
KERRY O'BRIEN: Julia Gillard, you have worked closely and intensely with Kevin Rudd since the two of you came to the Labor leadership. You won an election together. You worked through the global recession together. Did you forge a genuine friendship in that time? How close did you become?
JULIA GILLARD: I think we did forge a genuine friendship in that time, Kerry. We worked side by side. We worked together. I believe that we have been friends. I hope for the future we can continue some sort of bond.
These are difficult things and as your viewers would have seen from the edited highlights of a dramatic day that you have just shown, obviously for Kevin Rudd this has been a day of raw emotion.
I know Kevin Rudd. I know his resilience. I know his fortitude. He is determined to continue to play a role in the Federal Labor Party and of course there will be a role there for him.
So we will talk about that. Today obviously is a time for him to spend some time with family and with friends.
KERRY O'BRIEN: So how hard then if you became friends was to it plant the knife?
JULIA GILLARD: These are difficult things, Kerry. I'm not going to adopt your description in your question.
I had to come to a tough decision. I have been Kevin Rudd's deputy. I believe I have been a loyal deputy. I believe I have done everything I could to work with him and support him. But ultimately I had to make a judgement about what is in the best interests of the nation, what is in the best interests of the Government, what is in the best interests of the people we seek to serve and what is in the best interests of the Labor Party.
I came to that judgement with a heavy heart in many ways. It was not an easy judgement to form but having come to it I spoke to the Prime Minister last night, the then Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, and of course the events of today have then followed.
KERRY O'BRIEN: So as you saw the situation turning sour for Labor and for Kevin Rudd, was there a point where you looked him squarely in the eye and told him of your concerns about the Government going off the rails?
Did you identify clear things that you felt the Government needed to change and that he needed to change in his style or in his approach?
JULIA GILLARD: Kerry, I'm not going to canvass in the public domain conversations that I had as Deputy Prime Minister with the then Prime Minister.
I'm not going to canvass the contents of the conversation I had with the then Prime Minister Kevin Rudd last night. These are things between two colleagues working together and that's how they should remain. They are private conversations and I respect the privacy of the conversations.
KERRY O'BRIEN: I'm not asking you what you actually said. I'm just asking you whether you honestly eyeballed him at any point in these past few months and said, "Kevin, things are on the nose, I'm worried about our loss of direction here. I'm worried about where this is going. I want you to consider your change of style".
In other words, did you have an honest and candid conversation with him - without going to what you actually said?
JULIA GILLARD: Kerry, the best way I can answer that's to say I have had an honest and candid relationship with Kevin Rudd.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Okay. There is always a turning point in these matters. What was it for you?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I actually don't accept the premise of that question either.
I'm not sure. I know that people like to tell history as time and event all turning on one moment. Maybe that is true for some parts of history. I think for me the reality of where I found myself was there wasn't one big turning point but a growing sense of concern.
Obviously I had to keep my own counsel. I was Kevin Rudd's deputy. It would not have been appropriate for me to canvass these matters widely but I needed to think about them deeply and I did.
KERRY O'BRIEN: So when Kevin Rudd came to your office yesterday angry and accused you of disloyalty, did that help your resolve in what you felt you had to do?
JULIA GILLARD: I don't accept any of those descriptions, Kerry. Once again, I am not going to go into the details of conversations I had with Kevin Rudd but Kevin Rudd did not come to my office angry. Every discussion I have had with the Prime Minister - the then Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd - was a respectful and proper conversation
KERRY O'BRIEN: But he did come to your office yesterday and he did discuss the leadership with you.
JULIA GILLARD: Well, Kerry, there has been nothing unusual about the then Prime Minister Kevin Rudd walking into his deputy's office, nothing unusual about me walking round into Kevin Rudd's office. That has been the day to day stuff of my existence as Deputy Prime Minister and his as Prime Minister.
KERRY O'BRIEN: We are not being naive here. What I'm specifically - you know what I'm asking you.
JULIA GILLARD: And Kerry, I'm not - yes, I do know what you are asking me and I'm not seeking to shy away from answering it. I'm going to protect private conversations as is proper.
If you are asking me - and I believe you are - did Kevin Rudd and I have a series of frank exchanges yesterday about the circumstances of the Government, then of course we did, yes.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Were you shown the disastrous polling from New South Wales Labor about Kevin Rudd's deep unpopularity before you did decide to dessert him?
JULIA GILLARD: Kerry, I'm a professional politician. I'm someone who moves in the community. I represent an electorate in this Parliament. I obviously am in touch with community members.
That's what I have done as Deputy Prime Minister. It's what I would seek to do as Prime Minister. I don't need someone to show me polling to understand that a good government was losing its way. I don't need anyone to show me polling to understand that the Australian community had its concerns about that, its real concerns, deep concerns.
KERRY O'BRIEN: But did they show you?
JULIA GILLARD: Kerry, obviously the Labor Party as a professional political party conducts polling. Yes it does. I'm the Prime Minister of the country...
KERRY O'BRIEN: Well we know they conducted this polling. I'm asking you whether it was shown to you yesterday.
JULIA GILLARD: Well look, I'm the Prime Minister of the country today. I was Deputy Prime Minister yesterday. I was the second most senior person in the Labor team. You would expect me to be in contact with our senior campaign figures and to deal with what is a routine matter in politics, which is opinion polling.
But Kerry I'm not going to leave this conversation with the implication that I made a decision based on a bagful of polling. That is not true.
I made a decision having thought deeply about the circumstances of the Government and having concluded that a good Government had lost its way, having concluded that I could not resolve that from the position of deputy, and having particularly concluded that it was in the national interest, in the interest of the Government and the interest of the Labor Party for the Government to get back on track. And that is what I will deliver as Prime Minister.
KERRY O'BRIEN: You told Australian Story four years ago, "I had to fight hard to get preselected. I had to play a factional game to do that. I had to count numbers. I had to make deals and I'd do it all again tomorrow if I needed to."
Now what should we read into that in this context? What does it say about you? Whatever it takes?
JULIA GILLARD: Kerry, I am in the business of being a Member of the House of Representatives, a Member of the Parliament. That means by definition every three years I seek preselection from my political party to have the honour and privilege of representing them in the elections in the electorate of Lalor. And every three years I ask around 100,000 people for their trust and support to be the member for Lalor.
And as I have become more senior in politics, obviously, the way in which I canvass the Australian community and seek their trust and support is beyond my own electorate.
Consequently, of course, I'm a person that needs to have a view and stay in touch with community opinion. I'm a person who needs to stay in touch with my colleagues and what they are thinking. I do that willingly because I always believe you are strengthened as part of a team.
But what drives me in politics is not getting out sheets of paper and marking names and votes and numbers on sheets of paper. What drives me in politics is my passionate belief about delivering change in this nation - change in education because education made me; change in our health care system; making sure people have got the benefits and dignity of work.
These are the things that drive me in politics.
KERRY O'BRIEN: You didn't have to count the numbers this time. There were others to do it for you. Are you going to reward the plotters?
JULIA GILLARD: Kerry, once again, all very theatrical value-laden terminology.
If your question to me is, have I engaged in making any deals or arrangements to secure anyone's support for this position as Prime Minister, I have not.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Does that mean we are not likely to see Bill Shorten promoted in the ministry when you announce your new ministry?
JULIA GILLARD: I will work my way to announce the new ministry and what I will do Kerry, is I'll take soundings from my colleagues.
I genuinely believe that we are strengthened working as a team, that two minds are better than one, that a few more pairs of eyes on things is a good thing. I will talk to my colleagues and then I will make a decision.
Obviously the first point, the first thing to do is to speak to Kevin Rudd and to talk to him about a future role in the Labor Government. I will do that first and then of course make decisions on ministerial arrangements.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Now, can we just get a little more clarification on what you are saying to Kevin Rudd? Is-is a Cabinet job his for the asking? Is it somewhat less than that? Everybody knows his expertise in Foreign Affairs. Is that kind of portfolio open to him?
JULIA GILLARD: Kerry, nice try but my conversations with Kevin Rudd will be conversations with Kevin Rudd.
KERRY O'BRIEN: And you haven't spoken to him about this yet? You have no idea what is in his mind at this stage?
KERRY O'BRIEN: I have not had that conversation with Kevin today, Kerry. I think you gave the statistic of how many hours and minutes I have been Prime Minister for. This was a day of major events. Obviously for Kevin Rudd it has been a day of very deep emotion.
I will at the appropriate time have that conversation with my colleague, Kevin.
KERRY O'BRIEN: I've got another statistic for you now, actually, on the election timing. You will have governed for three years in November - although as Kevin Rudd recently pointed out, technically you could govern until March or April of next year - but five of the six Prime Ministers who tried to hang on significantly beyond the three years lost at the ballot box.
I don't imagine you are too keen to follow Prime Ministers like Billy McMahon down that road, are you?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I'm certainly old enough to have some recollections of Billy McMahon as Prime Minister, though I was pretty young at the time, Kerry. I want to point that out, I was pretty young at the time.
Kerry, I said today to the Australian people when I first spoke as Prime Minister that what I would do is obviously go and see the Governor-General in coming months we will be have the election. And all Australians as a matter of birthright have their vote and will exercise their say in that election.
KERRY O'BRIEN: But are you saying...
JULIA GILLARD: In the time in between then I'm asking the Australian people for their support as I do what is necessary to deliver the best possible Government for this country.
KERRY O'BRIEN: But can you indicate whether you are considering next year as part of the equation- of a legitimate part of the equation for this term, that you could govern through to March or April of next year?
JULIA GILLARD: Kerry, I can absolutely rule out next year. The election will be in 2010.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Okay. I'm glad we got that one off the table.
JULIA GILLARD: You were obviously deeply fascinated with it, Kerry.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Well I am. I am.JULIA GILLARD: So it is off the table now.
Your Christmas leave is safe, Kerry.
KERRY O'BRIEN: We were talking about Kevin Rudd a minute ago. You've said that you won't move in the Lodge until you are endorsed at an election by the people. Does that mean that Kevin Rudd will be able to stay there?
JULIA GILLARD: I haven't spoken to Kevin Rudd about this and my view is just simply, it's no more complicated than this, Kerry - Kevin Rudd has been through a profoundly difficult day. He is a man with a family. He is a man with a son in school in Canberra. He has been the Prime Minister of this country.
I think Australians sitting in their loungerooms listening to the conversation between you and me tonight would very quickly say - because Australians are very decent, generous people - that he needs whatever time is necessary for him to make arrangements for the living circumstances of him and his family.
I'm not going to set any time limits on that or speculate about that. That's a matter for Kevin to work through with his family.
KERRY O'BRIEN: You said today you would run a more inclusive Government drawing on the best efforts of Cabinet and so on, but you were a part of that very centralised executive Government that Kevin Rudd ran.
You were one of the gang of four. Did you at any stage say to him, "Kevin, this is wrong. We are not being inclusive enough. We need to consult Cabinet more widely"? Did you at any stage express that kind of sentiment?
JULIA GILLARD: Once again, Kerry, I'm not going to canvass past conversations when I was Deputy Prime Minister with the then Prime Minister.
What I am going to say is I believe when people look at the way that I seek to work they would say that I seek to work inclusively. I seek to bounce ideas around, I seek to get people's views.
The pressures of Government are strong, Kerry, and during the global financial crisis particularly we needed to make quick decisions - quick decisions in unheard of economic circumstances.
We had to do what needed to be done to keep Australians in work. But my predisposition is to draw on members of a team for their best insight and ideas and that's the way I will work as Prime Minister.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Can we look briefly at the toughest political issues that you have to deal with between now and the election - the issues on which Labor has lost ground this year.
You have said for instance on asylum seekers that you understand people's anxiety and this issue. But does that mean you are prepared to change Labor's policy to toughen it up?
Will you do what Kevin Rudd swore he wouldn't do on this issue, lurch to the right?
JULIA GILLARD: Kerry, I can absolutely rule out lurching anywhere. I won't be doing that.I do understand the anxiety and indeed fears that Australians have when they see boats, they see boats intercepted. It does make people anxious. I can understand that, I really can. And I can understand that Australians therefore say to their Government that they want to know what we are doing to manage our borders and what we are doing to manage asylum seeker flows. And I will be explaining as Prime Minister to the Australian people how we do that.
Of course, I obviously believe that as Prime Minister it is the role of the Government to do everything we can to best manage our borders.
KERRY O'BRIEN: But does that mean that you are prepared to change policy or not? Are you just going to explain or are you going to change as well?
JULIA GILLARD: Well Kerry, I'm going to explain and we of course we deal with changing circumstances. We have got some decisions to make about potentially changing country circumstances in relation to Sri Lanka for example.
I will continue day by day working with my ministerial colleagues like Chris Evans and Brendan O'Connor to work through the complex question of asylum seekers.
What I also say, Kerry, what I also say is that it is not appropriate for the Opposition to seek to inflate this into a language of crisis, to seek to scare people. I understand that even if the Opposition never said a word that Australians would feel anxious about these matters. But I am also very, very critical of political strategies to try to mount those anxieties for political profit and unfortunately that's the conduct that Mr Abbott has shown.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Very briefly, on climate change you have said you will re-prosecute the case for a carbon price as global economic conditions improve and as the Australian economy continues to strengthen. That's what you have said.
That sound to me like you are still wedded to the same timetable for an emissions trading scheme that got Kevin Rudd into hot water in the first place. So your leadership on that crucial issue will make no difference?
JULIA GILLARD: My leadership will be about talking to the Australian people about climate change.
I believe climate change is real. I believe that it is caused by human activity. I believe that we have got to therefore change the way we do things and that this nation will in the future need a price on carbon.
I also believe that if we are to have a price on carbon and do all the things necessary for our economy and our society to adjust we need a deep and lasting community consensus about that. We don't have it now.
That's why I said today if elected as Prime Minister at the forthcoming election then I will take the time to re-prosecute the case with the Australian community to develop that deep and lasting consensus. In the meantime of course there are steps we can take to address climate change, including better harnessing the great renewable resources of this land - solar and wind.
KERRY O'BRIEN: But what you are making clear is no change on the ETS before the election.
On the mining tax, you've dumped the Government's advertising campaign, you've won an early concession from the mining industry with its advertising but beyond that what has changed? Because the miners are not going to keep their minds open, as you have asked them to do, unless you put everything on the table including the size of the tax and whether it goes on existing projects or not.
Is everything up for discussion?
JULIA GILLARD: What I have said today is what I mean. We are opening door of the Government for negotiations. We have asked the mining representatives to open their minds. I asked for a show of goodwill from them as a reciprocation for what I was prepared to do and that was to take the Government advertising off TV.
I think today we have established some more goodwill. I think we have already established, as a foundation stone for agreement, that the mining industry can pay more tax and that Australians are entitled to their fair share.
Kerry, I'm not going to seek to design the parameters of the Resources Super Profits Tax here in a media interview several hours into being Prime Minister.
KERRY O'BRIEN: No. But...
JULIA GILLARD: But what I've found in my life and with complicated issues in the past is if you get people round a table with a modicum of goodwill and some respectful conversations, you never know where you might get to and I'm be willing to lead a government that has those negotiations and respectful conversations.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Okay. We're right up against it for time but I have got to ask one personal question. On a personal note, Kevin Rudd's personal hero was the German theologian, Dietrich Bonhoeffer. Yours I understand was the iconic Welsh Labour figure in British politics, Nigh Bevan.
In a couple of sentences, why? Because he never did make it to the top.
JULIA GILLARD: He never did make it to the top but I suppose to be true to my roots - I was born in Wales - to be true to my roots, you would expect me to pick a Welshman. You'd also expect me to pick a Welshman that had sought to make a difference to people's lives with vital services, in his case health services.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Julia Gillard, thank you very much for talking with us. A historic day.
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you. Good day for redheads.
KERRY O'BRIEN: You got me. 



JULIA GILLARD: Thank you for joining me in this jam packed room.
And can I say, Australians one and all, it's with the greatest humility, resolve and enthusiasm that I sought the endorsement of my colleagues to be the Labor Leader and to become Prime Minister of this country. I have accepted that endorsement.
And I am truly honoured to lead this country which I love.
I am utterly committed to the service of our people.
I grew up in the great state of South Australia. I grew up in a home of hardworking parents. They taught me the value of hard work. They taught me the value of respect. They taught me the value of doing your bit for the community.
And it is these values that will guide me as Australia's Prime Minister.
I believe in a Government that rewards those who work the hardest, not those who complain the loudest.
I believe in a Government that rewards those who, day in and day out, work in our factories and on our farms, in our mines and in our mills, in our classrooms and in our hospitals, that rewards that hard work, decency and effort.
The people who play by the rules, set their alarms early, get their kids off to school, stand by their neighbours and love their country.
And I also believe that 'leadership' is about the authority that grows from mutual respect shared by colleagues, from team work and from hard work, team work and spirit.
It's these beliefs that have been my compass during the three and half years of the most loyal service I could offer to my colleague, Kevin Rudd.
I asked my colleagues to make a leadership change.
A change because I believed that a good Government was losing its way.
And because I believe fundamentally that the basic education and health services that Australians rely on and their decent treatment at work is at risk at the next election.
I love this country and I was not going to sit idly by and watch an incoming Opposition cut education, cut health and smash rights at work.
My values and my beliefs have driven me to step forward to take this position as Prime Minister.
Today I want to make some commitments to the Australian people.
I want to make firstly a commitment that I will lead a strong and responsible Government that will take control of our future.
A strong and responsible Government improving and protecting the essential public services and basic rights our people depend on, including so importantly, their rights at work.
I wish to make two acknowledgments.
I take my fair share of responsibility for the Rudd Government's record, for our important achievements and for errors made.
I know the Rudd Government did not do all it said it would do.
And at times, it went off track.
I also certainly acknowledge I have not been elected Prime Minister by the Australian people.
And in coming months I will ask the Governor-General to call for a general election so that the Australian people can exercise their birthright to choose their Prime Minister.
Between now and this election, I seek their consideration and their support.
And I seek that consideration and support as we emerge from the biggest financial crisis the world has faced since the Great Depression, with the lowest debt, amongst the lowest unemployment rates and the highest growth of the world's economies.
This is an achievement we should be proud of - the working people, employers, employees, the trade unions, the small and big businesses, the employer associations who all made this possible.
I give credit to every hardworking Australian for hat has been achieved during these difficult economic days.
I give credit to the Labor giants, Bob Hawke and Paul Keating, as the architects of the prosperity of modern Australia.
I give credit to John Howard and Peter Costello for continuing these reforms.
And I particularly give credit to Kevin Rudd for leading the nation in such difficult times and keeping people in work.
And today I can assure every Australian that their Budget will be back in surplus in 2013.
So, having seen the global financial crisis and how or nation has responded, it has reinforced in me my belief that when this nation pulls together, we can do great things.
It is my intention to lead a Government that uses that spirit and that will to do even more to harness the talents of all of our people.
To do even more to make sure that every child gets a fair go in life and a great education.
It is my intention to lead a Government that does more to harness the wind and the sun and the new emerging technologies.
I will do this because I believe in climate change. I believe human beings contribute to climate change.
And it is as disappointing to me as it is to millions of Australians that we do not have a price on carbon.
And in the future we will need one. But first we will need to establish a community consensus for action.
If elected as Prime Minister I will re-prosecute the case for a carbon price at home and abroad. I will do that as global economic conditions improve and as our economy continues to strengthen.
There is another question on which I will seek consensus and that is the proposed Resources Super Profits Tax.
Australians are entitled to a fairer share of our inheritance, the mineral wealth that lies in our grounds. They are entitled to that fairer share.
But to reach a consensus, we need do more than consult. We need to negotiate.
And we must end this uncertainty which is not good for this nation.
That is why today I am throwing open the Government's door to the mining industry and I ask that in return, the mining industry throws open its mind.
And today, I will ensure that the mining advertisements paid for by the Government are cancelled.
And in return for this, I ask the mining industry to cease their advertising campaign as a show of good faith and mutual respect.
Negotiations will occur with the mining industry. They will be led by the Treasurer and new Deputy Prime Minister and Minister Martin Ferguson.
Can I say as well as dealing with these issues that as incoming Prime Minister I want to say to our troops, men and women at home and abroad.
We are a grateful country and we acknowledge your sacrifice.
Our country relies on you to keep us safe.
To keep the peace and to honour the U.S. and the other alliances that are so important for our nation.
The most recent loss of life of brave Australian soldiers in Afghanistan and the injuries that have befallen our troops remind us all of the depth of the sacrifice that our serving men and women can be called on to make.
Our thoughts are certainly with the grieving families.
Ultimately, Kevin and I disagreed about the direction of the Government. I believed we needed to do better.
But Kevin Rudd is a man of remarkable achievement.
He made wonderful history for this nation by saying 'Sorry' to Indigenous Australians.
He was the Leader who withdrew our troops from Iraq and had the foresight to reinforce our commitment in Afghanistan.
The Leader who saw us through the global financial crisis.
The Leader who turned his intelligence and determination to health reform, combating homelessness and closing the gap for Indigenous Australians.
And he came within a breath of brokering an international agreement on climate change.
Truly remarkable.
Of course I will be talking to Kevin Rudd about his future in the Parliamentary Labor Party.
I am also delighted to be standing here with the new Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan.
Wayne guided us through the very difficult waters of the global financial crisis. Now he's guiding us back into surplus, getting the Budget back in the black.
Wayne is an outstanding Treasurer of this country and I know he will make an outstanding Deputy Prime Minister.
Of course, there will need to be some consequential changes in our Cabinet and ministerial arrangements and I will announce them at an appropriate time.
In conclusion can I say to my colleagues assembled, to the men and women off the press, I will dedicate my abilities to what I believe in.
A nation where hard work is rewarded and where the dignity of work is respected.
A nation that prides itself on the excellence of its education system.
Where Government can be relied upon to provide high quality services for all Australians.
An Australia that can achieve even greater things in the future. We should not be afraid of the future.
A strong Australia respected as a global force for progress, for peace and for tolerance.
A bright democracy for the world to admire.
And a sanctuary for all of our people.
Can I say to the Australian people there will be some days I delight you; there may be some days I disappoint you.
On every day, I will be working my absolute hardest for you.
WAYNE SWAN: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.
Can I just say it's an unexpected privilege to be elected Deputy Leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party and therefore Deputy Prime Minister.
Today we move forward with Julia Gillard. Today we move forward with an intelligent, strong, competent and compassionate leader. She has been a first class Deputy Prime Minister and she will be a first class Prime Minister.
Now today isn't a day for celebration. Today is a day to knuckle down and to get back to work and that is precisely what we are going to do.
My focus is on providing continuity and stability and delivering the responsible economic management that has been the hallmark of this Government from day one.
Of course my priorities as Deputy Prime Minister are built on the beliefs I've held all of my life - a strong economy, a dynamic and internationally competitive business community, secure well-paid jobs, reward for effort, a fairer go for people on low-incomes, giving more Australians a role in our prosperity and security and dignity in retirement.
Now we have a very good story to tell about creating jobs and growing our economy but despite our success nationally with the economy, there are many people who still do it tough and of course they are the focus of our concerns everyday. We do understand that many families are under financial pressure and we understand that we need to address those concerns.
I also just want to just mention the importance of health and education, dealing with schools, our training systems, national broadband. They remain very important priorities for our Government.
But underpinning all of that is our emphasis on strong, responsible economic management.
Now I just wanted to say a couple of things about Kevin Rudd because I've worked closely with Kevin over 20, 25 years. It's a really tough day for Kevin, for his family and for his staff but I'd like to pay tribute to the hard work that he has put in, in his time as Prime Minister but also in his time in public service over a long period of time. It's a tough day but he's done a lot of good and he's worked very hard over a long period of time. But for us, it's straight back to work.
JOURNALIST: Did you finally, in deciding to take this move, were you moving from the position that you believed Labor was unelectable under Kevin Rudd's leadership?
JULIA GILLARD: I think I've made clear my reasons for taking this position. I came to the view that a good Government was losing its way. I came to the view that for the Australian nation I had a responsibility to step up, to take control and to make sure that this Government got back on track. And I believe too I've got a responsibility to make sure that at the next election, Labor is there at its strongest, putting its case as to why the Australian people cannot and should not risk the Opposition's cuts to health and education and a return to Work Choices.
JOURNALIST: When will the people get a say on this?
JULIA GILLARD: Well as I've indicated, obviously in the coming months I will go to the Governor-General and I will ask that she call the election. But in the time in between, I'm asking the Australian people for their consideration and support to achieve the things that I have outlined today and to run a good and stable Government focused on the needs of the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, one policy you didn't mention was asylum seekers. Are you going to shift the Party to the right on that and secondly, do you envisage a role for Mr Rudd in your ministry?
JULIA GILLARD: Well Mr Rudd, Kevin, has obviously indicated publicly and he has indicated to me privately that he sees a future for himself in the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party. When I spoke in this room not many hours ago at our caucus meeting, I said I believed Kevin Rudd had a great future in the Labor Party and in the Federal Parliamentary caucus if he wanted one. Now of course we will have those discussions.
Today is obviously a difficult day for Kevin, for his family so he will probably choose to spend some time with his family and there are plenty of times for those discussions.
On the question of asylum seekers can I say this; I can understand that Australians are disturbed when they see boats arrive on our shores unannounced. I can understand that Australians are disturbed by that. I can understand that sense of anxiety. This country is a sanctuary, it's our home so we've got a responsibility to manage our borders and manage the question of asylum seekers in the best possible way.
I've got no truck at all with elevating and fear-mongering about a problem for political advantage which is what I believe the Opposition is seeking to do. But I am full of understanding of the perspective of the Australian people that they want strong management of our borders and I will provide it.
JOURNALIST: On the mining tax, it's caused Labor all sorts of troubles in the resources states, WA and Queensland in particular. You talk about the move towards negotiating rather than just consultation, what are the key parameters under which you will be negotiating and do you hope to have this resolved before the election?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm not going to go through parameters today. What I am saying and it's a genuine offer is the door of this Government is open, I'm opening that door, I'm asking the mining industry to open its mind.I believe that Australians are entitled to a fairer share of the mineral wealth that is in our ground and belongs to all of us. We will negotiate through with the mining industry and I do believe that there is a consensus emerging that Australians are entitled to that fairer share and that the mining industry can pay more tax. Building on that consensus, we will have those negotiations.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, do you think the money that was going to be spent on the mining ads was a waste and did you argue against that spending in Cabinet; and also, were you saying that the doors on the mining tax have been closed?
JULIA GILLARD: Well can I say, Patricia, I am not going to canvas back through earlier Cabinet discussions but I am going to say this loud and clearly; I take my fair share of the responsibility for the decisions of the Rudd Government, absolutely. What I have decided today as incoming Prime Minister is I will order the taking of whatever steps are necessary to remove that government advertising as quickly as possible and in an exercise of respect, I'm asking the mining industry to do the same with its ad campaign.
JOURNALIST: Opening the doors to the industry, does that mean everything is on the table including the 40 per cent rate of taxation?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm not going to canvas through framework questions here. Today I'm indicating a very clear predisposition to the mining industry about the best way forward. I'm there throwing the door of Government open, I'm inviting the mining industry to walk through that door.
JOURNALIST: Aside from the mining tax, why and how did Kevin Rudd lose his way and what will you be doing differently to address that?
JULIA GILLARD: I think that this has been a good Government but I do believe we have lost our way. I believe that we have on a set of issues, and I have canvassed some of them today, not delivered the kind of stability and certainty and good management that Australians would seek. I also believe that it's important if you lead a team to rely on the collective efforts of the team. We are all enhanced by working in a team together.
So it is my intention as Prime Minister to lead a Government that draws on the best efforts of my Cabinet and ministerial colleagues, on the best efforts of each member of our parliamentary executive and the best efforts of each member of our caucus to ensure that our Government is on track, doing what Australians expect us to do -providing decent services, protecting their jobs and ensuring that they've got decent treatment and fairness when they perform those jobs.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, you obviously didn't just come to this realisation the Government was losing its way yesterday. Can you explain to us your categorical denials that you wouldn't seek the leadership; and secondly, what are you going to do about the G20?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm inviting my colleague, Wayne Swan, to attend the G20 on the nation's behalf and I believe he has accepted my invitation to do that.
WAYNE SWAN: And I'm leaving tomorrow afternoon.
JULIA GILLARD: And on the question of how I came to my decision, I have been Kevin Rudd's Deputy, I have done everything I believed I could do as Deputy to express the concerns I'm expressing now and on the inside of the Government, to do what was necessary to get the Government back on track.
I obviously, I obviously formed the view that I could not perform that role from the position as Deputy, that it was necessary for me to take this step and I acknowledge that this is a difficult day, it's a very difficult day for Kevin Rudd, but it was necessary for me to take this step to take control and to ensure that the Government got back on track. I have obviously formed that view in recent days.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, given your comments a moment ago about team work and about restoring, I suppose, those more traditional ways of Cabinet, government and so forth, do you intend to restore Labor's tradition of allowing the factions to nominate their candidates for your ministry or will you continue Kevin Rudd's system where the Prime Minister decides?
JULIA GILLARD: I think I'm indicating to you very clearly and I actually believe my track record as a Member of Parliament and as Deputy Prime Minister bares this out; I believe in consultation, I believe in talking to people and getting their best. If we look at the workplace relations legislation, the getting rid of Work Choices and the new Fair Work system, I consulted for hour after hour with business leaders, with union leaders, with small business leaders to get the balance right.
You consult and then you decide. I will take that approach to all questions in my Prime Ministership, including the question you raise of appointments to the parliamentary executive.
JOURNALIST: Are you now beholden to the factional bosses and will they have influence over your choice of ministry?
JULIA GILLARD: I'd remind the assembled friends from the media that this isn't my first day in the parliamentary building. I've been here since 1998 and I would defy anyone, anyone to analyse my parliamentary career and to suggest that on any day I have done anything other than made up my own mind in accordance with my own conscience and my best views about what's in the interests of the nation.
JOURNALIST: You will be Australia's first female Prime Minister. Can you talk to that and what that means to you?
JULIA GILLARD: Well there may be some firsts. When you look back in the history books all the photos are in black and white, so first woman, maybe first redhead. We'll allow others to delve into the history and I'll allow you to contemplate which was more unlikely in the modern age.
Look, I'm well aware that I am the first woman to serve in this role but can I say to you I didn't set out to crash my head on any glass ceilings. I set out to keep my feet on the floor and to be there walking the streets, talking to Australians about what's the right thing for this nation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-elect, how hard is it going to be for you to restore Labor's standing; and how hard do you think it will be to win the election; and have you been given a position in Saturday's match as full-forward?
JULIA GILLARD: I can disclose that I have received a text from Jason Akermanis inviting me to play that role but I'm not intending to take that up. Dennis, speaking to you, I should also indicate that it is my clear intention as Prime Minister to make it unlawful to indicate as a de facto speaker what should happen during Question Time from the press gallery, if you could bear that in mind in your conduct later today.
On the question of Labor's chances at the election, I took this step in part because I was so determined, so determined, to make sure at the next election this nation does not endorse a path that would see cutbacks to our schools, jeopardising the thing I most profoundly believe in - that every Australian child, every Australian child deserves a chance at a great quality education. That would cut back services like health and that would jeopardise people's rights at work.
I spoke a little bit earlier about growing up in South Australia. I grew up in a hardworking family. My father John, my mother Moira, with my sister Alison and the thing I learned from growing up in that family is hard work matters, but for families like mine, quality government services matter. And for families like mine, being treated decently in your workplace matters. And I was not going to allow that to become the prevailing government of this nation without stepping up to fight it with every ounce of my being.
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan when did you decide to support Ms Gillard?
WAYNE SWAN: Yesterday.
JULIA GILLARD: Not a word wasted.
WAYNE SWAN: I said before it was an unexpected privilege.
JOURNALIST: What brought you to that decision?
WAYNE SWAN: I came to that decision because I believed we needed a very clear and decisive outcome once I became aware that colleagues from across the parliamentary party were looking for change. So I took the view that we needed a really clear and decisive change.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, is the position that you announced on the carbon price any different from the delay that Kevin Rudd announced a couple of months ago? Or is it the same?
JULIA GILLARD: Well obviously I was a participant in the decision about the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and I don't in any way seek to diminish my role in making that decision. I came to that decision because I fundamentally believe that if you are going to restructure our economy so that we can deal with a carbon price and deal with all of the transformations in our economy that requires, then you need community consensus to do so.
Whilst Kevin Rudd, I believe did some remarkable things arguing here and internationally in the battle for climate change and I am full of admiration for the efforts of Senator Penny Wong working alongside him, the reality is that we were facing a situation and we continue today to face a situation where there is not that community consensus about a carbon price; where there is not deep understanding about what that would mean and how it will require us to work differently and live differently.
If I am elected as Prime Minister, then I will use the office of Prime Minister and the ability it gives me to speak to the Australian people to pursue that argument for change. And I will purse that argument for change as vigorously as I can and as long as I need to, to see the establishment of that community consensus.
JOURNALIST: It's very obvious that in a number of seats around the country, a large number of seats, Labor is trouble and your colleagues tell us that privately that recent party polling is part of the reason you are here now. To continue to football parlance, have you been handed a 'hospital pass'?
JULIA GILLARD: I suppose I should have foreseen that use of football parlance.
I believe as long as, you know, I am in a position to be out there putting the argument and putting the case for Labor, for fairness, for decency, for an Australia that rewards hard work, for an Australia that is not afraid of the future, that it is incumbent upon me to use all of my efforts to do that.
Will that be successful? Well that is in the hands of the Australian people at the election I will call in coming months. But I'll use the time in between to address some of the issues the Australian people have obviously indicated their deep concern about and to make sure this Government day after day, step by step, piece by piece is delivering good, competent, stable Government.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, was it your intention that Parliament will be sitting after winter break and when do you think you'll be moving into the Lodge?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I've said that in coming months I will talk to the Governor-General about calling an election and I won't give a more specific timeline than that. If you can allow me some small indulgence, I'm not sworn in yet and this is my first press conference as Prime Minister so I anticipate you would understand why I'm not being more definitive about things like election timetables.
On the question of, you know, moving homes and other things, I'm very happy in my home in Altona, I'm very happy in my flat in Canberra, I'd be happy to stay there for a considerable period of time. Indeed I believe it is appropriate for me to stay there until we have an election and I have fulsomely earned the trust of the Australian people to be Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, can I just clarify a couple of things? First of all when you say you're going to get consensus on a carbon price, will that be that you will be seeking consensus on the proposal you've already put forward on an ETS? And secondly, does all the community consensus building mean having a better relationship with the Greens in future?
JULIA GILLARD: If I can just take the second part first, the Greens and the Labor Party come at these issues from different perspectives. We are a Party of Government, we are a Party that strives to the Government of this country, we are the Government of this country today and that means that there are obligations on us about getting the balance right which are not obligations on a Senate party like the Greens Party.
Having said that, I believe in dealing with all senators with respect. I negotiated with the Greens and with Senators Fielding and Xenophon to get the Fair Work Act through and to eradicate Work Choices. There would have been many sitting here today who would have said that could not have been done. I negotiated with the Greens in a spirit of consensus to get the student income support bill through to make sure that there was a fairer system of assisting students going to university. There were quite a few along the way who would've said that couldn't be done.
I intend to bring that approach of dealing with people from different political perspectives like Senator Brown with respect as we work on the Government's agenda.
And on the ETS, obviously in saying what I've said about Senator Wong, I believe Senator Wong has worked hard with Kevin Rudd to get a balance in the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, could I just clarify the comment you made before? Are you saying you will not move into the Lodge unless you win a general election?
JULIA GILLARD: I am saying that.
JOURNALIST: When will there be a reshuffle?
JULIA GILLARD: We'll make some announcements in coming days about ministerial arrangements so I'll take some time to do that.
JOURNALIST: Will there be a big shake-up?
JULIA GILLARD: It is my intention to deal with these changes to maximise the stability of the Government.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, are you suggesting Kevin Rudd and his family will continue living there until the election even though he's not the Prime Minister?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm not suggesting that, Patricia, I'm not suggesting that. I have not spoken to the Prime Minister about these arrangements and I think the Australian people would want to extend to Prime Minister, former Prime Minister Rudd, you know, dignity and respect and appropriate transition time to make arrangements for his family. You would have seen his son Marcus today, for example. Marcus is here in school in Canberra.
So you know, these things that are of political moment are also of personal moment and I think people understand that, so let's let that happen as it needs to, to meet the needs of the Rudd family. For me, for me I have made a decision I will continue to live where I live now and I will present as obviously the next election and we will see what happens at the election.
JOURNALIST: How much arm twisting was there to get you to take this on?
JULIA GILLARD: I would not be here unless I was resolved and enthusiastic about the task.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) compromise if, as a result of the mining tax negotiations, there is compromise unless revenue raised will you pare back those consequent revenue spending commitments that have been made rather than compromise the commitment to getting the Budget back in surplus?
JULIA GILLARD: I will repeat what I said before. I am not here today ruling things in and ruling things out.The Treasurer, the new Deputy Prime Minister, will lead a team with Martin Ferguson to conduct these negotiations. The only entry point for these negotiations I believe, is that people need to understand the Government is determined to make sure that Australians get a fairer share of the mineral wealth in their grounds.
So we will work through step by step, piece by piece in a spirit of negotiation. I am asking for an act of goodwill today and I am offering one. I will take the Government advertising off our TV screens as soon as possible and I ask the mining industry to do the same.
JOURNALIST: Wayne Swan, will you take the mining ads off the TV, do you think that's a good idea?
WAYNE SWAN: Yes I do and I'd like to see the mining industry respond.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
JULIA GILLARD: Well as you would be aware, we have an appointment with the Governor-General fairly soon and whilst I'm not an expert on protocol I suspect that it's fairly poor form to be diabolically late to being sworn in as Prime Minister so what we will do is we will take Matthew, you and Phil and then we will call it a day. Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, I was just wondering if - you've opposed Tony Abbott in a number of incarnations - what approach will you be taking to convince Australians should not be Prime Minister and you should?
JULIA GILLARD: I'll be seeking first and foremost to govern the country, to exhibit by my conduct what I believe in and how as a Prime Minister I perform. People will have the ability to see what I do as Prime Minister and judge me by it.
On the question of Mr Abbott, I will be saying to the Australian people long and loud the things that Mr Abbott does not truthfully tell them - that he will reintroduce Work Choices and that he is determined to return to his track record of cutting health and he is determined to cut back funding to our schools.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd and Mr Swan have previously said with the mining tax that certain key elements are absolutely non-negotiable including the 40 per cent rate. Are you saying those things are now on the table?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm saying to you that today, today I'm taking a step forward in that debate - negotiations, our ads off the TV screens and calling on the mining industry to do the same. The Treasurer, the new Deputy Prime Minister will lead a team to negotiate. We will obviously be involved in making public statements as those negotiations continue.
JOURNALIST: You said ministerial changes would maximise stability. Would making Mr Rudd Foreign Minister help maximise stability? And in that three hour meeting you had with him last night, was any offer made in return for him stepping aside?
JULIA GILLARD: Well one thing I will not do now and I will never do is speak about the contents of my discussion with the Prime Minister last night. That was a confidential discussion between the two of us. I would view me talking about that as a gross breach of trust and I won't do it.
On the question of Mr Rudd and his future in the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party, you know, step at a time, settle, step at a time. This has been a dramatic and difficult day for Mr Rudd and his family. I will have that conversation with Mr Rudd at the appropriate point.
Thank you very much. 



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, has begun phone discussions with the world's leaders including a call this morning with the President of the United States, Barack Obama.
Ms Gillard spoke to President Obama at about 9:00am this morning for around 20 minutes.
The conversation was productive and very warm and reaffirmed the strength of our countries' longstanding alliance and partnership.
The US alliance is the foundation stone of Australia's security policy. Ms Gillard said her aim is to maintain and strengthen that policy under her leadership.
Ms Gillard and President Obama discussed the two countries' commitment to Afghanistan. She indicated that our commitment will remain unchanged and that she fully supports the current deployment and the plan for Australia to lead the Provincial Reconstruction team (civilian) effort in Oruzgan province.
Ms Gillard said that Australians have highest respect and regard for President Obama and that she and the President share a respect and admiration for the people they represent.
Ms Gillard also expressed her regret at not being able to attend the G20 meeting in Toronto at the weekend and that the Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, will attend in her absence.
She also said that President Obama and his family would be welcome in Australia at any time as a guest of the Australian people.
Ms Gillard spoke to New Zealand Prime Minister John Key yesterday afternoon and expressed regret at not being able to address the New Zealand Parliament next week.
She is scheduled to speak to Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak, Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper and new British Prime Minister David Cameron later today.



PM: Good morning and given it's a cold Canberra morning and I think you are standing in the rain we'll get on straight with the job. Today obviously is my first day as Prime Minister. Today I will conduct the first Cabinet meeting of the Gillard Government. Whilst of course I will not be discussing in detail matters that are to be dealt with by Cabinet, the purpose of today's Cabinet meeting is to be discussing the changes we will make to get the Government back on track.
In addition to today's Cabinet meeting I am of course speak to world leaders to introduce myself as the new Australian Prime Minister.
This morning I have already had the great honour and privilege of speaking with President Obama. I spoke to President Obama and spoke about the strong friendship between our two nations, the strong and enduring friendship and alliance between Australians and Americans. We are close as nations, we are in an enduring strategic alliance, we are close as people. We have fought together around the world and we continue to fight together in Afghanistan.
I assured President Obama that my approach to Afghanistan will continue the approach taken to date by the Australian Government. I fully support the current deployment and I indicated to President Obama that he should expect to see the Australian effort in Afghanistan continuing. We spoke about, of course, the cost that this causes to our nations, we have seen the loss of life of Australian soldiers, obviously too President Obama in his nation have families who grieve for those who have been lost in Afghanistan, but our determination to continue the deployment continues.
I also recorded my apologies for not attending the G20 in Toronto. President Obama understood that given events here in Australia I would not be able to attend. Wayne Swan is attending the G20 meeting on my behalf and will shortly leave Australia to go to Toronto for that very important meeting.
I assured President Obama that any time he chooses to travel to Australia he will be very, very welcome indeed. Welcomed by the Australian Government but even more importantly welcomed by the Australian people. I would imagine a visit by President Obama would be greeted with a great deal of enthusiasm by Australians. He indicated that he would very much like to travel to Australia, he regrets that he has not been able to travel here to date, he advised me that he has got such fond memories of this country from coming here particularly as an eight year old when he travelled unaccompanied to this nation, he has strong and fond memories, particularly of Sydney.
During the course of today I will also speak to the President of Indonesia, the Prime Minister of Malaysia, the Prime Minister of Canada and to him I will convey directly my apologies for not attending the G20 meeting and the Prime Minister of Britain. I had the opportunity yesterday to speak briefly to the Prime Minister of New Zealand, we are obviously very close as nations except when we are engaged in combat on the sporting field and he offered his congratulations on my appointment as Prime Minister. I of course have met him before.
So the Government is down to business, it's pressing ahead with the hard work and the changes that we need to make to get the Government back on track.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, what would you say to the thousands of people who are flooding our emails with angry comments about the manner in which you were appointed Prime Minister and is this the nature of politics now? And won't those same factional warlords come after you with knives if you don't turn the polls around and win the election?
PM: Well there are several assumptions in those questions so I'll try and unpack those assumptions. I offered myself for consideration by the Labor Party to become its leader and to become Prime Minister because of the obligation I felt to hard working Australians. The only judgement that ultimately matters to me, the people that I seek serve, are those hard working Australians who rely on decent government services and rely on having a job and decent rights at work.
I understand that Australians watching the events of yesterday would have seen the hurt felt by former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. Leading the nation, Government, is about the national interest, it's about the affairs of the nation, but it's also a job undertaken by flesh and blood human beings who have emotions, who have feelings, who feel hurt and exhibit pain and obviously yesterday was a very, very difficult day for Kevin Rudd, for this family, for his friends and for many, many others. But I took a decision because I believe it was in the best interests of the Australian people for the Government to get back on track and that is what I am determined to do.
I'll go Matthew and then Dennis.
JOURNALIST: With regards to the RSPT, yesterday in Question Time I think you were asked three times to commit as to whether you expect it would raise the $12 billion that was planned under the design. You didn't answer that, so is it fair for people to assume that you are now working on, in you negotiations with the mining industry, to are prepared to accept less revenue to find a deal, a situation, that is acceptable to industry and also gives Australians a greater share of mineral resources.
PM: What people should assume is that I will do what I said I would do yesterday, and that is we will genuinely negotiate with the mining industry. So that those genuine negotiations can start I have met this morning with Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan and with the relevant Minister Martin Ferguson to work on the Government's negotiating strategy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what other areas are you looking at changing in the broad, and have you spoken to Mr Rudd and is he in the Cabinet meeting today?
PM: I have not personally spoken to Mr Rudd, I will of course be speaking to Mr Rudd in the time period to come. Consequently Mr Rudd, we haven't made new ministerial arrangements so obviously the Cabinet that is meeting today is the continuing Cabinet of the Government.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Mr Rudd and also what the decision with Lindsay Tanner, will he be Finance Minister to the election or not?
PM: Well obviously former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd is no longer Prime Minister, he's surrendered his commission as Prime Minister and I have been appointed Prime Minister. On that basis of course, Kevin Rudd will not be in today's Cabinet meeting. We will make new ministerial arrangements, I am working on those arrangements now and I will announce them in due course.
If I can say a word about Lindsay Tanner. I was not aware until Lindsay came to see me yesterday that it had been his intention to leave the Australian Parliament at the forthcoming election. As I indicated in the Parliament yesterday, I known Lindsay Tanner all of my adult life, he's done a fantastic job as Finance Minister, I will be talking to him as I strike the new ministerial arrangements, I'll advise of them in due course and we will work on them carefully. The ministerial arrangements are my decision but I will obviously consult with my colleagues before I make the decision, including consulting directly with Kevin Rudd about his future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) priority for you in getting the Government back on track?
PM: My priority as we look through the issues of the Government is to make sure that in every area we are working hard for Australian families, we are working hard for those Australians who work hard themselves; who set the alarm clock early, who get up in the morning, get the kids to school and go to work and work hard. I want to make sure that we are working with them. I obviously have become concerned that there are a set of issues where the Government needs to better engage and better manage in the Australian interest.
The mining tax question is clearly one of those and I've indicated my intentions and we have already taken a major step forward in getting good will into the conversation with both our ads and the mining industry ads being taken down. I think that that is progress.
We'll continue to make progress in other areas that concern Australians. I'm doing to do this a step at a time, I'm going to do it methodically and I'm obviously going to make announcements to Australians about what the Government is doing to get back on track.
Patricia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the ultimate of mining requirement when you seek a consensus. Following on from Dennis' question, what other areas do you think the Government needs to change positions?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I thought Dennis was going to answer the question then, he loomed over your shoulder and I thought he was starting a sentence but nothing else came out - very distracting.
My priority obviously is to ensure that we deal with the question of the mining tax. It has caused uncertainty, I think that uncertainty has caused anxiety for Australians. I want to make sure Australians get a fair share of our mineral wealth but we want to genuinely negotiate so on my first morning of my first full day as Prime Minister a priority has been sitting with Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan and with the Minister for Resources Martin Ferguson to work on the Governments negotiating strategy.
I obviously believe Australians want to hear us speak too on what we are doing now to deal with climate change and we will do that. But they want to hear what we are doing to manage our borders and I will be speaking about that in the future, but broadly across the area of Government I will be going through and making sure that we are delivering what is incumbent upon us to deliver and that is the services and assistance that working families need and expect from Government. They expect the Government to lead a strong economy, to make sure that they've got the benefits and the dignity of work. They expect the Government to be delivering quality education, they expect the Government to be working with them to meet their health care needs and of course, they expect the Government to be doing those things that are necessary to prepare for the future including tackling the challenge of climate change.
We'll go over to Andrew, then to Malcolm and back through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just get back on leadership and the circumstances in which you've got it, would it be fair for the public to think that the leadership of the Labor Party is only secure as long as you're popular and does that mean that therefore that you will only go for timid reforms?
PM: Well both of those things would not be true to conclude, not true to conclude at all. I was motivated to step forward for this position as Prime Minister because I thought a good Government had lost its way. What concerned me was the national interest and governing in the interests of hardworking Australians. And what also concerned me is that I thought I had an obligation to make sure, at the next election, that we did everything we could to prevent this nation going back, back to the days of Work Choices, back to the days of cutbacks in health, back to the days of indifference on education and what needs to be done to make sure that every Australian child gets a fair chance at a great life. That is what has motivated me to step forward and take this position.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Australian Worker's Union and various MPs of its patronage made a lot of noise about opposing Kevin Rudd and backing you in as the next Prime Minister. Whether you like it or not, aren't you now part of that patronage?
PM: I think that that's a curious assumption indeed, if I can say that to you Malcolm the only thing that ultimately matters in the position of Prime Minister, the constituency that matters is the hardworking Australians around this nation. And of course I can understand that the Opposition and others will try and put a character in the events of recent days, I understand that, but I also believe, standing particularly in this place with the people who are here today, that across my life in politics since I was first elected in 1998, people would say the following things about me. It is completely absurd for anybody to look at track record in this place and to conclude anything other than that I have made my own decisions, I am a person of strong mind and I made my own decisions.
The other thing it would be completely absurd to conclude is that I am not prepared to stump up to hard reform, and I would refer people to me track record as Deputy Prime Minister, a record of reform. A record of reform like getting rid of Work Choices and introducing the Fair Work system with a Senate in which we did not hold the majority.
Reforms like getting national health and safety laws for this country, something bureaucrats had been working on for 25 years. On the day that that went through the ministerial council some of them cried, they had been working so long to get that reform and we did it.
Reforms like national curriculum that the country has been talking about for two decades, politicians came and went and talked about national curriculum, no one got anything done of substance until I stumped up and drove that reform.
Reforms like the My School website, once again, chat about transparency very fashionable, getting it done very hard and I have got it done. So on a track record of hard reform, difficult reform, contested reform, I think my track record speaks for itself.
Paul Bongiorno?
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Aren't you at all concerned that you have a record of being prepared to waste money as the Opposition accuses you of especially with the building of the Education Revolution. How are you going to address that perception if it's not a reality?
Well we have worked through the Building the Education Revolution. I obviously want to see value for money, I've made that clear. And consequently I've taken a series of steps to make sure that we are getting value for money. The creation of the Building the Education Revolution taskforce was a big step led by an Australian business person Brad Orgill with all of that commercial expertise. And then relying on his advice, we are withholding some payments to New South Wales to drive some of the changes we believe are needed for some of the schools in that state. These are appropriate steps to make sure that we get value for money.
Katharine?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there is a lot of criticism under Kevin Rudd obviously about his top down leadership style, about lines being issued centrally, about Cabinet ministers being neutered and not able to carve out their own political identities and put their own positions forward. How would you foreshadow your own leadership style? Are you more relaxed about your colleague around the Cabinet table having opinions that they are able to express publicly and prosecute publicly? Or are you more inclined to put a premium on discipline and on central messaging which was really the whole mark of Kevin Rudd's leadership. How would you describe your own attitude to those things?
PM: Okay there's no truth in the rumour that I'm prioritising redheads in the press pack, I don't want that to take hold. My style is this and will be. I believe that you get the best from people if you have them work as a team. I believe we're all strengthened if we work as members of a team. I believe the office of Prime Minister is there to focus on and to drive the strategic questions that confront this nation.
I trust Ministers to get on with the job in their portfolio. I will obviously work with them side by side on the strategic questions that confront the nation and confront them in their portfolios. I intend to run a straight Cabinet system of Government. I intend to rely on my colleagues to come to the Cabinet table with the best of their advice, with the best of their intelligence and the best of their labours as we work together to get the Government back on track.
I think as people have looked at the things I have done in public life and indeed even before I was in public life, I am someone who wants to work with the team; who wants to be there with a team. You have in your question created what I think is a false divide, between teamwork and discipline, I see no such divide. I actually think that the best discipline is obtained when people work together and work together well. I think that holds true from the top echelons of the national government to local football teams. The best way of making sure that everybody works together is to make sure that they all see a place in the team. That they are there being treated respectfully, their ideas appreciated, their labours understood; and that is the approach that I will take.
JOURNALIST: On a personal level, you've been talking to world leaders, you're about to chair a Cabinet meeting, has it sunk in as to exactly that you're Prime Minister? When and what did you do last night? Any celebrations?
PM: Well, I think obviously in some ways the weight of it has sunk in. I think for some of the more personal reflections that will probably have to wait to a time when I've got the time to take a moment for the more personal reflections. On what I did last night, I worked here in this building including a series of interviews ending with an interview with a very famous redhead Kerry O'Brien. I then went home and ate some takeaway food with my partner Tim and with a few friends who were in Canberra. I've been back here in Parliament House since early this morning.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Right. Okay, so you've obviously been speaking to my Aunt Millie, is that right? Aunt Millie who still lives in Cwmgrach which is the mining village from which my father is from. My father is here, obviously, alive and well in Australia. They breed them tough, the Gillards, they breed them tough. He is one of seven, he is the second youngest and most of his brothers and sisters are still alive. Most of his brothers and sisters stayed in the mining village in Cwmgrach and either went mining or married miners. Aunt Millie is telling a story about when our ship pulled up in Australia I dropped a koala bear that they'd given all the kids as a welcome present to Australia and I hear I dropped it over the side, accidentally. Aunt Millie's recollection is not quite right, in fact as my mother has recounted to me on many occasions, a very heroic officer on the ship actually went and somehow delve to where it had fallen between the ship and the pier and got it back out for me and gave me back the bear.
JOURNALIST: You clearly met Bill Shorten before the events of Wednesday night. At any point did you go to Kevin Rudd to seek an alternative to change the direction of the government without necessarily causing a spill? Why was there no alternative to a change in leader? What had Kevin Rudd done wrong?
PM: Look, I talked to many of my colleagues, and obviously my colleagues formed the same view I did that it was necessary in order to get the Government back on track that a good Government had lost its way. It was necessary to get the Government back on track with me as Prime Minister. That was obviously a view formed broadly and deeply by my caucus colleagues. Not unanimously, I certainly don't say that, but broadly and deeply, by my Cabinet colleagues.
I am not, today or on any other day, going to go through the details of conversations I had with Kevin Rudd, either in the lead up to yesterday's events or conversations we had when he was Prime Minister and I was Deputy Prime Minister. I think that would be improper.
But what I will say is this. Obviously I formed a view about the future of the Government, about the future of the national interest, I am a person who is frank and obviously I discussed that view within the government but I am not going to canvass the details of conversations with a former Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: Were you really upset about that article in the Herald? Those that installed you said it was the catalyst.
PM: As author of the article, you and Peter I think, you may have interest in saying something flamboyant or dramatic about it. I am afraid I am going to deny you that. The decisions I have made this week have been decisions about profound matters of national interest. They have weighed heavily on me. They were not easy decisions. I have taken them because I thought they were the right thing to do. I've not taken them because of any newspaper report.
JOURNALIST: How do you feel personally about the 40 per cent rate? Kevin Rudd used to say it was about right. What's your personal view as to those issues in the mining tax?
PM: Well, the Government is going to and I've been working on this today, the Government is going to have a negotiating strategy here. What I've said, my previous position, I've indicated it strongly yesterday, I' m indicating it again strongly today is that we need to harness the goodwill that has been generated within the mining industry and build on it in the national interest. We will work through that, with the negotiating strategy, we'll do that in a careful way. As those negotiations take shape and I'm in a position to report the Australian nation about what is coming through from those negotiations I'll do so.
JOURNALIST: So as the Prime Minister, do you commit to resolving those issues on the mining tax before calling an election?
PM: We will work through. Obviously, when you're negotiating, there's more than you in the room and so the attitude of others is important to this. My view is that this task needs to be undertaken as quickly as possible. We need to work through with goodwill and we will.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any advice from the federal police as to whether you can actually stay in your flat?
PM: No I haven't. No I've haven't.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) What are your foreign policy priorities?
PM: Well obviously, I believe speaking to President Obama today was very important. The calls that I am making now are introductory calls. In terms of our near neighbours, obviously discussions particularly discussions about people movement are important and they will be a priority.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Which particular marginal areas will you be targeting when you do go out?
PM: I will engage in a balance. I think it's important to be out there talking to the Australian people. But I also think it's important in coming days that I am here for long periods of time in Canberra. We need to get the government back on track, to do that we need to step by step take a series of decisions and that is bets done while I am here in Canberra. Okay, thank you very much. 



OAKES: Prime Minister, welcome to the program.
PM: Good morning, Laurie.
OAKES: And congratulations, of course.
PM: Thank you very much.
OAKES: But I've got to ask you the question Richard Carlton famously asked Bob Hawke - how does it feel to have blood on your hands?
PM: Well, Laurie, my answer will be I was a loyal deputy. I came to a decision about what was in the best interests of the nation to get the Government back on track. I obviously stand by that decision. It's my decision.
OAKES: It's true though isn't it, that you told Kevin Rudd on Wednesday that you'd been thinking of toppling him for a while?
PM: Laurie, I'm not now or indeed at any time in the future going to canvas publically my conversations with Kevin Rudd that night or indeed conversations I had with him during the time we were Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister.
OAKES: I'll re-phrase it, then. Had you been thinking of toppling him for a while?
PM: Laurie, I had had concerns about some of the directions of the Government. I believe we were a good Government. I think we'd done good things, for example, the response to the global financial crisis; keeping Australians working. This was important. We did what had to be done in the face of that international challenge.
But I was also growing in my concerns about some of the directions of the Government. I believed as a loyal deputy that what I could do is assist as a deputy. It became clear to me that I needed to do more, that is was important that I did take the actions that I took last week, that I took control to get the Government back on track.
OAKES: Now, you keep saying the Government had lost its way, needed to get back on track. Where had it lost its way? Where had it taken the wrong direction?
PM: Well today I've made an indication about what I think is a really major issue for this country: the question of population policy. I don't believe in a big Australia. I don't believe in simply hurtling down a track to a 36 million or 40 million population, and I think if you talk to the people of western Sydney or western Melbourne or the Gold Coast growth corridor in Queensland people would look at you and say 'where will these people go?' At the same time, we've got communities around the country crying out for more workers, for more people, more arms and legs to get vital work done. We've got to get the balance right, here, so today, as Prime Minister, I've indicated that to get that balance right I'll ask Tony Burke, the current Minister for Population, to be the Minister for Sustainable Population so we do get that balance right for the future.
OAKES: Well, you say this is a change of direction, but Kevin Rudd, of course, never set a target of 36 million or 40 million. It was Kevin Rudd who appointed Tony Burke to investigate how you could get the balance right, so where's the change of direction?
PM: Well, I think the change of direction is to put front and centre the sustainability issues. Yes, there are environmental issues about water and about soil, but there are also sustainability issues about planning, about services, about the buses and the trains, the freeways and the roads that actually carry our population.
OAKES: And that wasn't supposed to be part of Tony Burke's brief when Mr Rudd appointed him?
PM: Well, I think depending on what you put at the centre of this you take a different approach, and at the centre I want the question of sustainability.
OAKES: You see, it looks to me as though Kevin Rudd's been verballed; this 36 million so-called target's been put in his mouth when it never was a target.
PM: Well Kevin Rudd, as Prime Minister, indicated that he had a view about a big Australia.
OAKES: He did use that phrase, yes
PM: I am indicating -
OAKES: - But I'm not sure anyone wants a little Australia.
PM: Well, I'm indicating a different approach Laurie. I think we want an Australia that is sustainable. This place is our sanctuary, our home. We all wish it best for the future and I think for the best future we shouldn't just hurtle down a track. We should pause, we should take a breath, we should reflect and we should get this right.
OAKES: OK, you don't want people going to western Sydney, but you say other areas of Australia need more workers, so, how do you get people to go where you want them?
PM: Well, one good way of doing that is to make sure we've got a focus on employers sponsoring people who are the skilled labour that they need. So, having looked at the Australian population with us doing the right things about training, if we still need skilled migrants then of course we should enable them to come.
Laurie, I'm a migrant. My parents came here at a time that the country was saying to the world 'we've got a population of around about 11 million,' Australia, in those days, 'we want to build it up.' Big focus then on populate or perish, you would probably remember.
OAKES: I do.
PM: And, you know, Australia reached out for the right kind of migrants and I hope people would conclude my parents were the right kind of migrants. So, we'll still have an approach about getting the migration settings right, about meeting our needs for skilled labour, but I also want to see us do it sustainably and I want to see us emphasise the skills and training of our own people. I don't want employers telling me that they can't get the workers they need when in some parts of this country we've got youth unemployment in double digits. I want to offer those young kids a chance, as well as have the migration setting right so employers get the workers they need in the places they need them.
OAKES: OK, this is a population policy, or at least you've asked Tony Burke to develop a population policy, as Kevin Rudd had, but that's not going to solve the problem of asylum seekers arriving by boat, is it?
PM: I'm obviously concerned about asylum seekers, about boats. I've indicated that concern and I think the Australian community feels it. It does make them anxious when they see boats. A little-known statistic though Laurie is we intercept 98 per cent of boats. Under the Howard Government 1 in 10 reached the mainland.
But, we've got to best manage our borders. We've got more assets patrolling our borders than ever before but I want to make sure we're doing everything effective in this area.
This isn't about slogans. To use an old saying, in an area like this tough ain't enough. It's about being effective and that's what I want to ensure - that we are being effective. I've got a decision to make quite quickly about what to do about the processing pause we've got in place. We indicated that would be for three months.
OAKES: That's for Afghans and Sri Lankans.
PM: The first pause was for Sri Lankans, that's coming up in three months. The due date then is the 8th of July, so I've got a decision to make about that and I'll have more to say about these matters before that due date of the 8th of July.
OAKES: Of course, some of the people who moved over to the Greens were protesting against Kevin Rudd's imposition of that. They saw you as being harsh to refugees. Are you going to soften that so you get those people back?
PM: I believe in doing the effective things to manage our borders. I also believe this nation needs to honour its obligations to people who are genuine refugees and honour what I think is an Australian value about care and concern for children. I don't think Australians want to see innocent children behind razor wire, whatever decisions their parents may or may not have taken. Whatever people think about those decisions, the kids didn't make those decisions and they deserve the best of our care and concern.
OAKES: Well, another boat load arrived yesterday, 96 asylum seekers, so the Liberals would say it shows your policy's not working.
PM: Well, you know, once again, slogans are easy to engage in here -
OAKES: - Well, they are. I was going to ask you about that. You talked about how many votes your Government intercepts. John Howard's government intercepted the same number of boats and yet you, as Shadow Minister of course, as I reminded you last October, came out with the immortal line 'another boat, another policy failure.' So, you can't wriggle out of that. That's your line and your verdict.
PM: Laurie, well, let's just have a look at the facts here.
OAKES: Well, we had another boat yesterday. Another policy failure?
PM: And we intercept 98 per cent of boats now -
OAKES: - So did John Howard, and you said that.
PM: Well, under the Howard Government 1 in 10 used to hit the mainland. They weren't intercepted, so our interception rates are better than they used to be.
On my old press release, having had that interview with Laurie I did get out the old files and have a look at it - you've got a far better memory than me - and when I looked at it, the contents of that press release were about urging the Howard Government to do more, to patrol our borders, more naval assets. Well, we have more naval assets there now and the contents of that press release were about working co-operatively with our regional neighbours and obviously we do work with Indonesia and others and I will be open to looking at further effective measures to drive that cooperation and work.
OAKES: It's fair to say isn't it, that as Shadow Minister after the 2001 Tampa election, as Shadow Immigration Minister you actually were the substantive author of the policies which Kevin Rudd's government adopted? Is that fair?
PM: I was the substantive author of a policy paper which became Labor's policy. It was called Protecting Australia, Protecting the Australian Way.
OAKES: And was adopted in Government.
PM: It was adopted by the then Labor Opposition. Obviously, my successors in the portfolio put some of their own stamps on this and we brought that policy into government.
OAKES: But it is basically what you advised, wasn't it?
PM: Oh, look, I think the underpinnings were in that document, Protecting Australia, Protecting the Australian Way. Some things have happened since I authored that document of course - you know, the circumstances in Sri Lanka, for example, have changed radically since I authored that document, but you know, if you're asking me, Laurie, 'does my attitude remain the same?', my attitude is exactly the same and I think it's caught by that title: Protecting Australia. We want to do that. This is our sanctuary, this is our home. Protecting the Australian way, I think that's about protecting values like we've all got care and concern for innocent children and we want to extend to them our best.
OAKES: Now, you've now been pinged, along with Wayne Swan, as responsible for the shelving of the emissions trading system, the decision that more than anything else shredded Kevin Rudd's credibility. Do you accept responsibility for that?
PM: I accept my fair share of-
OAKES: -Which sounds like the lion's share from the reports we've had of the discussion.
PM: Well, I accept my fair share of the responsibility for all of the decisions that happened when Kevin Rudd was prime minister. I accept my fair share for the good things and the bad things.
OAKES: But you did argue that the ETS should be dumped because it was hurting Labor politically. Is that true?
PM: Laurie, was concerned that if you are going to do something as big to your economy as put a price on carbon, with the economic transformation that implies, with changing the way in which we live, you need a lasting and deep community consensus to do it and I don't believe we have that lasting and deep community consensus now. Now I believe we should have a price on carbon and I will be prepared to argue for a price on carbon, to lead so that we get to that lasting and deep community consensus, but we're not there yet. We can take practical measures on climate change.
I believe in climate change, I believe it's caused by human activity and I believe we've got an obligation to act and I'll be making some statements about some further things we can do to address the challenge of climate change as we work to that lasting and deep community consensus.
OAKES: You didn't actually say as Kevin Rudd did that this is a great moral challenge of our time, but you did, as recently as December, say that delaying the ETS was the same as climate change denial. Are you a denier?
PM: Well, no, Laurie, I'm not a denier. I'm not a denier, but I'm someone who believes that you've got to take the community with you when you make lasting and deep changes. Now, as Prime Minister, as a leader, I've got an obligation to have the conversation, to have the discussion, to indicate the attitudes and I'm doing that today.
I believe in the future of this we will have a price on carbon. I believe we will transform our economy the way that that price implies. I believe there will be ways in which we live that are different, but that's something that the community has to have a part in the decision, a part in the conversation and we've got to drive the consensus for change.
OAKES: Now, it seems to me and a lot of other people that in terms of policy, the three things, three big problems the Rudd Government had were asylum seeker policy, the ETS back flip and the mining tax.
Now, Kevin Rudd basically followed your asylum seeker policy, he did what you wanted on the emissions trading system. I don't know if you could be blamed for the mining tax, but two out three ain't bad.
PM: Well Laurie, I can understand that as a sort of patter, if I can use that terminology -
OAKES: - I hope it's more than that.
PM: I can understand why you've wanted to put that patter together, but let's actually get to the facts here. I am indicating to you my attitudes. I take my fair share of the responsibility for the decisions of the Rudd Government. I was vice-captain of the team. That's a different position from captain of the team. Now I have the position of captain with all the ultimate responsibility that goes with that, and you will see, as I exercise that ultimate responsibility, what my attitudes are to each of the questions that you've indicated today.
OAKES: Well, let's go to the third one - can Captain Gillard get the mining tax out of the way in time for the election?
PM: Well, I think I've taken a big step forward. On the first day as Prime Minister, my very first press conference, I think I took a big step forward for goodwill and respect in the discussion about the mining tax by saying we, the Government, would take our ads off TV screens if the mining industry did the same and we offered it - it wasn't conditional - we offered it unconditionally. We asked the mining industry to reciprocate and in an act of good will they have. I think that's given us a terrific foundation to now have the genuine negotiations we need to get to a conclusion here.
OAKES: Because the main difference between you and Mr Rudd on this, that you are prepared to negotiate on the 40 per cent level of the tax - is that the key difference?
PM: I think the main thing is the settings going forward, and I've been clear about it: no ads, an act of good will, genuine negotiations to get this resolved. I've indicated my concern about the anxiety that this has caused Australians. I don't think that that uncertainty is good for us. I don't think it's good for the nation.
So, we will work with the mining industry to get a fairer share for Australians. I do believe in that, but the mining industry generally says 'yes, we can pay more tax', so the central question before us is the 'how' question, how do we get this done and I believe we can work together to answer that question.
OAKES: Two things - if you, in the end, settle for a rate less than 40 per cent, won't that be seen as a back down, and secondly, if that happens and you get less revenue, how will you trim the budget to take account for that?
PM: Well, each and every decision I'll take as we genuinely negotiate will be driven by what's in the best interests of the nation. If you're going to have genuine negotiations, Laurie, I'm not going to play a rule in, rule out game on TV. We'll have the genuine discussion, the genuine negotiations, we'll work it through. I said to the mining industry I'm throwing open the door of the Government if they can open their minds and I think we're well on our way to seeing an opening of the minds and a respectful, genuine, negotiation.
OAKES: When will we see your new ministry?
PM: Well, very soon, Laurie. Obviously I have to have a set of conversations and make a set of decisions. As you would imagine, coming into the position as Prime Minister there has been a lot to do. I'm very keen to settle the ministry arrangements and I'll be doing that as quickly as possible.
OAKES: Now, are you seriously considering giving Kevin Rudd a spot?
PM: I will have a conversation with Kevin Rudd during the course of today.
OAKES: That's not quite the answer to the question, though.
PM: Well, the conversation should happen first, between two colleagues and we'll have that conversation first.
OAKES: You see there are those who believe that if Kevin Rudd was in the Cabinet the bitterness that must exist between you and Kevin now and between Kevin Rudd and the others who helped to knife him would make it a pretty divisive and divided government.
PM: Well, Laurie, on the vivid terminology my view would be let's just settle down a little bit. On the best way of dealing with these issues, it would be between me and Kevin having a conversation rather than you and I having a conversation, and I'll have that conversation during the course of the day.
OAKES: What about Ambassador to Beijing? Is that an option?
PM: Laurie, you aren't going to draw me out on this. The appropriate thing to do is to have a conversation with Kevin, and that's exactly what I will do.
OAKES: You do have a problem with the reshuffle, though, don't you? If you promote someone like Bill Shorten, who was one of the plotters who installed you in the leadership, it will look as though you're beholden to them and paying them off.
PM: Laurie, you're a man who sees a lot of problems. I'm a woman who's going to work to get a lot of solutions, so we'll work our way through and we'll announce the ministry relatively soon.
OAKES: Mark Latham says that you, when your popularity declines, will be the next one for the knife. What guarantee do you have that the same factional heavies who knocked off Kevin Rudd won't do it to you eventually?
PM: Laurie, my view here, my attitude, is that I'm Prime Minister. What's go to guide me and drive me is the best interests of the nation. The judgment I'm going to submit to, very, very soon, is the judgment of the Australian people. It's their birthright. They get a vote. They'll have that opportunity very soon. I am happy to be judged by all on my performance as Prime Minister in the national interest.
I made a judgment about where the Government was under former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. I did believe that we were losing our way. I did believe that there were things that needed to be done to get us back on track. That's what motivated me to take the decision that I did - the need to get the Government back on track so those hard-working Australians who are watching this program now, people who'll set their alarm early tomorrow, who'll get up, who'll get the kids to school, who'll go and put in a genuine hard day's effort, that we're doing everything we can to meet their needs, to get them the services they need, to work alongside them.
OAKES: Prime Minister, we thank you.
PM: Thanks, Laurie. 



PM: Thank you very much to the assembled throng and their capacity for sound effects, that was very impressive.
I'm here today with Simon Crean and with Stephen Smith to announce the details of my reshuffled ministry. Obviously I became Prime Minister because I believed it was important to get the Government back on track. I particularly believed it was important to renew our focus on strengthening the economy and delivering the services that hard working Australians need. In order to do this you need a steady hand, hard work and methodical work. So in considering the question of a reshuffle I have determined that it is best to have as limited a reshuffle as possible to keep the maximum stability amongst the team and to keep our focus on the work that Australians need the Government to be doing.
In that spirit I have invited Simon Crean to take over my portfolios of education, employment and workplace relations and social inclusion.
Of course Simon Crean comes to this task having served in an earlier Labor Government as Minister for Employment, Education and Training. He also comes to this task having been a President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions and I think when he served in that capacity, being recognised as one of the people who assisted in the modernisation of Australia's union movement and in making sure that our union movement understood the demands of a complex and dynamic economy and understood the need to work productively with employers.
Simon Crean is too our longest serving Cabinet Minister. He has served in the Hawke Cabinet, the Keating Cabinet, the Rudd Cabinet and now of course will serve in this capacity in the Gillard Cabinet. Obviously Simon Crean is a very safe pair of hands for portfolios that are very, very close to my heart.
I have asked Stephen Smith, who has been doing a great job as Minister for Foreign Affairs to also take over being Minister for Trade.
Stephen has served as a Shadow Minister for Trade, he is consequently familiar with the trade issues and as people would be aware the one Department, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, deals with both questions and consequently Stephen can easily work with the entire Department in his new capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Trade.
I have in recent days had conversations with Kevin Rudd about his future.
What I have said to Kevin Rudd is, and he has confirmed to me, that it's his intention to seek re-election as the Member for Griffith, so consequently what I have said to Kevin Rudd is I would be absolutely delighted to see him serve as a senior Cabinet Minister in the team if the Government is re-elected.
Obviously our focus is on delivering to hard working Australians a strengthening economy and a renewed focus on services. I am not making any assumptions about what will happen on election day; this will be a close, hard fought contest, but if the Government is re-elected I will be very delighted to welcome Kevin Rudd into the Cabinet in a senior position.
I'm very happy with those words to take questions. Yes.
JOURNALIST: What was Kevin Rudd's response to that, was he seeking an appointment earlier or is he happy to wait?
PM: Look there is nothing about this period of time that is easy or happy for Kevin Rudd.
As I've said at earlier press conferences and I genuinely believe this is a tremendously, tremendously difficult time for him and his family, I understand that. What I said to Kevin is that I think this is the best course and it would enable him, if he chose to do so at this time, to spend more time with his family, which I know is one of his key priorities in life is love of family, of Therese and the children, and that would give him the opportunity to spend some time with them. But he would be very, very welcome, very welcome indeed, if the Government is re-elected, serving in a senior capacity in the team.
We'll go to Paul and then to Matt.
JOURNALIST: Does this leave Queensland unrepresented in your Cabinet?
PM: Well the Deputy Prime Minister of this country is a Queenslander, Wayne Swan. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister does your mining tax, we know what steps you've put in place to resolve that issue, can you guarantee though that would be, that this matter would be resolved before the election. Don't Australians have a right to know what you are planning to do on this matter before they vote?
PM: Well I can guarantee today that I'm doing all I can, working with my team, particularly Treasurer Wayne Swan and Minister Martin Ferguson, to expedite negotiations to make sure that we are having clear, focussed, genuine negotiations about the mining tax.
I had assumed you might want to ask some more questions about the reshuffle but given you've gone to other matters, what I might, you've taken me by surprise, what I might do at this point is invite my colleagues to say a few words and then we'll go onto general questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) can you give guarantee-
PM: Well why don't we do this first and then I'll come back to your questions, stay in order, I like doing that as you know.
CREAN: Well thanks Prime Minister and of course I'm delighted to have been made the offer by you to resume some of the unfinished business in the portfolio that I had a great deal of involvement with in the past.
I genuinely believe that employment is fundamental to the economic security of this nation so anything that can be done to connect people much better with the workforce, to develop its skills, to give people the opportunity to continue developing those skills in a lifelong learning sense is fundamental to sustainable economic fortunes for the nation, as well as opportunity for individuals.
It's also essential we do everything to increase the retention rates in school, lift participation in school, because that produces a more prosperous nation, so this portfolio is intricately linked with the economic future of the country but with the opportunity for individuals within it.
As for the workplace relations area, whilst I haven't had portfolio responsibilities, I have had some experience in this field as well.
So I look forward to combining the tasks, look forward to working with Julia and the team to the re-election of the Government but we take nothing for granted, the task ahead is a hard one, and I look forward to playing whatever constructive role I can in developing the policy framework from which we hope we get the ultimate reward from the Australian people.
Thank you.
PM: We'll just go to Stephen then you can ask questions of all three.
SMITH: Well Prime Minister thank you very much. Obviously I'm very pleased to serve the Gillard Labor Government in the capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade.
One of the very important fundamentals which have secured Australia's prosperity historically has been being a great trading nation and our trade efforts of course have been not just bilateral, but regional and multilateral, and Simon has been an absolutely devoted Trade Minister who has been inexhaustible in his efforts to secure multilateral, regional and bilateral trade improvements.
Can I start but welcoming very much the decision by the G20 leaders' meeting over the weekend to put renewed emphasis on a successful conclusion to the Doha round.
Australia, in particular Simon, has been at the forefront of urging the international community to bring the Doha round to a successful conclusion and we welcome very much the G20 leaders' meeting decision to give added priority to the Doha round and to consider it again at the next G20 meeting in Seoul.
On the regional front, Simon has been instrumental in helping to ensure that a very important but under-appreciated regional trade agreement, the Australia-New Zealand-ASEAN trade agreement, came to fruition and we're now working very hard on the TPP, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is another very important regional trade agreement for us.
On the bilateral front, we continue to pursue a number of very important free trade agreements where we either have negotiations under foot or where we have preliminary studies in hand - in particular and importantly India and Indonesia.
So, I look forward very much to working in all of these areas.
I, of course, will benefit from the fact that we have one department, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, to assist in this task. It, of course, is of considerable advantage to any minister for foreign affairs and trade that we are served by one of the great departments of state, and so the fact that the department performs both roles will be of great advantage to me in the weeks and months ahead.
Can I finish by thanking the Prime Minister for the opportunity, but also by again complimenting and congratulating Simon on the terrific achievement to set a very firm foundation for Australia's trade role and performance into the future.
Thank you.
PM: OK, Mathew, on the Resources Super Profits Tax, obviously the Australian people will be able to judge the Government on the Resources Super Profits Tax at the time of the election. I welcome the judgment on that. We are working hard to collaborate with our mining community in a spirit of good will to resolve details associated with the tax.
Patricia.
JOURNALIST: You were criticised for having too much on your plate with all those portfolios. Do you think that that would be a problem for Simon Crean as well? Why did you not take an opportunity to split those portfolios and give them more attention through (inaudible)
PM: Well, obviously, I didn't think it would be a problem for Simon to perform this work, and that's why I've invited him to do it, and the premium that I have put in making these new ministerial arrangements is on stability, on making sure that we can continue to get on with the job of ensuring the Government is on track and doing what we need to do to meet the aspirations of hard-working Australians.
Dennis. Sorry, hang on, hang on, hang on - Dennis, then we'll come across.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) and the new education minister, will there be any changes in the investigations into the BER and Mr Orgill's taskforce?
PM: Dennis, if I can answer that and if I can thank you for your remarkable focus on this question.I think it would a be a little bit unfair to suggest to Simon Crean before he's sworn in or briefed on any of these matters that he should put a view. Obviously, I formed the view that the taskforce led by Brad Orgill is doing good work on the question of value for money.
JOURNALIST: Would you expect a much bigger reshuffle, with new faces, if you win the next election, and do you see any merit in Caucus and the factions resuming control of who should be in the ministry?
PM: Well, can I echo Simon's words, because I think he's put it well. Our focus is on governing for the nation now, and then when the election is called our focus will be on campaigning to gain again the trust of the Australian people to be their Government. Consequently, I'm not really wanting to be drawn on, you know, speculation for the days beyond. Our focus is about that election and the contrast between the Government and what is being promised by Mr Abbott, and they are stark contrasts.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Just hang on, hang on, hang on. They are stark contrasts. I think it is appropriate that as leader, in a consultative way, I work, I form a team and work with a team. I've said one of my hallmarks as Prime Minister is I intend to take a consultative approach. Once it comes to the moment of decision, the decisions are mine, but I intend to take a consultative approach along the way.
Andrew.
JOURNALIST: Just back on the mining tax, (inaudible) could you at least confirm that the original consultation phase (inaudible) and that is one that ends at the end of the year?
PM: The Treasurer, I think you will find, has clearly said that there were two phases to the consultations and that we were in the second stage. He said that a number of days ago.
Obviously, as incoming Prime Minister I have taken additional steps to make sure that we are meaningfully negotiating with the mining industry in the spirit of goodwill, which is why I took the Government advertisements off our TV screens and I was very, very pleased to see that the mining industry reciprocated.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could you consider disbanding SPBC and would you ensure that all major policy decisions go to the full Cabinet?
PM: I've already said, and in case there was any ambiguity about it, I'm happy to clarify it, my intention as Prime Minister is to run a Cabinet system of Government; run by a Cabinet system of Government means all substantial decisions will go to the full Cabinet.
Yes, Latika.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: What's happening with Lindsay Tanner?
PM: Sorry, I assumed that almost went without saying, but let me clarify it, make it express, obviously, I have asked Lindsay Tanner to continue in his position as Finance Minister until election day and, you know, from an abundance of caution, so all things are clear, there will be no further appointments to Cabinet. There will be no further ministerial appointments. There will be no further parliamentary secretary appointments.
The team is the team that you see here with everything else staying as you know it. Simon Crean has taken every part of my portfolio.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, by leaving Mr Tanner in the Finance portfolio, don't you open yourself up to claims from the Opposition that we won't know who's in charge of the nation's purse strings if you're indeed re-elected?
PM: Well, let me say if the Opposition wants to start that argument, gee, I'll be in it quickly.
We obviously have Treasurer Wayne Swan and Finance Minister Lindsay Tanner working together on the nation's finances and the economy. This is in stark contrast to an Opposition that appears to have absolutely nobody doing it.
If we are re-elected, then of course I will be ensuring that we have a strong Finance Minister in a future team, but our approach as a Government has been to do what we needed to do in the economy, in the global financial crisis, to keep people working, to bring the budget back to surplus and we will do that in 2013, and I think it is very interesting that the Deputy Leader and Treasurer Wayne Swan is attending the G20 on my behalf. There, countries around the world are saying they'll aim to halve their deficits by 2013. We will be in surplus in 2013.
Right, we'll go back here and then across. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Will you nominate a Finance Minister before the election if you are indeed re-elected?
PM: No, what I will do about positions is what I've indicated here today.
Our focus is on election day.
We take nothing for granted, nothing for granted.
If I am re-elected as Prime Minister and the Government is re-elected, then, following our election, I will shape the team at that point.
We'll go here, and then across to Michelle. Yep?
JOURNALIST: Sorry, your Cabinet has no regional voice. Is that a concern to you?
PM: Well, I think when you look across our whole Cabinet, when you look across our whole ministerial team and across who we represent in this parliament we have some very, very strong regional voices who are heard each and every day as the team goes about making its decisions. I've...
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, the decisions, the decisions of the Government, obviously Cabinet, is important.
We've got Lindsay, we've got Anthony Albanese there, working to represent regions, working in contact with Local Government.
Very recently in this Parliament House I attended a very important event that he had, an annual event, to make sure that we are talking to Local Government around the country, to make sure we're understanding the perspective of regions around the country.
We're a Government that's taken the Cabinet around the country to get the benefit of those perspectives.
We've got great regional Members, you know, Janelle Saffin, Kirsten Livermore and the list goes on and on and on, Jim Turnour, and so the list goes on, their voices are well and truly heard. Can I go to Michelle? Yeah, no, and I'm coming over here, I'm not-
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, will you consider the pursuit of an Asia-Pacific Community?
PM: Look, on questions of foreign affairs policy, I'm not here to make a statement today about foreign affairs policy. Obviously I will rely on advice from Stephen Smith in shaping future policy announcements by the Government. Okay, Malcolm.
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much Prime Minister. Back to the structure of Cabinet, the Cabinet structure. The so-called kitchen cabinet or gang of four was one of a number of cabinet sub-committees. Have you abolished that system of sub-committees, and with it the so-called kitchen cabinet?
PM: What I have done is I've said to my colleagues that we want to have a proper system of Cabinet Government.
That means that my colleagues in the Cabinet will shape the Cabinet committees and the rules that will govern the operation of the Gillard Government. We have commenced work on that, on that set of Cabinet arrangements and rules. But I couldn't be clearer here about my end point and my intention. I want to see a traditional system of Cabinet Government where the Cabinet is the highest decision-making body in the Government, in the Executive.
Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST: What was the tone of your conversation with Mr Rudd, and was he happy to accept a delay until after the election, or did you have to convince him to do that?
PM: Well look, I'm not going to go to details of what I believe to be private conversations. And I've obviously indicated there is nothing, nothing about this period that is happy or easy for Mr Rudd. It's obviously a very, very stressful, difficult time. Yes, Patricia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do your modest changes that you've made to your frontbench indicate something about election timing? Do you want to go into a quick election considering you made such minimal changes?
PM: No. The modest changes I've made to my frontbench indicate that my key focus is to have a steady hand, methodical work delivering for Australians.
Yes Mark.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday you talked about some of the concerns of people in Western Sydney about population. Their biggest concern is transportation, buses, trains, cars getting them into work, getting their kids to school. What can you offer people in outer urban areas in terms of improved transportation?
PM: Well I, look, I think there are a set of concerns that people in Western Sydney feel, and many of those concerns do go to the question of how you manage growth. And they've seen a lot of growth, and as I said yesterday, they hear figures like 40 million and 36 million and they don't want to see Australia hurtling towards 36 million or 40 million, and I think they will welcome the opportunity for the nation to take a breath, to work on the policy, to reflect on how we want to manage this future. Including how we want to manage getting the services to people that they need; the roads they use, the transportation systems they rely on.
It would be easy for me to make it a set of glib statements which would be interpreted as promises about new services. I'm not going to do that.
You know, we've got to take a measured approach here, a balanced approach. Anything to do with transport costs real money. And my focus is on making sure we deliver that surplus in 2013.
I have asked Tony Burke as the Minister dealing with questions of sustainable population to look at this area as part of taking a breath and planning our future.
Matthew to Simon.
JOURNALIST: On the question of education, it seems to me that Julia Gillard always made a big play about a Labor Government having to provide equality of opportunity. I'm interested to know whether you believe Australia has further to go in that area, and whether you are going to be developing (inaudible) policy in that area to take to the next election.
CREAN: Well I fundamentally believe that education is the great enabler for individual development. And I've- one of the reasons I joined the Labor Party was to advance that. I was a beneficiary of a good education, and I believe others should be entitled to be able to access that.
What Julia has done is to create a framework that lays solid foundations for advancing that.
What we have to do is to get ourselves elected so that framework is not dismantled.
I recall when I was last Employment and Education and Training Minister, we set up many of these things. We built them, only to see them dismantled. That's the fundamental difference between us and our opponents when it comes to things like education.
I see important opportunities to build again, but I inherit a great platform on which to do it. And I'm delighted to have the opportunity to continue in that direction.
PM: Okay, we'll take two more questions before everybody freezes to death. We'll go to Phil, with the two Phils.
JOURNALIST: Just back on the population thing, can you explain what Tony Burke's been tasked to do, given what Kevin Rudd had already tasked him to do?
PM: What I have asked Tony Burke to do is to develop a set of policies that enable us to have a sustainable population.
What you put at the forefront of your decision-making and thinking here, matters. And what I'm putting at the forefront of our thinking is the set of environmental concerns that come with an increased population, and the set of concerns about planning and where population goes.
As I said yesterday, I live in Melbourne's west, where across two growth corridors, my electorate lies across two growth corridors, in a place like that, Melbourne's west, in Western Sydney, in the Brisbane-Gold Coast corridor, people look at what has happened with growth and they hear figures like 36 and 40 million and they say 'where are these people going to go?'
At the same time, I travel to the northwest of this country and I meet industry leaders and communities that are crying out for more people and more workers. So I think we've got to get a balance here, and that is what I've asked Tony Burke to do.
Last question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just to clarify, is the CPRS still Government policy, or are you going to scrap that and start with something new?
PM: Well, I'm going to say to you exactly what I've been saying over the last few days.
The Government took a decision about the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and assessing in 2012 the degree of international movement on questions of climate change, and having done that assessment would then make a final decision about reintroducing the legislation for the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
I'm very clear that climate change is caused by human activity; that addressing climate change means that we will need to have a price on carbon. But I'm also very clear in my own mind that there is a lot of work to do to build the kind of lasting and deep community consensus we need to have the kind of transformation in our economy and the way we live that pricing carbon will require.
In the coming period, I will have more to say about what this nation can do and how Australians can work together to address the challenge of climate change.
Thanks very much.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the new Ministry of the Gillard Government.
The new Ministry will work as a team to progress the interests of the nation and the interests of all Australians so we can become a fairer, stronger, smarter Australia.
Minister Simon Crean will take over the portfolios of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations and Social Inclusion.
Minister Stephen Smith will take on the Trade portfolio, in addition to his current portfolio of Foreign Affairs.
The Prime Minister said the new Ministry will ensure maximum stability, allowing the Gillard Government to stay focused on delivering a stronger economy and improved essential services for all Australians.
The Prime Minister said Minister Crean was well placed to take over her previous portfolios having served for more than two years in the former Keating Government as Employment, Education and Training Minister.
Minister Crean is also the longest serving Cabinet Minister in the Gillard Government.
Minister Crean will be tasked with taking forward the Government's historic reforms in education. He will also continue to improve employment opportunities across this nation and make sure the rights of all working Australians are upheld.
The Prime Minister said the Trade portfolio was in a safe and strong pair of hands under Minister Smith, who has also served as Shadow Minister for Trade.
The appointment continues the existing link between the portfolios of Foreign Affairs and Trade, which are both supported by the same government department.
The current Minister for Population, Tony Burke will become the Minister for Sustainable Population with a new focus on making sure our nation develops a balanced and measured population strategy.
A sustainable population strategy is underpinned by respect for the environment and respect for the needs of Australians requiring good infrastructure and services.
Minister Burke will continue to develop a national strategy to be released later in the year with this new direction.
Ms Gillard said the Minister for Finance, Lindsay Tanner will remain in his current role until the election. 


Melbourne 
FAINE: Julia Gillard, good morning to you and congratulations.
PM: Good morning Jon, thank you very much.
FAINE: It's an Australian political cliché but do you have blood on your hands?
PM: Well, it is an Australian political cliché and of course I've been asked it in the last few days. Jon, I took a tough decision, it was a tough decision, but I thought it was in the best interests of the nation, the best interests of the Government, that we got back on track. I thought a good Government had lost its way.
FAINE: We've heard that several times now, when did Kevin Rudd and his Government go off the rails? Precisely when and why didn't you do anything about it as they started to go off the rails?
PM: Well Jon, you've heard it several times because it's the truth, I feel it very deeply. Obviously as Deputy Prime Minister I was vice-captain of the team and I endeavoured to play my role as vice-captain of the team to the best of my ability. I've said - and this remains Jon -I'm not going to canvass private conversations I had as Deputy Prime Minister but it became clear to me that from that position I couldn't do the things that needed to be done to get the Government back on track with a renewed focus on strengthening our economy and delivering real services, the services working families, hard working Australians need.
FAINE: So he wouldn't listen, he just wouldn't listen to you?
PM: Well you're inviting me Jon to go I think through discussions that are private discussions. I believe Kevin Rudd -
FAINE: Well we need to know. We the people who voted for a Government that we were told was Kevin07, we need to know what actually happened? You can't just say these were private conversations when it's the Government of the country that's been rolled.
PM: Jon, people voted for Kevin07, they voted for a new team, and they got a new team. And of course Kevin Rudd delivered so many important things that he had promised Australians, writing amazing new chapters in Australian history including through the apology to the Stolen Generations, ratifying Kyoto, and then of course he stepped up to the plate to do what needed to be done to keep Australians working during the global financial crisis and global recession.
But in recent days, as is a matter of public record, obviously the Government has had a set of issues and problems that have caused Australians to be anxious and caused me to become concerned that we needed to get a good Government back on track with a renewed focus on a strengthening economy and a renewed focus on delivering services. And that's exactly what I'm doing.
FAINE: One minute he's chairing Cabinet, the next minute you don't even want him in the Cabinet at all. Was he going to be disruptive influence if you appointed him to a job?
PM: I had some discussions with Kevin Rudd on the weekend and I certainly said to him, as I said publicly yesterday, I will be absolutely delighted if we are re-elected, to have Kevin Rudd serve as a senior member of our Cabinet with a senior portfolio.
For the time between now and the election I put a premium on stability, on making sure we kept people focussed on doing the job for Australians and that's why I announced a very limited reshuffle yesterday -
FAINE: So he would contribute to instability if he was a Minister in the Government today?
PM: No Jon, in this time period I thought the best thing was for Kevin to take a bit of time out, heaven knows he's earned it, I've never seen anybody work as hard as Kevin Rudd has worked in the last two and a bit years -
FAINE: And only a week ago he said he would work harder, he doesn't want a break but you think he needs one.
PM: Well I thought it was appropriate in this time that Kevin have the opportunity to spend time with family and friends. He's advised me that he will seek re-election as the Member for Griffith -
FAINE: The reality is, Julia Gillard, you wanted a break from him rather than him wanting a break from being a Minister.
PM: Well Jon I think that's a fairly unkind remark. What I thought was it was in the best interests of the Government to have a limited reshuffle. I thought it was in the best interests of Kevin, who's you know, obviously been through a very, very difficult period - I mean nothing about this has been easy for Kevin Rudd - that the appropriate thing was for him to have some time out from the intensity of the direct hurly-burly of politics.
Now Jon, we're going to move at some point during the second half of the year to election day and in the days beyond, you know, the essential thing is what happens at the election. If we are re-elected, and I expect it to be a hard, close contest, but if we are re-elected then I will be very, very pleased to see Kevin serve as a senior Minister of the Government.
FAINE: Tell me what's wrong with this scenario that's doing the rounds at the moment. You negotiate frantically for a week or so with the mining industry, then you zip off, have breakfast with the troops in Afghanistan, drop in in Indonesia on the way back, climb up on one of those big mining trucks in the Pilbara in a fluoro vest with a hard hat on, go and reopen a closed hospital in Queensland that you blame Tony Abbott for and then go and visit Bill Shorten's mother-in-law to call an election?
PM: Jon, you obviously have an aspiration to be in politics yourself, I'll have to see if there's an opportunity for you anywhere around the Government.
FAINE: But tell me what's wrong with that scenario in rough terms?
PM: Well my scenario Jon, the one I'm focussed on, is making sure that we're doing the things we need to do to get the Government back on track. You're right to identify dealing with the Resources Super Profits Tax as one, and the Government is negotiating and very focused on reaching a genuine outcome about the Resources Super Profits Tax.
Then of course in the weeks to come, I will have something to say about climate change. I think there is a concern in the Australian community about what is happening next on climate change and I want to be talking to people about that, and then my aim is to be delivering steady, good Government.
FAINE: We'll come to some policies in the future in a moment, one more question about the turmoil we have just experienced, if you lose the election when it comes, and I think August, do you stand aside?
PM: Jon, I'd have to say I haven't given that a moment's thought or reflection. My aim is on doing what we need to do to make sure we're addressing some of the problems that the Government and the nation faces. For example I think the Resources Super Profits Tax has caused uncertainty and concern, that's why I'm focussed on negotiating to a good solution there.
Then I'm focussed on delivering good stable Government, that's what I've got my eyes on Jon, not hypothetical scenarios for the day after the election.
FAINE: You've done your share of negotiations, both as a lawyer, as a policy advisor and as a Minister in the Government. Why would mining industry executives make concessions when they know your time pressures, your deadline and all they have to do is tough it out?
PM: I think there's some goodwill abroad and I think that's the -
FAINE: Not when billions of dollars are at stake.
PM: Oh, Jon, I think there is some goodwill abroad and I think we can harness that goodwill to get to a solution. The debate about the Resources Super Profits Tax had become a very heated and sometimes acrimonious one. I think we've already taken some substantial steps to get a better sense of goodwill and collaboration into the debate. I think me deciding to cancel the Government's advertising, the mining industry reciprocating with its gesture of goodwill and cancelling its advertising, I think all of that has helped.
I think that there is goodwill. I think the mining industry wants to see us a strong and prosperous nation for the future. I want to see Australians getting a fairer share. I think we can find a meeting of minds here.
FAINE: Do you believe in God?
PM: No, I don't Jon, I'm not a religious person. I was brought up in the Baptist church. As is now very well known I think, we're Welsh migrants, we're Baptists. I grew up going to Mitcham Baptist Church, we lived two doors down from the Reverend there, Ian Porter, and I was great friends with his daughter Helen.
So I grew up going to Baptist youth group and all the rest. But during my adult life I've, you know, found a different path. I'm of course a great respecter of religious beliefs but they're not my beliefs Jon.
FAINE: For years now we've had Prime Ministers who make a ritual of Sunday morning going to church, being seen to be and filmed going to church, and both John Howard and Kevin Rudd courted successfully the vital Christian vote. How are you going to in any way attract those voters and that support?
PM: Jon, I am not going to pretend a faith I don't feel, and for people of faith I think the greatest compliment I could pay to them is to respect their genuinely held beliefs and not to engage in some pretence about mine.
I think it's not the right thing, and I'm not reflecting on past Prime Ministers here, I'm definitely not doing that, but I'm trying to answer your question as frankly as I can - I've never thought it was the right thing for me to go through religious rituals for the sake of appearance.
You know, I am what I am, and people will judge that. For people of faith, what I would say to them is I grew up in a, you know, Christian church, a Christian background, a Baptist church, I won prizes for catechism for being able to remember Bible verses. I am steeped in that tradition, but I've made decisions in my adult life about my own views.
FAINE: Are you worried about the Christian vote?
PM: Look I'm, you know, worried about the national interest, about doing the right thing by Australians and I'll allow, you know, people to form their own views on whatever is going to drive their views.
What I can say to Australians broadly of course is I believe you can be a person of strong principle and values from a variety of perspectives and I've outlined mine to you.
FAINE: How can you meet global emissions targets, and specifically the ones we've signed up to, without a price on carbon?
PM: Jon, we are going to need a price on carbon, correct, absolutely right. And I have said that we want to move towards a broad and deep consensus about a price on carbon.
The reason a price on carbon works to cut emissions is it transforms the way you do things, it transforms the way you run your economy, it transforms the way we live as individuals in that economy and in that society.
If you're going to make changes that broad and that deep then you need a community consent to it, an understanding of it, and frankly I don't think we have that at the moment, so we'll be working towards that community consensus.
FAINE: Do you have a conflict of interest with your partner Tim Mathieson working for Albert Dadon and the Ubertas group which is one of the key lobbyists for the pro-Israel side of the Middle East debate in Australia, and a former Ambassador to the Middle-East writes a letter to the Fairfax newspapers today saying that you don't criticise Israel because of those connections.
PM: Look I've seen that letter to the newspapers and of course that is not right. I've made up my own views about Israel and made them publicly known well before there was any suggestion that my partner would work in a property group associated with Mr Dadon.
Indeed the statements that got national attention here and some criticism about were the statements I made at the time of the Gaza conflict when I was Acting Prime Minister which was of course well before there was any suggestion that my partner would be employed in this way. So - simply not an accurate recording of history Jon, and not an accurate recording of how I've formed my views.
FAINE: Will Tim Mathieson continue to work for the Ubertas Group?
PM: Well, you know, Tim's his own person with his own life, with his own job. I of course have taken advice, I took it at the time that Tim first took that job, to make sure that, you know, I don't sit at a Cabinet table or make a decision that would be inappropriate given that he's employed in that way and I've made all of the necessary declarations and disclosures.
You know Jon, I think maybe me sitting in this chair talking to you today as Prime Minister is saying very visibly to the nation we're in a bit of a different age. Kevin obviously was an example of that, Kevin was the first Prime Minister as I understand it, to have a partner with her own career and a formidable and successful career it is.
Now of course I'm the first woman, I'm obviously the first person to have a male partner, he's got his own career and own job and I hope that people would understand that, that he's got a right to live his life too.
FAINE: Did Stephen Baker get too long a time out from the tribunal for 12 weeks from last week's punch-up?
PM: Given all of the things I've said across my working life about people respecting umpires, particularly industrial umpires, I don't think that I can, I don't think that I can criticise an umpire, a tribunal in any setting now Jon.
FAINE: Well I thought I'd ask a football question in there somewhere.
PM: There'll be some upset fans though, that's for sure.
FAINE: Your next interview awaits, I'm grateful to you for your time this morning and look forward to a chance when you can join us to take talkback in the studio.
PM: Thanks very much Jon. 


Adelaide 
BYNER : Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard, good morning.
PM: Well thank you very much.
BYNER: Now we obviously have a challenge in front of us in the country because we had recently one of your chief advisors Bruce Hawker describe Kevin Rudd, only days before his demise, as the intellectual powerhouse of Labor. Do you agree with that assessment?
PM: Kevin Rudd of course is an incredibly intelligent man and that's why if the Government's re-elected, and I'm not taking anything for granted, it's going to be a close hard contest, but if the Government's re-elected I'd be delighted to have him serve as a senior Cabinet Minister.
I believe that across the Government these is real depth in the team, I think it's a good team and I'm obviously now leading the team to do the things that I believe are necessary to get us back on track and to deal with a series of issues that have obviously caused community concern.
BYNER: Julia, Prime Minister, you will know that many of your backbench colleagues, some from WA, have actually gone public and said, quote, we want more substance and less spin. Do you concur with that?
PM: Look I believe I'm a person of substance, I mean I understand that it's fashionable to chide politicians about spin Leon. What's motivated me in politics is substance and as Minister for Education I think I'm entitled to say I've delivered reforms of substance that will be making a difference for Australian kids and for the future of this country in five, 10, 15, 20 years time.
BYNER: But Prime Minister you're in electoral trouble, or you were with Kevin Rudd, with those same policies, so what's changed?
PM: Already I've stamped my direction on the Government. To give one example of that, I've stamped my direction on the future of population policy which of course is such a major issue as we try and envisage the Australian of 2020, 2030, 2040, 2050. I've said I don't want us hurtling down the track to a big Australia.
I think it's time to sit back, take a moment, take a breath and look at the policies that we need to deal with congestion and pressures in some parts of the country and crying out for more workers and more people in other parts of the country.
BYNER: Well you talk about sustainability which is sensible. But the ability to grow food is being undermined by the global Pacman that seems only interested in corporate profit. How highly do you rate food security?
PM: Of course Leon, people have to eat - having just chomped my way though a banana - people have to eat. And obviously making sure that we've got secure food supplies is vital.
Leon, all of these things are the stuff of Government and one of the things that I very, very much believe is that Australians want to see a steady and methodical approach to Government, taking things a step at a time, piece by piece. I am that kind of person and that's the kind of Government I want to lead.
BYNER: Well that's good to hear, but you see my question or point on this this morning is predicated, and this is only one example, that in general we trade with China, China's a great country but in terms of our competition with countries like China they have a labour advantage in cost of 30 to 1, let alone the occ-health and safeties and other issues with pesticides and other farming practices which we ban here that are not necessarily banned in countries for whom we import. Now all of these things carry a cost, and the fear I think of Australia and you would surely understand this, is that we have to make sure that when we trade, we trade fairly. And what seems to be happening at the moment is many of our growers are being undermined by a market that is not fair. And not only that, you then have European Economic Community Governments that subsidise many of those products that end up on our shores cheaper, and of course our growers can't compete with that, so that's why I'm asking you about food security.
PM: Leon, we are a great trading nation. You know, I don't think, I don't think we should be afraid or anxious about our abilities to compete on the world stage, we are a great trading nation. Our farmers show that each and every day, how they can hold their own on the world's stage.
BYNER: How do we compete with a country that has a labour advantage of cost of 30 to 1?
PM: Well the reality is Leon we do, and in the environment of competing with that country, we are still a great trading nation, where of course our farmers are there trading their produce around the world -
BYNER: We are becoming -
PM: We still have successful manufacturing enterprises -
BYNER: Oh yes we do -
PM: - including the car industry that as a Government we did a lot to work with and help -
BYNER: Did -
PM: during the global financial crisis. I think Leon, you know, the difference perhaps here is, you know, should we be afraid of needing to hold our own of the world's stage? My simple answer to that is no we shouldn't, we're well and truly up for it.
Should there be fair rules and, you know, good standards, you've raised the question of importing food, do I believe the food we important should be absolutely safe and we should have good quarantine arrangements and all the rest? Yes I do.
BYNER: Alright, I want to ask you about your ascension to power because in the dying days of Kevin Rudd losing his Prime Ministerial job, he made public statements to the media about factions within his party, the same factions that have asked you to take over for reasons they've already made public, that wanted him to be tougher on border protection. Has that ask been made of you, as it was to the former Prime Minister?
PM: Leon, I think you know me pretty well -
BYNER: Yes.
PM: - and I think you know I'm a person of strong mind and I make my own decisions. I made my own decision and it was a tough one. I made my own decision to call for a ballot and obviously as we all know out of that ballot I have became Prime Minister.
When it come to the question of dealing with asylum seekers and policies about border protection, I will make my own decisions, I will rely on the advice of my team, my Cabinet, but the aim here is for me to say I do understand that boats being intercepted up north causes anxiety for community members. I share that anxiety, I understand it, people want to make sure that we're managing our borders well.
BYNER: So is there a watch this space message in what you've just said?
PM: Well there's a check this space message in the sense that a lot of things are already being done to manage our borders, including having more naval assets, more patrols up there than we've ever had before -
BYNER: And we're also getting a lot of people seeking asylum than we've had before for a while.
PM: Yes and you know we've had events in our region like the events in Sri Lanka.
Leon, I'll have something more to say about these things. We've got a deadline looming. We said there would be a processing pause for Sri Lankan asylum claims - that processing pause comes to an end on the 8th of July and Government's got to make some decisions about that in the days beyond, so I'll have something more to say about this in coming days.
BYNER: When do you plan to sit down with the mining executives, that is the mining executives that have the lion's share of the ores market, which we mine and sell and the royalties are paid to the States, have you sat down with them yet or are you about to do it in order to nut out the mining tax debacle which has not helped you?
PM: Negotiations, genuine negotiations are underway Leon, they will continue, they will have my personal attention and focus. I believe that in a spirit of goodwill and showing some respect to each other we can get this sorted out, we can see a meeting of minds and that's my aim.
BYNER: Because what you probably can't afford to do, correct me if I'm wrong here, is to make any decision or compromise which then means that the bottom line delivery to your getting that budget help you need for that deficit, it needs to be based on what you've already calculated?
PM: Leon you're right, the mining tax is obviously being used in the Budget papers to fund a series of things like cutting the company tax rate.
We're going to work with the miners genuinely. Leon, we'll have those negotiations, we're having them now, we'll have them in a focussed way, in a respectful way and I do believe there will be an endpoint here, but what's driving me is not the, you know, temper of the polls or the tenor of the debate, what's driving me is it's not in the national interest for uncertainty and indeed acrimony to be there in the public debate.
BYNER: Okay. You may be aware that in Adelaide now we're having quite a controversy about an Adelaide Oval redevelopment and its cost. We recently heard that the cost to get what we want is going to be at least $700 million plus, but we've only got about $530, $540 million. Might you have a mind to put in, to help us get this development to a standard to which we aspire?
PM: Leon I'm obviously very, very fond of Adelaide, it's my home town and it's where my family still lives, but I'm also a Prime Minister who's very focussed on making sure that the budget returns to surplus in 2013. So Leon, you'll have to excuse me if I decline your invitation to make a commitment worth hundreds of millions of dollars on your show.
You know, obviously, I'm, you know, open to ideas and discussions but, you know, I want to run a Government that is very prudent about the budget and focussed on the dollars and the cents.
BYNER: Okay, when are we going to the polls?
PM: Leon, an election is due in the second half of this year, that's the ordinary time for an election. So I'm not going to nominate election day. You know, my focus now is on delivering good, steady, stable Government and the election will be held in the second half of the year which is the normal cycle and when it's due.
BYNER: Prime Minister, thank you for joining us today.
PM: Thanks Leon.
BYNER: My hope is, I mean you are regarded by many as one of the best Parliamentary performers and if you like question-answerers in the media, I like specifics, we tend to try and get some of those from you, I know you don't disagree with that because that's what we're here for, the hope is that you can do as Prime Minister, what you are able to do in the Parliament.
PM: Well Leon I'll be aiming whether I'm in the Parliament or elsewhere around the country, I'll be aiming to do my best.
BYNER: Julia Gillard, the Prime Minister.


Brisbane 
KING: Prime Minister, good morning and welcome to 612 ABC Brisbane.
PM: Good morning Madonna.
KING: Kevin Rudd wanted a job in your Cabinet. He's served as Prime Minister. Why did you say no?
PM: I thought the appropriate thing at this time, Madonna, was for me to make my Cabinet arrangements so that there was a maximum steady-as-she-goes for the Government. We've got a lot of work to do. We've got a lot of work to do to get the Government back on track. We've got a lot of work to do to renew our focus on a strong economy and good services.
KING: But if you -
PM: For Kevin, I thought the appropriate thing was for him to have an opportunity for a bit of rest and recuperation. There's nothing about this time period that's been easy for Kevin Rudd.
KING: No, but if he wanted to serve, and you're looking for steady-as-she- goes and, and, why not acquiesce to his request to stay in the Cabinet before the election?
PM: Well I thought the appropriate thing was for Kevin to get an opportunity for a bit of time out. I mean, he's a man who's worked unbelievably hard, unbelievably hard. And then of course if we are re-elected - and Madonna, I'm not taking anything for granted, it's going to be a close, tough contest - but if we are re-elected then I will be absolutely delighted to see Kevin Rudd serve in a senior role in the Government.
KING: Is it that you want to just put a little bit of space between that, the Rudd Government, and the Gillard Government? That the polls, the voters are saying they want something slightly different, and this is a better way of doing that?
PM: Well Madonna, I can't explain it to you more than I just have. They are the factors that drove my decision. I did want to make sure that the team could be working, stable. Overwhelmingly of course people have stayed in the same positions doing the same jobs. I wanted to achieve that. And for Kevin I thought the best thing was a bit of a rest and, you know Madonna, if we're re-elected - so I'm not taking anything for granted, and I always feel slightly uncomfortable talking about Ministerial arrangements for the day beyond the election, because people might think that's taking the election for granted -
KING: Alright -
PM: And I certainly don't do that -
KING: But there are some -
PM: I would want to see Kevin Rudd serving in a very senior role.
KING: And we'll come more to that in just a moment. You sat as part of his senior management team when the talk was about a big Australia, this mining tax. You now say you'll offer a slightly different direction. Is that, did you disagree with Kevin Rudd at the time? Or is the slightly different direction determined by the voters via the polls telling you they want a different direction?
PM: I was vice-captain of the team and so I take my fair share of responsibility for the good things and the bad things. Madonna, I'm not going to canvass the kind of advice that I gave Kevin in conversations when he was Prime Minister, or the kinds of things I said round the Cabinet table.
KING: But with respect, don't voters deserve to know how you stood, whether you argued against them or whether you simply said yes and went out and sold them with a straight face, but really didn't agree with them or not?
PM: Well Madonna, I think voters want to know where I stand. And I've made that clear. I don't agree with saying we want a big Australia and hurtling towards a population target like 40 million. I think we do need to take the time to, you know, take a breath, get a sense of how we want to manage our population. And I get to travel widely round this country. And you know, there are very different needs in parts of Queensland, obviously Brisbane, Gold Coast there's been spectacular growth with all the stresses and strains that come with that and people would be very anxious about further intensive growth. And then you go to somewhere like Karratha or even further north in Queensland and they're crying out for workers. So we've got to get the balance right.
KING: Alright. You used the word 'hurtling' toward a big Australia. But the 36 million dollar [sic] figure is actually a Treasury projection based on current growth figures. How are you going to stop that 'hurtling'?
PM: Well, what I've done is I've asked Tony Burke to develop the set of policies here, and people say well, what's changed by changing the title to Sustainable Population? Well, it's a question of what you put at the centre of the decision-making here. And I've put at the centre of the decision-making the environmental concerns that flow from increased population and the community concerns that flow from needs for infrastructure, buses, trains, roads, freeways, how suburbs are going to work, how hospitals are going to cope, put that at the centre of the decision-making.
KING: But wasn't Tony Burke's brief always to develop a sustainable population policy?
PM: His brief was to be developing a population policy, and I've said to him as Prime Minister I'm setting a new direction, I'm not endorsing the big Australia approach. I've said to him, Tony when -
KING: But what is a big Australia?
PM: - when you do this work, front and centre of everything you do needs to be this emphasis on sustainability.
KING: And that wasn't the emphasis under his previous brief?
PM: Well clearly, by changing the title we've changed the substance, and how I want this work done.
KING: Alright, but what is a big Australia? Would you consider 36 million a big Australia?
PM: Well I think that's exactly the wrong place to start the debate, which is why I didn't endorse the words big Australia. The right place to start the debate is what is in our national interest, and what best meets our needs and work from there.
KING: Will voters know before an election whether your concern is over the number of migrants coming to Australia, or whether it's the amount of children Australians are having in terms of that growth factor?
PM: Well, Australians are going to make their decisions about kids based on their family circumstances and, you know, all of the things that make a life and make the life choices that women and men around this country make.
On immigration, Madonna, I'm a migrant. How did I get here? Well, the Australia of 1966 said it wanted more people, and my parents were the kind of people it wanted. Hopefully Australians have concluded they did pretty well on the deal, they gave us the ten pounds, or we paid the ten pounds to get here, they paid the rest of the costs. I hope people think they've done alright on the deal. But that's the kind of thing we need to work through.
KING: So do you have a view in terms of our immigration make-up, on whether we're accepting too many business migrants or too many families, too many asylum seekers? Or do you feel strongly about one of those categories?
PM: I feel strongly that business needs to be able to get access to skilled workers after this nation has done everything it can to generate those skills at home.
What I don't want to see is us going into the next decade with youth unemployment rates in some parts of this country at 10, 12, 14 per cent, whilst at the same time business figures say to me 'we can't get skilled workers'.
KING: Are we saying too many asylum seekers?
PM: Well, the number of refugees that come to this country has been steady for a long period of time now. Under the Rudd Government, under the Howard Government, the number has effectively been the same. Obviously, the concerns about asylum seekers are the concerns people feel when they see boats intercepted at sea. And I understand those concerns. I mean, Australia is our sanctuary. It is our home. We do want to manage our borders. We do want to make sure -
KING: It's a tiny part, though, isn't it, of the migrants we're taking?
PM: Oh certainly, the number is steady and it is not a big part of the intake. You're absolutely right there Madonna.
KING: You're coming to Brisbane tonight, is that right?
PM: Yeah, I am coming to Brisbane to fulfil a commitment I had before all of these events Madonna, a commitment to our Member, Yvette D'Ath, so I will be in Brisbane for that.
KING: And is it right you're charging $5,500 a head for mining types and other business people to come and have an exclusive dinner with you?
PM: The event I've got with Yvette D'Ath tonight is an event including party members and Labor supporters. I'm not 100 per cent of the confident of the cost Madonna, but I understand it's in the order of $40.
KING: $40, not $5,500 a head as we've been told?
PM: Ah look, the event I'm having tonight with Yvette D'Ath is a commitment I had before I became Prime Minister, and as I understand it, she's got a party members, personal supporters style event.
KING: Okay, we'll follow that up there. Just on the mining tax -
PM: Madonna, you may be referring to some other event, but that's the event I've got tonight.
KING: Alright, is there another event you have in Brisbane where mining executives and business groups have been asked for $5,500 a head?
PM: Madonna, obviously the ALP does - including in Queensland - does engage in fundraising, including fundraising with businesspeople. But I do want to be clear, what I'm doing tonight is more -
KING: But do you know of this other event?
PM: Look Madonna, I believe I will be in Queensland later in the week for another event associated with Queensland Labor. I don't have all of the details here with me of who's coming. But I can certainly say to you tonight - sorry, say to you today- that the event of tonight is as I've described it.
And in terms of people getting to put a view to me, I'm someone who tries to make sure that they listen and consult and learn from people. As Minister for Education, if I can just use examples there, I've done that in a variety of ways, including having for example Principals' Forums around the country where people just come and get their say.
KING: Alright, I appreciate your time this morning. Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thanks Madonna. 



JONES: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Alan.
JONES: Congratulations.
PM: Thank you very much.
JONES: You've given a tiny Welsh mining village a bit of a flutter in the last week. How do you pronounce C-W-M-G-W-R-A-C-H?
PM: Well, you can tell it's Welsh when you see that many Cs and, you know, Ws and Ms in a row. It's pronounced 'Coom-grack'.
JONES: Cwmgwrach, in the hills east of Swansea. Is that where you were born?
PM: No, I was actually born in Barry, but that's my father's village. That's where he grew up, and that's where many of the Gillards are still in residence. My father was one of seven brothers and sisters and apart from him coming to Australia and his younger brother, Terry, going around the world and settling next to London, basically everybody stayed, so, they went mining or they married miners, Alan, and so there are many generations of Gillards bred in that village.
JONES: So the red hair and the pale skin and they say raw determination are the signposts of a working-class Welsh heritage? One of your neighbours in the village, a Mr Basil Baker, was quoted this week as saying that when you were 16, quote, 'I remember asking her what she wanted to do with herself, supposing she probably wanted to become a wife and mother. She said to me 'I don't know what I want to do, but I know I want to be something I can work at and rise from the bottom to the top.'' You're at the top now, it's fair to say. Is the view flash?
PM: Well, the view is full of challenges and pressures, but obviously it's a tremendous opportunity to be able to outline a vision for the nation and to make a difference and Alan, I'm driven today by the things I've been driven by all of my adult life. Closest to my heart is making sure that every kid gets a fair chance at a great education. If you look at my life and say 'what's been different from the life that my father has led or my mother has led?', and they've lived long and happy lives and they're still with me, Alan, which is terrific, but the difference is I got a great quality education and great opportunities when I was young, and I'd really like us as a nation to be able to turn to each other and say 'every child, no matter what the circumstances of their birth, gets a great education in this country.'
JONES: Well, let me ask you this - when I spoke to you on 6 May, I could see all this on the wall and I asked how could your Government be happy-
PM: -Nostradamus Jones.
JONES: No, but I did, no, but I did. I said, I said to you 'how can your Government be happy', I said, 'with a leader who's taking you into polling territory which demonstrates that on the last poll you wouldn't have won a federal election?' You said this:
PM CLIP: Alan, I'm very proud of the efforts that Kevin Rudd has made to save this nation from recession and to set this nation up for a stronger and fairer future. Kevin's obviously developed and driven his personal plan to improve our health care system and put it on a sustainable footing for the future. All of these are the important things that the nation wants to see done. I'm very proud of what Kevin's achieved and he's certainly, I believe, going to put before the nation plans to achieve so much more.
JONES: Now, Wayne Swan said the same thing to me. How do you reconcile that with your current position?
PM: Alan, I believe that we've been a good Government, but in recent times we have lost our way, and so when I reflect on the period of the Government and what Kevin Rudd achieved, I think he has achieved some remarkable things.
JONES: But did he lose his way between May 6 and last week?
PM: Well, I think in recent times the Government's lost its way. Alan, I'm not gonna canvas, kind of, private conversations I had with Kevin Rudd or concerns that I expressed, you know, in Cabinet meetings and the like.
I do believe there are things that we can be proud of and Kevin Rudd can be particularly proud of, and leading this nation through the global financial crisis, bringing the budget back to surplus in 2013, an unemployment rate of 5.2 per cent - these are things we can be proud of, but there are things that we need to do to get the Government back focussed on strengthening the economy, giving people the services that they need. I think we had lost our way, there were things that needed to be fixed and as the new leader I'm setting about fixing them.
JONES: Do you understand the irony of this, that in a Party which is supposed to be the champion of working families, it has given itself the option it refuses to give other employers. In other words, you can take away the job, and rightly, of a perceived non-performer - he's gone - but an employer can't under your legislation.
PM: Alan, you and I are going to have what's been a constant debate for us. Under the Fair Work system, of course, if an under-employee is causing a problem in a business than they can ultimately be dismissed. You've got to be fair, you've got to be reasonable. That's the difference between the fair work system and Work Choices.
Now, political parties, being-
JONES: Kevin Rudd was gone in a day. Kevin Rudd was gone in a day. No employer in this country can get rid of a person in a day if they are ineffective and inefficient, which was the reason Kevin Rudd went, but no employer who's got a Kevin Rudd on his books can get rid of him as you got rid of Kevin Rudd.
PM: I think the position of Prime Minister, being in politics, is a bit different from working in the local shop or at the local factory. People can get rid of us in a day on election day if they choose to, Alan. That's the life we've chosen. It comes with special obligations, special risks, but it also comes with amazing benefits because if you're passionately driven to deliver change, to make things better for the country, then, of course, politics is the way to do it, so, I'm not sure the analogy holds up.
JONES: OK, well, let's take, just take, I just want to, because this is what's concerning people in relation to, now, your Prime Ministership, because every issue that's brought Kevin Rudd alienation from the electorate was rubber stamped by you. I mean, there were things like the batts in the ceiling, the Grocery Watch which didn't work, the Fuel Watch which didn't work, the solar panel rebate scheme that had to be called off, an emissions trading scheme whose abandonment you promoted and now this mining tax. Now, you're a powerful woman. If you'd wanted any of those to not proceed you would have only had to prosecute your case in the Party room or the kitchen cabinet the way you do in Parliament every day, but you defended them. Mr Rudd goes and you stay. How do you reconcile that?
PM: Alan, once again, I'm not going to go to internal conversations within our Government, but I can say this to you: I take my fair share of the responsibility for the decisions of this Government - the good things and the bad things. I'm not seeking to walk away from that. I was vice captain of the team. Now I'm captain of the team I think that gives me the ultimate responsibility for the decisions that we make from here, and I am going to freely say to you, Alan, you're not going to have to push me to get me to say this, there are things that went off track. There are things that need to be corrected, and I'm here, I think, with a style that people would acknowledge is fairly methodical. I'm here to make sure we get back on track on those things that have caused community concern, and we're going to do that day by day and Alan, if I just can say I've got a little bit of good news for you this morning on things that I know have caused you concern.
JONES: Yes.
PM: I know you've been very concerned about the position of self-funded retirees and how much they have to draw down out of their superannuation-
JONES: -And they've suffered capital losses.
PM: Yeah, when they've suffered capital losses, which has of course been the story of the global financial crisis. You would be aware, Alan, we halved the amount they need to draw down for two years. I can tell you this morning, Alan, I'm going to extend that by another year. I know this has been a significant issue for you and your listeners and I want to take some pressure off by announcing that.
JONES: Right, the draw down relief will be in the form of a 50 per cent reduction in the minimum payment amounts for account-based allocated market-linked pensions. Thank you for that. I mean, Nick Sherry did do an excellent job on all of that. He's still in charge of that portfolio area, isn't he?
PM: Yes, Nick is still there, working away for us. Nick and Chris Bowen actually look after these areas. Nick Sherry, obviously, has had a passionate, long-term involvement in superannuation. Chris Bowen is the relevant Minister today, but, clearly, we all work together on these questions.
JONES: OK, well, let me just come to this big, big issue - the mining tax. Wayne Swan, who's now your deputy and has played a hard line in the development of this tax that's caused the Government so much grief, he argued the design of the tax was right, he prosecuted the war against the miners with some really rough verbal assaults. Now, when every man and his dog around the world was telling us what a super profits tax was doing to Australia's international reputation, and that it would make Australia uncompetitive as a place for investment by global miners, you were nodding your head in agreement with Wayne Swan and with Kevin Rudd.
PM: Alan, I think you would see from my public statements that I have been concerned that the tenor of the public debate had got a bit fast and furious and we needed a bit more light and a bit less heat. When I was in Western Australia in the last few weeks I did say at the Western Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry that, actually, there's a bit of agreement here: a bit of agreement that Australians are entitled to a fairer share; a bit of agreement that the mining industry can pay more tax, so let's build on that.
JONES: No, people don't understand what that means. You see, people pay tax, companies pay tax. The more profit they make the more tax they pay. The more mines, more stuff that comes out of the ground, the more royalties they pay, so they pay their tax, so the argument out there that you've got is with these people going to have to pay a tax under a system that doesn't apply to other business. Now, my understanding is if you don't resolve this by the end of the week this advertising campaign by miners is going to start again. Is that your understanding?
PM: Alan, we've got a period of goodwill here. I'm not, you know, obviously the mining industry will make decisions for the future, but we've shown goodwill, got the advertising off the TV screens, the Government advertising. They've shown a gesture of goodwill in return and got their advertising off the TV screens, but Alan, there's something special about mining that we should recognise and it's the foundation stone of this debate - companies pay tax, absolutely right. They pay 30 per cent tax, so the more they are profitable the more tax they pay.
The difference with mining is the key resource is our resource coming out of the ground and we've got to price it properly because we only get to dig it up once. Now, that is not the same as other businesses. If you and I decided we'd open a clothing store we'd have to pay a manufacturer for the clothes that we sold in our store-
JONES: -Hang on, these mining companies pay pretty healthy dividends for the right to go down and the high risk involved in finding the stuff. Look-
PM: -What they pay, Alan, now, for the use of the resource, what they pay now is State-based royalties, and those State-based royalties-
JONES: -So you're in favour of a mining tax, a super tax?
PM: No, Alan, what I'm in favour of is a profit-based tax that properly values the mineral wealth in our ground-
JONES: -All company tax is profit-based, Julia. All company tax is profit based.
PM: Yes, but Alan, Alan, let's just, absolutely right, I'm agreeing with you, we're not having an argument about that. What's different about mining? The key resource us a resource that is owned by everyone and we've got to work out what that's worth. Historically-
JONES: -That's not quite right, either. Constitutionally, what's under the ground is owned by the States.
PM: Well, you know, Australians, Alan - whether they're sitting in their States or sitting in their nation, it's owned by Australians.
JONES: I just attended a meeting in London of investment bankers. They asked me to attend a luncheon. We are in a state of utter disrepute here. They're laughing at us and advising fund managers not to put their money in Australia as a result of what the Rudd Government did. Now, the entire reason for having this resource tax one week before the budget was to get $12 billion into the forward estimates so you, not you, Kevin Rudd and Wayne Swan when they were there could boast to the electorate economic responsibility, figures in the black. Now, you're saying-
PM: -Oh, Alan, Alan, let's just, I agree you've got a passionate view about this, but let's just unpack the facts a little bit.
JONES: Well, it's true!
PM: Let's unpack the facts. Look, we're having a respectful conversation with the mining industry and we will continue to work with them and hopefully work our way to a conclusion about the Resources Super Profits Tax.
Why is mining different? Well, because it's relying on a resource we all jointly own. At the moment, that is valued through State-based royalties. They tend to apply tonne by tonne. We believe it would be better, and the mining industry believes it would be better, if that was profit-based.
JONES: This is a 40 per cent tax, Julia. Look, why don't you-
PM: -When, well, Alan, we're obviously talking through questions associated with the tax, but the concept here is actually a concept that the mining industry and the Government agree on, that it would be better that what they effectively pay the Australian people for the resource was based on profits, and so that's the conversation we're having.
JONES: All company tax is based on profit. Can I just say-
PM: -Yeah, but the difference with mining, Alan, and I really think this is the absolute nub of it, if you and I started a dress shop or a restaurant we would be paying someone-
JONES: That is wrong.
PM: For the raw materials. You'd be paying for clothes or for food.
JONES: Julia, Julia-
PM: The mineral wealth is there-
JONES: PM-
PM: And it's got to be valued and priced.
JONES: PM, they pay you an inadequate amount to be Prime Minister. So if you want to make a big quid, go out tomorrow and become a mining developer and a person in the mining industry, and take all that risk if you want. But you don't factor any of this in business, none of you in your Government, with the high risk involved in even finding the stuff. And surely if you were going to be fair dinkum about this, you'd say we'll take the $12 billion out of the forward estimates, and we'll start again. So let me ask you simply, will you give a commitment in the starting of it again and the good faith and the renegotiations, will you give a commitment that you'll take the $12 billion out of the forward estimates before we decide where we go next?
PM: The commitment I'll give, Alan, is I'm going to continue the good conversation and negotiations we're having with the mining industry now. And they have not said to us that a pre-condition for those discussions is what you've said to me now. So we'll keep working with the mining industry. The money in the forward estimates is money that is there to support things that would also help us grow our economy.
JONES: But you don't have the money.
PM: Alan, Alan of course, of course-
JONES: But you see, if you leave the business as it is now Prime Minister, leave it as it is now, you get $12 billion. You're saying we're going to compromise. We must therefore have in your mind the notion that eventually less than $12 billion will come in. Otherwise, the mining industry will be all over the top of you. If there's less than $12 billion, what are you going to take out of the expenditure to accommodate the fact that you don't have the revenue?
PM: Alan, I'll keep working through with the mining industry. The agreement that has been expressed generally by the mining industry is they would prefer a profits-based tax rather than volume related royalties. So that's, there's agreement on that. We can build on that agreement when we have worked our way through, and obviously Alan, the conversation is continuing. But we will, we will continue, having respectful negotiations-
JONES: But Julia, it's a dishonest, it's a dishonest-
PM: And if we strike an arrangement, then of course all aspects of it will be public, including the Budget aspects.
JONES: But it's a dishonest Budget. You've got $12 billion in the Budget in forward estimates and you don't have that money. Now, you-
PM: Well Alan, just- I think we need to just take a little, a little bit of a breath and settle down on words like dishonest. I mean, obviously, the Government's Budget is its projections for revenue and expenditure. I mean, we don't sit here, we don't sit here, you know, with a kind of a magic pile of cash. Of course money is raised through tax. You pay tax, other Australians pay tax, companies pay tax. And there is the proposal for the Resources Super Profits Tax.
JONES: But you-
PM: That's what's in the Budget-
JONES: But you put $12 billion-
PM: And then of course we spend money on things, you know, we spend money on pensions. We spend it on health. We spend it on education. And we have put in the Budget-
JONES: $12 billion.
PM: The Resources Super Profits Tax will be spent on infrastructure-
JONES: But you didn't discuss that with the industry.
PM: Supporting the super changes-
JONES: But you put $12 billion-
PM: For working Australians-
JONES: PM-
PM: Company tax and small business breaks.
JONES: PM, you put the $12 billion into the Budget without any discussion with the industry about whether that was a legitimate amount to expect from the industry. And you've also put in the Budget that the Australian economy will grow at a rate of three and three quarter percent. Now, in the past two months, we've seen profit warnings from companies like Toll Holdings, Elders, Perpetual Holdings, Primary Healthcare, Virgin Blue, Insurance Australia Group- how the hell do you get three and three quarter percent economic growth, and what is that going to do to the Budget?
PM: Well Alan, on the projections for the economy, we obviously rely on Treasury advice and forecasting. And that is the way that Governments have done their Budget since Adam was a boy. So nothing has changed about that.
JONES: And you know that they've mostly been wrong rather than right.
PM: Well, but Alan, I've had conversations with people- you know, the-
JONES: Ken Henry? Is he your principal economic adviser? He says there should be a super profits tax on more than the mining industry. Do you agree with that?
PM: Well, can I say this Alan, I don't believe in public debate that one should go after the public servants. They are there providing the best of their advice, and the best of their intelligence. And Governments of course over the ages have relied on official Treasury forecasts and projections to put Budgets together. We're doing no more or no less in that regard than Mr Howard did, than Mr Keating did, than Mr Hawke did, than Mr Fraser did, and so the list goes on. So that is the foundation stone of the growth projections and other things in the Budget. Alan, we've been criticised every which way on this.
There was a time when the Opposition was coming at us and saying the Budget forecasts, they're all too optimistic, things are going to be worse. And then they started coming at us and saying the Budget forecasts, they're all too optimistic. I mean, they're all, all round the place. Now, what we do, day after day, is we get the best advice from Treasury about Budget forecasts and we rely on it. Now the decisions about the Resources Super Profits Tax, Alan, I can understand you've got your strong criticisms about the past. What I'd say to you is that let's look at the future. We're having a respectful conversation, a genuine negotiation in an environment of goodwill, because people have got their ads off the radios and TV screens. I think building on that is the best way forward.
JONES: Okay, in your former portfolio, education, 112 complaints on behalf of aggrieved school communities. And the fellow Orgill, Brad Orgill, in charge of this inquiry, wouldn't accept them because he couldn't guarantee the anonymity of the principals. Principals are intimidated to the extent that they have to remain anonymous. Can I just ask a simple question that the public are saying- what sort of show are we running where people are being frightened into telling, away from telling the truth?
PM: I don't think we're running that kind of show. I've met with a lot of school principals as Minister for Education. And they've always been the most forthright of people. I've had principals forums around the country where principals have sat with me and said front-up, very clearly, you're doing this well, you're doing this badly, we'd like to see this change.
JONES: So is that not right? Is that not right that they feel intimidated?
PM: Well, I don't believe school principals feel intimidated. They are-
JONES: Why wouldn't Brad Orgill take their complaints, he said he couldn't guarantee their anonymity?
PM: Well, I can explain that. This was a set of complaints coming through third parties to Brad Orgill. What I can absolutely say for Brad Orgill and his taskforce, is if there is anyone listening today, a school principal or anyone else who wants to directly approach the taskforce on the basis that their name is kept out of it, they can do that Alan.
JONES: Alright, just let me ask you this. Given the published discrepancies between Catholic schools and public school building costs under the BER- Building the Education Revolution- will you be seeking legal advice as to whether there's been any attempt to defraud the Commonwealth by any of the contractors? And if so, commence proceedings for recovery of any sums that have been overcharged?
PM: Well Alan, let's be a bit careful about this. If I got advice in any area of Government expenditure- whether it was Building the Education Revolution, what we spend on pensions, what we spend on health, what we spend on defence- if I got any advice from anywhere that someone had defrauded the Commonwealth then of course I'd be there doing everything possible to get that taxpayers' dollar back. On Building the Education Revolution, the reason I appointed a leading Australian businessperson to look at value for money, to look at the whole system, is because the Government wants the benefit of his advice. That advice has already led to us withholding some payments, and his report, first report, is due in August. Now of course it will go to Simon Crean as Minister for Education. And we will respond to it. But we've got Brad Orgill on the job deliberately, shirt sleeves rolled up, in schools, and if people want to approach him and say, you know, my name's Suzie, I think this, but please don't mention my name to the school or to anybody else when you investigate it, then of course that can happen.
JONES: Okay, well I'm going to go back to some principals and check that assurance that you have given. Just Ken Henry- let's take the mining tax. Forget everything else that I think Ken Henry's made a mess of. But look at just the mining tax. He and Wayne Swan- and Wayne Swan only took his advice- is the architect of all of this. What does this say about Henry's judgment and to the extent that you are now being forced to investigate how you can change the whole thing, is Henry going to continue on as Treasury Secretary, and principal economic adviser to the Government, given that he's presided over so many programs that have cost you enormously in terms of political capital?
PM: Yes, Ken Henry is continuing as the Secretary of Treasury. And Alan, let's just get a bit of context and a bit of fairness into talking about Mr Henry. Ken Henry is also the Secretary of Treasury that provided advice to the Government as we've gone about dealing with the global financial crisis and global recession. And here we are as a nation getting back to surplus in 2013. Wayne's just been to the G20 as Treasurer and Deputy Prime Minister. In the G20, all the other nations are sitting round the table going 'I know, what about we try halving our deficits by 2013'. We will be in surplus in 2013.
JONES: Well I'm not too sure, hang on-
PM: And we've got an unemployment rate-
JONES: You say you'll be, but these are forward estimates based on growth rates of three and three quarter percent which you'll get advice shortly, I'm sure, aren't sustainable.
PM: And Alan, we're comparing ourselves with nations that rely on their own Treasuries for forecasts. And when Wayne Swan sat at that G20 table looking at the other developed economies of the world, there they are saying to themselves 'gee, it'd be nice to halve our deficit by 2013'. We'll be in surplus. And then you look around that table and you say, well, who's got a 5.2% unemployment rate? It's not America. It's not the UK. It's not the European zone. They're all struggling with figures over 7, some of them with figures over 9, here we are, 5.2%, Australians in work. You started off by saying to me you doubt, you doubt the veracity of Mr Henry's advice. I just think, Alan, in weighing that up, you should also be weighing up the advice he gave us and the work he did with the Government-
JONES: We should talk about employers in this country.
PM: As we responded to the global financial crisis-
JONES: Mr Henry doesn't create jobs, employers create jobs.
PM: And we've got great employers in this country Alan. They played their part. And we've got great, you know, employees. We've got unions in the country who responded well to the challenge of the global financial crisis. Look at Holden, in my home town of South Australia. Union employees work with management, short-time arrangements, and you know what, we've still got a car industry as a result. Now, these are important things.
JONES: One final question. There are many jurisdictions around the world which have an inheritance tax. Now people call it a death duty. If you didn't get the money from the mining taxes- $12 billion in the forward estimates, which is going to dramatically affect the credibility of the Budget- if you couldn't get that money, and it's quite clear that even if you get some, you're not going to get the 12, otherwise you wouldn't be negotiating to reduce it, would there be any circumstances in which you would consider an inheritance tax or a death duty?
PM: Absolutely not, no.
JONES: Okay, good to talk to you. Thank you for your time. We'll talk again.
PM: Thanks Alan.



HOST: Madam Prime Minister, hello madam.
PM: Hello, I'm not sure madam's necessary.
HOST: I was going to ask you what are people calling you in interviews?
PM: They're calling me Prime Minister, sometimes they're calling me Julia, hopefully they're not calling me anything else other than that.
HOST: Ok, alright.
HOST: Look we're going to play a song, but I feel it's inappropriate because like here you are, finally.
HOST: Do you mind waiting for a couple of minutes?
PM: I can listen to a song.
HOST: Ah good.
HOST: Are you rocking it with this David Guetta, Fergie thing? I'll play it to ya, you tell us if you like it, Julia Gillard, madam Prime Minister next.
[Song plays]
HOST: David Guetta and Fergie, No Gettin Over you this morning here at 2Day FM, you're on the air Kyle, Jackie-O and the new Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard, is joining us. What did you think of that song, is it your thing?
PM: Well I wouldn't have quite said that, you know, I'm a kind of really bad 80s dag I'm sorry.
HOST: We play a lot of that music here.
HOST: You'd get on well with our new newsreader here Emma. Hey congratulations, how is it being the first female Prime Minister of the country, is that good for you or does the female part not really stress you it's just, it's about being the Prime Minister.
PM: Well to use your language I think the female part doesn't really stress me, it is about being Prime Minister and obviously having the opportunity to do the things you think need to be done for hardworking people around the country. I think we've been a pretty good Government but we need to fix some problems to get a renewed focus on making sure the economy's strong and making sure people can get the services they need when they need them.
HOST: Do you know when I found out that you'd done the coup?
PM: When did you find out?
HOST: I was in the Los Angeles airport and I think there was what some regional folk that were flying back as well, because we were all lined up, because I'm a gate sitter, I don't do the, I don't sit at the lounge. I was sitting at the gate, some bloke goes 'hey have you heard Julia Gillard's in charge, Rudd's out, Gilliard's in?'
HOST: That's the text message I got.
HOST: And it was the talk of the Australia line, someone's like 'I haven't heard anything about that' and there was like a big chatter I was just listening to everybody. And I knew that it had happened, obviously, being like a huge media icon, I'm across all of these things-
PM: Of course you are.
HOST: Well for me it came out of the blue, what about for you was this a, was this something that you know, I mean for us it just happened all of a sudden, we had no idea-
HOST: Even The Australian didn't know the day before.
HOST: What about from your end though?
PM: Events did move very quickly last week so I can understand that there were people in lines in airports going 'what's going on, what have you heard' and people glued to Sky TV and all the rest of it, glue to their radios, look I can understand that. It did happen quickly and I had to make a very tough decision, obviously I'd been Kevin Rudd's deputy, I'd been very loyal to him, but I had to take a tough decision that I thought was in the nation's interest and so you have seen the change from last week. And now my focus is, you know, methodically, one footstep in front of the other, doing the things we need to do to get the Government back on track and make sure we're doing the right thing by Australians.
HOST: You seem genuine and I was making the point this morning that men are notorious throughout history of just saying anything just to get away with having to deal with any issues, and women if they say they're going to do something, they usually do it. Is that what you're going to be, like I would, forget the first female Prime Minister, the first Prime Minister in history that actually does what they say they're going to do, that would be a surprise for everybody.
PM: Well I'm going to try and do that, look, you know I think when you're doing something as complicated as being Prime Minister, there are days when people are gonna look at what you're doing and go, that's fantastic and there are going to be other days when they're gonna look at what you're doing and say 'why on earth did she do that?' So I'm not going to try and promise people that everything's going to be, you know, smooth sailing and they're gonna be applauding at the end of each day, this job's too tough for that, but I'll be trying my best and trying my best to be as frank as I can with the Australian people about the challenges we face, the great strengths of this country, it's a fantastic place, but there are some things we can do better and we should do better and we'll be working on that.
HOST: What are those things, what are the main things that you want to change and that you think we can do better?
HOST: You have to have a to-do list? All women have a to-do list.
HOST: What's on the top of the list?
PM: I do have a to-do list, my to-do list includes working our way through this Resources Super Profits Tax issue which we are doing-
HOST: We don't know anything about that-
PM: Right, as we speak. We've obvious got a set of things to do to make sure we're tackling climate change, I know a lot of people have been disappointed with what's happened with the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, we've got to do some work on helping the nation face up to climate change, and close to my heart, I mean I'm, you know, a migrant kid who came to this country and when I look back on what's made my life obviously a fantastic family, great mum and dad have been big, big parts of my life. But the other thing that's been a huge part of my life is getting a quality education, and I'd really like us to be able to say to each other, truthfully and genuinely, that every kid, no matter where they're from in this country, no matter of the circumstances of their birth, who their parents are, they're going to go to a great school and get a great education.
HOST: We have a couple of people who want to ask you some questions, Kristy had one particular question that was important to her, hi Kristy.
CALLER: Hi Jackie, hi Kyle, g'day Julia, congratulations by the way.
PM: Thank you Kristy.
CALLER: I just wanted if you're chasing I guess more votes particularly for the Labor Party, would you consider legalising gay marriage?
PM: We've got, I may be disappointing you now Kristy but this is the frank answer, we've got very clear Labor Party policy on this and won't be changing, that we believe they Marriage Act is appropriate in its current form, that it's recognising that marriage is between a man and a woman, but we have as a Government taken steps to equalise treatment for gay couples in things that Government does like social security benefits and the like.
HOST: But that's the Party, what do you personally feel, I mean is that your own personal view as well?
PM: Look that is my view, I think that that's, that's where we're at as a community now and I think it's appropriate that for these very sensitive issues that we're reflecting community views.
HOST: Maria, now we spoke to you earlier this morning about your father who is in hospital at the moment.
CALLER: That's right.
HOST: As promised we're putting you on with the Prime Minister.
HOST: Now Maria it's not the Prime Minister's fault, she has no idea about your story.
HOST: It's more to do with the hospital system.
HOST: Just run it through bullet point form.
CALLER: What happened was Dad was taken to ambulance, left in emergency for 24 hours, not given his medication yesterday, he's sick, he's a cancer patient, he's a heart patient, and I'm ringing up to ask questions what's wrong with my Dad, my kids weren't allowed to go in a see him because they were so busy. Something has to be done, he's 76 and it's not fair.
HOST: They can't get a doctor to see him, you know obviously there's an issue with the hospital system.
PM: Yeah look I 'm really sorry to hear that that's happened to Maria and her Dad and you know I've got my parents in their early 80s and we do worry what's going to happen to them next and you know when they need the health system they really need it. There are things we need to do to improve the hospitals, we particularly need to improve what's happening in our emergency departments. Part of the health changes we're in the process of rolling out, and they're going to take some time, got to be frank about that, you don't fix these things overnight, but part of the health changes is making sure that there's a four hour system in emergency so people are seen in the clinically recommended times and people are seen within four hours.
HOST: Oh that's good.
HOST: Yeah, rather than, well her dad was waiting you know for 24 hours and still no one had seen him so that obviously is a big problem.
PM: Yeah that would be dreadful for him and really stressful for everybody else.
HOST: No what, you only need a couple of people in that emergency ward to have rung in sick that day and it throws the whole thing into chaos as well.
PM: Part of the problem here, or a really big explanation of it is we're short of doctors, we don't have enough nurses, that's because of cutbacks, not under this Government, under the last Government, in fact Tony Abbott can talk to you about that because he was Health Minister.
HOST: No we don't talk to the Opposition because we only talk to the winners.
PM: Right, but you know I think everybody would recognise you can't make a doctor or a nurse overnight so we are making more of them but we need those more doctors and nurses to come on stream.
HOST: I have two questions, you might find them to be not high on your priority list.
PM: I'll do my best Kyle.
HOST: But Mr Rudd, promised us he would invite us to Kirribilli House for a barbecue, never happened, I brought it up several occasions.
HOST: Well it was promised before he became, he said when I become Prime Minister, then the barbecue will happen-
HOST: Yeah and he didn't invite us over and we kept asking-
HOST: We kept reminding-
HOST: And then he just never came back and then we would ring the press secretary they'd just say yeah he's scheduled to come on, and that just dragged on for like a year.
PM: Alright look I will review this promise but Kyle and Jackie you would know my form with a barbecue is not that great. You've probably seen me on TV chucking sausages around on the floor, but we'll see what we can do.
HOST: And they only other thing, is will there be any change to the law on redheaded jokes?
PM: Ah no you'll still, you'll still be able to make redheaded jokes but expect to get a response when you do, right from the top.
HOST: I think you'll do a good job, you seem like a cool, like a cool lady.
PM: Oh well thank you for that.
HOST: You're welcome.
HOST: Thanks for talking to us.
HOST: Good luck with it. I mean you're not moving into Kirribilli they say?
HOST: Yeah.
PM: Look I'm sort of happy living where I live and during the second half of the year the election's due so we'll have the election and obviously I think it's going to be tough, it's going to be close fought, but we'll see what happens and I'll be asking people to renew their trust in me and the Government and if they do then we'll make all the appropriate moves at that point.
HOST: And do you think that'll be sometime soon?
PM: Look the election's due second half of the year, we've got some things we need to do as a Government so that's my focus at the moment.
HOST: Ok.
HOST: Yeah we're looking at the moment for, we're filming this X-Factor show you would have heard about that, it's a big deal.
PM: It is a big deal.
HOST: Now we're looking to house these kids, do you reckon we could cut a deal where we could rent that joint off you? Put the kids in there?
PM: I think that's going to have to be a no, sorry about that.
HOST: The first thing we ask is a no.
HOST: At least she told you no, didn't make a false promise
HOST: Thank you, nice to talk to you. Can I do the madam Prime Minister thing? I like it.
PM: You can if you like.
HOST: Seems very Margaret Thatcher, I love it. Thank you nice to chat.
PM: Bye bye.



HOST: Well, Julia Gillard welcome to the show.
PM: Thank you very much. Now, I am old enough to remember the Mary Tyler Moore Show, where you got that song from. Love is all around, no need to fake it, all of that kind of stuff, but thank you for the re-write, that's very generous of you.
HOST: No problem at all.
HOST: We thought it fit you perfectly.
PM: Look, I'm going to have to make sure I've got a coffee and I'm playing it in the office. I'll be doing the paper work to it.
HOST: She used to throw a hat in the air at the end of it. It was lovely.
PM: She did, the beret off the head and swept up and into the air. I loved that show.
HOST: Now, congratulations on making history, the first female Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you very much.
HOST: But what a way to achieve it though. I wanted to be light and bright and have a chat to you today. This last couple of weeks, seeing Kevin Rudd do his final farewell, did you feel guilty at all with that?
PM: Look, it was incredible tough and obviously my heart did go out to Kevin at that point. I mean, nothing's been easy about this for Kevin Rudd and his family. I'm glad they're going to get some time together and be able to, you know, rest and recuperate and be with each other but, you know, I'm not in denial about the human dimensions of all of this. I mean, people see their politicians and they see them on TV and they see them shouting at each other in Parliament. Maybe it's easy to forget that there's flesh-and-blood people behind all of that and Kevin Rudd showed the human cost to the nation last week.
HOST: It was so quick and so, well, I do have a question, was it so quick? When did you, surely you must have known beforehand that there were movements about that they were going to depose him?
PM: Look, it did move very, very quickly and I think it's moved quickly in a circumstance where we can say that this has been a good Government and Kevin Rudd did some amazing things in this country, but in recent times we've had some problems. We've lost our way and we do need to focus now on, you know, making sure we're dealing with those problems - we're renewing our focus on strengthening the economy and getting people the great schools and great hospitals that they need. So, you know, yes it moved quickly and I've stepped up to do that job.
HOST: Well, I appreciate you making yourself available to us this morning, but when you say it moved quickly, I mean, you were in the meetings that, say, the mining tax was decided and went out and sold it. When did you realise that you were in trouble with that?
PM: I'm not going to canvass the sorts of things we say to each other around the Cabinet table-
HOST: Come on, Julia, come one, what happened in that room?
PM: No scoops, or indeed the, you know, private conversations I had with Kevin Rudd. I think from some of things I said publically, including when I travelled to Western Australia, people would have seen that I had a concern about the way the debate was going.
I thought we needed a more respectful debate. We needed people to show some goodwill towards each other and I'm really pleased that already, as Prime Minister, we've achieved that. We've taken our ads off TV screens, the miners have done the same, and we're having a good discussion, a good negotiation right now.
HOST: You know, I knew that Kevin was in trouble when I saw you hugging the, you know, the mining bosses at that dinner. I thought to myself, I was sitting at home went 'mm-hmm'.
PM: I can't help you with what you might think when you're watching the TV screen but I think I have hugged a few people in public life. I mean, I disturbingly had to hug Abbott one day on the TV so, you know, these things happen.
HOST: I know - I saw him wrap his ears around your forehead.
PM: Oh dear.
HOST: Prime Minister, I guess one of the big things we were scared of is spin. We don't like spin. How now can we be assured that what you say is your word and how now do we have the confidence to take you at what you say at face value?
PM: I think people would see in me a plain-speaking person. I think I've got that reputation from being Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Education and all the other portfolios that I've been serving in.
I don't think we should be naive about this. I mean, there are going to be some days you watch what I do and you say 'really, really good. Happy with that.' There will be some other days when you say, 'hmm, don't get why she did that', or 'I don't think that's the right thing', or 'I'm not happy with what she's said today.' That's the nature of politics and it's the nature of a big and complex job - you know, leading the nation, making sure that we're doing the right thing by hard-working Australians right around the country.
You're not going to please everybody all of the time, so I'll be as plain-speaking and frank as I can. Yep, there'll be some days you're a bit unhappy with me. I hope that there are more days that you're happy with me.
HOST: Yeah, well you were frank yesterday when you said that you didn't believe in God. What sort of things do you believe in? What do you want for Australia?
PM: Look, I think I've taken a value system with me from, you know, being in a strong and warm family and I've still got my mum and dad alive and we're a very close family and from that, and we were church goers. I certainly had the benefit of a Christian education.
From my earliest days I think I've taken into my adult life a few things. You know, I believe in hard work. I believe in having a red-hot go. I believe it's important for people to have the benefits of work. You know, my dad worked unbelievably hard and that's what built our family and our family life and my mum worked hard, too, so it really distresses me if Australians can't get jobs.
And I also believe the real difference between my life and my parents' life is education made me. I had a great education. I had all of the opportunities - you know, great schools, got to go to university, and one of the things I'd really like us to do as a nation is to make sure every child, wherever they're born, whatever their parents do, whatever the circumstances of their birth, that every child gets the same opportunity as I had for a great education.
HOST: Your parents are, they are a case, I saw them, I loved them when it was announced and the media pack went for them, I, you know, were you worried that they were going to say something that you'd regret?
PM: Well, I really, because of the nature of the morning and we were heading to the Labor Caucus meeting and the pressures that were on, obviously I sort of had it in my mind that there would be interest in mum and dad but I didn't quite think how intense the interest was going to be.
HOST: Well, your mum invited them in for a cup of tea.
PM: This was, by the time I spoke to my niece and then spoke to mum and dad they had apparently eight TV crews there. They'd let them all in. They were all in the little house that mum and dad live in in the retirement village, dad's making them tea and coffee and sandwiches, someone from one of the media outlets is answering the phone for him and so on so forth, but they coped really well and managed even to do, you know, live crosses and stuff like that. I think they were-
HOST: They learn quickly, don't they?
PM: They were a little bit confused sometimes about having the TV on and it being in delay and all of that kind of stuff, but they're very pleased and proud and I think that came across and I'm very proud of them.
HOST: Is this what you always wanted? Is this your end game? Is this what you strived for?
PM: I didn't set out to do this. You know, I think there are some kids who if you ask them in Grade 4 or 5, 'what do you want to do when you grow up?', they go 'Oh, I want to be Prime Minister.' I wasn't one of those kids and I came into politics wanting to make a contribution to a Labor Government, particularly in the areas of education because I've always been passionate about it, and workplace relations, making sure people get a fair go at work. I used to be a workplace relations lawyer and that's what drove me to get rid of Work Choices and introducing our Fair Work system. I didn't have my cap set on this, but circumstances have meant here I am and I'm really enthusiastic about doing the job and making a big difference.
HOST: Can I ask you, like, with Kevin, the ex-Prime Minister going, is he that bad that he doesn't deserve a ministerial position? I don't understand that you can lead the country and make policy and drive things forward and then all of a sudden not be worth it in the Labor frontbench.
PM: Oh, look if we're re-elected, and obviously I'm not taking anything for granted, I think we're going to have a tough, close-fought election, but if we're re-elected I will be absolutely delighted to have Kevin serve as a senior Cabinet minister in the Labor team. For the period between now and the election, I thought it best that, you know, Kevin have the opportunity to have a break and obviously, we move through dealing with some of the issues that I think Australians have been a bit anxious about.
HOST: Alright, well look, thank you very much for your time this morning. Just one more question: could you give us the date of the next election, please?
PM: Oh, look, not right now, but we've got some governing to do. We've got some governing to do and some things to get right and I'll be setting about that.
HOST: Well, Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time this morning.
PM: And thank you for the song.
HOST: Oh, that's alright. We'll talk to you again, Julia. Thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



BEAUMONT: Prime Minister, thanks for your time. Good morning.
PM: Good morning.
BEAUMONT: So you want us to believe that this is a new day, we have a new leader, this is a new era. You're asking us to forget about all that earlier policy on the mining tax?
PM: Well I am asking people to have a good hard look at the breakthrough that we made last night, the agreement that we've signed with some of our biggest resources companies, and our new Minerals Resources Rent Tax which we believe will mean we can all move forward. The nation can move forward, mining companies, mining communities, workers with increased super, and other businesses with lower company tax and some small business breaks as well.
BEAUMONT: So is that the new slogan, the campaign slogan? Moving forward is it?
PM: Well I just think it is a moment where I'm obviously very happy to see that we've managed to get people round a table. We kept them in a windowless room for a fair old period of time. Wayne Swan of course came back from the G20, so he literally went from a meeting with world leaders to a meeting with mining industry leaders. And I'm really pleased that we've sorted it out.
BEAUMONT: You're asking us to move forward, but every single person listening today knows that you, Kevin and Wayne came up with super profits in the first place. That was your idea wasn't it?
PM: Look, I take my fair share of the responsibility for the good things and the bad things that happened under the Rudd Government. I was vice-captain of the team. So I'm happy to be judged by that. I'm also asking people to look what I'm doing as captain of the team. And as captain of the team, we've been able to get goodwill and respect back into the conversation with our mining companies about taxation for the minerals industry. And here we are with a breakthrough and a new agreement, and I'm very pleased that we were able to create a bit of goodwill, and now we're building on that goodwill.
BEAUMONT: So what are you saying? The captain- you were the vice-captain of the team, the captain of the team Kevin Rudd stuffed this up did he?
PM: Look, I'm not going to reflect on the past. I'm all about what we've achieved last night and announced this morning and where it takes us from here. And where it takes us from here- and the significant thing I think for Australians is not analysing who did what, when- but rather looking at the result and saying what does it mean for me. Well, if you're in a mining community, obviously we've got the infrastructure fund. Working Australians, we're going to take superannuation from 9% to 12%. If you're running a business, big or small, reduced company taxation and some special breaks for small businesses.
BEAUMONT: If your tax take PM is reduced now, if it is no longer $9 billion out of the mining sector- if it's something less than that- how can you possibly fund the increase in super contributions to 12%?
PM: Well look, we've cut our cloth here. The original version of the resources super profits tax had us getting about $12 billion in revenue over the forward estimates, so that's four years of budgeting. This new arrangement gives us $10.5 billion, so we have taken $1.5 billion out of expenditure. What we're not proceeding with is we're not proceeding with a resources exploration rebate that industry basically told us they didn't want. And the company tax is now going to 29%, whereas the original plan was to take it to 28%. So we're making sure that it all balances up, and the Budget will come to surplus in 2013.
BEAUMONT: Alright, so there's still $10.5 billion if the flow-through still happens. One of the concerns I've read about this morning is that mining companies will be able to write-off some of their assets to a different value. They'll be able to, on paper at least, change their bottom line, so your tax take may be reduced. Are you concerned about that?
PM: Well we worked this through, obviously with representatives of mining companies. There are a number of very technical elements in this package as you would well imagine. But what we're going to do from here having signed Heads of Agreement so everybody's clear about the principal features of the Mineral Resource Rent Tax is we're going to have an implementation committee chaired by Don Argus, who of course is known in Australia for his own work and career in the minerals area. He will be working alongside our Minister, Martin Ferguson. They'll be guiding every aspect of the implementation.
BEAUMONT: Alright so- alright, so you're assuming it will all flow-through and the numbers are fulfilled.
PM: Well look, we've worked, I don't want to give-
BEAUMONT: Something has to give though, doesn't it? Something like an infrastructure project has to give?
PM: I don't, I don't want- sorry, I don't want to give you the impression that, you know, we've just, you know, sat with the back of an envelope and done the numbers, of course we've worked in a very, very detailed way with the biggest mining companies in this nation- where they've been very, very open about the information and the way in which their businesses work and consequently what revenue can be earned from different tax arrangements including this one. And then of course our own Treasury has worked on these figures as well.
BEAUMONT: Well look, I'm not disputing that. It's a fair question- for eight weeks we've been sold this super profits tax and we needed that $12 billion to fund infrastructure projects and the super contributions in Australia- you're saying you'll still be able to fulfil the super part of that formula, that equation. Something must give in infrastructure then?
PM: No, the-
BEAUMONT: Does it mean that Western Australia will not be able to fund some of their infrastructure projects?
PM: No, the infrastructure is the same. The resources super profits tax basically had $12 billion of revenue raised, and effectively $12 billion of expenditure. Now we are raising $10.5 billion of revenue, and so we've cut our cloth so there will be $10.5 billion of expenditure. What's gone out of the package- number one, an exploration rebate that the minerals industry told us they did not want. And the second thing that's gone out of the package is instead of the company tax rate going from 30 to 28, it will go from 30 to 29. That's what makes it balance at $10.5 billion. So the other things in the package, the infrastructure, the superannuation, the small business arrangements and tax breaks, those things are the same.
BEAUMONT: You're clearing the decks now on different policies. This was the main one. The other important policy that Australians wanted to hear you talk about and West Australians in particular, because a lot of this happens offshore for us, is changes to border protection and asylum seeker policy. When are you going to announce changes to that?
PM: I understand that people are very concerned about boats being intercepted to our north. And obviously in Western Australia, people are particularly concerned. And I've said I share those concerns. I can understand why it worries people and causes anxiety. I am going to have something to say about that area in coming days. Obviously one short week ago I became Prime Minister of this country, sworn in by the Governor-General in the middle of the day. My first priority has been to deal with the question of taxation for the resources industry. I thought the uncertainty wasn't doing anybody any good. And so we've worked through that, and it's been a lot of work and we've had this breakthrough. Now everybody can move forward with certainty and with goodwill. And I will be continuing to govern and to work my way through the issues that are causing people concern.
BEAUMONT: Alright, so talking about that in coming days, I'm sure our listeners will be very interested in what you've got to say. Thank you for your time this morning Prime Minister.
PM: Thanks very much for the opportunity.


Canberra
The new tax arrangements will underpin major economic reforms that will strengthen our economy so we can move forward together with confidence.
These arrangements will fund an historic boost to superannuation, new and better infrastructure, and business tax cuts including an up-front tax break and less red tape for small businesses to help them grow and thrive.
This agreement provides certainty to the resources industry, to mining communities right around the country, and to the broader Australian economy.
It sends a very clear message to the world that the Australian resources sector is strong and its future is secure.
The breakthrough agreement keeps faith with our central goal from day one: to deliver a better return for the Australian people for the resources they own and which can only be dug up once. It is the result of intense consultation and negotiation with the resources industry.
The improved resource taxation reforms focus on the most profitable resources, raise the uplift factor for tax losses, remove refundability and offer generous depreciation arrangements to promote new investment. They are more generous to industry in some respects, while industry has given ground in other areas. The improved profits-based taxation reforms will apply from 1 July 2012.
The improved resource tax reforms involve:
 * 	a new Minerals Resource Rent Tax (MRRT) regime applying to iron ore and coal in Australia; and
 * 	extending the current Petroleum Resource Rent Tax (PRRT) regime to all Australian onshore and offshore oil and gas projects, including the North West Shelf. This will provide certainty for oil and gas projects and ensure all oil and gas projects are treated equitably.
The Government will focus the resource tax reforms on our biggest and most profitable commodities: iron ore, coal, oil and gas. These represent three-quarters of the value of our exports and resource operating profits and account for an even greater share of resource rents in the mining industry. They also represent the vast bulk of growth in the sector over the coming decades.
Since the beginning of the mining boom, prices for iron ore have increased by over 400 per cent and prices for black coal have increased over 200 per cent.
Other commodities will not be included, which reduces the number of affected companies from 2,500 to around 320. These commodities were not expected to pay significant amounts of resource rent tax, and excluding them will allow many companies to remain in their existing taxation regimes.
The agreement also provides certainty for projects in the emerging industry of converting coal seam gas to LNG, by including all Australian onshore and offshore oil and gas projects, including the North West Shelf, in the PRRT. Including all oil and gas projects in the one regime will ensure equitable tax treatment between competing projects.
To ensure the smooth implementation of the new arrangements the Government is establishing a Policy Transition Group (PTG) led by Resources Minister Martin Ferguson AM and Mr Don Argus AC to consult with industry and advise the Government on the implementation of the new MRRT and PRRT arrangements.
Further detail on the improved resource tax reforms is contained in the Attachment.
The improved resource tax reforms are estimated to reduce revenue by $1.5 billion over the forward estimates. As the Government has always said, all elements of the tax reform package are dependent on the package being balanced by the revenues from resource taxation.
The reduced revenue makes necessary the following revisions to the associated reforms:
 * 	The company tax rate will continue to be cut to 29 per cent from 2013-14 but will not be further reduced under current fiscal conditions. Small companies will benefit from an early cut to the company tax rate to 29 per cent from 2012-13.
 * 	The resource exploration rebate will not be pursued. Resource exploration costs will continue to be deductible in the normal way and the PTG will consider the best way to promote future exploration and ensure a pipeline of resource projects for future generations.
We believe these improved reforms offer the best chance of delivering for hard-working families and small businesses around Australia while protecting and growing our great mining industry.
All along, our objective has been to deliver Australians a better return for the resources they own, which can only be extracted once, and this plan will deliver on that commitment.
We came together as a nation to stare down the worst of the global recession and now we come together to reform our economy, improve our tax system, and move forward with confidence.
Attachment
Today the Government announces new resource rent tax arrangements which will apply from 1 July 2012 to Australia's most highly profitable non-renewable resources; oil, gas, iron ore and coal.
The changes recognise the views of industry about how they would like new investment to be treated - through higher uplift factors and faster depreciation of new investment, rather than guaranteed refundability of unused tax deductions.
The new resource tax arrangement will apply to the value of the resource, rather than the value added by the miner. It will do this by setting the taxing point at the mine gate where possible, and using appropriate pricing arrangements to ensure only the value of the resource is taxed.
The MRRT will apply an internationally competitive rate of 30 per cent.
The new arrangements also recognise the preference of industry for more generous recognition of past investment, through a credit that recognises the market value of that investment written down over a period of up to 25 years. For companies that prefer to use their current written down book values a generous accelerated depreciation over 5 years will be available.
MRRT - Bulk commodity resource tax arrangements
 * 	Iron ore and coal will be subject to a new profits-based Minerals Resource Rent Tax (MRRT) at a rate of 30 per cent.
		 * 			MRRT assessable profits are calculated on the value of the commodity, determined at its first saleable form (at mine gate), less all costs to that point.
		 * 			Projects will be entitled to a 25 per cent extraction allowance that reduces taxable profits subject to the MRRT. This allowance recognises the contribution of the miner's expertise to profits at the mine gate.
		 * 			Small miners with resource profits below $50 million per annum will not have an MRRT liability.
		 * 			Miners may elect to use the book or market value as the starting base for project assets, with depreciation accelerated over 5 years when book value, excluding mining rights, is used; or effective life (up to 25 years) when market value at 1 May 2010, including mining rights, is used. All post 1 May 2010 capital expenditure will be added to the starting base.
		 * 			A book value starting base will be uplifted with the long term bond rate plus 7 per cent. However, a market value starting base will not be uplifted.
		 * 			Investment post 1 July 2012 will be able to be written off immediately, rather than depreciated over a number of years. This allows mining projects to access the deductions immediately, and means a project will not pay any MRRT until it has made enough profit to pay off its up front investment.
		 * 			The deductibility of expenditure under MRRT will be broadly based on the categories used in the PRRT regime.
		 * 			MRRT losses will be transferable to other iron ore and coal projects in Australia. This supports mine development because it means a company can use the deductions that flow from investments in the construction phase of a project to offset the MRRT liability from another of its projects that is in the production phase.
		 * 			Unutilised MRRT losses will be carried forward at the government long term bond rate plus 7 per cent.
		 * 			Unused credits for royalties paid will be uplifted at the government long term bond rate plus 7 per cent, as per other expenses. Unutilised royalty credits will not be transferrable or refundable.
PRRT - A national taxation system for all oil and gas, onshore and offshore Australia
 * 	The Petroleum Resource Rent Tax (PRRT) regime, which currently only applies to offshore petroleum projects will be extended to cover all oil, gas and coal seam methane projects, onshore and offshore Australia. The PRRT will apply at a rate of 40 per cent.
		 * 			Companies may elect to use market value as the starting base for project assets, including oil and gas rights.
		 * 			All state and federal resource taxes will be creditable against current and future PRRT liabilities from a project.
		 * 			The standard features of the current PRRT will otherwise apply, including the range of uplift allowances for unutilised losses and capital write-offs; immediate expensing for expenditure and limited transfer of the tax value of losses.
Policy Transition Group
 * 	A Policy Transition Group, led by Resources Minister Martin Ferguson AM and Mr Don Argus AC and comprising credible, respected industry leaders will oversee the development of more detailed technical design to ensure the agreed design principles become effective legislation. This will have the objective of ensuring the agreed principles are effected in line with their intent in a commercial, practical manner.



MITCHELL: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning.
PM: Neil, good morning.
MITCHELL: And congratulations on being Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you very much. I've sprinted in to your Canberra studio after a very long press conference. So I'm very, very sorry to have kept you waiting.
MITCHELL: Oh no, I understand. We've been taking parts of the press conference as well. Could I- I won't keep you too long- if we can get some of the detail. 20th of May, Simon Crean said the 40% tax was non-negotiable. 26th of May, Wayne Swan, Deputy Treasurer or Treasurer rather now Deputy Prime Minister, said the 40% tax was non-negotiable. Where's their credibility?
PM: Well this is a completely different tax structure Neil. We've got rid of the resource super profits tax proposal and replaced it with two arrangements- a mineral resources rent tax and a petroleum resources rent tax. So yes, it is structured differently. And Neil I've obviously stamped my authority on these negotiations, the way I wanted them conducted. And I wanted to reach an outcome that got us a fairer share of the mineral wealth, but also got us in a situation where we could have some goodwill and keep going forward. And we've done that.
MITCHELL: It's reported today that Wayne Swan's a bit grumpy because he feels he's been made to look a bit silly. Is that right?
PM: Well that's completely ridiculous Neil. Wayne Swan has been sleeves rolled up in a windowless room for a couple of days. You know, flew straight back in from the G20. One moment he's shaking hands with President Obama. The next he's here in Canberra working very, very hard with Minister Martin Ferguson alongside him to get this breakthrough that we were able to announce this morning.
MITCHELL: Am I correct in understanding that the new formula brings in $1.5 billion a year less?
PM: It's Neil- just to be accurate- it's $1.5 billion over the forward estimates.
MITCHELL: Oh, the four-
PM: So that's four years of budgeting. And so there have been some changes, because we wanted the revenue to match the expenditure. Key question here Neil, we have committed of course to return the Budget to surplus in 2013. We will do that. And I just made reference to Wayne Swan flying all those air miles back from the G20. I mean, at the G20 the other nations are sitting round the table saying gee, we hope we can halve our deficits by 2013. We'll be in surplus. What the package does is it- the company tax reduction is to 29%. So that has been a change from the earlier package. And then there was a resource exploration rebate that the industry basically said to us they didn't want.
MITCHELL: Well the $1.5 billion had been budgeted across those four years. Was it, is that entirely- where was that going to be spent? Entirely on the company tax cut?
PM: Yes. This, the package that was in the Budget for the resources super profit tax was a self-contained package if I can use that terminology. So money in, money out. Now of course with the new mineral resources rent tax there's $1.5 billion less of money in. So we have also changed expenditure, so there will be $1.5 billion less of money out.
MITCHELL: No other cuts?
PM: No, that's it. That's it. So it's the resource exploration rebate that the industry told us they didn't want. And the company tax change from now being to 29. It was- so it's 30% to 29%. In the original package there was a further reduction to 28%.
MITCHELL: And you don't need to do, to make any other cuts other than that change to the company tax rate? You don't need any other cuts to make up the $1.5 billion?
PM: No, the two cuts that make up the $1.5 billion, that change to the company tax rate and not proceeding with the resource exploration rebate that the industry didn't want. That's it.
MITCHELL: Doesn't small business though, they don't get an early start now on the company tax, do they?
PM: Small businesses still get an early start on the movement to 29. And small businesses still get the special tax breaks we promised them when they buy items of equipment, a rebate there.
MITCHELL: How much of this is predicated on the China boom continuing? How much of it is predicated on growth?
PM: Well, the growth assumptions, obviously in the Budget basically have stayed the same. I mean, we know that we are experiencing a minerals boom, and we will continue to experience a minerals boom. What this new taxation arrangements are about is making sure as we experience that boom that Australians are getting a fairer share. And that fairer share is being used to support infrastructure, particularly in mining communities, to back in our superannuation increases for Australians to 12%, the small business measures that were in the original package, and a company tax reduction to 29%.
MITCHELL: Will you need other cuts in your next Budget?
PM: No Neil, this is a self contained, you know, package, the way that I have explained it to you.
MITCHELL: So the superannuation boost for the lower income earners, that still goes ahead?
PM: Correct.
MITCHELL: The 50% tax down on interest earned on the first $1000 I think, 50% tax discount on that?
PM: Yep. The only changes Neil, the only changes are the ones I've described. So we could go line by line through the whole federal Budget, but the things that are changing are the two things I have described to you.
MITCHELL: Well, haven't we had enormous, enormous pain and even a lot of money wasted both by the Government and the mining industry on advertising over something which on this basis was fairly simply solved?
PM: Well Neil, you say simply solved. It's taken a lot of hard work. And it took a new approach.
MITCHELL: No, I don't mean to under- demean the work you've done on it. But what you seem to be saying here is you'll come up with a formula that keeps the mining industry happy, at very little pain to the Budget. Now, if it was that simple, why did we have to go through all this agony?
PM: Well look, you know, people will have their analysis of how we got here. But one of the things that I wanted to do as Prime Minister, and I made it pretty clear in my very first press conference, the very first time I spoke as Prime Minister, which was I thought we'd lost our way on a few issues. I thought some steps needed to be taken to fix those problems, to, you know, get us back where we needed to be. This was a big item on my to-do list, and we've got it done. It took injecting goodwill into the conversation. We'd lost that goodwill.
There was a lot of heat, a lot of fury, a few vindictive, you know, statements and words. And obviously that was shattering the ability of people to work together side by side to get a good outcome. I believe I injected goodwill back into the conversation by getting the Government ads off the TV. I think the mining industry very generously responded to that and got their ads off the TV. And then everyone took a breath, a moment of pause, and got back into it with the sense that we can fix this rather than the sense that this needed to be about acrimonious fighting.
MITCHELL: So did Kevin Rudd muck it up? Is that the bottom line?
PM: Well Neil, look, people will, you know, analyse the past. They'll analyse this deal. Not everybody will be happy. That's the nature of politics. But I did think this required us to have goodwill and respectful conversations. We've done that, and it's paid dividends.
MITCHELL: So did Kevin Rudd muck it up?
PM: Well Neil, you know, I've taken a different approach. And obviously I believe the approach has paid dividends with this breakthrough signed last night and announced this morning.
MITCHELL: It's not an answer. You don't- fair enough, you don't, I can understand, you don't want to answer, you don't want to go back in that sense. But it would seem that he wears it.
PM: But Neil, the important thing for me as a new Prime Minister- I understand, you know, some people know a bit about me, some don't know very much about me at all. I understand Australians are looking at me and saying, well, you know, who's this new Prime Minister, who is Julia Gillard, who's this woman. Well the best thing that I can do is show the Australian nation what I'm like by my conduct and my actions.
I am the kind of person who across, you know, my life, I'm not shy of a fight if a fight needs to be had. But I have found over my working life that if you can get people round a table, you know, some remarkable things can happen. And when people sit around a table in an environment of trust and goodwill and respect, and we've seen that on display this week.
MITCHELL: So are we seeing the future style for your Government? Consensus?
PM: You know, as Deputy Prime Minister I think I've shown that I am prepared to get people together and work together. I'm not, you know, I'm not shy of a fight. I mean, I had for example a fairly interesting set of discussions with the Australian Education Union about My School. That's just one example. But I've also found that if you do sit down with people, you can work things through.
So, you know, you should expect me to do the kind of things as Prime Minister I've done as Deputy Prime Minister. Got national curriculum underway, thirty odd years of talking about it. We actually got us on a path to deliver it. Occupational health and safety laws- thirty odd years of talking about them, we're now on a path to deliver uniform national laws. The whole Fair Work Act, getting rid of WorkChoices. Sat for countless hours in a business advisory group with trade unions in a workers advisory group. Not everyone left those rooms happy, but we got sufficient consensus to get the job done.
MITCHELL: Compromise or backflip, this one?
PM: Look, you know, I would obviously say a product of genuine negotiations. We've given a bit. We've compromised a bit. The industry's compromised a bit. We've shaken hands across the table.
MITCHELL: Week one is now finished, just about finished. How do you feel?
PM: Look, I'm feeling, you know, I feel physically, I feel fine Neil. If you're worried if I'm not getting enough sleep or not eating right-
MITCHELL: I hear Kevin Rudd used to sleep three hours a night. How are you doing?
PM: Well you know, I like a little bit more sleep than that Neil. So I do get a bit more sleep than that. And, you know, I'm looking after myself and eating my veggies and doing all that kind of stuff. So I'm feeling, I'm feeling fine and I'm feeling full of enthusiasm and determination to keep, you know, moving ahead, moving forward, particularly having solved this problem. There's a lot more for me to get through.
MITCHELL: I was going to ask that- this was a priority obviously, week one. What's next on the list?
PM: Well Neil, you should expect to hear some more from me in coming weeks about the kind of policy predispositions I'm bringing to being Prime Minister. You should see me working through some of the other questions I think are concerning the community. One of those, obviously, is the question of asylum seekers. I'm not pretending that there are any easy answers here or that, you know, one tough slogan and a bit of chest-beating makes all of the difference. Of course it doesn't. But I'll work my way through methodically those kinds of issues.
MITCHELL: The insulation issue's still causing a lot of pain in the community too, people still waiting for checks.
PM: Yes, I believe Minister Combet is doing a good job there in a difficult set of circumstances. Neil, this scheme became a mess. There's no point trying to put a gloss on it. It became a mess and we're dealing now with the consequences of that, including through the inspection regime that Minister Combet's overseen.
MITCHELL: I know you need to get away, but I was watching you and Tony Abbott at that funeral yesterday of the soldier. Even though, well, you were part of the Cabinet I suppose that sent that man to war effectively, or continued it, how did you feel? I mean, it must be an awful thing to go through.
PM: It's, I thought it was very important that I was there and that Tony Abbott was there. Because this isn't, you know, about party politics in any way, shape or form. It's about the, you know, national leaders sending a message that we understand what remarkable things we ask our serving personnel to do. And this was a very brave young man and an amazing family Neil. A dignified, amazing family coping with loss. So I felt privileged to be there. I mean, it's their choice, the family, whether I'm there or Tony Abbott's there, or they want to have their, you know, own private mourning and grieving. They did want us to be there as a sort of physical embodiment that the nation was mourning too. And I believe the nation does mourn when we lose brave soldiers like Ben Chuck.
MITCHELL: Have you yet been briefed on the outlook in Afghanistan?
PM: Yes, I sat down on Saturday with Angus Houston who of course is the Chief of the Defence Force, with our Minister, John Faulkner, who's a very experienced Minister. You know, I think John's reputation in Australia is as a very safe pair of hands, a very determined person. And we went right through the strategic outlook in Afghanistan.
MITCHELL: So no reason to change your mind on Afghanistan?
PM: No reason to change my mind Neil. And I don't say that easily. I certainly don't say it easily. We went to Afghanistan because it was a place that terrorists were being trained, who then unleashed their terror on citizens around the world, including Australians. 9-11, Bali, we've lost Australians to these terrorists trained in Afghanistan. We went there to make sure that we were addressing that incubation of terrorism. We're there now, training the Afghan National Army to stabilise Afghanistan, to make sure that it's not there training terrorists who come and harm Australians, and to also make sure it's a safer place for the Afghan people.
MITCHELL: Very quickly, I see speculation today that interest rates could drop. What do you think?
PM: Well look, I don't speculate on interest rate movements Neil-
MITCHELL: Oh, I thought-
PM: That'd be inappropriate. I am travelling to Sydney later today where I'll meet with the Reserve Bank Governor, so I'll obviously be able to get his perspectives face to face.
MITCHELL: Will you get to Melbourne for the football tonight?
PM: I won't be in Melbourne for the football tonight I'm sorry.
MITCHELL: Oh, but you're supposed to be playing full forward I think.
PM: Oh Neil, my training efforts have been woeful. I just couldn't possibly do that.
MITCHELL: You'll remember you told me you'd be in Mars before you were Prime Minister.
PM: Well I don't think your studio is quite Mars-like. I haven't seen any little green men running around. I'll let you know if I see one.
MITCHELL: Will you support John Howard for the ICC?
PM: Well look, I'm happy to say I would. I think, you know, John Howard, passionate, passionate cricket fan, I share some of the concerns he's voiced publicly about the kind of factors that are influencing this decision. So I'd be very happy to offer full support for John Howard to get this role.
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister is the title. What's the honorific? Miss or Ms?
PM: Maybe it's just Julia.
MITCHELL: Oh, I don't know about that. And I have to offer- I've said to every other Prime Minister from any party, every two weeks, welcome on the program any day you like. If we can organise a regular spot, we'll put it before you, and if you can have a think about it we'd appreciate it.
PM: I'll certainly have a think about it Neil. And obviously I do want to be able to talk to people right round the country, and radio's a fantastic way of doing that. It's the, you know, the voice in your car, in your lounge room, in your bathroom even in the mornings when you're having a shower. So it's a great way of staying in touch and making sure I'm hearing concerns through talkback too.
MITCHELL: Well, you are a Victorian.
PM: I am a Victorian. I'm a Victorian now. South Australian girl originally. Victorian now.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks Neil.



HOST: And I welcome the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, to the program. Good morning to you.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Prime Minister, what is your message to all those West Australians who thought a super profits tax was going to have a terrible impact on the mining sector, on jobs and investment in Western Australia. How does this new rent tax change that?
PM: Well, I think I can reassure those concerned Western Australians that we've made a breakthrough and we've struck an agreement with the biggest mining companies in this country that I think takes us all forward.
It means that Australians will get a fairer share of the mineral wealth in our grounds. It also means for the mining industry that they are prepared to agree to this new arrangement, and of course the money will be used to fund things like infrastructure in mining communities, to back in our superannuation changes, taking people from 9 per cent of super to 12 per cent and reduced company tax and some special benefits for small businesses.
So, we did have to get some goodwill back into this discussion. Things had got pretty heated. I think one of the first things I did as Prime Minister was get a bit of goodwill back into the discussion by taking the Government ads off our TV screens and we've been able, through some hard work led by Treasurer Wayne Swan and Minister Martin Ferguson over the last few days, to reach agreement.
HOST: Can I ask you what does that mean though for the $2 billion that Mr Rudd promised to WA as an infrastructure handout to compensate for that original super profits tax. Does that now disappear?
PM: No, we will still to be able to deliver infrastructure monies. Just to explain the way this is working, this is a different tax, a mineral resource rent tax and a petroleum resource rent tax. It's differently structured. There are a lot of technical aspects of that, but the resources super profits tax was going to generate $12 billion of revenue over the Government's budgeting period. This is generating $10.5 billion. We did, therefore, have to make $1.5 billion of cuts. We have not cut infrastructure. What we've cut is a resource exploration rebate that the industry told us they really didn't want, and we've also not fully proceeding with what was announced about company tax-
HOST: Yeah, it's a 29 per cent rather than 28.
PM: That's right, so it's not infrastructure that has borne the cutback.
HOST: Prime Minister what about, obviously in Western Australia there are a lot of mid-range miners, it could be BCI and it could be Atlas Mining, David Flanagan, who had a lot to say about this - those miners endeavouring to get bigger, who say that they weren't invited to the table, is there still talks to be had and will you be coming to WA to have those talks with the players that aren't BHP, that aren't Rio, that aren't Xstrata?
PM: Look, I'll certainly be coming to WA at some point and I'll very much be looking forward to it. I always enjoy it when I visit Western Australia. Obviously we talk to our big mining companies because inevitably they pay the biggest share of this tax and so it was very important we worked with them and that they were reassured the new tax arrangements would be internationally competitive.
The principles of the tax of are now clear and they're the subject of a Heads of Agreement, but I have also invited Don Argus, who's a fairly famous Australian and famous for his lifetime of work in the resources industry, to lead an implementation committee that will work alongside Martin Ferguson, our Minister, to get all of the details in the legislation right.
HOST: Prime Minister, do you accept that it appeared, at least, that Kevin Rudd may have been prepared to lose WA electorally to push a super profits tax, and I wonder do you accept that you have to do a lot of reassuring here in Western Australia that you're not just on the take, that you do more than acknowledge that this is where much of Australia's wealth is derived but that you will repay that with genuine Federal Government commitments to this State?
PM: I view myself as Prime Minister for all of this country. Obviously I haven't lived in every part of the country. I grew up in South Australia. I live in Melbourne now. I travel the country extensively but I'm not a West Australian and I'm not going to pretend to be, but in terms of meeting the needs of Western Australia I view myself as Prime Minister for every part of the country including every part of the West and I get the advice of a great team of representatives there, people like Chris Evans and Stephen Smith, Sharryn Jackson, people who are there on the ground working to make sure I understand what's going on. Gary Gray of course, a very local advocate of the West-
HOST: Of course, if Gary Gray hadn't push this hard Kevin Rudd might still be Prime Minister, but your Government needed to learn some lessons from this experience and what do you think you did need to learn, because the profits tax was announced; it was then imposed and then torn to shreds and when your predecessor spoke of consultation, well, no-one believed him. What are the lessons that need to learnt from this experience from your Government?
PM: I'd say the lesson from this experience is that you always do better if you get people around a table and have a respectful, frank conversation. Look, sometimes you're going to walk away from that table not having agreed and I'm not suggesting that everybody is going to be, you know, completely happy with the new Mineral Resource Rent Tax, but I think we have benefitted from sitting around a table and having a decent, frank conversation trying to sort things out. Now, as Deputy Prime Minister that's the approach I've taken for work I've done. I've sat round tables and had breakthroughs on issues that people thought were in the too-hard basket-
HOST: Do you accept that it really wasn't genuinely consultative enough and can you say that now, knowing that there is a new deal in place, can you acknowledge that the Government said it was listening, said it was talking, but really was doing quite a poor job?
PM: Look, I don't want to reflect on the past but I do want to be frank with you and say I think I very much put my own personal stamp on the process here and my personal stamp is to say if you're talking you have to also be genuinely listening and you can't negotiate unless you've got some goodwill and you're prepared to really listen and take on board people's concerns and that's what we've done in the last week.
HOST: Was it the last hurdle before announcing an election date?
PM: Well, I think there's more things that I want to focus on. I've said that we've got some more governing to do and of course we do have some issues that I want to address and work my way through-
HOST: So is an election a while off yet, because it's true that we'll just obsess in the media about, you know, days, dates and bookies will take money on when it's going to be, but is it a while off yet?
PM: Well, look, we are in the second half of the year. The election is due in the second half of the year. That's the normal cycle.
I've got some things that I still want to get done before we are in the election, some issues that are there concerning the Australian people. I want to have an opportunity, obviously, to come to great States like Western Australia, so you should expect to see me doing that.
HOST: We look forward to, unlike your predecessor, seeing you in the studio taking some talkback. Will you do that when you come?
PM: I'm always happy to take talkback and I generally learn a bit, get the benefit of some free advice over the airwaves and through the phones. That's all good.
HOST: Well, I appreciate you doing that. Thank you very much, Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you.



PM: Well as you know the Government's been engaged in detailed negotiations with the mining industry this week and I'm pleased to report to the Australian people that today we have a breakthrough agreement that moves Australia forward. It moves our mining industry forward with certainty. It moves our mining communities forward with new infrastructure. It moves things forward for the public, ensuring Australia gets a fair share for its non-renewable resources.
It moves thing forward for Australians who will look forward to retirement one day with increased superannuation. It moves things forward whether you're a coal miner in the Bowen Basin, a contractor in Karratha, and opal miner in Coober Pedy or a young worker in Sydney.
We've been stuck on this question as a nation for too long. Today we are moving forward together.
Last week I said we would be seeking consensus on the proposed resources super profits tax. I announced that the Government's advertising campaign would cease. I asked the mining industry to do the same, and doing this I believed fostered good faith. I'm pleased to announce that we've been able to build on that good faith, and I'm very grateful for the hard work of the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan and Martin Ferguson, the Minister for Resources, both of whom join me today, and I thank them for their work on behalf of the Australian people.
Today we're seeing what happens when people address difficult questions in a spirit of mutual respect and with a shared commitment to move forward. Wayne, Martin and I have spoken to the mining industry leaders frankly and directly throughout the process. Last night we sat down to settle the final agreement, and I can now announce we've reached agreement on the basic structure of minerals taxation for the future.
There will be a negotiated profit based tax regime but there will be no resources super profits tax. Iron ore and coal will be subject to a new profits based Minerals Resource Rent Tax at a rate of 30 per cent. The uplift rate will be lifted to seven per cent about the long-term Government bond rate. New investment will be expensed immediately, and we've removed the refund ability that industry told us they didn't want.
The Petroleum Resource Rent Tax regime will be extended to cover all oil, gas, and coal seam gas projects onshore and offshore at the rate of 40 per cent. More than 8 million Australians will benefit from a boost to their superannuation guarantee and while we were never relying on the resources tax revenues to return the Budget to surplus, under these revised arrangements we remain on course to return to surplus in 2013.
This will deliver better returns for the resources that all Australians own and that can only be dug up once. It will end uncertainty and division. It will invest a portion of the value of our resources into better superannuation for our people. It will allow us to move forward together as a nation. It will deliver the sustained investment in infrastructure that we need in mining and regional communities around the nation. It will maintain Australia's standing as a competitive and attractive destination for investment and strengthen our economy for the future. And it will enable Australian businesses to grow by cutting taxes for businesses and reducing red tape for small business.
For business to flourish competitive tax rates are essential. It's also essential we have stable and coherent Government and a positive basis for trust, and I believe we've established that this week. We know that some parts of the mining industry will still have their criticisms. But I believe we've struck the right balance. It takes industry concerns into account, it focuses on the most profitable resources and it offers generous arrangements to promote investment and jobs.
I'm delighted that last night we were able to sign a Heads of Agreement with some of our major mining companies. We will now be establishing a Policy Transition Group to consult with industry and advise the Government on the implementation of the new Mineral Resources Rent Tax and the Petroleum Resources Rent Tax. And I'm delighted that Don Argus, former chairman of BHP, has accepted my invitation to chair this process working alongside Minister Martin Ferguson.
Before I pass to the two Ministers with me, Wayne and Martin, I want to record that over the weekend the Treasurer and the Deputy Prime Minister was in Toronto, sitting at the table with the leaders of the G20 economies advancing Australia's interests in important discussions. Just a few hours later, he was at a rather smaller table here in Canberra, once again with sleeves rolled up. And together we have achieved a breakthrough that keeps faith with the Government's central policy goal. And that policy goal was that Australians are entitled to a fairer share of the mineral wealth in our grounds. And now we have a way forward for the Australian mining industry and the Australian people, so we can both prosper together and that is I think a great result.
With those words I'm going to turn to Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan and then to Martin Ferguson.
TREASURER: Thank you very much Prime Minister.
Could I just congratulate the Prime Minister on the role that she has played in this very important discussion and negotiation. I think it's fair to say that her intervention changed the tone of this debate and has lead to this breakthrough.
This is a very good day for economic reform in Australia. We have achieved a profits based tax in the minerals sector, we've done that with consensus, I think that's a very substantial achievement. I think in this room some weeks ago, when we released the response to the independent tax review, I said then that this would be a vigorous debate, that long-term economic reform in Australia is always hard fought and it has been no different on this occasion. But the intervention of the Prime Minister in the past week I think has made a great difference to the outcome. She gets things done and I think it's obvious by the nature of this agreement.
So now the country can move forward, and our economy also moves forward. And we can get on with very important economic reforms. The Prime Minister ran through some of the design features of this profits based tax, this MRRT. I think it's very important to note that this is going to be very good for new investment. We've had a debate about that in recent times. It is a better tax for the consultation.
It is a better tax for the negotiation that we have had in recent times. And I think it's pretty fair to say that not every single company or every single individual is going to agree with this outcome. Not everybody will always embrace the idea of paying more tax. But I think what we have achieved here is a pretty strong consensus in a critical area as we go forward. So I'd say this is a very sensible outcome in terms of our national economic interest.
Now it will involve less revenue, less revenue to the tune of about $1.5 billion. So what we've had to do is to change slightly some of the arrangements that were announced originally. Because we're collecting less revenue to the tune of $1.5 billion, the company tax rate will be cut to 29% from 2013-14 but will not be reduced further under current fiscal conditions. This rate cut will be provided early to small business from 2012-13 and we won't have the resource exploration rebate either. That just means those costs will be deductable in the normal way. But of course as the Prime Minister said, the big reforms that were announced, the big reforms of boosting superannuation, investing in infrastructure, reforming and lowering the company tax rate still proceed. This is a pretty good outcome for the country.
As I said economic reform is always hard. It's been a difficult debate, it's been an untidy debate. But that has been true of all of the big reforms we've had in the country, that is the nature of democracy. I was talking to the Chairman of one of the companies last night and I made the point, and he agreed, that we have a big chance to unite behind this decision now, to move forward, to get more done in the national economic interest.
As a country we came together during the global recession, we all worked really well together. I think we can do that again because what we are about to experience is mining boom Mark II in the Asian century. The challenges that that poses for our economy are ones that we can meet if we embrace the reform challenge. That's what this is all about, and that's what we've put in place with this agreement today.
MINISTER FERGUSON: Tax reform is about generating change, and that's what this package actually delivers for Australia. Firstly it puts in place a profits based tax system, it also builds Australia's capacity to determine where we are in ten and twenty years time and to my mind was the main focus on what we had to achieve over the last couple of months and especially the last week. We reached a balance which means that the Australian community would get a fair return for the one off opportunity to actually develop its resources. Mind you those resources are 100% owned by each and every one of us.
It also means that we have created certainty and maintained an attractive investment horizon which will guarantee that we can continue to bring forward that pipeline of investments that will create wealth and a bigger economic cake for Australia. It will also mean that we've got job certainty, not only for this generation but for future generations as we go forward and in think about today's package I just don't think about the profits based outcome and the certainty in brings for investment to Australia, I also think about our associated needs to actually continue to invest in the skilling of Australia and the infrastructure required for our resource regions.
From a tourism perspective- I'm also Minister for Tourism- the changes on company taxation I must say the immediate write-off for equipment are exceptionally important to an industry for example that's under huge pressure from the capacity of the resources sector at the moment. But I also look to the long-term requirements of Australia.
In 1996 when we lost Government we were on the verge of achieving 15 per cent superannuation for Australia, that was a lost opportunity. Labor in Government is about reform again, a profits based tax system, superannuation to go from 9 to 12 per cent, that will take further pressure off the Australian community in terms of servicing an aging population in the future, it also means we've got an even bigger savings portfolio to invest in Australia's future reform. I simply say, this package is a balanced outcome, it's a balanced outcome for the Australian community, and it's a balanced outcome for the minerals and petroleum sector in Australia because it means that we have certainty and ongoing investment.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: Yes- Phil.
JOURNALIST: The Government has said on dozens of occasions since this tax was announced that the 40 per cent rate was not negotiable under any circumstances. What do you say today to people who say that any industry that yells loud enough and complains loud enough and advertises against the Government can bully you into changing your policy, or was the Government just arrogant in the first place?
PM: Well what I would say is we were determined to get a fairer share of the mineral wealth in our grounds for all Australians. We were determined to deliver our superannuation changes because it will make such a difference for Australian retirement incomes. We were determined to deliver more in infrastructure for mining communities. And we were determined to assist with balancing growth in our economy by better arrangements in company taxation and for small business. We've achieved those things through a hard, frank and respectful discussion with the mining industry and that's the breakthrough that we're announcing today which I believe will take this country forward working with the mining industry.
Yes- Lyndal.
JOURNALIST: You've got the breakthrough but it's come at a not insubstantial cost to your Government. A fall in popularity, a change of Prime Minister, although it's meant a promotion for you. What have you learnt, what has this taught you about pursuing tax reform in the future?
PM: Well what I was say I've learnt across my life is that you can work best if you get people around a table and have open, frank discussions. We this week, particularly Wayne and Martin, have sat for very long hours around a pretty small table-
TREASURER: Longer than the G20.
PM: In a windowless room with their sleeves rolled up working through issues of concern. Now at the end of the day, you will never please everybody. And we're not suggesting that this package will please everybody. But I think what this is proving is the benefits of respectful conversations and frank talking. That's the approach I brought as Deputy Prime Minister to many of the reforms that I drove and lead as Deputy Prime Minister. National Curriculum wasn't an easy conversation. My School wasn't an easy conversation. Uniform occ health and safety law, not an easy conversation. Fair Work Act, not an easy conversation. But you can take things forward if you get people talking and working together and that's what we've done.
We'll got to Andrew and then come back across. Andrew.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, further to Lyndal's question, what does it say though about policy and the need for real world smell tests when it comes to issues like this and the acceptance- and the acceptance of advice that comes from airless rooms in Treasury.
PM: Well I don't know about airless rooms in Treasury. I'm not sufficiently familiar with the Treasury building. But obviously we need advice from within the bureaucracy and you know, I believe we've got great people working alongside us as a Government. I think we need their advice, but of course our job as leaders, our job with particular responsibilities for the nation, is to get out and talk to people, it's certainly my intention as Prime Minister to do that, and Wayne and Martin every day, every day, are in contact with people across industry, Martin particularly focussed on the resources and tourism industries, workers, unions, employers, industry associations to get the best of their real world advice.
Yes- David and then we'll got to Laura.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you say to the charge that after shelving the emissions trading scheme and now weakening this tax, this Government has a weak stomach for reform, and secondly, and you now ready to call an election?
PM: Well firstly I think as the new Prime Minister, former Deputy Prime Minister I'd be entitled to say scoreboard when it comes to the question of hard reform. This nation's talked about national curriculum for 30 years. I delivered it. This nation talked about school transparency for the best part of 20 years. I've delivered My School. This nation talked about uniform occupational health and safety reform for so long, but when I struck that agreement at the Workplace Relations Ministerial Council there were public servants who cried because they'd spent all of their working life trying to achieve this reform. Fair Work Act, a profound reform. And of course, here we are today, with another major reform of meaning to Australians right around the country. It's about moving forward on super, moving forward on infrastructure, moving forward with balanced development in our economy and taking the mining industry with us. We've been able to enter the Heads of Agreement with major mining industry representatives. This is how you get reform done. You think, you work, you consult, you talk, you have blunt conversations, and you take the nation forward.
Laura, and we'll just, we'll come back over to the boys I promise.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look we've got more governing to do and my focus is on, obviously, delivering those things that matter to the Australian people and keep us moving forward. That's what we're doing today.
Laura.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I ask the Treasurer to walk us through the revenue revised figures. In particular what are the savings that you've managed to achieve, that come out of this package and what are the new costs and do these figures reflect any revision of your estimates of how much money you will actually raise from the same amount of production?
TREASURER: I'm happy to do all that. Can I just say this is a robust profits based tax, I think the question was raised about that before, this is a robust profits based tax that will bring in, over the forward estimates, $10.5 billion, and by the way Laura will circulate this later and I've got the figures in terms of the shades- because essentially the cost is $1.5 billion. You'll recall that there was $12 billion over the forward estimates estimated previously. The cost now is $10.5 billion, the revenue previously was 12, so we've had to find savings of $1.5 billion.
We've found those across a range of areas, there's a change to the growth dividend, which has an impact, but not proceeding with the 28% company tax rate saves $600 million. Not proceeding with the resource exploration rebate is 1.12, and also the early start on the company tax rate for small business is 350. So essentially we're down by $1.5 billion and we've made up with that in saves.
We'll circulate the piece of paper later on. It has as the Prime Minister said before, it has nothing new really to do with us coming back to surplus in 2013, we're doing that, coming back earlier than any other advanced economy, coming back in three years. Three years early, that is the bedrock, the absolute bedrock of the Government's economic policy. But someone was chasing over there before so we might, we might be able to stop yelling if we give him a question there.
PM: Malcolm.
JOURNALIST: The 2% company tax cut was intended to help the move to 12 % for super contribution. Won't that be now significantly harder?
TREASURER: Well it goes to 29 cents in 13-14 and we said we would go to 28 cents the year after. We're just staying at 29 until we have a further look at fiscal conditions. And also for small business, what we're going is proceeding with the $5000 instant write-off, that proceeds. And also the early move for those incorporated business that pay company tax to 29 still happens, it just doesn't go to 28.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) super contribution to 12, won't it be harder now for business to pay-
TREASURER: Well, but the company tax doesn't necessarily go to 28 in the year that it was going to, and that would that that has been pared back, yes.
PM: We'll go to Phil Coorey and then through the back, Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST: Just an extension of Laura's question have you, between the original tax and now what it's become, have you changed any of the assumptions that underpin the revenue?
TREASURER: Well, it's a different tax. And of course, therefore it produces revenue in different ways. Let's just go through some of differences. This is a 30 cent rather than a 40 cent tax but this one does not have refundability. Refundability was a very big expense in the RSPT. It's no longer there. This has got an uplift factor of 7 over the long-term bond rate. That is in place because refundability was why we were stuck at the long-term bond rate under the previous proposal. But also, we've got a different starting base. The industry was particularly keen on recognising market value, we are going to recognise market value but we are going to depreciate it up to 25 years.
So, there are swings and roundabouts. The swings and roundabouts of the MRRT compared to our previous proposal means that there is only $1.5 billion less in revenue. So that goes to the point that was raised over here. This is a robust tax which brings in a little less revenue over the forwards, which means we can do a little less in terms of our original proposals. But we are still proceeding with the great bulk of the original proposal.
PM: Alright, Dennis and Michelle, come across.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, all three of you this morning have mentioned how you've made so much progress in the last week, and as a result of consultation with the mining industry. All three of you were there when the process began. Why wasn't this approach adopted from the beginning?
PM: Well Dennis, what I can say to that is, obviously, as Prime Minister, I've put my stamp on the approach that was taken here. And you know, from my past as Deputy Prime Minister and other things I've done during the course of my life we took an approach that I think sits well with me, and that is I'm a pretty frank person. I'm not afraid of a difficult conversation, but I believe you best take people with you if you sit around a table and work out how much you can agree, how much you have to have an argument about, and if it's capable of being settled then you work through it, get the best job done, take things forward. That's exactly what we've done.
Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Just to pursue the point that Malcolm was making, you've made quote a lot of your commitment to fairness, but isn't it true that on the swings and roundabouts of these changes the better-off big miners are going to get substantial benefits out of this compromise and the, some of the pain of paying for that is going to be borne by smaller companies in other, less well-off sectors who don't get the benefits, the full benefits they were promised?
PM: Well, I'll get Wayne to address that.
TREASURER: The fact is that the smaller miners said that they didn't want our proposals.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) who would have benefitted from the full company tax cut?
TREASURER: Well, okay, alright, but first of all, in terms of the construction of this tax, one of the reasons we've moved is that many of the small players who would have been the bigger beneficiaries if you like of the previous proposal, didn't want it.
What we actually have is a situation where the larger companies are going to be paying more tax - significantly more tax - and I think that needs to be understood. That is why this is still a robust tax, because essentially we are just looking at iron ore and coal and petroleum and gas, and of course most of the others are not in the net, so there is a very significant contribution to our national revenue coming from some of our largest companies. So I wanted to make that point.
And secondly, when it comes to the broader issue of tax reform across the economy, it is true that we've had to say that we can't go to the 28 cent rate in '14-'15. That will stop at 29, but we've commenced that process. And where we go will depend on fiscal conditions over the years, but let me just talk about our fiscal rules, because I think this is pretty important.
First of all, we've got our 2 per cent real spending cap in place which will stay in place until we come back to a surplus of 1 per cent of GDP, and we've also got our tax to GDP ratio. We don't want to let tax go above 23.6%.
Now, if we were to have healthier revenues in future years, and it looked like that was going to happen, we would be able to move further on tax reform, both in terms of the company rate and in terms of personal income tax rates. So that's the framework we operate within.
PM: We'll go to, hang on, hang on, we'll go to Katharine. Katharine was next. Katharine? Yep, we'll come over. Katharine?
JOURNALIST: This is a question to all three of you- given that you've renamed the tax to a much more neutral name, given that you were prepared over recent days to choose diplomacy over force in terms of your negotiations with the mining companies, and given that you've been prepared to land here, did any of you specifically advise Kevin Rudd that picking a fight with the mining companies and calling this thing a super profits tax was a bad idea?
PM: Okay, well can I say to that what I've said to similar questions earlier, which is I don't think it's appropriate - and I won't - go through conversations I had with Kevin Rudd as Deputy Prime Minister, nor conversations that have been had around the Cabinet table. But I have deliberately brought a new approach to working on this tax, and that new approach has seen us make the breakthrough agreement that we made last night, which now gives us the ability for people to work together and to keep going forward.
Yes, over here, we'll come through. Yes, Mark?
JOURNALIST: Companies like OneSteel in Whyalla were said to have several thousand jobs on the line under the resource super profits tax. Where does that company sit now? I mean, it's a matter of thousand jobs is an important matter, so why weren't they involved in these negotiations and what do you have to say to them now?
PM: Martin knows a lot about that.
MINISTER FERGUSON: Well, just think about the structure of this tax. Firstly, this effectively carves out, with very little impact, Victoria, Tasmania and South Australia. It effectively means that from a petroleum point of view you've created a level playing field for both onshore and offshore development, which is what the industry wanted.
You then come back to iron ore, which is principally Western Australia with some smaller reserves in places such as Northern Territory, South Australia and Tasmania. You go to coal, you're principally focussed on Queensland and New South Wales. So, we're down to a couple of hundred companies, as against many thousands. For those reasons we have established a policy transition group to be lead by Don Argus and myself. In terms of any outstanding detail, it will be the responsibility of that committee to actually smooth the application of the proposed tax system.
With respect to OneSteel, the key point from day one has been where you establish the taxing point. We've actually taken it to mine gate. We then go to actually applying these principles, for example, to magnetite. In my opinion, on the basis of my reading of these principles, there is no danger to any jobs in South Australia. We'll see the expansion of Olympic Dam which is going to create a huge economic opportunity for South Australia and the nation, and will secure the future of all those workers and their families who depend on OneSteel.
PM: Okay, we'll go here and then I think we had Tim had his hand up before, and then to the back, yep.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've effectively broken a 2007 election commitment by dumping the resource exploration rebate, which replaced the flow-through share schemes that Labor offered in opposition. Now, isn't this a classic case of the Government cowering to the big miners, the big noisy miners, at the expense of the small end of town?
PM: Okay, well I might let Martin answer that.
MINISTER FERGUSON: Well firstly, on the resource exploration incentives that we announced a couple of months ago - the industry decided they didn't want it. We ditched it because the industry wanted it ditched, so let's be a little bit factual about why it's not on the table today.
In terms of where we go from here, it will be part of the consideration of any other possible system through the implementation committee chaired by Don Argus and myself.
PM: Tim?
JOURNALIST: On superannuation, I guess this is probably to the Treasurer. Ken Henry, in his appearance to the Senate Estimates committee last month said that increase in superannuation from 9% to 12% would ultimately come out of workers' wages, and he was quite emphatic about that, that it would be offset by lower wage rises. Is that also your view, that essentially workers will in the end bear the cost of their own superannuation?
TREASURER: Well, it would depend upon wage negotiations. That's not inevitable in my view. It will be something that will be sorted out at the workplace level. That's entirely a matter for those negotiations between employers and employees, but what we have done through our super reforms is to make sure that the resources are delivered, particularly to those on the lowest incomes, to boost their adequacy. That's a very, very important reform and goes to the core of what we're on about in terms of economic reform.
It's not just about adequacy and retirement incomes of people on low incomes. It's also about building a national pool of savings which can assist this country to fund the economic prosperity and investment that we are going to experience through a mining boom Mark II. So boosting national savings is absolutely fundamental to maximising the opportunities, particularly the jobs and the wealth creation that will come through the higher terms of trade that we're going to experience as a result of being in the Asian century.
PM: Right, now, I prefer a methodical approach to Government, including press conferences, so we'll go here and then you haven't had one yet, have you? No, so we'll go here and then here and then move across.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this is obviously a very different tax to the one you started with. Is this where the Government was moving to while Kevin Rudd was Prime Minister or has the change of leadership not just changed the tone of the debate but the fundamental negotiating point?
PM: Well look, I think Treasurer Wayne Swan's best positioned to answer that.
TREASURER: I think Martin would agree with me that following the Prime Minister's intervention there was a marked change of tone and willingness to discuss these issues. I'm not going to go into the conversations, but in the last two or three days we have come a lot further than we've come in a considerable period of time prior to that, and particularly that is the case in the last week.
It has been a difficult process in which we have all been involved, so I don't say that in any way to apportion blame or responsibility to any particular individual or institution. We've all been involved in a very significant debate about the future of our economy and whether our children will receive good value for their mineral resources which are owned by us 100% and can only be dug up once.
That's what it's been about from our perspective, and of course, the mining industry does have legitimate concerns. And we recognise that. And that has been part of the discussion as well. So, we had a pretty vigorous and willing debate for some time. Well I can tell you is that in the last week particularly and most particularly in the last few days, there has been a marked change of attitude and we have all noticed it, who've been in that room, and that's a good thing for the country.
PM: Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) and you know, time to take a breath, but you did nominate this as your top priority, so what's next now? What's the next top priority?
PM: Okay, well look, obviously as Prime Minister I said I would take a series of steps to get the Government back on track. I believe that the step that was taken last night in signing this agreement and announcing it today is a very, very significant step forward. I will have things to say in coming days about our future policy predispositions. I've obviously said I'm concerned about the question of asylum seekers. I understand that there are community concerns about these questions. And I understand that, I'll be working my way through that. When I've got more to say, I will.
Lyndal.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just to clarify a couple of things- is it the Government's intention, the Government's wish, to cut company tax to 28% and offer income tax cuts when you've got the money, when the Budget allows that? And talking about how you progress tax reform the in the future, or any reform in the future, is it better to have the consultations, the talks you talked about, first, before the policy's finalised and announced?
PM: Well look, I'd echo exactly what the Treasurer has said. Obviously, as the Government, we've got a view that it's appropriate now to deliver a reduction in company tax - and we do, through these arrangements that we're announcing today.
We also, when there is the fiscal ability to do so, would look in the future to further reductions in company tax. Obviously there is always the question of income tax as well. Though I do note we delivered income tax cuts yesterday for hard-working Australians. So these are things that are on our mind for the future, but this directly delivers reduced company taxation and obviously benefits for small business that will make a difference.
Peter hasn't had one, so we'll go to Peter.
JOURNALIST: When do you intend to legislate these changes, and with whose support in the Senate? And secondly if I may, have the miners undertaken to you to keep their ads off the TV?
PM: Well, on the question of with whose support in the Senate, that may be a question you need to ask Tony Abbott, who seems to have substantially - indeed, without explanation - changed his position on the question of minerals taxation in the last 48 hours. On the question of the mechanics of the legislation, I'll go to Wayne.
TREASURER: Well, the mechanics are that this takes quite a period of time. The normal process for a tax change of this size is for a very long technical consultation after you've had the discussion about the overall framework. And we've just about now settled now what you'd call the major elements of the framework, but the whole point of the Argus committee which will also be chaired by Martin is to further flesh out any other issues that arise from that.
You then go through draft exposure bills and so on, and a whole lot of technical discussion that occurs between Treasury officials and others in industry. That is the normal way these things are done. I don't think you'd be seeing any legislation hitting a Senate this year. That would be very ambitious for any legislation of this type.
I understand Mr Hockey this morning has been on both sides of this cart. He's on the one hand he's called it, what did he call it? He called it a victory for commonsense or something like that, and then he said he'd rescind it. So I don't quite know where the Opposition's coming from on this debate, and I tell you what - there's a big issue of business certainty here now for the federal Opposition, because what-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Excuse me, sorry Treasurer, the second part of my question was whether the miners have undertaken to keep their ads off the TV.
TREASURER: Look, I don't, we're not in a position to answer for the mining companies, but we're keeping ours off TV.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) that's been a big issue over the last few months. Now, I know that with the PRRT, when it was introduced, I mean, that was, that only affected, it allowed companies to effectively recoup the full cost of their project, and in some cases it meant that the tax wasn't paid for 15 years. Now, I know that you've placed a market value assessment for projects. Does that in effect mean that BHP, Rio, Fortescue and so on will first recoup the full cost of building their projects before they pay tax, and what's the earliest point at which they will pay tax?
TREASURER: Well, that is a very complex question, and let me answer it as simply as I can.
Because there has been this concern raised by the companies, as you've indicated, they wanted to move towards a market value approach rather than a book value approach. So we have moved to a market value approach but with depreciation over up 25 years. Now, they can however opt, if they wish, to go back to book value with I think depreciation over 5. So there's an either-or there and that does have impacts on the revenue. And that's how we actually came to deal with that very, very difficult issue, and that's in addition to ditching refundability. That's where we got to on that critical question, and that was a very important part of the breakthrough. But I can't sort of, answer your question in great detail because it will vary across projects.
PM: Okay, we'll just, we'll just, hang on, we'll just take a couple more. I can see in people's eyes a certain yearning for a coffee that's starting to break out amongst the group and I know normally at this stage of the morning you'd be doing precisely that. As I think we've seen some three more hands, we'll take those. Now, you haven't had a question, Sid.
JOURNALIST: Well, Mr Swan, what happens to state royalties? And secondly, does the Argus committee have-
TREASURER: (inaudible), not refundable.
JOURNALIST: Does the Argus committee have a reporting date?
MINISTER FERGUSON: I think you're looking at a couple of hundred companies. We'll clearly establish principles early on and go on an ongoing basis to apply those principles and bed down today's announcements. The most important issue is the announcement today of the principles, because that guides the work of the Argus committee.
PM: Okay, now, you haven't had a question, sp-
JOURNALIST: So, what is the nature of the Heads of Agreement that the miners signed up to last night? What have they actually committed to?
TREASURER: I think it's been handed out, basically.
PM: You'll actually be able to access a copy of that, okay. So that'll be made transparent to you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) state royalties, and the potential rises-
PM: The Treasurer answered-
JOURNALIST: The Treasurer-
TREASURER: I just answered it.
PM: We just need to further explain it. Dennis almost ran to-
TREASURER: (inaudible) in terms of the future of state royalties is one of he issues that the committee that Martin and Don Argus are having a look at and will find a framework for that.
PM: Okay, okay, we'll make this the last question, thanks.
JOURNALIST: In the last few days, everything changed. It all got wonderfully better. You all talked well, negotiations, sitting down - was the major change that allowed all this to happen- the fact that you decided at the weekend that the 40% was now on the table, whereas previously it wasn't?
PM: Well look, I think a few very significant things changed. First and foremost I think we got goodwill back into a conversation that had been characterised to that point by a lot of heat and not much light. And as a result of getting goodwill back into that conversation we were able to get people together in the spirit of genuinely working through issues.Now, obviously, from our point of view, we've shown a preparedness to listen, to respond, to work with the mining industry to get an arrangement that is in the interests of this country for the long term and takes us forward.
Our, you know, ability to work with the mining industry, our preparedness to show goodwill, to be frank, to work through, I think was responded to by them - responded to well. And so, for example, the kinds of discussions that had not been possible in the weeks before became possible. And as a result we've had the breakthrough that we've seen last night. And I'm very pleased to be able to announce it today, because is certainly is an arrangement that takes us beyond some of the heat of the last few weeks, takes us forward with goodwill and importantly, takes us forward so that Australians get a fairer share of the mineral wealth that's in their ground.
Thanks very much.



PM: Well, can I say it's great to be here in Queensland. Coming from Canberra this is a fantastic opportunity to thaw out. So I'm very, very pleased to be here. I'm obviously very pleased to be joined by the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, Wayne Swan, a great Queenslander, and by our candidate for the seat of Dawson, Mike Brunker, who is a fantastic advocate for this local community. And I'd like to thank the people standing behind us from BMA for making us so welcome today as I've had the opportunity to have a look at the Hay Point terminal.
And as you move round here and see this coal coming in and being loaded on to ships it is telling us the story of this part of the world and across Australia. The story of the resources boom, of creating jobs, of growth as we get the mineral wealth from our ground and sell it around the world. I'm very pleased that as a result of the breakthrough agreement we announced yesterday that we have been able to give certainty to the mining industry and to communities like this one in Mackay.
Certainty, so we can wall move forward. And of course, as well as giving the mining industry certainty, the breakthrough agreement we announced yesterday means great benefit for Australians here in Mackay, in the great resource state of Queensland, and around the nation. Benefits in the form of superannuation- we want to make sure that working Australians have decent retirement incomes. And this agreement, this change backs in superannuation changes for working Australians.
A better deal for businesses around the country as our company tax rate comes down and we're able to offer small businesses the benefits of writing off the expenditure that they have on the capital items they need. And of course as well the benefits for mining communities like this one and mining states like Queensland of increased investment in infrastructure. Obviously, growth in our communities, growth in mining requires growth in infrastructure. It's great to be here to be able to see this first-hand, to be able to be briefed about the growth that's happening, and to see on the ground what our agreement with the mining industry and our new Mineral Resources Rent Tax will mean for local communities. And particularly what the benefits flowing will mean for local communities- better infrastructure, better superannuation, reduced company taxation, and a better deal for small business.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why isn't James Bidgood or Kirsten Livermore here with you today?
PM: They would've been very welcome, but obviously I'm here with Mike who will be asking this community to place its trust in him to be their representative in the federal Parliament. And I suspect when people vote they will be considering things like certainty for the mining industry, the Minerals Resources Rent Tax, and the benefits flowing from this package.
JOURNALIST: Is the Government worried about the seat of Dawson now that it's become much more marginal?
PM: Look, I'm Prime Minister for all of the nation, and I'm going to be trying to be in as many communities as possible. And the physical reality is you can't be everywhere at once. But I've travelled here before. I've had the benefit of talking to local community members before. I've had the benefit of being at the local university for example. It's always good to be able to come out to communities and talk about their needs.
TREASURER: Can I just say also that I've been coming here for many years. In fact, probably over 30 years. So coming through here is a pretty regular occurrence for members of the Government. And plenty of Ministers are through, and they're through frequently irrespective of elections.
JOURNALIST: Do we expect to see you then quite a few times before the election?
TREASURER: Well, certainly I'll be travelling up and down the Queensland coast as I've done for most of my life.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: When Wayne says 30 years he means he started coming here when he was very young.
TREASURER: I'm just a bit older now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be spending some time with Mike today to campaign, or-
PM: Well we're actually going to be talking to some local community members, so I'm very much looking forward to that. The way in which we've proceeded in the last week, the way I've worked as Prime Minister is, I think, you can do remarkable things if you get people round a table talking in a spirit of good will. I've done that with the mining industry. And of course there are some who are still looking and assessing this package and for them our goodwill and good faith extends. We have a process here to continue moving forward, chaired by Don Argus. But with that same style, believing that if you get people round a table you can do some remarkable things, I also want to be able to talk to local community members about what's on their mind. I'm never afraid of frank conversation, so I'll be there looking and learning from people here locally.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, some of the smaller mining companies were quite concerned they were left out of consultations. What is- why was this? And what do you have to say to them?
PM: Well, I have to say the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for Resources, Martin Ferguson, talked to people far and wide about this agreement, talked to them about our Mineral Resources Rent Tax. So there have been plenty of discussions. But I can also say the good faith and goodwill that we've brought this week as we've sat round a table to get the agreement we were able to announce yesterday will continue through the process chaired by Don Argus, a man with a great reputation in the resources industry. Working with my Minister, Martin Ferguson, to work on the implementation of these new taxation arrangements. So we'll continue to be talking and working with people in good faith.
JOURNALIST: Should small business expect some further announcements in the future given that the company tax rate is now going to 29% as opposed to 28%, but they still have the costs of increased superannuation?
PM: Well, I think for small business there are great benefits in this package. They will see the reduction in company tax early. They will experience the benefit of being able to get a new tax concession for the capital equipment that they need. You know, setting up a restaurant or running a restaurant and you need new furniture. If you've got a small business and you need new tools and equipment there will be special tax benefits for you. And as we talk about the superannuation changes, this is really important to working Australians. But we understood that businesses including small businesses would need time to adjust, so the changes are being phased in slowly over time to enable people to adjust.
JOURNALIST: The Opposition has promised to turn asylum seeker boats around. Will you do the same?
PM: Well look, this is an area where you can have a slogan, and you can beat your chest, and people do that for political advantage. But really, they're not talking about effective measures. As I believe Mr Abbott would well know, he can talk about turning boats around but the reality is that- and this has been experienced by this nation before- that if we seek to turn boats around, often the boats are disabled, and then there is a question of loss of life at sea. And really don't understand Mr Abbott to be saying he intends to leave people to drown at sea. Which is why of course this is a slogan, it's not a solution. Now, I'm not going to offer a slogan. And I'm going to say to people this is a complex problem. There is no simple fix. Anybody who pretends to you that a slogan and a bit of chest-beating is going to fix it simply isn't telling the truth.
But I do understand the anxiety of Australians about this issue. I feel that anxiety. I understand it. I understand when people see boats on our horizon that it worries them. And so I will be working through this issue. I've got some decisions to make with a deadline of the 8th of July, and I'll have something more to say in coming days. But what I have to say will be truthful, and it will be about effective measures, not chest-beating.
TREASURER: Could I just add to that- because Mr Abbott has said that he is opposed to the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, and therefore opposed to pouring $10.5 billion back into the Australian community to give small business a very substantial tax cut, a boost to superannuation, and importantly for regions like this to stop investment in infrastructure which is just so necessary in regions like this which are expanding rapidly- you can see it here today at the coal loader. You can see the stress on local roads and local communities, and he's opposed to that. So there's no certainty with Mr Abbott but the certainty he would stop those funds flowing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, since that deal's been struck with mining companies, are we any closer to an election date?
PM: Well look, the election's due in the second half of this year. And so you will see an election in the second half of this year. But I've made it clear that as Prime Minister I believe we've got some decisions, some governing to do. On the day I became Prime Minister I said I thought there were a series of issues where we needed to get back on track. The single biggest was dealing and most pressing was dealing with this question of the Minerals Resources Rent Tax, and I'm very pleased that we've had a breakthrough there as a result of a lot of hard work and respectful conversations that now take Australia forward and our mining industry forward. I'll have something to say in coming days about the question of asylum seekers. But I want to be there governing steadily, day after day, piece by piece, dealing with the issues that are on the minds of Australians. And we will have the election during the second half of the year in the timeframe in which its due.
JOURNALIST: So is asylum seekers the next policy, big policy issue for the Government? Is that what you want sorted out before the election is called?
PM: Well there is a deadline as a result of some earlier decisions. A decision was announced around three months back about suspending processing for Sri Lankan asylum seekers. That three months is up on the 8th of July. And so as Prime Minister I'll need to be indicating the way forward before the 8th of July, and it's my intention to do that.
Thank you very much.



BRUMBY: I'll start if I can- and obviously at the outset to welcome the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, to Marysville. And also here of course today are Danielle Green, our Parliamentary Secretary for Emergency Services- and Danielle really has been tireless in her work across the area during the bushfires and the recovery period. And of course Rob Mitchell, our Labor candidate for McEwen. So the reason we're here today is obviously to look at the progress which is being made in the rebuilding effort in Marysville. And I've been a regular visit here, virtually monthly I think during the course of this year, as we've seen more and more of the recovery effort underway.
And whether it's Marysville Central, the shops down there that we visited today, whether it's the handover of the vehicle today at the SES, whether it's the community facility and the school, whether it's Gallipoli Park, whether it's the main street, all of these are projects which are now underway and a sign that the recovery is gathering momentum in Marysville. Later today I'll be going to Lake Mountain to inspect the progress on the snow-making machine there, and we committed $9 million there for new equipment and new facilities to help bring tourists back to the area.
I'm delighted to say that over the June long weekend we had something like 2000 tourists who were at Lake Mountain. And one of the keys I think to the economic recovery of this area is to make sure that we do get strong numbers of tourists to come back into the area. And of course, as you know, we put aside $10 million to assist attracting tourists into the area. And today of course with the SES vehicle, we've got 14 members of the SES here in Marysville. They have done a magnificent job. Every single one of the volunteers here in Marysville was personally affected by the fires. And their individual effort, the support that's been shown them by the community, has been really fundamental in getting them back together, getting the unit re-established, and getting the vehicles back on the ground.
And again as you've seen of this today it's been a partnership between Government and between volunteer groups, particularly the Victorian Historic Racing Register who've donated that $25,000 to make this possible. But it's a great story about the community and working together. We've had 1130 new building approvals now in Murrindindi Shire. It's confirmation that the recovery is there, and that the recovery is gathering momentum. But I'm delighted to welcome the Prime Minister here today. There are many functions that I've been at over the last 18 months with Julia Gillard in her previous capacity, of course, as Deputy Prime Minister earlier this year with- at a number of book launches. But at many functions across the areas affected by the bushfires. But for her first official visit- if I could put it that way- back to Victoria since becoming Prime Minister, I can't think of a more fitting place for her to be than in the areas that were affected by the fires and to be here in Marysville.
So it's a great welcome to her, I think it's been a great fillip to the local community, and I'll now hand over to the Prime Minister.
PM: Well thank you very much to Premier Brumby, and also to Danielle Green, the local state Member for this area who's with us today, and Rob Mitchell, our Labor candidate for the seat of McEwen. I am very pleased to be back home. I arrived back in Victoria last night. And I'm also very pleased that my first official function in Victoria as Prime Minister could be here in Marysville. And it's given me the opportunity to spend some time with the people here, and to meet some remarkable people. And there are no more remarkable people than those who are working with the local SES, people who faced danger and loss themselves and have continued to volunteer in the interests of their community.
And of course they're experiencing a homecoming today, with the official opening of their new shed and headquarters for the local SES- another sign of reviving life here in Marysville, another step forward in what is obviously a strong recovery here in this local community. So it's really great to be here today, back home in Victoria.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) why didn't you invite the local federal Member?
PM: Oh look, I didn't make the organisational arrangements for the event, so you'd have to speak with the organisers.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh look, I think Fran Bailey has done a remarkable job as local Member in this area in the period of the bushfires and beyond. I think people remember during the days of the bushfires, Fran Bailey with her own home threatened worked very, very hard for her constituents and on behalf of this local community. She's worked hard alongside the Government to develop the kinds of things that the Commonwealth Government has contributed to. So I'm very, very happy to say that, you know, whilst Fran's- I don't know the organisational arrangements, she may have not been able to be here today- that Fran Bailey has as local Member done a good job here and I wish her very well in her retirement.
JOURNALIST: The latest Newspoll shows that state Labor's primary vote has dropped quite significantly- how do you rate Mr Brumby's chances at the coming election (inaudible)
PM: Well look, I'm not commentating on anybody's polls. But what I would say about John Brumby as Premier is I think he's doing a fantastic job for the state of Victoria. And we obviously know each other well, and we've worked alongside each other, including on the education reforms that are making such a difference for schools in this state. John's been very focused on delivering the services that hardworking Victorians need.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, I'm certainly going to have something to say on the question of asylum seeker policy in the coming days. There's a deadline looming, which is the 8th of July for making a decision about the processing pause currently applying to Sri Lankan asylum seekers. What I can say about asylum seeker policy is I can understand the concerns of community members about this. I can understand that it causes them anxiety when they see boats on the horizon. Obviously- overwhelmingly- boats are intercepted. 98% of boats are intercepted. Interception rates are higher now than they've been in the past. Under the Howard Government for example, around 1 in 10 boats reached the mainland. But clearly, I want to look at this area of policy, and I'll have something more to say about it in coming days.
JOURNALIST: You said you didn't want to be politically correct on the issue. What did you mean about sweeping away political correctness?
PM: Look, what I meant by those comments is I think on a debate like asylum seekers people should feel free to saw what they feel. And for people to say they're anxious about border security doesn't make them intolerant. It certainly doesn't make them a racist. It means that they're expressing a genuine view that they're anxious about border security. Same token, people who express concern about children being in detention, that doesn't mean they're soft on border protection.
It just means they're expressing a real, human concern. So I'd like to sweep away any sense that people should close down any debate, including this debate, through a sense of self-censorship or political correctness. People should say what they feel. And my view is many people in the community feel anxious when they see asylum seeker boats. And obviously, we as a Government want to manage our borders.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are your chances of re-election?
PM: Well look, I'm not commenting on polls. What I'm doing day by day is providing the kind of stable Government in the interests of hardworking Australians that I think they expect and deserve- so, step by step, working our way through some complex problems. The Mineral Resource Rent Tax being managed to a successful breakthrough last week which enabled us and the mining industry, mining communities to move forward. I will have something to say about asylum seeker questions in the coming days.
JOURNALIST: The Liberal Party's released its first attack ad (inaudible) the girl who replaced Kevin Rudd. Are you offended by that? Is that derogatory, is that targeting you because of your sex?
PM: I actually haven't seen, haven't seen the ad. This morning I've travelled up here and I had a few things to do before I got here. So, I haven't seen the ad. Look, you know, it's inevitable that in an election year people will see political advertising, but people can form their own views about the merits of it. My job and what I'm absolutely focused on is, you know, making sure we are delivering a strong, competent, methodical Government, step by step, day by day. That's my focus.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I don't comment on polls. And I don't give betting advice. Look, we're in the, we're moving into the second half of 2010. The election is due in the second half of 2010. But we've got some more governing to do. When I became Prime Minister in recent days I said I believed we've been a good Government, but we've lost our way on a few questions. But I wanted to make it my job to make sure we got back on track, and I'm still working my way through. Having delivered a breakthrough on the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is a very important step forward, but we've got more to do, and that's where my attention is focused.
JOURNALIST: Will you announce a policy on climate change and asylum seekers before you call the next election?
PM: Well look, I'll announce policies at what I believe to be the appropriate time. On the question of asylum seekers, there is a looming deadline which requires the Government to make a further policy statement, and that is the three months from the time that the processing pause was announced for Sri Lankan asylum seekers.
JOURNALIST: If you don't lift that suspension, then what would that say about Australia's human rights record?
PM: Well look, I'm not going to, you know, obviously go to the statement that I'll make in coming days. I'll have something more to say on asylum seeker questions- yes.
JOURNALIST: Is that asylum seeker policy going to be directed towards the Sri Lankans, or are you looking towards other (inaudible)
PM: Well look, I'm not today going to say anything more, but obviously we do have to make a decision and announce that before the 8th of July in relation to asylum seekers who are Sri Lankan. I am looking at this area of policy more broadly. And, you know, we will be making a statement in coming days about it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Once again, I'm not going to, you know, comment on those types of election decisions. I mean, my job is to be there as Prime Minister, delivering competent, stable Government. Australians have a birthright, and their birthright is that they get to exercise their vote in federal elections, in state elections, in local council elections. People will obviously have a choice in front of them as we move towards election day.
For the Government, what I would say and for me as Prime Minister, that choice will be about moving the nation forward, moving the nation forward with a focus on a strong economy delivering the benefit of work and jobs to Australians. A key focus on giving a fair go for every child, giving every child the opportunity for a great, quality education. And I'd also be saying the election's going to be about the future, and I'll be saying to Australians don't be afraid of the future, we can work through the biggest and most complex issues like climate change together.
JOURNALIST: Are you happy with the current fire protection laws?
PM: Fire protection laws-
JOURNALIST: Yeah.
PM: Well, obviously direct- fire protection arrangements are a matter for the State Government.
JOURNALIST: But do you think green areas can be dangerous in some cases?
PM: Well the State Government's obviously been working its way through- Premier Brumby- we've got the Royal Commission with the bushfires, so those areas of policy are best handled by the State Government.
JOURNALIST: Mr Brumby, it wasn't that long ago (inaudible) when you were effectively Ms Gillard's boss, and she was your Chief of Staff.
BRUMBY: How many years ago?
PM: It wasn't that long.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the person you hired to run your office and your staff would one day be the Prime Minister of the country?
BRUMBY: Well I suppose, I suppose that wasn't directly in my mind, no. But I appointed Julia as Chief of Staff because I thought she was a person of outstanding ability. And she proved to be, by the way, in terms of her ability to relate to people, to communicate well with people, to make the right decisions, and to provide leadership when it's necessary. She had all those attributes. So I don't think I ever thought about her in terms of future prospects but I was very keen to see her go into federal politics, and I'm obviously delighted as I said to have seen her as the Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: It must be nice to be rubbing shoulders with her today. Will some of her popularity rub off on you, perhaps?
BRUMBY: Well, we'll see. But-
PM: Working both ways.
BRUMBY: Yeah- but I think, you know, I've always been a big believer in Federal and State Governments working together and working together cooperatively, all through my political career in federal politics, and in state politics. And I believe we've got a great opportunity to do that with my Government and Julia Gillard's Government in the future. And as Julia mentioned, in areas of big reforms- you look at the national reforms on education- I think it's fair to say that a lot of the impetus for that has come from Victoria.
If you look at the agenda in terms of human capital, much of that has come from Victoria. And I particularly look forward to working with the Prime Minister in terms of climate change in the future. I mean, Victoria has led the way, all of these initiatives- whether it's been the push for an emissions trading scheme, whether it's been the national renewable energy target, whether it's been five star ratings for houses, it's Victoria which provided the policy leadership in these areas. And you know, I think there's a huge job to do in this area. But it won't be done properly unless the Federal Government and State Governments work together. And I'm looking forward to working with the Prime Minister to make sure that we fix some of these issues.
JOURNALIST: Premier, you were one of the most pleased people to see Kevin Rudd knifed given your track record with him?
BRUMBY: As I said, last week I was very pleased, in a sense very personally, for Julia. I've known her for a long time. And I said at the time, too, that I was delighted too, because of the, I guess, the inspiration that it would provide to many women across Australia. And I've got to say just when I've been out during the last few days around country Victoria and in Geelong, the number of women of all age groups who've come up to me and said it's a wonderful thing, a wonderful thing for them, they're so proud- it provides so many opportunities for their children, for their daughters.
There's a role model. There's a woman who's gone on to be Prime Minister of the country. And so I was, you know, delighted about that, delighted for Julia personally, and delighted too because I think there's a great opportunity for our two Governments to work very closely together for the betterment of the people of Victoria and Australia.
JOURNALIST: Premier, I just want to- that overnight attack at Noble Park train station. Are Police (inaudible) what appears to have been a Sudanese gang responsible for the attack?
BRUMBY: Well I don't have the details of the attack. What I do know is that it was a disgusting attack, completely unacceptable, completely unprovoked. I do know that it's occurred at a manned station, so the station was staffed. The staff called Police immediately. I do know that we've had additional Police on the trains, additional transit Police. But despite all of that, and of course closed circuit TV, this attack's still occurred. So it's a brazen attack. It's completely unprovoked. It's gutless and it's cowardly. And Police have got a big team working on it, and I'm confident that they'll bring the perpetrators to justice.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BRUMBY: Well look, we've got record numbers of staffed stations. We've got nearly a hundred now that are staffed from dawn to dusk. We've got 250 transit Police. We've got authorised officers, more than 600 of them. And we've got regular Police who are riding the trains, particularly at night, sometimes in uniform, sometimes in plain clothes. So there's actually quite a heavy Police presence. But despite that, you still get your brazen, gutless, cowardly sort of attack. But your perpetrators will be brought to account.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) green areas close to residential houses-
BRUMBY: You're talking about areas like this?
JOURNALIST: Yeah.
BRUMBY: Well look, we made a judgment early on that fundamentally if people wanted to return to areas which were burnt the Government shouldn't be closing them up and standing in the way. And I believe that that was the right decision. But you'll recall we also made a decision to toughen up the building regulations and put in place regulations which have led Australia into the toughest new building regulations anywhere in Australia. And so in some of these sites, if you rebuild again, you've got to rebuild to a higher level of fire safety.
Not everyone likes that, because sometimes that means you've got to pay more for the materials and more for the house design. But it's designed to build safety into everything we do in the future. There is a debate, still, about some areas of extreme fire risk. These are being worked through at the moment. And again, I think in this area, it's best to wait the final report of the Royal Commission, which will be at the end of July, to see what they recommend in this area.
Now, overwhelmingly we wanted people to return, to rebuild at higher standards, with tougher vegetation controls. But in some of that small, select numbers of extreme areas, we'll look to guidance I think from the Royal Commission. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Victorian Premier John Brumby today officially opened a new State Emergency Services headquarters in Marysville, marking another important milestone in the bushfire recovery process in Victoria.
Ms Gillard and Mr Brumby were joined by emergency services volunteers and the Marysville community to open the new headquarters and hand over a new rescue truck to the town's SES crew.
Ms Gillard said the Australian Government would continue to stand by those affected by the worst natural disaster in the nation's history and support them as they rebuild their lives, homes and communities.
The Marysville community and others affected by the Black Saturday bushfires have shown remarkable fortitude since the tragic day on 7 February 2009.
Ms Gillard said the volunteers in Marysville had the admiration and support of all Australians.
Many of the people volunteering in Marysville were affected by the Black Saturday fires, yet at a time of personal crisis, they chose to work selflessly for their neighbours. The entire nation continues to be amazed by their strength and community spirit.
The new $428,000 VICSES headquarters at Marysville replaces the original building which was virtually destroyed in the bushfires.
The Prime Minister and Premier handed the Marysville VICSES unit crew the keys to a new $55,000 rescue vehicle, funded through community fundraising and donations.
They also presented two Marysville VICSES volunteers with medals in recognition of their long service.
"The new truck is in addition to a $200,000 rescue truck the unit received last year from the State Government," Mr Brumby said.
"People from across Victoria, Australia and indeed all over the world have rallied behind communities affected by the Black Saturday fires and this truck is a great example of their ongoing generosity.
"The re-opening of the VICSES headquarters is an important step in the rebuilding and recovery of the community and builds on achievements including the Marysville Central Shopping, the Marysville Primary School and the re-opening of several businesses in the main street.
"We know volunteers like the VICSES are the lifeblood of our communities. Our Government is providing Victoria's emergency services volunteers with record support and will continue to ensure they are equipped with the resources they need to protect their communities," Mr Brumby said.
Parliamentary Secretary for Victorian Bushfire Reconstruction Bill Shorten said that the Australian Government was committed to rebuilding Marysville and supporting its residents.
"Given the scale of the destruction, Marysville has achieved an incredible amount in just over 15 months, but there is still a long way to go and we will continue to help this community as it renews itself," Mr Shorten said.
The Australian and Victorian Governments have put in place a $193 million plan which is driving the economic and social recovery of communities across Victoria.
The Rebuilding Together plan set out the rebuilding priorities which have been driven by local communities, to rebuild their essential town buildings and services, to generate business growth and investment and to rehabilitate key local attractions central to their future prosperity.
The $193 million Rebuilding Together plan delivered:
 * 	$93.4 million to support people and communities rebuild through ongoing accommodation support, counselling services and rebuilding key community assets including upgrading more than 20 community halls, building new community centres and restoring sports and recreation facilities, parks, gardens, walking and cycling trails;
 * 	$60.5 million to build new multipurpose facilities that will improve education and recreation services in Kinglake, Flowerdale, Callignee and Marysville including a new primary school in Strathewen, a new Marysville Police Station and a new Marysville community centre which brings together the primary school and early childhood services.
 * 	$21.6 million to assist small business to return to pre-fire operating levels, new tourism marketing campaigns, new National and State Park facilities and the restoration of the iconic Lake Mountain Alpine Resort as a major tourism destination; and
 * 	$17.5 million to rehabilitate the environment including urgent action to protect threatened species and habitats, regenerate state forests, help farmers and landholders restore their land and repair critical waterways and catchments. 


Lowy Institute, Sydney 
I am very thankful to the Lowy Institute for hosting me today.
This Institute has established a reputation for independent, robust and forceful analysis of our nation's place in the world. It is exactly the right place to make today's address: Moving Australia Forward.
I first would like to acknowledge the enormous contribution of the Institute's founding benefactor, Frank Lowy. Frank Lowy is a great Australian. He was a refugee who escaped to Israel after World War Two in a crowded boat full of asylum seekers.
After fighting for Israel, he arrived on our shores as a very determined 21 year old. He worked hard and went from factory worker to milk bar owner to Blacktown shopping centre developer and, in time, to the largest retail property group in the world - truly great achievements, and what a remarkable story.
As the Socceroos' number one supporter, no doubt Frank's had some frustrating recent weeks in South Africa, but I think both the Socceroos and Frank fought proudly for Australia.
But down to the business of today.
In my first press conference as Prime Minister I said I would lead a strong and responsible government to take control of our future.
That's why I moved to immediately end the uncertainty caused by the proposed resources super profits tax, which has been successfully adapted to become the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. The investment community can be assured that the future of mining in Australia is strong and secure, and to all our mining communities across the length and breadth of our country, I assure you that your future is also secure and your prospects are bright.
I also made it clear that a national leader must recognise when a Government needs to take a breath, slow down, weigh the evidence and make the right, considered judgments for our people. To this end I've made it clear that I support sustainable population growth and reject the idea that Australia should hurtle down the track towards a big population.
Population growth has always been part of Australia's story. I arrived in Australia as a little girl with my family in 1966. Since then Australia's population has doubled from 11 million to 22 million, reflecting both immigration and natural population growth.
In the years ahead, our population will continue to grow, but the issue for Australia is both the speed of that growth, and whether and where it can be sustained.
We are very roughly the same size as America and we are a great country like America - but we are not America. We do not have the inland sprawling plains, fertile soils and cities for that kind of population. 80 per cent of our population lives along our coast precisely because our continent is different.
In many faster-growing parts of Australia - like western Sydney, south-east Queensland and the growth corridors of my own electorate in Melbourne's west, Wyndham and Melton - people would laugh if you told them population growth was intended to improve living standards. People in these communities are on the front line of our population increase and they know that bigger isn't necessarily better.
At the same time, other parts of Australia are crying out for more people - skilled workers to fill job vacancies in occupations like mining, health and aged care, and community services. I regard this alone as a giant policy question for Australia. It is truly the mismatch of modern Australia: communities with too many people and not enough jobs; and then other communities with too many jobs and not enough people.
This is reason enough to declare that population policy should not be driven by a single, arbitrary number.
Instead, I believe it must be driven by the needs and the circumstances of each region across the nation. With this in mind I have commissioned the Minister for Sustainable Population, Tony Burke, to develop a population strategy for a sustainable Australia.
If we move forward together with sustainability guiding our way, there are also new industries we can grow, new jobs we can create, new skills we can teach, new technologies we can develop and, if we get this right, a quality of life that will continue to be the envy of the rest of the world, something very much to aspire fore.
And so, we have begun an important debate - the debate on sustainable population growth. It's a positive debate we intend to lead and one that must not be constrained by self-censorship or political correctness.
I've no truck with constraining debate on the big questions. I am for frank, open, honest national conversations, so let's have a frank, open, honest national conversation about the issues of border protection and asylum seekers.
Today I am announcing steps to strengthen Australia's border protection arrangements. I am setting out the long-term approach we will take to dealing with the pressure of unauthorised arrivals.
We are taking these steps in response to the increase in unauthorised people movements in our region and around the world.
I am also making the Government's policy goal clear: it is to wreck the people-smuggling trade by removing the incentive for boats to leave their port of origin in the first place; to remove both the profitability of the trade and the danger of the voyage.
I will return to these steps in a moment, but let me turn first to some remarks made in the last few days by a prominent Australian, Julian Burnside QC, an eminent lawyer much respected in our community. Mr Burnside said, and I quote:
"I challenge Julia Gillard to point out to the public that at the current rate of arrivals it would take about 20 years to fill the MCG with boat people."
Obviously, Julian Burnside, like me, is a Melbournian. He went on to refer to certain Australians as, and I quote:
"Rednecks in marginal seats"
On the first point Mr Burnside is very, very right and I'm happy to oblige. He is right because in the context of our migration program, the number of asylum seekers arriving by boat to Australia is very, very minor. It is less than 1.5 per cent of new migrants, and indeed it would take about 20 years to fill the great MCG with asylum seekers at present rates of arrival. This is a point well made.
On the second point, though, Mr Burnside is very, very wrong. It is wrong to label people who have concerns about unauthorised arrivals as 'rednecks'.
Of course, there are racists in every country, but expressing a desire for a clear and firm policy when you are faced with a difficult problem does not make you a racist.
For too long, the asylum seeker policy debate has been polarised by extreme, emotionally charged claims and counterclaims; by a fundamental disrespect that I reject.
But as poor as this commentary is, even worse is the deliberate use of inflammatory politics presented as policy. I speak of the claim often made by Opposition politicians that they will, and I quote: "turn the boats back."
This needs to be seen for what it is. It's a shallow slogan. It's nonsense.
Under John Howard, only a handful of boats were ever turned around.Tony Abbott claims that the Howard Government had an active policy of turning boats back. This is simply not true.
For the entire time of the Howard Government, only seven boats were turned back. The last Suspected Illegal Entry Vessel (SIEV) returned from whence it came was SIEV14 which arrived at Melville Island in the Northern Territory on 4 November 2003 with 14 Turkish passengers.
The Howard Government did not turn a boat back after 2003.
Now, let's ask ourselves why. Was it because the Howard Government suddenly lacked the resolve to turn the boats back? Well, of course that's not the answer.
The Howard Government's actions changed because of a change in the practical reality, and that reality that confronted Prime Minister Howard confronts us today: the reality that to avoid being turned around boats are sabotaged, raising safety of life at sea concerns for Australian customs and border protection and defence personnel, as well as the asylum seekers on board.
And the second practical reality is that there is nowhere to turn the boats back to, as Indonesia has made it clear it will not accept such returned boats.
My opponent, Mr Abbott, is really very good at slogans: a great, big, new tax on everything; a great, big, new mining tax; a big, bad tax; and now we've got 'turn the boats around'.
But these slogans are shallow.
The Opposition is trying to sell the Australian community a fairy tale in which all you have to do to deal with the asylum seeker issue is go out to sea, get an asylum seeker boat and turn it around and everything will be fixed - but this fairytale is not the facts.
The facts are the boat will be scuttled and it will start to sink.
The facts are that this nation would then be confronted by a stark choice: either we could leave the scene in the certain knowledge people, including children, would drown; or we could rescue the asylum seekers from the water.
Today let me say one thing loud and clear: our nation would not leave children to drown. We are Australian and our values will never allow us to countenance that kind of evil. So, inevitably, the so-called strategy of turning the boats back would become a strategy of rescuing asylum seekers from the water with all of the risks that entails to the lives of defence and customs personnel.
The slogan is hollow and Mr Abbott knows it.
In his own policy document he says that the so-called turnaround of boats would only happen, and I quote, "Where circumstances permit". This is an admission that it won't work.
How appalling is it that this is where the long-running debate on asylum seekers we are at this point - at the point of an unedifying exchange of incendiary labels like 'red neck' and hollow slogans like 'turn the boats around', with nobody asking how we can move the nation forward.
Think of the impasse the division has created. If you are hard-headed you're dismissed as hard-hearted. If you are open-hearted you are marginalised as supporting open borders.
I say to those engaged in this type of rhetoric: stop selling our national character short. We are better than this. We are so much better than this.
The other way, the path less travelled in recent times, is the path to move us forward together - to discuss the facts, reject the myths and make our decisions on what we know to be true, on the principles that can unite us.
So let's start by considering the facts. Consider the facts.
Last year, Australia received 0.6 per cent of the world's asylum seekers.
Refugees, including those referred for resettlement by the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees, make up less than 8 per cent of migrants accepted in Australia.
Even if all those who arrived in unauthorised boats were found to be refugees - which they will not - they would still be only 1.6 per cent of all migrants to Australia.
The total number of people accepted into Australia in 2009 as migrants under our refugee and humanitarian program, the total number accepted each year, is 13,750 people. This is a fraction of our annual migration intake. This number has remained stable for many years and does not increase, even when we face surges in boat arrivals. If more boats arrive, fewer people can be sponsored under a special humanitarian program. Fewer such people are sponsored, meaning the total numbers are unchanged.
We should also understand that what drives the peaks and troughs in the numbers of boats trying to get to Australia has less to do with what we do here and more to do with the conditions people are escaping - conditions like war, genocide, imprisonment without trial, torture, harassment by authorities, the disappearance of family and friends and children, the growing up of people and whole families in refugee camps with no prospect of ever seeing their home again.
And when conditions deteriorate in countries with sea routes to Australia, as they did between 1999 and 2001, more boats come - some 5,516 people came to our shores in 2001. But then, when conditions improved, as happened after 2001 with the downfall of the Taliban regime, fewer and fewer boats came.
This ebb and flow has been evident since the time when Malcolm Fraser was our Prime Minister in the 1970s and the people arriving in boats were from Vietnam.
Through their efforts to disrupt people smuggling, the Australian Federal Police, working with our regional neighbours, have prevented more than 5,000 foreign nationals coming to our shores illegally.
These are the facts.
But moving forward also means we must agree on the organising principles for developing policy, and believe we can agree on most principles.
That we should be prepared to accept people in legitimate need just as a young Frank Lowy was accepted 60 years ago.
That there is nothing humane about a voyage across dangerous seas with the ever-present risk of death in leaky boats captained by people smugglers.
That Australia's basic decency does not accept the idea of punishing women and children by locking them up behind razor wire or ignoring people who are fleeing genocide, torture, and persecution; nor does it allow us to stand back and watch fellow human beings drown in the water, but equally there is nothing inconsistent between these decencies and our commitment to secure borders and fair, orderly migration.
The rule of law in a just society is part of what attracts so many people to Australia. It must be applied properly to those who seek asylum, just as it must be applied to all of us.
That no-one should have an unfair advantage and be able to subvert orderly migration programs.
That there should be no incentive for people smugglers to take even bigger risks with people's lives in the name of mercenary profits.
That people smuggling is an evil trade to be punished.
That hardworking Australians who themselves are doing it tough want to know that refugees allowed to settle here are not singled out for special treatment.
That people like my own parents, who have worked hard all their lives, the thing that that can't abide is the idea that others might get an inside track to special privileges.
And finally, if this were to happen, it would offend the Australian sense of fair play.
And so with the facts on the table and these uniting principles as our guide we move forward. We move forward to an effective, sustainable, long-term solution: to stop the boats not at our shoreline but before they even leave the far-away ports from which they come; to ensure people smugglers have nothing to sell and so ending the long and dangerous voyages.
This means building a regional approach to the processing of asylum seekers, with the involvement of the UNHCR, an approach which effectively eliminates the onshore processing of unauthorised arrivals and ensures that anyone seeking asylum is subject to a consistent process of assessment in the same place - a regional processing centre removing the incentive once and for all for the people smugglers to send boats to Australia. Why risk a dangerous journey if you will simply be returned to the regional processing centre?
To this end I can report today that I have already taken steps to achieve this goal.
Irregular migration is a global challenge, and like all global challenges it can only be tackled by nations working together. That's why we have put so much effort into regional cooperation in recent years.
We co-chair the Bali Process with Indonesia, and through this process we are working with our regional neighbours and key organizations like the UNHCR and the International Organisation for Migration to manage irregular migration and stop people smuggling - and can I say how much we appreciate and value our cooperation of Indonesia as co-chair.
We do these things because we believe that building a sustainable regional protection framework is the most effective way to address irregular migration, including to our country.
Building on the work already underway in the Bali Process, today I announce that we will begin a new initiative. In recent days I have discussed with President Ramos Horta of East Timor the possibility of establishing a regional processing centre for the purpose of receiving and processing irregular entrants to the region.
The purpose would be to ensure that people smugglers have no product to sell. A boat ride to Australia would just be a ticket back to the regional processing centre.
It would be to ensure that everyone is subject to a consistent, fair, assessment process. It would be to ensure that arriving by boat does not give anybody an advantage in the likelihood that they would end up settling in Australia or other countries of the region.
It would, of course, have to be properly run, properly auspiced, properly structured.
President Ramos Horta told me that he welcomed the conversation about this possibility and I look forward to further consultation and dialogue on developing this initiative into a proposal that would advance the proper and consistent treatment of people arriving without authorisation in our region.
I have also spoken to New Zealand's Prime Minister about this possibility, and John said to me that he would be open to considering this initiative constructively.
East Timor and New Zealand are vital countries in this initiative as they are already signatories to the Refugee Convention, and New Zealand, like Australia, is a key resettlement country.
I have also already discussed this initiative with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Antonio Guterres. Australia maintains its strong support for the capacity of UNHCR to ensure appropriate forms of refugee assessment.
I told the High Commissioner that my Government is not interested in pursuing a new Pacific Solution. Instead, Australia was committed to the development of a sustainable, effective regional protection framework. Again, I look forward to a constructive and concrete dialogue with the UNHCR on this initiative.
This problem is not Australia's alone.
I want to reassure Australians that this is not about a quick fix - there is no quick fix. It is about stopping people getting in boats, but it's also about improving the protection outcomes for refugees by establishing a framework for orderly migration within the region. It will take time, but I believe it will be worth the effort.
Only this sort of long-term approach will deliver what we need. I ask for the patience and support of the Australian people as we work with the countries of our region on this shared challenge.
The signs are positive. A promising start for a regional solution to an international problem; a regional solution with the participation of the UNHCR could prevent the piling up of unauthorised arrivals in detention in Australia. This is a solution that I will pursue relentlessly.
It's also clear there are steps we must take in the interim in accordance with the principles I outlined.
Last night, the UNHCR published its revised eligibility guidelines on Sri Lanka. The guidelines are just one source of information which has helped inform the Government about the changing conditions in Sri Lanka.
The UNHCR report confirmed the improved human rights and security situation in Sri Lanka and that displaced people continue to return to their homes. Instead of automatically presuming that particular groups in Sri Lanka are refugees, the UNCHR states that all asylum claims must now be considered on a case-by-case basis, noting that some groups may still be at risk.
With the new information, acceptance rates are likely to fall.
Today, in the light of these circumstances, I am announcing the Government has decided to lift immediately the suspension on processing claims for Sri Lankans. Those currently in detention will have their claims processed against a range of country information including the revised UNHCR report I have described.
So, I have a message for people in Sri Lanka who might be considering attempting the journey to Australia: do not pay a people smuggler. Do not risk your life, only to arrive in Australian waters and find that you are far, far more likely than anything else to be quickly sent home by plane.
The other group of arrivals for whom processing has been suspended is people from Afghanistan. So far this year more than 60 per cent of all asylum seekers arriving by boat have come from that country. Although there was a time when large numbers of Afghan asylum seekers were granted refugee status, since April there have been more than 500 primary refusal decisions for Afghans. During the past month the primary refusal rate has exceeded 70 per cent.
If upheld at review, these increasing rates of refusal will result in many more people being returned to their homelands.
I am not immediately ending the suspension of processing of Afghan asylum seekers, but my Government will keep that decision under review in the coming weeks and months.
Under my leadership, the Government will work closely with the Government of Afghanistan on a range of migration-related issues, including putting in place arrangements for the return of Afghan nationals who are found not to be legitimate refugees. This process is essential for the integrity of our migration program, and it's important for sending a clear message of deterrence to people-smugglers and their clients that they cannot buy their way into Australia. I look forward to securing an efficient return arrangement and then resuming processing Afghanistan asylum seeker claims and getting Afghans home.
To reiterate: I am committed to treating people with decency while they are in detention in Australia, but if people are not found to be refugees, I am committed to sending them home, and whilst ever boats are attempting to enter Australian waters there must be effective policing.
We are successfully prosecuting dozens of people smugglers through our courts. We have successfully extradited alleged people smugglers from other countries.
Since September 2008 we have made 149 arrests for offences related to people smuggling. 48 people have been convicted and a further 99 prosecutions are now underway in our courts.
We are also investing in eight new patrol boats with improved surveillance and response capability - strengthening our Border Protection Command, which already has18 vessels and 18 aircraft available for patrolling Australian waters all year round. We already have more assets deployed for this task than any other Australian Government has ever had.
We ultimately destroy the illegal boats we intercept.
The Government recently strengthened penalties with the enactment of the Anti-People Smuggling and Other Measures Act 2010. This legislation includes mandatory minimum penalties for organisers and created a new offence of providing material support for people smuggling, with a maximum penalty of 10 years' imprisonment and/or a fine of $110,000.
If re-elected I will legislate to toughen these measures further, increasing maximum penalties for situations where a people-smuggling venture results in death.
Finally, with regard to those who are accepted as refugees, I believe Australians are prepared to welcome those who are genuine refugees, but they also expect them to learn the rules under which we live and abide by those rules. This means that when newcomers settle in our community, they accept their responsibility as members of the community - to learn English, get a job, and send their kids to school like everyone else.
Most refugees fulfil these obligations and are grateful to be able to make a new home in this country, just as hundreds of thousands of refugees also did in the aftermath of the holocaust and the Second World War in Europe.
But the rules are the rules. We will ensure refugees shoulder the same obligations as Australians generally.
In conclusion, we are implementing the changes I have announced today based on the principles I have outlined.
Moving forward means effective policies.
It means respecting the anxieties that are held by many in our community, but basing our policy and our discussion on the facts, moving beyond the false promises and the simplistic slogans.
It means speaking frankly about the difficulties we face, and seeking common ground consistent with the values that Australians share - values of fairness, respect for the rule of law, tolerance, compassion and responsibility.
I speak today cognisant of and proud of these values, and before the end of the year I will seek our people's endorsement so that we may all move forward together.
Thank you very much.



HOST: Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning, Deborah.
HOST: I'd like to, I suppose, hone in a little bit on the Indonesia part of this picture. East Timor, the East Timor strategy also involves very much trading on the co-operation and agreement of Indonesia. Australia has already asked much of Indonesia, which has already done a lot to remedy the terrorism risk in the region, for example. It also arrests and deals with many Australians, recreational drug users among them, who turn up in their bars and now in their jails more often than not. As Prime Minister, though, you've never met the Indonesian President, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, and now you want more. Now, Paul Keating said that Australia had no more important relationship than Indonesia. Do you share his view?
PM: I certainly believe our relationship with Indonesia is a vitally important one and yesterday when I spoke on border protection and asylum seeker issues I took the opportunity to thank Indonesia publically for their great co-operation with us to date on dealing with people smuggling and disrupting people-smuggling activity. So, they've been a good partner with Australia in these efforts.
Now, of course, I will be relentlessly pursuing discussions in the region about the regional processing centre and the idea here is a simple one, but, obviously, it's going to take time to work through. But the idea is that for the whole region, not just for Australia - for the whole region - it would be a better solution and a more durable solution to have a regional processing centre where asylum seeker claims are processed and a fair share in them of the refugees who are found to be genuine through that process, and this is because there is nothing humane about standing back and having people jump on boats with their families and risk their lives at sea.
HOST: Now, in foreign policy terms though, neither you nor Mr Abbott is particularly well credentialed. His 'cast them off' solution also has great potential to cause grief in the region. Voters might be forgiven for thinking that two highly accomplished domestic performers such as yourselves are amateurs at managing strategic regional alliances.
PM: Well, I suppose, you know, you come to the position of Prime Minister with the experiences that you've had. Obviously, I have had some foreign policy experiences, including representing this nation in the United States and in other countries, but I believe I do bring to the job a perspective about co-operation, about getting things done, about the remarkable things that can flow when you get people around a table working together. I'm going to take that same perspective to talking about the regional processing centre and working with our region, and if I can just say too, I mean, Mr Abbott doesn't have a solution here. He has a slogan, and he knows that. He knows, of course, that the slogan of 'turn the boats back' can't equal a reality. The reality is that boats are sabotaged and scuttled at sea and you are then faced with the stark choice - do you turn your back and let people drown, including children, or do you rescue them with all the risks that that entails for our Border Protection Command personnel and for the asylum seekers themselves.
So, let's not pretend that Mr Abbott's got anything other than a slogan. The solution here is going to take talk, it's going to take work, it's going to take time. I made that clear yesterday but I will be relentlessly pursuing it.
HOST: Prime Minister, can I just hone in a little bit on your regional literacy, as it were? Have you been to Jakarta?
PM: Yes, I've been to Jakarta. I was an election monitor, in fact, for the first free elections in Indonesia. We went to Jakarta first. This was a group of Australians from all political perspectives and all political parties, assisted by people from our Defence Forces and agencies like AusAID. I was then dispatched to West Timor to monitor voting in villages there, so I've had that experience.
But Deborah, I'm not going to pretend that I'm, you know, someone who spent their life in foreign affairs. I have not. That's obvious, you know, obvious from anybody who knows the simplest thing about my past and my track record. What I think I bring to the job is a preparedness to listen, a preparedness to learn, a preparedness to work with people and to take a methodical and analytical approach.
HOST: Prime Minister, yesterday in the Lowy Institute speech you very much appealed to Australia's better angels. You said we are better than this, we are so much better than this. Now, you also said in that same speech that newcomers needed to learn English, and quote, 'send their kids to school like everyone else', unquote. Now, as a former education minister, is there evidence that refugees have not been sending their kids to school?
PM: Well, as a former education minister I would say my perspective is that kids have to be in school and I've taken that perspective into policy by associating the payment of welfare with having kids in school. There is no excuse for not getting kids to school-
HOST: But did you have evidence that refugees are not sending their kids to school?
PM: Well, the perspective there wasn't a perspective about 'I've had so many reports about this or that or the other thing happening', my perspective there is it's important to say that the obligations we all shoulder as Australians apply to everyone and obviously I think that there is concern and perhaps some misunderstanding in the community about what happens when people are found to be genuine refugees and permitted to settle in Australia, and I want to make it very clear to the community that what happens, what should happen, what I will make sure happens is that refugees shoulder the same obligations that Australians carry generally. That is, the obligation to get a job, to earn your keep, to make your way, to abide by the rules and to do things like make sure your kids are in school.
HOST: But the implication that they weren't is sort of implying that there's a knowing neglect among these parents. Now, it is not the same as saying they throw their kids overboard, but there is an implication that there's some kind of deliberate neglect when I would have thought that one of the first things any asylum seeker is thinking when they decide to escape is that what they want is someone where their children might actually be safer and be educated. Surely they would be at the front of the queue to enter a school, not avoiding it.
PM: Well, Deborah actually in interpreting the speech I think in the very section that you referred to I said that, you know, many refugees who come here seize with both hands the opportunities that a new life in this nation provides, including the opportunities that it provides to get their children a great education. So, I did not, in the speech, it's not a fair construction of it to say that somehow I indicated there was a problem here with school attendance. I put both sides, and both sides are that many refugees have come to this country and made a life for themselves and been spectacularly successful.
I was speaking at the Lowy Institute, named in honour of Frank Lowy, a great Australian, now at the head of the biggest shopping centre property group in the world, a remarkable rags to riches story and he came here as a refugee and made a great life for himself and his family. I deliberately made that point, but I also deliberately made the point that, you know, fair's fair, and what is part of being fair is that everyone in this country, whether they were born here or arrived yesterday, has a set of obligations to themselves and to the nation.
HOST: Now, a careful response to the issue of border protection is obviously incredibly important, and part of Australia's duty, therefore, involves the protection of the rights of applicant refugees. Now, getting to the East Timor question, it's a very poorly resourced country. It's Portuguese speaking, remote, dangerous, allegedly corrupt in some examples. Australian soldiers remain there and they are battle ready. The courts, though, are very poorly set up, and Australian aid money, volunteer lawyers and others, go there to try to find and train judges, defence lawyers and prosecutors. So, exactly how might refugee applicants get legal assistance there?
PM: Well, the idea here for a regional processing centre, the policy proposal I outlined yesterday and said would take time to pursue, would be having a regional processing centre oversighted by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and of course the essential job off UNHCR is to protect the rights of refugees and to deal with assessments of who is a genuine refugee and as we have this conversation right now, UNHCR is doing that in many parts of the world.
HOST: Now, you also remarked in your speech that the refusal rate for Afghan refugee applications had now exceeded about 70 per cent and that this increased rate would mean that many more would be returned to Afghanistan. Now, of course, you've been to a couple of very tragic funerals of Australian soldiers killed there. The country is embroiled in war that may yet be unwinnable, the Government is said to be corrupt, the enemy is tyrannical. Is there an ethical dilemma that you face sending defenceless people back there?
PM: Well, I think the ethics, the morality here is that we do need to extend our protection and our generosity to people who are found to be genuine refugees. We are signatory to the Refugee Convention and that tells us how to assess, if you like, who has the status of a genuine refugee. For people who aren't genuine refugees, then the right thing is to return them to their country of origin.
I'm not going to try and put a simple construction on what's happening in Afghanistan. You're right, our soldiers are facing true and remarkable dangers. I've been to two funerals as Prime Minister already, which is reminding me and the nation of the bravery and the dangers that our soldiers face in Afghanistan, but parts of the country are stabilising and of course, as you assess an individual claim it's all about the individual and where they come from.
HOST: Now, the last thing, you're in Darwin, and the seat of Solomon is a very marginal seat there. It has also the highest proportion of military voters of any seat in Australia. Are you there to try and win them and how are you doing that?
PM: Well, I'm actually here today to look at our patrol boats. We have our patrol boats for Border Protection Command. We have 18 patrol boats already. We have 18 aircraft. We actually have more assets patrolling our waters than we've ever had before, but we are intending to add to that with 8 new patrol boats. So, I'll be out viewing one of the current patrol boats today and we will be adding 8 more.
HOST: Now, if they asked you when might they take their shore leave so that they can vote, what would you tell them?
PM: I would tell them, Deborah, that Defence makes arrangements for people to vote in all sorts of circumstances and I would also say to them, perhaps a little bit more seriously, that the election's due, you know, the second half of this year. That's the ordinary time for having the election. Obviously I am governing as Prime Minister, making decisions day by day, but taking the country forward, so I'll be doing that. Australians will get the opportunity to exercise their natural rights to pick their Prime Minister and pick their Government during the election due in the second half of the year.
HOST: Now, I have to ask you - did you ever think of yourself as an action hero? You might have seen the GetUp video of yourself.
PM: No, I haven't seen the GetUp video of myself and anybody who's met me and knows how unbelievably clumsy I am - I am a very clumsy person, I easily drop things and knock things over, I've done that spectacularly in front of a few TV cameras in my time - wouldn't see me as much of an action hero, so I'm sorry to disappoint.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks, Deborah. 



PM: It's good to be here in Darwin today and to have the opportunity to directly see and experience the remarkable work that is done by our Border Protection Command. We have today been on a training exercise on one of the patrol boats.
Obviously we have these patrol boats, we have assets securing our borders. Currently, we have 18 boats and 18 aircraft available to secure our borders. This is more assets than we have ever had before patrolling our waters. We are committed to providing 8 additional - sorry, 8 new I should, say - 8 new patrol boats, obviously with additional capabilities that can be used to patrol our borders.
It's been a great pleasure to be joined in this task and training exercise by the relevant Minister, Brendan O'Connor, Minister for Home Affairs, Justice and Customs; by the local Member for this area, the Member for Solomon, Damian Hale. I'm also joined today by David Bradbury, the Member for Lindsay in Western Sydney, who's come to see this work first hand.
I understand, as Prime Minister, whether you reside in Darwin, you reside in Sydney's west, or you reside in any other part of the nation - Australians are concerned when they see boats on our horizon and they want to make sure that the Government is actively managing to protect our borders.
Yesterday, I made a major public statement of my attitudes to protecting our borders. I particularly signalled that I will relentlessly pursue- through regional cooperation- creating a regional processing centre.
This is important because it will disrupt the business model that people smugglers sell. There's no point getting on a boat if what happens when you get off the boat is you are returned to the same regional processing centre.
I said yesterday, and very clearly, that this is not a quick fix. It's going to require a lot of discussion and a lot of work with partners in our region. I thank them for the cooperation they've shown to date as the region addresses irregular people movement. I particularly thanked the Indonesian Government yesterday, and we will be working on that goodwill as we pursue the discussions about the regional processing centre.
I'm very happy to also be here today to say that in a further step indicating the depth of our cooperation with the region, that the Minister for Justice and Customs and the Minister for Home Affairs will be making available additional police resources and equipment in our region. These new resources will be particularly directed at Indonesia, at Malaysia, at Thailand, and at Sri Lanka, amongst other countries.
These new resources include an additional seven Australian Federal Police officers, who will join other Australian Federal Police officers already deployed in our region. These officers are having success in disrupting people smuggling ventures. They've disrupted ventures which have prevented 5,000 people making the dangerous journey by boat.
The additional resources will also be focussed on Indonesia, with additional patrol and aircraft capability; with additional resources to assist in the forensics of police work; with additional resources to assist the police there. We have cooperated well with the Indonesian maritime police, and with these new resources and capabilities, obviously that cooperation can be strengthened.
I just want to make one remark on another matter before taking questions.
Today, Senator John Faulkner has publically confirmed that if the Government is re-elected he will not seek re-appointment to Labor's frontbench. John Faulkner is currently serving as the Minister for Defence and will do so until election day.
John has done a great job as Defence Minister and enjoys the respect of all of those who have worked with him. John is a legendary Labor Party and Labor movement figure. He's devoted 30 years of his life to active political involvement, full time.
What I have asked him to do, I've prevailed upon him to do, and he has agreed to do, is to seek re-election as a Senator and stay in the parliament. I believe he's got a further contribution to make as a member of the parliament and as a member of the team, but it's his personal wish, and it's been a long time coming, to take a step back from the added pressures of being a senior minister in government.
So, I thank John for everything that he's done today across his working life to support the Labor Party. I thank him for his ongoing support for Labor. I thank him for ceding to my pleas and agreeing to stay in the parliament.
It's my intention that when we move to the election that John Faulkner will travel with me as we go about election campaigning. He's a very senior person, a very wise head, and I very much rely on his wisdom and counsel and will continue to do so.
I'm happy to take any questions. We'll sweep through. We'll start over here.
JOURNALIST: The presence of Bradbury behind your shoulder, there. Doesn't that just confirm that this is a short-term political stunt, the Dili solution as it's been called?
PM: What I think it confirms is that there is concern across the Australian community about the question of border protection and asylum seekers. What I'd say is David Bradbury, as the Member for Lindsay, is he has, as a man very much in touch with the feeling in his community, indicated these concerns. Yesterday, when I spoke to the Australian nation through my speech, I indicated that I understand these concerns.
People want to see effective border management, and that is what we will provide.
On the question of timeframe, I couldn't have been clearer yesterday. There is no quick fix. I am not presenting a quick fix to the Australian people. I'm not presenting a slogan. I am indicating my determination to have new arrangements in our region, including a regional processing centre, and that's what I intend to pursue as Prime Minister, step by step and piece by piece.
We'll just go here and come back. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Perhaps you can indicate some idea of what the timeframe might be? Is it going to be a really long time or (inaudible)
PM: Look, I'm not going to give any timeframe on fostering this kind of regional cooperation. We need to be working with all of our neighbours.
I am thankful that the President of East Timor has indicated a preparedness to be involved in this discussion. I am thankful that the Prime Minister of New Zealand has also indicated that he is prepared to be involved in this discussion as a resettlement country for people who are genuine refugees.
The aim here is to stop people risking their life at sea in a dangerous journey in a boat; to stop having all of the safety at sea issues that presents for the individuals involved as well as those who bravely work for our Border Protection Command; and to end the people smuggling business in the sense that people smugglers would no longer have a product to sell if the end result of getting on a boat was that you went to the regional processing centre.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: On the Muckaty Station and the nuclear waste dump, you said the decision to build it there would be led by science, but the science shows that the Tennant Creek areas is prone to earthquakes and that the best place in country is a site near Woomera. Will you re-visit the decision to put the dump at Muckaty and actually institute a process that is based on science?
PM: Look, as Prime Minister I am staying with the same arrangements that people would be familiar with to date. We need, as a nation, to solve the problem of where we will store low- and medium-level waste. That waste is generated in processes valuable to the whole community like nuclear medicine.
There is a further process to go through in relation to Muckaty and we will go through that process.
We had a question over here? Yes?
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that you've brought forward a meeting of New South Wales Labor candidates and if so, why have you decided to bring that forward?
PM: I actually don't set such meeting dates. That's not something I do as Prime Minister. Those dates are set by our Labor Party officials. I did not make the decision to move the date. I was not involved in the decision to move the date. All of those arrangements are made by those who assist us on the campaign and were made separately to me.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given that PNG is a signatory to the Convention on Refugees and was at the time of Manus Island, given the fact that refugees or asylum seekers on Nauru were processed in that Tampa period with the assistance of the UNHCR, how can what you're proposing be different on East Timor? Isn't it the same?
PM: Let's just remind ourselves of a little bit of history, here. Of course, the Pacific Solution was announced by the Howard Government as a unilateral action of that Government and it was announced as an urgent response. It happened very, very quickly when we had the Tampa and other pressures. That processing was then undertaken on Manus Island and Nauru.
That's not my approach. It's not what I'm seeking to achieve. What I'm seeking to achieve through an open conversation with regional partners is a regional change in how we deal with irregular people movement.
Obviously, as Australia's Prime Minister, standing here with great representatives of the Australian people in the national parliament, our focus is on people movement to Australia, but we are not the only country that is experiences people movement. East Timor experiences people movement itself. It therefore makes for the region to work together, to cooperate to take away the product that fuels an evil trade and that is the trade of people smuggling.
That's my approach. I haven't made a quick announcement. I'm not putting this forward as a quick fix. It will be a process. It will build on, of course, the Bali process that has been in train for some time. These options have been canvassed within Government for some time.
What's new is my determination to proceed with and to pursue this solution.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, Damian Hale wants the Federal Government to pay compensation to traditional owners so Territorians can fish for free. Should southern taxpayers be funding that sort of measure?
PM: Look, I am going to indicate now I am not a person with a great personal familiarity with fishing. I would rely on others for the best of their expert advice. I understand this is an issue that Damian has raised as a local community representative and that's absolutely appropriate and we'll have a discussion about that.
JOURNALIST: But it's in your court. Will you make federal funds available for that?
PM: Best thing for me to do always is to work it through a step at a time. I can understand Damian's concern about local community members, obviously, for any decision that's got financial implications. We're running a Government which will get back into surplus in 2013. Any decision we make is taken through proper processes and prudently, so I'm not going to be announcing any decision today.
We'll take one more question here and then I must admit I have to go.
JOURNALIST: What does John Faulkner's decision today do for the credibility of the Government going into the next election?
PM: Well, look, I think John Faulkner will be missed at ministerial level. He is a senior and very, very capable figure. But he has made it clear that personally for him, that he feels that this is the right time to move from a ministerial career, and can I indicate this feeling by John is not a new one. Shortly after the 2007 election he indicated to the then Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, and to me, that he thought he had one term in him as a Minister. When the question came up about a new Minister for Defence John re-affirmed then to the then Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, and to me, that he, in stepping up to the job as Defence Minister felt he really only had one term in him - the 2007 electoral term - as a Minister. He's now pursued that political and personal decision, a decision based on how he personally feels about where he is in his life.
But I very much wanted to keep his talents and abilities available to me as Prime Minister, and to the Labor team. That's why I've asked him to work as a key strategist with me when we do have the election period, and that's why I've asked him to stay in the parliament and I'm very, very grateful, very grateful, that he's taken the decision to stay.
Thank you very much-
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one more question.
PM: Very, very quickly.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) so now we're, sought of, buying them off with our asylum seekers. How do you think that's going to look (inaudible)
PM: Well, look, I think that the best people to speak to the East Timorese people are the representatives of the East Timorese people. This is a new democracy. It has a President. It has a Prime Minister. Obviously, the President has indicated a preparedness to talk through these issues, and I welcome that.
Thank you very much.
ENDS



CHRISTENSEN: Julia Gillard, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Julia.
CHRISTENSEN: Very nice. The Julia and Julia show.
PM: That's right.
CHRISTENSEN: You've barely been in the- not been in the job for two weeks. Your first visit to Darwin, and I believe you're coming back on Saturday for a funeral, sadly.
PM: That's correct, yes I will.
CHRISTENSEN: Why have, why have you prioritised Darwin?
PM: Well, I've always loved coming to Darwin. I'm here today to look at our patrol boats. We do of course have our Border Protection Command working from Darwin. We have 18 patrol boats and aircraft that are patrolling our borders. We've never had more assets out there patrolling our waters than we do now, but we are intending to add 8 new patrol boats. So, I thought it was a good opportunity to come and look at them now and how they're performing, and to confirm that we will be having 8 more.
CHRISTENSEN: And of course you announced an asylum seekers policy yesterday involving a new immigration processing centre to be built in East Timor. We're on to that in just a moment because first of all, I wanted to ask you - you're not in favour of gay marriage, but a local gay nightclub has already held a Julia Gillard tribute night.
PM: Really?
CHRISTENSEN: Complete with drag queens impersonating your good self. Are you honoured?
PM: Well, I'm sure that that's a form of flattery. I'd like to see some of the photographs. Maybe they could get sent in?
CHRISTENSEN: Well, they did one for former Chief Minister Clare Martin and she went to the show and loved it, so there is actually an invitation from Throb nightclub. If you can fit it into your busy schedule, they will schedule the show specially for you.
PM: You know, the problem is I would go and I would feel comparatively underdressed. That would be the problem.
CHRISTENSEN: Robyn's on the line from Palmerston. Robyn, good morning.
CALLER: Good morning.
CHRISTENSEN: You're through to the Prime Minister.
CALLER: Thank you, thank you ma'am. Thank you very much for taking my question here. I'd just like to say that I've heard you say that you're proudly your own person and with your recent coming to the floor as the PM that you won't be swayed by Labor's factions or their heavies, and I commend you for this, but I'd like to know your personal definition - not necessarily the community's view - of marriage. As, for example, do you believe that it's between one man and one woman, or two people who love each other?
PM: My definition of marriage is the same definition as the Marriage Act that we have now, which is that marriage is between a man and a woman.
Obviously, we live in an age where there are all sorts of committed relationships which are not marriages. I'm in a committed relationship of that nature myself with my partner Tim, so I think this all boils down to personal choices. Obviously, we want every individual treating others with decency and respect, but it does boil down to personal choices.
I don't believe as Prime Minister it's my job to preach. That's not what I'm here for, and so people will make their own choices for their own reasons.
CHRISTENSEN: Robyn, thanks for your call. It's twenty six minutes to nine, 105.7 ABC Darwin. Julia Christensen with you with our Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, in the studio.
Julia Gillard you, as I said, announced your asylum seekers policy yesterday. You could call it the East Timor solution. What's the difference between that and John Howard's Pacific Solution? These are some comments that you made back in 2002.
PM ARCHIVE AUDIO: Labor's always said that it thinks the so-called Pacific Solution was more about getting John Howard through the election campaign than truly being a lasting solution to any problem Australia might face with asylum seekers. Our view would therefore be that we doubt the sustainability of the solution in the long term. We're particularly anxious to return to Parliament in order to get the Government to tell us what the price tag is. We still don't know what the so-called Pacific Solution is costing.
CHRISTENSEN: Julia Gillard, why would it work now when it wouldn't work then?
PM: Well look, I'd stand by every word of the statement that you've just replayed about the Pacific Solution. The difference here is we are not acting unilaterally, and we are not doing something quickly for political effect the way the Pacific Solution was done.
What I am laying out is what I believe is a policy solution that would be durable, and I've been very frank with people that it's not a quick fix. We are going to have to talk to our regional neighbours. We're going to have to work it through, but it would be better for the region if we had a regional processing centre where asylum seekers who are moving in the region can go and have their claims processed and nations like our own could take a fair share of those found to be genuine refugees.
I mean, there is nothing - nothing - humane about having a system that gets people with their families on boats in dangerous seas. That's not a humane solution. We don't want to be there. We also don't want to have the people smugglers profiting from other people's desperation.
So, this would be a model that would basically take away the product that the people smugglers are selling, because no matter how you moved you would end up in the regional processing centre being assessed in a comprehensive and fair way by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
CHRISTENSEN: You said this is not a political solution, but you're about to go into election mode. You've rushed this out without the full support of the East Timorese Government.
PM: Well, we've been very clear that this is about the region talking and working together. Now, these ideas, these policy questions have been discussed within Government for a period of time. They've been discussed in the region for a period of time. There's been a process known as the Bali process for talking about some of these issues.
What I think is new is my determination to relentlessly pursue this as a lasting solution for the question of asylum seekers and border protection, which I think meets the needs - meets the needs of taking away the product people smugglers are selling.
CHRISTENSEN: Catherine's on the line from Nightcliff. Morning, Catherine.
CALLER: Morning Julia, Julia.
PM: Good morning.
CALLER: I'd like to ask a question about self-maintenance, not about policy. Julia, I run a business and I'm really passionate about that business, but I often find myself working very long days, sometimes 20 hours a day, and that can take its toll on my health, and therefore my ability to perform well and my ability to make good decisions. So, what I want to know is you, as Prime Minister, running the country - which is quite a bit big bigger than my business - what do you do to ensure that you don't find yourself working 20 hours a day? What do you do to maintain your physical and mental health so that you can, as Prime Minister, continue to perform well and make good decisions in the best interests of Australia?
PM: That's a good question, and I'm used to working hard. I think I come from pretty hardworking stock. Both my mother and father are hard workers, but everybody needs down time, and everybody needs rest and moments to reflect. So, the way I've tried to organise myself as Deputy Prime Minister, which was a pretty busy job, too, and now as Prime Minister, is to, you know, get some sleep and also just have that little moment of pause where you're perhaps reading a book you're interested in or just, you know, sitting and thinking rather than always being on the move.
It's not easy to get the balance, but I agree with you - you do need some balance in it. We're not machines. We're human beings, and so we need that up time and a bit of down time.
CHRISTENSEN: Reports say that you had a manicure yesterday - a bit of down time?
PM: That was a bit of down time, exactly. I'm a woman who needs to get her nails done the same way that lots of women around the country would need to get these things done. So, that's a very nice bit of down time.
CHRISTENSEN: Interesting that it was reported, though. Cass has facebooked us from Holland. She's listening this morning. She wants to know if the PM is bothered that there are so many news articles about her hair, and your dress, and maybe your manicures, compared to your male counterparts?
PM: I expected it to be part of what would happen. I mean, it's obviously a great privilege to be Prime Minister of this country. People are interested in the fact I'm the first woman Prime Minister, so I expected all of that.
At the end of the day, I hope that people judge me on the work I do rather than the way I wear my hair or the clothes on my back, and I think Australians are pretty practical about their politicians. There might be some curiosity about these questions, but I think people will judge me on my abilities to do the job as Prime Minister.
CHRISTENSEN: Reports in the newspapers this morning that you're gearing for an August the 21st election - yes or no?
PM: Now, if I was going to give anybody an election scoop it would be someone called Julia. You would expect that, but I'm not in the position today to give anyone a scoop.
Look, I am in the business, day by day, of - in my own methodical way - going about the tasks I need to do as Prime Minister. That's why I'm here today. Obviously, I'll be looking at our patrol boats with our Labor Member here, Damian Hale, who's just a fantastic human being, taking some time to take some soundings from him about what's on the minds of the local community.
CHRISTENSEN: Jocelyn is a young woman from Numbulwar in the Top End. She wants to talk to you about the intervention. Jocelyn, good morning.
CALLER: Good morning, Julia. Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning, Jocelyn.
CALLER: I live in one of the prescribed Indigenous communities, Numbulwar, which is situated in south-east Arnhem Land, and I just wanted to ask you a question about what is actually happening with the intervention and how long is that going to continue to roll out?
PM: Well, my colleague Jenny Macklin is obviously directly oversighting policies for Indigenous Australians, including the intervention. We had some legislation go through the Parliament when the Parliament last sat about income management, welfare management, and what we have done is we've put that on what we believe to be a proper footing. That is, it is no longer in contradiction with the Racial Discrimination Act. But, as a Government, we do have powers to make sure that there is income management and that welfare is used for its proper purpose, and that is primarily to ensure people are supported and children are supported. So, you should expect that to be a continuing feature, not only here in the Northern Territory, but introduced in other communities around the country.
CHRISTENSEN: What about the prescribed areas act, will that be removed any time soon?
PM: Well, the feedback I have from Jenny Macklin about the intervention is that there has been a lot of good done and a lot of evidence that there is better attendance at schools, you know, more food in homes, better ability to deal with some of the service delivery issues. So, we will continue to be focused on that.
CHRISTENSEN: Thanks for the call Jocelyn. It's seventeen minutes to nine, 105.7 ABC Darwin, 783 Alice Springs, and right around the Territory on ABC Local Radio, Prime Minister Julia Gillard our guest in the studio taking your calls this morning on 1300 057 222.
Julia Gillard, I expect you've had time to catch up with our Chief Minister, Paul Henderson. Has he asked you to review the decision to locate the nuclear waste facility at Muckaty Station?
PM: I'll actually see Paul Henderson during the course of today. I wasn't in a position to see him last night given the time we arrived, so I'll have any discussion with Paul that he wants to have when we meet.
CHRISTENSEN: But he has gone on the record saying that's what he wants you to do. Will you review that decision?
PM: Well, we're in a process here, and I think it's very well known that for a long period of time, and it's not just been under the Government since 2007, it was also the period of time under Prime Minister Howard, to identify a site that could take low- and medium-level waste, the kind of waste that comes from nuclear medicine. We're in a process now about Muckaty Station. Obviously, there are some issues about traditional owners that are being worked through. Every step of the way we're going to be guided by scientific assessments.
CHRISTENSEN: But the scientific assessment says that Woomera in South Australia is the best option.
PM: Well, we are working through this, and the scientific assessment has also indicated that Muckaty Station is an appropriate site. There are some issues about land management, traditional ownership that are being worked through in the Federal Court.
CHRISTENSEN: Housing - obviously a key issue in Indigenous Australia and the Territory. The Australian reported at the weekend that more SIHIP houses are being built under local contracting schemes rather than under the cumbersome Government-private alliance partnership. Is it time to completely ditch that model and simply contract out to local operators experienced in remote housing in the Territory, some of them Indigenous business organisations?
PM: I think the aim here was to get the houses constructed, but also to get them in a way that provided local employment and training, provided some long-lasting benefits from the construction. Jenny Macklin's taken a fair degree of personal control and charge of this. We were obviously concerned about lack of progress, and I believe that Jenny's on the right path to ensure that we see more progress. So, you know, my view is that Jenny as the Minister on the spot is in the best position to make the judgments about the right management model for the right parts of the Territory to get the houses up, but also to get the lasting benefits from training and job opportunities.
CHRISTENSEN: Do you like fishing, Julia Gillard?
PM: No, I'm not someone who goes fishing.
CHRISTENSEN: It's a big topic in the Top End.
PM: I'm sure it is, and many, many people are very expert in it, but I'm not one.
CHRISTENSEN: Very expert. Well, when you come for a longer visit we might be able to take you out, but Territory fishers are having to pay for a permit to fish around the Tiwi Islands as a result of the Blue Mud Bay decision. Damian Hale, the Labor Member for Solomon - as you say, a good bloke - said the feds were looking at paying for those permits. Will you?
PM: Well look, I'm going to have to talk to Damian Hale about that. I'm not going to pretend an expertise in fishing issues in the Top End, but I'll be guided by a great local advocate in any decision that's made.
CHRISTENSEN: David's on the line from Gray. Good morning, David.
CALLER: Good morning. I'd just ask Julia - just tell her I love redheads. I'm a redhead fan from way back.
PM: A man of great taste.
CALLER: Yeah, redheads rock, OK? Yeah, I was just wondering, if I vote for you - I suffer from mental illness - I'm just wondering, will that be one of your priorities? Or when, in your governing style, or not?
PM: Well, what I can say is I think I grew up with some understanding of the challenges of mental illness. My father was a psychiatric nurse at Glenside Psychiatric Hospital in Adelaide for, you know, most of his working life, for more than 20 years of his working life.
Nicola Roxon, the Minister for Health, has indicated that in our big suite of health reforms - and we're focusing on making our health system sustainable for the future, getting people the doctors and nurses they need, training more GPs, 1,300 of them, training more nurses - but in the big suite of health reforms she wants to work on and have something more to say about the question of mental health. So, I'm going to agree with you that more needs to be done, and we will be working in this area, and I hope I bring some understanding of it from my family background.
CHRISTENSEN: David, stay tuned. Julia Gillard, a listener who says they're a self-funded retiree relying on mining shares says they're worried their income is being jeopardised by the new mining tax. Will it be?
PM: Well, there's no need to be concerned at all, and as you would've seen, I last week with our biggest miners - BHP and Rio and others - struck a breakthrough agreement that I think takes the mining industry forward, takes mining communities forward, takes the nation forward. The mining industry has responded well to that. Any threats or concerns that projects might not be going ahead have now been removed. It's back to business, back to new exploration, new projects, so that's good for mining, mining companies, mining communities, and also for those who invest in mining.
CHRISTENSEN: 1300 057 222 is our number this morning for talkback with the Prime Minister. I've got quite a few listeners who want me to ask you about the proposed internet filter: time to get rid of it, or at least an opt-in or opt out system?
PM: Well look, I know that there is some concern here, and I believe that the Minister, Senator Stephen Conroy, has been trying to work through to get a resolution, and I think the competing tensions are we obviously want, you know, a fast internet that meets people's needs, that's why we're rolling out the National Broadband. We're committed to it, obviously Tony Abbott's committed to taking it away.
But there's also a set of concerns about the dark side of the new technology, if I can use that expression, and, you know, clearly you can't walk into a cinema in Australia and see certain things and we shouldn't on the internet be able to access those things either. So, Stephen Conroy is working to get this in the right shape.
CHRISTENSEN: Are you comfortable, though, with that filter? I mean, Stuart has emailed and said it's hard not to draw parallels between what China conducts on its internet accessibility and what the Government's doing here.
PM: Look, I'm happy with the policy aim, and the policy aim is, you know, if there are images of child abuse, child pornography, they are not legal in our cinemas. You would not be able to go to the movies and watch that, and you shouldn't. I mean, no-one should want to see that, but you're not able to go to the movies and see those kinds of things. Why should you be able to see them on the internet? I think that that's the kind of, you know, moral, ethical question at the heart of this.
But I understand that there's a set of concerns about, technical concerns about internet speed, and also concerns that somehow this accidentally doesn't move into taking away legitimate use of the internet, and it's not my intention that we in any way jeopardise legitimate use of the internet, but I think all of would share repulsion for some of the things that can be accessed through the internet.
CHRISTENSEN: A question from Adam Lampe from the NT Education Union - currently the Federal Government's funding 200 extra teachers in Territory remote schools. Will the funding for these staff become recurrent?
PM: Well, we're a Government that's put a lot more resources into education under my leadership as Education Minister-
CHRISTENSEN: We can't afford to lose these teachers.
PM: No, no we can't, I agree with that, and we are actually working through with the Northern Territory, not only on the question of the 200 teachers but on education generally, and a new Indigenous education action plan.
So, I think, on education, I can say to people I have brought as Prime Minister a driving passion about education. One of the single biggest motivators of me ever getting involved in public advocacy or activism was my profound belief that to be a genuine, fair go country we need to be able to say to each other we give every child a great education. We've got more to do to get there, including in the Northern Territory, and as Prime Minister that will be unbelievably close to my heart.
CHRISTENSEN: One more little local test for you, Julia Gillard. The former Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, had a few problems on national TV with the pronunciation of one of our towns.
[CLIP PLAYS]
CHRISTENSEN: Do you want to have a go at it?
PM: Borroloola.
CHRISTENSEN: Very good. Mel's on the line from Darwin. Morning, Mel. Let me just try that again.
CALLER: Welcome to the Top End.
PM: Thanks, Mel.
CALLER: If you don't believe in God Julia, how do you think you're going to be the next Prime- you know, elected Prime Minister?
PM: Mel, we've had Prime Ministers in the past - longest-running Labor Prime Minister Bob Hawke for example - who did not have an active belief in God and was very well known for it. You know, people will make their own decisions about what's going to motivate their vote.
For me, I just think it's best to be honest about these things. I don't believe in, you know, I don't believe in pretending a faith I don't feel, so it would be, I suppose, the easier and in some ways less controversial choice to go through the rituals in the hope that that would make people believe I have an active faith, but I don't think that's right. I don't think it's right for me to pretend a faith I don't feel, so I've just told people the truth about that.
CALLER: One last question. Ramos- Jose Ramos-Horta said this morning said he didn't want East Timor to be a prison for asylum seekers. When are you- will you be going over there any time soon to negotiate?
PM: Well, we're going to be taking this a step at a time with the countries in our region. It's not, you know, I said yesterday it's going to take time. I asked the Australian people for their patience and consideration was we take that time. There have been some earlier processes, the Bali process. We'll build on that.
Our aim here is to have a regional processing centre within our region, which means that we take away the incentive for people to get on boats, to potentially lose their lives at sea, and take away the incentive to pay money to people who are plying a trade in misery - the people smugglers.
CHRISTENSEN: Julia Gillard, thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks, Julia. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the Government will immediately provide extra resources to our regional partners to help wreck the business of people smuggling.
The boost to law enforcement agencies in our region is a further step by the Gillard Government to strengthen our border protection arrangements and ensure fair, sustainable and effective processes to deal with irregular migration across the region.
Extra support will be provided to law enforcement agencies in Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, building on our pledge to tackle people smuggling through regional co-operation.
The package includes:
 * 	Extra patrol boats, surveillance aircraft and communications equipment to help the Indonesian National Police detect and disrupt people smuggling ventures in Indonesian waters.
 * 	New land-based policing surveillance and investigative equipment for partner law enforcement agencies in Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand,Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
 * 	Seven more Australian Federal Police officers to increase our presence in the region and boost the team that works with our regional law enforcement partners.
 * 	$5 million to develop the computer forensic capabilities of the Indonesian National Police.
The $24.8 million package underlines this Government's commitment to working with our neighbours on this complex problem.
We believe that establishing a sustainable regional protection framework is the most effective way to address irregular migration and put people smugglers out of business.
We recognise the burden faced by our neighbours in dealing with people smuggling and want to continue to work productively and closely with other countries to put a stop to this dangerous and inhumane trade.
Close cooperation between the Australian Federal Police and our regional law enforcement partners is critical to the fight against people smuggling and this approach is already delivering results.
Operations involving Australian agencies have resulted in authorities in Malaysia, Sri Lanka and Indonesia disrupting 204 people smuggling ventures involving more than 5,000 people bound for Australia since September 2008.
The $24.8 million package builds on the $1.2 billion dedicated to bolstering Australia's border security in the 2010-11Budget which builds on the previous year's whole-of-government strategy to combat people smuggling and enhance border protection.
We will take away the product that people smugglers are trying to sell, toughen the penalties for those involved in people smuggling and work towards an effective, sustainable, long term regional solution to deal with the challenge of irregular arrivals.


Springfield, Brisbane
PM: I've said, as Prime Minister, that I don't want to see a big Australia, I want to see a sustainable Australia. I don't want us to hurtle down the track to a population of 36 or 40 million without doing the work necessary on population policy.
I believe that it's time we just stopped for a moment, take a breath, have an opportunity to reflect, and have an opportunity to develop policies for managing population.
Of course, as an immigrant to this country I'm well aware of the important role played by migrants who come here, who bring their skills, who go to the places that need them and help build our country, so this isn't about immigration, but it is about planning. It is about making sure, as we build new communities, that there are the services and the lifestyle that people need.
Here in Springfield they have got that right: work to bring education services, schools, TAFE, university; working to bring health services, including a new hospital to cater for this community's needs; work to bring the parklands, the bike paths, the shopping, the things that go together to make a lifestyle.
Too often, Australians buy their dream home on the urban fringe but they get a nightmare lifestyle with long commutes, stuck in traffic; not able to move around their community the way that they want to; not having the schooling options they'd seek for their children; too far away from local health services.
We want to make sure that when people get a dream home they get a good lifestyle as well, and so I've asked the Minister for Sustainable Population, Tony Burke, to develop population policies for this country. I don't want to see the kind of problem we have now - some areas of the country with too many people and not enough jobs, whilst in other areas of the country we've got vacant jobs and not enough people.
We can do better than that, and as a Government we will be working to do better than that.
I'll turn to Tony Burke now for a few comments, and we'll be happy to take questions. Tony?
MINISTER BURKE: Thanks, PM. I think today at Springfield you can see really clearly the difference between building a housing development and building a community, and what we've got here at Springfield has been a plan to build a community.
One in three of the people living here will be able to have jobs here, so instead of losing hours and hours of every week that could have been productively spent at the workplace or as special time with your family. Instead of all those hours being lost in traffic, people will actually be in a situation where they're near work.
I had a coffee at the local shops this morning. I saw a bus, and unlike most buses I see in the place where I live there were seats on it. It was actually possible to get a seat on the bus. It was possible to see a community that was growing and working.
That's what we've got at Springfield. That's what sustainable population is about.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this-
PM: I'll just see if Shayne and Bernie want to start now skiting about Queensland and the State of Origin.
NUEMANN: Well, three-nil, the first victory, three-nil victory since Fatty Vaughtin's day. It's a fantastic result.
PM: We had to let them get that out. Matthew?
JOURNALIST: This community is the exception. This community came because it had an ambitious developer and he had a council that all got behind it. Had nothing to do with the Commonwealth Government, I don't think, in the early stages. It's not enough, surely, just to say, well, we need to have things like this.
Doesn't the Commonwealth have to either legislate, if it has the powers, or work with the States to make sure that as we develop new housing estates they aren't just housing estates, because that's the norm, isn't it?
PM: Well, I'll turn to Tony Burke, but can I just give some examples of the kind of role the Commonwealth can play and some of the ways we've assisted this community. We've obviously assisted this community with some direct work on the local parklands, and that's been important, and then the Commonwealth needs to step forward with things like settings for growth for universities. We put Australian universities on a growth path and we've got a university in this community. We're rewarding Australian universities that enrol students from low-SES backgrounds and the university in this community is.
Of course, we are a funder and a partner in schools, and we're a funder and a partner in health services.
Part of Tony's work will be looking at how the Federal Government can continue to engage, indeed, better engage with population policy, with planning and with the development of local services, but I'll turn to Tony for some comments, too.
MINISTER BURKE: Matthew, you're right in saying that a population strategy only works if you can have good levels of cooperation with each level of government. It reaches almost every portfolio at a Commonwealth level, but many of the levers do exist at state and local government level.
As we get to announcing the panels that are going to be putting together the issues paper that I've been talking about you will find strong representation from other levels of government throughout that, and that's going to be part of making sure that any population strategy isn't just some small corner of population issues at a Commonwealth level. It's actually reaching, in a cooperative way, to state and local government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a central way of making-
PM: We'll just have Matthew first and then move across. Matthew?
JOURNALIST: Sorry, just to follow it up, councils want rate bases. Look all over the country, look in your own two cities - there's all these housing developments with nothing but houses, so don't you actually have to take an interventionist role to actually drive this, because there is no incentive for developers to think about it?
MINISTER BURKE: The starting point at a Commonwealth level is to work through it on a cooperative basis. We're certainly not starting on any premise other than that. The consultation is real.
PM: And could I just make a comment, too? I think councils want to see good communities. I think local government is the area of government that feels community concerns about things like not having parkland or not having bike paths. When I meet with local councillors, and of course we've had the opportunity to talk to the mayor of the council that covers this community today, what they want to see for the citizens in their municipality is a great lifestyle, so I believe, you know, they've got a shared aim with us about managing population, about looking towards the set of policies that Tony Burke will develop for the Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, central to the great lifestyle is jobs and decentralisation of jobs out of the CBDs into these areas. What is the Commonwealth doing to facilitate that?
PM: Well, I think you're absolutely right. Jobs in a local community are very important to a lifestyle. I met today, one of the community members I spoke to was a man who's a physiotherapist who's got a 3-minute commute to work. There'd be a lot of people very, very envious of that.
Of course, we can play a role, looking at how we distribute services and part of Tony's work can be looking at that, and then the nature of the development plays a role, too, so that there are jobs available in local communities.
The reality here is we do have mismatches around the country: strong population growth and not enough jobs; other parts of the country where we've got strong jobs growth and not enough population. We want to work through that set of issues. It's going to take a comprehensive approach. It's going to take some time, but I've asked Tony Burke to work on this because I want sustainability to be at the heart of how we move Australia forward: not endorsing a big Australia, but a sustainable Australia; how we develop the policies that give us that sustainability.
JOURNALIST: Subsequent to that, we're seeing manufacturing job losses here because of competition, particularly from China. Is that a concern to you, and as a sub-question, would you look at establishing more Commonwealth services here so there are jobs here?
PM: Look, we are a great trading nation and I think we can compete on the world stage - and we do - and so for Australia, being there, competitive on the world stage, wining the international competition is vital to the economic future of this country, so I believe in having a strong economy that offers people the benefits and dignity of work. I don't think we need to be afraid of our ability to compete on the world stage. We are a great trading nation, a competitive nation.
On the question of Commonwealth services coming to municipalities, to localities, to growth corridors, obviously we want to make sure, as part of the great lifestyle, that we want to see Australians enjoy that they've got access to services, and when services are there that does mean local jobs.
JOURNALIST: Can we ask you about Timor? Obviously, some people might say it was arrogant to make an announcement, like you did, without actually having the permission of the people you needed.
PM: Well, the speech I gave the other day on asylum seeker and refugee policy was me laying down what I believe is the long-term, durable solution for the region.
We are not the only country in the region that experiences irregular people movement. It is a problem in our region, and I think the appropriate way of then moving to resolve this problem is to work across the region and have a regional processing centre.
When I outlined that policy a few short days ago I'd spoken to the President of East Timor. I had spoken to the Prime Minister of New Zealand. I have spoken now to the President of Indonesia, and our officials will now work in the region with our regional neighbours to get their views and to work on this proposal.
JOURNALIST: But you haven't spoken to the Prime Minister, Xanana Gusmao, and his deputy is saying that East Timor's unwilling and unable to deliver with this plan. If it's just a half-baked idea for a quick political fix [sic]?
PM: Well, this is an idea, question of a regional processing centre, that has been raised and considered for some time. We have had a process here called the Bali process which brings the region together to talk about issues including issues of people movement, so there have been suggestions in the past about a regional processing centre.
What's new is my determination to achieve this. What's new is my determination to relentlessly pursue it.
On the question of East Timor, can I say this: looking across the region, we will work with regional neighbours; we will have the necessary and respectful conversations.
Obviously, the President of East Timor indicated a preparedness to have the conversation. I'll speak to the Prime Minister of East Timor during the course of this week about the preparedness to have the conversation.
What we want to see here is dialogue across the region. Yes, of course, that will involve East Timor, but it will involve other regional partners as well, participating in that dialogue.
JOURNALIST: Isn't it the case that to be credible on this issue in a political sense, because as you have said, you put up an idea, you're seeking a dialogue, but to be credible on polling day, won't you have had to have done more than simply say this is what I would like to see happen? Don't you have to have results from your relentless pursuit before you ask people to vote for you?
PM: Well, let's just take that a step at a time. What I announced a few days ago was that I believed we needed a regional processing centre and I would be working to achieve that. That work has already started. We are already actioning that work, taking steps forward.
I also announced a few short days ago how we would be dealing with the question of processing asylum seekers from Sri Lanka, and our determination to ensure that people who aren't genuine refugees are returned home.
I also announced the steps that we are taking to strike a return agreement with Afghanistan, so, once again, people who aren't genuine asylum seekers are returned home.
I announced that we will amend Commonwealth legislation to increase penalties when there has been a loss of life because of movement by boat auspiced by people smugglers, and of course I've indicated to the Australian people that I share their concern about managing our borders and we want to do that effectively, which is why I have announced these policies and we are implementing them.
And, can I just say the choice on election day, the choice on election day is between me saying, as Prime Minister, that we will do these things; that we will have a frank and open conversation with the Australian people about these issues; that I am respectful of people's views. I don't want to see labels like redneck or intolerant or racist.
That approach versus Mr Abbott, who's got a slogan that he knows can't be turned from words into action. He's got a slogan - 'turn back the boats' - and he knows, he knows himself, it is impossible to do that and that's all it is, a cheap slogan.
JOURNALIST: Is it a fair burden to place on a developing country with 100,000 internally displaced people, though?
PM: Well, the President of East Timor, who obviously is the local representative, the President of East Timor, someone who, as people would know, across his adult life dedicated his work to bringing democracy and freedom to East Timor-
JOURNALIST: But he has a largely ceremonial role.
PM: Well, I don't think anyone would dispute the expertise of President Ramos Horta in all things East Timorese. The man's devoted his life to ensuring that country enjoyed freedom and democracy and he said that he believes it's appropriate to have the conversation.
JOURNALIST: Surely it would have been smart to have a chat to the Prime Minister of the country first?
PM: Well, look, the ordering here, obviously, we had the East Timorese President in Australia very recently. I followed that up with a conversation with him. Obviously, there will be internal discussions in East Timor and I will speak to the Prime Minister of East Timor as well, but this is a dialogue that will happen more broadly than East Timor. It will happen across the region, and the aim here - the aim here - is a very important one.
We want to take away the product that people smugglers are selling. What they're selling is a boat passage, which may be risky, dangerous, occasional loss of life, they are selling a boat passage to get to Australia in the hope that that will give people the ability to stay. What we would be saying with a regional processing centre is don't get on the boat because you'll end up in the regional processing centre anyway.
We will take our fair share of genuine refugees. We will work with other resettlement countries, like New Zealand, to ensure that a fair share of genuine refugees are accommodated in our country. That's the best way forward.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the latest boat arrivals, apparently the information was delayed after your announcements of your policy. Is that true?
PM: Oh, look, I'm not aware of that. The timing of announcements about boats being intercepted, there's obviously a set of operational matters and then the Minister for Home Affairs makes the relevant announcement.
JOURNALIST: Climate change - are we stuck without a policy?
PM: Certainly not. As Prime Minister, I've said I believe climate change is real. I believe that it is caused by human activity. Now, that's a pretty sharp contrast with my opponent, Mr Abbott.
[audio break]
-price on carbon when we have a deep community consensus about that price on carbon.
In the meantime, obviously, we will continue to work, continue to work on climate change policies and reducing the amount of climate CO2, our carbon footprint, as a country.
JOURNALIST: When will you guys stop misrepresenting what Tony Abbott said. That's not what he said. You know that.
PM: Well, he's on the record as saying that. Absolutely.
JOURNALIST: Some of the science is absolute crap.
PM: Well-
JOURNALIST: He didn't say climate change is absolute crap, and he's got policies, (inaudible)-
PM: Well-
JOURNALIST: That say he thinks climate change is real and he wants to do something about it.
PM: Well, my understanding about Mr Abbott's position is that he has been dismissive of the science, dismissive of the science that human activity causes climate change. He has been in favour of a carbon pollution reduction scheme, he's been against a carbon pollution reduction scheme, he's been in favour of a carbon pollution reduction scheme, he's been against a carbon pollution reduction scheme. I haven't checked today what his position on a carbon pollution reduction scheme is, but is has varied substantially over time
[audio break]
-as a Government, as Prime Minister, I have consistently said, and obviously believe, climate change is real, it's caused by human activity. We will, as a nation, need to price carbon. To get there, we need a community consensus about that change. There are steps we can take in the meantime to reduce our carbon footprint, and we will be taking those steps.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a local question - it's the second visit to Queensland since you took over the leadership. Do you need to work any harder here because Kevin Rudd was from the state?
PM: Look, I intend to be Prime Minister for all of the country, and to be Prime Minister for all of the country I believe it's appropriate to travel, to talk, to meet with people. I obviously can't be in all parts of the country on any given day, and what I do is rely on our great Labor representatives around the country to give me the best of their views, the best of their intelligence about what's happening in their local community. I'm standing here today with two great local Labor representatives, Shayne Neumann and Bernie Ripoll.
JOURNALIST: Queensland Labor (inaudible) dropping in the polls. Any concerns there with the performance of Anna Bligh and the Labor Government?
PM: Well, look, the issue for me as Prime Minister is I want to work cooperatively with state governments, including with the state government led by Anna Bligh. As Prime Minister I want to make sure we are delivering stable and competent government. What I said when I became Prime Minister I think that we've been a good government but there are a set of issues where we have lost our way and that I did want to take the steps necessary to get our Government back on track. I believe we're doing that day by day and we will be working with our state colleagues on the issues of concern to Australians. They include health, they include education, where I want to work with premiers around the country who are representing their states.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) deputy PM from East Timor said that you had approached other countries before you approached East Timor. Is that true, and if so, which ones?
PM: Look, the telephone conversations I have had about the regional processing centre are the ones that I've talked about publically, and they are the only conversations I have had to date, so I spoke to the President of East Timor, I spoke the Prime Minister of New Zealand, and yesterday, in the context of a congratulations call to me from the President of Indonesia, we also discussed the matter.
OK, one more and we'll go.
JOURNALIST: Is the problem with a price on carbon now that ordinary people can't afford to pay?
PM: Well, the issue about a price on carbon is people want us to address climate change. I want to address climate change, and ultimately having a price on carbon is a vital part of addressing climate change.
I also want to see Australians, many of whom are doing it tough, I want to see those Australians in on the decision and working with us so that there is a deep community consensus about change. That's how I want to deal with climate change as Prime Minister.
Thank you very much.



SATTLER: Hello, Prime Minister. How are you?
PM: Hello.
SATTLER: How does that sound?
PM: I think it sounds ok. What do you think?
SATTLER: Well, we would have said hello Julia a few weeks ago.
PM: Well, feel free to say hello Julia if you would prefer.
SATTLER: Right, well we're all cynics here. We're all cynics with an election around the corner.
PM: Really?
SATTLER: Well, you know what it's like.
PM: Oh, it's no cause for cynicism.
SATTLER: With politicians? You've got to be joking. When are you going to put us out of our misery? It is going to be August sometime, surely? I know what you're going to say, I can't speculate and all that sort of thing but when are you going to put us out of our misery?
PM: Howard, I was going to say you don't look miserable at all. You look very happy.
SATTLER: I am happy.
PM: Well, there's no misery then to worry about.
SATTLER: When are you going to tell us?
PM: Well we've got some things to do. Obviously, I've been in the job for two weeks now. First and foremost I wanted to deal with and resolve the issue with the minerals tax and we've done that. I made a major statement on asylum seeker questions on Tuesday. I said then that I have a plan for a regional processing centre. We would need to have dialogue with our region, we're doing that now. I was very pleased to have a conversation earlier in the week with the President of East Timor indicating a preparedness to be involved-
SATTLER: That doesn't count, it's the Government that counts, right?
PM: Yes, and I spoke earlier in the week to the President and he indicated a preparedness to have the conversation and today the Prime Minister of East Timor has said that he is prepared to have the conversation and to receive a concrete proposal -
SATTLER: But I heard you, in a news bulletin, only about half an hour ago, say you never gave the impression that East Timor was the place that you chose. But you did, didn't you?
PM: Well I can explain that Howard because on Tuesday, when I gave the speech, I indicated I had this plan for a regional processing centre that undercut the business model, the thing that people smugglers were selling. I said that I had had a conversation with the President of East Timor and we would be involved in dialogue with the region.
SATTLER: But you never mentioned any other country, apart from New Zealand and Indonesia, so -
PM: Absolutely, absolutely Howard. Absolutely agreeing with you. Today, on radio I was basically invited to unilaterally announce that there was going to be a regional processing country in a particular location. We're talking about sovereign countries here Howard and obviously I'm not going to unilaterally announce, on behalf of another nation what's going to happen in that nation -
SATTLER: No, but you did mention East Timor, you mentioned New Zealand, and you mentioned Indonesia.
PM: And I've mentioned all of that today.
SATTLER: Did you talk with any other countries?
PM: Well, Howard just step-by-step. Tuesday, I reported to the Australian people that I had this plan for a regional processing centre. I reported to the Australian people on my discussions with the Prime Minister of New Zealand and the President of East Timor. What I indicated then is that we would engage in further dialogue. It is not for me to unilaterally announce the location in another country. We're talking about sovereign nations.
SATTLER: But why mention any countries?
PM: Because I had a conversation with the President of East Timor and believed it was appropriate to indicate that he had said to me there was a preparedness to have the discussion with Australia. And then yesterday I did speak to the President of Indonesia and in what was a congratulatory telephone call also raised the issue with him and I've publicly reported that.
SATTLER: What's been his response?
PM: Well, obviously, he too would be looking forward to further dialogue. Then today on radio I was consistently challenged to, you know, unilaterally announce right now where is it going to be. The form of words running on your radio bulletin is from that interview.
SATTLER: Have you talked to anyone in Nauru or Manus Island?
PM: We are talking to signatories to the Refugee Convention, of which East Timor is one.
SATTLER: Would you rule Nauru or Manus Island out?
PM: I would rule out anywhere that is not a signatory to the Refugee Convention.
SATTLER: And they're not?
PM: Nauru is not a signatory to the Refugee Convention.
SATTLER: Papua New Guinea, Manus Island?
PM: Papua New Guinea, I believe, is a signatory to the Refugee Convention but obviously I am now going to build on the set of conversations that we've seen happen this week. The conversation with the President of East Timor. We've now seen the Prime Minister of East Timor today express some goodwill and ask for a concrete proposal so we will obviously now engage in that discussion.
SATTLER: I spoke with a former Prime Minister of East Timor yesterday and I want you to listen to what he has to say.
PM: Happy to.
DA SILVA: What I can tell you is that our party will not support it. And if it's happening we will campaign very hard in this country to reject it. Spoke to some Parliamentarians this morning on this issue because we were caught by surprise. The ones that I have spoken to, everyone seems to be completely shocked by what happened with this announcement. But, from the comments that I have received this morning from other Parliamentarians, it seems that they will reject it.
SATTLER: That's Estanislau da Silva, a former Prime Minister. What do you say to that?
PM: Well he's obviously got a different view from the current President and the current Prime Minister of East Timor.
SATTLER: He said he'd canvassed most of the Members and they don't want it.
PM: Well, look, he's got a different view from the current national leaders. You'd expect that in a democracy, Howard. Obviously, East Timor is a democracy and in a democracy people will have a variety of views.
SATTLER: What I want to know is if they knock it back, where will you go then?
PM: Well, step at a time. Had a conversation with the President. He said he was open to the idea. Obviously since then we've seen the serving, current Prime Minister of East Timor indicate that he is open to the idea and would want to see a more concrete proposal. Well, obviously we will engage in that dialogue and seek to build on that goodwill.
SATTLER: I want to quote something that the person called Julia Gillard said on 13th May 2003, and I quote:
Instead of stunts like this it's time the Howard Government faced up to engaging in a long-term solution in relation to refugees and asylum seekers. The so-called Pacific Solution is not a long-term solution. Can anyone in this place really imagine that Australia will be processing asylum seeker claims on Nauru in 10 to 12 years? Labor will end the so-called Pacific Solution of processing and detaining of asylum seekers on Pacific islands because it's costly, unsustainable and wrong as a matter of principal. 
Now you've clearly, apart from the word 'Nauru' changed your mind about that.
PM: I haven't changed my mind about any of those words and I'd happily read that quote out and make it my words of today.
SATTLER: But wouldn't it be costly and unsustainable and wrong to put them on East Timor?
PM: No, the premise of your question is that what I am talking about is the same as the so-called Pacific Solution of the Howard Government and that is simply not true.
SATTLER: Only the names have been changed, haven't they?
PM: well, let me just describe what the differences are. The so-called Pacific Solution was conceived by the Howard Government in a rush. It was entered into unilaterally, it was never going to be sustained as a long-term solution. What they were doing was looking for a quick political fix.
What I am talking about is a regional processing centre which would help the region deal with the question of irregular people movement. We are not the only nation that has got concerns about irregular people movement. Indeed, East Timor has had these concerns itself. So what would be a long-lasting solution is, if we get the right kind of regional cooperation, you would undercut the thing that people smugglers sell. They sell the prospect that if you get to a certain place such as Australia then you will get to stay. If we replace that and said no, wherever you end up you'll go back to the same regional processing centre, your claims will be assessed fairly, if you're found to be a genuine refugee then nations like ours and New Zealand will take a fair share. If we did that we would undercut-
SATTLER: Well why not take them to Indonesia?
PM: Well, just one second. We would undercut what people smugglers sell. Indonesia has indicated - and this is of course the great fallacy about Mr Abbott's slogan of 'Turn the boats around' - Indonesia has said that it will not take returned boats. And of course we know this slogan is just a slogan because what actually happens at sea is that boats are scuttled and the choice you face is whether you let people drown, children drown, or you go and rescue them with all of the risk that that entails to defence force and border protection command personnel. So Mr Abbot's got the slogan. I am working and engaged in delivering a long-term solution and I do thank the Prime Minister of East Timor for the goodwill he's shown today.
SATTLER: So back on the map, alright. Now I promised our listeners that you'd take talkback. Which your predecessor wouldn't, by the way.
PM: Very happy to.
SATTLER: Refused to take talkback. So let's go to the phones. The first caller is Barry of Mullaloo. The Prime Minister is listening, Barry.
CALLER: How are you Prime Minister?
PM: I'm very well thank you Barry.
CALLER: Tell me, we are a signatory to the United Nations Convention for Refugees?
PM: Yes, we are.
CALLER: And we are a democracy?
PM: Yes, we are.
CALLER: We decide what happens in our country?
PM: Of course we do.
CALLER: Then why is it so that when these refugees arrive we can't take them and put them back in the refugee camps which are run by the United Nations and let them apply for refugee status through the normal channels and not queue-jump other people that have been waiting there for years?
PM: Well, we don't do that at the moment because we've got no agreements which would enable that to happen. What I'm talking about with the regional processing centre is effectively the kind of thing you sound like you want, where there is an agreed way of dealing with irregular people movement across the region, a regional processing centre that serves that role. And from countries around the region, when they had irregular people movement, would look to the regional processing centre to process claims fairly and expeditiously and then developed nations like our own would obviously look to taking a fair share of the genuine refugees.
SATTLER: Alright. Dean of High Wycombe, hello.
CALLER: Hello. Hi Prime Minister. I've just got a question with regards to a statement that you made recently regarding same-sex relationships and that marriage is between a man and a woman, and that's the belief of your party. Why is it, if that is your belief and the Party's belief, why is it that when same-sex couples make claims for things like Centrelink and other things, the relationship has to be disclosed and then they're assessed as a couple, yet as a normal Australian taxpayer, our relationship isn't recognised? Surely the Commonwealth can't have two bites of the cherry?
PM: Well I think the perspective I've taken, the perspective that the Government has taken, is that the Marriage Act should stay in its current form. So it should say, as it does say now, that marriage is between a man and a woman. But what we have done is we have equalised treatment across Federal legislation. Now that has benefits and sometimes it's got burdens but it puts people in the same position that they would be as a heterosexual couple.
So to give an example of a benefit, before we started this equal treatment under the law, if you had a gay couple, one had a superannuation policy with a death benefit and that partner died, then the remaining partner had difficulties accessing the benefit because of the way superannuation law was. We have resolved those sorts of problems. 
SATTLER: Right just before our next caller, you also made the statement I think, do you think you've solved the problem with the mining tax, do you reckon? 
PM: Well look I think overwhelmingly we found the right balance- 
SATTLER: With four companies.
PM: Well just a moment. We've entered a Heads of Agreement with the biggest miners in this country, obviously the blockbuster companies like Rio and BHP. Yes, there are some miners who still have concerns but we have a process chaired by Don Argus, a former head of BHP, to work through these issues. I believe that we've found a balance which enables us to do what we said we wanted to do, which is get Australians a fairer share of the mineral wealth in their ground -
SATTLER: But would it disturb you to know that the Australian Mining and Exploration Council, which represents I think 110 members, they're small miners mainly, and a hundred service companies, have not been officially consulted yet? 
PM: Well we negotiated with the biggest miners in this country and entered a Heads of Agreement. Now of course we've got the process involving Don Argus. But I believe, having sat around the table with the biggest miners in this country, that we found a way forward, that mining companies can keep going forward with certainty about tax and - 
SATTLER: Big mining companies. 
PM: Well mining companies, because of course many of the concerns of small miners were brought to the table by these mining companies. 
SATTLER: Were you going to talk with the AMEC people? 
PM: There's a process there involving Don Argus, a former head of BHP. In terms of how we've restructured the tax, of course now with it applying to coal and iron, there are many miners who are now not subject to these new tax arrangements. There's also an exemption for smaller miners so in terms of the numbers of companies involved it's really come right in to a very limited number. 
SATTLER: Neil of Lake Grace is a farmer I think, hello Neil. 
CALLER: Yeah hello Howard. Good afternoon Prime Minister. 
PM: Good afternoon. 
CALLER: My question to you is what are you going to do for struggling wheat farmers who in my area alone have lost 35 per cent equity in their farms in the past two years because we cannot keep producing for below the cost of production? 
PM: Right, well obviously -
SATTLER: That one came out of left field.
PM: Yeah, look, as a Government we do support our agricultural industry with drought relief and other forms of assistance. You would need to just explain a little bit more to me why you're in the position where your costs are more than the price that you're getting for your produce.
CALLER: Well, it's been happening for far too long, Prime Minister. Our costs in fertiliser, particularly in the last two years, have absolutely skyrocketed.
PM: Right.
CALLER: The price of grain has gone south, and the farm consultant that I use assures me that the average loss in his area last year was between $400,000 and $500,000, and I can tell you in all honesty, Prime Minister, I'm average.
PM: Right, well look I understand that you're desperately concerned and that you're really suffering under these pressures. And I think life on the land can be very hard and people obviously sometimes leave farming because they find that they don't want to bear those pressures anymore. It might be more than they or their families want to deal with. As a Government, we obviously have forms of assistance, income support and other things that people can qualify for.
SATTLER: Alright, moving on. Paul of Wembley, hello.
CALLER: Prime Minister, there is a lot of talk about the mining tax and all that but I can assure you that lots of Western Australians are very passionate about the environment as well, and very concerned about what climate change could do to places like Ningaloo Reef and the Kimberley, maybe you can visit those places-
SATTLER: [inaudible] swim with a whale shark.
CALLER: That's right. It's an incredible coastline and climate change could really wreak havoc with it, so we're just disappointed and concerned that you may delay getting a price on carbon...
SATTLER: I'll just jump in there, Paul, what did you think also - and the Prime Minister might like to comment on this - Martin Ferguson allowing oil exploration off Margaret River?
CALLER: Oh, very concerned about that-
SATTLER: It's certainly a big issue, I can tell you.
CALLER: Yeah, LNG plants for the Kimberley coast. I mean there is a lot of things happening in the state but the ALP seems to be delaying its commitment on climate change, and I 'm just wondering why you can't get a price on carbon when you get back into government, if you do?
SATTLER: We'll get an answer for you Paul.
PM: Well, Paul, the answer is I believe climate change is real, I believe it is caused by human activity, and I believe as a nation we are up to dealing with this challenge. We do need to have a price on carbon. We'll get that price on carbon when there's a deep community consensus about having that price. We want to make sure that the community is included in this discussion.
SATTLER: But why would your Government be approving more oil exploration? Do you agree with President Obama we should stop being so dependent on oil?
PM: Obviously, we want to look to energy sources of the future, energy sources in terms of new ways of powering motor vehicles, solar energy, renewable resources-
SATTLER: Not oil?
PM: We are big investors in actually bringing on new technology, including solar -
SATTLER: But would you in government review that decision, to allow oil exploration off Margaret River?
PM: Well, obviously when there's a -
SATTLER: You are in government!
PM: Right, well obviously when there is a suggestion about oil exploration or mining of any kind, environmental impacts are worked through, there is a very clear process to do that under Federal legislation, so of course we take into account environmental concerns.
SATTLER: Mohammed, hello.
CALLER: Hello, Howard Sattler. Hello Prime Minister Julia Gillard, how are you today?
PM: I'm good, thank you.
CALLER: Prime Minister this is a good time for this country, I'm really happy to see you are Prime Minister a woman in this country, Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you very much.
SATTLER: Your wife will be very happy about that, Mohammed. Go on.
CALLER: Prime Minister, '07 Australia voted out of John Howard because of Pacific Solution. Children in the Woomera detention centre. People self-harming. All this, we said no. Is this the same situation, Prime Minister, that we are going, the same policy again?
PM: No, we're going forward to a new policy, a different policy, and something that I think gives us a lasting solution for the region. This is not the same policy as the Howard Government policy, which was adopted very quickly, adopted unilaterally, was never going to be a long-term solution. I am taking a very different approach.
SATTLER: Well, I started out today talking about politicians and how we're cynical about them. You're opponent today admitted he sometimes gilds the lily, because he is a politician, and particularly at election time. Do you sometimes do that? Have you ever done that?
PM: Well, I'm not surprised about that from Tony Abbott because we had on display during the 7.30 Report a little while back his very clear statement that the only time you should believe him is when he's working off carefully scripted remarks because the rest of the time, particularly under pressure, he might say anything. I am not of the same ilk, I do my best to -
SATTLER: But during election campaigns you must have gilded the lily a bit to try and get votes?
PM: Look, I try my best to be frank with people, and you can't always tell people what they want to hear. I understand that. I actually think Australians are up to having pretty robust conversations. I think I started a pretty robust conversation on Tuesday about asylum seekers. Would have been easy for me, in fact possibly conventional political wisdom, to not engage in that issue, but I believed in the interests of the nation we needed to take some further steps to effectively manage our borders. I believed I should explain to the Australian people the actual facts about asylum seekers and I did that. And I also believed it was inappropriate for me to leave unchallenged Tony Abbott simply putting forward a slogan he knows he can't deliver.
SATTLER: Alright, how important is the survival of the Labor Party in government to you? Is that paramount?
PM: What's paramount for me is what happens in this nation, my values drive me in terms of doing this job, they drove me into politics and what I don't want to see is I don't want to see this nation go back-
SATTLER: So the Party doesn't come first?
PM: Look you get involved. I got involved in the Party because of my values and my view about what should happen in this country. I got involved in active politics because I absolutely believed it's the fundamental right of every child to get a great education. That's what drives me Howard. You asked, that's the answer.
SATTLER: Is this your last trip to Perth before you call the election?
PM: Howard I've got some governing to do, I'm doing that now -
SATTLER: She won't fall in. She's not going to fall in.
PM: I am a regular visitor to Perth and I'm always happy to be here, even when it's wet like it is today.
SATTLER: Oh sorry about that.
PM: No the rain's a good thing.
SATTLER: Thanks for coming in. Talk to you again during the campaign.
PM: Thank you 


4BC Drive
HOST: I had this lengthy discussion with the Prime Minister earlier today, have a listen to this and it will tell you I think I certainly learnt a fair bit about this so called regional solution, here is a bit of that chat with PM Julia Gillard. I started by saying G'day.
PM: Hi, how are you?
HOST: Not bad. I am going to get Tony Abbott to put a dollar in the swear jar every time he says 'um' or 'ah', will you do it every time you say 'obviously'?
PM: Well I will obviously try and do that, obviously.
HOST: Good on you. The impression given to the Australian people is that this processing centre will be in East Timor, in Dili, and you haven't spoken with the government of Timor Leste prior to announcing it to the Australian people. It's redolent of the mining tax - make the announcement and then go into the negotiations afterwards.
PM: Well once again, with respect, and obviously I'm happy to be judged on what I say, and what I said in the speech was not that. I did not say that - I said what I just summarised to you now - that there was no quick fix, that there would need to be discussions across the region. These are the exact words that appear in the speech: no quick fix, would need to be discussions. I have had some discussions and, you know, there was more to follow, that this would take process, it would take time, it would take method, it would take engagement, and we've started that engagement now with our officials in the region working with regional neighbours and partners. I did outline a vision and the vision was for a regional processing centre, and that is important because it completely undercuts the people smuggling market because they no longer have a product to sell.
HOST: So where would it be?
PM: I'm not going to leave undisturbed the impression that I made an announcement about a specific location, which is how you phrased your question.
HOST: Where will it be then? Where will it be?
PM: Well, we will have the discussions I've just outlined and they have started already, in addition in that....
HOST: - Yeah, but where will it be?
PM: Well, this will have to emerge from the work with our regional neighbours -
HOST: So you don't know?
PM: It's exactly why I said there would be no quick fix and anybody who is trying to pretend to you that there is a quick fix on the question of asylum seekers and people movement is simply not telling you the truth.
HOST: Do you know where your regional processing centre will be?
PM: What I've said is this consensus about a regional processing centre, where it would be, how it would work, all of those things would need to come out of the regional dialogue. What I'm saying to you now is absolutely nothing new. That is what I said on Tuesday in the speech that I gave.
HOST: Have you got a plan?
PM: Well, clearly, I've got a vision for what would undercut the people smuggling trade to our country, and I will be pursuing that. A question of a regional processing centre has been in regional dialogue in the past through the Bali Process and other things -
HOST: So you've got a vision?
PM: What is new is the fact that I have commenced the discussions on it and I've got a determination to get it done.
HOST: You didn't answer the question though - have you got a plan?
PM: Well, I've just outlined to you exactly what I'm doing.
HOST: Which is a vision.
PM: Well, with respect, what I just said to you is I've obviously got this plan about a regional processing centre and we are pursuing it already through discussions. I've got a determination to get it done. And I obviously announced a series of other things in my speech...
HOST: Hang on a second PM. Hang on there because you made a point, you have a plan about a regional processing centre but you can't tell me where it will be?
PM: Well this is what needs to emerge from the discussions with our regional partners, exactly what I said on Tuesday, nothing new, no grand revelation here. Have a read of Tuesday's speech and you'll find it all right there.
HOST: I've got it in front of me.
PM: What I'm saying to you now is exactly the same as what I said in that speech and I think that should be acknowledged.
HOST: Righto, well 14 minutes past three is the time. I recorded about 30 minutes with the Prime Minister and you will hear that during the remainder of the show this afternoon, but I would love you views on that or your questions for the alternative Prime Minister Tony Abbott. Tony, G'day again.
[BREAK TO OTHER PROGRAMMING]
HOST: Hey look you said you were loyal to Kev. You were jointly responsible for the major decisions and the policies and then Kev got knifed when he trusted you. Tell me why we should trust you?
PM: Well I believe that I was a loyal deputy to Kevin Rudd, I was vice captain of the team. I obviously take my fair share of the responsibility for the decisions of the government, but I did form the view that whilst we'd been a good government, we'd lost our way and we needed to fix that in the interests of the nation and that did require me to step up as Prime Minister so I took what was a very very tough decision and it's obviously been a very difficult period for Kevin Rudd and his family. Very difficult.
HOST: Are you loyal? 
PM: Well I believe I was a very loyal deputy to Kevin Rudd. I think people who have watched my political career would say that I've been a loyal person to people I've worked with in politics you know Simon Crean and others. What was really pressing upon me was the need to get the government focused, get it back on track. That's in the interests of the nation and obviously I also wanted the Government to be in the best possible shape to fight the election because I don't want to see this country go back under Mr Abbott to things like Work Choices. 
HOST: Just on this issue of trust PM, because last time you and I spoke it was about the mining tax and you told Laurie Oakes on Channel 9 and then you backed it up with me, that the miners pay, you say if we look at company tax now for domestic miners they pay 17 per cent. For the overseas companies, the multi-nationals it's around 13 per cent. Now that was just manifestly wrong. Did you get bad advice or were you gilding the lily?
PM: Well I always try and give the right figures on questions that I'm asked about. Anybody can make an error. I'm not saying I've never made an error in my life but I was trying to - 
HOST: That's pretty egregious though PM. 
PM: Well I was giving figures that had been supplied to me. The basic proposition here when I spoke to you last time and indeed today the basic proposition is, you know, is it appropriate to have an arrangement where Australians get a fairer share from the mineral wealth in our grounds and I'm pleased that we've been able to strike an agreement -
HOST: OK, that's the mining agreement, the tax-
PM: Well, I think that's actually the important thing-
HOST: I don't. With respect, PM, I think it's your credibility. You went on Channel 9 on the Today Sunday show-
PM: Can I just finish that point because I think, if you want to talk about questions of credibility, what I said consistently about the mining tax is that I thought there were some points of agreement in this debate. I thought that, in fact, the mining industry and the Government were agreeing that they could pay more tax and that a profits-based tax was a better way forward. Now, the debate got bogged down in a lot of, you know, some name calling, some conversations that lacked respect and goodwill. What I did as Prime Minister was got the goodwill back into that debate by cancelling the ads on TV, and I was able to build on that goodwill and the points of agreement to get the breakthrough that you've seen, which means we will get a fairer share but also the mining industry can go forward with confidence. I think that's all about, you know, who I am and questions of credibility and how I work.
HOST: Righto, well let's just go to what you told Laurie Oakes and then a few days later what you told me, and they're quite specific hard numbers. In fact, you said, "It's really about the facts, Laurie, that's all we want the Australian people to have, the facts, and these are the cold hard facts, the truth. 17 per cent company tax for domestic miners, 13 - one three - per cent for multinationals. Now subsequently Rio Tinto has put out releases to the exchange that said it's 35 per cent, and you said to the public that it was 13 per cent. How can we trust you?
PM: Well, look, there were- can I just say in relation to that debate, that it did get pretty heated. There were-
HOST: Is that an excuse for falsities?
PM: No, and I'm not putting that to you, I'm not putting that to you at all and I certainly wouldn't put that. I think that's a completely crazy-
HOST: Then how did you get it so wrong when you said it was the cold hard facts, the truth?
PM: If you let me finish the sentence then I'm happy to give you an explanation but in order to explain it, I've got to be able to talk. And the explanation is that during that debate there were a lot of figures put out, both by the Government and by mining companies. Often, they were talking not about exactly the same thing. So there were figures that were not apples to apples comparison. And we can go along and painfully through all the figures, but what it boils down to, and what really matters I think - for the nation, for the mining industry, for mining communities, for all of us - is that we're able now to go forward with confidence, with mining companies, the biggest mining companies - you mentioned Rio, for example - saying that the new tax arrangements they can work with and it's a new tax arrangement that gets Australians a fairer share.
HOST: I just don't know how you could go on a national TV show and mislead us so, try to tell us that when you consider the facts 13 per cent company tax from multinational companies and that's turned out to be so wrong.
PM: Well, I've rejected the premise of your question. I was using figures that were supplied to me-
HOST: By whom?
PM: -through our economic advisers in government, through our Treasury and the like, and then often some of the contrasts in the public debate were not contrasts on exactly the same footing. So you know, it's a technical area where it's easy for figures to be about company tax, to be about royalties, for figures to vary - but we worked our way through all of that, we worked our way through it respectfully and with goodwill - sitting around the table with representatives of some of the nation's most important mining companies and we got to a solution.


Hyatt Regency Hotel, Perth 
It's a great honour to be here on my first visit to Western Australia as Prime Minister.
This visit is special to me because it is a chance to see old friends again. It is also a chance to underline my absolute determination to govern for all Australians, no matter who you are or where you live.
You are rightly proud of the State you live in. Western Australia plays a huge part in the Australian story and the Australian imagination.
The vote of Western Australia sealed Australia's destiny as a united federation. Many of the ships that took Australians to war departed from these shores, and you are home to our elite special forces. Many of the migrants who came "across the seas" made their landfall here to build a new life under new skies.
Western Australia has given the nation some of its greatest sons and daughters, and in coming to this state as Prime Minister for the first time, I am especially conscious that Western Australia gave Australia one of our most outstanding Prime Ministers, John Curtin.
Of course Western Australia also has a substantial claim on a second, Bob Hawke, although my fellow South Australians also like to claim him as one of their own.
I want to speak today about two matters that I identified as immediate priorities in my first remarks as Prime Minister two weeks ago.
I want to focus my remarks on the Government's commitment to provide certainty for the future of the mining industry, but let me first make some brief remarks about the Government's approach to addressing the concerns of Australians about the security of our borders and the matter of unauthorised arrivals in Australia.
Earlier this week I made the case that regional processing needs to be part of our long-term solution to unauthorised arrivals. I said in my speech that one possibility was a centre in East Timor.
I had spoken to President Ramos Horta and he had indicated both that he would need to speak to Prime Minister Gusmao and that he was open to considering the possibility. My government has been in further contact with the East Timorese Government since Tuesday.
Yesterday, as you know, Prime Minister Gusmao met President Ramos Horta.
Prime Minister Gusmao is right to say that a concrete proposal is the next step. He confirmed that his Government is open to considering one. He also said a proposal would need extensive consideration and debate, through the East Timorese community and Parliament. That reflects the proper functioning of a democracy.
I said on Tuesday that there is no quick fix and that a careful dialogue is needed. That is exactly what I am pursuing. The dialogue with other regional neighbours is also continuing.
A strong regional framework must include collaboration across the region and it must involve the UNHCR. Those critics who want to declare the approach dead in week one are mistaken and will, I'm afraid, be disappointed.
Friends, in coming to Western Australia today, I take as my starting point this simple proposition: the people of this nation admire and respect Western Australia's economic achievement.
Yesterday's labour force data, for example, showed that Western Australia generated almost half the nation's entire job growth in the month of June. unemployment in this State is now just 4 per cent, well below the national rate of 5.1 per cent.
At the heart of Western Australia's achievement is the mining industry, one of the nation's genuine success stories. All of us, from every part of the country, understand the vision and commitment that have made the mining industry what it is today.
We understand the passion of pioneers like Lang Hancock - entrepreneurs with big dreams who took big risks.
The current expansion is the fifth major mining boom in our history and by far the greatest. It will provide strong foundations for our future prosperity and enable our nation to aim higher than we ever could before, but we should not take it for granted.
Economists tell us the current phase of development in China and India in time will level off - as it did in Japan and South Korea earlier on. In addition, our mineral resources, while plentiful, are not unlimited.
It was for these reasons that the Government secured a more balanced share of mining revenues for the nation.
As we all know, the design of the tax as announced created uncertainty, not only in the mining industry but across the wider community. My West Australian parliamentary colleagues like Gary Gray were at the forefront in expressing those concerns. They understood, as strong and effective representatives of this State, that uncertainty on such a fundamental question could impact on our economy and our global reputation.
That is why in my very first remarks as Prime Minister I said that we needed to end the uncertainty. I indicated that my Government would throw open its doors and in return. I asked mining industry leaders to open their minds. That is the style of leadership to which I am committed.
The government I lead will address difficult questions in a spirit of mutual respect and with a shared commitment to move forward. We will consult, listen and encourage people to give their best and we will work though the nation's policy challenges with a calm, methodical and analytical approach.
It was in that spirit that we came to the table to seek agreement on the reformof resource taxation, and it was in that spirit that we reached a breakthrough agreement one week ago.
That agreement preserves the broad principle of a fairer share of our mineral resources for the Australian people, at the same time recognising the legitimate needs and concerns of the mining industry.
Together, by consensus and mutual respect, we secured an agreement that moves Australia forward.
I know that some parts of the mining industry will still have their criticisms, but I believe we've struck the right balance.
Our agreement:
cuts the headline rate from 40 to 30 per cent;more than doubles the uplift level from around five to around 12 per cent based on current bond rates;provides a 25 per cent extraction allowance;excludes small miners with resource profits below $50 million per annum; and,excludes all minerals other than coal and iron ore.As a result, we have been able to remove almost 90 per cent of mining firms from the scope of the original Resource Super Profits Tax, with coverage slashed from around 2,500 firms to just 320.
Most importantly of all, nothing in our agreement will deflect our steady and determined course of returning the budget to surplus in 2013.
The negotiating process from my first statement to the final deal took eight days. They were long and difficult days, but productive and respectful ones as well.
Having signed the Heads of Agreement last Friday, the Policy Transition Group will soon be getting down work. I'm delighted Mr Don Argus AC, former chairman of BHP, has agreed to co-chair this body alongside my Ministerial colleague, Martin Ferguson, to whom I also pay a warm tribute today, along with the Treasurer, Wayne Swan, who both did an outstanding job.
The Policy Transition Group will consult with industry and advise the Government on the implementation of the new tax in advance of legislation next year, should the Government be favoured by the Australian people with re-election at the coming poll.
As with the initial negotiating phase, our door is open and our good faith commitment is real.
My friends and colleagues, with the principal negotiations now over, it is worth reflecting for a moment on exactly why we embarked on this journey of reform in the first place.
Yes, this was about fairness and equity, but it was also about securing a lasting dividend from the mining boom so that our current prosperity can be expanded and made to last.
In the past, taxation increases have tended to be absorbed entirely into general revenue. This time we wanted it to be different.
We wanted to confer lasting and significant benefits upon the Australian community, in a similar way perhaps that the railroads and telegraph were a lasting endowment from the mining booms of the 19th century.
The Minerals Resource Rent Tax gives us scope to achieve three big things for Australia:
first, an increase in national savings through superannuation that will strengthen the financial security of more than eight million Australians in their retirement years;second, a reduction in business taxation to make us a more competitive and attractive destination for investment into the future, a huge contrast to the Opposition's planned 31.7 per cent company tax rate;third, a much-needed new investment in economic infrastructure for our mining towns and regions.In other words, using the dividends of growth to build our future prosperity. Nowhere are these things more important than in Western Australia, where the challenges of growth are all too obvious.
That is why, for example, a very large share of the Regional Infrastructure Fund will be expended right here in Western Australia - $2 billion out of $6 billion.
That's new money for ports, roads and utilities returned to the very mining communities where the Minerals Resource Rent Tax will come from in thefirst place.
These investments, in turn, complement the Government's wider investment in Australia's productive capacity so that the growth we enjoy today is not a flash in the pan, but a durable and lasting uplift in our prospects and our potential.
Key to unlocking our potential is the National Broadband Network or NBN, the missing link in Australia's economic infrastructure. In a global economy based on the flow of information, it is unacceptable that we lack affordable, ubiquitous high speed broadband.
The NBN is a critical piece of reform for Australia. That is why the Financial Heads of Agreement between Telstra and the NBN Company to utilise Telstra's assets is so important.
Not only that, construction of the NBN is already underway in Tasmania. The very first NBN customers have already been signed up and the NBN Company expects construction to begin this month on the first mainland release sites.
In other words, the NBN is not just a plan. It is happening right now and it will touch every Australian business and household.
The obvious question for this gathering is - what about Western Australia?
Well, I'm delighted to say that yesterday the NBN Company announced the first sites for the broadband network roll-out in Western Australia. These sites will be Victoria Park here in Perth; the vibrant growth centre of Mandurah; and the beautiful town of Geraldton to our north.
Construction should begin in the second quarter of next year.
I am determined that the West gets its fair share of infrastructure to help cope with the challenges and demands of growth, and I am determined that as a nation we should not be afraid of the future.
I understand that the challenges of today and tomorrow can easily leave us yearning for what we remember as a kinder and simpler age, but I do not believe in romanticising the past or going backwards.
The best days of this great State and this great nation lie in front of us, not behind us.
We can live sustainably together on this fragile land. We can create new wealth, reward hard work and extend a helping hand to each other. We can harness the best of new technology including the transformative power of the National Broadband Network.
My friends, in this growing prosperous State, I believe you share my sense of confidence about the future.
Indeed coming from Melbourne I can tell you when people in Melbourne's Collins Street think about the West, they visualise a State that's a kind of nirvana. They imagine a place where everyone earns six-figure sums from mining and the community is awash with money but as rightly proud as you are of your State, you know this is not the reality.
Here in prosperous Western Australia and right around the country, there are families finding it tough to make ends meet and to cope with cost of living pressures. Indeed as a result of Western Australia's prosperity, the ordinary costs families experience like the cost of buying a home have grown.
Research from the University of Western Australia has highlighted the significant economic stresses in recent years borne by Perth suburbs such as Mirrabooka, Girrawheen, Yanchep and Kwinana.
Between the start of the mining boom to the onset of the global financial crisis:
annual price inflation in Perth averaged 4.0 per cent, compared to the national annual average of 3.3 per cent;Perth rents increased by two-thirds more than the national average;and Perth house prices grew by 14 per cent a year, almost triple the national average growth rate.My Government is determined to help families battling with such cost of living pressures. Just last week, those families received a welcome boost from the tax cuts that came into force on 1 July, the Government's third round of tax cuts.
For someone earning $50,000 a year, last week's tax cuts mean an extra $450 in the pocket each year, and when you take our three tax cuts as whole, that's an extra $1,750 in the pocket, cutting the amount of tax paid by almost 20 per cent compared to three years ago.
We have also acted to help families with the cost of childcare - a significant burden on family budgets.
I am proud we have increased the Child Care Rebate so it meets 50 per cent of the out-of-pocket costs that families experience with child care. The maximum child care rebate is now $7,500 a year, over $3,000 a year more than under the previous government.
Valuing child care is a central part of our agenda of early learning. Driven by the research which shows that you make a profound difference to a child's life chances by supporting that child to develop in their early years, we have moved to ensure every child can benefit from pre-school, and Western Australia should be proud of its contribution to the innovative research in this area with the work led by Professor Fiona Stanley.
As part of helping with child care costs, today I announce that we will change the payment system for the Child Care Rebate so that families will have the option of getting the financial assistance we provide fortnightly rather than quarterly.
If parents chose, the fortnightly cheque can even be paid direct to the child care provider, slashing out of pocket costs.
Some families may well prefer to stick to the current arrangements and get a lump sum every three months, but for those families that find it hard to balance the budget while waiting for the refund, help will be available more quickly.
Take a family earning $80,000 with one child in full-time care.
At the moment, they would be paying more than $220 per week in out-of-pocket costs until they receive the rebate at the end of every quarter. Under this new proposal, the same family's out-of-pocket costs would reduce to just over $110 per week.
That's what our new measure designed to do - take a bit of pressure off. It's one way that as a nation we can again demonstrate our support for children and their mums and dads.
Friends, in conclusion I want to say to this great State that while I am not from here, I believe we share some common values.
A belief that hard work should be rewarded.
A belief that a fair go means, more than anything else, a fair go for kids delivered through a great education.
A belief that we can, as a nation, look forward with confidence and shape our future together.
Friends, to Western Australia, to the nation I say let's go forward together.



PM: Well I'm here today with the Minister for Defence John Faulkner. We are in Darwin to attend to funeral of Scott Palmer, a brave soldier, and we've come to Darwin today to mourn his loss with his family and friends.
Overnight I was very saddened to learn that we have lost another soldier in Afghanistan. We pay tribute to him and we mourn his loss. Of course today his family and friends will be feeling the pain of his loss very, very acutely. This is a tragic day for them, full of shock, grieving and sadness. I'm sure the thoughts of the nation are with them as they absorb this dreadful news.
There will be Australians today who are asking themselves in the face of this loss in Afghanistan, why as a country we continue to pursue our mission there. We pursue that mission because Afghanistan has been a safe haven for terrorists, for terrorists who have reaped acts of violence against Australians in 9/11 and in Bali. And we are determined to pursue our mission there, to train the Afghan National Army, to end Afghanistan being a safe haven for terrorists. This is clearly difficult and dangerous work and our soldiers and defence personnel in Afghanistan are at the forefront of this really dangerous task. We have obviously seen the results of that danger here today, Scott Palmer's funeral, we have mourned the loss of two other soldiers during the past week and with this news overnight that we have lost another soldier.
Obviously this hits everyone hard: family, friends, the nation, the people who serve alongside them in our Defence Force. But we are determined to continue to pursue this mission in Afghanistan.
Can I say to the family and friends of the soldier we lost overnight who will be in such difficult circumstances today, our thoughts are with you. As the Minister for Defence and Chief of the Defence Force have made clear, obviously we are not in a position to release details about this soldier or the incident in which he died at this time. Obviously as details can be released they will be released.
There was another soldier injured in this incident, our thoughts are with him and we obviously hope that he will make a very speedy recovery. As I have been advised by the Chief of the Defence Force, he is not badly injured but our thoughts are with him.
I'm happy to take any questions but obviously I'm shortly due at Scott Palmer's funeral.
JOURNALIST: Does this lift the total to 17 people who have been killed in Afghanistan since 2001?
PM: Yes.
FAULKNER: Yes it does. This will be the 17th death of an Australian in Afghanistan. Of course let me also say to you, we've had 143 Australians wounded in Afghanistan as you would be aware.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can I just ask you obviously are involved in reconstruction and training. Do you feel that they're being protected adequately enough?
PM: I believe our Defence Force personnel are professionals, they go about their task with complete determination and with high skills. I believe led by Angus Houston - who is with me today, obviously also due to attend the funeral of Scott Palmer - that our soldiers are going about this difficult and dangerous task as best it can be done. But there is no degree of skill or training or equipment that can take away the dangers, this is dangerous work and we are seeing the outcomes of the dangers that our soldiers face.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what effect has it had on you, this news overnight?
PM: Well I've obviously been very, very saddened to learn about this loss overnight. Today I'm here attending the third funeral of a brave soldier that I've attended as Prime Minister, so the danger and loss and sadness that is caused from these incidents in Afghanistan is obviously with me and very present with me.
This is a tough time, a particularly tough time for those families who are mourning the loss of soldiers and for the family that's got this dreadful news today, I'm personally saddened by it and I do want to send the family and friends of this soldier my very, very best wishes at what is obviously a tragic and dreadful time for them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how do you think the level of possibilities of success are in Afghanistan now given just with our small effort that we're making along with the Americans. Do we really have a chance of doing what we say our mission is?
PM: Well I certainly believe we are proceeding to acquit our mission, training Afghan National Army members in Afghanistan, which is the mission that we have set for ourselves. As a Government obviously through our Defence Minister John Faulkner and through our Chief of the Defence Force we've always been frank with the Australian people about the difficulty of this task, but we are proceeding through it.
I might turn to the Minister for Defence for some comments on that.
FAULKNER: Thank you very much Prime Minister. I have consistently said that in relation to progress in Afghanistan that we have made steady progress. I obviously have acknowledged that the progress is not as fast as some would like to see but I certainly believe that there has been a change in momentum in Afghanistan.
We are very focussed on our operational objectives: training the 4th Brigade of the Afghan National Army in Uruzghan Province. We've made clear recently about the latest information that is available in terms of the time we believe it will take to complete our training mission in the province, some two to four years, and indicated that it's likely to see the Australian commitment after that period transition to a support role.
But having said that, ladies and gentlemen, I make the point as I have made on so many occasions, it is a difficult and dangerous mission. The reason we are here in Darwin today to attend the funeral of an Australian soldier, and the news we are speaking about today of the death of another Australian soldier in Afghanistan, I think does indicate to you the risks that are involved in our mission. But let me stress as I've stressed in the past, our troops are extraordinarily well led, our troops are extraordinarily well trained, our troops have the best force protection available to them and of course our tactics, techniques and procedures, our rules of engagement, are such that ensure that our troops are very well protected. But for all that it remains a dangerous and difficult operating environment.
JOURNALIST: Are we seeing more deaths because of the change in momentum?
FAULKNER: I think there's no question that of course we see ourselves now in the fighting season in Afghanistan. It's important to remember, I have indicated just a moment ago, that there have been of course now 17 Australian soldiers who have died in Afghanistan, 143 Australian soldiers have been wounded in Afghanistan.
In 2010 we of course have seen the deaths of six Australian soldiers and 43 of those 143 soldiers have suffered wounds. Don't forget also of course that we had three Australians killed in a helicopter crash and seven Australians wounded in that helicopter crash that occurred not as a result of enemy action. And it's important as we look at the situation that we make frank assessments about that and I've certainly tried to report very frankly to the Australian Parliament and the Australian people about the situation that we face in Afghanistan and the challenges ahead.
JOURNALIST: Can you give your comments in relation to the funeral of Private Scott Palmer today?
FAULKNER: Well these are always very, very difficult occasions for the family and friends of a fallen soldier. I think on an occasion like this the thoughts of the nation are with a devastated and grieving family who've lost a son, and a brother. Devastated friends and of course devastated comrades, regimental comrades particularly, who've provided such fine support for a wonderful family at a very difficult time.
These are always difficult events but my thoughts always go to the people most affected, the families on occasions like this. That's where my thoughts will be today, can I say to you I believe that that's where the thoughts of the nation will be today.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The funeral service will obviously have addresses from family and people who served with Scott Palmer. I will attend the funeral today with the Opposition Leader Tony Abbott. The fact that we are both here and we have both attended the two other funerals for the soldiers that died in the same helicopter incident that the Minister for Defence has described, I think the fact that we are both here says that the nation is paying its respects to these soldiers through the presence of the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition.
Having attended two funerals as Prime Minister, and I'm sure this will be true today, what amazes me, impresses me is the grace and bravery of the family and friends in the face of such tragic loss. They are mourning the loss of brave men and the families and friends, obviously devastated, but conducting themselves with a great deal of dignity and bravery themselves in difficult circumstances.
Today we will be with parents who are mourning the loss of their son, with a brother who is mourning the loss of his brother, it's obviously a very, very difficult time and we are there to support but also to show that the nation is thinking about this loss, the nation is grieving this loss, and the nation is sending its respects.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask one other question sorry, not on the same subject, which is while you're up in northern Australia, will you be, either this evening or tomorrow, taking the opportunity to talk to any other foreign leaders in our region about the possibility of asylum seeker centres?
PM: Look obviously my focus today is on attending the funeral and with this tragic news overnight on this news, so I will be pursing with determination the dialogue with East Timor but that will wait for another day.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned I suppose both of you, about the wider implications of these deaths in terms of public support for the war in Afghanistan?
PM: Well obviously I think for the Australian people this tragic news hits them hard, which is why it is important that we continue to explain to the Australian people why we seek their support for the continuing mission in Afghanistan. This has been a country, a safe haven for terrorists who have reaped violence against Australian citizens occasioning loss of life, that's why we commenced on this mission, and I believe Australians, whilst mourning these losses and are very upset about the news overnight, will understand our continuing determination.
And one of the things I would say about the people who have attended the funerals of the other soldiers, the soldiers that have been lost in the helicopter incident, something that's come through very loud and clear to me is that loss actually increases their determination to get the job done.
Thank you very much.



PM: Can I say how pleased I am to be in my hometown of Adelaide, the place I grew up, and where my family still lives. I've taken the opportunity of being in Adelaide today to outline the things that made me and brought me to this moment in time, and obviously, so many of those experiences were in Adelaide. This is the place of my childhood. This is the place where I grew up. This is the place where I took my first steps into adulthood, into university, and into work.
And from my family background and those first steps in Adelaide, I am taking forward into the job of Prime Minister values that I've believed in all of my life, values formed through my family and my upbringing, values that have guided me as an adult. Particularly, I believe in hard work, and I believe in the benefits and dignity of work. I believe work is life's purpose, and without that purpose there can be a corrosive aimlessness.
I believe in the transformative power of education. It made me - having the opportunity to go to quality schools and then a university here in Adelaide, and obviously finishing in Melbourne.
As I said in the speech today, the opportunity given to me by my family and the great schools of South Australia to get a high-quality education has been transformative for me. I believe in the transformative power of education for this country overall. I particularly believe that this country has an obligation to make sure that every child, no matter what the circumstances of their birth, gets the opportunity for a great education.
And then, coming from this place in my journey in adulthood, I have become both an activist and an optimist. I believe that the best days of this country lie in front of it, not behind it. I believe we can face the future with confidence. I believe we can shape the future together. I fundamentally believe that the choice for Australians is a choice about going forward, not back, and I believe Australians instinctively are a people who want to go forward, not back.
So, it's tremendous to be here in my original hometown, to have the opportunity to outlay- to lay out to the Australian people the circumstances that have shaped me and the values that I bring with me into the position of Prime Minister.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you took a hit in the polls today, in two polls, but you're still in front. Will you call the election this week?
PM: The numbers that worry me and that have my focus are the numbers of Australians that are in work; the numbers of Australians that have that all-important job; the number of kids that get to finish school with the skills they need for life and work; the numbers of doctors and nurses we're training to work in our hospitals and our health system. They're the numbers I'm focused on.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) will you call the election this week?
PM: I've got some governing to do, governing step by step, driven by the values I've outlined today to make a difference to the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: Have you decided when the election date will be (inaudible)
PM: Well, thank you for the phrasing of that question. What I'm saying to the Australian people very clearly is we've got some governing to do. We've got some governing to do, shaped by my values and shaped by the things that I believe in.
Obviously, I've said to the Australian people that there are some issues we needed to address as a Government, some things where I thought we had got off track and that we needed to get back on track. I've been working on those.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) issue of asylum seekers, Prime Minister, yesterday (inaudible)
PM: Well, thank you for raising that question, and last Tuesday I took the opportunity to outline my policy and my priorities when it comes to protecting our borders. I wanted to outline an approach that was bad news for people smugglers, and the approach that I outlined was one of a regional framework with a regional processing centre.
I said that I had already had a conversation with East Timor about the regional processing centre, and we are in dialogue with East Timor now. I obviously want to get this done as quickly as possible. I am determined that we will see a regional processing centre and a regional approach to irregular people movement.
But I also want to be realistic with the Australian people. This will take some time. There is no quick fix here, but we are in dialogue with East Timor, and we are also briefing our regional neighbours about this regional approach.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott-
PM: Yeah, I'll come back here and then here. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Would you like to see it happen in the next term?
PM: Well, I will be doing this as quickly as possible. I'm determined to get it done. I announced it last Tuesday and I have been determined each day since to get it done. We are now in dialogue with East Timor. We are briefing regional neighbours in our region. Obviously, Stephen Smith, our officials and others are working on this, but we need to be realistic. This will take some time. We will be focused on it. I'm focused on it now. And there is a dialogue with East Timor now.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott made much today of the fact that you weren't directly elected as Prime Minister by the people. Is that going to be the Opposition's strongest point against you in the election campaign?
PM: Well, clearly, I said on my first day as Prime Minister that I have not been elected by the Australian people and that during the course of this year Australians will have the opportunity to exercise their birthright, and that is to exercise their vote and to choose their Prime Minister, and the choice will be between me and Mr Abbott. And I would say, on that choice, that I've outlined today the things that I believe in, and the things that I will passionately pursue.
I would also say that I have outlined my comprehensive approach to dealing with border protection. Mr Abbott has a slogan, and I note that today the former Immigration Minister in the Howard Government, Mr Ruddock, has basically unveiled that all Mr Abbott has is a slogan. Mr Ruddock has said in an interview on radio today that he acknowledges many of the things that I have been saying are right - that Mr Abbott has a slogan. He doesn't have a policy that will work.
JOURNALIST: You talk about hard work and your values (inaudible)
PM: I'd also note today that there's some newspaper reports about Mr Abbott's statement about green jobs. I've seen this two or three times before. I think it may be the second or third time that Mr Abbott has outlined his view about green jobs.
But what I would say about my approach is I believe in climate change. I believe climate change is caused by human activity. I also understand that doing the things that we will need to do to change our economy, to change the way we live to deal with climate change, are complicated.
They will require dialogue with the community. They will require the community's deep and lasting consensus about these changes and I will be working to lead that debate with the Australian community, and in the period of time to come I will be outlining some further policies and plans on climate change.
Once again, Mr Abbott is a man with a slogan. He is not a man with a comprehensive policy, and he has changed his mind so many times on whether or not he believes in climate change, believes in the science, believes in pricing carbon, believes in a market-based mechanism. I will methodically be working on our climate change policy.
JOURNALIST: Wasn't the timetable for an emissions trading scheme by 2012? Will that involve legislating in the next term? (inaudible)
PM: What I've said about the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is I have reaffirmed the decision we took as a Government, and that decision is in 2012, as we move to the next Kyoto commitment period, we will assess the degree of international action, we will assess the degree of community consensus on a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, and depending on that assessment, we will move to introduce the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. Of course, introducing any market-based mechanism to put a price on carbon requires legislation.
JOURNALIST: So the start date would be 2013?
PM: Well, I've indicated we've reaffirmed the decision of the Government and the timeframe is as I've just outlined it for you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, I will have something to say in the coming period on climate change policy, but the view I've outlined about the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is reaffirming the decision that the Government has taken, and the timeframe that I've just explained to you. I believe that there are things that we can do together to address the challenge of climate change. As I outlined in my speech today, I'm an optimist about the future. I'm an optimist about our ability to shape the future together. I believe on climate change and so many other issues Australians want to go forward, not back, and I will be outlining the way forward in the period of time to come.
JOURNALIST: Are you able to be more specific about when we might see a climate change policy from the Government?
PM: We will take the time to work through the policy. I obviously want to work through this step by step. I also want to have the discussions with my colleagues that are required to work the policy through. So, people will see our climate change policy in the period of time to come.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask, did you get up and watch the soccer this morning?
PM: I actually got up this morning to do a bit of work, I'm afraid, so that was my focus this morning.
JOURNALIST: Happy with the result?
PM: Look, I'd have to say my focus was on work. I'm going to leave the sports commentary on soccer to others. Thank you.



PM: Today I would like to announce a policy about extending the Education Tax Refund to school uniforms. The Government introduced the Education Tax Refund to help families with cost of getting the kids to school. The costs covered by the Education Tax Refund at the moment includes the cost of books, of stationary, of computer items that support kids in their learning at school.
Our experience with the Education Tax Refund is that not all families have claimed it and not all families have claimed the full amount. The full amount at the moment is $390 for primary school students and up to $780 for secondary school students, and obviously that amount is indexed year by year.
Eligible families are families who receive Family Tax Benefit A. That means that the Education Tax Refund is a benefit for 1.3 million families and around 2.7 million students. I have determined that if the Government is re-elected, we will extend the coverage of the Education Tax Refund to school uniforms.
Obviously this is a measure to help ease the cost of getting kids to school for families. It's something to take a little bit of pressure off. Obviously there are a number of ways we could choose to assist families. I've chosen to assist families through this new measure to help with the cost of school uniforms because of my belief in the transformative power of education and the need for that education to be one of discipline and rigour.
Yesterday in Adelaide, in my home town, I took the opportunity to speak about the things that have driven me all of my adult life. A key involvement of mine across my adult life has been working on education policy. I've been driven by the belief that to truly have a fair go society we've got to make sure that our society offers the chance to every child - to every child - to have a high-quality education, and I believe part of a high-quality education is learning how to present yourself to the world, and that's what a school uniform is all about.
I also believe that having a school uniform helps undercut the kind of unhealthy competition we can see at schools to have the latest, most expensive, fashionable gear. Consequently I think it's the right thing to do to extend the Education Tax Refund to give this additional assistance to families in getting the kids back to school. Overwhelmingly, school students in this country wear school uniforms approved by their local schools.
This policy will apply to expenses in the tax year in 2011-12, so my message to families would be: keep your receipts - keep your receipts now because you will be eligible for the Education Tax Refund on items like books and stationary and then if the Government is re-elected we will deliver this policy and people should certainly keep their receipts for the cost of school uniforms.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if families are doing it tough from higher living costs now (inaudible) why did (inaudible) for at least two years?
PM: Well, this is a policy that we will implement if re-elected at the forthcoming election, whenever that is. We intend to extend the Education Tax Refund. I believe that's the right thing to do.
Obviously we are already in a financial year. We will need to make arrangements for the change. We would make arrangements for the change so that it will apply to the expenses that are incurred in the tax year '11-'12.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when you call the election, will you leave your writs open for a week in line with ALP policy to give first-time voters a chance to get on the roll?
PM: I understand that given the Senate, particularly the Liberal Party, did not pass out legislation in relation to electoral reform, that there are Australians, particularly many young Australians, who may not have become enrolled to vote. My message to them would be being enrolled to vote, having the right to vote, is your birthright - get yourself on the roll.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think every school should have school uniforms?
PM: Look, I certainly believe in the value of school uniforms. These decisions should be made by school communities. Overwhelmingly, schools do have school uniforms and this measure that I'm announcing today will help families with the cost of those approved school uniforms.
For myself, I joked yesterday that I think I still have at the back of the wardrobe the prefect's tie that I proudly wore at Unley High School. I believe having a school uniform gives people a sense of self, a sense of discipline, a sense of how to present yourself to the world. I also think it undercuts some of those unhealthy things that can happen at schools when there's a competition for the latest, most fashionable item. That's why I think this is appropriate.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister -
PM: We'll go to Latika and then come across to Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the vote in East Timor last night, is that a setback to your East Timor solution?
PM: Well, this was a vote on a resolution in the East Timorese Parliament at a time that the Parliament was not well attended. We, of course, are dealing with the East Timorese Government. We have officials in East Timor. They were involved in discussions with East Timor yesterday. Those discussions will continue. Our focus is on discussions with the East Timor Government and the East Timor Government continues to confirm to us that it is open to the dialogue about the regional processing centre and we're in that dialogue now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, as you've said, well, you've suggested, (inaudible), You've stated you like the idea of school uniforms. (inaudible) Why should people who have children at schools that don't have uniforms not be able to access this because their schools don't have uniforms? Why are they disadvantaged? Why don't they get help buying clothes for their kids?
PM: Well, an education, the Education Tax Refund is available for all families who get Family Tax Benefit A, there to help with the cost of getting kids to school. Now, for many families, for the overwhelming number of families, that will include the costs of school uniforms and I think parents would know school uniforms can be very expensive and if you're trying to kit out a number of children who are going to school it adds up to quite a cost. That's why there is this additional measure that I have announced that we will deliver if re-elected.
I believe it is appropriate to assist with the cost of getting the kids to school. They obviously have to be the formal cost of getting kids to school, costs that we can track and measure, including the costs of school uniforms.
We'll go to Phil and then we'll come forward. Phil?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Just before you knocked off Kevin Rudd, Labor was leading the Coalition 52 to 48 (inaudible) still leading by the same amount. Has it been worth it, the last three weeks?
PM: Well, the numbers that matter to me are the numbers of Australians in a job; the number of kids who are completing secondary school, and we're of course talking about an education initiative today; the numbers of doctors and nurses that are available to meet people's healthcare needs. They're the numbers that I'm focussed on as Prime Minister and delivering those measures to assist hard-working Australians day after day.
I said we'd come here and then we'll come back. Yes?
JOURNALIST: How close are you to doing a deal with WA on health reform, and if you do cut them a deal, won't the other states and territories be understandably upset?
PM: Look, I did meet with Premier Barnett when I was in Western Australia recently. I am, of course, always available to have discussions with Premier Barnett about things that would benefit his state. I want to, the Minister for Health wants to, deliver better health care for the people of Western Australia. We will continue that dialogue. We will continue that dialogue in good faith.
The Federal Government, though, has a set of ambitions here in health reform. They were very clearly discussed when the Council of Australian Governments met. They include changes to make sure that our health system is properly governed and financed. We want to be the majority funder of health care. We believe that that is important to ending the cycle of blame shifting and cost shifting that Australians are heartily sick of and which from time to time has caused problems for patients trying to access patient care, so, very open to having continuing discussions with Premier Barnett.
Sorry, I did say Chris. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've given us a sense of how you're different from the Rudd Government. Can you give us some sort of sense, you keep talking about going forward, what will a Gillard, should you be re-elected, what will a Gillard Government look like? What are the things that matter to you? What's your second term agenda?
PM: Well, the things that matter to me are as follows. First and foremost I'm someone who believes in hard work. I believe I've worked hard myself over my working life and I work hard now. I therefore believe in the benefits and dignity of work. I believe the single biggest aim of running a strong economy is so that it can offer people the benefits and dignity of work. I want to run an economy that offers Australians access to jobs, an economy where we get into the workforce people who have been excluded from that workforce. I believe a life outside the workforce, a life on welfare, has a corrosive aimlessness which shows in individuals and their families and so I want to run a high-participation economy.
Secondly, the ongoing belief of my adult life, the thing that first got me involved as an activist in politics, is my belief in the transformative power of education; that education literally makes lives. It made mine. I would not be in the position I am today without having had access to a great quality education, and when I compare my life course with my parents' life course, the difference is the ability to access a quality education, and so the Government I lead will always have a focus on providing to every child and every Australian adult the access they need to the transformative power of a high-quality, rigorous education.
Third, my message is don't be afraid of the future. I believe much of our public policy debate in Australia has become bogged down because people are continuously invited to be afraid of the future. I don't believe in being afraid of the future. I believe the best days of this country are in front of it, not behind it, and we can work together to shape that future. We can work together to go forward.
I'll come back through because Matthew's had one. Yes, at the back.
JOURNALIST: From a health point again, are you coming around to Colin Barnett's view that WA gets a dud deal on the GST?
PM: Look, what I've said is the only thing I can say. I've had one discussion with Premier Barnett. My door is open for further discussion. We have got a set of aims here about improving health care for the Western Australian people. I'm always happy to have a conversation with good will and with respect to see if we can find our way through to a solution.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister have you been in contact with the Government in Fiji over the expulsion of Australia's acting High Commissioner?
PM: No, I have not. I have not. The Foreign Minister is dealing with this matter.
Obviously our attitude to this is we are gravely concerned that Fiji continues to take itself beyond and outside the workings of the international community. We will be making very, very clear to Fiji our protest about this unreasonable and uncalled for action.
Yes, we'll go to Mark and then come to Misha.
JOURNALIST: Doesn't having special concessions for WA imperil agreement with the other Labor states?
PM: Well, Mark, what I'd say is listen to my words, and my words are I'm prepared to have a conversation in good will. You are obviously making some assumptions about what might come out of that conversation. The assumptions aren't called for.
We'll have a conversation in good will. My aim: to improve the health services for the people of Western Australia, just like our aim is to improve the health services nationally. That's why the Government has been on the process of health reform.
What does it mean for Australians? Well, it means more doctors, more nurses, a greater focus in hospital emergency departments on attending to people within clinically recommended time; it means a focus on the provision of beds; it means a focus on local hospital networks and local engagement in running the health care system; and it means the level of government with the greatest financial capacity steps up to the plate to become the majority funder, given health costs are growing in our community as we age and as new technologies become available.
I said Misha next, so I'll go to Misha.
JOURNALIST: On that basis, (inaudible) earlier about your future agenda, one of the biggest pieces of unfinished health reform in this country is the disgraceful situation where tens of thousands of Australians cannot get access to dental care. Quite basic health problems then escalate into very serious medical condition. Is it your intention to act to fix this problem?
PM: Well, as you'd be aware, the Government has been trying to act to fix this problem, only to run into Tony Abbott and his Liberal Party who have always been in denial about the circumstances of the need for dental care in this country. I think, as you would see from the statements of the Minister for Health, she has vigorously pursued trying to deliver to Australians a better circumstance of dental care. The question, therefore, is one for Tony Abbott about why he continues to stand in the way.
Patricia?
JOURNALIST: Julia Gillard has the negotiations with WA moved on because you've taken a different approach to your predecessor, just like you did with big mining groups? I mean, I've obviously spoken to the sorts of people who are close to it who say that you went in and said they've opened up the negotiations, let's put different things on the agenda, we're willing to negotiate, we know we have to move on our side, you have to move on your side so we can come to an agreement. Is that the approach you took?
PM: Patricia, I didn't see you in the room when I was there, remarkably. You must have been-
JOURNALIST: Invisible coat-
PM: Right, wearing her invisible coat.
I've had a conversation with Premier Barnett. Health care reform is obviously complex. People would recall, I think, the lead up discussions for the Council of Australian Governments meeting - the intensity of the meeting itself, the volume of documentation that came out of that meeting. So, one conversation is not going to get us to a solution here. Whether we can get to a solution very much depends on the content of future conversations. What I am indicating is an attitude in those conversations and the attitude is one of good will and respect.
We'll go to Matthew just because you're sitting there and we'll come back through.
JOURNALIST: Your assessment of the way people are, you say shouldn't be afraid of the future, that they've been invited in the past to (inaudible) can we just dig down into that a bit. Are you saying that, say, the Howard Government, was John Howard a fear monger who traded on people's insecurities, and are you saying Australians aren't naturally like that, they're not naturally conservative?
PM: I'm saying Australians are naturally a people who want to go forward and I said that in my speech yesterday. We are not a country that has made its way through our history, or made our way in the world, by shying away from the challenges of the future. We're a country that has, across our history, embraced the challenges of change. I mean we wouldn't be here in the current circumstance we are as a nation if we hadn't embraced what were at the time some very, very difficult changes.
To go to just some of them - last night I was obviously at the launch of Bob Hawke's biography. Look at the degree of change overseen by the Hawke Government, the degree of economic change, the degree of social change, and Australians worked alongside the Government, embracing the future.
I think there are times when people are invited to be afraid of the future. They're invited to conclude that somehow the best days of this country are behind it, not in front of it. I don't agree with that with every fibre of my being. I do not agree with that.
I think with some of Mr Abbott's sloganeering people are being invited to conclude that somehow as a nation we can't work our way through complex problems and get to the right outcome. Well, I don't agree with that. I believe we, as a nation, are up to working our way together through the most complicated of circumstances and getting the right solution. That's what I stand for.
Now, I said we'd go here and here. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Have you spoken to Chris Trevor and how helpful is it that for two weeks he's been vacillating on whether to stand or not in a key marginal seat in Queensland because (inaudible)
PM: Look, I have spoken to Chris Trevor. I speak to our great Labor team as much as I possibly can as I go about the rest of my working day.
Chris Trevor is a great member for Flynn. He is someone who is very much focussed on delivering to his community. He represents in the Parliament an area of Australia that is undergoing great change and he wants to make sure that the community gets the assistance it needs to manage its way through those changes, so I have spoken to Chris Trevor. I will of course respect any decision that Chris Trevor makes, but he is a terrific representative of his local community in the Federal Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, this might seem like a strange question- but do you feel like the Prime Minister? Or will it take victory at the election (inaudible) There's something about this pre-campaign period that seems like Opposition Leader and Opposition Leader, strangely. Do you feel like the Prime Minister?
PM: Look, I feel like the Prime Minister. I am the Prime Minister. I've got the benefits and the burdens of this office. The responsibilities are considerable. What I also believe is that it's very important Australians get to exercise their choice. They'll get to do that at the forthcoming election. Australians obviously want to pick who their Leader is. I'm well aware that Australians are looking at me and assessing me, looking at Mr Abbott and assessing Mr Abbott, and they'll make their choice. But for me, going about this job day by day, I certainly am there as Prime Minister doing the job that needs to be done as I best see it for this country, driven by the values I'm describing to the Australian people and the aspirations I have for them.
Yes, we'll go there, and then back to Phil.
JOURNALIST: What factors are you taking into account when deciding the timing of the election?
PM: I know everybody enjoys- everybody sitting in front of me, the great men and women of the Canberra Press Gallery enjoy election speculation-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Okay, right, well, I've misread the room, I'm sorry about that. But I'm not here to add to election speculation in any way, shape or form. I've got work to do. We've got some governing to do.
Phil.
JOURNALIST: Just on that motion, the resolution in the East Timorese Parliament. What weight would you describe Julia, that some here have described it as the equivalent to a pack of kooks in the Senate (inaudible). What weight do you give that resolution?
PM: Well, I think in all of this it is best to rely on the bedrock of the facts. And the facts are that we are in dialogue with the East Timorese Government. And the facts are the East Timorese Government continues to indicate its openness and its preparedness to have that dialogue. And I know there's been a lot written and thought about how we got to this moment of dialogue. We got there because last Tuesday I announced that my view for a long term solution is that we need a regional framework with a regional processing centre.
I want to take away from people smugglers the products that they sell. I want to stop people risking life and limb, sometimes the lives of children, getting on dangerous boats and trying to make a journey by sea. That's why I announced the policy. I spoke to President Ramos-Horta, who obviously then consulted with the Prime Minister, and the Prime Minister has indicated that it is President Horta who will deal with this agenda for East Timor. That is, I spoke to the man who is the man taking this agenda forward for East Timor. We are in dialogue with East Timor.
For the Opposition, you know, Mr Abbott, I've said it before, he's a man who's good at slogans. He's got a slogan, it's a hollow slogan, a very hollow slogan. And increasingly over the last few days, the very hollowness of this slogan has come to the fore. Mr Abbott is so (inaudible) with this slogan, he hasn't persuaded Philip Ruddock, a long term Liberal Immigration Minister, and he hasn't persuaded another Member of the Liberal Party frontbench. They- Liberal Party members- are saying this slogan is hollow. What Mr Abbott is trying to sell the Australian people is a fairytale. And his very own Liberal colleagues are calling them on it- yes.
JOURNALIST: You talk about facts in your asylum seeker policy, but isn't it also a fact that any deal that your Government does with the Government of East Timor will have to be approved and enacted by the Parliament that yesterday passed a motion rejecting the idea?
PM: We will work through with the Government of East Timor, obviously- people working through to develop a concrete proposition which then would be dealt with by the East Timorese Government through its normal processes. Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, can you give us any indication of your timetable on your climate policy- is it today? Would you anticipate it out before the campaign? And secondly, you've made much of consensus as a key part of that policy, and you're praising Bob Hawke as a consensus politician. Is consensus more widely one of your organising ideas in your Government?
PM: Well thank you, and I'll take the second part first and then come back to climate change. I believe that people want their Prime Minister to lead, but they want their Prime Minister to lead in circumstances where people have been consulted and feel like they are involved in and own the decision. That is, I want to respect people's views. Now I'm well aware, I'm well aware, that you can sit around tables and work issues through and not come to agreement. That means of course that I have to make a decision, I have to lead, and I will do that. But I'm also well aware from experiences across my life, including my public life, that if you get people around a table, if you sit down in a spirit of goodwill and you try and work through difficult issues, then often remarkable things can flow.
I think Bob Hawke understood that as Prime Minister, and he was of course noted for taking tough decisions, for having hard conversations with the Australian people. I mean, when we look back on that history, there was nothing popular or quickly embraced about the kind of economic reforms that Bob Hawke drove, but he did it because he believed it was right for the nation. But he did it in dialogue, seeking the maximum consensus for action that he could. That is my outlook too. That is how I want to lead as Prime Minister.
On climate change, I said in the first statement I made as incoming Prime Minister that I understand there are millions of Australians disappointed that we have not yet been able to put a price on carbon. I am disappointed by that too. But in order to get there, we need to have a dialogue with the community that leads to a deep and lasting consensus about how we will price carbon, how we will go forward with a market-based mechanism, how we will work together to achieve the kind of transformations in our economy and the way we live that pricing carbon necessarily implies. I believe there are other steps we can take on climate change. And yes, of course, the Government is working its way through these issues, and we will do so methodically, taking the time necessary to get it right.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it your intention to announce the process for that consultation to occur?
PM: Well, the Government is working on these things now. When I've got something more to say, then I will. But we will work on these things methodically. We will work on these things so that the policies are right, right for the Australian nation, right for the future and take us forward.
Thank you very much.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the Government will expand the Education Tax Refund scheme so that school uniforms can be included in claims, giving families up to $779 per child each year to help with the costs of sending kids to school.
Ms Gillard said that she understands that despite the strength of the national economy, many Australians are doing it tough with high living costs. Not everyone is seeing the benefits of a strong economy.
That's why it is so important to make the cost of getting a good education as affordable as possible. The Government is committed to taking practical steps that help working parents get by and give their kids the best education they can.
We all know that uniforms can be an expensive part of sending kids to school but this change, along with the existing refund for textbooks and computers, will help families with that cost.
Around 2.1 million children across Australia are eligible for the refund. To date, almost one million families have claimed the existing refund to support more than 1.7 million children.
Parents will be able to claim up to 50 per cent of the cost of uniforms in addition to the existing education expenses included in the scheme, currently up to $390 per child each year for primary school kids or $779 per child each year for those in secondary school.
The Government will provide this relief to family budgets while ensuring we return the budget to surplus by 2013.
The existing items parents can claim under the Education Tax refund include the cost of computers and computer equipment, textbooks and trade tools for secondary school trade courses.
To be eligible, school uniforms would need to be approved by the school but not necessarily mandatory for the child to wear.
The new eligible items would be available for expenses incurred during the 2011-12 financial year and the tax refund would be paid in the 2012-13 financial year.
Over the forward estimates the Government expects to pay an additional $220 million (underlying cash basis) by including school uniforms in the refund.
Parents or guardians entitled to Family Tax Benefit Part A for one or more children in school are eligible for the refund. Parents are also eligible if their child receives another payment, such as Youth Allowance, Disability Support Pension or ABSTUDY Living Allowance, but would otherwise be eligible for Family Tax Benefit Part A.


National Press Club, Canberra
I'm delighted to be at the National Press Club, my third appearance this year and my first as Prime Minister, and today I come with a clear message about what I believe and what is driving me as Prime Minister.
I believe a strong economy is the foundation of everything else that I as Prime Minister want for Australia. It's the foundation because I believe that lives are given shape and purpose by the benefits and dignity of work.
For Australians and their families, work gives economic security and enables life time choices. For individuals, work that is appreciated and respected gives personal dignity.
So, for me as Prime Minister, I will make my economic judgements based on what gives Australians the best opportunity for access to work.
Getting a job, holding a job, developing skills and experience, getting the next, better job or starting your own business is what propels an individual's life forward and gives families security and choices.
For the nation, supporting jobs today as we embrace the changes needed to build for the jobs of tomorrow, is what propels the nation forward to increased prosperity and fairness.
For both individuals and the nation, going forward requires hard work, determination and smart choices. It tests you, and in the last few years this nation has been tested by the global financial crisis and global recession.
The good news is that together we passed the test and we kept Australians in work. Australia's economy has come through the global financial crisis in better shape than any major advanced economy. In 2009 the Australian economy grew by 1.3 per cent. In contrast, the world's advanced economies contracted by 3.2 per cent.
When the global crisis struck, the Government did what we had to do, and Australia avoided the recession that hit most advanced economies.
Australia has come through that global recession with an unemployment rate lower than any of the world's major advanced economies - yet we are still being tested.
We live in a challenging time for many Australian families, who are still doing it tough. Cost of living pressures, the cost of housing, job security, worries about affording education and retirement - these are all on the minds of many hard-working Australians.
Today, guided by my values, I want to share with you how I intend to move Australia forward to a stronger economy, with sustainable growth that delivers for hard-working Australians.
I believe that prudent and disciplined economic management is the foundation of good government. The good-quality, essential services that Australians expect can only be sustained by a Government when our public finances are sound.
That's why I believe in strong budget surpluses.
The Government I lead will return the budget to surplus in just three years' time. As the Treasurer announced yesterday, we are now on track for a surplus of more than 3 billion dollars in 2013.
This means Australia will be in surplus before every single major advanced economy in the world, and throughout the coming election campaign, the Government will sustain the discipline that has brought the budget back to surplus.
Those expecting an old-style, spend-up-big campaign can forget it. Any commitments made in the upcoming campaign will not add a single cent - not a cent - to the budget bottom line. Any and all commitments we make will be fully costed and funded.
Yes, the upcoming campaign will have strong elements of 'clean' and 'green' but above all else it will be very lean. There will be hard choices and some unpopular cutbacks but I am determined to offset new spending and ensure our return to surplus in 2013, and all our policies will be submitted to Treasury and Finance for independent costing under the Charter of Budget Honesty - and I challenge Mr Abbott to do the same.
I also believe that to maximise jobs today and tomorrow, governments must be a force for confidence and certainty in the economy. That is why I moved immediately to end the uncertainty in the mining industry and mining communities across Australia, and that's why I can say with confidence that a re-elected Gillard Government will cut company tax, give small business an extra helping hand, invest in infrastructure and increase national savings and retirement incomes for hardworking Australians through our support for increased superannuation - more balanced economic development that is good for jobs right around the country and good for national savings.
Remarkably, my opponent would deny Australians these benefits because he is refusing to accept the tax that our biggest mining companies have agreed to pay.
Not only is he spurning the mining tax arrangements around which I have sought to build consensus, but he actually wants to increase company tax. He wants to deny small businesses the early start in reducing company tax and the instant tax write down on assets which the Government has committed to give them.
I want to take Australia forward. Mr Abbott wants to take it back.
Today, I say to Australians let's talk about the challenges and complexities; let's move on from yesterday's debates to the debates of tomorrow; let's move forward together.
Today, I want talk Australians about my approach to economic management and to economic reform.
We are living through a time of heightened global uncertainty. The global financial crisis severely dented confidence in economies across the world, and left many of them with years of work ahead to restore jobs and confidence.
There remains a brisk trade in doomsday scenarios across the globe. Faith in global institutions and global markets was shaken, and now, debt burdens are weighing heavily on Europe. Recovery shows promise but is still tentative in the United States. Some nations are threatened by the prospect of high unemployment and budget cuts reversing years of economic and social progress.
In such a fragile environment, I say to the Australian people: now is not the time to take risks with the Australian economy - it is a time for prudent and careful economic management; not a time to take risks with a Liberal Party that got it wrong on the global financial crisis, that opposed action to support Australian jobs and that would have allowed hundreds of thousands of jobs to be destroyed.
Australia today is a great beneficiary of the economic growth in China and the demand for our mineral resources in our region, as we know, but if anyone thinks that gives us a free ticket to easy prosperity, they are mistaken.
We must reject the temptation to sit back and simply hope for the revenues from the next phase of the mining boom to wash over us - as the Howard Government did in the first phase of the boom.
Australia cannot expect the resources sector to shoulder the whole burden of building our future prosperity, and we do not want to create an Australia that has is an economic patchwork with some parts of the country booming and other parts going backwards. An economic patchwork that will have some regions crying out for skilled labour while in other regions Australians live aimless lives without skills, work or hope.
We must do the hard work of building an economy with higher productivity growth and higher workforce participation - the long-term drivers of future prosperity.
Australia has experienced a long-term decline in productivity growth since the 1990s, and turning that around is essential for Australia's long-term prosperity. Equally important is the need to maximise participation in the workforce.
A high-participation economy will sustain stronger growth, stronger public finances, and will better support the pressures on services caused by an ageing population. A high-participation economy will sustain hope and purpose in individual Australians and gives security and choices to their families.
I will make education central to my economic agenda because of the role it plays in developing the skills that lead to rewarding and satisfying work - and that can build a high-productivity, high-participation economy.
It is difficult to think of any investment that will generate returns as enduring as our investment in a child's education.
Consider this: a child who is 5 years old today is likely to still be in the workforce through to the 2070s. That means that what we invest today to expand opportunity for Australian children will be paying dividends for most of the century ahead through higher participation, stronger productivity and increased economic growth, and that is why I bring to my role as Prime Minister a passionate commitment to better schools and better educational opportunities for all Australians.
My approach to economic management begins with a commitment to macroeconomic stability, within frameworks that have served Australia well through 18 years of economic growth under the governments of Prime Ministers Keating, Howard and Rudd.
For monetary policy, that means an independent Reserve Bank that has responsibility for setting interest rates, with an inflation target of an average of 2-3 per cent over the course of the economic cycle.
For fiscal policy, that today means a commitment to achieve budget surpluses on average over the medium term, to keep taxation as a share of GDP, on average, below the level for 2007 08; and to improve the Government's net financial worth over the medium term.
As I've said, we are bringing the budget to surplus by 2013 - in three years' time, ahead of every major advanced economy. This requires ongoing economic discipline by holding real growth in spending to 2 per cent a year once the economy is growing above trend and allowing the level of tax receipts to recover naturally as the economy improves.
Once the Budget returns to surplus, we will still maintain spending restraint, until we deliver strong surpluses of 1 per cent of GDP. This is the responsible approach to macroeconomic management. It forces us to focus our effort on high-quality, effective services.
It sets clear parameters for all our policy decisions, and for the election campaign ahead.
A strong and stable macroeconomic framework is essential for the Australian economy, but there is more to responsible economic management.
In the 1980s and 1990s, Labor Governments led economic reform by recognising that in changing global conditions, only an open, market-driven economy could prosper. That meant floating the dollar, reducing tariffs, ensuring wage restraint and implementing sweeping competition policy reforms.
But as conditions change again, we need more than economic stability to ensure future prosperity. We need active reforms to improve Australia's ability to compete, to make sure that all our assets are utilised productively, and to make the most of our value-adding capacity.
That is what micro-economic reform does for an economy - helping to sustain stronger growth over the longer term and ensure that Australian firms and workers are able to adapt successfully to changing conditions.
Economic reform should benefit families, boost national prosperity, enable more Australians to enjoy the dignity of work and deliver a more competitive and sustainable economy. Over time, there should be a virtuous cycle between investment in human capital and resilient communities and economic growth, but this demands a different mix of policy approaches from the ones applied in the 1980s and 1990s.
Since I became Education, Employment and Workplace Relations Minister in 2007, I have argued for an approach to microeconomic reform which focuses on market design.
The sectors which may need renewal and reform are often those that were relatively untouched by the Hawke-Keating reforms - sectors like health and education that meet essential public needs, delivered largely within the domestic economy. Hospitals, aged care facilities, childcare centres, schools, and employment services - all services with a diverse range of providers from the public, private and non-government sectors, and services where competition and value is often held back by jurisdictional red tape and the lack of seamless national markets.
As far as I am concerned, there is no inherent superiority in a public sector or a private sector provider - certainly not on ideological grounds. The challenge is not whether to combine public and private resources in these essential sectors, but how best to do it.
Simply applying the extreme free-market medicine of liberalisation and privatisation without thought or care is not a solution. Maintaining an instinctive hostility towards the public sector and all it provides is equally wrong.
What matters is the hard work of understanding each sector, looking at the needs it must serve, and then methodically working to create the conditions in which markets serve the public interest through vigorous competition, transparent information, the freedom to make choices and a responsiveness to the needs of service users.
For this to occur we need strong, confident institutions at national, state and local level - institutions like innovative businesses, community-focused hospitals and great schools that create lasting value for the public.
But we also need sustained and sometimes bold action to unblock the market failures, open up new opportunities, and make sure that the interests of users and taxpayers are put first.
A modern, productive economy requires national consistency and better standards, and not a mish-mash of conflicting State and Territory schemes. This is the kind of reform that I have delivered for Australians in the areas where I have had direct portfolio responsibility. It is also the kind of reform that I will pursue as Prime Minister.
My record includes big changes such as the introduction of uniform Occupational Health and Safety laws across the nation, a change that policy makers have been pursuing for a generation and which will create billions of dollars in benefit for Australian firms; big changes like the introduction of the Fair Work regime, which has brought a national Workplace Relations system for the private sector, reduced the number of industry awards from more than 4,000 to just 122; and big changes like the My School website and the national Australian school curriculum.
For the first time, accurate and consistent information about the performance and the circumstances of every school in the country is now available to the public, whatever kind of school we are talking about. From next year, we will begin to implement a shared national curriculum, allowing every student to access the highest possible curriculum standards and eliminating a problem for those families who move from one state to another, as so many now do: national quality improvement and consistency in early childhood; national regulation and quality standards in vocational and higher education.
I have also focused on performance-based pay for teachers and performance incentives for universities, vocational education providers and for states that lift school retention rates, because I believe in rewarding hard work and making governments and public institutions more accountable to the public, and in driving reform that focuses on quality and performance, I have also overseen the massive renewal of educational infrastructure across our schools, universities and TAFE.
These programs have invested in the technology and infrastructure that these sectors need for tomorrow.
At the heart of many of the reforms I have championed, and many of the changes for the decade ahead is this: the microeconomic challenges of the future are not a simplistic choice between the market and the state, but the more sophisticated challenges of market design so that we bring public and private resources together to deliver better services and increased productivity.
My priorities are very different to those of the former government in which Mr Abbott served, which subsidised the growth of private providers and encouraged private consumption seemingly for their own sake, without much regard for the overall performance of their sector in service, innovation or cost-effectiveness.
As Prime Minister, I intend to advance an agenda that moves Australia forward to a more productive, modern Australian economy, - one whose dividend to Australians is better quality services, better quality jobs, more competitive firms, a better quality of life and greater financial security for the future.
I say this to my fellow Australians: my vision for Australia's economic future is not about the success of one sector against another, or one or two regions against the rest, because as Australians, we all have a shared stake in our prosperity and resilience.
Whether you're in mining up in the northern parts of Australia, or in manufacturing in one of the southern states; whether you're in the food industries of the Riverina and inland plains or in financial services or the creative industries in one of our big cities; no matter which industry, which region or which job - each of us has a stake in the success of all.
We need to build a dynamic, diverse economy with new businesses that can compete and succeed not just in Australia but also on the global stage;
An economy with a new generation of Australian entrepreneurs, researchers and inventors, an economy that moves forward to prepare our kids for the high-quality jobs of tomorrow - not one that goes backwards, with a Liberal Party that will again cut funding for education and put its energy into playing politics not reform;
An economy that moves forward to deliver good quality services to families - not one that goes backwards, with Mr Abbott once again cutting funding to our public hospitals;
An economy that moves forward and gives working people their fair share of our prosperity - not one that goes backwards, with Mr Abbott's return to the worst aspects of Work Choices and individual contracts that undermine the safety net;
An economy that moves forward with confidence, with an agenda for the future - not one that goes that goes backwards with a Liberal government that would have taken Australia into recession and put Australians on dole queues.
I am committed to moving Australia forward by providing the responsible, far-sighted economic management we need to expand work and life opportunities for all Australians today and tomorrow.
This is my commitment to my fellow Australians.
Thank you.


Parliament House
PM: Thank you Mathew Franklin for joining us, and thank you very much to everybody. Obviously, I'm joined by the Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan.
Can I say we live in a lively and a resilient democracy - and it works. We have democratic institutions and conventions that work well at the most important times when they're put to the test by the Australian people at an election.
The events of the past fortnight show us unequivocally that our democracy is very, very strong indeed.
With today's agreement with the independent Members of Parliament, with Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor, and with the previous agreements reached with the Greens and of course with Mr Wilkie, Labor is prepared to govern. Labor is prepared to deliver stable, effective and secure government for the next three years. Ours will be a government with just one purpose, and that's to serve the Australian people.
The election two weeks ago was the closest in modern memory. What the Australian people told us, and they told us this in no uncertain terms on that day and on the days that have followed, is this: that we will be held more accountable than ever before, and more than any government in modern memory. We will be held to higher standards of transparency and reform, and it's in that spirit that I approach the task of forming a government.
The discussions and the negotiations Wayne and I had with Rob Oakeshott, Tony Windsor, Bob Katter, Andrew Wilkie, with Bob Brown and Adam Bandt on behalf of the Greens, have been marked by openness, candour and diligence in working through the issues. The Independents, the Greens, they have been business-like throughout and I thank them for the substance, tone and tenor of our discussions, and can I particularly say to Mr Bob Katter, though of course he made another decision, that I thank him for the tone and tenor of our discussions.
In remarkable times there's opportunity. Indeed, this process, born of parliamentary deadlock, has resulted in more openness, transparency and reform in how we conduct our Parliament and the business of government than at any other time on modern Australian politics.
Throughout this process of forming a new government we've been open with the Australian people. To quote Rob Oakeshott, sunshine is the best disinfectant, and we've agreed to far-reaching reforms that make me as Prime Minister and our government and how it functions more accountable to the Australian people. So, let's draw back the curtains and let the sun shine in; let our parliament be more open than it ever was before. That's real reform, and that's the direct result of the election.
We need to govern, and we will govern, in the best interests of the Australian people, and I know that if we fail in this solemn responsibility we will be judged harshly when we next face the Australian people at the next election, and being held to that test is just the way I want it.
My government will be true to our principles and our beliefs, but we will be pragmatic as well in developing effective policies and programs on the major issues that we face.
We are governing with a majority of 76. We are prepared to go forward to serve the Australian people.
At the same time, I want to say to Tony Abbott and the Liberal Party, and I want to say to Warren Truss and the National Party, the following: I believe the Australian people, given the closeness of this vote, want us to find more common ground in the national interest. Accordingly, I pledge today my best efforts as Prime Minister to work constructively with you and your colleagues to find common ground where we can. I extend my hand to work with you in good faith and in the interests of the Australian people, and I acknowledge that Tony Abbott phoned me a short time ago to wish me well. I thank him for the simple courtesy and decency that making such a call shows. It can't have been easy for him and I genuinely thank him for that.
I begin this task more optimistic and more confident than ever before in the Australian people and our hopes and our aspirations, and I say once again as I've said many times before - the best days of this country are in front of it, not behind it, and that's the best days for every part of our nation.
We've weathered the greatest economic crisis since the Great Depression. Our economy is the envy of the world. We have an opportunity to improve health services, invest in education, build the National Broadband Network, make progress on global warming and the environment, deepen our security relationship with our allies, be a leader in this region and build Australia's enduring prosperity and well-being.
I will work tirelessly to do what we said we would do, and that is of course to forge a new paradigm of modern government in this country; to deliver for regional Australia, recognising that in our nation one size does not fit all; to redeem the hope you have placed in me and Labor; and to be faithful to the trust that has been extended to us.
So, in that spirit, I say thank you. I will always be working for the future, for this nation's future, and I pledge that from me to the Australian people.
I understand, of course, that there will interest in the arrangements that we have reached today with Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor. They came and they asked us for fairness for regional Australia and we were happy to work through with them to achieve that fairness, so today I confirm that the next round of health and hospitals funding will be focussed and dedicated to regional Australia. So will the next round of funding from the Education Investment Fund.
We will make sure that regional Australia gets its fair share of our upgrade of primary care facilities from which doctors work; of our critical skills investment fund; of our new reward payments for schools and our new funding for local school control. We will also ensure that the National Broadband Network offers the benefit of uniform wholesale prices to end the difficulties with telecommunications and difference in price for regional Australia, and we will ensure that priority is given to regional Australia as the NBN is built.
We will also dedicate $800 million to a priority regional infrastructure program and we will ensure that $573 million of the regional infrastructure fund works with the regional development authorities around the country to respond to local needs.
Of course, these commitments come on top of our general commitment to the almost $6 billion Regional Infrastructure Fund, the tele-health measures I outlined in the campaign, and our Building Better Regional Cities measures outlined in the campaign.
In total, this means for regional Australia they can look forward to benefits in the order of $9.9 billion, but that's a fair share. It's been worked through with Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor, and I thank them for working through that with me and of course with Wayne Swan.
Can I conclude by saying now, with this matter resolved, I intend today to meet with the Governor General and to present to her the agreements which indicate that I have the support of 76 votes in the House of Representatives. I will then move through to create the new government.
I want this to be a time where we are focussed on securing the future of our country for all Australians. This is a fantastic place; a place of opportunity, of freedom, of hopes fulfilled. It's truly a country where you can achieve your dreams. I've always believed that, and everything about that process has re-affirmed that belief in me.
Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST:Did you offer Rob Oakeshott a Ministry and/or the position of Speaker?
PM: I've certainly spoken to Mr Oakeshott as to whether he would be interested in serving in an executive capacity. He is considering that. Obviously, that's an unusual arrangement. He's also a man with a very young family and a new baby on the way, so he will consider that.
JOURNALIST:What job did you offer him?
PM: Look, I've said to him that if he wanted to serve to help drive these reforms for regional Australia that I would be open to that discussion. He needs to consider that.
JOURNALIST:Ms Gillard, you have just avoided becoming what I think would be the shortest-serving Labor Prime Minister in the nation's history - I could be wrong about that - but what will, now that you've got a second chance, how will you be different from your approach previously, and what changes in mindset does your Party need to make about the way it approaches being the Party of government?
PM: Well, on a historic day, thank you for that optimism and confidence for the future, and on an historic day, let me just say about that optimism and confidence in the future I've said to you, I've said to you during the election campaign and I've said to you in the days since, certainly, I've learnt some lessons and I believe the Government's learnt some lessons from the three years that have been.
I also believe that the Australian people have sent us a message in this election campaign. I've heard that message. I believe the parliament's heard that message, and what they are asking us to do is not to become waylaid in partisan bickering but to build for the future, and that's exactly what I've outlined to you today and I thank the Independents in these discussions, and the Greens Party, for also sitting down to work through how we can, with optimism and confidence, build for that future, and I would extend that as well to Bob Katter, even though he came to a different decision. He took a very diligent and thoughtful approach.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM: Andrew.
JOURNALIST:Pardon me for being parochial, but there does seem to be some remarkable similarities with the royalties for regions agreement that was reached between the Nationals and the Liberal Party in WA. How can you deliver $10 billion if the mining tax is to be reviewed?
PM: Well look I'll turn to Wayne Swan for that, but can I just say when you look at all of the figuring here you will see of course that we are referring, in part, to the $6 billion of money that will flow for infrastructure, two billion of it for Western Australia, from the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, but you will see that the arrangements here are for around half a billion dollars of that money to specifically able to be allocated with the advice and assistance of regional development authorities. But I'll also turn to Wayne.
TREASURER: The Regional Infrastructure Fund is something that we put in place earlier in the year, before any of these events unfolded, and we put it there for very good reasons. The need to invest the bounty of the country, particularly in regions in this country, which were producing so much of our wealth. So we put this in place, well before now, it's been noticed because of changed circumstances, but I sat in a room with all of you when we launched the Henry report and talked about how we needed to respond to the challenges of mining boom mark two, and the Regional Infrastructure Fund is a very, very important part of all of that. But I just wanted to also partially answer Matthew's question before because I think the Prime Minister was being somewhat modest. I mean I think what you're seeing here is the success of her consensus building style, she's very good at bringing people together and I think we see the outcome of that today.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM: I'll go to Kieran and come back, yes.
JOURNALIST:What do you say to people in, hospitals, shoddy hospitals in suburban Sydney or Melbourne or Brisbane about the fact that the next round of this hospital and health fund is purely for regions, when clearly, the infrastructure in city areas is not up to scratch?
PM: Well look I think that's a good question and one of the, I will answer your question but I just want to make a general point before I do so. Inevitably, inevitably, a lot of focus will go on what the political parties have talked to the Independents about since election day. But really, in assessing what we are doing for Australians, including regional Australians, you need to look at everything we promised at the election, which goes to Andrew's question, where we already were with $6 billion of investment for regions that obviously generate mining wealth but also feel the stresses and strains that mining can bring. There was already there in our election policy offer, and then what we've built on it since. And the same applies to health care. Of course the focus is going to come on what we've talked the Independents about, I accept that, it's inevitable, but I would say to Australians too, look at our health policy offer, look at the billions of dollars of new health capital that has already been delivered, already committed, already making a difference in hospitals right around the country including of course, in capital city Australia. Look at the new health agreement with the Federal Government, stepping up to 60 per cent of the ongoing responsibility of hospital costs, capital and recurrent, right around Australia. Look at where we've stepped up to provide GP Superclinics, to invest in primary care in capital cities as well as in regions around Australia. Look at the difference that our new health care training packages will mean with new doctors, new nurses, going to work everywhere in metropolitan Australia as well as in regional Australia. So I ask, Australians in capital cities, to understand that what is in this agreement builds on a huge suite of changes to get our health care system ready for the 21st century.
JOURNALIST:Ms Gillard did you offer all of the Independents you were dealing with, including Mr Wilkie and also not so much an independent but the Green's new MP, ministries as well or did you just choose to offer that to Mr Oakeshott?
PM: The answer to your question is no I did not. I have had a discussion with Mr Oakeshott, who obviously is passionate not only about entering into an agreement about regional Australia but also seeing it delivered day by day. One way of doing that is in the Parliament, as an Independent, participating on the new committee we will set up for regional Australia. Pressing us with the new resources and new energy that this process has driven into our Parliament, to keep delivering day after day, that's one way of doing it. Another way of doing it, of course, is to determine that you will, at least for some purposes, serve in executive Government. That's an offer that is there, it's there for Mr Oakeshott to consider.
JOURNALIST:So he was the only one?
PM: Yes he was.
JOURNALIST:In terms of this message you've heard about what the Australian people want and how they want the two parties to work together. The Treasurer graciously said you were very good at bringing people together, you're also in the past clearly one of Labor's most effective attack agents in the Parliament. Are you going to change your tone in the Parliament, are we going to have a gentler, kinder Parliament?
PM: Look I think these reforms are going to mean that executive Government, the Government, is going to be held to greater account than ever before. Now I'm not naive about political processes, and I think Australians want us to have a hard contest when there are real differences. So you should expect to hear me continue to have a hard contest about real differences like our approaches to workplace relations. But I also think the Australian people have sent us a message about needless partisanship, not wanting to see bickering and imaginary contests and I've heard that message. If you look at, and to give one example of that, we spent a lot of time in this building in the last Parliament arguing about climate change. I would hope, through the new climate change committee I've created through this process, with the resources of a Cabinet committee, open to multi-party players who want to work through to address climate change, that we might find a new way of building consensus on what has been an issue in which consensus in this building ended and ended very quickly and dramatically.
Yes.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister when do you expect to finalise your Ministry and are you anticipating major changes?
PM: Look we will work through this in coming days, obviously as Labor Party leader this is my prerogative but I intend to work with Wayne Swan and with my leadership team, with Chris Evans and Stephen Conroy, to have the discussions to form the new Ministerial team. I'd be looking forward to doing that, swearing new Ministers in the early days of next week, but obviously some of this is also about the convenience of the Governor-General.
Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST:Ms Gillard, longevity was one of the reasons the Independents opted for Labor, they thought you would go full term. Have you given them a date, as you set it out, so that this process for the next election in three years and in the interests in stability, if Kevin Rudd wants Foreign Affairs is it his to have?
PM: Well obviously for the Ministry we will work through our own processes and make our own arrangements. I gave Kevin Rudd a commitment that he would be a senior member of my Ministerial team, a Cabinet Minister, and he will be. On the question of the date of the next election, in the agreement that I have signed with Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor, I have indicated that I would work with them to agree when the next election will be, I will be hoping that we can make that date transparent well in advance of it coming on.
Malcolm Farr.
JOURNALIST:When did you know you had those two votes that you just mentioned, who were you with and what did you do?
PM: I knew when you did, I watched the media conference with Wayne Swan, with a number of my other Ministerial colleagues, with quite a few anxious Labor Party friends and staff members.
JOURNALIST:And what did you do?
PM: I sat and watched Fran, I sat and watched.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister is it your intention to recall Parliament as soon as possible to validate the arrangements announced today?
PM: Look I've asked Anthony Albanese, who was obviously serving as Leader of Government Business, and has been involved in the negotiations about Parliamentary reform. I've asked him as soon as we move in this period out of caretaker, which we will once I've seen Governor-General, to get some advice for us about Parliamentary dates. There are, as I understand it, some questions about the timing of declarations and other things that I need to take into account. Obviously my intention would be to have to have the Parliament come together in a reasonable period of time, but I can't now, without the benefit of that advice, give you a greater specific date.
Yes.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible) about the document that you put out. The $10 billion in spending that's now earmarked for the regions, that's not contained in this document because obviously it deals with some of the new spending. So basically you're saying that in terms of the Health and Hospitals Fund, in terms of some of these education funds, that any new spending for the four years under those health and hospital fund, or under the education, is earmarked for regional areas, the $1.8 billion that can only go to regional hospitals?
PM: Ok I'll just clarify that for you and then turn to Wayne. The amount of money in the Health and Hospitals Fund is $1.8 billion. We will open up around, it will be around that, is for regional Australia, it will also of course deal with the question for Tasmania and that was understood between me and the Independents. We will work through, the Health and Hospitals Fund, will then asses applications against their criteria, it is only quality applications that will receive the tick. So we are not saying that, necessarily, the whole of the $1.8 billion will be expended, that will be a function of the quality of the applications. But $1.8 billion is available.
There will be a round for the Education Investment Fund of $500 million.
The importance of the document you have in your hand is it shows our determination to make sure that any new spending is offset by savings. Obviously there is some new money that we have made available through the priority regional investment fund, and consequently we will and indeed have, on the document in front of you, identified and offsetting saving. We are continuing to acquit our Budget rule, there's been no more important issue in recent days than the question of Budget responsibility and Budget costings, where it was clear to the Australian people that what we said during the election campaign is what we meant and what we honoured. Obviously for the Coalition there was an $11 billion problem, but I'll turn to Wayne Swan just on the-
JOURNALIST:(inaudible) from the tax discount on interest (inaudible) do you regard that as a election promise broken or deferred?
PM: No that was a entry in our last Budget, it's not a election commitment, and there is a delay, that's true, of 12 months, there is an alignment with the roll-out of that now with the tick and flick tax return. So I'll turn to Wayne on that.
TREASURER: Well we're saving 700 million there, it is a deferral and that just underscores our determination to make sure that we stay within our fiscal rules. So our net save over the forwards is $43 million. So we've funded all of our commitments and the Prime Minister has run through the rest of them.
JOURNALIST:And what about the suggestion that he would've voted a different way if Kevin Rudd was still around? Would you think that (inaudible)-
PM: Oh look, I think obviously Mr Katter can make decisions as he sees fit. As I understand it, there were a range of things on his mind. I can't say I was able to listen to all of his media conference. I did have some other obligations as Prime Minister. But I understand from the sections I heard the question of carbon pricing, you know, climate change, Mr Katter has a different view from me for example about climate change and the need, ultimately, to price carbon in this country. He's got a different view on some other questions that he went through. But I would say, you know, I had an opportunity to really sit and talk with Bob Katter and to work through a series of issues in very good faith and good spirit and I'd look forward to that continuing.
Just go over here and then come back there.
JOURNALIST: Which issues do you want the tax summit to tackle?
PM: Right, well, as you would see, I'm trying to save Wayne's voice, but we'll also go to Wayne as well. Okay, you go.
TREASURER: Well, the Independents indicated they wanted a structured discussion about the recommendations of the Henry Review, and we're delighted to engage in a structured discussion about those recommendations. We are-
JOURNALIST: And the MRRT?
TREASURER: Well, that's a commitment that we have made and we are working through that, through the Argus Committee. And we are determined to progress that through the Parliament. But on the more, the broader question, what we've committed to, what we've ruled out, and what remains in terms of the Henry review, we're happy to have a structured discussion about that. We talked about it right through the campaign. Tax cuts for small businesses for example. The cut to the corporate rate. They're already factored into our Budget. And there are many more things that I've said to you before, particularly when we launched the report, that there would be debate about in this country for the years ahead. We're happy to have that debate.
JOURNALIST: Is the fact that you have now gladly and happily agreed to a structured debate about the whole of the Henry review- but that it took this election result and this pressure from Independents to force you to it-
TREASURER: No.
JOURNALIST: What does that say about-
TREASURER: I don't agree with that point.
JOURNALIST: Is the approach that you were taking prior to the election when you did want to have this open and structured-
TREASURER: You must have been at a different election campaign, Matthew.
JOURNALIST: No I wasn't.
TREASURER: We've-
PM: He was on a bus for a long time.
TREASURER: We've actually got our commitment to our Minerals Resource Rent Tax. We put forward to the Australian people a cut in the corporate rate as recommended. We put forward to the Australian people a tax cut for small business with the instant asset write-off. All of those things are commitments.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, that's not true.
TREASURER: That is just not true, and I'll take you back to the transcript of when I launched the Government's response to the report. I said very clearly then, as I'm saying to you today, that as we go through this term of Parliament that we are now embarking upon, there will be a wide-ranging discussion about many of the items that we didn't rule in or rule out. And there are many of those, and we're happy to have it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
TREASURER: Delighted to have it.
PM: Yes, we'll go here, you haven't had a question.
JOURNALIST: I was wondering whether you shared Tony Windsor's concern that Tony Abbott would win a snap poll if it had been held, and because supplementaries are in favour at the moment, I was just wondering if I could also ask you when you're going to move into The Lodge?
PM: On the second question, I've given it no thought, and I've got absolutely no idea. So I can't help you with that. On the, on the first question, no I do not. But that's not what's relevant. What I believe is relevant is that the Australian people were looking for stable and effective Government. And we have spent these days working through, step by step, piece by piece, discussion by discussion, to deliver just that, and the outcome we have reached is an agreement for stable and effective Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I'm just wondering- Rob Oakeshott said that he wants a swear jar put in place so that if you or any other member of the Government tries to use the word mandate as a- in any conversation, what would you describe your power now as Prime Minister of Australia if it's not a mandate?
PM: Look, I'm not sure I'm going to agree with Rob Oakeshott on that. Maybe, you know, swear jars will be in fashion for a whole variety of reasons. I'm not sure. And I agree with the Treasurer that perhaps in the lead-up to the Press Gallery Ball one in the Press Gallery could make a lot of money. But what I would say is there's no walking away, no attempt to in some way, you know, not understand the message from the result in the election. I understand that. I understand that the Australian people have sent me, sent the Labor Party, sent this Parliament a message, heard that message loud and clear. Now, obviously, we went to the Australian people and we made a set of commitments. And I will be doing everything I can to deliver on those commitments, but I also recognise-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: But I also recognise this, I recognise I will be seeking to deliver those commitments in a Parliament where I cannot automatically assume support for the Government's legislation in the lower House or the upper House. Now this is going to require us to have a new maturity, a new way of working together, a new spirit of openness. That's what I have sought to do as I've structured these agreements, as I've worked through, whether it's been with Bob Brown and Adam Bandt, whether it's been with Andrew Wilkie, whether it's been with Mr Oakeshott, Mr Windsor or Mr Katter. In each of those discussions, I've worked through for more openness, more inclusion. And then of course in the Parliamentary reform debate, we've worked through for more openness and more inclusion for every Member and every Senator. That is going to mean, it's new ways of working for us. I suspect for you. New things to think about, new things to understand, new expertise required in Parliamentary procedure and practice. So it's going to be a different world. I think the different world is an opportunity.
Yes- Phil.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said you're ready to govern and to get on with it. So, what- so the Australian people can get an idea of what you're going to do- for example, by Christmas, what would you like to have achieved?
PM: Well look, by Christmas, what I would've wanted to achieved is we will have brought the Parliament together. We will have commenced working on our legislative program. We would've commenced to honour every aspect of these agreements, and we would've commenced delivery of our election promises. I went to the election absolutely passionate about, and I am still passionate about- and a big flavour of my discussions with each and every person in the past two weeks has been my passion about a strong economy, about making sure people have got the benefits and dignity of work. You should expect to hear a lot of that. You should expect to hear a lot about the opportunity every child should have in this country for a great quality education. And I am delighted that Rob Oakeshott, as one of the most central things that he cares about, that he has pushed in these discussions has been closing the education divide between regional Australia and urban Australia, that's a fantastic thing to have a passion about every child, every school, every place, I share that passion.
I went to the election saying let's not be afraid of the challenges of the future. We can work together and defeat these challenges. Yes, these circumstances have laid out some new ways of doing that with climate change, with tax reform, and beyond. I think that is an opportunity.
JOURNALIST: Do you now believe that you were vindicated in getting rid of Kevin Rudd?
PM: Oh look, you know, this is- I'll allow all the political aficionados to do the, you know, what if scenarios- what, where we are now, and I think this is the important thing that matters for the Australian people- is looking to the future with a different Parliament, with a different way of working, with things that the Australian people care about absolutely passionately to be focused on and delivered.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: Yes Patricia.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) actively canvassed the Opposition to take the position of Speaker?
PM: Well look, I'm obviously, you know, we've got the new Parliamentary reforms. We say we want in those reforms more independence in the Speaker. You know, I am not aware of anybody from the Opposition who was interested in that position. But, you know, these are things that may become clearer in coming days. So I don't have a closed mind Patricia, but you'll have to excuse me if my focus in the last few days has not been on that question, but on the question of dealing with the Independents.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are your priorities as to conversations with world leaders that you might not have got to before you entered caretaker period, people you need to introduce yourself to?
PM: Well look, you would expect that to be all of the normal range of priorities for an Australian leader. No mystery about our foreign policy settings, about our foreign policy settings in terms of the depth of our relationship with America, our long-standing alliance. I did have the opportunity to have a conversation with President Obama before the election commenced. Obviously, I would look forward to future conversations.
I've actually, whilst we've been in caretaker, been in contact with the Prime Minister of New Zealand as they face the dreadful circumstances with the earthquake and of course the loss of life in the plane crash.
You should expect me to do the regional calls, the important calls in our region that matter for this country.
JOURNALIST:On broadband, Prime Minister, I note that you are going to prioritise regional areas. How much of a change will that be from what was already planned under the NBN, and consequently, in the next three years how much of regional Australia will be connected up to optic fibre?
PM: Well, obviously we will be working through with NBN Co to do this priority roll out in regional Australia, so we will need to take the time to do that working with NBN before I can, you know, give you a figure, and as you would be aware from some discussions we had in the election campaign, there are some commercial-in-confidence questions here, but what we are saying in this agreement with the Independents is that we want that to be a priority, the roll out in regional Australia, and of course we want there to be the same wholesale price and, you know, I really think people should just take a moment to have the force and significance of this settle in to their minds.
I mean, in this country today, if you want to ring a business in the centre of Sydney and you're doing it from Tamworth, that is going to cost you something different than if you are doing it from another business in Sydney, and it's that differential in costs that has borne on businesses in regional Australia and families in regional Australia ever since we had the telephone.
Now, what will happen with broadband is the wholesale price will be the same, so whether on the broadband in Tamworth or on the broadband in CBD Sydney seeking to communicate with another business in CBD Sydney, the wholesale price for your broadband will be the same. What a transformation, to equalise the cost of telecommunications across this country - what a transformation.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, a quick follow up on that, because that's achieved through a cross-subsidy, doesn't that mean people in the city would pay more in order to subsidise the services that the people in country get? Is that the way it's got to be?
PM: Well, look, what it means, of course, is that every Australian is going to be able to get access to the same wholesale price in competitive broadband. That is an opportunity for economic advancement and development right around the nation unparalleled since the days that people were talking about building railroads.
We just have to make, I do have an appointment with the Governor-General, so you will have to excuse me if I put some priority on that. We will take the last question from Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST:Just in the time you've been speaking, the Nationals have put out two press releases, they've coined a term for it, a pejorative term, I assume, the rainbow Coalition, for your new government, and they're saying with the Greens and so forth you're going to destroy jobs across the regions, etcetera. Is the era of, kind and gentle era over already?
PM: Look, I'll have a look at those press releases and I suppose the challenge is, for some, is whether or not they'll be in tomorrow's headlines or they'll be analysed.
Thanks very much.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the new Ministry of the Gillard Government.
The Ministry will work together to deliver a stronger, sustainable economy and better services for all Australians.
The Prime Minister said the Ministry includes experienced members of her Labor team remaining in Cabinet positions to continue their outstanding work in the most senior portfolios.
They will also work closely with the Independents and the Greens to deliver stable and effective government for all Australians for the next three years no matter where they live.
The Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan will remain as Treasurer to continue to build our economy and bring the budget back into surplus by 2013.
This will provide Australia with economic stability at a time when many other developed countries continue to feel the brunt of the global financial crisis.
The Ministry will continue to have a sharp focus on job creation and improving skills and education.
As promised, the new Ministry will provide a new focus on regional Australia with a dedicated Department within my portfolio and a dedicated Cabinet Minister, who will be supported by Ministers and parliamentary secretaries across the nation.
The Ministry also delivers on the promise to develop a sustainable population policy approach and a sustainable Australia.
The Ministry will continue to deliver welfare reforms, better health services and continue the rollout of the National Broadband Network right around the country.
The new Ministry will be dedicated to the development of a national response to climate change driven by a deep and lasting consensus of the Australian people.
The Prime Minister said the appointment of several new Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries would bring fresh ideas into the fold, creating a dynamic mix of enthusiasm, expertise and experience.
She said the addition of new faces in the ministry reflects the depth of talent in the Parliamentary Labor Party and demonstrates that the Gillard Government can deliver stable and effective government for the next three years.
The new Gillard Ministry will have a focus on openness and transparency and on finding common ground both within the Parliament and in the community to improve our nation's future.
This will further the consultative approach the Prime Minister has promised to deliver in this historic minority government in the 43rd Parliament of Australia.
						Cabinet Ministers					
									Julia Gillard					Prime Minister							Wayne Swan					Deputy Prime Minister Treasurer							Kevin Rudd					Minister for Foreign Affairs							Chris Evans					Minister for Jobs, Skills and Workplace Relations							Simon Crean					Minister for Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government			Minister for the Arts							Stephen Smith					Minister for Defence							Nicola Roxon					Minister for Health and Ageing							Jenny Macklin					Minister for Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs							Anthony Albanese					Minister for Infrastructure and Transport							Stephen Conroy					Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy			Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Digital Productivity							Kim Carr					Minister for Innovation, Industry and Science							Penny Wong					Minister for Finance and Deregulation							Peter Garrett					Minister for Schools, Early Childhood and Youth							Robert McClelland					Attorney-General							Joseph Ludwig					Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry							Tony Burke					Minister for Sustainable Population, Communities, Environment and Water							Martin Ferguson					Minister for Resources, Energy and Tourism							Chris Bowen					Minister for Immigration and Citizenship							Craig Emerson					Minister for Trade							Greg Combet					Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency	
						Ministers					
									Tanya Plibersek					Minister for Human Services			Minister for Social Inclusion							Brendan O'Connor					Minister for Home Affairs and Justice Minister for Privacy and FOI							Kate Ellis					Minister for Employment Participation and Childcare							Mark Arbib					Minister for Indigenous Employment and Economic Development			Minister for Sport Minister for Social Housing and Homelessness							Nick Sherry					Minister for Small Business			Minister Assisting the Minister for Tourism							Warren Snowdon					Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Defence Science and Personnel							Bill Shorten					Assistant Treasurer Minister for Financial Services and Superannuation							Mark Butler					Minister for Mental Health and Ageing							Gary Gray					Special Minister of State							Jason Clare					Minister for Defence Materiel	
						Parliamentary Secretaries					
									David Bradbury					Treasury							Jacinta Collins					Education, Employment and Workplace Relations							Julie Collins					Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs							Mark Dreyfus					Climate Change and Energy Efficiency			Cabinet Secretary							Justine Elliot					Foreign Affairs and Trade							Don Farrell					Sustainable Population, Communities, Environment and Water							David Feeney					Defence							Mike Kelly					Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry							Catherine King					Health and Ageing Infrastructure and Transport							Kate Lundy					Immigration and Citizenship			Prime Minister and Cabinet							Richard Marles					Foreign Affairs and Trade							Jan McLucas					Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs	



PM: OK, thank you very much, and can I start by thanking everybody for their patience. Some days the technical gremlins that live inside our computers don't like you so much.
I hope you haven't been sitting there all this time like that, have you? He'll be a very tired man.
OK, I'm here today to announce the shape of the new ministry of the Gillard Government, and first and foremost can I say the new ministry delivers on my promise to have a dedicated Department of Regional Australia that will be within my portfolio as Prime Minister, and it will be led by a dedicated Cabinet minister, Simon Crean.
Simon Crean will work with a team of ministers and parliamentary secretaries, who will seek to represent regional Australia to the Government. This is delivering on the focus that I agreed with the independents in the House of Representatives. It's delivering on a promise to regional Australia to focus on their needs.
Secondly, the ministry continues a strong emphasis on economic management and the creation of jobs. Of course, the Australian economy has emerged from the global financial crisis the envy of the world. That has happened because we have sought to provide stable economic management and we have sought to focus on jobs.
That kind of economic stability will continue, as will our approach to ensure the budget comes to surplus in 2013.
Wayne Swan will, of course, continue as Treasurer to lead the economic team.
Senator Penny Wong will become the Minister for Finance, to work with Wayne Swan ensuring the budget comes to surplus in 2013.
Senator Chris Evans, our leader in the Senate, Senator Chris Evans from Western Australia, will lead a strategic focus on jobs as the new Minister for Jobs, Skills and Workplace Relations.
Craig Emerson will be a new Cabinet member and Minister for Trade, and obviously will continue to travel the world to ensure that our country gets the best opportunities to sell the things that we make so well to the rest of the world.
Martin Ferguson will continue with his key role, working in energy; working with the resources sector; and of course working in tourism, too.
Our focus on skills continues. During the election campaign and over a number of years, Australians, I believe, have become familiar with my core belief that having an economy that offers people the benefit of work is vital, but of course making sure that we focus on education is vital - giving every child a chance of a great school education.
That's why I have asked Peter Garrett to be the Minister for Schools, Early Childhood and Youth, to continue a key focus on the education reforms that this Government has started to deliver and will continue to deliver to make good on our promise as a nation to give every child a fair go.
The economic team will also include Kim Carr, continuing to work in his important portfolio of Industry, Innovation, Science and Research; and Anthony Albanese, working in his important portfolio of Transport and Infrastructure.
The work of this team across human capital, infrastructure, innovation, industry policy, is vital to our jobs, productivity and participation agenda.
Of course, Anthony Albanese will continue to lead the Government's work in the House of Representatives as the Leader of Government Business.
The foreign affairs and defence team will be Kevin Rudd as Minister for Foreign Affairs and Stephen Smith as the Minister for Defence.
Stephen Smith will also continue in his portfolio or obligation as Deputy Leader of Government Business in the House of Representatives, working with Anthony Albanese.
Then, this new ministry also delivers on my promise that we will deliver a sustainable Australia and a sustainable population policy for this country. I've asked Tony Burke to lead this work as a new Minister for a Sustainable Australia, working in population policy, on the environment, water, and also housing policy.
I've asked Greg Combet to join the Cabinet and lead the Government's work on climate change.
I have asked Chris Bowen to lead the Government's work on immigration and citizenship. Of course, our focus is always on making sure that we keep border protection strong, and Chris Bowen will be focussed on that work.
Stephen Conroy will continue with his special responsibilities, including the responsibility for broadband, but we will build on that with Steve Conroy also serving as a minister assisting me to ensure that across the whole of government, whether it's health, whether it's education, whether it's any part of government, we are working to maximise what the broadband network can deliver in those service delivery areas.
Nicola Roxon will continue as the Minister for Health and Ageing.
Jenny Macklin will continue in her portfolio covering families and community services and Indigenous affairs.
Robert McClelland will continue as the Attorney-General.
Joseph Ludwig will move into a new area of responsibility as the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
This is the core Cabinet team.
Then, also serving in the ministry I have invited the following members to serve.
Tanya Plibersek will take a new responsibility to be the Minister for Human Services and the Minister for Social Inclusion. Tanya has done extraordinary work in her responsibility for housing. She will now move to this new challenge. Of course, as many people would know, Tanya is looking forward to taking a short period of maternity leave as she has her child, and of course when Tanya returns from maternity leave and beyond she will continue to be a strong member of the Government team, and of course she is a woman with an extraordinary future.
Brendan O'Connor will move to take additional responsibilities. He is currently the Minister for Home Affairs. He will move to also be the Minister for Justice, and he will work with me on additional responsibilities in my portfolio for privacy and information.
Senator Mark Arbib will also take on a new role and greatly increased responsibility. Senator Mark Arbib will serve in the area of Indigenous employment and economic development, something so important to ensuring that we close the gap for Indigenous Australians. He will also serve as the Minister for Social Housing, with a key focus on homelessness, and he will serve as the Minister for Sport.
Kate Ellis is also stepping up to new responsibilities, particularly the responsibility for employment participation, a strong focus on jobs, working with Chris Evans, as well as continuing her connection with child care policy.
Warren Snowdon will serve in the portfolios of Veterans Affairs and also Defence Science and Personnel. People would be aware that Alan Griffin, who served in comparable portfolios, has chosen for personal reasons not to make himself available for the ministry.
Senator Nick Sherry will continue to serve the Government, working in important areas, and most particularly important economic areas. He will be assisting on tourism and will have a sharp focus on the needs of small business.
Then, of course, the ministry is being strengthened by four new members.
Firstly, Bill Shorten, who will step up to the responsibility of being Assistant Treasurer, as well as working in superannuation and financial services; Mark Butler, who will join Nicola Roxon in a focus on health and will be particularly focussed on ageing and mental health; Gary Gray, who will become the Special Minister of State; and Jason Clare, who will have a focus on defence procurement in the Defence Materiel portfolio.
As you would see from the ministerial list, Justine Elliot has moved to being a parliamentary secretary. That has been done at her request, obviously for family and other reasons, but she will serve as Parliamentary Secretary for Trade.
The depth of the Labor team, I believe, is shown by the parliamentary secretary list. People would see there a large number of new names. Overall, we've got nine new parliamentary secretaries, showing the depth of the team.
People would also see that through the allocations here, through ministers and parliamentary secretaries, we do have a person dedicated to the voice of regional Australia right around the country.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the (inaudible) Kevin Rudd, you know, obviously you had in the past. (inaudible) put that behind you now?
PM: Of course.
JOURNALIST: Will you be moving into The Lodge soon, and have you got any plans to visit the troops overseas?
PM: Oh, look, we'll be making those arrangements over time. From my point of view there's no particular rush in terms of moving into The Lodge. Obviously, at the appropriate point, too, I would be seeking to visit our troops serving overseas.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it unusual that Stephen Smith made his announcement before your actual (inaudible)
PM: Look, just a question of logistics and his timing and commitments and mine.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's the reason for giving Peter Garrett Minister for Schools, Early Childhood and Youth, away from environment?
PM: Well, I want Peter Garrett to continue the Government's record of reforms in school education. Peter Garrett is a man who's been motivated across his life to address disadvantage in our community, and if you are serious about addressing disadvantage - whether it's closing the gap for Indigenous Australians or whether it's looking at Australians who are born into poorer and more disadvantaged circumstances generally - the best way of creating fairness, equity and opportunity is to give kids a great education.
I believe that with absolute passion, as does Peter Garrett, so this is a special new responsibility for him.
JOURNALIST: And did you talk to the independents about Simon Crean taking on the role of Minister for Regional Australia?
PM: Look, I of course made all of the selections here, but I'm well aware that Simon Crean, over a long period of time, has exhibited a passion for localism, for the embrace of localism, for the embrace of regional development, and I'm sure the independents know that.
JOURNALIST: And what was their reaction to, what was their reaction to you telling them that Simon Crean would be, in effect, their minister?
PM: Well, look, I haven't specifically confirmed it to them, but I'm confirming it to everybody now.
OK?
JOURNALIST: Mark Arbib and Bill Shorten are-
PM: -Just a tickle at the back of my throat.
JOURNALIST: It seems quite likely that people will, may interpret that as looking after them after the role that they played in bringing you the leadership - any response to that?
PM: Well, Mark Arbib was a minister, and he is stepping up to additional responsibilities, and that's because he's performed well as a minister. He's shown a particular passion for Indigenous employment, and that's why he retains a connection with that, and this is a broader, new role for him. It's based on the capacity and work he's done so far as a minister.
Bill Shorten is a very talented member of the federal parliament. He did extraordinary work as parliamentary secretary in the disabilities area, which I think has been recognised broadly, and if you talk to anybody in the advocacy community for people with disabilities they will talk glowingly of the role Bill Shorten played. Given he's shown that kind of merit and capacity, then it obviously makes sense to offer him a further opportunity at the next stage, and that's in the ministerial ranks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, who is taking over Mr Shorten's responsibility for disability?
PM: You will see the way we've done the parliamentary secretary list there that we've indicated what portfolios people will be connected to, so you would see in the area of family and community services - where disability lies - there will be two parliamentary secretaries working there. You can see that Jan McLucas is there and Julie Collins. It'll become a question for Jenny Macklin how she allocates individual duties.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) an opportunity to have more women in the ministry?
PM: Well, look, across the team there's a large number of women and, of course, I lead the Government where for the first time we have a woman as Prime Minister. I think in those circumstances people understand that Labor is committed to hearing the voice of women. It's happening right at the top.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I see Anthony Byrne's been dumped as a parl sec (inaudible) is there any reason, particularly, why (inaudible)
PM: Look, there have been a few changes in parliamentary secretaries. Obviously, the role of parliamentary secretary is to give people an opportunity. Anthony Byrne performed well and I'd be looking forward to him getting opportunities in the future, including opportunities directly in the parliament.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, hoping for a win for the Doggies tonight?
PM: I certainly am, certainly am, and I'll be there to cheer the Bulldogs on.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) would you give to Brad Johnson (inaudible)
PM: I think, well, I knew that, I was thinking about the message. I'd say, after the period that's been, a win's a win, and if you can get there by one point it's still a win.
Thank you.



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning. Welcome.
PM: Good morning, Barrie.
HOST: 'There should never be a crack of light between the prime minister and the foreign minister'. Are you and Kevin Rudd able to work as closely together as Stephen Smith suggests that you must?
PM: Yes, of course we are, Barrie, and we obviously will be working together in the interests of the nation. I appointed Kevin Rudd as Foreign Minister because he brings a lot of expertise.
Obviously, as a former leader too, he is entitled to respect.
I believe Stephen Smith was an outstanding foreign minister, but in putting the ministry together I did determine to appoint Kevin Rudd and asked Stephen Smith, in view of those circumstances, where he would choose to serve, and he chose defence and I think he will do a great job.
HOST: It was often suggested though that Stephen Smith didn't run foreign policy - the Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd did. Who will run foreign policy in your Government?
PM: Well, obviously, it will be run by the Government as a team. We will work as a team, and we will have a proper Cabinet process. There will be involvement by the Cabinet. Ultimately, of course, I'm the leader, Barrie.
HOST: Yes, because we've seen this kind of, it's probably through the Howard years particularly, but through the Rudd years as well, that increasingly leaders do manage international diplomacy.
PM: Well, it's inevitable that international diplomacy happens leader to leader at events like the G20 and that the foreign minister also has a large role to play, so Kevin and I will be working together, playing those complementary roles.
HOST: And when you look at Stephen Smith's record, and he's certainly somebody who's diligent and loyal, do you see it in the way that Anthony Albanese, I think, well, he certainly agreed with the proposition this morning that he took one for the team?
PM: Look, I think working together Stephen Smith and Kevin Rudd, and Stephen is right to say that leaders and foreign ministers have to work together, achieved some remarkable results. The most remarkable is the creation of the G20 in such a prized position in international relations. That's obviously great for Australia because we're at the table.
It didn't have to be like that. It could have been a G7 or a G8 where we would have been excluded. They worked hard to make sure the crisis response to the global financial circumstances was done by the G20 and we were there.
HOST: But all things being equal, Stephen Smith would have preferred to stay where he is, surely, or stay where he was?
PM: Look, Stephen Smith said consistently that his view of the Labor Party is a very traditional one. That is, that the leader gets to allocate the portfolios. Obviously, I made a determination about the best position for Kevin Rudd. I was well aware that Stephen had done an outstanding job in foreign affairs. I did have a discussion with him and he indicated in those circumstances he'd like to serve in defence, and he'll be great.
HOST: Well, you talked about the G20, but what other foreign policy achievements were there, because Kevin Rudd tried to create an Asia Pacific community - that didn't happen; he's been trying to win a seat on the UN Security Council - that's not looking too flash; and can you really say that he improved relations with countries like China, Japan and India?
PM: Well, I think, Barrie, when you go through it Kevin Rudd did have an influence on architecture in our region, in particular the formation or the shape of the East Asia Summit and the US becoming involved. That is significant, and in terms of relations with countries in our region I know, of course, that there's always the inevitable Opposition criticism, but as I deal with leaders in the region, as I saw that as Deputy Prime Minister and now as Prime Minister our relationships are strong.
HOST: Will it be part of his job now to persuade the region that having a processing centre on East Timor is a good idea?
PM: It will be part of Kevin Rudd's job, of course, working with the new Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen, to further the Government's policy of having a regional framework and a regional processing centre.
HOST: And you're not worried that he might see that as a lurch to the right on asylum seekers?
PM: Look, I think Kevin Rudd, like me, understands that it is not in the interests of asylum seekers to risk their lives at sea and get on a boat. It's not in the interests of this nation to have unauthorised arrivals by sea. We don't want to see people pay people smugglers. We don't want to further that evil trade.
HOST: But the night before you became leader he did warn of this lurch to the Right. What was he talking about if it wasn't something like that?
PM: Well, the Government's policy on asylum seekers will be as I've outlined it and we will be pressing for a regional framework and a regional processing centre. That is the right thing to do under the auspices of the UNHCR, the High Commissioner for Refugees; it's the right thing to do from a humanitarian perspective - we don't want people risking their lives at sea; and obviously, for this nation, we would prefer to deal with these questions so that there's orderly processing in a regional processing centre.
HOST: Now I'll just give you some names - Gray, Shorten, Farrell, Feeney, Arbib. They were all promoted and they were all quite active in the lead-up to the leadership change.
PM: Well, look, I've seen some of the commentary today about the ministerial appointments, and you know, call me very old-fashioned, Barrie, but I just think the news should be about the facts and the facts should be reported.
When you look at this reshuffle as I've done it, of course the big changes are Greg Combet and Craig Emerson going into Cabinet - both appointments well and truly on merit, and Greg will look after climate change and Craig trade; Penny Wong coming into finance; reshaping the ministry so that Simon Crean will lead for regional Australia; reshaping the ministry so Tony Burke will lead on our sustainable population policy.
Yes, I've made some new appointments - Gary Gray from Western Australia, Jason Clare from New South Wales, Bill Shorten from Victoria, Mark Butler from South Australia. These are all appointments on merit.
I know focus has gone on Bill Shorten and Mark Arbib. Both of them deserve the jobs they have. Bill did a remarkable job as Parliamentary Secretary for Disabilities. I worked closely with Mark Arbib. He was my junior minister. He did well in his former portfolio and he'll step up to this new challenge.
HOST: And you mentioned Penny Wong and finance. Does that now make her a member of the gang of four?
PM: Well, there won't be a gang of four. There will be a traditional Cabinet Government.
HOST: OK, who will take responsibility, now, for higher education?
PM: Higher education is exactly the same split as it has been for the last three years. Chris Evans will do the work that I used to do, which is he will have responsibility for undergraduate higher education. And then Kim Carr-
HOST: -But under what banner?
PM: Well, under the skills banner of course. His portfolio is Jobs, Skills and Workplace Relations, so he will have the undergraduate end of higher education as I did and Kim Carr will have the research and postgraduate end which he has looked after for the last three years.
HOST: It's just that higher education is it not mentioned at all in any of the portfolios. In fact, education is not mentioned in either the Cabinet or the ministry.
PM: Well if we step back, I mean, we created - deliberately - a human capital portfolio, the Department of Employment, Education and Workplace Relations. I have renamed slightly to talk about skills on the one hand and school education and early childhood development on the other, but of course that covers the full gamut of education from our earliest kids in preschool through schools, vocational education and training, universities and Kim Carr looks after research.
HOST: How will your style of government differ from that of Kevin Rudd? For example, will you encourage rank and file, the backbenchers, to speak out, and under what mechanism? How can they do that?
PM: Well I've always been someone who's believed that you work best if you've got a strong team with you. I believe that whether it's in the football; I believe that as a working Australian. That's why I'm a support of the trade union movement. At the end of the day being in a union is about joining a team and people are strengthened by being members of the team.
What that means for my leadership style is I will be including the team. There is merit in involving more people. For Caucus, I will be including them as well. As I said to them when Caucus met last week, new inclusion comes with new responsibilities. Have your say in the room, not outside it.
HOST: But you're seeing independents fairly regularly. You committed to that. How will be you take soundings from the back bench? Will you do it through faction leaders?
PM: Well, we have a Caucus committee structure where people get to have a say on legislation. What I've said to Caucus is we will design some new structures so people get involved at the ideas generation stage. They don't wait for a piece of legislation and then say 'I like that' or 'I don't like that'. They'll actually be able to throw ideas on the table before legislation is generated, so we will restructure internally to do that.
HOST: And what about media strategy? You say you don't like this focus on the daily news cycle, but what does that mean? What will you do?
PM: Well, what that means is it's more important where you're going to be in a year's time or two years' time than what is reported tonight.
Big reforms take patient, methodical work. Some days they won't get very good press. I, for example, did a series of education reforms. I worked over two and a half years on My School. There were many days when that was getting a bad run. The teachers' union didn't like it, people saying the tests were dud, people were saying, 'Oh, you know, this will never work, she'll never get it done.' You've got to avert your eyes from that and just say, 'Well, I'm going to keep moving, piece by piece, step by step, get the result', and of course when the result was there Australians could see the merit of it and it will drive a transformation in school education.
That's the approach I'm going to take.
HOST: Yeah, for sure, that's a sort of a policy approach in a way, but look, Kevin Rudd seemed to appoint a designated commentator from the ministry every day and they would go out and talk about everything and anything, whereas the way it used to work is that ministers would speak within their portfolio responsibility. Is that, which way will you go?
PM: Well, once again, Barrie, I'm old-fashioned. I quite like to read the accurate news in my newspapers, and you will see ministers commentating particularly in their portfolios.
Barrie, it's inevitable that people have to speak a little bit more broadly or they can't come on shows like this, but for traditional press conferences I will be asking ministers to stay within the confines of their portfolios.
HOST: And will they decide who they talk to, when they talk with them, what they say, or will that be controlled by your office?
PM: Well inevitably in modern politics we need to know what's happening each and every day. I'm not naive about that, but government has its own rhythm and ministers have things to say when things are ready, when government policy has been approved or it's been delivered or implemented, and they'll go out and say those things as necessary.
HOST: News Limited, what did you make of the News Limited coverage through the campaign and perhaps more to the point since the campaign in the 17 days that the country was in virtual limbo?
PM: Well, I think there's an obligation on news organisations in the modern age to act ethically and responsibly and report the facts. That's the standard against which I think people should be judged, and I'll allow others to have a free-flowing debate about how those standards were acquitted.
I'd also say for the campaign that's just been, Barrie, and this is perhaps a lesson for media organisations overall, when the central issue in the campaign was the economy - our stimulus and what it meant versus Tony Abbott's slogans about debt and waste, the central issue - and it took three independents to find the $11 billion black hole. That should have been a job done by journalists during the campaign. People should have known that before they voted.
So, I know that there's going to be a lost commentary by press people about the individual independents and their merits and how good they're going to be at their job. Well, at this stage if we rule a line under it, it was those three independents that got Australians the information they needed to know.
HOST: Yeah, but the media didn't have the access to Treasury that the independents got in the end.
PM: Well, there's a question about pressing in the campaign for costings. We were certainly pressing for Tony Abbott's costings and the biggest story of the campaign was effectively missed.
HOST: OK, you say standards have to be met, but you're not saying whether or not News Limited met those standards. Bob Brown has said so. He said that News Limited stepped out of its role of the fourth estate, that they think they can determine the parliamentary numbers. Is he just being paranoid or is he right?
PM: Look I don't believe in editorialising on the front page. I do believe people have got an obligation to report the facts.
I think that there are times when media personalities actually think that they are involved in the political process rather than commentating on the political process. Now, to some extent that's inevitably the nature of new media. I've been known to joke that Sky TV is endlessly journalists interviewing journalists - the politicians are no longer required.
Now, you know, I understand that when you've got 24-hour content, two stations doing that, the online media, we're going to see different ways of reporting the news, but it seems to me the ethics should be the same right throughout.
HOST: Have you decided yet when you'll move into the Lodge?
PM: Look, this is just a practical question. There are some small-scale repairs happening there and so we'll work through and go in when it's appropriate. Obviously, some of those repairs are best done when no-one is living there.
HOST: And Kirribilli House, is that going to be used any differently?
PM: Look, it will be used when I'm in Sydney. It's obviously the place for the Prime Minister to stay in Sydney. It's also a good place to host official functions when we have international visitors and the like.
HOST: And when you're in Melbourne?
PM: Well, I've still got to work all that through, Barrie. As you would be aware there are security and other issues. I'm staying in my home in Altona and I very much enjoy that but I suspect that there are some friends who deal with prime ministerial security who would wish for a different result, so we'll work through that.
HOST: And there's one portfolio missing. We no longer have a Minister Advising the Prime Minister on the Status of Women. I guess that's redundant, is it?
PM: No, that's not redundant and Kate Ellis will do that job. That was omitted from yesterday's list, but we're in a circumstance, I suppose, with the first female Prime Minister that maybe that portfolio can work a little bit differently in those circumstances.
HOST: And what about a minister advising the Prime Minister on the status of men, given that the Prime Minister is a woman?
PM: Well, I have enough men in the Labor Party, in the Cabinet, in the ministry to make sure I never lose any perspective on that, Barrie. I could always take a bit of advice from, you know, Barry Hall or someone like that, too, if I've lost any perspective.
HOST: Thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you.



The Prime Minister and the incoming Foreign Minister have agreed that Mr Rudd will visit Washington and New York from 17 September to 25 September.
Mr Rudd will visit Washington on 17 September, and meet with a range of senior figures in the US Administration.
This visit underlines the very high priority that the Government places on its relations with the United States, Australia's key strategic partner.
Mr Rudd will visit the United Nations in New York from 18 to 25 September. He will represent the Prime Minister at the UN General Assembly and deliver the General Debate statement on behalf of Australia.
Mr Rudd will also participate in the Millennium Development Goals Summit, as well as a meeting of the UN Secretary General's High-Level panel on Global Sustainability, which deals with climate change.
He will participate in a range of other meetings, including bilateral meetings with representatives of other governments present in New York. 



The Australian Government today announced that it will fund the upgrade of the national emergency warning system, 'Emergency Alert', to deliver warnings to mobile phones based on the location of the handset.
The 'Emergency Alert' system currently sends warnings by recorded voice and text message to landlines and mobile phones based on an owner's billing address rather than the actual location of a handset at the time of a disaster or emergency.
This has meant that people caught in a disaster zone, who have a billing address outside the affected area, have been unable to receive the vital and potentially lifesaving warnings.
Following the Interim Report of the Victorian Bushfire Royal Commission in August 2009, the Australian Government supported the Commission's recommendation to implement a national warning system based on the location, in addition to the billing address, of a mobile phone.
To achieve this, the Commonwealth provided $1.35 million to the Victorian Government to investigate the capability on behalf of all States and Territories.
This was part of the more than $26 million that has been provided by the Australian Government to establish a national telephone-based emergency warning capability, including $15 million for 'Emergency Alert'.
Since 'Emergency Alert' became operational in December last year it has been used 56 times and has issued in excess of 500,000 messages.
The system has been used in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Queensland for flood, tsunami, bushfire, chemical incidents and even a missing child.
The feasibility study into location based warnings conducted by Victoria earlier this year concluded that it is possible to implement these enhancements across all Australian mobile networks.
The Victorian Government will now commence and lead negotiations with each of the mobile phone carriers, the outcome of which will be considered by the Council of Australian Governments (COAG).
The implementation of these important technological enhancements will represent a significant step forward in our ability to prepare for and respond to significant national disasters and emergencies.
Funding for this announcement will be fully offset over the forward estimates, consistent with our commitment to return the Budget to surplus in 2013, three years ahead of schedule.  



HOST: Someone who's in a situation that I don't think is as precarious but it nonetheless intriguing and I think unprecedented in her political careers is the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, and she's been good enough to join me this morning. That you very much for being there.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: I want to start with a comment that Heather Ridout made on this program yesterday, who's talking about the way in which the announcement of the new ministry has happened and then the subsequent amendments to that announcement very early on. This is what she had to say:
[CLIP] RIDOUT: I think from a business perspective, you know, if I was in management and I did that I could get my knuckles rapped pretty fast and I think it's sloppy and it shouldn't happen.
HOST: Julia Gillard, she's not someone who's been overly critical, I would have thought, of the Labor Government in the past term, but that's fairly stinging criticism?
PM: Look, my perspective here is I'm a substance not slogans sort of person. I'm the sort of person who on Christmas Day wants to rip the packaging off and see what the present is. Other people like to look at the wrapping paper and comment on that, so I wanted to get right down to the substance.
Now, obviously, there were some comments about ministerial titles, some further decisions I had to make. The day on which all of that had to be clarified was yesterday, and of course it was.
The principal point of debate was about tertiary education, about universities, and of course not one thing moved a millimetre between the two big departments that work for universities, the Department of Employment, Education and Workplace Relations, and of course Kim Carr's department, which focuses on industry, innovation, science and research. Nothing moved between those two departments, so I thought that would all be fairly obvious to people. Unfortunately people were a bit-
HOST: -But it's an expression of an underlying philosophy, though, isn't it?
PM: Well, no, unfortunately people were a bit confused so I was happy to clarify that by putting tertiary education in the title.
HOST: I take the clarification, but it's not just a question of clarification, is it? I mean, there is an underlying philosophy that's implicit when you announce a ministry, and you left out tertiary education initially and have now said 'well, it really came under skills', but that's a kind of narrow, almost anaemic view of the role of education isn't it? I mean, tertiary education isn't the same thing as skills and that's part of the point.
PM: Oh, look, I actually think a lot of this is a sterile debate and a false divide. I believe as people go through their journey into education - whether it's in pre-school, school, vocational education and training, in our universities - people are developing skills and capacities which will stand them in good stead in the workplace and of course we want them to do that, and we also want them to develop a love of learning and interest in the world; an ability to absorb and process information; to use their critical thinking and capacities; to be a rounded citizen.
I think we want that at every level of education, and so I just don't think that there's some false divide here that sort of says 'well, if you're doing an apprenticeship that's just about functional skills and not learning to be a member of a team, or learning how to absorb knowledge, or getting capacities that will stand you in good stead in other occupations in your life' and somehow if you're at university you're not learning a skill.
I went to university. I studied law. I studied arts, majoring in economics. I got skills I used in a workplace, I used as a lawyer. I think I got more than that, and I've used the extra bits in my life as well, so let's not get too hung up on false divides here.
You are right that ministries do reflect philosophies, and what you should see from my ministry and the way that I have reorganised it is a key focus on regional Australia, on making sure that right across this country Government is working with citizens and local communities; a key focus on a sustainable Australia and tackling the challenges of climate change; and of course a continuing focus on a strong economy that offers people the benefits of work and leading reform in our education system at every level.
HOST: The artificial divide that you talk about, though, is one of your making isn't it? I mean if you'd, for example, had an education portfolio that was unified with an education minister that was singular, then there would be no divide. Now there is - we've got a Schools Education Minister, we've got a Tertiary Education Minister, we've got a Jobs and Skills Minister. These are a kind of, now, it's a fragmented view of the way that education works, and so can you really be seen to be complaining about a divide in the way that people think about education when really it's a function of the way you've structured the ministry?
PM: I think this gets to the misunderstanding that in part fuelled the reporting and perhaps some of the confusion that was in the education sector. In the last period of Government, when I was the Minister for Education, when I was Deputy Prime Minister, my portfolio extended to undergraduate education in universities, and Kim Carr, in his portfolio, had post-graduate education and research. That has been the divide for the last three years. Now, that divide hasn't moved one millimetre.
What I have done is I've specifically upped the focus on school education by having a dedicated minister in that area, Peter Garrett, and that is because we've got such a huge reform agenda.
HOST: What exactly is that reform agenda, I've got to say, because I'm not exactly sure what happened to the education revolution in the last campaign.
PM: Well, how long have you got? You've got be on my favourite topic and I'll talk till midday if you like-
HOST: -Well, I wouldn't mind a couple of points that are immediately substantive, if that's OK.
PM: Well, absolutely. What happened with education reform and the education revolution? Well, over the last three years we've rolled out a new philosophy of focussing on every school; of being transparent about school achievement through MySchool; using that transparency to drive new funding arrangements, particularly new funding for disadvantaged schools and schools that are struggling in literacy and numeracy.
We have focussed on the quality of teaching. That means that we've already implemented ways of bringing our best and brightest graduates into teaching; getting them to go to the classrooms that need them the most; and we've already implemented ways of paying our best teachers to go to disadvantaged schools to make the biggest difference to kids' lives who need that difference the most.
Of course, all of that has come with a revolution in school capital, with our Trades Training Centres, with computers in schools, with Building the Education Revolution.
In the campaign I've built on that. I outlined comprehensive education policies to keep building to make schools principals more autonomous. Already, in the last term of government, we as a Federal Government had taken more steps to give school principals more autonomy that had ever been taken before in the history of this nation. We intend to build on that with new resources to help principals manage their schools more autonomously.
We are going to build on what was has already been achieved with rewards for high-performing teachers to make sure that they are a standing feature of our education system. We are going to have a reward pool for most improved schools. This obviously links to the agenda already in play with MySchool and the new transparency.
So, we leave the last term of government - for the first time ever in this nation's history - able to understand what difference schools are making for kids and what standards they're achieving. We will now use that new transparency to drive rewards for teachers, to drive rewards for most improved schools, to drive further autonomy for school principals.
It's a huge transformation of how we think about education.
Before all of those reforms, what did the Federal Government do? Well, the track record of the Howard Government, of which Mr Abbott was a senior member, was to play politics between school systems and school sectors. I ended all of that as Education Minister, and Peter Garrett will continue reforms that focus on schools and work to deliver on the promise of a great quality education for every child in every school.
HOST: There's a lot that we could pick up but I do want to move on the broadband question, because that's clearly going to-
PM: -Well, I just want to say, when people 'Where is the education revolution?' - it's happening and it is the biggest transformation in school education. It is huge. It's got implications for parents with kids in schools. It's got implications for our nation's future. I'm passionate about it and this Government will be passionate about it.
HOST: Sure, and then we'll see how that's delivered and we'll scrutinise that as the time comes up. Just on the broadband question-
PM: -Well, as long as that scrutiny applauds the successes as well, and one thing to applaud in Melbourne is that we do, through Teach for Australia, have high-performing graduates, people who had remarkable academic careers, who are today teaching in disadvantaged schools that you are broadcasting to today, so let's celebrate the successes, too.
HOST: I'd like to talk about the broadband thing, because that's going to a clear focus of the next Parliament. You're currently spruiking, it seems, the rollout of broadband in Tasmania, arguing that it's come in at 10 per cent under budget. What you seem less keen to tell us, though, is only 50 per cent of homes and businesses have been connected on that costing, so that actually means that you're considerably over budget. Isn't that deceptive, firstly, and secondly isn't that exactly the kind of mismanagement that the Opposition is talking about?
PM: Well, what you've done there is pick up all of Malcolm Turnbull's spruiking from this morning. They're the assertions of the Opposition. Now, I don't think we should pick up the assertions of the Opposition and not indicate that that's the source of the question.
The National Broadband Network is rolling out exactly as we planned it, and I understand that an Opposition that showed in the election campaign it just didn't get what broadband could mean for our economy and communities is now trying to trash what's happening because their only strategy is a negative strategy. They don't have a positive policy. Well, I don't think we should allow that to occur.
I've seen the National Broadband Network in Tasmania. I've seen the people it's making a difference to: the older Australians with health complaints that can now, without leaving their home, have their heart rate monitored and other vital signs; have a face-to-face consultation with their doctor through the National Broadband Network without ever walking outside their house, something that will make a huge difference-
HOST: -But can you answer the allegation on the costings, the fact that, well, the allegation at the very least, that this is considerably over budget?
PM: Simply wrong - full stop. Simply wrong, and I refer you to, of course, all of the figures we published in the Budget; all of the figures we reproduced during the election campaign; all of the figures that have been made transparent by the National Broadband Network Company, NBN Co. I'd refer you to the fact that already today I myself on the radio have heard telecommunications experts saying that Mr Turnbull's assertions are nonsense.
Now, what I would say is I understand Mr Turnbull came into this Parliament with quite a lot of commercial expertise. I think the best use of that commercial expertise for Mr Turnbull would be working through why the Opposition had an $11 billion black hole in its costings, and until the Opposition can give a credible account of why that happened I'm not sure anybody should believe their assertions about figures.
HOST: I'll be speaking to Malcolm Turnbull in just a few moments, so these are themes I might pick up with him.
PM: Well, $11 billion black hole is something fairly big to explain.
HOST: I'm speaking to Julia Gillard, the Prime Minister of Australia. Just before I let you go, here's something that Tony Abbott said this morning, speaking to Lyndal Curtis on AM.
[CLIP] ABBOTT: I think that's ah, what we should be doing, and as I said I think with someone like Malcolm in charge of communications policy, in charge of exposing the waste and extravagance inherent in the Government's broadband plans, that becomes a very real prospect.
HOST: He's talking there about the prospect of winning over the independents to his side, which might mean a change of government mid-stream without an election. How do you respond to that prospect and how confident can we be that this fragile minority government is going to survive with that kind of manoeuvring happening in the Opposition?
PM: Well, let's get a little bit serious. Let's deal with some of the facts.
Tony Abbott does not have a broadband policy - full stop. Tony Abbott does not have a broadband policy and critical to the decision making of the independents was the power of broadband to transform regional communities.
What Tony Abbott did during the election campaign is he had some of his spokespeople, some of whom I think have now been demoted, some of his spokespeople tumble out a hastily cobbled together few sheets of paper while he was in another city - he was too embarrassed to be there for the launch - and then when he was asked he couldn't explain even the most basic fundamentals. So, as of today, Tony Abbott does not have a broadband policy.
Now, I would think that for Mr Abbott and Mr Turnbull, really, what they need to be judged on is their ability to propose positive policies. Anybody can get on the radio and spew out criticisms - easily done, and of course the Opposition will be doing that - but what really is the test here is what would you do differently? How would you do it better? And, of course, Mr Abbott and Mr Turnbull can't answer that. They didn't have a policy during the election campaign.
The broadband this country needs is fibre and we are delivering it.
HOST: I do have to move on. It's a good segue for my interview of Malcolm Turnbull in just a moment. Julia Gillard, Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining me.
PM: Thank you


PM: Today we are obviously in the Federal electorate of Fraser, and we're joined by the incoming Member Andrew Leigh, who of course is one of our new Labor Members in the House of Representatives. I'm also joined by Tony Burke, who has the responsibility of developing our strategy for a sustainable Australia, and in doing that his responsibilities include: responsibilities for environment; for water; for population policy; for communities, and also for housing policy.
In the last few minutes we've been looking around this sustainable community. It's had a focus on sustainability when it comes to the use of energy. It's got a focus on sustainability as it uses water. It's also got a focus on sustainability about the community itself - who lives here, how they mix, how they integrate and form an identity as a community.
I'm pleased that we have been able to support this development, been able to support it through our National Rental Affordability Scheme, and of course we've also provided support in the ACT for social housing and right around the country.
We've come today to look at this community because it's obviously from examples like this that we can learn as we develop a strategy for a sustainable Australia. A key focus of how I've reshaped the Ministry is to put a focus on a sustainable Australia. That's why within the portfolio that Tony Burke will lead I've brought together the big issues that concern Australians when we talk about population.
Australians obviously ask themselves when they think about a growing population, what impact will it have on our environment? Is there enough water? What will it mean for housing? Are there enough houses around the country?
Now, each of these big areas of policy - environment, water and housing policy - are within Tony Burke's portfolio because they are areas of key concern and areas we need to address and think through as we deal with our sustainable population strategy.
It will also be Tony Burke's responsibility to roll out our election commitments, most particularly our commitment to regional cities that want to grow; that we would work with them to bring affordable, new housing to those cities.
So, with those words I'll turn to Tony Burke for some comments and then we'll be happy to take questions.
MINISTER BURKE: Thanks, Prime Minister.
Today at Crace we see a local community bringing together the same principles that at a Government level we're trying to bring together in my new Department, and that is when we talk about sustainability and a sustainable population we look at making sure that you've got the water supply; that your energy is efficient; that your environmental footprint is being taken account of in every way.
The exact work that we're doing at a Government level, today we see on the ground at a community level: smart use of water; smart design in housing for energy efficiency and the Government policy factoring in to make sure that they're communities where you do have social inclusion and where the housing itself is affordable.
PM: Thank you. Thanks. Samantha?
JOURNALIST: Marius Kloppers (inaudible) today to look at a carbon tax ahead of an international agreement. Is there a risk that Labor's policy is now looking too timid for business?
PM: Look, I welcome the statements today from Mr Kloppers. Obviously, many members of the business community, Mr Kloppers included, have made statements and have called over quite a long period of time now for Government to deal with the question of pricing carbon. It's absolutely no secret, after particularly the election campaign that was, that the Government believes we need to work towards a price on carbon. The Government has consistently said that we want to work towards a price on carbon.
We obviously have indicated we think a market-based mechanism can provide that price, but we have also agreed with the Greens, and more broadly, that we will have an inclusive climate change committee to work towards a better way of addressing climate change in Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you ruling out a carbon tax? Is that something you will look at?
PM: Look, we've said we would work through options in good faith at the committee that I have formed involving, of course, the Greens, and it's my understanding that Mr Windsor will also seek to participate in that committee. We want to work through options, have the discussions at that committee in good faith.
JOURNALIST: So you're not ruling it out then?
PM: Well, look, you know, I just think the rule-in, rule-out games are a little bit silly. These are complex questions of public policy.
Obviously, I believe climate change is real. I believe we've got to take steps to address climate change.
The Government is doing that through our focus on a renewable energy target; we're doing it through our focus on energy efficiency, on each of us and all of us living in a more efficient way so we use less energy; and of course we've always said to Australians that if we are going to tackle climate change, if we are going to reduce our carbon emissions, then we need to put a price on carbon.
I've agreed that we will have this multi-party committee, and obviously involving independents as well, to work through options. So, let's take it a step at a time. I genuinely believe complex public policy questions are never assisted by simple rule-in, rule-out games.
JOURNALIST: When would you like the committee to report, because Marius Kloppers indicated that he would like this price on carbon as soon as possible?
PM: Look we'll work through and I'm under no illusion about the complexities, so we'll take the time it needs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Marius Kloppers did say, though, that he believes that we should act before the rest of the world, but until the rest of the world acts that any price on carbon, that the affected companies should receive a rebate from the Government. Is that something that should be looked at as well, or should you rule that out?
PM: Well, look we've obviously indicated as a Government that we are aiming for targets in 2020. Aiming for those targets in 2020 means we've got to work through a range of issues.
We have provided record support for renewable energy. We are working on energy efficiency for individual homes and businesses. We made some key election commitments in this area which we will deliver, like investing a billion dollars to bring, through new energy lines, the energy of the future into the national electricity grid.
So, each of these things needs to be worked through in turn.
JOURNALIST: But should a business be given a rebate-
PM: -Well, look, you know, let's just be a little bit sensible here. I've just said we will have the committee to work through options.
The Government's policy was outlined at the election. We've always said we would need to have a price on carbon. We've always said that we would take a very clear view about the impact on our economy and we would work through - we would work through to build community consensus, we would work through to make sure our economy was ready.
They're our commitments.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) someone from business, particularly someone with, you know, a big interest in coal, to push this case as far as Marius Kloppers has, rather than the Government, (inaudible) you that is saying this sort of thing?
PM: I didn't understand you were overseas and out of contact for the last three years. I must have missed that. I would have sent you a postcard.
But, obviously, over the last three years, the Government has been working through to address questions of climate change, and it's not been easy. It's not been easy in circumstances where Tony Abbott deliberately wrecked a consensus in Parliament house about the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, but, undeterred, we have made record investments in renewable energy. We are acting on energy efficiency. In the election campaign I talked frequently and at length about the strategies we needed to tackle climate change, about the need to price carbon, about the need to develop a community consensus, about the need to work through with Australian businesses.
Since the election, I've obviously agreed we would have this inclusive committee to work through options, and we will.
JOURNALIST: Mr Kloppers also suggested that you shouldn't change the pre-election mining tax deal; that, you know, you've reached an agreement with the companies. How flexible are you going to have to be, because you are going to have to make some changes, presumably, to get it through the House of Reps and the Senate? What's your parameters there?
PM: Look I've said consistently that I will deliver on the agreement that I entered into with Australia's biggest miners, including Mr Kloppers.
JOURNALIST: Have you received any advice yet on the Constitutional grounds for Rob Oakeshott to become Speaker?
PM: Look, we are still getting some legal advice. There are just some very practical matters her about the operation of the House of Representatives, so I viewed, and obviously as Leader of Government Business, Mr Albanese viewed it, as appropriate to get some advice, and we will.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you agree with the idea that Mr Oakeshott does not have enough experience to be Speaker?
PM: No. I've said, obviously, Mr Albanese has said on behalf of the Government, and I'm very happy to say, I think Mr Oakeshott obviously has the skills and attributes necessary, but there are some matters about the practical functioning of the House that we want to work through, and we're getting some legal advice on.
JOURNALIST: But are you still backing Harry Jenkins to be speaker?
PM: Look, we're taking this, again, a step at a time. Mr Oakeshott obviously has the skills and capacities. There are some practical matters.
I note that Mr Pyne was interviewed this morning, and in that Mr Pyne appeared to be saying that despite discussions leading to the agreement on changed Standing Orders it wasn't the intention of the Opposition to honour the agreement about providing the Speaker with a pair. So, there is that matter, there are matters about the practical functioning of the House and we'll get some legal advice on those questions.
JOURNALIST: What about poor old Harry Jenkins? I mean, he was a decent Speaker too, wasn't he?
PM: Well, there's an assumption in your question and what I've said is what I mean. Mr Oakeshott obviously does have the skills and capacities to be speaker. We are getting some legal advice. We'll consider that legal advice when we get it and it just goes to the practical functioning of the House.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, how would you describe your meeting with Kevin Rudd on Monday? Did you discuss with him what he would speak to the United Nations about and you know, what's your view on the situation in Pakistan? Do you think, like him, that the world needs to do more?
PM: Well, obviously, the Government's agreed to have its aid efforts there increased. Mr Rudd, as Foreign Minister, is there in Pakistan; as he announced yesterday at his press conference, going to Pakistan for precisely those purposes.
JOURNALIST: And how would you describe your meeting with him on Monday?
PM: Well, look I'm not going to have a running commentary about meetings with my Ministers.
JOURNALIST: Will you give him an open brief Prime Minister, in terms of considering his experience and considering his foreign policy experience? Will he-
PM: -The policy that we will take into the various decision-making bodies of the world will be the policy of the Government. I will play my proper role, Mr Rudd will play his proper role, and the Cabinet will play its proper role.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, just taking your mind back to your years in the law, there's a story in The Australian today where someone from the Queensland lawyers ethics board is complaining about the fact that law firms have got paralegals, secretaries, that are payed $20 an hour whose work is being charged out at $300 an hour. Do you think that's just business or do you think that that's profiteering?
PM: Look, I'm not going to engage in running commentary on legal fees. These things are dealt with by law associations and other bodies.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when - you're going to get asked this all the time till it happens - when are you moving into the Lodge?
PM: Look, there are some minor repairs happening there. Obviously, it's easier for people to do the work when it's empty and so, look, I'm in no rush. At the appropriate point I'll move in.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Mr Abbott said of radio this morning that BHP shouldn't push an idea that would ruin the mining industry (inaudible) that's helpful?
PM: Well, look I just think Australians seeking to determine expertise on mining between Mr Kloppers, the head of BHP, and Mr Abbott, pretty likely to pick Mr Kloppers.
Thanks very much.



I thank Annabel Miller for directing our ceremony here today and Marissa Starr for leading us so beautifully in our National Anthem.
And I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of this land, the Wiradjuri people, and thank Gloria Rogers for the Welcome to Country.
Friends, it is a delight to join you today in the beautiful city of Bathurst as we open a new centre to advance our understanding of a truly great Australian leader.
It is a real honour to do so in the company of members of the Chifley family.
There are many people behind the story of this house and I'll share one of them briefly today.
It is almost fifty years since in 1962, a skinny 15 year old kid walked into his first Labor Party meeting bearing a piece of paper with two motions scrawled upon it.
One motion was to create a Labor Party newspaper.
The second motion was to preserve Ben Chifley's house as an historic site.
The 15 year old kid was none other than Bob Carr.
Thankfully Bob's totalitarian tendencies were nipped in the bud and Australia was not endowed with a gumnut version of Pravda.
But the more important of those two motions did come to pass a decade later.
Thanks to the foresight of Bathurst Council, Ben Chifley's house was indeed preserved.
Number 10 Busby Street was opened to the public by Gough Whitlam on March 24, 1973 - and it has become a great gift to our nation.
The Chifley house is a window onto another time - a simpler Australia of modest comfort and sturdy frugality.
The house, too, is a window into the life of its owner, Ben Chifley.
Here we can see Chifley's humility represented in physical form.
There is no excess, no extravagance.
His outlet to the world was a wireless set and a Bakelite phone.
His biggest self-indulgence perhaps a meal of his favourite dish: corned beef and potatoes cooked in their jackets.
It is a place every Australian should visit to learn something of our better selves and the things that make us truly great.
For decades, this adjacent building - Number 12 Busby Street - was home to the Chifleys' neighbours.
You can imagine Lizzie lending her neighbour a cup of sugar to make a sponge cake or chatting over the back fence on washing day.
Now the property has been enlisted to enable Ben's story to be better told for those who make the Bathurst pilgrimage.
As with the original preservation of the Chifley Home, Bathurst Regional Council has taken the lead with this project and I thank them for their efforts.
I know everything to do with the Chifley Home is a labour of love for the council and its staff, and the nation is proud that the property has such careful custodians.
The Australian and NSW Governments have also played their part, with grants of $175,000 and $82,000 respectively, along with $282,000 from Council.
Isn't that the way we want government to work in this nation - all levels banding together for the common good.
I'd like to think that level of cooperation reflects something of the new approach we're trying to bring to the nation's affairs in Canberra.
The truth is that as Australians, we all do better when we work together.
Chifley proved that when he sat down with Bill McKell to plan the Snowy Scheme and the Commonwealth-State housing agreement.
In 2010 the times may be different, the job remains the same:
- to build a nation that is strong, decent and fair, and to so in a manner that is less partisan and more productive.
If anyone needs to rediscover the purpose and dignity of politics as our new parliamentary landscape unfolds, they need only come to this house and reflect.
One thing that almost oozes from its walls is Chifley's simple grandeur and his unwavering belief in our nation, its people and its potential.
For Chifley, those possibilities were endless, and the very same faith inspires me as I begin my own prime ministerial journey.
But there is a sadness to this house as well because Chifley didn't get to enjoy it in retirement.
He died in Canberra, aged 66, his body exhausted from eight years in government, managing with John Curtin the nation's gravest crisis, and putting in place the building blocks of post-war reconstruction that would protect the Australian people from the misery of unemployment and want.
Ben Chifley had the zeal of reform but it was tempered by the pragmatic realism of a man who had known defeat, as Labor's early hopes disintegrated in the misunderstandings and divisions of the 1930s.
With hard work and integrity, Curtin and Chifley rebuilt a new tradition of Labor in government - economically responsible, strongly protective of our national security and social reformist in a way that carried the community along.
In many ways, this is the model of a Labor government that still inspires us today.
And, of course, Chifley achieved it all in a profoundly Australian way.
As the historian Ross McMullin has said:
"there has surely never been a more down-to-earth, unpretentious Australian prime minister than Ben Chifley"
- and you can see that from the remarkable modesty of his own home.
It's just about impossible to imagine a Churchill or a Roosevelt inhabiting a place like this.
And certainly not a Menzies.
Though this place is profoundly ordinary - and perhaps because it is - this is the unique home of a unique national leader.
A life such as that must not be forgotten.
And with the preservation of the house and the addition of this fine new facility, it never will be.
In the name of the Australian people, I dedicate this Education Centre to the memory of Joseph Benedict Chifley, and take great pride in declaring it officially open. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today paid tribute to one of Australia's greatest nation-builders and former Prime Ministers, Ben Chifley, by officially opening the Chifley Home Education Centre in Bathurst.
The Prime Minister joined Chifley family members and the Mayor of Bathurst Regional Council, Paul Toole, at the Chifleys' Bathurst home, which will host the new education centre.
The new Chifley Home Education Centre documents the many reforms Ben Chifley achieved for our nation including:
 * 	Laying the foundations for Australia's post-war economic boom with reforms like uniform national taxation and policies for full employment;
 * 	establishing unemployment and sickness benefits;
 * 	expanding access to a university education;
 * 	introducing federal funding of public hospitals and the creation of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme;
 * 	welcoming refugees from war-ravaged Europe as part of the post-war immigration boom; and
 * 	giving Australia a leadership role in the establishment of the United Nations.
The new centre also recognises the construction of the Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Scheme, a project which is widely credited as one of Chifley's finest achievements and recognised internationally as one of the great engineering feats of the world.
Speaking at the site, the Prime Minister said the Chifley Home Education Centre would help enrich the cultural identity of both Bathurst and the nation as a whole.
In the darkest days of the Second World War, Labor was called on to lead the nation through a very tumultuous period of uncertainty.
Against the odds, the legendary leadership of John Curtin and Ben Chifley reconstructed the nation and prepared it for peace and a new global order.
The Busby Street site served as the only home of Ben Chifley and his wife, Elizabeth, and was opened as a memorial to the former Prime Minister in 1973.
The new extension to the centre includes exhibition areas, a museum shop, and an interactive education room with period furnishings and historical artefacts.
The $540,000 project was funded by the Australian Government, Arts NSW and the Bathurst Regional Council. 


Bathurst
We gather as members of the Labor family to honour the life and memory of one of Labor's greatest heroes, Ben Chifley.
For the men and women of the Labor Party, coming to Bathurst is more than a visit.
It is a pilgrimage.
A pilgrimage to the beloved home town of a man who embodied the Labor faith - the "light on the hill" - our enduring belief that positive government endeavour can improve the life of every Australian.
In honouring the memory of Ben Chifley, I also honour you, the members and supporters of the Australian Labor Party, who have kept the faith in good years and in bad.
Thanks to your campaigning, the Labor story in government continues.
The cliff-hanger result on August 21 underlines the importance of every Labor supporter in our return to office.
Every candidate, every booth, every supporter, frankly, every how-to-vote card.
If the result on August 21 was at first a disappointment, it has also yielded remarkable opportunity.
Let's remember what emerged from the last minority circumstance in the House of Representatives in 1941, almost seventy years ago, the Curtin-Chifley Government - which became the greatest government in the history of our Commonwealth.
Perhaps no government will ever equal theirs.
We'd surely hope no government again faces the wartime dangers that confronted that government.
But though we may not equal the achievements of Curtin and Chifley, we can aspire to equal their vision and dedication.
And we can renew their Labor traditions for a new century.
We can lay the foundation for an era of sustained growth and prosperity...
...just as Chifley laid the foundations of the long post-war boom with policies for full employment, uniform taxation, modern central banking and strengthening the place of Australia in the global economy through our role in the IMF, the World Bank and GATT.
We can build the National Broadband Network - as great a nation-building plan as the Snowy Mountains hydro scheme...
...which like the NBN, in its time was also decried and attacked by the Liberal Party.
We can make better health care accessible for all Australians - just as Chifley introduced the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme that made basic medicines accessible to all, and just as he sought the establishment of a national health service.
We can serve, as Chifley said in his General Election policy speech in 1949, "our fundamental objective, the betterment of the people".
Friends, the Curtin/Chifley Government led Australia to not only win the war but also to win the peace.
To build a post-war era based on equity and opportunity, firmly grounded in sound economic management.
In his ninth and last Budget Speech in 1949, Chifley called out to the nation as it stood at the threshold of the second half of the twentieth century, urging:
"We should not be afraid to set our goals high".
That is my appeal to our nation tonight, as we look ahead to the first sittings of our new Parliament just a few days from now.
Let's not lower our ambitions.
Let's not decide that because no party holds a majority, this cannot be a Parliament that makes progress and delivers lasting achievements.
As Prime Minister, I intend to go to the Parliament and do all we can to deliver policies and programs that Labor took to the election.
I intend to embrace the opportunities of this new Parliament - working together and getting things done.
The first Curtin and Chifley government - that relied on the support of two Independents from October 1941 to August 1943 - was immensely productive,not just in marshalling the nation's economy and resources for war, but also preparing for the peace.
From the beginning, they looked to the future.
The work on reconstruction and postwar recovery began just months after Labor took office - three years before the war ended - and it was well advanced by the time of the 1943 election, which Curtin won in a landslide.
In his recent book Graham Freudenberg remarks that "in truth, the Australian Parliament of 1940-43 was the greatest in Australian history."
Seven decades later, in vastly different circumstances, I believe this parliament can be equally purposeful and productive.
With restraint and civility, we can put aside the empty rancour of partisanship, and seek to work together.
To build consensus in the community, and majorities in the Parliament, for the "betterment of the people".
The parliamentary reforms for the new Parliament will change our political processes and the way we conduct our democracy, bringing new levels of openness and accountability into our democratic processes, with the hope that each of us in parliament can be judged on the contribution we make, not the points that we score.
But the reforms we have announced are only a framework, and within that framework Parliament must deliver results.
This is not a time for inaction, for filibustering or obstructing progress.
As the members of the 43rd Parliament arrive in Canberra on Tuesday week, I believe Australians are expecting from them a sense of responsibility, and a willingness to roll up their sleeves and get work done.
Unfortunately there are some early signs to the contrary.
The Parliament has not yet even met - but Mr Abbott has already spoken of how he wants to bring the government down.
In saying that, Mr Abbott implies that he does not intend a constructive engagement with the new Parliament - but instead, he wishes only to engineer a set of events leading to a vote of no confidence.
Friends, let me make this appeal to all members of the new parliament.
It's understandable that members on all sides may see political opportunity in that kind of approach.
And I appreciate it's a strong temptation for a Leader of the Opposition who came so closely to victory.
But I think there'll be a lot of disappointment in our community if that easy option is taken.
Because it is the easy option.
The harder path is the better path - where we set aside short term partisanship in pursuit of long-term progress.
Where each of us asks not, "is this in my party's interest?" but "is this in my nation's interest?"
A path that leads us to finding common ground, forging compromises and doing the work that Australians expect us to do.
The political landscape emerging from this year's election is challenging.
For Labor, we recognise there are important lessons if we are to better define and deliver the overarching purpose of the Labor Party in this, the second century of our nation and our party.
That purpose is to achieve progress for all Australians, to support them in improving their own lives and to deliver real opportunities through a stronger and broader economy.
Of course, Chifley articulated this purpose - the betterment of all the people - in his own concise and compelling way.
But he also knew that different moments in history demand different responses, to achieve the same enduring goal.
Labor governments have often confronted times of economic challenge.
And they have responded with reforms that have helped to secure our lasting prosperity.
Our goal means that we must work to make prosperity sustainable and ensure that it benefits all Australians, whoever and wherever they are.
When we achieve this, our communities can become stronger.
That requires strong and disciplined economic management.
And it requires us to deliver and implement changes that will underscore improvement in the lives of Australians for the years to come.
Changes like the National Broadband Network.
Changes like a new approach to regional development.
Changes like national health reform.
As well as superannuation, schools reform and making the transition to a low carbon economy.
These changes are big and daunting.
They will require determination and persistence.
To succeed we will have both to consult and collaborate - to seek consensus and build new partnerships.
And we will need to focus relentlessly on implementation - the delivery of better services and infrastructure in communities across the nation.
Combining these two approaches will deliver the progress that Australians rightly expect.
Our first priority must be continued, sustainable economic growth - so that the hard work of Australians is rewarded and their future is made secure.
Australia has come through the global financial crisis in remarkably good shape, but nobody should underestimate the challenges that lie ahead.
Our economy is being profoundly affected by the industrialisation and urbanisation of Asia.
In China alone, some 300 to 400 million people are expected to move to cities in the next 20 years.
That will require new apartments and new infrastructure.
Indeed, a typical family apartment will require six tonnes of steel - or around ten tonnes of iron ore.
Multiply those ten tonnes by the millions of apartments needing to be built every year, add to it all the steel needed for rail lines and infrastructure, and you can understand why Australia's terms of trade are now approaching the highest level in our nation's history.
For Australia, there are many benefits from high commodity prices.
But history shows us there are equally many risks.
We need careful management, and long term policy work.
Otherwise we won't capitalise on the benefits that the high terms of trade offers and our growth won't be sustainable.
We must confront the risks of higher inflation, acute skill shortages and the risk of 'Dutch disease' - where the high value of the dollar jeopardises the competitiveness of some industries and regions.
This is not a new challenge.
But this time - unlike in previous booms - we have better insights into how we can harness a surge of income to build sustainable growth right across the nation.
As competitive pressures on non-resource sectors like services and manufacturing intensify, we need to move up the supply chain and develop more innovative, higher value-adding industries.
That requires a better skilled workforce, high levels of workforce participation, innovation and advanced infrastructure.
Investing in our people, from the earliest pre-school age through to schools, universities and the existing workforce is essential for our future.
Because in the long term Australia's greatest asset is not actually the minerals in our ground.
It's in the skills of our people.
Success for our farmers, our manufacturers and our service industries depends on having high-level, up to date skills.
And investing in our people will be part of driving a culture of opportunity and responsibility in which individuals, having had their skills and capacities nurtured, show the self reliance and endeavour necessary to build their futures.
I believe in a high productivity, high participation economy because I believe in the benefits and dignity of work.
For our nation to achieve its potential, we need to enlist the talents of more and more people from every corner of Australia.
That means we'll create the sorts of opportunities that mean success is determined by how hard you work, not where you're from.
Labor will also drive the investments we need in advanced infrastructure for a more productive economy - broadband, rail, roads and ports.
And we need to make the historic transition to a low carbon economy, breaking the nexus between growth and increased carbon emissions.
That means acknowledging the reality of global warming and putting a price on carbon - priorities for the new Parliament.
The second great challenge I want to discuss tonight is at the heart of Labor's vision - ensuring that opportunity and prosperity extends to all parts of the nation.
This is a fundamental Labor priority.
We are a party born as much from the regions as from the cities - from Barcaldine, as well as Balmain.
That's why the regional development we finalised with the Independents is not for us a break from our past.
It consolidates a direction we'd already taken in our first term in office.
And it builds on a strong history of standing up for regional Australia.
Equity and opportunity for all is at the heart of the Labor faith.
In today's Australia, inequality of opportunity can be as much a product of region as it is a product of socio-economic background.
Labor's commitment to regional Australia comes from our enduring belief in the principle of universality - quality services, a better life and a fair go for all our people and every region.
For us, universality is a core social value ...an article of faith as old as party itself - dating back to our very first manifesto back in 1891.
For more than a century, Labor has represented and delivered for regional communities like Bathurst, which Ben Chifley so proudly represented.
And so today, we will deliver for regional Australia in new ways.
The NBN will deliver high speed broadband to every corner of the land.
And we will ensure that every region - city and country, coastal and inland - will pay the same uniform wholesale price.
High speed broadband is crucial for every region in Australia to participate fully in the economic opportunities of the future and the productivity transformations of the digital age.
It means our children will grow up in an Australia where more people are contributing to, and benefiting from our national prosperity, whether they grow up in Bathurst or in Brisbane, in Cessnock or Sydney, etc.
Ben Chifley always understood post-war reconstruction as being about the whole nation, not just some parts of it.
So too, broadband will be to the 21st century what the railways were to the 19th - not just an engine of growth, but a civic bond drawing our whole Commonwealth closer together.
Universality drives our educational reforms from pre-school to university.
We are not prepared to tolerate country kids falling behind city kids, indigenous kids falling behind non-indigenous kids and poorer children around the country being left behind.
Chifley went without a great education and longed for it all his days.
Our purpose is to right this kind of historic wrong, to ensure that every child in every school gets a great education and fair access to the opportunities for learning beyond school.
If we succeed in that goal, we will have truly accomplished our 'education revolution'.
Our historic health reforms and our GP Super Clinics also build fundamentally on the principle of universality of care, the same values that drove the creation of the Medicare system by the Hawke Government a quarter of a century ago.
It's our commitment to universally high health standards that has inspired the creation of regional cancer centres.
Because we simply can't accept the current situation, where Australians living in our rural and regional areas are three times more likely to die of cancer within five years of diagnosis.
Nor can we accept Australians having to wait years for essential elective surgery in some areas.
That's why we're implementing the national target for 95 per cent of Australians to receive their elective surgery in clinically recommended times.This commitment to universality runs like a golden thread through Labor's reform program.
It's why we can lay claim to be a true Labor government - governing with modern Labor values, for the challenges of today.
Friends tonight is a night for optimism.
I am confident Labor can deliver strong, stable and effective government in the unique circumstances of this new Parliament.
In this term of office we will build on Australia's strengths to deliver opportunities and benefits to all Australians.
We should not be afraid of this moment.
We have a remarkable opportunity to remake our democracy and to remake our nation.
If we handle the economic challenges of the decade ahead as well as we handled the global recession, we can build lasting prosperity.
The many historic buildings in Bathurst in 2010 still stand as a monument to the lasting prosperity built in the Gold Rush 150 years ago.
Our challenge today is to also build an enduring legacy for the future: investments in physical infrastructure and superannuation savings that will bring strength to our nation long after we have gone.
But more than that, investing in our people - what economists describe as our 'human capital' - because those investments endure for a lifetime.
Remember that kids entering school today will still be in the workforce in the 2070s,just as a baby born when Chifley became prime minister in 1945 would be reaching retirement age in this year, 2010.
That is the scale of our ambitions.
We want change that will reach across eras and span generations.
As the kids being born and entering school today grow up and grow old, we want them to inhabit a nation vastly better than the one we know today.
Richer not just materially but socially as well - a nation rich in concern for the less well off, at home and abroad.
A nation that is closer to closing the gap and reconciling with its First Peoples.
A nation richer in the good things of culture and recreation that are the just reward for those who work hard and seek renewal.
Friends, we might be a minority administration but I want our government to deliver outcomes and vision for Australia as though we had won a landslide, just like Curtin and Chifley did between 1941 and 1943.
They did not sit fretting about the numbers on the floor of the House of Representatives.
But based on a respectful partnership with their parliamentary colleagues, they made the bold decisions demanded by the times, informed by Australia's needs and inspired by Labor's values.
With goodwill and cooperation, we can do the same.
We can strengthen opportunity for all Australians, and build an enduring legacy for future generations.
That is how we will honour Ben Chifley and keep the Light on the Hill burning bright.



Between 4-5 October, the Prime Minister will lead Australia's inaugural participation in the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) in Brussels. This meeting brings together leaders from forty three countries in Asia and Europe with a focus on strengthening economic linkages and building closer cooperation on global challenges such as climate change, economic development and transnational crime.
The Prime Minister will travel to Hanoi, Vietnam, on 29-30 October to attend the East Asia Summit (EAS) and participate in the inaugural ASEAN-Australia Leaders' Summit. The recent decision by ASEAN to expand the EAS to include the United States and Russia advances Australia's interest in creating strengthened regional arrangements to better address regional economic, political and security challenges.
From 11-12 November, the Prime Minister will attend the G20 Leaders' Meeting in Seoul, South Korea. The Prime Minister will work with other G20 leaders in Seoul on further cooperation to strengthen the global economic recovery.
Following this, the Prime Minister will travel to Yokohama, Japan to attend the APEC Leaders' Meeting on 13-14 November. Australia continues to play a leading role in APEC's agenda for regional economic integration and trade liberalisation.
The Prime Minister will work closely with other world leaders at these meetings, and in associated bilateral meetings, to advance Australia's interests, strengthen regional stability and prosperity and promote the global economic recovery.  



PM: Can I start by saying I want to address some matters as we move towards the opening on the 43rd Parliament next week, and I also want to make some comments about the Commonwealth Games.
Firstly, starting with matters as we move towards the formal opening of Parliament next Tuesday, there has been a considerable degree of public interest in what is to happen with the position of Speaker. I have literally, minutes ago, put the phone down from a telephone conversation with the Leader of the Opposition, Tony Abbott. He has said to me in that telephone conversation that he and the Opposition will not abide by the parliamentary reform agreement that they signed.
Mr Abbott has indicated to me that whilst, of course, he and his political party agreed with parliamentary reform, he does not intend to honour that section of the agreement that has the Speaker paired. Mr Abbott has indicated to me that he intends to break his word - having given his word; having had his political party give its word; having entered an agreement in writing; having publically verified on a number of occasions that he intends to honour the agreement, he now intends to break his word.
The Opposition will not honour the pairing section of the agreement.
In those circumstances, where Mr Abbott is behaving in such a fashion, obviously the Government will consider its position and when I'm in a position to provide people with further advice about our attitude towards who should take the position of Speaker, then I will.
But can I confirm I view this to be an extraordinary set of events. Parliamentary reform is important. It's important to the openness of the Parliament.
The Government entered into discussions with the Opposition and with Mr Rob Oakeshott, representing the independents, in good faith. We gave our word. Our intention has always been to honour our word.
I would have thought it was a reasonable expectation that the Leader of the Opposition would also honour his word. He has now said to me, and effectively to the Australian people, that his word is worth absolutely nothing.
Then, of course, on arrangements for the 43rd Parliament, I can today confirm that when the Parliament sits the Government will be introducing legislation in both the House of Representatives and the Senate.
We will introducing over 30 bills into the Parliament in the first week of it sitting. These bills cover a wide variety of areas, and of course we will be releasing the full list of legislation to be introduced in the first week, but the bills include topics like: strengthening our nation's aviation security by increasing penalties; establishing a permanent national body to set safety and quality standards for our hospitals and health services; improving access to services and representation for university students; establishing, for the very first time, a national preventative health agency to help drive reform in the preventative health agenda - that is, keeping people healthier; and we will also be strengthening the ability of the Australian Crime Commission to fight organised crime.
These are obviously significant legislative items and they will be before the Parliament from the first week that it sits.
I now turn to making some comments about the Commonwealth Games, and let me start by saying there is obviously widespread concern about the Commonwealth Games. Now, the Government's role is to provide Australians who are intending to travel, whether they be athletes or whether they be Australians travelling generally, with the best possible advice that we can on the circumstances that will confront them when they travel.
The decision on whether to attend the Games is obviously a matter for individuals, just like any decision to travel is a matter for individuals, but as the Government we seek to provide people with the best possible travel advice, and I do remind Australians that for a considerable period of time our travel advice in relation to India has asked Australians to exercise a high degree of caution in India; our travel advice is made clear that there is a high risk of terrorism in New Delhi; and our travel advice has made clear that since 2000 there have been at least 14 major terrorist attacks in New Delhi.
Now, this travel advisory reflects our best assessment of the safety and security issues in India, and we'll of course continue to monitor the security environment in India very closely, and while security in India is ultimately a matter for the Indian Government, we have also boosted the number of officials we have in New Delhi and we have others on stand-by.
Now, questions about the Commonwealth Games are matters for the Commonwealth Games Federation. Our High Commission in New Delhi is in constant contact with the Indian Government, the Commonwealth Games Federation and of course our own Australian Commonwealth Games Association. Our High Commission is obviously also in contact with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade here in Canberra on all aspects of the Commonwealth Games preparations, including issues relating to safety and security.
The Commonwealth Games Federation and the Australian High Commission have sought repeated assurances from Indian authorities as to the safety and structural integrity of Games venues. Now, I understand that the head of the Commonwealth Games Federation, Mike Fennell, is meeting with senior Indian officials to discuss their concerns about the preparedness of the facilities. The Minister for Sport, Minister Arbib, will be seeking an update once those discussions have occurred.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
Yes, Mark?
JOURNALIST: How would you characterise the tone of your conversation with Tony Abbott and does this mean, this breakdown mean, that the new politics, the new atmosphere, is dead before it's even got to the starter's line?
PM: Well, look, the tone of my conversation was businesslike and professional, but obviously the news here, I think, is important news. That is, at the very outset of this Parliament Mr Abbott has indicated to me and to the Australian people that he can't be trusted to keep his word.
Paul?
JOURNALIST: Today you said that there's new information in terms of the Constitutional implications of the agreement?
PM: Well, there is new information. That is, the advice that was released by the Government yesterday from the Solicitor-General. It's a very extensive advice. My recollection is it's around 20 pages. I sat down and read it page by page yesterday, and what that advice provides to us is a very clear indication that the arrangement for pairing was Constitutional. The Solicitor-General, in his written advice, made that absolutely clear, so Mr Abbott is not in a position to use yesterday's Solicitor-General's advice as an excuse, and indeed in his telephone conversation with me he did not seek to do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what was the reason that he did use for not honouring the agreement?
PM: Well, Mr Abbott used with me the terminology that this comes down to a 'gentlemen's agreement'. The Solicitor-General uses the terminology that is a question of honour. Mr Abbott says he doesn't believe that these questions can be dealt with as a matter of honour or a 'gentlemen's agreement'. I, of course, disagree with that. I believe if you're prepared to keep your word then you can keep your word.
JOURNALIST: Why are you not able to now tell us what you'll do about the Speaker, and are you still casting around beyond Harry Jenkins?
PM: Well, Michelle, I literally put the phone down from Tony Abbott minutes before coming out here to advise you of this. Obviously, I was intending to make the announce about the legislation and also provide some commentary about the Commonwealth Games, so I've literally put the phone down minutes ago. In those circumstances I'll consider what the Government should do now following Mr Abbott's advice to me, and I'll have some consultation with my colleagues.
JOURNALIST: Further to Michelle's question, can you rule out the Government actually approaching a Liberal MP to be Speaker, and secondly, just on the Commonwealth Games matter, you mentioned that you've got security, you've boosted officials and so on to go to India, with other people on stand-by. Are you talking about military types, spy agencies, that sort of stuff? Is that the sort of personnel you're talking about sending to India?
PM: Well, firstly we don't comment on the detail of security arrangements, but we've boosted the number of people working in New Delhi.
On the second, I'm obviously not going to speculate about what decisions I and my colleagues may take following this advice from Mr Abbott. I had not expected that Mr Abbott would just wholly break his word - wholly break his word. That wasn't my expectation. In those circumstances I'll take the time to consider the matter and to consult with my colleagues.
JOURNALIST: So it is still possible? It is still possible-
PM: -I'm not going to, having literally just put the phone down from Tony Abbott, speculate about what course the Government might take now. I will consider the matter and I'll consult with my colleagues as I believe is proper and appropriate.
Katherine?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given that it is, it is pretty unlikely that a Liberal will deprive one of its own side of a number at this point, wouldn't it be better - with Parliament resuming next week - just to accept that Mr Abbott has taken this position, draw a line over it, and put up Mr Jenkins and move on? Wouldn't that be better?
PM: We'll, we'll take the time to consider it and I'll consult with my colleagues. Yes, Ross?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you planning to move into The Lodge before Parliament sits?
PM: Look, yes, I am making some arrangements. Obviously, The Lodge has had repairs done which were best done whilst no-one was there in residence. They go to securing some asbestos, for example, so I will be seeking to move into The Lodge before Parliament formally opens next week.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, some of the parents of the athletes have expressed concern about going to Delhi. What's your message to them today?
PM: Well, Australians need to make their decisions. Obviously, as a Government we don't - and this is true of the Government today, it's been true of the Government over years and years and years - this is a free country where Australians make their own decisions about where they travel to.
What we seek to do is to provide the best possible information, so I would direct their attention to the travel advisory. Obviously, they can also speak to our officials at the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. They should absorb the travel advisory, obviously work with their sporting association, work with the Commonwealth Games Association and make what they believe is the appropriate decision.
JOURNALIST: Are you intending to have your Sports Minister attend the Games?
PM: Yes, it's our intention that Minister Arbib will attend the Games. Obviously, Minister Arbib is there in an official capacity as the Minister for Sport.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition accuses you of breaking your word to the Australian people over a carbon tax.
PM: Well, that's as it may be, Paul - a matter of politicking by the Opposition. Obviously, what I have done as Prime Minister is recognise that in this Parliament there are players who are not members of the Government who will also be there in the Parliament, able to put propositions for consideration and debate. I've agreed with the Australian Greens and also with the other independents that we will have an inclusive climate change committee to discuss questions of best tackling climate change.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you able to give an assurance to the parents of the athletes and the athletes that the Government is telling them and the public everything you know about the security situation? And would you, having weighed up the travel advice yourself, would you actually prefer that people didn't go?
PM: Look, the Government provides publicly the best advice we can. We don't seek to hide anything. We want Australians to have the information and that - the travel advice there - is the best travel advice we can give people on the information that we know.
Now, you know, this comes down to a decision for individuals. I travelled to India in 2009 as Minister for Education and Deputy Prime Minister. I travelled there when the travel advice was in this form, so I made a decision.
Now, people need to make decisions, to think it through for themselves. We, as a Government - it's true of this Government, it's been true of Governments of the past - in a democracy where people are free to make their own decisions we don't tell people what to do. We give them the best possible information to inform adults and, obviously, adults that have the care of people who are under age, to inform them so that they can make their decisions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on your legislative agenda, have you discussed this with Senator Brown? Do you expect a euthanasia vote soon? Has he asked for that? What's your position on euthanasia?
PM: Well, firstly the legislation list - we have consulted as we're obligated to do under our agreements with Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor and Mr Wilkie, as well as the Australian Greens. As a matter of courtesy I've also asked my office to advise Mr Crook and Mr Katter that this is the Government's legislative agenda that will be introduced in the first week. So, advice has been given that this is the legislative agenda.
On the matter that Senator Brown talked about on Meet the Press, I think it was, on Sunday - which of course I watched - but on that matter, Senator Brown's indicated that he's going to move a Private Member's Bill. He is able to do that under the standing orders as they are now and, indeed, as they will be as a result of the new Parliamentary arrangements. So, I'm not going to give an indication about my own personal decision in relation to that bill until I see it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible) a conscience vote if it does come up?
PM: Last time - this obviously has a legislative history - where as I understand it, I wasn't in the Parliament at the time, but as I understand it the Northern Territory took a decision about euthanasia. Mr Andrews, who is still in the Parliament, Kevin Andrews sponsored a bill to change the competence of territories to legislate on such questions. It was dealt with then as a conscience vote by the ALP, so it would be dealt with now as a conscience vote by the ALP.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, the operation of Parliament, both Houses, requires a certain amount of convention and unwritten agreement. Does Mr Abbott's starts on the Speaker, in your view does that rewrite the way you're going to conduct business informally with the Opposition over the next three years?
PM: Look, my intention is to bring to this Parliament a spirit of goodwill and a determination to get things done. I would hope that others in the Parliament would show that same spirit of goodwill and determination to get things done. Obviously, I am concerned that the spirit that Mr Abbott is bringing to this Parliament is one of what can he wreck rather than what can he achieve.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there are issues, other Parliamentary reform - Question Time and so on. Have you had discussions with Mr Abbott about a committee to look at this? And is there any progress, once this issue, which is obviously being fought out, once that's settled, further reform, bipartisan Parliamentary committee?
PM: Well, extensive Parliamentary reform was the subject of this agreement, and the Leader of Government Business, Minister Albanese, has been working to have that changed from an agreement into standing orders. He's done that in a consultative way with his counterpart, Christopher Pyne. I would obviously hope that those new standing orders will get bipartisan support and be dealt with very early on in the life of the new Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you had any indication - have you had any indication-
PM: -You right there, Sid? You're confused today. You're alright?
JOURNALIST: No, no, I'm fine.
PM: Good.
JOURNALIST: Have you had any indication from the independents about whether they will support these bills, about whether these bills will pass? And secondly, why did you mention aviation security as the first bill that you talked about when you were outlining the legislative agenda, because I notice on the television this morning there's lots of reports out of the United States about increased threat levels.
PM: Look, I went to just a number of matters I thought were particularly noteworthy, so that was the reason for mentioning aviation security.
On the legislation, what we've done is we've advised the independents and the Greens that the Government will be seeking passage of this legislative program. That is, these bills will be introduced in the first week. Obviously, other legislation will be introduced in the other weeks of the Parliamentary session, including legislation that the Government will bring to the Parliament to action our election commitments. So, further consultation will happen following the introduction of the bills.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when will you send Chris Bowen to East Timor-
PM: -Last one. Last, last one.
JOURNALIST: When will you send Chris Bowen to East Timor, and when do you intend going yourself?
PM: Look, I did have a conversation, obviously, with Mr Gusmao. We had a conversation - he rang, we made arrangements to speak. Partly, as Prime Minister, he was offering me congratulations after the election. We did have a discussion about Minister Bowen going to East Timor as soon as that can be reasonably done for a discussion with his counterpart.
Okay, thank you very much.



Next week, the Government will introduce over 40 Bills into Parliament, when the 43rd Parliament of Australia sits for the first time since the election on 21 August.
With the formal opening of the new Parliament by the Governor-General on Tuesday, the Gillard Government will begin actively working with other members of the new Parliament to pass legislation through the House and the Senate.
On Wednesday, the first day of normal business in the Parliament, the Government will be introducing a series of Bills to renew our legislative agenda.
Little of this legislation will make headlines or nightly TV bulletins - but step by step it will make a difference to the lives of families across Australia.
In the next week alone, the Government will bring forward legislation continuing our reform program across a wide range of areas, including:
 * 	Strengthening Australia's aviation security regime, including by establishing appropriately severe penalties for threatening air security.
 * 	Establishing a permanent national body to set national safety and quality standards for Australia's hospitals and health services.
 * 	Improving access to services and representation for university students.
 * 	Establishing for the first time a National Preventative Health Agency to drive reform in preventative health.
 * 	Strengthening ozone protection mechanisms.
 * 	Strengthening water efficiency labelling for products.
 * 	Setting up the Australian Civilian Corps Bill, providing professional civilian specialists who can assist in disaster zones.
 * 	Introducing merit selection processes for the ABC and the SBS Boards and a staff-elected Director for the ABC Board.
 * 	Enhancing the parliamentary scrutiny of laws for consistency with our international human rights obligations, with the introduction of a new Parliamentary Committee.
 * 	Strengthening the ability of the Australian Crime Commission to fight organised crime.
 * 	Giving real recognition to carers, acknowledging their enormous contribution.
 * 	Improving the regulation of therapeutic goods in Australia.
 * 	Strengthening ASIC's investigative powers.
In this Parliamentary session Labor will also be pressing ahead to have legislation prepared to deliver the reform agenda we set out in the election campaign.
With this new Parliament, I know there will be many discussions ahead about aspects of our legislative program.
Delivering on the Government's legislation will require methodical work, a willingness to compromise where necessary, and a determination to deliver.
We call on the Opposition to work with us in the national interest to provide real benefits to Australian families as we begin working through a significant legislative agenda.
Attached is a list of legislation the Gillard Government plans to introduce into the Parliament next week.
BILLS FOR INTRODUCTION IN FIRST WEEK OF 2010 SPRING SITTINGS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRYFisheries Legislation Amendment Bill (No. 2)Facilitate the Australian Fisheries Management Authority making co-management arrangements with stakeholders in Commonwealth fisheries.Primary Industries (Excise) Levies Amendment BillIncrease the cap on the research and development component of the laying chickens levy from 10 to 30 cents per laying chicken.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ATTORNEY-GENERAL'SAviation Crimes and Policing Legislation Amendment BillStrengthen the existing legislative framework surrounding Australia's international and domestic aviation security regime.Civil Dispute Resolution BillEncourage the resolution of civil disputes outside of the courts and seek to improve access to justice by focusing parties and their lawyers on the early resolution of disputes.
Crimes Legislation Amendment BillImprove the ability of the Australian Crime Commission to deal with serious misconduct by staff and make a range of amendments to strengthen law enforcement agencies' powers to gather, examine and use evidence to investigate and prevent the commission of criminal offences.
Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) BillHuman Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) (Consequential Provisions) BillEnhance the focus on human rights in the Parliament scrutiny and inquiry processes, including through the establishment of a new Joint Parliamentary Committee on Human Rights.
Law and Justice Legislation Amendment (Identity Crimes and Other Measures) BillIntroduce new identity crime offences, enhance the administration of justice offences and address administrative issues for the Australian Federal Police and the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions.
National Security Legislation Amendment BillParliamentary Joint Committee on Law Enforcement BillImplement the Government's response to reviews of Australian national security and counter-terrorism legislation.Native Title Amendment Bill (No. 1)Provide for a new 'future acts' process to allow for the construction of housing and associated infrastructure on Indigenous held land which is, or may be, subject to native title.
Service and Execution of Process (Interstate Fine Enforcement) Amendment BillIntroduce a new scheme, allowing the States and Territories to register certain court imposed fines in the State or Territory where the defendant is present. These fines can then be enforced by that State or Territory according to its laws.
Sex and Age Discrimination Amendment BillEstablish a stand-alone Age Discrimination Commissioner in the Australian Human Rights Commission and amend the Sex Discrimination Act 1984 to include additional protections.
Telecommunications Interception and Intelligence Services Legislation Amendment BillEnable greater cooperation and assistance within the law enforcement and intelligence communities and enhance information and intelligence sharing among Australia's national security community.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BROADBAND, COMMUNICATIONS AND THE DIGITAL ECONOMYNational Broadcasting Legislation Amendment BillIntroduce a merit-based selection process for the appointment of non-executive directors to the ABC and SBS Boards and reinstate the position of staff-elected Director on the ABC Board.
Radiocommunications Amendment BillImprove the efficiency of the radiofrequency spectrum management regulatory framework by providing the Australian Communications and Media Authority with greater flexibility in when it can commence processes for re-issuing spectrum licences.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
DEFENCEDefence Legislation Amendment (Security of Defence Premises) BillEnhance the security of Defence bases, facilities, assets and personnel within Australia in a response to the changing nature of security threats.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EDUCATION, EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE RELATIONSFamily Assistance Legislation Amendment (Child Care Budget Measures) BillReduce the annual Child Care Rebate cap to $7500 and pause indexation for four years from 1 July 2010.Higher Education Legislation Amendment (Student Services and Amenities) BillAmend the Higher Education Support Act 2003 to improve access to amenities, services, representation and advocacy for Australian university students.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FAMILIES, HOUSING, COMMUNITY SERVICES AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRSCarer Recognition BillEstablish a legislative framework to increase recognition and awareness of informal carers and acknowledge the valuable contribution they make to society.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FINANCE AND DEREGULATIONFinancial Framework Legislation Amendment BillSimplify the financial management framework and streamline internal Australian Government administration; repeal unused special appropriations and Special Accounts; and update, clarify and align other financial management, governance and reporting provisions.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADEAustralian Civilian Corps BillEstablish the Australian Civilian Corps, and create a legal framework for the employment and management of Australian Civilian Corps employees.
Autonomous Sanctions BillStrengthen Australia's autonomous sanctions regime by allowing greater flexibility in the range of measures Australia can implement, thus ensuring Australia's autonomous sanctions match the scope and extent of measures implemented by like-minded countries.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEALTH AND AGEINGAustralian National Preventive Health Agency BillEstablish the Australian National Preventive Health Agency to provide evidence-based policy advice to governments on preventive health, and to implement associated programs as tasked by Health Ministers.
Food Standards Australia New Zealand Amendment BillRemove duplication of work undertaken by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority and Food Standards Australia New Zealand in developing maximum residue limits of agricultural and veterinary chemicals allowed to be present in food.
National Health Amendment (Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme) BillGive effect to a package of reforms designed to consolidate and build on earlier PBS reforms, which commenced in August 2007, including by reforming the PBS pricing arrangements for multiple brand medicines that are subject to competition in the market place.
National Health and Hospitals Network BillEstablish the Australian Commission for Safety and Quality in Health Care and provide a framework for its establishment, including an expanded role in setting national clinical standards and strengthened clinical governance.
Therapeutic Goods Amendment (2010 Measures No. 1) BillMake a range of amendments to the Therapeutic Goods Act 1989 to improve the regulation of therapeutic goods in Australia.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INFRASTRUCTURE AND TRANSPORTAirports Amendment BillAmend the Airports Act 1996 to require additional criteria to be included in airport master plans; require any proposed significant development to undertake certain processes; and prohibit certain developments which are incompatible with the operation of an airport site.
Protection of the Sea Legislation Amendment BillProvide for progressive reductions of sulphur content of fuel oil used in ships and provide legal protection for persons taking reasonable measures to prevent or minimise the effects of bunker oil pollution.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INNOVATION, INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND RESEARCHNational Measurement Amendment BillNarrow the circumstances in which some offence provisions may apply; provide for a new offence about letting for hire or loan unverified measuring instruments; replace monetary penalties with penalty units; provide for the Chief Metrologist to determine various technical standards and procedures.
Tradex Scheme Amendment BillProvide that partnerships are eligible to apply for a tradex order; and remove transitional arrangements relating to the Texco Scheme.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGIONAL AUSTRALIA, REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTTerritories Law Reform BillImplement reforms to Norfolk Island's administration and governance to improve accountability and transparency in administrative action and financial matters; and implement reforms to Christmas Island's and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands' administration and governance to improve efficiency and clarity.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RESOURCES, ENERGY AND TOURISMOffshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Legislation Amendment (Miscellaneous Measures) BillOffshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage (Safety Levies) Amendment BillAmend the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 in relation to: including in the functions of the National Offshore Petroleum Safety Authority regulation of non-occupational health and safety structural integrity for facilities, wells and well-related equipment; multiple titleholders of petroleum titles; strict liability offences; and occupational health and safety duties of titleholders. 
Enable safety levies relating to pipelines in designated coastal waters to be collected in certain states and the Northern Territory.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUSTAINABILITY, ENVIRONMENT, WATER, POPULATION AND COMMUNITIESOzone Protection and Synthetic Greenhouse Gas Management Amendment BillAmend the Ozone Protection and Synthetic Greenhouse Gas Management Act 1989 in relation to: establishing a civil penalties regime; powers of inspectors; evidential material procedures; and funding from the Ozone Account.
Water Efficiency Labelling and Standards Amendment BillProvide that a Water Efficiency Labelling Scheme (WELS) standard may require a product to comply with certain requirements relating to plumbing before the product can be registered as a WELS product.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TREASURYCorporations Amendment (No. 1) BillImprove the access to share registers regime and the Australian Securities and Investments Commission's investigative powers.Corporations Amendment (Sons of Gwalia) BillReverse the effect of the High Court decision in Sons of Gwalia Ltd v Margaretic relating to the rights of persons bringing claims for damages in relation to shareholdings.
International Tax Agreements Amendment Bill (No. 2)Give the force of law to the Second Protocol amending the Agreement between the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia and the Government of the Republic of Singapore for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income as amended by the Protocol of 15 October 1989.
Tax Laws Amendment (Research and Development) BillIncome Tax Rates Amendment (Research and Development) BillReplace the existing research and development (R&amp;D) tax concession with a 45 per cent refundable R&amp;D tax offset for eligible entities with a turnover of less than $20 million, and a non-refundable 40 per cent R&amp;D tax offset for all other entities.
Superannuation Legislation Amendment BillAmend superannuation legislation, including to: facilitate state and territory authorities and public sector superannuation schemes paying unclaimed superannuation moneys to the Commissioner of Taxation and enable the Commissioner to accept and subsequently pay out such amounts; provide transitional relief for income tax deductibility of total and permanent disability insurance premiums paid by superannuation funds; allow the trustee of a regulated superannuation fund to acquire an asset in specie from a related party of the fund following a relationship breakdown, and also ensure equitable application of the transitional arrangements in relation to in-house assets where an asset transfer occurs as a result of a relationship breakdown.
Tax Laws Amendment (2010 Measures No. 4)Amend taxation legislation, including to: amend the GST third party payment adjustment provisions to remove an opportunity to use third party payments to artificially reduce GST liabilities in certain situations; align the requirements of the scrip for scrip roll-over with the requirements of the Corporations Act regulating takeovers and schemes of arrangement; amend the gift provisions to extend deductible gift recipient support to volunteer fire brigades; add certain organisations as specifically listed deductible gift recipients (including the Mary MacKillop Canonisation Gift Fund); and increase the threshold above which a taxpayer may claim the net medical expenses tax offset (the claim threshold) to $2000 and commence annually indexing the claim threshold to the consumer price index, with effect from 1 July 2010.
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) BillEstablish a framework to protect the confidentiality of taxpayer information by placing a general prohibition on the disclosure of taxpayer information except in certain specified circumstances.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
VETERANS' AFFAIRSVeterans' Affairs and Other Legislation Amendment (Miscellaneous Measures) BillGive effect to a number of minor measures and technical amendments. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that additional safety measures would be implemented at "The Gap" at Watsons Bay in Sydney to help prevent suicides at the notorious hotspot.
The Gap at Watsons Bay is a unique geographical site which has tragically become known as a high-profile suicide hotspot.
The Prime Minister said the work would be progressed as a priority following recommendations by the Australian Suicide Prevention Advisory Council and consultation with the Woollahra Municipal Council.
The Gillard Labor Government will provide up to $1.1 million in funding to the Woollahra Municipal Council for infrastructure to reduce suicide and self-harm at the site.
Woollahra Municipal Council has consulted widely with residents, mental health providers, police and other interested parties to develop a comprehensive Gap Park Master plan that will, among other improvements, reduce the incidence of suicide and self-harm at the site.
The government is already providing funding to Lifeline for the provision of a 24-hour crisis support line at The Gap to provide ready access to individuals who may be considering suicide at the site.
Minister for Mental Health and Ageing Mark Butler said the funds were in addition to the Government's election commitment to provide $9 million to local governments to improve safety and infrastructure at well-known suicide hotspots.
"The government has committed to redoubling our national efforts to prevent suicides around the country. This funding is an extra step towards this goal.
"The funding for hotspots is just one component of the Government's $276.9 million Tacking Action to Tackle Suicide package to be delivered from over the next four years from 2011 - 2012," Minister Butler said.
Other important measures include:
 * 	Greater access to mental health services for those at the greatest risk of suicide, including psychology and psychiatry services, as well as non-clinical support to assist people with severe mental illness and their carers with their day-to-day needs ($113.9 million);
 * 	Increased funding for direct suicide prevention and crisis intervention services as Lifeline and providing funding to improve safety at suicide 'hotspots' ($74.3 million);
 * 	Provision of more services and support to men, who are at greatest risk of suicide but least likely to seek help ($22.8 million); and
 * 	Promotion of good mental health and resilience in young people, to prevent suicide later in life ($65.9 million).  


Sydney 
A big thank you to John Brogden, the team at Lifeline and Macquarie Bank for organising and supporting this special event today.
And before I begin, I want to pay tribute to Lifeline's CEO, Dawn O'Neill, whose decade of service to this great organisation comes to an end next month.
Dawn has made an extraordinary contribution, fostering a period of major governance and service reform for Lifeline, and her work was fittingly honoured by an award in the Order of Australia last year.
Thank you Dawn and good luck in all that lies ahead.
Friends, just about all of us have been touched in a personal way by the tragedy of suicide.
A friend, a family member, a colleague, a neighbour.
And always we ask ourselves the question: Could I have done more? Could we have done more?
Almost fifty years ago, it was those same thoughts that inspired the formation of Lifeline.
One of Australia's leading churchmen, Sir Alan Walker, had taken a call from a person in distress, who later ended his own life.
Sir Alan wanted to do something that could help others in distress - to save a moment of acute despair from becoming a point of no return.
That's how the 24-hour crisis support service began.
That initiative has done immeasurable good for almost half a century.
Lifeline now answers something like half a million calls a year, including 50 calls a day from people at high risk of suicide.
So today I honour the 1,000 staff and 11,000 volunteers of Lifeline, and all those who have served with Lifeline in years past.
All of you who are part of the Lifeline story are entitled to feel very, very proud.
Lifeline has helped take the issue of mental illness from out of the shadows and into the light.
The community's understanding of mental illness is probably greater now than it has ever been.
Much of the stigma of discussing mental illness that once existed has now gone.
And what remains is being stripped away by advocates like John Brodgen, Jeff Kennett, Geoff Gallop and Morris Iemma, and outstanding leaders in the field like Ian Hickie and Pat McGorry.
I want to pay a special tribute to John Brodgen today - a man whose own challenges were faced in the harsh glare of public scrutiny, and whose courage and dignity are truly an inspiration.
Friends, I too am no stranger to this debate.
My father was a psychiatric nurse and I learnt from him that mental illness is no less debilitating than sickness of the body, nor less worthy of our care and concern.
I was inspired from my first visit to Orygen and Headspace some years ago.
And I'm determined that as a government and as a community we step up our efforts to address the scourge of mental illness - which too often ends in the devastating consequence of suicide.
Our wider health reforms are the critical foundation for taking mental health forward.
Through investments in enhancing frontline services such as after hours support, e-health and GP Super Clinics, we will assist people living with mental illness receive better care in the community.
Through investing in mental health sub-acute beds, such as the 80 beds recently announced in South Australia, we will provide more places for people who require care.
Through a national network of Medicare Locals we will be able to identify and fill gaps in access to mental health services in many parts of Australia.
By taking full funding responsibility for primary care type outpatient services, we will be able to support more mental health services in community settings.
And by becoming the majority funder, we will reduce incentives for cost-shifting out of our hospitals.
I'm also proud to say we are doubling the number of Headspace sites across the country to ensure every capital city has at least one service.
And we are supporting the Early Psychosis Prevention and Intervention Centre or EPPIC model to providing treatment and support for up to 3,500 young people.
But more can be done and more should be done.
This is why during the election I announced major new plans to redouble our efforts for tackling suicide.I think of those 50 people ringing Lifeline every day and imagine the anguish that leads them to see taking their own lives as the only way out.
And I know that in a community as caring as ours, they should not be left to face the darkness alone.
Under our package, the Government will provide $277 million to boost frontline services, prevention and early intervention.
Our new measures will include psychological counselling services for around 12,500 people each year who have attempted or are at risk of suicide and up to 20,000 specialist psychiatry sessions.
We will establish outreach teams for schools affected by suicide to help reduce the chances of 'copycat' suicides.
And we will fund greater online resources for young people because we know they often value services on the Net more readily than in face-to-face settings.
Importantly from today's perspective, we will help Lifeline expand its hotline capacity by making calls from mobiles toll-free and enabling Lifeline to establish dedicated helplines at suicide hotspots.
We will also help improve safety more broadly at suicide hotspots, such as the Gap in Sydney, and I warmly acknowledge Malcolm Turnbull's advocacy on this issue.
In fact, I can announce today that the Minister will be speaking to Woollahra Council next week to look at what remaining work needs to be undertaken at the Gap, and get funding and work under way.
Friends, our package also targets one of the nation's most at risk groups, men, who account for three-quarters of deaths from suicide yet only 28 per cent of men seek help for mental health issues.
A large part of our package is therefore aimed at helping overcome those woeful statistics by:
o expanding beyondblue's National Workplace Program to help use the workplace to identify and support those with depression who are not receiving assistance;
o Increasing the capacity of beyondblue's helpline to provide information and assistance to up to 30,000 more men per year; and
o Providing targeted campaigns to help reduce the stigma associated with mental illness and encourage more men to seek help.
These are the things we promised in the election campaign and these are what we will deliver.
And I can assure you that issues associated with men's health will be very regularly drawn to my attention because my partner, Tim intends to continue his advocacy work on men's health issues.
But if John Brogden and those other mental health leaders have taught us anything, it is that our journey still has a long way to go.
We've come far, especially in the past five years, but there is much, much more still to do.
That is why I said in July that mental health would be a second-term priority for a reelected Gillard government - and I meant it.
We've made an important start by appointing the first ever Minister for Mental Health in an Australian government, Mark Butler, a new minister with a great capacity to make a difference in this field, and who has already made an outstanding contribution to health reform as Parliamentary Secretary.
Mark, Minister Roxon and I are keen to work with frontline service providers and experts to close the gaps in mental health service provision.
We know the sector is also calling for a five and ten year plan, something that fits with the Government's commitment to orderly and constructive policy development.
We also need to ensure that services meet consumer needs because long gone are the days when experts simply imposed solutions from above.
That is why I have specifically tasked Minister Butler with the job of speaking with consumer and carer representatives around the country to hear their stories and experiences first hand, and I know he is already out there doing exactly that.
Most challenging, perhaps, we need to better connect the web of services that those living with mental illness rely on, not just in health but across housing, education and employment as well.
Getting the quality and design of services right will take a great deal of thought and consideration.
We can't just treat people's medical needs, only for them to end up homeless or without skills and employment, because being without a job - being robbed of the dignity of work - so often sets people on a path towards hopelessness and despair.
Designing a better network of services to address the whole picture won't be easy or quick.
Nor do we simply want to graft ad hoc reforms onto an inadequate system so that another government will have to change it all again in a few years' time.
We want to get this right and we will.
As we work towards reform, I take great comfort from the fact that Lifeline and other leading organisations like beyondblue will continue to offer a hand of hope to those who need it most.
The Government respects and supports your great work.
You are indispensable allies not only in the struggle to deliver better services but to combat the stigma that makes mental illness a greater source of suffering than it needs to be.
Today our message to Australians living with mental illness is one of encouragement and inclusion.
We say that much more must be done, and will be done, to ensure you do not walk this path alone.
And we will fight the remaining barriers of stigma and prejudice to ensure that your illness is never the sum of who you are.
In Australia, no-one should be typecast as mentally ill, because the days of defining people by their condition are over.
There are simply people who live with mental illness, loved ones, colleagues and friends who have conditions that are eminently capable of being treated, managed, cured in some cases,but always, always understood.
Nobody knows more about the gift of understanding than Lifeline because that what is you have been doing for 47 selfless years.
I know everyone here today will respond generously to the needs of Lifeline as it so clearly warrants and deserves, sustaining this great organisation to its 50th birthday and well beyond.
It is an honour to share this event and to lend the support of my prime ministership to the cause of mental health.
Confident in the future, let us move forward and achieve great things together.



BONGIORNO: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Paul.
BONGIORNO: I notice you are wearing a black and white jacket there, Prime Minister. Despite your pleas yesterday, we have a draw. Do you agree with the captain of Collingwood- after the match, very disappointed? It's really a farce, isn't it? The AFL surely needs extra time for a Grand Final if there's a draw.
PM: Well, first Paul, no one should take any implication from the wearing of a black and white jacket. And I do have a purple top on, so there we have it. It was obviously a very, very tense day yesterday. The AFL, its history, its tradition is to play the Grand Final again, so everybody is heading towards next Saturday now.
BONGIORNO: You don't think that they're a bit Neanderthal with this attitude? Maybe it's time to update themselves.
PM: I'm sure there's going to be any amount of debate on this topic given yesterday's result, but heading into yesterday's Grand Final, if anybody had been asked what will happen if there's a draw, the answer would be the game's played again. So heading for another four quarters of football, it's an eight quarter Grand Final in that sense, Paul. Very, very pressurised for the players, but gee, we saw some extraordinary football yesterday.
BONGIORNO: Very diplomatic Prime Minister. Moving to other issues. That poll in the News Limited papers today- 78% of Australians would like to see the ban on euthanasia legislation in the two territories overturned. Are you with the majority? PM: Look, I think this is a question that people will work through as a matter of individual decision, not looking at the newspaper polls but looking at what they think is the right thing to do. Paul, there's obviously two tranches to this question. Number one - the question of the capacity of territories to legislate like states and whether people have a view about euthanasia. People will resolve this issue for themselves. There will be a conscience vote. I'll resolve it for myself, but I'll reserve my position until I've seen the full details of what it is that Senator Brown proposes.
BONGIORNO: What's your attitude in principle?
PM: Look, in principle, Paul, I do find this a difficult question. Sort of- intellectually you would say, well, people should be able to make their own decisions. But I find it very hard to conceptualise how we could have the sort of safeguards that we would need if we did say that euthanasia was legal. I find it almost impossible to conceptualise how there could be appropriate steps and safeguards. So I'm, you know, conflicted on it in that sense. I think it's a very difficult question.
BONGIORNO: Well going to raw-knuckle politics, if I can put it that way- Mr Somlyay, the Liberal MP, has now withdrawn his bid to be Deputy Speaker. Do you have another Liberal up your sleeve?
PM: Well Paul, I think all this means that as we head towards Parliament opening on Tuesday, and then parliamentary business proper on Wednesday, that increasingly we're seeing that Mr Abbott believes his role is to wreck. He's acting like a bull in a china shop thinking his job is to smash everything he sees up. I don't see it like that. I believe Australians want us to get on with the job. They want us to make this Parliament work. I will be asking myself every day, what can we build, what can we do positively in this Parliament.
That's why I entered into the agreement on parliamentary reform. That's why I am standing ready to honour the agreement on parliamentary reform. And I think it's deeply disappointing, deeply disappointing, that Mr Abbott would say yes to parliamentary reform, sign the agreement, see his representatives engage in the group hug, spruik parliamentary reform himself, and then trash it when it doesn't suit him.
BONGIORNO: So, by the sounds of it, you're still looking for someone else to pair with your Speaker?
PM: Well, we will present Harry Jenkins as our candidate for Speaker. Obviously, who is the Speaker of the Parliament is a decision of the whole of the House of Representatives. And of course Paul, we're looking to honour the agreement as best we can in circumstances where Mr Abbott says my job is to be a wrecker. That's all he wants to do. Smash things, trash things, break them up. +
BONGIORNO: Well, Tony Abbott's case against your credibility is based on this unequivocal statement you made five days out from the election.
[audio plays]
PM: There will be no carbon tax under the Government I lead.
BONGIORNO: Now Prime Minister, I accept that things have changed as a result of the election. But you and your Deputy Prime Minister have said that there will be no equivocation over the fact that you are heading for a surplus within three years. Why can't you give the same straight out commitment to no carbon tax?
PM: Well Paul, I think we've got to be a bit realistic here. Circumstances have changed. Obviously, during the election campaign, I was announcing the Government's position. Of course, the Government has its policies and plans. We also have a House of Representatives where we can't just go to the House of Representatives and say here is the Government's position and five minutes later it's passed by the House. That's not the circumstance we find ourselves in.
I would also say Paul, significantly too, we've seen the head of BHP, Marius Kloppers, make a very important speech on arrangements for carbon pricing and the view of a business like BHP about the need for certainty. What that means of course, is we will work constructively in this new Parliament. That's what I've said we would do. With the Greens, with the Independents, and indeed, that offer is open to the Liberal Party. We're putting together a committee that is open to representatives of all sides of politics who agree that climate change is real and we need to price carbon in order to reach the targets that we've set ourselves in 2020. Now, Mr Abbott, if he wants to take a constructive approach, could see his political party be part of those discussions.
BONGIORNO: Prime Minister, it's time for a break.
[ad break]
BONGIORNO: You're on Meet the Press with the Prime Minister. And welcome to the panel, Steve Lewis from News Limited and Michelle Grattan from The Age. Good morning, Steve and Michelle.
GRATTAN: Hi Paul.
LEWIS: G'day Paul.
BONGIORNO: This week saw a new focus on Australia's policy of detaining illegal immigrants and asylum seekers who come in boats. Rooftop protests at Sydney's Villawood detention centre were quickly linked by the Opposition to detention centres bursting at the seams, thanks to an increase in the number of seaborne refugees.
[audio plays]
MORRISON: If there are 5,000 people in detention, it's not because of the policy of detention. It's because of the policy that has encouraged so many to actually get on a boat and come here.
BONGIORNO: Michelle Grattan.
GRATTAN: Prime Minister, apart from the policies that you've already announced- which we'll come to in a minute- are you going to look at some new specific measures to try to stop the flow of boats?
PM: Well, as I announced during the election campaign, indeed, in the days leading up to the election campaign, my view is the solution here is to have a regional protection framework and a regional processing centre. And we will be pursuing that with our neighbours, including with East Timor. What that would do is take away any incentive to get on a boat. And we don't want people risking their lives at sea, getting on leaky, rickety boats and we don't want to see the evil trade of people smuggling profiting from people's desperation and misery. So that is the solution that I am focused on.
GRATTAN: More urgently, you've got to face up to the problem of what to do about the processing of the Afghan people. Now, there's been a freeze imposed on that, but that's about to come to an end, and you have to decide whether to renew it or start processing those people. What is your inclination?
PM: Well, this isn't a question of inclination, it's a question of the best country information we can get about Afghanistan. And obviously, that country information is assisted by the work of the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees and the information they help nations like Australia with when it comes to country circumstances. So, Michelle, I'm not going to prejudge. We will work through- the Minister for Immigration in the first instance- and then of course the Government as a whole, what to do at the time of the end of the processing pause.
LEWIS: Prime Minister, there are around about 5000 people currently in detention. Do you know how many of those are children? And does the number of children currently being held in detention centres around Australia actually worry you?
PM: Well I think we just need to be a little bit careful here Steve when we use the word detention. Yes, of course, we have a policy of mandatory detention, of making sure that people are detained. We need to have proper health checks, security checks and proper processing. But we also have a set of values, a value statement that guides how family groups, particularly children, will be treated, and the kind of circumstances in which they will live. So of course, when you look around at the country, it is possible for families to live in quite different circumstances from the high-security detention images that people see on their television screens.
LEWIS: So they're being held in motels as opposed to behind barbed wire? PM: Well, they're being held in accommodation that we believe is suitable for families and suitable for children. As a political party in opposition, we said we did not believe that children should be held behind razor wire in high-security detention. And so, we have worked to have more appropriate accommodation for family groups and for children.
GRATTAN: But there has been a lot of criticism from mental health experts for example, including the head of one of your own advisory bodies, about the effect that this policy and the uncertainty people face is having on people, and- including on children.
PM: Look, I understand that there is ongoing debate in the community. There are some in our community who would prefer we did not have mandatory detention. Of course, the Government's policy is for mandatory detention, so that's always going to be contested. Then, of course, when people are detained, we take advice about the best way of providing services to people, including health services. And obviously we do work with mental health experts on that.
BONGIORNO: Well Prime Minister, despite assurances from the top brass that our troops in Afghanistan are well supported, stories keep coming out of the ranks that this isn't the case. The Defence Force Association makes this point.
[audio plays]
JAMES: The Australians and Afghans involved did very, very well in it. But at the end of the day, they had to withdraw because their ammunition was running out and they didn't have sufficient force to destroy the enemy force. Now, if they'd been able to do that, they possibly wouldn't have had to fight a battle the next day and the day after and the day after that. So that's the big lesson from this.
LEWIS: Prime Minister, my colleague Ian McPhedran this week has exposed the concerns of soldiers and other senior members of the military about the state of play for our troops in Afghanistan. Have you sought personal assurances that our soldiers want for nothing, that they are absolutely well supported?
PM: Well, on an ongoing basis, the Government reviews force protection. I of course did read the story that you refer to which had the details of an email from a soldier. I also watched- and I'm sure you would've too, Steve- the press conference the next day from the Chief of Operations about the circumstances of that battle, where quite a different view was put. And he made the point that people in a combat situation can walk away from the same incident with very different perspectives about what had happened, but that the, you know, Army works through a process where they collect the various views of what's happened during the battle and produce a synthesised view of what has occurred. On force protection, of course the Government is committed to providing our troops the force protection they need. There was a force protection review that led to us stepping up and investing $1.1 billion in force protection. We keep the area under constant review through our National Security Committee and we will continue to do so.
GRATTAN: And what about policy more generally? Stephen Smith has promised that he will be arguing for more police resources to go to Afghanistan, but there's also American pressure to have more troops. Are you at all inclined to be sympathetic to that request?
PM: Well, when you say American pressure, Michelle, we have not received a request to increase our numbers of troops in Afghanistan. We engaged in a very major increase around 12 months or so ago. We believe the numbers are about right. What Stephen Smith has been talking about is adding to our training capacity for training police and, obviously, we will work through that question. But when it comes to the deployment in Afghanistan, as Prime Minister, as a Government, we are committed to the mission in Afghanistan. We are committed to seeing it through. I believe our numbers of troops are about right and we will continue steadfast in the pursuit of the mission. It isn't easy, obviously. We've seen soldiers lose their lives. We've seen a lot of tragedy. But we remain committed to getting the job done. And the job is training the Afghan National Army so that they can provide stability and security in Afghanistan and for the Afghan people.
BONGIORNO: Time for a break. Coming up, it's been a big week for Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd and we ask who's top dog in Foreign Policy.
[ad break]
BONGIORNO: You're on Meet the Press with the Prime Minister. Rivalries at the top of governments are nothing new. There was Hawke and Keating, Howard and Costello, and now the Opposition says there's another lethal rivalry between Gillard and Rudd. The new Foreign Minister certainly allowed the limelight in New York.
[audio plays]
ABBOTT: Kevin Rudd still feels deeply resentful, Alan, about the fact that he was politically assassinated, when in his view, he remained the best person to lead the Labor Party into the election.
BONGIORNO: Well Prime Minister, do you feel Kevin Rudd breathing down your neck?
PM: Paul, we are working together, getting on with the job, working as a team. I'm working with each of my Ministers, and of course, working closely and constructively with Kevin Rudd on foreign policy questions.
BONGIORNO: You're going to four international conferences in the next month or so. Will Kevin Rudd accompany you on those trips?
PM: These are leaders' events so I will be attending them. Obviously, Kevin will have a travel program as Foreign Minister. Paul, you should expect the arrangements between me and Kevin Rudd to be exactly the same as arrangements between Prime Ministers and Foreign Ministers in the past.
LEWIS: Prime Minister, one of the conferences will be a trip to Brussels. As I understand it, you'll be flying to Brussels for around about 24 hours and then back to Australia. That's a- would leave a large carbon footprint. Why is this particular meeting so important?
PM: Well Steve, as you well know from the point of view of journalists, it can be hard to win this one. If you go very quickly, you talk about carbon footprint. If I was gone for a long time, I can just imagine the headlines that you yourself would be writing. This is an important meeting. It's the first time Australia has had the opportunity to sit at a table, at this particular table, which brings together the leaders of Asia and Europe. Why is that important? Because it is bringing together so many of the economies with which we trade. Increased trade means increased jobs for Australians.
LEWIS: You're not known as a foreign policy specialist, but you will get the chance to meet with the British Prime Minister, the US President, etcetera. How do you reckon you're going to go mixing it with those sorts of world leaders? Do you reckon you'll be able to hold your own, and forge a new identity on the global stage?
PM: Well, people obviously come into this position as Prime Minister from a variety of life paths and life journeys. Obviously, Kevin came in with a great deal of expertise in foreign affairs, having spent much of his life as a diplomat. When we look at prime ministers past- Bob Hawke, Paul Keating, John Howard- they didn't come in through that that prism of foreign policy but each of them carved out a particular role on the world stage. Obviously, I will be looking to be in these international meetings as a feisty advocate of our national interest, of Australian interests on the world stage.
GRATTAN: Ms Gillard, just in that role as feisty advocate, as Paul mentioned you've got several conferences coming up. What will be the priorities you will be pushing at those conferences?
PM: Well, the clear priority for the Government and for how we intersect with these world events is keeping our economy strong. I mean, the globe is still in a tentative recovery phase from the global financial crisis. Our economy of course, is coming out stronger than major economies around the world. And that means we've got a unique opportunity to keep building economic strength, because we are coming out of the global financial crisis so strong. But that means, very much on the agenda of these international meetings- whether it's the G20 or other meetings- is what the world needs to do as we emerge from the global financial crisis is to get the global economy as strong as possible.
BONGIORNO: Prime Minister- just before we go, and briefly, it's moving into The Lodge day- have you been reluctant to move in there? Why has it taken you so long? PM: Not a question of reluctance. Before the election I said, and I think it was proper, that I wouldn't move into The Lodge until I'd been elected by the Australian people. Since the election, there's just been some very simple mundane matters of repair work, like securing some asbestos, that's better done when no one is actually living there.
GRATTAN: And can you tell us a bit about the role of the First Bloke? He's given up his job in Melbourne, I think?
BONGIORNO: Just very briefly, Prime Minister.
PM: Well of course, Tim will be with me in the Lodge as my partner, supporting me the way he does. You should expect to see him, too, continue his advocacy for men's health. He's someone who, very much, has taken up a passionate advocacy about making sure men look after themselves, go to the doctors and do all the right things.
BONGIORNO: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.



PM: Well, can I thank everybody for coming along. I'm obviously joined today by the Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan; by our Minister for Climate Change, Greg Combet. I'm joined by Senator Bob Brown, the Leader of the Australian Greens, and obviously Senator Christine Milne as well, and we're here to make an announcement about the form of the multi-party committee on climate change.
It's my intention to make some opening remarks, then I'll ask Greg Combet to make some comments, and then Bob Brown. If I could ask you at that stage to confine your questions to issues associated with climate change and the committee; if people then have questions on broader Government matters we would deal with them at the end, and obviously I will deal with them separately to the general group.
Can I start by making the following things clear: obviously, the Government accepts the science of climate change and we believe in tackling climate change; and our priorities as a Government are in three areas - supporting renewable energy; promoting energy efficiency; and working towards the introduction of a price on carbon, and as a Government, we have consistently said that in order to tackle climate change, in order to cut carbon pollution to the extent that we need to, we need to put a price on carbon. That's a requirement to reduce pollution. It's obviously a requirement to encourage investment in low-emissions technologies, and it's a requirement to complement our other measures, including our measures for renewable energy and energy efficiency.
And really, the case for a price on carbon is a very simple one. When you put a price on carbon pollution you create an incentive so that less pollution is generated; you create an incentive for people to find new ways of doing things and create less pollution.
Now, of course, this isn't easy, but we intend to work through and tackle the question of reducing carbon pollution and how we deal with a price on carbon, and dealing with a price on carbon is necessary to cut carbon pollution. It's also necessary to give business the certainty that they seek, and in recent days, we've seen major business identities, including Mr Marius Kloppers, the head of BHP, talk about the need for certainty.
Dealing with the question of pricing carbon is also necessary so that we stay in step with the rest of the world. The global economy has already begun to shift to a low-carbon economy and if we fail to act on a price on carbon pollution we, of course, run a risk of falling behind.
Now, as everybody knows, the election which was concluded at the end of the August threw up a result that no-one was predicting during the course of the election campaign. We're in a new environment, and in this new environment, as a Government we entered agreements to say we would create a multi-party committee on climate change and that committee would work through with all options on the table to see what, if any, consensus could be reached about putting a price on carbon.
That committee will be participated in by Senators Brown and Milne. It was also be participated in by Tony Windsor, an independent Member of the House of Representatives. Of course, we have said the committee is also open to Tony Abbott's Liberal Party. We are saying very clearly to the Coalition that we would ask them to work in good faith with this committee.
In order to join the committee, obviously, we would need them to acknowledge that climate change is real and that in order to tackle climate change we need to put a price on carbon pollution, but I would reiterate my call to Tony Abbott today not to continue to play the role of wrecker, but to actually join the multi-party committee, which will work through all options for putting a price on carbon pollution in the national interest.
I'll turn now to Greg Combet for some comments, and then we'll go to Senator Brown.
MINISTER COMBET: Thanks very much, Prime Minister, and as the Prime Minister's indicated, the establishment of the multi-party climate change committee is an important forum that will consider what is a fundamental economic reform, and that is the establishment of a price on carbon in the economy, which is an incentive to reduce carbon pollution and which would unlock investment in things like renewable energy technology and of low-emissions technologies, and importantly generate certainty for investment in our economy, particularly in important industries such as the energy industry.
The Prime Minister's indicated that the multi-party committee would comprise the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, myself, and Senators Brown and Senator Milne, along with the independent MP Tony Windsor. It is the Government's intention also to write to the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Abbott, to invite the Coalition to nominate two representatives to the committee and of course other independents, should they express a willingness and of course be prepared to accept what is a foundation for the establishment of this committee and that is the recognition that a carbon price is an important economic reform.
There will also be four independent experts who will advise the committee members, the committee members being as I've described. Those independent experts include Professor Ross Garnaut, who I think is very well known for his work in this area and others and an important economic thinker in our society, and Professor Garnaut, we welcome, has accepted the participation as an independent expert adviser to the committee.
Additionally, Professor Will Steffen, a climate scientist from the ANU, will be one of the experts.
Mr Rod Sims, who's currently serving as the chair of independent price regulator for electricity and other prices in New South Wales, but who has extensive energy market experience will also participate as an expert, as will Ms Patricia Faulkner, who brings a wealth of experience of knowledge of the social services arrangements in this country, and would be providing important public policy advice in relation to matters such as assistance for households.
These are all extremely important appointments as independent experts advising the committee and I think they'll bring a wealth of experience and we welcome their willingness to participate.
A Secretary's group from the leadership of the various the Departments which have a direct interest in the climate change policy area across the Commonwealth will provide support. That group will be chaired by the Secretary of the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency.
In addition, it's the Government's intention to establish two roundtable groups - one comprising business representatives, and another representatives of environment, unions and non-government organisations - to provide advice to the Government on this and various other matters.
So, it's a very important moment for consideration of this important reform.
SENATOR BROWN: Thank you.
Well, I'm delighted to be here with my colleague, Christine Milne, the Prime Minister and her ministers, and at the outset I thank you, Prime Minister, and your ministers, for your good offices in getting this process so far down the line that we are able to announce it's happening.
The nation will be very pleased with this result and it is as an outcome of the vote on the 21st of August.
There is widespread and popular concern about climate change, not least because it affects us, but because it affects our children, our grandchildren, and this great country and indeed the planet on which we live. We're in an age of dangerous and threatening climate change.
This committee is commissioned at looking at the alternatives that the Prime Minister and Greg Combet have just spoken about. It has a basis with top expertise.
We will be consulting with the community as we go down the line and it is clearly, from the outset, not a case of winner takes all. This is different politics. This is constructive. This is positive. This comes from the people. This is us, as their representatives, working to give them the result which will give them security in knowing that their elected representatives are working toward the best outcome for this great nation of ours.
There is give and take in all these things and we recognise that, but again, we take this with great responsibility; with great seriousness about the challenge that this committee faces; but a great sense, also, of optimism that we are working in the service of the nation to get the best outcome, and to put this country economically, employment-wise and environmentally into a safer trajectory into its future.
Sir Nicholas Stern said that those economies which are environmentally based - he was referring to climate change, here - will be the strongest in the decades ahead, and we want Australia to be the strongest, not just its economy but its society and its environment.
And, finally, we're always mindful in this that the fate of the Great Barrier Reef is in our hands; and that the fate of the Murray-Darling Basin is in our hands; the snowfields, Ningaloo, Kakadu, the living ambience of our great cities and our lifestyle in this nation, so this is working for 22, going on 23 million Australians, and we take that seriously, earnestly, and with a great sense of responsibility, so I look forward to the deliberations of this committee and we come to it with an enormously positive suasion.
I'll just ask if Christine wants to say a word or two, and then back to you, Prime Minister.
SENATOR MILNE: Thank you.
This is the opportunity for the parliament to unleash the creativity in the Australian community; rebuild the manufacturing sector; really make the change that will keep the expertise that we've developed in our universities at home; to make this major economic reform; to actually create the jobs in the new, low-carbon economy about which we've spoken so many times.
The opportunity here is for the parliament to demonstrate what minority government can really achieve in bringing the community to the floor of the House through a collaborative process such as this. I'm really looking forward to the work that's ahead of us because I'm confident, with the experts that we'll have in the room, with the good will from the parliamentarians in the room, we will get a good result for Australia, a good result for the environment, and a brilliant result for the economy.
PM: OK - Latika?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does this mean that you'll no longer persist with the citizens' assembly, and, roughly, do you have any time frame for how long you want this committee to convene?
PM: Well, in the terms of reference you will see that one of the tasks of the committee will be to work through on how best to harness a community consensus about dealing with climate change, and particularly putting a price on carbon pollution.
You'll also see in the terms of reference that it's envisaged that the committee would work through until the end of 2011, where there would be a consideration at that time about the further need for the committee to continue.
Obviously, we are looking for this committee, inclusive as it is, of Senators Brown and Milne and of Tony Windsor and open as it is to the Opposition if the Opposition wants to work in good faith, we are looking at this committee working through options for putting a price on carbon. Ultimately the decisions rest with the Government and the Cabinet and our caucus as to what the position of the Government is, but this is a good opportunity to work together with, you know, an understanding of the new environment, particularly the new environment in this parliament.
Matthew?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister and Senator Brown, you're all in this together now and that's the nature of the election result. Do you both- Senator Brown just said this is not a winner-take-all situation. Can you please both outline the areas in which you see that your particular positions as being more open for negotiation than others? For example, the Greens have been more into the renewables, you guys have been interested in clean coal. Do you see areas for compromise within those, sort of, areas of difference?
PM: Well, if I can answer that first and then I'll turn to Senator Brown, the focus of this committee is on community consensus, on putting a price on carbon, and on looking at options for pricing carbon. I am indicating that all options are on the table and we are bringing an open mind to this question.
Now, clearly we are in a very different environment than we were during the election campaign, and this is just a simple recognition that, you know, the Government, the Australian Greens, Mr Windsor, Mr Oakeshott, Mr Katter, Mr Abbott, Mr Wilkie, could not go to the House of Representatives with a proposition without having consulted or collaborated and expecting it to be passed. Getting these questions dealt with in the House of Representatives will require consultation and collaboration and so this committee is going to play an important role in that work.
Now, I'm sure Senator Brown is going to say 'well, the Senate's always been like that', and of course that is the case. In the last parliamentary term the Government could not approach the Senate and just assume that legislation was going to be passed. Now we have a parliament, both houses of parliament, where that's the case, and so we need mechanisms to work through and this is a good mechanism to work through.
BROWN: Thank you.
The unifying cause at the outset here has been establishing a carbon price, and it is a climate change committee because it also encompasses, as the Prime Minister and her team have said, energy efficiency and the renewables and any other method that's going to naturally help us towards tackling dangerous climate change and getting the advantages which tackling that involves.
I think one of the things that will bring us, focus our minds greatly, is the win for the economy that will come out of this once we start looking beyond the next six months and there's, you mentioned options there. They, of course, there's no options that's excluded from the purview of the committee. Our aim is to move towards a carbon price and with great deliberation and the best information we can get.
I don't see any matter that's beyond us talking over and trying to find common ground on, but we will have expertise in the room which is going to help facilitate this being a very informed committee, very informed in a way that - if I can just finish - in a way that parliamentary debates often are not, and I think that's a great advantage of this process.
PM: We're looking for a new paradigm of media civility, too, so we'll go to Laura in the back and then come across the front - Laura?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister and Senator, I just wondered, in setting these carbon prices, this carbon price, will you be just looking at the mechanism by which you do that, or will you be doing it towards a particular target of carbon reduction, and associated with that, is there an agreed position between the Greens and the Labor Party on what the reduction targets should be?
PM: Right, well, look, I'll get Greg Combet to talk about that, but can I just make this, the general point, and I made it in answer, partly, to Matthew's question - obviously, in terms of the mechanism, we will work through a range of options and you will see when you've had the opportunity to fully digest the terms of reference that it deals with a range of options. I did want to draw your attention to that, but I'll let Greg speak.
COMBET: Well, the first point is that of course the Government has long articulated its emissions reduction targets, ranging from between a 5 percent cut over 2000 levels by the year 2020 up to as much as 25 percent depending upon the international circumstances. I don't think it's news to report that the Greens have had a different view about targets, and both the Government and the Greens retain, I think, a different view about the emissions reduction targets.
However, as Senator Brown indicated a moment ago, what we have committed to do here is to examine ways in which a carbon price could be introduced into the economy to start the important work of reducing emissions, and you've always got to come back to the purpose of a carbon price and why we have common ground in this respect for the purposes of discussion at the committee, and that is that a carbon price in the economy will provide an incentive to start the work of reducing carbon pollution.
It will also provide an incentive that will unlock, I think, a significant amount of investment in low-emissions technologies; in renewable energy technology. It will drive and create jobs from that standpoint. It will generate business certainty, particularly, as I said earlier in relation to key parts of the economy, such as the energy market, where, because of the uncertainty at the moment investment is in investment backlog - decisions have been deferred, and yet we need significant investment in the energy market, and as the head of BHP, Mr Kloppers, indicated a week or so ago, a carbon price will be a very important for the medium- and long-term competitiveness of our economy as action is taken in other countries with which we trade.
So, it is important reform. That is the basis upon which the committee has been developed. You'll see, when you do peruse the more detailed material, including the terms of reference, that I will have responsibility as Minister for Climate Change for taking the options developed by the committee back to the Cabinet and, of course, on behalf of the Government the Cabinet will have the decision-making responsibility at the end of the day for the position that the Government adopts.
BROWN: Thanks. You'll know that the targets that we had set in the run to- well, throughout the last period of parliament were 25 percent and 40 percent respectively, but it's part of the working to this new search for a consensus at political level to match that that came from the voters of Australia that all things are on the table.
Business certainty is a central reason for achieving a carbon price, but community certainty is no less important: certainty about how our children and our grandchildren will find this country; certainty about the freedom to not be facing destructive cyclones, hailstorms, droughts, bushfires, sea level rises, and in an uncertain world where hundreds of millions of people are on the move, it's very important to many people in our community, so we'll be searching out a best way forward in these deliberations and I feel very confident we share a common goal in doing that. We will go back to our Party room at the end of this process and also deliberate on the outcome, but we are looking forward with optimism to agreement.
PM: I think, OK, we'll go Andrew, Phil, Dennis, and then through the back.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if this about community consensus, then why is it that you intend to keep the deliberations and the paperwork a secret from the public? And, secondly, when it comes to the Opposition, if you get an answer in the negative from Tony Abbott, then would you actively go out and invite individual members of the Coalition who have shown enthusiasm for a carbon price such as Malcolm Turnbull, Greg Hunt and Mal Washer?
PM: Look, I'll start with the second question first, and obviously Mr Abbott does lead a political Party that's profoundly divided on questions of climate change and putting a price on carbon. Indeed, the leadership of his political Party changed on precisely that question and that's why he is leader and Mr Turnbull is not.
What I would be saying to Mr Abbott as the leader of his political Party, and indeed the leader of the Coalition, is that he shouldn't seek to wreck this and he shouldn't seek to fear monger about it. He should seek to participate in what I think is a process in the national interest looking at options and methodically working through.
Now, you ask why are some things are confidential. Well, obviously, the committee will have outreach work to the community. There will be some expert reports and other things prepared for the committee that may well be able to be distributed publicly, but the actual discussions in the committee need to be confidential. We are talking about matters that are sensitive - sensitive in an economic sense, sensitive in a range of ways, and so it's proper and appropriate for the committee to be able to work through and for the outcomes of its deliberations to be announced.
Yes, Phil?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given you see committee winding up at the end of next year, is it your intent to seek a mandate at the election after, should we run three years, for a policy to put a price on carbon, whatever that policy is? Will you be taking something to the election?
PM: Well, look, we're going to get this up and running. We're going to have it working. Obviously, we're determined to make progress, and we'll be monitoring the degree of progress over time, and that's why the timeframe of 2011 is in the documents - to see how far we've gone in that time period, so I'm not going to engage in any hypotheticals or what ifs. We're going to get this committee up and running, get it working, allow that work to happen and then see what can come out of this process.
JOURNALIST: So your options are flexible-
PM: -Well, look, as I said in my opening and in answer to some other questions, I believe, you know, if you're going to have this work then you've got to have options on the table, not immediately start the usual rule in, rule out games.
Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, and Senator Brown may car to comment as well, but the mentioned international linking, is this just a price on carbon in Australia, or are you also, is it also on the table, the option of putting an impost on Australia's coal exports so that we don't just export the carbon problem?
PM: Look, I'll get Greg Combet to deal with that, but I think you will see from the focus of the documents that what we are seeking to do is to deal with that which is of profound importance to climate change and our environment but also profound importance to the Australian economy and our ongoing competitiveness as the globe and global economy move towards a low-carbon future.
COMBET: I think the answer to that, fundamentally, is that we need to examine the options that are available to us. You might recall that under the CPRS there was certainly no anticipation of an impost on coal exports and on the Government's part I wouldn't anticipate that would be an option we would be very enthused about either. However, we do need to and we have committed to look at the options that are possible for putting a price on carbon in our own economy.
But one of the other pieces of work that we do anticipate commissioning as a consequence of the committee's deliberations is having a look at what, in more detail, a factual analysis of what is going on in other countries overseas and the effective carbon price that is developing in a range of economies, developing and developed countries with which we trade in particular, so that there's a bit more substance to the debate about what is happening internationally, because a number of initiatives are being taken and there's been quite a deal of discussion about the measures being undertaken in the Chinese economy and I think we need a better factual basis for having a look at it.
BROWN: I think I generally agree with that. Enthusiasms will differ, but our uniting enthusiasm is to reach an agreement through this process, and Greg's right - other countries are way ahead of us and we'll, as part of the early deliberations here, all be well informed about what other countries are doing in terms of a carbon price and generally tackling the emission of carbon and how to reduce pollution of the atmosphere.
JOURNALIST: So you'd still like to see that on the table, then-
PM: -We're not playing rule in, rule out games.
BROWN: I'm not flagging that at all. We haven't drawn lines on that. What we have underlined is our need to achieve a carbon price in Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you seem to be saying that membership of this committee, it's prerequisite that you accept that a carbon price is what your heading towards. We know that officially the Coalition's position is not that, so are you only inviting members of the Coalition to join this in their official position representing the Coalition, or, just to follow up an earlier question, will you invite (inaudible) who may have a (inaudible) to join. If you're only inviting them knowing that (inaudible), what's the point? Can I just ask, before I finish, Senator Brown, on the issue of secrecy, you were always in favour of open and public debate (inaudible) Afghanistan is a case in point. Why have you agreed to secrecy in the deliberations (inaudible)
PM: Well, can I just say - and obviously Bob Brown will make some comments in relation to your second question - can I say in relation to your first question you're a braver woman than I am to diagnose the position of the Coalition on the question of carbon pricing. You really are, and all credit to you, but my understanding is that we had an arrangement with the Coalition to put a price on carbon. Tony Abbott wrecked that consensus and took the leadership by a vote and they said at that stage that they wouldn't be in the CPRS. Then they announced a series of direct action measures, as they termed them, but always indicated that they were open, over the longer term, depending on movements in the global economy, to a price on carbon here in Australia. And then, during the election campaign, it appeared that that position shifted again and that there was never going to be such a price on carbon under the Coalition.
Which position they have today - I've been in a few meetings so I'm not up with the contemporaneous reports of the wires services. You might be in front of me, but which position they have today I think is probably best asked of the Leader of the Opposition by correspondence where he clearly writes it down, and it will be very interesting to see what it is.
BROWN: Just on the question of secrecy, Cabinet meets in secrecy. So do Party rooms, and people respect that because they know that you have to be able to put forward differing viewpoints with a view to coming to consensus. The process of us standing here today and announcing this committee, I think it's a big breakthrough, but it's come through us being able to talk and reach agreement.
We have a bigger task in front of us now, and I expect that the average punter will think 'they're going to have to be able to talk over complicated and at times contentious matters, good luck to them'. The end result's going to be very public and a bit of secrecy or confidentiality along the way to getting the best result possible is a reasonable price to pay.
PM: Michelle Grattan - Michelle?
JOURNALIST: Senator Brown, you've pursuing your more robust targets through this process. Will that be a priority for you and the consequences that flow from that, and do you think it's important to get an adequate price on carbon for Australia regardless of what other countries are doing (inaudible)?
BROWN: Christine will say a word on that, but we went to the election very clear on those things. We got 13 percent of the result. We're here with Prime Minister Gillard, who has Government in the House and we recognise our strength and position in the Senate.
We are not putting pre-conditions in the way of this process because we want to get a good outcome, and so in the sense of putting it on the table as a pre-condition, no, we don't do that. We're aiming to get the best outcome we can and I'm sure that we're all in agreement here that this isn't a pre-condition committee that we go into - it's a committee with the end point being the important part, not the starting point, and so we go into it with great optimism and without throwing stumbling blocks in the way at the outset.
PM: Christine wanted to say something, then we'll come through.
MILNE: I'd also just remind everyone we're also meeting in the context of the Copenhagen Accord. Australia signed onto the Copenhagen Accord, and that was a commitment by the signatories to constrain global warming to less than two degrees, and we are all agreed that that is the aim of all the signatories and indeed anyone who wants to avoid catastrophic climate change, so that is understood. That is an Australian commitment, and we'll have the benefit on this committee of one of Australia's leading scientists, Professor Will Steffen, who will help to inform the committee about what that means.
PM: OK, we'll take Malcolm, and then in the back we're going to have to move soon. I know I and my two colleagues are now running hideously late for a meeting.
JOURNALIST: There's the prospect of a public forum on the issue. Would climate change skeptics be allowed to turn up there as well? I mean, how much of a closed shop is this?
PM: Look, people in the Australian community of all shapes and sizes and all predispositions are going to debate climate change in all sorts of ways. Public consultation processes of course, the doors will be open, talkback airwaves, the airwaves are open, people write letters to the newspapers, they blog, they do the whole routine. So, you know, people in the public will have their say across a broad variety of perspectives.
That is a different question, with respect, to who should sit on this committee to try and work through to a proposition about putting a price on carbon. Obviously, as the terms of reference make clear, appropriately, we are making that opportunity available to people who agree with the foundation stone - that is, that climate change is real and that in order to tackle it and to tackle carbon pollution you need to put a price on carbon.
Yes, down the back?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister and Senator Brown, the three Defence (inaudible) charged with manslaughter over civilian deaths in Afghanistan-
PM: -Can we just, I will answer your question, but can we just conclude any further questions on this, because I'll answer that separately.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Alright, well, you're going to look depressed otherwise, aren't you? Yep, Sid?
JOURNALIST: Look, I guess I'm just- I will, yeah.
PM: I very rarely see you look happy at the end of the process, but I'll see how we go.
JOURNALIST: I always live in hope.
Look, I guess I'm just a bit interested as to why, perhaps, we can't see Professor Garnaut's report - he's updated his report - when it's released, and also why would we be able to see reports from the Australian Academy of Science on the latest science? I mean, is this process going to be more closed that the last process, because if we can't see them, then I guess-
PM: -Well, look, I think let's just get a little bit sensible about all of this. Let's have the analogy with Government, how Government works in terms of Cabinet confidentiality.
This Government, government over the ages, State governments, local governments indeed, release documents to inform public debate each and every day, but you still have discussions that are held in-confidence. For us, they are called Cabinet discussions.
Now, in this process there will obviously be dialogue with the Australian community. There may well be all sorts of information that is informed by the experts working with the Committee, indeed informed by the Australian Public Service, that will be released publically to inform the public debate, but it is also appropriate that on the committee, the committee members can have some discussions that are kept between themselves as they work through on a complex question. The public interest here is in knowing what the outcome is and people will know what the outcome is.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when will the committee hold its first meeting, and what would be important (inaudible)
PM: We're looking to hold the first meeting in October.
Phil, last question.
JOURNALIST: Both Greens and Labor, you both have to be prepared to be flexible with your targets, your 2020 targets, you 5-15 and your 25-40. Are they no longer preconditions going into this committee?
PM: No, let's just be a bit clear about this, too. The Government's-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible)
PM: I can understand. The Government's commitments on targets are the Government's commitments, so yes, we're holding to them.
When you look at the terms of reference, and I do - know you'll say to me 'oh well, I didn't have an opportunity to read that before asking all the questions' - but when you look at the terms of reference, it's clear that what we're working through here is questions of pricing carbon and designing mechanisms.
Now, I understand, I'm sure Senator Brown and Senator Milne understand, that we're coming to this with different perspectives about questions of targets, but we're coming to it with a commonality of purpose about the need to put a price on carbon and a preparedness to work through options as to how putting a price on carbon could be best done in the environment in which we are post the election.
SENATOR BROWN: Our targets are different, but our targets are the same. We are aiming to get a good outcome from this committee and we do that, as I said, with a great sense of responsibility and contribution coming down the line. It's going to be hard work, but it's going to be worthwhile.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Afghanistan question?
PM: Yes, and so I think-
JOURNALIST: -And Senator Brown, can I get your reaction to that as well, the charges against the three Australian soldiers?
SENATOR BROWN: I think I'll leave that here to the Prime Minister, but I'm happy to give comment on that after my Party room meeting.
Thank you.
PM: OK, so if you want to do your question again?
JOURNALIST: Just your reaction to those charges, and do you think it will shake public confidence in the war?
PM: Look, can I say I have been advised and I am aware the Director of Military Prosecutions has decided that three Australian Defence Force members will be charged in relation to an incident in Afghanistan on the 12th of January 2009. This is a matter for an independent military legal process and I don't believe it's appropriate for me to offer comment on that or to be seen in any way to prejudge the outcome. The accused persons will be offered legal support.
Obviously, overwhelmingly in relation to the ADF I would say the following - our Australian Defence Force has strict rules of engagement and I think they've got the finest tradition and the finest reputation as they go about very difficult and dangerous work.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, wasn't the battle actually in February, and will the charge against three soldiers increase the danger for Australian troops on the ground in Afghanistan?
PM: I thought I did say February, the 12th of February-
JOURNALIST: -January, I think. Sorry.
PM: Oh, did I? Sorry, I meant to say February, so I may have mis-spoken. I'm sorry.
Our rules of engagement in Afghanistan and our mission there remain the same. Obviously, there is a process here through the military prosecutor and military legal process and I don't want to be seen to prejudge matters involving these individuals. That wouldn't be appropriate.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you worried, though, that this might have an impact on the soldiers that are serving there at the moment who are perhaps hesitant that some of their actions could result in charges?
PM: Well, look, I think we should understand this - our soldiers are well-trained and one of the things that they are trained in is rules of engagement and obviously in their strategic mission when they're involved in combat as they are in Afghanistan. So, if you talk to anybody involved in our Defence Force, anybody who's a professional soldier, they will talk to you about how they are trained and understand our rules of engagement, so that is part and parcel of what they do - understanding what the rules of engagement are.
JOURNALIST: Has there been any review of the application of those rules of engagement?
PM: Look, I'm not aware of any review of those rules. The rules of engagement are clear and obviously there's this is a question now of whether or not they've been abided by in a series of individual circumstances about which I don't want to be seen to make any comment.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask a final question about the committee?
PM: May have missed your moment.
JOURNALIST: Do you envisage it will report by the end of 2011, or will it report before it goes to Cabinet, or, I mean, Senator Brown said we'll get a very public outcome - when will these members be released from their confidentiality requirement?
PM: Well, look, I'm not going to add to what's in the terms of references, and I know that's not going to satisfy you but it's not going to add to what's been said already.
JOURNALIST: Where is the Government up to on this issue of who will be nominated as Deputy Speaker and will support confidence?
PM: Well, I've got some processes to go through, including attending a meeting of my own Labor Caucus, so I better go and do that before I can deal with-
JOURNALIST: -So Albo will come and tell us later, will he?
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: Can Albo tell us later?
PM: Oh, look, Albo will be dealing with the- well, I should be saying Minister Albanese will be dealing with the report out of Caucus as you would expect.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard has today announced the membership and terms of reference for the new Multi-Party Climate Change Committee to help build consensus on how Australia will tackle Climate Change.
The Multi-Party Climate Change Committee will explore options for the introduction of a carbon price. It will report to Cabinet, through the Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, Greg Combet, with a range of possible policy positions informed by discussions with independent experts, the public and industry.
The Committee will start from the position that a carbon price is an economic reform that is required to reduce carbon pollution, to encourage investment in low emissions technologies and complement other measures including renewable energy and energy efficiency.
The Committee will also play a role in establishing community consensus for action on climate change.
The Government will be represented on the Committee by the Prime Minister as Chair, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency who will serve as the Deputy Chair of the Committee.
The Government will invite two representatives from the Coalition, two from the Australian Greens, and representation from independent Members of Parliament. Australian Greens Senator Christine Milne will serve as co-Deputy Chair. Mr Tony Windsor has also already indicated his willingness to be a member of the Committee.
Parliamentary members of the Committee will be drawn from those who are committed to tackling climate change and who acknowledge that effectively reducing carbon pollution by 2020 will require a carbon price.
Four independent experts -  Professor Ross Garnaut, Professor Will Steffen, Mr Rod Sims and Ms Patricia Faulkner - will support the Committee as expert advisers.
The Committee will be supported by a Secretaries' Group comprising the Secretaries of Departments involved in implementing climate change policy.
The Government recognises that climate change is a significant challenge for Australia and its economy. We have a choice between paying for our inaction or investing to build a competitive, cleaner energy and more energy efficient economy.
The Government is already investing in new renewable technologies and better and more efficient ways of using our energy resources.
A carbon price will build on these efforts and will create an incentive to reduce emissions, drive investment in renewable and low emissions technologies, create certainty for business investment and begin the adjustment of our economy to a cleaner energy future.
TERMS OF REFERENCE
1. The Multi-Party Climate Change Committee ('the Committee') is established to:
1.1. consult, negotiate, and report to the Cabinet, through the Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, on agreed options for the implementation of a carbon price in Australia; and1.2. provide advice on, and participate in, building community consensus for action on climate change.
2. The Committee decisions will be reached by consensus or, if there are differences that remain after good faith discussions, these will be presented to the Cabinet, but with every effort made to produce workable options.
3. The Committee is established on the basis that a carbon price is an economic reform that is required to reduce carbon pollution, to encourage investment in low emissions technologies and complement other measures including renewable energy and energy efficiency.
4. The Committee will consider mechanisms for introducing a carbon price (including a broad-based emissions trading scheme, a broad-based carbon levy, a hybrid of both, and economy-wide and sector-based approaches) and will consider issues such as coverage, international linking, implementation issues, assistance measures for households and businesses (including emissions-intensive trade-exposed businesses) and review provisions.
5. From time to time the Committee, by agreement, may discuss other aspects of climate change policy that would benefit from multi-party consideration and discussion. However, the Committee's deliberations will be broadly limited to the issue of a carbon price.
6. The Committee will be informed by, and responsible for, measures including but not limited to:
6.1. inviting Professor Ross Garnaut to update the Garnaut Climate Change Review and to provide advice on pricing carbon;6.2. consider the findings of an expert body, which will be tasked with calculating the carbon price equivalent of measures taken by other countries;6.3. inviting experts to conduct a public forum in Parliament House on the economic, environmental and social impacts of climate change;6.4. receiving up-to-date date assessments of the science (from the Climate Change Commission, Australian Academy of Science, the Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, and eminent scientists);6.5. considering whether a Citizens' Assembly on Climate Change should be established and, if so, its objectives, format and timeframes; and 6.6. considering the objectives, functions, form and membership of the Climate Change Commission.
7. The Committee will establish a work program that addresses these terms of reference.
8. The Committee will ensure its deliberations and papers remain confidential to the Committee and the Cabinet until a final position is agreed or all parties to the Committee agree otherwise. At its initial meeting the Committee will determine the mechanism by which it will provide updates of its work.
8.1. As part of building community consensus around the need for action on climate change and a carbon price, the Committee may choose to make some of its materials available to the public.
8.1.1. Committee members may not act unilaterally in this regard.8.1.2. Committee members will be mindful of the need to balance public participation against effective and genuine negotiation.
9. The Committee will meet regularly, usually monthly, until the end of 2011, at which time the ongoing need for the Committee will be considered.
10. In making its recommendations, the Committee shall have regard to:  
10.1. The Copenhagen Accord;10.2. Australia's national economic, social and environmental interests;10.3. the views and ideas of the Australian people as determined through consultation and public forums;10.4. the views and ideas of experts, and key stakeholders;10.5. international trends, including action taken by other countries;10.6. Commonwealth, state and territory climate change policies; and10.7. the impacts of, and interactions between, proposed carbon price mechanisms and complementary measures.  
11. The Committee will be supported by:
11.1. Up to four permanent expert advisers appointed by the Government to regularly advise the Committee on their areas of expertise.11.2. a Secretaries' Group, comprising Secretaries of the Departments of Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Treasury, Finance and Deregulation, Resources, Energy and Tourism, Climate Change and Energy Efficiency (chair), Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs, Foreign Affairs and Trade, Infrastructure and Transport, Innovation, Industry, Science and Research, Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities, with others participating as required;11.3. the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency (in relation to most policy matters), and the Treasury (in relation to modelling, macroeconomic impacts, budgetary impacts and any changes to the tax and transfer systems to compensate certain households for price impacts of any scheme).
12. The Committee would generally meet in the Cabinet room. The Cabinet Division of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet will be responsible for minute-taking. 
SHORT BIOGRAPHIES ON EXPERT ADVISERS 
Professor Ross Garnaut
Professor Ross Garnaut (AO) is a Vice-Chancellor's Fellow and a Professorial Fellow in Economics at the University of Melbourne as well as a Distinguished Professor of the Australian National University. He is an Honorary Professor of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, and a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Social Sciences.
Professor Garnaut is the author of numerous books, monographs and articles in scholarly journals on international economics, public finance and economic development, particularly in relation to East Asia and the Southwest Pacific. Professor Garnaut was the foundation head of the financial end economic policy division of Papua New Guinea's Department of Finance in the mid-1970s, straddling Independence; the principal economic adviser to Australian Prime Minister R.J.L. Hawke from 1983 to 1985; and Australian Ambassador to China (1985 to 1988).
In September 2008, Professor Garnaut presented the Garnaut Climate Change Review to the Australian Prime Minister. This review, commissioned by the Australian government, examines the impact of climate change on the Australian economy and provides potential medium to long-term policies to ameliorate these. His most recent books (The Garnaut Climate Change Review, The Great Crash of 2008 and China's New 
Place in a World in Crisis) have recently been translated into Chinese and published by the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences' Academic Press. Professor Garnaut is the author of several major reports to Australian Governments in addition to the Garnaut Climate Change Review: 
Australia and the Northeast Asian Ascendancy (1989); Review of the Wool Industry (1993); and Review of Commonwealth-State Funding (2002).
Patricia Faulkner
Patricia Faulkner has had an extensive career covering both the public and private sectors. She is currently the chair of the Australian  Social Inclusion Board and the Chair of Jesuit Social Services. Jesuit Social Services is a small welfare based organisation that looks after people at the margins of society. She is also a Chair and Member of a range of health care and government advisory services boards, including the Federal Government Health and Hospitals Infrastructure Fund; and, the Council of Australian Governments Reform Council. She has spent 10 of the last 20 years as a partner with KPMG leading both their health and social policy sectors.
Patricia will provide advice on the impacts of climate change policies on the more disadvantaged people in our community. She was awarded an Order of Australia in June 2008 for her services to the field of Health and Social Policy; and a Centenary Medal in 2002 for services to Public Administration.
Professor Will Steffen 
Professor Will Steffen is Executive Director of the ANU Climate Change Institute at the Australian National University (ANU), Canberra, and is also Science Adviser to the federal Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency. From 1998 to mid-2004, he served as Executive Director of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme, based in Stockholm, Sweden. His research interests span a broad range within the fields of climate change and Earth System science, with an emphasis on incorporation of human processes in Earth System modelling and analysis; and on sustainability, climate change and the Earth System.
Rod Sims
Rod Sims is a Director of Port Jackson Partners Limited (PJPL), Chairman of the Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal in NSW, and Chairman of InfraCo Asia Development Limited which is based in Singapore. He is also a Commissioner with the National Competition Council, and a Director of Ingeus Limited. His previous roles include Principal Economic Adviser to Australia's Prime Minister from 1988-90, Deputy Secretary responsible for all domestic policy in the Commonwealth Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet from 1990-93, and Chairman of the Rail Infrastructure Corporation and State Rail Authority in NSW from 1996-2003. He was also a member of the 2002 COAG Energy Market Review.
With PJPL Rod has for over 16 years advised leading Australian companies on issues to do with corporate strategy and governance. Rod has in recent years also advised the Business Council of Australia (BCA) on appropriate policies to deal with the greenhouse challenge and infrastructure policy. In relation to the former he has advised the Business Council of Australia on Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) design and on the implications for specific companies of particular ETS design issues.  



After one of the closest elections in our nation's history followed by 17 days of negotiations, I know Australians are ready to see our Government get down to business.
I believe Australians want to see this Parliament get work done.
It's important to remember that the last minority government - the Curtin-Chifley Government in 1941 - went on to become arguably the greatest Government in the history of our Commonwealth.
In his ninth and last Budget Speech in 1949, Chifley called out to the nation as it stood at the threshold of the second half of the twentieth century, saying:
"We should not be afraid to set our goals high".
That is my appeal to the new Parliament as we embark on the first sitting.
Our goal is to improve the future of all Australians to make us a stronger, smarter, fairer nation.
It requires us to deliver changes that will improve the lives of Australians for years to come.
Changes like the National Broadband Network.
Changes like a new approach to regional development.
Changes like national health reform.....
...As well as the continuation of the education revolution, a continued focus on keeping people in jobs and the transition to a low carbon economy.
These changes are big and daunting.
They will require determination and persistence.
To succeed we will have to both consult and collaborate - to seek consensus and build new partnerships...
But I am optimistic.
I am confident that, led by Labor, this unique Parliament can deliver strong, stable and effective government that also delivers real change for all Australians.
I look forward to sharing our achievements with you.
Thank you.


ABC Radio National
HOST: Ahead of today's first question time, Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins you in our Parliament House studio, now.
Prime Minister, good morning and welcome back to Radio National Breakfast.
PM: Thank you very much, Fran. Great to be with you.
HOST: Prime Minister, we've been told to expect a cuddlier, kinder, gentler parliament, but today's question time will be just as confrontational as ever, won't it?
PM: Well, Fran, I guess we'll just have to get there and see, but I think the overwhelming message here, Fran, is the Australian people have voted for this parliament, and this parliament requires us to work differently. That's what the Australian people have voted for, so obviously, as Prime Minister, I am determined to deliver Labor's agenda, but I also recognise the Australian people have voted for this parliament and that requires us to work in new and different ways. You saw that on display yesterday, with the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker and the Second Deputy Speaker.
Today in question time I expect that the Opposition will be doing everything it can to hold the Government to account, and Fran, that's appropriate. You know, that's what question time is for.
What we're saying, though, is it's important that when we disagree, when there are disagreements in the chamber, particularly with some heat associated with them, that they are about big picture issues in the national interest, not the Opposition just pursuing politics for politics' sake, or just disagreeing for the sake of disagreeing.
HOST: You've not been beyond some sort of sniping and fairly attacking behaviour in question time in the past, though. Are you planning on changing your ways?
PM: Oh, look, Fran, I'm obviously someone who's been known as a pretty feisty political advocate, and you should expect me to show that same spirit when I'm arguing for the big changes that this nation needs for our future - whether that's keeping the economy strong and what we need to do that, to make sure that people have got the benefits and dignity of work; whether it's about transforming education; reforming health - you should expect to see me there putting some strong arguments, but the Australian people have sent us a message in this parliament. I've heard that message, and I have been saying to Mr Abbott, and I'm prepared to say it again, I think he needs to listen to that message, too. Australians don't want to see the Opposition disagreeing just for the sake of disagreeing and they don't want to see people putting their political interests before the national interest.
HOST: Prime Minister, how can this parliament work if every time a Government minister is absent you need to get a leave pass from Tony Abbott, which he's already signalled won't be given away lightly?
PM: Well, I think this is a question, really, for Mr Abbott to show just some plain, old, common sense. You know, old-fashioned common sense. Throughout the many, many years of this parliament, people have recognised that there are times when government ministers, and, indeed, the Prime Minister, need to be absent from part or all of a parliamentary day in the nation's interest. I'd simply ask Mr Abbott to respect that.
HOST: And do you think he will? I mean, under the signals he's giving, it means the Opposition leader can and perhaps will, for instance, dictate what trips the Government ministers can and can't go on. Are you comfortable with that?
PM: Well, I think this will become a question of judgement for Mr Abbott, but with Mr Abbott knowing that ultimately the Australian people will be watching his conduct, and if Mr Abbott is saying to me as Prime Minister or to one of the ministers that they can't do something in the national interest because he'd prefer to play political games, then I think people will judge him very harshly on that - and so they should.
HOST: This would strike many listeners as a bit bizarre, I think.
PM: In what way, Fran? You're going to have to explain that to me.
HOST: Well, the fact that your behaviour - what you can, where you can go, what trips you might go on, what trips you might not go on - can be dictated by the Opposition.
PM: Well, it's only bizarre, Fran, if Mr Abbott doesn't use any common sense or any decency in the process. I mean, pairing, informal pairing arrangements in this parliament are as old as the hills. I mean, the Senate, obviously, has had tight numbers for a long period of time and they've worked through pairing arrangements which enable Government ministers to get about doing the work they need to do, enable people to attend to family obligations. Obviously, there are some times people need to leave the parliament because they've got to be back home for some circumstance for their family, or they've got to be back home for some circumstance for their electorate, some major electorate event that they seek to attend as that community's elected representative.
Now, if we've been able to show common sense about these things over the ages, then really the weight, I think, is on Mr Abbott to show common sense in this environment now.
HOST: Can you clear up one thing for us? There's been a bit of discussion about Tanya Plibersek, one of your ministers, due to have a baby in a little over a week. Has she been guaranteed a pair while on maternity leave? Is that clear?
PM: My understanding is that she will get a pair, and that Christopher Pyne did indicate that one of the few occasions they were prepared to consider pairing arrangements was for pregnancy and maternity leave.
HOST: You told Tony Abbott yesterday that this parliament was not a forum to, quote, 're-fight the election'. You also accused him of acting in bad faith. Do you trust Tony Abbott?
PM: Well, I've lived through the experience where we saw an agreement signed and endorsed about parliamentary reform, and then Mr Abbott walked away from it.
Of course, I've lived through the experience and the nation has lived through the experience, where Mr Abbott backed action on climate change, particularly the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in the last parliament, and then when he saw it in his political interest he trashed that and he walked away from the agreement.
And, of course, I've also seen Mr Abbott, during the course of the election campaign guarantee that people would see his costings, only to hide them because he was needing to hide an $11 billion black hole.
So, those things have happened. They do go to Mr Abbott's conduct, and I believe Australians will be looking at that conduct.
HOST: Well, talking of bad faith, I mean, can he trust you? One of your first acts in this new parliament yesterday was to nominate Liberal MP Peter Slipper as Deputy Speaker against his own side's nominee, against his own side's wishes. What's in that for you?
PM: Well, we entered an agreement about parliamentary reform, and that agreement did say that we wanted to see new independence in the role of Speaker and Deputy Speaker, and that the best situation was for them to come from opposing political parties, so obviously the parliament yesterday endorsed Harry Jenkins as Speaker, and he will do a great job.
We believed that Mr Slipper was a good person to show independence in the role of Deputy Speaker. He's been in the Speaker's chair before, in the last parliament. He's shown that independence - indeed, standing up to a dissent motion in one of his rulings from his own side - so we believe Mr Slipper being Deputy Speaker actually acquits the spirit of parliamentary reform.
Harry Jenkins: expert, independent, having withdrawn from Labor Party activities in order to be an independent Speaker; Mr Slipper in the Deputy Speaker's seat, having shown that he can be very independent and made of sturdy stuff-
HOST: -You're not trying to pretend, though, that Bruce Scott wouldn't have been equally suitable and you were just trying to out-manoeuvre the Coalition yesterday, wrong-foot them?
PM: Well, we came to the judgement that Mr Slipper was best for this position. I'm certainly very respectful of Mr Scott. I said yesterday in the parliament, and genuinely believe, he is a very, very decent man, and if you asked Labor Party people who 'd they'd talk to and chat with and have respectful conversations with from the other side I think he would come up on almost everybody's list. He worked with me very decently on the question of distance education when I was Minister for Education in the last parliament, but we did believe that Mr Slipper was the better candidate for the role of Deputy Speaker.
HOST: It's 7.46 on breakfast. Our guest this morning in the Parliament House studio is Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
Prime Minister you mentioned there, brought up the example of Tony Abbott walking away from agreement on climate change, action on climate change. You, of course, already reneged on your promise ruling out a carbon tax. How many other promises could go the same way due to the strictures of a hung parliament?
PM: Well, Fran, I'm determined to deliver Labor's agenda: to deliver the things we promised to keep our economy strong; to keep transforming our education system; to deliver our reforms in health. I am determined to do that.
As Prime Minister I also recognise that the Australian people have voted for this Parliament, and this is not a parliament where the Executive, the Government, can go to the House of Representatives and simply demand that its legislation is passed. We're in a new environment that's going to require co-operation, collaboration, negotiation. I'm looking forward to it. I think it's got great strengths.
HOST: On your multi-party climate change committee, Tony Windsor is a member of it. On The 7:30 Report last night he was hedging a little on his support for a price on carbon. He thought it was, quote, 'a little bit of a mistake' to start a 12-month process with a predetermined decision to put a price on carbon, but that's exactly what your terms of reference for this committee stipulate, isn't it?
PM: Well, obviously I'll be working and the multi-party committee will be working with Mr Windsor and others in good faith. Mr Windsor does see the need to tackle climate change. He wants to come to this process with options on the table and an open mind.
Obviously, the terms of reference of this committee are about putting a price on carbon as a necessary part of tackling climate change, but I think what Mr Windsor was indicating is he's going to come to the table, in good faith, using the best of his judgment and working through the options.
HOST: Sure, but he's not a signed up believer, necessarily, at this point of a price on carbon, to a price on carbon, so that's not a prerequisite?
PM: Well, the terms of reference indicate very clearly that the purpose of this committee is to work on developing further community consensus for action on climate change and also to deal with options for pricing carbon.
Now, Mr Windsor wants to work through those options. Obviously, having worked through those options, he may conclude that he doesn't believe any of the options is the way forward, that's possible, but he wants to work on the options in a spirit of goodwill and I welcome that.
HOST: Now this process is set down for 12 months, as I understand it. If this committee does deliver to Cabinet a consensus position on a carbon price, will you legislate for a carbon price before the next election?
PM: Well, what I want to do is get this multi-party committee working. At its core is building community consensus on climate change; at its core is examining options for pricing carbon. So, this committee is inclusive - Mr Windsor will be there, the Greens will be there.
I've extended an invitation to Mr Abbott to have appropriate representation from the Opposition. Of course, he does have sitting alongside him, a few seats away on his front bench, a man who's passionate about climate change and putting a price on carbon, and that's Malcolm Turnbull, so he could be a very good representative of the Opposition on this committee.
What we've said timeframe-wise is that we would work through and we would review where we are at the end of 2011-
HOST: -So that leaves you two years of Government then, if you run full term. Would you guarantee to introduce a price on carbon if that's what the committee consensus is?
PM: Fran, I know it's frustrating to journalists and I'm going to continue to-
HOST: -And to listeners I think-
PM: -Well, look this is a different Parliament. The Australian people voted for it.
We're going to have this multi-party committee, and in order for it to do its work properly, then I won't, as Prime Minister, sit here before it's even met and start playing the rule-in, rule-out games about what might happen at the committee. The committee will start, the committee will work, it'll do it diligently, and we'll see where it gets to and what the outcomes are.
I think your listeners would say to themselves, 'Gee, that's a proper process - I see that happen in my workplace, in my local sporting clubs, in my local council every day of the week', that people go into a room in good faith, not having swept things off the table, but allowing issues to be worked through.
HOST: Alright, at the risk of hitting the rule-in, rule-out brick wall again, two early Private Member's Bills we know that will come up via the Greens: one on voluntary euthanasia, you've said that there will be a conscience vote on that; what about the one on gay marriage? Will you allow a free vote on gay marriage on your side of politics?
PM: Well, look the Labor Party's got a clear position about the Marriage Act that is a Party position, so, Fran, you should expect to see the Labor Party voting as a political party, voting in unison if that proposition comes to the Parliament.
But, you know, I'm saying the word 'if' deliberately. Of course, there are members making suggestions about what Private Member's propositions they are interested in thinking about pursuing. The Parliament will then collect those up in a proper process, bills will need to be drafted, and then obviously choices and selections will need to be made about what bills go forward.
There is only so much parliamentary time. We've got to deal with Government business as well as Private Members business, so there will be some clear selections about which bills get parliamentary time.
HOST: Prime Minister, marshalling the parliament is one thing - what about marshalling your own troops? Graham Richardson writes today that you tried and failed to demote two Cabinet ministers in your ministerial shake-up because they threatened to force a by-election if they were demoted and you couldn't risk that with the numbers so close. Is that true?
PM: Completely untrue.
HOST: Have any of your colleagues threatened a by-election if they didn't get the job they wanted?
PM: No.
HOST: Will discipline, do you think, be an issue for you if you can't threaten MPs too much for fear they might walk away?
PM: Well, let's just be a little bit clear about this, Fran. That report is completely untrue.
I met with my ministerial colleagues. I met with colleagues who became parliamentary secretaries. No-one on the front bench, anybody with a Ministry, anybody with a parliamentary secretary, no-one got their position by suggesting that if they didn't get the job they would resign from Parliament. I never had a conversation of that nature with anybody in my ministry, anybody who is serving as a parliamentary secretary. It is complete nonsense.
So, having never had a conversation of that nature, I don't see why I should start speculating about what would happen if I did have conversations of that nature. I've never had one.
HOST: Just finally, Prime Minister, Treasurer Wayne Swan said in an interview with the Financial Review yesterday, quote, 'we are a better Government for the set-backs of the past couple of years'. He also said the make-up of this Parliament makes him more confident about the opportunity for reform, not less. Will you be a leader of major reform, economic and social, or will you be a more cautious leader worried about the power of one?
PM: No, absolutely not. It's my intention to approach this Parliament with a bold agenda. It's my intention to approach this Parliament with real leadership.
Fran, I've always believed fortune favours the brave and I'll take that spirit into this Parliament. We have a major agenda for change for this country to make us a stronger nation; to make us a fairer nation; to deal with questions of sustainability. We've got a big economic agenda about continuing to strengthen our economy, so people have got the benefits of work. We've got a transformative education agenda I want to see us deliver and build on-
HOST: -You've also got a hung parliament, though, to deal with?
PM: Well, we've got major health reforms that will make a difference for Australians now using the health system, as well as Australians in 10 and 20 years' time, and you should expect to see me leading on those questions.
I said very clearly, in my Light on the Hill speech, I am bringing the approach to this that we won with a landslide. We are going to get the job done. We're going to make it work. That's what the Australian people have voted for. I think that's exactly what they're asking us to do and I'm going to seize the opportunity that being in Government presents and that this parliament presents.
HOST: Prime Minister, good luck with making the Parliament work - good luck for all of us. Thank you very much for joining us on Breakfast.
PM: Thanks, Fran.



M: Can I thank everybody for joining us this morning. I'm obviously here with the Minister for Health and also our Minister for Regional Australia, and we're here together to announce that today we are opening the new round of funding under the Health and Hospitals Fund. That new round of funding has its focus on regional Australia. This new round of funding obviously honours the commitments we made to the Independents during the discussions following the election.
Now this new round of funding means that the Government will be asking for applications from regional communities across the country on health infrastructure. Now it has to be health infrastructure that will make a difference. It can be health infrastructure for hospitals, it can be equipment, it can be health infrastructure that will make a difference for mental health, for dental care.
This new round obviously builds on the first round of funding from the Health and Hospital Fund, and that first round of funding was allocated in the 2009-10 Budget, and that has enabled work to already begin on over 30 projects around the country and planning is underway for another 22. That round of funding has also supported the 21 regional cancer centres around the country that are there to make a difference because we do know, tragically, that survivability of cancer when we look at the statistics, people in regional Australia are less likely to survive than people in capital cities and we want to make a difference to that statistic and to the availability of care for people in regional Australia.
So this is good news, I'm sure that there will be a lot of excitement amongst communities that do want to participate and put forward proposals for consideration in this funding round. Applications will be open until early December, then of course, working with the experts at the Health and Hospital Fund, the Government will consider that applications that come through.
I'll hand now to the Minister for Health for some comments and then to the Minister for Regional Australia.
MINISTER ROXON: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.
I think the Prime Minister has covered the main points, I just thought it might be useful to remind those of you who have been covering this area of some of the types of projects that were funded during the first round. Of the $3.2 billion of funding that was allocated through our first round and in the 2009-10 budget, 37% of that funding had been already allocated to rural and regional Australia, so we've been making investments across the country but we are dedicating this round to the extra needs that have not yet been met in rural and regional Australia.
For example, there is an integrated district health service being built in Narrabri, $27 million project. A paediatric ward that is being built at the Broome Hospital, about $8 million being spent on that.
The first ever Northern Territory medical school which means that we will be able to train, for the first time, for their whole degree, students from the Northern Territory or coming elsewhere to the Northern Territory who will help meet the very severe shortage of doctors that there are in northern and central Australia.
Funding at the Launceston General hospital, about $40 million going into there. A research facility which is to neighbour the Royal Hobart hospital. Funding for a research facility too in the Hunter Valley, near Newcastle and of course other projects like the new clinical school at Nepean hospital, as well as some significant investments for service delivery which meaning that we are starting to train more of the next generation of health professionals in the outer suburbs and in regional Australia where they are so desperately needed.
So there are some very exciting projects that are already taking shape and this now allows us to take the next step in our investments in health and hospital services across the country.
MINISTER CREAN: Yesterday at the Press club, when I finally got there, I outlined the Government's approach in terms of regional development - the approach that we will be taking.
This of course is one of the funding elements that will benefit specifically regional Australia, but the criteria that we're applying and it's outlined in terms of the application for funding that's been put out today specifically requires the proposals to actually stack up, to make the difference, to produce the efficiencies, to produce the much more effective delivery mechanisms.
It's also interesting, if you look at the guidelines, that we're putting a particular focus on e-health because obviously the opportunity with broadband out there, we really need to use health as one of the fundamental applications going on to the national broadband highway.
Education of course is another and there is also opportunity for creative programs that co-locate between the training facilities, the regional universities, for example, and the health services - that too will be given a particular focus in assessment.
So I'm delighted that we're able to move quickly to announce this round of funding. It is a substantial amount of money potentially that's available, but it does give real substance to the framework that I talked about yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister given your honouring your commitments like this one, in the deals done with the Independents, do you feel you were dudded yesterday by Windsor and Oakeshott in that vote?
PM: Of course not, of course not, and you know I've been talking to Australians about the nature of this Parliament and the nature of this Parliament is some votes will be won and some votes will be lost and that's the way the Parliament is. And in this Parliament I've determined to deliver Labor's agenda, I'm determined to work in a consultative and collaborative way with members in the Parliament to deliver Labor's agenda, but what I would say is it's inevitable in this Parliament that we will see new things happen, different things happen, new standing orders, votes like we saw yesterday, new arrangements for who will be the Speaker and Deputy Speaker in the Parliament which we saw the day before. So it's part and parcel of the Parliament that Australians voted for.
Matthew?
JOURNALIST: You were accused in the MPI yesterday of breaking promises, a particular one being the carbon tax issue. Now the quotes are out there on the record, but, so, do you accept Tony Abbott's assertion that you have breached your election promise on that and do you think that Australians if they understand the numbers game are prepared to cut you slack because of the fact that you are a majority Government and that you have to negotiate through on things?
PM: Look Mr Abbott's very good at slogans and I anticipate we'll see a number of them in this Parliament just as we did during the election campaign and obviously he was engaged in the slogan business yesterday. For me, what I care about is the substance and obviously during the election campaign I gave a series of commitments, made a series of policy statements that are the Government's agenda and obviously I am working to deliver that agenda. But I also recognise that the result Australians voted for on the 21st of August was this Parliament and that it is not possible for the Government to go to this House of Representatives and simply say here it is, vote it up, we want it done in the next five minutes, you know, all over all in. We will work with this Parliament and we'll seize the opportunities of this Parliament.
Now I believe the multi-party committee we've created on climate change is a good way of seizing the opportunities of this Parliament, of letting people have a say and work through what is obviously a complex question about putting a price on carbon. And my invitation remains there to Tony Abbott and really would say to him we are not day by day in this Parliament, I don't think Australians sent us here to re-fight the election campaign day by day. The election campaign's over and Australians have voted.
What they've sent us here to do is govern and have this Parliament work in the national interest. That requires an approach of consensus building, looking for change, looking for opportunities to work together. I'm bringing that approach and I think it's disappointing that the early signs are that Mr Abbott's which is simply what can he wreck, what can he destroy, what can he put out by way of slogans.
Paul?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister with the round that you promised to Mr Wilkie in regard to Hobart Hospital and if so does that mean Hobart Hospital doesn't have to try as hard as other hospitals?
PM: This is the round that Hobart Hospital, the Tasmanian Government can bring an application forward for the work there. We've always said to Mr Wilkie and to the Tasmanian Government that the application would need to stack up, it would need to meet the criteria, I'm picking up Simon's words, stack-up, elegantly put, it would need to stack-up. And on the question of the regional location, Australia is divided by our friends at the ABS into five categories - from capital city one to very remote at number five - this is a round for categories two to five and all of Tasmania is in those categories.
JOURNALIST: But if it doesn't stack up you're in trouble aren't you?
PM: Well look let's work it through and obviously the Tasmanian Government, and we should just remember the history of this. The Tasmanian Government did come forward to the first round of the Health and Hospitals Fund with an application around repair work and effectively the feedback was, look go and get the proper job done. The Tasmanian Government has since that time made a set of decisions about the long term location of the hospital, and given those set of decisions have been taken, then obviously the application brought forward now can be the application for the full job, the proper job, that the hospital needs.
ROXON: Sorry Paul I should also just add to the Prime Minister's comments. Of course remember that there is $100 million that has been pre committed to allow some very early work to the Hobart Hospital that doesn't come from this fund and we are already in contractual negotiations with the Tasmanians that would allow some early work to be able to be done on this project and are then putting in an application for the further expansion but that first $100 million is already the subject of negotiations with the Tasmanian Government.
PM: Okay we'll go to the back, Michelle, yes?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard since both the Government and Peter Slipper insist there is no special arrangement with him, surely Anna Burke has got a rather bad deal out of this whole Deputy Speakership row?
PM: Well, I think Anna Burke's spoken about this publicly and, you know, of course Anna Burke served as the Deputy Speaker in the last Parliament, she did a fantastic job. Obviously when arrangements were made and we determined to support Peter Slipper because we wanted to honour as best we could the Parliamentary Reform Agreement by having a person of independence from the other side be Deputy Speaker, Anna Burke accepted that, I understand she would be personally disappointed but you would see from every statement she's made publically that she understands and accepts the decision.
Anna Burke is a person of tremendous capacity, a great Member of Parliament, she served her community well and she'll continue to do play an important role for Labor in this parliament.
Phil Coorey?
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you a double banger?
PM: Depends.
JOURNALIST: Two things - the Coalition wants to escalate our commitment to Afghanistan. They accept the complaint that we're spread too thinly and so we need more men and material. Could I ask you for your views on that, and also your view on Tony Abbott's bid to overturn the Wild Rivers Act in Queensland? Would you contemplate looking at that, or is your position fixed?
PM: Well, look, thank you, and I will answer both questions.
On the first, I understand that the Coalition spokesperson for Defence has made a statement about troop commitments in Afghanistan. I understand that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Julie Bishop, has answered some questions about his matter on radio today, but I think on an issue like this of such utmost seriousness, really, it's important that the Leader of the Opposition clarify what is the formal position of the Opposition on this question.
For the Government, we have relied on the advice of the Chief of the Defence Force that our troop commitment is appropriate to get the mission done. If the Leader of the Opposition is now formally adopting a different policy in an area of such significance and seriousness, then I presume he will announce that, his reasons for it, what, if any, advice he's taken in relation to it and spell it out in a great deal of detail for the Australian people.
I would say we will have, of course, a debate on Afghanistan in this parliament and there will be the opportunity there for the Leader of the Opposition and of course for other Parliamentarians to put a view.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Wild Rivers?
PM: Oh, sorry - Wild Rivers. On that question, look, I understand that there are a variety of views here. There are a variety of views about the environmental questions and economic questions. There are also a variety of views amongst Indigenous communities about what best meets their interests for economic development and for the creation of jobs.
I believe the whole area could be the subject of a wide inquiry and look to make sure that the Parliament's got the best information in front of it. As I understand it, what will happen now, technically, that the Leader of the Opposition will introduce the bill when the Parliament comes back in private members' business. It'll then go to the selection committee that can look at what should happen next in terms of inquiries.
Chris?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you saying that in this round of hospital funding that Hobart Hospital starts in no better position than any other region around the country, and will you be giving any kind of extra assistance to the Tasmanian Government that won't go to any of those other regions?
PM: Well, look I refer you to the written terms of the agreement that we have with Mr Andrew Wilkie, the Member for Denison, where it talks about the proper processes of the Health and Hospitals Fund and the Hobart Hospital.
Yes, Mark?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you think about fingerprint technology for poker machine users?
PM: Look, I've seen those newspaper reports today and I'd just, to start at the beginning here, we asked the Productivity Commission to look into the question of problem gambling and what we could better do as a nation to deal with problem gambling and I think this is an issue Australians are concerned about. Too many people would know a family torn apart by problem gambling.
At the same time, many Australians like to place the occasional bet, have the occasional night out at a local club, and that's no problem for them or their family because they monitor their expenditure and it's just another form of entertainment.
We asked the Productivity Commission to look into it. It came back with a recommendation about this pre-commitment technology. We have obviously said we will work with Mr Andrew Wilkie, Senator Xenophon and in this Parliament to implement recommendations, but the Productivity Commission did not define which technology to use. That has to be the subject of inquiry and discussion. Senator Xenophon is obviously pre-disposed to a particular form of technology, the fingerprint technology. We'll be looking at the whole range of technology that could be used to meet this aim of pre-commitment.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on Afghanistan, is there a concern that a bi-partisan consensus on Afghanistan could turn into a partisan debate and split?
PM: Oh, look, obviously Mr Abbott and I have taken a bi-partisan approach to Afghanistan. I am optimistic that that bi-partisanship will continue.
I've had occasion, as, you know, Tony Abbott and I have attended funerals together we've had occasion to talk about Afghanistan, to talk about our mission there, and I believe broadly we are proceeding shoulder to shoulder on our commitment to Afghanistan and that's appropriate, which is I think, before we get to, make too much of a response to the overnight statements by Mr Abbott's spokesperson, that we would have Mr Abbott clarify what is the position of the Coalition.
Latika?
JOURNALIST: There was widespread for Ken Wyatt's maiden speech in the Parliament yesterday. Is part of you disappointed that that type of speech didn't come from a Labor MP?
PM: Look, I think it's terrific we've got the first Indigenous Australian in the House of Representatives. I don't think it's something about which side of Parliament. Obviously, the Liberal Party would be rightly proud of having selected Mr Wyatt, but I thought yesterday and the sort of speech that Mr Wyatt gave was a moment of celebration for the whole Parliament and I think that was fantastic and I think you saw in the reactions to it in the Parliament and I suspect in the community beyond, that it was received as a historic moment overall.
JOURNALIST: Why won't you increase the GST? Is it for political reasons? (inaudible)
PM: Obviously, the Government makes a set of decisions about the appropriate tax mix, and we've made that set of decisions and we have ruled out increasing the GST.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when you were asked about the carbon tax before you said that you made a series of comments during the election campaign that clearly stamped your agenda, so did you or did you not say, quote, 'I rule out a carbon tax'?
PM: Oh, look, I'm not trying to deny the quote. I've never tried to do that, but I've also said, and this is just the simple reality of this Parliament: Australians voted for this Parliament, and what that means is that in this Parliament it is not possible for the Government, in area like pricing carbon, to go to the House of Representatives and say 'here it is - pass it.'
This requires new ways of working and I'm obviously open to, indeed, enthusiastic about, embracing those ways of working, but let's also be clear, here - the Government, for a number of years, has talked to the Australian community about the need to price carbon in order to create the right incentive to reduce carbon pollution, and we've been clear with the community all along that we will not acquit our goals of reducing carbon pollution if we do not price carbon.
Now the multi-party committee will have a look at all potential options for pricing carbon-
JOURNALIST: -Therefore, hand on heart, do you regret making (inaudible)
PM: Well, you, 21st of August, Australians made a decision about the Parliament they wanted. They have created this Parliament. The reality of it is as I've described. I think that give us an opportunity and we should be looking to that opportunity.
Look, did I know the result of the 21st of August election-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible)
PM: Well, can I finish my statement? I didn't, obviously, know what was going to happen on election day until it happened. Neither did anybody in this room; neither did Mr Abbott, but having seen the Parliament that Australians voted for, my view is we should look to this Parliament and we should say 'how can we use the opportunity of this Parliament to create change in the national interest?'
Now, I understand Mr Abbott's of a different view. He looks at this Parliament and says 'how can wreak destruction?' Well, I'm in the building business. He's in the wrecking business. That's the difference between us.
PM: We're just, I know we called last question, but I always favour Mark Metherell, so we'll take one more.
Oh, OK, and we'll go to WIN, as well.
JOURNALIST: Given regional Australia got a pretty fair slice of funding in the last round, what do you say to the many metropolitan city hospitals that are desperate for funding that are going to miss out?
PM: Well, look, what I'd say to Australians right around the nation is we have got a profound agenda for health reform and we are making record investments. The Minister, obviously, is the custodian of every statistic and I'm sure you could have the hour and a half tutorial afterwards, but you would be-
MINISTER ROXON: -I would never do that.
PM: You'd be well aware that we have profoundly increased the amount of money that the Federal Government is investing in health, both through the Australian health care agreements; through direct investments and through capital investments, and obviously as we deliver our health agenda, our health reform agenda for Australians right around the country, we are recognising that they want more doctors, more nurses, better services, hospitals where there isn't blame shifting and cost shifting, where government is making sure that services are delivered, but they want the Federal Government to step up to the plate and do more, become the dominant funder of health, and we are committed to doing that, so it'll make a difference for Australians right around the country.
Yes, WIN?
JOURNALIST: Just one on the (inaudible) is it somewhat lopsided to put all this money into new hospitals if you can't get doctors to staff those hospitals in the first place?
PM: Well, I'll turn to the Minister for Health for a comment, but can I say this: this government is committed to training more doctors and more nurses. We came to government inheriting the damage wreaked by Tony Abbott's cuts as Health Minister: number of GP training places cut back; a crisis emerging in the number of nurses being trained and nothing done; and of course we inherited the consequences of the billion-dollar cut to public hospitals.
We have moved to increase training so we will have more doctors and more nurses, and that's good news for Australians, including Australians beyond our capital cities, and I'd ask Nicola to comment, too.
MINISTER ROXON: Thank you look, both of those last two questions indicate and are reflective of what regional Australia was asking us two and a half and three years ago and is the reason that our health reforms already include significant solutions to those problems.
Firstly of course as the Prime Minister's mentioned, increasing the number of doctor training places to five and half thousand over the next decade, more than half of which we have committed to being in rural and regional Australia. That wasn't part of a deal, that just part of the right thing to do when we made those investments in the past term of government.
If you look at the question that Mark Metherelll has asked, 'wont' city hospitals feel left out?', I remind all of you and the community that our health reforms mean that for the first time ever we will be taking on 60% of capital infrastructure costs of hospitals across the country, in the city, in rural and regional areas.
What this regional round does and I think this is stealing a word of Rob Oakeshott's, is turbocharge some of the investments that were needed and had been neglected for decades so that when we move to this new system some of those investments are already coming online.
But every city hospital country across the county, every regional hospital across the country will in a number of years for the first time ever have 60 percent of its capital costs met by the Commonwealth and it's a very significant part of the reforms that haven't really been focused on sufficiently for changing the way the Commonwealth will invest in health services across the country.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We, oh, OK, alright. We've disproportionately favoured WIN and Mark Metherell, but you snuck in at the end.
JOURNALIST: The IMF has said the central bank will need to increase rates if the mining boom continues to stoke the economy. Do you agree with that, and also, what pressure is the Reserve Bank under at the moment in terms of managing this (inaudible)
PM: Well, look the Reserve Bank sets interest rate independently, so I'll leave that for the Reserve Bank, but on the IMF report, what this IMF report is doing is endorsing the Government's economic management strategies. The Government's got a proud record of economic management, particularly steering this nation through the global financial crisis and global recession through the provision of economic stimulus, and the IMF report strongly endorses that.
The Government is now determined to return the budget to surplus three years early. We are engaged, as I said yesterday, in a huge fiscal consolidation task - the biggest fiscal consolidation task since the 1960s to bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13.
The IMF is endorsing bringing the budget to surplus and that fiscal consolidation approach.
Now, of course, is the time to build on that economic strength. We should be proud as Australians that we are emerging from the global financial crisis stronger than any other major advanced economy. Now's the time to build for the future, it's about investing in skills; it's about investing in infrastructure and pivotal to that is our investments in the National Broadband Network. It's about increasing our pool of national savings; and it's also about changing our tax arrangements, particularly in implementing the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
So, the Government's determined to continue to deliver our strong economic management and those economic reforms.
Thank you.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Health Nicola Roxon and Minister for Regional Australia Simon Crean today announced that applications for the Regional Priority Round of the Health and Hospitals Fund were now open.
This new round of funding will see regional hospitals around Australia receive critical upgrades of their infrastructure.
The funding will also support the clinical training capacity of regional hospitals.
The Prime Minister said today's opening of applications honours an agreement reached between the Government and Independent members of Parliament.
Projects approved as part of this priority round could include improved acute care facilities, new local centres to better treat chronic diseases, and infrastructure catering to mental health and dental health.
Expanding new facilities and patient services such as accommodation will mean patients won't have to travel as far to get the care they need.
Minister for Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government Simon Crean said the regional priority round would improve the lives of Australians living in regional areas and boost regional communities.
"Regional Australia deserves and is getting better health services under the Gillard Government," Mr Crean said.
Health Minister Nicola Roxon said the number of projects funded by the Government will depend on the quality of applications received, as evaluated by the Health and Hospitals Fund Board.
There is currently up to $1.8 billion in unallocated funds (excluding interest) in the Health and Hospitals Fund.
Ms Roxon said she had consulted with the Independent members of Parliament and the Regional Development Minister to ensure the new funding round is targeted to regional healthcare needs and that projects with local community support are prioritised.
"The regional priority round will build on the $3.2 billion allocated in the 2009-10 Federal Budget to deliver a world-class national cancer care system, upgrade the hospital network and expand medical research and training infrastructure to improve patient care," Ms Roxon said.
"With around 37 per cent of the first round also going to regional and rural areas, this Government is delivering the health infrastructure regional Australia needs."
"The first round of the Health and Hospitals Fund has seen work has commenced on over 30 health infrastructure projects and planning now underway for further 22 projects," Ms Roxon said.
Applications can be made at www.health.gov.au/tenders until 3 December 2010. For more information on the Health and Hospitals Fund, go to www.health.gov.au/hhf.  



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today met FIFA President Sepp Blatter to help make Australia's case to host the world's biggest sporting event in 2022 - the FIFA World Cup.
FIFA's Executive Committee members will decide which countries will host the 2022 FIFA World Cup on 2 December in Zurich.
The Prime Minister's meeting with Mr Blatter follows Football Federation Australia's (FFA) submission of its Bid Book in May and a FIFA inspection tour of Australia in July. The Prime Minister said that the meeting was a good opportunity to reinforce the commitment of the Australian Government to the bid and to highlight Australia's strengths as a bidding nation.
Australia is a sports-loving nation with a proud history of hosting outstanding major events. Like the Olympics in 2000, the Rugby World Cup in 2003 and the Commonwealth Games in 2006, a FIFA World Cup held in Australia would be a first class event, professionally delivered and enthusiastically embraced by the Australian people.
Australia is the only continent never to have hosted a World Cup and is competing against a strong field of bidders from across Asia, Europe and the United States of America, some of whom are also bidding for the 2018 tournament.
The Australian Government has been a strong supporter of Football Federation Australia's (FFA) bid to host the World Cup since FFA Chairman Frank Lowy announced his intention to bid for the event in February 2008.
This has included: 
 * 	a contribution of $45.6 million to support bidding activities;
 * 	the establishment of a dedicated Taskforce within the Commonwealth to work with FFA, State and Territory Governments and other key stakeholders to assist in the development of a competitive, high quality submission to FIFA; and
 * 	the delivery of the necessary guarantees and other commitments require d as part of the bidding material.
Ms Gillard said the Australian Government has been proud to work closely with FFA over the past two years and should we be awarded the World Cup we would look forward to working with FFA and FIFA to deliver a magnificent event just as we have with other major international sporting festivals.
Ms Gillard made the short visit to Zurich to meet Mr Blatter as part of her first international trip as Prime Minister. She has visited Australian troops in Afghanistan and is representing Australia at the ASEM leaders meeting (ASEM) in Brussels. 



Thank you very much, thank you for the welcome, but can I say I know that the most important event of today is not my visit it's the Grand Final, I understand that. How many Collingwood supporters in the crowd?
Well I was at the MCG last weekend to watch the draw, there were a fair few Collingwood supporters in the crowd then too, but obviously some more successful barracking today. So whilst it's paining me to say, congratulations to Collingwood. As a passionate Western Bulldogs supporter I managed to choke the words out. So, well done to Collingwood and all the Collingwood supporters in the crowd. There are only three, I doubt that.
Can I say more seriously, I did want to make sure that my very first trip as Prime Minister was to here, to come and see you and say hello to you. And I know many of you probably think politicians can talk a fair bit and that's probably right, but there's really one word that I come to say to you and that word is thank you. Thank you for everything that you are doing here, thank you for the bravery you're showing while you do it, thank you for the dedication that you're showing while you do it. I know it has been a really hard period, a really hard year, a really hard few months and we very much value what you are doing here. We very much value it, because the mission is so important to our national interest. The mission is critical to making sure that this place does not again become a training ground, a place that sponsors violence and terrorism that is visited on innocent people around the world, but particularly on innocent Australians. We've lost too many lives in terrorist attacks and what you are doing is making sure that this place does not continue to be part of that cycle of terror that has taken the lives of so many Australians.
And of course critically what you are doing here is training the Afghan National Army so that they can bring security and stability to this place. And that training mission, I'm sure, is stressing, it's got its difficult moments, it's got its days when you can feel the success and progress, it's got its days when you probably feel that progress seems a long time away. But that mission is critical to making sure that for the long term, this place does not again become a safe-haven for terrorists.
And I know as you do that dangerous work of training, that we have to make sure you've got proper force protection and if you are also involved in disrupting what the Taliban does, and making sure that the insurgency doesn't prevent you going about that training mission.
And I know that that does take guts and determination and bravery, and it particularly takes it after a period of time where you've seen so many of your friends and comrades and colleagues fall victim to death in the battlefield.
And I may not have been Prime Minister for a very long time, but I've certainly attended a large number of funerals. I've have cause to grieve with the families, I've had cause to grieve with some of the people from this place who have returned to Australia for those funerals and I've certainly thought about how that would be impacting on you, what it would be making you think and feel as you've seen that loss of life, as you've seen people wounded.
But one thing that's always come home to me as I've attended the funerals, as I've talked to Angus and to the people back in Australia, and as I've received the briefings this morning, is that despite those losses, your courage and determination to get the job done continues undaunted.
And one thing I can say to you having attended the funerals is the thing that has always seemed so amazing to me is even in the depths of their grief, the families of the soldiers we have lost have spoken about their determination to see this mission done and their determination to make sure that their loved one is best honoured by us continuing the mission here.
So they are remarkable people, the families that I've met back in Australia, and you are remarkable people for choosing to do this work, and I just wanted to say to you on my behalf, on behalf of the Government, but really on behalf of the Australian nation, we value what you're doing and you are in our thoughts.
Can I also say to you many of you would have heard that there is going to be a Parliamentary debate about Afghanistan in this newly created Parliament and some of you might have wondered what that means, what does it mean for the Australian people, does it mean that people are lessening their support for the mission here, and I just want to come today and make it very clear to you that the Parliamentary debate in my view is a very great opportunity, it's a great opportunity to tell the Australian people what you are achieving here. It's a great opportunity to tell them about the mission, it's a great opportunity to tell them about the progress, it's a great opportunity to remind them, though they probably don't need any reminder, of the bravery of the soldiers we have lost and the need to show care and concern for their families, and it is an opportunity to showcase your courage, determination and professionalism on the national stage, and that's certainly what I will be using it for.
So thank you very much for having me here today, and I'm looking forward to talking to people and enjoying lunch together.
Thank you.



On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia, I wish you all the very best for a successful, safe and joyous Commonwealth Games.
I know how hard you have worked to prepare yourselves for the competition we will see in the coming days. 
We salute your passion and your dedication.
Australia has a proud Commonwealth Games tradition.
A tradition not just of success, but of participation with other nations in the true spirit of the Games.
I know you will continue that honourable tradition and fly our flag high.
Along with all Australians, I will be cheering you on.
Good luck,



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, has visited Australians serving in Afghanistan at the beginning of her first international trip since becoming Prime Minister and thanked them for their hard work and dedication on behalf of all Australians.
In Tarin Kot she met with members of Combined Team Uruzgan, including personnel from the Australian Defence Force, Australian diplomats, AusAID officials, Australian Federal Police and the Special Operations Task Group and confirmed the Government's ongoing commitment to the mission in Afghanistan.
The Prime Minister paid tribute to the professionalism and dedication of Australian personnel and honoured the 21 soldiers who have lost their lives during the deployment.
Ms Gillard received briefings from local commanders on progress against the insurgency, the training and mentoring of the Afghan National Army 4th Brigade in Uruzgan, police training and on Australia's support for development and improved governance in the province.
While there are significant security, development and governance challenges ahead, Australians are making a difference in Afghanistan. The training and mentoring of the 4th Brigade will allow a progressive transition of responsibility for security to Afghan forces.
The Prime Minister later travelled to Kabul, where she met with the President of Afghanistan, Hamid Karzai, who thanked the Prime Minister for Australia's continued commitment. The Prime Minister congratulated President Karzai on the first fully Afghan-led elections since 2001.
She met with the President and a number of Afghan Government Ministers for discussions before having a private dinner with President Karzai.
Ms Gillard underscored Australia's intention to continue working with the Afghan Government to help meet its objectives to improve security, governance and development across the country and reiterated Australia's expectations of the Afghan Government in the process.
Ms Gillard also met with the Commander ISAF, General David Petraeus, and discussed the International Security Assistance Force's (ISAF) strategy in Afghanistan. General Petraeus confirmed that all elements of the US-led surge in Afghanistan were now in place and was being given time to complete its mission.
They discussed ongoing plans for ISAF and the Afghan Government to continue working on a transition to an Afghan-led security responsibility over the coming years and that this would be a focus of discussion at the NATO/ISAF Leaders Summit in Lisbon in November.
The Prime Minister will have further discussions on Afghanistan, including the transition to Afghanistan-led security, when she meets NATO Secretary- General Anders Fogh Rasmussen in Brussels on 4 October.
The visit was part of Ms Gillard's first international trip since becoming Prime Minister. She will also stop briefly in Zurich to meet with FIFA President Sepp Blatter to discuss Australia's bid for the 2018 and 2022 Soccer World Cup.
Ms Gillard will then travel on to Brussels where she will attend the ASEM conference where she will be among 46 world leaders from Europe and Asia to discuss trade and security.  



HOST: What was your impression of the situation in Afghanistan?
PM: Well, my impression was that our troops are making progress there. It is very, very tough. It is tough terrain. It is difficult work but they are training the Afghan National Army and they are making progress and of course our aid workers and our Australian Federal Police are making progress too, progress in health and education, in aid work and also progress in training Afghan police.
HOST: When you meet the NATO secretary-general here in Brussels, what will you be telling him about Australia's commitment to Afghanistan? Is it open ended?
PM: I will be telling him that we are very clear on what our mission is - training the Afghan National Army, training the 4th Brigade of that army. We are very clear as a result that we will be there to do that job. The best advice to me from the Chief of the Defence Force is that job is likely to take between two to four years but we are making progress and then we will transition so that leadership goes to the Afghan National Army.
This will not be a day, it won't be transition day. It will be a process where increasingly Afghan forces take the lead in providing security.
HOST: You assured one of the soldiers you met in Uruzgan that your Government deals urgently with requests for increased resources. Have you actually asked the chief of defence what his needs are at this point?
PM: Absolutely. I have had that conversation with the Chief of our Defence Force consistently. I had it with him in Afghanistan as we toured there together and the constant advice to me from the Chief of the Defence Force and this was confirmed by commanders on the ground in Afghanistan is that they have the equipment that they need.
Of course the Government invested an extra $1.1 billion in equipment to better protect our forces. We will act on advice if the Chief of the Defence Force says more equipment is necessary then of course, we will deal with that urgently but I should note that some of the things that have been dealt with in the media in Australia recently have not been dealing with matters that are of real concern in Afghanistan.
There has been a debate in the media about the need for tanks to be in Afghanistan. Now when I was there from the most senior general to the soldiers I met on the ground, everyone was guffawing at how ridiculous that was. You may as well send them a submarine.
So we really need to work on the best of professional advice here and that comes to the government from the Chief of the Defence Force.
HOST: Do they need helicopters?
PM: Well, there are helicopters. Obviously in Afghanistan and we do need access to attack helicopters. That has been provided through the Dutch and obviously we will look to that capability continuing to be provided as the Dutch withdraw from that active combat.
HOST: So that will then be provided by the Australians? By the Australian Government?
PM: We are working in coalition. Particularly in coalition with American forces and so we look at equipment and capabilities across the coalition forces including sourcing particularly air support from American forces.
HOST: So Australia won't be paying for it, Americans will be?
PM: The attack helicopter capability in Afghanistan at the moment is being provided by the Dutch. We would envisage that there would be a transition but it would be the Americans who are taking the main lead in providing air support.
HOST: Now John Howard didn't think it necessary to join this particular summit. Why do you, on the other hand, think the Asia-Europe meeting is important for Australia?
PM: We've pressed to join this meeting for some time because it brings together so many world leaders and so many of our major trading partners. We obviously trade substantially in our own region, in Asia. We also have substantial trade into Europe. It is therefore in our interest to come here, to be speaking to our trading partners, to be pressing them on questions like the Doha round and free trade and of course for us trade equals jobs.
HOST: Will you be meeting the Chinese premier while you are here?
PM: Look, we are still working obviously on final details of the program. I am obviously looking to have the opportunity to meet as many people as possible within the constraints that this is a two days in Brussels and obviously there are a large number of leaders here.
HOST: How concerned are you about the rising tensions between the US and China over Beijing's insistence on keeping its currency pegged?
PM: Well, look these are issues obviously. I can understand the United States pressing. I think for Australia what we do is we pushed hard to create the G20. That does bring the US and China to the same table talking firstly but not only about economic questions so it is the right place to have this kind of dialogue.
HOST: The US House of Representatives passed a bill last week allowing Washington to impose duties on Chinese imports because of its currency undervaluation. Was that a wise move in your mind?
PM: Look, I am not going to purport to tell those who legislate laws in the US what they should be doing. Just they will make their decision. What I would say more broadly is I think it is very important that the world doesn't succumb to a new round of protectionism. I don't think that that is the way forward. Certainly as a big trading nation, I think it is in our interest to be pressing to keep global markets as open as possible.
HOST: You had intended to meet Prime Minister David Cameron in the UK on this trip. What had you hoped to discuss with him or have I got that wrong?
PM: The intention really was to come here to Brussels and my understanding is Prime Minister Cameron won't be here. The United Kingdom will be represented by Deputy Prime Minister Clegg.
HOST: And will you be meeting with him?
PM: Yes, I will be seeing him during the course of the two days here.
HOST: It might be a good chance to get some tips on managing relationships in a minority government.
PM: It may be, but let me tell you as I meet with world leaders here and the discussions I've had on the telephone with a number, minority governments are quite a common experience.
We can talk about the Dutch, we can talk about a wide range of people who are striving in minority governments or to create them.
HOST: Something else you and David Cameron have in common is a stirring media interest in parliamentary expenses. Your government received a report on MP entitlements earlier this year. Do you intend to release that publicly?
PM: That is the Belcher Review and it will be released in the future. Yes, it is our intention to release it publicly and the Government's response to it.
HOST: Do you agree with the head of the Finance Department that there is a public expectation that the Government will introduce further reforms particularly in relation to travel for retired MPs and overseas study travel?
PM: What I would say is I understand that the community wants to make sure that there is transparency about Parliamentarians' entitlements. That is appropriate but people do also want to make sure that if they go to see their MP that they are in an office where there are staff that can help them so that people's concerns can be dealt with. So we have got to get the balance right here.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thank you.



PM: Can I say I'm very pleased to be here in Brussels. Obviously, I've arrived so that I'm able to attend the Asia-Europe Meeting over the next two days. This is the first time that Australia's had a seat at this table. This is a meeting that brings together over 40 world leaders.
As well as attending the sessions of the Asia-Europe Meeting, I will be taking the opportunity to have direct discussions with a number of world leaders, including the President of France, the Chancellor of Germany, the Prime Minister of Japan, amongst others.
I've come here today from Zurich, where I stopped over to talk to the President of FIFA, Mr Sepp Blatter, about Australia's bid for the World Cup in 2022. I, obviously, urged him to see the merits of Australia's bid for the World Cup. We are, of course, a great sporting nation. This is the biggest sporting event in the world. Australia has a great track record of running major sporting events, including the Olympics in Sydney and the Commonwealth Games.
The decision as to which nation will host the World Cup in 2022 will be made in December, so it was great to have an opportunity to talk through Australia's bid for this major sporting event.
And, clearly, I started my trip in Afghanistan. I believed it was very important as Prime Minister to make the first place I visited overseas Afghanistan so that I could talk directly with our troops there, and also with our AusAID personnel and our Australian Federal Police. They are doing a great job under difficult conditions: a great job training the Afghan national army; a great job supporting civil reconstruction works to assist the Afghan people rebuild their society.
It was a tremendous opportunity to be able to talk to the troops, to our AusAID personnel and to our Australian Federal Police directly, as well as to get briefings from personnel on the ground, including Colonel Creighton, General Cantwell, and of course General Petraeus, about the strategy in Afghanistan. I also had the opportunity to meet with the President of Afghanistan, so that was very enjoyable and a tremendous privilege to be able to talk to our troops.
So, I'm very happy to take questions. We'll start over here and go to there.
JOURNALIST: On Afghanistan, there's always pressure for more troops for the NATO effort. Is there any room in it to give on that, and what would be your message to Secretary General Rasmussen when you meet with him about Australia's commitment - length of commitment and numbers?
PM: Well, firstly, I don't want to assume what will be said to me tomorrow by the Secretary General of NATO, but what I will say about our deployment in Afghanistan is this - in terms of the size of our commitment, we have the biggest commitment of any non-NATO nation. We increased our commitment by 40 percent within the last 12 months.
Of course, what we have done here is we have defined the mission, and the mission is to train the Afghan National Army. In particular, to train the 4th Brigade, and having defined the mission, then we have taken the advice of the Chief of the Defence Force, Angus Houston, about what personnel and what equipment is required to acquit the mission.
As recently as being in Afghanistan, the fact that we have deployed the right number of people with the right equipment to acquit the mission was confirmed to me by the Chief of the Defence Force. It was also confirmed to me by commanders on the ground like Colonel Jim Creighton, like General Cantwell, that we have the appropriate force size for our mission.
Of course, the equipment that our troops have is always under review. We recently allocated $1.1 billion to increase equipment, to increase force protection. We constantly keep these matters under review, and should additional equipment be required then of course we will respond to that advice.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how did Sepp Blatter respond to your message about our game? Did he give you any indication of our chances?
PM: I suspect that inherent in the job of being President of FIFA is that you're pretty good at holding your cards close to your chest, and at the end of the day this is a voting structure, and so the votes will come in in December. Obviously, he confirmed to me that Australia's bid had complied with all of the FIFA rules, so we were, in his terminology, like a Formula One driver at the starting line - the car is fully fuelled and the engine is on. Whether we'll win the race, we'll know in December.
Yes, Karen?
JOURNALIST: What are the chances of you meeting with the Premier of China, who's also here, and there was some tension when Mr Rudd became Prime Minister that he went to China and didn't go to Japan. There's been speculation about concern about the reverse, because you're going to Japan later in the year. How conscious are you of those tensions, and are you hoping to meet the Premier here?
PM: Well, we are still, of course, working on bilateral meetings, so I've indicated some of the ones that are already organised.
Just on the sequence of my travel, what I thought was my first and primary obligation was to make sure that I went to Afghanistan. That's what I wanted to do first, and then my travel during the course of this year is to attend the major multinational fora that are important to our national interest: here at the Asia-Europe Meeting, the first time we've seat at this table; and then later in the year at the East Asia Summit, APEC, and of course the G20.
JOURNALIST: Why did you see it as important to have a seat at the table here, because Australia has had the option before but hasn't been here?
PM: Well, this is something that was actually pressed for, pressed for over a long period of time. This is a significant gathering of world leaders. It's in our interest to be here. It's particularly in our interests when both security and economic matters, including trade, are discussed.
Of course, as I said to the parliament before I left to come on this trip, trade is in our national interest. Trade equals jobs. We're a great trading nation, and so it's tremendous to be here for this opportunity to see so many world leaders in the one place at the one time.
JOURNALIST: How about climate change? What are you expecting to get out of climate change at these meetings here?
PM: Well, as such a significant issue for the whole planet, obviously climate change will be under discussion both in the forum itself as well as in the bilateral meetings, so I will take the opportunity to explain that as a nation, as a government, we are committed to tackling climate change. We believe climate change is real and that we have this multi-party committee looking at all options for the pricing of carbon.
JOURNALIST: Do you think there's support for a carbon price or a carbon tax here (inaudible)
PM: I believe that what we will see here and what we see in other international meetings is nations defining their own strategies, their own way of dealing with pricing carbon and dealing with reducing carbon pollution.
JOURNALIST: Your Trade Minister has raised his voice against groups calling for protectionism related to climate change, and there were warnings under the previous Labor Government about the likes of France suggesting that countries that didn't have emissions trading should be penalised. Australia seemed to use that at the time as an argument in favour of having emissions trading, and now that we don't have an emissions trading scheme you seem to be arguing against that position. Is that a change simply because you didn't achieve emissions trading, and what will you say to the French President here?
PM: Well, look, I think to be fair to what we've said over time, we have always said, over time, as a Labor Government, that we're not interested in protectionist measures, that we're a Party of free trade. We believe free trade is in the interests of Australia. We are a great trading nation.
We've also said, of course, that we should tackle climate change. I would agree with the Trade Minister that we don't want to see a return to protectionism under some other guise.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) out of Indonesia in the last 24 hours in the wake of your lifting of the freeze on processing of Afghanistan visa applications, suggesting that we'll now see an influx. How concerned are you? If you believe that freeze was effective, how concerned are you that this might be facing, you might see more Afghans seeking asylum in Australia now?
PM: Well, I think the message here, of course, is we now have further country information. We have seen the number of Afghan asylum claims which are accepted go down. As a result, the message would be that people who are not genuine refugees will have their claims processed and will be returned back overseas, so that would be my message to anyone.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the raised travel (inaudible) threat of terrorism (inaudible)
PM: Look, can I say our information is always used to inform our travel advisories. As I am advised now, our travel advisories have not been changed, but we keep these matters under constant review.
Thank you.



PRESIDENT BARROSO: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
I am very pleased that Prime Minister Julia Gillard has come to Brussels, immediately after her election, and to participate in this ASEM Summit, and also that enable us to have this first bilateral meeting. I congratulate Prime Minister Gillard for her election and I wish her and Australia all the best.
This is also an occasion to welcome Australia's entry into ASEM, the ASEM process, and of course the European Union has very much supported that process.
The European Union has been Australia's largest trade and investment partner for more than 25 years now. But our relationship goes well beyond trade. We have also very useful dialogues on global challenges such as development cooperation - especially in the Pacific - or energy security, or climate change.
Prime Minister Gillard has made proposals to develop further the European Union-Australia relationship. I welcome this initiative, I will examine those proposals in detail, consulting Member States. Let me tell you on my own behalf, on behalf of the European Commission that we very much support the idea of upgrading and giving more important expression to the relationship between Australia and the European Union.
As partners in the G20, we have discussed financial and economic governance and also the need to cooperate in multilateral fora. We also discussed briefly on climate change, in advance of the meeting in Cancun. We agree that we have a common interest in strengthening our ability to deal with these challenges.
We will continue to work with Australia on this comprehensive agenda. And I thank again Prime Minister Gillard for her partnership on these important matters.
PM: Well can I say on my behalf thank you very much for our discussions today which have been very warm and very constructive. This is of course a very important relationship for Australia with the European Union and we've discussed the importance of that relationship today. And because it is an important relationship, as a nation, we are seeking to have a treaty which would detail the very important elements of what is a very comprehensive and strong relationship, and I'm very glad to have received the feedback, that whilst of course this has to be the subject of consultation and further, there is a positive pre-disposition and I do personally thank you for that.
We've also taken the opportunity to talk through a range of matters, but most particularly work in the lead up to the G20 meeting in Seoul. At that meeting Australia does want to see progress made, particularly on the question of restructuring of the IMF, progress made on the economic framework as the globe recovers from the global financial crisis, and we did note that there is broad agreement to the financial reforms stemming from the global financial crisis.
So I very much enjoyed our discussions and and thank you for a warm and constructive discussion about what is a very strong and very deep relationship.
COMPERE: Thank you very much let's go to your questions now, who would like to ask a question, would you please come to the microphone, thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: Emma Alberici from ABC Australia. My question is to Julia Gillard, it's a domestic question. Your Opposition number Tony Abbott is currently in the UK, we understand that you invited him to go to Afghanistan with you but instead he chose to the Conservative Party Conference. What do you think about that?
PM: Look I think matters about Mr Abbott's travel schedule are probably better directed towards him.
COMPERE: So is there any other question? Would you please come to the microphone?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, Paola Totaro, Sydney Morning Herald and The Age. Can you give us a little bit more detail on the treaty that you're prosing to the EU to outline the relationship between Australia and Europe?
PM: I've got many Australian friends with me on the trip.
BARRASO: Good.
PM: The treaty would be, in our view it would be something that goes across the breadth of our relationship that has some priorities for further work. We have discussed today, and obviously all of this needs to be the subject of consolation and further discussion, but we have discussed today the possibility of further cooperation in research and development and innovation. As a nation we punch above our weight and of course I know it is a particular passion here at the European Union within the cooperation across the European Union and growing on their great strengths here in research and development.



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, will be representing Australia at the Asia-Europe Meeting in Brussels as part of her first international trip as Prime Minister.
ASEM brings together every two years the leaders from 46 countries in Asia and Europe - two regions of vital importance to Australia. 9 of Australia's top 10 trading partners are ASEM members.
This is the first time Australia has been invited to attend ASEM and will have a seat at the table where the leaders of many of the world's largest economies are discussing the global economy, trade and security.
Ms Gillard will deliver the first address at the opening dinner of the Summit. She will highlight the strength and resilience of the Australian economy and promote policies that will help ensure a sustainable global economic recovery. She will also highlight the benefits and urge an early conclusion of the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations.
The Prime Minister will use her attendance at the summit to advance Australian economic and security interests, including trade with these major partners, which helps provide Australian jobs.
Trade forms a vital part of the Australian economy with potentially hundreds of thousands of Australian jobs depending on our ability to export goods and services to the world.
During the summit, the Prime Minister will outline for the world leaders the opportunities Australia presents as the Government invests heavily in infrastructure including the National Broadband Network.
In other ASEM sessions the Prime Minister will forge cooperative links with key Asian and European partners on important security issues for Australia, including people smuggling, counter-terrorism, nuclear non-proliferation and piracy at sea.
The Prime Minister will hold a number of meetings with individual leaders of important partners for Australia on the sidelines of the ASEM Summit.
Securing Australia's membership of ASEM was a significant foreign policy achievement for the Foreign Minister, Kevin Rudd, and addressed a major deficiency in our regional and multilateral engagement with Europe and Asia.  



PM: Well, look, can I start by saying I've obviously had a long but very productive day here in Brussels. I've attended the opening session of the Asia-Europe Meeting.
I've also had the opportunity to speak today to the Secretary General of NATO, to meet with the Japanese Prime Minister, to meet with the Korean President, to meet with both the European Union Commission President and the European Union Council President, to meet with President Sarkozy of France and to meet with Chancellor Merkel of Germany.
I've had the opportunity to talk briefly with Chinese Premier Wen, and I look forward to meeting him at the East Asia Summit.
Across all of these discussions there have been two continuing themes. Obviously, many of the discussions have gone to the question of Afghanistan, of what our forces are doing there, of the efforts in Afghanistan to bring security, of the training of the Afghan National Army, and of course discussions leading up to the meeting in Lisbon for the continuing strategy in Afghanistan, the NATO meeting.
The other continuing theme of my discussions has been about global financial crisis and the economic recovery, and across those discussions there has been one uniform reaction, and that is to the strength of the Australian economy. People are looking at what has been achieved in our economy with a great degree of awe. They understand that compared with nations around the world our economy is very strong.
We have therefore talked about the opportunity that that gives Australia, the issues that the globe now has to work through as we strengthen our economy and we seek to strengthen the global economy. Those issues of course include reform of the IMF, continuing work together on the global economic framework, and also renewed efforts to free up trade, and particularly to conclude the Doha trade negotiations.
In my intervention at the Asia-Europe Meeting I stressed each of these economic points and the need for us to have international cooperation on the human capital agenda, on investing in our people and seeing investments in the skills and the capacities of people around the world.
So, I'm very happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, you outlined, obviously, a very busy agenda today. You went to Afghanistan on the way here and had a very busy day there.
PM: You're only saying that because you were with me.
JOURNALIST: Indeed. Do you believe that your performance here today has been compromised in anyway - jet lag or any of those sort of things?
PM: No, I slept very well last night.
JOURNALIST: Because Mr Abbott's arrived in Birmingham and he's said that he didn't go to Afghanistan because he wanted to arrive there fresh for the Tory conference. What's your comment on that?
PM: Well, I'll let Mr Abbott work out his own sleeping patterns. For myself, obviously, as you know, I went to Afghanistan, then to Zurich, then came here and did manage to get 8 hours' sleep last night, and that prepared me for a very long day.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said you had a brief conversation with Premier Wen. Can you tell us what you talked about with the Chinese Premier?
PM: Oh, look, it really was a greeting. I have spoken to him by phone. He had offered congratulations to me following the election, so given that telephone call we greeted each other in person and I'm looking forward to meeting him at the East Asia Summit.
JOURNALIST: You met with Nick Clegg today.
PM: Yes, I did.
JOURNALIST: And you talk about economic governance and changes to the financial architecture around the world. One of the things the Liberal Democrats in the UK are very strong on is breaking up the banks, of splitting them up into their retail and investment arms. Is that something Australia supports?
PM: Well, we are in a very different system, very different state with our banking system, so I'm not surprised that in London there are issues such as that under discussion, but for Australia, obviously we've had a well-regulated banking system. It was stable. We did not have the kind of sub-prime and regulatory failures that we saw in other parts of the world.
JOURNALIST: On banks, Prime Minister, there's talk they may raise interest rates by 0.4% regardless of whether there's any (inaudible) in two hours' time. What would be your message to them if they were considering doing that?
PM: Well, just firstly I'd say I'm back to the old conventions of not taking domestic policy questions whilst I'm overseas, but I am aware from the media reports that the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer has fully dealt with that question locally.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you make of reports on Four Corners last night suggesting there was some Labor MPs trying to undermine your chances of forming a minority government with the independents?
PM: Well, once again, not really taking domestic questions, but I have seen that report and I'd say that's not to my knowledge.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) why won't you take domestic questions-
PM: -Well, I think we're back to the old conventions. I thought they had merit.
JOURNALIST: Did you get a bit of a buzz out that, Prime Minister? It's obviously all very, but it is a bit of an historic moment. Did you enjoy it?
PM: Look, I did enjoy it and I did enjoy the discussions that I had. It's obviously a very special opportunity to get to speak to people and the great benefit of coming here, of this Asia-Europe Meeting being so early in my Prime Ministership, is that it's enabled me to see a wide range of people in the one location.
JOURNALIST: Did you discuss minority governments with Nick Clegg?
PM: I've had a few jokes about minority governments as the day has gone on, including with Nick Clegg.
JOURNALIST: Now, you did address today, at the dinner, you did address this idea of economic governance becoming a much more significant focus for this group and the G20. What is it exactly that you're wanting world leaders to do?
PM: Well, three things. Through the G20 agenda, firstly, we are committed to the global economic framework and to putting further details into that framework. That will be a key focus.
JOURNALIST: What framework are talking about?
PM: This is the G20 economic framework that was agreed at the height of the global financial crisis, which was about coordinated economic stimulus around the world which now is moving to other issues but is about the coordination of macroeconomic policy around the world so that we best have balanced growth globally-
JOURNALIST: -And they're now talking about withdrawing the stimulus.
PM: Yes, and the focus, obviously, of that work is fiscal consolidation, where we are in front of much of the world, bringing the budget back to surplus in 2012-13.
Secondly, that economic agenda is about global economic institutions and, in particular, the reform of the IMF so developing, growing economies get a fairer share of the voting entitlements at the IMF, a fairer share of the decision making.
And, thirdly, it's about finally agreeing the financial sector reforms that have come together because of the global financial crisis and the need to respond to what were major regulatory failures.
JOURNALIST: Why do we need a treaty with Europe?
PM: Well, in the elegant words of our ambassador, if I can adopt them, we have had a strong partnership with the European Union, but to quote Brendan Nelson, it's been like being engaged. Now we're looking to get married.
Thank you.



SECRETARY GENERAL RASMUSSEN: Good morning. I am very grateful for the opportunity to meet Prime Minister Gillard today. Welcome to NATO Headquarters.
As the largest non-NATO contributor of troops in Afghanistan, and indeed one of the largest contributors overall, Australia remains an important partner in our joint endeavour and I'm glad to have the opportunity to thank you for the commitment and bravery of Australian troops and civilians deployed there.
We share a common view that the mission in Afghanistan is vital for our own security interests. We face global threats to our security, as the tragic events in London, Madrid and Bali have shown us. These threats require a concerted and collective response. This means helping the Afghans to develop the capacity to run their own affairs.
Australia's recent commitment to train Afghans sends exactly the right message and Australia's contribution of $150 million to the Afghan Army Trust Fund, making it the leading contributor, is highly welcome.
We appreciate Australian achievements in Uruzgan. The efforts of your soldiers and civilians have delivered very real improvement to the people there.
This morning the Prime Minister and I also discussed the central element of NATO's new Strategic Concept; a concept which we intend to adopt at our Summit in Lisbon in November. A key element of this concept will be a refreshed approach to NATO's partners and it's my hope that the Strategic Concept will open the door more widely to partnership between NATO and countries around the globe, and I hope that Australia, if it so chooses, will have the opportunity to deepen its relationship with NATO in the future.
Thank you.
PM: Thank you very much, and can I thank the Secretary General for meeting with me this morning and also for those words.
We do share a determination and a commitment in Afghanistan. I was able, this morning, to brief the Secretary General on what I learned in my very recent visit to Afghanistan, and first and foremost what I would say is progress is being made. Progress is being made in training the Afghan National Army. That is what our soldiers are working on. We are engaged in a mission to train soldiers for the Afghan National Army in Uruzgan province, and progress is being made.
Progress is also being made in our aid and reconstruction work through our Provincial Reconstruction Task Force. I had the opportunity, when I was in Afghanistan, not only to meet with our very brave soldiers, but also to meet with personnel from AusAID, from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Australian Federal Police officers. They are working there on education, on health, on governance, and our Australian Federal Police officers are engaged in training of local police, so progress is being made.
This was an important opportunity to discuss Afghanistan in the lead-up to the Lisbon Summit. We are obviously determined to see through our mission there, our mission of training the Afghan National Army in Uruzgan province.
Can I also welcome the words of the Secretary General on the Strategic Concept that NATO is developing. Obviously, as a non-NATO country but a very significant contributor to the work in Afghanistan, Australia has been keen to ensure that we are included in all discussions of the strategy in Afghanistan. Obviously that has sparked discussion about structures and ways of engagement in the future. Australia would be looking towards having the ability to engage with NATO in a flexible way over time, and this is being debated through and discussed in the NATO Strategic Concept, so I thank the Secretary General as well for our discussions on that topic today.
Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Hi, just a question to both of you - Philip Williams from ABC TV. There is obviously progress being made. You've outlined some of it, but also lives are being lost. It's run for nine years. There is no known end to this conflict. How long do you think the Australian people and the other countries involved will have the political will to continue in what seems to be an endless conflict?
PM: Well, I can answer that first, given it's one of our Australian friends that I've brought with me who's asked the question.
Firstly, of course, the strategy in Afghanistan is a strategy to transition to Afghan leadership in the provision of security. That's why we are there training soldiers in the Afghan National Army, and in the province in which we work that training is showing dividends. It's showing dividends in the security environment.
What we've always said to the Australian people remains our position, which is: we will be able to transition over time to Afghan leadership of the provision of security. So, we look forward to that transition, which of course will be conditions-based.
When I've been asked for a time estimate - 'how long do we imagine that that task will take' - the estimate is between two to four years, so we are very clear on what the mission is; very clear on what success looks like as we see Afghan leadership of the Security Forces, the Afghan National Army and of course, the Afghan Police; and very clear on how that progress will roll out over time.
S.G. RASMUSSEN: Our presence in Afghanistan will not be endless. However, I will not fix an exit date. The whole process must, as the Prime Minister just said, be condition-based, but I can provide you with a roadmap.
I hope our Summit in November will announce that a transition to lead Afghan responsibility is about to start at the beginning of 2011, and at the latest by July 2011. At the same time, we will endorse President Karzai's ambition that Afghan Security Forces should be able to take lead responsibility all over Afghanistan by the end of 2014.
This is a clear road map endorsed by the international community at the Kabul Conference in July. That's our goal, but of course the whole process of gradual transition to lead Afghan responsibility must be condition-based. We will make sure that the Afghans are actually capable to take responsibility and to that end we need to train and educate Afghan soldiers and Afghan police and this the reason why it's so important that our training mission is fully resourced.
In conclusion, we are making progress in Afghanistan. We see a lot of media reports about increased fighting, but you shouldn't be surprised. We have sent in more soldiers. We are now attacking Taliban strongholds in Helmand and Kandahar, and obviously it gives more fighting, but the fact is that we see progress.
Al-Qaeda has no safe haven anywhere in Afghanistan. The Taliban is under pressure everywhere in Afghanistan, and gradually we will hand over responsibility to the Afghans.
JOURNALIST: Ben Nimmo from the German Press Agency, DPA. For the Prime Minister, on the question of strategic partnerships, from Australia's point of view how regular and structured would you want the partnership to be? Would you want something that goes beyond ad hoc cooperation on ad hoc issues?
And for the Secretary General, on ISAF, Pakistan has protested vocally against the, what it sees as the incursions across its border on Friday. It has closed down one of the supply routes into Afghanistan and it's asked for an apology, so have you apologized to the Pakistani Foreign Minister this morning and what are you expecting on the supply routes?
Thank you.
PM: Well, for Australia, we would see the engagement being a flexible one. We are obviously not a NATO country, but we are a country that has worked alongside NATO, including obviously now in Afghanistan, so it would be a flexible engagement and we're working through how best that can be achieved.
S.G. RASMUSSEN: This morning I had a meeting with the Pakistani Foreign Minister Qureshi. We had a good and open discussion. I expressed my regret for the incident last week in which Pakistani soldiers lost their lives, and I expressed my condolences to the families.
Obviously this incident was unintended. Obviously we have to make sure we improve coordination between our militaries and our Pakistani partners. There is a joint investigation on the way, and we will determine what happened and draw the right lessons.
It is important that we step up our cooperation in the border region. We must, together, prevent militants from crossing the border to attack and kill Afghans and international soldiers.
And finally, I expressed my hope that the border will be open for supplies as soon as possible. The Foreign Minister committed work on that, for which I am very grateful.
Thank you.



HOST: Prime Minister thanks for joining us. You joked in your dinner speech about your accent, now you're not really having trouble being understood here are you?
PM: No I'm not, but I thought a joke was worthwhile so I did say even the English language speakers might want to use the translation. Nick Clegg from the United Kingdom ostentatiously then put his headphones on and started pointing at them. So it was a good moment, a funny moment, but no people are understanding me.
HOST: Well is it your first trip abroad and you are obviously introduce yourself to a lot of leaders that you haven't met before. Now it may be confusing for some of them that it's not Kevin Rudd leading a Labor Government here. How are you explaining that to leaders and has anybody asked about it?
PM: People have been talking to me about it, about the circumstances of the election, but for many of these leaders a minority government is a very familiar thing, a very common concept and so no one has asked me about stability questions, particularly here in Europe, they are very used to minority governments.
HOST: You've raised the issue of a possible treaty with Europe, which I understand is related to trade matters and research and development, how much is that a precursor to a free trade agreement and if you were to pursue that, would that have to be pursued individually with European countries or with the EU as a whole?
PM: It would be a treaty level agreement with the EU as a whole. It would obviously have to go through the EU's processes. It would not be a free trade agreement, but it would outline the cooperation between Australia and the EU. Obviously the EU is a big economy, it's important to us in terms of collaboration and exchange. We want to have the same kind of status with the EU that other G20 countries do. That's why we're looking to take the relationship to this next stage.
HOST: You went to Afghanistan on the way here and you've spoken to the Secretary-General of NATO. How much pressure is there on Australia to increase or adjust its contribution? There always is pressure for extra contributions, is that pressure going on other countries or will there ultimately be a request for Australia to increase its troop numbers?
PM: I have not received a formal request from NATO or from the United States of America to increase our commitment. We've increased our commitment by 40 per cent already in the last 12 months. When the Minister for Defence Stephen Smith visited Afghanistan recently he did have a discussion with General Petraeus about trainers and we have said we would make available some artillery trainers to assist with that development of capacity with the Afghan National Army. But we're not the subject of any formal request to increase our troop numbers.
HOST: You've spoken to leaders here about Australia's handling of the global financial crisis, and that's obviously been well canvassed and probably well now understood, but as you head back home again, you'll be on your way home in 24 hours, how is it that you want Australia to be perceived by the nations of Europe and Asia, under your Prime Ministership?
PM: Well I want Australia economically to be perceived as a country that emerged from the global financial crisis strong, but a country that is not going to rest on its laurels, that will keep building on that strength, building with infrastructure investments, building with human capital investments, better education and skills training. So that's my message. We've done well, but we are aiming to do even better.
In terms of our foreign policy, obviously there will be a lot of continuity in our foreign policy, my focus will be on getting the big relationships right, and my focus will be on participating in multi-national forums, like this one of course, the G20, APEC, the East Asia Summit that are so important for the world and for our region.
HOST: Prime Minister thanks very much for joining us.
PM: Thank you.



PM: Well, thank you very much, and I know many of you have probably got flights to get, so we'll keep this as brief as possible.
Can I say, obviously today I've attended the Asia-Europe Meeting, and it has concluded. Today has also afforded me the opportunity to continue some bilateral engagements. Specifically, I met with the Prime Minister of Vietnam and the Prime Minister of Greece.
Significantly, the outcomes of the Asia-Europe Meeting for Australia are as follows: leaders at the meeting recognised the impact of the economic crisis and acknowledged that well-coordinated economic stimulus had made a difference, but also acknowledged that there's still fragility in the world economy and that we need to continue to pursue fiscal consolidation and work together to promote economic growth.
This meeting, the Asia-Europe Meeting, has sent a clear signal to the G20 meeting, which I will also attend, that we do need to agree on IMF quota reform and we do need to focus on economic growth and strengthening our financial system, the global financial system, resilience and transparency.
Importantly, leaders also reiterated their resolve to conclude the Doha round of trade negotiations. As I've been saying, trade equals jobs, and for a great trading nation like Australia the conclusion of that Doha round is very important.
In addition, leaders did reiterate the importance of continued international support in Afghanistan and reaffirmed their commitment to preventing Afghanistan from becoming, once again, a base for international terrorist activity.
Leaders signalled their strong position on nuclear non-proliferation, and leaders expressed resolve in combating people smuggling and acknowledged the importance of consistent regional approaches to deter irregular migration and, as you would know, I am determined to pursue a regional approach in relation to irregular people movements in our own region.
So, the outcomes of the summit, I believe, have been very successful ones. It's been a great opportunity to be here and to be able to meet with so many world leaders in the once place at the one time.
So, I'm happy to take questions. Yes, Mark?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) talked about irregular people movements. Did you speak to the conference about having (inaudible) say anything about what Australia has (inaudible)
PM: No, today I spoke to the conference about Afghanistan. That was my contribution. Obviously, officials have worked for the statements and communiqué that you would have seen.
There are two documents. There's a Brussels declaration on more effective global economic governance, and there's also the Chair's statement, which covers another series of matters.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, imposing an international levy on currency transactions was something that the Belgian Prime Minister said he was bringing to the summit. Did that get anywhere at the summit, and is Australia supportive of the proposal?
PM: Well, we're not supportive of putting extra taxes or levies on such transactions. That idea, obviously, has been discussed at a series of meetings and events and I anticipate it will probably be discussed again at the forthcoming G20, but it's not something that we're disposed towards.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) say about not really being all that comfortable, enjoying the scene too much. Could you just elaborate on that for us?
PM: Oh, I didn't say that. What I said was it's not foreign policy that brought me into politics. The thing that motivated me to first get involved actively in anything political was concern about education and about access to opportunity, so that's been my guiding passion throughout my political life, so I did say earlier today that given the choice I'd probably be in an Australian classroom, talking to a teacher and watching some kids learning to read, but obviously, as Prime Minister, I work across the full range of matters that are in our national interest, and it's in our national interest to engage in forums like this one.
JOURNALIST: So how did the small talk go in a room full of leaders who know you very well?
PM: It goes pretty easily. People are keen to have a chat, and that was my experience - all very keen to have a discussion.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) did you say to the Greek Prime Minister? Did you have a particular agenda in that discussion?
PM: Well, I certainly issued a very warm invitation to him to come and visit Australia. He would very much like to do that. Coming as I do from Melbourne - very strong Greek community in Melbourne and in Australia that I'm sure would welcome a visit. I think he would get a very, very enthusiastic reception if he was able to visit?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) advice from the other female leaders? We understand you were among only 4 out of 49.
PM: Well, I did have the opportunity to chat to the other female leaders. I did, of course, meet with the Chancellor of Germany. I've had some discussions with the leader from Finland, who, interestingly, became Prime Minister, I think, two days before me, so we are of similar vintage.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition's accused you of playing politics, saying that you invited Tony Abbott to Afghanistan when you knew that he was already planning to go there and then leaked that information (inaudible) what's your reaction to that?
PM: Oh, well, look, I'd refer people to the things I've said consistently over the last few days. I've said Tony Abbott's travel plans are a matter for Tony Abbott. I made an invitation to him to join me on the trip to Afghanistan and obviously, you know, he organises his own travel arrangements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given what you said the other day about the need for bipartisanship when the Opposition's apparent change of policy emerged, how helpful is this, this kind of debate between you and Mr Abbott to the morale of the troops and the (inaudible) of proper, bipartisan approach to the war?
PM: Well, I mean, I'm not aware, I'd happily refer people to the exact words of everything I've said over the last few days. The only thing I've said about Mr Abbott's travel plans are they are a matter for Mr Abbott. I've never said anything else, and I certainly don't intend to.
On the question of bipartisanship, each and every time I've been asked I've said I genuinely believe bipartisanship will continue for the deployment in Afghanistan.
Now, clearly the Opposition spokesperson, at an earlier point in time, made some statements about the size of our deployment and the need for equipment. What I said at that time was this was an important matter and I thought it was so important that the Opposition leader should clarify the position of the Opposition on these questions.
JOURNALIST: But did you only invite him because you knew he would reject the invitation?
PM: Certainly not, no, and that's not the sequence of events. I invited Tony Abbott to travel with me to Afghanistan. I thought that would emphasize the bipartisan support for the deployment. He considered that. Obviously, his schedule didn't permit him to do that. He still wanted to visit Afghanistan and obviously at the appropriate point arrangements will be made for him to do that, so your suggestion that he had a fixed date to go when I issued the invitation to him is not correct - simply not correct.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott's expressed regret about the choice of language that he used, he used the word jet lag, and has apologised for any offence that occurred. Is that where the matter should rest?
PM: Well, all of this is a matter for Mr Abbott. I've said that each and every time I've been asked during the last few days, and I haven't got anything else to add to it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if you're not playing politics with this issue, why did you tell journalists that you had invited him along?
PM: Well, obviously, that information was made available. I don't recall directly being asked that myself, but obviously I extended an invitation to Tony Abbott to accompany me to Afghanistan. I thought that was a good way of indicating bipartisanship. He made different arrangements. The matter's become the subject of public controversy because of some statements Mr Abbott made, and at no time have I sought to add to that debate. In fact, time after time I've declined the invitation to do so in exactly the same terms I've declined it today - Mr Abbott's travel plans are a matter for Mr Abbott.
JOURNALIST: What's the single most important thing that you've got out of this conference, and how important are the personal (inaudible) you've made over the last couple of days for the future (inaudible)
PM: Well, I would say two things. I think, firstly, it was important for me as Prime Minister to come and sit at this table because it's the first time Australia's had the opportunity to do so, so having sought to become involved in the Asia-Europe Meeting because of its significance, I thought it was important that I came and represented the nation here at our first opportunity to participate in this meeting.
Then, apart from that formal participation in the meeting, it's obviously afforded me the opportunity to meet a large number of people in the same location in a time-effective way, and I think that will stand me in good stead, particularly as I continue to see many of the same leaders at the G20, at APEC, at the East Asia Summit - all before the end of this year.
OK, thank you very much.



The Multi-Party Climate Change Committee held its first meeting in Canberra today. The Prime Minister, and the Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency were joined by the Leader of the Australian Greens, Senator Bob Brown, Senator Christine Milne and the Member for New England, Mr Tony Windsor. The Committee was assisted by the Member for Melbourne, Mr Adam Bandt and the Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, Mr Mark Dreyfus.
The Deputy Prime Minister was unable to attend due to his attendance overseas at meetings of the IMF and World Bank.
The Member for Lyne, Mr Rob Oakeshott, has also indicated his willingness to be a Member of the Committee but was unable to make this meeting for personal reasons.
The Committee members formally affirmed the Terms of Reference, and reiterated their commitment to work co-operatively across party lines in considering all the options for a price on carbon.
The Committee affirmed the intention to advise agreement on an option for a carbon price, but noted that where differences remain after good faith discussions, it would make every effort to produce workable options for Cabinet consideration.
The Committee also welcomed the appointments of Professor Ross Garnaut, Professor Will Steffen, Mr Rod Sims, and Ms Patricia Faulkner as expert advisors to the Committee. All four experts attended this meeting.
The Committee also agreed on operating procedures for Committee meetings, and resolved to meet monthly until the end of 2011.
The Committee also agreed that it will release a communiqué after each meeting, as part of its role in participating in building public consensus for action on climate change and public understanding of the issues surrounding carbon pricing.
From time to time, it will also release information papers that were provided to Committee members, as a means of informing the public and encouraging public debate. A website will also be established containing public information about the Committee and its work.
The Committee concluded that the Citizens Assembly should not be implemented in its proposed form. Given the formation of this Committee, and the changed political environment following the election, the Committee believes that the objective of the Citizens Assembly to build consensus will be better achieved in other ways.
In this regard, the Committee discussed processes and measures for public engagement on climate change science, climate change action, and forums for public dialogue.
It is anticipated that the proposed Climate Change Commission will play a role in public forums in different locations across Australia to promote greater understanding of the challenges of climate change.
The Committee was also updated on the Government's proposal for an expert body to investigate international carbon prices in key economies and for Professor Ross Garnaut to update his Climate Change Review. These were commitments given to the Member for New England by the Prime Minister.
Below is the current membership list for the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee.
Membership list for the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee
The Hon. Julia Gillard MP Prime Minister, ChairThe Hon. Wayne Swan MP Deputy Prime MinisterThe Hon. Greg Combet MP Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, Co-Deputy ChairSenator Bob Brown Leader, Australian Greens (Tasmania)Senator Christine Milne Deputy Leader, Australian Greens (Tasmania), Co-Deputy ChairMr Tony Windsor MP Independent (Member for New England)Mr Rob Oakeshott MP Independent (Member for Lyne) 



PM: Well I'm here with Minister Greg Combet and obviously we've just come from the first meeting of the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee and that meeting was attended by me and by Minister Combet. We were joined by Senator Bob Brown and Senator Christine Milne from the Australian Greens, Mr Tony Windsor, an Independent in the House of Representatives. The Committee was assisted by Mr Adam Bandt the Member for Melbourne and Mr Mark Dreyfus, the Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency. The Deputy Prime Minister who is a member of the Committee, Wayne Swan, was unable to attend today because he's commenced his travels overseas to attend meetings of the IMF and the World Bank. Mr Rob Oakeshott, who is also a member for the Committee, was unable to attend today, as people would be aware I think, he's just welcomed a newborn baby to his family so had more pressing matters than coming to a Climate Change Committee.
We were also joined by our four expert advisers, Professor Ross Garnaut, Professor Will Steffan, Mr Rod Sims and Ms Patricia Faulkner, who attended the meeting.
Today's meeting was a constructive and collaborative one. Specifically, the meeting endorsed the Terms of Reference for the Committee's work. The meeting also agreed the operating procedures and meetings schedules and agreed how it would work in terms of the release of information. Specially, the meeting agreed that there would be a Communiqué released in relation to each meeting of the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee and obviously I am releasing that Communiqué now.
The meeting also discussed the need to make sure the community is informed that we are harnessing community consensus about climate change and in that regard the Committee agreed that there would be a dedicated website which would provide information about the Committee's work, that the Committee would periodically release documents to inform community understanding about climate change, that we would create the Climate Change Commission which would engage in public outreach work to inform the community about climate change and about pricing carbon.
The Committee concluded that in view of the creation of this Committee and its intended outreach work, that the proposal for a citizens' assembly should not be implemented but there would be other ways of harnessing public dialogue, engagement in the science of climate change and engagement in questions of pricing carbon.
The Committee also commissioned today an update of the work by Professor Ross Garnaut on climate change, of course, he authored the Climate Change Review, a major piece of work, this follows commitments given to the Member for New England during the course of the negotiations leading up to the formation of the Government. So that piece of work will be updated.
All in all, this was obviously the foundation stone of what will be a work program for the Committee. It was a good and constructive exchange and I'm looking forward to the further meetings of the Committee. I'll just turn now to see if Minister Combet wants to add at all?
MINISTER COMBET: Nothing to add, Prime Minister.
PM: You're alright, ok, and we'll take your questions. Yes, Lenore?
JOURNALIST: Will the Government continue to make decisions on other aspects of climate policy and press ahead with election policies like Cash for Clunkers while this Committee meets or will you wait until to see what foundation carbon price you've got and then do the other thing?
PM: (inaudible) ahead with other aspects of climate change policy, including our election commitments, you've described one, the election commitment we made about enabling people to replace older vehicles, or assisting people to do that. Of course, we've got a big set of election commitments including the investment of a billion dollars in transmission lines to bring renewable energy into the national electricity grid. So there are, you know, three big streams of work here. Obviously, renewable energy, the renewable energy target work, for example like the transmission lines, is a big stream of work. Work on energy efficiency is a big stream of work and we will continue to with both of those and we've got election commitments in both areas. The Multi-Party Climate Change Committee will be focused, in accordance with its Terms of Reference, on issues associated with carbon pricing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you might have noticed that some business people were claiming yesterday that there's some sort of culture of intimidation under the Labor Government. Is there and do you find such claims ironic considering only less than six months ago the mining industry was spending many millions of dollars trying to intimidate you out of going ahead with a policy?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, look the only thing I would say is obviously there will be times when the government agrees with business community members, there will be times that we disagree, there will be many, many occasions on which the business community does not have one view, so we will agree with some and disagree with others. The only important thing is that on all sides they are respectful conversations.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, I think my track record would be one of having respectful conversations. Whether it was the business advisory group that helped the Fair Work Act or whether it was the set of discussions I had with Australia's leading miners leading to the agreement on the Minerals Resources Rent Tax.
JOURNALIST: The Government has put aside $3.1 billion for water buy backs. If the Murray Darling Basin Authority comes back with their draft guide tomorrow with deeper cuts how does the Government propose to finance cuts to the tune of 27 to 37 per cent?
PM: Well I think the appropriate thing here is to go through the process. The Murray Darling Authority will be releasing its plan, as I'm advised, tomorrow. That will then be the subject on consultation and discussion and that work will be led my Minister Burke.
JOURNALIST: Will the Government consider following the advice of the Department of Finance and take money from the funds set aside to improve irrigation infrastructure?
PM: Well, we'll get the plan properly in the public domain first and we'll have Minister Burke lead the consultations about it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) cost more than you budgeted for currently?
PM: We'll work though and obviously first and foremost, I understand there's been media commentary about this today, but the plan from the independent authority is being released tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: There has been criticism that the Climate Change Committee is shrouded in secrecy, how much information will you be releasing, after each meeting, in the Communiqué? Will it be substantial information or it will it basically be housekeeping?
PM: Well, I think we should be very clear about this, and I do want to be very clear. The Multi-Party Climate Change Committee is going to work in a manner comparable to a cabinet sub-committee. It is not a cabinet sub-committee but it will work in a comparable manner. That means, of course, that outcomes from the Committee will be publically announced. The Committee, from time to time, will choose to publish work for the public to digest but discussions in the room will be confidential.
JOURNALIST: When will the climate change people's forum kick-off, when's that due to occur?
PM: As I've indicated, we won't be proceeding with the citizens' assembly but we will be creating a Climate Change Commission and looking at a public engagement strategy so more work will happen on that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: That's correct.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Institute of Public Affairs that points to significant rises in power prices over the past five years? How do you expect to be able to sell a carbon price to the public when a lot of them are already struggling with power bills?
PM: Well I understand that electricity prices and rising prices are a big pressure on many working families but I think we also need to note, and I would just point out that on the Committee we are joined by Mr Rod Simms who is the Chair of the Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal dealing with electricity matters, so he's an expert in electricity prices and that expertise will be available to the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee. But on electricity prices, obviously these are a big pressure on working families and many experts will tell you that one of the problems in electricity generation is uncertainty about pricing carbon and it is preventing people from making the huge, long term investments necessary to generate more electricity and that puts upward pressure on prices.
JOURNALIST: Why was Adam Bandt at today's meeting? He's not a member is he? Can anyone just come along to this Committee?
PM: No. We won't be anticipating seeing you there, Matthew. Adam Bandt and Mark Dreyfus were there assisting the Committee with its work.
JOURNALIST: Well, what are they doing?
PM: Well, obviously, the Committee's going to have a big work program. Mark Dreyfus assists the Minister. He's the Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change. Mr Adam Bandt is obviously going to assist Bob Brown and Christine Milne with their work.
JOURNALIST: In the new age of transparency, the Treasury and Finance Departments released their incoming government briefs without any fee. Your Department is asking media outlets about $4,000 for the pleasure of reading what you've seen. Will you ask your Department to waive the fees so people can see the incoming government briefs?
PM: Well, as you know, Freedom of Information matters are dealt with by delegates in Departments, not by politicians and that's exactly the appropriate way from them to be dealt with.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the whole modelling exercise of the options that this Committee comes up with, like they did for the CPRS and do you envisage that you'll need to have a public advertising campaign to try to sell the whole idea to voters?
PM: Well obviously the Committee's got work to do, I'm not at this stage going to say what modelling or other things may be appropriate. We've just had the first meeting, it's dealt with a series of set-up matters which I've described to you and we will work through. Obviously the Committee can have recourse to the resources of Treasury or indeed any other part of the public service to inform work at the appropriate point.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) advertising?
PM: We've got no plans presently for advertising.
Latika?
JOURNALIST: Now that your Citizens' Assembly is dead, buried and cremated, how do you, can you say exactly how do you plan to harness the community consensus you're seeking and why do you need to do that when polls already tell us up to two-thirds of Australians do want a price on carbon now?
PM: Well first and foremost we think it's important that the community is fully informed and fully engaged in questions of tackling climate change and fully informed and engaged on questions of pricing carbon. Many people, I think, are hungry for more information and so we are envisaging a Climate Change Commission, we talked about this during the election campaign and we will continue to work on its structure and how it can best go out and engage community members and provide the information they need and they seek.
So this is an outreach program, I genuinely believe across the community many people are hungry for more information, many people would like to know more about what they can individually do to help, many people do want to understand what pricing carbon would mean for them, for their families, different options, how it would work. Many people are very interested in the science and see a lot of reporting in the media about the science and want to ask further questions. So I think there is a big scope here to engage to community and have dialogue and provide the information they seek.
JOURNALIST: And to follow up, do you envision maybe an advertising campaign for that?
PM: Well I just answered that, we've got no present plans.
Yep, Phil?
JOURNALIST: Who will be on this Climate Change Commission, how will it be comprised?
PM: Well we haven't made the decisions as yet about the structure and as you will see in the communiqué that's been released today the Committee's going to work through on that question.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) of the Citizens'Assembly, or did you let it go meekly?
PM: Well as I've just said to you, this is a Committee working akin to a Cabinet Committee in terms of information protocols, so discussions in the Committee are confidential Phil, you'll just have to die wondering.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) in relation to the Securency International issue with the (inaudible) bank notes, which is an RBA venture? Will you get Glenn Stevens to front a Parliamentary enquiry in relation to this issue, something that Bob Brown's been calling for since May last year?
PM: Well as Prime Minister I don't order the Reserve Bank Governor around and I don't order Parliamentary Committees around in terms of who they ask to see.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about this though, that the Reserve Bank would be involved in something like this?
PM: Well I'm not going to, this is a question with a lot of legal proceedings, I'm not going to speculate on any aspect of it.
JOURNALIST: Some time ago Bob Brown indicated that the Citizens' Assembly was gone, you then breathed new life back into it, why has it taken you so long to officially let go?
PM: Let's have a bit of clarity here about outcome versus method. What I talked about during the election campaign, what I talked about with the Citizens' Assembly was working through with the Australian community to provide information and to develop consensus about how we should tackle climate change. We obviously, in the run up to this year's election, during the course of the year and indeed late last year, had a debate in this Parliament about a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, there was a consensus in this Parliament that was then shattered. I thought it was important that we harness community members to rebuild a good, general public consensus on how to tackle climate change, how to price carbon. There's not one way of doing that, there's not one way of harnessing and involving community members, obviously the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee today is looking at and going to work through ways of doing that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister then why can the Commission do that better than the Assembly, what will the difference be?
PM: Well of course the Climate Change Commission would be staffed by experts who would be available to speak to people on the science for example. Many people hear very confusing claims about the science and they want to understand them at a level of detail. You could imagine, for example, the Climate Change Commission being able to assist people with working through and understanding the science.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when you were in negotiations with the Independents to form Government, did Rob Oakeshott ever approach you about the possibility of defence contracts with Birdon Marine?
PM: Well the Government's agreement with Mr Oakeshott is wholly transparent and was released by me at the time that the agreement was entered into, so there is no other matter that was agreed with Mr Oakeshott other than the things your transparently seen, has been available.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I think it's significant, there's no agreement other than the agreement that's been transparently made available which consisted of the signed agreement document and the letter to Mr Oakeshott. I do not recall Mr Oakeshott raising the matter with me, I simply don't recall it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you expect any world leaders to be offended by your comment that you'd rather be here in classroom than with them?
PM: Well that's a considerable construction of my comment and so let's actually just deal with the facts and what I said. What I said was, and I don't think there's been any mystery about this and in conversations I would obviously always say this, it's not a passion about foreign policy that brought me into politics.
The first thing that caused me to get actively involved in any form of political activity was concern about opportunity and access to education. That was the driving passion that caused me in the very first instance to attend my first meeting, to hand out my first leaflet, to think about political matters and be involved in active political advocacy and I've carried that passion with me all of my life. Which is why when I get to go to Australian schools and talk to teachers and talk to kids I absolutely love it.
Of course as Prime Minister I will be representing the nation on the world stage, being a feisty advocate for our national interests and I've been doing that over the last few days in Brussels, in Zurich and obviously, accompanied by Mr Coorey amongst others, have been in Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: So you don't feel you've offended anyone?
PM: I think the suggestion's absurd.
JOURNALIST: But if you're not that keen on it Prime Minister-
PM: Well that's not what I just said, I think that suggestion's absurd as well.
JOURNALIST: If you're not naturally passionate about it are you better off having Kevin Rudd taking care of business?
PM: Look what a silly construction of what I've just said. Let's just be very, very clear here. I first got actively involved in politics because of a passion for educational opportunity. Of course, as someone who's been in active politics now for a long period of time, I have a wide range of other interest.
If you'd like me to lecture you for a day and a half about the campaign against the toxic dump in Weribee I could do that.
If you'd like me to talk to you for a month or two about the Fair Work Act and my passion for fairness and decency at work, I could certainly do that.
If you'd like me to lecture long and large about healthcare reforms and how it's always been Labor in this country that's brought the waves of reforms that have kept our health system sustainable and equitable, I'd happily do that. I did that for many years in this Parliament as Shadow Minister for Health.
If you'd like me to talk to you about immigration and population policy, I could also engage in the Gillard oration about that; you pick any other subject and I'll give you a view as Prime Minister on it. I was making a simple point about the thing that brought me into active politics. Obviously as Prime Minister I will be a feisty advocate for our nation on the world stage.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on water reform, just one further question, the main concern is about rural communities, obviously if you're buying from willing sellers the farmer gets the money but then the money might leave the community, are you considering extra support for rural communities that might be hurt by these-
PM: Well I think we'll allow the Authority to release its plan tomorrow and then of course Minister Burke will engage in consultations on the plan.
Thanks very much.



The Government today released the Prime Minister's Task Group on Energy Efficiency report.
The Report was commissioned by the Government to provide advice on the development of policy that will strengthen Australia's response to climate change and reduce pressure on the energy costs of all Australians.
The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, welcomed the report, which reinforces the Government's wider climate change strategy and the need for a price on carbon.
The report notes that "by far the most important element in a vision of a step change in Australia's energy efficiency improvement is the presence of an explicit price on carbon"
The Gillard Government is committed to investing in clean energy, promoting greater energy efficiency and working towards the introduction of a carbon price.
The Government's Multi-Party Climate Change Committee is currently exploring options for the introduction of a price on carbon.
Well-targeted improvements in our energy efficiency will improve the productivity of the economy as well as helping us to shift towards a low pollution future.
In addition to the introduction of a carbon price. the key foundation measures recommended for the Government to make a step-change improvement in Australia's energy efficiency performance are:
 * 	Setting a national energy efficiency target of improving our primary energy intensity by 30 per cent by 2020;
 * 	Establishing an energy savings initiative;
 * 	Resetting the Government's framework for energy efficiency;
 * 	Providing a stronger enabling environment for energy efficiency; and
 * 	Building an energy efficiency culture in Australia.
This Report is a significant contribution to the energy efficiency debate as well as an important piece of work as part of the Government's Energy White Paper process.
The Government is already acting in the area of energy efficiency. The Government has already committed to a number of initiatives recommended in the Report. They are:
 * 	Implementing emissions standard for new power stations and extending the Energy Efficiency Opportunities program to electricity generators;
 * 	New mandatory CO2 emissions standards for light vehicles; and
 * 	Tax breaks for Green Buildings
The findings of the Report will also complement other improvements in energy efficiency that the Government is making through the National
Energy Efficiency Strategy and other energy efficiency programs.
The Report will help inform the further development and consolidation of the Government's climate change policy.
The Government's consideration of the recommendations will take account of the programs in the area of clean energy and our work towards the introduction of a carbon price.
The recommendations of this report will also be considered as part of the Government's Energy White Paper process.
The report is available at:http://www.climatechange.gov.au/publications/energy-efficiency/report-p… 



HOST: Good morning to you and welcome home.
PM: Good morning Lisa. Nice to be here.
HOST: Good to be back?
PM: Yes, lovely to be here.
HOST: You said while you were away that there are many other things that you would rather be doing than travelling the world looking after foreign policy. How would you rate your performance on your first overseas trip as PM?
PM: Well, I obviously enjoyed it, and particularly the opportunity to visit our troops in Afghanistan and our AusAID workers there, our Australian Federal Police. They're all doing amazing work in really tough conditions. And then, at the meeting in Brussels I did have the opportunity to meet leaders from around the world, very important trade relationships for the country, so that was also good, to be out there on the world stage spruiking Australia's national interest.
HOST: Mark out of ten?
PM: Oh, look, I'll allow others to do the marking out of ten. I've recovered from the jet lag remarkably well, too. I got back yesterday morning and straight into it, and I'm feeling good.
HOST: That's good, because there's obviously plenty on the agenda. If we can talk about climate change and the citizens' assembly, something you were very passionate about during the election. You also wanted a deep and lasting consensus before moving ahead with the carbon tax. Do you believe that you have that now?
PM: No, I think we've got more work to do talking to the Australian community. I think people are concerned about climate change and they want to see something done, and many people want to do their own things at home, at work, to make a difference, but we need to keep talking to the Australian community about what it means to price carbon, what's the best mechanism, how it would impact on the way they live, and so we will be doing that in a different way.
We'll have a climate change commission with experts who can be available to talk to community groups about climate change, its impacts, what we can personally do and what we need to do as a nation to have our economy ready to deal with carbon pricing.
HOST: But you've axed the citizens' assembly. Is part of the new paradigm that no pre-election promises count?
PM: Oh, certainly not. The Government's very determined to deliver our agenda and the promises we gave the Australian people, but we are working in a new environment and that gives us some new opportunities, including working in this multi-party committee to see if we can get a new consensus on climate change.
We had one in the last Parliament. That got shattered when Tony Abbott changed his mind. We thought 'well, what's the best way to rebuild consensus?' There's got to be work done in Parliament House but also in the community. There are many ways of doing that, and now we're looking at this climate change commission being in the lead role for community dialogue.
HOST: Did Rob Oakeshott mention the company Birdon Marine when he was in discussions with you about forming the new Government?
PM: Well, certainly not to my recollection, Lisa. I mean, we had discussions over the best part of a 17 day period, so we had lots of talks, but I don't recall him ever raising it. Now, he may have raised it once and I don't just don't specifically recall the conversation, but it wasn't a central part of what we talked about, and certainly it wasn't a central part of what we agreed.
Everything we agreed has been published in the agreement that Mr Oakeshott signed and the accompanying letter, and that's all there on the public record.
HOST: ICAC are looking at exactly what happened. Is that going to be a problem, that you can't remember what was said?
PM: Oh, look, my point in just saying that is it certainly wasn't, you know, a continuing theme of the things that we talked about, so 17 days of discussion, I'm not precluding that Mr Oakeshott said as an aside at some point, 'oh, and I've got this concern about jobs in my electorate'. He may have done that, but it was not the centre of what we were talking about.
HOST: You mentioned of course that you did meet with some of the troops in Afghanistan. Did they ask for more support?
PM: There were a variety of views amongst the soldiers. I had soldiers say to me 'we've got everything we need and we're getting on with the job.' I had soldiers ask me 'how does the Government make decisions about whether or we get more equipment?', and I explained to them that we take the advice of the Chief of the Defence Force and certainly, if they need more equipment then we get it for them - we've got $1.1 billion of more equipment already on the advice of the Chief of the Defence Force. And then there was a lot of laughing, I'd have to say, about the suggestion that they need tanks. Anybody who's been to Afghanistan would know it's not tank terrain and they're not engaged in that sort of tank-style war.
HOST: But isn't that part of the problem, that the war is so disparate? It's being fought on so many different fronts, the areas are so different in the way the war needs to be fought, and you would be aware that there is a growing confusion in Australia about whether or not we even need to be there and what we're actually gaining, particularly with so many young soldiers being killed?
PM: I can understand the community's really concerned, and when we've lost 21 lives of course we're going to be talking as a nation about our commitment in Afghanistan, but we do need to be there. We've got to remember Afghanistan was a training ground for people who came and took Australian lives, particularly in Bali. We've lost over 100 Australians in terrorist incidents, and that has its connection back to Al-Qaeda, back to training in Afghanistan.
We are making progress, but we've got to be really clear what the mission is, and the mission is to train the Afghan National Army so they can lead the security for their own nation, and it's different in different districts. We work in a province called Uruzgan. That's valleys, you know, and one valley can be a lot safer than another, but progress is being made, and of course progress has to be made in training the Afghan National Army, bringing security, but also in civil reconstruction works - getting kids into schools and people having access to health care centres and that's what our wonderful AusAID workers are doing, and our Australian Federal Police are there training the Afghan National Police.
We know from our own society what keeps us peaceful and safe- having the army, of course, our Defence Force, is very important. Having police on our streets is very important, and that's why we're training Police, too.
HOST: Well, Prime Minister, it's good to have you back on Australian soil. You and Tim settling into The Lodge well?
PM: Well, I've only been there, I think it's four or five nights, so still some way before it really feels like home.
HOST: Are you open to visitors? We'd love to bring cameras down one day.
PM: Well you'll have to come and say hello. I'd be very happy to do that.
HOST: Okay, I'll bring the crew with me.
PM: Okay, morning tea. It'll be on me.
HOST: Okay, you've got a deal. Thanks, Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you.



PRIME MINISTER: May I start by saying it's great to be in Newcastle today and we're obviously joined by the local Member, Sharon Grierson, I'm also joined by my Parliamentary colleagues Greg Combet, the Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, and Mark Dreyfus, the Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency. And of course, we're here today in pursuit of tackling climate change. The Government believes that climate change is real and in order to tackle climate change we need to do three big things: we need to make more use of renewable energy, we need to put a price on carbon, and of course, yesterday we had the Multi-Party Committee on Climate Change discussing the pricing of carbon. And thirdly, we need to be more energy efficient.
We're here today for two important purposes related to energy efficiency. Firstly, to sign the funding agreement for the Smart Grid, Smart City project. This is an important project to demonstrate how we can get more efficient as a community with the use of energy.
This innovative project is centred on Newcastle but also involves parts of metropolitan Sydney and the small township of Scone. That means it covers a large regional centre, metropolitan Australia and a smaller township. It will, through new technology particularly new information technology, enable the driving of energy efficiency. It will tell consumers, people in their homes, how much energy they're using and it enable them to be more efficient about the use of energy. For example, it would enable you to automatically turn on your washing machine in the middle of the night if that is going to give you the biggest advantage to use off-peak power. It's also going to be of great assistance to local businesses as they will be able to monitor their energy usage and reduce their energy usage. This is a demonstration project in the lead around the world and I'm very proud that we've been able to support it with the Federal Government investment of a $100 million.
Of course, we need to keep doing more on energy efficiency and the Government has made a range of commitments on energy efficiency including, mandatory standards for future power stations to make sure that we don't build dirty coal fired power stations in the future. We've also committed to helping to make our car fleet cleaner and greener. We've committed to working with building owners and businesses so that we work in greener buildings. We've, of course, already engaged in our solar schools project to help schools make more use of solar energy. These are part of the measures that we are investing in to help with energy efficiency. But today I also add to that suite of measures by launching the Prime Minister's Report on Energy Efficiency, put together for us a special taskforce. This energy efficiency taskforce report will help guide future policy development on energy efficiency. Now energy efficiency is important to tacking the challenge of climate change, but it's obviously also important to Australian families to help them deal with electricity bills, to help them monitor and cut their own power usage which makes a difference for their cost of living.
I'll turn now to Greg Combet for a discussion of the contents of the report.
MINISTER COMBET: Thanks very much Prime Minister. And as the Prime Minister indicated there are three elements of the Government's strategy, to deal with the challenge of climate change that we are focusing on. One of course is the importance of supporting renewable energy and its contribution to our energy demands, and we've set a target for the achievement by 2020, that 20 per cent of our electricity supply will come from renewable energy sources. Secondly, the government has committed, of course, to working on the introduction of a carbon price in our economy so that we can cut emissions, provide an incentive to cut carbon pollution in our atmosphere. And yesterday, the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee met for the first time to begin the discussion of that issue. Thirdly of course, is the importance of improving energy efficiency, and today of course as the Prime Minister indicated, we have signed the contract, or the contract has been executed with Energy Australia and other partners for the Smart Grid, Smart City program to be trialed here in the Hunter and in some areas of Sydney. Also today, the Prime Minister is releasing the taskgroup report on energy efficiency, and at the outset could I thank all of those who've contributed to the formulation of this important contribution to the debate on energy efficiency improvements in our economy. The task group was chaired by Dr Martin Parkinson, the Secretary of the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, who is here today. There are other members of course on the taskgroup whom I thank and there was also an advisory panel comprising a number of important representatives from business and non-government organisations, they included a number, but, several of them I'd just like to mention. One being the Climate Institute that made a very worthwhile contribution, along with Origin Energy, Rio Tinto and the Clean Energy Council amongst others. One of the important findings of the task group report that is being released today is that, in order to reduce the levels of pollution we do have in our atmosphere and to achieve the emissions reductions targets, that the government has committed to, and that are bipartisan targets, we need a price on carbon in our economy. Renewable energy and energy efficiency, as important contributions as they can make, need to be coupled with an approach to introduce a price on carbon to provide the incentive to reduce pollution levels. That's one of the important findings of the report that's being released today.
On the specific matters of energy efficiency improvements, I think this report will contribute significantly to a productive debate about the best measures that we can take. Importantly, the report has recommended that there be set, a national energy efficiency target to improve our energy intensity by the year 2020, of 30 per cent. That is, an improvement in energy intensity of 30 per cent, by the year 2020. That is one of the principal recommendations of the report. Secondly of course, as a mechanism to achieve that, there is a recommendation for an energy savings initiative, a major market-based approach to try and drive energy efficiency improvements. There are a number of other very important recommendations about how best, at a national level, to go about achieving improved governance frameworks for achieving energy efficiency improvements, particularly in light of the fact that, State Governments, of course have, implemented a number of very important energy initiative schemes over the years, and if we are to have an effective national approach we obviously need a coordinated national effort involving the states in particular and other important stakeholders.
So there are a range of very important recommendations. The Prime Minister has indicated that the Government has already acted in relation to three of them contained in the report. And they are the new standards, emissions standards, for new power stations, the new mandatory emissions standards for light vehicles, and the taxation arrangements that were announced in the election campaign to support energy efficiency in commercial buildings. So the Government's made an important start on these matters contained in the report. I wish to emphasise that we are releasing the report today on the basis that it is important that there be more input and consultation from stakeholders about the recommendations that are contained within, particularly with State Governments for the reasons that I pointed to. And so what we anticipate from here is a period of solid consultation on the recommendations so that, in the national interest, we can come forward with a government response that has the genuine support of all of the key stakeholders.
PM: Thank you, yes?
JOURNALIST: Minister, you spoke about bi-partisan targets there, and you may have had a chance to have glance at this report, but in it we're talking about mandatory penalties for those who organisations that don't meet their targets. We've got an Opposition that claims not to believe in climate change, let alone a carbon price, are you committed to these things or are they just recommendations?
COMBET: Let's just get something very clear and not confuse the issue of targets. There are bipartisan targets for emissions reductions across the economy, that, by saying they are bipartisan, are supported by the Government and the Opposition and that has been the case for some time. They range from a cut by the year 2020, over the year 2000 levels of between 5 and 25 per cent depending upon the extent of international action to deal with climate change. That's at an aggregate level. What this report says however, is that we should consider establishing an energy efficiency target, and that of course is not an issue that the government has yet committed to, nor anyone else, other than the taskgroup members and it has been put forward for discussion and consultation by stakeholders. So I just wish to clear that up.
JOURNALIST: In regards to the report, the Opposition have labelled it a giant electricity tax hike. What's your comment?
PM: Well, obviously the report is here, as Greg says, for a consultation and we'll be working through with stakeholder groups. But generally what I would say about the Opposition's approach is, we believe climate change is real, we believe in tackling climate change. That requires work on renewable energy, energy efficiency and putting a price on carbon. And I continue to say to Mr Abbott, who rejects generally the science and also specifically rejects putting a price on carbon, that we can work together on this. We've got a standing invitation to him and his political party to join the Multi-Party Committee on Climate Change. We'd need him to recognise climate change is real and we need him to recognise that to address climate change we need to put a price on carbon. Then, of course, he can work constructively rather than seeking to find things to wreck.
JOURNALIST: Is there merit in his concern though?
PM: Mr Abbott is throwing a slogan around, he threw a slogan around during the election campaign, he's throwing slogans around now. Slogans aren't going to tackle climate change for us, that requires methodical work, including dealing with a price on carbon. That's why we have the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee. We've invited Mr Abbott to put down the cudgels and actually work for a constructive outcome rather than engaging in slogans and seeking to wreck things. We do need to remember it was Mr Abbott who wrecked the consensus for the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
JOURNALIST: There's plenty of energy intensive industries here in this region and the aluminium sector is particularly concerned about the carbon price and how that's going to impact them. In the future will their concerns be taken into consideration during this consultation?
PM: As we've outlined the Government will have a working group with business, we will be out there listening to the views of Australian industry, Australian businesses and the Australian community as we work through this process. We want to do it methodically, we want to listen to people, have a genuine dialogue. But you would have seen the calls from Australian business for Government to get on with working through a price on carbon. It's Australian businesses that are calling for certainty because so many big businesses want to make investments in our future, but really want to know what will be done with carbon pricing before they authorise those big investments. That's true of the electricity sector and it's true more generally of the Australian economy.
JOURNALIST: When do you see that carbon price coming in Prime Minister?
PM: Well we said when we announced the terms of reference for the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee, and these terms of reference were affirmed yesterday, that we would work through, the Committee will keep meeting until the end of 2011 and we will see how much progress we can make.
JOURNALIST: You've also announced the Climate Change Commission, is that correct?
PM: Yesterday at the Multi-Party Committee we talked about, and this is in the communiqué, a Climate Change Commission. This was something that was announced during the election campaign. Its role is obviously to assist members of the community with the best of the scientific advice and with furthering the dialogue and the generation of community consensus on climate change. We will work through as to the exact form of the Commission and who will be the commissioners and how it will work.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No we don't.
JOURNALIST: The 30 percent (inaudible) increasing energy efficiency, obviously the carbon price is not going to solely get that 30 per cent. So what other things can the community expect to get that efficiency up?
PM: Well I will get Greg Combet to comment but I will say this as well. This Report, the Prime Minister's Energy Efficiency Taskgroup Report, makes it very clear that as a nation we will not cut carbon emissions the way we want to by renewable energy and energy efficiency. The Report makes it very clear that we also have to price carbon. I'll get Greg to comment on the 30 per cent target.
COMBET: We've got to bear in mind that the 30 per cent target is a recommendation of the Taskgroup's report to try and improve our energy efficiency. And, that's an important thing, now that the report has been released for all of the interested parties in the community to now consider and to provide feedback to the government in relation to it. But it's a recommendation that's now open for public discussion. But, energy efficiency initiatives for households reduce to a simple proposition, and that is, if we can improve energy efficiency we can cut people's power bills. And that's the importance too of the Smart Grid, Smart City initiative in which up to 50,000 households in the Hunter and elsewhere can participate, to learn how to improve the energy efficiency in their particular household. To use appliances in off-peak periods, to use information technology - the internet, to alter the way in which and the time in which their energy usage occurs in their particular homes. By doing things like that and becoming smarter in how we use energy in households and in business, we can reduce costs and that is a very important element to keep in mind, considering the recommendations of the Taskgroup's report.
JOURNALIST: Why was Newcastle and the Hunter chosen for this Smart Grid, Smart City initiative?
COMBET: Well, I suppose as a local MP, I can hardly do that, with much impartially, answer that question. But, I think the fair answer is that, there are great people here that are very committed to finding innovative ways for an economic future for this region, who came together with EnergyAustralia, IBM, many other partners, the Newcastle City Council, other local organisations, the University of Newcastle, all came together with the support of colleagues of mine, like Sharon Grierson and others, to say well, this region's going to continue to change. We are going to be smarter in how we do things. This is the heartland of electricity generation in NSW, it's the heartland of the coal industry in NSW, we've had a lot of industry, aluminium smelting was mentioned a moment ago which is a very emissions intensive business. We're also going to be in the leadership of thinking about how we can use energy smarter. What we can do with renewable energy and the Federal Government has provided a lot of support to the CSIRO facility here to try and do research on important things about renewable energy, and how it can feed into the grid. Where we've been in here today, is looking at ways in which renewable energy can be factored in to the electricity system in an efficient manner. So, I think it's a sign of the innovative capacity of Newcastle. That's what I'd certainly like to think, and I think that was reflected in the successful bid, which was an open process. And the best bid won.
JOURNALIST: Is it ironic that-
COMBET: I don't know why the Prime Minister is laughing?
JOURNALIST: Do you have anything to say?
PM: I'm very impressed, Sharon and Greg can always talk up this part of the world, but Greg is right, we actually asked for the best ideas around Australia and there was a competitive bid process and this idea won because it was the best.
JOURNALIST: When we talk about renewable energy is it ironic though that it's been, you know, Newcastle is home to the largest coal exporting-
COMBET: I don't find an irony in it. Coal mining started here in about 1797 I think it was, and it's been the economic heart of the Hunter region ever since then, since colonisation of the area and it continues to be extremely important, it will remain extremely important, but it's been the electricity generating hub. So it's no surprise that with an economy such as the Hunter has been, but there's also a lot of people here who think about the future and what contribution renewable energy can make and also what important contribution energy efficiency can make. The Smart Grid, Smart City program that has been executed in a contract today involves $100 million contribution from the Commonwealth but it leverages the value of a further $400 million in these projects. So all up about half a billion dollars over the next few years to find out how we can really use energy more efficiently in homes, and how we can distribute the electricity through the system far more efficiently and that will save a lot of investment, it'll save on electricity bills, it'll save of a lot of investment in the energy sector as well if we can prove it's successful.
JOURNALIST: On a different subject the State Government has today released or made public its application to Infrastructure Australia (inaudible) the Government's response?
PM: Well applications to Infrastructure Australia are then assessed by our independent experts there. I'm obviously pleased that the NSW State Government is taking the opportunity to update the infrastructure it says it needs for this State. We asked State Governments to keep Infrastructure Australia informed of infrastructure needs and the New South Wales Government's taken that opportunity, now Infrastructure Australia will work through its process to look at the new information for New South Wales.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister I had a question about the Murray-Darling plan, the draft plan that's due to be out later today. As I'm sure you've heard the irrigators, some irrigators have warned of job losses if there is a 35 per cent or up to 37 per cent of irrigation entitlements lost, and they've also warned of massive riots, what's your reaction to that?
PM: Well the Murray-Darling Basin Authority is an independent authority. Its report on the Murray-Darling will be released today. Tony Burke, our Minister for Sustainable Australia will then lead a consultation process where everybody will get to have their say about what is in the report. So I would say to anybody who is concerned there will be a process of dialogue and consultation and they'll be able to have their voice heard.
JOURNALIST: I was just wondering, financial markets are very excited that the Aussie dollar may be hitting parity, it's very close to it right now, is this good for Australia with the balance of imports and exports?
PM: Well as I think we all know from common sense and understanding of the Australian economy a high dollar is good for some parts of the economy and places burdens on others. One of the reasons we are very keen to drive a understanding of regional development in regional Australia, it's part of the brief I've given Simon Crean as the relevant Minister, is different parts of the country are growing at different rates, that's in part connected to the value of the Australian dollar, in part connected to the kind of industries that are in different parts of the country. We want to make sure that every region has an economic plan, a plan for prosperity, and that's part of the work that Simon Crean is doing.
JOURNALIST: Just quickly will the Commonwealth consider investing money in the Newcastle CBD, we've heard so many things lately of GPC pulling out, the residents are concerned that the State Government isn't doing enough, will the Commonwealth consider putting some funding in there to boost the CBD?
PM: Well I think with the two experts, particularly Sharon here, I'll leave that as a question for her, and I know, from Sharon, I'll hear all about it in detail.
Thank you.



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today announced the signing of the Smart Grid, Smart City project funding agreement.
This agreement delivers on the Australian Government's commitment of up to $100 million in funding to develop, in partnership with the energy sector, Australia's first commercial scale-smart grid.
The Smart Grid, Smart City demonstration project is an important step toward improving our energy efficiency and revolutionising Australia's energy network for the 21st century.
It is an integral part of the Government's plan to address the challenges of climate change. It is also an important part of the Government's record $10 billion commitment to support energy efficiency, renewables and other low pollution energy technologies.
Smart grids use advanced information and communications technology that allow energy providers to better manage and maintain our electricity network and provide Australian householders with information to more effectively use energy at home.
This will mean improved energy efficiency and improvements in the way households use electricity to help to reduce cost of living pressures for Australian families.
The Smart Grid, Smart City project will help industry address the challenges of growth in peak electricity demand placing a strain on ageing assets.
Lead partner EnergyAustralia will work with industry and community consortium partners including AGL Energy, IBM Australia, GE Energy Australia, Sydney Water, Hunter Water Australia and the Newcastle City Council to deliver the project.
The focal point of the demonstration will be in Newcastle though smaller trial elements will be undertaken in Newington, the Sydney CBD, Ku-ring-gai and the rural township of Scone.
Importantly the Smart Grid, Smart City project will keep Australia at the forefront of energy technology.



PM: Well thank you very much. Can I say it's very great to be here today and thank you to Roy and Chevron for making it possible. I'm joined by our Minister, Martin Ferguson, our Minister for Resources, Energy and Tourism. I'd also like to acknowledge we're joined by Senator Louise Pratt, one of our Labor Senators for Western Australia and by a local State Member Tom Stephens, who represents Karratha where so many people associated with this project stay or travel through on their journey to Barrow Island.
I'm very pleased to be here today to welcome these two pieces of good news. Of course as a Government we believe climate change is real, we believe the Australian community wants to see us tackle climate change. That's why, in Canberra on Thursday, I attended the first meeting of the Multi-Party Committee to work on pricing carbon. And it's why yesterday I was in Newcastle, there announcing and signing the funding agreement for the Smart Grid, Smart City project, which will show new ways of saving energy in Newcastle, in parts of metropolitan Sydney, and in a small country town. So having demonstrated that smart grid technology, we can roll it out in other places across the nation.
Today we're here talking about another way of tackling climate change and that is the technology of capturing carbon and storing it underground. The Government has worked with Chevron so that this Gorgon project could be a world leader in capturing carbon and storing it. I'm proud that we've been able to support their world leading endeavours.
And now these world leading endeavours have been recognised internationally by the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum. That's something I think we should all take pride in. Chevron, everyone who's involved in delivering the Gorgon project and the Australian nation, that we're here with the largest carbon capture and storage program and it is being recognised at that international level.
The Government, of course, wants to ensure that we not only see carbon capture and storage taking place in Australia, but that there is international sharing on the learnings about the technology, the ways of doing it, making sure that nations around the world understand the importance of carbon capture and storage to our future and to tackling climate change.
That's why as a nation we sponsored the creation of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute and so I very much welcome the announcement made today by Ambassador Bleich that the American Government will support the endeavours of the Institute with a half a million dollar grant, which will enable us to provide information to other countries about carbon capture and storage and what is happening here.
So two very good pieces of news to celebrate and I'm very pleased to be here on Barrow Island to be able to do just that. And we're very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Your Green colleagues have been opposed to this project because it's on a (inaudible) reserve. Do you think a project like this, the fact carbon capture and storage project (inaudible)
PM: Look I think this project is showing how to get it done whilst honouring all of the environmental standards that our nation expects. I've had the opportunity to travel here before, I've spoken to Roy, I've seen what's happening on the island, and everything that is happening here is respecting the fact that it is a class-A nature reserve, the footprint of the project is being kept deliberately small, the quarantine arrangements are very strict to make sure that no contaminant comes from the outside which would make a difference to the habitat and biodiversity here. So the environmental standards on the ground are excellent, and then of course, we are seeing this project demonstrate how carbon can be captured and stored. Now I would echo the words of the Ambassador here, many Australians would think carbon capture and storage is one of those things that scientists are experimenting on in labs around the world, but that it's not going to be part of their contemporary reality. What Gorgon is showing us is it is going to be part of how we live and work in a project that is taking shape and you can see it taking shape behind us.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) good timing for you and your Government, (inaudible) a couple of days after the Citizens' Assembly was shelved (inaudible) perhaps suggest a little bit of indecision in the Government's approach to climate change?
PM: Well these announcements would have been good news on any day, so I'm very happy to be here to celebrate the good news. As a Government, what we are doing is taking a methodical approach to tackling the challenges of climate change. We are investing record amounts in renewable energy and solar and wind and the emerging technologies of the future. We are, in fact, driving energy efficiency, the Newcastle Smart Grid, Smart City project is part of that. We are also making sure that for the future we mandate strict standards for power stations, we act to green our car fleet, we act to green the buildings that we work it, we provide support to schools to use solar energy, we provide support to households to use solar energy and yesterday, I announced the Prime Minister's Energy Efficiency Taskforce report which will help guide policies in the future.
And of course we're working through the very difficult question of pricing carbon. In the election campaign I did talk about a Citizen's Assembly; that was one way of helping harness a community consensus about pricing carbon. There's not one way to harness community consensus, and now, through the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee, we will work through other mechanisms to do just that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you've come an awfully long way, you're about as far away as you could possibly get from Canberra, it's a Saturday, it's not an election campaign (inaudible) that the Government's climate change message hasn't been selling so well.
PM: Well I'm always prepared to jump on a plane and come to Barrow Island, I've done it before and yes it is a long way from Canberra, but I've had a few long plane flights lately. I was joking with Louise that the trip is nowhere near as long as the trip back from Brussels to home, so a much shorter trip, but this is a great opportunity to be here, the celebrate this piece of news, and obviously the timing has selected itself because the international committee in Warsaw has just made this announcement.
JOURNALIST: Just on another issue Prime Minister-
PM: If we're moving to domestic issues, anybody got any more questions actually on the announcement or the project? Alright, all been covered? Ok? And I'll take your questions.
JOURNALIST: What's your reaction to Liu Xiaobo being award the Nobel Peace Prize?
PM: Well the Australian Government welcomes this news. We have made representations on his behalf to the Chinese Government, and we welcome the fact that his work has been recognised internationally now with the Nobel Peace Prize.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well the view of the Australian Government on his incarceration has been made well known to the Chinese Government well before this point in time, we've made representations in the past and will continue to do so. Now of course we commend the Nobel Prize as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) by the fact that he should be released from prison?
PM: Well certainly we've made representations that he should be released and we think the Nobel Prize is fitting recognition of the work that he has done.
JOURNALIST: In the past you've copped a bit of flak while you've been away from the Opposition over your comments with regard to Tony Abbott's sleeping patterns with regard to Afghanistan. Did you think you might have opened a bit of a can of worms there by commenting on (inaudible) of Afghanistan and why-
PM: I didn't make any comments on any of those matters, and I'm happy to refer people directly to what I said, and what I said at all points when I was asked was that Mr Abbott's travel arrangements are a matter for Mr Abbott, I've never said anything more than that and I don't intend to.
JOURNALIST: But you did point out the fact that you had managed to do the trip and get eight hours sleep, I think the clear inference to draw was that you were able to do it and he wasn't.
PM: Well I'll leave you to talk about how you may draw inferences. I was asked repeatedly when I was overseas to comment on Mr Abbott's travel arrangements and each and every time I was asked to comment I declined to do so, saying simply those things are a matter for Mr Abbott.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we're here on one of the driest spots in the country, it's probably an appropriate place to talk about water. There's huge outcry over yesterday's announcement that allocations (inaudible) Murray-Darling Basin (inaudible) lead to a loss of thousands and thousands of jobs?
PM: Well thank you for asking that question because it enables me to be very clear about what is happening here. The Murray-Darling Basin Authority is an independent authority; it has released a guide which is subject to consultation. Following that consultation it will release a draft which is subject to further consultation. So my message is, to anyone concerned, and I understand that there are people very concerned, there is a process in which their voice will be heard. So this is a guide which is a prelude, following consultation, to a draft plan. What I would say also about the Murray-Darling Basin is it's in the interests of every Australian that this river system is environmentally healthy. Whether you're a farmer, whether you live in one of our big cities, it's in our interests to get this right. That will require all of us to work together and there's a very clear process, for people from every perspective, to have their voices heard so we can get all of that and that can help facilitate the process of working together.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) social cost of jobs and towns shrinking?
PM: Well a degrading river comes at a cost to all of us, it comes at a cost to future of farming, it comes at a cost to future of the environment and obviously cities like Adelaide worry, rightly, about the impact on them. So there's a balance that needs to be got right here, a balance between keeping water flowing down the river, through the proper concerns of farmers, through supporting regional communities. There is a balance and obviously there is a process so everyone's voice can be heard as we work through achieving that balance. But I'd stress again this is the work of an independent authority, it's a guide for consultation, the outcome of that consultation will be a draft plan which will be the subject of further consultation.



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Resources and Energy, Martin Ferguson today welcomed a grant of US$500,000 from the US State Department to the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
Alongside energy efficiency measures, carbon capture and storage (CCS) will be an increasingly important part of the global energy mix, especially in developing countries which are reliant on a rising share of the world's fossil fuels.
This new grant will directly support carbon-reduction efforts in these nations through knowledge-sharing and capacity-building.
Speaking from the world's largest CCS project on Barrow Island the Prime Minister said the US funding was a tangible vote of confidence in the Australian-founded Institute and recognition of the expertise it offers to other nations.
The Australian Government showed global leadership when it established the Global CCS Institute in 2009.
The United States is also at the forefront of carbon capture and storage development and their funding commitment clearly demonstrates the value other countries place on the Institute's work.
Recognising the need to tackle climate change, the Australian Government is investing record amounts to support energy efficiency, renewables and other clean energy technologies in Australia.
However, finding new ways to move to a low-carbon economy requires global partnerships - partnerships that the Global CCS Institute is facilitating.
The Global CCS Institute's growing membership now has over 260 members including national governments, state governments, non-government organisations and leading global companies.
The work being done by the Institute on behalf of the US State Department will include:
 * 	Mapping and assessment of capacity for CO2 storage in developing countries;
 * 	A study on CO2 re-use;
 * 	Sharing of best practice and experience with financial support mechanisms and policies; and
 * 	Case studies on creating the best enabling environment for CCS deployment.
Chevron's CCS project on Barrow Island, part of the $43 billion Gorgon project, is an excellent example of what the Institute is seeking to achieve internationally.
The Global CCS Institute stock take report released in May found that the Gorgon project was the only new CCS project launched in 2010 which satisfied all 7 criteria agreed by the G8 at L'Aquila in 2009.
The Gorgon CCS project received another boost in support on the world stage yesterday, when it was formally recognised by the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum at its annual meeting in Warsaw.
The Prime Minister congratulated Chevron for this global recognition and for their outstanding contributions to our global understanding of the economic, technical and safety aspects of CCS.
This international recognition and support comes as the Government continues to focus on developing our natural resources in a way which furthers our economic wellbeing while ensuring environmental sustainability.
Further information on the GCCSI is available at www.globalccsinstitute.com. 



The Prime Minister today announced that the Australian Government will provide special legislative protection to control the use of names associated with Mary MacKillop, who will become Australia's first Saint on 17 October 2010.
The decision to grant additional protections reflects the significance of the canonisation of Mary MacKillop for millions of Australians.
The Corporations Regulations 2001 will be amended so that requests for use of a company name, or part thereof, that suggests a connection to Mary MacKillop will be prevented, unless Ministerial approval is granted.
A name need not include the text "Mary MacKillop" to suggest a connection. For example, a name including "Saint MacKillop" would be prohibited. A name including "Our Mary" might be blocked, depending on the circumstances and the rest of the text of the name sought.
This amendment will reduce the extent to which an entity may hold itself to be associated with Mary MacKillop.
The Prime Minister said the new measure would provide the highest level of protection currently provided for any individual Australian's name.
The only other individual Australian's name with similar protection is Sir Donald Bradman.
In addition, existing laws will continue to offer a range of protections against the improper use of Mary MacKillop's name, including the Trade Marks Act 1995, Trade Practices Act 1974, equivalent state laws, and the common law.
The Prime Minister said the new measure was further recognition of the significance that Mary MacKillop's life holds, not only for the five million Australians of Catholic faith, but for all Australians.
The amendment complements the Government's election pledge of $1.5 million to assist in the commemoration of the canonisation, which includes support for a delegation of youth and indigenous representatives attending the canonisation ceremony in Rome, and the inclusion of the Mary MacKillop Canonisation Gift Fund as a specifically listed deductible gift recipient. 



The Prime Minister today joined Australians around the nation to mourn the death of Dame Joan Sutherland - a great Australian and one of the nation's greatest voices.
Dame Joan Sutherland died peacefully at the age of 83 with her family by her side in Switzerland.
Dame Joan will be remembered by opera lovers for her extraordinary performances that kept audiences around the world spellbound.
She was widely regarded as one of the finest opera singers of the 20th century, so much so that Luciano Pavarotti once described her as 'the voice of the century'.
The Prime Minister said it was right for the nation to also celebrate the life of Dame Joan who made a tremendous contribution to her nation, to opera and the arts.
Dame Joan touched the lives of so many people around the world, yet never lost sight of her Australian upbringing and her many admirers at home.
She was generous in teaching and supporting new generations of singers and musicians, and until recently could be seen in the audiences of productions in Australia.
The Prime Minister offered her condolences to her husband Richard, son Adam and their extended family at this difficult time.
Born in Sydney in 1926, Dame Joan made her British debut in the Magic Flute in October 1952. Her 40 year career included a 19 minute standing ovation for her performance in Donizetti's Lucia di Lammermoor in 1959.
She was made a Dame of the British Empire in 1979 a Companion of the Order of Australia in 1975, Australian of the Year in 1961 and received an Order of Merit in 1991. 



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today announced that a parliamentary debate will be held on Afghanistan in the next sitting fortnight
The Prime Minister said she believed it was important that all Australians understood the critical mission in Afghanistan.
This debate will provide an opportunity to fully explain the Government's ongoing support for the current International Security Assistance Force mission in Afghanistan.
The debate will commence in the House of Representatives on Tuesday 19 October with a statement by the Prime Minister, followed by a reply by the Opposition Leader.
Debate in the Senate will begin the following week following the completion of Senate Estimates.
The full Parliamentary debate on Afghanistan will fulfil a commitment made by the Government in its agreement with the Greens. 



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today announced that a parliamentary debate will be held on Afghanistan in the next sitting fortnight.
The Prime Minister said she believed it was important that all Australians understood the critical mission in Afghanistan.
This debate will provide an opportunity to fully explain the Government's ongoing support for the current International Security Assistance Force mission in Afghanistan.
The debate will commence in the House of Representatives on Tuesday 19 October with a statement by the Prime Minister, followed by a reply by the Opposition Leader.
Debate in the Senate will begin the following week following the completion of Senate Estimates.
The full Parliamentary debate on Afghanistan will fulfil a commitment made by the Government in its agreement with the Greens. 


Brisbane 
It's always good to be in Brisbane - the perfect place to discuss my plan for a strong economy - and always good to be here at the Queensland Media Club.
You know you're back in Queensland when the "southern media" means the Courier-Mail.
Queensland's the perfect place to say this: I want all Australians to benefit from a strong economy, no matter where they live.
Friends, the day I came to Brisbane to launch Labor's election campaign, I came with two tasks: first, to outline my Government's policy plan to Australians as voters; and secondly, to outline my values as a person to Australians as people.
That's why I started that day by talking about the things I learned from my parents in my family home; the things I still believe in; the things that drive me on.
As I said on that day:
The importance of hard work - fulfilling the obligation you owe to yourself and to others to earn your keep and do your best.
A fair go through a great quality education, which with rigour and discipline enables a child to develop the character and skills they will need for a successful life.
The need to respect and value other people, an obligation that extends from simple courtesy and respect to supporting each other in good times and in bad.
So yes, I'm back here in Brisbane today to tell you about what my Government is doing to keep the economy strong through our policies and plans, and I'm also here to tell you why my government is doing it:
Because we are a Labor Government; a reforming Labor Government, in the great tradition of previous Labor Governments.
Because we believe in hard work, a fair go through education, and respect.
Because we know that we can't deliver on any of those values without a strong economy and because we know that we can't deliver on a strong economy without economic reform: significant fiscal consolidation; leveraging new investment in human capital; restructuring markets untouched by earlier waves of reform; right through to economic reforms in areas as diverse as carbon, water, and skills.
So where does our economy stand today?
The facts of our economy are good news for working Australians.
Australia beat the global recession.
Growth is over 3 per cent, business investment is surging, almost 600,000 jobs created since Labor came to office, with 350 000 jobs last year alone, and all with our Budget coming back to surplus by 2013, one of the strongest budget positions in the world.
Australia has emerged from the global financial crisis as the world's strongest advanced economy.
That was no accident. It was a partnership between a productive people and a progressive Government.
I was pressed about just this point when I met other world leaders last week - government heads from Japan and Korea, Germany and France all eager to hear how we did it.
I told them we did two things right.
One, when the crisis hit, we made good decisions. We made a timely, targeted investment in jobs.
We did this in tandem with effective monetary policy and we learned from recessions of the past. We invested in skills in the downturn, so we could capitalise on the recovery.
Two, when the crisis hit, we had the benefit of 25 years of good decisions behind us. 25 years of hard won economic reforms, most particularly the reforms of Hawke and Keating, reforms which internationalised our economy, drove competition in domestic markets and delivered surplus budgets - like the opening up of Australia's markets for goods and services, a reform that was continued by the Howard Government.
Reforms which mean that our open economy's ability to resist global shocks has become the envy of the world.
I want to dwell on this point about learning from past recessions and investing in skills, because it illustrates much about how a Labor Government should work.
Take the early 1990s recession. Apprenticeship starts collapsed. They fell by one third in just two years. What's worse, they took 13 years to recover to pre-recession levels, leading to skills shortages during the recovery and long-term joblessness even during periods of sustained growth.
As Education Minister, I was not going to allow that to happen again, so in 2008 and 2009, the Government invested in skills as the downturn hit Australia and cost jobs, and yes, like in the early 1990s we had a drop in training starts as the down-turn bit - falling nearly one fifth in 2008-2009. This time though, it has taken just two years to bounce back, and today, commencements in trade apprenticeships and traineeships are not just back to where they stood before the global financial crisis - they are the highest ever recorded.
The result is that unlike in previous downturns, we have not lost a generation of skilled Australians, so through the hard work of all Australians, the Government's good decisions of 2008 and 2009, and the legacy of a generation of reform we did beat the global recession.
The global economy is recovering, and Australia has played its part, but we still face domestic and global challenges. As the International Monetary Fund's release of additional chapters of the Global Financial Stability Report highlighted last week, conditions in the global financial system have the potential to jump from benign to crisis mode very rapidly.
That's why we must keep pushing for global financial reform, with our strong financial system an important example to the world.
We are fortunate that the resource-hungry emerging economies of Asia are growing strongly, that we have the right resources, and we are in the right region, but this good fortune brings challenges of its own.
If the emerging Asian economies continue to grow, while Europe and the US stagnate, then the gap between global demand for our mining and energy compared to our manufactured goods and our services will continue to widen, and while consumers and capital-intensive industries reap real benefits from a strong dollar, the upward pressure on our currency makes life even harder for exporters of services and manufactured and farm goods.
Commodity exporters have served our country tremendously well, raising the living standards of every Australian, but an economy that becomes too dependent on any one sector takes too big a risk.
Even while demand for commodities remains strong, we face the risk of a "patchwork economy" - an economy where some parts of the country boom while others go backwards, where some regions cry out for skilled labour while in others, Australians live aimless lives without skills, work or hope.
And if demand for commodities moderates over time, then we will only remain strong if we have ensured that our economic growth is broadly based: growth across all sectors - in services, manufacturing and agriculture, not just mining and resources; growth across the whole country - not just in a few states, and not just in a few cities or regions; growth through our whole society - so everyone who is doing the work shares in the gains; and growth sustained over time - without putting upward pressure on inflation and interest rates.
In the global financial crisis, we steered our economy away from the ditch.
Now in the recovery, we have to lift the speed limit of the economy again, so we will grow for the future with more hard work of Australians, more good decisions by the Government - but that's not enough. I know we must build a new legacy of reform for the future.
Governments don't do economic reform because it feels good. We do it because it works.
When you get economic reform right, you fuel the drivers of sustainable long term economic growth. Reform lifts participation, and greater participation will ease the constraints on growth from the increasing number of Australians who no longer work.
Reform also lifts productivity, and this is the heart of the matter. During the 1990s, productivity growth reached 2.1 per cent following the reforms of the Hawke-Keating Governments, but under the Howard Government, productivity growth fell to just 1.4 per cent in the 2000s.
Reform slowed. Productivity growth slowed.
Treasury analysis finds that if we can get productivity growth up to what it was in the 1990s - up to where it stood following the Hawke-Keating period - our economy could grow an extra 15 per cent by 2050.
That would add an extra $568 billion to Australia's economy in that year. This would be the equivalent of raising the average living standard of each Australian by $16,000 a year.
Reform is not easy - but it works, and for reform to be real, I know every Government decision matters and every dollar counts.
A rigorous, disciplined drive for reform has to inform all our economic decision-making.
This is a key point: one or two big ticket reforms is not enough. In Government, we must walk the reform road every day, and minority Government is no excuse.
Some of our reform policies you won't have read much about, like putting road user charges on heavy vehicles, and establishing national transport regulation to harmonise laws across state borders so the trucking industry pays its fair share of road construction and maintenance costs incurred by governments.
Some policies have delivered big controversies, like the enormous step of structurally separating Telstra as part of delivering a national broadband network. Australia's telecommunications sector represents real unfinished business in our economic reform agenda.
Successive Governments left Australia with a privatised vertically integrated monopoly; inadequate competition; consumers paying higher prices.
The Government's legislation and National Broadband Network will achieve the structural separation of retail and wholesale arms in the telecommunications sector - driving competition and a better deal for consumers.
In Government, we've been delivering, but we know there is more to do.
First, we must deliver fiscal consolidation. This has always been the first step in economic reform. That was true in the 1980s, it was true in the 1990s. It's especially important for us now.
Just as we made a targeted and timely investment in jobs during the downturn, so we must make targeted and timely savings during the recovery. Just as our strong budget position in 2008 allowed us to navigate a difficult global challenge, so we must strengthen our budget position now to deal with the next global challenge to arise.
We come to the consolidation task well placed. Australia's debt is lower than any major advanced economy - our net debt will peak at 6 per cent of GDP in 2011-12 - equivalent to someone who earns $100,000 a year taking out a $6,000 loan.
This compares to the net debt of the G7 economies - which will reach 90 per cent of GDP in 2015.
As a Government, we are up to the task. We have already taken savings decisions worth $84 billion since coming to office - but there is no room for complacency. That is why the Government is undergoing the most significant fiscal consolidation in at least 50 years.
Between 2009-10 and 2012-13, the budget balance will tighten by four and a half per cent of GDP. That's a shift in the Budget bottom line of almost $60 billion.
This is an extraordinary fiscal turnaround in a 3-year period - without slashing and burning services; with record investments in health and education; and it will deliver a Budget surplus by 2013.
Beyond fiscal consolidation, I am ambitious for reform. Reform is always tough, but it's particularly tough in a tight fiscal environment.
When Governments make big decisions to restructure sectors of the economy, inevitably winner and losers emerge. Some governments have the freedom to throw cash at those who lose from reform. It's clear mine won't be one of them.
Frankly, budget scarcity is a good discipline on Government. I want the Government to look at each decision from every angle: to hold them up to the light; to examine every possibility and every question; to make every dollar go as far as it can.
Budget scarcity is also a good discipline on policy advocates as well. It forces everyone - business, unions, welfare and commentators - to recognise the real trade-offs which sustain economic growth.
The Government has a job to do on the supply side of the economy and we'll walk the reform road every day:
- cutting the company tax rate to make our businesses more competitive; better sharing the benefits of our commodity boom; superannuation reform to lift national savings and support domestic investment;- investing in roads, rail and ports, and the National Broadband Network to build productivity and economic capacity; and- investing in skills in the sectors that need them most.
That's why we have a $200 million Critical Skills Investment Fund. Co-funded by industry, it will plan for and meet Australia's emerging skills needs in expanding sectors like resources, construction, renewable energy and infrastructure and it will minimise the effects on other industries that lose labour to these growing sectors.We'll work to meet the needs of the highest-growth sectors. As well, through a broad and balanced investment, we'll work to ensure that skilled workers are there across the economy and across the country.
With the additional Foundation Skills Package, the Government will invest a record $490 million to improve adult language, literacy and numeracy and access to pre-vocational training programs over 2010-13.A Quality Skills Incentive fund for TAFE and other registered training organisations will deliver $130 million directly to providers in return for better quality of teaching and learning, improve outcomes such as completions and greater participation by Australians less likely to engage in training.
We've created incentives for individuals so they'll stay in training, so there are solutions for the next several years.
A new Trade Apprentices Income Bonus will provide apprentices with $1,700 in additional tax free support to encourage higher completion rates, bringing total support to $5,500 tax free over the life of an apprenticeship.
A new national trade apprenticeship mentoring program to arrest attrition rates will begin next year, with an investment of $20 million.
And National Trade Cadetships will make sure students at every school who want to pursue a career in the trades have a clearly defined pathway, equal in quality, value and rigour to more traditional academic pursuits.
And I want to take the market-based tools that have made our financial and industrial capital so much more productive and apply them to our human capital: competition between producers; choice and information for consumers; and incentive structures which drive efficiency and innovation.
My ambitions for reform range more widely than those areas considered part of the traditional economic agenda, so my Government is also driving reform of Australia's family support system. Replacing obstacles with opportunity, and rewarding positive behavioural change, is a familiar family payments reform to improve participation of adults in the workforce.
Our drive goes further, leveraging family payments to invest in the children in the system as well, building their human capital - so parents of four year olds receiving income support will have to take their kids to undertake a Healthy Kids Check or else miss out on financial assistance and parents of children aged 16 to 18 receiving Family Tax Benefit Part A will get increased support if their children finish Year 12 or the vocational equivalent.
I also want to take the market-based tools that have made our domestic product markets and many private service sectors so much more efficient, and apply them to our health and education sectors, so my Government is driving structural reform of Australia's health and education markets.
These social services are large economic sectors in their own right. Efficient resource allocation in such large sectors of our economy has been too long neglected as an agenda for reform.
More than 10 per cent of Australia's workforce is in the health care sector. This makes health care Australia's biggest employment sector.
Our structural reforms will drive efficiency across the hospital system. Instead of states receiving block grants, hospitals will be funded for each activity they undertake. This will be based on the fair and efficient price for each service, set by an umpire with a level of independence akin to the Reserve Bank.
Pricing hospital services will also help identify under-performing hospitals. That means under-performance can be remedied and the best practices of better-performing hospitals shared.
Our structural reforms will drive quality and efficiency across the education system as well:
- providing parents with rich, comparative information about the performance of the schools that their children do or may attend;- paying the top 10 per cent of teachers 10 per cent more - and providing financial rewards to the nation's most improved schools;- introducing a national curriculum;- uncapping university places so government funding follows student demand;- national regulators focussed on quality.
And reform doesn't end there. I could talk more about our reforms in pricing carbon, or water allocations. It's an ambitious agenda for the Government I lead.
Friends, economic reform is good for our economy and it's good for our society. It makes our economy stronger - and it shares opportunity with more people. It's not easy. But it works.
Using market tools to improve social outcomes; doing the hard work of designing new markets for social services, looking at the needs they serve, and then methodically working to create the conditions in which markets serve the public interest - through vigorous competition, transparent information, a focus on quality, the freedom to make choices and a responsiveness to the needs of service users.
That's the future of Australian reform.
The Labor Government I lead puts reform at the centre of all our economic decisions, and I also believe the way we approach reform will be a case study for the best way to govern - methodical; making steady progress on our plans, day by day, week by week; working hard for all Australians, wherever they live; modernising; preparing Australia for the long-term with modern market-based solutions; carefully weighing the hard decisions, at the right time, for the right reasons; driven by our values - hard work, a fair go through education, respect, and always keeping our economy strong.


Brisbane
HOST: Obviously, the focus of this speech was on reform. One of the criticisms of the previous Labor Government was that it was trying to do too much in one term, especially looking at the COAG agenda, which was quite bogged down with committees and sub-committees. If you're focussing one or two big-ticket items this term, such as the carbon tax, which seems to be back on the agenda again, have you decided whether you're going to try and push it, legislate it, this term, before the next election:
PM: Well, thank you for the question, and of course you did get first dibs, and that's fair enough.
The question of timing is a question before the Multi-Party Committee on Climate Change for consideration. I've been very clear in saying we don't want to be taking options off the table, and that includes, you know, letting the Committee work through, seeing if there is consensus considering the question of timing.
Now, it's, I know that causes excitement amongst particularly our media friends, but it just seems to me that any corporate board in the country, any council for an institution like a university, any board that administers the local sporting club wouldn't chuck options off the table and then sit down and meet. They would meet when all the options are still on the table and that's my intention with the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee.
HOST: So the bottom line is there's lots of consultation to be done. It's unlikely to be done before the next election?
PM: Well, we said the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee would start meeting now, and it has, and it would continue to meet until around the end of 2011, and we would obviously be in a position to see how far those discussions had got. It's our intention to have communiqués as the Committee meets so Australians are informed of the work of the Committee, but it is also our intention for that Committee to replicate a Cabinet committee in this sense - that some of the dialogue will be kept confidential until there are outcomes to announce.
HOST: OK, before I lose the microphone to my colleagues forever, I will ask one more quick question.
Surprisingly, on the front page of the Fin Review this morning, there was a story about, you know, Labor's overhaul of industrial relation laws, which is, as you're well aware of, a streamlining of, I think, 4,000 federal and state awards to 122 national awards, but there's been a lot of employers who are struggling with this.
Do you acknowledge that it has been pretty complex and burdensome for business?
PM: I acknowledge that it's been a change, getting rid of Work Choices and obviously employers, the employees' unions, are getting used to the change. We've certainly invested in getting them good sources of information, including our Workplace Authority's running very extensive education campaigns.
The story on the front page of the Financial Review, I should acknowledge the newspaper, the story on the front page of the Financial Review is a story about some employers now appearing to raise the question of their being more arbitration in the system.
Can I say this question was canvassed extensively during the discussions that led to the Fair Work Act, and in that consultation every employer organisation in this country argued for strict limits on arbitration, argued against broadening arbitration, and so I don't know if today's article indicates some people have changed their minds about that. If they have, obviously we're open to talking to people about the reasons why, but, you know, the perspective of employer organisations as the Act was being drafted was less and less arbitration and more and more bargaining at a workplace level, and that's what the Act reflects.
HOST: OK, I might throw open the microphone to my colleagues, if you could just say your name and the organisation you're from. Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Cathy Border from Channel Ten. Welcome to Brisbane.
PM: Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Your colleague, Kevin Rudd, has taken to twitter today to make some comments on the school modernisation program. Do you endorse your Foreign Minister making comments about one of his colleague's portfolios or not?
PM: I haven't seen the individual tweets. I've got to make sure I get all my terminology right here - tweets and twitterverse and all that sort of stuff. I haven't seen the individual entries, but Kevin Rudd obviously is both the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Member for Griffith here in Brisbane, and every Labor Member who represents a local constituency - and our friends in the Senate as well - is excited about and engaged in the delivery of our education revolution, because there's nothing more important to local members than visiting their local schools.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Melinda Howells from the ABC.
This week you've been accused of Machiavellian bastardry and now Christopher Pyne has accused you of, and I quote, 'back-alley bitchiness'. Have you been part of a well laid-out political ambush over the Afghanistan trip, and is this all part of the new paradigm?
PM: Well, the answer to the question is no - just one word - and it's not my intention to add to this matter in any way, shape or form, to give further comments than I've given so far, which have been always to the effect that Tony Abbott's travel plans are a matter for Tony Abbott.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Angela Harper from Australian Associated Press.
Referring to another article in the Financial Review today, don't you think jobs should be based on merit, not gender, and while people continue to discuss gender over merit this issue will continue to fester?
In addition to that, do you think this discussion puts even greater pressure on those who struggle to juggle children and career?
PM: No, I don't agree with the premise of the question. I don't think there is a false divide between talking about merit and talking about gender.
I believe that merit is equally distributed between the sexes, and if you believe that - and I do - and you look at any institution and it's not around about half men, half women, you should be asking yourself the question why, because if merit is equally distributed between the sexes and the outcome is not half-half, then it must lead you to the conclusion that there are women of merit who have missed out for whatever reason, and so I think that would cause an organisation to query why is that happening; why are women of merit missing out, so it's essential, if we are going to have a merit-based selection method for occupations that is we see the merit in half of our community apparently not getting a fair go that we should address the issues as to why they're not getting a fair go.
We did that in the Labor Party and many businesses and other organisations are doing it now. In the Labor Party, when we confronted it, I mean, really, we were just confronting the age-old stereotype that if you'd addressed a Labor Party gathering like this 15 years ago and said to everybody 'close your eyes and imagine a politician, close your eyes and imagine a prime minister', almost everybody in the room would have closed their eyes and imagined a man in a suit, and so by saying 'well, you know let's have a think about targets, about merit, about making sure we get the best people in parliament', we changed that culture, and now, I would hope, if people in a room like this are asked to close their eyes and imagine a politician, even imagine a prime minister, there's some chance that the figure they conjure up in their mind is a woman.
That's a good thing, and I'd like that to be the same thing that happens when you say to people 'close your eyes and imagine a CEO of a huge corporation', 'close your eyes and imagine the chair of the board', 'close your eyes and imagine a boardroom table, who's around it?', I'd like people, when they do that, to imagine women in those jobs, too, and if we can have people thinking, 'well, you know, women in those jobs, it's about merit, merit's equally distributed, it's equally distributed between the sexes, how can we get outcomes that reflect that equal distribution of merit?', we'll get the best people and we'll be fair to everyone.
JOURNALIST: Kym Ages from Australian Associated Press.
Support for you as preferred Prime Minister is up, and also support for Labor on a primary vote is up. What do you think Labor has done correctly, or what do you think the Coalition has done wrong in the last four weeks to produce the change?
PM: I suspect I'm really going to disappoint you, and I'm going to give the age-old answer that we don't comment on the polls. I don't comment on the polls. I'll leave that for others, and I find I'm never short of media friends who want to comment on the polls.
HOST: Do you think Tony, I might just jump in, do you think Tony Abbott's just back to his old, aggro ways and he can't the discipline of election an campaign for a full parliamentary term?
PM: Well, I think I'll allow our friends from the media to work their way through that question, too.
JOURNALIST: Andrew Fraser from the Australian newspaper.
Just to pick up one of the themes of your speech, the main ones seemed to be the case for reform and reform is a good thing, which was, I think, the overall theme. In front of an audience like this, I don't think this is a particularly hard sell. However, with the general population you're always up against it.
People don't like change. Look at the Tea Party movement in America, which has many elements, but its main one is negative, it stops things.
How do you propose, if you're talking about a reform agenda, to take people with you?
Firstly, do you acknowledge that that's going to be an issue, and secondly, I guess, how do you propose to take people with you?
PM: I'm always wonderfully gratified when someone from The Australian agrees with one of my speeches. It's not my normal experience, but thank you very much for that.
HOST: (inaudible)
PM: So, thank you very much for that, and we'll see how it's reported tomorrow in that light, but having had that unusual and gratifying experience, I would say to you yes, there is a real question here about how you drive reform and sustain reform conversations, and I said in the speech, and it's true, a traditional way of getting reform has been to buy it, so you have people [audio break] shove a whole lot of money in their [audio break] enables you to deliver reform.
Our Government is not in that circumstance, so we are going to have to have some very tough reform conversations with the Australian community and persuade people about the benefits of reform. Now, that puts an onus on us and I don't shy away from that onus - that's what leadership's about.
It also put an onus on the media and the way in which we disseminate information, and I think one thing - governments around the world are still coming to grips with - it's not just us, it's President Obama's administration, it's administrations in other parts of the world - I think we're all still adapting government and having deep reform conversations to the new media environment.
Not everything can be reduced to a tweet. We are in a media environment now where you could make a blockbuster environment. As you're doing the press conference, someone is tweeting about it. Whilst you're doing the press conference a journalist is doing a stand up using you as a back drop. By the time you've walked back to your office, journalists are interviewing journalist about what the announcement may or may not mean, and two hours later someone is ringing my press secretary saying 'have you got a story for us?'
Well, I think we all - we all - have got an obligation for a nation that makes its economic way by pursuing a reform path. We all have an obligation to help sustain those deep conversations.
Now, I don't mean uncritically. I definitely don't mean that. I think, you know, I said when I had the education portfolio that if I could pick up newspapers every day and the first 20 pages were debates devoted to debating education reform and 10 of them were saying what I was doing was complete nonsense and 10 of them were saying what I was doing was OK and the contest was fast and furious, I would have thought that was fantastic, because that's how you sustain a reform conversation, so we've all got to play our part in that.
JOURNALIST: Dennis Atkins from the Courier Mail, Prime Minister.
Queensland is such a big state that we happen to enjoy both speeds of the economy as it goes along. I was wondering, when you're talking about a reform agenda, what you can say to Queensland small businesses who are having trouble getting access to credit and to a tourism industry that's being hit by an exchange rate that's punishing them? What can you say to these sectors is in the reform agenda that will be of benefit?
PM: Thanks for that question, and I deliberately used the expression 'patchwork economy' because I think some of the tradition imagery about two-speed economy does conjure up whole states - you know, Queensland, WA, boom states and other states not in that position - and of course, you know, there is huge commodities wealth here in Queensland that's driving a lot of economic growth, but I think just saying that then doesn't lead you to think about the other parts of the Queensland economy, and so that's why I deliberately used the terminology patchwork.
And you point to exactly the right issue - we've got different growth rates in different parts of the economy. A high dollar is good for some and bad for others. It's obviously bad for inbound tourism and obviously makes overseas holidays cheaper for Australians as well, so it introduced competitive pressures because people have more choices for the same expenditure.
What I would say to those small businesses, particularly in tourism, is the following - first and foremost, we obviously have coming down the pipeline the promised company tax reduction, which small businesses will get first. Now, not every small business is a company - many are, many are not, and for those others there is still tax relief coming in the form of being able to write off new capital that businesses need.
Skills development is particularly important to small businesses. The larger the organisation, the easier it is for them to sustain internal, often very complex training structures, whereas small businesses tend to be more reliant on the appropriate and innovative provision of training for the people that they seek to employ.
Economic stimulus has obviously played its part, and we have delivered economic stimulus differentially to some regions that were badly affected by the global economic downturn and now continue to show those effects, so there are some regional centres in Queensland, traditional tourism capitals, that when you look at the amount of investment we've put in there it's been deliberately calibrated more highly.
Then, of course, we need to work through, national and state, on our tourism promotion strategies. We're actually having a bit of a conversation about that at the table. That requires constant innovation. You would have seen the fact we'll be showcasing Australia on the American market through The Oprah Winfrey Show and those sorts of things. That is also important.
This will continue to get dedicated attention. I've not only asked Martin Ferguson to continue to have a responsibility for Tourism but Nick Sherry will be working with him and the whole team will be working with Simon Crean, our new Minister for Regional Australia, to look at regions, look at place, look at space, and look at tailored economic development strategies.
HOST: We've probably got time for one or two more quick questions, and if there's a journalist and students who are hiding under the table now, if they- oh, they're ready to go? OK, well, we'll get one more question from the working media and then we'll switch over.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Natalie (inaudible) from the ABC.
On the issue of asylums seekers, how hopeful are you that the East Timorese Government wants to partner with the Australian Government, and is there a price tag for that partnership?
PM: Look, Minister Bowen is in East Timor, and I believe has made some comments from there today and we are taking this, you know, in the spirit of good faith and good work that has prevailed so far.
Every time I have had had the opportunity to speak to the leadership in East Timor the message has been the door is open for dialogue. Obviously, I asked Minister Bowen to go to East Timor because we were having those reactions.
There's a big conversation to pursue, and so I'll have to let that conversation work through and for East Timor to talk to us about the proposition for a regional protection framework and a regional processing centre, but I am determined to about it because I believe a regional protection framework and a regional processing centre would take away from people smugglers the very product they sell, the very incentive to get on the boat that they then sell to desperate people for their own profit, so we'll keep pursuing it.
I've been very clear with the Australian people, as has Minister Bowen. We're not going to create any, you know, false deadlines here. You know, we're not the people wandering around with three-word answers to complex problems. We're the people who, methodically, are going to work it through and that's what the dialogue with East Timor is about.
HOST: OK, just quickly, one of the journalism students got a question, there?
STUDENT: Prime Minister, Emma Hart from the Q.
In line with putting a price on carbon, has your Government further considered an emissions trading scheme?
PM: The Multi-Party Climate Change Committee has all options on the table about pricing carbon. Obviously, we worked in the last parliament to develop an emissions trading scheme, the carbon pollution reduction scheme, and to seek a consensus for it in Parliament House, which we had, having shaken hands with the Opposition about it only to have Tony Abbott become leader and then take his hand away from the handshake, so in those circumstances and after the election that was and the parliament that Australians had voted for, we now have this multi party structure. It has all options on the table as it works through.
HOST: OK, is there another question there from- OK, final question, thanks.
STUDENT: Prime Minister, regarding the polls and research that show that 80 to 90 per cent of respondents disapprove of the proposed internet filter, do you really think that pushing through this legislation is in the public's best interest?
PM: I understand that there's been a lot of commentary on this and there are a lot of views about it and a lot of concern. My fundamental outlook is this - it unlawful for me, as an adult, to go to cinema and watch certain sorts of content. That's unlawful, we believe it to be wrong - you know, content that is child abuse, incredibly violent pornography. We say that's wrong and we don't show it in Australian cinemas. That's unlawful and we all accept it.
If we accept that, then it seems to me the moral question is not changed by the medium that the images come through, so if I cannot properly go and view such things in a cinema, and certainly I don't want to, but if no-one in this country can lawfully go and view such things in a cinema then I don't believe it should be lawful to view such things over the internet, and in those circumstance I think the internet filter is appropriate.
I understand that then raises a set of technical concerns about the 'how' question. It's obviously fairly obvious how we try and stop unlawful things being show in cinemas. It's much more complex how we do that on the internet, and Stephen Conroy, particularly, has been involved in the set of consultations with internet service providers to work through that 'how' question so it doesn't stop people, in some accidental way, viewing content which of course is perfectly, you know, fine to view, and it doesn't, in some incidental way, slow down internet speeds for people who are just using the internet for entirely garden-variety uses that we all use the internet for, so the 'how' question is more complicated, but the underpinning moral question, I think, is exactly the same.



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Health Nicola Roxon today announced funding for the clinical training of up to 12,000 more medical, nursing and allied health professional students to help deliver better health care to Australians.
22 health and medical professions will benefit in remote, regional and metropolitan Australia including doctors, nurses, midwives, physiotherapists, dieticians, dentists and Aboriginal Health Workers.
The Prime Minister said the funding will provide much-needed training places for undergraduates in those professions in highest demand.
The funds will support the undergraduate clinical training requirements for a 9.1% increase in the number of health professional students over the next three years.
This amounts to 1.2 million additional training days annually - an increase of 23.4% compared to the 2009 baseline - in 448 projects across 41 universities and over 700 clinical training providers.
The training will occur across a variety of locations and professional settings as follows:
 * 	60% of the providers will be the non government and private sector;
 * 	41% of placement days will be in priority settings as such as aged care, dental, mental health, primary heath care and community based services; and
 * 	37% of the additional days will be in rural and remote areas.
Minister for Health Nicola Roxon said places had been allocated by Health Workforce Australia (HWA), the new national body established by this Government to address health workforce shortages in a strategic way.
HWA have conducted the first ever nationwide workforce planning process to establish where these grants are most needed
In its future work HWA will undertake a comprehensive set of profession and specialty specific training plans for graduating nurses and medical officers. It is also working on the issue of clinical placements for overseas students.
Ms Roxon said $425 million had been allocated for the new training places over the next three years, of which $139 million would be delivered in 2011.
These funds are the direct result of the $1.6 billion COAG National Workforce Partnership, of which the Commonwealth is investing $1.1 billion - the largest investment in the health workforce ever made by an Australian Government.
Over $280 million of the National Partnership has already been allocated, including to new training and education capital projects and rural clinical schools.
The Government has already taken action to address the national shortage of health professionals by training 1,000 extra nurses every year and an additional 5,500 GPs and 680 specialist doctors over the next decade.
Training more health professionals means Australians will have better access to health and medical services into the future.
The details of training placement providers will be available at www.hwa.gov.au. 



PM: It's great to be back home in Melbourne and to be here at Austin Hospital. I'm joined by the Minister for Health, Nicola Roxon, and by Jenny Macklin, obviously one of our of ministers that's here today in her capacity as the local member for this area.
Yesterday I was in Brisbane, speaking about the importance of economic reform to our nation, and particularly the importance of making we continue to invest in skills and training. Now, many Australians, when they think about skills shortages, would think 'well, we're short in mining, we're short in construction, we're short in some traditional trades.' Now, that's true, but we are also short of the health professionals we need, and that's because when we came to government we inherited a health system from Mr Abbott that was both underfunded and understaffed.
Now, Nicola Roxon as the Minister for Health, and the Government, have been investing in the training necessary to have new health professionals. We've been particularly increasing the number of doctors we are training; the number of nurses we are training; and making investments so we will have the health workforce we need in the future.
Today, we are building on those announcements, and today we're here to announce the clinical training work necessary to support the training of up to 12,000 more health professionals. That's 12,000 more doctors, more nurses, more allied health professionals, who will be supported by the Federal Government to get the clinical training they need in hospitals just like this one.
Now, for the first time we have had a national planning process to work out where this clinical training should occur, because of course we know if people go and have a great-quality training experience they're very likely to end up being a health professional in that area, so where training happens geographically matters, and this is the first time we've had a national approach, a national plan for clinical training, and I'll ask Nicola to just describe that national plan.
MINISTER ROXON: Thanks very much, Prime Minister, and thank you to the Austin for having us here and teaching the three of us how to cannulate. Thank you for the experts who were given those sorts of duties, and we're very pleased to be here with Health Workforce Australia - Mark Cormack and Jim McGinty, the CEO and Chair are here. They have done a tower of work for us in making sure that the significant extra investments that governments across the country are making in health workforce training are targeted to the professions that need the support most, those where the shortages are most severe, and of course in parts of the country that are underserviced.
So, in announcing today that we are investing an additional 1.2 million of training days - so our money, nearly half a billion dollars, is going to pay for a 23 per cent increase in clinical training days across the country. The investments are in 448 projects across 41 universities and over 700 clinical training providers, and of course the Austin is one of those leading training providers, but I think it's important to explain that of this investment that 60 per cent of providers will be non-government and private sector providers. This is an area that's been under-supported in the past and where we're trying to expand the clinical training capacity to complement the fantastic work done in our public hospitals.
41 per cent of placement days are going to be in priority settings where there have been severe shortages in the past, such as aged care, dental care, mental health, primary health care and community-based services, but interestingly as well, the allocation made by Health Workforce Australia provides that 37 per cent of these additional days will be provided in rural and remote communities.
So, this is a strategic investment by the Commonwealth, identifying where there are shortages, identifying which professions need the most help, identifying which communities need the most help, which settings we can provide more training in, and you will see Health Workforce Australia has provided fact sheets so you can break down the projects by state and by profession, that nursing and midwifery, in particular, have a very huge share of this investment because there are very high demands for our qualified nursing and midwifery staff and I think that it will make a big difference over the coming years to ensure that we have a health workforce that can provide safe, top-quality care to our community and much closer to the places where people live.
So, thank you very much, Prime Minister.
PM: So, today's obviously good news. It's good news for those in our health workforce, and I can see some of them at the back, the students who need clinical training places in order to get that direct experience that they need to complete their training, and it's good news for all Australians, because we're all going to be reliant for health care on the health workforce of the future, so we're very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, you say you're after a big economic reform agenda. Isn't this actually an example of how trouble your Government has delivering reforms? The money was promised or agreed to two full years ago, and now you're spending some of it but you're having to spend half of it (inaudible)
PM: Look, I'll turn to Nicola for a comment, but I can certainly say this in general: what I spoke about yesterday was having reform that was methodical, that was delivered day by day, week by week, piece by piece to make a difference, and that is just the approach that we have taken to health care reform, and when you look at this announcement today it comes with a national plan about where training occurs, rather than the ad hoc approaches of the past, and I'll just get Nicola to make a comment, too.
MINISTER ROXON: This agreement was reached in the end of 2008, and investments have been made in 2009 and 2010. $280 million has already been allocated. These were allocated as projects where there was a competitive process, so $67 million for 64 projects to expand clinical training capacity in non-traditional settings was the first investment that was made. $90 million on 35 projects to expand clinical training infrastructure; $33 million on 22 new projects through the rural education infrastructure development pool-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible)-
MINISTER ROXON: -Let me finish, because this is important.
The three rural clinical schools and the first ever medical school in the Northern Territory.
Now, all of these investments take time, take planning and take care for the Government to ensure that we are investing in projects where they're needed, for the professions where there are shortages, and actually this is a quick turnaround to make sure that those projects are properly going to support our workforce of the future, and another $430 million is being allocated today.
Part of the investment in the $1.6 billion package comes from the state and territory governments for increasing funding of placing people within their facilities, so, actually, in the five-year plan that starts from 2008 and runs to 2013 we are absolutely on time, but I also make no apology for us making sure our money is going to be well spent, well targeted, that we test every project and ensure that it is going to deliver additional capacity, because you would be the first to ask us if we're spending taxpayers' money well if we didn't test every project to ensure that it is actually going to deliver benefits.
I think this is an example that this sort of significant reform does take time to deliver properly, but we are on target to deliver the way that we said we would, and the support of an additional 1.2 million training days across the country for our health professionals is something we're very proud of.
JOURNALIST: Minister, just while we've got you there, we're talking about training here, what does it mean for patients to be able to (inaudible)
MINISTER ROXON: Well, it means quite a lot of things for patients and for the community.
One, it means that you are much more likely to be able to see a doctor or nurse or allied health professional close to your home. By increasing the workforce, we are meeting a lot of unmet demand. By making sure that we're training more people in our rural and regional communities, where the shortages have been severe, we're ensuring that hospital services are going to be viable in those communities and that primary care services like GPs or your local physiotherapist are also being provided.
So, it's about providing access to well-trained, qualified staff, and of course it's about supporting quality facilities within our hospitals. We're already very proud of the work that's provided in a hospital like the Austin, but we need to make sure that we're training the workforce of the future. We cannot meet the needs of the community if we don't make these investments, and we are playing catch up from a time when the previous government did not plan and did not invest in the health workforce.
It takes a long time to produce a doctor, and making sure that we are now investing in the pipeline as new, young doctors graduate, making sure they're getting good-quality clinical training in their undergraduate years and then supporting them in their post-graduate years to become GPs or specialists is part of this comprehensive plan.
JOURNALIST: When does the scheme start?
MINISTER ROXON: The announcement today, the 448 new projects, all will be funded for the 2011 academic year, so planning has already commenced and it will mean that additional students will be placed through the course of 2011.
Of course, from our earlier investments we already have people that are being placed in those projects right now, and we have quite a large program of capital infrastructure which is underway, which the sorts of example is building a regional training facility in Taree next to that hospital so that we have students that can be placed there for a longer period, trained in the hospital, hopefully have a good experience and might stay and help us bring about a better balance of our workforce across the country.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is (inaudible)
PM: OK, well, we'll go other issues, yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the (inaudible) Afghanistan is up for debate. Will you allow your Labor MPs and ministers to speak freely on the issue?
PM: Certainly, we agreed as a Government, in discussion with the Australian Greens, that there would be a parliamentary debate on Afghanistan, so we are delivering on that commitment. The debate will start in the House of Representatives next Tuesday. I will speak as Prime Minister. The Leader of the Opposition will speak for an equal amount of time, and then from Wednesday morning on members of the House of Representatives from all sides of politics and the independents will be able to make their contribution to the debate, and obviously members will be able to make whatever contribution they choose to make to the debate.
Then, when the debate has happened in the House of Representatives, it will go to the Senate so senators get the same opportunity.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on another issue, the Peter Slipper matter, there's a number of allegations made against (inaudible) Did Labor make a mistake in (inaudible)
PM: I understand that the matters raised today in the newspapers relate to the time that Peter Slipper was a parliamentary secretary under the Howard Government, and my recollection is he actually Prime Minister Howard's parliamentary secretary. Of course, Peter Slipper is a member of the Liberal Party.
Now, there is a proper process that happens to investigate any allegations about misuse of entitlements and that proper process will work its way through.
JOURNALIST: But is it a good look to have him as Deputy Speaker?
PM: Look, allegations have been made and allegations made are investigated. There's a proper process to do that, but I would note again these allegations do relate not to the time that Mr Slipper has been Deputy Speaker but to the time that he was Prime Minister Howard's parliamentary secretary in the Howard Government.
JOURNALIST: Will you (inaudible) when you were negotiating with him to become Deputy Speaker?
PM: Look, obviously, allegations about entitlements do not come to me as Prime Minister. There is a process that's engaged in and it's not run by me.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 40 per cent of the money that is allocated to them under the BER at the same time as (inaudible) Do you still think it's a good idea for that money now to be poured into the economy? Wouldn't it be better to withhold it?
PM: Well, let's just be very clear about the Building the Education Revolution money and the result that it's had in our economy. There's no doubt, and if you talk to any of the expert commentators, whether it be the IMF, whether you look at the minutes that come from the Reserve Bank, if you look at any of our credentialed economic commentators, they will all tell you that economic stimulus played a large part in keeping Australia working during the global financial crisis and global recession.
Of course, economic stimulus was always budgeted to come out of the system, and we are already on the move through so that economic stimulus is coming out of the system and the most intensive parts of economic stimulus have already been delivered at the time that the economy needed that the most.
For the Building the Education Revolution program, we will continue the roll out in schools. The timeframes were set very deliberately and we will continue to have that roll out, in Victoria and around the country, to conclusion. There have obviously been some re-tendering work done in various parts of Victoria to make sure school are getting value for money, and obviously re-tendering, if that's necessary to get value for money, is a good thing.
JOURNALIST: They haven't even spent half, so why are we stimulating the economy with more than $1.5 billion when the economy seems to be-
PM: -Well, not right on the figures. I'd refer you to the data series that the ABS produces about non-residential construction, and school construction falls in that category, where it is apparent that BER is holding up the levels of non-residential construction.
You could not look at those figures and say that without BER we would be at normal or average construction levels in non-residential construction when you look at that series for the nation.
JOURNALIST: Do you have a view, Premier Brumby, on water, seems to be saying that the Murray Darling Basin Authority's report doesn't give enough credit to the ability of water-savings projects to produce water for the environment (inaudible) Do you agree with his analysis?
PM: Well, I think it's very important to be clear about the process here. The Murray Darling Basin Authority is an independent authority. What has been produced by it is a guide. There is a consultation process now which people can be involved in. Certainly, Premier Brumby can be involved in it and people in local communities can be involved in it.
That consultation work will then feed in to the production by this independent authority of a draft plan. Then there will be a further consultation process before a final plan is produced.
Now, I understand people care about this issue passionately. They care about the health of the Murray Darling. Obviously, they care about irrigation, farms, food production, communities along the river that rely on water from the river. There is an extensive consultation process for people to be involved in.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that Tony Burke should attend some of the meetings, the community meetings?
PM: Look, this is the Murray Darling Basin Authority's guide. It is an independent authority. As an independent authority it is responsible for the next stage, which is a draft plan. That's why this independent authority is conducting these consultations. Obviously, Tony Burke as Minister is out and about in communities, talking to people all the time, and people should feel free - and I'm sure do - raise any issues with him that are on their mind, but the Murray Darling Basin Authority is an independent authority and its process of consultation is rolling out.
JOURNALIST: Around 700 people were locked out of the meeting in Deniliquin today. They've called a third meeting now. Has enough planning gone into these meetings, and are you concerned about the number of people that now want to have their say?
PM: Well, once again, Murray Darling Basin Authority's an independent authority, so in terms of the logistics for its meetings, you need to direct the question to them.
Obviously, I want to see people able to have their say. That's why, when we look at this process - we've got a guide with a consultation period, followed by a draft plan with more consultation, all conducted by the independent authority that was set up legislation in the parliament, legislation that actually dates from the period of the Howard Government.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any comment on Mr Abbott's assertion that you're not doing enough to support the troops who have been accused (inaudible)
PM: I will respond to that. I did see Mr Abbott's words yesterday, and unfortunately Mr Abbott does not understand the facts of this matter.
First and foremost, the legislation that created our military justice system was legislation of the Howard Government. Mr Abbott was a senior minister of that government.
It went through the parliament with bipartisan support, but it was legislation of the Howard Government. Mr Abbott sat around that Cabinet table. If he had any concerns about this legislation, then why weren't they expressed at that time?
Second, the Director of Military Prosecutions was appointed by Brendan Nelson when he was Minister for Defence. Once again, Brendan Nelson, sitting alongside Tony Abbott at the Howard Government Cabinet table.
And third, in terms of the facts, Mr Abbott seems to believe that the Government can make representations in this process. That is simply not true, and anyone who had bothered to get themselves briefed as to the facts would have known that wasn't true. Representations are made on behalf of these Defence personnel by senior members of our Defence Force.
Now, national security, it doesn't get any more important than that. I would say to Mr Abbott this is an area where he's got the clearest of all obligations to inform himself of the facts before he speaks.
JOURNALIST: You say that legislation came through under the Howard Government, but do you support it?
PM: It got support bipartisan support in the parliament. That is, Mr Abbott supported it, and the Labor Party supported it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you feel it's appropriate for a politician to fire a rifle, and what do you think of Tony Abbott's decision to have vision or evidence of him doing this censored?
PM: Well, they're questions for Mr Abbott about his trip to Afghanistan and I'll leave those questions to him.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how did the cannulation go?
MINISTER ROXON: She was very professional.
PM: I think the three of us are very glad that it was a dummy arm and I think, yes, everybody was much better of that it was not a real person on the other end of the exercise.
I think we'll probably stick to our current jobs rather than be here with our friends who are in clinical training. I'm not sure we'd keep pace.
OK, thank you.



PM: Thank you very much. Obviously I'm joined by the Premier of Victoria and my ministerial colleague, Senator Carr, and can I open by saying that today we've had the opportunity to participate in a fantastic announcement which is good news for Melbourne, good news for Australia, and that is that IBM, here at the University of Melbourne, will be creating a world-class research and development laboratory.
Now, IBM is a company known to Australians, known around the world, as a leader in innovation, and this laboratory will bring together 150 researchers, 38 PhD students, and that research effort will be directed at some of the biggest challenges that face our nation and face our world, including challenges like dealing with natural disaster management.
This is good news for Melbourne and good news for the nation. It comes on top of Melbourne being home to the National Broadband Network Company, and of course comes on top of the efforts that the Victorian Government, working in partnership with the Federal Government, to make this city a leader in innovation.
I am really delighted to be here and able to participate in this announcement today. I think it really is a very important announcement for the nation's future.
Of course, this week I have talking about the things that will drive productivity and economic growth in the future - skills development and innovation - and today is a great day to celebrate this investment in innovation.
I'm proud we were able to support this investment as a Federal Government with $22 million of support, and I am also very pleased to be here with my Victorian colleague Premier Brumby, and I'll now turn to him for comments.
PREMIER BRUMBY: Terrific. Well, thank you, Prime Minister, and we're delighted. This is a great partnership, a partnership between our Government, the Federal Government, the University of Melbourne and IBM.
It's really about building a more liveable state. It's about building a more liveable Australia. It's about focussing on all of the big issues that affect urban living, and I think we've heard today the detail of this, the research: things like how we respond to natural disasters; things like how we respond to challenges in the transport system, building smarter, more intelligent transports systems; how we use smart grids and electricity to drive improvements and efficiencies and tackle climate change, and we're delighted, absolutely delighted that IBM has chosen Melbourne University and Melbourne as the centre for this first global R&amp;D facility.
There will be 150 researchers that are based here. It'll build on the great life sciences initiative that we were able to announce earlier this year with the super computer, the biggest life sciences super computer in the world - 800 teraflops - and all of the work that comes out of this will do good in terms of building a better society and a getter community: better in terms of things like cancer research; better in terms of things like smarter health systems, smarter transport systems, better use of water, better use of electricity, and better ways of managing things like bushfires and natural disasters.
We've made a substantial contribution to the project as a state. We're delighted to partner with the Federal Government and IBM and with Melbourne University on whom we've partnered with many projects, and I thank the Prime Minister for her leadership and support.
PM: Thank you to Melbourne University, Vice Chancellor over there.
Can I ask, first, if there are any questions on the IBM Research and Development Laboratory announcement today before we turn to issues of the day?
JOURNALIST: Do you think your federal legislation on R&amp;D research which is before parliament at the moment is helping or hindering (inaudible)
PM: Well, I'll get our resident expert to comment on that.
MINSTER CARR: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.
The R&amp;D legislation will be a major new incentive for research and development in Australia. It is a measure that will double the level of support for small business and increase the level of support for large business by one third.
We will be spending $1.6 billion per annum on support for business R&amp;D.
That legislation is being opposed by the Liberal Party. It was opposed by the Liberal Party sight unseen.
We've had an extensive period of consultation involving over 700 companies. It has substantial support from the ICT sector, IBM, other leading companies of that type, from pharmaceuticals, from biotechnology sectors, from the leading-edge, cutting-edge high technology sectors.
That's the sort of support the Government can provide to enhance our international position in terms of attracting new investment for research and development, so, yes, it will improve our performance. Yes, it will provide additional incentive for new investments, and it is a pity that the Liberal Party has chosen to be so obstructionist about such an important initiative.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) in the question. Would it actually help a place like this?
MINISTER CARR: Yes, it would help a place like this, but we are taking these measures immediately. Additional measures are required from time to time, particularly when we are working in an international environment where governments around the world are moving to support their particular economies, their particular innovation systems, and the additional support that we're able to provide through this particular measure has ensured that we get a global R&amp;D centre here when it could have gone to many other places in the world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) decrease in the number of foreign students (inaudible) and they directly attribute it back to attacks on Indian students in Australia and our image overseas. Are you concerned by that?
PM: Well, can we just see if there are any direct IBM questions, then we'll turn to those broader issues, and I did want to say something else before we do that. Yes?
JOURNALIST: In terms of this lab, IBM being a private company but this lab receiving government support, if they, say, develop solutions that could help during bushfires or traffic management or water management, do they then sell that information to profit from it or who owns the research?
PM: Well, this is a wonderful partnership between the university, IBM and two levels of government. I'll get Senator Carr to comment on the specific partnership arrangements.
MINISTER CARR: There is a combination of measures that are taken. Some issues are specifically, in terms of the IP arrangements, the property of IBM and some other measures, of course, are public benefit research measures, and so we would ensure that the public benefit provisions are protected and ensure that the public gets the benefit of those measures where required.
However, there is no doubt that there are commercial benefits for this part of investment. We take the view that it's important for our university systems to be more responsive to the communities that sustain them, both in terms of the broader public and also in terms of commercial opportunities, and we want to see new jobs created, new industries created and new opportunities taken that enhance our living standards in this country.
JOURNALIST: Premier, how much is the State Government putting in, all up?
PREMIER BRUMBY: Look, we're not disclosing that. We've had a long-standing practice of not disclosing what we contribute, but it's a substantial amount and the reason we don't contribute [sic] is because with projects like this we tend to compete against Adelaide, Sydney and Brisbane and this was a global and a footloose investment internationally, but it could have gone anywhere in Australia. It came to Melbourne because of the skills and the infrastructure and the quality of the university and, of course, from the support we've provided, but if we disclose that amount it bids up the price that we have to pay for projects in the future, so we've had a long-standing practice of not announcing those numbers, but it is substantial, and it is substantial because it's such a brilliant project, and it will tackle many of those big issues that we've been talking about, the challenges of the future, building a more secure future, and it is a great partnership with the Federal Government and I think it's a great investment for our state and it consolidates our leadership in innovation and IT.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) do you expect that they'll be Victorians getting those jobs, or recruited from interstate and overseas?
PREMIER BRUMBY: I think it's probably fair to say the bulk of those will probably come from our state, but IBM and Melbourne University, they're based here but they're global operations. They'll get the best people to do the work, so I think the bulk of them will come from here but you'll get some that will come from interstate and I'm sure there'll be some from overseas.
I think the key here is the flow-on effects, the direct and the indirect, that come from that, and we were so keen to get this and the Prime Minister and Senator Carr and I, it'd be two years ago or maybe a little more when we first discussed this. It's such an important hub to have to tackle the big challenges of our time and you think of Melbourne - you know, the last decade, we've never been out of the top three in terms of the world's most liveable cities. We've never been beaten by a city our size.
What people want is a good economy and a high quality of life, and it's this hub, this research and development facility, that's really going to focus on how we achieve both of those aims, so it's well worth the investment and the bulk of the jobs will come from Victoria.
JOURNALIST: Will, did IBM get any payroll tax deductions (inaudible)
PREMIER BRUMBY: No, we tend not to do that. We haven't done that for a long period of time, so any grants that we pay as a government - there are some in this case - tend to be build along KPIs and milestones, so as the project progresses, the number of people employed, the aggregate investment made, so that's how we do that and as those milestones are made those funds are paid.
PM: Alright, before we turn to - and I will come back to your question - but before we turn to other issues of the day I'd just like to make a statement about an announcement by Premier Keneally in New South Wales relating to national uniform occupational health and safety legislation.
It has been a key demand of employers for than 30 years that there be uniform occupational health and safety laws. That is, for businesses that trade in more than one state, and of course many Australian businesses do, that they face the same occupational health and safety regulation.
The Council of Australian Governments committed themselves to this goal, and they committed themselves to this goal of uniformity whilst ensuring high protections for working Australians. We want to keep people safe.
Now, there was an agreement entered into on 11th December 2009 by the Federal Government with all state and territory governments except Western Australia. That agreement was signed by New South Wales, to deliver on uniform occupational health and safety laws.
Now, that came after an extensive consultation process. This process started in July 2008, with the first COAG commitment. It was then followed by at least nine ministerial council meetings. The relevant authority, Safe Work Australia, met seven times. Its strategic issues group on OH&amp;S met 20 times to progress the laws. There was a national review involving outreach to stakeholders. More than 240 submissions were received. Two reports were published. An exposure draft was circulated, receiving 480 submissions from interested stakeholders.
Now, after that extensive process New South Wales signed an agreement with the Federal Government to deliver these laws. Premier Keneally has now indicated she will not honour that agreement.
Well, my message today is very clear - a deal is a deal, and the Federal Government requires this deal to be honoured. I am currently taking advice from my department about what options are available to the Federal Government to ensure that the New South Wales Government honours this deal.
This is a key economic reform. It's a key economic reform that was agreed by New South Wales, and we will require it to be delivered.
JOURNALIST: How much will you (inaudible)
PM: Well, the message here is very simple - Commonwealth-state relations has to work on the basis that people sign agreements and honour them. We will be requiring that of New South Wales.
JOURNALIST: What are the options that you're canvassing (inaudible)
PM: Well, I'm going to take advice on the full range of options and at this stage I'm not ruling anything in or anything out.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that the Keneally Government should have come to the Federal Government privately, rather than in the public way that it has?
PM: No, I think the Keneally Government should honour the agreement it made. It had an extensive period of time to raise issues of concern - and indeed it did, through its Minister at the Workplace Relations Ministerial Council table. Issues were raised, issues were discussed. When you are reaching uniform laws, it is obvious that states and territories come with different perspectives. They've got their own laws. If no-one moves then you never get national uniformity.
So, yes, New South Wales raised issues along the way, but it accepted the outcomes and it signed the deal. We require the deal to be delivered.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) harmonisation across the states, if that's not working, is one of your options to then move federally-
PM: -look, I'm not going to rule any options in or out at this stage. Obviously, this is a problem with New South Wales.
JOURNALIST: Is this a separate issue to the Barangaroo project?
PM: Yes, it is.
JOURNALIST: So what's your view on the exemption that the Keneally Government is asking for in Barangaroo, for example?
PM: Well, on that matter I believe Premier Keneally has been mis-advised and misinformed. Our building and construction guidelines only apply to projects that have Commonwealth funds involved.
JOURNALIST: So that doesn't include the Barangaroo project?
PM: As I'm advised, there are no Commonwealth Government funds involved, and so there is no implication from our guidelines for that project. The New South Wales Government is at liberty to work out its own workplace relations arrangements on that project - obviously, within the ambit of relevant law.
JOURNALIST: Have you spoken directly to Premier Keneally today on her announcement?
PM: My office received a letter from her yesterday on this occupational health and safety matter, and I'll be responding to that letter in writing.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, well, I received it in writing so I'll respond in writing.
JOURNALIST: In terms of the meetings that have taken place around Australia on water buybacks for the Murray Darling Basin, do you think the Water Minister, Tony Burke, should be attending those?
PM: Well, I think, once again, we've got to be very clear about this, and I did address this issue yesterday.
This is an issue on which we want to hear people's views, absolutely, and we understand that whether you're a member of parliament like Tony Windsor, who's expressed a view, whether you're a farmer, whether you're someone who lives in a regional centre, whether you're someone who cares passionately about the river through personal interest rather than being necessarily drawing your lively hood from the river, I think Australians across the board are concerned about the future of the Murray Darling Basin and we want to hear all views.
Now, the Murray Darling Basin Authority has a process to do that. It is an independent authority. It's put out a guide which will, following consultation, inform a draft plan which will then be the subject of further consultation.
I said yesterday, and of course it's true, that Minister Burke himself, as an individual, is always very open to hearing people's views, but the consultation process of the Murray Darling Basin Authority is its consultation process, and the Murray Darling Basin Authority is independent.
JOURNALIST: There's a report today that as many as eight rural towns, including Mildura and Robinvale could be affected by this. Was that a surprise to you, that this could be a potential outcome?
PM: Well, of course there is a long process to go before we reach the decision-making stage. Where we are, if people in Mildura and in other centres are concerned, should become involved in the process and have their voices heard.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) stopped that happening-
PM: Well there's a process and it would be wrong for me to prejudge that. I'm genuinely saying we want to listen to people and in those circumstances I'm not going to rule things in and rule things out, that's not fair to the people who want to have their voices heard. What's fair to the people who want to have their voices heard is for the Murray-Darling Basin Authority process, its consultation process, to keep rolling through and obviously for government, including Minister Burke, to be open to hearing the voice of the community and we are.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what are the chances of getting an agreement from the Murray-Darling plan?
PM: Well a step at a time, we've got a guide, a period of consultation, draft plan, further period of consultation before a plan is arrived at. This is a process, we want people to engage in and have their voices heard and whether it's a Member of Parliament, like Tony Windsor, or an interested community member everyone can have their voice heard in this process.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is you decision not to fund (inaudible) the State Government's closure of Hazelwood make it more difficult for John Brumby to close the power plant?
PM: Well obviously there has been some discussions between Minister Combet and Premier Brumby on that question and those discussions were constructive ones so I haven't got anything further to add to that.
JOURNALST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh sorry, you're getting treated badly here aren't you?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look on international education there are a variety of factors here. Of course we've got fierce competition in our region and beyond for international students, we have a high Australian dollar and earlier in this week when I delivered a major economic speech in Brisbane I made the point that a high Australian dollar is good for some in our community, some industries and obviously it puts pressure on others, and a high Australian dollar puts pressure on an export industry like international education. The Federal Government has, of course, made some moves to better regulation in international education, to lift quality, and they were appropriate moves and we've seen as well the Federal Government involved in major new funding sources for universities. So if we look across the board here there are a variety of factors. We have made some immigration changes about permanent migration but obviously we do want to see international students come and study here. So we'll keep working with the Victorian Government, with individual universities on international education, but there are a range of factors putting pressure on it at this time.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well as a Federal Government we've worked in a good partnership with the Victorian Government and around the nation on promoting Australia as a destination for international students and promoting very simple facts like when we interview international students after they've been here and ask them questions like would they recommend studying in Australia to a friend, they overwhelmingly say yes. So we'll continue to work together on that promotion of international education.
JOUNRNALIST: Those visa changes, they were aimed at the vocational end of the market, but here we're seeing consequences at the tertiary end of the market which is where the value is, is that an unintended consequence-
PM: I think we've got to be a bit clear, the visa changes were changes to our permanent migration arrangements which we did because we want who we select to come in the permanent migration scheme and the size of that scheme to be about immigration. So people coming here for education, we want that to be about getting a high quality education. People who seek to move to our country as permanent migrants we want to be dealt with properly through the migration stream. So that wasn't aimed at having a differential impact on different education sectors, it was about proper migration policy. For education, obviously we are seeing a mix of factors, obviously I did become concerned, the Government became concerned about some regulation and quality matters, particularly in the vocational education and training sector and we've been moving to address those.
JOURNALIST: Do you agree with Tony Windsor about alternatives outside the Murray-Darling Plan need to be looked at and would you support amendments to the Water Act to focus more on regional communities, the economic impact?
PM: Well it follows from what I've said. We've got a process here where we will hear people's views, we're very open to hearing the views of the community, that's why the independent Authority, the Murray-Darling Basin Authority is working its way through its own extensive consultation process and of course Government directly is interested in hearing people's views.
JOURNALIST: Should Bob Brown be travelling to Afghanistan ahead of the upcoming debate about the issue, I mean he's obviously quite strong in his position against diggers being in Afghanistan. Should he be travelling there?
PM: We will have a broad ranging debate in the Parliament on Afghanistan, it will be participated in by large numbers of people who have not had the opportunity to visit there. Obviously for all of the logistics and security issues which are obvious I think, opportunities to visit there are relatively limited, we can't have large numbers of people going over and visiting our troops, that would put too much pressure of security and logistics arrangements. So, you know, people will participate in this debate having informed themselves about what's happening in Afghanistan and what their own views are. Obviously Bob Brown has his stated opinion and I anticipate he will restate that in the Parliament.
JOURNALIST: As the leader of the Greens-
PM: Look I don't-
JOURNALIST: Should he be offered the opportunity?
PM: Well I don't think it's fair to conclude that somehow someone can't make a contribution in a Parliamentary debate because they haven't visited Afghanistan. If we had that rule very strictly, then I think there would be four or five, maybe six people in the whole Parliament who could participate in the debate. That's not how we want to do it, we want people to be able to put their views and have an open debate.
JOURNALIST: What do you think of the Opposition's (inaudible) soldiers who are going through the military tribunal need greater legal support?
PM: Well on that question can I say the following. Earlier this week Tony Abbott criticised our system of military justice and indeed used terminology about the Government stabbing soldiers in the back and criticised the Government for not making representations on behalf of soldiers. He made those harsh comments without having informed himself as to the facts and I am pleased today that the Shadow Minister for Defence has at least corrected the facts. The way this works is the system that was set up was originally legislated with bipartisan support under the Howard Government, the Director of Military Prosecutions was an appointment of the then Minister for Defence Brendan Nelson. The Government cannot make representations in this process, that is done by Defence. So I would simply say to the Opposition involved in this debate that there's an obligation, particularly in the area of national security, to inform yourself of the facts before you speak, and I would say about the Leader of the Opposition, we obviously are seeing constant changes of position on a range of very important questions, at an earlier point in time Mr Abbott appeared to be calling for more troops in Afghanistan, he has now walked about from that position. In July 2009 Mr Abbott was spruiking a carbon tax, he is now campaigning against that position. Mr Abbott signed a Parliamentary Reform agreement to deliver political donations reform, it appears the Opposition is now walking away from that agreement, and I'd just say to Mr Abbott and the Opposition, national leadership requires constancy of purpose, I would say to Mr Abbott it's not appropriate in so many important areas to just be looking for an opportunity to wreck or make reckless comments not informed by the facts.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister why do you say Barangaroo is outside (inaudible) a bit of a slap in the face to your IR laws?
PM: Look this is not the Fair Work laws, this is the building and construction code and a question of just the mechanics of the code, it applies to Commonwealth funded projects.
JOURNALIST: Premier, Jeff Kennett has just announced on 3AW this morning while he was in power he was shot at twice. What's your reaction to that, have you been shot at while you're in power?
BRUMBY: Serious comments? I haven't heard that and I wasn't aware of that, I've never had any security of police advice to that effect so I was not aware of that, and to my knowledge I've not been shot at.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) obviously you don't have security around all the time, is your personal safety crawling in the back of your mind?
BRUMBY: Well it's not actually no, I find overwhelmingly across Victoria that people are respectful and often you'll meet people with a different view but generally they express it in a respectful way, not always but generally. So I think it's common for people in my position, in such a position, to have some security, but it's not at top of mind for me I'm more interested in meeting people and hearing what they say.
JOURNALIST: Does it concern you (inaudible)
BRUMBY: I'm surprised to hear it and I was not aware of it, as I said, and it's not, and I speak with him from time to time and it was not something that I was aware of, it's not something he's ever mentioned privately so I'm surprised about, I guess the good news in the story is that no harm occurred and we can be grateful for that.
JOURNALIST: In terms of this IBM lab (inaudible)
BRUMBY: It's here at Melbourne University, so-
JOURNALIST: In the law building?
BRUMBY: I don't think it's going to take the best space of the law students, is it Greg? And I don't think it's going to be in this room, which is great news, but it's here at Melbourne University.
JOURNALIST: Given that you-
BRUMBY: And I think Gwyn would be happy to give details either now or at a later time.
JOURNALIST: Given that you obviously spent quite a lot of money (inaudible) to assure (inaudible) in terms of what we see with Monash Uni- (inaudible)
BRUMBY: I think on the contrary, and in fact just last week I released our Victorian Government plan for India, to build stronger trade and investment and cultural relations. And you've got to put India up here in the context of what they call the (inaudible) economies: Brazil, India, Russia, China. China is already our largest trading partner and India is just rapidly escalating in terms of our trade and investment and engagement, and we've got a big Indian community here, we've got more than 200,000 Indians who have made Victoria their home and we're proud of their communities, so I think more visits from us to India and from Indian officials to Australia, more business delegations, more tourism, more students, all of these things are important to building a strong and stable relationship into the future. But can I just about the higher education, we've got more overseas students studying today than virtually at any time in the last decade or 15 years, but there is a lot of competition, a lot of competition from the US, from the UK, increasingly from other parts of Asia. As the PM has said, the dollar is at record high levels and this makes a big difference to families, and then of course you have had, as the Prime Minister has said, the tightening of visa requirements. So all of these things have changed that student profile but I think looking forward our relationship with India is a strong relationship, it's a positive relationship and we would look to continue to build our student numbers in China, India, in the Middle-East and throughout the Asia-Pacific.
JOURNALIST: Premier are you concerned the Victorian public has lost confidence in the DPP after that saga goes on, Mr Lapke?
PM: Well look I think it's important to have that confidence in the DPP, as you know there was a meeting yesterday, I haven't been advised of the outcomes of that, as I said it was what is one of a number of regular meetings between the DPP and the Department of Justice and the Victorian Solicitor, so I'd hope that these matters can now settle down and that the public can again enjoy confidence in the DPP.
JOURNALIST: Is it time for the Attorney-General to intervene personally and talk to Mr Lapke about the allegations that are out there?
BRUMBY: Look I don't believe so and I think those issues were addressed in the media, on radio, by Ratke earlier this week and he's made very clear his position about promotion, about allegations of improper relationships and he's emphatically rejected that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) that Liberal voters should think carefully about who they preference. Should Labor voters preference the Liberals or the Greens first?
BRUMBY: Well it's irrelevant, and it's irrelevant because those seats, the Labor candidate will polls the highest number of primary votes, so those preferences aren't distributed, so you can have-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) put the Greens last?
BRUMBY: Well you can have a debate about these things but it's irrelevant-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BRUMBY: it's an irrelevant debate because our preferences are not distributed in those seats. So the point I'm making is an important point and if you go back a decade ago, it used to be Labor would come in first, the Liberal Party second, and the Greens third and most of the Green preferences go to the Labor Party, it's always been s and likely to be in the future. But nowadays because the Liberal vote in those inner suburban seats has collapsed it's Labor one, Greens two and Liberal three and because we don't get an absolute majority of primary votes, it's the Liberal preference vote that determines the outcome and so Adam Bandt could not have been elected without Liberal Party preferences and I just make the point, I made it in the speech David, you were there in that speech, I think many Liberal voters would not perhaps appreciate that their second preference vote is determining that seat and I say that because a decade ago it wasn't the case, their vote wasn't distributed. But it is now because they're coming in third, so it is absolutely true and factual to say that it is Liberal Party preferences that will decide the outcome of the seats of Melbourne and Brunswick and Richmond, and I would only say to those Liberal Party voters to think about where they put their second preference and whether they want to vote for what's been a stable and strong and secure Government for our State, that is our Government, a Labor Government, or whether they want to risk a Coalition with the Greens. And if they vote and give the second preference to the Greens, obviously they will put into question an absolute majority for our Government.
JOURNALIST: Premier are you concerned about a report that the Victoria Police turned a blind eye to bikies hooning on the roads and didn't arrest them?
BRUMBY: Well look it's an operational matter for Victoria Police so I don't interfere in their operational responses and how they do their day to day work, but I am advised, Victoria Police tells me that the claim that's made, that there was an instruction not to book or not to enforce is just not true.
JOURNALIST: Premier do you have plans to give up the (inaudible) water trading cap (inaudible)
BRUMBY: I'd really reiterate today, I think, all of the things that the Prime Minister has said and that is this the very early days of what's going to be quite a vigorous and long debate, and long discussion about the Murray-Darling Basin Plan and I said earlier this week, you're going to see some very strongly held views from people on both sides of the debate and I think the final plan, which is still a year away, my own view is it'll end up looking quite different to this original draft plan, but we'll see what develops over the year, but there's a process to go through, I think, as the PM said, communities have to have the opportunity to put their views about what they think of the plan and the socio-economic implications of that and of course we're very concerned about that. Communities have the right and I would encourage them to put their views in a respectful and constructive way but, if I can put it this way, there's a lot of water still to flow under the bridge before a final plan is agreed.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) as an outcome of this draft plan?
BRUMBY: Well again I'd just reiterate the comments that I made earlier in the week and our Water Minister Tim Holding did, and that is that I think the process is really important here, that people have the opportunity to have a say, to focus on the broader implications, the socio-economic implications. We've said that I think there's a, there will be I think a better way to achieve environmental objectives and to ensure that we still have strong regional communities and we are talking to country communities about how we would achieve that, but again I'd just reinforce what the PM said, it's still early days, it's going to be a lot of vigorous debate and I think it's not for the politicians to stifle that debate at an early stage.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can I just ask you (inaudible) at the back of your mind?
PM: We both have other commitments to get to so we will have to make this the last one. My answer to that is no, and can I, I'll have to inform myself about Jeff Kennett's comments, obviously they've happened whilst we've been here at this event. But I will say overwhelmingly is this, we live in a wonderful, safe, peaceful country and when you get the opportunity as I have to go to places like the United States and to see the sorts of security that's around people like the Presidents of the United States, I think it is a wonderful Australian thing that I, that Premier Brumby, that other political leaders and figures get to move around our communities still in a very, very open way by world standards, and I constantly have people remark to me when I pop-up in a shop or in a street, and they just happen to be there and see me, that they're surprised but they think that it says something about Australia that the Prime Minister can just move around like that. So we overwhelmingly live in a wonderful, safe community and we should remember that.
JOURNLAIST: (inaudible) JFK-
PM: I'm not saying those measures are unreasonable for the President of the United States, given the product of history and the role of the United States in the world, obviously those security measures are well and truly warranted for the President of the United States, but let's congratulate ourselves on the openness with which political leaders can move around giving the community good access to us, keeping our lives more normal that they otherwise would be and all I can say is may it last forever, may that always be the Australian way.



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Premier of Victoria John Brumby today announced IBM will establish a world-first global research and development laboratory at the University of Melbourne.
The new centre, which will be created with the support of the Gillard and Brumby Labor Governments, will be the first IBM global research and development laboratory anywhere in the world.
The Prime Minister said the new IBM centre will employ 150 highly-skilled staff and PhD students to help solve some of the biggest challenges facing the globe.
The national innovation centre will also seek to solve problems of the future that haven't even affected us yet.
The IBM laboratory will be located at the University of Melbourne where researchers can work side-by-side to help tackle international issues such as managing natural disasters, using our natural resources efficiently, fighting diseases, boosting agricultural yields and harnessing the power of biotechnology.
Premier John Brumby said the project further cements Victoria's reputation as the Information and Communications Technology (ICT) capital of Australia following the National Broadband Network's decision to build their hub in Melbourne, and the release of the government's $110 million ICT strategy yesterday.
"Victoria is the perfect place to base this globally important ICT research and development lab and create 150 new jobs," Mr Brumby said.
"We are home to the hub of the NBN, have the best ICT workforce in the country, a strong base of ICT research institutions and companies, a growing economy and a very supportive government.
"We have actively sought out new technology to help deliver another era of economic prosperity for Victoria.
"Just like our agricultural, mining, manufacturing and services phases, Victoria's ICT phase will transform our economy and create thousands of new jobs for Victorian families.
Glen Boreham, Managing Director for IBM Australia and New Zealand said IBM was working with the Australian and Victorian Governments to expand its R&amp;D capability in Australia.
"Aligned with its drive to build a Smarter Planet, IBM has been drawn to Australia by the availability of world-class talent, the innovation environment, continent-scale opportunities and Australia's robust economy," Mr Boreham said.
The Federal Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research, Kim Carr, said the expansion of IBM's facilities in Australia was an example of a good partnership.
"Co-investment with companies such as IBM helps provide a model of cooperation between universities and private industry, and will build high-skill, high-wage jobs for Australians in technologically cutting-edge industries," Senator Carr said.
"It will also provide real world experience for our researchers and PhD students in a world-class facility."
University of Melbourne's Deputy Vice Chancellor of research Professor Peter Rathjen said that the facility will bring together leading research and development initiatives with world-class ICT infrastructure.
"The establishment of the global R&amp;D lab will bring together some of the best minds in the country and arguably the world," Professor Rathjen said.
The new IBM facility is expected to start operating in the first quarter of 2011 and grow to about 150 researchers within the next five years.


Melbourne
PM: It's great to be back home in Melbourne and to be here at Austin Hospital. I'm joined by the Minister for Health, Nicola Roxon, and by Jenny Macklin, obviously one of our of ministers that's here today in her capacity as the local member for this area.
Yesterday I was in Brisbane, speaking about the importance of economic reform to our nation, and particularly the importance of making we continue to invest in skills and training. Now, many Australians, when they think about skills shortages, would think 'well, we're short in mining, we're short in construction, we're short in some traditional trades.' Now, that's true, but we are also short of the health professionals we need, and that's because when we came to government we inherited a health system from Mr Abbott that was both underfunded and understaffed.
Now, Nicola Roxon as the Minister for Health, and the Government, have been investing in the training necessary to have new health professionals. We've been particularly increasing the number of doctors we are training; the number of nurses we are training; and making investments so we will have the health workforce we need in the future.
Today, we are building on those announcements, and today we're here to announce the clinical training work necessary to support the training of up to 12,000 more health professionals. That's 12,000 more doctors, more nurses, more allied health professionals, who will be supported by the Federal Government to get the clinical training they need in hospitals just like this one.
Now, for the first time we have had a national planning process to work out where this clinical training should occur, because of course we know if people go and have a great-quality training experience they're very likely to end up being a health professional in that area, so where training happens geographically matters, and this is the first time we've had a national approach, a national plan for clinical training, and I'll ask Nicola to just describe that national plan.
MINISTER ROXON: Thanks very much, Prime Minister, and thank you to the Austin for having us here and teaching the three of us how to cannulate. Thank you for the experts who were given those sorts of duties, and we're very pleased to be here with Health Workforce Australia - Mark Cormack and Jim McGinty, the CEO and Chair are here. They have done a tower of work for us in making sure that the significant extra investments that governments across the country are making in health workforce training are targeted to the professions that need the support most, those where the shortages are most severe, and of course in parts of the country that are underserviced.
So, in announcing today that we are investing an additional 1.2 million of training days - so our money, nearly half a billion dollars, is going to pay for a 23 per cent increase in clinical training days across the country. The investments are in 448 projects across 41 universities and over 700 clinical training providers, and of course the Austin is one of those leading training providers, but I think it's important to explain that of this investment that 60 per cent of providers will be non-government and private sector providers. This is an area that's been under-supported in the past and where we're trying to expand the clinical training capacity to complement the fantastic work done in our public hospitals.
41 per cent of placement days are going to be in priority settings where there have been severe shortages in the past, such as aged care, dental care, mental health, primary health care and community-based services, but interestingly as well, the allocation made by Health Workforce Australia provides that 37 per cent of these additional days will be provided in rural and remote communities.
So, this is a strategic investment by the Commonwealth, identifying where there are shortages, identifying which professions need the most help, identifying which communities need the most help, which settings we can provide more training in, and you will see Health Workforce Australia has provided fact sheets so you can break down the projects by state and by profession, that nursing and midwifery, in particular, have a very huge share of this investment because there are very high demands for our qualified nursing and midwifery staff and I think that it will make a big difference over the coming years to ensure that we have a health workforce that can provide safe, top-quality care to our community and much closer to the places where people live.
So, thank you very much, Prime Minister.
PM: So, today's obviously good news. It's good news for those in our health workforce, and I can see some of them at the back, the students who need clinical training places in order to get that direct experience that they need to complete their training, and it's good news for all Australians, because we're all going to be reliant for health care on the health workforce of the future, so we're very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, you say you're after a big economic reform agenda. Isn't this actually an example of how trouble your Government has delivering reforms? The money was promised or agreed to two full years ago, and now you're spending some of it but you're having to spend half of it (inaudible)
PM: Look, I'll turn to Nicola for a comment, but I can certainly say this in general: what I spoke about yesterday was having reform that was methodical, that was delivered day by day, week by week, piece by piece to make a difference, and that is just the approach that we have taken to health care reform, and when you look at this announcement today it comes with a national plan about where training occurs, rather than the ad hoc approaches of the past, and I'll just get Nicola to make a comment, too.
MINISTER ROXON: This agreement was reached in the end of 2008, and investments have been made in 2009 and 2010. $280 million has already been allocated. These were allocated as projects where there was a competitive process, so $67 million for 64 projects to expand clinical training capacity in non-traditional settings was the first investment that was made. $90 million on 35 projects to expand clinical training infrastructure; $33 million on 22 new projects through the rural education infrastructure development pool-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible)-
MINISTER ROXON: -Let me finish, because this is important.
The three rural clinical schools and the first ever medical school in the Northern Territory.
Now, all of these investments take time, take planning and take care for the Government to ensure that we are investing in projects where they're needed, for the professions where there are shortages, and actually this is a quick turnaround to make sure that those projects are properly going to support our workforce of the future, and another $430 million is being allocated today.
Part of the investment in the $1.6 billion package comes from the state and territory governments for increasing funding of placing people within their facilities, so, actually, in the five-year plan that starts from 2008 and runs to 2013 we are absolutely on time, but I also make no apology for us making sure our money is going to be well spent, well targeted, that we test every project and ensure that it is going to deliver additional capacity, because you would be the first to ask us if we're spending taxpayers' money well if we didn't test every project to ensure that it is actually going to deliver benefits.
I think this is an example that this sort of significant reform does take time to deliver properly, but we are on target to deliver the way that we said we would, and the support of an additional 1.2 million training days across the country for our health professionals is something we're very proud of.
JOURNALIST: Minister, just while we've got you there, we're talking about training here, what does it mean for patients to be able to (inaudible)
MINISTER ROXON: Well, it means quite a lot of things for patients and for the community.
One, it means that you are much more likely to be able to see a doctor or nurse or allied health professional close to your home. By increasing the workforce, we are meeting a lot of unmet demand. By making sure that we're training more people in our rural and regional communities, where the shortages have been severe, we're ensuring that hospital services are going to be viable in those communities and that primary care services like GPs or your local physiotherapist are also being provided.
So, it's about providing access to well-trained, qualified staff, and of course it's about supporting quality facilities within our hospitals. We're already very proud of the work that's provided in a hospital like the Austin, but we need to make sure that we're training the workforce of the future. We cannot meet the needs of the community if we don't make these investments, and we are playing catch up from a time when the previous government did not plan and did not invest in the health workforce.
It takes a long time to produce a doctor, and making sure that we are now investing in the pipeline as new, young doctors graduate, making sure they're getting good-quality clinical training in their undergraduate years and then supporting them in their post-graduate years to become GPs or specialists is part of this comprehensive plan.
JOURNALIST: When does the scheme start?
MINISTER ROXON: The announcement today, the 448 new projects, all will be funded for the 2011 academic year, so planning has already commenced and it will mean that additional students will be placed through the course of 2011.
Of course, from our earlier investments we already have people that are being placed in those projects right now, and we have quite a large program of capital infrastructure which is underway, which the sorts of example is building a regional training facility in Taree next to that hospital so that we have students that can be placed there for a longer period, trained in the hospital, hopefully have a good experience and might stay and help us bring about a better balance of our workforce across the country.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is (inaudible)
PM: OK, well, we'll go other issues, yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the (inaudible) Afghanistan is up for debate. Will you allow your Labor MPs and ministers to speak freely on the issue?
PM: Certainly, we agreed as a Government, in discussion with the Australian Greens, that there would be a parliamentary debate on Afghanistan, so we are delivering on that commitment. The debate will start in the House of Representatives next Tuesday. I will speak as Prime Minister. The Leader of the Opposition will speak for an equal amount of time, and then from Wednesday morning on members of the House of Representatives from all sides of politics and the independents will be able to make their contribution to the debate, and obviously members will be able to make whatever contribution they choose to make to the debate.
Then, when the debate has happened in the House of Representatives, it will go to the Senate so senators get the same opportunity.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on another issue, the Peter Slipper matter, there's a number of allegations made against (inaudible) Did Labor make a mistake in (inaudible)
PM: I understand that the matters raised today in the newspapers relate to the time that Peter Slipper was a parliamentary secretary under the Howard Government, and my recollection is he actually Prime Minister Howard's parliamentary secretary. Of course, Peter Slipper is a member of the Liberal Party.
Now, there is a proper process that happens to investigate any allegations about misuse of entitlements and that proper process will work its way through.
JOURNALIST: But is it a good look to have him as Deputy Speaker?
PM: Look, allegations have been made and allegations made are investigated. There's a proper process to do that, but I would note again these allegations do relate not to the time that Mr Slipper has been Deputy Speaker but to the time that he was Prime Minister Howard's parliamentary secretary in the Howard Government.
JOURNALIST: Will you (inaudible) when you were negotiating with him to become Deputy Speaker?
PM: Look, obviously, allegations about entitlements do not come to me as Prime Minister. There is a process that's engaged in and it's not run by me.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 40 per cent of the money that is allocated to them under the BER at the same time as (inaudible) Do you still think it's a good idea for that money now to be poured into the economy? Wouldn't it be better to withhold it?
PM: Well, let's just be very clear about the Building the Education Revolution money and the result that it's had in our economy. There's no doubt, and if you talk to any of the expert commentators, whether it be the IMF, whether you look at the minutes that come from the Reserve Bank, if you look at any of our credentialed economic commentators, they will all tell you that economic stimulus played a large part in keeping Australia working during the global financial crisis and global recession.
Of course, economic stimulus was always budgeted to come out of the system, and we are already on the move through so that economic stimulus is coming out of the system and the most intensive parts of economic stimulus have already been delivered at the time that the economy needed that the most.
For the Building the Education Revolution program, we will continue the roll out in schools. The timeframes were set very deliberately and we will continue to have that roll out, in Victoria and around the country, to conclusion. There have obviously been some re-tendering work done in various parts of Victoria to make sure school are getting value for money, and obviously re-tendering, if that's necessary to get value for money, is a good thing.
JOURNALIST: They haven't even spent half, so why are we stimulating the economy with more than $1.5 billion when the economy seems to be-
PM: -Well, not right on the figures. I'd refer you to the data series that the ABS produces about non-residential construction, and school construction falls in that category, where it is apparent that BER is holding up the levels of non-residential construction.
You could not look at those figures and say that without BER we would be at normal or average construction levels in non-residential construction when you look at that series for the nation.
JOURNALIST: Do you have a view, Premier Brumby, on water, seems to be saying that the Murray Darling Basin Authority's report doesn't give enough credit to the ability of water-savings projects to produce water for the environment (inaudible) Do you agree with his analysis?
PM: Well, I think it's very important to be clear about the process here. The Murray Darling Basin Authority is an independent authority. What has been produced by it is a guide. There is a consultation process now which people can be involved in. Certainly, Premier Brumby can be involved in it and people in local communities can be involved in it.
That consultation work will then feed in to the production by this independent authority of a draft plan. Then there will be a further consultation process before a final plan is produced.
Now, I understand people care about this issue passionately. They care about the health of the Murray Darling. Obviously, they care about irrigation, farms, food production, communities along the river that rely on water from the river. There is an extensive consultation process for people to be involved in.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that Tony Burke should attend some of the meetings, the community meetings?
PM: Look, this is the Murray Darling Basin Authority's guide. It is an independent authority. As an independent authority it is responsible for the next stage, which is a draft plan. That's why this independent authority is conducting these consultations. Obviously, Tony Burke as Minister is out and about in communities, talking to people all the time, and people should feel free - and I'm sure do - raise any issues with him that are on their mind, but the Murray Darling Basin Authority is an independent authority and its process of consultation is rolling out.
JOURNALIST: Around 700 people were locked out of the meeting in Deniliquin today. They've called a third meeting now. Has enough planning gone into these meetings, and are you concerned about the number of people that now want to have their say?
PM: Well, once again, Murray Darling Basin Authority's an independent authority, so in terms of the logistics for its meetings, you need to direct the question to them.
Obviously, I want to see people able to have their say. That's why, when we look at this process - we've got a guide with a consultation period, followed by a draft plan with more consultation, all conducted by the independent authority that was set up legislation in the parliament, legislation that actually dates from the period of the Howard Government.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any comment on Mr Abbott's assertion that you're not doing enough to support the troops who have been accused (inaudible)
PM: I will respond to that. I did see Mr Abbott's words yesterday, and unfortunately Mr Abbott does not understand the facts of this matter.
First and foremost, the legislation that created our military justice system was legislation of the Howard Government. Mr Abbott was a senior minister of that government.
It went through the parliament with bipartisan support, but it was legislation of the Howard Government. Mr Abbott sat around that Cabinet table. If he had any concerns about this legislation, then why weren't they expressed at that time?
Second, the Director of Military Prosecutions was appointed by Brendan Nelson when he was Minister for Defence. Once again, Brendan Nelson, sitting alongside Tony Abbott at the Howard Government Cabinet table.
And third, in terms of the facts, Mr Abbott seems to believe that the Government can make representations in this process. That is simply not true, and anyone who had bothered to get themselves briefed as to the facts would have known that wasn't true. Representations are made on behalf of these Defence personnel by senior members of our Defence Force.
Now, national security, it doesn't get any more important than that. I would say to Mr Abbott this is an area where he's got the clearest of all obligations to inform himself of the facts before he speaks.
JOURNALIST: You say that legislation came through under the Howard Government, but do you support it?
PM: It got support bipartisan support in the parliament. That is, Mr Abbott supported it, and the Labor Party supported it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you feel it's appropriate for a politician to fire a rifle, and what do you think of Tony Abbott's decision to have vision or evidence of him doing this censored?
PM: Well, they're questions for Mr Abbott about his trip to Afghanistan and I'll leave those questions to him.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how did the cannulation go?
MINISTER ROXON: She was very professional.
PM: I think the three of us are very glad that it was a dummy arm and I think, yes, everybody was much better of that it was not a real person on the other end of the exercise.
I think we'll probably stick to our current jobs rather than be here with our friends who are in clinical training. I'm not sure we'd keep pace.
OK, thank you.



Parents and employers should get ready to benefit from the introduction of Australia's first Paid Parental Leave scheme on 1 January next year.
The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, and the Minister for Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs, Jenny Macklin, today called on Australian businesses to register with Centrelink to provide Government-funded parental leave to their employees.
Already 158 employers have registered with Centrelink, including Holden and Bank of Queensland.
The Government has also made it easier for expectant parents to plan for their baby's arrival by opening applications for Paid Parental Leave three months before their baby's due date.
Applications opened on 1 October and in the first week 129 families applied, including 23 on the opening day of applications.
The Government today also launched an information campaign to make sure that families and employers are ready for the 1 January start date.
The information campaign will reach expectant parents in doctors' surgeries, at work, in their living rooms, online and in Centrelink and Medicare offices around the country.
The Australian Government's scheme will provide eligible working parents of babies born or adopted from 1 January next year with parental leave pay for up to 18 weeks at the minimum wage (currently $570 a week before tax).
The Australian Government's Paid Parental Leave scheme will help employers retain skilled staff and boost workforce participation.
To help women remain connected to their workplace when they take time off to have a baby, the Gillard Government's scheme ensures employers provide Government-funded parental leave payments to their long-term employees.
Parental Leave Pay should be delivered as a workplace entitlement, just like sick leave or any other form of leave.
Parents can find out more by visiting www.familyassist.gov.au or calling 13 61 50.
Employers can find out more, including how to register to provide the Government-funded parental leave from 1 January next year by contacting the Centrelink Business Hotline on 13 11 58 or visiting www.centrelink.gov.au.
Australia's first Paid Parental Leave Scheme will give families more options than ever before to balance work and family, and will help boost the economy by encouraging workforce participation. 



PM: This is good news for Australian families. It's good news for our country overall, and employees and employers can register for the scheme now.
Registrations have been open from 1 October. Families can register so that instead of doing the paperwork at the time of the birth of their child, they can do the paperwork in advance, and of course employers can register. They are centrally involved in this scheme because paid parental leave is about helping mums and dads at the time of the birth of a new child, but it's also about keeping a connection between mums and dads who take leave and their employer.
We know that it's in the interest of Australian employers to see their highly skilled staff, particularly their highly skilled female staff, come back to work after they've taken time off for the birth of their child, so our message today is register now.
Today we've launched a Government information campaign to make sure that mums, dads and employers get all the information they need about how to register.
I'll turn now to Jenny Macklin for some comments, too.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much, Prime Minister.
This is a very exciting time for Australia. Finally, we catch up with the rest of the developed world and have our first national paid parental leave scheme.
It will start on the 1st of January next year. It will be paid for 18 weeks at the federal minimum wage, which is around $570 a week.
It's all about making sure that mums and dads have got more time at home when their new baby arrives.
Finally, we'll make sure that that right is there for mothers and fathers in Australia, and it will be so important to the casual workers, the part-time workers, the self-employed, the contractors, who haven't had access to paid parental leave before.
If you're pregnant now and expecting your baby in the new year, you can get online or you can go to your local Centrelink office, get the paper work done before your baby arrives. If you're an employer, and you have a mother who's about to deliver in the new year, you too can start to register, get your paperwork done, so that employers are ready to do their part to deliver paid parental leave for Australians.
PM: Thank you.
Can I say a big thanks to Holden for having us here today? We've enjoyed meeting a number of Holden staff who have either taken the benefit of having Holden's paid parental leave scheme or who are expecting a baby and will benefit from both the new Government-paid parental leave scheme and Holden's scheme, and thank you to Michael Danby as well - we're in his local electorate.
Happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how do you expect the scheme to cost taxpayers every year or over the life of the scheme?
PM: The paid parental leave scheme? Paid parental leave over a four-year Budget period is around a billion dollars.
JOURNALIST: Can the country afford it?
PM: Yes - it's in our Budget, fully factored in with the Budget coming back to surplus in 2012-13. We worked long and hard to make sure that this scheme was affordable for Government. We worked long and hard to make sure that the Budget will come back to surplus in 2012-13 with the costs of paid parental leave factored in.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the Auditor-General's report into the insulation situation was put down today. Why was Greg Combet not put forward to speak on the matter and instead a parliamentary secretary spoke?
PM: Mark Dreyfus has responsibility for the Home Insulation Program now, and consequently he was available to speak to the media today about the Auditor-General's report, and of course I'm happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Seemingly, he was unable to answer the question in relation to deficiencies in the 90,000 homes examined. Should he not know that information?
PM: Well, I think Mark Dreyfus today has answered questions about the Auditor-General's report. Of course, the Government's been frank and very up-front about the problems with the Home Insulation Program. I publically acknowledged, as Prime Minister, on a number of occasions that this scheme did become a mess and that's why we brought the scheme to an end, and, of course, Greg Combet, then as the relevant Minister, worked through on compensation arrangements.
We welcome today the Auditor-General's report. I note that it makes no recommendations because the Government acted to bring this scheme to an end. We did, of course, receive an earlier review in the form of the Hawke report.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Peter Garrett (inaudible)
PM: Well, the Auditor-General report today makes no findings against Minister Garrett. I note that.
The Auditor-General obviously makes a number of comments about the performance of the Department here and the management of risk.
JOURNALIST: So what confidence can you have things are fixed (inaudible)
PM: Well, we've taken steps to address the Home Insulation Program. We brought the Scheme to an end at the start of this year. We've structured compensation arrangements. Of course, we had the Hawke review, and all of that means that we as a Government, and I think those, too, in the public service, have worked through to learn the lessons here, and I welcome the Auditor-General's report because that will also assist both Government and the public service to learn from this example and to avoid these kind of risks in the future.
JOURNALIST: So given that Minister Combet called for an inquiry into a situation, why was he not available today?
PM: Well, very simply Mark Dreyfus as Parliamentary Secretary now has responsibility for this program.
JOURNALIST: As Greg Hunt says, the Auditor-General's prevented from examining Cabinet documents which showed the Government knew about the programs flaws and he wants a judicial inquiry (inaudible)
PM: Well, this is a wrong claim by Mr Hunt. The Auditor-General is entitled to access to any Cabinet document that the Auditor-General wants access to. The Auditor-General is the independent watchdog. He sets his own terms of reference. He structures his enquiry as he chooses and he is entitled to all Cabinet documents.
In making comments like this Mr Hunt is in fact casting aspersions over the work of the Auditor-General. Of course the independent Auditor-General went about this inquiry as the Auditor-General saw fit, with all of the powers that the Auditor-General has, including access to Cabinet documents.
JOURNALIST: So what about his call for a judicial inquiry?
PM: I've had experience before where the Opposition calls, in the first instance, for an Auditor-General report and then when they don't get the kind of findings that they would like they then start a call for a judicial enquiry. Well, the Auditor-General in the independent watchdog for the Commonwealth Government. The Auditor-General's delivered his findings today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just in relation to the national schools curriculum, are you disappointed at the number of submissions and the criticism of that? Some criticism are content heavy, too crowded, inflexible and tight?
PM: I always expected when we started on the creation of the national curriculum that it would the subject of debate and I think that that's a good thing.
We are talking about a very big reform for the country's future. It would be more than two decades now that people have called for a national curriculum. It's better for the around 80,000 students that move interstate each year. It's better for the teachers who move interstate each year, and of course we want to know as a nation that children in every school in every part of the country are studying a high-quality curriculum.
Now, obviously the Australian Curriculum Assessment Reporting Authority has gone about this in a highly consultative way. I think that's appropriate. We need to keep working through and getting the national curriculum out and being taught in schools.
JOURNALIST: Are you expecting that at the beginning of next year?
PM: The Ministerial Council will be dealing with these questions but the roll-out of the national curriculum is due to start from 2011 on. It will be a phased roll-out, but it's very important we get this reform done.
We want kids studying a high-quality curriculum right around the country, and if kids move school interstate, it's already all of the stresses that come with that - new school, new suburb, making new friends - we want them to go into classrooms and recognised the curriculum that's being taught.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the subject of the Murray-Darling water authority, are you still committed, without qualification, to implementing the final recommendations of the Murray-Darling Authority?
PM: Look, got to be clear about Government decision making here - the Murray-Darling Basin Authority is an independent authority. It's produced a guide. That guide is the subject of consultation.
It will lead to a draft plan, then there will be more consultation leading to a plan and Government will make its decisions, and as a Government we obviously will be listening to community views. Minister Burke is doing that, Minister Crean is doing that, and of course Minister Crean has asked the Parliamentary Committee, headed by Tony Windsor, to also engage in consultation.
JOURNALIST: What are you going to do to take the heat out of the debate?
PM: I'd ask people to recognise that the Murray-Darling Basin Authority is independent. It's published a guide. The guide is the subject of consultation. It will then publish a draft plan which will be the subject of further consultation.
So, the Murray-Darling Basin Authority will have those processes. There will also be the Parliamentary Committee, commissioned by Minister Simon Crean and led by Tony Windsor, that will be seeking community views.
Everyone will have an opportunity to have their say.
JOURNALIST: And would you like to see that Government decision on the final recommendation finalised in this term of Government?
PM: Let's work through the process. The Parliamentary Committee, commissioned by Minister Crean, will be working through 'til April next year. The Murray-Darling Basin Authority is on a timetable with consultation around the plan and then the production of the draft plan.
We obviously want to get all of those community views in, but addressing the problems of the Murray-Darling is something that whether you're a farmer, whether you live in a big city, wherever as an Australian you live and work you've got an interest in. This is our major river system. The health of this river system matters to all Australians - it matters to farmers, it matters to regional communities, it matters to Australians who live in metropolitan Australia, so we do need to work together to make sure that the river system is healthy. That's the objective and we have these processes to work through and listen to community views.
JOURNALIST: Ray Hadley has criticised Tony Burke for not being at the Meringo (inaudible) this week?
PM: Well, Ray Hadley simply doesn't understand the structures of what's going on here. Let's be clear, I hope Ray Hadley would be able to understand the processes here: Murray-Darling Basin Authority is an independent authority. It has outlined its own consultation process. It's of course appropriate for the Murray-Darling Basin Authority to have its own consultation processes and it's doing that.
Minister Burke is obviously available to speak to communities, to listen to community views, as is Minister Simon Crean, and he has been doing that, speaking to community representatives this week and there will be the Parliamentary Committee, commissioned by Minister Crean and led by Tony Windsor to hear community views, so this is a highly consultative process, but the Murray-Darling Basin Authority is an independent authority doing its work.
OK, thank you.


Sydney
PM: Thank you very much. I know there's snow in Canberra, icy winds here, but the welcome back home for you is a really warm one. It's a really warm one because it comes from our hearts. You've done incredibly well, the nation is very proud of you.
You went there, you gave your all, you competed hard, you played fairly, you did it in the Australian way. So congratulations to each and every team member. Now so many of you have come back sporting medals but many of you went there, competed and did your best and my congratulations, on behalf of the nation, goes to each of you and I know that you are all looking forward to that important moment when you get to see mum, dad, your partners and your family, your friends.
I know that they're all looking forward to welcoming you home and I did want to say to mums and dads and partners and friends, thank you to each of them for supporting you as you've trained so hard for this part of your career. Obviously, they're the ones that got you to training, they're the ones that helped you buy the equipment, they're the ones that provided the emotional and physical support that has helped you get through, so a big congratulations to them as well.
I know that you are, in the days ahead, going to be moving right around the nation going back home to every corner of the nation and everywhere you go you are going to be making people smile.
Well done.
Thank you.



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard and Minister for Sport, Mark Arbib today welcomed home Australia's successful Commonwealth Games team.
The Australian team returned from the 2010 Delhi Commonwealth Games with 177 medals - 74 gold, 55 silver and 48 bronze.
Australia's swimmers led the charge with 54 medals, including 22 gold, while our cyclists won 14 of 18 events and brought home 21 medals.
Australia topped the medal count, beating the home nation India, which had its best ever games with 101 medals, and traditional rivals England.
The Aussie team again showed its depth, winning medals in all 19 sports including gold in 13 sports.
There were a number of outstanding individual performances, with swimmer Alicia Coutts winning five gold medals, team mate Emily Seebohm winning eight medals, artistic gymnast Lauren Mitchell winning four gold and a silver and rhythmic gymnast Naazmi Johnston winning three gold and two silver medals.
The Indian Government and Organising Committee should be congratulated for hosting a safe and successful Commonwealth Games.
The Games were a showcase for India and its people and Australia's Commonwealth Games Team appreciated the warm welcome received from their Indian hosts.
"I particularly want to congratulate the team for their decision to donate money and uniforms to raise about $30,000 for Indian charities," Senator Arbib said.
"The money and uniforms will be split between three charities which provide health and sports leadership for underprivileged communities in India.
"This is a wonderful gesture of friendship from our young athletes who are great ambassadors for our country



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris Bowen today announced that the Australian Government had decided to expand its existing residence determination program and will begin moving significant numbers of children and vulnerable family groups out of immigration detention facilities and into community-based accommodation.
The Prime Minister said the Government would partner with community organisations to transfer unaccompanied minors and families who are awaiting the outcome of their applications for asylum into community-based accommodation.
The Government today also announced the commissioning of two new detention facilities - at Northam in Western Australia and Inverbrackie in South Australia - to help relieve the current pressures on existing facilities.
The new Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen, recently flagged that the Government was examining the issues of children in detention as well as the longer-term needs of the detention accommodation network.
Today's announcement delivers on that commitment and recognises the importance of balancing the Government's policy to mandatorily detain unauthorised arrivals with the humane treatment of those fleeing persecution and seeking asylum in our country.
This is especially important for children, for whom protracted detention can have negative impacts on their development and mental health.
To implement this expanded program, the Immigration Minister will use existing powers under the Migration Act to make "residence determinations" and place unaccompanied minors and vulnerable families in community-based accommodation.
The Minister will also use his powers under the Act to place conditions - such as curfews, requirements to live at a certain address and obligations to check in regularly with authorities - on those permitted to live in the community while awaiting the outcome of their applications for asylum.
The Government intends to progressively move several hundred children and families into community-based accommodation - with the assistance of community organisations - by June 2011.
The expansion of the residence determination program does not impact on the Government's mandatory detention policy.
All unauthorised arrivals will continue to be mandatorily detained when they first arrive in Australia for the management of health, identity and security risks to the community. A person granted a residence determination remains in immigration detention but is accommodated in the community.
Individuals will only be granted residence determinations if they are not considered a risk to the community and are assessed as unlikely to abscond.
The Minister's Council on Immigration Services and Status Resolution (CISSR) has taken a leading role in progressing this initiative and will have an important role in overseeing the implementation of the extended program in coming months.
The commissioning of two new detention facilities at Northam and Inverbrackie will help to relieve the current pressures on existing facilities.
The Northam site is situated approximately 80 kilometres north-east of Perth and will be used to accommodate up to 1500 single adult males.
The Inverbrackie facility, located near the Woodside Army Barracks, 37 kilometres north of Adelaide, will accommodate up 400 people, consisting of family groups.
The Department of Defence has confirmed that the sites are not required for Defence operational purposes, and no defence families will be moved as a result of this announcement.
As has been previously outlined, and in the context of the existing contract with the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, the Darwin Airport Lodge will be expanded to enable accommodation for 400.
The Government has also identified contingency sites that may be developed in the future, should further capacity be required. These are the use of the 11 Mile Antenna Farm outside Darwin and the further expansion of the Melbourne Immigration Transit Accommodation.
Today's announcement will allow for the decommissioning of less suitable temporary accommodation, such as the tents currently in use on Christmas Island.
The identification of appropriate sites followed an extensive process conducted by the Department of Immigration and Citizenship as part of standard contingency planning.
The Department will continue to engage with local stakeholders in the set up and ongoing operations of these new facilities. 



SALES: A short time ago I was joined here in Canberra by the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard.
Prime Minister, welcome to the program once again.
PM: Thank you.
SALES: Let's begin with Afghanistan. You said today that Australia's engagement in Afghanistan would continue through this decade at least. In what capacity?
PM: What I outlined in the Parliament today is we are obviously in Afghanistan. We're there for our national interests.
We're there to make sure that Afghanistan doesn't become a safe haven for terrorists in the future, and we're obviously there because of our alliance with the United States.
What we are doing is we are training and mentoring the Afghan National Army. We're also involved in civilian works - aid and reconstruction. We're training police.
Now, that means in the province in which we work, we are moving to leadership of security over to the Afghan security forces. It will happen place by place, it will be conditions-based. Transition will be a process, not a day.
Beyond that - and our estimate for the time frame for that is two to four years - beyond that, we anticipate having a supporting role for security and aid.
SALES: So does that mean that after the two to four years we would expect that those 1,500 troops we have there in front line operations would not be there any longer or will be there for the best part of this decade?
PM: What you should expect to see is as we transition place by place that we are able to have troops come out because the Afghan national security forces are taking the lead, but that is going to be on the basis that we are absolutely confident that when we have handed security leadership for a particular area over to the Afghan National Army that they will be able to do that security, that the process is irreversible in that sense - that they can take the security load, so you will see that happening progressively.
We anticipate on the best advice to us, that's two to four years. The president of Afghanistan has said that he wants to see Afghans in the lead in security for their own nation by the end of 2014, so you would be looking at less involvement over that time as we transition, then beyond that transition of security we would be there in a supporting role.
SALES: So we would expect then that for the next, say, two to four years we should be expecting regular loss of life among Australian soldiers?
PM: I said in the Parliament today that there are hard days ahead. We are involved, obviously, with a focus on counterinsurgency. We are involved with the forces there in Afghanistan as is well known and I spoke about it in the Parliament today.
The Americans have been surging, putting in more troops. That means that there's more intensity in the work that we do to counter the insurgency, more fighting.
Now, it does mean, of course, that as that intensity of work is done that we are able to provide more stability and security to enable transition to happen.
SALES: You talk about allowing that transition to happen. What specific benchmarks will demonstrate that that has happened?
PM: Well, I think the benchmark that would demonstrate it is that the Afghan national forces, Afghan National Army, Afghan police are providing security for their own people.
SALES: And so how would they actually measure that? Would it mean that there wouldn't be suicide bombings, that there wouldn't be people feeling that they can't leave their homes?
What specifically would you be looking for that would demonstrate that?
PM: What we would look for is that security is being provided by local forces, so they are able to cater for the security needs of the community with standing on their own two feet with Afghan people providing that security to the people of Afghanistan.
SALES: Living a regular-style life, that you would expect to be living in any country of the world - you can leave your house, you can get your groceries, you can go to school, you can go about your normal business?
PM: We obviously want to see Afghanistan stabilised in the way that you've described but we've got to be clear about the objectives here.
Our mission, of course, is to make sure Afghanistan doesn't become a safe haven for terrorists. We are training the Afghan National Army and the police to provide security. That will enable transition. They will be providing security, obviously - doing the police work, the defence force work that you would expect people in their own country to be doing.
Beyond the provision of security there is obviously a great deal to do in terms of provision of education and health, of government services.
I said in the Parliament today that we will be engaged, we'll be there providing civilian support. We'll be there providing some form of assistance for the- to the end of this decade at least.
I also said I think it will be the work of a generation of Afghan people to get democracy and a functioning government to take hold.
SALES: What would be the benchmarks then of a functioning government?
PM: I think we're all can identify what those benchmarks are. We've seen elections in Afghanistan and yes, I understand the reports about those elections. They've not been trouble free but elections have happened.
We want to see government obviously able to provide the kind of services that a population needs - education services and health services.
SALES: But to what standard, I guess I'm wanting to know, because in looking to benchmarks you need things that can be measured and there's a big difference between the sort of elections we have here, for example, and the sort of elections you have in Afghanistan, so I'm wondering where in that continuum you would think that that's a functional government?
PM: Leigh, in part this is for the Afghan national people to determine.
We are not there nation building in that sense. The Afghan people have to do that nation building themselves.
What we are there to do is to train the Afghan national army to enable the Afghan people to provide for their own security and we are there - and to therefore deny terrorists a safe haven in Afghanistan - so the security of the Afghan people and denying Afghanistan as a safe haven for terrorists, and we are obviously there supporting civilian reconstruction works, aid works, education, health.
We are there with capacity building and assisting with the development of governance, but our mission, our mission for our forces that are there is the training of the Afghan national army, the training of police, enabling the transition, place by place, over time, in Uruzgan province where we work so that that security and stability is provided by local forces.
SALES: You've said it's in Australia's national interests to be there because of this point about not having the country as a safe haven for terrorists and supporting our ally, the United States. Are those two considerations of equal weight?
PM: Well I'm not sure I would rank them but they are both there and both-
SALES: -The reason I ask is because some critics believe we're only there because of the alliance with the United States.
PM: Well, I didn't say that today, Leigh, because I don't believe it. I believe we're there for the two reasons and both reasons are in our national interest.
SALES: Is the safe haven argument hollow given that there are other countries, including Yemen and Somalia and Pakistan, that are safe havens for terrorists and we're not planning to sends troop there?
PM: As I said in the Parliament today, Al-Qaeda has proved to be a resilient terrorist network.
What we do know, of course is that Afghanistan is connected to not just 9/11, where we did lose Australian lives and of course America lost thousands of their citizens, but-
SALES: -But so were other countries. Saudi Arabia was.
PM: Then let's look at the Bali bombing, where we lost Australian lives - the second Bali bombing, the bombing of our embassy in Jakarta, these terrorist events that have threatened Australians, taken Australian lives, had connections in Afghanistan.
Consequently we are there because Afghanistan was a place where terrorists who then wreaked violence against Australians, amongst others, got their training. That's why we're there denying it returning to being a safe haven for terrorists.
Is it the only place in the world where Al-Qaeda operates? No, it's not, and as I said in the Parliament today we also work with the governments of other nations to do what we can to address Al-Qaeda in other places like Somalia and Yemen.
SALES: Was there anything that you heard in Tony Abbott's speech today that you thought was a point of difference to the Government on Afghanistan?
PM: Not in a considerable measure. I mean, obviously, two people giving lengthy speeches, you're going to take some different takes on things and use your own words and your own framework, and I think people who watch the speeches today would have seen that involving me and Mr Abbott, but what I took from the two speeches today is that there is deep bipartisanship around our mission in Afghanistan.
SALES: One of the things that Mr Abbott said is that there's a risk that the PR will be lost when the ground war is finally starting to show progress. Do you accept that you have a job to do to convince Australians of the merits of our continuing involvement in Afghanistan?
PM: Yes, I do. I think I do, I think the Government does, and obviously with the bipartisan support I think Mr Abbott has a role in that as do members of the Opposition, and I think this Parliamentary debate has a role in it, and because this Parliamentary debate in my view is a good process, a good way of ventilating the arguments and the issues, having it out there in the public domain - and I certainly today myself took the perspective that I wanted to be as frank as possible with the Australian people - because I think it has been good and a good way of discussing through the issues. I am committed as Prime Minister to making sure I make a statement of this nature every year that we continue to be in Afghanistan.
SALES: The US President Barack Obama is going to be travelling to a NATO summit in Portugal next month to be discussing future strategy in Afghanistan. Are you considering attending yourself?
PM: Yes, I am considering it. I haven't made a final determination about that yet but I did obviously, in the speech today, outline a number of things that Australia will be saying when we sit at the table at the summit in Lisbon.
SALES: And you think it could be best if you were there in person to actually deliver that?
PM: Well, Leigh, I'm still working through that question, so I'm considering it and we'll make a decision and make an announcement at the appropriate time.
SALES: On military justice, I know you won't comment specifically on the recent charging of three soldiers, but do you concede that the matter has caused a great deal of concern among frontline soldiers?
PM: I can understand that people are concerned but I'm not going to comment on the individual matter.
The point I made in the Parliament today, and I think it is a key one: We do have rules of engagement. We fight under rules of engagement.
Our ADF, that is what we do - we send our defence force to acquit missions for the nation under rules of engagement, and it's a key difference between us and the enemy we fight that we have rules and we do everything we can to avoid the loss of innocent civilian life, whereas of course the enemy we fight in the form of Al-Qaeda makes it their purpose to wreak terror by taking civilian life.
SALES: Do you think, though, that given the unrest that has come about as a result of this case that there is a role for the Government to offer some reassurance to soldiers?
PM: The best reassurance we can offer is that there are the rules of engagement and that there is a proper process and that proper process is being undergone now.
SALES: Is there anything that soldiers told you on your recent trip to Afghanistan that you've come home and thought 'OK, I'm going to take action on that, I'm going to look into that?'
PM: I came back with a deeper knowledge of the sense of the nation, of what it looks like, of the conditions there, of this sense of place; that different districts, even though they are very close to each other, can be very different in terms of their security situation, which is why we talk about and I talk about transition being a process, not a day, because two parts of the province in which we work could transition at very different times to Afghan leadership.
I had raised with me issues on the way to Afghanistan, issues about the attack helicopter capability, and I was able to pursue them when I was in Afghanistan and then subsequently in Brussels and we've had some resolution of that matter, so that was the kind of feedback I was getting. I could obviously see in my discussions the stress, the intensity of the work.
It's a difficult place. It's a harsh country, difficult environment. Our troops that have been there in this period have lost a lot of their mates and that's tolled.
I don't underestimate any of that, it's really hard, and so in speaking to the Parliament today I wanted to catch that sense of what I'd learned but I also want to be really frank that there are some hard days to come, but I believe we are making progress and I'm cautiously optimistic about that.
SALES: Let's move to other issues. Water reform, let's start with that.
Isn't it the case that regardless of what various inquiries show, environmental flows are going to be prioritised over socioeconomic concerns?
PM: This is a question of balance and getting it right. The Minister here, Tony Burke, has consistently said that we want to get the balance right between healthy river, water for food production and the circumstance of regional communities, and I know that in the public domain this can play out as either/or but really it's in everybody's interest that we have a healthy river.
It is not in the long term interests of farmers, of irrigators for the river to be degraded, so we all do need to work together for this key national goal.
SALES: On that point that it's in everybody's interests to have a healthy river, that goes to what I'm saying that the priority has to be the healthy river and everything else flows from that.
PM: It's about getting the balance right so that we've got health in the river, we are supporting food production, we can see viable regional communities. We've got to work through to get the balance right. This is not-
SALES: -But regardless, regardless, sorry to interrupt, but regardless of the social and economic effects cuts are still going to be going ahead to the water allocations aren't they? It doesn't matter how painful it's going to be, it has to happen.
PM: Let's remember we're talking about purchasing water from willing sellers. Let's also remember that this is not a zero-sum game in the sense that we can get more efficient with our water usage and we can make a difference to infrastructure that adds to efficiency.
So, all of those things are in the discussion about the future of the Murray Darling, but what isn't an option is to just say 'Let's go on the way that we have gone on to this point where water entitlements are over allocated, everybody knows it, there's a huge problem in the basin and it's not being addressed'.
That can't be the future. It's a difficult issue but we've got to work through it.
SALES: It's a difficult issue. Given that the Labor Government has in the past shown a willingness to back down on difficult issues such as the mining tax, how can we be assured that you will have the stomach for this reform given the angry reaction we've already seen?
PM: We'll keep working through it. You've heard me speak about it in recent days, and our Minister Tony Burke.
The Murray Darling Basin Authority is involved in its consultations and yes, I understand that there's, you know, community passion about this. The Murray Darling Basin Authority will have its consultations directly through the Parliament, through a committee led by Tony Windsor.
We will have consultations and we'll work to get the balance right here.
SALES: But that doesn't address my question that in the past you've backed down on controversial issues. What's to say you won't do it this time around?
PM: Well Leigh, I'm sitting here saying we're going to work through.
SALES: On the national broadband network, the shadow communications minister Malcolm Turnbull says he wants to see the plan referred to the Productivity Commission for a cost analysis. Is that fair enough?
PM: This is more delay from the Opposition.
I've actually seen that Malcolm Turnbull's made a statement. He was directly asked a question if the cost benefit analysis he says he seeks came in positively and said 'build the National Broadband Network', would he then agree and say it should be built?
And he couldn't manage to stutter out a yes in answer to that question, which I think really shows you the underlying motivations here. It's about delay and wrecking and opposition.
We have published a major implementation study here which goes through the questions about developing the national broadband network. We're going to get on with the job of doing it and not allow ourselves to be diverted by the wrecking tactics of the Opposition.
Leigh, I'm not going to sit here and watch this nation ends up in a circumstance where it exports jobs to Singapore and Korea, other countries in our region that end up with better infrastructure and better broadband than us.
SALES: What is the bill that you are introducing in the Parliament tomorrow to do with the NBN?
PM: The bill that we will be introducing tomorrow is to do with the structural separation of Telstra. This is a long-term policy goal. It's a key microeconomic reform where we separate the backbone, the infrastructure, from the retail sales.
SALES: But that didn't get through the Senate last time you put it up. This is the second time it's gone through. What makes you think it's going to get through this time?
PM: We will be pursuing it and it becomes a question, really, for Mr Abbott and for Mr Turnbull as to whether they will stand in the way of this key microeconomic reform, which of course will be better for businesses, better for customers and enable the further development of the National Broadband Network.
And, of course, since the legislation was last in the Parliament, we have entered an agreement with Telstra, and that is very significant - an agreement with Telstra which is about the delivery of the National Broadband Network and Telstra's customer base using the National Broadband Network.
SALES: Given that the Senate make up is going to be changing fairly soon, why is the timing to introduce this now? Why would you not wait until the new Senate comes into play?
PM: Well, we're determined to get on with the job of delivering the National Broadband Network. If Mr Abbott is determined to wreck that, well, I think we should have that made clear through how votes are excercised in the Parliament.
SALES: Have you had discussions though with the Greens and the other independents in the Senate to see if they will be backing you this time?
PM: Well, what we will do obviously is we'll introduce the legislation. Then we will go through our processes where we will discuss with the Greens and the independents the legislation and seek views, but I think it's very, very well known that the independents and the Greens have been strong supporters of the National Broadband Network. Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor - both from regional communities - have been strong supporters because they understand the power of this technology to get services to their communities that the tyranny of distance has prevented them having great access to to date - health services, education services, that will be transformed by the National Broadband Network, as well as enabling their local businesses to literally be connected with the markets of the world.
SALES: A final question, Prime Minister, on the row with the New South Wales Premier Kristina Keneally over the deal to create uniform occupational health and safety laws. Is your best strategy here to just wait four months, given the expectation that Barry O'Farrell will soon be the New South Wales Premier?
PM: I think my best strategy is to pursue day after day the delivery of a deal. A deal's been signed. A deal needs to be honoured. It's no more complicated than that.
SALES: Prime Minister, good to have you with me. Thank you very much.
PM: Thank you.



Mr Speaker, a national government has no more important task than defending the nation, its people and their interests. That is why we take so seriously any decision to go to war. The war in Afghanistan is no different.
Today I will answer five questions Australians are asking about the war:
 * 	why Australia is involved in Afghanistan;
 * 	what the international community is seeking to achieve and how;
 * 	what Australia's contribution is to this international effort - our mission;
 * 	what progress is being made;
 * 	and finally, what the future is of our commitment in Afghanistan.
Of course, while our troops remain in the field, I must be responsible in how much I say, but in answering those questions, I want to be as frank as I can be with the Australian people. I want to paint a very honest picture of the difficulties and challenges facing our mission in Afghanistan.
The new international strategy and the surge in international troops responded to a deteriorating security situation. This means more fighting, more violence, it risks more casualties, there will be many hard days ahead.
Mr Speaker, Australia has two vital national interests in Afghanistan.
One: to make sure that Afghanistan never again becomes a safe haven for terrorists, a place where attacks on us and our allies begin.
Two: to stand firmly by our Alliance commitment to the United States, formally invoked following the attacks on New York and Washington in 2001.
Last month we marked the ninth anniversary of Al-Qaeda's September 11 attacks. Before September 11 Al-Qaeda had a safe haven in Afghanistan under the Taliban government, a safe haven where they could recruit, indoctrinate, train, plan, finance and conspire to kill.
On September 11, Al-Qaeda murdered more than three thousand people, thousands of Americans - citizens of our ally the United States, people from many other countries.
Ten Australians, ten of our own, never forgotten.
And millions of people were terrified.
So we went to Afghanistan to make sure it would never again be a safe haven for Al-Qaeda. We went with our friends and allies, as part of the international community. We went with the support of the United Nations.
The war has put pressure on Al-Qaeda's core leadership, killed some, captured others, forced many into hiding, forced them all on the defensive.Al-Qaeda has been dealt a severe blow.
But Al-Qaeda remains a resilient and persistent network. Our successes against it in Afghanistan are only part of our effort against terrorism. We are working to counter the rise of affiliated groups in new areas such as Somalia and Yemen, and violent extremism and terrorist groups in Pakistan.
That is why we support efforts in those countries, with those governments, to target terrorist groups there as well.
The terror did not end on September 11. Since 2001, some 100 Australians have been killed in extremists' attacks overseas. Among them:
 * 	88 Australians were killed in the Bali bombing in 2002.
 * 	Four Australians were killed in the second Bali bombing in 2005.
 * 	Our embassy has been bombed in Jakarta.
In each of these cases, the terrorist groups involved had links to Afghanistan.
If the insurgency in Afghanistan were to succeed, if the international community were to withdraw, then Afghanistan could once again become a safe haven for terrorists. Al-Qaeda's ability to recruit, indoctrinate, train, plan, finance and conspire to kill would be far greater than it is today, and the propaganda victory for terrorists worldwide would be enormous.
So the goal of Australia and the international community is clear: to deny terrorist networks a safe haven in Afghanistan.
Mr Speaker, the international community has been in Afghanistan a long time: nine years. The Australian people are entitled to know what we are trying to achieve and when our troops can come home.
Removing the Taliban government in 2001 and pursuing Al-Qaeda in the years since has made a crucial difference in preventing terrorist attacks. From 2001 to mid-2006, US and Coalition forces and Afghan troops fought relatively low levels of insurgent violence.
The international force in Afghanistan was focussed on a stabilisation mission, and there were no Australian units deployed in Afghanistan between December 2002 and September 2005. Through this period, few would now argue, US and international attention turned heavily to Iraq.
Australia's substantial military involvement in Afghanistan resumed when the Special Forces Task Force was redeployed there for twelve months from September 2005 in support of international efforts to target key insurgents.
Violence increased further in mid-2006, particularly in the east and the south. Due to significant intimidation and the absence of effective governance in many rural areas, some Afghans turned to the Taliban at this time.
The mission moved to a counter-insurgency focus.
Australia's contribution increased from October 2008 on as we took a growing role in training and mentoring in the southern Afghanistan province of Uruzgan, however the international counter-insurgency mission was not adequately resourced until 2009.
In December 2009 President Obama announced a revised strategy for Afghanistan and a surge of 30 000 US troops, NATO has contributed more, so has Australia.
I believe we now have the right strategy, an experienced commander in General Petraeus, and the resources needed to deliver the strategy. The overarching goal of the new strategy is to enable transition, that is, to prepare the Government of Afghanistan to take lead responsibility for its own security, but our vital national interests, in preventing Afghanistan being a safe haven for terrorists who attack us and in supporting our ally, do not end with transition.
Our aim is that the new international strategy sees a functioning Afghan state become able to assume responsibility for preventing the country from being a safe haven for terrorists.
Australia's key role in that mission, training and mentoring the 4th Brigade of the Afghan National Army in Uruzgan, is expected to take 2 to 4 years, and President Karzai has said the Afghan Government expects the transition process to be complete by the end of 2014.
But let me be clear - this refers to the Afghan Government taking lead responsibility for security. The international community will remain engaged in Afghanistan beyond 2014, and Australia will remain engaged.
There will still be a need for Australians in a supporting role. There will still be a role for training and other defence co-operation.
The civilian-led aid and development effort will continue.
And we will continue to promote Afghan-led re-integration of former insurgents who are willing to lay down their arms, turn their backs on terrorism and accept the Afghan constitution.
We expect this support, training and development task to continue in some form through this decade at least.
Our mission in Afghanistan is not nation-building. That is the task of the Afghan Government and people. With international aid and development, we will continue to help were we can, but entrenching a functioning democratic Afghan state could be the work of a generation of Afghan people.
The new international strategy is comprehensive.
It is focussed on:
 * 	Protecting the civilian population - conducting operations together with the Afghan National Security Forces to reduce the capability and will of the insurgency.
 * 	Training, mentoring and equipping the Afghan National Security Forces - to enable them to assume a lead role in providing security.
 * 	And facilitating improvements in governance and socio-economic development - working with the Afghan authorities and the United Nations to strengthen institutions and deliver basic services.	 
The new strategy promotes efforts towards political reconciliation. It also includes a greater focus on partnership with Pakistan to address violent extremism in the border regions that threatens both Pakistan and Afghanistan, and the new international strategy is well resourced.
The international strategy is implemented by a combined civilian and military effort under the International Security Assistance Force.
This involves 47 troop-contributing nations, working alongside a host of international bodies and aid agencies, with and at the invitation of the Afghan Government, and under a United Nations Security Council mandate, a mandate renewed unanimously just this month.
This coalition includes many long-standing friends and allies of Australia, including the United States and New Zealand; the United Kingdom, Canada and France. Singapore and Korea, among other Asian countries, contribute, and several Muslim countries are involved, including Turkey, Jordan and Malaysia.
At the Asia-Europe meeting, I spent some time with Malaysia's Prime Minister Najib, I was particularly struck by what he said was one of Malaysia's most important contributions to Afghanistan: doctors, doctors who are Islamic women. They are able to work with Afghan women as few foreign medical professionals can.
We are part of a truly international effort in Afghanistan.
To ensure the new international strategy can be delivered, last December the United States committed to a military and civilian surge in Afghanistan. The elements of this surge are now reaching full-strength, once fully deployed, this will take Coalition force numbers to roughly 140,000.
US forces on the ground have tripled since early 2009.
The total force now has the resources required to deliver a comprehensive international strategy focussed on counter-insurgency and designed to deliver transition.
Mr Speaker, Australia's involvement makes a real difference in Afghanistan.The Government supports the new international strategy and we have supported the surge. Australia has increased our troop contribution to Afghanistan by around 40 per cent in the past 18 months. We now have around 1,550 military personnel deployed in Afghanistan. Our military force is complemented by around 50 Australian civilians.
Earlier this year we took over leadership of the Provincial Reconstruction Team in Uruzgan to spearhead our civilian efforts, and increased our civilian commitment to Afghanistan by 50 per cent. In fact since 2001 we have committed over $740 million in development assistance to Afghanistan.
The main focus of the Australian effort in Afghanistan is directed towards Uruzgan province, it is a difficult job.
Uruzgan province lies in southern Afghanistan. Around 500 000 people live there - roughly the population of Tasmania, across an area about one third the size of that state.
Nearly three-quarters of the land is dry and mountainous. Most of the people live in a few major valleys alongside the rivers. Subsistence agriculture and poppy farming are the main ways to earn a living, water is a precious and highly contested resource and overall economic prospects are poor. School attendance is low, and illiteracy is high, in fact, the female literacy rate in Uruzgan is less than one per cent. For men it is only ten per cent.
In Uruzgan, Australia's soldiers and civilians are part of Combined Team-Uruzgan. Combined Team-Uruzgan is a new structure that brings the military, policing, political and development elements of our assistance under a single command. The Team is commanded by a senior United States military officer, Colonel Creighton, and the senior civilian official is an Australian diplomat, Mr Bernard Philip. I met them both during my visit. We are lucky to have them.
The Team is built around an Australian-US partnership, with contributions from a number of countries including New Zealand, Singapore and Slovakia. Combined Team-Uruzgan was established following the Dutch drawdown in August.
We appointed our Senior Civilian Representative to lead the Uruzgan Provincial Reconstruction Team and co-ordinate all International Security Assistance Force civilian activities in the province.
The Government has worked closely with the Dutch and US Governments to ensure Australian soldiers and civilians have every support they need through the period of this handover.
I welcome the Dutch Government's decision to extend their attack helicopter support.
This is part of a broader International Security Assistance Force contribution from which Australia and all contributing nations benefit. Australia's contribution of two Chinook helicopters is part of this.
While in Afghanistan and Europe I met with:
 * 	Colonel Creighton, commanding Combined Team-Uruzgan;
 * 	General Petraeus, commanding the International Security Assistance Force;
 * 	NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen;
 * 	And the then caretaker Prime Minister of the Netherlands, Jan Balkenende
In each of these meetings, I emphasized the strength of my view, my Government's view, that continuing this support was necessary.
So I was glad to receive confirmation of the Dutch decision after my return.Our advice is that the planned arrangements for support following the full Dutch drawdown will see equivalent support to Australian forces.
While lighter in absolute numbers, the American support available to our forces is agile and highly effective in pursuing our common mission. In addition, Afghan forces in Uruzgan have increased from around 3 000 to 4 000 in the past eighteen months, meaning total troop numbers are larger now than when Dutch forces were present.
As Prime Minister, I am satisfied that our troops have the right support, and of course, this is a matter we keep under constant review.
In Uruzgan, Australia's substantial military, civilian and development assistance focuses on:
 * 	Training and mentoring the Afghan National Army 4th Brigade to assume responsibility for the province's security.
 * 	Building the capacity of the Afghan National Police to assist with civil policing functions.
 * 	Helping improve the Afghan Government's capacity to deliver core services and generate income-earning opportunities for its people.	 
As well as our efforts supporting transition in Uruzgan, Australia's Special Forces are targeting the insurgent network in and around the province, disrupting insurgent operations and supply routes.
While not part of Combined Team-Uruzgan, the Special Operations Task Group contributes to the province's security.
Our Special Air Service Regiment and our Commando Regiments are the equal of any special forces in the world.
They will make a difference to the outcome of the war.
I know all this is very dangerous work for our soldiers and civilians.
I give you my firm assurance that this government will listen to the professional advice and provide every necessary protection and support for our soldiers and civilians in Afghanistan. Over the past twelve months the Government has announced more than $1.1 billion for additional force protection measures for Australian personnel. This includes upgraded body armour and rocket, artillery and mortar protection.
The continuing and evolving threat posed to our troops by improvised explosive devices has seen us pursuing the right technologies to ensure our troops can detect these devices.
Our troops are protected through hardened vehicles and other protective equipment, and of course we will keep these force protection measures under constant review.
I have spoken to Air Chief Marshal Houston, the Chief of the Defence Force.
I have spoken to Major General Cantwell, our national commander on the ground.
Their advice to the Government is this:
As we stand today, our force structure - the number of troops on the ground and the capabilities they have - is right for our mission in Afghanistan.
As Prime Minister, I want to be very clear; the Government receives the advice on this decision, but we take the responsibility for this decision.
There has also been some debate about the rules of engagement for our soldiers in Afghanistan. Of course I will not comment on the particular case which is subject to current proceedings.
I do however want to respond to some of the public comments on the rules of engagement generally.
Those rules of engagement are properly decided by the Government.
They are consistent with the guidance provided by General Petraeus.
They are consistent with the International Security Assistance Force's rules of engagement.
They are consistent with the international law of armed conflict.
As with troop levels, we take the advice, but we take the responsibility.
As Prime Minister, let me say: I believe the rules of engagement are robust and sufficient for the mission in Uruzgan.
The Australian Defence Force is a professional military force, respected in Australia and around the world. They operate under strict rules of engagement. That is what they do.
Rules of engagement are central to the mission of the ADF. Strict rules of engagement are in the long-term interests of our troops in the field, but more than that: they are the difference between us and our enemy.
As much as anything, what marks us from them is precisely this.
We respect innocent civilian life.
I believe Australians would not have it any other way.
Mr Speaker, the new international strategy is in place.
The elements of the surge to support the strategy are now reaching full-strength. The hard work is underway, we will monitor events closely.
The NATO Lisbon summit in November will assess further progress against the International Security Assistance Force's strategy, mapping out the strategy will be a key focus of the summit.
Afghanistan is a war-ravaged country that faces immense development challenges. While the challenges are huge, I can report tentative signs of progress to date.
The Afghan National Security Forces are being mentored and trained.
The Afghan National Army reached its October 2010 growth objective of 134,000 ahead of schedule, and the Afghan National Police is also ahead of its October 2010 goal of 109,000.
The Afghan National Army is becoming increasingly capable and supporting coalition operations more effectively. Nearly 85% of the Army is now fully partnered with ISAF forces for operations in the field. Afghan forces are now in the lead in Kabul.
The ability of the Afghan government to provide services to its people is being built.
In primary education, enrolments have increased from 1 million in 2001 to approximately 6 million today. Some 2 million of these enrolments are girls. There were none in 2001. Nothing better symbolises the fall of the Taliban than these two million Afghan girls learning to read.
In basic health services, infant mortality decreased by 22 per cent between 2002 and 2008 and immunisation rates for children are now in the 70 to 90 per cent range.
In vital economic infrastructure, almost 10,000 kilometres of road has been rehabilitated and 10 million Afghans now have access to telecommunications, compared to only 20 000 in 2001.
With the increase in troop levels, the fight is being taken to the insurgency.
Insurgents are being challenged in areas, particularly in the south and east of the country, where they previously operated with near-impunity.
Indeed, much of the increase in violence this year is attributable to the fact that there is a larger international and Afghan presence pursuing the insurgency more aggressively.
In Afghan politics, efforts are being made to convince elements amongst the insurgents to put down their arms, to renounce violence and adopt a path back to constructive and purposeful civilian life.
And although we know democracy remains rudimentary and fragile, Afghanistan has a free press and a functioning parliament.
Last month parliamentary elections took place - elections with real and widely publicised problems - but elections did take place.
And the international community is working closely with Pakistan. Stability in Pakistan, and the uprooting of extremist networks that have established themselves in the border regions and terrorise both countries, is essential to stability in Afghanistan.
Mr Speaker, let me turn more specifically to the progress of Australia's mission in Uruzgan.
Our Mentoring Task Force is training the 4th Brigade of the Afghan National Army.
The 4th Brigade, as our commanders on the ground told me during my visit, is proving to be an increasingly professional force, fighting better and becoming more capable at conducting complex operations.
The Brigade's recent efforts in successfully completing a series of resupply missions between Tarin Kot and Kandahar has demonstrated improving capability. Since late last year, they have moved from observing and participating, to planning and leading these activities.
The Brigade also recently provided security for parliamentary elections in the province.
Our civilians are also making a difference in Uruzgan.
Our AFP contingent has trained almost seven hundred Afghan National Police at the police training centre for the province. It has also contributed to the successful targeting of corrupt officials and the tackling of major crimes.We are helping build local services.
In Tarin Kot township, business is flourishing at the local bazaar. There are two bank branches, crime is down, and the town is becoming a genuine provincial trading hub.
I visited our Trade Training School on the Tarin Kot base, which is turning out 60 graduates each quarter in basic trades such as plumbing and carpentry, most of whom then contribute to reconstruction and development in the province.
Our aid to Uruzgan is increasing to $20 million in 2010-11.
Already we have supported 78 school reconstruction projects and the disbursal of over 950 micro-finance loans. We have helped refurbish the Tarin Kot hospital and assisted the rehabilitation and operation of 11 health centres and 165 health posts. We are constructing a new building for the Department of Energy and Water, and building a bridge crossing to connect to the Tarin Kot-Chora Road.
Our civilians are working to build capacity within the provincial administration and support the reach of central government programs into Uruzgan.We are taking the fight to the insurgency.
On the C-130 flight into Afghanistan, a map of Uruzgan spread out on his knees, our national commander Major General John Cantwell briefed me on our work in the field. Valley by valley, we are gradually making a difference to security.
He told me about agriculture-rich Mirabad Valley, a strategically important region with a history of violence in recent years, just to the east of the provincial capital Tarin Kot. Mirabad was dominated by the Taliban for the last seven years. It was a place where the Provincial Government had no influence.
But over the last two years the Afghan security forces, in partnership with Australian, Dutch and now US forces, have methodically expanded their permanent presence into the Valley with the establishment of three Patrol Bases.
Insurgents, clearly threatened by the growing reach of the Afghan National Army, attacked the bases unsuccessfully a number of times during construction. Now the bases, combined with two nearby outposts, will allow the Afghan National Army to better protect Mirabad's communities.
Mirabad is far from a success story yet. Progress in development, education and democracy is yet to begin, but in the specific mission we have given our forces in Uruzgan - to train the Afghan National Army to take the lead in security - we see progress being made.
That is the beginning of transition.
General Cantwell also told me about Gizab. It is an isolated township in the far north of Urzugan Province that had long been a Taliban safe haven, and one which the Taliban used as a base to launch attacks against the Chora district.
Earlier this year, in April, the local community rose in revolt against the Taliban and, with the assistance of Afghan and Australian forces, captured the local Taliban commander and expelled the insurgents.
Gizab now has a local police force and a new district governor, and the provincial government is beginning to make its presence felt. Again, a place where progress is painstaking and incremental, where there will be new setbacks and where consolidation is needed. Again though, a place where the seeds of transition are being sewn.
I have shared some positive stories about the beginnings of transition. There are many stories which are not so positive. We should be very realistic about the situation.
Progress, even in security, is highly variable across the province, any gains come off a very low base, any advances made are fragile.
The challenges that face Uruzgan, and Afghanistan, are immense, but I do believe we should be cautiously encouraged.
Mr Speaker, Australia's national interests in Afghanistan are clear.There must be no safe haven for terrorists. We must stand firmly by our ally, the United States.
There is a new international strategy in place - focussed on counter-insurgency, designed to enable transition. Australia's commitment to Afghanistan is not open-ended.
We, along with the rest of our partners in the International Security Assistance Force, want to bring our people home as soon as possible, and the Afghan people want to stand on their own, but achieving our mission is critical to achieving both these things.
The international community and the Afghan Government are agreed on a clear pathway forward.
The Kabul conference in July welcomed the Afghan Government's determination that the Afghan National Security Forces should lead and conduct military operations in all provinces by the end of 2014.
At the upcoming NATO/ISAF Summit in Lisbon the international community and the Afghan government will assess progress against the international strategy. Mapping out the strategy for transition to Afghan leadership and responsibility will be a key focus of the summit.
Transition will not be a one-size-fits-all approach. It will be conditions-based.
It will happen faster in some places and slower in others. It will be a graduated process, not an event or a date, there is no "transition day". International forces will be thinned out as Afghan forces step up and assume responsibility. In some places the transition process will be subject to setbacks.
We need to be prepared for this.
My firm view is that for transition to occur in an area, the ability of Afghan forces to take the lead in security in that area must be irreversible.
Our Government will state this as a simple fact in discussions before and at Lisbon.
We must not transition out, only to transition back in.
Mr Speaker, Australia will do everything in our power to ensure Afghanistan is never again a safe haven for terrorists.
Australia will stand firm in our commitment to our alliance with the United States, the international community understands this, our friends and allies understand this, our enemies understand this too.
I believe that the new international strategy, backed by the surge in military and civilian forces, is sound: Protecting the Afghan people, training the Afghan security forces, building the Afghan government's capacity.
Working with the international community, Australia is making a real difference in Afghanistan, delivering on the international strategy in Uruzgan province - and supporting transition in the country as a whole.
Australia will not abandon Afghanistan, we must be very realistic about the future.
Transition will take some years, we will be engaged through this decade at least.
Good government in the country may be the work of an Afghan generation.
There will be many hard days ahead, but I am cautiously encouraged by what I have seen.
I believe this debate is an important one for our people and our Parliament.
That is why I announce today that as Prime Minister I will make a statement like this one to the House each year that our Afghanistan involvement continues.
This will be in addition to the Defence Minister's continuing ministerial statements in each session of the parliament.
Mr Speaker, attending funerals for Australian soldiers is the hardest thing I have ever done, and it is nowhere near as hard for me as it is for the families.There is nothing I can say to change their long walk through life without a loved one, a loved one, lost for our sake.
In the ultimate, I can promise only this: we will remember them.
Their names are written on the wall of the War Memorial in Canberra, their names are written in the walls of our hearts.
When I think of these Australians we have lost in Afghanistan, I think of the Australian poet James McAuley's words:
I never shrank with fearBut fought the monsters of the lower worldClearing a little space, and time, and lightFor men to live in peace
I know the professional soldiers of the Australian Defence Force are proud people. They offer their lives for us. They embrace wartime sacrifice as their highest duty. In return, we owe them our wisdom. Our highest duty is to make wise decisions about war.
I look forward to the deliberations of this Parliamentary debate on Afghanistan.
I hope we do our duty as well as they do theirs.


Canberra
PM: I'm joined today by the Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, and today the Government is reintroducing a landmark Bill that will facilitate the separation of the retail and wholesale arms of Telstra for the benefit of consumers.
Those reforms to the telecommunications sector will deliver the environment needed to ensure competition flourishes in the sector. Now this reform is vital because it will drive lower prices, better quality and more innovative services. In other words, this is a textbook micro-economic reform, creating transparent regulatory framework that delivers quality, choice and competitiveness, so consumers benefit and they don't face prohibitive barriers to entry.
So we are urging the Opposition today to not delay this Bill. Every day of delay for these reforms is a day of higher prices and less choice for regional Australia in particular. So we are saying to the Opposition, do not delay and cause extra days of higher prices and less choice, particularly for those Australians who live in our regions.
The Bill was originally introduced in September 2009, so the Opposition knows its contents and they've got no reason for unnecessary delay. Since the Bill was introduced last time, Telstra has entered into a Heads of Agreement with NBN Co. to partner in the delivery of this vital new infrastructure.
Now for too long Australian consumers have had experience of a telecommunications sector with far too much market concentration in one company. With this legislation we can effectively restructure the industry to build the National Broadband Network, to deliver broadband services to all Australians at a uniform wholesale price, meaning people who live in our regions won't be discriminated against.
And as we build this essential infrastructure across the country, the NBN will lift productivity, attract investment and create all important jobs.
Broadband not only stands to boost our nation's GDP by up to six per cent within a decade, but it will also transform the way we do business in this country and deliver services. It will transform the way we deliver health, as I commented during the election campaign, enabling Australians to have their health conditions monitored from home. It will transform the way manufacturing does business, able to manage its supply chains more efficiently. It will enable farmers to monitor crops and respond quickly to weather changes. It will enable students in classrooms to have great access to the knowledge around the world. We are delivering these reforms, working closely with Telstra and they are very important to Australians everywhere.
So that's why today we'll introduce the legislation that allows a smoother transition and handover of the copper network to NBN Co. I'll ask the Minister to make some comments and then we'll take questions.
MINISTER CONROY: Thanks Julia
Well as the Prime Minister has said, the reintroduction of the Competition and Consumer Safeguards Bill is a key step towards delivering a vibrant and competitive telecommunications sector.
This is in the interests of all Australians. In the telecommunications sector, infrastructure competition has failed. Last week, Maha Krishnapillai from Optus told the Communications Day Conference:
"People talk about letting infrastructure competition work - maybe you should learn a lesson from history.
"We have empirical evidence of what happened in the late nineties where Optus rolled out a pay TV network down streets in suburban Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane.
"Telstra went down the same streets, carpet-bombed the business case and effectively Optus and Telstra wrote off over $1 billion through that period.
He went on to say:
"We've certainly seen empirical evidence that that will not work and that's one of the main reasons we support the NBN."
Since 1997, and some of you have heard me say this before, there have been more than 150 telecommunications access disputes. This compares with only three in other regulated sectors such as airports and energy.
The Gillard Government is committed to addressing the mistakes of the past and establishing an effective and efficient telecommunications regulatory framework.
Reforms outlined in the Bill include restructuring the market to promote greater competition and strengthening consumer safeguard measures such as the Customer Service Guarantee and the Universal Service Obligation.
Importantly, the Bill also sets out a framework for Telstra to seek approval from its shareholders on the proposal to migrate fixed-line services to the NBN.
The Bill has been amended to provide the necessary legislative framework to support this arrangement, and to provide regulatory certainty to Telstra and its shareholders. The Heads of Agreement is a critical step in delivering the much needed structural reform of the sector.
The Government has always said that any final agreement reached by Telstra and NBN Co is subject to independent scrutiny. The ACCC will review the arrangements proposed in Telstra's structural separation undertaking to make sure that competition issues are properly addressed.
The Bill includes provisions that will authorise, for the purposes of trade practices law, certain conduct engaged in by Telstra and NBN Co that is required to promote the structural reform of the telecommunications industry.
If the ACCC approves the undertaking, Telstra and NBN Co should be given certainty that their actions to comply with and are acceptable, for the purposes of the Trade Practices Act.
This will avoid the need for multiple regulatory processes under the Trade Practices Act, while still ensuring the necessary level of scrutiny on the details of the arrangements.
Other important measures in the Bill that provide greater certainty for Telstra include allowing Telstra to bid for spectrum, given it is proceeding with structural separation; and allowing the implementation of functional separation to be deferred, while the structural separation process continues.
And these are key parts of the Heads of Agreement with Telstra that are necessary for their shareholders to be given the certainty to be able to vote in the next extraordinary general meeting of Telstra.
The ACCC will not be able to approve Telstra's structural separation undertaking, unless it contains measures to improve equivalence arrangements to wholesale customers during the transition to the NBN.
Telstra's compliance with an undertaking will also become a condition of its carrier licence.
The fundamental reforms in the Bill address the long-standing inadequacies of the existing telecommunications regulatory regime.
These stretch back over 20 years and two governments.
This is an important step in the reform of telecommunications which will result in a wholesale only open access network, with protection for industry and consumers in the transition.
During the election campaign Tony Smith confirmed the Coalition would not support structural separation. But he did say the Coalition would support the important consumer reforms in this Bill to Parts 11-B and Part 11-C.
But just last week Malcolm Turnbull appeared to shift the position on structural separation.
He told the Communications Day Conference in Melbourne:
"...we must recognise that if vertical integration is indeed the problem, then a structural or functional separation is the answer."
So it is time for the Opposition to come clean on their position on structural separation of Telstra. And the reform, this incredible micro-economic reform that has held back this sector for 20 years.
The Opposition claims it wants transparency and scrutiny ... but at every step it has blocked and delayed the reforms that would benefit all Australians.
First, they blocked a debate in the Senate on the NBN until the ACCC's report to the expert panel was released - and the report was released.
Then, they blocked debate in the Senate until the Implementation Study was released - it was released in full in May.
Thirdly, they opposed the legislation because they claimed it was bad for Telstra shareholders - but the Telstra board is now recommending the deal to their shareholders.
Finally, they claim they need a cost benefit analysis to support the NBN.
But Malcolm Turnbull has twice been challenged - including by myself on Lateline recently - that if a cost benefit analysis gave a clear go ahead for the National Broadband Network would he support it.
He has continued to refuse to say that he would support the NBN even if a cost benefit analysis was positive.
And yesterday, we saw another stunt by Malcolm Turnbull that is designed solely to delay the National Broadband Network.
Mr Turnbull wants to the Productivity Commission to carry out a cost benefit analysis of the NBN.
So let's recognise the Opposition's stunts for what they are - they are willfully delaying millions of Australians from getting a fairer deal on broadband and telecommunications services.
Just today ... just today we have another piece of research which shows Australia has slipped even further behind other Western countries when it comes to broadband.
Every day these delays of reforms, is another day that Australians are more for second-class broadband service.
The Gillard Government is delivering on this through the NBN and Australians don't deserve any more delays.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: Yes Phil.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) this legislation to lower prices, could you explain how much lower prices would be?
PM: Well obviously this legislation is about structural separation, so you've got, if you like, the backbone of the system, the thing that makes it work, separated from the competition that there can be on the system as service providers compete with each other to get customers' businesses. Now competition, by definition, is good for consumers, good for them getting packages they need at prices that they view as competitive and getting the best deal. We know that from economics 101, I'll have the Minister comment too.
CONROY: Let me give you some concrete examples of what's happening in Tasmania.
Let me give you some concrete examples of what's actually happening in Tasmania.
In Tasmania, these are introductory offers, we make that very clear, introductory offers.
You are seeing prices being offered of $30 for 25 meg download speeds. That is an exceptionally competitive package.
If you look at what another company is offering, they're offering $90 you get all your broadband and all your phone calls including your mobile for $90.
The equivalent Telstra package in Tasmania is $130.
So you are already seeing an impact and if you think it's an accident that at the moment Telstra and all of the other ISPs of Australia are suddenly offering higher download limits it's not an accident it's happening because of threat of entry of competition from the National Broadband Network.
You are already seeing prices and packages which include the download limits starting to be affected by what is happening in Tasmania and what is going to happen as the NBN is switched on in more and more homes across Australia.
So the National Broadband Network as Mike Quigley said last night will be providing its business case to the Government in the next few weeks and there'll be I'm sure a lot of information that's going to be available which will give a much stronger steer on what the mainland prices - as opposed to those introductory prices in Tasmania - are going to be and a lot of those questions will be able to be answered in a couple of weeks time.
PM: One at a time, Paul?
JOURNALIST: Senator Conroy if the Opposition succeeds in getting the Independents on side for this further inquiry, will that demolish the NBN?
CONROY: Not at all I mean the benefit, all around the world there are benchmark studies that have been done about the positive impacts.
My own Department released during the election campaign, or I released them on behalf of the Department, a couple of sectoral analyses in telehealth and in working from home and both of those showed positive impacts.
The IBM Access Economics study done just last year on a fibre-to-the-node, not even fibre-to-the-home so even as good an improvement as possible showed substantial productivity boosts.
So a cost benefit analysis will show that the boost to the productivity will be on par with the sort of examples that we see overseas.
So the Productivity Commission will be a complete waste of taxpayer's money to be engaged in this.
The financial case was set out in a $25 million study that we fully released, every word, all the claims that we tampered with it - we released every word of it and it showed that it is financially viable.
The Business Case will show when we release most of that information in a few weeks that it is financially viable so unless somebody wants to suggest that the benefits to the economy as a whole are negative from introducing this - a positive business case and a positive impact of broadband says this will be a positive outcome for Australia. Unless someone wants to argue that's a negative to over-balance the actual business case.
JOURNALIST: I was just wondering, Prime Minister, you said competition is economics 101, Senator you're saying that infrastructure competition has failed. Can you explain to me as a dummy on economics how can you have retail competition is going to help consumers, yet to have a complete monopoly at the wholesale infrastructure and how will we get the prices to be driven down?
CONROY: No, I could probably quote someone called Paul Fletcher - he wrote a book and he knows a little bit about the telecommunications sector in fact he knows so much in fact Malcolm Fraser had to take him with him to a couple of meetings with my officials - you've got a shadow shadow minister in Paul Fletcher.
Paul Fletcher made it clear, sorry Malcolm Turnbull, I've already made the jump, what he argues is the best outcome for competition is for one company to run the wholesale network and to have the proper regulatory framework just like we have a proper infrastructure regulatory framework in all these other sectors - gas, water, electricity.
The ACCC is bound to manage a wholesale monopoly but they would tell you and Graeme Samuel has said this publicly there's a quantum difference between trying to manage a vertically integrated monopoly and a wholesale only monopoly and they've managed it in all these other sectors without all of these disputes.
Where you've got a vertically integrated monopoly where you have the wholesale company favours its own retail company in its offerings, its behaviour and its conduct that's why there's such as enormous breakthrough, such an important micro-economic reform that is structural separation.
So proper regulation of the wholesale company under proper scrutiny from the ACCC which are these powers and more powers to come will do we'll see the wholesale market levelled and you'll begin to see the sort of retail competition that you're seeing in Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: Have you, or your office spoken with the Greens and Independents about blocking this Opposition move?
CONROY: I was in estimates until 11 o'clock last night so it was only announced during the course of the Senate Estimates so I haven't had a chance to talk to all of the minors and independents yet.
JOURNALIST: Are you going to have to rely on the Greens next July to get this through if the Opposition does delay it further?
CONROY: Well this is a bill that has been tied basically 38 / 38 in the Senate.
What one of the minor parties indicated is that they wanted to see a deal struck before they would consider this and I think now that Telstra are supporting this Bill - a deal has been struck - I think there is a fresh chance for this to pass the Senate before the 30th of June.
PM: Can I just, before we take the next question, can I just add there, and obviously the Greens and Independents will each announce their own position, but I think it's important to note that the Greens have been pro the National Broadband Network. It has been pivotal to Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor, who understand its benefits for regional Australia. Its benefits for regional Australia are well understood by Mr Katter and he has made some public comments about that today.
And of course Mr Wilkie comes from Tasmania and because Tasmania has seen the first of the rollout and it has consequently become the subject of a lot of community discussion in Tasmania, people would see, I think, that Tasmanians are very in favour of the further delivery of the National Broadband Network in their own state.
Now the pivotal issue here is what is Tony Abbott and Malcolm Turnbull's position. Because the question you raise about the Senate numbers only becomes relevant if Mr Abbott and Mr Turnbull back delay and in doing that they will be backing higher prices and less choice for Australians.
JOURNALIST: Did James Packer advise either one of you prior to his move yesterday to acquire a bigger stake in the 10 network? And have either of you indicated a disposition to Mr Packer about your attitude to anti-syphoning rules?
CONROY: I certainly, it was news to me, I read it online. So no he didn't call, didn't advise me.
And Mr Packer has been as I think was reported in the newspaper an active lobbyist over the anti-siphoning list.
PM: I was not advised and obviously saw the reports this morning.
CONROY: he's been part of an ongoing discussion I've been having with all of the parties so in terms of where we finally, we haven't reached a final decision so there's nothing to indicate.
JOURNALIST: Is it fair to impute that Mr Packer would have a good idea about where the Government is lining on anti-syphoning?
CONROY: Well he's been involved in the discussion in that he has is a player on the pay-TV side of the debate so he is conscious of the discussions but the Government hasn't made a final decision yet.
JOURNALIST: The big three miners are accusing the Government of breaking the heads of agreement of the mining tax negotiations insofar as you're not going to fully compensate any future royalties.
Are you confident that you indeed have not broken that agreement, if not the spirit of the agreement, and secondly for fear of not getting an opportunity, how is it that you propose to accommodate Andrew Wilkie on the Intelligence and Security Committee, given that legislation insists that the Government has a majority on that committee?
PM: Ok, well on the first question, can I say I think there are a number of assumptions in that question that I don't share and in answering it I don't want to be seen to endorse. The position from here is, obviously, there are a range of matters that are being discussed through the policy transition group that Don Argus is leading, with the participation of the relevant Minister, Minister Martin Ferguson, and obviously in that policy transition group there is a broad range of discussions and we welcome that, that's exactly what we wanted to happen. That's what the policy transition group is for.
We have said all along we'll credit existing royalties and scheduled increases and the policy transition group is going to advise Government on the best way to provide certainty to the industry, given that policy setting. Now in implementing the Minerals Resource Rent Tax we obviously won't be giving a green light to State and Territory governments to increase their royalties in a way which means the Federal Government effectively foots the bill.
As is well known, the proceeds of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax will be going to support a key range of changes to drive economic growth, reducing company tax, increasing our national savings, providing other tax benefits for small businesses. So that's where the matter stands. We will keep working through with the policy transition group.
Sorry, the second question, sorry about that. The Government will be making announcements about committee positions, I believe during the course of next week.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) want Parliament to engage on any more engagement in the future. They want to pass that law. Adam Bandt is going to put that up today, is that something you support?
PM: I'll listen to Mr Bandt's speech but the mechanism we have used for providing this information to the public and the Parliament is a Prime Ministerial Statement to the Parliament. That is noted by the Parliament. People obviously then get the opportunity to put whatever view they want to during the course of the debate on it. That's the mechanism that I would use for annual Prime Ministerial Statement, so I committed myself to that.
JOURNALIST: Senator, if I could, a basic element of the NBN, while there might be value for e-commerce and e-health, isn't it true that most households will not need want or use the boosted broadband services that you will provide, but they will nevertheless have to pay for them?
CONROY: Firstly the premise if wrong on two counts.
Firstly they're not being forced to pay for a connection it's being connected by the NBN for free and they don't actually have to take the service - this is the Tasmanian circumstance so they're not actually - you connect something to the side of the house but they don't have to take the service, they can keep using their copper line for the moment.
The Agreement with Telstra is that we shut down ultimately the copper network and then the only way you can make a fixed line phone call is on the NBN.
So you will be able to - notwithstanding the confusion that Malcolm Turnbull repeated again that he suddenly believes people are going to lose the ability to make a phone call.
As was clinically explained by Mr Quigley last night when the NBN replaces a piece of copper you will take the plug out of one socket and you will plug it into a different socket and you will keep making the same phone calls completely.
So this idea that suddenly you'll be losing your - which is the whole basis of some of what he claimed yesterday that you're losing your phone line is just wrong.
And I invite Mr Turnbull and everyone who's interested to have a read of the transcript where Mr Quigley explained that really complex process pulling socket from the wall and plugging it into a different box and you still get your phone service.
You don't have to take broadband you can ... there will be an offering for just a phone service.
And let's be clear not withstanding some confusion that has been the public situation all along.
I don't know how this confusion keeps arising this completely erroneous claims are made and then become almost urban myth like $6000 for wiring.
This is completely false. I don't know how many times I've read it on the front page of some newspapers - it's completely false.
Mr Quigely says it's completely false, I've said it's completely false and users in Tasmania - who are using the National Broadband Network - know it's completely false because they haven't had to re-wire their homes.
PM: Could I also, we'll just keep taking questions, could I also say, Malcolm, obviously the Minister's answer is precisely right, but I'd also say let's not get into a position here, where we are denying ourselves the benefits of the future. I've lived a bit of a time, I think you have lived at least as long as me, perhaps a tad longer... I succeeded Barry Jones in this place, who famously said that one day there would be more computers in Tasmania than cars. And right around the nation he was ridiculed - most ridiculous statement anybody had ever made, what a load of nonsense, more computers than cars, how could anybody be so stupid?
And look where we are today, with computer technology. With the phones we hold in our hands. Did you foresee, when mobile phones came out, that we would be using them, with the capabilities and for the purposes we do today? That very few people standing in this audience, would ever be more than six or seven inches from their Blackberry, or their iPhone? Did you foresee that?
We'll before we talk ourselves into saying what Australian's want is the old telephone network, let's actually think about the promise of this technology for the future. You characterised it as just e-health and e-commerce. That characterisation is nonsense. It's like saying, when we first got mobile phones, that the only thing we were ever going to have was the one that came in the suitcase that you carried around. It's ridiculous.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, there's increasing international pressure for negotiation with the Taliban and some early negotiations. Does Australia support that and do you see any role at all for Australia in such negotiations?
PM: As I said in my speech yesterday, there are discussions about political reconciliation and reintegration. Obviously, the political reconciliation process is one that President Karzai has outlined a process of bringing people together and I think, essentially, whilst other nations can assist, political reconciliation for the Afghan people has to be under the auspices and the leadership of the Afghan people.
There are conditions, obviously, President Karzai has been clear about that. Political reconciliation need to be about a laying down of arms and an acceptance of the Afghan constitution and democratic processes and practices, particularly elections. Now there's also at a more localised level some reintegration processes, you know, there are people who have obviously done some work for the insurgency, perhaps, you know, digging a ditch in which an improvised explosive device is later placed, but they do that to earn money, trying to feed their families. And if there is another way that they can get money and feed their families then they will choose that other way, they are not motivated fighters. So at a local level there are reintegration efforts of that order
Well I think we've just got to be very careful here about terminology. Obviously, there is a political reconciliation process, which the government wants to see worked through, which is about the laying down of arms and the acceptance of the Afghan constitution. Ultimately, these are matters that need to be determined by the Afghan people.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) national level, if they do agree to lay down arms, do you have a problem with the Taliban and the ideology they bring forming part of a provincial or national government?
PM: Well, look, I want to be really careful about terminology here, because I can easily see this ending up at cross purposes.
I don't accept the characterisation 'they'. I am not suggesting and did not in yesterday's speech suggest that we would see some grand bargain here. What I think is more likely is that some - some - people who may have had some association with the Taliban will, through these political reconciliation processes, work through, so the use of the terminology 'the Taliban' is not appropriate and not what I mean.
What President Karzai has talked about, what I am now talking about, is a process of dialogue which would involve some people who would've been associated with the Taliban in the past, and obviously some pivotal conditions and the foundation stones of those conditions is the laying down of arms and the acceptance of a democratic Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Tony Abbott's idea (inaudible) more time to question suspected insurgents once they're detained?
PM: Well, obviously I'm happy to work through on advice about these questions, but once again I think we just have to be a little bit clear here. The 96 hours, as I understand it, is in ISAF guidance as well as in our guidance. The 96 hours is the amount of time that detainees are retained by Australians before they then go into detention arrangements, which we do not run.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've placed a 10-year involvement in Afghanistan. Post 2014, does that by necessity involve a military engagement, or can it be provided through other forms of assistance?
PM: Well, what I said in the speech yesterday is what I meant. We are looking - the international strategy here, the international strategy that we support, the new international strategy, is to build capacity to enable transition.
Transition is not date-based. Transition is conditions-based. It's about conditions on the ground. It will be a process, not a day. Different places in Afghanistan will transition at different times to the leadership of the Afghan security forces.
My view is, and I'll be making this - made it clear yesterday - I'll certainly be making clear as we move towards Lisbon and other discussions, that pivotal to transition is that the capability of the Afghan forces to provide that leadership is irreversible. We shouldn't transition out only to transition back in.
As an area transitions, then forces like our own would take less and less role over time. Once again, that needs to be conditions-based and it will be different place by place.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard-
PM: -Yes, Phil.
JOURNALIST: Back to the Taliban question - Alexander Downer was quite explicit in that piece he wrote the other day. Is that a form of language you're not prepared to able to embrace as Prime Minister, when he says the Taliban must become part of the political process there - sit in the parliament, it would never be in the majority but it would, if you like, a Sinn Fein with the IRA, bringing that conflict to an end. Is that, are you not prepared to go that far at this stage?
PM: Well, look, I'll let Mr Downer pick his own terminology, and I think he is, you know, trying to conceptualise what the future may look like.
What I would say is these are processes that need to be worked through. You know, President Karzai has obviously started a process. It's very, very early days. I do not see the prospect of a grand bargain. I do think we are talking about elements of the Taliban, not a grand bargain, and so I wouldn't use the same terminology as Alexander Downer, and I'm not sure it's helpful to draw analogies between one country and other. I presume he's trying to draw the analogy with Ireland in order to help explain things to people, but I often find when you pick an analogy with another country there will be things that are very, very different, and analogies can get unhelpful as a result.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I was wondering if-
PM: Well, just do Denis, and yes, Karen, and then we'll go.
JOURNALIST: On Afghanistan, can we take it from what you've said this morning that Australia, at Lisbon or in other meetings, would not support any proposal which included bringing Mullah Omar into the government structure in Afghanistan?
PM: Look, I'm not going to be drawn on war-gaming through. You know, you could put a million scenarios to me. What, obviously, we're there to do in Afghanistan is to deny Afghanistan being a safe haven for terrorists. It therefore follows that the Australian Government would not support - and Coalition members, I think we can say this broadly - would not support any arrangements which may facilitate a return of Al-Qaeda to Afghanistan, using it as a safe haven or for terrorist training
But I also think we've got to be a bit careful here about what is for us to decide and what is for the Afghan people to decide. We have had elections in Afghanistan. They haven't been without problems, but we have had elections. You know, there, a national government, fragile as it is, is being formed.
I spoke yesterday and I believe this - that entrenching democracy in that sense will be the work of a generation of Afghans; so - their government, they're going to have to work through to entrench democracy in that way.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on that point, we still have an unstable Afghan Government, and there's a lot of international discussion about corruption and the fragility of that situation in terms of governance. There are analysts here, including Hugh White, who say if we only focus on strengthening the military and then we see that as our benchmark for leaving in terms of security, that we risk creating a situation where you have a strong military and a weak government which becomes a failed state, even worse than the instability you see in neighbouring Pakistan where you do have a strong military and often a weak government?
PM: Well, what I would say to that is it is not correct to somehow contrast that with what I said yesterday, and try and analyse it and say the two things are different. That's not what I said yesterday.
What I said yesterday is we are there, training the Afghan National Army. We are there training police. We are there involved in aid and reconstruction work. We are actually doing that in a combined taskforce.
What's the aim of our mission? To deny Al-Qaeda a return to a safe haven.
How will we acquit that mission? Well, the military mission will be acquitted by enabling transition to Afghan-led forces; transition conditions-based, a process area by area.
How long's that going to take? Well, the advice to me currently: 2-4 years. President Karzai has said he'd like that to have happened by the end of 2014, but it's conditions-based.
After that stabilisation of security occurs, I have said that we will be engaged to the end of this decade at least with training and support and civilian works, aid and development works, and then I have said I believe it will be the work of a generation of Afghans to build democracy.
So, it's not correct to say that somehow I am conceptualising a military mission which comes to an end and there is no further support to Afghanistan, and that is in fact the complete reverse of what I said yesterday.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) will be an international (inaudible)
PM: The aid work that we do is about direct services - schools, kids in schools, girls in schools; it's about health, kids getting immunised, infant mortality coming down, places that people can go to get health checks, access to doctors and nurses which they haven't had in the past; and it is about strengthening governance.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) do you mean that there is a possibility a large number of Australian troops could remain in Afghanistan after 2014, or do the bulk go and then-
PM: That's not what I said either, and I'd refer people to the words of the speech. What we are obviously looking at here is a circumstance where we acquit our mission: Uruzgan province, training the fourth brigade, training police, we are engaged in aid and civil work as well. It is integrated.
We then enable transition, place by place, to the leadership of the Afghan security forces. As they take the lead, we in a security sense, can obviously give leadership to them and start moving back, and what I have said is I believe, on the best advice to me at the moment, that that transition to their leadership will take 2-4 years - President Karzai says by the end of 2014 - and then we would stay engaged to the end of the decade at least, in some way supporting security and aid works.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I think it's that engagement beyond 2-4 years, 2014, conditions-based - is that engagement to the end of the decade, in your mind, still military engagement, or is it other forms of engagement, civilian, that sort of-
PM: I think we can conceptualise that there would be some overwatch functions for a period of time, and then we could conceptualise that there would be continued support for training over a period of time, but-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, Australian troops who are trainers, so our military, in providing training, obviously does a range of work that is not direct combat work. For example, you can imagine trainers being there, supporting leadership development for the Afghan National Army. We've got fantastic training of our officers in our Defence Force. You'd imagine people doing that, but we're in a situation where we've got to work this through, conditions-based, but I wanted to sketch out for the Australian people yesterday as best I can what the future is going to hold, and I wanted to be as frank as I could with Australians about what their expectations should be about Australia's engagement in Afghanistan.
So, you know, I think it was as frank an assessment as I could make it for the Australian people to understand our mission.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) transition is irreversible, isn't that running the risk of telling the Taliban that if they can overwhelm the Afghan army there's no chance of the Coalition forces coming back in, and-
PM: -No, complete reverse, Mark - the complete reverse. Security, the Afghan National Army being able to provide security, is obviously them able to provide security to have stability to not have the insurgency, to not have the return of the Taliban.
You know, to characterise my words any other way is really to twist them indeed. We are there training; we are there working through, place by place, district by district. There would be transition at a time that the Afghan National Army had the capability to deliver the security necessary - not before. That's my very point, and so that's what irreversible means, not what you're suggesting.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) how do you know the Taliban won't overwhelm the Afghan army after you've decided that you're not going back in?
PM: Well, you can assess capabilities of defence forces. We assess the capability of our own. We've got the view of the capability of other parts of the world. Our soldiers are there, our trainers are there, training so that the Afghan National Army has the requisite capability.
Can our trainers, our soldiers, judge capability? Well, obviously they can. They judge their own capability every day. They train people every day to make them capable.
Thank you.



People across Australia will be able to access cheaper and faster broadband services if a landmark telecommunications Bill is passed.
Prime Minister, Julia Gillard said it is crucial the Telecommunications Legislation Amendment (Competition and Consumer Safeguards) Bill 2009 is passed so that Australians can benefit from better broadband services.
The legislation will allow for the structural separation of Telstra's retail wing from the rest of the company.
This important Bill is being reintroduced into Parliament today after it was blocked in the Senate by Opposition filibustering before the election.
Ms Gillard and Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, Senator Stephen Conroy today said the Liberals and Nationals must support this legislation if they are serious about improving competition in the telecommunications market and delivering better services for their constituents.
Every day of delay for these reforms is another day of higher prices, less choice and fewer innovative services for consumers and small businesses - especially for those in regional Australia.
The Bill is an important micro-economic reform that will revolutionise the communications market for Australian consumers. It will set the stage for greater competition and productivity.
The Bill has been amended following a Heads of Agreement reached between NBN Co and Telstra in June this year.
The changes provide the necessary legislative framework to support the Agreement and give regulatory certainty to Telstra and its shareholders.
The Agreement also allows NBN Co to access Telstra's pits, ducts and other infrastructure, which will lead to a more efficient and cost effective rollout of the NBN. This will help cut billions of dollars from the cost of rolling out the NBN.
Australia currently has the 5th most expensive broadband charges amongst OECD countries. This Bill will help to bring prices down by allowing greater competition.
Consistent with the reforms announced last year, the purpose of the Bill remains to:
 * 	restructure the telecommunications market to promote greater competition and consumer benefits;
 * 	strengthen the telecommunications-specific access regime to provide more certain and quicker outcomes for telecommunications companies;
 * 	streamline the anti-competitive conduct regime by removing procedural impediments that in the past have restricted the effective operation of the telecommunications-specific competition regime; and
 * 	strengthen consumer safeguard measures such as the Universal Service Obligation and the Customer Service Guarantee.
 * 	Importantly, the Bill provides certainly for shareholder by setting out a framework for Telstra to seek approval from its shareholders on a proposal for it to migrate its fixed-line services to the NBN.
Other important measures in the Bill that provide greater certainty for Telstra include:
 * 	authorising certain conduct of Telstra and NBN Co, under the trade practices law, that is required to promote the structural reform of the telecommunications industry and deliver benefits to consumers;
 * 	allowing Telstra to acquire the spectrum it needs to provide advanced wireless broadband services unless the Minister determines in a legislative instrument otherwise;
 * 	giving priority to a genuine structural separation process for Telstra over functional separation.



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Attorney-General Robert McClelland today officially opened the Australian Government's Counter Terrorism Control Centre (CTCC).
The CTCC will play a lead role in strengthening the coordination of Australia's counter-terrorism intelligence efforts by setting and managing counter-terrorism priorities, identifying intelligence requirements and ensuring that the process of collecting and distributing intelligence is fully integrated.
The new facility will strengthen Australia's national security capability by improving our ability to prepare for and respond to significant national and international threats.
The centre will be hosted by the Australian Security and Intelligence Organisation with representatives from Australia's key security, intelligence and law enforcement agencies including the Australian Federal Police, the Australian Secret Intelligence Service and the Defence Signals Directorate.
The failed attack last Christmas on Northwest Airlines flight 253 demonstrated the need for our national security agencies to operate seamlessly in sharing information and intelligence to combat terrorism and other national security threats.
The creation of the CTCC was a key recommendation of the Government's Counter-Terrorism White Paper, which noted that Australia remains a key terrorist target, with prominent terrorists and extremists encouraging attacks on Australia both before and after 11 September 2001.
By providing a flexible and focused counter-terrorism capability, the CTCC represents a significant advance in Australia's national security arrangements.



The Prime Minister today announced that the Australian Government will provide special legislative protection to control the use of names associated with Mary MacKillop, who will become Australia's first Saint on 17 October 2010.
The decision to grant additional protections reflects the significance of the canonisation of Mary MacKillop for millions of Australians.
The Corporations Regulations 2001 will be amended so that requests for use of a company name, or part thereof, that suggests a connection to Mary MacKillop will be prevented, unless Ministerial approval is granted.
A name need not include the text "Mary MacKillop" to suggest a connection. For example, a name including "Saint MacKillop" would be prohibited. A name including "Our Mary" might be blocked, depending on the circumstances and the rest of the text of the name sought.
This amendment will reduce the extent to which an entity may hold itself to be associated with Mary MacKillop.
The Prime Minister said the new measure would provide the highest level of protection currently provided for any individual Australian's name.
The only other individual Australian's name with similar protection is Sir Donald Bradman.
In addition, existing laws will continue to offer a range of protections against the improper use of Mary MacKillop's name, including the Trade Marks Act 1995, Trade Practices Act 1974, equivalent state laws, and the common law.
The Prime Minister said the new measure was further recognition of the significance that Mary MacKillop's life holds, not only for the five million Australians of Catholic faith, but for all Australians.
The amendment complements the Government's election pledge of $1.5 million to assist in the commemoration of the canonisation, which includes support for a delegation of youth and indigenous representatives attending the canonisation ceremony in Rome, and the inclusion of the Mary MacKillop Canonisation Gift Fund as a specifically listed deductible gift recipient. 



The Prime Minister will travel to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia and Jakarta, Indonesia following the East Asian Summit in Vietnam at the end of this month.
From 31 October to 1 November the Prime Minister will make an official visit to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia to hold meetings with Prime Minister Najib Razak and attend an official lunch.
Australia's relationship with Malaysia is significant and growing.
The Prime Minister's visit will progress bilateral cooperation on a range of economic and security issues, including negotiations towards a free trade agreement and addressing regional security challenges such as counter-terrorism and people smuggling.
On November 1 and 2, the Prime Minister will visit Jakarta, Indonesia at the invitation of President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.
The Prime Minister and President Yudhoyono will discuss ways to further strengthen the bilateral relationship and increase cooperation across a number of economic, security, development and environment challenges.
The Prime Minister's trip comes after the Indonesian President's historic visit to Australia in March 2010 and follows the commitment made by leaders to meet annually in either Australia or Indonesia.
Indonesia is an important partner for Australia. We share values and interests and are working closely together to address a number of regional and global challenges.
As previously announced the Prime Minister's international trip will begin by attending the East Asia Summit (EAS) and the inaugural ASEAN-Australia Leaders' Summit in Hanoi, Vietnam on 29 to 31 October.
The EAS brings together the leaders of Australia's regional partners, including the 10 ASEAN countries plus Japan, Korea, China, India and New Zealand.
The summit's focus will be on building political, security and economic cooperation in the region and strengthening education, environmental and energy sector linkages. 



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced there would be a State Funeral Service for the Honourable Kenneth Shaw Wriedt, a highly respected member of the Australian Labor Party and of the Federal and Tasmanian Parliaments.
Mr Wriedt was a Senator for Tasmania from 1967 to 1980 during which time he served as a well-regarded Minister during the Whitlam Government, holding the portfolios of Primary Industry (later Agriculture) from 1972 to 1975, Minerals and Energy in 1975 and Leader of the Government in the Senate.
He also served as Leader of the Opposition in the Senate from 1975 to 1980.
Mr Wriedt subsequently transferred to Tasmanian state politics in 1982, serving as Leader of the Opposition and as Minister for Police and Emergency Services and Roads and Transport in the Field Government from 1989 to 1990.
Ken Wriedt will be long remembered as one of the true gentlemen of Australian politics, a man of decency and integrity who contributed greatly to the public life in our nation.
Mr Wriedt's wife of five decades, Helga, sadly predeceased him just a month ago, and he is survived by their daughters Paula and Sonia and four grandchildren.
The Prime Minister said the service would provide members of the Federal and Tasmanian Parliaments and members of the public with the opportunity to pay their respects to a long-serving and distinguished political leader.
The service will be held at 11am on Wednesday 27 October 2010 at the Federation Concert Hall, 1 Davey Street, Hobart.
Further details in relation to the service can be obtained by phoning 03 6232 7120 or 03 6232 7130. 



The Prime Minister today joined Australians around the nation to mourn the death of Dame Joan Sutherland - a great Australian and one of the nation's greatest voices.
Dame Joan Sutherland died peacefully at the age of 83 with her family by her side in Switzerland.
Dame Joan will be remembered by opera lovers for her extraordinary performances that kept audiences around the world spellbound.
She was widely regarded as one of the finest opera singers of the 20th century, so much so that Luciano Pavarotti once described her as 'the voice of the century'.
The Prime Minister said it was right for the nation to also celebrate the life of Dame Joan who made a tremendous contribution to her nation, to opera and the arts.
Dame Joan touched the lives of so many people around the world, yet never lost sight of her Australian upbringing and her many admirers at home.
She was generous in teaching and supporting new generations of singers and musicians, and until recently could be seen in the audiences of productions in Australia.
The Prime Minister offered her condolences to her husband Richard, son Adam and their extended family at this difficult time.
Born in Sydney in 1926, Dame Joan made her British debut in the Magic Flute in October 1952. Her 40 year career included a 19 minute standing ovation for her performance in Donizetti's Lucia di Lammermoor in 1959.
She was made a Dame of the British Empire in 1979 a Companion of the Order of Australia in 1975, Australian of the Year in 1961 and received an Order of Merit in 1991. 



The Gillard Government will introduce landmark legislation this week to secure better hospital services across Australia through fundamental reforms to the health system.
For the first time, the Commonwealth Government will take majority funding responsibility for public hospitals and full responsibility for primary care.
This change in funding arrangements provides the foundation for major reform of Australia's health and hospitals system.
Australia's health system has suffered from inadequate funding arrangements and unclear accountability for too long.
The new funding arrangements for Australia's health and hospital system will:
 * 	ensure, for the first time, that Federal Governments properly fund Australia's public hospitals - reversing the Commonwealth's declining share of hospital funding;
 * 	ensure that for the first time, the Commonwealth will fund hospitals for each service they provide, rather than through block grants - meeting increases in demand and helping take pressure off hospital waiting lists;
 * 	allow the Commonwealth, as dominant funder, to introduce new national standards for public hospital services, ensuring all patients receive timely and high quality services; and
 * 	drive improvements in primary care and prevention, because as the dominant funder of the hospital system, the Commonwealth will have an incentive to provide better primary care and prevention services to take the pressure off our hospital system.
Specifically the legislation will ensure the Commonwealth will fund:
 * 	60 per cent of the efficient price of every public hospital service provided to public patients;
 * 	60 per cent of recurrent expenditure on research and training functions undertaken in public hospitals;
 * 	60 per cent of capital expenditure; and
 * 	100 per cent of GP and primary health care services.
The legislation, which will be introduced into the Parliament this week, enables these changes by empowering the Commonwealth to dedicate approximately one-third of Goods and Services Tax revenue for health and hospital services.
The legislation reflects the historic agreement to reform Australia's health and hospital system signed by the Commonwealth and seven States and Territories.
Under this agreement, the Commonwealth Government will relieve the States and Territories of $15.6 billion in growth of health costs from 2014-15 to 2019-20 - allowing them to invest in other essential services.
The efficient pricing arrangements will mean that Australia gets value for money from our health dollars to deliver services as effectively and efficiently as possible.
Opposition support for this historic legislation will help deliver a more efficient, more sustainable and higher quality health care and hospital system.
By contrast, obstruction from the Opposition will only exacerbate funding squabbles between different levels of government, leading to longer waiting times in emergency departments and further elective surgery delays.
Australians deserve a properly funded health and hospital system with improved transparency and quality. This historic legislation will help deliver these outcomes.  



PM: I'm joined by the Treasurer Wayne Swan and by the Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon, and first and foremost can I just start by marking that it is Pink Ribbon Day for breast cancer. As people are probably aware, around one in nine Australian women will get breast cancer some time during the course of her life, so today is the day we wear the Pink Ribbon to remind Australian women to have the health checks that they need and of course to remind all of us to look after those in our community who are suffering with breast cancer and the family and friends that love and care for them to make sure we're providing our support to those family and friends.
And today we are actually talking about health and I'm here to announce that this week the Government will introduce landmark legislation to reform the structure of the nation's health system.
Now, this is going to be the first time that a level of Government, the Commonwealth Government, will take majority funding responsibility for public hospitals and full responsibility for the funding of primary care.
Now, this change is the foundation stone for our health reform agenda, and of course our health sector is now the nation's biggest employer. Australia's hospitals are getting busier and busier every year, our population is ageing and so that puts pressure on demand. There are more chronic diseases that ever before, and that puts pressure of demand.
And yet, when we look at the Australian Government funding of hospitals prior to this Government, it was in freefall.
Now, this legislation will reverse that. It will ensure that the Australian Government, the Commonwealth, permanently pays 60 per cent of the efficient cost of each and every hospital service.
It will mean that funding for hospitals, services, will keep up with demand. That will help ease pressure on waiting lists, in emergency departments and for elective surgery.
It will mean that the Commonwealth, as the dominant funder, will be able to set new standards for hospitals which will apply right across the country, and because the Commonwealth will be responsible for most hospital costs, we will be able to invest in services outside of hospital as well - primary care and prevention - so we will obviously have that responsibility and the right incentives to invest in prevention and primary care to keep people out of hospital because it is the Commonwealth Government that is paying the majority share.
Now, for many years Mr Abbott, as Health Minister, actually mused about two reforms for the hospital system. He never got either of them done but he used to muse about the Commonwealth taking over funding for hospitals and he used to muse about imposing strict transparent standards on the States as a condition of receiving increased national funding. Well, this legislation actually delivers both, so the test for Mr Abbott now is whether he will support this legislation as it goes before the Parliament and it will be introduced this week.
I'll turn now to Nicola Roxon for some comments.
MINISTER ROXON: Thank you very much for that Prime Minister.
Obviously, as a Government we're very pleased that we are introducing this legislation this week. The Treasurer has, I'm sure, some comments to make, having gone through the negotiations with the States and Territories.
Remember that this legislation means, for the first time, the Commonwealth will be taking on a 60 per cent share of funding and in the past decade - of course, the time when Mr Abbott was the Health Minister, as well as the time when he was in Cabinet - the Commonwealth's share of funding for hospital services dropped from 45 per cent down to 38 per cent. So, this legislation is the first time that we will be guaranteeing a fixed share of hospital funding into the future.
And, of course, we're taking this step based upon the evidence. Many of you will remember, many of you having travelled with us while we got expert advice, while we went through community consultations and while we negotiated with the States and Territories to get agreement to this change.
But, of course, this also is an important part that builds upon significant investments that are going into the health system - a 50 per cent increase in hospital funding negotiated at the end of 2008 when we first came into government, but also, of course, our $7.4 billion health reform package which sits on top of that record investment in hospital services, including the delivery of 1,300 more hospital beds; training of more than 5,500 GPs over the next decade; and, of course, more nurses, more practice nurses and hundreds and hundreds of extra specialists going to rural and regional areas; expanding primary care facilities with small infrastructure grants for more than 400 GP clinics, but an additional 28 new GP clinics across the country; and, of course, our world-leading preventative health measures such as our introduction of plain packaging for tobacco which is aimed to reduce smoking levels and take pressure off our hospitals long-term.
So, the legislation is really focused on us making sure that we will improve the sustainability and the efficiency of our hospital system, and it means, as the Prime Minister mentioned, that we can leverage our investments in hospitals using strong national standards, improved transparencies, new levels of accountability, and I'm sure that the Deputy Prime Minister will want to make a few comments about how this also means we can hold our State colleagues to account, ensuring that every dollar that we invest is going to health and every dollar that they allocate for health is also spent on health - a vital change, which has been achieved through our negotiations of this agreement earlier this year.
PM: So we'll turn to Wayne. Too early in the morning for you Mark Riley? You right?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Good. Thank you. No problem.
TREASURER: Thanks very much, Prime Minister. Thanks very much, Nicola.
Look, this is a very significant reform of Federal-State relations, one of the most significant reforms of Federal-State relations in decades, but it's also a very significant reform in economic terms. It's about getting value for money. It's about getting value for every health dollar that we spend, so the legislation that is introduced this week will particularly go to the core of Federal-State relations and we have to go back to what we're doing here.
What we're going to do is fund 100 per cent of primary care and aged care services, and 60 per cent of the efficient price of every public hospital service provided to public patients, as well as 60 per cent of the recurrent expenditure on research and training in public hospitals and capital expenditure.
Now, the efficient pricing mechanism is very important here, that's the way we get value for money, and to do all this around one third of GST revenue will be retained by the Commonwealth and invested in the national health and hospital funds in each State, and this means we can start reversing that decline that has taken place in Commonwealth funding of public hospitals over a long period of time.
What we are now going to do is really significantly invest in our public hospitals with our State partners, but make sure we can get value for money and, of course it means that we will relieve the states of $15.6 billion in growth of health costs from 2014-2015 to 2019-2020, so it is a significant reform of Federal-State relations but a significant economic reform as well.
PM: Thank you. Questions? Yes, Laura.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in the Treasury's incoming brief to the Government there seemed to some question marks about the technicalities of how you go about this, and in particular about whether you could get Western Australia to sign up to the intergovernmental agreement which will be fundamental to this going through. Even if the intergovernmental agreement conceded that Western Australia wasn't in agreement, what's the current status of those talks and when do think that will all be resolved?
PM: I'll turn to Wayne as well, but on the substance of health reform, if I can start there, I did have a brief conversation with Premier Barnett late last week in order to advise him that this legislation would be before the Parliament this week.
We obviously have to keep having some more conversations. We've provided more than $300 million in extra health funding to Western Australia. We'd like to provide around $350 million more, but in order to do that we are obviously continuing the conversation with Western Australia about getting on board with these health reforms.
I'll turn briefly to Nicola just for a comment on Western Australia and its health system, and then to Wayne on the IGA matter.
MINISTER ROXON: Yeah, thank you.
You probably will have seen, and I know our colleagues from the West Australian have been covering some of the issues in Western Australia about the delivery of health services, and there have been some significant problems, and many of the commentators and, in fact, many of the health professionals have, for example, looked at the four-hour emergency department targets that were funded partly through investments made by the Commonwealth earlier in negotiations. We have extra money ready and able to be invested in Western Australia to help assist them meet targets which they currently do not believe, or no longer believe they are going to be able to meet.
So, it is a time for Western Australia to reconsider whether their extra investment that the Commonwealth is prepared to make might be worthwhile, might assist in the delivery of health services, particularly when they're having a debate about an inability to achieve some of those targets without extra investments.
TREASURER: The talks are continuing with the States on the Intergovernmental Agreement, but they understand that we do have a legislative imperative to commence this legislation.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry, was that a follow up question on that, and then we'll go to the back.
JOURNALIST: There's no way Western Australia will get that extra $350 million without signing up to the Intergovernmental Agreement?
PM: We have been clear with Western Australia. We want them to sign up to the health reforms. We're prepared to continue a conversation in good faith, but the Minister for Health, obviously, does point out that there are some reasons emerging in the WA health system why it's a good time to have that conversation again in good faith.
Chris?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one of the arguments for doing this, of course, was that by 2050 the health costs will consume all State budgets because they are rising ahead of inflation at such a rate. What is in this agreement that will stop that from happening to the Commonwealth over time? What in this agreement constrains health costs?
PM: I'll make a comment then turn to Nicola.
You are right, of course, that a foundation stone of this reform is that the Federal Government, with its greater capacity, is stepping up to be the dominant funder for hospitals, 100% of primary care, but of course there are mechanisms built into this package of reforms to get efficiency into the system, and absolutely pivotal to that is the fact that Commonwealth funding will no longer just go as a big block to States, but we will be paying on the basis of the efficient price of services in order to drive efficiency and best practice through the systems. So, there's a reform at the centre of this which is about efficiency as well as the Federal Government stepping up to do more, because the Federal Government has the greater capacity over the long term to meet that cost.
MINISTER ROXON: As the Prime Minister said, there's two parts to this. In her introductory comments she made this very clear as well - It's the efficient use of money that is being allocated, but it's also giving one level of government, for the first time, proper financial incentives to invest outside our hospital system and earlier in somebody's healthcare needs.
We know that it's cheaper to provide support in a primary care setting or to invest in prevention, and it also has the benefit of providing better care for the individual, improving health outcomes, delaying or deferring entry into hospital, where it is more expensive to fix the problem by the time someone has got that unwell.
This is why the 60 per cent funding of hospital services, at an efficient price, and 100 per cent funding of primary care and aged care is so important, because for the first time Treasury officials, finance officials at one level of government can say it makes sense for us to invest in the front end because we won't have to pick up as much of the tab at the back end. In the past, the Commonwealth's been looking at the front end expenditure, the States have been looking at the back end and we've really never been able to put that proper incentive in place.
JOURNALIST: How will you proceed if you don't get an agreement with Western Australia?
PM: Well, look, we're going to keep having the discussions with Western Australia, so at this stage I think the best thing is to say we're going to press ahead with this legislation. We obviously have agreement with the other States and Territories and we want to proceed with this health reform. We'll keep talking to Western Australia and working through it.
We can certainly work through the questions of the legislation. There is a technical issue that Laura raised about the Intergovernmental Agreement, which can be resolved without Western Australia fully signing on to health reform, but obviously the aim we have is to have Western Australia sign on to health reform.
Yes, Andrew?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there was one idea floated a few months ago and the Health Minister might know about this, about directing money directly to hospitals. I mean that one has since gone. You must have a plan B, and secondly, when it comes to WA, too, if they don't sign on and they want to increase the royalties to make up the $352 million shortfall, royalties under minerals, they could bring the mining tax down as well, with Solicitor General advice saying that it's got some constitutional problems.
Can I ask you on the second of those as well, what advice do you have that your mining tax is constitutional?
PM: Right, well we may get you to be a special adviser to the Treasurer at the next meeting of Treasurers, or perhaps we could send you with Ken Henry when the heads of Treasuries meet and we could, you know, get all of this, but this is about health reform and the heath reform track will be dealt with as the health reform track, and, obviously we've got a conversation to continue with Western Australia about health reform.
We should remind ourselves, when you talked about direct funding for hospitals, of course a great thing about this set of reforms is we will have the efficiency driven by the efficient price and for the first time ever we will have absolute line of sight about what the Commonwealth is putting in and what the State is putting in, so instead of the fears of the past, where if the Federal Government increased resources, was putting money in the top of the bucket, people used to fear that money was being dragged out the bottom of the bucket.
With these reforms there will be absolute transparency. There will be the money - known, knowable, transparent - so people know that it's going to where they want it to go, which is for better health care.
JOURNALIST: On the constitutionality of the mining tax, the Solicitor General has raised issues regarding that.
TREASURER: But not as categorically as you've said at all. I mean, naturally we'll work our way through these issues in a way which is in accord with our constitutional arrangements.
JOURNALIST: How have they raised it? if his characterisation is wrong, what has been raised?
TREASURER: Well, we've received some advice on it and we've taken that advice on board, and we are working our way through the issues.
JOURNALIST: But you got that advice many months ago. (Inaudible)
TREASURER: (inaudible) Yeah, well, that's right.
JOURNALIST: But that was many months ago, Mr Swan, so what's the Government's response to it?
TREASURER: What we are doing is working our way through the final implementation details of the tax. When we do that we will move to a legislative phase, and naturally we will do it in a way which is in accord with our constitutional responsibilities
JOURNALIST: Can the GST split go ahead in the rest of the nation though, without WA being on board? The Treasurer doesn't seem to suggest that would be possible.
PM: This is the question that Laura first raised. There's, I guess, two consent issues from WA: there is it giving its consent to the necessary changes to allow it to happen to everyone else, and then there is the question of WA wholly agreeing to sign up for health reform.
Now, obviously, our understanding of Western Australia's position is they don't seek to stand in the way of the delivery of health reform for everyone else because they know everyone else has agreed to it, but they've got their own position about health reform for themselves.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've always been quite respectful in you public commentary around John Howard. In his book he criticises the decision to change the leadership from Kevin Rudd to yourself and says that going to an early election was a blunder.
Do you think he's just, to borrow a phrase from your predecessor, messing with your head, or have you ever given thought to whether perhaps it would have been better to wait to go to an election so you could discuss more important reforms like this and benefited from that?
PM: I simply think no more or no less than this - I am respectful of what Prime Minister Howard did as Prime Minister, but I have always made the point, guided by his stars, he sees the world very differently to me, he's got a different value system to me. That's why he's devoted all of his adult life to the Liberal Party and why obviously I took a very different decision and joined the Labor Party and have devoted all of my adult life to that. So, it's no surprise really that whether it's contemporary politics or the politics of 5, 10, 15, 20 years ago, Mr Howard and I would look at things very differently.
Latika?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the case of Tegan Leach in Queensland, I think it's led for some women to really ask that abortion be decriminalised in those States where it's illegal once and for all. Anna Bligh has said she won't take the fight on, I think disappointing many. Do you plan to take or show any leadership for those women who are seeking change, or will you let them down, too?
PM: These are decisions at State Government level.
Phil Coorey?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, Doug Cameron on the pledge, wants to have that looked at again so that Labor and Greens aren't strictly bound by caucus solidarity. Have you got any sympathy for that view and do you have any observation on the Greens and their continuing high vote? Is it a worry to you?
PM: Well, firstly, I don't comment on the polls. We obviously get on with the job of making decisions in the nation's interests on the economy, education, broadband, climate change and obviously today on health.
On the question of public debate issues, I mean, I think it's important we've got a rich, deep, public debate about the big issues that face Australian society. For my Labor Party colleagues, I've been very clear with them - I want our caucus to be a place of debate, of ideas generation. I want that to happen in caucus committees and in caucus itself, but we come from a political Party that believes we are strengthened by being members of a team and the way the team works is we have those discussions internally and work things through through our own processes.
We'll go the back and then come forward.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the legislation being introduced this week, what does that mean for surgeons, say at a hospital like Hornsby Hospital in Sydney, where they're still operating in operating theatres built in the 1960s; where the hospital is falling apart and doctors and surgeons have been saying we need to rebuild this thing badly - what does it mean in practical terms for those people?
PM: Well, I'll get Nicola to answer that first and then I'll make a comment myself.
MINISTER ROXON: Well, the most practical thing that it means immediately for those surgeons and doctors is it won't always be thus. This, as you rightly point out, is an issue that's been running for more than 30 years and that is because we have never had the balance of funding responsibilities, the transparency, the payment for efficient price - never had any of that running properly to enable hospitals to be funded properly and sustainably into the future, so what we offer to those surgeons and doctors is that there will be able to be a long-term cure for the problems of the hospital system that they've been working in.
But much more immediately than that, and I know that many advocates in New South Wales, and particularly clinicians have been arguing for this, the new local hospital networks are abolishing the current area health services in New South Wales. They have long been regarded as too big and too bureaucratic and replacing them with smaller local hospital networks, where the doctors and the nurses and other clinicians in each local hospital will have more say about the problems that need to be fixed, the investments that need to be made.
It doesn't provide an answer tomorrow for each and every hospital across the country, but it does provide a long-term answer which we, as a Government, have put up our hands and said 'we want to fix this for now and into the future'.
PM: And we do have to recognise, I mean, we came to Government in circumstances where the amount of funding as a percentage being put in by the Federal Government was going like that. We are now guaranteeing for the future 60 per cent of the costs of hospitals; giving them security of funding; having this transparency to make a difference for our healthcare system for the years to come.
And I understand there would be frustration and there are stresses and strains today. We've put a lot more money into health as a Government to help address immediate pressures and this reform agenda is the right way of doing things for the long term as the pressures on our healthcare system become even greater.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: Sorry, we're ignoring people over here. I'm sorry.
JOURNALIST: What initial talks have you had with the independents and Greens and what do you think you might have to offer them to get them on board?
PM: Well, obviously, in line with my agreements with the independents and with the Australian Greens I'll be speaking to them about this legislation today, but let's be frank - the position of the independents and the Greens comes into focus if Mr Abbott declines to support these reforms, so first and foremost we need an answer from Mr Abbott about whether or not he will support these reforms.
Now, when he was Health Minister, very long-serving Health Minister, as health funding from the Commonwealth went down as a percentage, we saw a lot of damage done to our health system. Even as that damage was being done, Mr Abbott would muse about reform directions - didn't get anything done, but he'd spent a lot of time talking about them.
This legislation delivers on the Commonwealth taking a greater role. This legislation delivers on national standards. These are things Mr Abbott has said in the past that he supports, so the challenge for him is: is he going to be screaming from the sidelines trying to wreck this reform the way he's been screaming from the sidelines on water, on children in detention, on interest rates, without any solutions?
It's time for him to stop screaming from the sidelines when he's got no solutions, get on board and support this legislation going through the Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Minister Roxon-
PM: -We'll just go over to Michelle and then come back.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, one of the issues that seem to be concerning the Left at their meeting on the weekend was the Party's attitude on gay marriage. Is there any circumstances in which you would allow a conscience vote on that issue, and if not, why is not more of a conscience issue than a normal sort of policy issue?
PM: Well, Michelle our Party considered these questions at our last National Conference. We came up with the answer. It's in the Party's platform and policies, and so obviously the Party's polices and platform are that the Marriage Act should stay in its current form with marriage being between a man and a woman.
JOURNALIST: So what's the point on encouraging debate, then, if you don't want to be prepared to accept any of the proposals coming forward?
PM: Proper processes, proper ways of working through - that's what I've said about our Caucus. I'm pointing to the outcome of a proper process and a proper debate, which was our Party's platform and policy.
JOURNALIST: One of the things about your new paradigm is that there's more time for private member's business, Minister Roxon, and last week there was, there's a motion, I think, still before the Parliament, put by Bruce Scott, which raises alarm bells about continued problems getting doctors to regional areas because of his claim that the specialist colleges are preventing, conspiring to prevent people, particularly overseas trained doctors, from getting into the country. Are you satisfied that that is not happening, and if it is happening, what are you going to do about it?
MINISTER ROXON: I'm not satisfied that we have the answer right yet about the way to encourage more specialists and more GPs into rural and regional Australia. I am satisfied that the incentives that we are introducing and the extra training places and the work we're doing with the colleges is improving what has been a problem for a very long time.
I saw the debate. In fact, the motion was debated last sitting week and Mr Scott and a number of MPs from both sides of the parliament spoke.
We are interested in any solutions that people have, because I think this is a long-term problem where we have part of the solution which is making a difference, but we don't pretend we have the whole solution, but there is one thing I can absolutely guarantee - and I have said this directly to Mr Scott as well - we will not support the lowering of standards for health professionals coming into Australia, and say that it is OK to allow second-class or second-rate doctors or specialists to operate in rural and regional Australia.
I make no apologies for having very tight standards. We've seen the risks of failing to do that, and that is a very important balance when you ask this question.
We have to make sure that we have proper controls in place, and I can tell you the colleges are the experts about what are the proper quality standards. I, as the Health Minister, should not make those clinical decisions. I don't believe any politician should.
So, we must be careful that we keep pressure always on the colleges to apply their expertise in assessing quality standards and that we don't let that slip into what might be restricting competition in some way, but the answer is not for the government to replace itself and suddenly be the assessor of clinical standards and give the approval to individual obstetricians, or surgeons, or pathologists, or others who do need to meet Australia's stringent standards so that we can ensure we're providing quality services to the community.
PM: We'll just help Malcolm Farr out.
JOURNALIST: Thank you much.
PM: Looking unhappy. Are you alright, Malcolm?
JOURNALIST: Look, I've never been happier.
PM: Good.
JOURNALIST: Never. I'd be even happier if I could ask the Treasurer a question.
PM: Right.
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan, there are going to be some bank profits released over the next week or so, and they're going to be beauties. Isn't this a further case for the banks cutting back the premiums they put on mortgage rates and business lending rates? Isn't it a further example that they've chopped off too much for themselves?
TREASURER: Well, we haven't seen the announcements that are coming this week, but I've made it very clear, and the Reserve Bank has made it very clear, that when you look at their net interest margins - which is the way in which you judge their overall profitability - they are now back to pre-crisis levels.
So, any argument from the banks, particularly in the context of their profit announcements that may come later this week, that somehow a rise outside the Reserve Bank cycle is justified is simply wrong and I believe any rise outside the cycle would be very cynical from the major banks. I just don't think it can be justified in any way, and the evidence which has been supplied by the Reserve Bank discounts the arguments that they're putting forward.
JOURNALIST: Do you think you'd think about giving ACCC more powers if needed, and the ACCC has said that they don't have the power to price signalling? Have you got any more thoughts about that?
TREASURER: Well, there is no doubt that as one of the consequences and one of the unfortunate consequences of the Global Financial Crisis has been a further concentration in our banking sector. I mean, one of the great benefits we had during the Global Financial Crisis, however, was that our banks remained strong, but unfortunately the Global Financial Crisis weakened the non-bank lenders. One of the things that we've been doing is building up support for the non-bank lenders via our investment in residential mortgage backed securities and that is starting to pay dividends, but it will impact in the long-term. It's no magic bullet, if you like.
Now, in this context I think it is always worthwhile examining what more could be done to promote competition in the banking system. The Government has always got a weather eye open for that, and we will evaluate that as we go forward.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just to clarify your earlier answer to Latika's question, obviously abortion laws are a matter for the States, but for the record do you take the view that even though it's not decriminalised in some States, women have no great difficulty finding abortion, therefore let's not have the debate, let's let matters lie, or do you believe that the passage of time that it should be decriminalised?
PM: I believe that this is a matter for State governments and State parliaments to work their way through without me offering running commentary on it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are you plan on saying to Indonesia about Schapelle Corby and will you also be raising the Bali Nine?
PM: Well, can I say later this week I will be travelling to Vietnam for the East Asia Summit. I will be coming back home via Malaysia and Indonesia. I'll have something further to say about the objectives of those visits a bit later in the week.
JOURNALIST: Minister Swan, what more can be done to increase rate competitiveness?
TREASURER: Well, what we must do is make sure that all of our arrangements are as competitive as possible. The Government has always got an eye to make sure that we can take action in that area.
JOURNALIST: But do you have any levers, any actual ideas, what you can actually do?
PM: One's always got to be very careful talking about levers, Lenore. We found that out last week.
TREASUER: Or speculating.
PM: Or speculating on them.
I think someone needs to buy Malcolm a cup of coffee, and perhaps Phil Coorey as well.
Thank you.



Campaigns to combat obesity, drug and alcohol abuse and smoking will be key priorities for a new National Preventative Health Agency if legislation is supported in Parliament this week.
The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard and Health Minister, Nicola Roxon today joined forces with peak health groups to call on the Parliament to support the historic Australian National Preventive Health Agency Bill 2010.
The Agency is central to the Gillard Government's reform strategy to improve Australia's health system.
For the first time, the Commonwealth Government will take majority funding responsibility for public hospitals and full responsibility for primary care.
The reforms will provide a strong incentive for the Commonwealth to provide better primary care and prevention services to take pressure off our hospitals.
Potentially avoidable diseases affect the lives of millions of Australians. They also account for around 20 per cent of the total health care expenditure.
Currently, smoking kills about 15,000 Australians each year and costs Australia $31.5 billion each year.
More than 60% of Australians aged over 18 are overweight or obese.
And more than 813,000 Australians aged 15 years and older were hospitalised for alcohol-related injury and disease between 1996 and 2005.
For the first time, the new National Preventative Health Agency will advise all Health Ministers and help coordinate prevention campaigns across the country.
The Agency will bring together some of the best expertise in Australia to gather, analyse and disseminate the latest evidence on ways to prevent chronic disease.
The Agency's impact will help take pressure off Australian hospitals as more people adopt healthier ways of living and reduce the risk of preventable illnesses.
It is part of the Gillard Government's $872.1 million commitment over six years towards the National Partnership Agreement on Preventive Health.
This is the largest investment ever made by an Australian Government to support health prevention strategies.
The Government has allocated $17.6 million to establish and operate the Agency, if the legislation is passed.
The Agency will be responsible for three specific programs under the National Partnership Agreement on Preventive Health, which are:
 * 	National social marketing programs relating to tobacco and obesity ($102 million over four years);
 * 	A preventive health research fund focussing on translational research ($13.1 million over four years); and
 * 	A preventative workforce audit and strategy ($0.5 million over two years).
This is in addition to the Government's commitment, following discussions with the Australian Greens and Senator Xenophon, to allocate an additional $50 million to the National Binge Drinking Strategy.
The Agency will put in place national guidelines and standards to guide preventative health. It will also form partnerships with industry, non-government and community groups to promote healthier lifestyles.
The Government's comprehensive approach to tobacco control, with sustained and coordinated actions, have seen smoking rates cut from 30.5 per cent in 1988 to 16.6 per cent in 2007.
Campaigns such as Measure Up have already helped Australians recognise the link between their waist measurement and their chances of developing chronic disease.
It is expected that once the Bill passes, the Agency will be operational in early 2011


 Canberra 
I'm very pleased to be able to speak at the Australian Industry Group's annual dinner.
As Deputy Prime Minister, as Minister for Education and Minister for Workplace Relations, and as a Labor frontbencher since 2001, I've long had dealings with the Australian Industry Group.
But this is my first opportunity to address you as Prime Minister.
As Prime Minister, I want to share with you not just my Government's economic agenda, but my own economic thinking.
We've got a reform agenda to deliver, and I'll come to that.
But I want to put our reforms in the context of three more specific challenges that government and industry face right now.
The dollar rising. Electricity prices rising. And anti-reform voices rising.
Australia has come out of the downturn as the strongest advanced economy. Now, the Government is working to turn the hard work through the downturn into lasting prosperity.
Our economy is strong overall, but I know that many sectors are finding conditions difficult.
The policy of my Government is to support broad-based growth and a balanced economy for the long term.
Commodity exporters have served our country tremendously well, raising the living standards of every Australian, but an economy that becomes too dependent on any one sector takes too big a risk.
Even while demand for commodities remains strong, we face the risk of a "patchwork economy" - where some sectors thrive while others hang on and hope.
And if demand for commodities moderates over time, then we will only remain strong if we have ensured that our economic growth is broadly based: growth across all sectors - in services, manufacturing and agriculture, not just mining and resources.
I know the strong dollar is making life hard for some.
I know that the upward pressure on our currency makes life harder for manufacturing exporters as well as exporters of services like tourism and education and agriculture exporters too.
Consumers and capital-intensive industries and those who rely on inputs like fuel and transport do benefit from a strong dollar, and have an opportunity to make productive investments.
But that doesn't make life any easier for those who are feeling the pinch.
What we also know is that the root cause of our strong dollar is our strong economy.
Compared to the rest of the world, we have strong growth, employment is expanding, investment flows into Australia are high, and we have record terms of trade. Interest rate differentials are obviously a factor, though in turn they reflect our higher growth.
And given our floating exchange rate, all of that will mean a stronger dollar.I appreciate that no one here is arguing for costly direct interventions in currency markets to drive our dollar down, much less fixing the rate.
That floating dollar is an invaluable pressure valve for our economy. Easing pressures on inflation and wages while we manage a phase of strong growth.The floating dollar is the founding fact of the modern Australian economy.
At the same time as the dollar is so strong, I'm also conscious that electricity prices are rising and that this is also hard for Australian industry.
I think it is important that the origins of these price rises be clearly understood. The current rises are a significant economic fact in themselves but I also think their connection to future policy should be clear as well.
The current price rises in a number of states have been principally caused by a sustained period of under-investment.
Over the past three years residential electricity bills have risen by more than 40 per cent across Australia.
We continue to see electricity prices increase. From July this year the Queensland Competition Authority will allow prices to rise by just over 13 per cent.
In NSW, the Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal has announced price increases of between 7 and 13 per cent from 1 July as well.
In Western Australia the Government has increased prices by 17.5 per cent during 2010.
These increases have been overwhelmingly driven by a lack of investment.
Significant investment is required to replace ageing network infrastructure and deliver energy security.
State and Territory Governments have no longer been able to ignore the need for electricity providers to recoup the costs of these investments through higher prices.
The Premier of Western Australia has effectively apologised for the situation, saying:I regret it, but it's something that simply has to happen.
There is another way to manage these issues.
Living in Victoria at the time, I saw the reforms of the energy sector undertaken by the Kennett Government and continued by the Bracks and Brumby Governments. This provides an example that other states could learn from.
A leading industry commentator - Keith Orchison, previously the CEO of the Energy Supply Association of Australia - put it this way in the Australian newspaper last week:After almost two decades in which Australia has coasted, meeting its power needs with cheap coal and putting off until tomorrow a higher level of augmentation of networks, while state Governments have reaped a handy dividend from the revenue earned by the electricity businesses they own, the reckoning is at hand.
It's not a pretty picture.
We'll all live with the legacy of those decisions. But my commitment is this.I'm not going to allow a repetition of this problem in another 10 years by allowing another sustained period of under-investment now.
That is one reason why I am so determined to deliver a carbon price.
Obviously, the fundamental motivation for our carbon price policy is pollution reduction. If carbon didn't create an externality by warming the planet, we wouldn't be pricing that externality in.
However the industry consequences are then immediate. Delaying a carbon price makes the eventual adjustment shaper and more costly. And the absence of a carbon price is already a problem.
Producers and consumers accept the science of climate change. Because they believe it, they are already responding, and their responses are already changing our energy economics.
Without certainty on a future carbon price, businesses won't invest in long-lived assets, because they won't know what their returns will be or what the environment will be for their competitors.
Investors already face perverse incentives for solutions which are driving them to adopt stopgap solutions rather than long term investment.
This is particularly the case in the electricity generation sector where uncertainty will direct what capacity growth there is towards meeting incremental rises in energy demand, rather than long-term baseload growth.
Where his predecessor is critical of some state governments for lack of investment and policy prudence, the current CEO of the Energy Supply Association of Australia, Brad Page, is imploring policy makers to underwrite investment by injecting a carbon price into the economy.
He has said that without a clear carbon constraint over the next few years, generators will be forced to make stop gap investments in technologies like open-cycle gas turbines to meet immediate increases in demand rather than take long term large scale investment decision. In Brad Page's words:That's not a zero-cost outcome - our lights would stay on but power prices will rise. Delaying a clear carbon constraint is going to cause electricity prices to go up anyway.
Inaction on a carbon price means higher prices.
There are other significant advantages to acting on a carbon price.
Revenue from the carbon price delivers transition support to households and industries. No such revenue is available to assist with the costs of the current price rises around the country - nor for future rises from an on-going investment strike.
That's because carbon pricing is a major structural economic reform.
So unlike the current catch-up round in the states, any price rises which do flow from carbon pricing bring with them the dynamic benefits of reform for the long-term.
Real carbon pricing reform will ensure industry uses energy more productively - increasing outputs compared to emissions.
Decoupling economic growth from growth in emissions is a key micro-reform.
This reform will also help us compete in a carbon-constrained global economy. Energy productivity is an emerging new arena for global competition in production costs and it's one where investment decisions now have an effect for years, for decades, to come.
Like all structural reforms, we need consensus and discipline to deliver good outcomes which are sustained for the long term.
I know the climate change committee and the business and community roundtables are working hard to deliver this consensus.
And the Government is determined to maintain this discipline, by taking the lead in a richer, deeper reform conversation which encourages thinking about the long-term.
Australia did not come out of the downturn as the strongest advanced economy by accident.
Government made good decisions.
And industry did too.
Having experienced acute skills shortages at the height of the last boom, during the downturn you sought to retain rather than shed valuable workers.Labour demand did weaken during 2008-09 - but this was mostly reflected in a decline in average hours worked, with firms seeking to put in place arrangements that avoided redundancies.
I pay tribute to the role that Australian industry has played.
But Government and industry alike had the benefit of 25 years of good decisions behind us.
25 years of hard won economic reforms, most particularly the reforms of Hawke and Keating.
Reforms which mean that our open economy's ability to resist global shocks has become the envy of the world.
Governments don't do economic reform because it feels good.
Reform is not easy - but it works.
When you get economic reform right, you fuel the drivers of sustainable long term economic growth. Reform lifts participation, and greater participation will ease the constraints on growth from the increasing number of Australians who no longer work.
Reform also lifts productivity, and this is the heart of the matter.
Treasury analysis finds that if we can get productivity growth up to what it was in the 1990s - up to where it stood following the Hawke-Keating period - our economy could grow an extra 15 per cent by 2050.
In Government, we must walk the reform road every day.
One or two big ticket reforms is not enough.
Reform is a seamless robe, which cannot be divided to suit sectional interest.
We all share the long-term benefits when we all share the short-term difficulties. No economic or social sector will have only beneficial reforms.
I said recently that minority Government is no excuse to walk away from reform. I mean that.
This country has had a reform agenda for a generation.
There are big differences between the parties and big issues at stake in politics - industrial relations and climate change obvious among them. At our best, though, there has been a historic reform project which spans the political divide.
A shared understanding between Governments of both persuasions and industry that modernising our economy creates opportunities for all Australians.
That shared understanding should ensure that minority Government does not mean an end to reform.
But I believe the reform consensus is now under serious threat.
I never thought in the 21st century I would hear a Shadow Finance Minister debate the need to allow our dollar to float.
I never thought that in the 21st century I would hear a Shadow Treasurer debate the need to allow a competitive market for interest rates.
Equally, I never thought I would hear a NSW Premier deny that a deal is a deal and a signature means you agree.
And I never thought, following a legislated reform direction, I would hear a NSW Opposition Leader threaten a reform of a river that belongs to the nation.
In our country we are hearing rising voices against reform.
Not just in the community as a whole, but in major party politics as well.
And strikingly, in the Parliament, in the once reform-advocating Liberal Party.
If a strain of economic Hansonism takes hold on the conservative side of politics in a Parliament which is so finely balanced, our long-term prosperity is at real risk.
Without the legacy of reform, our economy could never have resisted recession through two decades and three global shocks.
And at this time, with global uncertainty over growth and domestic uncertainty over carbon pricing, the reform consensus is as important as ever before.
Everyone who is committed to economic reform now has a job to do.
Simplistic solutions abound.
The risk of a return to economic populism is real.
The reform conversation needs many voices.
Leaders must lead, and my voice will be loudly heard.
Industry has a stake in the reform project - in opportunity, in prosperity, in growth - so you must have a strong voice in the reform conversation too.
My Government has an ambitious reform agenda: financial consolidation; building capacity on the supply side with tax, superannuation, infrastructure and skills; extending market-based reforms to health and education, carbon and water. We will pursue it with discipline and rigour.
As Prime Minister and Leader of the Labor Party I can guarantee we will not unilaterally withdraw from the post-1983 reform consensus.
Others must speak for themselves.
By nature, I am an optimist.
And by conviction, I am optimistic about our economy's future.
I am also a reformer.
The Labor Government I lead puts reform at the centre of all our economic decisions.
I also believe the way we approach reform will be a case study for the best way to govern.
Methodical.Making steady progress on our plans, day by day, week by week.
Working hard for all Australians, wherever they live.
Modernising.
Preparing Australia for the long-term with modern market-based solutions.
Carefully weighing the hard decisions, at the right time, for the right reasons.
Driven by our values - hard work, a fair go through education, respect.
And always keeping our economy strong.



UHLMANN: Julia Gillard, welcome to ABC News 24.
PM: Thank you very much.
UHLMANN: What do you hope to achieve at the East Asia Summit in Hanoi?
PM: This is an important meeting, of course the East Asia Summit is bringing together the right countries, the countries in our region for a comprehensive dialogue across security, economic matters, political matters.
The East Asia Summit is in the process of welcoming into its membership the United States and Russia. They will be there participating in this meeting, their membership will be formalised for the next meeting. So that means its brings together the ASEAN countries, the US and China - sorry the US and Russia - ultimately, as well as China, Korea, Japan, us, New Zealand and India. So it is a comprehensive regional dialogue.
UHLMANN: Are you going there with anything specific in mind that you'd like to achieve?
PM: Well we'll be talking about the role of the East Asia Summit. Obviously this is in development looking forward to its new and expanded membership with the US and Russia. We want to make sure that there's dialogue on the question of a further meeting with finance ministers. We believe that could play a useful role, brining the finance ministers of the same countries together. We also believe there's scope for cooperation on disaster management and we will be talking about that.
UHLMANN: Is the big question though, for Australia, how the relationship with between China and the United States evolves over the course of the next ten, twenty years?
PM: I think there are a set of big questions for us and, of course, that is one and what is very important about this evolving piece of regional architecture is that it will bring, to the same table, China, the US, countries like India, as well as our own, working through defence issues, economic issues and, political issues.
UHLMANN: Do you think the power is shifting in Asia and does that present risks for Australia?
PM: Well certainly the rise of China is something that is on everybody's mind, in terms of global politics it is the phenomenon of our age and the ever strengthening of India too, is also making a very big difference to our world and our region. And this important dialogue at the East Asia summit brings these nations together.
UHLMANN: Do you think there's a concern that it will bring the United States and China into conflict?
PM: I think dialogue always helps manage differences of opinion that's why it's so important to have them at the same table.
UHLMANN: What about the way we deal with our relationship with Japan as well, because there is concern, by the Japanese, that Australia is beginning to ignore Japan because of the rise of China?
PM: I certainly would say our relationship with Japan continues to be a close and strong one, I will look forward to seeing the Prime Minister of Japan for the second time at the East Asia Summit. We are good friends, strong trading partners and work in a very collaborative fashion in the region.
UHLMANN: There are two powers though in East Asia, one's Japan and one's China and they are both in competition for resources so there are really strained ties there and again Australia finds itself in perhaps sometimes an awkward position?
PM: My position and I think the position of this nation over time has been that we can sit around tables, talk to people, maintain good relationships and, encourage people to work through differences of opinion in a peaceful and constructive fashion.
UHLMANN: Now is there some deal with Burma and what's Australia's attitude to that? Is it best to try and include Burma at the table in discussions or to exclude it?
PM: I think our view about the situation in Burma obviously is one of very strong concern on human rights questions and we make that perfectly clear in a wide variety of ways including when we attend multi-national forums like this one.
UHLMANN: You're coming back, now, via Malaysia and Indonesia and will people smuggling be at the top of the list in the sorts of things that you'll be discussing with the Prime Minister and the President?
PM: It certainly will be on the list. I'm looking forward to a visit to Malaysia on the way back and discussions with the Prime Minister there and indeed with the Cabinet.
Then I will be coming back via Indonesia for an official visit at the invitation of the President. Of course, we're sitting here at Parliament House today and people would recall that the President of Indonesia came to Australia earlier this year and addressed the House of Representatives which was quite a special moment for this Parliament, for our nation and for the relationship between our two countries.
I will be looking to talk through a set of issues: economic questions, trade questions, education, people smuggling, counter terrorism, as well as further cooperation on issues like disaster management and relief. We are providing a million dollars to assist after the very recent tsunami and loss of life in Indonesia so I will also certainly be passing the condolences of the Australian people direct to the President of Indonesia.
UHLMANN: Is it your expectation that you may be able to progress your idea for a Regional Processing Centre in East Timor while you're in Indonesia?
PM: Well certainly I will raise the issues of people smuggling and people movement. The dialogue has been continuing. The Minister for Immigration has had discussions in our region, including with Indonesia, and those discussions will continue.
UHLMANN: Do you have any timeframes? Is your expectation that this is something that can be achieved in this term of government?
PM: Well look, I've always said, on this question, that I'm not going to pretend to the Australian people that there's some quick fix here. This will take methodical and patient work. We will be in dialogue with the region about a regional protection framework and in dialogue with East Timor about a Regional Processing Centre. So we're going to continue to work through.
UHLMANN: Will you be raising Shapelle Corby and trying to get her sentence commuted in anyway?
PM: Well I think it's best for me to pursue those questions, issues involving Ms Corby, and of course there are other Australians in Indonesia that we are concerned about, to pursue that directly and privately, I actually think is in the best interests of those individuals.
UHLMANN: Pursuing also the death penalty that's been applied to three members of the Bali Nine?
PM: Well, clearly Australia does not support the death penalty. That is our position as a nation. When it comes to advocacy on behalf of individuals it's certainly in the best interests of those individuals for me to be doing that discussion privately rather than publically and I intend to.
UHLMANN: You've criticised the Opposition in the past for three word slogans on 'stop the boats'. Isn't economic hansonism a two word slogan?
PM: Well it's a description of the conduct I believe we are increasingly seeing from the Opposition. And that is conduct that looks for a popular slogan, something that sounds goods, sounds appealing. But when you actually think about it, would be to the long term detriment of the nation. We are a country that has engaged in twenty five, thirty years of economic reform.
Yes, there have been some things that have been contested between the political parties but there's been a lot about modernising our economy that has been worked on with a broad political consensus and I have just sounded a warning bell that we are seeing that political consensus break down and the Opposition prepared to sloganise and seek to wreck the necessary reform programs for the nation's future.
UHLMANN: Well, the Labor Party opposed the GST, couldn't the Coalition say opposing the NBN is in the same sort of class?
PM: And of course there have been contests. Contests about things like workplace relations. The Coalition for Work Choices, the Labor Party decidedly against it. So yes, we've seen those contests. But broadly, when it comes to an open trading economy, to having a modernised economy, interest rates set independently, a floating currency, turning our face to the world, engaging in trade, understanding that we've always got to be working on productivity in our global competitiveness - these things have been shared economic space and we've seen in this Parliament that the Liberal Party, once a great advocate of economic reform, walking away.
UHLMANN: But contested, they've always been contested. The Labor Party has reserved it's right to contest some areas and the Coalition's reserving its right to contest its areas of interest.
PM: Look, I understand of course we're always going to have economic debates. But I didn't expect, in this Parliament, in the 21st century to have a shadow treasurer flirting with re-regulating interest rates.
UHLMANN: It was a flirt, though.
PM: This is what I mean by economic hansonism. It's the indicating of something that sounds simple and, you know, seductive, oh why couldn't the government just fix interest rates, and of course, those of us who have lived long enough and remember when interest rates where fixed. What is meant was young couples couldn't get a mortgage. It meant they went outside that sort of regulated interest rate system and used to get cocktail loans with extraordinarily high interest rates. So it's flirting with a return to the economy of thirty years ago. And everybody knows that to try and run our modern economy that way would spell economic doom.
UHLMANN: At the heart of it though is a concern about banks lifting interest rates out of cycle and we've seen two thumping profits from the ANZ and the NAB in the last two days. Do the banks not owe something to the government and the people that supported them during the global financial crisis?
PM: Certainly the banks owe it to the Australian people to offer them the best possible deals and I've got no tolerance for the banks increasing interest rates beyond official interest rate movements. The Treasurer's made that clear. I'm happy to make that clear and of course, the Reserve Bank has said that there is no excuse for it, in terms of the cost of money to them lending it to the banks. So, we're making that position clear -
UHLMANN: You can't stop them though, can you? There is nothing really that you can do beyond warning them at the moment?
PM: Well the best thing you can do is give people a choice. And so, in our banking sector we want to see competition, we want to see people able to move with their feet if they're getting a bad deal from their bank and we've made that easier. So if an individual bank moves with an interest rate increase then people can, go and shop around and get a better deal.
UHLMANN: The Treasurer pointed out yesterday that almost no one has used that facility.
PM: Well, let's be clear about the economic circumstances we were dealing with. It's in everyone's interests that we bring competition into the banking system and we did bring more competition in by making it easier to switch your mortgage.
Now, of course, then we had economic circumstances in which people saw the global financial crisis, felt very concerned. There was a flight to stability, people, many of them wanted to see their loans with big banks, they wanted to sit where they were, they wanted to assess what was going to happen next. As our economy has come strongly through the global financial crisis I anticipate that people will start saying 'Well, am I getting the best deal' and using that new competitive system.
UHLMANN: A couple of other quick things. Power prices, you've said that one of the reasons power prices are on the rise is because there has not been enough investment in power. But isn't it also because the governments are making new choices now. New, more expensive choices. Renewable energy is more expensive. Connecting solar power to the grid is more expensive. Having feed-in tariffs is more expensive. Isn't it time to tell the Australian people that we will face a much more expensive future when it comes to power prices?
PM: Well, I am trying to be honest with people and I've spoken as recently as this week, at the start of the week, at the Australian Industry Group dinner here in Canberra, about the problems we've got in electricity generation.
We've has a decade of under-investment, people are paying for that now through increased prices. I don't want to see the story of the next decade being another decade of under-investment and the industry is saying to us, look you know, to get the long term certainty we need to invest in electricity generation that costs literally billions and billions of dollars we need to know what's happening with carbon pricing, we need to know what it's going to be, how it's going to work.
So, you know, my challenge here, in the Parliament, to the Opposition, I think really to people broadly, is yes, this is a difficult debate and I'm not going to sit in this chair and pretend to Australians that we can tackle climate change, that we can price carbon and not one thing they do today will change.
Yes, our economy will change, the way we live will change but let's work through it. So I'm not, you know, accepting the invitation of the Opposition to once again sloganise about these things. I'm inviting people to work through the deeper debate.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, finally, are you determined to put a price on carbon in this term of government?
PM: I'm determined to work in good faith at the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee and to explore whether this new Parliament has given us an opportunity to deal with the complex issue of pricing carbon in a new environment. That's what we're doing.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you.



PM: I arrived in Vietnam yesterday and of course it's great to be here for the East Asia Summit.
Yesterday I met with the Prime Minister of New Zealand, we discussed a range of matters involving Australia's very close, long standing and deep friendship with New Zealand and of course I'm looking forward to visiting New Zealand next year. We did discuss the regional protection framework and regional processing centre and we also shared concerns over Fiji.
I also had the opportunity yesterday to meet with the United Nations Secretary-General. We talked through a broad range of issues, obviously Australia is a long standing, indeed founding supporter of the United Nations. We worked through a set of issues involving our participation in the United Nations including
I've got someone's phone, who wants that? I could have answered that for you!
So, Australia's participation in the United Nations, including our bid for the Security Council, we also addressed issues of climate change and I raised with the United Nations Secretary-General the Australian proposal for a regional protection framework and regional processing centre.
I also, yesterday, had the opportunity to meet with the Prime Minister of Singapore. I had hoped to see him at the Asia Europe Meeting, but as people would be aware that as a result of the death of his mother he returned home.
It was a good opportunity to talk about the strength of the relationship between Australia and Singapore. It's a deep economic relationship, we talked about further co-operation on education, particularly vocational education and training. We also talked about the contribution that Singapore is making in Oruzgan province in Afghanistan, working alongside Australian soldiers.
This morning I had the opportunity to meet with Premier Wen of the People's Republic of China, I've had that meeting this morning. I was very pleased to receive an invitation from him for me to visit China in the course of next year and I very much look forward to that visit.We talked across the full range of our relationship, which of course is a very strong economic relationship, but deeper than that we talked about our political relationship and our defence relationship. We talked about matters at the East Asia Summit today, including proposals for Finance Minister's meetings and for Education Minister's meetings.
We talked about outlooks for the G20, including nothing that progress has been made on IMF reform, something Australia very very strongly supported. We also talked about co-operation on education and the importance of people to people links, the importance of students from both counties having the opportunity to study in and learn about the other nation.
I will move from here to the actual opening of the East Asia Summit. I had the opportunity to attend the dinner last night and that was a fantastic occasion, hosted here of course by Vietnam.
This is a meeting, the East Asia Summit, that brings together political leaders who represent around 50 percent of the world's population and more than a third of the world's GDP. It is an important meeting to recognise the strategic importance of our region. It's an important meeting to recognise the dynamic growth of our region.
This meeting will welcome the moves to include the US and Russia and as I believe people are aware Secretary of State Clinton is here and did participate in the dinner last night. Their inclusion, the US and Russia, is something that Australia has very much pushed for and we are glad to see that their formal participation in the East Asia Summit will be formalised today.
At the Summit I will make a contribution on economic integration, on trade and economic matters. I will be making a contribution on having a second Finance Minister's meeting, which I think is important to ensuring we pursue the economic integration agenda. I will be indicating Australia's strong support for in Education Minister's meeting.
I will be raising the issue of people smuggling. I will be raising co-operation on disaster recovery and I will, of course, be raising our concerns about the upcoming elections in Burma, where of course Australia is committed to pressing for free elections, for transparency, for the release of political prisoners including Aung San Su Kyi and for reconciliation within Burma.
Later today I will be chairing the Australia ASEAN Summit. This is the first Summit since 1977. That's a long time and that obviously gives me the opportunity to talk directly to ASEAN about Australia's relationships in the region and I will be talking particularly about the development agenda.
Later today I will have the opportunity to have a discussion with the Prime Minister of India, with the Prime Minister of Laos and with the President of the Republic of the Philippines. So I'm looking forward to those engagements later today. I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: What response did you get from Ban Ki-moon when you talked about your ideas for a regional processing centre?
PM: I said Australia is pursuing a regional protection framework and a regional processing centre. That was noted by the United Nations Secretary-General and I will continue, as I have bilateral meetings, be raising questions of people smuggling and people movement in our region. The reason, of course, Australia is so committed to a regional protection framework and a regional processing centre is these issues are of shared concern across our region.
JOURNALIST: What did he say, what did Ban Ki-moon say?
PM: He obviously noted that Australia has this concept of a regional protection framework and regional processing centre.
JOURNALIST: Did he think it was a good idea though, like what was his reaction?
PM: Look, he noted it. That's as far as I can take it. This is something, of course, that Australia will pursue in direct discussion with the United Nations High Commissioner of Refugees, so that's the specific UN body that the very in detail discussions will be held with and of course as well as me raising these issues here in Vietnam during my bilateral discussions and at the Summit itself, our officials and the Minister for Immigration are pursuing the discussions about the protection framework and processing centre almost on a daily basis.
JOURNALIST: And what was the New Zealand Prime Minister's response to the idea?
PM: The New Zealand Prime Minister confirmed to me the response that he had given me by telephone, which is that New Zealand is interested in seeing the regional protection framework and regional processing centre further pursued. So New Zealand wants to be a participant in that dialogue, wants to be working alongside Australia as that dialogue continues.
JOURNALIST: But not on their territory?
PM: Well the dialogue of course is with East Timor.
JOURNALIST: Did Premier Wen raise any concerns about the United States joining the East Asia Summit?
PM: No, he did not.
JOURNALIST: Did he talk about the counterbalancing role that the United States might play?
PM: We talked about the East Asia Summit, about issues that will be before the Summit today, about its capacity to talk broadly across the strategic, defence and economic agenda.
JOURNALIST: What's your response to the terrorism concerns that have been raised overnight and involving Yemen?
PM: Look I'm aware of President Obama's statement on this matter and our transport security officials have moved so that there will be a comprehensive 100 percent screening of cargo coming from Abu Dhabi, Dubai and Doha. There are no direct flights from Yemen to Australia, so any cargo that originated in Yemen would come through one of those three locations and there will be 100 percent screening as a response.
JOURNALIST: What do you think, like the world has to do in the area of cargo because we've put in all these security on passenger flights and travel, what do you see as the future sparked by this incident and where it will go from here?
PM: Look, I'm still digesting, obviously, the full implications of this matter and of President Obama's statement and our transport security officials will be working on it and they've put in place these immediate steps.
But when we as a nation look at transport security, whilst the public focus is on aviation security for all of the obvious reasons and as individual people's contact with the system when they board flights, we do have a range of security measures for cargo and for people and goods that move by sea. I will take any further advice arising from this incident, but I don't have that advice as yet, as you would expect.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, since you've been Prime Minister, what have you observed with China, it's had a lot of fights with a lot of countries in the region. Do you think its rise is a force for peace or why does it keep getting into all these scraps?
PM: Well, China is obviously hugely important to Australia and hugely important as a rising power in our world. It's now our largest trading partner. We obviously want to see China involved in the international system, in a rules based framework.
We believe it's very important therefore that there are opportunities like this Summit, which will bring, after the formalisation of the participation of the United States and Russia today, will bring around the one table China, the United States, the countries of our region. We think that that's a good development and one Australia pushed hard for and that kind of engagement, we believe, is important for our future, for the future of China and its role in our world.
JOURNALIST: But why do we need that? Are you concerned what the rise of China means for Australia?
PM: The reason Australia and particularly former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, so much pushed for this development, is prior to this there was no regional forum that brought together the US, China, the countries of our region, working comprehensively across the economic, strategic, political and defence relationships.
We had other meetings that dealt with parts of that, or that were differently configured. Now with the East Asia Summit, with its new membership being confirmed today, we will have around a table the US, China, working comprehensively across the full range of issues, with the countries of our region. We think that's a very important development.
JOURNALIST: What is Australia's position on the two or three big issues in the background of this meeting, the South China sea, the currency and perhaps the Senkaku Islands as well?
PM: Well, on territorial disputes and questions, our perspective is that these matters need to be resolved through dialogue and diplomacy and that's been our publicly announced position and will continue to be our position. On the outlook for the G20, questions of currency, I did talk today to Premier Wen about outlooks for the G20 and for the role it will play in dialogue about strong, sustainable, balanced growth around the world.
JOURNALIST: What sense did you get from Premier Wen about, you talk about a rules based approach, about whether China feels the need to come within that, did you get any sense of whether they're going to come to that?
PM: Well, this is the first time I've had an opportunity to sit face to face, we've enjoyed some discussions on the telephone. These question about China's role in the world are ones that Australia, at government level, at academic level, at, you know, generally amongst Australian people I think, talk about, we recognise the complexity of it, so today was a good opportunity for me to have a first discussion face to face.
JOURNALIST: These meeting are all well and good, if they don't achieve a softening of the relationship.
PM: It's only though engagement and exchange of views that you can shape perspectives for the future and that's what I was doing today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on your earlier overseas trip, made some comments about what brought you to politics and your interest in foreign affairs. I think the Opposition verballed you on what you said about that, but I just wonder, you're getting, as a new national leader you're being exposed more and more to this kind of global politics. What, are you warming to it, what are your thoughts about that?
PM: Well, I think my remarks were greatly over interpreted. Obviously what brought me into active politics was a passion and enthusiasm for making sure every kid got a great education and that continues to be a great driver of what I want to see our nation achieve.
As Prime Minister I participate in meetings and discussions and summits like this one, to pursue Australia's national interest. In a globalised world, our future, whether it's defence, whether it's economic, whether it's our political ties and relationships, matter. They are worked through forums like this one that I will attend today. So, I'm very happy to be here, very much enjoying it and enjoying the discussions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said you've been invited to go to China, do you roughly know when that may be and have you ever been to China before?
PM: I have been to China before, Phil I'm not able to advise you of your forward travel schedule, but we'll work to find a mutually convenient time, obviously we've got to determine the Parliamentary sitting dates and a range of things before we could work that through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on a security matter, what can you tell us about the new US defence base that's to be built in WA and why is it necessary for Australia to co-operate with the United States on this front?
PM: Well, Australia's got a long standing co-operation with the United States on questions of space. Part of our long standing co-operation on defence matters and the strengths, you know, our very very important friendship with the United States. I've seen those reports. I've seen the colourful terminology used in the newspaper and I reject the characterisation that's in the newspaper.
Next weekend, of course, Australia will host AUSMIN talks which bring together Secretary of State Clinton, obviously the Defence Secretary, with our Foreign Minister, with our Defence Minister. I'll also be attending sections of that, so we'll have the opportunity to keep talking about these questions with the United States.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask you bit about India?
PM: Really quickly, then we're going to have to go. It's not good form to be late.
JOURNALIST: What is Australia's role in balancing India, China and the US in the region?
PM: I'm not sure that's going to be a short enough answer to get me to the East Asia Summit on time. But, certainly part of the role is making sure that we've got forums like this one, a summit like this one, which enables us, with those big regional players, to be round a table for a comprehensive discussion. Thank you.  



DAVIS: Julia Gillard thanks for your time. What has this summit achieved?
PM: I think this summit has achieved a series of things. First and foremost, of course, it has formally agreed that from next year the US and Russia will join the East Asia Summit, that means we have now achieved an important goal, where there will be a forum each year that talks about strategic and political matters, economic matters and defence matters, which involves the US, China and the countries of our region, so that's an important development.
This summit has also had a series of discussions about economic matters, we continue to be in a fragile global economy and of course views from this summit about trade liberalisation, about finance reform, about IMF reform will feed into the G20, which is not that long away.
It's also been an opportunity for us as a nation to come, participate in the summit, talk to leaders in our region and to make some important announcements. I made some announcements about increasing funds for disaster management, we're a disaster prone region unfortunately and also increasing funding to support work about pandemics and infectious diseases, as well as announcing 7,500 scholarships that will bring students from countries in the region from ASEAN countries, East Asian Summit countries, to Australia to study.
DAVIS: How do you see Australia's role in Asia? Paul Keating said that we were part of Asia, is there a Gillard doctrine on Asia?
PM: I'm not sure I'm going to quite pontificate about a doctrine, but obviously being part of this region, making our way in this region, participating in regional discussions, is one of the key pillars of our foreign policy approach. And so to have the opportunity to come here and see this summit develop into one that brings the US, as a standing feature of the summit from next year on, is an important development.
DAVIS: Are you worried by the rise of China? I guess if you're not worried, then why does the US need to be part of the summit?
PM: I think when we're looking at our relationship with China, we should remember of course that China is a participant in the meetings that the world has, it's a participant in the G20, it's a participant in the UN, it's a participant in all sorts of regional discussions, including the East Asia Summit.
We have a good relationship with China, they're now our biggest trading partner. So we work productively with them. We've got our long standing and pivotal alliance with the United States, but we think it's important that there is a forum, a piece of architecture, that brings the two together with the countries of our region: Korea, Japan, Indonesia and the list goes on.
DAVIS: It's been compared to trying to ride two horses travelling in opposite directions, trying to be friends with the US and trying to be friends with China at the same time. Do you think there ever will come a time though that we'll have to pick sides?
PM: Look, I think that dichotomy is over put, the US is striving to have good relationships with China, China is striving to have good relationships with the US and the world. There are a series of issues on which we will work very collaboratively together, I point particularly to the work of the G20, in the global financial crisis response, where what China was doing with economic stimulus was supporting what the US was doing with economic stimulus, was supporting what we were doing with economic stimulus, as everyone tried to get the global economy to recover. So there's far more work and collaboration, than I think those kind of phrases suggest.
DAVIS: And are you taking credit, or some credit for the United States joining the summit?
PM: This was worked on hard, particularly by former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, who had a vision of having a piece of regional architecture that would bring these big players together. So it's certainly something that the government's worked on very hard.
DAVIS: You're going to be travelling to Indonesia and Malaysia over the next few days, do you think you're going to receive any support from both those countries on your proposal for a regional processing centre for asylum seekers?
PM: I, of course, will be talking to Indonesia and to Malaysia about this question. Interestingly at the summit here today a theme of discussion was about transnational crime and what that means for us in a globalised world. Of course people smuggling, human trafficking, these are manifestations of transnational crime and that was one of the things raised by a number of countries, the impact of transnational crime.
So, I will, when I go to Indonesia and to Malaysia be directly raising the regional protection framework and regional processing centre and the discussions will continue at officials level and with the Minister for Immigration, who's already been travelling the region talking about people smuggling and people movement.
DAVIS: But has there been any support within this summit for your proposal?
PM: There is certainly more countries than just Australia raising transnational crime, human trafficking, people movement, concerns about people smuggling, so when we look at these issues they require regional solutions because by definition they impact more than one country.
DAVIS: Prime Minister thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today met President Nguyen Minh Triet, Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung, and General Secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam, Nong Duc Manh in her first bilateral visit to Vietnam.
The meeting followed on from the successful fifth East Asia Summit which concluded in Hanoi yesterday.
Vietnam is becoming one of Australia's most important and valued partners in the Asia Pacific region. Our trade relations are significant and growing, our defence and security links are improving and our educational partnership continues to strengthen.
Following the meetings the Prime Minister witnessed the signing of an Australia-Vietnam Plan of Action to strengthen the political, defence, security and trade elements of the relationship.
At the bilateral meeting, the Prime Minister announced an aid contribution of $160 million towards the design and construction of a new bridge across a major tributary of the Mekong River at Cao Lanh.
The bridge will form a vital part of a major new road transport network that will link people and markets across the Delta to the rest of South East Asia and beyond.
The project will be Australia's single largest aid activity in mainland Southeast Asia and is expected to benefit 170,000 road users daily.
The Prime Minister also highlighted the potential for increased cooperation in the mining and energy sectors, stressing Australia's credentials in these areas, and congratulated the Vietnamese leaders for their commitment to continue economic reforms.
Following the meeting the Prime Minister officially opened the new Hanoi campus of Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT), the first foreign-owned university to open in Vietnam.
The Prime Minister also announced 30 new scholarships for Vietnamese to study a Masters of Engineering at the Hanoi campus and awarded the Prime Minister's Australia Asia Awards to three Vietnamese scholars.
The Prime Minister thanked Vietnamese leaders for their successful hosting of the East Asia Summit and the bilateral ASEAN-Australia Summit.
She commended their ambitious and active leadership during Vietnam's year as ASEAN chair and welcomed outcomes including the expansion of the EAS with the inclusion of the United States and Russia, plus a strengthening of the EAS agenda and the inaugural ASEAN Defence Ministers' Meeting. 



PM: I wanted to take the opportunity to update people on the outcomes of yesterday's discussions and work and also to outline what I will be doing in Vietnam today.
First can I say the East Asia Summit concluded successfully yesterday.
I was very pleased to see that the Summit formally agreed to US and Russia becoming members of the East Asia Summit and participating fully from next year.
There was an important focus at the Summit on economic integration and connectivity, including through a region wide, comprehensive, economic partnership and through further discussions between Finance Ministers. There was also an agreement in the role regional organisations play in promoting regional stability through dialogue and co-operation.
I do note that members stress the importance of stability on the Korean Peninsula and this is referred to on one paragraph of the Chairman's statement and I mentioned the matter in my intervention. I'm pleased to see that in the Chairman's statement.
In addition there was a discussion, mention of the forthcoming elections in Burma. This matter is also dealt with in the Chairman's statement, stressing the importance of free and transparent elections in Burma.
There was an agreement to convene an Education Minister's meeting. Of course very important links are built through people to people links. There is no better way of doing that than through shared education co-operation.
There was also a recognition that globalisation brings a range of transnational challenges. I raised Australia's determination to tackle people smuggling through a regional framework and the question of people smuggling and the need for co-operation through the Bali Process is referred to in the Chair's statement and I'm pleased to see that.
At the EAS, the East Asia Summit I took the opportunity to make a range of announcements about how Australia would continue to work with our partners in East Asia. We committed to an expenditure of $32 million to combat infectious diseases and pandemics, a $10 million commitment for disaster response initiatives, the creation of 7,500 Australia ward scholarships for students from EAS countries to study in Australia over the next four years.
We are also pleased to support a Chair of Ecology and Environment Studies at Nalanda University in India, and Nalada University was frequently mentioned by leaders in the course of discussions at the East Asia Summit.
I also had the opportunity yesterday to chair and be involved in the ASEAN Australian Summit. This is the first time such a summit has been conducted since 1977, so it's been a long time in between. It was a good opportunity to meet with the leaders of the ten ASEAN countries. It was a good opportunity to highlight the importance of the Australia-New Zealand ASEAN Free Trade Agreement. It was a good place to be able to touch on the importance of regional discussions and finance, climate change, development assistance, education and disaster management and to also touch on the need for better co-operation and further co-operation on transnational crime issues, including people smuggling. I was able during the summit, the ASEAN Australian Summit, to announce that we would provide $132 million for infrastructure in the greater Mekong subregion and $10 million to support the International Labour Organisation to reduce the exploitation of labour migrants. We also indicated at that Summit that we would provide training support for the new ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights, that training support will be provided through our own Human Rights Commission.
I had the opportunity yesterday to also meet with the Prime Minister of India, very much welcomed the opportunity for discussions with Dr Singh. I had met him once before when I travelled to India as Deputy Prime Minister. Our discussions included economic co-operation and trade, international students and he acknowledged and appreciated the efforts the government had taken to address the issues of student safety. We also discussed Afghanistan and India's interest in making sure the mission was successful.
I had the opportunity too to meet briefly with the Leaders of the Philippines and with the Leader of Laos. I had the opportunity to have a brief discussion with Secretary of State Clinton, who is looking forward to her visit to Australia next weekend to participate in the AUSMIN talks, which comprehend our security arrangements and of course will focus on matters like Afghanistan.
Today I will be meeting with the President, Prime Minister and General Secretary of Vietnam. Vietnam is one of Australia's most important and valuable partners in the Asia Pacific, so I'm looking forward to those meetings with the Vietnamese leadership today.
Our trade relations are significant and they're growing, our defence and security links are improving and our educational partnership continues to strengthen. At the meeting today I will be in a position to advise them of a significant new Australian contribution to infrastructure in Vietnam.
I'm also look forward today, to formally opening the new Hanoi campus of the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, which is the first foreign owned university in Vietnam, so it's a very special opportunity to be able to do that. I will, when I attend that opening, be making some announcements about further support for Vietnamese students to study in Australia and to study at the Hanoi campus itself.
I will take the opportunity today to also visit the Temple of Literature, here in very historic Hanoi. Hanoi is celebrating its 1000th year anniversary, a very old city, I'll be going to Vietnamese students routinely visit to touch the stone statues for good luck before exams, you always need luck when you're doing exams, so I might as well try that as well.
So I'm looking forward to those events today and I am happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you feel like you won any support for your asylum seeker plan?
PM: Well I would refer you to the paragraph which deals with the matter in the Chairman's statement, which says and I quote: "We", this is obviously speaking on behalf of the whole summit, "reaffirmed our commitment to combat people smuggling and trafficking in persons." "We", that is the Summit, "stress the importance of continued bilateral and regional co-operation efforts including through the Bali Process on people smuggling, trafficking in persons and related transnational crime, to address the impact of these and other transnational crimes". So that statement is in the Chairman's words, I think that statement is a continued recognition that people smuggling, like other transnational crime is a regional problem, it's a problem beyond the borders of one country, and therefore addressing the problem requires regional efforts.
JOURNALIST: But it's not specific support for your proposal though, is it?
PM: Look, I came to this summit obviously to indicate, well I came for a wide variety of reasons, to formally agree to the participation of the US and Russia, to talk about the economic liberalisation and trade agenda, the work of Finance Ministers, to push for Education Ministers to meet, I think that's so important, to strengthening relationships.
So obviously I came for a variety of purposes, including putting forward in my bilateral discussions and mentioning in my intervention Australia's regional protection framework and regional processing centre. To put that these issues, which are transnational, do need a regional approach and in the Chairman's words, of course there is agreement that these transnational issues do need regional efforts and a regional approach.
JOURNALIST: Did any of the countries that are member of the Bali Process raise this with you at the summit?
PM: I raised it in my intervention and there were, in other interventions, references to transnational crime, to human trafficking, so these matters were raised and reflected in the words that you see in the statement.
JOURNALIST: Would it be fair to characterise the response to your proposals, as you said about the UN Secretary-General, basically it's been noted, people accept that it will be taken forward through the Bali Process?
PM: I think that's a good question and I think we've got to be clear about levels and engagement here. I'm here, the East Asia Summit, obviously a leaders meeting, talking across a wide variety of issues, as you would expect and those discussions from my intervention included the question of people smuggling and Australia's approach.
In terms of the in-detail discussions, they will happen Bail Process, through the work of the Minister for Immigration, who is already travelling the region. Once again with the UN Secretary-General, I raised it with him for information, obviously the in-detail work is done by the specialist agency within the UN, which is the UN High Commission for Refugees.
JOURNALIST: To what extent will that dominate your meetings in Malaysia and Indonesia?
PM: It will be a matter that I raise amongst a series of other matters. I am obviously having leader to leader discussions with important countries in our region, canvassing all aspects of the relationship: economic, political and strategic, defence and in the course of those broad discussions transnational crime questions include people smuggling.
JOURNALIST: Sorry Prime Minister, would it be fair to say, would it, that you feel you've progressed the issue in your debate?
PM: I'm pleased that there is a specific paragraph on this question in the Chairman's statement. I think that's an indication through the work of officials that have led to the words in the statement, as well as the discussions that occurred directly at the summit, that this is an issue that the region acknowledges needs further work. We have the Bali Process and we will have direct dialogue with countries in our region. As people are aware Minister Bowen has already started that direct dialogue.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your response to reports about the personal behaviour of one of your Cabinet Ministers. Have any Labor MPs raised their concerns with you or your office?
PM: Look, I'm not going to comment on idle gossip.
JOURNALIST: Hillary Clinton yesterday had strong comments to Vietnam about its human rights record and her concerns. Will you be raising human rights concerns in Australia's (inaudible)?
PM: I will be having some comprehensive discussions today with the leaders of Vietnam, I would prefer to comment on what's said after the discussions, rather than before, but we will obviously be talking across the full range of the relationship, which is growing in economic terms, growing in education terms.
There are very strong people to people links, a very big Vietnamese community in Australia and obviously I'll have a specific announcement to make about a further major assistance in an infrastructure project.
JOURNALIST: Do you share Dr Singh's view about the situation in Vietnam?
PM: I'll have the discussions and then we'll talk about matters raised in the discussions, but I anticipate we'll have a comprehensive engagement across all things in the relationship.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask about the division of labour in setting foreign policy in your government? You have a very experienced Foreign Minister and you yourself have said you are new to the field. He's talked a lot about China, very firm policy on China and it's very similar to what it was. Is that basically his arena, for the moment, while you find your feet?
PM: Foreign policy is set by Cabinet, where it's my intention as Prime Minister and my practise that we run a very traditional model of cabinet government, so foreign policy questions, just like education policy question and finance policy question, health policy questions, come to Cabinet through proper processes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just following up on Louise's question, will Australia be accused of being not very brave on the issue of human rights? I mean at a summit like this you have the opportunity to meet with leaders of countries that are notorious for human rights abuses, you met with the Chinese Premier. It seemingly didn't come up in that meeting, why can't we be stronger on a subject that really is the elephant in the room?
PM: I think that's an ahistoric analysis. If you look at Australia's engagement in the region, we obviously have been an advocate of human rights and we continue to be an advocate of human rights. Our position on a series of questions is well known, argued over time.
The fact that one of the pressing matters that I raised at this summit is the forthcoming elections in Burma. It's quintessentially a human rights matter, it's about people having the opportunity to vote in free and fair elections, about the release of political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, so these matters are in our dialogue constantly in the region. I think it would be not a correct characterisation of Australia's approach to take one discussion and say somehow that comprehends everything we do on these questions.
JOURNALIST: Is it economically imperative though, I mean in Vietnam in the last few days dissidents have been put in jail for making political comments that aren't liked by the administration, yet you and other leaders come here and talk about economics and strategic partnerships when people are being put in jail for simply speaking their minds and that's something we don't accept in our culture.
PM: Leaders have come here for discussions across a broad range of topics, including obviously commenting on two questions in our region that are very pressing: stability on the Korean Peninsula and the forthcoming elections in Burma.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just back the boat people issue, I understand what you've done here to get that, but as you know back in Australia boats still arrive from time to time, your opponents say you're doing nothing to stop the boats. So can I just ask why you approach the issue at the level you are here, what is your government actually doing in source countries about trying to stop boats?
PM: Well the government works in strong partnership with our regional neighbours to crack down on people smuggling and we've enjoyed some success at that, disrupting people smuggling activities, preventing people getting on boats, which is obviously both feeding into transnational crime, people smuggling, but from the point of view of the individuals involved, are dreadfully fraught and dangerous thing to do.
I refer anybody to the increased investments and efforts we've made, working particularly with the Indonesian authorities, maritime authorities, Indonesian authorities, to address problems of people smuggling. We've worked comprehensively across the region in strengthening, policing and enforcement matters on people smuggling, so that happens, continuously and has been stepped up in terms of the level of resources by the government since 2007, so the amount of money and effort invested in that has very dramatically increased. So that is about addressing people smuggling before people get on boats.
Then of course in Australia we have charged a large number with people smuggling activities, we have increased the strength of our domestic laws, which deal with people smuggling, that happened as recently as May this year. So across the range of areas, working with our neighbours, resourcing law enforcement activities in the countries of our region, our own border protection, which has never been higher than it is now, as well as increasing penalties in our own domestic laws, we've worked across all of those fronts.
JOURNALIST: Is your advice that that's working, because people see boats arriving and then they hear Tony Abbott saying they won't stop the boats and you're acting as you said on multi-levels, but is your advice that the levels you just went through are meaning we are seeing less boats than we otherwise might have?
PM: Certainly there have been activities that have been disrupted, which would have caused boats to come to Australia, there have been effective disruption activities.
In relation to Mr Abbott's slogans, well anyone can wander round mechanically saying three words, that doesn't tell you anything about the policies that would make a difference. I'm being very frank with the Australian people and I have been all along as Prime Minister. This is a complex problem, that will take a range of policies and work over time and we are engaged in that work.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you referred to the story in today's newspapers as idle gossip. But isn't it destabilising that people within your government are backgrounding against some others and trying to undermine each other, isn't that destabilising to the government.
PM: Idle gossip is just that, idle gossip.
JOURNALIST: You had some discussions on Friday night with the Singaporean Prime Minister about the appropriateness of a foreign government running the ASX, what was the discussion about?
PM: The discussions I had with the Singaporean Prime Minister were that there is a proper process and a Foreign Investment Review Board process and that will work its way through. I did not, in that meeting, and won't in any other circumstance, make comments other than about the process. That process needs to happen through the Foreign Investment Review Board and it's not proper for me as Prime Minister to comment on it whilst it's working its way through that process
JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied that all your Ministers are behaving to a proper standard?
PM: Idle gossip. Idle gossip.
JOURNALIST: Do you have a Melbourne Cup pick? Everybody's waiting for it.
PM: I'm working on it, I'm studying the form and I'll let you know.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard yesterday joined the leaders of ASEAN, China, Republic of Korea, Japan, India and New Zealand for the fifth East Asia Summit (EAS) in Hanoi, Vietnam.
East Asia is vital to Australia's political, economic and strategic interests. The members of the summit represent half the world's population and over a third of its GDP.
The Prime Minister said the summit was an important forum to discuss political and economic issues of common concern with the aim of promoting stability and economic prosperity in the region.
Leaders discussed a range of transnational threats and reaffirmed their commitment to combating people smuggling, including through the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking and Related Transnational Crime.
The EAS leaders formally agreed to expand the EAS group to include the United States and Russia and welcomed the participation by the US Secretary of State Clinton and Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov as guests at the forum this year.
The inclusion of the United States and Russia in the EAS is a major development in regional architecture and something Australia has worked hard to achieve to help bolster the region's influence.
The leaders supported ongoing work to reform international financial institutions including the recent move by the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors to reform the IMF to give greater weight to emerging and developing economies.
The Prime Minister said the leaders were in agreement of the need for national reconciliation in Burma and the importance of free and fair elections.
The situation in Burma is an important focus for Australia, including the need to release all political prisoners ahead of the elections.
The Prime Minister announced a number of new initiatives funded from the official development assistance budget, as part of Australia's contribution to the summit's objective to improve regional development and integration. These included:
 * 	$32 million to combat emerging infectious diseases and pandemics in the Asia Pacific.
 * 	$10 million for disaster response initiatives.
 * 	7,500 Australia Award scholarships for students from EAS countries to study in Australia over the next four years.
 * 	The creation of an Australian Chair of Ecology and Environment Studies at the Nalanda University, which is currently being built in India as a regional centre of learning. The Australian Chair will undertake regional research into environmental issues particularly in the areas of climate change and natural resource management.
Following the East Asia Summit, the Prime Minister co-chaired a special Australia-ASEAN Summit meeting with the leaders of the 10 ASEAN countries.
At this meeting the Prime Minister highlighted the importance of the Australia New Zealand ASEAN Free Trade Agreement and the continued need for regional discussions in the areas of finance, climate change, development assistance, education and disaster management.
The Prime Minister announced several new initiatives to help promote human rights and development in the region including:
 * 	$132 million towards improved infrastructure in the Greater Mekong Subregion
 * 	$10 million to support the International Labour Organisation to reduce the exploitation of labour migrants.
 * 	Training support for the new ASEAN Inter-Governmental Commission on Human Rights.
While at the summit the Prime Minister also took the opportunity to hold a number of bilateral meetings with other regional leaders including the Prime Minister of New Zealand John Key, the Secretary-General of the United Nations Ban Ki-moon, the Prime Minister of Singapore Lee Hsien Loong, the Premier of the State Council of the People's Republic of China Wen Jiabao, the Prime Minister of India Dr Manmohan Singh, the Prime Minister of Lao People's Democratic Republic Mr Bouasone Bouphavanh and the President of the Republic of the Philippines Benigno Simeon C Aquino III.
The Prime Minister also had an opportunity to meet US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton ahead of Secretary Clinton's visit to Melbourne on November 7-8, 2010 for AUSMIN.
The Chairman's Statement of the East Asia Summit can be found at http://asean2010.vn/asean_en/news/36/2DAA01/Chairmans-Statement-of-the-…



MIDDLETON: Prime Minister, thanks very much for joining us.
PM: Thank you for the opportunity.
MIDDLETON: Now you had a brief one on one meeting with Hillary Clinton while you were here, what did you tell her?
PM: Well the main impression that I had from my short discussion with Hillary is that she's very much looking forward to coming to Melbourne. We have AUSMIN, our regular discussion on defence matters between the United States and Australia, happening next weekend in Melbourne and she seems very enthusiastic to get to Melbourne and spend a little bit of time.
MIDDLETON: Just how important is it to have the United States onboard as one of the members of the East Asia Summit, along with China, India, Korea, Japan? What does it say about the development of the institution?
PM: It certainly is important and it's something that Australia very much supported and indeed fought for. We wanted there to be a place where the US, China, the major countries of our region, would sit around a table and talk about strategic questions, defence questions and economic questions.
So this East Asia Summit has authorised the US and Russia joining as parts of the East Asia Summit from next year on and that does equip that vision of having a table that brings together these major players in our region, with the rest of the region.
MIDDLETON: Well, let's take one key issue which is in the news at the moment, which is China is increasingly, increasing stridency about its claims, territorial claims in the South China Sea. Speaking of Hillary Clinton she made some pretty solid remarks to the Summit, saying that the United States has a national interest in the freedom of navigation and unimpeded lawful commerce, speaking of this dispute. Did you say anything similar to Wen Jiabao when you met him in your bilateral meeting?
PM: The Australian view of this issue is well known, so I didn't need to particularly go to it today, it is well known that we believe that these issues should be resolved peacefully and through dialogue. Of course there are ways of resolving such disputes, bringing the parties together and that's what we want to see.
MIDDLETON: How concerned then too is Australia about the bitter row now going on between China and Japan over the East China Sea. This is very serious, when you consider the importance of secure trade routes to an exporting nation like Australia and indeed to the prosperity of the whole region.
PM: Our view is the same, of course we've seen these matters and seen them with concern and our view is that these disputes need to be resolved amicably, peacefully, through dialogue.
MIDDLETON: Economic integration is one of the issues which is right within the remit of this organisation. The proposed merger of the Australian and Singaporean stock exchanges, did you discuss that at all in your meeting with the Singaporean Prime Minister?
PM: It was raised by the Singaporean Prime Minister and we both very much agreed that, whilst there is going to be media interest in these matters and community interest in these matters and we both understood that. We also both understood that there is a clear process to be gone through here, a clear process from the Australian point of view, with our Foreign Investment Review Board and that that process would be gone through.
MIDDLETON: Did you get advance warning from either of the participants about what they were planning? I'd have thought you needed this issue like a hole in the head, quite frankly, especially given your view that economic hansonism is on the rise in Australia. Doesn't something like this just give ammunition to those who would reregulate the economy, take it back down the time tunnel, as Paul Keating might have said?
PM: Well, I certainly hope that no one would seek to criticise or disturb what have been long standing and bipartisan arrangements to assessing foreign investment and assessing it through the prism of our national interest. It's what the foreign investment review board does, ask the question is this in Australia's national interest.
MIDDLETON: But you've really got no hope, have you, of getting it through the Parliament as it currently stands: The Greens have already indicated they're opposed to it and some of the Independents too and they've got the balance of power, you can't get the ownership (inaudible.
PM: It would be improper of me to speculate about what the foreign investment review board may or may not decide, so we'll have the process go through.
MIDDLETON: You spoke about Burma to the East Asia Summit, did you say about the question of human rights and did you back Hillary Clinton's very public reiteration of support for a UN Commission of Inquiry into human rights abuses?
PM: My contribution was about the forthcoming elections, which literally are only days away and I said about those elections that they needed to be fair and transparent. That Burma needed to release all political prisoners, obviously including Aung San Suu Kyi and that there needed to be reconciliation within Burma, so that was the perspective I put about the forthcoming elections.
They should be ones in which political parties can participate freely, otherwise they are not going to meet the test of being free and fair elections and we're obviously concerned that, you know, international media is being excluded and the like.
We will continue to provide aid to the Burmese people, but we will continue to be very clear about the need for proper processes, proper elections, political prisoners being released and political reconciliation in Burma.
MIDDLETON: Did you raise this question of a UN Commission of Inquiry with either Wen Jiabao, because the Chinese are doing their best to stifle it, or indeed with India's Manmohan Singh, whose government has indicated it's got reservations about the idea too?
PM: No I didn't raise that question. My contribution on Burma was made in the room at the Summit and focussed on the elections which will be very shortly upon us.
MIDDLETON: Prime Minister, thank you very much.
PM: Thank you.



PM: I wanted to briefly go through what I consider to be the key outcomes of the meeting that I've just had with the Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia. Obviously, the Prime Minister of Malaysia is unwell, and our best wishes go to him for a speedy recovery. Can I say I think the key outcomes of this meeting are as follows.
We discussed the free trade agreement, and we have agreed to continue the dialogue on that with a view to bringing the free trade agreement to conclusion next year. So I am very pleased to see that agreement arising from today's meeting. Malaysia is a substantial trading partner for Australia. Freer trade between the two countries is in everybody's economic interest, and I was pleased to see discussion leading to that conclusion today.
Second, I am pleased to see that we have agreed to a memorandum of understanding with Malaysia focussed on vocational education and training, and furthering our cooperation in higher education. We have been working with the Malaysian Government, providing technical expertise about our vocational education and training structures, which of course we're very proud of. The Malaysian Government would like to take that dialogue further, and we've agreed to do that today.
Third, I was very pleased with our discussion about Afghanistan. Malaysia is playing a special role there. They are particularly playing a special role on the aid and development agenda. Malaysia is uniquely positioned to do things like provide female Islamic doctors to Afghanistan. I congratulated the Deputy Prime Minister on that work by Malaysia. We have been partnering in a master teacher program that is training people from Afghanistan to be master teachers who can go back and train more teachers.
The number of kids in school in Afghanistan is growing. The number of girls in school is growing. That's a good thing for the future of the country, but as that growth happens teachers are required and we have agreed we will continue to collaborate on that training, which has already seen 60 master teachers trained, including a number of women.
Fourthly, I was pleased to see from today's discussion our talks on security matters. The Malaysian Government has created a new transnational crime centre and I offered Australia's cooperation on that. Obviously, creating such a centre is a recognition that many crimes now have a transnational flavour, and they require a transnational effort, so I offered Australia's cooperation on that.
As one key transnational crime, we discussed the issue of people smuggling and human trafficking. The Deputy Prime Minister raised this issue with me, and I was very pleased that he raised it. Of course, he raised it against the backdrop of Minister Bowen, the Immigration Minister, having come here to provide some preliminary advice and engage in preliminary discussions about Australia's proposals.
The Deputy Prime Minister and I agreed that this is a complex problem. Indeed, I made that point when I first outlined Australia's policies and plans at the Lowy Institute. We also agreed that regional approaches are necessary to what is a regional problem, that no one country through its domestic laws can address this problem, and individual countries acting may displace the problem to another country but not solve it, so it requires regional cooperation to be solved, and the Deputy Prime Minister and I agreed on that.
We agreed, following our discussion, to share information and continue to work through on our proposal for a regional protection framework and a regional processing centre. I welcome that agreement and we obviously will continue to build on today's discussions by sharing information and working through Australia's proposals.
Can I conclude by saying I came to Malaysia for my first stand-alone bilateral visit very deliberately. We are two countries that have had a long history of cooperation. To take just the example of people smuggling, though there are so many more, we've got a great history of cooperation. I congratulated the Deputy Prime Minister on work that's being done here disrupting people smuggling and human trafficking. The work that's being done here in Malaysia joins work happening across our region, where we've seen around 240 disruptions, 200 arrests, and several thousand people movements stopped as a result of this work, so I certainly offered my congratulations on Malaysia's part in that.
I very much welcome the fact that Malaysia has legislated to make people smuggling a crime. This is one example of cooperation across a broad range of areas - economic, defence, development, strategic and political questions. I believe Australia and Malaysia have a good relationship, but I chose to make my first stand-alone bilateral visit here because I want to see us take this relationship to the limit of its full potential, and believe today's talks have contributed to that.
We'll come across the front.
JOURNALIST: Did the Deputy Prime Minister express or raise any specific concerns about the East Timor plan with you?
PM: What I've said encapsulates what was talked about in the meeting. We agreed to share further information on it, and we agreed to keep working on it together.
JOURNALIST: He did raise some questions about how it would in practice. Would Malaysia have to contribute money to make this regional processing centre work?
PM: There's no mystery, I think, that people would want to look at this in detail and from every angle. I've obviously said that this is a complex problem, put forward the regional protection framework and regional processing centre as a way of developing a regional solution. We always expected- and from the very first day I spoke about this- we always expected it would take time and dialogue.
What has been indicated today, of course, by the Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister, is that he wants to be involved and have Malaysia involved in that dialogue. In terms of questions of costs, obviously they would be worked through and worked through from Australia's perspective as well, but the main question here is to agree on the framework and principles and the foundation stone of this, the absolute foundation stone, is that you cannot solve a transnational crime by stand-alone domestic action.
Any efforts you make in one country for a transnational crime means that the crime mutates and moves but it is not solved, so countries acting alone cannot solve this problem. It's about working together, the Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister was certainly directly on the same page on that.
JOURNALIST: On transnational crime, drug smuggling's obviously another huge issue for the region. There's a major bust, obviously, in Sydney. What are your thoughts on that? Is drugs a bigger problem than people smuggling, or the other way around?
PM: Look, transnational crime is a problem in all of its manifestations and mutations - people smuggling, human trafficking, drug smuggling. Obviously, in terms of our defence ties with Malaysia we talk about those transnational crimes; we work together on counter-terrorism matters; we work on traditional defence arrangements, including joint exercises. These are all important things.
On the major drugs bust in Australia today, I'd offer my congratulations to the Australian Federal Police on such a sizable haul, and obviously now the investigation work will be completed and I understand that charges are being laid.
Sorry, I'll go to Matthew next. I'll go down here. I'm discriminating against you. I don't mean to be.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, Prime Minister. The Deputy Prime Minister said there are a few outstanding issues that need to be addressed on the East Timor question. What are those few outstanding issues?
PM: Well, I think what the Deputy Prime Minister was saying is he wanted to keep working through. We've had Minister Bowen here having initial talks. I was very pleased that the Deputy Prime Minister today said that he wanted to keep working through, sharing information, continuing the dialogue. Obviously, the individual matters about which more information is sought will be part of those discussions and dialogue, but it's very pleasing that he wants to keep working through and sharing information on this.
I want to be very frank with people about it. I said on the very first day that I announced that this would be my approach as Prime Minister, which was before the election at the Lowy Institute, that this was a complex problem that would require detailed working through; it would take time. I've never tried to create artificial expectations in Australia about the amount of time that would be needed, but if we are to find a solution to a transnational crime and problem, it requires regional work, detailed work, not sloganeering, and that's the approach I'm taking.
JOURNALIST: But if, you know, you're trying to get a solution, if you're trying to find that solution and he's saying there are a few outstanding issues, surely they would have been canvassed today, those issues? Aren't you trying to get to the bottom of what those issues are?
PM: Well, look, certainly, we're trying to, we're sharing information, we're working through and that will be across any area of information or further dialogue that Malaysia raises.
JOURNALIST: But did he indicate what those few issues are?
PM: Well, I don't want to be seen to be putting words in the Deputy Prime Minister's mouth. Our agreement is to further share information and to continue the dialogue on Australia's proposals for addressing a complex transnational crime problem.
JOURNALIST: He said- he said there would be implications. And firstly, can you tell us whether he said what those implications would be? And secondly, if you're giving us the clear impression that, well, as I sit here it's dawning upon me that for your proposal to go ahead requires policy changes in governments all around the region, because, as he says, there are implications, and you've just said you can't, one nation acting alone can't do this. Have you bitten off more than you can chew?
PM: The implications are, in that sense, if I can answer your question, are quite clear. The foundation stone of this proposal is that when people make a asylum claims that they would face the same processing arrangements, potentially in a regional processing centre, that's what we've talked about, so my vision here - regional protection framework, a regional processing centre - people would face the same processing arrangements and outcomes. Consequently, there would be no advantage in continuing to move from country to country trying to seek different processing regimes because you would find yourself returned to the one area, under the one processing regime. That's the foundation stone of the proposal, so obviously that has implications for each nation because it means the processing of asylum seeker claims would happen that way.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) basically it becomes a regional policy, then? A big thing you're trying to do.
PM: The correct language is the language I've used, a regional protection framework. Let's remember the underpinning here is provided by a convention of long standing, of well understood terminology, with many countries in our region signatory to it, and it defines what a refugee is - that is, someone who is fleeing a legitimate fear of persecution, fleeing as a result of a legitimate fear of persecution, so, you know, we've got a long standing convention; understood and agreed definition about who are refugees under that convention; we've got UNHCR and the International Organisation for Migration that throughout the region do processing work now, so this is about building on those foundation stones with a regional protection framework and regional processing centre.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) East Timorese Government has said again that it would like to see a three-way discussion with yourself, Indonesia and East Timor about this. Is that something that you're willing to try and facilitate in your discussions tomorrow, and more broadly, what's the priority for you in Indonesia tomorrow?
PM: Well, can I say first and foremost the reason I have travelled out of Australia at all, my first visit to the region, is as Prime Minister to engage in dialogue across our full range of interests in the region in which we live - our economic interests, trade liberalisation, for making sure we've got investment cooperation, our defence interests of long standing in the region in which we live, our political and strategic dialogue, our development dialogue, our human rights dialogue, and then of course I have, in the course of my travels, also been discussing Australia's proposals for a regional protection framework and regional processing centre.
When I travel to Indonesia tomorrow at the invitation of the Indonesian Government to meet for discussions there I will be talking across that full range of dialogue. Indonesia is an incredibly important neighbour for us. Our relations with Indonesia are pivotal to our economic interests, our national security interests, our people-to-people links, we've got a substantial aid and development agenda in Indonesia. I will be talking about the full breadth of that relationship.
One component will be discussion of regional protection framework and regional processing centre, but we will be talking across the full range - economic, defence, strategic, political, civil aid and development, transnational crime, counter-terrorism, drugs, people smuggling, the whole breadth of our relationships, so that's what I will seek to be working through tomorrow in the formal talks.
On the question of East Timor's proposal, we will continue in a dialogue with East Timor. Of course, East Timor is a nation where we share history. We share a recent history, particularly with our Defence personnel having done remarkable jobs there and continuing an involvement there. We share a substantial aid and development agenda. We share substantial dialogue about economic development for that country, and of course we are talking to them about the regional processing centre.
On the question of three-way talks, if there is a proposal about three-way talks that's facilitated, we would be happy to engage in it, but our direct relationship with East Timor is a very, very strong one, as is our direct relationship with Indonesia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on Indonesia, what would you say about Schapelle Corby and the Bali Nine?
PM: Look, I will talk about those things when we get to Indonesia.
Thanks very much.



President of the Republic of Indonesia, H.E. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and the Prime Minister of Australia, H.E. Julia Gillard had a bilateral meeting in Jakarta, 02 November 2010 to exchange views on various issues of common interest to strengthen the relationship between Indonesia and Australia.
Both Leaders agreed to commence negotiation of an Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IA-CEPA). They expressed their satisfaction with the report of the Joint Feasibility Study on an Australia-Indonesia Free Trade Agreement and agreed to progress to a comprehensive economic partnership, covering economic cooperation, trade and investment issues which would further contribute to building a higher-level and mutually beneficial economic partnership between Indonesia and Australia.
President Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Gillard further agreed that the negotiations should take into account the discussions and achievements gained during the Joint Feasibility Study and that both countries will conduct the negotiations constructively, positively and with flexibility recognizing the different levels of development of the two countries.
President Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Gillard noted that Australia has established a technical assistance and economic cooperation facility to support the negotiations with a view to ensuring that representatives of both countries are able to participate fully and effectively in the negotiation as well as in the implementation of the results of the negotiations.
In addition, the two Leaders shared the view that the two countries need to take into account the result of negotiations on the Agreement Establishing the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area (AANZFTA) and that the bilateral comprehensive economic partnership agreement should be consistent with the WTO provisions. 



The first official bilateral visit to Indonesia by Prime Minister Julia Gillard underscores the closeness and the importance of the relations between the two neighbouring countries and strategic partners. In the same year, President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono made a state visit to Australia on 9-11 March 2010 during which a historic speech was delivered to the joint session of the Australian Parliament outlining the strength, challenges and the renewed commitment of both countries to work closely bilaterally, regionally and globally. Both democratic countries are close friends and partners in advancing prosperity, peace and security in the region and beyond.
Indonesia and Australia, having reached maturity in their relationship, are committed to renew with vigour their commitment to upgrade the existing bilateral relations into an enhanced comprehensive relationship. Prime Minister Gillard's visit to Jakarta follows the agreement between the leaders of the two countries last March to upgrade the partnership, with annual leaders meetings alternating between Indonesia and Australia.
Acknowledging the established mechanism of the Indonesia-Australia Ministerial Forum (IAMF), Indonesia and Australia are committed to follow up the recommendation of building on the contribution of the IAMF towards the strengthening of the bilateral relationship. The upcoming 10th IAMF which will be held in Indonesia, serves as an important venue for laying out and further enhancing the bilateral cooperation.
Complementing the leaders' annual meeting, the meeting of our respective foreign and defence ministers will be held annually at the appropriate time. It is favourable that the first of such ministerial meetings be preceded by a meeting of senior officials including the Security Cooperation Consultation Group as the agreed mechanism to review existing cooperation and coordinate and set priorities of the Plan of Action of the Lombok Treaty.
Indonesia and Australia are working together with shared interest to address security and defence challenges. Both countries welcome cooperation by relevant institutions to implement commitments and mandates under the Lombok Treaty and its Plan of Action, including through the conclusion of negotiations of "the Arrangement between the Ministry of Defence of the Republic of Indonesia and the Department of Defence of Australia for the Implementation of the Lombok Treaty and Its Plan of Action on Defence Cooperation". Once signed, the Arrangement will provide a stronger and more comprehensive basis for security and defence cooperation between the two countries.
Indonesia and Australia are pleased to announce agreement to commence negotiations on an Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IA-CEPA).The decision to embark on negotiations will take forward the shared goal in the March 2010 joint statement of increasing the volume of bilateral trade and investment. A partnership which covers economic cooperation, trade, and investment will further contribute to a closer trade and investment relationship that is balanced and mutually beneficial for Indonesia and Australia.
In order to enhance people-to-people links, both countries agree to hold the first meeting of the Indonesia Australia Leadership Dialogue in the near future. The terms of reference including format, participants, and themes of the Dialogue are to be further discussed and jointly agreed. Such a regular Dialogue is expected to make significant contribution to the people-to-people links and cooperation at senior levels. We are committed to conclude the on-going stocktaking exercise to review and identify possible ways and means to further promote increased and more meaningful people-to-people exchanges.
In addressing the complex challenges of people smuggling and trafficking in persons, Indonesia and Australia reiterate their commitment to working together closely under the auspices of the Bali Process and bilaterally under the Lombok Treaty, including through the Implementing Framework for Cooperation on People Smuggling and Trafficking in Persons. It is also understood that trans-national crime including people smuggling and trafficking in persons is a regional issue that requires a comprehensive approach involving all stakeholders in the region, especially the countries of origin, transit and destination, including in close cooperation with relevant international agencies.
As co-chairs of the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Trans-national Crime, both countries underline their shared commitment to promote cooperation including identifying new initiatives in making our regional efforts more robust and effective. In that regard, Indonesia and Australia look forward to convening a ministerial-level meeting of the Bali Process in the near future and holding further discussions on Australia's proposal for a regional protection framework which addresses matters including processing, returns and resettlement.
In the spirit of cooperation, both countries agree to strengthen police-to-police cooperation in the effort of preventing and combating trans-national crime, and enhancing counter-terrorism, sharing information and capacity building especially on combating terrorism. Australia commended Indonesia's commitment and successes in dealing with the threat from terrorism and welcomed the establishment of Indonesia's new National Counter-Terrorism Agency. Both countries will continue to cooperate closely in addressing this threat in the interests of both countries.
Both countries are committed to enhance and strengthen mutual cooperation across legal sectors, in areas such as mutual legal assistance, extradition, asset recovery, and development of legislation. In the case of cooperation on extradition, both sides are committed to facilitate, in accordance with their respective national laws, existing bilateral agreements and relevant multilateral conventions, requests for extradition in a timely manner.
The signing of the Arrangement on Consular Notification and Assistance in March 2010 provides a strong framework for consular access and assistance to our nationals. Indonesia and Australia reaffirm their commitment to implement fully the terms of the arrangements as a priority. In that regard the two countries agree to hold a senior officials meeting to address relevant issues in the near future consistent with relevant international instruments.
Both countries acknowledged the long history of bilateral cooperation and capacity-building in agriculture. Australia and Indonesia are committed to further strengthening cooperation in agriculture, including quarantine, joint research and capacity building to promote trade and investment, particularly in beef and crop production, as well as to enhance food security and innovation. Both countries welcomed continued dialogue between Agriculture Ministers.
Indonesia and Australia recognize the importance of cooperation in preventing, combating and eliminating of Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing between the two countries and in the Asia-Pacific region. Both countries are satisfied with the current progress of cooperation in fisheries surveillance and response activities through the Indonesia-Australia Fisheries Surveillance Forum (IASF) and more broadly through the Australia and Indonesia-led 'Regional Plan of Action (RPOA) to Promote Responsible Fishing Practices including Combating IUU Fishing in the Region'. Both countries also recognize that IUU Fishing is a major threat to the food security in the Asia-Pacific Region as stated in the Paracas Declaration of the 3rd Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Ocean Related Ministerial Meeting, 11-12 October 2010 in Paracas, Peru, and committed to promote as widest as possible application of the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime to combat IUU Fishing.
Indonesia and Australia reiterate their commitment to the Australia Indonesia Development Partnership valued at $2.5 billion over five years. Both leaders acknowledged the success of this partnership, which has seen the two countries working together to increase access to basic education, improve the health of mothers and children in Eastern Indonesia, reduce HIV/AIDS, provide water and sanitation to poor families and strengthen Indonesia's flagship social protection program, PNPM.
Australia and Indonesia agreed on a new $500 million program to support Indonesia's goal of providing every child with a full nine years of education by 2015. Australia and Indonesia have a strong history of working together to support better education outcomes for Indonesian children. Over 330,000 Indonesian children now have access to school because of previous joint work in basic education. The new $500 million education program will build on this success. It will build or expand up to 2000 schools, support around 1,500 Islamic schools to achieve accreditation against national education standards, improve the quality of school management across Indonesia, and support research and analysis in education.
Indonesia and Australia welcome the continuing educational cooperation on partnership, exchange program, scholarship and training at all levels of education. Indonesia and Australia are committed to increase the number of students studying in each other's country, among others through the Australian Scholarship, the ACICIS Program and the Indonesian Darmasiswa Scholarship. Both countries acknowledged the further strengthened cooperation in youth and sport, particularly in youth exchange, volunteer, expert, as well as entrepreneurship and leadership programs.
Both countries enjoy the increased growth of travellers to each respective country. Therefore, Indonesia and Australia are committed to enhance cooperation in the tourism sector as a means to promote people-to-people contacts. In that regard, both countries are committed to continuing dialogue to further promote while reducing impediments for more in depth and extensive people-to-people links and cooperation.
On the institutional architecture of our region, both countries reaffirmed their support for the East Asia Summit as a leaders-led forum for dialogue and cooperation on broad strategic, political and economic issues, the centrality of ASEAN in regional architecture and welcomed the decision by EAS leaders to invite the Russian Federation and the United States of America to join the EAS in 2011. Indonesia and Australia welcomed the first-ever ministerial-level participation of Russia and the United States at the EAS meeting in Hanoi and looked forward to their participation at the leader level at the next EAS meeting in 2011 in Indonesia.
Indonesia and Australia welcomed the results of the ASEAN-Australia Summit in October 2010 which reviewed and further deepened cooperation between ASEAN and Australia in areas of mutual interests.
Natural disasters are a serious challenge for each country. Australia expressed its condolences for the loss of life and damage caused by the tsunami in the Mentawai Islands and the Mount Merapi eruption. Indonesia acknowledged Australia's A$ 2.1 million package of support for those disasters. Both countries reiterated their commitment to work together to strengthen disaster response, management and mitigation capabilities. Both leaders expressed their satisfaction with the success of the Australia Indonesia Disaster Reduction Facility. With the entry into force of the ASEAN Agreement on Disaster management (AADMER) on 24 December 2009, including the establishment of ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management (AHA Centre), Indonesia anticipates that the cooperation in responding to natural disasters and reducing loss due to disasters can be improved. The AHA Centre is expected to be in operation by the end of 2010. Indonesia and Australia are looking forward to working together to support the Centre. In this context, Australia appreciated the initiative of Indonesia and Japan to co-chair of the ASEAN Regional Forum Disaster Relief Exercise (ARF DiREX) 2011 in Manado in March 2011.
The leaders also noted that the joint commitment to the regional promotion of democracy was underlined at the highest levels with the opportunity of Indonesia and Australia co-chairing the Bali Democracy Forum. Indonesia looks forward to Australia's participation in the third Bali Democracy Forum scheduled to be held in Bali in December 2010.
Indonesia and Australia are committed to working closely in promoting greater and stronger cooperation in the South Pacific region in particular through the Pacific Islands Forum. The promotion of democracy, good governance, human rights, rule of law and capacity building are identified as areas of possible joint undertakings of the two countries in the South Pacific. As advocates of the Southwest Pacific Dialogue, both countries will promote further cooperation among participating countries in relevant areas.
Indonesia and Australia recognize the value of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) as a key forum for advancing free and open trade and investment in the region. Both leaders commended the tremendous progress made in 2010 by the economies towards the Bogor Goals, as shown in the report of the assessment on the achievement of the Bogor Goals, and encouraged all member economies to embrace further measures that will enhance regional economic integration and growth prospects. As fellow founders of APEC, Indonesia and Australia will maintain their leadership role in APEC. Australia is committed to support Indonesia's chairmanship in 2013.
The G20 summit in Seoul comes at an important time for the global economy. Leaders agreed to work closely together in advance of the summit to ensure it delivers key reforms necessary to strengthen the global economy, provide a more balanced and sustainable framework for global economic growth, and outline a roadmap for the conclusion of the Doha Round.
Both countries recognize the importance of marine resources for the livelihood of people living in coastal areas. Australia appreciates Indonesia's leadership on the Coral Triangle Initiative on Coral Reefs, Fisheries and Food Security (CTI-CFF), as well as the Manado Ocean Declaration 2009 in the framework of the World Ocean Conference agreed to advance discussion on oceans and climate change. Indonesia welcomes Australia's further commitment to support the Coral Triangle Initiative as a partnership to safeguard the region's extraordinary marine and coastal biological resources.
As climate change constitutes a major threat to achieving sustainable development, both countries acknowledge the global nature of the problem and the threat posed to the prosperity and security of all countries. Both leaders share the view that the most effective way to achieve this is through a global comprehensive climate change agreement under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, agreed upon through the two-track approach as mandated by the Bali Action Plan and acknowledging our undertakings in the Copenhagen Accord. Thus, both countries are committed to working towards the attainment of an achievable and implementable agreement in the forthcoming COP 16/CMP 6 in Cancun, Mexico through a set of decisions that will help enable the conclusion of a balanced, comprehensive, and legally binding instrument the next COP 17/CMP 7 in 2011.
In the ongoing bilateral cooperation to address climate change, both countries will continue to take practical steps through the Indonesia-Australia Forest Carbon Partnership to support the REDD initiative. The establishment of the A$30 million Sumatra Forest Carbon Partnership as the second joint practical activity on REDD, will bring the total contribution towards the Indonesia-Australia Forest Carbon Partnership to A$70 million. Indonesia is confident that this initiative will further support developing the necessary policy, technical and financial capabilities for participation in future international carbon markets for reduction of emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD).
Both leaders reaffirmed their interests in addressing global and regional challenges that have made Indonesia and Australia important partners including through the G20. These challenges include maintaining peace, security and prosperity in the region, through diverse cooperation on handling trans-national crime; people smuggling and trafficking in persons; climate change; environment, and; food security, agriculture including investment and market access, energy security and human security issues.  



I'd like to thank Sondang Sirait for her introduction and Minister for Foreign Affairs Dr Marty Natagelawa for his kind words.
Let me say first how saddened Australia was by the twin disasters that struck western Sumatra and Central Java in recent days - and by the devastating floods in Papua a few weeks ago.
Our thoughts are with all Indonesians at this time, particularly those who have lost loved ones.
We stand ready to contribute to Indonesian recovery efforts in every way we can.
Indeed, Australians and Indonesians are becoming used to standing by each other in good times and bad times.
And I also want today to acknowledge Australia's profound debt of gratitude to the Indonesian police and intelligence experts who have worked so hard to bring to justice the terrorists who have killed Australians holidaying and working in this beautiful country.
The same terrorists who have also killed many Indonesians.
Friends,
I would like to leave the present for a moment and go back in time.
In 1999, as a new member of the Australian Parliament, I was privileged to witness the birth of modern Indonesian democracy as an election observer in West Timor.
The enthusiasm of the Indonesian people as they patiently sat waiting to vote is a precious memory.
Eleven years later, I return to Indonesia for my first visit as Prime Minister of Australia, making this visit early in my tenure to signify the high priority I attach to our relationship with Indonesia.
The decade just passed has been a remarkable era of progress for the people of this nation.
Out of uncertainty you have created one of the world's great democracies. And in the process you have provided an inspiring example to emerging countries around the world.
When I look back on the optimism of those voters in West Timor, I know their trust in the Indonesian spirit was well placed indeed.
Our paths to democracy have been vastly different, but today
our relations are warmer and closer than ever.
President Yudhoyono's historic and successful visit to Australia earlier this year was a high point in the friendship between our two countries.
On that visit, His Excellency described the relationship as a strategic partnership.
And of course it is.
It is a partnership based on a shared interest in each other's progress, prosperity and security.
As a result, Australia and Indonesia now have annual Leaders' Summits and Foreign and Defence Ministers' meetings to drive even higher levels of cooperation between our two governments.
During his visit in March, President Yudhoyono also challenged us to reinvigorate the people-to people relationship.
Together we are working to do that.
Nearly 18,000 Indonesians are studying in Australia.
The number of tourists travelling between our countries is nearing record levels.
A recent survey revealed that links at the community level are widespread and growing.
I am also pleased that next year we will hold the first Australia-Indonesia leadership dialogue.
This dialogue will draw together public figures, business people, and academics on a regular basis - to share perspectives, build understanding and generate new ideas for strengthening ties between Indonesia and Australia.
Our economic relationship is one area where we can do more.
Today I had the opportunity to discuss with President Yudhoyono the next steps in our bilateral economic relationship and in particular our decision to launch negotiations for an Economic Partnership Agreement.
An EPA has been under discussion for some time because we recognise that while Australia-Indonesia trade and investment is substantial, it is smaller than it should be.
With an EPA, we could transform our economic relationship to the benefit of both countries.
Indonesia's economic growth is adding to its weight in global affairs.
We welcome that.
We share membership of the G20. We have worked together to ensure sustainable economic growth and to reform international financial institutions to give more weight to emerging economies.
We are partners in the East Asia Summit and we are working closely together in APEC.
Australia shares Indonesia's interest in making the East Asia Summit a forum which can make a real and positive contribution to regional stability.
In that regard, we have both welcomed the United States and Russia to the EAS.
I look forward to visiting Bali for next year's Summit.
Friends,
A strong and prosperous and democratic Indonesia is good for Australia and good for Southeast Asia.
Australia is committed to Indonesia's development - so much so that we are providing up to $2.5 billion over five years under the Australia Indonesia Partnership.
This partnership focuses on four major areas - education, health, infrastructure and governance.
Today I want to draw attention to our partnership around education, one of my absolute passions in public life.
I believe profoundly that education is the transformative experience that can uplift the horizons and prospects of every child.
That is why Australia is committed to helping Indonesia achieve its goal of providing nine years of quality basic education to all children by 2015.
Our commitment extends to the $387 million Basic Education Program, which is seeing more than 2000 schools built or expanded.
This morning I was pleased to discuss with President Yudhoyonoa new $500 million Education Partnership between Australia and Indonesia.
Under this Partnership, Australia will construct or expand up to 2000 more schools, which will create more than 300,000 new places for students wishing to attend junior secondary school.
In addition, we will work closely with the Government of Indonesia to improve school management by providing training for Indonesia's educational leaders.
And we will continue our support to Islamic education by helping around 1,500 Islamic schools to achieve accreditation against national education standards.
Australia is also working to support the higher education of Indonesians - over 300 scholarships are awarded annually to Indonesians to study at Australian universities.
Following these remarks it will be my very great pleasure to present scholarships to three such outstanding students.
Friends,
Visiting here today, I am reminded that Australia has a long history of friendship with Indonesia.
Just as I was witness to the birth of modern democracy in West Timor in 1999, Australia stood with the people of Indonesia in their struggle for independence six decades ago.
Our prime minister in those days - Ben Chifley - was much loved by the Australian people, and his support for Indonesia was deeply rooted in his values and his experiences.
In his earlier life Chifley had travelled to this archipelago where he promised that if he was ever in a position to help the Indonesian people, he would do his very best.
By a remarkable coincidence of history, Chifley became Australia's Prime Minister at precisely the time when Indonesia's fate lay in the balance.
At Chifley's repeated urging, the fledgling United Nations intervened to end colonialism and secure Indonesian independence.
And it was Australia, led by Chifley, that was the first government in the world to recognise the new Republic of Indonesia.
These events, and the support of ordinary Australians for Indonesia's independence, are recorded in a photo exhibition outside this room.
Why did Chifley do these things?
Because Chifley believed in the potential of the Indonesian people and saw great things for the future of this nation.
Like Chifley I too am an optimist.
I believe that for Indonesia, as for Australia, we can do great things and that our best days still lie ahead.
Let us build that future together.
Thank you.



PRESIDENT SUSILO BAMBANG YUDHOYONO (unofficial translation): In the name of Allah. HE Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Dear journalists that I love. Today Indonesia has the honour of a visit by the Australian Prime Minister, the first female Australian Prime Minister in the history of Australian politics.
We have conducted a very productive bilateral meeting, full of enthusiasm to boost relations and cooperation between the two nations and countries.
Australia-Indonesia relations and cooperation have been cordial and continue to progress and we have agreed to enhance the cooperation into the future. We discussed a number of bilateral issues as well as regional and international issues. The bilateral issues include cooperation on law enforcement and security. They include cooperation on how to handle people smuggling. We have also agreed to extend the cooperation on tackling the transnational crimes, including counter terrorism.
We also raised the need to forge cooperation on tackling the Montara oil spill in order to prevent environmental damage and the need to provide compensation to those in need.
In the fields of economy, investment and trade, I would like to inform you that there has been good development. Last year the total value of trade stood at US$6.7 billion. This year, in the first semester alone it has reached US$4.4 billion or an increase by 22 per cent. That is why for both countries' interest, we agree to think about the establishment of a Comprehensive Economic Partnership between the two countries so that the excellent trade achievement can be further enhanced. Comprehensive Economics Partnership is not just trade but also investment and other fields. Australia's investments in Indonesia are also good. Last year they stood at US$4.8 billion. I would like to correct that the US$4.8 billion figure is an accumulative figure up to 2009.
We also discussed cooperation in the agricultural sector in order to boost agricultural production and productivity in Indonesia.
We also discussed people-to-people cooperation especially in the education sector. And I thank Australia for its large assistance in the Indonesian education sector to date.
I would also like to invite the Australian Prime Minister to boost cooperation in the youth, sport and tourism sectors. And cooperation on climate change sector has been going well, particularly in forest management and we agreed to continue our cooperation.
On the regional and international issues, ladies and gentlemen, we exchanged ideas about the importance of developing the right regional architecture in the Asia Pacific region.
Indonesia is of the opinion that we must maintain the Asia Pacific region's peace, stability and security. The region should also have good economic growth. People to people contact should also be developed. These are the pillars of the regional architecture we are developing for the future.
I also thank Australia for its active participation in the Bali Democracy Forum. I hope (Australia) will continue to take part in this important forum to exchange experiences on democracy particularly with Asian countries.
Another issue is the Pacific Islands Forum, which is also important, and I thank Australia for its constructive participation in the Pacific Islands Forum. Indonesia wishes to forge better ties with southwest Pacific countries.
Australia and Indonesia are also members of the G-20 and APEC . We have agreed to continue our collaboration and forge cooperation on these two forums. Next week we will meet again in Seoul and Yokohama to attend the G-20 and APEC. And I'm glad Insya Allah that at the G-20 meeting in Korea development issues will be given adequate attention.
That's all I wish to convey. Once again, our meeting was very productive and I would like to offer the floor to HE Prime Minister Julia Gillard to give remarks to the press.
PRIME MINISTER JULIA GILLARD: Thank you very much, Mr President. Thank you firstly for your invitation to me to visit your country. I wanted to come here early in my period as Prime Minister to demonstrate my personal commitment to making sure that our already strong, strategic, relationship continues to grow.
Today I have had the opportunity to say to the President that the Australian people pass their condolences to him and to the people of Indonesia on the loss of life and damage occasioned by the recent natural disasters that have impacted on the Indonesian people and I know that is taking so much of the President's time. I was pleased to be able to advise Mr President today that we will be increasing our assistance for recovery by $1.1 million taking it to $2.1 million. We are two nations that have had strong partnerships in the past and each of us has faced natural disasters. As someone who comes from the state of Victoria can I personally thank the President and the people of Indonesia for their support when Victoria faced devastating bushfires.
Today we have had the opportunity to talk through a comprehensive range of bilateral, regional and global issues. I have indicated to the President that our relationship has been strong and continuous over the past decade, that his address in March to the Australian Parliament was a watershed moment in that relationship, taking it to a new level and making it even stronger. I'm pleased that today, as our relationship strengthens, we have been able to agree to our two countries entering a comprehensive economic partnership - one that not only comprehends further trade liberalisation but deals with the full range of economic issues that bring our countries together including investment, business-to-business links and capacity building. I think that is a good development for our two countries.
I have also spoken to the President today about Australia's gratitude to him and to Indonesia for their work on counter terrorism. Remarkable progress has been achieved in this nation and we very much thank the President and the Indonesian people for that. We know that it has not been without cost and particularly, there have been some police and security force members who have lost their lives in this effort. We are very grateful for it.
I've also indicated to the President in our discussions today that my firm belief is that the future of our two countries will be determined largely by what is happening in the schools of each of our nations today. Consequently, I am pleased to be able to announce that the Australian Government will invest half a billion dollars over five years in further assistance for school education in Indonesia. This will enable the construction of 2,000 new schools and it will enable 1,500 current Islamic schools to be brought up to accreditation standard to meet the national standards of Indonesia. I'm very pleased to be able to make that announcement today.
We also have talked about the regional questions that we face - questions of transnational crime, including questions of people smuggling. I have thanked the President for the work that has been done here in Indonesia to address people smuggling and thanked him for his personal support of criminalising people smuggling in Indonesia. We have agreed to continue dialogue on the question of addressing people smuggling, on regional solutions, a regional protection framework and processing centre through the Bali process in which we both have leadership roles. I thank him for that indication.
We've also had the opportunity today to talk about the new regional architecture with the East Asia Summit and with the US and Russia becoming full members of that summit from next year on. That summit, of course, will be held here in Indonesia under the President's leadership. We very much look forward to those discussions. This is a significant change for the region and brings greater US engagement into the region, which we have discussed today.
We have also discussed the prospects and outlooks for the forthcoming meetings of the G20 and APEC, which we will both be attending. I have indicated to the President that we are pleased of the progress being made at the G20 on matters associated with the economy and global financial crisis response, including the work that is being done by finance ministers on IMF reform. I've indicated to the President that I very much support his idea to bring to the G20 further work on development questions for discussion at the forthcoming meeting.
I have, as Australian Prime Minister, spoken today to the President about matters involving some Australians - most particularly, Ms Schapelle Corby - and indicated the Australian Government's support for her clemency plea and also indicated to the President that whilst there are further legal proceedings in train for a number of Australians known as the Bali nine, should those legal proceedings finalise with Australian citizens facing the death penalty, then at that point, the Australian Government would indicate its support for clemency.
Overall, can I thank the President and his ministers for the dialogue we've had today. It has been comprehensive. It is part of a good friendship. It is part of a strategic friendship and it is part of building on that friendship for the future.
PRESIDENT YUDHOYONO: Thank you Madame Prime Minister. I will now allow journalists to ask questions.
JOURNALIST: Hello, this is Adam Gartrell from Australian Associated Press. This is a question for you President Yudhoyono. You have said in the past that you will not give clemency to drug traffickers. Given that, is there any chance you will support Schapelle Corby's clemency application and when will you make a final decision on it?
PRESIDENT YUDHOYONO: The reduction of sentence is part of our legal system so on many occasions I did give a reduction of sentence for those from Indonesia or foreign origins. Certainly, there must be prudent consideration, especially to serious crimes. With the case of Ms Corby, based on our system, there are a number of reductions of sentence that have already been provided. During the bilateral discussion with Prime Minister Gillard we did discuss how we can develop a kind of framework to deal with similar cases applied in Australia and also applied in Indonesia. What we have experienced is the extradition case involving our two countries. We have what we call mutual legal assistance and we might want to discuss the sentence and transfer, something that might be developed for future cooperation. This is what we need to develop - balancing what we consider as justice must be upheld and also to give consideration to the issue of humanitarian aspects. I'm quite optimistic that we'll be able to develop such a framework.
JOURNALIST: I have question for the Prime Minister. We know the Indonesian students partake in education programs in Australia, so are there any plans from the Indonesian Government and Australian Government for visa exemption for Indonesian students if they want to study in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: You are right, a large number of Indonesian students come to Australia to study and we very much welcome that. We have a quite comprehensive scholarship program because we do want to be able to support Indonesian students to come to our country and study. We will continue to have a visa arrangement for students who want to come and study in our country. They are very welcome to come to Australia and study in our higher education institutions. As a government we have been working with state governments to make sure that we do provide better support to students when they come away from home to study in our country and that there is welfare and other support for them and we will continue to build on that approach.
JOURNALIST: Hello my name is Naomi Woodley from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Mr President, a question to you. I'm interested in your views for the government's proposal for a regional processing centre for asylum seekers in East Timor. Do you think it will work? Will it help to stop people smuggling and are you concerned that Indonesia might have to contribute funds to that proposal?
PRESIDENT YUDHOYONO: We did discuss how to best develop an effective cooperation to deal with the people smuggling and trafficking process. We have already two frameworks in place - one is the Bali Process, to deal with the issue at the regional level and at the bilateral level we have the Bali-Lombok Treaty. I have proposed that early next year we could sit and discuss within the framework of the Bali Process how to best and efficiently deal with the issue of people smuggling and trafficking of persons. On the issue of a regional processing centre, the forum would be the best place to discuss this, especially involving regional countries including Timor Leste, Indonesia and Australia to ensure that the regional processing centre is a proper way to improve the effectiveness of our regional cooperation in dealing with people smuggling. . Indonesia is open to that but we have to discuss this in depth to ensure once again that this is a solution to our regional problems.
JOURNALIST: I would like to ask Prime Minister Gillard the first question, how will your government and Indonesia handle the flood of immigration so far? Indonesia quite recently became a temporary state for illegal persons from Iran and Afghanistan I am wondering whether both countries have set up joint cooperation on it? Second question, is your government really serious about building a detention centre in East Timor for asylum seekers?
PRESIDENT YUDHOYONO: Madame, if I could further clarify, he stresses on the involvement of all sides in this connection - the countries of origin, the countries of transit, the countries of destination - to be part of the offer of regional cooperation
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: Thank you very much, thank you for the question. Can I say I agree that for us to work through comprehensively questions of people smuggling we do need to be working with countries of origin, countries of transit and countries of destination. Our dialogue is able to comprehend all of those matters. On the question of the regional protection framework and the regional processing centre, Australia will be working with Indonesia and other countries in our region through the Bali Process, as the President has indicated, and through bilateral discussions to work through a protection framework and processing arrangements which would undercut the business model of people smugglers, would take out of the hands of people smugglers the very product that they sell because there would be no reason for someone to keep engaging in movement around the region because processing arrangements would be the same. And there would be collaboration across the region on a protection framework and with a processing centre - so that matter has been the subject, as the President has indicated, of discussion today and there will be further discussion through the Bali Process as the President has indicated.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard yesterday met with President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono in Jakarta to conduct extensive bilateral talks aimed at strengthening the Australia-Indonesia partnership.
Yesterday's meeting follows on from President Yudhoyono's historic visit to Australia in March 2010 and the commitment made by the leaders to meet annually.
Topics covered at the meeting included bilateral discussions on trade, investment and development assistance, regional issues such as terrorism and people smuggling and global issues such as the upcoming G20 agenda.
The Prime Minister and President agreed to start negotiations for an Indonesia-Australia Economic Partnership Agreement which will help build on our trade and investment links.
The two leaders agreed on a new $500 million Education Partnership under which Australia will construct or upgrade up to 2,000 schools across Indonesia.
This new five year program will build on the success of previous partnerships between the two nations to help Indonesia reach its goal of providing every child with nine years of education by 2015.
The program will also improve the quality of school management by training 293,000 school principals, school supervisors and district education officials.
The Prime Minister also announced the Australian Government would provide an additional $1.1 million in development assistance to support the not-for-profit SurfAid to help the Mentawai Islands over the next year, following the recent tsunami.
These funds are in addition to Australia's initial support package of up to $1 million announced last week for relief and recovery efforts.
The Prime Minister raised the matter of Schapelle Corby with the Indonesian President, following which President Yudhoyono proposed the development of a bilateral prisoner transfer agreement which could apply to cases such as Ms Corby's.
These discussions may take some time and could require legislation to be passed by the Indonesian Parliament however the Prime Minister welcomed this significant development.
The Prime Minister briefed President Yudhoyono on progress on Australia's proposal for a regional protection framework for asylum seekers and both parties agreed that discussions on the framework would continue in the region through the Bali Process and beyond.
Ms Gillard also met with the Speaker of the People's Representative Assembly Mr Marzuki Alie and urged the Indonesian Parliament to consider passing a law to criminalise people smuggling.
During the visit the Prime Minister paid her respects to Indonesia's fallen soldiers and other national figures by laying a wreath at Indonesia's Kalibata Heroes' Cemetery and presented Australia Asia Awards to three Indonesian students to undertake doctoral studies in Australia. 



STEFANOVIC: Welcome home, Prime Minister.
PM: Thanks, Karl.
STEFANOVIC: Nice to see you again, now we went to the news this morning, our dollar has launched through parity and that's where it's standing right now, first of all your thoughts on that.
PM: This is a mixed thing Karl, it's good for some of our industries and bad for others, particularly for tourism. As a Government we're going to work with every part of Australia to look at their own regional development and economic plan, that's what Simon Crean is doing as our Minister for Regional Australia, so it's swings and roundabouts, good for some, bad for others.
STEFANOVIC: And really bad for exporters, really bad, they've had a tough run of it.
PM: They have had a tough run, it's obviously if you rely on imported components to do what you do then it makes a good difference for you, but if you're competing like tourism, international education another big one, it makes it really tough.
STEFANOVIC: Also this morning $600 billion the US is printing in cash and there is also talk of a rate war around the world, a currency rate war around the world. These are uncertain times.
PM: These are still uncertain times, the world has been in an uncertain economic phase since the global financial crisis and whilst our economy is emerging strong, and we should all take joint and shared pride in that, right around the world there's still a lot of fragility and a lot of risks. I will be going soon to the G20 meeting, where President Obama and other world leaders will be talking directly about these questions. We've had some successes, new financial rules, new rules for the IMF, the International Monetary Fund, but there are risks out there Karl and it takes careful work to manage it.
STEFANOVIC: Right, and risks, the thing that really stings Australians are that they're fully aware of these risks and then they see the Reserve Bank come out and raise interest rates, but then the Commonwealth Bank go even more than that, it really, really stings. We also hear this morning that the Greens, Andrew Wilkie, may back Joe Hockey's plan to try and get a little bit more accountability into the system, your thoughts on that?
PM: The Treasurer announced in early October that he would bring forward a plan to bring even more competition into the banking sector, we've already done some things, we've made it easier for people to vote with their feet and change their mortgages and I think there'd be a lot of Commonwealth Bank customers who are thinking about that right now. We are working on a comprehensive plan to bring more competition into the banking sector. Of course banks are vital to our economy so you've got to be careful, you've got to make sure the changes are right and that they're going to have lasting effect and that's what we're doing now.
STEFANOVIC: Will you legislate to regulate?
PM: We're looking at questions like giving the ACCC, our competition watchdog, greater powers. These are the things that the Treasurer has been working on in a very careful way since October and they build on our earlier competition reforms like making it easier to get out and change your mortgage.
STEFANOVIC: But none of those are really regulation, as you going to go as far as legislating to regulate?
PM: Look, you certainly, in a modern economy, can't regulate interest rates. Joe Hockey, of course floated this idea, but those of us who have lived long enough Karl, remember when interest rates were regulated in this country and what that meant was young couples, small businesses could not get finance, or if they did get it they got it in an expensive cocktail, with some coming from a bank, some coming from another sort of financial lender and they used to end up paying astronomical interest rates, so we're not going down that regulate the interest rate path, that's economics discarded for the last thirty years, but we are increasing competition, which puts pressure on banks to do the right thing.
STEFANOVIC: You see, you would understand and you would know that there is real anger, searing anger out there, particularly at the Commonwealth Bank and probably the rest of the banks will follow suit here because effectively what they have done is absolutely thumbed their nose at the Government, they don't care.
PM: Karl, I'm angry and I understand why Australians paying mortgages are angry and as the Reserve Bank has said there is really no justification for interest rate movements above and beyond what the Reserve Bank independently decides our economy needs. So, yes, angry with the banks, angry with the Commonwealth Bank for this move -
STEFANOVIC: But nothing you can do about it?
PM: Well we can increase competition and that's the package the Treasurer is working on now and individual customers can say 'I've had enough' and take their money and their business somewhere else.
STEFANOVIC: Is it naive for Australians to think that you and your Government can do something about interest rates, have they got it wrong?
PM: The Reserve Bank sets interest rates independently and we've got to have that system, you don't want me or the Treasurer waking up every morning and going 'gee, what should interest rates be today'. Once again that's the economics of thirty years ago, we moved to independent setting of interest rates deliberately for our modern economy. So the Reserve Bank does that. What then keeps the banks honest is the pressure of competition of customers just saying 'I'm not interested in your bank anymore, I'm going somewhere else'.
STEFANOVIC: Alright, the Greens have also suggested a move to fixed gap mortgages and also a ban on two dollar ATM fees, are they things that you would support?
PM: Well, once again, increasing competition is about making sure that people get a better deal and that's what the Treasurer is working on, but once again Karl I'd just say, you know, you'll hear a million ideas in this area and ideas are a good thing, but the health of our banking system, vital to our economy, one of the reasons we came out of the global financial crisis strong, is unlike other countries we didn't face the prospect of a bank collapsing, so when we're talking about changing settings for banking, patient, careful, methodical work, rather than snap shot ideas is what's called for.
STEFANOVIC: I think people, there are going to be people at home, and you know only too well there will be people at home this morning going 'I just want the Government and I want Julia, our Prime Minister, to do something about this' and you're not.
PM: Well, step one, we have done some things to increase competition and if you've had -
STEFANOVIC: It didn't work though, the Commonwealth Bank has almost doubled -
PM: Well, if you'd had it with your bank, used the power of your dollar, of your business to pressure for a better deal and go elsewhere, we've made it easier for people to do that. The Treasurer has already said, in October, that we will bring forward a package to put more pressure on and create more competition.
STEFANOVIC: Let's talk about Schapelle Corby, just briefly, now Schapelle Corby, you've said that you will support a clemency, her clemency, how far have negotiations got with Indonesia in terms of perhaps a prisoner exchange here, and the second part of the question is what if she doesn't want to come back?
PM: Well, two things Karl, I went into the meeting with the President of Indonesia, President Yudhoyono and indicated that I personally supported Schapelle Corby's bid for clemency and the President of Indonesia is considering that now, so that's the potential for a sentence reduction from the twenty years. But out of our discussions also emerged a discussion about a transfer of prisoner agreement, which would enable, for example, Schapelle to serve the balance of her sentence in Australia, where should could get things like mental health services and support. Now, I want to be really clear about this, there's a long way to go, I have to negotiate the agreement and the agreement has to go through the Indonesian Parliament, but the fact that the President talked to me about it in the meeting and came out of the meeting and publicly announced that Australia and Indonesia would be working on this is a good sign. For Schapelle, obviously if we got to that stage she would be able to make a choice, but here in Australia we do have the ability to provide health services and particularly mental health services and support, that it seems to me Schapelle is in need of and not able to access where she is now.
STEFANOVIC: Alright, busy times. Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Thanks Karl.


Melbourne 
PM: It's great to be here today with Premier John Brumby, I'm also joined by the Federal Water Minister, Tony Burke, and by the Victorian Water Minister Tim Holding, and we're here today to make an important announcement. We have been working together, and the Federal Government has been driven by a reform program for the Murray-Darling Basin.
You would of heard both me and the Minister for Water Tony Burke, say constantly over the last few weeks that we want to see an outcome for the Murray-Darling Basin that means we have strong communities, we have food production, and we have healthy rivers. That we can win in all of these areas, keeping our communities strong, having food production, and improving our environment.
Today we're announcing an historic partnership which fits in with this reform agenda. It is a win for farmers, and a win for the environment. Today I'm here to announce that the Federal Government will make available $953 million to upgrade old irrigation infrastructure in the Goulburn-Murray area.
Now much of this infrastructure is old, some of it is very old, indeed 80 years old. That means of course that the water seeps, it leaks, it evaporates, and we are not using the water efficiently.
By upgrading the infrastructure we believe we can make available 200 billion litres more water, we can save it from seeping and leaking and evaporating. And the water that is saved will be divided 50 per cent for the benefit of farmers through increased irrigation, 50 per cent for the benefit of the environment with more water able to flow naturally through the river.
This is a great outcome and a product of a strong partnership with the Government of Victoria. So I'll turn now to the Victorian Premier for some comments.
PREMIER BRUMBY: Thank you very much Prime Minister and can I just too acknowledge Luke Donnellan today as the Parliamentary Secretary to me and also as the local Member. This is a fantastic announcement today and if I could thank the Prime Minister for this announcement, $953 million.
The timing of this in terms of the impact it'll have in regional areas couldn't be better, this'll mean jobs, confidence, optimism and prosperity for the future, and if you think about this in the context of what is an historically high Australian dollar, for all of our producers, whether they're in the stone fruit business, whether they're in the dairy business, this is a challenging environment with a high Australian dollar, and so what this investment will do is secure the future of irrigated agriculture and horticulture in our food-bowl region.
And I think everybody's aware we've been great supporters of this food-bowl project, it is an idea that came from the region and we talked to leading irrigators, leading horticulturalists in the region, and we worked out with them what's the best way for them to go forward, to secure the future of agriculture, to secure the future of regional Victoria, but also to return water to our environment. And that's what food-bowl project is all about, or Northern Victorian Irrigation Renewal Project as we call it. It's about investing in infrastructure that was built between 50 and 100 years ago, and it's like a lot of things that were built between 50 and 100 years ago, they're not as efficient, it's not as efficient as it could be, and the losses out of this system are huge - up to 800 billion litres a year of water lost, as the Prime Minister has said through evaporation, seepage, leakage, poor metering.
And by investing in the infrastructure, by sealing some of the systems, by taking out some of the old open channels, by improving the way in which we move that water there are immense water savings.
As the Prime Minister has said today this is a win for farmers and a win for the environment, it is. This project will ensure that there's 200 billion litres of water savings - 100 billion litres of water savings for the environment, and 100 billion litres of water savings for farmers - and of course it builds of what we're doing in stage one, so we kicked this off with our billion dollars, work is underway now, there's already 56 billion litres of savings, already those savings are coming through the system in fact at a bit better than we expected. Already they're being returned, already they're making a difference, already they're generating confidence and jobs in the region.
And last winter there was something like 500 people directly employed on projects in relation to this food-bowl stage one. Next winter you'll see even more, the winter after that even more, as the Federal money starts flowing in and this great transformational project, this great partnership between our Government and the Gillard Government kicks into full steam ahead and secures the futures of this region.
We're here today at Montague's, Montague's have got a lot of investments, four generations of families right across the State, some of them in the food-bowl region, but they know the importance of secure irrigated water for the future. In terms of making the big investments, in terms of generating the jobs, and so this is a just a fantastic investment, a fantastic announcement for our State today, and as the Prime Minister said, in the current debate about Murray-Darling I think this is a great signal by the Federal Government about the direction in which they're heading, where you can have a win for farmers, a win for regional Australia, and a win for the environment as well.
More water for the Murray, but more water too for irrigated agriculture, so it's a fantastic announcement Prime Minister, we thank you for that, and I think today is really a great stepping stone to a confident future for our farmers, for our regions and for the Murray river.
PM: Yes can I say thank you to the Montague family too, thank you for the little pictures that the girls did for me, all perfect apart from the Collingwood flag flying out the front, but there we have it, it was a good apple. Have we got any questions?
JOURNALIST: How does this fit in with the Murray-Darling Basin Authority's plan, does this mean that less water will have to be taken off farmers?
PM: Well we are continuing to work through the process for the Murray-Darling Basin Authority plan. The Murray-Darling Basin Authority, independent authority generating the plan, of course we now have a Parliamentary Committee led by Tony Windsor and Minister Burke is also engaged in direct consultations with communities, but the water that is able to be saved through work like this does count towards the sustainable diversion limits that you've seen in the guide which will lead to the production of the draft plan, which will ultimately, following further consultation, lead to the plan itself.
JOURNALIST: Will you be offering similar support packages for other areas?
PM: We have been big investors in upgrading irrigation infrastructure, we're doing it because it's an efficient way of saving water. When we came to Government obviously we came in a circumstance where the Federal Government had not been involved in purchasing water, so for the first time we've done that, and where the Federal Government did not have a large sustained program of upgrading irrigation, and we've been doing that and today's announcement fits in with our broader program around the country of upgrading irrigation infrastructure. So we're getting the water for productive purposes, rather than seeping or leaking or evaporating; that means for irrigation, and more for the environment itself.
JOURNALIST: So does that mean you'll be able to take less from farmers under the Murray Basin plan, or you just know yet?
PM: Well we've just got to be clear, we're some way away from having the Murray-Darling Basin Authority plan. We've got a guide, then we'll have a draft plan, and we'll have further consultations for the final plan. The concept throughout though is about sustainable diversion limits, how much water can be taken. The water that is saved through this work can count in that process, so it does make a difference but of course I don't want to pre-empt what the endpoint will be, the limits will be defined in the final plan because we've got some journey to travel yet. And throughout that journey our frame here for decision making is we want to see healthy rivers, we want to see strong communities and we want to see food production. We believe we can get a triple bottom line win: a win for the environment, a win for farmers, a win for communities. We're working on that, and making sure that we've got modern infrastructure for irrigation is part of achieving that triple bottom line win and that's what today's announcement is about.
JOURNALIST: Will we ever get to a point where there are no more open water channels in Australia? Would you like to get to that point?
PM: Well that's obviously a very grand ambition given how much open water channels we've got. The focus for our investment has to be where we can most efficiently make a difference, so the dollars can do the maximum work, which is why this project stands out, the dollars invested here can do a lot of work. Premier Brumby might want to say something.
BRUMBY: I was just going to say there's a lot of channels, I think in this, in food-bowl it's 6,500 kilometres, but of course again in partnership with the Federal Government we've just completed Wimmera Mallee Pipeline, that was something like 19,000 kilometres of open channel, and that's all piped and the beauty of this is that system now is still only on 20 per cent, it still hasn't rained a lot up there, but at just 20 per cent, because the whole system is piped, there is four years of guaranteed water security. That's a system that was losing nine litres out of every ten, you put ten litres in and only one would get through to the farmer, so you can piped these systems, but my own view is it wouldn't be realistic in the next decade or so to imagine sealing every open channel across Victoria and across Australia, but there's no doubt that this works, there's absolutely no doubt that when you upgrade the system, seal some of the pipes, put in the best metering, put in the most sophisticated irrigation equipment, you get huge water savings and we've seen that in Wimmera Mallee, we're seeing it in food-bowl.
JOURNALIST: I'll just ask the Prime Minister, are you under more pressure now to reform gay marriage laws given Mark Arbib's comments in The Australian this morning?
PM: Well Mark Arbib's made statements about his personal views, this is a matter that gets ultimately decided at our national conference as a matter for the whole of the Australian Labor Party, so Mark's expressed his personal views and no doubt he will take them to the next national conference which is the proper place to have this debate.
JOURNALIST: I think he also expressed his view for a conscience vote, if I'm not wrong, do you support that on this issue?
PM: Once again we have currently a Party policy, the Party policy's crystal clear, that marriage is between a man and a woman, that's what the Marriage Act says and that's how it should stay.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) conference next?
PM: Well this is a binding policy of the Labor conference, so the proper process here, if anybody's got a view about changing the policy or indeed how we vote on it, is to take that matter to the Party conference which is some time away.
JOURNALIST: It does seem to be an issue that's gaining a lot of traction and momentum?
PM: I think it's an issue where there's community debate, but also it's an issue where there are divided community views, I've been very clear about my view, I believe the Marriage Act should stay in the form that it is, there will be community debate because there's community debate, inevitably there will be debate in political parties as well, and I think Mark Arbib is signalling that when that debate happens in the proper place in the Labor Party, he'll have something to say during it.
JOURNALIST: And Prime Minister why has Australia made the new defence arrangements with the United States and reported in The Australian today?
PM: We'll be here in Melbourne tomorrow and Monday, in part I'm here to participate in events associated with the Ministerial Dialogue between the United States and Australia on foreign policy and defence questions. I very much thank the Premier of Victoria for having me and the Defence Minister and the Foreign Minister, and of course Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, and also Secretary Gates here in Victoria for these important discussions.
What you've seen in today's newspaper is speculation about what might come out of those talks, in those talks we anticipate discussing America's Force Posture Review in our region, we anticipate that will give rise to a process of discussion about how that Force Posture Review has implications for Australia, it could have implications in further joint exercises, it could have implications in further joint sharing of facilities, but that's to be worked through arising from these talks.
JOURNALIST: And Prime Minister you did promise Hillary Clinton a good time, how do you plan to have a good time?
PM: Well Melbourne is a very good place to have a good time, so whether it's sauntering on Melbourne's streets, grand boulevards or in our back lanes, whether it's shopping, whether it's talking to our great sporting identities or just enjoying beautiful Victorian weather, there's a lot for Secretary Clinton to do here in Melbourne.
JOURNALIST: And have you been following the State campaign, how do you think the Premier is travelling?
PM: Well you would anticipate I think that as colleagues and friends obviously I'm very admiring of John Brumby's leadership of this State. I believe when you look at what's been achieved here in Victoria under the Brumby Government, that Australia is well positioned coming out of the global financial crisis, we're coming out strong, but Victoria is particularly well positioned because of the policies of the Brumby Government, because of its leadership in innovation, its leadership in issues like the one we're talking about today: food production, its leadership in jobs and job expansion in this State. Victoria I think is coming out particularly strong and with the right management I believe that gives Victoria tremendous opportunities for the future.
JOURNALIST: Did you watch the debate last night?
PM: I didn't have the opportunity to watch the debate last night, I was attending a function. Sorry, I would have liked to but I didn't have the opportunity.
JOURNALIST: And Premier obviously good to have the Prime Minister by your side in the first week?
BRUMBY: Yeah fantastic, yeah, and it's great and I hope I expressed clearly before just how fantastic this announcement is today and we've been working on this for some time, it's something I believe in, something Tim believes in, it's about, in essence, having your cake and eating it too, it's about how you secure agriculture, how you secure regional Victoria, and you secure the environment. And to get this decision from the Prime Minister today it's just fantastic and I'll see a bit more of the Prime Minister over the weekend with a couple of activities as well, and to have her full support, working with us, particularly in relation to investment and jobs and regional development is just a wonderful partnership and I think it'll serve our State well.
JOURNALIST: You've had a bit of time to reflect on the debate, how do you think you went? A lot of the commentators are saying that Ted Ballieu might have come out on top?
BRUMBY: Look I was happy with the debate, I've said that to you last night, and I think debates are a good thing and I thought there was some good questions last night, some tough questions last night, but it was really an opportunity for me I think to make my position known about the importance of jobs, the importance of the economy, keeping the Budget in surplus, continuing to grow our State, and investing in education and health. That's what you'll get from my leadership and our Government, we're very clear about that, you'll get a strong economy, you'll get strong jobs growth, you'll get investment in education, and you'll get investment in health and you'll get us too, tackling the issue of climate change in really serious way.
JOURNALIST: Was Ted Ballieu playing by the rules last night during the debate?
BRUMBY: I'll leave that to the commentators, there'll be a hundred different views about that last night, and I think it's good we've had a lot of our Ministers out and debates as well, we've got the Burvale I think next week, so I'm looking forward to that. So it's a good, it's all part of this.
JOURNALIST: Do you think his interjections were over the top though?
BRUMBY: Well they didn't bother me, I don't know what the viewers thought of them, but they didn't bother me.



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced Commonwealth Government support worth nearly $1 billion to help support the Murray River and provide more water for farmers in northern Victoria.
The announcement is part of an historic agreement reached between the Commonwealth and the Victorian Government to upgrade old and leaky irrigation systems in the Goulburn-Murray Irrigation District, some of which are more than 80 years old.
The Northern Victorian Irrigation Renewal Project Stage 2 agreement will see more than 7,600 irrigation properties in the Goulburn-Murray Irrigation District benefit from more reliable and efficient delivery of water.
This is a once in a generation investment in water efficiency that will provide greater water security for farmers whilst protecting the environment, including the Murray River.
The Goulburn-Murray Irrigation District loses on average, 800 billion litres of water through evaporation, seepage, leakage and system inefficiencies. Even over the last 15 years of drought, losses have averaged more than 700 billion litres.
This project will help save 200 billion litres of water on average each year, to be shared equally between farmers and the environment.
This will significantly reduce the water losses in the irrigation system which will allow for rapid delivery of water where and when irrigators need it most.
The Commonwealth Government will contribute up to $952.8 million towards Stage 2 of the Northern Victorian Irrigation Renewal Project (NVIRP).
Victoria is investing $1 billion in Stage 1 of the Northern Victoria Irrigation Renewal Project and Victoria will contribute 10 per cent of funding towards Stage 2 of the project with the timing and nature of this contribution to be negotiated with the Commonwealth.
Once both stages of NVIRP are complete by 2017/18, water savings are expected to total an average of 425 billion litres per year.
The Victorian Premier John Brumby welcomed the Gillard Labor Government's commitment and said it would help to lock-in a prosperous, sustainable future for farming families.
"We know how important it is to keep our farmers ahead of the game and that's why we have been making generational investments in upgrading our Food Bowl irrigation system," Mr Brumby said.
"This investment by the Gillard Government will back our farmers with a world-class irrigation system, keep our rivers healthy and means more water for our rivers and wetlands for generations to come."
Stage 2 water savings for the environment will form part of Commonwealth Government's program to help restore the Murray-Darling Basin's ecological health while minimising the socio-economic impacts on regional communities.
These water savings will contribute to meeting the new Sustainable Diversion Limits under the final Murray Darling Basin Plan, and will complement the Government water buyback program.
Today's announcement gives the green light to the NVIRP Stage 2, which had in-principle support under the 2008 Intergovernmental Agreement on Murray-Darling Basin Reform.
This approval follows a detailed due diligence assessment and is subject to the agreement of final contract details.
This project is funded through the Commonwealth's $5.8 billion Sustainable Rural Water Use and Infrastructure program under the Water for the Future initiative.  



PM: It's great to be here today with Premier John Brumby, I'm also joined by the Federal Water Minister, Tony Burke, and by the Victorian Water Minister Tim Holding, and we're here today to make an important announcement. We have been working together, and the Federal Government has been driven by a reform program for the Murray-Darling Basin.
You would of heard both me and the Minister for Water Tony Burke, say constantly over the last few weeks that we want to see an outcome for the Murray-Darling Basin that means we have strong communities, we have food production, and we have healthy rivers. That we can win in all of these areas, keeping our communities strong, having food production, and improving our environment.
Today we're announcing an historic partnership which fits in with this reform agenda. It is a win for farmers, and a win for the environment. Today I'm here to announce that the Federal Government will make available $953 million to upgrade old irrigation infrastructure in the Goulburn-Murray area.
Now much of this infrastructure is old, some of it is very old, indeed 80 years old. That means of course that the water seeps, it leaks, it evaporates, and we are not using the water efficiently.
By upgrading the infrastructure we believe we can make available 200 billion litres more water, we can save it from seeping and leaking and evaporating. And the water that is saved will be divided 50 per cent for the benefit of farmers through increased irrigation, 50 per cent for the benefit of the environment with more water able to flow naturally through the river.
This is a great outcome and a product of a strong partnership with the Government of Victoria. So I'll turn now to the Victorian Premier for some comments.
PREMIER BRUMBY: Thank you very much Prime Minister and can I just too acknowledge Luke Donnellan today as the Parliamentary Secretary to me and also as the local Member. This is a fantastic announcement today and if I could thank the Prime Minister for this announcement, $953 million.
The timing of this in terms of the impact it'll have in regional areas couldn't be better, this'll mean jobs, confidence, optimism and prosperity for the future, and if you think about this in the context of what is an historically high Australian dollar, for all of our producers, whether they're in the stone fruit business, whether they're in the dairy business, this is a challenging environment with a high Australian dollar, and so what this investment will do is secure the future of irrigated agriculture and horticulture in our food-bowl region.
And I think everybody's aware we've been great supporters of this food-bowl project, it is an idea that came from the region and we talked to leading irrigators, leading horticulturalists in the region, and we worked out with them what's the best way for them to go forward, to secure the future of agriculture, to secure the future of regional Victoria, but also to return water to our environment. And that's what food-bowl project is all about, or Northern Victorian Irrigation Renewal Project as we call it. It's about investing in infrastructure that was built between 50 and 100 years ago, and it's like a lot of things that were built between 50 and 100 years ago, they're not as efficient, it's not as efficient as it could be, and the losses out of this system are huge - up to 800 billion litres a year of water lost, as the Prime Minister has said through evaporation, seepage, leakage, poor metering.
And by investing in the infrastructure, by sealing some of the systems, by taking out some of the old open channels, by improving the way in which we move that water there are immense water savings.
As the Prime Minister has said today this is a win for farmers and a win for the environment, it is. This project will ensure that there's 200 billion litres of water savings - 100 billion litres of water savings for the environment, and 100 billion litres of water savings for farmers - and of course it builds of what we're doing in stage one, so we kicked this off with our billion dollars, work is underway now, there's already 56 billion litres of savings, already those savings are coming through the system in fact at a bit better than we expected. Already they're being returned, already they're making a difference, already they're generating confidence and jobs in the region.
And last winter there was something like 500 people directly employed on projects in relation to this food-bowl stage one. Next winter you'll see even more, the winter after that even more, as the Federal money starts flowing in and this great transformational project, this great partnership between our Government and the Gillard Government kicks into full steam ahead and secures the futures of this region.
We're here today at Montague's, Montague's have got a lot of investments, four generations of families right across the State, some of them in the food-bowl region, but they know the importance of secure irrigated water for the future. In terms of making the big investments, in terms of generating the jobs, and so this is a just a fantastic investment, a fantastic announcement for our State today, and as the Prime Minister said, in the current debate about Murray-Darling I think this is a great signal by the Federal Government about the direction in which they're heading, where you can have a win for farmers, a win for regional Australia, and a win for the environment as well.
More water for the Murray, but more water too for irrigated agriculture, so it's a fantastic announcement Prime Minister, we thank you for that, and I think today is really a great stepping stone to a confident future for our farmers, for our regions and for the Murray river.
PM: Yes can I say thank you to the Montague family too, thank you for the little pictures that the girls did for me, all perfect apart from the Collingwood flag flying out the front, but there we have it, it was a good apple. Have we got any questions?
JOURNALIST: How does this fit in with the Murray-Darling Basin Authority's plan, does this mean that less water will have to be taken off farmers?
PM: Well we are continuing to work through the process for the Murray-Darling Basin Authority plan. The Murray-Darling Basin Authority, independent authority generating the plan, of course we now have a Parliamentary Committee led by Tony Windsor and Minister Burke is also engaged in direct consultations with communities, but the water that is able to be saved through work like this does count towards the sustainable diversion limits that you've seen in the guide which will lead to the production of the draft plan, which will ultimately, following further consultation, lead to the plan itself.
JOURNALIST: Will you be offering similar support packages for other areas?
PM: We have been big investors in upgrading irrigation infrastructure, we're doing it because it's an efficient way of saving water. When we came to Government obviously we came in a circumstance where the Federal Government had not been involved in purchasing water, so for the first time we've done that, and where the Federal Government did not have a large sustained program of upgrading irrigation, and we've been doing that and today's announcement fits in with our broader program around the country of upgrading irrigation infrastructure. So we're getting the water for productive purposes, rather than seeping or leaking or evaporating; that means for irrigation, and more for the environment itself.
JOURNALIST: So does that mean you'll be able to take less from farmers under the Murray Basin plan, or you just know yet?
PM: Well we've just got to be clear, we're some way away from having the Murray-Darling Basin Authority plan. We've got a guide, then we'll have a draft plan, and we'll have further consultations for the final plan. The concept throughout though is about sustainable diversion limits, how much water can be taken. The water that is saved through this work can count in that process, so it does make a difference but of course I don't want to pre-empt what the endpoint will be, the limits will be defined in the final plan because we've got some journey to travel yet. And throughout that journey our frame here for decision making is we want to see healthy rivers, we want to see strong communities and we want to see food production. We believe we can get a triple bottom line win: a win for the environment, a win for farmers, a win for communities. We're working on that, and making sure that we've got modern infrastructure for irrigation is part of achieving that triple bottom line win and that's what today's announcement is about.
JOURNALIST: Will we ever get to a point where there are no more open water channels in Australia? Would you like to get to that point?
PM: Well that's obviously a very grand ambition given how much open water channels we've got. The focus for our investment has to be where we can most efficiently make a difference, so the dollars can do the maximum work, which is why this project stands out, the dollars invested here can do a lot of work. Premier Brumby might want to say something.
BRUMBY: I was just going to say there's a lot of channels, I think in this, in food-bowl it's 6,500 kilometres, but of course again in partnership with the Federal Government we've just completed Wimmera Mallee Pipeline, that was something like 19,000 kilometres of open channel, and that's all piped and the beauty of this is that system now is still only on 20 per cent, it still hasn't rained a lot up there, but at just 20 per cent, because the whole system is piped, there is four years of guaranteed water security. That's a system that was losing nine litres out of every ten, you put ten litres in and only one would get through to the farmer, so you can piped these systems, but my own view is it wouldn't be realistic in the next decade or so to imagine sealing every open channel across Victoria and across Australia, but there's no doubt that this works, there's absolutely no doubt that when you upgrade the system, seal some of the pipes, put in the best metering, put in the most sophisticated irrigation equipment, you get huge water savings and we've seen that in Wimmera Mallee, we're seeing it in food-bowl.
JOURNALIST: I'll just ask the Prime Minister, are you under more pressure now to reform gay marriage laws given Mark Arbib's comments in The Australian this morning?
PM: Well Mark Arbib's made statements about his personal views, this is a matter that gets ultimately decided at our national conference as a matter for the whole of the Australian Labor Party, so Mark's expressed his personal views and no doubt he will take them to the next national conference which is the proper place to have this debate.
JOURNALIST: I think he also expressed his view for a conscience vote, if I'm not wrong, do you support that on this issue?
PM: Once again we have currently a Party policy, the Party policy's crystal clear, that marriage is between a man and a woman, that's what the Marriage Act says and that's how it should stay.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) conference next?
PM: Well this is a binding policy of the Labor conference, so the proper process here, if anybody's got a view about changing the policy or indeed how we vote on it, is to take that matter to the Party conference which is some time away.
JOURNALIST: It does seem to be an issue that's gaining a lot of traction and momentum?
PM: I think it's an issue where there's community debate, but also it's an issue where there are divided community views, I've been very clear about my view, I believe the Marriage Act should stay in the form that it is, there will be community debate because there's community debate, inevitably there will be debate in political parties as well, and I think Mark Arbib is signalling that when that debate happens in the proper place in the Labor Party, he'll have something to say during it.
JOURNALIST: And Prime Minister why has Australia made the new defence arrangements with the United States and reported in The Australian today?
PM: We'll be here in Melbourne tomorrow and Monday, in part I'm here to participate in events associated with the Ministerial Dialogue between the United States and Australia on foreign policy and defence questions. I very much thank the Premier of Victoria for having me and the Defence Minister and the Foreign Minister, and of course Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, and also Secretary Gates here in Victoria for these important discussions.
What you've seen in today's newspaper is speculation about what might come out of those talks, in those talks we anticipate discussing America's Force Posture Review in our region, we anticipate that will give rise to a process of discussion about how that Force Posture Review has implications for Australia, it could have implications in further joint exercises, it could have implications in further joint sharing of facilities, but that's to be worked through arising from these talks.
JOURNALIST: And Prime Minister you did promise Hillary Clinton a good time, how do you plan to have a good time?
PM: Well Melbourne is a very good place to have a good time, so whether it's sauntering on Melbourne's streets, grand boulevards or in our back lanes, whether it's shopping, whether it's talking to our great sporting identities or just enjoying beautiful Victorian weather, there's a lot for Secretary Clinton to do here in Melbourne.
JOURNALIST: And have you been following the State campaign, how do you think the Premier is travelling?
PM: Well you would anticipate I think that as colleagues and friends obviously I'm very admiring of John Brumby's leadership of this State. I believe when you look at what's been achieved here in Victoria under the Brumby Government, that Australia is well positioned coming out of the global financial crisis, we're coming out strong, but Victoria is particularly well positioned because of the policies of the Brumby Government, because of its leadership in innovation, its leadership in issues like the one we're talking about today: food production, its leadership in jobs and job expansion in this State. Victoria I think is coming out particularly strong and with the right management I believe that gives Victoria tremendous opportunities for the future.
JOURNALIST: Did you watch the debate last night?
PM: I didn't have the opportunity to watch the debate last night, I was attending a function. Sorry, I would have liked to but I didn't have the opportunity.
JOURNALIST: And Premier obviously good to have the Prime Minister by your side in the first week?
BRUMBY: Yeah fantastic, yeah, and it's great and I hope I expressed clearly before just how fantastic this announcement is today and we've been working on this for some time, it's something I believe in, something Tim believes in, it's about, in essence, having your cake and eating it too, it's about how you secure agriculture, how you secure regional Victoria, and you secure the environment. And to get this decision from the Prime Minister today it's just fantastic and I'll see a bit more of the Prime Minister over the weekend with a couple of activities as well, and to have her full support, working with us, particularly in relation to investment and jobs and regional development is just a wonderful partnership and I think it'll serve our State well.
JOURNALIST: You've had a bit of time to reflect on the debate, how do you think you went? A lot of the commentators are saying that Ted Ballieu might have come out on top?
BRUMBY: Look I was happy with the debate, I've said that to you last night, and I think debates are a good thing and I thought there was some good questions last night, some tough questions last night, but it was really an opportunity for me I think to make my position known about the importance of jobs, the importance of the economy, keeping the Budget in surplus, continuing to grow our State, and investing in education and health. That's what you'll get from my leadership and our Government, we're very clear about that, you'll get a strong economy, you'll get strong jobs growth, you'll get investment in education, and you'll get investment in health and you'll get us too, tackling the issue of climate change in really serious way.
JOURNALIST: Was Ted Ballieu playing by the rules last night during the debate?
BRUMBY: I'll leave that to the commentators, there'll be a hundred different views about that last night, and I think it's good we've had a lot of our Ministers out and debates as well, we've got the Burvale I think next week, so I'm looking forward to that. So it's a good, it's all part of this.
JOURNALIST: Do you think his interjections were over the top though?
BRUMBY: Well they didn't bother me, I don't know what the viewers thought of them, but they didn't bother me.



PM: It's great to be here today with Premier John Brumby, I'm also joined by the Federal Water Minister, Tony Burke, and by the Victorian Water Minister Tim Holding, and we're here today to make an important announcement. We have been working together, and the Federal Government has been driven by a reform program for the Murray-Darling Basin.
You would of heard both me and the Minister for Water Tony Burke, say constantly over the last few weeks that we want to see an outcome for the Murray-Darling Basin that means we have strong communities, we have food production, and we have healthy rivers. That we can win in all of these areas, keeping our communities strong, having food production, and improving our environment.
Today we're announcing an historic partnership which fits in with this reform agenda. It is a win for farmers, and a win for the environment. Today I'm here to announce that the Federal Government will make available $953 million to upgrade old irrigation infrastructure in the Goulburn-Murray area.
Now much of this infrastructure is old, some of it is very old, indeed 80 years old. That means of course that the water seeps, it leaks, it evaporates, and we are not using the water efficiently.
By upgrading the infrastructure we believe we can make available 200 billion litres more water, we can save it from seeping and leaking and evaporating. And the water that is saved will be divided 50 per cent for the benefit of farmers through increased irrigation, 50 per cent for the benefit of the environment with more water able to flow naturally through the river.
This is a great outcome and a product of a strong partnership with the Government of Victoria. So I'll turn now to the Victorian Premier for some comments.
PREMIER BRUMBY: Thank you very much Prime Minister and can I just too acknowledge Luke Donnellan today as the Parliamentary Secretary to me and also as the local Member. This is a fantastic announcement today and if I could thank the Prime Minister for this announcement, $953 million.
The timing of this in terms of the impact it'll have in regional areas couldn't be better, this'll mean jobs, confidence, optimism and prosperity for the future, and if you think about this in the context of what is an historically high Australian dollar, for all of our producers, whether they're in the stone fruit business, whether they're in the dairy business, this is a challenging environment with a high Australian dollar, and so what this investment will do is secure the future of irrigated agriculture and horticulture in our food-bowl region.
And I think everybody's aware we've been great supporters of this food-bowl project, it is an idea that came from the region and we talked to leading irrigators, leading horticulturalists in the region, and we worked out with them what's the best way for them to go forward, to secure the future of agriculture, to secure the future of regional Victoria, but also to return water to our environment. And that's what food-bowl project is all about, or Northern Victorian Irrigation Renewal Project as we call it. It's about investing in infrastructure that was built between 50 and 100 years ago, and it's like a lot of things that were built between 50 and 100 years ago, they're not as efficient, it's not as efficient as it could be, and the losses out of this system are huge - up to 800 billion litres a year of water lost, as the Prime Minister has said through evaporation, seepage, leakage, poor metering.
And by investing in the infrastructure, by sealing some of the systems, by taking out some of the old open channels, by improving the way in which we move that water there are immense water savings.
As the Prime Minister has said today this is a win for farmers and a win for the environment, it is. This project will ensure that there's 200 billion litres of water savings - 100 billion litres of water savings for the environment, and 100 billion litres of water savings for farmers - and of course it builds of what we're doing in stage one, so we kicked this off with our billion dollars, work is underway now, there's already 56 billion litres of savings, already those savings are coming through the system in fact at a bit better than we expected. Already they're being returned, already they're making a difference, already they're generating confidence and jobs in the region.
And last winter there was something like 500 people directly employed on projects in relation to this food-bowl stage one. Next winter you'll see even more, the winter after that even more, as the Federal money starts flowing in and this great transformational project, this great partnership between our Government and the Gillard Government kicks into full steam ahead and secures the futures of this region.
We're here today at Montague's, Montague's have got a lot of investments, four generations of families right across the State, some of them in the food-bowl region, but they know the importance of secure irrigated water for the future. In terms of making the big investments, in terms of generating the jobs, and so this is a just a fantastic investment, a fantastic announcement for our State today, and as the Prime Minister said, in the current debate about Murray-Darling I think this is a great signal by the Federal Government about the direction in which they're heading, where you can have a win for farmers, a win for regional Australia, and a win for the environment as well.
More water for the Murray, but more water too for irrigated agriculture, so it's a fantastic announcement Prime Minister, we thank you for that, and I think today is really a great stepping stone to a confident future for our farmers, for our regions and for the Murray river.
PM: Yes can I say thank you to the Montague family too, thank you for the little pictures that the girls did for me, all perfect apart from the Collingwood flag flying out the front, but there we have it, it was a good apple. Have we got any questions?
JOURNALIST: How does this fit in with the Murray-Darling Basin Authority's plan, does this mean that less water will have to be taken off farmers?
PM: Well we are continuing to work through the process for the Murray-Darling Basin Authority plan. The Murray-Darling Basin Authority, independent authority generating the plan, of course we now have a Parliamentary Committee led by Tony Windsor and Minister Burke is also engaged in direct consultations with communities, but the water that is able to be saved through work like this does count towards the sustainable diversion limits that you've seen in the guide which will lead to the production of the draft plan, which will ultimately, following further consultation, lead to the plan itself.
JOURNALIST: Will you be offering similar support packages for other areas?
PM: We have been big investors in upgrading irrigation infrastructure, we're doing it because it's an efficient way of saving water. When we came to Government obviously we came in a circumstance where the Federal Government had not been involved in purchasing water, so for the first time we've done that, and where the Federal Government did not have a large sustained program of upgrading irrigation, and we've been doing that and today's announcement fits in with our broader program around the country of upgrading irrigation infrastructure. So we're getting the water for productive purposes, rather than seeping or leaking or evaporating; that means for irrigation, and more for the environment itself.
JOURNALIST: So does that mean you'll be able to take less from farmers under the Murray Basin plan, or you just know yet?
PM: Well we've just got to be clear, we're some way away from having the Murray-Darling Basin Authority plan. We've got a guide, then we'll have a draft plan, and we'll have further consultations for the final plan. The concept throughout though is about sustainable diversion limits, how much water can be taken. The water that is saved through this work can count in that process, so it does make a difference but of course I don't want to pre-empt what the endpoint will be, the limits will be defined in the final plan because we've got some journey to travel yet. And throughout that journey our frame here for decision making is we want to see healthy rivers, we want to see strong communities and we want to see food production. We believe we can get a triple bottom line win: a win for the environment, a win for farmers, a win for communities. We're working on that, and making sure that we've got modern infrastructure for irrigation is part of achieving that triple bottom line win and that's what today's announcement is about.
JOURNALIST: Will we ever get to a point where there are no more open water channels in Australia? Would you like to get to that point?
PM: Well that's obviously a very grand ambition given how much open water channels we've got. The focus for our investment has to be where we can most efficiently make a difference, so the dollars can do the maximum work, which is why this project stands out, the dollars invested here can do a lot of work. Premier Brumby might want to say something.
BRUMBY: I was just going to say there's a lot of channels, I think in this, in food-bowl it's 6,500 kilometres, but of course again in partnership with the Federal Government we've just completed Wimmera Mallee Pipeline, that was something like 19,000 kilometres of open channel, and that's all piped and the beauty of this is that system now is still only on 20 per cent, it still hasn't rained a lot up there, but at just 20 per cent, because the whole system is piped, there is four years of guaranteed water security. That's a system that was losing nine litres out of every ten, you put ten litres in and only one would get through to the farmer, so you can piped these systems, but my own view is it wouldn't be realistic in the next decade or so to imagine sealing every open channel across Victoria and across Australia, but there's no doubt that this works, there's absolutely no doubt that when you upgrade the system, seal some of the pipes, put in the best metering, put in the most sophisticated irrigation equipment, you get huge water savings and we've seen that in Wimmera Mallee, we're seeing it in food-bowl.
JOURNALIST: I'll just ask the Prime Minister, are you under more pressure now to reform gay marriage laws given Mark Arbib's comments in The Australian this morning?
PM: Well Mark Arbib's made statements about his personal views, this is a matter that gets ultimately decided at our national conference as a matter for the whole of the Australian Labor Party, so Mark's expressed his personal views and no doubt he will take them to the next national conference which is the proper place to have this debate.
JOURNALIST: I think he also expressed his view for a conscience vote, if I'm not wrong, do you support that on this issue?
PM: Once again we have currently a Party policy, the Party policy's crystal clear, that marriage is between a man and a woman, that's what the Marriage Act says and that's how it should stay.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) conference next?
PM: Well this is a binding policy of the Labor conference, so the proper process here, if anybody's got a view about changing the policy or indeed how we vote on it, is to take that matter to the Party conference which is some time away.
JOURNALIST: It does seem to be an issue that's gaining a lot of traction and momentum?
PM: I think it's an issue where there's community debate, but also it's an issue where there are divided community views, I've been very clear about my view, I believe the Marriage Act should stay in the form that it is, there will be community debate because there's community debate, inevitably there will be debate in political parties as well, and I think Mark Arbib is signalling that when that debate happens in the proper place in the Labor Party, he'll have something to say during it.
JOURNALIST: And Prime Minister why has Australia made the new defence arrangements with the United States and reported in The Australian today?
PM: We'll be here in Melbourne tomorrow and Monday, in part I'm here to participate in events associated with the Ministerial Dialogue between the United States and Australia on foreign policy and defence questions. I very much thank the Premier of Victoria for having me and the Defence Minister and the Foreign Minister, and of course Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, and also Secretary Gates here in Victoria for these important discussions.
What you've seen in today's newspaper is speculation about what might come out of those talks, in those talks we anticipate discussing America's Force Posture Review in our region, we anticipate that will give rise to a process of discussion about how that Force Posture Review has implications for Australia, it could have implications in further joint exercises, it could have implications in further joint sharing of facilities, but that's to be worked through arising from these talks.
JOURNALIST: And Prime Minister you did promise Hillary Clinton a good time, how do you plan to have a good time?
PM: Well Melbourne is a very good place to have a good time, so whether it's sauntering on Melbourne's streets, grand boulevards or in our back lanes, whether it's shopping, whether it's talking to our great sporting identities or just enjoying beautiful Victorian weather, there's a lot for Secretary Clinton to do here in Melbourne.
JOURNALIST: And have you been following the State campaign, how do you think the Premier is travelling?
PM: Well you would anticipate I think that as colleagues and friends obviously I'm very admiring of John Brumby's leadership of this State. I believe when you look at what's been achieved here in Victoria under the Brumby Government, that Australia is well positioned coming out of the global financial crisis, we're coming out strong, but Victoria is particularly well positioned because of the policies of the Brumby Government, because of its leadership in innovation, its leadership in issues like the one we're talking about today: food production, its leadership in jobs and job expansion in this State. Victoria I think is coming out particularly strong and with the right management I believe that gives Victoria tremendous opportunities for the future.
JOURNALIST: Did you watch the debate last night?
PM: I didn't have the opportunity to watch the debate last night, I was attending a function. Sorry, I would have liked to but I didn't have the opportunity.
JOURNALIST: And Premier obviously good to have the Prime Minister by your side in the first week?
BRUMBY: Yeah fantastic, yeah, and it's great and I hope I expressed clearly before just how fantastic this announcement is today and we've been working on this for some time, it's something I believe in, something Tim believes in, it's about, in essence, having your cake and eating it too, it's about how you secure agriculture, how you secure regional Victoria, and you secure the environment. And to get this decision from the Prime Minister today it's just fantastic and I'll see a bit more of the Prime Minister over the weekend with a couple of activities as well, and to have her full support, working with us, particularly in relation to investment and jobs and regional development is just a wonderful partnership and I think it'll serve our State well.
JOURNALIST: You've had a bit of time to reflect on the debate, how do you think you went? A lot of the commentators are saying that Ted Ballieu might have come out on top?
BRUMBY: Look I was happy with the debate, I've said that to you last night, and I think debates are a good thing and I thought there was some good questions last night, some tough questions last night, but it was really an opportunity for me I think to make my position known about the importance of jobs, the importance of the economy, keeping the Budget in surplus, continuing to grow our State, and investing in education and health. That's what you'll get from my leadership and our Government, we're very clear about that, you'll get a strong economy, you'll get strong jobs growth, you'll get investment in education, and you'll get investment in health and you'll get us too, tackling the issue of climate change in really serious way.
JOURNALIST: Was Ted Ballieu playing by the rules last night during the debate?
BRUMBY: I'll leave that to the commentators, there'll be a hundred different views about that last night, and I think it's good we've had a lot of our Ministers out and debates as well, we've got the Burvale I think next week, so I'm looking forward to that. So it's a good, it's all part of this.
JOURNALIST: Do you think his interjections were over the top though?
BRUMBY: Well they didn't bother me, I don't know what the viewers thought of them, but they didn't bother me.



HOST: Prime Minister welcome to the program.
PM: Thank you Laurie.
HOST: Why did you allow Joe Hockey to steal a political march on you over the banks?
PM: I'm not necessarily going to accept that analysis Laurie, but what I would say is this. The Government, for a number of months, has been working on a further package about banking, indeed this was made public I think in early October by the Treasurer Wayne Swan. This comes on top of our package from the middle of the year and ASIC this week will make some announcements about how that will come into force, and that package is about cracking down on unfair mortgage exit fees, the things that keep people bound into their banks even though they want to change, because they want to shop around and get a better deal.
Wayne is working on a further package, we're doing that in a methodical way, obviously we want to get this right across for banking and for measures that affect the economy generally, they have to be right.
HOST: But the perception is that Joe Hockey's forced you to act; I mean have you blown the politics of this?
PM: There's a difference between being in Government and being in Opposition. In Government Laurie, we are going to work carefully, methodically, get things done, get things right, and make a difference for Australians. Joe Hockey, in Opposition, is jumping up and down on the one spot shouting 'look at me, look at me, everybody pay attention to me.' These are different tasks, so Wayne-
HOST: But he is going to introduce a Bill to give the ACCC power to deal with collusive price signalling, will the Government vote for that or consider voting for it?
PM: It's been no mystery Laurie that for a number of months Wayne Swan has been working on precisely that measure, but we're going to get it right, we've been working with the regulators, we've been consulting, this is an economy wide measure. Yes it will have impact on the banks, but it will also have impact on businesses in other sectors and we are not going to risk an unintended consequence for a struggling small business somewhere in Australia. So Joe Hockey might be typing something up and cobbling it together, but we will bring forward to the Parliament, and to the public, a package of measures that are well thought through and carefully done.
HOST: Now when will we see that, and how extensive will it be?
PM: Well Wayne Swan's made it clear that we will see that next month and Wayne Swan has also made clear that he's working on a number of measures.
HOST: He's calling it a wave; I mean that sounds very big and very dramatic.
PM: Well Laurie it will be a number of measures that Wayne will be bringing forward. We are about facilitating greater competition in banking. We want consumers to be able to put pressure on the banks by saying to them 'look, I'm a person, I can take my business elsewhere, I can shop around, I can get a better deal.' There are various ways that banks hold consumers in, there are various ways that competition is not easily facilitated in the current market, so Wayne is working through measures to do just that.
HOST: But once you promise a wave of reform, you raise expectations, risk disappointing the punters don't you?
PM: I would say to Australians the measures that we will bring forward will add to competition in the banking sector. We've already brought forward some measures and people will see that, they will see this week the operationalising of the measure to crack down on unfair mortgage exit fees, which keep people tied into banking products they no longer want and they can get a better deal elsewhere.
So Wayne is working carefully on these measures and he will bring them forward, that is the right thing to do, rather than the sort of Joe Hockey 'everybody pay attention to Joe Hockey' kind of conduct that we've seen.
HOST: Well Ralph Norris, the amazingly well paid head of the Commonwealth Bank, claims that short-term populism is damaging Australia's reputation among foreign investors. Is he right?
PM: I'm not going to agree with Ralph Norris on any critiques about banking, I believe that Australians are sending the banks a message loud and clear and I hope Ralph Norris and other banking CEOs listen to that message.
HOST: Another quick economic issue, the appreciation of the dollar has caused a big drop in Government revenue, do you still absolutely guarantee that the Budget will be back in the black in 2013.
PM: The Budget will be back in the black, back in surplus, in 2012-13-
HOST: Guaranteed?
PM: Yes, the Budget is coming back to surplus Laurie in 2012-13 as promised. You are right, the high Australian dollar has had an impact on revenues and there is consequently revisions that will be seen in the upcoming Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, they particularly affect the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, and all of that will be in front of peoples' eyes in the updated figures. But we are determined to drive the biggest fiscal consolidation since the 1960s, we're a Government with a track record of savings, we've saved more than $80 billion over our Budgets, we are going to keep up the discipline and we will bring the Budget back to surplus as promised.
HOST: Because the obviously alternative to not doing, well the alternative to breaking your promise, is tough cuts and breaking other promises. Are you prepared to break other promises to keep this one?
PM: Laurie I think we've shown an ability to manage the Budget, where we make savings, where we make sure that Budget dollars are doing the work we want them to do, and as a result we're showing the fiscal discipline necessary to bring the Budget back to surplus.
HOST: Ok, you're spending time today with Hillary Clinton. Yesterday in a slip of the tongue she referred to Kevin Rudd as the Prime Minister, is that embarrassing?
PM: I don't think so Laurie, just a slip of the tongue, I mean everybody can make a misstatement can't they?
HOST: I guess so, but I mean it does indicated the rest of the world perhaps still sees Kevin Rudd as the trump?
PM: Not of any interest or consequence to me Laurie, obviously just a slip of the tongue and there we have it.
HOST: What will you and the Secretary of State talk about?
PM: Well the Secretary of State is here for the AUSMIN talks, these are our pivotal security dialogue talks with the United States. We of course have a major, the most major of our defence alliances is with the United States, we are long-term allies, long-term friends, we keep our alliance fresh and contemporary through this kind of dialogue and we will be talking about Afghanistan, we will be talking about security issues in our region. America is further engaging with the Asia-Pacific, for example, joining the East Asia Summit which I have recently attended, so we will be talking about that.
We will be also talking about some of the contemporary challenges, the new challenges: space junk Laurie, in the modern age we have to worry about things like space junk and also we have to worry about things like cyber security and they will all be part of these talks.
HOST: When you're discussing Afghanistan with Secretary Clinton, are you going to talk about an exit strategy. I mean you've said we'll be there for ten years, do you think the Americans will still be there in ten years?
PM: The talk in Afghanistan is all about transition, the way in which transition will occur, the conditions that will lead to transition. I dealt with this matter when I spoke in the Parliamentary debate and I've made it very clear that transition needs to be conditions based, it will happen place by place, individual regions and areas will stabalise more quickly on others. We should transition at a point that we are satisfied that Afghan security forces can take the lead and that that lead can be sustained. I've been very clear, I think it would be a bad error to transition out only to have to transition back in, so the conditions that would lead to transition are the pivotal discussions now, I expect it to be had in part here in Australia during the AUSMIN talks, I then expect it to be had even more comprehensively in the NATO discussions in Lisbon.
HOST: Are you going to that meeting?
PM: I have decided to go to that meeting, I will be accompanied by Stephen Smith, the Minister for Defence, but in my view those talks are absolutely pivotal to the delivery of the agreed strategy in Afghanistan, and to understanding the conditions that enable transition which will guide what our forces do and when our forces can start transitioning out. So I intend to personally participate in those talks in Lisbon.
HOST: And what message will you take?
PM: The message I'll take is the one that I've really just said Laurie. I've got a very firm view that we need to be very clear that when we are transitioning our forces and transitioning leadership to local Afghan forces, that that needs to be irreversible. So there's some intellectual labour that needs to brought to bear when we say we're going to engage in a conditions based transition. How do we define the conditions, how do we know the time is right, how to we know that the Afghan security leadership is sustainable? That's what I anticipate the NATO talks will be focussing on and it's in that discussion that I want to make a contribution.
HOST: Now in these talks with Hillary Clinton and Secretary of State Gates at the AUSMIN talks, we read that this will all lead to an increased US military presence in Australia. What do we need that?
PM: The US is engaged in what it calls a Force Posture Review, so looking at its forces in our region, and working out how they are best deployed for the future. We anticipate that at the AUSMIN talks, part of the discussion will be on that Force Posture Review and implications that it may have for further joint exercises or joint use of Australian facilities. There will then be a process following AUSMIN to work through individual decisions.
I think this is in Australia's national interest Laurie, obviously our defence relationship with the United States is critical to us, it is our foundation stone alliance, in those circumstances the best possible cooperation between our Defence Forces is in Australia's interest. We collaborate, we cooperate well now. If you go and talk to American defence generals, they'll say to you every time they turn around, they meet an embedded Australian who is working alongside them. We are well complimented about the quality of our Defence personnel and troops, but further engagement, further collaboration is in Australia's interests.
HOST: But is the idea of having a lot more Americans here, sharing bases with them, giving them increased access to Australian bases, is that all about the military expansion of China?
PM: The Force Posture Review is obviously an American led process determining how it wants to have its forces work and where it wants them to bring ships in to harbour and refuel and all of those kind of things.
It does give the possibility, of course, for further joint exercises, further collaboration, that's in Australia's interest. I do expect that at the AUSMIN talks we will be talking about stability and security issues in our region. I think we will be talking about the geopolitics of our region, and that means of course we'll be talking about the rise of China and as China rises, what sort of force it is going to be in the world. I believe we have a shared perspective with the United States that we want China to be a force for good, strongly engaged in global and regional architecture, strongly engaged in a rules-based framework. I anticipate that those questions about China's rise and the impact on our region and on our globe will be part of what we discuss at AUSMIN.
HOST: Are you developing a passion for this stuff yet?
PM: Laurie, the thing that brought me into politics of course was my passion for education, and that will always be the thing that is absolutely closest to my heart, creating opportunity for Australian children, making sure every child gets a fair chance. Education has defined my life, it has made me what I am today, I'd like others to enjoy that benefit, that opportunity, that very great privilege, that great start in life, so that will always be closest to my heart. You should expect me on foreign affairs to be a feisty advocate of Australia's national interest. I love this country, I'm proud of it, I'm happy to argue that with anyone, anywhere, anytime including in the councils of the world.
HOST: Will you be a feisty advocate next week at APEC, you will be talking to President Obama there, will you discuss climate change with him? And how do you think his decision to abandon a cap and trade system, emissions trading system, impacts on your policy to introduce a carbon price?
PM: I'm looking forward to meeting President Obama, I will obviously see him at the G20 and then meet directly with him at APEC which immediately follows it in time, though different country, we'll move from Korea to Japan. On climate change, President Obama is obviously defining the strategy for his country, in circumstances where the Congress has been difficult for President Obama to deliver his reform agenda on climate change, and post the mid-term elections Laurie, it is going to be increasingly difficult. So President Obama is defining a strategy to tackle climate change in the political circumstances that America finds itself in. We are great friends and allies of America, but we are not an American State. We are our own country, we will determine our own strategy.
HOST: Is there a point in us going ahead now that America has dumped the idea?
PM: Laurie, emissions trading schemes, prices on carbon, different ways of tackling climate change, are being developed around the world. And yes, different countries are finding different paths, many have gone down the path of pricing carbon.
You are talking now about America; California has had a way of pricing carbon for quite a long period of time now. So we will determine our own national strategy in our own national interest. I believe it's in Australia's interest to tackle climate change, and it's in Australia's interest to make sure we transform our economy to a low pollution, low carbon economy. The world is moving in that direction, it will require it of other economies, it will impact competition, how people trade, what they buy. We can't afford to have our economy fall behind.
HOST: Quick final issue, there's a lot of talk about a lack of vision in Labor, headlines in the weekend, like disquiet on Labor's lack of vision, your own people are being talking about it. Does Labor have a vision, and if you do have, can you tell us what the vision is in words other than 'moving forward'?
PM: Laurie, I do have a vision and of course I will be laying that out increasingly as Prime Minister for the Australian people. My vision is about a country with a strong economy and opportunities for all Australians. We will be laying out our election campaign, and the content of that.
HOST: So Labor doesn't lack a soul, doesn't lack a core?
PM: No, it does not Laurie.
HOST: Prime Minister, we thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: Can I thank Daniel Grollo for having us here today, and it's obviously a great pleasure for me to be here with Secretary of State Clinton and with our ambassadors, both the US Ambassador to Australia, Ambassador Bleich, and of course our very old friend and our Ambassador to the United States Kim Beazley.
And we are here today to talk about how we jointly are working on and facing up to the challenge of tackling climate change, and as Daniel has explained, there could be no better place to have this discussion than in this remarkable building, where the wind turbines up on the roof that we've just seen were invented here in Victoria, in fact they're from Bendigo. And the living roof features local grass species, and the information technology that runs throughout this building manages all of the systems, the carpet, the photo-voltaic roof arrangement which was manufactured in the United States.
So this building in and of itself is a partnership of Australian products and American products.
Of course as a Government we are strongly committed to investing in renewable energy and that's why we've set the renewable we've set the renewable energy target of 20 per cent by 2020. And the very setting of that target is expected to drive $19 billion in investment, and we've further allocated $5.1 billion to our clean energy initiative to drive further innovation.
We're also committed to deliver to the Australian people a number of new energy initiatives, including implementing standards for new coal fired power stations and extending the energy efficiency opportunities program to electricity generators.
We're going to set mandatory CO2 standards for light vehicles and we're going to implement tax breaks for green buildings. We are of course going to continue to pursue our efforts to put a price on carbon in our economy.
Australian and the United States have a long and productive history of working in partnership in areas that will shape the future including on clean energy. Recently we've enhanced our collaboration in the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, and I want to acknowledge that we announced that new initiative when Ambassador Bleich and I had the opportunity to travel to Gorgon on Barrow Island in the far north west of our country.
We've earmarked a number of Fulbright scholarships for specific research in the field of climate and clean energy research and I'd acknowledge our friends that have joined up from Fulbright today.
And we've created a new joint committee on science and technology to identify new areas for collaborative research on clean energy, energy efficiency and climate research.
Today I'm very pleased, with Secretary of State Clinton, to be able to announce a further step, a major new initiative that builds on these joint efforts between our two nations.
Australia and the United States have agreed a new solar research collaboration initiative. Now I think we all know that solar power has significant potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and provide the clean energy we need for the future.
One of the greatest barriers to a broader commercial take-up of solar power is its cost, and that is specifically what this joint research initiative will address. The price of solar technology has come down in recent years but we need to accelerate that trend. The joint project, with the United States, is part of an aggressive effort to bring the sales price of solar technology down by two to four times, down to the point where the price of electricity from solar is comparable to electricity generated from conventional sources.
Now this is an ambitious goal, but anyone who has stood under the Australian sun, even here in Melbourne where sometimes we see and sometimes we don't, knows how much we stand to gain in we can do this.
So the Australian Government will commit new funding of up to $50 million for this initiative to be managed by the Australian Solar Institute. This builds on the work of the Australian Solar Institute which is already driving collaboration, focussed research and development that will have a major impact on the efficiency and cost effectiveness of solar technologies.
That will support research and development collaboration with the United States, including through a number of foundation projects. We will be concentrating on solar power technologies, the research is expected to look at advanced solar technologies, such as dual-junction photo-voltaic devices, hot-carrier solar cells and high-temperature receivers, all likely to be part of our future.
The United States also has a very strong solar energy research program and this new initiative will build on existing expertise from both of our countries. These joint efforts will ensure that we lead the way in development and supply of the most competitive solar technologies at the most reasonable price.
In conclusion can I take this opportunity to thank the US Government and Secretary Clinton for their continued commitment to investment in technology that is essential to a clean energy future.
Thank you very much.
SECRETARY OF STATE CLINTON: Well good afternoon. We just had a wonderful lunch and I think speaking for myself I'm still back relishing the break in the schedule and having fun in Melbourne.
Let me start by thanking the Prime Minister for her leadership on this really important issue, it's obviously important for Australia but it's important as a global commitment and we look forward to working with her on this and so many other matters.
Daniel Grollo thank you for having us at this amazing example of what can be done when contractors, developers, construction companies, owners, get together and decide to make the investments that will pay off in clean energy, in this case, zero carbon buildings.
I also want to acknowledge Lyndell Wilson, the acting Executive Director of the Australian Fulbright Commission, Nick Otter the CEO of Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute and Wayne Kemp, district General Manager of Honeywell.
I've had an extraordinary trip through Asia over the last two weeks, I don't think there is a more important event that I've participated in than this one. To speak about our efforts on climate change and clean technology at a building that represents the future. This building, thanks to Grocon's commitment, brought together your country's most creative minds to create a building with ingenious energy saving features. It puts energy back into the power grid from its wind turbines and its solar panels, it has a living roof that we just saw, that cuts cooling costs. It uses mainly rainwater and filters its own waste water through beds of reeds to reduce the run-off it sends into the sewers.
Now I am sure that many Australians and frankly Americans and others will be studying the Pixel building example. Certainly the State Department will want to send our experts to delve into greater specificity with you because we are committed to building environmentally sustainable embassies all over the world. So this sets an example, unfortunately it's unique and in the world we are trying to create we want it to be typical, standard, routine, that buildings do what this one does in terms of efficiency.
We really have very little time to make our buildings, which are massive users of inefficient greenhouse gas produced energy, more in line of what we are seeking. We need innovations like the ones we see here to generate renewable energy and manufacture goods without polluting our air and water, and these tools need to be affordable and available in every country.
So we need to start a global clean tech industry and that will help our economies grow by creating tens of thousands of new jobs and give us viable alternatives to fossil fuels and reduce our dependence of foreign sources of energy. I think that the United States and Australia working together can be pioneers of this movement and I'm excited that we are joining forces, taking our sophisticated research and energy abilities and putting them together for this purpose. We each have brilliant scientists working on problems like capturing carbon, increasing food production, developing more efficient technologies and I think both the people of Australia and America don't want to see more bickering about what should be done to reduce carbon emissions, they want to see action and the Prime Minister and I are here today to say we are committed to action.
I know that the Cancun conference is coming up soon to build on what happened at Copenhagen. I am one who believed strongly that we accomplished less than what we should have at Copenhagen but we did come out with an agreement and we're committed to working with our partners around the world, particularly the Government of Australia, to ensure that we make progress again at Cancun.
And so rather than just waiting for global agreements, we have decided between our two Governments to take steps on our own.
First we are launching, as the Prime Minister said, a new solar energy research collaboration. We have a common goal of making solar energy competitive with conventional sources by the middle of this decade, 2015. The good news is that the price of photo-voltaic modules has dropped about 50 per cent in the past three years, but to meet our goal we have to drive the price down even more.
I can remember when the first cell-phones came out, you know they weighed as much as a brick, they were very expensive and look at now where we have advanced to because we made it a goal that the result would be cell-phone technology available universally and we now have 4.6 billion cell-phones in the world. Well under this initiative our two Governments will share both the cost and the benefits of research and development, which will speed up innovation.
Second we are stepping up our joint efforts to make it commercially viable to capture and store greenhouse gasses. I'm pleased to announce that the State Department will provide a new $500,000 grant to the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute which is co-funded by the Australian Government.
This new funding will help promote carbon capture and storage in developing countries, it will pay for a global survey to identify the most promising technologies for reusing carbon dioxide. For instance by turning it into materials that can be used for roads or buildings, or into liquid fuel that can power cars or generate electricity, and our support for this Institute demonstrates we want to make sure that the best ideas get the funding they deserve.
Third we're expanding one of the world's best educational programs, the Fulbright Scholarships. We're creating a special focus on climate change. Over the next three years Australia and the United States will fund up to 15 additional scholars to work specifically on climate change and clean energy. We hope these clean tech Fulbright Scholars will do some of the work that advances our understanding of climate change and leads to new commercially viable solutions.
Fourth we are expanding our collaborations on science and technology across all the difference agencies of our Government, to make sure that our efforts dovetail together we will convene a science and technology joint commission meeting in Washington in February. We want to make sure that in both the United States and Australia, we're getting the best return on taxpayer's investments in these new technologies.
Now I think what you're seeing here this afternoon is a recognition by both of our Governments and the people of our two countries that in the 21st century no single country will be able to address these environmental challenges on its own. We need partnerships now more than ever, we need all the talent and the capital we can muster and I cannot imagine a better partner than Australia in building the kind of green clean and prosperous future that we want and deserve.
So Prime Minister thank you for leading this effort here in Australia and for all that you are doing. We look forward to working with you.
Now I think we're going to answer a couple of questions?
PM: We are going to answer a couple of questions.
JOURNALIST: Madame Secretary I have a question for you, it's Sabra Lane from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. President Obama's comments abandoning the emissions trading scheme, have been seized on by the Opposition here, they say that the Prime Minister should follow that lead and abandon it here. I'm interested to hear your thoughts on that. Many commentators believe that that decision will now have an impact right around the world, with other countries deciding to ditch emissions trading scheme as a means of bringing down carbon emissions. Is that your view and if so, is it government regulation or a carbon tax that will be the best way of reducing emissions?
CLINTON: First let me start by saying that I think what President Obama said the other day was a statement of the reality that we face politically in the United States Congress. As you may know the President was successful in passing a cap and trade system through the United States House of Representatives, we were not successful in getting that considered by the Senate.
Given the changes of the mid-term election and the fact that in our system if you don't have action on pending legislation by the end of the Congress with ends this coming January, then you have to start over, and so the President is still very committed to the United States addressing climate change, making investments in clean energy and we will be looking at a range of options to take, including as you point out the regulatory route, which we've already been doing in concert with the legislative route.
I don't think that President Obama's statement is meant to describe anything other than what is happening inside the United States. Obviously decisions in Australia are up to the Government of Australia and the people of Australia, but what we are absolutely clear eyed about is our commitment to addressing climate change and its affects. So we're going to keep moving forward, and we're going to come up with approaches that we think will work, some of them regulatory, some of them supporting the kind of clean building initiative that we see here, some of them through legislation.
PM: I think we are taking a question from our American friends, yes?
JOURNALIST: Hi, this is a question for both of you. I know that trade is on the agenda and you've been talking about it. I want to ask about that in light of the recent terror scare prompted by the packages that were mailed from Yemen. Do you think there should be tighter restrictions on international shipping by air or by sea, and if so how do you manage that and not put a crimp on economic growth?
PM: Well I'm happy to answer that for Australia's behalf. What we would say is that we are very committed to free trade, we have an open trading economy, we're very committed to seeing the world continue to make progress on trade liberalisation and at the forthcoming G20 the future and level of ambition of the Doha round will obviously be under discussion.
With the scare from Yemen, I believe the solution is not in turning our backs on trade, we've got to have free and open trade, we also need to have the adequate screening and security that makes sure that that trade is safe. For Australia we immediately moved to a new screening regime, we don't have direct carbon shipments from Yemen, so we were screening 100 per cent of cargo coming through ports like Dubai for the immediate days that follow. We have now instituted the kind of protocols that are being followed around the world for screening arrangements.
So yes it has changed levels of security, but that's the appropriate response. Turning our back on free trade is not the appropriate response.
CLINTON: I agree completely. 



HOST: Prime Minister welcome to the program.
PM: Thank you Laurie.
HOST: Why did you allow Joe Hockey to steal a political march on you over the banks?
PM: I'm not necessarily going to accept that analysis Laurie, but what I would say is this. The Government, for a number of months, has been working on a further package about banking, indeed this was made public I think in early October by the Treasurer Wayne Swan. This comes on top of our package from the middle of the year and ASIC this week will make some announcements about how that will come into force, and that package is about cracking down on unfair mortgage exit fees, the things that keep people bound into their banks even though they want to change, because they want to shop around and get a better deal.
Wayne is working on a further package, we're doing that in a methodical way, obviously we want to get this right across for banking and for measures that affect the economy generally, they have to be right.
HOST: But the perception is that Joe Hockey's forced you to act; I mean have you blown the politics of this?
PM: There's a difference between being in Government and being in Opposition. In Government Laurie, we are going to work carefully, methodically, get things done, get things right, and make a difference for Australians. Joe Hockey, in Opposition, is jumping up and down on the one spot shouting 'look at me, look at me, everybody pay attention to me.' These are different tasks, so Wayne-
HOST: But he is going to introduce a Bill to give the ACCC power to deal with collusive price signalling, will the Government vote for that or consider voting for it?
PM: It's been no mystery Laurie that for a number of months Wayne Swan has been working on precisely that measure, but we're going to get it right, we've been working with the regulators, we've been consulting, this is an economy wide measure. Yes it will have impact on the banks, but it will also have impact on businesses in other sectors and we are not going to risk an unintended consequence for a struggling small business somewhere in Australia. So Joe Hockey might be typing something up and cobbling it together, but we will bring forward to the Parliament, and to the public, a package of measures that are well thought through and carefully done.
HOST: Now when will we see that, and how extensive will it be?
PM: Well Wayne Swan's made it clear that we will see that next month and Wayne Swan has also made clear that he's working on a number of measures.
HOST: He's calling it a wave; I mean that sounds very big and very dramatic.
PM: Well Laurie it will be a number of measures that Wayne will be bringing forward. We are about facilitating greater competition in banking. We want consumers to be able to put pressure on the banks by saying to them 'look, I'm a person, I can take my business elsewhere, I can shop around, I can get a better deal.' There are various ways that banks hold consumers in, there are various ways that competition is not easily facilitated in the current market, so Wayne is working through measures to do just that.
HOST: But once you promise a wave of reform, you raise expectations, risk disappointing the punters don't you?
PM: I would say to Australians the measures that we will bring forward will add to competition in the banking sector. We've already brought forward some measures and people will see that, they will see this week the operationalising of the measure to crack down on unfair mortgage exit fees, which keep people tied into banking products they no longer want and they can get a better deal elsewhere.
So Wayne is working carefully on these measures and he will bring them forward, that is the right thing to do, rather than the sort of Joe Hockey 'everybody pay attention to Joe Hockey' kind of conduct that we've seen.
HOST: Well Ralph Norris, the amazingly well paid head of the Commonwealth Bank, claims that short-term populism is damaging Australia's reputation among foreign investors. Is he right?
PM: I'm not going to agree with Ralph Norris on any critiques about banking, I believe that Australians are sending the banks a message loud and clear and I hope Ralph Norris and other banking CEOs listen to that message.
HOST: Another quick economic issue, the appreciation of the dollar has caused a big drop in Government revenue, do you still absolutely guarantee that the Budget will be back in the black in 2013.
PM: The Budget will be back in the black, back in surplus, in 2012-13-
HOST: Guaranteed?
PM: Yes, the Budget is coming back to surplus Laurie in 2012-13 as promised. You are right, the high Australian dollar has had an impact on revenues and there is consequently revisions that will be seen in the upcoming Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, they particularly affect the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, and all of that will be in front of peoples' eyes in the updated figures. But we are determined to drive the biggest fiscal consolidation since the 1960s, we're a Government with a track record of savings, we've saved more than $80 billion over our Budgets, we are going to keep up the discipline and we will bring the Budget back to surplus as promised.
HOST: Because the obviously alternative to not doing, well the alternative to breaking your promise, is tough cuts and breaking other promises. Are you prepared to break other promises to keep this one?
PM: Laurie I think we've shown an ability to manage the Budget, where we make savings, where we make sure that Budget dollars are doing the work we want them to do, and as a result we're showing the fiscal discipline necessary to bring the Budget back to surplus.
HOST: Ok, you're spending time today with Hillary Clinton. Yesterday in a slip of the tongue she referred to Kevin Rudd as the Prime Minister, is that embarrassing?
PM: I don't think so Laurie, just a slip of the tongue, I mean everybody can make a misstatement can't they?
HOST: I guess so, but I mean it does indicated the rest of the world perhaps still sees Kevin Rudd as the trump?
PM: Not of any interest or consequence to me Laurie, obviously just a slip of the tongue and there we have it.
HOST: What will you and the Secretary of State talk about?
PM: Well the Secretary of State is here for the AUSMIN talks, these are our pivotal security dialogue talks with the United States. We of course have a major, the most major of our defence alliances is with the United States, we are long-term allies, long-term friends, we keep our alliance fresh and contemporary through this kind of dialogue and we will be talking about Afghanistan, we will be talking about security issues in our region. America is further engaging with the Asia-Pacific, for example, joining the East Asia Summit which I have recently attended, so we will be talking about that.
We will be also talking about some of the contemporary challenges, the new challenges: space junk Laurie, in the modern age we have to worry about things like space junk and also we have to worry about things like cyber security and they will all be part of these talks.
HOST: When you're discussing Afghanistan with Secretary Clinton, are you going to talk about an exit strategy. I mean you've said we'll be there for ten years, do you think the Americans will still be there in ten years?
PM: The talk in Afghanistan is all about transition, the way in which transition will occur, the conditions that will lead to transition. I dealt with this matter when I spoke in the Parliamentary debate and I've made it very clear that transition needs to be conditions based, it will happen place by place, individual regions and areas will stabalise more quickly on others. We should transition at a point that we are satisfied that Afghan security forces can take the lead and that that lead can be sustained. I've been very clear, I think it would be a bad error to transition out only to have to transition back in, so the conditions that would lead to transition are the pivotal discussions now, I expect it to be had in part here in Australia during the AUSMIN talks, I then expect it to be had even more comprehensively in the NATO discussions in Lisbon.
HOST: Are you going to that meeting?
PM: I have decided to go to that meeting, I will be accompanied by Stephen Smith, the Minister for Defence, but in my view those talks are absolutely pivotal to the delivery of the agreed strategy in Afghanistan, and to understanding the conditions that enable transition which will guide what our forces do and when our forces can start transitioning out. So I intend to personally participate in those talks in Lisbon.
HOST: And what message will you take?
PM: The message I'll take is the one that I've really just said Laurie. I've got a very firm view that we need to be very clear that when we are transitioning our forces and transitioning leadership to local Afghan forces, that that needs to be irreversible. So there's some intellectual labour that needs to brought to bear when we say we're going to engage in a conditions based transition. How do we define the conditions, how do we know the time is right, how to we know that the Afghan security leadership is sustainable? That's what I anticipate the NATO talks will be focussing on and it's in that discussion that I want to make a contribution.
HOST: Now in these talks with Hillary Clinton and Secretary of State Gates at the AUSMIN talks, we read that this will all lead to an increased US military presence in Australia. What do we need that?
PM: The US is engaged in what it calls a Force Posture Review, so looking at its forces in our region, and working out how they are best deployed for the future. We anticipate that at the AUSMIN talks, part of the discussion will be on that Force Posture Review and implications that it may have for further joint exercises or joint use of Australian facilities. There will then be a process following AUSMIN to work through individual decisions.
I think this is in Australia's national interest Laurie, obviously our defence relationship with the United States is critical to us, it is our foundation stone alliance, in those circumstances the best possible cooperation between our Defence Forces is in Australia's interest. We collaborate, we cooperate well now. If you go and talk to American defence generals, they'll say to you every time they turn around, they meet an embedded Australian who is working alongside them. We are well complimented about the quality of our Defence personnel and troops, but further engagement, further collaboration is in Australia's interests.
HOST: But is the idea of having a lot more Americans here, sharing bases with them, giving them increased access to Australian bases, is that all about the military expansion of China?
PM: The Force Posture Review is obviously an American led process determining how it wants to have its forces work and where it wants them to bring ships in to harbour and refuel and all of those kind of things.
It does give the possibility, of course, for further joint exercises, further collaboration, that's in Australia's interest. I do expect that at the AUSMIN talks we will be talking about stability and security issues in our region. I think we will be talking about the geopolitics of our region, and that means of course we'll be talking about the rise of China and as China rises, what sort of force it is going to be in the world. I believe we have a shared perspective with the United States that we want China to be a force for good, strongly engaged in global and regional architecture, strongly engaged in a rules-based framework. I anticipate that those questions about China's rise and the impact on our region and on our globe will be part of what we discuss at AUSMIN.
HOST: Are you developing a passion for this stuff yet?
PM: Laurie, the thing that brought me into politics of course was my passion for education, and that will always be the thing that is absolutely closest to my heart, creating opportunity for Australian children, making sure every child gets a fair chance. Education has defined my life, it has made me what I am today, I'd like others to enjoy that benefit, that opportunity, that very great privilege, that great start in life, so that will always be closest to my heart. You should expect me on foreign affairs to be a feisty advocate of Australia's national interest. I love this country, I'm proud of it, I'm happy to argue that with anyone, anywhere, anytime including in the councils of the world.
HOST: Will you be a feisty advocate next week at APEC, you will be talking to President Obama there, will you discuss climate change with him? And how do you think his decision to abandon a cap and trade system, emissions trading system, impacts on your policy to introduce a carbon price?
PM: I'm looking forward to meeting President Obama, I will obviously see him at the G20 and then meet directly with him at APEC which immediately follows it in time, though different country, we'll move from Korea to Japan. On climate change, President Obama is obviously defining the strategy for his country, in circumstances where the Congress has been difficult for President Obama to deliver his reform agenda on climate change, and post the mid-term elections Laurie, it is going to be increasingly difficult. So President Obama is defining a strategy to tackle climate change in the political circumstances that America finds itself in. We are great friends and allies of America, but we are not an American State. We are our own country, we will determine our own strategy.
HOST: Is there a point in us going ahead now that America has dumped the idea?
PM: Laurie, emissions trading schemes, prices on carbon, different ways of tackling climate change, are being developed around the world. And yes, different countries are finding different paths, many have gone down the path of pricing carbon.
You are talking now about America; California has had a way of pricing carbon for quite a long period of time now. So we will determine our own national strategy in our own national interest. I believe it's in Australia's interest to tackle climate change, and it's in Australia's interest to make sure we transform our economy to a low pollution, low carbon economy. The world is moving in that direction, it will require it of other economies, it will impact competition, how people trade, what they buy. We can't afford to have our economy fall behind.
HOST: Quick final issue, there's a lot of talk about a lack of vision in Labor, headlines in the weekend, like disquiet on Labor's lack of vision, your own people are being talking about it. Does Labor have a vision, and if you do have, can you tell us what the vision is in words other than 'moving forward'?
PM: Laurie, I do have a vision and of course I will be laying that out increasingly as Prime Minister for the Australian people. My vision is about a country with a strong economy and opportunities for all Australians. We will be laying out our election campaign, and the content of that.
HOST: So Labor doesn't lack a soul, doesn't lack a core?
PM: No, it does not Laurie.
HOST: Prime Minister, we thank you.
PM: Thank you. 


Melbourne 
PM: Can I thank Daniel Grollo for having us here today, and it's obviously a great pleasure for me to be here with Secretary of State Clinton and with our ambassadors, both the US Ambassador to Australia, Ambassador Bleich, and of course our very old friend and our Ambassador to the United States Kim Beazley.
And we are here today to talk about how we jointly are working on and facing up to the challenge of tackling climate change, and as Daniel has explained, there could be no better place to have this discussion than in this remarkable building, where the wind turbines up on the roof that we've just seen were invented here in Victoria, in fact they're from Bendigo. And the living roof features local grass species, and the information technology that runs throughout this building manages all of the systems, the carpet, the photo-voltaic roof arrangement which was manufactured in the United States.
So this building in and of itself is a partnership of Australian products and American products.
Of course as a Government we are strongly committed to investing in renewable energy and that's why we've set the renewable we've set the renewable energy target of 20 per cent by 2020. And the very setting of that target is expected to drive $19 billion in investment, and we've further allocated $5.1 billion to our clean energy initiative to drive further innovation.
We're also committed to deliver to the Australian people a number of new energy initiatives, including implementing standards for new coal fired power stations and extending the energy efficiency opportunities program to electricity generators.
We're going to set mandatory CO2 standards for light vehicles and we're going to implement tax breaks for green buildings. We are of course going to continue to pursue our efforts to put a price on carbon in our economy.
Australian and the United States have a long and productive history of working in partnership in areas that will shape the future including on clean energy. Recently we've enhanced our collaboration in the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, and I want to acknowledge that we announced that new initiative when Ambassador Bleich and I had the opportunity to travel to Gorgon on Barrow Island in the far north west of our country.
We've earmarked a number of Fulbright scholarships for specific research in the field of climate and clean energy research and I'd acknowledge our friends that have joined up from Fulbright today.
And we've created a new joint committee on science and technology to identify new areas for collaborative research on clean energy, energy efficiency and climate research.
Today I'm very pleased, with Secretary of State Clinton, to be able to announce a further step, a major new initiative that builds on these joint efforts between our two nations.
Australia and the United States have agreed a new solar research collaboration initiative. Now I think we all know that solar power has significant potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and provide the clean energy we need for the future.
One of the greatest barriers to a broader commercial take-up of solar power is its cost, and that is specifically what this joint research initiative will address. The price of solar technology has come down in recent years but we need to accelerate that trend. The joint project, with the United States, is part of an aggressive effort to bring the sales price of solar technology down by two to four times, down to the point where the price of electricity from solar is comparable to electricity generated from conventional sources.
Now this is an ambitious goal, but anyone who has stood under the Australian sun, even here in Melbourne where sometimes we see and sometimes we don't, knows how much we stand to gain in we can do this.
So the Australian Government will commit new funding of up to $50 million for this initiative to be managed by the Australian Solar Institute. This builds on the work of the Australian Solar Institute which is already driving collaboration, focussed research and development that will have a major impact on the efficiency and cost effectiveness of solar technologies.
That will support research and development collaboration with the United States, including through a number of foundation projects. We will be concentrating on solar power technologies, the research is expected to look at advanced solar technologies, such as dual-junction photo-voltaic devices, hot-carrier solar cells and high-temperature receivers, all likely to be part of our future.
The United States also has a very strong solar energy research program and this new initiative will build on existing expertise from both of our countries. These joint efforts will ensure that we lead the way in development and supply of the most competitive solar technologies at the most reasonable price.
In conclusion can I take this opportunity to thank the US Government and Secretary Clinton for their continued commitment to investment in technology that is essential to a clean energy future.
Thank you very much.
SECRETARY OF STATE CLINTON: Well good afternoon. We just had a wonderful lunch and I think speaking for myself I'm still back relishing the break in the schedule and having fun in Melbourne.
Let me start by thanking the Prime Minister for her leadership on this really important issue, it's obviously important for Australia but it's important as a global commitment and we look forward to working with her on this and so many other matters.
Daniel Grollo thank you for having us at this amazing example of what can be done when contractors, developers, construction companies, owners, get together and decide to make the investments that will pay off in clean energy, in this case, zero carbon buildings.
I also want to acknowledge Lyndell Wilson, the acting Executive Director of the Australian Fulbright Commission, Nick Otter the CEO of Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute and Wayne Kemp, district General Manager of Honeywell.
I've had an extraordinary trip through Asia over the last two weeks, I don't think there is a more important event that I've participated in than this one. To speak about our efforts on climate change and clean technology at a building that represents the future. This building, thanks to Grocon's commitment, brought together your country's most creative minds to create a building with ingenious energy saving features. It puts energy back into the power grid from its wind turbines and its solar panels, it has a living roof that we just saw, that cuts cooling costs. It uses mainly rainwater and filters its own waste water through beds of reeds to reduce the run-off it sends into the sewers.
Now I am sure that many Australians and frankly Americans and others will be studying the Pixel building example. Certainly the State Department will want to send our experts to delve into greater specificity with you because we are committed to building environmentally sustainable embassies all over the world. So this sets an example, unfortunately it's unique and in the world we are trying to create we want it to be typical, standard, routine, that buildings do what this one does in terms of efficiency.
We really have very little time to make our buildings, which are massive users of inefficient greenhouse gas produced energy, more in line of what we are seeking. We need innovations like the ones we see here to generate renewable energy and manufacture goods without polluting our air and water, and these tools need to be affordable and available in every country.
So we need to start a global clean tech industry and that will help our economies grow by creating tens of thousands of new jobs and give us viable alternatives to fossil fuels and reduce our dependence of foreign sources of energy. I think that the United States and Australia working together can be pioneers of this movement and I'm excited that we are joining forces, taking our sophisticated research and energy abilities and putting them together for this purpose. We each have brilliant scientists working on problems like capturing carbon, increasing food production, developing more efficient technologies and I think both the people of Australia and America don't want to see more bickering about what should be done to reduce carbon emissions, they want to see action and the Prime Minister and I are here today to say we are committed to action.
I know that the Cancun conference is coming up soon to build on what happened at Copenhagen. I am one who believed strongly that we accomplished less than what we should have at Copenhagen but we did come out with an agreement and we're committed to working with our partners around the world, particularly the Government of Australia, to ensure that we make progress again at Cancun.
And so rather than just waiting for global agreements, we have decided between our two Governments to take steps on our own.
First we are launching, as the Prime Minister said, a new solar energy research collaboration. We have a common goal of making solar energy competitive with conventional sources by the middle of this decade, 2015. The good news is that the price of photo-voltaic modules has dropped about 50 per cent in the past three years, but to meet our goal we have to drive the price down even more.
I can remember when the first cell-phones came out, you know they weighed as much as a brick, they were very expensive and look at now where we have advanced to because we made it a goal that the result would be cell-phone technology available universally and we now have 4.6 billion cell-phones in the world. Well under this initiative our two Governments will share both the cost and the benefits of research and development, which will speed up innovation.
Second we are stepping up our joint efforts to make it commercially viable to capture and store greenhouse gasses. I'm pleased to announce that the State Department will provide a new $500,000 grant to the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute which is co-funded by the Australian Government.
This new funding will help promote carbon capture and storage in developing countries, it will pay for a global survey to identify the most promising technologies for reusing carbon dioxide. For instance by turning it into materials that can be used for roads or buildings, or into liquid fuel that can power cars or generate electricity, and our support for this Institute demonstrates we want to make sure that the best ideas get the funding they deserve.
Third we're expanding one of the world's best educational programs, the Fulbright Scholarships. We're creating a special focus on climate change. Over the next three years Australia and the United States will fund up to 15 additional scholars to work specifically on climate change and clean energy. We hope these clean tech Fulbright Scholars will do some of the work that advances our understanding of climate change and leads to new commercially viable solutions.
Fourth we are expanding our collaborations on science and technology across all the difference agencies of our Government, to make sure that our efforts dovetail together we will convene a science and technology joint commission meeting in Washington in February. We want to make sure that in both the United States and Australia, we're getting the best return on taxpayer's investments in these new technologies.
Now I think what you're seeing here this afternoon is a recognition by both of our Governments and the people of our two countries that in the 21st century no single country will be able to address these environmental challenges on its own. We need partnerships now more than ever, we need all the talent and the capital we can muster and I cannot imagine a better partner than Australia in building the kind of green clean and prosperous future that we want and deserve.
So Prime Minister thank you for leading this effort here in Australia and for all that you are doing. We look forward to working with you.
Now I think we're going to answer a couple of questions?
PM: We are going to answer a couple of questions.
JOURNALIST: Madame Secretary I have a question for you, it's Sabra Lane from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. President Obama's comments abandoning the emissions trading scheme, have been seized on by the Opposition here, they say that the Prime Minister should follow that lead and abandon it here. I'm interested to hear your thoughts on that. Many commentators believe that that decision will now have an impact right around the world, with other countries deciding to ditch emissions trading scheme as a means of bringing down carbon emissions. Is that your view and if so, is it government regulation or a carbon tax that will be the best way of reducing emissions?
CLINTON: First let me start by saying that I think what President Obama said the other day was a statement of the reality that we face politically in the United States Congress. As you may know the President was successful in passing a cap and trade system through the United States House of Representatives, we were not successful in getting that considered by the Senate.
Given the changes of the mid-term election and the fact that in our system if you don't have action on pending legislation by the end of the Congress with ends this coming January, then you have to start over, and so the President is still very committed to the United States addressing climate change, making investments in clean energy and we will be looking at a range of options to take, including as you point out the regulatory route, which we've already been doing in concert with the legislative route.
I don't think that President Obama's statement is meant to describe anything other than what is happening inside the United States. Obviously decisions in Australia are up to the Government of Australia and the people of Australia, but what we are absolutely clear eyed about is our commitment to addressing climate change and its affects. So we're going to keep moving forward, and we're going to come up with approaches that we think will work, some of them regulatory, some of them supporting the kind of clean building initiative that we see here, some of them through legislation.
PM: I think we are taking a question from our American friends, yes?
JOURNALIST: Hi, this is a question for both of you. I know that trade is on the agenda and you've been talking about it. I want to ask about that in light of the recent terror scare prompted by the packages that were mailed from Yemen. Do you think there should be tighter restrictions on international shipping by air or by sea, and if so how do you manage that and not put a crimp on economic growth?
PM: Well I'm happy to answer that for Australia's behalf. What we would say is that we are very committed to free trade, we have an open trading economy, we're very committed to seeing the world continue to make progress on trade liberalisation and at the forthcoming G20 the future and level of ambition of the Doha round will obviously be under discussion.
With the scare from Yemen, I believe the solution is not in turning our backs on trade, we've got to have free and open trade, we also need to have the adequate screening and security that makes sure that that trade is safe. For Australia we immediately moved to a new screening regime, we don't have direct carbon shipments from Yemen, so we were screening 100 per cent of cargo coming through ports like Dubai for the immediate days that follow. We have now instituted the kind of protocols that are being followed around the world for screening arrangements.
So yes it has changed levels of security, but that's the appropriate response. Turning our back on free trade is not the appropriate response.
CLINTON: I agree completely. 



Australian Prime Minister, Julia Gillard and US Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton today announced a major joint initiative to help more people benefit from affordable solar energy solutions.
The US-Australia Solar Research Collaboration initiative will support joint projects specifically designed to cut the cost of solar energy technologies.
It represents a major commitment from both countries to protect the environment by ensuring solar energy hardware becomes cheaper to buy.
The Australian Government is committing up to $50 million from the Renewable Energy Future Fund to support this initiative.
Solar power has significant potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and provide clean and renewable energy.
However, the cost of solar technologies still represents one of the greatest barriers to its wider commercial take-up.
The joint initiative will address this barrier - building on expertise and collaboration between Australian and US researchers.
The initiative will see new research on advanced solar technology projects such as dual junction photovoltaic devices, hot-carrier solar cells and high temperature receivers.
Funding will also be provided for exchange programs and research scholarships focused on achieving affordable solar energy solutions.
The Australian Solar Institute (ASI) - which is already driving research and development to make solar energy more efficient - will manage the Commonwealth's contribution.
Today's announcement builds on the joint commitment to further develop energy cooperation and innovation between the US and Australia.
Australia recently welcomed a US$500,000 grant from the US State Department to support the work of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute in developing countries.
In December last year, Australia pledged its support for the US-led Renewable and Efficiency Deployment Initiative (Climate REDI) to help bring renewable energy technologies to developing countries.
Joint efforts between Australia and the US will ensure that we lead the way in the development and supply of the most competitive clean energy, including solar technologies.
This will provide real and sustainable benefits for citizens of both countries whilst contributing to the global response to climate change.
The Australian Government is committed to tackling climate change - with $5.1 billion allocated to its Clean Energy Initiative.
Australia's renewable energy target is for at least 20 per cent of the nation's power to be generated from renewable energy sources by 2020.
That target is expected to drive and estimated $19 billion in investment in renewable energy generation. 



PM: I'm joined here today by Jenny Macklin in her capacity as Minister for Indigenous Affairs, and by my colleague Robert McClelland the Attorney General, and we're here today to make an announcement related to the commitment of the Government to acknowledge the special place of our first peoples in the Australian constitution.
Can I start today by saying now is the right time to take the next step and to recognise in the Australian constitution the first peoples of our nation; now's the right time to take that next step to build trust and respect, and we certainly believe that constitutional recognition is an important step to building trust and respect, it's an important step to building and acknowledging that the first peoples of our nation have a unique and special place in our nation.
As we all know the Australian constitution is the foundation document of our system of government, but currently it fails to recognise Indigenous Australians. The national apology to Indigenous Australians, in particular the stolen generations, helped build respect between Indigenous and non-indigenous Australians. It helped generate the trust we need for closing the gap. When driving a national effort to close the gap in life expectancy and life opportunities between Indigenous and non indigenous Australians, a great deal of work is happening in early education, health, jobs, remote housing and services, governance and infrastructure, but more dollars are not enough. We came to office determined to reform the way dollars are used and determined to leverage them for long-term outcomes, ways that transform individual lives, family lives and the lives of communities, by rebuilding the positive social and economic norms that underpin daily life.
We came to government also knowing that change was needed on an emotional level, as well as a practical level. The recognition of Indigenous Australians, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, in the Australian constitution is another step, the next step in that journey. But of course, without the support of the majority of Australians in the majority of States, constitutional recognition cannot succeed. I'm pleased that we are starting the active work on this process of constitutional recognition with bipartisan and wide-spread support in the Australian Parliament. Of course, Prime Minister John Howard made a landmark address about this very matter to the Sydney Institute in 2007. Tony Abbott, the Opposition Leader, supports constitutional recognition, as John Howard did in 2007. The Australian Greens have expressed their support for such a referendum, as have the Independents in the House of Representatives, Rob Oakshott, Tony Windsor and Andrew Wilkie.
Now this broad-based support in the Australian Parliament gives us a rare opportunity in the live of our nation. Referendums are rarely carried and those that face Parliamentary opposition have far less of a chance. Support this widespread across the Parliament means we have a once in a fifty year opportunity for our country.
I'm certain that if this referendum is not successful there will not be another like it. So, to build the support necessary the Government will move to establish an expert panel by the end of the year, to progress the recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in the constitution. This expert panel will include Indigenous and non-indigenous Australians, it will include community leaders, constitutional experts and Members of Parliament. It will lead a national discussion and broad consultation in 2011 to build consensus about the recognition of Indigenous peoples in the constitution. This expert body will work closely with organisations with expertise and history of engagement on this issue, and that includes the Australian Human Rights Commission, the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples and Reconciliation Australia.
The panel will be asked to consider how best to progress constitutional recognition of Indigenous peoples and provide the best possible option on the nature of the amendment which could be put to the Australian people at a referendum.
Now, I'm certain the work of this body will give the referendum every chance of success. We will ask the expert panel to work throughout 2011 and to report to the Government by the end of 2011, but I do want to stress today the conversation that this expert panel leads is a conversation that needs to involve all Australians and we will be looking forward to their input. I'll turn now to Jenny Macklin for some comments.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister. This is a very significant day, particularly for our Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. For some time, Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have been calling for the recognition that they deserve in our Constitution. Today, we see that going that step further.
Our Government recognises that we need mutual respect if we're to close the gap, and the Government's taken a number of steps to build that mutual respect. Of course, the National Apology was a very, very significant part of that journey. We also indicated our support for the United Nations' Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. We've moved to support the establishment of the National Congress of Australia's first peoples, and we've also supported, financially, the establishment of the Healing Foundation to make sure that we can financially support different projects around Australia to help Indigenous Australians heal. These measures are very significant, individually and together.
The next step on this journey is to see the recognition of our first peoples in the Constitution. As we indicated in the election campaign, we are about to establish an expert panel to facilitate the discussion that needs to take place with the Australian people about the nature of this constitutional change. We're releasing today the draft terms of reference for that expert panel and we're calling on Australians to come forward with their suggestions as to who might usefully contribute to this expert panel.
As the Prime Minister has indicated, the work of the expert panel will be very important in building a consensus for change to our Constitution. It is the case that Constitutional change is difficult, but we are very optimistic that this change can be brought about through good will, and that's the job of the expert panel - to build that consensus, to build the agreement across the political spectrum and across this very big country of ours. So this is a very significant day, a very significant step forward in that journey that we began with the apology.
MINISTER MCCLELLAND: Thank you. yes, as the Prime Minister said, the Constitution is our foundational document so therefore any amendments, obviously, are not taken lightly.
The expert panel, however, will enable the opportunity to obtain advice, not only advice and also consultation with the community, the Indigenous community and from the broader community, but as the Prime Minister indicted, advice from experts, including obviously, constitutional lawyers.
In this way the community can be assured that that foundational document, our constitution, that also contains the various checks and balances and safeguards, will be, that any amendments will be consistent, entirely consistent and appropriate given our constitutional framework, that will be an important thing.
As the Prime Minster indicated, and Jenny Macklin indicated, referendums aren't easy. There have been forty-four in Australia - only eight have been successful. But one of those which was successful was the 1967 referendum to recognise Indigenous Australians, that had some ninety per cent of Australians supporting it. So with the historic opportunity, with bipartisan support, with goodwill, with consultation and appropriate advice, we are confident that this presents an historic opportunity for Australians. Thank you.
PM: Right, we're happy to take questions. Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, obviously the work of the body will be consultative work. There will be costs associated with the referendum, that's right. The Government is also committed to a referendum on the recognition of local government, so we will, as part of this process, also be working- well, not this process, this process will be dealing with the referendum about recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait islander peoples in our constitution.
During the first six months of next year we'll also be working through the process about the local government referendum, and questions of cost can be dealt with at that point.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you anticipate holding the referendum at the next federal election in 2013 because of the consultative process, or is it still possible that it could happen in 2012?
PM: We are expressly leaving options open as to whether it is held with or before the next election.
JOURNALIST: What sort of options, I mean, what sort of changes to the constitution? I mean, it says in the release that we've got here that there are various ways it could be altered. What are some of the things that you're looking at?
PM: I think it's really important that we don't pre-judge this process. That's the very reason for having it, and the very reason for having it and bringing together this group in the form that we've specified - representatives of the parliament, representatives of Indigenous Australians, and experts - is to maximise understanding, agreement and consequently prospects of success for the referendum proposition, so I don't think it would be wise for us to be engaged in, you know, shooting the breeze about what this referendum proposition may contain. It needs this process to maximise the prospect of success, and it should be a conversation that all Australians involve themselves in, but we fundamentally believe and gave this commitment at the last election to have this process of change, that now's the right time in Australia's history to take this next step forward, this next step to build trust and respect between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Yes? That's alright, you're allowed to, you know.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) do you therefore envisage a, something like the human rights consultation that Frank Brennan led with town hall meetings, these sorts of things? Will it go to that level? How much do you anticipate that would cost (inaudible)
PM: Look, to a great extent how this body will work will in fact be in its own hands, so that it can define processes which best engage the Australian community and best build constituencies of support for the referendum, but I'll also turn to Jenny Macklin for some details on the working of the body.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much, Prime Minister. I think that question is very important because if this question is to succeed we do need wide ranging support. We know it will be important for the expert panel to get out and discuss the issues with people right across Australia, but we also know that there are other groups who have experience on this question, like Reconciliation Australia, the Australian Human Rights Commission, the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples, they themselves are also wanting to participate in this discussion and I'm sure there will be many others, so we want to encourage that debate and discussion in as many different forums as possible.
JOURNALIST: How many people do you think will be on the panel?
MINISTER MACKLIN: That too is something that we want to discuss over the next few weeks with all the interested parties, so the Prime Minister is today writing to the leaders, to the Leader of the Opposition and the leader of the Greens, and the Independent Members of Parliament, inviting them to participate. We're also going to discuss the membership with the main Indigenous organisations that I've just mentioned. We'll also discuss it with other community leaders over the next few weeks. We hope to have the panel established by the end of this calendar year.
JOURNALIST: If this is passed, what sort of impact will this have on the lives of Indigenous Australians, like you mentioned six or seven (inaudible) - what would happen with this one?
MINISTER MACKLIN: Well I think that's why both the Prime Minister and the Attorney and I are all emphasising the critical role of respect, if we're to close the gap. We understand how critical it is if we're to close the gap, that we put the investment in that's needed, into health and education, supporting people to get a job, having a decent home to live in. But we also know how critical it is that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are respected, that they respect themselves, that their place in Australia is written into our Constitution, and understood to be that special place that I think so many of us understand.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say that, what would you say to those that look at this as a token gesture?
PM: We are progressing two agendas here, and as Jenny Macklin has just said, they need to be done together. I think, frankly, in the Australian debate for too long there's been some sense that there's a false divide between working practically and working to generate trust. I think these two things go together, and what the apology to the stolen generation certainly reinforced in me, and I believe it reinforced in the life of our nation, is that by taking a step to put out an arm of friendship and treat people with respect builds trust so that the very practical things you then want to do - about getting a job, having a home, appropriate health services, kids in school - can work better because there is that sense of trust and respect.
I think we all know in our own lives that to make a life, of course, you have to have physical things around you and services that you can rely on, but to make a life you too have to feel that you are somehow recognised and respected. That's inherit in how we understand our own way of being. I think it's inherit in how we've got to move with Indigenous Australia so we make a real difference in the lives of Indigenous Australians and do the things we want to, like close the gap on life expectancy.
JOURNALIST: PM, just on another matter, your meeting with Hillary Clinton. How did that go? Could you characterise that for us, and also looking forward to your trip overseas?
PM: With Hillary Clinton, I did have a good day in Melbourne yesterday, and I think Melbourne was showing a very good face to the world. I had the opportunity to spend some social time with Hillary, having lunch together, and very much enjoyed that.
Of course, the formal talks are proceeding today, involving our Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Defence, and both Secretary of State Clinton and Secretary of Defence Gates, so those formal talks are in train, but I did have the opportunity for a wide-ranging conversation with Hillary when we had the opportunity to walk through Melbourne and have lunch afterwards, and then of course I hosted the dinner at Government House last night.
The essence of the security dialogue that will be happening today - Afghanistan a big part of it, our role and our security dialogue about our region of the world, the Asia-Pacific, and the fact that the US is increasingly engaged in the Asia-Pacific. There is dialogue on some of the new challenges we face in this age - space junk, cyber security threats and the like.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) US and Australia have different positions on dealing with Fiji. Is that something that's going to be discussed? Is that a problem?
PM: When it comes to Fiji, we obviously support pressure being maintained so that there are democratic elections in Fiji. The Australian Government is very sceptical that the elections which are supposed to be held in 2014 will actually occur. It's important to us, to the US, to the world generally, that we keep working together to maximise pressure on Fiji to give the Fijian people the appropriate opportunity to go out, exercise a vote and pick their government.
So, we'll be collaborating and discussing these questions with the US and more generally. Fiji continues to be a major issue of concern for me, for the Government, in our region, and we want to work with others to keep pressure on so elections do happen for the people of Fiji.
JOURNALIST: Would you consider adopting a more US approach so you have a direct (inaudible)
PM: I think the best thing is for us to be discussing how we can best work together so that we maximise the pressure on Fiji.
OK, thank you.



The Gillard Government today announced the first step towards recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in the Australian Constitution.
The Australian Constitution is the foundation document of our system of government, but it fails to recognise the special place of our first Australians.
Constitutional recognition of Indigenous Australians is an important step towards building a nation based on strong relationships and mutual respect.
Recognition will demonstrate that we are a country that is united in acknowledging the unique and special place of our first peoples.
The national apology to Indigenous Australians, in particular the Stolen Generations, helped build a bridge of respect between Indigenous and non-Indigenous people. It helped generate the trust and respect needed for closing the gap.
The recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in the Australian Constitution is the next step on that journey.
The Government is pursuing an ambitious agenda to close the gap in Indigenous disadvantage, including undertaking major reform and delivering unprecedented investment in early education, health, jobs, housing and services, and infrastructure.
Formal recognition in our foundation document will build on this work by publicly acknowledging our history and the significant contribution that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples continue to make to this nation.
This important reform commences today as the Government moves to establish an expert panel to progress the recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in the Constitution.
This is an important issue for all Indigenous Australians, and we want Indigenous people to be involved in the process and in building broader community support.
Without the support of the majority of Australians, this reform will not succeed.
The expert panel will include Indigenous and community leaders, constitutional experts, and parliamentary members. It will lead a national discussion and broad consultation during 2011 to build consensus on the recognition of Indigenous people in the Constitution.
It will work closely with organisations with expertise and a history of engagement on this issue, including the Australian Human Rights Commission, the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples and Reconciliation Australia.
The panel will consider how best to progress constitutional recognition of Indigenous people, and provide possible options on the nature of the amendment which could be put to the Australian people at a referendum.
The Gillard Government is committed to strengthening the relationship between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians by holding a national referendum on this issue during the current term of government or at the next Federal election.
We do not under-estimate the challenge of achieving nation-wide consensus.
There are diverse community views and only eight of 44 referendums since Federation have been successful. To succeed, the referendum must attract the support of a majority vote nationally, and a majority of votes in a majority of states.
Achieving nation-wide consensus to achieve constitutional change will be a challenge given the history of referenda in Australia. To achieve this historic reform we must make sure we build the most robust and persuasive case for change.
The panel will therefore be asked to develop options for constitutional change which will attract broad support from the Australian community.
Parliamentarians from across the political spectrum have expressed support for recognising Indigenous Australians in the Constitution.
The Prime Minister has written to the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the Australian Greens, and Independent Members and Senators, inviting them to nominate a Parliamentary representative on the expert panel and suggest other panel members.
The expert panel will report to the Government by December next year. Fact sheets with further information on Indigenous constitutional recognition are available at: www.fahcsia.gov.au
People are encouraged to make nominations for representatives for the expert panel by emailing: constitutional.recognition@fahcsia.gov.au. Nominations are open until 18 November. 


State Memorial Service,  Sydney
Last month the great and generous life of Dame Joan Sutherland came to its end, and so we gather formally as a nation to express our gratitude and to mourn our loss.
But we are also conscious that the family and friends of Dame Joan have lost someone precious and dear and they have our deepest sympathy and support. Our thoughts are especially with Richard, for whom Joan's passing has not only broken a lifelong partnership but it also ended one of the most remarkable artistic collaborations in the history of modern music.
Richard can't be here, but I hope he can picture us here today as Joan's spirit inhabits this familiar venue one last time.
And, of course, it is fitting that we gather here in the Opera House.
Where better to say goodbye to the greatest singer of the 20th century than in the greatest building of the 20th century?
Friends, Joan Sutherland's was a fortunate life.
It began 84 years ago last Sunday, with an idyllic early childhood here on the shores of this great harbourside city.
She absorbed the sound of her mother's beautiful voice as easily as she breathed the air itself, giving her a sense of effortless achievement that later helped transform potential into legend.
Today we remember Dame Joan at her peak, as we should.
But the truth is she lived through the hard days of Depression and war, and had to seek employment to pay her way.
For over a decade, she cheerfully accepted the humblest roles as the price for future success, always believing that sheer optimism and relentless hard work would bring their own rewards.
Joan's first paid recital was here in the Sydney Town Hall in 1947, earning her the princely sum of £10.
And though she later sang in the greatest cities of the world, her first tour was to the communities of Leeton, Wagga, Cootamundra and Griffith in southern NSW.
In London the rigour continued.
She took on junior roles, substituted for performers who were sick and undertook arduous regional tours before the big breaks came.
But when those breaks did come, all the great stages of the world were hers: Covent Garden, Venice, Paris, La Scala, Vienna, the Met.
She conquered every one.
Not only that.
In partnership with Richard, she revived an entire tradition of opera and brought forth a whole new era of scholarship and research, changing the world of opera forever.
Perhaps most importantly for our nation, she brought her talent home to Australia, ushering in a golden age of opera during the 1970s and 1980s.
As Australians, it is this contribution we honour above all others today.
Dame Joan stood at the forefront of that extraordinary postwar cultural flourishing that forever transformed how we saw ourselves as a nation and?as a people.
In all of this, Dame Joan's voice shone effortless and clear.
I never heard that voice live but those who did will carry the memory to?their graves.
And the recordings will remain a treasure house for decades to come.
But no voice, regardless how fine, can sustain a career across 43 demanding years.
Joan's voice might have brought her to greatness but it was stamina and?will-power that kept her there.
In her first season at Covent Garden alone she sang 60 performances.
And the list of performances in her autobiography runs to 40 closely-typed pages.
Through four punishing decades, Dame Joan remained alert, professional and robust, her career an essay in character and resolve.
As Joan herself said: "success is one thing; sustaining it is something else."
Amid the fame and the accolades, Dame Joan remained cheerfully unaffected.
On stage, she had the grace and grandeur of a prima donna. But off stage she was just as likely to be seen doing needlework before the curtain went up or having a joke with a stagehand.
Joan's earthy good humour and firm sense of practicality were distinctively Australian.
And while it is true she spent many years abroad, her identity as an Australian remained firm.
It was here on this soil that her career began.
And it was here that her career ended 20 years ago last month.
Critic Peter Conrad wrote of that final night here at the Opera Theatre when Joan's last notes had been sung and her best had been given:
"She walked slowly into the wings through the parting sea of her colleagues, and despite our baying and stamping and screaming she didn't reappear. We won't look upon her like again."
That is true.
We will not look upon her like again.
A figure of this stature comes along once in a century, and in Joan Sutherland, Australia has been richly blessed.
So today across our nation, flags stand at half-mast and our people unite in gratitude for this final farewell.
And in this moment of leave-taking we say one last time:
- Thank you.
- Goodbye.
- You will never be forgotten.



PM: Well, I am glad to be here in Seoul, too, to have joined you all today, but most particularly, of course, I have had the opportunity to meet the President of Korea. We have discussed the strong friendship between our two countries. We have discussed our mutual desire to rapidly conclude the Free Trade Agreement which has been negotiated between Korea and Australia.
Trade means jobs. The Free Trade Agreement will be good for Australia. It will be good for Korea and we have discussed this afternoon working to bring that Free Trade Agreement to conclusion.
I also congratulated the President of Korea on his leadership in hosting this meeting of the G20. The meeting which will be conducted over the next two days, I believe, is shaping up to be very successful event. Of course, Australia and particularly Kevin Rudd worked hard to ensure that the G20 was created to guide the worlds' response to the global financial crisis and to become a standing part of the way that the world does business and the G20 has already some significant achievements.
When the G20 met as the global financial crisis unfolded, in Washington there was agreement about financial sector reform - so important as the global financial crisis was engulfing the world. In London there was agreement to coordinated stimulate fiscal stimulus: US$5 trillion to support economic activity and to support jobs around the world as the world confronted the global financial crisis. And in Pittsburg the G20 worked to get a response to drive the global recovery.
Here in Seoul we will be building on this earlier work and taking it forward. I am very pleased that here in Seoul we will finalise the reforms to the International Monetary Fund. Australia has worked hard on these reforms. We co-chaired the working group with South Africa and in my discussions with the President of Korea, just a little bit earlier today, he did thank Australia for the work that we have done on IMF reform.
We will also see the delivery of the G20 framework for driving global growth as the global economy recovers. There is a recognition that the global economy is still fragile. As the economists would say, the risks are on the down side, so we need to keep working together to keep driving the global economy, to keep lifting growth and lifting jobs as a result.
Thirdly, this meeting will deliver the Basel III financial stability rules, and once again Australia has worked hard on these rules and making the case about what is different in Australia. Of course, we have a strong banking sector and we have been keen as discussions have unfolded to have the world understand that given the different circumstances in our economy, different circumstances of our banking sector, that Australia did need some special consideration as these rules were being put together.
Because we have worked hard to secure that special consideration, I can confidently say that there is nothing that will happen at the G20 or as a result of these financial rules that justifies an Australian bank putting up interest rates above and beyond movements by the Reserve Bank. There is nothing stemming from the G20 that justifies that.
Can I just say that I look forward to the meetings over the next two days. I did also want to highlight the fact that the leadership of the President of Korea development matters will also be discussed at this G20. I believe that that is significant. The global financial crisis has literally thrown tens of millions of people into poverty. I believe it is appropriate that at this G20, in a country that is so successful in making the journey from being a developing country to a developed country, that we have the matter of development on the agenda and I welcome the fact that the President of Korea has so squarely put it there.
I'm very happy take questions.
Yes, Bonge?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe, in light of the ANZ following the bad example of the Commonwealth that you should continue to argue strongly for Australian banks to receive favourable treatment from the Basel framework?
PM: I think we've got to be very clear here about what we're arguing for. In these Basel III rules and this framework there are suggestions about the amount of government bonds and government debt that banks should hold.
Australia is in a different position to other countries around the world. By comparison with other countries we have low debt, so these rules don't work for us. We've made that case, and we've made that case because we don't want Australian banks to have any excuse from these new financial rules to excuse their arrogant conduct in putting up interest rates above and beyond Reserve Bank movements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the ANZ scrapped its exit fees, though, so no credit there?
PM: I think, looking at the moves of the ANZ today, the Australian people will be angry. I think the ANZ Bank will experience the same degree of anger that the Commonwealth Bank did as a result of its conduct on Melbourne Cup Day.
The Government has already acted to deliver proposals that will increase competition in our banking sector. We already acted to deliver a crack-down on unfair mortgage exit fees. We've already acted to support second-tier lenders through our Residential Mortgage Backed Securities.
As is very publically known, the Government is working on a further package of reforms and no-one should doubt our resolve to deliver those reforms, and deliver increased competition in the banking sector.
Michelle?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, do you think that further package, though, will prevent the sort of action we've from the ANZ today and the Commonwealth before, or will the Government still be relatively powerless when it comes to the crunch?
PM: The purpose of competition reforms is to empower consumers to walk away from their bank and go and get a better deal.
Mark?
JOURNALIST: Isn't the problem, Ms Gillard, though, exemplified by the ANZ today, that now you have two of the big four essentially acting in the same way, so that if you move from one bank, you go to another, it does the same thing? How are you as Prime Minister and how is the Government going to encourage people to use the other players in the market, the smaller players, and to assure them that they're as safe as the big four?
PM: Bit of history, and a bit of the future - the history, obviously, is we moved when the global financial crisis threatened to guarantee bank deposits. We did that in the interests of Australians. It was them that we were concerned about. We also have supported second-tier lenders with our Residential Mortgage Backed Securities arrangements, but you are right - the impact of the global financial crisis has been that there has tended to be a move from second-tier lenders to the big four. We want, as the global economy recovers, and certainly as our economy recovers, to foster increased competition in the mortgage market.
Now, before the global financial crisis we were seeing more competition in the mortgage market. There were lenders, for example, like Wizard, that were out there pushing hard in the mortgage market. We want to see increased competition. Therefore, reforms that enable increased competition - good for consumers - enable them to shop around.
Yep, Phil?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, do you consider ANZ's action of raising the rates by 39 basis points then abolishing their exit fees, do you consider it a sign they're not scared to see customers walking away?
PM: I believe Australians are angry. I believe that Australians are angry enough that they will be looking again at the conduct of their own bank and judging what they should do next based on that conduct.
Mal Farr?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just to Devil's advocate a bit, how can you turn up at a conference which is going to deal with extraordinary economic features and yet say that the banks are not justified in taking extraordinary steps themselves?
PM: Once again, bit of history, bit of the future - we need to remember that when the global financial crisis swept the world, of course there was a contagion running through global markets that we feared the impact on Australia, but we also came to that global financial crisis with good regulation and with the big four banks in a strong position. Out of the world's top 100 banks, our four banks are in the top 10.
In those circumstances, even as the global financial crisis has unfolded and thanks in part to the decisive action taken by the Australian Government to keep our economy going, the banks have emerged from this difficult period still profitable, still strong, so in those circumstances I am entirely justified to say to the banks that there is no excuse for the sorts of interest rates movements we've now seen from the Commonwealth Bank and the ANZ Bank.
The solution is to keep fostering competition. We have already acted and we will continue to act and no-one should doubt our resolve to act.
Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does your anger and thirst for competition extend to looking at the four pillars?
PM: The issue here is where do consumers go? People with mortgages, how do they get a loan? On what terms and conditions do they get a loan? How do they end up locked in to that loan? That's what the exit fees debate is about, locking you in so you can't go and shop around.
We want to foster competition. Fostering competition gives people choice of lenders, so I don't really think the dialogue or terminology of the four pillars helps this debate. We are talking about people having choice. When there are active second-tier lenders, people have choice.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on G20, the comments this week of the German Finance Minister attacking the Fed and their movements on quantitative easing, China, Brazil, Russia - what do you believe? Do you agree with what the Fed has done? Is that part of deliberately devaluing their currency, and how will that play into what you've got ahead over the next two days?
PM: I think there will be a great deal of discussion about currency questions. There will be a great deal of discussion about competitive currency devaluations as a new form of protectionism. I believe that that will be something that's very much on the agenda at this G20.
What we need to emerge with is an agreement that helps balance global growth. We are all aware of current imbalances. We have nations that need to save more and nations that need to spend more, and in order, in part, to support that balancing, we need to move over time to market-based mechanisms for currency fluctuations. That's the Australian position. It's the position we took at the G20 Finance Ministers meeting. It's the position we will take at this G20 meeting.
Clearly, questions of currency devaluation and quantitative easing will be on the agenda at this G20 meeting.
Yes, Mark?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're here, essentially one of the things you're doing is arguing to help the Australian banks in terms of the Basel III, yet the banks, of course, aren't exactly doing you any favours. Will you in all future circumstances put the interests of the Australian banks at the front of the queue in meetings like this, or would you ever have cause to reconsider?
PM: There's only one thing at the front of the queue and that's the interest of the Australian people. It's in the interests of the Australian people to not have rules that don't suit our economy imposed on our economy. That's why we're having the argument - national interest, interest of the Australian people.
Because we will succeed in that argument, there is no reason stemming from the G20 or its financial rules that would help a bank in Australia justify an interest rate movement above and beyond movements by the Reserve Bank, so we've got to be very clear here - actions are in the interests of the Australian people. Guaranteeing deposits in the teeth of the global financial crisis was about Australians and their savings and the things that they rely on to go about their ordinary lives. We did that in the interests of Australians.
Our banks went into the global financial crisis strong, and they've come out strong, and what that means is that there is not a justification for moving interest rates above and beyond Reserve Bank interest rate movements and there's certainly no excuse arising from the G20.
Mark?
JOURNALIST: Is it time to hauls these bankers in for a meeting with you and the Treasurer and to remind them of what you see as their social responsibilities and their responsibilities to ordinary Australians, mortgage holders?
PM: I think the best thing to do is to determine and deliver the package that we are working on. The Treasurer has been working for a number of months to add to the earlier measures we have already delivered to increase completion.
So, we have already acted to increase competition. We will act again. I am very clearly saying no-one should doubt our resolve on the question.
Sorry, Kieran? We don't want to discriminate against Kieran.
JOURNALIST: Are you expecting a negative reaction from the United States after you rejected Tim Geithner's call for indicative guidelines on surpluses to correct the global trade imbalance?
PM: No. Once again, Australia is in a different position. With our current account deficit, obviously it is explained by us being a resource economy enjoying very large capital inflows. We are therefore in a different position from other nations whose current account deficits would be explained by excess consumption and too little savings, so we were right to make that case and we'll continue to make it.
I'm not expecting any reaction to that other than understanding. It's quite a simple proposition.
Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Just on the Korean free trade, would you be encouraged if the US and Korea finally settled their first agreement, and would that give you encouragement for an Australian FTA with Korea?
PM: As I understand it, President Obama is very enthusiastic to conclude the US-Korea free trade agreement. That's good for the US.
We want an agreement that's good for Australia. My mission here and my mission as I travel overseas generally is to say that free trade is good for trading economies like our own. We're competitive, we're a trading economy. Free trade is good for us, it's good for jobs. That's why I'll put the case.
Apart from the Korea-Australia free trade agreement that I do want to see come to conclusion, we should anticipate here at the G20, of course, that there will be broader discussions about trade and particularly putting urgency and ambition into the Doha round.
JOURNALIST: Did you talk about any timing for the Korea-Australia FTA in the talks with the President today?
PM: We talked about our shared desire to bring this to conclusion expeditiously.
JOURNALIST: What are your plans for Remembrance Day tomorrow?
PM: The program will be given to you, but tomorrow I will be laying a wreath in remembrance of fallen soldiers. I will have the opportunity to meet some Australian veterans who are here in Korean who served in Korea, so I'm very much looking forward not only to having the opportunity to lay the wreath as we mark remembrance day, but to also meet those individual Australians and to hear their life stories, which I'm sure are going to be quite remarkable ones.
Thank you very much. 


Adelaide
It's always good to be in Adelaide.
I never feel like a visitor. Adelaide for me is Mum and Dad and Uncle Frank and Aunty Glad, backyard fruit trees and Brown Hill Creek, learning to knit and learning to read ... I'm glad I'm here today.
Adelaide's also one of Australia's serious cities, a place where we can talk about ideas. So I'd like to begin by reflecting on 2010 so far.
By any measure, this has already been a tumultuous year in politics.A change of Prime Minister in office, the closest election campaign in sixty years, the first minority government since the war.
So much of 2010 has been defined by immediate events.
Now, I believe Australians want to know more about the long term. With the immediate politics of the election and the new Parliament behind us, Australians want to know what's next. Of course I see this reflected in some ways in political commentary and I'll come back to that.
I also hear it from people I meet as I travel around the country.
From an apple storage cool room in Narre Warren outside Melbourne to a liquefied natural gas project in Karratha to the mess hall in Tarin Kowt - the Australians I've met since the election haven't been asking me who is going to win that day's argument on that night's news.
We've been having a much more interesting and more challenging conversation than that.
Australians are really asking me three related questions:
What drives me, personally, in politics - why do I do it, what gets me out of bed every day?
What's the Government's vision for Australia - what do we want Australia to look like in five years, ten years?
And what's the Government actually doing? What are the goals which make that vision real?
They're all fair questions and I've tried to answer them as they arise. But today, in Adelaide where so much for me began, I want to speak in more detail about each.
First, what really drives me, personally, in politics? It's a question I've answered before, and I know I need to keep answering it as I go to new places and as I meet new people.
Hard work. The benefits and dignity of making your own way. Everyone who can, should.
A fair go through education. I know as much as anyone does that learning is the great life-changer.
Respect. That great Australian belief that no one is a lesser person simply because they have a title, occupation or background different from your own.
Other people have other passions that brought them into politics - care for the sick, or homelessness, or a fair go at work - and a Labor Government gains so much from the diverse motivations of our people. But those are mine.
Hard work. Education. Respect. And when I think about policies and politics, those values come back to me all the time.
What's my Government's vision for Australia?
A strong economy - and opportunity for all. That's really it, in a nutshell.
In five years, in ten years, I want our economy to be strong. And I want more people to share in the opportunities that creates.
It's not complicated, it's not grandiose, but that's what I see when I think about the future of Australia.
I think it's the vision of any Australian Labor Government. More jobs, more opportunity, better life chances. For all, not some.
A strong economy - and opportunity for all.
What are we doing about it?
My Government is working methodically to ensure our economy stays strong today and is ready to meet the challenges of the future, in order to create opportunities for all Australians to prosper and succeed in life.
To conquer the challenges of the future we need higher skills, higher workforce participation, higher productivity, better infrastructure like the national broadband network, a low-carbon economy and a strong Government budget.
I will not let this nation drift into the future and be mugged by change. We will plan for it, prepare for it and prosper.
We have a strong platform to build on.
Since 2007, we have created 600 000 jobs and doubled funding for education.That is my values and our vision brought to reality in the most difficult global economic circumstances.
Now we have new opportunities with a new Government.
We've been dealing with the immediate requirement to form government and working with a new parliament. Australians now have the stable, effective administration they deserve, and the new Parliament is working well.
We've been establishing a way ahead on three difficult challenges: asylum seeker processing, a mining resource rent tax and a consensus on a carbon price.
None of these things will be concluded tomorrow but each is on course.
At the same time that has been happening, the Cabinet is also investing time thinking through and delivering our plan for three years of Government and beyond. I believe it is crucial we do this early in the term, and that's why we have spent so much time and energy on it since the day we formed Government.
I've brought my values to the table, and we've had that shared vision of a strong economy and opportunities for all to guide us.
And we are working through the hard grind of bringing together our values and our vision in the things the Government actually does.
As Prime Minister, I have chosen five goals to aim for. Increased prosperity ... sustainability ... and fairness. Govern for all Australians. And stay strong in the world.
That's the measure of progress. As I lead, I will ask: is Australia reaching these five goals?
I know there's so much else Government does. Everything from addressing problem gambling to preparing for the centenary of ANZAC in 2015. It should be true that nothing Government does is unimportant.
But this is the list I work from when I say, are we getting the job done? Are we getting closer to the vision ...
A strong economy - and opportunity for all.
Now. I said I'd detected a similar mood in the people who ask me what the long-term holds, and the media commentary.
That sense that after a momentous year of immediate events, people are asking "what's next" and looking to the long-term.
But I do want to challenge one strand in the commentary on the Government's values and vision, and in the debate over our seriousness about reform.
I'm glad when commentators take up the chant "What do we want? Long-term reform!" It keeps me honest.
I am accountable to the public, I am responsible for leading on issues and managing events as they develop in the public arena. That's the media's job, to make life tough for politicians, and we'd all be much worse off without them.
But that does not mean that the task of government is to deliver reforms exclusively in line with the contemporary media cycle.
I can only put it this plainly. I do believe I will convince you of my long-term reform credentials.
I do not believe I will convince you of my long-term reform credentials tomorrow.
I quite literally, and by definition, cannot.
And I am not about to try.
"What do we want? Long-term reform."Yes, agreed."When do we want it? Before we tape our Insiders segment."Sorry, ain't gonna happen.
To suggest that an effective approach to reform requires sweeping proposals to be put forward and enacted within weeks defies logic.
No successful reforming government has ever worked this way and mine certainly will not attempt to.
I chose my words carefully when I said I would walk the reform road.
I believe this is how reform must work in modern politics.
Leaders must lead and Governments must show resolve.
But that resolution must be shown over months and years, not hours and days.
That is real reform courage.
There are two equal and opposite mistakes on the reform road.
One, the negative tactics of political wreckers creating excuses for interminable delay.
The other, just as wrong, the false urgency of commentators demanding a decision in time for the weekend's features.
When my Government honestly believes a reform is good for Australia for the long-term, we must also honestly believe that in a genuine conversation withAustralians, the majority will come to share our view.
So we will lead a reform conversation which brings Australians with us.
And we will begin the work early enough to be sure there is time for that conversation to take place.
The measure of progress is in the years. I said that one of my Government's goals is increasing sustainability.
So today I want to talk about our plans to make smarter use of energy and water.
These are big challenges for our future, challenges I hope we can meet together.
So following the election, I announced that the Government would establish a Multi-Party Climate Change Committee to look at the best way to deliver a price on carbon.
The Committee held its first meeting last month and includes representatives from the Government, the Australian Greens and the Independent MPs Tony Windsor and Rob Oakeshott.
It meets again tomorrow.
Listening, consulting and collaborating.
The economists like to say the solution to climate change is "decoupling economic growth from emissions growth".
I think of it this way.
We want to grow our economy without growing our pollution.
We want more jobs and higher incomes ... without putting out more carbon and higher emissions.
Because carbon pricing puts a dollar value on cutting pollution, it allows the market to find the cheapest sources of emissions reduction.
This means it can deliver the greatest reduction for the least cost.
That is why the best way to cut carbon pollution is with market-based tools.
This point was made in Parliament earlier this year, by one of the speakers for the Government's legislation for a carbon pollution reduction scheme. He said
Market forces deliver the lowest cost and most effective solution to economic challenges ... Gas is expensive and clean; brown coal is cheap and dirty. If there is no cost charged for emitting carbon, there is simply no incentive to move to the cleaner fuel.
The speaker was Malcolm Turnbull. He had a point.
To really see the importance of using market-based tools in action, we have to think about where electricity comes from - how it is produced and sold in Australia.
This is the hard work of market-based reform.
Understanding a sector, looking at the needs it must serve, and then methodically working to create the conditions in which markets serve the public interest better.
Across Australia the electricity sector contributes just over one third of our nation's carbon pollution. So electricity has to be a big part of the solution to our carbon problem.
Basically, we get electricity from brown coal, black coal, natural gas and renewables. That's things like solar and wind.
Brown coal puts out between three and four times as much carbon pollution as the most efficient natural gas generators. Black coal is in the middle.
And of course solar and wind produce no carbon pollution at all.
There's a National Electricity Market, and it's very competitive on price, which is good. Electricity users get the best value for money and electricity producers only sell what people need or will pay for.
But. The price of electricity doesn't include a price for carbon pollution. So lower pollution sources, like gas and renewables, cost more than higher pollution sources, like brown and black coal.
That's what we need to change if we are going to cut carbon pollution. A carbon price could make a difference straight away.
Right now in the National Electricity Market, black and brown coal make up around 58 per cent of our capacity to generate electricity. Gas fired generation makes up about 20 per cent.
But that's capacity.
The electricity actually used is about 82 per cent from coal, and only around 10 per cent from gas. Renewable energy sits at around 7 per cent.
If the cost of electricity from coal rises relative to gas and renewables, there will be more electricity from gas and renewables as a result.
Our existing generators would invest in ways that cut their carbon pollution. There would be extra incentive for investment in carbon capture and storage.
And new investment would flow to new renewable and gas power stations.
South Australia would be one of the winners from this.
Much more electricity generated here comes from natural gas - almost half in fact. And you have one of the highest levels of wind generation in the world, already 18 per cent of the electricity generated here.
So, carbon pricing is good news for the South Australian economy.
Because carbon pricing reform makes so much difference to how the electricity market works, we also have to move soon to ensure the right investments are made in future.
We can see the effects of under-investment in the way electricity prices are already rising across Australia.
The current price rises in a number of states have been principally caused by a sustained period of under-investment in networks and distribution. The surge in investment now needed to catch up is one of the key reasons we are seeing a surge in prices.
Here in South Australia, the distribution network will invest $1.7 billion over the next five years to replace aging assets and meet increasing peak demand.
More than double the capital expenditure of the last five years.
The story is the same across Australia with an estimated $42 billion of network investment being made over the next five years.
It's this increased network investment which is now being paid for in each electricity bill. And over the past three years residential electricity bills have risen by more than 40 per cent across the country.
I understand how much pressure this is putting on families.
Australia cannot afford similar under-investment in generation in the future.
Long-term investment requires long-term certainty.
The lack of a carbon price will distort investment, and lead to price rises.
That is why the Government is committed to a carbon price.
Better energy security and lower carbon pollution.
Anyone who tries to pretend to you that the choice is between higher electricity prices with a carbon price and lower electricity prices with current arrangements is not telling you the truth.
There are real price pressures in current arrangements - a future of uncertainty and under-investment, energy insecurity with the real risk the lights will go out, pressure on prices and then a spurt of catch-up investment paid for through quickly delivered higher prices.
There is another way to reduce carbon pollution - Government can pay companies directly to make changes which cut their emissions - what Mr Abbott sometimes calls "direct action".
In other words - picking winners. Paying subsidies. Special deals.
Companies coming in to the market, with no incentive to minimise their carbon pollution by innovating, just sitting and waiting for a subsidy or a deal.
But as was pointed out in the Commonwealth Treasury's Incoming Government Brief, which is a public document:
...a market-based mechanism can achieve the necessary abatement at a cost per tonne of emissions that is far lower than alternative direct action policies.
Moreover, many direct action measures cannot be scaled-up to achieve significant levels of abatement anyway, and for those that can be scaled up, the cost per tonne of abatement would rise rapidly, imposing further costs on taxpayers and consumers.
I think this is good advice. And under Mr Abbott's model, Australians pick up the bill through their taxes.
Like all structural reforms, we need consensus and discipline to deliver good outcomes which are sustained for the long term.
I know the climate change committee and the business and community roundtables are working hard to deliver this consensus.
And the Government is determined to maintain this discipline, by taking the lead in the reform conversation. Water reform is another important step to improving sustainability.
No South Australian audience needs a history lesson on the Murray River and the politics of water reform in this country.
I want to talk with you about what's happening now with the independent Murray Darling Basin Authority's Guide, which has begun the process of consultation on the eventual Murray Darling Basin Plan.
First of all, it's important to understand that the Authority was established by the Howard Government under then-Minister Turnbull, with the support of both major parties.
The process for developing the plan, the timelines for consultation and the way decisions are finally made were similarly established by the Howard Government with the support of both major parties.
This is important because I believe that without building deep and lasting support in the community and across the political divide, we simply won't get water reform in Australia.
That is how the Murray Darling Basin Authority's work began, and that is the best way for it to continue.
My Government's approach to water allocations is consistent with our approach of market-based reforms.
Putting a dollar value on water rights has given water rights-holders a valuable asset, as well as giving them greater flexibility and choice in their own decisions.
But it has also created a market incentive to return water to the river in more cost-effective ways.
In time, the Basin Plan will set how much water is to be returned to the river. This is where the market mechanisms will come in to play.
Because we will have a price for water, we will have a way of assessing what is the best and cheapest way to return water to the river.
We can compare the economic cost of some buybacks with their social and environmental costs and benefits.
And we can compare the economic cost of infrastructure and other water savings proposals with their social and environmental costs and benefits as well.
Now, the Authority is already meeting with communities along the river, and discussing their ideas. My Minister for Water, Tony Burke, is doing the same, along with my colleagues Simon Crean and Senator Joe Ludwig.
Over the last couple of weeks Tony has visited Dubbo, Griffith and Renmark. Simon has been to Wagga Wagga and Albury-Wodonga and is off to Griffith, Mildura and Murray Bridge this week. Joe is in Shepparton today and will be in Albury-Wodonga tomorrow.
And they will continue to visit communities, engaging with them directly to ensure we understand the concerns as well as the opportunities that communities see in this important reform.
We also have the Parliamentary Committee for Regional Australia Inquiry into the impact of the Basin Plan chaired by the Independent MP Tony Windsor, reporting in the first half of 2011.
There is more than twelve months before a final Basin Plan will be presented to the Minister. If he is satisfied, the Plan will be put before the Parliament.Either House of Parliament can disallow the final Plan. So it will have to have majority support to proceed.
The Authority has already said that its original timeline, the end of 2011, will be difficult to achieve.
If a few extra months mean that we can get a workable solution and restore the river to health, then that is the right way to proceed.
And while the final plan is being generated, we will continue taking positive steps to improve the health of the Murray through water buybacks, with 705 gigalitres of surface water already secured, as well as other infrastructure projects.
That said, whether the Plan goes to the Parliament at the end of 2011 or the beginning of 2012, I can absolutely state this.
The Plan will go to this Parliament. And every member of this Parliament will face his or her own reform test. Smart use of energy and water matter to all Australians, but they always seem especially immediate in Adelaide.
Climate change does feel different here.And you know the Murray as well as anyone.
Almost three thousand years ago, an inspired author looked for an example of things which never change.
"All the rivers run into the sea," he wrote.
South Australians could go to Goolwa or the Coorong or Clayton in the last ten years and say, "it isn't always so".
Improving sustainability is an important goal for my Government. We can't maintain the Australian way of life if we don't find smarter ways to use water and energy.
That's why my Government will keep making the changes we need to make for the long-term national interest.
And why we'll listen, consult and collaborate. So that our reforms work.Because the measure of progress is in the years.
That is the way we will govern.
Methodical. Making steady progress on our plans, day by day, week by week. Working hard for all Australians, wherever they live.
Modernising. Preparing Australia for the long-term with modern market-based solutions. Carefully weighing the hard decisions, at the right time, for the right reasons.
Driven by our values and our vision. Hard work. A fair go through education. Respect. Opportunity for all. And always keeping our economy strong. 



PM: Today is Remembrance Day, it's the day when we remember and honour Australian war dead, Australians who served in so many conflicts and lost their lives. Today I've had the opportunity to lay a wreath here in Korea, accompanied by a Korean war veteran, Jack. We've had an opportunity to mark Remembrance Day and particularly to honour the service of the more than 17,000 Australians who fought for democracy here in Korea. We lost 340. 281 of our Korean war dead are buried in Korea.
It's been a very special way of marking Remembrance Day and to each of the veterans who has made the journey and joined us today, I say a big thank you for sharing your morning tea with me, for sharing an insight into their lives and an insight into their war stories.
From marking Remembrance Day I will now move to two bilateral discussions, I will be meeting with the Prime Minister of Canada, I will be meeting with the President of Russia and I will also be addressing the G20 Business Summit. And of course I want to take this opportunity as I move to those bilateral discussions and discussions with members of the business community to remind why the G20 is important and why we are here.
It's about strengthening global growth, it's about lifting the number of jobs, it's about making sure our financial institutions and financial markets are strong and open and can meet the test. That is what is under discussion here at the G20. We know that the consequences of high rates of unemployment, weak global growth, risks in financial markets end up hurting people around the world. It tells in joblessness, which ultimately tells in the loss of homes, in often the loss of families, because of family break ups. It tells as people are thrown into poverty around the world. That is what we are here working through at the G20.
In the course of those discussions we will be talking about currency questions and Australia believes that currency should be market based, that is our position, that is what our economy has and it has served our economy well. So the agenda will include discussion on currency questions, but it is broader than that, currency is one part of a broader agenda about how we ensure that we move beyond today's stage for the global economy to a stage of greater growth, more jobs, healthier financial markets around the world. I'll turn now to the Treasurer for some comments and we'll take questions.
TREASURER: Thanks very much Prime Minister. It was also a privilege to meet with our veterans today on Remembrance Day, to be with them and to share with them their memories about this country, and to talk with them about why they fought.
It's also an important day when we're looking at the G20 agenda. There's two years of pretty solid work which is coming to fruition in this meeting over the next 24 - 36 hours. There's fundamental reform as the Prime Minister said, of the global economy. We need structural reforms to lift growth, not to shift growth - fundamental reform of the International Monetary Fund. And also fundamental reform of the international financial system to prevent financial crises in the future, which have caused so much damage and such high unemployment, particularly in developed economies around the world.
Today we've had the unemployment figures out at home. There have been 375,000 jobs created in Australia in the last year and over 600,000 jobs created since the Government was first elected. That is a remarkable performance for a developed economy, given that we've just been through a global financial crisis and a global recession.
What that reminds us of as we go through discussions in the next 24 hours, 36 hours, is the importance of continuing to grow the economy because if we can keep people in work everybody benefits, and that's why it's important we put in place the sort of reforms that have been talked about at the G20.
I'd also like to say in terms of the reform of the financial system, that there will be absolutely no fig leaf or no excuse for any domestic bank to blame any interest-rate rises on the decisions that are taken here. The decisions that are taken here will be decision which will safeguard customers, which will safeguard deposits, which will make sure our banking system is in good nick both globally and domestically. Because what we learnt in the global financial crisis is that no country is immune when we have a global financial crisis and a global recession.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister if I could ask you a question. Is the asylum seeker decision by the High Court a victory for human rights in Australia?
PM: I have been advised of the decision of the High Court today, I haven't had the opportunity to study it in detail. The Minister for Immigration has of course responded to this in Australia and indicated that the government will take legal advice on the implications of the decision and respond in due course. We process asylum seeker claims in order to do the right thing, to ascertain who is a refugee to whom we have an obligation under the Refugee Convention and as a matter of opening our hearts to people in real need and who does not have a valid claim and should be returned to their own country. But we'll study the decision, get appropriate legal advice, the Minister for Immigration has indicated that in his press conference in Australia today, he's meeting with the Solicitor-General this afternoon and will be able to make a full statement.
JOURNALIST: So is it advice to get around the decision?
PM: When you get a High Court decision you would anticipate the government would meet with its legal advisers to fully understand all of its implications. Absolutely standard, due process and we'll do it.
JOURNALIST: Would you legislate if necessary to preserve the status quo?
PM: Well, let's not get ahead of ourselves, we've got a High Court decision, the government will take legal advice on it, the Minister will meet with the Solicitor-General and when we understand all of its implications we'll respond in full.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask about banks Ms Gillard.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: It's not a a little bit ironic that you're here with Mr Swan arguing the case for our banks to not be included in Basel III measures, whilst they're at home sticking you in the back with interest rates?
PM: I answered this question yesterday and I'll turn to Wayne for a comment as well. I answered this question yesterday and let me say again, we need to be very clear about what we are doing here at the G20, we're talking about a framework to lift global growth, that's good for Australia, it's good for working Australians, it's good for their families.
We're talking about a framework here that through lifting global growth, continues to create jobs around the world. We are seeing strong employment growth at home, but there are many millions of people around the world desperate for work who do not have it now, with all the potential long term social consequences that that spells out. We're here making sure that there is a strength in our financial system which means we do not see a global financial crisis occur again.
That's good for Australians, good for their jobs, good for our economy because our economy was not immune when the world went through a global financial crisis. That's what we're doing here, good for Australians, good for the global economy, good for trade, good for jobs. I'll turn to Wayne for a direct comment as well.
TREASURER: Yes, the Basel III arrangements aren't just about banks. They're about securing future prosperity. They're about a sound financial system. They are about making sure we have a flow of credit in our economy. So it's not about the banks.
These arrangements are put in place to secure the safety and the security of our national and international financial system and, of course the banks are not being exempted. But what we have secured is a recognition that there are differences in the Australian banking system and one size doesn't always fit all. So there will be some differences in the application of those rules in Australia which recognise unique features of the Australian system.
So they're not being exempted, but also it is very clear that these new rules will work for people because they all work to protect the security of the financial system, because when it was threatened, the flow of credit to Australia two years ago was in doubt. That's why the Government moved to put in place the bank guarantees, not for the banks, for the Australian people. And because we did that we've had the economic growth that you've seen in Australia, which is unique in the developed world. We wouldn't be talking about 375,000 jobs in Australia in the past year if we hadn't made those moves to secure our financial system.
PM: We'll take two at the front then we'll have to go, going to be quick.
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan, in the Wall Street Journal you had an article with Timothy Geithner and Tharman Shanmugaratnam, and you said that the cost of borrowing for banks will be higher for a time. Aren't you agreeing with what the banks have argued about their own circumstances?
TREASURER: No I'm not. The fact is this; our banks are achieving record profitability. It is true that in some sections of their business they are facing increased costs, but their attempt to put up rates over and above the cash rate is not justified because their net interest margins are back to what they were pre-crisis.
Yes, there will be swings and roundabouts in funding costs, but the fact is the Reserve Bank data is in, it rejects completely the claim by the banks that their funding costs should be passed through in addition to Reserve Bank rises because their net interest margins are back to pre-crisis levels. Within that, of course there will be changes in the cost of funding, but overall their net interest margins are back to pre-crisis levels, thereby rejecting the central premise of the claim that they have made.
PM: Ok, last question quickly, I don't want to keep the Canadian Prime Minister waiting.
JOURNALIST: What does Australia see as the markers of success from this G20 meeting? What decisions have to be made to ensure this meeting is a success and on currency particularly?
PM: Well, I'll answer that and then turn to Wayne as well. First and foremost we want to see the endorsement of the new global framework to drive growth, not just the endorsement of the words, but the determination to deliver the framework to drive growth. Growth equals jobs, it's good for Australia, it's good for the world.
Second, we want to see the absolute delivery of the IMF reforms, which we have worked on so long and so hard co-chairing the working group with South Africa, these are very important changes to rebalance voting shares in the IMF between the developed and developing world.
Third, we want to see the adoption of the new financial rules that Wayne has just been talking about, they are important for global financial stability, so we do not find ourselves in the future back in a global financial crisis. Yes, in the course if that we've got to make a case for some things that are different about the Australian economy and we will do so.
Finally, can I say I think it's important that at this G20 we've got development on the agenda, that's been put there by the President of Korea and as I said yesterday I believe that that is important for the G20 agenda and for G20 work going forward. So, when you work through the list, we've all got a shared interest in global growth, in jobs, in financial stability.
I think it's important that development has come on the agenda and finally we do want to see new impetus for the urgency and level of ambition in the Doha round. Trade is good for jobs, trade is good for Australia and that's what we're here doing at the G20. I'll turn to Wayne for a comment.
TREASURER: Well, just in addition to that, reducing global financial imbalances is very important to the framework for strong balanced and sustained growth and therefore, I think, a re-affirming if you like of the commitment that was made at the Finance Ministers' Meetings that countries not engage in competitive devaluations, for countries to work on structural reform including currency reform. The overall commitment to market-based exchange rate regimes. That's important, and I think that's what the Finance Ministers have put forward for the Leaders to consider this weekend. 



Today Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev witnessed the official entry into force of the Agreement between Australia and Russia on Cooperation in the Use of Nuclear Energy for Peaceful Purposes.
The Agreement allows for the supply of Australian uranium to Russia for use in its civil nuclear power industry, updating the existing nuclear agreement between our countries. That agreement, concluded in 1990, permitted Australian uranium to be processed in Russia on behalf of third countries but did not allow it to be used for power generation within Russia.
This brings Australia's bilateral nuclear relationship with Russia into line with the agreements we have in place with other countries, including the US, China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.
The Agreement will help Russia to meet its expanding energy needs as it seeks to reduce its greenhouse emissions by diversifying its energy sources and shifting away from a reliance on fossil fuels. It will increase export opportunities and create jobs for Australia's uranium suppliers and consolidates Australia's position as a reliable provider of energy resources.
Importantly, the Agreement meets all of Australia's long-standing nuclear safeguards requirements by ensuring appropriate safeguards, controls and accounting arrangements apply. Nuclear material transferred to Russia under the Agreement will be used solely for peaceful, non-military purposes. Australian uranium can only be used, processed or stored in facilities subject to Russia's safeguards agreement with the IAEA.
As well as allowing the sale of Australian uranium for use in Russia's civil nuclear industry, the Agreement provides a framework for cooperation between our countries on peaceful uses of nuclear technology and collaboration on nuclear safeguards and security.
The treaty can be accessed on the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade website at: http://www.dfat.gov.au/geo/russia/treaties/aus_ru_safeguards_agreement…. 


PM: I've just fresh from the family photo, so we've done that bit of the G20. The G20 meeting is still in progress, what happens here matters for Australian families. Big topics on the agenda of this G20 to which we will agree during the course of the meeting do matter for Australian families. Australian families need to know that the world's financial system is stable. When the global financial crisis hit and the world's financial system was not stable, that did have an impact on Australian families. So the financial stability reforms that will be agreed at this G20 meeting matter to Australians and their daily lives.
Second, what happens here matters for Australian families because global economic growth matters for Australian families; whether growth is balanced and can be sustained in the long-term. A growing global economy is good for the Australian economy, a growing global economy means Australian jobs and Australian prosperity.
And thirdly, what happens here matters for Australian families because we are a great trading nation. So what happens to free up trade, to increase trade, matters for Australian families because for Australian families, put very simply, trade equals jobs.
Each of these issues is under discussion at the G20 and it appears that agreement on these substantial areas of work will be reached.
Financial stability through new rules including the Basel III rules and reforms to the IMF, increased global growth through agreement to a new global framework to work on lifting growth and addressing imbalances between those countries that currently spend too much and those countries that currently save too much. Balanced global growth is in the interests of the world and in the interests of Australians because it means global growth can be higher and sustained.
And it appears the G20 will also agree to the conclusion of the Doha round to the end-game, this is a major set of trade negotiations that the world has been working on for a long period of time, now we are determined to move to the end-game, that's good for Australia, we're a trading nation and it's good for Australian jobs.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday it appeared that your written text in the speech you gave to the business summit was tougher and stronger (inaudible) than the speech you actually gave. Why did you soften your sentiments?
PM: Can I say what a load of nonsense. I had a written text, I went to the business summit, the format was a round table, so rather than read my way through many pages of a speech, I drew off it and extemporised as I went. I did that for all of the speech. I made sure that when I gave that speech, which effectively became an off the cuff speech drawing off the written speech, that I was very clear that the conduct of Australian banks in putting up interest rates above and beyond the Reserve Bank movement is unacceptable, it is of concern to the Australian community, and the Government is responding with competition measures. I made that very clear.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister 24 hours after the High Court's decision on asylum seekers, are we any closer to knowing whether there (inaudible) changes?
PM: I will work through that with the Minister for Immigration when I return to Australia.
JOURNALIST: He seems to be given an indication that they might be though, and courting the possibility of having to change the laws (inaudible)
PM: The Minister for Immigration's directly dealing with this matter back in Australia. He'll work through and make some recommendations about need for legislative change. I would just make this point - we are of course talking about Howard Government legislation. We now have the High Court decision and we need to assess its ramifications. It appears to me that in some of the media today there's a suggestion that somehow this High Court decision affects my plans for a regional protection framework and regional processing centre, it does not.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister -
PM: Michelle and then I'll come to Malcolm.
JOURNALIST: You have spoken strongly about the danger of increasing protectionism, do you think that this is a serious imminent threat to the international economy?
PM: I think it's a medium term threat to the international economy, by that I think the measure is in years not months. I think it's a medium term threat, because there are many nations around the world that are struggling with high levels on unemployment. Fortunately in Australia, because of the special circumstances of our economy, because of the quick and decisive action of the government with the provision of economic stimulus, we are seeing unemployment rates that by world standards are not as high as other countries are dealing with. So our most recent unemployment rate 5.4 per cent, whereas for example the Americans are dealing with an unemployment rates of more than 9 per cent, so the medium term threat here is governments go through fiscal consolidation, which in the language of ordinary families in many parts of the world will mean cut backs to government services that they rely on. In those nations at the same time there will be persistently high unemployment levels and sluggish growth, I think in those circumstances in many countries around the world that will give rise to domestic calls for protectionism. Australia is in a different position, our economy is in a different position, but if a tide of protectionism broke out around the world that would ultimately be bad for us, we are a trading nation. Malcolm?
JOURNALIST: Are you saying there are no manifestations of re-emerging protectionism within Australian politics, I'm not talking about government, but (inaudible)
PM: I think that there is a debate in the Australian community about free trade, about whether it's good for us, I think we've had that debate, and will continue to have it, but I don't think that debate had sharply increased in tempo in Australia. My warning here at the G20, in terms of challenges that face G20 leaders in the medium term is that not in Australia, given our economic circumstances, but in other countries, sluggish growth, high unemployment, dramatic budget cut backs, that that in those countries is a recipe for rising protectionist sentiment and we can't afford to have it break out around the world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister -
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that DFAT (inaudible) Congolese mining in Australia is based on a French investigation claims that he was (inaudible) with only 350 people in 1999.
PM: Look, I can't help you with that, I'll have a look at it and we'll get back to you with a comment.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in your written speech yesterday you suggested that the (inaudible) banking could damage the wider Australian economy. Do you believe that there is a risk of economic problems arising from the bank's actions?
PM: What I said yesterday at the business summit was that domestically in Australia the economic debate is about banking and about the mortgage rate increases, about how Australian families rightly feel ripped off about that and about the need for increased competition building on the government's earlier competition reforms. I believe all of that is true. I believe the focus in Australia on banking means, of course, there is less debate about other things that are happening in the economy, where we are with unemployment, which once again if you compare with the US or the UK or so many countries around the world, we are in a different and better position and in other economic debates we are obviously having - a patchwork economy, different, growing different speeds of growth in different parts of the nation, so that was the force of my comment. The Government is obviously working on a further package of competition reforms, which I'll announce with the Treasurer next month.
JOURNALIST: But on Mark's question, do you believe that the actions of the banks are threatening Australia's good economic (inaudible)
PM: I think the actions of the banks are impacting on Australians and they rightly feel ripped off. I am not putting the case and I did not yesterday put the case that the actions of the banks in this case threaten, for example the unemployment rate. I'm not putting that case, but Australian working people, rightly feel ripped off by these interest rate increases, they're the wrong thing to do, the Government knows they're the wrong thing to do, we've already introduced competition reforms and we will go further. Kieran?
JOURNALIST: China has agreed to a form of words taking its currency to a more market basis to avoid a form of protectionism (inaudible).
PM: There is still some work happening on that question. I believe an agreement will be reached. We should just not what this process is about, it's called a mutual assessment process and it's about having a way of assessing imbalances in the global economy between countries. We want to emerge from this G20 meeting with the process agreed to and with a timeline agreed to, there is still work and discussion underway about the timeline. Thank you 



PM: The G20 Summit has obviously come to an end and I am very pleased by the outcomes of the Summit. I was pleased to be here representing Australia, and I'm very pleased at what has been achieved. The G20 was the forum that made leaders work together so that the world didn't tip from a global recession into a global depression.
What has been achieved here at Seoul is building on what been achieved at earlier G20 meetings.
At the Washington Summit, there was the comprehensive plan for financial sector reform to stabilize the financial system following the global financial crisis.
In London, there was the agreement for coordinated fiscal stimulus to inject growth into the global economy and to support jobs. Then, of course, there was also the agreement to inject $1.1 trillion into the IMF to restore credit flows.
In Pittsburgh, the dialogue of the G20 moved to global recovery. Now, this coordinated action before Seoul, in stopping a great depression, has saved 21 million jobs around the world. That's the estimate of the International Labour Organisation. That means the number of jobs that have been saved around the world is almost equal to the total population of Australia.
We came here to Seoul to build on those foundations, and particularly focus on global growth and jobs for the future and that is what has been done at this Summit.
When I came here, I came with three specific objectives. First, to deliver Basel III, the new financial stability rules, and that has been achieved. This is good for consumers, to make sure that the financial system is stable. It's a prudent measure to prevent in the future the kind of financial crisis we saw in the past with the Global Financial Crisis. I came here to ensure that these rules were delivered in a way which did not justifyAustralian banks talking about this Summit, and increasing interest rates as a result of it, and that has been achieved. What has happened here in Seoul does not justify interest rate movements by Australian banks, above and beyond the Reserve Bank increases.
Second, I came here to ensure that the reform of the International Monetary Fund that Australia had worked on so hard was delivered. We had co-chaired a Working Group with South Africa. This matter had been in deadlock and now it is resolved. This means that the resources of the IMF are increased to enable it to go about its work and the voting shares between developed and developing countries have been allocated more fairly. This resolves any questions of legitimacy about the structures of the IMF and now our attention can turn to the IMF going about its work and, particularly, going about its work so it acts early, before countries fall into crisis, not afterwards.
Third, I came here to support the global framework which is about global growth and about jobs. It is about undertaking hard reform to economies, including our own. It is about moving towards more market-based exchange rates. And we have outlined here in Seoul a clear path, in 2011, to addressing global imbalances. That won't happen overnight, but the reform work is underway.
In addition to these three direct measures from the Seoul Summit, I came here to advocate for increased trade. Trade is good for Australia, it's good for jobs and I am very pleased that the Summit communiqué makes it clear that Leaders here are committed to bringing the Doha Trade Round to the end-game in 2011; to getting the job done with a level of ambition.
I am also very pleased that here in Seoul we have reaffirmed our commitment to not go down the path of protectionist measures. As I've indicated in my earlier statements at this Summit, I think that that will be hard. I think that there will be protectionist sentiment abroad in many nations. I am very pleased that global leaders here in Seoul have re-confirmed their commitment not to succumb to protectionism that would hurt the world, hurt global growth and hurt Australia. We are a trading nation, and trade means jobs.
I am also very pleased, that here in Korea, under the leadership of President Lee, the G20 had a good discussion about development. There's no better place to do it than here in Korea, which is such a shining example of what development can bring to a nation, and the prosperity of its people.
All in all, here in Seoul what we have worked on is ensuring we've got a stronger global economy. We've got stable financial markets. We've got a commitment to sustained growth. We've got a commitment to increased trade. All of these things are good for Australians. Global growth is about Australian jobs. Financial stability, it's about security for the future. Increased trade, that's about Australian jobs. And correcting the imbalances in the global economy is about sustaining growth over time. Good for the world, good for Australia.
So I'm very pleased with the outcomes here, and I'm very pleased to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how have you saved the banks from facing higher costs, and justification for raising rates, and what do you think of the past two rises by last two big banks
PM: To take your second question, first, I would say to the two banks that have moved their interest rates today that there is absolutely no justification for doing do. Australians will judge them very harshly for it. I believe people who bank with those banks will judge them very harshly for it. We are determined to increase competition in the banking sector. We've already made some moves to increase competition and we will make more. And the message to banking customers is, I can understand that you're not happy with the conduct of the banks, and we will be facilitating your ability to go out and get a better deal. So, very very critical of today's move by the two banks on interest rates.
Here in Seoul, in terms of the Basel III rules, there were obviously some questions about how these rules would be implemented for economies like our own, where we have low government debt, and consequently the rules about holding debt and holding bonds were not going to work well in Australia. And through implementation processes, we will be able to deal with that matter, so there isn't an impact of these rules on our banks in the same way that there will be an impact in other economies where there is more government debt.
JOURNALIST: On the review of countries' current accounts. The timetable has been rather stretched out compared to the earlier focus, is that right?
PM: The timetable is that the matter will be discussed in the first half of 2011, and that the first assessment will be done during the period in which France is chairing the G20, that is, in the next twelve months. This has been a step forward. This has obviously been a difficult issue in the lead up to the Summit and at the Summit itself. It's to seek better balance between those countries that consume and spend too much and those countries that save too much. Adjustment isn't easy, but we are committed here, through this communiqué, to an assessment process of current account deficits and surpluses and that assessment will happen in the next twelve months.
JOURNALIST: Given the rhetoric that is coming from the government in the last couple of weeks, do you feel, from the government's perspective, insulted by what (inaudible) that they continue to ignore you?
PM: At the end of the day, it's about making sure that the people who matter most to banks - their customers - have the most ability to make a choice and put pressure on. That's what we're determined to deliver and do.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how confident are you that this new commitment on Doha is going to be anything more than just another commitment to join the list of failed efforts.
PM: I can understand that scepticism, and you're right, there have been references in earlier G20 communiqués to injecting life into the Doha Round. But I would specifically point you to the fact that this commitment from Leaders talks about the end-game in 2011. Now, those words are deliberate and they are important. It is inevitable in negotiations that people keep a bit back, a bit in their pocket, until they think the deal is imminent. And then they get the last chip out of their pocket and put it on the table. By using the terminology "end-game", leaders are saying to their respective negotiators: 'Don't keep holding back, get it done now. Don't keep an offer that you were going to make in reserve. Put it on the table, get it done.'
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how do you assess the outcome on the so-called 'currency wars', and what's your assessment about the dynamics between the United States and China, on that issue, and more generally in the Summit.
PM: The US and China came into this Summit with different views about the best way through in the Summit; those view have been obviously worked through over the last day-and-a-half, and we have reached what I think is a good step forward. It does mean that there will be an assessment process of imbalances, and that assessment process will happen in the next twelve months. So, this has been a sensitive question, no doubt about it, and a way has been found through.
JOURNALIST: Is the language strong enough for your liking?
PM: Look, a way has been found through. My language has been about clear pathways and timelines, I didn't want to leave this Summit with 'diplomat-ese' - with greatest respect to those who assist us with writing the communiqués. I didn't want to leave this Summit with 'diplomat-ese' that had no sense of time in it. I used, when I spoke in the meeting itself, the language of clear pathways and timelines. There's a clear pathway, and there's a timeline; I'm satisfied with that.
JOURNALIST: What do you think about Doug Cameron's (inaudible)
PM: Well, Doug's just not right on that matter.
JOURNALIST: Can you tell us what you discussed with President Obama in your own meeting today?
PM: I've had the opportunity to have a couple of discussions with President Obama during the course of the Summit, here. I should say, I've also had the opportunity for a meeting with Prime Minister Cameron, I had the opportunity for a brief conversation with President Hu.
As you would be aware, the Summit is constructed so Leaders spend some time by themselves, and that has enabled me to meet a number of people that I hadn't had the opportunity to meet before, including President Obama. I anticipate when I meet President Obama tomorrow, we will be talking about the outcomes of this Seoul Summit. We will be talking about America's engagement in our region, following our very successful AUSMIN talks in Melbourne just last weekend. And we will be talking about the future strategy in Afghanistan, particularly given that the NATO Summit is in Lisbon next weekend.
Thank you.  


Melbourne 
It is a great to join you for the third annual Prime Minister's Literary Awards.
A special celebration of ideas and the power of words in the lifeof our community.
This event today is special for me.
Not only because we are celebrating the best in Australian writing but because this is my first cultural event as Prime Minister.
I can't think of a more appropriate gathering in which to express my support for the arts and my belief that a vibrant creative sector is fundamental to our success and identity as a nation.
This belief has led to my appointment of a senior and distinguished Minister, Simon Crean, to lead arts policy in Australia.
Simon and his wife Carol are not only longstanding patrons of the arts.
Simon has a deep interest in the linkages and opportunities that come from the arts -
- for example, in providing training and employment opportunities for young Australians
- discovering the possibilities that come with broadband,
- and unlocking the potential of the arts to unite and energise regional communities.
To support Simon, the Office for the Arts has been relocated to the heart of government in the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
And together we will give renewed attention and impetus to the arts.
Friends,
Simon and I both believe that the arts profoundly define the sense of who we are, how we see the world and how the world sees us in turn.
They attract talent to our shores and help cultivate a climate of creativity across society.
The arts also play an important role in building the attractiveness and amenity of our regional cities and towns.
And of course through the arts we celebrate the oldest continuous cultures on earth, those of the First Australians which are such a precious part of our human heritage.
Above all, it is the Government's profound belief that the arts belong to every Australian ...
And every opportunity must be taken to ensure the arts are open and accessible to all.
For those who seek a more pragmatic definition, we can also recognise the contribution that cultural industries make to our national prosperity and productivity.
The arts sector employs more than 200,000 Australians .
They promote and sustain employment and investment in tourism, exports, education and training.
They equip young Australians with skills of critical thinking, innovation and design that are so fundamental to the nature of the modern economy.
And the creative imagination is central to the success of our communications industry, in particular the National Broadband Network.
Through the NBN, arts and cultural organisations will be able to dramatically expand their reach.
Arts companies are already exploring the possibilities of digital media, for example with live broadcasts to digital screens around regional Australia and engaging young new audiences through Twitter and Facebook.
With the roll-out of the NBN, those possibilities will be dramatically enhanced for Australians, no matter where they live.In all of this, the Australian Government and our partners in the states and territories and local government have a role, and that role is one of nurture and support.
The ideas, the creativity come from you.
And in the end, our cultural sector can only succeed though your commitment to excellence and the audience loyalty you can attract and sustain.
For Labor, our commitment to supporting and nurturing the arts has endured for a century, dating right back to Andrew Fisher.
Fisher was a music-lover, and a lifelong supporter of our first distinctively Australian school of painting, the Heidelberg School.
It is my desire to continue the tradition begun with Fisher and continued through the Whitlam, Hawke and Keating governments.
We will strengthen our support for the arts with the release of Australia's first national cultural policy in almost two decades.
This is an important priority for the Government which will demonstrate our leadership in valuing a creative culture and the central place of the arts in our society.
Simon Crean will work closely with the arts sector to identify the priorities for a cultural policy framework.
We need to look at how we support this valuable sector and consider new models for promoting stronger engagement between arts organisations and the philanthropic and business communities given the very tight fiscal circumstances in which we find ourselves.
I look forward to the input of the publishing and literary community in charting the future course for the arts over the next decade.
In many ways it is literature which anchors and inspires the arts.
The distinguished Australian historian Geoffrey Serle called literature "the great civiliser."
So often it is books that give life to other art forms such as film, theatre, even dance and opera.
John Marsden's book Tomorrow When the War Began, for example, has been adapted to the screen to become this year's highest grossing Australian film.
And of course books are a portable and affordable form of culture easily accessible to all.For a nation so often defined by outdoor leisure and sport, we are also frequent travellers on the journey of reading and ideas.
New book sales stand at $2.5 billion per annum.
Eighty-four per cent of Australians are regular readers, including one in five who read poetry.
And despite the some real concerns over the future of publishing, remember we live in a golden age of Australian writing.
What a privilege it is to have living at the one time authors such as David Malouf, Peter Carey, Shirley Hazzard, Richard Flanagan and Kate Grenville.
And to witness a renaissance of historical authorship in the hands of such gifted writers as Peter Fitzsimmons, Evelyn Juers, Les Carlyon and Graham Freudenberg.
For myself, I was an avid reader as a child, forever cracking cases with Nancy Drew or going on adventures with Frodo Baggins.
These days I tend to curl up in The Lodge with a good briefing rather than a good book.
But a Tim Winton or Stieg Larsson novel is never far out of reach.
Of course reading is a gift that grows by being shared.
That is why I am so passionate about the importance of a good education in the lives of Australia's children.
No part of a good education is more important than literacy and reading.
A glance at British social history, for example, will reveal how working class families prized having someone in the family who could read.
The "reading child" was a feature of many 19th century households.
One child, often the youngest girl, would read newspapers or novels out aloud to the family, keeping them informed and entertained, and perhaps also empowered as well.
One of the great reform journeys over the past century has been to make every child a "reading child".
And why? Because the power of education is transformative.
As Tom Stoppard once said: "Words are sacred... If you get the right ones in the right order you can nudge the world a little."
I want Australia to be a community of readers.
I want every Australian to have the power of words and ideas at their command so that together we can "nudge the world a little."
That is why it is so important to celebrate Australian writing and also Australian publishing.
And to ensure that in Australia, books and ideas always have a home.
Friends,
These awards show the maturity of Australian writing.
Writing that transcends geographical and social borders.
Writing that reaches across genres and narrative faultlines to bring stories of humanity home to our libraries and bookshelves.
With the expansion of these awards to include children and young adults, these are now truly national prizes, backed by the office of the Prime Ministership in the same way that the various state awards have for so long been supported by our Premiers.
It is a simple yet powerful way of saying to our publishers and writers that we treasure what you mean for our nation.
And it is also by extension an opportunity to thank those who sustain our reading culture:
- the wonderful teachers and librarians in our schools,- our booksellers,- the literacy tutors in our migrant communities,- the editors of our literary journals and our book reviewers,- the lecturers in our creative writing schools,- and of course our journalists.
That is why I am deeply proud of this year's winners and nominees.
But I am prouder still of the industry and the society that has made them possible.
Australia truly is a reading nation.
Long may it remain.



PM: Today, obviously, has been the start of the APEC meeting. I'm very glad to be here at this important meeting of economies in our region. And APEC has, for two decades, been driving regional openness and prosperity. It's the kind of work that the G20 is now doing globally. The historical focus of APEC has been about promoting trade and investment in our region, and APEC has enjoyed some success. But there is still more to do to engage in economic liberalisation in our region. More to do on the trade front and more to do behind borders so that countries work on those regulatory questions that can end up making it difficult for businesses to invest and trade with each others' country. Now this is important for Australia because APEC economies account for two-thirds of Australia's two-way trade in goods. And one in five Australian jobs relates to trade. So that means if we can improve doing business with our region, if we can improve trade with our region, then we of course improve the prospects for Australian jobs.
APEC is now, following its trade successes, going to continue to be delivering to its goals on trade but it's also broadening its focus to these behind-the-border issues that can prevent business and investment. And this is really a question of very practical things. To give you some example, under the umbrella of APEC, Australia is leading better heavy vehicle safety standards. And Lindsay Fox, our own Lindsay Fox, is playing a role in this with a dream that you could drive one of the heavy vehicles that Lindsay Fox owns so many of, and go through the region and have the same safety standards - that is, not at every time when you are trying to engage in transport and logistics, hitting a different safety or regulatory regime.
There's the cooperation that's led to the lowering of mobile phone roaming costs. I think everyone can understand just as a matter of practicality, if we are going to facilitate trade and investment in the region, being able to move around the region, use your mobile phone, use it at reasonable costs, is very important. And there's the work that we're doing to enable Australian professionals, people like accountants, to go and work in other parts of the region, take their Australian qualifications and be recognised for their skills and ability and be able to start practice. So as this meeting works through, we will be talking about trade, we will be talking about these behind-the-border issues, we will of course be talking about what happened at the G20 and the implications for the economic liberalisation work in our region and the economic collaboration in our region.
In addition, today, I've had the opportunity to meet with President Obama for a formal bilateral discussion. At the G20 I had the opportunity to have a few casual discussions, non-formal discussions, with President Obama but today we met for a formal bilateral meeting. In that meeting I reaffirmed Australia's long-term friendship with America. We are good mates and we will continue to be good mates. And what that means is that we've got an agenda of work that the two countries will participate in. Some of that agenda of work was talked about at the recent AUSMIN talks in Melbourne when Secretary of State Clinton and Secretary of Defence Gates came to Australia for the formal AUSMIN talks. We talked then about greater collaboration on defence work. We talked about the implications of the US Force Posture Review for work in our region and implications for joint collaboration and work with the Australian Defence Force.
We too of course have had the opportunity with President Obama today, and more broadly with Secretary of State Clinton particularly, to talk about the diplomatic developments in our region, the geopolitical challenges and America's new engagement in the region by becoming a formal member of the East Asia Summit and I was able to discuss that matter with President Obama today.
We also briefly touched upon the question of climate change, what is happening in each of our countries. We talked substantially about Afghanistan as we move towards the Lisbon summit next weekend which both President Obama and I will be attending. This is obviously a meeting of NATO countries. Australia will be there, not because we're a NATO country, but because we are a major contributor in Afghanistan and we'll be there to participate in the discussions about the strategy in Afghanistan. And to be very clear about that strategy, it is the one that I talked about in my parliamentary contribution. We are talking about the conditions that would enable transition of security leadership to move from the forces who are there, including Australian forces, to Afghan-led security by the Afghan National Army and Afghan police. But we will have an enduring commitment to Afghanistan in the sense of supporting the people of Afghanistan. When I spoke in the parliament I made the nature of that commitment clear. We are engaged there now fighting the insurgency, training the Afghan National Army, facilitating the transition to Afghan-led security. But I was very clear with the Australian people that we would be engaged there to the end of the decade at least, and we would have a continuing involvement in the provision of aid and the development of governance in Afghanistan. So I had the opportunity to talk to President Obama about those matters today. Now as the lights come on and off I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you see as the three key markers of success of APEC coming out of tomorrow? What do you want to see out of the meeting?
PM: What I'd like to see out of the meeting is that APEC at a regional level backs the work that's been done at the G20, particularly the work on the Global Framework, the Framework for balanced growth, so that would be number one.
Number two that we commit to stay the course on trade liberalisation and reaffirm our commitment to not succumb to protectionism, even in a period where for some countries in the region this will be difficult as they have persistent unemployment rates and engage in fiscal consolidation which will put some pressure on government delivery of services.
And number three, that we also have the commitment to keep driving the collaboration that is making the difference to the behind the border issues. APEC is at this meeting considering a growth strategy, it's been the subject of discussion amongst leaders today and it goes towards these sorts of questions.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the G20 has overshadowed APEC? Do we need APEC? Is it a costly add-on these days?
PM: We need APEC. We need APEC to keep driving the collaborative work which is necessary in our region. Trade liberation, the regulatory matters that I've talked about as behind the border matters. This is a level of in detailed work that APEC really has a reputation for. For driving the sort of partnership in the region that allows this in detailed but meaningful work to occur. So the examples I've gone to: global roaming, heavy vehicle standards, these things make a practical difference to the ability of the countries in our region to do business with each other.
JOURNALIST: With the American president going to the East Asia Summit next year, do you think that he will be willing to keep up these multiple groups, attend these multiple groups?
PM: Well the president will be hosting APEC next year so he will have to get to Honolulu which presumably he'll look forward to. Look I believe there is a role for APEC on these matters that involve our region. I mean we're building on a lot of work here over a long period of time, 1989 to now. There's been a consistent work program, therefore it is a deep collaboration between countries and consequently I think it continues to play a valuable role.
JOURNALIST: Do you think we have too many of these summits now? By next weekend you will have been to four in the last six weeks or so. Leaders seem to be flat out just going to summits all the time. Is it a sign that nothing gets down unless the leaders do get together or are we wasting our time at these summits? It's good to have a new prime minister meet people but what is the value of these personal contact summits?
PM: You wouldn't want to extrapolate from this time period into saying that the intensity of summits is like that all year long, clearly it is not. We've been in a time period where yes they've been a number of summits clustered. In part that's done for the practicalities that once people have come to Korea for G20 its obviously easy, or easier for them to continue to Japan than it would be to go back home and at another time travel again. So yes there have been a clustering of summits in this period but they've each had an important role.
Now in terms of my choice of travel; we pressed to be a member of the Asia-Europe Meeting. It's a leaders' level meeting and having pressed to be involved in it then we did need to be represented at leaders' level. The G20 has been absolutely pivotal to holding the world back from depression. We press very strenuously for the G20 to be the guiding body for the economic work that we need to do globally, so clearly leaders' level meeting and that's appropriate. APEC was uplifted by Paul Keating to being a leaders' level meeting. Yes there are meetings at ministerial level as well but it plays a very useful role. The decision to travel to the NATO summit was a discretionary one. Australia did not need to be represented at leader level but I determined that at what I believe is a pivotal point in the strategy for Afghanistan given the importance of this in terms of our military commitment that it was appropriate for me to attend this NATO summit.
JOURNALIST: What was the nature of your discussion with President Obama on China today? Was there mutual concern in any areas or was it just general?
PM: We talked about the geopolitics of our region particularly in the context of the East Asia Summit which the US has determined to join. We very much pressed for there to be a part of the regional architecture that brought the US and China amongst others around the table to have a dialogue across the full range of areas, economic, defence, strategic questions, geopolitical questions that has been achieved with the joining of the US to the East Asia Summit. So we talked about our region in that context. We are obviously on the same page in the sense that the Australian attitude and the American attitude is to have a positive and constructive engagement with China. Everybody is talking about China's rise and that's understandable and as China rises and obviously we want to see China be a force for good in the world and be a participant in the global and regional discussions, and be a participant in the rules based system. And so Australia and the US have the same strategic objectives here.
JOURNALIST: You've been invited to go and see Barack Obama in the US next, did he make any indication about whether he's coming to Australia finally?
PM: We would like to see President Obama in Australia, but he issued the invitation for me to visit him next year and we'll look for an opportunity to do that in the first quarter or so of the year depending on other commitments .President Obama knows that he is welcome in Australia whenever he can make the trip.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Japanese Prime Minister made some very strong remarks today about the need to open up the economy. He acknowledged that Japan is losing ground because of the rise of China and other nation in Asia. That's a very positive sign for trade relations between Australia and Japan. Have you had any talks with the Japanese about trade yet? Do you take any comfort from the kind of signals that the Japanese Prime Minister is sending?
PM: The Trade Minister has just been here and you're right, this is a very positive signal. It's a positive signal that appears to be in the context of the Trans Pacific Partnership and the fact that that partnership is under discussion and coming together and obviously Australia is a participant in it. The prospect of that partnership causing Japan to think again about its trade position and to suggest a more open approach. This is very good news: for a long, long period of time Australia has pressed for freer access on agriculture to Japan. We've been endeavouring to negotiate a Free Trade Agreement between our two countries for some period of time, but obviously pivotal to our interests is agricultural access. So we very much welcome this change of view by the Prime Minister here and we'll keep exploring exactly what it means in a practical sense through our own free trade discussions. And we will come to understand more clearly what Japan means through discussions about the Trans Pacific Partnership.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it does seem that there's a tradition that seems to have gone by the board. We understand you've been fitted up for something - we don't know - a kimono, a shirt, or something - but it seems that the APEC funny shirts have been buried here at Yokohama?
PM: The only person who could give you an answer about that is our host, the Prime Minister here, so you'd need to direct your question to him.
QUESTION: You don't regret the passing of this tradition?
PM: I seriously can't help you on what's happened to the APEC shirts. I did wear the East Asia Summit dress which, the one supplied to me was a cream jacket, and it didn't meet with grand appreciation by the photographers, as I recall it they were hoping for something more flamboyant.
QUESTION: Prime Minister could I get your personal view on two matters that are linked to the current debate on gay marriage and the debate on this that's going on within your party.
PM: And you've come all the way to Japan to ask that question? Or you've found it on the APEC agenda?
JOURNALIST: It's the only reason. It might be.
PM: I think there are some foreign affairs officials who are indicating some grand scepticism about that proposition.
JOURNALIST: What is your view on marriage and secondly what is your view on gay couples raising children?
PM: My view on these questions is on the record in Australia. So I would refer you to my statements in Australia rather than deal with these issues whilst I'm here in Japan.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on China, was the issue of their rare earths policy brought up in today's meeting?
PM: No, the question of the rare earths policy hasn't been raised in the forum. It may be during the course of tomorrow, but it wasn't raised in today's discussions.
JOURNALIST: Did you raise it with President Obama?
PM: No, I did not.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Treasury Department in its incoming government briefs, raised a lot of doubt about bilateral Free Trade Agreements, it said the whole game should be multilateral or absolute regional. The longstanding effort of the business sector in APEC has been to get a Asia Pacific-wide Free Trade Agreement. What is your view on it? Is it do-able? Are resources being directed away from the multilateral talks to deal with all these bilateral talks that Australia is involved in?
PM: We are free trade exponents, and our preference would be for a global multilateral round, ie, to have Doha come to a conclusion with a level of ambition. Our preference is to work as broadly as possible. But in circumstances where it has been very, very difficult to make progress with Doha, we have pressed to keep forward momentum for bilateral discussions as well. So yes, we're working on the Doha Round globally, we're working regionally, and APEC has been important to that trade liberalisation work. In circumstances though, where the global round has taken so long, we have also been pressing on bilateral Free Trade Agreements.
JOURNALIST: Like an Asia Pacific FTA, a free trade region?
PM: Well APEC's obviously worked on liberalisation and been effective; we now have these discussions on the Trans Pacific Partnership. We believe those discussions are important. I think you and I are probably on the same page about the ambition here, which is to have the broadest possible round, but in terms of playing out negotiations effectively, given we are a participant in the negotiations but clearly everybody else's view can effect timing and content and ambition, there are occasions where we think that it's in our interests to move as well as participating in those talks for bilateral arrangements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given you've been seeing the leaders up close, you've had informal meetings with some and formal meetings with others. On the question of China, do you sense that the chill between the US and China is kind of easing through these summits? Is there hope that there'll be better relations there, particularly regarding the region?
PM: I think difficulties are always improved by having an opportunity to sit and talk them through. That doesn't mean that the talking is easy, but I ask you to think about what the alternative is - to have these tensions, and no moment where the principal players come together to talk them through. It is better to have structures that bring people together and enable that dialogue.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you have had a series of intense summits and meetings with world leaders for the first time as Prime Minister. How do you feel fitting into the foreign policy area now? Are you developing a passion for foreign affairs and trade?
PM: Dennis, I like dealing with people and whether you're dealing with leaders of the G20, whether you're dealing with leaders here at APEC, whether you're at home talking to Australians about what's on their mind, people are people and if you can get them talking and work issues through you can normally find a good place, a good path, so I'm someone who likes to have a discussion, I like meeting people, and I've had the opportunity to do that here.
I also want, as Prime Minister, to always be a feisty advocate of our national interest and to do that you need to be at the tables where that national interest is effected, that's what I've been doing over the last few days. There couldn't be a more important place to talk about our economy and the prosperity of Australian families than at the G20, there couldn't be a more important Labor legacy to build on than APEC, and to talk about liberalisation in our region, and that matters for Australian families too.
JOURNALIST: Are you finding some passion for it?
PM: You don't want to over-extrapolate earlier comments, the way that sometimes your friends from the media are wont to do. 


Yokohama, Japan 
PRESIDENT OBAMA: The United States does not have a closer or better ally than Australia. We are grateful for all the work that we do together. I expressed my personal thanks to the people of Australia through the Prime Minister for the enormous sacrifices that are being made in Afghanistan by Australian troops.
We, I think, are going to be discussing these issues further when we see each other at the Lisbon Summit, but obviously all of us here have an interest in bringing about a good outcome in that region that ensures our safety and security over the long term.
On the economic front, I have reiterated to the Prime Minister how important the Asia Pacific region is to our economy and to world economic growth. Australia is a central player in that economy, so we are going to continue to explore ways that we can work together to expand trade, expand investment, ensure that everybody is playing by the rules of the road in the region and co-operating effectively. The Trans-Pacific Partnership is a good example of the kind of collaboration between our two countries and I think we can expand opportunities for all people.
So I am just grateful to have this opportunity to speak with the Prime Minister, I have extended an invitation to her to visits the United States sometime early next year and we'll find a date and hopefully we can build on some of the discussions we've already had to further enhance our bilateral co-operation.
So Prime Minister, thank you and to your entire delegation for the good work that you've done and I look forward to seeing you in Washington.
PM: Thank you. If I could say to President Obama, we've had the opportunity to be at the G20 over the last few days and had the opportunity to have a few brief discussions there and we will see each other in Lisbon next weekend.
Our two countries are great mates, to use our terminology and as great mates we are continuing to work together in our region and beyond. We have had the opportunity to talk about Afghanistan and I do take this opportunity to pass on the condolences of the Australian people for the losses that you have suffered there. But we are working together there and will have time next weekend at Lisbon to talk about the transition strategy.
We have also had the opportunity to reflect on the discussions we had at AUSMIN about the American force posture review and the work that we are doing on new challenges like cyber security. And we've had the opportunity to talk about our engagement in the region there, the US engagement is strengthening through forums like the East Asia Summit and we are on the same page on trade, so we very much look forward to the discussions of the Trans-Pacific Partnership during the course of the APEC meetings.
So a very good opportunity to have a good discussion about the areas where our two countries are collaborating now and will in the future. Thank you.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Foreign Affairs Kevin Rudd today welcomed the release of Aung San Suu Kyi from house arrest on behalf of the Australian people.
The Prime Minister said the nation had the greatest admiration for Aung San Suu Kyi, who has become the symbol of the struggle for democracy and freedom in Burma.
Aung San Suu Kyi paid a heavy price for advocating freedom, having spent 15 of the last 21 years in detention.
Her detention was completely unjustified and release long overdue . The Government condemned her most recent conviction and sentencing in August 2009 in the strongest of terms.
Minister for Foreign Affairs Kevin Rudd said the Government was seeking an early opportunity to speak with Aung San Suu Kyi, to convey Australia's support for her and her struggle for democracy in Burma.
We will closely monitor her situation, including any restrictions imposed on her freedom of movement or association.
Australia continues to call on the Burmese authorities to immediately and unconditionally release the more than 2000 political prisoners still detained in Burma.
We also call on the Burmese authorities to embark on an inclusive and genuine process of national reconciliation and engage in dialogue with all of Burma's ethnic groups.
The release of Aung San Suu Kyi offers the Burmese authorities an opportunity to move the country forward. Australia calls on Burma to grasp the chance to make genuine progress towards democracy and greater international engagement. 



PM: The APEC Summit has drawn to an end and I wanted to take this opportunity to summarise what has been achieved. Australia was proudly a founding member of APEC, because we saw the economic advantages of greater trade and economic engagement in our region.
Here we are 21 years later and having APEC has made a difference. To just give you one statistic which tells the story, in the period from 1994 to 2009 trade within the APEC region tripled. Now what that means is more trade, more economic opportunities and more jobs for Australians.
At this APEC Summit we have built on APEC's earlier successes. We have done a stock take against the Bogor Goals and worked out how much progress has been made and reflected on what more we need to do. And a great deal of progress has been made in reducing tariffs and barriers on trade between APEC nations and economies.
Now we need to keep building on that work. We have noted that against the Bogor Goals there is still work to do, particularly to liberalise sensitive sectors like agriculture. And building beyond those goals, we want to now move from talking solely about tariff protection and free trade to an even greater focus on the behind the border barriers. The behind the border barriers of different regulatory regimes, different ways of working that can prevent trade investment and the creation of jobs.
The communiqué, the leaders declaration from APEC deals with all these matters. In addition it reflects the communiqué of the G20. APEC has also committed itself to engaging in a framework for growth, making sure we life growth, in what is still a difficult time in the global and regional economy. Making sure that that growth is balanced and we address some of the issues that give rise to imbalances between nations including imbalances on the current account. And APEC had said that it too wants to show leadership on the hard grind of structural reforms that economies need to do as the world economy turns to growth. This has been a successful meeting and the leaders declaration is now available for all to see.
In addition today I attended a meeting convened by President Obama to bring together the nations that are joining the Trans Pacific Partnership discussion. We are holding true to a vision of free trade and economic integration across our region. The Trans Pacific Partnership is another stepping stone to get there to greater economic liberalisation and integration.
The original four countries in the Trans Pacific Partnership were present at the meeting convened by President Obama and those nations are Brunei, Chile, New Zealand and Singapore. Now we, Peru, the United States and Malaysia have already indicated we want to be involved in the Trans Pacific Partnership and today Vietnam announced formally that it also wanted to be involved in the Trans Pacific Partnership.
Significantly Prime Minister Kan of Japan joined the discussions in a status of consultation, but the fact that Prime Minister Kan was there in the room for the Trans Pacific Partnership discussion, I believe is a good sign, building on the earlier good signs of his statement about taking a more liberalised approach to trade and particularly dealing with the sensitive subject of agriculture.
The nations in the room talked about their ambition for this agreement. President Obama indicated that he did want to see a good degree of progress by the Honolulu meeting of APEC next year and so nations in the room are aiming to progress this agreement as quickly as possible, with a view to showing that work is achieving by the APEC meeting of next year.
Finally today, I did have the opportunity to engage in two bilateral meetings. One was with the Prime Minister of Thailand, Prime Minister Abhisit. One was with the President of Mexico, Mexican President Calderon. I spoke to the Mexican President particularly about outlooks for Cancun; he is as President of Mexico the host of that important discussion on climate change. I had the opportunity to talk to the Prime Minister of Thailand across our full range of engagement, we are obviously engaged with Thailand in our region on economic matters, we have a strong partnership with them in a number of multilateral forums.
He raised with me the question of people movement in the region and the stress that does put on Thailand. We briefly discussed my proposals for a regional protection framework and regional processing centre and agreed that talking about those proposals should be the subject of further bilateral dialogue and dialogue in the Bali Process.
So all in all, in conclusion as the APEC summit comes to a close, I believe that both the G20 and APEC have done good work, good work to coordinate what is happening in our economies, while the world economy is still in a fragile and difficult stage.
Yes, the world economy has moved to recovery, but the recovery is fragile and it needs to be nurtured and harnessed, it needs to be built upon through freer trade, economic liberalisation and the hard work of structural reforms including addressing imbalances in economies, that's what the discussion over the two summits has been about.
For people in their homes in Australia, that quickly becomes a proposition about our nation's prosperity, about their jobs and their prosperity into the future. I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I just clarify on Vietnam, did they become one, in addition to the four that signed up, or just involved in talks?
PM: So, yes, it's the original four, plus the four that had already indicated they wanted to formally join in the talks. So you've got the agreement for the four and there are discussions about broadening that agreement to others. We had already indicated that we wanted to be in those discussions about broadening and today Vietnam also indicated it wanted to be in those discussions about broadening. So it's not, it's not signing on to the agreement in its current form, it's a dialogue about broadening the agreement with more partners in it.
JOURNALIST: After your meeting with President Calderon are you any more optimistic that something real can be achieved at Cancun to combat climate change?
PM: Having talked to President Calderon, his discussions with me are built on earlier streams of advice to me, including through Minister Combet. The focus in Cancun will very likely be on fast track financing, that is getting assistance to developing countries, to deal with climate change matters and focus will very much be on forests, on the loss of forests and the impact that that has on the climate, on carbon generally. So they are likely to be the things were we will see developments in Cancun.
JOURNALIST: So no talk of targets or anything like that?
PM: President Calderon is very clear about where he wants to take this discussion, he believes that important measures and progress were achieved at Copenhangen, but he does understand that expectations have been built very high and whilst the Copenhagen accord was a good step forward, because expectations were so high, many were disappointed by progress, he understands that. However he believes the important purpose of Cancun is to build on that earlier progress and he wants to particularly build on it in fast track financing and in the forest measures.
JOURNALIST: Given the modest goals that seem to be taken forward to that summit and what's happened in the United States are you confident that you can retain the momentum for implementing a carbon price in Australia?
PM: I will be, as Prime Minister, doing everything I can to generate community and Parliamentary consensus for change in our economy. We need it and we need to remind ourselves that around the world as these international talks continue to happen, around the world economies are changing to deal with climate change and deal with a different future when it comes to using carbon.
We cannot risk being left behind as economies adapt and become low pollution economies. My argument about working out a way through the question of pricing carbon is: it's good for us to be dealing with the adaptation our economy needs for the future. It's in our national interest to build the low pollution economy we will need in the future and let's just be very clear about President Obama's position here, President Obama is responding to the domestic political circumstances he faces, he sponsored a cap and trade scheme, he didn't get through the Senate, it wasn't going to get through the Senate. We know a bit about what it can be like to face hostile Senates, we've got that in common and following the mid-term elections, now the prospects for any such agreement are, for any such legislation going through both the House and the Senate is nil and President Obama has responded to that.
JOURNALIST: On Thailand, is the President of Thailand aware of your regional processing centre and did he give any indication of what he thought of the idea?
PM: He raised with me the issue of people movement and some of the pressures that that puts on Thailand. I, you know, well they do have Burmese refugees in particular in large numbers pressing on their borders and into Thailand and they've experienced those flows for quite a long period of time and this morning we were talking about circumstances in Burma, so I'm sure you can image what occasions those flows of people into Thailand.
So he raised the issue of people movement with me, I'm not a mind reader, but I anticipate he would have done that against a background of knowing that Australia had the propels and discussions in train about a regional protection framework and a regional processing centre.
Our officials have been consulting extensively across the region and so the discussion proceeded on the basis that we were both acknowledging that there was a real issue here, it's an issue that affects both of our nations, we're looking for solutions. Australia has put forward this proposal and he wants to keep discussing it bilaterally and we have the Bali Process for that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just back on climate change, the APEC declaration today doesn't touch on pricing carbon, it does talk about a lot of practical measures and you seem to be suggesting that the President of Mexico is also talking about practical measures in Cancun. Do you feel that he's still committed to reintroducing an ETS, or a price on carbon given the deadline of the 23rd?
PM: Well, first and foremost let's not create a straw man here, there was never any suggestion that this declaration was going to deal with a price on carbon, you know we're here for APEC, which is predominantly, overwhelmingly focussed, as the name would imply, on the economic agenda and in dealing with the economic agenda then it does bring you into a discussion of climate change, but that's not what this meeting is about.
Second, we should remind ourselves that around the world, nations are taking measures to deal with climate change. Many important places in the world price carbon, to give just one example California. If California were a country it would have a seat at the G20 table, it has an emissions trading scheme, it prices carbon. And it's just one example and when we look around the world, through measures that are being taken, shadow prices are being put on carbon, carbon is effectively getting a pricing in some economies.
So against this movement around the world, against the preference of consumers, increasingly being more sharply expressed, that they want live in a greener way and want to make their own contribution to cutting emissions, we can't just sit still and pretend that our economy can deal with what is going to be the way the world economy focuses in the future and consumer preference focuses in the future.
We need to work our way through the adaptations our economy needs to be a lower pollution economy, it's why the government is talking through the multiparty Climate Change Committee and directly with business and stakeholders about pricing carbon.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I saw you having a fairly animated chat with Barack Obama before the leaders declaration, I was wondering what you were talking about?
PM: We were having an animated chat about our political systems and differences in them, for example how we have question time and the fact that I am flying through the night to return to one.
JOURNALIST: Next week the Greens, or in the next fortnight the Greens will put forward legislation to see the banks hold their interest rates, or follow the RBA's lead for the next two years, is this something that the government will support?
PM: The Government will have its own package of measures to deal with competition in the banking sector. Wayne Swan has been working on them, as has been publicly known since October, when it comes to dealing with something as important as the banking sector you want to get it right, Wayne Swan is working to get it right, we will bring forward and support our own package.
JOURNALIST: Is that still in December, Ms Gillard?
PM: Wayne Swan has been very clear it would be next month.
JOURNALIST: The OECD's analysis of the Australian economy today was released and it is very critical in terms of the changes that were made to the RSBT and saying that the MRRT should be broadened, the rate increased, and (inaudible) the negotiated agreement that you came to, what do you say to the OECD's findings about the MRRT?
PM: I entered an agreement with Australia's biggest miners about the way in which this tax would be constructed, we've got the policy transition group working on the detail. I'm certainly intending to hold to the agreement that I made, we have obviously worked through to get a consensus in difficult circumstances and I will hold to that consensus.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, part of that Greens package on bank reform is the removal of the $2 transaction fee on ATMs, I understand that you're not going to support the Green's legislation and you have your own package, but would you support that?
PM: The Government will bring forward its own package of measures on banking as heralded by the Treasurer Wayne Swan and building on our earlier competition reform.
Am I discriminating against you Malcolm, so badly, you've just given up?
JOURNALIST: All my questions have been asked.
PM: Oh, ok. If you don't go there early then - I was actually talking to the Canadian Prime Minister who has introduced a list system in his press conferences.
JOURNALIST: He doesn't like journalists.
PM: I'm picking up tips as I travel.
JOURNALIST: The journalists in Canada went on strike.
PM: We'll they'd better be back working now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the TPP talks, can you give us a sense of the friction, and those APEC members in the approach of ASEAN, those three (inaudible) TPP was the much friction on those talks yesterday?
PM: No, no, there's not friction. There is an understanding that there's a number of things that are happening and an understanding that we need to share information, so people can understand as these various potential agreements develop that something isn't happening in one area which isn't complementary with another area.
So there's an information sharing tasks that needs to go on, but not any friction expressed because of the different forms of agreement that are being pursued and my view, clearly, is we need to have the global round come to conclusion, the Doha Round, and that was expressed very clearly at the G20.
We need to pursue further trade liberalisation in our region, both on the question of tariffs but also these behind the border measures that we've discussed and given how difficult this is we won't have all our eggs in one basket, we will take opportunities to press forward on free trade and economic liberalisation in a number of areas.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the TPP, can you talk more about what the goal is over the next year? You said that there was a goal to reach by Honolulu one year from now, does that mean signing up to a more firmly, does that mean getting (inaudible)
PM: I think the goal here is to see an agreement that is comprehensive, that is it's not just dealing with goods, but also dealing with services, that has a level of ambition in it.
This has been referred to as a next generation free trade agreement and I believe that terminology is referring to the comprehensiveness of the measures that parties are looking to in the agreement. We will do everything we can as a country to push these talks along and clearly President Obama has expressed a level of ambition, both in terms of what's in the agreement, but also progress by the time he hosts the G20 in the US.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given Prime Minister Kan's comments and his attendance at the meeting today, how realistic are the prospects of a bilateral free trade deal now, are you heartened, encouraged, and what were your thoughts on kabuki theatre?
PM: I'm heartened, heartened by what had happened in the last few days here in Japan. I was heartened by the Prime Minister's statements on his government's approach to free trade. I was heartened by the fact he came to sit in the meeting about the Trans Pacific Partnership.
So they are good signs, but I'm not underestimating the journey from here, free trade, questions of agriculture have been very politically sensitive in Japan and difficult. I think Prime Minister Kan has taken some courageous steps but there is a lot more to do. On kabuki, I hadn't seen any before, so I've learned something.
JOURNALIST: I know we're overseas, but I just wanted to get what your priorities will be for the final sitting weeks of the year?
PM: You will no doubt hear about those long and loud in question time tomorrow, so I will see you back in Canberra for that. Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Sport Mark Arbib today announced the launch of the 2011 Prime Minister's XI cricket match in Canberra next January.
The match is a showcase for up and coming Australian cricketers and this year's event will support the Prostate Cancer Foundation of Australia.
The Prime Minister was represented at today's launch at Manuka Oval by Minister Arbib and her partner Tim Mathieson, in his capacity as Men's Health Ambassador.
Prostate cancer affects 200,000 men in Australia each year and the Prime Minister applauded the Foundation's initiatives to raise awareness of symptoms, early detection and treatment options.
With the January 10 match being played just three days after the end of the Ashes series, there is certain to be heightened interest in the outcome.
This will be the seventh match between the PM's XI and England, with the PM's XI winning four matches to England's two.
The Prime Minister's XI was first played in 1951 against West Indies and was reinstated in the cricket calendar in 1983-84 under Prime Minister Bob Hawke. The match has been played annually since then.
Senator Arbib thanked match sponsors ACT Cricket and Canberra Investment Corporation Australia (CIC) for supporting the game, which has become an important fixture on the Australian cricket calendar.
The Prime Minister's XI continues the Australian Government's committed to helping develop the next generation of Australian cricketers.
Earlier this year the Government invested $17.5 million in the Cricket Australia Centre of Excellence in Brisbane as part of our broader commitment to nurturing sporting talent.
Tickets for the event are on sale through Ticketek. The event is expected to attract a sell-out crowd. 



I am so glad to be back in Victoria. I am so glad to be here in Bendigo. I am so proud to support this Government in this campaign. A government with its best years still to come.
This election matters to Victoria. The Liberals would be bad for our state's future. They don't support high speed broadband. They don't support wind power. They won't even have their policies costed. They put at risk a State budget that every Victorian has helped make strong. I've seen these things from conservative parties before. Opposition for opposition's sake - not a plan for the times ahead.
Victoria needs a strong Labor Government. Your vote for Labor has never mattered more. I know as much as anyone does in modern politics, every vote counts. No matter where you live. No matter who the leading non-Labor candidate is. After all that has happened in 2010 no one can doubt it - if you want Labor to govern, you have to vote Labor.
I want to tell you about this man John Brumby, my valued colleague and my trusted friend. I first met John over 15 years ago. I've worked with him, and worked for him, for years. He's a warm and engaging person. A man who is just as much at home in Harcourt as he is in any boardroom. And it pains me to say it, but he is a Collingwood six-footer if there's ever been one. If I live for 40 more years, I never want to have to sit next to him at the football again, but when I think about all the years I've known John and all I've seen him do for his party and his state, I can only say: John Brumby is a man of rare strength and rare understanding.
In the darkest days of opposition, when thousands of teachers and nurses were being sacked by the Liberal State Government, John Brumby had the strength to stand up for the fairness and decency he has always believed in.
When the Liberal State Government turned its back on country Victorians, John Brumby was their advocate and friend. When all of Australia jeered at Victoria as a "rust-bucket state", John Brumby had the vision to dream of a new future of innovation, prosperity and governing for all.
Last Saturday I came to Melbourne to support this campaign. John and I announced together the Commonwealth's commitment of nearly a billion dollars in funding for the Northern Victoria Irrigation Renewal Project. The project will deliver 200 gigalitres of much-needed water savings. We spent a couple of hours together in the car from the city out to Narre Warren and back again, and as we drove to Melbourne's heart John spoke to me of his determination to keep delivering for the Victoria he knows so well and loves so much. That's the John Brumby I've always known.
Your Premier has a plan for a growing state for the next four years: 300,000 more jobs. Rebuilding and modernising every Victorian school. Employing another 2,800 nurses and building the Geelong Hospital and the Monash Children's Centre.
And your Premier has a vision for a fair and sustainable state for a generation to come, for a fairer Victoria, strong new investments in crucial areas like child support, homelessness and problem gambling. For a solar state leading Australia on smarter use of water and energy.
My fellow Victorians There are no iron laws in politics. But there is an iron rule in life. Hard work brings rewards. John Brumby is working hard for Victorians.
Labor has governed Victoria well. John Brumby has led your Government well. And on 27 November I believe Victorians will recognize Labor as the right choice for the future under the leadership of your Premier, my friend, John Brumby.



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard today congratulated His Royal Highness Prince William of Wales and Catherine Middleton on the announcement of their engagement.
The Prime Minister said it was a happy time for the royal couple who will be married next year.
The Prince is well known for his charity work and for his ongoing service in the British Royal Air Force.
Prince William left a strong impression on many Australians during his visit at the beginning of the year.
Ms Middleton will no doubt strengthen this remarkable reputation and she has the nation's best wishes and support.
The royal engagement is a time for celebration amongst the Royal and Middleton families and the Prime Minister wishes them all the very best at this happy time.
Governor-General Quentin Bryce AC has sent formal congratulations to the Palace on behalf of the Government and people of Australia.


Parliament House, Canberra
Senator the Honourable Kim Carr, Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research and our fellow parliamentary colleagues.
Distinguished ambassadors and members of the diplomatic community.
Our honoured guests from the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Scientists, teachers, leaders from the academic community and the public sector
Award nominees and your families.
And a very special welcome to previous Australia Prize and Prime Minister's prize winners.
What a delight it is to welcome you to this prestigious ceremony here at the heart of our democracy in Parliament House tonight.
No venue could better reflect the special place that science holds in the fabric of Australian society.
Science is not just another industry or another sector.
Along with other values such as universal schooling, an independent public sector and the rule of law, science is one of the fundamental platforms upon which our conception of a modern advanced society is based.
The objectivity and rigour of science are basic to our existence and success as a community of reason.
It is science, more than almost any other pursuit, which has freed humanity from the habits, fears and superstitions of the past.
It is science which has created greater progress in the past two centuries than all the previous millennia of human history.
And it is science to which we turn for a better understanding of ourselves and the future of our fragile planet.
New knowledge in the human and social sciences will help us to understand that most complex of systems - the human race.
These insights will help us live more productive and fulfilling lives.
That is why tonight we gather to acknowledge the men and women who make scientific endeavour possible.
We honour our scientists who dedicate their lives to the pursuit of knowledge.
We honour the teachers and lecturers who do so much to bring a love of science to the next generation.
And we honour those who build bridges of engagement between the world of science and the wider community...
... individuals like Dr Karl, Adam Spencer and Robyn Williams...
... and great organisations like the Australian Academy of Scienceand the CSIRO.
The issue of engagement is the essence of my message tonight.
That is why my government is investing $21 million over three years in Inspiring Australia, the country's first ever national strategy for science engagement.
This program has been developed by Senator Carr to champion the cause of science and help share the achievements of science with the whole nation.
The early phases of the strategy are already underway.
Through Inspiring Australia, we will continue to recognise achievement through these Prizes for Science.
We will continue to support National Science Week, Australia's premier vehicle for bringing science and research to the people, right across the country.
But Inspiring Australia will go further, supporting science events and activities in Australia's cities, regional and remote areas all year round.
We will target young people, outer-metropolitan and regional areas, and Indigenous and remote communities too.
We will connect with popular community events such as writers' weeks and music festivals.
And Inspiring Australia will connect with mainstream and new media to promote science issues and achievements to an even wider public.
You do great things.
Let's ensure the community gets to hear about them.
Friends,
We also need to ensure that the world of science can enlist the full range of Australia's potential.
We can no longer afford to allow talent to languish simply because of the circumstances of birth, demography or gender.
That is why tonight I am pleased to announce the creation of two new ARC Australian Laureate Fellowships for outstanding women researchers.
The Fellowships will be named for two Australian pioneers, Kathleen Fitzpatrick and Georgina Sweet who were active and prominent in the early to mid 20th century when female researchers were a small minority indeed.
The Kathleen Fitzpatrick Australian Laureate Fellowship will be available to a highly ranked woman researcher from the humanities, arts or social sciences.
And the Georgina Sweet Australian Laureate Fellowship will be available to a highly ranked woman researcher from the science and technology disciplines.
The thinking behind this is simple.
Experience has shown that women can compete very effectively at this elite level - when they apply.
But application rates for women are much lower at this level than the proportion of women among capable, accomplished senior researchers.
These Fellowships are intended to attract a larger number of applications from female research leaders of international repute.
They will include an additional funding to support ambassadorial activities to promote women in research.
We aim not only to recruit and promote our best senior women researchers, but to utilise their experience to help foster the next generation as well.
But the story of engagement does not stop there.
One of the most exciting new frontiers of science is the engagement of experts across disparate fields of knowledge.
Our newest Nobel Laureate Elizabeth Blackburn often stresses that the best way to work on problems is to get people of relevant expertise around the table from a range of fields.
After all, the big challenges of our world do not occur neatly within disciplinary boxes, so why should our responses.
We are only beginning to tap the potential of this approach.
For example, bringing economists, cultural researchers and historians together with water experts, meteorologists and agricultural scientists to understand water usage in arid areas.
New collaborations across these traditional divides have a powerful potential to change the way we solve real world problems.
Similarly, the engagement of industry with science has enormous potential to boost productivity and skill our workforce.
Australia has a good track record in this respect like our Cooperative Research Centres and the CSIRO.
But as a nation we cannot afford to rest on our laurels.
That's why we have instituted the Joint Research Engagement scheme to encourage universities to work with industry.
And announced the ARC Linkage Training Awards to embed 200 of our best research students into industry settings.
Most significantly, we are replacing the current inefficient system of tax concessions with a fairer, more effective tax credit, to encourage industry to become more involved in research and development.
So more engagement between disciplines and more engagement between science and industry; both indispensable in the years ahead.
But science has no borders and therefore our engagement must be global as well.
After all, our scientific community may be exceptional but it is also relatively small.
That means if we want to compete we also have to collaborate, and those collaborations can take many forms:
Like Australian physicists working in international teams at the Large Hadron Collider beneath the Swiss Alps.
Or anthropologists and linguists from all over the world conducting field work in the Pacific Islands or the Australian outback.
In fact, one of the most special collaborations is our emerging partnership with China.We are deeply fortunate to be joined tonight by Professor Lu and his colleagues from the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
They have to come to help us celebrate the 30th anniversary of scientific cooperation between China and Australia ...
... and their presence does us great honour.
Last year, China overtook Germany to become our third most favoured country for scientific co-publication after the USA and Britain.
Between 1996 and 2009, the level of our co-publications with China rose twenty-fold, easily the highest rate of growth among our top partnerships.
The recent Australia-China Science and Technology Week at the Shanghai Expo showcased a range of exciting collaborations between our countries.
And it strongly underscores the role science will play in the progress and prosperity of our two nations - and the whole world - in the years ahead.
Friends,
We live in a crucial time for science in Australia and around the world.
It is a time demanding strong leadership, from the grassroots to the highest levels of government.
Together we must ensure that science, research and innovation can continue to play their part in shaping our future and guiding our decisions.
We saw vividly last year in the lead-up to Copenhagen just how greatly the forces of denial and distortion can hinder good public policy.
And how decades of thorough science can be overshadowed by those with louder voices and fewer scruples.
But as the great American statesman Daniel Patrick Moynihan once said: Everyone is entitled to their own opinions, but they are not entitled to their own facts.
In that light, it is simply worth re-stating that the spirit of science is optimistic and so am I.
That is why in a community of reason like Australia, knowledge and facts will triumph in the end... as they must.
And so I say to all of you tonight -
Be proud and be courageous.
Dedicating your lives to science is not always easy, but your work is more necessary and more relevant than ever before.
So together let's champion the cause of science.
And through these awards and beyond, let's tell your brilliant story to the world. 



Parents will get unique access to data which tracks the progress of students in Australian schools with the launch of the new-look My School website.
The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, and the Minister for School Education, Peter Garrett, today previewed the site which will be publicly available with new data next month.
For the first time, My School will outline the progress students have made in literacy and numeracy since the 2008 National Assessment Program - Literacy and Numeracy tests.
This will provide unprecedented insight for parents and carers on the impact of teaching and learning across Australia's schools.
The enhanced version of My School will also include financial information on schools.
It will be the first time information on the resources available to schools will be publically available.
With this year's updated and new data, My School becomes a living site, with schools' progress tracked year by year for those students who have remained at a school from 2008 to 2010.
My School has undergone a number of important changes since its first release in January 2010, reflecting valuable feedback and input from parents, teachers and unions.
The enhancements build on the highly successful existing My School website for parents. There have been more than 4.1 million visits to My School since it was launched.
The improvements to My School reflect the Gillard Government's ongoing commitment to continual improvement and transparency in school education.
Anyone will be able to follow a cohort of students as they move through school levels to see what progress they have made over the last two years.
The 2010 National NAPLAN Summary Report shows that from 2008 to 2010, there has been significant improvement at the national level in Year 3 reading, writing, grammar and punctuation, Year 5 numeracy and Year 7 reading.
Nationally, over 90 per cent of students are at or above the national minimum standard in almost all domains and year levels. The exceptions are Year 9 Writing at 87.2 per cent and Year 9 Spelling at 89.6 per cent.
The new My School site will provide further information on these national figures at the school level. This will help to better identify what is working and help inform local discussions about how school performance can be improved.
The key additions to the My School website are:- data about growth in student achievement- data about school finances- a more accurate method of calculating the Index of Community Socio-Educational Advantage (ICSEA)- new graphical methods of displaying NAPLAN data- security features to ensure that data is used appropriately
The Government acknowledges the significant input from the My School Working Party which included representatives of parents, teachers, principals, academics and education unions. Their suggestions along with those of state and territory education ministers have strongly influenced the form of the new site.
Information available on the website from today includes a preview of the new site and a fact sheet outlining the new features of the site.
The enhanced site will go live in December. For more information, please visit www.myschool.edu.au
Schools that have questions about the site, are encouraged to email info@myschool.edu.au


Canberra
PM: Thank you very much, good afternoon. I'm here today with Peter Garrett, our Minister for School Education, and with Barry McGaw who leads our Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting Authority.
Earlier this year we launched My School, a website that gave parents more information than they had ever had before about their child's school.
More information about the school and its performance in national testing. More information about the school in terms of the student population. More information about the school in terms of the numbers of teaching and non-teaching staff within the school.
My School has been a hugely popular site. Two and a half million Australians have visited it; it has had more than 4 million hits. And I think we all remember that on the day that My School was launched it was the subject of overwhelming demand.
And after the launch of My School we had an intense national conversation about what has happening in Australia's schools and how we could best improve school education for every child in every school.
We're here today to give you a preview of the next version of My School. My School2.0 will give parents even more information. Even more information about their child's school and their performance in that school. Because we are now at the stage where we have had three rounds of national testing, for the first time My School is able to include data to show the growth in student achievement; because kids that have sat an earlier test have now sat another national test. MySchool2.0 includes new information about school finances. It includes a more accurate method of calculating the community socio-education advantage index, the ICSEA index which ensures that you can compare schools that service similar student populations.
It's got new graphical means of displaying the national testing data and it's got new security features to ensure that the website is used appropriately.
This preview of how My School will now look will of course be followed by the new My School information in December. This is an important set of new data for Australian parents, for teachers and for the Australian community.
I've always believed that if we are to achieve our vision of a great quality education for every child then we needed the whole nation to have accurate information, school by school, about the quality of education and My School is giving that information to parents and Australians.
I'll turn now to Peter Garrett for some comments and then we will take people through the site.
PETER GARRETT: Thanks very much Prime Minister and thank you to ACARA for the work they have done in bringing this previewed site to us for our attention. It's worth reflecting that Education Ministers at the State and Federal level, previous to the My School website, didn't have easy access to national data on education and school performance.
And that's why My School is so important and that's why continuing to improve My School is important as well.
As the Prime Minister said the updated MySchool2.0 site, when it goes live in December, will have a number of important and new features but one I want to mention to begin with is that there will be additional information supplied by schools to contextualise the school, to provide school characteristics on display for parents and those who come in and want to understand more about a school. And I know this is something that principals in particular wanted to see reflected on the updated My School website and it is reflected here.
Growth data - for the first time nationally we will have growth data which shows us how well students are progressing when they undertake their NAPLAN tests. So that is growth data for student in literacy and numeracy. The same group of students who sat the test, say in 2008 and then sit it again in 2010. We now have the capacity under this site to see what progress and improvement has been made by those students. So measuring growth of progress  -  a very, very important feature in this My School2.0 site.
School finance data. As the Prime Minister said, for the first time the provision of information across government and non-government which determines both recurrent income that the schools have received and also their capital expenditure. Now that's an extremely important piece of work that has been undertaken by ACARA in cooperation with the relevant authorities and I am really pleased to see this information coming up on this site. The first time we'll see the distribution of resources at school level and we'll also see it across the nation.
Finally as the Prime Minister said, the ICSEA index  - new and improved -  better data coming into that index. That provides a richer information base in terms of looking at where schools sit on the site and that will be of great interest not only to the parents and the student communities but more generally to the community at large.
I want to specifically say that this has been a huge piece of work and you will notice that there are graphical improvements on the site. It's a where when its been tested, that parents and principals have thought that the new graphics are working well. I am pleased to hear that.
It will be very exiting when it goes live in December but for the moment I would like to hand over to ACARA Chair, Barry McGaw to take us through the site in more detail.
BARRY MCGAW: Now the site has the same front page as before. You can search for an individual school by name or you can search by suburb. I'll take you straight into the site. The next page is new. This is a page that sets out terms and conditions of use and also obliges, as many websites do, a user to type some somewhat obscure letters, the purpose being to make sure the user is a human and not a machine that  . And then you accept the conditions and you go into the first page of data on the school. We have provided more space for the school to describe itself this year. Much of the other information is similar. The index of socio educational data each - this is a school just below the mean of 1000. This is a raw score. And it's a real set of school comparisons that we are offering.
I'll just highlight some of the things that are new. Over here there is an overall summary of school finances; this is a school with total finance of around $12.7 million and expenditure per student of around $10 000 per student. If you want more detail you can click there but I will show you the detail in a moment.
To get to the rest of the website you can go via a set of icons at the bottom that indicate what you will be going to see. Or you can use as before, the detail at the top.
So we go to the school finance information and what it shows is that the recurrent income that the school had, how much it got form the Commonwealth Government - this is a government school - it got about $2 million from the Commonwealth Government, how much it got from the State Government, how much it raised from parent contributions or parent activities in the school and how much it raised from other sources. In some schools that will be interest earnings through investments or from capital reserves.And that is expressed per student and that was the summary figure that you saw on the first page.
Now we will have that information for the 10 000 schools in Australia, one by one. And you can look it up and see how much is spent per student in every school in the country. That is information that none of us has had before.
And we have also captured capital expenditure. Capital expenditure is going to be 'lumpy' of course in some years when building is undertaken there will be more expenditure than in others. But over a period a picture of capital expenditure in a school will emerge. So that will be provided.
If any of the actual recurrent income is committed to capital expenditure, that is put into capital works and not available as expenditure on the students, we treat that as a deduction and then produce a net figure. And that is the nett figure that you saw before. We've made that able to be seen but not gone (inaudible) and we have got a graphical display.
And when we go to the NAPLAN results themselves and you can do that in a number of ways. It's a graphical presentation rather than just a tabular one.
And you'll notice on the top, this is information that was on the site last year but we have put it together with the results, what percent of students at the school fronted on the day of the test? And if there is any irregulation over time and any decline or fall of students being present that will show. And here is the per cent that were present on the day of the test.
And of course some of them were absent because they've got specific learning needs and they're excluded from testing but the real state of the numbers that are absent and the numbers that are withdrawn, withdrawn by parental request in advance. All of those are conditions that existed for all of the years of the NAPLAN assessment but we brought them together here and put them immediately above the results.
Now here this school's result. 2008, 2009, 2010, in Year 7 reading. We can change from Year 7 to another year if you want, or you can change from reading to another test when you want to look at the other dimensions. This year instead of putting all the results for one year together, we are putting all the results for one test together, because it's the trends that people will start to become more interested in and whether there are three, four, five, six years of assessment, trends will be more evident.
You'll notice as well, an average result over the three years. We've done that particularly because for small schools for which there are too few students to have a result show, in any one year.
So schools are  about too few students in a particular year, or if they have a result, they will now likely have a three year average result. So there will be fewer schools with no information and then we will be able to next year give two, three year rolling averages, and three year rolling averages giving a more stable estimates of trends.
So that's the nature of the results for the school then it will be possible to say, 'well how are schools with similar students doing in comparison to this school',Just click here, and you can now see, well there's the school's mean and the schools with similar students in 2008 have a better mean, and the fact the pale pink area indicates there is a substantial difference actually between 2.2 and a half standard deviation. We showed that last year with the colours, what we didn't show at the same place last year, but we did show it elsewhere, with something about margins and error and we think we really should have those two bits of information in the one place.
Now, here's the way to read this, this school is between .2 and .5 per cent deviation behind schools with similar students. That's not trivial but it nevertheless within the margins of error - the lines going out indicate that the margins of error for the school, and this is the margin of error for the average with schools with which the 60 schools with which the comparison is being made. Look what's happened over time, the school hasn't changed, but the schools with similar students have been getting better, and better to the point where their average is beyond the margin of error, the schools, so this is a school holding constant but behind it in comparison with schools with similar students.
Now let me show you where that school stands in relation to all schools in the country. All schools in the country haven't shifted and this school is sitting constant with all schools in the country. Now without the My School site, as a parent you would have known, no doubt, the national average for NAPLAN and you would have got your schools result, and you would have seen my schools at the national average and it's still there.
But with the My School site you could say it's actually not doing as well and it's also got students like this school has. Then you can go to the table, which is exactly the way we showed the information last year, and it's still there, but it's better to take people to the graphical presentation first as its easier to interpret and this is even a bit more complicated than last year because of we put the margins of error on but the table is there for people who prefer to look at tables than to look at graphs.
You can then look at the results in 'Plans', which is the same display we had for last year. We think this is very important actually because what's happened in some other countries when they present results that compare schools, they focus too exclusively on what percent of students are above some minimal level, not paying attention to what the really best students are doing.
And you end up with a focus, at that minimum level and schools will concentrate, in many cases, too much effort on the students just above to preserve them there, just below in the hope to get them over and ignore their high performers or their really low performers. There are stories like that from the U.S. and the U.K. We are proceeding in every case, last year and now this year, information that will help them push these students to the highest level in the band compared with similar schools and all schools.And then you can go now to the Student Progress Measure. Now this is the same students in this school in 2008, when they were in Year 7 and 2010 when they were in Year 9. Now we've excluded from the Year 7, any students who were there then but not there now, and we have not included any students who were now there in Year 9 but weren't at this school in 2007. So these are genuinely students for which the school had responsibility for over those two years, and that's how they've changed.
Now what about schools with similar students? And again for all of the schools with similar students, we've counted only students who were in each of those schools on the two occasions. So it's the first time we started to get these trend measures, and we avoid the problem of people saying 'well we only had these students for six months and it's the other schools should take responsibility for them'. So we are focussing here on ones in the same school on both occasions.
It's a site I really like, actually. It's so much better than last year's, it was very hard to read this last year, because we just had the schools listed alphabetically and you'd pore up and down the list trying to see the differences, what we've done this year is - here's your school, put your mouse over it and you get the name of the school, your mean and your margin of error and you can put your mouse over another school. These are the 60 schools, which all schools being compared, you can see them, name by name, save you wading down a list of names, click up here and we'll give you the list of names. They are not there yet, but they will be in December when the site goes live which are the 60 schools. Go back to the display and there it is.
Now this is a margin of error that runs out to about, I can't read it, 5-55. So it's in around here. So these schools are well beyond the margin of error for that school. These are schools with similar student and they are more than half a standard deviation ahead which is a substantial difference. So these are schools doing much better with similar students than this school. And these are schools from which this school might learn about policies and practices. And they know them, by name. They can go look at their website, they can call their principal and that's been done from this site year already. So it makes it much easier. And the school can take gain comfort that the school is only half a standard deviation behind ...inaudible
Now suppose you are a parent and you say, 'well, I already know the national average, I know that  have given us close to the national average so we're a sort of average school performing at an average level. There are a group of like school that actually don't look that good, so where does that group of schools sit in the overall scheme of things?' Well, zoom out - that's the distribution of all the schools in the country and that's the region in which your school is one is in that range there. Your school is the national average but of course comparison schools they are low. Now some parents will look up their school and find well, (inaudible) so all this information is readily available from this site and then, we provide as we did last year, a list of neighbouring schools but there are no direct comparisons with neighbouring schools because t hey only thing they share is geography. They may have very different students. You can click and go and look but the school to get all this information but we don't give systematic comparisons with geographic neighbours. We give systematic comparisons for schools with similar students. So that's the site.
PM: Thank you very much to Barry and we're obviously happy to take questions and Barry will take questions too. Can I just remind people that when we set out on this journey as a Government following the election in 2007, we wanted to transform the way that Australians thought about and talked about school education. We wanted the focus to be on every school. Our politics, our discussion about school education until that point had tended to be about schools systems - public, Catholic, independent. We wanted the focus to be on every school because if you look at every school then you can make a difference for every child in every school.
And the existence of the My School website has transformed that national conversation since it was launched at the start of this year. It has also worked with government to help us better target resources.
I think with this version of the site we are going to transform the conversation again. We'll be now able to talk about what is achieved over time because of having the results for kids across years. And we're going to have a national conversation that is about governments and what governments do and how they fund schools, and we'll have that national conversation with more information than we've ever had before. And it's not only in the hands of people in government, it'll be in the hands of parents and the Australian community.
But I would stress it's more information than Government has ever had before, either. These school by school financial comparisons across sectors, across states, every school, so this is a very exciting development.
Happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: There's been some allegations of cheating substantiated against schools in the NAPLAN tests. Are those allegations, the ones that are substantiated, going to be reflected on the My School website?
PM: I'll get Barry to talk about that one.
MCGAW: The allegations are investigated by the state testing authority and then reported to us, and we are going to report them publicly. You will receive, via our website a list of the nature of any misdemeanours and the actions that have been taken.
JOURNALIST: In terms of the My School website, will there be a little asterisk somewhere next to the school (inaudible) allegations proven against this school, and will those results be taken off, and will there be a note there?
MCGAW: If the results are unreliable they won't be displayed.
JOURNALIST: You made a virtue of the funding being revealed for the first time. Will every dollar available to every school be revealed? Because there's been some speculation that, say, some of the wealthier schools that may get income from trusts and wealthy parents and other structures that they have, won't be reflected in these figures. Will every dollar available to every school be revealed?
MCGAW: The financial information available is the money that the school manages, it goes through the school's books. If there are trusts that are not under the school's control then the information isn't available.
JOURNALIST: Even if the money is available to the school to use to-
MCGAW: Depends how the trust is organised. If the trust is managed by the school, it's in the school's books, then we have access to that information.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when the site was first launched its critics, including the teaching unions, were saying that there was too little information, it would lead to crude league tables. You, at that time, promised more information and context. Do you believe that the new site will satisfy those critics and what is the potential for, down the track, further information (inaudible)
PM: I suspect there will always be some critics of transparency so we will always have the debate.
I've always said in relation to that, that I believe information is power, that parents should have this information and the nation should have this information. I've also consistently said there's nothing to be gained from having crude league tables that just list, from top to bottom, 10,000 Australian schools.
What's powerful about My School - and it's been clear from Barry's explanation today - what's truly powerful about My School is the comparison with schools serving similar students. So we all know, sitting here, that a wealthy school on Sydney's north shore will be getting different results than an Indigenous school in outback Australia. We all know that. We don't need a league table to tell us that.
What is powerful is comparing that Indigenous school in outback Australia with schools that serve similar students and saying 'are they at the bottom, or are they at the top?' And then not being satisfied with just that comparison, how are they going against the Australian average?
So for that school we want the journey to be getting better and better, they can learn the most from schools that serve similar students, they'll be able to go through this site and contact those schools. And obviously we want everybody to be progressing up and seeking to be the top of their list of schools, and we want them to be looking to improve every year.
JOURNALIST: The crude league tables you were talking about - this My School2.0 will crack down on that, so to speak. Is cracking down on it just that security page at the front to stop computers being able to hack into it, or is there other measures to stop, say, newspapers or television stations being able to create those reports?
PM: Certainly the dialogue box at the front is a security measure about people using the site as opposed to programs that are data mining off the site. We as a Government have repudiated some of the calls that have been made about legislation and the like. I don't believe in that and we won't be going down that path.
But we have taken the security measures that you've seen on the site itself.
MCGAW: The terms and conditions that people accept are also part of it, drafted for us by the Commonwealth Solicitor. Because in this last year it wasn't so much people using the data in other ways. There was some misuse of the data, there was misleading use of the data which we acted against, but we'll be in a stronger position to act against. So I mean some of it could be acted against under civil action, and some of it under Trade Practices.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister I was going to ask a question about that because when the site was first launched there was a great controversy over companies using the information to make their own league tables and sell the information to parents. Is there much you can do to stop that (inaudible) about some of the new security measures in terms of the password, on intellectual property grounds?
And secondly, I understand that you say you don't find the information terribly useful in terms of league tables. But why are you squeamish about it? Why not let people see that information ranked if they wish to do so?
PM: Because it's not powerful. It's just simply not powerful, not useful. For us to genuinely understand what is happening in schools we need to understand what advantages and disadvantages kids are bringing to school.
Now we should not then fall for the assumption that demography is destiny. It most manifestly is not. But if we are going to analyse what is happening in a school we've got to understand the advantages and disadvantages kids bring to school, we've got to be able to measure what the school is doing compared with schools that serve similar student populations. That's the truly transformative bit. And when you look at these school groups that are serving like students, they are forming already off My School, and it will be easier for them to do so, connections which enable them to learn from the best of what is happening in schools that serve similar students.
So the thing we're doing through My School is the most powerful thing, the most meaningful thing. And we want parents and the Australian community to have that access to the most powerful and meaningful information that we can give them.
JOURNALIST: What do you want parents to do with that information? If they see this site and they're worried about the performance of their school or the finances of their school, what do you want them to do, who should they contact directly, and what can you tell them about what the government will do with this new information as well? Will you be reshaping funding?
PM: Well I'll turn to Peter for some comments, but what I would say is this: parents are hungry for this information. Some of them will use it to inform school choice, because people have got children - they've either moved suburb or they've got kids who are going into primary school for the first time or into high school for the first time - they use it to inform school choice. And that's one use of My School.
The other use of My School of course is for your child enrolled in a school - you have a look, you form a view, and you should go down and talk to the principal, should go down and talk in the various consultative forums that schools have about what this means for your school and what's going to happen next. Obviously they should be respectful conversations.
But principals want parents engaged with education. I've met a lot of principals in my time in politics, and one thing that hallmarks a good school is that they welcome engagement by parents. They'll welcome those conversations.
On the question of funding, which is revealed for the first time - I suspect people will have a lot of conversations with us, and they'll have a lot of conversations with State Governments, and I think they'll be pretty good conversations.
The nation deserves to have this information.
I'll turn to Peter as well.
GARRETT: Thanks, Prime Minister.
Just one thing to add. This is a richer, deeper set of information for the school community overall, and for people who are serious about the quality of education - that includes schools and principals - they will have a better informed dialogue, as the Prime Minister's just said.
And one of things that's very clear to me in the time that I've spent in the portfolio is that schools do desire to do the best they can for their students, just as parents want to get the best education possible as well.
The interface between those two desires and wants comes about in a better way because of what we've got on My School2.0.
I just add one other comment remember that the Commonwealth is now making significant investments through the national partnerships, both in low socioeconomical schools, also in partnerships around teacher quality, and literacy and numeracy. So we are already seeing that investment going into the schools sector and teachers and the schools system are already giving us the feedback as to what kind of impact that's happening. We are also going to be able to effectively monitor the worth of that investment over time. That will be a very powerful tool for policy makers. Finally we do have an independent schools funding underway chaired by David Gonski. Again a better context for Mr Gonski and his panel to continue their consultation process and ultimately to come down with recommendations for Government to consider about overall funding in the future.
JOURNALIST: Minister what was the cost of the update and did the Government consider at any stage putting advertising onto funding?
GARRETT: I will ask Barry McGaw to answer that question.
MCGAW: I don't have a figure actually I am sure we could I could get you a figure but we did consider advertising.
PM: So this is obviously integrated into the work of ACARA or in ACARA as funding's accounted for in the Budget papers and no we didn't consider advertising.
JOURNALIST: Minister Garrett was there anything since you became minister that you were concerned about or wanted to have looked at on the original My School has changed on My School 2?
GARRETT: What i was interested in doing was seeing what was the decision that Ministers had previously made in relation to the ACARA delivery of the website. And the information that Ministers were seeking and what we've had is Minister's request for this version of the website. Which I think is the next logical step from the first My School website. I mean it is a world first, there's no question about that, and what I saw was an enormous amount of work had been done to get My School underway. Remember it's this year it came out, was it January of this year so we are actually going to get to My School 2.0 within a 12 month period. Which is a pretty phenomenal achievement on the part of all those who have done that work and I was just very pleased to see how hard they were going at it.
JOURNALIST: Minister Garrett you are working on, in line with the election promises, giving more power to principals and I am wondering whether you think that principals will be able to use this as something of a management tool to identify teachers classes areas are working and then to the great power you going to give them take action. Is this designed to be used as a partly management tool?
GARRETT: Well it is designed to give everybody including principals, who are obviously extremely important people in the schooling process, the additional level of information they need to properly understand the progress that their students are making and understand how their school is travelling as well. So I think it will be an important tool for principals and I believe that principals will welcome this tool. They on the other have the discretion how they manage their schools and its different across the jurisdictions as you probably know. But it will be a rich information source for them and think they will use it well.
JOURNALIST: Minister Garrett there has been some criticism from non government schools there is an early criticism of the revised methodology for the index in this version of the My Schools tool. And there has been some reporting suggesting that perhaps the launch of the site might be delayed because of challenges from schools to there IGSA score. What's your response to those criticisms and when will the site fully be launched?
GARRETT: Well three things to say quickly: the first is that any of the schools that have raised issues about their IGSA designation have been given ample opportunity to have that matter properly considered by ACARA and I understand the Chief Executive enabled extra time for that to happen. In terms of the detail, the data detail in terms of resolving those issues that is something that has been undertaken as we speak. And in terms of timelines and delays, I have no advice in front of me to suggest that we won't launch in December.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister your were able as Minister at the time to stop the teachers unions from going on strike over NAPLAN are you confident that these revisions will now stop them from going on strike in the future?
PM: The Government's determination to deliver my school I think as been there for all to see. Yes we did have some conversations with a bit of heat in them with the Australian Education Union. I think we will continue to have some different views about my school but my school is here to stay and we are here today to show you that it is getting better and better for parents. Now I am concerned that sitting day we have question times but if I could
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on the royal family, do you think you'd like to go to the wedding?
PM: Thank you David Speers, I was going to make a statement about the royal wedding obviously Australians today have woken to the news, that Prince William and Kate Middleton have announced their engagement. On behalf of the Australia people and personally on my own behalf I wish them very well for their life together ahead, I am sure Australians are going to follow all details of this with great enthusiasm and delight, they're doing that today and I am sure they will do that as the wedding itself takes shape.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on gay marriage, have you seen the reports today that Kevin Rudd before he left that job, agreed with Penny Wong and Anthony Albanese to pursue the prosecution of civil unions, do you have any response to that report?
PM: Look I have seen that report today but my position is very, very clear as is the Labor Party's as from our last National Conference.
JOURNALIST: If Labor is prepared to support the bad motion now why are you not prepare to support a conscience vote on gay marriage?
PM: Lets be very clear about what the motion moved by Adam Bandt is. The motion is about some people being in contact with their constituents. Of course as Members of Parliament when issues are of community debate Members of Parliament should be in contact with their constituents talking to them about their view, that's what Members of Parliament do. For example, I think people will be having a lot of constituent conversations about My School.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on that if the results come back and there is an overwhelming desire, as the polls would suggest, that people are ok with gay marriage. Will you then reconsider a conscience vote on this or change the Party platform?
PM: The Labor Party will have its National Conference and I anticipate there will be a broad range of matters that are discussed there, including this one. We're a Party of Government, were a Party of ideas. We're a Party of Government that is getting on with delivering our vision for a strong economy ready to meet the challenges of the future, opportunities for all Australians and you couldn't get a more powerful example about what that means then the education transformation of My School.
So we are a Party of Government we're a Party of ideas and as a Party of ideas people at our National Conference and in the lead up to it, within and beyond the forums of ALP, will be debating ideas, I think that is a good thing.
JOURNALIST: Will you accept the recommendation of the Conference?
PM: The National Conference sets the Party's platform. I am in exactly the same position as every Labor leader since we have had the Labor Party, which is a long long time ago now, which is that the platform is decided at the conference.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) new legislation?
PM: Well hang on. The platform is decided at the Conference and the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party, led by me, makes decisions about how we will go about working on platform questions.
JOURNALIST: When are you planning on releasing the NBN business case Prime Minster?
PM: The Minister's been very clear and that will be in December.
JOURNALIST: Would you be looking to lead that debate rather than just follow and take what Conference says?
PM: I think everybody is getting way, way, way ahead of themselves so let's just steady a little bit. There will be a lot of issues discussed at National Conference, I will of course be playing the role of leader of the Labor Party at that National Conference.
But today here we are in Parliament governing the nation, transforming opportunities for Australian students and when we are talking about the things that will determine prosperity, opportunity and equity in this country for the decades in front of us. There aren't too many more powerful things then what we are looking at today.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried this could prevent an unwanted distraction for the next twelve months?
PM: We are a Party of Government and a Party of ideas. David?
JOURNALIST: Are you aware of any deals struck by Kevin Rudd on this issue?
PM: No.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the AFR survey released today shows that the average salary of the top 300 Chief Executives was $2.25 million last year. Six Executives received (inaudible) are you comfortable with that?
PM: We have acted on executive pay and I share the uncomfortable feeling many Australians have when they see these huge numbers and the thing that used to drive people absolutely nuts was when they would see a CEO walk away with huge truck loads of money following them as their exit package. As a Government we've acted on that. Acted on that because we understood Australians looked at it just amazed that people could be walking out the door with that much money in their hand, but we do have Question Time to go to.
Thank you very much.  



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard today congratulated His Royal Highness Prince William of Wales and Catherine Middleton on the announcement of their engagement.
The Prime Minister said it was a happy time for the royal couple who will be married next year.
The Prince is well known for his charity work and for his ongoing service in the British Royal Air Force.
Prince William left a strong impression on many Australians during his visit at the beginning of the year.
Ms Middleton will no doubt strengthen this remarkable reputation and she has the nation's best wishes and support.
The royal engagement is a time for celebration amongst the Royal and Middleton families and the Prime Minister wishes them all the very best at this happy time.
Governor-General Quentin Bryce AC has sent formal congratulations to the Palace on behalf of the Government and people of Australia.



HOST: The Prime Minister joins us now. Julia Gillard, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Fran.
HOST: Prime Minister, this NATO summit, will it formally agree to the 2014 timeline for handing over security, or transitioning, as we like to say now, to the Afghan national security forces?
PM: Fran, the focus of this summit is going to be on transitioning, to use your word, which of course means handing over leadership from international forces to Afghan-led forces. 2014 is the timeframe that President Karzai has indicated he wants and he wants to see Afghan leadership of security, but my message at Lisbon in the context of these NATO discussions will be that we've got to have transition place by place in a conditions-based way.
Our eyes shouldn't be on the calendar. They should be on the ground and working out whether the time to transition is right, whether the Afghan security forces are ready to take leadership transition over and particularly, are ready to take it over forever.
My message to the Parliament, and the same message will be taken by me to Lisbon, has been we shouldn't transition out, only to have to transition back in some time later, so irreversibility is very important.
HOST: I beg your pardon, does that you'll be arguing against a fixed 2014 timeline?
PM: I'm not arguing against what President Karzai has said. He has set an aspiration for his nation and his people and that's entirely appropriate, but we need as we move place by place to transition, to be satisfied that conditions are right on the ground and that will be at the centre of the discussions at these NATO talks.
In addition, I will be making the point that we've got to ensure our commitment to Afghanistan is one for the long term. I made the point when I spoke in the Parliamentary debate, when I opened the debate in the Parliament, that we are in the phase now of having security forces there and we're talking about transition to Afghan-led security leadership, but our engagement with Afghanistan and our support of Afghanistan will endure beyond that as we help build governance and as we help with aid and assistance questions, and I did make the point in the Parliament, too, that building a democracy there, I believe, is the work of a generation of Afghan people. So this is going to be a long-term commitment, but the shape of the commitment will change over time.
HOST: Just in terms of building the democracy, plenty of people who are living through the process at the moment say that things aren't looking good on that front. If I quote Malalai Joya, a former female MP in the Afghan Parliament, she says the situation in most Afghan provinces for women and girls hasn't changed and she's given up hope of any positive change at the ballot box.
PM: Fran, what I would say is we're making progress on security conditions on the ground. We are training the Afghan National Army. We are training police. We need to do that in order to have security go to the Afghan national people, Afghan leadership and the Afghan people obviously in security control of their nation.
There are aid works also happening, including building schools which educate girls, but the issue there is that is very donor-led, international organisation-led. Ultimately, that has to become the work of the Afghan people and Afghan nation, and then building democracy, obviously, is the work of Afghan people for themselves. We can assist by providing aid and support and advice about building governance structures, but ultimately it is the Afghan people who need to shape their democracy.
HOST: Back on the security front, there's a media report today claiming that NATO planners will ask for more Australian troops to fight in the Kandahar province - we're already on Uruzgan - after Canada pulls out its force next year. Have you had any formal or informal approaches about providing more soldiers?
PM: I haven't had any formal or informal approaches about providing more soldiers. As is on the public record both from me and from Defence Minister Smith, we are in discussions. We've agreed to provide some additional artillery trainers, so that has been agreed. There is a proposal about increased police trainers and we are considering that, but Fran, I've always said and I'm very happy to say again that the Australian Government believes that our contribution to Afghanistan is about right-
HOST: -So that'd be a no, if you are asked for more troops?
PM: Well, there's a question of mix, Fran, between, you know, who is doing what job and who is doing what kind of training, but in terms of the total level of the contribution we are the biggest non-NATO contributor. We have increased our contribution by 40 percent in the last 12 months, so we are doing a fair bit.
We're obviously prepared to talk about what's the right mix as we go through and train the Afghan National Army in Uruzgan, the province in which we're working and we also train police.
HOST: It's 8.12 on RN breakfast. Our guest this morning in our Parliament House studio is Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
Prime Minister, can we go to domestic issues now? Senators are demanding that you release the NBN business plan. We had Senator Nick Xenophon earlier telling us that every day the Government holds up the release of the business plan is a day the government's case is diminished. Will you release it next week as the Senate is demanding?
PM: Well, I'm very respectful of Senator Xenophon. Obviously, he's from South Australia and I'm an Adelaide girl, so you would expect me to say that, but I'm going to have to disagree with him on this occasion-
HOST: -Why?
PM: NBN is the biggest infrastructure project this nation has ever undertaken. The Government has received an extensive business case. It's more than 400 pages. It obviously contains some very in-detailed work and we are going to put a fine-toothed comb through it. That's what we are doing now and we have said we will release the business case in December. I believe it's absolutely proper and absolutely appropriate for the Government to be there with that fine-toothed comb.
HOST: Is it absolutely proper and appropriate for the Parliament to have oversight of the business case for the biggest infrastructure project ever undertaken? Isn't that appropriate?
PM: The business case will be released publically, Fran. Obviously, some matters are commercial-in-confidence matters, but the business case will be released publically, will be there for all to see, but as a-
HOST: -But why is it taking so long? It's hard to get beyond the impression that this is a Government trying to avoid scrutiny. You've got the business plan, you've had it for more than a week now. You've got another week in which to get across it. You could bring all the resources of Treasury, Finance, Broadband departments to help you get across it. Why does it need to take so long?
PM: Well, firstly, Fran, we're talking about a document of, obviously, great weight and technical description of more than 400 pages. I am leading a Government that is going to be very careful, very methodical and is going to take that approach to the oversight of the National Broadband Network and we are doing that now.
Yes, the business case will be available publically. It will be available publically in December, and Fran, of course, I anticipate when it's available publically we will see debate about what's in the business case. I mean, after all, Tony Abbot has said his political mission is to destroy the NBN, so he will be there trying to take a word or a figure out of context and distort that in the public debate, so all that is in front of us.
We'll have that public debate and the business case will be there, but the Government will work its way through carefully and we're doing that now.
HOST: It's a dangerous roll of the dice for you, isn't it? The NBN was a policy which attracted a lot of support from the Independents, got some of them over the line in terms of supporting you. You're inviting a backlash here by not releasing when they want to see it.
PM: I believe, whether it's inside the Parliament or beyond, Australians want to see government being careful, being prudent, looking at the details, crossing the 't's, dotting the 'i's. That's the kind of Government I want to lead. That's exactly what we're doing with the NBN.
HOST: Talking about crossing 't's and dotting 'i's, the Government looks like it's going to face a battle in the Parliament over the health reform deal that Kevin Rudd signed off on with the states earlier in the year. The Coalition has confirmed it will oppose the legislation next week in part because it seems as though some of the guarantees you made in that deal about the states handing over 30 per cent of their GST in return for the health overhaul is unravelling. They're being asked to sign over much more than that.
PM: Fran, that's completely untrue. Every word of that question - completely untrue. The health reforms were always predicated on GST hand over. The average figure is a third of the GST. It has always varied from state to state-
HOST: -That's not what we understood at the time, that it was an average.
PM: Well, Fran, that was very, very clear - very clear in the COAG discussions, always understood by the states, and there was public commentary about the matter at the time, so the third was the average across Australia and individual state figures vary, depending on how much they spend on health and their per capita GST, but let's be really clear about this, Fran: what Tony Abbott is now saying he will do is he will wreck in the Parliament a reform that is going to give 1,300 additional hospital beds, 6,000 more doctors, 2,500 more aged care beds.
Australians want more hospital beds. They want to be able to see a doctor more easily. So many communities are just crying out for more doctors and people are well aware in communities of the shortages that they can face of aged care beds, and it's Tony Abbott that wants to take those things away from Australians. That's what he's saying in saying that he will oppose this Bill - wrecking health reform for his political interest, not concerned at all, for one moment, about the national interest and about community members that want those hospital beds, want those doctors and want those aged care beds.
HOST: It's 8.17 on RN Breakfast. Our guest this morning is Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
Prime Minister, you've agreed to bring forward the next ALP national conference by six months, in part to facilitate debate on gay marriage. That's still more than a year away. How do you think you might keep a lid on this debate until then? Can you wait that long, really?
PM: Fran, I determined to bring forward the ALP national conference. It was my view that it's appropriate. We're a party of government and a party of ideas. In order for us to be a party of ideas, that we have the national conference early in the life of the Government.
Many times, national conference has been held quite close to the election. Inevitably, that means national conference is more about election scene-setting than people being able to come and bring their ideas. I believe the Labor Party is a party of ideas, and people should be able to express them and debate them and the national conference is the right place to do that-
HOST: -And then will you respect them?
PM: -so I've determined to have it, you know, fairly soon in the life of the Government, so it will be at the end of next year.
HOST: If the conference agrees on a new position on the issue of gay marriage, to support the notion of gay marriage, will you support that in the Parliament?
PM: Let's be clear about the role of the national conference. party of ideas, setting our platform, and then it's the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party, led by me, that determines the steps we will take to bring that platform to life, so we will be keeping those historic roles. That's absolutely right, that elected representatives should have that responsibility, but I do want to see people come to national conference and debate ideas and obviously we will have a debate about same sex marriage, but I think we will have debates in a wide number of areas, and I think that's a good thing.
We can be a party of ideas and a party of government at the same time - on with the job of governing, delivering our vision of Australia whilst we are also debating ideas at our national conference.
HOST: On this particular debate, is your mind set on same-sex marriage, or would your position on that, if your Caucus and your national conference change its mind?
PM: Fran, I've made my position clear. I do believe that in our society, with our heritage, with our traditions, with our history, that marriage has a special place and special definition, so I've been very clear about that, but I will also being saying to party members at our national conference that it is the right forum to be debating ideas about this topic and more broadly.
HOST: Prime Minister, last week in a speech you called for more time to get reform done. How much time do you need?
PM: Fran, in that speech I was making the point that media commentators frequently write that they want to see long-term, profound reform in our country. They say that, perhaps, in their Monday column, and then by the Saturday column they're saying 'why haven't you got it done yet?', and I was simply making the point -- profound, long-term reform can't be turned around for a 24-hour media cycle, a weekly media cycle, or even in the online environment for a 15-minute media cycle.
Long-term reform takes patient work and we will do it, and if you look at governments past and if you look at the opening up of our economy that the Hawke and Keating governments did, that was achieved over years, not over 15-minute news cycles and a couple of sound bites, so I'm just asking people to do a reality check. You can't ask for structural reform to our economy on a Monday and then toss your head on a Saturday because it's not done by then.
HOST: Did you raise expectations yourself, though, when you took over and declared that Labor had lost its way when you took over the leadership and you promised to fix three big policy issues - mining tax, a price on carbon, and asylum seekers - before the election, most of which still have a lot of friction within them. Did you raise expectations about getting reform done quickly and I quote one of your MPs, Doug Cameron. In the newspaper today he's quoted as saying that he's concerned Labor's taking too long to introduce its reforms.
PM: Well, I don't agree with that, obviously and each of the areas you nominate, we are on a path that will take us where we want to go. Look at the path we are on with pricing carbon - working through with the multi-party climate change committee. This is a major structural reform for our economy to make sure that we continue to prosper in what will be a lower-pollution future. We are working through with that committee. We've said we'll get that work done during the course of next year. That's appropriate. These things take methodical work. They take leadership and I'm very happy to be providing both.
HOST: And just finally, Prime Minister, the commentary about the 24-hour news cycle is one you've made a few times now. Do you think the speed of the media cycle today is making it harder to govern, or harder to govern well?
PM: I think it makes it harder to have deep conversations. The reality is you can announce something quite important at 10 o'clock in the morning and because people are reporting it instantaneously, even as you're saying it by tweeting and the like, then by midday journalists are back saying 'right, we're over that now. What's the next story?'
Well, explaining what we need to do to ready our economy for the challenges of the future like making it a low-pollution economy, like dealing with the infrastructure challenges of building the NBN, take more than five minutes of explanation, so Fran, maybe it will mean that from time to time you and I argue about things, but I'm going to stick on the course of saying I've got a vision for this country. I'm going to get about, day-by-day, step-by-step, delivering that vision. I'm not going to be spooked by media commentary into thinking I need to cobble something together for a 15-minute news cycle.
I won't be diverted from the course I've set for myself, and that is I want to see this nation, with a strong economy that's ready for the challenges of the future, I want to make sure we're genuinely giving opportunities to all Australians to prosper and succeed. There are too many kids, too many people who miss out today. We are going to be working on delivering better education, better health, better government for all to make sure they too are included in the life of our nation.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us on breakfast.
PM: Thanks, Fran. 



Mr Speaker, opening this parliamentary debate on 19 October I said:
I know the professional soldiers of the Australian Defence Force are proud people. They offer their lives for us. They embrace wartime sacrifice as their highest duty. In return, we owe them our wisdom. Our highest duty is to make wise decisions about war. I look forward to the deliberations of this Parliamentary debate on Afghanistan. I hope we do our duty as well as they do theirs.
The Leader of the Opposition, Mr Abbott, sounded a similar note when he said:
Our job is not to persuade people to like the work our armed forces are doing but they need to understand it and to be able to support it ... our challenge this week is to be just as effective and professional in our tasks as our soldiers are in theirs.
On this, at least, we are at one.
Many Australians have told me that they think the Parliament has done the right thing by finally debating our commitment to the war so openly, so the Government has sought to paint a very honest picture of our mission in Afghanistan.
We do face real difficulties and challenges, and we have sought to share our best judgement.
There will be many hard days ahead, but we are cautiously encouraged by what we have seen.
Mr Speaker, Australia has two vital interests in Afghanistan.
One: to make sure that Afghanistan never again becomes a safe haven for terrorists, a place where attacks on us and our allies begin.
Two: to stand firmly by our Alliance commitment to the United States, formally invoked following the attacks on New York and Washington in 2001.
I have discussed the long course of events in Afghanistan since 2001, good and bad, already in this debate. But I also said I believe we now have the right strategy, an experienced commander in General Petraeus, and the resources needed to deliver the strategy.
Our aim is that the new international strategy sees a functioning Afghan state become able to assume responsibility for preventing the country from being a safe haven for terrorists.
The main focus of the Australian effort in Afghanistan is directed towards Uruzgan province. In Uruzgan, Australia's substantial military, civilian and development assistance focuses on:
 * 	Training and mentoring the Afghan National Army 4th Brigade to assume responsibility for the province's security.
 * 	Building the capacity of the Afghan National Police to assist with civil policing functions.
 * 	And helping improve the Afghan Government's capacity to deliver core services and generate income-earning opportunities for its people.
Australia has increased our troop contribution by forty per cent in the past eighteen months and increased our civilian contribution by fifty per cent, including in police training.
The Fourth Brigade is becoming an increasingly professional force. Our best judgment is that we are on track to complete our training mission in two to four years.
A number of criticisms of the international strategy and the Australian Government's policy have been made in this debate. That was rightly part of the purpose of the debate. So I welcome the opportunity to respond to them today.
Some Members have argued that there is no progress on the ground in Afghanistan. I do not agree.
Our military assessment is that increased operations are reversing the momentum of the insurgency and extending the reach and capacity of the Afghan Government into areas long-held by the Taliban and their allies.
These security gains are being matched by progress in training the Afghan National Security Forces, which slowly are becoming more capable. The economy is growing and there is improvement in basic health care, education and infrastructure.
We face a resilient insurgency and the situation in Afghanistan remains difficult, serious and dangerous with the potential to revert, but our cautious optimism is justified.
Some Members have argued we have already been in Afghanistan nine years and that the timeframe the Government now envisages is too long.
To this, I say first, let us be realistic.
In the future, when we look back on the years since 2001, no one will deny that international attention turned heavily to Iraq.
Second, while it has taken too long, there is now a strategy to achieve a transition.
To do that we need to put the Afghan security forces in a position where they can take the lead on security.Some Members have suggested that Australia's mission is unclear, that we cannot define what success would mean in Afghanistan, or that we cannot achieve the goals we have set for the mission.I disagree.
We have a credible, achievable task, one where some progress can already be seen.
Some Members have argued that we should leave Afghanistan because al Qaeda is no longer there and the threat is somewhere else - in countries including Yemen, Somalia and Pakistan.
We must remember that while we have made progress in Afghanistan, if we stopped military operations now, the country would remain at risk of becoming a safe haven for terrorists in the future.
That said, I certainly agree that extensive international cooperation to counter terrorism is needed - and Australia does contribute to these global efforts.
Some Members have raised concerns for the likelihood of an enduring political settlement.
Most Afghans agree that the Taliban regime should never be returned to power and that is certainly our policy.Reconciliation will only work if it is an Afghan-led process.
Yes, there have been preliminary signs that some senior Taliban leaders may be considering the path towards negotiation.
But reconciliation will be long, complex and inevitably subject to setbacks.
A number of Members have raised questions about the structure of our forces in Afghanistan, and the protection available to our soldiers and civilians in the country.
I have no complaint that Parliament scrutinises the Government's decisions in this area. It is a grave responsibility.
Australia's forces in Uruzgan are structured to include a range of critical capabilities. Not all capabilities are, or need to be, provided by the Australian Defence Force. Many capabilities are provided through the international force as a whole.
Australian troops now have access to more artillery and mortar support than they did a year ago, and they have access to attack helicopters and close air support from fighter aircraft when necessary.
In this area of policy, we accept the professional advice, but the Government decides.And this is a matter we keep under constant review - as circumstances change and the insurgent threat adapts and evolves.
Under current conditions, our troops have the right support for the mission they have been assigned.
I am satisfied that our force protection posture is appropriate.
Today I leave Canberra for the Lisbon Summit on Afghanistan.
I believe it is important to be there.
Australian soldiers are fighting and dying in Afghanistan. Australia has vital interests at stake in the campaign in Afghanistan. And Australia fought hard for the principle that decisions on the campaign in Afghanistan could not be made by NATO members alone.
So in Lisbon, Australia's voice will be heard by world leaders including President Obama, Prime Minister Cameron, President Sarkozy and Chancellor Merkel. President Karzai will attend the Lisbon Summit. So too will the UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Speaking for Australia, I will argue for two main outcomes
First, a credible and conditions-based strategy for transition to Afghan-led security by the end of 2014.
If leaders at Lisbon endorse such a framework, then commanders on the ground working with the Afghan Government can provide the detailed planning on when and where transition will take place.
But let me be clear - transition refers to the Afghan Government taking lead responsibility for security. The international community will remain engaged in Afghanistan beyond 2014, and Australia will remain engaged.
So secondly, I will argue for a commitment by the international community not to abandon Afghanistan.We must give the new international strategy time to work. And we must recognise that after transition, the support, training and development task will continue in some form through this decade at least.
I also expect there to be a clear focus on governance in Afghanistan and on the role of Afghanistan's neighbours, particularly Pakistan, in the Lisbon discussions.
We expect the Afghan Government to meet its commitments to improve governance and the delivery of basic services, and to combat corruption.
And the international strategy depends on an effective partnership with Pakistan to address violent extremism in the border regions that threatens both Pakistan and Afghanistan.
At Lisbon, I will look forward to a progress report from General Petraeus and Ambassador Sedwill. From my own discussions with General Petraeus, I know he will also be frank: that this progress is fragile and that we can expect setbacks.
And I will be frank as well.
I go to Lisbon to state this clearly:
Australia will not abandon Afghanistan.
Australia will see the mission through.
Mr Speaker, this Parliamentary debate began four weeks ago in a full House and before a full public gallery.
I explained the Government's policy. Mr Abbott explained the Opposition's.
The gravity of the debate reflected the gravity of the war itself.
The House witnessed passionate and poignant contributions both for and against the war.
There is good will and love of country on all sides of this debate. And no one in the House denies the terrible human cost of our decisions.
This war has seen more tears outside the Parliament than in.
The House also heard a strong and considered case for our commitment from the majority of the people's representatives. I was proud of the contribution of the Government members, in particular those of the Ministers for Defence and for Foreign Affairs.
Afghanistan dominated the news media and the public discussion for days.
But debate moved on - in the public and in the House.
And as I observed that gradual change, I became determined to conclude the debate on behalf of the Government.
I believed that I should be here at the end of the debate, just as I was at the beginning.
And that the nation's attention should not long waver from the war.
Mr Speaker, nine years after the attacks on New York and Washington, the war in Afghanistan has been long.
We are not weary.
But we must be very realistic about the future. Transition will take some years.
Good government in the country may be the work of an Afghan generation.
There will be many hard days ahead, we will be engaged through this decade at least, but I am cautiously encouraged by what I have seen.
I go to Lisbon confident that I speak not only for the Government but for the Parliament and the people of Australia when I say: Australia will see the mission through. 



PM: I'm joined today by the Minister for Defence, Stephen Smith. We're here in Lisbon for what will be an important round of talks about the future strategy in Afghanistan.
Tomorrow, 48 nations will meet for discussions about the strategy in Afghanistan. These are the nations within NATO and beyond that are contributing to the efforts there.
The meeting will, of course, talk about the strategy for transition. When I spoke to the Australian parliament at the opening of our parliamentary debate on Afghanistan, I spoke about the strategy for transition. President Karzai has indicated that it is his goal that local Afghan forces take the security lead in Afghanistan by the end of 2014. In the parliament, I spoke about how transition would happen place by place and be conditions based, and we will be having that discussion at the talks tomorrow.
We will also be discussing the enduring commitment that nations must have to Afghanistan. When I spoke in the Australian parliament I said that beyond transition we would remain engaged with Afghanistan to the end of this decade at least, with that engagement taking the form of training and support, and of course civilian aid works, so that enduring commitment to Afghanistan will also be the subject of discussion at this meeting tomorrow.
This is an important meeting at an important moment to ensure that the nations engaged in Afghanistan and Afghanistan itself have an agreed strategy forward in Afghanistan as we move to transition and beyond.
Since arriving here in Lisbon with Minister Smith, I've had the opportunity to meet with General Petraeus. I've had the opportunity to meet with Mark Sedwill, the lead civilian representative in Afghanistan. I've also met with President Karzai. In separate bilateral discussions I've met with the President of Poland, the President of turkey, and the Foreign Minister of the UAE.
I'm looking forward to these discussions tomorrow. Our commitment in Afghanistan is an important one for the Australian people. It's important so that we deny terrorists a safe haven in Afghanistan. It's important to our alliance with the United States, and of course it's important because we have troops fighting there and we have lost Australian lives, so we wanted Australia's voice to be heard at this table as the future strategy for Afghanistan is shaped.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a report out today from 29 aid agencies, led by Oxfam, that are working in Afghanistan, saying they fear that NATO's assessment of the situation there is overly optimistic and urging the NATO and non-NATO countries here not to look for quick fixes to get out of Afghanistan.
How do you respond to that report?
PM: General Petraeus will give a report to the meeting tomorrow and I had the opportunity to get a preliminary assessment from him in my meeting with him today. I also had the opportunity to meet with General Petraeus when I was in Afghanistan myself.
I believe General Petraeus is providing good advice on the situation in Afghanistan. Much of it accords with the advice that we receive from our very own Defence Force, and they are telling us that progress is being made in establishing security, but there is more to be done. There is more to be done in establishing security; more to be done in establishing governance; and, obviously, more to be done in civil aid and re-construction.
So, as I said to the Australian parliament, this is a process. It will take effort. It will take time. Transition does need to be place by place and conditions based. Our estimates are 2-4 years, and President Karzai has outline his goal of by the end of 2014, so I want to be very frank with people - progress is being made, but for security to transition will take some time yet.
JOURNALIST: There's a report in the Sydney Morning Herald today suggesting that you're closing - I think it's six - intelligence posts around the world. How does that fit with the strategy on Afghanistan? Are you re-focussing on the region, or are you undermining Australia's security strategy?
PM: We have contributed a great deal of resourcing to Afghanistan, to our efforts there, and we will continue to do so. Assessments are made from time to time about where efforts are best placed, so you do, in terms of our global effort, see individual positions move from post to post, but in Afghanistan we have increased our troop commitment by 40 per cent. That was increased last April, so we are dedicating resources to our work in Uruzgan province and we'll continue to do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you express to President Karzai any concern about continuing levels of corruption within his Government?
PM: I certainly expressed to President Karzai that Australia wants to see continuing work on the question of fighting corruption in Afghanistan. He indicated to me that efforts are being made within Afghanistan to deal with corruption questions.
Of course, we want to continue to assist and as governance capacity is built in Afghanistan we want that governance capacity to be corruption-free, so, yes, the issue was raised by me in our meeting.
JOURNALIST: How do you assess when or how well Afghan troops will be ready to take over the task of controlling security of the country?
PM: Well, the assessment is going to be made or needs to be made from the ground up, from people who are in a position like our own Defence Force is in Uruzgan, people who are working alongside the Afghan National Army, people who are engaged in the training, people who are therefore involved very closely as the Afghan National Army goes about its work and are in a position to assess its capabilities to provide security.
That security assessment needs, too, to take into account what is happening with governance. Governance matters to the maintenance of security, so all of these factors need to be assessed and the reason we talk about transition happening place by place, that there's no single transition day but rather it's a process, place by place, is that stabilisation and security are happening at different rates in different places.
JOURNALIST: President Karzai has had some fairly tough things to say in a London Financial Times interview today about America in particular and operations. Was any of that re-discussed? Did he repeat those concerns?
PM: The discussion I had with President Karzai was focussed on the meeting tomorrow and the strategy that will be discussed tomorrow and the need for unity around that strategy. President Karzai and ISAF, Australia - we are on the same page, wanting to see Afghan leadership of security. President Karzai has expressed his goal of 2014 and of course we have accepted that expression of his goal, as have all of the other ISAF partners, including the Americans, so we are working on the same agenda about enabling Afghan security leadership in Afghanistan.
I understand why President Karzai puts forward the sovereignty of his country, and the end of this is for Afghanistan to be functioning as a sovereign nation with the ability to take security lead and to engage in strategic denial of Afghanistan from terrorists who would seek to use it as a safe haven and training area.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about another matter? There's been a mine collapse in New Zealand and 27 miners are missing. I'm wondering what your response is to that and whether Australia can offer any assistance?
PM: I have certainly heard of this and our hearts do go out to the New Zealanders who would now be waiting very, very anxiously for news of their loved ones and friends. If there's any assistance that we can offer, then certainly we will offer it and we'll stay in touch with our New Zealand counterparts about it.
The world has witnessed a mine disaster already this year, and a miracle when people came out alive, and so our very best wishes go to the New Zealanders as they deal with this situation.
Thank you very much. 



PM: I'm here with Stephen Smith at the conclusion of the meetings today about the future strategy in Afghanistan, and the meeting today has been an important meeting for Afghanistan and for Australia.
48 countries have met to discuss the future strategy in Afghanistan. Now, previously we had agreed that we would work towards having Afghan national security forces in the lead in security in Afghanistan by 2014. Today, we have agreed to launch the transition process for security leadership in 2011, and that would be occurring in selected districts and places in Afghanistan.
This means that we have pressed the political start button on transition. As I've said before, transition will be a gradual process. It will happen place by place. There will be no one transition day, and transition will be conditions-based.
It's important that when we begin the process of transition in an area in Afghanistan we are confident that the Afghan local forces can take the security leadership and sustain that security leadership. We should not transition out only to have to transition back in later.
There will be a rigorous process of assessment to determine where transition can start, in which particular areas. There will be an assessment of the capabilities of local Afghan forces, of the security environment and local governments, and as transition occurs, ISAF, the International Security Assistance Force, will remain assisting.
A joint ISAF-Afghan board has been established to guide the transition process, and of course we will be consulted on and work with transition in our area of Uruzgan province. We will make recommendations in relation to our own area of work.
Our mission is in Uruzgan, and Uruzgan province will not be among the provinces and districts expected to start the transition process early next year. A date for transition in Uruzgan has not been set. However, we do believe we are on target to complete the training of the Afghan National army in Uruzgan in 2-4 years.
President Obama said today at the meeting that training is the ticket to transition, and that's exactly what Australia is doing. In Uruzgan province we are training the 4th Brigade of the Afghan National Army so that they can take security leadership in that province, and we have made a recent commitment of 20 trainers to the Afghan National Artillery School, the kind of additional training capability that is being sought.
I welcome today the commitment from NATO partners that Afghanistan will be the subject of an enduring partnership and commitment. As I said in our parliamentary debate, we will not abandon Afghanistan, so even after security leadership has moved there will be a continuing role for Australia in Afghanistan to the end of the decade at least. Of course, the form of that continuing role will vary. We will be engaged in support and in civilian aid works.
I particularly welcome this long-term partnership declaration by NATO about Afghanistan. We also discussed today at the meeting the reconciliation attempts in Afghanistan, and leaders agreed that these reconciliation endeavours needed to be Afghan-led and could involve those members of the insurgency who renounce violence, cut their links to terrorist groups and accept the Afghan constitution.
We welcomed efforts by the Afghan Government to improve governance and delivery of services to its people. We recognise that corruption remains a major challenge to be addressed, and we welcome President Karzai's commitment to addressing this major challenge.
We also recognise the challenge of addressing the cross-border movement of insurgents between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Earlier today, at the meeting, we did hear reports from General Petraeus, from the chief civilian representative, Mark Sedwill, and the reports we received from them and also the words of President Karzai fitted in with our cautious optimism that progress is being made. We are making progress in fighting the insurgency. We are making progress in training Afghan national forces, and we are making progress in improving governance. But we know this progress is fragile, and will, from time to time, be subject to reversals in some areas. To quote General Petraeus from his report to the meeting, 'nothing in Afghanistan is easy.'
My message to the summit was that we needed to be clear - clear as we left the summit and clear with our people, with the people, the 48 leaders around the table represented. We needed to be clear with them why we are in Afghanistan. We are there to prevent it becoming, again, a safe haven for terrorists.
We need to be clear that progress is being made and that we are cautiously optimistic about the future.
We need to explain to people that we are very clear on what our mission is, and we need to explain that we now have a clear transition strategy and that our commitment to Afghanistan will endure beyond security leadership changing to Afghan local forces.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in your address this morning (inaudible) can you give us an idea of what you said to the other leaders around the table, and whether you think it was well received?
PM: I spoke to the other leaders around the table about Australia's commitment in Afghanistan. We are, of course, the largest non-NATO contributor in Afghanistan. I spoke about our parliamentary debate and indicated that as Prime Minister I had said to our parliament and through our parliament to the Australian people that we would be involved in Afghanistan. We would continue our training mission there. We would see security leadership move place by place on a conditions basis. We would stay engaged in Afghanistan until the end of the decade at least. That is, we would see ourselves still engaged after security leadership had transitioned to Afghan local forces, and that I had said to our parliament that the creation of a stable democracy in Afghanistan would be the work of a generation of the Afghan people.
I spoke about the need to be frank and clear about these things with our own people and with people represented by other leaders around the table. I also welcomed the strategy emerging from the meeting - the start of transition in early 2011 and that transition would be conditions-based, not calendar-based.
I also welcomed the fact that it is the 10-year anniversary of a specific UN Security Council resolution on women. We know that in times of violence it is often women who bear the brunt, and I welcomed the NATO ISAF endorsement of that resolution.
JOURNALIST: You say that General Petraeus gave an assessment of how progress is being made on the ground in Afghanistan. Can you give us a bit more information on why the leaders are so confident that progress is enough to have a 2014 deadline?
PM: Well, I've had the opportunity to be briefed by General Petraeus on two earlier occasions, once here yesterday and once when I was in Afghanistan myself, and what he said to the meeting this morning mirrored those briefings I've had from him in the past. He talks about those areas in Afghanistan where security is being extended, where people are now more free to go about their daily business, the daily routines of life. He talked about his plans to further extend those bubbles of security, the progress that is being made there, so whilst General Petraeus was frank - this work is not easy - he did point to progress that is being made on the ground.
In our own province of Uruzgan, our own Defence Force advises me that progress is being made on the ground, so, for example, in Uruzgan where we work, in Tarin Kowt, you do see people being able to go about daily life, including the local bazaar being open and people being able to engage in trade and commerce and shop and those kind of daily life activities because the security situation has improved.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rasmussen, he talked about more trainers being committed. Are any of those trainers going to come from Australia at all?
PM: Well, we have already responded to requests for additional trainers. I spoke, for example, about our response to the request for artillery trainers, and of course the essence of what we are doing is training. That is, the work that we are doing in Uruzgan, we are training the 4th Brigade of the Afghan National Army.
We, of course, have increased our contribution to Afghanistan by 40 per cent in the last 18 months, so we have stepped up.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, going to what you said about not wanting to go back in when we go out, how much risk is there, after having conversations with leaders here, of this process of transition falling victim to the political calendar of some of the bigger players around the table, and I'm thinking particularly the US presidential elections? Is there a risk, or how much risk is there, of pressure being applied to withdraw more quickly to fit in with domestic political timetables?
PM: President Obama's been very clear that transition needs to be conditions-based. President Obama's been very clear that transition will start in 2011 and this meeting has announced that transition will start in early 2011, but he's also been very clear that it will be a conditions-based process aiming to meet President Karzai's goal of security leadership transition by 2014, so the way forward, I think is clear, and leaders around the table constantly referred to the conditions-based transition and I was not the only leader to make the point that transition, when it occurs in an area, needs to be irreversible, that we should not transition out prematurely, only to have to transition back in.
JOURNALIST: But you don't think there's a risk that some countries will succumb to the temptation to pull their troops out in advance of an election to be able to seen to be taking a safer option?
PM: I think in countries around the world there are obviously varying domestic political pressures, but one of the reasons for having meetings like this one is so that countries can come together and agree the strategy, and that's what has occurred today, and the agreement is for a conditions-based transition process.
JOURNALIST: And you're confident that President Karzai is 100 per cent on board with a conditions-based withdrawal and what sounds like a flexible deadline, then?
PM: Look, President Karzai was at the table today. He had the opportunity to outline his aims and vision for Afghanistan to the leaders. He has made it very clear that his goal is to see transition to Afghan security leadership in 2014. If we look in the area where we work, Uruzgan province, that does accord with the best estimates of our Defence Force about the training time necessary, so I think President Karzai's goal fits in precisely with the agreed strategy at this meeting.
JOURNALIST: Given that the ultimate aim is to deny terrorists a base to operate from, Yemen is developing as exactly that. Would you rule out possible military intervention in Yemen, being involved in a similar sort of operation in Yemen if that situation isn't sorted?
PM: Well, I don't think we can go around speculating in that kind of fashion. These matters are too serious.
I have spoken to the parliament about our concerns about other parts of the world where terrorism and terrorists are allowed to gain safe haven. I particularly pointed to Yemen and Somalia.
Australia is engaged in Afghanistan, but our counter-terrorism work and focus extends beyond that, including to other areas where we see potential problems, so it would be not correct to assume that our counter-terrorism effort globally is confined to our work in Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: Could that evolve into a military-
PM: -Well, you simply don't speculate about these things and I won't be drawn on it. That wouldn't be responsible.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you if you have any update on the situation with the coal mine in New Zealand and any involvement Australia is having, and particularly on the Australian that's trapped there?
PM: Acting Prime Minister Wayne Swan has spoken to the New Zealand Prime Minister. As you would know, we've offered whatever assistance we can provide, and some assistance is being provided through emergency management personnel.
As I understand the situation, they are still working on obtaining samples of gas to see if it is possible for rescuers to go in, so in these very difficult circumstances as loved ones get more and more anxious, our thoughts and our hearts go out to them. It's a very, very difficult time.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you one more thing relating to the meetings today? Did anyone raise with you the state of the European economies and talk to you about Australia's economic position, seek any advice or take any council on economic management?
PM: I had a number of bilateral discussions and whenever, well, almost whenever we have bilateral discussions the strength of the Australian economy does come up. We are in a very, very different position to many nations around the world with whom we meet, so Australia is seen to have come out of the global financial crisis very strong.
I don't, I wouldn't suggest I was asked for advice, but there's certainly a sense of admiration and perhaps envy at the Australian economic results. Many of the nations I've met with during the course of this summit and in other places are in very difficult economic situations with very, very high unemployment rates and quite savage budget cut backs at the same time.
JOURNALIST: Do you fear that those could have a flow-on effect, particularly the contagion effect in Europe? That could have a flow-on effect around the world, and of course inevitably affect Australia, too.
PM: Well, with the global financial crisis we obviously saw that events starting in some parts of the world can flow through our financial system. That's why, through the G20, we've worked long and hard to bring new financial stability rules, so, you know, the world continues to work together to deal with the aftermath of the global financial crisis. There are obviously some individual nations now under particular pressures, like Ireland, and so that's been the subject of discussion at some of the bilateral meetings today, but the world, I think, at the G20 and beyond, has worked well together on financial stability, on coordinating macro-economic policy, and I believe we will continue to do so.
JOURNALIST: You're not worried about the immediate problem of Ireland, Portugal, possibly Spain, that that could slow-
PM: -Look, we obviously monitor closely all of these international events to assess possible impacts, but I'm not going to stand here and make dramatic forecasts for you.
We continue to take the best advice from Treasury and the best advice from Treasury about our economy is the growth and other data that you saw in the Mid Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, and I don't have any advice or any reason to believe we should vary from those growth estimates.
JOURNALIST: You've had a pretty hectic international travelling schedule these past six weeks. Will you be relieved when you get home with your last big international meeting out of the way for a little while?
PM: I'll be relieved to be flying to the final parliamentary week, so we'll be flying into question time and we'll be looking forward to it, won't we? Love question time.
MINISTER SMITH: Absolutely. Couldn't think of anything better to be doing.
PM: Thank you. 



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Defence Stephen Smith today welcomed an important decision to begin the process of transition in the Afghanistan mission in early 2011.
Members of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai have agreed to Afghan National Security Forces leading security operations in some districts and provinces by next year.
The decision was endorsed by the leaders of the 48 ISAF members at the NATO-ISAF Summit in Lisbon this weekend.
ISAF partners also gave a clear commitment to provide necessary support and training to help the Afghan Government beyond 2014, when transition to a lead role for Afghan security forces is expected to be complete.
This represents a significant step towards achieving the shared goal of a secure and stable Afghanistan.
The Summit was an important opportunity for Australia to engage with international leaders on the strategy in Afghanistan.
Australia supports a conditions-based transition to Afghan-led security across Afghanistan and is making an important contribution to achieving this objective through our military and civilian efforts in Uruzgan province.
The Australian Defence Force is training and mentoring the Fourth Brigade of the Afghan National Army in Uruzgan Province until it has the capacity to lead.
The transition of security to Afghan authorities will be a gradual process, to be achieved when the conditions are right on a province by province and district by district basis.
Importantly, transition does not mean withdrawal from Afghanistan - Australia and its international partners will continue to provide support to the Afghan Government and its people.
The international community, including Australia, welcomed President Karzai's commitment to continue to tackle corruption and improve governance and the rule of law.
Australia's involvement in Afghanistan is directly in our national security interests. We have a responsibility to Afghanistan and our international partners, and especially to the Australian people, to continue to support the Afghan Government's efforts to fight terrorism and ensure stability in Afghanistan.


Canberra
PM: I'm here with the Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, and we are here predominately to talk about the National Broadband Network, and of course the Telstra structural separation Bill in the Senate, but I do, before making those statements, want to make a brief statement relating to North Korea and tensions on the Korean Peninsula.
Of course I am, and the Government is, deeply concerned by yesterday's artillery attack on the Republic of Korea, which is a great friend of Australia. I condemn this attack and I send my condolences to the people of Korea, the Republic of Korea, following this attack.
Yesterday's events, of course, follow the incident in March where a North Korean submarine attacked a vessel of the South Korean Navy. This incident also follows recent reports that North Korea is developing a sophisticated uranium enrichment program in complete defiance of UN Security Council resolutions.
Now, these series of events are deeply troubling. They threaten stability on the Korean Peninsula and in North Asia, and in the face of these provocations the Republic of Korea has acted with a great deal of restraint, but in such a tense and heavily armed environment, the risk of miscalculation and escalation is ever-present.
The Government calls on North Korea to abide by international norms of behaviour and to cease its hostile acts. We call on North Korea to abide by the 1953 Armistice agreement, and we call on North Korea to make a genuine contribution to abandon its nuclear programs.
It goes without saying the Government is monitoring events in North Korea closely. During the course of the morning members of the National Security Committee have been brought together for a briefing from our Defence community and security agencies on the situation. We are in close consultation with our South Korean, Japanese and US partners, and we will be also be urging China to bring what influence it can to bear on North Korea. It's important, we believe, for all nations, including our own, to stand up in complete condemnation of North Korea's aggression and to urge it to stop all hostile acts.
Let me turn now to the question of the National Broadband Network and the Telstra structural separation Bill.
I can confirm that the Government today is releasing an important document to facilitate the passing of the Telecommunications Structural Separation Bill in the Senate. I want to reiterate, as I have in the Parliament over the last few days, that this Bill will deliver historic reforms, a historic economic reform and allow the roll-out of high-speed broadband to go ahead. Securing the passage of this Bill would secure that result despite Tony Abbott's consistent determination to wreck the National Broadband Network.
This reform will enable us to deliver high-speed broadband to homes, businesses, schools and hospitals while making sure it's available at a price that families can afford. This will mean lower prices, more choice and more innovation in service delivery to Australian households.
Shortly, we will be releasing a 50-page document that summarises the NBN Co business case. I have determined to do this in consultation and joint work with the Minister after a series of detailed discussions with the independent senators, and of course we are continuing to engage closely with the crossbench members of the House of Representatives who supported the National Broadband Network and supported this Bill.
We've determined, following those discussions, that it is possible to publically release carefully selected materials which answer some of their key questions and which allow them to explain to their constituents their decision making process, but we have been very careful and the material being released will not cause any market uncertainty and it does not relate to matters which are under Cabinet consideration.
Now, of course, we could not release the whole National Broadband Network business case because of those questions of market uncertainty and Cabinet consideration. The document does not, for example, detail a Government decision on the number of places retail providers will be able to plug into the NBN. As is publically known, that decision will be made by Cabinet once the ACCC advice on the matter is received.
Importantly, the document does expand on the information in the letter that has already been released from the National Broadband Network Company over the weekend. It confirms that the NBN will be built on a financially viable basis with affordable prices for customers. It confirms that prices will decrease over time as the markets become more and more competitive and more customers join the network. It confirms that NBN Co will receive a rate of return higher than the long-term bond rate. It confirms that the cost of constructing the NBN will be far less than originally thought due to the agreement between NBN Co and Telstra.
The document is first being provided to the independent senators and members of the crossbenches and then will be made publically available.
Can I say in conclusion, major economic reform is never easy. It wasn't an easy decision to float the Australian dollar, but we did it. It wasn't an easy decision to start getting rid of tariffs in this country and engage in major tariff reform, but we did it. It wasn't easy to deregulate the country's financial industry, and structural separation is not an easy reform, but it's the right reform.
We will continue today to be making that case in the Parliament.
I'm very happy to take peoples' questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why has it taken until the afternoon of the final day of, the day before the final day of Parliament, for you release this? Why wasn't this done weeks ago?
PM: We are releasing this to facilitate the decision making of the independent senators and also to support crossbench members who have supported this legislation. A number of them have availed themselves of the confidential briefing from NBN Co. They have legitimately said to us that they would like to be able to explain to their constituents why they've taken the decision that they have taken, and we are responding to that by putting this information into the public domain.
What we've always said, and what of course the Opposition call on us has been, is that we will not release the NBN Co business case until there is a proper process of Cabinet decision making about the points of interconnect decision, and we need ACCC advice on that and will receive it shortly; and we will not release information that will cause market uncertainty, and so the Opposition's been calling for that. We won't do that. We are prepared to release this additional information to support the crossbench members in explaining their decision to their constituents and to facilitate decision making by the independent senators.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Is Senator Fielding onboard with this as well, and is there anything Nick Xenophon asked for that you didn't give him?
PM: Well, this information is being released to facilitate decision making by the independent senators and I obviously mean, using those words, Senator Xenophon and Senator Fielding.
Yes, Lenore?
JOURNALIST: What information is in this document? What extra information is in this document that wasn't in the letter you released on Friday? What will we know when read it that we didn't know before?
PM: Well, significantly, the document goes to timeline for product release, the sorts of products that people will be able to get through the National Broadband Network, so that's a new piece of information.
The document confirms that under all sensitivity assumptions, and all assumptions about the points of interconnect decisions, that the rate of return is in excess of the government bond rate. That is, the project is financially viable above the government bond rate on all assumptions and sensitivities.
It confirms that the total capital expenditure is $37.5 billion. That is obviously less than the capital expenditure previously publicly released of $43 billion, and that difference is overwhelmingly explained by the agreement with Telstra and the ability, therefore, to get access to Telstra infrastructure for the rollout.
So, this is very significant information.
Yes, Michelle?
JOURNALIST: This document is a fresh document that's been prepared on the basis of the report, rather than being the report's summary. Is that correct?
And are the only points, significant points, left out of this document points that are commercial in-confidence and who has chosen what goes in and what's left out of the document?
PM: The document has been put together informed by what is in the NBN business case. The Government, in consultation with NBN Co, has made the decisions about what is within this document and clearly we are not putting anything into the public domain that would cause market uncertainty and we are not putting anything into the public domain that is properly the province of Cabinet after it has received the ACCC information.
Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said you were releasing this to assist the crossbenches and independents, but they've actually had a briefing which is wider than this summary. How does releasing this assist them? Surely what you're doing is releasing something to make it look like you are giving out more information, and in fact the independents have more information than we're going to get in this document?
PM: They breed them cynical at The Australian, don't they? Let me just explain the following situation: Senator Fielding availed himself of the confidential briefing; Senator Xenophon chose not to avail himself of that briefing.
It is true that Senator Fielding and members of the crossbench that availed themselves of that confidential briefing have been given more information than is in this document. That is true because they did have access to information that we believe should not be released publicly because of the market sensitivity questions.
For Senator Xenophon, this information is obviously information he can rely on. He chose not to take the confidential briefing because he had an issue about confidentiality clauses.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you undertake, and Minister, to table your regulation in relation to anti-siphoning before the Parliament concludes this week?
PM: I'll turn to the Minister for that.
MINISTER CONROY: That's certainly our intention.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, reduced prices of building the NBN is $35 billion. Does that reduce the Government's contribution (inaudible) to $28 billion? Is that-
MINISTER CONROY: -That stays the same.
PM: It stays the same.
Mark?
JOURNALIST: At the risk of going back over David Speers' ground, the information you've given us today about the difference with Telstra on board to the cost of not being on board and other points in the document you're releasing -
PM: -Sorry, I got distracted then by an accidental but somewhat violent act between the camera people, so could you just repeat that?
JOURNALIST: I thought our camera people were all pacifists.
PM: No, no, it was an accident.
JOURNALIST: The information you're releasing today, such as the difference in the cost with Telstra on board and Telstra not on board, the $5.5 billion dollars additional and other information - if it's not market sensitive and it's not before Cabinet, why haven't the people had a right to know that information before now?
PM: Well, we have been providing information on the NBN consistently. Let's remind ourselves of the journey we've been on.
I know a lot of the Parliamentary debate and particularly some of the Opposition attacks in question time have been predicated on the basis that no-one had heard about the NBN before this week. That is ridiculous and part of their wrecking campaign. The Minister, the Government, has been consistently providing information about NBN for a number of years now and it's been the subject of inquiry in this Parliament.
MINISTER CONROY: I've actually lost count of the number of inquiries that have been held into this. Mike Quigley has appeared before many of them. He's appeared at every Senate estimates since he was appointed unless he was overseas and he's been answering the questions. This argument that there is no ongoing scrutiny is just not true.
PM: And so we, against that background, to facilitate the independent senators and the crossbench having information that they can talk to constituents about and supporters about, have put this information out today.
Yes, Matthew?
JOURNALIST: You've said a number of times that will convey this information so that the independent senators will be able to, you know, explain to their constituents the basis for their vote. I suppose their constituents will think that that was a good thing. Why is it a good thing today but it wasn't previously? What is the public meant to make of the fact that you had to be dragged to this point today when you could done it a week ago?
PM: Let's just actually think about the journey we're on here. We're a Government that is determined to deliver to this country a visionary infrastructure project which will transform the way we live and work; which will mean we've got a stronger economy for the future and Australians have got access to better services, particularly health and education services. That's the vision.
Consistent with that vision we are structurally separating Telstra. Now, this is a reform literally 30 years in the making.
We have come to this Parliament to deliver that microeconomic reform, of the structural separation of Telstra. We have worked with the crossbench in the House of Representatives and now we are working with the independent senators to support and facilitate their decision making on this piece of legislation. That's entirely appropriate.
The aim here is to secure this transformative microeconomic reform, the structural separation of Telstra, and to support the delivery of the National Broadband Network.
We'll just take two more and then we'll go.
JOURNALIST: Do you and Wayne Swan intend to read the full, 400-page document before Cabinet has its next deliberation, or given the various pieces of advice, that you'll just read the summaries of the documents before you -
PM: -Well, what an absurd question, and anybody who has ever met me or anyone who's ever had a conversation with me would know how thorough my preparation is on major reforms.
We'll go here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Senator Xenophon says that the Government has backed down. Is that how you'd characterise it?
PM: Look, our terminology, I'll allow Senator Xenophon to use whatever words he wishes to use.
We are facilitating important decision making on a transformative piece of microeconomic reform for this country 30 years in the making. There are only so many moments in a nation's history where you get the opportunity to make a decision to get something as big as your telecommunications system right. The moment has been missed in the past. It was missed with the privatisation of Telstra. We are determined that it will not be missed again and that is why we have put this information into the public domain - to support the decision making of this Parliament, which we're due in very shortly.
Thank you very much. 



The Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr Key has just confirmed that there is now no hope that the 29 miners trapped underground at Pike River will be brought out alive.
This is tragic news, 29 families have been hoping, praying, waiting to hear good news and now they've heard the most terrible news.
Our hearts go out to them and on behalf of the Australian people I give the condolences of this nation.
Of course two of these families are Australia, the family of William Joynson and Joshua Ufer.
To those families we especially say we want you to have our condolences, we want you to understand that the nation is grieving with you at this dreadful and difficult time.
This is obviously a community in New Zealand that will now grieve bearing this dreadful loss, we send our best wishes and our best wishes, sympathy and support go to the two Australian families now living with this dreadful and tragic news.



 CURTIS: Prime Minister, welcome to AM.
PM: Thank you.
CURTIS: If we can go to New Zealand first, two Australians are presumed to have died in the mining tragedy there. Is there any help you can offer the families?
PM: Certainly, our condolences go to the families of the two Australians who have died, and this is a dreadful tragedy. Those many hours of waiting must just have really torn at people, so our condolences do go.
On the question of how families will be compensated, this is obviously an industrial accident and there are processes to be worked through.
CURTIS: To the Parliament now, you have the votes you need for the Telstra separation bills, but behind the headlines and since the election you've been finessing the case for the NBN.
Last night you likened the National Broadband Network to the introduction of the copper phone network. Are you worried that, as happened with the emissions trading scheme, you're losing the battle of public perception?
PM: I'm very pleased that what's happened in the Parliament this week is a win for families. It's a win for families who are going to get faster, cheaper broadband; a win for families; a win for hospitals; for schools that will want to use the broadband to deliver new services in different ways, so that's been what's coming out of the Parliament this week.
And it's against a backdrop where we know from Malcolm Turnbull and Barnaby Joyce and indeed Tony Abbott himself that the Opposition came into the Parliament to destroy the NBN.
CURTIS: But don't you have some hangovers from your previous term in office, that whatever the validity there were questions about your capacity to deliver, especially on things like school building and insulation, and is that perception that you have problems with delivery going to infect the broadband process?
PM: On broadband, I believe Australians want broadband. Many Australians voted for broadband. It was a huge issue at the election and for many Australians it was the biggest thing on their mind when they walked in and cast their vote. It was such a significant issue in this Parliament coming together. The country independents knew that their communities wanted broadband, so we understand that there's a careful job of delivery to be done here and we will, through NBN Co, do a careful job of delivery.
I'm running a very methodical government. We will have appropriate oversight of NBN and of all Government decisions and projects.
CURTIS: You and your ministers have also been dealing with the public perceptions of Labor as well, what you stand for and what you'll do. You outlined in a Rotary speech and to a special Caucus meeting last night your Labor values and goals. They include job opportunity for all, increasing prosperity and sustainability, governing for all Australians.
Aren't they the political equivalent of saying you believe in meat pies and pavlovas, something that no-one could disagree with?
PM: I'm certainly not going to agree with that, Lyndal! I understand that sometimes the members of the Liberal Party would use these words, but let's actually analyse the actions.
I believe in a fair society. You can't believe in a fair society and WorkChoices - Liberal Party believes in WorkChoices.
I believe in strengthening the economy. You can't strengthen the economy without having plans for how we will deal with the challenges of our age: climate change, having infrastructure like the National Broadband Network. We have those plans.
The Liberal Party is basically, as a Party of the past, pretending those future challenges don't exist. They just want to run away from them.
So you can say the words - 'a strong economy' - but you can only deliver them if you've got plans for those future challenges. Bringing the budget back to surplus, an essential part of a strong economy - we've got the plans to do it, the Opposition's got an $11 billion black hole around its neck, and so, of course, the list goes on.
That's why those words have meaning, because they relate to things that I am delivering for working families.
CURTIS: But what does it say about you and about your Government that you have to go through this process now of explaining to people what you stand for?
PM: I think what it says about me and the Government is when we have meetings like we had of our Labor colleagues yesterday that we are taking a purposeful, methodical approach to everything we do.
CURTIS: You also have a problem with the Greens, as well, who took votes off Labor. They offer a different product to both Labor and the Coalition - some would say, the Opposition might say, would cost more. Wayne Swan effectively said last night that they do less. But isn't it that difference that attracts voters and won't those voters be hard to win back?
PM: Labor does stand for something very different to the Greens and very different to the Labor Party. We stand on our political heritage, our reforming heritage of Hawke and Keating, of bringing to this country the innovations and policy changes it needed.
When you look at our economy and the things that built it, Labor delivered the reforms that it stands on.
When you look at our healthcare system, like Medicare, these are Labor innovations. We bring that reforming tradition to Government today.
Of course, the Greens are always going to say things different to us. They come off a different set of beliefs and they haven't got, in my view, the full economic view that we have of this country.
They come at issues from a different perspective, and of course the Liberal Party may chant soothing words from time to time - say for example, they believe in fairness, but they obviously don't. They brought WorkChoices to this country.
CURTIS: You keep saying you'll walk the reform road and last night at a business dinner you were given a pair of shoes to symbolise that, but they were small shoes. Is that emblematic that you're taking baby steps and that a lot of your essential agenda at the moment is still the Rudd agenda: the NBN, carbon price, health, population and asylum seekers?
PM: Well, I don't get to pick the gifts that I get at business dinners, but I did think that it was very cute that the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry gave me some small shoes; some small shoes to represent walking down the reform road. We are walking down that reform road and it requires taking a step every day. You don't deliver huge reforms like the National Broadband Network overnight.
CURTIS: One of the things you've got coming up that you will be looking at at the end of next year is the question of gay marriage, same-sex marriage. You've said marriage is between a man and a woman and that's the tradition and the history, but a lot of the traditions that have had their basis in society or religious reasons have fallen by the wayside: Sundays are no longer shopping free and sacrosanct; family dinners are going by the wayside; women are no longer expected to be at home raising families - they can be prime ministers. All those traditions have gone. Why are you wedded to this one?
PM: I, of course, bring my own views to this, my personal views, and I've made those views well and truly known. Our political party debates these issues at our national conference. I expect this will be a one of a huge range of issues that is debated at our political party conference, our Labor conference, at the end of next year.
I think our society is always an amalgam of holding to the traditions of the past and building for the future. People will make different judgement calls about the best mix. I've made a judgement call about holding to a tradition which is a foundation stone of our heritage as an Australian society.
CURTIS: You're about to head into a Cabinet meeting to talk about anti-siphoning. Can Australian people go to Christmas knowing they'll have the tradition of being able to watch sport they watch for free, that continued?
PM: Lyndal, I'm going to say to you Cabinet's confidential, number one. I'm also going to say to you, as a major football follower and I think I'm well known for that, I obviously want to see Australians being able to enjoy their footy and the sport that they care so much about.
Government will work through on this issue to get the balance right and work in the interests of Australian families who like watching footy and other sports.
CURTIS: Julia Gillard, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thank you.


Canberra 
Thank you very much and can I acknowledge the Leader of the Opposition, Tony Abbott; can I acknowledge so many Parliamentary colleagues and friends who are with us; can I acknowledge some background noise; and can I also acknowledge Andrew O'Keefe and his colleagues in the White Ribbon Foundation.
Now, I trust that I don't offend anybody when I say I would prefer if we weren't here today; if there was no need for us to come together and to wear white ribbons; there was no need for us to talk about violence against women and girls because our society no longer had this violence against women and girls.
And there's something deeply confronting about the fact that we can stand on this beautiful day, this picture-perfect day in this remarkable building in a country led by a female leader, and be here to talk about violence against women and girls and yet we do have to come together and talk about violence against women and girls because too many women and too many girls continue to feel that violence.
As a Government, as a Parliament, I believe we are united in our efforts to make a difference to the appalling statistics of violence that our nation still sees, and I could talk about the economic costs, I could talk about all of the statistics, about what this costs us as a nation, but really the most important thing is the emotional cost - what it does to the individuals who end up bearing the brunt of that violence in their daily lives.
We, as a Government, have taken steps to address violence against women and girls. We've announced a $42 million commitment in 2009 to fund initiatives such as the respectful relationships project and the 1-800 counselling service. There's a 12-year national plan that's backed by a further $44.5 million in funding, and that's about improving services for domestic violence victims, telephone support, for frontline workers, a new national centre of excellence for research and a grants program to help local communities themselves reduce violence against women and girls.
These efforts by the Government, which have been led by my colleagues Tanya Plibersek and now by Kate Ellis, are important efforts, but in many ways the most important efforts are those that are taken by individuals who come together to convey a message about how unacceptable this conduct is and how deeply we want to see change, which is why the White Ribbon movement is so important; such an important way of bringing people together; such an important way of involving men, to have them say that they believe this is wrong and that they want to say to men across the country this is wrong.
So, I welcome very much this work of the White Ribbon Foundation, the fact that we are here wearing these ribbons today, but that it is part on an ongoing challenge. I also welcome the fact that it's the subject of deep bipartisanship across this Parliament, so whilst in this Parliament we argue about so much, there is no doubt that every parliamentarian stands united in supporting this cause and united in having their voice heard against violence against women and girls.
Thank you very much. 


Canberra
PM: Accompanied by the Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the House and Minister for Infrastructure, Anthony Albanese, and by the Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, Stephen Conroy.
Today in the Parliament the Government has delivered an historic win for Australian families and businesses, laying the way open for our further delivery of the National Broadband Network and achieving an historic microeconomic reform in this country through the structural separation of Telstra, however before going into that I do want to turn to the Leader of the House to have him explain today's Parliamentary proceedings.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Thanks, Prime Minister. Today we saw the Parliament resumed in the House of Representatives, quite simply at great cost to the taxpayer so that Tony Abbott could rant and rave.
It is extraordinary that there was no vote on the Bill as has been amended by the Senate last Friday. So what we saw was days of delay, prevarication, opposition and blocking in both Houses of Parliament, and when it came to the crunch, the Opposition didn't even vote against it.
The Opposition had three amendments today before the House, two of which were ruled out of order by the Speaker. So after having days to get their act together on this vital piece of legislation, three amendments, one lost on the floor of the Parliament, one ruled out of order because it simply wasn't in accordance with Standing Orders, and one they didn't proceed with.
The only explanation for their behaviour over recent days is that they wanted to go through Tony Abbott's suspension motion, of which he knew, because of the number of pairs that had been granted, there was no possibility of it being carried by the House, which is what Mr Oakeshott's comments on the floor of the Parliament went to.
This is an Opposition that throughout the year, through their own behaviour of wrecking on the floor of the Parliament, has alienated themselves from the very people who just months ago they said they wanted to join with them in forming Government. It's not surprising that we leave this Parliament after the last five weeks' sittings, with the Independents alienated from the Opposition due to their own destructive behaviour.
PM: Thank you. So today once again we've seen Mr Abbott play the role of wrecker - negative, bitter, and his side of politics in an absolute shambles unable to deliver even the most simple mechanisms in the Parliament to pursue their own agenda.
Against that relentless negativity, the Government today has delivered a win for Australian families and Australian businesses. The legislation that has finally been passed today is there for the National Broadband Network, part of preparing for the National Broadband Network, and new superfast broadband will transform the way we deliver health services. Will transform the way we deliver education services, and will transform productivity in our economy.
And of course this legislation also delivered a microeconomic reform of great merit in its own right. For almost 30 years now this nation has tried to reform Telstra, to end up with a structural separation so that the wholesale business and the retail business were not fused together, creating an anti-competitive monopoly. Today we have achieved that structural separation. Once again, this is a win for families and a win for Australian businesses, it's a win for the economy, it's a win for those who believe that competition delivers better prices, better services and more innovation, and that's exactly what we have achieved through this legislation.
Now this is a big win, but the Government will not be resting on our laurels having delivered this win for Australian families and Australian businesses. As we move from 2010 to 2011, I want to make it clear that 2011 will be a year of delivery, it will be a year where Australian families can increasingly see the services they rely on like health changed because the Government is delivering health reform. Where they will increasingly be able to see, in their nation and in their own communities, the power of highspeed broadband, where they will increasingly be able to see the benefits of the Government's work to keep our economy strong and keep the number of jobs growing.
2011 will also be a year of decision. It will be the year the nation needs to make a decision on pricing carbon. It will be a year in which the Government will make decisions on increasing participation in our workforce. We've talked about our ageing society, we've talked about the demands of the resources sector for new workers and new skills, in 2011 we will move from the discussion to the decisions, new solutions, new skills, new opportunities for Australians as we lift workforce participation.
I'll now turn to the relevant Minister for comments on the National Broadband Network and then we'll take questions.
MINISTER CONROY: Well thank you, as some of you were here on Friday, some of this may be a little bit repetitive but what was the most, the most disappoint part about the performance again today, was that in the past when Labor Governments had a historic mircoeconomic reform in the Hawke and Keating period, the Opposition could always proudly say 'well we stood up and were counted, we voted for microeconomic reforms.' But that mantle is now passed, this is an opposition that is interested in nothing more than opposition and wrecking. When it came to a choice between supporting significant, what is often described as the holy grail of microeconomic reform in the telecommunications sector, the Opposition went missing. So it is with some disappointment that I saw one final chance they had to actually get on board and they decided to go down the wrecking and opposing path.
But the National Broadband Network, obviously now has an enormous task to do, it has an enormous task to begin the rollout around Australia at its peak, as many of you have heard me say, there'll be 31 different build spots around Australia. There will be an enormous engineering task, but this isn't Government that's just resting on its laurels, this is a Government, and for those of you who've seen my new title, you've probably not noticed it yet, the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Digital Productivity, I know you're all going 'what the hell was that?' but that is about making sure that this Government takes advantage of all the applications, the e-health applications, the e-education applications, the aged care applications, the veterans' care, sustainable energy policy like smart grids that are being rolled out in Newcastle, all of these areas of Government and more that I haven't mentioned, that is the task of this Government now is to move on and start making sure that those applications are being rolled out along with the National Broadband Network so the true benefits of the revolution that we are beginning to unleash here and able to be enjoyed by all Australians.
PM: Happy to take questions, Phil?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister were you surprised at the election result in Victoria and what message is there in that for you?
PM: Clearly the Victorian election result is still working its way through, I know that we are probably anticipating today seeing Premier Brumby and Opposition Leader Ted Ballieu deal with this in press conferences, so I don't want to substitute myself into statements that should be made by those two leaders, but what I would essentially say about the Victorian election is it was an election fought by a capable Premier - John Brumby I believe is a very capable man and he has led Victoria very ably - but an election being fought by a Labor Government that had served the Victorian people for 11 years and was asking of course for a further four years in office to take it to 15 years.
You don't need to be too much of a student of political history to know that it is very difficult for long term governments to present and have their mandate renewed and I think that's what we've seen happen in Victoria.
Michelle?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard one of the reforms that you mentioned in your speech this morning, again now, is health reform, hospital reform. With a change of Government in Victoria, what do you anticipate that will do to your capacity to deliver that, do you think the Victorians will renege, and will you be seeking early discussions on this issue?
PM: Whoever emerges as the Premier of Victoria, I will say to them what I'd say to every other Premier and Chief minister - our health reforms are about more doctors, more nurses, more hospital beds, more responsive emergency departments.
Now, Premiers, I believe, and Chief Ministers, want to see their communities enjoy more doctors, more nurses, have access to more hospital beds, elective surgery done more quickly and more responsive emergency departments, and I said this morning, and I'm happy to say again, for any Premier there is a simple mathematical equation here. We know that if states continue to carry the burden of predominantly paying for hospital costs, that if you fast-forward the clock that will take more than they earn in revenue. Simple maths - not sustainable, requires reform, and we are standing ready to deliver those reforms, including stepping up to 60 per cent of the hospital costs, which now press on state governments. So, I'll be making that case very clearly to Premiers and Chief Ministers around the country.
Latika?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if I can ask you two questions, please, following on from this morning's speech, when do you think you will legislate for a carbon price, not just have made a decision regarding one?
And on a separate matter, does Australia have anything to fear from the next round of Wikileaks? Do we have anything to fear from cables from Australia being published?
PM: Well, on Wikileaks, I'm not going to comment on cables and intelligence matters, but obviously the Government is keeping the matter under close appraisal and the Attorney-General has been making some statements about our mechanisms for doing that today.
On the first, carbon pricing, I've said today that 2011 needs to be the year the nation decides - that we decide on how we will price carbon with sufficient consensus that it can be legislated.
Now, this parliament is the master of its own destiny, but for the Government we will drive the agenda so that in 2011 it can be transparent for Australians and for parliamentarians what the Government believes needs to happen in order to price carbon. We want to do that working through the multi-party climate change committee. We want to do that working with community members and with our two roundtables - the business roundtable and the roundtable involving unions, community groups and environmental groups - but we need to force this matter through in 2011, that is, through to decision, a decision on how we're going to price carbon that is capable of getting support in this parliament and enjoys support in the community.
Paul Bongiorno?
JOURNALIST: In 2010, Labor's been unable to win enough confidence of the voters to form government in its own right. It's been a very bad year. Is the Labor brand toxic?
PM: I understand that the Leader of the Opposition has been out making those statements today. You'd expect Tony Abbott to be out playing politics on a day in which the Government goes to parliament and, despite his negativity, despite his wrecking, delibvers a major reform, and what I can say to you and say to the Australian people is today I've been focussed, the Government's been focussed, on delivering a win for Australian families, Australian businesses, and the Australian economy. Tony Abbott's been focussed on hurling political insults.
Matthew?
JOURNALIST: There is a debate within the Labor Party at the moment, partly, I think, pushed on by the Victorian election result, about whether the future of electoral recovery for your Federal Government at the next election lies in moving your policies to the left, towards where the Green sit on issues like same-sex marriage and border protection, or going to the more traditional bread and butter, economy, services argument. On which of those two arguments do you fit, or do you believe that it's possible to deliver both?
PM: The future for this Government in terms of community support lies in governing and governing well. That's exactly what I will deliver - good government.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) that shows that most Queenslanders are yet to be convinced that the minority government is working, and 52 per cent think we should go to a new election to give one side out of the two a majority. How are you going to convince those people that your Government is working and that this can last three years?
PM: By governing and governing well, as we have been during this parliamentary period - securing important reforms through the parliament. We're talking about one such very important reform today, reforming our telecommunications industry for the future, but of course other important reforms have gone through this parliament - sustainability of the PBS, for example, has been an important measure dealt with in this parliamentary session, and we've got more than 15 bills that have passed this parliament.
So, the best way of demonstrating to the Australian people that we are governing well is by doing it, and we are.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Nick Xenophon said today that he can't support the NBN access arrangements bill as it stands, as it was introduced to parliament last week, because it could lead to preferential pricing for Telstra. Do you share his concerns, and are you willing to go through this kind of parliamentary saga every time an NBN-related piece of legislation moves through both houses?
PM: Well, I'll get the Minister to comment on the detail of the legislation, but want I can say about this parliament is whether we're talking about NBN or whether we are talking about other matters, we need to work through the parliament the Australian people voted for. That does require discussion, respectful conversations.
I think announcing the finalisation of the piece of legislation that we are here talking about today, we are showing what you can achieve with those respectful conversations.
MINISTER CONROY: The Senate has always been a challenge for a ruling Labor Government, so we're sort of used to it, negotiating our way through the Senate. It's nothing unusual. It's different, obviously, with the Reps, but the Senate has always been a chamber where we've negotiated until we've either won or lost a bill.
On the specific issue that Senator Xenophon is raising, what is set out in that bill is that if the NBN want to give, say, a volume discount, it has to go and get approval from the ACCC, so it doesn't say the NBN can just go off and give a volume discount to anybody or make any pricing arrangements.
Now, Mr Quigley has consistently said the policy of the company is not to give volume discounts, so there is Mr Quigley on the record, and I said, if you actually read the relevant legislation it's very specific - it can only be done if the ACCC gives it the tick.
JOURNALIST: Is that, since Mr Quigley has said that, why is there any room within the legislation for volume discounts to be allowed? Why not simply state in the legislation that there will be no volume discounts?
MINISTER CONROY: Well, we've put in a mechanism that the ACCC could tick them off or it could reject them if they were sought, so we're just allowing a degree of flexibility in the legislation, but let's be clear - it has to be done with the ACCC's approval, but the bill's been out as a draft for some time and this is a bill which will now work its way through all the committee stage. We'll listen to the committee. We'll listen to the other members of parliament, and we'll consider that sometime in the first half of next year, but I would imagine this is at least a six-month process that we'll be going through.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the NBN bills will be, when do you think they'll be voted upon in the Senate?
MINISTER CONROY: Oh, it's not for me to say. It's taken 12 months to get this one up, longer than 12 months to get this one to completion, so I'd be a bad judge of when we'd actually get a chance to vote on it.
It'll be debated, I'm sure. As I said, there'll be a lengthy committee process. There'll be lots of discussion on it, but as for when the chamber- I would hope that it could be done before the first half, but the Senate's program is in the hands of the Senate.
JOURNALIST: Malcolm Turnbull
says that they support the structural separation-
MINISTER CONROY: -Well, he said that, but he had a chance to vote for it today. He had a chance to vote for it today, and he didn't.
JOURNALIST: In the Senate, people like Nick Minchin gave absolutely savage attacks on the proposal. What do you make of the Senate actually speaking differently to what their supposed policy is?
MINISTER CONROY: Look, there's clearly been a divide within the Liberal Party over this. If you go and took a poll - you know, you sometimes do - not for attributing, the majority of Liberal members that I have spoken to support structural separation. They recognise the mistake the Howard Government made, and they in private have been very supportive, but there've been those that have been campaigning hard, like Senator Minchin, to protect his legacy, which is the privatisation of Telstra, and the world has now moved on and today's vote moves the world on in a quantum leap, and so while I've congratulated Malcolm a number of times on saying that he supported structural separation, he had the chance to put his mouth where his money was, and that was a fail - an absolute fail.
PM: OK, can I suggest, Latika, the easiest answers to your question are timing for the next bill, try and find out how long Mr Abbott is going to mire himself in wrecking and negativity. That's an important piece of information, and yes, you're right, the Liberal Party is divided on Tony Abbott's wrecking tactics.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: But Labor (inaudible) in Victoria and it also looks like losing New South Wales next year, it's just in four months. How much help will you be giving Kristina Keneally over Christmas and the summer break to help her stem the tide, stem the damage which is likely to be inflicted in March?
PM: Well, I'm intending, let me tell you, to take a little bit of a holiday over Christmas. Yes, there are state elections to come. We've just had one in Victoria. I will be associating myself with state campaigns in the way you would expect a federal leader to do.
Ultimately, state campaigns turn on state issues, and Premier Keneally will be out there arguing for the further support of New South Wales voters.
Now, I understand that following the Victorian election there will be any amount of political commentary about what all of this means. I'll leave that to the paid political commentators. That's not my job, but I will just briefly remind on this - of course, we saw John Howard successfuly govern and be re-elected in circumstances where people were marching to ballot boxes in state elections voting for Labor governments. Australians separate these two questions in their minds. That was clearly on display during the period of the Howard Government.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Ms Keneally's call for Mr Riordan to resign?
PM: Look, these are matters for the New South Wales branch.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: You mentioned health, but changes of state government, state government level, what affect would that have on the overall COAG agenda of your Government?
PM: Well, I will be working with, obviously, currently, if you look across the stats and territories we've got Premier Barnett in Western Australia. My job as Prime Minister is to work with the Premiers and Chief Ministers that their states and territories elect to get a job done for Australian families and for the future of the nation. That will be my mission and that's what I'll be going about doing.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) which is a lot more (inaudible) first five weeks of parliament. Shouldn't voters expect their elected members to turn up for work, rather than playing hooky on the last day, especially given that people like Tanya Plibersek had trouble getting a pair when she was pregnant?
PM: Well, I'll go to the Leader of the House, but can I just say this in response to your question: Today's sitting need not have occurred. It only occurred because of Mr Abbott's negativity, and Mr Abbott only came today to hurl insults.
Now, I think taxpayers will take a pretty dim view of that - you're right - but the person who needs to explain the parliament being brought together at this expense is Mr Abbott. The only reason he was here today was to hurl insults, not to do anything in the interests of Australian families.
I'll turn to the Leader of the House on the pairs question.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Can I just add that Tony Abbott also wasn't there for the actual end of the debate on structural separation. He came, gave abuse and ranted and raved and then left the chamber, and he only returned when divisions were held.
Pairs occur and are negotiated between the Chief Government Whip and the Chief Opposition Whip. I'm not aware of all the circumstances for each individual.
I know, for example, that a couple of the pairs were because of a meeting of the committee that's dealing with the inquiry into Wild Rivers. It's appropriate, given that meetings would have scheduled and transport arrangements, etcetera, in Far North Queensland, that that occurred.
I think, over the year, we have seen the Opposition , as part of their blocking and negativity, some of their responses in terms of pairing arrangements have been, I think, completely indefensible - the fact that there had to be a little mini campaign to ensure there was a pair granted to Tanya Plibersek is perhaps the best example of that, but what I would hope occur is with a bit of maturity from the Opposition is that over the long break that actually recognise that this parliament, the 43rd Parliament, has been elected for three years. It's pretty obvious it's going to serve for three years, and that they should therefore act in a much more mature way when it comes to the functioning of the parliament, because I think that's what Australians expect.
PM: OK, we'll take the last two questions, and then we'll go. Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) cost, in ballpark figures today? Was it close to a million dollars?
MINISTER ALBANESE: That would be a matter for the Finance Minister. What I do know is that given that the Opposition failed to even call a division on the matter, the primary matter, that was before the House today, this could have been dealt with last Thursday, frankly, had the Senate not had a considerable debate - they actually had a long debate last Thursday about how long the debate would go for. They then had a dinner break. They then went home early. The fact is that this could have been dealt with.
It was clear from last Wednesday that there was majority support for this vital legislation in the Senate and the House of Representatives. Tony Abbott chose to play his negative game before the House of Reps today.
PM: Alright, Phil Coorey - last question.
JOURNALIST: A philosophical one.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Here we go!
JOURNALIST: This time last year, the Libs were two days away from knocking off their leader, Turnbull. They were in the pits. You guys were riding high. What's your takeout from the last 12 months? Is it the delivery of the speech you gave this morning? Is that the lesson you've learnt from the last year in the Labor movement, or is there more than that that you take out of what's happened in the last 12 months?
PM: I believe what we're elected to do is we're elected to, we go to the election saying to Australians we've got a vision of the future. We're elected to then methodically deliver that vision. Often, that's not easy. That's not easy, particularly in a parliament like this, with the negativity of the Opposition. That's not easy, but you've got to go about it with determination, methodically.
That's what we've been doing in this parliamentary session, and as I've said, 2011, I believe, is the year where Australians will be saying to us, and I am determined to this, Australians will be saying to us 'we want you to govern.' It's what I intend to do - not play politics: govern, govern for the future of all Australians; for their opportunities for the future; for ensuring that we have a strong economy and that we tackle the challenges of the future, including, of course, sustainability and climate change.
So, I ask to be judged by our actions and what we deliver for Australian families.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you just said that you're not elected to play politics, but you've been standing here for 15-20 minutes smashing the heck out of your opponent because he didn't agree with your broadband policy. Isn't that inconsistent?
PM: Parliament is a place of debate, not a place of relentless negativity and wrecking. Tony Abbott's whole world view coming into this parliament was 'don't worry about broadband and reform for Australian families. Demolish NBN, demolish the Government', and when it was clear last Wednesday that he was not going to succeed in demolishing the NBN, he has forced, for the playing of politics, parliament to keep sitting, including today.
Now, I am going to give frank assessments of how the Opposition is behaving in this parliament. That is making clear to Australians, for example, what we're doing in parliament today.
It is impossible to explain why the parliament is sitting today without going to Tony Abbott's negativity and wrecking strategy. I've got to come here and tell people the truth. That is the truth.
Thank you.


Sydney
Friends.Parliament sits for the last time today after an extraordinary year in politics.I go from here to Canberra for a historic vote in the House of Representatives.It is nearly twenty years since Professor Fred Hilmer's landmark report on competition policy was handed down.Two decades later, we are finally structurally separating Telstra.Delivering nation-building investment and structural economic reform.Today.So it is a good day to reflect on 2010 and look forward to 2011.But my thinking about next year sits in a longer-term context.So first I want to discuss the economy since 2007 and look forward to the years ahead.
The bare facts of our economy in 2010 are as simple as this.Australia has emerged from the global financial crisis as the world's strongest advanced economy.You know that.But to really understand our economy's future, we need to look at the last three years more closely ...Because Australia's good position today is no accident.
In May 2008 my colleague Wayne Swan delivered the first Labor Budget in thirteen years.We believed then, and in hindsight I am certain we were right, that this first Budget found the correct balance for the economy at that time.Combining a tight fiscal policy with setting aside the money we needed for infrastructure and education.Dealing with the challenges of growth while being prepared for risk.
Then in September that year - barely more than two years ago - Lehman brothers sank.Confidence in the global financial system went with it.And for a time, our country was genuinely threatened with the disappearance of the very means of global finance and exchange.It was our economy's hour of maximum danger.The Government acted. And we got it right.
We guaranteed Australian bank borrowing, so banks could keep lending.We used targeted, timely, and temporary fiscal stimulus to support demand through the downturn.We worked with the independent monetary policy decisions of the Reserve Bank, in the downturn and as the domestic economy recovered.We fought for the G20 to be the broadly representative and widely recognised coordinating council for the global economy, so we could play our part in the world.
Our financial, stimulus and economic decisions, in October 2008 and February 2009 and in the 2009 Budget, were tough ones.Big and bold decisions. Hard calls.Opposed by our political opponents and conservative critics.Controversial then and now.And we got it right.
So that today, we can honestly say, Australia beat the global recession.Growth is over three per cent, business investment is surging ... with 375,000 jobs created last year alone ...... and all with our Budget coming back to surplus by 2013, one of the strongest budget positions in the world.From this position of strength, I want to ensure Australia learns the right lessons from the economic events of the last four years. This is not straightforward.Our country faced a once in seventy-year event in September 2008.So we will not govern in the next few years as we governed in those few weeks.I am deeply conscious of the importance of governing for the long-term.The other lessons I carry with me for the economy's coming years?We made good decisions in the crisis, but we were in a strong position to make them because we had a legacy of more than 25 years of economic reform. So we must walk the reform road.We were able to spend in the downturn which in turn means we must save in the recovery. So the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus from the Commonwealth Government is forecast to reduce real GDP growth by one percentage point in 2010-11 and half of a percentage point in 2011-12.In the crisis we had to move quickly to guarantee financial institutions, as well as fill a hole in private sector demand. The Government intervened where needed, to make up for private sector fragility and paralysis. So in the recovery, we move from intervention to investment - not doing the heavy lifting for the private sector, but rather building the enablers of broad based economic growthWe must learn from "mining boom mark one" as we move through "mining boom mark two". So to ease the pressures on inflation and interest rates and to ease what I call the "patchwork economy", we must deliver investment in economic capacity as well as continued reform.The decision making in the growth phase is just as tricky just as important and just as demanding - in a different environment, our goal of a strong economy and opportunity for all remains.In the global financial crisis, we steered our economy away from the ditch.Now in the recovery, we have to lift the speed limit of the economy.
Through the global downturn, Labor managed crisis well.Since 2007, in the toughest economic circumstances, we have created over 650 000 jobs and doubled funding for school education.Now we have new opportunities with a new Government.We've been dealing with the immediate requirement to form government and working with a new parliament.Australians now have the stable, effective administration they deserve. And the new Parliament is working well, even if a little differently to what we've been used to for so many years.And my Government has an ambitious reform agenda: fiscal consolidation; building capacity on the supply side with tax, superannuation, infrastructure and skills; extending market-based reforms to health and education, carbon and water.We will pursue it with discipline and rigour.First, we must deliver fiscal consolidation.We come to the consolidation task well placed.Australia's debt is lower than any major advanced economy. Our net debt will peak at 6.4% of GDP in 2011-12, while that of the G7 economies will peak around ninety percent of GDP in 2015.And as a Government, we are up to the task.We have already taken savings decisions worth $84 billion since coming to office.But there is no room for complacency.That is why the Government is undergoing the most significant fiscal consolidation in at least 50 years.A shift in the Budget bottom line of almost $60 billion.Between 2009-10 and 2012-13, the budget balance will tighten by four and a half per cent of GDP.Going further, faster, than Peter Costello's first four Budgets. They delivered a total fiscal tightening of 3.1 per cent of GDP - around two thirds per annum of what we are delivering now.This is an extraordinary fiscal turnaround in a 3 year period.And it will deliver a Budget surplus by 2013.In many ways, budget scarcity is a good discipline on Government.I want the Government to look at each decision from every angle.To hold them up to the light. To examine every possibility and every question.To make every dollar go as far as it can.Budget scarcity is also a good discipline on policy advocates as well.It forces everyone - business, unions, advocates and commentators - to recognise the real trade-offs which sustain economic growth and promote opportunity.Second, as the Budget returns to surplus, the Government has a job to do on the supply side of the economy.We are lifting Australia's economic capacity so that we can grow productively through the boom.Cutting company tax.From 2013-14, we will cut the company tax rate to 29 per cent, with a head start cut for small business from 2012-13. The first cut to company tax rate in a decade.Superannuation reform.Over the next eighteen months low income workers become eligible for a government superannuation contribution of up to $500.And we will increase compulsory superannuation to lift retirement incomes and national savings.
Investing in infrastructure.A new dual carriageway between the F3 and the New England Highway near Branxton. A $1.65 billion project delivering a new and more direct route between central Queensland and western New South Wales as well as the Port of Newcastle and Sydney.Work is underway, expected to be completed in 2013. Part of our record investment in roads, rail and ports.And skilling Australians.Applications will be called early next year for the Critical Skills Investment Fund's partnership program with industry, which will create up to 39,000 additional trade skills training places in the mining, infrastructure, construction and renewable energy sectors.Part of our new resources and reforms in skills.And the government is extending market reforms to health and education, carbon and water.I want these large sectors of the economy to be more productive now.And I want them to deliver more productive use of our human and environmental capital into the future.Driving efficiency across the hospital system.Legislation is before the Parliament to retain a share of the GST from the states to dedicate to health - part of a compact with the States where the Commonwealth permanently meets sixty per cent of hospital costs.Lifting quality across the education system.My School 2.0 will launch, with new data to show growth in student achievement, new information about school finances and a more accurate method of identifying schools which service similar student populations.Pricing carbon.The Multi Party Climate Change Committee with representatives from the Government, Greens and the Independents has now met twice.The two roundtables for business and environmental/community groups held their first meeting in Canberra this Friday.Reforming water.Last week the Government opened tenders for $300 million of new water buybacks in the southern-connected river system, which includes the Murrumbidgee, as well as the Lower Balonne region of Queensland.This adds to the more than $12 billion committed to water purchasing and infrastructure under the Water for the Future Programme.It's an ambitious agenda for the Government I lead.I know you will judge our reform legacy over a decade, not over a day.As you should.I also know that in all these areas, we are making steady progress - day by day, week by week.As we must.
That steady progress is what gives me the confidence to look forward to 2011 knowing it will be a year of delivery - and a year of decision.The Government will deliver major investments and reforms in the coming year.In particular, rolling out high speed broadband and implementing hospital reform.And the nation will face major debates and major decisions.In particular, putting a price on carbon and lifting participation in the economy.
2011 is the year of delivering high speed broadband.Five "first release sites" in mainland Australia, connecting 12 000 addresses in four states. Construction commencing already this year, with services in 2011.In Townsville, where civil work has begun. In Armidale, where aerial work design is with Country Energy for approval.In Minnamurra in New South Wales, where aerial work is about to commence. In Willunga in South Australia, where a full underground build with boring and civil work is well advanced.In Brunswick, in Melbourne's inner north, where the majority of construction build will use existing Telstra duct network with new pipe layed in areas of high congestion.Testing the rollout in areas of different terrain, housing type and density, demographics, climate, existing infrastructure and other local factors.Joining Tasmania, where the NBN is already operating on 200 km of laid fibre.
2011 is also the year we deliver historic health reform.From July 1, the Commonwealth's share of hospital funding will increase to sixty per cent. The Independent Hospital Pricing Authority will be established and operational. GST retention and dedication to health care will commence.Access to elective surgery will improve as reward payments begin to flow to states. And the Commonwealth begins funding 60 per cent of public hospital research, training and capital.And the first group of Local Hospital Networks begin operating.
So 2011 will be a year of delivery.And 2011 will be a year of decision as well.2011 is the year Australia decides on carbon pricing.The Parliament is now the master of its own destiny. But for the Government, I say we must decide in 2011 on a way of pricing carbon that is supported by a broad enough consensus that it can be legislated.Climate change was first discussed in our Parliament in the nineteen eighties.It's been central to public debate in two successive Federal election campaigns.But a working consensus for action has eluded us.In a system like ours, it is incredibly rare to have a second opportunity at a hard reform which fails in the Parliament. We have one on a carbon price.In May, Professor Garnaut releases his updated report. The Productivity Commission will publish advice on the measures being taken by our trading partners and the impacts of a carbon price on our international competitiveness around the same time.The multi party climate change committee will meet increasingly regularly through the year - expert papers are already being released publicly and discussed in the committee.The Climate Change Commission will carry out its task of bringing together expert opinion and public attitudes.I promise you, no responsible decision maker will be able to say next year that they need more time or more information on climate change.In 2011 there will be nowhere to hide,And 2011 is a year where workforce participation will come to the fore.We'll need to decide that we seriously want to be a high participation economy.An economy where everyone who has the capacity to work has the opportunity to work.And we'll need to decide that we are seriously prepared to change the policies which stop that happening now.It's now eight years since the first Intergenerational Report. Three of the Reports have been released.Yes, that's shifted the public debate and it's made a difference in clarifying the reasons to act. But too little has actually been done.Now, not only is the ageing population making the working age population more important than ever before, but the mining boom is reshaping our workforce as never before too.So in 2011 the debate needs to move from the problems, like ageing population and jobless families, to the solutions, like new incentives and new skills.And the Government will be moving from discussion to decision.
By any measure, this has already been a tumultuous year in politics.A change of Prime Minister in office, the closest election campaign in many decades, the first minority government since the war.
I intend for 2011 to be defined less by politics and more by government.Australians do not face a Federal election next year - or the year after.Australians do not want their Government to campaign.Australians want their Government to govern.We are and we will.So 2011 will be a year of delivery - and decision.
Methodical.Making steady progress on our plans, day by day, week by week.Working hard for all Australians, wherever they live.
Modernising.Preparing Australia for the long-term with modern market-based solutions.Carefully weighing the hard decisions, at the right time, for the right reasons.
Driven by our values and our vision.Hard work, a fair go through education, respect.Opportunity for all, and keeping our economy strong.



The Prime Minister today spoke with Ted Baillieu to congratulate him on his election victory in Victoria.
The Prime Minister also congratulated John Brumby on his time as Victorian Premier, and on a hard-fought campaign.
John Brumby has made an enormous contribution to Victoria both as a Minister and as Premier.
He has led the State through difficult times, including the devastating bushfires which ravaged Victoria in 2009.
He has worked with the Commonwealth to deliver reforms in important areas including education, health and water.
The Prime Minister had the privilege of working with John Brumby, whose passion for regional Victoria and giving every child a great education always shone through.
The Prime Minister looks forward to working with Ted Baillieu to tackle the challenges facing all Australians, including the continuing need for improvements in health, education and broadband. 



Twenty-eight years ago, the word "AIDS" entered our language and entered our hearts.
Only two years earlier, a great Australian, Professor Frank Fenner had proclaimed the eradication of smallpox, seemingly bringing to an end the long centuries of suffering caused by major disease.
But it was not to be.
In HIV/AIDS, humanity had acquired an even more stubborn and formidable enemy than the diseases which had gone before.
And the scale of the devastation has been almost beyond imagination:
More than 25 million people have died from AIDS.
Another 35 million live with the condition.
A majority of them are women and children.
And almost all of them live in the regions of the world least able to bear the cost.
It is - in every sense - a catastrophe and a crisis.
Tonight, on the eve of World AIDS Day, we light these two great public buildings in the colour so closely associated with emergencies, and that is appropriate for the scale and impact of this pandemic.
Friends, with this red lighting, we proclaim a day of mourning for our brothers and sisters who have been lost.
Each of them is loved and each of them is remembered.
But with this lighting, we also proclaim a renewal of hope because though we cannot cure AIDS at present, we do know how to curb and control it.
Through education and some very basic public health tools such as condoms and needle exchanges, we can prevent the spread of HIV.
Australia's brilliant response since 1983 proves how effective those tools can be.
And thanks for that go not only to courageous governments from both sides of politics, well supported by clinicians and experts, but also thousands of volunteers, carers and activists, many in organisations represented here.
Your work has ensured that a tide of care and compassion overwhelmed the forces of ignorance and doubt - and you have my admiration and my thanks.
So a huge role for prevention and education - which as Bill Bowtell reminds us, are still the cheapest and simplest tools for combating HIV/AIDS.
But since the 1990s, we've also had combination drug therapies that can slow and sometimes even halt the progress of AIDS, saving lives and enhancing the quality of life.
And I say today:
? Those drugs belong in the hands of everyone living with HIV,no matter who they are or where they live.
HIV/AIDS has no boundaries.
Nor should our response.
Friends, if there is hope amid the pain and loss of AIDS, it comes from people like Bono and Bill and Melinda Gates.
Their message is a message of hope.
A message that with adequate funding, coordination and goodwill, HIV/AIDS can be mitigated and overcome.
That is the hope that unites us today.
But more than hope, we also need a sense of urgency because while this condition is now preventable and treatable, the scope of AIDS is destroying entire social and economic structures in the countries where it prevails in the developing world.
There is also a sense here in Australia and other developed nations that the prevention message is being lost as new generations grow up and complacency sets in.
There is no room for complacency in the HIV/AIDS debate.
This battle is not yet won, and we have not yet done enough.
So let us take the opportunity of World AIDS Day 2010 to pledge more.
Yes, more funding.
But also more understanding.
And a more insistent focus on the basics of education and prevention that we know can and do work.
So as we illuminate these great buildings, let us keep the light of hope burning in our hearts, until we can stand together, like Frank Fenner did with smallpox 30 years ago, and say the journey is over and the job is done.



The Prime Minister today announced that the Minister for Resources, Energy and Tourism, Martin Ferguson, will represent Australia at the Memorial Service for the Greymouth miners who tragically lost their lives.
The service will be held tomorrow, 2 December, in Greymouth.
Minister Ferguson will offer the nation's condolences on this sad day for New Zealand and Australia.


Melbourne
 HOST: On the line is the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard. Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Neil.
HOST: Would seem our World Cup bid is in a bit of trouble. What do you think?
PM: Well, we're waiting for that result anxiously, which we will get early morning Friday our time. Mark Arbib, our Minister for Sport, is over there. The Governor General will be there, representing Australia, and we are in there with a great bid, so we're going to keep pushing on, Neil, and keep advocating our bid.
HOST: But have you heard of the finance report which puts us a long last-
PM: -I have heard-
HOST: -in terms of, yeah, sorry.
PM: I have heard of that report, Neil, and it's missed a very important factor, and that very important factor is, of course, we are in the Asian region, and by 2022 75 per cent of the world's population is going to be in our region, and for the future of football, for this to be truly a world sport as they want it to be, they want to see growth in Asia, they want to see more people watching it, more people playing it, more people caring about it, which is why Australia is well placed to help with that by having the World Cup in the Asian region in 2022.
HOST: Did I hear right? You just called it football.
PM: I have been calling football.
HOST: So what does Footscray play?
PM: The Dogs play Aussie Rules, Neil.
HOST: Alright, a few other things. John Brumby, your mate, your former boss, took a belting at the weekend. Have you got a job for him?
PM: Well, John Brumby's got a job, being the Member for Broadmeadows. We are close mates. I did work for John as his chief of staff. I believe he's been a fantastic Premier of this State, and-
HOST: -But seriously, I mean, surely you could fit him into your team. It's not so good John Brumby couldn't get a job in a ministry, is it?
PM: John Brumby's got a job, Neil, as the Member for Broadmeadows.
HOST: He's not going to be happy with that for too long. You know he's a political animal, he's politically focussed. It's his life, apart from his family, politics, and he's a very good operator. Don't you think you could say, well, 'what about a safe seat?' Kelvin Thompson's had enough. Get him into a safe seat and get him into the Cabinet.
PM: Neil, it's not for me to get on radio and speculate about what John Brumby should do. I think John Brumby's the man who'll make his own plans, and as I understand his plans, and he's been pretty clear about them, he will be there as the Member for Broadmeadows. He loves that area. He loves representing it. He'll continue to do that well, and I believe he's been a great Premier of this State.
HOST: So you haven't said to him 'if you'd like to move on, there's a job'?
PM: No, I haven't, Neil.
HOST: OK. Nuclear power - a number of your backbenchers are pushing for an inquiry into it. Should it be debated, or do you rule it out unequivocally?
PM: Labor Party's got a very clear policy, here, and it's a really long-standing policy of opposition to nuclear power.
Now, we will have our national conference at the end of next year. I want the Labor Party to be a Party of debate and a Party of ideas, so if people come to national conference saying 'I've got something to say', then I want them to have their say at national conference.
In this area of policy, Neil, I'd have to say anybody who's arguing to overturn our long-standing policy is setting themselves up for a pretty tough argument, but I'm not going to be there saying to people 'don't come and put your view.' We're a Party of ideas. It's good to have debates, and we'll have a few at national conference.
HOST: So what would your vote be - pro or anti nuclear power?
PM: Look, in this country, as we look where we are today, nuclear power doesn't stack up as an economically efficient source of power for our nation. We're in a different situation from many nations that need nuclear power. We've got abundant sources of renewable energy.
HOST: Sorry, a callers just rung and said you talk about soccer and Asia and the World Cup. Aren't Japan and Korea a part of Asia as well?
PM: Yes, of course, but the penetration, particularly, that FIFA is looking for is into China, into the growth regions of the world.
HOST: OK, so, nuclear power - unlikely in Australia?
PM: Well, I don't think is stacks up here economically, Neil. That's been my view for a long period of time. We are very focussed on record investments in solar and renewable technologies. We've got abundant energy from those sources, but I understand people join the Labor Party because they're passionate about the future of the country. That means that we'll have a lot of debates at national conference. I think that's a good thing.
HOST: Yesterday, you became the first Prime Minister in 15 years to address the ACTU executive. It's reported you sneaked out the back door afterwards. Is that right?
PM: I walked in the front door and I did go through the basement to get into the car on the way out. I went to speak to the ACTU national executive. I wasn't so much there to speak to a few reporters who were loitering outside.
So, Neil, I did go to speak to the ACTU executive. I think that's a good thing to be doing. The trade union movement's been important to this country in the past. It will be important to this country in the future, so I went there to share my views.
HOST: Did you promise to work more closely with them?
PM: Labor and unions have a close, ongoing relationship. If you go back 100 years, we, obviously, came out of the same impulse-
HOST: -Well, as I recall, the Labor Party was formed by the union movement to be its political arm, but that's a long time ago, but did you promise to work more closely with them?
PM: Look, I didn't need to, Neil, because people who know me and have dealt with me, whether it's been as Prime Minister or as Deputy Prime Minister or indeed the years I was in the Labor Party before that know I'm someone who's very respectful of the role of the trade union movement and always happy to talk issues through.
That doesn't mean we'll always agree. I've had some historic disagreements with the trade union movement. People would remember, of course, our disagreements over transparency in schooling and the My School website. People would remember me going to an ACTU congress where people were wearing protest t-shirts because they didn't agree with what I had to say-
HOST: -Well, I think that's part of the point. This was a bit of a peace meeting. Is it true you offered them or suggested to them a greater involvement in policy making and decision making?
PM: Neil, I didn't say anything yesterday that I wouldn't have said the day before or the week before that or the month before that, which is I am someone who is very respectful of the role of trade unions. I believe we share an impulse, which is to look for fairness and decency for Australians in their workplaces and beyond. I'm always therefore happy to have a conversation.
Does that mean we're going to agree on everything? No, it doesn't, and my abiding interest will always be the national interest. When I've disagreed with the trade unions I've disagreed because I've taken a different view of what best serves the national interest.
I'll continue to do that, but I'll continue to have respectful conversations with the trade union movement - and with others. I go and meet with a lot of groups, Neil.
HOST: So, do they have any greater say in government than the employer groups?
PM: The trade union movement obviously has a say on matters for our society, as does the Australian Industry Group, the Australian-
HOST: -Yeah, but have they got a louder voice? Have they got a louder voice?
PM: No, it's not a question of louder voices, Neil. My door is open-
HOST: -Hang on, they think it is. They say 'we put a pile of the money into your campaign', and there was some, you're right, there some people who were a bit, sort of, equivocal about supporting you last time, in the movement. They've pulled, in fact, some pulled out, but they've put a pile of money into your campaign, and they say 'well, we deserve a louder voice.'
Did they argue to you yesterday that the workplace laws need amending?
PM: Yes, they did, and that's an argument that I've been having, or discussion with the trade union movement, since the Fair Work Act, and there's a number of things we simply don't agree on, so there was nothing new from that, Neil-
HOST: -So you won't, you haven't agreed to their, they want improved rights, described bargaining, union official (inaudible). You haven't agreed to any of that?
PM: Of course not, Neil. Neil, let's just take one step back and analyse the situation, and the situation is this: it is not a question for me, as Prime Minister, about loud voices. I don't care who's selling. What I care about is the quality of the input and the quality of the ideas, and if I see a good idea in the national interest come from the trade union movement, then I'll respond to it. If it comes from an employer group, I'll respond to it. If it comes from an Australian walking down Watton Street, Werribee, in my electorate, I'll respond to it.
I am not someone who is going to respond to loud voices. I'm going to respond to good ideas. I certainly used words to that effect yesterday, where I talked about good ideas for the nation's future. That's my perspective as Prime Minister.
HOST: Do you want encourage people to join unions?
PM: I've always believed that it's good for people to be in trade unions. I fundamentally believe, Neil, that we are strengthened by being members of a team. However strong and as smart we are as individuals, we are strengthened by being members of a team. I bring that approach to working as a team with my Labor colleagues. In workplaces, people can bring that approach by joining with their workmates and joining their trade union is one way of doing that.
HOST: A number of finance nerds and a few people publically have been in my ear - I'm thinking particularly of David Koch at Sunrise - about setting up a prosperity fund. Now, that's also been raised by the Future Fund and by the Reserve Bank bosses. Do we need a prosperity fund that takes the money we're rolling in at the moment, in a sense, with our resources boom, and puts it aside for the future?
PM: Well, we do have some finds which we've already set up which do just that. For example, our Health and Hospitals Fund which has money that's investing in the infrastructure we'll need for health and hospitals for the future. Our Education Investment Fund-
HOST: -So do we need to take it further?
PM: Well, what I think we need to do is we need to harness some of the new wealth that will be generated by resources boom mark II, and make sure that it makes a long-term difference to our prosperity. We have determined to do that by making sure we're using that new wealth to invest in things like lowering company tax so we see balanced growth across the economy, particularly lowering tax rates on small business to help them-
HOST: -So you'll do that rather than, sort of, put it aside for the future?
PM: Look, it's not an either-or proposition. The resources boom is going to be with us for a long time, Neil. That's my prediction. What we are doing now is harnessing revenue through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. It's our policy to use that to fuel balanced growth across the economy: less company tax; good tax breaks for small business; investing in infrastructure; and investing in national savings in the form of superannuation - good for individuals, better retirement incomes, good for the public purse, people have got more super, and of course good for national savings as well.
HOST: OK, Ted Baillieu's pretty sceptical about the health deal. Do you think you can convince him to sign up?
PM: Well, Victoria has signed up to the health deal, and the health deal means, for Victoria, things like-
HOST: -So he can't get out of it? He says he's going to get it and look at it and re-assess it.
PM: As I understand, what Premier Baillieu is saying is he wants to look at the details, and I say that's good, because when he looks at those details what he will find is that there are important benefits for Victorians-
HOST: -But if he's not happy with it, can he get out of it, or is he stuck with it?
PM: Well, Victoria has signed the health deal. Obviously, Premier Baillieu will be there, making his own decisions, and I'm not going to put words in his mouth, but-
HOST: -No, but as far as you're concerned, is Victoria unequivocally, inescapably locked in to the health deal?
PM: Victoria has signed the health deal. I do expect States to honour the commitments that they have made, but beyond honouring a signature on a document, there are great reasons for Victoria to be in this health deal and stay in this health deal: reasons like 444 more hospital beds; reasons like almost $4 billion new in growth fund for health-
HOST: -But can Victoria opt out?
PM: -to the end of the decade-
HOST: -Is Victoria able to opt out?
PM: Well, there aren't opt out clauses, Neil, but I think you would understand that arrangements between governments partly rely on written documents and they partly rely on political understandings and honourable treatment between leaders, so Premier Baillieu says he's going to look at the issue. I certainly believe that's appropriate. He's a new Premier. He'd want to be fully briefed. He'd want to understand all of the details, and when he does understand all of the details, I think it will be very clear to him this is a good deal for Victoria, and one thing I would say-
HOST: -Yeah, but the point is if he doesn't, and he's certainly being sceptical at the moment, are you saying it'd be dishonourable to try and break it?
PM: Well, I think it would not be in the interests of Victoria, and of course there is a signed agreement, but I'm not going to characterise Premier Baillieu's conduct in any way in this interview, Neil. He's a new Premier. He says, responsibly, he wants to get himself fully briefed. I absolutely understand that, and I am confident when he gets himself fully briefed he will say to himself 'this is an important arrangement for Victoria', and the reason he will say that, Neil, is because if you fast-forward the clock on how much hospitals cost, if you look down the timetable and say 'what will be happening in 10 or 20 years?', funding hospitals the way we do now will cost State Governments more than they earn in revenue from all sources. That's not sustainable. That's why we need change.
HOST: Just finally and quickly, how do you assess your Government's performance since the election - points out of 10?
PM: Look, I don't think Government's as easy as points out of 10. What I wanted to do between the election and the end of the year is show to Australians that this Parliament could work - and it is working and delivering important reforms-
HOST: -But you must be very frustrated, dealing with all these whackos and fringe dwellers?
PM: Well, I'm not going to adopt that terminology and I'm going to point to the scoreboard, Neil - more than 50 pieces of legislation dealt with in the Parliament, including huge reforms like reforming telecommunications and laying the way for the National Broadband Network.
I wanted to leave this year having shown Australians this Parliament can work, and it is working, and we can deliver good, stable Government, making a difference for families - and we are.
HOST: Finally, are you going to have a holiday?
PM: Yes, I am.
HOST: OK, thank you very much. The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard.



PM: It's great to be here in Queensland in the federal electorate of Petrie. I'm joined from federal politics by the Minister for Health, Nicola Roxon, and our fantastic local member Yvette D'Ath, and it's also a great pleasure here in Queensland, to be joined by the Treasurer of Queensland Andrew Fraser, and by our local state representative for the seat of Redcliffe, Lillian van Litsenburg.
We're here to announce some very good news for Queensland and for Queenslanders that rely on their health system. And the good news flows from the historic partnership between the Federal Government and the Queensland Government for health reform. We signed a health reform agreement because we wanted to work together to improve services for people here in Queensland.
And so today it's a great pleasure to be able to announce an allocation of $95 million to make a difference to healthcare here in Queensland. First it's going to make a difference for patients needing elective surgery, it's going to fund 8000 extra operations, and by funding those 8000 extra operations, we're building on what has already been achieved through our elective surgery blitz.
And then as part of this funding, we will also be allocating new money for paediatric care and I'm standing here in Redcliffe Hospital because it will specifically benefit from this new money for paediatric care.
Firstly here at Redcliffe we will refurbish the paediatric ward to provide a six bed short stay unit for that ward, some very excited staff at the back, we will refurbish the community health building to provide four additional paediatric outpatient clinics and we will renovate the emergency department waiting area to improve it as an area for children and their families.
And investments will also be made at Caboolture Hospital, which will benefit from five paediatric same day beds and doubling the paediatric consultation rooms from four to eight. So a special focus on the care of children as well as a focus on elective surgery for people here in Queensland.
I'm very pleased that before we came to the hospital we were able to tour the Superclinic that is taking shape, able to offer multidisciplinary care to people here locally, one of the Superclinics that we are investing in around the country, making a difference to people who need care in our community and need to see more than one health professional and excitingly this Superclinic development also has a training capacity so we will be training health professionals here in Redcliffe with them looking to have a future in healthcare in this area.
Whilst I was at the Superclinic I did have the opportunity to meet a young apprentice there, I said I'd assist him with his work, I'm not sure, despite our best efforts, that the Minister for Health and I were of much assistance to him but I was very pleased to meet him and I'm also very pleased to announce that today we have seen national figures released which say we are at an historic time for the number of students, the number of apprentices. That is Australia is training more apprentices than we ever had before, there's very good news in Queensland, with growth rates of more than 12 per cent, and I think we all know that if a young person can get a start as an apprentice then it puts them on a great pathway for the rest of their lives.
So I'm very pleased to be able to see those good figures and that good news.
I'll turn now to the Minister for Health for some comments.
MINISTER ROXON: Thank you very much. I'll just add briefly to the comments that the Prime Minister has already made.
Of course inspecting the work that's underway at the Super Clinic has been fantastic.
Yvette as the local member has campaigned incredibly hard to get those investments and worked with the foundation that had a vision as far back as 2005, that the community wanted this sort of investment. They raised money, I think more than $1 million themselves.
So for the commonwealth to be able to commit $5 million and an additional $5 million, so there's a total investment now of $10 million there, I think is a significant, really significant compliment to the community for the work that was done to get that idea ready for us to be able to fund.
The Prime Minister has also mentioned the $95 million that is being invested today. This is part of the money that was agreed through our COAG negotiations with the Queensland Government.
We're very proud to see that, that is now turning into specific investments in communities. Like here in Redcliffe, like in Caboolture and of course, just over $60 million which is going to be invested in Surgery Connect which has been a very successful program here in Queensland to make sure that, particularly those patients that are waiting longer than recommended, can get some urgent attention.
So we are delighted to be in partnership with the Queensland Government to deliver extra services whether it's investing in capital like we are here at Redcliffe, whether it's investing in more procedures being undertaken like you see through Surgery Connect.
We believe that by working together we can provide better services for the Queensland community and that's why we're so committed to our health reform agenda and to continue to implement it as we're doing here in Queensland.
MINISTER FRASER: Thanks. This is a good day for someone who is the Treasurer and the Acting Health Minister, what you see here is health reform in action. Put the politics aside and what you get here are better health outcomes for Queenslanders. Health reform delivering more money for hospitals here in Queensland and more surgery. Our Surgery Connect program we funded with a $90 million commitment in our last election, and a $60 million has been allocated out of the (inaudible) and focus on hospitals and health is going to deliver another 8000 episodes of surgery.
We already have the lowest elective surgery waiting time in Australia and we're determined to keep it there, and we're going to keep there because we want to work with the Federal Government to deliver on health and hospitals reform, that's precisely what this funding commitment today does.
It's also important for booming suburbs around Redcliffe and Caboolture have increases to paediatric care. I've already met a young man on the way into the hospital today that was taking home child number four, we know that there's a baby boom here and that paediatric services are absolutely vital for the nappy valley suburbs around these parts of the world.
What we see here is the sort of commitment and the sort of results you get when you put the politics to one side and focus on delivering better healthcare. That's what we are determined to do with the Federal Government.
PM: Very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister given the split in your climate change committee would you accept any compromise (inaudible)
PM: We've decided to have the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee work through the issue of carbon pricing, it's going to keep working. It's no surprise at all that people would bring different views to that table, we understood that when we created the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee, and it will work through the question of pricing carbon. As Prime Minister I'm saying very clearly to the nation we have to get this done, we need to come together as a nation in 2011 and make a decision about how to price carbon so that we can set get this job done. That will be better for us because it will enable to develop the low pollution economy we need for the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well Multi Party Climate Change Committee is discussing how to price carbon, that's what we always it will do and it's doing that job.
JOURNALIST: How soon is the Government going to release plans to improve competition in the banking sector?
PM: Well Wayne Swan, the Treasurer and of course a great Queenslander, has been working on the package and he has said he will release it in December so the Treasurer is on course to do that.
We have worked through this package carefully, Wayne first indicated publically that he was working to build on our earlier competition reforms in October this year. When you are dealing with something as important as banking, you've got to get it right. The Treasurer will announce the further package in December.
But I would remind people that we've already moved to increase competition in the banking sector, already moved by supporting second tier lenders during the global financial crisis, already moved by cracking down on unfair exit fees that keep people tied into a mortgage they no longer want and they want to be able to go and get a more competitive product, we've already moved on questions like ATM transaction fees.
So there's been work to bring more competition to our banking sector, the Treasurer will build on that with a package of measures this month.
JOURNALIST: The My Schools website (inaudible)
PM: The time is being taken that's needed to check this data, we want the My School website to be right, this is a new era of transparency. When we first launched the My School website, Australians had more information than they had ever had before about schools around the country. Indeed, Ministers for Education had more information that they had ever had before about the performances of schools.
Now we're adding to that information, some extra processes are being built in to double check that information so that when the site is launched next year, people will know that they information has been through a very rigorous process.
JOURNALIST: Is it embarrassing though given that last month you said it was ready to go?
PM: The advice from our experts at the Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting Authority is that they want to take some time to check the information again, they've actually engaged some external assistance to go through that checking process. I want to get it right, I want this information to be out there, it's going to be hugely powerful when people see it. For the first time ever having the information on the resources available to schools, how much the Federal Government puts in, how much State Governments put in, and how much is raised from parents. This is information no one in this country's ever had before. I don't have it, Premiers don't have it, no one's ever seen it before and everybody's going to be able to see it through My School.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) slump in retail sales?
PM: I know that the retail figures have been released today and they are consistent with what we would have expected having seen the national accounts this week. Our economy has come through the global financial crisis strong, and it is growing strongly. Consumers are showing a bit of caution and are saving some more money, but when we look overall at our economy, and particularly when we compare it to circumstances around the world, our economy is growing strongly, we have a huge pipeline of investment, a huge pipeline of investment including particularly here in Queensland.
So we have a resources boom mark II for the nation, our job as Prime Minister and also here in Queensland with the Queensland Government is to make sure we balance that growth, that we are cutting company tax to help balance that growth, we're investing in national savings through superannuation and we're investing in the infrastructure a growth economy needs including the National Broadband Network.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned attacks on your staff (inaudible)
PM: Am I concerned about what sorry?
JOURNALIST: Attacks on your personal staff and are you happy (inaudible)
PM: I'm not aware of any significance and obviously my staff do a great job.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I talk to my very capable Ministers about portfolio allocations and Chris Bowen's a great person for that very difficult portfolio of immigration and he's doing a fantastic job.
JOURNALIST: Any regrets about not going to Zurich for the World Cup bid?
PM: I've been to Zurich to support the World Cup bid, when it comes to things like this big decision for the World Cup, I think it pays to get in before the rush, I did get in before the rush by firstly hosting the bid inspection team at Kirribilli when they were out in Australia looking at our fantastic facilities for putting on sport. I went to Zurich to meet with the President of FIFA to explain to him just what a great bid Australia's got. Like many Australians I'm going to be sitting on the edge of my seat tonight in my pyjamas watching the coverage come through very, very late at night. I'm very excited to see the result and what we can say as a nation is Australia put on the best Olympics ever, we can put on the best World Cup ever.
JOURNALIST: The Premier Anna Bligh says that she's had a bloody awful year, how would you describe how the State Government's doing?
PM: Well I'll be catching up with Premier Bligh tomorrow and be very pleased to see her. Premier Bligh and I are working on the big challenges for this nation, making sure we've got a strong economy, making sure that in this period of economic growth we are investing in what we need for long term prosperity, that we're tackling the challenges of the future like climate change, and that of course we are making sure we've got a fair society that gives everybody a chance at opportunity. There's nothing more important to that than the quality of local healthcare services. People can't participate in our society and take advantage of all of its opportunities if they can't get something like healthcare when they need it. That's why I'm so excited by today's announcement.
JOURNALIST: Just back to the World Cup video (inaudible) for its jingoistic imagery, do you think that runs counter to the modern image of Australia (inaudible)
PM: I'm proud of that Aussie imagery, I think when people overseas think of Australia they do think of kangaroos and so to weave a kangaroo comedy script around the World Cup showing some of the great iconic places in Australia I think was a good idea. It's meant to be there as a promotion of Australia, it's meant to be there with a bit of fun attached and I think that does summarise what people could expect coming to Australia for the World Cup, that they'd be in a country with world class facilities but in a country that will welcome people from right around the world for the World Cup, that's why the theme is 'Come, Play', this is a great place to do it.
Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Cabinet meeting tomorrow here?
PM: We've got a Community Cabinet this evening.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Yep.
JOURNALIST: Is there a full Cabinet meeting on tomorrow or is that it?
PM: We'll have the Community Cabinet so Ministers are available in the local community, obviously we're taking the opportunity to have some internal discussions and meetings, but we'll be on display at Clontarf Beach State High School just a few hours from now.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No I'll be here in Queensland and I'll get to watch the World Cup result here in Queensland overnight.
Thank you for your interest in my program, thank you.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Federal Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon and Queensland Treasurer and Acting Health Minister Andrew Fraser today announced new funding for Queensland hospitals under the Federal Government's national health reform.
Speaking at Redcliffe Hospital today, the Prime Minister said the Gillard Labor Government would deliver $94.8 million over the next three years to improve Queensland's public hospitals.
This initial investment is one of the first steps in providing Queensland hospitals with the resources they need for more beds and better care, following on from the COAG agreement reached in April this year.
Today's announcement includes $61 million for the Bligh Government's Surgery Connect program to provide an additional 8,000 elective surgery operations.
These additional operations will help patients receive their treatment sooner either in private hospitals or through available capacity in public hospitals, with priority given to patients who have waited longer than doctors recommend.
A further $33.8 million will go towards improving the paediatric facilities at Redcliffe and Caboolture Hospitals as part of the South East Queensland Paediatric Services Plan, with further investments to be announced at Logan Hospital in the near future.
At Redcliffe Hospital, $15.6 million will be provided for six new children's short stay beds, four children's outpatient clinics and a dedicated children-friendly waiting room.
At Caboolture Hospital the Federal Government will be providing $18.2 million to refurbish their paediatric unit, including five new short stay beds and an additional four paediatric outpatient consulting rooms.



New health services are just around the corner for the Redcliffe community as the construction of the new, purpose-built Redcliffe GP Super Clinic continues ahead of schedule.
The Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon today visited the Redcliff site to inspect progress, with construction on the third storey of the five-storey now underway.
When operational next year, the clinic will make it easier for Redcliffe locals to see and contact a doctor when they need to, a key commitment of the Gillard Labor Government's health reform agenda.
The clinic will bring together GPs, practice nurses, specialists and allied health professionals including a dietician, diabetes educator, physiotherapist, pharmacist, dentist and psychologist.
It will provide preventive and chronic disease management services addressing local health needs including diabetes, respiratory and heart diseases and mental health issues.
The Australian Government committed $5 million in funding in 2007 to the Redcliffe project.
A further $5 million was promised in the 2010 election to provide outreach services for aged care and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, and specialist chronic disease clinics.
The government has provided $275 million over five years from 2007 to establish 36 GP Super Clinics around the nation.
8 of these are now open, including 2 in Queensland at Strathpine and Ipswich.
Construction has started at 16 sites, while services are being delivered prior to or during the construction at a further 8 sites nationwide.
In 2010, the Government committed an additional $370.2 million for a further 28 GP Super Clinics and upgrades to around 425 general practices, primary care and community health services, and Aboriginal Medical Services.



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that one of Australia's finest scientists, the late Professor Frank Fenner, would be honoured with a State Memorial Service.
The service will commemorate Professor Fenner's life and his remarkable contribution to global public health and environmental science.
Professor Fenner's long and distinguished career involved groundbreaking work on the impact of malaria on his fellow servicemen and women during World War II, research into tuberculosis, the eradication of smallpox and the control of Australia's rabbit population.
The Prime Minister said the service will provide Australians with the opportunity to pay their respects to this remarkable Australian whose work touched the lives of so many people around the world.
Professor Fenner's State Memorial Service will be held at 4.00 pm on Friday 17 December 2010 at Llewellyn Hall, Australian National University.
Information about the service will be published in major newspapers next week including a contact number for those who wish to attend the service.
Professor Fenner passed away peacefully on 22 November 2010 at the age of 95.


Brisbane
HOST: Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning-
HOST: My turn to ask.
PM: The tables have turned, I'm a little bit worried now.
HOST: Don't be too worried, I'm sure if, you know what I mean, to become Prime Minister you've got to know how to handle all these questions, but a lot of people listening to this program frankly don't like you, and don't like your Government, so what are you going to do about it?
PM: Well keep working and keep working hard and providing good government. I think people will ultimately judge the Government on what they see in their own lives, what is changing in health services, what's changing in their local schools, how we're managing the economy and giving people the benefits and dignity of work.
I'm pretty proud that we've created 650,000 jobs since 2007, hasn't been easy during the global financial crisis, now we've got to manage the challenges of growth and we are poised to do that, making sure we balance up growth around the nation, cutting company tax, increasing super for working people - good for national savings as well - as of course providing the infrastructure we need, including the National Broadband Network, which will be so important to our future prosperity.
HOST: The day you became Prime Minister, you're first press conference, I sang your praises immediately afterwards, I was doing this program, because I thought your first speech was really good, but what's changed since? You had a lot of ambitions and passion on that day, it's just not coming across right now.
PM: I have every ambition and passion that I had on that day today still, and I'm pursuing them. You' have the ambition, you have the vision, you know what you want to change about the country, then you've got to set about doing it piece by piece, day by day, methodically. You don't make big changes overnight, you've got to work for them, I think people know that in their ordinary lives, the same is true for this country.
So I've got a vision for the future of the country, I want to see us having a strong economy - that's the foundation stone - I want to see us offering opportunities to Australians right around this nation, that means we've got to be getting education right, every child, every school, it means we've got to be getting our health services right, and it also means we've got to tackle the challenges of the future: climate change, delivering the NBN, and we're getting about all of those things.
HOST: Well I've got to ask about a couple of those things, but I guess, do you think it's harder to be Prime Minister than to actually get the job?
PM: It's a hard job and it should be a hard job, you're leading a nation and that takes work, it obviously means there's pressure on your shoulders, there's weight on your shoulders, I accept that, and I stepped up to this position because I believed I could make a difference for the nation. What brought me into politics was a passion for change, particularly a passion for change in education, making sure even the most disadvantaged kid got a great education, now I'm working on that front and a lot wider than that making sure that there's fairness and opportunity in our great country.
HOST: Well you're setting a big agenda and I guess you've got to deliver on it otherwise people will judge you badly. George Megalogenis, who I think is one of the better writers in Australia media, is his Quarterly Essay he's lamented the lack of passion, the philosophical underpinning on both sides of the Parliament, you know, who's the real Julia and what's, this is the big question?
PM: Well the woman sitting in front of you and talking to your listeners now, I'm also a big fan of 'Mega' as we call him, you've got to shorten everybody's name don't you, so Megalogenis becomes 'Mega'. I'm a big fan of Mega but I think that there is passion and difference in Australian politics. I believe very different things from Tony Abbott, now if here were sitting here with me we'd get on and have a perfectly amicable conversation-
HOST: As we should-
PM: As we should, but we believe in different things.
HOST: But there's the personalities that aren't, there's not enough colour and movement and sort of out there moments in politics.
PM: I think in Parliament over the last two weeks there's been some colour and there's been some movement, definitely some colour and movement, but question time colour and movement is one thing, you know, 24 hours later everybody's forgotten about it, but what happened in Parliament over the last fortnight will change the nation for the next 20-30 years, because we delivered the legislation to change the way we do telecommunications.
It's technical, it's called the structural separation of Telstra, but it basically means we're laying the way for the National Broadband Network, we're laying the way for more competition, lower prices, better services, more innovation in our telecommunications.
HOST: Now I don't want to lower the tone completely but this bloke Mark Latham won't go away, he says you're a dud and you can't win, you must love him really?
PM: Well Mark Latham writes for one of our newspapers, I must admit I don't normally get round to reading the column and I didn't get round to reading it this morning.
HOST: Ok so Mark Latham no answer, that's the simplest way from your point of view?
PM: Well, you know, Mark Latham has been involved as a personality I suppose is the best word one could use for it, he was involved as a personality during the election campaign, and he continues to be a commentator. I'll let him do that, I'll just get on with the job of making a difference for Australians.
HOST: Alright that's all you really can do from your position I'm sure. Now the GFC, normally when there's a crash, the crash kind of sorts out the debris at the bottom end of the economy, the things that, people that aren't working the business that are on the edge and are going to fail generally get sorted out. But when you put a lot of Government intervention into the market place, they've been propped up, jobs have been saved sure, but a lot of businesses that maybe should have been sorted out by the GFC haven't been, some are saying today there's going to be a correction to that maybe next year. Do you see that on the horizon and what are you going to do about it?
PM: The nature of our market economy, competition, competition does sort people out, so if you're in any business whether it's having a corner store or a dress shop or a restaurant or any business, competition will sort you out if you're not offering good service to your customers, then the doors close.
HOST: And the savage corrections normally throw people on the edge out of the market, it's tough, it's cruel, it's horrible, it's a momentary hurt, and then you rebuild. The great schism hasn't really occurred in Australia.
PM: But we've got to remember the genesis of the global financial crisis wasn't a lack of competition or good businesses in this country, it was a contagion that came into worldwide global markets, not because of anything we'd done wrong or Australians had done wrong, but because of problems starting with the sub-prime mortgage issue in the United States and so on. Now that did put pressure on Australian businesses, it was the right thing to do to invest in Australian jobs and we did, we came through, we came through strong, now we've got to harness the opportunity that coming through strong gives us to grow for the future.
HOST: And if you've just tuned in you are listening to the Prime Minister. Everyone knows your voice I think now, how tough do you think it is for people right now in Australia, cost of living going up, prices of fuel, prices of electricity, all these things that we've heard promises about in the past. Right now the delivery is hurting a lot of people.
PM: There's pressure on, there's no doubt about that, there is cost of living pressure on Australian families so we're in an economy that is moving into growth, we came through the global financial crisis well, that's good, there are jobs, people have got jobs, at the end of the day cost of living, you've got to have that job, you've got to have that pay packet. But even with that pay packet, people are really feeling the pressure. Utility prices going up-
HOST: Pensioners have got some problems theres-
PM: Yeah pensioners problems, but we did deliver a record increase in the pension and we have sought to partner with Australian families to held them with cost of living pressures, cutting tax three years in a row, creating our education tax rebate, help with the cost of getting kids to school and that'll be important as the kids go back to school next year.
Increasing our childcare tax rebate, so we're 50/50 sharing the out of pocket costs of childcare. We've got more to do, we do have the paid parental leave scheme coming on stream from the 1st of January next year, that's really groundbreaking for this country-
HOST: Bit undersubscribed so far, Jenny Macklin put out a call for more Queensland families to subscribe to it.
PM: Well we want people to register early, she's saying well you can wait-
HOST: Hold off having a baby til the 1st of January is the first thing I think.
PM: No, no, have the baby when the baby should come, but if you want to do the paperwork in advance rather than at the same time the baby's coming, then you can register early and that's why she's put the call out. And we will have some other measures for cost of living, particularly helping families with teenagers. We've got this odd thing in the family tax benefit system at the moment where it kind of assumes that 16 year old kids are going off into the workforce, that doesn't happen today, they stay at school, they rely on mum and dad, we want them to do that, so we're going to change the family tax benefit to give a bit of an extra helping hand for families with teenagers.
HOST: Alright now carbon price, you said before the election it's not going to happen now it is, what's going to be the costs on our electricity bills?
PM: We're going to work through the question of carbon pricing and I know power prices, electricity bills, are putting pressure on people, but the issue is this and it takes a little bit of explanation. But we are seeing underinvestment in electricity generation because there's uncertainty in the market about what's happening with carbon pricing, and if we under invest in making electricity, prices go up and you risk blackouts at peak periods, and there are times of the year we use a lot of power. So we can have all of that continue to happen, uncertainty, underinvestment, rising prices, risks of blackouts, or we can get on with the job we need to do which is pricing carbon. I'm for getting on with the job.
HOST: Well I guess yeah, the current problem we've got with electricity generation is because for 20 years there's been an underinvestment and the current crop of electricity purchasers are paying for the catch-up - 
PM: That's true.
HOST: There is this big debate that's been signalled the last couple of days, and bright blokes like Mark Bishop, one of your Senators from Western Australia making the point about nuclear power, you would have to at least welcome the discussion, it's an important one and I noticed Mark Bishop sort of said who didn't enjoy an anti-nuke rally in past years, but now we've got to seriously talk about this and at the same time you've got this discussion about gay marriage, so what's the most important thing for Labor, nuclear power or gay marriage?
PM: The most important thing is governing and governing well-
HOST: So you avoid the question?
PM: No I'm going to answer the question, but the most important thing's governing and governing well, but as a political party we're going to be doing two things at the same time. We're a party of government, and we'll be providing good and stable government in the interests of Australian families - jobs, health, education - the things that matter to Australians. At the same time, we're a party of ideas, people come and join the Labor Party because they're passionate about something, they want to have their say.
HOST: You don't mind the stoush?
PM: Look we've got a mechanism for those passionate people to come and have their say, it's our national conference, and I expect at our national conference people'll come and have their say about a huge range of issues. There'll be people who will say I come from this part of the country and it's the most important thing for us is a particular issue, so look there'll be a huge range of issues discussed. That's democracy, that's health, that's ideas, that'll be happening but I will be leading the Government getting on with governing.
HOST: Is it down to just simply what the Greens think on what the outcome will become?
PM: We are a political party, the Labor Party, with more than a hundred years of history. We have our own values, our own ethos, our own ways of working, we had them 50 years ago, we will have them 50 years into the future. We've got our own beliefs, the Greens are their own political party, they have different beliefs from us.
Now that doesn't mean that there aren't some things you can come together and agree on, indeed there are things we come together and agree on with the Liberal Party, they've got an entirely different belief system from us.
But we are Labor, we've got our own beliefs.
HOST: You probably find more common ground with the Liberal Party on some things for a lot of the Labor Party, than you do with the Greens though?
PM: I think there's a lot of, you would remember from your days in the Federal Parliament, if you actually step back, there's a lot of things that everybody in the Parliament agrees on, they tend to be the things that don't get the headlines because everybody's agreed and then there's a lot of things that the Government and the Opposition agree on, and work together on. We'll see that in this Parliament, I hope, if Tony Abbott doesn't stay on his current course of trying to wreck everything. There will be some things that we're able to work productively with the Greens on, and I believe carbon pricing is one of those things.
HOST: So you're in control, not the Greens?
PM: Definitely, I'm in control, of course, I'm the Prime Minister.
HOST: You're Prime Minister, you're running the place, Bob Brown's not in the study at the Lodge all the time, telling you what's going on?
PM: No Bob Brown is not in the study at the Lodge all the time, I meet regularly with Senator Brown, I meet with the Independents in the House of Representatives, I meet with my Ministers, I meet with my backbench and importantly I meet with Australians out and about, pursuing their own lives with their own interests and I'll be meeting with a large number of them here in Queensland today and Clontarf State High School for a community cabinet meeting in the federal electorate of Petrie.
HOST: Good well that will be good for them and I think it'll be good for you as well. Wikileaks, what should we be worried about, you'd have had the briefing by now, what are they telling you we should be waiting for?
PM: Look I have been receiving briefings and we have a whole process to go through all of this information, I mean, millions of pieces of information and asses the implications for us. So we'll work through that and I absolutely condemn the placement of this information on the Wikileaks website, it's a grossly irresponsible thing to do, and an illegal thing to do.
HOST: It's going to be interesting to see where that ultimately goes and Queensland's claiming Mr Assange and his mother's a little bit terrified and disappointed and worried about him, Australia I guess will have some say when people catch up to him as to what happens to him I would hope we'd have some say.
PM: You can always understand a mother's love and anxiety about her son and I do understand that, but the wrong thing's been done here.
HOST: FIFA decision, football federation, let's talk about the back page stuff because it's top of your mind, posing in papers with kangaroos, plastic blow-up kangaroos, who talked you into that, do they tell you no silly hats and no blow-up animals?
PM: Well the kangaroo had been very naughty, it'd gone to FIFA, and stolen the World Cup, brought it here to Australia, and I had to help get it back.
HOST: Now but Ben Buckley, I heard him this morning on this radio station saying because Elle MacPherson's there, in brackets she has sex appeal, she'll win over the old blokes making the decision. How offended about that approach are you?
PM: We've got a great World Cup bid in, we are the nation that delivered the world's best Olympics, and we want to deliver the world's best World Cup, that's the essence of our bid. I reckon Elle MacPherson is a fantastic ambassador for Australia.
HOST: So she's got it so she should flaunt it?
PM: Well she's made a career as a model, a world beating career as a model, but she's a great Australian and we want to have faces of Australia there. Of course the Governor-General is there too.
HOST: Of course, two powerful women in different ways I suppose. The Government campaigns, I'll just deal with a very, very domestic issue-
PM: Sure-
HOST: And I appreciate your time, but Government campaigns, sponsored by State Governments, I think it's a national program though: If you drink and drive you're a bloody idiot; you're stupid if you don't wear a seatbelt. And today we've got police officers in this State who are receiving what's quoted as 'management guidance' because they've called people they've pulled over not wearing seatbelts stupid. Have we gone a little bit too precious?
PM: I must admit I'm not familiar with all of the details-
HOST: I haven't held anything back, that's essentially it-
PM: Well I'd have to say I think I can understand frustrated police officers who go to road crashes and see injury and death and hideous sights and then have to go and tell families that dad's not coming home anymore. I can understand them using a little bit of tough language to try and get the lesson through to people, we don't want them drinking and driving, put your seatbelt on, get home to your family. What a shocking time of year to lose someone in your family after a Christmas party-
HOST: Or whatever, anytime. You know it just strikes me though that you've got courts have recently ruled that somebody who calls a police officer a five letter word starting with p-r, and it's thrown out of court and although I could use it according to the judge because it's common language, that's the joke, you don't, you don't worry about those words, you roll with that. But a police officer says to somebody you're stupid for not wearing a seatbelt, and he gets hauled before the bosses and getting management guidance.
PM: I think we all know there's a lot in the way you say things too. You can actually use some rude words as a joke between friends and it's taken as a joke between friends, but I think not wearing your seatbelt, drinking and driving, it is stupid conduct and we're trying to get that message through to people so we might as well just use the plain language and the plain words - stupid is stupid and don't do it.
HOST: Well Prime Minister Gillard good to see you.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: Thank you for your time today. Can you tell Wayne Swan I'm ok, he can come on this program?
PM: I'm sure he knows that.
HOST: He should, I've been interviewing him for 25 years, what would he be afraid of today? Thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you very much.
HOST: Congratulations on being Prime Minister, do a good job, that's all we care about right now, ok?
PM: That's exactly what I care about too.
HOST: Alright Prime Minister Julia Gillard's been our guest this morning and we appreciate your time.


Moreton Bay Regional Council
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Queensland Premier Anna Bligh and Moreton Bay Regional Council Mayor Allan Sutherland today signed the Moreton Bay Rail Link Intergovernmental Agreement at North Lakes.
Prime Minister said the historic signing was a key milestone in the delivery of the Moreton Bay Rail Link - a crucial piece of nation building infrastructure for Queensland.
Put simply, it means it is all systems go for this much-needed public transport system in one of the fastest growing regions in Australia.
 Key benefits of the project include:
 * 	Reduced travel times; when completed, an express train from Kippa-Ring to Brisbane CBD will take approximately 45 minutes, compared to more than an hour by car in peak traffic conditions.
 * 	A reduction in congestion and carbon emissions; each full train will remove 600 cars and associated carbon emissions from arterial roads including the Bruce Highway.
 * 	Local jobs; the Moreton Bay Rail Link will create over 8,000 new jobs over the life of the project.
 * 	Greater use of public transport; at present, more than half the region's working population leaves the region for work daily with (83%) commuting by private vehicle.
The $1.15 billion project is jointly funded by the Australian Government ($742 million), the Queensland Government ($300 million) and Moreton Bay Regional Council ($105 million).
The Queensland Government will also provide the rail corridor for the project, which had been preserved for three decades and is valued at $120 million.
Premier Anna Bligh said there has already been significant progress in planning and community consultation for the project.
"The time is right for this project to become a reality and the agreement we have signed today means that construction will begin in 2012," she said.
This is an unprecedented commitment from three levels of government to build the 12.6 kilometres of dual-track rail line from Petrie to Kippa-Ring, including six new rail stations at Kallangur; Murrumba Downs; Mango Hill; Mango Hill (east); Rothwell; and Kippa-Ring.
Mayor Allan Sutherland said the signing of the Intergovernmental Agreement and the release of computer animation signalled once and for all the Moreton Bay Rail Link was on track for delivery.
"After more than 100 years of promises nobody should now be in any doubt that real work has started on the Moreton Bay Rail Link. It will be built and that's the reality," Mayor Sutherland said.
"This is an investment that will benefit the entire Moreton Bay region by relieving pressure on the Bruce Highway and other arterial roads while also driving new investment.
"The Moreton Bay Rail Link is part of council's strategy for managing the growth of the region and it's not only a win for commuters, but also local businesses that rely on the road network for goods, services and importantly their livelihoods."
Construction of the Moreton Bay Rail Link is scheduled to be completed by 2016.
Community consultation is already underway and continues with the third community open day held tomorrow, Saturday December 4, 2010, at the Redcliffe Library, Oxley Avenue, Redcliffe.
Further community open days are also planned for February 2011.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Sport Mark Arbib today congratulated Qatar on their successful bid to host the 2022 FIFA World Cup.
Australia put the best bid possible forward and everyone associated should be extremely proud of their efforts.
The Prime Minister said that while the nation was disappointed to not have been awarded the hosting rights to the 2022 competition, the country would continue to be an avid and active supporter of the competition.
Australians love football and will continue to chase the World Cup competition around the world in Brazil in 2014, Russia in 2018 and again in Qatar in 2022.
All bidding nations put forward top-quality bids - there is no question each of the contenders would have put on a hugely successful event.
The Prime Minister thanked supporters around the nation for their efforts in the development of Australia's bid.
Our 2022 World Cup bid received bi-partisan support from the Federal Parliament and from each State and Territory Government. Our bid would not have gone as far as it did without everyone's efforts.
The tireless work of Frank Lowy, Ben Buckley and the Football Federation of Australia must also be recognised.
Hours of effort were put into ensuring Australia put forward a technically excellent, credible and responsible bid against enormous competition. It is through these efforts that we came so close to the ultimate prize.
Frank Lowy and the team have taken Australian football to new heights on the international stage and we shall continue to build on the legacies created around this World Cup bid.
The bid itself has also put Australia the world stage as we proudly showcased our nation as an attractive tourist destination with welcoming people.
Australia will now turn its turn its attention to securing the right to host the 2015 Asian Cup. The host city will be announced in January.



PM: It's a great pleasure to be here today. I'm joined by the Premier of Queensland, Anna Bligh, and joined by the Mayor of the Moreton Bay Council, Alan Sutherland, and we are here to sign this document. Our signatures have been put on the page, a very important document, saying there for all the world, in gold letters, that this is the Intergovernmental Agreement for the Moreton Bay Rail Link. This is a fantastic partnership between the Federal Government, State Government, and local Council to bring a desperately needed rail line to a community that has campaigned for it for more than 100 years.
During the election campaign, with the Premier and with the Mayor, I announced that the Gillard Government, if elected, would contribute more than $700 million to this project. I'm pleased today to come here and honour my word, to honour my word by signing this agreement and with the signing of this agreement it is absolutely all systems go to build the Moreton Bay Rail Link.
It's going to make a great difference for people in this local community. Less travel time simply means more time at home with family and friends, and people desperately want to spend more time at home and less time in transit to work.
It's a greener way of people moving from this peninsula to where they need to go for work. Each full train is the equivalent of taking 600 cars off the road, and of course there are thousands of jobs created through this project - thousands of jobs in direct construction and then the jobs which will flow from people being able to move more easily through the new rail line.
I'd like to say to this community, particularly standing here with the Premier and with the local mayor, congratulations on all of the campaigning work you've done to bring this project to this stage I know it's been long fought for. And I'd like to specifically acknowledge our local member Yvette D'Ath, the Member for Petrie, who has been a strong and continuing advocate for this project.
And I'd also like to acknowledge the work of our Minister, Minister Anthony Albanese, who as our Minister for Transport and Infrastructure has been pivotal to the Federal Government making this commitment.
I'll turn now to the Premier for some comments.
PREMIER BLIGH: Thank you Prime Minister and welcome to Queensland, welcome particularly with such good news.
The Moreton Bay Rail Link has been a long time coming. I think it has been promised by almost every Premier of Queensland. I was determined that I would not promise this rail link unless I could deliver it. I am absolutely delighted today to be standing here with the Prime Minister of Australia and the Mayor of the Moreton Bay region to deliver to the people of this part of Brisbane a rail link that will transform their community.
The Moreton Bay Rail Link today becomes signed and sealed. The challenge now is to deliver it. Over the next 12 months we'll have our final geotechnical work undertaken, public consultation on the preferred alignment and construction is set to start in 2012.
This project is now full steam ahead. We've got the finances settled and we're on track to have this start construction in 2012. This rail link will make a huge difference to the congestion on our roads in the northern part of Brisbane and I'm absolutely delighted that we're making it happen.
Prime Minister you came here and made a promise. Today you're keeping that promise. We thank you. To the Council, I know that finding these sorts of funds is not easy at the local level of government. Between the three of us we can make this happen. If it'd been left to one level of government, it would have been a very tough call, but when we all put our shoulders to the wheel we can make something very important happen.
So thank you, thank you to my state Members who between them have always been champions for this project.
As I said it's been a long time coming. No-one can accuse anybody of rushing it, but it's now a reality and it's something that we will now get on and deliver.
I'll invite the Mayor.
MAYOR SUTHERLAND: Well, as I said before, I'd like to thank both the Prime Minister and the Premier. This is indeed an historic occasion for the area and I am absolutely delighted that this is a great example of what happens when people cooperate and work together.
The benefit is going to be for the members of this community, for every man, woman and child that using a car, a clean, greener way to get to work, to get to school, to get to university and that's what it's all about. It's about lifestyle.
This is a very fast growing area in Australia, one of the fastest growing areas in Australia, and unless we work together cooperatively, we won't have these great outcomes and I couldn't be more happy with the outcome here today. After over 100 years of promises, we are finally delivering the Moreton Bay Rail Link.
PM: Thank you very much. We're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, you'll be able to have a look at the agreement but we have worked long and hard to get the costings right on this. As the Premier has said, and as our local Mayor has indicated, we haven't rushed into this, we've got the details right and the details are in the agreement that we've signed. The funding is being made available, the finances are right and work will be underway in 2012.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that residents will still be sceptical until they see some actual work started, though?
PM: Well, I can understand that people like to see earthworks and things actually happening, but it is locked in. It's absolutely locked in.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
SUTHERLAND: Well, I think one of the reasons for the scepticism, as I can remember at least six or eight occasions where it's been promised from all tiers of government and so many elections. In fact, I can remember going back to the '70s when I was aware of it actually being promised politically, and the rail line, the corridor had been bought many, many years ago. 90 per cent of the corridor had been obtained in the '70s, but still no rail, and you can actually see the rail line from the air. The corridor's been available for many, many years. So when people Moreton Bay Rail Link and the rail to Redcliffe and the names it's been called over the years they go 'oh yeah', but this time it's a reality. That's the difference.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BLIGH: What this says about the project is that when all three levels of government work together you can actually accelerate something and I think that's a great outcome. One of the reasons why this project can now become a reality is that unlike 30 years ago we now have a much bigger population in the region that will sustain public transport. So, I agree with the Mayor - you can actually Google the rail corridor. It's been here for 30 years, but having that corridor means that now that we've got the funding and the population to sustain it, what can get on a move very quickly. We don't have to go through a long and expensive acquisition process.
So what the Commonwealth and Council funding means is that we can bring forward this project and to bring forward an accelerate projects can often transform the road network, so it's a good thing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you achieve high public office through good looks or intelligence?
PM: Look-
BLIGH: -It doesn't have to be an either/or.
PM: I presume you're referring to some comments made by the Leader of the Opposition in Queensland. Can I say, in relation to those comments, every day I go round this country I meed fantastic women who are doing amazing things using their intelligence and using their capacity for hard work.
JOURNALIST: Do you find the comment insulting?
PM: I think they're not right for the 21st century. I think they're a bit of a throwback in time.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We are opening GP clinics around the country and yesterday, of course, I was very delighted with the local Member here, Yvette D'Ath, to visit the GP Superclinic in Redcliffe, which is in construction, fives stories emerging from the ground, in construction and something that's going to make a big difference to health care, including health care training. As we open clinics we obviously phase in workforce. That's what's happening in the clinic you refer to in South Australia. Doctors will be available from that clinic, workforce is being phased in. The clinic's been opened with the first workers who are available and as areas in the clinic are finalised workforce will be phased in. It's the absolutely standard way of opening a new facility.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The Minister for Health has obviously worked with the local community to get plans. It's absolutely normal to phase in workforce - nothing unusual, nothing odd, absolutely normal to phase in workforce.
You look here in Queensland, where people I believe are embracing GP Superclinics, you look at the delight in Redcliffe with the new Superclinic, which will not only enable people to get health care services, importantly it will enable training for health care professionals right here, with the ability of people who have been trained here to then stay to help their profession in the region.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I don't accept any of that critique. It's not justified by the facts and we're very happy to give you all of the full facts of the program, and can I suggest that you may want to talk to the people involved here in Redcliffe about how absolutely delighted they are with this transformative project for local health care - a good example of how GP Superclinics are making a difference right around the country.
The GP Superclinic schedule has been published by the Government. The Minister for Health has obviously made a number of announcements about where GP Superclinics are to be located. We've got Superclinics that are open and providing services. We've got Superclinics that are in construction and nearing completion, like the very transformative one I saw in Redcliffe yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Will you release the banking report over the weekend?
PM: The Treasurer, Wayne Swan, has made it clear that he will release his plans on banking and increased competition in the banking sector in December. It'll be released this month, as verified by the Treasurer.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BLIGH: I don't have any current intentions to do so. My Minister's have big responsibilities and I want them to get on with the job of meeting those responsibilities in their portfolios.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about how you made it to the top in public life? Is it all good looks or intelligence?
BLIGH: I think with the comments John-Paul Langbroek has managed to singlehandedly insult every woman in Australia. My experience is that Australian women and Australian men get success in life through hard work, intelligence and perseverance, and I think these sorts of comments frankly belong in the last century.
JOURNALIST: Do you reckon he might have got his job by his good looks?
BLIGH: You might (inaudible), but I couldn't possibly comment.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BLIGH: Look I just don't understand why people are still talking about these sorts of things in the 21st century. Women have to work very hard, just like men, to succeed in any field - whether it's at home, whether it's at work, whether it's in sport, whether it's in something you chose to do after hours. It's not easy to get to the top in any field and for Australian women, just like Australian men, hard work and intelligence is always what takes you there, and these sorts of comments frankly belong in the last century.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, was Paul Hogan the right person to represent Australia in the World Cup bid, considering (inaudible)
PM: The decisions about who appeared in the promotional campaign were made by FIFA and what FIFA wanted to do was bring iconic Australian personalities and iconic Australian scenes woven together with a story with some humour to promote Australia to FIFA and to promote Australia on the world stage.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) $45 million is a lot of money for one vote?
PM: I think everybody is disappointed and those that worked so hard on what was a great bid are very disappointed, and I'd certainly say I believe Frank Lowy and his team have done a remarkable job.
A great bid was put together to showcase Australia to the world. I believe the bid shows that, just like the held the world's best Olympics, we would have held a great World Cup here in this country.
Getting these international sporting events to your nation is tough. People would remember that we have two unsuccessful bids before we attracted the Olympics to Sydney and what a remarkable and wonderful Olympics it was.
So, we've been able to showcase Australia to the world. I'm disappointed, I think Australians are disappointed and the key members of our bid team including great Australians that have worked long and hard, like Frank Lowy, are understandably very disappointed.
JOURNALIST: You're not embarrassed by the result, though, for Australia?
PM: We've shown Australia to the world and that's very important. People will analyse the FIFA voting decision. We're not the only nation disappointed today. Obviously the home of football, the United Kingdom, is also disappointed with the result, but let's remember: great world stage on which to showcase Australia, and we've done that. We had a great bid and it is difficult to get these big, international, sporting events. We tried twice before we successfully got the Olympics in Sydney.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'm sure this community honours the Bee Gees in many, many different ways. Whether they want a statue I'll leave to local council to work through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's Australia (inaudible) The torture video of Papuans, what does Australia -
PM: -I've had cause to comment on this matter before and when I met with the President of Indonesia he was very, very open about saying to me, and he later said to the waiting media who interviewed the two of us, that he personally wanted to see the appropriate action taken about this matter. He wants to see any wrongdoers brought to justice and is very focussed on that.
JOURNALIST: What will Australia do?
PM: These are matters for the Indonesian government. It happened in Indonesia.
JOURNALIST: Why is Australia still (inaudible)
PM: We, as a nation, have human rights values and we raise those human rights values on the world stage, that's appropriate. The President of Indonesia has made absolutely clear that he wants to see any wrongdoers brought to justice in this matter.
JOURNALIST: Premier, health bureaucrats have gotten into (inaudible), what was your reaction to that (inaudible)
BLIGH: Queensland reports incidents in our hospitals in an open and transparent way. This is the report of critical incidents in our hospitals that was published in relation to '07/'08. We publish it every two years and the next one will be due in the early part of 2011.
This material is publicly available. We report openly and transparently. In fact, we're required to under national requirements.
What we will not do - and I give the patients of Queensland this absolute reassurance - what we will not do is provide through right to information material the names of patients to journalist and nor will we provide the names of staff to journalists. I can understand why journalists want this material, but I give the patients of our health system an absolute guarantee that their confidentiality and privacy will be protected.
What we will do is provide this information as we have done consistently, I think for almost a decade. Every critical incident that happens in our hospital gets recorded and then published in documents such as this, in a form that is part of a national agreement so that we can make comparisons between Queensland and other states.
JOURNALIST: Why would they go to that length to hide information? I mean, details (inaudible)
BLIGH: I understand that the material that was not provided to the journalist in question was material that, while the name had been blacked out, still had sufficient identifying information. We will protect the identity and confidentiality of the patients of Queensland Health, as well as the staff who work in our system where appropriate.
What we will also do is continue to report in considerable detail, because we understand you only improve the system by ensuring you examine carefully those mistakes that happen in the system. That's what this report does. This report will be published every two years.
What I will not do - and I give and absolute commitment to patients in our heath system - is provide identifying information to journalists. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Attorney-General Robert McClelland today announced the Federal Government would provide financial assistance to NSW communities affected by flooding in the state's west.
The Prime Minister said the Commonwealth assistance was designed to help out our farmers and their families in times of need.
While high rain fall on Australia's East Coast in recent weeks is good news for our dams, for many crop farmers excessive rain is leading to delays in harvesting and affecting the quality of production.
The Gillard Labor Government is focused on supporting these flood affected families, particularly as we go into the Christmas period.
Commonwealth assistance is being provided to NSW through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) and will apply to the natural disaster declared areas covered by Mid-Western Regional Council and Weddin, Wellington, Warrumbungle, Cootamundra, Coonamble, Harden and Young Shires.
Under the NDRRA, financial support will also be provided by the Commonwealth to NSW for the restoration of essential public infrastructure, such as roads, bridges and schools, where expenditure exceeds certain thresholds and requirements.
In addition to funding the cost of counter disaster operations (on a 50/50 basis with NSW), funding will also include disaster relief and recovery assistance including:
 * 	personal hardship and distress grants to low-income earners whose principal residence has been damaged;
 * 	concessional loans of up to $130,000 for small businesses and primary producers;
 * 	concessional loans of up to $25,000 for voluntary, non-profit organisations; and
 * 	road and rail freight subsidies of up to $15,000 to assist primary producers for the carriage of livestock and fodder.
Attorney General Robert McClelland said the Commonwealth Government would continue to monitor the situation in the disaster declared areas and work with the State Governments to provide assistance to communities affected by the floods.
We strongly urge anyone in these declared areas to contact the flood hotline to see if they are eligible for assistance.
We will also continue to monitor the situation in other flood affected areas along the east coast of Australia.
For information about assistance, phone the NSW Emergency Management Hotline on 1800 227 228.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that Australia will provide urgent assistance to help combat the bushfires in Carmel forest in Northern Israel.
The three-day old bushfires have already ravaged about 30,000 acres and claimed over 40 lives.
The Prime Minister said Australia would move quickly to make both expertise and resources available following a formal request from the Israeli Government yesterday.
The Prime Minister also spoke directly to Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu to confirm Australia's assistance and convey her condolences, and those of the people of Australia, to the people of Israel at this difficult time.
A team of air base managers and air attack controllers with expertise in controlling or directing fire-fighting aircraft are being deployed to Israel within the next 24 hours. This team includes the Chief Fire Officer for the Victorian Department of Sustainability and the Environment, Mr Ewan Waller.
Arrangements are also underway to transport chemical fire retardant if this is required by Israel. The provision of other resources is also being investigated.
The Australian Defence Force is assisting with logistics.



HOST: I'm joined now by the Prime Minister from Canberra.
Julia Gillard, starting with the WikiLeaks exposure of Kevin Rudd's comments on China to Hillary Clinton when he was Prime Minister, in particular his advice that the US should be prepared to use force against China if all else failed, what is the risk that those comments will harm Australia's relationship with China?
PM: Kerry, I don't want to disappoint you in what will be my last interview on your show, but I am not going to comment on the details of leaked cables that are making an appearance on WikiLeaks.
What, of course, I will talk about is our relationship with China, and we have a strong relationship with China, a constructive relationship, but also a frank relationship where we can say things that are in our national interest, that express our views and opinions. Expressing our views and opinions, being frank, doesn't hurt the relationship. You can have a frank discussion. We have in the past and we will in the future in the context of a strong and constructive relationship.
HOST: Well, of course I wasn't going to ask you to confirm what was in the cable, but we can all take our own judgments on that and all those other cables that have been released and the various political leaders' reactions to them, but just on the reports and what has been exposed, it could hardly be helpful to the relationship for Chinese leaders to be reading that an alleged friend and important trading partner in the region was privately telling the world's most powerful nation to be ready to use force against them if necessary. Now, how do you know that the Chinese won't privately take offence at that, even if they don't come to you and say, 'You've hurt us'?
PM: Kerry, I'm not going to assume accuracy in the cables. We're not commenting on the contents of these cables.
HOST: No, no, I understand that.
PM: What I can say about our relationship with China is I think everybody knew that WikiLeaks was going to put a lot of information out there. Everybody's been expecting that. I don't anticipate these reports will make any difference at all in our relationship with China.
HOST: But, nonetheless, there are realities and the term 'brutal realism' was used about Kevin Rudd's approach to Australia's global diplomacy. Every nation has its national security, every nation has its armed forces, every nation has its security strategies. You must be covering these issues in your discussions with various countries in the region, but particularly with the United States. What is the circumstance in which force would be justified against China?
PM: Kerry, our outlook on China is something that's been in the public domain. We've had an opportunity to talk about it at length recently, partly because I've been at important meetings like the East Asia Summit; partly because when Hillary Clinton and Secretary of Defense Gates were here in Australia for the annual Australia-US Strategic Dialogue, our AUSMIN dialogue. Inevitably, the rise of China was something under discussion.
Our settings here, Kerry, are that a prosperous China engaged in regional institutions like the East Asia Summit is an important force for good. We want to see a prosperous China. We want to see China engaged in a rules-based system. We want to see them engaged in regional architecture like the East Asia Summit.
We also believe the US plays a stabilising force in our region, which is why we were so pleased to see the US step forward and join the East Asia Summit. We believe there will always be differences between countries. We'll have differences with China and they are resolved through diplomacy and dialogue.
Of course, as a country, we make proper provision for our national interest, including our defence interest. You'd expect a national government to do that and we do.
HOST: And when you talk about encouraging China to be a part of regional and global forums that it hasn't previously been a part of, is that a part of a process of ultimately containing China?
PM: The rise of China, of course, has got everybody thinking, 'How does this new giant fit in with regional stability, with global stability, with diplomatic architecture, with security dialogue, with trade dialogue?' Of course, everybody has been talking about the rise of China, but we are very clear on how we are going to work bilaterally through our strong, constructive, frank relationship with China, through regional-
HOST: -But does the word containment feature in your vocabulary?
PM: Engagement is the word in my vocabulary, Kerry - engagement in regional forums like the East Asia Summit where we do have now around the table China, the US, countries of our region, engaged in a dialogue across the economic, the strategic, security matters. These are good things and that's what we want to see as China increases to be a force in our region and in our world.
HOST: Can we talk now about what could be a make-or-break year for you next year, in the context of what has been a horror year for Labor in 2010.
Firstly, do you agree with me that there is a real hunger in the community for inspired leadership and a sense that they're not getting it - yet - from you?
PM: I think our community wants to see the vision of the future. They want leaders to put that before them and they want to know that you're working towards it, and Kerry, as Prime Minister, I am doing that and I'll continue to do it.
I think people have underestimated the sheer size and scope of our reform agenda. We are drawing on our heritage as a Labor Party, the threads through Hawke and Keating, our reformist tradition. Kerry, some of the things that they did were nation-changing, but they could only be done once. You can only float the dollar once, for example.
We are now getting on with the reform work that is necessary for parts of our economy which are important to people's day-to-day lives, but haven't had transformative reforms for, you know, over a generation. I'm talking about health, I'm talking about education, about water, and of course, the newer challenge of pricing carbon. We're bringing our market-based tools to this change.
HOST: But we have been hearing that framework of policy challenge since before you came to power in 2007. When you talked about people being surprised or not fully understanding the scope of the reform agenda, do you think you yourselves did not understand what you were taking on, coming in in 2007, that perhaps you took on too much with what you were promising?
PM: We came to government in 2007 with a wave of enthusiasm for change. A long-term government was being replaced. I said on election night, sitting with you, Kerry, that I thought people still had a sense of connection and respect for Prime Minister Howard, but they did want change and our government set about delivering change.
I think we did a lot of things very quickly and there were times that we didn't explain the full importance of our reforms to the Australian people, and then on top of what was a very broad reform agenda, we had to handle the global financial crisis, and, Kerry, I'm proud of our response to the global financial crisis. I'm proud of how the country responded. Because we responded that way, since 2007 to now, we can talk about 650,000 jobs being created - Australians in work, with pay packets, with dignity, with self-worth as a result of those policies.
But we do keep- I do need to keep explaining the vision of the future and I'm going to do that now and in 2011.
HOST: But when you talk about the vision for the future, so much of your agenda for next year - and I've read very carefully through your various outlines of that, and there have been a few - and so much of that agenda seems to be coming from a defensive base: digging your way out of the mess that the new mining tax became; trying to recover credibility on climate change; trying to take the heat out of the asylum seeker issue. Even on the economy, everything's framed by your overall imperative to climb out of deficit. This is not an inspirational agenda on the face of it, is it?
PM: Kerry, I'm going to disagree with you. I think we do have an agenda to inspire.
I was inspired to become involved in public life in politics because I had a vision, a care, a concern about the circumstances of every child getting a great education. That's part of what we're doing in 2011, taking more steps to making that dream come true - every child a great education.
And then when I look at health - nothing more important to Australians when they or their families are under pressure than knowing that they can see a doctor, they can see a nurse, they can get a hospital bed. Well, we will be making our health reforms real next year and we'll be transforming our health system for the decades to come.
HOST: But let me just stop you right there. Health reform - so people will be able to do these things next year. This reform agenda is going to kick in next year. So by the end of next year, you will be able, or the public will be able, to look at very real outcomes on your health reform agenda and I'm not just talking about pockets here and there. You're saying that by the end of year '11, we will be able to see broadly across this country evidence of where your health reform policies have bitten?
PM: Change is happening now, Kerry, and people will see more change in 2011.
To take just some examples of the change, we've driven thousands more elective surgeries through our hospitals, and just last week I was in Queensland announcing some good news with some more money for more elective surgery. Now, for Australians that have been on waiting lists, this is incredibly important, part of our health reforms. More doctors, more nurses - part of our health reforms. Local hospital networks, you'll be able to see their boundaries - part of our health reforms. Medicare locals, bringing together the important primary care services that help people when they first become unwell or to manage a chronic condition in the community - people will be able to see those taking shape.
Kerry, health reform and its delivery is going to take some time. Making a new doctor or a nurse takes some time-
HOST: -Yes, but this is the point-
PM: -I'm not going to resile from that-
HOST: -But that's point I'm making-
PM: -But delivering, piece by piece, transformative change is necessary for our health system. Kerry, we come off-
HOST: -Sorry, that is the point I'm making: that in so many of these things, these are very slow building blocks. As I say, people are hungry to get a sense, a real sense, of your leadership, but this agenda is still Kevin Rudd's agenda, isn't it? I look at your agenda outline for 2011 and I still see Kevin Rudd's agenda. When can we begin to define the substance of Julia Gillard's leadership; to see the stamp that says Gillard on this Government?
PM: Kerry, on the day I became Prime Minister, I said to the Australian people I'd believed all of my life in some basic principles that had guided me. I said I believed in the benefits and dignity of work, and I have signalled that in 2011, you will see changes. What we will call, in the language of politicians and policy-makers, participation changes, but changes to make sure that more Australians enjoy the benefits and dignity of work - having a job.
I was driven into public life by my belief in the transformative power of education. It changed my life. I wouldn't be sitting here being interviewed by Kerry O'Brien if it wasn't for the transformative power of education. We will continue to drive that agenda - something that quintessentially, Kerry, I've stood for every day I've been in Parliament. And I believe-
HOST: -But I've heard you, I have heard you outline these things many times, many times-
PM: -Well, you've asked me for my agenda, Kerry, and I'm outlining it for you, and of course-
HOST: -Well, you're outlining a vision that you first outlined quite a long time ago, but the bottom line is people, it seems, are still struggling to be convinced about your leadership. That jury would still seem to be out, and I would think you'd agree with that, but you've had plenty of time to reflect on what went wrong for Labor in the last term, particularly the raising of expectations, that probably you as a Government, Kevin Rudd as leader, were never going to be able to meet in the time, certainly not within one term, with or without a global crisis. What part do you think that the Government's media strategy played in what became a nightmare third year - and you've touched on this briefly in the past. I'm just interested to hear about what you regard as the challenges of a new media environment for Government today?
PM: Well, Kerry, I'm happy to talk about that and in part I think our last exchange may exhibit a little bit of it to people. I was talking to you about the things I first said on the day that I became Prime Minister, about the dignity of work, about education, about my confidence in the future of this country and our ability to deal with so many difficult issues, like pricing carbon, like reforming health, like rolling out the infrastructure of the future, the National Broadband Network.
Now, I talked about my passion, my vision about those things in June. Here we sit in December, and Kerry, you don't make that kind of change in six months. You can start it, you can deliver bits of it, but you need to methodically keep delivering. And that's what I will be doing in 2011. And in the media-
HOST: -But in that context- yeah, go on.
PM: In the media environment, we constantly are under pressure to say, well, what's new? What's different? As if the journey in health reform or the journey in pricing carbon or the journey in making sure every child gets a great education or more Australians have the benefits and dignity of work, that that journey is somehow over the first day that a reporter types up what I've said in the first press conference. Of course, real reform isn't made that way.
HOST: But isn't it also true that the Rudd Government set itself up for this, because almost daily it was like there had to be a new headline, there had to be a new policy announcement? Even if there wasn't a new policy to announce, there was old policy dressed up as new. It was as if there had to be a regular feeding of the media beast, because if you didn't somebody else would. Now, I know that's something that you've become concerned about. I just wonder how you are going to change this Government's approach to its relations with media while still hopefully being open?
PM: I'll certainly be open, Kerry, and I accept the responsibility as Prime Minister to say to the nation where I want us to head to, what the vision is, and how we're going to do it. That's my responsibility.
The new media environment, I think, puts some new challenges in my way in acquitting that responsibility, but ultimately I'm going to keep persisting, and, Kerry, what it is about is it's about saying, as I did to the press gallery when they gathered with me for a Christmas drink at the end of the parliamentary year, you can really think about this like Australians think about a Christmas stocking: there are a few things that people will give each other this Christmas that are meant to last and have meaning for a lifetime - that first watch you give your child, the first locket you give your daughter, that you want them to have for 20 or 30 years - and there are the things that are stocking fillers that you know will be broken in 24 hours' time, or lost, or fully consumed in 24 hours' time.
In the public policy area, I'm more interested in the things like that watch or that locket that will still have meaning in 20 years than the things that are forgotten about tomorrow. That is going to require me to keep having that conversation with journalists, with our Australian media, but I'm going to keep doing that. and Kerry, if, in 12 months' time, whoever is sitting in your chair says to me, 'don't tell me you're still going on about education; don't tell me you're still going on about everybody having the benefits and dignity of work; don't tell me you're still going on about tackling climate change,' I'll count that as a success, because that means that for 12 months-
HOST: -I think they'll probably be asking asking you about the realities.
PM: -for 12 months we would've been talking about those deep reforms.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thanks very much for talking with us. Thank you.
PM: And if I'm allowed a moment of nostalgia, Kerry - fantastic to be able to be here for your last week and I'm sad to see you go. I'm sure there will be moments that I won't miss a tough Kerry O'Brien interview, but you've made a fantastic contribution to the Australian national debate and our sense of ourselves.
HOST: Thank you for that. Goodnight.
PM: Thank you.



The Gillard Labor Government has today signed a loan agreement drawn up with the NSW Government to ensure asbestos victims and their families continue to receive payments through the Asbestos Injuries Compensation Fund (AICF).
The Prime Minister said the Gillard Labor Government would provide up to $160 million to the NSW Government to give victims of asbestos-related diseases and their families the peace of mind and financial security they deserve.
Under the agreement, the NSW Government will contribute an equal amount in funding to the AICF each time they draw down from the Federal loan.
The AICF was established following a 2005 agreement between the NSW Government and James Hardie Industries N.V to compensate people who have made legitimate asbestos-related claims against the company in Australia.
Without the loan agreement, the AICF had advised that asbestos compensation claims would have been rationed and paid in instalments, with some victims facing the prospect of not living long enough to receive their full compensation.
Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasurer David Bradbury said the loan agreement did not excuse James Hardie from its legal or moral obligation to contribute to the AICF.
The Federal Government expects the company to continue to fund the AICF as its financial position improves.
The funds advanced to the NSW Government are to be repaid to the Commonwealth by 30 June 2020. Interest will be payable on the loan at a rate equivalent to the Commonwealth's cost of borrowing.
The loan agreement follows through on the commitments made by the Commonwealth and NSW Governments in the Heads of Agreement signed last year.



The Gillard Labor Government has today signed a loan agreement drawn up with the NSW Government to ensure asbestos victims and their families continue to receive payments through the Asbestos Injuries Compensation Fund (AICF).
The Prime Minister said the Gillard Labor Government would provide up to $160 million to the NSW Government to give victims of asbestos-related diseases and their families the peace of mind and financial security they deserve.
Under the agreement, the NSW Government will contribute an equal amount in funding to the AICF each time they draw down from the Federal loan.
The AICF was established following a 2005 agreement between the NSW Government and James Hardie Industries N.V to compensate people who have made legitimate asbestos-related claims against the company in Australia.
Without the loan agreement, the AICF had advised that asbestos compensation claims would have been rationed and paid in instalments, with some victims facing the prospect of not living long enough to receive their full compensation.
Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasurer David Bradbury said the loan agreement did not excuse James Hardie from its legal or moral obligation to contribute to the AICF.
The Federal Government expects the company to continue to fund the AICF as its financial position improves.
The funds advanced to the NSW Government are to be repaid to the Commonwealth by 30 June 2020. Interest will be payable on the loan at a rate equivalent to the Commonwealth's cost of borrowing.
The loan agreement follows through on the commitments made by the Commonwealth and NSW Governments in the Heads of Agreement signed last year.


Adelaide
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins us on 891 Mornings. Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Prime Minister, you're coming back to Adelaide for Christmas. You'll be working, and are you staying with mum and dad, and have they still got your room as you left it?
PM: I am staying with mum and dad, and I will be in Adelaide for Christmas. My parents no longer live in our family home, so it's not my bedroom from when I was a teenager with, you know, David Essex posters on the wall, but they have got a spare bedroom for me, which is very nice.
HOST: So, you have a David Essex bedspread, or is it My Little Pony? No, you would have been, you were a bit older when you left home.
PM: I've moved on a bit now. I don't anticipate any of that being there this Christmas.
HOST: No, lovely stuff. Now, more opinion polls out on your Government. Do you think you'll ever lead a popular Government?
PM: I'll lead a determined Government, and I'm determined to deliver the big-picture reforms this nation needs. It's going to take time and I'll have to keep explaining to the Australian people what my vision for the country is, but 2011 will be a year in which people see that vision taking shape.
HOST: Are we a bit slow, are we? You have to keep telling us.
PM: I think complex public policy requires continuing explanation-
HOST: -Or they don't like your Government.
PM: Oh, look, it just, when you're doing big-picture things, it requires continuing explanation. That's a good thing, because it means that the nation is talking about the changes it needs to be an even better country in the future.
So, next year will be definitely working on strengthening our economy. That's, of course, about bringing the Budget to surplus, but it's also about continuing to create jobs and get more people into those jobs.
We'll be working on climate change, pricing carbon, water reform, and we'll be continuing to deliver our health and education reforms, because to be a genuinely fair society people have to have high-quality services and every child, in particular, has to have a great-quality education, and we'll certainly be out there governing for all of the country.
Adelaide is different from other parts of the country. Every community has got its own story, it's own issues, and I'll want, as a Government, for us to be working with each community on its vision of the future.
HOST: Have you worked out why so many people stopped voting Labor this year - State and Federal?
PM: Commentators will spend millions of words and lots of newsprint on all of this. I'm not looking back to the election that was. I'm looking forward to the changes that I want to deliver to realise the vision-
HOST: -It's not an unreasonable thing for you to do. I don't think anybody would criticise a Prime Minister who stopped, paused and thought, 'well, why have so many people stopped voting Labor?', and I expect, Prime Minister, that you have actually done that in your quieter moments, and I just wonder whether you'd like to share your conclusions with the people who did and did not vote for you.
PM: I don't spend my time thinking about the past. I spend my time thinking about the future. When I look at the election that was, we obviously had an election in difficult circumstances. We needed to be there, I needed to be there, talking to the Australian people about our vision for the future. We were met with what was a protest vote campaign from the Leader of the Opposition.
I think as we turn the page and move into 2011, people are looking to me to visibly deliver on that vision for the future, and I will be doing that, and I think they're looking at the Leader of the Opposition and they're saying 'hmmm, is there more here than a couple of slogans about stop this, end that, prevent the other?', which is where the Opposition leader finds himself, with a set of negative slogans, as we move out of 2010.
So, 2011- my eyes on the future, delivering change that matters for Australian families, and matters to them every day: jobs, health, education, tackling climate change.
HOST: That list you've just run off, does that come out of focus group research? In other words, do people sit down with you and say, Prime Minister, people want you to say that Tony Abbott talks in two-word slogans now? I think it was three words, and that you want to move forward, and these are the things that matter? Does that-
PM: -Absolutely not, no. Everything I've just said to you I've said because I believe in it, and I'm the architect of the analyses of Tony Abbott, of the three-word slogans. That's what I think. It's what I've said. I've said it in Parliament, and I believe people are looking at Mr Abbott and thinking to themselves 'gee, that seems right. He does wander around with three-word, negative slogan.'
HOST: Prime Minister, what are you going to do to stop the cost of living bruising Australians in 2011?
PM: I understand cost-of-living pressures are weighing heavily on people's shoulders, so we'll be there, working with Australian families to try and lift some of the burden. To take one really practical example, people will go into the Christmas period, they'll come out of Christmas, spend some time, and then of course it'll be time to get the kids back to school. When it comes around to getting the kids back to school, we'll be there with our Education Tax Rebate, saying to Australian families 'we understand that getting the kids back to school costs a bit. Keep your receipts and you'll be able to claim that for a tax rebate', and we will be extending that in the future so that it covers school uniforms.
Of course, for people with younger kids, they worry about the cost of childcare, and where there is a partner saying 'we will pick up 50 per cent of the out-of-pocket costs of childcare', and we've got some reforms to come during this period of Government, like helping families who have got teenagers with the cost of teenagers. We've got a funny thing in our family tax benefit system now where the amount you get drops off when your child turns 16, whereas I think we all know 16-year-olds don't cost less than younger kids. If anything, they probably cost a bit more, so we're changing the family tax benefit system to make a difference to that.
HOST: Are you going to get people like Ruth Webber off taxpayers' backs? If you're talking about helping families and you've got a former Labor Senator who's been forced to repay almost $20,000 in using gold pass flights - she chalked up, according to The Advertiser, she lost her seat in 2008, chalked up 147 individual flights costing $116,662 under the Gold Pass scheme for retired federal MPs. All of them were business class, by the looks of it, and there's no purpose test for free flights, according to the Department. Are you going to get her off people's backs?
PM: I think what that story shows is that there are clear rules for parliamentarians and if you breach them then you've got to give the money back, and that's appropriate.
HOST: What, that level of travel is appropriate for a retired Senator?
PM: Well, she's, as I understand the story here, and obviously I haven't had time this morning to get comprehensively briefed about this matter, but as I understand the issue, we're talking about a former parliamentarian who seems to have made claims outside the rules and she will be required to pay that back.
HOST: She'll have to repay, according to Phillip Hudson's piece, $18,855, but the total bill was $116,662. She's still able to rack up, legitimately, some $100,000 worth of travel, and you're talking about getting people off, you know, getting the burden off people's backs. I'm asking you whether that sort of gold pass travel is a fair cop, and what people who are looking to you to get costs of their backs would be thinking about that?
PM: Well, first and foremost I'd need to study the individual details of this matter, so I don't want to be seen to be commenting on an individual case I don't have the full details of, but in the broad, can I say this to you - for people who are in parliament, yes, there are costs associated with having a democracy and having parliamentarians. I understand people-
HOST: -This is after she lost her seat, Prime Minister.
PM: Well, I'm coming to that in just one second, and I understand that people will debate those costs from time to time. For me, the cost of parliamentarians, the best way for dealing with all of that, is to have an independent tribunal that deals with it, clear rules, and if someone breaches the rules then, obviously, they have to pay the money back.
For former parliamentarians, I'm the successor to Barry Jones in my seat of Lalor - probably one of the most-loved parliamentarians this country has ever had - and I know for a fact that people still ask Barry Jones to come and speak at their Rotary Club, they still ask him to go to event associated with science, as enthusing young Australians with a passion for science.
HOST: So you're defending the Gold Pass?
PM: I'm giving you an individual example where I think people would say if someone like Barry Jones is invited, perhaps, to go to a science awards function for young people in Sydney, that people would say 'yep, I get why that would happen. I get why someone would want to have Barry Jones there', so my point to you is simply I think it's a little bit more complicated than just going 'Members of Parliament, former Members of Parliament, gee, you know, any expenditure to get them to a different part of the country is a waste of money.'
HOST: I didn't say that.
PM: I think it's a bit more complicated than that.
HOST: I didn't say that.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard here on 891 Mornings with Matthew and David.
I was just asking whether a former Labor senator who spends $116,000 on 147 individual flights, whether you regard that as just off the planet.
PM: Well, look, I'll look at that individual example. I'm not going to-
HOST: -It doesn't shock you?
PM: Look, I'm going to look at the individual example. Taxpayers' money needs to be spent wisely. Obviously, I believe in that. We're a Government that watches the dollars and cents. We're engaged in big work to consolidate the Budget, to bring it to surplus in 2012-13. We're very focussed on doing that, on making sure that we make prudent decisions with taxpayers' money, but it's not prudent of me to make statements about an individual example without looking at it in full.
HOST: Now, we've got a raft of energy measures, we've got Premier Mike Rann talking now about a bigger shift to renewable energy here, and his Energy Minister concedes that that means more expensive power here. We've got a similar thing happening in New South Wales with their solar tariff rebate, which has pushed up the average electricity bill, according to some reports, by $150. Every State Government is moving on these issues, and the result has been a big increase in power costs for Australians. Are you going to grab this by the scruff of the neck and should there be a coordinated approach, rather than having every State Government running off, trying to get pats on the back in Cancun?
PM: Well, I don't think that's necessarily what State Governments are doing. I think what politicians are grappling with, what I'm grappling with as Prime Minister, what individual state Premiers are with, is how we make the transformation in our economy to a low-pollution economy for the future.
Now, in terms of grabbing issues by the scruff of the neck, to use your terminology - I like that, a grab by the scruff of the neck - we are doing that through grabbing the issue of carbon pricing by the scruff of the neck. This is a complicated question, a difficult question which we are working through, and we're being very honest with people. There are pressures on electricity prices now. That's absolutely right. Overwhelmingly, those pressures are arising because of a decade of underinvestment in new electricity generation, and part of what's driving that underinvestment is a lack of certainty about carbon pricing.
HOST: So, is that a good time to add on a carbon price?
PM: Well, we have to, as a country, grapple with this issue, and I don't want the next 10 years to be another 10 years of underinvestment in electricity generation causing pressure on prices and the real risk of black outs because we haven't grappled with this issue.
HOST: Are you able to guarantee that the most vulnerable people won't be out of pocket as a result of a carbon price?
PM: We are going to work through on carbon pricing. I understand that for Australians, particularly Australians on fixed incomes, as we work our way through this issue, we will be showing concern for their position. I'm not going to get into a rule in, rule out game now about what a carbon price will look like, but from me to you and to you listeners, of course I think every day about what we can do to assist Australians who are bearing the burden of cost of living pressures, and particularly to assist Australians who are doing it the most tough.
That's why, for example, the Government delivered an historically large increase in pensions, because we think about those things every day.
HOST: What was your average power bill in the last year at Altona, at your home in Melbourne. I know you wouldn't be there a lot, but what would it be?
PM: Oh, look, I wasn't there a lot, but look, it's always in the hundreds of dollars, even for someone who's not there very much.
HOST: Hundred, three hundred for a quarter?
PM: Oh, look, routinely in the range of $350-$380, that kind of amount a quarter for someone who's not there very much.
HOST: And how much has that gone up, do you know? Is that a 50 per cent increase on the year before, or 25 per cent?
PM: Oh, look, I'm not able to give you a percentage increase, and look, I am not the best test case because in one quarter, just the way I've lived over the last 12 months, one quarter, say, over the summer period I can be there a lot. Another quarter, when Parliament is sitting, I can be there very little, so I'm not a good person to say 'let's compare this quarter with that quarter', because the amount I've been in the home has changed. I'm not in the same position as a family who's lived here every day and is able to say, well, our power usage each and every day has been basically the same but the cost that we're paying for it is more now, just because of the lifestyle of being Deputy Prime Minister and Prime Minister, but I don't-
HOST: -Well, would you know what they've gone up for your neighbours, or Victorians in general?
PM: Look, let's just be really obvious commonsense about this. I don't need to look at my own power bills to know that around the country, depending on which state you live, people have experienced big increases, some of those increases in the order of 30-40 per cent. I don't have to sit at home looking at my own power bills to know that.
I know that because people talk to me about it. I know it because obviously it has been extensively reported in the newspapers, people expressing concerns about how power prices are putting pressure on them, so if you're saying to me 'do I understand that Australian families are feeling this pressure from power bills?', yes, I do, and I don't have to sit in Altona puzzling over my own to work that out.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you very much for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: We appreciate it.
HOST: I was thinking we could always go for some solar Christmas lights. That'll help.
PM: Well, just on renewables, we have set a renewables target for 2020 and we are making record investments into solar and renewable technologies. We're a nation with abundant sunshine, with the opportunity to use other renewable sources of energy, and it's going to be a big part of our future, including for Christmas lights.
HOST: I was suggesting a Christmas present for mum and dad or Tim or something, that's all.
PM: Alright, thank you for the suggestion.
HOST: You can get some quite nice ones. Prime Minister, thank you for talking to 891 Mornings.
PM: Thank you.



HOST: Let's talk to the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard. Julia, Merry Christmas.
PM: To you, too, Leon.
HOST: The reason I wanted to chat with you today is I have a concern that our government in South Australia has done something which I think the pensioners feel most aggrieved about - and they should - and that is that when Kevin Rudd gave the $30 to the pensioners there was an understanding by all states, including South Australia, that that money would be quarantined, but unfortunately in the last state budget this government have decided not to do that and include it in income assessment and this will mean that our pensioners are going to be markedly worse off than other pensioners around Australia, and I'm wondering what you think about that?
PM: Leon, I can say to you that I am not at all happy with this decision by the South Australian Government and believe that they should reconsider it.
When the Federal Government gave this historically large increase for pensioners, we actually went to state governments, including the South Australian Government, and said we want this to be for pensioners. We want them to get the benefit of it and so we don't want public housing rents moving because the pension's gone up, and looking around the country, we did get assurances from state governments that they would not put rents up to eat into this pension increase.
We got that assurance from South Australia, from the Minister for Housing, in October 2009, just following the pension increase, and now, of course, we and pensioners who are in public housing are confronted with the news that the South Australian Government has changed its mind and is seeking to put rents up and eat into this pension increase, so I'm definitely saying to the Government of South Australia this is the wrong decision and they should immediately reconsider it.
HOST: If I was Jennifer Rankin now, what would you be saying to me?PM: Leon, if you were Jennifer Rankin, I would be saying precisely this - that in October 2009 she gave her word that pensioners would benefit from this increase and she should hold to that position, what she put in a letter to the Federal Government in October 2009.
HOST: Another issue, the poll has come out today and these polls are fairly regular. Whilst you are ahead, and comfortably as preferred Prime Minister, the Party position is 50/50. You surely must to disappointed, because you've made a number of announcements that you have heralded, for example the broadband network and so on, and there are other things that you plan to do next year on the environment, which no doubt will be controversial. Are you surprised at this 50/50 balance, where it looks as if, if we want to an election now, Prime Minister, we'd have another hung Parliament?
PM: Leon, I'll leave commentating on the polls to the people who get paid to do it, and there's no shortage of those, many people working in the newspapers and beyond who will comment on the polls.
For me, the important thing as we leave 2010 is we've demonstrated in the weeks that the Parliament has sat that this Parliament can work, it can work to deal with big reforms like the reform to lay the way for the National Broadband Network, which will be so important right around the country, including to the people of Adelaide; and as a Government we have shown that we can govern effectively and well.
2011 is a year in which we will deliver on the vision that I have outlined for the country. We will be delivering on a stronger economy. I want to make sure Australians right around the nation have the benefits and dignity of work, that we're continuing to create jobs and get more people into jobs.
We'll be delivering on the education reforms that are so close to my heart. We'll be delivering on health care reforms, because there is nothing more important to people than making sure the health care system is there when they need it, and of course we'll be tackling some the big and complicated issues that we need to tackle as a nation - border reform and pricing carbon are two of the big ones.
HOST: Alright, now, in the business of pricing carbon, are we going to have a carbon tax run by Treasury and somehow connecting it to the normal taxation methods, or are we going to try and run some kind of ETS that bit the dust, particularly Copenhagen and beyond when Kevin Rudd was last there.
PM: Well, we're going to work through the question of what's the best way to price carbon. We have a Multiparty Climate Change Committee working on that question now. We obviously have parliamentarians of good will sitting around a table and working through these complex issues.
But at the same time, as the Prime Minister, I have been saying to the nation, through speeches I've given and interviews I've given, that 2011 is the year that as a nation we've got to come together and deal with this issue. I am incredibly confident that as a nation we're up to this. We are filled with ingenuity, with ways of working for change and that's what I believe the nation will do in 2011 - we'll come together and we'll find the right way to price carbon.
HOST: I have a concern that we need a broad-based national discussion about what the national interest is, because for me investment is one thing, which is good, but just allowing nations to come in, or companies to come in and buy something- I mean, for example, we've just sold our bulk grain storage to a company in Canada, and they've been shutting silos, so now we have a 3km queue of cars from farms trying to deliver wheat. Now, this is the old chestnut, if you like, that what you don't own you can't control. Will you support such a debate, because that's something that I feel must be on the national agenda next year.
PM: We have a structure for looking at foreign investments in this country and making sure that major investments are in the national interest. Now, we're a great trading nation and it's in our interest to be fully engaged in the global economy.
We've got to remember that being fully engaged in the global economy comes with a tremendous upside for this country. We are great exporters. We export resources, our farmers export their produce, we grow twice as much food as we need to consume ourselves, so we export a great deal and we earn money from it. So, we've got to be out there, engaged in the global economy. We do have structures to make sure major foreign investments are in our national interest.
HOST: Well, we do, but I would argue that for the Foreign Investment Board to be looking at only $230 million-plus, when in New Zealand the same rules are five hectares of land, I think we do need to rethink this.
PM: Land, I know that there has been some commentary about this in the newspapers, but overwhelmingly farmland is owned by Australians and worked by Australians, so we need to make sure that we're getting the facts out.
I'm very happy to see the nation talk about issues that are on people's mind, and if this is an issue on people's mind then, sure, let's talk about it, but let's talk about it informed by the facts, and that is overwhelmingly farm land is owned by Australians. We make money on selling food. We generate twice as much food as we need to consume-
HOST: -We'll need to do more than that Minister, because the big problem's going to be with a growing world population of an extra three billion within the next few years, we need to be producing a lot more than we are now.
PM: Well, currently between what we sell and what we buy in food, we make around $14 billion on the deal. That is, we export more and earn more than we import, so we're a great trading nation. Our farmers are amongst the best in the world - the most efficient, the most ingenious, the ones that are always out there looking for how they can adapt and change their farm practices to be even better, and that's great for this nation.
HOST: What are you doing for Christmas?
PM: I'll be in Adelaide for Christmas, Leon.
HOST: A little more, are you having Christmas lunch with the rellies, are you going to the cooking, or will you be purely the guest that enjoys what is on the table?
PM: I'll be with my parents, staying with my parents, and the full family will be gathered as we always gather at Christmas time. We have some very clear Gillard family rituals for Christmas. We tend to do the same things in the same order and there's something wonderfully comforting about that, so I'll be going through the Gillard family rituals and they do include me helping with the food preparation, Leon.
HOST: Really?
PM: They do. I do the simple tasks. I'm not going to pretend I do any of the complex ones.
HOST: So no Masterchef for you?
PM: It's more like peeling potatoes and things like that - the things that require labour but not high degrees of skill are the jobs that I get allocated.
HOST: Oh well, they're jobs that go offshore, but not this time.
PM: No, there'll be a bit of potato peeling and carrot peeling happening on Christmas morning.
HOST: I wish you well, Prime Minister. You've got a tough year next year.
PM: I'm looking forward to it Leon. It's a great privilege to be Prime Minister of this country and a great privilege to be in a position to lead us for changing the nation in ways which mean we'll be even better in the future. 



In October, the Tasmanian forestry industry and several environment NGO's reached an historic high level principles agreement for protecting native forests and developing a sustainable timber industry in Tasmania.
The Gillard Labor Government welcomed the landmark agreement.
It is a credit to those involved that after decades of disagreement they have been able to work through complex problems to forge a new consensus.
It is now time for the next step.
Last month several of the parties to the agreement along with the Tasmanian Government met with Ministers Burke, Crean, Carr and Ludwig, and asked the Commonwealth to play a role in facilitating the next stage in the process - developing the details of the agreement and the details of its eventual implementation.
Cabinet has today considered the request and believes it is important that we play a constructive role by working with the industry, environment groups, communities and the Tasmanian Government as they move to develop a more diverse and secure economic base, at the same time as delivering a balanced and sustainable approach to native forest management.
The Gillard Labor Government will do three things as part of this process:
 * 	Work with the Tasmanian Government to undertake an initial due diligence assessment of the Tasmanian forest industry in light of the Principles.
 * 	With the Tasmanian Government, jointly appoint an independent facilitator to work with the signatories to the agreement as an honest broker to help build an implementation plan for the Principles.
 * 	Endorse the initial moratorium agreed between the parties on further logging in specific areas while the process of due diligence and further development of the implementation of the principles continues.
Due Diligence
To help drive an effective and lasting outcome, the Australian Government will work with the Tasmanian Government to undertake an initial due diligence assessment of the Tasmanian forest industry.
This due diligence will ensure all parties have a strong understanding of: 
 * 	 the resources currently being used in the industry;
 * 	 the extent of renewable resource available;
 * 	 the sustainable size of the industry in the future, particularly given the changes in the market for Tasmanian timber products;
 * 	 agreed understanding between the parties of detail and definitions contained within the Statement of Principles including High Conservation Value forests; and
 * 	 most importantly the social and economic impact on communities in Tasmania. 
Independent facilitator
The Gillard Labor Government will also assist the Tasmanian Government by jointly appointing an independent empowered facilitator to work with the signatories to the agreement as an honest broker to help build an implementation plan for the Principles.
The facilitator will officially report back to all parties by the end of June 2011.
Initial moratorium
Part of the Principles agreement was for areas of High Conservation Value forest to be identified and preserved.
As a sign of good faith to the parties to the agreement the Gillard Labor Government is pleased to announce its endorsement of the Tasmanian Government taking action to have a number of High Conservation Forest Areas identified by the parties immediately included as part of a moratorium on further logging while the next stages of due diligence and details of the principles are worked through.
The Commonwealth endorsement of an initial moratorium will be consistent with the following considerations:   
 * 	 the moratorium will be for a set term and any permanent closures will be conditional on the agreement being taken forward;
 * 	 an initial moratorium will necessarily cover a small area, with additional areas being added over time as the final agreement progressed; and
 * 	 many areas covered by a moratorium are not currently in production, meaning that short-term closures of these areas could be achieved without cost for industry.   
The Gillard Government stresses that the Commonwealth's facilitation of this process - in the next steps of due diligence, putting detail around the principles, and an implementation strategy - is contingent on all the parties to the Principles agreement remaining supportive of the agreement, and reaching an agreed outcome as they work through the details of the Principles.
The Gillard Government's current role in the process will be to help facilitate negotiations, as opposed to providing new financial resources.
The Gillard Government recently announced a $22.4 million package of assistance for the Tasmanian forestry contractors. In addition, the Government has already committed $325 million over 25 years to the Tasmanian Government and forest industry through the Regional Forest Agreement. This support is a clear demonstration of the commitment the Gillard Labor Government has to long term sustainable forestry in Tasmania.
The industry and environment organisations have been able to work cooperatively together, and the Gillard Labor Government expects to work in a similar spirit with the Tasmanian Government to achieve a lasting legacy for the people of Tasmania.



PM: I'm here with David Bradbury, the Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasurer, to make an announcement relating to a Commonwealth loan arrangement with New South Wales for the asbestos-related victims of James Hardie.
Can I start by saying that when I was a young solicitor I learned at first hand the cruelty of asbestos-related diseases for Australians and their families. This is a very difficult circumstance that Australians families in their thousands have had to confront - knowing that they were exposed to asbestos, the long wait to see whether or not that would cause a disease that then, of course, meant such tragedy for families.
We've seen great Australian heroes like Bernie Banton fight against this cruel disease and fight for compensation in the full gaze of the Australian public, and I believe many members of the Australian community watched, particularly, Bernie Banton's fight with a great deal of sympathy and concern.
So, today with David Bradbury I'm here to announce that the Commonwealth has signed off a loan agreement with New South Wales for up $160 million. This money will be directed with matching New South Wales Government contributions as necessary into the Asbestos Injuries Compensation Fund. This was the fund set up in 2005 to be the source of money to deal with asbestos-related claims for victims of James Hardie.
People would recall the debates at the time; that we wanted to ensure that victims had certainty; that they would be able to make their claims and there would be a source of funds for those claims.
Now, in making this loan available to the Government of New South Wales to be drawn into the fund with matching contributions from New South Wales, we are giving certainty to James Hardie asbestos victims that there are funds available to meet their claims.
Now, this in no way overrides the moral or legal obligation of James Hardie to continue to make contributions into the fund, but the profitability of James Hardie has been affected by the global financial crisis and that has affected its ability to make contributions into the fund in recent times.
So, to give families certainty at what is an incredibly difficult part of their lives, we have determined to make this loan arrangement available. The loan will be repaid to the Commonwealth - it will be repaid in full to the Commonwealth - but it will be available now to give families certainty.
I'll turn to David for some comments and then I'll make some comments about another matter.
PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY BRADBURY: Thanks very much. It's good to be here with you, Prime Minister, to announce that earlier today I signed a loan agreement with New South Wales of behalf of the Commonwealth, and under that agreement the Commonwealth will be making available an amount of up to $160 million to the New South Wales Government. As and when funds are drawn down by the New South Wales Government under that loan agreement, those funds will be paid into the Asbestos Injuries Compensation Fund and the New South Wales Government will make payments that are at least matching and potentially of a greater amount into the compensation fund.
The purpose of this loan is to assist New South Wales in being able to ensure that sufficient funds are made available in that compensation fund to give victims and their families, victims of James Hardie-related asbestos injury, to give them the certainty and the peace of mind of knowing that their compensation claims will be paid and paid in full.
For many of the victims this means that they will be able to receive their compensation payments whilst they're still alive, and whilst no amount of compensation can ever give back to these victims and to their families that which this brutal disease has taken away from them, we do believe that it is important for the Government to do what we can to assist and to ensure that the victims are able to have those payments made to them in full.
As the Prime Minister indicated, there is in place an agreement between the New South Wales Government and James Hardie, and under that agreement there is a specified formula that requires James Hardie to make certain payments into the compensation fund. Now, that formula is linked to the performance, the profitability, of James Hardie, and as James Hardie's profitability has declined in recent times as a result of the impact of the global financial crisis, those payments have in some cases not been required to be made, and that is certainly the case in relation to 2009, although in 2010 James Hardie did make a payment into the fund of approximately $72 million.
The funds that can be drawn down and matched, drawn down under the loan agreement and matched by the New South Wales Government, will provide sufficient funds in the compensation fund to ensure that the liabilities, the compensation payments required to be made over the coming three years will be provided for and that of course is not taking into account any additional and future payments that James Hardie makes into the fund.
The loan agreement, as the Prime Minister indicated, is required to be repaid in full by the 30th of June 2020 and the loan is being made available with an interest rate that is equivalent to the Commonwealth's cost of borrowings. This measure has been included in the 2010-11 Budget and has no net impact on the fiscal balance.
I would like to take the opportunity to acknowledge the New South Wales Government, to acknowledge the trade union movement, the ACTU and Unions New South Wales for their contribution towards ensuring the victims of James Hardie-related asbestos disease have been able to obtain some justice.
I also wish to take the opportunity to acknowledge and to thank the many asbestos-related advocacy groups. As the Prime Minister indicated, most well-known amongst them has been Bernie Banton and the various groups that he has given voice to. Without the advocacy that they have provided and without the support of the New South Wales Government and the union movement then the compensation payments that are currently being paid to many of these victims would not have been made available.
So, this is an important initiative. What we are doing today, in having signed this agreement, is to formalise and to confirm the arrangements that were entered into between the New South Wales Government and the Commonwealth Government last year in the forms of a Heads of Agreement, and we certainly look forward to working closely with the New South Wales Government to ensure that payments are made to victims in a prompt and appropriate fashion.
PM: Thank you. We're happy to take questions on that matter, but before we do I would like to make some comments about one other matter.
Mr Michael Taylor, the Chair of the Murray-Darling Basin Authority, has today announced his resignation from that position.
I'd like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Taylor for his work. I am a very big respecter of people who put their time and energy into public service. Mr Taylor has done that and he's done that in circumstances where it wasn't easy. And Mr Taylor has shown, I believe, a great deal of persistence and openness in attending forums at regional communities, where often he was dealing with people who were angry, or distressed, or confused about the nature of the reforms and he has worked through with those individuals. So, I'd say to Mr Taylor that my thanks as Prime Minister and the Government's thanks go to him for the work he's done as Chair of the Murray-Darling Basin Authority.
As Mr Taylor makes clear in his letter of resignation, he has a particular view about the meaning of the Water Act and the way in which the Murray-Darling Basin reforms should occur. Particularly, he believes that the overriding outcome that should be sought from these reforms is the environmental outcome.
As Prime Minister my view is that we must optimise across the environmental, social, economic areas of work. That is the aim of these reforms; is to ensure we've got a healthy river; we've got food production; and we've got viable regional communities. We want to optimise across those three areas - healthy rivers, food production and viable regional communities.
I believe that when the Water Act first went through this Parliament under the then Howard Government and under the oversight of the then Minister Malcolm Turnbull, that the aim was optimising across these three areas. The Government will continue to see these reforms with optimisation across these three areas.
The Government will appoint a replacement as Chair of the Murray-Darling Basin Authority and our reform programme will stay on track. As people would probably be aware we are at the stage where a guide to the Murray-Darling Basin Plan has been published. There have been consultations about that guide. During the course of next year a draft plan will be published and there will be further consultations and the ultimately our Minister, Minister Tony Burke, will sign off a plan and bring it to the Australian Parliament.
At the same time as that work is happening through the independent Authority, the ministers involved - Minister Burke, Minister Crean and Minister Ludwig - will be out there consulting with regional communities and the Parliamentary Committee, led by Tony Windsor, will also be out there consulting with regional communities. So, the reform program here is on track and that is the forward work program for 2011.
We've got one chance to get water reform right. This is an area that people have talked about for a long period of time. Now we need to get it done.
We've got one chance to get it right and getting it right means optimising environmental, social and economic outcomes and that will be the reform work we will do in 2011, so that for generations to come Australians will be able to see that we've got healthy river systems, we've got food production happening in this country and we've got viable regional communities in which people make their homes and make their lives.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, has your view changed since Adelaide, during the election campaign, on the Murray Darling, because if I, I'm going off my memory, but, which isn't the best sometimes-
PM: -Hey, fragile source.
JOURNALIST: Sometimes. But if I remember what you said correctly in Adelaide, during the election campaign, you only spoke about environmental outcomes and you basically promised to buy every litre of water that was necessary to restore the Murray-Darling, to the environmental outcomes for the Murray-Darling, so has your position now changed to take in social and economic matters?
PM: As the year draws to a close I don't want to get into a debate with you about quality of recollections on the year that's been, but I can say to you very clearly that the election commitment I made is that the government will do what is necessary to implement the Murray-Darling Basin plan.
We have been in market buying water. We are buying water from willing sellers and the commitment I made in Adelaide was when we have the Murray-Darling Basin plan we will implement it and that will require further water purchasing from willing sellers.
So, the aim here is to get the plan. The plan needs to make sure we are optimising environmental, social and economic outcomes and we will implement the plan.
The promise I gave is in sharp contrast to the promise that Tony Abbott gave. He said he would implement the draft plan within two weeks, I think it was, of being elected. That is, he didn't want to talk to regional communities, didn't want to have any consultations, he didn't want to ask people what their views were. Well, I believe this reform is a fundamental one, it's a big one, but it's one where we should have people with the opportunity to have their voices heard and that's what's happening now.
Yes, Lyndal?
I did say Lyndal. We've got some civility in the shade.
JOURNALIST: Mike Taylor, in his letter, seems pretty clear that he believes he was acting in accordance with his obligations under the Act. Given you've had differing legal advice, would you seek to reconfirm or get new legal advice, because presumably the last thing you want, the last thing, presumably you don't want any questions of legal certainty over the final deal when it's done?
PM: I'm completely confident about the legal advice we have received. I'm completely confident that the Water Act is requiring optimising across environmental, social and economic outcomes. As Prime Minister, leading this Government, that is the reform agenda that we want to see delivered in 2011. It will require the independent authority to continue its work and then it will require the relevant Minister, Tony Burke, to bring the plan to Parliament.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Why should the Australian taxpayer bailout a company which not only produced products which killed people, and what confidence do you have that the Government won't be in the same position in 4-5 years' time if the American housing market doesn't recover, which is the main source of James Hardie's revenue?
PM: Well, no-one is bailing anyone out. What we are doing is making arrangements so that families who have had a family member diagnosed with a fatal disease like Mesothelioma, a cruel disease, know that they've got certainty that there is a fund they can turn to for their justifiable compensation claims.
I don't want families under that kind of stress to also be anxious about what is going to happen with funding their compensation claim.
It was recognised in 2005, when these agreements were struck, that it wasn't in the interest of claimants to have James Hardie go under. What was in the interests of claimants was to have ongoing arrangements, a source of funds to meet claims. We're in a circumstance where, under that agreement, James Hardie's profitability was always going to be a factor taken into account in its ability to put money into this fund. Clearly, in global financial crisis circumstances that has had an impact in its profitability, hence the loan arrangement we have announced today.
The Commonwealth will be repaid the loan arrangement and families will get certainty in the meantime.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Your Government's cuts to funding for the Tasmanian forestry industry, do you accept criticism that that'll cause the Tasmanian forestry accord to completely collapse?
PM: We're not cutting anything, so the premise of your question is entirely wrong, I'm afraid.
What the Government has said, what the Government's announced, is that as a Government we want to facilitate the historic agreement entered into by the stakeholders in Tasmania being brought to life. What's happened here is that industry, unions and environmental stakeholders, many of whom had been fighting each other for 20 years, have sat around a table and struck an agreement about the future for Tasmanian forests and the future for industry in Tasmania.
Now, for that agreement to not just be words on a page but actually to be in the real world and make a difference, for that agreement to come to life, it requires the Tasmanian Government to step up to some responsibilities; it requires engagement of the Federal Government, and yesterday we announced the manner of that engagement. It will be through a jointly appointed, empowered facilitator - an individual who will work with the groups that have signed this agreement to now take the next steps.
Paul Bongiorno?
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much. By the sound of it, Mr Taylor was pushed. Will you be looking for someone to replace him who shares your view of the Act, and anyway, won't the result of the Victorian election make it virtually impossible to come up with a national plan for the Basin?
PM: First and foremost, Mr Taylor has resigned.
Second, I am optimistic about achieving the reforms that we seek. I think Australians are saying to the Federal Government, and they will also be saying to state governments, that this is a reform the time for which has come. I think Australians will judge very harshly any leader, any government, who lets this reform moment go by, and let's remember in this parliament this is a bipartisan reform - started by the Howard Government, Malcolm Turnbull as Minster, being continued by the current Government, with optimising across the three areas: social, economic and environmental.
Now, I know there are days in Question Time when we see the Leader of the Opposition in his usual negative mode. It can be hard to diagnose that this is a bipartisan reform, but it is bipartisan in its generation here. We need to work with state governments to deliver it. I think people will judge state governments very harshly if they let this reform moment go by.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, timber workers say they need an assistance package of about $200 million. They say your, I think, $22 million dollar package isn't enough. Have you got any plans to deliver some more money?
PM: Well, we've got the engagement that we announced yesterday here for bringing the agreement to life, and I do want to say to all stakeholders, as a Federal Government, no-one should expect a blank cheque here. No-one should expect us to be there just listening to claims and then responding to them.
What we need is we need a process that gets the stakeholders to work on delivering the agreement. We also require the Tasmanian Government to step up to its responsibilities here and to access revenue that it can access to be put into this task, so we require the Tasmanian Government to step up.
We pointed yesterday to the fact that the Federal Government already has some money allocated in the forward estimates for forestry-related issues in Tasmania and that's the source of funds that we are looking to. We want to take a prudent, disciplined approach here - and we will.
Yes, Phil Coorey?
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about the revelations today about Craig Thomson's past - are you concerned about any implications that may flow from that information today?
PM: Well, I'm not going to comment on a legal matter that's in train. What I would say is that Craig Thomson is very valued member of my team. He completely rejects out of hand these allegations. Consequently, there is a defamation action on foot and where there is a defamation action on foot before the courts I'm not going to be drawn into commentating on it.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) how prepared is Labor to fight a by-election if it comes to that?
PM: I didn't hear that first part?
JOURNALIST: How prepared is Labor to fight a by-election?
PM: I know it's drawing to the end of the year but I'm not sure that we've moved into flights of fancy rather than reporting news. What we've got on foot is a defamation action where Mr Thomson completely denies the allegations that have been made against him.
Kieran?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition is calling on you to confirm whether or not the advice Mr Rudd gave to Hillary Clinton last year is formal Government policy. Why won't you do that, and as we come to the end of the year, on a separate tack, what's the morale like in the Cabinet?
PM: Well, firstly on the issues yesterday, on the statements yesterday of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Julie Bishop, they have been rightly criticised by foreign policy experts today, outside Government, as cheap and irresponsible and that's what they are.
The Government is not going to be commenting on the contents of or alleged accuracy of any cables involved in this WikiLeaks process. Anybody who is asking us to do that is playing cheap politics rather than looking to the national interest.
Yes, Phil Hudson?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned flights of fancy. Today it's been revealed that a former senator under the gold pass scheme, in just two years took 147 flights costing $116,000. Is that really a good use of taxpayers' money? Are you going to shut down the gold pass scheme?
PM: I think we've got to give the prize for the most tortured word association of today, but fairly well done on that word association.
Look, I've seen that these matters have been reported in today's newspapers and that the story is authored by one Phil Hudson. I've seen that and I will be briefed on this individual matter.
I'm not in a position to comment on the individual matter now, but I will say about the question of how parliamentarians' entitlements are dealt with, that my view is it is best if these entitlements are dealt with independently by a tribunal independent of parliamentarians, that they set fair rules and that people then adhere to those rules.
I understand that there are public questions about the use of entitlements by people who were politicians. I think there's some things that need to be considered in this debate. I've said before and I'm happy to point to it again as an important example, I am the successor in the seat of Lalor to Barry Jones. Barry Jones, today, is still invited the attend conferences and events around the country associated with science. He came into this parliament famous for Pick a Box. He left this parliament famous for his passion for science and there are people around the country who still want to hear him speak and have him involved in their events because of that passion for science-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible) for a week.
PM: Look, I believe that there's some balances there we've got to strike and I think it would be unfortunate if a figure like Barry Jones couldn't attend a school event in New South Wales to promote science. So, how you get the balance right, I think these things are best done by independent tribunals.
We'll just go, we haven't, Latika hasn't had a question.
JOURNALIST: Thank you, Prime Minister. Following on from Friday, your comments when you said the WikiLeaks case was illegal, what Australian laws do you think Julian Assange has broken?
PM: Look, the foundation stone of this WikiLeaks issue is an illegal act. The foundation stone of it is an illegal act. Information was taken and that was illegal, so let's not try and put any glosses on this. It would not happen, information would not be on WikiLeaks, if there had not been an illegal act undertaken.
JOURNALIST: But that happens with whistleblowers leaking information often. That doesn't necessarily mean the person who then brings that information to the public light has committed an illegal act, does it?
PM: The Australian Federal Police is going to provide the Government with some advice about potential criminal conduct of the individual involved. People would be aware that there's also the issue of a warrant relating to an alleged sexual assault in Sweden.
What I would say about the publication of the WikiLeaks information is it's grossly irresponsible and anybody who looks at the pages of newspaper and sees that things like critical infrastructure lists are being put on WikiLeaks would as a matter of just common sense understand how grossly irresponsible this is.
JOURNALIST: So, Ms Gillard that relates to the law in another country, the actual giving out of the information. The question, I think, was about Australian law. Have you had any preliminary advice from the Federal Police, and they've had now some time to give such advice - why is it taking so long?
PM: I haven't received advice yet and obviously our Federal Police go through thorough processes before providing such advice, but I've been asked about this matter a number of times and I want to be clear about my attitude to it: the foundation stone is an illegal act that certainly breached the laws of the United States of America. The individual involved, there are potential matters arising from Sweden and the warrant there. Then, of course, we've got the Australian Federal Police looking to see whether Australian laws have been broken and then we've got the common sense test about the gross irresponsibility of this conduct.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) is reforming the telecommunications sector-
PM: -Say again? I missed the first few words.
JOURNALIST: You're Government is reforming the telecommunications sector. Fred Hilmer, who's something of an expert on competition, as I'm sure you agree, has today said that you are in fact re-regulating the industry. First of all, what did you make of Mr Hilmer's comments?
And I guess as a second question, 47 per cent of Australians are willing to pay extra for electricity prices to take action on climate change. You've got the Greens, I guess, dragging you, as we all know, towards putting a price on carbon by early next year. How are you going to balance the demands of the Greens with the desires of the Australian people who don't want to pay more for electricity?
PM: Well, once again I'm not accepting the premise of the second part of your question, it's wrong, and on carbon pricing what I will be saying to the Australian people as Prime Minister is that it's in our interests, in the interests of Australians, to get our economy ready for a low-pollution future.
As Prime Minister, I am guided each and every day about what's in our national interest. What's in the interests of Australian families? It's in their interest for us to have a low-pollution economy in the future.
Australians are rightly concerned about electricity prices. They've seen big increases, and in part they've seen those big increases because we've had a decade of underinvestment in base load electricity generation, partly as a result of uncertainty about carbon pricing.
Well, as Prime Minister I am not going to allow the next decade to be the same as the last, meaning Australians will face ever-escalating electricity prices and the risk - the real risk - of black outs in peaks period of usage.
That's why as Prime Minister, working with Minister Combet, we are leading the debate for how this country should price carbon. I'm not going to pretend that it's easy - it's not easy - but it's a necessary reform: the future of our economy; dealing with questions like electricity supply; future of Australian families, and we will be working in 2011 to deliver an agreed mechanism for pricing carbon.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh, sorry, and on Professor Hilmer, I've seen today's comments. I believe that the reforms that we brought to this Parliament and secured through this Parliament, despite the bitterness and negativity of the Opposition, are important reforms for telecommunications, for the telecommunications industry, important reforms for competition. They are ending the vertical integration which has created Telstra as an absolute gorilla in the market. We will have NBN Co providing fibre and retail competition on the basis of it - good for Australia. We need this technology for our future - good for competition, pricing, services, and innovation.
Mark, we'll take the last question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given your previous portfolio, will you be intervening personally in the national curriculum negotiations, and given that New South Wales is questioning education plans and Mike Taylor is questioning some of the water plan, are you confident that 2011 will still be a year of delivery?
PM: Absolutely confident, and on national curriculum Minister Garrett has the matter well in hand.
Thank you. 



For the first time, the Commonwealth will reward States and Territories with $108 million for exceeding targets to increase elective surgery operations.
The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard and Health Minister, Nicola Roxon announced the payments today, which demonstrate the success of the Federal Government's strategy to improve access to elective surgery.
Combined with the elective surgery blitz, which helped more than 70,000 Australians, the Gillard Government's reward payments are providing the states incentives to ensure they continue to deliver increased numbers of elective surgeries.
The reward payments are specified in the National Partnership Agreement on the Elective Surgery Waiting List Reduction Plan (the Plan), formally agreed to at the Council of Australian Government (COAG) in 2009.
The COAG Reform Council, which independently assesses the performance of the States and Territories, has advised the Government that the targets have been achieved.
This is the first time the Commonwealth has used these type of targets and rewards in the health system.
They results show the Gillard Government's health reform strategy is delivering benefits, helping Australians get the health services they need.
The reward payments are part of Labor's $600 million election commitment to improve access to elective surgery.
While the Government recognises there is still more work to do, this historic investment by the Commonwealth in elective surgery has been a critical first step.
Without the Commonwealth's investment, over 70,000 Australians could still be waiting for elective surgery.
The $600 million commitment to improve access to elective surgery included a $150 million elective surgery blitz, a $150 million investment in more than 120 infrastructure and medical equipment projects across the country and $300 million for the reward stages of the project. Today's announcement represents the first two stages of reward payments, with the final rewards to be determined in 2011.
The Gillard Government is committed to elective surgery beyond the conclusion of this funding, with $800 million to improve timely access to elective surgery across the country over the next four years as part of our health reform agreement.



PM: Can I start by saying it's a great pleasure to be here at St Vincent's and I thank everybody for having hosted and shown us around. I'm joined by the Minister for Health Nicola Roxon. We're here in Melbourne looking out on a grey and rainy day so I did want to start by acknowledging that right around the country many Australians are battling with floodwaters. There are problems in Queensland, in New South Wales, in Victoria and in South Australia. Some areas of disaster have been declared in New South Wales and Queensland and as result the Commonwealth is providing disaster relief payments. We are obviously working with State Governments and emergency services around the country, continuing to monitor situations closely and standing by ready to assist as communities and individuals battle impending floods.
As Prime Minister I do want to say to those community members that our thoughts are with them and that the Federal Government will provide the assistance necessary as we deal with floodwaters and lots of rain in many parts of the country.
I also want to send my congratulations to all of the emergency services personnel and volunteers who do such remarkable work in these difficult circumstances. And while in four States we are seeing a lot of rain and a lot of water, we should remind ourselves that over in Western Australia farmers are still facing a heartbreaking drought and our thoughts are with them as well as they continue to battle with drought and its effect on their farms.
Can I turn now to saying something specifically about health and the visit here at this great hospital today. As a Federal Government we announced that we would provide $600 million to assist Australians to get elective surgery. We know that too many Australians have had to wait for elective surgery procedures, we wanted to make a difference to that so we announced a $600 million plan.
Now part one of that plan was the funding of 70,000 more elective surgery procedures. Part two of it was providing more resources to 120 hospitals around the country to make a difference to their facilities. And I'm here today with the Minister for Health to announce part three and that is the payment of $108 million in reward money to states and territories.
We didn't want the extra 70,000 elective surgery procedures to be a one hit wonder, we wanted higher levels of effort, more elective surgery to be provided over time. So we said to states and territories that we would provide reward money if they did provide extra elective surgeries to their citizens and states and territories have risen to that challenge and I congratulate them.
As a result we are able to make available this $108 million in reward payments.
For Victoria this means an extra $27 million. Victoria well and truly exceeded its target and I congratulate all of those involved in hospitals in Victoria, all of the staff in achieving that result.
Now what this shows in a really practical way is what health reform can achieve, what the Council of Australian Governments can achieve, what working together between Federal and State Governments can achieve for people who need healthcare, and when it comes right down to it our health reforms are about more doctors, more nurses, more beds in hospitals, more Australians getting the healthcare they need.
Our hospital reforms for Victoria would mean an extra $4 billion of resources for hospitals. Yes, as part of these reforms, the Federal Government would take back a share of Victoria's GST, but the extra amount available to Victoria would be $4 billion, that is more money would come into Victoria for health than has been retained by the Commonwealth in GST.
This is an important reform for Victoria, an important reform right around the country. I will continue to talk with Premier Baillieu and to work with his new Government because I believe here in Victoria and right around the nation Australians want to see the Federal Government working with State Governments to deliver real change like more doctors, more nurses, more beds, more healthcare services available for Australians.
Can I conclude by saying COAG is dealing with a number of important reform agendas, health is one of them. Another very important reform agenda is education and today in Canberra Education Ministers are meeting and discussing a broad range of issues, but most particularly the national curriculum.
Education Ministers will deal with this issue in detail today but Education Ministers are working their way through in this meeting so that the national curriculum will be a reality in schools.
Coming out of today's meeting we will see states and territories working with the Federal Government to deliver the national curriculum from 2010 on. This is an important reform for Australian schools and Australian students - a national, high quality curriculum being taught in every school.
I'll turn now to the Minister for Health for some comments.
MINISTER ROXON: That you just some brief comments. It's great to be here again at St Vincent's, of course this is one of Melbourne's leading hospitals and it's provided, despite it being a non-government organisation, it plays a vital role in the public service delivery of health services for Victorians. The Prime Minister and I met today two patients who've had their elective surgery undertaken as part of a program under the Victorian Government, funded by us and run jointly, which allows people waiting on public waiting lists to be able to get their surgery undertaken here at St Vincent's and I think this is an example not just of a partnership between State Governments and the Commonwealth, but also between the public and private sector.
Our reforms want to be able to make the most of the capacity across the whole health system and this is an example of how that's been done well. The Prime Minister has outlined our determination to be able to work with the new Victorian Government to ensure those benefits continue to flow to the community in Victoria, and an example is that the Brumby Government committed as part of their implementation plans for COAG, a $4 million investment here at St Vincent's, to be able to upgrade the intensive care unit and the higher dependency unit, providing more than 20 extra beds. We hope that the new Government will look at those sorts of benefits and work with us to implement this plan, because we believe it has a lot to offer not just for Victorians today, but for generations to come.
PM: Thank you we're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I had an initial discussion with Premier Baillieu by telephone shortly after the Victorian election.
I said I would like to meet with him to talk about a number of things on the COAG agenda. Premier Baillieu understandably said that he wanted to get his feet under the desk, get his office set up and be fully briefed on these questions. I spoke to him before he had even made the transition into working from the office of the Premier. So I well and truly understand that and I'm looking forward to that discussion at the appropriate time and of course we will have, I have written to my State and Territory colleagues including Premier Baillieu indicating that we will have a COAG meeting in the new year on the 14th of February.
JOURNALIST: On the leaked US diplomatic cables, it seems the US Government agrees with you that under Mr Rudd Australia had lost its way. Are you still confident that Mr Rudd is the right person for Foreign Minister, given the United States has called into question is judgement on foreign affairs?
PM: Well firstly I'm not going to comment on the content of any cables, I've made that clear about the Wikileaks matter and I won't be commenting on the specifics of any cables that are released through Wikileaks. On the question of Kevin Rudd, Kevin Rudd is doing a fantastic job as Foreign Minister. Kevin Rudd is a man who throughout his adult life has devoted himself to expertise in foreign policy, he's bringing that expertise to bear for the Australian nation and doing an absolutely first-class job.
JOURNALIST: You can't just push those cables away though, they're out there, they're causing embarrassment worldwide, so could that cause problems in having Kevin Rudd being the front person for (inaudible)
PM: Certainly not and on the cables, let me say, people are going to talk about individual cables, I understand that. But what we're seeing is a grossly irresponsible release of thousands and thousands of cables and I am not going to be drawn and the government is not going to be drawn into commenting on confidential cables released through Wikileaks.
JOURNALIST: Were you aware that Mr Rudd had this reputation with diplomats?
PM: Well I'm not going to agree with the premise of the question. We're talking about one cable, obviously there are hundreds of thousands of diplomatic cables drawn up by countries around the world as a normal part of diplomacy, year in and year out. It would be foolish indeed to extrapolate from one cable a whole attitude. The alliance between Australia and America is strong. When I met with President Obama I described our two countries as great mates. That's what we are, that's what we'll continue to be.
JOURNALIST: Do have concerns about other countries about (inaudible) approach to the world?
PM: That's a laughable question, absolutely not.
JOURNALIST: It does seem to be more though than just the one cable. Are you at all confident that (inaudible) assessment of Australian foreign policy under your leadership are any better than (inaudible)?
PM: The thing you should judge foreign policy on is outcomes and let's look, standing here in this great city of Melbourne at outcomes. The incredibly successful AUSMIN meeting we had here, out annual strategic dialogue with the United States, Secretary of State Clinton, Secretary of Defence Gates, in Melbourne and obviously delighted to be here to participate in an annual dialogue that had real outcomes about further cooperation in our defence and security relationship, including further cooperation dealing with the new threats of our age, some threats in space, space junk and threats with cyber terrorism and cyber security.
These are the outcomes of foreign policy, as Prime Minister I've had the opportunity to attend a number of meetings including the East Asia Summit where we realised Australia's vision of having a piece of regional architecture, a meeting where leaders went which brought around the one table the President of the United States, with the Leader of China, with the countries of our region, talking across strategic issues, defence questions and economic questions. These are real foreign policy outcomes, good for this country.
?JOURNALIST: Do agree with Ambassador Beazley's position that Australians would side with Americans, with America in any conflict?
PM: It would be irresponsible for me to deal with hypotheticals about conflicts and I'm not going to do so.
?JOURNALIST: There's been a view that political correctness gone mad in (inaudible) taking decorations down (inaudible)
PM: Always very delighted to see Christmas decorations, I was actually commenting to the friends from the hospital as we moved around, I didn't quite break into song, but I did use the expression that it's beginning to look a lot like Christmas when we saw so many Christmas decorations.
I think Christmas decorations are a wonderful and joyous thing they should be where ever people want to have them, including schools and school buses.
JOURNALIST: On the Murray Darling Basin Authority, would you consider reforming the Water Act?
PM: There's not need to reform the Water Act. The Water Act enables us to deliver a plan for the future of the Murray Darling Basin that optimises across environmental outcomes, economic outcomes, social outcomes. What that really means is a healthy river, food production and viable regional communities.
The Water Act is constructed to enable optimising across those three, that's what Minister Turnbull, Malcolm Turnbull said when the Howard government legislated the Water Act and we are pursuing this reform agenda to its conclusion and we will stay on track for delivering those reforms in the timetable we've already outlined.
JOURNALIST: By tweaking that question though couldn't you just remove any uncertainty whatsoever (inaudible)
PM: We're very confident that the Water Act enables us through the Murray Darling Basin Authority, and we do need to remember of course it's an independent authority, but the Water Act enables the Murray Darling Basin Authority to produce a draft plan for consultation and then a plan for the Minister and the Minister will of course then bring the plan to Parliament, enables that to be done optimising healthy river, food production and viable regional communities.
?JOURNALIST: Another Labor MP had quit in NSW, are you worried about the party down there?
PM: That's a matter for the NSW State Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, again on the Wikileaks cable, it is disappointing to see evidence that Australian diplomats were making disparaging comments about the then Australian Government to the Americans and can you give an assurance that none of the diplomats that have been named in the cables will suffer any repercussions?
PM: I'm not commenting on the contents of cables. We select our diplomats on the basis of competence and their ability to represent Australia and I've got every confidence in the diplomats we've selected and of course our diplomatic relationship, our alliance with America is incredibly strong and I'd refer people to the AUSMIN meeting here, to my own discussion with President Obama, two countries, great mates, working together on a shared agenda in so many areas, defence, strategic geopolitical agendas around the world.
?JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
MINISTER ROXON: Well I can absolutely clarify it, there's no uncertainty from the government's point of view. GP Super Clinics must include GPs, that is part of the requirement for every contract we enter into. The report I think is quite misleading and actually actively wrong. We have made an offer to establish a Super Clinic in Rockingham, we are conducting those negotiations right now with the division of GPs. They know that that offer requires GPs to be part of the clinic, if they chose not to follow that course then of course we would negotiate a contract with another provider. So I think there's a little bit of positioning going on in those negotiations.
This was a commitment that was made at this recent election, so we're actually in a very good position that we're negotiating a contract with them right now that would enable services to be provided in the Rockingham/Kwinana region of Western Australia.
So we need to be very, very clear here, the GP Super Clinic program is about getting more GPs closer to people's homes, where they need them and encouraging GPs to work with other health professionals, nurses, dieticians, physiotherapists, podiatrists and others. Is it not about providing services without GPs, although of course there are many, many more services that are being provided now in multidisciplinary teams to enable the best type of care that can be provided to local mums and dads not having to run around with their kids between lots of different services and getting more of their care in the one place. 


The Langman Hotel, Melbourne 
Thank you for your warm welcome - and a big "thank you" to the Australian Children's Choir for their outstanding performance here today.
We're here today because Sue Alberti has chosen to do something very special with an auction win from last year.
She could have sat down with five friends and enjoyed a luncheon with me.
Instead, she has transformed it into an opportunity to do good for the whole community, and that is so typical of Sue and her legendary generosity.
Today we launch an appeal that is very close to Sue's heart, and in doing so we remember her daughter Danielle with great affection and respect.
Danielle's passing is a reminder that we must fight hard for life and never, ever give up hope.
Friends,
We will honour Danielle's memory best by doing all we can to manage and defeat diabetes because diabetes is an insidious disease that we under-estimate at our peril.
It is not just a matter of insulin injections or monitoring your sugar levels.
It is a difficult condition to control with sufferers often battling multiple health problems.
For many, it can lead to the loss of limbs and even loss of life.
And like all chronic diseases, it requires constant management, placing a huge toll on patients and their families.
In short, diabetes is a serious condition that merits a serious response.
These points are not lost on me or on the Government.
That is why, from the first of July next year, we will invest more than $30 million to pilot Coordinated Care for Diabetes.
This program recognises the complexities of diabetes and will identify the most effective methods of care for those living with the disease.
This work will be undertaken through the Diabetes Advisory Group which includes Diabetes Australia and the Australian Medical Association and I understand the Diabetes Advisory Group are, in fact, meeting today.
Notwithstanding the Coordinated Care pilot program, current arrangements for diabetes will continue with more than $2.7 billion invested in diabetes care over the next four years.
Of course, the Government is committed to a broader and long overdue reform of the entire health system.
And I want to share some of the key points today because your presence here shows a special commitment to the future of our health system.
The first thing about the future is that it can't be the same as the past.
The old model of block funding to the States and Territories cannot be sustained.
We need a system that delivers measurable results in return for the taxpayers' dollar.
A system that responds to community needs at the local level.
A system that delivers more early intervention and prevention so hospitals are a last resort not a first response.
Above all, we need the system to be financially sustainable into the future.
That is the purpose of the reforms we have agreed with all the States and Territories bar Western Australia.
Remember the Federal Government's health reforms have two interlocking purposes that every State and Territory needs to keep in mind.
First, by taking on 60 per cent of hospital costs and 100 per cent of community and aged care, the Commonwealth assumes the lion's share of rising health costs into the future.
That growing burden, which would have bankrupted the state treasuries by mid century, now shifts to the Commonwealth.
That means an increasing level of support, starting with at least?$15.6 billion in additional growth funding between now and 2020 above what the States and Territories would otherwise have received.
Yes, the Commonwealth is retaining a share of GST to increase its share of hospitals funding from less than 40 per cent to a permanent 60 per cent.
But the simple reality of this exercise is this:
- the amount of GST we will retain is worth substantially less than the amount we will give back to each state's hospital system.
And as hospital costs grow so quickly, that gap will only widen?over time.
Second, by taking the majority funder role, the Commonwealth will no longer have an incentive to cost-shift into the hospital system because we would only be cost-shifting onto ourselves.
That means we will look for the best way to treat patients - for example in community and aged care settings - rather than using hospitals as a lazy fallback option.
Taken together, our reforms are the biggest change to the nation's health system since Medicare.
It is the best deal the States and Territories will see in a generation.
Friends,
The health system is about working within the bounds of the known and the familiar using remedies that are proven to work and succeed.
But when we look to the future, we look for cures and treatments that exist only in the minds of our researchers.
Capturing those ideas and putting them into practice is exactly what our great research institutes like St Vincent's exist to do.
You and your sister institutions are writing the next chapter of medical science.
You are rehearsing the future that our children and grandchildren will inherit.
We may not recognise the names of those who devote their lives to research but their work resonates far beyond the laboratory walls.
That is why this year the Australian Government is backing them with $700 million in medical research funding, $430 million for research infrastructure.
I know your institution has its own ambitions with the planned Aikenhead Centre for Medical Discovery at Fitzroy and I understand Greg Sword in his capacity as Chair of St Vincent's has recently put a business case for this centre to the Government.
Meanwhile, the great work of St Vincent's continues:
- on heart and bone diseases, cancer, Hepatitis, HIV/AIDS, Alzheimer's,
- and, of course, diabetes treatment which is such a special area of interest for us gathered here today.
I'm told that your islet transplant program has now resulted in four patients becoming independent of insulin a huge improvement in their dignity and quality of life.
I met one of those patients, Margaret Harrigan and we are honoured to have her here with us today.
Margaret's story is a great example of the fact that medical research changes lives.
And it points to a remarkable century of discovery that lies ahead.
But not all breakthroughs belong in the future.
There is something we can achieve right here and now; and that is to advance our understanding of childhood diabetes.
Today I am proud to launch the St Vincent's Institute Childhood Diabetes Appeal because as a society, we need to know more about Type 1 diabetes.
For a disease so prevalent, there is still so much more we have to learn.
What is happening in the immune system of people at risk of the disease?
How can we treat Type 1 diabetes without the use of needles?
The money raised through this Appeal will help unlock answers to these very fundamental questions.
Answers that, if achieved, will change the lives of thousands of Australian children.
Needless to say, if you are feeling a surge of the festive spirit, then give generously.
And I extend that invitation to our friends in the wider corporate world as well.
After all, that's why Sue has gathered us here today; to make a difference.
So dig deep and give the gift of hope to those kids living with the challenge of diabetes.
With special thanks to Sue Alberti, I officially launch the St Vincent's Institute Childhood Diabetes Appeal.
May the spirit of goodwill that has brought us here today sustain and inspire us in the year ahead.



EWART: Prime Minister, welcome to the program.
PM: Thank you very much Heather.
EWART: Are you completely satisfied that the authorities on Christmas Island did all that they could to avert the scale of this tragedy?
PM: On the advice available to me, people deployed quickly, that is our Navy personnel and our Customs and Border Protection personnel and of course Christmas Islanders themselves came out to try and help people who were in the sea.
Inevitably we will get finer detail and more information over time, but I do think we should be congratulating the Navy personnel and the Customs and Border Protection personnel who put themselves in harm's way to rescue people who were in the water.
The advice to me too is, and Minister O'Connor who is on Christmas Island has made this very publicly clear, the advice to me is the weather was extreme, we are talking about very rough seas and that's why the Navy vessel and the Customs vessel were actually sheltering on the other side of the Island.
EWART: Now at your news conference this afternoon you did give a timeline, but even given that the dreadful weather conditions there does seem to be gap between the time of notification and actually getting to these people and trying to save them, can you explain that?
PM: As I am advised that the alarm was raised at around 5:48am Christmas Island time, the Pirie, the Navy vessel, was basically put into action, told to respond at 6am, so 12 minutes later and then there were people on the inflatable boats that had been launched at the scene by 7:01.
That's the advice to me and that's been made public through Customs making available the timeline. So as I am advised, people responded as rapidly as they could, given the circumstances, given the geography and the weather.
EWART: And you called a series of inquiries into this whole tragedy, including a working group of politicians made up of Labor, Liberals, the Greens and the Independents. You phoned Tony Abbott about this, the Liberals are now saying they're not playing ball. What was your strategy in calling for this?
PM: Well, I want to be very clear about the offer that I've put to the Opposition and of course to other Parliamentarians. The offer I've put is for the Opposition to have its shadow spokespeople, particularly Mr Morrison and Mr Keenan, join government Ministers Chris Bowen and Minister O'Connor and a representative of the Greens and the Independent Parliamentarians, to receive continuing reports from the agencies that are responding to the incident, the AFP, our Customs and Border Protection people, Defence and so on.
Now the purpose of that is I don't want us debating the facts and Heather you would recall in times past, things like children overboard, where for months and months and months the most basic facts were not clear to Australians. Had an asylum seeker thrown a child in the water, not clear for months and months and months. I want to take a different approach; I want all Parliamentarians to have the benefit of the facts on the table.
Now I anticipate that given a look at the facts people may well take different views and advocate for different policy solutions, it's a democracy, healthy vibrant national conversations are a good thing, but let's get the facts on the table and the best way to do that is for a continuing stream of reports to go to representatives for all Parliamentarians.
EWART: But do you think that the Opposition smelled a rat and viewed this as clever tricky politics and perhaps a way to silence criticism of the government?
PM: Well there's no, any of that from my point of view, quite the reverse. I said in my press conference today, and this is my view, that we will have a debate, a national conversation about asylum seeker and refugee policy.
We've had one already and I suspect we will have one with a renewed intensity following this tragic incident, very very tragic incident, but let's get the facts on the table. The facts are the facts and then people will debate the policy. This is a mechanism to make sure everyone's got the same information.
EWART: Do you have blood on your hands, as one commentator calling for your resignation has suggested?
PM: I've obviously seen that in today's newspapers and what I would say to that Heather is no one, no one, should let the people smugglers off the hook here. The people smugglers who ply this evil trade, who seek to profit on human misery with callous disregard to human life and let's just reflect for a moment on the tragic loss of life in this incident.
People smugglers who ply this evil trade are responsible and no one should be saying that they should somehow be let off the hook.
The government, of course, is responding to this evil trade by working with our region to create a Regional Processing Centre and a Regional Protection Framework to take out of the hands of people smugglers the very product that they sell.
EWART: But is that really working? Does this show, when you say you expect a debate, that aspects of the policy should now be up for grabs, that you should have a rethink?
PM: I'm very happy to go through our policy; our policy is to have more assets patrolling our border than have ever been available to patrol our borders before. We did make some changes to the Migration Act as a government, that's absolutely true and not one Member of Parliament objected to or opposed those changes. The Opposition did not oppose those changes.
We have as a government invested resources in working in our region to disrupt people smuggling and we've enjoyed some success at that with around 240 disruptions, stopping thousands of people who would have sought to put themselves in the hands of people smugglers with the potential tragic consequences that we've seen here. We've increased penalties for people smuggling and we maintain a rigorous mandatory detention policy.
EWART: Would you at the very least consider shutting down the Christmas Island facility in the light of what's happened?
PM: Christmas Island has been a destination that people smugglers have sought to go to because of its proximity to Indonesia. So it's the geography that puts Christmas Island in that position, it is far closer to Indonesia than it is to the Australian mainland.
EWART: Do you feel that the Labor Party over the years has allowed itself to be boxed into a corner on this issue by the conservative parties? Why not just state in clear simple terms that the number of asylum seekers coming here is relatively small?
PM: I've done that Heather and I'm happy to again. My approach -
EWART: Do you need to show even stronger leadership on it then?
PM: My approach as Prime Minister to this issue has been to tell the truth, to explain to people the problem to put it in its proper context and I deliberately.
When I first spoke as Prime Minister on this issue, adopted Julian Burnside's words about how many years, 20 years, to fill the MCG at current rates of arrival, to give people a mental picture about what we're talking about here.
And so I wanted to get the facts out there and of course the facts include what I've put to you about border protection, about our work in the region, about how we've assisted law enforcement throughout our region.
EWART: But that hasn't stopped a tragedy like this though, has it?
PM: We've seen in Australia's history tragedies like this in the past and we're seeing a dreadful tragedy over these days and of course search and rescue is continuing even as you and I speak.
EWART: Do you accept that something here is just not working?
PM: I accept that this is a difficult problem, a global problem. We're seeing large numbers of people moving around the world, fleeing war, fleeing persecution, fleeing famine.
Australia is one nation that sees people arrive on its doorstep, but look at the countries in Europe and the numbers that they face, America and the numbers that they face, the Canadians of course have started to deal with this problem too, in terms of boat arrivals.
What we can do as a country is have strong border protection, strong laws on people smuggling, work with our regional neighbours on law enforcement, have mandatory detention.
But I do want to do more than that, we want to achieve a Regional Protection Framework and a Regional Processing Centre, which would take out of the hands of people smugglers the very product they sell. Why would people move if from a Regional Processing Centre, if they got on a boat and were just returned to the Centre, that's what we are trying to achieve.
EWART: Julia Gillard, thank you for joining us.
PM: Thank you.



PM: I have this morning been briefed by a range of officials, including Deputy Commissioner Colvin, on the tragic situation at Christmas Island. Can I start by saying this is a tragic event. We have seen loss of life. There are people on Christmas Island who will never forget the dreadful sights that they have seen in the last day and a half. Those memories will be with them for the rest of their lives. And of course we know in circumstances like this, that Australians want to understand what has happened. I will today be providing an update from Christmas Island and the tragic circumstances there, but I do want to be clear - what we know from past events like this one, is that the facts take some time to compile and so things that I will talk about today are advice to hand presently, but further details will become available over time.
Let me outline what we do know at this still relatively early stage. Border Protection Command was first notified of this vessel early yesterday mornings, when it was clearly in distress and hard up against the Christmas Island shore line. Navy and Customs vessels responded rapidly, but were unable to reach the vessel before it hit the rocks. A search and rescue operation was launched and it continued yesterday in extremely bad weather conditions, it continued while there was light. And this operation has been recommenced; it is underway as we speak with Navy and Customs assets. A P3 Orion has also been tasked out of Darwin to provide additional search and rescue capability. As of this morning, on the most recent advice available to me, 42 passengers from the vessel have been rescued, though this number may move around as we clarify through officials at Christmas Island the number of people who are now there on the Island in their care.
28 bodies have been recovered and of those 28 bodies, a number are young people and children. We do not know with any certainty how many people there were on the boat, so we've got to prepare ourselves for the likelihood that more bodies will be found and that there has been further loss of life than we know now with the numbers available to us now.
Our initial assessments, though these are not yet confirmed, are that the passengers on the boat are on Iranian, Iraqi and Kurdish origin. All survivors were originally brought to Christmas Island and the injured are receiving care. Two passengers were evacuated overnight to Perth because of the serious nature of their injuries and the need for the kind of assistance that can be made available in Perth, than cannot be made available on Christmas Island.
We expect a further three survivors to be transferred to Perth today, once again to receive additional medical care. A further three survivors are being observed in the Christmas Island Hospital. A team of trauma counsellors, Red Cross carers, interpreters and Immigration Officials is on its way to Christmas Island to provide additional support and we're also making every effort to respond to the needs of the Christmas Island community, including offering counselling and support to those who were witness to these dreadful events.
Yesterday we saw a truly horrific event, a terrible human tragedy, on what is a very dangerous coastline at Christmas Island and I know the nation is shocked by what we have seen. We condemn the trade of people smuggling, it is an evil trade, but I believe Australians are responding to these events today as human beings. We're seeing other human beings in distress and they're imagining to themselves - how would I feel if I was in those circumstances, how would I feel if I lost my wife, my husband, or my child in such rough and dangerous seas. I think we are seeing Australians respond with the kind of compassionate response that as Australians we are known for.
I want to today pay tribute to the people of Christmas Island. They were magnificent in these really difficult circumstances. They responded with great bravery and great compassion. I want to pay tribute to the professionalism of the men and women of the Australian Navy and Border Protection Command. They put themselves in harm's way, in dangerous seas, to help others. I think they were magnificent in how we've seen them respond and I think Australians who have seen the photographs would see that for themselves.
Together the people of Christmas Island and our Navy personnel and Border Protection personnel have rescued over 40 people and we owe them a debt of gratitude for that.
Finally, I also want to thank Western Australia, its Police and Emergency Services personnel, its health workers. I want to convey my thanks to the Premier of Western Australia; they've been very supportive as this incident has unfolded. I do also want to convey my thanks for the work that is still being undertaken by the Australian Federal Police and of course the work that will continue to be undertaken by the Immigration Officers of our own Department of Immigration.
Clearly it's going to take some time to establish exactly what has happened here. We expect that there will be a WA Coronial investigation, which will cover all of these events in detail. The scope of that investigation will be determined by the Coroner. There will also be a criminal investigation under Australia's people smuggling laws. There will be an immediate review carried out by Customs and Border Protection, this will involve and initial collection of facts and the initial assessment indentifying any immediate action required. The information from that assessment will be provided to the Australian Federal Police, in the context of their investigation and their anticipated report to the Coroner.
I believe it is vital that the truth, every fact, about this tragic incident is known to decision makers and to the general public. I'm sure that each Parliamentarian and every member of the Australian community would see it that way, they would want to know what the facts are.
I want to take this opportunity to thank the Opposition for their very responsible approach and responsible public commentary as this matter has unfolded and while search and rescue operations are still underway, as they are today.
Inevitably there will be public debate about policies relating to asylum seekers and refugees. As I've said before, I'm all in favour of frank, open and honest national conversations about policies in this area and generally. These conversations will be had as they should be had, but these conversations are best had when they're fully informed by the facts.
Whatever the debate to come about policy is, the facts are the facts. To ensure the facts are known I have decided to invite the Opposition, the Greens and the Independent Members of Parliament to work with the Government and the relevant agencies for managing the response to this incident.
Specifically, I believe it's appropriate to bring together the Ministers for Immigration and Home Affairs, that is of course Minister Chris Bowen and Minister Brendan O'Connor, together with their Shadow Ministerial counterparts, Mr Morrison and Mr Keenan, a representative of the Greens and a representative of the Independents in the Parliament, and that these people form a standing group that receives direct reports from all of the government agencies that have been involved in this incident. That includes Defence, Customs and Border Protection, the Australian Federal Police, the Department of Immigration, amongst others.
This will ensure that all have access to the same reports and insights about this very tragic incident. I believe this bipartisan reporting mechanism will assist the whole Parliament and the Australian public to understand the facts and to draw properly informed conclusions about the operational processes at work in this incident and whether in operational terms anything would be done differently should a comparable incident arise in the future.
I intend this group to first meet when the immediate response to this incident has been concluded and there is no risk of resources being diverted from the urgent search and rescue and response task. I anticipate therefore, that the group will meet before the end of the year, the group would then meet as necessary in the new year to hear further reports as more facts are established.
This is an unusual step, but one I've determined to undertake because I believe it's important that the comprehensive facts are available to all. I'll now turn to Deputy Commissioner Colvin for some comments and then we'll happily take you questions.
Thank you.
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER COLVIN: Thank you, Prime Minister.
As the Prime Minister has already said, this is a very fluid situation, and it's being conducted in what are quite difficult circumstances. Weather conditions on the island are poor, which are making very difficult for all agencies involved in the search and rescue and the recovery efforts.
From the Australian Federal Police perspective, we currently have 45 personnel on the Island. We're joined by 13 officers from the West Australia police, which we're very grateful for, as well as three officers from the West Australian Coroner's office, who'll be involved in the investigation.
Obviously enough, this is still early days in this response and recovery. Our officers are focussed today on the land-based search, and gradually, over time, that will transition to a focus on both the Coronial investigation and the criminal investigation that the Prime Minister has mentioned.
As part of that, we will need to go through the necessary disaster victim identification process. Many of you are familiar with that process. It is a difficult process and can sometimes take time and we are in the very early stages of that at the moment.
At this stage, there's not a lot more that I can say to you that the Prime Minister has not already said. As more details become available today we'll be, obviously, speaking to those survivors and talking, as well, to eye witnesses and getting accounts of what they saw, and piecing together exactly what happened yesterday morning.
Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have any information yet on how the boat got so close to Christmas Island without being detected?
PM: The advice to me is that the boat approached Christmas Island when it was dark and in extreme weather conditions, and consequently the boat wasn't detected until it was seen from Christmas Island itself.
JOURNALIST: Just a question on the response time, how long did it take rescuers to arrive at the scene of the incident after they'd been alerted to the presence of the boat? How long did it take them to get to (inaudible) to the scene and (inaudible)
PM: Well, can I refer you to a timeline that is in the process of being released by Customs and the Border Protection Service, so that will be available to you in writing. That constitutes the best advice to me.
What I can say to you of that advice provided by Customs and the Border Protection Service is that it was at 5.48am local time - of course, Christmas Island has a 4-hour time difference from the east coast of Australia - 5.48am local time yesterday that Border Protection Command was notified that a vessel had been sighted 200m from Rocky Point, Christmas Island. At approximately 6am local time HMAS Pirie was tasked to respond to that sighting. At approximately 6.31am local time Australian Federal Police officers on Christmas Island reported sighting the vessel being was onto the shoreline at Rocky Point, causing the people on board to be thrown into the water, and then the timeline that has been provided by Customs and Border Protection continues that at approximately 6.35am local time HMAS Pirie requested the assistance of the Customs vessel Triton to respond. The Triton immediately responded, and then that the tender - that is, the inflatable craft you've seen pictures of, or various craft, I should say, there was more than one of them - from the HMAS Pirie arrived on the scene at approximately 7.01am local time and rescue operations commenced.
So, that written timeline will be available to you. It's being released by Customs and Border Protection.
JOURNALIST: So that's - sorry - that's an hour and 13 minutes from the point at which the boat was first sighted. How far away from the scene were they, because they were on the lee side of the Island? Is that correct?
PM: That's right, they were on the lee side of the Island, and I was advised this morning that in terms of the distances in those kind of weather conditions, we're talking about a transit of least 30 minutes from where they were round to where the incident happens, but can I just say let's be very, very careful here. These things will become clearer over time. This is the best timeline that has been made available at this stage.
JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied - sorry, just a final question on that point - are you satisfied with the adequacy and the timeliness of that response? Is that (inaudible)
PM: To that I want to say two things. I certainly want to congratulate the Navy personnel and the Customs personnel who put themselves in harm's way in difficult and dangerous seas to rescue people whose lives were at risk, and tragically a number of them have died.
In terms of the operational questions here about responses, about clarifying all of these matters, I think that that will occur in the days to come. What history teaches us about these incidents is that it does take some time to establish the facts. We will need to work through to establish those facts, and one of the reasons that I've determined it's the appropriate course to bring together Government Ministers, Opposition representatives and other representatives from the parliament is as the facts become clearer and clearer they are known to everyone.
JOURNALIST: But Prime Minister, do you acknowledge that the fact that no-one knew this boat was one its way until it was almost crashing on the cliffs indicates that there's a problem with the surveillance system?
PM: I think what it indicates, on the advice to me, is that in very rough and very difficult circumstances there are clearly limits. Minister O'Connor has been dealing with this question today and has been very clear that in very rough and dangerous seas there is a limit to what can be achieved through the use of radar and other surveillance mechanisms.
I'll go there and then go here.
JOURNALIST: Thank you. Your Government has attracted a great deal of criticism over its handling of boat people. You're inviting the Opposition, the Greens and the Independents to have their say. Are you in fact admitting defeating and you just don't know how to go forward or handle this situation?
PM: Well, you've misrepresented what I've just said to you. What I've said to you is that I thought it was important that across the parliament we had a mechanism so people could hear reports from the relevant agencies and so everybody could have a comprehensive view of the facts. Whatever policy view people take the facts are the facts, and I think it's important that all parliamentarians and members of the public have access to the facts. That's why I set this body up.
JOURNALIST: Have you talked to the Opposition about this?
PM: Yes, I have. I've had the opportunity, a short time ago, to speak to Mr Abbott. He is in Japan, as I think is well-known publically. We did contact his Chief of Staff earlier in the day and then were able to make a call to him, so I have indicated to him that I'll be making these public statements and seeking to bring together this group.
I also asked Minister Bowen to have the same discussion with his counterpart, Mr Morrison. Mr Morrison is in Sydney today and that discussion did occur between the two of them a little bit earlier today.
JOURNALIST: They accepted the invitation?
PM: Well, what Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison have said is that they, of course, do want access to briefings, but I'll allow Mr Morrison - he available in Australia, clearly Mr Abbott is overseas - but Mr Morrison will probably want to convey his own views himself, so better if he does that than I endeavour to do it for him.
JOURNALIST: Just on the question of policy, Prime Minister - last July at the Lowy Institute you said, and I quote, that 'there is nothing humane about a voyage across dangerous seas with the ever-present risk of death in leaky boats captained by people smugglers.'
Now, doesn't it follow from that, from your own words, that it's morally incumbent on your Government now to do whatever it takes, within reason, to stop these boats from coming, including a much tougher set of border protection policies?
PM: Well, the Government does have a tough set of border protection policies. We've got more assets patrolling Australia's borders than we've ever had before.
What I would say to you as well is Australia's history teaches us that when people set sail with people smugglers in vessels trying to get to this country, tragically that can end in loss of life. It's happened in the past. It's happened in the last 24 hours.
We are not alone in confronting these circumstances. If we look right around the world, we see people who are seeking to move, flee war and persecution, and tragically a number of them die in the hands of people smugglers in the attempt, so let's not lose sight of the fact there is a real responsibility here on the shoulders of people smugglers who ply an evil trade attempting to profit on human misery, and the plying of that evil trade too often ends in tragedy and loss of life.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I know you said you wanted to wait for the facts, but the slamming has begun by commentators saying that you've got blood on your hands. Do you feel like you've got blood on your hands?
PM: Well, look, I believe in dealing with the facts. I believe in making sure that the facts are available. I want to again congratulate the Opposition and thank the Opposition for the responsible approach they've taken to this incident, the responsible approach they've taken to public commentary on it, when search and rescue is underway and where, inevitably, not all of the facts are to hand and facts will become clearer in coming days. That's the responsible approach the Opposition has taken.
We'll go there and come forward.
JOURNALIST: It seems that there won't be a full, independent, judicial inquiry into what's happened?
PM: Well, I'll actually have our Deputy Commissioner comment on this too, but there will be, we anticipate, a Coronial inquest. Interestingly, the Coronial responsibilities on Christmas Island are undertaken out of Western Australia, and so it would be the WA Coroner who is responsible for that Coronial inquest, and the WA Coroner would set the scope and terms of how they would go about that inquest task.
Of course, there will be an Australian Federal Police investigation into the criminal potentials of this. People smuggling is illegal, and so there will be an Australian Federal Police investigation.
What I have also announced today is that I would bring together a group of parliamentarians across the parliament to be able to have access to the continuing streams of reports from agencies involved in handling this matter so the facts of it can be available across the parliament.
But I will ask Deputy Commissioner Colvin if he wants to add on investigations.
DEUPTY COMMISSIONER COLVIN: Thank you, Prime Minister.
I think it's fair to say that we don't want to pre-suppose the breadth of what the West Australian Coroner decides or determines, as is his right a duty to do how broad he wants his investigation to be.
Obviously, the investigation that we will conduct, along with West Australia police, will help him inform the breadth of his inquiry, as well as inform our own criminal investigation. I'm sure the full facts of the matter will come out in that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on this bipartisan working group that you set up - one way of looking at this group would to be to say that this is a Government attempting to share its political risk on this and its political liability on this by turning the aftermath of this terrible tragedy into some sort of bipartisan exercise.
What do you say to that observation or interpretation?
PM: There's one motivation behind putting this group together, and that's to make sure people have got the facts.
Now, people will take different views about the policy, they'll take different views about what they want to say in the public domain. I'm all for open, frank national conversations. I'm all for policy discussions and debate. I made that very clear when I first spoke about the question of asylum seeker and refugee policy at the Lowy Institute, but that debate is best had informed by facts, and what we know from past instances in this area of policy is that there have times when there have been a lot of misunderstand and a lot of debate about the facts.
Well, I want the facts to be known. I want them to be understood. The facts are the facts. They're not a matter of debate. They can be shown and proved and demonstrated to people, and then when everybody's got the facts then the policy debate can then happen informed by the facts.
That's my motivation in bringing this group together to make sure the Government, the Opposition, other parliamentarians and therefore the national conversation is informed by the facts.
JOURNALIST: Did you seek or receive any undertaking from the Opposition in these discussions about not attempting to politicise this issue?
PM: No, I did not seek one, and certainly none was volunteered. No, that is not what this is about at all. This is about what I've just said - it's about ensuring that people have got access to the facts.
JOURNALIST: Just one question on the relationship between facts and policy, it's a fact that during the years of the Pacific Solution a very small handful of boats arrives and since its dismantling in 2008 you've had, I think, more than 200 now. Do you accept that there is any relationship between what was done in 2008 and the onflow of boats that we've seen since then? Any relationship, causal relationship, at all?
PM: Let's go through policies here. We see circumstances change around the world as to what gets people moving, circumstances change and for example - to deal with something that's been quite contemporary - when we saw the situation in Sri Lanka become more acute with the country at one point, effectively in a civil war that caused people to get on the move. So these things happen, we see world events change, cause people to get on the move. What I certainly accept is that as Prime Minister, as the Government of this country, we've got an obligation to strongly protect our borders and we do.
JOURNALIST: Is there any way to treat these people any differently, will the survivors of this disaster be waking up behind the fences of the Christmas Island Detention Centre tomorrow?
PM: People will be cared for as necessary depending on their personal circumstances, as I have indicated there are some who require medical assistance that can only be provided in Perth. Our Immigration Officials will deal with this on a case by case basis, but people will go through assessments at the appropriate point and we are talking, people are obviously going to need time to recover from this dreadful incident, but people will at the appropriate point go through assessments of their claims.
JOURNALIST: Will they stay in detention until that point?
PM: As you would be aware we relatively recently announced some new policies about detention, about the circumstances in which people, how people will be detained, so those policies will apply to these individuals as well and there is clearly some case by case assessments there as to the circumstances in which people are detained, but as a Government we are very firm on having a mandatory detention policy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say you're waiting for the facts to come in, as the facts do come in, if the facts do prove that the policy has flaws, will you then change the policy, are you open to that?
PM: The Government makes policy decisions, that's our job and we've made policy decisions, we've made policy decisions to have strong protection of our borders, with more assets patrolling our borders than ever before. We've made policy decision to have a strong mandatory detention system. We've made policy decision to ensure that claims are assessed rigorously and that people whose claims are not bona fide claims to be refugees that arrangements are made for them to return to their country of origin, that's part of our policy setting. And of course our policy setting includes strong cooperation with our region, indeed Minister Bowen has very recently been in Geneva pursuing this dialogue with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees about regional processing in the Regional Processing Centre. So they're the government's policies, but the group that I'm bringing together, I'm bringing together so that there is a common understanding of the facts here, the facts are the facts. If we look back in Australia's history there has been times when people have long debated what the facts of a particular incident are, I don't want us doing that, I want everybody to have access to the information and to understand what the facts of this matter are.
JOURNALIST: Just a question going back for a moment to the incident itself, you said in your opening remarks that a number of deceased were young people and children. Can you tell us exactly how many children are known to be among the dead and whether or not there is a feeling that this was one of those boats that was loaded with, there were a lot of families on board it would seem, according to eyewitness accounts, is that your information that there were a number of families on this?
PM: I don't have any information that I can give you about the question of loading of the boat. I can't help you with that. On the question of the deceased and numbers of men and women and children, I believe that that information will be made available; obviously our Customs and Border Protection people are making information available as best they can. So I will leave it to them to finalise that information to make sure it's accurate and released at the appropriate time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you know if the people smugglers themselves, or the skipper, or the people smuggling operators were on the boat and survived?
PM: Well, I may defer to the Australian Federal Police on that.
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER COLVIN: Prime Minister, look it's too early for us to be categorical, we're working through the process of who survived and who the deceased are, that will form part of the DPI process and also as we interview people, obviously we will ascertain what their role is, but it would be presumptuous for me to try and answer that now.
JOURNALIST: At 5:48 Prime Minister, just back to the timeline, was Border Protection Command told that this is a vessel in distress or were they just alerted to the existence of this vessel?
PM: I'm not in a position to take you through word by word what people were told at that stage, as I've said we've got to be cautious here, I think we all recall incidents in the past where perhaps assumptions were made and things said that later didn't prove to be right, I'd rather take the cautious approach and as facts are available, then I'm specifically setting up a mechanism to ensure that those facts come to public attention.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Kevin , he was a former diplomat and whistleblower over the SIEV X disaster in 2001, in which 303 people died, (inaudible) border protection in Australia in situations such as this, (inaudible)
PM: What I think is necessary are the things that are announced.
JOURNALIST: Just on the boat itself, you said it wasn't being - it just sort of slipped in past under the cover of night. Did we have any information on the existence of this boat from the Indonesian side, we get pretty good intel out of Indonesia, did we know that this boat had got in, was on our radar in that sense?
PM: Well the advice to me is that this boat was not sighted until the time that I've given you when it was sighted from Christmas Island, and we do have to be very clear here, we're talking about very difficult weather conditions, very difficult weather conditions.
JOURNALIST: I was just wondering if you had any discussions with your Indonesian counterparts about this particular boat?
PM: No, I haven't had discussions with Indonesian counterparts about this incident; obviously my focus has been on being briefed about search and rescue operations and management of the incident, which is still continuing. You've got to remember of course we've got people out there now who are looking hopefully for survivors, though we do have to brace ourselves for the likelihood that they will identify more people who have died in this incident.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look Minister O'Connor is there and is consequently about to provide me with direct reports from Christmas Island.
JOURNALIST: Why shouldn't there be an independent commission of inquiry, in the search for facts why should we rely on the Opposition or the Greens or the Independents?
PM: You've just been advised that there will be a Western Australian Coronial inquiry, you've also been advised in my opening statement to you that there will be an assessment by Customs as I outlined.
JOURNALIST: Are you going to resume your holidays or are your holidays off?
PM: Well I did return to work yesterday having had a few days off and I will make some assessments about what's the appropriate thing to do next, I haven't spent any time considering that question yet.
Thank you. 



PM: Can I start by advising people that today as I speak an extensive search and rescue mission is continuing to occur at Christmas Island. They're searching along the shore line and we have rescue divers in the water.
The HMAS 'Pirie' and the Customs vessel 'Triton' are engaged including in areas where ocean currents may have taken survivors or victims. Three aircraft, including two P3 Orions are involved in the search. The operation will continue until nightfall and an assessment will be made then about whether or not it continues tomorrow.
I do want to be clear though, that given the passage of time I believe we do need to face the grim reality that it is becoming increasingly unlikely, an increasingly remote possibility, that survivors will be found at this stage.
The numbers of survivors hasn't changed since yesterday and as people were advised yesterday it remains at 42. I can confirm that there are three Indonesian crew members amongst the survivors and they are being interviewed by the Australian Federal Police. I can confirm that a further two victims have been found amongst the wreckage of the boat by rescue divers and that does bring the number of victims to 30.
Now I know Australians are united in their sadness and their shock at these events and that people's thoughts are on the loss of life and the family members who are grieving, on the circumstances of the injured and I believe people's thoughts are also with those on Christmas Island who tried to help and are now dealing with such difficult memories of this incident and I believe people thoughts are also with our rescue personnel, our Navy and Customs and Border Protection personnel who have been involved in the search and rescue efforts in this tragic incident.
I think Australians are thinking of this today and certainly their good wishes and thoughts are with the grieving, with the injured, with the people of Christmas Island and with our search and rescue personnel.
It remains unclear exactly how many people were on the vessel and we may never know that number with precision. Three survivors have been airlifted from Christmas Island to Perth overnight.
I advised yesterday that there had been some movement of other survivors, so that now brings to five the total number who have been airlifted to Perth for assistance. Now four of those individuals required the specialist assistance that can be made available to them in Perth through the health care system and one is the husband of the injured woman who has also gone, obviously, to be with his wife in these circumstances. Other injured survivors are being treated at Christmas Island.
Obviously the survivors of this incident are traumatised and they're receiving all the care and support we can provide. An imam met with survivors yesterday and arrangements are being made to hold a memorial service that is likely to be on the 19th or 20th of December. A memorial service or services and they will be for the purpose of recognising the loss of life and allowing people to grieve.
Obviously we are very mindful as well of the needs of the people of Christmas Island at this difficult time. Counselling services have been offered to Christmas Island residents who participated in the rescue or witnessed the incident. A shopfront has been established on Christmas Island with professional counsellors to provide immediate assistance to community members who feel they need that assistance.
Now I recognise that there is a great deal of interest in why this vessel was not detected and how the rescue effort was undertaken. As I said yesterday I want there to be a clear flow of information to the public as the facts of this matter become known.
I did ask yesterday for the chronology of events to be released so that Australians did have access to that information and of course there are a number of inquiry and review mechanisms here, including the Western Australian Coronial inquiry, the work of the Australian Federal Police and a Customs assessment which will be conducted quickly as to what has occurred here.
I also yesterday spoke about the establishment of a bipartisan standing group of Parliamentarians in order to receive continuing reports about what the facts of this matter are.
Now it's important that none of these proper processes be pre-empted, but because of speculation to the contrary I do want to be clear that the people smuggling vessel was not sighted until it was sighted from Christmas Island itself by residents. It was not sighted before that time.
If we look at Australia's search and rescue zone it covers 10 percent of the area of the earth. If we look at the amount of ocean that lies to our north, the area that we seek to keep under watch, the area in which we are most likely to see asylum seeker vessels, that area is more than 1.4 million square nautical miles. That's a very big area, to give people a context here, a Dash 8 aircraft in a seven hour mission could fly over 50,000 square nautical miles. I think that helps people give a sense of how big an area we are talking about.
Consequently I think people would understand with such a big area, that it is possible for a boat to get to Christmas Island and not be detected. As I indicated yesterday, the radar that is on vessels, that radar is affected by weather and in these circumstances extreme weather conditions where the Navy and Customs vessels were the other side of the island, the radar was not effective to detect the vessel before it was obviously at Christmas Island and was sighted by residents.
Now I also understand that there is a great deal of interest in the chronology and the rescue efforts here and through the various processes that I've outlined I'm sure that more information on all of this will come to hand over the days and weeks ahead. However I do want to make the point that the rescuers worked in incredibly difficult conditions, I do not believe any Australian could underestimate how difficult this task was, or the determination with which the Navy and Customs personnel went about this difficult and dangerous task.
I also want to recognise that there will be a great deal of public interest in the criminal investigation and the possibility of bringing to justice the people smugglers who organised this venture.
Now I do not want to say much about this investigation for all of the obvious reasons, but I can say that I'm advised by relevant agencies that the investigation is progressing, that Australian authorities are working closely with the people smuggling taskforce from the Indonesian National Police. This collaboration has been successful in the past, with the arrest of 112 people smuggling organisers in recent years. I'm happy having provided that additional information to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you make of Anna Bligh's comments that these events should prompt a rethink by the Labor Party of its refugee policy?
PM: Well obviously it's the Federal Government and me as Prime Minister working with the relevant Ministers who set policy.
Our policy is there and we are determined to keep delivering on our policy, we've got more assets patrolling our borders that we've ever had before, we operate a rigorous mandatory detention system, we've increased the penalty for people smugglers, we've lifted our efforts at cooperation with Indonesia and countries in our region for the policing task, we've enjoyed some success in disruption people smuggling ventures and of course we will continue to work with our region on law enforcement.
As well we will pursue the policy I outlined earlier this year, of having a Regional Protection Framework and a Regional Processing Centre and the aim of that is to take away the very reason why people would get on boats, to take away from people smugglers the very product that they sell.
JOURNALIST: Has she jumped the gun by making these comments when the full details of what happened on Christmas Island are not yet known?
PM: People can make comments from their various perspectives. Obviously the government has set its policies and I've just outlined those policies for you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, based on the where this boat has come from and getting as far as Christmas Island, it then becomes quite feasible that there are or have been many other boats that have perished in the oceans and Australian authorities haven't noticed it?
PM: All I can say to you is what I have said. We are dealing with a huge area of ocean, our search and rescue zone, 10 percent total area of the globe and it is not possible for every square nautical mile to be under surveillance 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year.
I'm not going to extrapolate or engage in hypotheticals about things, you've got no facts on and I've got no facts on, but I did want to explain to people, to give them a sense of the size of the area here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, have you had advice about how many other boats may have -
PM: No I haven't.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday when you announced a committee had been set up, it seemed there may have been confusion as to what that committee would be doing. I think some people thought that maybe it would be a committee that managed the response, what exactly did you mean by this committee, can you spell out what it will be doing?
PM: Thank you very much. I outlined this clearly at the press conference yesterday, I do think the matter because a little confused during the afternoon and I'm not blaming anyone for that.
Yesterday, obviously people were trying to get across a lot of information about a dreadful and tragic incident, but I do again want to be clear about the purpose of this group. What I want to do is bring together Parliamentarians that represent political parties across the Parliament, the Opposition, the Greens and a Parliamentarian representing the Independents.
What that group would do is it would receive reports from the agencies that are involved in managing the incident and will be continue to be involved. Receive reports, so Parliamentarians have got the facts, I want people to have the facts, I want Parliamentarians to have the facts, I want the Australian public to have the facts. This group would not play any role in managing the incident, they would not write a report, they would not make recommendations, they would not be dealing with policy questions.
They would be there to receive reports and get the facts. Now that would be in addition to, on top of, the normal protocols about briefing the Opposition on matters like this.
Now, why do I want to do that extra bit to get the facts to people? Well if we reflect on Australia's history there have been times when it has been debated for months what the facts of an individual incident are.
People would recall the children overboard affair, where for many months the nation debated whether or not an asylum seeker had sought to throw a child off a boat and it took many many months for the facts to be clarified that that had not occurred . I don't want us to go through that again, I want people to have access to the facts, for the facts to be known, for Parliamentarians to know those facts and consequently for there to be that broader reporting back to the Australian people.
Obviously as Prime Minster I will be doing what I'm doing today and bringing the facts to the Australian people as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister has the AFP come up with any charges that can be applied to Wikileaks?
PM: I'm happy to answer that question, but what I will do, if you don't mind, is take any questions about the incident at Christmas Island first and then we'll come back to other matters.
JOURNALIST: You said there were three crew are being questioned, is that a case of they, even they didn't get a reliable number of how many people on the boat?
PM: Look, the advice to me is that we do not have a reliable number, and so I don't want to do go the details of questioning of individuals by police officers. I don't think that's appropriate, but the advice to me is that we do not have a reliable number.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, I think first and foremost we've got to complete dealing with this incident. We are still in the search and rescue phase, though, as I've indicated to people - and it is grim news - but as hours pass, obviously the likelihood of finding anybody else alive becomes a more and more distant possibility.
So, we are still in the search and rescue phase. We've got the internal, immediate review being undertaken by Customs and Border Protection. I would expect the outcomes of that immediate review to be available shortly, and we will see what we can learn from that in terms of future responses to incidents like this, and then there's the Coronial inquiry and the Australian Federal Police's work, so I think we've got to have these processes work through to make sure we're working on the basis of the facts and drawing the right conclusions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) spoke with Rob Oakeshott this morning about this. What were his comments to you?
PM: Look, I did speak to Mr Oakeshott this morning about the purpose of the group that I wanted to bring together of parliamentarians. I will be writing today to make sure that this matter is absolutely clear, writing today to the Leader of the Opposition, to the leader of the Greens, obviously, Senator Brown, and to the Independents to make sure that they've got full details of the proposal I outlined at the press conference yesterday.
OK, are there any other-
JOURNALIST: -Prime Minister (inaudible)
PM: Yeah, no, we're going to come to, as I said, down the front, so we'll take people in order. As I said down the front, we'll just make sure we've dealt with any questions in relation to Christmas Island first.
Other questions? Alright, well, I think it would be fair to go back to you first, and then I'll come to the back.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The Australian Federal Police has reported back to Government that it has not found breaches of Australian law here, and I do want to be clear about this matter - I believe that in some reporting there's been some conflation of what are different issues and I'd like to take this opportunity to go through those issues.
First, as I think people would be aware from media reporting, there's a series of hearings in the UK that ultimately relate to a matter in Sweden that involves Mr Assange. Obviously, Mr Assange will have all the consular assistance you would expect, and we've made clear that, obviously, as an Australian citizen Mr Assange is entitled to the consular assistance we provide to Australian citizens around the world when they find themselves in legal circumstances like the legal circumstances involving Mr Assange currently.
Second, there is the question of the theft off documents, what I've described in the past the foundation stone of WikiLeaks. It's clear that the theft of those documents is an illegal act. That's properly in the hands of the US authorities to deal with.
Third, in relation to WikiLeaks more broadly, the Government believed it was appropriate to refer the matter to the Australian Federal Police to ascertain whether or not there had any breaches of Australian law. We've done that now. We've received the advice and the advice is that there have been no breaches of Australian law.
So, I do want to make it clear. Obviously, there is a foundation stone here, which is the original theft of the documents. The US authorities are the lead agencies there, dealing with breaches of US law, and I'm not going to speculate on the result of any of those investigations, though I would say this: should any of those investigations ultimately mean an Australian is involved, then an Australian involved in such a matter would be entitled to consular assistance. We always assist Australian nationals when they face legal proceedings overseas.
But I do also want to be very clear about my attitude here. Now, I know there are a number of people who are fans of WikiLeaks. Let me make it very, very clear - I am not. This is a grossly irresponsible matter in my view. The release of all of this documentation has been grossly irresponsible, and I stand by the remarks that I've made about this previously.
I would also say that whilst I know that there are times when people are whistleblowers, when they are involved in circumstances where they believe that something wrong is happening and they've taken all reasonable steps to deal with it and then they do convey confidential information publically in order to get some public attention on that wrong, that is not the circumstance here in my view with WikiLeaks.
This has been a wholesale release of information without regard to national interest questions, to Australian national interest questions. I think it is irresponsible, and that continues to be my view.
Now, what I can say, obviously there are some people who are fans of this conduct, but I most certainly am not.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) in the 21st century dealing with these kinds of leaks in the future (inaudible) these kind of irresponsibilities?
PM: Look, I don't believe, on the advice to me, that there's any issue about changing our laws that's raised in these circumstances.
JOURNALIST: What's the difference between the information (inaudible) are you saying that that's the part that's illegal, that (inaudible)
PM: Well, it's clearly illegal to take documents without proper consent. That is obviously illegal.
JOURNALIST: But what kind, doesn't that put a hell of lot of Australian journalists (inaudible)
PM: Well, no, because I'm referring to- no, absolutely not, and let be very clear about this, because there's been a lot, in my view, of conflation of issues here and I don't want to see that happen again.
In fact, what I would do is refer you to my original statement about this, because I think it properly describes it and I want to remind people of what I did say so that those words can be reported and what I said last week when I was asked about these matters is I said I was going to ask the Australian Federal Police for advice. I said I wanted to be clear about my attitude, and my attitude, as I outlined last week, and this continues to be my attitude, is as follows - the foundation stone here is an illegal act that breached the laws of the United States of America. That is, the initial taking of the documents. That was not done by a journalist. The initial taking of the documents by someone who had access to them.
I'm not making any prejudgements about who that individual is. All of that will happen through proper court processes, but a person who is employed and has access to confidential material and then takes that material has obviously been involved in an illegal if they take classified material.
In WikiLeaks, let's be absolutely clear, that reference to the foundation stone is not a reference to a journalist.
Let me remind you what I then said following that. I went on to refer to Mr Assange and to refer to the fact there were some matters potentially arising, at that stage, from Sweden, and as I've made clear today Mr Assange is entitled to receive consular assistance as an Australian citizen dealing with those matters.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, the reason we provide people with consular assistance, one of the reasons we provide people with consular assistance is if they have complaints about how they've been treated, that they've got an ability to raise those complaints with Australian officials, so for Mr Assange, obviously, if he wants to make access to consular assistance and put forward any concerns he's had about how he's been treated, that's the proper way to do it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just then on (inaudible), you're advice is that while we don't understand that Assange took the original documents, which you say was the foundation event, your advice is he hasn't done anything illegal in this country.
PM: The Australian Federal Police advice to me is that there is no breach of Australian law here.
JOURNALIST: Should he be suspected of having breached US law in relation to the leaks, would you consider extraditing him, consider taking-
PM: -Not going to speculate on hypotheticals upon hypotheticals upon hypotheticals. We deal through proper processes with Australian citizens. Proper process for Mr Assange, who faces some legal issues unrelated to WikiLeaks, faces some legal issues unrelated to WikiLeaks arising in Sweden, proper process there is to provide Mr Assange with consular assistance as an Australian citzen.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your reaction to one of the WikiLeaks, that (inaudible) for 12 months to become Prime Minister of Australia?
PM: Well, can I say firstly, let's remind ourselves about what cables are - and I think this always needs to be clear in the reporting - cables are a person's view of a conversation that they have had or some views that they've come to, so a statement in a cable does not confirm a fact. It confirms that someone had that view.
On cables, I don't, I've said all along, and the Government's said consistently, we are not commenting on the contents of confidential cables in the WikiLeaks process. What I will also say is I have been consistently asked, there couldn't have been a question put to me more frequently during the course of 2010, about the events of 2010 leading to me becoming Prime Minister. I've answered these questions consistently, I've answered them truthfully on every occasion, so people want to know what the facts are - they should refer to my answers.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, I think this is a matter that people will debate, debate through the ethics of, but I just, you know, for me it's appropriate that when people are reporting on WikiLeaks that they do not make the slip of suggesting that because something is written in a cable that it is a fact. Cables are reporting the views of the individuals writing the cables, and so that should be clear on all occasions.
I also believe that whilst this process has its fans the other side needs to be put, which is that I do believe this conduct is irresponsible conduct.
JOURNALIST: Is there any particular leak that's come out that would affect Australia and would have adverse affects in terms of our international relations?
PM: Oh, look, I just think the whole process of releasing lots of-
JOURNALIST: -But is there a danger of (inaudible)
PM: Well, certainly, and you would have seen Government spokespeople make this point and I don't allege that this has occurred, but confidential cables can, for example, identify people who provide information to governments, people who live under repressive regimes. Now, that can, if someone is identified in those circumstances who lives under a repressive regime, then of course that can have consequences.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Mr Assange that he doesn't release them?
PM: Well, how on earth would I know whether such cables exist?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, there's no source of knowledge or advice to me that would enable me to know what Mr Assange has in his possession.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, do you plan on apologising to Mohammed Haneef?
PM: Mr Haneef has returned to Australia for a mediation process. I don't think I should be making any comments about what is a legal process that will be undertaken during the course of coming days.
JOURNALIST: His comments are fair, that his reputation has been-
PM: -I'm not going to be drawn into commenting on the Haneef matter when a legal mediation process is immenant.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the New South Wales Court of Appeal ruled today, overturned bans on seven former directors of James Hardie. Is this a blow to the role ASIC is meant to be playing as a watchdog for this big business?
PM: Look, I'll have to get back to you on that matter. I'm not briefed on that currently. Obviously, my time this morning has been spent in briefings related to the Christmas Island incident.
OK, thank you very much.



PM: OK, thanks very much. Now, I've come today with a mob, really, so I'll describe the nature of the mob. We have of course the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, Wayne Swan, the Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, Senator Conroy, the Minister for Finance, Senator Penny Wong, and Mike Quigley who is the CEO of NBN Co.
And what we're here to do today is to release the business case for the NBN. If I can just describe how I would like to do proceedings, I'll make some - [laughs] thank you for that supportive look there, Matthew - I'll make some statements about the NBN, as will Senator Conroy. If we could at that stage take any questions that people have relating to the NBN, then when we have finished that, obviously Mr Quigley will leave at that point, then I will make some statements about an update on Christmas Island and then be very happy to take any questions of the day on other matters. But if we could have the NBN questions first, that would be fantastic.
Today we are releasing the corporate plan, the business case for the National Broadband Network. Now, if we look at the history of telecommunications in this country, in each century we have seen major developments. In the nineteenth century we first saw the telegraph connect Darwin with South Australia, putting the nation in contact right across our vast nation.
In the twentieth century we saw the rollout of the copper telephone network, putting Australians in touch with each other. And that technology has stood the test of time.But now we need to move to the next technology, the technology of this century, fibre, and that technology will be rolled out to Australians through the National Broadband Network. This is the telecommunications development of our century.
And the business case that we are releasing today confirms that the National Broadband Network can be delivered for a lesser cost than originally forecast, the total capital investment necessary is less than originally forecast, that the NBN can be delivered with a rate of return, which means taxpayers will be repaid their investment in the NBN with interest, that the NBN can be delivered with uniform wholesale prices and that those prices will be affordable for consumers with a $24 wholesale price for the basic product.
And of course this case also confirms that there are major benefits for our economy from the rollout of the National Broadband Network. And as people would be aware, there have been a number of estimates of the benefit to our economy, but it is worth at least 1.3 per cent of GDP for our economy to have access to this new technology.
And the business case that is being released today also confirms that by June 2013 the National Broadband Network will be able to be accessed by 1.7 million premises - that's homes, businesses, schools and hospitals able to access the National Broadband Network.
So the business case today, I believe, is good news and is outlining for Australians that building the National Broadband Network is affordable, that taxpayers can be repaid their investment with interest, that consumers will be able to access the benefits of the NBN at affordable prices, and that through the NBN we will be able to get the productivity benefits for our economy and be able to roll out education and health services in new ways to Australians right around the nation.
Now, people would recall that when the Parliament last sat we released a summary of the business case for the NBN as the Parliament considered the Telstra structural separation legislation. Since that time, the Government has received the ACCC advice on the points of interconnect decision and so the business case that is being outlined today includes the impacts of policy decisions taken by the Government having received that ACCC advice.
And the Government did determine to accept the advice of the ACCC to have a semi-distributed model, to make sure that we are using existing infrastructure to have more points of interconnect around the country for businesses to plug into.
The ACCC has advised the Government that with this model the ACCC has the regulatory powers it needs to ensure a uniform wholesale price should the market not deliver that. The ACCC has also said to the Government that its expectation is that there would be uniform retail prices.
In addition, when looking at the business case that's released today, the impact of the points of interconnect decision and other policy decisions are shown in the new rate of return, that rate of return being 7.04 per cent.
The impact of the points of interconnect decision on the rate of return has been a relatively minor one and that is because with this semi-distributed model and the benefits of the ACCC advice we know that we will be in a position to have a uniform wholesale price with all of the uptake in regional Australia that flows from the benefit of uniform wholesale pricing.
With those words, I'll turn to Senator Conroy for some comments.
MINISTER CONROY: Thanks, Prime Minister.
The release of NBN Co's corporate plan today reinforces that the National Broadband Network is financially viable and will deliver affordable prices to all Australians. It reinforces the Government's belief that the NBN is not only something Australia can afford to do, it is something that we cannot afford not to do.
Today we are releasing NBN Co's corporate plan and we are also releasing a statement of expectations for the company in implementing the National Broadband Network.
It is not usual practice for governments to release corporate plans for government business enterprises. We have never done it before and it certainly did not occur under the Howard Government. But the NBN is the largest nation-building infrastructure project in our history, and the Gillard Government is committed to ensuring that Australians are provided with as much detail as possible without compromising commercial sensitivities.
The release of the corporate plan means that all Australians can take a look at NBN Co and its assumptions and costings. Importantly, the corporate plan confirms that taxpayers will get their investment back in NBN with interest and they will get a world class network they can use for decades.
The NBN Co corporate plan includes detailed financial and rollout information that includes that government expects to contribute $27.5 billion in equity for the rollout. NBN Co's expected rate of return is 7.04 per cent which compares favourably with the average 10-year bond rate to September 2010 of 5.41 per cent. That means the Government can expect to recover all of its NBN Co funding costs with interest.
As a wholly owned company, the Government, by its complete control of the project during rollout and the flexibility to ensure outcomes, are optimised for all Australians. The total capital expenditure for the project is estimated to be $35.9 billion. By June 2013, NBN Co is expected to pass 1.7 million premises. NBN Co will offer a range of wholesale pricing options providing retailers with maximum flexibility to tailor their services to customers.
NBN Co will offer uniform national wholesale prices with its access price for its basic service of 12 megabit download and one megabit upload across all technologies starting at $24 per month. This will strengthen competition between retail service providers.
With a level playing field we've now created, we expect competition between retail service providers to be strong and result in better services and better prices for Australians.
As I said today, the government is releasing a statement that sets out our expectations of NBN Co as it rolls out the NBN.
One of the most important decisions recently finalised, as the Prime Minister has said, was on the number and location of the points of interconnect to the NBN and on battery back-up arrangements.
The ACCC advised the government that a network design where the NBN will extend to meet, but not over-build competitive back-all routes, would be the best outcome for competition and the long-term interests of end users. This approach has been generally supported by industry, in consultation with the ACCC. The government has accepted the ACCC's advice and, as a result, NBN Co will establish approximately 120 points of interconnect, 80 in metropolitan Australia and 40 in regional Australia.
The ACCC will closely monitor the level of competition on back-all routes and use its new upfront pricing powers to address any failure in these markets to deliver competitive outcomes, particularly in regional areas.
The government expects this approach will deliver a uniform national wholesale pricing outcome and support the ability of retailers, in the ACCC's opinion, to offer uniform prices at the retail level.
The government expects NBN Co to provide battery back-up to all premises in the fibre footprint, to ensure a standard telephone will continue to provide voice services during black-outs, and we're in consultations with industry about how to do that ongoing and what the implications are.
Additional policy decisions, stressed in the statement, include the role NBN Co and the ACCC will have in delivering uniform national wholesale prices. The NBN Co will be the wholesale provider of last resort for fibre connections in new developments. And performance and monitoring arrangements, including the NBN Co, will develop a charter that outlines how it will conduct its affairs to best meet the needs of stakeholder groups.
The statement of expectations not only gives clear direction to NBN Co, but also represents the government's final response to the implementation study. In the period since the study was delivered, and following consultations with NBN Co, industry and other stakeholders, a number of events have occurred that have had a bearing on how the government has responded to the implementation study and its key recommendations.
These events - that's three events stand out.
The financial heads of agreement between NBN Co and Telstra. The commitments to regional Australia agreed with the independent members, Tony Windsor and Rob Oakeshott, following the election. And the joint ACCC-NBN Co consultation process on the number and location of the points of interconnect.
In July 2010, in line with the implementation study recommendation, the government set NBN Co an objective to reach 93 per cent of premises with fibre technology by the end of the rollout period.
The government also requested NBN Co to build the wireless network that will deliver fixed wireless services, delivering peak speeds of at least 12 mb to premises in the 93 to 97 percentile of premises. And the government expects the NBN Co to maximise the use for existing infrastructure where it is efficient and economic to do so in the delivery of the fixed wireless network.
So 2010 is the year the Gillard Government's NBN vision became a reality. 2010 has been an extraordinary year for the NBN and Australia's communications landscape more generally. In 2011 it is time to focus on the delivery of this important infrastructure and how it will change our way of life in Australia.
We know with the release of these documents today and from the many studies and inquiries that have been carried out here and around the world, that the NBN is financially viable and will deliver enormous benefits to all Australians.
It is now time to pursue those benefits with determination and innovation, to turn our attention and energy to using the NBN to fulfilling our vision and to change the lives of Australians, no matter where they live or work.
Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in your opening remarks you talked about a $24 wholesale price being the basic service. And you also - I think you said also that uniform retail at one point...
PM: I said that's the ACCC expectation, that's what I said.
JOURNALIST: So based on a $24 wholesale price, what's a reasonable retail price for people to expect to pay?
And secondly, when Kevin Rudd first announced all of this, there was a big focus on mum and dad investors being able to buy Aussie bonds to invest in that. What's happened to that?
PM: Right. Well firstly, retail prices will obviously be set by the retail market, but it's just, you know, a golden rule the more competition you have the better pricing consumers have.
Golden rule in markets of all kinds. It's a golden rule in telecommunications and the way in which NBN is being rolled out, uniform wholesale price will obviously facilitate competition between retail providers who will be vying for business with competitive prices.
The business plan that you also have today shows that NBN has factored in wholesale prices coming down over time in real and in nominal terms. So that is part of the information set that you've got today.
So when you add it all up, what does it mean for consumers? Well it means better quality; the NBN is obviously better quality than people have had access to. Fibre is better quality than the technologies people have been using. More competition - more competition is good for retail prices and, of course, we've got the benefit of the uniform wholesale price and its expectation of decline over time.
On private equity investment raising, you will see in the material that you have before you today that there is obviously a government equity injection and that NBN Co, advised by Goldman Sachs, believes that we will be well and truly able - NBN Co will be well and truly able to raise the private equity that's necessary.
JOURNALIST: A little bit of a follow up from that question. You talk about - you both mentioned retail prices will be affordable, but you can't say yet, because you don't know, what those retail prices will be, that they will be affordable, particularly for low income earners do you?
And also your Minister mentioned a lot of things that he says will happen including the - the repayment of the government equity and the internal rate of return. But aren't those based on assumptions? You don't have - you can't say definitely whether those things will happen either can you?
PM: Well every business in this country engages in business planning and that's exactly what NBN Co is doing. Every business in this country does that. And we have brought to bear, through NBN Co, the best available commercial expertise to put the document before you and before the Australian people today. It's been worked on by experts over a considerable period of time, informed by important things like the policy decision the government took following the ACCC advice on points of interconnect.
And good news in this document being released today is that the rate of return is higher than was initially anticipated in the implementation study. We are talking about a rate of return at 7.04 per cent. What that means for taxpayers is this is a use of taxpayer's money that has a sufficient rate of return, that taxpayers can be paid back with interest. It is more than the long-term government bond rate.
There's been any amount of discussion in this building about a cost benefit analysis. Well what this document is telling you today is the NBN is viable, with a viable rate of return, as a proposition in its own right. That's before you go to all of the economic benefits for businesses. It's before you go to all of the service delivery benefits for health and education in our country. That's what it's telling you in the business case.On retail pricing; retail pricing is a function of cost and the wholesale cost is there before you for the most basic product and retail pricing is a function of competitive pressures and there will be more competition in this market than there has been in the past. I'll also get the minister to comment briefly, then we'll come across.
MINISTER CONROY: Well that's right. Obviously, as Mr Quigley said in the briefing earlier and is in the document there, you have to make some calculations. But there isn't a national uniform wholesale price to compare it against. There isn't the quality of the fibre versus the quality of the copper to make a direct apples from apples comparison. And one of the great tricks in this sector is the willingness of all of those - and the ACCC has repeatedly had to intervene on this issue - to try and muddy up how you actually do an apples with apples comparison. There are all sorts of mechanisms that are used, at the moment in the marketplace to try and not allow you to make very simple comparisons. And one of the key questions is, well, can you compare a 10 gigabit download limit with 100 gigabit download limit? And they've got nothing to do with the speeds - they're just a limit to the amount to actually make comparisons.
So there's a whole range of complex issues that are going to be able to be dealt with very simply, because the pricing model of NBN Co is that there is one basic national wholesale price which allows you then to have a level playing field - something you haven't had before. And that's the really key difference.
In the past Telstra have had an incentive, obviously, and this has been identified in a whole range of access disputes, over 150 of them, you've all heard me talk about this before, that are now going to be removed.
There's no longer any need for game playing by NBN Co because they are the provider, they are the wholesale provider. So we are levelling the playing field and creating a competitive environment that will see, as Mr Quigley has said, nominal and real prices falling over time for, well, for the wholesale price, falling over time.
JOURNALIST: Just on the cost-benefit analysis question, so we're spending $27 billion of government money over the next decade and a half, two decades...
MINISTER CONROY: Eight years.
JOURNALIST: Well, okay, but it's out there for a long time.
MINISTER CONROY: $3 billion a year.
JOURNALIST: Before it gets back.
MINISTER CONROY: $3.5 billion a year.
JOURNALIST: Now we've just gone through a briefing where the overwhelming number of people using the NBN will be residential customers. And they will be using the NBN to download IPTV or something similar. Now what do you say to people sitting in traffic in Sydney or waiting in a hospital queue or spending money to send their kid to a private school because they can't get a decent education at a public school - why is that $27 billion better spent on the NBN than spent on public transport, hospitals, or education?
MINISTER CONROY: Because spending on the NBN is about spending money on hospitals. It is about spending money on hospitals. It is about spending money on education. It is about spending money on environment improvement through people being able to work from home. So they're not sitting in those traffic jams, so they're not sitting in hospital waiting lists because they're able to do those things from home.
Because if you look at what, for instance, Hong Kong have just completed on their e-health, can I - if I can finish, thank you. The e-health benefits if you look at what Hong Kong have done, are already saving lives.
Now what they would like to do next is what we're doing - and that is start taking pressure off hospitals by having people in their homes earlier. That means less waiting lists - that's what it's about, it's about improving the costs for public health, it's about improving the cost for public education, giving a richer education experience to your kids, giving a better health experience, giving a better aged-care experience, because you're able to have people stay in their homes longer - rather than putting them into aged-care centres, into institutions.
This is the sort of technology if you look around the world is already starting to happen.
And we released, my department, perhaps you haven't seen it, Sid, a study just recently about the benefits of people being able to work from home.
And they're calculated, I think, between $1.5 billion and $2 billion I think. We're happy to give you that. We've released that sum many months ago - which demonstrates the benefits, which means that people aren't sitting in those traffic jams for longer.
Now is it going to solve all of those state-based problems on roads? No. But what we have been doing is putting more money into public education. Putting more money - this is directly into education - more money into public education, more money into public health, more money into infrastructure investment around this country so we can actually chew gum and walk at the same time, because we're not just investing in the NBN. We're investing in public education. We're investing in public schooling. We're investing and getting all those other range of services like aged-care facilities. We're doing all of that and the NBN and all at the same time as bringing the budget back into surplus by 2013.
So we're managing to walk and chew gum. We're not sitting here wasting our time navel gazing. For those who tried to argue that a cost benefit is absolutely essential, it works on the flawed assumption that this loses money and you need the national benefits to counteract the losing of money.
This shows you're not losing money. Taxpayers get the money back plus interest.
JOURNALIST: Just on your deal with the Independents, obviously there was a lot more focus about the NBN being outside in rather than in and then out. How was that - and the Minister might be able to answer this - how has that affected the cost of the NBN and in fact the rates of return that in this short-term in particular?
MINISTER CONROY: That's based on an assertion that we were starting in the metro. If you look at where the NBN is already being built - Tasmania, hardly what can be considered a metropolitan centre, is a regional - it's a region.
JOURNALIST: We were told that you were going to be more outside in and...
MINISTER CONROY: No no. I've just started with Tasmania. Okay, if you look at four of the five first release sites that the NBN is currently building in place, four of the five of those are in regional rural Australia. Townsville, Camperdowns, Armidale, Willunga.
The only one of those that's metropolitan is Brunswick in Melbourne.
And then if you look at the next 19 sites that have been identified by the NBN Co, I think 14 of them are actually regional.
So this was based on an assumption from people that we already weren't highly focused on regional Australia. And so you can see from that that the NBN Co, I think we've identified there'll be 31 build sites across Australia, at once at our peak build. But we've already identified in those 19 that were already prioritised around regional Australia.
That's not to say that we're not going to be doing metropolitan - we're going to do that. But if you actually look at the balance of what's there now - we've actually already started in regional Australia. And this perception that suddenly we'd change the whole build structure was just wrong.
PM: Can I just - we'll keep going. And can I just say, all of the undertakings we gave the Independents can be acquitted with the figures in front of you.
JOURNALIST: I just want to ask, back on the retail and we've been trying to ask what sort of costs we can look at for the consumer at home - because you now have a wholesale level playing field on the wholesale price, surely there's some modelling that's been done by government and NBN Co that says what ball park we're looking at consumers paying, maybe a percentage mark up on the wholesale price that they'll end up paying to get at that 12 megabits per second or 100 megabits per second - why can't we get that sort of ballpark figure today.
PM: Well if I can...
MINISTER CONROY: It's actually in the document. If you look on page 105.
PM: There is some material in the document, but can I just say this, when you want a competitive market to work, when you want the competitive market to work and to get all of the benefits that competition can provide, the last thing you would want is me standing here as Prime Minister saying my expectation about mark up is - because then you're obviously giving a signal to the market about what people should go out and charge, whereas we want them to use their best energies, their best endeavours, their best innovation, their best marketing, their best thinking to compete in a market - and to offer people low prices.
What drives people to offer the lowest prices is the force of competition.
MINISTER CONROY: And if I can just make one point - the Chief Executive of the largest, I think, telecommunications company in the world came to see me a couple of weeks ago when Parliament was sitting on the extra Monday. And what he said, he's... you know, he's the Vodafone Chief Executive, and he wanted to talk about what we were doing, and what he's indicated publicly is that if we actually deliver on what we've talked about delivering, they will enter the fixed market.Now Vodafone aren't in the fixed market today.
So there is a direct statement from a CEO - I know it didn't make the front page of some newspapers because he was just the largest telecommunications company executive in the world - but they made it clear they will enter the market.
If there isn't a bigger endorsement of why you should do the NBN, I don't know what it was, from that one chief executive of the world's largest company.
PM: Okay, if... yeah.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we've heard today that the remaining seven per cent is a market which wouldn't be touched by the commercial sector with this level of investment. What assurances can the government make, that should the NBN face privatisation, that that commitment would remain to provide that service to these people?
PM: Well we'll obviously - you know, our commitments about the servicing of remote Australia is what you're referring to isn't it, with the seven per cent? Our commitments will obviously be honoured in any decisions that was taken about privatisation would be decisions taken meeting those service obligations.
JOURNALIST: Once it becomes a private company...
PM: Well you can...
MINISTER CONROY: We've got USOKO.
PM: You can impose service obligations on companies that are not government owned.
MINISTER CONROY: But we are transferring responsibility for a whole range of, like, emergency services, those basic services that somebody's got to provide. And Telstra are required to provide them at the moment.
We're creating - at the moment it's called USOKO. We will come up with something slightly sexier - a term like that, possibly, you know, NBN was such a sexy name that they kept it. But USOKO is looking at holding all of those universal service obligations within it now rather than being on an individual company.
JOURNALIST: Isn't the NBN Co business plan half as competitive in regional Australia as what the ACCC wanted? They wanted 81 points of interconnect, and I understand there are 40 points of interconnect specifically located in regional Australia.
MINISTER CONROY: I'm not sure quite what you mean by that, but me, let me be clear about this - the ACCC have indicated that they will declare - so this perception that you get cheaper prices by having more POIs is not actually right. You increase the amount of competition and therefore lower prices by having less number of POIs.
So there's this perception that more POIs, more competition, this is actually wrong.
PM: And we are accepting the ACCC advice
JOURNALIST: They wanted 81..
PM: No we haven't moved, the ACCC advice has been accepted
MINISTER CONROY: The key different is that they've indicated that they are prepared to declare pricing on regional back-all routes if they is a problem and that's why the NBN Co have been able to say that there will be less of an impact on their internal rate of return because they expect that the take-up in regional areas, because of that decision by the ACCC, not the number of POI's that they're prepared to step into the market because of the market failure on back-all competition.
So they're stepping in, that's the key difference, that, with a simple argument 14 versus 200, it's that commitment from the ACCC that makes the difference for regional Australia.
JOURNALIST: Minister, you mentioned take-up
PM: Oh we were going to go over here...oh alright Dennis.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned take-up and both you and the Prime Minister have mentioned passing 1.7 million premises, what are the take-up estimates?
MINISTER CONROY: The next page in the presentation was indicated it's nearly seven hundred thousand I think? Right nearly six hundred thousand.
QUIGLEY: Nearly six hundred thousand.
MINISTER CONROY: Sorry five hundred and seventy thousand.
PM: That's access 1.7 million, anticipated usage of that access six hundred thousand. Is that your question? Yes. Ok, Kathryn.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister I was also going to ask the same question but I also need a supplementary if I can. Just in terms of the issue of cherry picking and the next sort of legislative phase of this picnic. How does the government propose a...
MINISTER CONROY: We've already tabled it inside the bill that exist, that we tabled on the last couple of days of Parliament sitting,
JOURNALIST: The legislation?
MINISTER CONROY: Yes the legislation. So some of the cherry picking aspects, some of those are contained in there, and we'll look at other provisions if necessary, but it's a piece of legislation before the Parliament.
JOURNALIST: And have you begun negotiations with cross benches?
MINISTER CONROY: No, we only tabled it in the last few days of the Parliament, I think Senator Xenophon has already indicated that he's got some issues he wants to raise with us about it and we will go through all of that usual process that we go through to pass legislation.
PM: Yes, we will have plenty of time to work that through.
MINISTER CONROY: But the fundamental principle is a cross-subsidy works if the richer areas cross-subsidise the poor areas. If you can't guarantee the NBN Co can access those areas you can't ultimately protect with the cross-subsidised national wholesale price, so you've got to have the balance, you've got to be able to access those areas, as opposed to just those areas.
JOURNALIST: I understand that there will be considerable political sensitivity around the issue of protecting a government monopoly right there, isn't it? Isn't it...
MINISTER CONROY: We've indicated from day one that this was going to be a wholesale only government monopoly and we'd be working on a cross-subsidy which they've instated from almost the very first press conference and what this is doing is just following through on that.
PM: Ok next question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you are announcing the spending of billions and billions of dollars taxpayer dollars. I still don't understand how it is not possible with the government doesn't have a ballpark figure on how much it is going to cost for a household to connect for 12 Mb per second...
MINISTER CONROY: It's actually on Page 105, it's in there. I'll throw to Mr Quigley at this point
JOURNALIST: But how do you know it's affordable, you haven't given us $30 bucks a month for 12 megabytes or $150 a month for the 100 megabytes.
MINISTER CONROY: Well the comparisons between, I'm on page 105, comparisons between what is charged in the marketplace today and they don't include, Mike correct me if I am wrong, and they don't include 30 odd bucks for line rental on top of that, so those prices are direct comparison between, and I think NBN Co in there estimate what sort of prices. What you see is they are very compatible prices for a better product, fibre versus copper, they're comparable prices.
For a better product which allows us to have the capacity to take advantage of all the new applications that will come along, but it's not based on that, and also NBN Co have made it clear that they intended to lower in both nominal and real terms all of their product prices so we are actually driving prices lower into the marketplace than they are today.
PM: One second. Now I think Senator Conroy has given you the detail and he is very much across it but I think just from absolute commonsense, absolute commonsense, wholesale price declining over time in real and nominal terms - a competitive market.
Now you'd have to be saying, you'd have to be saying if you're going to extrapolate this that you'd have to be saying to yourself the rules of competition have been suspended in this market there is nothing, no piece of evidence that could lead you to conclude that, all you would have to be saying to yourself a declining wholesale price in real and nominal terms over time is a bad thing. You'd be crazy to say that so simple commonsense.
Declining wholesale price, competitive market, competition is good for pricing so we can walk down the street look at the shops have a think about it.
JOURNALIST: The figure you've come up with is (inaudible) can you just explain for a 12 MB plan per month with a 50 gig download limit is between roughly between $53 and $58 a month. Is that what you expect of retail consumers to pay?
QUIGLEY: That is what we would calculate looking at all of the factors that a retailer would base their price on, based on our wholesale prices.
In that document you will see a comparison with other plans in the marketplace and you've got to be very careful of the headline dollar plans and then the things you have to have to add into it so we've factored those into it.
If I can also add there is one thing that we took into account which is very important is that if somebody is going to use a voice-only service, which may exist, we have an arrangement in the deal we've done with Telstra to make sure that their prices will not go up. They will pay no more today, or no more tomorrow than they are paying today.
So these plans are quite difficult to compare, you really have to look across all of the different factors that go into them and not just look at the one headline number that you see on the back of the bus.
JOURNALIST: I am just wondering what your priorities will be for the roll-out. Will you be looking for places that are the least well served by broadband at the moment to roll-out there first where it is going to be easiest to roll out, how will that work?
MINISTER CONROY: Obviously it is easier roll-out in dense inner-city areas but obviously we won't be doing just that. My life as I have said a number of times is ruled by engineers and - meet my favourite engineer - and they make their decisions based on a whole range of factors.
There is a whole range of, they travel around Australia there is a whole range of councils, of not just small areas like Barcoo and their Mayor Scott has been very vocal, but there is a whole range of centres that are banding together to put forward submissions as to why we should start there first.
This is a fantastic thing we are doing. Many of the places that have already been picked were because the communities got together and put forward a case to NBN Co and NBN Co looked at a whole range of factors and made decisions based on that so when NBN Co are making engineering decisions and they are making it based on a information that communities are putting to them as to how they can best benefit. So there is a whole range of factors.
PM: NBN Co makes those decisions. Righto, we will take a last question on NBN and then we will move. Thank you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) ...the percentage of people that would use the 12 Mb per second and the percentage of people who will use the faster and faster (inaudible) shows that pretty much over all up until 2028 there is only a small decrease in the number of users using 12 mega bits per second, whereas the high end users seem to be the ones that will go up to faster and faster speeds. Are we expecting from this that we will have a lot of people, the haves and the have-nots, the people who can only afford 12 Mb per second that will stay pretty much the same whereas more wealthy people will be able to afford faster and faster broadband?
MINISTER CONROY: No.
JOURNALIST: Well how does it work? This shows that the vast bulk of people will stay on that slowest broadband rate.
QUIGLEY: The slowest broadband rate, by the way, as you see in there, is better the, and across all three technologies - fibre, wireless, fixed wireless, and satellite - is better than the ADSL2 plus services today. So if you're doing downloads of web pages or whatever else this will be a very good service you get, and remember it is distance independent. It doesn't matter how far away from the exchange you are how many people are on the network, it will work just as well.
So we are expecting, and some people can say we are conservative in those estimates, we haven't predicted a huge growth in high speeds. Higher speeds will happen. I frankly, personally will be a little surprised if we didn't see those people moving through some of those higher speed tiers faster as more and more services become available. But that's the basis of our numbers that we built up in a business case.
MINISTER CONROY: We'd have been criticised if we'd tried to say well, well look seven in 10 people will start jumping to try and make the numbers look better but that's not what happened in this case. They gave a very conservative estimate, and so we can still make money even if that trajectory takes place. So we'd have been criticised by a whole range of financial markets and experts in the sector saying oh now look, they've decided now 7/10 people have got to jump to the next, in the first three days that is not what they've done. They've taken, the NBN guys have taken a very conservative approach. It is not saying that will be the outcome but it will be a very conservative approach to construct the numbers.
I do think the force of what Mr Quigley has just said to you ought not be lost in the discussion and the terminology. What is being referred to is the basic service here is faster than most Australians would ever have seen or used. That's the basic service - faster than most Australians would have ever seen or ever use. That's the basic service in the documentation. So basic is better for most Australians than they've ever seen on or used, and then you've got this huge capability beyond what is described as basic.
PM: Thank you for that, now we are happy to take questions on issue of the day, but before I do that I did want to just make some statements about Christmas Island and some updating matters there.
This morning and during the course of the weekend I received regular briefings on the situation at Christmas Island. As people would be aware on Friday the difficult decision was taken to suspend the air and sea search and rescue operation, that is because the tragic advice had been provided that it was not possible for someone to have survived at sea beyond that period of time.
I've also been updated by the Australian Federal Police about estimates of how many people were on the boat. As I have said publicly before we may never know absolutely certainly how many people were on the boat. We may never know the precise number.
But the advice to me is that the best estimate at present is that there were around 90 people on the boat. That does mean of course that we are still not able to account for around 18 people on the boat, but I do say that we may never know the total number with certainty, but that's the best advice and best estimate available to me.
What of course that means is the total number of lives that has been lost here is higher than the number of persons who have been recovered and that number remains at 30. We are of course talking about very rough seas, very rocky and difficult coastline, and so it may be that there are bodies of people who travelled on the boat that are never recovered.
So that is obviously very, very grim news and I'm sure that Australians today are continuing to reflect on this tragedy, to reflect on those that are grieving who have lost loved ones, to reflect on those who worked on this incident, the Christmas Islanders who watched from the shoreline and saw such dreadful scenes, the Christmas Islanders and the Navy and Customs personnel that went to the aid and effected the rescues.
I am pleased to say that the number of people in hospital has now reduced to one, there is one person remaining in the Perth Hospital, but the other people evacuated to the Perth Hospital and the people who have been in the Christmas Island Hospital have now been discharged, but are obviously our thoughts continue to be with people who are injured following this very tragic incident. As people would be aware there are memorial services that are occurring for those who have survived and also for people in the Christmas Island Immigration Detention Facility, those services are obviously playing a role as people grieve and mourn their losses.
The Christmas Island community at the appropriate time will also have a community memorial service, the best timing of that will be determined by the Christmas Island community itself. Christmas Island is a place where many people travel from Christmas Island back to mainland Australia for the Christmas New Year period and so the Christmas Island community will work through as to what is the best time to have the memorial service so that community members in the largest possible numbers have the ability to participate in it.
Of course counselling services continue to be available both for those who have survived to incident itself and for the Christmas Island community as they deal with the burdens on them from this day and having seen what so many people saw from the shoreline and having participated in rescue efforts.
So the news from Christmas Island will I'm sure continue to weigh heavily on Australians and particularly the loss of life will weigh very heavily on Australians.
I'm very happy to take questions on that or any other matter.
JOURNALIST: Notwithstanding the management of this particular incident at Christmas Island, do you see any case for changes to the government's policy in relation to unauthorised boat arrivals, either strengthening of the policy or an (inaudible) of the current deterrent?
PM: The government will continue with its policy and as is well known we are seeking to add to it with a Regional Protection Framework and Regional Processing Centre.
When we look at the government's policy we've got more assets patrolling our borders than we've ever had before, we have a rigorous mandatory detention policy, we have increased penalties for people smugglers, particularly for people smugglers who cause loss of life, whose conduct causes loss of life.
We are continuing to work with our region and invest in our region to assist law enforcement capabilities and we have disrupted around 240 people smuggling ventures and we've enjoyed some success in arresting people smugglers, both in our region and in Australia itself.
We will continue with those policies. We do though want to smash the people smuggling business model, we do want to take out of the hands of people smugglers the very evil product that they sell and that is why we are working on a Regional Protection Framework and Regional Processing Centre.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) actually help smash that people smuggling racket, or do you think it would make it more attractive.
PM: Look, the government's got no plans to increase the humanitarian intake. Obviously the government takes decisions about immigration numbers in all classes from time to time, but we've got no plans to do that.
What I would say is the people smuggling business model will be there for however long people think to themselves if they pay a people smuggler and risk their life at sea that they will be processed and dealt with in a different way than if they stayed where they are, which is why the Regional Protection Framework and Regional Processing Centre is about smashing that business model. It's about saying to people if you get on a boat, pay a people smuggler, risk your life at sea, even when you reach Australia what will happen is you are returned to the Regional Processing Centre, so you do not get an advantage by having paid a people smuggler. That is our aim.
JOURNALIST: An extension on that question is in relation to the intake and the composition. According to the UNHCR, Indonesia has something like 17,000 people who are registered as asylum seekers, 798 who are refugees.
Australia will only take 500 of those, if you're not going to change the size of the intake but the composition, could you take more from Indonesia where there is obviously a lot of people waiting to come to Australia to take some of the pressure, to therefore stop people making these perilous journeys.
PM: Look I think we've got the be a bit practical about this and if we are going to be a bit practical about it, what we have to say to ourselves is around the world there are millions of people on the move seeking to make asylum claims. We see it throughout Europe, there is travel throughout Europe and tragically we've seen loss of life in that travel too, people would be familiar the instance of people who have smothered in the backs of vans making transits across Europe. So there are literally millions of people on the move.
The size of our humanitarian intake needs to be determined by the Australian government, we're a compassionate and generous people and we step up and do more than our fair share in terms of taking refugees from refugee camps around the world, so we do have an intake there.
Now in terms of what would break the people smuggling model, it seems to me you couldn't say well if you move into one country and take more caseload that you won't see more people arriving and replacing the caseload that you've taken, that I think is the problem with the argument you put. What we need to do is we need to smash the people smuggling business model itself.
JOURNALIST: What do you make of criticism of mining companies of the government handling of the resources super profits tax and the claims that the government wasn't straight with the industry? Do you have confidence that you and the Treasurer, who is the subject of some of this criticism, will be able to push through whatever cynicism there in the mining sector to get an outcome on the new tax?
PM: Well, I'm very happy to take that question. If the Treasurer wants to say something, then he will.
We see lots of huff and puff in newspaper articles with no names in it, lots of huff and puff. Meanwhile, in the real world, the policy transition group processes are working well. We will deliver the policy transition group report shortly.
We are in positive discussions and on a positive pathway with the mining industry. That's the real world.
TREASURER: And I just to make this point - this has been a tough debate. It's not surprising to see all sorts of claim and counterclaim. The Government had always determined to include the mining tax in the budget, because as you would well remember the centrepiece of the budget, the centrepiece of our response to Mr Henry's report, was to deal with the challenges of Mining Boom Mark II, and to deal with the challenges of Mining Boom Mark II we needed to have lower rates of corporate taxation overall; we needed to be able to invest in infrastructure, particularly in mining regions which are under such tremendous pressure; and also to build our national savings. The only responsible thing to do in those circumstances was to include all of that in the Budget. Could you imagine what people would have said if we hadn't included that in the Budget?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Hang on, hang on, we'll take it one at a time. Settle down and we will allow Matthew another one. I don't quite know why but an overwhelmingly Christmas generous urge is coming upon me. Matthew?
JOURNALIST: Well, Treasurer, even in your own state of Queensland, Anna Bligh has said yesterday that she believes that with regard to the negotiations for the new tax, your commitment was clear, that it would cover-
TREASURER: -Matthew, whether it was the old tax, or whether it was the new tax, under either arrangement there was no way in the world that royalties could keep going up willy-nilly. It's just not common sense.
But look, we'll work our way through this in a sensible way. As the Prime Minister said, the Argus group, the committee, the Policy Transition Group, has worked well because I think everybody understands an outcome here is good for Australia. It's good for certainty and what we are doing through that group - and the report will be released before Christmas - is bringing the certainty through. That's a good thing. That's what the industry wants. That's why the Prime Minister worked so closely with the industry to resolve the design. This group was an outcome of that process, and we will work cooperatively with the industry and the States to resolve all of the issues, but I think it's going pretty well.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, Anna Bligh has made the point that in the Heads of Agreement, which you both signed, all referred to all royalties, including future. Is that correct - and I understand of course that previously it wasn't the case. Does all mean all in the Heads of Agreement?
TREASURER: We will receive the report from the Argus group, as I said, before Christmas. We'll deal with these issues.
As I've already indicated before, nobody sitting around the table thought that there was going to be some green light for state royalties to go up forever, not the Queensland Government, nobody thought that.
We get all sorts of claim and counterclaim now. We'll deal with this because this is good for Australia, good for the mining industry, and particularly good for great mining states like Queensland and WA, but we'll work our way through those issues. We've got the Argus report coming through. The Government will respond to that in a careful way and deal with all of these issues.
JOURNALIST: But for a State like WA where the GST share is going to be dropping over the coming decade - every single year it's going to drop - the temptation will be to increase those royalties. To decode what you've meant by willy-nilly, are you saying that the Government will accept some increase to royalties or nought?
TREASURER: I'm not saying that at all. It is simply common sense that States, for example, that have increased their royalties in recent times, would not be contemplating doing that again willy-nilly, so I don't necessarily anticipate this happening. Now, some states have done that-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible)
TREASURER: Well, I don't think so, because you know what? I don't think it would be good for the mining industry and I don't think it would be well received by the mining industry, but there are legitimate issues involved here. There are wider issues of federal-state financial relations. We will deal with those through the normal processes, through the COAG process. We're awaiting the report from the Policy Transition Group.
We'll deal with this in a methodical, sensible and commonsense way, but there will be claim and counterclaim, but in the middle of all of that this is a very, very big advance for Australia - a stream of revenue to boost savings, invest in infrastructure and lower tax for business.
PM: Can I just add to that before we take the next two questions, and perhaps this may cause people to think some of these issues through again, most of this questioning is proceeding on the assumption that there is some intractable problem here that can't be solved. That assumption's completely untrue.
We're on a positive pathway, working through the policy transition group - which is working well. As the Treasurer says, we will deliver its outcomes before Christmas. We will continue to work through a bit of huff and puff from unnamed sources in newspapers - doesn't affect that reality where people are sitting down, working things through and have been doing it in a positive way leading to the policy transition group report.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the miners and the mining states weren't lulled into a false sense of security, were they, before an election, to think that the state royalties would be rebated and covered by the MRRT and the Government's tax scheme-
PM: -The mining industry, through the policy transition group process, is working through in a positive way with Government. That is the reality of what's happening.
TREASURER: Can I just make this point-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) before an election-
TREASURER: No, no.
PM: No. How absurd, and an assumption you'd only come to if you weren't dealing with the reality of this and the reality of this is very clear - I entered an agreement with the mining industry. We have had the policy transition group to work through bringing that agreement to life, and then, of course, at the appropriate point, we'll have legislation which people will be able to comment on.
The policy transition group process, which is bringing the agreement into life, is working through positively. That's the reality.
TREASURER: I just want to add one thing to that. This is very important, because when you put a fundamental reform like a resource rent tax in place there is always going to be claim and counterclaim. This is a very significant change and you will get those who will oppose it. You'll get those who will support it.
Our job is to look after the national interest, and the national interest is served by a tax like this one - well designed, there's been strong consultation with industry, and implemented so we can deal with the challenges of Mining Boom Mark II.
I don't expect that people will be on the sidelines saying everybody in the industry is necessarily in agreement with the outcome, but the outcome is a good one for Australia, but what you do run into here is really strong, powerful and loud vested interests.
Now, what the Prime Minister achieved was a very good agreement with the industry - a breakthrough agreement. Coming from that has been this process led by Mr Argus in which the industry has all been involved.
I'm sure when industry sees the outcome there will still be people who won't agree with the outcome, but there will be a substantial group of people who recognise that it is in Australia's national - interest including people in the mining industry.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: OK, just take these at the front, and then I think we're going for a world record here. Yes, I think you're, Katherine?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the benefits of sitting in the front row of this room, you can see a lot more than when you're down the back. I've just noticed a lovely big ring on your left hand and I'm just wondering if someone engaged our Prime Minister?
PM: Right, we've got to that stage in a press conference where it's all got a bit silly. No, I've had that ring for a long period of time, and I miscellaneously wear it on my left hand or my right hand depending on how much hand writing I'm doing because I don't know about you, but I find if I work a long period of time writing with rings on my right hand then they start to hurt, and so then I slip it onto my left hand.
If it'll make you feel better I'll slip it back onto the right hand.
JOURNALIST: Is it (inaudible)
PM: No, it's not.
JOURNALIST: On a perhaps less important matter, overnight the US Vice President, Joe Biden, declared Julian Assange as a type of high-tech terrorist. Is that a view you agree with, and how do you feel about an Australian citizen engaged in the type of activities he's engaged in being described as a terrorist?
PM: Well, look, I've made my views well known here. I think the conduct in relation to WikiLeaks has been grossly irresponsible. Now, I know it's got some fans in some places but I think it is grossly irresponsible. I think it risks damaging the interests of individuals named and it risks damaging the US national interest, and of course the interest of the US and its allies. That's my analysis.
I'm not going to adopt anybody's form of words. That's my form of words. That's what I believe.
JOURNALIST: Does it worry that an Australian citizen has labelled a terrorist?
PM: Well, Mr Assange can obviously deal with these questions himself. He has world-class access to the media if he seeks to respond on that matter.
JOURNALIST: Are you back on holidays now, Prime Minister, after today, or-
PM: -I've come to spend some time with you, and I've got a few more things to do, so I'll be around.



The Gillard Government today released NBN Co Limited's Corporate Plan, which shows the National Broadband Network (NBN) will provide all Australians with world-class broadband on a financially viable basis at affordable prices.The Corporate Plan shows taxpayers will get their investment back, with interest; the NBN will provide a rate of return significantly higher than the government bond rate; and all Australians will gain access to this state-of-the-art network.The plan provides a range of detailed information on the rollout and costings of this important project including:
 * 	 NBN Co's expected rate of return is 7.04 per cent, which compares favourably with the average 10 year bond rate (July 2009 to November 2010) of 5.39 per cent. The NBN Corporate Plan shows the Government can expect to recover all its funding costs with interest.
 * 	There will be uniform national wholesale prices across NBN Co's network which will provide a foundation for retail prices that will be both affordable and competitive.
 * 	By June 2013, NBN Co is expected to have passed 1.7 million premises.
 * 	As a wholly owned Commonwealth company, the Government will have overall control of the project during rollout and the flexibility to ensure outcomes are optimised for all Australians.
 * 	The total capital expenditure for the project is estimated to be $35.9 billion.
 * 	The Government expects to contribute $27.5 billion in equity for the rollout.
NBN Co will provide uniform national wholesale prices, with an access price for its basic service of 12mbps / 1 mbps across all technologies starting at $24 per month. The Government expects this will translate into retail prices that will be both affordable and very competitive.NBN Co will also offer a range of wholesale pricing options, providing retailers with maximum flexibility to tailor their services to customers.The Corporate Plan has been adjusted in recent weeks to take account of the Government's response to the NBN Implementation Study, including the decision regarding the Points of Interconnect (POI) to the network that was informed by advice from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC).The ACCC has advised that a semi-distributed network design would be the best outcome for competition and in the long-term interests of end users. Uniform wholesale prices can still be delivered under a semi-distributed POI approach.The ACCC will closely monitor the level of competition on backhaul routes and address any failure in these markets to deliver competitive outcomes by using its new upfront price determination powers where needed.Based on the ACCC's advice, NBN Co's internal rate of return has not been materially affected by the decision on POIs, as these changes mean that regional take-up is not likely to be significantly affected.A key assumption of the Corporate Plan is the finalisation of the Definitive Agreements between NBN Co and Telstra.The Government recognises that Telstra's participation in the rollout of the NBN represents a major transaction delivering significant micro-economic reform.Corporate Plans for Government Business Enterprises are not usually released to the public, however, the Government is keen to ensure Australians are provided with as much detail as possible on the nation's largest infrastructure project.In releasing the public version of NBN Co's Corporate Plan, the Government has set the stage for significant advances on the NBN rollout in 2011.Ubiquitous high-speed broadband is vital to productivity, jobs and long-term growth, and has the power to transform and strengthen Australia's economy.The NBN will deliver benefits, including improved delivery of healthcare and education, for all Australians, no matter where they live.NBN Co's Corporate Plan is available at: www.dbcde.gov.au/nbn



The Gillard Government today released a statement that sets out its expectations of NBN Co as it rolls out the National Broadband Network (NBN).
The Statement of Expectations also comprises the Government's final response to the Implementation Study, which was publicly released on 6 May 2010.
The Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy Senator Stephen Conroy said the Statement of Expectations puts in place the final pieces of how the NBN will be implemented.
"Today represents another significant milestone in the delivery of the NBN and it means we can get on with delivering Australia's largest nation-building project in our history," Senator Conroy said.
Statement of Expectations:
The Statement of Expectations provides NBN Co with the Government's policy implementation objectives for the NBN.
The Statement covers the Government's expectations in relation to, among other things, coverage and premises to be served, NBN Co's role in new developments, the legislative and regulatory framework, ownership arrangements, funding, planning, reporting and performance management.
Some of the most important decisions recently finalised were on the number and locations of the Points of Interconnect (POIs) to the NBN, and on battery back-up arrangements.
The ACCC advised the Government that a semi-distributed network design, where the NBN will extend to meet, but not overbuild competitive backhaul routes, would be the best outcome for competition and in the long-term interests of end users. This approach was generally supported by industry in consultations with the ACCC.
The Government has accepted the ACCC's advice and as a result, NBN Co will establish approximately 120 POIs: 80 in metropolitan Australia and 40 in regional Australia.The ACCC will closely monitor the level of competition on backhaul routes and address any failure in these markets to deliver competitive outcomes by using its new upfront price determination powers where needed.
The Government expects this approach will deliver a uniform national wholesale pricing outcome and support retailers' ability to offer uniform prices at the retail level.
The Government intends to undertake consultation with stakeholders, including emergency services, on the appropriate way of ensuring access to battery back-up services for those who need them.
The Government has indicated that in the interim it expects NBN Co to provide battery back-up to all premises in the fibre footprint to ensure a standard telephone will continue to provide voice services during blackouts.
The Statement also outlines key decisions in relation to NBN Co's role in transforming the industry structure. To ensure NBN Co operates on a level regulatory playing field the Government will be making an amendment to the Telecommunications Legislation Amendment (National Broadband Network Measures - Access Arrangements) Bill 2010.
This will require new fibre networks built after 1 January 2011 for residential and small business purposes to be wholesale-only as well as offering a Layer 2 service on an open-access basis. The Government will consult with industry in finalising the detail of such an amendment.
NBN Co will retain the option of overbuilding infrastructure built after 1 January 2011. The Government has also already indicated it will consider the introduction of a levy, if necessary, to prevent opportunistic cherry picking.
The statement also outlines that in consultation with NBN Co, industry and community, the Government will explore practical legislative options that support the NBN rollout, including changes to the Telecommunications (Low-Impact Facilities) Determination. Any changes will give adequate weight to industry and community sensitivities and consider NBN Co's 'on the ground' experience.
The Government will also present to the Council of Australian Governments a proposal for state and territory governments to streamline their planning and development processes to implement a nationally consistent approach.
Additional policy decisions addressed in the Statement are:- The role NBN Co, overseen by the ACCC, will have in delivering uniform wholesale national prices.- The definition of 'premises', which NBN Co needs to connect to achieve the Government's coverage objectives.- That NBN Co will be the wholesale provider of last resort for fibre connections in new developments.- That NBN Co will conduct a home-run fibre trial in a new development by early 2012 and, in consultation with the ACCC, provide a report to Government.- Performance and monitoring arrangements including that NBN Co develop a charter that outlines how it will conduct its affairs to best meet the need of stakeholder groups.- NBN Co is also to develop a comprehensive strategy for engaging with individual consumers during the rollout, including handling complaints.
Government response to the Study:
The Implementation Study was prepared by McKinsey and Company and KPMG and confirmed high-speed broadband for all Australians was achievable and could be built on a financially viable basis, with affordable prices for consumers.
The detailed and rigorous Study into the NBN made 84 recommendations for the Government to consider. Those recommendations covered technology, financing, ownership, policy framework, and market structure.
The Study was informed by comprehensive stakeholder consultation with industry, vendors, consumer groups, the finance sector, and international experience and trends. Since receiving the Implementation Study, the Government has taken decisions progressively on its recommendations and provided NBN Co with directions to implement those decisions.
"In the period since the Study was delivered, and following consultations with NBN Co, industry and other stakeholders, a number of events have occurred that have had a bearing on how the Government has responded to the Implementation Study and its key recommendations," Senator Conroy said.
"Three events stand out: the Financial Heads of Agreement between NBN Co and Telstra; the Commitments to Regional Australia agreed with the Independent Members Tony Windsor and Rob Oakeshott following the Federal election; and the joint ACCC/NBN Co consultation process on the number and location of the POIs to the NBN conducted in October and November 2010."
A large number of the recommendations were also responded to by the NBN legislation introduced into Parliament on 25 November 2010 and by the Fibre in New Developments policy statement on 9 December 2010.
In July 2010, in line with the Implementation Study recommendation, the Government set NBN Co an objective to reach 93 per cent of premises with fibre technology by the end of the rollout period.
The Government also requested NBN Co to build the wireless network that will deliver fixed wireless services, delivering peak speeds of at least 12 Mbps, to premises in the 94-97 percentile of premises.
The Government expects NBN Co to maximise the use of existing infrastructure where it is efficient and economic to do so in the delivery of the fixed wireless network.
The Statement of Expectations is available at: www.dbcde.gov.au/nbn



I am pleased to announce new arrangements for departmental Secretaries, which will take effect in the near future.
The Treasury
After 10 years as the Secretary to the Treasury, Dr Ken Henry AC, will finish in that role early next year.
Dr Henry was first appointed Secretary to the Treasury on 27 April 2001 and he was reappointed for a further 5 years from 27 April 2006. He is an ex-officio member of the Board of Taxation, member of the Board of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Alternate Governor (for Australia) of the International Monetary Fund and Chairman of the Advisory Board of the Australian Office of Financial Management.
Before his appointment as Secretary, Dr Henry had a distinguished career in the Treasury and related areas dating back to 1984. He has also served as a senior adviser to the Treasurer (1986-91) and as Minister (Economic and Financial Affairs) in the Australian Delegation to the OECD in 1992.
Dr Henry was awarded a Companion of the Order of Australia General Division (AC) in the Australia Day Honours 2007 for service to the development and implementation of economic and taxation policy, to the finance sector through a range of banking and regulatory bodies, and to the community in the area of welfare and care of native wildlife. He has been instrumental to the development of taxation policy over a long period of time, not least with his work on the review of Australia's Future Tax System and to the public service in general.
More generally, Dr Henry has made a major contribution to the well-being of Australians and the prosperity of the nation during his more than 25 years at Treasury, during 10 of which he has been Secretary. He has become one of the greatest of all Treasury Secretaries.
Dr Martin Parkinson will succeed Dr Henry as Secretary to the Treasury. I congratulate him on his appointment to this very important role. In order to facilitate a smooth transition in the pre-Budget period, Dr Parkinson's appointment will take effect from 7 March 2011. Dr Henry has indicated to me that he warmly welcomes Dr Parkinson's appointment and is looking forward to taking a break after 10 years as Secretary. Over the coming months I will be having further discussions with Dr Henry concerning his future.
Dr Parkinson was appointed as Secretary of the Department of Climate Change upon its establishment on 3 December 2007. As Secretary of the Department of Climate Change and the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, Dr Parkinson has contributed to the development of Australia's climate change policies, led constructive engagement with business and community groups, and established a new department with policy development, program design and management, service delivery and regulatory responsibilities.
Dr Parkinson has also served as Deputy Secretary in Treasury with responsibility for domestic and international macroeconomic issues and as an Associate Secretary in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. He has also worked at the International Monetary Fund on the reform of international financial architecture. In the early 1990s Dr Parkinson served as Senior Adviser to the Treasurer.
Dr Parkinson's involvement for more than two decades in economic policy in the Treasury, PM&amp;C and the IMF, working on macroeconomic issues, monetary and fiscal policy, tax, labour market and structural reform, global financial system reform and other international development issues, has been invaluable preparation for his appointment as Treasury Secretary.
Department of Families, Housing, Community Service and Indigenous Affairs 
Dr Jeff Harmer AO, Secretary of the Department of Families, Housing, Community Service and Indigenous Affairs has indicated his intention to retire from the Australian Public Service next year.
Dr Harmer began his career in the Federal Public Service in early 1978. Since then he has gone on to occupy executive positions across a range of Commonwealth Departments and agencies.
In 1994, Dr Harmer was promoted to the Deputy Secretary position in the Department of Housing and Regional Development and in 1996 he was recruited to the position of Deputy Secretary of the Department of Social Security. He was appointed Managing Director of the Health Insurance Commission in 1998. In 2003, he was appointed Secretary of the Department of Education, Science and Training. He was appointed Secretary of the then Department of Family and Community Services in October 2004.
Dr Harmer has also made a significant contribution to public policy development more broadly. He was appointed as a member of the panel, chaired by Dr Ken Henry, to review Australia's Future Tax System. He was made an Officer in the Order of Australia (AO) for service to public administration through leadership of key policy initiatives, particularly programs for housing assistance, child support, mental health, the disabled and insurance reform, and through initiatives for Indigenous Australians.I also take this opportunity to acknowledge the outstanding service provided by Dr Harmer over his career in the Australian Public Service. He has been an innovative and imaginative policy adviser while also adeptly managing the very large organisations he has headed over many years. He is in many senses a model for a successful modern senior public servant.
The position of Secretary of the Department of Families, Housing, Community Service and Indigenous Affairs will be filled by Mr Finn Pratt PSM. Mr Pratt was appointed to the position of Secretary of the Department of Human Services in 2009.
Mr Pratt was previously the Chief Executive of Centrelink and before that was an Associate Secretary in the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations. His background in linking policy and service delivery will continue to be invaluable in his new role.
Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency 
Mr Blair Comley will be appointed to the position of Secretary of the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency. Mr Comley commenced as a Deputy Secretary in the Department of Climate Change in 2008. He previously held a range of senior positions in the Treasury and has represented Australia on economic matters at the OECD. Mr Comley was also the Acting Chief Executive Officer the Australian Office of Financial Management.
Department of Human Services 
Ms Kathryn Campbell CSC will be appointed as Secretary of the Department of Human Services. Ms Campbell is currently a Deputy Secretary in the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations. Ms Campbell has previously held positions in the Departments of Defence, Administrative Services, and Finance. Before joining DEEWR, from 2005 to 2010, Kathryn was Deputy Secretary of the Budget and Financial Management Groups in the Department of Finance and Deregulation.Appropriate transitional arrangements where required will be finalised in the new year.
Department of Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government 
I have also decided to appoint Ms Glenys Beauchamp PSM to the position of Secretary of the Department of Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government. Ms Beauchamp has been the Acting Secretary of the Department since September 2010 and was previously a Deputy Secretary in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. Prior to her appointment to PM&amp;C, Ms Beauchamp worked in the Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs as a First Assistant Secretary and Deputy Secretary.
All the appointments will be for a period of five years.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced arrangements for an Independent Review of the Intelligence Community to start in early 2011.
Intelligence plays a key role in preserving Australia's national security and supports a wide range of our national interests.
The Prime Minister said the review will ensure Australia continues to have a well-coordinated, appropriately resourced and adaptable intelligence system that supports our national interests.
The aim of the review is to ensure Australian intelligence agencies are working effectively together and are well positioned for challenges in a constantly evolving security environment.
The review will also consider working arrangements between intelligence agencies and their international partners.
It will take into account the significant growth in the intelligence community's resources and capabilities over the past decade.
The timing of the review meets a recommendation of the Inquiry into Australian Intelligence Agencies in 2004 by Mr Philip Flood AO, that the intelligence agencies undergo further external review every five to seven years. Funding for the Review was announced in the Budget in May this year.
The 2011 Review will be led jointly by Mr Robert Cornall AO and Associate Professor Rufus Black.
Mr Cornall has extensive experience at a high level in public administration, particularly as the Secretary of the Attorney-General's Department until his retirement in 2008.
Associate Professor Black is the highly regarded Master of Ormond College at the University of Melbourne, and a notable ethicist, management consultant and theologian.
The Review will produce its final report to the Government around the middle of 2011.
The Terms of Reference for the Review and the biographies of Mr Cornall and Associate Professor Black are available at: http://www.dpmc.gov.au/publications/iric/index.cfm.



The Australian Government today took a further step towards the recognition of Indigenous people in the Australian Constitution by appointing the members of the expert panel that will help lead the process.
The panel members are accomplished and respected individuals who will be responsible for developing options to recognise the unique and special place of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in the Constitution. They will also help generate community support for the proposal.
The panel is made up of Indigenous and community leaders, legal experts and parliamentary members, who bring together a wide range of expertise. It will be co-chaired by Professor Patrick Dodson and Mr Mark Leibler AC.
The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner and the co-Chairs of the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples will also be represented on the panel.
The panel was chosen after the Government received public nominations for members, as well as consultation with the Opposition Leader, the Greens and Independents.
The panel will lead a wide-ranging national public consultation and engagement program throughout 2011 to build consensus on the recognition of Indigenous people in the Constitution.
Its first formal meeting will be held early in 2011 and it will work through the year before reporting to the Australian Government by the end of 2011.
In developing options for constitutional change, the panel will consider a range of views and will propose options for change which have the best chance of success at a referendum.
The Australian Government is committed to holding a national referendum on this issue during the term of the current government or at the next Federal election.
Constitutional recognition of Indigenous people will be a significant step towards building an Australia based on strong relationships and mutual respect between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.The Government does not underestimate the challenge of achieving nation-wide consensus. To succeed, the referendum must attract the support of a majority vote nationally, and a majority of votes in a majority of states.
Constitutional change will require support from across the political spectrum, as well as the support of businesses, community organisations and individuals from around the country.Australians are encouraged to engage with the expert panel's work and to put their views forward.
Further information on Indigenous constitutional recognition, including biographies of Panel members and its terms of reference, is available at: http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/sa/indigenous/progserv/engagement/Pages/const…



Merry Christmas.
In the Gillard family, Christmas is a time for tradition.
Everyone has the same job on Christmas Day. I always get to peel the potatoes and carrots.
We eat the same food in the same order. Dad tells the same jokes!
We get a little older each year, and the presents for my niece and nephew have changed as the years go by, but not too much else does.Whether that's time in church, or with your family, or at the cricket or on the beach, or helping others, I hope this Christmas is a special one.
Christmas is also a time when we reflect on what's been.
After lunch on Christmas Day, I think many of us have that quiet moment where we look around and think, 'all in all, we're lucky to have each other'.
Certainly, that's how I feel about our country this Christmas.
We are all Australians, all people of this place, and as a people, as a nation, we have got so much to be grateful for.
Through it all, there's nowhere I'd rather be. We are still lucky.
For some I know Christmas this year is a sad time.
We lost a lot of brave Australians this year: from the 2nd Combat Engineer Regiment, from the 2nd Commando Regiment, from the Special Air Service Regiment, from 6 RAR.
They died for us and I know every Australian has a special thought for their partners and children, their families, and their mates, this Christmas. We don't forget.
Just as Christmas reminds us of the good things we have, it can be a tough time for some among us. So if your Christmas is a sadder one this year because of family problems, or illness, or the loss of a loved one, I hope you know that you're never alone.
2010 has been an eventful year in our country's life, but above all else, we shouldn't forget the most wonderful thing that happened this year.
The drought broke in the eastern states at last.
Of course, it's never easy on the land, and I know that now it's flooding which is making life hard in many places even today.
But we're grateful for some of the rain at least.
We think of the farmers still in drought. We wish some of the rain would come your way now too.
I want to say something to Australians who have to work at Christmas to serve and protect us.
Our police and fire fighters, our ambulance officers and nurses, emergency personnel and of course our troops abroad ... so many people sacrifice their Christmas Day to make life better for others.
It's hard to think of a more generous Christmas present than that.
Thank you.
Finally, whether you're going around the corner or across the country please drive safely. Don't make next Christmas a sad anniversary.
For all Australians, my wish is that this Christmas, wherever you are in our country or overseas, you have the chance to do those special things that mean Christmas for you, with people who are special to you.
I wish you the merriest of Christmases and the happiest of New Years.


Adelaide
Thank you very much for that welcome and can I start by acknowledging friends who have joined us here today including His Excellency the Governor of South Australia, my colleague and friend Premier Mike Rann, Dr Rollond the Mayor here, thank you very much for your insights into the history of this place and I know that is part of your special passion to understand the history of this place.
I've also very much like to acknowledge my Federal Parliamentary colleague, Steve Georganas who represents this area so well in the Federal Parliament. Can I also acknowledge the indigenous owners of the land on which we meet and in the spirit of reconciliation pay my respects to elders past and present. It is such an important part of our Australian past, our Australian present and our future that we are a nation that is the custodian of the oldest living culture on earth. I acknowledge it and I honour it.
As we meet here today in this very moderate temperature with a gentle breeze, with a beautiful blue sky, it's also time I think to remember Australians in other parts of our nation who are not dealing with such lovely climate conditions. I am of course particularly thinking of those in Queensland who are battling flood waters even as we meet here today. Over this Christmas season there have been many Australians who have had to battle the extremes of weather; floods on the one hand and extreme heat on the other. Of course when Australians battle natural disasters, when we battle our sometimes harsh climate, we do it by coming together and you will have seen on TV screens and heard on your radios how Australians have come together in these circumstances, working of course with their State Governments and the Federal Government is there ready to assist in any way which is necessary. But as governments play their part we know that when Australians have to battle flood and heat, it is community volunteers who bear the brunt of that work and I'm sure our thoughts and our very best wishes are with them today in other parts of Australia as we gather here in a beautiful Adelaide.
To South Australians gathered here today it's such a special privilege to be able to join you on Proclamation Day. For me Christmas of course is about coming to Adelaide, since I migrated here as a four year old every Christmas of my life has been spent in South Australia in Adelaide, it's a very special part of who I am and who my family is that we get to come together in South Australia each year no matter how far afield we may have been in the 12 months in between. And the Christmas season here in Adelaide not only offers that time with family and friends, but on Proclamation Day it offers an opportunity to reflect on the past and to think about the future.
That's why I believe it was so appropriate for Dr Rollond today to speak to us about the history of this place and particularly the history of the Thomas and Skipper families; their part in building this place, and I do acknowledge Dr John Skipper and his wife Betsy who are with us today, descendents of the Thomas and Skipper families. And when you reflect on the story of Robert and Mary Thomas, it is of course a perfectly South Australian story. Free settlers, who not only founded a life for themselves and their families here in this place, but free settlers who played a special part in building a new colony and a new nation, and if I can echo some of the words of the Governor is his Proclamation Day address today, it's hard to imagine in an age of instantaneous information what an important thing it was to have a printing press, to have a way no matter how slow, how cumbersome by today's standards, for a young colony to tell its stories to itself, for a young colony to record its news, its history. For a young colony to have a way of exchanging information, and we've heard today as part of the history of this place, about the development of one of the schools. Once again something so South Australian, putting such a focus on education, equity and the opportunity that education brings.
South Australians are of course hard working people, with a great faith in the future, great faith in education as the key for their kids and great faith in their ability as a people to work together in good times and in bad and we've shown time and time again as South Australians that we can do just that, look after each other in times good and times bad.
Of course on a day like today when we reflect on history, we tell perhaps one or two individual stories. But the history of this state is the combination of all of our stories and I know that many of you sitting here today are taking this moment to reflect on your story, on your family's story, to reflect on what it is about you that has brought us here today, brought us here together. Because of course history, at the end of the day, is made up by the mixture of the remarkable and the ordinary, that is everyday life and the writing of the history of the nation.
I'm proud that my family's story, my own story, is rooted in this place; just one of the many millions of stories that make up South Australia.
Today we rightly reflect on the struggles and achievements of Adelaide's founders. It is easy to recognise the distance between them and us and the difference between their times and ours. But I think what we share with those people is real. Most of all, I feel very deeply that we share their vision and imagination, their confidence and optimism. How much confidence and optimism would it have taken to build this city from this landscape?
When South Australia was proclaimed, under the old gum tree, they knew the best days were ahead of them, that they were just starting, and I believe that that is still true today. As remarkable as our history has been, the best days lie in front of us. The old tree, held up today with concrete, is of course a poignant sight, but it does make me very proud. I believe those who heard Governor Hindmarsh read the Proclamation here absolutely intended this new society to live longer than this historic tree.So I do not see the old gum tree as a sign of our age. It tells me one thing and it tells me this: We have outlived the shade of our founding and yet we remain young. Lawson wrote of "the old dead tree" and "the young tree green". The old gum tree may have withered, but our state and our country is still young, still looking forward to the best days to come.
Hindmarsh proclaimed South Australia 174 years ago. My wish for 2011 is that each of us makes our own proclamation, makes our own proclamation that we will dedicate our best efforts for our State and country in the year ahead, confident in its future as we should be.Thank you very much.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Acting Attorney-General Brendan O'Connor today said the Commonwealth Government would continue to provide assistance to Queensland communities affected by flooding over Christmas.
Following a request from Queensland, the Government is providing two Blackhawk helicopters to assist in the evacuation of Theodore.
Australian Defence Force personnel are on stand-by to offer further support if required.
Six additional Local Government Areas have been declared natural disaster zones following severe rainfall over the past few days - Cairns, Cassowary, Tablelands, Goondiwindi, South Burnett and Western Downs.
A total of 31 Queensland LGAs are now receiving Commonwealth assistance through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
Under the NDRRA, financial support will be provided by the Commonwealth to Queensland for counter disaster operations and for the restoration of essential public infrastructure, such as roads, bridges and schools, where expenditure exceeds certain thresholds and requirements.
In addition personal hardship and distress grants are available to communities in the Southern Downs, Western Downs, Lockyer Valley, Banana Shire, Central Highlands, Barcaldine, North Burnett and Bundaberg Local Government Areas.
While conditions across much of Queensland have eased, the threat from floodwaters remains in many areas. Authorities have evacuated a number of residents in Charleville, Theodore, Dalby and Chinchilla. Other communities remain isolated.
The Gillard Government will continue to work closely with the Queensland Government to provide assistance to affected communities.
Many emergency services workers and volunteers in Queensland spent Christmas away from their families to support communities that have been inundated with water. These people deserve our thanks.
Acting Attorney General Brendan O'Connor said the Commonwealth Government would continue to monitor the situation in disaster declared areas across Australia and work with State Governments to provide assistance to communities affected by extreme weather conditions over the past few weeks.
More than 120 LGAs in five states - Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia - are receiving Commonwealth assistance through the NDRRA.
We will also continue to monitor the situation in other flood affected areas, particularly in NSW where a number of communities remain isolated across the state.



PM: Thank you very much for coming along and I've taken this opportunity to say a few words about the situation in Queensland and I'll be very happy to take a few questions.
Of course the Christmas-New Year period is a time of joy and family celebration for literally millions of Australians, but this year we know that there are far too many Australians who are battling floodwaters. The floods in Queensland are particularly devastating, some communities are seeing floodwaters higher than they've seen in decades and for some communities floodwaters have never reached these levels before for the time that we have been recording floods; so unprecedented levels of water.
In these situations what we see is Australians pulling together, working together to deal with the situation at hand. I'm sure we can all imagine what it must be feel like to face the devastation of your home, to face the damage and the destruction. It's certainly something weighing so heavily on many Australians today. But at the same time, we can all be proud of the efforts of volunteers and emergency services personnel who are assisting flood affected families and flood affected communities.
As Australians we pull together and we're certainly seeing that.
Today there is another way that we can pull together as Australians. The Premier of Queensland, Anna Bligh, has announced a special disaster relief fund and she has said that in that fund the Queensland Government will make the first donation of $1 million. Today I can announce that the Australian Government will match that donation with $1 million. Members of the public can donate to this fund in order to assist the people of Queensland as they face these floodwaters.
Of course the work between the Queensland and Federal Governments extends beyond this, working together for the disaster relief fund. 38 Local Government Areas in Queensland have been declared as areas to benefit through our natural disaster recovery and relief arrangements. That means that those areas are eligible for special assistance, we won't know until the floodwaters recede, the total amount of damage done, but what this does mean is that the Queensland and Federal Governments will work together in those areas in partnership with the rebuilding of critical infrastructure. It also means that families can be eligible for emergency and hardship payments.
We know that the Queensland floods are particularly devasting, but Australians in other places are also affected by floodwaters. We've seen flooding in New South Wales, in Victoria, in South Australia and in parts of Western Australia. In total, 130 Local Government Areas around the country can benefit through our natural disaster recovery and relief arrangements.
Finally can I say the Federal Government will also be assisting Queensland through making available Australian Defence Force assets as that can be of assistance, we've already seen for example, helicopters assisting with evacuations.
It's my intention in coming days to tour some of the flood affected areas in Queensland, but at this time, to the people of Queensland, can I say my thoughts are with you and to Australians generally, please consider donating to this disaster relief fund, as a practical way of showing your help and your support to your fellow Australians.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister why haven't you visited Queensland yet?
PM: Well we're in a situation where obviously communities are directly battling floodwaters, for many communities we haven't even seen the peak of the floodwaters yet, that's a number of days away. In this period I've been in contact with the Queensland Government, we've been working together, I've spoken to Premier Bligh today, she is touring flood affected communities today, and I will tour flood affected communities. We want to make those arrangements so I'm there at the right time, many communities efforts right now are on preparing for what will be the peak of the floodwaters, or directly battling floods.
JOURNALIST: Given the extent of the flood is there likely to be any provisional or possible assistance over and above the usual disaster relief fund made available for people?
PM: Well the disaster relief fund is there to provide emergency assistance. When it comes to infrastructure, really the full extent of the damage can only be properly assessed when the danger has passed and the floodwaters have receded, but under our disaster relief and recovery arrangements, there is a partnership to help rebuild critical infrastructure like bridges, like roads, like schools, but we're some way away from being at that point. At the moment many communities are still preparing for the floodwaters and there are communities directly in the phase of dealing with the floodwaters themselves.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The declarations are made as communities face natural disasters and then there are arrangements through the natural disaster relief and recovery arrangements, so there are guidelines that then automatically apply once the area has been declared as one affected by those disaster recovery and relief arrangements. Unfortunately, as a nation we deal with extreme weather events, with fire and with flood, and as a result the Federal Government and the state and territory governments, have a series of rules as to how we work together in these difficult circumstances. Those rules have been practiced in the past because we've had to face these sorts of events in the past.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well we are certainly asked our Australian Defence Force to assist as best it can and as quickly as it can including making helicopters available, so our Defence Force as soon as they're tasked, get about the job. Sometimes there can just be practical issues about whether a particular piece of equipment like a helicopter is ready to go.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think Australians generally recognise that our Defence Force is hugely professional and goes about its work diligently as quickly as possible and that's what's happening in these circumstances.
JOURNALIST: There's talk of potential forced evacuation (inaudible) do you think they should be forced or should they have the choice to stay?
PM: Look I think the best thing for me to urge Australians including the people of Rockhampton, is to listen to the best advice available to them from emergency service personnel. I'm sure other Australians like me have seen on our TV screens some people that got into trouble not having listened to the best advice available. Floodwaters are dangerous and in those circumstances people should be taking direction from police and from local emergency coordinators.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it should come down to force though?
PM: Well in the first instance I'd be relying on people's practical commonsense, and practical commonsense dictates that if an emergency coordinator explains the danger and asks people to evacuate then that's the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: On paid parental leave (inaudible) there's still a loophole, some parents that are eligible for the full payments (inaudible)
PM: Industrial entitlements like annual leave and maternity and paternity leave are defined through our Fair Work system and our national employment standards. They're an industrial set of rules; paid parental leave's set of rules is there to govern the entitlement and to make sure that families can benefit and I believe families right around the country are looking forward to our nation having a paid parental leave scheme. For too many years under the former government, we saw other nations around the world provide this kind of assistance to parents but not provide it here, I'm glad that paid parental leave is starting, it's starting on the 1st of January.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well they're different entitlements for different purposes, with different (inaudible) I should say, obviously the industrial entitlements have intended as obligations between employers and employees. The Government is funding paid parental leave in order to benefit families, and also enable women particularly, who take time off, to maintain their connection to work. So paid parental leave: it's good for mums, good for dads, good for babies and also good for our employers because you keep that connection between skills workers and the workplace.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well the Australian Government is completely opposed to whaling, that's why we're taking appropriate action through the International Court system, we view whaling as absolutely unacceptable. So I'm opposed to it in every circumstance including that circumstance.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well we consistently put our opposition to the Japanese Government about our total opposition to whaling.
Thanks very much.


HOST: Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard's in the studio. Nothing to do with things you may have said in the past. That's my theme. PM: Well, Howard, as long as you're not going to ask me to sing, because I think that that would end badly. HOST: I'm not allowed to sing, and you're not allowed to sing. How are you going?
PM: No singing. I'm very well, thank you, and very pleased to be in Perth.
HOST: But even though in Perth, Western Australia, in the State of Western Australia, the voters don't like the Labor Government? They don't like Federal Labor Governments. You only won three seats out of 15 last time round. Why?
PM: Well, Howard, this is a great State and I'm here as Prime Minister and be out and about meeting people in Western Australia. The main thing, I think, for the Government, is to be here in Western Australia and to keep delivering the changes that people want to see in this State.
I was very pleased that earlier this year I was able to strike a healthcare agreement with Premier Barnett which means we'll be in a position to invest $1.8 billion extra in health in this State  -  more doctors, more resources, less waiting times in emergency departments, more local control of hospitals, less bureaucracy, so I'm just going to be determined to keep working with Premier Barnett, keep working in this State.
HOST: Do you think you'll finally win us over, do you?
PM: My aim is to provide good Government, to do the things that need to be done for this nation's future and this State's future.
HOST: But when you analyse that performance, which you must have done, you must think to yourself ‘well, what did we do wrong in Western Australia? Why don't they like us?' There must be a reason you've come up with. What is it?
PM: Day to day, as Prime Minister, I keep my eyes on building for the future and making sure this country's got a great future and this State's got a great future, a future of opportunity, of prosperity, of fairness, tackling the challenges of the future, like delivering the National Broadband Network, like tackling climate change. That's what drives me.
When I look in the past, Howard, which is what you're inviting me to do -
HOST: -Yeah, but I'm asking you to look to the future and work out from your side how you can win more seats next election. Have you got to ditch the mining tax, as an example?
PM: Well, I think ultimately people will judge on performance, not politics  -  performance in health, performance in education, performance in keeping the economy strong, performance in delivering the National Broadband Network, tackling climate change, big challenges for the future.
Howard, I understand the Minerals Resource Rent Tax-
HOST: -They hate it here.
PM: Well, if I can finish my sentence, I understand the Minerals Resource Rent Tax has been very controversial here in Western Australia. I absolutely understand that, and because I understood that we needed to settle this tax in the right form, I entered an agreement with our biggest miners.
Then we've had a policy transition group working under Don Argus' leadership, and we've accepted all of the recommendations of that group, and when you strip it all back, what the Minerals Resources Rent Tax means for this State is that we are in a position to fund more infrastructure, to fund more support for business, and to enable people to have more superannuation when they retire.
HOST: But talking about taxes now, we only get 68 cents in the dollar return from our GST, right. Why is that? Why do we only get 68 cents in Western Australia and other States get up to 90 cents in the dollar? Why are we being punished?
PM: I understand that's controversial, too. This is -
HOST: -Well, it allows the Premier to beat up on Canberra. Everybody goes ‘go for it, Colin.'
PM: Well, this is a formula struck by an independent - struck and administered independently through the Commonwealth Grants Commission. Now this has been system over a long period of time  -  sure, there have been some changes from time to time  -  but overall the system has been that stronger States help weaker States, and if we look at the last 50 years for Western Australia, in well more than 30 of them it was a net receiver of money from other States as the State built.
HOST: But not now.
PM: Now, of course, this is controversial. The Commonwealth Grants Commission, in the most recent iteration of the formula, actually increased the amount of GST that Western Australia gets to keep-
HOST: -Up to 68 cents?
PM: No, to 72 cents, increased to 72 cents  -  just trying to explain it. I don't do that. That's done through this formula. Now, I understand this continues to be controversial and it's an issue that I will need to keep strongly engaged with, but Howard, you asked me -
HOST: -Can you alter it? Can you do anything about it?
PM: You've asked me for an explanation, and that is the explanation. It's an explanation about how States, stronger States, are called upon to support States that are weaker than them.
HOST: OK, but can you do anything to change it? Can the Government do anything to change it?
PM: Well, Howard, the conversation has got to continue. I understand that this is very controversial in Western Australia.
HOST: OK, let's talk about the carbon tax, which is all anyone talks about these days, most of the time. Do you agree that power costs will rise if it's introduced?
PM: Well, power costs are rising anyway-
HOST: -Tell us about it.
PM: -particularly here in Western Australia.
HOST: It's outrageous.
PM: Well, the sad truth is electricity prices are going up. The choice we can make as a nation is whether we tackle climate change by pricing carbon pollution, and that's a price paid by the big polluters, so 1,000 businesses in this country that generate the most pollution would pay to emit that pollution, because at the moment -
HOST: - You said they pay to emit, so they pay up and they're allowed to keep emitting?
PM: Yes. At the moment, if you're a business, a big business -
HOST: - I'm a big emitter.
PM: If you're a big business and you're a big emitter, at the moment you can put any amount of carbon pollution into the atmosphere and pay absolutely zero.
We are going to price carbon pollution. You'll have to pay to emit carbon pollution-
HOST: -But you keep emitting.
PM: And if businesses have to pay, then they will innovate to reduce the amount of carbon pollution they emit -
HOST: - Or hike their prices.
PM: - because they won't want to pay that cost. They'll work out better ways of doing things.
HOST: Are you sure of this?
PM: Yes, I am  -  very sure. And we will move through to what is called a cap-and-trade system, which means we will cap the amount of carbon pollution in our economy, and there will be a market in permits, and the market will set the price.
Economists tell us -
HOST: -But all those things, sorry, permits, pay up, taxes, allows them to keep emitting if they pay for it?
PM: Yes, but let's just be very clear about this  -  businesses compete with each other. They compete on price. You and I go to the shops and we buy the things that are best priced. If you say to a business ‘something you used to do for free will now cost you to do', then they will innovate and change to reduce that cost, and the way that they will do that is they will look to cleaner energy sources, for example, and that will help price our economy being a clean energy economy for the future.
HOST: Solar?
PM: Well, certainly  -  solar, wind, tidal power, geothermal. We are a nation that is blessed with abundant sources of renewable, clean energy.
HOST: OK, but what percentage of Government, Federal Government, buildings are solar powered?
PM: Oh, I can't tell you that -
HOST: -Wouldn't it be good if they all were? Wouldn't it be good if you had a program that said we're going to solar power all our buildings? That'd be a way to go?
PM: Well, wouldn't it be good, Howard, if we had a system that drove us to being a clean energy economy in the most efficient way that can be done, and economists tell us the most efficient way to do it is to price carbon pollution, and if I can just explain my system versus the alternative, my system: big polluters pay, households are assisted, we will provide generous household assistance to deal with price impacts -
HOST: - Tax cuts?
PM: Well, tax cuts are a live option. The alternative from Mr Abbott is he puts an additional impost on taxpayers - $720 per year, takes that money and gives it to big polluters to subsidise what they're doing.
Now, total cost of his program if he's going to reach a target he's set himself of -5 per cent by 2020, if $30 billion. That is not an efficient way of cutting carbon pollution.
We're going to do it the most efficient way. That's making the big polluters pay whilst we generously assist households.
HOST: Well, as long as they, instead of paying, cut their amount of emissions.
PM: Well, Howard, we do know from around the world- we are not the first nation to do this. I know sometimes the community dialogue is as if we are going first. We're not going first-
HOST: -I know, Germany's tried. (inaudible) there.
PM: -and I don't believe that Australia should lead the world in this area, but I don't think we can afford to be left behind, either.
We have a high carbon pollution economy. We've got a journey to go through to get to a clean energy economy which will give us the prosperity and jobs we want in the future. Pricing carbon, asking big polluters to pay, is the most efficient way of doing that, and we will.
We're a Labor Government, we'll act fairly  -  we'll generously assist households on the way through.
So, that is the way the system will work. Other countries have emissions trading schemes. Other countries-
HOST: - You're really hot about this, aren't you?
PM: Well, no, I'm determined. I'm faced with a ferocious fear campaign, Howard, a ferocious fear -
HOST: - It might cost you Government.
PM: - a ferocious fear campaign which is not about the facts. Mr Abbott is trying to scare people, and I am going to take every opportunity to say to the Australian people there is nothing to be afraid of here. We are confident, creative people. We'll work on this. We'll get through.
HOST: You're going to go down swinging, are you?
PM: We'll create this clean energy economy for the future.
I believe Australians want us to tackle climate change. It's my job to keep explaining how, and Howard, I'm taking the opportunity to do just that.
HOST: Alright, it's hot in Perth. You've noticed that already?
PM: Yes, it is.
HOST: Kids are going to school, no air conditioning because they're not in the right zone. Can you believe that?
PM: Well, this is a State Government -
HOST: - On one side of the highway, you can't have air conditioning; the other side of the highway, you can, because you're in the zone.
PM: Well, this is a State Government policy, Howard. You're talking, obviously, about State Schools.
HOST: Yeah, but I'm talking about the new Building the Education Revolution. I would have thought every new building - every new home that's built these days has air conditioning  -  but every new school building built under the Building the Education Revolution doesn't have air conditioning because of some stupid warranty scam.
PM: Well, Howard, let me give you some good news in this area.
We, as a Government, invested $1.8 billion in school buildings in Western Australia. It was the right thing to do. Every school has benefitted in some way. We've built 500 new classrooms, 300 new libraries, 200 new multi-purpose halls, 188 early learning centres, and the list goes on and on.
When those new facilities were constructed, whether or not they were air conditioned in State schools depended on the State Government's policy  -  the zones that you talk about.
Now, there is actually more than $20 million left over -
HOST: - Unspent.
PM: - unspent, from doing this -
HOST: - Are you listening, Colin?
PM: - unspent from doing this construction in Western Australia. What I want to see done with that money is I want to see that money spent so it air conditions those Building the Education Revolution buildings which haven't been air conditioned because of the State Government -
HOST: - Can you believe they can't be air conditioned when they're built?
PM: Well, Howard, I can't answer for the State Government policy -
HOST: - No, but can you believe that when you build a new building these days, particularly in a state like this, you don't air condition it?
PM: Well, Howard, I understand your point precisely about kids, heat and concentration and all of that. I understand your point precisely.
We worked with the State Government to get these school buildings built. The State Government's got its policy. My point very clearly to you today is there is money left over, which I want to use to air condition those Building the Education Revolution buildings in State schools that aren't air conditioned.
Chris Evans, a Western Australian who is the Minister in this area, will be working to achieve that result with the State Government  -  good for kids, good for getting air conditioners into those buildings.
HOST: Sounds like a slogan.
PM: Cool kids.
HOST: Just before you go, I know time is tight, but is the East Timor detention centre solution a dead duck? Surely they don't want it up there. I've talked to several politicians up there on a regular basis. They don't want it. When are you going to kill it off?
PM: Well, Howard, we could field you as a foreign affairs adviser.
HOST: Well, I just ring ‘em and they say ‘we don't want it.' They say ‘we have enough problems up here trying to get our tiny nation together. The last thing we want is an asylum seeker detention centre.'
PM: Look, Howard, we're continuing that discussion with East Timor, but there is an important meeting happening basically as we speak.
HOST: In Bali.
PM: That's right, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister for Immigration are there.
That is a big meeting, a large number of nations coming together to work on people smuggling, and there we will be pressing that this is a regional problem that requires a Regional Protection Framework  -  a regional solution.
Now, bilateral discussions, a discussion between us and East Timor, will continue, but the important meeting this week is the meeting happening in Bali.
HOST: The solution is to stop the boats coming, isn't it? Really, that's the ideal solution. If it could all be sorted out in UN camps in Indonesia, the applications all handled there, then they say ‘OK, this person's a fair dinkum refugee, they can go, they can go to Australia'  -  wouldn't that be the best solution?
PM: Well, Howard, you are effectively advocating for the solution I've put forward with a Regional Protection Framework and a Regional Processing Centre.
HOST: So you would prefer that to happen, rather than any boats.
PM: Of course, Howard. No-one wants to see boats. I don't want to see boats. I don't want to see boats  -  people risk their lives on them. Women and kids lose their lives on them. We saw that at Christmas Island, you know, at the end of last year.
We want people to be safe. We want claims processed in an orderly way.
What I want to do is I want to undercut the people smuggling business model, so, you know, if you pay and get on a boat it doesn't get you anywhere, because through a Regional Protection Framework and Regional Processing Centre you end up back in the same place.
That's what I'm striving to achieve. I always said ‘no quick fix.' We're working through it, and the important way of working through the regional protection framework this week is at the Bali meeting.
HOST: You're minders are winding you up. Thanks for coming.
PM: Thanks, Howard.
HOST: And we'll see you again soon.
PM: Thank you.



PM: I'm here in Bundaberg with Premier Anna Bligh, we have had the opportunity today to be briefed by local emergency services personnel and to be briefed by the local council and I thank Tony very much for that.
I'm also joined by my Federal Parliamentary colleagues the Member for Hinkler and the Member for Dawson.
As Prime Minister I wanted to come to Queensland and see firsthand the effect of these devastating floods, I wanted to be briefed by the people who have been battling these floodwaters on the ground, and I also wanted to talk to Queenslanders who have been affected by these floods.
Here in Bundaberg the situation is improving and we're very, very happy to see that. I had intended to travel to Emerald today, that is not possible today because the situation there is a difficult one, aviation fuel supplies are short and we want to make sure that those aviation fuel supplies are used for emergency purposes.
I will later today be travelling to Rockhampton, and of course Rockhampton is still bracing for the floodwaters to come, the peak of the flood for Rockhampton is still some days away.What I can say and what I've been able to discuss with Premier Bligh is the fact that as devastating as these floods are we are seeing a magnificent response by all levels of government and by emergency service personnel. People are there on the ground making a difference.
We are also seeing a tremendous response by volunteers and I've had the opportunity to meet some of those volunteers today. Whether it's the SES, the Red Cross, Life Line, people who've just walking in off the street and donated their time, their efforts, their labour, to make a difference for their neighbours, we're seeing a tremendous response from volunteers.
All in all this is the Queensland way, coming together, pulling together in times of difficulty and we are seeing on display the best of that community spirit. In the evacuation centre I had the opportunity to talk to a number of people who haven't been able to return to their homes, some of them don't even know what circumstance their homes are in today, but the overwhelming sentiment from those people is one of resilience and one of care and concern about their neighbours. Many of the people I met with actually said "I'm ok, I'm worried about others", so that sense of community pulling together, that Australian sense that when times are tough we work together and look after each other.
So I'm looking forward to going to Rockhampton for further briefings and meetings there in Rockhampton.
In terms of the Government response the Federal Government and the State Government are working closely together to work through our national disaster relief and recovery arrangements and we'll continue to do so as the effect of the floods in different regions becomes more manifest over the next few days.
I'll turn now to the Premier for some comments.
PREMIER BLIGH: Thank you Prime Minister. I'm very pleased to welcome the Prime Minister to Queensland today so that she can see for herself the dire situation emerging in so many parts of our state. Here in Bundaberg I'm very pleased to see the water levels starting to recede, but that is only the beginning of the recovery task here in the city. There are still many people out of their homes and unable to return for another few days.
We are now seeing a very serious situation, a dire situation emerge in Emerald, the waters at 16 metres and still rising, there are more than 1200 people out of their homes in Emerald and more to come. We now have, thank you to the Prime Minister, the Defence Force setting up temporary accommodation outside of Emerald, to cope with what we think will be a very large group of people who will become homeless over the next 24 hours as a result of continuing levels of water rising in Emerald. So we're very grateful for the assistance from the Commonwealth Government, the Prime Minister and I have been in regular contact and the facilitation of particularly the Defence assets, the Blackhawks and now the temporary accommodation are making the difference and we really do want to thank you for that.I'm also very pleased this morning to see that we're continuing to see people contribute to the relief appeal, the Commonwealth Bank have announced this morning a $1 million donation, we now have the relief appeal at over $6 million.
When you meet with people in evacuation centres as the Prime Minister and I have just done and realise just how difficult their life now is as a result of this flood, relief appeals like this will add to all of the government funds that are available and make the difference in people getting their lives back together.
So I thank everybody who's making those donations and I'd encourage Australians to please dig deep, Queenslanders are doing it very, very tough.
We now have three major river systems in flood, we have 17 evacuation centres and we have more than 1000 people in those evacuation centres and many more thousands living with relatives and friends because they can't get back into their own homes and we've still got major places like Rockhampton with floodwaters coming down the river and what may well be the biggest flood they've ever experienced, so a lot more to go until we can really say that we're in full recovery mode.
JOURNALIST: Would you say that the Federal Government's $1 million funding is pretty poor given this is a billion dollar disaster?
PM: Can I just answer that first because your question's based on a complete misconception.
The Federal Government's funds flow through our national disaster relief and recovery arrangements, they flow in the forms of assistance to individuals, assistances to businesses, we'll obviously be working together to help communities recover through the infrastructure, so that is the stream of Federal Government funds that is there to assist in circumstances of natural disaster like these devastating floods.
On top of that, in addition to that we have made a million dollar contribution to the Premier's disaster relief fund, that fund of course can go to do those extra things to make a difference for families and people of Queensland who have faced these floods, but Federal Government funds are flowing, this is a natural disaster across Queensland that is going to occasion between levels of government literally hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars of expenditure and we'll work in partnership to do that in addition to those usual flows of funds to work on a natural disaster together, we put in a million dollars to make that extra little bit of difference.
JOURNALIST: Is there a figure on funding from the Federal Government?
PM: The way the arrangements work is that we respond as the disaster unfolds, this of course is still unfolding, the circumstances in Rockhampton, the circumstances in Emerald today, so our natural disaster recovery and relief arrangements include payments to support individuals and businesses. I can't give you what the total figure is because I can't tell you what the damage is going to be because we are still in the middle of the floodwaters coming to places like Rockhampton, but we'll be working in partnership now and through the recovery efforts.
JOURNALIST: And will you donate more to the Premier's appeal then?
PM: Well the appeal is there, we put in a million dollars as has the Queensland Government, there has been some very generous big corporate donors, I thank them for that, but I think the great thing about having that fund is there'd be lots of Australians who'd be sitting in their homes seeing the various spectacular footage of these floodwaters, seen interviews with people who have lost their homes and thought "What could I do, what could I do to make a difference myself?" It's a great way that they can make a difference, they can send a donation. So we'll see some big corporate donations and we have, but I think we'll see a lot of $5, $10, $15, $20, $50 donations from people who just want to make a difference.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) back into surplus?
PM: The Budget will be back in surplus in 2012/13 as promised.
JOURNALIST: So it's not going to affect the Federal Budget at all?
PM: We will manage the Federal Budget so it's in surplus in 2012/13 as promised.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I guess you're hearing up the back there people are concerned that we're donating more to overseas disasters, should charity begin at home?
PM: I think Australians as individuals do give money overseas when they see natural disasters, here in a Christmas season our minds probably do go back to the tsunami in Indonesia and Australians opened their hearts and opened their purses and wallets to assist in a natural disaster like that. Here, with the Queensland floods, there is the ability for Australians to open their hearts and their purses and wallets for their fellow Australians. I'm very confident Australians are a generous people, we want to look after each other and we'll see a response.
JOURNALIST: How does the scale of this flooding compare to previous natural disasters?
PM: Well these are devastating floods, the Premier is the expert with the comparisons with floods past, but here in Bundaberg, we were talking in the evacuation centre, this is the biggest flood which Bundaberg has seen since the late 1940s. It was a much smaller place then. I'm not looking a Paul in the sense that I think he was Federal Member then, I don't think that that's true-
PAUL NEVILLE: I'm working on it-
PM: But these are big-
NEVILLE: 1942 it was.
PM: Biggest since 1942 and whilst we don't know yet exactly what the circumstances in Rockhampton will be, it may be the biggest flood event Rockhampton's ever seen.
JOURNALIST: Given all the cane farmers around here, obviously we've had the best sugar price we've had in years, and in the beginning of 2011 there's not going to be much cane, what assistance are you giving to cane farmers?
PM: Well as we work through the natural disaster relief and recovery arrangements they do include some support for businesses but we need to keep dealing with the immediate crisis of people being evacuated from their homes, things like making available Defence Force resources and then we will work through the kind of assistance people will need in recovery.
JOURNALIST: Is this funding getting through to people as quickly as possible, are they getting it today, tomorrow?
PM: Well I think we see from the kind of efforts we've seen here locally in Bundaberg that people are responding, governments are responding, local government, our wonderful police and emergency service personnel, volunteers, everybody is responding as quickly as possible to try and assist others.
JOURNALIST: You've just had a lady (inaudible)
PM: I did get hug from a lady called Sandy who did wish me a happy new year and it is humbling, I think is the word, that people in such difficult circumstances would be giving me their best wishes. I had another man who said to me "You've got a lot on your shoulders and I'm worried about you" and I thought well that's just amazing, that someone who's here in these circumstances would actually be concerned about my welfare. I'm fine; my concern is for people who are facing very difficult situations with floodwaters in their homes, so a humbling moment.
JOURNALIST: Will you be going down to the water to see the houses firsthand?
PM: We're on our way as we speak.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Acting Attorney-General Brendan O'Connor today announced the Australian Government will provide additional payments for people significantly affected by the Queensland floods crisis.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will be available to people significantly affected by flooding in Queensland Local Government Areas that have been declared natural disaster zones.
There are currently 41 LGAs across Queensland that are natural disasters zones.
There are many people across Queensland who will be doing it extremely tough over the new year as a result of these floods.
These payments will see $1000 for each adult and $400 for each child in the hands of families most in need, including people who have lost their homes or whose homes have sustained major damage.
The payments will be delivered by Centrelink, subject to eligibility criteria. The Australian Government will establish an Emergency Assistance Hotline on 180 2266 to receive claims for assistance.
The hotline will be open between 8am - 8pm (QLD time), seven days a week from tomorrow, Saturday 1 January. Centrelink staff will also be available in some recovery/evacuation centres. Arrangements allowing the payments to flow will be finalised in the coming days.
Today's announcement is in addition to assistance from the Australian Government already being provided through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
The NDRRA funding will be provided to Queensland for counter disaster operations and for the restoration of essential public infrastructure - such as bridges, roads and schools - where expenditure exceeds certain thresholds and requirements. Personal hardship grants and distress grants are also available.
Late yesterday and this morning, Toowoomba Regional Council and Woorabinda and Cherbourg Aboriginal Council areas were declared natural disaster zones.
There are also hundreds of volunteers, emergency services workers and ADF personnel who bring in the new year supporting flood-affected communities in Queensland. We thank them for their tireless work in helping their fellow Australians.
The Gillard Government will continue to work closely with the Queensland Government to provide support to these communities.
More information on Australian Government assistance is available at the Disaster Assist website.



PM: I'm here today in Rockhampton and I'd like to say thank you very much to the Mayor for hosting me and the Premier of Queensland, we're here talking to the local community about the preparations it's making for what is anticipated to be the peak of the flooding in Rockhampton on Sunday.
Just like Bundaberg earlier today, there is a great community spirit here with people working together as they face these devastating floods.
Here today I'd like to take the opportunity of making an announcement about further Federal Government support for those who are affected by flooding. I have determined with the Acting Attorney-General that we will make available to families who have lost their homes or whose homes have sustained major damage, payments under the Australian Government disaster relief payment system. This means families who have lost their homes can be eligible for a payment of $1000 per adult and $400 per child. These payments are made available through Centrelink. We will have a hotline that people can ring in order to access the payments and discuss their eligibility available from 8AM Queensland time tomorrow. The number for that hotline is 180 22 66.
These payments apply to the 41 declared areas in Queensland which have been affected by flooding. The purpose of this payment is to assist people who have lost their homes to ensure that they can have some immediate access to cash for all of the expenditure that they would need as they're in evacuation centres or otherwise dealing with the loss of their home. It's one way that we want to assist families affected by these devastating floods.
Of course each level of government keeps working together to provide further assistance and the Premier of Queensland and I have had the opportunity today to keep discussing the ways we can work together through our natural disaster relief and recovery arrangements to support affected communities. And it's fantastic to see each and every level of government - Federal, State and local - there is a great spirit of cooperation and partnership as we work with local communities who are flood affected.
Very happy to hand over to the Premier for some comments.
PREMIER BLIGH: Thank you Prime Minister, it's great that you could not only come to Queensland but get to two parts of Queensland that are affected and see firsthand what many families and many communities are experiencing here.
I welcome the extra assistance from the Australian Government and I know that there will be many families who will be very grateful; it will make a real difference where they're really hurting.
This is a very big event, it is now affecting 41 of Queensland's local government areas, we have 41 local council areas that are disaster declared, that is more than half of the local governments of Queensland.
That of course is testing our resources and testing our personnel, they're all rising to that challenge but they will need some relief over the coming week. I'm very pleased that the States of both Victoria and New South Wales have offered to provide additional assistance and we will relief teams coming from Victoria and New South Wales early next week. I'm anticipating a team of 30 SES officers from Victoria arriving probably Monday, to begin the clean-up in the south west in towns like Dolby and Chincilla. We'll also see a team of some 20 disaster co-ordinators who will come in from Brisbane and relieve the central co-ordination centre where people have been staffing that centre managing this event since Christmas Day. So these events are marathons, they're not sprints, and we need to make sure that all of the people at the front line are getting relief to manage fatigue so we can make sure we keep getting good decision making. So I thank Victoria and I thank New South Wales, having those extra bodies on the ground will make a difference and we look forward to seeing those relief staff arrive early next week.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) and flying over Emerald?
PM: Well I had the opportunity to fly over Emerald and it is truly a startling scene from the air when you see how widespread the floodwaters are and how affected Emerald is, how many houses have been affected. The patches that are not covered by floodwaters are a lot less than the area that is covered by floodwaters so it's a very tough time in Emerald, we've been talking about that during the course of my visit and discussions here today. Of course I had intended to go to Emerald today, but given the circumstances the focus needed to remain on immediate relief work that was required today.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: This is a direct form of assistance to help people at that critical time when they've lost their homes, they're out of their homes, they may not have been able to take much with them and consequently they've got an urgent need for purchasing things like clothes and those sorts of items. Through the co-operating arrangements we have through our natural disaster relief and recovery system, we will work with the Queensland Government to make available further assistance that will be in the form of community recovery assistance, it will be in the form of assistance to farmers and other business that have struggled as a result of the flooding and it will also be in the form of further payments to families to assist them in circumstances where people have lost their homes.
Of course as we now, with flooding still in process and here we are in Rockhampton where the peak of the flooding is yet to come, the focus is obviously on responding to the immediate emergency, we will be working together over many, many months to assist these communities as the true scale of the loss becomes apparent when floodwaters recede.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think the Mayor is best able to help you with that.
MAYOR CARTER: In terms of compulsory evacuations we opened our evacuation centre this morning at 8 o'clock at the Central Queensland University, it's functioning very effectively, we've only had about two registrations early this morning, but as the day progresses, as we work in daylight hours we'll be looking at implementing compulsory evacuation to those people that need that assistance. We've also had a system of voluntary evacuation that's been working for the best part of a week, at this stage it won't be until later today that we know how many people are utilising the facility at the university, we do know that is has the capacity to handle up to 1200 people in large accommodation and if we need to extend that, we can extend that out to about 2000 people.
I'd also like to take the opportunity of thanking the Prime Minister and the Premier for these early announcements. The assistance that's been announced today and previously by the Queensland Government to assist the community in our recovery (inaudible) lives back on schedule again as they move into their homes. The sad thing for our community will be that we're going to have many people out of their homes for at least two weeks as these waters rise. Not only are these waters going to rise, they're going to remain quite high for at least two weeks.
JOURNALIST: On that, the airport's expected to close tomorrow (inaudible) city of this size is it acceptable (inaudible)
PM: Obviously in circumstances where you've got huge floodwaters, this is a big, big flood, the anticipated rise of more than nine metres, we were talking as to whether or not this will be the biggest ever flood in Rockhampton's history, that looks less likely now, but we are still talking about a huge event. So in those circumstances yes there is impact on critical infrastructure and the team is working well, across all levels of government, to ensure that things like food supplies and other essentials can be kept flowing into Rockhampton.
JOURNALIST: Certainly there's been talk about the standard of the Bruce Highway and that's obviously going to be cut. Can you flood-proof the Highway (inaudible)
PM: Something that the local Member here, Kirsten Livermore, has certainly worked on with our Minister Anthony Albanese. What we need to do now is focus on the crisis that is immediately facing communities in Queensland, we will then need to work through a whole host of other issues, but my thoughts now and the work efforts now are on working with local communities to face this immediate crisis and get people through.
Thank you



Happy New Year.
As the fireworks fade and the cricket moves from Melbourne to Sydney, I'm proud to be Australian and excited about the year ahead.
Australia can look forward to 2011 confident in our future as a fair and prosperous nation.
As the New Year begins, we have much to look forward to.
I still think we are lucky. But I also think the harder we work, the luckier we get.
So I think 2011 will be a good year for Australia because of the capacity and decency of the millions of Australians who now contribute, in their own way, without thanks or praise, to making it a better place.
In our mines, in our factories, in our hospitals, in our schools and even on patrol outside Tarin Kowt, Australians will do amazing things this year.
As I look forward to 2011, I do see some challenges for our country.
Like creating jobs in a strong economy, giving every child a great start in life at school, tackling climate change and persevering in our mission in Afghanistan. Real challenges for our country. Big things to be achieved. We wouldn't want it any other way.
And my overwhelming sense at the start of this New Year is optimism.
Optimism because of what has already been achieved by the people who have made Australia what is today.
Australia is a wonderful country, the greatest country on earth.
I know this year we can do great things together.
I hope you enjoy the rest of your break, and come back full of energy and excitement - but not too soon. Happy New Year.



PM: Can I start by saying happy New Year. Happy New Year to Jenny Macklin who has joined me here today and happy New Year to Australians. And today is not only a great day to say to happy New Year, it's a date to be celebrating a historic day for Australians families.
Today is the start of our paid parental leave scheme, it is making history, history for mums and dads, for babies and for employers. Finally Australia has a paid parental leave scheme which will make a difference for working families, make a difference with that extra bit of support at the time of the birth of a new child, make a difference so that mums and dads can spend more time at home with their new baby, make a difference for employers because it's part of keeping that all important connection between work and skilled staff who are attending to family responsibilities.
We had the great pleasure today of meeting baby Hirani, baby Hirani born in this hospital around 2AM this morning - a New Years Day baby - and baby Hirani and baby Hirani's parents will receive paid parental leave. We've been talking to Anjna, the mother of baby Hirani, a working mother who will now have the benefit of paid parental leave.
So it's a good day to be celebrating a new year, it's also a great day to be celebrating the start of paid parental leave. I'll turn to Jenny Macklin for some comments.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much Julia and happy New Year to everybody and particularly happy New Year to all those mums and dads who are now going to be eligible for Australia's first national paid parental leave scheme. We've just met one of the first mothers who will be eligible for paid parental leave here at Westmead hospital, and she's just told us what it means for her. It means that she's going to be able to take 18 weeks of paid leave, paid at the federal minimum wage, around $570 a week before tax. She's just told the Prime Minister and me what it's going to mean for her family. It's going to mean extra financial support so that she can have those critical early months at home with her baby, otherwise of course, it would have meant going back to work more quickly than she might have otherwise done.
For those parents who haven't been working and may not be eligible for paid parental leave, of course the baby bonus and family tax benefit continue for them because we do understand how important it is to provide support for parents whether they've been in the workforce or not.
Today is a very exciting day for all Australian families, the first time that we have a national paid parental leave scheme.
PM: Just before we take questions, and we'll be happy to do so, I just wanted to say something about the Queensland floods. I yesterday had the opportunity, with Premier Bligh, to go to some of the flood affected communities.
When I was there I announced the Australian Government is making available an emergency disaster relief payment for people who have been badly affected by these floods. We know there are far too many families who have had to leave their homes, they're in evacuation centres, and this disaster relief payment will help them.
It's a payment of emergency relief, $1000 per adult and $400 per child. The hotline that people can ring for information is up and running now, the number is 180 22 66, so I would say to the people of Queensland as they are battling these floods, please remember that number in terms of getting information about that emergency disaster relief payment.
Of course there are a lot more things we're going to do and going to need to do to help Queenslanders with these devastating floods, but the disaster relief payment is there immediately for people, they can make telephone calls now and payments will flow in the coming few days to assist families who are in this situation of moving from their home and needing that extra assistance.
We will of course be working with the Queensland Government through our natural disaster relief and recovery arrangements, which provides further support to families, further support to communities, to businesses affected by these floods. We're still directly battling floodwaters, we haven't seen the peak of the flood yet at centres like Rockhampton, so the people of Queensland in many places are doing it tough today, and our thoughts are with them.
Very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what's your message to businesses who may decide to roll-back their own paid parental leave scheme as a result of the Government's measures?
PM: I would say to those businesses that extending benefits to their staff, their highly skill staff, that keep them connected to that employer as they have their family, is good for business. We know businesses around the country value their skilled staff. I meet with a lot of business leaders and I often ask them the question, 'what's the most important thing about your business?' And without exception, they say to me the most important thing about their business is their staff, the skills and capacities their staff bring.
And so keeping their own parental leave schemes, adding it to the Government's paid parental leave scheme, is a great way of keeping that bonded connection between employer and a skilled staff member, who's gone for some family responsibilities but who will want to come back to work and the employer will want the benefit of those skills.
JOURNALIST: So are trusting employers to do the right thing, is it possible they could be fined for winding back entitlements?
PM: What we're saying to employers is it's good for business to keep this connection with their staff, the Government is making available a paid parental leave scheme, but obviously there are businesses around the country that have already seen the sense of extending to their staff the benefit of paid parental leave, and what made them think that was a good thing to do still stands, it's about a connection between them and their staff, getting people back to work at the appropriate time, back bringing their skills into the business.
JOURNALIST: Today there's an article in the Sydney Morning Herald about the school chaplaincy scheme, suggesting that the service that's provided is inadequate. Are you concerned about that and are you happy that the Commonwealth Ombudsman will do enough to rectify some of the problems or make recommendations to rectify the problems?
PM: The school chaplaincy scheme is a great scheme and because we think it's such a good scheme we promised at the election last year to extend it. I've had the opportunity to meet a lot of chaplains and go to a lot of schools and get the feedback that school chaplains provide that extra bit of pastoral care which can often make a real difference in a child's life.
Now obviously, like all other Government programs, there are quality standards and monitoring and expectations about what are to be achieved be chaplains in schools, so we'll continue to keep monitoring but the feedback from schools communities about school chaplains is overwhelmingly positive.
JOURNALIST: Should there be a set of national guidelines for these chaplains, should they adhere to national guidelines?
PM: This is a national program, there are national arrangements for this program, including national arrangements and expectations about the roles that chaplains play in schools, but I'd have to say feedback is overwhelmingly positive from school communities.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the high court challenge that's been launched into the program may fail then?
PM: Look I'm not going to comment on the potential outcome of legal case, but school chaplains are very welcome in school communities and the reason we decided to extend the program is schools around the country were saying they wanted the benefit of this program, they wanted to see more of this kind of pastoral care available in schools.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the floods in Queensland (inaudible) impact on the mining industry up there, we also impacts on the share market yesterday, what's the economic impacts (inaudible) how concerned (inaudible)
PM: Clearly the devastation being caused by these floods is going to have an economic impact. You're right to point to the impact on mining, a number of mining companies have effectively used the force majeure clauses in their contracts, they've had to say to the people who buy their minerals that at this time circumstances are such that they can't keep supply moving. Even those mines that could continue to mine obviously have got difficulties with supply routes because so many roads have been affected and transport routes have been affected.
There will be other economic impacts for farmers, for small businesses in townships that rely on business and trade and tourism, so we'll have to work our way through that and we will do so with the Queensland Government. We're not at the stage yet where we can put a figure on it, we need of course to deal with the immediate circumstance and then, as floodwaters recede, we will be able to assess the degree of the damage and we'll continue working with the Queensland Government and local government through that, because local government is right there on the frontline as communities face these kinds of circumstances.
As for the Government Budget, we will bring the Budget back to surplus in 2012/13 as promised, we will manage appropriately to ensure that that occurs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Tony Abbott has this morning called for the Government to explain why two Alcatel executives are running the NBN? Do you think this needs to be examined?
PM: Look Tony Abbott said to Malcolm Turnbull when he appointed him spokesperson about the NBN, 'do anything you can to destroy it.' And what we're seeing today from the Opposition and in recent days is scraping the bottom of the barrel to try and do that. This is a personal smear against a highly regarded businessman, actually an Australian recognised for his telecommunications expertise around the world.
So I'd say to Tony Abbott, and I'd say to the Opposition in general: get out of the politics of smear.
They may be in denial about the future about the NBN, they may want to keep saying to Australians, 'don't go into the future, stay in the past, chuck your mobile phone out, throw your computer out, go and get yourself a tin can'. Tony Abbott might want to say that to Australians, but he shouldn't be smearing people along the way.
JOURNALIST: But no doubt it's another headache for the Government in trying to sell the NBN to the public and try and sell the amount of money that the NBN will cost to roll-out?
PM: I think the only thing that's coming out of this is something about Tony Abbott, not about anything else.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what are you going to tell the Australian cricket team this afternoon?
PM: Well I will be welcoming them for afternoon tea, both the Australian and the English cricket teams, so I'll be passing round the sandwiches and wishing them well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just before Christmas and in recent days it's been in East Timor media about wanting to have Australian troops pulled out in 2012, has there been approach with the Australian Government or any discussions about this at all?
PM: Look I've seen those reports and obviously we do work through proper processes when the East Timorese Government forms a view about force deployment, but before any decisions are made we would work through a proper process with the East Timorese Government, with the United Nations. Obviously the Australian Government would be involved as would the New Zealand Government. So all of those formal processes are yet to come, and we'd respond to full communications from the East Timorese Government.
JOURNALIST: Has there been any approach to the Government by East Timor (inaudible)
PM: Look there's been, obviously, these statements in the media. I have not received specifically, a brief in this Christmas period about such an approach. But should such an approach be received say at local Post level, then we will work through it in the proper processes.
Thank you



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs Jenny Macklin today visited Westmead Hospital in Sydney to meet some of the first parents to benefit from the Gillard Government's new national Paid Parental Leave scheme.
The Prime Minister said the start of the scheme - a first for Australia - represented a major win for Australian families and a historic day for workplace relations in this country.
The scheme provides up to 18 weeks of Government-funded Parental Leave pay at the National Minimum Wage (currently $570 per week before tax) for eligible parents of children born or adopted from 1 January 2011.
After decades of inaction, Australian families now have the added security of Paid Parental Leave while they welcome in a new member of their family.
The Government expects 148,000 Australian families will be eligible for Paid Parental Leave each year. Already more than 7,500 families expecting babies early in 2011 have applied for the payment.
To be eligible for Paid Parental Leave the primary carer must have an individual annual income of $150,000 or less and have worked prior to the birth of their baby.
Applicants will meet the work test if they have worked at least 330 hours (just over one day a week) in 10 of the 13 months before the expected date of birth.
Minister Macklin said that for many women, particularly the self-employed and those in part-time, casual, seasonal or contract work, this will be the first time they will have access to Paid Parental Leave.
Most mothers will receive parental leave pay through their employer in their usual pay cycle - just like employer provided leave entitlements.
This will help women stay connected to the workforce, and will help employers attract and retain valuable and skilled staff.
Parental Leave pay can be transferred between parents to give families more options to balance work and family.
Families who don't qualify for Paid Parental Leave will still have the option of the baby bonus and other family payments if eligible.
Paid Parental Leave can be taken any time from the birth of the child until the child turns one, as long as the parent has not returned to work. It can be taken at the same time as, before or after any employer-funded leave.
Parents can lodge their claims for Paid Parental Leave up to three months before their baby's due date to ensure payments begin as soon after the birth as parents wish.
The Government-funded scheme has a net cost of around $260 million each year.
This is a great victory for the many Australians who have campaigned for decades for a national Paid Parental Leave scheme.
To apply or to find out more, please visit www.familyassist.gov.au.



LEVINGSTON: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning.
PM: Good morning Rebecca.
LEVINGSTON: Who's eligible for the $25,000 grants?
PM: If I can go through it a step at a time, because I do want people to get the accurate information.
Firstly there is an immediate relief payment for people across 41 local government areas that have been affected by this devastating flooding. So that's an immediate payment for people who are out of their homes, in evacuation centres and they need some cash. That amount is $1000 for each eligible adult and $400 per child and that helps people right in the middle of the crisis.
We have had a hotline open over the weekend for people to make contact if they need that payment and people's details have been taken and payments will start to flow from tomorrow and if I could just remind that that number to ring is 180 22 66.
LEVINGSTON: And Prime Minister, can I just check there, is that separate to the emergency assistance payments being offered by the State government?
PM: Yes it is. So to be just really clear with people about the details, that's a federal government payment, it's called the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment and for people who believe they could be eligible for that the right number to ring is 180 22 66.
LEVINGSTON: And can you only receive funding from one or the other, or are people eligible to ask for money from the Commonwealth and from the State government?
PM: No, they build on each other, so people can be eligible for more than one type of assistance.
And Rebecca if I can just explain the next type of assistance that's available. It's assistance that Premier Bligh and I are announcing today. It's assistance that's available under our natural disaster arrangements and it's assistance to help people as they go into recovery mode.
So the Australian government disaster recovery payment, the $1000 per adult, the $400 per child is for people right in the middle of the crisis, in an evacuation centre, needs to buy some clean clothes or something like that, it's to help them through that time.
Then as we move into recovery mode and we've triggered these payments for nine local government areas, then people can be eligible for further emergency assistance grants. Grants to help them replace their household contents and that assistance can be up to $4980 per family.
Grants to help them repair their houses and that assistance can be up $13,800 per family.
And then there are grants for businesses, because of course this is about people and their homes and the damage to their homes, but it's also about the damage to businesses, and so businesses can be eligible for grants of up to $25,000 to small businesses and primary producers are also eligible for that assistance.
We know primary producers are looking for some of that assistance to help with emergency fodder drops, food for stranded animals, so it can be used for that kind of purpose and then as people rebuild they're eligible for concessional interest rate loans of up to $250,000 for small businesses and primary producers.
And then beyond that Rebecca, when floodwaters recede, we're going to see a lot of damage to roads, to bridges, to schools, to the community facilities that everybody relies on. We can't assess what that's going to cost until we can see the damage when the floodwaters have receded, but we will obviously be working with the stage governments, with Premier Bligh's government to rebuild that essential community infrastructure.
All in all we know that hundreds of millions of dollars are going to flow into Queensland to help deal with these circumstances and I did want to be as clear as I could today about how that assistance is going to work for people.
LEVINGSTON: It's a lot for people to get their heads around and Prime Minister, you've seen the mess first hand, that people are dealing with at the moment and indeed in Rockhampton are still waiting to deal with.
In terms of paperwork and proof of damage, what sort of things will people have to show in order to access these payments immediately?
PM: The best thing is for people to ring the right numbers and I can give you those numbers.
So for the $1000 emergency payment people should ring 180 22 66. For people who are looking for what I'm referring to as the recovery payment, that's when they've gone back to their houses, they can see the damage, for small businesses, that number is 1800 173 349. And for primary producer, because they have special needs they've got their own dedicated hotline 1800 623 946.
Rebecca, I understand and our emergency services personnel understand, that if you've had to flee your home with rising floodwaters, you may not have had time to get the kids in the car and get organised without running around trying to find all of your business paperwork.
I understand that, our emergency services personnel understand that, so they are able to work through with people in these circumstances, and they've obviously done it before, for example when we had the very devastating bushfires in Victoria, payments were made and processed for a lot of people who had understandably lost all of their paperwork and documents when their houses went up in smoke.
LEVINGSTON: You're listening to the Prime Minister Julia Gillard detailing disaster recovery payments for flood affected small businesses and famers and also individuals and I'll run through the phone numbers that the Prime Minister gave at the end of the interview today.
Prime Minister, when can people apply for these grants up until?
PM: Look they will be kept open for a long period of time, I'm talking about a number of months, clearly the emergency assistance $1000 is the payment for people right now when they're in circumstances like they've lost their homes, they're in an evacuation centre, so that is the payment that's immediately available.
But the recovery payments like rebuilding your house, your household contents, the damage to your business, people will be able to make applications for them for many months to come, because we understand that people will need to get back home, will need to get back to their businesses and assess the extent of the damage.
LEVINGSTON: You mention that it's difficult to know until the floodwaters subside exactly how far reaching the damage will be, but are you anticipating that the impact of this on the Queensland economy and the Australian economy will be felt for months and possibly even years to come?
PM: We are going to see an economic impact, there's no double about that. We're seeing people sustaining losses, it is going to have implications for many businesses, but we'll work through with all of that. The thing that's most on my mind is making sure we're getting the assistance to people who are facing being out of their home, or who are at the stage where they are able to go back and assess the damage.
LEVINGSTON: You've been to Emerald, was it a shock to see just how much water is soaking Queensland right now?
PM: I had the opportunity on Friday to go to Bundaberg and talk to people in the evacuation centre and go and see some of the affected houses and the thing that stays with me from that Rebecca, is the remarkable courage that people are showing in such difficult circumstances.
I met a woman called Sandy, I met a woman called Jackie, they were out of their homes but were actually full of good cheer and full of sort of stoicism, so remarkable response. It said a lot about them as individuals, said a lot about the toughness of Queenslanders.
I had the opportunity to fly over Emerald, I wasn't able to land because of the circumstances in Emerald that day, but even from the air, you could see how high the floodwaters were and how much of the town was under waters and the clean up job there is going to be a very very big one.
And of course Rockhampton is still bracing for the worst, I've been in contact with our local member Kirsten Livermore, she lives in Rockhampton, she's there on the ground, talking to her about how the community is responding. I had the opportunity to go to Rockhampton on Friday and once again saw the preparations that have been made, the sense of courage and we're going to deal with this and we're going to pull together which was written on everybody's face, it was truly remarkable.
LEVINGSTON: Do you know when your next trip to Queensland might be?
PM: I'll certainly be up in Queensland later in the week, talking to people as they work through the recovery mode and many of my Ministers will be touching base with places in Queensland this week. We have opened a Defence co-ordination facility at Enoggera Barracks in order to co-ordinate the work of the ADF as it goes about assisting in flood relief and the relevant Minister Warren Snowdon will be there today.
We obviously want to make sure we're staying in good touch with affected communities, so people from the federal government will be available, including me later this week.
LEVINGSTON: Prime Minister, I appreciate your time today, thank you.
PM: Thank you.



PM: Thanks for coming along today. I want to take this opportunity to provide an update to the Australian community about the circumstances of the Queensland floods and the federal government assistance that is being provided.
On Friday I had the opportunity to travel to Queensland and to tour in the some of the flood affected areas. We know of course that many Queensland communities are facing very difficult flood situations, for some communities it's the biggest ever floods that their community has seen.
We know some communities have moved into recovery mode already, for example I was in Bundaberg and floodwaters were receding, but we also know Rockhampton is still to experience the peak of the floods. In these circumstances I wanted to explain the work that is happening in Queensland to assist the Queensland community with the floods that they face. These are devastating floods, already 1600 homes have needed to be evacuated and many thousands of businesses have been affected and as I've indicated we are still seeing floodwaters rising in Rockhampton.
We have been working with the Queensland government to provide assistance to flood communities. We have been working with the Queensland government, including through the provision of support from the Australian Defence Force. I has the opportunity a little earlier today to talk to the Chief of the Defence Force Angus Houston. What they set up over the last few days, and it has been a full operation for a period, a joint task force out of the Enoggera base, and with that join task force of around 80 personnel, assistance is being provided as necessary to assist with the Queensland floods.
Today what is happening is that a C130 is moving food supplies from Amberley, so that they can be taken to Mackay and then moved by road into Rockhampton. 50 tonnes of food supplies will be moved by this method today and tomorrow. Of course it's possible that that road will become impassable and already contingency plans are being made to move food either by barge or by helicopter into Rockhampton by Defence Force work. So I do want to take this opportunity to say to those Defence Force personnel thank you for everything you are doing and everything that you will continue to do in coming days to assist people in Queensland as they battle these flood waters.
I also want to be clear about the assistance that's available for people in Queensland at this time. When I was there on Friday I met people in evacuation centres, we have already announced and triggered a special payment to assist people who have had to leave their homes. That's the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment and that provides access to emergency assistance, $1000 per adult and $400 per family*. The hotline that people can ring to access this has been in operation over the weekend, it is of course still in operation now and will be for a long period of time to come. The number to ring for those relief payments is 180 22 66. Now that emergency relief payment is there for people who are in the immediate time of crisis, having to leave their homes perhaps in an evacuation centre, needing access to emergency payments.
Today with the Queensland Premier I am announcing a further set of payments and assistance. This further set of payments and assistance is for communities and individuals as they move into recovery mode. They do contain some addition forms of emergency grant assistance should that be necessary, but the focus of this assistance through our natural disaster relief and recovery arrangements is to enable people to start the rebuilding and recovery process. Particularly for families who return to homes that have been flooded and damaged these payments include assistance of up to $1660 dollars for individuals and $4980 for families and that's to replace essential household contents. In addition families and individuals can be eligible for assistance for repairs to their homes and dwellings, that assistance is of up to $10,250 for individuals and $13,800 for families.
Of course whilst houses are affected, businesses are affected too and we know many businesses caught up in these Queensland floods will sustain flood damage and obviously the losses that come from the clean up and then not being able to trade and operate as normal for some period of time. So the assistance that I am announcing today with the Queensland Premier includes grants of up to $25,000 for small businesses and primary producers for cleaning up and recovering and we know for example that there are primary producers that will use some of that assistance for things like emergency fodder for stranded animals as well as the general clean up and recovery that is necessary.
In addition small businesses and primary producers can be eligible for concessional loans of up to $250,000 as their businesses and farms strive to recover from these flood waters. So these are the forms of assistance available for communities that are moving into the recovery phase.
Obviously as floodwaters recede we're going to see a lot of damage, we're going to see a lot of roads that have been damaged, bridges that have been damaged, schools and essential community infrastructure that's been damaged. We will work with the Queensland Government to provide recovery packages to communities to assist with the necessary rebuilding.
We will only be able to assess the dimensions of what is required as flood waters recede and we are able to see what has happened as a result of the damage from the floods.
All in all the Commonwealth government assistance flowing will be in the order of many hundreds of millions of dollars. This is a very very severe set of floods, affecting communities that are very geographically dispersed and the Commonwealth Government will be there, working with the State Government and with local government, in the time of crisis and as communities move into recovery.
Can I conclude by saying, of course, we have seen one confirmed fatality as a result of these floods and there is one person missing. I would want to say to the families and friends of the person who has died that my best wishes and thoughts are with them at this very difficult time, for the person who is missing we obviously hope for the best. I would also say to people that floodwaters are dangerous, fast moving water, rising water is dangerous, so I would ask everybody to please abide by the instruction of emergency services personnel and police as to how to move around and deal with this dangerous situation.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how can people physically get this assistance? You're saying it's there for them, how do they get it?
PM: I can go through a set of telephone numbers which would be the first way to do it and people in evacuation centres will also be able to get assistance to access payments, but if you will bear with me as I go through some telephone numbers I would be grateful. For that emergency assistance payment of $1000, say for someone who is in an evacuation centre, who has had to leave their home because it's full of flood waters, the number to ring is 180 22 66. For people who are looking to access the recovery monies, that is the money for household contents, for repairs to dwellings, the assistance that I talked about for small businesses, that number is 1800 173 349. We all know primary producers have special needs and as a result they have a dedicated hotline and that dedicated hotline is 1800 623 946.
Now clearly in these disaster circumstances, and we've seen it in other natural disasters, there may be problems with people not having identification or documentation when people have moved because they knew floodwaters were coming, obviously their focus has been on getting themselves and their families out and safe, for people who have been evacuated by boat out of rising floodwaters they may well not have taken anything with them, normal identity papers or receipts or things that we usually carry with us and have access to, but may not have in these circumstances. So they personnel who deal with these grants are used to dealing with those sorts of difficult circumstances people can find themselves in.
JOURNALIST: Are those numbers available now?
PM: Yes indeed and the 180 22 66 was available throughout the weekend and people were contacting it over the weekend.
JOURNALIST: Several times you've mentioned that the money goes up to an amount, is there any means testing or any assessment for families to say look you need this or you get half of this money?
PM: It's a set of eligibility criteria and the amount of damage that people have sustained will be different in different circumstances, so I think it's best for people to make contact and for their individual circumstances to be worked through.
Can I say all of this assistance that's flowing through what we call the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment, which is that emergency $1000 for adults or $400 for children and these forms of recovery assistance, which we call the Category C assistance under the natural disaster relief and recovery arrangements, these forms of assistance are obviously going to be in the hundreds of millions of dollars and the rebuilding is going to be in the hundreds of millions of dollars. All of this is in addition to the contribution the Commonwealth made to the Premier's Disaster Relief Fund, than contribution was of $1 million, but what I think has been very very heart warming is that the amount of money in that fund now is money that is being donated, not by government but by businesses and by mums, dads, Australians around the country, who through their $5, $10, $20 want to show their own way of supporting people in the Queensland floods, so I think it is really heart warming to see Australians pull together and for people to go and make sure they've put their bit of money into that relief fund.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the government considering forms of assistance (inaudible), for example the coal industry?
PM: Well we do know that a number of mining operations have been affected by either large amounts of water being in the pit of the mine itself, or by supply routes being cut, so that the commodities can no longer be got safely to market. Now for those bigger businesses, many of them have used what are called forced majeure clauses in their contracts, they're not allowed to keep up supply at this time. Ordinarily bigger businesses can find their way through recovering from disaster situation, but we'll obviously be talking to those businesses as they work through recovery. The assistance that I've outlined today is for smaller businesses and primary producers.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there has been criticism that the government wasn't doing enough, do you think these measures address that?
PM: I think this is a time where we're all pulling together, where people on the ground are working as hard as they can. Having had the opportunity on Friday to be in Bundaberg and Rockhampton, to see the devastation in Emerald, to meet with people who are providing emergency relief, I think local government level people are doing everything they can, State Government level people are doing everything they can and the Federal Government is working through what we can best do is provide the Defence Force assets, and they have been provided. I've talked to you about the assets that are actually working today, but of course other assets have been provided in days past, for example the provision of habitat by the Defence Force that has been done to assist flood affected communities, so I think our Defence Force personnel are there working away hard in operation flood assist in Queensland and as a government we have triggered these payments as quickly as possible to get relief to people.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we're always on the doorstep for any other nation that's in need first of all, have you had any contact from any international leaders in the last 24, 48 hours asking what we need?
PM: I have had an approach from the Prime Minister of New Zealand. You are right, we do come and assist others in times of need and people would recall that we did provide some needed assistance to New Zealand with the dreadful mine disaster and we very quickly helped move some equipment that they didn't have available, but that Australia did have available. So the Prime Minister of New Zealand, conscious of that, has made an approach and said New Zealand is standing by to assist should that become necessary.
JOURNALIST: Is that it?
PM: That's the approaches at this point. We have had an enquiry too, I should say, from the American Embassy in Canberra indicating that should we come to the view that there may be something that the United States of America could provide that we needed, that of course they would respond. But in these circumstances, dealing with flood waters, flood communities, what we've got there at the moment is some wonderful emergency services personnel, police doing remarkable job, our great Australian Defence Force. I know the Premier of Queensland has been in contact with a number of her counterparts and other states are going to provide assistance as necessary, so at the moment, through our own Australian resources we can manage these circumstances.
JOURNALIST: Would you expect just a phone call from Indonesia?
PM: I think international leaders, we have in times of past natural disaster had assistance from Indonesia, for example with the very devastating bush fires in Victoria there was an offer of assistance from Indonesia, so I can't guess the future for you, but I think we're a nation that does respond very generously when other people are in trouble and we've seen in the past other nations respond very generously to assist us.
JOURNALIST: You said that there's a C130, but are there other drops? I mean given that that area is supposed to be to total area of France and Germany combined, what else is being used to take supplies in?
PM: The main supplies issue at the moment is in Rockhampton, given the size of the population and the rising flood waters, which is why that is the focus of the airlift today, but I don't want to give you the impression, because certainly it wouldn't be correct, that that's the only thing that Defence has done over these days of flood crisis in Queensland. They've evacuated people by Black Hawk helicopter, they've provided habitat, flown it in so that it can be used for emergency evacuation and assistance. What they're being asked for now, and of course we respond to the request about what's needed, what they're being asked for now is to get 100 tonnes of food into Rockhampton and they're going about that task, but having had the opportunity to talk to the Chief of the Defence Force today, Angus Houston, through the joint task force that they've set up there, they are well postured to respond to incoming requests over the coming days and I have certainly spoken directly to Premier Bligh, I travelled with her on Friday and I have stayed in contact with her since and she is well aware that if there is anything they need that Defence can do, then Defence will get about the job of doing it, that's why the taskforce is there and together it's liaising constantly with the Queensland emergency management personnel.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just one last question. On another matter, it's been almost three weeks, 17 days I believe, since the Christmas Island disaster. We're assisting people with identification in Queensland. There are relatives of people who probably died on that boat who still have no idea what happened there, they don't know whether they're alive or dead. Is there not something more you could be doing for these people?
PM: The Australian Federal Police made it, I think, clear at the time of this disaster that the disaster victim identification process does take some time. I understand it puts a lot of stress on family members and we've seen in other disasters that that disaster victim identification process does take time and that puts pressure on, but the Australian Federal Police, I believe, are doing everything they can, they work to very strict protocols because they absolutely need to get it right to make sure that when identify a body from a disaster, including a disaster like Christmas Island, that it's the right identification.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in NSW today the Premier is (inaudible), there are questions about (inaudible), do you have concerns about (inaudible) in NSW?
PM: What I would say is if I was a resident in NSW I would certainly want to be assured that if a government asset was being sold off that appropriate value for money for that asset was being obtained.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) a report saying that the public (inaudible) results of schools is actually (inaudible) those public schools in Britain. What would you have to say about that in regards to My Schools?
PM: I'm all for school transparency, that's why I created the My Schools website, to give parents, teachers, indeed the government, more information than we've ever had before about what Australian schools are doing and how they're performing and I created the My School website and brought that transparency into existence because I absolutely believe it makes a difference to education quality and results. I'm not in favour of simple league tables, that's why the My School website is a comprehensive and rich source of information. But more information for parents and teachers and the community is good for schools, good for school results.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: As I made clear at the time of the Christmas Island disaster, our search and rescue zone for maritime incidents is huge, absolutely huge. A very big responsibility for search and rescue, we don't want to see anybody come to harm at sea, so I think my primary message would be to the crew of the Sea Shepherd and to any other vessel in the area, that they need to conduct themselves appropriately so everybody is kept safe. The important thing is to make sure everybody is kept safe in what is a remote, dangerous and very inhospitable part of the world.
[ENDS]
* Provision is for $400 additional per child



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Premier Anna Bligh today announced additional Commonwealth-State disaster assistance to help small businesses and primary producers impacted by Queensland's flood crisis.
The Prime Minister said today's announcement would see small businesses and primary producers in 13 Local Government Areas eligible to receive grants of up to $25,000 for clean up and recovery.
We know there are far too many families who have had to leave not only their homes, but also their businesses.
This targeted financial assistance will help them minimise their economic losses as they embark on the very difficult recovery period that lies ahead and help businesses start trading as soon as possible.
The grants will be made available immediately to the 13 Local Government areas of Banana, Barcaldine, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Lockyer Valley, North Burnett, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Western Downs, and Woorabinda.
Category C assistance will help primary producers with cleanup, removal of debris, disposal of dead livestock and further restoration without which production and viability could be disrupted beyond the next season.
This will include costs incurred by primary producers for urgent fodder drops for stranded livestock.
For small business Category C grants will help operators resume trading as soon as possible, including establishment costs in temporary premises.
This assistance may also be extended to other areas once the impact of the floods in each area can be properly assessed.
Category C assistance does not compensate for income losses and is not intended to replace insurance. The grant scheme will run until 30 September 2011.
Concessional interest rate loans of up to $250,000 for small business operators and primary producers, as well as freight subsidies of up to $5,000, are available across 23 Local Government Areas.
The Prime Minister said the Gillard Labor Government would continue to work with the Bligh Government to ensure this recovery happens as quickly as possible.
This is a major natural disaster and recovery will take a significant amount of time.
The extent of flooding being experienced by Queensland is unprecedented and requires a national and united response to provide as much support to communities as we can.
Some places, such as Rockhampton, are still battling floodwaters, so our focus there is on emergency disaster relief, but they too will have this assistance ready and available to them once the flood waters subside.
Premier Bligh said it had been a dreadful start to the new decade for tens of thousands of Queenslanders, particularly those on the land.
While the long term impact of the floods crisis will take some time to determine, thousands of Queensland families and businesses are suffering right now.
These grants will go some way to help primary producers with the heartbreaking clean up, as well as the more urgent task of feeding stranded livestock.
The additional grants announced today come on top of the range of assistance already being provided by both the Queensland Government and the Australian Government.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGRDP) is available for people who have been significantly impacted by the floods.
The AGDRP is a payment of $1000 for each eligible adult and $400 for each eligible child, including people who have lost their homes or whose homes have sustained major damage.
Joint State and Commonwealth Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) have been activated for 41 local government areas.
Under the NDRRA, councils will be able to access funding from the Australian and Queensland Governments to assist with the cost of restoring essential public infrastructure as well as the cost of counter disaster operations.
Disaster relief funding arrangements have also been activated for people experiencing personal hardship in a number of local government areas.
These funding arrangements consist of:
- Emergent Assistance Payment - up to $170 per person and $780 per family.
- Means tested - Essential Household Contents Grant - up to $1,660 for individuals and $4,980 for couples or families.
- Means tested - Repairs to Dwellings / Structural Assistance Grant - up to $10,250 for individuals and $13,800 for couples or families.
For more information on assistance that's available, contact the Australian Government's Emergency Assistance Hotline on 180 2266 or the Queensland Rural Adjustment Authority 1800 623 946 or www.qraa.qld.gov.au



GOREY: Prime Minister, we've of course been speaking about the devastating floods in Queensland this morning and a lot of that water is of course on the way to Northern New South Wales and your government has got another funding package to announce we understand?
PM: That's right and I know we're having a lot of fun here today, but people's thoughts I think will also be on those who are battling flood waters. We know Queensland's doing it tough, but so are other parts of the country and here in New South Wales. We've got communities that are recovering from floods, so with the New South Wales Government, the Federal Government has today announced grants of up to $15,000 to help out small businesses and our primary producers recover.
WILLIAMS: All right Julia, who is eligible for those Category C grants?
PM: Well, they will cover more than 50 flood affected areas in New South Wales, they are for small businesses and primary producers that need to do things like get out and about doing their cleanup work. We know a lot of primary producers have lost fencing, they've got a lot of work to do and so do small businesses, we want them up and running again. So this is a bit of a helping hand along the way.
WILLIAMS: Thank you very much for that, that's a great announcement.
Now that the politicking has been done, you know that there's a Prime Ministerial tradition that you're expected to uphold today, Prime Minister, and that is to bowl a ball. We've seen John Howard do it famously, are you going to reply in kind?
PM: Look, I'm not going to be bowling a ball. I always think that a smart leader draws on expertise, so given I'm here, where so much expertise in bowling lies, I think I'll let the experts do that for me.
WILLIAMS: You couldn't do any worse.
PM: Well, my clear recollection is that Prime Ministers past and I'm not going to use any names, but Prime Ministers past haven't necessarily had the most happy experience trying to bowl a ball. So I'm not going to go down that path.
GOREY: We all know who you're talking about. You don't need to name any names, we know who you mean. Now, just back on the floods, now the important thing is of course for victims to be able get funds quickly. There's a taskforce I understand that is going to be able to make that happen?
PM: Yes, we are making sure that people can get funds quickly, so there are hotlines for people to ring and Centrelink and Medicare staff are standing by and they can help people through, working out eligibility issues. So please, for people in flood affected areas, make sure that they follow up these funding grants and packages, we want that money out on the ground making a difference.
WILLIAMS: Alright, well certainly that is a fine thing that you're doing today and I guess everyone on New South Wales and in Queensland look forward to more government support for the hardships they're going through. Are we predicting a turnaround in Australia's fortunes on the pitch today?
PM: Well, I'm hoping, hoping to see a turnaround. We're hoping for a few quick wickets I think, it's that what we've all come to see?
WILLIAMS: Yes, that's so true.
GOREY: Enjoy the day Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you very much 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Premier Anna Bligh have announced that flood response and recovery efforts in Queensland will be bolstered with two Australian Defence Force (ADF) Sea King helicopters being sent to Roma.
The helicopters will support the response and recovery of towns and properties affected by flooding in the Condamine and Moonie rivers in south-west Queensland including Surat, St George, Dirranbandi and Thallon.
The Prime Minister said that the support from ADF will assist communities along the Condamine and Moonie rivers which are still experiencing rises as floodwaters move inland.
Already C-130 Hercules have delivered supplies from Brisbane to Mackay, these were then transported to Rockhampton.
These deliveries continue with more planned in coming days to ensure the Rockhampton community maintain food, water and other essential items.
Premier Anna Bligh said the unprecedented flooding being experienced in Queensland has seen tremendous support from the ADF.
The Navy Sea King helicopters will be on stand-by in Roma for use in various roles from resupply efforts to medical emergencies and evacuations.
These helicopters have a large lift capacity, able to lift loads greater than a Land Rover, and can operate day and night.
An Army Chinook is also on stand-by in Townsville should it be required by disaster managers.
Black Hawk helicopters will continue to be used in Central Queensland with evacuations.
A Royal Australian Air Force C-130 Hercules also delivered a 'flexible habitat', a purpose built temporary accommodation module, late last week which is now being used by the people of Emerald.


Sydney
MAXWELL: Terry Alderman, It's a great pleasure to introduce the Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard, welcome to Grandstand.
PM: G'day Jim. G'day Terry.
MAXWELL: How are you going?
PM: I'm enjoying the day, in the sense that I'm enjoying the pink army we have here for Jane McGrath and I've just been at the high tea, where women in pink are gathered. They're fundraising, they're focussed on making sure we've got more breast care nurses available for women with breast cancer and it's a grand delight to see so many people including young men and boys and girls and old men, women, right throughout the ground all got their pink on.
MAXWELL: And Australia, I think they're going from pink to red actually, on the field. They're struggling a bit, red faced about this strong England batting. I know you're going to talk to us about this flood relief, there is a lovely story from one of our many SMSs who stranded by the floods, had a few problems. One - the water had risen so much his wife couldn't get back to the house, two - he'd run out of beer, three - he was listening to the cricket on the radio, so that was keeping him happy.
PM: Well I'm glad the cricket is there being a backdrop and past time and entertainment for people in such stressful circumstances. Cricket's going to play its fair share in helping people through with the one day match on the 30th at the Gabba and of course we're very focussed on the people of Queensland today. I've asked one of my Parliamentary colleagues, Joseph Ludwig, to be a Special Minister working on Queensland flood recovery. We want to help communities through this really difficult time. Australians are digging deep to help people and we know we're going to have some more opportunities through the cricket to do that.
MAXWELL: And in the background here the cheer is going up because young Steven Smith at last is getting an opportunity to bowl, but England in a very strong position. So, how much resource is being pumped into this by the Federal Government?
PM: Well the expenditure is going to be in the hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars, that's the reality. We're making relief payments available to people now in Queensland, we're supporting small businesses and primary producers in Queensland and in New South Wales and we announced a new assistance for New South Wales overnight, because they've got flood problems as well. We're only going to be able to assess the true dimensions of the damage when the flood waters recede and people are going to need a lot of support and communities are going to need a lot of rebuilding. So we'll be working together with the Queensland government on that, but it's always wonderful to see individual community members digging deep too and that's what's happening in the great Australian way.
MAXWELL: It's the country of extremes, isn't it? That we've got floods, but probably in Western Australia we've probably got drought.
PM: South West, the bottom of Western Australia, if I can use that terminology, is still facing severe drought, that's right. And of course at this time of year in many parts of the country we worry about bush fire, so all of the extremes on display.
MAXWELL: So it needs a fair bit of commitment continually though, doesn't it, from the federal government, to be able to support the range of, the diversity of natural disasters that take place. You'll need a big bank for all of this?
PM: We're going to have to make resources available, we're doing that now and we will make sure that we're keeping the budget going back to surplus in 2012/13 as we promised and we're making the right decisions to get there, but we do want to be supporting the people of Queensland particularly as this time and those in New South Wales, small businesses, primary producers, who need a bit of a helping hand.
MAXWELL: I mean federal government's can do so much, but what influence do you have on the man upstairs to stop the rain from coming?
PM: I'll have to perhaps defer to you on that degree of influence, but I suspect if we all had that degree of influence we might be doing something about the score.
MAXWELL: Yes, well, at the moment Australia might look forward to a bit of rain falling here at the moment, but Smith is bowling and there's the premeditated paddle from Bell as he laps it around the corner and collects another run.
So have you been up there travelling around, are you about to go back there at some point and see the nature of this ongoing flood and crisis?
PM: I have been to communities in Queensland and I will be there again on the weekend and the thing that really strikes when you're into communities is the stoic, courageous attitude that Queenslanders are bringing to this, they really are facing it together and making sure that they are working together to deal with the consequences of flood. It's a great spirit.
MAXWELL: So there's a bit commitment from the Federal Government, what about State Government in a situation like this? Are they holding out their hand to you or are they making a similar sort of commitment to do what they can?
PM: We're working hand in hand, we worked through something called the natural disaster relief and recovery arrangements, so Queensland too, the state government, the Premier Anna Bligh, providing funds and assistance and logistical support to communities at this time. And our Australian Defence Force is doing a wonderful job making Defence assets available, whether it's planes, whether its helicopters, to help with flood relief. They're doing tremendous work.
MAXWELL: It's very encouraging that this is all occurring. And now this match is during the one day series isn't it that they're going to do all this. There will be a lot of people in Queensland who can go down to the Gabba and offer their support. 30th of January at the Gabba, that match is dedicated to this flood relief campaign, so we're hoping for a full house there and lots of people making their donations.
ALDERMAN: I was up there about eight weeks ago, my daughter lives in Rockhampton, she's in Perth for the Christmas holiday, so luckily, but yeah, you feel so far away from it. She's thinking that maybe her business is going to go under water and all those sorts of things, but when we're so far away from it and you don't have a loved one that's involved in that, I think we forget about it a bit. It's great that we can all pull together in this time, I think.
PM: It's a beautiful place Rockhampton, with that wonderful old architecture still on display and I've been up there a bit and I've gone for morning walks along the river and its been, you know, a bit of a creek, the truth be told. Now it's a raging torrent of water, so much changE.
ALDERMAN: Yes, I got the tilt train from Gympie actually, to there and that was an experience in itself, but no doubt that most people there, that area, use that train a hell of a lot to get around so they must be cut off from everywhere, not being able to get round.
PM: We do have people cut off, in Rockhampton there's still a way of getting supplies though by rail from the north, but, you know, the airport's out and there's a lot of floodwater around and many other towns in Queensland are in similar circumstances.
MAXWELL: So at the moment what is the extent of that flood up in Queensland and how many hundreds of square miles are we talking about being inundated in such as way as to make life impossible for people?
PM: Well I think the best way of thinking about it is we've got 20 towns that are battling flood waters at various stages, between waiting for the worst to still come, to being in recovery already, but that's a lot of people over a very widespread area and it's obviously going to be a lot of damage. People have pulled together and we're going to come through this, but I know Australians will want to show their generosity at the one day match at the Gabba. I think we'll see at lot of the people of Brisbane out there making sure that they're showing their support.
MAXWELL: Will you be there?
PM: I would be hoping to be there, being Prime Minister means you've got to get that time allocation right, but I'm certainly going to be in Queensland in the coming days and staying in very good touch with those that are battling floodwaters. I've been speaking to some of the people on the ground by phone as well as seeing them when I've been up there are they're just doing a tremendous job. Fire fighters, Police, Emergency Services personnel, Defence personnel, local government, all pulling together to make it work.
MAXWELL: Prime Minister thank you for coming in and sharing your time with us today and we hope that the help goes where it's most needed in the next few weeks.
PM: Thank you.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and NSW Premier Kristina Keneally today announced additional Commonwealth-NSW Government assistance for NSW primary producers and small businesses affected by flooding.
The Gillard and Keneally Governments have activated a package of one-off "Category C Grants" - worth up to $15,000 - under the National Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRAA).
Since December, a total of 51 Local Government Areas in New South Wales have been declared natural disaster areas.
The Prime Minister said the grants would help the many NSW communities that are still doing it tough as a result of the floods that inundated south and north west NSW in November and December of last year.
Now that the floodwaters in the majority of places in NSW have subsided, it has become clear that many small businesses and primary producers have suffered significant disruption to their businesses.
These one-off grants will help minimise the economic impact of the floods in the affected communities and help people get back to business as quickly as possible.
The Prime Minister said the Gillard Labor Government would continue to work with the Keneally Government to provide as much support to NSW communities as we can as the recovery process continues.
Category C assistance will:
 * 	Help primary producers with general clean up costs including the removal of debris and dead livestock, purchase of fodder and replacement trading stock and repairs to damaged equipment and property access - without which production and viability could be disrupted beyond the next season; and
 * 	Help small businesses affected by flooding to conduct repairs and resume trading as soon as possible
Premier Kristina Keneally said the additional Commonwealth and State assistance will be welcomed by farmers who are in need of help.
"Many primary producers and small businesses have suffered hardship and disruption from these floods after years of drought, and this is a way of helping them get back on their feet," Ms Keneally said.
"Some parts of NSW have experienced the most widespread flooding in 30 years, and these grants will provide much-needed relief to those communities."The NSW State Emergency Recovery Controller has been working with councils, government agencies and the non-government sector to ensure the region is receiving the support and assistance it needs.
"The Commonwealth and NSW governments will continue to work together to ensure that affected communities get the support they need during this difficult period."
Today's announcement is in addition to joint Commonwealth/NSW Government assistance being provided under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements across the 51 Local Government Areas. That includes:
 * 	Concessional loans of up to $130,000 for small businesses and primary producers;
 * 	Concessional loans of up to $25,000 for voluntary, non-profit organisations;
 * 	Road and rail freight subsidies of up to $15,000 to assist primary producers for the carriage of livestock and fodder;
 * 	Personal hardship and distress assistance;
 * 	Restoration of public infrastructure; and
 * 	Certain counter disaster operations.
Category C assistance does not compensate for income losses and is not intended to replace insurance. It does not cover damage to dwellings, damages covered by insurance and cost of using own labour, existing staff or own equipment.
To be eligible, applicants need to show that 51 per cent of their income is derived from primary production - based on copies of their latest personal and business taxation returns.
Applications for assistance must be lodged to the NSW Rural Assistance Authority by Thursday 30 June, 2011.
For further information, or to apply for assistance under the Natural Disaster Community Recovery Package, call the NSW Rural Assistance Authority on 1800 678 593 or visit www.raa.nsw.gov.au
The 51 local government areas that have been declared natural disaster areas are Wagga Wagga, Parkes, Warren, Upper Lachlan, Narromine, Gilgandra, Mid-Western Region, Weddin, Wellington, Warrumbungle, Cootamundra, Coonamble, Harden, Young, Gundagai, Cabonne, Dubbo, Narrabri, Walgett, Upper Hunter, Yass, Lithgow, Muswellbrook, Cooma-Monaro, Boorowa, Gunnedah, Bathurst, Forbes, Palerang, Queanbeyan, Orange, Tumut, Liverpool Plains, Goulburn Mulwaree, Cowra, Coolamon, Tamworth, Urana, Corowa, Moree Plains, Bogan, Greater Hume, Wentworth, Wakool, Snowy River, Tumbarumba, Balranald, Blaney, Narrandera, Kyogle and Ballina. 


Sydney
NICHOLAS: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, nice to have you with us.
PM: It's lovely to be here.
NICHOLAS: Spectacular day in more ways than one this, isn't it?
PM: It is a spectacular day. I think you've very much enjoying the cricket. I've been enjoying the Jane McGrath events today. Obviously the crown is emblazoned in pink, celebrating the celebrating the life and work of Jane McGrath and fundraising for breast care nurses and I've just had the absolute delight of going to the high tea, where there are women everywhere, wearing pink, fundraising for such a special cause.
NICHOLAS: Now I'm one of the select few who saw you here earlier posing for photographs and helping to promote the cause that does such a good job for nurses and carers, that's the great thing about it, isn't it?
PM: It is a great thing. I was able to come this morning, very early that was right, to meet Jenny who's a breast care nurse and that is what Jane wanted to see. She wanted to see Australian women having access to breast care nurses. I met Fiona who is battling breast cancer herself and understands what it's like to have that support from a breast care nurse. I'm pleased we were able to contribute $12 million to support breast care nurses, but so much is raised just from this day, from people coming to the cricket, from Australians who think that's a great cause and I'm sure Jane would be very proud to see it.
NICHOLAS: We're going to have a chance, I think, to meet both of those ladies at tea time. It's a very difficult period for you in many ways, today is a joy but there's no joy in Queensland right now.
PM: No, another tough day in Queensland and we've got communities that are in recovery mode, we've got communities that are still bracing for the peak of floodwaters. I know that cricket's going to make its contribution to fundraising to support the people of Queensland with the one dayer at the Gabba on the 30th, so that's a fantastic way of making a contribution. Cricket did such a great job raising money to support victims of the Victorian bush fires and I know that cricketing crowds are now going to dig deep and help people in the Queensland floods.
We're helping too, with payments for people. We've got to remember the floods are in Queensland but they're beyond Queensland, so we announced relief for people in New South Wales today, with grants to help small businesses and primary producers and we are helping small businesses and primary producers and ordinary people in Queensland who are battling these floodwaters. But it's a tough time, I've asked one of my Ministers, Joe Ludwig, a great Queenslander, to lead our efforts there and to make sure that he can have the special job of assisting our Attorney-General with the Queensland flood recovery. We want to get this done right for the people of Queensland.
NICHOLAS: That's terrific. We're coming together with you too with Channel Nine and Cricket Australia and that begins on Sunday evening with a telethon to raise money for what's happening up in Queensland and then we go one stage further with that game that you just talked about, at the Gabba. Yeah, I mean these are hard days, extreme weather that's given the country a very difficult couple of years and obviously you're involvement in that is massive, as it is generally with children and sport. I mean the government continued to support, and you're very conscious of the need for kids to be active and not to be stuck on the couch in this multimedia age.
PM: Absolutely, I mean we love coming and watching our sport, but we obviously want our young kids playing sport and for many kids the thing that holds them interested in school is actually sport. So sport's good in its own right, getting kids active, but it's also a great way of keeping kids engaged in school so they get on with those skills that they need to have for life - reading, writing, doing maths. So we are working with our great sporting codes, including cricket, to use sport, to develop sport, get kids playing sport and use it as a tool for getting involved more in school and more engaged in their school work. Great way to learn maths. doing cricket scores.
NICHOLAS: It's the culture of the country, outdoor life, isn't it? And that's what you're pursuing, which is great.
PM: We want to make sure that that culture of the outdoor life is a part of the future of this country, in the way it's a part of the country today and yesterday. And that means we do want kids and families, certainly watching the cricket, but also making sure they're still playing some in the backyard.
NICHOLAS: Now I know you're a great football fan.
PM: I am a big football fan. Yes, Aussie Rules football with my beloved Western Bulldogs.
NICHOLAS: What about cricket, I mean it's in the household isn't it? I mean Tim your partner loves the game.
PM: It's certainly is in my household and I've been joking with people today that I've been doing work in the study, but I can monitor what's happening with the cricket without even having the radio on, I can just listen for the shouts from the lounge room, with Tim there watching it. So I'm getting up to the minute reports through the calling down the hallway.
NICHOLAS: And you're enjoying a day here, I know you're a guest of Cricket Australia, but the Sydney Cricket Ground with 40,000 people in, albeit today specifically because they're all here on Jane McGrath day, it's still a great sporting spectacle isn't it?
PM: It's a great sporting spectacle, it's a wonderful ground and I've been looking at the people here today and when you can see, you know, big young men, 17, 18, 19 year olds, really young men bearing their pink t-shirt, wearing it very proudly, I think that says that a cause has really been taken to the hearts of the Australian people and I believe supporting the Jane McGrath foundation has been taken to people's hearts and it's so much on display today.
NICHOLAS: Lovely, isn't it?
PM: It's great.
NICHOLAS: Just a final thought, you've got your big day on Monday, the PM's XI match down at Canberra against England.
PM: That's right; we'll have the traditional Prime Minister's match in Canberra on Monday.
NICHOLAS: Lovely. Tim Paine is captaining that PM XI side, Brett Lee's making an appearance, he's here today, he's decked out in pink. He's got a pink suit, he's had it specially made for him, so he's feeling very good about it.
PM: I'm not sure that we can make him play cricket on Monday wearing that same pink suit, but perhaps we can do a pink something.
NICHOLAS: You've got your bandana on.
PM: I've got my bandana on and a pink shirt.
NICHOLAS: Great, lovely to see you. Thank you very much for all the support you're giving, not just for today, but more specifically I think to everybody who so needs it in Queensland.
PM: Thank you very much.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today welcomed the appointment of Major General Mick Slater to lead the Queensland Flood Recovery Taskforce.
The appointment of Major General Slater will provide the Queensland Flood Recovery Taskforce with Defence experience and leadership.
In his role with the Taskforce, Major General Slater will focus on developing a road map to recovery for flood-affected areas.
The Gillard Government is pleased to be able to provide the Queensland Government with this senior secondment.
The Taskforce will be overseen by the Queensland Flood Recovery Cabinet Committee, which will include the newly appointed Minister Assisting the Attorney General on Queensland Floods Recovery, Joe Ludwig.
Major General Slater is originally from Queensland and is currently the Commander of the 1st Division, based at Gallipoli Barracks, Enoggera.
He is an experienced operational commander, having led the Defence response following Cyclone Larry, which devastated Innisfail in March 2006.
In addition, Major General Slater commanded the Australian Defence Force's return to Timor Leste, at the request of the Timorese Government, in June 2006.
Prime Minister Gillard wishes Major General Slater well in what will be a challenging appointment.


Perth
The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard and the Premier of Western Australia, Colin Barnett today announced that Kings Park in Perth would be the Retreat location for leaders attending the next Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM).
CHOGM will be held from 28-30 October 2011 and is expected to attract as many as 3000 delegates from more than 50 nations.
The existing facility at Kings Park will be significantly expanded to accommodate the Retreat, which will be the centrepiece venue for world leaders to discuss key issues in a private, informal atmosphere.
The Retreat will involve the construction of a new high quality reception centre on top the existing complex where the temporary marquee currently exists - offering visitors exceptional facilities and views of Perth.
The construction by the Western Australian Government is anticipated to be completed well in advance of the October meeting.
The Gillard Government has worked closely with the Western Australian Government to identify the best possible venue for the Retreat.
CHOGM 2011 will be the biggest international event ever held in Perth and is a unique opportunity to showcase Perth and Western Australia as modern, world class destinations.
Kings Park is a magnificent location which will offer visiting Commonwealth leaders a valuable opportunity for informal discussions and the exchange of ideas.
The Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma was consulted and supported the selection of Kings Park as the Retreat venue.
Around 1,000 representatives from the media are also expected to cover the event.
For more information visit the CHOGM 2011 website: www.chogm2011.org



PM: Well, I'm here with the Labor Senate Leader, Chris Evans, a great Western Australian, and I'm here having done a little spot of back-to-school shopping with Peter, with Shelly, April and Hope. Now right around the country families are starting to think about getting the things they need for the kids to go back to school and we've seen today on the shelves here that there are so many items that you need when you're going back to school.
Whether it's the stationery, folders and pens and pencils, whether it's the text books, whether it's the computer equipment, there are all sorts of needs and expenses when kids go back to school.
I understand that preparing for back-to-school can cost a bit of money and I'm here today to remind Australian parents, and particularly parents here in Perth, that they can collect their receipts and at tax time make a claim through the Education Tax Rebate. The Education Tax Rebate enables families to get a refund of almost $400 for what they've spent on back-to-school for their primary school aged child and almost $800 for what they've spent on back-to -school for their secondary school aged child.
This is one way of helping families manage cost of living pressures. Now we will be reminding Australian families in coming days to keep those all important receipts, there will be an advertising campaign, including in newspapers and on television, to remind people to keep their receipts.
We introduced the Education Tax Rebate as a Government, because we want to support families with school costs. We want to see families making those claims. We know that many families haven't made claims even though they're eligible. There are around 1.3 million eligible families, so please this year when you're shopping for back-to-school, keep your receipts and at tax time you will be able to claim the Education Tax Refund.
I'm also here in Perth to meet today with Premier Barnett and we will be talking about the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting that will be held in Perth later this year. This is a huge event for Perth and for Western Australia. It's the biggest international event to ever come to Perth, more than 50 countries are involved, around 3000 delegates. This is going to be a very big thing for Western Australia during the course of 2011. So I am looking forward to talking to Premier Barnett about our preparations for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.
Now many Australian families are of course still enjoying the new year and some holiday time, but right around the country there are Australians who are doing it tough, facing flood waters and trying to recover from the damages that floods bring. So tomorrow I will be visiting Carnarvon to say hello to people who have already seen damage from a flood, and of course, are now facing difficult circumstances again. At the time of the original flood crisis I asked Chris Evans to visit Carnarvon and he did so, I'm now looking forward to getting there myself to be able to talk to people in Carnarvon about how they're managing this crisis and how we can support them during recovery.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have any update on the impact of the Queensland floods on the federal budget and how much money?
PM: The Queensland floods, as we know, are very very widespread and there are many towns that are still battling rising flood waters as others have gone into recovery. This is going to require a lot of investment, it's many many dollars that will need to flow from the Federal Government and the State Government. Money is already flowing, it's flowing through emergency payment s and it's flowing in support of families as they come back to their homes and see the repair task, small businesses and primary producers.
We did of course set up a hotline and that hotline has had around 4000 calls and around 700 claims have already been made. Now we're not going to know the true dimensions of the damage until flood waters recede and we can see what's happened with roads what's happened with bridges, what's happened with vital infrastructure like schools. But I can say we will be working every step of the way with the Queensland Government and to ensure that works I've specifically appointed Joe Ludwig, one of by Cabinet Ministers, a great Queenslander, to lead our efforts working with the Queensland Government and Queensland community for flood recovery.
JOURNALIST: Do you think there'll be a need to put more money into flood affected areas?
PM: Inevitably money will need to flow, absolutely. We need see what the damage is and we need to work with the Queensland Government and local communities in addressing that damage. We really can't put a price tag on it until the flood waters recede and we can see what's underneath, but we will be working with Queensland and that's why I've specifically asked a Queenslander, Joe Ludwig, to do that job.
JOURNALIST: With economists saying the economic impact will be between $6 and $9 billion, is it going to affect the time when the budget returns to surplus?
PM: I'm determined the budget will be back in surplus in 2012/13 as promised. That does mean that we're going to have to make some tough choices and we will to bring the budget back to surplus as well as meeting the needs of Queensland as they recover from this flood crisis, which is so widespread. We are going to be there in partnership with the State Government and local communities as they recover and what's also been a tremendous thing to see is the generosity of Australians towards their fellow Australians who are doing it tough. Right around the country, you know, mums and dads have gone and put in 5, 10, 20, 50 dollars to help out Queenslanders and we're now seeing, you know, our sporting codes like cricket responding, they're going to have a special one day match at the Gabba to fundraise for the Queensland floods. So there's a lot of community generosity as well as work from government.
JOURNALIST: And that's, I think some farmers are calling for a rethink on the timeline for the Murray Darling Basin Plan based on this huge flood. Is that something that's (inaudible)
PM: I think we've got to keep on time and we've got to deal with the water reforms we need for the Murray Darling. We know that there are floods round the country now, but we're also a nation that regularly experiences drought. Indeed there are some farmers in this state, even as other primary producers battle with floodwaters, there are farmers in this state who are still facing drought. So rather than just wait til the next drought hits the Murray Darling, now is the time to get it right for the future, so we will continue in 2011 to pursue our reforms through the Murray Darling Basin Authority. We've got to get this right, we've got to make sure that we've got a healthy river, viable communities as well as food production along the Murray.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on a disaster of an unnatural kind, you've landed in Perth when there's a Labor Party leadership challenge. The party is struggling in this state there is no issue there, but do you support Eric Ripper?
PM: Well we're seeing plenty of rhetorical flourishes at the start of 2011. The, ultimately who leads the state Labor Party is a matter for the state Labor Party. What I would say is Eric Ripper has been a long term leading Labor figure in this state; he did a lot of good work as a leading member of the former government. He's a good person doing a very tough job as Opposition Leader, but who leads the state Labor Party is a matter for state Labor members.
JOURNALIST: Federal Labor has come under attack for its role in state party stocks, the mining tax obviously a big issue over here. Do you take any responsibility for Mr Ripper's woes at the moment?
PM: These are decisions for state Labor as to who should lead the team.
JOURNALIST: Have you got any advice for him?
PM: Well state Labor will make these decisions; it's not for me to advise on them.
JOURNALIST: Have you spoken to Mr Ripper or Mr Wyatt about the Labor leadership here?
PM: No, I haven't and I believe that state Labor members will work their way through this and they'll make their choice. They're talking about the leader of their team, so they're the people who should make that decision.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, just offshore for a moment, in Afghanistan Robert Langdon is reportedly had his death sentence commuted to a 20 year sentence. Are you aware of that and if you are what's your response?
PM: Look, I am aware of that and I've been aware of Mr Langdon's circumstances for a considerable period of time now. Obviously we very much welcome the fact that Mr Langdon will not face the death penalty, we as a government, indeed as a nation, we are opposed to the death penalty, we intercede for Australians around the world who may face the death penalty and register out nation's strong opposition to it. So I am pleased to see that Mr Langdon's sentence has been commuted.
JOURNALIST: When you go to Carnarvon, I guess one of the figures up there that they may be forgotten in the shadow of thee huge floods in Queensland. What message will you have for them and what sort of support can they expect from you?
PM: I'll certainly be saying to the people of Carnarvon that they are on my mind and we want to be working with that community to recover from its floods. The devastation in Queensland is widespread; we're talking about around 20 towns that are battling flood waters, some in recovery, some yet to see to see the peak of the crisis. So this is a widespread, big disaster in Queensland, but as Prime Minister let me assure you, I understand there are flood waters in New South Wales, there are flood waters here and I wanted to personally say to the people of Carnarvon that their circumstances, the problems that they face are on my mind and we want to be working with the people of Carnarvon to help them recover too. They certainly will not be forgotten and through my physical presence tomorrow I will be saying to them that we want to work in partnership with them, as their community works through this crisis.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We've been in contact with the Government of Western Australia about financial assistance for the people of Carnarvon, particularly for small businesses and primary producers, so some assistance will be flowing and I'll be in a position to advise of the full details of that tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: The day after the Reserve Bank criticised you for spending, you've announced another stimulus here today. Are you worried it may put pressure on interest rates?
PM: This is in the Government's budget, we've offered this Education Tax Refund, we brought it in as a Government because we wanted to support families with cost of living pressures, so this is already fully in the Government's figures with the budget coming to surplus in the 2012/13. It's the right thing to do, to help families get ready for school. There's nothing more important than making sure that kids get a great education, to do that they need the pens, the pencils, the text books, the computer equipment that helps them get that great education. It does cost money and the Education Tax Refund is there to help take a bit of pressure off.
JOURNALIST: Have you had any discussions with Premier Barnett about signing the health deal (inaudible)
PM: Well as it happens I'll be jumping in a car from here and meeting with Premier Barnett to, in the first instance have a talk about the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, so you'll probably see me over there very soon with Premier Barnett.
Thank you.



As kids prepare to head back to school, the Gillard Labor Government is encouraging an estimated 1.3 million Australian families to take advantage of the Education Tax Refund to help parents with the pressure of back-to-school costs.
Eligible families can claim refunds on a range of back to school items including computer equipment and textbooks.
The beginning of the school year can be tough for parents facing education costs, but the Education Tax Refund means eligible parents know they will receive a refund for half of claimable expenses come tax time.
Families can claim 50 per cent of eligible education expenses, up to a maximum refund of $794 for high school children and $397 for primary school children on back-to-school items.
Parents should make sure they keep their receipts in order to make the claims.
The Education Tax Refund is a $4.4 billion Government initiative that is helping families with the cost of living whilst giving their children the best education opportunities.
This initiative, along with the Child Care Rebate and Paid Parental Leave scheme, reinforces the Gillard Labor Government's commitment to helping families struggling with tight family budgets.
Parents who receive Family Tax Benefit Part A for children in primary or secondary school are eligible for the Education Tax Refund, as well as independent students, and parents who receive some other allowances.
From 1 July this year, the Government will also extend the Education Tax Refund to include school uniforms. This means parents will be able to claim for school uniforms bought in the new financial year.
An education campaign starting this weekend will ensure eligible families know what and how much can be claimed and remind parents to hang on to their receipts.
The information campaign will reach eligible families through TV, print, radio and online.
For more information visit www.australia.gov.au/educationtaxrefund



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard today announced additional assistance for primary producers and small businesses affected by flooding last month in Carnarvon and the Upper Gascoyne in Western Australia.
The Prime Minister has agreed to a request from the WA Premier, Colin Barnett to activate a joint Commonwealth State Government assistance package of clean-up and recovery grants worth up to $15,000.
These one-off "Category C Grants", will cover primary producers and small businesses in Ashburton, Carnarvon, Exmouth, Murchison, Northampton, Shark Bay and the Upper Gascoyne - areas that have been declared natural disaster zones.
The Prime Minister said the grants would support primary producers and small businesses doing it tough as a result of the extensive flooding.These one-off grants will help reduce impact of the floods on local economies and ensure businesses are able to get back on track as quickly as possible.
The new assistance is in addition to the joint Commonwealth State payments and support that were activated in flood-affected regions by the WA Government on 20 December.
The Category C Grants, provided under Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA), will:
 * 	Help primary producers with general clean up costs including the removal of debris and dead livestock, purchase of fodder and replacement trading stock and repairs to damaged equipment and property access; and
 * 	Help small businesses affected by flooding to conduct repairs and resume trading as soon as possible.
Existing joint Commonwealth/WA Government NDRRA assistance being provided includes:
 * 	Emergency assistance payments for people who have suffered personal hardship or distress;
 * 	Interest rate subsidies for small businesses and primary producers as part of loans up to $150,000;
 * 	Professional advice grants of up to $1,500 and freight subsidies for primary producers (up to 50 per cent for the cost of transporting livestock, fodder or water for livestock or building or fencing equipment or machinery as a direct result of a natural disaster)
 * 	Restoration of public infrastructure; and
 * 	Certain counter disaster operations.
People can apply for assistance or seek further information by contacting the following agencies:
 * 	Primary producers: Department of Food and Agriculture - 1800 198 231
 * 	Small Business and other enquiries: - (08) 9323 9552



HOST: Prime Minister thank you for your time tonight. You've toured the flood hit areas today, what have you seen and how as it affected you personally?
PM: Today I've been in St George and they are still bracing for the peak of the flood. They're very well prepared, but of course they're anxious as they await the peak and there are people there who had their homes flooded in March and who are now battling floodwaters again.
Now I'm in Rockhampton and you can see the river and the water behind me. I've had the opportunity here today to go to the local evacuation centre and the recovery centre to speak to a large number of local people. The peak of the flood is past here, the mood is stoic, people are looking after each other, they're really lending a helping hand to each other.
HOST: Now tell me, we've seeing these pictures for weeks now, is it different when you're actually there on the ground?
PM: I always think the important thing isn't so much the pictures of the water, though we need to see those to understand the dimensions of what's happening here, but the really important thing is the stories of the people, understanding what's happened to them, what sort of pressure they feel under and what's the best way of working with them as they go through firstly relief - like being in the evacuation centre - and then recovery, and go back and rebuild their homes and businesses and of course many of our primary producers have been affected as well.
HOST: Well a very long process ahead, thank you so much for your time tonight.
PM: Thank you and of course I'd be asking Australians to dig deep for your telethon and appeal.
HOST: I'm sure they will, thank you.



PM: Thank you very much I'm here in Rockhampton, I'm joined by our local Federal Member Kirsten Livermore and by a man who now needs no introduction I don't think, Brad the local Mayor here and we are here in the operations centre with people continuing to work on flood relief and recovery.
Here in Rockhampton of course the peak of the floodwaters has passed so that's good news but the community here still has a journey ahead. The floodwaters will subside slowly and so we've been talking today about expectations are that the highway will be cut for around another week, that the airport will not be available for a number of weeks to come. So there is still a journey ahead for the community of Rockhampton.
I will go from this centre to the evacuation centre and be talking to people who have been directly affected by these floodwaters, but I did want to take this opportunity to congratulate Brad, Kirsten, the community of Rockhampton on how it is continuing to work together to manage the circumstances here, there is a real sense of solidarity, a real sense of professionalism, of getting on with the job and of helping each other.
We've also had the opportunity here today on my second visit to Rockhampton, to talk about what needs to happen in the future on infrastructure in Rockhampton. Of course we won't know the full damage from the floodwaters until the floodwaters recede, but we've started today a discussion about what can be done in the future to better flood proof Rockhampton.
This place, as people like Brad and Kirsten know only too well, Rockhampton had a major flood in 1991, and just like this flood, through those floodwaters the highway was cut, the Bruce Highway. That's why immediately on coming to Government we commissioned a feasibility study of flood proofing the Bruce Highway and the results of that feasibility study will be available in the middle of this year and I believe that will point the way to the long term solution for having a road that is flood proof.
We've also made available, not as a result of the immediate flood circumstance, but as a result of earlier representations from the local community and from the local Member, we had budgeted for $40 million to enable some urgent works to be undertaken.
So we've started a conversation today about infrastructure, that conversation is obviously going to have to continue, but I'm sure I can speak for all of us and say at this point our thoughts continue to be on the relief efforts and recovery efforts and waiting, hoping for those floodwaters to subside.
So I'll turn now to Kirsten Livermore who may want to say a few words.
KIRSTEN LIVERMORE MP: Thank you very much Prime Minister and it's a great pleasure to welcome you back to Rockhampton. It's only a week and one day since your previous visit but I think we all agreed upstairs that has been a very long eight days.
I've been moving around the community for the last little while talk to those people who have been affected by these floodwaters and I would repeat what the Prime Minister said, we are in for another very long week or so in the coming period ahead of us.
We really have to be very understanding as the community around those affected by the floodwaters, that this is going to be an incredibly difficult time for them and it's great to know that we're are getting so much assistance from agencies like Centrelink, the Red Cross, Salvation Army, so many churches and other charity groups, and just the other people of Rockhampton and our surrounding communities to really walk this journey with them and to be ready to assist in any way we can. It's been terrific Prime Minister, to have you here again today, to be talking about what we face in the coming weeks but very importantly to keep going on the work that has already been done in this Government on these important questions about our infrastructure for the future.
MAYOR BRAD CARTER: If I could just lead off with a statement that from adversity you can get prosperity and today it's been a pleasure to have the Prime Minister to her second visit and to sit down with myself and some of our senior officers and representatives of the local disaster management group and talk seriously about critical infrastructure that we may be able to put into place in the long term that will flood proof parts of our community and certainly this wonderful asset that we have, the Rockhampton Airport.
I'd like to thank the Prime Minister for taking the time to listen to us and to listen to our brief in terms of how our community has been affected by this particular disaster and if I could also thank here again for listening to our plans for the future.
Thank you very much Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the airport is an issue up here, the Mayor and City would like it flood proofed, are you committing (inaudible)
PM: We were talking about the circumstances of the airstrip and I've seen it from the air so you only see a small part of what is normally the tarmac poking through the water. We are going to have to see what the circumstances of the tarmac are when water subsides. But the priority that the local council has put to me and that Brad has put to me is their concerns about the highway, the flood proofing of that, and how that interconnects into the roads for Rockhampton. This is a growing community and we obviously have a major freight task getting freight that currently goes through Rockhampton to where it needs to go and so we've been talking about that as the priority.
JOURNALIST: It's not an unreasonable expectation is for a city the size of Rockhampton (inaudible)
PM: Well I think when it comes to setting expectations it always pays to talk to the local people in the know, Kirsten with me today, our local Member and obviously having the opportunity once again to talk to our local Mayor Brad, they are I think good at explaining what it is that the community's looking for and so we've talked through their priorities today.
JOURNALIST: The West Australians are still very unhappy with the deal they're getting, they think that $15,000 compared to the $25,000 that the Queenslanders are getting is just not on. Are you going to change it?
PM: Well let me be very clear about this. I was in Carnarvon yesterday and I did have the opportunity to see there some very considerable flood damage that has happened for the people of Carnarvon. There in Carnarvon the circumstances are a little bit different actually, most of the damage tends to be done as the water rushes back when the floodwaters are subsiding and that's damaged a number of people's plantations of properties. When I was there in Carnarvon local community members, including the local State Member of Parliament, were talking to me about the differences in the assistance packages and what can be claimed as clean-up money by small businesses and primary producers, and the figure for WA at the moment is $15,000 and here in Queensland it's $25,000.
I explained to the people of Carnarvon that as Prime Minister I respond to requests from Premiers of States; I responded to Anna Bligh's request and she requested up to $25,000 and that was agreed to, I responded to the Premier of Western Australia's request and he requested up to $15,000 and that was agreed to. I indicated to the people of Carnarvon yesterday, and particularly to the local State Member who of course is a member of the Barnett Government, I indicated to him that should Premier Barnett and the Barnett Government make a further request of me as Prime Minister, I would deal with that as quickly as possible and with the absolute degree of sympathy that I can. I've seen the flood damage myself, so in terms of how that request is initiated, it would be initiated by the Government of Western Australia. If I receive it I will deal with it quickly and very, very sympathetically.
JOURNALIST: What's your impression of the scale of this disaster? You've flown over two regions of Queensland today, what have you seen (inaudible)
PM: Well the view from the air is incredibly reveal and I've had the opportunity today to be in St George and then to fly into Rockhampton on a Blackhawk helicopter so you get a tremendous view and I do thank our great Defence Force for assisting me getting here today.
The scale of the floodwaters, the sheer size of this is best appreciated from the air and we are talking about huge areas, lots of water, a lot of it still very fast moving and so it's going to be a long time back. We were just discussing upstairs in our meeting floodwaters to not subside quickly, it takes some time, it's going to take some time here, we've got wide scale floodwaters here in Queensland and that's going to put pressure of Queensland and local communities for a real time to come, and so for us as a nation we've got to set expectations about how long we will be needing to work our way back from here - it's going to take a long time.
I just do want to be clear though, Queensland's been hardest hit, but we do have flood circumstances in New South Wales and in Western Australia in Carnarvon and I think everybody wants to bear in mind all Australians in various parts of our nation including mainly here in Queensland who are suffering through it.
JOURNALIST: How big would the cost of this be to the Federal Government (inaudible)
PM: The best thing to do is to work with people now through relief, work through recovery, and then assess the damage. You cannot know how much damage has been caused until you can see what happens when floodwaters subside, but we are standing by and have already made available money to assist through the just direct emergency payments, the $1000 emergency payments from individuals who have had to leave their homes, $1000 an adult, $400 a child, already around $3 million has been expended here in Queensland, joining with the emergency payments from the State Government it's around $4 million. Then on top of that there's the clean-up money and the concessional loans and then of course on top is going to be the infrastructure bill. I've been very clear that we are talking about hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars but you can be precise about the figure until you see the damage underneath.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister with Rockhampton, I'm from Rockhampton-
PM: I can tell that-
JOURNALIST: You really need an assurance that (inaudible) it should have been fixed 20 years ago, 25 years ago (inaudible) and the plans (inaudible) so surely you can give a commitment that we can get this done, not just say we'll look at the plans when it comes through.
PM: I think we've got to be a little bit fair about how long this problem's been in the making. The highway was cut in 1991, that's 20 years ago, it's a long time ago, well maybe not 20, round about, 2011 now. So that's a long time ago. 1991 the floods cut the highway, and then we didn't see any action to address that problem until the election of our Government and through the work that Kirsten did to bring this problem to the attention of the Federal Government we said well, we need to really work through this and feasibility study is the way of really working through it. So in terms of predispositions to get something done, it's this Government that has brought that willingness to task after it was lacking for all of the years since the 1991 flood.
JOURNALIST: And given that how long do you think the city can function effectively without (inaudible)
PM: We're talking about this study being available in the middle of this year and we're talking about $40 million being expended for urgent works, that's separate to anything that ends up stemming from flood relief, $40 million for urgent works that has already been committed.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister in meeting with the locals on your tour, have you encountered any particularly compelling stories?
PM: Well I'm off to the evacuation centre next so I'll really look forward to the opportunity to see you there. I've had the opportunity to talk to a number of local people in St George a little bit earlier today and I think the thing that really there is most startling and most pressing is meeting with people whose homes were flooded in March, who have been through the months of recovery and rebuilding, who just got their homes back where they wanted them, wanting to move in, excited Christmas, the house is back together again after the March floods and now they're facing flooding again, that's really, really tough for those people in St George and I had the opportunity to talk to someone today who's facing exactly that problem.
Thank you very much we'll see you at the evacuation centre.



PM: Of course St George has been on alert about rising floodwaters for many days now and as the Premier and I were remarking when we toured the town, not one minute of that time has been wasted.
Emergency preparations here have been done at a very high level and I want to take this opportunity to congratulate Donna, the team she leads, the Emergency Services personnel, who have done such a great deal of work in St George to ready for the flood.
We know that as flood waters rise it's going to get tougher here in St George and it's tough for many many people throughout Queensland.
We've been talking today about dealing with the flood peak, we've also been talking today about the recovery work that lies beyond and certainly we will stay in touch in close partnership with the Queensland Government and the local council here as those recovery works unfold.
I am pleased to be able to say standing here with the Premier of Queensland that we are making emergency payments, dollars into people's pockets who are affected by this flood emergency throughout Queensland, that are making a difference to them right now.
Already around $4 million in total, between Federal Government emergency payments and State Government emergency payment have been made to individuals and families are doing it tough in Queensland floods.
Of course that is the money in the pocket, money on the ground now, but there are hundreds of millions more dollars that are going to be required to help Queensland through and to help with the rebuilding.
It's been great to be here today and to see the extent of what St George has prepared for first hand and I do very much thank the local community for hosting me here.
I'll turn now to the Premier for some comments.
PREMIER BLIGH: Well thank you Prime Minister. It's very heartening to see the Prime Minister back in Queensland again, touring some of the flood affected areas.
There is no substitute for first hand eyewitness assessment of the damage floods are doing, they havoc that they're wreaking in communities, the pain and suffering that they're causing to individuals and families.
We know that between all three levels of government, we've got a bit rebuilding task ahead of us and I'm very pleased to see the Prime Minister here with the Mayor of St George Donna Stewart, having a firsthand look at this damage.
I'm very heartened by the fact that Australians are digging deep to help Queenslanders in need. The Premier's Relief Appeal has just today gone over $20 million, tonight there'll be a telethon on a national TV station, I ask people to get behind us when we need that help.
To those people who have already donated and we've had more than $5 million come in through the banks, from ordinary mums and dads, thank you.
Whether it's $2, $5, or whatever it is it's all making a difference. $20 million worth of aid over and above the hundreds of millions of dollars that each level of government will be contributing to the rebuilding effort will make a huge different, particularly to those families who really have lost everything.
So thank you Australia, we're absolutely thrilled that you're here standing with us in our time of need here in Queensland.
There's been a lot of relief here in St George as we've been able to establish that the water is not going to get above the previous record, or may only slight, we're not going to see the worst case scenario here. However we are going to see a long time for these waters hanging around St George, causing road damage.
This road out here is the main road out to Cunnamulla, we don't know when it'll be open again and we don't know when we'll be able to get vehicles on it until we see the damage that's done.
We also know that there's many other towns downstream, Dirranbandi, Bollon and Hebel are likely to be cut off and isolated for many weeks, so getting supplies into these towns will continue to be a big priority and for all those people who are in isolated properties and smaller towns being cut off and isolated, we do know about you and we're getting supplies in to help you.
STEWART: I would like to say that I'm delighted that the Prime Minister Julia Gillard accepted my invitation to come to our community so promptly and also as always lovely to have our Premier here and I'm very pleased that they can come and speak with members of my community and understand not only the emotional anguish, but also the ongoing problems with infrastructure and getting that infrastructure back into a workable place so that commerce can continue and bring money back into our community. So once again thank you on behalf of my community.
PM: And can I say we've also had the opportunity while we've been here today to touch base with Senator Barnaby Joyce and I have brought with me one of my Queensland Labor team, Graham Perrett. This is his home town but I haven't really got the full details of his school days yet, I've been asking local people for stories about his naughtiness at school, but I'm going to have to keep that enquiry going.
So, we're very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: I've got a question from Canberra, Channel Ten understands (inaudible), what's going on there? He's saying it's not enough (inaudible)
PM: Look, as reported in papers today an out of court settlement has been reached. The settlement is confidential. Clearly this is a matter that has been a long time in the making and in the interests of the Commonwealth, it's wasn't in our interest to have a long and protracted litigation, so the matter has been settled.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, has the Government offered Mamdouh Habib an apology?
PM: Look, as you've seen the terms of this settlement are confidential, that's part of what has happened. It was in the interests of taxpayers to bring this matter to an end. I think Australians understand this is a matter of long standing, it did not start under the current government, it started a number of years ago, but it was in the interest of taxpayers to settle it and that has been done.
JOURNALIST: So as far as you're concerned (inaudible)
PM: Well, as I am advised the matter has been settled.
JOURNALIST: And where did it come from, Mamdouh Habib says he didn't tell the press about this, so it must have come from somewhere else?
PM: Well you may have to make enquiries amongst your press brethren to work that out.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BLIGH: We have a number of major coal mines which are flooded in the Central Queensland area. These are big major local employers and we want to get them back operational as soon as we can.
We are working with every one of these mines about how they can discharge their water out of those big pits. Some of this water will need to be treated before it can be discharged, others have tested OK.
What we do know is that sometime the best time to discharge is when the water is moving quickly through the river, so it can move out. So, we're working with hydrologists and with environmental scientists and with the companies to do everything we can to get these mines operational. They're some of the biggest employers in Central Queensland and the best thing we can do for those communities is to get people back to work.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this is obviously pretty tough for St George, second time in ten months. Has there been any discussion of what the first steps are to get these people back to normal life and is there any preventative measures being talked about for the future?
PM: We've had a good discussion this morning and what I can say about this community is it is facing a tough time, very quickly after the March floods. There is a real sense of resilience and pulling together and being prepared and it's very impressive. It's a real tribute to the community.
Yes, there's going to be a lot of work to make sure that infrastructure is built; that businesses can get back to normal, so people's jobs are there, the product is getting to market so that people can be selling what they produce and earning their income.
We've been talking about that today as well. It's obvious that until we see these flood waters recede we're not going to be able to see the true extent of the damage.
Donna, for example, has been explaining to me that the bridge that is normally there is completely out of sight because the flood waters are over the top of it. Something like that bridge, we'll only be able to assess the true damage when the flood waters recede.
But we will keep working together, Federal Government, State Government and Local Government in that recovery.
JOURNALIST: Is this dam proposal being considered at all?
PM: As I said yesterday, my focus is on working with local communities as they face flood waters and then recover. That's my focus, being out and about with these community members.
Any proposals and I understand the Leader of the Opposition's announced a plan for a committee, on any proposals that some from that, obviously there will be plenty of time to talk about that in the future.
My focus now is on immediate work to work with communities.
JOURNALIST: Can we ask please ask for your impressions of St George and the preparations there?
MAJOR GENERAL SLATER: Flying into St George you can see that there's an awful lot of water out there. I think that the people of St George have been a little luckier than they could have been the way things are looking at the moment, but one of the things that's struck me already about the organisation in St George this morning is that the community has come together well.
They have learnt from previous experience and the last twelve months about how to prepare themselves for such a food. The Police, Emergency Services, the local civil authorities have done a really great job and if the water does rise more than we're expecting at the moment, then I don't think any town could be better prepared.
JOURNALIST: Premier, can I just ask you, there's around $20 million in the donation fund at the moment. Can you say where that money will go? Will that go to help people whose homes aren't insured?
PREMIER BLIGH: The funds in the relief appeal will all go to individuals and families and communities. All the major infrastructure, like roads and rail will be dealt with by Government.
The purpose of the relief fund is to top up, for those families who are either uninsured or uninsurable or whose insurance doesn't cover all that has happened to them. To make that little bit of difference between getting something and being able to get your life back on track.
So there are people who are, who have some insurance but it won't cover everything. Some people who because of the nature of their insurance policy will find that they thought they had flood coverage and it won't cover it, and that's what this relief fund will do.
This will make the difference between people being able to put their lives back together or not and it'll be administered separate to government, by the Red Cross and the Red Cross are the ones staffing our evacuation centres at the moment. They are the people who know the families that need it the most. So this is a fund that is about people and about recognising the human face of this tragedy.
JOURNALIST: Is it a situation where people have to apply, or (inaudible)
PREMIER BLIGH: What we've done in the past and we'll have to look at the circumstances here over so many different places which is a bit unique, but in Cyclone Larry for example the funds, the trustees of the funds will determine the criteria and then yes people will have to (inaudible)
But obviously we'll make sure that we're encouraging people to being forward their claims.
PM: Thank you very much.



PM: I'm here today to make an announcement about assistance for Australians who are doing it tough as the nation battles floodwaters. Already as Prime Minister I have triggered the payment of emergency money to Australians who are doing it tough - the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment. That's the emergency money of $1,000 per adult, $400 per child, for people who find themselves in circumstances like in an evacuation centre because their home has been flooded. Already we've received over 8,000 claims for that emergency assistance and over $10 million has been paid.
In addition, working with state governments, with premiers around the country, Premier Bligh and Premier Barnett, we have triggered payments under the Natural Disaster Relief Arrangements. Those payments have also been triggered in New South Wales with Premier Keneally. They are the payments which enable people to get some assistance when they return to flooded homes to replace household contents, the payments that enable small businesses and primary producers to get some clean up money and the assistance which enables small businesses and primary producers to get access to concessional loans as they rebuild following flood waters.
Today I announce a further assistance measure - this is the Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy. This measure is to assist people who are not able to do their normal income-earning work and get their normal income because of flood and disaster circumstances.
So, to just take some examples of that, it could be a truck driver who's stood down because the mine in which he or she works isn't working because of floodwaters. It could be a small business person, maybe someone who owns and operates a coffee shop and they are in a flood-affected area, their coffee shop is flooded and not working. It could be a farmer who is not earning their ordinary income because they can't get their produce to market because roads are cut.
This payment has been triggered in earlier natural disasters. For example, it was triggered in the wake of Cyclone Larry, and also in the wake of the very devastating bushfires in Victoria.
This subsidy enables people to get income support at the same rate as Newstart, so that is the payment generally available for people who are unemployed. It enables people to get income support at that rate for a 13-week period. The income tests for Newstart apply, but the asset tests do not.
So, this payment is available in circumstances where people haven't been able to access other Federal Government payments through our normal social security payment system.
I've determined that these payments should be made not only in Queensland but also in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia. Now, that will seem like a lot of areas - it's around 150 local government areas - but the reason for that is since the start of November we've seen extreme weather events in many parts of the country.
I, for example, was in Carnarvon just a few short days ago where they have seen flooding. We know that we've seen other communities impacted in other parts of the country, so this payment will be available if people aren't able to get their ordinary source of income because of these natural disasters - whether they're employees, small businesspeople or primary producers - and they meet the income test, so people will need to show that they have lost income and are eligible for the payment.
People who feel that they may be eligible for the payment should ring 180 22 66. That's the same number that people have been using for the emergency $1,000 and they can make a claim and discuss their eligibility with the people on the hotline from later today.
Payments are first expected to flow during the course of next week. This is important for the individuals involved who are doing it tough, the individuals in the families who aren't in a circumstance to get their ordinary income because of the extreme weather events we've seen, but it's also important economically for us to hold labour - particularly seasonal labour - in location so that as communities move to recovery they don't immediately experience a skills shortage where people who normally would have been available to work in that community are no longer available. Certainly, the experience in natural disasters in the past has been that there's been this economic benefit of holding labour where we are going to need it as communities recover.
Now, I know Australians around the country are very, very closely monitoring what is happening, particularly with the Queensland floods and as floodwaters move into New South Wales. There are a lot of Australians doing it tough, facing very, very stressful circumstances and I'm very pleased to see that Australians in large numbers have themselves determined that they want to donate to help their fellow Australians in a time of need. So, I absolutely congratulate people who have made those donations. It's a great way of showing that as a nation we all have care and concern for each other in tough times like these.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Federal Opposition has expressed some concern about the differential between Queensland, New South Wales and WA and the payments for farmers and small business owners, $15,000 versus the $25,000 versus the $15,000. Is the Federal Government considering trying to put out a flat rate across those three states, or negotiate with the states about increasing those?
PM: Look, thanks for that question and this issue was raised with me particularly when I was in Carnarvon in Western Australia in the last few days. Just to be very clear about our Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery arrangements, premiers write and request particular forms of assistance and the Federal Government's role is then to agree or potentially not agree with the forms of assistance requested.
As we stand today, as Prime Minister I have agreed with all requests for Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements that I have received from Premier Bligh, Premier Keneally and Premier Barnett in Western Australia.
So, for example, in Carnarvon the request that came from the Premier of Western Australia was for a different and lower rate for clean-up money for small businesses and primary producers. I made it very clear when I was in Carnarvon, and actually had the opportunity to talk to the local State Member there, who is a member of Premier Barnett's government, that if we receive an additional request from Premier Barnett then of course I will deal with that as quickly as possible and as sympathetically as possible.
But in terms of changing those levels of assistance, I would need to receive a further request.
JOURNALIST: So have the Premiers of Victoria and South Australia written and asked for assistance? And if not, why have you accepted this new support to those states?
PM: I'm extending the new support to those states and we've got different differential impacts all round the country of what have been a series of really extraordinary weather events and obviously widespread and record flooding. I've extended this more broadly because those communities in Victoria and South Australia are trying to get back to normal and there may be people in those communities who could be eligible for this assistance, so I thought it was best to enable people to make application widely and then for those applications to be assessed.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, as you know, the Opposition Leader is talking about the need for consideration of building more dams. As I understood, when you were asked about that last week you pointed out the hypocrisy of the Coalition opposing the dam up in Queensland that was knocked back. Putting aside that observation you make about Tony Abbott's hypocrisy or otherwise, isn't it time, as demonstrated by the events of the last eight weeks, for the nation to seriously consider whether it is building enough dams, whether it is doing enough of storm water harvesting?
PM: Well, thank you for that question, and what I would say in answer to it is right now it's time to focus on this immediate crisis in so many parts of our nation and helping families and communities through, so that's where my focus is.
I anticipate that as we move through and help communities go into recovery that people will want to raise questions for debate and I understand the Leader of the Opposition's announced a plan to have a committee look at issues.
From the Government's point of view, individual dam proposals need to be assessed on their merits, but my focus as Prime Minister right now is on working with communities, working with state governments, working with local governments, to assist them through what is a pressing and immediate crisis.
JOURNALIST: I understand that, but just let's go back three months. What's your policy on these issues?
PM: The Government's policy on considering dam proposals is that each dam proposal should be looked at on its merits and work through as to what it will do for water supply, what it will do for environmental concerns, what it will do generally. So that's our longstanding policy - that individual dam proposals should be assessed on their merits, and as your remarked in your question, these individual dam proposals in the past have been opposed by members of Mr Abbott's opposition.
Sorry, we'll go here and then come up the back. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, regarding today's announcement, what's the advice that you've received from officials on the number of people who would apply, potentially apply, for this subsidy and what the impact on or what the cost to the Federal Budget would be, what the range is?
PM: Look, thanks for that question.
I have had the opportunity to be briefed by officials. I also had the opportunity when I travelled with Premier Bligh on Saturday to talk with her about the potentials for this payment to assist in Queensland and certainly Premier Bligh was very keen to see this payment triggered for Queensland, because in her visiting to flood regions she'd met with people that this payment could make a difference for.
I'm not in a position to give you a precise figure about costs and that's because of two very commonsense reasons: the flood crisis is still emerging, so we ultimately don't know how many communities are going to be impacted by flood waters, though we are very concerned now about the circumstances in South-East Queensland and in New South Wales; and secondly this program is demand driven, but I anticipate the expenditure for this proposal will be in the order of tens of millions of dollars.
Yes, we'll go to the back and then come to the front. Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Just to follow up on that question, Queensland Treasury has delayed the release of its mid-year economic forecast to factor in the impact of the floods. What advice is the Commonwealth seeking about the impact on the budget and when will you be in a position to be able to update the Australian public about its impact, given your planned return to surplus?
PM: Look, we'll update on our budget figures at the time of the May budget.
The budget will return to surplus in 2012-13. That will require us to make some hard choices and we will make those hard choices.
I've been consistent in saying to people I can't, at this stage, tell people what the total cost of recovering from these floods is going to be because I can't predict the draw down on infrastructure money until we see what's under the flood waters and how much damage has been done. You know, I can't know whether a bridge has been washed away until we can see the bridge again. I can't know how much damage is being done to a road by floodwaters until the floodwaters subside and the roads people can get out there and test the road.
So, you know, we're going to be able to get clearer and clearer about the total cost as floodwaters subside and we're able to look at the impact around the country, but we're not in that position yet.
We'll just go to the front here.
JOURNALIST: Given the row over the GST and online sales, is it reasonable to put the GST on the table for the tax summit mid-year?
PM: Well, there's a process for dealing with GST and online sales questions - that's the process that's been announced by Minister Shorten and the Productivity Commission.
What I would say is that, you know, I would be very reluctant to see Australians who are facing cost of living pressures not able to access shopping on the internet in the way that they access it now, and Minister Shorten, of course, has already outlined the process for dealing with this, and that's through the Productivity Commission.
JOURNALIST: And the GST on the tax summit agenda? Is that-
PM: -Well, the GST is not on the Government's agenda. There's absolutely no way in the world that the Government is going to be revisiting rate of GST questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you see the people's increasing use of the internet to buy things as an example of globalisation, and would you see putting taxes on those as akin to sort of stepping back on economic reform, a form of protectionism?
PM: Well, I think we've just got to be clear about internet shopping. Yes, people shop on the internet. It's convenient. It's a new way of doing it, so for some people it's a way to shop. Others are always going to love a wander around their local shops and get a pleasure out of shopping as an activity as well as purchases as an outcome.
Much of the internet shopping that happens happens for Australian services, so people are internet shopping and buying from Australian businesses. A small percentage - a very small percentage - internet shop from overseas, and the present advice is in terms of revenue and recovery for that small percentage that it would cost more in administration costs than would be recovered in revenue.
That's the phenomenon of internet shopping that people are talking about in recent weeks.
JOURNALIST: What about as it increases, though? I mean, it won't be small forever, will it?
PM: Well, we have the Productivity Commission process. Minister Shorten has obviously commenced that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned the 8,000 claims for the disaster relief payments that's already in effect, and that $10 million has been paid. Is that all to Queensland, because I understand those payments are only available to Queenslanders at this point in time?
PM: Those payments, that's true, are available in local government areas in Queensland. We will obviously keep that under very close review as we're dealing with emerging flood circumstances.
JOURNALIST: OK, but you haven't decided yet to extend the DRP to beyond Queensland to-
PM: -Well, that payment is there in circumstances where we've got movements into evacuation centres and homes being inundated by floodwaters, so we will keep working through as we're seeing floodwaters move the way we're seeing them move at the moment.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a report today that Minister Albanese would not fund transport in Sydney if a Liberal government in New South Wales did not go ahead with the Epping Rail Link. Isn't there some unfairness there, in that it suggests that your Government would help a state Labor government to the tune of $2 billion, but if it was a Liberal Government in Sydney you wouldn't help them in the same way if they decided their infrastructure priorities were different?
PM: Well, your analysis just simply isn't right. What we do is we fund projects that we believe are of major importance, and we've done that around the country irrespective of the political identity of the premier of the state or the government of the state. I would point you in the direction of the major infrastructure investments we've made in Western Australia.
Yes, we'll go that way. Yep?
JOURNALIST: Angus Whitley from Bloomberg News. Will the Federal Government cover the costs of those in flooded areas whose homes and properties aren't covered by insurance policies? Do you have an estimate on how much that might cost you?
PM: Look, once again, because the flood crisis is still emerging, so I couldn't even say to you today how many homes are going to end up inundated by floodwaters because we've got floodwaters moving, but the way in which our assistance works is through the guidelines of the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements, so we do make payments available to households for things like households contents, so the guidelines for the payments are quite clear.
JOURNALIST: For homes themselves?
PM: Those guidelines are for homes themselves, as well as small businesses and primary producers.
Yes, we'll take a question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what lessons can Australia learn from the weekend shooting in Arizona?
PM: Well, this is a truly, truly shocking crime, and a dreadful, dreadful thing to see. I mean, a 9-year-old child lies dead and a congresswoman lies battling for her life having been involved in meeting the people that she represents.
America's our greatest ally, and I think around the nation people would have just been shocked to hear this news yesterday - really, really shocked. My thoughts and I think the thoughts of a lot of Australians will be with the people who have lost loved ones and the people who are injured from this truly shocking crime.
JOURNALIST: I know we don't have the same sort of gun culture as they do in America, but would it be timely, perhaps, for the Federal Police to look at security for MPs and Ministers here in Australia?
PM: Look, the Federal Police do all of that. They do it in an incredibly professional way and they make assessments against Australian circumstances.
Yes, we'll go here and then there. Yep?
JOURNALIST: On a much more important matter, are we sending a gift to Princess Mary and the twins?
PM: I'm sure the nation will want to mark the moment. I wouldn't be surprised if a lot of Australians themselves actually bundled up some gifts.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: What's your reaction to the latest anti-whaling activity in the Southern Ocean?
PM: What I'd say about whaling is as follows.
Firstly, my Government is absolutely opposed to whaling. That's why we are taking international legal action, and we will pursue that vigorously.
I've been very clear that in terms of the activities in the Southern Ocean, this is a remote, inhospitable, dangerous place. Everybody has to act responsibly. Any sense that somehow you can act irresponsibly and somehow someone miraculously turns up to save you - that is not the way the world works. These are dangerous waters and people need to conduct themselves responsibly in any protest activity, and all vessels - all vessels - need to conduct themselves responsibly.
Thank you very much.



The Gillard Labor Government today announced that it will provide additional support for employees, small businesses and farmers who have lost income as a direct result of the floods crisis.
Currently, over 150 Local Government Areas across Queensland, Victoria, Western Australia, New South Wales and South Australia have been declared natural disaster zones as a result of flooding and severe weather conditions since November last year.
The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy is a fortnightly payment of up to the maximum rate of existing Newstart Allowance for a period of 13 weeks. The subsidy will be available to those who have experienced a loss of income as a direct result of the flooding and are not currently receiving, or eligible for, any other income support payment.
The floodwaters and storms have hit people's livelihoods and made it difficult for people to continue their everyday lives - including going to work or operating their small businesses.
With such significant and widespread disruption to businesses and their employees, it is clearly in the national interest to provide support to those who have temporarily lost their income as a direct result of the flooding, as well as maximise the chance that local businesses will be able to retain their labour force for the eventual resumption of normal business.
The Commonwealth Government will support these people who have been unable to work through no fault of their own.
Employees, small businesses and farmers who reside or derive an income from disaster declared areas in these States will be eligible to claim the Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy should they fulfil the criteria.
Centrelink will start processing claims for the Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy immediately and first payments are expected to begin rolling out early next week.
This additional support is the latest in the range of assistance provided by the Australian Government for people affected by floods or severe storms in affected areas.
The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy is in addition to the Australian Government's ongoing assistance to individuals, state and local Governments in the flood and severe weather affected areas across Queensland, New South Wales, Western Australia, Victoria and South Australia.
For more information or to claim the Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy, people should contact the Australian Government Emergency Information line on 180 22 66 to register their details.



For those of you who haven't been to Manuka Oval before, I'm sure you are loved being here today. It's a lovely place. I've grown fond of this ground, coming and watching the Western Bulldogs play here during football season, but as a cricket ground I'd have to say it's even better.
This is a wonderful, wonderful place - a Cathedral end, a caretaker's cottage I think the envy of many Canberra residents, that caretaker's cottage, a canopy of trees. It really is a very lovely place.
We're here in the Bradman Stand. As we watch the game we've got the Hawke Stand to our left and the Menzies to our right. That's telling you something about Canberra, that they managed to get that touch done so well.
And as we watch the game, we are of course looking out at the Jack Fingleton scoreboard.
And Fingleton had two careers: he was one of our toughest cricketers; and second he became one of our most respected Canberra journalists, and so it's a fitting symbol that the scores of this game are put on a scoreboard that bears his name.
Now, I want to tell you just a brief story about Fingleton, because I think he's a man who generated many stories, but one of them that he met the great fast bowler Harold Larwood in 1948 in England and they became great friends - such great friends that Larwood viewed it as 'well, OK.'
That on Saturday in 1950 he would send to Fingleton a which read:
"LEAVING TOMORROW WITH WIFE, FIVE DAUGHTERS AND ELDEST DAUGHTER'S FIANCE STOP CAN YOU FIND JOBS AND ACCOMMODATION STOP"
Now, whether you got that by text in the modern age or whether you got it by telegram back then, that would be a bit of a stressing request, wouldn't it?
And so it was a stressing request for Fingleton, who later said that he was asked to meet this very tall order during a time of housing shortage, so he thought that he better enlist the help of the Prime Minister, Ben Chifley, to get this job done.
And so the job was done, appropriate accommodation found and Larwood was simply delighted when he arrived here and saw what had been done on his behalf.
Apparently, Fingleton then thought it appropriate that there be an opportunity for Larwood to thank Chif in person, and so he took Larwood to Chifley.
Chifley said some words. Larwood looked at Fingleton for a translation. Fingleton helped out.
Chifley said a few more words, and translation was once again sought.
So I tell you this story to prove that I'm not the first Australian Prime Minister with the kind of Australian accent that I bear.
Fortunately, though, my Australian accent is not so bad that any of our English cricketers asked me to be translated last night - or perhaps they were simply being polite. We just don't know.
But it's truly a great experience to be here for this match.
I also wanted to take this opportunity to thank cricket for everything it is doing to assist our flood victims right around the country, and particularly in Queensland.
I've had to stop watching this very successful bout of cricket, our cricketers still out there, I've had to stop watching that and go back to Parliament House for a press conference to announce further disaster relief for flood victims.
But, of course, cricket is playing its part and it's particularly going to play its part later this month at the 'Gabba, and I take this opportunity to thank you.
Now, we've got Tim Paine and his team out there today, and they are the future of Australian cricket. I think I'm pretty well known for saying as a general motto that the best days of this country lie in front of it, not behind it, and that's true of the best days of Australian cricket as well.
And what I can certainly guarantee you is if today Tim Paine and his team are successful, then I am certainly going to have some great boasting rights. Most particularly, I will be boasting to Bob Hawke that at my first PM's XI the Australians succeeded.
Thank you very much.



NEGUS: Prime Minister, thanks for your time. Firstly I -
PM: Good evening George.
NEGUS: I noticed that your colleague Anna Bligh actually described this as a grim disaster, an unfolding human tragedy. When you heard about the immensity of it, the shock and horror of what's been happening here in Queensland, what was your own personal reaction?
PM: Well, it's heartbreaking George. You watch those images, they are so so shocking with cars being tossed around, with houses literally washed away and to digest the grim news that we have lost nine Australian lives, including children and that there are many Australian families waiting to hear now anxiously what has happened with their loved ones. This is all really heartbreaking stuff, but I suppose we also are seeing on display courage and determination from Queenslanders as they deal with this crisis and we're going to be with them shoulder to shoulder through the days ahead and then the months and months of recovery afterwards.
NEGUS: Good point PM, because it will take months, I mean it's a double edged sword, isn't it really, because you need immediate assistance for people who are now surprisingly find themselves flood victims, they need immediate help. Of course the longer problems, the recovery, economically and in human terms can take an immense time and an immense amount of money, are we up to it?
PM: Yes, we're up to it George, we're up to it as a nation and I know Australians will want to support Queenslanders in their time of need. We're already there, with emergency payments, more than $13 million has been paid in emergency payments, more than 10,000 claims. We've got over 1000 Centrelink staff focussed on working with flood victims who need that kind of assistance, but it's just the start, just the start of months and months of recovery as we stand with Queenslanders.
George we can't know yet how much damage there will be to recover from, because the crisis is still unfolding.
NEGUS: Indeed.
PM: And we can't know what damage has been done until flood waters subside, but my focus now is on the Defence Force efforts to work alongside Queenslanders, as well as the making of emergency payments to get money into people's pocket.
NEGUS: And you're coming to Brisbane I hear PM, because that's the latest place to be hit by this water?
PM: Yes, I will be travelling to Brisbane tonight, I'll be there tomorrow to meet with Premier Bligh and be available for our Defence effort, to be talking to our Defence personnel. They are doing a remarkable job and certainly we will use whatever Defence assets we need to support the people of Queensland and to help them through.
NEGUS: Prime Minister we'll have to leave it there, but thanks for your time.
PM: Thanks George.



PM: For many days now Queenslanders have been battling with flood waters and the misery that flood waters bring and many Australians have watched this battle and they've shown their sympathy and support by donating to the various flood relief efforts. I'm sure that many Queenslanders and Australians right around the nation would have been hoping that the worst of this was behind us and that we were shortly to move from the immediate crisis into a recovery phase.
Tragically that hasn't occurred. Yesterday we saw some simply shocking events in Toowoomba and other communities in the Lockyer Valley, literally walls of water, smashing into cars and to buildings. We've seen very dramatic images of cars tossed around, of people on roofs of houses and on the roofs of cars and people literally hanging on for dear life to trees and to signposts. I'm sure those images have shocked Australians. That means that now, of course, we are in a situation where as a nation we are grieving the loss of eight Australian lives, four of them children.
72 Australians are unaccounted for and that means in Queensland and around the nation there are people who are frightened, people who are desperately waiting for news of their loved ones, a weight that would be bearing so heavily on them, it's very hard to imagine what a weight like that is like.
So to those people who are bereaved, to those who are now waiting for news of their loved ones, I want to say to them, as Prime Minister my thoughts and my sympathies are with you, the thoughts and sympathies of all Australians are with you in these dreadful and difficult circumstances. The nation does need to brace itself for the fact that the death toll as a result of yesterday's flash flooding and walls of water is likely to rise. We know that search and rescue efforts are underway. Difficult weather circumstances continue to prevail and I have been continuously in contact with Queensland Premier Anna Bligh, but with 72 Australians unaccounted for, with flood waters so dangerous and moving so swiftly, we do need to brace ourselves for the likelihood of further bad news.
Today I have been briefed by our National Security Adviser, by the Head of Emergency Management Australia. I have spoken to the Commanding Officer of Operation Queensland Flood Assist. As we speak we have helicopters, Black Hawks and Sea Kings in the air, working hand in glove with the Queensland emergency personnel on search and rescue efforts. As those search and rescue efforts continue flood waters are now threatening more parts of Queensland, including Ipswich and parts of Brisbane. There are some communities that have been hit by flood waters for a second time. Hit once, evacuated, gone back and now being hit again. So they circumstances in Queensland continue to be very dire indeed.
We will continue to provide the support of the Australian Defence Force and I have made it very clear to Premier Anna Bligh that any resource she needs from the Australian Defence Force will be made available to the people of Queensland to assist them during this very difficult period. In my various conversations with Premier Anna Bligh she has made very clear to me the courage and commitment of Emergency Services personnel who have faced these incredibly harrowing circumstances over the last 24 hours. Indeed they were joined by volunteers, by others including by media helicopters to help get people off roofs last night.
To everyone who has helped so courageously and so competently I give my thanks, I know you are still out there, still engaged in search and rescue, I thank you for what you have done, what you are continuing to do and what you will do in the days ahead. Our Emergency Services personnel have simply been magnificent in very very difficult circumstances.
I would like to say to the people of Queensland that I understand the past few days have been very harrowing indeed and that there are still more dark days ahead, but the spirit of Queensland is to face these circumstances with courage and with determination. We're seeing that on display today, we saw it on display even in the amazing images in Toowoomba yesterday.
To the people of Queensland, can I also say Australians are thinking of you and anything that they Australian nation can do to assist the people of Queensland in these difficult days will be done.
Queenslanders are showing courage and determination. We will meet that courage and determination with the assistance they need in these very difficult days of the Queensland flood crisis. I do note that we are also facing flood waters in other parts of the nation, in New South Wales and in a typically Australian contrast we have people fighting bushfires in Western Australia.
Right around the nation there are Australians who are doing it tough, Australians who are also showing a great deal of courage. Our thoughts are particularly with those caught up in this immediate and very difficult crisis in Queensland, but around the nation our thoughts are with people battling floodwaters, battling fire, battling these difficult circumstances. I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you say you'll do anything you can to help. Is it possible that you would consider setting aside you target of bringing the Budget back to surplus by 2013 in order to pay for the clean-up, the road damage, the damage to other public infrastructure. Is it time to set that aside and commit yourself to long-term funding for this infrastructure?
PM: Well we are committed to long-term funding for the rebuilding of Queensland and in the days ahead as floodwaters ultimately subside the rebuilding task will become clearer and what we need to do and finance to enable Queensland to overcome the damage of these floodwaters will become clearer. We will do that, and bring the Budget to surplus in 2012-13, and yes that will entail some tough choices.
JOURNALIST: But can that been sustained?
PM: Yes we will do both, but the immediate task at the moment, we are searching for Australians who are unaccounted for, the immediate task is to facilitate all of those efforts. For a number of days now during the Queensland flood crisis we have had the Australian Defence Force there through Operation Queensland Flood Assist, we have some 150 Defence Force personnel who have been there working alongside the people of Queensland and the emergency services personnel.
What I have said to Premier Anna Bligh and what I want to restate here very clearly is anything else that is needed from the Australian Defence Force will be made available to assist Queensland as they face these incredibly difficult circumstances.
We'll just go to the back.
JOURNALIST: What is your sense of the predictability of this disaster, whether or not the extent of this could have been foreseen and would you like to see better warning systems, perhaps the use of the SMS warning system developed after Black Saturday for flood prone areas?
PM: Well the SMS warning system has been used in parts of Queensland, so something that was learned through the devastation in Victoria with the bushfires was worked on and now that is available and can be used in other disaster circumstances. In the days to come I'm sure that there will be a review of things like whether warnings and the like, that is work to come in the days ahead, but right now in the midst of this emergency our thoughts are on dealing with the emergency and our efforts are on dealing with that emergency. Can I just say too, and the reviews will happen in the future, but I think we live in a world, we approach a world with more technology than we've ever had before with resources available to us that were unimaginable for earlier generations, but the power of nature can still be a truly frightening power and we've seen that on display in this country, we've seen it through fire, we're now seeing it through flood.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Are you, I'm sorry to press the question, but are you in any way concerned that the people, even with the emergency alerts via SMS and other means, people weren't forewarned enough?
PM: What I've seen today is I've seen the experts from the Weather Bureau in Brisbane talk about the limits to their ability to track these extreme weather events in individual localities. Now I am not an expert from the Weather Bureau, you would have seen that at Anna Bligh's press conference she was joined by an expert from her Weather Bureau so that information is there, I'm sure people will want to review and look at what else can be done by weather bureaus, but I believe he sought to explain how this event happened with no warning and happened with such severity.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just on the first question, back to the first question, because the commitment on the surplus is central to the Government's objectives, does that mean that any rebuilding investment would have to be funded from perhaps other infrastructure funding that's been set aside already or that there would have to be savings elsewhere in Commonwealth outlays to pay for that rebuilding?
PM: We will make the choices in the Federal Budget that are necessary to work with Queensland on the rebuilding and to bring the Budget to surplus in 2012-13, and there may be some tough choices. We want to make sure that we are working to rebuild critical infrastructure in Queensland and that will be done. Those Budget choices will be made in our Budget cycle and we don't even know yet and can't know, it's not possible for anyone to know, what the damage bill is going to be from these floods across Queensland, we're only going to know that as floodwaters subside and they we'll be working with State Government, with local government, on the rebuilding.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how can you fund the health deals from July this year when the States haven't actually handed over their GST revenue, it's only six months away, is it possible to proceed with the reforms that you planned without that money in the bank?
PM: There's plenty of time to talk about health and health agreements.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you've given the sense of ADF personnel who are up in Queensland but what other Commonwealth resources have been deployed up there, can you give us an idea?
PM: Well the Commonwealth resources, the ADF, we've had the Joint Taskforce operating 150 personnel, we've had helicopter assets assisting, we've got helicopters in the air now for the search and rescue efforts, we've had helicopters working in Rockhampton for communities that have been isolated. You would have seen for example those Blackhawk helicopters have been used to do things like medical evacuations. We've used fixed wing aircraft including C-130s to fly supplies around that have been needed, we've got those huge military trucks available also to take supplies around and they are trucks that are able to sometimes push through in circumstances where other vehicles can't and we are there standing by and will deploy whatever assets are necessary to assist Queenslanders through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in terms of offers from overseas and what we need, what offers have we got for help and assistance from overseas and what have we taken up?
PM: Well, we've taken up the offer of New Zealand for personnel, and those personnel have already hit the ground and are deployed in Queensland assisting.
We've had message of sympathy and support and offers of assistance from literally around the world: from the United States; from the United Nations; the EU. In our own region, we've had similar offers from China, Indonesia, Japan, Singapore and Sri Lanka, as well as from East Timor and New Caledonia.
We are taking advice of our emergency services experts about whether we need to accept those offers and action particular forms of assistance. To date, the one that's been actioned has been the New Zealand offer. Obviously, New Zealand was able to get personnel to us very quickly.
JOURNALIST: Obviously, for us, when we help a lot of other nations in natural disasters, often it's both personnel and money. Am I guessing for us it's not a case of money, it's more just potentially logistical help and personnel?
PM: We've seen nations donate money in past very difficult times in Australia. For example, in the Victorian bushfire crisis that did happen, and we have also sourced expertise that may be strained in Australia because the event is so pressing. We have sourced expertise in the past. For example, we have had people assist us with things like disaster victim identification.
Now, the main thing here is our experts, both at Defence and in emergency management and the emergency management leaders in Queensland will make it clear if any of these offers should be taken up to assist us, and what form of assistance they would most require, whether it's a particular form of expertise, for example.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you going back up to Queensland in the next few days to have a look at how things are going on the ground?
PM: Look, I will certainly be going to Queensland. I will either go to Brisbane tonight or tomorrow morning.
As Premier Anna Bligh has made clear, the circumstances in Toowoomba and the Lockyer Valley are of such crisis and emergency that this is not the right time to visit. Emergency personnel and police need to be getting on with dealing with the emergency, but at the appropriate time, obviously, I will look to visit and touch base with people.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott said he would like to do a similar thing. Would you offer, or would you potentially take him with you?
PM: Oh, look, we certainly facilitated Mr Abbott's visited to Queensland. He visited, for example, to Dalby, and we facilitate that visit with the use of aircraft and the like, so I'm happy to make whatever arrangements suit, but at the moment in the immediate crisis area, where you saw those graphic images yesterday and where search and rescue is continuing, this is not the right time for visiting. The focus has to be on the search and rescue efforts.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in your briefings this morning, have you been given any indication as to whether the next few days is likely to see the passing of the '74 flood level in South-East Queensland?
PM: The updated advice to me, talking to the preparation in Ipswich, is that they currently believe the levels will be just a bit less than the 1974 flood level, but I do stress the hydrology and hydrologists reports that we get vary. They're done constantly and the reports vary as they see floodwaters emerge, so we're obviously going to keep a very careful eye on that.
We are monitoring the situation continuously and the situation continues to change and new facts emerge.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what is the update that they have for Brisbane city?
PM: Look, I've spoken to the Premier of Queensland and to the Lord Mayor of Brisbane, and as you would know they've swung into operation the Brisbane City Council disaster management arrangements. They are probably the best source of advice for minute-by-minute updates of what they are expecting, and we are working together to share information at every point.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in your talks with the Colonel in charge of the joint taskforce this morning, did he give you any indication of the kinds of things they'd been doing - medical evacuations and those sorts of things, the activities they'd been doing.
PM: Just to be clear, what the Black Hawks and Sea Kings are doing at the moment is assisting in search and rescue. Those helicopters couldn't be got in the air for a period of time because of the adverse weather conditions. It simply wasn't safe to get them up in the air to begin these tasks. As soon as it was safe, then of course they were deployed to begin these tasks.
More generally, across Queensland we've had helicopters and fixed wing aircraft involved in resupply and helicopters involved in emergency evacuation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given the Opposition's argument about the lack of dams that we've built in this country, have you had any advice or got any thoughts on whether even if dams had been built they would have done much to mitigate the damage that we've seen, given the volume of water that-
PM: -No, I don't have any advice to that effect, and I'm sure in the days to come people will want to talk about some of those issues, but obviously the focus of people now is on the emergency and meeting the emergency as it unfolds.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I've seen one figure of something in the order of $11 billion of damage and the cost of the clean up. Have you had any advice on the overall cost of this, and would you put it in the billions of dollars?
PM: I've been very clear that this is going to be a lot of damage and a very big price tag, but I've also been very clear that we can only work that out when floodwaters subside, so yes, people are trying to work through and predict what they might see when floodwaters subside, and location by location I can understand why people are turning their mind to that and that forward planning, but we're only actually going to be able to know when floodwaters subside and we can see what's happened to bridges, what's happened to roads, what's happened to airstrips, what's happened to critical community infrastructure - schools and the like. It's only then that we will be able to get a very clear estimate of what the rebuilding task is, but yes, all of this is in the many hundreds of millions of dollars, many hundreds of millions of dollars and we will be working with the people of Queensland in this rebuilding.
Thank you.



HOST: Prime Minister, it now seems certain this disaster is going to get much worse before it gets better. How much help can you provide to Queensland? Will the army be sent in large numbers?
PM: Our Australian Defence Force personnel are already out on the ground. They have been working with Queensland across this emerging flood crisis and we have had helicopters in the air today assisting with search and rescue work.
I've certainly said to the Premier of Queensland that anything she and the people of Queensland need from our Australian Defence Force will be provided to help Queenslanders as they face this grim and rapidly evolving crisis.
HOST: Prime Minister, like many of us, as an individual, how helpless do you feel locking at the pictures of such unbelievable destruction?
I've been shocked by the images and obviously very, very saddened to hear that nine Australians have lost their lives, including some children and I can understand that there are many families who are frightened, anxiously waiting for news about what has happened to their loved ones and at the same time people are still bracing for flood waters.
We are going to be working with through the Defence Force but also through making available emergency payments. There is a number that people can ring, 180 22 66 and we have got more than 1,000 Centrelink staff focused on flood work. Mark, this is a very grim situation now and Queensland is going to need us to stand shoulder to shoulder with Queenslanders over months and months and months of recovery and we will be there doing just that. I'm sure that's how all Australians feel tonight.
HOST: Prime Minister, speaking of shoulder to shoulder, are you intending to visit the disaster zone?
PM: I will be travelling to Brisbane this evening, later tonight, so I will be there on the ground tomorrow.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.



HOST: Prime Minister Gillard, I imagine there are days when you wonder just how tough this gets?
PM: I did sign up for this and I signed up for leading the nation in the best of times and in the worst of times and we are seeing some of the worst of time right around the nation, but most particularly in Queensland. So I still view this job as an absolute privilege and we are extending as much support as we can to the people of Queensland, the Defence Force is doing a fantastic job helping the people of Queensland and I've certainly said to Premier Bligh that anything she needs from the Defence Force we will supply and we are also of course making payments, emergency payments to help people in Queensland whose homes are inundated by water. The number to ring for that is 180 22 66, we've already processed more than 10,000 claims and paid more than $13 million and Phil this is just the start. There will be more payments and support for people in recovery and then all of the rebuilding to do for the many many months ahead. We're going to be working with Queenslanders to get through this crisis.
HOST: Prime Minister, you used the word extended and that strikes me as very apt. Every time we seem to think we've got to the point where we might start the recovery and clean up, we go back into the emergency phase of this and this morning more military, we've had Federal Police involved in search and rescue operations here, a couple of days ago the Singaporean Airforce offering their help. How long can we maintain this operational tempo, as this crisis seems to continue?
PM: We can keep sustaining the Australian Defence Force effort, there is on double about that. You are right, we've also had very generous offers from overseas, we do have some New Zealanders on the ground in Queensland helping out, the Singaporeans have offered their helicopters to assist and nations around the world, the United States, the United Nations, the EU, China, Indonesia, East Timor, almost you name it, they've offered assistance, so if we do need to call on the resources of the world we can. But our Australian Defence Force has got the resources it needs and that have been asked for now and if more is needed then it will certainly be swung into action.
HOST: I suppose it's one of these things that we have, we learn to think in terms of states and localities, but disasters like this do not know borders and the co-ordination must be very challenging between local authorities, as this water moves across the border into northern New South Wales and the you sit in the Federal sphere and try to work this through. How efficient are we finding the co-ordination and the logistical work between the levels of government?
PM: The levels of government are working together well and there are very clear arrangements as to how we work together. So of course Premier Bligh and the Queensland Government have their co-ordination committee, their emergency management committee, but the Defence Force sits alongside that, they participate in those meetings, so they know immediately what is needed. At the Federal level we have a crisis co-ordination committee; I am briefed by that, through our National Security Adviser, so you know we've got right across government people swinging into action. Defence Force on the one hand, but more than 1000 Centrelink staff on the other to process payments and to be able to give advice to people about how we can support them during this difficult period. So people are working together tremendously well and everybody seems to be bringing to it a real can do spirit, let's get the job done.
HOST: There has been a high level of honestly and openness in briefing right through to a public level, I appreciate that you're background briefings are far more detailed than that and you have warned us to expect that the death toll may well rise and there will be more emotional hardships for us in the days that are ahead. You're not expecting this to get better quickly?
PM: I am asking people to brace for the unfortunately and tragically likely news that the death toll has gone up from nine. Now obviously I would love to be proved wrong, but I believe the nation does need to brace itself for knowing that more Australians have died in those tremendous walls of waters that we've seen on our television screens and which crashed through Toowoomba and the Lockyer Valley. So it's a very very tough period, a lot of Australians bereaved, a lot anxiously waiting for news.
HOST: The emotional impact takes a long time, the economic stuff takes a long time as well. Are there already arms of government starting to look at how long the effects of this spin out for in terms of everything from our transport infrastructure and the way that affects exports through to primary production and mining? I mean those kind of things.
PM: We're certainly looking at it in every dimension, from the absolutely urgent, how do we get and emergency payment into someone's pocket when they've had to evacuate their home and their home is full of water, through to how do we help people who can't get to their place of employment any longer because of flood waters, through to how do we help people when they return and they start rebuilding their homes, through to how do we help small businesses and primary producers recover with clean up grants and concessional loans. We are working through every dimension of this, and then of course there will be the infrastructure rebuilding. We can't know the true dimensions of that until flood waters subside and we can see the damage underneath and which bridges have been swept away, which roads have been damaged, which schools have been damaged and when we get to that stage we will continue to work in partnership with the people of Queensland and to be there for the rebuilding.
HOST: Prime Minister, before I let you go, on a personal note, I was on the Darling Downs when you were visiting St George and we all saw you in Rockhampton and so on. How important is it for you to, to actually be there and put your arms around someone?
PM: I think it's really important for me as Prime Minister of the country to work in Canberra and make sure that government is doing what it needs to do, but also to be out on the ground seeing people and hearing their stories. It is about putting your arms around someone when there are tears, but it's also about listening to them, so that I can understand whether government is working for them and you always learn something, you always learn something that you can then bring back and make sure than we are doing right. For example in St George the real pressure that people are under, who had their homes flooded in March, just got back into their nice new renovated homes, thinking gee this is fantastic, Christmas is here and now we're back, we're over the floods and then the floods come again. Understanding the dimensions of pressure on those people and having seen that with my own eyes in St George, I've been able to work through, to make sure that we are tracking people who have been hit more than once and offering them a special level of assistance in terms of access to counselling, because it's a lot to go through in less than a 12 month period.
HOST: And a long way from the sometime rarefied atmosphere at the Cabinet table in Canberra. Prime Minister, thank you for making the time to talk to us. Are we likely to see you in this neck of the woods again soon?
PM: I'm actually flying from Canberra through to Brisbane tonight, so I will be in Brisbane tomorrow. Once again, working through, meeting with Premier Bligh, getting briefings and making sure that we understand around that Cabinet table, as you put it, but understand in the decision making structures of government what is actually happening on the ground, so that we don't miss things that are pressing on people and we need to address.
HOST: Prime Minster Gillard, thanks you.
PM: Thank you.



HOST: The Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard joins us on the program, good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Peter.
HOST: Are you in Brisbane yet?
PM: Yes I am, I am in Brisbane and I will be attending this morning the meeting of the State Disaster Management Committee, we have been working well together with the State Government's efforts and I want to make sure that that coordination continues. I'll also be meeting with the Commander of our Defence Force operation here and the Defence Force operation has been going for as long as the flood crisis has been going but we've been increasing efforts as we need to and we are increasing them again today, bringing in 7 additional helicopters, that's taking to 15 the number of helicopters here in Queensland, and the focus of a lot of their work is on the search and rescue task because we're still so, so worried about the people who are unaccounted for in these dreadful circumstances. And we're increasing the number of C-130s here, they're the planes that can move food supplies particularly to assist those regional townships that are cut off and might be running short of necessary supplies. And we do have several hundred Defence personnel on a notice to move should that be necessary as the crisis emerges and evolves, we know this has all happened rapidly and as needs arise we're going to be standing there ready to meet them.
HOST: Are you going to visit any of the specific areas that have been so affected?
PM: Well I will be looking to get out on the ground talking to people, we've got to organise all of that when - search and rescue and all of those things are the first priority - so getting out on the ground for me, I don't want to hamper any of the rescue efforts so that's obviously our very first priority.
But I do want to out talking to people affected by this flood disaster as well as making sure that all of our efforts here are working well for the people of Queensland.
HOST: Prime Minister we've had a lot of contact at the station from listeners in other countries, we've had calls this morning from the UK and America and Ireland, have you been contacted directly by any other world leaders at the moment about this developing crisis?
PM: We've had offers of support from around the world and I have talked to some world leaders myself as well as received letters of support. So right around the world, whether it's the United States, the United Nations, Singapore, New Zealand, China, Indonesia, almost you name a country and they've expressed their support and offers of assistance, and we do have some New Zealanders out and about on the ground right now helping in Queensland.
HOST: Have you seen much of the coverage of what happened in Toowoomba and subsequently what is also happened in Ipswich on television in the last few days, some of the most extraordinary pictures you could see from any disaster anywhere in the world.
PM: I certainly have and they've been shocking images, shocking images, we've seen cars tossed around and just this level of damage and when you see that wall of water and you hear the statistics about how many people are unaccounted for it does really make your heart heavy but also make you very determined to get out with the search and rescue efforts and that's what, for example, the helicopters will be doing today, working with the State emergency personnel who are doing such a great job in such difficult circumstances.
HOST: And of course you've actually appointed Joe Ludwig, is it, to head up a taskforce to assist Queensland through this disaster?
PM: I have appointed Joe Ludwig, a great Queenslander, to lead our recovery efforts here and we are going to be standing shoulder to shoulder with Queenslanders whether it's assisting people with an emergency payment when they first flee their flooding home or whether it's helping primary producers or small businesspeople or householders when they return to a scene of devastation, we will be making financial resources available.
With that first initial emergency payment, so that's the urgent dollars in people's pockets, we've almost processed 10,000 claims already, $17 million going into people's pockets, we've got 1,000 Centrelink staff who are doing this work, working through to make sure people are getting the assistance that they need as quickly as we can provide it, and this is going to take months, which is why I appointed Joe Ludwig, we're in the midst of the crisis now, but Queensland is going to be recovering, rebuilding, for many months ahead and I want to be working with Queenslanders, supporting them, for the months that's it's going to take to recovery from this.
HOST: Prime Minister on a practical note, people who have been evacuated from their homes and are looking for the emergency funding that you are able to provide. Two questions, how much funding will they receive and also is it as simple as getting in contact with Centrelink?
PM: What I would say is ring 180 22 66, Centrelink staff will take your call. This is the first initial emergency payment, so when people return and are rebuilding other payments are available, but the first initial emergency payment is $1000 per adult and $400 per child. People who go to evacuation centres, we have Centrelink staff available to assist people there as well.
HOST: Alright thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you very much.



STEFANOVIC: PM, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Karl.
STEFANOVIC: Tough morning isn't it?
PM: It's a very tough morning here in Brisbane and right across Queensland.
The people of Ipswich and Brisbane bracing for more flood waters and of course we are out there on the search and rescue task and so many Australian unaccounted for, so many families that would really be going through hell as they wait for news.
STEFANOVIC: You're right about that, logistically this is very difficult too, from an Emergency Service perspective?
PM: Yes it is. We've had our magnificent Defence Force here throughout the flood crisis, working with Queensland and their Emergency Services personnel and as it's changed we've made more available. We're making more available today, we're bringing on task seven more helicopters, bringing to a total 15 in Queensland and they're going to be on what could be some heartbreaking work with search and rescue.
We're also making available more C-130s, they're those planes that can move food supplies around, to help those townships that are isolated and might be running short of something and we've got several hundred Defence Force personnel on a notice to move should that be necessary.
STEFANOVIC: I guess at some point they're going to need to, there may be a need to take over certain areas, that's an issue that might come up.
PM: Well at the moment I think people are behaving very sensibly and obviously my message to them is listen to what the Emergency Services personnel are telling you, they are literally trying to keep you safe and we know these flood waters can be deadly.
So please listen to the advice that you're given, make sure that your neighbours are OK, we're all going to get through this but we need to stick together.
STEFANOVIC: From a health point of view, how can people access that help? I know that there's a lot of people involved here and that it's across a very wide ranging area, but how can people get access to help and what are you going to do for people who are isolated at the moment, how can they possibly get help?
PM: Well in terms of Emergency Services personnel, obviously the Queensland authority is now Defence Force people are out there, doing the work that I've described. In terms of emergency payments and assistance people can ring a number, it's 180 22 66.
We are making dollars in pockets available, the first emergency payment for someone who's literally had to flee their home because its filling with flood waters and they're at an evacuation centre, already we've processed almost 10,000 claims, more than $17 million hitting the ground and that's just the emergency payment, there's going to be more when people return and they're recovering from the devastation in their homes, their businesses, on their farms.
STEFANOVIC: When something is as broad as this, what sort of plans do you put in place for a cleanup operation to happen, because this is going to be a massive cleanup?
PM: It's going to be a massive cleanup and that's why we made Mick Slater available, a very senior Defence Force Officer, to lead the recovery effort here in Queensland, working with Premier Bligh and her Government, but obviously bringing to bare all of that Defence Force expertise about logistics and how you mobilise over big areas to do recovery work.
STEFANOVIC: I noticed this morning that the Premier Anna Bligh has said that there are now in excess of 90 people missing, it's a worrying sign that that number is growing. What information can you give to people around the Brisbane area about what you're hearing about those numbers and what (inaudible)?
PM: Premier Bligh and I are working off the same information, I did tell the nation yesterday and it was a fairly grim duty, but I did tell the nation yesterday that we do need to be prepared for this death toll to rise.
These are dangerous waters, we've lost people, we've lost 10 Australians, including some children and I fear and I think people need to be prepared for that death toll rising.
STEFANOVIC: How do you deal with people on that level, who, and you've been out and you've seen people who have lost everything and have lost loved ones in all of this?
PM: I think the only thing you can do Karl is there's no magic words that take that kind of pain away, all you can do is be there one human being to another.
STEFANOVIC: Tough?
PM: It's tough, yeah but look it's not, I'm here obviously I'm working to lead the efforts that we need, the people who are doing it tough are the people who are leaving their homes, looking back over their shoulders and wondering what they're going to come back to and the people who are just standing by waiting for that call to know what's happened to, you know, mum, dad, or someone else in the family.
STEFANOVIC: This balance here between looking ahead and looking at place like Grantham where it hit the other day, it's a very difficult balance in fact in terms of reporting, what can you tell us about what we can expect in the next 24 hours, as the country's leader what are you expecting to transpire here?
PM: Well what I'm expecting is the search and rescue efforts are going to continue and you're right, those places in the Lockyer Valley that just had that wall of water smash into them, we are still searching there and that's what the additional helicopters will be doing.
At the same time Ipswich, Brisbane, people are preparing for these flood waters, there are evacuation centres, there is the access to the emergency payments and I just think from a human point of view we'd be saying to everybody keep calm, we're going to get through this but maybe go check on your neighbours, just make sure everybody is OK, maybe there's the old lady down the end of the street and you haven't seen her for a while, just go and check, make sure people are doing it OK.
STEFANOVIC: Good advice on any day of the week in fact, but particularly poignant now. Prime Minister thank you very much, we'll let you go I know you've got a busy day ahead too.
PM: Thanks for the opportunity Karl.



HOST: Well the Prime Minister Julia Gillard has been closely monitoring events and she joins us on AM, Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning Tony.
HOST: As I understand it you're in Brisbane today, what will you be doing?
PM: Yes I am in Brisbane and I will be meeting with Premier Bligh and attending with her the meeting of the State Disaster Management Committee. We have been working alongside the Queensland Government and their wonderful emergency services personnel right throughout the flood crisis, so I wanted to be here personally to make sure all of our efforts are pulling in the same direction. We are lifting the presence of the Defence Force, our Defence Force has been deployed during the flood crisis right throughout but as circumstances have changed we've lifted efforts and we are lifting them again, making available an additional 7 helicopters, bringing to 15 the number in Queensland and many of those helicopters are going to be on the difficult and potentially heartbreaking work of search and rescue.
We're also increasing the number of C-130s, they're the planes that can take supplies to isolated parts of Queensland, townships that have been cut off by floodwaters and may need some extra supplies, and we do have several hundred Defence personnel on a notice to move should that be required.
HOST: Where are those Defence Personnel on stand-by Prime Minister?
PM: We do have Defence Personnel in Brisbane, of course we've got some very important Defence facilities here, including Enoggera and we do also have access to Reservists who can be swung into action.
HOST: Major General Mick Slater has been appointed to oversee the rescue and repair in Queensland, but with these floods extending now into New South Wales, is there a case for his brief to be extended do you think?
PM: Mick Slater will be focussed on Queensland recovery and that is going to be a lot of work and we will be standing shoulder to shoulder with the people of Queensland for the many, many months of recovery to come. We are of course closely monitoring the situation in New South Wales as well and we will be working with the New South Wales Government as necessary to support people there and to assist with recovery there. The dimensions of what's happening in Queensland with the flooding so widespread means that the recovery work for Mick Slater I think has to be focussed on Queensland, that will be enough terrain and enough work to do. There will be so much infrastructure to repair.
HOST: Prime Minister are you concerned about the huge economic hit that Queensland's going to take from this?
PM: Look I am concerned obviously about the impact on people's jobs and livelihood, we are trying to make a difference to that, we're making available a range of payments including emergency dollars that go straight into people's pockets when floodwaters hit their homes and they have to evacuate, through to payments that help small businesses and primary producers rebuilding, through to payments that support working people when they can't get to their place of employment. So that range of assistance is there and that's my real focus now.
We will have to work through the long-term economic impacts for Queensland and of course the huge infrastructure rebuilding task to come as floodwaters subside.
HOST: And it's a cost that'll have to be borne by Australian taxpayers generally?
PM: Yes there will be costs to meet, there's no doubt about that, and I've said that this is going to be an effort over months and months and months, costing hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars. Right now my focus is on doing things like making sure someone who's in an evacuation centre because their home is flooded, can get an emergency payment in their pocket, so we've swung 1,000 Centrelink staff into operations to assist people hit by floods and already we've processes almost 10,000 payments and paid out $17 million and that's just the first initial emergency money to assist people, there's obviously a lot more to do and a lot more assistance to flow.
HOST: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thanks for joining us this morning on AM.
PM: Thanks Tony.



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard has come to Brisbane to witness this devastation first hand. She joins me now. If I can get an update as far as logistics to help out. I know you have called in extra reinforcements.
PM: Thanks, Mel, our magnificent Australian Defence Force has been helping every day of the flood crisis. And as the crisis has worsened we've increased assets available, we're doing that again today, there will be seven additional helicopters available. That will bring to 15 the number in Queensland and that will mean that 11 of those helicopters will be available to assist with search and rescue, because we are still so worried about so many people who aren't accounted for yet. We're also making available additional C-130s, they're the planes that can move food and supply and their role will be to make sure that there are supplies particularly in regional Queensland, where townships are cut off and people may need that assistance flown in. And we do have several hundred Defence personnel on a notice to move should that be necessary, in order to assist the people of Queensland. So on the Defence Force side, more is being done, they've been there all along, working hard, but we will keep increasing as necessary to meet the evolving needs of this widespread crisis.
HOST: Yes, which we are witnessing is requiring more and more every minute as we speak. Just, I guess, run us through, what have you seen in the last 48 hours and some of the pictures and what you've experienced?
PM: I have been shocked, Mel, I think we've all been shocked by the images of that wall of water just wreaking such devastation and I agree with you that when we hear the statistics about how many homes are going to be hit in Ipswich and here in Brisbane, gee, the dimensions of it are truly mind-boggling. What we are going to do is just keep working through to assist people at every stage of this crisis from putting an emergency dollar into someone's pocket when they've had to flee their home because it is filling up with floodwaters to helping small businesses and householders and farmers when they return and start cleaning up the devastation and I did want to emphasise, Mel, we do have those initial emergency payments available. We've processed almost 10,000 claims, around $17 million, the first initial payment going into people's pockets. And if people need that kind of assistance, the number to ring is 180 22 66. We're going to keep building on that but that's the first payment to help people who literally have had to evacuate because of rising floodwaters.
HOST: Ok, so those payments are easy to get and they are going through quickly I guess as people want to hear because I know in past disasters we've seen sometimes there can be little holdups and it is the last thing anybody wants, so you can tell us they are easy to access and they will be quick?
PM: We've got 1,000 Centrelink staff on the task of working on the flood and they are working as hard and as quickly as they can.
HOST: Lives are all that matter in situations like this. Are you meeting with families, particularly those who are grieving? We've got the death toll standing at ten the Premier Bligh has said that that will probably at least double?
PM: We are bracing for further bad news, Mel, and I am certainly going to be available here in Brisbane. I will be attending the meeting of the State Disaster Management Committee this morning to make sure that the Federal efforts and the State Government efforts all continue to work together. We've worked together well so far, we want to keep that going. I'm going to be meeting with the Commander of the ADF, here in Queensland, Luke Foster, who is commanding our efforts and I will be looking forward to talking to the people of Queensland about how this flood crisis is impacting on them. It's always great to get out on the ground and the opportunity to talk to people face to face.
HOST: Absolutely. More than anything, they want to know they are being supported both at a government level and also a personal level and we're doing all of that, everybody is, we're right behind them we're doing everything we can. Julia Gillard, thank you very thank you very much for your time this, I know you have lot on your plate is a lot ahead. Thank you.
PM: Thanks Mel and I'm sure you've caught the sentiment, we will all be standing shoulder to shoulder with Queensland for the months and months of recovery ahead as well as in the days of this immediate crisis.
HOST: Yeah absolutely as you said, it's going to take a long, long time and we certainly are. Thank you so much.
PM: Thank you.



PREMIER BLIGH: Well good morning. I welcome to Queensland the Prime Minister and Chief of Defence Angus Houston as two of our largest cities Ipswich and our capital city of Brisbane prepare and begin to experience the worst natural disaster in our history.
As our city prepares for that disaster we are also managing a number of major incidents in other areas of Queensland and I'd like to work through some of the issues that are unfolding in those towns and cities first and then go to the Brisbane and Ipswich area.
Today because of the clearing of the rain we will see a major search and rescue effort into the Lockyer Valley searching for those people who remain missing. Very sad news overnight with further missing notifications made to the Queensland Police and the number they are searching is over 90. We can confirm that at this stage we have no confirmations of further deaths but we do expect that our emergency search and rescue teams today may face a very difficult and emotional task as they search for a possibly find bodies in some of those isolated areas.
Our thoughts are with those works and particularly with those families who are continuing to hope and anxiously wait for news of their loved ones, we hope that they have good news at the end of today although we do stress that it may take several days of major search and rescue efforts given the damage in some of these areas, to properties and to local terrain.
The Coroner is moving to the Lockyer Valley today to assist with these efforts and we have 8 specialist counselling teams including people particularly trained in counselling children and grief counsellors and they will be locating across the towns in that valley today.
In other parts of regional Queensland we're continuing to see floodwaters rise, the town of Dalby still has 125 people in an evacuation centre although the water is now stable there. In Chinchilla we have a major flood incident occurring with waters continuing to rise and current advice is that Chinchilla is likely to experience a flood peak over and above what they experienced about 10 days ago.
The town of Condamine was completely evacuated yesterday evening for the second time in 10 days and they are likely to be out of their home again for a period of time. The towns of Goondiwindi and Texas are also facing rising waters, Goondiwindi is expected to be within potentially half a metre of its levy banks, that could see those levies collapse and we are keeping a very careful watch on Goondiwindi, this is a town of some 5000 people.
The town of Texas, a relatively small town of about 600 people, are also seeing waters rising and evacuations have started in Texas.
The good news is that the water in Rockhampton is falling, although very, very slowly, similarly the water in Gympie is falling, but that water from Gympie is now making its way to Maryborough and Maryborough can expect to see its waters rise and reach a peak tomorrow.
In Bundaberg we are also seeing some minor rises and some new flooding occurring in Bundaberg.
I give you all that information so that you can appreciate the scale of this incident and appreciate that our emergency teams are working across a number of areas, across an enormous part of Queensland. We also note that as we start to prepare here in the capital city, that many of these towns are experiencing this event for the second time. I think we need to draw inspiration from their resilience and draw inspiration and courage from the experiences they've had and are continuing to face.
If I can move now to Ipswich and Brisbane.
In Ipswich at 7:30am this morning the water had risen to 18.9 metres, there is some slightly good news in Ipswich and that is that the expected peak has been revised down from 22 metres to 20.5, however they experienced 20.7 in 1974, so we are in a 1974 flood situation in Ipswich. I stress that in making those 1974 comparisons, both the city of Ipswich and the city of Brisbane are vastly different places than they were in 1974, we have significantly population, we have more dense construction, we have people living in high rise units where in 1974 nothing existed. So many more people are expected to be affected by this event even though the waters levels may be relatively similar.
So for example in Ipswich today at that level we expected to peak today at 20.5, that we expect that that will inundate and affect 4000 properties in Ipswich, 1500 are currently affected by floodwaters. We have 10 evacuation centres operational in Ipswich and 1200 people in those evacuation centres, many more out of their homes and staying with friends and relatives.
The nearby towns of Toogoolawah and Esk are completely isolated. They're not necessarily experiencing floodwater but are completely isolated by cut roads and we'll be getting supplies into those towns as soon as possible.
Here in Brisbane the water is currently at around 3.1 metres and it is rising, we expect it to rise relatively slowly this morning but much more quickly after lunch this afternoon. By this afternoon we expect it to peak around 4.5 metres and rise to 5.5 metres tomorrow morning, Thursday morning. Sometime around 4am tomorrow morning we expect to see those waters peak around the 5.5 mark, in 1974 it peaked at 5.45. So by 4am tomorrow morning we expect Brisbane to be experiencing flooding of 1974 proportions and slightly higher.
We have an evacuation centre established at the RNA Showgrounds, there are currently 182 people registered to accommodate there overnight but of course we expect that number to swell significantly throughout the day.Those people who are unable to get to higher ground with friends or family, can I please encourage you to make early registration and early arrangements with the evacuation centres. The first centre is the RNA Showgrounds, from 8am this morning, the second centre was activated at the QE2 Stadium on the south side of Brisbane.
The Lord Mayor advises me he is speaking now with major churches to see whether it is possible to utilise church halls and other church facilities in local neighbourhoods should that be necessary.
We have the very significant issues arising on the Brisbane River. Many of you will have seen the images of pontoons and boats attached to pontoons floating down the river. We have salvage operations occurring to ensure that we don't see further damage caused by those floating objects running into businesses and homes. We have a very significant operation being undertaken right now across the river from the Regatta Hotel where a large barge, known as The Island, and many people in Brisbane will know that boat, it is at risk of coming loose of its moorings and there are an operation right now to secure that facility.
Throughout today there will be a number of critical issues that will be managed by our emergency teams. Firstly the Port of Brisbane is now closed and will only be open for emergency supplies under police and harbour authority's escort. Traffic management plans are being put into place, as we see power cut off in some areas, and I will talk a little bit about power in a moment, but as we see power cut off, we are likely to see some traffic lights out around the CBD parts of Brisbane. A very significant traffic plan is being put into place and police will be doing everything in their power to manage that today, but in a large capital city, I think you can all imagine the difficulties they will face.
This is likely to be a significant problem with roads cutting from localised flooding and traffic lights out. One of the biggest messages I send to people in the city of Brisbane today and Ipswich is do not travel if you do not have. It is a danger to the rest of the population to have people out travelling unnecessarily. What that will do is take police and emergency resources off the front line where they are needed to protect and save lives. Please, this incident is not a tourist event. This is a deeply serious natural disaster, stay in your homes, do not travel unless it is absolutely necessary.
The second message is for those who haven't already done so, find a friend in high places. There are many parts of Brisbane that will not be affected. Brisbane is a very hilly city, many of us have friends and family living on those hills. Please if you are not going to be affected, reach out to a neighbour, reach out to a friend or a family member. We will ensure everything is being done to evacuate people to official evacuation centres but this could last for several days and I can assure you that you would rather be, if possible, with family than in one of these centres.
The water we are preparing for is a worst case scenario in Brisbane. We anticipate some 2,100 streets will be affected, that19,700 residences are likely to experience flooding across their entire property. We expect a further 3,500 commercial properties to similarly experience flood water across the entire property.
This is a very significant event, it will create enormous disruption and dislocation.
We are already seeing the beginning of this flood, the Brisbane River has broken its banks at Yeronga, near the Corso. We are seeing flooding starting this morning in places like Milton, Toowong, Jindalee, the Graceville area and we are likely to see more and more as the day progresses.
The fact that this is peaking tomorrow does not mean we won't see very dangerous situations emerging right now.
I think we've all woken up in Brisbane to a very surreal experience. The sky is blue, we are facing an almost perfect Queensland summer day. We can take no comfort from that blue sky. The water and rain have already done their damage, they are in the catchment and they are on their way down our river system. So please do not think, do not take any comfort from the fact we've got blue sky here this morning.
Can I just conclude by acknowledging that everybody out there, no doubt, is experiencing this as a quite scary and frightening event. Can I say that I know in my bones that Queenslanders are up to this and that we can take it and I know that because I know we have the best people on our front line. They are coming from all over Australia, from other states, SES, emergency workers, police, from New Zealand and from the Australian Defence Force.
I know it because we've enormous resources that are now deployed here in the South-East and in other parts of Queensland, including a massive boost from the Defence Forces and the Prime Minister will outline that in more detail.
I also know that we are very strong and that we have enormous community spirit. This event will test us as it is testing people in regional Queensland; they have prevailed and the people here in the South-East will equally prevail.
Ladies and gentlemen please keep updated throughout the day, this is a rapidly moving event. I thank everybody to date for their marvellous effort. We've got, I think, the hardest times are still ahead of us.
If I can invite the Prime Minister to join me and to make some comments. Prime Minister, thank you for being in Queensland today.
PM: Thank you. Thank you very much to the Premier for that introduction and can I say to the Premier, it's been a genuine privilege to attend the State Disaster Management Committee meeting this morning and to hear directly what great work is being done by emergency service personnel right throughout Queensland.
I'm here today with the Minister for Defence, Stephen Smith, with our minister, Joseph Ludwig who will concentrate on Queensland flood recovery. I'm joined by the Chief of the Defence Force, by my national security adviser and by the head of Emergency Management Australia.
And we have come to Queensland today to be in Brisbane to very visibly say that we are working with the people of Queensland shoulder to shoulder as they face this flood crisis.
Throughout the days of this flood crisis, the Australian Defence Force has done great work to support the people of Queensland. They have been out there each day as floodwaters have threatened. As the crisis has changed in its dimensions, we have stepped up Australian Defence Force efforts and we are taking a further step up today. We are bringing to bear an additional seven helicopters, that will mean that there are 15 helicopters available throughout Queensland and one of the biggest sources of work for those helicopters will be the very difficult, very urgent and occasionally heartbreaking task of search and rescue in the Lockyer Valley.
We are also ensuring that we have more C-130 aircraft available. These are the aircraft capable of carrying food and supplies in order to resupply parts of Queensland, townships in Queensland, that have become isolated and need food and supplies brought in by air.
We will continue to work with the people of Queensland through the Australian Defence Force. We have several hundred Australian Defence Force personnel on a notice ready to move, and during the course of the day more and more personnel will join the efforts in Brisbane to assist with tasks like sandbagging.
I understand that across Queensland and particularly in Ipswich and Brisbane today, there would be many frightened people anxious about what is going to happen next. To those people, I would say that the Australian Defence Force will be there providing support to the magnificent emergency personnel in Queensland, to be working with them, to support Queenslanders through this crisis.
And of course we know that there are many Australians who are waiting very anxiously for news of loved ones who haven't been located since the wall of water hit Toowoomba and moved through the Lockyer Valley. That's why such a priority is being put on making helicopters available for the search and rescue task
At the same time, we will continuing to support the people of Queensland with emergency payments and, of course, at the appropriate time, when flood waters enable people to go back to their homes, with grants to assist with recovery and rebuilding for families, for small businesses and primary producers.
But my task today is to give some information to those who might be leaving their homes now, who are evacuating now, and who need emergency assistance. This is the first initial payment available with later payments down the track when people are in recovery mode.
In South-East Queensland today, Centrelink offices are not staffed. Just like other major employers, the Commonwealth has enabled Centrelink staff, many of whom live in flood-affected areas themselves in Brisbane and Ipswich, to make appropriate arrangements for themselves and their family and to make sure they are not moving through streets and causing the kind of traffic and issues that the Premier referred to.
Therefore, the best way of people getting Centrelink assistance today is to ring 180 22 66 in order to access emergency payments and support. We will also be having people in recovery centres, for example, there are Centrelink staff in the recovery centre in Ipswich.
1,000 Centrelink staff are focusing on Queensland flood efforts and making sure that they are getting appropriate information to the people of Queensland. The system is working well, we have made around 10,000 emergency payments, that's $17 million that has got into people's pockets as the first initial payment to help people through and, as I say, there are later payments when people are looking to replace household contents, going back to their small business or their farm, engaging in clean-up and rebuilding.
I also want to alert people to the fact there are income support arrangements. There will obviously be people who cannot go about their ordinary work, employees who can't reach work, small business operators whose businesses are flooded and cannot be operated, primary producers who cannot get their goods to market. As I announced on Monday, there are special income support payments available for people in those circumstances and once again, they should access that 180 22 66 number.
Premier, can I say to you and through you to the people of Queensland, Queensland has already faced some dark days and there are dark days still ahead but Australia is standing with you, working with Queensland to help Queensland through this crisis and we will be there shoulder to shoulder not only for the days ahead but for the many months of recovery and rebuilding to come.
And Premier through you, can I also say a very big thanks to all of the emergency services personnel, to all of the volunteers, to all of the people in local communities, the local mayors, the local councillors who are doing such a good job to lead their communities during a very difficult period and difficult time. I've seen firsthand today at the committee meeting I've just attended, the professionalism and determination of the emergency services personnel of Queensland. It really is very heart warming to see it and my thanks go to everyone who is making a contribution.
JOURNALIST: Premier in Brisbane and Ipswich in particular, what are the worst affected areas at the moment?
In the Brisbane area the areas that we've started to see the first flooding are in the Jindalee reach of the river, in the Milton and Toowong areas and in the South Brisbane and Yeronga reach of the river, but this is rapidly changing. You can expect to see more and more suburbs join that list very quickly over the next couple of hours, and I'm sorry I can't give you a similar list for Ipswich but I can say in Ipswich we have 1,500 homes, so very significant sections of Ipswich, we're still getting final reports in from them. Can I just say that people in Ipswich last night really saw the water come up quite dramatically and there's more to come and that is what is what people in Brisbane will experience over the next 24 to 48 hours.
JOURNALIST: Can you confirm reports that there's been any looting in Ipswich and whether anyone has been forcibly evacuated (inaudible)
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER STEWART: Certainly we've dealt with a couple of instance of stealing in the Ipswich and another area in Gatton and Lockyer Valleys. We're following up on those but police have responded to those.
BLIGH: Sorry I should say, I understand there was one incident where police powers were used last night to protect the safety of one individual.
JOURNALIST: How long are you expecting the water levels to stick around Brisbane?The current advice is that the water levels, once they peak at about 4am tomorrow could last at around that level at least until Saturday before they start going down. But there will be many people for whom it doesn't go down enough for them to either access their home or their street for more days after that. So as these rise reasonably quickly, they will move on but it will take several days. That's why it's important not to be travelling around at the moment. If you decide to go off to the shops or to your workplace unnecessarily, you may find yourself there for many days. The best place to be at the moment is at home.
JOURNALIST: The Commissioner earlier said earlier there were a couple of families stranded on rooftops out at Lowood and there was an emergency rescue operation happening out there. Is there any update on that?
BLIGH: We have successfully rescued 8 people from roof tops in the Lowood area, I understand that involved a couple of families. A number of people off I think two or three roofs. So there was rapid rising water in Lowood last night around 3am and people got to safety on rooftops; early morning rescues have seen all of those people rescued safely.
I might just give one update because I've had a number of inquiries and my office has had a number of people ringing in. I think the heart of many Australians were very touched and concerned by images on Monday night of a family sitting on top of a white car and the car appeared to be sinking in the Toowoomba incident. I can advise that involved a mother and a father and a child. The mother and child have been located and are safe. The father is unfortunately one of those on the missing person list. So for all of those people who have been particularly concerned about that family, that was heartrending images and a great feeling of helplessness I think for everybody who saw it. I'm very relieved that the mother and child are safe, but as I said we are still searching for the father in that case.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what else are you going to be doing today, and are you staying up here indefinitely?
PM: Look I will be staying in Brisbane for a period of time. Today I am intending to be briefed by our Commander Luke Foster, who is commanding Queensland Operation Flood Assist for us. I will travel to Enoggera in order to talk to him and meet directly with Defence Force personnel. Obviously I would like to get out and about too, meeting the people of Queensland and talking to them as they deal with this flood situation. In terms of where that is possible, obviously we'll be working with Queensland and taking the necessary advice. To echo what the Premier is saying, obviously none of us want to distract from emergency efforts that are underway now, but I do want to be our speaking to people on the ground. I found in the visiting that I've done so far in Queensland that you always learn something from talking to people and their direct experience and then I can feed it back in to make sure that our government systems are responding directly to their needs.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) commit to flood mitigation funding for Queensland, perhaps an expansion of the Wivenhoe Dam, which obviously isn't quite big enough, and perhaps the Bureau of Meteorology who said yesterday that they're not up to scratch to identify what -
PREMIER BLIGH: Can I just comment on that because I was at that press conference, that is not what the Bureau of Meteorology said. What the Bureau of Meteorology said was that currently available technology is not capable of resolution to the degree that would enable an event like that to have been pin pointed. So I think it's very important to understand, our Bureau of Meteorology has world class, most cutting edge equipment, but the technology available, science is not quite at that stage yet. Science may well get there and protect us better in future, but it's not there yet.
JOURNALIST: Have you had an opportunity yet to sit back just for a moment and sort of cut yourself away from all the briefings that you get? Your electorate is going to severely impacted here, maybe even your home, have you had a chance to sit back and feel the emotion of what your residents and friends are probably going to be feeling?
PREMIER BLIGH: Along with many other people in Queensland my family is not immune to these experiences. My mother's house is in one of the low lying streets of West End, my brother and my sons evacuated her yesterday, she's now at my house and I'm very happy about that. So that's certainly a peace of mind for me and it's a reminder to me that there are thousands of other people going through exactly that experience.
My constituents will be severely impacted; the suburbs of East Brisbane, Norman Park, South Brisbane will all be flooded. We also have parts if Brisbane that weren't, that look completely different than they did in 1974, Southbank did not exist, we will have major areas of the city flooding in ways that we will find hard to predict and experience. So I can honestly to people, I do know what it's like to be out there worrying about your own family. This is a frightening time, but if we're all calm, if we all stick together, if we all reach out to each other, then I am absolutely confident that together with our emergency personnel and the army that we will prevail in this event.
JOURNALIST: There are reports that there are several children stuck in a child care centre out at Withcott and a couple of babies are there. Emergency Service hasn't got any closer to rescuing those children?
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER STEWART: No, certainly there is no flood activity in the Withcott area at the moment. I think what you're referring to -
JOURNALIST: Are the roads cut off?
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER STEWART: Certainly that is the case, the roads system out in the Lockyer Valley is tenuous to say the least and we're doing everything we can to address all of the calls for assistance we have.
JOURNALIST: Are there any emergency rescue operations currently underway that you can detail, like people standing on the roofs in Lowood, is there anything that you can explain to us now?
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER STEWART: Certainly there are situations that are situations happening right now in the Ipswich and Brisbane areas. I don't have particulars of those, but I do know that we're responding to multiple calls for assistance, as are all emergency service personnel.
JOURNALIST: Premier, you've told people to think about moving very early, but there's always going to be people that just simply won't until the water starts coming up in their homes. What's your advice to them, just to leave behind and get yourself out, forget about all those possessions?
PREMIER BLIGH: Without any double, we need to put human life first and there is every possibility that people will have very little time if they don't make early preparation. If you start to see water in your yard, get out, take your family and get to safety. This water could rise very, very quickly. We will have additional flood boats out and about rescuing people and getting people to safety. We have additional personnel arriving from other States today. But we need to make sure that we're working with them. We shouldn't be deliberately testing them, we should be doing everything in our own power to protect ourselves and leaving our emergency people to deal with the absolute extreme cases.
JOURNALIST: You said the Island may break away, can you also confirm reports that the Oxley's restaurant may sink and also the Wesley Hospital may need to be evacuated.
PREMIER BLIGH: Yes I can confirm Oxley's wharf restaurant is likely to sink some time likely to sink today. Salvage efforts were being made yesterday, but in the interest of safety those efforts have now stopped and it is nothing further can be done for that restaurant. And it is likely - it is however moored to the banks of the river with very strong steel cables.What is happening is those cables are pulling the restaurant down into the river. So it is very likely we will see that restaurant sink t into the river sometime today or overnight.
But it is on to the river bank and my understanding is it is likely to stay there. So the restaurant will be lost but we be don't expect to see it break but we will be monitoring that very carefully. In relation to the Wesley Hospital, there is no expectation that the Wesley Hospital will experience flooding, obviously because it's on quite a high hill.
Current work is being done just to ensure that the flooding is not likely to isolate that hospital. Obviously hospitals need to be places where we can get supplies and doctors in and out of and medical staff easily. So there is some work being done at the moment just to guarantee that we can continue to get road links into the Wesley Hospital in every possible scenario.
It's not possible to entirely rule out some evacuation of critical parents but that would be an absolute last resort, frankly because obviously that would have its own risks for those. So that is an unlikely but remote possibility.
JOURNALIST: Can you say what damage may be caused if the Island does break away from where it's situated at the moment?
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER STEWART:Certainly the options that are open to us is to allow the Island to sink actually and that is not a bad option as long as it stays in place and obviously the maritime experts are looking at and that's exactly the same with the Oxley Wharf restaurant. It is actually safer to have it in place sunk and to be able to repatriate it later
JOURNALIST: There were reports that Suncorp Stadium might be on fire after a transformer shorted out. Do you know anything about that?
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER STEWART: No, I can comment on that, I have no knowledge yet.
PREMIER BLIGH: Sorry, the one other issue I meant to raise which I think is important is I think understands that electricity and water do not mix and Energex will systemically throughout this event be having to shut down power in some parts of the city. They will only do to protect your lives, but it will cause inconvenience and it will make a difficult job of enduring this event more difficult.
And I understand that that is going to try people's patience, but you will only have your power disconnected if it is imperative to save your life and to protect you and your property from what might otherwise be catastrophic electrical events.
So you will be advised by Energex, Energex will be doing updates about areas of the city that will be cut off from electricity and obviously as soon as waters subside they will be reconnected as quickly as possible.
Many part of the CBD are being disconnected today, these are large buildings and they have substations in them, small substations generally in a lot of those large high rise CBD buildings and some of those substations located in basements will flood today and flood quickly and we need to disconnect that power so that means the whole buildings will be without power, so again, people should going to work without checking and going into the city because many of those buildings will be shut down.
JOURNALIST: Premier, the weather is so unpredictable, what are your plans for the rest of the day, are you based here or are you planning to be out and about?
PREMIER BLIGH: It's important, I think, for myself and our senior emergency people to be based here at Disaster Co-ordination Centre and be monitoring events, not only here in Brisbane, but across a very large area region of Queensland. As you heard from my earlier report, as massive as the event in Brisbane may be, we have equally significant events in places throughout regional Queensland, escalating situations in Chinchilla, in Texas, in, in Goondiwindi, so we will be monitoring those today as well.
Like the Prime Minister I will be looking for the first reasonable and available opportunity to be out talking to people who have affected by this flood. But I think Queenslanders want make sure that the person in charge is in charge today that's where I intend to be.
JOURNALIST: Are there any plans to plans to open any more evacuation centres around Brisbane?
PREMIER BLIGH: The Lord Mayor advises me that the two mayor evacuation centres for Brisbane will be the RNA Showgrounds and the QE2 Stadium, but he is equally now working as I speak with a number of major churches in around the Brisbane area, all of whom have facilities such as halls, in local communities often ground where smaller evacuation facilities may be set up, so that process is happening now.
I should say that happened spontaneous overnight in Ipswich. There are official evacuation centres in Ipswich but spontaneously local communities have got together, opened up a local church hall, took their sleeping bags down and kept everybody safe, so I thank them for their, for showing a bit in ingenuity there and that's made a big difference to the effort in Ipswich
JOURNALIST: Premier, can I just ask, the staff that are coming forward today are they volunteering to help out or are you asking them to and this isn't their primary role as the defence of nation, so how are they responding to going out and helping people?
CDF HOUSTON: Our people are always very very pleased to assist in any disaster response situation, particularly when there's a major emergency such as this. We obviously have permanent people, we also have a large number of reservists who will be involved and as we go forward you will see more and more soldiers out there doing the hard yards and they give their work very willingly, they see it as a very important part of their function as a member of the Defence Force. And I must say I am very very proud of everything they've done thus far and we will be there for the long haul and we will assist as much as we can in the days and weeks ahead. Thank you.
PREMIER BLIGH: Can I also, Angus Houston's comments that the Prime Minister and I were in Theodore the other day with Major General Mick Slater. Mick Slater and I were talking to a number of Defence personnel who were there and he asked them to put up their hand if they were on leave and every hand went up: So these were people who were otherwise on leave and they had come back off leave and were there willingly and very enthusiastically helping in Theodore.
Can I just add that while we are managing an immediate emergency response in a number of places here in South East and the South West, we know there are number of towns who are now over their flood experience and moving very much into the recovery and rebuilding phase. Can I say to all of those towns, Major General Mick Slater and his duties remain with his focus on them. So as Brisbane experiences this, the recovery and rebuilding process, under the leadership of Major General Mick Slater, continues full steam ahead. So we are not delaying that or being diverted by these events in Brisbane. Mick Slate has been already this week out in places like Bundaberg and Emerald and will continue to do so.
The rebuilding effort is happening alongside the emergency effort here in the South East. So to regional Queensland, nothing is being delayed because of these events here in Brisbane. We are looking continuously to rebuild regional Queensland as soon as humanly possible.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what assistance will be the Government give for flood mitigation and preventing this sort of disaster happening again?
PM: Well our assistance obviously flows in various stages as the flood hits people and then we move into the recovery stage. Under our Natural Disaster Relief arrangements, what we do, firstly, we provide the emergency payments that I've referred to, then we provide assistance to households, to small businesses, to primary producers, households to deal with the loss of household content and effects, small businesses and primary producers to provide clean-up money and then concessional loans so they can get back on their feet.
Apart from that we've triggered the income support arrangements that I spoke about earlier. And then we move of course to dealing with the infrastructure damage that flood waters have done. We aren't in a position for all parts of Queensland to assess that yet.
We can start doing assessments as flood waters subside and we can see what's happened to roads, to bridges, to essential community infrastructure.
Under our arrangements we can move to better what was there before, they are not simply replacement arrangements, we can provide better than was there before. So for example if we were rebuilding a levee, then there might be a need to make that at a better state in order to resist flood waters.
But all of those assessment are going to have to be done as flood waters subside. It's going to be a major major task, assessing that infrastructure and recovery need. I am pleased that we were able to make Mick Slater available to lead the recovery work here of course, a very senior and distinguished member of our Australian Defence Force.
We will continue as we move to that phase of infrastructure r building to be working in partnership with the Queensland Government and with local government so that we can get the infrastructure back up and in appropriate state for the people of Queensland. That's why I say the task of Federal Government is to stand shoulder to shoulder in these difficult days. But also for the many many months of recovery and rebuilding to come.
JOURNALIST: Premier, will you be expanding Wivenhoe Dam and do you require Federal assistance for that?
PREMIER BLIGH: I think it would be helpful for me to give you some information to understand the enormity of what is on our back door step by way of water. In 1974, when there was no dam and no dam wall, the inflowing into that catchment area and down the Brisbane River were about 1.5 million litres of water. What is now coming through dam is 2.5 million litres of water. Obviously at the end of this event we will do a significant review of Wivenhoe capacity, but I think we need to be realistic about whether any dam could hold back all of 2.5 million litres of water.
What we do know is that dam wall was not there, 2.5 million litres would be coming through Brisbane. So we already have a very significant mitigation effect for this event from the Wivenhoe Dam. We will be looking to assess the capability and performance of the Wivenhoe Dam after this event. We will similarly be looking at sensible, practical flood mitigation across the State.
But I should make point that a number of the river systems that have flooded here in Queensland already have large dams on those rivers. The Emerald flood, for example, the Fairbairn dam is on the system. In the Burnett, the Paradise Dam is there, it was built in 2005. Here in Brisbane, the Wivenhoe Dam and two on the system that went into the St George area.
So there are dams on these river systems. Dams do floods. Dams can help mitigate and minimise some of the impact that might have happened without them. But a dam cannot stop the sort of flood that is coming across the plains the Lockyer Valley and the catchment area into the Wivenhoe system.
JOURNALIST: Premier, apologies if you've already answered this question, but last week there was an estimate of around 200,000 people affected by this flood crisis. Now it's obviously affecting both the south-west and south-east, do you have an update on the numbers? Would it be close to a million do you think?
BLIGH: Clearly we'll have to do updates and I'm sorry I don't have that figure just yet, we've still got unfolding circumstances. But in Brisbane for example the current modelling predicts 19,700 homes affected. If you took an average of three people in each house, that's directly affected with their properties completely flooded, you're starting to get some very big numbers; similar sorts of 4,000 homes in Ipswich. But when we say affected we also have places where they don't have floodwaters but they are completely cut off. They have not been able to leave the town in some cases now for two and a half weeks and we've been flying supplies, medical supplies and food into them. So these floods have an effect whether they're in your backyard coming through your floorboards or whether you are just isolated and unable to leave your town.
So we will certainly be looking at updating those numbers but the other point I would make is that all of the modelling made earlier, the city of Brisbane and the city of Ipswich are just vastly different than they were in 1974. The city of Brisbane is a major capital, home to more than a million people in the direct area, so there is going to be a very big effect.
JOURNALIST: Premier it's only early but is the water responding to those computer models that the projections are based on? Is it doing exactly what the computer thought it would?
BLIGH: To date the predictions are proving to be very accurate, particularly about river levels. The hydrologists predicted that Ipswich would get to somewhere between 18 and 19 metres around midnight last night, it got to about 17.5 and by 4am this morning it was 18.9, and so within a couple of hours they're very high levels of precision. In terms of where the flood water is going, the early flood water seems to be going according to prediction but we really have to see I think this afternoon as it starts to increase the pace at which it moves. And if you're never anywhere any of the coloured lines on those maps, even if you're not directly in that area, you should be ready to take precautions and be ready to move if you need to.
JOURNALIST: There's been examples of panic buying, does that sort of concern you when so much of the rescue response is so well organised with evacuation centres being set up? And secondly when you have so many organisations and people pitching in a working together, how do you react when you hear reports of looting?
BLIGH: Look the people of Brisbane and Ipswich have had a relatively short amount of time to prepare for this event and if they've gone out and stocked up their homes with groceries then that was exactly the right thing to. The last thing we want is supermarkets full of food and people completely isolated without food and unable to access it. So for many people going out yesterday and stocking up their food supplies, getting their prescriptions filled et cetera was a very prudent preparation to make.
So I would necessarily assume that because supermarket shelves are empty that people have been irresponsible or panic buying. It is appropriate in these events, shops are likely to be closed for many days. People may not have floodwater in their own homes but may be cut off from getting out of their neighbourhood and getting to supplies.
So if people have got enough supplies in their home then we don't need to use emergency resources and send the SES or other people in by flood boat to supply them. So it's actually smart thinking and as I said I am happy if there's empty supermarket shelves, it means right now that people have grocery supplies in their homes.
In relation to looting, look I don't think there's any word bad enough for the people who do these sorts of things. These people are out of their home in the most dire of circumstances. They've had to flee in the middle of the night. They've had little to take with them and whatever is left in their homes I want that there when they get home. So anybody who sees any of this sort of activity, please report to it the police. Police are out and about patrolling and they will be in the days to come to prevent this sort of activity. I think the entire community reacts with disgust when we see people take advantage of those people who are suffering this event.
JOURNALIST: Premier we've heard about the possible outbreak of disease following these floods. Has preparation been put into place for this?
BLIGH: Across Queensland we've had a very major supply operation over the last week of additional Tetanus shots, Hepatitis B and supplies of mosquito repellent because obviously in some parts we're worried about mosquito borne diseases.
So these supplies have been out there, doctors and health centres and clinics have been ensuring that people who are involved in the clean-up are assisted to know what they should be doing; obviously it's things like rubber gloves as well.
I should say that as the clean-up starts people should going into muddy, wet areas in thongs, it can mean you're going to be standing on glass and metal and often it's those cuts after a flood that make people more at risk of serious infection.
To date while we have seen some of those sorts of incidents they've been relatively minor, we haven't seen any large scale public health issues. So the one other message that I did want to get out and if you guys can help that would be great.
It seems completely ridiculous that I would be saying to people in this circumstance that we should conserve water. We have massive amounts of water flowing past our doorsteps, however it is possible that our water treatment plants could be affected by this flood and we may see some issues around drinking water in days to come. So people should be conserving water so that those water treatment plants that are working can continue to supply the volumes that we need. Those people who can get bottled in we will be able to get supplies of bottled water through the ADF.
So it's not any reason to panic, but now's not time, as crazy as it sounds, now is not a time to be wasting water because we don't quite know what might happen with our water supply as water treatment plants become affected. We have more than one water treatment plant in Brisbane, they won't all be affected, but we might have a limiting of supply in the days after. So please don't go drawing on that water supply any more than you need to, as strange as that might seem.
PM: Can I, just to add two factual things just prompted by the various questions. The Federal Government has triggered our health incident centre so that will obviously work alongside Queensland on any necessary public health response. And as the Premier said lots of people did go and stock up the groceries yesterday, that meant a lot of people were therefore using ATMs, and there have been reports of ATMs that are out of cash.
We're aware of those reports and the Reserve Bank will be working with our banking system with obviously the individual banks to ensure that there are cash supplies, but it is possible that people could go to a location today where they normally go to access cash and find that the ATM doesn't have cash for them, and if they needed to access cash then obviously they may have to look at another ATM to do that. But the Reserve Bank will be working with our banks on ensuring that cash supply is maintained.
BLIGH: Ok folks, thank you very much. We will do another 2 hourly update at 11:30am in this room.
Thank you.



GILBERT: Thank you Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank very much for your time. A difficult day, the Premier said that the number missing are now 90, it's terribly sad.
PM: It is terribly sad and I do fear that as a nation we have to prepare ourselves for some more bad news and for a rising death toll.
These are very very dangerous flood waters. We are going to have people on the search and rescue task today, we've had the Australian Defence Force right throughout the flood crisis working with the people of Queensland and as the crisis has changed we've stepped up efforts.
We're stepping up again, there are seven more helicopters that are going to be available, bringing to 15 the number in Queensland and many of those are going to be on the difficult and sometimes heartbreaking work of search and rescue.
We're also bringing into play more C-130 aircraft, they're the aircraft that can move supplies around for isolated townships that might be running short of food or vital supplies, and we do have several hundred personnel on a notice to move should that prove necessary.
GILBERT: But the next 24 hours is obviously going to be a gruesome task for the police and the military out there in the Lockyer Valley?
PM: I think all of would want to send our best wishes to the magnificent emergency services personnel, professionals and volunteers who are doing such a great job in Queensland and of course our Defence Force always does a great job, they will do a great job here.
I will be briefed today by a local Commander Luke Foster who is leading our efforts in Queensland for Queensland Operation Flood Assist and I am here too to talk to the Premier, to attend the State Management Disaster Committee. We've been working well together, State efforts, Federal efforts, shoulder to shoulder, side by side and I want to make sure that that continues.
GILBERT: We know the river has broken its banks now and the projection is four and a half metres today, five and a half metres tomorrow. When you look at the river and this debris, it's hard to comprehend isn't it?
PM: It is hard to comprehend and the numbers of households affected in Ipswich and Brisbane are truly mind boggling numbers, very very large, but we're going to get through this Kieran, we're going to get through it by working together, that's the Australian way and so my message here to the people of Queensland would be we will be there with you for the many many months that it's going to take to recover from this.
And we're going to get through this by everybody staying calm, doing what they need to do, listening to the instructions of Emergency Services personnel and also just going that extra yard to show a bit of care or concern for the neighbours. If there's someone in your street you're worried about, maybe an older Australian and you haven't seen them for a while, just go knock on the door and just make sure they're ok.
GILBERT: And is that the advice that you're receiving at this stage that most people are listening to the directions they're being given and that people are lending a hand?
PM: I think most people are showing a lot of common sense and I've had the opportunity to have a brief word with a few people this morning, I was even told a story about people in supermarkets yesterday, huge queues as people stocked up on supplies, but a real atmosphere where people were talking to each other, sharing the occasional joke and that's something so Australian, isn't it? That we in part get our way through by making sure there's a bit of larrikin good humour involved.
GILBERT: Absolutely, you need it in times like this and it's just a bit ironic isn't it with the wet weather the way it is today, the sun out for the first time in days, if not weeks.
PM: It is a somewhat eerie feeling to be standing in brilliant sunshine, but to know that all of this is happening, even as we stand here bathed in sunshine.
The nation is going to have some grieving to do and today we've got some work to do as well, to assist people to prepare and to keep with the search and rescue, there are Australians desperately waiting for news.
GILBERT: I know you've got a busy day ahead, I'll let you go but, how long are you going to stay in Brisbane, do you think?
PM: Look, I will be making arrangements as I go, there is obviously a degree of unpredictability about what will happen next, I mean we're trying to give people the best possible information, but this has been a fast evolving crisis and so I'll work that out as I go, but I do want to be here today, seeing Premier Bligh, meeting with the State Disaster Management Committee, meeting with our local Commander of Defence Force efforts.
GILBERT: Well good luck with it, thanks Prime Minister, appreciate it.
PM: Thanks very much, thanks Kieran.



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard and Acting Attorney-General, Stephen Smith today announced further assistance for primary producers and small businesses affected by flooding in Carnarvon and the Upper Gascoyne in Western Australia.
In December, WA Premier, Colin Barnett wrote to the Prime Minister requesting $15,000 grants for small business and primary producers. 
The Prime Minister agreed to this request and on 7 January announced the activation of a joint Commonwealth State Government assistance package of clean-up and recovery grants worth up to $15,000.
Earlier this week, the Acting Attorney-General wrote to the Western Australian Premier advising him that the Commonwealth Government stood ready to consider any further requests for assistance from the State Government.
The Prime Minister has since agreed to a subsequent request from Acting WA Premier, Dr Kim Hames, to make a further $10,000 available.
This brings the total amount for the joint Commonwealth State Government assistance grants package for clean-up and recovery to $25,000. 
These one-off Category C Grants provided under Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA), will cover primary producers and small businesses in Ashburton, Carnarvon, Exmouth, Murchison, Northampton, Shark Bay and the Upper Gascoyne - areas that have been declared natural disaster zones.
The new package will now be up to $25,000 and consist of:
 * 	Category C Tier 1 clean-up and recovery grants of up to $5,000, not requiring proof of damage and expenditure; and
 * 	Tier 2 grants of up to $20,000 for both small business and primary producers, including those in agricultural and pastoral industries, requiring proof of damage and expenditure.
The new assistance is in addition to the joint Commonwealth State payments and support that were activated in flood-affected regions by the WA Government on 20 December 2010.
The grants will help primary producers with general clean up costs including the removal of debris and dead livestock, purchase of fodder and replacement trading stock and repairs to damaged equipment and property access. They will also help small businesses affected by flooding to conduct repairs and resume trading as soon as possible.
Existing joint Commonwealth and Western Australian Government NDRRA assistance being provided includes:
 * 	Emergency assistance payments for people who have suffered personal hardship or distress;
 * 	Interest rate subsidies for small businesses and primary producers as part of loans up to $150,000;
 * 	Professional advice grants of up to $1,500 and freight subsidies for primary producers (up to 50 per cent for the cost of transporting livestock, fodder or water for livestock or building or fencing equipment or machinery as a direct result of a natural disaster);
 * 	Restoration of public infrastructure; and
 * 	Certain counter disaster operations.
People can apply for assistance or seek further information by contacting Primary producers: Department of Food and Agriculture - 1800 198 231 (primary producers) and (08) 9323 9552 (Small Business and other enquiries).



PM: Thanks very much and can I say it's an absolute privilege to be here today. I'm joined by our local member, Shane Newman, his electorate is called Blair and in current circumstances it's probably better to say that we are standing his patch here in Ipswich. I'm also joined by the local mayor Paul Pisasale and I thank him very much for all of the efforts that he and his team are going to.
And when I say it's absolute privilege to be here I really mean it, I've had the opportunity to just go through a major evacuation centre here and floodwaters can wash things away, but what they can't possibly take away is the spirit of Australia and Queensland that's just on display here. I've met people who are looking at photos of their houses, relatives have gone there and taken a photo and they're underwater and they're just digesting the news. I met a young girl who told me that nana was in hospital, but I've met people who are smiling and pulling together in the most difficult of circumstances, the overwhelming impression from going round is that people are there, they're together, they're very grateful for what the volunteers are doing and they're going to pull through this.
I just on the way out talked to a family, they've got flood waters in their house, but what they're saying is the main thing  -  we're all right, the kids are all right, we're all together and we're going to get through it. It really is just a fantastic Australian spirit, Queensland spirit here on display in Ipswich.And we know here and Brisbane and right around Queensland, so many people are still battling with flood waters. This is a major disaster, still doing a lot of damage, many people out of their homes, many people not sure what state their homes are in, many people separated from family and friends, many still anxiously waiting news of what may have happened with loved ones that they can't contact yet. So this disaster is still continuing but so is the spirit of pulling together.
I did want to take this opportunity to just explain some of the things that the Australian Defence Force is doing today to assist the people of Queensland and also some of the things that are happening with our Centrelink workers. In terms of the things that need to happen today that are really important to support the people of Queensland we have a company, an emergency company of soldiers that are working in the Lockyer Valley, they're working on the search efforts, that's around 120 soldiers and they do have with them bushmasters, which are vehicles that can go through some very heavy terrain. The focus of that work is search, that's very urgent work, very important work.
And then when we look more broadly in Queensland re-supply issues are obviously critical and you've got so many communities that are struggling. Struggling because they're cut off with flood waters, struggling because people are in evacuation centres and they need things.
And so in order to meet that need we have aircraft that are making runs today, we have swung into effect two C-17s, they're the really big aircraft that are capable of moving food and equipment around. They've made a run into Townsville today, two of those planes and they will now be used to bring some equipment from Townsville to Brisbane that may come into use and that's some of the vehicles that people may have seen in Defence Force footage. They're called LARCs and they can literally go on the ground then cross water and then go back on the ground. So they can be of use in these circumstances.
At the same time we've had one of the C-130s doing a re-supply run into Bundaberg. We've now increased the number of helicopters to 19, that means they can be doing search work, they can be ferrying people around as needed, people who need to get from place to place and they can certainly be used to assist with re-supply.
We're making available the Bushmasters, and heavy vehicles that the Defence Force has here in Queensland in Enoggera Barracks, that's in the order of more than a dozen Bushmasters and there are also trucks there, particularly those very heavy vehicles that can get through water and get through some very rough terrain.
At every stage of this unfolding disaster, the Australian Defence Force has been there, it's been increasing efforts as needed and those efforts are increasing today. Needs are changing over time and they'll continue to change as we move in to clean up and recovery they'll change again and of course the Australian Defence Force will continue to be there, working with the people of Queensland and supporting the Emergency Services personnel who are just doing such remarkable work.
I did also want to say just some things about Centrelink and then I'll be very happy to take some questions. Centrelink has faced real challenges in supporting people in Queensland and particularly south east Queensland, because the Centrelink headquarters like many CBD buildings in Brisbane has had flood issues itself and people cannot work in large numbers from that Centrelink headquarters, so that has been a challenge that Centrelink has had to work its way through. At the same time individual Centrelink staff have been confronted by their own personal challenges, a number of them are in flood areas, I mean they live in Brisbane, they live in Ipswich and they themselves are dealing with flood waters for themselves and their families.
We've also had Centrelink staff that we deployed to places like Dalby and Condamine to help the communities there and they now can't get back to their homes and their families even though their homes and their families are battling flood waters. So I should acknowledge and I think we all should acknowledge this has been a particularly challenging time for the staff of Centrelink and they're doing their best in very difficult circumstances.
They are quadrupling the number of people that they've got on the ground today so that there will be Centrelink staff in evacuation centres around Queensland, obviously in south east Queensland. Centrelink staff who will be available to work with the kind of people I've just met with to help them claIm initially the emergency payment, that's the first $1000 for adults and $400 for children, that's the emergency money we want to get into people's pockets. And then of course over time as people go into clean up and recovery there are other payments that people will be able to access, but getting that dollar into people's pockets when they're in circumstances like this is really important and that's why there'll be Centrelink staff in every evacuation centre.
At the same time the call number is operating, that's 180 22 66.  We are now swinging in from other Federal Government agencies extra staff to work with the Centrelink staff, we've double the number of processing staff to 800, we've got call centre capacity working and to give you a flavour of the demand the call centre from right around Queensland took 15,000 calls yesterday. So we are talking about major demands being fielded and that tells us there are a lot of people who need emergency relief and that's why we've got the staff there taking their calls.
Already they've processed more than 20,000 payments, they've paid out, that's cash into people's pockets, more than $24 million, but the fact that they got 15,000 calls yesterday shows that there's a lot lot more to do and that's why we're backstopping Centrelink and why Centrelink is making more people available on the ground, even in circumstances where its head office in Brisbane has got its own CBD-style flood issues and individual staff members are confronting some of their own personal flooding challenges and problems.
So that's the view from what I've seen and had meetings about today, to make sure is in action for the people of Queensland, but I do just want to say and I'm going to be out meeting some more people here in Ipswich, talking to people in Queensland, the overwhelming sentiment you get is of people pulling together, volunteers coming together, people supporting each other, of people even in the darkest days looking on the bright side and trying to find a word of comfort for each other.
I do just want to conclude by saying congratulations to all the volunteers, I've met some today from Red Cross, the volunteers that we always rely on, SES all those volunteers, to young Kobi I met today, a young man who's just a young boy who's brought himself into the centre to help play with the kids that have houses that are flooded and are in the evacuation centre.
I mean it's remarkable to see that community spirit. I know people were sandbagging yesterday when I went to an evacuation centre in Brisbane yesterday that had so many volunteers that they were just asking some of them to sit and have a chat and so that again is the spirit of Queensland really on display and you're not going to see that taken away no matter how hard hit people are by this disaster.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister people who are still looking to help out in this situation and volunteer, especially here in Ipswich, what can they actually be doing?
PM: Well there are going to be all sorts of tasks for people, there are obviously things in evacuation centres, picking up supplies, we've seen people running in supplies while we've been here, making the food because feeding a lot of people takes a lot of effort, we all know that and that's going to need to be sustained for a period of time. 
And we know that floodwaters subside, people are going to be out of their homes for a considerable period as clean-up happens and so it's not just about helping out in the first few days, it's going to be about helping out for weeks and months to come.  And so it can't be the same set of volunteers who are doing it today, who are doing it continuously for months and months ahead, they're going to need other volunteers to swing in and give them a bit of relief.
JOURNALIST: The scale of this disaster is obviously enormous.  We're hearing their personal stories today Prime Minister, what effect does that have on you?
PM: Look it really does just warm my heart, sometimes break my heart, to hear some of the personal stories.  People who have been through circumstances, one woman we met in Bundaberg, flooded there, now she's in Ipswich, flooder here, amazing.
People who are just looking at the devastation in their homes and trying to think how they're going to deal with this and how they're going to come back from this. But everyone you see is basically saying, c'mon, someone else is worse off than me, so they're looking on the bright side of it.
I was in Brisbane yesterday, met a young boy called Noah, he was showing me that he rescued a caterpillar from the rising floodwaters, doing his bit, but when young Noah was showing me that caterpillar I thought well there are kids that age that have lost their lives in this, so young Noah's still there, helping the caterpillars out, I'm not an expert on how much assistance caterpillars need in times of flood, maybe they need a little bit to get to high ground, but the real tragedy is that we've lost some Australian lives and we've lost some young kids.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) large structure being steered down the Brisbane River this morning and under the Gateway Bridge?
PM: Yes I am, I've been this morning for the meeting of the emergency services personnel who meet and brief Anna, Premier Anna Bligh each morning, and they have talked about the work that they'd need to and it's been some pretty extraordinary work because of big structures floating down the Brisbane River.  We've had some sizeable sections of walkways that came adrift then had to be maneuvered by tugboats so that they safely got down the river and out to sea and didn't do any major infrastructure damage along the way.
Our Defence Force has actually helped a little bit too, there have been some of the big structures in the Brisbane River, big boats, that have needed assistance with their mooring, there's been a continuing issue people would be aware of with the craft that's called The Island to make sure that it doesn't break its moorings and start catapulting down the river and doing damage, so the Defence Force has been helping with some of that work.
JOURNALIST: You've said since early on in this crisis that there will be Federal funds available, significant funds. Given how much it's escalated over the last couple of days, will there be needed a re-tweaking of the Budget even? 
PM: We will do what we need to, to make sure that funds are available for the people of Queensland. This is an unfolding disaster now, people out of their homes, some people I met in this evacuation centre still don't know if their homes have been flooded. So this is still unfolding and we're in the immediate phase of responding to people's needs, that's why that emergency payment is there to respond to people's immediate needs and then there's going to be a (inaudible) building and I understand that as Prime Minister, and we're going to be working with the people of Queensland, brick by brick as we rebuild this State.
It's going to take many months, it's going to take a lot of dollars, and we're going to organise the Federal Budget so we can be there providing that assistance for the people of Queensland. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Budget surplus?
PM: Look we are going to make the choices necessary to make sure we're supporting the people of Queensland, make sure we're bringing the Budget to surplus. Australians everyday of their lives make choices about how they're going to spend their own money and many of them have made choices in recent days to make a donation, so I think people understand about budgets and priorities and choices. We are going to make supporting the people of Queensland a priority.
JOURNALIST: Still back in 2012-13?
PM: We will bring the Budget back to surplus in 2012-13, but we are going to meet the needs of Queensland as well, we are going to organise the Federal Budget so we are meeting the needs of Queensland in extensive rebuilding, bridge by bridge, road by road, facility by facility.  There's going to be a lot of work to do, we're going to meet the needs of the people of Queensland and we're going to rearrange everything in the Federal Budget so we can do, and we can bring the Budget to surplus in 2012-13.
Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard at the evacuation centre, I know you've been here the last couple of days, when you look around the crèche, the stack of clothes, the books, all of the things that have been organised, Salvation Army, is it a humbling experience for you?
PM: It's a really heart-warming experience. I was here yesterday and let me tell you kid's corner has really kicked on since yesterday because of the work of volunteers.
I've been in three other evacuation centres today and the message in all of them is that volunteers have just stepped forward, Australians of all walks of life, from the smallest contributions to the biggest contributions, all pulling together. It really is tremendously heart-warming.
HOST: You think back obviously the last time a capital city was hit by a disaster of this scale was Darwin in 1974, here we are in 2011, it's Brisbane now. For you what does it mean to be Prime Minister at a time like this?
PM: What it means to be Prime Minister is I've got an obligation to lead in difficult times and that means direct assistance to the people that I'm seeing in these evacuation centres, making sure that our Centrelink system, our payment system is working for people and we've paid out more than $24 million and that's just the first emergency money in people's pocket, there's going to be lots of payments and support to come. It means working with our Defence Force to get the assets of our Defence Force out, we've got helicopters doing searches, we've got aircraft and helicopters moving the things that people need, resupplies that are vital to communities, and all of that expertise of the Defence Force in water purification that comes in so vitally needed at a time like this.
So it's important to be making sure all of that is running well for the people who need the assistance, it's important to be here offering reassurance and it's going to be important to be here for every step of the rebuilding.
HOST: Have you been stung by the scale of this, seemingly it's gotten worse and worse day after day?
PM: Size, scale, the dimensions of the loss, the loss of Australian life, the loss of children's lives, the flash flooding that we've seen with the powerful destruction of the wall of water, all of that has been startling. And then scenes like this one are amazing in their own way, Aussies coming together, doing it tough but at the same time looking after each other, it's fantastic.
HOST: I noticed you were just given a finger-painting by one of the young kids, have you worked out which way's up and which way's down?
PM: When I studied it closely it does have a signature in the bottom, like all great works of art it has a signature in the corner.
HOST: Just finally I noticed your boot's mud spattered, it's almost become the calling card of Queensland hasn't it?
PM: Yes this is Ipswich mud, I was out in the CBD of Ipswich today which was inundated by water, but the water has cleared in some parts and people are down to the painful task of trying to hose that mud out and get their shops back up and running. But even in doing that task, volunteers have come forward to help businesspeople who are literally sweeping filth out of their stores. I met a lady today and there's an arcade of shops there, they've had volunteers working with them all day to clean those shops, help those businesspeople and those employees get their businesses back running, get those employees back to work. I mean that's a real spirit of volunteerism right round the nation, people here in Queensland looking after each other, people around the nation sending in their donations, it's just wonderful.
HOST: Another busy day ahead for you tomorrow, I wish you well, thank you Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you very much. 



PM: I'm here at Amberley today, I was actually here yesterday to talk to some of our magnificent Australian Defence Force Officers about the work that's been happening right here from Amberley. You can see behind me one of the huge planes that has been used to move supplies around Queensland, so important at this time to make sure that townships that have been isolated can still get vital supplies and it's here in Amberley too that our helicopters have worked from, engaging in search and rescue tasks, as well as helping people with supplies and medical evacuations when necessary.
And I did want to say publicly, what I said privately when I had the opportunity to talk to people here yesterday, which is a very big thank you for the work that has happened from here. There are really amazing, courageous stories about the work that has happened from here, including rescuing people off roof tops and if I can just share one story  -  I talked yesterday to a person who had been on one of the helicopters following the worst of the flash flooding from Toowoomba, who has gone in rescued an elderly lady from a house filled with water, got her onto the helicopter in circumstances where there was concern about a live electricity wire. So just goes to show the kind of truly courageous work that has happened from here.
I have also over the last few days, as I've had the opportunity to talk to people in Queensland talk to the Chief of the Defence Force, Angus Houston, and the Minister for Defence, Stephen Smith. And following those discussions I've decided now is the right time to dramatically increase the number of Defence personnel who are working in Queensland to assist with the Queensland floods.
Across Queensland today communities are starting to move to recovery and clean up. That means people are going back home, to their businesses, finding a lot of filth, a lot of muck, a lot of garbage, that they need to work their way through, get cleaned up, so that they can start getting life back to normal.
So to assist in the next phase of the work we are going to dramatically increase the number of Defence Force personnel to 1, 200. Now this is the biggest deployment for a natural disaster since Cyclone Tracy. Now what those Defence Force personnel will be doing in coming weeks is in the following general areas. There of course will be a command structure, the joint task force that has been in operation, will continue to be the command structure and will work closely with the Queensland authorities.
There will be a general stream of cleanup work, so that is Defence Force personnel getting out, helping with the mopping, the hosing, the removal of debris and rubbish that needs to happen so communities can start getting back on their feet and getting back to something like normal.
There will be a continuation of this aviation effort, we will still need to be moving supplies around and there may still be a need for medical evacuations and the like and obviously search activities are continuing.
There will be an engineering effort. The Defence Force has an engineering capacity and those engineers can work alongside Queensland experts to do things like assess the structural integrity of roads, to assist with urgent repairs, to help vehicles and people get moving through again, to assist with things like creating temporary bridges if that's required, to get people moving through.
There will also be some specialist services provided, our Defence Force for example has a number of psychologists who are used to dealing with people who have been involved in very traumatic incidents and those psychologists will be made available to assist in the coming weeks to assist the people of Queensland as they are cleaning up from and recovering from this event.
Now the coming weeks there's going to be a lot to deal with, there's a lot of dirt, a lot of filth, a lot of mess that needs to be cleaned up and these 1, 200 Defence personnel will be there as part of that cleanup effort in the coming weeks. But what of course we know is that the work of recovery is going to take months and months and months beyond that and so I will be here, the Government will be here, and of course we will be working through to assist the people of Queensland in those months and months of reconstruction.
And that effort will be lead by Mick Slater, a very senior Defence Force Officer that we made available to lead those recovery efforts, because of the kind of expertise developed in Defence on those big recovery style tasks.
So there's a lot to go through, we've been through some very difficult days and there's still a lot to go through in the weeks and months that lie ahead. What I can say to the people of Queensland in those weeks and months is that we'll be giving it 100 per cent, we'll be giving it more than 100 per cent to help people through in this period.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: How long will the deployment be current, how long will it take, as long as it takes or what?
PM: Look, we're making this deployment available and we view these kind of tasks as lasting at least a number of weeks, and then there will be the recovery effort that Mick Slater will need and there will be times that Defence is assisting with that recovery effort, for example you can imagine the engineering expertise that I've spoken about would still be needed during that period. But the task of cleaning, actually getting the filth out, getting the debris off the streets, getting the rubbish dealt with, that is obviously the work of the coming weeks.
JOURNALIST: Where are they coming from, the Defence personnel?
PM: These Defence personnel will come from Queensland and also as necessary beyond Queensland. We do have Defence personnel here, we obviously have them here at Amberley and we have them in Enoggera, and then Defence personnel will be moved from interstate as necessary. The Minister for Defence Stephen Smith will also be speaking publically later today and will be talking through some of those details.
JOURNALIST: It's certainly going to take a lot of manpower isn't it, from what you've seen, the amount of devastation?
PM: Well yes, from what I've seen the amount of devastation, it's going to take a lot of work and I'm sure many Australians have seen those images of people standing in their homes standing ankle deep, knee deep, even worse in filthy water, filthy mud, surveying the scene trying to work out how they're going to clean-up from here, so making available the biggest deployment of Defence personnel for a natural disaster since Cyclone Tracey is going to be a real help.
JOURNALIST: The Queensland Premier's been quite emotional, especially yesterday about this, how have you been coping?
PM: Look this is a tough, tough time and a tough time for everyone involved, I've heard so many really heart-warming stories, heart-rending stories, people who have just been through so much loss. I've met with people whose homes have been destroyed, who are wondering what they're going to do next, people who are worried about relatives, about neighbours, what's happened to them. It's been a really tough time and people bearing a lot of weight on their shoulders and our thoughts are really with those people who continue to bear the weight of not knowing what's happened with loved ones and that's absolutely got to be the worst because whilst cleaning up your devastated home is a big, big job and you can clean-up, what you can't do is you can't bring someone back if they've really been in danger in this flood period. So people are grieving, I think the nation's grieving with them, and we're all really focussed on the search efforts and answering those questions for people who are still waiting for news.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you're about to tour some of the worst affected areas, what, I mean your reason for going to see it first-hand?
PM: My reason for going firstly to see the devastation first-hand, because that's going to help us maximise the efforts that we're making to assist with the recovery, the more we can understand about the damage that has happened, the better we can do that. But there's another big reason for going and it's the reason I went to so many evacuation centres yesterday, which is to just be there and reassure people that we're going to be there working alongside them for the long days, the long months ahead as Queensland recovers and I found yesterday going through those evacuation centres, that people did want to have a conversation, they did want to tell me what was happening to them, some of them did want a bit of real reassurance, so it's really a privilege to share some of those quite difficult moments in peoples' lives and to just try and make a bit of a difference to it.
I can also say just by way of update, I've been continuously updating for people the work that Centrelink is doing, they're making emergency payments available for people who are in that really dire situation, had to leave their home, home full of floodwaters, evacuation centre, really need cash to get them through. Centrelink has been working very hard, our hotline took 20, 000 calls yesterday, we're now at a situation where 27, 000 claims have been processed and $35 million made available. So that's just a start, but it is a tribute to the staff of Centrelink that in such difficult circumstances they've been dealing with so many claims and making a difference for so many people across Queensland and I do want to thank them for that.
And I do want to say as I stand here with our Defence Force personnel, thank you for everything you've done so far, it's been truly amazing and thank you for what you are going to do; 1, 200 Defence Force personnel out in Queensland making a difference, I know that they'll do great work and my thanks already go with them for doing that great work.
Thank you. 



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that the Australian Defence Force would contribute approximately 1,200 personnel to support the clean-up and restoration phase of the flood crisis in Queensland.
This is the biggest deployment of troops for a natural disaster since Cyclone Tracy.
These personnel will be drawn primarily from the Army's Brisbane-based 7th Brigade, but will also include other Army units as well as elements from the Royal Australian Navy, the Royal Australian Air Force and the Army Reserve.
The Prime Minister said the Gillard Labor Government was working hard to make sure Queenslanders were getting all the assistance they need now and in the months ahead.
While many parts of Queensland and Northern NSW are still in the immediate grip of the floods, the Commonwealth has started to plan and provide for clean-up and restoration phase of this natural disaster.
This needs to be completed as quickly as possible so we can move to the reconstruction phase.
The Defence Personnel will form part of a Joint Task Force (JTF) which will work with the Queensland and local authorities to assist during the clean up.
Their activities will include:
 * 	Engineering infrastructure assessments
 * 	Road clearance and repairs including the clearing and repair of culverts
 * 	Construction of temporary bridges
 * 	Removal of debris and general clean up
 * 	Water purification facilities
 * 	Building and area searches
 * 	Helicopters for medical evacuations, resupply and transport
 * 	Psychological Support Teams and Environmental Health Officers to provide specialist support to supplement other agencies.
The Minister for Defence Stephen Smith said the Joint Task Force will be supported by C130 and C17 aircraft.
The ADF will also provide expertise for surveying the Brisbane River including the deployment of Navy survey teams, divers and remote underwater vehicles.
These capabilities will find and clear objects on the seabed and assess bridge foundations. 
Despite the increase in resources to the recovery efforts the Australian Defence Force will continue to be involved in operations around the world and retain the capacity to respond to unforeseen emergencies.
Defece will also continue to take a major role in emergency response efforts, including search and rescue while the need exists. 



HOST: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins us now, good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Julian.
HOST: Prime Minister you've spent the last few days in Queensland, can you tell us what support the Federal Government is providing on the ground at the moment?
PM: I certainly can. We've been supporting the people of Queensland through the Australian Defence Force, they've been helping with search and rescue tasks, we've had 19 helicopters available to support and of course unfortunately, tragically, there's been a lot of work for them to do. They did do earlier in the week some rooftop rescues and there are some amazing stories of courage by our Australian Defence Force in incredibly difficult circumstances. I had one of the chopper pilots say to me yesterday, he's been flying the chopper for 20 years and it's the worst weather they've ever put the chopper up into, so amazing.
And then of course the Defence Force has been moving supplies around, getting supplies into isolated places has been one of the tough things that's needed to be done, so we've had C-17s, which are huge planes, and C-130s moving supplies around the state and that's been vital work.
And the Defence Force at every stage has stepped up to do a bit more, they are doing things now like tanking water into the Lockyer Valley where water supplies have been disrupted.
At the same time we've been making emergency payments to the people of Queensland. If you imagine the circumstances where you've had to flee your home, you're in an evacuation centre, you urgently need cash. We've been making payments available through Centrelink and they, for example through their special hotline, took 20,000 yesterday and it's more than, well more than $20 million that's got into peoples' pockets to just help them through the first few days. Now that's just the start of the relief payments and recovery payments to come, but it's been really important to turn that around quickly, and it hasn't been easy because Centrelink  -  its main office is in the Brisbane CBD  -  so like other CBD buildings it hasn't been able to work and we've had circumstances where we've sent Centrelink members to Dalby and Condamine to help out there, then they got isolated and couldn't get back when their own homes were flooding in Ipswich and Brisbane. So some real tales of hardship but Centrelink, despite all of that, has turned it around and has been out there with staff in evacuation centres helping people through.
HOST: There's been a lot of focus this morning on the role of insurance companies and many people who do have insurance policies finding out that they might not be covered for this particular flood damage. What's your message to insurance companies this morning about dealing with victims of the flood?
PM: Well a really clear message which is that insurance companies should be doing the best for people, I would be hoping that we see insurance companies extending as much compassion as they possibly can and today in Brisbane the Treasurer Wayne Swan and the Assistant Treasurer Bill Shorten are meeting with some of the major insurers to talk to them about just that.
HOST: Prime Minister many insurance experts are in favour of a compulsory pooled national disaster insurance scheme that's low cost for everyone concerned. This has worked in other countries, and we know that compulsory schemes in say, accident compensation in New Zealand and of course third party compensation for drivers work well. Would you in favour of a compulsory pooled national disaster insurance scheme?
PM: Look I think we will have to work through after we recover in this immediate crisis period I'm sure there will be many policy issues that we need to consider and talk about. It's in a different area but we are actually having the Productivity Commission look at the prospect of an insurance scheme that would help meet the needs of people with disabilities, because I think we all know that as a nation we would like to see people with disabilities, whatever their circumstances around the nation treated with dignity and respect. So we're looking at some models through that Productivity Commission.
We have our own standing ways of responding to disasters and crisis around the nation, they include long-standing arrangements as to how the Federal Government works with State Governments, and of course in the centre of the crisis there's always a lot of pressure, a lot of stress, a lot strain, a lot of logistical challenges, but I think as this has unfolded really people have stepped that extra yard and the emergency services personnel have been remarkable, so has the ADF, and generally the systems have worked well.
HOST: Prime Minister you've committed to getting the Budget back into surplus by 2013, but obviously the cost of this flood situation is going to be massive, definitely in the billions, is it irresponsible for you to maintain that commitment to getting the Budget back into surplus at this time?
PM: We will do what we need to with the Budget to make sure we're meeting the needs of the people of Queensland, and we will make choices within the Budget so that the Budget comes to surplus in 2012-13-
HOST: Regardless of the amount of reconstruction work that's required?
PM: Look budgeting is about choices and we will supporting the people of Queensland as they rebuild from this disaster, brick by brick, piece of concrete by piece of concrete there's going to be a lot to do.
Now we don't even know yet what the total bill is going to be, we can't know until floodwaters subside and we can do things like have roads tested and see whether they've still got their structural integrity and they're safe or whether there's repair work that needs to be done, we don't know all of the damage to bridges yet, public infrastructure like schools. So part of the recovery work and an urgent part of it will be getting to grips with how much needs to be done, and of course we've made Mick Slater available, one of our senior Defence Force officers, to work with the people of Queensland and the Queensland Government on precisely that, that recovery effort.
HOST: And just finally Prime Minister, obviously as result of this disaster fruit and veggie prices are going to rise, the rebuilding's going to be immense, surely nationally this disaster presents real problems for inflation?
PM: We will work through all of that. Look this is a big disaster, a big disaster, it's cost Australian lives, we've tragically lost the lives of some very young children, there's a lot of rebuilding to do, there are going to be a lot of economic impacts. All of that we will have to grapple with in coming days. Necessarily the focus of the last few days has been on the immediate crisis response, getting people rescued, getting water to them when they need it, getting them into evacuation centres. We will now turn to the hard work of recovery and we'll be there working with Queensland day by day in what is going to be a difficult period.
HOST: Prime Minister thanks very much for joining us on Radio National Summer Breakfast this morning.
PM: Thanks for the opportunity. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Attorney-General Robert McClelland today announced additional disaster assistance for communities in Northern NSW experiencing flooding as a result of floodwaters from Queensland entering the state. 
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) will be made available to people who have been impacted by flooding in disaster declared Local Government Areas in the Northern Region of NSW and the Clarence Valley LGA.
The AGDRP is a one-off payment of $1,000 per eligible adult and $400 per eligible child to help them recover. 
This assistance is being extended to parts of Northern NSW as we experience unprecedented flooding in large parts of Australia.
The Prime Minister made the announcement while visiting Grafton this morning.
This payment will provide financial assistance to eligible people including those whose residence has been significantly damaged, who were stranded within their home or unable to gain access to their residence for at least 24 hours, or whose principal place of residence was without electricity, water, gas, sewerage or another essential service for at least 48 hours.
The assistance will be delivered by Centrelink.
Communities in Northern New South Wales are feeling the flow-on effects of severe flooding in South-East Queensland.
The flooding in these communities has caused considerable disruption, including the evacuation of thousands of people from their homes.
Many of these people have had to spend considerable time away from their residences.
This payment will go some way to helping people get back on their feet.
The Gillard Government continues to closely monitor the flood situation throughout other areas of New South Wales, as well as developments unfolding in Victoria and Tasmania.
The Government is providing significant assistance to flood-affected areas of Australia and will respond with further assistance as required.
Today's announcement is over and above the support already being provided by the Australian Government in areas affected by flooding throughout NSW.  This includes the Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy  -  a payment for employees, small business owners and farmers whose ability to work has been affected by the flooding.
Other joint Commonwealth/NSW Government assistance is also being provided under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA), including grants of up to $15,000 for small businesses and primary producers affected by flooding.
Information about the AGDRP or Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy can be obtained by phoning the Australian Government's Emergency Assistance Line on 180 2266 between 8am to 8pm local time, seven days a week.  People can also visit their local Centrelink office or log onto www.centrelink.gov.au.  



PM: Can I say it's fantastic to be here in Townsville, I'm joined by some very tall friends you can see behind me from the Townsville Crocs, they had a great victory last night, and I'm also joined by Senator Jan McLucas who is a Queensland Senator up here in far north Queensland. And it's been terrific to be here for two reasons. Number one, to see the basketball game last night and to see the community spirit at that basketball game which meant the people of Townsville raised more than $50,000 to help Queenslanders who are suffering with the floods, and I think that's a great example of what's happening right around the State and right around the country as people pull together and make sure they're helping each other at what is a really difficult time.
And it's also great to be here in Townsville to see the way that supplies are being brought through. The opportunity, when I was at Amberley, so see these kind of supplies being packed onto C-17s, the huge Defence Force aircraft that are moving supplies around to help out during the floods. And here we're seeing what happens to those supplies, when they land on the ground they are quickly dispatched so that they get out there and people can get the things that they need.
So a very big thank you to the Defence Force again for all the work it's doing and a very big thank you to people who are here who are making all of the arrangements so that this work goes to good use. I know these have been very difficult times right around Queensland, one of the things that people have been worried about is how will I get the stuff that I need, that my family needs and the food we need and here we're seeing part of that answer with such great work being done by Defence.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is it time to start looking at maybe flood proofing the Bruce Highway or (inaudible)
PM: Well as a Government we have invested in the Bruce Highway and we've also invested in a feasibility study about flood proofing (inaudible) major issue and we're expecting the works of that feasibility study, which was commissioned some time ago before the current flood crisis, to be available to us in the middle of the year. But generally what I think is going to happen as floodwaters subside, we're going to see what's happened to the infrastructure, we're going to see where we need to (inaudible) see where we need to rebuild to a better standard so it's more flood proof in the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well we made a series of commitments to the people of Townsville during the election campaign and we'll be honouring those commitments. In terms of getting engineering advice and structural advice, advice from surveyors about what we need to do in dealing with this flood crisis, that will happen in the days and weeks ahead. The focus has been on the really immediate thing that people need to live, food's really important and that's what we've seen here, we've seen the supplies getting through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just quickly, can I just ask about Mamdouh Habib, why request the Inspector-General to investigate him if the Government paid him compensation I understand?
PM: Look we did settle that case which of course was leftover from the previous Government, and so we thought it was in the interests of Australian taxpayers to conclude the matter.
Thank you very much. 



PM: Thank you very much. I'm here today in Grafton, I'm joined by Janelle Saffin the Member for Page and by Richie Williamson, the local Mayor here and I thank both of them for taking the time to talk to me about circumstances in this part of the world, and I also thank the people here who have worked their way through dealing with floodwaters here.
I want to say a few things about assistance for this part of the world and northern New South Wales in a moment, but firstly here today I have taken a call from President Obama who rang specifically to say that he's thinking about the people of Queensland and the people of Australia at this very difficult time. President Obama wanted me to convey his best wishes to the people of Australia as we deal with these floodwaters. I've discussed with President Obama the circumstances in Queensland and the scale of the devastation and the loss of life that we've seen in Queensland. President Obama has confirmed an offer already made by the United States of America to provide any assistance that we need at this difficult time. I'm specifically spoken to President Obama about the kind of assistance we might need as we move into the recovery phase and we will be working with the United States on their expertise which may be able to assist us in this period.
So, for example, we will be talking to them about expertise that can come to the Australian military about the kind of manpower and specific capability they may have to assist Queensland as it moves into reconstruction and recovery.
We know that a lot is going to have to be done to bring roads back into functioning order, railways lines back into functioning order and we will be talking to our American friends about that kind of assistance.
Then secondly can I say right across Queensland today people have got up, they've marched out of their homes and they've gone to find people to help. It's a tremendous spirit of volunteering right across Queensland as it moves into the recovery phase of this disaster. So the spirit there I think is an absolutely magnificent one and the scale of the volunteering is taking peoples' breath away that literally everyone is trying to find someone to help, selflessly going and helping a neighbour. And to all of those people who are doing that today in Queensland and who will do it in the days to come I salute you for your efforts, it really is showing tremendous Aussie spirit.
And then I'm here today in New South Wales because we know that Queensland has faced such devastation, that there are also floodwaters here and in the discussions I've had with the people who have managed the local crisis here today, the first thing everybody has said to me is that they understand that thoughts need to be with Queensland and that they themselves have been thinking how they can assist the people of Queensland.
Local people, even in flood affected areas here, who have been sending money, sending resources to help the people of Queensland.
So I really want to say congratulations for that spirit; you said it to me, Janelle said it to me, almost everybody I've spoken to today, it's the first thing that they've said, they understand the dimensions of the need in Queensland and they too want to help.
But people here have sustained flood damage too, so today I am able to announce that for nine local government areas in New South Wales we will be making available the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment. So that's eight local government areas in northern New South Wales that are disaster declared and that they've seen Queensland floodwaters come through, it's also this area where we stand today in the Clarence Valley.
What that will mean for people is that they will be able to access $1000 emergency payments for each adult, $400 for each child, if they've faced inundation of their home and been flood affected. So I'd say to people to access that assistance, one way of doing is ringing 180 22 66, and Janelle has said another way of doing it is that Centrelink staff will be available in the local recovery centre here in Grafton and in other places during the days of next week.
So I'd want to thank everyone for having me here today and being able to discuss circumstances here.
Finally can I say we've also floods affecting the people of Victoria and people will have seen some of those images on their TV screens today. I am obviously very concerned about the circumstances of the people battling floodwaters in Victoria and it's my intention to visit those parts of Victoria on Monday and to be able to say hello to people in those circumstances.
JOURNALIST: There's been a tragic loss of life, beyond that, how concerned are you about the cost to this country of these floods?
PM: Well we have seen a tragic loss of life in Queensland and one of the things we've talked about today, about the differences between Queensland and New South Wales is that here people have sustained losses and we've seen infrastructure damaged but there's been no loss of life, and one of the reasons peoples' heartfelt wishes are directed towards Queensland is because they too have been saddened by the loss of life there.
So we know there are still people grieving, there are still people anxiously waiting for news and our thoughts are with them. There is a lot of infrastructure damage and we will be working to rebuild Queensland. Volunteers are getting out literally in their thousands and thousands today to start with the dirty work of the immediate clean-up, then we will need to move to rebuilding and we will be working with the people of Queensland on that.
JOURNALIST: The Lockyer Valley is a major food production area for places including Clarence Valley, what extent to do think food supply, price and quality will be affected and does the Australian Government have any plans to do anything (inaudible)
PM: Look the best thing we can to deal with those circumstances is to try and get supply routes open again as soon as possible and so one of the reasons when I talked to President Obama today I indicated to him that we were very thankful for his offer of assistance and that we will consider accessing American military expertise on opening supply routes is because we want to do that as quickly as possible.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) take some time to recover.
PM: Yes it will, yes it will, the scale of this kind of devastation, I've seen it for myself in Queensland, I had the opportunity to be in Grantham yesterday, I was able to see the affect on the township itself, on the people, on the farmland, the devastation there is huge and it's going to be a big, big effort to recover from it. And so we'll be working supporting primary producers as they try to get their land back and working and growing food, we'll be working to clear the supply route so that people can get their produce to market, and we'll be doing all of this work in partnership with the Queensland Government, local government and the people of Queensland who today are getting about so much of the task through volunteering efforts.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: In relation to this matter which dates from 2005 there is an inquiry underway, there have been some serious allegations made so the best way of dealing with that is through an inquiry.
JOURNALIST: Janelle I might ask you as a local Member what are you hearing from people about the flood, on a local (inaudible)
JANELLE SAFFIN: What I was hearing is is that everybody's thankful to our emergency services workers and particularly the SES, the Rural Fire Service, everybody who hopped-to and they listened to them as well when they said it's time to evacuate. So there's a lot of appreciation from the community and appreciation today as well for having the Prime Minister come and say thank you to our volunteers and a thank you to the whole community. But what I'm hearing is there's infrastructure damage, some people have sustained some damage around their houses, with their residence, and issues to do with what's floating around in the waters. But the overwhelming feeling from my electorate of Page, all the people, is our hearts go out to everyone in Queensland.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
MAYOR WILLIAMSON: Look I think through this whole emergency our thoughts really have been with our next door neighbours in Queensland, some of those images will remain with our community forever, we too live on a floodplain and from time to time do experience flooding, but those images will stay with us for a very long time.
At this point though we're asking for peoples' patience, we're hearing through the SES that people are driving on closed roads; that is of a particular concern to those here at the SES. The last thing that we want is for somebody to drive on a road that's closed and put either themselves at risk or someone rescuing them at risk, or even worse still a loss of life at this late stage of this incident. We would like the opportunity to check the roads, we would like the opportunity to ensure that the culverts are safe, the bridges are still there and are safe  -  we understand that we have had some culverts that have suffered some real damage; some of our road network has suffered some real damage. So at this stage we're just asking for peoples' patience, bear with us the second the roads are able to be travelled on we will open them, I can assure you, we're not closing them for any longer than what they need to be closed. On the lower Clarence particularly there is still a number of roads with water over them, they will in the next couple of days reveal themselves, our engineers are standing by, whether it's three o'clock in the morning or two o'clock tomorrow afternoon, we will have people on the road to ensure that they're safe and the second they are safe, they'll be opened. So we're just asking for a little bit of patience in this late stage of this flood event here on the Clarence.
PM: And can I just echo those words, the main this is for everybody to stay safe and can I echo that sentiment, here today (inaudible) locally including people who have worked long, hard hours dealing with the flooding here, their thoughts have been with the people of Queensland and we've heard that reflected by Janelle and by Richie. I did have the opportunity this morning to talk to Premier Keneally, I've been staying in touch with her about the flood circumstances in New South Wales, and she too says that right throughout New South Wales people are thinking about their neighbours in Queensland. The New South Wales Government has made available emergency services personnel and swift-water rescue teams to assist the people of Queensland and she herself I think has made that very clear. So that community sentiment right throughout New South Wales.
Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister thank you for your time.
PM: My pleasure.
HOST: How are you holding up?
PM: Look I'm fine but it's been an emotional week for all of us I think, the nation, person by person, has been going through the same emotions as we've watched the absolute tragedy unfolding in Queensland and so much devastation and so many shattered lives. What's fantastic to see today though is how many people in Queensland are just finding any way they can to help others, it's remarkable for the spirit, everybody getting out as a volunteer to do their bit.
HOST: I watched it again for some time this morning, congratulations, our television networks I think have been quite brilliant, but where to know, I mean the communications, the way it's all been handled by the Queensland Government was tremendous, but time wise, when could we really say that we're going to see the old Brisbane?
PM: Well the truth is it's going to take a long period of time to do the rebuilding, that needs to be done right across Queensland. We're in the clean up phase now and you probably would have seen we've got Defence Force personnel assisting with that, so soldiers and people out and they're going to be helping with mops and buckets as well as doing all the great stuff they do with aircraft and moving supplies and engineering assistance and the like. So clean-up, dealing with the actual filth and garbage is all well underway, but the infrastructure rebuilding is going to take a long period of time.
HOST: Prime Minister just exactly how many people have been displaced and aren't able to go back or live in their houses and apartments at this point in time?
PM: Well the reality is many thousands, when you look right across Queensland, people are obviously in different circumstances because we've still got places that are isolated, we've got places that were still anxious about rising floodwaters even as water was starting to recede in Brisbane. So people are at various stages of moving into recovery and for a lot of people it's going to be a long period of time before life goes back to anything that resembles normal. And having seen the places like Grantham that bore the brunt of that wall of water that smashed everything in its way, there are going to be people really grieving and really hurting for a very long period of time.
HOST: Just some of the photos Prime Minister that I've seen in the last few days and some of the damage to the infrastructure, roads that have been washed away, it's very, very hard to comprehend this actually happening in our country but it's going to be a huge effort from everybody to try and get things back to the way they were.
PM: You were just congratulating the media earlier on keeping information to people and I agree with that, the media's done a great job and never has the old saying, a picture tells a thousand words been more true. I think the only way we've been able as a nation to come to grips with the dimensions of this is the TV coverage but also some of the remarkable photographs that have been in the newspapers that capture a moment and really in that moment capture the emotion as well as the physical image about what's happening.
HOST: Of course we've had so much to talk about with Queensland but we can't take our eye off the ball, what about Grafton?
PM: Well I'm here in Grafton today, I've been here to say thanks to the volunteers here and the emergency services personnel who have done such a great job and to talk to the people of Grafton about how they're feeling as they deal with floodwaters and move into recovery. And the overwhelming sentiment here in Grafton and I'm sure it's true right throughout flood affected parts of New South Wales is that yes they're dealing with floodwaters but their first thoughts are for the people of Queensland. Almost everyone said to be today, ‘yes we've got a job to do but gee, it's our neighbours up north that are really doing it a lot tougher than us'. But I did want to come and recognise that there are people here too that have dealt with flood and are dealing with the aftermath of it and we are making available some Commonwealth Government emergency payments to assist people through in the Clarence Valley where Grafton is and in eight other local government areas that are disaster declared, affected by Queensland floodwaters and people are dealing with all of that.
HOST: Well look it's terrific to have you in Grafton today, when you get a quiet moment to yourself you must sort of sit down and I guess be so uplifted when we live in this extraordinary land of ours, but more importantly the people who inhabit it?
PM: That's certainly true, when I get a moment to myself, takes a bit to get a moment to yourself, but when I get a moment to myself I really reflect on the people as I meet, the stories they've told me and then stories of despair and courage and terror and all of those sorts of things, all of the really sad depressing stuff that comes from-
HOST: Oh, I think we've just had the Prime Minister's phone cut short on us, but look we thank her for her time, I mean she's remarkably so busy and covered so much territory over the last few days, apologies about that battery running out on the Prime Minister but she's right, it is uplifting. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Premier Anna Bligh and Federal Treasurer Wayne Swan have called on Australians to dig deeper for the relief effort in Queensland.
"The governments that Anna and I lead have both agreed to kick in another $10 million each into the relief fund, to help encourage Australians to give all they can to Queenslanders who are suffering," said Ms Gillard.
"Australians in every corner of our country can be proud of what they've raised for the flood victims so far, but let's try and go that extra mile to give a bit more to those devastated by these floods.
"This is only a small part of the contribution the Australian and Queensland governments will make to helping Queenslanders get back on their feet - but if it encourages others to dig just that little bit deeper then it's crucial."
"I know Australians will do what Australians always do in difficult times - pull together to help each other out."
Ms Bligh thanked Australians for their extraordinary generosity since the Queensland flood crisis began with donations to the Premier's Disaster Relief Appeal reaching over $50 million.
"But this disaster has now grown into something absolutely unprecedented in our State and the situation we are facing has more than tripled in size since the appeal began," she said.
"The generosity of Australians has been incredible. I know they have been digging deep, but my message today is, we need you to keep digging.
"We need to kick start again the Premier's Disaster Relief Appeal to reflect the new situation we face.
"If you've already donated I'm asking you to think about giving again. And if you've yet to give something please think about making any contribution that you can."
The Prime Minister and Premier said the State and Federal Governments wanted to help drive the appeal with an extra $10 million donation each.
Treasurer Wayne Swan said, "As a Queenslander I'm proud to be able to say both governments have joined forces to put more in the fund as part of our broader efforts to assist the rebuilding of the state".
Premier Bligh said that every penny from the fund would go to flood victims.
"It will help rebuild homes, replace property, and set Queensland families back on their feet," said Ms Bligh.
"Initial estimates show that well in excess of 28,000 properties have been affected by the Queensland floods and, as our wet season continues, more may follow.
"By way of comparison the Victorian Bushfire Appeal Fund stands at $392 million and the number of properties affected in that terrible disaster was around 3,400.
"The comparison in the number of properties affected gives you a sense of the scale of the task that Queensland families are facing and the wide spread devastation that the State has experienced.
"Thousands of Queenslanders are now re-entering their homes and they are being confronted with scenes of absolute destruction. With your help we can support them now."
The State had already set aside $680 million in this year's budget to cope with natural disasters and the entire recovery effort, including the clean up and repair of crucial infrastructure, will take billions of dollars of State and Federal Government money.
Both Governments are encouraging people donating to the Premier's Disaster Relief Appeal to donate online or in person to free up call centre staff and phone lines for emergency calls.
Donations can be made on the Queensland Government website, www.qld.gov.au/floods, and also in person at any Queensland branch of the Bank of Queensland (BoQ), Commonwealth Bank, Westpac, ANZ, NAB, Suncorp, St George Bank, Bank West, Bank SA, Australian Central Credit Union and the Savings and Loans Credit Union.
People can also make donations at Coles Supermarkets and cheques can be made out to the Premier's Disaster Relief Appeal.  



PM: (inaudible) talk to people, many of them said to me those things, that they're more concerned about the circumstances of the people of Queensland that they are for themselves. So a real spirit that they wanted to say their best wishes to the people of Queensland, even as they confront floodwaters themselves. Of course we've seen quite severe flooding in Victoria, communities right across Victoria that are facing some of the worst flooding that they've ever seen.
So there is a need too in Victoria for a big effort for communities to come together and assist each other. But they are making a big effort, I had the opportunity to travel in a car today with Dean from the local SES, who told me here over the weekend volunteers filled 35,000 sandbags. It's that kind of spirit of pulling together that we've seen on display right across the country that we're continuing to see on display in Queensland as people move to the clean up and recovery stage.
So it's tough times right around the nation but some great Aussie spirit right around the nation too.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Is there anything in the way of grants and what's the situation in terms of relief funding?
PM: What I can say here in terms of funding in Victoria, we work through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements, so the way that works is that the Premier, Premier Baillieu, would trigger a category of assistance and then approach the Federal Government to agree to the request. I know Premier Baillieu was here yesterday also having a look for himself and having a talk to people, so I'm sure he's configuring and working through what's the right category of assistance to make available for people. We do have Centrelink offices available, I had the opportunity to say hello to the Centrelink officers inside and there are some forms of assistance available, for example assistance when people, because of floodwaters, can't get to work, can't run their small business and can't earn their ordinary income.
JOURNALIST: Isn't it important that the assistance doesn't discriminate depending on where people live; I mean a flood-affected house is a flood-affected house?
PM: The way it works is because it's a State and Commonwealth arrangement, the way it works is the State Premier makes a request to trigger the arrangements, so you would expect that States, given that they manage the direct emergency services response, police and emergency personnel, that that's the level of government that takes the first step. So I know Premier Baillieu has been here and has been looking at it himself.
JOURNALIST: Are you expecting him to (inaudible)
PM: I can't put words in Premier Baillieu's mouth and I'm not going to try to but obviously Premier Baillieu was here yesterday having a direct look at circumstances.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) pressure on wage (inaudible) skills shortage, do we need to boost skilled migration?
PM: We're going to see all sorts of economic effects; this has been such a huge catastrophe, huge catastrophe in Queensland, floodwaters in New South Wales, floodwaters here in Victoria. We've seen houses damaged in Tasmania, but obviously the major point of this crisis is the widespread devastation throughout Queensland, and yes there are going to be big economic effects. The Treasurer Wayne Swan today has said that in economic terms this is probably the biggest natural disaster the country has faced. Now we're going to have to work through those economic affects as we move from the immediate crisis stage through the clean-up and recovery stage into rebuilding of infrastructure and getting communities back on their feet. So we'll need to take it a step at a time, but yes there are going to be economic impacts.
JOURNALIST: Is it time yet to reassess the (inaudible)
PM: We will be managing the Federal Budget, we will be managing the Federal Budget so that we can meet the needs of recovery and rebuilding and I've been in Queensland, I've been to a number of locations there, I've seen as far as you can see with the floodwaters still high the scale of the damage and we know when those floodwaters recede we're going to see even more damage underneath.
So I know that there's going to be a lot of effort and money and resources needed to rebuild, particularly rebuild Queensland, but we'll be managing the Federal Budget through the Federal Government so that we can meet those needs as well as managing the Budget into surplus in 2012-13.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) potentially a matter of words in terms of how people are covered in Queensland (inaudible)
PM: What I'd certainly say to them is they should be doing the right thing by the people of Australia at a time as tough as this. The Treasurer Wayne Swan and the Assistant Treasurer Bill Shorten have met with the insurance industry, they met with the insurance industry in Queensland on Friday to put that message direct. Now is the time to show a spirit of generosity that matches the kind of community spirit we've seen right around the country.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I know that the Treasurer Wayne Swan has said that there may need to be a look at a more standardised definition of floods and flood damage and those questions can be worked through, but the issue for now is how claims from these flood events are going to treated and my message to the insurance industry would be to show the same kind of spirit the people of Australia have been showing as they've really pulled together in these very difficult circumstances.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) a uniform definition to say what a flood is, how (inaudible)
PM: These are questions for days ahead, for the days to come, to work through. The focus now is on still managing floodwaters, we've got people I've just spoken to who are evacuated from their homes who don't even know what the dimension of the damage is that they'll face when they go back. We've got Queensland in clean-up phase with tens of thousands of volunteers getting out there and helping their neighbours, helping their friends, helping complete strangers, people they don't know to recover from this disaster. So the focus is on that, yes they'll be issues to work through in the days ahead and that's one of them that we very clearly signalled through the work that Treasurer Swan and Assistant Treasurer Bill Shorten have been doing with the insurance industry.
JOURNALIST: What was the general feeling like in that room you went into in the relief centre, what was the general feeling in there?
PM: Plenty of congratulations for the volunteers for assisting the people who are working with them in this relief centre, plenty of congratulations too for the people who came and assisted with evacuations, I met some people who were assisted to get into boats to evacuate and they are full of praise and good wishes for the rescuers and volunteers who put themselves on the line to come and help others, and a spirit too of sticking together as they work their way through the issues here locally and a spirit of sticking by the people of Queensland, quite a number of them indicated to me that they thought their wishes are really with Queensland, even as they're managing their own personal circumstances wondering what's happened to their own home, their best with the people of Queensland, so that's a lovely spirit.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) how does that make you feel?
PM: It makes me feel both privileged and humbled. I had the opportunity over the past few days to be in a number of evacuation and relief centres to hold a hand, to give a hug, to have a conversation and I think that's really important part of the job for me, personally being there to offer people the reassurance that we know that they're hurting, we know that they want people to understand that they're hurting and need assistance and best wishes from their fellow Australians, so by being here I think I can bring a bit of that spirit with me.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) not respect warnings with floods (inaudible)
PM: I'm sure that in the days to come both her, New South Wales, Queensland particularly, but everywhere that has suffered from floodwaters there will be thinking and questions, even some tough questions about what we can learn from these experiences. The SMS system was obviously developed following the devastating Victorian bushfires and in the days ahead we'll obviously work through, and I'm sure the State Government will want to work through, issues about how it works in these circumstances.
JOURNALIST: A lot of the area down here in Victoria that's been affected by floods is farmland (inaudible) will the Government continue the exceptional circumstances package for those farms?
PM: Isn't it amazing, you're absolutely right that the same people that have struggled with years and years of drought and then we have the locusts and now we've got floods, so mother nature has been here with all sorts of contradictory challenges, drought on the one hand and flood on the other. In terms of the way Federal Government assistance works, flood assistance obviously works differently to drought assistance because you can immediately or almost immediately see what the damage is once floodwaters subside whereas drought gets worse day after day, month after month, year after year as the drought continues.
But what I'd want to say to people is we obviously want to be working to assist people through and I'm sure that Premier Baillieu, Opposition Leader Daniel Andrews is here, people right across will be working with the Government to assist. 



PM: I'm joined here today by Lindsay Fox, who first introduced himself to me as ‘just a truck driver', but I think he's known by Australians for much more than that, obviously the head of Linfox, a very substantial transport and logistics business.
Lindsay has joined me here this morning because today I want to talk about the contribution of corporate Australia to Queensland flood recovery, but before I do that I do want to say something about the circumstances that Victoria is facing today. We know many communities are anxiously waiting as flood waters rise and many townships across Victoria have already been impacted by flood waters. We also know that a small boy is missing and so these are very difficult times in Victoria.
Our thoughts are with everybody who is dealing with this emerging flood crisis in Victoria and my thoughts are particularly with the family and friends of the missing boy who are dealing with such a tragic situation. I had the opportunity yesterday, late yesterday, to talk directly to Premier Baillieu about circumstances in Victoria. That followed travelling to flood areas myself, I went to Echuca and I had the opportunity to be briefed in the morning by the State Control Centre, so I have been able to talk through circumstances in Victoria.
Premier Baillieu late last night gave me a request for further natural disaster assistance for Victorians, given the flood circumstances and I will be responding as soon as possible, so we can make available to Victorians who are battling flood waters some further Federal Government assistance. We want to be able to provide assistance to families, to small businesses and to farmers who are dealing with flood waters.
I also spoke to Premier Baillieu about fundraising efforts here, Premier Baillieu has working with Red Cross got an appeal happening for Victorians, that is the Red Cross Victorian Flood Appeal and I can this morning announce that the Federal Government will make a contribution of $1 million to that appeal, to help kick start what I'm sure will be a lot of community fundraising in Victoria, as Victorians try to look after each other during some very difficult circumstances.
However, I'd have to say, as I had the opportunity yesterday to talk to people in a relief centre, people who've been evacuated from their own homes, people who were dealing with the flood situation, many of them not really sure what they were going to go back to when they went back to their homes. Even in those circumstances when I met with those Victorians, very many of them said to me that their thoughts are actually with the people of Queensland. So as tough as they were doing it, their first though, their first heartfelt sympathy was for the people of Queensland as they go through the aftermath of their flood disaster. So great sentiment from Victorians pulling together but also thinking about fellow Australians up north.
And it's about recovery from Queensland's floods that I want to talk now. I've invited Lindsay Fox to join me today, because I've decided to bring together ten Australian leading business people to form a business roundtable to assist with corporate support as Queensland recovers and rebuilds from these devastating floods. I've asked Treasurer Wayne Swan to chair this group, I've spoken to Premier Bligh about it and the Treasurer of Queensland Andrew Fraser will also be a member of the group working with Wayne Swan.
The purpose of bringing leading corporate identities together, including Lindsay Fox, is to further leverage corporate support for the recovery and rebuilding in Queensland. Already corporate Australia has been tremendously generous, many businesses have made donations, many businesses have allowed staff to go and assist with flood work, many businesses have helped sponsor community fundraising. So there's already been an opening of hearts and wallets from corporate Australia to help with Queensland flood recovery and rebuilding, but given the scale of this disaster we need to do more and so a key purpose of this business taskforce will be to further leverage support from corporate Australia. Secondly a key purpose of this taskforce will be to help co-ordinate in kind efforts from corporate Australia.
Once again, generosity has flowed and people have made available the assets that their business has, whether it's trucks, whether it's foodstuffs they've been prepared to donate, whether it's computer equipment they've been prepared to donate, people have been very generous. But there is a need to make sure that these efforts are co-ordinated so the right kinds of donations are getting to the places where they can be most used and to the people who need them the most, so that kind of co-ordination will be a second purpose of this business taskforce.
And thirdly if you get ten very smart people together from corporate Australia they have some advice and insights that can be shared with communities as they rebuild and we would be looking to the business taskforce for that as well.
I want to be clear, this is not a group that will be managing the government response to the flood crisis, the Federal Government will continue its direct work, obviously the Queensland Government will continue its direct work and Mick Slater will be there leading the recovery group in Queensland, but this is a complimentary role, about making sure that we are leveraging the best possible business support for Queensland as it rebuilds from these very difficult days of these devastating floods.
I did yesterday write to corporate Australia and ask them to consider further donations, the kind of additional support that this business taskforce will not work directly on and I'm very pleased to be able to announce that in response to that direct request I had a conversation, actually this morning, with Richard Goyder from Wesfarmers and he has pledged that Wesfarmers will donate $5 million towards the Queensland appeal to assist the people of Queensland with rebuilding. So it's that kind of additional generosity on top of current efforts that we are looking for through this business taskforce and through its connections with corporate Australia.
With those words I'll turn now to Lindsay, who will be a member of the taskforce. We've got representatives of various parts of the Australian economy, obviously Lindsay knows everything there is to know about transport and logistics and I'll hand over to him now.
LINDSAY FOX: Well I guess one of the things that we gained out of the fires throughout Victoria was how to try and look after all the people within those communities and while water and fire are totally opposite the same devastation exists for all of the people within those communities. They've lost their homes, they've got nowhere to stay, they've got nowhere to place whatever belongings they had to be stored and placed somewhere, and we've had requests for containers to go up there and the containers are currently on their way and then there's all of the supply routes that have got to be covered through these specific areas. Ultimately there will be a process by which goods are put together here in Victoria and in New South Wales and they'll become the supply chain to all of the requirements that are currently today in Queensland.
Mick Slater is an outstanding leader, he has been appointed as the singular head, his communication skills are terrific, he has everybody within the organisations that are working with him communicating with twice a day and he's showing every skill that I've seen in any form of leadership.
It's a pleasure to sort of back up all of the requirements that he may require from time to time. He has the main role running the front of the show and some of the areas where he needs supply of some goods, we've probably got the access and I guess it's my job to help create a lot of that access to come through in ultimate outcome for the people of Queensland.
PM: Thanks very much, we're very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister in light of the recent floods is the Budget still expected to be back in surplus as promised?
PM: Thank you for that question because I note some reports this morning on this question referring to a statement that I made yesterday, and I actually want to read to you the statement I made yesterday and I stand by every word of it.
I said yesterday the following:
“we will be managing the Federal Budget so that we can meet the needs of recovery and rebuilding and I've been in Queensland, I've been to a number of locations there, I've seen as far as you can see with the floodwaters still high the scale of the damage and we know when those floodwaters recede we're going to see even more damage underneath.
So I know that there's going to be a lot of effort and money and resources needed to rebuild, particularly rebuild Queensland, but we'll be managing the Federal Budget through the Federal Government so that we can meet those needs as well as managing the Budget into surplus in 2012-13.”
That was my statement yesterday, that's my position and the position of the Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible)
PM: We are going to have to make some tough choices, when you look at the scale of the damage that we're seeing in Queensland, and we've seen the images on our TV screens and we're obviously very fearful about the level of damage underneath when floodwaters recede and we can truly see what's happened to roads, to railway lines, to bridges, to community infrastructure like schools. This is going to be a huge task and it's going to require tough choices, we will work through to make those tough choices.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well we are going to work through to make tough choices, obviously it would be irresponsible of me at this stage to be indicating to you how that's all going to be done, we don't even know what the price tag is yet because we can't even know what the full flood damage is. So we will work through this a step at a time, but I do want to be very clear with people, we face some very tough choices with the Federal Budget but we'll make them so that we are there rebuilding Queensland and so that we are there bringing the Budget to surplus in 2012-13.
JOURNALIST: How long do you think it will be before you get the (inaudible)
PM: Look that's probably a question almost better directed to people from the weather bureau and our hydrologists that have given us all of the advice during the Queensland flood crisis. We will be putting together a view about the infrastructure rebuild in Queensland as soon as we can, but we are here with mother nature dictating many of the circumstances, so there will be the need to see floodwaters recede before we can get an accurate picture. In Queensland obviously floodwaters have hit at different times in different places, places went into recovery earlier, some places went into recovery earlier, and so we'll get the infrastructure view a piece at a time as communities move through recovery into rebuilding. That will then be able to be put together to give us the total picture, we're obviously working on that now but we need floodwaters to recede to enable us to see the full damage.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister would the Government consider dipping into (inaudible) funds to find the (inaudible) for reconstruction?
PM: Look we will have to make decisions about financing the reconstruction but I'm not going to speculate about how that should be done, it would not be responsible for me to do so, we'll get a view about the scale of the damage, a better view than we can have today, as floodwaters recede and when we have that better view we will make the decisions necessary to support the rebuilding of Queensland and to bring the Budget to surplus in 2012-13.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister I know you said you will be responding to Ted Baillieu's request for Federal Government support for Victorian flood (inaudible) as soon as possible, is it likely they will receive financial support from the Federal Government?
PM: I received Premier Baillieu's letter from him last night, so we will respond to it as soon as possible, he's asking for natural disaster assistance in what we call category-C, so that means that there is assistance for households with replacing household effects that have been ruined by floodwaters. Everybody I think understands the filthy muck and devastation people come back to after floodwaters have been through their homes and so how much needs to be replaced in a household. So there's support for household contents, clean-up money support for small businesses and primary producers. We've already triggered and are in a position to assist people with income support when they're not able to go about their ordinary work or do their ordinary business, so that could be someone who normally works on a farm but can't do that job at the moment because of the floodwaters, or someone who works in a business but can't get to the business because of the floodwaters, or someone who operates a small business, say a coffee shop or something like that, which is inundated by floodwaters itself so the business can't be operated; so that assistance is already there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister as you've travelled from flood communities in Queensland into Victoria, how has the peoples' reaction affected you?
PM: Well these are such tough days for people and I've been out in evacuation centres talking to people, offering some words of comfort because some people are understandably very, very distressed and for me the impact is one where you feel such great sorrow for peoples' loss but also a sense of determination about working with them in the rebuild and people I think have had on display the full range of emotions from being tearful and downhearted through to Aussie larrikinism and jokes and ways of keeping their spirits up. I had a woman say to be yesterday ‘oh well at least now I won't have to get the carpets cleaned I'll be able to get new carpets', I mean that kind of joking in the face of adversity which is a typically Australian response. So that's really very, very heart-warming.
So for me there's a lot of sorrow, a lot of sorrow, but also a lot of pride seeing how Australians responded and a lot of determination about how we're going to get through this and how we're going to rebuild from it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there's been a lot of comparison to the Victorian bushfires. (inaudible) rebuilding and redesign and things like that, so has there been much comparison from the Federal Government's point of view looking at the problems that are still going for Victoria and how that may then be transported to (inaudible) Queensland (inaudible) a year, two years down the track?
PM: I think there are a lot of experiences that Victoria's been through which can help people in Queensland  -  no two circumstances are ever alike  -  but there are always things that can be learned and taken through to the next stage. So I know Premier Baillieu has been in direct contact with Premier Bligh, there will be that kind of discussion and exchange, obviously as a Federal Government we'll facilitate that discussion and exchange. For some of the communities that I've seen in Queensland their circumstances did very much remind me of the community reaction after the Victorian bushfires.  I mean Lindsey's right to say water and fire are two opposite ends of the spectrum but some of the communities like Grantham have been psychologically through the same thing as our bushfire communities which is literally you were sitting in your home and life was normal one moment and then devastation hit you the next. That absolute traumatic unbelievable power of nature is just on you in ten seconds; that sort of feeling of shock and trauma is very much the same. So I think there are things that happened here that we can learn from and experiences we can share.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on a different issue why has NBN Co been given an exemption from Freedom of Information law?
PM: My understanding is this is the ordinary operation of the Freedom of Information Act, that a body like NBN Co would not be subject to it, so for further details on that obviously feel free to speak to Senator Conroy but it is the ordinary operation of the FOI Act.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I think freedom of information laws, we've got the system, the system's there and the system is one where something like NBN Co is not covered by it so there's nothing extraordinary or unusual about it, it's just ordinary business of government.
Thank you. 



As everyday Australians show their compassion and determination by pulling together to help Queenslanders affected by the devastating floods, Australian businesses have answered the call as well.
The Prime Minister today announced the Australian Government will immediately establish a Business Taskforce to support Queenslanders in the immediate recovery effort.
The Business Taskforce will bring together ten Australian business leaders from a range of industries to mobilise business efforts across Australia.
The focus will be on:
 * 	Leveraging corporate donations of dollars
 * 	Helping drive and coordinate in-kind donations
 * 	Using Australia's best business expertise to help with business recovery and rebuilding efforts in Queensland.
The Taskforce will be chaired by the Federal Treasurer and will meet with the Prime Minister for the first time next week.
The support pouring in from across Australia for people affected by the Queensland floods has been amazing  -  but Queensland is going to need much, much more in the coming months.
It is important to ensure that business support is marshaled effectively to ensure it gets to the areas and people who need it most, as well as to make sure that the resources being provided are useful and appropriate. 
The Taskforce will be established for three months initially, with its ongoing operation to be reviewed at that time.
The Taskforce will play no role in directing government funding or managing the government's response to the floods disaster. Instead, it will play the important role of helping to drive the involvement of a key sector of Australia in supporting Queensland at this difficult time.
Members of the Taskforce
 * 	Wayne Swan, Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer
 * 	Bill Shorten, Assistant Treasurer
 * 	Andrew Fraser, Queensland Treasurer
 * 	Graham Bradley, Business Council of Australia President
 * 	Brian Flannery, White Energy Chief Executive
 * 	Lindsay Fox, Linfox Chairman
 * 	Wayne Goss, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Chairman
 * 	Jock Laurie, National Farmers Federation President
 * 	Catherine Livingstone, Telstra, Macquarie Bank, WorleyParsons Director
 * 	Michael Luscombe, Woolworths CEO
 * 	David Michaelis, Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry President
 * 	Heather Ridout, Australian Industry Group CEO
 * 	David Stewart, Leighton Holdings Ltd CEO 



PM: I'm here today with Brigadier Paul McLachlan and I've been briefed on the Defence Force efforts across Queensland. We have 1, 885 Defence Force personnel out across Queensland today making a difference in clean-up and recovery.
I've had the opportunity to directly see some of their work in Long Street, East Graceville, where they are literally just taking a mountain of rubbish off the streets, helping with the clean up. When I saw them today in pouring rain, despite the circumstances, they were in good spirits working hard and almost all of them commented to me that they are working alongside volunteers who just keep pouring in. People turning up with trucks, people turning up with equipment, to work alongside them and to help out.
So I do want to say in this opportunity to all of our Defence Force personnel who are out there working today, a very big thank you, they are making an incredible difference. And of course many of them are directly out there making a difference to the filth and the muck and the garbage, but there are continuing operations to get water to purification in to townships that need it, to make sure that food is moving around, getting to the places it's needed. There's continuing search work happening in the Lockyer Valley, right across Queensland Defence Force personnel in a myriad of ways are making a real difference.
So Paul, to you and your team, thank you very much.
Today too we know that there are people in Victoria battling rising flood waters. So here in Queensland I've been focused on the work that's happening in clean-up and recovery, but in Victoria we do have rising flood waters and some very anxious communities. I can announce that the Government will be making payments available through our Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment Scheme, that means that people who have been hit by flood waters can make a claim for emergency money, that first assistance they need when they've been evacuated, when they need some cash to get them through and that payment is $1, 000 per adult and $400 per child. I've also worked with the Premier of Victoria, with Ted Baillieu to work through to make assistance available through our Natural Disaster Relief arrangements and that assistance will be in the form of clean up money for primary producers and small businesses as well as some assistance for households.
From tomorrow people will be able to ring 180 22 66 to get full details of those payments, but today as communities in Victoria face difficult flood circumstances, our thoughts are very much with them as they go through what will be a stressing time and a difficult time.
But I did have the opportunity to visit in Victoria and when I did overwhelmingly peoples' thoughts were here with the people of Queensland, even as they faced flood waters themselves.
So with those words and that thank you I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Has the enormity of what's happened in Brisbane (inaudible)
PM: The scale of what's happened here is just almost beyond imagining, that's why it's great to be able to get out on the ground and actually see what's happened to people's homes, and I had a look through at a house today, clean up in progress and got to see what it looked like as the family and friends were going about the clean up. I had the opportunity to travel, not only in Brisbane and Ipswich, but to Rockhampton and St George to see the flood waters from the air and just see where they hit houses on the ground.
I had the opportunity to be in the Lockyer Valley and Toowoomba and see what's happened in those communities and talk to people who have been directly affected by these flood waters.
So, it's huge, it's everywhere, with so much of this great State facing troubles at the same time and when I've been here, people are of resilient spirit, but this is a big disaster and it's going to take a long time to recovery.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We will make the decisions necessary to rebuild Queensland. So my focus is on making sure that we are rebuilding Queensland. It is going to require us to do a lot of hard work, make some difficult choices and decisions to rebuild Queensland and to bring the budget to surplus in 2013 as promised.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, which is more important for you?
PM: Both, we will rebuild Queensland definitely, full stop, we will rebuild Queensland and we will make the difficult decisions necessary to bring the Budget to surplus in 2012-13. This is not either/or, this is both.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what can the Government do to ensure that flood insurance remains accessible to everyone?
PM: Look I don't want to speculate on what might happen with premiums in the future but as you would have seen the Treasurer Wayne Swan say, we are doing work with insurance companies, doing work to say that we want insurers to extend the maximum generosity and compassion to their fellow Australians in these difficult circumstances. We've seen community spirit on display everywhere, I saw some of it today as people worked alongside Defence Force personnel in the clean up. We want that spirit of generosity to also be taken by our insurance companies. As we said through Wayne Swan the Treasurer, there may well be a need to look at questions like flood insurance, its design, what the definition of ‘flood' is so that people can have clarity in the future about what they're covered for.
JOURNALIST: There's been some suggestions that insurance companies like RACQ and that sort, you know, the smaller ones may not be able to afford to pay out all these claims, that the Government should consider stepping-in in that regard?
PM: Well look I'm not going to speculate on hypotheticals, our focus here is on clean-up and on recovery and rebuilding. A tremendous job is happening on clean-up and 1,885 great Defence Force personnel are working and many of them are making a direct difference to clean-up. We are working through clean-up; we'll work through recovery and then work through rebuilding. In the days ahead there's going to be any number of issues that we're going to have to confront and work our way through, but we need to go through it stage by stage with the people of Queensland to help people recover and to help the state rebuild.
JOURNALIST: I realise the floods are obviously a priority now, but this is a big year politically for you as well. What are your priorities for the next 12 months?
PM: Well the Government's priorities are something that I will be speaking about in coming days and I think all of those priorities are pretty clear, it's about keeping our economy strong, it's about extending the benefits of opportunity to all Australians, continuing to improve our education system. It's about improving health, and also about tackling the challenge of climate change and pricing carbon. We've got a big reform agenda to work through but my focus right now standing here is on Queensland and recovering from this disaster and my focus as Prime Minister is also on those other parts of the country that aren't facing a disaster of this scale but are still facing floodwaters.
JOURNALIST: Will the Government have to re-prioritise though in the face of this disaster (inaudible)
PM: You betcha, yes, absolutely and they are the difficult decisions of the days ahead but we will do what we need to to rebuild Queensland, to be here working with Queensland as it is rebuilt. People now are on the immediate task, I've had the opportunity to be briefed by the Lord-Mayor this morning, talking to me about the rubbish removal that's happening right throughout the city of Brisbane, the sheer scale of the amount of filth and much and rubbish and broken household effects that need to be shovelled off streets and got away as part of clean-up. So the focus now is on that but quickly it will turn to rebuilding and we'll be here with the people of Queensland rebuilding Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Can you just clarify that (inaudible) are they the ones that are currently (inaudible)
PM: That's right, there's a payment called, the technical name is the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment. This is the first emergency money that people can get, so it's in those really fraught days when peoples' homes have been flood inundated or affected by floods, they may be in an evacuation centre, circumstances like that where they need some cash, they might have to go and try and get some medicines or something that they had to leave behind when they left their homes; it's that emergency cash money.
That's been made available in Queensland and the most recent advice to me is more than $130 million had been paid as emergency assistance to people, that same assistance has been made available for parts of New South Wales that have got floodwaters, much of that coming from Queensland as a result of the water flow, and it will be made available for parts of Victoria and people will be able to get full details of that through the same telephone number that people have been using here, if people can look for those details from tomorrow, check 180 22 66.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister I just have a question from our Canberra bureau -
 PM: Sure -
JOURNALIST: How do you think the Greens having the balance of power come July, how do you think that will change Australian (inaudible)
PM: Well, from the Government's point of view we'll just be governing guided by our values and delivering for the people of Australia.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Attorney-General Robert McClelland today announced further Commonwealth assistance for Victorian communities impacted by recent severe flooding.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) has been activated which will provide those eligible with a one-off payment of $1,000 for adults and $400 for each child.
This payment will go some way to helping people get back on their feet as they get on with the job of rebuilding their lives and cleaning up.
In addition, the Gillard Government has also activated the ‘Category C' Community Recovery Package under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
The package includes:
 * 	$4 million Community Recovery Fund to help restore community facilities; and
 * 	$25,000 clean up and restoration grants for small businesses and primary producers. 
This package will help flood affected communities recover as well as minimise the economic impact of the floods and allow people to get back to business as quickly as possible.
This announcement is in addition to Commonwealth assistance already being provided across 27 local government areas under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements, including:
 * 	personal hardship and distress assistance;
 * 	restoration of essential public infrastructure; and
 * 	counter disaster operations.
Through the Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy, the Government is also providing additional support for employees, small businesses and farmers who have lost income as a direct result of the floods.
The Australian Government will continue to work with Victoria to ensure affected communities get the support they need.
Information about the AGDRP and the Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy can be obtained through the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 2266. The line will be open from 8am to 8pm local time, seven days a week. 
Enquiries in relation to the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) should be directed to the Victorian Department of Human Services on 1300 650 172 or visit www.dhs.vic.gov.au/emergency



HOST: Prime Minister thanks for your time tonight.
PM: My pleasure.
HOST: Now while the floods are ongoing and the damage bill just keeps mounting, there have been estimates, reported estimates, of up to $30 billion for Queensland and then of course there's the other States, the other areas. What's the latest estimate in regard to damage and lost production that you're working with?
PM: We don't know what the damage bill is for rebuilding infrastructure yet and we won't be able to know with clarity for some time. We do have to wait for floodwaters to subside to see what's underneath, but this is a major economic impact from the floods. Everybody's talked about 1974 comparisons for the actual floodwater, what we've got to remember is that in 1974 Queensland was a far smaller part of our national economy than it is now, around 14 per cent then, around 19 per cent now. And Queensland contributes about 25 per cent of our exports so a flood crisis in Queensland has major economic impacts around the nation.
HOST: Even if no one is certain of the amount yet and you do know, what everyone knows is that it is going to be huge and that the lion's share of that cost will be borne by the Commonwealth. Now in light of that what economic reason, economic reason, do you have for pushing on for a Budget surplus for 2012-13?
PM: Well put simply the economic reason is our economy will be running at close to full capacity at that period of time. We are facing a big repair bill for Queensland, and we are facing economic consequences of the floodwaters. To take an example Queensland supplies 80 per cent of our coking coal, the coking coal that comes out of Australia, it exports $100 million of it a day and 40 mines, around about, haven't been able to work during the floods. So yes this is having an impact but we've got to remember our economy is strong with a large pipeline of investment coming through. That means by 2012-13 our economy will be running hot and when your economy's running hot, that's the right time to be having a Budget surplus and saving for the future.
HOST: But Prime Minister business, financial and union leaders are now raising doubts about sticking to the Budget surplus timetable and couple I spoke to earlier today said that if you do hold steadfastly to that timetable, it's for political, not any good economic reason. So therefore, why not reconsider it?
PM: It is for a good economic reason and that's why it's the right way to have our Budget position given where the economy will be at that time. Let's remember strong economy, we came out of the global financial crisis strong, an economy that was running or tending to run close to full capacity. That the right thing to be doing in those circumstances is to have a Budget surplus, that's why we had determined that we would bring the Budget to surplus in 2012-13-
HOST: But if economists and business leaders Prime Minister are saying ‘look we don't have to stick to this, this can rollover, we don't have to steadfastly stick to this timetable' then surely they'd be saying that with some basis?
PM: Well I've got to respectfully disagree. As Prime Minister what I'm saying to the nation is we will rebuild Queensland and we will bring the Budget to surplus in 2012-13 because that's what our economy will require. Now that does mean we face a number of tough choices and I am working on making those tough choices right now.
HOST: Let's talk about a couple of those potential tough choices. Your Government, until now, hasn't ruled out a flood levy. Will you rule it out now?
PM: This is going to require some difficult decisions, there will be spending cut backs and there may also be a levy. I am working on those decisions now and when I'm able to I will announce them at the appropriate time, we obviously have more work to do, we don't have the total damage bill yet, but I want to be very blunt with Australians, we have a lot of flood damage to repair in Queensland, there will be some economic effects on GDP growth, a short-term effect on inflation with food prices and the like, but our economy is strong and we will get through this by pulling together the same way we got through the global financial crisis, by pulling together.
HOST: You say there may be a flood levy, how likely is it? Is it a certainty?
PM: I'm using that terminology deliberately, I am working through the decisions now, when the decisions are made then of course I will announce them, but I think people from a standpoint of commonsense would say we've been fully engaged in responding to the immediate flood crisis, making emergency payments available, getting the Australian Defence Force in there assisting. We don't know what the full damage bill is yet but of course we're collaborating with the Queensland Government and local governments on getting an assessment of the damage bill and we'll see more as floodwaters recede, and at the same time, I am working on making the decisions this nation will need to in order to rebuild Queensland and have the appropriate Budget strategy which is bringing the Budget to surplus in 2012-13.
HOST: Now the independent MP Tony Windsor has said a flood levy should be considered and he believes most Australians would be willing to pay into it. Now you've been travelling the country over this past few weeks on this issue of floods, visiting flood areas, have you actually had the opportunity to ask folks on the ground ‘are you prepared to pay a higher tax, an extra tax to pay for this'?
PM: Now I haven't, when I've been out on the ground in evacuation centres and when people have been cleaning up from the floods I've been chatting to people to provide some words of reassurance and support, there have been a few tears along the way, there's also been some great Aussie good humour and larrikin spirit, and I've of course talked to people about their individual entitlements, what we can do to assist them with emergency payments and help their business recovery and their farm recover. But at the end of the day, whatever the community thinks about the measures I determine are necessary, I'll decide and we'll do them. I suspect we'll get a fair bit of criticism and that there will be things I decide are necessary that won't be very popular at all, but we need to make the decisions to rebuild Queensland and to get the Budget to surplus.
HOST: Now the economist Saul Eslake believes before looking at a levy, at more taxes, that Government spending should be seriously reviewed, the cutbacks and reigning-in in certain areas ranging from the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme to the first homeowners grant. Now do you know yet what areas you will be looking at and will you, in priority, cutback before you look at a levy or a tax?
PM: There will certainly be spending cutbacks. I'm not in a position tonight to detail to you the areas, I am working on that now, working of course with Treasurer Wayne Swan and my federal colleagues on those decisions, but there will be spending cutbacks and there may also be a levy.
HOST: So maybe both?
PM: Well I've put it as plainly as I possibly can, there will be spending cutbacks and there may also be a levy. We are obviously working on those decisions now, as we work with our Queensland colleagues to clarify the bill for infrastructure rebuilding. At the same time, of course we're seeing floodwaters in Victoria, they're right in the midst of battling those floodwaters and there may well be infrastructure rebuilding that needs to be done after those floodwaters recede.
HOST: Prime Minister in terms of funding for the rebuilding what about Tony Abbott's idea of scrapping the National Broadband Network and using some of that money?
PM: I've seen this suggested and this is a misunderstanding of the way in which the National Broadband Network is being financed. The National Broadband Network is an investment which will end up earning interest money, effectively, for taxpayers. It's the same as investing in a house and then when you ultimately sell it you get your money back with interest, so this is a very different form of investment expenditure than the budget spending that governments normally do from year to year, and apart from that we've got to be able to deal with the consequences of floods as well as do the big economic reforms necessary for this nation's future and building the infrastructure we need for the future is part of that necessary economic reform.
I think Australians would be rightly very disappointed is we just said ‘well the only thing we're going to do is recover from the floods' as considerable as that task is, and we're not going to invest today in the things that are going to ensure they and their children have jobs tomorrow.
HOST: Prime Minister a major issue that has arisen out of these floods is that of insurance. Frustration is deepening and widening among people who thought they had flood cover and evidently don't. Just how committed are you to ensuring that there is a clearer standardised definition of ‘flood' in policies, without it being used as a reason to hike premiums?
PM: My colleague Wayne Swan and Assistant Treasurer Bill Shorten have been meeting with the insurance industry, they've been doing that from the point of view of prevailing upon them to show the same spirit of generosity in this flood crisis as Australians have shown to each other. So we're certainly putting that message to the insurance industry and yes this issue has been raised about standardising what it means to be flooded, hit by floodwaters, so that's something that the Government is considering. But for people who are in this circumstance right now obviously we do want to send a message to the insurance industry to be on the side of generosity; on this occasion I think Australians expect that.
HOST: But if it's in black and white in a policy, how can they be on the side of generosity when they could argue back ‘well it's all there, it's in black and white, it's in a policy'?
PM: Well my understanding is that there are some areas of interpretation too that people are raising as to what their policies mean, so on many occasions it's not as simple as saying ‘it's in black and white' and everybody clearly understood what was covered and what wasn't.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard thank you so much for your time tonight.
PM: Thank you. 



Australians all,
It's always wonderful to be back in my home town.  I was last here for a family Christmas and the celebration of Proclamation Day, a celebration of the spirit of South Australia. 
Nothing better symbolises that spirit than the place we gather in today - Adelaide Town Hall.
Nearly a hundred and fifty years ago Adelaide's citizens decided to build the largest municipal building in the Southern Hemisphere.
There's much I wouldn't recreate about nineteenth century politics! 
But that optimism and confidence, that vision for the future and practical will to build it now, is something we should hold dear, in the best of times and the worst of times.
Today, we come together to celebrate the spirit of our nation.
The days of summer have an iconic appeal for Australians.  We hope for lazy days, watching the cricket or playing it in the back yard, time at the beach or around a barbie, the special joy of more time with family and friends.
But this summer, such hopes have not been realised.
Instead, as a nation we have endured some of the worst floods in our history. 
Together we have shared the shock and then the horror at the scale of the destruction.
Together we are grieving for the lives lost.
And we have bonded together and worked together to see the nation through.
From Premier Anna Bligh, who faced the floods with steel in her backbone and occasional tears in her eyes, to the volunteers who have been in evacuation centres with a cup of tea and a welcoming smile, even when their own homes were threatened, to the soldiers who cancelled their leave to move mountains of rubbish, to the unbelievable number of Queenslanders who turned up to help a stranger, we have pulled together.
I have been privileged to share some precious moments with those whose courage in adversity simply takes your breath away and those Aussies whose good humour has never failed them not matter how hard life is.
- the teenager evacuated in the middle of the night sitting still wearing her Hello Kitty pyjamas and a big smile as she sits in an evacuation centre surrounded by strangers;
- the Mayor of Lockyer Valley Steve Jones who saved so many with a friend, a bulldozer and a truck;
- the child in the Helidon evacuation centre who told me her story of sitting on the roof hoping for rescue and who survived even as half the house fell away;
- the brave man from our Defence Force who waded through chest high water to rescue an elderly lady and get her on to a helicopter even though a nearby live electrical cable could have ended both their lives;
- the clown who turned up to entertain the kids in an evacuation centre clutching a chicken called “KFC”.
Even as I have listened, held a hand, shared a laugh, helped dry some tears ... even in the depths of the sorrow, I have been so very proud.
I'm proud of everyone associated with the rescue and recovery effort  -  both those on the ground and those who have expressed their concern through donations, prayers and every kind of support. 
I'm proud of the evacuees. 
I've met people who lost everything they owned, people with nothing but the clothes on their back and their wedding photos under their arm and who said to me over and over:
We'll be alright, there are plenty worse off than us.
You couldn't make it up.  It's just so humbling to meet people like that.
I'm proud of the thousands of clean up volunteers. 
They are amazing.  Brisbane needed help.  And so who helped?  First of all, Brisbane.
With sun hats and strong gloves, with long pants and work boots, with complete determination and complete good humour, they came.
Some people said it's incredible, the generosity of strangers.  But they weren't strangers, really. 
They were Australians.
This Australia Day, mateship lives.
When things get hard, Australians stick together.  We just do.
I've long admired what historian Gavan Daws said about the Allied prisoners of war under the Japanese in places like Changi:
...all the way down to starvation rations, to a hundred pounds of body weight and less, to the extremities of degradation  -  all the way to death  -  the prisoners of the Japanese remained inextinguishably American, Australian, British. 
The Americans were the great individualists of the camps. 
The British hung on to their class structure like bulldogs. 
And the Australians kept trying to construct little male-bonded welfare states.
While time has moved on, and today we have moved beyond simply “male bonding” and “welfare states”, when things are tough, Australian mateship comes through.
Over this devastating summer, Australians have reached out to each other with the hand of mateship and we haven't let go.
The force of the story about Aussies in Changi isn't the mateship that was shown on the first day of imprisonment, it is that the mateship endured through the continuing hell.
On this Australia Day, I am calling on our nation to dedicate ourselves to continuing the spirit of mateship, to not letting go in the hard days of recovery and rebuilding to come.
And on this Australia Day, I am calling on our nation to pursue with new determination the Aussie fair go, which alongside mateship, defines the spirit of our nation.
Here in Adelaide, I grew up surrounded by this kind of Aussie spirit and I am still driven by those values today.
From their little Welsh town to Pennington Migrant Hostel to their own home in the suburbs, Dad worked two jobs and Mum worked the afternoon shift to buy a home and educate their kids.
And they thrived in this egalitarian country with its larrikin embrace of informality because they are egalitarian by instinct.  They embraced the sense of opportunity and community that they found in Australia and the sense of future possibilities for their children that Australia so clearly offered them.  
They always taught me that everyone is equal and worthy of respect.
It's wrong to view yourself as better than the person who waits on you in a restaurant  -  or at a flash Town Hall lunch.
It's wrong to believe that you should defer to anyone simply by dint of them having a title, occupation or background different from your own.
I was a shy child, who through the nurture of my family found the sense of self to face the world with confidence, to look others in the eye and greet them with a firm shake of the hand.
I grew up an Australian.
And I've always known that the overwhelming majority of Australians are as thoughtful and tolerant and compassionate as we've seen these last two weeks.  
I know this because they are my neighbours and friends.
And as Prime Minister I am reminded of it every day.
Through my work, I have met some remarkable Australians.  Some famous, most unknown.  I've learnt so much from meeting them and been reminded of many things I already knew.
In the plants and mines in the west and the north I've seen the great Australian cultural tradition of informality that rejects the sort of snobbishness and expectations of obsequiousness that infect other societies.  “Oi Julia, give us a wave.”  They don't talk like that to the President of France.  And I love it.
In Afghanistan, I've met Australian soldiers, and I've seen Australian strength and compassion.
As our diggers risk everything they have, to deny terrorism a safe haven, while protecting the weak and allowing little girls to learn to read.
And in schools and hospitals and at factories and on farms all over Australia I've met all sorts of workers whose very lives show the benefits and dignity of work itself.
It's when I am lucky enough to share the life stories of working Australians and their families that I renew my determination to make Australia fair forever.
To make sure Australia is a place where demography is not destiny and where success in life is defined by preparedness to work hard not by where you are born or what your parents did.
A place where you get a fair go.
This week we will be reminded of so much that is good about our country.
I'll be privileged to travel from here to Sydney, and Perth, and Canberra, and see so many Australians in so many phases of life.
Raising our flags, singing our songs, sharing our sorrows, celebrating our achievements.
I'll meet a new Australian of the Year and I'll meet new Australian citizens.
Australians will picnic and barbecue, read poems and give speeches, from the Rocks to the Rock.
Play cricket and tennis and probably crack whips and chop wood too.
It's a time to celebrate, and we will.  And we'll reflect.
Of all the unforgettable things I heard in Queensland last week, one that will live with me through my life as Prime Minister is the families who were together in the worst moments as the water tried to tear them apart and who told me that in that moment all they could say to each other was
Don't let go.
And they made it, together.
As people, as families, as a country, we have so many good things already in our hands, good things to pass on for the future.
Our wealth, our way of life, our values.
As we prepare for Australia Day my message to you here and to Australians all, is simple.
Don't let go.
We will hang on to each other in the worst times and in the best.
We will hang on to our Aussie mateship and our Aussie fair go in the worst times and in the best.
Because we are Australian. 



PM: It's absolutely fantastic to see the way that Australians have been pulling together during the tough times that our nation's been enduring over the last few weeks and obviously the challenges aren't over yet as we face floodwaters in Victoria.
I think as Australians pull together through these tough times they understand that we face some difficult choices in the weeks and months ahead, some difficult choices to make sure that we can rebuild the damage that's been done by floodwaters, the damage to infrastructure that needs to be repaired. As Prime Minister, I am working on making those tough decisions and as I was clear last night with the Australian people, there will be difficult decisions, there will be spending cutbacks and there may also be a levy to support the rebuilding that we need to do. But I'm confident, as a nation, we will pull together, that's an Australian thing to do, a very Australian thing to do, we'll pull together and we'll get through this.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, South Australians already pay a save the River Murray levy and they also pay an emergency services levy. Do you think they're really going to cop another levy?
PM: I think there will be people who don't like some of the decisions that I will have to make, but they are difficult decisions, when I make those decisions I fully expect that there will be some criticism and there will be some complaint, but I'm determined that we make the decisions that are right for the nation and right to rebuild the nation after the devastation that we've seen.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it is fair though for the many people who've already donated generously to the flood appeal to now face another levy?
PM: I'd certainly encourage Australians to keep donating to the flood appeal and people have been doing that in all sorts of ways, whether it's from a humble sausage sizzle or whether it's been some of the huge corporate donations that we've seen into the Premier's relief fund, it's been fantastic and I'm sure Australians are going to continue with that spirit of giving. As a nation we do now face some difficult decisions about how to support rebuilding. As Prime Minister I'm working through and making those decisions now, they're not easy choices, there will be spending cutbacks, there may also be a levy, but I am determined that we will rebuild the damage that's been done.
JOURNALIST: How would you see that levy working?
PM: Well I'm not going to speculate on matters, we will announce them as soon as we are able to. I just wanted to be upfront with the Australian people and so I'm indicating to the Australian people, we've been through a difficult period, it's not over yet in terms of the immediate crisis, we're still battling floodwaters in too many places and then there's the hard work, the months and months and months of recovery and rebuilding to do and in that recovery and rebuilding we will be rebuilding Queensland, making good the damage that's been done by floodwaters. That does mean there'll be spending cutbacks, it may also mean that there will be a levy. When I'm in a position to give people the full range of decisions I certainly will, but I do want Australians to know that as Prime Minister I'm working through what is a hard set of choices now and I will work through them in the interests of the nation and rebuilding the damage done.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just on a much lighter note, there's a major fundraiser here this week in the town hall, Mike Rann's one of the pantomime characters according to the release here, how do you reckon he'd go dressed as Peter Pan?
PM: I've heard about this fundraiser in the town hall, I've heard that Mike Rann is playing a character in a play, I don't have any inside information as to what that character is but whatever it is, he'll do it extraordinarily well.
JOURNALIST: How much is the levy about returning the Budget to surplus?
PM: Any of these decisions, I want to be clear about this. We've got some tough choices, there'll be some spending cutbacks, there may be a levy and that will be about rebuilding full stop.
Thank you. 



I want to begin by acknowledging two great Australians, Gough and Margaret Whitlam. The Chinese community  -  and the People's Republic  -  have no truer friends and I know Gough and Margaret are with us in spirit tonight.
I am a migrant.
I came here on a long journey with my family in search of a better life.
I found that better life  -  better than I could ever have imagined: a great education; a great job; and a humbling opportunity to serve our nation in public life.
But more than these things:
I found a home.
A place to belong.
A place to dig deep roots.
A place to bond with and people to bond to with.
To me that is the meaning of Australia Day.
Acceptance.
Commitment.
Mateship.
Belonging. 
And in the history of this nation, few have such a sense of belonging as the Australian Chinese community.
We don't know the name of the first Chinese migrant to come to this land; what he did or when he died.
But we know for certain that from the 1820s onwards, the Chinese have been a proud part of this nation and the story of its building.
The Chinese were there in the long decades of striving and struggle:
On the farms and the gold fields.
The docks and the warehouses and the workshops.
The story is told in records and artefacts.
In temples and churches and stores that survive.
And in the Chinese headstones to be found in cemeteries across inland Australia.
There's even a bookmaker's ledger in Launceston showing Melbourne Cup bets written entirely in Chinese.
But friends,
We know the story most directly from the families who have treasured their Chinese identity down the generations, while retaining a fierce and abiding loyalty to this country.
The journey was not always easy.
As we know from the current floods and the recent drought, this country can be harsh and unforgiving.
It took remarkable courage to travel from a different culture and build a new future in a strange land.
For some, it was too hard.
I was touched by the story of Kwan Hong Kee, a businessman who came to Australia from China in 1885.
Despite high hopes, his career was beset by frustration and failure.
But just before he passed away, he wrote a memoir for his children and it is a work of great wisdom and deep humility.
At the end of the book, looking back over his life, he had this to say:
If you have good fortune, do not be proud, and if you have misfortune, do not be downhearted. Be diligent, and thrifty.
Look forward with courage. Do your best.
Yesterday, in my home town of Adelaide, in my own words, I called on our nation to look forward with courage as we overcome adversity.  I called on the nation to make this Australia a celebration of and rededication to the great Australian values of mateship and a fair go.  To Australians, who have joined hands in such tough times, my message is ‘don't let go'.
Here, tonight, I acknowledge that across our history the larrikin embrace of this nation was not always extended to the Chinese community.
But you never lost faith in the nation.
So much so that the Chinese community welcomed the advent of Federation with open arms, and sent one of its finest sons to Gallipoli, Billy Sing.
Culture, language, background  -  none of these determine our right to belong.
If you love this country, embrace its values and work hard for its future, you are Australian.
There is no other test.
There is no other bar.
Friends,
As we approach two centuries of Chinese settlement in Australia, we do so with pride and with satisfaction.
Today, the equalitarian embrace of this nation does extend to the Chinese community and we won't let go.
Instead, today, we warmly celebrate the Chinese community's growth in size and in influence: a population approaching 700,000; a sophisticated range of community services; and extraordinary success in the professions, the arts, media, sport, politics and academia.
It has been an incredible journey  -  a journey made all the more significant by Australia's renewed engagement with China, pioneered by Gough Whitlam in 1972 and nurtured by every Prime Minister  -  Labor and Coalition  -  in the four decades since.
My commitment to the Australia-China relationship is enduring and strong.
I welcome Ambassador Chen to his new post.
And look forward to visiting China in the months ahead.
I will do so conscious that this is a decisive decade for China and her place in the world.
Australia welcomes the emergence of China as the world's second-largest economy, and as an important partner in dealing with challenges such as global financial reform, climate change, poverty, food and energy supplies, world trade and regional security.
We are proud to be partners in her journey of progress and prosperity.
Central to that partnership is you  -  the Australian Chinese community  -  who form a special bridge of friendship and understanding.
For two centuries, you have been at the heart of the Australian story.
And so it is truly fitting that Chinese New Year and Australia Day fall so close together. Our celebrations and our stories belong together.
As this lunar New Year begins, I honour the Australian Chinese community and say thank you.
And to those born in the Year of the Rabbit, I offer my special good wishes.
Those born under the sign of the Rabbit are said to be articulate, talented and ambitious.
I was born in the Year of the Ox and we oxen, in turn, are said to be steadfast, confident and determined.
I am indeed determined.
Determined that in this year ahead, we will face the nation's challenges with courage and resolution together.
Restoring the cities and towns hit by floods.
Harnessing our economy's strength to build a society with fairness and opportunity for all.  Ensuring demography is not destiny.
And friends,
We will succeed.
We'll succeed together.  We'll stay together.  We won't let go.
Joined by mateship, driven to deliver a fair go to all, we will be proud of our history even as we build a better and fairer future.
Our best days are yet to come. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Tasmanian Premier David Bartlett today announced joint Commonwealth-Tasmanian Government assistance for primary producers and small businesses in Northern Tasmania affected by flooding.
The Gillard and Bartlett Governments have activated a package of one-off “Category C Grants”  -  worth up to $25,000 - under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRAA). The grants will be funded on a 50/50 basis.
The Prime Minister responded to a request yesterday from Premier Bartlett for Commonwealth additional assistance.
The Prime Minister said the grants would help producers, small businesses and not-for-profit organisations affected by the floods get back to business as quickly as possible.
The Gillard Labor Government is working with the Bartlett Government to support Tasmanian communities as the recovery process continues from the flooding that inundated communities in northern Tasmania earlier this month.
The Attorney-General Robert McClelland and the Member for Braddon Sid Sidebottom were on the ground in flood-affected areas in Northern Tasmania just yesterday to witness the effect this flooding has had on farmers and small businesses.
Category C assistance will:
 * 	Help primary producers with general clean up costs including the removal of debris and dead livestock, purchase of fodder and replacement trading stock and repairs to damaged equipment  and property access  -  without which production and viability could be disrupted beyond the next season; and
 * 	Help small businesses affected by flooding to conduct repairs and resume trading as soon as possible. 
Today's announcement is in addition to joint Federal-Tasmanian Government assistance available under NDRRA to restore critical public infrastructure  -  such as roads and bridges  -  once certain thresholds are met.
Premier David Bartlett said the additional Commonwealth and State assistance will be welcomed by farmers who are in need of help.
“Our primary producers play a vital role in Tasmania's economy. The Tasmanian Government is pleased to be able to help them recover from the recent flood damage,” Mr Bartlett said.
“I want to thank the Prime Minister and the Commonwealth Government for responding so quickly to our request. Our thanks also go to the Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association, which has worked hard to assess the flood damage with us,” he said.
Category C assistance does not compensate for income losses and is not intended to replace insurance. It does not cover damage to dwellings, damages covered by insurance and cost of using own labour, existing staff or own equipment.
Application forms are available at Service Tasmania shops from Monday 24 January, or by calling 1300 135513, or at www.dpipwe.tas.gov.au.
Applications for assistance must be lodged to Service Tasmania shops by Thursday 30 June, 2011.
For primary producers, applications can also be addressed to:
Department of Primary Industries, Parks, Water and Environment
GPO Box 44
Hobart, TAS, 7001
Or faxed to (03) 6228 5123.
Further information is available from Service Tasmania by calling 1300 135 513, or specifically for primary producers by calling DPIPWE on 1300 368 550.  



HOST: Thanks for joining us on the inaugural 6pm program, Prime Minister. It's a small moment in Australian media history, I know, but thanks for being with us. We will talk about what you've been up to in Brisbane today, because I know you've been very busy with the flood relief, but can I ask you a personal straight political question? You've had so much on your plate before the floods I wouldn't blame you if you've had second thoughts on whether or not it was such a smart idea last year to knock over Kevin Rudd. You could say who in their right mind would want to try and run this country at the moment?
PM: Well George let me congratulate you on a moment in history with your new show, and let me say it's a privilege to serve in this position each and every day. I took this position to lead the nation in the best of times and in the worst of times and we've been doing it really tough. This is not the summer we wanted, George, we wanted a nice lazy summer where we could sit at home and watch the cricket, but this is what Mother Nature has done, and we are going to pull together and recover from this.
And every day that I'm out speaking to people I'm just blown away by the community spirit
HOST: I know you've been dealing today with apprentices and people who are eventually going to help in the post-flood reconstruction as it were, a mammoth task. PM are we up to it? I know you're going to try tell me that we are but, in all honesty, are we?
PM: George I'm telling you we're up to it because we are up to it. Here in Brisbane today, I've done two kind of contrasting things but they've been on a theme. I've been in a boardroom talking to the representatives of corporate Australia about what more they can do to help with the efforts to rebuild Queensland and the nation, and I'm here and I've been in Tracy's home, looking at the flood damage, meeting with Matt and the apprentices that he employs, and they're here volunteering, helping Tracy through as just one of the flood victims in Queensland.
So businesses from the biggest in the nation through to local small businesses, are pulling together, and it's been great to meet with the apprentices here. They're part of our workforce of 26,000 apprentices. They're going to be pulling together for the flood effort.
HOST: While you've been busy up there in Brisbane, there's a lot of debate going on, as we speak in fact, about this one-off levy that you've proposed, but isn't a better long-term solution a national disaster fund? Or are we going to have to cop you and Tony Abbott getting at each other ad nauseam over whether a levy is what he would call another great big tax?
PM: The only thing you're going to hear from me is just some plain speaking about what the nation needs and what we need to do now is rebuild. That's going to mean some Budget cutbacks, there'll be tough choices there, probably some complaints, but we're going to do it George because we need to free up the money for the rebuilding, and there may also be a levy.
Australians, I think, understand that part of the contract between us, part of the thing about being Australians together, is that we work together in tough times. The choices I'm making now aren't easy decisions but they're about the nation getting the job done and rebuilding Queensland and other parts of the country.
HOST: I don't want to end on a negative note, but the word I keep hearing from the commentators about your own performance at the moment is that it's disappointing. We like Julia Gillard, we admire Julia Gillard, but it's a bit disappointing. What would you give yourself - honestly - out of 10 at the moment? How do you think you're going?
PM: George look I don't worry about any of that and this isn't about me. This is about people like Tracy whose home's been flooded. This is about people like Matt who is here helping with the rebuilding, helping with the renovation of Tracy's home. This is about leading the nation during a difficult time, making the decisions we need so that we can do the rebuilding here in Queensland and beyond. That's my focus.
HOST: Well you've certainly got plenty on your plate, that's true. Thanks, Prime Minister, thanks again for your time.
PM: Thanks for the opportunity George, and good luck with the first show. 



The Victoria Cross only bears two words, and those words are ‘for valour'.
Two simple words, but nothing else needs to be said, because those two simple words have a universe of meaning. They remind us of the finest traditions of our great Australian Defence Force: love of country; pride in service; mateship.
The Victoria Cross correctly stands before all other decorations; regardless of age; regardless of rank.
Our first VC was awarded in 1900, and since that time Australia has never been without a living VC recipient. It's an unbroken chain of courage that is part of our national story.
From the millions of people who have called Australia home, only 97 have been awarded this very great honour. Of them, only two remain, and today they are joined by a third  -  Benjamin Roberts-Smith. Three giants; three of our greatest living Australians.
Friends, the award conferred today upon Corporal Roberts-Smith honours his valour on a single day of action, but in truth, of course, it honours so much more than that.
It honours the values and the discipline of a soldier; the marks of character acquired throughout a lifetime from family and school, mentors and mates; and the awareness of a greater tradition than that of his own, a greater tradition that binds all of us, a greater tradition of which he is now part, a tradition called Anzac, and in awarding this VC today to Corporal Roberts-Smith, we are saying to him that he breathes that tradition anew.
I had the privilege of spending some time last week with Ben, with Emma, with their beautiful twin girls, Elizabeth and Eve, and also with Ben's mother-in-law Christine, and in those few moments shared together I formed the view that Ben is actually a very humble man, reluctant to be the centre of so much fuss and attention, though of course he is the very centre of so much fuss and attention today, keen to also remind of the bravery of the mates that he fought alongside, and also a man determined to keep his family in his protective and loving embrace.
Exhibiting those characteristics  -  humility, mateship, love of family  -  Ben is clearly one of us, like so many other Australians, but Ben is also different from us; different from because he will always know, as we know now, that in the heat of battle he did not fail when mateship and duty called, and though it might easily have cost him his life, he was fully prepared to give it.
That's why the nation extends this Victoria Cross. It's an award unsought but completely deserved.
Today, on behalf of all Australians, I want to say to Corporal Benjamin Roberts-Smith you went to Afghanistan a soldier.
You came back a hero.
Our nation is enriched by you being among our number.
Today, we demonstrate that with the awarding of an honour so high that even the Chief of our Defence Force salutes those who hold it.
Today, the nation joins with him and we all salute you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today thanked David Bartlett for his service to the people of Tasmania as Premier, following the announcement of his resignation from the position today.
The Prime Minister acknowledged the tremendous contribution David has made for his state, particularly in his roles as Premier and Education Minister. 
The Prime Minister and the former Premier have a shared passion for education and the right for all students to have access to a first-class education, which they jointly pursed in their respective roles of Education Ministers in the Federal and State Governments.
David's belief in the importance of telecommunications also saw him secure the rollout of Australia's National Broadband Network (NBN) ahead of every other state in the country.
As a result, Tasmanians are already benefiting from the power of the NBN.
The Prime Minister wished David well in his future role in the Cabinet, where he will continue to play a leading role in the State Labor Government. 
The Prime Minister also welcomed and congratulated the incoming Premier of Tasmania Lara Giddings.
Lara has been an active and valued member of the state cabinet since 2004 and is well placed to take on the role of Premier.
The Prime Minister looks forward to working with Premier Giddings and her government in the delivery of crucial resources and reform including the provision of disaster relief for flood affected residents, small businesses and farmers in the north of Tasmania, the continued rollout of the NBN, the implementation of national health reform and the delivery of the next generation of the Education Revolution. 



PM: Good morning, I'm here in Brisbane for the first meeting of the Prime Minister's Business Taskforce. Leading corporate figures from around the country are gathering here today for our first discussion about how corporate Australia can work even harder to assist the people of Queensland during this difficult time.
Just like we've seen Australians pull together in so many ways around the country, we've seen the business community pull together to help the people of Queensland. But through today's Taskforce I want to see corporate Australia doing more, doing more to make more donations available to help the people of Queensland, doing more to make more in-kind support available and to coordinate the delivery of that in-kind support so it's doing the best possible work that it can, and working together to make sure that the great expertise that the Australian business community has is brought to assist people in Queensland and communities in Queensland as they recover. So I'm very much looking forward to the day's discussion and I do want to thank each member of the Taskforce for joining this effort.
JOURNALIST: The in-kind donations (inaudible) in that regard?
PM: Well we have in the room people with expertise in transport and logistics, in retailing and food, in telecommunications. There is obviously going to be a role as we work through emergency housing and support to rebuild communities, to look at the sort of in kind assistance people with that expertise could bring.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) this morning said that it'd be good if they all kick in a bit more cash (inaudible) pass the hat around the table?
PM: Well I've certainly been sending a message to corporate Australia that we need to see more donations into the Premier's relief appeal, I wrote to many Australian leading businesses and I'm very pleased to see some of our major companies have stepped up with large donations. So we do need more money, we do need in-kind assistance, and we do need the benefits of the kind of expertise that leading businesspeople have going direct into communities that are rebuilding after all of the devastation.
JOURNALIST: How much do we need Prime Minister?
PM: Well we still don't know what the total damage bill is and of course we've got to be very clear here, the Federal Government is going to step up and do everything we need to do to rebuild Queensland. The efforts through this Business Taskforce are about complementary efforts to make sure that we're seeing the maximum level of donations into the Premier's relief appeal and the maximum coordination of in-kind assistance from the provision of expertise; that'll work alongside what Government does, it's certainly not a substitute.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister when will you decide whether a levy (inaudible)
PM: These are extraordinary times as we recover from the widespread devastation we've seen here in Queensland; these are extraordinary circumstances, and in these extraordinary circumstances I'll be making the decisions we need to - some of them very difficult decisions  -  to make sure that we can support the rebuilding of Queensland. When I have made those decisions, which I will be doing soon, I will of course be explaining them to the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We've already made available hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars of emergency assistance. Obviously one of the things that the recovery authority is going to do is to work through the best use of the money flowing from the relief appeal, but we've got to be very clear here about all of the assistance that Queensland's going to need; people needed emergency money and we've made hundreds of millions of dollars available; people will need assistance replacing household goods and we're making that assistance available. Small business and primary producers will need assistance with clean up money and getting back on their feet and we're making that assistance available. Then we've got to rebuild all of the infrastructure that's been damaged and that's going to take a lot of resources which is why in these very difficult times, we're working our way through the decisions to make that amount of money available. What can be achieved today through this Business Taskforce is complementary to that, corporate Australia has already been generous, I want to see them step up again.
JOURNALIST: What's delaying the levy decision?
PM: Look there are very difficult decisions to make here and of course we're still waiting for the full details of the damage to be known, flood waters are still pressing in many parts and we can't know the full scale of the damage and have full information until floodwaters recede.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I want to make sure I'm working off the best possible information I can get and as soon as I'm in a position to explain my decisions to Australia I'll do that.
Thank you. 



The Gillard Labor Government has today accepted all the recommendations of the Customs and Border Protection's internal review into the Christmas Island tragedy.
The review found that Border Protection Command personnel involved in the rescue effort acted professionally and risked their lives to save others.
Their skills and bravery saw 41 people rescued from the water and 30 deceased people recovered. One man made it to safety by himself.
The Prime Minister wholeheartedly commends the actions of Border Protection Command personnel and thanks them for their service.
The review details the incredibly difficult weather conditions in which the rescue was conducted including high seas, strong winds and low visibility, amongst floating debris and close to the dangerous cliffs that claimed the wrecked boat.
The Government accepts all eight of the review's recommendations and several of them have already been progressed. 
The Government will also favourably consider recommendations from the local Christmas Island Emergency Management Committee which is currently conducting a review of emergency response resources on the Island.
We will also be trialling new surveillance capacity and providing additional safety and rescue arrangements on Christmas Island as soon as possible including:
 * 	a trial of a land based radar surveillance system of the northern approaches beginning at the end of this month
 * 	additional safety and rescue equipment including ‘grenade-style' throwable life jackets, inflatable life rings and hand-held radios at strategic locations
 * 	Australian Federal Police (AFP) and Department of Regional Australia (DORA) vessels.
The Prime Minister has tasked the existing Border Protection Taskforce to oversee the implementation of the recommendations adopted in response to the tragedy in their entirety and without delay.
The Taskforce is a senior cross-agency group chaired by the National Security Adviser Duncan Lewis. It will consider actions that could reasonably assist Christmas Island's search and rescue capacity, particularly during periods of dangerous sea conditions and during the monsoon season. The Taskforce will also consider the search and rescue related recommendations of the Christmas Island Emergency Management Committee referred by the Minister for Regional Australia Simon Crean.
The Government recognises there is strong community and political interest in this incident. 
As a result, the Prime Minister considers it appropriate to refer this tragedy to a broad Parliamentary Committee process.
When Parliament returns next month the Government will move a resolution in the Parliament to establish a Joint Select Committee to inquire into the SIEV 221 incident.
The Government wants this Parliamentary Committee process to be transparent and calls on the Opposition, Greens and Independents to resist the urge to play politics on this issue.
The Acting Minister for Home Affairs has today briefed the cross party Standing Group, established immediately after the incident, about the Customs Internal Review and the Government's response.
The Government will now start consultations with members of the Standing Group, the Opposition, Greens and Independents on the details of this Committee, such as terms of reference and membership. 


Canberra
Thank you to Karl and Lisa for that welcome.
We're here tonight to celebrate some Australian spirit and tomorrow Australia day will be dedicated to celebrating the spirit of mateship that has brought the nation together during such tough times, the spirit that means people come together to lend each other a helping hand, the spirit which means volunteers keep on volunteering even as their own homes are flooded, the spirit that means soldiers come off leave in order to move rubbish for their fellow Australians, the spirit that means Australians in their millions tomorrow will hold barbeques to raise some money for flood victims in Queensland and around the country.
And as part of celebrating that Australian spirit tonight we are going to celebrate and congratulate some remarkable Australians.
I've had the privilege of meeting the nominees earlier today, they come from a broad range of backgrounds, but the one things that ties them together is that they constantly and selflessly give of themselves to the community that they seek to serve.
This is a tremendous occasion to be celebrating these great Australians, I'm looking forward to it and announcing the Australian of the Year. Thank you very much. 



The Prime Minister today condemned Monday's terrorist attack on Moscow's Domodedovo airport.
This brutal attack appears to have killed many and injured more, and the thoughts of Australians are with the families of all those who have suffered as a result of this act.
The Prime Minister offered Australia's condolences to the people of Russia, and to the many nations likely to have been touched by this appalling and indiscriminate act of violence.
The Australian Government condemns all acts of terrorism as cowardly attacks upon innocent people, and will continue to work with its neighbours and with the international community against the perpetrators of terrorist acts.
Australian consular officials in Moscow are urgently seeking to determine if any Australians have been hurt in this attack.
Australians concerned about relatives can contact the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade's consular hotline on 1300 555 135. 



PM: It's great to be in Toowoomba for Australia Day, it's been fantastic to be able to move through the crowd and talk to people, it's also been great to be able to thank the Emergency Services workers who made such a different on that dreadful night in Toowoomba.
I'm please to be here with the local Federal Member Ian Macfarlane, with the local Mayor and with the local State Members as well, I'm also really pleased to be in such a strong community that's showing the spirit of this Australia Day, which is the spirit of mateship, of reaching out to each other and not letting go.
And I've also come here to announce that from next Australia Day on we will create some new Australia Day honours. Through the Governor General I am asking the Queen to create some new Australia Day honours, so from next Australia Day we can especially recognise those people who have helped their fellow Australians during times of emergency and natural disaster.
We'll be backdating that Australia Day honour so it can capture the courageous work that was done during the floods here in Queensland and in other parts of Australia. We'll indeed be backdating that honour so some of the amazing things done in Victoria to help people during the devastating bushfires can also be honoured.
And we won't be waiting 'til next Australia Day, working with Premier Anna Bligh and States and Territories around the nation, we'll make sure that there's some recognition during the course of this year and Premier Bligh as already indicated she want to strike a special medal to honour those who made such sacrifices during the dangerous flooding in Queensland.
So my congratulations go to her on that initiative and I'm looking forward to similar initiatives around the country and then next Australia Day being able to formally honour Australians who have made a difference to their fellow Australians during a natural disaster.
It's great to be here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, of all the places you wanted to come today, you wanted to come to Toowoomba?
PM: Yes I did want to come to Toowoomba. I picked Toowoomba, there are many places to go on Australia Day and of course as Prime Minister I've got some obligations in the Australian Capital Territory in Canberra, but I wanted to come to Toowoomba because this is a community that faced water of such ferocity and is now pulling together with the communities of the Lockyer Valley that faced such deadly quick flash flooding.
This is where Australians are grieving, but also where Australians are pulling together and showing so much community spirit, even in the face of such loss.
JOURNALIST: Is there any developments or announcements with the levy? 
PM: Look, I'll have some things to say about those matters in the days to come, but on Australia Day it's a time to say happy Australia Day, to reflect on what we've lost, to grieve for those we've lost, to extend mateship to each other and to pull together as we rebuild.
JOURNALIST: You've met a lot of people who have been heroes in the last couple of weeks, are there any stories that particularly moved you?
PM: Look, I did have the opportunity to meet Ambulance workers, Police, SES and some of our great Australian Defence Force personnel, Fire fighters, who have all made a difference.
I suppose the thing that's been said to me today that will stay with me is those Emergency Service workers themselves just had to sit at home with a sleepless night afterwards in shock at what they'd seen here. That's how sudden and unexpected it was, that even for professionals who have seen so many other traumatic scenes, it was such a huge shock to see those flood waters.
I think that sums up how many Australians felt when we first heard the news.
Thank you very much.


Regatta Point, Canberra
Around the nation today, Australians will come together, and I believe on Australia Day, we do three things.
First, we celebrate Australian mateship. We celebrate friendship, the bonds that bring us and hold us together, and on this Australia Day, more than many, we will be celebrating those bonds of mateship because we've seen them on such strong display as the nation has come together in the aftermath of the Queensland floods and floods which have hit other parts of our country.
We've seen a remarkable extension of mateship from Australian to Australian, a reaching out of the hand of mateship to help someone in need, and during 2011 we won't let go. We will make sure that that hand of mateship is there as people recover from these devastating floods.
And on Australia Day we also reflect on our national characteristics and attributes: our courage; our humility; our humour; and our fierce determination to make sure that everyone gets a fair go in life, and in an audience containing so many children it's a great day to remind ourselves that truly believing in a fair go means that every Australian child should get the best possible start in life; that for no part of our nation should demography be destiny; that success in this country should be determined by a person's character and attitude and propensity for hard work, not the circumstances of their birth.
And on Australia Day, thirdly, we welcome new members of the Australian family. We will welcome some here today. We will welcome 13,000 around the country.
Now, no migrant's story is the same as another. Every story is unique. Every migrant family can tell the tale of what brought them here, the very special set of circumstances that led them to calling Australia home.
I can lend some insight into the migrant experience, being a migrant myself. We, of course, are Ten Pound Poms. I arrived here in 1966 with my family, with father John and mother Moira and my sister Alison, and whilst I never stood at a citizenship ceremony the way we will see people stand at this ceremony today, and the way 13,000 people will stand at ceremonies around the country, I do remember the debates in the family home as my parents determined that they would become citizens of this nation.
And having chosen this country, they've loved it with a fierce determination, with a fierce passion.
I know that the 13,000 people who join the Australian family today will do the same  -  love this country with a fierce determination. And we will be bound together by a love of country and by the Australian values that we hold so dear.
Australia Day is a wonderful day. A wonderful day here, a wonderful day for celebrations, whether they're formal citizenship conferrals or whether they're days with families and friends. Right around the country people will be marking Australia Day, and on Australia Day citizens old and new can re-affirm their pledge to this country.
I invite you to do that, no matter whether you've been born here or been here for many years. Today is a great day. Re-affirm your love of Australia, your embrace of this country, your embrace of your fellow Australians.
Thank you very much. 



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard has written to the Governor-General recommending that the Queen establish a new medal for people who have performed extraordinary acts or services during a national emergency.
This summer's floods have served up the worst that nature can deliver and our nation has responded with the best of the Australian spirit.
While in some parts of the nation, the rescue and recovery efforts are still underway, the stories of heroism, bravery and selflessness are emerging as communities start to reflect on the tragedy that swept through their lives.
To complement existing forms of national recognition, the Prime Minister has recommended that a new medal in Australia's honours system be established called the “National Emergency Medal”.
The new medal would recognise extraordinary or sustained services to others during a national emergency such as the recent floods.
Following approval, the award will also be back-dated to cover the Victorian bushfires in 2009.
The proposed new medal will be a permanent element in the national honours system, established by the Queen and awarded by the Governor-General. 
In addition to the new medal, the Prime Minister has proposed a new scheme to ensure that everyone who has contributed to the rescue and recovery effort in their local communities receives due acknowledgement.
Ms Gillard is writing to the Premiers of flood-affected States to support a separate community-driven form of recognition to acknowledge local heroes, including the outstanding work done by professionals and volunteers alike.
Informal recognition by way of commemorative pins or certificates is often initiated by the relevant State in partnership with the Commonwealth for a particular event and can provide broad, community-based recognition for all of those involved.
Ms Gillard said the medal and local hero recognition scheme will provide the nation with a way to express our collective gratitude for those who have supported individuals and communities during a time of crisis.
Nominees for the medal and recognition scheme could include members of emergency services personnel, government employees, corporate and private sector employees and private citizens.
Only those who have provided sustained or significant service to others in a national emergency would be eligible for the medal.
The criteria for medal nominations will be developed in the coming months following approval by the Queen.
It is expected that the first medals will be awarded retrospectively to people who distinguished themselves during the Victorian bushfires and the recent floods.
The medal will then be awarded annually as part of the official Australia Day ceremonies. 


Picnic Point, Toowoomba 
Thank you very much, thank you for that great welcome and thank you to your local Mayor for being such a great community advocate during this difficult period. I've had the opportunity to meet with him to discuss your community's needs and also to hear so much about your community spirit, even during these very difficult days.
I also want to acknowledge my Federal Parliamentary colleague Ian Macfarlane, known as Macca, he's been texting me signed Macca, confusing me because I've got a mate called Macca too, so if we keep doing that I might send you back something on the text you'll be very confused about, but it's nice to be here with Ian Macfarlane.
And can I also acknowledge Mr Kerry Shine, the State Member for Toowoomba North, Mr Mike Horan, the State Member for Toowoomba South and can I say what an amazing job done by your local town crier Ralph, I've had the opportunity to already be at some Australia Day celebrations today and I haven't met a town crier quite like Ralph, so well done to Ralph.
Today across the nation we're celebrating Australia Day and in many ways we're doing the things that we've done on other Australia Days, from Toowoomba to Tassie, from the Rocks to the Rock, Australians are out celebrating what it means to be part of this wonderful nation.
But of course this Australia Day is different. It's different because we are also taking the time to stop and reflect on the devastating floods that our nation has faced in the last few weeks and I know as communities do that around the nation, here in Toowoomba too, you are thinking about what your community has been through.
We are grieving the loss of life, but we are also celebrating tremendous community spirit, as people work together in the most difficult of times, in the darkest of hours and as people are continuing to work together in the rebuilding.
We will never forget those we have lost in this period, but we should also never forget the community spirit that has been shown, by strangers who have done courageous things to help each other as flood water has threatened, by volunteers who have been there to support their fellow Australians, even though some of themselves have faced flooding in their own homes, the work we've seen done by soldiers who cancelled their annual leave and just came back in order to move mountains of rubbish and help their community, the work we've seen done by local councils, by Red Cross, by Lifeline, by local community organisations in all their shapes and form, reaching out helping people when they needed that helping hand.
Today on this Australia Day more than any other we are celebrating that spirit of mateship, that spirit of mateship that caused us as Australians to reach out our hands to each other in a time of desperate need, and in 2011 having reached those hands out in the spirit of mateship we won't let go.
There's a lot of rebuilding to do, there's a lot of grieving to do, there's a lot of families who still need support as they mourn their lost loved ones, as they rebuild their houses, as they rebuild their businesses and farms, as they rebuild their lives.
And in all the many months ahead as we go through that difficult journey of rebuilding we won't let go. This spirit of mateship that we are celebrating today will see us through.
I wanted to come here today to say hello to this fantastic community, but I also wanted to come here because I thought this was the right place in the nation to make a very special announcement about how we will honour in the future those who have done such courageous things, such selfless things, during these dark and difficult days.
Through the Governor-General, I have requested of  the Queen that in Australia Day in the future we will have special honours, special honours where we will acknowledge Australians who have done that extra bit during natural disasters and emergencies, Australians who have gone out of their way to extend the hand of mateship to their fellow Australians in times of need.
We will first award those honours next Australia Day, we will backdate the awarding of those honours so that they can catch the heroic acts, the selfless acts, the volunteering that happened here and across Queensland during the time of the floods and we will indeed backdate these honours so that the selfless and courageous acts that happened during the Victorian bushfires can also be recognised because so many Australians then also extended the hand of friendship and they haven't let go.
In the time between now and next Australia Day we will also work together to recognise those who made a special contribution during the days of the flood.
Premier Anna Bligh has announced that Queensland will strike a special medal to recognise those who did those very special things to help others and I will be working with Premier Anna Bligh and with Premiers and Chief Ministers around the nation, so that we can recognise throughout this country those that gave of themselves to help others over this summer, during these floods when time were tough.
Here in Toowoomba I know that you are pulling together, the community spirit is strong, the sense of rebuilding is strong, the sense of mateship is strong. I've come today to share a moment of that with you, so can I conclude by saying a happy Australia Day, a time of reflection, a time of pause, a time of mateship and a time where we will say to each other we will rebuild for the future, we won't let go.
Thank you very much.



The Prime Minister today expressed the Government's gratitude for a $NZ4 million ($A3.1m) Australia Day donation by New Zealand to help Queensland and Victoria recover from the floods.
New Zealand has donated $NZ3 million to the Queensland Premier's Flood Relief Fund and NZ$1 million to the Red Cross Victorian Floods Appeal.
Australia and New Zealand share the closest of bonds. As nations, we both know what it is like to suffer from natural disasters. We are there for each other in times of crisis and great need.
I would like to thank the Government and people of New Zealand for responding so generously to the floods in the spirit of our trans-Tasman ties.  New Zealand's assistance will help the people of Queensland and Victoria to get back on their feet.
New Zealand was also quick to respond to the floods in Queensland by sending a team of emergency management and disaster recovery specialists to provide practical support to the State's emergency services.  



The Prime Minister today announced the Gillard Labor Government's response to the immense national challenge of rebuilding flood-affected regions across Australia.
Preliminary estimates, following consultation with the Queensland Government, indicate that the Government will need to invest $5.6 billion in rebuilding flood-affected regions, with the vast majority going on rebuilding essential infrastructure.
Two-thirds of that funding will be delivered through spending cuts.
The other third will be provided by a modest one-year progressive levy that won't be paid by people directly affected by the floods or by low-income earners.
The Government will deliver the funding through the following measures:
 * 	$2.8 billion in spending cuts, including removing industry assistance and cutting back other green programs by abolishing the Green Car Innovation Fund and the Cleaner Car Rebate Scheme and making other cuts.
 * 	$1 billion in delaying some infrastructure projects -  which will free up funds and skilled workers at a time of skilled labour shortages around the country.
 * 	$1.8 billion through a progressive levy on people earning over $50,000. This will only apply to income above the $50,000 threshold. For example, someone earning $60,000 a year will pay less than a dollar a week, while someone on average annual adult full-time total earnings of $68,125 will pay $1.74 a week. Anyone directly affected by the floods will not have to pay the levy at all.
Every cent raised through these measures will go directly to flood-affected regions across Australia. 
The Government recognises many Australians have already donated to people affected by the floods to help them with personal costs. That is a great contribution, but entirely separate from the job of rebuilding essential infrastructure in flood-affected regions  -  which is what today's announcement, including the progressive levy, is focused on. 
To ensure recovery and rebuilding can start as soon as possible, and to provide certainty to the Queensland Government and Queensland local authorities, the Australian Government has agreed to make an advance payment of $2 billion to Queensland.  
The decisions the Government has taken have been necessary to meet the scale of this disaster while keeping the economy strong.
The Government will rebuild Queensland while delivering the budget surplus as promised in 2012-13.
It is important to note that estimates of the impact of the floods are preliminary, and do not take into account what is expected to be a hit to government revenues as tax receipts fall in the aftermath of the floods. 
Where the funding is going
The vast majority of the $5.6 billion will be invested in rebuilding infrastructure damaged by the floods.
After discussions with the Queensland Government, preliminary estimates of the infrastructure repair costs under existing arrangements for the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) are around $5 billion, of which the Australian Government will provide close to three quarters (around $3.9 billion).
There are also anticipated to be significant but smaller costs arising from flooding in other states.
The Government has also committed significant funding to provide for urgent assistance for those affected by flooding, in line with standard arrangements for natural disasters. This is estimated to include around $600 million for the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment and $120 million for the Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy.
Levy
The Government will introduce a modest one-year levy to help pay for the rebuilding effort.
The levy will not be paid by those affected by the floods, will not be paid by lower income earners, and will apply only in the 2011-12 financial year.
The levy is based on an individual's ability to pay:
 * 	Anyone earning under $50,000 will not pay the levy.
 * 	People earning between $50,000 and $100,000 will pay 0.5 per cent of taxable income in excess of $50,000.
 * 	People earning over $100,000 will pay 0.5 per cent of taxable income in excess of $50,000 and 1 per cent of taxable income in excess of $100,000. 
As examples:
 * 	Someone earning $60,000 a year will pay 96 cents per week.
 * 	Someone on average annual adult full-time total earnings of $68,125 will pay $1.74 a week.
 * 	Someone earning $100,000 a year will pay $4.81 per week.
The levy will be paid through tax taken out of regular pay, in the same way the Medicare levy is paid.
To make sure those affected by the floods do not have to pay the levy, anyone who received an Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment for a flood event in 2010-11 will be exempt from the levy.
Spending cuts
The Government will make $2.8 billion in spending cuts, with the funding to go towards the recovery and reconstruction effort, including:
 * 	Not proceeding with the Cleaner Car Rebate Scheme
 * 	Abolishing the Green Car Innovation Fund
 * 	Reducing and deferring spending on the Carbon Capture and Storage Flagships and Solar Flagships programs and the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute
 * 	Abolishing the Capital Development Pool from 1 January 2012
 * 	Discontinuing funding for the Australian Learning and Teaching Council
 * 	Reducing the National Rent Affordability Scheme dwelling target
 * 	Redirecting funds from the Priority Regional Infrastructure Program and Building Better Regional Cities Program
 * 	Capping annual claims under the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) Vehicle Scheme
 * 	Capping funding for the Renewable Energy Bonus Scheme  -  Solar Hot Water Rebate
 * 	Not proceeding with Round 2 of the Green Start Program
 * 	Capping funding for the Solar Homes and Communities Plan
 * 	Withdraw funding to the O-Bahn City Access project.
Infrastructure
The strong Australian economy means that Australia faces very real skills shortages. This pressure on skilled labour will increase in the face of the major rebuilding effort in Queensland.
To make room for this demand the Government will defer $1 billion worth of infrastructure projects, freeing up builders, carpenters, electricians and other skilled workers to rebuild essential infrastructure in flood-affected regions.
Around $325 million of deferred projects have already been agreed with the Queensland Government, with the remainder to be discussed with the relevant state and territory governments (see Attachment 4). 
Skills and the rebuilding task
As Australia rebuilds, this will create additional demand for skills and workers.
To assist employers in flood-affected areas fill positions and get on with the job of rebuilding, the Government will:
 * 	Establish a special team within the Department of Immigration to deliver employer-sponsored temporary visas (457 visas) within five days (where applications are ‘decision ready') for employers genuinely involved in Queensland flood reconstruction work; and
 * 	Double the number of places in the job seeker relocation pilot program to help job-seekers move to take up employment opportunities.
The 457 visa program is demand-driven. These measures simply make it faster for employers to get the workers they need to rebuild. All workers seeking a 457 visa will still be subject to strict skills tests. 
The recent floods across Australia pose a unique challenge. 
This is likely to be the biggest natural disaster in Australia's history in economic terms  -  an extraordinary event requiring an extraordinary response. 
In times of crisis Australians see what needs to be done and we do it.
Australians have pulled together in the face of crisis in the last few weeks, and will continue to pull together in the difficult months of rebuilding that lie ahead.  
Please find below five factsheets containing further information.
Attachments:
 * 	Attachment 1: Providing relief to flood affected communities - DOC 30KB | PDF 55KB
 * 	Attachment 2: Paying for Recovery and Reconstruction - DOC 45KB | PDF 70KB
 * 	Attachment 3: Temporary Flood Levy - DOC 40KB | PDF 30KB
 * 	Attachment 4: Infrastructure and Flood Recovery - DOC 30KB | PDF 65KB
 * 	Attachment 5: Skills and the Flood Recovery Task - DOC 40KB | PDF 35KB


Canberra
Yesterday was Australia Day, and in some ways, it was an Australia Day like any other.
Picnics and barbecues, tennis and cricket, a new Australian of the Year and new Australian citizens - in so many ways it felt just like last year did and just like next year will.
But yesterday in Toowoomba, Australia Day felt different to any I have known.
I went to Toowoomba yesterday to be with some of the people I have met in these last weeks. I went to Toowoomba, where shock has been followed by horror and horror has been followed by grief and where grief's long season has only now begun, because I wanted the people I have met to know that their Prime Minister won't let them go.
I also went to Toowoomba to express my admiration for the way Australians have started rebuilding already.  Whether with a mop or a shovel or a bulldozer, Australians see what needs to be done and are doing it.
It is no different for the Government. I see what needs to be done and I will do it.
We will rebuild.
The great floods of this summer have been a national tragedy, not just a natural disaster, because of the awful loss of human life.
The great floods of this summer have destroyed billions of dollars of wealth and robbed us of billions of dollars of income.  In time they may prove to be the most expensive disaster in Australian history.
We are grieving.
We are burying the dead.
We are thanking many thousands for their courage and selflessness.
We are moving from crisis to recovery.
Now is the time to count the cost and to start to rebuild.
THE TASK BEFORE US
So today, I want to explain what we already know about the task before us and what we plan to do.
Queensland is of course the worst affected, but there are flood affected areas in almost every state, and the effects are being felt in the whole country today.
In order to think clearly about the best way to rebuild we need to understand not only the costs to the economy and the Federal Budget, but the growing capacity constraints on the economy, as well as the importance of the Government's long-term reform agenda.
The economic costs begin with the immediate cost of damage and destruction of property.
Private homes and cars have been wrecked, business equipment ruined, public ferry terminals and highways have been damaged, even the ocean floor of Moreton Bay itself needs cleaning up.
That is a huge, one-off cost  -  simply replacing the things the floods have destroyed.  These costs will be shared by people and families, by firms and insurers, by all levels of Government. 
The Australian Government's greatest part is through direct payments to affected individuals and businesses and through the cost of rebuilding.  And in rebuilding, the Australian Government pays the greatest share.  Under our longstanding natural disaster arrangements with the States, we meet 75 per cent of this cost for major disasters.
Today's estimates of the Federal Budget costs of these floods over the next four years are of course preliminary, but they are the best figures we have before us.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payments  -  which have given short-term financial assistance to half a million Australians affected by the floods  -  are estimated to cost over $600 million.  The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy  -  helping workers, small businesspeople and farmers who have lost income  -  will cost another $120 million.
At this stage  -  and I stress the estimates are preliminary and costs may well rise  -  the cost to the Australian Government of rebuilding flood affected areas outside Queensland is estimated at $1 billion.
Rebuilding flood affected areas in Queensland itself is estimated to cost us $3.9 billion.
Bringing all of those elements together the best preliminary estimate of the direct cost to the Federal Budget of this summer's flood disaster is just over $5.6 billion.
So that is the immediate Budget challenge, to find over $5 billion.
Although our economy remains strong, there is also the one-off effect on economic activity because of the immediate disruption from the floods. 
When a city of millions is closed for business for days, the cost to the economy is huge.  When roads are closed all over a State that represents a fifth of GDP, the cost to the economy is enormous.
And the cost of this disruption continues into the future.  Some coal mines won't return to full production for months and farming will be affected for seasons. 
Treasury's preliminary estimates are that GDP growth in this financial year will be around half a percentage point lower due to the floods.  The Treasurer will be saying more about the future impact on the economy in coming days.
But we still have the advantage that our overall economy is strong and that means we have the capacity to pay as we go”.
With our growing economy and rising national income, we can pay for rebuilding now.  And if we can, we should.  We should not leave the task of finding the money until future years.
My experience in Government since 2007 tells me that while we must plan to sustain growth we must never take future growth for granted, so we should not put off to tomorrow what we are able to do today. 
Solely borrowing to rebuild Queensland is a soft option I am not prepared to consider. 
My Cabinet's job is still to make the decisions which will bring the Budget back to surplus in 2012-13.
In a growing economy, we pay as we go.
In addition to the Budget challenge there is a wider economic challenge as well: building and managing economic capacity.
This is because we don't only need to be able to pay for the new things we now need  -  we quite literally need to be able to make the new things we now need as well. 
The floods have not washed away piles of hundred dollar notes.  They've put holes in roads, buckled rail, broken up sections of ports, wrecked factory equipment, washed away fencing on farms.
So we're not just going to need money, we're going to need concrete and rubber and steel  -  and more importantly, we're going to need carpenters and bricklayers and road gangs.
And while the advantage of a strong economy is felt when we come to fund the rebuilding, the challenge of a strong economy is felt when we look for the capacity: delivering the actual rebuilding itself.
There is unprecedented demand in many parts of Australia for skilled labour.
Unemployment is already low and participation is already rising. 
And that's before we add one extra tradie or truck driver to rebuild after the floods.
There is unprecedented pressure on Australia's infrastructure as well. 
More infrastructure is already needed to nurture the mining boom and support economic growth, so the Government is investing in long lived economic assets and infrastructure like high speed broadband, ports, roads and rail.
Now we have thousands of kilometres of roads and rail to rebuild as well.
Simply spending to rebuild without addressing the balance between supply and demand in the economy as a whole is not an option. 
That would only drive up the cost of skilled labour and the cost of building materials and other economic inputs, reduce value for money in the rebuilding itself, rob our mining industry and other economic sectors of the skills and material they need, and ultimately spill over into higher inflation and interest rates.
To make up for the demand we are putting into the economy with our rebuilding efforts the Government must take some demand out of the economy at the same time.
So sound Budget principles say we should pay as we go  -  and sound economic principles say we should not add to capacity pressures.
And we must drive reforms for the future as well.
I know Australians expect that while we rebuild after the floods, the Government will not lose sight of our long-term reform agenda.
Australians expect their governments to do more than one thing a time. 
So 2011 remains a year when I will be delivering the national broadband network, creating more opportunity through education reforms and improving health care as well as a year when I will make long-term decisions on workforce participation and a carbon price. 
That is my job and that is what I will do.
DELIVERING REBUILDING
Here's how I'll begin.
I will make an immediate upfront payment to Queensland of $2 billion.
With this money rebuilding can start in more than 60 flood-affected communities across Queensland. 
The payment will be made in the current financial year, as soon as financial controls and arrangements are finalised.
I'm acutely conscious of the desire of the Queensland Government to use their powers to cut through red tape and deliver rebuilding as fast as they can. I want to ensure that nothing in the funding arrangements holds them back.
I want this money to be available immediately. In my meetings with Premier Bligh and with Major General Mick Slater they've stressed that no town should be closed for a day longer than is necessary because of a lack of funds ready to be spent. And from my discussions with local community leaders and small and medium business owners, they want funds to flow as soon as possible so economic life can return to the main streets of regional towns.
A National Partnership Agreement with Queensland will establish the conditions of the funding. I expect this to be a simple, transparent and generous set of guidelines which ensure public money is spent in the right ways and at the right time.
Queensland will get what it needs.
The money will be managed by the Queensland Reconstruction Authority, which will scope and coordinate the total statewide rebuilding program and develop a statewide reconstruction plan. This will take into account unique local problems and opportunities in each flood affected community.
Payments to other states will be made through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements in the usual way. We are working closely with the responsible State Governments to ensure all this assistance is delivered when and where it is needed.
The Australian Government's total commitment  -  which our best estimates suggest will reach $5.6 billion  -  is absolutely vital to the rebuilding of our country and our recovery from the floods.
FUNDING AND SKILLING REBUILDING
We will meet the cost.
Rebuilding after the floods in an economy with growing capacity constraints for the present while delivering reforms and making decisions is a big joband there'll inevitably be setbacks. 
But as a nation we are up to the challenge and we are up to managing the economic strains. 
So we can do just that, I have made a set of decisions on funding and managing economic demand.
I announce today a $5.6 billion funding and skilling package for flood rebuilding.
A balanced package which cuts some spending programs, defers some new infrastructure and applies a one-off levy to most Australian income earners from 1 July this year.
Two dollars are saved in spending cuts for every dollar raised by the levy.
With other changes to ensure we have enough skilled workers to get the new work done.
First, we will deliver a one-off levy. It will not include lower-income earners.
A levy of 0.5 per cent will be applied on taxable income between $50,001 and $100,000 and a levy of 1 per cent will be applied on taxable income above $100,000. Anyone earning under $50,000 will not pay the levy.
In other words it is not like the Medicare Levy, which for most taxpayers applies to all their income  -  it is like income tax rates which apply only above certain income levels.
Under this levy, someone who has an income of $60,000 will pay just under $1 extra per week.  A person earning $100,000 per year will pay just under an extra $5 per week.
The levy will apply only in the 2011-12 financial year and it will raise $1.8 billion.
People who were affected by the floods will not pay this levy.
Anyone who receives the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment for a flood this financial year will be exempt. 
And importantly, this levy is completely separate from donations. 
People who have generously donated are helping out individuals in their time of need.  People who pay this levy will be helping to rebuild the infrastructure  -  roads, bridges, ports  -  which has been torn apart by these floods.
The great majority of Australians are ready to contribute, I have no doubt about that.
The legislation will be introduced into the Parliament in the first sitting week.
Second, we will defer some infrastructure projects to help manage capacity constraints and to redirect funding to immediate rebuilding.
Six Queensland roads projects will be delayed by periods of one to three years. This will save $325 million in the Budget period.  And these changes have been agreed to by the Queensland Government.
I have also identified a number of projects in other states where delays and reductions in Australian Government funding will save approximately $675 million.  Over coming days I will be discussing these projects directly with the affected State Governments before the Minister for Infrastructure publicly announces the details of our changes.
The savings from these infrastructure decisions make a major contribution to funding the rebuilding.  Perhaps even more important, these decisions will free up skilled labour for rebuilding. This is part of ensuring we not only pay as we go, but manage capacity as well.
These decisions will also ensure value for money when these projects are delivered.
That's an important part of my thinking in deferring these infrastructure works: for these long-term projects, I am determined to ensure value for money.  Pressing ahead now would inflate the cost to taxpayers considerably.
Third, we will cut some spending programs and cap some others.
I am abolishing, deferring and capping access to a number of carbon abatement programs.
These include the Green Car Innovation Fund, Cleaner Car Rebate Scheme, the Carbon Capture and Storage Flagships and Solar Flagships, the Solar Hot Water Rebate, Green Start Program, Solar Homes and Communities Plan and the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
The key to these carbon abatement program savings is my determination to deliver a carbon price. 
There is complete consensus that the most efficient way to reduce carbon is to price carbon. Some of these policies are less efficient than a carbon price and will no longer be necessary  -  others will be better delayed until a carbon price's full effects are felt.
And these decisions also mean cuts to industry programs. Business will be doing its part.
With the major call on the Budget for rebuilding, it is now appropriate to reduce this spending, in the knowledge that the objectives will be delivered better through the Government's more economically efficient policy of a carbon price.
I am also capping some programs to limit their cost: the National Rental Affordability Scheme and the LPG Vehicle Scheme.  And some lower priority education spending, where the desired outcome can be achieved through other programs, will be discontinued.  This includes the Capital Development Pool and the Australian Learning and Teaching Council.
And Building Better Regional Cities funding and Priority Regional Infrastructure Program funding will be redirected to the highest priority infrastructure demand on Government  -  flood rebuilding.
There are no easy savings, but this package is balanced and appropriate. 
I am confident Australians will understand the need for these decisions.
Skilled labour will be as important as funding for rebuilding.
The 457 visa program for temporary skilled migrants has proven to be very responsive to prevailing economic conditions. The program is entirely demand driven by employers.
So I am announcing quicker approval for temporary skilled migrants who work on flood rebuilding.  There will be extra resources, assistance to employers and simpler processes to ensure a five day turnaround for ‘decision-ready' applications for workers in a host of nominated occupations to work on rebuilding Queensland.
I am also doubling the pilot of relocation assistance for people on income support and directing it to Queensland.  Up to 4 000 eligible jobseekers who want to get a job helping out will now receive support to move to Queensland and make a difference on the ground.
The offer to these jobseekers is simple: we can get you help to get there if you can stick at the job.
The funding and skilling package is the right one.
Two dollars saved in spending cuts for every dollar raised through the temporary levy.
Cutting less efficient carbon abatement programs because the carbon price will deliver a market based solution. Business doing its part through cuts to industry programs.
Capping demand-driven programs to limit costs. Redirecting infrastructure spending to the highest priority, flood rebuilding.  Delivering the skilled workers we need as quickly as we can.
Paying as we go and managing demand.
THE INVALUABLE WORK OF THE COMMUNITY AND BUSINESS
As important as the role of government is in responding to this disaster, others will also play a vital role.
Australians have given generously to the Premier's Relief Fund in Queensland and similar funds in other states. I am very proud of that helping hand of mateship.
This will help meet the hardship and distress of individual flood victims.
The Australian Government has pledged contributions to these funds as well as encouraging business to give generously. 
And I do want to take a moment to pay particular tribute to corporate Australia's contribution in the crisis.  Hundreds of Australian big, medium and small businesses have already pledged money and donations in kind.
My meeting with business leaders in Brisbane on Monday confirmed that more money was on its way to rebuild and repair  -  as well as trucks to remove the rubbish, bottled water for drinking, clothes and toys for people whose houses were lost or damaged. 
These are just examples of the substantial corporate assistance coming through.
I'm proud of the way corporate Australia has given something back this month.
I believe all insurers should show as much compassion and flexibility in dealing with individuals affected by the floods.
Australia's insurance industry has a very positive record of assisting communities after natural disasters, but I know a number of questions have arisen as a result of the floods about definitions, coverage and consumer protection.
Already the Treasurer and Assistant Treasurer have engaged in a frank and constructive dialogue with the Insurance Council of Australia and the major flood affected insurers and we have seen RACQ lead the way by announcing a $20 million package to assist flood victims.
This is an example the industry should follow.
But the rebuilding cost for government is something quite different from corporate assistance and the relief funds or the costs met by insurance.
Donations will provide invaluable extra help. 
Government funding will provide the core assistance all Australians rely on and rightly expect from their Government.  This will largely fund the restoration and replacement of essential public assets and long-term economic infrastructure.
Roads and rail to get farm produce to market and coal to port - Integral parts of the public infrastructure, which urgently need to be brought back into service, and for which the costs run into the billions.
A CHALLENGE FOR OUR NATION 
I've spent a lot of time in flood-affected parts of our country in the past two weeks.
I wanted to be on the ground to make sure that the Queensland Government could get whatever it needed from the Government straight away. 
I also wanted to be able to see my Government's efforts with my own eyes and ensure it was all working at its best, across the country.
What I have learnt has certainly been instrumental in my own thinking as we've put together this package to rebuild after the floods.
And while what I learnt was important, what I was reminded of was so much more.
I was reminded about our people.
Flood affected people in Queensland who feel the sorrow, even the grief, but who know the sun will come up and are determined to endure.
Flood affected people outside Queensland who keep telling me there's worse off than them, and they are glad there hasn't been greater loss of life in their parts.  But flood damage is flood damage and in a quiet way, they also say to me ... don't forget us.
Australians not affected by floods who just want to help.  Not just Brisbane's amazing clean up volunteers, not just friends filling sandbags for friends, but all Australians, especially those far from the waters, are looking for a way to make a difference.
As I reflect on these floods and what has happened, I can't escape the sadness.  None of us can.  But I won't forget the pride in what we have done together.
But then I look forward and I know what needs to be done: Investing in rebuilding; investing in future growth; managing demand; reforming for the future. That's what we will do.
My plan for rebuilding after the floods is the right economic solution, but it is more than that.
It is what Australians have a right to expect.
Putting the national interest first.
Working to build consensus.
Tackling the big challenges.
Focussing on delivery.
Doing it the Australian way.
Sharing and sticking together.
Everyone doing their part.
We put out a hand to help the flood victims on the first day when they needed us. They still need us.
We won't let go. 



HOST: Now, the Prime Minister is with us. Julia Gillard, good morning to you. 
PM: Good morning. 
HOST: We've been running a phone poll on this. We have asked: are you prepared to pay a flood levy to rebuild Queensland? 93 per cent have voted no from 4,500 calls. Are you going to be able to convince people that this is actually necessary, that you don't have the money to pay for it yourself out of our taxes? 
PM: I believe Australians do want to make a contribution to recovering from this unprecedented natural disaster, unprecedented in terms of the scale around the country and in Queensland, so Kochie, I'm going to keep putting the argument. I am absolutely determined to work to secure the rebuilding of Queensland. That's why I put the package together. It's the right package and I'll keep explaining it for people. 
HOST: Look, no-one will quibble about the need to spend money to rebuild Queensland. Absolutely everyone agrees with that, but what we disagree with is that we pay our taxes, you've got the money, you've got it in emergency slush funds to come up with the $1.8 billion.
PM: Kochie, I am going to have to disagree with you on that. It is simply not true.
I know you have made a reference to the contingency reserve in the Government's budget. To quote Peter Costello, a former Treasurer of this country, that is not a rainy-day fund. It is not sitting there to spend on natural disasters like this one. 
The contingency reserve is necessary to keep the budget on track. In the budget we've got all sorts of programs like Medicare and the PBS, the program that supports buying medicines. Now, we model the best estimates of what that is going to cost the budget, but you don't have to be too far wrong in those assumptions - more people going to the GP in a year, for example - for more money to be needed. So, the contingency reserve is there to meet occasions like that.
If it wasn't there, then the budget would blow out and the Treasury verified that as recently as when it looked at Mr Abbott's and Mr Hockey's costings for the election campaign. They went to the contingency reserve and Treasury said no, no, that's a budget blowout. 
HOST: OK, good point. 
So this is your emergency money, this is an emergency, why not dip into it? Will you guarantee, say at the end of this financial year when you get all your budget figures for the household budget for the country and there hasn't been an overspend in any of these areas or you have earned more income from other areas than you budgeted it for, you'll allow that contingency slush fund to be used to rebuild Queensland. Why not?
PM: Kochie, it's just not right to refer to it as a contingency slush fund. That terminology is not right and it's meant to conjure up something in people's minds-
HOST: -It just sits there. 
PM: That is not true, Kochie. It doesn't just sit there. This is not a magic pot of money that can be rolled pot in the face of an unprecedented natural disaster-
HOST: -Well, what if it's not used? It just sits there.
PM: That money is necessary as part of the budget process because in something as complicated as the Federal budget, where there are demand-driven programs like Medicare and the PBS, to take two good examples, it is needed, it is needed to make sure the budget stays on track-
HOST: -But what if it's not this year?
PM: What you are inviting me to do is make some wild guesses and risk a big budget blowout and I'm not prepared to do it Kochie, I'm not prepared to risk that.
HOST: No, what I'm saying is the levy starts in July. At June 30 when you get all the numbers from this year and you don't need to dip into your contingency reserve for your conservative bias allowance, use the money rather than leave it sitting there for another year.
PM: Well, the contingency reserve is there every year. It has been under every government-
HOST: -OK. 
PM: When Mr Howard was Prime Minister, when Peter Costello was Treasurer, the contingency reserve was there. Kochie, you are making an error. I'm sorry to say it, and I know that on financial advice you're a good man to go to, but you are making an error about the nature of the Government's budget. It is not true to say-
HOST: -OK, I am not alone in making the error. There are a few doing that error.
PM: It is not true to say to Australians there that there is a big pile of money there that somehow I could just go and use. That is not true, Kochie.
That's why I have put a package with the levy as an element, and let's remember more is being done in budget cuts than is being asked for from Australians in a levy. 
HOST: A lot of people saying what do we spend on foreign aid? Why don't we haul some of that back because we need it more at home rather than give it to other countries.
PM: Well, in the budget cut backs I announced yesterday, we are cutting back around $2 for every $1 that we are asking Australians to contribute in this levy, and when we look at the design of the levy-
HOST: -No, no the question was foreign aid, why don't we cut back foreign aid. How much do we spend? $5.5 billion goes to foreign affairs department, not all in foreign aid, but that's just the headline rate? Why don't we cut back foreign aid to other countries because we need it here?
PM: Kochie, we do make contributions around the world in foreign aid. I think Australians have prided themselves on being good global citizens. We're often the first to go and assist when people are in poverty and are in real trouble-
HOST: -Now we need it.
PM: Well, now we obviously need to rebuild Queensland and other parts of the country, and I struck what I believe is the right package to do that. 
HOST: So your answer's no? You won't reduce the foreign aid budget?
PM: What I selected for cut backs yesterday, Kochie, are the things that I think should be cut back at this time. Programs to deal with some green climate change matters, we're going to price carbon. That's a more economically efficient way to do it and some deferral of infrastructure- 
HOST: -Bob Brown happy with that?
PM: -that's about making room in the economy to rebuild Queensland-
HOST: -Is Bob Brown happy. Are the Greens happy with that?
PM: I'll let Senator Brown and others speak for themselves. I've struck the package I believe is right for the nation. 
HOST: The basic fundamental is we don't trust politicians with these new levies. We don't trust that the money is going to be used in the right areas and you're not going to raid it for something else. You're going to have this big pot of money, $1.8 billion, and say only $1.5 billion is needed or $1 billion, you haven't off-set the increase in revenue from the stimulus. 
Do you guarantee that you won't raid the money for other purposes  -  rolled-gold guarantee?
PM: Absolutely. 100 per cent. Every dollar will be used for flood rebuilding - every dollar, every cent. It will not go anywhere else.
HOST: Do you guarantee that if the Federal budget is better than expected you'll then give the money back? 
PM: Kochie, we are going to proceed with the levy and the cut backs that I have announced. That's the right way-
HOST: -But you say you can't but a cost on it. You say no-one knows the real cost of it. If you don't need all of that money will you give it back, or, if, for example, you don't dip into your contingency reserve or your revenue receipts are more than expected and your costs are lower and the deficit isn't as big, will you use that money to rebuild Queensland and then reimburse the levy? 
PM: Kochie, I don't see any circumstances where the bill for rebuilding Queensland and the nation is less than the $5.6 billion I outlined yesterday. It could be more, and if it is more then we will cut back other area areas of the Government budget in order to fund more. that's the approach that I'm taking.
HOST: OK, alright, Prime Minister, we'll have to leave it there, run out of time. Thanks for joining us. 



HOST: Julia Gillard, good morning.PM: Good morning.HOST: Are you taking advantage of people's generosity? They've given generously to the flood appeal and then you slug them some more? They may not be so willing to make donations from now on.
PM: I think Australians around the country realise this is a time where we need to pull together. We are seeing a natural disaster of unprecedented economic proportions still unfolding in our country. We have still got flood waters rising in parts of Victoria.Now we need to rebuild, to help the people of Queensland and beyond rebuild the roads, the rail, the bridges, the ports, all of the things that are necessary to rebuild communities and rebuild the economy. That's what this package is for.HOST: People pay their taxes and they expect the Government to manage for contingencies such as floods and fires. Why not blow the budget surplus?PM: We're a nation that does see a lot of natural disasters. We live in a continent that regularly serves up to us floods and fires.What's different this time is the huge economic cost. I mean, we've seen 75 per cent of a State declared a natural disaster zone. We've seen flood waters right around the country doing damage.Given the unprecedented scale of this we have to put together the right package so we can rebuild now and the right package for our economy, and it is in the interests of our economy to bring the budget back to surplus in 2012-13.HOST: Is it? Because economist and Reserve Bank board member Warwick McKibbin and others say the impact of blowing the budget would be negligible, that this is exactly the circumstance in which you could and should borrow more and wear a deficit even - if you blew the surplus.PM: Well, I respectfully disagree. By 2012-13 our economy will be running very strongly, very near capacity, and in those circumstances we've got to manage demand in our economy.HOST: They've take that into account.PM: Well, I respectfully disagree. I've made a different judgement call and I'll stick by my judgement call, and my judgement call is with an economy that will be running near capacity, near full capacity in 2012-13, we've got to manage demand. Part of managing demand is to reduce the Government's footprint on the economy. That's what having a budget surplus is all about, and if we don't get that right then we put upwards pressure on inflation and interest rates.So, the package I announced yesterday is about rebuilding and making sure we manage the growing capacity constraints in our economy. That's why we have done things like deferred some infrastructure spending.HOST: If you'd borrowed more, even the lot, say $5 billion, what would have happened to interest rates?PM: Well, simply don't accept the argument that it's not in our nation's interest to be bringing the budget to surplus to 2012-13.HOST: You just said bringing the budget to surplus was necessary in order not to keep, put pressure on interest rates. So, if you had borrowed the lot and you didn't have a surplus, what would have happened to interest rates?PM: Well, clearly, if you have got greater demand in the economy when it's running close to capacity that feeds inflationary pressures. Inflationary pressures feed interest rate pressures. That's why it's in everybody's interest that we manage this demand in our economy.So, yesterday's package  -  yes, it's got a levy, and I think Australians around the country will want to help in these times. It's also got spending cuts, very important - the Government making sure that we are paying for this package, and if you actually look at the balance, you, know there's $2 in spending cuts and re-profiling of infrastructure compared with $1 in levy in this package. So, more has been done on the Government's budget than we are asking Australians to do through this levy.
That's the right way to manage demand.HOST: Just on this point, how much do you think interest rates would have risen if, for example, you'd borrowed the lot or-PM: -You're asking a question that's incapable of answer by any living human being. There is not a mathematical-HOST: -But you made a judgement about-PM: -Well, I made a judgement, but your question is asking me for a mathematical equation. There is no mathematical equation here. There is no-one who can answer that question for you, but what everyone can say is the hotter the economy runs, if you don't manage demand that leads to inflationary pressures and that can put upwards pressure on interest rates. That's undeniable as an economic proposition.HOST: But you can't say how much pressure?PM: No living human being can tell you that. There is no mathematical equation, so you are in search of something that doesn't exist.HOST: There is a risk that the damages bill will blow out. You've acknowledged that and you've pledged that any extra funding will be found from budget savings, so clearly there is more room to cut fat. Why couldn't you find those savings now?PM: Well, I'm not going to agree with the language of blow out. That's not appropriate language in these circumstances.What I said yesterday is we were working off the best preliminary estimates available to us, having worked hard with Queensland Government officials, for example, to see what the damage rebuilding is going to cost.Now, of course there is a risk that the bill is more than that. I wanted to assure Australians, and I offer them that assurance again - this is a temporary, one-off levy. It will be there for 12 months and that is all.So, if we need to find more money then we will do that through further budget cuts. We have already made major budget cuts in this package and if we need to do more then we will.HOST: Why not do that now instead of slugging people with an extra tax?PM: Well, given the unprecedented economic scale of this we needed to get the mix right. The mix is that the Government has rearranged the budget to manage demand and to free up money.We are asking people to make a contribution, too, and let's be very clear about the size of that contribution. You know, if you look at people earning $60,000 a year, they are being asked for less than $1 a week. People under $50,000 a year in income won't be paying anything at all.So, we are asking people to make a contribution to what is a huge rebuilding effort.HOST: You set the target of a budget surplus a while back. It's a political target by definition, and you set it to prove that you are good economic managers. That's by definition playing politics, isn't it?PM: I disagree with every assumption in your question. It's an economic need to bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13-HOST: -But a raft of economists say that's not necessary.PM: Well, I've made a different judgement call - full stop. Don't agree with them. Sorry about that.My judgement call is, with an economy that will be running hot in 2012-13, a budget surplus is the right thing to do, and our economy despite, this big disaster, is strong now. We've got strong employment growth; we've got strong wages growth; we've got inflation in the band where we want it.
In those economic circumstances it's the right thing to do to pay as you go and that's what this package enables us to do.HOST: The Opposition is vowing to vote against the levy, so you'll need the support of the Greens and independents, many of whom want the Government to set up a permanent disaster relief fund. Will you?PM: Well, firstly I think Tony Abbott's got some thinking to do. I mean, if it was good enough for him to say to the Australian people he was going to put a levy on to fund his election promises then how can it be right for him, in these circumstances, with a disaster of this scale, to say it's not good enough to have a levy to rebuild Queensland and other parts of the country?HOST: Well, you're not going to get his support, so you'll be dealing with Greens and the independents-PM: -Well, I think he has got some thinking to do and I will be making that case very strongly.Tony Abbott needs to answer the question to the people of Queensland and beyond, why was it good enough for him to levy for his election promises but it's not good enough for him to support a levy to help their rebuilding and recovery? It's a key question.HOST: So, on the question of the Greens and the independents, to get their support will you set up a permanent disaster relief fund as they have suggested?PM: What I'll do is go to the parliament and say this is the right package and it's an urgent package and it requires people's support so we can get it through the parliament, get on with the job of doing the necessary rebuilding.HOST: Do you think that climate change has anything to do with this flood disaster?PM: I don't think you can look at one weather event, one disaster- I mean, this has been a huge, unprecedented disaster, but I don't think you can look at one, a bit of the weather and say that equals climate change. I don't think it's as simple as that.But, having said that, of course I do believe that climate change is real and is going to impact on our country.HOST: Independent MP Tony Windsor says there have been enough disasters to show that a fund is warranted, so to keep insisting they are one-off events is to ignore the role of climate change.PM: What I would say to that is we do cope with natural disasters. We do it all the time. We see some floods, some fires, and we manage them.Now, there is a difference with this event. There is a difference with the scale of it. There is a difference with the economic effect, and it is because of that difference that the Government and I laid out the package yesterday and we are asking Australians to make a contribution, but the Government is also implementing major budget cuts and changing infrastructure spending to make sure that we can rebuild Queensland and other parts of the country that need our support.HOST: So is a permanent disaster relief fund on or off your agenda?PM: Look I understand Mr Windsor and others will want to have that discussion, but what I would say is first and foremost we've got to get on with rebuilding Queensland. We've got to get on with rebuilding those parts of the country that need our help now: to put back vital economic infrastructure; roads that need to be rebuilt; bridges that need to be rebuilt; rail lines that trains can't get through now unless work is done.We need to deal with this package urgently. That's what I will be asking the Parliament to do.HOST: You say that taxpayers will get better bang for their buck by putting a price on carbon than funding a raft of green programs that you've either slashed or put off, but there is no certainty that you will get a price on carbon, because after all you promised an emissions trading scheme and didn't deliver.PM: Well, I'm very determined that in this Parliament we will get a price on carbon, and that's the most economically efficient way of dealing with carbon pollution, and given that economic efficiency it is a better way than some of the programs that I determined should be axed or re-profiled to make way for the spending we need to rebuild the nation.HOST: Julia Gillard, thanks for joining AM.PM: Thank you. 



PM: Good morning, Neil.
HOST: Thank you very much for your time. I appreciate it.
Prime Minister, with your Government's history of mis-management, like the insulation program, school re-building, who are you going to put in charge of the spending of this money you're going to take from us?
PM: Major-General Mick Slater is the chair of the Queensland recovery authority.
HOST: But he's a soldier. Is he going to be in charge of the money?
PM: So, Queensland has created a recovery authority just like Victoria did when we had the very devastating bushfires. We've made Mick Slater available. He's obviously going to bring all of his Defence Force experience to that role, and then of course the authority will employee professional people, just like the recovery authority did in Victoria, to roll out funds.
We will also have an agreement with the Queensland Government with strict guidelines around expenditure, but we do need to get on with this job, Neil, and start the re-build.
HOST: Look, I couldn't agree more, but with due to respect to the Major-General, he's probably a terrific organiser and soldier, but he's not an accountant. He's not a money man, and Defence hasn't got a great record of managing its money. How can you guarantee us that it won't go the way of the insulation program and the school rebuilding? Putting a soldier in charge doesn't fix it.
PM: Well, the money will be spent through the recovery authority, which will obviously engage the professional staff it needs, the accountants, the-
HOST: -So who's accountable?
PM: Well, the recovery authority has Mick Slater as the chair. There is a committee there that will run the authority. Obviously, the authority will report to the Queensland Government and we will receive reports from the authority, and we will have an agreement with the Queensland Government.
I will, the Federal Government will, make sure that the guidelines are there and that they're adhered too so that we get value for money.
HOST: You keep talking about Queensland. Does any of this money come to Victoria?
PM: Yes, of course, Neil-
HOST: -So who oversees it in Victoria?
PM: We'll work with Baillieu Government on that, and see what sort of arrangements Premier Baillieu wants to strike-
HOST: -and what about Tasmania? Same thing in Tasmania?
PM: Well, yes. Neil, I think we've just got to take one step back here. Special arrangements in terms of a recovery authority are being made in Queensland because of the size and scale of the devastation  -  75 per cent of the State natural disaster declared  -  but yes, we've got rebuilding to do in other parts of the country, including in Victoria. Now, the damage is there, it needs to be addressed, and we will work with the Baillieu Government to do it-
HOST: -So, I guess the bottom line is trust. How can we trust you? Why should we trust you, given the history of the Government, not to waste it?
PM: Well, Neil, what I've just said to you is the way I'm going to approach this. We're going to get it done. We're going to get it done with value for money. I was so concerned about value for money that I have deliberately deferred some infrastructure spending so that we didn't have an overheated construction sector and not being able to get value for money in these rebuilding jobs.
Now, deferring infrastructure's never popular. When you go to people and say ‘actually, you were going to get your road re-built and now I'm putting it back a couple of years', but I've done that and made that decision deliberately because of my concern about value for money questions.
HOST: Can we go to that? Looking at it, I think it's roughly $300 million deferred in Queensland, $600 million in the other States. Is it right that of that $600 million, two-thirds of the spending is in Victoria, so $400 million deferred in Victoria?
PM: Well, we will work through with State governments, and when we've got agreed arrangements, which we hope to have shortly, we'll announce full details of that, then.
HOST: But that'd be a pretty heavy belt, if Victoria was to cop a $400 million cut in spending.
PM: Well, I'm not going to deal with it in the hypothetical, Neil. We'll work through and we'll strike arrangements with State governments-
HOST: -So we don't actually know where those cuts will be yet.
PM: Well, we'll work through, we'll strike arrangements. You will know very soon. The Minister for Infrastructure is in discussions with State governments now. We had already worked with Queensland to identify projects-
HOST: -But that's hypothetical. We don't know whether it's going to be cut yet, don't we?
PM: Well, Neil, you will know, and we are talking about deferrals. I‘ve stressed that  -  deferrals, not projects being cut entirely.
HOST: Prime Minister, if the budget figures are better than expected, because this cuts in at the end of the financial year, or the beginning of the new one, would you drop it?
PM: Drop the levy?
HOST: Yep.
PM: No, I won't-
HOST: -Why not, if we suddenly have boom figures?
PM: Well, Neil, we obviously keep a weather eye on the budget figures and we're also putting together what is the best possible estimate of the damage here. Our nation has faced what is probably the most costly disaster in economic terms in our history-
HOST: -So why won't-
PM: -and as a result, we are going to need funding from a variety of places, including asking people to pay this levy, but I do stress we've made cutbacks and deferrals in the Federal Government budget, so out of this package around $2 comes from cutbacks and deferrals for every $1 we're asking for people to pay through the levy, and, you know, it's a 12-month levy, one-off. 60 per cent of taxpayers will pay less than $1 a week.
HOST: OK, why won't you use the contingency reserve, which has got several billion dollars in it?
PM: Well, this is a complete misunderstanding of what the contingency reserve is. I've had this debate today on television this morning. The contingency reserve is not a fund put aside for natural disasters-
HOST: -Well, can I quote to you from the budget papers? It is there, quote, ‘provisions for events that are reasonably expected to affect the budget estimates. For example, provision for the continuation of drought relief.' Now, if it's a continuation of drought relief, why not flood relief?
PM: Well, Neil, you misunderstand what the contingency reserve is for-
HOST: -Well, I'm quoting direct from the budget papers.
PM: And I'll give you the explanation which explains those words to you as well.
The contingency reserve is there in the Federal Government budget because we, in the budget, have a number of programs that are demand-driven. Big example of that and one that people would understand is Medicare, so when we put aside money for Medicare we're obviously working off the best possible estimates of how much that's going to cost, but we don't, you know, if people unexpectedly go to the GP more in any one year, you don't need that assumption that's driven the costings to be wrong by much before you're talking about hundreds of millions of dollars extra. That's what the contingency reserve is for, and-
HOST: -But it specifically outlines it can be for drought relief-
PM: -and yes, yes it does, because-
HOST: -why not flood relief?
PM: Neil, I can explain that. Drought relief is a standing part of our budget. We are paying drought relief, so just like my Medicare example, it is possible for the amount of drought relief needed in a year to be more than was factored into the budget. That's what the contingency reserve is for-
HOST: -So why not-
PM: -Neil, if I could just, I do really want to explain this point because there's a lot of misunderstanding out there. To quote-
HOST: -There's a lot of disagreement, Prime Minister, not misunderstanding.
PM: No, there's misunderstanding on this point, Neil-
HOST: -Just because we don't agree with you doesn't mean we misunderstand it.
PM: No, no, there's direct misunderstanding of what these funds are for. I'm using the misunderstanding deliberately because it's true. I've had people put questions to me today which misunderstand what the contingency reserve is for. As the former Treasurer Peter Costello said, this is not a rainy day fund, and as Treasury said as recently as when it was costing the Federal Opposition's election promises, if you raid the contingency reserve you punch a black hole in the budget and I'm not going to do it.
HOST: Have you looked at cutting some of our foreign aid?
PM: Well, we do make foreign aid available, that's right, to countries around the world, and countries around the world have come to our assistance during this natural disaster.
I selected the parts of the budget for cutback which I thought were the right ones to-
HOST: -So you considered foreign aid, did you?
PM: Obviously, Neil, I looked at the Federal budget, I made decisions about where to make cuts that were the best places to do it, and that's the list that I published yesterday.
HOST: So why not cut foreign aid, things like the $500 million that's been so contentious for the schools in Indonesia? Why not cut that?
PM: Well, I think the Australians are a generous nation and we do go to the assistance of other countries for poverty alleviation  -  you know, kids that are literally at risk of starvation. We do help our regional neighbours. It's in our interests for our regional neighbours to be peaceful places and education, a great education system, helps with that, so we do make those kind of investments, and I do stress, of course, that the world has also responded to help Australia during our hour of need.
But I thought the best place to make budget cutbacks to support this package was in a range of environmental programs. We're going to get on with the job of pricing carbon. That's a more efficient way of dealing with carbon pollution-
HOST: -Another tax.
PM: -We're cutting back some business assistance-
HOST: -Another tax-
PM: -because that was the right thing to do, too, and we're deferring some infrastructure. That's got to do with making room on the Federal budget, but it's also about managing demand for construction in our economy.
HOST: OK, we're coming up to the news, we'll just hold onto the news for a moment.
Prime Minister, do you agree you're staking your whole political future on this? If you can't sell this, you're finished.
PM: Look, Neil, you know, you make any declaratory statement you like. I'll-
HOST: -We'll, I'm asking a question. Do you believe you are facing-
PM: -Look, I'm not interested in any of that. What I'm interested in is doing the right thing to rebuild this country-
HOST: -So you're not interested in the politics, here. You're not interested in the politics here?
PM: I've put together a package I believe is right for the nation now. It's full of tough decisions. When I was making them I knew they would be controversial. I believe it's right. I'm going to get on with doing it.
HOST: Prime Minister, every economist I've seen says this is political opportunism. It is not about the nation, it is political opportunism so you've got money to spend going into the next election campaign and so you bring the budget back into surplus. Do you deny, do you deny there are any political imperatives in this?
PM: That's complete nonsense, Neil-
HOST: -Do you deny that you've got any political considerations whatsoever?
PM: Complete nonsense. Bringing the budget back to surplus is about what our national economy needs-
HOST: -I'm sorry, but complete nonsense, do you deny that there are any political-
PM: -The motivation for bringing the budget back to surplus is an economic one, not a political one. In 2012-13, our economy will be running hot. It will be running at close to full capacity.
What's the right thing to do by the national economy in those circumstances is for the Government to deliver a surplus and reduce the footprint of government on the economy. That's the right thing to do by this nation, and I'm going to do it.
HOST: You say Australians are a generous people. You say this is the right thing to do. Why is there such massive opposition to this? Why do people not accept it? Is it possible they don't trust you?
PM: Well, look, I've had people contact my office today Neil. I've had an invalid pensioner contact my office, saying ‘can I pay the levy?' Well, of course they don't have to, but that's how generous someone on a fixed income-
HOST: -Are you denying it's massively unpopular?
PM: Well, I've seen stories in today's newspapers, Neil, of people who are flood victims themselves - who do not have to pay this levy  -  saying they're prepared to pay it voluntarily-
HOST: -That's what puzzles me, because Australians are so generous and they do donate so well, but I can tell you by the reactions to the newspapers, the television stations and to this radio program and stations like this, they hate it. Why? Why is it so unpopular?
PM: Well, Neil, I believe Australians will work their way through, they'll get the details of the levy, they'll assess what it means for them. I believe people are generous, they do want to contribute, and people will make their minds up about it. I think people are still, probably, getting all of the information they need, and that is very understandable when something was announced yesterday.
This is the right package for the nation and I'm determined to deliver it.
HOST: Do you believe that it could affect future donations? I've had people ring me and say ‘I've already donated several hundred dollars. Now they're going to hit me again.'
PM: People have been very generous with donations, but the donations that people have made are being used for a different purpose than this levy money. We need to give people-
HOST: -They're still being hit twice. I mean, they're still being hit twice.
PM: We need to give people a helping hand, and that's what the donations are for, but we need to rebuild the vital economic infrastructure, too. Farmers can only get back to running their farms if they can get their produce to market. People can only back to their jobs in coal mines if we can get the coal out, get it to the port and get it on a ship and export it to the world. We have to rebuild that infrastructure.
HOST: The floods are continuing in Victoria today and into next week. We've got no idea what it's going to cost. How can you put together a plan when you don't know the cost yet?
PM: Well, we work to get the best possible estimates available to us-
HOST: -So what's the estimate in Victoria?
PM: Well, we worked with Victoria in this package-
HOST: -And what was the figure?
PM: Well, in this package Neil, there is an estimate of a billion in Victoria, and we will work through with the Baillieu Government to refine estimates. I will be in Victoria myself today, in flood regions, talking to people directly, but we needed to get started. We needed to get started on this rebuilding. That's why I announced the package and that's why we will make a payment to Queensland very soon of $2 billion  -  so we get started.
HOST: Are you confident that this can be done without being inflationary, without forcing up interest rates, or is it inevitable now that interest rates will go up?
PM: Neil, I deliberately deferred infrastructure because of my concerns about capacity constraints, and that is a way of managing demand. You are right  -  when the economy is running hot you've got to manage demand so you don't put upwards pressure on inflation and interest rates. That's what the infrastructure deferral is about, and ultimately that's what bringing the budget to surplus is about, too.
HOST: What if, God forbid, we have massive fires somewhere next summer somewhere in Australia, and the Victorian fire's an example of horrendous loss of life and horrendous cost. Would you look at another tax then?
PM: Well, we are a nation that sustains natural disasters, Neil. Tragically, we sustain them quite frequently and we manage our way through them. This is different to things we've seen in the past. This disaster is probably the most economically costly disaster the nation has ever seen, and that's why there are special arrangements to deal with this natural disaster.
HOST: Has the Party, have you or any of your people, spoken to the independents? Can you get it through the parliament?
PM: Look, we'll work, you know, in discussions, we'll make briefings available, but I'm determined to see this go through the parliament because it's the right thing to do.
HOST: OK, what, will you negotiate it further, or is it set in stone?
PM: Look, I will be saying to every parliamentarian this is the right thing to do and we need to get on with this urgently.
HOST: Is it set in stone or will you negotiate it further?
PM: Look, Neil, what I've just said to you is what I can say to you  -  I want this package through the parliament. That's what I'll be saying to people - let's get on with it - and I will certainly be saying to Tony Abbott, leading the Opposition, if he thought a levy was good enough to pay for his election promises, then I really can't see how he can say to people around the country affected by floods that it's not good enough to rebuild.
HOST: That's a fair point, but you want to get this through the parliament. Will you negotiate it and change it if necessary to get it through the parliament?
PM: Look, I will brief the independents. I will of course talk to the independents, but I am determined to get this package through, Neil.
HOST: OK, so you will negotiate if necessary?
PM: Well, I just said to you I am determined to get this package through. Of course, I'll go through proper processes, talking to the independents and of course the Australian Greens in the parliament.
HOST: Is it possible you could take money out of the Future Fund to avoid it?
PM: No. The Future Fund is set aside to meet liabilities coming at the Commonwealth through superannuation. If you took money out of that all you're creating is a black hole for the future.
HOST: Just finally, you're confidence has taken a bit of a battering lately, hasn't it? I mean, you've had a pretty rough start to the year. People have been critical of you. You've had an emotional start to the year. We saw your partner talking about that, getting around, talking to people. Has your confidence taken a battering?
PM: Look, Neil, I am determined. We've been through an incredibly sad time and I've shared some of that sadness. I've sat in evacuation centres with people who have lost everything. I've sat and listened to people tell me the most horrendous stories about fleeing walls of water smashing at their homes and their cars. There's been a lot of sadness around, but I am determined now to do what we need to do to rebuild. That's what's driving me.
HOST: OK, but not everybody in your Cabinet agrees with it, do they?
PM: Oh, Neil, don't be ridiculous.
HOST: No, it was a question.
PM: And I've just given you the answer.
HOST: Don't be ridiculous is a statement. Does everybody in your Cabinet agree with it?
PM: This is my package. This is the Government's package. Full stop.
HOST: Does everybody in Cabinet agree?
PM: Oh, look, Neil, don't be so silly. We, as a Government, want to rebuild Queensland. We, as a Government, support this package.
HOST: Sorry, why is that silly? I asked whether it-
PM: -Well, it's silly, Neil, because you are trying to create an apprehension that somehow there is division about this. There is not division-
HOST: -Well, with respect, Prime Minister, you can end that by answering it-
PM: -And Neil, if you allow me to say a few words, I probably will-
HOST: -Well, you haven't-
PM: -There is not division. We will get on with the job of delivering this package. Everyone wants to rebuild, as we need to. Everyone wants to support Australians. Everyone understands the need to do the right thing by the national economy, bring the budget to surplus by 2012-13, and we'll get on with delivering this package.
HOST: Fair enough, but look, I would just say, if there is one rort, if there is one travel junket, if there is one wasted dollar in the next couple of years, there's going to be hell to pay because the people won't cop it.
PM: Well, Neil, we will work to deliver value for money-
HOST: -And to manage the money properly! Please!
PM: Neil-
HOST: -No more people in-
PM: Neil, you don't need to patronise me, thank you very much.
HOST: I didn't mean to patronise you.
PM: I understand, Neil, thank you-
HOST: -I didn't mean to patronise you.
PM: -the need for value for money. I understand that. Why do you think-
HOST: -Well, Prime Minister, you didn't when you were running the building the education system, that rebuilding.
PM: OK, Neil, do want me to answer the question, or-
HOST: -Well, no, you say I'm patronising you. I am not. You ran the Building the Education Revolution, and it was an absolute disaster, so don't tell me that.
PM: Neil, what nonsense. 3 per cent of schools complained, and on the question now of value for money, you're talking to the person who decided to defer $1 billion of infrastructure because I was concerned about value for money. Do you think that's an easy decision, Neil? No, it's not. I've taken it-
HOST: -Don't patronise me, Prime Minister. Of course it's not an easy decision.
PM: No, and I've taken it because of my concerns about value for money, so thank you very much for making that point. I am making it too.
HOST: OK, I appreciate that. I am simply looking at history and I think the people look at history and say this Government has a history of waste. Please don't waste this new tax.
PM: And people will look at this package and say ‘gee, they must have been really concerned about value for money to defer $1 billion worth of infrastructure.
HOST: Thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you. 



KING: Prime Minister good morning and welcome to 612 ABC Brisbane.
PM: Good morning Madonna.
KING: Can I just start with that point, people have been so generous, is this just hitting some of them one more time?
PM: People have been generous and I believe people will continue to be generous. Already today I've had people ringing into my office, including an invalid pensioner who wants to work out how they can pay the levy, of course as a pensioner they don't have to pay the levy, but that's the spirit of generosity they want to show. I've seen stories in today's newspapers of flood victims who don't have to pay the levy saying they'd voluntarily pay it, there is so much of that community spirit in the wake of this disaster, it's fantastic to see.
KING: I've had emails this morning of people saying they would not have donated money if they'd known of this levy, that they believe they've been as generous as they can possibly be, what would you say to those people?
PM: What I'd say to those people is firstly their donations are going to be used to help people with a hand of mateship to rebuild their lives, what this levy is going to go to and what the package I announced yesterday is going to is to rebuilding all of the infrastructure that we need in Queensland and in other flood affected areas, the roads, the rail, the ports, the bridges, that we've got to get rebuilt so communities can go back to life as normal and the economy can keep functioning, coal can get out on ships to where it needs to go, farmers products can get to market.
I'd also say to people that I understand that people have been generous, the way we've structured the levy, and we've done this very deliberately, is to make sure that the more people earn the more they pay. 60 percent of Australian taxpayers will pay less than $1 a week, in a 12 month one off levy.
KING: You raise the issue that you are also implementing spending cuts, you're cutting climate programs and delaying some infrastructure to raise the money too. What was the argument around the Cabinet table against leaving the budget in deficit a bit longer and funding this solely through spending cuts instead of imposing this levy or tax?
PM: Well I have been very clear Madonna that I'm going to do the right thing to rebuild Queensland and the right thing by the national economy.
KING: But would it have been the wrong thing to do this solely through spending cuts?
PM: In terms of how the package is put together, let's just make sure we're clear on all the issues, first it's the right thing by the national economy to bring the budget to surplus in 2012/13, by then we will have an economy running hot, close to full capacity and what you do when you've got an economy running hot is you make the sort of footprint of what government does less, that's what having a budget surplus does. Despite this huge disaster and it has been a huge disaster, we have a strong economy now. We've got strong employment growth, strong wages growth, we've got inflation in the band where we want it and in those circumstances it's the right thing to do to pay for this as we go. The package has put together budget cuts, infrastructure deferrals and the reason for that is we're going to have to do a lot of building and if we're going to have to do a lot of building then we can't do everything at once, we do need it sequenced and of course I am saying to Australians that they will be paying this levy to make a contribution.
KING: You say you can't do everything at once, why not put the NBN on hold? You wouldn't have had to cut programs or impose a tax.
PM: Completely untrue Madonna. That's not the way the government budget works. The National Broadband Network is an investment that we've made that is going to pay a return to taxpayers. It is not money in the government budget that can be reallocated from the NBN to another purpose that's not the way it works, it's an investment. And then the other thing is we have to have a strong economy, so we've got the capacity to do things like meet natural disasters. Now pivotal to having a strong economy for the future is having the infrastructure of the future and that's the National Broadband Network. When we look at what's happened in Queensland, so much of the burden has been borne by regional centres in Queensland, they're exactly the places and exactly the local economies that will benefit from the National Broadband Network, I'm not prepared to rob them of that.
KING: The burden that you mention, some people have said in emails to me would you have considered slowing down on foreign aid for one year to help those at home. Was that talked about at all?
PM: In terms of our foreign aid assistance, we do assist countries overseas and I think generally Australians are fairly proud that we go and do things like help kids in extreme poverty, kids who are at risk of starvation, that we do do that kind of work around the world.
KING: But did you consider holding off or throwing that in the mix just for one year?
PM: Well Madonna, I obviously structured the package I believed as the right package and that's the package I announced yesterday. I do just want to say on the question of our relations with the world, the world has come and offered us assistance in our hour of need, we shouldn't forget that.
KING: Will you rule out more pain in your May budget or do you believe your estimates of this damage bill are accurate and this is where it stops, the pain?
PM: I've used the best possible estimates available to me now, but they are preliminary. We will learn more about the damage in Queensland in the weeks and months ahead, obviously out there in Queensland people are trying to get to grips with everything that has been damaged and then work needs to be done to see, you know underneath roads and bridges and all the rest of it what has happened. If there is a need to make further money available we will do that by further budget cuts.
KING: OK, so budget cutbacks, it is a one off levy only.
PM: It's a one off levy only for 12 months, absolutely.
KING: You've said you wanted to do this quickly and people need the assistance quickly, the infrastructure has to be built quickly. How do you ensure you don't end up with another home insulation program on your hands?
PM: Well the expenditure will be worked through the Queensland Recovery Authority, we've made Major General Mick Slater available to chair that authority and I think he'll do a great job and he will bring with him all of the expertise you get in the Defence Force on questions of logistics and doing very very big and complicated things. The Federal Government will have two representatives on the board, we will have an agreement with the Queensland Government which will have very strict guidelines about value for money and how money can be spent, but I want to get on with this job, I want to rebuild Queensland. We'll get value for money as we do it.
KING: The problems with home insulation did hurt you and your government. We've received many complaints about the $1000 Centrelink handout, you get it here no questions asked if your power's off for 48 hours, that is Federal public money. Information just yesterday that people earning more than $250,000 a year were sitting in their beach homes on the Gold Coast during the flood and received it, how can you stop that kind of rorting?
PM: Well we have had the Australian Government Disaster Recovery payment in that form for donkey's years, so there weren't new guidelines for the Queensland floods, there were the guidelines that have been used for a long period of time. They're used because it's money that needs to be made available urgently for people and I don't make any apology for getting money into the hands of people quickly during a flood circumstance and disaster. If there's any fraud involved then there is a particular fraud squad that will deal with that.
KING: That's not necessarily fraud; because someone on $500,000 is entitled to that $1000 no questions asked, should the guidelines be tighter though ensure that public money is going to the right people?
PM: The guidelines have been drawn to deal with circumstances where people can find themselves in an evacuation centre, not able to get to an ATM, not able to access their own cash and they need help urgently, that's what that payment is for.
KING: Have you heard of problems with this $1000 Centrelink handout in Queensland?
PM: Generally when I've been out in Queensland on the ground meeting with Centrelink workers in evacuation centres people have been grateful that the assistance has got through and they've desperately needed it.
KING: Just finally we've had the big bushfire appeal in Victoria, now the flood appeal, in determining who wins out of people's wonderful generosity and it's generosity you've referred to too this morning. Do you have any view on whether payments should be means tested, or whether we need to look after the uninsured as well as the insured?
PM: I think these things are best dealt with and by the committee that's been brought together to administer the donations that people have very generously made. As a Victorian obviously I saw the work that stunned in the Victorian bushfires, including the work that was done from the donations that people around the nation and indeed around the world made when Victoria suffered so badly and what that has taught be is it's very important to have a committee that is working with local communities and assessing needs. Communities are different, circumstances are different, natural disasters are different, so I don't think it's for me in this interview Madonna, to pronounce about how that should be done. I think it's for the committee that's been selected to work with local communities
KING: Julia Gillard, thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins me now from Canberra. Good morning, PM.
PM: Good morning, Karl.
HOST: Good to have your company this morning. I just wonder, in light of that and in light of the fact that this crisis continues, is 6 billion conservative?
PM: Karl, as I said yesterday we're working off the best preliminary estimates we can get. Yes, there is some risk that the damage bill is more and if it is more then we will make budget cuts to pay for the extra. The levy is there. It will be there for 12 months.
I'm asking Australians around the nation to make a contribution, those that can afford it, and I think Australians do want to contribute to the rebuilding of the nation. The Government's also made substantial budget cuts already, so if we're looking at the proportion between budget cuts and the levy, it's $2 in Budget cuts for every $1 I'm asking Australians to pay for in the levy.
HOST: It's highly likely that it will cost more. Conservatively, some are looking at $15 billion. We know that $8 billion has already been lost in mining stoppages, so it is going to go higher. How are you going to pay for it, and if you're talking about budget cuts, why not make the cuts now?
PM: Well, Karl, I think we've got to be clear about damage estimates. What this money is for is it's to rebuild the roads, the rail, the ports, the bridges that have been hit by floodwaters; it's to rebuild that essential public infrastructure so we can get coal exports onto ships and out to the world and make money on them, we can get farm produce to market. So, that is our damages estimate. That's where it's been drawn from.
We are facing a disaster of unprecedented proportions in economic terms. I mean, 75 per cent of Queensland natural disaster declared; floodwaters New South Wales, Victoria and beyond. Given the unprecedented scale of this, then we do need a package of measures including the one-off levy, and, Karl, I would be making the point 60 per cent of taxpayers will be paying less than $1 a week in this levy. It's been struck so that it is fair in design and we've also made substantial budget cuts.
HOST: But why not make the cuts, back to the original question, why not make the cuts now? We know that it's going to cost more? Why don't we just get on top of it early?
PM: Well we're getting on top of it with this package, making $2 billion available to Queensland now-
HOST: -With respect, PM, it's not going to be enough. We know that it's not going to be enough, so why not make the cuts now rather than producing the levy?
PM: Well, Karl, the risk is, you're right, that the damages bill is greater. That's why I've got to make sure I've still got capacity in the budget to do some more if I need to do some more. That's why I've got to get the mix right now, including the levy, so if, unfortunately, the damages bill is more, we've got ways of meeting that additional damages bill.
HOST: And the levy will not go more than a year?
PM: Correct.
HOST: That's a guarantee?
PM: Absolutely.
HOST: Because they have gone longer in the past. In fact some of those levies, some introduced by the previous Government, are still going.
PM: Well, Karl, we'll legislate this. It will be a levy for a year, 12-month levy starting on the first of July. It's a highly progressive system, in the sense that the people who earn more, pay more - 60 per cent of taxpayers will pay less than a dollar a week, people who earn more money will be asked through the levy, obviously, to pay more.
And, Karl, I'm glad you've made the point about levies from the previous Government, because of course Mr Abbott is out there saying today that he's going to oppose this levy - you know, doing what he does, opposing what the Government does. Well, I think, he really needs to answer the question why is it that he was prepared to support levies when he was in government, but he's not prepared to support this levy to rebuild Queensland and rebuild the nation?
Indeed his election promises were all about having a levy to pay for his election promises, so it was somehow good enough to have a levy to pay for election promises but he's trying to say it's not good enough now when we need to deal with this huge natural disaster. I think that's a pretty important question for him to answer.
HOST: Alright, so we have a guarantee there for those, because a lot of people are concerned at home that this is going to continue, we have a guarantee from the Prime Minister today that that is not going to go any longer and there will be budget cuts if the damage bill from these floods, which is probably inevitable, will rise.
PM, thank you very much for those guarantees, at least, today. Thank you.
PM: Thanks, Karl. 



Today I announce that my Chief of Staff, Amanda Lampe, has resigned and will be replaced by Ben Hubbard.
Amanda's personal circumstances have changed and she has decided to move on. She will leave at the end of March, allowing for a 2-month transition period.
I wish to thank Amanda for her significant leadership during her time as my Chief of Staff in the Prime Minister's Office and the Deputy Prime Minister's Office.
Amanda's extensive experience and skills have been invaluable and I wish her and her family the best for the future.
Mr Hubbard has accepted my offer to become my Chief of Staff and will begin on Monday, 7 February.
He brings significant public administration, stakeholder and management experience to the role.
He is the outgoing Chief Executive Officer of the Victoria Bushfire Reconstruction and Recovery Authority and has previously served as my Chief of Staff when I was Deputy Opposition Leader and Deputy Prime Minister. 



HOST: Yes a very special guest too, Prime Minister Julia Gillard is with me here in the studio, great to see you, you've been all over, not just the state of Queensland where we're focusing today, we've had this problem obviously in Victoria; in Western Australia not so long ago.
PM: Unfortunately we've had floodwaters everywhere, obviously the crisis in Queensland has been of a bigger scale than anywhere else, but people in New South Wales, in Victoria and over in WA have all had to battled floodwaters.
HOST: I was talking to Premier Anna Bligh before we got underway and she was really quite pleased with the progress and it's very difficult when a lot of money suddenly comes in to distribute it correctly and have it used quickly isn't it?
PM: Look we need to manage that and mange it well but my sense is that Mick Slater, the Defence Force Officer we made available to lead the recovery authority is doing a great job, Anna and her team are doing a great job and they're really listening to communities about what is needed for the recovery. Inevitably this isn't going to be one size fits all, we've got to get down and look at the roads, the rail, everything that needs to be fixed after the floodwaters have been through, so a lot of infrastructure to rebuild and a lot of homes and lives to help out, and of course the donations go to helping people rebuild their lives whilst the Government gets on with the job of rebuilding the infrastructure.
HOST: Today's community is the cricket community and it's come together remarkably well. The figure is around about $4.5 million already come because of today's initiative and from the cricket community already is $1 million and I know that you've got an announcement about that.
PM: I do have an announcement about that, I want to congratulate Cricket Australia and all the state cricket associations, the English Cricket Board and the players themselves for their very generous donations, as well as people who are putting their coins in the tins going round the ground. As a Government we're going to match that dollar for dollar, so there's more than a million in that bundle of money so far, Cricket Australia and the state cricket associations, the players, and the English Board, and what people have put in the tin, so we'll keep matching it dollar for dollar and I'm sure that figure is going to rise during the day as the crowd keeps getting into it.
HOST: So it's not just the cricket fraternity that have raised a million, you've matched that million, but also everything that comes out of the supporters, the audiences' pocket today you've matched?
PM: That's right, we will match what happens on the ground and we know not everybody can be here sitting waiting for a bucket to go by to put their money in, so we'll also match dollar for dollar donations made today to the Premier's Relief Appeal either by phone or through the website. So people at home, if they've put in some money, we'll match it.
HOST: OK, so you ring up now and put in ten bucks, rest assured the boss says there's ten bucks coming from her as well. Just to give you a feel, I mean Queensland cricket alone a quarter of a million dollars, you mentioned the Australian players, this is Australian cricketers around the country, $190,000 already, the English Cricket Board $50,000, the English players another $62,000. Just about everybody seems to be finding a way to contribute and that of course is the overwhelming feeling, the way that everybody in the communities of Australia, not just Queensland, are finding a way to contribute and it's a community life that works so well for Australia isn't it?
PM: It does and it makes you really very proud to see the way Australians have just got out and responded from a local barbie someone puts on in their backyard and they put the hat around, to some of our biggest companies in the country making available millions of dollars. People in their own way have gone in and responded and what better way to do than a day's cricket, drawing people together and some great fundraising happening too.
HOST: Lovely, well good to see you, thank you very much for coming in and particularly thank you for that double donation, we can call it, I think that everybody in Queensland is going to be hugely grateful.
Two for 87, with Shaun Marsh going well. I hope you have a good day and enjoy watching the play.
PM: Thank you very much. I'll go enjoy it.
HOST: Thank you Prime Minister.



HOST: Julia Gillard joining is in the ‘Gabba commentary box. Great to see you in Brisbane again.
PM: Thank you very much for having me in the box.
HOST: And look, which parts of Australia haven't you seen at the moment, because over the last couple of weeks there are so many people in need and you've been incredibly busy.
PM: I've been trying to get round to as many communities as possible because 1) you want to offer a word of reassurance; and 2) you want to really see it for yourself, what it's like on the ground, how much we're going to have to rebuild.
HOST: You'll have to call a few of the boundaries, too, Prime Minister.
[Cricket commentary omitted]
There are millions of stories. Is there one that strikes you off the top of your head at the moment from all the devastation, regional, suburban?
PM: From all of it I think the thing that stays with me the most is the people of Grantham and talking to them - the absolute smashing up of homes and cars and planes and bridges and roads in the Lockyer Valley and in that community, Grantham. I met a little girl who'd been evacuated from there and she told me this horrific story about the night they'd had on the roof of the house waiting to be rescued, but told it to me in the same sort of tone of voice a child would tell you about what happened at school that day, just amazing. She was a great kid.
[Cricket commentary omitted]
HOST: To think, here we are today trying to rally the community in and around Brisbane again and throughout the state of Queensland because of floods, and there are people in the northern part of the State battening down the hatches once more with a cyclone imminent.
[Cricket commentary omitted]
So, only a cyclone imminent here in Queensland but I think the good word is it is getting a little, well, the threat's been downgraded in Western Australia, which is good news.
PM: That's a little bit of good news, but, gee, it just seems so cruel doesn't it, that at the end of the summer period we've had and at the end of all of this flooding that now we have to talk about cyclones here in Queensland and in WA. It really is just cruel, I think there's no other word for it, putting more pressure on people.
HOST: We do live in an extraordinary country, though, because on one side of the continent we have floods and a few weeks ago in West Australia we had bushfires, so you go from one extreme to another.
PM: We continue to have farmers in drought in some parts of the country, so just as people are cursing too much water there are still people with too little.
[Cricket commentary omitted]
HOST: And there's been all manner of appeals over the last couple of months, but from the cricket community today already over $1 million has been raised through Cricket Australia, the State bodies, the players' match fees from today.
[Cricket commentary omitted]
And Prime Minister you've got a wonderful announcement today as to the Federal Government's recognition of today and realising that you're also going to pitch in?
PM: We are going to pitch in, so Cricket Australia's done a remarkable job bringing together the cricketing community, so we're going to match that dollar for dollar and we're also going to match the donations people make today to the Premier's Relief Appeal, whether that's by phone or on the website. So, if you're thinking of donating, do it today because you're going to double your money. We're going to match it.
HOST: And that's the Queensland Premier's Flood Appeal website and also the number today?
PM: The number today is 1800 219 028.
HOST: So 1800 219 028, we'll give that number again.
[Cricket commentary omitted]
HOST: Prime Minister just wondering whether or not, we have had previous Prime Ministers partake in the gentle art of cricket. We have seen a previous Prime Minister attempt to bowl a cricket ball. When are we going to see you at the crease at some stage or other?
PM: Never. I saw John Howard at the Sydney Cricket Ground and said to him I'm never going to try and match you for being the biggest cricket tragic who's a Prime Minister. You win hands down. I give up right now. And so I'm not going to try and keep in his footsteps.
HOST: Are you a cricket fan?
PM: Look I'd have to say Tim, my partner, is probably the fan in the family. I'm the one in the study doing the paperwork but I can track what's happening by the shouts coming out of the lounge room. 
[Cricket commentary omitted]
HOST: And you speak of your partner Tim, did I read that he's going to be part of a game at Manuka Oval in Canberra?
PM: There is a game at Manuka coming up for the first sitting week, which is also going to make a contribution for flood appeal fundraising. I think he's hiding some of the details from me but he's talking about wicket keeping.
HOST: OK.
HOST: If he wants any tips just give us a yell.
[Cricket commentary omitted]
HOST: Yes a former Ashes tourist wicket keeper here in Ray Phillips, but, yes, I believe the ACT Brumbies and the Raiders and a lot of the sporting community in Canberra. We've seen it everywhere across the country. It doesn't matter whether people have been affected or not, but they're trying to do their bit.
[Cricket commentary omitted]
HOST: There you go Prime Minister. Tim would have seen Matt Prior moving nicely to his right there are gloving it very softly.
HOST: It's all in the footwork.
PM: All in the footwork - I'm not guaranteeing that we will see that move reproduced at Manuka Oval.
HOST: (inaudible) down at Canberra there and bowl a few overs, just behind closed doors.
PM: I'm not sure I'm going to be the best person to practice with. We might have to get a few others around to help.
HOST: David Hussey's the new man. Prime Minister just before you go a word on, there are so many stories of community help and so forth, but those that are employed at the same time to do the work, out national service over the last month or so, the men and women of the national service probably haven't had as much talked about them because there's been so many other stories out there. They've come off leave, they've done all manner of things just as, well, all others around Australian in voluntary means, but what are the stories you're hearing from them?
PM: Amazing. We've had more Defence Force personnel here helping in Queensland than any time since Cyclone Tracy for a natural disaster and I've met with a number of them. They've literally saved dozens of lives in the Lockyer Valley, getting people off roofs. Some tremendous stories of individual courage, and then they were there moving filth and muck just to give people that sense of confidence that help was there, help was coming, and they were going to be there to help people rebuild their lives. It's been tremendous.
[Cricket commentary omitted]
HOST: Well, Prime Minister, just to reiterate that the Federal Government today matching the donations of Australian cricket, which is already upward of one million, the Premier's Flood Appeal donations today on the website and on the phone number 1800 219 028. So, it's great to see that on this day where the cricket community is pitching in - as Hussey gets off the mark, turning Woakes through the onside for one, they'll come back for a couple, the score to 4/115  -  that again the Government has seen yet another part of the community doing its bit and has decided to put its hand up as well.
PM: It is terrific and we do need people to keep donating. That is going to help their fellow Australians in a really personal way as people get about the job of rebuilding their lives. Our job as a Government is to get on a rebuild all the big infrastructure that's been damaged by floodwaters, but help a fellow Australian, ring the number today and we'll pitch in as well.
HOST: Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard, thanks for coming in.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: And now you've got another one on your partner. He'll be jealous if he's a cricket fan, that you've been on board ABC Grandstand cricket.
PM: I'll have bragging rights for a good while.
HOST: Thanks for your time.
HOST: Wish him good luck at Manuka Oval.
PM: I will. Thank you. 



PM: Despite being here at the cricket which is obviously a great event, I do want to open up by making some comments on Egypt. People will have seen on their TV screens the huge demonstrations that are happening in Egypt and some of the associated violence. The Australian Government certainly understands the desire of the people of Egypt for reform, for democracy - we understand that  -  but we are monitoring the situation closely and calling on everybody to exercise calm and restraint. To make sure that the security forces are being restrained, and also to make sure that demonstrations are peaceful.
There are a number of Australians in Egypt, there are around 870 who are officially registered and we believe the number of Australians in Egypt is likely to be in the thousands. Our message to Australians in Egypt is stay away from demonstrations and if it is safe to travel to exit Egypt, then do so.
Today as a result of monitoring the situation in Egypt and the intensity of the demonstrations there, we have upgraded the travel warning for Australians, the travel warning now says do not travel. It's a very clear message to Australians who may have been contemplating travelling to Egypt, do not travel.
We have increased our consular ability in Egypt to support Australians who are already there but I would very clearly give the message to anybody contemplating travel, please observe the travel advisory and when you do you will see that it very clearly says do not travel to Egypt in current circumstances.
I'm very happy to take questions on that or any other matter, and I'm obviously here with the Treasurer and Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan.
JOURNALIST: What's your response to the CBA's move this morning to put up about $57 million to help people affected by the floods?
PM: Can I say about that, Wayne Swan and I in Queensland a few short days ago had a meeting with corporate Australia and we thanked them for the generosity they'd shown so far but also asked them to step up efforts, and since that time we've seen things like the RACQ announce its compassionate arrangement for people insured with it and I'm really pleased to see the announcement from the Commonwealth Bank today. This is an announcement of a big dollar figure, it combines a compassionate approach to insurance claims with direct assistance to flood victims, so it's great to see the Commonwealth Bank taking that further move.
We will continue to keep working with corporate Australia, they've shown a lot of generosity so far, but there's more to do and as there's more to do in recovery over the weeks and months ahead, we'll continue through our business roundtable to be staying in touch with corporate Australia, asking for cash donations and help but also asking for in-kind donations to make a difference to communities.
JOURNALIST: What do you think of the idea of an ongoing federal disaster assistance fund once this has all blown over?
PM: Look I understand that people want to talk their way through that question about our long-term disaster arrangements. I would make this point that we are a nation that unfortunately very regularly sees fire and floods and other forms of natural disasters, and in the ordinary course we can deal with them through our normal natural disaster arrangements. What's been different this time is just the sheer size, scale and economic cost of the floods in Queensland particularly. So this is likely to be the most costly natural disaster we've ever seen in economic terms and that's why special arrangements have been structured.
So I understand people will want to have that long-term conversation, but my message to the Parliamentarians who will gather in Canberra next week is that passing the Government's package for flood relief is an urgent task, we want to get on with the job, get on with rebuilding Queensland.
JOURNALIST: What message do you have for Queenslanders who are now looking at the two cyclones this week?
PM: After the summer that's been you just think can any more cruel blows actually land on Queensland and the nation and unfortunately the answer seems to be yes.
Queenslanders are obviously bracing for Tropical Cyclone Anthony and at the same time we've got people in the south west of this country in Western Australia bracing for Cyclone Bianca.
My message to people in affected communities, whether they be in Queensland or in the west, is make the preparations that you are being urged to do by emergency services personnel, we've got fantastic emergency personnel here in Queensland and right around the country, people need to listen their warnings, they need to be making the preparations that they're being asked to make and at all times respond to the advice of emergency services personnel.
We're all made of tough stuff and we'll get through this but this is another big cruel blow coming on top of what has been a summer of tragedy already.
JOURNALIST: Have you had any chance to talk to the independents over the levy package?
PM: We will be briefing the independents, we will be briefing all members of Parliament and asking them to get on with passing this packing as quickly as possible, it is urgent to put the package in place, it is urgent to assist the people of Queensland, but I would also say I think there is a message in this for Mr Abbott, now is the time to be looking at the national interest, not his political interest, and I understand that Mr Abbott's instinct when the Government says something is to always say no, but it really doesn't have to be like that.
When levies have been proposed in the past, including by the Howard Government of which Mr Abbott was a member, the Opposition has agreed with them. When we were in opposition we agreed with and supported things like the Timor Levy, the Gun Buyback, you can as an opposition make a decision in the national interest and I'm still calling on Mr Abbott to do so.
JOURNALIST: What do you think of his offer to help you find more savings in the Budget to avoid the levy?
PM: Well Mr Abbott came to Queensland yesterday, he could have come to outline his package, he didn't do that, he came to talk about his political interest and the politics he thinks he can make out of all of this. I'm sure most Australians, that's not what they want to be hearing now.
What Australians want to see from their leaders now is getting on with the job of rebuilding, that's what the package is for, that's why I'm still continuing to call on Mr Abbott to act in the national interest and just this once, put aside his political interest.
JOURNALIST: Just to clarify you said you'd be briefing the independents but you won't be necessarily horse trading, they already have some demands (inaudible)
PM: Well we've got a package we believe is the right package, we want to get it through Parliament, we need to get it through Parliament as quickly as possible so that they Commissioner of Tax and businesses can all make their arrangements for the forthcoming tax year. So I'll certainly be talking to Parliamentarians, including the independents, but our message to them will be this is the right package let's get on with the job.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the Government would provide an emergency flight out of Cairo to Europe for Australians affected by the unrest in Egypt.
The charter flight is being arranged with Qantas and will depart Cairo on Wednesday to take affected Australians to either Frankfurt or London.
Australians wishing to register for the charter should contact the DFAT Consular Emergency Centre on +61 2 6261 3305 (if calling from overseas) or 1300 555 135 (if calling from within Australia). 
Further details of Wednesday's charter flight are currently being finalised, with additional charter flights to be arranged if necessary.
The Prime Minister said the charter flight would be provided free of charge as part of the Government's response to this evolving situation.
Australians taking up this option will be responsible for arranging their onward travel from Europe, but consular officials will be on hand to assist travellers in need.
The airport in Cairo remains open and commercial flights are departing, although significant disruption and delays may be experienced. 
Departure by commercial flights remains an option for Australians with a confirmed booking who are able to travel safely to the airport.
Australian officials will be at the airport in Cairo today and in coming days to provide advice and assistance to Australians.



PM: Thank you very much for coming to a press conference at what I understand is an unusual time of day to have one. I've just got a brief statement to make about circumstances in Egypt, and then I'll be very happy to take a few questions.
As Australians know, the Government has been monitoring the situation in Egypt very closely. Yesterday, I advised Australians that we had moved our travel warning to do not travel. We had advised Australians and we continue to advise Australians in Egypt to travel out of Egypt if it is safe for them to do so.
This afternoon, I have been briefed by relevant officials and talked to relevant ministers. Following those discussions, I have determined that we will make available an evacuation flight for Australians from Egypt.
The flight will be a Qantas plane that the Government has chartered.
The evacuation flight will be available to take people from Egypt on Wednesday.
The circumstances in Egypt are that we are saying to Australians to travel out of Egypt. As a result of that advice, many Australians have already made arrangements, commercial arrangements, to leave Egypt, and they have confirmed commercial bookings.
Cairo airport is still operational, and commercial flights are leaving Cairo airport, but there is significant pressure on commercial flights, and some disruption and delay. In these circumstances, I have determined that the best course of action is to make this assisted evacuation flight available to assist Australians to leave Egypt.
This flight will be made available at no cost to Australians who travel on it. The flight will return to either London or Frankfurt. Officials of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will be available to meet people who come off the flight to assist them with making their further arrangements for where they wish to travel to next.
Obviously, a number of Australians would have airline tickets that they can change bookings in relation to. A number would have travel insurance. A number would have been stopping off in Egypt on their way to further locations, but officials from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will be available to assist people, and obviously to provide assistance if there are cases of particular hardship and Australians need assistance to move from either Frankfurt airport or London airport.
My highest priority is the safety of Australians. Australians will have seen the circumstances in Egypt and in Cairo and would have recognised the dangers that are there. As a result of those dangers, that is why we did move the travel advisory, and I do want to stress it remains do not travel to Egypt, and that is why we are making these special arrangements to assist Australians to move out of Egypt.
We will obviously monitor demand for this assisted evacuation flight and, depending on demand, we will make further flights available as necessary.
Now, I'm conscious that it is morning in Egypt and there would be a number of Australians who are trying to work through their travel arrangements and work out how they are going to get out of Egypt, so if I can take what is a bit of an unusual course in a press conference but advise people of the right telephone numbers to ring.
For people who are in Egypt, the number that they can contact is our embassy there. The number there is 202 2575 0444.
For Australians who want to ring in to the DFAT consular emergency centre here in Australia that number, ringing from overseas, is 61 2 6261 3305.
For Australians who are ringing in Australia but want to contact the number on behalf of family or friends, they should ring 02 6261 3305.
We now have operational a calls arrangement so calls will be answered 24/7 both in Cairo and in Canberra using those numbers.
I'm very happy to take any questions that people may have.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how many people can get on board this flight, and how do they get a ticket?
PM: Well, they ring those numbers.
We know that there are around 1,100 Australians registered with our embassy in Egypt. We anticipate that there are more Australians in Egypt than that, but the only hard number I can give you is the number registered and that's the 1,100. We know a number of those Australians would have confirmed commercial travel arrangements, so that's why we're making the flight available.
It's a 747, so obviously it has a large number of seats, as big planes do, and we will monitor demand, and if it is necessary to make a further flight available then we will.
JOURNALIST: One class of seat?
PM: Oh, look, I can't give you all the details of the configuration of the aircraft. We've urgently this afternoon sourced a Qantas plane that we can charter for this purpose. It's coming out of Europe, so I'm not sure we had every choice in the world about its internal fittings and fixtures.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you about the safety of people in Egypt, given that you've it to do not travel, but how concerned are you as a Government about the situation in Egypt?
PM: Well, we are very concerned and we wouldn't be taking these steps if we weren't concerned. The highest travel advice we can give Australians is those very plain and simple words  -  do not travel. That's our highest travel advisory, do not travel, and so we have issued that deliberately because we do not believe that it is safe for Australians now outside Egypt to travel into Egypt, and at the same time we gave Australians the advice for them to travel if it's safe to do so, and obviously with disruption on the streets people will need to take account of the circumstances that they find themselves in.
So, we do want people to be safe. It's my highest priority that we keep Australians safe, and that's why, as a Government, we have determined to take this decision and to make available this charter flight to assist with evacuations.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can this be taken as a signal, Prime Minister, from your intelligence or whatever, that the situation in Egypt's about to deteriorate significantly, this (inaudible)
PM: People should take this on face value for what it is. People will have seen on their TV screens very significant disruption on the streets. That's not only been in the form of mass demonstrations. That is also in the form of looting and crime, so in those circumstances I just think, as a matter of commonsense, people can work out that it would be very easy to be caught up in a situation where people could be subject to violence, and we want to avoid that.
Highest priority  -  keeping Australians safe. I've talked to officials this afternoon. We took a step up in the travel advisory yesterday, and today we're taking this further step of assisting with the evacuation.
There is significant pressure on commercial flights, and that is what is causing the disruption and delays at the airport.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what level of concern is there about the protection and security of Australian officials in Egypt, and has there been any consideration of evacuating Australian staff, Government staff?
PM: At this stage we are staffing, and indeed have increased resources so that we're in a position to provide consular assistance to people in these circumstances.
Now, we are going to monitor this closely, day by day, indeed, hour by hour, and if we think any further action is required, then we'll take it and we'll certainly advise people of it publically, but people should take the message from this announcement that there will be staff at the Cairo embassy who can assist them, that there will be people to answer their telephone calls both if they ring the Cairo number or if they ring the Australian number, and that, in addition to normal commercial travel arrangements, people who have confirmed commercial bookings, there is now this assisted evacuation flight available.
JOURNALIST: Have you sent other staff from other posts in the region to Cairo?
PM: Look, at an earlier point in time we did increase resourcing because we recognised that there would be a number of Australians who would need assistance in these circumstances.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you confident that Cairo airport will remain open, and does the Government have contingency plans in case it closes, given reports of violence and rioting near the airport?
PM: We're continuing to monitor the situation, and if we form any view about a change to the advice that I've just given people, then we will obviously update about that advice, but at the moment the advice to me is commercial flights are flying. Cairo airport is open. There is significant pressure on it, and consequently significant delays, but if people have confirmed commercial bookings and they believe they're in a position to access those bookings, then that is one way to leave Egypt.
Obviously, another way to leave Egypt is to use the numbers and information I've just given people and to register for the flight which will go on Wednesday.
JOURNALIST: Can I just clarify, Prime Minister, if you have a commercial booking and there's a big flood of people going there, will you be able to get on the Government flight instead, or will there be a priority given to people who haven't been able to get on-
PM: -Thank you for that, and that's an important clarification.
People will not be refused access to this assisted evacuation flight because they have a commercial booking.
Having said that, if people have a confirmed commercial booking, and it is going soon and they believe that they are in a position to access that flight, then that is going to work for them as a way out of Egypt, so I am not suggesting to people that they cancel commercial bookings that they believe they can safely go and access, but I'm also not saying that if you cancel a commercial booking you will be denied access to this flight.
I think in these situations where, clearly, you know, our highest priority is the safety of each individual, we've got to show some flexibility and generosity and make sure that we're assisting the maximum number of Australians. At the same time, I think if someone can travel, say, today, and they've got a confirmed commercial booking to do so, then there is no reason to delay their departure until this flight is available.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, apart from those Australians who've officially notified the embassy that they're there, have you got any, are your officials making any estimate of how many Australians, unregistered, might actually be there?
PM: Look, we do have estimates, and they are in the numbers like 2,000-3,000, but we can't be sure. The number we can be sure about is the number who are registered with the embassy.
JOURNALIST: What's the cost of this exercise, and have you given thought to recovering some of the cost through claims on their travellers' insurance?
PM: On the question of cost, obviously, there is a cost associated with chartering an aircraft, but we are going to bear that cost in order to put the safety of Australians first.
We are not seeking, we will not be seeking, cost-recovery arrangements for people who fly on that flight.
Other nations are also making available planes to take people from Egypt. The United States, for example, has announced an arrangement today. Their practice is to have a cost-recovery arrangement. It's not our practice, and there won't be a cost recovery arrangement for accessing this flight.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, has the Government received any advice about the reports of Egyptian police and Egyptian internal security forces redeployed onto the streets in the next day or so?
PM: Look, I'm not going to go to intelligence reports, but the situation is as people have seen it on their TV screens. It's a situation which people can be caught up in dangerous situations, either because of street demonstrations, reaction to street demonstrations or associated crime whilst there is such significant disruption on the streets. You would be aware there's been reports of looting, crime, gunfire, and in those circumstances it's, you know, very easy for someone to end up injured or something worse, and that's why we have advised do not travel why we are advising, if you are in Egypt, to travel when it's safe to do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given what you've just said about gunfire, will it be necessary for the embassy to organise buses or convoys or anything like that to make sure Australians get safely to the airport?
PM : Well, the best thing, the best advice I can give people now, is contact the number, register for the flight. DFAT officials will work it through with people, where they are, how to get to the airport. I mean, the airport, we just do need to remind ourselves, the airport is still functioning. People have been travelling to the airport and getting on flights and they've been doing that in circumstances where they've been making their own way to the airport, so the best advice I can give people is ring these numbers. We are monitoring the situation day by day, hour by hour. The travel arrangement we'll make for Australians to get on the flight will obviously be appropriate to keep people safe in the circumstances of getting to the flight on Wednesday, but, you know, let's just deal with the fact as we know them know  -  as we know them know.
People have been travelling to Cairo airport, which is open, and they have been accessing commercial flights.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, is it the Australian Government's position that President Mubarak should stand down?
PM: Look, the position of the Australian Government is the one I spoke about a little bit earlier today. We understand the aspirations of the people of Egypt for freedom, for democracy, for the kind of things that in Australia we largely take for granted. We have said that the Government of Egypt should recognise these legitimate aspirations by the people of Egypt; that the future government of Egypt is in the hands of the people of Egypt.
It is not for me to determine what should happen. The essence of people being able to participate in a democracy and to have the benefits of the kind of freedoms that we take for granted here is that the people of Egypt need to shape their future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you received a briefing today on the threat to the Queensland coast of Cyclone Yasi?
PM: I'm continuously receiving updates, and I've also been contacted by Premier Anna Bligh, so amongst other things we are very closely watching that weather formation and staying in very close touch with the Queensland Government about what it could mean for the people of Queensland.
Thank you.



HOST: Julia Gillard, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning, Jon.
HOST: We had, in fact, a very positive reaction on talkback on this radio station but I'm astonished to see that the next morning the written media - the press - pretty much universally say that your policy has been badly received and on the skids.
PM: Jon, I understand people are under financial pressure, and when you first ask them about paying a levy I'm not surprised some Australians think ‘gee, I'm going to have to consider that', but overall I think Australians are very generous people, that we want to pull together when times are tough, and people will ultimately come to understand why the levy is necessary as one way of working together to recover from the Queensland floods, but also from floods in other parts of the country, including Victoria.
HOST: Are you going to rethink your policy after the reaction that you got from it?
PM: No, I'm not, Jon. I'm determined to rebuild as we need to around the country. Our preliminary estimates are that that's going to cost $5.6 billion. It's a lot of money. We've made some room in the federal budget through cutbacks, but we also do need Australians to make a contribution through the levy-
HOST: -Well, you don't. You've could cut another $1.8 billion from cutbacks if you wanted to find it that way, but why don't you?
PM: Well, I've determined that the best package here is for us to cut back on the federal budget, and we have. For every $1 we're asking Australians to pay in levy we've cut back $2 on the federal budget, but I think that this is a fair proposition. For the vast majority of people it means that they'll be paying less than $1 a week. Even for someone on $80,000 a year we're in cup of coffee territory in terms of what they're being asked to put in.
HOST: Do you blame Tony Abbott for politicising the flood disaster?
PM: I would say about Tony Abbott's reaction that at times like this people want to see us all pulling together and I think Australians have really pulled together. What I'd say about Tony Abbott's reaction is, look, he's not opposed to levies. We know that - he's not opposed to levies. He was a supporter of Howard Government levies. He was a supporter of a levy to fund his own election promises. What he's looking for here is the politics of it, the political advantage, and I really don't think that's what Australians are expecting of their political leaders at times like this when we've got a lot to do and a lot of rebuilding to do.
HOST: He's cashing in on a lot of suspicion that in fact you're Government and your predecessor Kevin Rudd were running a Government that just doesn't know how to spend money responsibly and that's a reputation that he says you've earned.
PM: Look, Tony Abbott has just come out against the levy holus bolus, despite the fact that he's been a supporter of levies in the past, so this is him looking for political advantage and he made a speech over the weekend about how he thinks this can be something that assists him and the Liberal Party back into government. I don't think Australians want to see that kind of approach from their political leaders. They want us to get on with the job and he's got no fundamental objection to levies. He can't have - he's supported them in the past, including paying for his election promises. So, really, Jon, I'd say if it's been good enough for Tony Abbott to support a levy to pay for his election promises then surely it's good enough when we've got so much rebuilding to do around the country.
And I understand people want to see value for money. I want to see value for money. That's why I've deferred $1 billion worth of infrastructure - so we don't create capacity constraints which cause price to go up. And we will be working with the Queensland Government; we'll have two people on the recovery authority board; my Minister, Joe Ludwig is sitting on the State Cabinet committee that is dealing with flood recovery; we'll have auditing at every level for us to make payments, including against the $2 billion prepayment we're going to give the Queensland Government; there will need to be audit sign-off, including audit sign-off by the state Auditor-General; and of course we made Mick Slater available here, a very senior Defence Force official, who will bring all of his expertise to the task.
HOST: Warren Truss claims that you're pork barrelling the infrastructure rebuild.
PM: I've seen those claims and, Jon, the simple circumstance here is when we looked for what we could defer in terms of infrastructure spending we obviously had to select projects where we didn't have contracts underway and people working doing them. That is, we had to select projects that were in the planning stage and not under fixed contracts. So, when you're looking across your infrastructure expenditure there's only some many projects that fit that bill, and we worked through with the Queensland Government to select the right projects to be deferred.
That deferral is important because we need to ensure we're not bidding up prices. We need to make money available, but you need concrete, you need workers, you need skilled workers to come along and rebuild things and just to put it really simply we can't do everything at once, and that's why we're deferring some infrastructure that was otherwise planned.
HOST: What's wrong with a permanent natural disaster fund? It would take very little to start building up a capital fund for all of these sorts of events that may occur in the future.
PM: I understand that people are going to want to have that conversation, Jon, and my only message is that we can't hold up getting started on the rebuilding from this huge natural disaster while we have that conversation. And I'd also say, just in terms of our disaster preparedness and our disaster resilience, that we should note that this has been an extraordinary set of circumstances. This is probably the biggest natural disaster we've ever faced in economic terms-
HOST: -Yeah, but we're warned to expect more of them in future.
PM: Well, Jon, we're a nation that sees natural disasters. We've seen them in the past, we'll see them in the future  -  cyclones, fire, flood. Normally we are able to deal with that through standing natural disaster arrangements. What's been different this time is the sheer scale of it. I mean, 75 per cent of Queensland natural disaster declared; a city of millions, Brisbane, basically closed down because of a natural disaster; and then floodwaters cascading into other parts of the country, including, of course, into regional Victoria.
HOST: In fact Peter Ryan, the leader of the National Party and Deputy Premier here now in Victoria said that he couldn't believe, on this program early this morning, he said he couldn't believe that in your whole National Press Club speech you didn't even mention Victoria, and he and Ted Baillieu, the Premier here, are wary now they think you're going to cut back on infrastructure spending here in Victoria. What guarantees can you give?
PM: Well, look, I understand that people will make some of these political points along the way but the reality here is, Jon, I visited flood regions in Victoria. I wanted to do that to talk to people on the ground directly.
We'll work with the Victorian Government in exactly the same way we're going to working with the Queensland Government. There's a formula which is how much the Commonwealth contributes. We contribute 75 per cent of the rebuilding cost. We'll do that in Victoria in exactly the same way we're going to do it in Queensland, so I'll just get on with the job working with Premier Baillieu and his Government, same deal for Victoria as there is for Queensland, and we'll get on with the rebuilding.
HOST: What advice are you giving to Australians in Egypt?
PM: The advice we're giving to Australians in Egypt is certainly to stay away from any of the demonstrations and to try and stay in safe and secure areas. We're also saying people should commence to travel out of Egypt if it's safe to do so. Now, the airport is still open at this stage. We are obviously monitoring this very, very closely so that we can make the best possible arrangements for Australians to move out of Egypt and we are certainly saying to Australians who are here at home or in other parts of the world, do not travel. Do not go to Egypt.
HOST: Are you expecting a knock on, a domino effect as it's been described, across the rest of the Arab world?
PM: I think we can all understand the yearning of people in Egypt and in other parts of the Middle-East, the yearning for democracy, for freedom, for many of the things that as Australians we take for granted day after day because we live in such a peaceful and wonderful country. So, I think we do understand that yearning but we also want to see as much calm and restraint as possible. We don't want to see people losing their lives in a situation like the one that Egypt finds itself in now.
HOST: But we could see chaos replacing tyranny that could even become completely ungovernable?
PM: We're certainly calling on the Government of Egypt to respond to the very legitimate desires of the Egyptian people for change. I mean, ultimately the future of Egypt has to be in the hands of the Egyptian people. That's what we want for our own country, that we as Australians get to determine our future and so the people of Egypt need to determine their future, but clearly as we monitor the situation closely we continue to urge restraint in these difficult circumstances. We've seen a pretty high death rate already and we don't want to see more tragedy.
HOST: And just finally closer to home, there's been an internal brawl in the Victorian branch of the Labor Party, which you have more than passing familiarity with. Is it a good idea to recruit celebrity candidates? Frank Maguire to replace John Brumby in Broadmeadows.
PM: I think it's a good idea to recruit good candidates and good candidates can come from all walks of life. Some of those walks of life have already brought them to public attention. Some of those walks of life are quieter walks of life and no-one knows their name until they step forward for politics, but I think Mr Maguire will be a good candidate.
HOST: Mary Delehunty, Justin Madden, Peter Garrett, we could keep going through. They don't always work out in as spectacular fashion or to the expectations heaps upon them, these sorts of recruits, do they?
PM: Well, Jon, I'm not going to get involved in using the names of individuals. Peter Garrett's obviously working with me in the Federal Government, doing a great job in the area of school education, something very, very, very close to my heart.
I think when a political party like the Labor Party is looking for candidates we should look as broadly as possible. Some people that stand for the Labor Party will come from public walks of life and consequently they'll be people who are known. Some of them will even be from the ABC, Jon, we've seen that in the past, and some will be not known to anybody beyond their local community, not a public name at all, but will make a great Member of Parliament. There's not one path into politics.
HOST: No, there certainly isn't, but there's one path out in particular that no-one wants to take Julia Gillard. We will see exactly where-
PM: -Oh Jon, surely more optimism can be summoned at the start of a working week.
HOST: And at the start of what could turn out to be quite a turbulent year. We will see just how turbulent it turns out to be.
I'm grateful to you for your time today.
PM: Thank you very much. 


Hilton on the Park, Melbourne
Last week I spoke at the National Press Club on meeting the challengesof flood recovery while retaining our commitment to fiscal responsibility.
Today I want to take a broader view of our nation's economic future in the years and decades ahead.
Two months ago I spoke to you on CEDA's 50th anniversary, and what remarkable years they have been for our nation.Those five decades divide neatly into two very contrasting eras.
The first 25 years were a time of complacency when we sheltered from the outside world.
The next 25 years were the age of reform.
Through good decisions and hard choices, we built an open and competitive economy based on skills, productivity and innovation.
I am a product of that era.
That is why I know that our continued economic success dependson continuous reform.
Reform to nurture us through the resources boom.
But also reform to take us beyond the resources boom.
Nurturing the boom and sharing the growth won't just happen,it will take national leadership and decision-making.
Reform is essential if we are to realise our aspirations to progressas individuals and as a nation.
One thing is clear.
Managing the current expansion through the conventional tools of fiscal and monetary policy are not enough.
Macroeconomic stability, including low and stable inflation and the stability of the financial system are vital.
They are necessary.
But they are not sufficient for the future I have in mind for Australia.
I am deeply ambitious for our nation.
Australians are hard workers.
Australians are innovators.
Australians are determined.
That has driven much of our success.
But we have been lucky too, blessed by a resources boom which, matched with hard work, is sustaining much of our growth.
We are the lucky country, but we are so much more than that as well.
I am determined to drive a permanent reshaping of our economy so that our success far outlasts our luck  -  and I believe we are up to it.
A high tech, high skill, clean energy economy that is self-sustaining beyond our reliance on mineral exports.
That's the future I want our children and grandchildren to thrive in.
Such a future is in our hands, and it will be defined by the way we handle the current minerals boom.
Get it wrong, and we falter.
Get it right, and we set the nation up for decades to come.
Mining  -  the opportunities
Friends, the current upsurge in our terms of trade has been described by the Reserve Bank as the biggest resources boom since the 1850s gold rush.
Since 2004, mining investment has increased fivefold.
This year, Australian industry will invest more money into mining than the whole country invests in building new houses:
 * 	something that has never happened before.
One single project  -  the $43 billion Gorgon project  -  is worth about the same as 2 years of output from agriculture.
To use a more domestic analogy:
Five years ago, the money earned from exporting 10,000 tonsof iron ore would buy about 280 dishwashers.
Today it would buy you around 1,400 dishwashers, a 500 per cent increase.
On any measure, we are living though a boom.
And that boom is a good thing.
Mine workers are gaining higher wages.
Suppliers are benefitting.
Superannuation funds are earning more.
And the higher dollar is cutting prices for household goods such as clothes, appliances, TVs and computers.
The boom is good news for Australia and we should celebrate it.
But there are real challenges in managing its effect on the economy.
Just as we made the big decisions to beat the global recession in 2008and 2009, so we need to make the right calls to nurture our economy though the boom and safely beyond.
Mining  -  the challenges
Because mining is especially profitable at the moment, it rewards investors and pays workers well.
Equipment and workers are drawn from other parts of the economy,like a magnet dragging iron filings towards it.
While the boom is good news for Australia, there is a challenge in managing its effect on the economy.
I think of this effect as the “patchwork pressures “ where some parts of the economy are strained by growth while others risk being left behind.
In mining areas, the boom has lifted housing costs, it forces non-miners to raise wages to keep workers; and it puts pressure on infrastructure like roads, ports and rail.
The mining boom has fuelled a record high for the Australian dollar.
This strong Australian dollar lowers prices for imports  -  which is good.
But is also makes it harder for our exporters to compete.
Mining's hunger for equipment and workers can also raise costs and make it harder for these non-mining sectors to compete, compounding into a double-whammy the effect of the high Australian dollar.
The Minerals Resource Rent Tax will help ensure the proceeds of the mining boom are invested in a stronger economy to benefit the whole community.
Revenue will be used to cut the company tax rate for all companies,to increase superannuation for all workers and to build essential infrastructure across the country.
These policies will strengthen and help share the growth across all parts of the economy.
Skills for the future
But friends, the biggest challenge arising from the boom is the shortage of skills.
After three decades when unemployment was our major problem, we now face shortages of labour  -  a problem unmatched anywhere in the industrialised world.
Since November 2007, we have created more than 715,000 jobs.
Never have so many Australians enjoyed the benefits and dignity of work.
But we need more workers  -  for today and tomorrow.
In the short term, the mining boom is placing huge strains on our labour market, compounded by the demands of flood recovery.
For example, the resources sector will face a potential shortfallof 36,000 tradespersons by 2015.
But the ageing of the population will create even greater pressure over the next 40 years because it will create a yawning demographic deficit.
By 2050 almost one-quarter of this country's population will be over 64; almost double the figure today.
Real per capita GDP growth will slow to an average of 1.5 per cent a year - compared with 1.9 per cent during the past 40 years.
At the same time, Australia's productivity growth has slowed over the past decade, averaging only 1.4 per cent compared to 2.1 per cent in the 1990s. 
It is vital that we unlock all the potential of our labour market:
Both the young people who are the workers of the future.
And the adults of working age whose absence from the labour forceis not only a social tragedy but an economic risk.
Friends,
For young people, our goal is nothing less than the best education system in the world.
Great schools led by great principals and staffed by great teachers.
Universities creating opportunities for all  -  with uncapped publicly funded places to meet the aspirations of students and at the same time, supply the professional skills that industry needs.
A world class market-driven TAFE and vocational training system  -  designed to deliver the expertise and skills to unleash a new wave of innovation in Australian industry.
We also need to drive participation for young people who fall through the cracks because the better their skills, the more likely they are to succeed in life.
That is why we have entered into a compact guaranteeing every young Australian under age 25 a training place if they are not already in full-time education or in work; Learn or Earn.
We are also increasing family support by up to $4,000 a year to encourage teenagers aged 16 to 18 remain in school or TAFE.
In the same way, we have been gradually changing policy settings to increase immediate and long term incentives for adults to participate in the economy.
Last month we introduced the nation's first ever Paid Parental Leave scheme, which will help redress the Australia's relatively low participation rate for women aged 25-44 compared to the OECD average.
We have increased the Child Care Rebate from 30 to 50 per cent, and raised the annual limit per child from $4300 to $7500.
Along with Child Care Benefit, this means that low income families have around 80 per cent of their child care costs met by the Australian Government, a significant measure to support low income families with young children return to work.
Our incentives also extend to the tax system.
We have delivered significant tax cuts for low to middle income earnersin our first three budgets, including an increase in the effective tax free threshold for low income earners from $11,000 to $16,000, a huge advance in making work pay.
And we intend to do even more to build participation and make work pay.
Friends,we look with particular care and concern on the large number of working-age Australians, possibly as many as two million, who stand outside the full-time labour force, above and beyond those registered as unemployed.
Around 800,000 are in part-time jobs but want to work more.
Another 800,000 are outside the labour market, including discouragedjob seekers.
And there are many thousands of individuals on the Disability Support Pension who may have some capacity to work.
We know that not all of them can work right away.
Many will need re-skilling.
The right mix of incentives.
Help to overcome ill-health or meet family responsibilities.
But we do want them to re-engage with the workforce and gain the benefits that come from having a job: increased income; social engagement and friendship;self-esteem and wellbeing.
That is why this year I will continue to take steps to improve the incentives for such potential workers to rejoin the labour market, while also investing in the intensive support needed to lift their skills and job readiness.
The policy changes are formidable, and we will not lose sight of the need for compassion and understanding of individual circumstances.
But to the maximum extent possible, I want to ensure that every Australian who can work, does work.
I want to ensure that the incentives of work always outweigh the attractions of staying on welfare.
Beyond the boom
Friends, managing the pressures of the boom is vital.
But I believe we can do so much more.
We can create a high participation, high productivity economy, where everyone shares in the benefits of our hard work.
To do this, we need a stable macroeconomy, creating certainty for economic decision making.
We need flexible markets with the right incentives and price signals to maximise the value of our people and capital resources.
We also need strong  capabilities:  skills, infrastructure, research and development, entrepreneurship.
With courage and imagination, we can build a high-skill, high-tech, low-pollution economy that will succeed independent of our mineral wealth.
That is my vision for the nation.
A fundamental reshaping of the Australian economy as profound in scale and ambition as the reforms of the Hawke-Keating government, which opened our economy to the world.
I want to make sure that our nation invests enough of the profits from the mining boom so that the benefits are there for the long term.
That means investing in long lived economic assets and infrastructure.
Preparing for the nation's journey through the 21st century:
Ports, roads and rail to fuel our exports and unblock our cities.
Research infrastructure to nurture the ideas and inventions of tomorrow.
Bringing the transformative possibilities of broadband to every home, school and business in the nation.
And above all, putting a price on carbon - a fundamental structural reform as significant in our own time as the reforms of the Hawke-Keating government a generation ago.
Hawke and Keating floated the dollar.
We will price carbon.
A carbon price will drive another sweeping technological revolution like Information Technology did in the 1980s and 90s.
New technologies bringing new jobs and demanding new skills.
Using the abundant resources of this nation  -  solar, wind, geothermal  -  that currently go to waste.
Manufacturing more and exporting more.
And regaining comparative advantage because the world is always in the market for good ideas.
That's the future I want for our nation: strong; smart; sustainable; grateful for the boom but ready for the time beyond.
Friends, to achieve all these things, we need a strong and sustainable financial position, based on a culture of public and private saving.
Under my plan to increase super contributions from 9 to 12 per cent,our $1.7 trillion pool of super savings will double in 15 years.
I want to make sure we save enough of the profits of the mining boom for the long term.
Putting some of that money into superannuation will do that.
To complement an increase in private savings, we also need to increase public savings and strengthen our budget position.
The truth is that although our economy is strong, our budget position remains compromised by the recklessness of the Howard years.
In the final term of the Howard government, additional revenue contributed $334 billion to the budget surplus over the years from 2004-5 to 2010-11 while new spending decisions and tax cuts reduced the surplus by$314 billion.
Effectively, the Howard government spent the entire additional revenue from the commodity boom Mark One.
Put it another way:
Whenthe economy was growing strongly during the previous boom,real spending growth under the former Coalition government ran at3.7 per cent, almost double our 2 per cent spending cap.
That was the situation we inherited in 2007.
Returning the budget to surplus is thus not a political goal but an economic imperative.
Firstly, to rebuild the structural integrity of our nation's finances.
Secondly, to ensure that the footprint of government does not add to aggregate demand when the economy is running close to full capacity as expected in 2012-13.
In circumstances of strong demand, it is economically prudent to reduce inefficient spending and offset all new outlays.
Even before the floods response, our fiscal consolidation has been the fastest budgetary turnaround since the 1960s.
And in 2011-12, Commonwealth revenue as a share of GDP will be lower than for every single year of the Howard era.
This is a low taxing government.
And a last week's flood response opened a new dimension of fiscal stringency.
I stand by those cuts and by the fiscal and policy rigour which drove them.
It's right to price carbon, the most economically efficient way of reducing pollution and to cut less efficient programs.
We have also proposed a modest one-off levy to help pay the costs of rebuilding as we go: targeted, temporary, transparent.
There is a strong history of levies being used by the Australian Government.
Six were proposed during the course of the Howard years:
A levy on superannuation for high income earners.
Levies to restructure the milk and sugar industries.
A levy to buy back guns in the aftermath of Port Arthur.
A levy to help meet the entitlements of former Ansett staff.
A proposed levy to help the people of East Timor rebuild.
And, of course, Mr Abbott's proposed levy on Australian business to fund his paid parental leave scheme.
If a levy was good enough to pay for Mr Abbott's election promises just last year, how is it not good enough to support rebuilding flood-ravaged regions now?
That is political hypocrisy at its worst.
Friends, the levy I propose is modest and affordable.
The flood victims themselves won't pay a cent.
60 per cent of taxpayers will pay less than a dollar a week.
Someone on $80,000 will pay $2.88 a week - less than a cup of coffee, 10 times less than the tax cuts they've received over the last three years.
With the funds raised from the levy and our budget measures we will help put the Queensland economy fully back in business.
We will fund the high-cost infrastructure that sustains employment and facilitates our exports, the hard infrastructure we own as a community: roads, rail, ports.
By contrast, the donations so generously given by the Australian people will go to individuals and families affected by the floods.
Those donations are tax-deductible.
And every cent will help a family in need.
Just as every cent of our $6 billion recovery package will go to restoring productive  infrastructure damaged by the floods.
Two different streams of money, but one shared purpose  -  to put the flood affected regions back on their feet.
Conclusion
Friends, a high tech, low-emissions economy; skills; productivity; infrastructure; broadband.
I seek these things because they are the future.
And while we must govern for today, we must govern for the futureas well; for the nation we can become.
Yes, the challenges of today and tomorrow can easily leave us yearning for what we remember as a kinder and simpler past.
But I do not believe in romanticising the past, any more than I believe in being afraid of the future.
We best combat fear by taking deliberate steps to shape the future together.
Hard steps on the road of reform.
Big decisions and a big vision for our nation's future.
I am a complete optimist about that future because I firmly believe the best days of our nation are in front of it, not behind it.
Australia is a wonderful country, the greatest country on earth.
We are privileged to live here and we best respect that great privilege by shaping a future of opportunity for all. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today welcomed the Federal Member for O'Connor Tony Crook's support for the Gillard Labor Government's Flood Response Package to help rebuild flood-affected infrastructure across the country.
This $5.6 billion package includes a pre-payment of $2 billion to make sure rebuilding can get underway as quickly as possible.
The Prime Minster said that Mr Crook's support for the package was good news for flood-affected communities who continue to be hampered by the damage to their local roads, rail lines, bridges and schools.
Mr Crook's endorsement is indicative of a willingness from Australians across the nation to stick together through the recovery and the rebuilding process.
The Government's Flood Response Package includes $2.8 billion in budget savings, $1 billion in the deferral of infrastructure projects and a modest levy for taxpayers earning over $50,000 per annum.
The Prime Minister said that while people who have received an Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) are already exempt from the levy, there were individuals outside of these areas who have also been severely affected.
The Government will provide an exemption to anyone that meets one or more of the criteria for AGDRP and lives in an area declared for the purpose of the National Disaster Recovery and Relief Arrangements.
AGDRP is paid where someone is adversely affected by a major disaster and in the past has included circumstances where a person has suffered a serious physical injury in a disaster, where the disaster caused the death of an immediate family member, or where their principal place of residence sustained major damage.
The Government's Flood Response Package will be introduced into the Parliament next week.  



MCGUIRE: The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard joins us on the Hot Breakfast this morning, good morning Julia.
PM: Thank you, great to be here.
MCGUIRE: Julia can we just spend a bit of time with you- first of all on the cyclone that's about to hit Far North Queensland. We've been talking to people up there all throughout morning. It's a horrible situation. What can you do in the lead up to it, and what can we do in the next couple of days?
PM: I think horrible is the word Eddie, it's just another big, big blow to Queensland on top of everything people have had to put up with so far. We've had the Australian Defence Force out helping and working alongside the Queensland Emergency Services personnel, so we've had four of the aircraft, those huge C17s and the C130s, the Hercules aircraft evacuating the Cairns private and public hospitals, so all of those patients have been taken to Brisbane.
We worked alongside the Queensland Air Ambulance to do that.We're moving sandbags in, we're moving food in so that there are those supplies there, we've also helped evacuate some residential aged care, and we've got soldiers out now working alongside Queensland personnel doorknocking the low-lying areas where it is a mandatory evacuation situation, you've got to go because of the fears about tidal surges.
MCGUIRE: We've had callers this morning saying they can't get people out, is there any more planes that we could get in, is there, is there any way we can set this up to get people out? It's so hard to airlift the entire city, obviously.
PM: A lot of people have got out, they've self-evacuated and then the role of the Defence Force has been to take the people most at risk, the ones that we couldn't look after in an extreme situation if we lost power for a long period of time, like people who are unwell. And we're going to be there working on the ground, we've got a bit Defence Force base in Townsville, so that's a good thing in a bad situation.
We also built a Emergency Management Centre in Cairns a couple of years back, we did it as part of economic stimulus and that is Category 5 rated, so it can withstand this cyclone and the local emergency response will be run from there.
BUCHAN: Prime Minister we saw you right out front and centre helping to manage the devastation caused by the Queensland flash floods- excuse me. But we've also had some calls this morning, we know that there's going to be a lot of aid going to the Queensland towns that have been devastated. We've had a few calls from Victorians who are suffering in the floods, this is just one of them, this is Wayne from Carrum: 
“I've been up in the flooded area up in a little country town called Litchfield fighting the floods. You don't seem to hear much about the Victorian floods at the moment, and it's 95km long and 50km wide this flood. We've got cousins that are there and they've been under water for 11 days now, they're isolated. Maybe we need Anna Bligh down in Melbourne.”
MCGUIRE: The point that that caller also wanted to make was that Telstra have helped the Queensland victims as far as replacing phones etcetera, that hasn't been afforded to the Victorians. So from a parochial point of view, how are we going with the Victorian people?
PM: Look it's fair enough for people to be focussed on their own situation, obviously Queensland's bigger in terms of scale, just the geography of it, but if you're home's under water your home's under water, whether it's in Queensland or in Victoria.
We're making the same levels of assistance available as a Government, so there are the same emergency payments and our arrangement with the state is that we pay for replacing the infrastructure up to 75 percent of the cost and the state Government puts in 25 percent. We'll do that in Queensland, we'll do that here to rebuild Victoria.
MCGUIRE: So you are thinking of Victorians?
PM: I've been out and about talking to some of those Victorians, I was in Swan Hill for example the other day and that was my second visit into the flooded areas and people are doing it tough. Many of them did say to me ‘well, you know, we know Queensland's a bigger problems, but kind of don't forget about us', and we certainly won't be forgetting about Victorians that need assistance.
MOLLOY: Prime Minister yesterday you were in the fire ravaged areas of Melbourne on a pretty eerie day, it was 38 degrees and hot and windy, very similar to the conditions when it actually went up. Did you learn anything about how that money went that informs how you're going to spend the money you're going to make from the levy for the flood victims?
PM: There are some lessons- people would remember that here in Victoria the government created the Bushfire Recovery Authority that's lead the reconstruction works, and Anna Bligh is picking that up for Queensland, she's going to have a Recovery Authority. So that's a good move, and everything we've learnt here can go and help with that huge reconstruction in Queensland, and obviously Victoria's absorbing lessons that will help with our reconstruction here, so we have learned some things about how to do it.
With the levy I understand that people want reassurance that every dollar is going to be spent rebuilding infrastructure, and it will be. And I understand they want reassurance that value for money is going to be got. And we're working on all of the accountability arrangements to make sure we know where they money's going and that we're getting good value.
MCGUIRE: Prime Minister, the levy- we're not going to have that debate that's already been and gone and maybe the events of Queensland in the next 24 hours will make it a moot point, that we actually have to have some money to rebuild things and we can't just stop the entire world, when every time we have a climactic situation. This show has been fervently in favour of the levy and so have our callers to a person over the last week.
One of the things we did bring up though was compulsory insurance; the one thing that seems to go sideways whenever this happens is those who are either underinsured, not insured or have bad insurance policies. Is it time for us now, and we have suburban houses going up every other week as well and four families out on the street, is it time to get past the angst of those who do the right thing and then resent those who don't and all that sort of stuff?
There is no win in this, other than I can see, of having a government compulsory insurance. Some will say that's another big fat tax and all that sort of stuff, but it might be one we need in this country, because the one thing we can bet on is that we're going to have more of these situations.
PM: I'm open to the sort of national discussion I think we're going to have about long term disaster management. Anything we do has to work with private insurance, we wouldn't want people to get the message ‘don't worry about being insured anymore because if anything happens the government's going to fix it'. I mean we're never going to be able to have a scheme like that, so people do need to have their private insurance.
I think we'll end up looking into some of these issues, but we can't hold up the flood recovery we need now, here in Victoria and in Queensland with the $5.6 billion package. So let's get that done, get the levy through Parliament and then explore some of these questions.
DARCY: Prime Minister, we have to take a break, a lot happening here in Australia but also a fair bit happening over in Egypt at the moment, an old team mate of mine Danny Southern, we spoke to earlier this week and we'll come back and ask you some questions about Egypt, what's happening with the Australians over there and play your some of Danny Southern, I think one of your favourite players I reckon in the early days, Western Bulldogs. We'll come back with the Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard. [BREAK]
DARCY: The Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard is with us, and I was very excited myself Julia, about 12 months ago, I thought I was the first person ever to do that (inaudible) apparently everyone has done that who's ever been behind a microphone. But I tell you what everyone hasn't done though Prime Minister, and that's live in Cairo for six years as has Danny Southern, who's an old team mate of mine who'd you know from playing over a hundred games for the Bulldogs. We spoke to him a couple of days ago, his wife's pregnant and this is what he had to say: 
“We're on a road sort of heading south of the city to another city called Faiyum and there was a big prison breakout, around 6000 prisoners escaped from this one prison which is on my side of the town. So the looters and the thugs are basically everywhere, and yeah, you know, I've actually barricaded the front door to be honest with you, I just to make sure my pregnant wife's alright, I don't mind looking after myself and obviously if push comes to shove then I'll defend my family and my wife obviously with everything I can.”
What's the situation in Egypt at the moment Prime Minister?
PM: As people would see on TV the huge demonstrations continue, talking about a million man march, so huge demonstrations continue. Our advice is for Australians to leave. Now, we provide the best advice that we can to people, and so we're saying if it's safe for you to get to the airport then you should leave. We're going to keep putting on a jumbo a day to help people get out, and we've made some arrangements with other countries, like we got some Australians on a Canadian flight that was going, and commercial planes are still going so people can go out on normal flights, if I can use that terminology.
But I understand that people have to make their individual choices, not everybody's in the same position, and not everybody would have as as strong a connection to the place as obviously Danny does, I mean most people who are in Egypt are there as tourists and looking to leave as soon as they can.
MCGUIRE: Prime Minister if you are Time's man of the year and you're from Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, normally you'd be a shoo-in for Australian of the Year, there'd be a tickertape parade, anything like that. Julian Assange however is not feeling the love. This is what he said this morning: 
“ASSANGE: Gillard needs to declare publically that this is not an acceptable treatment of an Australian organisation, Wikileaks is registered in Australia, and nor is it an acceptable treatment of an Australian.
JOURNALIST: Will you return to Australia eventually?
ASSANGE: I'd like to return to Australia immediately.”
MCGUIRE: Right. Julian Assange from Wikileaks wants to come back. It is a very difficult situation for you and the Government, because obviously you have you have your international relations with the United States of America. However, as we always say in football land, they might have fleas but they're our fleas and he is one of ours, what do we do? We're airlifting everybody in from everywhere, do we put the arm around Julian Assange as an Australian citizen, and then fight the battle from there and let him face whatever charges, what is the situation at the moment?
PM: Look, we've always had, to use terminology, our arm around him as an Australian citizen, he's had all of the consular support that we give Australian citizens overseas when they're in trouble. Unfortunately Australians do get into a bit of trouble sometimes overseas, end up with legal problems, and our Embassies assist them, they've been assisting Mr Assange. He's entitled to that as an Australian citizen and that will continue to be provided to him.
What we can't do is we can't make legal problems that people get overseas go away, so he's in a situation where there's extradition proceedings in relation to some charges in Sweden that people would be aware of, and those proceedings are going to have to go through their, you know, independent judicial work to get to a conclusion. And there's not anything the Government can, or indeed should, do about that because they're charges, you know, and they've got to be worked through proper processes.
MCGUIRE: Until he faces those would you have any issue with him being domiciled here in Melbourne?
PM: Look, certainly, if Mr Assange wants to be in Australia and there's no legal reason in terms of, you know, legal proceedings overseas preventing him coming here, he's entitled to be here as an Australian citizen. I mean, it's not, you know, I don't go round issuing invitations to come to Australia, if you're an Australian citizen you are entitled to be here unless of course there is some legal obligation keeping you overseas.
MCGUIRE: Wikileak is massive, the fact that he is Australia is a by-product until it actually gets to your level, how much heat do you get from the other governments particularly the United States over this?
PM: Look, I haven't got any heat in that sense, I've made my own decisions about it, and I've got a different view than Mr Assange about Wikileaks. I understand that there can be moral force in being a whistleblower, someone who works for a big corporation, a big government department that's doing the wrong thing and they've got to get the truth out. I respect that, I understand that, it's what gave us things like Watergate into the public eye. That is conduct I can understand.
Wikileaks is something else, it's not about, you know, making a moral case it's really about all of this information and just putting it up there and whatever happens, happens. And given my concerns about national security, proper diplomatic relations, I've expressed my view about that- I think it's an irresponsible thing to do.
So Mr Assange and I are never going to see eye to eye about that, but I don't have to see eye to eye with people-
MCGUIRE: Is he a security threat to Australia if he was here?
PM: No, no, Mr Assange is not a security threat. I don't agree with his conduct, I don't think it's been responsible, but it's, you know, that isn't about his rights as an Australian citizen. I mean with 21 million people, you know, I agree with some of them, I disagree with others. I think people have behaved well, I think people have behaved badly. Whatever I think, we always extend protections to Australian citizens.
MCGUIRE: One final topic, we've got the 8:30 news and of course Prime Minister I understand this, that Adrian Anderson from the AFL's coming in so we have to have affairs of state ready to speak to him later on.
PM: I understand my place Eddie, I get it.
MCGUIRE: The workforce, you want people back in the workforce. We seem to have this never ending battle where West Australians, in fact Julie Bishop in the run up to the last election said on this very program that she would welcome having refugees coming into West Australia to help fill the void in the mining sector over there, it was changed later that afternoon when Tony Abbott came out and said that he'd turn back the boats, and that all happened in a 12 hour period.
Let's leave the politics of it all aside- we've got an opportunity now to get skilled and unskilled workers in from countries all over the world, we've got the pick of the world at the moment. Ireland's all over the place, Europe's all over the place, the Middle East is all over the place, and of course the war-torn areas. Are we going to look to maybe look at assisted migration as we have done right throughout our history, at a time when we need skilled and unskilled labour in this country?
PM: We are going to need skilled people and we will be getting some of those people from overseas. And you would have seen that for flood reconstruction I said we'd have a streamlined process for the skills we need. But what I want to see too, Eddie, is us focussing on training and getting our own people into jobs. It is not acceptable to me that I can go to the north west of this country and meet with mining owners and they say ‘I need workers, skilled, unskilled, I just need them, I can't get them' and then I can go to Perth and youth unemployment rates are more than 10 per cent. That's not acceptable to me.
HOST: Well it's 15 per cent in Broadmeadows at the moment.
PM: Yeah, and we need to harness this mining boom to make a long term difference to that. And even making that long term difference, we'll still need some skilled migrants from overseas. But let's leverage this to make a real difference for those pockets of disadvantage around the country. And people are going to be saying, listening to this, that's ridiculous, a mining boom can't fix unemployment in Broadmeadows.
When I was last in the northwest, I was on Barrow Island where the Gorgon Project is, $43 billion, I'm wandering around in my steel-cap boots. I get talking to a bloke, he's a Western Bulldogs supporter, and he says to me ‘I live two streets from you in Altona' I said ‘you what?' He flies in and flies out to Barrow Island from Altona, that's his life, that's his job.
So there's a tremendous opportunity here to leverage this mining boom to make a real difference to unemployment right around the country and underemployment, people who want more work and people we've just pushed out of the workforce and said, you know, the disability pension is good enough for you but they've got some work capacity.
So let's try and make that difference as well as look as we need to for skilled people from overseas.
MCGUIRE: Prime Minister thank you for joining us this morning, we've got through a fair bit there and we really appreciate your time. Wow, the weather in Australia, what do you do? You must just get up every morning and say ‘what now?'
PM: I saw Anna Bligh at the cricket on Sunday and we were just both shaking our heads saying ‘do you remember running over a black cat, did all of Queensland run over a herd of black cats, what on earth is going on?' So, look, it's another really, really tough day, tough few days for Queensland and then the aftermath to follow.But they're tough people. Our Senator Jan McLucas, one of my Labor colleagues is in Cairns, she lives there, I talked to her last night and yep, she's a little bit anxious and it's an eerie period of time but one of the first things she said to me is ‘yeah, we've lived through a lot and we'll get through this' so that's the kind of Queensland spirit.
MCGUIRE: Prime Minister we need strong leadership, we wish you all the very best.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: I want to make some comments about Cyclone Yasi, then about the circumstances in Egypt.
For many weeks now, as Australians have watched and hoped and sent their best wishes to the people of Queensland, the people of Queensland have had to meet the most destructive forces of nature.
It's happened over so many weeks, and every day over the dreadful weeks that Queensland has faced, the people of Queensland have met what nature has thrown at them with courage and determination.
I think the whole nation has watched and admired the way the people of Queensland have responded day after day.
At the same time, the people of Queensland have responded by showing a very special brand of mateship, getting out and helping each other in times of crisis, and I think the whole nation  -  indeed, I reckon the whole world  -  has marvelled at that spirit of mateship in Queensland.
Today, of course, we are seeing the people of Queensland tested again; tested again by this very savage cyclone, and what I want to say to the people of Queensland, particularly to the people of Far North Queensland, is in the hours of destruction that are coming to them all of Australia is going to be thinking of them. Our thoughts are with you.
In this time, as you face these frightening hours, we are with you in spirit, and in the days and hours beyond this cyclone, we will be with you on the ground, making a difference. The people of Australia will be there to help the people of Far North Queensland through.
Today, I've had the opportunity to Senator Jan McLucas, one of my Labor team, a senator who lives and works in Cairns. I've had the opportunity to speak to Warren Entsch, the Member for Leichardt. I've had the opportunity to speak to Bob Katter, the Member for Kennedy. I've had the opportunity to speak to Ewen Jones, the Member for Herbert.
Each of them is in their community in Far North Queensland, spreading words of reassurance and showing great community leadership. I want to thank them for that, and I want to wish them well in the hours ahead as they provide that community leadership role in their local communities.
I've also had the opportunity to speak on a number of occasions with Premier Anna Bligh. Premier Anna Bligh and her emergency management team are facing this crisis with the same steely determination that has got them through so far, and of course our best wishes are with Premier Bligh and with her team as they work their way through.
As the cyclone has threatened, preparations have been made and the Australian Defence Force has played an important role in those preparations. I want to thank them for their work to date. They engaged in the biggest hospital evacuation we've seen airlifting people out of the Cairns public and private hospitals. They assisted with evacuating residential aged care. They've flown sandbags and foodstuffs in. People from our Defence Force have been involved in the doorknocking to get warnings through to people in the mandatory evacuation areas.
Of course, the people of our Defence Force will continue to be there, making a difference.
I've also had the opportunity to be briefed today by the leadership of our Australian Crisis Coordination Committee. It is meeting and will continue to coordinate Commonwealth Government efforts as we work with the emergency management personnel and the people of Queensland to meet this crisis.
As the cyclone passes through and the hours that follow afterwards, arrangements are already being made to make available assets from our Australian Defence Force. Helicopters and aircraft will be available. We have 4,000 soldiers in Townsville who will be available to help. We have Naval assets that are sheltering further up the coast that will also be available to help.
As soon as it is possible to do so, we will make sure that our Centrelink systems are up and running to assist people in affected areas
But before we get to that stage, there are many, many dreadful frightening hours ahead for the people of Far North Queensland. This is going to be a very difficult night, and to the people of Far North Queensland, I say to them as they face what is probably the worst cyclone that our nation has every seen, this is a powerful natural force, but the courage of the people of Far North Queensland is an even stronger force again.
The people of Queensland have got through some really difficult days in the weeks of this summer some incredibly difficult days, and in those days of difficulty they've prevailed, and in these days of difficulties they will prevail again.
And we will be with them every step of the way, making a difference as they recover from this cyclone. We certainly won't let go. We will be there with the people of Far North Queensland.
I do want to say something, too, about Australians in Egypt who are facing difficulties of a different nature.
Earlier today, Qantas announced that it would provide free flights to assist people evacuating Egypt. That is, they would provide assistance for people who are taken by the evacuation aircraft to London or to Frankfurt. They would assist them with their onward journey using spare capacity.
I want to thank Qantas for what is a very generous gesture, something that will make a difference to Australians who find themselves caught up in difficult circumstances greatly beyond their control.
Today, we've seen circumstances in Egypt change again as the President of Egypt has declared that he will not run again for another term at the elections due later this year.
Now, of course, it's not possible for us to say at this point what affect this will have on the situation in Egypt, what the reaction to this announcement by the President will be.
As I've said on other days while this circumstance has been happening in Egypt and as we've had to look to the safety of Australians there, as I've said on other days, the future of Egypt is in the hands of the people of Egypt as it properly should be. We understand their very legitimate desire for change, for freedom, and for democracy. We believe that there does need to be a transition process that is orderly and peaceful, and we are continuing to call for calm and restraint at this time in Egypt. We, obviously, don't want to see anyone caught up in violent incidents.
So, circumstances in Egypt continue to develop. So does the need to keep providing evacuation assistance to Australians. As has already been made clear, we will continue to run evacuation flights as necessary to assist people to get out of Egypt. Commercial flights do continue to operate. There is a great deal of pressure on the airport, and people will have seen that that has caused a great degree of disruption and delay, but commercial flights are operating, so some Australians are availing themselves of commercial flights, and we continue to make available the evacuation flights to assist to meet demand to get people out of Egypt in these days.
Finally, can I conclude by saying, on another matter, Tony Crook today  -  one of the crossbench members of the House of Representatives  -  has publically indicated that he will support the Government's flood levy legislation. I very much thank him for taking that approach. I very much thank him for taking that approach in circumstances where the flood levy legislation is necessary to finance the rebuilding we will need to see in Queensland and in other parts of the nation.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) given what's happened in Cairns?
PM: Well, I think our focus right now is on what is happening with the cyclone and helping people through and helping people in the hours and days of recovery after the cyclone has passed through.
Yes, of course, there's going to be rebuilding.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, where will you be monitoring the situation from tonight and in the coming few days?
PM: I'll be here in Canberra. The crisis coordination committee is meeting here in Canberra. We are linked in at every level: to the Queensland Government team; I am obviously directly linked in with Anna Bligh, talking to her regularly; and we have coordination arrangements where people from our crisis coordination committee and people from Defence sit in on the very regular emergency management committee meetings that Anna Bligh and her team have in Queensland.
These arrangements have been very useful ones during the days of the flooding crisis. It's what has enabled us, at every stage, to meet the requests of Queensland for Defence Force assets in particular, as well as Centrelink and other assistance, and so we will keep those arrangements in operation.
JOURNALIST: On the levy, Prime Minister, do you still rule out any increase in the levy to a bigger bill in Queensland?
PM: Look the levy proposal I outlined last week is the Government's proposal, that's it, but this is not the time in my view for talking about some of these political matters. I did want to thank Tony for his indications today but we'll have plenty of time in the days ahead and in the next Parliamentary week to talk about the levy, my focus today is on the circumstances in far north Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Have you considered what the new damage bill might be, obviously it's going to-
PM: It's impossible for me to understand the damage bill of a cyclone that hasn't hit communities with full force yet, I think simple commonsense would tell people that, this is not the time for talking about legislative or other arrangements, this is the time for focussing on the welfare of the people of far north Queensland. But I do want to say the Government's levy as announced is the levy that we will bring to the Parliament next week.
Phil?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister could I ask you about Egypt, do you support President Obama's call that President Mubarak should start transition now and not wait until September?
PM: Well as I've indicated we believe that there should be an orderly transition process, that we want to see that being a peaceful transition process. The people of Egypt are calling for change and we very much very much understand that call for change. As I said I think as recently as yesterday it's not appropriate for me as the leader of another nation to specify what that change should be, but there does need to be a transition, we want it and I think the people of the world would desire that it is orderly and peaceful, but the shape of that transition that does need to occur, needs to be shaped by the people of Egypt; it's their nation, their aspiration for democracy, and that's what democracy is about, the people of Egypt shaping their future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on the cyclone, has Premier Anna Bligh asked for anything in particular from the Federal authorities and secondly in your talks with the local MPs, what was their feeling about what the community feeling on the ground?
PM: They were showing the kind of resilience and courage and determination that we've come to associate with the people of Queensland in these very dark and difficult days, all of them have been out and about talking to community members, Bob Katter was in the town hall at Innisfail with 300, 400, 500 people with him, so they are out and about in their community with a great deal of determination and resolve and the thing I think has become the hallmark of the people of Queensland during every stage of this crisis has been a determination to prevail in difficult circumstances and each of the Federal representatives I've spoke to today is showing that same determination.
JOURNALIST: When you look at the scale of the preparations so far, the evacuations of hospitals and that sort of thing, do you think that everything that can be done has been done, are you satisfied that north Queensland is as well prepared as it can be?
PM: Look I'm satisfied that very appropriate arrangements have been entered into to prepare for this crisis, I mean what has been done is a huge mandatory evacuation to get people out of low-lying, most at risk areas from tidal surges. Very good advice has been provided to people about how to prepare in their homes; to medically evacuate two hospitals is a huge thing to do and it has been done, to evacuate residential aged care is a difficult thing to do and it has been done.
Queensland has faced cyclones in the past, this is a cyclone of savagery and intensity, we know that from what the experts at the weather bureau are telling us, but Queensland has drawn on its past expertise in meeting cyclones to prepare for this one. That doesn't make the wait any easier for people and people are facing some really dreadful hours in front of them as they wait, as it builds, and there seeing it get worse around them and getting their way through. But the people of far north Queensland, they're made of very tough stuff and we'll see that on display.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is there any need for a full Cabinet meeting to be brought forward to deal with this crisis (inaudible)
PM: We have been co-ordinating, through a Ministerial committee, the response to the floods, so that has brought together Ministers who represent all of the relevant departments and agencies for recovery. We will continue to use that style of arrangement to bring together recovery here. The tragedy of this in some ways is that this has been such a difficult summer and such a difficult for the people of Queensland, we've seen all of these days unfold and what has happened during those days is we've become more and more practiced at these arrangements and working with Queensland Emergency Management. So all of the systems that we need to co-ordinate with Queensland are in place and have been used (inaudible) this crisis.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you intend to travel to far north Queensland once it's safe to do so?
PM: I would want to be in far north Queensland but the timing of that needs to depend on how recovery goes, absolutely the last thing anyone would want to do is to use an aviation asset that could be better deployed for immediate search and rescue work, so I will time a visit bearing in mind that the most important thing we can do in the hours as the cyclone passes over is get on with the task of clean-up, or search and rescue, of making sure people are ok.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just in relation to Egypt, you're saying that flights will continue as necessary, what's the latest advice you have on the prospect of the airport remaining open and this continuing? Can you characterise what the expectation is over the next few days in Cairo?
PM: I've got no advice that would suggest to me circumstances at the airport will change, circumstances for a period of time now have been: airport open, flights getting in but a degree of chaos in the sense of long delays, lots of people, lots of pressure on the airport. I don't have any advice to me to suggest that that is going to change and we, because of the pressure on commercial flights and because of our desire to make sure Australians were got to safety, that's why we're running the jumbos in to pick people up.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister does the fact that we have another disaster on our hands make a compelling argument to pass the flood levy next week?
PM: Look we'll deal with all of those discussions next week, I mean the focus now has to be on the emergency response for far north Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) suspended Question Time when the Victorian bushfires were on for all of the week (inaudible) given over to condolence motions. In the wake of this latest disaster will you consider suspending Question Time for the entire week to mark (inaudible)
PM: Look no consideration's been given to anything like that yet, our focus has been on the absolutely immediate, what we need to do to make sure Defence assets are prepositioned, what we need to make sure we're ready to run out Centrelink services as soon as possible after the cyclone's passed through. I'll speak to Minister Albanese about Parliamentary matters and he'll liaise with his counterpart as necessary. You are right that there is an agreement at this stage for Tuesday to be given over condolences and reflections on the summer it's been and on everything that nation has been through and most particularly the people of Queensland have been through.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We have 4000 soldiers stationed in Townsville.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: They too are sheltering, as you would imagine as people have been instructed to do generally and preparations have been made for them and their families to shelter appropriately, but they are there on the ground, 4000 soldiers so that's a considerable complement to bring to the recovery task and any necessary search and rescue tasks.
Thank you. 



PM: A little earlier today the Acting Chief of the Defence Force advised the nation that we have lost a soldier in Afghanistan. Yesterday in Afghanistan Corporal Richard Atkinson was killed by an improvised explosive device, by a bomb.
Corporal Richard Atkinson was very brave and a very young man. He was 22 years old. He was on his first deployment to Afghanistan. He was drawn from our First Combat Engineering Regiment that is based in Darwin.
On behalf of the nation, I want to convey my sincerest sympathies to the family and friends of Corporal Atkinson. He was engaged to be married, and I particularly convey my sympathies to his fiancée, who would be in the depths of grief today.
Corporal Richard Atkinson was killed in an incident in which another soldier was injured. That soldier is being cared for in Tarin Kot in Afghanistan. That soldier was seriously wounded.
In these circumstances, I also want to say to the family and friends of the soldier who has been wounded that our thoughts are with them and with him as he recovers from his injuries. At the request of the family, the name of that soldier has not been released.
When I spoke to the Parliament last year about our deployment and mission in Afghanistan, I said that there would be many hard days ahead. This is one of those hard days. We have family and friends grieving in this country for the loss of a young man. We have family and friends anxiously awaiting further news about an injured young soldier. This will be a tough time for those Australians.
Our mission in Afghanistan is an important one and even on a day like this - a very hard day - I want to say to the people of Australia that it is vital that we see this mission through. We are determined to ensure that we deny those who would seek to harm Australians, those who would seek to visit terror on Australian citizens here or in other places in the world, that we deny them access to Afghanistan for training in the arts of death and destruction. So, it is vital that we do continue that mission.
Closer to home, I don't believe many Australians slept well last night. I think Australians right around the nation slept badly because they were so worried about our fellow Australians in North and Far North Queensland facing this devastating cyclone. It's been a very, very tough night and I think people slept badly around the nation because we were so worried by the power of this cyclone. We were so worried about its ability to cause destruction in North and Far North Queensland.
But even as we worried about fellow Australians facing danger and very, very frightening hours, I think at the same time we knew that they were facing that danger with courage and that they were well prepared.
Today it seems that that courage and that degree of preparation has won through. I have been briefed this morning by the Head of the Emergency Management Australia and by the Deputy National Security Adviser on circumstances in Queensland. I received that briefing at 6am this morning. I have had the opportunity to participate by telephone in the State Management Disaster Group that meets in Brisbane, at their meeting, which was attended by Premier Anna Bligh and by her relevant minister as well as representatives of all of the Emergency Services.
I had the Attorney-General participate in that telephone conference with me here in Canberra. That gave us an opportunity to listen first-hand to reports from District Commanders in the affected areas and from local council leaders in the affected areas.
While reports are still early and sketchy for some parts, at this stage it appears that we have not lost any lives as a result of this cyclone. Indeed, I think many Australians would have been gladdened at heart to see this morning the news that we actually had a new Australian life, a baby born in an evacuation centre, in these circumstances.
But I do stress, these reports are early and some badly affected areas, we are still getting people in and we do not have comprehensive reports on the circumstances in those badly affected areas.
Right throughout those parts of Queensland that continue to be affected by this cyclone there is continuing danger. I do want to echo the words of Premier Anna Bligh: danger does still continue - surging tides, power lines that are down, flooding danger, and there are some parts of Queensland that are bracing for the cyclone to come across land and to still hit.
So, in those circumstances I do want to reinforce the message that people need to keep listening to and responding to the advice of Emergency Services personnel. I am sure everybody is very, very tired, very exhausted, but people cannot let their guard down yet. The danger is not over and so people do need to listen to and respond to that advice.
Even as these hours of some danger continue, our thoughts are turning to the best ways of assisting people in recovery and rebuilding.
I do want to announce that we have determined to make the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment available to people in affected areas. This is the emergency money, $1,000 per adult and $400 per child, that can help people in circumstances where they've been evacuated, where their homes have been damaged.
We will have Centrelink personnel on the ground as soon as it is possible to do so. We have Centrelink officers and personnel in some of the affected communities and as soon as it is possible for them to do so and travel safely themselves, they will be reopening those Centrelink offices. We will then add to that Centrelink capacity as soon as we can get people into these areas with safety, but that cannot start to occur for a period of time yet, but we will make available that Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment.
We will also make available the Income Support Payment that assists people if they are unable to work for a period of time or unable to operate their businesses for a period of time because of the natural disaster, and we have activated our Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements, which means that people whose homes have been damaged are eligible for assistance, and small businesses and primary producers are also eligible for assistance.
Right throughout these affected areas there is going to be a lot of damage and a lot of rebuilding to do. I want to say to the people of Queensland and to the people of the nation generally that we will rebuild.
We will rebuild from the floods. We will rebuild build from the cyclone. We will rebuild from anything that nature throws at us.
We will continue to work together and we will rebuild.
Can I conclude by mentioning a further matter in which Australians have been involved, and that is the circumstances in Egypt.
The Government is deeply concerned by the violence that occurred in Cairo overnight.
I absolutely condemn this violence, and I want to stress that we believe the Government of Egypt has to acquit its responsibility to keep people safe, and it has to acknowledge the right of people to peacefully protest.
We unreservedly condemn this violence.
Clearly, a transition is required in Egypt. The time for that transition has come. We want that transition to be peaceful and orderly. It is for the people of Egypt to shape their future, but the time for change has come. Transition, but we do want to see that happen in an orderly and peaceful way.
We are continuing to deal with the situation of Australians who are in Egypt. We made available, as is now fairly well known, an evacuation flight, a Qantas plane that has taken people from Egypt to Frankfurt. A second plane will take further Australians out of Egypt. We will continue to monitor the need for further assistance, and if further assistance is required, more planes are required, then we will make more planes available.
The emergency numbers that have been circulated in the media for people to contact in Egypt and here in Australia are still in full operation, so people in Egypt who need to make contact can do so through those numbers.
Our advice to Australians in Egypt remains the same - that is, to travel out of Egypt if it's safe to do so. And our travel advisory remains the same. Our words of warning to Australians are do not travel to Egypt in these circumstances.
I'm very happy to take people's questions.
Phil?
JOURNALIST: On the cyclone, when do you envisage it will practical for you to go and see firsthand the damage, and are there preliminary estimates on, sort of, the costs - economic costs, infrastructure costs, anything like that - at this stage?
PM: Look, it's too soon for me to give you clear advice on either. I'm still liaising and taking advice on when's the right time to go.
We're in a circumstance now where emergency operations are still in full swing and people are still getting into some communities, but as soon as it is possible for me to travel and to be on the ground, talking to Queenslanders who have been hit by this cyclone, I will go and meet with them. I am really very, very keen to do that, so the only hold up there is just the very practical problems about when travel can occur.
On estimates of damage, it's also too early to tell. As you would see from the media, we have got sketchy reports from some places. Damage assessments are still underway. Indeed, search and rescue in the sense of making sure everybody's OK is still well and truly underway in these hours, and so the focus continues to be on people's safety.
Clearly, there will be damage. People will have seen images of the damage on their TV screens. We know that there are problems with some infrastructure, with power supplies, with telecommunications, but we will only be able to give people a sensible estimate of the degree of the damage when sometime has gone by and people can get out on the ground.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's been a fair amount of criticism of the disaster relief payments. One critic says it's encouraging a culture of entitlement, and besides, people who really weren't eligible for them were given these payments, especially in the Brisbane floods, without any check.
PM: Well, can I say two things about that.
Firstly, if there's any fraud  -  that is, people have claimed monies and they are not properly entitled to them  -  if there has been any fraud involved then we will crack down and deal with that. Centrelink already has a team that is working on any fraud issues, so just like in other areas of our social security system, if anybody's done the wrong thing then they should expect to feel the full force of the law, and there won't be any mercy shown in that regard.
On people who are properly eligible, I decided, as Prime Minister, I decided to make the eligibility requirements for this disaster relief payment the same for this set of natural disasters as they were for the flooding that hit Queensland in March last year. I decided we should have the same criteria.
I do note that the Leader of the Opposition also wanted to see the same criteria applied. Indeed, he publically called for that to occur.
So, I take complete responsibility for showing the same generosity to the people of Queensland in these circumstances that has been shown in earlier natural disasters. I think that's the right thing to do. I thought it at the time I made the decision, and I continue to believe it now.
Mark Riley?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it true that the Queensland Government has chosen not to insure or re-insure its infrastructure assets, and that if it had in the same way that other States do it would have had coverage through its reinsurance and there would have been no need for a levy?
PM: Look, I can't help you with details of Queensland Government insurance policies. You'll have to talk to them about that, but the levy is part of the $5.6 billion package to re-build roads and rail and ports that have been damaged by flooding, and we still have damage now to assess from the cyclone.
I'm not aware of insurance arrangements that enable you to insure things like major highways, major train lines and major port facilities against this kind of damage.
Michelle?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, on the flight from Egypt, apparently it was only part full because many people couldn't actually get to the airport. Are you convinced that the embassy there has proper planning in place to help people get to the airport?
PM: I think the embassy's doing the best it can in what is a very difficult set of circumstances. Difficult set of circumstances because of the disruption in the city; difficult set of circumstances because we don't want people travelling from wherever they are to the airport, where they could get swept up in a demonstration that could result in violence, and unfortunately we've seen that violence overnight.
And as you would be aware, there has also been problems with just outright lawlessness as the normal structure of society have come under strain and policing and other things have broken down.
So, I believe the embassy's doing the best it can in difficult circumstances, but these are difficult circumstances. Communications have been periodically difficult. So, I would say to Australians there to keep in touch with the embassy and we will keep working with them to make appropriate arrangements to get them out, but unfortunately we just can't wish away all of the difficulties that there are in people talking to each other in Cairo at the moment because of communications difficulties and travelling through Cairo.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the Premier of Queensland Anna Bligh is going to make money for the disaster relief appeal available to cyclone victims now as well as those who are victims of the floods, are you going to look to extend that same criteria to the flood levy in order to use that money raised to help rebuild from the cyclone?
PM: We will have to assess the damage from the cyclone and we will meet that damages bill from the Federal budget, it will require cutbacks in other areas, there's no point sugar coating that, and I suspect when we make cutbacks in other areas to support the rebuilding, there will be people who aren't very happy about where the cutbacks are made, but we will rebuild from this cyclone and we will arrange the Federal budget in order to do that.
On the question of the flood levy, the flood levy I announced will be presented to Parliament next week, I indicated that yesterday, that we will be bringing the legislation to Parliament next week, I do want to say that we will be extending the exemption arrangements so that people who have been hit by the cyclone and who have qualified for Federal Government disaster relief payments will have the same exemption from the levy as people who have been hit by the floods and who are exempt from paying the levy.
JOURNALIST: Will that affect the amount it's going to raise (inaudible)
PM: We are looking at that, there's is clearly a cost in providing further exemption, that's likely to run into some millions of dollars, but in terms of the size of the levy, we're talking about a $1.8 billion levy, it's a smaller cost component not a substantial one.
JOURNALIST: Will it specify in the legislation that the money can only be used for flood rebuilding?
PM: Well the levy legislation, what we need to legislate is not the appropriations expenditure, what we need to legislate is the changes so that the levy can be collected. I do want to be clear, we will not reduce in any way the amount of assistance we have pledged for flood rebuilding. I have said that our preliminary estimates of damage are $5.6 billion for flood rebuilding, that's why we put together a $5.6 billion package and everything we intended to do for flood rebuilding before the cyclone we will continue to do despite the cyclone. Now of course we've got more we need to do, on top of everything we're going to do for the floods. What's the quantum of that? Well in the same way I answered Phil's question I simply can't tell you that and no one could give you that figure at this very early stage.
JOURNALIST: On the extending the exemption, if you do extend the exemption then presumably the 1.8 goes to 1.7, 1.6-
PM: Well can I just say I do believe it will be anywhere in that order-
JOURNALIST: The shortfall, will that be found in cutbacks or by increasing the levy ever so slightly?
PM: No, there will be no increase to the levy. To the extent that there is any difference between the original $1.8 billion figure and the total amount collected because of this new exemption, we will that up in other budget arrangements so that the package is at the figure that I announced last week. Can I just say in terms of the size and scale of the levy, this further exemption will be a very figure.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you think that it's reasonable to expect that state governments would take out catastrophe reinsurance on the global market to protect their assets and infrastructure?
PM: Look it's a question you're going to have to direct if there's a particular issue with Queensland that people want to raise then they will need to raise that with the Government of Queensland, what I know from natural disaster recovery in the past is that we've got guidelines and arrangements about how we work with state governments in rebuilding for natural disasters of any real size or scale, the Commonwealth's obligation is 75 per cent. That routinely includes money for road rebuilding, rail rebuilding, port rebuilding and that's the kind of rebuilding we need to do from the Queensland floods.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you have any update on the state of Defence assets, like Lavarack Barracks, whether or not they're ok through the cyclone and what the Defence Forces' role at the moment is?
PM: Yes thank you for that. The Brigadier, we've stood up a joint taskforce out of Lavarack barracks in Townsville, the Brigadier commanding that joint taskforce was on the telephone hook-up that I participated in this morning with the Attorney-General and of course with Premier Anna Bligh. They are standing ready to be tasked by local disaster management bodies, those tasks are likely to include assistance with search and rescue, assistance with clean-up, provisions potentially of bottled water and maybe foodstuffs but more critically bottled water because there are problems with water supply in some locations. They are in a position to assist with generator capacity, people would be aware that there have been large numbers of power outages because of windblown things disrupting, well the wind itself knocking into power infrastructure and then of course flying debris hitting power lines and bringing them down, so in those circumstances they can assist with generator capacity. And as we showed I think in the earlier stages of the flooding, Defence can do a series of things that you mightn't predict on the first day but do need to be done, I'm not sure anybody on the first day of the Queensland floods would have said ‘gee we'll need minesweeper capacity in the Brisbane River', but as it turned out we did to clear the Brisbane River as Defence has those kind of assets and equipment. But the tasking of Defence works through our co-ordination arrangements with the Queensland Government and there is also some tasking that happens locally so when there's a local need Defence gets in and does it if they can help.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there were reports yesterday that Tony Abbott's called to Liberal Party members to donate to oppose your flood tax. Do you have a response to that? And secondly, how confident are you that your flood legislation will pass next week given that you have the support now of Tony Crook; have you spoken to any of the other independents and have they indicated their support or opposition to it?
PM: I've been working with some of the Members of Parliament and we've certainly been providing briefings to all independent members who have sought those briefings and I'll continue to have those discussions, but I'm confident that the Parliament will see the need to support the rebuilding the nation needs and that's what the flood levy is all about.
On the issues involving Tony Abbott and the Liberal Party yesterday and the call to donate to the Liberal Party, I'd have to say I'm just, personally I was pretty shocked by that, I haven't spent any more time dealing with the issue than being advised of it yesterday afternoon when it was starting to be reported on in the media. I was pretty shocked by it.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Attorney-General Robert McClelland today announced Commonwealth Government assistance for people in Far North Queensland affected by the impact of Tropical Cyclone Yasi.
Financial assistance that will be provided includes:
 * 	Assistance under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements;
 * 	The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment; and
 * 	The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy.
Overnight, the Queensland Government declared 19 Local Government Areas across Far North Queensland natural disaster zones - Burdekin, Burke, Cairns, Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Charters Towers, Croydon, Doomadgee, Etheridge, Flinders, Hinchinbrook, Mackay, Mont Isa, Palm Island, Tablelands, Townsville, Whitsunday Wujal Wujal and Yarrabah.
Assistance under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements
Assistance from the Australian Government will be provided to the Queensland Government through the jointly funded Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
Funding will be provided to Queensland for the cost of counter disaster operations as well as for Personal Hardship and Distress Payments.
Payments available through the Queensland Government include:
 * 	Emergency Assistance grants - a grant of $170 per person, up to a maximum of $780 for a family of five or more is available. This grant is available to people experiencing hardship due to the disaster who require assistance to meet their basic needs.
 * 	Essential Household Contents grants - assistance of up to $1,660 for individuals and $4,980 for families.
 * 	Repairs to Dwelling grants - assistance of up to $10,250 for individuals and $13,800 for families can be provided.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) will be available to people in these areas significantly affected by the impact of Tropical Cyclone Yasi.
These payments will see $1000 for each eligible adult and $400 for each eligible child in the hands of families in need, including people who were forced to leave their homes or whose homes have sustained major damage.
Eligibility criteria apply for people claiming the AGDRP.
The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy
The Government will extend additional support for eligible employees, small businesses and farmers in these areas who can demonstrate a loss of income as a direct result of Tropical Cyclone Yasi.
The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy is a fortnightly payment of up to the maximum rate of existing Newstart Allowance for a period of 13 weeks. The subsidy will be available to those who will experience a loss of income as a direct result of the cyclone and its impact and are not currently receiving any other income support payment or pension.
The Commonwealth Government will support these people who will be unable to work through no fault of their own.
Other Commonwealth Government Assistance
A number of communities on the Far North Queensland coast have been severely damaged overnight as a result of Tropical Cyclone Yasi, particularly in the Innisfail region. Places such as Mission Beach, Innisfail, Silkwood, Tully, and Cardwell were hit with Yasi's full force last night.
Conditions remain extremely serious in large parts of the state, as Tropical Cyclone Yasi moves inland.
While the reports of damage are significant, major centres such as Cairns appear to have escaped the severe damage expected from a Category Five cyclone.
The Commonwealth Government will continue to support communities across Far North Queensland in the recovery process as conditions ease.
Once it is established that it is safe to do so, Centrelink staff will immediately begin to fan out across evacuation and recovery centres throughout the region to provide assistance to those impacted by the cyclone.
The Australian Government Crisis Committee will meet again today to help coordinate Commonwealth assistance to the region.
The Australian Defence Force has established a Joint Task Force JTF664 based in Townsville to coordinate ADF support.
There are approximately 4,000 Defence personnelbased in Townsville and it's expected that these Townsville-based ADF members will form the Joint Task Force to support post-impact emergency relief assistance.
The ADF will respond to requests for further assistance from the Queensland Government.
For more information or to claim the Australian Government Disaster Payment or Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy, people should contact the Australian Government Emergency Information line on 180 22 66 or visit their local Centrelink office.
Information about Australian Government assistance is also available by visiting www.disasterassist.gov.au or www.centrelink.gov.au.
Information about Personal Hardship assistance is available through the Queensland Department for Community Services on 1800 173 349. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, who we welcome to the studio.
PM: Thank you very much.
HOST: Did you find yourself a warm shower this morning, how were the conditions?
PM: No I didn't find myself a warm shower but a cold shower was fine, particularly when it's so hot and humid, nothing wrong with a bit of cold water.
HOST: So what have you seen since you've been here?
PM: My main purpose in being here is to talk to people on the ground about what they've experienced. When I came in last night I was immediately briefed by your local police commander, by Michael Keating, and also by Brigadier Smith, because he and his team of soldiers, we've got 4000 soldiers in the region, they've been doing such remarkably good work.
Today I'm going to go to the Blue Care residential aged-care facility, I want to say thank you to the carers and the police and the soldiers who helped evacuate those very frail aged people and are now helping them get back home, and then I will be travelling to Innisfail and hopefully through to Tully, to see the damage and to talk to people about what they've been through but also what needs to be done to get those communities back on their feet.
HOST: You mentioned Brigadier Smith and the Army, 4000 soldiers, is that the largest peacetime deployment of soldiers we've seen?
PM: It's certainly going to be right up there, we had about 1500 soldiers doing clean-up in Brisbane, and that was the biggest deployment for a natural disaster since Cyclone Tracy. Here in Townsville, you're home to Lavarack Barracks with soldiers there so they can be on the ground immediately, they helped in the preparation and they've done things since like water supplies, medical evacuations, they're helping with clean-up, helping move people around who need assistance, and all of their very specialist skills are going to come to the fore as we move into the recovery and rebuilding phase.
HOST: Prime Minister you've mentioned you're trying to get into Tully yourself today, when are you going to able to get the Army in there, they're a lot of people without roofs in Tully?
PM: They're endeavouring-
HOST: Houses without roofs.
PM: Yes, they're endeavouring to move through, we've got those big trucks that the Army has that have got high clearances and can get through in circumstances that ordinary vehicles struggle with, so speaking to Brigadier Smith last night their focused on trying to push through into Tully today. Clearly it's a function of flooding because we've still got flooding occurring and damage across roads and all the rest of it, but they are very much focussed on getting more assistance into Tully.
Clearly things can be got in by air, but in terms of moving mass amounts of equipment and supplies, we need the Army to push through and get the vehicles in.
HOST: It's a continual problem with the Bruce Highway, every time it floods, it's been cut several times already since Christmas, we've seen what happened during the floods with trying to supplies in and you've used our Army planes to get supplies into the people of north Queensland. When will the focus be on upgrading this piece of infrastructure so it doesn't cost any more money in flying food in, when will the focus for the funding be put straight into flood proofing the Bruce Highway?
PM: As a Government we did act on this issue of flood proofing the Bruce Highway. It's been an issue a long, long time in the making, we're talking about decades of people talking about flood proofing the Bruce Highway with not much getting done. As a Government we commissioned a feasibility study to see how you would do it; it's one to say the words ‘flood proofing', it's another thing to think about all of the engineering and design that would need to go into that. That flood proofing study will be with us in the middle of the year, so we'll be able to digest that, and we have made some money available to fix some of the more difficult sections going into Rockhampton to try and give additional resilience against flooding.
You referred to the big movement of supplies we had a little bit earlier on, that was C-17s and C-130s that were being used to shift stuff so that it could get into Rockhampton.
HOST: It does happen every year, millions and millions spent in similar situations when the Bruce Highway is cut. Now we've seen that as part of your package to, for the Queensland floods, to compensate that road projects are being put on hold, 6 Queensland road projects including one that involves the Bruce Highway. Is it really sensible to be delaying this anymore? I mean if it goes back four years, five years, ten years, that's still more funds that are being put in every year during the wet season?
PM: We agreed the projects with the Queensland Government that would be deferred and what's driving us here is just the very practical conclusion: we can't do everything at once, it's a question of money yes, but much more than money it's a question of the concrete, the labour, the skilled labour that you need to do this work. We've got a construction workforce, we can add to that construction workforce by getting some people from other parts of the country to come here, getting some unemployed people in helping with the manual labour, and using skilled labour from overseas if we need to. But our construction workforce can't suddenly extend to do everything at once, all of the flood reconstruction, all of the cyclone reconstruction and everything that was already programmed in from a big infrastructure program from the Government.
So yes we've had to sequence some things and it's because of that constraint on capacity.
HOST: We're with the Prime Minister Julia Gillard who's in Townsville this morning and heading north to Tully, hopefully, and to Innisfail to have a look at the flood damage. Prime Minister you've announced that immediate funding is available now for people who've been affected by Tropical Cyclone Yasi, exactly what's available?
PM: This is what we call the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment, it's an emergency $1000 for adult, $400 per child for people who have been badly affected, in evacuation centres, out of their home, without power for a considerable period of time and consequently chucking out everything that was in the freezer and the fridge.
People can ring 180 22 66, 180 22 66, to talk to our Centrelink staff about this payment and Centrelink here in Townsville should be up and running again on the weekend, like everywhere else in Townsville Centrelink's had power problems, water problems and all the rest of it, we're flying in some people to reinforce local staff and they're hoping to get Centrelink up and running during the course of tomorrow and they'll be working the weekend to assist people, and for people in other parts, Cairns Centrelink has maintained its functionality, they weren't as badly affected and will be looking to get mobile services into hard hit communities like Tully and Cardwell as soon as it's possible.
HOST: Where's the money coming from that payment, is that separate to the flood levy?
PM: It's separate to the flood levy, separate to the $5.6 billion I've already announced to rebuild Queensland from the floods, so we are going to be spending more money on cyclone recovery, we've got to find that money, and we will do that by making some cutbacks in other areas of the budget-
HOST: Could the levy be expanded?
PM: Well we'll stick with the levy as we've designed it, I believe it's the right scale and right shape. It certainly means the vast majority of people are very low amounts, $1 a week to help out, many people of lower incomes aren't paying anything at all.
So I think it's the right size, the right shape, the rest of it we're going to have to do by rearranging the Federal Budget; now that's not always going to be popular and people are going to see some cuts they problem don't like the look of, but we've got to rebuild the nation, rebuild after the floods, rebuild after the cyclone, Queensland's copped it really, really hard, other parts of the nation need a bit of assistance as well so there's a lot to do.
HOST: Where's left to make the cuts?
PM: Well I'm not in a position to redo the Federal budget here talking on the radio, but we'll be focussed on doing it and it's going to be full of hard choices, none of it's going to be easy.
HOST: Ok, alright, so where to from here?
PM: From here I will go to the Blue Care centre, say hello there and then off to Innisfail first.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard thank you for coming in.
PM: Thank you 



PM: I'm here in Townsville this morning, I'm here with the Attorney-General Robert McClelland, I'm also here with the local Member Ewan Jones and I thank him for coming to meet with me today. Also with the Chief Superinident Michael Keating and with Brigadier Smith here in Townsville, who's leading the men that you see doing such good work in this residential aged care facility.
I want to start by offering my condolences to the family and friends of a 23 year old man who has lost his life. Tragically this morning we have confirmed the news that a young man has lost his life because he has been overcome by fumes from a generator. This reinforces the safety messages that are being put out about what people should be doing to deal with generators in the aftermath of the cyclone, and making sure that as they use generators they themselves are safe. So condolences to his family and friends, to see such a young person die like this is a real tragedy and I would say to everybody please heed the warnings that are being provided about how you can safely use generators.
Here in Townsville I have been very pleased to see the community spirit that's been brought to the fore as people got about the rebuilding. I came here to this Blue Care residential aged care facility because I knew that both the carers and the police and Army have done a remarkable job. A remarkable job in evacuating frail, aged Australians into an evacuation centre, a remarkable job in caring for them as they were in that evacuation centre during the cyclone, and now they're doing a speedy clean-up which will enable these frail Australians to come back to their home very quickly.
Already in the hours of work that have been done this morning a miracle is being worked, Sandra the leader of this residential aged-care facility is just overwhelmed by the amount that's been achieved so quickly and what all of this effort means is that some very special Australians who need our care and concern are going to be able to return to their home.
I'm very happy to take peoples' questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how many troops have you got on the ground in Queensland?
PM: Well here in the region there are 4000 troops in total, we are here in Townsville which is home to Lavarack Barracks, we have a large standing presence here in Townsville and in this region, and so those 4000 soldiers are able to assist during the cyclone recovery and they did do a lot to assist as the community prepared for the cyclone as well and I do want to thank them for their work and I thanked some of the individuals involved today.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: It's a very big deployment, in the Brisbane flooding recovery when people were battling with filth and mud we had over 1500 soldiers in Brisbane doing that work, and that was the biggest deployment for a natural disaster since cyclone Tracy. So this is a lot of boots on the ground making a real difference and as you would have seen from the times just a few minutes ago when I was talking to some of the individuals from the Army doing the work, they're doing it with a great of a spirit of enthusiasm, it's great to see.
JOURNALIST: What were your initial observations and thoughts after you touched down last night, and you've presumably had a look around this morning, what did you think of Townsville (inaudible)
PM: Last night I had the benefit of a conversation with the Chief Superintendent and with the Brigadier to get a sense of the damage here in Townsville. I have been able to have a look round this morning and experience the Townsville concerns about water and all of the things that Townsville struggled with overnight. Here there is damage that will need to be recovered from, the streets are littered with broken tress, broken branches, with things that have flown through the air because of the strength of the cyclone, so there is work to do. But I think the people of Townsville, the people of Cairns, whilst they recover themselves are very focussed on what they can all do to assist people in the devastated communities of Tully and Cardwell that have just done it so tough and that's why I'm hoping to travel through to Tully during the course of the day, to have a look.
This is a big cyclone, it's a big area, it's a lot of damage and the damage is still being created because of the floodwaters that people are now concerned about and we know that whilst the cyclone has become a tropical depression, the rain that it brings has the potential to do damage in other areas. So whilst the most frightening hours are past, people do in this period need to make sure they're listening to all of the emergency services warnings, this isn't the right time for people to let their guard down and think that it's over, people do need to keep themselves safe.
JOURNLAIST: Prime Minister are you amazed at the lack of injuries and loss of life so far?
PM: Overwhelmingly I think we should be saying to each other that courage and preparation won through with this natural disaster. Queenslanders in the north and the far north, they're very resilient people, they know that the tropics can throw a lot at them and so they were well prepared and very courageous as the cyclone hit and benefits of that preparation I think has been seen right throughout these communities and it's also been seen in the fact that the loss of life has not been higher.
JOURNALIST: Any early estimates of the damages bill (inaudible)
PM: It's still too early to tell the damages bill, I mean you can see the damage around us, what we can't do at this stage is do the testing of the damage to roads that's been caused predominately by water, by surging water and by the flooding that's come with the cyclone, so we're going to need to assess all of that and work out the damage bill.
To give people some sense though, with Cyclone Larry the Federal Government spent the best part of half a billion dollars in that recovery.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister have you got any indication on how the buildings that were built during the Building the Education Revolution program have faired the cyclone?
PM: Well I don't have any direct information, we've actually driven past some schools with BER buildings, I don't have any direct information which would suggest they've faired any differently than any other building in the area.
JOURNALIST: Will you be examining the damage on your way or will you be asking for a briefing on how those buildings-
PM: Well I'm asking for a briefing on damage generally, including to community infrastructure: schools, the infrastructure the community relies on, so there's not a particular focus on buildings that were constructed through that program, I mean school buildings are school buildings and schools need to function, and obviously we'll be working with the Queensland Government on assessments about schools and their functionality, so that's something that we'll be done as part of the general damages assessment.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister when can people start accessing the relief from the cyclone (inaudible)
PM: Thank you for that question because it does give me the opportunity to say to people we have triggered the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment, this is the emergency $1000 that can help people get through when they're in evacuation centres, when they've lost power for a long period of time and they've got to throw out everything in the fridge and freezer and there are additional costs that they need to bear. People can access that payment by ringing 180 22 66 and our Centrelink staff will be able to discuss with them the emergency payment. Our Centrelink staff will also be able to discuss with them eligibility for our income support payment, so this is a payment which helps people if they are not able to go about their ordinary work for an extended period of time or they are not able to run their business or farm for a period of time because of natural disaster damage, and the same staff on the same number, 180 22 66, can help people.
Here in Townsville we are hoping to get the Centrelink office operation again during the course of tomorrow, so bringing it back into operation on the weekend. We have Centrelink staff who live here, who have been through the cyclone too, and we are bringing in some additional staff to work with them. Cairns Centrelink, as I'm advised, is function basically as normal, obviously there are some stresses and strains, but it's up and running, and Cairns is helping provide some support into some of the very hard hit communities but that's really early days and it's going to take us some time to get into places like Tully and Cardwell with the mobile Centrelink offices that we do have available. The task in those communities at the moment is the really direct recovery, making sure people have got food and water and shelter and those kind of things, but we're hoping to make that Centrelink support available to people fairly soon.
JOURNALIST: And will north Queenslanders be exempt from the flood levy at all?
PM: Yes they will, we will use the same eligibility for exemption that I announced when I announced the rebuilding package including the flood levy, so people who have been directly assisted and have been assisted by Government because they've been directly hit, will not need to pay the flood levy in the same way people hit by flooding don't have to pay the levy.
JOURNALIST: And you won't increase that either to pay for the damages here?
PM: No we won't, the package I announced last week, the $5.6 billion, that package, including the levy, will stay and it will be for flood recovery. We will need to find additional resources in the Federal Government's budget to meet the needs of recovering from this cyclone and so we will have to make some very tough decisions to make money available, there will inevitably be some budget cuts that people won't necessarily like the look of, but we will do that in order to make sure that we've got the resources available to rebuild in north and far north Queensland. We will rebuild from the floods, we have to rebuild here too, we'll do both.
Thank you very much. 



HOST: Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: What are you expecting when you arrive in the far north?
PM: Well I'm here in Townsville now, so in the north, as I get to the far north I'm expecting to see more and more devastation and I wanted to come up so that I could talk to people about their experiences, I mean people have been through such a frightening time and I did want to talk to people about what recovery is going to mean.
We've already made some emergency payments available, that's the emergency money that can help people in evacuation centres, people who have lost their homes who have been without power for a long period of time, so we have already started that process of emergency assistance, but I wanted to see the damage for myself and talk to people about the recovery and rebuilding we'll need to do together.
HOST: Prime Minister how can people access that emergency assistance and where?
PM: The best thing is at the moment people can ring a hotline number, it's 180 22 66, so they can ring that from wherever they are. In terms of our Centrelink services, Cairns Centrelink is operational, in Townsville we are hoping that the Centrelink office will be back in operation on the weekend and we're bringing some additional people in to assist with that and we are hoping too that we'd be able to make mobile services available to the really, really hard hit communities like Tully and Cardwell, and I do want to thank our Centrelink staff in Cairns who are doing a lot of work to run services beyond Cairns and to help people out.
HOST: Prime Minister as you know many people have lost their homes, their businesses, what else can the Government, can you do, to help these people?
PM: Well what we can do is working with people in the rebuilding of businesses and for primary producers. Our natural disaster assistance does help people in the immediate time of the emergency with the cash payments, but we also help people with assistance when they've lost homes, when they need to get their business back on its feet, when they need to get their primary production back up and happening; exotic fruits, bananas, all of that we know how much damage has been done from the pictures we've seen on our TV screens and the reports of local farmers. So we can do all of that and then we need to work to rebuild critical infrastructure.
HOST: As you would be aware banana farmers have been particularly hard hit by this, I think 75 per cent of production of bananas is between Cairns and Cardwell, it has been pretty much wiped out. Now banana growers have been calling, or urging the Federal Government this morning to provide wage assistance like the Government did after Cyclone Larry, is that something that will happen?
PM: As a result of bringing the emergency Australian Government Disaster Relief payments on stream, we've also triggered an income support payment which can help people when they can't go about their ordinary job and that might be people who work in the banana growing industry or the exotic fruits industry, and it can also help the business owner when they can't go about their ordinary work and can't get their ordinary income. So that's in place already and that number: 180 22 66 can give people details of those kind of payments.
Then we will have to consult and work with communities as to what else needs to be done. We're still in the hours where danger is present, with flooding in so many areas and where our focus has been on getting the Army there, working with the Queensland Emergency Services personnel to meet people's basic needs for food and water and shelter and make sure we know where everybody and make sure people who might need medical assistance are getting that assistance. So that's the sort of immediate phase of the response, and then we will have to keep consulting and working with people as we design the best package for the rebuilding in addition to all of the payments we've already triggered.
HOST: That number again if you do need assistance: 180 22 66, 180 22 66. Prime Minister is it too early to look at the lessons that have been learnt or need to be learnt from this disaster?
PM: I think we will be thinking about those lessons, I suspect for people who are still shell-shocked in communities looking at what used to be their home, it's too early for that, but for some parts that are already looking at the recovery, people will already be reflecting on the lesson to be learned, and that will be part of what we need to discuss in the weeks and months to come, but as I say I guess as Prime Minister at the moment, my focus has been on the things we need to do right now to make sure people are safe and to get them the things that just sustain human life; water, food, shelter, medical assistance if they need it. We've got 4000 soldiers in the region so they'll make a powerful difference, and I did also want to make sure we were triggering those first rounds of emergency payments to help get people through.
HOST: And in the longer term, we've had the flood levy of course, will that be extended to cover the rebuild of places, towns in the far north?
PM: The flood levy won't be changed, it will be in the size and shape that I announced and that means it's a levy that we're asking Australians to pay, the vast majority of Australians will pay less than $1 a week, but it will help collect $1.8 billion that can be used for rebuilding. I do want to be clear about this, I announced a $5.6 billion package for flood rebuilding and we will use that package for flood rebuilding, we are now going to have to find additional resources to meet the needs of rebuilding from the cyclone. So we won't be taking money away which otherwise would have been used for flood rebuilding, we'll have to find further cuts in the Federal budget to fund the extra amount of money that's now required to get us back from the cyclone.
HOST: I'm speaking with Prime Minister Julia Gillard, that number again for assistance 180 22 66. Prime Minister I just wanted to raise with you the role of airlines in all of this, we've had reports of pricing the day before the cyclone, people were desperate to get out of the far north, and fares from Cairns to Brisbane were starting at $1500 one way, and also airlines were allowing people to get on flights from elsewhere to fly in to Cairns and these poor people arriving to be told that there was cyclone on the way and having to get on planes and go back.
PM: Look I have heard some of those reports, I haven't had an opportunity yet to get it all checked and to make sure that I understand everything that went on here, but I'll certainly have a look at all of that.
On airlines I do just want to note we have had some good news and good assistance from Qantas in getting people out of Egypt, so this week they have been helping Australians in a difficult circumstance overseas, but there is obviously a problem here that people are raising and I'll have a long hard look at it, but I haven't had an opportunity to do that yet.
HOST: And Prime Minister I guess people just want to know that the Government can guarantee that people will be helped to get back on their feet, to rebuild their homes and their businesses?
PM: Well we will be working with the Queensland Government and with your local councils to rebuild. We've brought, everyday of this unfolding crisis in Queensland, the flood crisis and now the cyclone, every day we've brought a spirit of working together with the Queensland Government, to get communities through and then to rebuild.
As a Federal Government we particularly focus on rebuilding the critical infrastructure, the roads, the rail, the ports, the things that mean communities can run, farmers can get their product to market, all of that kind of absolutely vital infrastructure, and we focus on a helping hand for individuals, families, small business and primary producers and I can say to everyone listening, and I'm sure people have been clutching their radios close during the hours of the cyclone and beyond, I can say to everyone listening we will be doing what we need to rebuild here.
HOST: Prime Minister I do appreciate your time, thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, the Minister for Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs, Jenny Macklin and the former Parliamentary Secretary for Victoria Bushfire Reconstruction, Bill Shorten, today marked the second anniversary of the Black Saturday bushfires at a service at Melbourne's Federation Square.
The service remembered the 173 people who lost their lives in the devastating bushfires, as well as the more than 800 people who were injured.
The Prime Minister, Ms Macklin and Mr Shorten joined with others to pay tribute to the many individuals and communities who have shown extraordinary courage in rebuilding their lives after the bushfires.
Black Saturday also caused catastrophic damage to people's homes and properties, and to community infrastructure.
The Australian Government has supported the recovery and reconstruction effort with a commitment of more than $468 million.
The Australian Government provided direct and immediate financial assistance to more than 59,000 individuals and families, helped 171 Emergency Relief organisations to meet increased demand, and supported 11 community organisations to provide additional counselling support services to bushfire affected families
The Income Recovery Subsidy has offered temporary income support to employees, small business operators, and farmers who lost income as a direct result of the fires.
The Victorian and Australian Governments have also jointly established a $10 million Community Recovery Fund to assist community development and recovery.
The Australian Government will continue to support individuals and communities as they rebuild their homes, businesses and their lives.  



BONGIORNO: And it's welcome back to the program, Julia Gillard. Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning, Paul.
BONGIORNO: We are just going to Victoria. There had been evacuations overnight. Are we heading for a bigger disaster in that state than was first thought?
PM: We are heading for some major problems in Victoria Paul and this is going to strike people as really cruel, given that Victoria is about to mark the second anniversary of the devastating bushfires that hit Victoria and killed so many Victorians.
On the advice available to me, four townships have been the subject of evacuation orders so this is going to get a very tough indeed.
BONGIORNO: So the Commonwealth will be prepared to give as much assistance to Victoria as you have been giving to Queensland?
PM: Oh, absolutely. We work on a formula agreed over time as to how the Federal Government works with state governments in natural disasters and we step up for major natural disasters to 75 percent of the rebuilding costs.
We also have emergency payments available for people. They have already been triggered for the January flooding that Victoria faced and we will work with Premier Baillieu in what needs to be done in these circumstances.
With the January flooding, I said to Premier Baillieu, anything that he needed, which we could supply through the Australian Defence Force, we would do. So we will work together with the Victorian government, the same way as we have worked with the Queensland government to get people through as best we can, as they face these extreme weather events.
BONGIORNO: Prime Minister, that report from Brisbane that the cyclone damage is $2 billion, that is adding to the almost $4 billion in preliminary estimates for the cost of the natural disasters in Queensland.
Can you assure the taxpayers of Australia that the fact that Queensland doesn't have natural disaster insurance, as other states do, that the federal taxpayers aren't picking up more of the tab than they should be?
PM: Yes I can, Paul. The way in which the Federal Government and State Governments approach their insurance arrangements is what is going to give the best value.
The former Howard Government, indeed it was Joe Hockey as the then responsible minister, decided the Federal Government should not continue to be the insured because given the size of the premiums it just simply was not a value for money proposition and I don't make any criticism of him for that, he made a hard headed assessment of whether it was value for money.
Different states have made hard headed assessments. They are in different situations. Queensland, obviously, is more exposed to extreme weather events because of the tropical nature of our north and far north. In those circumstances, it has been better value for money for them to effectively self-insure. And they do have $700 million available from that self-insurance. In other states, different arrangements have been made, Victoria, for example, is insured for road damage.
But whilst we are seeing an extreme weather event in Victoria now, they are not as routine in Victoria as they are in North and Far North Queensland, meaning the financial proposition about whether or not you should insure or self-insure is a different one.
BONGIORNO: Well, $2 billion on top of the $4 billion in Queensland and still to be tallied, the damage in Victoria, $1.8 billion for the levy seems small. Do you really think that you need to revisit how much the levy should try to collect?
PM: The levy will be, as I have announced it, $1.8 billion and a levy that is calibrated so that the more you earn, the more you pay and 60 percent of taxpayers will pay less than a dollar a week.
Paul, I had to make some tough decisions about the right balance between budget cutbacks and asking Australians to directly help. I believe I have struck the right balance and for the further rebuilding we will need to do, after the cyclone and after more floods, so we will find budget savings.
BONGIORNO: So are those budget savings going to be across the board or are they going to be more aimed at say issues like climate change programs?
PM: We will go through the budget and we will make some choices, Paul and they're going to be tough choices. I want to reinforce this point, we have already made as a government more than $80 billion of savings since 2007. We want to make sure that every dollar in the Budget does the best work it can and is directed to the best purpose it can be.
There are no easy choices left now, so in making further budget cuts, there is going to be some pain around and people are going to have to recognise that. That is why in getting the balance right; I thought it was appropriate to also ask Australians to chip in through the levy.
BONGIORNO: It does seem, though, from what you have just said that you are lending some weight to the Opposition's claim that there is fat in the Budget.
PM: On the Opposition's claim, Paul, there's been a lot of politics played by Mr Abbott and his team. Mr Abbott said that budget cuts could be easily found and then his various spokespeople, Mr Hockey and Mr Robb and others, said that they would produce a list of these cuts shortly after Australia Day.
Well we haven't  seen any list, Paul, because it is not that easy and last time the Opposition went looking for budget cuts, it got itself in a huge mess and ended up with an $11 billion black hole, so I've got a plan there to rebuild as we need to in Queensland and around the nation.
We need to rebuild. We need to finance the rebuilding. I have got a plan to do that and the proposal that will go before the Parliament for the levy. I would say to Mr Abbott, it's time to stop playing politics with this and help us get on with the job of rebuilding the nation.
GRATTAN: Ms Gillard, your Minister Greg Combet, has flagged the possibility of a two-stage scheme starting with a fixed price on carbon and then moving to a trading scheme. Is this the model the Government is now going to adopt?
PM: Minister Combet is properly outlining models and discussing options with the Australian community. The decision hasn't been made yet about the best mechanism to price carbon and we will work through with the multi-party Climate Change Committee and through internal government decisions to do that, but the objective is clear, we need to change the way our economy works.
That is why I have drawn the comparisons with Hawke and Keating and floating the dollar and reducing tariffs - big structural changes to the economy, changing price signals in the economy. When we brought tariffs down, people said ‘it'll just cost jobs and there will be no benefit'. Well, there have been huge benefits, we changed the price signals to businesses and they got more efficient. Through pricing carbon, we'll change the price signals to businesses and they will get lower pollution ways of manufacturing, of going about their business in all sectors of the economy.
GRATTAN: Speaking about businesses, the Greens of course are a big part of your committee that is devising some scheme and they're anxious that polluters should have to pay.
Can you give a guarantee that effective industries won't be any worse off than they would have been under the carbon scheme that was promoted under the Rudd Government?
PM: A lot of work was done by policy-makers in collaboration with stakeholders to design the various elements of the carbon pollution reduction scheme and it's not my intention to throw all of that work out the door. A lot of good work was done, particularly on the area that you nominate, about how to assist industry with the transition.
GRATTAN: So can you give the guarantee?
PM: Michelle, I know journalists like simplistic guarantees and rule-in, rule-out games. What I can say to you is I will have more to say in the months ahead about how we will price carbon. It is not my intention to discard the work that was well done about matters in the carbon pollution reduction scheme.
A lot of policy work was done. A lot of stakeholder work was done. A lot of thought went into how we would deal with industry transition. We are bringing that to the table as we make the decisions this year.
FARR: Prime Minister, there is some confusion about the deal you are trying to settle with the States on health funding, such that there is the appearance that the Federal Government is retreating from its commitment to be the dominant funder, 60 percent of public health funding for the States, to use that money somewhere else. Are you retreating? What are you after from the States now?
PM: Well, I'm sorry Malcolm if you're confused but I am not at all confused and my objectives here are very, very clear. I will be making them clear to the Premiers in the lead-up to COAG and I've of course already had some discussions.
Objective number one - we do not give additional money for health without reform. Reform is vital. Objective number two - I want to look at the world through the eyes of a patient, of someone needing healthcare. I want to look at the world through the eyes of someone needing to go to a hospital but also look at the world through the eyes of someone needing care in the community and the truth is, too many Australians end up in hospital because they did not get the right care at the right time from the right person in the community and we've got to resolve that.
My eyes are on the health reforms as well as financing discussions, which have been so much in the public domain and public debate.
FARR: OK, Still confused. Are you going to be asking Premier Bligh, Premier Keneally, to change the deal that they have already made? Will there be any alteration to the arrangements with those States?
PM: Malcolm, I'm not going to be able to answer all of your questions today, they will be answered when COAG meets, but I will be saying to every Premier, get to the table on Monday the 14th, Valentine's Day, I'm not sure why we picked it for COAG, but there we have it, get to the table on 14th February, and we will walkout with a national health arrangement.
That is what Australians are expecting us to do. Yes, there will be a lot of focus and discussion on financing arrangements, but Australians don;t walk into doctors' surgeries or into hospital emergency departments chattering to each other about financing arrangements. They walk in, thinking, ‘am I going to get the care I need in the time that I need it?' That is my focus.
GRATTAN: Ms Gillard, there's been a report today that Kevin Rudd has spent nearly half his time as Foreign Minister overseas. Do you think this is a bit excessive?
PM: Guess what, Michelle? Foreign ministers travel. That's what they do. It's inherent in having the Foreign Affairs portfolio.
GRATTAN: But the question is the quantity, the amount.
PM: Kevin Rudd obviously is travelling extensively. Foreign Ministers in the past have travelled extensively and they will in the future, it is inherent in the job. You can't be Foreign Minister unless you get out talking to countries around the world about issues that are in Australia's national interest.
BONGIORNO: So he is not investing time in a future career in the United Nations?
PM: Don't be silly, Paul. He is investing time in advocating our interest on the world stage. That's what Foreign Ministers do.
FARR: Prime Minister, I don't think Tony Abbott is going to be any nicer to you over the coming year. Are we going to see response in kind? You're a pretty good fighter yourself when you get down to it, is it going to be a rough year?
PM: I think what we are seeing from Tony Abbott is playing politics at a time of national crisis. What you will see from me, Paul, is leadership. Yes, in the Parliament, I can give as good as I get, but even taking that feisty demeanour into the parliament, can I tell you, I have been absolutely amazed, absolutely amazed that Tony Abbott somehow thought it was OK to be out fundraising for the Liberal Party during a national crisis like the one we have been going through.
I have been absolutely amazed that he hasn't taken responsibility for an email with his name on it. I have been absolutely amazed that his message to Australians has been, ‘you can afford to give the Liberal Party money, but you can't afford to give money through the levy to help Queensland'.
This is not a good start for Mr Abbott, all about politics. Whereas our eyes are on the national interest  -  or my eyes are on the national interest at this time.
FARR: Do you believe the levy will get through Parliament?
PM: I will come to the Parliament and say to the Parliament, this is the right thing to do, to rebuild Queensland and rebuild the nation and I will be saying directly in the parliament to Mr Abbott, if it was good enough for him to support levies under the Howard Government, if it was good enough for him to advocate a levy for his election promises, why isn't it good enough to support a levy to rebuild Queensland?
What sort of hypocrisy is this? I don't think Australians are going to be very tolerant of that kind of hypocrisy in the circumstances the nation confronts now.
GRATTAN: One of your critics on the levy, on your own side, was Kristina Keneally, who called for some changes, which you rejected, but despite this, with the very difficult election for Labor coming up in NSW, will you be campaigning shoulder to shoulder with Kristina Keneally during the state election?
PM: I am the Federal Labor leader, Michelle, and I campaign with my Labor colleagues. We have differences of opinions from time to time and I had a sharp difference of opinion with Premier Keneally on this question of the flood levy and I will continue to maintain my view.
FARR: Prime Minister, a number of commentators, from David Williamson to my esteemed colleague on my right even, and rank in file Australians have been critical of your personal response to the floods and the natural disasters. Critical of you saying you couldn't find the right pitch in the emotional register in your response. Now I'm sure you wouldn't say you're lacking compassion, so are those critics too harsh or do you indeed have a problem communicating on that level?
PM: Malcolm, I am a substance not style person. I understand that people will make commentary about political style. My focus is always on the substance and I think at the end of the day, people judge their leaders and their governments by what gets done, by what difference is made in their actual lives.
FARR: Is Premier Bligh all style is she?
PM: That is a silly way of doing the distinction, of course not. People will make comments about style. My style, Premier Anna Bligh's style, Tony Abbott's style, and the list will go on. What people will look to is they will look to substance and what gets achieved for them.
Premier Anna Bligh, during this crisis, has been all substance and she will be all substance in the recovery and I believe ultimately, people will judge each of us on the changes we make in people's lives.
GRATTAN: On the question of substance on a different front, Prime Minister, the post-mortem from the election, the report on that is soon coming out and we understand that it will suggest that the power to choose the Labor front bench goes back to Caucus rather than staying with the leader as it is now. Would you support that change?
PM: I am not going to speculate on the contents of the ALP review. That will be made available to the National Executive on the date that I have selected, 19th February. But I am happy to talk to you about positions I have held for a long period of time. I have been on the public record for a long period of time saying the Leader should pick their frontbench team and I will continue to do that.
FARR: Despite whatever recommendation comes up from the review panel?
PM: I am not going to speculate on what is going to be in the review, but despite who says whatever in whatever context, I will maintain my view. As Leader, I will pick my frontbench team.
BONGIORNO: Prime Minister there is a report that Tony Abbott would like to extend $100,000 low interest loans to small businesses affected by the natural disasters. Would you be prepared to match that?
PM: Paul this just shows that Mr Abbott has spent far too much time playing politics and not enough time checking the facts.
As a part of our natural disaster arrangements, we are already making available concessional loans of up to $250,000 for small businesses and primary producers.
Indeed when Mr Abbott was in government that was a standard part of the natural disaster package too. So he either hasn't done his homework, or he is asking me to cut the amount of assistance to small businesses and primary producers and I'm certainly not going to do that, Paul.
BONGIORNO: OK Prime Minister, before we go, we have a question from THORFI on Twitter. He or she says, ‘given recent climate events and climate change reality, will you be funding the disaster recovery from coal subsidies' he or she believes you pay?
PM: The way in which we will fund the natural disaster recovery, I've made clear how we are going to find $5.6 billion. I will be making clear how we will fund the rest through budget cutbacks. The best thing we can do to deal with the challenge of climate change is price carbon and as I have said, 2011 is the year of decision.
BONGIORNO: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you very much for being our first guest in 2011, hope to see you again later in the year 



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard will travel to New Zealand on 15 and 16 February.
Ms Gillard will meet the New Zealand Prime Minister, John Key to discuss opportunities for closer bilateral and regional cooperation. 
The Prime Minister will express her thanks to the New Zealand Government and the people of New Zealand for their generous assistance during the floods in Queensland and Victoria. 
Ms Gillard will use her address to members of New Zealand's Parliament  -  the first ever by a foreign leader  -  to highlight the close and enduring partnership between Australia and New Zealand. 
Ms Gillard will meet senior New Zealand business leaders in Auckland to discuss recent progress made towards a trans-Tasman single economic market and future steps in this direction.
The Prime Minister will also meet New Zealand's Governor-General, Sir Anand Satyanand GNZM QSO, and the Leader of the Opposition, the Hon Phil Goff. 
Australia's relations with New Zealand are the closest and most comprehensive we have with any country. 
The relationship is shaped by strong ties between our peoples, businesses, governments and defence.
In her discussions, the Prime Minister will emphasise the importance Australia attaches to our close partnership with New Zealand.  



PM: Thanks to everybody for gathering in the courtyard, some fresh air for everybody. First and foremost can I say I am wearing a yellow ribbon today because today is the two year anniversary of the devastating Victorian bushfires. Yesterday I had the opportunity to attend a memorial event in Victoria, there were many Victorians at it who has family members who lost their lives in those devastating bushfires, there were many Victorians at it who are still rebuilding their lives after such death and devastation.
This will be a difficult day in Victoria for many people and many communities and our sympathies are with them on this difficult day. It's a reminder to all of us just how long and painful the journey back from natural disaster can be. It's going strike those Victorians and Victorians generally as perhaps a very cruel irony that on the day they mark the two year anniversary of the Victorian bushfires, so many Victorian communities are actually battling floodwaters. There are some communities that have seen more rain in two days than they normally see in twelve months. There were some communities evacuated last night who have now been evacuated for the second time, consequently there are a lot of people in Victoria today engaged in battling floodwaters, some of them mopping up, many of them anxious about the future. I want to say my thoughts are with them today, we are working with the Victorian Government to assist those communities through.
And whilst Victoria battles floodwaters, over in the West people are battling bushfires and we've seen the loss of homes. People who have been through the devastation of knowing that all of their possessions are gone, many of them not able to take things with them that are precious to them and which are now lost. So there is pressure on today in Western Australia, pressure for those who know their homes are gone and pressure for those that are still battling these bushfires. We are, through our Emergency Management Arrangements, staying in close touch with the Government of Western Australia and we will be working through them as Western Australians face this bushfire problem in their own state.
All of this reinforces that the nation has been through a very tough time, there's a lot of rebuilding to do. So today I want to announce some new arrangements that the Federal Government will make to do that rebuilding. As Prime Minister I want to make sure that every dollar we spend on rebuilding from the floods and the cyclones is a dollar that gets value for money. I want to make sure that every dollar spent gets the maximum value for money and goes to the regions that need it the most. We will have rebuilding to do in Queensland, we will have rebuilding to do in other parts of the nation, including Victoria.
So I now want to outline the oversight arrangements to drive value for money and making sure assistance goes to those regions that need it.
Firstly, as I think is now well known, the Queensland Government intends to manage its reconstruction work through the Queensland Reconstruction Authority. The Federal Government will have an agreement with the Queensland Government about expenditure of our 75 per cent contribution towards rebuilding.
We will also have two representatives on the board of the Queensland Reconstruction Authority. I can today announce that those two representatives will be Brad Orgill, a former merchant banker who will bring his commercial expertise and eye for value for money to the task. The second representative will the Secretary of the Department of Regional Australia, Glenys Beauchamp, will also serve on the Reconstruction Board. In addition to having Commonwealth representatives Brad Orgill and Glenys Beauchamp on the Reconstruction Board and at the National Agreement between the Federal Government and the Queensland Government, I announce today that the Federal Government will require audited statements for its contributions to be paid against, to make sure that money has been properly spent. That audit requirement will not only be there in relation to Queensland, it will be there in relation to all rebuilding expenditure around the country.
Then thirdly, today I announce we will also create a Reconstruction Inspectorate to oversight work around the country and increase scrutiny and accountability of rebuilding projects. The aim of the Inspectorate is not to duplicate bodies like the Queensland Reconstruction Authority, its aim is to ensure that there is proper accountability, scrutiny and value for money.
In order to do that, then Inspectorate will be able to scrutinise rebuilding contracts, it will be able to directly inspect projects to ensure they are meeting progress milestones, they will be able to investigate any complaints or issues which may be raised by the public, they will work directly with state agencies, including reconstruction agencies like the Queensland Authority to develop contractual frameworks, tendering processes and project management systems. They will be able to scrutinise requests for reimbursement by local government for projects that have been completed and they will be able to examine high value or complex projects prior to execution; that is they will be able to scrutinise the contracts before they are signed.
I can today announce that the Chair of this construction inspectorate will be Mr John Fahey, who is known to the Australian community as a former Premier of New South Wales and also a former Federal Finance Minister. He will be assisted on this board by Martin Albrecht, who is the former Managing Director of Thiess. He will also be assisted by Matt Sherrin from Deloitte.
Their job, as the Reconstruction Inspectorate, will be to provide new accountabilities and oversight. This Reconstruction Inspectorate will report directly to the Cabinet Subcommittee that is guiding the Government's work on natural disasters, I Chair that Cabinet Subcommittee and Simon Crean, the Minister for Regional Australia is its Deputy Chair.
Can I conclude by saying clearly Australians know that around the nation we've got a lot of rebuilding to do. People have seen the damage on their TV screens, people know that we are coming back from an unprecedented series of natural disasters and that we are coming back from a flood crisis of unprecedented scale. People are familiar with the fact that three quarters of Queensland was declared a natural disaster zone, that the city of Brisbane was shut down for days and that was before we saw the cyclone hit Queensland.
People also know that we face natural disasters in other parts of the country and that New South Wales and Victoria in particular have had to battle flood waters and Victoria continues to do so. Consequently I believe as we rebuild from these large scale and widespread natural disasters, that it's appropriate to have these mechanisms to ensure that every dollar is a dollar that is spent effectively and every dollar spent from taxpayers' money goes to do work that is necessary to rebuild the nation.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Do you (inaudible) up to more Commonwealth oversight for this spending than we saw in relation to the economic stimulus spending?
PM: This is a purpose designed oversight package for the rebuilding that we will need to do in Queensland particularly, but around the nation.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) under the pink batts and green loans and BER to some extent (inaudible). Is this, has your administration been informed by the difficulties in those schemes about the need for greater value for money in these schemes?
PM: As I've said before clearly as Prime Minister and as the Deputy Prime Minister I had learned some things by rolling out major construction projects. I of course understand that Building the Education Revolution is talked about, I see that in the media too. I would remind that in many thousands of projects, many, many thousands of projects complaint rates were at 3 per cent, but I do acknowledge that I've learned some things. I've also said publically before, and I'm very happy to say it again, I will, as Prime Minister, take the approach of holding up every decision to scrutiny, holding up every decision to the light, looking at it from every angle, and when it requires us to get assistance in the form of a reconstruction inspectorate to do that well, then we will do so. I believe the form of this body, involving as it does, Mr John Fahey, former Premier  -  so he knows how state governments work  -  former Finance Minister  -  he knows how Federal budgets work  -  as well as people with expertise in building and accounting will bring a new degree of oversight and that's the right thing to do.
Phil Coorey?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) asked these question and you suggested at the time that Brigadier Mick Slater and the role played by Joe Ludwig and others would be sufficient to provide oversight. Why this now, is it a reaction to the concerns of the Independents about the accountability of the money or is it pressure from the Opposition?
PM: It's my determination to make sure we get value for money for every taxpayers' dollar spent. I understand I'm asking the Australian community, through the levy, to contribute directly to rebuilding around the nation. We've made budget cutbacks but the money that flows from the Federal budget at the end of the day is taxpayer's money, it's not the Government's money, we only have it because taxpayers have forwarded it to the Government in one way or another through our taxation system. In those circumstances it's the right thing to do to have focussed oversight. When I spoke at the Press Club I did indicate there are a number of oversight mechanisms and I think people should have confidence in them, I think people should have confidence in a Queensland Reconstruction Authority led by Major-General Mick Slater, I think he is a man who instils confidence from communities; I've been in communities with him and I've seen people react to him, very confident in saying that.
I also believe when we look at reconstruction that's happened in the past in Queensland, State Government work in coming back from natural disasters, local government work in coming back from natural disasters, Queensland with its climate has seen its fair share of rebuilding in the past and people would know that that's been done effectively.
In these circumstances, beyond having confidence in Mick Slater, beyond having a partnership agreement between the Federal Government and the Victorian Government, beyond having a dedicated Minister and a Cabinet sub-committee, I think it's appropriate to build in an additional layer of oversight.
I particularly want to see that additional layer of oversight working for rebuilding around the country; inevitably in this discussion our focus is on Queensland, partly I think because we all know of the size of the task there, partly because at the same time I am announcing our direct representatives to the Queensland Reconstruction Authority, but I want to be clear, this level of oversight will be there for rebuilding done right around the nation.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) a number of caveats, obviously people who were affected by the floods in Queensland and Victoria and then the cyclone. This is a parochial question, so I apologise in advance, but are there going to be some other caveats for example the hundreds of people who've been affected by bushfires on the other side of the continent?
PM: We will need to work through that, as you would be aware we've done the exemption from the levy predominantly by using the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment as the mechanism, though we have struck a special mechanism for people impacted by floodwaters in Western Australia. You will need to allow us to get beyond the days of the immediate bushfire response, that's where certainly Western Australia's focus is today and our emergency management people are working with them to deal with the question you asked, but what I can say generally is we want to bring the same approach, which is if people have been hard hit by natural disaster then we've said people in those circumstances shouldn't pay the levy.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) inspectorate, is it any project that has even partial Federal funding and how long do you think it will need to exist and how big is it, how many people do you think it's going to employ?
PM: It's any Federal project that has Federal money. We are flowing money under our Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements. That means that we bear the lion's share of the cost, 75 per cent. So any project that's got money coming from that 75 per cent will be under the oversight of this Inspectorate. Unfortunately you're asking me a question that I don't think anybody's capable of answering in terms of how long this will take, because we're still in the days of preliminary but getting firmer assessments about flood damage, but we're in a whole new ball park with cyclone damage now and the focus there has just been on food, water, shelter, absolute disaster management for those very devastated communities, so we are not very far down the track with damages assessments in terms of infrastructure.
Michelle?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard do you have any meetings with crossbench members lined up for the next few days, and what areas of your package are now open for negotiation. You've dealt with the oversight matter, you've ruled out the disaster fund in the short term, what is potentially up for negotiation if anything?
PM: Michelle I can assure you that I'm on my normal quota plus some for meetings with Parliamentarians this week, so I will be chatting issues through with members of the crossbenches and beyond as Parliament reconvenes this week.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I have a normal weekly cycle of meetings when Parliament's sitting and I'm always happy to have another conversation with people, I don't mind talking, sitting down having a cup of tea and talking, so we'll do a bit of that this week. But my message to people will be a very clear one, my message to people is the nation wants us to get on with the job of rebuilding, and I'd also have a message in that regard to Tony Abbott. My message to him is it's time to put the playing of politics to one side and help us to get on with the job of rebuilding the nation.
Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just in relation to value for money, in the longer term is there any prospect of reviewing states' insurance schemes, and whether reinsurance should be extended as part of this inspectorate and looking at value for money?
PM: Dennis I'm worried you've joined a Bee-Gees revival group over the summer, we may need to talk about that not quite at a full press conference, so that's distracted me.
I think your question is about insurance. On insurance, I do want to be clear about this and I answered some questions about this yesterday, States and indeed the Federal Government have to make value for money assessments about insurance premiums and it depends how risk rated you are. Queensland, with its tropical climate and vast expanse of the state is in a different position from other areas of the country like Victoria  -  Victoria doing it tough today but not normally battling with a tropical climate, not prone to cyclones and the like.
So states around the country have done assessments about risk versus reward in terms of being insured, as did in fact the former Federal Government and the then Minister Joe Hockey came to the view that risk versus reward for the Federal Government that is wasn't the best way forward.
So I do not intend to second guess all of that, there's no evidence before me which would suggest those decisions have not been properly made.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) all the work that has been done on the business compensation under the CPRS, but Christine Milne says that's not going to cut the mustard. What do you say to that?
PM: Well I'll stick with the comments that I made yesterday, they're my approach and that's my perspective.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister when will you have something to say about further budget cuts just on reconstruction post Yasi?
PM: I note that the budget guessing game has started a little bit early, it seems to me that every year in terms of every fixed anniversary in the cycle, whether it's the Parliamentary cycle, the government cycle or just normal human endeavour, everything gets done earlier, so we see Easter eggs in the shops earlier than we ever used to, we see hot-cross buns in the shops earlier than we ever used, we see Christmas decorations in the shops earlier than we ever used to, and the guessing game about the budget has started earlier than it ever used to, that means that we will go through the same cycle of responses just for a longer period of time. I'm not going to speculate about what's in the budget, what I have said is we will find the appropriate room in the budget by making cuts to fund the reconstruction from Cyclone Yasi. We are in a situation where, as a result of the $5.6 billion flood recovery package I announced the other day, we will be getting on with flood recovery work, damages assessments will come in from Cyclone Yasi and then we will make the necessary arrangements to meet that cost. But we'll do that in a methodical way and work through on all of the details.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) you spoke last week about welfare reform and getting people back into the workforce. Are you in the game of welfare reform because you see that as an economic reform, or are looking for budget cuts by cutting welfare?
PM: I'm in the space of talking about participation in work because I believe in it. Of the things that have driven me all of my adult life and that I've believed in all of my adult life, I've believed in opportunity being fairly extended to every Australian child.
Demography is not destiny. I'm only standing here because I got a good education, and it breaks my heart that there are children in this country today who don't get a good education. We've got a moral responsibility to fix that. We've got an economic responsibility to fix that.
A fair nation does not unfairly deny children access to opportunity.
I've also believed all of my life in the benefits and dignity of work. I think through my own personal life I've shown a preparedness to work hard. I'm someone who believes in the benefits and dignity that come from work. I believe those benefits and that dignity should be extended to as many Australians as possible. That's what's driving my interest in workforce participation measures.
JOURNALIST: Just to clarify (inaudible) more spending cuts (inaudible) May budget?
PM: Look, we will work through in a methodical way and announce as necessary, but of course the next major economic statement is the May budget, and I would remind you can get yourself into a terrible mess when you do these things off the back of an envelope. We've seen Tony Abbott do that in the past and conjure up an $11 billion black hole. We may well be in for a repeat of that cycle.
Yes, Karen?
JOURNALIST: Today's Newspoll has Labor's primary vote lower than it was when you replaced Kevin Rudd. Why do you think that is?
PM: I'm surrounded by people who like to make their living writing poll commentary, so I wouldn't possibly want to substitute my work for yours. You'll do all of that.
Of course, the Government's got a lot of hard work in front of it. My focus is getting on with that hard work.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you, just back on the initiatives you've announced, these sort of things haven't been in place before for State Government spending of federal funds. To what extent is this a recognition that State Governments can't be trusted spending federal funding, and if that's the case, won't this add red tape to the reconstruction effort?
PM: This is a recognition of my determination to make sure that every taxpayer dollar spent on flood recovery, cyclone recovery, is spent effectively. That's why I've announced these arrangements.
The reconstruction inspectorate is going to need to work in a timely way. That is certainly one of my objectives, that the Queensland reconstruction authority wants to get on with the job. Mick Slate is, by definition given his seniority in the Defence Force, a can-do person. He wants to get on with the job. Premier Anna Bligh wants to get on with the job, and I want to see communities reconstructed.
I want people's lives to go back to normal as soon as possible, and we need to reconstruct to do that.
So, in those circumstances, the reconstruction inspectorate will work in a nimble way and in a timely way, but it will have the ability to check major contracts before they are executed to ensure there is value for money.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Which minister is responsible for the spending?
PM: The sub-committee of Cabinet will receive the direct reports from this reconstruction inspectorate. It's Chaired by me. It's Sub-chaired by Simon Crean. Simon Crean is taking the lead on the natural disaster recovery outside Queensland. Minister Ludwig is taking the lead on natural disaster recovery inside Queensland. That's a big enough job for us to specifically dedicate a person to it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what legislation do you need?
PM: Thanks, Paul. It will not need legislation. The obligations in relation to it will be in the agreement between the Federal Government and the State Government, and it will start work as soon as necessary to acquit these tasks, so in the next few weeks.
JOURNALIST: Don't you need the Audit Act?
PM: It's not auditing in an Audit Act sense. I did make a reference to auditing, and that reference to auditing is to us paying, in relation to audited accounts and requests for expenditure, so there is an audit function here, and that's where the audit function is.
Sorry, I just want to be clear about that. Of course, the Auditor-General, the Australian National Audit Office, is still doing, you know, whatever the ANAO determines to do, led by the Auditor-General.
I'll just come back over.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) being held, look, I appreciate negotiations are still continuing ahead of next Monday, but is the Commonwealth's preferred status as the majority funder of health, is that still a condition of the reforms, or is that something that you are prepared to give away if you have to?
PM: As I indicated yesterday, I've got a clear focus here, and my clear focus is we are not making additional payments for growth without reform.
How will I judge those reforms? I'll judge them by their capacity to make a difference to the efficiency of the system, and of course, paying on activity-based funding and efficient price is vital to that; and their ability to make a difference to the experiences of the Australian community.
People don't judge their healthcare system on Commonwealth-State financial relations. They judge their healthcare system on whether they can find a doctor when they need one in their community; on whether they can find a nurse when they need one in their community; whether they can get access to preventative healthcare for managing chronic diseases - all of the things that keep people out of hospital, and we are a society with very high hospitalisation rates compared with comparable nations, and then, if people need a hospital, whether the hospital can respond to their issues and concerns in a timely way at the emergency department or for elective surgery.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the end product (inaudible)
PM: Well, allied with budget speculation, there's the well-known game of COAG speculation. I know you're all going to play it. You'll have to excuse me if I retire from playing the game. I'll be talking to my colleagues and working on that.
JOURNALIST: You had a position on the GST before. It's laid down. It's out there. Is that position still operative, or is it not operative?
PM: The position I've just outlined is the position that is driving me on health care reform. Clearly, I'll be working with Premiers and Chief Ministers in the lead up to COAG on Valentine's Day, for which I am sure there are cards already in the shops, consistent with my view everything happens earlier than it used to.
Yes, just one sec, we'll just do two more  -  one here, one here.
JOURNALIST: On the governance (inaudible) that you put out today, the way in which it's been structured with the Inspectorate responding back to the sub-committee, of which you are the Chair, are you quite deliberately structuring the system so that you are responsible? You're taking responsibility for any value-for-money issues that might arise in the spending of this money?
PM: I'm the Prime Minister. I lead the Government. I take responsibility. I'm setting up a system which means we've got extra oversight, an extra way of ensuring that we get value for money.
Over here. Dennis?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) you've never heard me sing. I'll spare you my voice.
Just on COAG, I'm not asking you to speculate, but given that Kristina Keneally has actually started campaigning for the election and there are different views between her and Mr O'Farrell on the health reform. Have you given any idea or thought to briefing Mr O'Farrell ahead of COAG or involving the Opposition in negotiations?
PM: Well, call me old-fashioned, Dennis, but I think it's normal to extend to Australians the courtesy of voting before determining who their government's going to be.
Yes, there will be an election in New South Wales and the people of New South Wales will get to elect their government through that process.
Premier Keneally will be attending COAG as you would expect.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think you can read between those lines, Matthew.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced strict new oversight and accountability measures to ensure value for money is delivered in the massive task of rebuilding flood-ravaged regions.
To make sure every cent of our Flood Rebuilding Package goes where it is needed the Government will implement the following: 
 * 	A new Reconstruction Inspectorate to increase scrutiny and accountability of rebuilding projects.
 * 	Require the states to provideindependently audited financial statements to support any claim for infrastructure rebuilding, including verification of spending against any advance payments made.
 * 	Nominate two federal appointees to the board of the Queensland Reconstruction Authority. These will be Mr Brad Orgill former Chairman and CEO of UBS Australia and head of the BER Implementation Taskforce, and Mrs Glenys Beauchamp, Secretary to the Department of Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government.
We need to help flood affected communities rebuild their roads, their bridges, their rail lines and public facilities so they can get their lives back to normal.
Australians will all be pitching in to help through budget savings and the flood levy.
I am determined to see every dollar spent effectively.  That is why I have established these accountability and oversight measures today.
OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES
Reconstruction Inspectorate
Former Federal Finance Minister John Fahey has been appointed as Chair of the Reconstruction Inspectorate.  He will report directly to the Natural Disaster Recovery Cabinet sub-committee.
Other members will include Martin Albrecht, former Managing Director of Thiess and Matt Sheerin from Deloitte.
The Inspectorate will: 
 * 	Scrutinise rebuilding contracts
 * 	Directly inspect projects to ensure they are meeting progress milestones
 * 	Investigate complaints or issues raised by the public
 * 	Work directly with state reconstruction agencies to develop contractual frameworks, tendering processes and project management systems
 * 	Scrutinise requests for reimbursement by local government for projects completed for the purposes of reconstruction
 * 	Examine high value or complex projects prior to execution
While the Inspectorate will be able to review any relevant project, it will have a particular focus on high value, complex contracts.
The Inspectorate will not replicate the function or responsibilities of decision-making bodies such as the Queensland Reconstruction Authority. 
The Inspectorate will work closely with state authorities to provide an additional level of check and balance for the expenditure of funds. 
The roles, responsibilities and powers of the Inspectorate will be incorporated into the terms of any national partnership agreement or other agreement which delivers reconstruction funding from the Commonwealth.
The Inspectorate will be supported as necessary by others with expert knowledge of relevant fields, for example quantity surveying, construction management and contract law, as necessary.
Requirement of independent audits
The states will be to required to provide independently audited financial statements to support any claim for infrastructure rebuilding, including verification of spending against any advance payments made.
These statements must be certified by the Auditor-General.
The arrangements will be formalised in a National Partnership Agreement that will be signed by the Commonwealth and the relevant State Governments.
Australian Government nominees to the board of the Queensland Reconstruction Authority
The Gillard Labor Government will appoint former Chairman and CEO of UBS Australia, Mr Brad Orgill and Glenys Beauchamp, Secretary to the Department of Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government.
Commonwealth Natural Disaster Recovery Taskforce
The Federal Government will create a dedicated task force to provide support for reconstruction work following the recent floods and cyclone.
It will provide specialist assistance and advice to Federal Ministers involved in the flood recovery efforts and other relevant Commonwealth bodies including the Reconstruction Inspectorate.
It is expected that the Taskforce will be a standing body for the next two years 


House of Representatives
I move that the House:  acknowledges with great sadness the devastation occasioned by this summer's natural disasters including unprecedented floods, Cyclone Yasi and bushfires; extends its deepest sympathies to the families of those who have lost loved ones; records its profound regret at the impact of this summer's natural disasters on the economic and social well-being of affected communities; records its admiration for the courage shown by so many in the face of these disasters; acknowledges the enormous efforts of Defence personnel, emergency workers, and so many volunteers in responding to these disasters; and pledges the full support of the Australian Parliament and community to assist affected areas to recover and rebuild.
Mr Speaker, yesterday, we commemorated the two year anniversary of the Black Saturday bushfires, which took 173 lives. 
Around Victoria, communities have been coming together, to remember the dead and share the stories of that day of hell and the journey of rebuilding since.  I shared such a moment of coming together on Sunday and had the opportunity to talk to a number of survivors, who still miss those who are lost and who are still healing.
For me, Sunday was a powerful reminder of how hard it is and how long it takes for individuals and communities to recover from devastating natural disasters.
Here today, it's with very great sorrow that I offer words of condolence to Australians who are now facing this hard journey and to assure them they won't travel that hard journey alone  -  we won't let go Mr Speaker, we won't let go.
Mr Speaker this summer will be always be remembered for the force and scale of the natural disasters the nation has endured. 
This summer will always be remembered for the many times we turned to each other and said ‘it's bad, but the worst is behind us now' only to find that there was a new horror ahead.
This summer will always be remembered for the way Queensland suffered  - floods of unprecedented proportions, an inland tsunami so powerful it swept away lives and shattered communities, and the most powerful cyclone the nation has ever seen.
Australia has watched in horror as day after day a new chapter in natural disaster history has been written.
This summer will always be remembered for the way that suffering of already unimaginable and unprecedented proportions in Queensland was joined by suffering in other parts of the nation.
Flooding continues in New South Wales and Victoria, Tasmania, Western Australia and South Australia have not been spared either.
And while so much water has done so much damage and caused so much despair the nation has also being called on to fight fire in our West.
We can talk about what we've lost this summer in terms of cold hard economic facts and, the reality is, we must.
But after the roads are rebuilt, businesses are back to full strength and the people are back in a place they can again call home, those whom we have lost in this tragedy will still be lost.
And that is a cost that can't be measured.
The unprecedented and unexpected severity of the Queensland floods paid no heed to the sanctity of human life.
There are hundreds of Australians mourning the loss of the 35 people who died in the Queensland floods since the 30th November or who wait anxiously on news of the 9 people who remain missing.
And across our nation there are others who mourn.
Those are not just names on a list Mr Speaker.
They are somebody's brother or sister, somebody's parent or grandparent, somebody's child, somebody's friend.
Their deaths have left people behind who now live with an empty, gaping chasm and no insurance payout is going to fill that, no financial assistance payment is going to fill it, no rebuilt house will fill it.
We offer those loved ones our deepest sympathy.
Mr Speaker, together we come together as a Parliament to mourn those who have died, to share our stories of the horror and grief, to describe the devastation.
And we will ultimately rise in our places in silence. And so we should.
Healing great pain requires both coming together as human beings and lonely moments of quiet reflection.
But I urge that this summer when we write its history we should make sure that the history written into the books and into our hearts is more than the history of a time of loss and grief.
We should also remember this summer as a summer of courage.
Mr Speaker I've brought with me today a mud splattered, tattered Australian flag and I want to show it to the House.  It was recovered from the area of Murphy's Creek by the crew of a Defence Force helicopter, and I want to thank Major Scott Summers, Captain Lachlan Thornley, Sergeant Dean O'Cass and Corporal Steven Abbot who gave it to me.
These four men joined by others showed persistence and bravery, they worked alongside people from the Queensland emergency services had flown helicopters through a dark and dangerous night, when waters crashed through the Lockyer Valley, to literally save dozens and dozens of lives. 
Many who flew that night, some of them who had been flying for more than twenty years, said to me it was the worst weather they had ever taken a helicopter up in to.
And yet despite that they continued and they saved lives.
These helicopters continued with search and rescue in the days to come and they found this flag Mr Speaker.
And I was honoured when they gave it to me, it was muddy and it was soaking wet, and they did so because it was a powerful symbol for them: 
 * 	Of what it means to face the elements
 * 	Of what it means to be hurt
 * 	Of what it means to endure
 * 	Of what it means to be Australian.
I spoke to them of courage, it spoke to them of courage.
The courage it takes to keep filling sandbags even when your back is breaking.
The courage it takes to hold your nerve in the dark as a cyclone races around you.
The courage it takes to tell your children to run across the railway line, knowing it's dangerous, knowing they could fall but knowing it's their only hope of getting to safety.
The courage it takes for a young boy, 13 year old Jordan Rice, to say to his rescuer, take my brother first.
And before that brave rescuer could return, Jordan and mum Donna, were taken by the flood; but the legend of Jordan's amazing courage will go on.
 A hero in the purest sense of the word.
And there are other heroes Mr Speaker, like Mark Kempton and his helicopter crew from Emergency Management Queensland, a crew that winched 28 people to safety over a period of two and a half hours.
They should be patting themselves on the back and saying job well done to each other.
Instead, Mark is haunted, he's haunted every human face of this disaster, a woman he rescued who wept uncontrollably as she was pulled into the helicopter.
In a media report Mark said: 
“I looked over my shoulder and saw her sitting on the floor of the aircraft and she was just devastated. It was heartbreaking.”
What Mark was witnessing was a young, pregnant mother who, just seconds before the chopper had arrived, had had her young child wrenched from her weary arms by the floodwaters.
She finally succumbed to the terrifying power of nature that night.
How do you tell Mark to rejoice in thinking of the people he saved when that young mother can think of nothing except the child she lost?
I say to these heroes, and they are heroes, for every one person you saved there are hundreds, even thousands of people who are not grieving today, people who don't know you but without your skills, your bravery, your willingness to put your life on the line their loved one would not be here today.
Your devotion to your task is humbling.
I pay tribute to every police officer, every emergency services worker, every health worker, every Defence Force member, every local council worker, every community services worker, every one who made such a difference to their fellow Australians this summer.
Mr Speaker, in speaking and remembering the courage of this summer, I also want to record the nation's admiration: 
 * 	For the courage shown by Premier Bligh who hour after hour informed, reassured and provided the leadership the people of Queensland needed;
 * 	For the courage of the local council Mayors who did the same for their own communities;
 * 	For the courage of those who spent long weary days in evacuation centres without complaint  and often with a smile on the face and a quick joke on their lips;
 * 	For those who returned to devastation and found the courage clean up.
Mr Speaker it's been a great privilege over this summer to meet with so many Australians of courage:
 * 	The young girl sitting laughing in an evacuation centre wearing her Hello Kitty pyjamas, the only clothes she had left;
 * 	The small child who told me about her terrifying night on the roof waiting to be rescued;
 * 	The Pastor whose church became an evacuation centre for frail aged Australians;
 * 	The people with tears prickling in their eyes who cleaned up their homes and businesses.
Mr Speaker, across the ages millions of words have been written trying to define courage and we will never reach a satisfactory definition.
But this summer, tens of thousands of Australians found deep within themselves the ability to do something they thought they would never be able to. 
Mr Speaker, that's courage.
This summer will always be remembered for it.
And it will be remembered for the extraordinary display of Australian mateship:
 * 	We pay tribute to the mateship shown by every trained volunteer who flocked to help  -  SES, Red Cross, Lifeline and the list goes on.
 * 	We pay tribute to every Australian who came to help their fellow Australians with a mop and a bucket, a barbecue and a bottle of sauce, a smile and endless goodwill.
 * 	We pay tribute to the businesses and the unions who saw a need and got in and met it.
 * 	We pay tribute to every Australian who has donated to help their fellow Australians in a time of need.
I've travelled around Queensland, in New South Wales and in Victoria, I have been so touched by the stories of bravery, of courage and of mateship that I felt an obligation to honour these wonderful Australian traits
I have sought approval from the Queen to introduce honours for Australians who have gone out of their way to extend the hand of mateship during times of crisis.
Next Australia Day I'm confident we will present our first awards to those who have performed heroic and selfless acts and volunteered their services across Australia in times of crisis.
And we will backdate the awards to include those who reached out to eachother during Black Saturday.
Mr Speaker, we mourn for the lost, we ache for those whose lives have been turned upside down and we won't let go
We will rebuild.
We will not succumb to the misguided notion that once the floodwaters recede, once the debris strewn by the cyclone is removed and the camera crews pack up and the focus of the nation turns to something else, that life somehow magically returns to normal for those who have suffered at the hands of natural disasters.
It does not.
The Queensland community in particular has a long and arduous road of recovery ahead and they will need the rest of Australia's support.
We will work with the Queensland Government, as we are with the Governments of Victoria and New South Wales, to provide a range of assistance measures to individuals, businesses and primary producers who have been hit by these floods. 
These include personal distress and hardship assistance to individuals in the worst affected areas, concessional interest rate loans and freight subsidies to businesses and recovery grants for primary producers and small businesses.
We are providing extra Centrelink support.
We have also increased access to mental health services because we know that the victims of this trauma will need ongoing support for weeks and months to come.
We, as a nation, are facing a long-term task.  We will rebuild.
Mr Speaker, in our many hours of need this summer, Australia has been deeply touched by the support from around the world.
We have received messages of sympathy and offers of assistance and donations from more than 100 countries and international organisations.
From our friends in the United States, in China, in Japan, and the United Arab Emirates, to our close neighbours and regional partners of New Zealand, East Timor, Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, Singapore and Samoa. What people should notice about that list is that countries that have so much less than us have still been willing to help.
The outpouring of international support has sent a clear signal, a message to us that we were not alone.
And we thank the international community from the bottom of our hearts.
As our days of crisis have been reported around the world, so has our nation's response. 
The world has marvelled at the way we' ve pulled together.
We should be so proud, so proud that there is something uniquely Australian about the way we go about helping our mates.
It's understated.
It's done with humour and humility.
And it signifies a strength of character that is etched deeply within our nation's DNA.
Character that has ensured that our darkest hours are always followed by our finest hour as we work together to help each other, to not let go, to begin the healing.
Mr Speaker, to the victims of the catastrophes of this summer, our sincere condolences.
We can't replace the precious things that people have lost and we can't replace the lives. We can't replace the door jambs full of pencil marks that recorded a child's height as they grew from toddler to teen.
We cannot replace an elderly lady's letters, written to her by a wartime beau, we can't replace the baby photos that have been lost.
We can't take away the grief from those who mourn any more than we can bring back the loved ones who are gone.
But we can, we can face this together as a nation and we can support those who have lost so much.
We can listen to them and ensure they feel the warm embrace of the Australian community.
We can Mr Speaker and we will, we will hold on to each other as we grieve, as we recover, as we rebuild.
And we will always remember the days of despair and the days of courage we've lived through together this summer.
I commend this motion to the House.  



Australia congratulates the Government of Sudan and the people of Southern Sudan on the successful completion of their referendum.
The results of the referendum have now been officially announced and indicate an overwhelming majority of the people of Southern Sudan voted in favour of independence.
Australia commends the Government of Sudan for accepting the outcome and committing to work towards good relations with Southern Sudan.
After decades of conflict in Sudan this is a significant step forward. 
Southern Sudan is set to become a sovereign and independent state in July 2011, as set out in the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement.  Australia looks forward to welcoming Southern Sudan to the community of nations at that time.
Australia urges both parties to continue their important work in reaching resolution on a number of outstanding issues, including the status of the Abyei region, to ensure full implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Australia was pleased to be able to support the referendum process. We will continue to provide humanitarian assistance to the people of Southern Sudan, focussing on education and maternal and child health. 
There is much work that still needs to be done as the people of southern Sudan make their way towards nationhood: it will be an enormous task.  Australia stands ready to support this process. 



I acknowledge the first Australians, on whose lands we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And I believe that our debates are the stronger for our acknowledgement of country ... for this emerging Australian tradition of respect.
I remember so vividly Matilda House's words, speaking to all of us, when this 43rd Parliament began.  She said:
I expressthe hope of a united, reconciled nation, the oldest living culture joined with the many diverse cultures of a modern successful Australia.
I believe that, for all the democratic differences between us in this place, this is a hope we do all genuinely share.
I also remember so vividly what Kevin Rudd said, speaking for all of us, when the 42nd Parliament began.  He said:
Sorry.
With that one word, Kevin Rudd made wonderful history for Australia. 
As an Australian, as a member of the Government, I was proud to be here that day.
And then Kevin turned his intelligence and determination to Closing the Gap for Indigenous Australians. 
Setting six specific, ambitious targets for our nation to achieve.
Close the gap in life expectancy.
Halve the gap in mortality rates for children under five.
Ensure access to early childhood education.
Halve the gap in reading, writing and numeracy.
Halve the gap in Year 12 attainment rates.
Halve the gap in employment outcomes.
And I am proud to be here now.  Taking up the responsibility for the Australian Government in Closing the Gap.
So today, I make the third annual Prime Ministerial Statement to the House on Closing the Gap.  And the Parliament should be in no doubt.  Prime Ministers will be reporting on Closing the Gap for decades to come.
This work will go on.
I do believe that Australians want our Indigenous people to have a better life.  I also understand that many Australians wonder if our country can ever make that happen. 
I feel the force of these two Australian emotions  -  our deep dream of a better life for all, and our deep fear that we can never truly achieve it  -  as I speak to the Parliament today. 
I know our people think of the past, of the great policy movements and the passionate debates, of the money spent and the stubborn persistence of disadvantage, and I know they sometimes wonder ...
... can we really make a difference?
I am an activist and an optimist.  For me, the answer can only be yes. 
The reality of change is never simple, our knowledge is never perfect and action is never easy.  But Closing the Gap has allowed Australia to move beyond anecdote and intuition and instead to act on the best evidence we can get. 
The Closing the Gap goals mean we know what we are trying to achieve: in education, in employment, in health.
The Closing the Gap strategy means we know how we are going to achieve it: improving investment, changing behaviours, working together with respect.
The framework is in place and delivery has begun.
Closing the Gap is the slogan of no party.
That is much of its power.
The community, particularly the Indigenous community, made Closing the Gap a campaign.
This Government has made Closing the Gap our policy.
And in my own work, first as Education Minister and now as Prime Minister, I've come to see ever more power in Closing the Gap as a way of defining, driving and measuring improvements in the lives of Indigenous Australians.
As a way of describing and understanding the Government's plans for the enormously difficult and complex social problems of Indigenous disadvantage.
Because I believe a fair nation creates opportunities for all ...
... I see Closing the Gap as a genuinely important national goal.
That all Australians will have the same opportunities  -  that demography will not be destiny  -  that success will be defined by hard work not postcode.  And that this will be true for any Aussie kid, whether they're from the red centre, Redfern or Rose Bay.
Because I believe in tackling the big challenges in the national interest ...
... I see Closing the Gap as a way ofunderstanding the problems.
It is evidence-based, accountable and transparent.  It tells us what needs to be done first and fastest and builds a methodical approach.  It allows us to build consensus in support of specific progress, instead of debating abstract ideas.  To do what we can, with what we have, where we are.
Because I believe Australians judge Governments on delivery ...
... I see Closing the Gap as a way of working on the solutions.
It is a way of making specific, measurable progress.  It is practical and cumulative.  It gives us new information which means we can invest where investment will make the greatest difference.  Information which means we can be sure that the Government is meeting its responsibilities.
So Closing the Gap is a way of saying that Indigenous people should expect from the Government the same things every Australian expects.
The building blocks all people look to Government to provide.
The necessary conditions of opportunity in life.
And Closing the Gap is a way of saying that Indigenous people should expect of themselves the same things all Australians expect as well.
Because I also believe that with opportunity comes responsibility and individuals only achieve progress though work and effort ...
... so I see Closing the Gap as a call for changes in behaviour. 
A call to every person, to every family, to every community.
To take care of your children.  To take a job when you find one.  To create a safe environment.  To send your kids to school, pay your rent, save up for a home.  To respect good social norms and to respect the law.  And to reach out to other Australians.
If I speak strongly, it is because I have listened to Indigenous people who do these things already, people who speak even more strongly. 
People like Chris Sarra, the inspiring Indigenous educator whose creed high expectations, and whose words stronger, smarter stay with me.
People like Noel Pearson, who pioneered the arguments for social and personal responsibility as a driver of Indigenous opportunity.
To borrow a phrase from President George Bush, we must reject the “soft bigotry of low expectations”.
It is not only well known Indigenous Australians who are driving behavioural change.
It is the mother in the city who feeds her children and gets them ready for school.
The aunty in the country town who tells the stories to the young.
The father in a remote community who sets an example of strength and gentleness to his sons.
These are the hidden heroes of Indigenous Australia  -  the people who are leading the change more than anyone else.
I am certain that Australia will never Close the Gap without all of us committing to the change.
When this campaign began, the truth is this: the most remote community and the most respected leader, the smallest shop and the biggest corporation, and the Australian Government itself, we all needed to change.
And we needed not to change alone, but to change together.
Saying sorry was vital for so many reasons.
One that I want to reflect on today is the chance it gave us to break the cycle of blame between Australian Governments and Indigenous Australia.
In the worst moments of this cycle, Australian Governments have sometimes seemed to say to Indigenous Australia, let us know when you have got your act together. 
And in the worst moments of this cycle, Indigenous Australia has sometimes seemed to feel, the Australian Government has to invest before our behaviour can begin to change.
Both attitudes are destructive and wrong.  Bad behaviour by individuals is never an excuse for Government failure.  The failures of Government are never an excuse for bad behaviour by individuals.
If Indigenous kids in this nation aren't getting a fair go, we share the responsibility for change. 
I don't mean as Indigenous people, I don't mean as non-Indigenous people.  I mean as adults.
Politicians, bureaucrats, local communities, schools, teachers and parents.  Us. 
All of us and each of us ... we share the task ahead.
I really think we all now see it that way.  In the past three years we have genuinely come together with respect and worked together with shared responsibility and genuinely broken the cycle of blame.
Because Closing the Gap is now more than a public policy.
Closing the Gap is a national goal.
In the same way, I believe recognising the unique and special place of our first peoples in the Australian Constitution can be a wonderful national goal.
An opportunity to recognise, in the founding document of our nationhood, our shared pride in being Australian and our shared pride in Australia's continuing Indigenous culture.
When that happens, it will be a wonderful, uplifting, uniting moment for our nation ... a day of great national pride. 
I look forward to working with the expert panel, with all members of the Parliament, and with all Australians, as we approach that goal together.
But the work can't wait until that day  -  and we won't let it. 
Since 2007, our nation has been working together to Close the Gap: in health, in education and in employment. 
To overcome decades of under-investment in services and infrastructure.  To encourage and support personal responsibility as the foundation for healthy, functional families and communities.
And to build new understanding and respect between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.  We have done an enormous amount of work together.
First, we've invested in what we call the “building blocks”. 
Those necessary conditions of opportunity.
Early childhood and schooling, health and healthy homes, safe communities and economic participation, as well as governance and leadership.
Reversing decades of under-investment in services and infrastructure.  Delivering the things all Australians expect.
So we've invested in early childhood ...
Delivering infrastructure, staff and programs in remote communities and town camps.  Making community based preschools more affordable.  Hiring extra full-time teachers to support Indigenous kids.
Last year nearly 15 000 Indigenous adults and children visited one of the 45 Communities for Children services sites to receive assistance with early learning and literacy, parenting and family support and child nutrition. 
10 new child and maternal health services have been approved for funding across Australia.  Two of these services have already commenced in Warburton, Western Australia and Ceduna, South Australia and up to 11,000 Indigenous babies and their mothers will be helped by 2013. 
More than 6000 children and parents meet regularly in 69 supported playgroups operating across Australia.  Supporting children's development and giving parents a hand as well.
We've invested in schooling ...
The Government is building new classrooms, science centres, libraries and resource centres in 29 remote communities across Australia.  These projects are due to be completed this year.
Last year, more than 3500 Indigenous young people who were at risk of not completing Year 12 or an equivalent were personally helped under the Youth Connections program which encourages young people to stay at school, get back to school or take up training and achieve their goals.
More than 5000 students were supported in academies such as the Clontarf Foundation football academies, the Former Origin Greats Queensland academy and other sports-based academies in 2010.
These academies reach out to school students at risk of not completing school.  They teach and promote self-discipline and self esteem, life skills and the importance of education, particularly through close mentoring and participation in sport.
More than half of participants reported improved academic performance and positive changes in attitudes and behaviour.
We've invested in health ...
The Indigenous Chronic Disease Package is training and expanding the Indigenous health workforce and tackling chronic disease risk factors.
This has funded more than 300 new positions in the Indigenous health workforce: outreach workers and health project officers, regional tobacco coordinators and tobacco action workers, healthy lifestyle workers, practice managers and other health professionals.
To tackle petrol sniffing, there are already 108 sites across regional and remote Australia supplying low aromatic Opal fuel.
Eleven new Indigenous communities in the Gulf region of Queensland, East Kimberley in Western Australia and the Top End of the Northern Territory, home to nearly 9000 people, will be getting access to Opal fuel through 39 new retail sites. This begins in 2011 and will be complete by 2013.
Opal fuel has delivered a 70 per cent reduction in petrol sniffing across communities, with improved health outcomes, family function and community safety.
We've invested in healthy homes ...
The Australian Government is making an unprecedented long-term investment to reverse decades of neglect.  Tackling overcrowding and homelessness, poor housing conditions and the severe housing shortage in remote Indigenous communities. 
People need a decent house to cook a healthy meal, to sleep at night, for children to wake up the next day ready for school, for parents to wake up the next day ready to work ... that means the houses have to be built, and we're doing that.
We have listened to communities and are building housing to cater for different sized families  -  houses that cater for singles, young families and the elderly  -  and houses that allow privacy.
Last year 316 new houses and 828 refurbishments were completed. 
New and refurbished dwellings are subject to new tenancy agreements, which help tenants transition to rental arrangements in line with other public housing, and ensure regular repairs and maintenance.
We've invested in safe communities ...
The Australian Government is helping protect Indigenous children from neglect and abuse.
We are helping develop new family support services for families at risk, increasing the number of child protection workers, and strengthening alcohol controls.
The Australian Government has paid for the construction of three permanent police stations in the APY Lands in South Australia.
These began operations late 2009 and early last year, bringing a permanent police presence to those communities for the first time.
66 Australian Federal Police officers have been deployed to the Northern Territory since June 2007.   We've funded 45 extra Northern Territory Police recruits who have graduated since 2009 and commenced their duties within the Northern Territory Police Force in 16 communities from Maningrida to Yuendumu. Another 15 recruits should graduate in April.
And in child protection, new national standards for Out of Home Care, which apply to formal care arrangements including residential care, foster care and kinship care, will ensure children get proper care, no matter where they live. 
We've invested in economic participation ...
Over 16,000 Indigenous Australians started employment and around 12,500 began training in 2010 with support from the Indigenous Employment Program.  As part of the Tailored Assistance element of the program, work began on construction, retail, hospitality and mining projects valued at over $180 million.
Nearly 2 000 Indigenous Australians were supported into employment over the last twelve months through the Community Development Employment Projects program.
Since starting in September 2009, the Australian Indigenous Minority Supplier Council has generated over $4 million in contracts and nearly $3 million in transactions between its members and certified suppliers.
The Council links corporate and government purchasers with certified Indigenous suppliers of goods and services.   Demand is growing, not only for Indigenous workers, but for Indigenous business as well.
And we've invested in governance and leadership ...
The National Congress of Australia's First Peoples provides a central mechanism with which Government, the corporate and community sector can engage and partner on policy design and implementation.
In remote communities, we are supporting community capacity building and leadership initiatives such as engagement workshops, leadership development workshops and community development training.
Closing the Gap demands that the Australian Government meets our responsibility: to overcome decades of under-investment in services and infrastructure.
We are doing this.
Closing the Gap also demands personal responsibility: the foundation for the life of every family and community.
Indigenous people are doing this too.
Closing the Gap means change in people's lives.
And Indigenous people know that when the child starts attending school ... when the drinker stops abusing alcohol ... when the adult takes the job that is there ... then change begins.
And Indigenous people know these decisions are not made by Governments.
They are made by people.
The job of Government, of communities, is to support good decisions.
So when the child goes to school, there is a great teacher ... when the drinker stops, they finda great counsellor ... when the adult takes the job, they have great skills.
That is what we are doing across Australia.
In Fitzroy Crossing ...
The leaders of Fitzroy Crossing and the surrounding communities of the Fitzroy Valley in Western Australia requested alcohol restrictions and these were first imposed in 2007.  Since 2008 the alcohol restrictions have been evaluated and reviewed annually. The reviews are good news.
There is less tolerance for domestic violence and more willingness to report it.
Families are purchasing more food and clothing and parents are taking more care of their own health and wellbeing and that of their children.  Fitzroy Crossing is a quieter and more peaceful town for families to live in and a better place for children to grow up.
In Alice Springs ...
The Australian and Territory Government Alice Springs Transformation Plan is designed to meet very specific local needs.  It is funding work on new roads, curbs and gutters, new power and water infrastructure and street lights.
85 new houses are being built, with 18 new houses already completed and remaining work to be completed this year.  This goes with normal tenancy management arrangements where residents are expected to pay their rent and maintain their homes.
In Alice Springs itself, there is now more accommodation for renal patients and people receiving other medical treatment and extra managed accommodation beds for homeless men. 
Health checks and family assessments are being provided to make sure 300 Indigenous children are ready and able to attend school.  And the successful dog control program has been extended for a further two years.
On Cape York ...
In Queensland, the Cape York Welfare Reform Trial is a partnership between the Queensland and Australian Governments, Cape York regional organisations and the four communities of Aurukun, Coen, Hope Vale and Mossman Gorge.
The trial encourages people to take responsibility for community well-being by improving school attendance and child safety, tackling alcohol and drug abuse, gambling addiction and family violence and improving tenancy management. 
Noel Pearson has driven these reforms on the Cape over many years.  But Cape York is a strong example of the way this Government is working with communities across the country and supporting local design and control.
In Brisbane ...
Chris Sarra's Stronger Smarter Institute at the Queensland University of Technology has delivered transformational change in Indigenous education. 
Chris has also led the Stronger Smarter Learning Communities Project, supported by the Australian Government.  This has brought new resources to drive improvement in schools which our transparency measures show need help.
Giving principals and teachers across Australia the tools to improve performance in their schools. 
Not just the support, but the challenge: to set the highest expectations and for Indigenous students and deliver the best results.
I said earlier, Chris's creed ofhigh expectations, and his words stronger, smarter stay with me.
By very definition, Government cannot deliver personal responsibility.
But modern Government creates many incentives for personal behaviourand has many opportunities to support good decisions.
This is what we are doing now.  It is helping to Close the Gap.
So today the Government releases the third annual report on progress towards our Closing the Gap targets.
At their launch, we knew these targets were specific and ambitious. 
Ambitious, because we chose targets that would be difficult to achieve ... specific, because we chose targets where we'd know if we didn't get there.
The report tells us that we must keep improving investment, keep changing behaviours, keep working together with respect, if we are to meet the targets to Close the Gap.
Here is what we know.
We can be most confident of meeting two of the six targets.
To halve the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under five by 2018.
To ensure access to early childhood education for all Indigenous four years olds in remote communities by 2013.
We should be confident these two targets are on track.
We see improvement in three of the six targets, and with faster improvement over time, we believe these can be reached.
To halve the gap in reading, writing and numeracy achievements for children by 2018.
To halve the gap for Indigenous students in Year 12 (or equivalent) attainment rates by 2020.
To halve the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians by 2018.
The final target is the most challenging of all.
Closing the life-expectancy gap within a generation  -  that is, by 2031.
That means the life expectancy of Indigenous men will need to increase by over twenty years and the life expectancy of Indigenous women will need to increase by over sixteen years by 2031. 
This is a thirty-year target.  No one thinks it can be achieved sooner.
Indeed it will be extremely challenging.
  I know we could never say mission accomplished three years into a thirty year process. 
But the message of this report is clear.
Together, we can do this.
We have a plan for progress. 
We do see change for the better.
And we know where we want change to continue.
This is the power of Closing the Gap.
We do not have a plan to do everything.  Such plans rarely succeed.
We do have a plan to meet six targets. 
Together, we can do this.
With this evidence of where we have more work to do comes a responsibility to do more work now.
Closing the Gap is built on measuring improvement.
Measurement needs to improve as well  -  so we always know what works. 
For preschool access we use a new Australian Bureau of Statistics survey.
For literacy and numeracy we use NAPLAN, which is also annual.  It is national data, rich and rigorous.
But our mortality, life expectancy, year 12 attainment and employment targets are based on the Census, which happens every five years. 
So we need other ways to measure improvement between the censuses. 
And the census itself hasn't always reached Indigenous people or identified them well. 
So some targets are particularly difficult to measure today. 
Extra resources for the Australian Bureau of Statistics and for the States are making a difference. 
This year's census will tell us more about Indigenous Australians as a result.  This is an area where more will be done over time.
Today, I met with leaders of the Closing the Gap Coalition here in Parliament House.  Their campaign is approaching its fifth anniversary next month.  They have a lot to be proud of.
The Closing the Gap Coalition have been important advocates for Indigenous health equality ... becoming a united voice on what should happen to improve Indigenous health.  But they emphasised to me that advocacy on the outside is not enough.
The Closing the Gap Coalition, with the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples, is not just arguing for action, but advising on what works where.
This practical effort to ensure services fit the conditions of specific people in specific places  -  to work together to deliver the right investments and the right behaviour changes  -  to translate good policy into real progress  -  is the absolute essence of Closing the Gap.
This is the work which will go on.
Clear goals.
Measured progress.
Focussed on the targets.
Government delivering what all Australians expect.
Indigenous people doing the same.
Together, we can do this.
With passion and perspective.
Determined to deliver. 
All sharing our pride in Australia's Indigenous culture.
All sharing our determination to give everyone a better life.
We can Close the Gap. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the key aspects of the health deal the Government will aim to finalise at COAG on Sunday  -  aimed at delivering a better deal for patients.
The deal will include a 50/50 funding arrangement for all public hospital funding growth, including delivering over $16 billion in hospital funding over the next decade.
Rather than focusing on complex accounting arrangements, the new deal aims to give patients a better deal by delivering more money combined with changes to the way health services are delivered.
Under the new deal:
 * 	The Federal Government will step up to permanently pay 50 per cent of the growth in hospital costs.
 * 	This will be done in two stages, increasing to 45 per cent in 2014-15 and to 50 per cent in 2017-18.
 * 	Once this kicks in, the States and the Commonwealth will share future funding growth in a 50/50 partnership.
 * 	If an agreement is reached, the States and Territories will receive $16.4 billion in extra hospital funding to 2019-20.
 * 	The Commonwealth will not seek to take back any GST from the States.
However, there will be no blank cheques  -  without this crucial reform to give patients a better deal, the Government will not be delivering extra funding.
In return for this extra funding, the Gillard Labor Government will demand significant reform from the States and Territories, including: 
 * 	Greater local control of hospitals.
 * 	A price on hospital services  -  through activity based funding to drive efficiency and reduce waste.
 * 	Strict national standards, including a four-hour target for emergency waiting times, a 95 per cent elective surgery target, and a National Access Guarantee to ensure that no Australian experiences extremely long waits for elective surgery.
 * 	More transparency through strict reporting via the MyHospital website.
As part of the changes announced today, the Commonwealth will have a renewed focus on the delivery of stronger primary health care, to get people the services they need in their local communities and keep people well and out of hospital.
Clinicians are at the heart of the health system and need to be at the heart of health reform.
Implementation of these reforms will include stronger clinical engagement to ensure that the voices of clinicians all over the country are heard in the process.
This will be national health reform that will last, built on a genuine partnership between the federal government and state governments, that delivers real benefits to patients.
HEALTH FUNDING
The biggest challenge facing our health system is that it is running out of money.
There is a fundamental structural problem: hospital costs are rising faster than the states can raise money to pay for them.
Without structural reform, rapidly rising health costs will overwhelm State and Territory budgets within the next few decades.
The Government is committed to properly funding public hospitals to meet the rising costs of care into the future.
From 2014-15, the Commonwealth Government will increase its share of public hospital funding by funding 45 per cent of all efficient growth in public hospital services, increasing to 50 per cent in 2017-18.
That is, from 2017-18, 50 cents in every new dollar spent on efficient hospital costs will come from the Commonwealth.
This will mean a genuinely equal partnership between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories on how growth in hospital costs is paid for into the future.
The financial benefit of this arrangement to the States and Territories will be around $16.4 billion over the remainder of the decade.
NATIONAL FUNDING POOL
The Government will improve transparency of funding flows through the establishment of a single national funding pool.
Both Commonwealth and the State and Territory Governments will pay their share of base funding and efficient growth funding into a single national pool.
This body will be administered by an independent, jointly-governed national body, distinct from Commonwealth and State Health Departments, to be operational from 1 July 2012.
Funding from the national pool will be distributed to State-based accounts, and from there to Local Hospital Networks.
MORE EFFECTIVE, MORE EFFICIENT HOSPITALS
The Government is determined to deliver health reforms to give patients a better deal.
That means cleaning up our inefficient health system in which there is too much waste, by introducing solid market-based reforms to drive greater efficiency and innovation in the public hospital system.
Efficient Price
Instead of States receiving block grants  -  the equivalent of blank cheques  -  hospitals will be funded for each activity they undertake.
This will be based on the fair and efficient price for each service, set by an independent hospital pricing authority.
This will help identify our best hospitals, as well as some of our less effective hospitals  -  hospitals that are delivering services at far too high a price and as a result wasting important funds.
That means under-performance can be tackled and successful techniques used by our best hospitals can be shared.
In some instances, like payments to smaller regional hospitals and some highly specialised services, funding will continue to paid in block grants.
Standards
The Commonwealth Government will continue to insist on tough national standards for public hospital performance to drive shorter waiting times for both elective surgery and emergency departments.
We will work with the States and Territories on safe and effective implementation to deliver:
 * 	The four-hour National Access Target  -  to reduce long waiting times in public hospital emergency departments, by aiming to have patients assessed, treated and discharged or admitted within 4 hours where clinically appropriate
 * 	The National Access Target for elective surgery, ensuring that 95% of all patients waiting for elective surgery will be treated within clinically recommended times.
 * 	The National Access Guarantee for elective surgery, which means that extremely long waits for elective surgery will become a thing of the past.
Transparency
The Government will also publish information about how each hospital performs so the public can choose the best care.
This is another important market principle which will drive improvements in patient outcomes across the nation
Local Control
National health reform will also give local communities and clinicians a greater say in the delivery of their local hospital services through the establishment of Local Hospital Networks.
A GREATER FOCUS ON PRIMARY CARE
The Gillard Labor Government also understands that a strong health system requires more focus and investment in primary care services.
Our primary care reforms aim to shift the centre of gravity from hospitals towards primary health care.
The Government is establishing Medicare Locals to drive improvements in primary health care and ensure that primary care services are better tailored to meet the needs of local communities.
The Government will strengthen its primary care reforms by:
 * 	ensuring that Medicare Locals are locally responsive, and can demonstrate how they will connect to local communities and respond to local health needs  -  this will mean establishing more Medicare Locals than originally planned;
 * 	bringing forward the establishment of more Medicare Locals to ensure more communities receive the concrete benefits from Medicare Locals sooner;
 * 	fast-tracking reforms to after hours GP care, through which Medicare Locals will plan and support local face-to-face GP after hours services;
 * 	ensuring that local communities have robust information about their local primary health care services  -  including key information on opening hours and availability of health care services, patient outcomes such as rates of preventable hospitalisations and information on the health status of the community, such as rates of chronic disease.
Over time, the Commonwealth will empower Medicare Locals with more flexible funding to target services to their local community's specific needs.
These are the key aspects of the deal the Prime Minister aims to finalise at COAG.
Together, they represent significant national health reform that will build a genuine and lasting partnership between the Federal Government and the State and Territory Governments to deliver real benefits to patients. 



PM: Good morning. I understand a number of you have probably got questions about Egypt and I'll be happy to take those questions at the appropriate time but I'm actually here to make a major statement about health.
Can I start by saying we know that our hospitals face an enormous funding challenge. When we look at hospital costs and health expenditure the rate of increase in hospital costs is faster than the rate of increase in the revenues available to state governments. If nothing is done to fix that it means over time state governments will find it harder and harder to properly fund hospitals and that means patients will find it harder and harder to get the care that they need. Indeed if you look at the projections of the growth of hospital costs as compared to state revenues, if nothing is done states will face a situation where hospital costs overwhelm their state revenues. That is, they would not have money left to fund other essential services like police and like education.
This is an unsustainable position and it requires genuine reform. Last year Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister sought to tackle this major challenge for the nation. He was the first Australian Prime Minister to step up to the plate and to seek to deal with this major challenge for Australians and the future of their health care system.
On Sunday the Council of Australian Governments will meet and if we emerge from that meeting with a new health agreement, then it will stand on the shoulders of the reform work undertaken by Prime Minister Rudd. But it is now clear that the agreement that Prime Minister Rudd negotiated will not become a national agreement, it is clear that different states are pulling in different directions. Now what we need is national reform and a national determination to deliver better services through a national agreement.
The country needs that national reform, that genuine health reform and that's got to be about a better deal for patients with a focus on health reform, not about accounting transactions. I want a better deal for patients, that's my bottom line as Prime Minister. I do not want to let a political argument about financing arrangements stop me securing that better deal for patients. I do not want to let politics stand in the way of the cause of genuine health reform. When I talk to patients, when I talk to Australians around the country they don't talk to me about the GST, they don't talk to me about financing transactions, they talk to me about their health care needs and the services they want to see available in their community for them and their families and that's what we have to do deliver  -  health care that will deliver concrete benefits to patients in communities, we've got to deliver genuine health reform that will stand the test of time. That means we've got to tackle the structural funding challenge that I've just outlined as we deliver a better deal for patients.
Now that requires five key reform elements  -  more transparency, less waste, strict national standards, including shorter waiting times, activity based funding and more local control.
So to round it all up, what is the aim here? It's better hospitals and better frontline health services right around the nation, whether a patient is in Melbourne or Perth or Brisbane or in one of our great regional centres or in rural Australia, we want them to have the health care that they need. That's my focus, not financing transactions and achieving the better deal for patients is my bottom line, anything else is a distraction.
As a result of taking this approach, when COAG meets on Sunday I will put the following proposal to Premiers and Chief Ministers: first I will deal with the question of funding and properly funding hospitals into the future to deal with the structural financing problems that I've outlined. I announced today that I will at the meeting on Sunday say to Premiers and Chief Ministers that the Federal Government is prepared to contribute half of the costs of growth in public hospitals. That is we will contribute 50 cents for every new dollar that is needed for public hospitals, that will come from the Federal Government.
That means with us contributing 50 cents in every new dollars that is needed, that there is an equal partnership between the Federal Government and State and Territory Governments in meeting the growing costs of health care.
This will overcome the challenge of dealing with rising hospital costs, which I've outlined. As a result that funding will be there to overcome the problems that a lack of funding has caused including a lack of beds, a lack of equipment, a lack of staff. We need this kind of structural reform and we need the Federal Government to share the fair burden of growth and the fair burden is for the Federal Government to pay for half the growth.
The financial benefit of this arrangement for States and Territories to the end of the decade is $16.4 billion, which is roughly equivalent to the current estimate of what they would have received through the COAG discussions and agreement last year. So there are very serious benefits here for States and Territories.
The second element of the proposal I will put is in return for providing more funding for hospitals into the future, I will ask States and Territories to commit to transparent new arrangements for the funding of public hospital services. I will propose that the Federal Government, States and Territories contribute their share of hospital funding and growth funding into a single national pool. That national body will transparently report on the number of services paid for by the single national pool. You will be able to see very clearly money in, money out, from the Federal Government and from State and Territory Governments.
Third, I will propose to the State Premiers and Chief Ministers that we drive structural reform in the health system through using very familiar market based tools. One of those market based tools will be activity funding, that is funding flowing on the basis of an efficient price for services. That efficient price will be set by an independent body, a bit like the Reserve Bank, independent of the Federal Government, independent of State Governments.
That pricing of hospital services will help us identify underperforming hospitals, it will help us identify best performing hospitals, underperformance can be remedied and best practice can be shared.
Then we will be, I will also at the meeting on Sunday, be saying we must agree to standards about how hospitals treat patients. This is the same reform style approach I brought to education, where we were very focussed on quality and increasing standards. I will be insisting on transparency, once again a very familiar approach, just as I insisted on school reform being one that included the transparency we now have from My School, we will have transparency in health reform.
And once again a familiar old friend from education reform, local empowerment and local autonomy, a key element of this will be local hospital networks, making decisions at a level closer to communities. Clearly in this package that I've outlined today there is a very key focus on hospitals and that is to be expected, given the concerns of States and Territories about rising hospital costs and the health care problem this poses for the nation, but we need to remember if this country is going to have quality health care into the future we need to do better in front line services.
We are a nation that has high hospitalisation rates compared with countries that are similar to us. We can only address that through better front line services, better for patients to get their care from the right person, in the right place, at the right time and avoid a trip to hospital, better for the finances of the nation, for a person to get that care and not ending up being in an acute hospital bed which is the most costly part of our health care system.
So today as an improvement in primary care I want to outline the following reforms to Medicare Locals. We will of course be committed to establishing Medicare Locals, primary healthcare organisations, the job of which is to better co-ordinate front line services that care for people. I want to build on and improve the Medicare Local system, which the Government has already announced.
So today I announce that we will ensure that Medicare Locals are more representative of their local communities. That means there will be more Medicare Locals, I have been concerned some of the Medicare Locals are too large in size, we will be creating more Medicare Locals. We will fast track the delivery of Medicare Locals, I am going to double the number of Medicare Locals that start in the next 12 months from 15 to 30. I will also be providing to these Medicare Locals funding to enable them to deal with afterhours services, it's a big problem that people end up in hospital emergency departments because they can't find care after normal business hours when they need it and people don't time their illnesses or their children's illnesses for office hours, people often need after hours care. So I intend to start two years earlier with the funding to be provided to Medicare Locals for after hours services.
I also want to empower Medicare Locals so that they are able to respond to particular health care needs, in their community and plug service gaps. That means that my vision for Medicare Locals is that they will be fund holding over time, they will have funds to plug service gaps. I will also be insisting on transparency as to the performance of primary health care within Medicare Locals, I want local communities and regions to be able to see transparently how primary health care is going in their community, in their Medicare Local, in the same way that I have enabled Australians to see how their local school is going.
Medicare Locals will work with local hospital networks to improve patient care and the quality of health and hospital services in local communities.
All in all as we move to COAG on Sunday, my focus is on a better deal for patients, on achieving structural reform, a financing of health care so it is sustainable and properly funded over time, of using market based tools to reform health care, of using transparency, quality standards and local autonomy to improve health care and as Prime Minister I will have a keen focus on front line services. I am very, very persuaded of the fact that unless we improve frontline services and keep more people out of hospital when they don't truly need to end up there, we won't as a nation have that health care service that we need for the future.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister wasn't the whole thrust of this reform agenda to effect at least majority Federal control of the hospital system because the states had bungled it so badly, the administration of hospitals and in some cases dangerously, and isn't this now an embarrassing admission of defeat for you and your Government?
PM: My focus here is a better deal for patients and what your question is asking me about is will patients get a better deal, and under this package yes they will. Patients don't end up worrying themselves about whose name is on that pile of money, does the little plaque say ‘state' or does the little plaque say ‘federal', what they worry about is does my hospital have the money in needs, when I go there will I get the treatment I require, will I get it in a timely way, will I understand what's happening, will I be able to see how my local hospital is performing, and across those range of questions, the answer out of this package is yes, yes, and yes.
Yes there will be proper funding, us stepping up to 50 per cent of the new money.
Yes there will be standards, including times for treatment.
Yes there will be clear transparency so people will know what is going on.
Yes there will be efficiency because there will be a price, an efficient price, and people will be able to see transparently whether it's being secured or not.
These are the things that matter to people and they're delivered by this package.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: Matthew Franklin.
JOURNALIST: Would it be fair to say, just as you compare the previously proposed package and this one, that in having given away the idea of a change of the funding structure that had been proposed, and you've just explained that and why, your new, you make up for that by imposing more transparency in the style that your brought to the education sector, is that your response and your way to get more control and better efficiency?
PM: What I believe will drive improvement in healthcare - so the broad answer to your question is yes - what I believe will drive improvement in healthcare is everyone being able to see what is going on, there being clear standards that people will be held against and standards are part of this package, and there will be proper funding. The reality here is we've been in an endless blame game between Federal and state governments about health, because if patients get poor services, then the state governments have said ‘well it's because the Federal Government doesn't fairly fund us', and the Federal Government has frequently said ‘it's because the states don't administer health well.' Well we're busting out of all of that, it will be beyond question for the future that the Federal Government and state governments are partnering together to pay for growth: 50 per cent from us, 50 per cent from them, and this is against a backdrop where we've seen in the past the percentage that Federal governments are putting into hospitals going down over time, so an equal partnership for the future. And then there will be the transparency and standards and accountability and local control that I've referred to.
Laura.
JOURNALIST: So you're saying that this will end the blame game, what's the cost to the budget of this because you're bringing forward spending, what's the new money that's going to be spent over the forward estimates and does the reduction from 60 per cent to 50 per cent partially fund this acceleration of the primary health measures?
PM: The amounts involved in the primary healthcare measures are modest and they are bring forwards predominately, they will be accounted for in the budget. In terms of the big quantum, the big quantum of money, the amount of money, new money, flowing into health through these arrangements is basically the same as what would have happened under the old arrangements: we're talking about $16.4 billion. What of course you don't have is the merry-go-round of GST money.
Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Could you tell us in what figure the federal funding will represent, what proportion  -  it's now 38 per cent I think  -  by 2020, what will be Commonwealth proportion and do you agree that this is the second best model that has been essentially forced on you by political changes in the states, or do you think this is a better model than the one Kevin Rudd put forward last year?
PM: I think this is the best deal for patients, so we're getting away from an argument about financing, so if you actually think what has happened since COAG last year, people have blued about financing, they have blued about the GST, well my analysis is people sitting in hospital emergency departments, or queued at their local doctor waiting for an appointment, aren't there wondering to themselves about the mysteries of Commonwealth/state financial relations, they're actually looking desperately at the clock and at their watch and looking at the queue and wondering when they're going to get in to be seen.
JOURNALIST: Well why did you have it in the first place?
PM: Well obviously there was a vision pursued last year and I'd make it very clear, this vision of healthcare is standing on the shoulders of what has gone before, but the essential public policy problem that Kevin Rudd was grappling with last year is if you looked into the future you could see a time where state governments could no longer afford to fund healthcare, that it just wasn't going to work over the long-term and so he grappled with that sustainability issue. This package solves that sustainability issue as well as focusing on key reform elements to get a better deal for patients.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Yes I do I'll come to other questions but you asked me Michelle, just remind me because I could bore you silly with, how long have you got?
JOURNALIST: By 2020 what will be the Commonwealth proportion of hospital funding which is now about 38 per cent?
PM: Ok, within the decade our, this is the total, so the growth 50/50, within the decade we will reach over 40 per cent and that will keep growing, so if you go to the end of the decade it will exceed 44 per cent, so inevitably with stepping up to 50 per cent of growth you are dragging the base up behind you and that's-
JOURNALIST: 44 per cent in 20 years?
PM: That's right, and that's showing you how the base is being dragged up.
JOURNALIST: How will the national funding pool work, who will control it and how will, how can you be sure that the arguments between the state and Federal governments won't be sort of transferred onto whatever the mechanism for the national funding pool?
PM: Well the proposal I will take to COAG is that there be a single national funding pool, that it have an independent board, so in line with the general principles of COAG reform and you would have seen some talk about those this week from the COAG Reform Council, that there would be a board that is not the Federal Government, and not the state government that runs the pool. There would be state accounts within the pool, clearly we cannot have a circumstance where money for health for Western Australia ends up paying needs in the ACT, no one is suggesting that, so state money goes to state needs and there's absolutely clear and transparent accounting, Federal Government money in, state government money in, activity based payments out.
JOURNALIST: So it's more about accounting and transparency that body?
PM: That's right-
JOURNALIST: More than distribution?
PM: Correct. The distributional tool is the activity based price, which would be set by an independent pricing authority.
Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST: Excuse me if I sound a bit thick, could you explain how you've restructured the growth funding because as I understand it the Commonwealth was to take over 100 per cent of growth funding under the original deal, and now you're saying you'll pay 50 per cent of it, is that right, it's still the same.
PM: I can explain that to you and I want to assure you that question is not thick, I think you're talking yourself down there Phil and you've got all of your colleagues here to do that for you. So the maths of this is, that the Federal Government under the old proposal, was going to fund 60 per cent of healthcare costs, 60 per cent of growth. Now that required a take back of GST revenues and you've seen all of the public debate about that take back. Under the model that I am laying out before you, the GST would be with the states as the GST has been with the states in the past, there would be no take back. What that means of course is that the states have available to them the benefit of those revenues for health and for other purposes, but clearly the single biggest expenditure item that comes on any state government's account is health expenditure. Therefore you've then got to work out how are you going to fund growth into the future, so the GST is out of the picture, states have got the GST, we are not using the GST for healthcare purposes, how are you going to fund growth? The right way of funding growth I believe is an equal partnership, 50 cents in every new dollar coming from the Federal Government, 50 cents in every new dollar coming from state governments.
JOURNALIST: Where do the states get that money from?
PM: Well the states have available to them all of their GST, which they didn't under the old model, and their ordinary revenue sources. So that's the percentages, what matters in the world is the dollars, so when you go to Aussies for a cup of coffee after this you'll be required to pay in dollars not in percentages, what matters is the dollars. The new dollars flowing to states and territories under the proposal I've put to you today is basically the same as the new dollars that would have flowed under the agreement struck last year.
JOURNLAIST: Prime Minister what legislation will be required at a federal and a state level for this?
PM: We will need legislation, they'll need to be legislation in relation to, and you would have seen some of this legislation has already started to be talked about and worked on; pricing authority requires legislation, the creation of the funding pool requires legislation, however we do not need to pursue the GST legislation which has been in the Parliament and the subject of discussion.
JOURNALIST: Will the states need mirroring legislation as well?
PM: Look we'll need to work through, depends on some conclusions about structures and governance of some parts of these arrangements.
Katherine.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister notwithstanding health reform is obviously urgent and important, why are you seeking to wrap this up this weekend, given that we've got an election coming up in New South Wales that almost inevitably is going to deliver a change of government, aren't you exposing yourself to a situation where Kevin Rudd was in last year where he had the Barnett hold-out? Why this weekend rather than letting it go on for a couple more months?
PM: Because the task is urgent, it is important, and we need to get sustainable arrangements over time. I accept, as I indicated in my opening remarks, that the arrangement that was struck last year is not going to become and never going to be a national arrangement. We would not get Western Australia to agree, and clearly as the cycle of politics changes and it has changed in Victoria, I'm not going to predict state election outcomes, but it may at some time change in other places, as the cycle of politics changes then less and less agreement and buy-in was going to be had for that deal. But the most controversial bit of it was the GST take back and my view is we could all grow old and tired talking about state/federal financing arrangements, or we could get on with the job and deliver a better deal for patients. My bottom line is a better deal for patients. I also believe if I can go into COAG on Sunday and walk out with a national agreement with the political consent of Premiers who are now Liberal and Labor Premiers, that that would give me and the nation assurance about the sustainability of these arrangements over time.
Mark Metherill. I'll come to the back, go to Mark first, no I'll go to Mark first and then come to the back, we've got to give the old bloke a go.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister will the funding pool cover all health spending and secondly when do think the activity based funding will actually be fully implemented?
PM: The pool will be the financing pool for hospitals, so there'll be the activity based funding, there will be the need for some block funding because you would be aware in terms of the activity base that there are some rural and regional hospitals, some special circumstances where activity based funding doesn't meet the needs, we will be staying on track to get activity based funding up from the middle of 2012.
At the back.
JOURNALIST: What indications have the states given you so far to this new plan?
PM: We're in negotiations, COAG negotiations are always, you know, got their twists and turns and we may see a few more between now and Sunday, but this is the proposal that I will take on Sunday, I have been very clear at every point with states and territories and let me be very clear here, there will be no new money without reform, quite a simple equation, just got an equal sign in it, no new money if there's no reform. So there will on be, there will only be additional money available for states and territories, the growth money they seek, if they reform. There are no blank cheques here.
We'll go to the back.
JOURNALIST: If you don't get an agreement on Sunday is a referendum back on the table for a Commonwealth takeover of the health system?
PM: Well the model I've just outlined in the model I think is appropriate, it's an equal partnership in growth between states and territories and the Federal Government, my eyes are on Sunday going into the room and coming out with a health reform agreement that will stand the test of time.
JOURNALIST: But if you don't get one?
PM: Well, you know, eyes on Sunday and on succeeding and that's what I am focussed on, walking into that room on Sunday and coming out with a health reform agreement that stands the test of time, a health reform agreement that's a better deal for patients, that properly funds hospitals into the future, that gives us more transparency, less waste, more local control, market based tools like activity based funding, that's what my eyes are on.
We'll go back, because Phil's already had one, we had to explain the maths to him, so we'll go up the back and come along. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Originally there was a 1 July start date for the new financing arrangements, the GST handover. Now, what is the deadline you're setting yourself for getting a lot of these quite new arrangements up and running? When does this pact start?
PM: well, the new funding would flow from 2014. Of course, we have provided a great deal of new funding to States and Territories in the meantime. As a Government, when we entered the healthcare agreements that hospitals are working on now, we upped funding by around 50 per cent.
And since then, for the time that was going to be in between discussions and when the reform were really going to start  -  remember, of course, the reform package talked about last year had an operation date in 2014 as well  -  for the time in between we've already agreed with the states and territories that around $3.5 billion of extra funding would be available. That's for elective surgery and emergency departments and the like, as well as financing improvements in primary care and health workforce.
So, all of those will continue to flow, but the step through to these new arrangements, moving to 50 per cent of growth, would start on 1 July 2014.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: The actual, tangible outcomes for patients, or expectations, the new hospitals, how quickly they can get surgery and so on, are they expected to be the same under this arrangement or better or worse?
PM: Well, put simply, there is effectively the same amount of new money on the table. Money matters. Money makes a difference, but it matters the most if you are getting the efficiencies you need in providing services, so a key part of this package is no more waste. That's what the efficient pricing mechanism was about. That's what the transparency's about.
Waste will stand out like, well, I won't use that expression, but waste will stand out very clearly, and as a result of it standing out underperformance will be able to be remedied and good performance, and this is something I very much brought with me from my days in education, with more transparency, more accountability, clear standards, proper funding, you identify what's going wrong, you get in and fix it, but you identify and celebrate what's going well and you get in, work out why it's going well, and you share it.
So, with the efficiency-based pricing we will see hospitals going really well. We'll learn something from them for the rest of the nation. We'll see some hospitals falling behind and that will have to be addressed to lift them up to the right standards.
Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr Rudd described the deal last year as securing the future of federation, based on 60 per cent dominant funding from the Feds and GST rake-back from the states. You've mentioned the test of time, and given figures for the next 20 years, are you confident, particularly as far as capital funding is concerned-
PM: -Particularly as far as?
JOURNALIST: -As far as capital funding, as capital works, is concerned, that this will continue to secure the future of Federation and health, or is there actually going to be a shortfall that the States are going to have to make up in 15, 20 years time?
PM: No, I believe these are the durable arrangements we need over time.
If we look at the architecture of Commonwealth-State financing, the States got access to a growth tax with the GST, and we remember all of those debates from way back when.
As it turns out, the rate of increase in that growth tax does not match the rate of increase in health care costs, they rise more rapidly, so it's an unsustainable proposition to say ‘GST growth tax, Federal share in health care costs going down over time, that equalling a good health care system and good hospital system'. It doesn't add up.
Now what we will have, State's GST growth tax over time, Federal and State government's stepping up to an equal partnership in new money.
We are an area of government, the level of government, with the best revenue-raising capacity. Now, it's always hard to get revenue in, as we've seen from some other debates, but we have our revenue raising capabilities. We can step up to that 50 per cent of growth.
The old system, of course, has been to go into COAG, shove a pile of money on the table, walk back out, the States and Territories take the pile of money and it means the share of the Commonwealth funding of hospitals go down and the States and Territories just end up wearing that.
We are busting out of that by the equal partnership in growth.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the principle at the heart of the Rudd plan was that the only way to guarantee the outcomes was for the Commonwealth to be the majority funder. Do you not accept that principle, and if not, how to do you guarantee the outcomes will actually flow?
PM: The way you guarantee outcomes is you set up a package that means the delivery of those outcomes is spelt out in it. So, you've got to get the mechanisms right.
What's the mechanisms in this package that get it right? Well, we'll have money in a single, transparent pool -  no hiding, no hole in the bottom of the bucket as we're tipping money in at the top. A single, transparent pool: dollars in, dollars out. Everybody will know who put them in and where they went.
So, that's fundamentally important.
Then, what do you pay for? Do you just send a blank cheque with a post-it note on the top of it saying ‘do your best'? No. Those days are gone.
We pay for activity, and we pay at the efficient price. So, if you are inefficient, you bear that burden. That will be a powerful incentive to States, hospital administrators, to everyone involved in health care, to step up and deliver efficient price.
Now, if the financial burden of not delivering the efficient price is not enough, everyone will know that you are not delivering the efficient price. That's what the transparency is about, and everyone will know if you are not treating patients properly because there will be clear standards, including waiting times, and clear transparency about whether or not they've been reached.
The Australian public's got a role here. The Australian public, in my view, should always have a role in improving government services. That's why I was so passionate about My School, and controversially, at one point said  -  at least it was controversial in the media, I don't think it was controversial in the community  -  controversially said if you get on My School and you're not happy about the performance of your child's school, walk down the road and go and have a chat to the Principal. You, as a parent, are a partner in this. You've got the tools. You've got the information. Insist on the performance. We will be mirroring that in health.
We'll come back to Phil. I'm feeling sorry for him.
JOURNALIST: The money you were going to take from the States in GST, will the States have to sign, to commit to that level to health, so they can't, sort of, fritter it away on other stuff like transport or other areas. Will they be duty bound to put that equivalent percentage on health under the agreement?
PM: States spend a lot of money on health. It's their single biggest expenditure item. Where the discipline comes in this is I'm not putting in new money if they don't. My 50 cents only goes on the table if their 50 cents has gone on the table. That's the partnership.
JOURNALIST: So, just a second half to that question, Barry O'Farrell has said he's not going to bound by anything Kristina Keneally signs up to unless he assess it himself.
If you, in anticipation, you get a national deal this weekend, what would be your message to Barry O'Farrell should he be Premier after March 26?
PM: Well, I've already declared on these questions I am very old-fashioned, so I think-
JOURNALIST: -As a hypothetical.
PM: Well, I think before people should conduct themselves as a Premier then people should get the opportunity of a vote. Call me old-fashioned, a traditionalist, but I do believe that that's the case.
So, should Mr O'Farrell or indeed anybody else emerge as a new Premier or a Chief Minister anywhere, what I would be saying to them if we go into the room on Sunday and come out with a deal, what I'd be saying to them is these are arrangements that are sustainable over time which would have had political consent from conservative and Labor premiers and I think that makes them sustainable.
What we have now, of course, is a situation where, you know, there was a lot of work done, a lot of focus on the reform need. Kevin, as Prime Minister, did do a lot of great work in this area, but we do not have a national agreement and we do not have people pulling in the same direction. I want to remedy that.
Go to Karen at the back.
JOURNALIST: Can I just change the subject, maybe briefly, to yesterday and the Senate's passage of the Coalition Bill on youth allowance. The Government's calling that a Money Bill. Can you tell us what you propose to do about that legislation? Will you allow it to go forward in the House or not?
PM: I've seen all of the media reporting about this and I obviously saw the events in the Senate yesterday. This is all blindingly simple at the end of the day.
Number one, it's not constitutional. Money Bills can only become law in the country if the Government agrees to them. That's why they call it the Treasury benches when you sit on the Government side. So: unconstitutional.
Number two, on the merits of the proposition, let me say as follows  -  it seems very, very easy for Mr Abbott to find ways to spend money. What he's not so good at is finding ways to save money and offset that spending. So, it is grossly irresponsible of Mr Abbott, to allow his political Party or his Coalition to bring to the parliament a Bill with unfunded savings.
What does he say I should to fund that Bill? Cut health? Cut education? Cut Defence? Cut flood recovery? What is it that he says I should do to fund that Bill? Question is unanswered.
Now, I no Mr Abbott will probably shrug his shoulders and say ‘finding budget savings are easy.' To that I would say if they were so easy to find it's hard to explain why his endeavour to find budget savings has led to the implosion of political Party.
Finally, can I just say this, on the question of student income support, I have read claims that this is Coalition pushback against Federal Government cuts in student income support. That is entirely untrue.
Anybody who says this Government has cut student income support is wrong. What this Government did is take a system of student income support with clear inequities in it, where the participation rates of country kids were going down, and strike a better and fairer package that was revenue-neutral over the forward estimates, but beyond the forward estimates, as participation in university grows because of our targets to get more kids university education, as participation grows funding on student income support grows.
So, let's not have any of this hypocrisy that this is somehow a pushback against cuts. That is completely untrue.
JOURNALIST: Does that mean you won't allow the Bill to go forward?
PM: No, we won't.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, for the second time in a week you've announced measures to increase accountability, efficiency and to sort of head of waste in big-spending Government programs. You almost sound like you're singing from Tony Abbott's election play book.
How concerned are you about perceptions in the community that your Government was wasteful in the first term?
PM: I must admit I never saw that play book. Tony Abbott's play book was, what, the $11 billion black hole? I'm certainly not taking any lessons from that play book.
Every time we announce something we properly account for it and properly fund it. Mr Abbott has a few three-word slogans that he wandered around with during the election campaign and we're not intending to adopt any of them.
JOURNALIST: Can you answer his question about waste, though?
PM: I am very focussed, as Prime Minister, on making sure that Government money is spent efficiently, and I've had that discussion before with self-same press gallery, and we will do what we need to to make sure, whether it's in flood recovery or other areas, that we get the maximum value for Government dollars.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) impact of the health reforms today that you've talked about today, can you say whether there's a net increase or decrease in the budget bottom line over the forward estimates, and if so, will that be outlined in the next days or would you make the adjustments in the May budget?
PM: From the hospitals package that I've outlined, we're on the same path as the forward estimates.
I'll go to the back.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a question on Egypt  -  what are the dangers of President Mubarak staying on, and do you think he should step down before September?
PM: I know the Foreign Minister has had something to say about this today, and can I say, too, we are very concerned about events in Egypt. We are monitoring the situation very, very closely.
We want to see an orderly transition, but we want to see peace. We're obviously all very concerned that circumstances as they are unfolding in Egypt may occasion further violence, and we would be calling for calm and restraint on all sides. I don't think anybody wants to see violence happening, and clearly there is a real risk of that.
To summarise my position, the Government's position, we do believe that there needs to be fundamental reform. We do believe that change has to come. We understand the status quo is not a tenable position, but we do want to see peace in the transition.
JOURNALIST: What's the latest advice on Australians still in Egypt?
PM: Look, the advice to me remains the same. Obviously the circumstances in Egypt, we've seen developments which now would cause us to have concerns about violence as demonstrations are likely to swell in reaction to current events, but the circumstances for Australians remain the same.
We evacuated, made available evacuation opportunities for people. A range of Australians chose to stay. A range of Australians, obviously, made their own arrangements on commercial flights to get out. We have beefed up consular assistance, so the numbers of people who are available to assist.
We've expressed our condemnation for attacks, violent attacks, and threats and menacing of journalists, including some Australian journalists who were caught up in some very frightening and difficult situations.
JOURNALIST: Just on the health reforms again, I think in the former package the Federal Government was going to pick up 60 per cent of capital funding. Is that all now the States' responsibility, and are they willing to accept that?
PM: Under this package, the money and resources for the task are the same. We need to remember that.
Under this package, capital planning would remain the responsibility of the States, and I'm certainly very keen that we see transparency in capital planning, and that we see capital planning calibrated against the information we will have about activity levels that comes through activity-based pricing, and we will continue to provide assistance over time to health care capital. We've done that in the past through the Health and Hospitals Fund. We're in the process of doing that now for regional and rural hospitals.
The package is still being negotiated, so this is what I've outlined to you today  -  the proposal I will take to COAG.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) capital planning issue, call it, sounds a rather tighter approach than was proposed under the previous agreement.
PM: Well, we're looking for transparency here. We will be able to map activity-growth pressures because of the activity-based funding. You'd expect to see those growth pressures in growing communities, for example, or communities that for whatever reason become home to populations with high health needs. So, you know, we will have a way of assessing where activity is growing and we want to see transparency.
But I do want to be clear, just in case anybody's under any misapprehension: what I've outlined today is my proposals for COAG on Sunday. Clearly, we've got some work to do and we'll have the meeting on Sunday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the national anthem, what did you think of former Victorian premier Jeff Kennett's idea of changing the anthem to ‘I am, you are, we are Australian'?
PM: I can understand the emotional resonance of that song. I most recently heard it sung on Sunday in Victoria at a bushfire memorial event, and it did bring tears to many people's eyes as there was a slight change in the words to reflect the bushfire situation.
So, that is a song of great emotional warmth and attachment for Australians, but I can't agree with Jeff that is should substitute for the national anthem.
I am at least relieved that he hasn't suggested the Hawthorn club song.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Attorney-General Robert McClelland today announced additional Commonwealth Government assistance for people impacted by the bushfires in Western Australia earlier this week.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will be made available to victims of the recent bushfires.
These payments will see $1000 for each eligible adult and $400 for each eligible child in the hands of families in need, including people whose homes have been destroyed or have sustained major damage.  Eligibility criteria apply for people claiming the AGDRP.
The payment will also be made available to people impacted by flooding last month in the Carnavon region.
The payments will be available in the following Local Government Areas notified as disaster affected by the WA Government. 
WA Bushfires- Armadale, Canning, Chittering, Serpentine Jarrahdale and the City of Swan.
Carnarvon Floods- Ashburton, Carnarvon, Exmouth, Murchison, Northampton, Shark Bay and Upper Gascoyne.
Today's announcement is in addition to Commonwealth Assistance already being provided, including:
 * 	Assistance under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements; and
 * 	The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy.
In addition to today's announcements, Commonwealth disaster assistance available in Western Australia includes:
Assistance under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements
People affected by the December bushfires, storms and floods in Western Australia have access to a range of Commonwealth assistance through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
These payments are jointly funded by the Commonwealth and WA Governments and administered through WA Government agencies.
This includes: 
 * 	Personal hardship and distress assistance including:
		 * 			The provision of emergency assistance including emergency accommodation, food, essential clothing and other personal items  -  payments of up to $388 per eligible adult and up to $194 per eligible child on the 1st day of assistance (with reductions in payment levels on subsequent days);
		 * 			Temporary living expenses of up to $110 per day per adult/family in the metropolitan area and up to $150 per day per adult/family in country areas;
 * 	Up to $5,000 - to assist with the reconnection of electricity.
 * 	Up to $10,000 - for the replacement of white goods and floors coverings.
 * 	Restoration of essential public assets for local councils
 * 	Cost of counter disaster operations
 * 	Interest-rate subsidies for loans of up to $150,000 for small businesses and primary producers
 * 	Professional advice grants and freight subsidies for primary producers; and
 * 	Clean-up and recovery grants of up to $25,000 for small businesses and primary producers.
The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy
The Government has extended additional support for eligible employees, small businesses and farmers in these areas who can demonstrate a loss of income as a direct result of the bushfires and floods.
The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy is a fortnightly payment of up to the maximum rate of existing Newstart Allowance for a period of 13 weeks. The subsidy will be available to those who will experience a loss of income as a direct result of the cyclone and its impact and are not currently receiving any other income support payment or pension.
The Commonwealth Government will support these people who will be unable to work through no fault of their own.
For more information about the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment or Disaster Income Recovery, visit your local Centrelink office or phone 180 2266.  Centrelink will be accepting claims under the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment from Monday. 
For information regarding personal support contact the WA Department of Child Protection on 1800 199 008.
For information on assistance for small businesses, contact the Fire and Emergency Services Authority of Western Australia on (08) 9323 9552.
For information on support for primary producers, contact the WA Department of Agriculture and Food on 1800 198 231.
Information about Commonwealth Government assistance is also available by visiting www.disasterassist.gov.auor www.centrelink.gov.au



This is a remarkable day for the people of Egypt. 
In their millions, Egyptians have called for change - for an open, democratic society that offers greater opportunity for its people.
Through their courage and determination to have their voices heard, Egyptians have made an important step toward that goal.
All Australians will have been moved by the joy we saw last night in Cairo's Tahrir Square.
But the path ahead for Egypt is unclear and many challenges remain.
Together with many other concerned nations, Australia calls for fundamental reform that will ensure the opportunity and freedoms that ordinary Egyptians have been calling for. 
Australia calls for constitutional reform and a clear timetable towards free and fair elections and a representative civilian government that will govern for all Egyptians.
This change must come without violence or intimidation against those who have been peacefully demanding reform.
Australia stands ready to help in this transition in any way we can. 



PM: Thank you very much and clearly COAG has had a long day talking about issues of importance to the nation and I do thanks Premiers and Chief Ministers for their patience and resolve in working through so many long hours and I do want to thank the members of the federal parliamentary press gallery for attending a very late press conference, thank you for that.
Today I want to advise you of two of the important topics COAG has talked about today: first, natural disaster preparedness and then second, health.
On natural disaster preparedness, after the summer of disasters that we have lived through it was important for the nation's leaders to gather together and to reflect on that summer and what lessons could be learned from it. I thank very much Premier Bligh and Premier Baillieu for leading the Council of Australian Governments in that discussion. As a group we want to take this opportunity to record our very sincere thanks to every emergency services worker, to every police officer, to every ADF officer, to every health worker, to every volunteer who made such a difference during this time of natural disaster.
We did share experiences and we have determined that we will ask our ministers for emergency services to review what can be learned from the events of this very, very difficult summer, to provide some advice to COAG on emergency management on the way that disaster payments work, on disaster resilience and the like.
We have also agreed that we will work on the question of gift deductible status for the various charitable funds that have been set up following these natural disasters. As people would be well aware the Premier's relief appeal in Queensland now has I think around $200 million in it, a very substantial amount of money and in other states, including the state of Victoria, there are charitable funds that have been fundraising to give that extra helping hand. We want to make sure that our taxation system is working in the right way with those funds, we learned some lessons about that from bushfire relief in Victoria following the tragedy of Black Saturday and we want to make sure that those lessons continue to be learned and to apply to these funds.
So I'd thank my colleagues for that discussion, it was very important that as a group we have it at this time.
The other substantial issue on the agenda today was of course the question of health, and we came here today with three objectives: to deliver health reform that would stand the test of time, that was genuine reform that would last; to deal with the structural funding problem facing our health system; and to make sure that we were delivering a better deal for patients.
I can advise that we have secured an agreement which meets these three aims and I thank my colleagues for their patience and diligence in working through that agreement.
My bottom line was that we saw a better deal for patients and my colleagues agreed with me on that bottom line. My bottom line was that I wasn't going to let politics get in the way of entering a truly national agreement that would last over time and we have secured that agreement.
I want to be clear that in securing this agreement we have held true to the principle that new money should only flow when there is reform and reforms will be made to our health system as a result of the agreement today.
This new deal will deliver unprecedented transparency in our healthcare arrangements. If you want to summarise what we've achieved today, we've achieved more money, more beds, more local control and more transparency, and we have achieved an agreement which will mean less bureaucracy, less waste and less waiting.
I want to take you through the five elements of what we have agreed today. First, in terms of funding, we have agreed that there will be a guaranteed $16.4 billion in new money from the Federal Government to state and territory governments from now to 2020. This comes on top of what has been agreed to in the Australian Healthcare Agreements, and on top of the $3.4 billion that is being used for elective surgery and emergency departments.
Under this agreement, the Commonwealth will step up to a fair share of growth; 50 per cent of every new dollar coming from the Commonwealth. Over time, my state and territory colleagues have faced a circumstance where the Commonwealth's share of funding has been declining as a percentage of what they need to run their public hospitals and the Commonwealth was not stepping up to its fair share of growth. Now, as a result of today's agreement, the Commonwealth will become a 50 per cent partner in growth for the future, that's important for the long term stability and quality of our healthcare system.
Second, we are boosting transparency. People want to know what is happening with the money that goes in to fund health. They do not want it beyond their line of sight; they do not want to wonder whether when one level of government is stepping up to putting more in, perhaps another level of government is taking some out. As Education Minister I was driven by the principle of transparency, not only because people have a right to know what is happening with funds that are being spent for public purposes like education and health, but because the very transparency itself can drive change. That is if you identify underperformance, you can step in a rectify it, if you identify best practice then you can share that best practice.
So today I can announce that we have agreed that there will be a national funding body which will be a pooled arrangement making transparent funding flows in health. This is a huge step forward and I thank my colleagues for the discussions today. Through this national funding body, we will be able to ensure that hospitals around the nation are transparently and fairly funded, we will also be able to ensure that information between states is truly comparable.
I said the third element, the five elements of this package: funding, transparency  -  thirdly we are taking a giant axe through red tape and unnecessary bureaucracy. Under the former deal there was an agreement which would have created eight separate bureaucracies that would have risked over time, eight separate approaches to funding and it would have risked over time that information was not truly comparable nationally. As a result of today's agreement we are sweeping away those eight separate bureaucracies for one national funding body.
Fourth, I have agreed with my colleagues that we will, as a Federal Government, step up in primary care, particularly bringing Medicare locals on stream more quickly than initially envisaged and we will step up to ensure that we are delivering extra assistance for after-hours more quickly than envisaged.
And finally we, through today's reforms, are dealing with greater community say and local control through the national hospital networks structure. Pivotal to these reforms remains having an efficient price for services that are provided in hospitals because that efficient price will drive change in our hospital system.
Today with my colleagues we have signed a Heads of Agreement on each of these areas, the in detail worked will now happen to bring this Heads of Agreement to a full agreement, but I thank them for signing the Heads of Agreement today.
We have also jointly signed today a national partnership agreement, dealing with targets in emergency departments and elective surgery, and I thank my colleagues for signing that agreement today too.
All in all, I think whilst this has been a very long day, it's been a very successful outcome.
When we walked into the COAG room we did not have a national agreement on health reform. When we walked into the COAG room there was reason to fear that as time went on the agreements between the Commonwealth and those states that had signed would become increasingly unsustainable in the absence of a national agreement. When we walked into that room today, we didn't have the benefit of one national funding body for the kind of transparency that I have outlined.
We have walked out of the room having ensured we've got one national agreement, transparency, proper funding, local control, new investments in primary care, and less bureaucracy.
For people around the country, this does mean more money, more beds, less waiting time, more access to the healthcare that they want now and into the future.
With those words, I'll turn to the chair of the Council of the Australian Federation, CAF, and Paul Henderson from the Northern Territory.
CHIEF MINISTER HENDERSON: Thank you, Prime Minister.
I will be brief, but certainly on behalf of all the premiers my colleague the ACT Chief Minister, it was our first time to come together and catch up with the Premier of Queensland and demonstrate out support and commitment as Australians across all levels of government to assist with the rebuilding of Queensland and affected areas.
It's been a really horrific time across the nation, just watching the impact of the floods unfold, the impact on people's life, on communities, and certainly, as Australians, we all know people in Queensland directly, indirectly, businesspeople. It has been a tragic, horrific, extraordinary time and today we've all come together as leaders from across our nation and said to the Premier of Queensland ‘We are with you. We will work with you and do everything we can to assist in the rebuilding of Queensland and affected areas', and also, importantly, to learn those lessons.
And, just briefly, as the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, the one comfort that I take out of the extraordinary devastation from Tropical Cyclone Yasi, talking with the Premier of Queensland, it does look as though that the cyclone codes that we actually build to in the northern Australia certainly have stood up very well in terms of homes and businesses that have been built to those codes, and certainly that should give some comfort to people who live in northern Australia, that living in a home that has been built to those codes that have been in place since '84 or '85. We wish we'd never had this test, but the fact that we have had the test should give some comfort.
In regards to the historic health reform agreement we have today, as the Prime Minister said, when we walked into that room this morning we did not have an agreement on the table, and at times today it looked as though it was going to be difficult to reach agreement, but I would like to thank all of my colleagues, the Premiers and the ACT Chief Minister, that when we stood back from the issues around the detail, we focussed on patients.
At the end of the day, what we have today is a better deal for patients in our hospital system. It means more beds right across Australia. It means reduced waiting times in emergency departments across Australia. It means reduced waiting times for elective surgery, and importantly for our community, transparency and a line of sight in regards to every dollar that goes into our hospital system  -  how that relates and reflects on the ground in terms of the care of patients and people in our system.
So, I'd like to thank all of the Premiers and Prime Minister today. My first meeting as the Chair of CAF, but it has been a sign, I believe, that even though that CAF now reflects different political stripes sitting around the table, we can all sit around the table in the national interest and reach agreement, and we've done that on health today.
PM: Thank you.
So, we're happy to take questions. I should have said, of course, that apart from being my first COAG meeting it's the first COAG meeting for Premier Baillieu, for Premier Giddens, and for Genia McCaffery, representing local government, so this is the Canberra press gallery. They're not too bad.
Matthew?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, all the messages that we heard during the day was that the bone of contention, if they're was one, was your single pool. Were the Premiers simply trying to avoid scrutiny, or what was their reasonable concern, and when you say that you've got a heads of agreement rather than an iron-clad deal, what concession have you made?
PM: See what I mean about them?
A heads of agreement is a signed deal. We will now do all of the technical work that needs to be done, all of the work that needs to follow it through. We will be distributing the signed heads of agreement so you can see it yourself.
So, we've walked into that room with no national health agreement and we've walked out with a national health agreement.
You would expect, when I have been proposing considerable changes to the agreements that a number of States had signed onto, and a new way of thinking about health compared with the proposals of last year, that Premiers and Chief Ministers would want to analyse that, hold it up to the light, ask all of the questions, have all of the debates. I think that absolutely appropriate. That's what leaders should do and that's what we've been doing in the room today.
But I'm very pleased that we have been able to work through, with a lot of hard work, a lot of respectful dialogue, and get the agreement, a signed agreement on which we will build with a full, detailed agreement when officials have done all of their work.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) measures that you nominated on Friday, as you nominated?
PM: The transparency measures I nominated on Friday are in the signed agreement. I want, and have been very clear with my colleagues, I'm a big believer in transparency. I believe in it because I believe Australians have got a right to the information. I believe in it because transparency drives change, and if you look in this country today, we spend tens of billions of dollars each year on our public hospitals, but we do not have good, real-time information that people can see, and we do not have good line of sight on dollars in and dollars out. We will now have that line of sight. That is a really important reform.
Of course, from the point of view of people in emergency departments and people waiting for surgery, people who want to see a doctor, they are going to say to themselves ‘what is different for me?' Well, what is different for them is a national agreement, so right round the nation, whether you're in Perth or Brisbane or Darwin or Launceston or in Sydney, any part of the nation, there's a national agreement that is applying to your healthcare that's got more funding, more beds, more transparency and more local control than people have had before.
Yes, we'll go there and come across. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does that mean that all major elements of the agreement will be ready to roll July 1?
PM: What that means is people will start to see real changes on July 1. Many of the elements of this agreement, building, as they do, on the shoulders of the agreement that went before, do have a July 1 start date.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on that, you say more beds, exactly how many more hospital beds will there be, including in the next 12 months, and how many extra people will have elective surgery who weren't going to have it?
PM: Well, we are working at the moment through the additional $3.4 billion that we provided to assist elective surgery around the country, and that has literally resulted in tens of thousands of additional procedures, and we are able to give people the details of that.
What this agreement means for the long term is there's more money and growth is not capped. So, in this country, because of the approach of the Federal Government, and this has been a problem a long time in the making, and it was certainly there under the former government, in this country we've seen a declining share from the Federal Government. We've seen a capped amount of funds. If States and Territories were in a position to lift activity beyond the cap they had to pay for it. There was no more extra Federal money.
Now, we are moving to a system where we are partners in growth  -  50 per cent, 50 per cent, the system growing as it needs to. That's a transformational change.
JOURNALIST: How many more beds?
PM: As the agreement is implemented, obviously, beds will come on line. What I can give you is I can give you the statistics about what the money to date, the difference has made, and it has literally been in tens of thousands of additional procedures in elective surgery.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we were told 10 months ago, with great fanfare, that there was an agreement when in fact there was none. There was a lot of hyperbole. We're being told that there's an agreement today, but we're also being told that it's not a full agreement. If I could ask you to allow the Premiers and Chief Ministers to talk, what are the caveats and or conditions that have been placed on signing a final agreement?
PM: Well, it's not a question of caveats and conditions, and you will have in your hand as soon as the photocopying can be done, a signed agreement. You'll be able to read it for yourself, and what you will see is that some further work needs to be done by officials in various areas, and that's appropriate.
I said on Friday that what I wanted to do at this meeting was sign a heads of agreement, sign up the principles for reform and change. I did not envisage we would walk into this room and walk out with the comprehensive, technical detail of every level of these reforms.
What we've walked out with is a signed agreement which outlines all of the key elements of the reforms that we've agreed to.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Premier Keneally as well, did you have to offer anything extra to get the Premiers and Chief Ministers over the line today, separate to what you had on Friday? And Premier Keneally your government's already implemented the original package of reforms, does changing to the new system going to present any problem for you bureaucratically or anything else?
PREMIER KENEALLY: Thank you Phillip for the question, you're right New South Wales has already rolled out 369 beds of the 488 that we secured last April, we've also implemented our local health networks, we've got the boards in place, the chairs in place and we've passed the legislation. We had made arrangements, as per the COAG agreement in April, to put the state funding authority in place as was agreed in April, but we have no qualms about the national funding arrangements that the Commonwealth have proposed in this agreement, we see the transparency initiatives that the Prime Minister has put on the table as ones that are good for the health system, not just in New South Wales but indeed nationally as we were very pleased to be able to come here today and achieve what is truly national health reform for New South Wales. The health reform has meant a significant boost in funding, that's what last April represented, that's why my bottom line was to keep the beds, the money and the growth money, and what put that at risk was the risk that over time, without all the States signed up and all the Territories, that that agreement would start to unravel. What we've done today is secured the future of health reform, national health reform, in Australia.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) sweeten the deal at all?
PM: The envelope of money is as I announced it on Friday, so it's the $16.4 billion and that is specified as the minimum, as I specified it on Friday in this health reform agreement. We also have entered a second agreement; the second agreement is about the targets in elective surgery and in emergency departments. I have agreed with my colleagues that to facilitate the best possible progress towards those targets, that we will bring forward some $200 million and make that available earlier than it otherwise would have been available, so that's a movement across two financial years.
We'll come across the front, yes?
JOURNALIST: What details still need to be finalised, and is there a timeline for finalising those details?
PM: Well you will see when you see the agreement the kind of work that needs to be done now, and we will be signing this agreement in the coming months, it's my intention that COAG will meet in the middle of the year, and we will obviously be finalising the agreement at that time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister a year after you originally promised to have an independent pricing authority, you still haven't introduced legislation to set it up, it's going to have less than 12 months to work out the, one of the key aspects of this reform, the national efficient price, can that be done within 12 months?
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister did you get agreement from the Premiers today to narrow the scope of COAG, and in particular those four key areas that you announced last week that you really want to focus on a get a renewed commitment from the Premiers for the COAG vehicle?
PM: Yes we have had some discussions today about this being a meeting of the nation's leaders, that it's our job to be focussed on the most important strategic challenges for the nation, and we've talked about what those priorities should be. We have agreed five priorities, we have decided that it is very important that First Ministers continue to oversight our Closing the Gap agenda. In the priorities I announced, we talked about Closing the Gap under the heading of participation, and of course making sure that Indigenous Australians get what I refer to as the benefits and dignity of work is so important to ensuring life time equality and opportunity including for the children of those Indigenous Australians, but First Ministers decided we wanted to put even more oversight on it than that and so we have nominated it as its own priority.
JOURNALIST: On transparency-
PM: Sorry, we'll go here, I did wave there, so that's fair and then I'll come across.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on transparency the money will flow from the national pool to the hospitals via State based accounts, what Federal oversight will there be of those State based accounts? Are you worried about double handling with that State based money? And Premier Barnett do you feel vindicated on your position about resisting the GST clawback?
PM: The main thing with transparency is that we know where money comes from and where it's going. We will obviously work on arrangements to minimise double handling, no one around the COAG table wants to see unnecessary double handling, what we do want to see is transparency so that we've got a clear line of sight on money being provided by the Federal Government, money being provided by the State government, and the purposes and activities for which it is used in hospitals, that's the transparency that the agreement deals with.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) national pool?
PM: Well you can be transparent across all of the national pool, including the State based expenditure.
I'll turn to Colin for comment.
PREMIER BARNETT: Well for Western Australia the issue of surrendering the GST revenues to the Commonwealth was a show-stopper. We would simply never agree to that and that was a bi-partisan position in Western Australia. Once the Prime Minister took the GST matter off the table that did open the door for an agreement, we've had over 12 hours of meetings and negotiations today, there has been, in my opinion, a fair degree of goodwill and give and take on all sides. The work that's to be done now is the detailed mechanics of the structure of the body to be established, and how the funds will flow and how the hospital system will be managed. Now that is detailed work this is probably best undertaken by respective Commonwealth and state health officials and that's what we're relying on.
Hopefully after that we can stay where we are at the moment, and that is talking about health, not GST, and that we can look at other issues like mental health, aged care and I think everyone agrees in front of you today, that it is about health and improving health services and value for money and the vast amounts of money that are spent collectively on health.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Heads of Agreement will proceed more smoothly that the previous Heads of Agreement on the mining tax Mr Barnett?
BARNETT: I don't think we're going to proceed smoothly on the mining tax.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you guarantee that this will end the so-called blame game between the Commonwealth and the States?
PM: I think that's a really good question and what I can absolutely say to you is the following: first and foremost one thing that has caused a blame game, or at least a round of recriminations between the two levels of government, one thing that's caused that round of recriminations is the absence of transparency. So there have been fears, and perhaps sometimes they've been very unjustified, but there have been fears that one level of government is adding money in, as another level of government is taking it out, so many in health would tell you they fear that money is being tipped into the top of the bucket, but money is coming out the bottom of the bucket and they can't even see where the hole is. The arrangements we've struck today will end all of that.
Then the other blame game that people worry about is a blame game about pressures on public hospitals as those pressures have grown, States and Territories have rightly said to the Commonwealth ‘you don't fund us properly', and sometimes the Commonwealth has turned to States and Territories and tried to put blame on their shoulders. That is over now because we are going to be equal partners in growth.
And then the other end of the blame game is pressure between the various sectors of our healthcare system, so the States and Territories have right said at various parts of Australian history, that the Federal Government has been under investing in primary care, not training enough doctors, and under investing in aged care, and all of that burden has ended up in their public hospitals. As a result of the arrangements we've struck today, because we're equal partners in growth, the Federal Government as the main funder of first instance care, primary care, and aged care, now has a structural incentive to make sure people get cared for in the right place at the right time by the right person. It's not in my interests as Prime Minister to have someone in an acute hospital bed when they could be in an aged care bed, because we're going to be partners in the growth, that will come 50 cents onto the Commonwealth account. It's not in my interests for primary care to fail an Australian who then ends up in hospital, whereas they wouldn't have needed to be there if they'd got proper primary care, because we're going to paying 50 per cent of the growth. So those incentives to get primary care and aged care right will be there and that's been a big part of the blame game.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said that 2011 was going to be your year of delivery and decision, is this the first delivery, is that how we read this?
PM: Well I would hope, I would hope Australians would recognise this for what it is, I think it's a very major achievement. We've struggled with health reform, the nation has struggled with the prospect that if you left it all un-reformed, that the growth in health costs would overwhelm State budgets. We would have woken up in a future where State governments, Territory governments, would have rightly said we cannot afford to run the hospital system anymore, we would have seen declining quality; that's where we were headed.
Today, we're sitting here with a national agreement that avoids that. It stands on the shoulders of what's gone before in health reform, but it is a health reform agreement, we have got away from all of the politics around the GST and financing transactions, and we've got on with the business of improving health. I think that's a very big achievement, it is shared with my colleagues sitting in front of you; we're only sitting here now because we worked on this together in a spirit of goodwill and respect and co-operation and I thank them for that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister in your decision to cut the bureaucracy was there any discussion about whether that means a loss of jobs and how many?
PM: These are entities not yet created, so we have swept the need to create all of those new entities aside.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) maybe Premier Rann, do you envisage that this single pool could eventually be expanded to cover more than just hospital funding, that more things could be brought into the umbrella?
PM: I'm very happy to turn to Premier Rann, but I should say to my colleagues gathered here I have the constant dialogue with the press gallery that they would have been those kids trying to run down the stairs at 2 o'clock in the morning on Christmas Day to rip open their presents.
Yes, Phil, I'm sure you're going to start writing very learned pieces about the future of health, but perhaps where we get there we could digest this major health reform that's been delivered today.
Mike?
PREMIER RANN: Can I just say the transparency's important for us because since I was elected Premier, South Australia's Government has more than doubled its expenditure on health and hospitals, and we did that in the context of as we were putting more money in we saw the Howard Government taking more out, and that's at the nub of transparency, and let's make sure that can't happen either way.
So, we're very pleased that we have reached a deal.
For me, it was very important that having signed a deal at the end of last year that there was not one single cent less, and that's guaranteed in the heads of agreement that we've signed.
I have to say there's one area that I'm very pleased that COAG has agreed upon, and that is that I've proposed that we have a special session of COAG in the future on mental health, and I'd like to see eminent people like Patrick McGorry, Monsignor David Cappo and others address us as national leaders on that very important area of mental health, and that's been agreed today as well.
JOURNALIST: Mr Baillieu, you were one of the States resisting the original agreement put forward by Kevin Rudd. Are you happier with today's outcome, and do you believe an agreement has been reached between the Premiers and the Commonwealth?
PREMIER BAILLIEU: I do, but bear in mind that our predecessors signed up to the 2010 version. We expressed some reservations about that in terms of the funding model, and I'm pleased that the new agreement has dealt with those issues, and I think it's been very constructive in that respect.
We did have concerns about some aspects of the NPA, and I think a lot of those issues have been addressed, and we're pleased to have signed up. I think this will be a substantial gain for Victoria and Victorian patients in particular, but obviously a substantial gain for Australia.
To have everybody on board, I think, is significant in itself, and can I say on the issue of transparency, each of the Premiers and the Territory leaders, if I can dare to repeat was said, we were explicit in our desire to see transparency in resolving these issues. I think that's going to be an important development as well, to ensure that we do share the growth in funding and we do share the responsibilities.
PM: Sorry, we'll take this as the last question. I'm moderately concerned you'll be selling tomorrow's morning newspapers tomorrow afternoon if we keep going.
JOURNALIST: Just on transparency, you talk about how everyone's going to find out all the details, how to use the jargon, how much in real time will we get these statistics? Will the figures on how hospitals are performing and how the money's being pasted between them be two years after the fact? Three months after the fact? How regularly will the transparency be reported, and how out of date will it be when we get it?
PM: Well, we are talking about transparency that basically is in real time. It's transparency about the funding flows. We're dealing with monthly accounts and those kind of things, so in terms of a data collect for Australian hospitals, we're talking about more transparency than we've ever had before.
JOURNALIST: How often will the public see these figures?
PM: Well, the aim of this and the aim of a transparency agenda is that it is there not only for levels of government to have, but it is there for the public to see.
I've brought into this position the same kind of reformist drive I showed about transparency in the education portfolio. That data transforms because the public has it, so I'm bringing the same reform drive here.
Thank you.



The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) today agreed to a streamlined forward agenda that will ensure the effective implementation of national reforms.
These reforms focus on issues of national strategic importance, shaped by five themes: 
 * 	a long-term strategy for participation;
 * 	a national economy driven by our competitive advantages;
 * 	a sustainable and liveable Australia;
 * 	better health services and a more sustainable health system for Australians; and
 * 	closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage
The Prime Minister said today's agreement builds on the strong history of reform achieved through cooperative federalism.
COAG acknowledged that success will require strong buy-in from leaders of government at all levels with a greater focus on implementation and delivery.
To achieve this, the Commonwealth and the States and Territories have committed to prioritising the passage of legislation to give effect to agreements reached by COAG.
New COAG Ministerial Councils
COAG will reform its system of Ministerial Councils so that emerging national issues can be addressed promptly without jeopardising COAG's longer-term agenda.
Under the new system, enduring issues of national significance will be addressed through councils with a long life (Standing Councils), while critical and complex issues will be addressed through councils with a limited life (Select Councils).
The Standing and Select Councils will assist COAG in developing a sustained and collaborative reform agenda for long-standing challenges while providing the flexibility needed to address urgent challenges as they arise.
The new arrangements will put a greater emphasis on implementation in a tighter relationship between COAG and its Councils.  There will also be an increased focus on performance and delivery.
Long-term Standing Councils will be established in the areas of:
 * 	health;
 * 	community, housing and disability services;
 * 	school education and early childhood;
 * 	tertiary education, skills and employment;
 * 	transport and infrastructure;
 * 	police and emergency management;
 * 	law and justice;
 * 	federal financial relations;
 * 	energy and resources;
 * 	environment and water;
 * 	primary industries and
 * 	regional Australia
Shorter-term Select Councils will be established to cover:
 * 	homelessness;
 * 	workplace relations;
 * 	climate change;
 * 	immigration and settlement;
 * 	women's issues; and
 * 	gambling reform (which has been previously established and will continue)
These new councils clearly outline the priorities for COAG in the 21st century and the format for addressing them.
Separate ongoing bodies known as Ministerial Legislative and Governance Fora will manage ongoing legislative and governance functions where they are outside the scope of Standing Councils.
Building a Seamless National Economy
COAG today welcomed the release of an independent report by the COAG Reform Council (CRC) on the progress of the National Partnership Agreement to deliver a Seamless National Economy.
The report found that good progress has been made in 21 of 27 deregulation priorities and six of eight competition reforms, with seven regulatory reforms and one competition reform completed. 
Since the report was finalised, a further six regulatory reforms have been completed or reached the implementation stage. 
Recognising the good progress being made in implementing the Seamless National Economy reforms, COAG agreed to bring forward its final completion date from June 2013 to December 2012. 
Given the high priority all governments attach to boosting productivity and the competitiveness of the economy, COAG has asked for options to be developed for a further wave of regulatory and competition reforms. 
COAG must continue to drive national competition and regulatory reform to improve Australia's economic productivity through a clear, prioritised agenda of reforms. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Attorney-General Robert McClelland today welcomed the Council of Australian Governments' adoption of a National Disaster Resilience Strategy.
Recent natural disasters have had a profound impact on the lives of hundreds of thousands of Australians and devastated communities across the country.
COAG adopted the new national strategy and agreed jurisdictions would take immediate steps to implement its measures. 
The strategy includes steps to improve our understanding of the risks of natural disasters, educating people of these risks and improving the methods of communicating urgent messages to communities so they can make informed decisions about their options when faced with natural disasters.
The strategy also looks at how we can reduce the impact of natural disasters in the medium to long term by considering disaster prevention measures in current and future urban and regional planning.
To achieve this, the emergency management sector must be involved in the development of public policy in the areas of climate change, land-use planning, building codes and development standards.
COAG also agreed on the importance of insurance in disaster recovery and the provision and construction of resilient infrastructure. 
Measures to be taken by governments as part of the strategy include: 
 * 	All jurisdictions should undertake disaster risk assessments for priority hazards over the next three years.
 * 	Jurisdictions should maintain registers of significant risks to inform decision making at all levels of government and by the private sector and communities.
 * 	Heads of Treasuries will report to the National Emergency Management Committee (NEMC) on strategies for maximising the role of insurance in fostering greater community and individual resilience.
 * 	Planning officials from the Ministerial Council responsible for planning and local government will work with NEMC to ensure that land use zoning and planning decisions integrate consideration of priority hazards
 * 	The Australian Building Codes Board will continue its work on risk-based building codes for priority hazards, and
 * 	NEMC will review all funding arrangements associated with relief in the resilience context, including the delivery of individual grants, public appeals and insurance, in shaping recovery policy, including provisions for betterment and mitigation.
Natural disasters will continue to be an inevitable part of our continent so it is imperative we have the ability to prevent, prepare, respond to and recover from them.
This National Disaster Resilience Strategy is the first step in a long-term process to move towards an approach that is focused on prevention, mitigation and resilience.
COAG acknowledged the challenges facing many communities as rebuilding gets underway and the need for Commonwealth, State and local governments to work together as part of the reconstruction process.
COAG also endorsed the establishment of the Australian Government Reconstruction Inspectorate to ensure accountability and rigour in the use of substantial public funding to be committed to the rebuilding. 



Today's new deal on health delivers national health reform that will last, built on a genuine partnership between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories.
The Gillard Government will invest a guaranteed extra $19.8 billion in public hospitals  -  matched by tough national standards to make sure that money goes straight to hospitals and straight to patients.
And because this is a genuine national deal, every person in Australia will benefit, no matter where they live.
What that all adds up to is a better deal for patients.
 * 	More money, more beds, more local control and more transparency
 * 	Less bureaucracy, less waste and less waiting.
Under the new deal:
 * 	The Federal Government will step up to permanently pay 50 per cent of the growth in hospital costs.
 * 	This will be done in two stages, increasing to 45 per cent in 2014-15 and to 50 per cent in 2017-18.
 * 	Once this kicks in, the States and the Commonwealth will share future funding growth in a 50/50 partnership.
 * 	The States and Territories will receive $16.4 billion in extra hospital funding between 2014-15 and 2019-20 under the new structural funding arrangements and $3.4 billion for extra emergency departments, elective surgery and 1300 sub acute hospital beds in the next four years.
As part of the agreement there will be a single national funding pool, meaning hospitals will be paid the same way, delivering unprecedented transparency in hospital funding arrangements.
In return for this extra funding, States and Territories will also deliver significant reforms to the way hospitals are funded and services are delivered, including:
 * 	Greater local control of hospitals.
 * 	A price on hospital services through activity-based funding to drive efficiency and reduce waste.
 * 	Strict national standards, including:
		 * 			a 4-hour target for emergency waiting times
		 * 			a 95 per cent elective surgery target, aimed at ensuring 95% of all patients waiting for elective surgery are treated within clinically recommended times.
		 * 			a National Access Guarantee to ensure that no Australian experiences extremely long waits for elective surgery.
 * 	More transparency through strict reporting via the MyHospital website.
As part of the changes announced today, the Commonwealth will have a renewed focus on the delivery of stronger primary health care to get people the services they need in their local communities and keep people well and out of hospital.
Implementation of these reforms will include stronger clinical engagement to ensure that the voices of clinicians all over the country are heard in the process.
HEALTH FUNDING
The biggest challenge facing our health system is that it is running out of money.
There is a fundamental structural problem: hospital costs are rising faster than the States can raise money to pay for them.
Without structural financing reform, rapidly rising health costs will overwhelm State and Territory budgets within the next few decades.
The Government is committed to properly funding public hospitals to meet the rising costs of care into the future.
From 2014-15, the Commonwealth Government will increase its share of public hospital funding by funding 45 per cent of all efficient growth in public hospital services, increasing to 50 per cent in 2017-18.
That is, from 2017-18, 50 cents in every new dollar spent on efficient hospital costs will come from the Commonwealth.
This will mean a genuinely equal partnership between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories on how growth in hospital costs is paid for into the future.
The financial benefit of this arrangement to the States and Territories will be a guaranteed $16.4 billion over the remainder of the decade.
NATIONAL FUNDING POOL
The Government will improve transparency of funding flows through the establishment of a single national funding pool.
This will ensure that all hospitals are funded under the same comparable, transparent arrangements.
Commonwealth and the State and Territory Governments will pay their share of base funding and efficient growth funding into a single national pool.
This body will be administered by an independent, national body, distinct from Commonwealth and State Health Departments, to be operational from 1 July 2012.
Instead of eight bureaucracies under the previous deal, there will be just one national funding body.
MORE EFFECTIVE, MORE EFFICIENT HOSPITALS
The Government is determined to deliver health reforms to give patients a better deal.
That means cleaning up our inefficient health system in which there is too much waste, by introducing solid market-based reforms to drive greater efficiency and innovation in the public hospital system.
Efficient Price
Instead of States receiving block grants  -  the equivalent of blank cheques  -  hospitals will be funded for each activity they undertake.
This will be based on the fair and efficient price for each service, set by an Independent Hospital Pricing Authority.
This will help identify our best hospitals, as well as some of our less-effective hospitals. 
Combined with indicators of quality and access, we can identify our underperforming hospitals and successful techniques used by our best hospitals can be shared.
In some instances, like payments to smaller regional hospitals and some highly specialised services, funding will continue to be paid in block grants.
Standards
The Commonwealth Government will continue to insist on tough national standards for public hospital performance to drive shorter waiting times for both elective surgery and emergency departments.
We will work with the States and Territories on safe and effective implementation to deliver:
 * 	The four-hour National Access Target  -  to reduce long waiting times in public hospital emergency departments, by aiming to have patients assessed, treated and discharged or admitted within 4 hours where clinically appropriate
 * 	The National Access Target for elective surgery, aimed at ensuring that 95% of all patients waiting for elective surgery will be treated within clinically recommended times.
 * 	The National Access Guarantee for elective surgery, which means that extremely long waits for elective surgery will become a thing of the past.
Reporting on Performance
The Government will also publish information about how each hospital performs so the public can choose the best care. 
This is another important market principle which will drive improvements in patient outcomes across the nation.
Transparency will also be increased through activity-based funding, meaning you pay for what you get, and one national funding body to ensure all hospitals are paid in the same way for services delivered.
Local Control
National health reform will also give local communities and clinicians a greater say in the delivery of their local hospital services through the establishment of Local Hospital Networks.
A GREATER FOCUS ON PRIMARY CARE
The Gillard Labor Government also understands that a strong health system requires more focus and investment in primary care services.
Our primary heath care reforms aim to shift the centre of gravity from hospitals towards primary health care.
The Government is establishing Medicare Locals to drive improvements in primary health care and ensure that primary health care services are better tailored to meet the needs of local communities.
The Government will strengthen its primary health care reforms by: 
 * 	ensuring that Medicare Locals are locally responsive, and can demonstrate how they will connect to local communities and respond to local health needs  -  this will mean establishing more Medicare Locals than originally planned;
 * 	bringing forward the establishment of more Medicare Locals to ensure more communities receive the concrete benefits from Medicare Locals sooner;
 * 	fast-tracking reforms to after-hours GP care, through which Medicare Locals will plan and support local face-to-face GP after hours services;
 * 	ensuring that local communities have robust information about their local primary health care services  -  including key information on opening hours and availability of health care services, patient outcomes such as rates of preventable hospitalisations, and information on the health status of the community, such as rates of chronic disease.
 Over time, the Commonwealth will empower Medicare Locals with more flexible funding to target services to their local community's specific needs. 



HOST: Julia Gillard you got your deal but you needed did you not, were you feeling that your credibility was at stake, that you needed a positive and decisive policy outcome to kick off this political year?
PM: I thought the nation needed a deal, I though the nation needed an arrangement which meant we were going to get a better health system and a lot of work had been done last year on health reform by the then Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, he was the first Prime Minister to step up and say ‘this is all going to go very badly if we let health costs eat State government financing.' So we needed health reform, clearly we weren't going to secure the reform Kevin had looked for with the GST, so I focussed on health reform rather than GST financing reform, and the nation needed to see its leaders come together yesterday and make an agreement for change and reform and that's exactly what we did.
HOST: Well we'll look at the details, some of the details of that package in moment, but are you concerned about a public perception that's emerging in opinion polls too, that this Government isn't delivering enough policy outcomes, and for example, the Australian Workers Union's released a survey showing that 27 per cent of its workers think this Government has their interests at heart; that's Labor heartland, is that good enough?
PM: The Government's got a lot of hard work in front of it, we've got to be out there delivering the changes that will make a difference in people's lives-
HOST: Do you need to lift your game?
PM: Well this is the year, as I've said, of decision and delivery, we've got a lot of hard work in front of us and that hard work is about improving the lives of Australians around the country; people's use of the health system, continuing to improve the education system, dealing with the big economic challenges facing the nation with our economy running at different speeds in different places, and of course dealing with the challenges of the future like pricing carbon and rolling out the national broadband network. We've got a lot of hard work to do, but I would say yesterday we did a very important piece of hard work for this nation's future, Australians rely on their healthcare system, and they will now be able to see more money in it, more hospital beds, more transparency, more local control and getting rid of a lot of things that really aggravate people about the health system, we're going to ensure there's less waiting time, less bureaucracy, less red tape than there has been in the past.
HOST: We've been hearing a lot today that the devil is in the detail, that this is going to take several months to work out. Now the mining tax was viewed as a deal as well and that's starting to unravel, is it possible and are you geared up for this, that the health agreement could go the same way?
PM: Well the mining tax is being progressed step by step, we had a policy transition group-
HOST: You're not there yet are you?
PM: Well we had a policy transition group, and now we're working through to produce the legislation. Yesterday we went into a room, no national health agreement, no way of delivering change and reform which was going to impact on the healthcare of every Australian. I came out holding a signed agreement, signed by every Premier and every Chief Minister for change. And of course that change is going to mean new resources, more than $16 billion of new resources, but I always said new money would not be on the table without reform, and we have secured major reforms. More transparency than people have ever had before, an efficient pricing system, we're taking our market based tools to drive new efficiencies in the healthcare system and a structural financing reform.
HOST: One of the key points is setting an efficient price for a hospital stay, how do you go about that in a way that suits all States? Are you leaving yourself open here to the blame game continuing?
PM: At the moment healthcare funding goes into a dark, black box and we don't know what happens to it next, you don't know, we don't know, the nation doesn't know. Well with our transparency measures and with our efficient pricing measures we're going to change that, and probably the easiest way to think about the efficient price is to say it's the fair price. To look at what it really costs to do a hip operation, or a knee replacement, to work on generating that price and then saying to hospitals ‘that's the efficient price, if you can do better, then you get to keep the benefits of that extra efficiency gain. If you're doing worse, then you've got an incentive for change.' The actual striking of the efficient price will be done by health experts in a pricing authority.
HOST: And what if the States don't like the efficient price that you've set?
PM: Well the States and Territories, by virtue of signing on to health reform, have signed on to the creation of efficient pricing, it's pivotal to the reforms and it is taking something that works in the market, in other marketplaces, people understand what the right price is, we are taking that kind of market methodology to health. It's not good enough for us to just send cheques to the States and say ‘whatever you can do for this is fine by us', if there are more efficient ways of doing things then we want States and hospitals, local hospital networks striving for those efficiencies. I want every dollar in health to make the biggest possible difference it can, that's why the efficient price is important and why the transparency is so important.
HOST: Now the focus here is very much on public hospital funding, other areas like community healthcare come under an umbrella that I think is called Medicare locals. Already there seems to be confusion about how that's going to work and why it doesn't all come under one umbrella.
PM: We want to make sure that primary care, first instance care, the care people get in their communities is better co-ordinated. At the moment we've got lots of people out there doing fantastic things, doctors doing great things, practice nurses doing great things, dieticians, speech therapists and the list goes on, but often people struggle to get the co-ordinated care they need with complex conditions, if you've got type 2 diabetes sure you need a doctor, but you may also need a dietician to help you improve your health, you may need a podiatrist because circulation problems means you're at risk of an amputation and so on. Medicare locals will help co-ordinate that primary care, we want to grow and strengthen the primary care system, whilst we're also developing local hospital networks so communities have more say in the running of hospitals in their area whilst the other reforms are showing benefits, the transparency, the efficient price, the more money that comes with the agreement signed yesterday.
HOST: Can you understand disappointment amongst some medical and healthcare professionals that they feel that they have been sidelined?
PM: Well the voice of medical and healthcare professionals has been well and truly heard over the last few years, we had of course Christine Bennet, a very eminent Australian, guide a reform commission to generate a reform blueprint, then former Prime Minister Rudd did a lot of work and a lot of consultation to generate reforms. But the truth is that all ended up falling victim to a political discussion about the goods and services tax, and I think many medical and health professionals would have been saying to themselves, well I'm not a tax expert, what I want to see is better healthcare. Well the national agreement that I struck yesterday is about better healthcare. I've said I wanted to get away from politicians arguing with politicians about the goods and services tax and who should hold it and have it, I wanted to focus on health reform and that's exactly what we've done.
And when you ask stakeholders in health what do you care about, transparency is a huge thing, they want to make sure that if one level of government is putting in more money, the other level of government isn't taking it out, the transparency I fought for yesterday with the national funding body, the national pool, will mean we always know where health dollars come from and what they go to pay for.
HOST: Once again mental health has been put in the too hard basket for now, what does that always happen?
PM: I can't quite agree with that Heather, yes we have agreed that COAG will hear from mental health experts at its next meeting, this was a suggestion of Premier Mike Rann and I think it was a good one, but in reforming hospitals and in reforming primary care, and part of the package yesterday is that the Federal Government is going to step up and bring out primary care reforms on stream more quickly. Doing those things makes a difference for patients with mental health problems, far too often people with mental health conditions end up in emergency departments when they shouldn't be there. If they'd be better cared for in the community they wouldn't have ever got there. Investments in primary care make a difference, and then for people with acute mental health conditions, they do need public hospital treatment, so better public hospitals is good for them.
HOST: Could you have done without media reports in recent days that your predecessor Kevin Rudd was less than happy in the Cabinet room that his policy had been dumped?
PM: Well look I saw a bit of rumour mongering-
HOST: You know what I'm talking about?
PM: Yes I do and I saw a bit of sort of rumour stuff in media reports. The reality is Australians are necessarily going to focus on what this means for them and their healthcare, it's a better deal for them and it's going to bring changes that Australians will be able to see and touch. Of course we had Cabinet discussions about this health package, we have Cabinet discussions about the full range of Government activity, you expect them to be robust but the rumour mongering I saw in the newspapers was simply not right.
HOST: Somebody in your Cabinet room is leaking, what are you going to do to restore discipline?
 PM: Well of course it's very clear that Cabinet is confidential and that is an obligation of participating in the Cabinet process and I say to my colleagues at the Cabinet level and at Labor Caucus when we meet during Parliamentary sitting weeks with my Labor colleagues, that we have hard work to do, to focus on the changes Australia needs, that's what I expect the team to be doing.
HOST: You were dogged by leaks last year, are you worried that that cycle might be repeating itself?
PM: The only thing that's been on my mind in the past few days is all of the intensive work it's taken to strike a major national health reform deal. It was hard, it was many, many hours of discussion not only in the room yesterday but in the lead up to it, but it was hard for a good cause, this is a national agreement, we didn't have a national agreement until yesterday. States were going to get left behind as reform happened in some places and not others, we didn't have the agreement for the kind of transparency that we signed up to on the dotted line yesterday, that's going to be a profoundly transformative thing for our healthcare system, more information that we've ever had before, and our course more community control, efficient pricing so that there's less waste, less waiting time in emergency departments and for elective surgery, this has taken all of my time and all of my effort and I'm very pleased that my colleagues, Labor colleagues and Liberal colleagues, Premiers Barnett and Baillieu, joined me in this endeavour to get a new national healthcare system for Australians.
HOST: How would you rate your first months in office, was it the year from hell and that you needed to start afresh?
PM: Look it's not about me putting labels on things, of course 2010 as is very publically know had some moments of great difficultly for me, a very difficult election campaign and before that of course a very difficult decision about offering myself for consideration for this position. But 2010, people can write the history books, take whatever perspective they like, as Prime Minister my determination is that 2011 is a year of decision and delivery. Yesterday was about decision and delivery, deciding that the nation needed a better healthcare system and delivering it with a national agreement signed up to by all Premiers and Chief Ministers.
HOST: This morning you attended yet another funeral for an Australian soldier killed in Afghanistan. Is that getting harder and harder for you?
PM: Every funeral is very, very hard, we're talking about very brave young men, Corporal Atkinson whose funeral was today, was 22 years old, so we're talking about a family with amazing dignity in the depths of grief and I had the opportunity to speak to the family today, to speak to his fiancé Danielle. They are amazing people showing unbelievable courage in a very difficult circumstance, a tragic circumstance.
But when I go to those funerals and I've been to a number and I look family members in the eyes the way I'm looking you in the eyes now, many times they say to be that we best honour their sacrifice by seeing the mission through. These are families who are bearing unbelievable burdens and that is what they say to me.
As Prime Minister I'm saying to the nation this is a tragic, tragic cost but we need to see the mission through.
HOST: Is there a limit to how many funerals, a limit in your own mind, to how many funerals you'll attend before at least considering a review of Government policy on this issue?
PM: I've made a decision about our engagement in Afghanistan which I believe is right, and so having made that decision my message to the nation is this is going to be hard, and I frankly warned the nation last year that there would be hard days ahead, and today has been a really hard day. There'll be, I suspect, some more hard days ahead, but the mission is a vital one for our peace and national security. Afghanistan is a place where people who have been trained and those people have come and taken Australian lives using the skills that they picked up in terrorist training camps in Afghanistan.
We are there to deny terrorist trainers their ability to use Afghanistan for that deadly purpose.
HOST: Julia Gillard we'll leave it there, thank you very much for joining us.
PM: Thank you 



HOST: Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning. I think I've cut someone short, have I?
HOST: Yeah, but we're really pleased you have.
PM: OK, I'm glad I've come in handy.
HOST: Welcome to the Adelaide airwaves.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: It's a big reform to get our heads around, and it sounds like there's still a lot of detail to sort out. You know Australians hate bureaucracy, but you've got a new one.
PM: I understand Australians look and want to see the most money possible going into healthcare, and I share that. That's why the agreement we struck yesterday is going to provide $16.4 billion more to the end of this decade.
Actually, this agreement sweeps a whole lot of bureaucracy away. Last year, an agreement was struck where there would be a new, national funding body and then there would be an individual bureaucracy  -  a new one  -  in every State and Territory.
This agreement sweeps all those State-based bureaucracies away, Territory-based bureaucracies. They're all gone.
What we've got is a national funding body so that the money in health is really clear.
I know a lot of Australians are worried from time to time that one level of government is putting more money into health but somehow it's leaking away and, you know, money is being taken out by another level of government and no-one's clear what's happening. From now on, with this new funding body you'll be able to see every dollar going in and where it is going to, and we are going to drive, through this agreement, more beds, more local control, more transparency, and of course there's more funding.
HOST: One of the issues about dealing with dollars, health dollars, is are we getting bang for our buck? What is this efficient price that you talk about?
PM: Bang for the buck is a good way of thinking about it. If you look at all of the things that happen in our hospitals, you know, say, hip operations, what does it cost to have a hip operation done in a hospital?
Well, there is a price for that which is a price meaning everybody is doing their job efficiently, and there is an amount you could pay for that which would be inclusive of a whole lot of waste, a whole lot of costs that could be cut, if the hospital was operating more efficiently. So, to drive efficiencies, we will be paying on the basis of an efficient price, and because of the transparency - a bit like My School, which obviously I drove as Education Minister  -  you will be able to see hospitals that are doing it really well being even more efficient than the standard of the efficient price. You will be able to see hospitals doing it badly, and then we can step in and fix that underperformance.
HOST: Prime Minister, I guess all operations are different. Who determines what's an efficient price for a procedure?
PM: We will have health experts who determine that efficient price, and of course people are different. Approaches to surgery, though, have a lot of things in common in terms of who you need in there doing what, and so it is possible to work through and deal with these pricing questions.
HOST: A lot of people saw a giant flaw in the previous national attempt to fix health  -  no mental health in there. Our Premier has asked for it. When's he gonna get it?
PM: Yes, Premier Rann certainly raised mental health yesterday and I'm very, very glad he did. We are committed, now, at the next meeting of leaders, the next Council of Australian Governments meeting, to have a session on mental health where we will be addressed by experts from the field  -  people like Pat McGorry, who was Australian of the Year last year. So, we do want to focus on mental health, but let's remember that if we are improving our hospitals and improving care in the community then we are improving circumstances for people with mental health.
A lot of times in emergency departments, people are there because they've got mental health problems which haven't been properly managed in the community. I am committed to new investments in primary care and better coordination of services, and that really matters for people with complex conditions like many mental health conditions, where they need to see more than one health professional and they need to get a coordinated package of care to help them through.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard with us, talking about the national health reform that was thrashed out over many hours in Canberra yesterday.
The other thing that isn't there, we understand, is aged care, and you know that we have a blockage in our hospitals because we can't get elderly people into aged care. When and where do you fix that?
PM: Well, the agreement yesterday will make a big difference for that, and this has been central to the blame game between the Federal Government and State governments, something people would have seen year in, year out when Premiers used to come to Premiers' meetings with Prime Minister Howard and they would say ‘you're not properly funding aged care, it's causing a problem for our public hospitals', and it would never get resolved.
Inherent in yesterday's agreement, a key part of it, is that as Prime Minister I have agreed with the States and Territories that we will be an equal partner in the growth in costs in public hospitals. So, 50 per cent of it comes onto my books, 50 per cent of it goes onto their books.
What that means is I have the incentive to get aged care right. With me paying 50 per cent of the growth, it is not in my interests to have a frail, aged Australian unnecessarily in an acute hospital bed when I could have done better for them in the community.
HOST: Prime Minister, I know your next commitment is coming up. The Opposition said ‘we won't see a lot of this money until 2017 plus.' What do you tell us about when the money starts?
PM: Well, that's just a load of nonsense.
Already we are providing 1,300 more beds. Already we have provided 70,000 more elective surgery procedures. Already we have provided 250,000 services from GP Super Clinics. Already we are upgrading emergency departments around the country.
Then, from 1 July, people will see further changes. They will see local hospital networks start, so they'll have more local control and more say. They'll see a GP afterhours access line start so they can get help in the middle of the night when a kid's sick and it's really fraught and people are really anxious. They'll see our GP telehealth investment start to come online so we can use the power of new technology, particularly for people in regional and remote communities.
These investments are flowing and making a difference for healthcare now. We are training 1,000 more nurses a year, training 6,000 more doctors to the end of the decade. That makes a difference when people need care, so that they can get a professional they need.
And let's remember we are coming back from an environment where the current Leader of the Opposition, as a long-serving Health Minister, took $1 billion out of public hospitals and cut GP training places so we're short of doctors and we've been short of money.
We are fixing that.
HOST: However, the Opposition Leader says this is a big win for the Premiers and a humiliating backdown for you, the Prime Minister.
PM: You know what's really funny about that is the Opposition Leader went out and did a press conference to tell Australians how bad this all was before the agreement was even finished. He didn't wait to see it, he didn't wait to read it, he just said ‘no, it's no good.'
Well, that's opposition for opposition's sake, and frankly, it's what we've come to expect from Mr Abbott  -  anything I say, he will be opposed to. He won't even take the time or the trouble to read the details.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us today.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Julia Gillard good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Jon.
HOST: Congratulations on striking a deal on health or is it: why have you backed down on Kevin Rudd's supposed deal on health?
PM: I went into the meeting with my colleagues from States and Territories yesterday, wanting to get a better deal for patients and wanting to get a better deal for every patient in the country, a truly national health deal. I went into that room yesterday having said to my colleagues that I didn't want us to continue a political debate about financing and the GST, I wanted us to focus on health reform, and that's what we've done and we've walked out of that room with an agreement that gets more money into hospitals, that will mean more beds with more transparency than we've ever had before and more local control.
HOST: But have you got an agreement or just an agreement for an agreement, the devil's in the detail is what all the Premiers are saying?
PM: I've got a signed agreement, signed by every Premier and Chief Minister, and to take an example Jon, I'm passionate about transparency, I believe Australians should know where the dollars come from in their health system and where they go to, we've got an agreement from yesterday for a national body, a national pool, so we will have more transparency than ever before, the agreement requires that that will be made into law, we agreed that yesterday. Yes of course, there are some details to work through, the composition of who's on the board that governs that body for example, but yesterday signed by everyone, we will have it, it will be brought into existence, it will be brought into law.
HOST: Prime Minister what will change from the point of view of the patients, the consumers, the users of the health system?
PM: Well some very important things will change, for patients, what they will see in their health system is they will see more local control through local hospital networks, communities want to have a say about their healthcare system. They will see more doctors and nurses in the system, we're training 1000 new nurses a year, and 6000 more doctors to the end of the decade.
HOST: We'll see more bureaucrats too won't we?
PM: We'll see less bureaucrats under this model than under the model agreed last year-
HOST: But you've got another layer of decision making, how can there be fewer bureaucrats?
PM: Well Jon, last year the agreement was to create a new bureaucracy in every State and Territory as well as a national pool, I have swept away all of those new bureaucracies in States and Territories.
HOST: So Kevin Rudd's model was for even more bureaucrats than your model, but your model is, is it not, for more bureaucrats than we have now?
PM: My model's for more transparency Jon-
HOST: And that means bureaucrats, people who count stuff?
PM: But Jon in using that term you're obviously trying to imply somehow this isn't worthwhile, and I'm going to fundamentally disagree with you on that. You transform public services when you have more information about them, central to this reform agenda is having an efficient price, so we are not wasting money, we're not giving a big blank cheque and then saying do your best, we are actually defining what is an efficient price for a service and through the transparency, we will be able to see hospitals that are doing well and being even better than the efficient price and we will be able to see hospitals doing badly and fix that underperformance.
Transparency matters because it changes delivery, transparency matters because it drives improved services. Jon you asked me what else people will see, people will see Medicare locals co-ordinating care in their community. The burden of disease is chronic and complex conditions, people need to see a doctor of course, but they also need to see other health professionals and at the moment people can struggle to get the right package of care that they need, people will see a GP after-hours access line, getting help in the middle of the night when your child's sick has been a big problem for people. People will see tele-health, using the power of the National Broadband Network and new technology, and people will see more beds Jon, and more elective surgery. We're already in the process of delivering 1300 new beds, we've delivered 70,000 more elective surgery operations and that's just a start.
HOST: Surely for a Labor government the gap between rich and poor ought to be an issue, what is there in this package that changes the outcomes for people who can't afford private health?
PM: Jon you're absolutely right, that is front and centre of what I think about, the equity of the package. First and foremost people without means rely on our public hospital system-
HOST: Which is getting worse and worse all the time, I had some experience this summer of our public hospital system, the wards aren't as clean as they should be, the staff are rushed off their feet, people are left to their own devices half the time, it's not a happy picture.
PM: Not it's not been a happy picture Jon and I can explain why is hasn't been a happy picture; healthcare costs rise and they rise quickly. States and Territories have been trying to keep their public hospitals up to standard and up to scratch as healthcare costs have risen quickly, and as money going into the healthcare system from the former Howard Government, indeed when Tony Abbott was Health Minister, was going down as a percentage of public hospital costs it was going down. So the burden was falling increasingly on States and Territories and it was going to get harder and harder.
Yesterday, through this agreement, we fixed that. We have agreed that the Federal Government will step up and be an equal partner in the growth of health costs. Now that is going to make a huge difference, the single biggest claim of the States and Territories all of these years has been ‘we can't keep making our budgets work if year after year we are the level of government with the burden of healthcare cost growth on our shoulders.' Yesterday we fixed that, the Federal Government will be an equal partner in paying for growth.
HOST: Alright well we'll be speaking to the Premier Ted Baillieu to see how enthusiastic he is from Victoria's point of view a little later this morning. The latest opinion polls, the Age/Nielsen poll published today Prime Minister, has your disapproval up four per cent, you're primary vote down three per cent, not a happy picture.
PM: Well we've got a lot of hard work to do Jon, we've got a lot of hard work to do and that's what we were doing yesterday. Australians are rightly looking to me and looking to the Government to deliver, they want to see change, they want to see improvements. As a citizen yourself you've said you've had experience with the public hospital system, and you're just one of millions and millions of Australians with that kind of experience. People want to see change, want to see improvement and that's what we delivered yesterday, a better deal for patients.
HOST: Well you might be concentrating on the fine detail of government, but the art of politics is a lot more than that isn't it, and it would seem to be that whatever it is that you've been doing doesn't work.
PM: I think ultimately people judge their governments by what is changing in their lives and what government is doing to work with them and to improve things. People will see improvements in our healthcare system, and that will be important to them.
HOST: Have you had the trainer wheels on?
PM: I'm not sure what you mean by that Jon.
HOST: Well there's a lot of commentary, and I'm sure you follow it just like the rest of us do, people saying ‘oh look, you know, Julia Gillard hit the ground running da da da da da', and then people saying ‘oh look, inexperience is showing in the way that she's dealing with some of the issues that confront the government.'
PM: Well I don't worry with much of that Jon, I'd have to say, what I worry about day to day is getting the job done, making a difference for Australians, so when I walked into that room at the Council of Australians Governments yesterday, I wasn't thinking about what people may or may not write in newspapers, I was thinking about how long someone waits in an emergency department, how long a pensioner waits on a list for a hip operation, and what we can do to make a difference for that, we made a big difference yesterday.
HOST: Do you feel Prime Ministerial?
PM: Jon I am conscious of the obligations and responsibilities of this job, and every day I get up and set about doing it to the best of my ability, I've got a very clear agenda for the future of this nation, a very clear agenda about what I believe in, I'm passionate about making sure every Australian has the benefits of opportunity, a fair nation doesn't unfairly deny a child a chance in life, we are changing that, to change that we have to support families and support them with the services that they rely on, health is a big part of that and that's what was driving me yesterday when we went into that room to see if we could get a national deal, something that had eluded the Federal Government and properly funding health for years and years and I say again, under the Howard Government, if you want to chart the percentage of money going into public hospitals, the line on the chart was only going in one direction and that was down. We needed to fix that and we have done that yesterday.
HOST: The other political drama and before we move on I want to ask you about the Victorian flood compensation package in a moment as well, but the other subtext in all of this of course is the relationship you have with your predecessor, with Kevin Rudd, and here you are now trashing another one of his signature pieces.
PM: Well what I'm doing is working through, as a I did yesterday, with Premiers and Chief Ministers, to get a deal for the whole of the nation. The reality is Kevin worked very, very strongly on health reform, he was the first Prime Minister to step up to the problem we had with financing in health and that was if you just sat back and didn't do anything ultimately the cost of hospitals was going to break State budgets. Kevin looked at that problem, unlike Prime Ministers in the past, Prime Minister Howard assisted by Health Minister Abbott who made that problem worse, Kevin said how can we fix this, and he worked hard on health reform. But the place that he got to was where we did not have a national deal and where we were talking about the GST and healthcare financing rather than focussing on what was going to give more beds, get more elective surgery done, it meant people waited for less time, that they had more information about what was going on. We needed to get a health deal which improved health services and that's what I secured yesterday, a deal for right round the nation, so whether you're in Melbourne, or whether you're in Broome, or whether you're in Hobart or whether you're in Darwin, this health arrangement that we struck yesterday will make a difference for you.
HOST: Prime Minister the Victorian flood relief package, according to today's Herald Sun front page, will total $500 million. Where did that figure come from?
PM: The $500 million is a pre-payment Jon. Just like we've agreed to make a advance payment to Queensland so they can get on with the job up there, I want to make an advance payment to Victoria so they can get on with the job. That won't be the total amount of money that's paid, the damages assessment is more than that, the damages assessment is in the order of more than a billion dollars, but getting money quickly means people can get on with things quickly and I want to see the rebuilding that Victoria needs happen as fast as possible.
HOST: I'm just about to speak to Christine Assange next Prime Minister, she is the mother of Julian Assange, who is either the most dangerous man in the world or the most heroic person in the world depending on your perspective. You condemned him as soon as Wikileaks started embarrassing both American and its allies around the world, she says that the Australian Government ought be protecting her son and helping him rather than condemning him as you did.
PM: The Australian Government is helping her son as an Australian citizen, Mr Assange-
HOST: How?
PM: Well by providing consular services Jon. When Australians get into trouble overseas, our diplomats, our embassy staff go and help them. That happens right around the world-
HOST: It's of little help to him, but you were quick to condemn-
PM: Jon, Jon look I'm not going to let you say that, that is not fair and that is not right.
HOST: Do you reject your condemnation of him when he was-
PM: Well Jon let me finish because I'm not going to let you leave the impression with your listeners that somehow Julian Assange is being assisted in a lesser way that other Australian citizens. Julian Assange is receiving exactly the same assistance we would give any Australian in any part of the world who was caught up in legal proceedings, exactly the same assistance.
HOST: Do you regret condemning him out of hand when this matter first boiled over last year?
PM: I've got a view about Wikileaks as grossly irresponsible, that's my view. I also have a view as Prime Minister that it's my job and the Government's job to support Australians overseas who get into trouble, we are doing that with Mr Assange just like we would with every other Australian citizen who for whatever reason faced a legal problem overseas.
HOST: You and others were quick to say you thought he'd probably broken laws, there's been no law that anyone can find here, in the US, or anywhere else in relation to Wikileaks that he's alleged to have broken. Was that all quick to, wrong to rush so quickly to judgment?
PM: Well the point I've made Jon is clearly some laws have been broken in the taking of confidential information-
HOST: Not my Wikileaks or Mr Assange, maybe by others, Bradley Manning in particular?
PM: Correct, absolutely, so at the heart of this we would not have had this information available to Wikileaks-
HOST: So you convicted the wrong person.
PM: Well Jon if I can finish my sentence, we would not have had this available, this information available on Wikileaks if there hadn't been an illegal act in the first place. Then, of course, there's what view you take of it and I understand people have got different views, but my view is that this is irresponsible, and I will continue to hold that view. Now that is a different point from saying what do we then do to support an Australian citizen who is in a legal problem overseas. We support Mr Assange in exactly the same way we would support any other Australian citizen in a comparable difficulty.
HOST: Thank you for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks Jon. 



HOST: Julia Gillard, you say this health deal will last but the last one only lasted for 10 months. Why will this one go for longer?PM: This is a truly national health deal. Every Premier, every Chief Minister signed yesterday to deliver this deal. I went into that room wanting to get a better deal for patients and, importantly, get a better deal for patients right around the country. I didn't want one State or one Territory left behind.
So, we've got a deal for the whole country, every Premier, every Chief Minister having signed the deal yesterday.HOST: It has been signed but it is far from delivered. The fine details are still to be worked out. Why won't, in six months' time when you want to do that, the Premiers come back and say, ‘well, no, we've got more problems with it'?PM: Yesterday Premiers and Chief Ministers signed a deal which is very clear about more money flowing to our public hospitals, about the Federal Government and State governments being partners in growth, about more transparency, a national body, a national pool making clear to every Australian the money that's being spent on health and who's providing it, whether it's coming from the Federal Government or from State governments.More local control was part of the deal signed onto yesterday, also very important so communities get a say in their health services. This is part of what was directly agreed yesterday.HOST: And those details won't change when the fine details are nutted out in six months' time?PM: We got an agreement signed yesterday. Sure, fine details have to be nutted out. Take, for example, the national body, the national pool that will guarantee transparency. Yesterday we agreed to put that into law. The details of that legislation have to be typed up and worked through, you'd expect that, but yesterday's agreement was signed by every Chief Minister and every Premier in the room, as well as by me as Prime Minister.HOST: It took Kevin Rudd an extra several billion dollars to get the States to sign on last April. How much extra money did you have to kick into the kitty to get them to sign on yesterday?PM: I made it very clear to the States and Territories that we were going to provide growth money of $16.4 billion but only provide it in return for reform, so that was the funding envelope available yesterday. It's a funding envelope that is the same as the deal last year, but obviously these arrangements are different.I've got away from the GST. I didn't want the nation endlessly talking about financing. I wanted to focus on health reform and a better deal for patients and that's what we have succeeded in achieving.HOST: But you had to bring forward some payments which were intended as reward payments to the States, didn't you?PM: As part of yesterday's meeting we signed this major health reform agreement. We also signed an agreement about waiting times in emergency departments.I don't want people waiting unnecessarily for treatment and far too often Australians do wait, so, as part of securing those targets and that agreement, we did bring forward some money that was in the Government's budget anyway, but we will pay it more quickly to help States and Territories progress towards those targets.HOST: How long will it be before a parent can take their child into emergency and not have to wait for more than four hours, or a pensioner on an elective surgery waiting list for a hip replacement can reasonably expect to get that surgery delivered when they're told it will be done?PM: Well, what I can say is already, through working with the States and Territories, we have delivered 70,000 more elective surgery procedures, so that matters for the person who needs the hip replacement. We've delivered 250,000 services through our GP super clinics, so that matters for people who need to see a health professional in their community.We are training 1,000 more nurses a year. We are training 6,000 more doctors to the end of this decade. We are upgrading emergency departments around the country. We have provided 1,300 new beds.
Now, all of this is a start.On 1 July people will see some important things changing in their health system. We'll start with local hospital networks, more local control. People will see Medicare locals start to be rolled out, better coordination of the care that they need in their local communities so people don't fall through the gaps and the holes. They will see a GP afterhours access line - very important if your child gets sick in the middle of the night and they'll see our telehealth initiatives come on stream as well.HOST: But how long will it take before those benchmarks, those targets, those things the States have to deliver, like 4-hour waiting times in emergency, are delivered across the board?PM: Yesterday we signed an agreement which deals with the progressive phase-in of targets. Yes, it is going to be difficult to reach those targets. It's not easy.In order to take pressure off emergency departments we need to make sure that, first instance, primary care in the community is working right. We need to make sure that aged care is working right.But the important thing about yesterday's deal is because the Federal Government is now stepping up to being a partner in growth in the costs of public hospitals, we have the right incentive to make sure people get treatment in the community when they can, when that is the best thing for them.HOST: This deal changed from the plan that Kevin Rudd nutted out. Instead of the Commonwealth being the dominant funder it's now sharing costs, sharing the costs of the growth funding 50/50 with the states.Who sets the level for that 50 per cent to be matched? Does the Commonwealth say, ‘this is how much we are kicking in' and the States match it, or do the States decide?PM: An independent body decides what is the efficient price for a service. Now, that sounds like a lot of jargon, I know, but if you imagine, what does it really cost to do a hip operation? An independent body will work out what that price is, what that efficient price is. We'll pay half of the growth and the States will pay half of the growth.What that means is we will see through our transparency measures who is doing well and who is doing badly.HOST: And it will effectively be demand driven as patients turn up? That's when the cost will be decided?PM: It will be demand driven. This is uncapped growth, so if the number of operations, the level of activity rises, then the level of funding will rise. So, the $16.4 billion agreed yesterday is a minimum in that sense. It's factored against our predicted levels of activity, but if that's higher then more money will be paid.But I do want to come back to this efficient price and transparency point. It's really important. By striking the efficient price and then having transparency through the national pool, the national body that was agreed yesterday, a bit like My School, we will be able to see who is doing well and who is doing badly.
If people are being inefficient, then we will be able to step in and get it fixed. If people are doing really well then hospitals around the country can look to that hospital and say, what are they doing better than us that we can learn from?
HOST: You say your deal takes an axe to red tape, but Kevin Rudd said that about his deal. Why is yours better?
PM: Well, the arrangements from last year ended up with nine different bureaucracies, a national bureaucracy and then one in each State and Territory. What I've done is swept eight of them away. We will have one national body, one national pool.
HOST: Did Mr Rudd express his displeasure at your deal when it was talked about in Cabinet?PM: Look, I'm not going to go to Cabinet conversations but I have seen some reports and some rumours here which are all pretty silly. Kevin participated in the Cabinet meeting, as did his other Cabinet colleagues, and then he had a plane to catch.HOST: But given that he had, that you were axing central parts of his deal, particularly the dominant funding, would it be unsurprising if he was a little unhappy?PM: Cabinet always has good discussions. We work through details, we focus on what we need to do-HOST: -Somewhat robustly?PM: -but what happens in Cabinet is confidential and once again I've seen some chatter about this in the newspapers. We had a Cabinet discussion. Kevin needed to go and catch a plane.HOST: Given that there was that chatter, someone is obviously leaking, if incorrectly in some terms, from Cabinet. The latest polls show your primary vote down to 32 per cent. Tony Abbott's given his troops a talking to about leaking. Given your Government's standing in the latest polls, do you need to give your troops a talking to as well?PM: I speak to our Labor Caucus every time the Parliament meets and every time I speak to my colleagues what I say is we've got a lot of hard work to do. We've got a lot of hard work to do to get on and to make sure our country is as fair as it can be, as prosperous as it can be in the future. I am driven by a passion for making sure every Australian gets the benefit of opportunity.In order to do that we have got to make sure government services are supporting Australians, and health is really critical. We took a big step forward yesterday with a better deal for patients.HOST: You got the States to sign on to health but you are still working on the numbers for your flood levy. Steve Fielding has apparently signed on but you haven't got Tony Windsor yet. Are you still short of the numbers in both houses?PM: I'll keep working through, talking to the independents about the flood levy, so I'll keep working through with the Independents but let's remember we are in this position because Tony Abbott, without a plan, without numbers that add up, with no idea how he would support the rebuilding of the nation, has decided in the interests of politics to vote against the levy and I would maintain to Mr Abbott it is time for him to focus on the national interest. The national interest requires delivering the flood levy, making the cuts to the Government's budget and getting $5.6 billion out there to rebuild from all the damage.HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.PM: Thank you. 



Thank you very, very much and it's a very great privilege to join you here tonight, join you with so many friends around the room.
Now I am going to try and acknowledge my Federal Parliamentary colleagues who are here tonight, but I know even as I say those words I am going to get these acknowledgements wrong, because every time look down at my list of Federal colleagues here tonight I've seen another one or two saunter past, so the room is filled with colleagues from the Federal Parliament.
But the list is something like the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer and long time friend of this union, Wayne Swan, the Assistant Treasurer, Bill Shorten, who has such a special connection to this union, and then other Parliamentary colleagues including Mark Bishop, Stephen Conroy, Yvette D'Ath, Michael Danby, Don Farrell, David Feeney, Michael Forshaw, Bernie Ripoll is here, Mark Dreyfus, Mark Furner, Ed Husic, Joe Ludwig, Deb O'Neill, Graeme Perrett and I think so more that I've managed to miss.
But the fact that so many of us are here from the Federal Parliamentary party should tell you how much we value your work.
And of course we are joined by friends from the union movement, including Ged Kearney and Jeff Lawrence.
Perhaps instead of doing a long list of acknowledgements, it would be easier to say here tonight the people gathered in this room are friends of Bill Ludwig and that would catch every category.
And, of course, friends of Bill Ludwig because Bill Ludwig has been a stalwart of this union, a big man with a big heart, but Bill Ludwig as a Labor leader has always understood that strong unionism and a strong Labor Party go hand in hand, and whilst he has fought for his union he's fought for Labor governments here in the great State of Queensland, and for the whole nation, and tonight I honour his contribution over so many years to the labour movement and to the Labor Party. It is unequalled in my experience in the Labor Party. I'm proud to be here and to call myself a friend of Bill Ludwig.
And Bill, I did want to thank you tonight for letting us have Joe Ludwig in Canberra. He brings your values, your ideals, your understanding of this great State with him to Canberra. He's a very valued member of my team and I thank him, too, for his friendship and support.
And I also want to acknowledge Paul Howes tonight. I want to thank him for his speech a little bit earlier, and I also want to say to Paul thank you for asking me to join you here for Valentine's Day. I'm viewing it as a kind of Valentine's Day date, however you're viewing it, and even though, of course, your wife is here tonight.
But, Paul, I did want to just say a few words which I mean in a spirit of constructive criticism, so if you could take them that way I would be very grateful.
As people know from my time as Minister for Education, I am a stickler for grammar and for English language and its true meaning. I'm therefore very concerned that the title of your recent book should be Confessions of a Faceless Man. I think to have written this title you must have misunderstood the meaning of the word confession, and misunderstood the terminology ‘faceless man.'
If I can explain to you where the word ‘confession' comes from, it comes from a religious practice where one goes and acknowledges error and asks for forgiveness. It is therefore not appropriate to start any text with the words: ‘I confess, I was right'.
And, Paul, I also mean this in the spirit of constructive criticism, but it seems to me it is perhaps hard to describe oneself as a ‘faceless man', having in the past described oneself as a media tart. These things would seem to me to be mutually inconsistent, and can I say to you I think possibly a little earlier in your life you would have needed to have chosen the path of a faceless man. Given you didn't, I think it's probably too late to try and be one now given your face is so well known.
But, Paul, I do mean this in the spirit of constructive criticism, because I'm sure in the future we will see further great works from your pen, and most of the room is living in fear of it.
But, Paul, of course, is a great contemporary leader of this union with its 125 years of proud Labor history, and I want to reflect on some of that proud Labor history and then talk to you about what it means for our future as a nation and for the future of our Labor Government.
I want to set the scene by drawing your attention to words written a long time ago talking about the things of this union's history, and the words are as follows:
The meeting place is at Barcaldine at the end of the camp. Against a tree flying the flag of Freedom under the Southern Cross. The flag is a bit ragged, and no wonder, for it is never taken down. The reading room or recreation hall is a good specimen of bush-building, fitted with seats and tables of rough packing-cases, where the men read and play cards, chess, or draughts. Their lending-library was roughly built at first with bits of old bag and tattered canvas, but a new tent has taken its place. Some 600 books of all sorts are collected here and issued on loan under the authority of the librarian, ‘Old Jim', who may always be found close at hand, unless drawn hence by ‘home affairs', or marching off with his wooden gun for a little drill.
What those words from your union's history should tell us is that it is rooted in this great union and in the Labor movement; to believe in the politics of opportunity; to believe in the politics of social mobility; to believe in the distribution of the benefits of hard work; to believe in what teamwork can bring.
And I know that it is fashionable in the modern age - we see it in newspapers commentary all the time, and sometimes we perhaps indulge this commentary ourselves - but it's fashionable in the modern age to reflect on the labour movement as if it is no longer a movement with a future. It's sometimes fashionable in the modern age to reflect on the Labor Party, and some are driven to conclude that the Labor Party no longer understands its purpose. And sometimes people reflect on Labor Governments in the modern age and wonder how they join with the historic ideals of the labour movement.
I think in all of these reflections we are showing an uncertainty and a timidity that is not justified, and we should not forgive. We should not succumb to this timidity and uncertainty.
I believe the labour movement knows where it is going, and it's got a bold course for the future. I believe that whilst I won't be here and neither will Bill Ludwig, that this union will celebrate another hundred years in the future, and another hundred years beyond that, that it will continue to build a future the way it built over 125 years in the past.
I do not believe we should be uncertain about the future of the labour movement. The labour movement has a strong future as a part of this country; as part of shaping the destinies of working Australians; as part of shaping our prosperous modern economy. That's true today and it will be true for many, many years to come.
And I do not believe that the Labor Party has ever forgotten its purpose. I am crystal clear as Labor Party leader what the purpose of our political party is. The purpose of our political party is to ensure that every Australian, no matter the circumstances of their birth, enjoys opportunity. A fair nation does not unfairly deny a child access to opportunity. This is what we have fought for over all of these long years - opportunity and social mobility - because the trade union movement has been built by working people who have done some amazing and courageous things, fuelled by the ambition and belief that their sons and daughters would live a better life than they have: a more materially prosperous life; a life of greater opportunity.
That's why the manual worker dreams of his son getting an apprenticeship. That's why the tradesperson dreams of his daughter going to university.
Working people believe in opportunity. They want to leave a country for the next generation that is better than the country they inherited from the generation before.
We are fuelled and driven by the politics of opportunity. This is the great Labor purpose, and that great Labor purpose is best fulfilled when we work together as a team. And put simply, that's what unionism is: the simple recognition that by being members of a team together we are strengthened beyond our individual efforts; that every great team is more than the sum of its parts; that therefore a union is actually more than the sum of the individuals within it, because there's a special power that comes when working people combine and pursue goals together.
The purpose of unionism, that sense of teamwork, that mission of coming together to achieve great goals, is part of our Labor history, it's part of our Labor future, it's part of our purpose, it is what defines us as a Labor Party.
So, clearly understanding as Labor leader the historic mission of Labor, the politics of opportunity, the politics of working together, the understanding of the great combinations of working people and what they can achieve, my vision for this Labor Government, despite the circumstances of a minority Parliament, is a very clear one.
We will work together as a political party, with the labour movement, with the broader community, to bring change to our nation, to further opportunity - opportunity for every child, opportunity for every person, driving towards a nation where we can truly say demography is not destiny, and you cannot predict a child's life path by knowing which postcode their parents reside in.
That through this Labor Government we will harness the benefits of economic prosperity, make sure that those benefits persist into the future, that we are a prosperous nation with those benefits to share.
That the purpose of this political party in government is to ensure that as we share those benefits we share them in the form of social services that working people rely on, including health, which is why the struggle for health reform has been so important to me in the days that have just gone by.
And it is not in this political party's DNA, it is not in the DNA of the labour movement, to be afraid of the future. This Labor Party, this labour movement, has been created by people who were prepared to face up to the challenges of the future, and they haven't always been easy.
When this union was formed the challenges of fighting two world wars were still to come. When this union was formed the challenge of the Great Depression was still to come. When this union was formed what we needed to do to modernise our economy and make our nation competitive in a ruthless and cut-throat world was still to come, and people from the Labor Party and labour movement looked inside themselves and found the courage to face those challenges.
We are called on today to face some of the difficult challenges so we can shape our future. They're different challenges than the past; the challenge of climate change and pricing carbon; the challenge of making sure our technology, like the National Broadband Network, keeps this nation in front rather than falling behind, but they are challenges that we are up to and challenges that we will meet working together.
So, friends, if I can leave you with one message tonight, one message in this great gathering of working people from the Australian Worker's Union, a union with so much history combined with so much Labor Party history; if there's one message I want to leave you with it's this:
We will be as bold in our future as we have been in our past.
We will serve the cause of brining opportunity to every Australian.
We will pursue that historic mission of fairness that has created the Labor Party and had it endure all of these years, and we will do it together as we always have, understanding that working together as a team we're unbeatable.
Thank you very much. 



JOURNALIST: Could I start by asking you about why you chose this school and its relevance to national standards, and were you acknowledging that there are teething problems in the system?
PRIME MINISTER KEY: Well, firstly I chose this school because this is where we launched national standards. That's the flagship policy for the Government. We believe it will make a substantial difference to lifting literacy and numeracy standards in New Zealand, and I thought it was a great place to take Julia to show her how (inaudible) highly successful because it's really been implementing national standards now for a long time, for the eight years that (inaudible) been principal.
In terms of teething issues, yes, look there are one or two issues. We've acknowledge those to the teachers in the last few months. They're really minor issues around moderation between schools and that's part of why we've got the significant number of feedback loops. We're working on those with the schools. It's one of the reasons why particularly the first year was for all intents and purposes a trial because that data wasn't released publically, but like any system, (inaudible) it will take some time to bed down, but we think the long-term gains we be that all New Zealanders will have a greater opportunity to enjoy a good education.
JOURNALIST: And are you looking at Ms Gillard's My Schools website, perhaps, as the next step?
KEY: Yeah, well, look we noted the fact that when that was launched in Australia there was huge participation from parents right across Australia wanting to know how their children are going. I think every parent wants to know if their child is succeeding at school and what they can do to help them and (inaudible) those ideas.
JOURNALIST: What's the main thing you want to achieve at the end of this visit? What do you want to be able to tell the New Zealand people at the end of this visit?
KEY: Well, firstly, the fact that Prime Minister Gillard has come to New Zealand is very significant. It's important that she's here. This is our strongest relationship. We work together across many aspects of life and we are great mates, I think, as two countries and we're there to support one another, but also long term, I mean, a single economic market with Australia has real economic benefits to, I think, the citizens of both countries and this is just further example that we continue to work together, and I think it sends a strong message to our ministers that-
JOURNALIST: -You're politically opposed, though, are you not?
KEY: Look, I can't speak for Julia but we parked our politics up at the door when it comes to international relations. We deal with leaders right across the world and we do so in the best interests of New Zealand and we don't let politics get in the way of that.
JOURNALIST: One more question, a lot of Kiwis asking about border control, about getting over to Australia quickly and easily.
KEY: Well, I think the moves we made some years ago to introduce SmartGate were very important. They've certainly been well received by New Zealanders. Awful lot of Kiwis now using SmartGate and good technology to get across the Tasman. We want to make that as easy as possible. Last year about 1.1 million Australians came and visited New Zealand, a lot of New Zealanders went across the other side of the Tasman, so that's really important.
Now, I can't say whether one day we would go to a borderless or effectively passport-free zone. It's possible but it's also possible that we would just continue to enjoy and employ modern technical advancements to alleviate that issue, but it's certainly a lot easier than it was years ago.
PM: And can I say, just in terms of being here, I've really come for the following purposes.
First and foremost I've come to say thank you for everything that New Zealand has done for Australia during this summer of hardship. It's been a great example of the friendship between us that one of the first people to ring me was your Prime Minister offering assistance, offering people, and I've had the opportunity today to thank three of those people on behalf of so many others who came and helped flooded communities in Queensland, so thank you for that.
Second, we're here so we can talk as leaders about the shared strategic challenges we have in this region. We have, with politics aside, a very shared perspective of our place in the world, of what it means to make our way in this region, and we will be discussing that shared perspective and the strategic challenges our region faces.
We also, of course, are continuing to talk about the economy, about the world economy after the global financial crisis and as we talk about our economies I think we've already well and truly decided that as we face the world economy we are always strengthened by working closer and closer together and that's what our economic partnership over almost 30 years has been about, and we will be looking to take the next stage in that economic partnership.
And then of course it's good to share information .We've been sharing things across all of our history, a shared defence heritage, and also sharing public policy. Education, very close to my heart, and the Prime Minister's brought me to a school that's got significance to him, because it's been engaged in such a program of change. I share that passion for making sure kids get great life chances and it's always a good opportunity to come and learn from each other on the big public policy questions of our age.
JOURNALIST: You share the same perspectives on a single economic market, so what's standing in the way?
PM: Well, we're making progress. We stand, obviously, on a 30 year track record, almost 30-year track record, of closer and closer economic partnership and integration. Each and every step of the way there's been more progress made and we are looking forward to making more progress during this visit, particularly formalising new and more liberal investment arrangements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about defence? The Defence Minister has confirmed today that HMAS Tobruk will be out of action for longer than expected. It follows the Kanimbla and the Manoora. You've already floated the idea of perhaps sharing a ship with New Zealand. Is this going to be discussed, and Prime Minister, what's your attitude to that?
PM: Well, on the comments of the Defence Minister I'll leave them to him given he's made them in Australia and it's appropriate for him to do that
On our defence cooperation, this is part of our heritage with the Anzac tradition, it's part of our present as we work alongside each other in Afghanistan, and we'll of course be open to talking about how that partnership should work in the future.
KEY: In terms of sharing assets we're open to that concept, and Stephen Smith was here in New Zealand last week. I think it makes that New Zealand and Australia share assets where it makes sense. You have long-range large aircraft like C-17s, we don't. The Canterbury is a good ship that might be useful for Australia. So, look, from time to time we will share assets and I think that's part of the sort of shared arrangements that we have. We work alongside each other in countries like Afghanistan, we have obviously in Timor and the like.
PM: Now, we better take a question from the back. I was explaining to the Prime Minister Dennis Shanahan from our press gallery and for a reason I can't quite understand there's been an outbreak of beard growing in our press gallery over summer.
KEY: I nearly didn't recognise you Dennis.
PM: Phil Hudson is another example, but Dennis is here with us. I do think he looks a bit Barry Gibb-like but we can talk about that later.
JOURNALIST: On that theme of holidays and beachside, what sort of discussions are you going to be having about climate change, and are you going to discuss the possibility of Australia setting a $20 a tonne price on carbon?
PM: Well, Australia is working through pricing carbon. The next meeting of the Multi Party Climate Change Committee is on Friday and following that meeting, obviously, I or Minister Combet will be making some statements about progress made.
So, I am determined to price carbon. I'm not going to endorse a dollar figure or make reference to any recent reports. We are continuing to work through, through our Cabinet processes and through the Multi Party Climate Change Committee.
As we work through we learn from experiences in other countries, including, of course, the experience in New Zealand, where they do have a carbon pricing regime, where it is being reviewed, so New Zealand itself is looking at how it can further deal with carbon pricing, but we will learn from that experience as we learn from experiences around the world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about the NBN? Telstra is saying that its wireless next generation, Prime Minister Gillard, that is, sorry, to be clear. Telstra is saying that its next generation will rival the speed, download speeds of the NBN. Why, then, should be proceed with the NBN?
PM: NBN Co. is of course dealing with the fibre rollout and it's dealing with wireless technology as an appropriate solution for Australians, the limited number of Australians who will live beyond the reach of the fibre.
Can I just these are complementary technologies, and I believe people can understand that from their own daily lives. There are times when we want to be on the move and have the technology with us. There are times when we're in our own homes where the quality and speed of downloads is pivotal. Things like using the NBN for service delivery including the health services that we've promised, depend on that quality and that download speed.
And the other difference, of course, between the fibre and wireless is wireless speeds go down depending on how many users jump on the technology at the same time. There'd be many people who have been to a sporting event, they've been to a crowed MCG on grand final day and they can't use their BlackBerrys, can't send a text, can't send an email because everybody's jumped on at the same time. Fibre does not have those limitations.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask on another issue, on asylum seekers, Scott Morrison's come out today and said that the federal taxpayer shouldn't be footing the bill to bring asylum seekers over to Sydney for the funerals today?
PM: Well, I would endorse the comments that have been made in Australia today by the Minister for Immigration. People died, a large number of people died very tragically at Christmas Island, and it's appropriate to allow people to bury their dead and to grieve and to show them some respect as they do it.
JOURNALIST: Are you disturbed by those comments?
PM: Well I think Ministers dealt with that direct response, but for me I'd say as a nation we understand what it is for human beings to lose someone they love and I think as a nation we would extend to everyone the respect they need as they grieve for someone they've lost.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, in your absence a number of the States have raised concerns about the costs associated with your health reforms. Barry O'Farrell's the latest. What are you going to (inaudible) they won't face any additional costs?
PM: Well, can I say Mr O'Farrell of course will fight an election in the weeks to come. If he is elected as Premier of New South Wales then I will be happy to speak to him about the billions of dollars of growth money that the Federal Government wants to put into the hospitals of New South Wales, and I'll say to him, as said to every Premier and Chief Minister at the Council of Australian Governments meeting, there's no money without reform. This is the right set of reforms. Mr O'Farrell, if he is elected, may want to consult with Premiers Baillieu and Barnett on that question.



Kia ora tatou katoa
I have come here today to pay tribute to the friendship between our two nations and to offer a very special tribute to the people of New Zealand for your overwhelming support during Australia's summer of hardship.
I'd like to make particular mention of the members of the New Zealand Civil Defence team, who join us here today, and say a very personal thank you for your efforts.
You brought mateship.
You brought comfort.
And your work won't be forgotten.
We, too, will not forget the 29 men who never came home from the Pike River mine.
They live on in our hearts and our memories.
And at a time of hardship and grief, Australia will always be there to help.
Always.
Friends,
This is my first visit to New Zealand as Australian Prime Minister.
I know you've had some tough times lately.
Not only with the tragedy at Greymouth.
But the Canterbury earthquake.
And the after-effects of the global economic downturn.
But I want to say unambiguously that New Zealand is a success story.
And each of you should be very, very proud to be part of that story.
New Zealand has built a modern, competitive economy linked to Asia and open to the world.
An economy with a global reputation in clean energy.
Tourism.
Fine food and wine.
Film and creative industries.
Financial services.
You brought the world to your door with the Lord of the Rings trilogy, and told the story of a vibrant, clean and green New Zealand, a story that many understood for the first time through the wonders of these films.
Friends,
Our countries have so much shared history that there is a sense of the familiar when an Australian steps onto New Zealand soil.
Of course there is the Anzac story, that will never diminish in its power to move and humble us.
Or the incredible story of Australia and New Zealand competing at the 1908 and 1912 Olympics as a unified team.
And there are our shared economic achievements, with the most significant peace-time event in our relationship being the signing of the Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement.
CER very appropriately came into effect on New Year's Day in 1983.
Appropriate because it was a new beginning.
With CER, both our countries began to unroll the protectionist postwar settlement that had kept us so safe for so long.
But the protectionist embrace was a delusion.
The delusion that any small economy can shelter itself from the forces and benefits of change.
We can't.
And we shouldn't.
In a dynamic world, we compete and we fight and we succeed.
There is no other way.
That is why CER is so important.
It is a ‘living agreement'  -  an agreement we continue to enhance and expand.
Australia and New Zealand's successful economic integration has become a model for other countries.
The cross-pollination between our two nations constantly refreshes the ideas, innovation and expertise in our business sectors.
Our closer ties have given us, among other things, a free market in exports and opened up our service markets.
The Trans-Tasman Mutual Recognition Arrangements  have freed up the movement of goods and professionals.
And both our governments are committed to the Single Economic Market agenda which reduces the regulatory barriers for industry.
The progress of a single economic agenda will forge even greater business cooperation and investment across the Tasman. a perfect example of how we will keep breathing ‘life' into this agreement.
We're also doing what we can to make travel from Australia to New Zealand more like travel among the Australian states: largely borderless.
That's important because at any one time, over half a million Kiwis are living in Australia.
And each year, around one million Australians visit New Zealand.
We need to make their journeys as seamless as possible.
Friends,
CER is a success story in anyone's language.
It has been the springboard for the 8 per cent growth oftwo-way goods trade between Australia and New Zealand since 1983.
Trans-Tasman trade is worth around A$21billion orNZ$27 billion a year.
More Australian businesses export to New Zealand than to any other country.
And New Zealand's top export market is Australia.
This week we'll add another dimension, with the introduction of the CER Investment Protocol which I will sign with Prime Minister Key tomorrow.
This Protocol will further free up investment in each other's economies...
Australia is increasing from $231 million to just over $1 billion the threshold under which the New Zealand investment will not, in nearly all circumstances, require screening.
This puts New Zealand on par with the United States in enjoying the most liberalised access possible to the Australian investment market.
And New Zealand is making a similarly significant change to its threshold  -  from NZ$100 million to nearly NZ$500 million.
I'm also delighted to working with Prime Minister Key, and our eight other partners to bring an expanded Trans Pacific Partnership into being.
Building a free trade zone that includes the United States, Chile, Malaysia and Singapore will be major development.
One of the biggest steps since CER itself.
Prime Minister Key and I will work to make the expanded Partnership a reality by the time of APEC this year.
CER only tells a fraction of the story about the economic relationship between our two countries.
The success of our business partnership is built on cooperation, interdependence, a healthy competitiveness and a deep and abiding mutual respect and trust.
A trust that has been earned over 200 years.
Today, our bilateral agenda remains squarely focused on taking advantage of the fact that we are natural markets and partners for each other.
These reforms stand us in good stead to take advantage of opportunities in the changing global environment.
But complacency is not an option as we face new challenges in a changing global economic environment. 
The global economic recovery remains fragile, with highly uneven growth across different regions and a number of significant vulnerabilities.
Much of the world's activity has been generated by a strong recovery in emerging market economies where capacity is relatively tight.
There are continuing concerns over high levels of public debt in many advanced economies, particularly in Europe.
Inflation is accelerating in emerging market economies, driven partly by rising food and other commodity prices.
And rapid capital flows into emerging markets could be destabilising.
International cooperation is needed to respond effectively to these global challenges, many of which are being addressed through the G20 where Australia is playing a key role.
This work complements efforts underway in other forums including the WTO, the East Asia Summit and APEC, in which Australia and New Zealand are both strong advocates for reform.
New Zealand entered a recession before the GFC and while still facing many challenges, I note that your economy has started to turn the corner. 
It is crucial that both our economies maintain ambitious post-GFC reform agendas to keep productivity and competitiveness high.
When you get economic reform right, you fuel the drivers of sustainable long term economic growth.
Friends,
Australia emerged from the GFC with lower debt, stronger growth and lower deficits than the major developed economies.
Australian banks are among the world's strongest, with the “big four” AA-rated, the highest ranking available.
We are also uniquely positioned to benefit from one clear consequence of the global recession; the rebalancing of growth towards the Asian region.
Major Asian economies value us because we are strongly competitive in a number of key commodities, we offer security of supply and our public finances are rock solid.
This is confirmed by our excellent sovereign credit ratings
Our extremely low levels of net public debt.
And our mature financial services sector, which boasts assets of almost $4.5 trillion under management.
To put it simply:
-      Conditions for business and investment in Australia are very strong.
Last year the World Bank ranked Australia as one of the most business-friendly economies in the world.
Like the New Zealand Government, my Government is committed to returning our Budget to surplus as a matter of priority.
We are committed to sound fiscal rules that will see this happen by 2012-13  -  a commitment on which I will not waiver.
Of course this summer's unprecedented floods and devastating category 5 cyclone have given rise to obvious economic consequences.
The Reserve Bank of Australia estimates that these events will subtract around half a percentage point from GDP in 2010-11.
Of course the rebuild effort will add to GDP again in time.
In parallel, there will be strong growth in mining investment and high commodity prices.
Indeed there are currently $380 billion worth of mining projects underway or in the pipeline.
We welcome that and we celebrate it.
It is an historic opportunity.
At the same time, we know there must be opportunity beyond the boom, and that means ongoing reform and discipline to position us for the future.
A future based on a high-skill, high-tech, clean energy economy based on skills and innovation.
To take us there, my Government has committed to a broad ranging agenda to boost the productive capacity of the economy.
We are investing in the traditional critical infrastructure of rail, roads and ports and I know a number of Kiwi companies are benefitting from this work including Fulton Hogan and Beca.
We are building the transformative infrastructure of the 21st Century, the National Broadband Network which includes the structural separation of Telstra, itself an outstanding instance of micro-economic reform.
We are delivering a seamless national economy to reduce red tape caused by inter-state barriers.
An ambitious new agenda of training and workforce participation.
Market-driven reforms to bring greater transparency and contestability in health, education and water.
And  -  most significantly of all  -  we seek to follow New Zealand in putting a price on carbon an outcome that will not only allow us to meet our environmental obligations but also drive decades of innovation and investment that will fundamentally redraw the shape of the Australian economy.
To conclude Friends,
In all of these decisions, Australia and New Zealand walk the reform road together.
We have done so for nearly three decades.
And we must continue to do so.
We need to encourage each other in the task of reform because that task is never easy and there are always temptations to pause and turn away.
I have felt those pressures myself, but I have and intend to stand firm against them because any short-term benefit gained by giving way is outweighed by the long-term losses we suffer.
Closer Economic Relations and the reform mentality that made it possible have served us well.
We are island nations to whom nobody owes a living.
If we gain any advantage in the world, it is because we fight for it and we earn it.
There is no other way, except to say this:
We can achieve more together than we can alone.
 A strong New Zealand is good for Australia.
A strong Australia is good for New Zealand.
Let's build a new generation of closer economic relations and face the Asia Pacific Century together. 



PM: Well, thank you very much.
It's great to be here in New Zealand. I'm very much looking forward to this visit. Of course, I'll have the opportunity now to speak to some of New Zealand's business leaders. There's no closer economic partnership between Australia and any country in the world than the economic partnership we have with New Zealand and we are seeking to build on it.
I'll also have the opportunity this afternoon to talk about something very dear to my heart, and that is education and the creation of opportunity when I visit a local school with Prime Minister Key.
I'm also very much looking forward to the opportunity of addressing members of the New Zealand parliament tomorrow. Australia and New Zealand are very close friends. We share a strategic outlook. We share common bonds. We share our longstanding Anzac tradition, and of course we share a partnership based on our economic integration, and I will be talking about that over lunch today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you disappointed that you won't be speaking during the session of parliament tomorrow and that that plan is being kyboshed by the Green Party?
PM: I'm absolutely honoured to have the opportunity to speak to members of the New Zealand parliament in their parliamentary chamber. The details of these arrangements are properly a matter for the parliament of New Zealand, but I will be very, very honoured to be there.
JOURNALIST: How would you describe your rapport with Prime Minister Key?
PM: We've got on very well in the various international fora that we've worked together. I think our close partnership reflects the close partnership between our two countries.
JOURNALIST: You're polar opposites politically.
PM: Well, when it comes to dealing with many of the strategic challenges in the world, strategic challenges in our region, defence challenges like working together in pursuit of the Anzac tradition in Afghanistan, when it comes to dealing with the consequences of the global financial crisis, for international regulation, we've taken very common approaches and worked closely together.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there are funerals in Australia today for some of the asylum seekers who were killed off Christmas Island. Scott Morrison has drawn some questions about whether or not the Australian taxpayer should be funding relatives coming out for funerals. Do you have any comments?
PM: The Acting Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, and the responsible Minister, Chris Bowen, will deal with those matters back home.
Thank you. 



HOST: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard is with us here in our Wellington studio. Welcome.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Good to see you with us here at Morning Report. First of all Prime Minister, New Zealanders have been voting with their feet and going to Australia for a long time and they continue to do so. If we open up this economic relationship even further, isn't New Zealand going to lose out even more?
PM: I think a strong economic relationship between our two countries benefits both of us. We both get stronger together and that's why across 30 years New Zealand and Australia have pursued greater and greater economic integration and partnership, and I'm here to take another step forward in that.
I will today, with Prime Minister Key, be signing an investment protocol which will make it easier for us to invest in each other's countries and that means greater investment and that means more jobs. So, good for both.
HOST: Politicians here on both sides of the house have been saying we need to catch up with Australia, we're behind and at the moment we're losing our skilled workforce to your country. How can we stop that? Won't this make it worse?
PM: Well, Australia did come out of the global financial crisis strong. We came out with low unemployment, low debt, relatively good growth by world standards. As the world went into recession, Australia did not. So, we have a strong economy which we're very proud of and we're seeking to harness that growth for the future to be even stronger in the future.
But a strong Australia is good for New Zealand. We are so closely tied that the stronger each of us is the better it is for the other. So, I don't think it's about fearing Australia's strength. I think it's about a genuine partnership where Australia and New Zealand work together to give each other economic opportunities, including job opportunities, and there will always be a big two-way exchange of people between our two countries.
HOST: The fear is though if the market takes its course, the bigger partner will inevitably dominate the smaller partner.
PM: I wouldn't have that fear. I think New Zealand has a really strong sense of itself, a really strong sense of its future and how it wants to grow its economy.
There have been some tough times here in New Zealand in economic terms and I know everybody is looking forward to turning the corner but I think there is a lot of self confidence here about the future and you should have that self confidence. So, I don't think it's a question of big dominating small. I think it's a question of partnership and a sense of family and working together that our two countries have.
HOST: So you're looking for a more common approach, but would you object to a New Zealand political leader wanting to put safeguards in to protect New Zealand's economic sovereignty?
PM: If you're going to work together then that's got to have some trust in it and I think there is a good, trusting relationship between our two countries and I think we can point to the benefits that have come from closer economic partnership to date. I mean, we've grown trade between our countries and that has enriched both countries. So, this freer exchange is a good thing.
It obviously makes sense, too, for us to be bringing our regulations closer to each other so you're not reinventing the wheel in both countries but you get the benefit of closer and closer regulatory structures, so that can actually help with some cost savings and that's good for both countries.
HOST: Actually, what is the nuts and bolts of what you want to see this single market look like?
PM: Well, in terms of what I am saying about our close economic relationship, this isn't a new vision in the sense that it's the next step in a vision that has been 30 years in the making, since our two countries first sat down and said let's have closer economic ties, let's work together on a set of agreements to bring our economies closer together, and step by step since the days of Prime Minister Fraser in Australia and Prime Minister Muldoon here, we have worked through a series of changes to get our economies to function together better.
I am here to take the next step and that is freer investment between our two countries, and for the future we'll keep working on it: harmonising regulation, freer flow of people between the two countries. We've got this aim of travel between the two countries feeling like travel between two Australian States that is essentially borderless.
HOST: You actually see a common border as something you'd like to achieve?
PM: Well, we're working on that sense of travel between Australia and New Zealand and we've already made improvements with SmartGate so that it's easier for people to travel between the two countries and we want to keep making further improvements so that there is that sense of, you know, borderless travel between our two nations.
HOST: I don't think the New Zealand Prime Minister was quite so enthusiastic about that yesterday. I think he used the word ‘possible' about the common border.
PM: Well, certainly we are in agreement that our two countries will keep working to make travel easier for both of our peoples, and it's, you know, huge numbers that come each way. Around a million Australians visit New Zealand in any year.
HOST: What about a common currency?
PM: Well-
HOST: -You always get asked that, don't you?
PM: Look, yes, we do, and I don't have any proposals or plans about a common currency. I think there are a lot of things we can do to work together more closely and to harness economic strength together before we would start talking about a common currency.
I don't think that is on the agenda because there are so many more things we would need to do to bring our economies closer together.
HOST: So, today you're signing the investment protocol. What's the next thing you want to tackle after that?
PM: Well, we are then going to keep working on a series of regulatory reforms, and I know this doesn't sound very interesting and people listening would probably have images of, you know, public servants labouring over documents together-
HOST: -So what does it mean to man and woman on the street?
PM: I can understand why people would think ‘what's this got to do with me?', but it's got to do with some very practical things like we've worked on harmonising our patent laws so that if you've got something that you've invented and you want to trade it in both countries you don't have to go through multiple approval processes. It's those practical changes that make a real difference.
HOST: Can we move onto some regional issues now?
PM: Certainly.
HOST: Migration - we've been hearing that Australia and New Zealand are likely to be dealing with more and more migrants leaving countries in the Asia-Pacific because of economic uncertainty, cyclones, climate change. Are going to have to cooperate more and have to find a common policy in dealing with migrants?
PM: I've certainly got a vision of the region cooperating more on unauthorised people movement, of when people move between countries without authority, without proper papers. From the Australian perspective that means we see arrivals in boats and we have seen a number of those. So, I've got a perspective about the region working together with a regional protection framework to try and undercut the business model of people smugglers. To do that we would need to say, well, if people do keep moving then effectively they are returned to a processing centre and their claims are all treated the same to undercut the incentive to get in a boat.
And that's important because it means people smugglers don't profit, but it's also important because, tragically, on our shores we've seen people die because they have risked journeys in boats, and as recently as yesterday in Australia there were funerals for people who lost their lives on the rocky shoreline of Christmas Island.
HOST: I think Australia has something like 5,000 or 6,000 asylum seekers in detention. Would you be looking for New Zealand to take some of these people off your hands?
PM: No, we wouldn't but I have spoken in the past with Prime Minister Key about cooperating in generating a regional protection framework and a regional view about how we deal with people movement.
HOST: And what's been the response to that, because many New Zealanders might think that Indonesia is just a little bit too far away from us.
PM: I don't think from the New Zealand perspective that there's any room for complacency and I don't get the feeling from Prime Minister Key that there is.
Yes, of course, New Zealand is geographically further away but I think for all of us the issue of irregular people movement and people smuggling worries us in the region. I don't think anybody wants to see evil people profit from what is a trans-national crime, so there is good reason for taking a regional approach here.
HOST: And what direction are we heading in with the two defence forces? There's been some extra cooperation of late. What sort of shape do you see the two forces being in in time to come?
PM: I think we will continue to see very close cooperation, and of course we are with each other in Afghanistan, working together in Uruzgan province, and we are very grateful for the New Zealand contribution there and we know it hasn't been without sacrifice and without heartache for the New Zealand people, but it's a very important mission and we are looking forward to continuing it together and our defence forces regularly collaborate and exchange and we will continue to see that [indistinct] in the future-
HOST: -You're happy with that? Because often New Zealand has been portrayed as not pulling its weight in defence exercises with Australia?
PM: Look, we're happy with the cooperation we're seeing and we always believe we can keep building for the future.
HOST: You want more though?
PM: Well, it's a question of partnership. It's a question of both of us seeking to grow the kind of benefits that come when your defence forces are familiar with working with each other.
HOST: You mentioned Afghanistan. More and more Australian soldiers are losing their lives, and other coalition forces soldiers and civilians are continuing to lose their lives. Isn't it time to pull the plug on that?
PM: As recent as Monday this week I attended the funeral of Corporal Atkinson, who is our most recent soldier lost in Afghanistan, so the Australian people have had a great deal to grieve about. But I have said to the Australian nation that whilst there will be hard days ahead, we need to see this mission through. We went to Afghanistan to deny terrorists the ability to train people who would then come and wreak violence against the citizens of Australia and the citizens of New Zealand.
Both of our countries have seen losses in the World Trade Centre, in the Bali bombing and in other terrorist incidents overseas, and of course they've got a connection with training in Afghanistan. So, we're there to engage in that strategic denial of Afghanistan as a training place for terrorists and we need to see that mission through.
HOST: Isn't the point though - is this the best way to do it? And isn't the evidence from the increasing casualty rate that perhaps this isn't the best way to go?
PM: Well, I think this is the only way to do it, that we need to engage in the security, in the actual fighting, that is necessary to secure Afghanistan. We then need to transition to security leadership by local Afghan forces and of course our people, they're in Uruzgan province with some New Zealand friends training the Afghan National Army so over time they can take responsibility for the security that the Afghan people need.
HOST: Can I come back to a domestic issue we've been reporting on this program earlier, and you were at a New Zealand school yesterday.
PM: Yes, I was.
HOST: The Government here is promoting a National Standards format. It's been very controversial here. You've been an Education Minister. You pushed through national standards in Australia. Schools here, not all of them are very happy with it. Any advice for the Prime Minister?
PM: Well, I don't think it's appropriate for me to venture onto domestic policies considerations for New Zealand, so I think New Zealand will work out what it wants to do with its education system. But for me, as Prime Minister of Australia and a former Education Minister, I am driven by a passion to see that every child in Australia gets a great education; that wherever kids come from, whatever school their parents choose, it's a great school. And for me that does mean you've got to have national standards and you've got to be saying to schools keep improving every day - get up every morning and work out how you can do it better.
Kids only get one chance at education and we've got an obligation as adults to make sure they get a great education.
HOST: One final question just to throw at you-
PM: -Yes, this is sounding terrifying now.
HOST: Under your watch, are we going to get into a debate again about Australia becoming a republic?
PM: There is a live debate in Australia about becoming a republic-
HOST: -As there is here.
PM: It continues to be a community debate. There is no immediate decision point on the horizon. There's no fixed date for a referendum or anything like that but it will continue to be-
HOST: -Would you favour it?
PM: Oh, look, I'm certainly in favour of a republic and Australians around their, you know, coffee tables when they're having a cup of coffee would often muse on it and I think it is important that that debate continues and I'm sure it will.
HOST: Thank you very, very much indeed for joining us this morning. That's the Australian Prime Minister, Julia Gillard. Thank you for coming into Radio New Zealand this morning.
PM: Thank you. 



Mr Speaker
Prime Minister and members of the Cabinet
Leader of the Opposition and party leaders
Honourable Members
It is truly a privilege to be the first Australian Prime Minister, indeed the first foreign head of government,to address members of the Parliament of New Zealand. 
I accept your welcome to this historic chamber as a profound tribute to the friendship between our nations and our people.
I also acknowledge it has been some time since a full bilateral visit by an Australian Prime Minister and I'm glad to be able to put that to right.
But more than that, I don't want familiarity to slide into forgetfulness.
I therefore announce that Mr Key and I have agreed to restore the pattern of regular Prime Ministerial exchanges that we have had in the past. 
I look forward to hosting Prime Ministerial talks in Australia next year.
And I look forward to coming back to New Zealand in 2013.
Mr Speaker,
It is a great honour to address members of this parliament and through it, the people you represent.
Yours is one of the oldest continuous democratic legislatures in the world.
The first to recognise the right of women to vote.
A leader in reconciliation with its First Peoples.
Among the first parliaments to respond to the challenge of climate change by putting a price on carbon.
New Zealand may be a small nation.
But one with a bold vision of its place in the world.
For Australia, New Zealand is the natural partner in all that we believe and all that we hope for.
As I look around this historic House, the plaques and wreaths commemorating battles from the Boer War to Vietnam are snapshots of the shared and lasting bonds between our two nations.
Our ties were indelibly forged in hardship and mateship, from Gallipoli and the Somme to Tobruk, Korea and beyond.
Our soldiers, as has been said, came “from the uttermost ends of the earth”.
And wherever Australian and New Zealand blood has been shed, it remains sacred ground.
Sacred because when our young men were sent to far shores, they went not for wealth or gain.
But to defend common values and a treasured way of life.
The freedom to speak and pray and write.
The freedom to elect leaders and stand safe under the rule of law.
The freedom to succeed that drew men like Peter Fraser and Keith Holyoake from the most modest background to the highest office.
These are what ANZAC means.
A story of courage and conviction told and retold in homes and schools, in the pubs and clubs, throughout the length and breadth of both lands.
A story also infused by the freedom from deference and formality that makes Australians and New Zealanders so different from anyone else and yet so very like each other.
But ANZAC is not a legend confined to records or books.
It is a living story.
A story that lives in the courage of Willie Apiata, Mark Donaldson and Ben Roberts-Smith.
The ANZAC spirit will receive a practical expression from next month when our personnel join together in the new Ready Response Force headquarters to be based in Brisbane.
This Force will provide a robust capability to meet contingencies, including humanitarian assistance and disaster relief across the region we love so much.
And, of course, the ANZAC spirit lives on in the most strategically challenging theatre of our times, Afghanistan.
Again, a conflict against those  -  terrorists  -  who threaten our cherished way of life and against whom we must prevail.
Today I stand before this Parliament and pay tribute to the men and women of our armed forces.
The road is hard and the price can be very high.
Just two days ago, I attended the funeral of Corporal Richard Atkinson, the 22nd Australian to be killed in Afghanistan.
I embraced his family and felt, deeply, their immeasurable grief.
New Zealand has not been spared this anguish. 
Not in the past, with the death of Lieutenant Tim O'Donnell, the first member of the New Zealand Defence Force to fall in Afghanistan.
And not today, with the terrible news of another sad loss for New Zealand, the death of Private Mila. 
We grieve for these men and their families as we grieve for our own.
Because the ANZAC story speaks for both our nations.
An imperishable Trans-Tasman bond.
They can never be replaced, our fallen.  But they shall never be forgotten.
Mr Speaker,
In the 1890s, there was a possibility that New Zealand and Australia might formally have joined their destinies to each other.
A relic of that aspiration even remains in our Constitution to this day.
But it was never necessary.
Our founders could not have imagined the extraordinary events that would bring our nations far closer than any words or any laws.
Not forged in meeting rooms by old men wearing suits.
But by young men in trenches wearing slouch hats and lemon squeezers.
That is why I say Australia has many alliances and friendships around the world.
Economic and defence partnerships of every kind.
But New Zealand alone is family. 
When those 29 men never came home from the Pike River mine, we didn't just mourn for the two Australians.
We mourned for them all.
Family.
When Pike River exploded, New Zealand didn't have to ask Australia to send help.
We just did.
And when natural disasters hit Australia this summer, New Zealand didn't need to be asked to lend a hand.
You just did.
And our gratitude is boundless.
Prime Minister,
Your predecessor, Sir John Hall said there were 1200 reasons that separated Australia and New Zealand 
-      the 1200 miles of the Tasman Sea.
The Australia-New Zealand memorial in Canberra tells a very different story.
It is a sculpture unlike any of the other memorials that enshrine my nation's capital.
It is a simple, graceful curve of bronze, representing the handle of a basket used traditionally to collect flax seed.
It embodies the Maori saying that we each hold one handle of the basket.
Shared effort. 
Shared memory.
Shared sacrifice.
Underneath that memorial is etched a poem by the New Zealand poet Jenny Bornholdt.
In it she describes the Tasman not as a barrier, but a bridge:  “a bridge of faith.”
A faith anchored and bonded in the past.
But also a faith directed resolutely towards the future.
Mr Speaker,
It is true we have done great things in the past.
Remarkable things.
Not just in war but in peace as well.
We took sheltered, insular economies and opened themto the world through the remarkable reforms of the 1980s and 90s.
At the same time we opened our economies to each other creating a degree of integration that is unparalleled throughout the world.
It was the first bilateral trade agreement of its kind in the world.
It remains the gold standard in trade liberalisation.
It was not an easy decision as Robert Muldoon and Malcolm Fraser grappled with the realities of a fast-changing world.
But the Agreement was achieved, and it has served us well.
There was another author of CER who deserves our acknowledgement, a great New Zealand diplomat and politician, Hugh Templeton.
It will be my very special honour this afternoon to investMr Templeton with an Honorary Order of Australia for his pivotal role in establishing the CER
Hugh Templeton's career is the story of the modern New Zealand.
He went to London as a junior diplomat in 1954, representing a nation that, like Australia, relied on primary production, sheltered behind tariff walls and called Great Britain “home”.
But as the 70s and 80s unfolded, Hugh and his fellow leaders on both sides of the Tasman and both sides of politics knew it was time to change.
Britain had joined with Europe.
Asia's economic miracle was unfolding.
We could not afford to be left behind.
And we were not.
Our leaders found the courage to change, and those changes were hard.
Perhaps even harder on New Zealand than Australia.
But those decisions were right then, and they remain right now.
CER has been an enduring foundation for new ventures such as the Trans-Tasman Mutual Recognition Arrangement and the Single Economic Market initiative.
Thanks to these agreements, our nations are closer than ever before.
Goods and services flow freely.
Our insolvency and copyright laws have been harmonised, along with competition and financial services policy.
Our citizens can work in their chosen profession in each country thanks to mutual recognition.
Students in each country pay only domestic fees for their education.
Reforms unprecedented in their scope and ambition.
Reforms that are hard.
But reforms that have worked.
Two-way goods trade between our two countries has grown at 8 per cent a year since CER.
Trans-Tasman trade is worth around A$21billion orNZ$27 billion a year.
More Australian businesses export to New Zealand than to any other country.
And New Zealand's top export market is Australia.
Now it's time to write the next chapter as we journey towards a Single Economic Market.
During my visit, I've been pleased to discuss with Prime Minister Key the excellent progress being achieved on the SmartGate project to create borderless travel between our two countries.
A joint study will commence this month to examine how we create a truly “domestic-like” aviation experience.
In addition, Mr Speaker,
Prime Minister Key and I will today sign the Investment Protocol to CER, a significant milestone for our two countries.
The Protocol will make investment simpler and cheaper, creating employment and opportunity on both sides of the Tasman.
For New Zealand, this agreement provides the most liberalised access to the Australian investment market.
For Australia, it makes CER our most liberal and comprehensive trade agreement.
And as family, that is how it should be.
But friends,
The “bridge of faith” extends not just to the past, not just to today.
But to the future.
Today, the world changes more in a decade than it used to change in a century.
And we must deepen our resolve to reform and adapt.
We need to embrace the transformative possibilities that will create the high-skill, high-tech economies of the future.
The possibilities opened up by high speed broadband.
Clean energy.
Smart manufacturing.
Creative industries.
World class skills and training.
All underpinned by rigorous fiscal discipline, constant structural reform and an unswerving commitment tofree trade.
In that context, let me be clear that Australia accepts the verdict of the global umpire and will implement the WTO rulings on the importation of New Zealand apples into Australia.
We accept the obligations of free trade, just as we embrace the possibilities of free trade.
Mr Speaker,
For Australia, these possibilities are keenly sharpened in the context of the unprecedented change unfolding in the Asia-Pacific.
China's rise, India's growth and the emergence of Indonesia, are changing the strategic contours of the region.
As the global balance of power shifts to the Asia-Pacific, it will throw up real challenges that will need to be collectively managed.
Challenges associated with the inevitable strategic flux brought by the changes unfolding in the Asia-Pacific. 
And broader challenges brought by globalisation, such as climate change, food security, natural disasters, people smuggling and pandemics. 
But it will also create tremendous opportunities for those brave enough to seize them.
We should not fear this future but embrace it.
Together, we have enduring sources of strength.
The strength we find in each other.
And the strength we find in our people and our history and our values.
If we don't shape the future we want, we may well face a future not of our choosing
And Australia and New Zealand have never been ones to sit on the sidelines of history.
We are both stable, progressive, well-governed countries, respected for our pragmatism and our ideas. 
We have highly mobile and educated populations.
We have competitive and resilient economies. 
And we have highly capable and effective armed forces.
Harnessed in partnership, these will allow us to confront difficulties and grasp opportunities.
This is why our two nations must remain active and engaged:
Reforming our own economies.
Uniting ourselves across the Tasman.
And reaching out together to the world beyond.
Before us we have the prospect of a Trans Pacific Partnership.
Perhaps the greatest economic opportunity for our two nations since CER.
I'm proud to say that New Zealand has led the wayas one of the Trans Pacific Partnership founding partners since 2005.
I was proud to stand with Prime Minister Key, President Obama and our seven other partners in November last year pledging to the make the expanded Partnership a reality by the time of APEC this year.
The Partnership could be a stepping stone to an Asia Pacific Free Trade Area
If we achieve that, we will create a free trade community as significant as the EU or NAFTA.
A zone of trade, investment, jobs as big as the Pacific itself.
To do this, we will need not just our own efforts.
But the commitment and energy of many others, foremost our great friend and ally the United States.
An active, engaged America is a fundamental feature of the international system that underpins our stability, security and prosperity.
Australia, like New Zealand, remains deeply committed to this international system and we will work with key emerging players  -  not least China and India  -  to ensure that it continues to deliver the benefits both our peoples have enjoyed for so long.
Mr Speaker,
We know we can meet the challenges of tomorrow because we've done great things before.
But in the last century, the conflicts and the issues that defined the world were fought out in another hemisphere.
Today they are decided here.
This is the Asia Pacific century, and we are at its heart.
Here under the southern cross, emblazoned on both our flags, we have created two of the most successful societies in the contemporary world.
Two advanced, multicultural democracies, tied by tradition and affection to the old world, but anchored firmly in the new.
This is our time.
A time for optimism.
Because our best days lie ahead.
That is why I come here on this journey of hope.
To celebrate all that is best in us.
And bring closer the future that awaits our grasp.
Drawing together.
Reforming.
Reaching out to the world
And achieving more together than we ever could alone.
Thank you for the privilege of addressing you today.
You honour me.
And you honour my country.
Kia Ora. 



Australia and New Zealand have reached an historic agreement today with the signing of a new protocol that will strengthen economic ties between the two countries.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and New Zealand Prime Minister John Key signed the Australia-New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement (ANZCERTA) Investment Protocol in Wellington today.
The signing of the Investment Protocol is an important development in our broader bilateral economic integration and a significant milestone for Australia and New Zealand.
It is the last significant piece of the historic CER agreement that has made Australia and New Zealand's economic integration a gold standard around the world.
The Investment Protocol will deliver substantial benefits to investors in both countries.  It will result in lower compliance costs, less red tape and improved legal certainty for investors.
This means increased trans-Tasman investment flows, more jobs and greater prosperity for people in both countries.
For Australia, the Protocol is expected to result in over half of all new Australian investment in New Zealand being exempt from screening.  For New Zealand, the Protocol will provide the most liberalised access (with the US) to the Australian investment market of any country. 
Current accumulated investment between Australia and New Zealand stands at over A$110 billion.  Australia is the largest source of foreign investment into New Zealand.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard will confer an honorary Order of Australia on the Hon. Hugh Templeton in Wellington today for his role in establishing the Australia-New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement (ANZCERTA). 
Mr Templeton was Minister of Revenue (1977 - 1982) and Minister for Trade and Industry (1981 - 1984) and played a leading role in developing stronger investment ties between Australia and New Zealand.
Honorary Orders of Australia are sometimes conferred on people such as Mr Templeton, who are not Australian citizens, in recognition of extraordinary achievement.
Mr Templeton's determination in advocating for closer economic relations between Australia and New Zealand saw the historic establishment of ANZCERTA in 1983.  The agreement is one of the cornerstones of our bilateral relationship.
ANZCERTA  has provided the basis for trans-Tasman economic development and integration since it came into effect in 1983 and is regarded as a gold standard in trade liberalisation. Two-way goods trade between Australia and New Zealand has grown by over eight per cent annually since 1983.
 Since leaving Parliament, Mr Templeton has remained active on trans-Tasman issues.   



Prime Ministers John Key and Julia Gillard held bilateral talks in Wellington on 16 February 2011 during Prime Minister Gillard's first official visit to New Zealand. 
The Prime Ministers welcomed the opportunity to meet and committed to holding annual Prime Ministerial talks. 
They reiterated their expressions of deep sympathy for the victims of recent disasters in Australia and New Zealand, including floods in several parts of Australia, Cyclone Yasi in northern Queensland, fires in Western Australia and, in New Zealand, the Pike River mine disaster and Canterbury earthquake. 
They also expressed their appreciation for reciprocal assistance during these and other natural disasters and welcomed the meeting of senior officials to discuss emergency management cooperation on 15 February 2011. In particular, the Prime Ministers welcomed the agreement by senior officials to develop a joint framework for crisis management cooperation to include annual consultations and a joint crisis management exercise aimed at enhancing our ability to provide reciprocal assistance. 
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed that both countries' interests were served by the closest possible cooperation, coordination and collaboration on national security and defence, noting in particular the continuing importance of their contributions in Afghanistan and commending the successful operational collaboration in the Solomon Islands and East Timor. Defence White Papers in both countries have committed to the contemporary ANZAC relationship, including by sharing key capabilities. The Prime Ministers welcomed the establishment of an ANZAC Ready Response Force to respond to regional contingencies. 
The Prime Ministers agreed on the importance of strengthening regional cooperation, including through the East Asia Summit and APEC. They committed to working closely together to achieve a substantial agenda for this year's East Asia Summit meeting in Bali and to support the US in its year as host of APEC. The Prime Ministers also welcomed US, and Russian, participation in the East Asia Summit. 
Recognising both countries' commitment to the Cairns Compact on Strengthening Development Coordination in the Pacific, the Prime Ministers welcomed the coordinated efforts by New Zealand and Australia to assist Pacific Island countries to accelerate progress towards the Millennium Development Goals, achieve broad-based economic growth and build sustainable livelihoods. 
The Prime Ministers expressed concern about the continuing deterioration in Fiji's political and economic situation. They agreed to continue working together, within the Pacific Islands' Forum and with other international partners to encourage Fiji to return to democratic and constitutional government. 
The Prime Ministers committed to accelerate efforts towards greater trans-Tasman economic integration to provide an enhanced foundation on which to build future prosperity. In this regard, the Prime Ministers welcomed the signature of the Closer Economic Relations Investment Protocol, which will facilitate trans-Tasman investment by reducing regulatory barriers. Noting the very successful progress thus far in the Single Economic Market agenda, including on financial reporting standards and business law coordination, the Prime Ministers committed to work towards establishing a joint patents examination system, more competitive mobile roaming charges and accelerating cooperation on joint trade and investment initiatives. 
Recognising the economic and social benefits accruing to both countries from the free flow of people across the Tasman, Prime Ministers reinforced the value of the Trans Tasman Travel Arrangement. The Prime Ministers acknowledged that the free flow of people has been a key factor in the integration of our two economies and reiterated their commitment to maintaining that freedom of movement. The Prime Ministers further welcomed the positive steps aimed at making travel across the Tasman a domestic-like experience, including the roll-out of SmartGate and joint studies looking at further improvements to trans-Tasman travel. 
In pursuit of shared trans-Tasman objectives, the Prime Ministers encouraged engagement between Ministers of the two countries and welcomed the recent decision by the Council of Australian Governments to invite New Zealand to be a member of relevant standing councils, select councils and legislative and governance forums in the reformed ministerial council system. The Prime Ministers also welcomed on-going involvement by New Zealand on COAG's Business Regulation and Competition Working Group (BRCWG). 
The Prime Ministers discussed the global economic outlook and agreed on the importance of implementing the G20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth to secure the global economic recovery. Australia welcomed New Zealand's participation in G20 discussions through the Global Governance Group (3G). 
The Prime Ministers agreed on the need to push hard for a conclusion to the WTO Doha Round this year. They also committed to work closely together to deliver an ambitious Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement. 
The Prime Ministers agreed to continue the joint work of their trade promotion agencies to create new trade opportunities in third countries, including by 
leveraging the benefits of ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement. They also agreed on the importance of developing the wider potential of CER, including by collaborating on a CER-ASEAN Integration Partnership Forum to share the lessons learnt from CER and the SEM within ASEAN. 
The Prime Ministers welcomed the close cooperation and constructive bilateral dialogue following release of the WTO Appellate Body's report on the Australia-Apples case and looked forward to implementation of the findings within the agreed timeframe. 
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to the elimination of whaling in the Southern Ocean. In this context, Australia welcomed New Zealand's decision to intervene formally in Australia's action against Japan at the International Court of Justice while continuing to pursue diplomatic efforts to bring about an end to Southern Ocean whaling and to resolve the current impasse in the International Whaling Commission. 
The Prime Ministers agreed to continue close collaboration on climate change. Australia agreed New Zealand's emissions trading scheme provided useful guidance as it developed its own policy approach carbon pricing. 
The Prime Ministers welcomed and encouraged further cooperation on science and innovation and highlighted the importance of the joint bid to host the Square Kilometre Array Radio Telescope Project (SKA). The joint work on the SKA is a powerful example of the potential to enhance the bilateral science and innovation relationship. 
The Prime Ministers tasked officials with drawing up a joint work program to progress trans-Tasman cooperation as agreed during their talks and committed to take stock at their next bilateral meeting.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced Senator Kate Lundy will have a renewed focus on multicultural affairs in her role as Parliamentary Secretary assisting the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship.
The decision comes ahead of the unveiling of the Government's new multicultural policy to be outlined by Minister Bowen tonight.
As part of this new strategy, Senator Lundy will focus on the promotion of multiculturalism in the Parliament and the community on behalf of the Gillard Labor Government.
Senator Lundy will also work to combat racial discrimination in our community to ensure everyone has access to the same opportunities in life, regardless of their background.
The Prime Minister said she had agreed that Senator Lundy's title would be updated to Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs to reflect this renewed focus.
Senator Lundy will also continue in her role as Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister. 



PRIME MINISTER KEY: Okay good afternoon, so the programme is that I'm going to make some opening remarks and then I'll pass to Julia Gillard to make some remarks and then we'll go over and sign the investment protocol then we'll come back and take questions. You'll appreciate there is a limited period of time we have for questions because of the Parliamentary reception.
Firstly, can I just welcome everyone here, I'm pleased to welcome Prime Minister Julia Gillard here to Wellington, on her first visit to New Zealand as Prime Minister. Australia is our indisputable ally, partner and friend. Our relationship is growing stronger and closer all the time. We share close business and commerce links and our people-to-people links are very strong, through everything from family ties to our rivalry on the sporting field. But nowhere is the bond between our two countries stronger than in our shared Anzac history and tradition.
It is particularly poignant today to receive news that a New Zealand soldier serving in Afghanistan had been killed in a vehicle accident. Three other soldiers were injured, one seriously. I want to offer the New Zealand Government's sincerest condolences to the families of Private Kirifi Mila. Both our defence forces are operating in a difficult and dangerous environment in Afghanistan in order to help the Afghan people. Later today Prime Minister Gillard and I will lay wreaths at the National War Memorial to again acknowledge our shared Anzac history.
Prime Minister Gillard's visit has been an excellent opportunity for us to talk about our shared ambitions, to further develop the trans-Tasman relationship. Last night we had a working dinner at Premier House, followed this morning by talks with myself and the Cabinet. Discussions have been wide-ranging, covered everything from the economic conditions we face to our security responsibilities both in the region and further afield and the role that we play together.
Prime Minister Gillard has just addressed MPs in Parliament as you are aware, an event that further underscores the close and unique nature of the relationship between our countries. In our talks we have discussed the good progress being made on various fronts and we will be releasing a joint statement on this shortly.
We are continuing to progress the single economic market agenda to make a seamless trans-Tasman business environment a reality. A concrete example of that agenda is in the CER investment protocol which we will sign shortly. It increases the screening thresholds above which foreign investment in business assets require regulatory approval. For New Zealand firms investing in Australia, the screening threshold will increase from A$231 million to A$1 billion.
For Australian firms investing here, the threshold will increase from NZ$100 million to NZ$477 million. These thresholds will be updated annually based on changes in GDP. This latest move builds on existing goods and services agreements and aligns CER with other modern, high-quality free trade agreements. I will now pass over to Julia to say a few words and then we'll sign the investment protocol.
PM: Thank you. Thank you very much to Prime Minister Key. Can I start by saying, as I said to the Parliament, Australia and New Zealand are family, the bonds between us are very, very strong indeed and so on this occasion where New Zealand is grieving the loss of a brave man in Afghanistan, I do want to offer my condolences and the condolences of the Australian people to the New Zealand people and particularly to the family and friends of Private Mila.
We know what it's like to grieve the loss of brave men in Afghanistan and we will grieve this loss as one of our own. I do, too, want to reaffirm how honoured I felt to have the opportunity to address the members of the New Zealand Parliament and to be the first head of a foreign government to have that privilege. In honouring me, the New Zealand members of Parliament have honoured Australia and I thank them for that.
In that address, I talked about the bonds between our two countries. They've been forged throughout the Anzac tradition, they've also been forged by working together to build our economies and our prosperity. The trade liberalisation between us is gold standard, it is envied around the world and today we are going to take another big step forward in that integration of our economies, that working together, that growing together and strengthening together through signing this investment protocol, enabling freer and freer investments in each other's countries will simply mean more prosperity and more jobs for both the people of New Zealand and the people of Australia, so I'm very pleased to be here and very pleased to have the opportunity to formally sign that investment protocol.
[SIGNING OF PROTOCOL]
PM KEY: Okay, so we'll take some questions, maybe it's polite if we take one from the Australian media to start, as you are our guests.
JOURNALIST: Prime Ministers, you're saying that today is a step forward towards a single economic market  -  where will that journey end?
PM: Well, every journey requires the taking of steps forward and what we've done today is another important part of what's been a journey of almost 30 years in building closer and closer economic relations between our two countries. This is a very significant piece of the jigsaw that's been missing and that is to enable there to be freer investment exchanges between our two countries.
We both recognise we've got more work to do, and that work is continuing, some of it happens well beyond the gaze of the public spotlight because it's not necessarily viewed as intrinsically very interesting for media reporting and I understand that but it's the technical work that can make a lot of difference as we harmonise regulations in areas like patent protection, so that rather than people who seek that kind of protection for things that they've invented needing to go through two sets of procedures and two sets of processes, there is a seamless way of doing it. So that work on greater and greater regulatory harmonisation is continuing.
PM KEY: Well, I suspect the fact that we are separate countries with separate Parliaments means that there will always be work in progress, as new technological advances come along, but I think what you can see is a real determination to try and integrate each other's economy where there are net benefits for both countries.
What we've seen is that if you look at CER from a trade perspective and as we move into the investment protocols, substantial gains have been made over and above what we would expect the status quo to be without it. So, look, we're moving into areas that are increasingly sometimes more tricky or complex and as the Prime Minister said, not all of them are going to be headline news, but, you know, from the conversations that we would have with Australian businesses and New Zealand businesses, they welcome the moves that we're making and if anything, they continue to make the point that the faster we can move, the better.
JOURNALIST: Prime Ministers, (inaudible) can you honestly say this increasing human sacrifice on the part of both countries is actually worth (inaudible)
PM KEY: Well let me start by saying our sympathies go to the family of Private Mila, it's a tragic day for his family and for New Zealand. I think it's important secondly to recognise that this was as a result of an accident, and motor vehicle accidents do happen. Tragically I think New Zealand lost around about three people in East Timor in similar conditions.
Nevertheless, the point that you make is a valid one, that it is a dangerous and difficult environment in Afghanistan. I believe that New Zealand should remain absolutely committed to seeing the job done, because I think that to not do that will allow insurgent forces, the Taliban, al-Qaeda and the likes to regroup in Afghanistan and the implication for Australian and New Zealand citizens is significant and as we know, New Zealanders are not immune from the activities of global terrorism, many of which were born out of training camps and environments like Afghanistan.
So, in my view, as tragic as it deeply is that we've lost this young man, I don't think we should change course as a result of his death and, in fact, I think we honour is death that ensuring that we do everything we can and in the case of Bamiyan to make sure that we can hand over that province to Afghan control but in a way where all of the good works that we've done in the last decade can bear fruit in years to come.
JOURNALIST: Do you think we're actually winning this war (inaudible)
PM: I'm very happy to answer that, and certainly progress is being made. Clearly it's not easy and Australia very much endorses the strategy now being pursued in Afghanistan under the leadership of General Petraeus and progress is being made through that strategy.
I had the opportunity a little bit earlier today to talk to the Prime Minister about some of my insights into the work in Afghanistan. One of those insights comes through the eyes of our most recent VC winner, Ben Robert-Smith, who has been to Afghanistan on a number of occasions and can talk with great force and conviction about the changes he's seen and the progress he has seen in the security environment since he was first deployed there.
So, yes, we're making progress. I've also been very frank with the Australian people, we expect there to be some hard days ahead. Today is a hard day for New Zealand and I expect there to be hard days ahead. But, we are making progress and we need to see the mission through.
We went to Afghanistan to deny terrorists, people who would seek to take the lives of Australians and New Zealanders, to deny them the opportunity to use Afghanistan as a training base. In order to do that, we've got to complete the mission and enable the Afghan people to provide their own security and to deny terrorists the benefit of those training possibilities and so we will continue the mission. My determination on that is very clear, until we can transition that security leadership in a way that is sustainable to Afghan forces.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, on the issue of the economy, today your (inaudible) has indicated that there are 60 billion dollar (inaudible) last week you were talking about using the mining tax to (inaudible) superannuation and various other economic initiatives. Are you still confident you can do that and is this an indication that you gave away too much on the tax negotiations?
PM: Dennis, we always understood that, with a mining tax that was going to tax on the basis of profits, that there would be years that there were high tax collections, but there would be years when there were lower tax collections.
To give you a simple example, flowing from the disasters that we've seen in Queensland, a number of those mines have not been able to operate as usual. That will impact on their profitability this year. The kind of tax the Mining Resource Rent Tax is, is it's calibrated on profitability and I think that's appropriate.
Understanding the design of the tax we made the expenditure decisions which use that revenue to make a difference to company tax rates, to our pool of national savings, through superannuation and also to support, tax cuts for small businesses and infrastructure. We've obviously worked so that that is sustainable on the Government's budget. We need to remember that this is about getting a fair share for Australians of our mineral wealth, but also about balancing our economic growth. We do want to encourage balanced growth which is why cutting the company tax rate as well as giving tax breaks to small businesses is appropriate.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, the Greens have said that this is further evidence as to why you should go back to the original proposal. You're going to need them to get it through Parliament  -  are you willing to move at all on the design of the MRRT?
PM: No, I'm not. I've been consistent on this proposition and I've been asked on more than one occasion. So I will repeat what I've said every time I've been asked. We will deliver, through the Australian Parliament, the tax as I agreed it with Australia's biggest mining companies. We will not be compromising that agreement in order to secure the legislation through.
JOURNALIST: Just on the apple issue - do you regret it taking so long to be resolved?
PM: In Australian sporting matches, sometimes, ah, people might give a little bit of advice to the umpire along the way, but we are a people with a tradition that says you abide by the umpire's decision. We've had the umpire's decision. You would expect that in a rules based trading system, which is what our world trade system is through the WTO, that as a nation we would use those rules and use appeal rights as they were made available. But the umpire has now spoken, we will abide by the decision. We believe in free trade, we believe in free trade, ah, in, in, its benefits and in its obligations and accepting the umpire's decisions is one of the obligations we expect.
JOURNALIST: So you can guarantee that next apple growing season we'll see New Zealand apples exported with open arms into Australia.
PM: I can't guarantee what conduct will be engaged in by people who grow apples in New Zealand, but what I can say, for the Australian Government, is we will abide by the umpire's decision at the WTO.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) China central television news (inaudible) and the news said that it could be bad for the relationship between China and New Zealand because under your defence policy. How do you respond?
PM: Look, I would say simply that both Prime Minister Key and I have been at a number of international meetings together where China has been represented. Our engagement with China is a constructive one and we will continue that constructive engagement. Obviously with the growth in the Chinese economy, our economic relationship with China has gone from strength to strength ever since the days of the Whitlam Government, our political relationship and strategic relationship with China has been one that's based on mutual respect and on constructive engagement and that's what people should continue to see.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Key, do you expect New Zealand businesses to gain much at all out of the investment protocol you've just signed, I mean allowing a billion dollar threshold without (inaudible) because what we've seen recently is New Zealand business simply don't have cash to get together on our own investments, let alone across the Tasman (inaudible).
PM KEY: Well I do expect to see New Zealand businesses gaining an advantage through the investment protocol that's been signed. For a start off, we need to acknowledge that New Zealanders have $36 billion dollars invested in Australia.
We have some very large funds that, invest, out of New Zealand. The Super Fund, with tens of billions of dollars now invested so that's a significant force. We obviously have very large private companies in New Zealand in the form of someone like Graeme Hart, so there will be New Zealand companies, and you can see that with Fletcher Challenge's recent attempt to buy Crane in Australia, that you're seeing bigger and bigger deals being undertaken.
So look, obviously it's a high threshold, but that gives great confidence to New Zealand investors that if they want to buy a slice of an Australian company, then they are free to do that without reference to the authorities if it's under one billion Australian dollars.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what about the other way, what about Australian investment in New Zealand? Is there any concern domestically that Australia will be able to buy up too many New Zealand assets and businesses, is this relationship, can it be too close?
PM KEY: Well firstly, we've seen significant investment from Australian companies in New Zealand, they have been the major investor in our economy and I believe our economy has been stronger and has delivered more jobs as a result of that investment and you can see that domination in the banking system and other sectors of our economy.
I think the second thing that's worth remembering is that this means that from an Australian company's point of view, under $477 million they don't have to have referenced the authorities, but even if they were referenced the authorities it doesn't mean that that deal would be turned down, I mean, very often it is the case that those deals will go through.
So look, I think from an Australia New Zealand perspective we are stronger because of the ability to invest in each other's economy and from time to time we will see that investment, foreign investment always has it detractors. We need to acknowledge that, but I come from the camp in believing that it's enhanced New Zealand's economic growth and therefore the wellbeing of our citizens by being supportive and that's really what the protocol is attempting to do.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, on your health reforms, why did you go ahead spending millions of dollars advertising Kevin Rudd's now obsolete reforms before the deal was done and are you planning another advertising campaign?
PM GILLARD: Look, the health reform arrangements I struck at COAG on Sunday are right for the country, they're a better deal for patients, they're right for the country's future. We're going to move now to working with state and territory colleagues to enter the in detailed agreement which builds on the heads of agreement we entered into on Sunday.
You should expect me to be talking to the Australian people about how these health reform changes will work for them, including the creation of Medicare locals, local hospital networks, what the transparency measures will bring, what an efficient price means. So I will continue to explain that to the Australian people. I don't have any plans for an advertising campaign, but I do believe it's important that Australian's understand how these reforms will benefit them, what difference it will make to our health system, and the fact that it's a truly national deal, whether you're in Perth or in Brisbane, that this is a health arrangement that is going to impact on you and have benefits for you.
JOURNALIST: Why did you go with the advertisement before the deal was done?
PM GILLARD: You're talking about the advertising campaign in the past, well, once then Prime Minister Kevin Rudd had reached agreement with all of his State and Territory colleagues except for Western Australia, the Government set about implementing that agreement. I formed the view, as I've been very clear about earlier this year, that we were not going to reach agreement with Western Australia and that I wanted to get sustainable, long term health reform that required us to move away from the financing model and to talk about health, that's exactly what we did and we've got a national agreement as a result of it.
JOURNALIST: On the MRRT again, how do you justify the Government taking a hand in hand to the Australian people for a $1.8 billion flood levy when you're essentially giving away 60 billion dollars to big miners which we see in the case of BHP and they're making enormous profits?
PM: Well that's a completely apples to oranges comparison. The revenue coming from the MRRT is revenue that will flow over time, the flood damage and cyclone damage we need to rebuild from is a pressing matter that needs to be financed now.
For example, we are making a pre-payment of $2 billion dollars to the Queensland Government. We're making a prepayment of half a billion dollars to the Victorian Government. We are dealing with a damages bill where people want to see us rebuild as quickly and efficiently as possible, we're looking at a damages bill pressing now of $5.6 billion, that's why, as one part of financing that $5.6 billion, it is the right decision to have a fair, temporary, targeted levy which will generate revenue in the next financial year starting the first of July, to immediately get to the task of rebuilding.
Can I just say on the issue of natural disasters and the impacts in Australia after the summer of incredible hardship we've already had, I am monitoring events with the weather bureau's warning about a cyclone for Darwin in the top end of the Northern Territory. As is normal, we will work with Chief Minister Paul Henderson and his Government and the emergency workers there to assist them.
Emergency warnings have been issued; Darwin has already experienced very strong overnight winds occasioning damages for some homes and power outages for quite a number of homes  -  8,000 lost power last night. So people are being asked to make appropriate preparations on the basis that they could face a cyclone and I'll continue to get advised of what is happening with the weather and whether this weather is intensifying into a cyclone.
The summer of hardship for Australia is not over yet, and my thoughts are with the people of Darwin and the top end as they prepare for this and are already experiencing strong winds and some damage and certainly as a Federal Government we will be working with them every step of the way.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard (inaudible) luxury BMWs for your VIP visit?
PM KEY: Yeah, so, can I just give you some details on that  -  back in 2007 the then Labour Government agreed a transaction which had two legs to it  -  it was a six year deal with a three year roll over.
That decision to invoke the right to roll those cars over and bring new cars in was made by the Department of Internal Affairs without reference either to their Minister or to me. So the first that I was aware of that was last week when one of the crown car drivers in Auckland told me that was the case.
So, it's not a situation where we as the Government have decided to do that, the Department has made that decision. They believed that they didn't need reference to either their Minister or to me, because they had the authority signed off by the previous Government. From that regard, would it have been the decision we would have made? Well, it's a little too late to speculate on that now because unfortunately those cars are going to turn up in New Zealand and economically on the brief information I have it would be more costly to send them back than to carry on with the contract as it was agreed by the Department of Internal Affairs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, have you and Mr Key discussed plans for some sort of regional trans-Tasman processing centre for asylum centres, and if so, how far down the line might that be and (inaudible) set up?
PM: We have had a discussion about Australia's proposal for a regional protection framework and regional processing centre. Australia will continue to pursue that dialogue, including through the Bali process and bilaterally with our neighbours, including New Zealand. So yes, we have had some discussions of that matter today.
JOURNALIST: Have you talked about possible locations of that or is it (inaudible)
PM: The Australian Government is in dialogue with the Government of East Timor as a location for the regional processing centre, so I did have the opportunity to update Prime Minister Key this morning on those discussions.
JOURNALIST: What's your position on that Mr Key (inaudible)
PM KEY: From our perspective, we certainly had that discussion this morning and as I indicated to the Prime Minister, New Zealand is willing to continue to engage in that dialogue, we said this is a regional issue, we're not quite sure how things will play out in the end but it's our view that New Zealand is not immune from the issue of people smuggling, and on that basis a more advanced regional solution that's part of the Bali agreement could we be useful and we're quite happy to continue to have those discussions.
JOURNALIST: And on climate change, just a quick word, discussions on climate change?
PM KEY: Well I think that we've had a healthy discussion in that area, again, look, if the challenge of climate change is to be resolved it needs to be tackled by every country. I think we all may have a different approach in how we do that.
 Putting a price on carbon, maybe changes in regulation or a combination will be invoked, I think, by lots of countries around the world. From New Zealand's point of view, moves that are made by Australia that are similar to New Zealand's are obviously welcomed because of the trans-Tasman nature of the relationship but in the end it's for the Australian Government to determine what the right policies are for their people.
JOURNALIST: Mr Key, is East Timor an appropriate destination for a regional processing centre?
PM KEY: I'm not in a position to assess that, but, look if that's the area where the Prime Minister is having discussions than we're more than happy to continue in that dialogue with her.
JOURNALIST: One final one on asylum seekers, Prime Minister, is it fair to send the families of the grieving asylum seekers from Christmas Island straight to Sydney for the funeral and then straight back to Christmas Island?
PM: I know this was the subject of debate in Australia yesterday and I made my position clear that it was appropriate to enable people to come and say a formal and tragic goodbye to their loved ones, that that was the right thing to do.
We are a nation that operates a mandatory detention policy and that means of course that people in detention whose claims are being processed need to be housed in appropriate places and Christmas Island is one of the most major facilities that we do that in. 



JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Sydney Morning Herald has reported this morning that the Opposition's Immigration spokesman, Scott Morrison, has urged the Shadow Cabinet in December to capitalise on the community's growing concerns about Muslims in Australia with a discriminatory policy. Can you comment on what this leak may mean?
PM: Well, first and foremost we need the Leader of the Opposition, Tony Abbott, to confirm whether or not these reports are true, that his Shadow Cabinet sat around talking about making Australia's immigration policy one that discriminates on the basis of religion or race. And Mr Abbott has to confirm today, does he agree with Scott Morrison that we should have discriminatory immigration; that we should knock someone back because we don't like their religion. Is that Tony Abbott's position?
And if that's not Tony Abbott's position, then really he has to say to Mr Morrison, his Shadow Minister, he's not prepared to follow him down this grubby path and Mr Morrison should go to the backbench rather than being on Mr Abbott's frontbench.
JOURNALIST: What does this mean on the back of the debate of the last few days about the appropriateness or otherwise of bringing the asylum seekers to Sydney for the funerals of (inaudible) Christmas Island?
PM: This is an incredibly important question for the future of the nation - how we construct our migration policy. For many, many long years now it's been bipartisan politics in this country that we do not discriminate on the basis of race or religion.
I'm a migrant. I've got a very clear view about what it means to be a good migrant to this country. I can talk about that from lived experience. You're a good migrant to this country if you come here; you're here because you want to abide by the rules of this country; you love this country and you're prepared to work hard to make its future. That's the basis on which we run our migration program.
We don't say to people ‘you can't worship this way if you want to come to Australia.' That's not the Australian tradition, it's not the Australian way. So, this is a big question for Mr Abbott to answer today.
In an act of leadership, is he saying the modern Liberal Party now stands for discrimination on the basis of religion?
Mr Abbott clearly made comments he regretted about enabling asylum seekers to attend funerals of their loved ones. Mr Abbott said that when Mr Morrison backed away from those comments he was pleased to see that Mr Morrison had.
Today there is another big issue, a very big issue, involving Mr Morrison. Mr Morrison, from today's reports, appears to want to go down a very grubby path in the migration debate in this country. Is Mr Abbott going to follow him down that path or stop it now and get Mr Morrison to go to the backbench?
JOURNALIST: Do you think the Party is extremely divided on this issue?
PM: Liberals, over a long period of time, Liberals like Malcolm Fraser, have championed a non-discriminatory immigration policy. Prime Minister Howard championed a non-discriminatory immigration policy. He at one stage questioned that policy and then, in his latter years as Prime Minister of this country, said he very much regretted ever questioning it and he very much believed in non-discriminatory immigration.
So, if Mr Abbott is making this move, he is repudiating Prime Minister Howard, Prime Minister Fraser, and many people in his political party today.
JOURNALIST: And what are the implications for Australia's social fabric if this is the way policy, or at least behind closed doors discussions, are going?
PM: Well, I simply can't imagine it. I can't imagine that an Australian Government would ever do what Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison may well be urging. I can't imagine that an Australian Government would ever say ‘if you're Greek Orthodox, you can't come to this country; if you're a Muslim, you can't come to this country.'
I can't believe that Mr Abbott or Mr Morrison really want to see the nation go down that path. That's why it's so important today that Mr Abbott comes out and says ‘these reports are incorrect, and I believe in a non-discriminatory policy', or ‘these reports are correct, Scott Morrison is wrong, he's going to the backbench, and I, Tony Abbott, reaffirm the Liberal Party's belief in a non-discriminatory immigration policy'.
JOURNALIST: Thank you for your time, Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: Today I've had the opportunity to talk to residents in Tully Heads to see some of the damage in Tully and then to be here talking to local banana growers about what it's going to take to recover from this devastating cyclone.
The Federal Government has announced a package of assistance modelled on the kind of assistance that growers and communities got following Cyclone Larry. We have made some improvements to the package that followed Cyclone Larry. Significantly, we have made sure the concessional loans to help businesses and producers rebuild are up to the value of $650,000, and $50,000 of that can be a grant.
We've also increased the amount that is available for the wage subsidy and we've been talking about how that's so important to keep local people in local jobs rather than losing them and then when you're able to go back into production not being able to have people around who know what the work is and can take the jobs back up. So, we want to hold workforce in local communities and the wage subsidy enables that.
This package also includes a rural resilience fund which will work for local communities to identify the extra needs that communities may have and to flexibly respond to those needs. We've also been talking about other important elements of the package, including the $25,000 of clean up money that is available to assist producers cleaning up after this cyclone. For example we've talked about the very practical issue that a lot of what has been used to cover the bananas can end up blown around and if it's not cleaned up then it will end up in local waterways and out to sea. So this clean up money is so important.
The feedback today has been that the package will make a big difference. We need to keep monitoring where the package has been available. We've made assistance available across a broad region. We've made the most intensive assistance available where communities have been most hard hit. We will obviously be monitoring and working with local communities to make sure that the right package is available in the right place.
I do, when I'm here, also want to pay some tribute to Superintendent Michael Keating, who's with me. He will be leading the co-ordination of the recovery effort here. He, of course, is well known to community members as a very senior police officer and he's been playing that role as communities here have responded to this devastating cyclone, but now he will move into a role with the Queensland Recovery Authority, being the local commander on the ground able to get access to Premier Bligh if he needs assistance, able to get access to me through Premier Bligh and the Queensland Recovery Authority.
We want to make sure that what State Government is working with the Federal Government and the best way of doing that is to have someone who is the pinnacle of the chain of command on the ground and that is Michael Keating and I thank him for playing that role.
I'd also like to thank Bill Shannon, the local Mayor, for being with us today. I met Bill when I was in Port Hinchinbrook immediately after the cyclone, when our helicopter had to put down because of weather conditions. It was very wet, it was very difficult (inaudible) Bill was there amongst local community members and I do want to thank him for that.
I also want to say joining today by Bob Katter. Bob has played a big role in making sure that I understand and Wayne Swan understands what's happening in communities. I thank him for playing that role. And Senator Jan McLucas has also been eyes and ears on the ground. She lives in Cairns and that's been really important to having a direct line of information about needs in this region.
So, with those words I'm very happy to take questions, but I would at this opportunity also like to say something about a political issue today, an issue of importance to the nation's future.
Earlier today people would have seen a report in the daily newspapers suggesting that the Federal Liberal Party was abandoning its long standing committed to a non-discriminatory immigration policy. That is, that the Federal Liberal Party was contemplating picking migrants to this nation on the basis of their race or religion.
Can I say I'm very clear about what makes a good migrant to this country. I'm a migrant myself, I've got lived experience and to be a good a migrant to this country, you've got to be someone who loves this country, accepts the rules of this country, and is prepared to work hard to make your life in this country. People who are prepared to do that come from all races and religions.
Now, I know that the Leader of the Opposition has spoken about this matter today, but despite his comments, it's still not clear to me whether his Shadow Minister for Immigration personally supports discriminating against migrants on the basis of their religion, and if his Shadow Minister for Immigration personally supports that, then the course here is clear: either Tony Abbott has to say that has become the policy of the Liberal Party, or he has to ask his Shadow Minister to go to the backbench. The Liberal Party cannot maintain that it is keeping its long-standing policy of non-discriminatory immigration and have someone with a very different view holding the Shadow Ministry.
So, it's a question for Tony Abbott whether he is going to rule out this ugly politics and ugly approach, and he is going to very visibly do that by getting his Shadow Minister to go to the backbench if he holds those views.
I'm very happy to take peoples' questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what sort of (inaudible)
PM: The $1,000 and the like? We've had considerable numbers of people across this community claim the $1,000 emergency money and the $400 per child that goes to assist people in very difficult circumstances. What that means is between the amount that's been made available in emergency payments and the additional package that has modelled on what happened after Cyclone Larry, our investment will be around $400 million in this region, and that's before we get to rebuilding infrastructure. The cost of rebuilding infrastructure will be on top of that.
JOURNALIST: Will the Government build cyclone-rated centres?
PM: Well, of course, as we rebuild we will be taking with us what we learn from the way that buildings hold up in cyclone conditions. One of the things we've talked about as we've moved around is what was learned following Cyclone Larry about the kind of conditions that buildings need to be able to withstand and the building codes that go with that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you (inaudible)
PM: Well, what I know is, for example, when we built in Cairns, and Senator McLucas was very involved in this, when we provided some economic stimulus money to Cairns, we did that to build a Category 5 cyclone rated disaster management centre. That was used during this cyclone and was where people managing the emergency response worked from.
Also, as I'm advised, what we built through Building the Education Revolution has stood up in these cyclone conditions and I certainly know some of those buildings across Queensland have been used for recovery and relief activities.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) quite happy with the assistance package, but I know that other farmers and business groups have expressed that they find it disappointing. Will you be extending it to include growers (inaudible)
PM: Well, we've rolled out the package here. We'll obviously listen to feedback but I think from my discussions today people believe this is the right package and it is an improvement of what was made available after Cyclone Larry. We continue, day by day, to work with the Queensland Government on recovery from the devastating series of events that hit so many parts of Queensland. So, we'll keep working with the Queensland Government on that, but I'm pleased we've been able to make this package available.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, we'll work through a step at a time, but I did view it as an important thing to clarify for growers in this region what was going to be happening with wage subsides so that they could hold their workforce, and the feedback to me today has been that that has enabled people to have a bit of a deep sigh and to know what's going to happen next, bit of a deep sigh of relief, and that's very important so people know what their future's going to be and we don't get people unnecessarily moving away, not sure what's going to happen next, when there will be jobs for them, there will be bananas to pick.
JOURNALIST: What about graziers inland that aren't eligible for this assistance at the moment?
PM: Well, we will continue, as I've said, to work through, but we did want to make this package for the hardest hit areas of the cyclone available and clear as soon as we could.
Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan, a great Queenslander, is continuing to work on these questions in almost daily dialogue with his counterpart. He's worked very intensively with Treasurer Andrew Fraser and I continue to work directly with Premier Anna Bligh on these questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the failure of Telstra's landline system following the cyclone has been described as a national embarrassment. What is your office doing to ensure that Telstra doesn't let us down to this scale again?
PM: I've worked directly with Telstra to talk to them about their response on the ground. I knew that there were complaints and I knew we needed to get them addressed and fixed. So my office did have a direct conversation with Telstra about that at a very senior management level and as a result of that conversation my feedback from Bob has been that there has been an improvement here on the ground.
KATTER: The discussions were very frank and the results were very, very speedy. We thank the Prime Minister. Keep going.
PM: Thank you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) give farmers a guarantee today that the green light would not be given to bananas to come over from the Philippines?
PM: Well, we've talked about that and we've talked about the science, of course this is a question of quarantine and science and what we've discussed today is the work that the growers themselves have done on the science, looking at the threats that could come from imported produce. My message has been if the science says no, if the science says that there are quarantine risks, then the relevant Government agencies will need to work off that science.
JOURNALIST: That science has been done before though, Prime Minister.
PM: Well, the science we talked about today, I think, is making these issues even clearer for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've come under fire for not guaranteeing some of the funds for councils for crucial infrastructure in the wake of the floods. When's the bickering going to stop and a decision be made on whether the Government can put the money up (inaudible)
PM: Well, I certainly wouldn't endorse your word because I don't think that's what's been going on. What's been going on is we are standing here with goodwill and generosity to help people respond and rebuild. We are also standing here wanting to know what things are going to cost, and when I talk to local council members they tell me when they make a decision at their local town hall and in their local council meeting, they want to know what things are going to cost. So, they're really not going to expect me as Prime Minister to make a decision without appropriate costings-
JOURNALIST: -And how much more detail do you need from council?
PM: Well, there is a considerable amount of work underway to scope all of this and to understand what needs to be done in various communities, and I think looking at this with goodwill, let's understand the situation here, councils inevitably have turned their minds most quickly to the really basic things that need to be done in recovery  -  getting food to people, getting water to people, running evacuation centres, getting tarps on roofs.
Now councils are going to start turning their minds to how to keep our economy going and that's why the package we announced yesterday is so important. Then, of course, they'll look at the infrastructure rebuild and we'll work with them on the details of the infrastructure rebuild.
So there's goodwill and a proper look for information on the side of the Federal Government, and I believe overwhelmingly we are working with local councils full of goodwill, and understanding our need for proper information.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, whaling in Antarctica and the Japanese, the situation's changed. Is that encouraging (inaudible)
PM: I saw these reports today. On my most recent advice they haven't been confirmed by the Japanese Government, so we are awaiting that confirmation, but if that confirmation comes then this is welcome news that this whaling season will be brought to an end.
But then we have to keep pushing, have to keep pursuing international legal action because there are the whaling seasons for the future and from the point of the view of the Federal Government we are very passionate about our commitment to end whaling.
JOURNALIST: How much are you prepared to pay for a banana?
PM: Well, we will see the market conditions prevail and think we all know, following Cyclone Larry, that there was a price spike in bananas. Some people are going to pay any price to get their bananas, they're very good things, but we also know the price spike was relatively short lived. It's a question of how quickly production can be got back and I am not expert in banana growing, but fortunately I've had great advice from some very good experts, who have told me that the timing of this cyclone and the weather conditions that have followed it give them more optimism about getting production online more quickly than Larry. So, people are working hard to make sure bananas get to market and consumers get reasonable prices for a product they very much love.
JOURNALIST: What did you think when you went to Tully Heads this morning? Were you shocked?
PM: Look, it is a shocking scene. I have had the opportunity on the ground in Port Hinchinbrook, at least, to see the smashing up of the marina there and the boats going into buildings, and I had the opportunity to fly over Tully. We couldn't land when I came last time, and it was immediately following the cyclone and weather conditions just got too difficult to keep the helicopter going, so I've had the view from the air.
I knew it was going to be bad. I've seen the television images, so I knew it was going to be bad, but there's nothing like seeing it in person, and it is very affecting when you see it and you see people living in those conditions and working their way back from some very difficult conditions.
So, there's a lot of loss there, a lot of heartache, a lot of determination to rebuild and stay in their community.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this morning Rob Oakeshott's indicated he may not support the levy. Are you concerned about getting (inaudible)
PM: Well, I will continue to say to the parliament what I said over the last three weeks, since we announced $5.6 billion rebuilding package. Let's remember that's our preliminary estimate of damage before we deal with the consequences of this cyclone where $400 million has already been committed and there is the infrastructure rebuild to come  -  and very simply, we've got to finance this. We've got to pay for it.
We've got cyclone and flood effects on our economy, but underlying all of that we've got a very strong economy. When you've got a strong economy the right thing to do is pay as you go. We will do that through budget cutbacks in other areas and by asking Australians to pay what is a fair 12-month levy to assist.
Now, I think it's a very fair proposition. That's what I'll be saying to the parliament, and it's an important amount of money - $1.8 billion in a $5.6 billion package.
JOURNALIST: So, how hard are you going to have to work to get it over the line?
PM: We'll work as hard as is necessary because I don't understand anybody to have a budget cutback alternative which stacks up and replaces this $1.8 billion. The Federal Opposition tried to do it and got themselves in such a hell of a mess that the Deputy Leader was bluing with the Treasurer was bluing with the Leader of the Opposition.
Now, what that tells you is it's pretty hard on the Government budget to try and replace this $1.8 billion with cutbacks. Federal Opposition's tried and it's ended in miserable failure, so if we want to get that $1.8 billion we need the levy through the parliament, and we will make the other cutbacks to get the $5.6 billion in total, and we'll make the other cutbacks to fiancé this rebuilding.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, we'll be back in parliament next week.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the people of Cardwell who stayed during the cyclone were deeply traumatised. Why didn't the Government provide cyclone-rated shelters as part of the school halls program, when you did spend a considerable amount of money on the cash refunds?
PM: Well, we built to all the relevant standards that Queensland schools are built to, so when we provide money to school communities to build, we work with school communities and we build to the same standard any other building in that school would have been built.
JOURNALIST: So will you ensure next time, that if you have another funding package like this again, that you would have storm-rated shelters?
PM: Well, I think it's a question of State Government and local council planning. Australia is a big place, lots of different conditions, lots of different hazards  -  cyclones, flood, fire. Lots of different problems that people face, and what we do is we work with the local building code. You would expect that to be different in bushfires areas in Victoria that saw so much grief during Black Saturday than here. This is not a one-size-fits-all proposition and consequently not something the Federal Government is seeking to do. It is better to have those building issues worked on by state governments and local governments who best know what conditions are like on the ground, and then we match whatever code or standard is.
Thanks very much. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Welcome back to the Far North.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: Tell us where you'll be visiting today.
PM: I'll be with Senator Jan McLucas, who is with me now, and we will in Tully. We'll be talking to local community members. We'll also be talking to banana growers, local business people.
Yesterday, the Treasurer and Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, with Premier Anna Bligh, announced a new assistance package. This has been modelled on what happened with Cyclone Larry, but in a number of key respects it's better than what happened with Cyclone Larry - there are bigger concessional loans available, the amount of wage subsidy available is slightly higher, to help people keep their workers as they rebuild.
But I want to talk to local community members about how they're seeing the world through their eyes. It's an incredibly tough time and it's always good to be out on the ground, talking to people, gathering up their experiences and working through what we can do to help.
HOST: Will you be visiting Tully Heads, do you know?
PM: We're in Tully itself and Tully Heads, yes, I'm having that confirmed by Jan, who's helped us put all of this together, and I know that a range of people are coming to meet with us from the surrounding areas. We will be able to meet with people who are experiencing it in various parts.
HOST: Now, Prime Minister, when you first visited the region after the cyclone you said that the Commonwealth stood ready to help Far North Queensland recover. Now, why has it taken two weeks for this rebuilding package to be announced?
PM: Well, we were there from the very first days with money to assist communities. We made available the $1,000 emergency payment, which was so important when people were out of their houses, dealing with complete devastation, and now we've moved to the recovery package stage, which is why all of the details were announced yesterday by the Deputy Prime Minister and Premier Anna Bligh.
So, this is about the next stage of recovery  -  rebuilding your business, cleaning up your home, getting your banana plantation back on track. With this package and money that's already being paid, this is around $400 million to assist the region, and that's before we even get to the cost of the infrastructure rebuilding, which will be separate again.
HOST: Now, I'm sure you're aware it's not just coastal communities that have been devastated by this cyclone. A lot of inland communities as far west as places like Georgetown have copped the full brunt of even a Category 4 cyclone in some of those areas, yet the Etheridge Shire has been excluded from the relief package announced. Why is that?
PM: We've worked with the Queensland Government to identify local community needs, so there are a large number of councils that are getting some form of assistance, and then the most intensive assistance we try and focus on the hardest-hit areas. We understand that we've always got to be working with local communities and the Queensland Government to identify needs, so even having announced the package this week we will continue to work through, and if there are communities that need additional assistance then we will be working with those communities and working with the Queensland Government on providing that assistance.
HOST: So, there's the opportunity even on a case-by-case basis for people outside the areas that have been cut off, so to speak, could apply?
PM: Well, we'll work on an area-by-area basis, but we will work in consultation with local communities and the Queensland Government to make sure that areas with the greatest needs get the greatest assistance.
HOST: Primary producers have been hard hit by this. Small business as well, they need to get back on their feet, and what we've been hearing on the show is that what they need in many places, more than anything, is physical manpower  -  you know, they don't need it in three or four weeks' time, they need to get a lot of stuff moved right now.
In those sort of circumstances, is there still a role for the Army to be playing in Far North Queensland?
PM: There will be a continuing role. We've had up to 1,500 soldiers working on clean up and recovery. The number recently has been around about 1,000. What the Australian Defence Force is saying is that it will still be available to assist. There will be special advisers working with local communities to identify tasks, and then those tasks will be responded to, so the amount of person power that's going to take will depend on the number of tasks that the Australian Defence Force ends up undertaking.
Clearly, of course, the Australian Defence Force has its usual job to do of being ready to meet the national security needs of the nation, so we'll just be balancing that, but people should expect to see the Australian Defence Force, through special advisers, still available and meeting needs in communities, and they've done a fantastic job. I mean, having made available air assets to move food supplies around; having made available Naval assets to do what in war time would be called mine sweeping but obviously in response to a natural disaster is about identifying obstructions in waterways, as well as just the sheer physical grunt people have seen on the ground  -  getting supplies in and helping with the clean up.
HOST: It's certainly made a difference to people's morale, seeing a truck of Army soldiers coming through.
Now, just as an example, we spoke to one grazier earlier in the week, Shane O'Brien at Kinrara Station, which is about 90km south-west of Tully. Now, he's still got no water, no power, no road access to his property. He reckons the damage to infrastructure is close to 100 per cent on his property. No, the concessional loans might help in the future, but right now he needs to clear roads and fences to make way for rebuilding. Is that help available for him and people like him right now, and when could people like the O'Briens see help coming to them?
HOST: As part of the package that's been announced, there's is clean up money available of up to $25,000, so what I would suggest to anybody who's in that circumstance is please ring the special assistance number or make contact with Senator McLucas to talk through your entitlements.
The special assistance number is 180 22 66, but as part of the package there's clean up money which is separate to the concessional loans.
HOST: OK, I'm speaking with Prime Minister Julia Gillard on ABC Far North, nineteen to nine.
Now, at the same time as the worst-affected areas are crying out for help, as you know, there's been some criticism, including from the local Federal Member in this part of the world, of the eligibility criteria applied to the $1,000 relief payments from Centrelink.
Do you think 48 hours without power is enough to justify assistance?
PM: I thought it was important that the eligibility criteria used for the flooding and the cyclone, all of these natural disasters that have hit Queensland so hard, that the eligibility criteria was the same as has been used for earlier disasters.
Indeed, the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Abbott, issued a public call to me to make sure that the criteria were the same, and so we rolled it out the way it's been rolled out in the past. So, I'm a little bit surprised that Mr Entsch would be taking that view, and he might want to have that discussion with his Leader, Tony Abbott, because Tony Abbott certainly said to the Government ‘please make the eligibility criteria what they've been in the past', and that's what we did.
HOST: You may be aware that the Cairns Base Hospital was evacuated the day before the cyclone to avoid the potential impact of the storm surge, which could have hit the Cairns Esplanade. Do you think it's acceptable for a region of more than 200,000 people to be served by a makeshift hospital set up at an indoor sports stadium?
PM: I'm certainly aware of the evacuation of the hospital, because the Australian Defence Force played such a great role in getting that job done, as well as Queensland Emergency Services personnel, the air ambulance and the like. I mean, that's a really difficult thing to do, to evacuate a hospital and keep everybody safe, so full credit where credit is due - a remarkable job done.
On the future of the hospital and what would best meet the needs of this region, that's really a question for the local government to work through with the State Government.
People would be aware than on the weekend I struck a new funding deal for health and a new reform deal for health with Premiers and Chief ministers around the nation, including Premier Anna Bligh, and what I can say as a result of that agreement is Queensland will have more money, more beds, more doctors, more nurses, than Queensland has had in the past. So, there are real benefits in this package, but decisions about capital infrastructure  -  where hospitals are, what they look like  -  remain as decisions for the State Government.
HOST: And can you just give us a sense of how things will be better at Cairns Base with this health reform?
PM: Well, the thing that's really put pressure on hospitals right around the country, including locally here, is that State Governments have been trying to keep up with funding demands as health costs have risen and risen, and at the same time, under the Howard Government, the amount of money going in from the Federal Government was going down as a percentage. So - growing health costs, Federal money not keeping up, State governments trying to do their best in those circumstances.
What's happening now, under this new agreement, is we will step up to being an equal partner in growing health costs with State governments. So, it won't be a question of health costs are growing and the Federal Government saying ‘do your best' to State Governments. We'll be there as an equal partner in growth.
We will also be driving reforms. We want to make sure our hospitals are efficient. We don't want to see waste. Compared with the earlier health agreement we've cut out a lot of bureaucracy. We don't want money being eaten up by red tape, so this is an important development for the hospital here and for hospitals and health care right throughout Queensland.
HOST: Now, before I let you go, Prime Minister, the other national issue today is the decision to send asylum seekers who've just attended a funeral of their loved ones in Sydney back to detention on Christmas Island, including a 9-year-old child. Do you think that's a compassionate decision?
PM We want to show compassion to people in such difficult circumstances, and I think many Australians would be thinking about that small child and the grief that we've seen displayed on our TV screens and would be very focussed on the needs of the small child involved and community members who are grieving the loss of others.
We, as a Government, stand by mandatory detention policy, but we are working to make sure that the circumstances in which children and families are held are better circumstances than they've been in the past.
Now, we've got to be balanced here. We need to make sure we've got strong protection of our borders and we've got more assets patrolling our borders than ever before, but as human beings I think we respond to others in grief and distress and having community members come, family member come, from Christmas Island to mourn their loss and attend funerals was the right thing to do.
HOST: Prime Minister, just finally, in your visits to Tully and places like Tully Heads today, what will you be saying to people on the ground?
PM: I'll be saying to people that this is going to be a long, tough road ahead. There's no point pretending anything else. It's not going to be easy and there are going to be moments of very great pressure and strain on individuals, but during all of that re-building, that hard journey ahead, we will be there, working with the local community, working with local community members, to help them re-build.
There's nothing that the Federal Government can do that's going to wipe the slate and take all the pain away. People are going to be looking at what they've lost.
What we can do is we can work with them in the rebuilding, and that's what we intend to.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for coming in today.
PM: Thank you.  



I welcome the 2010 ALP National Review Report which was released today by the Australian Labor Party National Executive.
The review was conducted at my request and covers an assessment of the Labor Party's performance over the past three years, including in last year's election campaign.
I would like to thank Senator John Faulkner, former Premier of Victoria Steve Bracks and former Premier of NSW Bob Carr for conducting such a widespread and inclusive review.  John, Steve and Bob have brought to the task their great love for and loyalty to the Labor Party combined with a wealth of experience and an insightful approach.
The report contains many valuable reflections and recommendations for the Labor Party and its future.
The Labor Party will consider these recommendations and respond through the Party's processes.
As Prime Minister and Federal Labor Leader, I today outline the principles which should govern the Party's response as it is shaped in the coming months.
1. ALP members are the future of the Party.  
For the ALP to remain a party of strength we must tap into the boundless idealism and energy of our members, of our supporters, and of the wider community.
We must be a broad based party that is engaged with the Australian community. We must build capacity in our members and in our organisation.
2. We must continue to be a party of ideas and a party of government.
Being a party of robust debates is a sign of strength, not weakness.
There must be a genuine contest of ideas and arguments within the Party but we must never lose sight of the fact that the only way to turn the ideas that mean so much to us into a reality is to win government.
3. The only political strategy that counts in the end is making a difference to people's lives. 
Any discussion of political strategy must begin and end with that recognition.
People expect change from their political leaders. They expect us to make a difference in their lives, to change this country for the better.  That is what they will judge us by.
That means ensuring that the ALP continues to drive change so that it benefits all Australians.
It means ensuring that we deliver on both economic and social reform, and that when we do, we never lose sight of the importance of building a society which fairly distributes opportunity. Building opportunity, enabling social mobility and shaping the future is the core mission of the Labor Party. 
4. There are matters that must be determined by the Parliamentary Leader.
While the Party and the Government must work together, there are matters that I believe are ultimately the decision of the Parliamentary Leader.
As Labor Leader, I will insist on the right to freely choose the Executive of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party.  I have chosen my team of Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries and I will continue to do so.
I will also continue to determine the best structure for my office to support me and the Government. 
5. There are matters that must be determined by the Parliamentary Party.  
While the Party sets the platform, the Government must determine its policies.  This is the case now and this must continue.
These are appropriate principles in approaching this report and I hope that the Labor Party  -  from the Party President down to our newest grassroots member  -  takes part in what will be a constructive debate.
That is what has always characterised our Party.
Finally, I recognise that more than anything else people expect the Government to govern.
However important the many recommendations in this report are, my main focus this year will remain:
 * 	rebuilding disaster stricken communities;
 * 	building opportunity through the Government's education and participation reforms;
 * 	shaping the future by pricing carbon, rolling out the NBN, and delivering a better and sustainable health care system; and
 * 	seeing our mission through in Afghanistan. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard thanked Professor Penny Sackett for her contribution to the promotion of science during her tenure as Australia's Chief Scientist, following news of her resignation today.
Professor Sackett has offered objective, clear and constructive advice during her two-and-a-half-years at the helm of this important office.
She has been a terrific communicator at home and abroad and has helped convey complicated messages on behalf of Government.
Professor Sackett's work as part of the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council (PMSEIC) has proved invaluable. It has helped to ensure that long-term strategic plans in important areas such as food, water and the environment are being put in place.
The Prime Minister wished Professor Sackett well in all future endeavours and thanked her again for the enthusiasm and commitment she has always shown.
Professor Sackett has developed a strong team with the skills and expertise to continue her good work.
The Government has begun the process for the appointment of a new Chief Scientist. 



The Gillard Labor Government has today announced grants for eligible charitable businesses and not-for-profit organisations following the Queensland floods and Cyclone Yasi.
These grants will help not-for-profit groups in impacted areas get back on their feet to enable them to once again provide important local-based services like counselling, medical care, child care, family counselling, job-training and employment services.
The Category C grants are activated under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements and provide recovery grants of up to $25,000 for not-for-profit organisations in 36 local government areas affected by the recent disasters, 
The Gillard Government will be the primary funder of these grants, expecting to contribute up to 75 per cent of total expenditure, with the remainder to come from the Queensland Government.
Organisations seeking further information about the grants should contact the Queensland Department of Communities on 1800 173 349.
Local Government Areas
The Category C grants are activated under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements and provide recovery grants of up to $25,000 for not-for-profit organisations in 36 local government areas affected by the recent disasters.
Flooding
Tier 1 clean up recovery grants of up to $5000 and Tier 2 grants of up to $20,000 for primary producers and small business are available in 22 local government areas and 6 partial local government areas (28 LGAs in total). 
They are: 
 * 	Balonne
 * 	Banana
 * 	Barcaldine
 * 	Brisbane
 * 	Bundaberg
 * 	Central Highlands
 * 	Cherbourg
 * 	Fraser Coast
 * 	Gympie
 * 	Ipswich
 * 	Lockyer Valley
 * 	Moreton Bay
 * 	North Burnett
 * 	Rockhampton
 * 	Scenic Rim
 * 	Somerset
 * 	South Burnett
 * 	Southern Downs
 * 	Sunshine Coast Toowoomba
 * 	Western Downs
 * 	Woorabinda
This also includes the defined portion of:
 * 	Blackall-Tambo
 * 	Gladstone
 * 	Goondiwindi
 * 	Isaac
 * 	Maranoa
 * 	Murweh
The grant scheme will run until 30 September 2011.
Cyclone Yasi
Tier 1 clean up recovery grants of up to $5000 and Tier 2 grants of up to $20,000 for primary producers and small business are available in 8 local government areas. 
They are:
 * 	Burdekin
 * 	Cairns
 * 	Cassowary Coast
 * 	Hinchinbrook
 * 	Palm Island
 * 	Tablelands
 * 	Townsville
 * 	Yarrabah



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today welcomed announcements from the Australian Greens and from Independent Andrew Wilkie, the Member for Denison that they would be voting for the Government's legislation on the flood levy.
The levy will go towards a multi-billion package to rebuild bridges, roads, rail lines and schools that have been damaged by the recent natural disasters.
Following discussions with the Greens, the Government has agreed to return the previously announced saving of $60m to the Solar Flagships program over the period to 30 June 2015.
The Government has also agreed to re-phase $40 million into the period to 30 June 2015 that was previously allocated to the period beyond 30 June 2015.
The Solar Flagships program is part of the Australian Government's $5 billion Clean Energy Initiative to support the development of commercial solar technologies.
The timing of actual expenditure will be determined by project requirements following the outcome of the merit based competitive selection process. 
The Government expects to announce the outcome of Round 1 of the Solar Flagships program in mid-2011.
The Government has agreed to continue to engage with solar industry stakeholders as the design of Round 2 of the program is developed.
Following discussions with Mr Wilkie, the Government will continue to support the promotion of excellence in university teaching through the provision of $50 million in project and award funding over the forward estimates.
Funding for the grants and awards that were previously provided by ALTC will be administered by DEEWR from 1 January 2012.
The Greens also raised the issue of the National Rental Affordability Scheme (NRAS) with the Government.
In response, the Government confirmed that the National Rental Affordability Scheme (NRAS) will not lapse in 2014-15. The scheme is being capped at 35,000 homes in the years up to 2014-15, consistent with current industry tracking.
Over a longer timeframe, the scheme will continue to operate to deliver at least the 50,000 homes provisioned for under the original program.
The net impact of these negotiations on the budget is $150 million, made up of $100 million for the Solar Flagships Program and $50 million for teaching and learning grants.
This will be offset in the upcoming Federal Budget in May. 



PM: As Prime Minister I am here to offer the nation's deepest condolences to the family and friends of Sapper Jamie Larcombe. Sapper Jamie Larcombe lost his life last night, Australian time, fighting in Afghanistan.
Sapper Larcombe has family and friends who will be grieving for him very deeply today. They include his parents, his three sisters and his girlfriend. Our most sincere condolences go to his parents, sisters and girlfriend and to everyone who knew Sapper Jamie Larcombe.
I also want to offer my thoughts and best wishes to his comrades-in-arms in his regiment, the First Combat Engineering Regiment. On Monday this week we had the funeral of Corporal Richard Atkinson, he was a member of the same regiment. As a result the soldiers who serve in that regiment would also be very, very hard hit by this news coming as it does so quickly after the loss of Corporal Richard Atkinson.
Every day we have to talk about a lost soldier is a hard day, every loss hits us hard as the first one did, and there will be many Australians grieving today, many Australians pausing and reflecting on this loss of a brave man.
Jamie Larcombe was fighting in Afghanistan; he was part of our forces there that are there for three essential purposes: to train the Afghan National Army, to assist with building governance and capacity in Afghanistan, and taking the fight to insurgents so that security in Afghanistan can prevail.
Jamie Larcombe died taking the fight to insurgents.
This is a hard day and last year when I spoke to the Parliament about our strategy in Afghanistan, I warned that there would be hard days ahead; this is one of them.
I very much, very much grieve and very much mourn this loss and I know that there'll be a lot of Australians sharing this burden today. The nation as a whole will mourn, the family and friends of Jamie particularly will mourn, and our thoughts are with them.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said that Sapper Larcombe died taking the fight to the Taliban, the insurgents, as part of an expanding operation into Taliban heartland. Are you concerned that Australian troops are now getting too thin on the ground in Uruzgan and it may be time to look at increasing troop numbers?
PM: The continuing advice to me from the Chief of the Defence Force is we have the personnel and equipment we need to acquit our mission in Uruzgan province. We keep this issue under close watch and close monitoring, but the advice to me remains, as it has been for some time, that we have the men and the means to acquit our mission in Uruzgan province.
JOURNALIST: When you go to Washington will that be an opportunity to reassess the commitment or will it just be business as usual?
PM: Every time I've spoken to President Obama when I've met him at international meetings, Afghanistan has been something we've spoken about. We together attended the Lisbon summit of NATO in ISAF format; that is it was a summit of all countries who have provided troops in Afghanistan and are part of the international mission there.
Each time I've had those discussions with President Obama I've said to him exactly the same thing that I've said to the Australian people: it's the interests of the Australian nation to deny Afghanistan as a training ground for terrorists. It has been used a training ground in the past and those terrorists have come and taken Australian lives and American lives. In those circumstances we are committed to our mission, to seeing it through, to denying Afghanistan as a training base for terrorists. It's a hard mission and I'm not underestimating the cost, I understand the cost, and we're talking about the loss of a very brave, very young man today. Jamie was 21 years old, so I understand the cost, but I also understand the importance of this mission. So today I am immeasurably sad but I am certainly very determined to see the mission through.
JOURNALIST: Could I ask you a question about Australian defence. It was reported at the weekend that our Defence facilities are at risk of being easily penetrated. Have you called for any information on this and do you think there is serious reason to be concerned and what do you plan to do about it?
PM: Michelle I would direct you to the Defence Minister on that, I have seen those reports, but my purpose today is to deal with this tragic loss, so I can talk to you about those things in the days to come and I'd direct you to the Defence Minister's statements which were made on the day that report was in the newspapers.
Thank you. 



FROST: Prime Minister I've often said to people who recently attained power and so on, whether attaining power was, whether it was different to what they'd expected and in your case you've been Deputy Prime Minister and so on, but in fact it's different in your case because you've been confronted with such a major situation, first of all with Queensland. I mean how soon did you realise how serious that was?
PM: The realisation, unfortunately, came quite quickly. We've had just a dreadful series of weeks, with the dimensions of the flooding crisis in Queensland and now, of course, with the cyclone also causing damage in Queensland and more water pouring from the sky. So as we moved through the December period into the period just after Christmas is became clearer and clearer that this was going to be a big crisis and it is the most costly natural disaster we've ever faced as a nation.
We have seen some loss of Australian lives. We've seen more Australian lives lost in other tragedies, for example the Victorian bushfires, but just in terms of the sheer scale of it, the amount of the country that has had to battle floodwaters, it's been some very testing days and they continue.
FROST: How long will it take for things to be back to normal. I mean it's a long process, presumably, an expensive process and a long one.
PM: It's going to be both long and expensive. Communities have really pulled together to get things back to a semblance of normal pretty quickly. We've literally had armies of volunteers turn out to clear filth out of people's homes that the flood waters have left behind and clear off the streets all of the garbage and broken trees and all the rest of it that was there, but we need to rebuild a lot of infrastructure, a lot of roads, rail, ports and that is going to take some time. We can't do everything at once, so we're going to sequence the most urgent priorities to make sure communities can get back to normal in the sense of farmers getting their product to market and our great mining businesses getting their coal and other mineral exports out to our ports.
FROST: And the ANZ Bank says some of the damage cost $20 billion, I think they said, and so on. I mean, how much will it have cost by the end of the procedure do you think, more than that, or less?
PM: There are a lot of estimates around about the total scale of the damage. From the Federal Government's point of view out first estimate is $5.6 billion, and of course we're talking about the major infrastructure. All of the damage to people's homes and businesses is on top of that.
So, this is a huge natural disaster for our country, but we will get through it, we will work our way through it. People have really pulled together and we are in a fortunate circumstance where our economy is very strong and so we will be able to absorb this disruption to our economy and very quickly get back to strong economic conditions. We continue to have low unemployment, strong wages growth, inflation where we want it, so the strength of the economy is going to assist us through.
FROST: The tax to bring in money in has caused controversy, of course. I mean people care about it and maybe they've already given money before they heard about this tax and so on. In retrospect are you glad you did the tax, or do you think it would have been better not to have had it that way?
PM: The flood levy is an important part of financing this rebuilding. Australians have been very generous and donated money to the Premier's Relief Fund and various other relief appeals that have been hosted. That money's going to go to help families directly to make a difference in someone's life. This is billions of dollars to make a difference for the hard infrastructure the nation needs, community needs, and the economy needs. So, it's two different purposes and we do need to finance it.
We also need to finance it whilst we're getting on with our other reform priorities as a Government, so the best way of doing it was to ask the people of Australia for a contribution, but we've also substantially cut back in other areas of Government spending, so for every dollar we're asking Australians to put in through a levy, we've cut back two dollars in other areas of the federal budget to make room for the flood rebuilding.
FROST: Since you became Prime Minister you had that election that was very close and had a happy outcome for you, just, at the end and so on. Do you think you could have survived as leader of the party if you hadn't won that election?
PM: I really haven't spent a lot of time thinking about what the alternative would have been. Certainly I would have offered myself to be Leader of the Opposition if we hadn't formed a government and believe I would have served as Leader of the Opposition. But the essence of being in government and managing both the day-to-day pressures and the long-term reform agendas is you don't spend too much time on the ‘what if' questions. Rather, you spend your time on ‘what can I build today that's going to matter for tomorrow'.
FROST: Not the ‘what if'. Someone said, I read somewhere someone said that during an examination or a profile of you that in fact, in a way the fact that you've never married was almost a deliberate sacrifice that you made, choosing public life rather than that. Was it a deliberate sacrifice, or did it just happen?
PM: I wouldn't use those words myself. I've always been someone who's worked hard, who's believed in making a contribution. I believe work has defined my life and it defines purpose for people, so work and hard work is important. So, that's part of who I am, but life's choices have been dictated by a focus on work or a sense that I would give up this in order to succeed at work. It's been defined by all of the things that life brings you: some good luck; some choices along the way; the people you meet and the decisions you make.
FROST: You said once that ‘if I met a man that you know I was tremendously in love with and everything we wanted was to have kids then obviously maybe I might have made a different set of decisions, I mean who know with the what ifs, but that isn't the way my life's played out, obviously. I mean that it happens but you don't plan it all out in advance.'
PM: I don't think you can plan everything in advance. I think everybody's life is a combination of some deliberate decisions and some luck and some circumstances that life brings you. I've been someone who's made my own choices. I don't regret any of my choices. I can imagine that I could have lived a different life, but I'm very settled in the choices I've made and where it's taken me.
FROST: And you planned to do this from quite a time, from when you started you could be Prime Minister in 20 years.
PM: I didn't quite plan to do this, the job of Prime Minister. I've joked in the past that I wasn't the kid in kindergarten dreaming of being Prime Minister. I suspect that there are some people in politics today who were that kid in kindergarten, but I wasn't and it never occurred to me that I could be a Parliamentarian or anything like that when I was a really young person.
I was involved in politics in a more active way at university through student unions and then across my 20s formed the aspiration that I could run for Parliament and make a contribution and then I used to say to people ‘gee, if I could become elected as a Labor Member, if I could serve in a Labor Government, if I could be Minister for Education, or Minister for Workplace Relations, that would be fantastic.' As it is I've got to do both of those roles and be Deputy Prime Minister and now Prime Minister, so it's more than I ever anticipated when this journey started.
FROST: What, apart from the natural disasters that we were talking about earlier, what is your biggest challenge as Prime Minister of Australia now? I mean, is it to do with immigration, or is it to do with something entirely different?
PM: I think it is to do with harnessing our economic strength at the moment. We are experiencing a resources boom, which for wealth into our nation is the equivalent of the gold rushes that we experienced in the 1800s. You know, this is a lot of wealth coming into our country quickly and that is fantastic for the country, but we've got to make sure that it's not just fantastic today, but it's making a long-term difference for the years that this country will have to make its way in the world after the resources boom and I'm very focussed on harnessing this wealth today to make a long-term difference to opportunity and prosperity in this country.
I got into politics, public life, fuelled by an ambition that every child should get a great education. I'm really conscious that education made me. I wouldn't be sitting here with David Frost if I hadn't had a great education and consequently a great life opportunity and I want to make sure that that benefit is extended to others.
So, we can use this wealth to make a difference to opportunity and prosperity and fairness for the long term.
FROST: Who were the people who influenced you, inspired you?
PM: The most profound influences on me have been my parents. I mean, they are people who through their lives have shown the benefits of hard work and decency and an interest in the world, a great set of values about fairness and helping others.
My father was always very interested in public affairs and was a shift worker and so on days off he'd have Parliamentary Question Time on the radio and he would talk to us about the issues of the day. He'd talk to us about the culture that he brought with him from Wales, a culture with a belief in trade unionism, of idolising the likes of Nye Bevan, talking about what he had achieved in the politics of the United Kingdom, so that was all very pivotal for me and the shaping of me.
And then I would also point to a family friend I went to school with - twin girls, Lynne and Kathy Bolovsky and we were great mates throughout all of our schooling and their mother, Marlene Bolovsky, was a big influence on me. She always said to me to aim high. She was the person who first suggested to me that I should go into the law and she I think really forced into me a sense of aspiration and that you can make a difference.
FROST: You've talked about Barry and so on, in terms of the UK, England or Britain and so on, you've said on a number of occasions that you think that possibly the time that Australia should become a republic is when the Queen's reign comes to an end. That, you think, would be the right thing to do?
PM: I'm certainly a republican. I want to see our nation be a republic, but we've had a long-standing debate in this country. We actually had a referendum which didn't succeed.
I think there is a real sense of connection to the Queen. She's been an important figure in the lives of many Australians and we'll be very delighted to welcome her here this year if she is able to come for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. So, there is a real affection for the Queen and I do think that one of the things that might help with the transition in people's minds to a republic is that we make that move at a time beyond the current Queen's reign.
FROST: What's the actual tangible advantage of being a republic, I mean?
PM: I don't think there's a tangible advantage. I think there is that intangible advantage of a sense of self and nationhood which comes from being a maturing country.
We will always have strong ties to the United Kingdom. Our history will always give us that and the way we structure our democracy and our system of government will always give us that strong sense of connection, and we are home to so many British migrants. But I think for many Australians, including myself, it's the next stage in our national journey as a country to say that we are a republic.
FROST: And tell me Prime Minister, how does it work out with Kevin Rudd as Foreign Secretary and so on, in the sense that, obviously, famously, you ousted him as Prime Minister. Do you think he still has a  -  he'd be very human if he did  -  the hope of managing to reverse the situation and replace you again? How intimate can you be in that situation?
PM: I think for Kevin there is obviously a sense of sadness. You wouldn't be a human if you weren't hurt by the events of last year and by losing the prime ministership, but it was foreign affairs that motivated him to come into public life. As a child in Queensland he developed this fascination for China. It took him ultimately into our foreign service, into being a diplomat and was a very big motivator in him making the decision to come into politics, and so as our Foreign Affairs Minister he can pursue that lifetime passion and is enjoying it and is a very active Foreign Minister and visiting around the world and very actively shaping our foreign policy engagement. And we very much pride ourselves on, the terminology we always use is punching above our weight, having more influence in world affairs than perhaps our strict size as a country would suggest that we should.
FROST: So we can say, people will say in years to come that you and Kevin lived happily ever after?
PM: I would hope so and I know that might strike people as odd or difficult to comprehend, but we have as a country, with the Howard Government, had an example of Prime Minister Howard working alongside Foreign Minister Downer for all of the years of that government, Alexander Downer having been leader of the Liberal Party at an earlier point in time, so these things are not unknown. Indeed in contemporary UK politics these things are not unknown.
FROST: Exactly, and they come together again later, absolutely. You mentioned earlier on in passing immigration. What would you like to do about immigration? I mean, it's obviously, the feelings of lots of Australians are that they'd like it to stop, but it's not practical for you to stop, but what would you like to do to limit it?
PM: We've been a long-term welcoming country of new migrations. I mean I migrated to this country.
Migration really built this nation post World War II and Australians are very conscious of that and very conscious and proud of having developed a multicultural, peaceful, successful society through migration.
In the modern age I think people recognise that we do need to continue to have some skilled migration come into the country to keep fuelling this wealth and this resources boom, but I also think Australians rightly ask themselves the question ‘how can it be that big mining companies in the North-West of this country are crying out for workers, where at the same time in the city of Perth in Western Australia we still have high youth unemployment?”
And they're asking us to do better at making sure we're skilling Australians and getting them into work and I've certainly indicated as Prime Minister that is a very big part of my vision for the future of this country, that we leverage this wealth to get more people into work with greater skills. Now we will still need skilled migration and we will still draw on it and it will be part of the mix, but we can't use skilled migration as an excuse for leaving that teenager unemployed in Perth when he or she could have got a job.
FROST: You mentioned links with Britain and so on and to do with war and so on, but at the moment of course you have pledged very much to continue your predecessor's devotion to the policy of helping, participating, in Afghanistan. You see no end to that at the moment?
PM: I had to make a Parliamentary Statement on Afghanistan last year. It was a good process. It caused us as a nation to have a debate at depth that we needed to have, and there are a variety of views in our country about our engagement in Afghanistan and they came to the fore in that debate, but as Prime Minister I'm very determined that we see the mission through there and the mission is strategic denial of the ability of terrorists organisations, particularly Al Qaeda, to use Afghanistan as a training place, and when it's used Afghanistan for that purpose in the past, some of those people have come and taken Australian lives in various terrorist incidents.
FROST: And of course at the moment there's one Australian who's in the news and you said you don't approve of his activities very much - Julian Assange and Wikileaks and so on. He underlines the fact that as far as he can tell no-one has been killed or even harmed as a result of the revelations that they cascaded on the world and so on, but do you still feel very, very much opposed to that?
PM: I do, I mean Julian Assange is an Australian citizen and he is entitled to all of the rights and assistance that we afford our citizens, including consular support and assistance as he works his way through legal questions involving potential charges and legal questions from Sweden, but for me I basically don't agree that Wikileaks has got some sort of, it hasn't got in my view any moral purpose.
I can understand the moral purpose of whistle blowing. If you were the person with a piece of information about Watergate then of course there was a moral purpose in making that piece of information available to the media and we all know how spectacular that scandal was.
But that's not what Wikileaks is about and it's not even claimed to be about that, some moral purpose about making an individual piece of information available. It's just this scattergun approach of saying ‘well look we've got it, so let's just shove it out there', irrespective of the damage done or the irresponsibility and I, personally, don't see the value of that.
Now, Mr Assange and I are never going to see eye to eye on it and we're never going to persuade each other, but that's neither here nor there. My job as Prime Minister is when I'm asked to answer questions honestly, and that is my view. My job as Prime Minister is to extend protections to Australian citizens, and that is being extended to Mr Assange.
FROST: There's another extraordinary crisis going on in Egypt, of course. I mean, triggered off by what happened weeks ago, as well. How do you feel about, I mean, this country, Egypt, it seemed so stable. Maybe it obviously wasn't as stable as it looked, but I mean, is it a trend that worries you, or is it just que sera sera?
PM: I think it's something we can understand, in the sense of understanding people's legitimate for greater freedom, for democracy, for their nation having structures that we, in our country, take for granted  -  people being able to determine their own future.
Certainly, we believe change is necessary, but we want the transition to be an orderly and peaceful process. It's for the Egyptian people to shape their own future, but change is needed, and we want to not see violence or chaos as change happens.
In the circumstances that have been in Egypt in the last few days, we've certainly said to Australians ‘don't travel there', and we're making available evacuation flights for Australians out of Egypt.
FROST: Yes, and I mean, it's extraordinary. People predicted two or three weeks ago that what had just happened might spread throughout North Africa or wider in the Middle East and so on. It does seem to be that, maybe, freedom is contagious.
PM: It may be, but I think it's something that in an individual country and in an individual system, people's aspiration, I think, for freedom, is widespread, and people do look to see what is happening in other nations, but to see so many people come out on the streets and actually voice their yearning for change is really quite extraordinary.   
FROST: Well, the time has rocketed by, we're out of time. Thank you so much indeed for this Prime Minister, and I may a particular thank you for the warm welcome that Australia gave to the English cricketers at the time of The Ashes.
PM: Now you're just being naughty. We'll get you back.
FROST: Fair enough. We'll look forward. Thank you so much.
PM: Thank you. 



MINISTER ROXON: Thank you very much for coming here bright and early this morning. It's a very great pleasure to be here, Dr Lim has hosted us in her General Practice. She's a GP of more than 20 years standing and very much loved by her patients as we've just seen. So thank you for letting us come to your practice. 
I'm delighted to be here with the Prime Minister, the Minister for Mental Health and Ageing and Gai Brodtmann, the Member for Canberra. We're here to release the guidelines for the establishment of Medicare Locals, to call for applications for Medicare Locals, the first of which will start on the 1st July this year, another 15 on the 1st of January next year and the remaining number by the 1st July 2012.So I'm delighted that the Prime Minister's here to bring a bigger focus onto primary care and I will hand over to her and of course we will distribute these guidelines, the application process for them and I'm sure that you'll have questions to ask and a very proud general practitioner who no doubt will want to tell you about her practice as well so over to the Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you very much to Nicola and thank you very much to Dr Lim for having us here and to my colleagues for joining me. We of course talk a lot about health and when we talk about health, politicians on TV screens, people often think it's all about hospitals and hospitals are really important, what happens in our public hospital system is so important to community members. And that's why when we struck the health reform agreement we were very focussed on making sure that our hospitals could be better for the future, that they were properly funded with more than $16 billion of new resources, that there was a change in the funding system, so that the Federal Government would be an equal partner in growth and that there were changes which would empower local communities, which would mean less waste and less red tape and less waiting time.
So hospitals are important, but often we don't talk enough about primary care, the care than happens in our community and can keep people out of hospitals. From the point of view of individuals, if the primary care system is working for them they get the care they need from the practitioner they need it from at the right time. They don't have to worry about who to go and see, because when they see their local doctor, when they go to their local health care service, they can get a coordinated package of care which meets their needs.
And in the modern age so many Australians struggle with chronic and complex conditions and whilst they need a great general practitioner, they often need so much more  -  access to a dietician, access to a podiatrist, access to other health services that'll make a difference to their needs. We know from the point of view of the health care system, if we can keep Australians out of hospital by keeping them then that is better for the system. By international standards Australia has very high hospitalisation rates and we want to change that by having great care in the community, so I'm very proud to be here today to announce the guidelines for our first section of Medicare Locals.
When I announced our health reform agenda, coming out of the Council of Australian Governments meeting, I said I wanted to see a national health reform agreement for hospitals, but I also wanted to put a greater focus on primary care. Medicare Locals are the bodies that will coordinate primary care in the community, today we announce the guidelines and we want to get the first 15 Medicare Locals up and going from the middle of this year and the second 15 Medicare Locals up and going from the 1st January next year. I've determined we should have more Medicare Locals and we should have the come on stream more quickly.
What Medicare Locals will do is they'll be able to bring together our primary care system so that patients can get the coordinated care that they need. I've also sought to invest in our primary care system by making sure we bring on stream two years early, access to after-hours consultations and that will happen from 1st January next year, with our new after-hours hotline coming on stream on the 1st July this year.
And I want to make sure that there's transparency in primary care, so people know how their local primary care is going, so they know how health care is going in their local community. I also want to make sure that Medicare Locals over time become fund holding organisations, so they've got the ability to get service gaps in the local community filled, so if there isn't enough of a particular service available Medicare Locals can make a difference to that.
We've had the opportunity today to talk to Dr Lim and what she's stressed to us is in her clinic here she's got access to a range of services, she said it was on more than one occasion that as a general practitioner she can't do everything and that meeting patients needs is about team work, that's what Medicare Locals are about, bringing that team work to local communities.
Now if it works well from the point of view of the patient, they'll get the care they need, they mightn't see this big engine behind that is driving that coordinated care, that will be work that happens between practitioners, but it means a patient will be able to get the coordinated care that they need.
So I think today is an exciting development as we continue to make sure that patients get a better deal with health care. I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: So Prime Minister are you saying that a patient will never actually see anybody working in these Medicare Locals?
PM: Of course, they'll see their primary care practitioners and the primary care practitioners will be working together through the Medicare Locals. What I want is not for the patient to worry about ‘who should I go and see next, how do I get my care coordinated, how many times to I have to give my records to people, how many times do I have to tell my story about my health care problem'. From the point of view of the patient I want them to get access to the services that they need, because the practitioners are collaborating through the Medicare Locals, that's what I mean by the engine being there, bringing the practitioners together. I don't want patients to have to worry about that machinery; I want patients to get the care they need.
JOURNALIST: Who will pay for the allied health care that they might need, that the GP would want to refer them to, which isn't covered by Medicare at the moment?
PM: Well we have various programs which assist people to get allied care, particularly when they have chronic and complex diseases which mean that they need access to a coordinated package of care and ultimately I want Medicare Locals to strengthen our primary care system by becoming fund holding. But with Medicare Locals coming on stream this year and with more of them next year, what we will see is a development where there is more coordination and more focus on primary care. I believe that's what our health care system needs, we don't want people ending up in hospital if they could have got the care they needed in the community and that they could have been kept well in the community rather than ending up in a hospital.
JOURNALIST: More coordination ain't going to work if the patient can't afford the physio or podiatrist.
PM: Certainly we have programs to support access to a broader range of services and that's important, but the coordination is important too. Patients, many of them these days present with conditions that require access to a range of services. You take Type II diabetes, yes you need to see your general practitioner, you may also need to see dietician, or go to an education class to help you manage your diet, you may need to see a podiatrist because of circulation problems, if you can get that package of care coordinated for you that's what Medicare Locals are about.
JOURNALIST: These after-hours services that will be offered, will they be bulk billed, because if they're not, won't they still be an incentive for people to roll up at the hospital emergency department?
PM: Our aim with after-hours is to make sure people can get access to assistance over a telephone line, often people need reassurance and need some help, they need a sense of whether or not they need immediate assistance or they have something that they can go and see a doctor about in coming days. And then we want people to be able to access consultations after hours, we will be making appropriate arrangements for that and there are parts of the country where after hours services work well now and meet people's needs. Often for people it's just that they don't know where to go, don't know how to get help, the hotline will help with that and then after-hours access will help with that.
JOURNALIST: So there's no guarantee they'll be bulk billing?
PM: We will be working to bring services on stream that will meet people's needs, but for many Australians they simply don't know how to access an after-hours consultation and in their local community at the moment there's no mechanism to enable them to do that. The hotline will make a difference and then bringing on stream two years early our access to face to face consultations will make a difference too.
JOURNALIST: But the co-payment issue is becoming bigger all the time, it seems you've got radiology patients storming the battlements today over the claims that the gap is becoming too big for people to access diagnostic care, what do you say about that?
PM: Given the dramatic wind up to the question, I'll ask the Minister for Health to answer.
ROXON: I'm please that you have asked that because despite the storming of the battlements that I think you say, actually the bulk billing rate for diagnostic imaging is at an all time high. That's because our government introduced a bulk billing incentive 18 months ago or so. That is working well. There are still people that do have to pay co-payments and we obviously do all we can to make sure that we reduce that number but we do have a system where there is some balance provided by making sure there is good access to bulk billing services. We have an all time high for bulk billing services for GPs. That is good news for the community and as the Prime Minister has made clear of course people won't pay for the telephone service, a service that ultimately will also be an online service that will be free of charge to the public and our new after-hours incentives are going to mean that it's possible to coordinate better across an area, so if its Dr Lim's practice or another practice there's an opportunity to work with other neighbouring GPs to provide services after hours, hopefully in a way that makes it more cost effective for them and hopefully more able to be bulk billed or at a lower charge to the patient
JOURNALIST: Pathology rebates haven't been increased or indexed for 13 years, why is that?
ROXON: Well as you would know Sue that's because for ten of those years there were two memorandums of understanding with the diagnostic imaging which is a price and volume agreement struck by the Howard Government. At the request of the industry that agreement was not renewed at the end of the second five year period. We've been in discussions with them, there's been a review for both pathology and diagnostic imaging that is close to completion and of course what you're seeing now is a campaign, one where you wouldn't expect people in an industry to ask for less money for their industry but we have to temper those with the needs of the community. Our consideration for investments that are made will be putting patients first and making sure that we have a strong and viable health sector.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why do you think Labor's done so well in the latest poll, or why is the Coalition doing so poorly?
PM: I said a few weeks ago that we had a lot of hard work to do and there's nothing about anything today that has changed my view. We've got a lot of hard work to do and we'll get about doing it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister has the Australian Government has any update on what's happened in Libya overnight and do you think it's time for Western intervention?
PM: Thank you for that question and I'm sure many Australians have been very shocked at the images they've seen on their TV screens of such widespread violence in Libya and also deaths in Libya. Firstly can I just address the circumstances for Australians, our travel advisory says do not travel, so I'd say to Australians who may have been contemplating travel to Libya for any reason, our travel advisory says do not travel.
For Australians who are in Libya and on our advice in terms of registered members of Australians, there are relatively limited numbers, we are talking around about 80 Australians. Our advice to them is to travel out of Libya if it is safe for them to do so, we are starting to canvas evacuation options should that be necessary.
On the general circumstances in Libya, we condemn in the strongest possible terms the violence that people have seen on their TV screens, we condemn in the strongest possible terms the use of the military against peaceful protesters. There is no excuse and no tolerance from the Australian Government for violence being wreaked against peaceful protestors. So our message to the government of Libya, to Colonel Gaddafi, is that they must respect peaceful protest.
JOURNALIST: And can governments like Australia and the US (inaudible) say that to Libya (inaudible)?
PM: I think what we can do is put pressure on Libya to respect the wish of the Libyan people to engage in peaceful protest. We will be making that point very strongly to the Libyan Ambassador here and the world will be joining in condemning the scenes that we've seen and the use of the military and security services against peaceful protestors. We condemn it outright and absolutely.
Across the Middle East and in Libya we are seeing an outpouring of people's pent up demands for more freedom, for democracy, for a say in the running of their societies, that's what we're seeing in Libya now and the peaceful protest that people are engaged in should be respected and not met with this kind of gross violence.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) plan to abolish exit fees despite receiving advice back in October that it could actually costs customers more?
PM: The government believes that our moves to increase banking competition, including getting rid of bank exit fees, will get a better deal ultimately for customers, that more competition is good. If the banks go in competing hard for people's business, then consumers will get better deals and in fact over recent weeks people will have seen major advertising campaigns from the banks out there, offering deals to consumers going in to get consumer business offering better deals as a result.
So that's what our competition package and banking reforms have been all about, making sure that the customer has choices, the customer can take their business from bank to bank and the customer therefore can require their banks to give them a better deal, that's why we didn't want to see exit fees that lock people in into one product and prevent them saying to their bank, I'm going down the road for a better deal.
JOURNALIST: Did you get that advice and did it worry you at all?
PM: You've got to strike a package here and government has to make the decisions that it believes are in the national interest and we certainly believe it's in the national interest to not have people handcuffed to banking products they no longer want and not able to use their ability to say to their bank I want a better deal or I'm taking my business elsewhere.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd has asked that that the ALP review, the Labor Party eliminate the power of the factions, factional leaders. He's also asked for the report to be released publicly, will you release the full report?
PM: The report is in the hands of the National Executive and it will make the arrangements about this. For me I'm focused on the future, focussed on governing in the best interests of the Australian people, that's what we're doing today and that's what Nicola Roxon and I have been working on with our health reform plans including these plans for Medicare Locals.
JOURNALIST: You don't support releasing that review?
PM: This is a matter for the National Executive; we're a party of government and a party of ideas. I'm happy to see ideas debated by the Labor Party, we're a party of government, we're getting on with the job of governing in the interests of the Australian people. Health, the health care system is very important to Australians, but they want to know the public hospital is going to be there if they need it, they want to know they can get the care in the community that they need. That's what we're talking about today and making progress in with Medicare Locals coming into existence on the 1st July.
JOURNALIST: What's your response though to claims that that review actually points the finger at yourself for some of the campaign bungles?
PM: I'll let other people chew over history, we'll get on with the job of making a difference to Australians.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what do you make of Scott Morrison's motion to the House last night to cut the number of asylum seekers coming by boat and then Judy Moylan's reaction speaking out against it in the House?
PM: I made my views about the conduct of the opposition very clear in the House yesterday; we are a country that's got a proud bipartisan history of having a non-discriminatory immigration policy. It's been something that's been treasured and prized by Labor governments and Liberal governments and as I said in the House yesterday there are a number of Liberal Prime Ministers who should be applauded for the stance that they took in favour of our non-discriminatory immigration policy. We are not a nation that believes in discriminating on the basis of religion.
I believe the Leader of the Opposition has to show some leadership on this matter, we have now a very very dreadful spectre haunting the Parliament and the nation of discriminating in our immigration policy on the basis of religion. The Leader of the Opposition has to confirm that he stands for a non-discriminatory immigration policy, they will hollow words unless he moves to replace his Immigration Spokesperson and his Parliamentary Secretary.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on that matter, I wonder what you make of the radio station that conducted a quiz asking callers to (inaudible) the number of asylum seeker deaths, did you hear about that one?
PM: I saw a report of it in today's newspapers and it's absolutely revolting. 



It's a great honour to be here today.
And I warmly acknowledge the Governor-General because it was her predecessor Lord Gowrie who opened this building 70 years ago and she very appropriately stands in his footsteps today.
Lord Gowrie, our longest serving Governor-General, was himself a holder of the Victoria Cross and a soldier of exceptional gallantry.
He opened this building to commemorate one terrible war in the darkest days of another.
In 1964, it was another Governor-General and VC holder, Lord D'Lisle, who opened the original version of this hall, known as VC Corner.
Again, Australia was at war.
A war that Keith Payne and his mates remember all too well.
And, of course, Her Excellency has been the first Governor-General in 40 years to confer the Victoria Cross as yet again, our nation finds itself at arms in the cause of security and freedom.
There could be no-one more appropriate to open this display and I thank Ms Bryce for her words and her presence here today.
She has done this occasion great honour.
Friends,
The vice-regal connection is a sign of continuity and abiding purpose unchanged since the day Lord Gowrie opened this building 70 years ago.
In his opening remarks, Gowrie posed this most enduring of questions: 
“When we read the names inscribed on the walls of this memorial ... let us ask ourselves:
what can we do for those who did so much
what can we give to those who gave us all?”
His answer  -  the only possible answer  -  was to ensure their sacrifices were not in vain.
We do that by remembering.
The simple gift that every Australian can offer, no matter what their means, no matter what their background.
It is a sobering fact that 95 of the 98 VC winners are no longer with us.
Their deeds are immortal.
But they are not.
Age wearies.
The years take their toll.
And so we must remember.
We remember, foremost, in the shrine of our hearts.
We remember each time we pass a memorial in streets of our suburb and towns.
In the Anzac Day ceremonies held in even the smallest one-teacher school.
When the Last Post echoes and chills our spines.
And  -  above all  -  we remember here at the nation's pre-eminent temple of honour the Australian War Memorial.
John Curtin called this place “the sanctuary of Australia's traditions” and I am personally committed to ensuring it remains so.
It is here that we come to contemplate the high price of war.
It is here we come also to honour the valour that comes with conflict because it is a remarkable and consistent fact that great battles elicit great courage; when ordinary men find it in themselves to do extraordinary things.
There are no words or symbols that can really honour their courage, but as humans we grasp for tokens that somehow express what we feel.
In a proud tradition, drawn from our British heritage, we in this Commonwealth have used the Victoria Cross and its sister award, the George Cross to express the nation's debt.
They are simple tokens of metal and cloth that express a profound inward reality.
And they deserve the veneration of our people.
From a modest space not much bigger than a broom closet opened by Lord D'Lisle in 1964 the Memorial and its architect have created a worthy home; wrought in lasting materials of stone and bronze that convey dignity and a modest grace.
The location is also eloquent:
Above us stands the Hall of Memory, embodying the unbroken link between courage and sacrifice.
There is another axis too, and that is the axis connecting this memorial to Parliament across the lake.
That too is no accident... because in a democracy, military service is an expression of citizenship.
Of free men and women who love their country and are willing to pay any price to serve it.
The 102,000 who made the supreme sacrifice  -  including Sapper Jamie Larcombe just two days ago.
A mother's son resting above us whose name we will never know.
And the 107 names inscribed in this Hall of Valour, which we dedicate to the nation today.
With gratitude.
With honour.
With everlasting remembrance. 



The Gillard Government has released new guidelines for Medicare Locals to help health practitioners provide more responsive and targeted services for local communities.
Launching the guidelines, the Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Health and Ageing, Nicola Roxon also encouraged primary health care organisations to apply to become Medicare Locals through the invitation to apply process, which opened today.
Medicare Locals are a key part of the Gillard Labor Government's national health reform measures.
They will be primary health care organisations working to make it easier for patients to access the services they need by better linking local GPs, nursing and other health professionals, hospitals and aged care, and maintaining up to date local service directories.
The new guidelines will help Medicare Locals:
 * 	Improve the patient journey through developing integrated and coordinated services;
 * 	Provide support to clinicians and service providers to improve patient care;
 * 	Identify the health needs of local areas and develop locally focused and responsive services;
 * 	Successfully implement primary health care initiatives and programs; and
 * 	Be efficient and accountable with strong governance and effective management systems.
Over time, Medicare Locals will be provided with more flexible funding to target services to meet their local community's specific needs. This could mean, for example, supporting local diabetes care or anti-smoking activities.
The first group of up to 15 Medicare Locals will begin operating from 1 July 2011. A further 15 will be established from January 2012, with the remainder commencing in mid 2012. 
The Gillard Government will provide a total of $477 million over four years to establish a national network of Medicare Locals across Australia.
Primary health care is the part of the health system that Australians use most.  More than four out of five Australians see a GP or other primary health care provider at least once a year.
That is why the Government's reforms to shift the focus from hospitals towards primary health care can deliver so much benefit to patients as well as making the health system more sustainable.
Effective primary health care means patients can get the services they need in their local community closer to home - the right care at the right time.
The first group of Medicare Locals will be drawn from high performing Divisions of General Practice, preferably working in partnership with other organisations.
The subsequent groups of Medicare Locals will build on the expertise and capacity of existing primary care organisations, particularly partnerships between Divisions of General Practice and other primary health care organisations and services.
More information on applying to become a Medicare Local is at www.yourhealth.gov.au



PM: Good morning.
As Australians are starting to go about their day this morning I know that their thoughts are with the people of New Zealand as they grapple with this enormous tragedy in Christchurch.
It's obviously been a harrowing night in Christchurch for people. There have been aftershocks, and search and rescue efforts are underway to deal with people who are trapped in buildings. There are media reports that there are around 100 people trapped in buildings and search and rescue efforts are trying to get to them.
I've been briefed this morning by the Australian officials who are coordinating the Australian response. Sadly, it seems that a long-term Australian resident of New Zealand origin has lost his life in this disaster. Reports are sketchy and we are still working through the details, but it appears that this person was a family man and our condolences go to his family, who would be struggling with this news.
It also appears that he was assisted by a passer-by in the last hours of his life. Our thanks would go to that stranger and I think that's an emblem of the kind of spirit that we're seeing in Christchurch as people get together to help each other in such difficult circumstances, and I'm sure many Australians have watched with a great deal of admiration as they've seen New Zealanders get about the task of search and rescue, with people just doing everything that they can to help.
In these conditions we are still working through to confirm that Australians are safe. At the present time, the hotline that we set up for anxious family and friends to ring has received - let me just check - more than 5,000 calls, and we have through that process registered 1,511 Australians as being in Christchurch. We continue to estimate there were more than 8,000 in the broader Canterbury region. Through this registration process and through the work of our consular officials, we've been able to confirm the safety of 417 of those Australians and we are still seeking to confirm the status of 1,094 Australians.
As I advised yesterday, we have three consular staff on the ground. We are sending in more consular staff. A further seven officials from our embassy in Wellington and our consulate in Auckland will reach Christchurch today. We are also sending in six officials from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade here in Canberra to bolster our consulate presence on the ground so that they can be working through to confirm the status of Australians. This is going to take some time. We are dealing with large numbers and we are dealing with very, very difficult conditions, so I am going to ask Australians for patience about the thing that it's almost impossible to be patient about, and that is trying to get news of your loved ones and confirm that they are safe, but we are sending in extra officials and they will be working as hard as they can to confirm the status of Australians in Christchurch.
We are also sending over four Centrelink social workers. This has clearly been a traumatic experience and we want people to be able to get that kind of assistance and support.
I understand that the Christchurch airport will be open today and commercial flights will resume. Both Qantas and Air New Zealand are going to put on extra capacity, so our consular team, as well as ascertaining the safety of Australians, will be assisting people to make arrangements to travel from Christchurch and return home.
Our efforts to assist New Zealand continue and there is of course a lot to do. Two New South Wales search and rescue teams will be on the ground today; that's a team of 36 and a team of 34. They will be joined by a team of 70 from Queensland which are also a trained search and rescue team. These people will be working alongside their New Zealand counterparts to go through the damaged buildings and to look for people who are still lying in those buildings.
As people would be aware from media reports and as I've been briefed this morning, there are people making telephone calls and sending texts messages from those buildings to alert people to the fact that they are there, so the search rescue teams will be working through to try and get assistance to those trapped people.
An Australian medical assistance team will also deploy today to provide further assistance to New Zealand.
New Zealand has also asked us, at a police-to-police level, particularly to the New South Wales Police, for a contingent of police officers to go over and help relieve the very hard-pressed local forces. My understanding is that New South Wales is working to respond to this request and we will be able to make additional police officers available.
This is a very, very difficult time for the people of New Zealand. It's also a very difficult time for Australians who are waiting for news.
I think from the images people are seeing on their TV screens, they can get some understand of the conditions in Christchurch. There's a lot of damage. There's a lot of uncertainty about where people are in buildings. There are very dedicated search and rescue efforts underway to get to people.
The people of New Zealand and Christchurch are pulling together to look after each other in evacuation centres, and certainly our officials are there to assist Australians and to get them through in these difficult and trying circumstances.
We will be doing everything we can to work with our New Zealand family, with Prime Minister Key and his emergency services personnel, his military officers, his medical people, his search and rescue teams. We will be working alongside them to give as much relief and assistance to New Zealand as we possibly can.
When we have more information we will certainly make it available. I know there are many, many Australians very hungry for information about what is happening in Christchurch, and as soon as we've got more information we'll make sure it's released.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you spoken to John Key since you spoke to him yesterday? Also, do you know how many police officers have been requested, and where are we likely to see further requests to assistance, for help from the Defence Force, for help with supply issues?
PM: The numbers of the police requested, the only information I have is that they've asked for a contingent of police officers, so I don't have the numbers, but it makes sense that their very hard-pressed police would need some relief at this stage.
On further requests, we anticipate that we may receive requests for things like Australian Federal Police assistance with victim identification. That's a request that may come in. We may get requests for practical assistance like water purification, the ability to provide tents and habitat to people who need to be sheltered and can't stay where they normally stay. There are a large number of people in evacuation centres that have been put together very, very quickly. We may receive further requests for medical assistance, even for medical evacuation and if that is necessary then we will respond to those requests, and as they move from this stage to clearing the rubble and mess that you are seeing throughout Christchurch, then if they need assistance with equipment at that stage, then we would certainly provide it.
So my message to Prime Minister Key has just been ‘please ask, and we'll do everything we can.' I haven't spoken directly to Prime Minister Key since our conversation yesterday. I do anticipate that during the course of today I will speak to him, and as people know, he has been on the ground in Christchurch.
JOURNALIST: We're already dealing with the aftermath of the floods and cyclone in Queensland, floods in Victoria, of fires, is there any prospect that down the track as Christchurch gets into the recovery phase that resources across the Tasman may be stretched?
PM: When you look at everything that people have lived through this summer, with Christchurch coming on top of it, I've been concerned and I know Premiers have been concerned - particularly Premier Anna Bligh was very concerned - about fatigue factors for emergency services personnel and police officers who have just been asked to be stretched to their limit because of the circumstances we've faced.
Our emergency services personnel are well aware of that and are managing fatigue factors so that people do get some relief, so as we assist in New Zealand and as we deploy people into New Zealand that is being taken into account, so we are not pushing people beyond the limits that they can go.
But having met with some of these search and rescue workers in the past and having met with a lot of emergency services personnel this is what they train to do, this is what they live to do and this is what they want to go and do - use their skills to help others.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have any confirmed reports of Australians missing in Christchurch?
PM: We've got, as I said to you yesterday we are working through. There are four people we've got concerns for and we are working through to ascertain where they are. As people would know from media reports we are concerned about the circumstances of Australians in the Pine Gould Building. There was one media outlet that was directly in contact with a woman who was in that building and trapped, but able to use her mobile phone. I haven't been able to get any further details on the situation of that Australian woman who made contact with a media outlet, but there is search and rescue underway as we speak at the Pine Gould Building with a New Zealand urban search and rescue team doing everything they can because they do know that there are people in there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what have you been told about the state of medical facilities in Christchurch and you mentioned the possibility of evacuations - does that mean that you envisage there is a possibility that people would be brought to Australian hospitals for a time?
PM: Look, we're not at that stage yet, but it stands to common sense and reason that there are large numbers of people who need medical assistance. New Zealand obviously has capacity in other parts of the country to assist people, in Auckland and Wellington and other parts of the country. What they've asked us for at this stage is for medical people to go there and how you move people with injuries and do that safely is a complex problem and you need to make judgements about the best way of assisting people.
But if we get to a stage that the best way of assisting people is to medically evacuate them and bring them here, then of course we will do that, but I don't have advice that that's the situation that we're at yet.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have any more information about the long-term Australian resident who has passed away? Do you know where in Australia he lived and whether his family are in New Zealand with him at the moment, or whether they're in Australia?
PM: Look, the details are still being worked through and I'm not in a position to release details which may identify him at this point, but my understanding is his family are in Australia, that he is a Kiwi by birth, he's a permanent Australian resident and he's lived here a very long period of time with his family and that they are here in Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have an update on the situation in Libya and any further plans to evacuate Australians that might be in that country?
PM: The problems aren't confined to Christchurch, you're right. We also are concerned about the circumstances of Australians in Libya.
We are continuing, as a Government, to call on Colonel Gaddafi to end the violence that we've seen against protesters in Libya and we certainly are condemning the statements that he has made and that his son have made about effectively plunging Libya into a civil war. We are saying to Colonel Gaddafi that he must listen to the voice that is rising from his people on the streets of Libya and engage in dialogue about the country's future. The future of the Libyan nation should be defined by the people of Libya.
For the Australians who are there, we are providing them with consular assistance. We are looking at evacuation options, not only by air but potentially by sea. As I indicated yesterday, the United Kingdom has made an offer to assist us with that, they too have got citizens in Libya and we will be working through with them on the best way of assisting Australians.
Our advice clearly remains do not travel to Libya - do not travel - and for the Australians who are there, stay in touch with our Consular people there, only travel if it's safe to do so, and please work through with them on the best way of getting out of Libya.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what about the status of Libyan officials in Australia? I know a UN delegation has split with its government. Do you have any advice on what's happening there?
PM: There are some reports about statements made by the Ambassador here from Libya. I don't have precise confirmation about his intentions, but we'll be seeking to clarify that.
But if I can make a more general point, so this a point not specifically about what he might say about himself but more generally, around the world we are seeing a number of Libyan officials turn away from the Gaddafi regime and make that very public and visible in the countries in which they are and I think that is a further expression of the aspiration of the Libyan people for freedom and democracy and we're seeing that on the streets and I think we're now seeing it more broadly through the statements that are being made by Libyan officials.
JOURNALIST: Would you be prepared to grant them asylum of they do defect?
PM: I think we've got to take it a step at a time. It's not for me to make a determination about an individual's future. First and foremost we would need him to clarify his intentions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said that there are about 100 Australians in Libya yesterday. Do we know if they are all still there, or have some managed to get out?
PM: I understand that people having been moving to leave Libya. I can't give you updated numbers at this stage about how many have left, but certainly we believe people have been taking our advice and moving to get out of Libya and we'll keep working through to assist Australians.
JOURNALIST: By air, or land, or - 
PM: -We are looking at evacuation options that include moving both by air and by land and we are talking to the United Kingdom about that, given their offer of assistance.
JOURNALIST: And have we been able to confirm, I guess, the relative safety of all the Australians that are known to be in Libya?
PM: I've got no advice to me that would cause me to say that there's a concern about someone's safety at this point, but clearly the situation is a volatile and unpredictable one, and as was the kind of thing we said with the situation in Egypt, it is easy for people to get swept up in circumstances that are happening around them, which is why we're being very clear with people: don't go to Libya, and if you are in Libya work with our staff there and only travel if it's safe to do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on a domestic matter, where are you up to with negotiations on the flood levy (inaudible) and is progress being made?
PM: On domestic matters I'll obviously continue to deal with them during the week, including the flood levy, but my purpose today and my focus today is on bringing assistance to New Zealand.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Gillard warmly welcomed Prime Minister Batbold as the first Mongolian head of government to visit Australia since the two countries established diplomatic relations in 1972 and since Mongolia's democratic transformation in 1990.  
The two Prime Ministers welcomed the friendly and growing relations between Australia and Mongolia, particularly in the field of minerals and energy.  The two leaders noted that the development of major mining projects, including the Oyu Tolgoi copper and gold mine, would promote Mongolia's economic development while deepening Australia's commercial ties with Mongolia. 
They welcomed the increasing interest of the Australian mining industry in sharing its expertise with Mongolia, and the capacity of Australian businesses in the geological, drilling, mining software, environmental management, financial, legal and training sectors to contribute to the development of Mongolia's minerals and energy sector. 
The two leaders acknowledged the importance of open and transparent markets, and the rule of law, to promote further trade and investment between the countries.  In this regard, Mr Batbold welcomed Australia's assistance in developing a best-practice regulatory and legislative framework to promote the successful and sustainable development of Mongolia's minerals and energy sector. 
The two Prime Ministers noted the significant potential to expand the bilateral relationship across a range of shared interests.  They witnessed the signature of four bilateral agreements:
 * 	A Memorandum of Understanding on vocational education cooperation aimed at helping Mongolia build the capacity of its mining workforce, encouraging the exchange of vocational education students and staff, and encouraging the exchange of information on education systems, qualifications and recognition processes between vocational education institutes and universities.
 * 	A Memorandum of Understanding to promote agricultural development and the sharing of information and agricultural technologies, with the aim of improving livestock and crop production in Mongolia.
 * 	A Memorandum of Understanding between the two governments to foster the exchange of information on Cabinet Secretariat operations and on enhancing transparency and public access to information.
 * 	A Memorandum of Understanding between the Australian Academy of Science and the Mongolian Academy of Sciences to promote the exchange of ideas and the review of collaborative opportunities in scientific fields of common interest, such as geology, water resources and agriculture.
Ms Gillard also announced that Australia would take the following steps to strengthen ties with Mongolia in the fields of trade, education and development:
 * 	Austrade will open a permanent office in Ulaanbaatar in 2011, in view of the growing number of Australian companies interested in doing business in Mongolia.
 * 	Australia will expand the Mongolia-Australia Scholarships Program from 28 to 38 Mongolian students every year from 2012.  More than 140 Mongolians have received scholarships to study in Australia under the program over the past decade.
 * 	Australia will provide $1.5 million in 2010-2011 to support water and sanitation, cost-benefit analysis of mining sites, and children with disabilities.  The projects will be implemented by UNICEF and the United Nations Development Programme.  The bilateral development partnership, valued at $7.4 million this year and more than $50 million since 1995, has to date focused primarily on improving Mongolian public and private sector capacity to manage its economic development.
The two Prime Ministers welcomed the growing people-to-people links between Mongolia and Australia, and the contribution of the Mongolia-Australia Scholarships Program in this regard. They noted the active work of the Mongolia-Australia Society, or the “Mozzies Association”, in sustaining linkages between the two countries.  They noted that more than 300 Mongolians had studied in Australia, including a current minister and three serving members of parliament. Mr Batbold welcomed the presence of Australian Youth Ambassadors for Development volunteers in Mongolia. 
More than 120 young Australian volunteers have contributed to Mongolia's development.  Both leaders also highlighted the value of parliamentary delegation visits in both directions.
Natural disasters and extreme weather events are a serious challenge for both countries.  Ms Gillard conveyed the appreciation of the Australian people for Mongolia's condolences for the loss of life and damage caused by the recent floods, cyclone and bushfires in Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia.  She also welcomed Mongolia's financial contribution to Australia's disaster relief efforts, provided by Mr Batbold in his meeting with Ms Gillard. 
In turn, Mr Batbold expressed appreciation for Australia's assistance in overcoming the effects of Mongolia's extreme winter drought in 2010, which devastated Mongolia's livestock holdings and threatened the livelihoods of Mongolian herders.
Both leaders underscored the importance of national and global efforts to combat climate change.  They welcomed the results of the 2010 Cancun Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and agreed on the need for prompt implementation of the Cancun agreements.
Australia and Mongolia share common strategic interests and objectives in the Asia-Pacific region, including the peaceful development of the region.  Ms Gillard and Mr Batbold both commented on the value of Australian and Mongolian cooperation in regional meetings such as the ASEAN Regional Forum.  Ms Gillard welcomed Mr Batbold's desire to enhance Mongolia's engagement with the Asia Pacific region. Both leaders also reiterated their commitment to a world free from nuclear weapons and their commitment to the global non-proliferation regime. Mr Batbold noted Mongolia's interest in developing its uranium industry, and that Australia and Mongolia, two countries with significant uranium resources, had a shared interest in promoting best practice of safeguards, security and export controls.
The two leaders reaffirmed their commitment to International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.  They welcomed Australia's and Mongolia's cooperation in training the Afghan National Army at the Artillery School in Kabul, led by Australia.  Both leaders emphasised the common interest of the international community in a sovereign, stable and secure Afghanistan that no longer serves as a safe haven for terrorism. 



The Australian Government will make an immediate $5 million donation to help with the earthquake recovery effort in New Zealand.
The donation will be made to the New Zealand Red Cross earthquake appeal, following advice from the New Zealand Government.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard said the money will be used to assist in the immediate recovery and to help Christchurch get back on its feet after one of New Zealand's darkest days.
The Prime Minister has advised the New Zealand Prime Minister John Key that the Australian Government will make the donation to the Red Cross.
The New Zealand Red Cross is on the ground in Christchurch, working with authorities to provide welfare assistance and first aid.
Red Cross relief supplies are being distributed and deployed from around New Zealand. 



The Prime Minister will visit the United States of America from the 5th to the 13th March. 
This will be Prime Minister Gillard's first visit to the United States as Prime Minister. The United States is our closest strategic and security partner and one of our most important economic relationships. This year Australia and the United States celebrate the 60th anniversary of the ANZUS alliance.
In Washington, the Prime Minister will meet President Barack Obama and senior members of the Administration, including Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner. 
Ms Gillard's discussions will focus on strengthening the Alliance to meet contemporary security challenges, the strategy for transition in Afghanistan, developments in the Asia-Pacific region and the global economic recovery.
The Speaker of the US House of Representatives has invited the Prime Minister to address a Joint Meeting of Congress during her visit. Ms Gillard will meet Congressional leaders after the address.
During her visit, Ms Gillard will also meet US intelligence heads and will discuss economic development issues with World Bank President Robert Zoellick.
In New York, the Prime Minister will meet United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and support Australia's candidacy for a non-permanent seat on the UN Security Council in 2013-2014. 
The Prime Minister will be guest of honour at a reception to mark Commonwealth Day, as Australia prepares to host the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Perth in October.
While in New York, the Prime Minister will also focus on the business, trade and investment relationship, highlighting the strength of Australia's economy, and the United States as Australia's number one investment destination.
The Prime Minister will stop in Honolulu on her return to Australia where she will meet the Commander of the US Pacific Command, Admiral Robert F Willard, to discuss security issues in the Asia-Pacific.



HOST: Prime Minister, on the eve of the last election you said there'd be no carbon tax. Were you wrong to say that, and what's change your mind?
PM: The Australian people voted for this parliament, and this parliament gives us an opportunity to price carbon  -  and we should. It's the right time to do it.
HOST: But people didn't vote for a carbon tax, though, did they, at the last election?
PM: I think Australians voted for action climate change. I believe Australians are persuaded of the science of climate change - the science is in and they want to see us get on with. They want us to do the right thing and the right thing is to price carbon, so the announcement I've made today is that we will price carbon from 1 July 2012, and we announced today the broad design of the mechanism to price carbon.
Now, Heather, I'm well aware there will be any amount of fear campaigning about this from the Opposition and there'll be figures bandied around in tomorrow's newspapers about what this will cost people. We've made a decision and an announcement about the price mechanism. We will continue to work through on issues like the actual price, and none of the figures bandied around tomorrow will be accurate. They'll be baseless, and none of them will take into account the fact that from a Labor Government there will be a fair carbon price and there will be assistance for households.
HOST: Well, you've raised the point  -  the Opposition Leader has predicted a people's revolt, and Tony Abbott says he'll be fighting against this for every second of every minute of every day. Are you geared up for that? Is this a make-or-break issue for your Government?
PM: Tony Abbott's only got one speed, and that's to oppose everything, and so of course he will be clutching for all of his old slogans, ‘great big new tax on everything' and out there-
HOST: -But there hasn't exactly been a ringing endorsement from business groups, either.
PM: Well, we were expecting and we will see a fear campaign from Tony Abbott. That's the only thing he knows how to do. He will be out there actively misleading Australians with false and baseless figures. He won't be talking to Australians about assistance from the Government to help them through.
I expect, Heather, this is going to be a hard debate, but I am determined that we will be out there winning this debate and pricing carbon. It is the right time. It's the right step for our nation's future.
I don't want to see this country left behind with an old-fashioned, high-pollution economy when the rest of the world has moved on.
HOST: You balked at this in the Rudd Government when the going got tough. Will you balk at it again?
PM: Well, Heather, I'm not going to canvass issues in the past, but-
HOST: -If there is overwhelming pressure, mounting pressure from the public and from voters about this, would you be tempted to balk at it again?
PM: I'm here as Prime Minister, leading a Labor Government, and we have a proud tradition of doing tough things that have built prosperity for Australia. We've done them in the past.
You know, taking tariffs away, for example. People said ‘that'll cost jobs,' ‘it'll be unpopular', but we did it because it was the right thing to do and those kind of economic reforms made a difference to Australia and are part of the explanation for the prosperity we enjoy today.
This is a tough economic reform and I am determined we will get this done.
HOST: Are you confident of getting this through the House of Representatives with the support of the independents, because Tony Windsor, for starters, doesn't look as though he's supporting it yet.
PM: This parliament gives us some unique opportunities, and we've seized them through the Multi Party Climate Change Committee, which the Australian Greens are on, Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor.
Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor are part of the process. They've certainly said today they want to see the carbon price mechanism discussed by the Australian community. They were supportive of us making this information available today.
The Government has endorsed this mechanism. The Australian Greens have endorsed this mechanism. Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor were content to see it be announced so Australians could see it.
We'll keep working together with good faith and good will, the way we have to date.
HOST: With this carbon tax - you do concede it's a carbon tax, do you not?
PM: Oh, look, I'm happy to use the word tax, Heather. I understand some silly little collateral debate has broken out today. I mean, how ridiculous. This is a market-based mechanism to price carbon. It's-
HOST: -With this carbon tax, then, it does seem certain that fuel and electricity prices will go up. How are you going to be sure that you can compensate for that, especially for low-income earners?
PM: Well, can I say this is a market-based mechanism to price carbon. It has a fixed price period at the start, a price that will be fixed. That is, effectively, a tax, and I'm happy to say the word tax.
How will we know that we can support people? Well, every dollar that is raised through this carbon price will go to assist to Australian households, assist industry to help make the transition, and go to fund programs that tackle climate change, and I know there'll be a lot of discussion about electricity prices. The hard truth, Heather, is electricity prices are going to go up. That's what everyone is saying  -  whether we price carbon or not.
If we price carbon, we will be able to assist people and move to a low-pollution future. Otherwise, electricity prices will go up, there'll be no assistance and no transition in our economy.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thanks for joining us tonight.
PM: Thank you. 



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard today outlined the Government's plan to cut pollution, tackle climate change and deliver the economic reform Australia needs to move to a clean energy future. 
This is an essential economic reform, and it is the right thing to do.
The two-stage plan for a carbon price mechanism will start with a fixed price period for three to five years before transitioning to an emissions trading scheme.
The Government will propose that the carbon price commences on 1 July 2012, subject to the ability to negotiate agreement with a majority in both houses of Parliament and pass legislation this year.
A carbon price is a price on pollution. It is the cheapest and fairest way to cut pollution and build a clean energy economy. The best way to stop businesses polluting and get them to invest in clean energy is to charge them when they pollute.
The businesses with the highest levels of pollution will have a very strong incentive to reduce their pollution.
The Government will then use every cent raised to:
 * 	Assist families with household bills
 * 	Help businesses make the transition to a clean energy economy
 * 	Tackle climate change
The Government will not shy away from this difficult but vital economic reform to move Australia to a clean energy nation.
The global economy is shifting.
Right now, Australia is at risk of falling behind the rest of the world. The longer we wait, the greater the cost to the economy, and the greater the cost to Australian jobs.
An initial fixed carbon price will provide businesses with a stable and predictable platform to transition to a ‘cap and trade' emissions trading scheme that will be linked to international carbon markets.
This will give businesses time to understand their carbon liability and begin the transformation in a steady and purposeful way.
Today's proposal is the result of hard work by the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee which has been meeting co-operatively, determined to help deliver this crucial economic reform.
The framework has been agreed by Government and Greens members of the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee (MPCCC). The other members, Mr Tony Windsor and Mr Robert Oakeshott, have agreed that the proposal should be released for community consultation.
The Committee will continue to discuss other important elements of the proposal including the starting level of the fixed price, any phasing in of sectors of the economy, and assistance for both households and industry.
The document outlining the proposed carbon price mechanism is available below.
 * 	Multi-Party Climate Change Committee - Carbon Price Mechanism (RTF 83Kb)
 * 	Multi-Party Climate Change Committee - Carbon Price Mechanism (PDF 135Kb)
Members of the public and interested parties who wish to provide input on this approach should contact: MPCCC@climatechange.gov.au, or write to:
The Multi-Party Climate Change Committee SecretariatGPO Box 854Canberra ACT 2601Australia
Further information in relation to this proposed approach is available at www.climatechange.gov.au



PM: Today, accompanied by the members of the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee and we're here together today because we're releasing a paper which describes a proposed carbon mechanism.
Now this proposed mechanism for pricing carbon is agreed by the Australian Government and by the Australian Greens. Mr Windsor and Mr Oakeshott, who have joined us and who are members of the Multi Party Climate Change Committee, have agreed that this proposal should be released to be considered by the community and to demonstrate that progress is being made.
The ultimate objective for the Committee is to agree to the draft carbon pricing legislation  -  including the architecture in the paper that is being distributed today  -  before that legislation is introduced into Parliament.
We are seeking a way of pricing carbon that's got broad support, so details, including a starting price, the length of the fixed period, and assistance arrangements for households, communities and industry will be addressed in subsequent discussions, and those discussions will be held at the Multi Party Climate Change committee.
I do want to take a few moments to explain why I am so determined to price carbon
First and foremost I'm determined to do it because climate change is real. We have never before lived with so many people on the planet emitting so much carbon pollution. What that means is that carbon pollution is changing our climate. 2010 was one of the two hottest years in recording history. So our climate is changing and we need to reduce carbon pollution.
Second I'm determined to price carbon because history teaches us that the countries and that the economies who prosper at times of historic change are those who get in and shape and manage the change.  If we look at the industrial revolution, the countries that prospered were the countries that got in on the change and didn't linger. If we look at the information technology revolution, the reason Bill Gates is such a rich man today is he got on in on the change. Bill Gates sit there saying ‘I think I'll leave it 10 or 15 years and see whether or not this computing thing catches on', Bill Gates understood the need to be in on the change.
The same is true now, this is the time to be pricing carbon and dealing with the change to a clean energy future.
Around the world economies are changing and we simply cannot afford to be left behind. To be left behind means that we will lose jobs and lose prosperity in the long-term. I do not believe that Australia needs to lead the world on climate change but I also don't believe that we can afford to be left behind. That's why the time is right and the time is now.
If we do risk being left behind, it will cost us jobs. Now there are some people that will say we can't afford to move to a clean energy future, I disagree with that, we can't afford not to move to a clean energy future and that's why we've got to get on with pricing carbon.
Then in terms of assessing the mechanisms that is before you, it's been founded on principles that I support and I believe are self evident. Principle number one: if you put a price on something, then people will use less of it. At the moment it is free to emit carbon pollution.  If we price carbon pollution people then people will find ways of emitting less of it because they won't want to pay the price. So it's axiomatic if you put a price on something, if we put a price on carbon pollution, we will reduce carbon pollution.
And the second principle behind this mechanism is that markets are efficient.  Australia is not some old Soviet style command and control economy.  We are a market based economy and because we are market based economy, a market mechanism is the right mechanism to price carbon, and economists around the world tell us that that's the way of getting our economy to adapt to a low pollution future at the least cost.
Now the architecture that you have before you today delivers on these principles.
We will of course be dealing with futher issues in the months to come. We are committed to having a scheme which starts on 1 July 2012. The architecture we've released today has a fixed period in which there is a fixed price on carbon  -  a market mechanism with a fixed price.
The fixed period would be between three to five years and it would be followed by a smooth transition to a full cap and trade emissions trading scheme with a flexible price linked that is linked to international carbon markets.
We propose to settle the fixed period, the three to five year period to settle that, prior to the introduction of the legislation.
One year before the legislated end of the fixed period there would be a review.  That review would consider if there was any reason to delay moving to a cap and trade scheme. So the hardwired mechanism here is to move to cap and trade, but there would be a review one year in advance to assess whether there were any real reasons not to take that step.
I do want to indicate to people the mechanism you have in front of you does not propose to put agricultural emissions into the carbon pricing system.  The measures and mechanism for counting agricultural emissions are simply too complex, but we do want to work with farmers, with our agricultural community, to make sure that they get the benefits of changing practices and changing carbon and from the Government's point of view that's why we announced that carbon farming initiative during the election campaign.
Can I conclude by saying this, I am well aware that immediately following today's announcement the Leader of the Opposition will be out spruiking a fear campaign calling and talking to Australians about a great big new tax on everything.
I'll put money on that, that that's what will happen during the course of today.
Can I make it very clear that in the debate that will ensue I am not intending to take a backwards step.
We are a confident nation and we are good at change.
We have proved it in the past, we've proved it with floating our dollar, we've proved it with reducing tariffs, we've proved it with things like reducing smoking rates, with Sun Smart campaigns. We are a confident and adaptable nation and we are good at change. And because we are good at change we can do this, we can price carbon and we can deal with the change.
I also want to be very clear with Australians about what pricing carbon does.  It has price impacts, it's meant to -  that's the whole point.  Consequently things that generate a whole lot of carbon pollution will be more expensive that things that generate less carbon pollution  -  that's the whole point - to have those price effects, to send a price signal so people innovate, people adapt, people go to low-pollution clean energy alternatives.
Now as a Labor Government, when we price carbon we will ensure that the carbon price is fair, that it is a fair system.
Every cent raised from pricing carbon will go to assisting households, helping businesses manage the transition and funding climate change climate change programs, and the Government will always support those who are in need of assistance with cost of living pressures.
To finish, carbon pollution is a threat to our country and our future, it's a threat to our future prosperity, we need to price carbon, we need to ensure that our Australian economy is a low pollution economy for the future; we can't afford to be left behind.
And because we're a Labor Government, we'll make sure that when we price carbon we do it in a fair way. I'll turn now to Greg Combet, the Minister, for some comments and then to Senator Brown.
MINISTER COMBET: Thanks Prime Minister, this is an important step in our efforts to put a price tag on pollution in our economy. It's the second document that has emanated from the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee; the first was just before Christmas, which articulated a set of principles that will underpin the continuing design work in establishing a carbon price mechanism. What's being released today though is another important step and it outlines the broad framework for a carbon price mechanism, and as the Prime Minister's said it has been the subject of a lot of discussion and is the subject of agreement with the Greens. Mr Windsor and Mr Oakeshott are in a position where of course they have been involved in all of that discussion, they have agreed to the release of this proposal to enable community consideration and also importantly to show the progress that's been made, and I'd like to thank both Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor and Senator Brown and Senator Milne for the work that we've done so far. It is a mechanism that, as the Prime Minister has said is a market mechanism. That is very important, because it will find the most cost effective ways of reducing pollution in our economy. It is a proposal that is intended to start, subject to the passage of legislation through Parliament, on 1 July 2012, and sends a very clear signal, I think, to the business community, that they can have certainty about the broad framework, provide feedback to the government, and have input as we go into the further detailed discussions about the detailed design of the mechanism. You will see that there has been no discussion to date of the starting price of the carbon price mechanism, or of the proposed household assistance measures that might obtain, or of the proposed measures for assisting industry in the transition to a clean energy future, at this point in time, that is detailed work that we will have ahead of us in the weeks and months ahead. But nonetheless, the mechanism that has been outlined here, is a very important step forward, it does involve an emissions trading scheme structure, commencing with a fixed price period for a fixed period of time, and is does involve a smooth transition from that fixed price to a fully flexible cap and trade emissions trading scheme in due course. So the important framework elements are contained within the proposal and we look forward to any questions that you may have, but Senator Brown I think wishes to make a few comments first.
SENATOR BROWN: Thank you Prime Minister. Thank you Minister. We feel very happy to be here, in a process which is moving forward to this nation's future. The Prime Minister's outlined the architectural agreements that are involved here. The Committee is moving on time and on target. This is a hybrid process for a fixed price move to a cap and trade system which we actually developed from Professor Garnaut's ideas some twelve months ago. The Government and the Prime Minister has with us, established this Committee we have got a lot of hard work as the minister has just outlined on getting to important detail in the coming months but it's on time and as Prime Minister Gillard has said we are aiming for the proposal for a carbon price to be in place July, 12 Months. Now this is nation building.  Michael Cramer the Greens Euro MP was here in this building yesterday. Germany made its equivalent decisions on this very matter seven years ago he told me not even the Greens could have guessed the success for that nation. The renewable energy component of the economy has held Germany in best stead during the recent economic troubles and 330000 extra jobs have been created in Germany because of legislation moving to a clean, green energy future.   As the Prime Minister said, we're not world leaders here, we're coming from behind, but the Prime Minister and her government, together with a very positive-minded Greens Party and the cross bench are moving towards giving this nation a great service  -  economic, security as well as a vital hedge against the increasing impact of global warming on our nation's future.
So, we have a lot of work to do but we're very pleased. This huge project is on track.
I'll ask Christine Milne if she wants to say a word, and then also happy to answer questions.
SENATOR MILNE: Well, today the community, the environment movement, the community organisations and business have been wanting for a long time and that is a date.   That is the outcome of here today is that providing we can reach an agreement on the details on 1 July 2012 Australia will have a carbon price, will have one henceforth, won't be going away and people can plan for the future on that and on that date will be seeing systemic change.  We will going away from the ad-hoc grants and the ad-hoc programs.  We will be getting systemic and we will be moving towards that date.  It is exciting, we have only got a few months in terms of parliamentary activity in the second half of the year to get the legislation through and see this happen on the 1 July 2012.  And it's happening because we have shared power in Australia.  Majority governments wouldn't have delivered this outcome. It is because the Greens are in the balance of power and working with the other parties to deliver, not only aspirations, but the process to achieve it.  And I'm really grateful for the good will that is shown around the table to make sure we could get to today. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it still your view that the CPRS compensation arrangement were broadly satisfactory? Are you likely to now introduce less-generous compensation arrangements to get agreement from the Greens?
And Senator Brown, are you prepared to compromise on compensation arrangements for industry to actually get a deal here? How are you guys going bridging your differences on this?
PM: Can I just say we've got work to do. We've got work to do on industry assistance arrangements. We've got work to do on household compensation arrangements.
What I've said is that a lot of good work was done in designing the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, and it's not my intention to just put that work to one side, but there are discussions to come and there will be some difficult conversations to come. There's no doubt about that, but we are working through. That's what the Multi Party Climate Change Committee is for.
SENATOR BROWN: Just to extend your question, you can tell the readers of The Australian that we'll be working hard to see that householders, all 22 million Australians, will have their interests taken into account by this Committee as it moves forward.
It isn't just a matter of compensating industry, particularly polluters. In fact, what we want to do is compensate those people who are suffering the outcome of a long-term carbon pollution of the atmosphere, and we'll be working to that end, so yes, we have-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We'll just get a little bit of order in it, so I think I saw Phil Coorey first, then we'll come across Lenore and Laura and then go to Andrew. Phil?
JOURNALIST: Senator, this hybrid model is similar to what you proposed after the ETS hit the fence before the last election, and when you proposed the hybrid you spoke about a starting fixed price of around $23. Is that still your starting point for a price, or are you prepared to be flexible?
SENATOR BROWN: Oh, of course. We are now moving towards looking at what that starting price should be. I'm not going to gainsay that.
Yes, we put that figure there because that came through from calculations and worked on at the time by Professor Garnaut, but we're 12 months down the line. We are now looking at what that price should be and that'll be a matter for further discussions by the Committee.
PM: Lenore?
JOURNALIST: Am I correct in understanding that the Government and the committee is now saying that the transport sector should be included in a pricing mechanism, unlike the CPRS?
And also, in the list of things that you say you'll look at in the review, included in there is the state of international carbon markets. Does the Government think that if there's no more countries moving to a cap and trade than have one now, would it still be appropriate for Australia to move to flexible pricing?
And just one more, if I may, the independents are kind of lingering down the back and the Minister said that they'd agreed to release this allow community consultation, so I'm just interested in to what extent you're, you know, with the program on this.
PM: OK, I'll Greg Combet to answer your first two questions, and then obviously Tony and Rob.
MINISTER COMBET: The first issue, just to alert you to, in relation to the document of course is that, the sectoral coverage of the economy is canvassed within the document, but it does say in the introductory remarks, that it doesn't preclude us having further consideration of a phased approach to coverage of different sections of the economy, so that is not a settled issue at this point in time, it will be an issue that the Committee will consider. And you'll see that in relation to a number of the elements in the document, there are parameters for further discussion to take place, and no doubt that as the document is digested by many stakeholders, there'll be some feedback in relation to those issues.
JOURNALIST: So transports in, but will it be phased in?
MINISTER COMBET: No, I'm not saying anything conclusive about it, because it's a subject that will have to be further discussed. But you'll see in the document that it does make clear, that the concept of broad coverage of this carbon price doesn't preclude us having a further conversation at this stage about a phased approach to coverage of different sectors of the economy. Look, and the answer to the second part of the question I think is that there is a very clear intent here that we move to cap and trade emissions trading, and that is an important thing because, it will allow us of course to approach targeted levels of emissions reductions over time, and it's also of course an efficient way for us to continue to go about achieving reductions in the context of a targeted level of emissions reductions by 2020 for example, so that linking of that system to the international carbon markets is an important consideration when we have a look at the issue twelve months out from the planned transition to emissions trading and you'll see in the document some commentary about that. There will be one very important concern that I wish to emphasise as we approach a timing of that nature, and that is the importance of ensuring a smooth transition and certainty for business, and these are the sorts of issues that we'll be engaging with from this point on with the business roundtable, members of the NGO roundtable, and of course all other stakeholders that we speak to in coming weeks.
WINDSOR: Your question if I can remember it Lenore relates to the proposal. This is very much the start of a process in my view. I know that you were trying to get some information from Greg there a moment ago in terms of the transport issue. There's a lot discussion to take place, on this issue, what we have established today is a framework to attempt to work within. Now that doesn't mean that the game is over. In my view, and one of the reasons I wanted to be involved in this Committee, was we wanted Professor Garnaut to look at the international stage as to what was happening, either with or without the emissions trading schemes, what is happening globally, and also for the Productivity Commission to look at some of these competitive aspects and the impacts of various prices and different systems on our nation. And so I see this and please don't construe through my presences here that I will be actually supporting any scheme. I'm more than happy to be involved in a process within this framework, but there is a whole range of unanswered questions that all of us have to deal with until we reach conclusion. I'm pleased about the way in which agriculture and land use management, landscape management and some of those issues are being addressed both in the committee and in the boarder community and I will be one of the interests that I will be looking at as well.
JOURNALIST: Just to clarify that, because people are saying that by next year we will have a starting point, are you saying that it's possible by next year we might not have a starting point?
WINDSOR: I think that all options are on the table. This is a framework to work within. We've made progress. Obviously, there would have to be there would have to be an agreement in both houses of Parliament of a model that we all agree with. We haven't seen that model yet and I'm sure there would be arguments and issues raised. Nothing's settled in my view, I can only speak for myself. I think that the globe, and this is a personal view, should be looking at doing something in relation to climate change. Whether Australia doing something in the context of the globe will be sufficient to have any meaningful effect, my vote will not only be determined on what the committee does, but also in terms of the information and feedback from the globe as to what it's doing.
OAKESHOTT: Look I certainly support this document and if I have to vote on this tomorrow I would. I do think that this is an important step for there are three critical considerations that the group MPCCC will have and this is one of them, price and compensations will be the other two still to be resolved. But this is a negotiation you know we are around a table for a reason cause we want to get an outcome, an outcome in investment security oh sorry investment certainty energy security and I would hope you also pick up on the land use and biodiversity work that is also starting to creep in and keep your eyes on the first of March when Ross Garnaut next report which will be in this rural land use area. So you know I'm negotiating as hard as I can. I am aspirational on the side of trying to get to a market without a fixed price as quickly as possible. You win some you lose some in the end I'm not going to scuttle an outcome over the architecture so I'm more than happy for this to be released and hopefully in generates a really positive discussion in the community.
PM: We'll just, we'll go to Phil Hudson, come back over to Bonge.
JOURNALIST: Oi, oi, oi!
PM: Oh, sorry, your friend generated so much discussion that we got off track. I did promise Laura, then Andrew, then we'll move around. Laura?
JOURNALIST: Thank you, Prime Minister. Two things: could I just clarify whether there are any constraints on this - explicitly, in the transport sector, whether there's been any discussion about treatment of petrol prices.
And second, at what stage, if any, will there be a discussion about whether the carbon price is determined by particular targets for greenhouse gas emission?
PM: Well, the transport answer is the one that Greg Combet, Minister Combet, gave to Lenore-
JOURNALIST: -Petrol hasn't been excluded in any way at this stage?
PM: The coverage and phasing of coverage is something that is still to be talked through, as Minister Combet just explained.
On the targets, this is a mechanism hard-wired to go to a cap-and-trade system, and the reason you have a cap-and-trade system is so that you can deliver to a target.
JOURNALIST: When will that actually come into the negotiations, the target?
PM: Well, the architecture you've got in front of you here has the fixed price for 3-5 years. Then it's hard-wired to go to cap-and-trade. So, the Government's target remains the target you're very familiar with, which is the -5 per cent on the current level of global action.
Andrew?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I'd like to tease out the issue of compensation to companies, because one of the big issues the Greens had with the CPRS was the compensation that went to the EITEs, the emission-intensive trade-exposed companies. Is that the broad framework that you would take, because that would put you in trouble with the Greens? What sort of changes would you make to the those, the EITEs, and secondly, on the household compensation, would that also follow the means-tested track that you had under the previous model?
PM: Look, I can't stand here, and I won't stand here, guessing the outcomes of future conversations that we will have at the Multi Party Climate Change Committee, so on compensation and assistance for energy-intensive trade-exposed areas of the economy, what I've said is that there was good work done as the carbon pollution reduction scheme was worked up. There are clearly conversations to be had about that, conversations we'll have through the business roundtable, through our non-government organisations roundtable, and round the Multi Party Climate Change Committee table, and we'll have conversations about household assistance around that table.
Clearly, as a Labor Government, as a Labor Prime Minister, I want to make sure that industry can make the change; that they've got a smooth transition in the change. We're doing this because we want to see future prosperity, a clean-energy economy, the new jobs that come with that, as well as making a contribution on climate change, and as a Labor Prime Minister I will be making sure that impact of a carbon price is fair.
SENATOR BROWN: (inaudible) clear that we are open to looking at impact on the trade-exposed industries, but there is quite a deal of world experience in this now, and we'll be looking at that experience because it doesn't back up some of the alarmist projections we've heard in the past, and real experience like that is valuable, and if there is a benefit for Australia having been slow to act in this area, we have some international experience to look at as this Committee deliberates on an outcome.
PM: I did promise Bonge, and then we'll come back. Bonge?
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Is this announcement today a breach of faith with the electorate, given that immediately prior to the election you ruled out a carbon price?
PM: This is the parliament the Australian people voted for. You're seeing it on display in front of you. This is the parliament Australians voted for, and we have to get on with the job of pricing carbon.
There are real risks in being left behind. I use that analogy with the industrial revolution, with the information technology revolution, deliberately.
History tells us that you need to be on the wave of change. You cannot afford to be stranded and left behind.  So it's the right time to act. We've got a collaborative process to work on how we're going to act, and you're seeing the product of that collaborative process in terms of this carbon pricing mechanism here today.
JOURNALIST: You are the, on another matter you are the Minister who put the stake through the heart of Work Choices, what do you think about Peter Reith's suggestion that the Coalition should be re-embracing that and in the same vein, how open are you to changes and amendments to your Fair Work legislation?
PM: I will answer that question, but can we do all questions to the group first, because I don't think  -  others may not want to join me as I answer questions about Work Choices and the like. We may have unanimity on that, but then we could get a whole lot of questions that are ones that people would have different views  -  Greg's here too I know. Michelle
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, you say the architecture is hard wired to go to a market model, but isn't it also true that with your long term move to the market and the possibility of deferring, it is possible that you could not have a market model at all, even under a Labor government. And secondly, buy keeping the fixed carbon price for so long, doesn't it make the system more vulnerable to the opposition at the election simply saying we'll abolish the carbon price and therefore you don't really build in certainty for business?
PM: If we can just back up that truck a little bit, because in the fixed price period this is still a market model, it's a market model in the sense that there will be permits that have a price, so it is a market model, it's ready to go and it's hardwired to go to a cap and trade scheme. So that is the default, if you like, that's built into it. Yes there is a review, 12 months in advance, so that the assessment can be made as to whether anything else needs to be done, but that's the default that's built into it.
On your second question, the reality is however this was designed, however it was designed, Tony Abbott would be out there trying to raise fear about it.  He's not interested in the details, he's not interested in making sense on climate change, the minute I say two words ‘climate change', he will say ‘great big new tax on everything' irrespective of any of the details.
JOURNALIST: It was already cap and trade, wasn't it?
PM: We will just be out there winning that debate, because the simple proposition here is, very simple proposition, if you want to see less carbon pollution then you need to put a price on it, so there's a signal to people to innovate and create less carbon pollution. Second, we are in a market based economy and in a market based economy the best and most efficient mechanism for pricing carbon pollution is through a market mechanism.
And I would say too on the comparisons with the opposition, Tony Abbott is not talking climate change seriously, he's got no real plans to address it and I'd have to say it strikes me as an irony that we're standing here today and the Parliament will vote on the flood levy and Tony Abbott will say Australians can't afford to pay a $1.8 billion levy, but he'd be quite happy to charge Australians $10.5 billion for his failed climate change program. Something people should contemplate in terms of what Mr Abbott is looking to cost Australians around the country for his failed policy.
JOURNALIST: Just to follow Michelle's question  - 
PM: It's an age before beauty choice, Dennis.
JOURNALIST: I gave Mr Oakeshott the chance to speak, beards together.
Just following up Michelle's question, it is clear from the provision of the parachute, the deferral, you cannot guarantee that there will be an emissions trading scheme by 2020 under this agreement?
PM: I'll have Minister Combet answer that, but that's misunderstanding the timeframes in this document. So Minister Combet will deal with that.
MINISTER COMBET: Just to be clear. The proposal is that we commence with an emissions trading scheme structure, permits, with a fixed price period of between 3 and 5 years, to be resolved in further discussions, and that it move to emissions trading with a flexible price at that point in time. So if for example, the scheme, the legislation, was legislated and commenced on the first of July, 2012, and there were for example, a three year fixed price period, from the first of July 2015, emissions trading with a flexible price would commence. That is the intent of the document. What is provided for, is the capacity to have a look at the issue twelve months out from the commencement of emissions trading, particularly, obviously, having regard to, the nature of the international negotiations to address climate change, the extent to which of course Australia may have committed to binding obligations in the international community, and at that point in time, twelve months out from the commencement of legislation, the document makes clear that we would set the target to be achieved by 2020. So it's certainly not canvassing, as you were suggesting, that emissions trading might not be commenced until beyond 2020. It's specifically canvassing the construction of an emissions trading scheme to commence from the first of July 2012 with a fixed price period at the front.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) emissions trading starts at all, is that the point of the review, to see whether you defer it?
MINISTER COMBET: No, you'll see the clear intent of the document is that emissions trading commences, but we want to have the capacity to have a look twelve months out to consider the nature of the international environment, and the other criteria that are set there, and just confirm a number of things. One of them, is the, as I just referred to, what the international obligations we may or may not have at that time might suggest in relation to a target, and I should make clear of course the Government's position on targets remains as it has been stated for some considerable period of time now, but we will obviously have a look at that at that point in time in relation to the criteria that was set twelve months out from the commencement of emissions trading.
SENATOR BROWN: Just a removal of doubts clause here  -  there is no intention to not move to a trading system. There's a general feeling that that's where we're headed, and we've got the carbon price as a move in that direction , but if there is a supposition here that there's some move to not have an emissions trading system, it's wrong. I don't pick that up at all in this process, which I think is very positive.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) How long is it possible to have the trading system, a free market emissions trading system when that decision is made, is it open-ended?
COMBET: Let me come back to a few basics here.  This is a broad framework document.  The question's quite valid but we have a lot of work to do. And what is canvassed in this document are options on a number of fronts, for example the length of the fixed price period is yet to be determined in the discussions. Some of the other transitional questions are yet to be resolved.  It will ultimately be a lot of detailed work and very detailed legislation that will be required and we have a huge amount of work to do.  But at this point in time this is an important step forward and the input of stakeholders with the release of this document will be very important and we'll be looking forward to people's views about it, identify the issues that no doubt will the subject of further detailed discussion.  But don't get ahead of yourselves.  There's a lot of detailed work to do. The starting price has not yet even been discussed. The household compensation package has not yet been discussed.  Support for emissions-intensive trade exposed industries has not yet been discussed.  The treatment of the energy sector has not yet been discussed.  There's a lot of detailed work to do be done.  And at each point in time when we achieve a detailed outcome, our commitment is to bring it out publicly as we are doing now.
JOURNALIST: Dr Brown, the Prime Minister said that the target for the government is -5 percent, that seems the only thing here that's clear, or that's been discussed and put forward. Is that OK for the Greens and it is enough?
SENATOR BROWN: Well, the target for the Greens is -25 per cent. We went to the election on that, but you know, we are part, here, as the Prime Minister just noted, of working in the service of this country and the way it voted at the last election.
So, again, let me dispel the idea that anybody's got locked in and is not wanting a good outcome here which is going to service Australia's economy and its wellbeing into the future.
So, yes, we recognise that's the Government's position. We read their policy documents in the run to the election and they've read ours. So, these, as the Minister has just said, these are important matters which are going to engage our attention in the coming months and we're here today because we are on the move with this process and the Prime Minister is overseeing a Committee which is doing good work, and that we've come to agreement on this architecture is an indication of that.
You all know the schedule. It's got a good way to go yet but we're working hard on it and we have this nation's wellbeing  -  whether we come from different starting points, and we do  -  there's no doubt that all members on this committee have this nation's future wellbeing at the forefront in trying to come to decide on those very hard, particular issues which are yet undecided.
JOURNALIST: Would you be willing to accept less than 25 percent?
SENATOR BROWN: I'll tell you that by, maybe, July 1.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given there is one clear point of agreement between you and the Greens, that the market mechanism is the best way to proceed to drive an efficient use of our resources, will you then once this comes in get rid of all the distortions to the market by way of those programs which are spending millions of dollars of government money to fund renewable programs and would the Greens support that?
PM: I think you've seen from the government a determination to price carbon, to price carbon in the most efficient way which is through a market based mechanism and to not pursue programs that have got a higher abatement cost that will continue to be the government's determination. The Multiparty Climate Change Committee is working on how to price carbon, this is an important step today with the release of this document about the mechanism.
Dennis. Sorry, sorry, I was discriminating in favour of Queenslanders.
SENATOR MILNE: The carbon price is a very important invention in the market place but it is not going to be enough on its own to drive the transformation to renewable energy in the time frame in that we need because we are unlikely to get a higher enough price to be able to do that so we are still going to need the renewable energy target in my view we will still need a feed in tariff and so on we will need both a carbon price and complementary measures but I do agree that a lot of the ad-hocking interventions by way of grants and so on will be able to be taken up because we are going to systemic change
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you agree with Senator Milne when she says that this kind of plan could not be delivered by majority government?
PM: I mightn't share Christine's exact words, but this parliament gives us some opportunities, some opportunities and we are taking them to price carbon and it's the right time to do it and that's why we are seizing this opportunity to get the job done.
Now I am under no illusions about how difficult the debate ahead of us will be. We've got some in detailed and complex work to do within this committee, I suspect we will have a fast and furious public debate with Mr Abbott out there doing everything he can to raise fear in the community and we will engage in that debate and we won't take a step backwards in that debate because this is the right time to price carbon, we are working on the right mechanism to get it done. The one in front of you is the right mechanism, there is more work to do, but we will keep working through and delivering to the timetable to price carbon on 1st July 2012.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you set a timetable for when you want to make decisions on the precise carbon price and the household electricity assistance?
PM: Minister Combet has set a punishing work program for us all, so he can describe that.
MINISTER COMBET: Obviously it's very detailed work. And there'll be a lot of discussion that we have to go through.  But to meet a timeframe to have legislation through the parliament so the scheme could commence from 1 July next year, we've got a lot of work to do over the next four or five months in particular.  And we can't predict at this point in time the precise date upon which we might settle on any special element of the package.  But we've been working pretty hard already and there's going to be a bit more to do.
JOURNALIST: Senator Brown, could this deal have been done more than 12 months ago, given that you and Senator Milne are in the same position?
SENATOR BROWN: Could we have done?
JOURNALIST: This deal, why wasn't it achieved 12 months ago?
SENATOR BROWN: Because we're in a democracy, and we're in a situation where we're working. All parties went to the election with differing points of view, but committed to tackling climate change and we're in the process of combining those to come up with an outcome which reflects the Australian people's vote.
On the question about majority or minority government, what we're needing here, and I think what we're seeing, is good government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister or Minister Combet, do we need a legally binding  - 
PM: This is going to have to be the last one, we've got some very important flood levy legislation to go and vote on. Paul.
JOURNALIST: OK, can you tell me, do we need a legally binding global agreement before we move to a fixed price?
PM: We're going to be moving to a fixed price under this model on 1st July 2012.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, before we move to a flexible price?
PM: The criteria that Minister Combet's gone through include international linking, the depth and liquidity of the international carbon credits market, that's going to be a consideration that we work through. I wouldn't use the work condition no.
JOURNALIST: Can you answer my Work Choices question now?
You are the Minister that got rid of Work Choices.
PM: Correct.
JOURNALIST: Peter Reith now says that the Coalition should be re-embracing its principles, what do you think of that and how is your latest advice on how the Fair Work Act is settling down and do you leave open the possibility of amendments?
PM: I don't think there's any news today on this topic, the Coalition loves Work Choices, it'll always love Work Choices and it's never seen an industrial instrument that took pay and conditions away from a worker that it wasn't prepared to embrace. So that is, was and always will be. Peter Reith is perhaps being a bit more frank about it than Mr Abbott's been, but the Coalition is in the embrace of Work Choices.
So if Mr Abbott was elected to government it would follow that we would see the reintroduction of Work Choices.
On the Fair Work Act, I believe the Fair Work Act is working as we wanted it to. It's an enterprise based bargaining system which enables businesses to respond to the need to drive productivity. We've had all sorts of statistics, including industrial action statistics which would lead you to believe the system is working well.
JOURNALIST: Just one about Libya, the President of the United States  - 
PM: We do have to go vote, so last, last one. Seriously last one.
JOURNALIST: The full range of options when it comes to Libya, does that extend do you think to possible military intervention, what are your thoughts about the options on the table?
PM: Look, our position on Libya is as it's been outlined by both me and the Foreign Minister. I mean the situation on the ground is chaotic, we're involved in consular work to assist Australians to get out and we are getting people out and we're looking to get some more out on a US chartered ferry during the course of today.
We absolutely endorse what has been said by the international community, what's been said in terms of the Security Council and other commentary. This is a vile regime and we are seeing  -  the violence that's happened on the ground is grossly unacceptable and some of the language used by Colonel Gaddafi, which would lead you to believe that he is ready to wreak bloody vengeance against his own people is disgusting and wrong. The international community does need to respond and it has been responding and we will ensure that the Australian voice continues to be heard in that response.
But we might go and vote for the flood levy.
JOURNALIST: What do you know about two Australians who have been detained in Tripoli and also will the tax summit still be held before the middle of the year as promised?
PM: On the Tripoli question we'll have to get back to you with some details, OK? And we'll deal with those things a bit later too, we're under real time pressure.



HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: My pleasure, Neil.
HOST: Do you accept, August last year, the eve of the election, you lied to the voters when you said this:
AUDIO CLIP: There will be no carbon tax under the Government I lead.
HOST: Is that a lie?
PM: I went to the last election, Neil, saying that I believed climate change was real, that it was caused by humans, and that we had to price carbon. What I announced yesterday was a market mechanism to price carbon. It's going to have a fixed price for the first few years. 
Now, there was going to be this silly semantic debate break out about whether or not that was effectively like a tax, and I'm happy to say for the first few years with a fixed price, it's effectively like a tax, but Neil, this is the right thing to do.
HOST: So did you lie to us on the eve of the election?
PM: Well, Neil, I've just explained to you I went to the last election saying I wanted to price carbon, that that was the right thing to do, and that's exactly the thing I am going to be doing.
And Neil, if we want to comb through the history, I'm sitting here with a quote in front of me from Tony Abbott, where he says that the simplest thing to do would be to tax carbon.
HOST: But he's not Prime Minister, Prime Minister. We went into the election with a promise from you there would be no carbon tax. There is now going to be a carbon tax. Why should you be trusted?
PM: We went into the election and we emerged with this parliament that people voted for, and in this parliament the Labor Party is committed to pricing carbon, and we are obviously working with others in the parliament committed to pricing carbon.
The Australian people want us to get on with it, Neil. It's the right thing to do.
HOST: The Australian, I'd suggest, want honesty and directness, particularly before an election. Did you, before the election, believe in a carbon tax, because you now believe in one? What was your view before the election?
PM: Neil, every day, every day of the election campaign, every day of the last parliament, for a long period of time, I have believed that global warming is real. I've watched the science-
HOST: -But did you believe in a carbon tax?
PM: Well, I'm answering your question, Neil. I've believed that global warming was real. I've seen the scientific evidence come in. Having seen that evidence come in I knew we had to do something about it, and I became persuaded by the economists around the world who said the best way of tackling carbon pollution is to price carbon.
HOST: When were you convinced of that?
PM: Neil, any day you would have wanted to ask me that over the last several years I would have said that to you.
HOST: So why did you tell us there'd be no carbon tax, and there now is?
PM: Well, Neil, we're getting involved in some word games here-
HOST: -No, we're involved in an issue of integrity, Prime Minister, and-
PM: -and I'm answering that issue, Neil. And do you want to get out all of my quotes during the election campaign, where I talked about climate change being real; where I talked about it being induced by human activity; where I said this nation needed to have a clean energy future and price carbon, and that was something that the parliament should do, should price carbon, and that's exactly what I announced yesterday. We will price carbon.
HOST: Do you believe, at the last election, the Australian people voted for you believing you would impose a carbon tax?
PM: I think the Australian people voted for me knowing I believe climate change is real and that I was determined to act on it, and that the Labor way of acting on it was to price carbon. I don't think anybody could have watched the last few years in politics and not come to that conclusion, Neil.
HOST: So, your quote, ‘there will be no carbon tax under the Government I lead.' How do we misinterpret that, Prime Minister?
PM: Well, get out every statement from the election campaign, Neil - all of the ones where I talked about the need to price carbon. This is a semantic debate about the mechanism, the mechanism for pricing carbon, and let's be clear about this, Neil.
Yesterday, I announced the carbon pricing mechanism. That mechanism is a market-based mechanism.
That means that, ultimately, a market will fix the price of carbon. For the first few years it will be fixed by the Government, and people were going to say, ‘well, isn't that going to work, effectively, like a tax', and we were going to have one of those silly debates about whether or not I would say the word ‘tax', so I just clarified yesterday that the first few years, with the fixed price, do work effectively like a tax.
This is the right thing to do - to price carbon. That will have price impacts. It means goods that have more pollution in them, carbon pollution in them, will cost more. Goods that have less carbon pollution in them will cost less. People will respond to those price signals and people will be assisted with payments so that they can adjust to this new system.
HOST: OK, will it affect petrol?
PM: It will have price impacts, Neil. What I announced yesterday was the carbon price mechanism. The decisions about the amount of the price and how it will be phased in on industry sectors are yet to be made, and-
HOST: -Well, I'm not asking for the exact figure, but will it affect the price of petrol?
PM: And I've just given you the answer, Neil. The-
HOST: -I'm sorry. I didn't understand it.
PM: Well, the second thing I said is the industry coverage and industry phasing in  -  which sectors of the economy it will apply to, when  -  those decisions are yet to be made, and what that means, Neil, is any newspaper you have seen today that has a dollar figure in it suggesting that a particular family will pay a specific dollar figure, all of that is misleading and wrong. The dollar figures haven't been set and there will be assistance to households.
HOST: OK, but it will affect households directly, clearly. I mean, so we don't put a figure on this, say $300 a year.
PM: Neil, let me just put it to you absolutely clearly  -  there will be price impacts. That's-
HOST: -What's a price impact, Prime Minister. Let's speak, seriously, what is a price impact? Prices will go up.
PM: Neil, if you can't understand those words-
HOST: -No, I'm sick of jargon.
PM: Oh, that's not jargon, Neil. That-
HOST: -Price impact, prices will go up? Will petrol go up, will electricity go up, will gas go up?
PM: Neil, settle back down and let me answer the question-
HOST: -Oh, Prime Minister, I-
PM: -and I'm going to answer it very directly for you.
There will be price impacts, and what that means, Neil, is the price of goods with a lot of carbon pollution in them will go up, relative to goods with less carbon in them.
HOST: So, petrol will go up?
PM: What that means - No, listen to me, Neil-
HOST: No?
PM: -what that means  -  no, I'm asking you to listen to me, and I will deal with the question of petrol. I'm not having you construe from an interrupted interview what I may or may not be saying.
HOST: Thank you.
PM: So, Neil, there will be price impacts. The whole point of pricing carbon is to say that goods that have got a lot of carbon pollution in the, get relatively more expensive. People innovate, they start to make things with less carbon pollution in them, and those things are cheaper.
What do we do with price impacts? Well, we assist households. The households, therefore, have their purchasing power, they go to the shops, they look at the prices, they will buy the things with less carbon pollution in them.
What does that mean in the long term? Our economy will move-
HOST: -Can I ask a question, rather than you ask them?
PM: -to a low-pollution, clean-energy future.
Just making sure I get a few words in, Neil.
HOST: Fair enough, but rather than you ask the question, then answer them, I'd like to ask a few, and let's clear up the petrol. You say it will affect carbon-causing areas. Obviously, petrol will go up, won't it? And gas and electricity.
PM: Big decisions, Neil, about sectors of the economy and when they will be phased in are yet to be made, but let me deal very specifically with electricity prices, you've just used that example. Let me deal very specifically with electricity to start with.
Electricity prices are going up, Neil. That's the hard truth. They're going up whether or not we price carbon.
The choice we've got here is whether we have them go up because industry is uncertain about carbon pricing and not willing to invest in the absence of a carbon price, or whether we price carbon and assist households along the way.
I'm making the choice to price carbon and assist households, rather than leave households with rising power prices and no assistance.
HOST: Petrol?
PM: Well, Neil, that's an industry sector we will need to make a decision about the coverage of and I've explained to you that those decisions are yet to be made.
HOST: OK, who will make them? Bob Brown?
PM: We will work through the Multi Party Climate Change Committee. We will work through our Government and Cabinet processes. The Government makes its own decisions. I am prepared to work with people of good will to get things done that are the right thing to do for the Australian economy.
I want this nation to have a clean-energy future. I don't want us to be left behind as the world changes. I don't want us to lose jobs because we've been left behind. I'll make decisions about those things and I'll work with people of good will to get them done.
HOST: Is there any way of avoiding an increase in the price of petrol?
PM: I've just explained to you about petrol and making decisions about industry sectors, Neil. I'm not going to play a silly game of hypotheticals. I'm being very frank with you about price impacts, also very frank with you about assistance to households.
HOST: Prime Minister, I'll be frank with you. People are feeling duded. People are feeling unsure and insecure. They see their petrol prices going up, their gas prices going up, their electricity prices have already gone up, as you say. They see them going up more. They see the possibility of an increase the equivalent of the GST, a 25 per cent increase in the GST, every year, and they are concerned, worried, and we can't really just dodge it, which, with respect, I think you're doing.
PM: Oh, what a load of nonsense, Neil, and I'm not trying to do that, and on judging the view of the Australian community, Neil, let's have a frank exchange about that.
Last time I came on this show you were there, bristling and saying to me ‘The flood levy! People hate it! Look at the polls on TV screens! Everybody hates it! There will be a riot and what a dreadful, dreadful mistake!'
Well, I'm happy to say, Neil, that I said to you then, calmly, on that show, I believe the Australian community will come to accept this as the right thing to do, and Neil, I think there's plenty of evidence I was right about judging the community mood.
On the community mood about climate change, I think Australians want us to get this done. They know it's the right thing to do.
Yes, they will be concerned about how it will work, how it will impact them, what assistance they will get, and I will be clear about that as the decisions are taken every step of the way and I will be on shows like yours and right around the country, explaining it, taking questions, talking to people, very happy to do that. That's the way I work and that's what people will see from me.
HOST: Do you accept that this decision is sufficiently contentious to put your Government and your leadership on the line?
PM: Oh, what a load of nonsense, Neil. The Government, in a methodical, careful, structured way is doing the right thing to create a clean-energy future for this country, to make sure we've got jobs in the future. I don't want this country to be left behind. I don't succumb to this hysteria that breaks out in the media.
I mean, honestly, Neil, I get set more tests than the average VCE student. You know, parliament convenes last year: ‘Ooh, can the parliament work?' And it does. I announce the flood levy: ‘Can she persuade the Australian people? Can she get it through the parliament?' Well, I think there's a fair degree of evidence that yes, I can, and it's happening.
On this, I will take the same approach, patient, methodical. I'll leave the huffing and puffing to others.
HOST: Fair enough, but when are told there'll be no carbon tax, they probably believe it and they're a little surprised when they get one.
PM: And when people were told in the last election campaign that the scientific consensus was in, humans are inducing global warming, we need to cut down on carbon pollution, and the best way of doing that is to price carbon, they probably accepted that too, Neil, and that's exactly what's happening.
HOST: So, you really don't think this is important enough to put the Government on the line, or your leadership on the line?
PM: I just don't succumb to this sort of hysteria. What governments do is we make decisions in the national interest. Some of them are tough decisions. Some of them are controversial decisions. Some of them you've got to be ready to go out and put your case and argue for it, and some days those arguments are quite hard.
That's what governments do, Neil. That's what reforming governments do. My Government is a reforming government. That's what I do as Prime Minister  -  full stop.
HOST: The Council for Social Service says that low-income earners will be the hardest hit and the quickest hit. Do you disagree with that?
PM: That's why we will assist households.
HOST: OK, will you guarantee households at all levels will not pay more?
PM: The way carbon pricing works is the revenue collected can then be used by government. The single biggest thing it will be used for is assisting households.
HOST: Will high--income earners be compensated as well?
PM: We will assist the households most in need, Neil. Someone on your income level  -  if I may put that to you, I don't know precisely what you earn but I suspect by community standards it's a fair bit of money - 
HOST: -Yes.
PM: -I think someone on your income level can probably look after themselves a fair bit.
There are other Australians who need more assistance.
HOST: So at what level will compensation end?
PM: Well, we will announce the assistance to households, but the single biggest use of the money raised from pricing carbon will be to assist households.
HOST: But not high-income earners? What's a high income earner? I accept I am and you are.
PM: I'm a Labor Prime Minister. I'm from a Labor Government. We do things in a Labor way, which means fairly, and when we do things fairly that means we assist people with the most needs, and high-income earners like you and me do get asked to look after ourselves  -  and we can.
HOST: Prime Minister, the new era of decent politics  -  that's gone, isn't it? You called Tony Abbott a hollow man, say he's hysterical. He called you Lady Macbeth. That didn't last too long, did it?
PM: Well, I think Tony Abbott and I, over many long years in various capacities, have been known to have a red-hot go in parliament, and I don't apologise, Neil, for-
HOST: -That was another promise, though. You promised a new era in politics. It's gone.
PM: Well, Neil, I actually don't think I ever suggested that I wouldn't go into the Australian Parliament and have a feisty go in respect of what I believe in. People know I am a feisty parliamentary performer. I can take it up to the Opposition. That's what I've done ever since the day I first got here and I've never suggested I'd do anything else and I never will.
I will always be a passionate, sometimes fierce, advocate for the things I believe in.
HOST: Just to wrap up, do you think there's any other things we've misunderstood you on? I think the public would have said we don't think there'll be a carbon tax. You're now saying ‘well, it was probably always going to happen.'
What else did we believe in that we perhaps got wrong?
PM: Neil, I've said this year is the year of decision and delivery, so let's be really clear about what you can expect to see from me.
HOST: Changes?
PM: We will price carbon. We will get the Minerals Resource Rent Tax through the parliament. We will continue to deliver our education reforms, because I believe every child deserves to get a great education. We will deliver workplace participation reforms. I want people to have the benefits and dignity of work. We will deliver our health reforms. We will deliver the National Broadband Network.
I want to make sure that this country is a land of opportunity and that we seize the opportunities of the future, and having a low-pollution, clean-energy economy is one of them. We cannot afford to be left behind and stranded by history. I'm not going to do that to the nation.
HOST: So, there's nothing else there that we misunderstood?
PM: Well, Neil, I've just run through my agenda for 2011 with you.
HOST: Fair enough, and you haven't been bullied into this by the Greens? It was always going to happen?
PM: I've made my decisions, Neil.
HOST: Without influence from them?
PM: I've made my decisions. I've always believed climate change was induced by human activity, that we needed to cut carbon pollution, that the most efficient way of doing that was a market mechanism to price carbon. That's precisely what I announced yesterday.
HOST: So it's nothing to do with keeping the Greens onside?
PM: It's to do with making sure this nation has a prosperous, clean-energy future and we don't lose jobs.
HOST: No political expediency whatsoever in this?
PM: I've just explained it to you, Neil. Clean-energy future, Aussies having jobs.
HOST: A very quick question, if I may.
The War Memorial, I was there during the week and I know you were there, launching the Hall of Valour. I was there before that, interviewed the three VCs, terrific people. Are you going to restore the $5-7million they say they've been cut or not? 
PM: Well, Neil, I'm not going to accept those figures, because they're not the figures that have been supplied to me, but way, way, way before this ever was raised in the Australian Parliament I had become concerned about funding for the War Memorial.
I said to the Minister for Veterans Affairs and the Minister for Finance let's look at the funding of the War Memorial. I want to make sure they're properly funded. Let's look at it properly, do it well, do it methodically, get it all right - get together, work on it, give me a report. I'm receiving that report very soon and we will act on it. I want to see the War Memorial properly funded. It's a sacred place.
HOST: Thank you very much for your time. Did we get through that without patronising each other?
PM: Well, Neil, I suppose that's for others to judge.
HOST: Well, I don't think I did, but thank you.
PM: Well, Neil, all I was doing was making sure that I got my point of view across.
HOST: Thank you very much for your time
PM: Thanks, Neil. 



HOST: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard is in the studio in Canberra. Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Alan.
HOST: Prime Minister, look, can I just make a minor point? I've got my job to do, you've got your job to do. Your people rang here yesterday. It was agreed this interview would take place at 7.10. We accommodated that and cancelled someone who was to be here who'd made very significant personal arrangements as well. 7.10 is 7.10, isn't it?
PM: Well, I'm sorry about that, Alan, but I've been delayed on another interview.
HOST: Yes, but I mean, this is what your staff, we have made many requests for you to be on this program. None of those requests have ever been acknowledged. I can understand you may not want to come on or you can't come on, but surely courtesy has to be part of the way in which the way the public are treated?
PM: Alan, I believe I am a very courteous person, I'm also a very busy-
HOST: -(inaudible)
PM: If I can finish my sentence Alan-
HOST: -We're all busy-
PM: -I'm also a very busy person and-
HOST: -We're all busy-
PM: -And Alan, if I can finish my sentence uninterrupted, I've had media commitments this morning and I was delayed-
HOST: -You had a media commitment this morning at 7.10 which your staff agreed on this program.
PM: Well, Alan, I am happy to apologise to you for being late. I am now here. If you have a question in the nation's interest then please feel free to put it.
HOST: Thank you. I've got several.
PM: Right.
HOST: Do you understand that there is white-hot anger out there and there was yesterday and there will continue to be, because five days before the August 21 poll you said there will be no carbon under the Government I lead, I mean this what you've said:
AUDIO CLIP: There will be no carbon tax under the Government I lead.
HOST: And then, in case there was any doubt, you repeat the line in The Australian newspaper the day before the election. You said ‘I rule out a carbon tax.'
PM: Well, Alan, let me answer that. In the last election campaign I talked consistently about how climate change was real, it was caused by human activity, that we needed to cut down on carbon pollution and that the best way of doing that was to price carbon through a market-based mechanism, and that's what I announced yesterday-
HOST: -No, no, Julia, you didn't say that-
PM: -And when I announced that yesterday, Alan, I announced that there would be a fixed price for the first few years, and rather than play any semantic word games - that is a market-based mechanism - but rather than play any semantic word games I was frank enough with the Australian people to say that that first few years would work effectively like a tax.
But, Alan, I know, and if we're going to go through history let's just be really clear about the history, I know that you speak to Tony Abbott regularly on this show and you listen to what he has to say-
HOST: -Well you're welcome anytime. You're welcome anytime-
PM: -Let me remind you of what, Alan, let me remind you of what he's had to say about carbon pricing, and I'm reading from a sheet here, ‘why not just do it with a simple tax?' He's actually said the simplest way to price carbon is by putting a fixed price on it.
HOST: He went to the election, he went to the election, Julia, saying, quite clearly, there will no carbon tax. You said, in 2009, on the ABC, ‘I think when you go to an election and you give a promise to the Australian people, you should do everything in your power to honour that promise.' Now, your Deputy Prime Minister, who became the Deputy when Kevin Rudd left, your Deputy Prime Minister said this also to the nation during the election and prior to the date of the vote:
AUDI O CLIP: No, it's not possible that we're bringing in a carbon tax. That is a hysterically inaccurate claim being made by the Coalition.
HOST: Do you understand, Julia, that you are the issue today, because there are people now saying your name is not ‘Julia' but ‘Ju-liar', and they are saying that we've got a liar running the country. Just listen to Brad here, who rang this morning. Julia the lines were on fire, believe me, about this, and this is what Brad said:
AUDIO CLIP: I felt sick in the stomach. I felt like I could cry. How much of this raping have we got to tolerate from this Government. The wastage, the pink batts, the school halls, the bloody internet thing, and now this. I feel sick throwing out a carton of milk that goes out of date. These people could throw out billions of billions of dollars, without giving a stuff how hard it is to earn money every day. I've been up since 3.00 this morning trying to earn money, but these clowns, they pee it up against the wall, Alan. I've had enough. How do we organise a march or a petition? This has to stop.
HOST: Do you understand those sentiments?
PM: I understand people work incredibly hard, Alan, and I understand people worry a great deal about making ends meet, and that's why on your show I can say that I'm determined to price carbon; I believe Australians agree that climate change is real and it's the right thing to do to have a clean energy future for this country with all of the jobs that go with it; that people don't want Australia left behind and losing those jobs in the future-
HOST: -Left behind whom?-
PM: -But I understand, Alan, if I can just finish, I understand people will think about ‘how is this going to impact me?', and what I can say to them is that the single biggest use of money from the money raised by pricing carbon will be to assist households with cost of living.
And I can also say to people like Brad, any dollar figure he has seen referred to in today's newspapers suggesting a particular family would pay a specific dollar cost is a misleading figure. We haven't determined the price yet and households will get assistance with the cost of living.
HOST: See, that's because you haven't determined the price because Christine Milne said yesterday it's happening because we have shared power in Australia. Brown, Senator Brown, was at least honest enough to say that this will rise every year. How can you, as the, you see, you just said before ‘We don't want to get left behind.' Who are we being left behind? America? Europe?
PM: The world is moving, Alan. There are more than 30 countries with emissions trading schemes, and 10 American States with emissions trading schemes. The world is moving. Now I don't believe Australia has to move in front of the world, but I also don't believe we can afford to be left behind.
We are very big emitters of carbon pollution per head of population, one of the biggest emitters in the world. That means if we don't change as the world moves we could get stuck with an old-fashioned, high-carbon-pollution economy and not have the jobs of the future-
HOST: -But PM, today-
PM: -I am not, Alan, going to put the nation in that position. Pricing carbon is the right thing to do and I said that during the election campaign.
HOST: No, you did not.
PM: Yes, I did Alan-
HOST: -Julia, you gave a policy speech-
PM: -Get all of the statements out, Alan, and you will see-
HOST: -Julia, people-
PM: -During the election campaign I said climate change is real; I said we needed to address it-
HOST: -Julia-
PM: -that pricing carbon-
HOST: -PM-
PM: -is the most efficient way to do it-
HOST: -PM-
PM: -that is what happened during the election campaign.
HOST: PM, PM, this is untruthful. You launched-
PM: -Alan, Alan, check my statements-
HOST: -You launched the campaign- PM, you launched the ALP campaign. You uttered 5,400 words in that speech to the ALP faithful when you launched the campaign. You did not mention carbon tax and you had one sentence on climate change. That's your prospectus-
PM: -Oh, Alan, Alan, are you suggesting in a 35-day campaign the only speech I ever made, the only statement that ever came out of my mouth, was on the day of the ALP campaign launch-
HOST: -At the launch you weren't game to say it because-
PM: -How ridiculous, Alan, and how calculated to mislead your listeners. I am asking you to look at all of the statements I made in the election campaign-
HOST: -You said specifically there will be no carbon tax under the Government I lead-
PM: -Alan, and any Australian after three years that have just been in Australian politics-
HOST: -Unbelievable-
PM: -seriously say-
HOST: -Julia-
PM: -that the Labor Party was not committed to pricing carbon and dealing with climate change.
HOST: You weren't prepared to say that in the policy speech because you knew it would alienate a major constituency that you wanted to support, namely the working families. You knew they'd be alienated and you left it out. Now-
PM: -What I can say to those working families, Alan, is the carbon price mechanism I announced yesterday will assist households with cost of living pressures. Obviously I understand there are many households that really struggle to make ends meet, many families that do it tough and for those families we will be providing assistance.
No-one should be fooled by any of the dollar figures in today's newspapers. Those figures are not based on any known facts.
We will price carbon. We'll have a specific price and we will have an assistance package to help Australians under cost of living pressure.
HOST: How can you say to the Australian people that this will cut our emissions of carbon dioxide when you're pocketing - because you represent us, the government - billions of dollars from selling coal and iron ore to China and the rest of Asia?
Surely this is hypocrisy and deceit rolled into one, isn't it?
PM: We're a resource rich economy, Alan. We're going to use those resources and we're going to export them around the world, correct. That creates jobs, that creates wealth - 
HOST: -Helping China?
PM: That's good for Australia -
HOST: -Helping China double or triple its emissions?-
PM: -What's also good for Australia's future is to move to a clean-energy, low-pollution economy. That means Australian jobs too.
What's the theme here Alan? Australian jobs. I want Australian people to have the benefits and dignity of work with everything that gives them in terms of supporting their families. I want this nation to have jobs. That's why I believe in a clean energy future. That's why we can't afford to risk being left behind as the world moves and the world is moving on climate change.
HOST: Well, Barack Obama is doing nothing on climate change.
PM: That's completely untrue, Alan.
HOST: But let me just come to the jobs business  - 
PM: -You should look at Barak Obama's State of the Union address and that statement you've just made to your listeners, Alan, is not true.
HOST: Every business person, not every business person, significant business people, last year the Reserve Bank board member Dick Warburton said Australia had to follow Mr Obama's lead and investigate other ways to cut carbon emissions. He said we'd be stupid to introduce a carbon price without the United States.
Now, Alan Joyce, the Chief Executive of Qantas, said at the end of last year, against a carbon tax, ‘We're one of the biggest users of fuel and where I think the carbon tax is going to be important to us to make sure that Australia doesn't go on its own and applies a tax that causes distortion to competition and ends up with wrong outcomes for both the environment and business.' He said ‘We spend $3.5 billion on aviation fuel a year, so the potential for us to move to sustainable fuel is huge. What we need is not a penal tax, but to try and encourage people to move in a direction and help people who've made the commitment to move in a direction to actually get there with the right investment.'
PM: OK, Alan, and I would hope that over the next few days when you're broadcasting you'll get out the statements of the Business Council of Australia that talk about the importance of tackling climate change and the importance to business of the certainty of knowing what the price on carbon is.
I hope you get out the reports of the Australian Industry Group that says the same thing. I hope you get out the statements of many leading Australian business people that say we do need to tackle climate change, we do need to price carbon -
HOST: -Is Dick Warburton a leading business person?-
PM: -And it is preventing investment that we do not have a price on carbon now. It is certainly preventing investment in electricity generation, so if you want to give your listeners, Alan, and it's right for you to do so, a representative selection of the views of business, then go right across the board. The biggest business organisations in this country have said consistently to government ‘We need the certainty of knowing what a carbon price is.'
HOST: Prime Minister, you can give the certainty to the business community, and I've said this over and over again, by saying there'll be no carbon tax, which you said during the election. Do you accept the fact that you've stolen an election with a false promise?
PM: Oh, Alan, what a load of nonsense. The Australian people voted for the Parliament that I am sitting in here today. I'm sitting in Parliament House, I sat in the House of Representatives yesterday, Australians voted for the people sitting in that House of Representatives-
HOST: -149 of them  - 
PM: -and when you look at the people sitting in that House of Representatives, the Labor representatives have consistently said to the Australian people ‘you remember the debates about the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme - we need to price carbon'. I am working with the others in the Parliament of good will who also believe that we need to price carbon.
HOST: You and I talked about about those things off air, you might remember. Julia, we talked about that off air, didn't we? We talked about the emissions trading scheme off air, didn't we, Julia? Do you remember that?
PM: I've got no idea what you're referring to, Alan, so if you're going to try and make some allegation, get out there and make it. You haven't got the guts to make it, then don't refer to it.
HOST: I've certainly got the guts to make it. I told you in a discussion we had here that that emissions trading scheme proposal was going to bury Kevin Rudd and your Government. I told you that off air and I said you'd be unwise, off air, to be part of that debate. I told you that and the emissions trading scheme buried Kevin Rudd and this will bury you.
PM: Alan, I'm not responsible for the statements you make off air. I'm responsible for the statement I make on air and off air -
HOST: -I made it to you, I made it to you. Just coming -
PM: -And Alan, you would be aware from discussions I've had with you on air and off air, that I have always supporting pricing carbon using a market-based mechanism  - 
HOST: -Well then why did you say that - 
PM: -because that is the most efficient thing to do. If you look across the election statements - 
HOST: -But why did you say that?
PM: -you will see me saying those things, when you look at the Parliament  -  Alan, if I can finish  -  when you look at the Parliament that Australians voted for - 
HOST: -One Greens member-
PM: -they voted for Labor members-
HOST: -One Greens member-
PM: -Alan, if you can let me finish my sentence, they voted for Labor members committed to pricing carbon. They voted for some Independent and a Green member, many of whom are also committed to pricing carbon.
I believe in pricing carbon. It's the right thing to do for this country's future.
I am not going to risk Australian jobs in the future. I am going to get on with doing this and I will work with people of good will voted for by the Australian people to get it done.
HOST: 150 people in the Parliament. There's only one Greens member. Why did you say - 
PM: -Well, Alan, have you seen today's newspapers and that Mal Washer, a Liberal member, has said we need to price carbon? Have you ever read any of the things that Malcolm Turnbull, the Liberal Member for Wentworth, has said about pricing carbon?
HOST: Yeah, I've read them all, that's not the issue Julia.
PM: How can you say to your listeners - 
HOST: -That is not the issue-
PM: -that the people who sit in the Parliament, apart from one, are not committed to or interested in pricing carbon? You could get a Liberal member, Malcolm Turnbull, on this show, following me right now, and he would say that we need as a nation to price carbon.
HOST: I'm sure he would.
PM: So don't try and mislead the Australian people, Alan-
HOST: -I'm not misleading anyone-
PM: -on the positions of people in the Parliament.
HOST: Malcolm Turnbull was ditched as the Leader of the Liberal Party - 
PM: -And he believes in pricing carbon - 
HOST: Because of pricing carbon he was ditched.
PM: Mal Washer believes in pricing carbon, half of Tony Abbott's backbench believes in pricing carbon and Tony Abbott himself is on record as saying-
HOST: -Julia, Julia-
PM: -a carbon tax is the simplest way of pricing carbon.
HOST: All of that, all of that we could accept, all of that  - 
PM: -All of that's true Allan.
HOST: Whoa, whoa, whoa - if it's true, why then, why then, before the election, listen, why then did you say this:
AUDIO CLIP: There will be no carbon tax under the Government I lead.
HOST: Why did you say that?
PM: We, in the election campaign, were talking about climate change, pricing carbon, what are the mechanisms to do it - 
HOST: -Why did you say that?-
PM: -There are various mechanisms to do it and I was answering a question dealing with all of that - 
HOST: -But why did you say that?-
PM: -Alan, I didn't want to get into any word games yesterday. The mechanism I am now advocating to the Australian people is a market based mechanism. Ultimately the market will set the price of carbon  - 
HOST: -But why did you say that Julia?
PM: There will a fixed price in the meantime. That is effectively like a tax and I just wanted to be straightforward about it - 
HOST: -But why did you say that?-
PM: -but we will go to a market-based mechanism, which is what I talked about in the election campaign.
HOST: Why did you say, no, hang on - 
PM: -I just explained it to you Alan.
HOST: Why did you say there'll be no carbon tax under the government I lead?
PM: Well, I've just explained it to you - 
HOST: -I rule out a carbon tax, you said-
PM: -and you may not have been listening - 
HOST: -I was listening.
PM: -because you're too busy to interrupt but - 
HOST: -No, I didn't interrupt.
PM: -but I've just explained it to you Alan. 
HOST: I rule out a carbon tax.
PM: The Australian people voted and they voted for this Parliament and we're getting on with the job of pricing carbon.
HOST: All of that would be accepted by the electorate and they wouldn't be as angry as they are today were it not for the fact that you said there will be no carbon tax under the government I lead. You said I rule out a carbon tax and Wayne Swan, your deputy, I just want to, so that you understand, Wayne Swan said this, your deputy:
AUDIO CLIP: No, it's not possible that we're bringing in a carbon tax. That is a hysterically inaccurate claim being made by the Coalition.
HOST: What's your response to that?
PM: My response to that is Alan, is I speak on a lot of radio shows and I often get told that people who commentate on those radio shows, like you, somehow know what the electorate's thinking.
I did a lot of radio immediately after I announced the flood levy and I had people saying to me ‘the Australian community hate it, they'll never accept it, no-one will ever pay it, this will destroy your government, how could you make such an error', and I patiently and methodically said ‘I reckon Australians are people of good will and common sense and I reckon they'll come to accept this', and I think on the flood levy I've been proved right Alan.
And I understand having announced a carbon price mechanism yesterday, we'll get the same reaction and it'll be fast and furious and it will be a difficult debate and people will do television polls and phone-in polls and take talkback and all the rest of it and people will quickly conclude that somehow this is a grave error of judgement by me. I do not accept that.
I believe I will patiently and methodically explain to the Australian people this is the right thing to do. People want us to act on climate change. People want a clean-energy future. They'll want the jobs of the future. They won't want this nation left behind. That's what I'm going to deliver and I'll be out there explaining it to the Australian people.
HOST: Just one final point, because you're the Prime Minister and I believe you're entitled to be heard and I've tried to allow that to happen today. I'm concerned about the commitments that you gave before the election, but we've covered that ground.
Could I just say, though, on the flood levy, you made a very specific statement that you'd issue a flood levy. You thought the damage, you quoted $5.6 billion, and you said and I'll pay for the other stuff by cutting certain Government programs. That's what you said to everybody, that's what I'm going to do, flood levy, and everyone said right-o, $5.6 billion. They said right-o, flood levy, I mightn't agree but she's told us what she's going to do, she's going to pay for this here, 1.8, and then she's going cut programs.
Then, when the Greens found out that some of those programs were Greens programs, you immediately did a double somersault like Esther Williams and said ‘oh, well we'll reinstate half a billion dollars of Greens programs. In other words, what I said last week's not true, I'm going to change my mind now.'
PM: Alan, what have just said to your listeners is completely untrue. Either you misunderstand what happened or you are trying to deceive. We are - 
HOST: -We don't try to deceive.
PM: Well, let's get your listeners the facts then, because what you've just told them is not the truth.
HOST: You reinstated Greens programs that you said you were going to cut.
PM: Well, Alan, are you going to let me give people the truth or are you going to insist on your lie?
HOST: No, you've had a fair go.
PM: The truth, the truth - 
HOST: -Did you reinstate Greens programs that you said you would cut?
PM: -the truth, Alan - I'll finish my sentence, thank you - the truth, Alan, is I obviously talked to members of the Parliament. We made an adjustment to the cutbacks of less than three percent - less than three percent, Alan.
HOST: About half a billion.
PM: That is completely  -  did you just say half a billion?
HOST: Half a billion.
PM: Completely untrue. That is a lie.
HOST: What, 350, tell me how many million?
PM: That is a lie.
HOST: Tell me how many million?
PM: It was an adjustment of $150 million, less than three percent. You are trying to deceive your listeners with the wrong figure.
HOST: We'll call it half a billion.
PM: That is the wrong thing to do, Alan. You shouldn't treat your listeners like that.
HOST: I think it's not $150, but even if it were - 
PM: -Well, it is, Alan. Maths is maths, facts are facts, and you can't distort them.
HOST: But hang on, let go of the facts are facts, I'm just simply saying your credibility - 
PM: -Less than three percent, Alan-
HOST: -when your credibility, you stood up and said this is how we'll pay for it, but when the Greens got a bit dirty you said we've got to get this thing through - 
PM: -Oh Alan, what a load of nonsense. I needed to work with people to get the flood levy through because Mr Abbott irresponsibly, completely irresponsibly, putting the politics first, said he wouldn't vote for it.
In the past he's never seen a levy he didn't like. He loves levies. He went to the election with a $6 billion levy that he wanted to put on the shoulders of Australian business, but when it came to having a levy to rebuild Queensland and around the nation, because he put his political interest in front of the national interest, he opposed it.
In those circumstances I did need to talk to other Members of Parliament to get the flood levy through and we made an adjustment of less than three percent in the package.
If Mr Abbott had put the nations interest first, rather than his perceived political interest, we would not be in that position, and if Mr Abbott comes on your show and talks about climate change, you may want to ask him, Alan, why he said that a carbon tax was the simplest way of pricing carbon and why he's walking away from that and engaging in a hysterical and hollow fear campaign today without any plans for the nation's future.
HOST: OK, one final thing. You mentioned Bill Gates yesterday.
PM: Yes, I did.
HOST: And you said the reason he's rich today is that he got in on the change.
PM: Correct.
HOST: Now, do you understand that Bill Gates invented stuff that'd make him money. You're inventing a tax that will cost us money.
PM: What I'm doing Alan is I am pricing carbon to drive innovation and to create a low-pollution, clean-tech future. There are lots of smart Australians out there and what they will do is they will invent the low-pollution, clean-energy products of the future and they'll make a fortune out of it and that's fantastic, because so will the nation and we'll have jobs here.
I want to see as many Bill Gates-style people in this country as possible, making their living creating the products of the future - low pollution, the products the world will want to buy.
What I don't want to see if that young Australians get left behind and they don't have the jobs of the future whilst people in other countries do.
HOST: OK. Thank you for your time and you're always welcome, it's just that sometimes we can't get answers from your office. But anytime, as you were in opposition, so to in government, you're welcome to present your views.
PM: Thank you, Alan. 



PM: I'm here this morning at the Australian National University with our Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet, and with our local Member Andrew Leigh.
I would like to thank the ANU for having us here today and you can see behind us a solar dish that the ANU is working on, this is a way of collecting the power of the sun to make it into the clean energy of the future.
I do also want to acknowledge that this is the last working day of Ian Chubb, the Vice-Chancellor at ANU, who has announced his retirement. Ian Chubb has been a great leader of this university and a very important voice in higher education in this country and I personally wish him very well for his retirement and congratulate him on what he has achieved here at our Australian National University.
Here today, looking at this solar dish, looking at the clean energy of the future, is one of the important reasons why we yesterday announced pricing carbon. I want the Australia of the future to be a clean energy low-pollution economy that has access to the jobs of the future. When our world changes then we have to be on that wave of change, if you look at the information technology revolution, the people who made money, who generated prosperity and jobs out of that revolution were people who went with the wave of change like Bill Gates. I want the young Australians of the future to have the clean energy jobs of the future. To be making their money from innovating and bringing to the world new technology, and we see some of that on display today.
Yesterday the Government announced a mechanism to price carbon. We went to the last election saying to the Australian people that climate change was real, that it was caused by human activity, that we needed to cut carbon pollution. To do that efficiently we needed to price carbon and we needed to do it through a market based mechanism and that is what was announced yesterday.
We announced yesterday carbon pricing will start on the 1st of July 2012, that it will be a market based mechanism, that for the first few years there will be a fixed price and I don't want to mince any words that works effectively like a tax. That we would, because we're a Labor Government, assist Australians who need it, that we would provide assistance to Australian households to deal with the change of pricing carbon, and we will also be working with Australian businesses.
Many Australians would have woken up this morning and seen figures used in today's newspapers speculating about what the cost for Australians would be. Let me say to Australians those figures are pure speculation, there is no factual base to the figures that are appearing in today's newspapers.
The decision about the carbon price will be made in the months to come, as will the decision about the assistance package for households. It is when those decisions are made that people will be able to see the accurate figures; so no one should become concerned today about the figures in today's newspapers, they are speculation and they are not taking into account the fact that as a Labor Government, we are committed to assisting households, indeed, the biggest use of the revenue generated from pricing carbon will go to assisting households.
We need, as a country, to make sure that we are not left behind, the world is moving to a cleaner energy future, we need to do that to tackle climate change. That means the world is innovating, economies are changing, and we need to make sure that we have a low pollution clean energy economy for the future. We are very bit emitters of carbon pollution by world standards, per head of population amongst the highest in the world. We cannot be stranded with a high pollution economy as the world changes. That will cost Australian jobs, I want Australians in the future to have a clean energy future with those jobs.
I'll turn now to the Minister for some comments and then we'll be very happy to take questions.
MINISTER COMBET: Thanks Prime Minister.
The Prime Minister's of course outlined the key issues for why it's important to price carbon in the economy; I might just add a couple of words about the process from here.
The Prime Minister of course announced yesterday not only the proposed starting date but the broad framework for a carbon price mechanism. That now enables the opportunity for the Government to consult widely with stakeholders, particularly those within the business community, who wish to have an input into the ultimate design of a carbon price mechanism, but also other stakeholders in environment groups and other representatives in the community for example, who'd like to have a say about how any household assistance package may be designed.
That is the purpose, we've got a lot of detailed work ahead of us, but it does enable us now to have some further detailed consultations. We have set up a Business Roundtable for that purpose and it is widely accepted at that roundtable and throughout the business community that a carbon price is necessary so that we have a certain investment environment within our own economy, and that we can start to cut pollution and can start to drive the investment in clean energy.
I think the CEO of Origin Energy has issued a statement this morning welcoming yesterday's announcement and reaffirming Origin's belief that a carbon price is necessary. That's a view that is shared, I think, widely in the business community but we will not have a period of consultation about various detailed design issues and get our roller-skates on for the hard work that's ahead in that coming four or five months.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister.
PM: Yes Kieran.
JOURNALIST: You confronted one of your biggest critics this morning, a fairly robust interview with a Sydney broadcaster, is this a sign from you that you're going to butt heads on this?
PM: We will be out there advocating in this debate, we will be out there arguing for the Government's position, and I expect that this will be a fairly fast and furious debate and at time it'll be a little bit torrid, and in that debate I intend to give as good as I get, because in that debate I want to be explaining to Australians why we need a clean energy future, and what difference it will make for them and their families and the jobs of the future. I also don't want Australians to be misled, which is why I am strongly making the point that the figures that people have seen referred to in today's newspapers are speculation and they are not dealing with the assistance that will be provided to households. So no one should be concerned about the figures they've seen in today's newspapers.
JOURNALIST: You've not got a price yet and you haven't got a compensation package sorted, is this getting out early because you know it's going to be one hell of a fight that you've got on your hands to win this debate?
PM: Well this is a process that we've determined to work through the decisions that we need to make, the Government decision making and the work through the Multi Party Climate Change Committee, and we've determined to explain to the community every step of the way. So yesterday we announced the mechanism for pricing carbon, today we're here explaining that mechanism and how it will drive a clean energy future. The purpose of pricing carbon is to have price impacts, it means that things that are generated with more carbon pollution will be more costly, things that are generated with less carbon pollution will be cheaper, people will choose to buy the lower pollution cheaper alternatives, and that's good, because it drives innovation and it drives change.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you've said that the period of the fixed price is effectively like a carbon tax, but this is essentially the right policy direction to head into, is this a concession that the imperative to put a price on carbon and the imperative to take action trumps that election commitment when you said that there wouldn't be a carbon tax?
PM: Well let's be clear about what I said and what the Labor Party stood for at the last election. At the last election we said we believed climate change is real, that it's induced by human activity, that you've got to cut carbon pollution if you're going to tackle climate change. We said consistently that we believed in the power of markets and the best way of pricing carbon in our market economy is through a market based mechanism, and that's what we announced yesterday, a market based mechanism where businesses will need to pay for permits when they are generating carbon pollution, that's what puts the price on carbon.
There is a fixed period at the start, it is still a market based mechanism, a permit system where businesses will need to buy permits; they will be at a fixed price.
Now I wasn't going to get involved in a semantic and ultimately sterile debate about you call that fixed price period, that's why I was upfront and said it's effectively like a tax and it will take us through to a cap and trade emissions trading scheme, a market mechanism to price carbon, that's what Labor was talking about in Government and working on between 2007 and 2010, it's what we spoke to the Australian community about during the 2010 election
JOURNALIST: Are you worried about a people's revolt as Tony Abbott says there will be?
PM: Look Mr Abbott is someone who believes in scare campaigns, he came into politics not to create anything, not to do any good for the Australian community, he came into politics to make his reputation around what he could wreck. He sought to wreck the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in the lead up to the last election, and he's just recycling the same old fear campaign now. Well I think it's growing pretty tired, and I think Australians are also starting to look at Mr Abbott and say ‘why is it that the only thing he ever talks about is ending things, stopping things, destroying things? Why doesn't he ever talk about positive things for Australia's future?'
Now this is a political campaign from a man with no real solutions to climate change and carbon pollution. He's had every position on this it is possible to have, including saying to the Australian community that the most simple way of pricing carbon is a tax, a Tony Abbott statement, and yet despite having made that statement he's out today with this hysterical fear campaign. Well we will have the discussion with the Australian people calmly, methodically, patiently. We will contest every wrong proposition and every bit of fear campaign that comes from Tony Abbott and I believe Australians will come to come to understand the way in which we are pricing carbon and they'll view it as the right thing to do to get on with the job.
Latika.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister I followed you on the election campaign and your climate policy was about a citizen's assembly and (inaudible) for electricity transmission lines, why don't you just say that yes you did say there would be no carbon under the government you lead, you changed your mind, what's wrong with sorry or that you have a different plan now?
PM: Well Latika I remember the election campaign, I was there too, and I'll refer you to all of the statements during the election campaign. What was having a process to involve the community about? It was about talking to people about pricing carbon through a market based mechanism, that is what it was for, that was why we were discussing it during the election campaign. The whole foundation stone was saying to the Australian community ‘climate change is real, it's human induced, we've got to take action, we've got to price carbon, a market based mechanism is the most important way to do that, the most efficient way to do that.'
If you look at the political debate between 2007 and 2010, does anybody seriously contend that at the end of that political debate people didn't understand that the Labor Party believed in pricing carbon and wanted to see a carbon price in this country? So I'm not going to get hung up on word games about how you describe various pricing mechanisms; and I've been very upfront with people, with a fixed price it's effectively like a tax taking you to an emissions trading scheme. People would have heard those words before, they were words used every second day between 2007 and election day in 2010, people heard Labor speak about that consistently.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister was a carbon tax a core or non-core promise?
PM: Well I've just explained that.
JOURNALIST: But how do you relate the two (inaudible) then, there will be no carbon and this morning you're telling us that for the first three to five years it will act exactly like that?
PM: Well I've just explained it to you, I knew yesterday when we announced a market based mechanism, a permit scheme with prices where businesses would buy permits and because carbon was priced they would have the incentive to reduce carbon pollution. I knew when we announced that yesterday that we would be explaining to the Australian people a fixed price period and then a full cap and trade emissions trading scheme, and I knew, because Mr Abbott opposes everything, he doesn't want to see any positive change in this nation, he doesn't want to see us tackle climate change, he doesn't want a clean energy future, he wants to make political hay out these issues. I knew immediately he would be playing word games about this. Well I'm not into that kind of spin, I'm into the substance, I'm into doing the right thing for the Australian economy and the right thing for Australians and I am not going to stand by as Prime Minister and let some semantic word game stop me delivering to the Australian people the clean energy economy they need for the future, so Australian kids today have the jobs of the future and they aren't falling behind the standards of the rest of the world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what about people who question your conviction given you advised Kevin Rudd to put the ETS on ice?
PM: Well I'm not accepting the premise of your question and as for the past, people can debate what they like about the past, I'm for the future, and making very clear my intentions for this economy and this nation in that future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you give us an update on the situation in New Zealand and the Australians in Libya?
I can give a quick update, it's been a harrowing and very tragic night in New Zealand and people will have seen that the death toll has continued to rise there, and people are going about the grim and trying work of search and rescue and are finding more bodies. This does continue to be a search and rescue mission and our search and rescue teams are there with our medical teams and they are being joined by around 300 police to assist with community policing, but this is a tough time for our New Zealand family and we are working with them shoulder to shoulder. And I would remind what I said to the Parliament yesterday, we'll be demonstrating that through the cricketing community and through a cricket match between Australia and New Zealand where the players will literally stand shoulder to shoulder for a minute's silence, and people will have the opportunity to contribute their money to the Red Cross earthquake 2011 appeal for our New Zealand family.
On Libya we continue to assist Australians to leave Libya, there are 37 Australians registered, there are some 12 Australians who have been aboard a ferry to leave Libya and we will continue working with them. This has been a very difficult set of circumstances on the ground to assist people, but our consular staff have been working through. We had one consular person on the ground in Libya, we've been trying to bring more in to assist; we've had problems getting visas and getting them into the country but that's now been resolved and there will be more people there working to assist the Australians who remain in Libya. Our message clearly is: do not travel to Libya, and we continue to raise our voice in absolute condemnation of the vile threats and continuing violence that Colonel Qaddafi and his regime have engaged in against the Libyan people, he needs to listen to the voice of the Libyan people.
JOURNALIST: PM can we just get comment on Julian Assange, he and his mother say that it's a conspiracy, a British court as ordered that he can be extradited to Sweden, what do you make of the claims that it's a conspiracy?
PM: Ok well we'll take this question, you've got one for Minister Combet and then we'll have to go.
On Julian Assange, Julian Assange is involved in legal proceedings in the United Kingdom, Mr Assange has indicated his intention to appeal the decision that has just come down, in those circumstances I'm not going to make any comments about his legal case as legal proceedings are ongoing. But I certainly can confirm that at every stage of these legal proceedings Mr Assange has received the same degree of assistance that any Australian overseas faced with such legal proceedings would receive. He has received consular visits, our staff have been there to visit him, they've been there present during the trial to assist and to provide support. Mr Assange has received exactly the same assistance package as someone named John Smith would in comparable circumstances, there is not one iota worth of difference.
JOURNALIST: Mr Combet just back on climate change, how much responsibility do you think the Greens have now in ensuring this process is implemented successfully, do they have a greater deal of responsibility than they did before and what are you expecting from them?
COMBET: Well (inaudible) not making judgments about relative responsibilities other than the fact that we are all approaching these discussions in good faith in the Multi Party Climate Change Committee and certainly I think Senator Milne and Senator Brown have been doing so, along with Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor and the Government, and so far it's produced two important results. Firstly being an agreed set of principles that will underpin the design of a carbon price, and secondly now a broad framework for carbon pricing. What we've now got ahead of us, as I said earlier, is a lot of detailed work on all the elements of the design, clearly I don't think we're giving any secrets away to indicate that there are going to be some tough decisions ahead and there are policy differences that exist between Labor and the Greens and Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor have got their ideas about issues too, but if you approach these issues in good faith, we all have the objective of trying to get a well designed carbon price mechanism, I'm sure we'll succeed.
JOURNALIST: Mr Combet business says now they just have long uncertainty instead of certainty, did you announce too little too early?
COMBET: Well I don't think business says that generally, in fact quite the opposite, many business leaders are indicating what they are looking for is a resolution of this carbon price issue. Now Tony Abbott has actually generated the greatest uncertainty about carbon pricing in our economy of anyone. He usurped Mr Turnbull's leadership of the Liberal Party over this issue just 14 months ago when there was agreement between the Coalition and the Government on carbon pricing. He's an opportunist in that respect, prepared to overthrow certainty about carbon pricing for his own political gain, he's going to run a scare campaign as the Prime Minister has said, but we will meet that scare campaign and stare it down. What we've got to do is to continue to do the detailed work to resolve this issue and that will provide the greatest certainty for the business community and that's why I indicated earlier it will be important for us to now engage over this broad framework and get the detailed design work done.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning, Laurie.
HOST: Prime Minister, how is the effort going to get Australians out of Libya?
PM: Laurie, we've made the decision to withdraw our consular staff from Libya. The security situation is degenerating and the United Kingdom, the United States and Canada have taken similar decisions, so our three consular staff have been evacuated. We've been assisted by Canada to do that, and they are now in Malta.
We do have a very limited number of Australians still in Tripoli. A number of them have made their own arrangements to leave. Some have knowingly decided to stay and we are concerned about the circumstances of one Australian who is being detained by Libyan security forces. We've been making inquiries about his welfare but we have been unable at this stage to confirm his location or to get in contact with him.
So, we will continue those efforts, but Laurie, as Prime Minister, I've got a duty of care to our consular staff and like other nations I formed the view that it was not safe to have them stay in Tripoli, so we have got them out.
HOST: What about the issue of sanctions? The Americans, the EU, have announced sanctions. Are we doing the same?
PM: Overnight, Foreign Minister Rudd has announced sanctions on Australian's behalf. They go to travel and financial sanctions. Obviously we also support arms sanctions. We don't have any direct military relationship with Libya, of course, but we do support arms sanctions. 
Laurie, as we speak the Security Council is in session and we are urging that the Security Council pass resolutions which enable the world with to speak with one voice and to further isolate the Gaddafi regime.
As you know from the coverage from Libya, Gaddafi is set on a murderous and violent path and the world does need to speak with one voice in absolute condemnation of this conduct.
HOST: Do we know whether the Gaddafi family or members of the regime have assets in Australia that you can freeze?
PM: Look, I am not advised of any assets but one of the reasons that you do the financial sanctions and the travel sanctions is to close in around Gaddafi and his family and cronies so that they are not able to travel freely and they are not able to move money freely. I don't think anybody wants to see them profit from the kind of violent and vile conduct we've seen on display.
HOST: There are reports in some Sunday papers today that Bob Hawke told guests at a dinner in Perth that you won't go the distance, and Greg Combet will take over sooner rather than later. What is your response to that?
PM: Well, as it happens, Laurie, I had breakfast with Bob Hawke yesterday and we were laughing together about Julie Bishop's endeavours to spin this story, so Bob and I were having a good old chuckle over some yoghurt and fruit yesterday morning. 
HOST: So he denies to you, to your face, that he said that?
PM: Oh, what Bob said is, clearly, Julie Bishop has been out and about trying to sell this story and we just laughed about it. It is just one of those silly little flurries.
HOST: Mr Hawke has confirmed that he does expect Greg Combet to be your successor.  Now, Greg Combet, is older than you, so that doesn't suggest Hawkie thinks you are around for the long haul.
PM: I think Bob Hawke would happily confirm that he is a fan of Greg Combet - and no wonder. Greg Combet is a very, very talented man and I've recognised those talents and put him in charge of a very big area of policy for the nation and its future, and that's creating a clean energy economy, having the jobs of the future through pricing carbon and tackling climate change.
HOST: OK, let's talk about climate change and the carbon tax. Do you deny being one of those who leaned on Kevin Rudd to shelf his emissions trading scheme?
PM: Laurie, I'm not going to pick over history. I'm all about the future and making sure that this nation has got a clean energy future and we don't get left behind as the world changes.  I've never spoken about my private and confidential discussions with colleagues or Cabinet discussions - and Laurie, I never will.
HOST: Well, it looks as though, as I've said once before, that's a fairly easy way out, but this goes to whether you can be trusted, it goes to your credibility, and people will be wondering how you reconciled being a cut and run advocate last year and now a chest-thumping climate change warrior today.
PM: Well, Laurie, firstly I'd say I've never spoken about my confidential discussions with colleagues and I won't. When I give my word to enter into confidential discussions I keep them confidential, so I am not accepting any of the premises of your questions.
For my own belief, Laurie, let me say this very clearly - I've always believed that climate change was caused by human activity; that we needed to cut carbon pollution; and that the best way of doing that was through a market-based emissions trading scheme, that markets are efficient.
So, what I went to the elections saying and what I believe is that the best way though is to price carbon; for us, as a nation, to have a target and the Government has announced targets about how much we want to cut carbon pollution; to then cap carbon pollution at that moment and allow the market to fix a price for a permit to issue a tonne of carbon pollution. 
That is what Labor stood for in the last parliament. It is what I said at the last election, and it is what we are doing now.
Yes, Laurie, some circumstances have changed in the meantime. I didn't predict before the election that we would have the parliament we have today, but we do have the parliament the Australian people elected, and I want to work with that parliament to get things done. That means that in working with people in the parliament, who genuinely want to tackle climate change and price carbon, I have agreed that we would start with a fixed price and then move to the full emissions trading scheme. 
HOST: And you have agreed that the fixed price is the same as the carbon tax?
PM: Laurie, I didn't want to get caught up in what I knew would be one of those semantic word games about whether or not I would say the word ‘tax'. You know how these games are played, Laurie. A politician decides they are not going to say a word, and then media, people like yourself, Laurie, spend weeks trying to make them say it. I wasn't going to do any of that-
HOST: -I would do that!
PM: -So I just said  -  Laurie, maybe you wouldn't have, but maybe others less kind than you might have  -  so, Laurie, I just have been really clear with people: a fixed price is effectively like a tax.
HOST: OK.
PM: But the end point that we are going to get to is the end point we talked about in the election campaign. That is, an emissions trading scheme where you set a cap, no more carbon pollution than this amount, and then you let the markets sort out the price. 
HOST: But you did say before the election, a week before the election, ‘there will be no carbon tax under the Government I lead.' Now just about every Australian has seen that television clip over the last few days, seeing you saying it with your own mouth. Do you now admit that that was a mistake, and will you apologise for it?
PM: Yes, I did say that, Laurie, and circumstances have changed.
What my vision was was to be elected as Prime Minister and to introduce an emissions trading scheme - which is not a carbon tax. A carbon tax is where you fix price. An emissions trading scheme is where you fix quantity and allow the market to sort out price.
That is what I wanted to do, but we have the parliament the Australian people voted for.  I had a choice between throwing my hands up in the air and saying ‘I can't get anything done now' or saying ‘I'm for action, I'm tackling climate change.'
I will work with this parliament. That will require some compromises along the way, and I've agreed that there will be a fixed-price period, effectively a tax, for the first few years.
I think Australians will accept that when circumstances change, how you are going to do things may change, but they want you to be true to the goal, and the goal is tackling climate change through pricing carbon in an emissions trading scheme, a market-based system which has a cap on carbon pollution.
HOST: You talk about circumstances changing, but at the time you made that statement, and for a long while before, everyone knew the Greens would almost certainly control the balance of power in the Senate. That didn't change. What changed was the lower house, but that doesn't affect it. If you had a majority, you would have been in an even stronger position, so you are talking about the Senate and that didn't change.
PM: But I am in the same position, Laurie, as prime ministers past. Prime Minister John Howard went to the election-
HOST: -Telling fibs?
PM: No, no. Prime Minister John Howard- well, that may also be an analysis of John Howard's career, but that wasn't the point I was going to make Laurie.
The point I was going to make was Prime Minister John Howard went to an election saying that he wanted to have a goods and services tax. Then when it came to legislating it, he had to sit down with Meg Lees, then leader of the Democrats, and make some changes to his goods and services tax in order to get it done.
Well, effectively, I'm in that same position. I am making some changes in order to work with the parliament that Australians voted for.
HOST: You are in a similar position to John Howard in that he said that there would never ever be a GST, and there was. You said there won't be a carbon tax, and now you say there will be. The difference is that John Howard went to another election to get people to vote on his new policy. Will you do that?
PM: The difference is, Laurie, Labor has gone to two elections, 2007 and.2010-
HOST: -Not promising a carbon tax.
PM: -saying clearly to the Australian people ‘Climate change is real. It's caused by humans. We have to cut carbon pollution. The best way to do that is price carbon and where we want to get to is a full emissions trading scheme.' That is what I'm achieving through the mechanism I announced last week.
The difference is, with the circumstances of this parliament, yes, there will be a period of a fixed price, and then we will get to the end goal - the most efficient mechanism I've always wanted and Labor has always advocated for, which is a full emissions trading scheme, a cap on carbon pollution and the market sets the price.
HOST: OK, now, the Coalition is in full cry about the cost of living impact of what you are going to do. Tony Abbott is talking about a $300 a year increase in power bills, 6.5 cents a litre increase on petrol. What will you do to compensate people for that sort of increase?
PM:  I do want to be clear about this, Laurie, and I want to be clear about the principles that will guide me as we work the household assistance package through.
First and foremost, the most important thing that revenue raised from pricing carbon will be used for is assisting households. Households will come first, and the assistance that they get will be generous assistance. Because we are a Labor Government, because we care about fairness, of course, we will direct our thoughts and attentions first to lower-income Australians and people on fixed incomes, like pensioners. But many Australians who consider themselves to be middle income will also be assisted.
Laurie, in the last parliament, I struggled long and hard to kill Work Choices because I believe in being fair to Australian working families. I will bring that same principle of fairness to designing the household assistance package.
HOST: Now, how much compensation will there be? Under the Rudd proposals, pensioners and some low-income earners were, in fact, going to be better off. Is that what you have got in mind, and at what level will that advantage cut out?
PM: Laurie, people should expect to see a generous assistance package. They should expect to see that the revenue raised by carbon pricing is put to assisting households first. 
And I do want to be clear - every cent raised from pricing carbon will go to assisting households, to helping businesses transition, and to programs to tackle climate change, but the highest priority will be assisting households.
So, Laurie, the exact assistance package still has to be worked through. The carbon price hasn't been determined yet, and that means that the figures people are seeing in their newspapers and coming out of Tony Abbott's mouth are figures of speculation.
And I understand in this debate that Tony Abbott is going to style himself as complainer-in-chief rather than pitch in and get this done, but the nation needs us to do this, Laurie. We need a clean energy economy. We can't afford to be left behind.
HOST: What about petrol prices, Prime Minister? We see reports today that you're considering a neutral scheme, whereby every increase, every cent increase in petrol prices under your scheme will be offset by one cent a litre reduction in excise. Is that what you are thinking of?
PM: Well, when we designed the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in the last parliament we did have a mechanism to reduce excise as the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme came into effect. Of course, the carbon pollution reduction scheme never got through the parliament because Tony Abbott leapt into the shoes of complainer-in-chief, even though in the past he has stood for a carbon tax, very clearly stated that he thought that a carbon tax was the simplest way to price carbon.
In this parliament, Laurie, with the parliament the Australian people have voted for, we will keep working and making the decisions about which bits of the economy are phased into the scheme, so -
HOST: -Is that what you have in mind for petrol?
PM: Well, those decisions are yet to be made, Laurie. When they are made, they will be announced. So there has been some speculation about this question, but that is one of the issues still to be worked through.
The question of industry sectors and how they are phased in, household assistance, and the carbon price - these issues will be worked through between now and the middle of the year, and every step of the way, we will be keeping the Australian people informed, and engaging in what I'm sure will be a debate between us creating the Australia of the future, and Mr Abbott, moaning, being a complainer, because he doesn't want to pitch in and build the Australia we need in the future.
HOST: I notice, Prime Minister you are not using the excuse today that you and Wayne Swan have used until now, which is that it is has not been decided whether the petrol will be included. The Greens want it included. Aren't you so conceding now that they are so powerful, if they want it, that is how it will be?
PM: Certainly not, Laurie. We will work through the Multi Party Climate Change Committee.  Now, I understand that the deputy leader of the Greens, Christine Milne, made some statements about this matter yesterday. Those statements, in my view, were not appropriate in the sense that these discussions are still to come and decisions are to be taken.
HOST: But they call the tune?
PM: Oh, Laurie, would you have said way back when that Meg Lees called the tune because John Howard sat around a table with her and negotiated details of the goods and services tax, like whether or not it would apply to fresh food? Would you have said then that Meg Lees was calling the tune? I don't think so, Laurie, and really, circumstances aren't different.
HOST: Prime Minister, we thank you.
PM: Thanks, Laurie. 



HOST: As you know the Prime Minister of Australia is Julia Gillard, hopefully the Prime Minister is on the line. Good morning.
PM: Good morning John.
HOST: How are you Prime Minister?
PM: I'm very well, I'm in South Australia and I've just launched the new Holden Cruze, so a very special honour and a brand spanking new motor vehicle.
HOST: Yes and good for Australia.
PM: Absolutely. To be manufacturing cars here is fantastic.
HOST: You bet it is. Now who is telling fibs and who isn't telling fibs?
PM: Well John, that's a pretty broad brush question, but if you're asking me to talk to you about the debate of the last few days, carbon pricing, I'm more than happy to.
In the 2007 election campaign and the 2010 election campaign Labor went to the election saying to the Australian people, climate change is real, humans are causing it, we've got to reduce carbon pollution and the best way of doing that is to have a market based emissions trading scheme, where you cap the amount of carbon pollution your economy can generate and you let a market mechanism sort out the price as people buy and sell permits and that's exactly where we're going to end up John.
HOST: But what about when you said this:
PM: There will be no carbon tax under the government I lead.
You said it.
PM: Yes I did, I'm happy to acknowledge that John. I did say that and a carbon tax is a different way of pricing carbon, so I've always believed that a market mechanism is the best approach, you cap the amount of carbon pollution and you let the market sort out the price.
HOST: But it's still a tax.
PM: There is another way of doing it and that is the government to fix the price.
HOST: But it's still a tax.
PM: Look certainly John, I'm not trying to hide anything from people. If you price carbon  - 
HOST: When you said there would be no tax, that really wasn't the truth was it?
PM: Well if I can just finish, a carbon tax is a different way of pricing carbon, that's where the government strikes the price. So John I've always believed in a market based mechanism, I'm sitting in the parliament the Australian people voted for, I want to get to a market based mechanism, I've worked with others of good will and we've determined that the way to get there is to have a period of fixed pricing, which is like a tax and then get to the market based mechanism that I talked to the Australian people about in 2010. So I'm working with the parliament the Australian people voted for and yes I have made some compromises in order to act now, rather than just throw up my hands and say ‘let's not do anything'.
HOST: Does a compromise mean you changed your mind?
PM: It means I'm there working with the parliament that Australians voted for  - 
HOST: No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
PM: Look John it's a lot like John Howard went to an election  - 
HOST: No, no, I don't want to talk about John Howard.
PM: Well it's a good analogy I think. John Howard went to an election promising to have a Goods and Services Tax, when he went to the parliament he needed to sit down with Meg Lees, the then Leader of the Democrats and work some issues through. I've taken a similar approach.
HOST: Yeah, but he went to an election saying that he was going to introduce a GST.
PM: And I went to the 2010 election saying  - 
HOST: That there would be no carbon tax.
PM: I went to the 2010 election says I wanted to price carbon through a market based mechanism and that is exactly where we'll get to and Labor went to the 2007 election saying we wanted to price carbon through a market based mechanism.
HOST: Yes, but you did say this:
PM: There will be no carbon tax under the government I lead.
That's what you said.
PM: Yes I did John and working with this parliament I have agree that there will be a fixed price period before we get to a full market based pricing scheme. That is effectively like a tax, I'm happy to say that and I'm happy to say that I worked with the parliament the Australian people voted for. That's required some compromises, but the end point is exactly what I talked to the people about during the 2010 election campaign.
HOST: Did you hear what Tony Abbott had to say about the comments that you made? Just listen to this:
HOST: Is out Prime Minister a liar?
ABBOTT: Ah, I think the short answer is yes. I don't think there's any other way word to use.
Pretty damning statement, isn't it?
PM: Well, you know Tony Abbott can make any statement he likes, people would also remember when he went to an election giving a rock solid, iron clad guarantee that the Medicare safety net he was in charge of as Health Minister wouldn't change, and immediately after the election it did change and he basically said ‘well, I didn't keep my word before the election', so we've seen Tony Abbott do that. John I  - 
HOST: Can I just say this to you, does that mean the Australian public has got to accept the fact that all out leaders are likely to lie?
PM: No, absolutely not. People should look  - 
HOST: Well you did and now you're saying Tony Abbott did and you're the leaders.
PM: Well John, if I can just answer the question. There's no doubt Tony Abbott went to an election saying he wouldn't change the Medicare safety net, he gave a rock solid, iron clad guarantee and then he changed his mind and broke his word. He's admitted that on the public record, so that's part of our past. For the debate we are talking about now, the carbon pricing debate, I said to the Australian people we have to deal with climate change, we have to price carbon. I want to create a market based mechanism to do that and that's exactly what I'm doing John.
HOST: OK, but you also said, this is what you said:
PM: There will be no carbon tax under the government I lead.
And there is.
PM: And John it is absolutely true, working with this Parliament in order to get to what I promised the Australian people I believed in, that is a market based mechanism to price carbon, we will have a fixed price that works effectively like a tax, that's a compromise I've made to ensure we act in this parliament, working with the parliament the Australian people voted for.
HOST: The Greens and the Independents obviously are leaning on you very heavily.
PM: It's not a question of that John, it's a question of the right thing to do. I've got two choices, I could throw up my hands and say ‘I'm not going to get anything done', or I could seize the opportunities of this parliament and start creating the clean energy future this country needs. Well I'm for action, I'm for creating that clean energy future, I want to make sure Australia doesn't get left behind and young Australians have the jobs of the future. That's what I'm doing John.
HOST: Nobody would have any argument with that, it's how it came about that the people who are concerned are concerned about. I mean obviously the Independents and the Greens did lean on you.
PM: I'm working with the parliament the Australian people voted for, it's a parliament in which to get proposals through both the House of Representatives and Senate I need to work with others. What I do as Prime Minister is I work out what's the right thing to do, the right thing to do is to price carbon, the right thing to do is to act now. I've negotiated on the how question, so we will have a fixed price period and then get to what I've always believed was the best mechanism, a market based mechanism for pricing carbon.
HOST: Again let me say that I have no objection to any of that and I think many Australians feel precisely as I feel, but can you tell me how much will the carbon price reduce pollution compared to other world powers? Are we going to be doing better?
PM: Well my view is Australia shouldn't lead the world in this, but we shouldn't be left behind either. Other economies and countries are moving, 32 of them have got an emissions trading scheme, 10 US states do, so we can't afford to be left behind. We are big emitters of carbon pollution by world standards; more pollution emitted per head of population that even the Americans. That means we've got a lot of work to do to transform our economy for a cleaner energy future and that's why it's smart for us to get started and get this done.
HOST: OK, but what difference is it going to make if the Chinese do absolutely nothing and that's their intention?
PM: Well China is doing a number of things to battle climate change, but my point John is that we, as Australia, need to look to our own national interest and say what's best for us is to have a cleaner energy economy, that's what will give us the jobs for the future.
HOST: Some of the media's heavy hitters, in print I mean, are predicting a push from Greg Combet. Is it time to tread carefully and carry a big stick do you think?
PM: Oh no, all of that was a little bit of a silly flurry on the weekend. Julie Bishop was the Deputy Leader of the Opposition was at a function that Bob Hawke was at and we all knew she was out trying to sell a story about all of this. I had breakfast with Bob Hawke in Sydney on Saturday and we were laughing about it.
HOST: Well that's good, but you can't blame him for wanting to stir up a bit of trouble, don't you all do that, all politicians?
PM: Julie Bishop and Tony Abbott have been at each other's throats and they're very deeply divided and I think as a result she probably thought it was politically clever to try and distract from the fact they've been at war about a very important series of issues, including I think they're at war internally now about carbon pricing because many of them do believe in putting a price on carbon.
HOST: You've got to remember also that the Kevin Rudd rumour was a silly flurry too and where's Kevin?
PM: John, you know, I'm not going to engage in any of that sort of analysis of the past, as for Bob Hawke having a chat at a function in Perth and Julie Bishop trying to sell a story out of it, Bob and I were literally laughing about it Saturday morning.
HOST: Nasty business politics, isn't it?
PM: Well it's a great business if you care about the nation's future and you come into the parliament wanting to make a change and wanting to make a difference. I came into the parliament to make us a nation of opportunity; I came into the parliament to make sure we could truly say to each other that we were giving every Australian child a chance at a good life. Part of that's having a strong economy, to do that we've got to have a clean energy economy, so if you come into politics to create and make a different, it's a fantastic business. Some people come into it just to destroy and wreck, that's Tony Abbott's mindset, it's not mine.
HOST: I don't think Tony Abbott is wanting to destroy and wreck, why would he want to do that, it wouldn't be to his benefit would it?
PM: Name me one thing you know he's in favour of? He's against carbon pricing, he's against the flood levy, he's against the National Broadband Network, he's against health reform, he's against education reform. Name me one thing you know he's in favour of?
HOST: Well I better ring him up and ask him.
PM: I'll be intrigued by the answer John, because I haven't heard one.
HOST: Alright, we'll I'll ring him immediately. We'll try and get him on the phone immediately and hopefully someone will certainly tell you what he has to say, but I will ask him that very simple question, what are you in favour of?
PM: I sit across a dispatch box from him every day in question time and he's never put a positive policy forward and indeed many of his backbench are very critical about his lack of positive policies. So if you can get an answer John you'll be breaking national news, because no one knows what he's in favour of.
HOST: Oh, I'm good at that.
PM: You are good at that, I'll agree.
HOST: Nice to talk to you Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time, as usual.
PM: Thanks John, bye bye. 



HOST: As promised we have the Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard on the show this morning, unfortunately we were scheduled to have her some 10 minutes ago.
HOST: It's the rudest thing I've ever seen.
HOST: Prime Minister we're just a bit disappointed, we are all busy here at Triple M.
PM: I know you're very, very busy and I know the responsibilities, for example, on Mick Molloy's shoulders are just beyond belief, I'm really sorry I kept you waiting.
HOST: You've got your job to do Julia and I've got mine, ok?
PM: That's true Mick.
HOST: Julia just while we're on the topic there we'll play a bit of what we thought was just out of control on Friday from Alan Jones up in Sydney.
HOST: It's 7:21, The Prime Minister Julia Gillard is in the studio in Canberra. Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Alan.
HOST: Prime Minister, look, can I just make a minor point? I've got my job to do, you've got your job to do. Your people rang here yesterday. It was agreed this interview would take place at 7:10. We accommodated that and cancelled someone who was to be here who'd made very significant personal arrangements as well. 7:10 is 7:10, isn't it?
PM: Well, I'm sorry about that, Alan, but I've been delayed on another interview.
HOST: Yes, but I mean, this is what your staff, we have made many requests
HOST: And on it went.
HOST: And it just gets worse.
HOST: What were you thinking when that was going on?
PM: Oh look, I was thinking this is Alan Jones, and I was thinking despite incoming I'm going to get out there and argue for carbon pricing, so it was almost the interview I was expecting to have, possibly a little bit more exaggerated than my expectations but Alan's got his view of the world and that's fine, but I do think when you're on the radio and you're being interviewed you should be able to get your point across, and people can leave their editorialising and what they want to say about politics separately to that. Unfortunately Alan decided to run the whole lot in together.
HOST: Alright, well Julia let's get down to the tin-tacs that we want to speak about, and that is the carbon tax. Now last week, the announcement sort of misfired, and there was a big criticism of Kevin Rudd that he couldn't sell his stories and that was part of the reason why everything went upside-down back 12 months ago. Can you tell us today was is, what are you trying to achieve here and how will it affect Australians by getting this carbon tax across, how much money's going to come out of our pockets?
PM: Right. What I'm trying to achieve is less carbon pollution, to do that we've got to price carbon, that sends a price signal to our industries, to our businesses that they can make more profit if they find a way to cut the amount of pollution they generate. So at the moment they can pollute with carbon pollution for free, if you send them a price signal they they'll stop and they'll think about it and they'll say ‘how can we do this better, how can we do it differently, how can we reduce carbon pollution?'
Because we are going to price carbon, that does mean that it will flow through to things that people do buy, we will assist households, particularly low income households and middle income households  -  you know, you'd expect the assistance package to be generous and fair from a Labor Government  -  so you will get assistance but it does mean when you go to the shops you'll see that some things have got more expensive because they've got more carbon pollution associated with their making and you'll be able to choose to buy things that have less pollution associated with their making. So as a consumer too, you can make a difference.
HOST: Prime Minister I don't trust anyone to do with the energy business to not use this as an opportunity to jack the price up, we see electricity prices going up, we see petrol prices going up. One of the things that I think the electorate can't understand is in a resource rich Australia where we've got uranium, we've got coal, we've got all these natural resources, we've got hydro, why is it that our energy costs are going through the roof?
PM: Well the cold hard truth Eddie is whatever we do, electricity prices are going to go up. With electricity prices at the moment, we are seeing big rises, there's been a lot of under-investment in electricity generation and distribution, that underinvestment is coming home to roost and that does mean that people are facing rising prices. And a big problem with getting the investment into electricity that we need is uncertainty about carbon pricing, because they don't know what's going to happen next, they don't want to put the billions and billions of dollars in that it costs to generate and distribute more electricity. So carbon pricing will give them the certainty that they need to invest.
So you're really looking at two scenarios for the future: electricity prices are going to rise under any scenario, with pricing carbon we'll be making a difference for the environment and we will be providing households with assistance whereas if we just let things run, prices will go up and people won't get any assistance and we won't reduce the amount of carbon we're generating.
HOST: We had Tony Abbott on this morning Prime Minister and he said that this is just showing the Labor Government is now effectively the Greens, they're headed down that path, his solution was to simply just grow more trees, is this a real defining moment I suppose for you and your Prime Ministership?
PM: It's a very important moment and I'm determined to get this done. I want us to have a clean energy economy for the future, the world is moving and we can't afford to get left behind and I know the Leader of the Opposition's going to do the usual scare campaign routine, but the reality is we can't fix carbon pollution by measures like planting more trees, we have to price carbon and that's why I'm going to get on with the job of doing it.
I expect Tony Abbott will be out there trying to frighten people, and I'm just going to meet that fear campaign with reason, and Australians are confident people, they're smart people, people who'll think about, people who'll work it through, and I think people will also look to our past and say ‘gee we've done some tough things before', we've reduced tariffs and everybody said ‘oh there'll be no more jobs in Australia, no more manufacturing in Australia', and here I am, I'm in South Australia today going out to launch the new Holden Cruze. So we've done tough economic reforms in the past and we've won through, we'll get this one right and we'll be a more prosperous economy because we've got it right.
HOST: In regards to a fear campaign, the Opposition are already claiming petrol's going to go up 6 cents a litre, can you confirm that that's the case, can you confirm that petrol will actually be a part of your carbon tax?
PM: We haven't announced the price yet, so no one can tell you what price effects are going to be, so anybody who is wandering around with a figure like that is just making it up. We will announce the price, we'll announce the assistance to households which people should expect to see as generous assistance, and we haven't announced yet what sectors of the economy this will apply to. So the decision about petrol hasn't been made yet.
HOST: Thanks Prime Minister and a beautiful photo of you locking lips with Barry Hall in the Herald Sun this morning.
HOST: Can I just ask is your left leg rising from the knee, like a movie kiss, we can't quite see in that photo?
PM: Well because he's so, no this is really embarrassing, because he's so much taller than I am I've kinda gotta get a boost on one leg or I can get up as high as I need to.
HOST: She's actually on Wayne Swan's shoulders there.
HOST: Thanks Prime Minister we'll have to get Tony Liberatore to make a comeback for you.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard there on the carbon tax on Triple M's Hot Breakfast. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Innovation Kim Carr today welcomed the launch of the Australian-made Holden Cruze at the company's Elizabeth Plant in South Australia.
The Gillard Government is very proud to have supported the production of this low emission car through a $149 million investment from the Government's New Car Plan for a Greener Future. 
This investment brings real benefits for Australian consumers and the national economy, both now and into the years ahead.
The Prime Minister said the Aussie model of the Holden Cruze was a very tangible sign that the automotive industry was alive and well in Australia.
Today's launch also makes the turbo diesel version of the Cruze Australia's most fuel efficient locally-built vehicle.
Clean manufacturing and innovation lie at the heart of the Government's agenda for a fairer, richer and greener Australia, built on a broad-based and sustainable national economy.
Innovation Minister Kim Carr said Australia is one of only 13 countries in the world capable of building a car from design to production.
“The level of confidence in this industry is high,” Minister Carr said.
“Participants in the Automotive Transformation Scheme (ATS) such as Holden are estimating that by the end of 2015 they will have invested over $4 billion in capital and innovation.
“There is a good future for the 60,000 workers directly employed in the sector.
“Last year Holden was able to reinstate a second shift at Elizabeth in order to produce the Cruze, along with the Series II Commodore.
Minister Carr said that while the Government has closed off the Green Car Innovation Fund to help pay for flood reconstruction, it is committed to all the other elements of the $5.4 billionNew Car Plan for a Greener Future.
“Australia's advanced manufacturing skills and infrastructure are vital to our economy and vital to the livelihoods of thousands of workers,” Senator Carr said.
For more information on the Gillard Labor Government's support of Australian manufacturing, visit www.innovation.gov.au. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Tony Abbott's causing more pain for the Government by making it crystal clear there will be no carbon tax under a Coalition government.
Business looks, above all, for investment certainty. Has he dealt your plan a damaging blow?
PM: I think the damaging blow that Tony Abbott has dealt is to the Australian economy for the long term. What Mr Abbott is saying is after this Government has priced carbon, if he is elected he will roll that back.
Now that message to international markets would be Australia is not a safe and secure place to invest. You make investments on the basis of a carbon price, and then Mr Abbott comes in and recklessly sweeps that away - dreadful for our international reputation. Also, dreadful for the businesses that have made investment decisions on the basis of a carbon price, particularly in our energy sector where we need to see investment. Directors, businesses, boards would make decisions, they would start employing people, and then Mr Abbott would come and sweep that away, recklessly stranding those investments and losing those jobs.
HOST: But Tony Abbott has been opposed to a carbon tax, an emissions trading scheme, for a very long time, so it's no surprise that the Opposition is now saying that it will repeal any carbon tax that you may introduce. The fundamental problem for the Government-
PM: Well Alex, I can't agree with that question.
Mr Abbott has not opposed pricing carbon for a very long time. Mr Abbott has had every position on this it is possible to have.
He has supported pricing carbon, he has opposed pricing carbon, he has believed climate change is real, he said climate change is, to use his words, absolute crap.
Mr Abbott will get up and say anything any given day that he thinks is in his political interest.
HOST: So your problem is that you've had two opposing positions on carbon tax. The fundamental problem is that you broke an election promise. You said before the election there will be no carbon tax under a government I lead and now you've shifted your position. So you don't have a mandate for a carbon tax.
PM: Alex, we went to the 2007 election saying we had to price carbon and the best way of doing that was an emissions trading scheme where the market sets the price for carbon.
HOST: But you went to the last election-
PM: We went to the 2010 election saying we need to price carbon and the best way of doing that is an emissions trading scheme where the market prices carbon. What will we deliver? An emissions trading scheme where the market prices carbon.
Yes, there will be a period where the price is fixed, effectively like a carbon tax, but we will end up exactly where we promised Australians we would go.
Now I understand that Mr Abbott today might want to oppose carbon pricing. He supported it in the past but he wants to run a scare campaign today, that's one thing, Alex.
But it is another thing entirely to say if you are elected in 2013 that you will roll back this major economic reform, jeopardise our reputation in the markets of the world, strand investments that have been made in good faith on the basis of a carbon price, get people sacked who have jobs in those new investments or because of those new investments, and rip out of the purses and wallets of householders the assistance that we have provided them with and which they have factored into their family budgets.
That is what Mr Abbott is saying to the Australian community - that degree of risk, that degree of uncertainty to the economy, to jobs and to the budgets of householders.
HOST: Why should Australian people believe you now when you so emphatically stated just before election day there'd be no carbon price?
Nothing's changed between then and now except that you won power after a deal with the crossbenchers. And that remains your fundamental problem.
PM: Well your question is wrong, Alex. Before the last election I consistently said we needed to price carbon.
HOST: You said no carbon tax.
PM: We needed to price carbon, and what are we doing? We're pricing carbon. Why? Because it's the right thing to do to create a clean energy future for this country. Malcolm Turnbull acknowledges it's the right thing to price carbon. Many Liberals acknowledge it's the right thing to price carbon, and we will get to the emissions trading system that we always said was the best way of pricing carbon.
Yes, in the Parliament the Australian people have voted for, I've needed to work with others to structure how we're going to price carbon, which is why we will have a fixed price period at the start.
And I always understood that would start a political debate. But in this political debate I am going to be saying to the Australian people, ‘We need to have a clean energy future; we need to have those jobs of the future; we have to get on with the job of pricing carbon.'
Meanwhile, Mr Abbott is running a scare campaign, making figures up in order to scare Australians, and worse, now he is threatening the Australian economy for the future, threatening our reputation overseas as a safe and secure place to invest, threatening businesses that if they make investments on the basis of a carbon price those investments will be ripped away from them, and threatening households that when I want to give them assistance to help them through he'll rip that money off them.
HOST: Why then were you so specific before the Federal election, saying that there would be no carbon tax under a government that you led?
PM: There's various ways of pricing carbon and I was clear before the election that I believed and Labor believed the best way of doing it was an emissions trading scheme where the market prices carbon.
You set a cap - you say we won't produce any more carbon pollution than a fixed amount - and you let a market develop in trading permits for carbon pollution and the market fixes the price.
That was the mechanism I wanted to see, I believe that it is a superior mechanism to having a carbon tax for the long-term.
Now in this Parliament I've needed to work with others to get the job done. In order to get the job done I've agreed that we will have a fixed price period - a market mechanism with permits with a fixed price which will work effectively like a tax for a period - and then we will get to what I said to the Australian community we should have.
So what we stand for: cutting carbon pollution, clean energy future, creating jobs, giving households generous assistance, and giving businesses certainty. Mr Abbott wants to rip all of that away.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thanks for joining us on AM.
PM: Thank you. 



Principals from around the nation will today get access to their school's data on the new look My School website in preparation for the public launch on Friday.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and School Education Minister Peter Garrett today said the My School 2.0 website will take the new era of greater transparency and accountability further for every school in the country.
For the first time, My School 2.0 will provide information about school finances and changes in student performance over time.
This additional information will facilitate greater debate at the grassroots level about how schools are performing.
The key improvements to the My School 2.0 website include:
 * 	data about growth in student achievement
 * 	data about school finances
 * 	a more accurate method of calculating the Index of Community Socio-Educational Advantage (ICSEA)
 * 	new graphical methods of displaying NAPLAN data
 * 	security features to ensure that data is used appropriately.
From today, Principals will be able to see the progress students in their school have made in literacy and numeracy since the 2008 National Assessment Program  -  Literacy and Numeracy tests.
My School 2.0 will also show, for the first time, the funding a school receives to deliver education to its students, including school capital and recurrent income from governments, schools fees and other contributions.
The improvements to My School reflect the Gillard Government's ongoing commitment to continual improvement and transparency in school education.
Principals around the country will be viewing their My School 2.0 page today, in anticipation of widespread community interest when the website goes live on Friday.
My School 2.0 will put powerful information in the hands of Principals and parents to help them identify what is working and help inform discussions about how school performance can be improved.
My School 2.0 will be publicly launched on Friday 4 March 2011.
For more information visit www.MySchool.edu.au



PM: I'd like to start by introducing the people who have joined me today here at this wonderful school. We're here with the school principal, Jan Day, looking at her section of the My School website, which I'll explain shortly. I'm also joined by the Minister for School Education, Peter Garrett, by the local Federal Member, Andrew Leigh, by the local Minister for Education, Andrew Barr, and also by Barry, who is well known to all of you as our wonderful leader of ACARA  -  the Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting Authority.
And we're here today because the My School website, My School 2.0, will go live on Friday. Principals around the country today will be able to access their school's My School website. They will be able to see what their school's entry will look like on My School.
This is the final check and validation of this information as principals around the country are able to log on and see how their school's information will be presented on the My School website, and that's what we've just been doing for Turner School, with principal Jan able to look at the information.
My School 2.0 has some significant changes from the first version. They are very big improvements. For the first time ever, people will be able to see the amount of money that goes into educating their child, the amount of money that comes from the Federal Government, from the State Government, and from private sources like the fees that parents pay. They will be able to compare the amount of money spent on their child's education with the education of children right around the country.
We have never had this information as a nation before. Politicians haven't had it, governments haven't had it, teachers and principals haven't had it. This is the first time ever as a nation we will be able to see this information.
I've always believed that making this information transparent would transform the way that we talk and think about education in this country. For the first time ever we would be able to have an informed conversation about the amount of money going into schools and the outcomes that those schools are achieving.
And, for the first time ever, My School 2.0 will allow you to look at a child's educational journey over time. Because we've had national testing for three years now, we have children who have sat the first national test now having sat the third national test, and we are able to chart the growth of those children in their education over the years in between. So, for the first time ever the My School website will be able to give you an understanding of the growth and journey that children are on as they go from one level of education to another. So, for example, children who have been in Grade 3 at a school, we will be able to see their results in Grade 5 and see how they are progressing compared with children in similar schools and compared with the national average.
So, this is an important development to give parents even more information than the first version of the My School website. I believe that on Friday, when the My School website goes live, we will see parents around the country logging on to get this information about their child's school. We'll see parents around the country logging on to see about the schools in their local area to help inform them about the choice they will make for their child's education. I suspect too, we'll have lots of curious Australians who are doing things like looking at the performance of the school that they went to, and all of that is fantastic because it informs our national debate about education, and all of it's fantastic because it enables parents to come to schools, to talk to school principals, to talk to teachers, with more information than they have ever had before about their child's education.
When I was Education Minister, I wanted to bring transparency to school education. I always believed parents had a right to know what was happening in Australian schools, the nation had a right to know what was happening in the nation's schools, and the nation would best improve education if we had that information available to us.
I'm very proud that we're able to now launch My School 2.0 on Friday, and I'm very pleased that principals today will be able to get access to their own school's information.
I'd like to turn to the Minister, Peter Garrett, who has led this part of the journey to get us to My School 2.0.
MINISTER GARRETT: Thanks very much, Prime Minister.
Principals are a really important part of the school community. They're the entry point for parents, they provide the leadership in schools which is so essential. And for principals to be able to have access to their portal today and see this new provision of rich and deep information is a giant step forward in empowering principals in their leadership and in their teaching, and in informing the community about how their schools are travelling in education.
As the Prime Minister has said, this is a major step forward for transparency. We're getting the blinds up, we're opening the curtains and letting the sun shine in on schools in a way that all Australians can see, share, understand and talk about.
And in particular, I think what's really critical about My School 2.0 is that it will stimulate a conversation around this country on a level playing field where everybody has access to a rich field of information about their children's schools, where kids, teachers, the community itself, can have a full and clear understanding of how schools are travelling and also of the resources that they have as well.
So this is an exciting period in the transformation of our understanding about education, and it is a strong indication of the commitment that we have to transparency.
On Friday, people in Australia will be provided with more new information about schools than has ever been the case before. And that'll be good for us, because it'll mean that our conversations about education, our understanding about what works in schools, and also as policy makers and as politicians where we need to look in terms of education in the future can happen.
So thank you very much Jan for hosting us here today. This is a beaut school. We can see from the kids that they're a happy bunch of students, that's fantastic, and I was so pleased to hear you say that having access to your portal will provide you with the sort information as a principal that you need as well.
PM: And we can see the merits of this school through the local Minister for Education, Andrew Barr, who attended here.
OK, we're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, last week there were 23 schools that the financial data still wasn't accurate for, they said they still had problems. That was revealed at Senate Estimates. Have all these been ironed out already, or are they still having problems, and are you confident that private schools and public schools will feel confident in their data and be able to compare their financial data on the site?
PM: Well, I'm confident that the data on the site has been through assurance processes, including an assurance process involving Deloittes. This has been a huge thing to do. It's been a lot of work, and it's taken more time than we initially anticipated, but ACARA, under Barry's leadership, has worked through a series of assurance processes, including having schools themselves able to look at and comment on their own information.
So, I'll turn to Barry just for the technical description of what's occurred to assure the information.
MCGAW: There's a small number of schools still for which the data are not completely finalised. All of the data on finances have come from the schools, not from ACARA, but in some cases there are some inconsistencies. In some schools we will know the total but we won't know, necessarily, some of the breakdowns, and we'll just say breakdown pending, but the total will be there and the amount per student will be there, but it's just over 20, now, yes. That's out of 1,060 independent schools.
JOURNALIST: And is it problems with their data, or problems with their methodology (inaudible) collate that data?
MCGAW: No, no, it's questions about the data itself that we're resolving. The resolution that's required is in the data, not in the transformation.
PM: And just, I think we should just remind ourselves, to get a sense of scale here, we're talking about 9,500-odd schools around the country, the information for which is on the My School website, and you've just heard Barry McGaw, leading ACARA, say the numbers that are still working through some potential issues are around about 20, so given how huge the amount of work has been to get to this stage, given the fact the nation has never had this information before, I think people would very quickly see from those statistics that they will be able to get on the My School website on Friday  with confidence about the information.
JOURNALIST: Will totals be published for all schools, or will there be some schools that-
MCGAW: -There may be a couple for which even that's not clear, but most of them it's just some sub-elements that are not clear.
And I should say, for all the government schools there was a huge task as well, because a lot of the services that independent schools have to pay for themselves are paid for by government schools in central offices or regional offices. So, we've identified the costs of all of those services and we've attributed the relevant share to each of the government schools, and the same in the case of the systemic Catholic schools.
Without doing all of that, their costs would be under-reported and the comparison with the independents wouldn't be fair.
JOURNALIST: So, when will that data be up, the 20 schools? Will it be whenever it's ready, or will you wait till My School 3.0?
MCGAW: Oh no, we won't wait until 3.0 next year. We'll have a date on which we put it up, but we've been working with these schools pretty intensively and have still not finally resolved them, so as soon as we can, we'll do it, but we're not going to wait 12 months.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Minister Garrett just said this provides a level playing field, but won't presenting the financial information actually show that it's not a level playing field in education in Australia, and that elite private schools actually, per child, receive a huge amount more money than a public school like this?
PM: Well, it will show us the accurate information. I didn't want the debate on education in this country to be about what people might think is the case. I didn't want it to be based on assumptions. I wanted it to be based on accurate information. I wanted people to see school by school what the amount of money available to educate a child was.
Now, we've had an education debate in this country which for years has concentrated on school systems  -  public education, independent schools, the Catholic system. Well, kids don't march into the gate of a school system each morning. They march into the gate of a school, and what's important to that child's education is what is happening in that school. That's why we need information at the school level, and we will never have had this information before.
Now, I can't tell you, standing here, what it's going to show, what assumptions people have made about education it's going to prove true and what assumptions it's going to smash to the ground. I suspect both will happen. I think this will transform our education debate, because we will be talking about the information at the level it matters  -  each school, because that's what matters to a child's education, what's happening in his or her school.
JOURNALIST: This data is, I suppose, expected to show large increases in per student funding between some schools, maybe differences in per student funding of $10,000 or maybe even more. Is that kind of disparity in resources defensible if we as a nation believe in equity and equal opportunity?
PM: Well, what this data, I think, is going to show us is it's definitely going to give us more information about school finances than we've ever had before. Because you also get the results, the outcomes in national testing in this data, you'll be able to look through and you'll be able to compare schools servicing similar kids, maybe with similar amounts of money being brought to the educational task, but getting very different results, and that's going to tell you that really there could be a quality improvement in the school that's falling behind, even with that level of resourcing, because somewhere else in the country, with that level of resourcing, with kids from those kind of backgrounds, another school is getting a better result  -  and that's fantastic, because we'll be able to share the best practice and we'll be able to work to resolve the underperformance.
It may well also show us that if you get kids of similar backgrounds and you give them very different resourcing levels that that shows in the results, too, that the resources matter, and we as a nation need to understand that and we need that to inform our debate about school funding, and of course we've got the school funding review in progress, led by a very remarkable Australian, David Gonski, so the information that the nation will be debating following My School will be information that's necessary to properly inform that school funding debate.
But I don't think we should make quick assumptions here. I think we're going to learn a lot of things about quality of education in terms of teacher practice and school methods. I think we'll see some schools, very similar resources, very similar kids, very different results, and that's going to be about the quality of practice in that school. I think we'll also see some schools, similar kids, very different resourcing levels and very different results, and that's going to tell us something about the power of the money, but we need to understand both  -  quality practice and the power of the money  -  to inform our education debate.
MINISTER GARRETT: Thanks Prime Minister. Can I just add, on level playing field  -  what I'm talking about there is a level playing field for all of the community to have access to all of the relevant information about schools. We've never had that before.
And this is going to be an absolutely transforming moment in education here, because everybody will be viewing the information from the same level. We will have access to the same level of information.
No doubt there's differences in the school systems and in individual schools, but to have that provision of information now on My School 2.0 will hugely expand the capacity of us as a nation to have a robust and well informed discussion about education; and given the significant number of reforms that we've already got underway as a government, for people to better understand some of the things that we're doing as well.
JOURNALIST: Last year, when the initial site was launched, the website was down for some time because so many people were wanting to get access to it, so have you made any plans to prevent it from going down this time?
PM: Yes, we did get overwhelmed by the community's enthusiasm, but Barry can talk about that.
MCGAW: Actually, last year the website never went down. What we did was to control the numbers that could get on so that those that were on didn't have a degraded experience, so it was physically never down. Some of the activity on site was actually web robots just scraping data from the site, so we'll stop that this year by having one of those capture screens where you have to type in scrambled words that you have to do with Facebook and others, so that that's got to be done on the first page of the website before you can get in so only a human gets beyond the first page.
And then, in addition to that, we've increased our capacity and we have a completely duplicated system, and if anything happens with the first one we can go to the second. We don't anticipate the problems this time, but I just emphasise that last time it was load and a desire to not have everybody on with degraded performance but to keep some off until others got off.
JOURNALIST: So there'll be more people able to get access to the site this time?
MCGAW: Oh yeah, and the problem last year was only between 7 and 9 in the morning on the first day, really.
JOURNALIST: Are there issues still to be resolved with (inaudible)
MCGAW: No, we gave schools the chance to, we gave them their draft ICSEA value, and we gave them the opportunity to request a review. We made it clear that if you wanted your ICSEA reviewed, it had to be on the basis that you had additional information that was not already available to us, and we made clear to schools exactly what data we had and how we'd used it, how it was actually being used, and at that point a very large number actually withdrew their requests for review. Some produced additional information and their ICSEA has been recalculated. Where they've not produced additional information, the ICSEA will stand.
JOURNALIST: How many schools have had their ICSEA reviewed?
MCGAW: I can give you that number offline. I do know the number, but it's not, it's in the order of, it's around 100-200.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if MPs like Tony Windsor are receiving death threats, is that a sign that the carbon debate has gone too far and people need to take a step back?
PM: I think Australian democracy has always been one where we can have robust debates where people can passionately put their ideas, and that's what I intend to do in the debate about carbon pricing.
Of course, there is no excuse in a society like ours, in a peaceful, wonderful country like Australia, for people making threats or people engaging in any acts of violence. There's absolutely no excuse for that. It's not part of our democracy. It's not part of the Australian way.
JOURNALIST: Are you aware of any threats made to Labor MPs?
PM: No, I'm not. No, I'm not.
JOURNALIST: Would it help of Cory Bernardi and Scott Morrison were sacked from the Opposition frontbench? Are they generating that sort of angst in the community?
PM: Look, I don't think he question of Mr Morrison or Senator Bernardi is about what Mr Windsor said yesterday. That's about simple decency and about bipartisan support for a non-discriminatory immigration policy. That is, not discriminating against people on the basis of religion. So, on that simple matter of principle, that we are not a nation that discriminates on the basis of religion; neither Mr Morrison nor Senator Bernardi should continue to hold their positions on Tony Abbott's frontbench. He can't say he supports a non-discriminatory immigration policy and have those two people serve in the executive of his political Party.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think the Liberal Party is incredibly divided on questions of immigration, and on questions of multiculturalism. I think they're incredibly divided on a set of questions that are very important to the future of the nation.
As I said in the parliament yesterday, I do believe that there are Liberal Party members who don't want to see the race baiting, they don't want to see the politics being played with grief that we've seen in recent weeks, they don't want to oppose the National Broadband Network, and they don't want to oppose carbon pricing. There are Liberals with those views in the Liberal Party and that is why they're so divided, so subject to internal debates.
If we just look at the question of carbon pricing, two days ago we had Malcolm Turnbull say there wasn't an economist he'd ever heard of who would endorse Tony Abbott's plan for reducing carbon. We had Malcolm Turnbull two days ago saying Tony Abbott's plan would lead to waste.
Yesterday, we had Professor Garnaut saying that it would lead to tax increases or to service cuts for Australians, and here we are today and we are able, as a Government, to release figures from the Department of Climate Change that says Tony Abbott's climate plan would cost this nation $30 billion and that would put a burden of $720 on every family in the country. Now, that's the carbon pricing debate.
There are Liberals like Malcolm Turnbull who understand that pricing carbon's necessary and the kind of market-based mechanism I'm committed to is the best way to do it.
Thank you very much. 



The Prime Minister today welcomed Senator Xenophon's support for the Government's floods rebuilding package, including the flood levy.
This now means the floods levy will pass the Parliament, allowing us to get on with the critical job of rebuilding Australia after the devastating summer floods.
As a result of discussions with Senator Xenophon, Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) for future disasters will be strengthened to help ensure state and territory governments have adequate capital or insurance to fund the replacement and restoration of essential public infrastructure. These new arrangements will not apply to disasters that occurred this past summer. 
Under the new arrangements:
 * 	States and territories will not be eligible to receive the maximum level of Commonwealth support unless they undergo regular assessments of their insurance arrangements by an independent specialist, such as the state Auditor-General.
 * 	These reports will be assessed by the Department of Finance.
 * 	They will then be considered by the Attorney-General, who may make recommendations to the states or territories in regards to their insurance or mitigation strategies.
 * 	If a state or territory has failed to take appropriate action within a reasonable time, then the amount that state or territory would be reimbursed under the NDRRA may be reduced.
States and territories have a responsibility to taxpayers to put in place cost effective insurance arrangements  -  for example through commercial insurance and reinsurance or other mechanisms such as self-insurance.
These new arrangements will reinforce that responsibility.
The Attorney-General will write to his counterparts in the states and territories about the new requirements today. 
In addition, the Commonwealth Government's responsibilities under the NDRRA will be audited by the Auditor-General every three years.  
The Gillard Labor Government firmly believes the Commonwealth should continue to provide financial assistance to states and territories through the NDRRA to ensure disaster affected communities receive the support and assistance they need to rebuild. 
However, these Commonwealth-State arrangements are not designed to supplant, or operate as a disincentive for, insurance or disaster mitigation.
The Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements have been in place under successive governments for more than 30 years. 
The Gillard Labor Government is committed to ensuring they remain an effective way of helping communities around Australia recover from natural disasters.
Most importantly, the Gillard Labor Government is determined to rebuild Australia after the floods and other natural disasters we have seen this year.
The Government thanks Senators Fielding and Xenophon, as well as Tony Crook, Bob Katter, Andrew Wilkie and Adam Bandt for their support of this important legislation.  



PM: [AUDIO BREAK] -But this is his first visit as Prime Minister, and he is a very welcome friend.
The Prime Minister, with me, is a friend of Australia, a leader in our region. We've discussed today the depth of the relationship and partnership between our two countries, and it's a partnership with a very impressive history.
We have fought shoulder to shoulder together during the Second World War and in the emergency, fighting against Communism.
We have studied together and we have talked today about how 300,000 Malaysians have been educated in this country. That's a long-standing part of our relationship.
And we have prospered together. We are countries with a dynamic economic partnership and we will be seeking to build on that for the future.
Today, we've discussed the economic ties between our two countries, and we've determined that we want to accelerate the free trade agreement that our two countries have been discussing. The Prime Minister made a request of me to accelerate those discussions, and I've agreed that that is a good idea, so we have determined today that we will conclude this free trade agreement between our two nations within the coming year, and we want to see it concluded and signed before the anniversary of this visit next year.
We've also talked today about cooperation in areas as diverse as education and as important to the Australian community as sport, and we've had the opportunity to talk about sports mad country. We've signed today two memorandums of understanding, one a memorandum of understanding on further cooperation on education, one a memorandum of understanding on further cooperation in sport.
We've also talked about approaches to regional issues, and the work we do together in regional forums, particularly the East Asia Summit, which was the first occasion that I had the opportunity to meet with the Prime Minister.
We've re-affirmed our shared commitment to the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
I have also congratulated the Prime Minister on his impressive leadership on combating people smuggling and countering terrorism and transnational crime in our region. It's clear that these regional challenges require regional solutions, and we are continuing to work together on them.
The strength of our cooperation extends to work we do in Afghanistan. I'm particularly proud of the joint program we have to train in Malaysia master teachers who then go to train teachers in Afghanistan. That is very impressive work.
Today, Prime Minister Najib and I took stock of our nations' shared history, and we committed to define our relationship as a relationship for the 21st Century. Our shared achievements in the past will be built on by shared achievements in the future, because we live in the region where the future is going to happen  -  the Asia-Pacific region.
Prime Minister, I'm very honoured by your visit and I welcome you to make some remarks.
PRIME MINISTER NAJIB: Thank you very much, Prime Minister Gillard, and first of all I would like to say how delighted I am to be here once again in Australia in a slightly different capacity, but I do know Australia pretty well over the years. I've been here many times, but as you put it, this is my first visit as Prime Minister, and this is to reciprocate your visit to Malaysia.
We had a very productive, very useful discussion. I can only second what the Prime Minister, and certainly those are the areas of agreement that we arrived at today.
I started by expressing our sincere, heartfelt condolences with respect to the very, very damaging floods in Queensland, but we are so impressed with the indomitable spirit of the Australian people that you have recovered well. That you have a great sense of volunteerism, and you've been very, very positive, including helping Malaysian students. I'd like to say how grateful we are to you, Prime Minister, and to your Government.
And we certainly look forward to a much deeper relationship, a relationship that has been predicated on a very strong foundation over many, many years, starting of course with your soldiers fighting for our freedom, and we are very grateful for your stalwart and sterling support for us in the defence of Malaya and then subsequently Malaysia, and that defence relationship is still very strong today. The APDA arrangements, it's important because that leads to peace and stability in our region.
We recognise there is a great deal of importance with respect to human trafficking and people smuggling, boat people, which is a big issue in Australia. It is an issue that we can identify with because many years ago we had similar problems with respect to the Vietnamese boat people and we had to handle it, and therefore I pledge our support to be as cooperative as possible. We will take this up in Bali in due course in the near future and we will try to find cooperative solutions and be as useful as possible, and we'll do our part to make sure that Malaysia is never a transit point for these people, and this is where cooperation, in terms of exchange of timely intelligence will be very useful for us to make the appropriate interdiction.
In the area of fighting global terrorism, we continue to cooperate and as you know we've been fortunate we are free from Al Qaeda activities in Malaysia, and also the threat of Jemaah Isamiah is very much under control in Malaysia, and our efforts in the southern Philippines, for example, I briefed the Prime Minister that is to make sure that the southern Philippines will be a region of peace and stability and will not fester the growth of unwanted terrorist activities in that part of the world.
With respect to economic cooperation, our total trade is in the region of $10 billion, which is a good level, but we believe that we can push it to even greater heights, and therefore I was very, very keen that the negotiations, with respect to the Malaysia-Australia free trade agreement, MAFTA, will be concluded as soon as possible and we both agree that it would be useful to set a certain timeline for our negotiations to conclude, and we both agree that within a year we should sign the Malaysia-Australian free trade agreement, and that comes on the back of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, negotiations of which will continue and hopefully by the time APAC takes place in November there'll be some interim agreement and eventually we will become partners within the Asia-Pacific region.
I would also like to mention that the education links have always been strong, and when I was Education Minister I gave approval to the setting up of three universities from Australia, namely Monash, Curtin and Swinburne. All these three universities have campuses in Malaysia. They are very happy, very pleased with their presence in Malaysia, and they are doing very well, and we hope that, if you like, there are so many Malaysian students studying here over the years - more than 200,000 have studied here  -  and a very, very strong alumni, even in our Malaysian cabinet. So we would like to see more Australian students studying in Malaysia and there is some understanding that we should encourage, for example, one semester during the course for Australian students to study in Malaysia. The numbers are quite small.
We are gratified the number of Australians visiting Malaysia, in terms of tourists, the numbers are burgeoning. We had 8.9 per cent increase from 2009 to 2010, and about 580,000 Australians now visit Malaysia  per year. We are increasing the linkages between our two countries, and the latest will be the direct flight from Perth to Kota Kinabalu and we expect that the numbers will be on the upswing in the future.
We also talked about Australia's competency in the field of carbon reduction, and Malaysia hopes to learn from Australia how we can reduce our carbon footprint in Malaysia.
Also, in the area of public sector reform, we note your accomplishment in this particular field, and we'll be very keen to learn more about what Australia has done to improve the efficiency of the public sector.
So, all in all, I'm very pleased with the discussions we had. I think it's very clear that Australia is a close friend of Malaysia, a long time partner, and we hope to take the relationship to be even stronger as we move forward. Thank you.
PM: Thank you very much. So, we'll take some questions now in turn from the media. You may want to start with the media representatives from Malaysia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, is Australia seeking to increase investments in Malaysia, and if so in what areas will that be?
PM: We've had some direct discussions today about Australian investment in Malaysia. Australian businesses want to increase our trade and they want to increase our exchange and investment two-way, we want to see Australian investment in Malaysia and we welcome investment by Malaysia in this country. So we've talked through that today, talked through some very specific companies that have interests in new investments in Malaysia, including Rio Tinto that's investing in, seeking to invest in aluminium and we have one of our banks also seeking to invest. So that has been raised today as an example of our growing economic partnership.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Andrew Probyn from the West Australian, welcome to Canberra Prime Minister. My question is about border protection, firstly I would like to know what your impressions or thoughts or views are on Prime Minister Gillard's idea for a regional processing centre in East Timor?
And secondly, Australian authorities believe Malaysia is a transit point for many asylum seekers that reach Australia, especially Kuala Lumpur International Airport, if you could detail what further cooperation you are offering?
PM NAJIB: Well first of all we've amended the human trafficking act in Malaysia, people smuggling, and we have increased the penalties; penalties now are very severe.
Secondly we've also stepped up our interdiction and there've been many instances of people have been interdicted in Malaysia before they move on to Australia. I think that kind of cooperation will continue.
With respect to the processing centre, this is a regional initiative, and I believe this will be discussed in Bali, we need a bit of time to study the Australian proposal but we will be as positive as we can.
JOURNALIST: Are you positive at the moment, what is your disposition towards it at the moment?
PM NAJIB: We have to take a regional outlook first, and we will be as cooperative as possible.
JOURNALIST: Question for Prime Minister Gillard. The Prime Minister mentioned that there is a big disparity between the number of students here, Malaysian students here in Australia and a number of Australian students in Malaysia. Are there any plans for you to increase the number of students going to further their studies in Malaysia?
PM: We had the opportunity during our discussions in the Cabinet room to discuss this matter with our relevant Minister, Chris Evans, who's the Minister for Tertiary Education. We noted that there are some study patterns now where students in Australia who are doing qualifications at Australian universities can spend a semester in Malaysia and we both agree that that's a very good development and we would like to see more of that.
So the Minister for Tertiary Education, Chris Evans, arising from our discussions will now be raising that issue with Australian universities to see what we can do to have more Australian students visit Malaysia and study part of their courses in Malaysia, that would be a good way of facilitating exchange.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, if I could ask a domestic question, on the Green's proposal on Territories' powers. Is it your understanding of that will anyway allow the Territories to move their own laws on gay marriage or will the Federal Marriage Act still have primacy and effectively prevent that?
And also on your factional delegation yesterday you received, what pressure are you under now to exert yourself as the leader of the Government to assure people that Bob Brown's not running the country?
PM: Well thank you for that question with so few assumptions made in its formulation - if you'd just excuse for one moment dealing with a domestic matter  -  if I can deal with this in some detail and describe exactly the Government's position.
The Caucus meeting on Tuesday considered an amending proposition about the ability of Territories to make their own legislation, the Labor Party supported similar legislation in 2006, so there was discussion at Caucus and we have supported similar legislation in the past.
Subsequent to the Caucus meeting a number of Caucus members raised a concern with me about the breadth of that legislation, there were some amendments to the Bill that came in quite late as I understand it during the course of Monday, some Caucus members raised concern with me about the breadth of the legislation.
Can I say there is nothing unusual about that process, I see Caucus members frequently, they are members of my team and I see them very frequently to discuss over issues and an issue was raised with me yesterday.
The Government determined to support the reference of that Bill to a committee, the committee will now look into it and we may well learn some things from the Committee's deliberations.
I'd also note that members of the Opposition have been favourably disposed to this kind of legislation in the past, unsurprisingly they are people who represent Territories and I would point in that regard to Senator Nigel Scullion, for example, who is on the record in defence of the Territory he represents in the Senate, supporting propositions like this one.
I do want to just deal with some media reports today. I understand that there have been media reports that during the discussion about this legislation yesterday that someone raised with me concerns about the influence of the Greens on the Government. That report is completely untrue, no Caucus member has ever raised such concerns with me.
So we will have the Senate inquiry and we will see what emerges from the Senate inquiry. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today reaffirmed the Government's ongoing commitment to the Australian War Memorial, announcing an additional $8m per year to support its ongoing operations.
The increased financial support is the result of a comprehensive review ordered by the Prime Minister on funding arrangements for the Australian War Memorial.
The review and funding increase reflect the Gillard Government's ongoing commitment to maintain this esteemed cultural institution.
The new funding will increase the Memorial's operational budget by $8 million per year - on top of the Memorial's regular annual funding which is currently $38 million.
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, Warren Snowdon, visited the Memorial today and praised its outstanding contribution to Australian society.
The Gillard Government is investing in the future of the Memorial so it can continue to deliver its core activities and, importantly, prepare for the Centenary of the Anzac landings and other important military anniversaries.
The new funding will ensure the Memorial can adequately respond to increased demands for these events as well as supporting general enquiries, multimedia and educational programs, research centre services and professional historical advice.
Today's announcement also includes a one off payment of $1.7 million to begin the redevelopment of the Memorial's First World War galleries.
It is fitting and appropriate that in the lead up to the Centenary a permanent and enduring exhibition is developed for the First World War  -  this funding will ensure this legacy.
The Prime Minister also announced today that Minister Snowdon will take on a new role as Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the Centenary of Anzac.
Minister Snowdon will advise the Prime Minister on the best possible program of commemorative events for the Centenary. 


Great Hall, Parliament House, Canberra
His Excellency, Prime Minister Najib Razak and Madame Rosmah Honourable Ministers,
Honorable Members of Parliament from Malaysia and Australia Senior officials, diplomats and friends, Prime Minister,
Welcome to Australia and welcome to our Parliament.
Your visit to Australia is a milestone in the long friendship between Australia and Malaysia.
It is a visit full of significance for us.
Yours is the third visit by a Malaysian Prime Minister in 30 years.
And it follows in the steps of one Malaysia's greatest son,s the man who more than any other set your nation on the path of modernisation, your late father, who through great suffering, served the Malaysian people until his final days and whose role and legacy you inherit.
Prime Minister Gough Whitlam was proud to welcome Tun Abdul Razak to Canberra in 1975.
As Gough's friend and successor, I very proudly welcome you and I thank you for making this journey: This journey of understanding, dialogue and cooperation.
Your Excellency's visit comes soon after my own visit to Malaysia last year.
I want to thank you for your concern that you were not able meet me at that time, and for taking the time to telephone.
In choosing Malaysia as the first regional country to make a bi-lateral visit as Prime Minister, I wanted to signal just how much we value the relationship with Malaysia.
I wanted to reaffirm also Australia's deep and principled commitment to regional engagement and to all we can achieve together as partners and friends.
Our ties are longstanding and they are strong.
We value our defence history as we stood together against the successive evils of fascism and communism.
We value our education links, going back to the Colombo Plan  -  that have seen 300,000 Malaysian alumni from Australian universities make an important contribution to your nation's development.
We are working together in new and important areas such as public sector reform, superannuation and regulatory reform and we would be very pleased to deepen this partnership.
And, of course, we share a deepening economic relationship, with two-way trade valued at A$14 billion and considerable scope to grow further.
But most importantly, your visit is about the future because the region we share is where the destiny of the 21st century is being written.
Prime Minister,
You are a leader in our region, and a friend.
You are an exemplar in the fight against extremism and upholding the true values of Islam, and I salute your leadership of the Global Movement of the Moderates.
And like us, you share an abiding commitment to the benefits of free trade, which is why our work together on the Trans Pacific Partnership and a prospective Malaysia-Australia Free Trade Agreement is so vitally important.
Prime Minister,
Your visit strengthens further an already strong education relationship.
Both of us have served as reformist Education Ministers for our nations sharing a passionate commitment to the role a great education can play in opening up opportunity for every child and in forming human capital that will be the source of our future growth and wealth.
Given our shared commitment, I know you join me in taking great pride in the fact that 23,000 Malaysians are currently enrolled in Australian education institutions young men and women who will play such an important role in realising your dream of creating a knowledge economy for Malaysia's future.
We are proud to be an international education destination of choice for your nation.
And today's Memorandum of Understanding on Education Cooperation, which we witnessed earlier will extend our sharing of expertise in the development of vocational education and build on the work that you undertook as Education Minister.
How appropriate, then, that Australia's largest university is tomorrow awarding you an Honorary Doctorate.
Monash University was named  after John Monash,was Australia's finest military leader but also a man who valued education very, very deeply.
He had three university degrees, including a law degree from the same faculty I was privileged to graduate from many years later.
And he saw education as the key to a nation's future and the quality of its leadership.
The Australian community finds abiding inspiration in the life and example of John Monash. I'm sure you will too.
Of course, Prime Minister,
The benefits of education extend far beyond our own shores.
Our education cooperation is also benefiting third countries, like Afghanistan where the Malaysia Australia Education Project is skilling  Afghan master teacher trainers.
We think of the children who will benefit.
In some cases, their families have not known peace since these children's grandparents were themselves children.
And now, after decades of conflict and poverty, these children will have the chance of a new life.
Mr Prime Minister,
Our nations have longstanding defence ties, which stretch back to before Malaysia's independence in 1957.
Our personnel have experienced the hardships of Somalia, East Timor, Afghanistan.
And we have done so, not for any material gain, but to assist the cause of security and freedom.
This year we celebrate the 40th year of the Five Power Defence Arrangements, a set of agreements that underline our shared strategic interests and affirm our commitment that Asia will never, we hope, know war again.
The Australian Defence Force continues to utilise and has personnel based at the Royal Malaysian Air Force Base at Butterworth.
The Malaysia Australia Joint Peacekeeping Initiative is building regional peacekeeping capacity in support of mutual regional security objectives.
And we have jointly trained PNG and East Timor forces, with a third workshop being considered this year.
Likewise, in law enforcement, I acknowledge your leadership in combating transnational crime including people smuggling and human trafficking in the region.
I warmly welcome Malaysia's action to criminalise people smuggling, and recognise your strong leadership in disrupting criminal syndicates in the region including the outstanding contribution of Malaysia's law enforcement community.
Of course, we know much more needs to be done to address the issue of irregular people movements that can so often lead to tragic consequences in our region.
Your Excellency,
These developments all lead back to the same point: that our region can best succeed through dialogue and cooperation.
Malaysia has always been at the forefront of dialogue: As a founding member of ASEAN and APEC, a founding member also of the WTO, as a member of the Cairns Group, as the host for the inaugural East Asia Summit in 2005, Malaysia has a proud record of regional leadership.
And I thus look forward to working closely with you to ensure the successful future of the East Asia Summit with the US and Russia set to join shortly.
It is Australia's priority to work with you on developing a substantial political and security agenda for the EAS, in order to strengthen its future role in the region.
We also seek, in partnership, to set a new ambitious agenda for APEC at this year's Summit.
These are only some of the things we plan to do in the future.
 Prime Minister,
Your visit marks a new chapter of a comprehensive partnership. A partnership based on warm and cordial relations between ourselves, between our Ministers, between our civil service, law enforcement and military authorities.
And it is not just the Governments that are making a significant contribution to the relationship.
It is our people ... our greatest strength.
Through the Australia-Malaysia Institute, AsiaLink, Malaysia's Institute of Strategic and International Studies and other institutions our scholars and diplomats, our artists and writers, and our civil society organisations engage in open and thoughtful dialogue.
Our schools are twinning together.
Our young people can now travel and explore each other's cultures on working holiday visas.
And direct Malaysia Airlines flights between Kota Kinabalu and Perth have now made people-to-people links even easier.
Prime Minister,
Just 10 days ago, a courageous and brilliant athlete mastered a very serious injury to win bronze at the World Cycling Championships in Manchester.
His name, of course, is Azizulhasni  Awang.
This young man carried your nation's flag in Beijing and yet he trains with an Australian coach in my home city of Melbourne.
It is a metaphor for everything we seek and everything we hope.
It characterises the relationship our predecessors have built. The relationship we will build even further.  Because, having come so far and achieved so much, there is no limit to what we can do in the future.
A future we will share and shape together.
A future that has come closer because of your visit to our shores this week.
Terima kasih.  Thank you. 



PM: Thank you very much to the War Memorial for having me here this morning. I'm joined today by our Minister for Veterans Affairs and for Defence Science and Personnel, Warren Snowdon. I'm also joined by ACT Senator Kate Lundy and by our two local members in the ACT, Andrew and Gai have both joined me, and I thank them for that.
I was very recently at the War Memorial, and when I came here I said that this is a sacred place for Australians. It's a place where we come to reflect on the high price of war. It's also a place where we come to reflect on some remarkable deeds of courage and valour. It's a sacred place for all Australians.
As Prime Minister, during the course of last year, I became concerned that we were not funding the War Memorial in a way which was sustainable over time. I asked the Minister, Warren Snowdon, working with our Finance Minister and working with the War Memorial itself and with the Department to review finances and to make sure that they were on a sustainable footing.
I'm very pleased that arising from that review I can today announce we will make available an additional $8 million each year for the War Memorial. This will add to its current resourcing mean, for the long term, the War Memorial is properly funded for the important work that it does.
The War Memorial and the nation is preparing for the centenary of ANZAC. We will have commemorations across the nation  -  indeed, around the world  -  as we move to the 100-year anniversary of 1915. It's not that long away in terms of preparation time, and this will be a major event for Australia.
I therefore announce today that I have asked Minister Warren Snowdon to become the Minister Assisting me with preparations for that centenary, for the ANZAC centenary.
This will be a major piece of work for the nation. We want this commemoration to be something of significance to every Australian. We will commemorate the centenary of ANZAC here in our own country, and obviously on the battlefields of the world, including Gallipoli.
In addition, I want the War Memorial to be able to revamp its exhibit which deals with the First World War. We walked through that exhibit today, and it has some very special reflections on the First World War, but to get ready for the centenary, I've determined to make available some additional assistance for the War Memorial so that it can improve that exhibit of the First World War. The Government will make available an additional $1.7 million for that purpose.
We've talked today about how many people come to this place. We've seen, as we've walked by, the number of poppies that families come and put next to the name of their loved one. We've talked about the 125,000 school children who come here each year. I expect that all of that will continue to grow, and particularly as we move towards commemorating the centenary of ANZAC the interest in this very sacred and special place will be heightened.
So, I'm glad we're able to work with the War Memorial to give them the resources they need to have this amazing place properly resourced every day, but particularly to make sure it is properly resourced as we work towards the centenary of ANZAC.
I will ask Warren Snowdon to make some comments.
MINISTER SNOWDON: Thanks, Julia.
Can I thank the Prime Minister for making this money available to the War Memorial. We have a job of work to do together across this country to celebrate the centenary of ANZAC, and that job of work requires us all to be focussed on getting the right outcomes, and I want to thank the Prime Minister for announcing my appointment assisting her on the centenary of ANZAC.
I also want to thank the Commission for the Centenary of ANZAC, which ably led by former Prime Ministers Malcolm Fraser and Bob Hawke, who'll be providing advice to the Government by the end of the month on what they think we should be doing to celebrate the centenary.
PM: We'll take any questions that relate to this announcement. On other issues of the day, I'll be press conferencing later in the day, so we won't deal with those questions at the War Memorial.
Any questions on the announcement I've made today?
JOURNALIST: How is this money going to be (inaudible)
PM: Well, we might actually ask if you would like to- we've got the expert.
GOWER: Thank you, Prime Minister.
We see the money going towards our operational costs, helping us to maintain our services, hopefully restore some of the services we have let lapse, and in particular enabling teams to be put together so that we can meet the very high expectations of the Australian people for the centenary of Gallipoli and all the other activities of the First World War.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I have a question. It is on another topic, whether you'll allow a conscience vote on the Territories legislation. If that's an inappropriate question ask now, may I request that some of the media ask questions to you once you step outside this building?
PM: What we'll do is I'll be press conferencing mid-morning. We have the Malaysian Prime Minister visiting and I'll deal with issues of the day following that press conference.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Gillard warmly welcomed Prime Minister Najib on his first visit to Australia since taking office in 2009.  The visit followed Prime Minister Gillard's visit to Malaysia in November 2010.
The Leaders agreed that the relationship between Australia and Malaysia had entered a new chapter. The relationship was now more multi-faceted and stronger than ever before. Leaders committed to intensify this cooperation across the full range of bilateral, regional and global issues.
The two Prime Ministers recognised the breadth and warmth of people-to-people links as a foundation of the bilateral relationship. Educational links were especially strong, with large numbers of Malaysians studying in Australia and three Australian universities having established campuses in Malaysia. Leaders welcomed the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding to further strengthen cooperation in education. Leaders also discussed increasing cooperation on vocational education and training.  They noted the value of the active program of sister-schools relations between Australian and Malaysian schools, and the role of the Australian Government's Australia-Malaysia Institute including in building the next generation of people-to-people relationships.  Leaders further welcomed the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding on sports cooperation as a means of expanding people-to-people linkages into new areas.
The Prime Ministers discussed domestic policy reform agendas. Malaysia welcomed continued Australian collaboration in the areas of public sector reform, productivity and government transformation. The two leaders agreed superannuation reform was another prospective area for collaboration. Prime Minister Gillard welcomed Prime Minister Najib's leadership on economic reform in Malaysia and noted Australia's ongoing support. She noted that links were being developed between the Australian Public Service Commission and the Australian Productivity Commission and their Malaysian counterparts and encouraged this development.
The two Prime Ministers reiterated their desire to conclude a quality Malaysia-Australia Free Trade Agreement (MAFTA), noting that Trade Ministers would have an opportunity to continue MAFTA discussions at the Australia-Malaysia Joint Trade Committee scheduled to be held this year. The two countries agreed it was important to deliver substantive progress in Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) negotiations this year. Leaders underlined their commitment to an open and transparent international trading system and their desire to see the Doha Round of trade negotiations concluded this year, and expressed their support for greater two-way investment.
The two Prime Ministers committed to deepening the longstanding defence relationship, noting this year was the 40th anniversary of the Five Power Defence Arrangements. They welcomed the contribution being made by the Malaysia Australia Joint Peacekeeping Initiative in strengthening regional peacekeeping capacity and agreed to conduct a third joint peacekeeping workshop in 2011.
The two Prime Ministers discussed the situation in Afghanistan, noting their respective contributions. They welcomed the impact of the Malaysia-Australia Education Project for Afghanistan (MAEPA) in strengthening the Afghan education sector, noting 60 teacher trainers from Afghanistan had been trained to date, agreed to commence a third phase of this project in 2011 and to explore options for extending the training to other developing countries, including ASEAN countries.  Given the success of the model, Leaders saw advantage in identifying further areas of assistance to Afghanistan.  Leaders also agreed to explore opportunities for Afghan recipients of Australian development scholarships to undertake their studies at Australian institutions of higher education in Malaysia.
Leaders welcomed the outstanding cooperation between our law enforcement agencies on transnational crime, including people smuggling and counter-terrorism.  Prime Minister Gillard expressed appreciation for Malaysia's regional leadership and effectiveness in these areas and Leaders reiterated their commitment to work side-by-side in addressing them.  In this regard, Leaders looked forward to the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding on Civil Maritime Law Enforcement Operations as a means of further strengthening Australia-Malaysia cooperation. 
Leaders noted that people smuggling was a regional problem requiring a regional solution and agreed to continue to cooperate closely in addressing it.  Prime Minister Gillard updated Prime Minister Najib on Australia's proposal for a Regional Cooperation Framework and agreed to continue discussions at the forthcoming Bali Process Ministerial Meeting.  Prime Minister Gillard welcomed Malaysia's recent amendment to the Anti Trafficking In Persons and Anti Smuggling Of Migrants Act 2007 that also criminalises the offences relating to people smuggling.  Prime Minister Gillard also expressed Australian support for the Malaysian Academy on Transnational Organised Crime and Australia's willingness to assist the Academy's work.
The two Leaders discussed the expansion of the East Asia Summit (EAS) with the membership of the United States and Russia and agreed on the importance of strengthening the agenda of the EAS to address economic, political and security challenges in the region. They reiterated their commitment to APEC as the pre-eminent forum for regional economic cooperation. They agreed to work closely together in the lead-up to Australia's hosting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Perth in October 2011.
Prime Minister Gillard welcomed Malaysia's announced intention to establish a new Consulate General of Malaysia in Melbourne.  The Leaders viewed this initiative as a welcome step towards enhancing bilateral cooperation, people-to-people relations and business linkages.
The two Prime Ministers also discussed cooperation in the area of Islamic Finance and how Malaysia could share its expertise in developing the Islamic Banking and Finance sector in Australia.
The Leaders acknowledged the need to address adverse impacts of climate change, including in relation to food security. 



JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, are you disappointed that the President didn't refer the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Doha round of trade talks?
PM: Can I start by saying I'm very thankful for the opportunity I had this morning to meet with President Obama. I was very grateful for the amount of time that I had the opportunity to meet with him in total.
We had an extensive bilateral discussion, followed by travelling to and from the Wakefield School together, and I did enjoy our discussions with the history students there. They knew a little about Australia, but not a lot, but it was a fantastic opportunity to be in a classroom talking to American students.
On trade, during our bilateral discussion we did comment on President Obama's aspirations for significant progress in the Trans-Pacific Partnership by the meeting of APEC in Honolulu later this year, and we also talked about the need to conclude the Doha round.
I've consistently said in Australia ‘trade equals jobs'. We are a great trading nation, so we join with President Obama in his desire to see the Trans-Pacific Partnership make significant and real progress by the time that APEC meets later this year, and we are maintaining our pressure for conclusion of the Doha round.
JOURNALIST: Did (inaudible) the Treasury Sec?
PM: We just had an opportunity to meet with the Secretary of the Treasury. We've compared the performances of our economy. I particularly asked him for his views of recovery in the American economy. As people would be aware, recently employment growth has taken the unemployment rate under 9 per cent, so that is welcome news.
We talked about the perspectives for further growth, so here in the United States, dealing with a different set of economic conditions from Australia, are still waiting to see further jobs growth, and of course managing a difficult budget debate through the Congress.
In Australia, we are managing what will be differential growth rates around the country, what I've called the patchwork economy, and I did take the opportunity to explain my determination to bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13.
Yes, Hugh?
JOURNALIST: President Obama is (inaudible) likes outcomes from these meetings. (inaudible)
PM: Well, today's meeting was one to yet again remark on the strength of the alliance between Australia and the United States. I took the opportunity to say the alliance is 60 years young. We have much more to do together, so we did talk about the Global Force Posture Review, and our cooperation on the Global Force Posture Review.
We did talk about working together on trade in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and in the Doha round.
We shared perspectives for the forthcoming G20 and East Asia Summit, as well as dealing with a number of issues in our world  -  climate change, the circumstances in the Middle East, our shared mission in Afghanistan.
So, for us to be able to have leader-to-leader dialogue with our closest ally is important to Australia, and that's the opportunity I had today, not only in the formal bilateral but also in the informal discussions to and from the school, as well as the delightful experience at the school.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: In the Review?
The Global Force Posture Review was the subject of some discussion at the Ausmin meeting late last year in Australia, which was attended by Secretary Clinton and Secretary Gates. We are working with the US on what may mean for its posture in our region and for Australia itself.
Certainly, we are a country that is well used to joint exercising and joint work with the United States, and we'll continue to work productively as they go through the Global Force Posture Review to determine what that may mean for American visits to Australia in the future, joint exercising in the future, and the like.
We'll just go over here and then we'll come back. Yep?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did President Obama have anything to say about the decision for a carbon tax, and how would you rate his ball skills?
PM: Well, I taught the President to handball. He's a pretty good athlete, so he took to that pretty quickly, but had a predisposition to pick the football up like that, which of course, isn't the way we do it in Aussie Rules.
On climate change, we did discuss climate change briefly. Clearly, President Obama has said to the American people that he is focused on a clean-energy future, and so am I for Australia. 
Yes?
JOURNALIST: On Libya, Kevin Rudd's put out another statement today and he's sounding quite hawkish when it comes to this no-fly zone. Are you on the same page as Kevin Rudd (inaudible) in regards to Libya, given that there (inaudible)
PM: Well, I think you've heard President Obama's words direct today at the end of our meeting, when he spoke generally to the media, he made clear our joint calls to Colonel Qaddafi that it is time to go, our joint calls that Colonel Qaddafi and his henchmen stop using violence against the Libyan people, and that all options are on the table to deal with this situation.
One of those options that is being discussed, including by Foreign Minister Rudd, is the prospect of a no-fly zone.
JOURNALIST: But on that issue, it sounds to me like there's a bit of freelancing from Kevin Rudd on this issue, because he seems to be going far in advance of what you might be prepared to say publically?
PM: Look, I don't agree with the characterisation in your question at all, and we're all on the same page about our revulsion for the regime of Colonel Qaddafi and its violent current actions, and all on the same page about exploring options for dealing with this violence, including a no-fly zone.
We'll just take one question from Phil Coorey, then we'll have to go.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) coming under any pressure or any suggestion being made about the US expanding its permanent presence in Australia, or military bases, not just joint exercises and temporary things, but actually re-locating in a significant way (inaudible)
PM: Look, it's a question of discussion between great mates with two militaries that cooperate every day. We fight side by side in Afghanistan in terms of our new platforms for our Australian military. We are getting platforms overwhelmingly that can operate with American platforms  -  the Joint Strike Fighter is just one example of that. We are well used to joint facilities on Australia, we have them now. We are well used to American visits, including visits by ships. We're well used to joint exercising, and so we are enthusiastic and I believe the United States is enthusiastic about looking at ways we can further that cooperation into the future.
JOURNALIST: But can you answer his question, which is are you under pressure to-
PM: -Well, my answer was meant to be clear, Matthew, but if it's fallen foul of your standards I'm very sorry about that, but I'm using the language of enthusiastic deliberately. There is no sense of pressure here. There is a sense of enthusiasm about how we could work together, more ways that we could work together.
JOURNALIST: What did Mr Geithner say about the prospects for a budget outcome this year or next that doesn't actually undermine their efforts in relation to (inaudible)
PM: Clearly, the American administration and the Congress are working these issues through. I don't want to say anything about that domestic political debate, but Secretary Geithner is very focused on achieving the fiscal consolidation that America is looking for.
JOURNALIST: Will it affect Australia-
PM: -And it's being dealt with through America's proper processes, but certainly President Obama and Secretary Geithner have been very publically clear about their desire for fiscal consolidation.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Veterans' Affairs, Warren Snowdon, today launched the Australian Government's commitment of $3.3 million towards a world-first education centre in Washington DC honouring Vietnam veterans.
The Prime Minister said the Vietnam Veterans Education Centre will be a state of the art digital education and exhibit facility located on the Mall in Washington, dedicated to educating visitors about the Vietnam War.
Our participation in this project is a powerful opportunity to explain the Australian contribution to the Vietnam War to the American people and to further strengthen our long-standing relationship with the United States. 
Australia's funding commitment currently comprises:
 * 	$1 million to ensure Australia's input in shaping the plans for the Centre including Australia's footprint within the facility;
 * 	$0.52 million for a ‘Wall of Faces'  -  a photographic image display of 520 Australian War Dead from the Vietnam War alongside their US comrades;
 * 	$1.5 million for interpretive material for permanent display and development of displays for special occasions such as Anzac Day, Long Tan Day and other commemorations. 
The Government is pleased to be supporting this unique opportunity to honour the 60,000 Australian servicemen and women who served in the Vietnam War, more than 35 years ago.
In time the Centre will become a place of quiet pilgrimage for our veterans and their families, and for any Australian who wants to pay their respects.
To mark the announcement, three Vietnam veterans accompanied the Prime Minister and Minister Snowdon to Washington DC to visit the site of the Centre: Mrs Terrie Ross, the Hon Graham Edwards, and Mr Arthur Francis, CSC, OAM.
We cannot thank our Vietnam veterans enough for their courage and sacrifice. This remarkable undertaking will be a source of pride to them, and their families, and represent our ongoing commitment to recognising their service to Australia.
The Vietnam Veterans Education Centre is expected to cost US $80 million. Construction is planned to commence in 2012.  For more information on the centre including a virtual tour visit www.buildthecenter.org. Artists' concepts of the Centre and images of the veterans travelling to Washington are available on the DVA Media Centre. Biographies of the veterans are below. 
Australian Vietnam Veterans in Washington
The Hon. Graham Edwards (Perth, WA)
Mr Edwards served in the Army for three years (1968  -  1971) and saw service with the 7thBattalion, Royal Australian Regiment in 1970 as a Private. He was wounded twice in Vietnam, the second time losing his legs to a ‘jumping jack' anti personnel land mine. 
After discharge from the Army and a period of rehabilitation, Mr Edwards spent ten years with the Department of Veterans' Affairs and Department of Defence. He was elected as a honorary Councillor with the City of Stirling in 1980 and in 1983 was elected to the West Australian Parliament, where he served for 14 years including seven years as a Minister. In 1998 Mr Edwards was elected to the House of Representatives until he retired in 2007. Mr Edwards was recognised by the RSL with the Anzac of the Year Award in 1991 for service to the veteran community. He has also been awarded the Rotary Paul Harris Fellow and the Lions Melvin Jones Fellow.
Mr Edwards is now a member of the Australian War Memorial Council and the Prime Ministerial Advisory Council on Ex-Service Matters. He was recently made a Freeman of the City on Wanneroo.
Mrs Terrie Ross (nee Roche) (Jerrabomberra, NSW)
Mrs Ross served in the Royal Australian Army Nursing Corps in Vietnam between May 1967 and May 1968 as a Lieutenant. Before the War, she completed her nursing training at the local base hospital in Goulburn, NSW, and then her midwifery training in Sydney before returning to Goulburn to work as a midwife. She was among the first four nurses selected to go to Vietnam. During her time in Vietnam, she was primarily responsible for running an intensive care ward. She met her husband Michael in Vietnam while he was serving in the RAEME (Royal Australian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers).    
After the War she was posted to Wagga Wagga, NSW, for a short time before leaving the Army in 1970. She then started up a private nursing home in Crookwell, which she ran until 1979 before Michael was posted to Canberra. She had two children and worked at the Canberra Hospital until her retirement in 2000. Mrs Ross currently volunteers for Karinya House, offering accommodation and support for disadvantaged new mothers and their babies.
Mr Arthur Francis, CSC, OAM (Singleton, NSW)
Mr Francis served in the Army from 1964  -  1997. He spent two years in Malaya and saw active service in Borneo during the Indonesian Confrontation. In 1967 he volunteered for service in South Vietnam and completed two tours of active service with the Royal Australian Regiment, first as a Corporal, Section Commander during 1967-68, the second as Platoon Sergeant during 1970-71. He also served overseas in Brunei, PNG and Singapore with trips to Cambodia, Rwanda, Somalia and the Western Sahara. In 1994 he was appointed as the Regimental Sergeant Major of the Army in 1994 until his discharge in 1997.
In 1987 he was awarded the Order of Australia Medal and in 1997, the Conspicuous Service Cross. On retirement from the service he spent 10 years working at the Infantry Centre Singleton under contract for the Department of Defence. He is on the board of the Royal Australian Infantry Corps Museum, he is the Secretary of the Singleton Legacy Group and is a regular volunteer for Meals on Wheels. 



PM: It's a great pleasure to be here in Washington today. I'm joined by the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, Warren Snowdon. We're here this morning to make an important announcement honouring an election commitment that we made last year, and that is to invest $3.3 million in an interpretation centre here in Washington as part of the Vietnam Memorial.
Of course Australian troops played a major role in Vietnam and we want their stories told, the whole story of Australia's engagement in Vietnam. It was a controversial war and that story should be told too, but so should the story of the bravery of our troops, their sacrifices and what they went through over in Vietnam.
As a nation we've come to recognise that we didn't honour the service of those veterans when they returned the way that we should have. In this interpretation centre we will be able to tell that story too. I'm very pleased to have been joined here today by a number of Vietnam veterans, including Graham Edwards, a former Federal parliamentarian, who served during the Vietnam War.
So, this has been a special opportunity to mark a new stage in honouring the sacrifice and service of our Vietnam veterans.
I'm very happy to take any short questions.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard can I ask your response to the Newspoll back in Australia today? It's a reaction to your carbon tax, it seems.
PM: It won't surprise you when I say I don't comment on polls. What I would say, broadly, is this: I've always understood that arguing for a tough economic reform like pricing carbon was going to be a big debate, it's going to be a hard debate, but it's one that I am determined to win, so that we price carbon from the 1st July 2012 and transform our economy into a clean energy economy.
I always expected Tony Abbott to run a ferocious scare campaign. The one thing Mr Abbott is good at is running fear campaigns and that is what Australians will see him do, but I believe Australians are a confident, creative people. We understand that we need to change, that we need to conquer this challenge of the future, climate change, and we need to transform our economy into a clean energy economy.
So, I will continue to press to price carbon and we will get that done from 1st July 2012.
JOURNALIST: But why is he being successful in that scare campaign?
PM: It's fairly easy to stoke fears and Tony Abbott is a master of it and he will continue to stoke fears. But Australians, I believe, will come to see that pricing carbon is the right way of dealing with climate change and the challenge of it transforming our economy.
I understand that stoking fear can be relatively easy, but every day that Mr Abbott is out there stoking fear, we'll meet it with reason, with facts and I know that the Australian people will ultimately be confident enough to take this step of pricing carbon.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, is your message to the Labor caucus exactly the same as it is to the Australian people on the carbon tax?
PM: The Labor caucus believes in pricing carbon and when we embarked on this debate we knew it was going to be hard, it was going to be tough, there were going to be difficult days, but we also knew it was right for the country, which is why we will persist and we will price carbon from 1st July 2012.
JOURNALIST: What's on your agenda with the meeting with the President this morning?
PM: I'm looking forward to seeing President Obama. I'm sure we will have a wide range of topics to talk about, but amongst them will be the 60th anniversary of our alliance and its future, particularly as America works through its Global Force Posture Review. We will also be talking about the issues in our region, including the new regional architecture  -  the East Asia Summit and the US role there.
I'm looking forward to discussions on trade. Trade equals jobs, free trade is good for Australian jobs and we've got important trade rounds underway - the Trans-Pacific Partnership which President Obama is so committed to, and of course the Doha Round.
I'm also looking forward to talking to President Obama about our shared mission in Afghanistan; we are determined to see that mission through. I expect we will touch on events in the Middle East, as well as on climate change and important issues confronting our world.
I'll also be looking forward to talking to President Obama about the G20 meeting later this year and its focus on economic progress, particularly its focus on jobs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, you mentioned when you were talking about the Vietnam War that the democracy that these guys were defending might not have produced strong support for them. Are you suggesting that when you were a young person like I was, watching on TV as you were a kid, were you actually a supporter of the Vietnam War?
PM: The truth is I was too young to have a view about the Vietnam War. I was only in primary school at the time of the Vietnam War, so I only have the vaguest of recollections of the moratorium demonstrations being on TV and those sorts of thing, just that little bit too young to have an active, sort of, adult-style memory about it.
But certainly what I know from my lived experience in the years after the Vietnam War rather than the war itself is that there was not appropriate embrace of the troops when they came home. Because the war was controversial I think people did take that out on our serving men and women and I think one of the lessons that we've learnt from that war and that we've digested as a nation since is whatever view you take about engaging in the combat, you should always extend a nation's embrace and a nation's sense of honour to the people who served.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Admiral just now mentioned that Oruzgan province might be able to be handed over to the Afghan local forces soon, he mentioned the word ‘soon'. Do you have a particular timetable yet on that?
PM: On the Afghanistan strategy transition will happen in some places from the beginning of this year, but Oruzgan province will not be amongst the first places to transition. So, we have to see the mission through in Oruzgan. We certainly hope that we will be able to transition, but it won't be during the course of this year. So we are preparing for transition, continuing the training, continuing the efforts there, but what I said to the Australian people in the parliament is we will not be amongst the first areas to transition.
JOURNALIST: On the carbon issue again, should Australia be out in front in the way it is considering that things have stalled in the United States in dealing with this?
PM: My view remains that we shouldn't try to lead the world, but neither can we afford to limp behind. We have a high-emissions economy. We've got a lot of work to do transition that economy and that's why we have to start soon and the 1st July 2012 is the right date to price carbon. 



SENATOR MCCAIN: It is my distinct privilege and honour to welcome Prime Minister Gillard to Washington, DC and to Capitol Hill. A number of us will be meeting with the Prime Minister later today, and we are looking forward to her addressing a joint session of Congress tomorrow. Madame Prime Minister we are honoured by your presence here in our nation's capitol.
No matter who occupies the White House, and no matter what party holds power in Congress, America's commitment to the security and success of our ally Australia is enduring and unbreakable.
This year we celebrate the 60thanniversary of the ANZUS Treaty, and as we do, we recognize that we are bound together by far more than that one document. We are united by ties of family and friendship, mutual interests and common values, and our shared sacrifice in service of each other.
We were just viewing a photography exhibit in the Russell Rotunda, that commemorates more than one century of shared military struggle and sacrifice that Australians and Americans have undertaken together. And on a personal note, my father was a submarine commander in World War II and was based out of a base in Perth, Australia and some of his fondest memories were there relationships and friendships between the United States and Australia in that great war. And I also, during the Vietnam War, had the honour of spending some time also in the beautiful city of Sydney, Australia.
I also want to mention that more than 50,000 Australians served, and 521 gave their lives, in the war in Vietnam  -  and as I was personally very moved by, and very grateful for the Prime Minister's visit to the Vietnam War Memorial yesterday, and especially her generous contribution to the education centre that's now being built there.
Our nations have given much together; they are still giving in Afghanistan, Iraq and wars since the beginning of this last century, not this but the last century.
So Madame Prime Minister, if you take only one message back to Australian from your time in Washington, let it be the thanks of this grateful nation  -  which values our historic alliance, which values the brave Australians who are serving with our men and women in uniform in Afghanistan, and which values above all else the safer, freer, and better world that your nation does far more than its fair share to promote. Thank you, Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you very much, it's privilege to be here with you Senator McCain and to have the opportunity to open with you the photographic exhibition we've just seen.
It's an exhibition to celebrate the 60 years of ANZUS and as we've walked past some of the photographs we've seen a photograph of the very famous Great White Fleet and the Australia writer David Malouf described that visit by the Pacific Fleet in August 1908 as one of the shining moments of our national memory, this huge outpouring of feeling for America and Americans.
And Senator, you yourself wrote at the time of the 100 year anniversary of the Great White Fleet, that is was then that Australians and Americans recognised the kindred spirit of two rugged and energetic peoples separated by half the globe but united by shared hopes for mankind.
I think those words ring very true today. The 60 photographs here are borrowed from our Department of Defence and from the sanctuary of Australia's traditions of the Australian War Memorial and I do thank those institutions for allowing these photographs to travel here to Washington, they are very, very important parts of their collection.
I'd also like to acknowledge Australia's Ambassador, Kim Beazley, for his personal interest in helping to select the images that you will see in this exhibition, they're a fitting tribute.
There are obviously some things that photographs can show us that words can never quite tell. Those images of Australian and American servicemen and servicewomen in this exhibition do capture a personal reality and they add to our reflections on war.
It's a reality Senator McCain has faced himself, in his distinguished military career and one that had given him permanent reminders. Senator McCain I'd like to use your words again, you once said. “Courage is not the absence of fear but the capacity for action despite our fears”. Australia and the United State have always taken action together, despite our fears. We've been bold and we will continue to do so.
This exhibition is not just a record of our shared past, I believe it's an inspiration for our shared future and it's a great honour to be here to open it with you. Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: Thank you Senator and Prime Minister. Senator is time running out for American action to help (inaudible) Libya and to you Prime Minister, is a message to America (inaudible) about the need for American (inaudible) on comprehensive solutions to climate change?
SENATOR MCCAIN: I don't know (inaudible) time is right now, but I do know that as we speak (inaudible) people of Libya being massacred from the air and in recent days we have seen a (inaudible) in air attacks both helicopter and fixed wing. I've just got one other point and that is that there are (inaudible) which are very vulnerable to air attacks, which could possibly lead to catastrophic and (inaudible) consequences.
Remember when we drove Saddam Hussein (inaudible) and I would not put it past Mr Quaddafi to take similar action in his desperation.
PM: We share one planet and we share the problem of climate change. In our nations we need to make decisions about how we will end up with a clean energy future and here in the United States President Obama, has announced his strategy for a clean energy future. In Australia we have announced our strategy too, we believe that the most efficient way of reducing the amount of carbon pollution our economy generates is to put a price on carbon and so we will be legislating to price carbon from the 1st July 2012, firstly with a fixed price and then moving to a full cap and trade emissions scheme.
Our end point is a clean energy future, that's the drive here in the United States and it's the drive in Australia.
SENATOR MCCAIN: Could I just (inaudible), every day that goes by, every hour that goes by, innocent Libyans are being attacked and massacred from the air and I worry about additional action that Quaddafi could take, such as bombing oil facilities, which could also have extreme environmental consequences.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
SENATOR MCCAIN: I think we should reach out to any Libyan, but particularly his inner circle to come over to our side. He is being propped up, as you know, by family members and mercenaries to a significant degree. I met yesterday with the former Libyan Ambassador, who has come over and is now in opposition to Quaddafi and so I'm very hopeful that some of those people would desert Quaddafi and that's the best way to persuade him to step down.
I would point out again on this issue of a no fly zone, the President of the United States has said that Quaddafi should leave power  -  that's American policy. Then therefore it means that one of the ways to achieve that goal is with a no fly zone and I want to repeat my opposition to ground troops in Libya. That in my view that would not be a productive enterprise.
JOURNALIST: Senator McCain, on Guantanamo Bay, (inaudible). Do you think that any of these places will ever be (inaudible)
SENATOR MCCAIN: I think they'll be tried in Guantanamo on a Military Commission which I think is the appropriate way to treat these cases.
JOURNALIST: Senator, do you think there is a likelihood that Julian Assange will be charged in the United States and would you want Australia to support any extradition that then flowed from that? And Prime Minister, your reaction?
SENATOR MCCAIN: I'd be interested in the Prime Minister's views on this issue. It is the greatest, largest, most damaging security brief in the history of this country and I understand the aspect of it where American diplomats and State Department are embarrassed by the revelation of certain conversations, but what's more disturbing is a revelation of individuals in places like Iraq and Afghanistan, who were cooperating with the United States. That literally puts their lives in danger.
I don't know exactly how this situation should be treated best, but I would like to see those responsible for Private First Class Manning's ability to all by himself be responsible for these massive leaks, be held responsible. As far as I know, not anyone besides Private First Class Manning has been charged with anything, has gotten a letter of reprimand, has been fired and he couldn't have done all of that just by himself, other people are responsible as well.
PM: Well I wouldn't speculate on hypothetical situations, the only legal matters facing Mr Assange are the legal matters stemming out of proceedings in Sweden and of course at every stage Mr Assange has received consular assistance, just as any other Australian citizen would have received such assistance.
JOURNALIST: The US is currently undergoing the Force Posture Review, would you like see the end result of that the US having a greater force presence in Australia once that's complete?
SENATOR MCCAIN: I think the ties between our two countries are as close, or closer than almost any other country in the world and probably the facts that I would like Americans to know more about is that the Australian Government and military have played a vital role in parts of the Pacific where the small island nations have had great struggles and great challenges, including a large nation of New Guinea and it's been at significant cost to the Australian taxpayer, it has been an act on the part of the Australian government to try to bring about stability and a better life in some of these small island nations.
I regret to say that a lot of my countrymen are not aware of the incredible role that Australia  -  partnering with New Zealand  -  are playing in the entire Pacific region. So I'm very happy with our military to military relationship. I'm very grateful for the sacrifice and service of the Australian military. Prime Minister was just telling me she just attended a funeral of a brave young Australian who just lost his life in an attack in Afghanistan. This is the kind of friendship and relationship which is really remarkable.
JOURNALIST: Senator, just following on (inaudible) if I may, with the military rise of China, do you see it as inevitable that there will be closer military links (inaudible)
SENATOR MCCAIN: I think facts are, somebody said facts are stubborn things and the fact is that the Chinese just announced a 12.5 per cent  increase in their defence spending. It's also a fact that we don't know the extent of Chinese defence spending because they're opaque in many respects, but there's no doubt that the Chinese are fulfilling Deng Xiaoping's last priority and that is a military build up. They have been acting very assertively in the region, the Spratleys and in other areas, including latest dust up that they've had in a collision, I believe it was with the Vietnamese, but the fact is that there are a rising power and they are a military power.
Now that doesn't mean to me that there's going to be conflict, that's not necessarily so, but it does mean to me that Australia and the United States must ensure that basics like freedom of the seas are observed by the Chinese. They have talked about the South China Sea being quote “special zones” and that kind of thing. So I do think that the United States and Australia will be working more actively to make sure that there is not any tensions in the region and I do not predict any conflicts, but I do say that there the best way to prevent that is for the United States and Australia to assert the basic principles of conduct that all nations should adhere to.
Thank you very much. 



Women like me are lucky  -  the positions we hold are based on the efforts of so many courageous women not only in the century since the first International Women's Day but through history.
They worked to improve all aspects of all women's lives: equality before the law and in the workplace; access to services like health and childcare; freedom from violence and coercion; the right to chart our own lives and careers.
Above all, those women fought for every woman, every girl, to have education.
Education is one thing no person can ever take away from us  -  the one thing all our opportunities rely on.
My Government is building on this platform, delivering our country's first national Paid Parental Leave Scheme, increasing child care benefits and boosting women's economic security through the introduction of the Fair Work Act and superannuation reforms. And I'm determined to make sure every child in Australia gets a great education.
So we remember the hard work of women in the last hundred years whose efforts shared opportunity with all of us  -  and we dedicate ourselves to work just as hard to share opportunity with all women today.



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
In particular, thank you to Secretary Clinton, whose career as a woman in public life has been such an emblem of inspiration and courage. 
Hillary, you've been an example to women all over the world.  I want to echo your own words in 2008.
You applied them to others but I believe they apply to you.  Your bravest and most remarkable achievement is what you have made unremarkable ... female leadership.
You've made it unremarkable that women lead.
It is a great good fortune to be here today.
I say that because I do believe that women like Secretary Clinton and I are fortunate. 
While we have worked for the positions we hold, we owe the opportunity to so many women of courage who came before us.
From pioneer women in politics like Susan B Anthony in your country and Jessie Street in mine right down to today. 
And not only in the century since International Women's Day but throughout history. 
Every brave mother who ever raised a strong daughter helped us get here.
Those women worked for more than political rights and they worked for more than the opportunity for women to hold high office. 
Those women worked to improve all aspects of all women's lives.  And we believe today in the same things those women believed in always: in our rights.  Our equality.
Not just the right to vote, but the right to equal work and equal pay, the right to proper services, the right to physical safety.
Perhaps the right of greatest ultimate importance, the right to education. 
I am passionate about education.  I believe deeply in education's transformative power. 
Education is the key to all our opportunities.  It is the great tool for self improvement and social progress.
Whatever else women and girls may encounter in life, a sound foundation of excellent, rigorous education ought to be their entitlement. 
Education is the one thing no one can ever take away from us.
And education takes courage as well.
It always takes moral courage to learn to read. 
For any teacher, any child, it is an adventure.  And reading is an adventure that never ends. 
I saw that courage in the young women whose high school President Obama and I visited yesterday at Wakefield, Virginia... just as I saw that courage in the little girls whose primary school  I visited last week at home in Canberra.
But in too many parts of our world today, girls learning to read need real physical courage as well. 
This is the great symbol of global courage: women's fight for the right to read. 
And I want a world that is safe for the girl who reads.  A world where the girl who reads doesn't need physical courage and neither does her teacher. 
Wherever they are.
In an Indonesian school which provides a basic modern education in that most populous Islamic country where support from the Australian Government is so vital.
In a school in Uruzgan province in Afghanistan, with female literacy of less than one per cent but now with the freedom for girls to learn to read where Australia is providing $36 million over four years through Save the Children to improve education and health for women and children.
So today we remember the courage of women in the last hundred years who worked for all of us to have the rights we share.
We salute the courage of women here today who have worked so hard to make the most of the rights they have.
And we promise to be just as courageous in working for rights for all women and girls tomorrow, here and around the world. 



JOURNALIST: [AUDIO BREAK] talking about policies such as quotas for women on boards. Is it Government policy, and how does your response fit with your appearance at the International Women of Courage awards this morning?
PM: The Governor-General has devoted her life to arguing about women's equal opportunity and she was certainly at the forefront of those arguments when our nation was having to work its way through making sure women had an equal say and an equal role, so I believe it's appropriate for the Governor-General to continue to advocate what's been her lifetime passion.
The Government's policy is that we have a quota or a target for Government boards of 40 per cent, which we are working our way towards. We are strenuously urging the private sector to act to get more women onto their boards.
I view regulating as the last option. I want to see self-motivated change from Australian companies, and whenever I meet with leading Australian business figures, and I do that very frequently, they are very conscious of the need for change and for more women on boards.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you agree with Senator McCain that there's an issue with Australia and the need for close cooperation between the US and Australia on the rise of China, and specifically with regard to the Defence Posture that we've been discussing in the last couple of days. Is it likely, would you think, we might see more US ships in our region as the US seeks to counter the rising power of China?
PM: First question, I think Australia and the US need to cooperate on all strategic challenges, and what is happening in our region is largely being defined by the rise of China, so we constructively engage with China. That's our policy. It's the policy of the US.
We also have frank discussions with China where we have differences. That's our policy and the policy of the US.
On the deployment of US military assets, well, clearly that is not for me to make a decision about. The US will work that through in its Global Force Posture Review, but yes we are collaborating in that Global Force Posture Review, and the outcome of that will be known later this year, so we will be able to then comment with some certainty about the deployment of US military assets.
JOURNALIST: You said yesterday you anticipated more visits, more involvement and so on. Does this mean more American boots on the ground in Australia?
PM: What I said yesterday is we are an enthusiastic participant in the Global Force Posture Review process. We are enthusiastic about working with the US military. We do so now. We do it through joint facilities, exercising, by visits by American ships to Australian ports. Clearly, all of those options can be explored as part of the Global Force Posture Review.
JOURNALIST: More people here- there?
PM: Look, all I can say is I'm enthusiastic about further cooperation and collaboration. 
What shape that will take will come out of the Global Force Posture Review, but we currently have joint facilities, joint exercises. We welcome American ships to our ports, and those things can be a very strong part of our future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, independent MP Tony Windsor has suggested that an advertising campaign on the carbon tax would be useless until there's more information around about it. Do you think that is s wise move, putting it off until, say, we know what the carbon price actually is?
PM: Look, I'm just not going to rule anything in or anything out on Government advertising. There is a role for Government advertising to get information to people.
JOURNALIST: You just, back on the quota business, you said you'd rather see businesses implement it. You said regulation is a last option. Is it an option?
PM: Look, Minister Tanya Plibersek, having responsibility for Status of Women at the relevant point when this debate was very much out in the Australian community made it clear that that was the last option, but we wanted to see change from Australian businesses themselves, and I believe they're motivated for change.
JOURNALIST: But should they be setting quota themselves voluntarily?
PM: Amongst other things, I think they should be looking to get more women on boards, they should be looking to harness female talent, they should be looking to assist women to get the skills that they need to to participate on Australian boards. So, all options should be explored by Australian businesses.
I don't think there's just one mechanism that's going to drive change. Change is driven by businesses themselves working through the issue and working out what's going to drive change for their business, but fundamentally, on International Women's Day, as much as every other day but particularly on International Women's Day, let me just say I believe men and women are born with equal capacities and so if you see an area of life like boards in corporate Australia where we disproportionately see men and not a sufficient representation of women, that is not a merits-based decision. Something is stopping the women getting through, and Australian businesses need to address that.
JOURNALIST: Are you at all disappointed that Guantanamo Bay will not be closed, it seems to be now going to be effectively a permanent (inaudible)
PM: Ultimately these are questions for the American administration to determine.
JOURNALIST: It was a big question for the Left, though, wasn't it? It was a symbol, very much for a long time, closing down Guantanamo Bay. It was for the President here, then it was a rallying call that was taken up in Australia, so for that go away, is that a disappointment? How should people understand that?
PM: The proper engagement of the Australian Government and me as Prime Minister on this is if there are some issues about Australian citizens. Otherwise, this is an issue for the American administration to determine.



UHLMANN: Julia Gillard, welcome to 7.30.
PM: Thank you very much Chris.
UHLMANN: When you met with President Obama did you press him on when the US will put a price on carbon?
PM: We did talk about climate change, obviously I am committed to pricing carbon in Australia, it's the right thing to do for our economy to make sure we have a clean energy economy for the future.
President Obama is taking a different course here in the United States, that's a recognition of the political circumstances he finds himself in with the Congress and so he too is looking for a clean energy future, but will pursue it differently because he couldn't secure a price on carbon through the Congress.
UHLMANN: But if the United States doesn't put a price on carbon why should Australia?
PM: Well we have to look after our own national interest and our own national circumstances. The reality is we are bigger emitters of carbon pollution per head of population than the United States of America. That means the transformation we need in our economy is more, the most efficient way of driving that transformation is by pricing carbon.
UHLMANN: But to speak of one economist of our own and Ross Garnaut said in his first report that ultimately global mitigation will only be successful if countries can trade in emissions permits and if the United States never gets there that will never happen, will it?
PM: I think you are making some assumptions about the future of the world and other countries in our world which aren't warranted. Already 32 countries have emissions trading schemes, 10 American states do as well, they haven't waited for action at the national level, they are acting themselves and when we talk about American states we can be talking about very sizable economies.
UHLMANN: But Prime Minister, those states you're talking about, in fact there's a retreat by states in the United States, states like New Hampshire and New Mexico are pulling out of those systems that you're talking about, so in fact rather than there being an advance in the United States, there is a retreat in the United States and John Boehnor who you met today, the head of the Republicans in the US House of Representatives, he actually wants to cut the budget of the EPA by $3 billion so it can't regulate carbon prices.
So I ask again, without the United States being in on this, why should Australia put a price on carbon?
PM: Well Chris, what I would say to you is Australia and America are great mates, but we're not the same country. The US will make its decisions here and they'll make their decisions through their political system.
It's well known of course that President Obama wanted a cap and trade emissions trading scheme, a scheme like the one that I am saying we need in Australia, but he faced political circumstances in the Congress after the mid-term elections that made that impossible. Well, that is the democratic decision making  - 
UHLMANN: That because it's impossible they've agreed it will never happen and that means that your carbon price will remain a carbon tax forever, won't it? Without an international agreement there won't be an international market, which means the carbon price that you impose will remain a carbon tax?
PM: Can I just finish what I was saying? America, its own country, its own democratic institutions, and they are the political circumstances in America now. What should we do? We should make a decision in our own national interest and I've made it. I am saying to the Australian people, when you look at the world, countries are moving for change. We've got a big journey of transformation, we need to start on that journey now, we cannot afford to wake up down the track with a high carbon pollution economy when the rest of the world has moved and then try in some huge rush to transform our economy with all of the high prices and disruption that that would imply.
UHLMANN: Is it true that there will be no solution to climate change without international action and that means that we need an international market?
PM: What that means is nations around the world will move to address climate change. They will move to clean energy economies; we need to move to a clean energy economy. What should we do? We should select the most efficient way of doing that transformation - and that's pricing carbon.
And what are the alternatives to this? Well Tony Abbott has written for one of today's newspapers that there's no way of fixing carbon pollution without significant price increases or significantly changing people's lives. What he's admitted today is his direct action plan is a con, it's a con job. It's not going to do anything. It's just a piece of political theatre; he's actually admitted that in today's newspapers effectively. 
UHLMANN: Prime Minister when you began this debate  - 
PM: Compared with that I'm telling people like it is, and like it is is we have a carbon pollution intense economy, we need to transform it and the most efficient way of doing that is pricing carbon.
UHLMANN: Alright Prime Minister, when you began this debate four years ago you had public sentiment behind you, how is it that a Newspoll today has you at 30 percent, that's the lowest primary vote in that poll's history. How is it that you lost that community sentiment somewhere along the way?
PM: Well I'm not going to comment on polls, they'll go up, they'll go down, but what I would say is this: I've always expected that the debate about putting a price on carbon would be a hard debate, this is a major economic reform and economic reform is tough. When we made the big reforms of the past, like reducing tariffs, that wasn't popular, but it was the right thing to do. Putting a price on carbon is the right thing to do, it's in our nation's interest and I understand Tony Abbott is the master of scare campaigns and he'll say anything and he'll do anything to frighten people and wreck things. If that's the political debate we're going to have, well that's the political debate I am determined to win, to price carbon in the interests of our nation.
UHLMANN: One more quick point on this, will you run a government funded advertising campaign to try and turn community sentiment around?
PM: Look, on government advertising, from time to time we advertise to get necessary information to people, so I'm not going to rule in or rule out government advertising in the future.
UHLMANN: But it's possible?
PM: But I will be there saying to the Australian community, as I am saying to you now Chris, this is what we need to do for the future of our economy. We're a confident, creative people. We've engaged in tough economic reforms in the past, even when they weren't popular and we've had a prosperous country as a result. We're up to this as a people, we'll get it done.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: Thank you very much. I've just met with the United Nations Secretary General and I thank him very much for his discussion with me today. Our discussion has focussed on circumstances in the Middle East, particularly the circumstances in Libya. We share a deep concern as to what is happening in Libya and a deep concern about the continuing violence.
We discussed Australia's support for humanitarian efforts to assist those who have fled to the borders because of the situation in Libya. We also discussed the work happening within the United Nations, the work so far undertaken by the Security Council and then continuing discussions about further action and Australia welcomes the fact that Security Council members are engaged in further informal discussions at this stage and considering further action.
We also welcome the fact that there is contingency planning occurring for potential further action on Libya. I had to opportunity too to talk to the United Nations Secretary General on two areas of key concern to Australia and where we are substantial contributors.
First, in Afghanistan, where Australia is the largest non-NATO contributor of troops and where we are pursuing the mission in Afghanistan, most particularly in Oruzgan province. We discussed the prospects for transition in Afghanistan and particularly the work the United Nations is undertaking on development and governance assistance in Afghanistan.
Second, we discussed East Timor. Australia is a key contributor there, we work under a United Nations mandate and the Secretary General and I discussed the prospects for what would occur beyond the end point of that mandate in 2012.
Of course as a very near neighbour, Australia has a deep relationship with East Timor which will continue, but we did discuss particularly what would occur after the 2012 United Nations mandate period.
It's been a good opportunity for me to be here, discussing issues of concern with the Secretary General. I took the opportunity to congratulate him on the work he has personally led for women in the United Nations. This week of all weeks, when we have celebrated International Women's Day, it was the right time to congratulate the Secretary General on his leadership of work for women in the United Nations.
I also discussed with him and congratulated him on the work he is leading about sustainability. This is work where our Foreign Minister, Kevin Rudd, makes a contribution on the expert panel and we discussed this sustainability work which has been well lead by the United Nations Secretary General. It's been a great opportunity to have these discussions and I thank him for making himself available for the discussions today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you inform Secretary Moon of our official position on Libya on the no fly zone not happening without the express position of the Security Council and did you use the opportunity to also further our bid to become a temporary member of the Security Council?
PM: I certainly raised with the Secretary General that Australia, as part of our continuing and deep commitment to the United Nations, has put its name forward for consideration for the Security Council.
On Libya, the question of a no fly zone is of course a question for the Security Council and its determination, rather than the determination of the Secretary General and so the Australian position on that is we understand contingency planning is underway. We understand a range of options are on the table, including a no fly zone. We understand that members of the Security Council have commenced discussions with each other about further action, including potentially a no fly zone and we welcome the fact that those discussions are underway.
The Security Council has of course already acted with sanctions against Libya. We as a nation acted with autonomous sanctions and welcomed the sanctions that flowed from those Security Council discussions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you actually tell the Secretary General that Australia's position, or preferred position at least, was for imposition of a no fly zone?
PM: The Secretary General, when we discussed Libya, made it very clear that issues like a no fly zone were for the Security Council to consider and for the Security Council to speak on. So the Australian position is as I've just outlined it.
JOURNALIST: Just on that, you said your position was understanding various scenarios, I don't think that is a position, a position has been presented by Kevin Rudd and that is his preference for a no fly zone. Is that your position too?
PM: What Foreign Minister Rudd has said is that he's deeply concerned about the deteriorating situation in Libya. Of course, I am deeply concerned about that deteriorating situation, no one wants to see the kind of violence that we're seeing in Libya continue.
What Foreign Minister Rudd has also said is that he welcomes the fact that the Security Council and members of it are discussing a range of options, including the no fly zone.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your view of the proposal for a naval blockade that might not require endorsement by the UN, might that be sufficient?
PM: Our position is the United Nations Security Council to date has spoken for the world when it's come to Libya. We were pleased that the Security Council moved quickly to put sanctions in place, we had already autonomously imposed our own sanctions, but we believe the Security Council spoke for the world and acted for the world, putting those sanctions in place and our view is that further measures should be considered by the Security Council.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the no fly zone that you and the Foreign Minister and the Secretary General are discussing a declaratory no fly zone, or a no fly zone in the sense described by US Secretary of Defence Robert Gates, when he said you have to go in, take out their defences and thousands could potentially die?
PM: I'm not a military planner, but my understanding of course is that if one is to impose a no fly zone that does mean that you need to consider circumstances like airfields and potentials for surface-to-air missiles and all of those matters that would come into military planning and logistics.
JOURNALIST: Could I venture, is that potentially the difference between what your interpretation definition of this no fly zone is, which is the US definition and the definition that Kevin Rudd might be using?
PM: Look, there's no difference between me and Foreign Minster Rudd on what is needed to achieve a no fly zone effectively, that is a question for military planners and for people expert in these enforcement matters.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, no fly zones are very expensive. Has Australia volunteered any weapons, monies, forces toward any prospective no fly zone?
PM: We are a long way from Libya and what we've said is that in the first instance NATO would need to work through this question of the no fly zone and the Security Council would need to authorise any further action involving Libya, including potentially a no fly zone.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on a non Libya question, there was a joint Australian-Sri Lankan citizen who is the Sri Lankan Ambassador here at the UN, Palitha Kohona. There's been a case filed with the ICC, namely because Australia is an ICC member. I wanted to know for his role in the bloodshed at the end of the conflict in Sri Lanka, are you aware of that case, what do you think of it and what do you think of the UN's dealing with that final stage of the conflict?
There's been an investigation, but with no conclusion, no visit to the island. What can you say on that?
PM: I'm not personally aware of all of the details of that case. We are a supporter of the ICC. We are a supporter of proper legal processes and practices and one of the rules that come with proper legal processes and practices is that political leaders shouldn't make commentary about legal matters when they're underway.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you discuss the issue of a processing centre in East Timor?
PM: No, we did not.
JOURNALIST: Or your regional strategy for refugees?
PM: No, our discussion about East Timor was specifically in the context of the UN mandate, which is timed to come to an end currently in 2012 and consequently what role the United Nations Secretary General saw the UN playing beyond that time. So the discussions were specifically in that context.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what is your favoured option for dealing with Libya? You've spoken of a range of options other than a no fly zone, where would you like to see it?
PM: I think it's appropriate for the Security Council to consider a full range of options, I don't believe that range of options should be narrowed.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) will happen within days, the next action?
PM: I think everyone is seized of the urgency of this situation and the fact that it's deteriorating and causing a lot of harm and a lot of bloodshed and a lot of loss of life.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, at the Congress today were you moved by the reaction that was evident among some of the Congressmen who were there listening to your speech today?
PM: On Congress today, I always viewed giving that speech at Congress as an honour for Australia, an honour for Australia to celebrate sixty years of our alliance. I was very moved and very overjoyed to see the reaction but I think the emotion in the room was about the bonds between our two countries.
JOURNALIST: Was that a little dust in your eye at one point?
PM: A little?
JOURNALIST: Dust in your eye?
PM: It was some emotion showing. I think the bonds between our two countries are deep, we feel them deeply. I feel them deeply and it was a big occasion today for Australia. Thank you very much. 



Mr Speaker.
Mr President Pro Tempore.
Distinguished Members of the Senate and the House.
Distinguished Guests.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
I am the fourth Australian Prime Minister to address you here assembled. 
Like them, I take your invitation as a great honour.  Like them, I accept it on behalf of Australia.
Since 1950, Australian Prime Ministers Robert Menzies, Bob Hawke and John Howard have come here. 
Speaking for all the Australian people through you to all the people of the United States they each came with a simple message.
A message which has been true in war and peace, in hardship and prosperity, in the Cold War and in the new world. 
A message I repeat today. 
Distinguished Members of the Senate and the House ...
You have a true friend down under.
For my parents' generation, the defining image of America was the landing at Normandy. 
Your “boys of Point-du-Hoc” risking everything to help free the world.
For my own generation, the defining image of America was the landing on the moon. 
My classmates and I were sent home from school to watch the great moment on television.
I'll always remember thinking that day: Americans can do anything.
Americans helped free the world of my parents' generation. 
Americans inspired the world of my own youth. 
I stand here and I see the same brave and free people today.  I believe you can do anything still.
There is a reason the world always looks to America.
Your great dream  -  life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness  -  inspires us all.
Those of you who have spent time with Australians know that we are not given to overstatement. 
By nature we are laconic speakers and by conviction we are realistic thinkers. 
In both our countries, real mates talk straight. 
We mean what we say.
You have an ally in Australia.
An ally for war and peace.
An ally for hardship and prosperity.
An ally for the sixty years past and Australia is an ally for all the years to come.
Geography and history alone could never explain the strength of the commitment between us. 
Rather, our values are shared and our people are friends. 
This is the heart of our alliance. 
This is why in our darkest days we have been glad to see each other's face and hear each other's voice.
Australia's darkest days in the last century followed the fall of Singapore in 1942. 
And you were with us. 
Under attack in the Pacific, we fought together.  Side by side, step by bloody step.
And while it was Australian soldiers at Milne Bay who gave the Allies our first victory on land in the Pacific War, it was American sailors at the Battle of the Coral Sea who destroyed the fear of an invasion of Australia.
Distinguished Members of the Senate and the House Australia does not forget.
The ultimate expression of our alliance, the ANZUS Treaty, was not signed until 1951. 
But it was anticipated a decade earlier. 
In the judgements  -  the clear, frank and accurate judgements  -  of an Australian Prime Minister. 
And in the resolve  -  the extraordinary, immovable resolve  -  of an American President.
In the decades since, we have stuck together.  In every major conflict.  From Korea and Vietnam to the conflicts in the Gulf.
Your darkest days since Pearl Harbour were ten years ago in Washington and New York. 
And we were with you. 
My predecessor John Howard was quite literally with you and he came to this Capitol when you met on September 12 to show you that Australians would be with you again. 
And after fifty years, under a new Prime Minister and a new President, the ANZUS Treaty was invoked. 
Within Australia's democracy, John Howard and I had our differences.  But he was and is an Australian patriot and an American friend, a man who was moved by what he saw here in that terrible September.
When John Howard addressed you in 2002 we were already with you in Afghanistan. 
And we are there with you today.
I want you to know what I have told Australia's Parliament in Canberra - what I told General Petraeus in Kabul - what I told President Obama in the Oval Office this week.
Australia will stand firm with our ally the United States.
Our friends understand this.
Our enemies understand this too.
We must be very realistic about Afghanistan's future. 
Australia firmly supports the international strategy led by President Obama and adopted at Lisbon last year.
Australia is doing our part  -  in Uruzgan province in particular and across the country as a whole.
The Government of Afghanistan must do its part too.  
We know transition will take some years yet. 
We must not transition out only to transition back in.
From my discussions with your country's leaders in Washington, my meetings with our generals in Afghanistan and my time with our troops, this is my conclusion:
I believe we have the right strategy in place, a resolute and courageous commander in General Petraeus, and the resources needed to deliver the strategy.
I am cautiously encouraged by what I have seen.
Corporal Ben Roberts-Smith is Australia's most recent Victoria Cross winner  -  our equivalent of your Medal of Honour. 
Ben is a veteran of five tours of Afghanistan and first went there in 2006.  
When we met recently, his words to me were compelling:
It is not the same country I first went to five years ago.  We are making a difference.
There are hard days ahead.
I flew to your country the day after attending the funeral of a young Australian who served in Afghanistan.  
Sapper Jamie Larcombe was from my home state of South Australia, from a small community with the most perfectly Australian name, Kangaroo Island.
Jamie's life's ambition was to serve his country. 
He was a long way from Kangaroo Island when he made the ultimate sacrifice. 
We will remember. 
I know very many young Americans have served their country and lost their lives in Afghanistan too. 
As a friend we share your grief.
As an ally we share your resolve.
Afghanistan must never again be a safe haven for terrorism.
Just as our security alliance is one for war and peace, our economic partnership is one for hardship and prosperity.
In hard days, we work together.
Our societies share a deep understanding of the human importance of work. 
We believe life is given direction and purpose by work. 
Without work there is corrosive aimlessness.  With the loss of work comes the loss of dignity. 
This is why, in each of our countries, the great goal of all we do in the economy is the same to ensure that everyone who can work does work.
In turn, this is why each of our countries took early and strong action in the face of the greatest threat to the world's economy since the Great Depression. 
And we did not just act locally or individually. 
We worked together when hardship came.
New global realities and the emerging economic weight of countries like China, India and Brazil meant the vital forum for the global response was the leaders of the G20 nations.
My predecessor Kevin Rudd worked hard to ensure this was so.
The world needed a global response to the economic crisis and global leadership was vital. 
Together, the G20 coordinated $5 trillion in fiscal stimulus for the global economy. 
While there has been very real pain, that global response averted true economic disaster.
Economic stimulus has been crucial  -  to limit the worst effects of the downturn.
Economic reform is crucial now  -  to deliver the best hopes for a strong recovery.
Like you, I am a leader in a democracy.
I know reform is never easy. 
But I know reform is right.
The global economic outlook remains fragile and uncertain. 
Global economic imbalances persist and we must address them or risk future instability. 
Your leadership in the G20 is still needed to ensure we make the reforms which will keep the global economy on the path to strong, sustained and balanced growth.
And that is the path to growth in America as well.
We worked hard with you during the global economic crisis to resist protectionist pressures.  This only built on our decades working together to promote free trade in the world.
I know many of you worked hard to achieve the Australia-US Free Trade agreement.
Thank you. 
Our FTA experience shows the benefits of free trade.
And we aim for even larger benefits from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is a great economic opportunity for our two countries and seven of our regional partners.
And we have other opportunities to promote trade and jobs together as well.
I am looking forward to your country hosting the APEC Leaders' meeting later this year.  We will work closely together there.
Australia is also working for an ambitious and balanced conclusion of the WTO Doha Round as soon as possible.
And we look forward to your Congress passing a 2012 Farm Bill that advances free trade rather than distorting it ... and that through free trade, creates jobs.
We know the equation is simple: trade equals jobs.
Our societies share a deep understanding of the human importance of work. 
And our societies share a deep commitment to the value of education.
We understand education's transformative power. 
We know education is the future for every child who learns.
We also know education is the future for our economies.
Our future growth relies on competitiveness and innovation, skills and productivity ... and these in turn rely on the education of our people.
Australia and America are partners in a globalised world, where open societies flourish and competitive economies thrive.
This is why I went to a school in Wakefield, Virginia with President Obama this week.
The President and I not only saw children learning.
We saw the future of your people and the future of your prosperity as well.
Australians are deeply grateful to your “Greatest Generation” for their mighty deeds.
This week I have seen a new generation of Americans .
I genuinely believe they can be greater still.
Achieving prosperity while sharing its benefits requires far-sighted educational reforms. 
In the same way, achieving growth while caring for our climate requires far-sighted economic reforms.
Breaking the link between economic growth and emissions growth is a difficult challenge for our economies and we can only achieve it by working together.
Our cooperation in key international forums and in research and development is making an important contribution.
We must work together to achieve an historic transition to high technology, high skill, clean energy economies.
Shared values are the basis of our security alliance and shared values are the basis of our economic partnership as well.
Through hard work and education, we can deliver a strong economy and opportunity for all.
Americans are great optimists and Australians will always “have a go”. 
So, conceived in the Pacific War and born in the Cold War, adapted to the space age and invoked in the face of terror, our indispensable alliance is a friendship for the future. 
It is this year's sixtieth anniversary of the signing of our Treaty that occasions your invitation to me today. 
For that I am grateful.  As I said to President Obama, it is an alliance sixty years young with so much future to share.
And this is a timely opportunity, not so much for reflection on our past, as for discussion of our future.
The bipolar world in which our Alliance was signed has long disappeared.
I am not sad about its passing. 
Hundreds of millions of people have a better life today, democracy and human dignity have spread wide in the world in the last twenty years. 
We have seen this from Eastern Europe to East Asia in recent years and we are seeing the hope of it in the Middle East now.
We understand that nothing is certain. 
There is still much for the people of the Middle East to do and the governments of the world will be called on to help them do it. 
Yet I believe what we are seeing is unchanging realities of human nature finding a new expression and in a new way.
For Australia's part, we will do what we can  -  and work with you  -  to support orderly transitions to democracy. 
To foster human rights and religious freedom within the countries of the Middle East. 
And to secure a lasting peace between them. 
A peace where no nation threatens another, which is why we join you in condemning Iran's nuclear program. 
A peace where Israel is secure, and where Palestinians have a state of their own, which is why we join you in calling on all parties to negotiate in good faith.
Our Alliance was signed sixty years ago in the Cold War and it lives in a new world today.
And momentous as the changes in the Middle East are, I believe it is in the Asia-Pacific where the global order is changing most. 
We admire India's example as a true democracy. 
We never forget Indonesia's transition to create the world's third largest democracy in the world's largest Islamic country. 
And we applaud China's lifting some 500 million people out of poverty. 
The centre of global strategic and economic weight is shifting to this region.
The rise of the Asia-Pacific will define our times. 
Like you, our relationship with China is important and complex.
We encourage China to engage as a good global citizen and we are clear-eyed about where differences do lie.
My guiding principle is that prosperity can be shared. 
We can create wealth together. 
The global economy is not a zero-sum game. 
There is no reason for Chinese prosperity to detract from prosperity in Australia, the
United States or anywhere in the world.
America has always understood this principle of the economy - that everyone can benefit when everyone competes.
And for sixty years your leadership in the Asia-Pacific has showed this.
Your commitment to free trade and investment fuelled the growth. 
Your presence and network of alliances ensured the stability. 
You were indispensable in the Cold War and you are indispensable in the new world too.
So your growing engagement with key countries in the region  -  like Japan, India, South Korea and Indonesia  -  is enormously welcome.
We will work closely with you to strengthen the fabric of these relationships and underpin regional stability.
Strengthening regional institutions so that the countries of the Asia-Pacific increasingly manage the frictions of a growing and changing Asia-Pacific.
This is why your nation's decision to join the East Asia Summit is such good news. 
The Summit brings the leaders of the region's major powers together and has a mandate to deal with the whole range of economic, political and security issues our countries face.
Our relationship is evolving to meet these new challenges: from defence and intelligence to diplomacy and trade.
Australia in the south, with South Korea and Japan to the north, form real Asia-Pacific partnerships with the United States. 
Anchors of regional stability.
An alliance which was strong in the Cold War ... an alliance which is strong in the new world.
In both our countries, true friends stick together. 
Our nations do this, and our people do this as well.
Nothing better tells this truth than the story of two fire fighters.
Many Australians and Americans worked together in the late 1990s to be ready to protect the 2000 Sydney Olympics from possible terrorist attack.
One group of Australians spent two months in New York training and working, including a long time with New York's Fire Department Rescue 1.
They worked hard together and became more than colleagues - they became mates.
So when it was time to go home the Australian commander gave Rescue 1's chief his Australian Army “slouch hat” .and the chief presented the Australians with a battle scarred fire helmet.
Dated December 1998 and signed by members of the Rescue 1 crew, including Kevin Dowdell
Three years later, Kevin Dowdell was one of the hundreds of New York firefighters killed when the towers came down. 
Kevin led his men in.  His remains were never found.
But that helmet was found ... in Australia.
And Aussie firefighter Rob Frey found Kevin's sons.
James Dowdell is one of New York's bravest, a firefighter like his father before him. 
Patrick Dowdell is wearing his country's uniform in Afghanistan.
Rob came to America to give James the helmet his father signed. 
A precious possession.  A last link to a father lost.
And I give you their story.  A precious possession too.
These two men are here today. Rob, James - good on you.
We are so proud of what you represent, your story says it all about the friendship between Australia and the United States.
Together in the hardest of times. Friends for the future.
When our alliance was signed sixty years ago, the challenges of the space age were still to come.
The challenges of terrorism were still to come.
For sixty years, leaders from Australia and the United States have looked inside themselves and found the courage to face those challenges.
And after sixty years, we do the same today.
To protect our peoples.
To share our prosperity.
To safeguard our future.
For ours is a friendship for the future. 
It has been from its founding and remains so today. 
You have a friend in Australia. 
And you have an ally.
And we know what that means.
In both our countries, true friends stick together ... in both our countries, real mates talk straight. 
So as a friend I urge you only this: be worthy to your own best traditions. 
Be bold.
In 1942, John Curtin  -  my predecessor, my country's great wartime leader  -  looked to America.  I still do. 
This year you have marked the centenary of President Reagan's birth.
He remains a great symbol of American optimism.
The only greater symbol of American optimism is America itself.
The eyes of the world are still upon you. 
Your city on a hill cannot be hidden. 
Your brave and free people have made you the masters of recovery and reinvention. 
As I stand in this cradle of democracy I see a nation that has changed the world and known remarkable days.
I firmly believe you are the same people who amazed me when I was a small girl by landing on the moon. 
On that great day I believed Americans could do anything.
I believe that still.
You can do anything today. 



Friends all
I've always found my American friends so instinctively polite that even when you find me completely indecipherable all you still nod and smile sweetly. 
But among so many friends of Australia I hope I can relax and use my own vowels?
I'm not sure Mark Twain would have approved of my modern Australian accent given his troubles when he visited Australia in the 1890s. 
As he wrote:
Now and then, but this is rare, one hears such words as piper for paper, lydy for lady and tyble for table fall from lips whence one would not expect such pronunciations to come. That mislaid 'y' is rather striking when a person gets enough of it into a short sentence to enable it to show up. In the hotel in Sydney the chambermaid said, one morning:  "The tyble is set, and here is the piper; and if the lydy is ready I'll tell the wyter to bring up the breakfast."
Australia and America are old friends and Americans are extraordinarily polite.  
We're always conscious that we are friends who live a long way away and it is traditional advice to Australians visiting America to “assume good will but no knowledge”. 
But I know I'm among a friendly and knowledgeable audience tonight.
In Washington earlier today I spoke about the geography we share and the history we have drawn from it. 
The first Europeans to see the great waters we share called it the South Sea.
 We owe to Magellan its naming as the Pacific Ocean.   
And it is a wonderful legacy of Magellan's, because we do seek a pacific friendship, we do dream pacific dreams.
So much of our friendship has been a story of the sea.  American ships have brought friendship to ours and many shores.  Not only Yankees either.
The Confederate ship Shenandoah made a famous visit to Melbourne in January 1865. 
She had found the North Pacific sadly short of combatant warships and she came to Williamstown slip, so her Captain J. I Waddell said, for food, water and repairs. 
Why that required the crew to visit the Ballarat race day and have photos taken with half the town has never been fully explained, but they had a good time. 
And in fact the Shenandoah was so warmly received that they recruited forty two new members of crew in Victoria.
There's a broad historical consensus that this is the only occasion on which an American naval vessel has come to Australia to steal our young men.
Our friendship is not just one for peace, but one for prosperity.
Australians and Americans alike now the equation is simple: 
Trade and investment equals jobs. 
And good jobs equals good lives. 
So we share a partnership for growth.
I know our American friends have been through very tough economic times these last few years. 
We're very conscious that while Australia beat the global recession, our American friends have felt great economic pain. 
Unemployment is a terrible social problem.  And when home ownership is threatened too, the human cost only grows.
There is no country in the world which bounces back better than the United States. 
You are the masters of recovery and reinvention. 
We are optimistic on your behalf.  And as friends of Australia I know you will be keen to hear some good news from us as well.
So I want to remind you about the extraordinary opportunities being created by our mining boom.
The current upsurge in our terms of trade has been described by our Reserve Bank as the biggest resources boom since the 1850s gold rush. 
In seven years, mining investment has increased fivefold.  This year, Australian industry will invest more money into mining than the whole country invests in building new houses:  something that has never happened before.
These are projects with great national reach.  One single plan  -  the $43 billion Gorgon project  -  is worth about the same as 2 years of output from agriculture. 
When I went there last I met a worker on site who lives one block away from my home in Melbourne.  Gavan works on the project on a fly-in, fly-out basis.  
This is like commuting from Portland, Oregon to Houston, Texas. 
Mining is a remarkable force for progress and modernisation in Australia. 
Australia's mining industry employs engineers, computer specialists, logisticians, environmental managers. 
It once employed a young Herbert Hoover.
 Hoover may not have written a love poem to a Kalgoorlie barmaid, though Aussie legend insists that he did. 
But he was instrumental in organising one of the biggest firms in our industry and he never forgot his time in Australia's west ... saying for the rest of his life that even the sight of a camel train made him seasick.
It's a more sophisticated industry today.  Not too many camels.
And on any measure, we are living though a boom.  
Our mining boom is a good thing. 
Our mine workers are gaining higher wages.  Our suppliers are benefitting.  Our superannuation funds are earning more.  And the higher dollar is cutting prices for household goods in Australia too.
It's that equation again: Trade and investment equals jobs. 
And good jobs equal good lives. 
So while we know you have endured tough times, we also know you understand the way ahead, and we are confident America and Australia are on the same road. 
Friends and partners in a globalised world, where open societies flourish and competitive economies thrive. 
A world where the safest course is the boldest one.
Our alliance must always be a friendship for the future.
So tonight I am pleased to announce a $2 million Australian Government contribution to a project to ensure the Australia-United States alliance remains so. 
The 21st Century Australia-United States Alliance Project will be led by the US Studies Centre at the University of Sydney.
It will bring together the best institutions and thinking from Australia and the United States to canvass new thinking on our alliance's future challenges and its future course.
The21st Century Australia-United States Alliance Project will be a partnership of government and business. 
It's important we recognise the role of business in the bonds between Australia and the US.
The Government's contribution will be matched by US corporate partners.  I'm grateful for the first such donation, which has been generously made by the Dow Chemical Company.
Represented here tonight by Andrew Livris, CEO, Chairman and President. 
Thanks Andrew.
We remain friends for the future because our peoples remain friends. 
We're not twins, and I love the differences between us. 
I think the thing Australians and Americans might enjoy most about each other is we amuse each other. 
You do like to laugh at us a bit  -  nothing wrong with that, one of the most famous books about Australians is called They're a Weird Mob  -  and as for us, well I'm a guest, so maybe I should just say we “enjoy your sense of humour”.
I have always enjoyed travelling here and meeting Americans visiting Australia because what you see is what you get. 
Last year I met Oprah in Melbourne.  Wow.  She's not given to understatement, is she!  And then she goes home and raises much needed funds for the Queensland floods. 
Just magic.  What a wonderful ambassador for America.
And I know our New Zealand friends  -  we think of them as family, in truth  -  have deeply appreciated America's generosity as well.
Our peoples each speak with our own voice, but we share many values.  Above all we know the dignity of every person. 
In the 18th century an American wrote “all men are created equal”. 
In the 19th century Australians said “Jack's as good as his master”. 
We each value effort more than status and we each reject the sort of snobbishness and expectations of obsequiousness that infect other societies. 
Our egalitarian societies share that deep determination of the New World: that everyone is worthy of respect ... that a Prime Minister or President is no better than the person who serves her dinner.
And in both our countries, true friends stick together. 
President Kennedy once described Australians as “good friends in peace, best of friends in war”.   I think he was right and it's a badge we wear proudly. 
We're Australians.  We're here for the hard days.
Here in New York we can never really forget the hardest of days ten years ago. 
John Curtin's words during the Battle of the Coral Sea speak to us still:
As I speak, those who are participating in the engagement are conforming to the sternest discipline and are subjecting themselves with all that they have  -  it may be for many of them the ‘last full measure of their devotion'  -  to accomplish the increased safety and security of this territory.  
In the face of an example of that description, I feel that it is not asking too much that every citizen who today is being defended by these gallant men in that engagement, should regard himself as engaged in the second line of service to Australia ... Men are fighting for Australia today. 
Those who are not fighting have no excuse for not working.
Australians and Americans are engaged in Afghanistan tonight.
And those of us not there are working for our countries, each in our own way. 
When Douglas Macarthur first met Curtin in March 1942 he said
Mr Prime Minister, we two, you and I, will see this thing through together.
There will be hard days ahead. 
But Curtin and Macarthur's words also speak to us still. 
They draw us ever forward to the deepest sources of confidence in the future that lie in our national characters.
All friendships need work and ours is no different.
Percy Spender knew this. 
Spender of course was the Australian External Affairs Minister who more than any one Australian can claim credit for the successful negotiations for the ANZUS treaty sixty years ago. 
As an old politician himself, he found a sure fire way to President Truman's heart.
You see when the Washington Post's music critic criticised President Truman's daughter's singing voice in 1950, Truman wrote to the journalist:
I have never met you, but if I do you'll need a new nose and plenty of beefsteak and perhaps a supporter below.
So Spender found the best way to talk to Truman ... was to get him started on how terrible the press is. 
To be fair, you don't need incredible powers of perception to know that any politician's favourite topic of conversation is complaining about journalists,
But Spender opened up a rich vein of friendship with a President who already had fond memories of Aussies from the Great War. 
So while the Second World War experience and the Cold War environment undoubtedly played their part in bringing our countries together as Treaty partners in 1951, the friendship between two politicians played its role.
Thank you for your friendship. 
Not just tonight but in all the work of the Association. 
What you do to bring our countries ever closer together is of incredible value. 
We have so much in common but we can never take each other for granted.
After centuries as friends, decades as allies, days and nights like these are precious still.  We are reminded of our best selves. 
Americans are still optimists, Australians still have a Go  and our future is there for us as long as we are bold. 



Thank you.  In particular I'd like to thank His Excellency the Permanent Observer to the African Union Mr António for hosting this event and His Excellency the Permanent Representative of Mauritius, Mr Meetarbhan for chairing the meeting.
Excellencies.
I would like to thank you for gathering here today. 
It is a privilege to speak with you at a time of momentous challenges and opportunities in Africa. 
Recent and historic events in North Africa serve to demonstrate the central and indispensable role of the United Nations. 
They also serve to demonstrate that regional leadership  -  in this case through the African Union and the Arab League and its members  -  is always necessary to international stability and to respect of human dignity. 
So I warmly acknowledge the actions of the African Union and the League of Arab States for putting their weight behind freedom, human rights, good governance, and helping the transition to more representative and responsive forms of government. 
I am fortunate to serve in government in a peaceful and stable democracy. 
We do sometimes speak of political courage but in truth, what an Australian politician risks is slight. 
That is why I want to very warmly acknowledge both the Permanent Representative of Libya who is here with us this afternoon, HE Mr Abdurrahman Mohamed Shalgham, and his Deputy HE Ibrahim Dabbashi for the profound courage they have shown by calling for the protection of the Libyan people in these difficult days.
INTRODUCING AUSTRALIA
I am proud of Australia's record at the United Nations.   
For Australia  -  one of the world's five oldest continuous democracies  -  the values of the United Nations Charter are central to how we conduct ourselves on the world stage. 
We strongly support the rules-based international order which the Charter underpins.
The values of the Charter don't only reflect the official stance of the Australian Government. 
They reflect the character of the Australian people.
We believe in sharing.  Australians call this “a fair go”. 
In practice, it means respecting the vital importance of every person having the means of a dignified life. 
Australia is part of a region where 20 of our 22 closest neighbours are developing countries.  We believe in building partnerships to create development opportunities for the world's poorest and we are part of the global fight to eradicate extreme poverty.
We believe in sticking together. 
Australians call this “mateship”. 
In practice, it means recognising that many human problems require co-operation. 
Australia is part of a complex, inter-connected world and we know countries cannot succeed alone.  We believe in working together across national boundaries.
And we are optimists and innovators. 
Australians call this “having a go”. 
In practice, it means forging creative solutions to common challenges. 
Australia does this in the United Nations  -  from developing best practice in peacekeeping doctrine to sharing new ideas for environmentally sustainable consumption and production.
We are a country of energetic, innovative and practical people.
Australia is also a diverse and tolerant society. 
We are one of the world's most multicultural countries, home to people from hundreds of ethnic and language backgrounds and to all the world's religions. 
One in four Australian residents were born overseas. 
In recent years many Africans have made Australia home and now over a quarter of a million Australians can claim African descent.
The Australian continent is home to Indigenous Australians  -  perhaps the oldest continuing cultures in the world. 
And I am proud that the Australian Parliament in 2008 issued a National Apology to Indigenous Australians. 
Like many similar nations we have a long way to go to close the gap in life opportunity between indigenous people and our community as a whole. 
We are the first to admit that. 
But with the Apology my country crossed an historic bridge and there is no going back.
AUSTRALIA'S OVERALL INTERNATIONAL APPROACH
In the United Nations, and in all our international engagement,
Australia works to make a difference for the small and medium countries of the world, who otherwise risk being shut out of the international agenda.
We are unique among the major developed countries, situated as we are between the Indian and Pacific oceans, in a region of developing countries. 
Our history and geography combine to give us a distinctive perspective:  a perspective of both the North and the South. 
We have been committed to the United Nations for all of its sixty five years  -  the United Nations is the first pillar of Australian foreign policy.
Our record of achievement in international peace and security is proud  -  from the deployment of the first international peacekeepers in 1947; to the Cambodian Peace Settlement; to the Canberra Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons and the recent International Commission on Non-Proliferation and Disarmament; to the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty; and from Cyprus to Timor-Leste to Sudan.
We have worked hard for the Millennium Development Goals, doubling our aid budget over the last five years and intending to double it again to 2015. 
We are giving a new priority globally to the least-developed countries.
Australia is also emphasising sustainable development as a critical challenge.  We are committed to global action on climate change.  
We played an active and constructive role in the formation of the Cancun Agreements which built on the Copenhagen accord. 
Our Fast Start funding of around $600 million was announced early and almost 80 per cent of it has already been allocated to developing countries.  This is part of the $1.2 billion we are spending on climate change in developing countries over the next few years.
We will continue to play a positive, and I hope thoughtful role.  Last month I committed to introduce a carbon price in Australia in July next year. 
I am determined that Australia will not be left behind in the world's transition to a clean energy future.
Climate change is a key theme for Australia's international engagement but our engagement ranges widely.
We believe in an effective and responsive United Nations and we try to show that in our role here.  Australia's own history in the UN is that we do what we say.
We support early reform of the Security Council and the way it works. 
No-one should have a monopoly on global decision-making. 
We have a special commitment to the Indigenous peoples of the world.  We seek to advance the interests of First Peoples in every country.
And we are committed to interfaith and inter-religious dialogue.  People of faith from all the world's religions live together in our multicultural nation. 
We actively participate in interfaith and inter-religious dialogues.  Together with Indonesia we established the first major dialogue in our own region almost a decade ago.
So good citizenship, human development, environmental sustainability and peace and stability remain the decisive elements of our international agenda.
Today I want to reflect particularly on peace and stability. 
It is an area where Australia's record is particularly strong and remains central to our work in the UN.
Many of the countries represented in this room have contributed to peacekeeping.  Many here have taken on enormous burdens in African-led peace operations. 
We understand those responsibilities.
Today more than 3500 Australians are deployed in peace and security operations globally. 
Our commitment to peacekeeping is longstanding, including in Africa.  We have participated in more than fifty UN and other multi-lateral peacekeeping missions. 
We have most recently been called on to lead several in our own region  -  in Timor-Leste, the Solomon Islands and on the island of Bougainville in Papua New Guinea. 
In Africa our involvement goes back to the 1960s through a dozen missions including Republic of Congo, Uganda, Namibia, Mozambique, Somalia, Western Sahara, Ethiopia and Eritrea, Sierra Leone and Rwanda. 
We are active in de-mining activities  -  Australia's first Mine Action Strategy was launched in 2005-06 and since then we have spent over $11 million Australian dollars reducing the threat and impact of mines in Africa.
We are increasing our training for African defence officers in Australian courses. 
We have contributed funding to AMISOM in Somalia.  
And we have been working closely with the African Union on developing guidelines on the Protection of Civilians. 
I applaud the African Union and its members for their continued strengthening of regional prevention and response mechanisms, for the work of the Union's Peace and Security Council and for its intra-regional cooperation efforts. 
We owe it to the troops we send and to the populations they protect to get peacekeeping and peacebuilding right.
AUSTRALIA'S APPROACH TO AFRICA
The same principles that animate Australian society and our work in the United Nations animate our approach to friendship with Africa. 
Respect, co-operation, creativity. 
And as we strengthen our UN engagement, we increase our efforts right across Africa.
We recognise Africa's growing global role and leadership.
Australia is an Indian Ocean country, as well as a Pacific one. 
And when we look across the Indian Ocean, we see a strong and dynamic continent ... a place full of possibility.
Over the last decade six of the world's ten fastest-growing economies were in sub-Saharan Africa. 
Foreign direct investment has increased almost six fold and average real economic growth more than doubled compared to the previous two decades. 
Australians believe Africa's future holds great promise. 
Australian companies know this.  
They have already invested more than US$20 billion in Africa's resource sector  -  with over another US$20 billion currently being assessed as prospective investment.
More than 220 Australian resource companies are engaged in over 600 projects across 42 African countries.  Over 140 new projects were added last year alone.
In fact, Australian companies have more projects in Africa than they do in any other region of the world.
Australian business has led the way, but I would candidly say that the Government itself has not done enough in the past.
So it's right that Australia is expanding our diplomatic presence in Africa.  We have opened a new embassy in Addis Ababa and increased representation in other diplomatic posts. 
Last year we signed a Memorandum of Cooperation with the Commission of the African Union to increase cooperation in trade and investment, peace and security, achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, agriculture and food security, democracy, governance and human rights, and climate change.
From the first, Australian prosperity has been secured through industries which are important to Africa today.  Agriculture and mining, forestry and fisheries account for more than half of Australia's export earnings. 
So we are keen to share the expertise that has brought us prosperity with our African partners and friends.
Let me outline some of our programs in Africa directed at capacity-building and institutional support.
Supporting food security and building capacity in agriculture.
Through projects designed to build research capacity, improve the functioning of rural markets and enhance the resilience of communities most vulnerable to food insecurity.  
Projects consciously aligned with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme endorsed by the African Heads of State in 2003 as the framework to restore agricultural growth in Africa. 
Improving water and sanitation.
Through programs to increase access to clean water and effective sanitation through infrastructure and institutional development.
Supporting maternal and child health.
With initiatives to focus on midwifery training, basic obstetric and newborn care and family planning in eastern Africa.
Sharing mining expertise.
We are sharing our experiences with resource management and building capacity in African mining.  This includes promoting public-private partnerships to share expertise from the mining industry, government, academia and civil society.  This year 60 mining short-course awards are being delivered. 
In addition, at Mining Indaba in Cape Town in 2010, we established an initiative with four universities in West Africa to undertake mining-related research and teaching, including in the geosciences.
Working in the World Trade Organisation Doha Round.
Through our Chairmanship of the Cairns Group of agricultural exporting countries Australia is working actively with Africa to break down protectionist agricultural trade barriers, particularly those in the US and Europe, which deprive countries of development opportunities.
And boosting human resource capacity. 
Targeted, technical assistance to African countries in areas including agriculture, public policy and natural resource management.   
And promoting knowledge, education links and enduring ties between Australia and our friends around the world.
Much to do many opportunities for progress.
 As Africa's influence grows in the world the countries of Africa should be better represented in the councils of the world.
That is why Australia strongly supports Africa's claims for two permanent seats on the UN Security Council and for an equitable proportion of new elected seats.
I appreciate the opportunity to meet you today.
We are ambitious for the UN and the multilateral system. 
Our Australian mission here in New York today introduced me to an African proverb
If you want to go fast  -  go alone. 
If you want to go far  -  go together. 
That is the spirit Australia brings to the United Nations and that is the spirit we hope to bring to the Security Council.
I would like to hear your assessments, perspectives and questions on these challenges. 
And I welcome and strongly encourage a dialogue with you in the future ... starting today. 



PM: Good morning, thank you very much and it was good to be able to give you a wave from the trading floor.
I'm here at the New York Stock Exchange and I've been here this morning meeting with a number of leading business figures to talk about the Australian economy; the government's reform agenda; our plans to price carbon; and the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
The feedback I've received from these leading business people is they understand the strength of the Australian economy and that it's a great place to do business.
This morning I've met with people including Jac Nasser from BHP Billiton, the CEO of ALCOA, amongst others.  Last night I had the opportunity to talk about the Australian economy with the CEO of GE and Dow Chemical, so over last night and this morning I've been able to talk to a broad range of players about the future of the Australian economy. 
Our future of course is bright. We've emerged from the Global Financial Crisis with the strongest economy of any nation in the advanced world.  That means Australia is a great place to do business. 
The government's reform agenda is about boosting productivity, boosting our long term prosperity and growth and in order to do that we need to be investing in the skills and capacities of Australians, which is something I'm passionate about doing as part of our education reform agenda  -  making a real difference to the life prospects of Australians. 
Lifting our productivity is also about having the infrastructure for the future  -  ports, road, rail and the National Broadband Network.  It's about making sure we manage the challenges of the future, like pricing carbon. 
So it's been good to have those discussions today. I very much thank the New York Stock Exchange for welcoming me here, for enabling me to meet with so many leading business people and for enabling me to have a look at the Trading Floor; it's a very interesting place. 
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your understanding of the general response to your climate reforms?
PM: People have been interested to hear about our plans to price carbon. Many of the leading business figures that I have met with are people who have said to me that they believe in pricing carbon. 
The CEO of GE, the CEO of Dow Chemical have not only said to me, but have said publicly, that they believe in pricing carbon, that we have to tackle climate change, and that pricing carbon is the most effective way to do it.
JOURNALIST: PM, one of the desks that you actually visited today on the trading floor actually trades in aluminium. Given that you spoke to the ALCOA Chief, what sort of encouragement have you given them, or the company, or the aluminium industry, with regards to the way that that product will be treated in Australia?
PM: I certainly did see the CEO of ALCOA today and I was asked this question, as you would recall, in the Australian Parliament.  Being from Victoria I'm acutely aware of the contribution that ALCOA has made to employment in regional Victoria and during the period of generating the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in the last Parliament, there were a broad range of discussions between the Government and industry, including ALCOA, on their position with the carbon pricing scheme and how we would work with our trade-exposed industries that also generate emissions, to make sure that they could continue to compete in the world.
We will have those discussions as we work through pricing carbon.  We've announced the mechanism to price carbon; we have a Business Roundtable where businesses are invited to come and put their view about competitiveness as we price carbon.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I just ask you a question on Libya? Foreign Minister Rudd said yesterday that on the question of the no fly zone, we don't come with some naïve attitude to this; “it is, however, very much the lesser of two evils in our judgment and the greater evil is simply to stand back and allow the innocent people of Libya to be strafed and bombed”.  Is that your view?
PM: Well of course the greatest evil is the violence that we're seeing perpetrated against the people of Libya. I spoke about this matter in the Parliament on the 2nd of March and when I spoke about it in the Parliament I said then that I wanted the United Nations Security Council to consider a no fly zone; that we'd want to see further action to protect the people of Libya. 
On this trip, being here in Washington and New York, I've been in a fantastic position to be able to talk to figures in the Obama Administration, and more broadly, about what next in Libya. 
Having said on the 2nd of March that the UN Security Council had to consider this matter, I'm pleased that they are considering this matter, I'm pleased that NATO is engaged in contingency planning on a no fly zone. 
What I want to see emerge from the United Nations Security Council  -  what the government wants to see  -  indeed I think what the world wants to see, is an effective package of measures to address the violence  -  the ugly violence  -  that is being perpetrated against the Libyan people.
JOURNALIST: So straight up Prime Minister, is there a rift between you and Kevin Rudd on what to do?
PM: Kevin Rudd and I are talking about exactly the same thing.  On the 2nd of March in Parliament, on behalf of the government, I said we wanted the United Nations Security Council to consider a no fly zone. That consideration is happening. NATO is doing the contingency planning. 
Both the Foreign Minister and I have been very clear about what we view as absolutely revolting and repugnant, the violence that we're seeing against the people of Libya.  It's truly disgusting.  We are calling on Colonel Qaddafi to cease this violence and to go. 
I said in the Australian Parliament, and I've said consistently, it's time for him to go and we want the Security Council to consider an effective package of measures including, as I identified on the 2nd of March, a no fly zone.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you have an opportunity to talk to Mr Leibowitz about issues of our ownership and control of securities exchanges can be separated and effective control can be maintained from a national regulatory scheme, and did it inform or change your view on the Singapore bid for the Australian Stock Exchange?
PM: We did not have a detailed discussion about the Singapore Stock Exchange and the Australian Stock Exchange matter. We didn't have a detailed discussion on that.  Certainly we talked broadly about matters involving the New York Stock Exchange and its future. 
The question of the Singapore Stock Exchange and its potential merger with the Australian Stock Exchange is one that needs to be properly dealt with at the appropriate time, by the Foreign Investment Review Board. 
As you would be aware, there is very clear legislation in this area and the decision is one for the Treasurer to make.  So I am not going to speculate broadly about this matter; it wouldn't be appropriate for me to do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did any of the business leaders you spoke to this morning raise any concerns about the carbon tax or the resource tax and can you give us a flavour of what you're likely to say to Mr Murdoch?
PM: We talked about carbon pricing  -  people are obviously keen for information about how our economy is performing and I'm always very happy to spruik the Australian economy.
We do have a strong economy, we're a great place to invest, we're a great place to do business and so I've been here spruiking the Australian economy. I've also been here talking about the Government's policies and plans  -  certainly carbon pricing, and the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
I affirmed that I intend to legislate the agreement that I struck with Australia's biggest mining companies in the middle of last year, and that I intend to see carbon pricing start in our country from the 1st of July 2012. 
Oh sorry, and on Mr Murdoch, Mr Murdoch, of course, is a leading global business person.  He's from my home town, from Adelaide. I'll be looking forward to talking to him about circumstances in Australia; the strength of the Australian economy; and the government's reform plans for the future.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, I only spoke (inaudible) yesterday I think it was... I get confused with time.
PM: It's the only paper you can buy in New York, I'm sure that's true.
JOURNALIST: Absolutely. It was confirmed to us by the Treasurer that the carbon tax would not be in the Budget.  If the carbon tax is going to offer business certainty shouldn't you  -  ought you  -  include the carbon tax projections inside the four year period?
PM: As I've said I think to you and others, we will be announcing the further details of carbon pricing as decisions are made by the government, working with a Multi-Party Climate Change Committee. We have to work through and announce what the price will be, what the household assistance will be, and I've been very clear the household assistance will be generous, and the single biggest item that the revenue raised from carbon pricing will be spent on is household assistance. 
We will assist industries and we will fund programs to tackle climate change. Every cent raised from pricing carbon will go to those purposes. The budget accounting will be done, well and truly in time for the start of the scheme on the 1st of July 2012. The budget accounting will flow from making those decisions about the price and about the use of the money to generously assist households; to help Australian industries transition; and for other climate programs.
Sorry, we'll go to Michelle at the back.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you spoken to Kevin Rudd about the government's policy on Libya over the last 24 hours and (inaudible)?
PM: No I haven't personally, but as you can be aware I'm travelling with the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, and I'm also travelling with my Foreign Affairs Adviser. 
Our offices have been continuously in contact and we've been in contact through the Department. We are in different parts of the world and different time zones  -  time zones causing sufficient confusion that people don't know what day it is, over here from Andrew Probyn, so we're staying in contact through those mechanisms.
JOURNALIST: But he's having [inaudible] obviously with a number of very relevant figures at the moment on the matter. Do you want to talk to him over the next 24 hours?
PM: Look, we're both having discussions with important figures on the matter. I discussed the matter with President Obama, with Secretary Clinton.  Kevin is travelling in the region and also engaged in discussions and they are very important discussions too. 
So the most efficient way for us to share information is through our Departments and our offices as we pursue our commitments in different time zones and different parts of the world.
JOURNALIST: We've seen attacks now on two oil installations in Libya.  Do you believe there is a danger that Colonel Qaddafi might turn his focus on the oil industry in the way that it affects the world oil situation?
PM:  I'm not going to try and predict what Colonel Qaddafi might do next but obviously I fear, I believe we all fear, further damaging action against the people of Libya, potentially against oil infrastructure  -  hard to predict what Colonel Qaddafi might do next. 
But you know, the principal message here  -  whatever may be going through Colonel Qaddafi's mind  -  the principal message here has to be, it's time for Colonel Qaddafi to go.  It is time to stop the violence against the people of Libya.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, given there is a need for precision in foreign policy, what is the Australian government's position?  Is it your position as stated yesterday, that you don't want to see any narrowing of options, or is it Kevin Rudd's position that the next logical step is a no fly zone?
PM: These things are completely in accord with each other. What I want to see, what the Foreign Minister wants to see, what Australia wants to see is the UN Security Council come forward with a package of measures that has the greatest chance of being effective.
I don't want to narrow any options
JOURNALIST: He does.
PM: I don't want to narrow any options, I don't accept your characterisation. The Foreign Minister would not want to see any options off the table that might assist. We want an effective package of measures to come from the UN Security Council. We would obviously want the Security Council to consider measures that will be effective, any measure that will be effective.
Clearly there is detailed consideration of a no fly zone.  On the 2nd of March in the Australian Parliament I called for that detailed consideration of a no fly zone, I'm very pleased that it's occurring at the Security Council and that contingency planning by NATO is occurring as well.
So no fly zone, called for it to be considered and it is, but if there are other measures, in addition to a no fly zone, other measures that could have an effect then of course you'd want them to be considered.
You've got to make sure there's not a confusion here between ends and means.  The end that we are seeking is the stopping of violence against the people of Libya. A no fly zone is a potential means to that end.  If there are other potential means to that end then of course they should be considered, because the thing we want here is we want the violence to stop.
JOURNALIST: So just (inaudible), you're for the no fly zone completely as well as other measures if they can be -
PM: I'm for ending violence in Libya. I'm for the United Nations Security Council considering the most effective package of measures it can put together. I identified on the 2nd of March that one of those measures that should be considered is a no fly zone.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it's appropriate that senior ministers tweet in the middle of a very sort of dire diplomatic situation.
PM: Look, I'm not sure what you're referring to.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd has been frantically tweeting about how well it's going in the negotiations.
PM: Right, well I think if we look at the situation in the Middle East, one of the things that history will record is this is, I think we saw this circumstance in Iran too with the demonstrations at the time of the elections which were met with such violence, then we've seen it in Egypt and now we are seeing it more broadly.
We're seeing a natural human urge for freedom and for the ability to chart your own course in life and to live in a democracy, that natural human urge meet new technology. So tweeting, the internet has been a big part of what's enabled people to come together to express their urge for freedom.
It would seem to me that if people are valuing that communication source in those circumstances then it's entirely appropriate for the Foreign Minister indeed for anyone else to be using that communication source.
Look, let me be frank about this, when tweeting first burst on the scene, I assumed I must admit that it was probably going to be the modern way of asking people to meet you for coffee. I've been proved entirely wrong, this has actually ended up being a powerful tool for transmitting information in some of the most desperate and dire circumstances.
We're seeing it in the Middle East but we also saw it in natural disaster circumstances. Text messages, tweeting, proved to be a way of getting information out in some of the most grievous situations that human beings can face.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr Rudd tweeted less than 24 hours ago, “working with other countries on no fly zone to stop Gaddafi's war mates”.  Now, that's a significant difference in emphasis from your formula of considering options including a no fly zone. 
Now Mr Rudd is a member of your Cabinet, he's not a freedom fighter or a citizen in a demonstration. Surely he should not be going out making these comments to the world at large, on policy issues?
PM: Let's be a bit fair here, I've just explained the merits of tweeting, one of the great limitations of tweeting is the limit to those number of characters. So in terms of assessing Mr Rudd's position, I think it would be fair to look at all of his statements and fair to look at all of his statements involving consideration by the UN Security Council.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your pitch to the African nations for inclusion on the Security Council?
PM: I will be speaking to the African Union later today; of course there are more than 50 nations in the United Nations who are in the African Union. I will be talking to them about the contacts and increasing partnership between Australia and Africa.
Very significant to that are the investments being made by mining companies in Africa. This is now a growing economic feature in Africa and a growing feature of what the great resource companies in our country are doing.
I will be talking to them about diplomatic matters, about aid matters, and yes I will be seeking to persuade them that Australia is the appropriate nation to be on the UN Security Council and deserves their support and consideration for that position.
I'm very proud of Australia and I'm very proud of our track record of diplomacy as a creative middle power.  I'm very proud of our values and I believe we would bring all of those to the Security Council table and the fact that over the last few days one of the things that I've most talked about with figures on this trip, that we've most talked about in terms of these press conferences, is what the United Nations Security Council will do in relation to Libya, proves I think the importance of that body, it's an important body, it's where the world looks to in times of trouble and I do believe Australia could make a contribution there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're having lunch with Mr Murdoch.  Have you bought him an 80th birthday present?
PM: Having lunch with Mr Murdoch and?
JOURNALIST: Have you bought him an 80th birthday present?
PM: No I haven't. I've had a few things to do, I'm sure I will be forgiven for that. Thank you.
JOURNALIST: What sorts of messages have the business leaders that you've spoken to this morning and last night given you about the direction of the US economy and (inaudible)
PM: We'll take that as the last question and the consistent view I've had in my discussions over the last few days with business leaders, with figures from the Administration and indeed in some of the discussions in Congress, in and around giving the address to Congress was a sense of some optimism about the progress of the American economy. 
When I've had discussions on earlier occasions a while back, many people were speculating about a ‘double dip' recession, all of that speculation is gone now. People are seeing signs of growth and change. Indeed the amount of growth I think has pleased people, it was ‘on the upside', to use the language of economists.
I think the reduction in unemployment also pleased people and was more than was expected, so these are good signs for the future.
Well yes, these are good signs for the future, there's a long road ahead when you've just got your unemployment rate under nine per cent, there's a long road ahead but there is a sense that things are going in the right direction. Thank you. 



	Excellencies.
	Members of the Commonwealth family,
	Friends,
	In particular thank you Sir Mark and Ambassador Charles for co-hosting this event.
	Thank you Ambassador Charles, and Minister Bellingham for your kind remarks.
	I am grateful for the opportunity to acknowledge Commonwealth Day with you here.
	This year's Commonwealth Day celebrations focus on women as agents of change.
	I think this theme is particularly appropriate for Commonwealth Day as the day itself focuses so much on reaching young people through schools.
	There's a marvellous practicality and idealism in the selection of the second Monday in March as Commonwealth Day.
	The ideal of sharing our hopes for a better world with the children of our countries the practicality that this particular day is chosen because it is a day when all our countries' children are in school!
	It is a very Commonwealth approach.
	A billion women and girls live in Commonwealth countries.
	If every one of those girls lived in a safe home, had good food and clean water and could get health care, we would live in a different world.
	Not just because of the difference it would make in their lives but because of the difference they could then make in the lives of their communities and  the world as agents of change.
	I have spent several days of this week here in New York and at the UN in wide ranging discussions with quite a range of people.
	Coming here to mark Commonwealth Day after that range of conversations I am very strongly reminded of the things Commonwealth countries really share.
	We share a distinctive way of doing things internationally.
	Consulting and co-operating, in the common interests of our peoples, and supporting international understanding and world peace.
	Events in the world and the issues we discuss as leaders regularly remind me:
	Not every country in the world shares this way of working.
	So it's good to be here with so many Commonwealth partners.
	We also share a distinctive set of concerns internationally.
	International peace and order.  Liberty for individuals.   Deep opposition to racism.  An ever-growing commitment to development.  And addressing climate change.
	So it's good to be here with so many Commonwealth friends.
	The nations and peoples of the Commonwealth  -  nations and peoples of six continents and five oceans  -  are enormously diverse.
	Taking in one quarter of the UN's members ... one third of the world's population ... and acting as a voice for some of the smallest countries in the developing world.
	Yet these values we share  -  our distinctive way of doing things in the world and our distinctive set of concerns for the world's people  -  unite us in a way that is truly wonderful.
	Our association of sovereign nations shares a remarkable international friendship.
	COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING 2011
	I'm delighted Australia will be hosting the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in October this year.
	Australia was honoured to be selected as the host nation, in our western city of Perth.
	Our preparations are well advanced and the setting for our meeting could not be more appropriate.
	Perth is a beautiful city.
	Perth overlooks the Indian Ocean and serves as a gateway to the beautiful state of Western Australia.
	It is a vibrant multicultural city, a centre for Australia's burgeoning minerals industry and enjoys rapidly expanding links to Asia, India and Africa, with many Commonwealth countries included.
	A fitting symbol of Australia's engagement in the world.
	As Chair of CHOGM, I want Australia to make a difference for the small and medium countries of the world.  No-one should have a monopoly on global decision-making.
	Australia's history and geography combine to give us a unique perspective: a perspective of both the North and the South.  Ensuring small and medium states have a voice in international decisions is an important priority for CHOGM.
	AUSTRALIA'S APPROACH AT THE UNITED NATIONS
The presence of so many friends from so many countries does give me an opportunity to describe Australia's approach to the challenges the nations of the world face today.
Combining practicality and idealism ... in service of our distinctive way of doing things in the world ... and our distinctive set of concerns for the world's people.
The challenge of international peace and order.  
When ordinary people think of the UN, they often think of peacekeepers  -  blue helmets. 
And increasingly we think of UN peace-builders.  These functions are a crucial benchmark for the UN's success or failure in an increasingly complex world. 
Australia has participated in more than 50 UN and other multilateral missions across the globe, and led several of these in our own region  -  in Timor-Leste, Solomon Islands and on the island of Bougainville in Papua New Guinea.  Today we have 3500 troops deployed globally for peace and security operations.
The challenge to foster liberty for individuals.   
Australia has an enduring commitment to the aims and purposes of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
Earlier this year, Australia was examined at the Universal Periodic Review in Geneva and we feel our record is worthy of our democratic aspirations. 
As we have recently been reminded, the desire for human dignity and respect is universal.  Governments forget this at their peril. 
The challenge of racism.  
Australia has a strong human rights record.  But like every country we can do better.   
Our own great challenge lies in closing the gap between Indigenous Australians and our society as a whole.    
In 2008 the Australian Parliament issued what is now simple know as the National Apology to our indigenous people. 
This was an historic and emotional moment in our modern history.
And our work goes on, to “close the gap” between indigenous people and all Australians.
Global poverty.
The 2000 UN Millennium Summit fundamentally changed the way world leaders saw development. 
We put the Millennium Development Goals at the heart of our development cooperation program. 
Australia has more than doubled our development assistance in the last five years and we are intending to double it again to 2015. 
Climate Change
We played an active and constructive role in the formation of the Cancun Agreements which built on the Copenhagen accord. 
Small island states under threat of climate change and rising oceans know Australia is doing everything possible internationally.
Our Fast Start funding of around $600 million was announced early and almost 80 per cent of it has already been allocated to developing countries. 
This is part of the $1.2 billion we are spending on climate change in developing countries over the next few years.
This is an ambitious agenda, addressing many challenges in many ways. 
I believe this ambition is appropriate.
We are ambitious for the UN and for the countries of the world. 
We hope others will share our ambition too.
I have appreciated the opportunity to present some of these thoughts to you. 
It is against this background that Australia has presented its candidacy for a seat on the UN Security Council in 2013-14.  I believe we have something to contribute. 
Australians are proud of our modern, multicultural people.
We are a global people: one quarter of Australians were born overseas.
And Australians are proud of our enthusiasm, energy and ideas. 
We are straightforward: we do what we say.
We believe in the multilateral system and its capacity to address global problems.
We believe in the ideal of good global citizenship.
We believe we can make a difference for the small and medium countries of the world.
Happy Commonwealth Day! 



PM: Thank you very much for making me so welcome and thank you to each of you who participated in raising money for the Queensland floods. As I've wandered through and said hello to everyone, so many of you personally came and made a commitment to doing some fundraising, that's the real Aussie spirit and thank you for showing it.
And it's tremendous to be in this wonderful, vibrant city and find so many Australians who are just wowing it here, congratulations to you (inaudible).
As I commented when I was briefly behind the bar, I did offer to do a bit of serving but that was quickly rejected, maybe they worried about my skill levels. But as I commented behind the bar, I don't really get out and about much anymore to drink beer, so it is a very special occasion.
Thank you very much, enjoy yourselves and I'm sure I'll take the beer with me, but probably have to relinquish it, as I go around the rest of the official program. I'm not sure you can turn up at a diplomatic function carrying a beer (inaudible).
In an Australian crowd you're only going to get urged on for the second beer, but please enjoy and thank you very much and I'll be returning to Australia tomorrow, I've had a great visit here in the US, we've been made incredibly welcome wherever we've been and it's been great to see so many Australian on the journey.
Thank you very much.



HOST: Prime Minister Gillard, thank you so much for taking the time to come and visit us.
PM: My pleasure. Thank you. 
HOST: And get to see the Stock Exchange. Hopefully you'll see it with some people on it too.
But over the past two days it's been incredibly busy for you. You've obviously spent time with President Obama, Ben Bernanke, Tim Geithner, Congress and a whole lot of other people. How's the visit been so far?
PM: It's been a fantastic visit and I couldn't have got a warmer welcome. It's-- been really enjoyable, interesting, stimulating. Having the opportunity to address Congress yesterday was a very special honour for Australia and I enjoyed it a great deal. So, it's a great way of reminding ourselves of the strong bonds between our two countries.
HOST: And we have a picture of you, which is a lovely picture, of you playing Australian football yesterday at the White House with the President. How did that come about?
PM: Well, we'd had the formal meeting where we talked about a range of issues, but I'd brought one of our Australian footballs, so we were just mucking around with it in the Oval Office. President Obama kept, you know, going like that, like you would with an American football, but that's not how we do it. We handball, we kick and we did that around the Oval Office without breaking anything.
HOST: Had to correct him and show him how to do it.
Well, you mentioned the speech to the joint session of Congress, which I had a chance to hear. It was very moving and you were talking about how as a little girl you saw America put a man on the Moon and actually got the afternoon off, they sent everyone home from school to go home and watch it, and you said that now, and I'm quoting you, ‘I believe that you can do anything still', about America. Look, our country's had a tough few years and I think a lot of people have questioned where America is headed and I wanted to just ask you what it is about America that you think makes our country special?
PM: I wanted to send that message when I was in Congress - a message of ‘be bold' to America. I am so optimistic about this country's future and almost every decade people predicted the demise of America and they've always been wrong and they'll be wrong again, and I think the special characteristics of Americans are their optimism, their belief in the future, their capacity for reinvention, for grabbing opportunities, innovating, changing, seizing the future, and I know that's what we're going to see in this country again.
HOST: And it matters a lot to hear that from Australia because when we look at Australia, your most important economic partner, by far, if you look at exports and trade, it's China now. Number one buyer of your iron, I think nearly half of their iron comes from your country, from Australia. Is China more important to Australia's future now than the United States?
PM: The United States and China are both important to our future. Our alliance with America is rock solid and we are still huge economic partners. Our free trade agreement has brought tremendous benefits and we want to keep working together and increasing trade and I'm very supportive of President Obama's trans-Pacific Partnership Trade Initiative.
Yes, we've got a big economic relationship with China too and we believe it's important to constructively engage with China. We are frank when we need to be, but we want to see China take its proper place in the rules-based order in our world  and we were very passionate about making sure the US sat down the able of the East Asia Summit. China is there, the major countries in the region are there, and we can work issues through.
HOST: Given, though, the reliance economically on China, I'm wondering what you think about how the terms some have thrown around about Australia that it's becoming an economic colony of China in some ways. Is that fair or totally insulting?
PM: Well, it's not a fair analysis on the facts. We've got a highly diversified economy. We get a lot of inward investment from the United States. Indeed, the inward investment we get from the United States is far greater than the inward investment we get from China.
So, we have a diversified economy. We're making our way in the world on our resources, of course. Our commodities are strong.
But we are also a strong services economy, a great agricultural trading nation. We've got a strong manufacturing sector, a great tourism sector. We want everybody to come and visit-
HOST: -Right, well, so there's that, yeah, but if you look take the top industries in Australia in terms of goods, all the top 10 are commodities. If you add in services, sure, tourism and education get in there, but are you worried that Australia is way too reliant on commodities?
PM: Look, we are making sure that we balance economic growth. The resources boom is a good thing. It's a great thing for our country.
HOST: Right.
PM: But we're also conscious that we need to use the wealth coming from the resources boom to invest in the things that will be the drivers of growth tomorrow, and the most important driver of growth tomorrow will be the skills and capacity of the Australian people. So, I'm passionate about using this moment in time to invest in education, invest in skills and to increase the participation rate of Australians in the workforce.
HOST: Would you be all right with a Chinese company buying one of your, benchmark, marquee companies, and obviously China does have a stake in some of your big mining companies in Rio, but a BHP Billiton or a Rio Tinto. I mean, it's a big issue in this country. Do you allow a Chinese company to come in and buy an American giant. Would you be open to that?
PM: Well, we have a Foreign Investment Review Board process to look at major investments with a national interest criteria. We, in our free trade agreement, the US-Australia free trade agreement, have increased the benchmarks, so it really has to be a huge investment from the United States-
HOST: -To trigger that-
PM: -before there's scrutiny, but for other investments, scrutiny happens. It happens for Chinese investments and any other investment, so we do keep a weathered eye on national interest concerns.
HOST: Right.
PM: But we're also an open trading economy and we accept the disciplines that come with that. We do want to see money move. We want to see investment move. We want to see trade in goods and services.
HOST: And then since we're talking about mining, obviously the mining tax in Australia has gotten a lot of discussion in markets around the world. I know that your version obviously is different than your predecessor's, but with the coal industry in Australia so hit by floods and coal and iron being what you would tax at up to 30 percent, are you still committed to pushing that mining tax through this year?
PM: Look, we are committed to pushing it through and it's a profit-based tax, so when you have problems like we had in Queensland with mines not able to operate because of floodwaters, then of course that affects their profitability, and under the Minerals Resources Rent Tax would take their tax burden down. But we think it's appropriate to be taxing on the upside when profits are strong.
HOST: So is it going to be at the 30 percent or are you open, as some are trying to push you to do, to increase that tax rate to 40 percent, as Mr. Rudd had originally proposed?
PM: We entered an agreement with the biggest miners in our country and we'll stick to it, so the new tax rate that I agreed with them will be the tax rate that we legislate.
HOST: When people think of Australia - all right, in this country - they think of kangaroos. They think of the Outback. They hopefully think of commodities. But they should be thinking about how you really emerged from the financial crisis unscathed, relative to all the other developed economies, so unscathed that when I looked at the numbers this week your housing prices are at record levels in Australia, and I'm wondering if you're worried about an eventual housing crash? I mean I thought housing prices almost six percent year on year, even now. That's a big jump.
PM: It is a big jump, and housing shortage is a big issue. We do need to make sure we are building enough houses and planning some more growth, but I'm very confident that the fundamentals of our economy are strong and we will be able to work our way through issues like housing supply shortage.
HOST: The floods obviously are contributing to that, but I mean it was horrible and we saw a lot of the images here with the loss of life and property and obviously affecting such a crucial industry for you. For Americans, I guess, I've seen it compared to Hurricane Katrina in terms of the dramatic affect it's had on Australia. Do you think that climate change was responsible for the floods?
PM: I don't think you can look at one weather event and say that equals climate change.
HOST: Right.
PM: But across the globe and into the future the scientists are telling us that there will be more extreme weather events with climate change. I believe we do have to act on climate change. I believe it's real. I think it's humans that are causing the carbon pollution that causes climate change, and so we've determined that we will price carbon, put a price on it from the first of July 2012. We are a very emissions-intensive economy. Per head of population we generate more emissions than Americans do.
HOST: Right. And you rely on coal.
PM: Our industrialisation has been based on relatively cheap coal. We've got to seize the opportunity for the clean energy future and pricing carbon will help us do that.
HOST: The carbon issue though is a big one in your country. There was a quote from you when you took office saying you weren't going to do anything with carbon taxing and that change in policy is part of the reason that support for your party is at a record low, and for the first time your personal approval ratings fell below 50 percent. Why the change of heart? What do you say to people who say, ‘Well, she said she's going to do this and now she's doing that'.
PM: Well, look, I understand this is going to be a big debate. Before the election I did say we needed to price carbon and we've always supported, as a political Party, a cap and trade scheme. We are in a minority government and we need to work with others to get legislation through, and in order to act we've agreed to have a scheme that is fixed price for a period - effectively like a tax - and then going to a full cap-and-trade scheme.
So, yes, that's different than what I said before the election. If I had every choice in the world we would be there going to a full cap-and-trade scheme, but I've seized the opportunities of this parliament to make sure we get carbon pricing done.
HOST: And you're willing to make this your signature issue? You're willing to, ‘my tenure, my career, to stand on this issue of carbon'?
PM: Well, I'd like my tenure, my career, to be remembered for creating an opportunity society in Australia; for making sure that every Australian child gets the chance at a high-quality education and has all of the opportunities that the future should bring that child. Part of those opportunities is going to be a clean energy future.
I can't stand by and have our economy fall behind as the world moves to a cleaner energy future.
HOST: I know you obviously spent a lot of time with the President and many issues came up, I know among them Afghanistan, And you're visiting our country in the midst of history. I mean it's an amazing moment, what we're seeing in the Middle East and the President is considering right now a no-fly zone over Libya.
This is a tough issue - how much it's going to cost, what we would get for it, who's going to be a part of it. You're a crucial ally of the United States. Oil prices matter to Australia as much as anyone else, and I'm curious whether you'd be part of, let's just call it a coalition of the willing if there were to be military involvement in Libya?
PM: Well, I think we are all absolutely revolted by the violence that we're seeing in Libya, and the message to Colonel Gaddafi from the US, from Australia, from the world is it's time to go - to stop this violence and to go.
A no-fly zone is one of the options before the Security Council. We believe it's vital that any action has Security Council support and we will wait to hear from the Security Council. We acted autonomously on sanctions. The Security Council then backed sanctions then.
Clearly further options can be looked at, including a no-fly zone, but this be Security Council-authorized.
HOST: All right, so not going ahead without that. And what about on Afghanistan? I mean, in Afghanistan you've had more troops serving than any other non-NATO country and withdrawal is slated right now for about 2014, although this week Secretary Gates had indicated he might keep some troops in a little bit longer than that. Do you support an accelerated withdrawal from Afghanistan or are you going to say we're in it until the end, even if the US moves that date?
PM: Well, we're in it to make sure that we are denying Afghanistan as safe haven for terrorists and I've been very clear with the Australian people - we want to transition security leadership to local Afghan forces, but we've got to do that when they can provide security sustainably. We can't transition out early only to have to transition back in later.
It's got to be sustainable, and I said to the Australian people the timetable that President Karzai has announced is 2014, but we should expected to be engaged in Afghanistan in some form to the end of this decade at least.
HOST: And one final topic, one I personally am very curious about and a lot of Americans don't know that Australia has more camels than any other country in the world. Your predecessor, Kevin Rudd, had supported- a lot of these camels obviously are wild and seen as pests by many Australians. He'd supported killing them in aerial culls and some of the pictures that came out from that were rather disturbing. So, I'm wondering whether you support aerial culls of camels or whether you believe this could be an industry for Australia? Some of the numbers we've seen are if you ranched camels the milk market alone could be $10 billion. The milk's good for autistic children or lactose-intolerant people. I know you've got a lot of things to think about, right, but I'm curious what you think about this issue.
PM: Look we need to deal with these issues in the best way. I understand that when culling's necessary people want to see that done humanely, but we are talking about huge amounts of terrain and sometimes a very sizeable problem, so I'm not sure that it's practical to say that that could all be dealt with through farming methods
So, we do have sometimes camels, sometimes wild horses, we have other pests that were introduced when people first came to Australia. Rabbits continue to be a great big problem-
HOST: -Cane toads.
PM: -cane toads. Yeah, you name it, we've got it, but we've also got a lot of wonderful wildlife that people come from around the world to see.
HOST: All right. Well, thank you so much Prime Minister Gillard. Wonderful to see you.
PM: Thank you very much. 



PM:  On behalf of Australia I want to express our very sincere condolences to the people of Japan and the government of Japan on the death and devastation we're seeing following the earthquake and tsunami.
Like people around the world I've been watching the images on our TV screens. They are truly shocking. This is a major disaster and whilst it's still unfolding we don't know the full scale of the devastation yet.
It is really very apparent that the Japanese people have been dealt an incredibly cruel blow by this earthquake and the tsunami following it.  I've spoken this morning with the acting Prime Minister Wayne Swan. He will convene a meeting with the National Security Council tomorrow, Australian time, to discuss how Australia can assist the people of Japan.
I have also spoken to our ambassador in Japan, he informs me that we have around 45 Australians registered in the region hardest hit by the earthquake. What of course we know is that there will be more Australians there than the 45 who registered. We don't know the total number at this stage.
The ambassador will be doing everything he can to get in contact with Australians and to ascertain their safety and welfare, but as people would well and truly understand the situation on the ground is difficult to make contact with people but he will be doing everything he can over the coming few days. I've indicated to him that I wish him to formally convey to the government of Japan our very sincere condolences and the fact that Australia stands ready to assist.
Now of course following this earthquake there is a tsunami warning for many countries across the ocean as the force of this continues to move through. I'm advised that there is no risk of a tsunami in Australia, but there is a risk for many other countries and our posts have been activated there, our diplomatic posts, to do everything they can to contact Australians.
My advice to Australians in any of those countries is to listen for emergency warnings and certainly to make contact with our local embassy and authorities when they can.
For Australians who are concerned about loved ones in Japan and of course tens of thousands indeed hundreds of thousands of Australians travel to Japan every year. For Australians who are concerned about their loved ones our advice is to endeavour to contact them first. 
If that proves impossible then there is a hotline number to ring at the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to assist people, that number is 1300 555 135 but please if people could try and contact their loved ones first and use that number if they're unable to get in contact.
The devastation we're seeing is in the north of Japan, having spoken to the ambassador whilst Tokyo was shaken there is not bad damage there and his advice is that Australians in Tokyo are safe and that there are not in concerns for Australians there. So the focus for Australians concerned about loved ones would be if they know they are in the north of Japan, in the hardest hit region.
This is a terrible, terrible natural disaster. I have been personally shocked by the images that we've seen. It's going to be a very, very stressing, difficult, tragic time for our friends in Japan. We'll stand by them and we'll do anything we can to assist.
JOURNALIST: Will Australia be sending in teams or what shape is the assistance likely to take?
PM: Look we will stand by and we will act in accordance with the wishes of the government of Japan. As people would know from the Christchurch earthquake which was so recent, these natural disasters just seem to be coming at us all the time.
But as people would know from that earthquake we did assist with things like search and rescue teams, we had very expert search and rescue teams. We did assist with hospital and medical facilities, with the emergency transportation in of medical personnel to help and we did in that earthquake assist with police resources as well. But we will do what we are asked by the government of Japan to assist.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister a number of MPs are currently in Japan at the moment. Do you have updates about their whereabouts and their well being at this stage?
PM: Yes I do, I spoke to our ambassador about our Parliamentary Delegation which is travelling in Japan. This involved MPs Amanda Rishworth, Stephan Jones, Senator Cash from Western Australia, Stuart Robert from the Gold Coast and one Victorian MP Natalie Hutchins. They are safe and well, they were on a bullet train, the journey was interrupted but otherwise they are safe and well.
JOURNALIST: Will this affect your own travel plans, to get back to Australia, at this stage?
PM: At this stage we don't quite know. It had been my intention to meet with Admiral Willard in Hawaii. We now anticipate Admiral Willard will be very much focused on American efforts to assist the people of Japan, but we will commence our journey now.
We were due to refuel in San Francisco and we will continue with that refuelling stop and then take advice there about the circumstances in Hawaii and how Admiral Willard is positioned. Clearly I will well and truly understand if his focus and attention needs to shift to directing American military assets to assist the people of Japan.
JOURNALIST: And just saying that there's definitely no threat at all to any parts of Australia?
PM: That is the advice we have. We have a tsunami warning system and from information from the warning system and from the bureau and our experts who track the weather and tsunamis for us the advice is that there is no threat to the Australian mainland.
But I don't want to be seen to be dismissive about what will follow this earthquake.  This was a huge earthquake, 8.9, that's a very, very huge severe earthquake and consequently the tsunami and ocean reaction it will cause will be considerable. So there are countries at risk, fortunately Australia is not one of them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you shocked at what nature is throwing at us this summer?
PM: It just goes on and on and on doesn't it. I think the people of Australia would be looking at this and just shaking their heads in wonderment.
Every time we've hoped we've seen the worst and that we're in recovery and life is following a more normal pattern, then mother nature seems to throw another huge disaster at us and this is a huge disaster.
The images are really shocking. And whilst we can't be clear about the scale of the devastation at this stage, I think all the early indications are this is a dreadful natural disaster and will cause considerable loss of life. 



PM: Good morning. As people would be aware I returned to Australia in the early hours of this morning, since my return I've been briefed by the Chief of the Defence Force, by our Deputy National Security Adviser and by senior officials from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Attorney-General's Department, which manages emergencies, on the situation in Japan.
I did have the opportunity on my return journey from the United States to spend some time in Hawaii with Admiral Willard. He was in a position to brief me on the way in which the American military is assisting the people of Japan at this dreadful time. 
Like Australians I am continuing to watch and be shocked by the images of devastation and destruction coming from Japan. We've all seen images now of buildings swaying, of walls of water hitting buildings, of the rubble and devastation that has left townships that have literally been eradicated from the face of the earth.
Like all Australians I've been truly shocked by what I've seen and I do want to convey my sincere sympathies and condolences to the Japanese government and the people of Japan. I have written to the Prime Minister of Japan to convey these sentiments to him and I am hoping to speak to him relatively soon, of course he is fully deployed on leading his people and the recovery efforts at this dreadful time.
We know in the last 48 hours Japan has continued to sustain aftershocks, some of them exceeding a magnitude of six, more tsunamis and extensive fires, so our friends in Japan confront continual agony.
The first priority in these dreadful conditions is search and rescue, that is saving lives, saving the lives of those who are trapped in this rubble and wreckage. The Japanese government asked the Australian government for assistance with search and rescue and we are providing it.
One of our Defence Force C-17 aircraft is departing later today carrying a 72 strong New South Wales search and rescue team and they will also have with them Queensland sniffer dogs and their handlers. These are the same search and rescue personnel who did such amazing work in Christchurch, their skills and capacities are being called on again, we wish them well as they go to Japan to look for survivors. They are highly trained, highly motivated, wanting to make a difference and they will be there seeking to make a difference for the people of Japan at this time.
As a government out priority is also on assisting Australians who are in Japan and providing them with the information and advice that they need at this time. As of early this morning we have 2331 Australians registered in Japan, we've confirmed the safety of 1271 of those. The number of Australians registered in the most affected regions is 191, but we do anticipate that there are around several hundred Australians in the most affected regions. Not everyone who travels registers and our ordinary experience is numbers do exceed the number of Australians registered.
Our embassy staff are doing everything they can to contact all Australians in Japan. Of course we can't rule out the possibility that Australians might be amongst those caught up in the worst of this, but we've got no information at this time which would lead us to conclude there are Australian casualties, we are still in the process of checking the safety of Australians.
This process is very difficult, there are significant disruptions to everything that enables you to check on people's safety, significant disruptions to communications, but our embassies staff are literally working night and day to check on the safety of Australians.
A team of four officials will deployed to the most affected region as soon as it is safe to do so, we are hoping that that will be as early as tomorrow in Japan. We're also increasing the presence of officials at our embassy in Tokyo, so we can have more people there working through this checking process, an addition 10 officials are being deployed from Canberra into our Tokyo Embassy.
We have a team of four officials who are at Narita Airport on a 24 hour-a-day basis, to help Australians who are trying to exit Japan. Commercial flights are flying, six Australian bound flights departed last night. My current advice from our officials in Japan is that the backlog of Australians at the airport seeking to get on flights out has been cleared, but we do accept that more Australians will come to the airport seeking to get a flight out and the officials will be there to assist them.
Our information to Australian family and friends, people here who are worried about someone who is in Japan, a loved one who is there, is firstly they should try and contact them directly, if that proves impossible then they should contact our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade 24 hour Emergency Centre  -  the number is 1300 555 135. If people are calling from overseas the number is 612 6261 3305.
We understand people would be very concerned, but please so that our officials are directing their energies where it is most needed, if people can endeavour to make contact themselves first we would be grateful for that.
As people would be aware from television news reports and other media reports, Japanese authorities are today tacking a whole new set of challenges and that whole new set of challenges arises from the explosion of the outer walls of a nuclear power plant, which is 270km north east of Tokyo.
The Japanese government has said that the explosion did not affect the nuclear reactor and that containment has not been affected. Now obviously this is a very serious issue, Japanese authorities have said to people that they should evacuate the 20km zone around the nuclear plant. Our advice to any Australians in the region is to listen to the Japanese authorities and to evacuate the zone where Japanese authorities have indicated evacuation is required.
We are certainly saying to Australians do not travel to this region, please listen to the advice of Japanese authorities. We will continue to stay in touch with the Japanese government and Japanese authorities about this situation in order to get the most up to date information from them. We have requested information from them and we do want to make sure we are monitoring the situation very closely, as do our international counterparts.
In all of these circumstances it may be that the Japanese government asks us for further assistance and support. We have indicated to the government of Japan that we would provide additional support if it is requested. Of the things that we could do to assist if a request was made, we could certainly assist with medical teams to meet the medical needs of the people of Japan as they struggle with this immense crisis and we could provide assistance with disaster victim identification if a request is made, we do have nuclear experts and should their assistance be required then of course we would make them available to assist.
But at this stage the direct request that has been made of us is for search and rescue teams and we have responded.
Australians have witnessed here in our own country, we witness and lived through some dreadful, dreadful days this summer. We then witnessed and lived through the devastating earthquake which hit Christchurch. Now unfortunately the tragedy continues with our friends in Japan, we wish them all the best as they struggle with this immense and devastating crisis. It's a dreadful time and we will be there to support them if they need our support in any further way.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you know how Australians over there are holding up and whether they're helping themselves in the recovery effort?
PM: Look, my advice from our Ambassador when I spoke to him was that people were responding calmly and stoically to a very difficult set of circumstances. I don't have direct reports of the ways in which Australians are assisting, but I imagine Australians are doing everything they can to help the people of Japan and to help each other during this difficult time. I think the spirit we saw on display in Queensland would be the same kind of Aussie spirit we would see in Japan in these circumstances.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, from your briefings how serious is the damage afflicted to the Japanese nuclear power reactor?
PM: The advice that I have is as I've just described to you, the advice we have from Japan is that the explosion was to the wall of the nuclear reactor, that is was not to the nuclear core of the reactor but to the wall of the reactor. We have requested further information; we will be very closely monitoring the situation.
This is a huge added burden on the people of Japan at a time where they are already dealing with devastation and trying to get about the search and rescue tasks, the supporting of individuals, the getting of supplies through. But the advice to us from the Japanese authorities is that the explosion people have seen on TV screens was to the wall of the reactor, not the core of the reactor.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given the scale of the disaster and the and difficulties the Japanese authorities are facing in (inaudible), is it really a priority do you think for them to provide regular updates to Australia about the state of the nuclear plant?
PM: Look, this is part of what we're doing overall. The Japanese government has reached out to countries like Australia, they're in regular contact about this emergency and how they're responding to it, they're in regular contact so that we can respond to the tasks that they need done, like we're responded to providing the search and rescue team and the sniffer dogs.
So we will continue to exchange information at all levels, including this level. This is part of our positive, ongoing collaboration with them, exchanging information, understanding what's happening and consequently having a clearer and clearer view about what is needed to assist.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the explosion at the nuclear plant, should that give proponents of nuclear energy in Australia pause for thought?
PM: I really think I'd prefer to leave all of that for another day. We need to focus just now on what the people of Japan need us to do, there will come a time where we'll understand far more in detail what has actually happened with this nuclear power plant, how it's related to the earthquake and tsunami and all of those things will no doubt be the subject of scrutiny and debate, but I don't think today is the day.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do your briefings give you any reason to think that there is any risk to the region, any nuclear risk to the region because of the situation today?
PM: The briefings that I have had, and of course we are relying on the information supplied to us by the Japanese authorities, is that the explosion was to the wall, that it was not to the nuclear core, but the exclusion zone has been put in place and that deals with the risk coming from the circumstances at the nuclear reactor.
We're relying on the information supplied to us from the Japanese authorities, but I would say this, the Japanese authorities are responding to this circumstance, they'll be wanting to keep the people of Japan safe, they'll be responding to in order to keep the people of Japan safe. We have Australians in Japan, we want them to be safe, that's why I'm urging that they respond to the advice of Japanese authorities.
Certainly on the briefings to me, I mean there is no risk to Australia in any way, shape or form. It's a question of how people in Japan, how people anywhere near this nuclear power plant should act and my advice to them is act as the Japanese authorities are telling you to act. If there's an evacuation zone then obey the authorities instructions and get out of that zone that is to be evacuated.
JOURNALIST: On the information and updates you're getting on the nuclear situation, do you support Kevin Rudd's approach of demanding a briefing, or would you rather wait until the government has the information to provide to you?
PM: Look, I've spoken to Kevin Rudd this morning and what he's advised me is he had a conversation with his counterpart, the Foreign Minister of Japan, about the whole range of circumstances following this huge disaster. He had a positive conversation, we're wanting information so we know best how to help, we're wanting information so we can best understand the advice that we can give Australians who may be in Japan. The Foreign Minister had a conversation of that nature with his counterpart.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) urgent briefing when the Japanese government has a lot more on its mind than providing briefings to places like Australia. Is it appropriate to demand an urgent briefing?
PM: What is happening as we deal with this devastation in Japan is that many levels in the government, from the level of me talking to my counterpart the Prime Minister of Japan, which I will, Prime Minister Kan, to the Foreign Minister talking to his counterpart, to our military leaders, Angus Houston has been talking a military counterpart, our emergency management people are engaged with their emergency management counterparts, our nuclear regulatory authority is engaged with their counterparts. At every level we are exchanging information and collaborating, that's perfectly proper, perfectly appropriate. It's about us best understanding what's going on so we can best assist, It's about us best understanding what's going on so we can give the best advice to Australians.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the Foreign Minister's comments in terms of a no fly zone and now the demand for an urgent briefing fully supported by your Cabinet?
PM: Look, I know that there's been a lot of commentary back here about Libya and these sorts of issues. My position, the position of the Foreign Minister on the question of a no fly zone in Libya is exactly the same and I think  -  to be frank, I think every Australian has the same position on the disaster in Japan, which is how can we help, how can we send out best sympathies, how can we send our support. So there's no difference in any of those approaches.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you concerned about the fatigue of Australian search and rescue crews, given the spate of disasters they've been asked to respond to in recent months?
PM: I directly asked that question when I was briefed a little bit earlier today, because I was concerned about fatigue issues and I've been advised that they have been able to rest for an appropriate period since their return from Christchurch. I'm well aware we're putting a big burden on their shoulders, it's been a dreadful and continuing set of incidents that we've has to ask them to respond to, but I specifically asked about fatigue and was assured that they had been rested sufficiently in order to go and respond.
I've has the opportunity to meet with some of our search and rescue personnel, it's what they're trained to do, it's what they want to do, it's what they're motivated to do. They're devoting their lives, literally to getting out there and saving the lives of others when search and rescue is needed, so they're going to Japan to do just that, the thing that they believe in that took them to search and rescue in the first place.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we were told they were meant to leave yesterday. Is there a reason for the delay of them leaving today, is there problems getting on the ground?
PM: Sorry, say the first bit again?
JOURNALIST: Sorry, we were told yesterday that the search and rescue teams were likely to leave last night, is there a reason why it's been pushed back to today?
PM: There were some Defence operational issues which needed to be dealt with in getting the C-17 loaded and up and so that's what's dictated the timing, the availability of the C-17 and getting it loaded and up.
Once the C-17 is in Japan, one thing that we may be asked to do, the request hasn't come in yet, but one thing we may be asked to do is station the C-17 there, they are these absolutely huge aircraft, people have probably seen them on their TV screens because they were used to fly supplies around Queensland during the flooding.
One of the things they may be asked to do is stay and help move supplies around to those parts of Japan that need the basic things like water and food, which are questions of supply and resupply are always critical following a natural disaster and given the scale of the devastation we're seeing on our TV screens, getting the basics - water and food  -  to people is going be a critical issue.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, are you concerned about reports that a second group of detainees has escaped from Christmas Island?
PM: Look, I've asked for a briefing on that since my return early this morning and I have received that briefing. What I've been told is that the situation is well in hand, a number of people did leave the facility at Christmas Island, Christmas Island of course is just that  -  it is an island  -  so there's nowhere to go other than to other parts of the island. At all times they were watched by our staff up there and Australian Federal Police officers will obviously be working to get people back into the facility.
JOURNALIST: But it's obviously a concern, Prime Minister, I mean clearly the situation there isn't under control in terms of inside the detention centre itself.
PM: We've seen incidents like this one at detention centres in the past.
JOURNALIST: So they're acceptable?
PM: We obviously say to the contractor Serco, who runs these facilities for us when we've seen incidents, for example in other detention centres. We investigate, we see if there is any contractual breach and if there is a contractual breach then we take the appropriate action. But my advice is that this is a situation which is well in hand.
JOURNALIST: You mention the C-17 might stay in Japan.
PM: It's a possibility, we haven't been asked yet, but if we are asked then we'll make it available.
JOURNALIST: I'm just wondering if you've had any indication from the Japanese authorities that an offer to do more than what we're already doing, whether that's likely to be taken up, is there any likelihood from them that they will ask us for that?
PM: Look, I think it's well and truly possible we'll be asked for more, but our job is to indicate what we can do, stay across all of the information, offer what we can do and then respond to requests as they come in. So if you put yourself in the shoes of the people who are managing this situation in Japan and imagine how overwhelming it is, clearly they are working through, they're identifying tasks, when they identify tasks they then reach out to international partners and if they reach out to us, we'll be there.
JOURNALIST: And do you have any advice on how quickly we could get medical teams there, or victim ID teams there, are they ready to go now, would they be ready within days?
PM: We could do all of that very quickly, it's once again a question of getting people loaded on to appropriate military aircraft and transported up to go and help in Japan, but our Australian Defence Force could make available aircraft to get people in.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, support seems to be growing in the Middle East for a no fly zone. Given your discussion with Admiral Willard and American leaders and the briefings you had, do you have any better idea of what role Australia might play in such an operation?
PM: We've been clear all along that, and I've referred people to my statement in the Parliament on 2nd March, I called then for the United Nations Security Council to consider a no fly zones. I've repeated that at every occasion I've ever been asked about this issue. A new piece of information effectively overnight is that the Arab League has decided to support a no fly zone and I anticipate that that indication of support from the Arab League would feed into Security Council members considering this question of a no fly zone.
But we've also said consistently, in terms of putting it into operation, that this would be for NATO to put into operation. We've been very clear that we're a long way from Libya and we would not be in a position to assist with putting it into operation. But our call has been consistent, our call has been clear; we are revolted by the violence being wrecked against the people of Libya. We are calling on Colonel Qaddafi to go, I made that call when the Parliament was sitting, I've reiterated it every opportunity I've had. He must go so that we can see this violence cease and I have consistently said we are calling on the Security Council to consider a no fly zone.
JOURNALIST: Is it a bit peculiar for the Australian Foreign Minister to be travelling around the Middle East advocating this action in which Australia can play no active role?
PM: I think when you consider what the Foreign Minister has been saying, what I have been saying, what I think many people in Australia are saying  -  they are seeing this violence and they are disgusted by it, they are revolted by it, they want to see it come to an end.
No one wants to see people who are doing no more than raising their voices in support of basic freedoms killed for having raised their voices. So driven by our Australian values, valuing freedom, valuing democracy, and valuing peace, we of course have raised out voice and said the Security Council must consider a no fly zone. I think that's absolutely consistent with everything value we hold dear.
JOURNALIST: Do you intend to let your Foreign Minister continue to have the level of independence that he's displayed to date in terms of advocating this or that around the world, I mean that's not a very conventional arrangement in Australian politics. Are you entirely comfortable with the Foreign Minister having as much independence and discretion as he seems to have had to date in order to set Australia's foreign policy?
 PM: Can I say there are a million assumptions in that question and not one of them is right. Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard will attend New Zealand's National Memorial Service in Christchurch this Friday to commemorate the lives lost in the Christchurch earthquake on 22 February.
The Prime Minister will be accompanied by the Governor-General, Ms Quentin Bryce AC, and the Leader of the Opposition, the Hon Tony Abbott MP.
They will convey the deepest sympathies of the Australian people to those affected by the earthquake.
Two Australians, a long-term Australian resident of New Zealand nationality and an elderly Australian citizen who lived in Christchurch, died in the earthquake, along with 164 others.
The Prime Minister will reiterate her offer of Australian Government support as New Zealand begins the reconstruction of Christchurch.
The overall Australian effort at the height of the crisis involved more than 600 people.
The Australian Government has also donated $5 million to the New Zealand Red Cross Earthquake Appeal, following advice from the New Zealand Government. 



JONES: Good evening and welcome to Q&amp;A. I'm Tony Jones and to answer your questions tonight the Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard. Please welcome the Prime Minister.Okay. Well, Q&amp;A is live from 9.35 Eastern Daylight Savings Time but it's simulcast on ABC News 24 Australia network and News Radio and you can go to our website to send you questions and join the Twitter conversation using the hash tag that's just appearing on your screen now.
Well, Julia Gillard arrived back in Australia yesterday, fresh from her visit to the United States. Over there she was praised by Barack Obama and given a standing ovation in Congress. But following her proposal for a carbon tax in Australia, she's facing some of Labor's worst ever opinion polls. We'll get to those issues soon but our first question tonight comes from a Maria Bairaktaris.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yes, thank you very much. My question is in the aftermath of the earthquake and tsunami in Japan, will the Labor Party continue to entertain the idea of nuclear power for Australia?PM: We haven't entertained the idea of nuclear power. The Labor position has been opposed to the development of nuclear energy. We don't need it. We're a country with abundant solar, wind, geothermal, tidal - you name it, we've got renewable sources of energy so we don't think nuclear energy is right for this country.JONES: You personally or the Labor Party? Because Martin Ferguson, who is one of your ministers, would like to see a debate on nuclear energy and I'm just wondering if that debate is now over.PM: Well, I think to be fair to Martin, Martin has talked about some matters involving exporting uranium but the Labor position is entirely clear, which is we don't think we need nuclear energy. We don't seek the development of a nuclear industry in this country. So that's where we are.
When we look at what's happening in Japan, I think what goes through all of our minds isn't so much a debate about nuclear energy. I'm sure we'll continue to discuss those things in our country, but just the humanitarian circumstance we're seeing on the ground, it's just truly shocking and so many people still in need of basic supplies, food and water and we're helping move some of them around and getting a search and rescue team in.JONES: Can Australia do more and are you being asked to do more and are you prepared to do more?PM: We're certainly prepared to do more and I spoke to the Prime Minister of Japan last night around 6 o'clock our time and said if you need us to do anything more then we're happy to do it.
Amongst the things we will probably be asked to do and will do, we've flown a C17 up, which is one of those huge military aircraft. It took the search and rescue team up and their equipment - they have a lot of equipment. We'll probably leave that in Japan so it can assist with moving food and water supplies around and we've given an open offer about medical teams, disaster victim identification, which is obviously not a nice thing but a necessary thing in these circumstances, but we haven't - the Japanese haven't indicated whether they want to accept those offers yet.JONES: Just on this nuclear question, well, the potential disaster and a potential meltdown in several reactors, Kevin Rudd yesterday asked his Japanese counterpart for urgent briefings on the safety of these reactors and the situation there. Did you get the briefings and are you still concerned at the regional implications if there was a nuclear meltdown?PM: We're getting information flows through, so they come from the Japanese counterparts to our own nuclear experts here and at every level of government - political levels, functional levels - there's collaboration between us and the relevant part of the Japanese government, so emergency management working together, military working together and our nuclear people have been exchanging information and the situation has been pretty grim and we're certainly hoping that there's improvement in keeping the coolant levels up over the next 24 hours.
But it's a tough situation. Having said that the Japanese have had nuclear power for a long time and they've got great experts and great engineers and all of that kind of stuff. So everything that can be done is being done but it's, you know, a pretty problematic situation that they're working their way through and pretty tough on top of everything else they're struggling with.
JONES: All right. Let's go to our next question. It comes from Kate Marshall.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Julia, I work for Red Cross and we've already seen a whole string of disasters and it's not a quarter of the way through the year. Do you think it's actually time for Australia to consider some sort of future fund against catastrophe and, if so, what form would it take?PM: We've certainly had a year of it, haven't we, and let's hope we don't see anything else for the rest of the year in this country. I think there's a live debate about how we make provision for disasters in the future. Certainly Senator Nick Xenophon opened up a conversation about insurance and I think we should have that conversation. Realistically we make proper provision for natural disasters.
You know, normally we're able to step up and do it through our natural disaster arrangements, working with the states. What was different this year was the size and scale of the economic damage. What happened in Queensland with the floods particularly is probably the most costly natural disaster we've ever seen in economic terms. That's why we had to strike some special measures like the flood levy. But I think it is worth thinking our way through. Can we do this better for the future and that conversation will continue.JONES: You talked about that before, a conversation continuing. What's the conversation going to include? I mean, does it include the real possibility of a permanent natural disaster fund?PM: Well, I think it includes looking at these insurance questions and we've got a process now to do that. In terms of making budget provision, you know, we are normally able to make budget provision. That's been the history. What was different this time was just the size and scale of the disaster.JONES: Okay. We'll go to our third question tonight. You're watching Q&amp;A where you get to ask the questions. The next one comes from Ruby Hamad.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi. Prime Minister, in your gushing speech to US Congress last week, you tearfully proclaimed that America "can do anything!" Millions of Australians cringed. In the year 2011, can we really not have a relationship with the United States without paying lip service to the myth of American exceptionalism?PM: Well, that's an interesting question. That's an interesting question and I thank you for it but I guess I'm taking a little bit of a different view. I think we can be bold and confident in our own right as Australians and still acknowledge what is great about American and their capacity for reinvention, for change, for innovation and that's what I sought to do in that speech to Congress. We've been in an alliance for 60 years. We're different nations. We're different peoples. I've said we're not little Americans. We're Australians. We've got our own values and our own way of approaching things.JONES: How are they different?PM: Well, I think it's a set of things really. One of my favourite quotes is about how prisoners of war responded in Changi and the historian Gavan Daws has recorded that right down to the depths of degradation people kept their national characteristics. So he's talked about the UK holding on - the British soldiers holding onto their class system, the Americans holding onto their individualism, being the great individualists of the camps, and Australians forming male bonded welfare states to support each other through these dreadful, dreadful times of starvation. Now, I don't think in modern Australia we talk about male bonded welfare states and I don't think that that's how we think of ourselves but I do think we still have that sense of a fair go and pulling together. I think Americans tend to a more individualised view of the world. They look less to government. You know, health care is a good example of that, where we look at the American debate and think what on earth are they going on about? We know public health works. We know Medicare works. We know the PBS works.JONES: But you didn't take the opportunity to tell them that. I suppose getting back to the question...PM: Well, Tony, to be fair to my speech, I took the opportunity to tell them a few things that I thought it was important for them to hear. I think a confident America is good for the world and...JONES: What was it - because the questioner asked about the tearful part of the speech and that was right at the end when you were talking about seeing a man land on the moon. What was it that brought a tear to your eye, frankly, about that?PM: If I was having a conversation with you, Tony, over a cup of coffee one morning or a glass of wine one night and we were recalling our school days and started talking about the moon landing I doubt that I would feel tearful about it. But in an occasion like the Congress, there was a lot of emotion and warmth in the room. I think that was emotion and warmth about the bonds between our two countries.JONES: Did you get carried away by the personal warmth shown to you?PM: No, I just think I was reflecting the nature of the occasion and I did want to say to that very special place to speak - I did want to say be bold, which I think is amongst the best of the American traditions, that sense of ‘can do', which actually led them to the moon. You know, something that when it was first said sounded ridiculous - we're going to put a man on the moon - and yet they did it. I think that that sense of can do, of America being bold, is good for the world. We don't want a hesitant, inward-looking America and that was the message of my speech.JONES: Briefly, when I was a small boy my first impression of America was of the Vietnam War and the fact that young Australians were being conscripted to go and fight in this war and there were demonstrations in streets and the notion of ‘all the way with LBJ' and at that time Labor figures were leading the demonstrations. There's no sort of reflection of any of that Labor tradition in your speech - a sort of cynicism about American power.PM: Now, Tony, I'm going to have to be unkind and say that's because you're older than me.JONES: Not that much.PM: I'm sorry -JONES: Not that much actually.PM: Well, no, it's not that much now that we're this age but when you're little it is a fair bit. I don't remember the Vietnam moratorium demonstrations. I just don't. I think - I mean, the big demonstrations were 1968, 1969. I was seven and eight years old. I don't remember them. So that is not my first impression of America. Now -JONES: Your Labor colleagues didn't bring you up to speed on that when you (indistinct). I'm surprised.PM: I didn't have Jim Cairns lecturing in my primary school in South Australia. I'm sorry to disappoint you.JONES: Okay. Let's pass it back to the audience. We've actually got another question and it comes from Adam Marsters.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thanks, Tony. Prime Minister, following Wikileaks publishing of classified documents in December of last year, you labelled the organisation's actions illegal, despite being unable to identify any law which had actually been broken. Given the increasingly vocal support for Wikileaks, do you now regret such comments?PM: I can tell already my answer is probably not going to please the audience but let me make my attitude clear. First, I want to lay to rest one myth that's kind of got out there. We are supporting Julian Assange the same way we would support any Australian citizen who got into a legal difficulty overseas.
We support people who are accused of drug trafficking. We support people who are accused of murder. Whatever view people have about those kinds of crimes, and I'm sure everybody here would say, "Well, drug trafficking is wrong. Murder is wrong," we support Australian citizens who have got into trouble overseas. So my view about the conduct is neither here nor there in that sense. He's getting the same support someone called John Smith would get in the same situation.
But I do have a view about the merits and morals of the act and I simply don't see the moral force in it. I have got a lot of respect for people who whistleblow. I know enough about American history to know the history of Watergate and Deep Throat did the right thing getting that information into the public domain.
There are people who have worked for big tobacco who have got information into the public domain, being whistleblowers. They've acted and they've acted for a moral purpose. I respect that. At the centre of Wikileaks, I don't see that moral purpose. It's just...JONES: You didn't see - you didn't see -PM: - here it is, have it.JONES: You didn't see any potential moral purpose in the leaked documents which showed that Middle Eastern potentates were behaving corruptly?PM: Well, no. In this sense, to the -JONES: Because some people say that some of those issues helped lead, for example, in Tunisia, to the overthrown of the government.PM: But what I'm going to really is Assange's motivations and I think if you're motivation - I can respect whistleblowing if your motivation is to right wrong. His...JONES: So what do you think his - what do you think his motivation is?PM: Well, his motivation, as stated, is a sort of anarchic here it all is, just have it and I don't have a great deal of respect for that. Now, I understand people will take different views on it but that's the view that motivated me to make those comments.JONES: Okay. You're watching Q&amp;A. Remember you can send web or video questions to our website. The address is on the screen to find out how to do that. Well, the next question is a video question and it comes from Julian Assange, who is under house arrest in England.JULIAN ASSANGE: Prime Minister, you just got back from Washington but what Australian citizens want to know is which country do you represent? Do you represent Australians and will you fight for Australian interests because it's not the first time that you or a member of your cabinet has been into a US government building and exchanged information.
In fact, we have intelligence that your government has been exchanging information with foreign powers about Australian citizens working for Wikileaks. So Prime Minister, my question to you is this: when will you come clean about precisely what information you have supplied the foreign powers about Australian citizens working or affiliated with Wikileaks and if you cannot give a full and frank answer to that question, should perhaps the Australian people consider charging you with treason?JONES: Take the treason part first, if you like.PM: Well, of course, as Prime Minister of this country I represent this country all day, every day. You don't have an accent like mine and get confused with being someone from another nation so let's just put that to rest. On the exchange of information he's talking about I honestly don't know what he is talking about so I'm afraid I can't help him with full and frank disclosures. I don't know anything about exchanging information about people who work for Wikileaks.JONES: So it hasn't happened to your knowledge?PM: To my knowledge it hasn't happened. But on the more broad allegations he makes about do we exchange information about Australian citizens with foreign governments, yes, we do sometimes. Following up transnational crimes like people smuggling, following up transnational crimes like drug trafficking, following up like transnational crimes like terrorism.  Of course we exchange information.JONES: What about espionage which, of course, is the charge the United States would like to lay at the feet of Julian Assange?PM: Well, Mr Assange hasn't been charged with anything relating to Wikileaks. He's got some legal issues relating to personal conduct questions - alleged personal conduct questions in Sweden - and no one in the United States raised with me Mr Assange. No one.JONES: Okay. I mean but you are acknowledging and I suppose we're going to find out eventually from him - he didn't supply us with any information, I must say, to prove this but he says he has the information. There is an intelligence sharing arrangement with the United States, as you've just acknowledged. It's not inconceivable, is it, that we could have shared intelligence, Australia, that is, with American security agencies about him or his colleagues in Wikileaks?PM: Well, I'm not going to do hypotheticals on hypotheticals on hypotheticals. Do we exchange intelligence with the United States? Yes, we do. It's part of our alliance and it's in the best interests of this country. We are a small place. We therefore - in population terms - we therefore can't have the world's best intelligence networks. We just couldn't support them in terms of money and capacity. It's in our interest to share intelligence with a nation like the United States which is part of our defence arrangements with them and so it should be.JONES: Okay. All right. We've got a web question on this subject. It's from Nin Butrus in Melbourne: "American politicians have called for the execution of Australian citizen Julian Assange. Will you guarantee that Mr Assange will not be extradited to the US where he may face espionage charges and the death penalty?"PM: Well, once again we're doing hypotheticals on hypotheticals here. But policy-wise we do not extradite people who could be subject to the death penalty. That's not a question of Mr Assange or not Mr Assange. That's Australian policy. We just don't.JONES: Okay. Our next question and we'll move onto a different subject completely, comes from Joanna King.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi, Julia. Since becoming Foreign Affairs Minister, Kevin Rudd has become Eddie Everywhere, providing media commentary at seemingly every opportunity. Today, an opinion poll has Mr Rudd ahead of you as preferred Labor leader. Do you think he needs to be reined in and although you say you don't put any weight behind opinion polls, how do you explain his clear rise in popularity?PM: Well, I don't put any weight behind opinion polls and I don't think leadership is about opinion polls, so that doesn't really, you know, cause me to consider it any way. I just don't worry about those kinds of things. On Kevin's role as Foreign Affairs Minister, when I appointed him to that job, I always knew Kevin was going to be an activist foreign affairs minister and, yes, he is and he's someone with enormous work capacities and you're seeing that on display as he travels around the world.
But as he does that, he's doing things that are in our national interest every step of the way. He's been very active on the question of responding to the dreadful violence that we're seeing in Libya. He's very active now on dealing with the issue in Japan. We've got Australian citizens to locate and make sure they're safe. That's done through our embassy.
We've got a backstop staff. We've got to get more resources in and Kevin is making sure all of that happens. So you should expect to see him doing an activist job as foreign minister. I think that's a good thing for this country.JONES: What about the last part of the question which was "Do you feel threatened by the fact that he might want your job?"PM: Well, I think that's an assumption on an assumption too. I mean every -JONES: Probably based on the fact that you wanted his job.PM: Well, everybody - Tony, everybody knows the history here and everybody knows where we are now, which is Kevin is being our Foreign Affairs Minister following up the passion he's had over a lifetime for foreign affairs questions, for pursuing our relationship with the world, particularly in our region with his expertise on China. So, yes, he'll be travelling. That's what foreign ministers do.JONES: Do you know, by the way, which of your advisers supplied journalists with the quote, "Kevin Rudd is out of control"?PM: Well, I don't believe that that quote came from anybody on my staff.JONES: What about one of your advisers, because that's what it was -PM: Well, yeah, but I don't know -JONES: - it was listed on the front page of the Sydney Morning Herald as one of your advisers. Not necessarily someone on your staff. It could be on another staff but someone whose advising you.PM: I simply don't know who that is set up to -JONES: It's a very damaging leak, isn't it?PM: Well, you're assuming that it's somehow connected with me. I don't know who it is, Tony.JONES: No, I'm not assuming that. I'm just saying it's a -PM: Well, can -JONES: I'm wondering have you tried to find out who it was, because it is a damaging leak. It damages the credibility of the foreign minister and, arguably, your credibility.PM: Well, I am very satisfied that it is no one who is properly described as an adviser to me, being on my staff. I've got no idea who it is. I don't agree with the comments which were made and, Tony, you would be aware too that there is some calibrations in the media about how they explain anonymous sources so you get, you know...JONES: Adviser to the Prime Minister.PM: Well, you get cabinet minister. You get senior government source. You get an adviser in the Prime Minister's office. This was kind of miscellaneous adviser. I've got no idea who it refers to.JONES: Okay. Let's go to our next question. It comes from Lyn Stevenson.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Good evening, Prime Minister. Mine follows on from the last question. I'm wondering particularly is a no-fly zone over Libya an integral part of Australia's foreign policy and something which Cabinet has decided or is Mr Rudd once again off on a frolic of his own?PM: Well, we decide these things as a government and the government decision is that - well, we're all appalled by the violence in Libya. That goes without saying and you don't need to be sitting around a government decision making table to come to that conclusion. You just need to turn on the TV and I think Australians have been absolutely appalled by the violence.
So we're all appalled by the violence. We're all focused on what we can do to try and make this stop and so we've said to the UN Security Council we want them to consider a no-fly zone. We think that that's very important. You would probably have seen in the last 24 hours the Arab League, which represents countries in the region, has called for a no-fly zone, so indicated their support. That's a significant diplomatic development.
We're specifically saying to the Security Council now you should positively respond to this initiative from countries in the region and get on with doing your job and considering a no-fly zone. So, you know, yes we're positively advocating the position that has now been put by countries in the region and I do think that's tremendously significant that there should be a no-fly zone.JONES: Did you advocate that to Barack Obama, by the way, in your discussions with him? Because a no-fly zone probably wouldn't work so well without the Americans and NATO.
PM: We certainly - I certainly discussed the situation in Libya with President Obama and also with Secretary of State Clinton.JONES: Did you advocate a no fly zone?PM: Look, I'm not going to go into specifics in those conversations.JONES: Did you talk about a no fly zone.PM: But, no, Tony, what you're reacting to, I suspect, if I can guess what's in your mind, what you're reacting to is some media commentary that somehow my position on this changed or was different after meetings in the United States.
This is just simply not true. I'd say to anybody have a look at what I said day after day after day after day. Exactly the same thing, exactly the same thing, exactly the same thing.JONES: Okay. This is Q&amp;A, the live and interactive forum. Sorry, we had people with their hands up there, we'll try and come back to you. The next question comes from Chris Travers.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, how much of your recent poor polling results do you attribute to your lie on the carbon tax?PM: Well, poor polling I'll - questions of polling I'll let other people talk about but I'm actually glad you asked me that question because it gives me an opportunity to explain and I do want to talk to the Australian people about what I said in the last election.
Now, I did say during the last election campaign - I promised that there would be no carbon tax. That's true and I've walked away from that commitment and I'm not going to try and pretend anything else.
I also said to the Australian people in the last election campaign that we needed to act on climate change, we needed to price carbon and I wanted to see an emissions trading scheme.
Then we had the election and the 17 days that were and we formed this minority government. Now, if I'd been leading a majority government I would have been getting on with an emissions trading scheme. It's what I promised the Australian people.
As it is, in this minority parliament, the only way I can act on climate change by pricing carbon it to work with others and so I had a really stark choice: do I act or not act? Well, I've chosen to act and we will have a fixed price, like a carbon tax, for a period and then get to exactly what I promised the Australian people, an emissions trading scheme.
Now, when I said during the election campaign there would be no carbon tax I didn't intend to mislead people. What I believed then is an emissions trading scheme is right for this country. I believe that now and we will get to that emissions trading scheme.JONES: Keep your hands up. We'll get a comment from - sorry. Keep your hands up if you've got a comment. We will come back to you in a moment. First we've got a video question on this subject. It comes from Denis Gow on the Gold Coast in Queensland.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Is the proposal for a carbon tax coming from the real Julia and was it the other Julia that before the election stated that "there would not be a carbon tax”? All Australians are totally confused in regard to your two personalities.PM: Well, maybe I can help on that. There's only one Julia. That's the one that's sitting here. That's the one Julia who has always believed in an emissions trading scheme and fundamentally here to act on climate change, we've got to put a price on carbon pollution.
At the moment you can put it into the atmosphere for nothing. If we put a price on it businesses will innovate, there will be change in our economy. There's two ways to do it and it relates to the question I just answered from over here. There's two ways to do a carbon price. You can fix a price, a tax, and say for every tonne of carbon pollution you have to pay X amount or you can cap supply and say whole economy, we're not going to generate more carbon pollution than a fixed amount and you can let a market trading permits set the price.
I believe this is the better system. Fix the amount, let a market trading permits get to the price. That's where we'll get to. Yes, we have to go through the carbon fixed price, the carbon tax on the way through working with this parliament. I chose action.JONES: All right. I want to see - we've got a few people with their hands up and I'd like to just get a sense from the audience. Give comments if you can as to what you are thinking. We'll go to this gentleman in the front row first of all.AUDIENCE MEMBER: How much is the carbon tax going to be and if you do not known, why did you announce it?PM: That's a good question too and I thank you for that. Look, this is going to be a big change to our economy, a big change to the way we live. It's a necessary change because I genuinely do believe that climate change is real.
It's going to cause more droughts, more bushfires, more extreme weather events. It's going to affect the barrier reef. It's going to affect food production. We've got to act.
Now, when you're doing a big public policy reform like this, I actually think the best way to do it is for me to lead and to give people a sense of the direction we're going to go. We're going to go in this direction and then to consult on the details.
If you look at what Prime Minister Howard did with the Goods and Services Tax, that was a big change too. He basically went out and said we're going to have a tax on goods and services. Everybody went, gee, I don't know about that and started debating it and it was 15 months before he then put out all of the details the way that tax would work. So it was a process.JONES: But you know the fundamental difference is that after he did that he then took that policy to an election and he let people vote on it.
PM: That's true. That's absolutely, Tony, dead right. Absolutely right. We went - Labor - we went to the 2007 election saying we wanted an emissions trading scheme. We went to the 2010 election saying we wanted an emissions trading scheme and you know what's the...JONES: But you went to the 2010 election - you've just acknowledged it - and you said you walked away from this saying you were not going to have a carbon tax.PM: Certainly. Absolutely.JONES: I mean that's what people are angry about. Let's hear some people.PM: Well, if I can just say I'm acknowledging that absolutely. My preferred mechanism is an emissions trading scheme.
If I'd be elected into a majority government then what I would have done is legislated an emissions trading scheme. But with this parliament I had a choice, act or don't act. I've chosen action and just on who went to elections with an emissions trading scheme, so did Prime Minister Howard in 2007.JONES: All right. Okay. We've got a few people with their hands up and what I'd like to do is get comments from you people. So over to you first, sir.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, it appears that you're splitting hairs between saying you rule out a carbon tax but you didn't say that you - sorry, you said you would support an emissions scheme.
To be honest, during the whole campaign, I don't recall you actually mentioning that you were supporting an emissions trading scheme. It was a non-issue and now you're splitting hairs saying I didn't say that but I did say that. I don't recall it even being an issue. Do you recall a time where you said that?JONES: Well, hang on a sec. I want to hear a few other comments. We'll go to this gentleman in the front row here first.AUDIENCE MEMBER: If we act before other countries do, does that not mean we're going to fall behind?JONES: And there's a lady in the back row there as well. Let's hear from you.AUDIENCE MEMBER: I just wanted to know how much the Coalition or the Greens has an influence on a carbon tax.JONES: All right, a range of issues. You could probably answer them together.PM: Sure.JONES: But you can see there's a - we see this ourselves, there seems to be a lot of confusion about this issue, a lot of anger over the broken promise and a feeling that you've released something with no detail.PM: And, Tony, I'm just going to keep explaining it.
One of the reasons we're doing it the way that we're doing it, releasing the mechanism first, is so I can have this conversation with the Australian people, so that there's time to explain. It is a big change and it's going to require a lot of explanation.
On what was said during the election campaign, certainly we put out policy documents and I did events during the election campaign talking about the need to price carbon and have an emissions trading scheme.
I particularly remember one event in Brisbane where all of the attention went on a protester who was trying to get into the room whilst I was giving a speech about pricing carbon. So the images you probably saw on your TV screen that night were of some Federal Police officers wrestling a protester to the floor.
I can't help the selection of what makes the nightly news, but that was just one of the days that we talked about an emissions trading scheme and, certainly Tony Abbott was in no doubt about this because he was running the fear campaign back the other way, saying if you vote Labor you'll get a price on carbon and that's a bad thing, with all of the hysterical claims we've seen made in recent days. So that did happen.JONES: Just to pick up on some of the points, that person over there asked whether the Greens were involved in this decision.
They clearly were because you have an alliance with them now. I mean was it on their advice you decided to go for a carbon tax rather than the emissions trading scheme that you talked about in the election campaign?PM: We've got the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee, which is the government, the Greens, Mr Windsor and Mr Oakeshott and I think it was the lady here who asked this question. Yes, we did talk about all of this in that Multi-party Climate Change Committee.
Now, the government makes its own decisions but we work through that committee because unless we can get a consensus in that committee, we won't be able to get legislation through the parliament. That's just the practical mathematical reality of the parliament that the Australian people voted for.
So once again, I had to make a decision, given the position of others in that committee, given the need to get legislation through the parliament, am I for action or am I for inaction?
I chose action and if I can use an analogy here - lots of people here, Tony probably himself - will leave this place tonight and they'll drive home. If you find that you're blocked on your normal route driving home, do you just sit there and say, "Gee, I'm never going to see my home again" or do you find a different way through?
I want us to have an emissions trading scheme. I've found a different way through.JONES: Okay. We've got a few people still with their hands up but I'd first go to a web question to give someone from outside of this room the chance. Brenton Jury in Paddington, Queensland asked: Prime Minister, the language by the Opposition and their supporters to criticise your Government and you personally continues to be testosterone fuelled, macho and crude.
When people like Alan Jones use words like "Ju-liar" what would you really like to say in response?PM: There's some words you probably can't use on the ABC Tony, even at this time of night.JONES: I'm sure that's not the case.PM: I think it would be a bad result if tomorrow people were showing on TV and then the Prime Minister said beep beep beep so we'll try not to do that.JONES: So why do you go on these talkback radio shows if you feel about them as you - well, these unspeakable words?PM: Because I'm not going to let people spew nonsense out into the public uncontested and Mr Jones gets on his radio show and he says things like climate change isn't real, carbon dioxide is a good thing.
You know these politicians just want to price carbon so they can use the money themselves instead of talking about how we're going to assist households and people have just got the radio on. They're listening to it, there's no reason for them to suspect that everything they're being told is wrong and you just can't let people do that - you know, actually try and hoodwink people and not tell them the truth.
Now, I'm going to get on there and even if it means that it's a not pretty exchange and there's a few raised voices and I've got to give back as good as I get, I'm going to get on there and I'm going to stop someone putting out that kind of nonsense uncontested.JONES: Do you share Tony Windsor's fear? Do you share Tony Windsor's fear that Australia could go down the same route as the United States where these kind of debates lead to violence, including violence against politicians?PM: I wouldn't say I share that fear. I understand what made Tony Windsor make those comments. I can understand how he is concerned about an edge in this debate and I don't like to see us importing the language of the Tea Party from the US.
I may go and make speeches at the Congress that are very approving of America but I don't approve of all things American. I certainly don't approve of that kind of Tea Party hardness in the public debate and when you're calling for a people's revolt I think we're getting into some fairly silly terrain but I...JONES: Dangerous terrain, is that what you say?PM: No, I wouldn't say dangerous.I don't pick up that - I can understand why Tony Windsor made those comments but I don't adopt them for myself. But I do think it's better in public policy if we have a more sensible debate and that's not because I fear violence. I just think we make better public policy if we're actually talking about ideas and sensible things.JONES: All right. Let's hear from another questioner, Cate Cadell, in the audience.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, much of the scepticism surrounding your carbon tax proposal has to do with the household cost of living.
Have you made any concrete decisions on who will be compensated and by what means?
And will household compensation be the feature of any upcoming ad campaign?PM: Thank you for that question and I might, too, just try and answer the gentleman's question down here about are we in front of the world and will that cost us.
What we're going to do with the carbon price is we're going to put a price on carbon pollution.
It will be paid by some of the biggest businesses in this country that generate carbon pollution. There's less than 1000 of them but they will pay the price.
So I think there's some confusion here, people are expecting they'll go to the shops and on the docket they get from the checkout they'll see carbon tax as the last item. That's not what's going to happen.
It's the big polluters that are paying the price for carbon. Now, that does have price impacts. It does feed through to things that people buy in the shops and I'm not going to pretend anything different. Because of that we will assist households.
So of the money we raise by putting a price on carbon pollution, the single biggest thing we will do is we will assist households. We'll also assist businesses.JONES: What households? How far will you go up the income scale because there are middle income families who are worried they're not going to get any assistance?PM: Look, and I can understand why people are anxious about this and I can understand -JONES: That's because you haven't given any detail.PM: No, well, I can understand that people are anxious about it and I can understand that cost of living pressures are really acute for people.
But we will, of course, compensate generously. It won't be for real upper income earners. I won't expect to get any assistance with this but -JONES: Do you have an imagined cut off point in the income scale?PM: Well, I hate to disappoint you, Tony, but I'm not going to announce the household assistance package here on Q&amp;A tonight but we're -JONES: I'm not after the whole package just the income levels would cut in at.PM: But we're a Labor government and we'll do this fairly. We're a Labor government and so we will focus on the needs of people who are under pressure.
I didn't go to hell and back in the last parliament to get rid of WorkChoices because I fail to understand the kind of pressures that can be on people when they're trying to make ends meet.
Getting rid of WorkChoices was to make sure people knew what money was coming in the door in their pay packet and they couldn't have it ripped off them. Fair compensation in carbon pricing will be to make sure that people aren't getting put under more pressure. We'll do that.
But I also want to say this: don't imagine that the choice here is between no cost of living rises and pricing carbon and seeing price impacts. Here's the news: the price of electricity is going up. Either way it's going up.
The only choice we're making is with rising electricity prices are we pricing carbon so we drive innovation in renewable and cleaner energy or are we just watching electricity prices go up because business is uncertain about carbon pricing and they won't make the long-lived investments we need to to add to our electricity supply.JONES: I'm just going to quickly bring you briefly to the last part of that question. Will household compensation be a feature of any upcoming ad campaign?PM: Well, we haven't made any decisions about an upcoming ad campaign. We haven't even made a decision about having a campaign.JONES: Well, I mean, there was an FOI story in the Australian today that said you already had a $30 million ad campaign ready to go for the emissions trading scheme. Don't you still have the same campaign there ready to roll out?PM: Just so people are clear, that's a reference to the carbon pollution reduction scheme in the last parliament. I'm not going to rule anything in or out here. I do think if you're making a big change then it's fair to get information to people.
If I was here saying I'm going to make a big change to Medicare, I think people would say, well, it's fair enough. You know, I use Medicare, I use it when I go to the doctor, I want to understand all the details of what's changing.
I consequently think it's fair when we're doing a big change like carbon pricing to say we're going to keep open the option if that's the best way of getting information to people to use that way.JONES: All right. We've got another gentleman with his hand up right there.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, isn't the whole point of having a carbon tax to affect the prices that consumers pay? If there's no change in consumer behaviour, you're not going to achieve what you're trying to achieve to reduce carbon pollution.
So if it's compensating households, aren't you simply undermining the effect that your tax is going to have and ultimately make no change?PM: That's a very perceptive question and I think a lot of people are thinking about this, about how does it work? If I'm getting compensation, what's actually changing?
Let me just explain that. The carbon price affects the big polluters. Yes, they will cause some price impacts for consumers, that's true. We will then assist consumers and I can understand why people then intuitively go, well how does all of this work? Isn't money going in and money going out? What's the effect?
Well, the effect is that in the shops when you come to buy things, products that are made with relatively less carbon pollution will be cheaper than products that are made with more carbon pollution.
So you're standing there with your household assistance in your hand. You could still keep buying the high carbon pollution products if you want to or what you're far more likely to do is to buy the cheaper, lower carbon pollution products.
That means that the people who make those things will get the consumer signal, gee we will sell more, we will make more money if we make lower pollution products. That drives the innovation.
So I want you to have that household assistance in your hand but I also want you to see price effects which make cleaner, greener things cheaper than high pollution commodities. That's why it works.JONES: Okay, we have another video question. Thank you. We have another video question giving people outside of the room a chance to get involved. It's from Richard Glegg in Tottenham, New South Wales.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, I am a farmer from regional Australia and I am interested to know what policies, if any, the Labor Party has to re-engage rural and regional Australia between now and the next election, in light of the massive damage that has been inflicted on the Labor brand because of Labor's u-turn on the carbon tax and the growing perception that the Labor Party is becoming the party for the inner city elite?JONES: The party for the inner city elite is how that ended up.PM: Yep.JONES: But he does - I think that's reflecting that there is a lot of anger about the back flip on the carbon tax out there. What's your response to someone from regional and rural Australia, I should say?PM: Well, firstly, I'd say there will be opportunities for farmers through addressing climate change. They're often the ones who are at the forefront of the best practices for using our land and we're going to have a system where they can get a new stream of income through carbon credits through things like soil carbon, trapping carbon by better land management practices. So there's an economic opportunity there.
Beyond that economic opportunity there are all of the things we want to do working with regional Australia. The National Broadband Network is a really important economic opportunity for regional Australia. Bringing the cost of telecommunications down, the quality of telecommunications up, one of the big things that regional Australia has rightly complained about is that they've been left behind as telecommunications has changed.
NBN will fix that and we're very focussed on delivering things like better hospitals, better education services for regional Australia, which is why out of our capital investment funds we're having dedicated rounds for regional Australia to bring new services to them that they haven't had before.JONES: Just come to the end of his question. "The party of the inner city elites" is what he said and I think you can read Greens for inner city elites in terms of what he's saying there, I think anyway, so are you prepared to admit your formal alliance with the Greens is coming at something of a cost?PM: Well, I have an agreement with the Greens. I have an agreement with Mr Windsor from regional Australia. I have an agreement with Mr Oakeshott from regional Australia and I have an agreement with Mr Wilkie from Tasmania, not from regional Australia, from the electorate of Dennison.
So that is the set of agreements which enable me to govern as Prime Minister. I think when you go through that list you'd see Mr Windsor and Mr Oakeshott, champions of regional Australia, they're there, able to talk to me about things that matter to regional Australia and they're there in the Multi-party Climate Change Committee putting the views of regional Australia as we work our way through the carbon pricing scheme.JONES: All right. Let's move onto another topic. I'm sorry to interrupt you there. We're running out of time. Our next question comes from Rick Samimi.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, I do have a very serious question to ask, but may I just make a comment? If you truly think ETS is a better option than carbon tax, why don't you go back to the polls? That's a comment.
But on a much, much more serious note, I'd like to know if Peter Garrett offered Midnight Oil's "US Forces" for inclusion in the iPod that you gifted to the President?PM: Well, there are some Midnight Oil songs on there, I'm sure President Obama has got enough of a sense of humour to get a laugh out of listening to "US forces get the nod." I remember the words of the song too. Peter Garrett doesn't wander around the ministerial corridors singing it or anything else. Maybe we should entice him to.JONES: It's quite interesting imagining Barack Obama walking around the corridors or the White House singing it though.PM: That is a little bit interesting and I doubt that's going to be happening. On the question of having an election, my view is we went to the people 2007 and said an emissions trading scheme. So did Mr Howard with Tony Abbott on his front bench.
We went to 2010 and said an emissions trading scheme. Now, is the moment, now is the time, let's get this done and one of the reasons we need to get it done, and it relates to the question from here, is the rest of the world is moving.
There's this image that somehow we're the only ones, simply not true. You know, China closing down a dirty coal-fired power generation facility at the rate of one every one to two weeks. Putting up a wind turbine at the rate of one every hour. Set their own targets by 2020 of reducing carbon pollution by 40 to 45 per cent per unit of GDP.
India, taxing coal to create a revenue stream for clean energy. India in April this year will have an energy trading credits scheme. The rest of the world is acting and we with our high emissions economy can't afford to be left behind, stranded with a high pollution economy when the rest of the world has gone forward. Now is the time.JONES: We've got a question on a completely different subject. We are running out of time. It comes from Bek Leys.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, I'm a teacher at a small independent school in south western Sydney. There has been much discussion of My School recently and NAPLAN is coming up again soon.
Is it really fair that you impose a grossly inadequate and inequitable test on all students or students of particular grades and then publicly publish the results as basically the sole indicator of a school's success?PM: Well, I think unfortunately you and I aren't going to agree on this. I think it's incredibly important that parents have and the nation has this information about schools and literacy and numeracy matters and that's what NAPLAN tests, the national tests, and the comparison is not a simplistic league table telling you that the most advantaged school in the richest suburb in Australia is doing better than an outback Indigenous school.
I would agree with you that comparison is not telling you anything you wouldn't have known anyway but My School is enabling you to compare an individual school with schools that teach students with comparable levels of advantage or disadvantage and that individual school with the national average. That's information people should have.
Now, do schools do other things than teach literacy and numeracy? Of course they do and of course they should. But whatever else you get taught at school, whatever else, you've got to come out able to read, write and do maths. Whatever else you've been taught and so it's fair to test that.AUDIENCE MEMBER: But Prime Minister, it's very unfair, it's very unfair to ESL students, to students that are special ed...JONES: English as a second language students.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yep. Yep. It's unfair that only those two of the multiple intelligences are tested and only one of those tests is numeracy. The rest are all literacy.
How is that fair to a English second language student or a special ed student who wants to do the same as their peers but is discouraged by their teachers or their school or their parents because of how they may affect the school's performance. How is that fair?PM: Well, there's, as you would know, the number of special education students is on My School so you can assess how that may - the participation of those students may have connected with the tests.
There's only a limited number of reasons why kids can properly be withdrawn from the tests. The attendance rates at the tests are on My School, so if you see one school that's got sharply low attendance then you would go in and investigate - have kids been artificially withdrawn from the test in order to pump up the results. So those things are there. Now, this is a very detailed conversation. I'd be happy to come back and have it. I'm a big advocated of My School -JONES: I think we might -PM:  - but philosophically school transparency matters. This nation has got a right to know what is happening in our schools and nothing matters more for this nation's future than what is happening in primary schools and high schools today. I should know that, you should know that, everyone should know that.JONES: We're rapidly running out of time. We have time for one more question and it comes from Liz Rowell.AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, in the movie Sliding Doors a woman had her life changed for her in moments. Are you the Gwyneth Paltrow of Australian politics? Knowing what you know now, would you take that walk to Kevin Rudd's office again?PM: On the comparison with Gwyneth Paltrow, I suspect I'm, oh, two foot shorter and probably 20 kilos heavier so I'm not sure I'm going to be able to do that comparison that easily.
On Sliding Doors moments I think when you look back - I'm going to turn 50 this year. So when you look back over your life you do wonder about some decisions that you could have made differently at parts of your life and you wonder about the other life not lived, what would have happened if I had stayed in South Australia and not moved to Melbourne, for example, but -JONES: Or what would have happened if you hadn't walked into Kevin Rudd's office.PM: But I'm - .JONES: That's what the question was about.PM: Yeah, and I am coming to that. But I've never - so I have in my own mind run the control test about some parts of my life. What would have happened if I hadn't moved to Melbourne?
What would have happened if I had picked teaching instead of law, which I almost did, but I've never run that control test because I'm convinced that was absolutely the right decision.JONES: Walking through the doorway?PM: Correct.JONES: All right. That's all we have time for. Please thank our guest, the Prime Minister Julia Gillard.



PM: I'm genuinely sorry to have kept you waiting so long. I have just come from briefings about matters in Japan.
As people in Parliament House may be aware, the National Security Committee has been meeting this morning in order to receive briefings and further information about the unfolding tragedy in Japan.
Australians continue to be shocked and concerned as they see the images of grief and devestation on our television screens, and I know that the hearts of all Australians have been going out to the people of Japan in these circumstances.
At a Government level, we have been engaged across a broad range of agencies, responding to this tragedy in Japan. Of course, our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is strongly engaged, particularly helping to locate Australians in Japan and helping Australians who wish to leave Japan to do so. Through our Attorney-General's Department, Emergency Management Australia has been engaged in doing things like assisting the search and rescue team that has travelled to Japan and is performing work there. Our Health Department is engaged and working with the Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency - APANSA, as it is referred to  -  to keep us informed of the circumstances with the problems with nuclear reactors in Japan.
In addition, we have the Defence Department engaged, and they have been working, providing support. They transferred the search and rescue team and we continue to have a C-17 available in Japan.
So, right across Government, across a wide range of agencies, people have been working to monitor and provide the best advice and assistance.
I do today want to provide updates on four issues relating to the tragedy in Japan.
First, on the health and welfare of Australians, we now believe that there were 145 Australians that were in the worst-affected regions when the tsunami hit. Our consular staff are working hard to locate and verify the safety of those Australians. As I believe people already understand, we have consular staff in large numbers on the ground in Tokyo. In all, we have 145 Australian and locally engaged staff, and there is a team which has been dispatched to the worst-affected areas to work there locally to verify the safety of Australians.
We are still urgently trying to contact these 145 Australians.
There is hotline number for families to ring if they have been unable to contact people, and soon as we can give more advice about the safety and welfare of those Australians, then of course we will.
Second, I want to advise of a matter involving our search and rescue team. I want to advise of this matter not to cause concern, but in the interests of transparency.
We have had a search and rescue team working more than 100km away from Fukushima and where the matters concerning the nuclear reactor that people have seen on their TV screens are occurring.
I've been briefed that early this morning a US helicopter carrying four Australians from that search and rescue team and some New Zealand personnel had to land at Fukushima airport. The helicopter needed to land, as I'm advised, because of issues about ice on the rotary blade of the helicopter. That landing at Fukushima airport was 20km outside the 20km evacuation zone.
As people would have seen from media reports over a number of days now, there is a 20km evacuation zone in place. This landing at Fukushima airport was 20km beyond that evacuation zone.
All members of the team, the four members, have now travelled back to where the search and rescue team is working and is based, and that is more than 100km away from where the nuclear reactor concerns are.
On return, two of the team that travelled by vehicle to return to home base were tested for contamination exposure, and they did show very low levels of contamination on their boots. Search and rescue teams train for dealing with contamination incidents, and consequently, in accordance with their training, the two members of the team went through decontamination procedures.
The clear advice to me is that these two personnel are safe and well, and that the degree of contamination was low-level, and it was on their boots, so those team members have returned and they are safe and well where the team is based, which, as I say, is more than 100km away from the zone in which the concern about the nuclear issue arises from.
Third, I do want to address general fears in the Australian community about the nuclear issue. I know people are absorbing this information and it is clear from telephone calls that the Government is receiving, including through our health incident centre, that there are a number of Australians who are highly concerned about this matter, so I do want to be as clear as possible with Australians about the circumstances and what the Government is doing to monitor the circumstances.
We are monitoring it closely. We have our own nuclear experts at our Nuclear Safety Agency. They continue to work with their international counterparts and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
In terms of their advice to the Government, they have advised me, our nuclear experts, that there have been three explosions at the Fukushima nuclear facility, and some radiation has been released.
They have also provided clear advice in terms of the health effects. Our nuclear experts advise that there is a small chance of contamination at very low levels for Australians who were in the Fukushima area. The risks of health effects from exposure at these low levels is considered very low to negligible.
Our nuclear experts at APANSA and the Department of Health advise that outside the exclusion zones around the Fukushima facility, contamination is extremely unlikely and the health risks are negligible.
Australians returning from Japan are highly unlikely to be contaminated or exposed to significant radiation and will not require checks for radioactivity. If people wish to seek medical advice, then they should contact their local GP.
So, can I be very clear, because we are receiving calls from family and friends who have Australian loved ones who are in Tokyo and other locations that are a long way from where these nuclear reactors are located in the Fukushima area  -  I want to be very clear about the health warnings.
The advice that I've just described goes to risks for people who were in the 20km evacuation zone and those risks, even for people within that 20km evaluation zone, are descried to us as being a small chance of contamination at low levels.
Beyond the 20km evacuation zone, there is a 10km zone where people should listen to the advice of Japanese authorities. That advice is to stay indoors. People may choose to travel out of that region if they can and it's safe to do so.
For Australians who are in Tokyo, for example, which is a long way away from the this area, there is no reason, on the advice given to me, to assume that those Australians have got any cause for concern from what is happening in Fukushima.
However, as Australians return to Australia, and many are seeking to return, clearly people should, if they are concerned, seek their own medical advice through their General Practitioner.
Finally, can I go to the question of economic effects of this very, very major human disaster in Japan.
Now, it is too early to discern all of the environmental and human impacts of this disaster, let alone the economic impact. We can predict that the economic consequences of these events, these very, very awful events, will become clearer in the weeks and months ahead.
As a Government, we've got a standard position of not commenting on market and exchange rate movements, and I do not intend to do so.
As the third largest global economy and a major trading partner, these tragic events in Japan will inevitably have an impact on the global economy and here at home, but at this stage, we are certainly  -  certainly not  -  making any dire predictions of the impact on our own economy. Can I remind that Australia's economy was not knocked off course by the global financial crisis, nor by the floods and natural disasters we've sustained over the summer.
Our economic fundamentals are strong. We are half way through our 20th year of continuous growth, and we have low unemployment, a solid investment pipeline, strong public finances and a sturdy financial system.
The Government will update on our assessment of the economic impacts as more advice comes to hand, but, you know, our clear focus remains on the human tragedy in Japan, and also on providing assistance to the people of Japan and ascertaining the safety of Australians.
Can I conclude by saying the travel advisory which we have issued remains unchanged. People can have a look at that travel advisory. It certainly says not to travel to the evacuation zone, so I would direct people's attention to the travel advisory.
Events are still unfolding. We will continue to monitor events minute by minute and hour by hour. If there comes a need to provide additional information to Australians, then of course we will do so.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have any information on how many Australians might be in the Fukushima region, in particular the 20 and 30 zones?
PM: Look, I don't have precise figures. That's one of the issues we're obviously directing our attention to. I do know that our consular staff have been working to locate people, working to locate people whose safety and welfare we want to confirm by speaking to them directly, and they are working to provide advice to anyone who has been in that zone, but the advice for those people would be, certainly, if they want to get health checks, to get health checks, but the degree of health effects I've described through the information given to me by our nuclear safety agency.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this was presumably an unscheduled meeting of the National Security Committee, was one specifically because of the events in Japan. Can you indicate how frequent these happen? When was the last time there was a meeting of the National Security Committee in response to an overseas event?
PM: Well, the Acting Prime Minister convened a meeting on the weekend of the National Security Committee to talk about the incidents in Japan.
We do have scheduled meetings of various Cabinet committees, including we had a scheduled meeting of the National Security Committee this week in any event, but we will convene the National Security Committee as often as is necessary to make sure that we are getting consolidated advice from all agencies about circumstances in Japan.
JOURNALIST: But before Japan, when was the last event that there was an unscheduled meeting of this committee, to your knowledge.
PM: Look, my recollection is we had a meeting in relation to Christchurch and assembling the assistance teams there. We certainly engaged comparable agencies right across the board  -  Emergency Management Australia, Defence and others  -  as we responded to the summer of natural disasters, so because of the period we've lived through it's unfortunately been far too common to have to get people to together quickly to talk about coordinating in the face of natural disasters.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) any news on any requests from Japan for other resources from Australia to help them out? Is there even any consideration of whether we could send them food or any other assistance like that?
PM: We are obviously holding ourselves available to assist them with anything that they might ask for that we are reasonably able to assist with. The presence of the C-17 still being available in the Japan is a way of helping move around food and water supplies. These are big, big planes  -  very big planes. People probably can remember what they looked like from the runs that they were doing to keep places like Rockhampton supplied during the flood crisis over summer.
So, the C-17 is available in the region, in Japan, to be tasked by Japanese authorities to move food and water if that's necessary.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, regarding the 145 people, I imagine many of them would be regarded by others as quite resourceful young folk. Can you give us a profile of the people who are, well, I won't say missing, but you've got concerns for? And, with these 145 people, have you spoken to their family here and are you talking about that number because there's been nothing heard from them either from Government or by their family?
PM: We're talking about that number because family members- so, either people would have been registered with the Department, or family members have said that they've been trying to contact them and have been unable to do so, and our consular staff in Japan have not been able to make contact with them yet.
JOURNALIST: What is the profile of those 145?
PM: I'm not able to give you a profile of the type of people that they are, and clearly there are some privacy issues here, too.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) speaking, younger people-
PM: -I'm not able to give you population characteristics of the 145, and that's, you know, not really at the centre of what we're trying to do. What we're trying to do is to contact them and to make sure that they are safe.
Now, the fact that we haven't been able to contact people, 145 Australians, you would be aware from everything that's been reported to date that there are significant disruptions to telecommunications, significant disruptions to the ability to move around, significant disruptions therefore to people being able to get themselves in circumstance where they can make contact.
So, I think people just need to have an understanding that with the kind of problems that are clearly happening on the ground in the wake of the earthquakes, the continuing aftershocks, the tsunami and all of the rest that the Japanese people are living through, that with those disruptions it's difficult to contact people, and that's what our embassy staff are doing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you mentioned the economic effects, do you think that in the GFC growth did slow and we did have to sandbag stimulus spending, there was a small effect in this quarter from floods in Queensland. Are you anticipating, I know you said it's too early to say, but are you anticipating out of Japan that there will be some impact on GDP or on exports or both?
PM: It is too early to tell and so I'm not going to make quick predictions, I don't think that would be the right thing to do, but what I would say more broadly and we've seen this in relation to the summer of natural disasters that we've lived through and we know it from natural disasters in the past, that you tend to see a short term affect on growth and you may  -  for example Cyclone Larry, when we had a domestic natural disaster we saw an impact on the pricing of some commodities, in Cyclone Larry particularly bananas. So the general pattern with natural disasters is that there is a short term impact and then growth tends to be restored as you move into recovery and rebuilding mode.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on Christmas Island, do you think it's appropriate that police have fired beanbag rounds, as they're called, into protesting detainees?
PM: Clearly we need to make sure that on Christmas Island and indeed on other detention facilities that people are where they're supposed to be. I know our staff, the contracted staff, Serco, our Immigration Department staff, do try and work through issues that may be raised by people who were being detained. Our consistent message is protest activity does not make any difference to the processing of claims and of course we ask people who have been detained to obey lawful instructions that are given to them, including instructions by police.
You would see the Minister for Immigration, in relation to the incident involving tear gas earlier this week has already announced that that matter will be looked at and we'll make sure we're across every circumstance there.
JOURNALIST: Was that reasonable force though?
PM: Well that's exactly one of the things you would anticipate being looked at in the investigation. I understand that police confronted with situations of difficulty do have to make judgement calls about how they will respond; I think we understand that whether it's on Christmas Island or whether it's in a CDB of one of our capital cities on a Saturday night. Police have to make those judgement calls, so I'm not going to stand here and second guess those judgement calls, but the Minister for Immigration has indicated that the incident will be the subject of an investigation and review.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will there be an offshore processing centre on East Timor or anywhere else in the region in this term of government?
PM: We will continue to pursue the discussions and diplomatic work on a Regional Protection Framework and Regional Processing Centre. From the very day I announced this last year, we said then there was no quick fix, we said then it would take patient and careful work, we are engaged in that patient and careful work.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) progress on that work?
PM: I haven't been updated today Michelle, because I've had my mind on the urgent, urgent circumstances in Japan and responding to those matters. So my advice continues to be the advice I've spoken about publicly before, which is we are strongly engaged with countries in our region working through the Regional Protection Framework and Regional Processing Centre.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said on Q&amp;A that you would have proceeded with an emissions trading scheme if you won the election outright. Why then has Kevin Rudd suggested you helped persuade for that policy to be dumped before the election if you were always going to introduce one after the election?
PM: Once again, in terms of answering questions, let me be clear and be factual about it. What I said on Monday night when I was asked about these things is exactly the same thing I'm going to say to you know: I am not going to talk about conversations that were held around a Cabinet table, or confidential conversations between colleagues, I'm not. I was the Deputy Prime Minister of a government that determined to not further proceed with the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. I absolutely was a participant in that decision making and I take my share of responsibility for that decision making. I always have believed that climate change, in the modern age when we've known about climate change I've always believed that we should accept the science, the science is absolutely clear, we need to act on climate change and the best way of doing that is by pricing carbon. I want this nation to have an emissions trading scheme, I wanted that when I was campaigning in the 2007 election, I wanted that when I campaigned as Prime Minister in the 2010 election, I want that now for the nation and we will get there.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Karl Bitar's resignation?
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: What do you think about Karl Bitar's resignation?
PM: Thank you for that question. Karl Bitar has today announced as National Secretary that he will be resigning. I want to take this opportunity to thank Karl Bitar for all of the work that he has done as National Secretary and for the Labor Party more generally over a large number of years. He's led our campaign efforts, he's done a good job, he's done a good job in what have been sometimes very difficult circumstances. Karl's a man with a young family, he's said to me over quite a long period of time now, that he does want to move to a different stage of his life and have the opportunity to spend some more time with his family and also to go and look for new challenges, so I wish him very well as he does that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, during the election campaign you were prepared to discuss what was said in Cabinet in relation to your objections to the pension increase and paid parental leave. If it was convenient for you then, why can't you do the same on emissions trading, given you're desperately trying to build credibility on the issue.
PM: Once again we get the inflammatory premises to questions which I'm not accepting. When I did talk during the campaign about leaks that were reported on the media, I'm very happy to refer you to the words of my press conference that day and I think if you do go back and look at the words of that day, I said I was prepared to make some things clear about my attitude, not discussions around the Cabinet table, but about my attitude to assessing and testing major policy proposals that were before government. So the premise of your question is  -  if I can finish my sentence thanks very much  -  the premise of your question is wrong and the comparison is wrong.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister in the final Caucus meeting of his leadership Kevin Rudd gave a speech in which he said quite clearly that you and Wayne Swan had suggested that you walk away from the climate change things that he was proposing, was he misleading his colleagues then?
PM: My answer to you is going to remain the same. I don't talk about, I haven't talked about and I won't talk about discussions that are held around the Cabinet table or discussions that are held confidentially between colleagues.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, as far as your future prospects are concerned the new National Secretary is going to be very a important player, are you backing Anthony Chisholm, who seems to be the frontrunner?
PM: These are matters for the National Executive to decide.
JOURNALIST: But you certainly want some input into it, this person is going to be running your next campaign. Who would you like to see?
PM: The National Secretary position is appointed by the National Executive, anything I have to say about that question I'll say within the Labor Party and we'll make a decision.
JOURNALIST: Can I clarify something, on Monday night when you said that if you had had a majority government after the election then there'd be an ETS with no carbon tax, because you have a minority government, is the phrase you used, you've been sort of forced to have the carbon tax. Could you tell us who has forced you to have a carbon tax?
PM: Let's be very practical about the circumstances in the parliament and I'm not sure that in this audience I really need to describe them. In this parliament, in the House of Representatives and the Senate, in order for legislation to pass the Government needs to negotiate with others. Now that's something that we've been doing on other pieces of legislation, we negotiated to ensure that we could structurally separate Telstra and deliver a huge economic reform to this country as part of delivering a National Broadband Network. I negotiated to make sure that we are in a position to rebuild Queensland with the flood levy and the flood levy will pass the parliament. Through the Multi-party Climate Change Committee we are negotiating as well to design a way of pricing carbon that can pass this parliament.
At every stage in this carbon pricing discussion around the Multi-party Climate Change Committee I've determined that I'm for action. I am for getting a price on carbon. I am working with others in order to get a price on carbon. Now that does mean that the views of others need to be taken into account. That is not an unusual situation for a government to find itself in. Prime Minister Howard has to take the views of the then leader of the Australian Democrats, Meg Lees, into account when he designed and delivered his Goods and Services Tax. So that's the circumstance we're in.
JOURNALIST: But specifically who was it that made you have to change your election commitment? Because you said on Monday night if it's a majority it would be an ETS, but it's not a majority so I have to have this carbon tax. Who made you have the carbon tax?
PM: That carbon pricing mechanism has emerged from the discussions of the Multi-party Climate Change Committee.
JOURNALIST: Do you mean the Greens, because Tony Windsor is not running around saying there needs to be a carbon tax. Are you saying that you have to have a carbon tax because of the Greens?
PM: No, I'm saying we've got a Multi-party Climate Change Committee participated in by a number of people, Mr Windsor, Mr Oakeshott, the Australian Greens and of course the Government. There have been discussions around that table and it led to the carbon price mechanism that I released.
JOURNALIST: Don't the Greens also want an ETS?
PM: And we're going to have, let's just be very  -  well, if I can answer your question  -  let's be very clear about this and I do think there's some confusion in some people's minds when we are talking about pricing carbon, the people who will pay that price are the biggest polluters in this country.
People aren't going to have to worry that somehow they go to the supermarkets and they pick up something and there's a new price tag on it that says at the end of the day ‘this is a tax on this good', it's not like the Goods and Services Tax in that sense. This is a tax on the biggest polluters in this country. From the money that we raise from pricing carbon we will provide assistance to households and assistance to businesses and we will fund climate change programs, programs to tackle climate change.
I have been very frank with people that there will be price impacts, that's why we will be providing the generous assistance. I've always thought when it comes to pricing carbon that the best way to do it is to create an emissions trading scheme, so you cap the amount of carbon pollution your economy generates and you allow a market buying and selling permits to release pollution, you allow a market to develop that fixes the price. The other way of doing it is to have a fixed price, a carbon tax, where you aren't capping quantity, but you are cutting pollution by putting a price on the pollution and people will respond, businesses will respond, they'll innovate, they will create less pollution.
Now between those two mechanisms the fixed price, which works like a tax or the market mechanism with supply of carbon pollution, the quantity capped, I've always thought this was the best mechanism and we will get there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, before the election when you made your promise, you probably couldn't have foreseen what was going to happen with the outcome of the Lower House, but you would have known you wouldn't have a majority in the Upper House and that you would have had to negotiate with the Greens to get your ETS through and one thing the last parliament proved was that Labor and the Greens can't agree on the ultimate target of an ETS and couldn't agree on how to design one, so surely back when you made your promise, you knew you weren't going to be able get an ETS through the Upper House.
PM: Dear me, so we're now going to have a new standard in Australian politics are we, so John Howard was wrong to campaign on the Goods and Services Tax because he hadn't war gamed whether or not Meg Lees would agree with it?  Tony Abbott was OK to campaign on stop the boats without considering for a moment whether the composition of the parliament would have enabled him to enact that policy? I mean you go to an election saying to the Australian people ‘as a government this is our program, this is our plan, these are our set of promises, this is what we want to do'. It's what Mr Howard did when he went to the election with the GST and then when he came back he negotiated. It's what governments have done over a long period of time; we all know that it is not a norm in Australian politics to have control of the Senate as well as the House of Representatives. Leaders, Prime Ministers and Leaders of the Opposition have never campaigned in this country on the basis of my promises will consist of what I think I can get through a Senate which is under election at the same time that I'm campaigning.
Leaders have always gone to elections in this country saying ‘this is my vision, this is what I want to do', I did exactly the same thing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, under your Plan A when would your new ETS have started and secondly given the nasty debate that you're confronting daily and trying to respond to, are you now going to hurry up your deliberations and give a date by which time we will know the details of your new scheme.
PM: Well, I'm very happy to have the debate, so you can use whatever adjectives you like to describe it, I'm very happy to have the debate. This is the debate the nation needs to have. Climate change is real, Mr Abbott is walking around spruiking climate change denial, I'm for action, he's for doing nothing, nothing effective. I'm for working with the parliament that the Australian people voted for to get this done and we will get this done. What is the proposition? The proposition will be what I promised the Australian people at the last election, an emissions trading scheme, which caps the amount of carbon pollution our economy generates, gives us the clean energy and the jobs of the future that we need.
We will get there by a fixed price mechanism. I did not foresee that during the campaign, I did not intend to mislead anyone, I did give a commitment about that and it is a commitment I've walked away from, absolutely correct.
If I can repeat the analogy I used on Q&amp;A, because I think it's a good one. When you drive home tonight, if you hit a roadblock in the middle of the road, will you sit there for the rest of your life saying ‘I'm never going to see my home again' or would you find a different way through? Well I found a different way through, we will get to where I promised the Australian people, we should go.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd's Brisbane Broncos declaration was such a clear reference to your own Western Bulldogs declaration, do you think he was having a bit of a lend and has it gotten to the point where, as effective as Kevin Rudd is, that you're a bit frightened in case he might bite?
PM: I don't know when we made this slip from questions that might be examining facts into rhetorical flourishes, but there we have it. I suppose it's the modern media age. On leadership questions, let me tell you I've been in the parliament since 1998, I've heard a few people answer them, I've never heard anybody give an answer that wasn't capable of being characterised by the media any which way they wanted to characterise it. So if Sam, you want to tweet the perfect formulation which would mean no one in the country then generates a leadership story off it, you let us know.
Thank you. 



I would like to thank Karl Bitar for his leadership of the organisational wing of the Australian Labor Party over the last two and a half years.
He has been a tireless worker for Federal Labor during that time and his efforts, calm demeanour and leadership under pressure helped us be re-elected in 2010 allowing us to deliver our plans to make Australia a stronger and fairer society.
Karl brought many attributes to the job including his strategic thinking and his desire to broaden Labor's interaction with its supporters and the wider community by overhauling our online capacity.
I thank Karl for his strong commitment, leadership and professionalism and he will be missed by the ALP.
On a personal note I wish him, his wife Joanna and his children all the very best for the future.  



It's great to be back in Adelaide.
The city of my childhood.
The city where I received such a great education.
The city where my parents gave me values for a lifetime.
Today we celebrate the legacy of a remarkable Australian, Don Dunstan.
Our nation has never seen a leader like him.
Today many remember Dunstan primarily for being colourful.
But we should also remember him for being courageous and clear-minded.
Dunstan saw our nation not just as it was, but as it could be. Dunstan built a community based on innovation, creativity and ideas.
I was shaped by the Dunstan era and its spirit of principled reform.
Let me assure you, I won't be wearing pink hot pants into parliament any time soon!
But I do profoundly share his belief that we can envision
a better future and embrace the reforms that will help take us there.
Dunstan understood that such leadership involved a choice between two pathways.
Defence of the status quo, based on caution and fear.
And an optimistic faith in the capacity of our people to embrace change.
I hold that optimistic faith to the core of my being.
It is my belief. It is Labor's belief.
Tackling the big challenges and building a nation of opportunity and prosperity for all.
We've done it before.
Postwar migration and the Snowy scheme.
Gough Whitlam's renewal of our social fabric.
Hawke and Keating opening our economy to the world.
Today we must embrace another moment of decision for the future of our nation: a decision to cut carbon pollution and build a clean energy economy for the 21st century.
Neither of the extremes in Australian politics can deliver this reform.
The Coalition has surrendered itself to fear-mongering and denying the power of markets.
The Greens are not a party of government and have no tradition of striking the balance required to deliver major reform.
Like the economic transformation of the 1980s, thisis a reform that can only be handled in the progressive Labor tradition.
We did it in the 1980s with the social wage and industry assistance that eased the path of structural change.
We will do the same this time, with generous assistance for households and support for business to adapt.
In all of this, we draw strength from enduring Labor values:
Protecting jobs  -  always our first commitment.
A sustainable environment for future generations  -  an environment with less carbon pollution.
Reform with equity, looking after those who need a helping hand.
And accepting a scientific world-view in a community of reason.
Friends, the second US President John Adams once famously said that “facts are stubborn things.”
No opinion poll can change the fact that climate change is real.
It is caused by human activity.
And we must cut carbon pollution.
In a nation rich in fossil fuels, I wish it were not so.
But it is.
Greenhouse gas levels are one-third higher than before the Industrial Revolution, and higher than at any time in the last 800,000 years.
As a result, global temperatures have risen 0.7 degrees celsius over the past century and continue to rise.
The last decade was the world's hottest on record, warmer than the 1990s which were in turn warmer than the 1980s.
In fact, globally 2010 was the equal warmest year on record, tied with 2005 and 1998.
2010 is the thirty-fourth consecutive year with global temperatures above the 20th Century average.
In Australia, average temperatures have risen almost one degree since 1910, and each decade since the 1940s has been warmer than the one before.
That warming is real.
Its consequences are real.
And it will change our lives in real and practical ways.
More extreme bushfire conditions and droughts.
Falling crop yields.
Loss of species.
Increased cyclone intensity.
More days of extreme heat.
Coastal flooding as sea levels rise.
Bleaching of our coral reefs.
And a substantial decline in alpine snow cover.
Indeed, Professor Garnaut's latest report indicates that the need to act is greater than ever.
And the scientific consensus is stronger than ever.
Given these realities, I ask who I'd rather have on my side:
Alan Jones, Piers Akerman and Andrew Bolt.
Or the CSIRO, the Australian Academy of Science, the Bureau of Meteorology, NASA, the US National Atmospheric Administration, and every reputable climate scientist in the world.
It is deeply ironic that as the scientific evidence mounts, the Coalition's position grows more extreme with every passing day.
Mr Abbott doesn't care about climate change because he doesn't believe in climate change.
Yes, he says the right thing to the wider community.
But put him on talkback radio and his true opinion emerges.
It is no wonder that Mr Abbott told his party room not to talk about the science.
Because half the Coalition party room consists of sceptics, deniers and opportunists.
While decent men and women of the small ‘l' liberal tradition like Judi Moylan, Mal Washer and Judith Troeth tear their hair out in frustration watching a hard-won consensus evaporate in a cloud of denial and fear.
Friends, that consensus was the product of long years of deliberation and debate.
The first warning by a senior world leader came from none other than Margaret Thatcher  -  a trained scientist who knew what was at stake.
At the 2ndWorld Climate Change Conference in 1990, Mrs Thatcher warned that:
The danger of global warming is ... real enough for us to make changes and sacrifices, so that we do not live at the expense of future generations.
That conference led to the Earth Summit in Rio in 1992 and Kyoto in 1997 moments of hope, lost to inaction and delay.
There have been some brave attempts at reform alongthe way.
As Environment Minister, Senator Graham Richardson first proposed a climate change response in 1989.
His successor, David Kemp along with Peter Costello, tried again in 2002.
In 2007, Prime Minister Howard accepted the Shergold plan to establish an emissions trading scheme.
Both Labor and the Coalition went to the 2007 election pledging to price carbon.
That consensus has now been destroyed.
And friends, let's set the record straight about the 2010 election.
Yes I did promise that there would be no carbon tax.
I also said to the Australian people that we needed to act on climate change, we needed to price carbon and I wanted to see an emissions trading scheme.
Now, if I'd been leading a majority government I would have been getting on with an emissions trading scheme, just as I promised the Australian people.
As it is, in this minority parliament, the only way I could act to price carbon was by working with other Members of Parliament, or else do nothing.
I had a stark choice: do I act or not act?
I chose to act.
The Government's plan means we start with a fixed carbon price for a temporary transitional period a plan that puts a price on carbon from day one.
We will still have an emissions trading scheme but we will get there by a different route.
Our carbon pricing model will give industry time to adapt in a steady and deliberate manner.
It will generate revenue to assist households and businesses make the transition.
And it will provide a real incentive for firms to reduce their carbon pollution.
The important thing to know is that from 1 July 2012, carbon will be priced in the Australian economy.
The journey of transformation will begin.
Friends, I chose action over inaction because of this simple truth:
If Australia does not adopt a carbon price in 2011, we probably never will.
This is the year of decision.
Action versus inaction.
Acceptance versus denial.
Setting Australia on the path to a high skill, low carbon future.
Or leaving our economy to decay into a rusting industrial museum.
That is the choice we face.
Action will protect jobs.
Inaction will cost jobs.
Tony Abbott will cost this nation jobs.
In his landmark report, Lord Stern noted that while action has its price, but the cost of inaction will be far greater:
“The costs of action to the global economy would be roughly 1 percent of GDP, while the costs of inaction could be from 5-20 percent of GDP.”
                                                                                                                                                                              [UK Government, Stern Review:
                                                                                                                                                                                                      The Economics of Climate Change, 2006]
As Prime Minister of Australia, I will not trifle with our nation's future.
I will not expose our people to such risks.
We cannot afford to be stranded with an outdated high-emissions economy.
We can't freeze our economy in time, any more than we could lock ourselves behind tariff walls while the world changed outside.
I don't want us to wake up in ten years time lumbered with a high carbon economy when the rest of the world has moved on and then scramble to catch up.
Our nation is well equipped to make the transition.
We have an abundance of natural resources like wind, natural gas, solar and geothermal.
For example, the highest average solar radiation per square metre of any continent in the world.
We have an agile, innovative business sector tempered by three decades of exposure to global competition.
We have a talented workforce ready to embrace the jobsof tomorrow.
As Deputy Prime Minister, I often spoke about the opportunities that will come with a low carbon economy, like my address to the Green Skills Forum in 2009.
It is a conviction I hold even more strongly today as countries like China plunge headlong into new industries like solar energy while we delay and hold back.
Friends, the dignity and value of work lie at the very heart of everything my Government stands for.
That is why climate change is not just a debate among economists and scientists.
Every Australian family has a stake in what we do.
Delay will cost them jobs.
It will cost them jobs through the impacts of a changing climate.
Like the crop failures that will come with longer and harsher droughts.
Or the loss of tourism jobs that will come with the bleaching of our coral reefs.
Inaction will also cost jobs because emission-intensive economies will become uncompetitive in a low carbon world.
In the quest for comparative advantage, investment will flow towards those countries that can offer more output for fewer emissions.
Inaction will cost jobs.
Action will support jobs.
Friends, action on climate change means creating new jobs for the future.
It means saving and transforming existing jobs.
It means re-skilling workers for the future.
We will see new job opportunities in clean energy generation.
Electric and hybrid cars.
Manufacturing clean energy equipment.
Energy efficient construction and retro-fitting existing buildings.
Carbon capture and storage.
Today's workers will find themselves in different industries and different settings.
Welders and steel workers will build and maintain large-scale solar power plants.
Plumbers and electricians will be reskilled to install solar hot water systems and solar panels.
And there will be new jobs too.
Just as in the 1960s, the South Australian community could never imagine the jobs in tourism, fine food and wine, the film industry and the arts that lay just around the corner.
Or back in the 1980s that the ingenuity of markets would create enterprises like Google and Facebook that would change the world.
In a similar way, clean energy will open up opportunities we are only just beginning to imagine.
Those opportunities begin with that simple but momentous decision: Putting a price on carbon.
Friends, a price on carbon is the cheapest way to drive investment and jobs.
A low carbon economy will be more efficient and more productive.
It will change behaviour right across the economy, driving innovation and creativity.
Like the dynamic benefits of tariff reform, a market in carbon will not only cut carbon pollution but make the economy more efficient as a whole.
The countless decisions needed to transform our economy cannot  -  and should not  -  be made by government decree.
They can only be made by individual firms calculating how best to position themselves for a low carbon future.
By contrast, the Coalition wants to pick winners from a central bureaucracy located in Canberra.
More Karl Marx than Adam Smith.
Their “direct action” approach was a short-term fix cobbled together when Mr Abbott unexpectedly became Opposition Leader.
It is a threadbare piece of policy.
Never intended to be implemented.
Merely a fig-leaf for denial and delay.
No Liberal of consequence can support it.
No economist of standing does support it.
The Coalition's direct action method abandons any commitment to market forces.
It will increase emissions by 17 per cent, not the promised 5 per cent cut.
And it will cause a $30 billion black hole that the Federal Budget could never sustain.
Direct action simply taxes families and puts that money in the hands of polluters, with government rather than markets picking winners.
Malcolm Turnbull nailed the argument when he said:
“Having the government pick projects for subsidy is a recipe for fiscal recklessness on a grand scale.”
                                                                                                                                   [Hansard, 8 February 2010]
I totally agree.
And it's time Malcolm Turnbull, Joe Hockey and the other climate change believers in the Coalition stood up to be counted.
Or are the Liberals not only no longer the party of the free market.
But no longer a broad church party where MPs are free to express their convictions as well?
Friends, none of this means we have to lead the world, and we have not.
At the same time, we cannot afford to be left behind, yet we are.
While Australia delays, our peers and competitors are on the move.
Thirty-two countries and 10 US states already have emissions trading schemes.
Other economies, including China, Taiwan, Chile and South Korea, and a number of Canadian provinces, are either considering developing their own ETS or already have trial schemes in place.
Carbon taxes are in place in Britain, Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden, the Netherlands and Canada and are under discussion elsewhere, including Japan and South Africa.
China is closing environmentally-damaging, unsafe and economically inefficient small coal-fired generators at the rate of one every one or two weeks and replacing them with larger plants that are economically and environmentally much more efficient.
They are putting up wind turbines at the rate of one every hour.
China has also set its own ambitious target of reducing carbon pollution by 40 to 45 per cent per unit of GDP by 2020.
India is taxing coal to create a revenue stream for clean energy, and from April this year they will have an energy efficiency trading scheme.
In the race to build a clean energy economy, we have given the rest of the world a head start.
We're going to have to work hard if we don't want to be left behind.
Friends, as we make that transition to a low carbon future, we won't leave business and workers and unions to manage on their own.
That is not the Labor way.
In the coming months, you'll hear a lot about the impact a carbon price will have on employment.
Let me say this very clearly:
We will protect Australian jobs at the same time as we create new ones.
The Government understands that some Australian firms compete with overseas industries that won't necessarily incur the same carbon costs as they would here.
I don't want jobs in those industries to go overseas.
And I don't want the emissions that come with those jobs to go overseas either because that would only compound the world's carbon problems.
That's why the Government has committed to helping Australia's trade-exposed emissions-intensive industries as the world transitions to a lower carbon future.
Some people argue that providing assistance removes the incentive for business to reduce their pollution.
I reject that assertion and I reject the lack of importance that this sentiment gives to the importance of protecting Australian jobs.
To take just one example of the way this assistance could work.
If the Government chose to provide that assistance in the form of free permits as some have suggested though this decision has yet to be made, these businesses would then have an opportunity to reduce their carbon emissions, sell their surplus permits, and actually make money.
Friends, just as we assist industry, so too will we assist households.
There is no cost-free way of reducing carbon pollution and I don't resile from that fact.
Even Mr Abbott accepts there will be a pricing impact:
“I'm not saying there's cost-free ways to reduce emissions.”
                                                                                [MTR, 1 March 2011]
Amid all the misrepresentations, that is a precious grain of truth.
But there is another more important truth to accompany it: under Labor's equitable approach, price rises will be met by fair and generous assistance.
We are still yet to decide on assistance measures, so Mr Abbott's talk of excessive cost impacts is simply absurd.
What is certain is that all funds raised by a carbon price will go to assisting households, helping business transition and programs to tackle climate change.
Not a cent will go to Treasury.
And the biggest share will go to households
We will not allow low and middle income Australia to lose out.
This is how Labor does economic reform.
Make the big decisions.
But carry the nation's families and households with us along the way.
Friends, three weeks ago, I began a process that will equip our nation with a clean energy economy for the future: a price on carbon.
It is a big call.
One of the biggest in the modern era.
A call that will shape the destiny of our nation as greatly as floating the dollar, cutting tariffs or introducing the GST.
This nation-changing reform has been met with a campaign of fear just as Dunstan's groundbreaking reforms were met with fear and misunderstanding, reforms now taken for granted as part of everyday life.
Like those purveyors of fear in the 60s and 70s, Australians of the future will look back on Mr Abbott's campaign with pity and shame.
The pity and shame posterity reserves for leaders who miss the wave of history and misjudge the big calls.
The leaders who create fear and try to stop a confident nation dealing with the challenges of the future.
I will never be such a leader.
Faced with hurdles, I will always find a way through.
Faced with choosing between taking a few knocks or doing what's best for the nation, I will put our nation first every time, no matter what the personal price.
I will always ensure that this nation seizes the opportunities of the future and does not cower in fear.
A low-pollution, clean-energy economy is one of those opportunities.
Lord Stern calls it “the most dynamic and creative energy and industrial revolution in our economic history.”
Mr Abbott wants us to believe that Australians are incapable of such change.
I don't share his basic lack of faith in the Australian people.
Growing up here in Adelaide, I learnt something better than that.
I learnt to have faith in the creative and optimistic spirit of this nation and its people.
To believe that we are a smart, competent, resilient nation.
A nation that has done great things in the past, and which can do even greater things in the future.
A nation that understands when the soft options are gone, only hard choices remain.
That is why we choose action over inaction.
We will cut carbon pollution.
We will not leave our nation stranded by history.
We will not live at the expense of future generations.
We will get this call right and get this job done:
For our nation.
For our people.
For our future. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and her partner Tim Mathieson will attend the wedding of His Royal Highness Prince William of Wales and Catherine Middleton next month.
The Prime Minister and Mr Mathieson received an invitation from Buckingham Palace to attend the Royal wedding which will take place at Westminster Abbey on Friday 29th April at 11am.
The Governor-General, Ms Quentin Bryce and her husband have also been invited.
The Prime Minister and Mr Mathieson are delighted to have been invited to the wedding which will capture the hearts of millions around the world. 



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Thank you, Peter, for that very kind introduction.
My Lord Bishop, Reverend Fathers, Irish Consul-General Caitriona Ingoldsby and Deputy Head of Mission Orla Tunney, Tony Burke, Minister for Sustainability and Environment, Senator Michael Forshaw is here with Jan and Senator Ursula Stephens is here with Bob, and I know Johnno Johnson is here - Johnno is an icon.
Federal, state and local government colleagues, and my fellow speakers today  -  Kristina Keneally, Premier of New South Wales, you're a lucky woman, married into Irish-Australian nobility, and there's some Kenneallys here today. They stick, I reckon.
Tony Abbott, Leader of the Opposition - It's great to see a bloke who loves his job, isn't it. I'll do my best to keep him in it for as long as I can.
I'm glad Tony is here today because I know there was a last-minute flurry when he checked his diary this morning and discovered that this is a green event celebrating a saint, but once he worked out that the saint was named Patrick, not Bob, it was all OK.
Barry O'Farrell, also Leader of the Opposition - I hope you have more fun today than you do Saturday week.
And a special welcome to Frances Fitzgerald, Irish Minister for Education - welcome to Australia!  And congratulations on your election. We know the Irish people and economy have done it really tough in the last years and we look forward to the fresh start your Government is going to offer your people.
I'm very pleased to be here for the Lansdowne Club St Patrick's Day luncheon, especially on your 25th anniversary. 
Congratulations Peter Brennan, the Board of Directors and all of the members on that wonderful milestone.
St Patrick's Day is a great day for the Irish in Australia.
The new exhibition titled Not Just Ned that opens today in Canberra at the National Museum of Australia shows the far-reaching influence of the Irish well beyond the Kelly Gang. The Museum worked with national and international partners to secure the loan of many significant objects for this display.
I'd like to acknowledge the role of the Embassy of Ireland for their efforts in seeing this project become a reality, and to the Lansdowne Club for your support.Congratulations to all who played a part in bringing us this great tribute to Irish-Australian history.
We can't talk about the Irish influence without knowing who they are.
Who are they? English schoolchildren grew up with Arthur Mee's famous children's encyclopaedia in the 1950s.
Mee's answer  -  and I am not making this up, this is a genuine school textbook quote  -  is that there are three Irish “types”.
There is a very primitive type still to be met with in the West ... the one formerly used in Irish caricatures by unfriendly observers. The forehead is low, the mouth and lower part of the face are large, there is an inclination to a squat figure, and the general effect is that of a survivor form an early period in human history
Now Barry, I just want to say, I think that is deeply unfair.
But Mee goes on:
There is the businessman, chiefly from the north, who carries in his speech and form and features signs of being of a stiffer and less pliant breed, as from Norse, Scottish, or English forefathers.
Any Ulstermen here? Does that sound right? 
And the third type:
Then there is the tall, often blue-eyed, engaging Irishman of easy address and good humoured air, who would wile a bird from a bough by his fluent tongue, ready for adventure anywhere.
The amazing thing - Arthur Mee had never met Tony Burke.
I believe the real legacy of the Irish in Australia is the example - A fair go through education, hard work and respect.
I love the story of the Irish labourer looking for work on a building site. First day in Australia, the foreman, very sceptical, says
            Mick, you don't look like you know a girder from a joist.
Mick, very offended, replies
I most certainly do know my Goethe from my Joyce. Goethe wrote Faust and Joyce wrote Finnegan's Wake!
That to me is the true example of the Irish in Australia - An educated people who knew how to work.
The Irish landed just a few miles east of here. They landed in chains. Yes, they brought a song and a smile and a tear, and “drinking, praying, fecklessness” - all that malarkey. 
But we know you a bit better than that. We know what really happened. Our Irish worked. And they taught their kids. And I don't see too many chains in the room today.
People have made the point before me - these kinds of Irish people and these kinds of Irish values were how Irish emigration created a kind of Irish empire. Not like the empire that the Romans or the British built, but an empire nevertheless - an empire of song and story; an empire of education.
The Roman Empire's strongholds were its legions. The British Empire's strongholds were its ships. The Irish Empire's strongholds are its schools, the thousands of them in Australia today; St Mary's, St Joseph's, St Edmund's, St Pat's - the strongholds of the Irish empire.
It has been said, somewhat unfairly, that the Irish are the Celts who could swim.
My parents obviously were not swimmers, remaining in Wales until 1966 - and even then making the journey on a boat.
But as a Welsh migrant, I do feel the need to leave you with one rather significant observation about St Patrick; he might have converted the Irish to Christianity; he might be the patron of half our Catholic schools; his feast day might be the day all Irish celebrate their roots; but the historical record is unambiguous - St Patrick was Welsh. We remember the great influence on Australia that the Paddys have had, butlet's not forget it took a Taffy to get the ball rolling!
So today, we join to acknowledge that great Celticsaint, Patrick.
So, congratulations to the Lansdowne Club on your 25th anniversary. Thank you for your all you do for the Irish Australian business community, and thank you for the invitation to join you on this great Irish day.
An Irishman will cry at his brother's wedding and sing at his brother's funeral. No wonder he'll laugh at a Prime Minister's jokes.
No matter how many hours of lunch you still have to go, have a happy St. Pat's Day. 



HOST: Good morning, Prime Minister. Took you to your student days there, did it?
PM: Good morning. Well, the event did take me back to my student days in this sense, that the first major public speech I ever gave in was in the Bonython Hall. I was an elected student representative on the University Council at Adelaide University and I was invited to speak at a graduation ceremony. So, that was a big occasion for me many a long year ago, and it was great to be back there again last night.
HOST: Well, you came back there are 150 protestors saying ‘when are you going to act on gay marriage?' They said that if Don Dunstan was alive today, I've heard this phrase before, someone said often he'd be spinning in his grave, not turning in grave, because he was a person who wanted homosexuality to be recognised. He decriminalised it and they're saying well, as Prime Minister they're calling on you to give same-sex marriages legal status.
PM: Well, I have a different view. People are going to make their voices heard, including through turning up and peacefully having their say at occasions like last night. We live in a democracy and we want to hear people's voices, but I have a view about the Marriage Act - 
HOST: -OK, well on that, I suppose you could say you could choose to act or not to act and in this case you've chosen not to act on the Marriage Act, but on Q&amp;A the other night you said I had a choice, do I act or don't I act and I chose to act on climate change and go with this idea of a carbon tax. That echoes the phrase the cost of action is greater than the cost of inaction, I think I've heard that said by a lot of people with the UN. How much is this carbon tax going to cost the average person?
PM: Well, we haven't fixed a carbon price yet. We are taking this a step at a time so that we can explain every bit of it to the Australian people. Now-
HOST: -Well, you can explain it this morning, because on Q&amp;A someone said ‘well, will it be a sliding scale?' For example, we know with our income tax that there's a sliding scale, so can we find out if it's a sliding scale or not?
PM: Look, I can certainly explain that to you, and I'm afraid the premise of your question isn't quite right.
This is a tax on big polluters. It's not individuals paying this tax, so the question of income tax scales doesn't matter - this is big polluters paying this tax.
At the moment they can put carbon pollution into the atmosphere for nothing. We will put a price on carbon pollution and that will change the way that businesses do things. They'll innovate and we will have a clean energy future with all of the jobs that come with that.
Now, it will have price impacts, because clearly if you put an extra impost on business by pricing carbon pollution - I've been upfront with people - there will be price impacts. We will use the revenue that the big polluters are paying to provide generous assistance to households, as well as to assist businesses make the transition to this clean energy future.
I want to make sure we're protecting Australian jobs. We do that by assisting industry to make the transition. We do that by making sure we've got a competitive, clean energy economy of the future and we get the new jobs of the future.
And the revenue will also be used for programs to tackle climate change, but the single biggest use of the revenue will be to assist households.
HOST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott's been able to run a very successful scare campaign because I just asked you how much people would pay and you, sometimes you call it carbon tax, sometimes you call it a carbon price, it's a bit like a ghost. If you can't see how much you'll pay, isn't that why Tony Abbott's winning this argument, because he can rightly say be afraid, be very afraid, because we don't know what it is?
PM: Look, whatever we said and however much detail we had announced, and we will of course be announcing full details of the scheme. We'll be working through, we'll be explaining every bit to the Australian community. I wanted to explain this bit first, about how the pricing mechanism works  - 
HOST: -But the price is what people want to know about. They want to know how much they'll pay. Can you say, for example - 
PM: -Look, can I just say this to you: even if the Government had gone out and announced every detail of this carbon pricing, even if we had done that, Tony Abbott would be running a scare campaign.
Now, let's not mince any words about this. Tony Abbott is not running a scare campaign because he says there's not enough information. He's running a scare campaign because he thinks it's in his political interests, and at the end of the day he doesn't care about climate change and he doesn't believe in the science, so I am not going to make Government announcements based on Tony Abbott's scare campaign. That will be a feature, a scare campaign from Tony Abbott will be a reliable feature of our world in the same way the sun coming up every morning is a reliable feature of our world. That'll happen.
What I'll do is get on with making responsible decisions for this nation's future, making sure we've got a clean energy economy and the jobs of the future and that's what carbon pricing is about.
HOST: It's very interesting that one in three Green voters in key seats at the last election would have supported Labor if it had not delayed introduction of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, so, in fact, it really affected you badly in the last election and now you've got the situation where you're actually becoming unpopular because you're acting, but a lot of people are saying this is because you can't sell it. I mean, Kevin Rudd lost office because your Party said he'd lost touch with the electorate. Have you lost touch with the electorate?
PM: We are in the early days of this discussion with the Australian community and I understand when you start talking to the Australian community about big changes the nation needs to make that people become concerned and it can be easy to generate fear. But let's look at the past -  this nation has been able to adapt in the past. When we brought tariff walls down people said ‘Gee, we wouldn't have any Australian industry anymore', and here we are in a more prosperous economy because we took those step, and it's only Labor  - 
HOST: -So you're saying people will be better off once the tax is in?
PM: Certainly we will be better off as a nation to have a clean energy economy. This is about the future prosperity of this nation.
The world is moving to a cleaner energy future. We are high emitters of carbon pollution per head of population. Indeed, we're the highest in the developed world, and we can't afford to wake up in 10 years' time with the world having moved to a clean energy future and we're limping along behind with a high carbon pollution economy.
We can't afford that. That's why it's right to move, it's right to act, why I believe in action and that is exactly what we're doing.
HOST: Just quickly on one other tax that we've heard a lot about, what's happened to the mining super profits tax? Now, Norway created a future fund to ensure its financial stability for centuries to come. Are you still going to go ahead and do this?
PM: Yes, we are going to legislate the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, which I agreed with Australia's biggest mining companies. It's been in an in-detail policy process where mining representatives have got to sit round a table with the Minister Martin Ferguson and that group's been led by John Argus, quite a famous Australian name who is famous for being a big person in the mining industry. They've been working through all of the details. That will feed into the legislation and the legislation will come to parliament, absolutely.
HOST: And will you put that money into a special fund for the future of Australia?
PM: We've announced how we're going to use that money and it's going into infrastructure. Mining is a great benefit, but it also puts pressure on infrastructure, so we will be funding infrastructure.
We will be doing what the Government needs to do to increase superannuation for Australians from 9 per cent to 12 per cent. It's about national savings and a better retirement future for working Australians.
And we'll be using that money to cut company tax rate. We want to have a balance in our economic growth, so we think it's important that that money is used to cut the company tax rate and particularly assist small business so we get balance in our economic development around the country.
HOST: Just quickly before we go to calls, Kevin Rudd said the sorry speech and signing of Kyoto were a couple of the key things that he saw as great achievements in the first few months in office. You've been there a year now, so what's your two great achievements?
PM: Well, firstly I'd say striking a National Health Reform Agreement. We need to make sure that we've got quality health services in the future. If we're going to have those health services we can't keep going on the way we are where State governments are asked to pick up the sharply growing cost of public hospitals. If you fast forward the clock that means the cost of hospitals would eat all of the revenue that comes to State governments, and none of them would have money for schools and police. We fixed that with the National Health Reform Agreement, so I think that that's a big achievement for this Government and it's a truly national agreement. Every State and Territory have signed up to it.
Second, we structurally separated Telstra. Now, that's a mouthful, but one of the big problems we've had in telecommunications in this country is that the business that owns all of the monopoly infrastructure has also been a retail business. We're going make sure that we've got genuine competition in telecommunications. That means better prices and better deals for Australians.
And if I can sneak in a third, I think successfully making sure that we've got a package to rebuild the nation and particularly Queensland after the recent devastating floods and cyclone. That's required me to win a hard argument about a flood levy and I've won it and that legislation is going through the parliament.
HOST: Well, let's see if you can win the hard argument over the carbon tax. We've had an SMS saying ‘I run a small business and when my costs go up I usually have to reluctantly pass on those costs to customers. How can Julia Gillard say that the big polluters will be the only ones paying the carbon tax?'. Derek from Adelaide.
CALLER: Hi, Prime Minister. You've obviously been briefed by the CSIRO, Bureau of Meteorology and others about the magnitude of the problem of climate change and the facts are the polar ice caps are melting, Greenland's melting, the Siberian permafrost's melting, the oceans are warming, etcetera etcetera. Now, I just think before we talk about the minutia of a carbon tax, you need to explain to the public, because they obviously don't know how serious the problem is.
HOST: OK, Derek.
PM: I think that's a really good point and in the speech I gave in Don Dunstan's honour last night I did explain the science, the science that comes to use from very reputable places like the CSIRO and climate change scientists around the world. We do face a future with rising temperatures. That will mean more extreme droughts, more bushfires, increased cyclone activity. It'll cut into jobs, because it'll cut into things like food production. In the Murray Darling there'll be less water around, less food production. It means it will cut into things like tourism. It'll bleach coral in Great Barrier Reef and 60,000 Australians are actually involved in businesses that rely on the Great Barrier Reef being there.
So, that's the future - the future of declining jobs as our climate changes, as well as being left behind as the rest of the world moves to a clean energy economy, and I'm going to be strongly making that point.
I believe in climate change. I believe it's induced by human activity. Tony Abbott doesn't care about climate change because he doesn't believe in it and he's made that very clear in recent days. When he's talking to people, when he's on talkback radio, he agrees with climate change denial. So, I'm for action - he's for inaction.
HOST: Prime Minister, just quickly on that one, the Independent Climate Change Commission you set up has got Tim Flannery at the head of it, but climate change deniers, in fact that's the name of their site, say that he's no expert in this area and maybe you should have had someone from the CSIRO?
PM: Tim Flannery is a well-known Australian and well known for his scientific expertise and he will be out there explaining the science to Australians-
HOST: -He hasn't been doing much in the last month, because we spoke to him about a month ago and I haven't seen him coming around trying to explain the carbon tax which he said was the only way forward in 2007.
PM: Well, you certainly will see him. His appointment has been made and he's got a very active program of events and public engagements, so you will see him.
But really, can I just say to you, off the climate change deniers website what we're going to get is climate change denial. Now, that might be where Tony Abbott gets his inspiration from and he might want to get his science off Alan Jones or Andrew Bolt. I'm going to get my science off the reputable, scientific agencies in this country and around the world and they are crystal clear: climate change is real and we need to respond.
HOST: Speaking of science, we did an interview this morning with Craig Knowles, the head of the MDBA and when he was asked about the science of the Murray Darling Basin, he said you put 12 scientists in a room, you get 12 different answers and that's why he wasn't going to go with the recommendations that they have a minimum flow down the Murray to keep the river alive.
PM: Well, what I think you'll see the Murray Darling Basin Authority doing is consulting  - 
HOST: -But how can you recognise the science in one area and then when it comes to the river appoint someone like Craig Knowles who says ‘look, put 12 scientists in a room and get 12 different answers.'
PM: Look, I obviously didn't hear that interview, but let's be clear. In every - 
HOST: -It was on Four Corners as well. He said the same thing the other night on Four Corners.
PM: Well, I didn't see Four Corners, but can I just be clear with you, in every aspect of our daily life we accept science.
I mean, do you accept that smoking causes lung cancer and it's bad for people to smoke? I accept that and it's scientists that told us that.
Do you accept, as I do, that we shouldn't be running around in strong sunshine without any form of sun protection on? I accept that. I accept that because scientists explained to us that not having sun protection causes skin cancer.
HOST: Let's hope the scientists that are telling the head of the Murray Darling Basin they need 3,000-4,000 gigalitres at a minimum for a healthy river that they might listen to his words.
PM: Certainly, the river science will be taken into account, but what the Murray Darling Basin Authority is doing is working on the plan that will make sure when we're looking at the water in the River Murray that we've got good environmental outcomes; we've got good outcomes for food production' and we've got good outcomes for communities along the river.
We can have a win-win-win here and that is what we're aiming for.
HOST: Alright, Robert from (inaudible).
CALLER: Morning, Prime Minister. Welcome to Adelaide again.
PM: Thank you.
CALLER: My point to you is, well, two points  -  a statement, a couple of statements and a question to you.
It appears that successfully Tony Abbott and his Party, coalition Party, have been using the ALP for the last three and a half years as a punching bag to knock down every single policy that you put up to the Australian electorate, and I think you've got to take some of the blame for that because your selling credentials have been extremely mediocre and that's why the ETS failed and this is why the carbon tax is failing so miserably at the moment.
Should your Ministers be starting, and I mean every single Minister on your front bench, should they be starting to propel some good language, easy, simple language out to the Australian to tell us the pros  -  obviously, the pros in your favour  -  why we should have this carbon tax and knock the hell back down Tony Abbott's negative campaign, and might I say, I'll say to Mr Abbott, I'm not voting one way or the other on this issue; I'd just like to know the truth and the facts of the matter.
But I've looked at my electricity bill over the last six and a half years and it's been going up anyway. I just want some simple answers and I want to know from one Party or the other where Australians are going to be better off.
PM: Well, I can tell you very simply when Australians are going to be better off and how they're going to be better off. We will be better off if we price carbon. We will be better off if we act. We will be better off in terms of our environment and we will be better off in terms of our economy and the jobs of the future. We can't afford to be left behind.
Now, Mr Abbott will run his scare campaign, that's what Mr Abbott does, but let's just look at a parallel here. When I first announced the flood levy I was on talkback radio and people were saying to me ‘Australians hate this. You'll never get this through. This is a huge error. Your Government could be destroyed on this. How could anybody do something like this?' And here we are after patient explanation, and I think Australians have come to accept that it's the right thing to do to assist the people of Queensland, that the flood levy is struck in a fair way and it is going to go through the parliament.
Well, in the face of a fear campaign, and Mr Abbott ran a vicious fear campaign against the flood levy and he doesn't even bother talking about it anymore.
Now, we've got another vicious fear campaign, and patiently and methodically we will explain the benefits of making sure we act on climate change, and that means we've got to put a price on carbon that'll cut carbon pollution, that will give us clean energy jobs in the future.
HOST: [AUDIO BREAK] for your time this morning. We've had a couple of texts come in saying that, ‘how much will we pay? Why are we introducing something that China and the big polluters aren't?' SMS from Fred: big new tax, nothing will change with the world polluters, the cost of living will rise, but you'll go out on a huge pension.
PM: Well, I'm glad that people are raising those questions because there is, I think, some talk in the Australian community about what is the rest of the world doing.
The rest of the world is acting. We should not succumb to some image that somehow we are alone and we are the ones that are acting.
I can go through it with you very quickly. You've got 32 countries that have emissions trading schemes. We've got 10 US States that do as well. President Obama has announced an ambitious goal to create a clean energy economy in the United States. In China they're acting on climate change. They're shutting down a dirty coal fired power station, an inefficient power station, at the rate of one every one to two weeks and replacing them with more environmentally efficient power stations. India is taxing coal in order to generate a clean energy fund and they are going to start an energy trading credit scheme in April this year. The world is moving.
So there is a choice for us  -  do we stand still and risk being the ones who are left behind, or do we do what the environmental scientists are telling us to do, act on climate change, and do we use the mechanism that the economists are telling us is the most efficient, least-cost mechanism, and that's pricing carbon.HOST: Just very quickly, Prime Minister, when would you have the details available for people to understand them in more clarity?
PM: We'll be announcing further details of the scheme between now and the middle of the year and then we will have the legislation in parliament in the second six months of this year.
I wanted to be able to have the conversation with the Australian community about the mechanism, how we were going to get this done. I'm doing that right now, and then of course I will be talking to the Australian people about all of the further details.
But I do want to emphasise this is a tax on polluters. People will get generous household assistance.
I'm a Labor Prime Minister. That means my first consideration is always protecting Australian jobs. We will support industry in the transition and this is all about having the jobs of the future.
So, if you care about meeting the challenges of the future, if you care about the environment we're leaving, this nation's children and their children, and you want us to be a prosperous nation in the future, then this whole conversation can only end in one conclusion - and that is we've got to get on with the job and price carbon.
HOST: We'll, I'll let you get on with the job today of being Prime Minister. Thank you very much for your time this morning and hopefully we'll be able to continue that conversation when more details come forward. Thanks for your time, Julia Gillard.
PM: Terrific, thank you. 



The Australian Government welcomes the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 1973, which importantly calls for the imposition of a no fly zone over Libya and demands the immediate establishment of a ceasefire and a complete end to violence. 
The resolution also authorises member states to take all necessary measures to protect civilians under threat of attack while excluding an occupation force.This is an important step by the international community towards stopping the Qaddafi regime's attacks on the Libyan people.
The broad-ranging package of measures adopted by the Security Council includes a ban on flights by Libyan aircraft, including Libyan commercial flights.
These measures strengthen enforcement of the UN arms embargo and broaden the reach of the financial sanctions.
The Australian Government was among the first to call for decisive action by the international community, including a UN-mandated no fly zone.
Through this action, the UN Security Council has invoked the Responsibility to Protect for the second time in three weeks and has taken decisive action to protect civilians in Libya.
UNSCR1973 provides a clear legal mandate for the imposition of a no fly zone.The Council has now responded to the calls from the international community, in particular the Arab League, for the imposition of such a zone.This is particularly timely given our fears for the people of Benghazi, who are facing attack from Qaddafi's forces.Qaddafi has warned Benghazi's residents that his army is coming with full force and that there will be no mercy, and Qaddafi's son Seif Al Islam has threatened rivers of blood.Australia has already fully implemented UNSC1970 and adopted autonomous sanctions measures against the regime. 



Thank you! I feel very much at home today. Here among friends. Here among the Labor family. Here among those who hand out at the train stations, stand at the polling booths and stuff the envelopes. Here among so many people who believe in fairness, among so many people who are ready to fight for it.
And I know Kristina will lead that fight for fairness with incredible courage and determination. That's because this election is about fairness for families. Fairness for New South Wales families, families who deserve a government that cares. Families who rely on properly funded public services. Who rely on health and housing, on care for the ageing and the disabled, on teachers and nurses and police. These families need Labor. And these families cannot afford the Liberals. The contrast with our opponents could not be greater. Labor is a party with a practical, positive plan to help. Six days to go, the Liberal policy is still hide and seek. If Mr O'Farrell thought the people of New South Wales would support his policies, then he'd tell us what they are. He won't. Because he knows they are not what families want. My message to the people of New South Wales is simple: Don't give Barry O'Farrell a blank cheque. Don't let Barry O'Farrell do whatever he wants. Friends, last time a Liberal Government could do whatever it wanted we ended up with Work Choices. Pay cuts for working Australians, getting the sack if you looked like you might complain, overtime, penalty rates and public holidays on their way to being things of the past. New South Wales can't afford a Liberal Government in love with Work Choices. New South Wales can't afford a Liberal Government which doesn't support teachers and nurses. New South Wales can't afford a Liberal Government dumping 128,000 extra homes in the West and the South-West. With a blank cheque, Barry O'Farrell will go too far and it will be families that will pay the price. This great state deserves a government that cares. That cares about services and cares about families. That cares about fairness. And this great state deserves a government that understands. That understands the threat of climate change and the need to help families with cost of living pressures. That understands the promise of education to transform a child's life. A government that understands the future. The NSW Liberals will never understand. That's why the NSW Liberals oppose Labor's plans to help families with the rising cost of electricity. That's why the NSW Liberals oppose Labor's plans to help children learn in school.  Remember it was Mr O'Farrell who tried to deny parents in this State the powerful information on My School. All my life, I have believed education is the key to success for individuals and for the nation. Having the world's best education system will mean Australia is able to compete with bigger economies.  Having the world's best education system will also mean Australian is a fairer nation. Whatever else our young people may encounter in life, a sound foundation of excellent, rigorous education ought to be their entitlement.  Today we know that Labor will deliver this in New South Wales. And today we know that the Liberals will not. Labor's education philosophy, boiled down to one word, is: Teach. The Liberals' education philosophy, boiled down to one word, is: Cut. That is the Liberal way, but it is not the Australian way. We believe in a fair go through education. This is what we believe in today and this is what we fight for on Saturday. We will now take a moment to watch a short presentation.  Friends - your Premier is a fighter. She will give nothing away. Your Premier has a vision for the future. She will deliver in education. Your Premier understands families. She will fight for fairness. Please welcome my friend, your Premier, Kristina Keneally. 



Thank you very much and thank you to Dennis for that introduction.
I would like to say about Dennis, that he is a fantastic leader for us in the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. He has served more than one Prime Minister, but he has continuously served the national interest, and I thank him for that.
He is a tough-minded person. He is a person who always keeps Australia's interests at the forefront of his mind. He is also someone I have relied on as I have come to this position, and as you will have seen, undertaken a number of trips, including most recently to the United States.
But clearly when there is a new Prime Minister there is that moment, that first moment when Dennis comes and introduces himself, where he is obviously calculating to himself that this is the moment where he can perhaps most impose his vision of the future on the new prime minister, when the new prime minister's reserves are at the lowest and they are perhaps at their most impressionable.
In my conversation with Dennis at that time, he didn't actually seek to persuade me about anything regarding the future of foreign affairs in this country, but he did seek to persuade me that I was very lucky to have him, because if he wasn't working doing his current job then of course he had a standing offer to be the halfback at the Canberra Raiders.
This is something that I didn't quite believe at the time and I found as Prime Minister a healthy degree of scepticism helps you along the way, but Dennis is a fantastic person to rely on and thank you for being here.
Dennis, I too have struggled with doing the acknowledgments tonight, being well aware that if I was to name everybody individually then I would really have to start at the tables and just work through.
But I will do is I will acknowledge my parliamentary colleagues. The Deputy Prime Minister is here. We have two Parliamentary Secretaries here. Our Parliamentary Secretary for Trade, Justine Elliot, is here, and we are also joined by Parliamentary Secretary, Richard Marles, who works assisting the Minister for Foreign Affairs, most particularly on work related to Pacific Islands. So thank you very much for being here.
Can I acknowledge members of the foreign diplomatic corps in Canberra? Can I acknowledge leaders of the Australian business community? Can I acknowledge leading thinkers from our wonderful ANU and other parts of the academy and the foreign policy community? Can I even acknowledge members of the Canberra press gallery, including Paul Kelly, who I had the opportunity to be grilled by this morning? It's good to see you here.
And I did want to take this opportunity too, to single out one person for special acknowledgement and for thanks. That person is Gordon de Brouwer, he of course is the sherpa for the G20.
One thing I have learned in this job is they don't call them sherpas for nothing. It is a very onerous job but Australia is very well served by his character, his professionalism and his experience and I thank him for that work.
I have had the opportunity tonight to share my meal and some discussion with our Ambassador from Japan. I thank him for his company and I want to take this opportunity to once again convey my condolences to him and to the people of Japan on their devastating recent losses.
Tomorrow the Leader of the Opposition and I will attend with you, sir, to sign your condolence book on behalf of the people of Australia.
But even as we meet here tonight, Australians are seeing on their TV screens the story, the retelling of the stories of some members of our Urban Search and Rescue team who went to Japan to assist the people of Japan during these very dark days.
And whilst of course I haven't seen the television program because it's showing as we are here, I am very confident that what that program will show recorded through the eyes and the experiences of those Australians, is the incredible courage and resilience of the Japanese people in the face of this devastation.
I think we can also remember as we think about that Urban Search and Rescue team, that even as they leave Japan they are donating to the people they have worked alongside, their tents, their generators, their equipment. They wanted to do that in a spirit of friendship, and that I think is really, for all of us, an emblem of what our friendship with Japan means and particularly means for us in these very dark days.
It's my task tonight to reflect and give you a few words on the G20 and how it sits in Australian foreign policy and what we want to achieve at the G20 at the end of this year.
To turn to the first question - how does the G20 sit in the foreign policy of my Government? - can I say to you I am of course committed to an activist and creative foreign policy. It's not the Australian way to stand on the sidelines when we've got something to contribute.
As Prime Minister I view myself as walking in the footsteps of the Labor leaders past. We are internationalist by instinct. We believe in multilateral forums. We've believed that since the days of Doc Evatt and we continue to believe it. We believe as the world has grown ever more connected that the role of multilateral organisations has grown ever more important.
So we continue as an Australian nation to be very strong supporters of the United Nations and we are very strong supporters of effective global and regional institutions.
We believe in that kind of internationalism and that kind of engagement and it's certainly my intention as Prime Minister to continue with what I believe is a great Labor tradition.
The G20 sits firmly within this tradition. It's a body whose membership it reflects the new global economic and political realities. It's a body which can provide collective solutions to global economic challenges, and it's a body for which we want an ambitious agenda.
The G20 membership also reflects the growing dynamism of the region in which we live, just as by instinct as the Labor members and as a Labor Prime Minister we believe in multilateral engagement.
Since the days of Bob Hawke and Paul Keating, we have firmly turned our face towards our region. We know our future lies here. We know the history of the 21st century will be written in the Asia Pacific.
And so our engagement in the G20 we believe reinforces the engagement we have through regional institutions and the membership of the G20 bringing together as it does so many of the important countries of our region - China, Japan, South Korea, Indonesia with its standing outreach to whichever nation is chairing ASEAN at that time - that this is an important forum, the G20, to bring together countries in our region.
It builds of course on top of our engagement in developing regional architecture. We continue to have a strong focus on APEC, and Labor claims a proud tradition in relation to APEC.
We are working in the emerging new architecture of the East Asia Summit and we intend to be activist players in creating a broad agenda for the forthcoming East Asia Summit, and we do participate in forums like the ASEAN Defence Ministers Plus Eight Meeting.
We believe that there is a great deal of scope for agendas which are discussed in these regional forums to be agendas that can link to what is happening in the G20.
To give just one example of that, we believe that the East Asia Summit, as we move towards the end of this year, that there will be the capacity to link the work of the East Asia Summit with the financial stability agenda being dealt with through the G20. We believe that there could be a role to be played by the East Asia Summit in financial stability work in the region which reinforces and reflects the G20 agenda.
So we believe the G20 sitting as it does, having been formed at a leader's level in response to the global financial crisis, is an important global institution for us to be working within a global meeting place for leaders.
We believe it equips our multilateral tradition and we also believe that there can be a synergy between its agendas and the work that we are doing directly within the institutions and bodies of our region.
Now it's impossible to discuss the G20 without acknowledging the remarkable role that Kevin Rudd played in its formation at leader level.
If I can reflect very briefly the words I spoke at the US Congress last week. I said then, the vital forum for the global response was the leaders of the G20 nations.
My predecessor Kevin Rudd worked hard to ensure this was so, and he took his dynamism and energy and ideas into the creation of that first G20 discussion, and his determination and intellect are still serving Australia well as he serves as the nation's Foreign Minister.
Of course Kevin wanted to see the G20 come together at that important time in economic history because he understood that it was uniquely positioned to respond to the global financial crisis, and it has done so. It has done so with the reforms to global financial regulation. It's done so with the reforms to the IMF and the tripling of the IMF's resources. It's done so with the provision of economic stimulus, some $5 trillion in fiscal stimulus around the world. And through the provision of that stimulus, literally tens of millions of jobs were saved.
We know many jobs were lost and other countries have suffered so much more greatly than Australia has, but millions of jobs were saved by that quick, collective action through the G20.
Leaders have put in place an important framework for strong, sustainable and balanced growth to coordinate during those days of crisis, to coordinate during the days of recovery, and we would say to keep coordinating beyond the recovery into stronger and stronger growth.
That means the G20 should, in our view, continue to play a role in ensuring that there is dialogue about sound macroeconomic policies and economic reforms that have the capacity to boost productivity, income, jobs and national wealth.
Now, all of this means that through Australian eyes we see the G20 as a serious strategic opportunity, not just for us but for the global economy. And we believe that there is a shared and collective interest in making sure that the G20 is a genuine force for future growth.
Now, that won't just happen, we are determined to play a role in making it happen.
Can I talk now about where I think the G20 can and should go as we move towards the meeting at the end of this year?
I'd like firstly to talk about trade, not because I believe trade will dominate the agenda of the G20 at the end of the year - I most certainly do not - but I want to talk about trade first because I want to reinforce in this gathering that from the Australian perspective, focusing on trade is an urgent task.
Indeed, what will happen on trade will largely have happened by the time the G20 meets towards the end of this year.
And of course I'm referring to whether or not real progress will have been made in concluding the Doha Round.
And so I wanted to talk about trade first to reinforce the Australian view that at this stage of the global economic recovery, the global economy needs the can of Red Bull that the Doha Round would be to global growth. We believe it would be a great shot in the arm.
Now I'm a realist but I'm also a campaigner and an activist, and I understand how many hurdles lie in the way of concluding the Doha Round. But I also understand that we will not see it concluded unless we raise our voice and press on every opportunity to bring it to conclusion.
At the last G20 meeting, G20 leaders used terminology like end game. There are only so many occasions on which leaders can come together and use such terminology and not succeed.
When I spoke at the G20, I said to the leaders assembled there that whilst we were right to congratulate each other that we had not succumbed to a rising tide of protectionism in the darkest days of the global financial crisis, whilst we were right to congratulate each other on that, those congratulations could well be coming too soon, because I genuinely believe that the greatest and most difficult days in seeing off the potential for rising protectionism are not the days we've lived through, but the days to come.
I actually think as many nations around the world go through a period of sluggish growth, of stubbornly high unemployment rates and of fiscal consolidation, which in the language of people in the streets is the language of cut-back, government cutting back expenditure on things they used to rely on, that it is in those days that domestic pressure for protectionism will be at its most acute.
We are yet to live through those days, but if I am right on that prediction, it gives an even newer urgency to concluding the Doha Round because if we do not conclude it now I fear it will never be concluded.
And I do not believe that we can continue to go to meetings like the G20 full of congratulations that we haven't succumbed to protectionism but not able to take another step forward in freer global trade.
So I did want to go to trade first, not because I expect it to dominate the G20 agenda, but because I do believe it should be a key focus of what we talk to each other about and what business we try and conclude during the course of this year.
When G20 leaders come together, we aren't central bankers, we are leaders of nations. I mean that with all due apology to Glenn. I didn't mean that badly or unkindly - very important to have central bankers. But when we gather together, we are there as national leaders, and our task is to deliver for the people of the countries that have elected us to represent them.
Now, I'd have to say no one hammers that point harder than the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, Wayne Swan, who is very outcomes-focused at the G20 and has literally spent hundreds of hours of his life going and speaking with his peers in international forums on these issues. That's hundreds of hours there as well as hundreds of hours in transit.
So I will be carrying the same message to G20 leaders at the end of this year. We need to make sure that through those meetings we are delivering in a practical way for the people that we represent.
Consequently, I believe it is very important that the forthcoming G20, in further considering the global framework for sustained and balanced growth, has a particular focus on jobs and the growth that is necessary to create more jobs.
Now, the reality is in Australia, we do not have the kind of unemployment problem that others have around the world. We have a set of economic challenges we need to manage as growth continues to be fuelled by resources boom, the likes of which we haven't seen since the middle of the 1800s.
So we have challenges to manage. But they are different challenges from nations around the world which are struggling with not enough work for their people. So there needs to be a key focus on jobs. And I believe in focusing on jobs, that needs to be a focus not just for G20 nations talking about jobs for their own people, it needs to be a focus on jobs and employment growth around the world.
It would take a whole other opportunity and address to talk about the events that we are living through in the Middle East and North Africa, and that is not my purpose tonight. But when we reflect on some of those events, for example what has happened in Egypt, of course there are a broad range of causes.
But one of the things that we can clearly identify as a pressing problem is large numbers of young people often with high education levels and with no real prospects of work. This is a problem for individual countries, it is a problem for our global economy, and it should be a key focus of the dialogue at the G20.
To create jobs we need to improve growth. To improve growth we need to deliver economic reform. Australia's got a good economic reform story to tell, a story about focusing on skills, on participation, on continued competition reforms like the structural separation we've succeeded in, in telecommunications, the infrastructure improvement we will bring with the NBN, our drive towards a seamless economy.
So we can tell this story, but we would tell it for its demonstration effect about the benefits of economic reform in spurring growth. And so it will fall to the G20, in my view, to have further dialogue about creating jobs through increased growth, and that requires economic reform and a mix of interventions, including deep structural adjustment and fiscal consolidation for economies represented at the G20.
Whilst domestic economic policies are of course a matter for national governments, we know how interdependent nations are. And so I believe the G20 must continue this economic reform dialogue and the G20 does need to speak confidently and loudly about what its members are doing to ensure growth and to avoid the structural economic fault lines that gave rise to the global financial crisis in the first place and that could give rise to a future crisis if we don't continue to work on improving.
Of course this includes the G20 continuing its focus on improving the efficiency and competitiveness of the global banking system, and I'm very pleased that Australia will be chairing a workshop in the lead-up to the G20 on this new financial landscape. It needs to be a continuing and important part of the G20's work.
Having talked a great deal about the G20's role in driving the reforms that are necessary to secure growth, I do also want to reinforce tonight that through Australian eyes we see a broader role for the G20 than focusing solely on economic matters, as important as those economic matters are. We also believe that the G20 agenda should expand and we should be building on some of the developments that have occurred to date.
Every chair of the G20 puts their own stamp on the agenda. Certainly President Lee did in Seoul by making sure development was on the agenda. And we believe at the forthcoming G20 we can, with that on the agenda as a result of President Lee's work, have the G20 be a catalyst for improving the way in which we go about development.
Of course President Sarkozy has a great deal of ambition for the forthcoming G20 and we believe there is a real role in seeing that ambition harnessed and making sure we drive it to conclusion in a series of areas.
President Sarkozy has certainly flagged job creation as an important part of the G20 which he will chair and lead. But he's also said that he wants to see a focus on food security and we welcome that. We welcome that because of the importance of food security to tackling extreme poverty in our world.
We believe, with our expertise, that we can make a major contribution to this dialogue at the G20. Boosting agricultural productivity is a key part of ensuring food security, and Australia brings a very unique set - unique and deep set of tools to that debate. We are a nation that knows a great deal about productivity in agriculture, and we would be in a position to share that.
We also endorse the need for reform of the Food and Agriculture Organisation as part of this food security discussion. We endorse too the focus of President Sarkozy on stable energy markets, understanding that they're vital to sustaining economic recovery and protecting people against unnecessary rises in the cost of living. So we intend to be a contributor to that discussion at the G20.
We also believe that this G20 can play a role ahead of the 17th Conference of Parties in Durban in December on climate change. We believe in particular the G20 can play a role in developing options on climate change financing for consideration in the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, another important set of discussions to be had at the G20 at the end of this year.
And as a great resource nation, I also believe Australia can make a contribution to an agenda around natural resources security. We have a reputation globally which we fought for hard and which we well deserve as a reliable global supplier. We believe we can make a contribution on the agenda at the G20 on the topic of natural resources security.
So that is a broad agenda to discuss and think through. Of course there will be other elements that come on the agenda. But I did tonight want to touch on those things that are at the forefront of my mind as we work through and prepare for the forthcoming G20.
Can I conclude by saying to you, the G20 has proved its worth. It was vital for stability during the global financial crisis, it was vital as we saw off the worst of the effects of what could have been a global depression.
Now the G20, having come through those days, is a serious strategic opportunity for this country and for the global economy. Seizing that strategic opportunity will require leadership.
That's something I said to President Obama when I recently met him in the United States.
For the G20 to work, leaders must lead. Diplomats, business leaders, academics, commentators, all have their responsibility of course. But national leaders have a special responsibility in a forum for leaders, and that is a responsibility I'm very glad to embrace.
A strong and successful G20 means growth and growth means jobs and jobs mean an opportunity at a good life. I fundamentally believe that. I believe that here, when in our domestic policy I talk about the benefits and dignity of work, I believe it as I attend meetings like the G20.           
And because of that, because growth equals jobs and jobs equal a decent opportunity in life, the G20 matters so much to this government. And that's why Australia will continue to do its part at the G20. We will continue to deliver reform here at home. We will continue to support reform abroad.
Making the G20 a genuine force for future growth is going to require a sustained diplomatic effort and it will be a substantial foreign policy achievement. The Australian Government will lead in many of these discussions and I know that our diplomatic community will do its part.
I also believe that it will take every one of the extraordinary talents that we have here tonight, political and diplomatic, business, academic and media from Australia and around the world, to create and sustain this kind of effort and to achieve the kind of ambition we have for the G20.
We will all need to work together to deliver growth, jobs and better lives for people in this country, people in the G20 and the people of the world. It's a big challenge, but I'm looking forward to working with you on it.
Thank you very much. 



HOST: And without further ado, we're joined in the studio by the Prime Minister. Julia Gillard, thanks for your company.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: I want to come to Libya in a moment, but just very quickly, Prince William's in town. Do you hope that by the time he's King William that Australia's become a republic?
PM: Well, I had the opportunity to meet Prince William in New Zealand at the memorial service that I attended on Friday. Now, he's here spreading some comfort to victims of the Queensland floods, so that's great to see.
I'm not sure when to predict Prince William as king. We've got a way to go  -  our current Queen, and then of course his father, Prince Charles.
Inevitably, we will continue to debate and work through when this nation wants to become a republic. It's not a debate at the forefront of our national conversations at the moment, but I believe it will return, but I'm not going to make any date predictions on either the ascension to the throne of Prince William or the date of this nation becoming a republic.
HOST: Alright, going straight to Libya, though, the events are moving very quickly. Do you think that the UN Resolution entitles the forces, the coalition forces, to go on the ground in Libya and actually take ground troops in there?
PM: It's very clear from the UN Security Council Resolution this is not about ground forces, but this is about a broad range of military actions to try and protect the Libyan people.
What is enlivening the action here is the responsibility to protect, and we've seen from every statement from Colonel Qaddafi that he intends to wreak more and more violence, more and more bloodshed in Libya, and so the international community has spoken and now is acting with what we've seen happening overnight. From Pentagon briefings, we know that cruise missiles are being used to take out defences being used by Colonel Qaddafi to try and stop this gross violence against the Libyan people.
HOST: But the UN Resolution talks about using all necessary measures. Does that rule out, as far as you're concerned, taking further action beyond just military strikes, extending into forms of ground troops operations?
PM: I believe the Resolution has got breadth in terms of what the international community can do, but I believe the Security Council would meet and deliberate again if there was a question of ground forces. My understanding is that they are looking at options like the option we are seeing being used over night of using force  -  indeed, a great deal of force. We're talking about more than 100 cruise missiles in order to limit Colonel Qaddafi's ability to keep inflicting violence on his people.
HOST: The Australian Government's taken a very firm position on this issue. The rhetoric from both yourself and the Foreign Minister is very strong. If further Security Council action is required, will Australia back that?
PM: Well, the Foreign Minister and I have been very clear that we wanted the Security Council to consider a no fly zone, to consider measures to try and protect the Libyan people, and they've done that.
The task now is to see how these measures work, so Paul, I'm not going to go beyond that today. We are seeing the commencement of military intervention. We are seeing the commencement of the world's military response. We need to monitor that response and see what happens on the ground in Libya as a result.
What we obviously want to see is Colonel Qaddafi ceasing violence  -  not pretending to, as he has in the recent few days, where he's pretended that he's going to engage in a ceasefire and then actually engaged in violence. We want violence stopped.
HOST: Further afield in the Middle East, something that the Foreign Minister wasn't as clear on was what the Government's position was vis-a-vis the Saudi Arabians sending troops to Bahrain to support the royal family there in the face of democratic uprisings. What actually is the Australian Government's position on that? Are you opposed, for example, to Saudi Arabia sending those troops?
PM: Well, around the world we support people's peaceful right to make their voices heard, their peaceful right to protest. On events in Yemen and Bahrain, we are monitoring the situation very, very closely, and as we have things to say about the situation on the ground, then we will.
As the Foreign Minister has made clear a little bit earlier today, and he's made clear in his various conversations with me, our focus, immediately, is on the military intervention that we are seeing in Libya, and we are all hoping that this actually does lead to an end to violence.
HOST: But this situation in Bahrain is a point of tension between Saudi Arabia and the United States. Surely the Australian Government has an attitude to the deployment of Saudi forces to protect the Bahrain Government? What is the Australian Government attitude?
PM: We have an attitude towards violence  -  we abhor violence around the world when it is used against people who are protesting peacefully, and we make that attitude clear in all sorts of circumstances around the world.
HOST: Prime Minister, staying overseas but moving to Japan, Paul Kelly in his editorial talked about some of the ramifications for Australia from what's happened there, in particular the problems with the nuclear reactors. Is it fair to say that that has had an impact on your thinking about exporting uranium to India? That's something the Government has opposed. We've seen a lot of pressure to try to turn around and do otherwise. Are you sticking to that now? Does this have any impact on that?
PM: What is happening in Japan doesn't have any impact on my thinking about uranium exports from this country. We do export uranium, and we will continue to export uranium. Countries around the world will make their own choices about how they source their energy.
On uranium exports to India, we've had a long-standing policy of not exporting uranium because we've got a long-standing policy - which is not aimed at India  -  but a long-standing policy of not exporting uranium to countries that are not signatories to the non-proliferation treaty. So, not individually aimed at India, but does have the effect that we don't export uranium to India.
My focus on Japan has not been on those questions. It's been on the humanitarian circumstance of the Japanese people. It's been on the work of our consular staff there to help Australians and to identify the number of missing Australians, and I do want to take this opportunity to just say our ambassador and his team have, in my view, worked miracles over the last few days, shown a great deal of fortitude and bravery in very difficult circumstances, and the Australian people should be thanking them for those continuing efforts.
HOST: There's a lot of international issues in the press at the moment. You once said that foreign affairs wasn't a passion of yours. Is that fast changing?
PM: Well, I was making a very simple statement about what brings people into politics, and people come into public life from a variety of walkways and for a variety of reasons. The thing that first got me active, the first reason I ever wrote a leaflet, went to a protest, thought about a government decision and sought to change was in the area of education.
I've always believed, across my life, that a fair distribution of opportunity, that making sure people from the most humble of circumstances can get a great education and consequently access to a great life is a great moral force and it drives me. It drove me all those years ago when I was a university student; it's driving me the best part of 30 years later. That was my point.
HOST: But just on this issue, as Prime Minister, do you want to leave your mark on foreign policy, and if so, where?
PM: Well, every Prime Minister leaves some mark on foreign policy, and I believe I will, as Prime Minister, be able to lead this nation's engagement in the East Asia Summit, which is becoming a much more important part of the way our region comes together and we talk about not just economic questions, but strategic questions and military questions. This is a very important emerging architecture, and I will play a role in that.
HOST: Do you think you'll ever have a passion for foreign affairs?
PM: Well, I am highly engaged in foreign affairs, and really, I think, Paul, if I can make a point  -  a lot of this has been overanalysed in a way I think is a little bit melodramatic and bordering on the silly.
I'm sure if I said to you ‘what is the thing you most like doing in your working life/', you might say ‘well, I most like writing the books, that's what get's my creative juices going.' It would not be fair to then say ‘oh, does that mean you hate appearing here on Sky?' I mean this is a bit of a nonsense continuum.
HOST: Prime Minister, that's a positive, whereas you were talking about a negative. You said it's not a passion. You didn't simply say ‘education is the passion.' You said ‘foreign affairs is not a passion.'
PM: This all came from a discussion when I was first overseas at the Asia-Europe meeting about the things that most enliven me and I talked about being in classrooms and I talked about my passion for education. I'm making the very simple point that the fact that it was education that got me into public life, the fact that I drive myself and drive my Government to make sure that we can truly say to each other as a nation we're extending every Australian child the opportunity of a great education and a great life should not be taken to mean that somehow I'm not engaged and enthusiastic in being a feisty voice for this country on the world stage. I am and I will be. You will see me doing that.
HOST: Just switch to climate change, Ross Garnaut has said that the revenue from pricing carbon, the carbon tax, should be used for substantial tax reform off the back of the Henry review. Are you attracted by that idea?
PM: Certainly, tax cuts is a live option. We've got to remember, what's the purpose here? The purpose is to tax businesses that are creating carbon pollution. At the moment they can put that in the atmosphere for free. We will put a price on it.
It will affect less than 1,000 businesses. They are big polluters, and in relation to that price they will then innovate and respond. They'll try and reduce the bill their business has to pay. That's what businesses do every day  -  seek to reduce their costs and increase their profits.
So, they will respond to the price by innovating and finding ways of doing things that create less carbon pollution.
I've always said yes, there will be some price impacts, and we will provide generous assistance to households. Tax cuts are a live option.
We've also got to look at-
HOST: -But what about tax reform? It's one thing to say tax cuts are a live option in the sense of compensating households, but tax reform is qualitatively different. It would be designed a different way. Garnaut's talking about the interaction of the tax system and welfare to encourage the welfare-to-work transition. Are you interested in that sort of tax reform?
PM: Look, I've already said, Paul, separately to the carbon pricing debate, that I believe we need to do more to encourage workforce participation, particularly in this point of our economic development as a country, when we've got the benefits of the resources boom. So, the Government is already working on workforce participation measures-
HOST: -But surely this is the opportunity. Look at all the revenue.
PM: Paul, if I can go through it a step at a time, we are already working on workforce participation measures. I'm on the public record as saying I believe in the benefits and dignity of work. I do not believe, if people have the capacity to work, that they should be in some sort of corrosive, aimless life. So, that is already driving me on the Government's policy agenda.
When it comes to pricing carbon, we want to get assistance to households. Of course, as we get assistance to households we will be looking at doing that in the best possible way for the economy, for communities, and for individuals.
We do need to remember not everybody who is going to be in need of assistance is in the workforce. We've got around 4 million pensioners, so we are talking about a balance here across the tax and transfer payment system.
HOST: But do you see advantages for the Government in tying the climate change reform to tax reform?
PM: Well, I see advantages in making sure people can work do work. I see advantages in making sure that we use-
HOST: -You're still dodging the question.
PM: Well, Paul, you would expect the Government is working on these questions. We've been working on them for some time.
Let's remind ourselves what's happening here. We are determined to price carbon. We've announced the mechanism. We've said that we would use the money raised from pricing carbon pollution to assist households, business, and for programs to tackle climate change.
Of course the Government is working on the best way of assisting households.
You're asking me what drives me, what do I think about when we are looking at policy measures like this one?
Well, I've made it clear I'm pro-work. I've made that clear across my political life.
I'm also making clear we will design that assistance with the needs of the economy, communities and households in mind.
HOST: Prime Minister, the whole point of pricing carbon is to have a price impact, isn't it, on people, so that they stop using carbon-intensive products and therefore it has a real impact on climate change. If you're going to give it all back to people one way or the other, then how is that price impact actually going to achieve climate change action?
PM: I'm glad you've asked that question, because I think there is some lack of understanding here and I can understand that people say, ‘well, polluters are paying and then households are getting generous assistance, how does this work to give a price signal to change behaviour?'
Well, firstly, in the businesses there is a clear price signal to change behaviour. They used to do something for free and now they're paying for it. Any rational business person will think to him or herself ‘how can I reduce that carbon pollution bill?', and they'll innovate. So, that's important.
In the consumer end, where there will be some price impacts, people will be standing there in the supermarket with the household assistance in their hand.  As a result of pricing carbon pollution, some products will be relatively more expensive. Products that have less embedded carbon pollution will be relatively cheaper. Now, people can go in and keep on buying the same old products, or they can respond to those price signals, buy the things that are relatively cheaper with less carbon pollution in them and send a signal back to business ‘you know what, consumers like to buy things with less carbon pollution in them', and businesses will respond to that price signal, too.
HOST: And assuming that that all works, there's then the issue of what will all this actually achieve? If the argument that Australia's emissions are only about 1.5 per cent of global emissions, and the 2020 aim is to reduce our emissions by 5 per cent. Now I'm not sure what 5 per cent of 1.5 per cent is, but I'm sure it's not a lot. What's the point of this whole thing?  That's what a lot of people are asking.
PM: Well, the point of this whole thing is to say to ourselves the truth, which is we are big emitters of carbon pollution by world standards. Per capita, per head of population, we are the biggest emitters of carbon pollution in the developed world.
HOST: That's true, but we're a small a country in terms of population.
PM: But the rest of the world is moving. Many countries are moving to make their economies clean-energy economies. Look at what President Obama set  -  a very ambitious goal, about 80 per cent of electricity coming from clean energy sources.
China is changing. India is changing. Economies around the world are looking and making their economies cleaner.
Now, the choice for us is, do we just sit with our high carbon pollution economy, the rest of the world moves, we've got an economy that is behind the pace because it's still a high-pollution economy, and then do we say to ourselves in some unseemly scramble ‘gee, we've got to quickly catch up', with all of the disruption that that would mean for our economy, or do we say to ourselves the rational thing  -  the world is moving. We need to move, too. Let's get started now and let's get that clean energy economy we need for the future.
We want to cut carbon pollution for the environment. I want to cut carbon pollution so we've got economic prosperity and the jobs of the future. I don't want this country left behind.
HOST: If you want to cut carbon pollution, petrol is a critical area. The Greens want the price of petrol increased at the bowser. What's your view?
PM: Well, we are obviously concerned about impacts for families. We've said all along I understand that families are struggling with cost of living pressures. That's why, as a Government, we do things like we've provided tax cuts for three years. We provide the Education Tax Rebate to help with the kids and the cost of getting the kids to school. We provide relief for childcare, and the list goes on.
HOST: So you'll do a deal on petrol?
PM: I understand that there are cost of living issues, and I understand the price of petrol is something that people do worry about, because many people, with our current public transport system, don't really have that much alternative to jumping in the car.
In those circumstances, we will work through and make some decisions about petrol.
HOST: Will you offset petrol, given the raw concern about families and household pressures? 
PM: Well, you'd be aware, Paul, that in the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme design that we did have a mechanism for offsetting-
HOST: -That's what I'm asking.
PM: Those decisions haven't been taken yet, but I am indicating to you a very clear concern about cost of living pressures for families, including those arising from petrol prices.
HOST: Prime Minister, I wanted to put a quote to you and see if you agree with it. “Bob Brown is pretty much the most calculating politician in Canberra. He's not an archangel of moral force. He's a bloke who wakes up every day and days ‘how can I chisel a bit of political advantage today?'”
Do you agree with those words?
PM: That's a good quote. It's mine.
HOST: But do you still agree with it? You said it in 2005. Now you're in alliance with Bob Brown. Do you still think that he's somebody who's pretty much the most calculating politician in Canberra?
PM: I think Bob Brown's a very smart politician, and he's a calculating politician and he's basically created a political party in his own image where that political party didn't used to exit on the stage. If we go back 20 or 30 years, when I was in university there were no Australian Greens. There were plenty of protest parties, but there weren't the Australian Greens as we know them now.
HOST: This was in 2005, and you're-
PM: -I'm not in any way resiling from one word in that statement - not one word. What that means is if we look at the Australian political spectrum, and I would have said this any day I was in politics  -  I know there's some commentary to suggest I've only recently discovered a difference between the Labor Party and the Greens, what a load of old cobblers  -  any day I've been in politics, any day I've had an interest in politics, which is across my adult life, I would have said the Labor Party is a party of government. We're a party of getting the balance right. We're a party of reform. That's what we seek to do.
To our right, we have the Liberal Party. In the modern age, climate change deniers and in denial about the power of markets.
To our left, we have the Greens, who do not have an economic philosophy about reform or about growth.
We drive mainstream change. That will play out in the climate change debate. Look at the CPRS. That didn't go through the parliament because the Coalition under Tony Abbott didn't care about climate change and because the Greens didn't sufficiently care about jobs.
We were there in the mainstream. We'll continue to drive the change this country needs for its future. That's Labor heritage, Labor tradition. That's how I govern as a Labor Prime Minister.
HOST: OK, you've talked about a Labor heritage and Labor tradition. How significant then are the overall policy differences between Labor and the Greens? I ask because some of your colleagues, in private, are concerned that it looks as though Labor is following the Greens.
PM: Well, what area did you want to talk about, Paul, and I'll calibrate the differences.
HOST: How significant are the difference s between Labor and the Greens, Prime Minister?
PM: Well, highly, a great deal of difference.
HOST: Where?
PM: There are some areas we agree on and some we sharply disagree on. The plans for the economy, we tend to sharply disagree.
In my own portfolio of education when I was deputy prime minister I had some epic struggles with the Greens. I wanted parents to have information about schools through My School; they didn't. Around the country, including here in New South Wales, they were always passing resolutions in the parliament, helped by Mr O'Farrell, interestingly, to try and stop parents having that information.
But let's go through any area you choose to name: health, there's a difference; education, there's a difference; the economy, there's a difference; foreign affairs, there's a difference  -  do we want to keep going?  -  agriculture, there's a difference; mandatory detention, there's a difference.
HOST: (inaudible) if we can just go to another of Bob Brown's initiatives, he told us last week on this program that he will press ahead with his euthanasia bill to over-ride the effect of the Andrews bill in relation to the Territories, allowing them to legislate for euthanasia. What's your personal view on euthanasia?
PM: Well, personally I can understand that people in the end stage of life may want that choice, but I have never been able to satisfy myself that the policy proposals that are advocated for by pro-euthanasia advocates have sufficient safeguards in them. I've always been concerned that this would open a door that would lead, ultimately, not to people having choices, but open the door to exploitation and perhaps callousness towards people in the end stage of life. That's my concern.
HOST: Can I ask you about another issue  -  gay marriage. It strikes me that it's an odd position, from my perspective, for you as Australia's first female prime minister, in a de facto relationship, an open atheist, you've had gay people on your staff, you're the leader of a progressive political party. I understand that you've said that you believe that marriage is between a man and a woman, and that's why you're not pro-gay marriage. My question is why? Why do you believe that marriage should only be between a man and a woman?
PM: Well, Peter, I'm glad you find me an interesting mix. You wouldn't want boring politicians, would you?
HOST: Definitely not.
PM: Definitely not.
For all of that analysis from you, I do find myself on the conservative side in this question, and I find myself on the conservative side because of the way our society is and how we got here.
I think that there are some important things from our past that need to continue to be part of our present and part of our future.
HOST: Is that for you personally, Prime Minister, or is that because as the leader of the nation you think that that's where a lot of people are and you want to reflect those views?
PM: It's for me. If I was in a different walk of life, if I'd continued in the law and was partner of a law firm now I would express the same view, that I think for our culture, for our heritage, the Marriage Act and marriage being between a mad and a woman has a special status.
Now, I know people might look at me and think that's something that they wouldn't necessarily expect me to say, but that is what I believe, and you know, I'm on the record as saying things like I think it's important for people to understand their Bible stories, not because I'm an advocate of religion  -  clearly, I'm not  -  but once again, what comes from the Bible has formed such an important part of our culture. It's impossible to understand Western literature without having that key of understanding the Bible stories and how Western literature builds on them and reflects them and deconstructs  them and brings them back together.
HOST: You sound a traditionalist. You sound very much a traditionalist, talking now. A cultural traditionalist.
PM: Well, I think in many ways that's right, Paul. I had a pro-union, pro-Labor upbringing in a quite conservative family, in the sense of personal values. I mean, we believed in lots of things that are old-fashioned in the modern age. We believed in politeness and thrift and fortitude and doing duty and discipline. These are things that were part of my upbringing. They're part of who I am today.
HOST: OK, I think we need to ask you about Christmas Island. We've seen in recent days more than 200 detainees confront AFP with improvised weapons, engage in property destruction. What's your response as Prime Minister to this activity?
PM: Well, violence is wrong. Violence is wrong whether it's happening on Christmas Island or whether it was happening on the streets of Sydney last night, on Saturday night.
Violence is wrong, and my message to anybody on Christmas Island would be that they cannot and will not profit from this violence. Indeed, there is a direct detriment to them.
First direct detriment is processing of claims cannot happen in circumstances of instability in the detention centre. Immigration staff cannot go about the proper work that they need to do to process claims, so if their complaint is that they want to see claims processed, well, violence slows that down.
And then, of course, second, as the Minister has made clear, the Minister does have a discretion when it comes to giving visas to take into account character questions.
HOST: But are you prepared to have such people accepted into this country as refugees?
PM: That comes to the Minister's discretion on character questions.
HOST: But what's your view on that? You must have a view, as Prime Minister?
PM: Well, I have an understanding of the legal backdrop, Paul, and the legal backdrop is that the Minister has to exercise this discretion about character-
HOST: -But your his boss. You can tell him what to do.
PM: Well, that's a misunderstanding of the Migration Act and a misunderstanding of the way in which decisions need to be made in individual cases.
He will look at individual cases and exercise his discretion, which of course there's a whole legal backdrop here about character questions.
HOST: But what does that mean? Does that mean, in fact, that people who engage in violence, on character grounds will not be deemed to be refugees?
PM: If I had a representative here from the Attorney-General's Department, Paul, the one thing they would say to me is don't make sweeping generalisations about the use of a discretion in individual cases.
HOST: (inaudible) I think the Australian public would like to know, given the magnitude of this incident, I think the Australian public would like to know what your view is in terms of the refugee claims of these people?
PM: Well, I've just made my view very clear  -  violence is wrong, and people will not profit from it. Indeed, there is things that can happen to people to their great cost if they engage in violence.
HOST: Prime Minister, you've been very generous with your time. I've just got two very quick questions before we let you go.
I know you have to run to the New South Wales Labor launch, which is why I've got to be quick. Why was it only yesterday morning that it was confirmed that you were going to be attending the New South Wales Labor launch? My understanding that that was the point that that happened. Was that because Kristina Keneally didn't want you there, or was that because you didn't want to go there, or was there another factor?
PM: Oh, look, as soon as we were asked we said yes. I mean, as you would imagine, Kristina's been making the arrangements for her launch. I've always said if you want me there, I'll be there. How they want to do the launch is a matter for the New South Wales ALP.
HOST: Took them a long time, though.
PM: Well, look, I don't know how much you've been involved in political campaigning, but let me assure you you necessarily make arrangements, you know, often you're making the final decisions about how you want things to go quite late. Campaigning requires fortitude, which Kristina's showing. It also requires flexibility. I've always been happy to come to the launch if New South Wales ALP wanted me at the launch. It depends, obviously, on the style of launch they want.
As it is, I'm going, and I'm looking forward to it.
HOST: OK, and one very quick, final question - is it the case that next month an advertising campaign, a Government, taxpayer-funded advertising campaign is to be started up on climate change and on the carbon tax, and is it also that case that you've commissioned an ad agency already to run and organise that?
PM: Well, a final decision hasn't been taken about an advertising campaign, but I'm going to say what I've said on this before. I think it is proper, if you are bringing in a big change which will impact on Australians, to get information to them about it.
If I was contemplating a big change to Medicare, then I would think it's appropriate to get information to people about that. Pricing carbon will be a big change. It will change the way our economy works. Households, individuals, will want to know how this all happens and what it means for them.
It's appropriate to get information to people, and really, when we've got Tony Abbott, climate change denial, out there stoking a fear campaign, and then he says gee, he's anti government advertising, having revelled in the biggest advertising campaign the nation's ever seen on Work Choices, I'm not going to listen to too much of that.
HOST: You're going to get an argument from me on that front, either. Prime Minister, you've been very generous with your time. I appreciate you coming here on Australian Agenda.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: I'm here this morning at our fantastic Australian National University, I'm joined by our local member, Andrew Leigh, and I'd like to thank the new Vice-Chancellor, Professor Ian Young, for having us here today.
We're here today looking at the future, the future of solar technology, the future being worked on by researchers here is this building today. I'm very proud that the Australian Government was able to contribute to these laboratories with a $5 million grant, part of $150 million of commitment to the Australian Solar Institute, part of $5 billion which we are investing in clean energy.
Here today, looking at the future of clean energy, the solar technology which will make a difference for Australian lives and Australian industry. Pricing carbon is about creating the right incentive to drive this clean energy future.
I want Australia to have a clean energy future. I want Australians involved from the research and development, like the research and development we've seen today of new technologies, through to having those new technologies where they live and where they work.
Putting a price on carbon will create the right incentive to create that clean energy future. It will cut carbon pollution. It will be good for our environment, but it will also be good for the future of Australian jobs as we transform our economy into a clean energy economy for the future.
I very much thank the Australian National University and the researchers we've met today. They're doing amazing things. Carbon pricing will create the market incentive to make sure these amazing new technologies become part of how we live and work.
Very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition Leader says your tax summit is meaningless. What meaning does it have?
PM: The Opposition Leader, of course, is doing what the Opposition Leader does - which is being negative about everything. The Government's got a big agenda and we're getting on with it, and of course I am making sure that every day the Government is delivering the things that we promised the Australian people: delivering changes in our family tax benefit system to benefit the parents of teenagers; delivering changes like our Minerals Resource Rent Tax; and I am committed to putting a price on carbon. We'll be getting on with the job of doing each of those things.
Later in the year we will have a tax forum and there are plenty of things in our tax system and our tax and transfer system which can be the subject of discussions at that forum, including how Federal taxes work with State taxes. So, plenty of things for the tax forum to have a good discussion about later this year, but in the meantime the Government will be getting on with the job.
JOURNALIST: On the intervention, is there case for a bipartisan approach to the Federal intervention as per the Opposition Leader's comments?
PM: Well, I've seen these reports today and let me say this in respect of those reports - the Opposition Leader on Friday mentioned to be his continuing concern about the circumstances in the Alice Springs town camps. He said he would write to me and then seek to meet with me on this matter. It's a serious matter.
Instead of taking that course, the Opposition Leader today has gone hunting for a headline.
Well, I don't think this should be about the politics. It should be about the policy for the lives of Indigenous Australians. So, I'm not going to get involved in Mr Abbott's politics but I will, with the Minister Jenny Macklin, be getting on with delivering new policies in Alice Springs, in those town camps, and I do note that Jenny Macklin, the Minister, has been able to work very cooperatively with her Opposition counterpart, Nigel Scullion. He's a man motivated about Indigenous Affairs. He has that portfolio for the Opposition. He's also a Territorian.
So, there's been good collaboration and work between Jenny Macklin and her Opposition counterpart because they put the policy before the politics. It's a pity Mr Abbott couldn't do the same.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister when the budget is delivered this year, can we expect to see the budgetary implications of the carbon pricing regime or compensation arrangements or will you have to wait till next year when that's all been finalised?
PM: With pricing carbon we are working on the decisions now and we will be announcing them during the course of this year and bringing legislation to the Parliament in the second half of this year. What that means is Australians will have full details of the price we are putting on the nation's biggest polluters for putting carbon pollution into our atmosphere, and full details of the generous assistance to households. We will, of course, also assist industry to adjust to protect Australian jobs and to make sure we've got the jobs of the future and we will fund programs to tackle climate change.
So, all of that carbon pricing package will be there for Australians to see and to judge, including the generous assistance for Australian households.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister with what we're seeing and hearing coming out of Libya, is this how you expected the military action there to proceed and if Australia was asked to provide troops for any further intervention in Libya, would we provide them?
PM: We've been clear all along that we would not be making any military contributions to the efforts in Libya. We are a long way from Libya and it is not our normal theatre of action. This is something being led by NATO and obviously involving forces from a range of countries, including the United States.
On Libya, can I say we welcomed the United Nations Security Council resolution to impose a no fly zone, amongst other measures.
Colonel Qaddafi was given an opportunity to abide by that resolution and to stop his violence against the people of Libya. He chose not to do that. He chose to continue the violence, to continue to bloodshed that we've seen in Libya.
So, now the United Nations Security Council resolution is being enforced. I welcome that fact. The end point here is to stop Colonel Qaddafi engaging in this bloodshed and violence.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, should the end point, though, be the end of the Qaddafi regime. Shouldn't we go further than just protecting civilians and make sure that he can't do this again?
PM: Well, the United Nations Security Council has spelt this out. It forms the legal basis of acting and the motivator here to act and act now, to call on Colonel Qaddafi for a ceasefire, and when he failed to respond to that call to commence the action you've seen, to put in place the no fly zone, the motivator here is our responsibility to protect, as human beings, the people of Libya.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given that the two big- firstly, can I ask why are the two tax instruments included at the tax forum, carbon tax and the mining tax, and are you expecting any blowback from the country independents?
PM: Well, we're getting on with the job. This is a Government of action. This is a Government of decision and delivery. That's exactly what we're doing in 2011, what I promised: decision and delivery; getting on with the job every day; making decisions that will make this a nation of greater opportunity and greater prosperity and fairness in the future. So, I'm going to get on with that job every day.
Yes, we'll have a tax forum later in the year, and there will be plenty for that tax forum to focus on, but I am not going to engage in days of inaction waiting for a tax forum. We've got a big job to do: a big job to do to manage our economy; a big job to do to price carbon; a big job to do to make sure that in the future we've got a cleaner environment, less carbon pollution, the clean energy jobs of the future, the kind of jobs that the technology I've seen here today will help create.
We're not going to delay in that. We're getting on with it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, residents of Christmas Island say that the Government put their safety at risk by failing to deal with overcrowding the detention centres. Why did it have to escalate into a full-scale riot before anything was done?
PM: Well, the Minister for Immigration has been upfront and clear about this all along, been upfront and clear that the Christmas Island detention centre was under pressure in terms of numbers and upfront and clear that the Government was taking action to relieve some of that pressure, and you've seen across the months of this year the Minister for Immigration make a number of statements about detention centres and detention capacity.
I understand for the people of Christmas Island that they feel under pressure with the detention centre there. There are some Christmas Island community members who have expressed that. I can understand that they feel concerned. The Government is taking action to relieve the pressure in terms of numbers on the Christmas Island detention facility.
JOURNALIST: How many detainees are missing?
PM: Look, my advice from the Australian Federal Police is that, overwhelmingly, the detainees at the Christmas Island centre are accounted for. To the extent that any are missing obviously the Australian Federal Police will take appropriate action to locate them.
JOURNALIST: There's been significant violence and destruction. Do you expect people will be charged with criminal charges?
PM: Look, ordinarily, your ordinary understanding as a layperson is if violence has occurred - and violence has occurred here - and the police are able to identify the culprits, then charges do get laid, but it is not for me to make a guess about what might happen here. The Australian Federal Police need to go through their proper police processes.
I'd say that about violence on Christmas Island the same way I would say about violence in the streets of one of our capital cities if that occurred, that police have to go through proper processes, and that's what's happening now.
JOURNALIST: Will the Government be willing to consider creating a new visa category that would allow genuine asylum seekers who haven't got security checks to stay on the mainland?
PM: Look, I've seen these reports this morning and I've also seen that the Minister for Immigration has said this report is based on some documents that have been generated within his Department. As people, I think, well and truly understand, Government departments canvass policy options all of the time, and this is a document in his Department. That's the status that it has.
JOURNALIST: We heard estimates that there are some 900 people in this case, though? Wouldn't it be necessary to relieve pressure on Christmas Island?
PM: Well, I've indicated to you what the Minister has said about the document that forms the basis of that report.
OK, we'll take last question. We've really got to go.
JOURNALIST: The Government's handling of indigenous affairs in the Northern Territory appears to have failed, with rising crime and violence. Are you suggesting that Tony Abbott's offer was disingenuous and won't be taken up, the offer for a joint trip that he's presented to you?
PM: The Government has been acting across the nation and in the Northern Territory on the circumstances of Indigenous Australians. We've taken real steps to improve housing, to improve health, to improve education.
In Alice Springs itself we have a $150 million transformation plan for the Alice Springs town camps. This means more new houses - more than 80 new houses. It means houses being fixed - more than 130 being fixed. It means more police, more lighting. These things are already happening and some of them are happening as a result of productive discussions between Jenny Macklin and her Opposition counterpart, Senator Nigel Scullion.
Now I'm not underestimating, and never have, the difficulty of closing the gap for Indigenous Australians. I refer you to the speech I gave in the Parliament on closing the gap.
The Government's acting. Making sure you get a headline on the front page of a newspaper is politics, not policy. We'll get on with the policy.
Thank you very much. 



The Australian Government will make a $10 million donation to support the recovery effort in the wake of the devastating earthquake and tsunami in Japan on 11 March.The donation will be made to the Red Cross Japan and Pacific Disaster Appeal, following advice from the Japanese Government.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today said the money will be used to support Japan in its hour of need and to help the Japanese nation get back on its feet after one of the worst tragedies the country has ever endured.Donations to the Red Cross appeal will be used to provide emergency relief, equipment and assistance to affected communities and families in Japan.This morning the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition, the Hon Tony Abbott MHR, attended the Japanese Embassy together to sign a book of condolences. The Prime Minister earlier spoke with Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan on 13 March to express sincere condolences to the people and Government of Japan, and to emphasise that Australia stood ready to assist them throughout this disaster. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Neil.
HOST: Prime Minister, before the election you promised no carbon tax, but you also promised you wouldn't act until the economy was ready and the Australian people were ready. Now, is that part of the promise still operative? Is the economy ready? Are the people ready?
PM: The time to act is certainly now, Neil, and we will be out there explaining to people, and part of why I'm on the show this morning is to just that  -  to be explaining to the Australian community how all of this will work-
HOST: -So you think people are ready?
PM: Well, look, I think there's a job of explanation to do. There's plenty of hard work in front of us and I'm not going to make any bones about that, Neil - plenty of hard work to talk to the Australian community about this, and to consult with Australian businesses, and we're doing that through a business roundtable.
HOST: So, is the economy ready?
PM: Well, I'm absolutely convinced, Neil, that we are ready in the sense that the rest of the world is acting and we can't risk being left behind. So, the right time to start carbon pricing is 1 July 2012. We've got to make sure we transition our economy, which is, at the moment, an economy where we emit a lot of carbon pollution per head of population, into a clean energy economy.
It's right thing to do for our environment. It's the right thing to do for our economic future to make sure we've got the jobs of the future.
But Neil, I understand many people have got questions, and that's why I'm here this morning.
HOST: Shane - go ahead please, Shane.
CALLER: I'm just wondering if the Prime Minister can clarify that, from what she's said, that the cost of living for just ordinary Australians, just workers on wages, is not going to be impacted by a carbon tax?
HOST: Sorry, what's the question?
CALLER: Well, the question is is that the case?
PM: I'm happy to explain that, Neil.
The way in which pricing carbon works is we say to the biggest polluters in the country, the businesses that make the most carbon pollution  -  and there's round about 1,000 of them  -  we say to them ‘look, you used to put carbon pollution in the atmosphere for free. Now you're going to have to pay for it.'
So, that means the price falls on them, but of course, and I've been very upfront about this, some of that will get passed through. There will be price impacts for Australians who go to the shops, and so we will help Australians with that by providing generous household assistance to Australians.
So, they will be there with generous household assistance, which could be provided through tax cuts, could be provided through pension increases, or could be provided through direct payments, and we're still working those decisions through, but there will be generous assistance to help households with those price impacts.
Now, interestingly-
HOST: -Sorry, there could be tax cuts?
PM: That's one mechanism for doing it Neil. Yes, certainly.
HOST: But your whole tax summit is to be held in October, after you've decided that. Why won't you bring the tax summit forward?
PM: Because we've got to get on with this job, Neil, and pricing carbon is about creating a mechanism where you're getting the polluters to pay, and then you take that revenue and you use that revenue to assist households - that's the single biggest thing you do  -  to assist businesses to make the transition, and to fund programs to tackle climate change. Not one cent of this money raised from carbon pricing ends up in the Federal Treasury waiting for other decisions to be taken about how it's going to be used.
So, there's plenty of other things in the tax and transfer system for a tax summit to work through, but when we price carbon, the money comes from the biggest polluters and then is used to help households, help businesses and to tackle climate change, and all of that will be very clear and transparent.
HOST: Well, yes, but you could be changing the tax rates, and then after that you're going to hold a summit on tax rates. What's the point?
PM: Well, Neil, there are plenty of things in the tax system that people want to talk about. There will be plenty of work for the tax forum to do, but I'm not going to hold up getting on with this job for a tax forum later in the year, and Neil, let's-
HOST: -OECD says today income tax is the best way to compensate for a carbon tax. Do you agree with that?
PM: Look, it's certainly a very live option, Neil, a very live option before us. There are a series of options about how you can provide people with assistance, but the main point is we are going to provide people with assistance, and the only threat to that assistance is Mr Abbott and Mr Hockey announced yesterday that if they are elected they will take that assistance away-
HOST: -But they'll also take the carbon tax away, so you won't need the assistance, but what-
PM: -Well, Neil, let's just unpack that for one little moment, because, Neil, it's not entirely right.
What Mr Abbott is committed to doing is he's committed to raising $30 billion to act on climate change through his mechanisms. Now, really, they're all just a sham and they're not going to work, but he has this commitment for a series of measures he needs to fund. That means he's going to raise $30 billion, and that is going to come out of the pockets of families - $720 per year extra.
Now, what that means-
HOST: -So how much extra out of yours, Prime Minister? If we're going to play politics on it, seriously, how much money out of yours? How much will your tax take out of people's pockets?
PM: Well, the carbon price, Neil, is paid by the big polluters-
HOST: -So how much will it take out of people's pockets, Prime Minister?
PM: Neil, it's paid by the big polluters.
Yes, there will be price impacts. I've been upfront about that from the very day I announced carbon pricing, and we will assist households. Neil, the decision-
HOST: -How much, Prime Minister? I mean, you're plucking a figure on Tony Abbott. What about your figure?
PM: No, no, I've just done some simple maths on Tony Abbott's-
HOST: -Well, do some simple maths on yours. It's your policy. How much is it going to-
PM: -Well, Neil, if you allow me to answer, then I will. If I can't get a word in edgewise then I can't answer, can I?
HOST: -Well, Prime Minister, we're playing politics. I-
PM: -No, no, we're not. We're dealing with facts, Neil, and I think Australians are entitled to the facts, and they're entitled to understand the alternatives. So, let's be really simple and plain about this, and I'm trying to, Neil, I'm trying to describe it to you.
My option  -  we will put a price on carbon pollution. It will be paid by polluters. We haven't fixed that price yet, Neil. When we fix that price, of course, we'll be out there explaining it to the Australian community.
What does that money, paid by polluters, go to? It goes to assisting households, helping businesses adjust, and to tackling climate change.
Mr Abbott's scheme is the actual mirror image of this. What he wants to do is use taxpayer's money to subsidise bid polluters. It's the absolute reverse.
We charge big polluters and help households. He'll take money from households and subsidise big polluters.
HOST: Prime Minister, can you tell us how much your scheme will cost the average family?
PM: Neil, I've been very clear  -  the decisions about the price for carbon and the details of all of all the assistance are yet to come, and when those decisions are made we will be out there explaining them to the Australian community, as I am here today to explain our carbon pricing mechanism to the community.
HOST: Terry, go ahead, please.
CALLER: Hello?
HOST: Yes, Terry, go ahead.
CALLER: Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning, Terry.
CALLER: Self-funded retirees  -  how will they be compensated?
PM: Well, Terry, we will make sure that there is fair assistance. We're a Labor Government, and that's what we do  -  we do big reforms and we do them fairly.
Terry, I'm obviously not aware-
HOST: -He's asked how, Prime Minister?
PM: Well, I'm not aware of all of Terry's circumstances-
HOST: -He's a self-funded retiree. That's enough.
PM: -whether he's in the tax system in any way at all, so I would need further details of Terry's circumstances, but what I can say to Terry is we will do this fairly, and what I can also say to Terry, and Neil, if I could lean on your producer for this, if Terry wants to leave his details, when we've announced the assistance measures in detail I will be more than happy to provide Terry with a specific answer, and to come back on air and provide it, if that suits you, Neil.
HOST: All I'm  -  Terry, we'll get your details  -  Prime Minister, you said you'll provide them in detail. You're not providing anything. This is the problem. There is a climate of fear here because you're saying ‘oh, Tony Abbott will do this', but you won't tell us or you don't know just how it's going to affect us or how we're going to be compensated, so Terry rings and says ‘I'm a self-funded retiree, tell me how I'll be compensated', and you can't, can you?
PM: Well, Neil, I've decided to take this a step at a time because it's a big reform. Now, I understand there are some people who have criticised that decision and said, well, I should have waited a number of months and announced it all in one big package-
HOST: -(inaudible) people are frightened.
PM: Neil, I'm answering your question.
Now, I understand there are some people who believe I should have left it and announced it in one big package. I don't agree with that. I think it's better to explain it a step at a time.
What are we explaining now? What can we explain to people? Well, we can talk about climate change being real and go through that. We can talk about pricing carbon pollution and how that will mean less pollution. We can talk about the mechanism  -  how it will apply to the 1,000 big polluters directly, and the money raised from pricing carbon pollution paid by those big polluters will then be used to assist households and businesses and tackle climate change.
I want to explain all of that now, and then, as the decisions are made  -  the price, the mechanisms for household assistance  -  I'll keep explaining.
I think it's going to help the community to understand it if we do it a step at a time and explain it a step at a time.
HOST: Dan, go ahead please, Dan.
CALLER: Yes, good morning, Prime Minister. One of the things that affects the cost of living directly and indirectly is petrol prices, so much so that I'm a courier and I now have to, I basically can't survive any more. What are you going to do about this obvious price collusion and petrol pricing, because I keep hearing ‘oh, yes, yes, it's not right, we're going to do something about it.' The ACCC's hopeless. They can't do anything. I can show you photos of this price collusion-
HOST: -OK, Dan, I'm sorry, but you're in an entirely different area. We can talk about that at another stage, but while we're on petrol prices, do you now accept, Prime Minister, it's inevitable this will effect the price of petrol? It's already going through $1.50 because of what's happening in Libya. It'll go up further, won't it?
PM: Neil, I certainly understand that when it comes to household budgets the price of petrol  -  really big factor that people worry about - and representing the part of the community I do out in Melbourne's west, where unfortunately there are lots of times that people have absolutely got on alternative but to jump in the car and use petrol to get around, I understand that the price of petrol really makes a difference for families.
I also understand that the cost of electricity really makes a difference for families.
What I can say to you on petrol, Neil, is we have yet to take the decision about which sectors of the economy will have the carbon price applied to it. Clearly, there is a decision to be made about petrol. You may recall-
HOST: -Is it possible petrol will not be affected?
PM: Look, Neil, I'm not going to pre-empt decisions. That decision is yet to be taken, but I would remind of this, Neil  -  that under the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, the scheme that was discussed up hill and down dale in the last Parliament, there was a mechanism to take the pressure off petrol prices by reducing the excise.
So, that was in the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
Can I say something, Neil, about electricity prices, and I want to say something very frank and very blunt, which is the truth is electricity prices are going up. Electricity prices are going up whether or not we price carbon.
If we price carbon, then we will be in a position to provide assistance to households. That's what I want to do.
HOST: But they will go up more if you price carbon.
PM: And there will be assistance to households, Neil. The alternative-
HOST: -But we don't-
PM: -Well, Neil, just on the comparative, how electricity prices will go up, one big problem here in electricity is that there has been an underinvestment in the infrastructure that means you and I can sit in our households and put the electricity on, put the lights on, put the heating on, whatever it is we want to do.
There's been an underinvestment in distribution. There's been an underinvestment in generation. That underinvestment relates to the uncertainty about carbon pricing, so actually not pricing carbon puts pressure on  -  puts pressure on investment in electricity, and that puts pressure on prices.
So, electricity prices are on an upwards scale, that's true-
HOST: -Yeah, all of which is a State issue.
Prime Minister, Tony Windsor, the independent, said in a doorstop this morning ethanol should be excluded. Will it?
PM: Well, once again, that's in the same bundle as petrol. Those decisions-
HOST: -Well, what do you know? What do we know about compensation, about cost. We know nothing, do we? You're debating it for a month and you've got nowhere?
PM: Well, Neil, very important fact: you know under my scheme there will be household assistance - full stop. Households will be assisted. Under Mr Abbott's scheme, household assistance will be taken away. Mr Abbott committed yesterday to taking away from Australian families any assistance that we provide them.
HOST: Please, let's leave the politics out of this, Prime Minister.
PM: Well, it's a fact, Neil, just simple fact.
HOST: Will people be fully compensated? Will they be completely compensated at all levels for the cost of a carbon tax?
PM: Neil, I've been very clear  -  we will do this fairly. I do not expect, for myself, as an upper income earner, I'm not the sort of person who needs compensation or assistance. Neil, I don't know what you earn, but I suspect neither do you, so we will be taking into account the circumstances of Australian families and making sure that we're assisting them fairly.
HOST: Prime Minister, take what you can- what is rich? Above what level?
PM: Well, Neil, I'm not going to sit here and pick levels. We're here today-
HOST: -Well, what will you tell us, Prime Minister? Please.
PM: Well, Neil, we're here today talking about the carbon pricing mechanism, and I'm very happy to explain to people how that's going to work. There are some basic-
HOST: -But we've been trying now for 20 minutes and I don't know that we've got very far.
PM: Well, Neil, that's perhaps because, Neil, instead of-
HOST: -I'm no good, OK.
HOST: No, no, well, Neil, if you allow me to finish my sentence instead of finishing it for me you'll find I'm going to say something more generous about you than you just said about yourself.
HOST: Well, I don't care, Prime Minister, to be frank. I really just want to get the point through that people are deeply frustrated here because we've been talking about this for a month and we can't tell them anything  -  not even generalisations.
PM: Neil, that is complete nonsense. If you allow me to explain, I think it's important to explain to people that climate change is real, so Neil, let's have a conversation about that.
I think it's important to explain to people why we need to act now, and what's happening in the rest of the world. Let's have a conversation about that.
I think it's important we explain to people how this will work. I know there are some Australians out there who have got the view that they will go to the supermarket and when they get to the checkout and they ring their stuff through the checkout they'll get a docket at the end that's got carbon tax as an item at the bottom of the docket.
Well, of course, that's not true, and today, Neil, I can speak to your listeners and I can explain to them how it will work  -  that it's big polluters who pay.
Now, we can go through all of that, you can sit there-
HOST: -(inaudible) polluters pass their costs on to us, Prime Minister?
PM: Yes, of course, Neil-
HOST: -Well, who pays then, Prime Minister?
PM: -and I've said that since the first day that-
HOST: -so let's not just say polluters pay. We all pay.
PM: -we announced the scheme. Neil-
HOST: -That's the whole point. We all pay.
PM: Correct, Neil, which is why, on the very first day when I announced we were going to price carbon, I said to the Australian people I want to be upfront about this: there will be price impacts. I said that on the very first day.
HOST: You did. Hello, Jeff-
PM: -So, Neil, I did say that-
HOST: -You did. Look, I'm agreeing. You said it to me.
PM: OK, well, thank you very much for that, so don't, Neil, try to pretend to your listeners that somehow I am being obscure about price impacts (inaudible)-
HOST: -But Prime Minister, I'll ask you again  -  how much?  -  and you can't tell me. That's not obscure? What is the price impact, Prime Minister?
PM: And Neil, I've explained, and you know, that we are going to announce the price later on-
HOST: -Well, that's obscure, in my view-
PM: -we're still working on the price, we're still working on the households assistance, and I will come back on your show Neil, I'll be very pleased to, to talk through all of those details.
There's a lot of content to talk through now, Neil, so you can make a decision. Do you want to complain about what's not there now, or do you want to help explain to your listeners what is there now so they can form a view about it? That's a decision for you.
HOST: Hello, Jeff, go, we're talking calls and every one of them's to do with how it affects them directly, which is not unreasonable from any voter. Yes, Jeff?
CALLER: G'day Neil, Prime Minister.
Prime Minister, I voted solely on your comment about the carbon tax - ‘there will be no carbon tax under a government I lead.' Now, we're a struggling family, my wife and I, trying to put them through school. You obtained my vote and my wife's vote by deception. Is that, yes or no, electoral fraud?
PM: Well, look, I'm very happy to answer your question, and let me say to you I did say before the last election that there would be no carbon tax. I did, and I've walked away from that. Absolutely right.
And during the 2010 election campaign, I said to the Australian people that we needed to price carbon and we needed an emissions trading scheme, which I believe is the best way of pricing carbon.
We also said that to the Australian people in the 2007 election, as did Prime Minister Howard.
Now, when this Government was formed, this minority government was formed, I had to make a decision. Did just sit here and do nothing on climate change, or did I work with other members in this Parliament to act?
Well, I chose to act. I chose to work through and get us to that emissions trading scheme that I talked about as the way we needed for the future during the 2010 election.
Now, I didn't intend to mislead anyone, and we will get to an emissions trading scheme  -  not in the way that I envisaged in the 2010 election, but we will get there.
HOST: Prime Minister, both the unions  -  the Manufacturing Workers Union, Dave Oliver  -  and the chairman of BlueScope Steel today are saying you've created a destructive climate of uncertainty. Now, they're not their words, they're mine, but that's what they're talking about, uncertainty  -  bad for unions, bad for business, bad for jobs. What's your answer to that?
PM: Well, what I would say to that is there is a clear mechanism for both unions and businesses to have their say on the further details of how we are going to design this carbon price.
HOST: But what about the uncertainty you've created?
PM: Well, Neil, can I just say there's a continuum here, if you like. If you're saying it would have been better for me to work in a closed office, come out of the door and say ‘here's all the details of the carbon price scheme  -  every detail', that would have given people certainty and it would have given businesses like BlueScope and trade unions no say.
What I've done is I've announced the mechanism. I've said we will announce the details towards the middle of this year. In between, businesses can put their view through our business roundtable. Unions and other organisations that represent people in our society can put their view through the non-government roundtable.
I think including people and consulting with them is the right thing to do, and we're doing it.
HOST: I'd like to ask quickly about another couple of things in a moment, but given what's happened in Japan, do you accept that the world is going to be wary of nuclear power, and therefore there's going to be a reduced likelihood of the rest of the world following the path that you're planning?
PM: No, I don't think that that follows at all. I do think there will be people looking at Japan and there will be discussions in some nations about nuclear energy.
For our own nation, Neil, I don not believe we need nuclear energy. I don't see nuclear energy as part of our future. We are blessed with abundant sources of renewable energy, of clean energy, of solar, wind, tide, hot rocks - you name it, we've got it in abundance, and one of the things that carbon pricing will do is create the kind of incentive we need to give a huge push to that clean energy future.
So that's our future  -  not nuclear, a clean energy future with carbon pricing as part of it.
In other nations, people are acting for a cleaner energy future. China is acting, India is acting, the United States is acting.
HOST: OK, can we take a call? Steve's related to that, I think. Yes, Steve, go ahead.
CALLER: Good morning Prime Minister, Neil. Prime Minister, if your scheme is entirely successful and we bear the pain of this, what's going to be the result? Are we going to save the world? Are we going to save the environment, or in fact isn't the truth, Prime Minister, that without the big polluters like China, India and America on board, that we're going to achieve absolutely nothing, and we'll all bear this pain to achieve absolutely nothing in the real world.
PM: That's a really good question and I thank you for it and I think it's a question that's on a lot of people's minds.
First and foremost, I think sometimes there's a sort of dialogue out in the community that we're the only ones who are doing anything. That's actually not true.
China is acting. It's closing down small, inefficient, dirty coal-fired power stations at the rate of one every 1-2 weeks, and replacing them with more economically and environmentally efficient power stations-
HOST: -So what's the optimum we can achieve? What's the best we can achieve?
PM: If I can just, Neil, go though  -  India, taxing coal in order to fund clean energy changes; President Obama out there promising that the United States will have 80 per cent of its energy from clean energy sources by 2035. These are big changes.
So, what does that mean for us?
What that means is we will price carbon in order to make sure we don't get left behind, and I can say very-
HOST: -And what will the impact of that be, Prime Minister, for us?
PM: I can say very confidently to the nation the impact of that will be that we will have made a contribution to tackling climate change and we will have a more prosperous economy as a result, because the world will have moved to a clean energy future and we cannot afford to be left behind with an old-fashioned, high emissions economy as the rest of the world moves.
HOST: How much will we have reduced the world's carbon emissions?
PM: Well, the Government's target is for us to reduce our emissions, to reduce them by 5 per cent by 2020.
HOST: And what affect will that be in world carbon emissions, Prime Minister?
PM: Well, Neil, I can't forecast for you what China's action is going to mean for world carbon emissions or India's action is going to mean or America's action is going to mean, but what I can tell you is they are acting. If they are acting for a clean energy future, then it makes sense for us to use the most efficient mechanism  -  which is pricing carbon  -  to transform our economy into a cleaner energy economy.
HOST: Very quickly, the polls are very good today. Are you winning this fight?
PM: Look, I'm not a great studier of polls, Neil. They'll go up, they'll go down. I'm pursuing this because it's the right thing for the nation's future and I'll be out there persuading. Others, Mr Abbott and his team, will be out there raising fear. I'll be out there talking to people about the facts.
HOST: Thank you very much for your time.  



 Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Attorney-General Robert McClelland and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General on Queensland Floods Recovery Joe Ludwig today welcomed the passage of the Commonwealth Government's Flood and Cyclone Levy Bill through the Parliament.
The Gillard Government will now implement its $5.6 billion floods reconstruction package as a priority to help rebuild Australia after this summer's floods and other natural disasters.
The Government's flood levy legislation passed both houses of Parliament with the support of Senators Fielding and Xenophon, as well as MPs Tony Crook, Bob Katter, Andrew Wilkie and Adam Bandt.
The passing of this legislation is excellent news for disaster-affected communities who face the task of rebuilding local roads, rail lines, bridges and schools.
It is also another example of the Gillard Government's ability to work with the independent Members and Senators and the Greens in the national interest to get legislation through the 43rd Parliament.
Assistance will be delivered to Queensland through the Queensland Reconstruction Authority, which will coordinate the total statewide rebuilding program.
Payments to other states will be made through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
Yesterday, the Attorney-General moved to strengthen the NDRRA guidelines for future disasters by issuing new guidelines to help ensure State and Territory Governments have adequate capital or insurance to fund the rebuilding of essential public infrastructure.
States and Territories have a responsibility to taxpayers to put in place cost effective insurance arrangements  -  for example, through commercial insurance and reinsurance or other mechanisms such as self-insurance.
Under the new arrangements tabled in Parliament, States and Territories will not be eligible to receive the maximum level of Commonwealth support unless they undergo regular assessments of their insurance arrangements by an independent specialist such as the state Auditor-General.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Arts Minister Simon Crean today conveyed their congratulations to Emile Sherman, co-producer of The King's Speech, which won the Best Picture Oscar at this year's Academy Awards.
The Prime Minister and Mr Crean met Emile Sherman today during a visit to Parliament House with representatives of the Screen Producers Association of Australia.
The Prime Minister said the nation's success at the 83rd Academy Awards demonstrated the strong creative pool of talent in Australia.
Emile Sherman's achievement at this year's Oscars, along with the nominations of actors Geoffrey Rush and Jacki Weaver, again demonstrates that Australia is a great performer on the world stage - both in front of and behind the camera.
The Oscar recognises Mr Sherman's outstanding contribution to an exceptional film. He is only the second Australian producer after Bruce Davey for Braveheart to win an Academy Award for Best Picture.
The Prime Minister and Mr Crean also extended their congratulations to Australia's three other Oscar winners Shaun Tan, Kirk Baxter and Dave Elsey. 
Australia's success at the Academy Awards is another positive sign for the Australian film industry, which is benefiting from the Government's investment in local screen productions.
A recent review of the independent screen production sector showed Government investment in the local Australian film industry has increased three-fold in the past three years.
A Film and Television Drama Survey for 2009-10 conducted by Screen Australia shows total production expenditure in Australia was a record $731 million. The latest ABS figures reveal that almost 24,000 Australians are employed in the film and television sectors. 



PM: I'm here today at the Capital Wind Farm and I'm joined by Mike Kelly, our local Member for the area, and I want to very much thank our friends from Infigen for inviting us here today and letting me look at these wind turbines. What we're seeing today on display is the energy that we need for a clean energy future. These wind turbines are generating energy as we stand here. It's creating a stream of income for the people who own this land.
It's good for farmers, creating a stream of income they can rely on. It's good for generating electricity, harnessing the power of the wind, and it means that that clean energy can then be used right around the national electricity grid.
We're actually standing here at Capital Wind Farm, which is the biggest wind farm in New South Wales by a country mile - the biggest wind farm.
We've also had the opportunity to meet some wind farm apprentices, young people who are learning their trade here in the clean energy industry.
The Government is committed to a renewable energy target, that 20% of the energy we use comes from renewable energy sources by 2020, but that renewable energy target was always designed to work with a price on carbon.
If we are going to drive this clean energy future we must price carbon, and here is a practical example of the difference that it can make: a stream of revenue for farmers; clean energy; young people getting the skills that they need for the future.
This is one of the reasons that I am so determined to price carbon. It will drive a clean energy future for this country. We will see more energy coming from sources like wind, solar, tide and hot rocks.
We are a country that it blessed with renewable energy sources. We've got to get on with using this clean energy and to do that we have to price carbon.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, 33 busloads of protestors are on their way to Canberra this morning. (Inaudible) suggest you've got a bit of PR work to do in selling this to voters, and also, are you (inaudible) perception that you've broken (inaudible)
PM: Well, of course Australia's a great democracy and in a great democracy people can make their voice heard by attending peaceful protests, so that's what's happening today in front of Parliament House.
Also today, the Minister for Climate Change, Greg Combet, will receive a petition signed by around 10,000 working Australians, 10,000 people who are urging the Government to act on climate change. That petition will be presented to Greg Combet by the ACTU leader, Ged Kearney, and also by the World Wildlife Fund, by WWF, but it's around 10,000 people who are also wanting their voice to be heard, saying that they want us to get on with tackling climate change and pricing carbon.
Now, I understand there's always going to be a variety of views in the community, we'll see that on display today, but pricing carbon is the right thing for our nation's future and that's why I'm determined to do it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister will you take the opportunity to address this gathering? You said that it's a big job ahead persuading people that this is the right course of action. Will you talk to these people to try and persuade them?
PM: I talk to people about climate change and the need to price carbon every day, and I'll keep doing that. I talk to people who have indicated they're already pro addressing climate change, and pro carbon pricing. I also talk to people who have doubts or who are opposed and I will keep doing that.
This is something that we need to talk through with the Australian community, but as Prime Minister I am determined to act. Our nation cannot afford to be left behind. We need a clean energy future. The world is moving. We too can have a clean energy economy and here we are today seeing exactly what that clean energy economy would look like.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what about the argument that the cost to build wind farms such as this outweighs the benefit in terms of the amount of power it produces?
PM: Well, we are seeing today power being produced and the amount of power coming from this wind farm is considerable, so the economics of this stacks up. This business wouldn't be here today if it wasn't a viable way of producing electricity, but pricing carbon will give an additional incentive for these clean energy sources of the future. That's why pricing carbon, working with our renewable energy target, will drive a clean energy economy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Chairman of BlueScope Steel says the consultation process with business (inaudible)
PM: Well, look, I completely reject that suggestion. We are engaged in genuine and direct dialogue with business. We have a business roundtable to do that and the CEO of Bluescope has been participating in it and I welcome that. I want him there. I want his voice there.
As Prime Minister, I meet directly with Australian businesses and talk about carbon pricing. The Minister for Climate Change meets directly with Australian businesses and talks through carbon pricing. The Deputy Prime Minister does that; the Parliamentary Secretary does that. Right across my team people are engaged, talking to Australian businesses about pricing carbon and we're doing that because we are genuinely interested in their views.
Now, can I remind people there's been a little bit of commentary in the media that maybe the Government would have been better off to wait, to wholly design a carbon price proposal and then to announce every detail. Well, one reason I didn't do that, one reason I announced the mechanism first, is that I genuinely wanted to hear the voice of Australian business as we design the details of this scheme, and that's exactly what we're doing now.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the Chairman says (inaudible) not listening to (inaudible)
PM: Well, the door's open and we are listening and we will continue to listen through the business roundtable, as well as through our direct engagement with business.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when Kevin Rudd was Prime Minister he went and spoke to the people protesting about (inaudible) Will you go down and talk to the people protesting today (inaudible)
PM: Look, I talk to people every day about carbon pricing and I'll continue to do that. The people who've come to Canberra today have come to make their voices heard. They will be exercising their democratic right to protest. That's appropriate.
We've got people presenting a petition, 10,000 signatures pro pricing carbon, but the reality here is, as Prime Minister, I have determined what I believe is right for this nation's future. What's right for this nation's future is pricing carbon, creating the clean energy economy we need for the future.
If you care about jobs in the future, then you're for pricing carbon. If you care about our environment for the future, then you're for pricing carbon. I'll keep making that argument and we will act.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I understand you're meeting with representatives from the Youth Climate Coalition today who are in favour of the carbon tax, so why won't you meet with people who are against the carbon tax?
PM: Look, I meet with people - let's just be clear about this - I meet with people every day with a variety of views. We were talking before about the views of Australian businesses. I meet with industry leaders, I meet with trade union representatives, I meet with non-government organisations, I move around in the community and I talk to people day in, day out, about the issues that define this nation's future and of course carbon pricing is one of them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when it comes to meeting people, will you be meeting with Uighur leader Rebiya Kadeer today when she comes to Parliament, and are you advising your MPs that meeting her is a good idea?
PM: She is on a private visit to Australia and my understanding is she will be in Parliament House today and will meet a number of Members of Parliament. I will not be meeting her, but a number of Members of Parliament will.
JOURNALST: Prime Minister, was Christopher Pyne clutching a straws yesterday when he was drawing parallels between the climate change debate and the Holocaust?
PM: Well, I think we've got to be a bit clear about this and a bit factual about it. John Howard used the terminology ‘climate change denier'. The terminology ‘climate change denier' is very commonly used. People would read it in the newspaper every day of the week.
I'll stop calling Tony Abbott a climate change denier when he stops denying the science of climate change.
The problem here is that Mr Abbott prefers to play the politics rather than look at the national interest, and some days when he's playing the politics he thinks it's smart to deny the science of climate change. Well, if Mr Abbott stops denying the science of climate change, we will stop calling him a climate change denier.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the (inaudible)
PM: Look we continue to see military action in Libya to impose the no fly zone. We welcome that. Action's being taken to put the no fly zone into operation to take out Colonel Qaddafi's air defences and also to target his command and control structure. This is authorised by the UN Security Council resolution. We are seeing nations cooperate together in that military action and this all about protecting the people of Libya from the very gross violence we've seen Colonel Qaddafi prepared to perpetuate against his own people.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the Greens leader Bob Brown says that he didn't force the Government into taking up a carbon price unwillingly. Is his memory of how the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee meetings have gone a little dotty?
PM: I made a decision here. I made a decision that to get on in this Parliament with pricing carbon I needed to work with others to get the legislation through.
I could have said ‘it's all too hard, I won't deal with this major challenge for the nation's future, I as Prime Minister will just sit idle as this country gets left behind and other countries move to a cleaner energy future.'
I made a decision to act rather than not act, and in making that decision, clearly with the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee, we needed to work through to get the best possible consensus on the carbon pricing mechanism. That's the mechanism I announced a few weeks ago.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what did you think of Tony Abbott mocking you for attending the royal wedding because you don't believe in God, marriage or the royal family?
PM: Look, Tony Abbott's spends time talking about me. I spend time talking about the issues that matter for this country's future. That's my job as Prime Minister and that's what I'm intending to do.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you confirm that the situation on Christmas Island is under control, and (inaudible) is it true that some (inaudible) have been questioned by the AFP without (inaudible)
PM: I'm not in a position to make comment on Australian Federal Police operational matters and I won't do so. The advice to me is that the situation at Christmas Island is calm. The situation has been calm for a number of nights now. The Australian Federal Police are in control of the Christmas Island detention facility.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) discrepancy with numbers (inaudible)
PM: Look, my advice is the Australian Federal Police are in control of the centre and the situation is calm.
OK, thank you very much. We've got Parliament to get to.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today welcomed the announcement by President Karzai of the first seven provinces and districts to begin the transition to Afghan security responsibility from July of this year.
President Karzai's decision is a significant step toward the Afghan Government's goal of assuming lead responsibility for security across Afghanistan by the end of 2014. 
The Prime Minister also welcomed President Karzai's call for reconciliation and constructive regional engagement.
The decision to begin the transition in these seven areas was based on an assessment of the security, governance and development conditions on the ground. 
Transition is a process, not an event, and Australia and its International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) partners will continue to support Afghanistan as the mission progresses.
The transition process was agreed at the Lisbon Summit in November 2010 by the 48 nations of ISAF.
The key challenge for the Afghan Government and ISAF is to ensure that transition is sustainable and irreversible.
Australia will continue to train and mentor the Fourth Brigade of the Afghan National Army in Uruzgan as well as train police and support the Provincial Government to improve the delivery of basic services to the people of the province. 
We expect the transition in Uruzgan province and its districts will begin in the next one to three years.
Australia is working towards this transition with the Afghan National Security Forces and our partners in Combined Team  -  Uruzgan; the United States, New Zealand, Singapore and Slovakia.  



On behalf of the Australian Government, we condemn in the strongest terms the bombing in Jerusalem on 23 March that killed one person and resulted in injuries to scores more.
The Australian Government extends its condolences to the friends and families of those killed and injured, and calls for the perpetrators to be quickly brought to justice.
Terrorism of this kind is a cowardly and brutal act for which there can be no justification.
We also express the condolences of the Australian Government for those civilians killed in Gaza in attacks by Israeli forces on 22 March.
The Government is deeply concerned by the recent escalation of violence in Israel and the Palestinian Territories, including rocket attacks on Southern Israel by militants in Gaza and the killing of civilians in Gaza, the West Bank and Jerusalem.
We call for all parties to show restraint and reject outright the use of violence, which undermines the prospects for a peaceful resolution of the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians.
It is the Australian Government's firm position that the conflict can only be resolved through negotiations between the parties that lead to a secure Israel living side-by-side with a secure and independent future Palestinian state.
The Australian Government urges parties to negotiate urgently on final status issues, and refrain from actions which undermine trust, including settlement construction and terrorist attacks. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today confirmed that Her Majesty The Queen will travel to Australia for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Perth later this year.
Her Majesty will be accompanied on her visit by His Royal Highness, the Duke of Edinburgh.
The Queen's last visit to Australia was in 2006, when she opened the Commonwealth Games in Melbourne. Previously, in 2002, The Queen attended CHOGM in Coolum, Queensland.
Confirmation of the Royal visit is an important and exciting development in the preparations for CHOGM 2011.
CHOGM will be held from 28-30 October and is expected to attract as many as 3000 delegates from more than 50 nations.
CHOGM 2011 will be the biggest international event ever held in Perth and is a unique opportunity to showcase Perth and Western Australia as modern, world class destinations.
Commonwealth leaders meet at CHOGM every two years to discuss global and Commonwealth issues and to agree on collective policies and initiatives.
Around 1,000 representatives from the media are also expected to cover the event.
For more information visit the CHOGM 2011 website: www.chogm2011.org



Prime Minister Julia Gillard congratulates Barry O'Farrell and the Coalition on the New South Wales election result.
The Prime Minister also congratulates Kristina Keneally for her fighting spirit and delivery of a strong campaign under very difficult circumstances.
The Gillard Government is committed to working cooperatively with the incoming O'Farrell Government to achieve the best results for the people of New South Wales.
The Prime Minister said people rightly expect governments of all persuasions to work together in vital areas such as health, education and infrastructure to deliver better services and build stronger communities. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the Centenary of ANZAC Warren Snowdon today welcomed a report on ways to pay tribute to the ANZAC Centenary and a century of military service since the First World War.
The report was developed by the National Commission on the Commemoration of the ANZAC Centenary, which was established by the Federal Government to look at options to mark the Centenary of the First World War 2014  -  2018, in particular, Anzac Day 2015.
The commission considered more than 600 submissions containing more than 1,500 suggestions from Australia and overseas.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard said the report was an important step towards the most significant anniversary for Australia since the Centenary of Federation in 2001.
In 2015, Australia will pay extra special tribute to the Anzacs who forged the values of mateship, loyalty and courage that define our nation today. 
During the First World War over 420,000 Australians enlisted to serve and more than 60,000 lives were tragically lost.
This was an extraordinary commitment for a young nation with a population of just over five million at the time.
The Prime Minister thanked the six members of the National Commission on the Commemoration of the ANZAC Centenary, for their contribution to the report.
The commission's report makes a number of recommendations for Government to consider in six general themes:
 * 	Education and public awareness so we can continue to pass on our understanding and experiences of the war on from one generation to another;
 * 	Refurbishment and maintenance of our memorials, cenotaphs, honour rolls and avenues of honour;
 * 	Recognition of a Century of Service, to ensure anniversary of the First World War and all other conflicts and peacekeeping operations in which Australians have been involved are properly recognised;
 * 	Major Commemorative Services such as the annual ANZAC Day Dawn Service at Gallipoli
 * 	Community engagement to encourage activities that acknowledge and inform the local community about Australia's military legacy including local wartime experiences; and
 * 	International engagement to generate opportunities for Australia to be involved in initiatives and activities that will promote international collaboration.
The Prime Minister announced the formation of a new ANZAC Centenary Advisory Board to progress the work of the commission and provide strategic advice on the planning and implementation of ANZAC Centenary events and initiatives.
Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the Centenary of ANZAC, Warren Snowdon, said the new board was the next logical step in the journey towards 2015.
The Government will consider the commission's report and announce its response later in 2011.
The commission members include former Prime Ministers the Rte Hon Malcolm Fraser PC AC CH, and the Hon Bob Hawke AC, RSL National President, RADM Ken Doolan AO (Retd), former Peacekeeper MAJ Matina Jewell (Retd), veteran advocate, Kylie Russell, and cartoonist and journalist Warren Brown.
The report can be found at www.anzaccentenary.gov.au



JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, surely Barry O'Farrell's got a mandate to spend the $2 billion in government funding, Federal Government funding, on whatever infrastructure he likes, after the result on Saturday?
PM: Thank you for that question. Can I start by congratulating Mr O'Farrell on his victory in New South Wales. I congratulated him on Sunday, I rang him to offer my congratulations and I know I will be able to work with Mr O'Farrell in the interests of the people of New South Wales. Mr O'Farrell is a reasonable man who will want to get on with the job in New South Wales that he's been elected to do.
I'd also like to offer my congratulations to Kristina Keneally on a campaign that was hard fought, energetically fought and courageously fought by her.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the New South Wales style of politics dead?
PM: The people of New South Wales have spoken. They were, of course, delivering their verdict after 16 years of government. The people of New South Wales have spoken and now it's my task as Prime Minister to work with Mr O'Farrell in the interests of his state on areas like education and health and transport.
I've always believed that reasonable people can sit down and work together, that's what I intend to do with Mr O'Farrell.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) reasonable sit down with Mr O'Farrell and talk about the fact that he'd like the $2.1 billion grant not to go to the Epping-Parramatta road, but to the one he claims he's got a mandate for?
PM: The Federal Government gave a commitment during the federal election and I intend to honour that commitment. I understand that Mr O'Farrell has a set of policies and plans for transport in New South Wales and I'll be happy to speak to Mr O'Farrell about those policies and plans. New South Wales, the people of New South Wales are obviously looking to see Mr O'Farrell deliver improvements in education, in health, in transport. We are a Government with a big reform agenda and a major set of investments in each area. If we look at education, $20 billion of investment in New South Wales, if we look at health, $12 billion of investment, if we look at infrastructure, $12 billion of investment. I'll be happy to sit down and work with Mr O'Farrell in a reasonable discussion about his policies and plans and my policies and plans.
JOURNALIST: What measures are you taking to make sure that the New South Wales style of politics doesn't infect your Government?
PM: What happened on the weekend is a state election, it was participated in by the people of New South Wales and they delivered their verdict in that state election.
I believe the people of New South Wales know the difference between state issues and federal issues. This was a decision a long time in the making and it was delivered on Saturday.
JOURNALIST: But how is Federal Labor different to New South Wales Labor, that's the question?
PM: Of course, and the Federal Government is getting on with the job we were elected to do. The message here, I believe, is people want to see you make progress, not play politics. This is a Government that is making progress, making progress on the issues that matter to the Australian people, keeping the economy strong, getting the budget back into surplus, tackling the challenges of the future like climate change, delivering the National Broadband Network, improving local schools, improving local hospitals, making sure people can get a doctor when they need one. These are the things, the real progress that is driving the Government I lead and that's what we'll continue-
JOURNALIST: Key independents lost their seats in New South Wales, they're now firmly back in the hands of the Coalition. Coalition figures say that this is an indictment on your carbon tax and also an indictment on the independents forming government with you federally, it's a backlash.
PM: Let's just be a little bit practical about this, we're talking about a state election after 16 years. I think New South Wales voters had made up their mind a long time ago and I don't think that they made up their mind on the basis of events in the last few weeks, I think they'd made up their mind a long time ago and we saw that when people went and put their ballots in ballot boxes on Saturday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you make of the pressure being put on the independents by the National Party, saying that they're seriously compromised and that they made the wrong call in supporting your Government?
PM: Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor made a decision on what they believed was in the best interests of their electorate. They made a decision on policy, for example they made a decision because they understand the power of the National Broadband Network to transform regional economies in the way that people get services, like health services and education services. And I think the problem with this analysis from the Opposition is it goes through to the next stage  -  why was the Opposition in a position where it didn't have the right policies for regional communities? No effective policy about broadband, no effective policy about health, no effective policy about education, no effective policy about transport infrastructure. What we continue to see from the Opposition here in Canberra is just continued negativity.
I believe in New South Wales, what we will see from Mr O'Farrell is a reasonable man, a moderate Liberal, seeking to get on with the job and engage in constructive federalism.
JOURNALIST: Is Kristina Keneally welcome in your federal party?
PM: Kristina Keneally has made clear what she sees as her future, when she gave what I thought was a very gracious speech on Saturday night.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you outline what the federal consequences will be of Mr O'Farrell's election and was this a rejection of your carbon tax?
PM: I just answered the question before and I will work with Mr O'Farrell they way I've worked with Premier Barnett and Premier Baillieu to get results for the people of Australia. Let's remember it was at the COAG meeting earlier this year that I struck a national health agreement, with Premier Barnett, with Premier Baillieu at the table. An agreement that means more doctors, more resources into health, more local control, less waiting time, less bureaucracy. An agreement in the interests of Australians, worked together constructively, reasonable people sitting around a table. I believe Mr O'Farrell is a reasonable man, is a moderate Liberal, he will bring that spirit to discussions with the Federal Government. I do not believe Mr O'Farrell will follow Tony Abbott in his extremism. 



HOST: Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard's in the studio. Nothing to do with things you may have said in the past. That's my theme. PM: Well, Howard, as long as you're not going to ask me to sing, because I think that that would end badly. HOST: I'm not allowed to sing, and you're not allowed to sing. How are you going? PM: No singing. I'm very well, thank you, and very pleased to be in Perth. HOST: But even though in Perth, Western Australia, in the State of Western Australia, the voters don't like the Labor Government? They don't like Federal Labor Governments. You only won three seats out of 15 last time round. Why? PM: Well, Howard, this is a great State and I'm here as Prime Minister and be out and about meeting people in Western Australia. The main thing, I think, for the Government, is to be here in Western Australia and to keep delivering the changes that people want to see in this State. I was very pleased that earlier this year I was able to strike a healthcare agreement with Premier Barnett which means we'll be in a position to invest $1.8 billion extra in health in this State  -  more doctors, more resources, less waiting times in emergency departments, more local control of hospitals, less bureaucracy, so I'm just going to be determined to keep working with Premier Barnett, keep working in this State. HOST: Do you think you'll finally win us over, do you? PM: My aim is to provide good Government, to do the things that need to be done for this nation's future and this State's future. HOST: But when you analyse that performance, which you must have done, you must think to yourself ‘well, what did we do wrong in Western Australia? Why don't they like us?' There must be a reason you've come up with. What is it? PM: Day to day, as Prime Minister, I keep my eyes on building for the future and making sure this country's got a great future and this State's got a great future, a future of opportunity, of prosperity, of fairness, tackling the challenges of the future, like delivering the National Broadband Network, like tackling climate change. That's what drives me. When I look in the past, Howard, which is what you're inviting me to do - HOST: -Yeah, but I'm asking you to look to the future and work out from your side how you can win more seats next election. Have you got to ditch the mining tax, as an example? PM: Well, I think ultimately people will judge on performance, not politics  -  performance in health, performance in education, performance in keeping the economy strong, performance in delivering the National Broadband Network, tackling climate change, big challenges for the future. Howard, I understand the Minerals Resource Rent Tax- HOST: -They hate it here. PM: Well, if I can finish my sentence, I understand the Minerals Resource Rent Tax has been very controversial here in Western Australia. I absolutely understand that, and because I understood that we needed to settle this tax in the right form, I entered an agreement with our biggest miners. Then we've had a policy transition group working under Don Argus' leadership, and we've accepted all of the recommendations of that group, and when you strip it all back, what the Minerals Resources Rent Tax means for this State is that we are in a position to fund more infrastructure, to fund more support for business, and to enable people to have more superannuation when they retire. HOST: But talking about taxes now, we only get 68 cents in the dollar return from our GST, right. Why is that? Why do we only get 68 cents in Western Australia and other States get up to 90 cents in the dollar? Why are we being punished? PM: I understand that's controversial, too. This is - HOST: -Well, it allows the Premier to beat up on Canberra. Everybody goes ‘go for it, Colin.' PM: Well, this is a formula struck by an independent - struck and administered independently through the Commonwealth Grants Commission. Now this has been system over a long period of time  -  sure, there have been some changes from time to time  -  but overall the system has been that stronger States help weaker States, and if we look at the last 50 years for Western Australia, in well more than 30 of them it was a net receiver of money from other States as the State built.
HOST: But not now. PM: Now, of course, this is controversial. The Commonwealth Grants Commission, in the most recent iteration of the formula, actually increased the amount of GST that Western Australia gets to keep- HOST: -Up to 68 cents? PM: No, to 72 cents, increased to 72 cents  -  just trying to explain it. I don't do that. That's done through this formula. Now, I understand this continues to be controversial and it's an issue that I will need to keep strongly engaged with, but Howard, you asked me - HOST: -Can you alter it? Can you do anything about it? PM: You've asked me for an explanation, and that is the explanation. It's an explanation about how States, stronger States, are called upon to support States that are weaker than them. HOST: OK, but can you do anything to change it? Can the Government do anything to change it? PM: Well, Howard, the conversation has got to continue. I understand that this is very controversial in Western Australia. HOST: OK, let's talk about the carbon tax, which is all anyone talks about these days, most of the time. Do you agree that power costs will rise if it's introduced? PM: Well, power costs are rising anyway- HOST: -Tell us about it. PM: -particularly here in Western Australia. HOST: It's outrageous. PM: Well, the sad truth is electricity prices are going up. The choice we can make as a nation is whether we tackle climate change by pricing carbon pollution, and that's a price paid by the big polluters, so 1,000 businesses in this country that generate the most pollution would pay to emit that pollution, because at the moment - HOST: - You said they pay to emit, so they pay up and they're allowed to keep emitting? PM: Yes. At the moment, if you're a business, a big business - HOST: - I'm a big emitter. PM: If you're a big business and you're a big emitter, at the moment you can put any amount of carbon pollution into the atmosphere and pay absolutely zero. We are going to price carbon pollution. You'll have to pay to emit carbon pollution- HOST: -But you keep emitting. PM: And if businesses have to pay, then they will innovate to reduce the amount of carbon pollution they emit - HOST: - Or hike their prices. PM: - because they won't want to pay that cost. They'll work out better ways of doing things. HOST: Are you sure of this? PM: Yes, I am  -  very sure. And we will move through to what is called a cap-and-trade system, which means we will cap the amount of carbon pollution in our economy, and there will be a market in permits, and the market will set the price. Economists tell us - HOST: -But all those things, sorry, permits, pay up, taxes, allows them to keep emitting if they pay for it? PM: Yes, but let's just be very clear about this  -  businesses compete with each other. They compete on price. You and I go to the shops and we buy the things that are best priced. If you say to a business ‘something you used to do for free will now cost you to do', then they will innovate and change to reduce that cost, and the way that they will do that is they will look to cleaner energy sources, for example, and that will help price our economy being a clean energy economy for the future. HOST: Solar? PM: Well, certainly  -  solar, wind, tidal power, geothermal. We are a nation that is blessed with abundant sources of renewable, clean energy. HOST: OK, but what percentage of Government, Federal Government, buildings are solar powered? PM: Oh, I can't tell you that - HOST: -Wouldn't it be good if they all were? Wouldn't it be good if you had a program that said we're going to solar power all our buildings? That'd be a way to go? PM: Well, wouldn't it be good, Howard, if we had a system that drove us to being a clean energy economy in the most efficient way that can be done, and economists tell us the most efficient way to do it is to price carbon pollution, and if I can just explain my system versus the alternative, my system: big polluters pay, households are assisted, we will provide generous household assistance to deal with price impacts - HOST: - Tax cuts? PM: Well, tax cuts are a live option. The alternative from Mr Abbott is he puts an additional impost on taxpayers - $720 per year, takes that money and gives it to big polluters to subsidise what they're doing. Now, total cost of his program if he's going to reach a target he's set himself of -5 per cent by 2020, if $30 billion. That is not an efficient way of cutting carbon pollution. We're going to do it the most efficient way. That's making the big polluters pay whilst we generously assist households. HOST: Well, as long as they, instead of paying, cut their amount of emissions. PM: Well, Howard, we do know from around the world- we are not the first nation to do this. I know sometimes the community dialogue is as if we are going first. We're not going first- HOST: -I know, Germany's tried. (inaudible) there. PM: -and I don't believe that Australia should lead the world in this area, but I don't think we can afford to be left behind, either. We have a high carbon pollution economy. We've got a journey to go through to get to a clean energy economy which will give us the prosperity and jobs we want in the future. Pricing carbon, asking big polluters to pay, is the most efficient way of doing that, and we will. We're a Labor Government, we'll act fairly  -  we'll generously assist households on the way through. So, that is the way the system will work. Other countries have emissions trading schemes. Other countries- HOST: - You're really hot about this, aren't you? PM: Well, no, I'm determined. I'm faced with a ferocious fear campaign, Howard, a ferocious fear - HOST: - It might cost you Government. PM: - a ferocious fear campaign which is not about the facts. Mr Abbott is trying to scare people, and I am going to take every opportunity to say to the Australian people there is nothing to be afraid of here. We are confident, creative people. We'll work on this. We'll get through. HOST: You're going to go down swinging, are you? PM: We'll create this clean energy economy for the future. I believe Australians want us to tackle climate change. It's my job to keep explaining how, and Howard, I'm taking the opportunity to do just that. HOST: Alright, it's hot in Perth. You've noticed that already? PM: Yes, it is. HOST: Kids are going to school, no air conditioning because they're not in the right zone. Can you believe that? PM: Well, this is a State Government - HOST: - On one side of the highway, you can't have air conditioning; the other side of the highway, you can, because you're in the zone. PM: Well, this is a State Government policy, Howard. You're talking, obviously, about State Schools. HOST: Yeah, but I'm talking about the new Building the Education Revolution. I would have thought every new building - every new home that's built these days has air conditioning  -  but every new school building built under the Building the Education Revolution doesn't have air conditioning because of some stupid warranty scam. PM: Well, Howard, let me give you some good news in this area. We, as a Government, invested $1.8 billion in school buildings in Western Australia. It was the right thing to do. Every school has benefitted in some way. We've built 500 new classrooms, 300 new libraries, 200 new multi-purpose halls, 188 early learning centres, and the list goes on and on. When those new facilities were constructed, whether or not they were air conditioned in State schools depended on the State Government's policy  -  the zones that you talk about. Now, there is actually more than $20 million left over - HOST: - Unspent. PM: - unspent, from doing this - HOST: - Are you listening, Colin? PM: - unspent from doing this construction in Western Australia. What I want to see done with that money is I want to see that money spent so it air conditions those Building the Education Revolution buildings which haven't been air conditioned because of the State Government - HOST: - Can you believe they can't be air conditioned when they're built? PM: Well, Howard, I can't answer for the State Government policy - HOST: - No, but can you believe that when you build a new building these days, particularly in a state like this, you don't air condition it? PM: Well, Howard, I understand your point precisely about kids, heat and concentration and all of that. I understand your point precisely. We worked with the State Government to get these school buildings built. The State Government's got its policy. My point very clearly to you today is there is money left over, which I want to use to air condition those Building the Education Revolution buildings in State schools that aren't air conditioned. Chris Evans, a Western Australian who is the Minister in this area, will be working to achieve that result with the State Government  -  good for kids, good for getting air conditioners into those buildings. HOST: Sounds like a slogan. PM: Cool kids. HOST: Just before you go, I know time is tight, but is the East Timor detention centre solution a dead duck? Surely they don't want it up there. I've talked to several politicians up there on a regular basis. They don't want it. When are you going to kill it off? PM: Well, Howard, we could field you as a foreign affairs adviser. HOST: Well, I just ring ‘em and they say ‘we don't want it.' They say ‘we have enough problems up here trying to get our tiny nation together. The last thing we want is an asylum seeker detention centre.' PM: Look, Howard, we're continuing that discussion with East Timor, but there is an important meeting happening basically as we speak. HOST: In Bali. PM: That's right, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister for Immigration are there. That is a big meeting, a large number of nations coming together to work on people smuggling, and there we will be pressing that this is a regional problem that requires a Regional Protection Framework  -  a regional solution. Now, bilateral discussions, a discussion between us and East Timor, will continue, but the important meeting this week is the meeting happening in Bali. HOST: The solution is to stop the boats coming, isn't it? Really, that's the ideal solution. If it could all be sorted out in UN camps in Indonesia, the applications all handled there, then they say ‘OK, this person's a fair dinkum refugee, they can go, they can go to Australia'  -  wouldn't that be the best solution? PM: Well, Howard, you are effectively advocating for the solution I've put forward with a Regional Protection Framework and a Regional Processing Centre. HOST: So you would prefer that to happen, rather than any boats. PM: Of course, Howard. No-one wants to see boats. I don't want to see boats. I don't want to see boats  -  people risk their lives on them. Women and kids lose their lives on them. We saw that at Christmas Island, you know, at the end of last year. We want people to be safe. We want claims processed in an orderly way. What I want to do is I want to undercut the people smuggling business model, so, you know, if you pay and get on a boat it doesn't get you anywhere, because through a Regional Protection Framework and Regional Processing Centre you end up back in the same place. That's what I'm striving to achieve. I always said ‘no quick fix.' We're working through it, and the important way of working through the regional protection framework this week is at the Bali meeting. HOST: You're minders are winding you up. Thanks for coming. PM: Thanks, Howard. HOST: And we'll see you again soon. PM: Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today said the National Broadband Network will offer unprecedented opportunities for West Australian businesses to diversify and tap into new markets.  
The Prime Minister witnessed first-hand today how the digital economy has helped transform Perth retailer, The Beaufort Street Merchant, which has embraced online opportunities.  
The Prime Minister was joined by Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, Senator Stephen Conroy, Federal Member for Perth, Stephen Smith and Google Managing Director, Nick Leeder.   The Beaufort Street Merchant complements its bricks and mortar retail store with an integrated online presence.
The website allows people to browse products online and generates up to 30 per cent of bookings for the restaurant.   The retailer also has its location on Google Maps, which ensures people can find key business details and user reviews when searching on the online mapping platform for nearby restaurants and shops.  
Its online presence is driving sales growth and ensuring the business attracts customers who haven't driven past the front door.   Senator Conroy said having an online presence is essential for small businesses to succeed in a global digital economy.  
The rollout of the NBN will offer many more WA businesses the opportunity to grow like the Beaufort Street Merchant.   WA will benefit from the largest investment in broadband infrastructure in Australia when it's rolled out, compare to every other state and territory.   This will have major implications for the expansion of businesses across WA who'll be able to develop an effective online presence to drive sales growth.  
More than one fifth of the transit fibre that will be used to provide high- speed broadband connections around Australia will be laid throughout WA.   This amounts to more than 11,700 km of transit fibre that will deliver broadband services to West Australians.  
Minister Smith said it is a key example of the Gillard Government delivering more for the people of Western Australia.   The current lack of decent broadband services in WA means a large percentage of businesses are missing out on the opportunities that the digital economy can provide.  
The NBN will help remove this source of frustration for businesses by delivering high speed, reliable broadband to all Australian households and businesses.   The benefits of the digital economy are especially profound in Western Australia.
The NBN will truly end the tyranny of distance, opening up new markets  -  attracting customers from the east or from overseas for businesses in WA.  
The Government has provided $14million in the Small Business Online Program providing grants to help small businesses get ready for the opportunities ahead.  
It has launched the Digital Business website to provide easily understood information about how to get your business online.   And it is encouraging industry players to help drive the digital economy through programs like the Google and MYOB Getting Aussie Businesses Online.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, School Education Minister Peter Garrett and Federal Member for Perth Stephen Smith joined together today to officially open the new John Forrest Trade Training Centre in Perth. Prime Minister Gillard said the new Trade Training Centre  -  located at John Forrest Secondary College in Perth  -  received more than $2.5 million as part of the Trade Training Centres in Schools Program.
The new Centre, to be shared with Mount Lawley Senior High School, will provide young people in the area with the best learning facilities to prepare them well for jobs of the future. The Trade Training Centre, like others around Australia, will provide students with the training opportunities and experience they need to take the next step towards further education and employment. The Trade Training Centre is another example of the Gillard Government delivering for the people of Western Australia. The Gillard Government is delivering better education and training options for students in Western Australia - with 117 schools benefiting from $127.7 million invested in 38 Trade Training Centre projects across the state. Mr Smith said the facility will provide training directly relevant to various local industries, including workshops for plumbing, gas-fitting, painting and decorating. The Government has almost doubled schools funding to $64.9 billion since coming to office. Trade Training Centres are being established to help increase the number of students achieving Year 12 or an equivalent qualification and to help meet skill shortages in traditional trades and emerging industries. The Trade Training Centre will also be used for Try a Trade programs that allow students in Year 10 to take part in a two-day program focussing on either plumbing or painting and decorating. At full capacity, the centre will have the capacity to train 60 pre-apprentices each year and 1500 Try a Trade students each year. All of these programs are being made available to all schools in the Perth Metropolitan region and beyond. Further information about the John Forrest Trade Training Centre and all schools funded under the Program is available at: www.tradetrainingcentres.deewr.gov.au.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today said the National Broadband Network will offer unprecedented opportunities for West Australian businesses to diversify and tap into new markets.  
The Prime Minister witnessed first-hand today how the digital economy has helped transform Perth retailer, The Beaufort Street Merchant, which has embraced online opportunities.  
The Prime Minister was joined by Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, Senator Stephen Conroy, Federal Member for Perth, Stephen Smith and Google Managing Director, Nick Leeder.  
The Beaufort Street Merchant complements its bricks and mortar retail store with an integrated online presence. The website allows people to browse products online and generates up to 30 per cent of bookings for the restaurant.  
The retailer also has its location on Google Maps, which ensures people can find key business details and user reviews when searching on the online mapping platform for nearby restaurants and shops.  
Its online presence is driving sales growth and ensuring the business attracts customers who haven't driven past the front door.   Senator Conroy said having an online presence is essential for small businesses to succeed in a global digital economy.  
The rollout of the NBN will offer many more WA businesses the opportunity to grow like the Beaufort Street Merchant.   WA will benefit from the largest investment in broadband infrastructure in Australia when it's rolled out, compare to every other state and territory.  
This will have major implications for the expansion of businesses across WA who'll be able to develop an effective online presence to drive sales growth.  
More than one fifth of the transit fibre that will be used to provide high- speed broadband connections around Australia will be laid throughout WA.  
This amounts to more than 11,700 km of transit fibre that will deliver broadband services to West Australians.   Minister Smith said it is a key example of the Gillard Government delivering more for the people of Western Australia.
The current lack of decent broadband services in WA means a large percentage of businesses are missing out on the opportunities that the digital economy can provide.  
The NBN will help remove this source of frustration for businesses by delivering high speed, reliable broadband to all Australian households and businesses.  
The benefits of the digital economy are especially profound in Western Australia. The NBN will truly end the tyranny of distance, opening up new markets  -  attracting customers from the east or from overseas for businesses in WA.  
The Government has provided $14million in the Small Business Online Program providing grants to help small businesses get ready for the opportunities ahead.  
It has launched the Digital Business website to provide easily understood information about how to get your business online.   And it is encouraging industry players to help drive the digital economy through programs like the Google and MYOB Getting Aussie Businesses Online.



 The Gillard Government has commissioned a review of the distribution of revenue from the Goods and Services Tax to the States and Territories.
We have appointed Nick Greiner, John Brumby and Bruce Carter to conduct the review.
The review will lead to a simpler, fairer, more predictable and more efficient distribution of the GST to States and Territories.
Instead of States facing penalties for economic growth and rewards for economic underperformance, the GST distribution process should encourage economic reform and better delivery of services, and provide States with certainty.
This will build a stronger Australian economy and make for better, more efficient delivery of essential services like schools and hospitals. 
Under any changes that might be considered by the Government, we will ensure that smaller States continue to receive a fair share of GST revenue, and that States with larger economies are not unfairly penalised for success.
At present, there are a number of elements of the distribution arrangements that could be improved. Under the current arrangements, there is:
 * 	Not enough incentive for reform  -  currently underperformance in service delivery and economic growth can be rewarded. As far as possible, States should not be put in the position where they can be penalised for investing in economic growth and improved service delivery.
 * 	A need for more certainty and predictability  -  currentlyStates can be hit with unexpected shocks to their finances.
 * 	The potential for greater simplicity -  current arrangements are complex and accordingly not very transparent.
The incentive for states to pursue reforms which get the best performance from their economies can be excessivelydulled by the current arrangements for distributingrevenue gains away to other states.
On the other hand, major errors in economic management that lead to sustained slow growth in a way that hurts a state's ongoing ability to raise revenue can be compensated.
States should have an incentive to invest in economic reform; they shouldn't be unfairly punished for success.
As well as structural problems that need to be addressed, the Gillard Government recognises the impact of shifts in our economy over time.
In particular, we recognise growth in the mining sector is increasing the discrepancy in the amounts of revenue raised by States and Territories, as well as making it more difficult to anticipate GST distribution from one year to the next. 
A key principle of GST distribution is that States and Territories have the ability to provide broadly equivalent services in areas such as education, health and public transport. 
This is especially important given the differences in the cost of providing services between regions.
The Review will be advised by a Heads of Treasuries Advisory Committee comprising representatives from all States and Territories, and will seek submissions from the public.  It will be supported by a secretariat within the Commonwealth Treasury, with representation from the States and Territories as well as other agencies as appropriate.
The Review will provide an interim report to the Treasurer by February 2012 and a final report by September 2012.
The Commonwealth Grants Commission will continue to serve as the independent umpire and make recommendations on the distribution of GST revenue.
The Federal Government will request the CGC to update its methodology to reflect any agreed recommendations from the Review. 
The Review will not affect the distribution of the GST revenue in 2011-12 or 2012-13. 



HOST: Prime Minister good morning to you. PM: Good morning Geoff. HOST: Prime Minister just before we got to 10 o'clock I asked our listeners if they would come up with the first question for you today and Steve's question was ‘Prime Minister, when will you stop speculation about tax cuts connected to the carbon tax?' He, like many others, would like some certainty.
PM: I can understand that. We will be announcing in the middle of the year all of the design elements of carbon pricing in order to bring legislation to the Parliament in the second half of this year. We have announced, as everybody knows, the mechanism for pricing carbon that will be making big polluters pay, and we will be using that money to assist households, to help businesses transition, and to fund programs to tackle climate change. We're consulting now with Australian businesses, with non-government organisations, with unions, with environmental organisations. We'll take all of that feedback into account and then make the announcements about all of the further design features. HOST: Prime Minister Colin Barnett only has to play the state vs Canberra card and rightly or wrongly he wins very strong support - our GST revenues are down, you're planning a resource rent tax and WA becomes the nation's cash cow. What counter argument can you put forward? PM: Well, on the Minerals Resource Rent Tax I understand this has been very controversial in Western Australia, but what I will be saying to the people of Western Australia while I'm here - I came yesterday so I've already had the opportunity to have this conversation and I'll continue to have it at the Community Cabinet meeting in South Fremantle later today - what I'm saying to the people of Western Australia about the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is ultimately this means more for Western Australia: more investment in infrastructure; more people being able to benefit from increased superannuation in their retirement; in fact, more than 800,000 people in Western Australia with increased superannuation; and more support for businesses, particularly small businesses. here will be more than 200,000 small businesses that benefit from what we will be able to do to assist them through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. So, we believe that it's right to have a fair share of the mineral wealth in our grounds for the people of our country, and it specifically enables us to provide benefits around the country and here in Western Australia. HOST: But on notions of a fair share, what WA wants is the Grants Commission to return a bigger share of GST revenues to WA. Anything other than that is just tinkering and talk. PM: Well, you've asked me about the Minerals Resource Rent Tax and that's one thing that I will keep talking about with the people of Western Australia. On the GST, I understand that this, too, has been a very controversial topic and I'm intending to have something further to say about that later today. HOST: Will there be good news later today, Prime Minister? Because the reason is I know you will always argue of the broad benefit, but Colin Barnett will always argue cash cow, 40% of the nation's exports, what do we get for it? Answer: nowhere near enough. And that was very punishing for you at the last Federal election, very effective argument. PM: On the GST, I think we do need to recognise that there's been a formula here, there's an independent body, the Commonwealth Grants Commission, that strikes the formula. The formula is so stronger states are called on to assist weaker states. Now, for a long period of time Western Australia benefitted from that system. If we look over the last 50 years, for well more than 30 of them that caused money to flow to Western Australia. Now, of course, with Western Australia so strong, there has been concern about the Western Australian share of GST. When the Commonwealth Grants Commission struck the last share, the amount that Western Australia keeps of its GST went up from 68 cents to 72 cents, but understandably this is still controversial and I will have something more to say on the question of GST just a little bit later today. HOST: I think it would be much nicer for you to tell me now, but clearly you're not going to. PM: Sorry about that, Geoff. HOST: Asylum policy, Prime Minister - it's a sore and it's not healing and the public perception is that you're running out of band-aids. PM: This is a difficult issue right around the world. We have people on the move around the world, people who are fleeing conflicts and war. If we look at the situation now in Libya, what do we see? We see people getting on the move, going to border regions. Inevitably some of those people will keep moving and are likely to end up in nearby European nations. So in a world where unfortunately we do see war and conflict and persecution and famine, people do get on the move. Now this is a complicated issue. It's not going to be solved by endless repetition of three word slogans. We do need to confront this issue as a region, and as we speak the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister for Immigration are at a very important meeting in Bali working with a large number of other countries on this issue, which is an issue for our whole region. HOST: I know you're putting a positive spin on that meeting, but I just want to put a couple of things to you. Do you concede that what we seem to have at the moment is this patchwork of ideas - some asylum seekers offshore, some on the mainland, some killing themselves because they can wait no longer for their visas to be assessed and no sign from that meeting of which you speak that East Timor will host that offshore processing facility which you said would happen. Their Foreign Minister isn't even at that Bali meeting, Prime Minister. PM: Well, I think we've got to be a bit clear about what the Bali meeting is about. We are engaged in bilateral discussions with East Timor. What the Bali meeting is about is the whole region coming together to talk about regional solutions. So, the purpose of the Foreign Minister being there and the Minister for Immigration being there is to participate in those multilateral discussions on regional solutions. The question of talking to East Timor is not a question for a multilateral forum. It's a question for direct discussion between Australia and East Timor. HOST: The Government looks politically trapped and the next boat arrival just adds to that impression. Do you concede, and I know this is always difficult for your Government, that it looks neither tough nor does it look very humane? PM: Look, I'm not someone who is focussed on the look of things. I'm focussed on the substance of things, and focussing on the substance of things means you've got to recognise that this cannot be solved by some simplistic slogan. When we look at things that have happened in the past, for example, from time to time the Opposition says ‘well we should have a detention facility in Nauru', well the reality is overwhelmingly - overwhelmingly - the asylum seekers who went to Nauru to have their claims processed ended up being refugees who came to Australia, so it was a detour, not a solution. What I've been working on and what the Government is committed to is trying to drive to a solution that breaks the business model of people smugglers. What they are saying to people is ‘give us a lot of money, get on a dangerous boat, risk your life at sea in order to get to Australia.' What we need to work on - and this can only be done by regional cooperation - is to have a circumstance where if you get on a boat, you end up back in the same place having your claim processed in the same way. Now that's not easy to achieve. When I first announced these plans last year I said no quick fix, this will take time, it will take work, it will take effort and that effort is being engaged in today at the Bali meeting. HOST: Sure, but you did say- PM: -But I do want to be very clear, the Bali- HOST: -But you did say there was- PM: -The Bali meeting was never about the direct discussions between Australia and East Timor. The Bali meeting has always been about the region coming together to talk about a regional solution. HOST: But do you acknowledge that in the months since you became, or were returned, as Prime Minister, there has not been one bit of good news out of East Timor about their interest in hosting this offshore facility; not one scrap to support this idea of yours that this was going to be a bit of a game changer? PM: Look, we've had a continuing conversation with East Timor and we've had Ramos-Horta, for example, say that a proposal had been received from Australia that answered the questions that he had asked, so we've had that kind of feedback. We've had officials engaged. I am not going to say on your show that a problem as complex as global people movement and how that then plays out in our region is something that is going to be easily solved. I've never said that to the Australian people. HOST: You, Mr Abbott and Mr Brown are doing a, I was thinking about it this morning, it's like a little progressive barn dance at the moment. You dance with Bob, who agrees with the resource rent tax; then the dance ends when he disagrees with you on the decision to cut company tax; then you and Tony sweep round the floor agreeing that a drop in company tax is a good thing; and then that dance finishes because of course he hates the resources rent tax, and I just wonder when we look back at the photos of this night whether we'll remember it as a great night out or an unmitigated disaster. PM: Well, a very flamboyant description but what actually happens is the Government determines the best policies and plans for the nation's future. My eyes aren't on a dance floor -  it's on where our nation will be this month, this year, next year, 5 years from now, 10 years from now, and as I work through those issues what I say to myself is we are in an extraordinary time in our economic history, an extraordinary time with the resources boom. What we've got to make sure is we use the opportunities from this extraordinary time to make a long-term difference to the Australian nation, and that's about making sure we're investing in the skills of our people; we're getting more Australians into work; it's about embracing and dealing with the challenges of the future - rolling out the National Broadband Network, tackling climate change; and of course it's about improving the services that families rely on and I'm very proud that at the start of this year, working with Premier Barnett, I was able to strike a national health reform agreement which will give people in this State more doctors, more money in health, less waiting time in emergency departments, more local control of their local hospitals and less bureaucracy. They're the things that I get on with. Now, you are right - in this Parliament, the Parliament the Australian people voted for, in order to get legislative propositions through, we do have to discuss those legislative propositions with others and work with others, and we've been getting through the Government's agenda. National Broadband Network, a very good example - got through the most recent important piece of legislation on Monday. HOST: Prime Minister I can't wait to find out what the news is on the GST, but we'll have to wait. Thank you for talking to us. PM: Thanks, Geoff. 



PM: [audio break] to update you on some very tragic and sad news for our Defence Force family. I'll turn to the Minister for Defence now. Here we are. MINISTER SMITH: Thanks very much Prime Minister. As you may well be aware just before midnight last night, near HMAS Cerberus in Victoria there was a terrible traffic accident. The traffic accident involved five young trainees at HMAS Cerberus. Cerberus of course is far and away our largest naval training institution.
The five young trainees involved were all marine technical trainees. As a result of the accident very tragically two young navy trainees are dead and we extend our condolences and our sympathies to their families. The other three are in hospital either in a serious or a very serious condition and our thoughts are with them and their families and we of course wish for them a speedy recovery. Navy and the Defence Force will of course cooperate fully with the Victorian Police and the Victorian Coroner in this matter. There will be a coronial inquiry into the two tragic deaths and in the meantime it wouldn't be appropriate for me or for the Navy to be drawn on any of the detail of the circumstances surrounding such a terrible accident. This will be a terrible blow to the navy family, a terrible blow to the men and women at HMAS Cerberus. Earlier today I spoke to the Chief of Navy Russ Crane to get an update from him and in the aftermath of this tragedy again our condolences and thoughts are with the families concerned. Navy have issued a statement and as we speak, the Commanding Officer of HMAS Cerberus, Mark Hill - Captain Mark Hill is giving a press briefing. The families concerned have requested that details of the family - of the - of the five involved in the accident not be released at this stage. Of course we'll respect the wishes of the family but in due course Navy will release full details of the deceased and of the other three seriously injured. Thanks Prime Minister. JOURNALIST: Were they on duty or off duty? MINISTER SMITH: They were, as I understand it, off duty. They had leave until 6.30am in the morning, this morning. Other than indicating that in the circumstances of a terrible accident I wouldn't be proposing to go into any detail. PM: Thank you very much to the Minister for Defence and can I as Prime Minister also offer my condolences and the nation's condolences. There are two families who will be grieving the loss of two young people and our thoughts are with them. Our thought and best wishes are also with the young people injured in that accident and we wish them the best for their recovery. I'm sure this will be weighing very heavily on their Navy colleagues today and our thoughts are also with them. If I could turn now to today's announcement; today here in Western Australia with my Western Australian colleagues, I announce that there will be a full scale review into the distribution of the Goods and Services Tax between States and Territories. I have appointed the Honourable Nick Greiner, the Honourable John Brumby and Mr Bruce Carter to be the review team. Nick Greiner and John Brumby are former premiers and their names I think are well known to Australians. Mr Bruce Carter is a South Australian business person who has also served working on economic development plans in the state of South Australia. This is a high quality review team. The review team will provide an interim report by February 2012 with the final report to be provided by September 2012. Now I have determined to embark upon this course because the current way in which the Goods and Services Tax is distributed between States and Territories is in my view deficient in four regards. First there is a need for greater simplicity and transparency. The current arrangements are very complex, they've very opaque, they're very difficult to understand. I think the federation would be best served by an arrangement that was transparent and could be understood by Australians right around the country. Second I believe there is need for more certainty and predictability in the distribution of the Goods and Services Tax. Under current arrangements it can be possible for the amount that a State or Territory is to receive under the Goods and Services Tax to be unpredictable. States, Territories can get shocks and not realise how much Goods and Services Tax they are going to receive with all of the consequences that can have for their budget. Most recently there was an issue in Victoria when they were quite surprised by the GST distribution to them. So I believe there is a need for more certainty and predictability. Third and very significantly, I think under current arrangements there is not enough incentive for reform. I do not want there to be any road blocks for reform in States and Territories. I want States and Territories to always be reforming and aspiring to having the best quality and most efficient health services, education services and everything else that States and Territories do. Under current arrangements it is possible for States not to feel the full value of having engaged in reform because the benefits of that reform are then redistributed as the Goods and Services Tax is redistributed. In my view states should always have an incentive to be in the economic reform business and they shouldn't be unfairly punished for success. If we have a system that is punishing economic reform and punishing success then it doesn't work for States and it doesn't work for Australia as a nation. Fourth I believe we need to embark upon this course because the current way in which the Goods and Services Tax is distributed has struggled to deal with changing economic conditions. In particular I recognise that the growth in mining is increasing the discrepancy in the amount of revenue raised by States and Territories as well as making it more difficult to anticipate GST distribution between States and territories from year to year. So we need a formula, a system that better copes with growth. Now I would remind of course that GST distribution has been dealt with by an independent body, the Commonwealth Grants Commission, but I believe as Prime Minister it is time to have a review of the formula to deal with the deficiencies in the current system that I have identified. Premiers have for a long period of time called for reform. For example Premier Anna Bligh said our State is being penalised for our economic success. The Victorian Treasurer Kim Wells said and I quote; that there is a long term disincentive to undertake significant economic reform and here in Western Australia Premier Barnett has posed the question: what have we done wrong apart from being successful? So Premiers have been campaigning for reform. I therefore believe today's announcement will be welcomed by premiers and chief ministers. To give just one example of that, here in Western Australia today I have spoken to Premier Barnett. He has welcomed this review and welcomed the identity of the review panel. He has indicated to me in our conversation that he believes that John Brumby, Nick Greiner and Mr Bruce Carter are well picked to do this important task. Can I conclude by saying there is an Australian principle about the way in which we distribute the Goods and Services Tax. That is an Australian principle about helping each other out and making sure that people right around the country get a fair go. There is therefore an obligation on the strongest states to help the weaker states and that obligation must continue. It's the Australian way. But when I've listened to the complaints raised by state premiers, their complaints have not been about supporting weaker States or Territories. For example they do not complain to me about a strong state stepping up to the plate and assisting say, the Northern Territory. But they do believe that there are flaws in the current system and through the review that I've announced today they will be able to have their voices heard about those flaws. When this review is completed its work will come to me, as Prime Minister, to the Federal Government and my Federal Cabinet but it will also go to the Council of Australian Governments, to the treasurers when they meet and then to the leaders when they meet. I think that is appropriate. COAG needs to receive and work through this review as well as it being worked through by the Federal Government and the Federal Cabinet. I think this is the right step to take at this time in our federation's history. I thank Nick Greiner, John Brumby and Mr Carter for indicating their preparedness to serve as this high level review panel and I look forward to the outcomes of their work. I'm very happy to take any questions. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the (inaudible) 75 cents in the dollar below which (inaudible) couldn't fall, is that something that would be considered as part of this review? PM: It certainly will be. I've spoken to Premier Barnett today, he's also written to me today and in those conversations he's confirmed to me that he welcomes this review, that he supports the people who are conducting the review, the review panel and that he intends to put before the review his proposal for a floor on GST below which a strong state could not fall. Now that is one reform proposal that the review will consider. There will be other reform proposals put forward I'm sure, but Premier Barnett has specifically said to me he wants that reform proposal considered and it will be. JOURNALIST: Your incentive payments idea that there should be some incentive (inaudible) states, there's been call in WA for port reform for example to be included (inaudible) encapsulate broader reform such as health and ports? PM: No this is a review of the formula and mechanisms for distributing the Goods and Services Tax between States and Territories, so the Government will continue to pursue reform in education, in health, and in other important areas of work which we share with state governments. But in order to have these things together, we've taken an approach for example in education and health that we should have reward payments for states and when they reform, when they get better, those reward payments flow to them. One of the problems with the current Goods and Services Tax redistribution is it doesn't reward reform. So a state can be getting more efficient and stronger and not feel the benefits of that greater efficiency and that greater strength. At the same time a state can be lagging behind, not driving reform, not driving its system efficiently and not feel the full consequences of that lack of reform drive and inefficiency. I'm concerned that when you blunt the message about reform you blunt the appetite for reform. I want there to be a strong appetite for reform and that's one of the reasons that I've determined to take this course and have the (inaudible) reviewed. JOURNALIST: Is there some danger here for example that this reform - review of the GST will sort of endanger the national health reform for example? PM: Oh no, no, they're - absolutely not. The national health reform is a health reform agreement. We're talking about federal funds, not Goods and Services Tax funds, federal funds, are being invested in health in order to get a reformed health system. So the health reform agreement, on track, will be delivered. JOURNALIST: (inaudible) some states to provide, of their own accord, some of their GST to a national pool. Surely there is some - PM: No, no, no. Not under the new health reform arrangements, that's not true. The new health reform arrangements do not require - specifically do not require a state to put Goods and Services Tax money - so the - I'll put that another way. Originally there was a health reform proposal which required us to legislate, and would've enabled the Federal Government to retain some GST. I entered a health reform agreement with Premier Barnett and with premiers and chief ministers around the country earlier this year that is differently constructed. We do not need to re-legislate the GST to have that health reform agreement come to fruition. So that is on a completely different track from this work of the GST distribution. JOURNALIST: But effectively states will be taking from their funding pools, a large chunk of that which is GST, to give to that national health pool. Won't there be - PM: States will source revenues. Yes, the GST is a stream of revenue in a state. They'll source revenues and they'll work collaboratively with us to fund health. This is a different question. The two are not in any way associated. We will conclude the health reform agreement, as I outlined earlier this year, in the middle of this year. Whilst this process goes on, they are not together. JOURNALIST: In terms of the timeline, the earliest any changes will take place is the 2013 - 2014 financial year. Is that soon enough? PM: I believe we need to work through and get this right. We're talking about a federation; a federation which I want to be sustainable and I want Australians right around the federation to have great opportunities to have access to quality services, and I want the system to be fair. Fair so that it rewards reform, fair so that people can feel the benefits of success. Also fair so that states that are inefficient understand the consequences of that inefficiency. So it's worth taking the time to get this right. Remember, we will get the interim report as early as February next year. When we are talking about something that involves a lot of money and getting it right for the long term, we need that amount of time. JOURNALIST: The GST, is by definition, a zero-sum game, is only so much of the pie. So taking some money off others will necessarily penalise some states. Are you envisaging a big fight, particularly say among the three or four premiers, for example, who don't want to necessarily give up their share of GST? PM: You are right to say there's only so much revenue raised from the goods and services tax and what this is about is the fair distribution of it between States and Territories, and consequently between Australians. I am content that this process is starting off in an atmosphere of cooperation, and we've got a high level review panel, people bringing different perspectives but a high degree of skill to the task. I think that's important. Now, I expect premiers and chief ministers around the country - and certainly Premier Barnett has made his view very clear to me - I expect premiers and chief ministers to welcome this review. They've been calling for a review. Now we need the review to work through. I understand that there will be some difficult conversations along the way, but the alternative is to just have current arrangements stay, and current arrangements in my view are not satisfactory. We've got a state like Western Australia, and the current arrangement's not properly dealing with high economic growth here. We've got a lack of simplicity and transparency. We've got a lack of reward for reform. We've got an unpredictability about the amount of money states and territories can budget for out of the GST. I want to get those things fixed, and this is the process to get them fixed. JOURNALIST: What are the goals here to flatten out the impact of the state finances and the distribution of the often quite short-term spikes in commodity prices which mean that royalties flow in very unpredictable ways, is that what the goal of it is, to try and I guess smoothen that impact? PM: Certainly predictability is a goal of this. When you've budgeting for things that inevitably have fixed costs; your education system, your health system, the number of police you employ; you don't need to be a state treasurer, you just need to use a little bit of common sense to know that you can't go - in terms of those fixed costs - from here to here really quickly. People are employed, budgets are committed, things are happening, kids are being taught, patients are being treated, police are walking the beat. So in those circumstances, predictability is very important and it's one of the goals. JOURNALIST: (inaudible) from the time when (inaudible) the Government's coming under attack from the WA Premier over the mining tax and the royalties issues. Is the timing of this in any way related to that, to try to blunt his attack? PM: Not at all related to that, no. I believe the conversation and discussion that's been occurring between the Federal Government and Premier Barnett about the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, questions of state royalties will inevitably continue and I'll be a very active participant in that conversation, making the point to the people of Western Australia that through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, we will be in a position to give more to Western Australia. More infrastructure, more support for small businesses. There are 200,000 - more than 200,000 small businesses in this state. Indeed, 90 per cent of the businesses in this state are small businesses and we will be able to better support the superannuation of more than 800,000 Western Australians so they have a better retirement income.That's what the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is about. I'll keep pursuing that discussion with Premier Barnett, but that's not related to this. This is related to what I acknowledge is a legitimate concern from Premier Barnett, and indeed from other premiers - I've cited for example Anna Bligh - about the way in which the Goods and Services Tax is currently distributed. JOURNALIST: Can you go and say that after this process, (inaudible) that WA won't actually go backwards? PM: Look, we've got a review team, and I've outlined the aims here. The aims here in terms of predictability, enabling people to enjoy the benefits of success, enabling people to go about reform tasks and making sure they get the benefits of those reforms. So this is the review that - people have called for a review. This is responding to those calls for a review. The terms of reference are right to make sure that the deficiencies that I point to in the current system are addressed by the new system, recommended by the review team. Now of course, we've got to trust the review team to do its work. That's why we've appointed such high level expert individuals, and I'm very pleased to see that they are getting support here in Western Australia and more broadly. JOURNALIST: (inaudible) complaining about the GST cover, Colin Barnett has for a long time been complaining about WA getting an unfair proportion of asylum seekers in our state compared to the other states. Will you review that as well? PM: Look, the issues about detention centres, we've made our announcements on those. There is a facility being developed at Northam and we are working through with the local community. So that policy in terms of location of detention centres has been announced and will be pursued by the Government. JOURNALIST: But there's no hope there in terms of getting less asylum seekers and a fairer deal - you know, and share more equally across the states? PM: We've announced our policies there and they're the same. No change. JOURNALIST: Are you embarrassed by East Timor's rejection of the processing centre? PM: There's an assumption in your question I'm not going to agree with. The Australian Government's been involved in discussion with East Timor about a Regional Processing Centre. As we speak - you're going to some comments from one minister in today's newspaper. But if I can answer your question, then I most certainly will. The Australian Government has been in discussions with East Timor about a regional processing centre. Those discussions will continue. But there is a meeting that is happening as we speak in Bali. That meeting was never about Australia's bilateral discussions with East Timor about a processing centre, those discussions were never about Australia's discussions with East Timor about a Regional Processing Centre. They are bilateral discussions between Australia and East Timor. What's happening in Bali is a large multilateral meeting to talk about regional solutions to what is a regional problem, where Australia will of course be advocating a regional solution and a Regional Protection framework. The two should not be confused. JOURNALIST: I don't think they were going to discuss that issue at the Bali summit. PM: The Bali summit is certainly discussing the regional problem of people smuggling; that's what it's been brought together to do. JOURNALIST: Sorry, just one more thing, from what you say, are you still hopeful that you're going to pull off a processing centre in East Timor? PM: What I'm saying is those discussions are continuing, but people should be looking at today's meeting in Bali for the true purpose for which it has been brought together. It has not been brought together for Australia and East Timor to pursue that bilateral discussion that has been occurring. This is a multilateral forum with a large number of countries talking about a regional approach to the regional problem of people smuggling. JOURNALIST: On Paul Keating's comments overnight about John Robertson saying he has no authority to lead New South Wales Labor and describing him as lead weights (inaudible) PM: Look, whoever leads the team in New South Wales should be selected by New South Wales State MPs. JOURNALIST: Just back to the GST issue, do you find it ironic that one of the key goals you've outlined today is to give some certainty because of fluctuating mining revenues affecting GST applications - do you find it ironic that you're introducing the mining tax that will introduce volatility into the Commonwealth Budget and give you less certainty? PM: I think you may have over-interpreted my remarks. I was asked about fluctuating commodity prices, that's true. But the - what introduces unpredictability into the distribution of the GST is matters relating to the formula that are broader than just the question of commodity prices. We should not say to each other here today that the only thing that introduces unpredictability is commodity prices, because that's simply not true. One of the aims of this review is to give greater predictability, which will require the review team to look far more broadly than fluctuations in commodity prices. JOURNALIST: I'm not sure if you're aware, another detainee has actually tried to take his own life at Curtin today. Given that we've had detainees move from Christmas Island to Curtin recently, have you just shifted the problems? PM: Any incident of self-harm in a detention centre is obviously a sad and tragic incident. We don't want to see anyone in any circumstances engaging in self-harm. So obviously as human beings we're touched by that.But I am a supporter of mandatory detention. I think it's the right policy for this country. I think it's the right thing to do for this country to have a way in which we can clearly assess people's claims for being refugees, people's health status, and people's security status. So as Prime Minister, I am determined that we will have a mandatory detention system. JOURNALIST: Do you support tighter regulation of the electricity generation industry after Professor Garnaut's comments about the increasing power prices? PM: We have a regulator in the Australian electricity market who is charged with dealing with - I suppose charged might have been the wrong word - we'll start that again. We have a regulator in the Australian energy market - the Australian electricity market - who has the responsibility of looking at the kind of questions that Professor Garnaut has raised. And if - that's the last question, can I just conclude by saying, I'm sure I can reflect the views of the team, that we are all wishing the new Australian captain Michael Clarke very well in his endeavours. Over the summer, I had a photo taken with Ricky Ponting. It appeared in the newspapers under the heading: one of these people has the hardest job in Australia and the other is Prime Minister. My best thoughts and best wishes go to Michael Clarke as he takes on what obviously is the hardest job in Australia. Thanks. 



PM: [audio break] as well as the local member Tony Buti, and we are here meeting with the Burge family. It's their home that you can see behind us, destroyed in the devastating fires which hit families in this area.
When we look back at the summer we've lived through right around the country, including here in Western Australia, families faced grief, they faced loss, they faced the misery of natural disasters. Here in Western Australia, 66 homes were lost to bushfire, but one of the things that I can say, having been to so many areas of the country touched by natural disaster in recent months, is where ever you go you see the same Australian spirit; the spirit of pulling together; the spirit of volunteers who came to the aid of those touched by natural disasters. So it's been a real privilege to be able to talk to the family whose home we are looking at, to David and Janine and to their lovely children, including Erin, I can see over there proudly bearing her school prefect badge. They have had to face up to losing their home. It's been a great privilege to meet with the volunteers who have come to help, who came to help fellow Australians in need. As a Federal Government, we've also worked to assist Australians in need by providing a disaster relief payment, and then as families rebuild we assist with replacement and rebuilding costs, but it's a very difficult time. Here in Western Australia, for families touched by bushfire we've provided more than $4 million in assistance, but I understand as governments assist, as volunteers help, there is still a big and difficult road back for families that have lost everything, like David and Janine and their family. Our thoughts are with them as they go through the journey of rebuilding and it's been an absolute privilege to be here today to share some thoughts and reflections with them. JOURNALIST: Why did you come out here today? PM: I came out to see firsthand what had happened here in Western Australia. I've travelled right around the country to natural disaster areas and whilst, of course, with the very sophisticated media we've got today, we get the news very quickly, there's nothing like seeing it for yourself. So, I'm very pleased I had the opportunity to come and to speak to a family directly affected and volunteers who got out on the ground and helped. JOURNALIST: How bad's this summer been in terms of natural disasters? PM: It's just been a remarkable period to live through. I think every Australian at the end of this summer would have just looked back and been amazed at the dimensions of natural disaster we live through - floods, fire, cyclone. Right around the country people have been really under pressure from our environment, from Mother Nature, but Australians have pulled together and I think as we move from the summer of natural disasters we're not just reflecting on what we've lost, but we're also reflecting on the amazing Australian spirit that got us through. JOURNALIST: So after visiting here today, is there anything else that the Government is going to do to help (inaudible)? PM: We will keep delivering the assistance through our Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery arrangements. We work with the State Government in those arrangements. It's a helping hand and as we provide that helping hand we know that it's a bit of help to help families through, but there's still a lot of pressure on people as they go about rebuilding their homes and rebuilding their lives. JOURNALIST: And what of the victims here, which ones are exempt from the flood levy? PM: People who are eligible for the Australian Government Disaster Relief payment do not have to pay the flood levy. We deliberately struck those arrangements. We understand that in many parts of the country people have been touched by natural disaster. Those people have been eligible for the Australian Government Disaster Relief payment. If you're eligible for that payment then you do not have to pay the flood levy. Thank you 



I am deeply honoured to be here today - honoured as a Prime Minister and honoured as an Australian. Our nation has produced few more substantial figures than John Joseph Curtin. Arthur Fadden went so far as to call him “one of the greatest Australians ever”.
It was said at Curtin's death that:
“His memorial stands around us - a free land, a free people.” And that is why it is tempting to say that 24 Jarrad Street, Cottesloe should be regarded as a shrine to a great leader. But that is a description that John Curtin would have vehemently rejected. He was an unassuming man, as this modest home shows. For Curtin, “his country was his pride, his brother man his cause.” And that epitaph speaks as powerfully about the man as his speeches spoke of his vision for our nation. Friends, Paul Keating once said that one of the most important tasksof a leader is to interpret the future to the present, and John Curtin was the master of that skill. He united our country in accepting the short-term sacrifices of war to pave the way for a better future. Curtin spoke plainly to the nation when he said: There can be no going back to the good old days. They were not good days and they have truly become old.
We have to point the way to better days. As a former journalist, he was respected by the Canberra Press Gallery and worked with them to share his un-compromising message with a sometimes reluctant nation - the message that Australia needed fundamental reform in the economy, immigration, education and welfare. Above all, that we had to chart our own direction as an independent nation, looking to new allies and new strategic circumstances. Friends, if Curtin was a great Australian, he was a great West Australian too. That is why in accepting the honour of being a patron for the place, I share that patronage, very fittingly, with the Premier of this State, Mr Barnett. Yes, Curtin was Labor to his core, but his call to shared sacrifice and commitment transcended partisan bonds and resonated in every Australian home and every Australian heart. The presence of Mr Barnett  -  and the fact that this house was magnanimously purchased by two Liberal leaders, John Howard and Richard Court  -  marks how greatly the Curtin legacy is treasured in this State. Curtin was not born here but came here later in life, at age 32, to take up a new job and to marry his beloved Elsie.  He loved his adopted State as his own, and would have taken great delight in its achievements today fulfilling in its confident prosperity his hopes Perhaps because his home and his heart were here in the West he understood in his bones the effort needed to draw this vast country together during the war. Or, as he so eloquently put it: “...during the twilight through which inevitably we have to pass before the dawn can come.” John Curtin lived in a time when a Prime Minister could have his home phone number and address listed in the phone book, as he did until his death. A time when a Prime Minister had no security guards and could leave his front door unlocked, so constituents could come and voice their concerns. A very different time indeed. But the lessons that John Curtin taught us, of leadership and integrity and courage in adversity, are just as relevant today. This house is a symbol of John and Elsie Curtin's unwavering commitment to a decent, simple, honest life. A life filled with hardship, and a life lived for others. I hope this place serves as a constant reminder that, despite the lack of worldly trappings, this was home to a just and good man and a very great leader. I congratulate the National Trust of Western Australia and John Curtin's descendents for bringing this project to fruition, presenting an enduring story to a new generation. The Curtin family home is a national treasure by virtue of the family that inhabited it. A simple bungalow that bespeaks the inner grandeur of this man better than any mansion or palace. I proudly declare the refurbished Curtin home officially open and dedicate it to the nation in whose service he lived and for whose future he died. 



Men and women of Australia. Words, adopted from John Curtin, but ever identified with Gough Whitlam. They say so much, to so many.
In a simple phrase which still captures some of the most attractive features of the Whitlam generation:A life of reason, addressing our people as adults;A love of country, expressing a progressive patriotism;A politics of inclusion, that matter of fact assumption that women and their interests matter in our country's politics.And behind all that, a modernising temper. Men and women of Australia; 40 years on there is still something sharply contemporary about that phrase. Gough Whitlam remains one of the most paradoxical and enigmatic living Australians.  I sometimes feel that every Australian's idea of Gough contradicts some other Australian's image of the man. And we can well imagine Gough, like his near-name sake, crying:Do I contradict myself?Very well then I contradict myself,(I am large, I contain multitudes.) Like Walt Whitman, Gough Whitlam will never be contained “between his hat and boots”. The brawler who threw a glass of water in Hasluck's face. The sophisticate who delighted a visiting Italian President by quoting Dante. The wit who told Francis James “you may call me bourgeois, but not decadent”. The moderate who moved beyond the old state aid debate. The statesman who turned our face north toward China. The moderniser who changed Labor's organisation and ideas. The pragmatist who swore that only the impotent are pure. A sophisticated and funny man, a fighting Labor leader and Prime Minister, who modernised and moderated and reformed We know Gough in multitudes, and yet we know only one Gough - above all, a restless reformer.   In honouring that spirit of reform, in honouring the multitudes of Gough, tonight I could have chosen dozen of topics as my theme. I could have spoken to you about the way Gough forever changed the way Australia provides health care with Medibank. Or the way he helped create modern Australia by ensuring higher education was for the deserving many not the privileged few  -  an achievement this University embodies. Or of his deep understanding of the aspirations and needs of Australians in our growing suburbs  -  Gough was a Prime Minister who made sewerage a national cause as part of putting the quality of suburban life on the national government's agenda. I could have spoken about these things and so many more lessons we learned from Gough Whitlam. But tonight, standing here in Sydney's West, I want to reflect on what Gough taught us about our political party, our Labor Party. Because in his famous phrase “the Party, the platform, the people” I believe the restless Whitlam of reform speaks to us still. Between 1966 and 1972, Whitlam did not simply reform the Labor Party's structures, update the Labor Party's platform and gain support in the country at large.Whitlam achieved a vital integration of these elements of reform and in doing so, he did more than make Labor fit to govern again. He fashioned our understanding of ourselves as a party of government. On the one hand he saw that the affairs of the Labor Party could never be an end in themselves.  On the other, he knew that the Labor Party can never be merely a means to parliamentary power. I see the Whitlam period of leadership as one which regenerated the idea of the Labor Party as a vital institution in Australian society. A great force for fairness in our country which must in a very profound and serious way be true to itself, to its best self. Friends, as Gough Whitlam found, reforming our Party, ensuring it could be a party of government and a party of ideas, isn't easy. Whitlam faced scorn and had to fight;to endure the taunts of my own Branch of the Labor Party the newspaper of which carried a banner headline, WHITLAM, with the W and M crossed out so it spelt HITLA;To ensure the parliamentary party played its true role of leadership and reform, rather than being dictated to by the faceless men;To reach out to new constituencies and embrace them in Labor membership and Labor activism.  Here in this great State, following Saturday's election, those who believe in the enduring values of Labor, now face the same challenge that Whitlam faced:to rebuild the Party;to renew the policyto regain the trust of the people of NSW. Friends, if Australian politics has a grand old party, it is ours. Before there was a Parliament of Australia our Party had known great victories and great defeats.  We have done great things. We created the aged pension, brought the Sixth and Seventh Divisions home from the Middle East, dammed the Snowy, modernised the economy, said sorry to our Indigenous peoples. Yet ours is also the Party of 1916 and 1932 and 1955, of 1975 and 1996, and 2011 in New South Wales now joins the roll. Our Party in this State has suffered a shattering, but expected, defeat which must never be forgotten. For Labor in this State, the test is what we do next. Our party has come back from punishing defeats before and it can be done again. Remember how hard it was for those like Gough Whitlam who lived the defeat of 1975 to imagine the victory of 1983. But for NSW Labor coming back from this defeat will require a hard and honest look at some painful and difficult questions. NSW Labor must now confront questions of character and culture as it seeks to rebuild, renew and regain.  This means that NSW Labor must recognise there is no productive purpose in blame shifting and settling scores. Everyone has a theory for what went wrong, and given Labor barely got one in four votes, they might ALL be right. The truth is, when you do as badly as State Labor did last Saturday, there is plenty of blame to share around and plenty of things that went wrong, but the starting point for the analysis of this defeat must be Kristina Kenneally's evocative words in her concession speech when she said of the people of New South Wales: They did not leave us, we left them. Kristina fought a campaign of extraordinary courage and showed remarkable fortitude, and on Saturday night she was right. I congratulate John Robertson on his election as NSW Labor Leader. I would say to him that as he leads the task of rebuilding Labor his most trusted advisers must be the people of NSW themselves. It is with the decent, hard-working people of this State that he must consult. It is their voice he must listen to.  And I believe we can hear their voice loud and clear saying they are sick of the scandals, intolerant of the factionalism, disheartened by the failures to perform. The direct work of rebuilding in this State will necessarily fall on the shoulders of John and his team. But as Prime Minister and Federal Labor Leader, it is my role to define what it means for Labor to be its best self.  To raise my voice and explain the vision of Labor that should govern the Party's response here to this defeat and the Party's response around the nation as we strive to strengthen the Labor Party on following the National Review Report .And I intend to do so tonight.  Strengthening Labor requires us to be crystal clear about our sense of purpose. It is periodically fashionable for there to be outbreaks of existential angst in the Labor Party where the cry goes up ‘we don't know what we stand for'.  Even if Labor isn't raising the cry, media commentators raise it for us with never ending predictions of our imminent demise. Let me say to you tonight, I am deeply intolerant of this bunkum. I am absolutely clear what Labor stands for, what we aspire to achieve, what our culture is and our role as a party of government. The historic mission of our political party is to ensure the fair distribution of opportunity. From the moment of our inception our mission has been to enable the son of the labourer, the daughter of the cleaner, to have access to same the opportunities in life as the son of the millionaire, the daughter of the lawyer. Creating opportunity and enabling social mobility has required different policies in every age. We have moved beyond the days of big government and big welfare, to opportunity through education and inclusion through participation. But at every stage in our history fair access to opportunity has been our historic mission. And we have always acknowledged that access to opportunity comes with obligations to seize that opportunity. To work hard, to set your alarm clocks early, to ensure your children are in school. We are the party of work not welfare, that's why we respect the efforts of the brickie and look with a jaundiced eye at the lifestyle of the socialite. The Labor culture values effort more than status. It prizes the great Australian tradition of informality and rejects the sort of snobbishness and obsequiousness that infect other societies. Labor culture values the strength that comes from working as a team and supports the role of unions in ensuring working people succeed together and that their work is recognised, rewarded and appreciated. This is the best self to which Labor must always be true. This is our continuing culture, born in Barcaldine and Balmain, the culture of mateship and the fair go, hard work and respect, that we have shared from our first days. And we are the party of the future. From our earliest days we have always known that you don't turn back; you can't turn back. There will always be those who say the way ahead for Labor is to go back. They said it to Keating and to Hawke, they said it Whitlam and Chifley and Curtin ... they probably said it to Watson too. We never can. We have always understood that we must be the interpreters of the future to the present and must shape the future so it is one of fairness.  That's why both tackling climate change and rolling out the National Broadband Network, both very modern challenges, are being approached by us in a very Labor way. Take climate change, if we drifted to a future of environmental degradation, it would be those with the least means who suffered the worse consequences. That's why making polluters pay and generously assisting those who need help to adjust is the Labor way. Take the NBN. If we allowed drift, if we didn't seize and shape the future, then the digital divide would exacerbate unfairness as today's poor would become tomorrow's excluded. That's why making sure everyone has access to this new technology is the Labor way. We are a party of opportunity and a party that strives to shape the future. And we are party of ideas and a party of government. To provide quality leadership to our community we have to be in touch with it and understand it. That requires continued outreach and never ending respect. We always, always, always have something to learn from our fellow Australians. And to requires us to reach out and grow our membership. Our members are the future of our Party. We are strengthened by tapping into the boundless idealism and energy of our members and supporters. Our Party must never view itself as some sort of exclusive club. The best people want to be surrounded with the best people.Labor Party members should always be able to challenge us. Being a party of robust debates is a sign of strength, not weakness. There must be a genuine contest of ideas and arguments within the Party. But we must never lose sight of the fact that the only way to turn the ideas that mean so much to us into a reality is to win government. We are a party of government with all the attachment to the political centre and to pragmatic decision making that comes with being a party of government. A party of government and proud of it. We happily leave to the Greens being a party of protest with no tradition of striking the balance required to deliver major reform. Like the economic transformation of the 1980s, these new reforms can only be delivered in the progressive Labor tradition. The differences between Labor and the Greens take many forms but at the bottom of it are two vital ones. The Greens wrongly reject the moral imperative to a strong economy. The Greens have some worthy ideas and many of their supporters sincerely want a better politics in our country. They have good intentions but fail to understand the centrepiece of our big picture - the people Labor strives to represent need work. And the Greens will never embrace Labor's delight at sharing the values of every day Australians, in our cities, suburbs, towns and bush, who day after day do the right thing, leading purposeful and dignified lives, driven by love of family and nation. Meanwhile, the federal conservatives have surrendered themselves to fear mongering and in the carbon debate even deny the power of markets. They have abandoned a 25 year consensus for reform in Australian politics and embraced a populist substance and style quite alien to our political traditions. An extreme leadership powered by an out of touch backbench is now determined on a strategy of opposition for opposition's sake. It is a commonplace to say that that the party of Fraser is unrecognisable today, but in truth, the growing extremism of the Abbott Liberals is such, the party of Howard is disappearing from view.  The government I lead will always be driven by my vision of Labor as our best self. A government for opportunity, for shaping the future, for the many. A government getting on with governing. There are many important recommendations in the National Review Report and we have rightly been called upon to strengthen our party around the nation.At the same time, restoring the true Labor culture to the Branch in New South Wales is vital. Our Party's officials and members have much work to do. But as Prime Minister my higher obligation is to govern well. To rebuild disaster-stricken communities; to share opportunity through the Government's education and participation reforms. To shape the future by pricing carbon, rolling out the NBN, and delivering a better health care system and to see our mission through in Afghanistan. That is what I was elected for and that is what I will do. I've congratulated Barry O'Farrell and the Coalition on their New South Wales election result. We're committed to working cooperatively with the incoming O'Farrell Government to achieve the best results for the people of New South Wales. People rightly expect governments of all persuasions to work together in vital areas such as health, education and infrastructure, to deliver better services and build stronger communities. The people of NSW are demanding progress, not politics. In the same way, if there is one lesson of the Whitlam Government it is this. You can't govern without a strong economy. So having talked about the party and politics, let me talk about jobs and opportunity about the coming Budget. In truth, for many Australians, the election six days ago will matter less than the Budget in six weeks' time.  After difficult years for the economy, we are facing a huge boom  -  the biggest mining boom in 150 years. Since 2004, mining investment has increased five fold. This year, Australian industry will invest more money into mining than the whole country invests in building new houses  -  something that has never happened before. One single project  -  the $43 billion Gorgon gas project  -  is worth about the same as two years of output in agriculture. Or to take a more domestic analogy, five years ago the money earned from exporting 10,000 tonnes of iron ore would buy about 280 dishwashers. Today it would buy you around 1400 dishwashers. On any measure, we are living through a boom and that boom is a good thing. Mine workers earn higher wages, suppliers benefit, superannuation funds earn more and the higher dollar is cutting prices for household goods like clothes, appliances, televisions and computers. The boom is good news for Australia and we should celebrate it. The challenge for the country and for the economy is to manage that boom well  -  to nurture it so that it lasts  -  by investing in productivity while preventing inflationary pressures from running out of control. As we saw in the last years of the Liberal Government, without strict management of the Budget, the economic boom will cause prices and interest rates to spiral out of control. That's because the private sector will employ more people, spend more money, and build more projects  -  and that means unless the government pulls back on spending, we will be chasing the same scarce resources. We all know that strong economies risk inflationary pressures and that's why we have to make the right decisions and not take risks with people's cost of living. In other words, good economic management isn't just good for the economy  -  it's good for the family budget as well. We will keep a tight rein on spending to return the Budget to surplus and keep our economy strong. That's responsible economic management. This budget will be about making the right decisions for the country; the right decisions for families and the right decisions for jobs. I will never risk the economy and people's jobs for the soft political option of putting off hard decisions to next time. We know this because we saw the opposite happen under the Liberal Government.John Howard's Cabinet spent billions of dollars buying votes instead of investing in a more productive economy through things like broadband, health and education. And because the government was spending so much money, without investing in a more productive economy, we saw inflationary pressures spiral out of control. The Liberals ignored 20 warnings from the Reserve Bank about inflation  -  they did nothing and interest rates continued to rise and rise and rise after they had promised they would stay at record lows. I believe a Budget surplus is a key sign of a strong economy. It means we are prepared when the country's luck turns, and we are hit with a crisis like the GFC. And it means we are prepared when individuals' luck turns as well  -  because we have a strong social safety net. So we face a choice. We can take these tough decisions now to bring the budget back to surplus  -  or we can put them off to the nevernever, which will just make these decisions harder and these cuts more severe when the time comes. It's like looking after your health  -  you can see a GP today  -  or you can put it off, and be forced into emergency surgery down the track. A fiscal blowout 10 years down the track would mean radical cuts to key social services  -  like public education, universal health care, and pensions. Around the world, we see Governments facing huge structural deficits which are forced to slash education funding, public services and entitlements. Together, we can take the tough decisions to deliver a Budget surplus in 2012-13 and keep the economy strong. That's what we said we will do and we will do it. Even given the budget pressures which do result from natural disasters at home and overseas. Taking some pain now will ensure that households avoid a lot more pain in the future. There is a strong progressive logic to this approach. When the private sector was in retreat, the government stepped forward to fill the gap  -  it was controversial but it was right. Now that the private sector is charging forward, it's time for the government to pull back on spending. This budget will be about making the right decisions for the country, the right decisions for families and the right decisions for jobs:A Budget to nurture the boom so that it lasts;A Budget to respond to “patchwork pressures” in the economy;A Budget to make hard decisions now to prevent long-term pain;A Budget to grow jobs and share opportunity a Labor Budget;  Friends, we meet tonight not to honour our past but to address our future, just as Whitlam's Labor was always about the future, not the past. And friends, in New South Wales, our eyes must be on the future. A future in touch with the community. A future of increase party membership and new policy ideas. A future in which I trust John Robertson's team will strive to be known by what it proposes not what it opposes. I am a realist and I know that for NSW Labor the journey of reform ahead will be long and at times painful. But I'm also an optimist: optimistic as I articulate the Labor vision; optimistic as I urge NSW Labor to renew, rebuild and regain.  And above all else, like Gough, I am a complete optimist about the future of our country.  I firmly believe that the best days of our nation are in front of it, not behind it. I understand that the challenges of today and tomorrow can easily leave us yearning for what we remember as a kinder and simpler past age.  But I do not believe in romanticising the past. I do not believe in being afraid of the future.  We best combat fear by taking deliberate steps to shape the future together, a future of opportunity for all. This the Labor way. This is the Australian way. 



PM: It's fantastic to be here on another beautiful Perth day with Chris Evans, the Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Jobs and Workplace Relations, and we're here to open this impressive new facility, the Curtin Engineering Pavilion. This is a building that the Federal Government contributed $20.5 million to. It's an important new development for the training of engineering students right here at Curtin University.
In Western Australia we know the economy is running strong, this gives us an historic opportunity to get young people opportunity in life, get them a job, a high paid, high skilled job for the future. The industry players that are here today and who have supported this building, big businesses like Rio and Woodside are crying out for skilled engineers, they want to give young people an opportunity, they want to give young engineers a start, and here at Curtin University, through this new facility, Curtin University will be able to better train and better skill its young engineers. I've met today some students who have talked about the benefits of studying in a facility like this one, which enables them to work together in teams, to collaborate, to do the kinds of things that they will do as engineers in business, working together with other young engineers. It's a real privilege to be here today and this building is really an example of our economic plan for the nation as a whole. I want this country to have a future where young people can aspire to a high skill, high wage job. To do that I want to lift skill levels, I want to lift participation in the workforce  -  that's part of ensuring that Australians get to participate through the benefits and dignity of work in our strong economy. I congratulate Curtin University for this new facility and it's been a real pleasure to be here. And if I could just recap briefly on the events of yesterday, I would also like to say to the people of Fremantle, it was a great opportunity to have a discussion with them last night at community cabinet, we were able to take questions and have discussions on a broad range of issues, the Government wants to listen to the concerns of local community members, Community Cabinet gives us a wonderful opportunity to do that, so thank you very much to the people of Fremantle, thank you very much to South Fremantle Senior High School for making us feel so welcome yesterday. I'm happy to take questions. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what do you make of Tony Abbott's welfare reforms? PM: Well I've seen reports this morning of Mr Abbott's so-called plans and let me just say this about Mr Abbott's plans: these are recycled plans, in fact twice reheated. The first time Tony Abbott announced these plans he said he was going to fund it by putting up the excise on alcohol and cigarettes and by increasing the age at which you could get the pension. The second time he announced it was during the election campaign and it had a $1 billion black hole associated with it. This is the third time he's announced it and this time he hasn't even bothered to try to talk about the money, where the money would come from. Now I think I can explain to Australians why Mr Abbott has brought out a twice reheated policy today and that's because the Liberal Party focus groups would be telling him that people are worried that he's negative all the time. So this is all about the politics, all about the focus groups, all about clutching for an old policy that isn't properly costed, isn't properly funded, and trying to pretend to the Australian people it's a new idea. JOURNALIST: So Prime Minister should non-permanent disability pensioners be sent back to work, as he suggests? PM: What I will do is what I've done from the first day that I was Prime Minister. On the first day I was Prime Minister I said to Australians I believed in the benefits and dignity of work, I believe that people should get work opportunities, I want to see Australians who can work in the workforce, that's why as a Government we're investing in skills, that's why as a Government we've worked to create a strong economy with 700,000 new jobs and that's why as a Government we are very proud we've achieved in recent months record participation rates in our labour force. I have already spoken to the Australian people about my intentions to build on our investments in skills and build on our achievements in participation by creating new participation measures in the May budget and beyond. So the Government is there delivering practical changes, working in a responsible way with costed policies to make a difference to Australians. So I'll leave to Mr Abbott the twice reheated policies that don't add up, we'll get on with the job that we've been doing which is delivering the policies and plans that make a difference to participation rates, to the ability of Australians to get a job, and to the ability of Australians to get a great education. JOURNALIST: But should people be forced to work where there is employment, where there are jobs to be had? PM: Look my view is people who can work should work, and that's why we have been reforming welfare, including through income management. That's why we've been reforming the rules about benefits when people are unemployed, making sure that people do turn up, do participate, do seize the opportunities to get a job. That's why I've been talking to the Australian community for many months now about doing more. But let's be really clear about what Mr Abbott's done today, he's obviously feeling some political heat because he's been so consistently negative every day, just getting out there and criticising what the Government's doing with no positive policies or plans. Instead of coming up with any new positive policies or plans, he's gone back to a plan he's run out twice before, here's the report from February 2010 when he ran out this policy for the first time, that's when he wanted to fund it by putting up the age at which you could get the pension. The he ran it out again during the election campaign: a billion dollar black hole. He's run it out again today and he hasn't even bothered to explain where the money would come from. JOURNALIST: Speaking of negative Prime Minister, the Opposition says the GST review could be done sooner, what's your response to that? PM: That's very interesting from a political party that was in Government for 12 years and never mounted a thorough review of GST distribution the way that I announced yesterday. So once again the Opposition are criticising, but no record of positive action. Here in Western Australia, clearly people in the community have been concerned about the way in which the GST is distributed and whether this state is getting its fair share. The review I announced yesterday is a review that will look at how we distribute the GST, I want to be fair to all Australians, I want states to experience the benefits of success and successfully reforming how they deliver services, I want state budgets to be more predictable, I want the whole system to be more transparent. That's why we've got the review team; it's a good quality review team, as Premier Barnett in this state has said himself. JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 14 months ago, of the formula, the Grants Commission? PM: This is a thorough going review led by a panel with a great deal of experience and expertise, raising all of the questions that need to be looked at for the GST formula for the future. What I want to see is a system, simpler, more transparent, rewards reform, has predictabilities, so States and Territories know what is going to be in their budget and deals appropriately with strong economic growth in parts of the country and clearly we see strong economic growth here in Western Australia.
JOURNALIST: On the Northam Detention Centre are there any problems with the site or any things that are going to delay the actual building of that that, or is it all on track? PM: There have been some issues with the construction, hitting of very hard rock, as I understand it, which will occasion a slight delay in the construction, one of those practical problems that you strike when you build. We will continue to work with the Northam community, with the local community and liaise with them. We're working strongly with the community; the detention centre will be constructed, as there's just been a practical difficulty in that construction. JOURNALIST: Do you have a date for when you think it will be completed? PM: As I understand it there will be a slight delay because of this practical difficulty in construction. JOURNALIST: And at Northam will there be set staffing levels or will Serco be able to set its own staffing levels, given the understaffing at Christmas Island? PM: Our contract arrangements with Serco require them to properly staff and manage detention facilities and of course we'll have contract arrangements that are appropriate to achieving that at Northam. JOURNALIST: Given the outcome in Bali, is the East Timor solution dead? PM: On the outcome from Bali, I very much welcome the statement that came from yesterday's Bali meeting. We went to that meeting urging that the meeting agree to regional cooperation to deal with the global and regional problem of people movement and people smuggling. And in the statement from the meeting there is agreement to a regional cooperation framework, I welcome that. I also welcome the fact that that framework will have specific reference to processing centres in the region, so the statements that have emerged from yesterday's meeting are a step forward. Australia did, at that meeting, want to see regional agreement and we've got that regional agreement, so I welcome that step forward. As I said yesterday, the question of the East Timor Processing Centre is something that Australia continues to pursue with East Timor at the highest levels. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you comfortable that your government did everything it could in the lead up to the last election to accommodate the increase in arrival of boat people? PM: We've announced step but step as a Government our policies and plans for dealing with detention and where detention facilities are to be located. So we've taken an appropriate approach at every stage, we've been transparent with the community about pressures and consequently the need for new facilities. The Minister for Immigration, Chris Bowen, has made a series of statements to explain to the Australian community where we plan to put detention facilities and then we're working intensively with local community members. JOURNALIST: At Curtain are there plans to double the site? PM: No there are not, there are no plans. We've already made very clear and I refer you to every statement from the Minister for Immigration, made very clear our policies and plans in relation to Curtin. JOURNALIST: Could it be interpreted  the GST review a method of sweet talking WA into agreeing with the Mining Resources Tax? PM: No, absolutely not. The Minerals Resource Rent Tax, I understand it's controversial here in Western Australia. I've had community members raise it with me every time I've visited here since I worked on the Minerals Resource Rent Tax with some of the biggest mining companies in this nation and got their agreement to the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
So I understand it's been controversial here. We are pursuing the Minerals Resource Rent Tax because it means more for Western Australia, means more infrastructure, more support for businesses, particularly small businesses, it means more support for people's retirement incomes. We will continue to purse delivering the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. The most recent step in that was the Policy Transition Group Report, a group led by a famous mining identity Don Argus and every recommendation was accepted by Government. The GST review I've announced, because I am concerned that to have our federation as we want it for the future, we've got to have fair arrangements about the distribution of the GST and that's what we are aiming for through the GST review.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the inquiry into Qantas among others, are you concerned about Qantas safety record? PM: Qantas is a very safe airline and any look at the statistics of airlines around the world will verify that. JOURNALIST: Michael Danby has accused China of detaining an Australian writer, do you agree with your backbencher and what's Australia doing about this situation? PM: There has been concern about the circumstances of an individual, Dr Yang. As I am now advised he is in hospital, he's in contact with his family, we are pleased that we now know where he is and we will pursue consular access and assistance to him, making sure that our officials in China support him. JOURNALIST: Wayne Swan said last night that you now have (inaudible) balance between mining tax and royalty system. He didn't seem though to have a view as to what are you going to do if Premier Barnett includes royalties in (inaudible). What is your answer, what can you do if Premier Barnett is (inaudible)? PM: The Federal Government and State Governments work every day on financial arrangements and relationships between the two of them. If we need to cross that bridge then we will and we'll work with Premier Barnett on doing it. JOURNALIST: The WA Government announced yesterday that value of the resources industry has skyrocketed in the last two years, is the WA Government being a bit silly in their opposition to the MRRT given that? PM: I've got my view about the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, Premier Barnett can put his view to the people of Western Australia, but my view is with the resources industry performing so strongly in this state and around the nation, it is the right thing for Australians to be able to share that mineral wealth, to better share it and the way of better sharing it is that that Minerals Resource Rent Tax is used to fund more infrastructure, particularly for states like Western Australia, to support businesses, particularly small businesses and let's remember in Western Australia, though you are home to huge mining companies, 90 per cent of businesses in this state are small businesses. And also to support more than 800,000 Western Australian have a higher retirement income, I think that's appropriate through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, Premier Barnett is of a different view and I'll allow him to put his view himself. Thank you very much  



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Kevin Rudd expressed their shock and deep concern at yesterday's deadly attack on the compound of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Mazar-e-Sharif, Afghanistan.
“We utterly condemn this brutal and senseless attack”, Ms Gillard said.
“The United Nations has been a steadfast friend to the people of Afghanistan”, said Mr Rudd. “The staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan are dedicated to building peace and stability in Afghanistan, and better, safer and more prosperous lives for its people.”
“Attacks on these UN workers are deplorable”, Mr Rudd said. “The Australian Government calls on those responsible for this crime to be identified and prosecuted for this grave offence.”
Ms Gillard and Mr Rudd extended their sincere condolences to the families, friends and colleagues of those killed, to the United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, and to the Special Representative of the Secretary General, Staffan di Mistura.
They called on the UN not to allow this outrage to impede the vital work that the UN undertakes in Afghanistan and many other of the world's trouble spots.    



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning and welcome.
PM: Thank you very much, Greg. Good to be with you.
HOST: Yeah, and a busy day ahead, an important day ahead. You would have seen footage of the community forum on the insurance and other matters held in Ipswich yesterday  -  profoundly emotional and you can understand how the residents were feeling, no doubt, and your Government's calling for clearer definitions of flood and what flood is from insurers in the future. I'm wondering, though, Prime Minister, how does it help people who were there yesterday and all the others who weren't there yesterday? What is your Government going to do now to help those people now?
PM: I understand that people are in difficult circumstances now. Yesterday I was out in Toowoomba and Dalby meeting with people who'd been hit by the floods, including people from the Lockyer Valley, who have lost so much and whose family members have lost their lives, so I do understand how much pressure people are facing.
I did have the opportunity to see the Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, and the Assistant Treasurer, Bill Shorten, yesterday at a meeting they had following the Ipswich meeting, a meeting of major businesses around the country to keep mobilising support for Queensland.
We do want to fix insurance for the future. I want people to be able to look at their policy and understand what it means and I do understand now many people are feeling ripped off by insurance companies, so we will maintain pressure on insurance companies to do the right thing and to consider claims sympathetically and we're going to keep pressure on insurance companies to do what they should have done yesterday and to go and front that meeting in Ipswich and hear directly from the people of Queensland.
At the same, we'll continue to work with the people of Queensland on rebuilding. We will be investing over $5 billion here in Queensland as part of our recovery efforts, and around $1 billion of that is going directly to individuals to help them through.
HOST: A lot of that money was donated locally to the Premier's Relief Fund - $255 million of, which only $55 million of that has gone out so far. Do you really think that's satisfactory?
PM: The Premier's Relief Fund is a separate source of funding from what I'm talking about. So, that $5 billion that I'm talking about is Federal Government investment and the $1 billion of it going to individuals is Federal Government payments in the form of disaster relief.
On the amount of money that's been raised by the Premier's Disaster Relief Fund, I've got two messages: I'm continuing to urge businesses to do more and that's part of why I met with business leaders from around the country in Queensland yesterday; and I know that the Premier is working with a committee of people drawn from Queensland on how to use those funds.
HOST: The Premier, Prime Minister, is erring  -  in her own words, and Mr Hamill's words  -  on the side of caution in not giving money to those they believe don't deserve it. Hasn't the time really come when you've got to err on the side of giving it to people who desperately need the money and if they're are fraudulent claims we can take care of that later on?
PM: I presume that an approach is being taken about making sure that this money in the Premier's Disaster Relief Fund does the maximum good that it can, so you wouldn't want to look back and say ‘Gee, we could have done better with the money that people have generously donated', so I'm sure that's the approach that's been taken.
On the direct relief that comes from the Federal Government, as you would know, the payments to assist people, the emergency money, got out on the ground very quickly indeed and now we are continuing to work with communities to rebuild and rebuild infrastructure that has been hit by flood waters and also hit by the cyclone.
HOST: You see, I'm just not quite sure that we  -  and I know you tried to answer that first question, it's a very difficult and complex one  -  but essentially everybody is now focussing on insurance companies, some of which clearly did the right thing, some of which clearly did the wrong thing, but  the responsibility clearly goes much wider than that and again, in addressing what can be done for the future, what directly can be done for those people's lives who have been wrecked at moment?
PM: Well, first and foremost Government's got to play its proper role of supporting individuals, families, communities and rebuilding infrastructure. We are doing that and we will do that. I've said loud and publicly that we won't let go. We will be working with the people of Queensland during this difficult period of rebuilding and recovery.
For the insurance policy, we can't go back in time and rewrite people's insurance policies, but we can put pressure on insurance companies to sympathetically and quickly deal with claims and we can name and shame, Greg, when insurance companies do the wrong thing and I am more than prepared to do that and we can fix this for the future, so Queenslanders, Australians right around the nation, can pick up their policy and understand it, know what they're going to get if they get into times of difficulty, and that there is a clear definition of the word ‘flood'.
HOST: See, this becomes one of the complexities, though. You're going to name and shame them and you say a lot of them have been irresponsible in what they've done. They're not here, of course, to defend themselves in that and obviously some did the wrong thing. Some will argue, however, that people were allowed to build in flood plains knowing they were flood plains and without having insurance. How is that possible to do?
PM: My point about the insurance companies is they should be out there. They should be out there taking people's questions at meetings like the Ipswich meeting yesterday, and if people have got something to say, the insurance company may agree with it or disagree with it, but they should be prepared to front it out and take people's questions and complaints. I think it's cowardly that insurance company representatives didn't go to that meeting yesterday.
HOST: Again, it doesn't resolve the issue though, does it? I mean people are passionate, they're emotional and we're trying to help a lot of those people, so we understand that. Meantime, Senator Joe Ludwig says he just asks for patience. As we could see last night and we can understand, people are way beyond having patience.
PM: I met with people directly yesterday. I wasn't at the same meeting that the Treasurer and Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan and Bill Shorten were at, but I was out and about talking to people who had been hit by flood waters and people who had lost a lot, including people who had lost family members, and I understand from those conversations that people want to rebuild their lives, that there is a sense of absolute urgency in doing that, that people do feel ripped off, and we will be working alongside them as they do that.
I understand it's a hard thing to be patient about when you're out of home and you want your home rebuilt, but we do have to work alongside people in this journey of recovery. Not everything is going to be put back the same way that it was instantaneously. That's just the truth. We do have to work with people, it is taking time, it is difficult to ask for patience, but I suppose we do have to ask people to understand that it takes some time to rebuild communities, rebuild homes, to rebuild lives, but there are resources available to help - more than $5 billion coming from the Federal Government flowing into this State, as it properly should.
HOST: OK, just needs to get out there faster, doesn't it? All that help and relief money has to get out there faster.
PM: We'll, we've got the emergency payments out there very, very fast. I mean they were done literally within days of - 
HOST: -But we've got people living in tents, Prime Minister. Living in tents, their kids who are breaking down, social workers who saying people talking about suicide is rising every single day, so it's clearly not getting to those who desperately need the help.
PM: I think we've just got to, in terms of how this has unfolded and working with people, there was the immediate emergency situation, people out of their homes, in evacuation centres, some of them in desperate circumstances, and the emergency money to assist them got out very, very quickly - very, very quickly - to help people.
Now there's the need to help people as they rebuild and I understand people want to do that as quickly as possible. I talked to people yesterday who are living with relatives, living in difficult circumstances, anxious to rebuild their homes and rebuild their lives, so I definitely understand that and we will be working with those families and those communities as they rebuild.
HOST: OK, our Prime Minister with us - not for much longer, I know you've got a busy morning. George Negus, a very worrying story last night on his program: an Army cadet at the national elite military academy is facing serious charges and the sack after he filmed himself having sex with a female Air Force cadet - she came forward last night - and broadcast it to his mates. I suppose in asking you how you feel about that story, why does it matter if they've committed a crime - and they may well have  -  should they simply sack those that made the footage and those who watched the footage?
PM: As I understand it, there is an Australian Federal Police investigation here and the Defence Force is investigation it too, so that's got to happen and I don't want to say anything that would prejudice those investigations, but if I can make a point more broadly, obviously any conduct that treats a woman in a way that her dignity is pushed aside, that engages in misusing trust, breaching trust, going out of their way to embarrass people, strip them of dignity and a sense of self worth is disgusting conduct and we would all repudiate it. It's not what we want to see in this country.
HOST: Absolutely.
You've spoken a lot and had to respond to a lot of questions related to Kevin Rudd's appearance on Q&amp;A the other night, Maybe I can come at it from a different way - honesty test. As Mr Rudd was saying what he did about the Cabinet decision to dump the ETS on Q&amp;A Monday night, as you watched it, and you watched the program, what did you say or think?
PM: I didn't watch the program, I'm sorry!
HOST: Shattered that.
PM: Look, I'm busy as Prime Minister and I - 
HOST: -You know what he said, though?
PM: Look, I've obviously seen reported what he said, but I didn't watch the program. I wasn't in a position to do that.
HOST: OK, when you first saw or read what he said, then, what did you say or think?
PM: I understand that Kevin will be asked about his period as Prime Minister and answer questions about that period, so that will happen, and obviously did happen on Q&amp;A on Monday night, but I also understand that on Q&amp;A Kevin was asked a lot of questions about our substantive policy to tackle climate change and to price carbon, and they didn't get as much reporting, but obviously what he was doing was supporting Government drive to tackle this big challenge for the nation's future and to get a price on carbon.
HOST: Prime Minister, isn't that part of the dilemma, though, because it's quite clear that he was talking about you and others, which gets to the point you just raise - how can you tell us a carbon tax is so important now when you wanted to dump it for political reasons seemingly just a year ago? 
PM: I'm not going to talk about confidential discussions between Cabinet colleagues. I've said that before. There's nothing new in that-
HOST: -But you did say it, didn't you? You did say it?
PM: What I can say to you is I've always believed this nation needed to tackle climate change. I've always believed the best most efficient way of doing that was through an emissions trading scheme and through what I am advocating now this nation will have an emissions trading scheme.
I'm all about making sure that this nation is as prosperous as it can be in the future and we do the right thing by the environment and to do that we need to price carbon, and that's what I'm focused on now.
Yesterday, as well as meeting people hit by the Queensland floods, I went to the Darling Downs power station, sat in a lunch room and talked to a group of power workers about pricing carbon and how we need to do that for the nation's future.
So, every day I'll be out advocating this big change - 
HOST: -We know that. I know you're out and about working very hard and I know also you need to get away.
Just one final point on that, though, because I just think it's really important at a time when there's a lot of concern, and you're running against it in the polls, you must know there's a lot of negative reaction to the carbon tax, although we're in the early days of the debate.
The leaked minutes of the special meeting of the Labor Party, June 24 2010, as carried in The Australian, quote Kevin Rudd as saying ‘I changed our position on the emissions trading scheme. I wish to place on record here that Lindsay Tanner and Penny Wong strongly argued to me against taking that position. Equally strong was the advice from Wayne  -  meaning Swan  -  and Julia  -  meaning you  -  that the emissions trading scheme had to be abandoned.' So I guess politically and for all us trying to get our head around this, how could you be so strong against it then and so strong for it now?
PM: I'm going to leave picking over all of this to the historians, but if you're asking me what my views are now and what they were last year and the year before and the year before, my views have been absolutely the same  -  we have to get on with tackling climate change.
That means we have to cut carbon pollution. The best way of doing that is to get the biggest polluters in this country to pay a price for the carbon pollution then generate, use that money to assist households, protect jobs and tackle climate change.
That's exactly what I'm advocating for and I want to deliver for this country, starting on the 1st of July 2012.
HOST: Final question, and fully understand your sincerity in that, why has your attitude changed between last year and this year?
PM: My attitude is the same. I believe in tackling climate change. I believe the best way of doing that is an emissions trading scheme. That's always been my view.
HOST: But you didn't want to support Kevin Rudd with it?
PM: Look, I'm not going to pick over events in the past. I'll leave that to the historians and people ask questions about this, I understand it, but  - 
HOST: -You can understand why it's important, though. You can't-
PM: -I think what's important is people will say to themselves, they'll be at home with their families, they'll be in their workplace, they'll look at their family members, they'll look at their work colleagues, they'll think ‘gee, I do want to do the right thing by the environment, but what's it mean for me, what's it mean for my family, what's it mean for my workplace?'
That's what people care about and that's what I will be explaining every day.
Of course, I am passionate about doing this, passionate about doing it and that's what's driving me to make sure I'm around the country explaining it to Australians.
HOST: You've got a busy day ahead. It's a very important day talking to a lot of people who want to see their Prime Minister, so we'll let you at it and good luck.
PM: Thank you very much. 



UHLMANN: Julia Gillard, welcome to 7.30.
PM: Thank you very much Chris.
UHLMANN: You've revisited places you saw devastated just three months ago, what was that like?
PM: It was a tremendous opportunity to be out talking to people and my overwhelming sense is whilst there's a lot of fighting spirit there, there's a lot of hurt too. It is a long journey back for people and I've had the opportunity yesterday and today to talk to people in Dalby and Toowoomba, people from the Lockyer Valley, people in Goodna, so it's been a great opportunity to catch back up and see how people are going and I've very much valued it.
It is tough out there, but people are taking it a step at a time and rebuilding their lives and we'll be there with them as they do it.
UHLMANN: Now the Government's been here talking to people, but you've been quite critical of some members of the insurance industry, you've called them cowardly, why?
PM: I've called them cowardly because there was a special opportunity created yesterday for members of the insurance industry to come and front Queenslanders in Ipswich and actually address people's complaints and I think they should have taken that opportunity.
It can be difficult sitting there, talking to people who've got criticisms, but it's the right thing to do, to front people and explain why you've made the decisions you have and the insurance companies refused to do that yesterday. I did think that was cowardly.
UHLMANN: Now the devastation in Queensland will have an effect on your budget, you've seen revenues collapse through your company tax receipts. You've made it quite clear that this is going to be a tough budget. Are you going to target welfare in this budget, do you think there are too many people on welfare.
PM: We are committed to rebuilding Queensland and around the nation, so money has been allocated for that. I announced our $5.6 billion package to do just that and we've spent almost $1 billion here in Queensland on individual payments already and there is a tough environment in many senses, apart from natural disasters here, with all of the economic loss of revenue that that causes. We've had implications for our economy from Japan and whilst the mining sector is booming, other parts of the economy are quite flat and that's hit into company tax receipts. But my purpose in talking about participation for the budget is really a purpose about spreading opportunity in this country.
I want to make sure that Australians who can work do have the opportunity to work and that we get people into work. That's about giving life chances.
UHLMANN: But certainly one of the things that you're going to have to do is move people off things like disability pensions, aren't you? And do you intend to do that, how many people do you intend to move off and what do you intend to save while doing that?
PM: I've talked about participation consistently, this has been a theme of mine and I've said we face formidable challenges. There are around 2 million Australians who are not in the fulltime workforce, above and beyond those who are officially registered as unemployed.
Now I understand that there are a whole set of individual circumstances for those Australians, but for Australians who can work, I believe we should have those Australians working. It's going to take a lot of policy innovation to do that, it is a formidable policy challenge. As a government we've made a start and in the budget I want to do more.
UHLMANN: Sure, can I put some flesh on the bones about that though, are you talking about disability pensions; are you talking about moving people off disability pensions?
PM: I'm talking creating a circumstance where we're building a bridge to employment for people through more training, more skills and making sure that people are motivated  - 
UHLMANN: And fewer people on welfare?
PM: Inevitably that would cause fewer people on welfare, because given the choice I want to see people in the workforce, not on welfare. We do have to build those bridges into the workforce, give people the skills and trailing they need to get a job opportunity.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, have you always consistently, publicly and privately supported a price on carbon?
PM: I've always believed we had to price carbon in order to tackle climate change, absolutely.
UHLMANN: Kevin Rudd says that you didn't at one stage, that you urged him to abandon the former ETS scheme.
PM: Look, I understand that people will focus on some of this history, but Chris if I'd wanted a history job I would have become a historian and studied the relevant qualifications.
UHLMANN: It is history and Kevin Rudd is a primary source and this isn't in dispute now, Kevin Rudd said that's what you did, is that what you did?
PM: Well Chris, I've always been very clear that I'm not going to talk publicly about confidential discussions between Cabinet colleagues  - 
UHLMANN: Yet he has.
PM: But I've also been very clear Chris and I'm happy to be very clear again, I believe climate change is real, I've always believed climate change was real, that we needed to tackle it by pricing carbon and I am committed to getting that done and we will do that from 1st July next year.
UHLMANN: But Prime Minister, this confidential conversation has been revealed by Kevin Rudd and his take on it is that you and Wayne Swan urged him to abandon his carbon pollution reduction scheme, is that the case? In private when things got hard, did you decide that you should cut and run from that?
PM: Look Chris, I'm absolutely determined to price carbon, I'm not going to go over past conversations  - 
UHLMANN: So the answer is yes you did?
PM: Well, no, the answer is the answer I'm giving you  - 
UHLMANN: Unless you correct the record.
PM: I'll leave the history to you, my focus is on making sure that we price carbon, so that we have a clean energy economy for the future with all of the jobs and prosperity that comes with that and so we are doing the right thing to cut carbon pollution and tackle climate change. I'm not going to canvass confidential discussions between colleagues.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, are you pleased with the Foreign Minister's performance this week?
PM: I understand that Kevin was asked on Q&amp;A some questions about that period of his prime ministership and he answered them  - 
UHLMANN: And did he tell the truth?
PM: What's been less reported Chris, is that he was also asked about his work now and made it very clear that he's got his shoulder to the wheel, pressing the policies and plans of this government out there arguing for them and that's exactly what I expect my ministers to do.
UHLMANN: Are you happy with this performance this week?
PM: Look, I just answered the question. I expect my ministers to be out there arguing for the Government's policies and plans and Kevin Rudd was doing that on Monday night.
UHLMANN: Kevin Rudd said today ‘as a former Prime Minister I will speak as appropriate to make sure the record is straight', are you happy with that as Prime Minister?
PM: What I want my ministers to be doing, Kevin included, and he was doing this on Monday night when you look at all of the questions that he fielded, is I want them to be out there explaining to the Australian community the Government's policies and plans. He said on Monday night, he'll have his shoulder to the wheel doing that, that's a great thing.
UHLMANN: And this week he's sucked the oxygen out of the campaign that you had this week on a carbon tax and he's opened up the questions that the Liberal Party might open up, what do you stand for and can you be trusted. So he's done you some great damage this week.
 PM: I'm very clear about what I stand for and I'm very clear about my focus on the future of this country, on creating an Australia where we fairly distribute opportunity, where people don't get left behind, for example on welfare when they've got the ability to work and we as a nation tackle the challenges of the future and there's no bigger one than climate change and pricing carbon, which I'm determined to get done.
UHLMANN: Do you trust the Foreign Minister?
PM: Of course, Kevin is part of my team  - 
UHLMANN: Why after this week?
PM: Chris, I'll leave the political commentary and hyperbole to you. Kevin Rudd as Minister for Foreign Affairs went on an ABC show on Monday night, on that show he advocated for the Government's policies, that is what I expect my ministers to do and Kevin Rudd was doing it.
UHLMANN: You said in a speech that you gave recently that the Greens would never embrace Labor's delight in the Australian values that you shared, what did you mean by that?
PM: Exactly what those words do mean, I was obviously referring to the Greens political party, I know there's been some misreading of these comments to suggest that I was referring to every person who votes Green.
But my point there was, Labor is a mainstream political party, a mainstream political party that always wants to be, and indeed delights in being the voice of everyday Australia and in touch with their values.
The Greens, they started on a different journey, a journey about the environment, I understand that, but our journey as a mainstream political party has been, for more than 100 years now, giving political voice to the aspirations of Australians right around this country, ordinary hardworking Australians, people who need a job, need a pay packet, worry about the bills, want their kids to go to a great school, want to know that the hospital's there when they need it, want a decent old age and retirement.
UHLMANN: Finally, briefly Prime Minister, don't you think the Greens would share a delight in that as well? Aren't they part of Australia, don't they share Australian values?
PM: I think that's a simplistic divide and I'm not prepared to say that's what my comments meant. I stand by the words in that speech and I stand by a rational construction of them.
The Greens have a different genesis from the Labor Party, they didn't come into existence to be the mainstream voice of working Australians, they came into existence to be a protest movement about environmental causes and if we look now on some of the big policy debates in our country  -  mandatory detention  -  that's a policy debate in our country, I believe Labor is more in touch with mainstream Australian values on that, to take one example.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, we'll have to leave it there. Thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Queensland Premier Anna Bligh today announced a $39 million package to support the recovery and wellbeing of people in Queensland following the State's worst-ever summer of natural disasters in recent memory.
The package was launched under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements in Queensland today to assist communities to confront the challenges associated with long-term recovery.
The Prime Minister said the support will help Queenslanders confront the long-term challenges of the recovery process that go beyond bricks and mortar.
The package includes:
 * 	$20 million for community development and recovery funds on the ground to provide intensive support to the State's most highly impacted local communities, including supporting not-for-profit community groups, events and memorials;
 * 	Up to $10 million for a Mental Health Disaster Recovery Package to support mental health services in disaster-affected communities in Queensland on top of $1.2 million in funding announced earlier this year. Local organisations on the ground within the mental health sector will receive much needed funding to bolster their excellent work within severely affected communities.
 * 	Up to $5.8 million Financial Counselling to provide support to families and individuals affected by the disasters who are experiencing financial problems.
 * 	A $2 million Disabilities Care Plan to help a number of non-government organisations across Queensland to deliver crisis accommodation and respite care for people with a disability.
The Prime Minister said today's Community Recovery Package announcement was the next step in supporting Queensland following the recovery and the start of reconstruction efforts.
The Gillard Government will not forget the Queensland people who have been affected by the recent floods.
We are here to help you rebuild your homes, your workplaces, your infrastructure and your spirit.
Premier Bligh said that the mental health measures were important in the lead up to the Easter period.
“Grants will be made available to local non government organisations to deliver assistance, counselling services, community access, respite and expert referral to other support services,” she said.
“These local groups will also provide additional individual and family counselling, personalised support and group support to those that need it.
“This means that people who are experiencing distress or mental health problems and need support will have access to additional individual and family services.
“Under this funding the carers themselves will get extra access to information, counselling and other support services.”
Further details of the services that will be funded under the Community Recovery and Wellbeing Package will be settled with the Queensland Government over the coming days and will be consistent with NDRRA requirements. 
For more information please contact the Queensland Department of Communities on 137 468. 


PM: It's a great pleasure to be here today. I'm joined by the Premier of Queensland, Anna Bligh, by our local member Graham Perrett, and I thank him for being here. We've got Mick Slater here, Milton Dick from the local council and we're joined by a representative of the mental health community for what is a very important announcement.
I've been here in Queensland over the last few days, talking to people about their journey of recovery as Queensland recovers and rebuild from the floods and from the cyclone. We've in fact been here talking today about the recovery of this lawn bowls club and I've had the opportunity to meet with a range of people, in Toowoomba, in Dalby, here in Oxley, around Goodna, a number of places, talking about the recovery journey. It's still tough for people out there, I certainly understand that but Queensland is being rebuilt.
Already we've got a vibrant game happening behind us, so that's that noise. As people would know, I committed $5.6 billion on the 27th January to recovering from the natural disasters that our country faced.
Already here in Queensland we have provided funding for 44 disaster affected councils, working of course with Premier Bligh's government. We've got reconstruction work well underway with almost 6,000km of roads being reconstructed, almost 4,000km of rail, 55 bridges and culverts repaired to date and ten of the eleven damaged sea ports in Queensland have now been reopened.
And we are, through a tourism push, getting the message through, that there's never been a better time to come and visit here in Queensland - Queensland is open for business and anxious to see people from around Australian and around the world coming and saying hello.
We are of course also investing to bring skilled workers in to assist with the recovery and we've made almost a billion dollars of payments directly to the people of Queensland to assist them with their personal recovery. So far we've helped over 928,000 Queenslanders, that's one in five of the total population.
Today we are here to announce a new package of assistance which helps people recover some of those things of the spirit. There is a lot of fighting will in Queensland but when you look in people's eyes you also see a lot of hurt. And it's community members and community groups that are helping keep people together as they recover from the disasters of the last summer.
So today, with the Premier, I'm here to announce a $39 million package of further support. $20 million of that will be directed to helping communities recover. We want communities to have the resources they need to pull people together. That money will go to assist the employment of community development officers, and also assist not-for-profit organisations that do so much to hold communities together as they rebuild.
Some of that money will also help people develop the kind of memorials they want to have in their community to mark what their community has gone through, what they've lost and what they've rebuilt together. $10 million will be made available to support mental health for disaster affected communities.
We all know that these kinds of natural disasters and the journey of recovery place a lot of pressure on people. Today I met a man who sat in his car for a large number of days after his home was flooded. He could be enticed out of his car periodically, but then went back to sit in his car again because he was so shocked and devastated by what had happened to his home.
I met a woman yesterday who told me that she runs to the local pub when she hears droplets of rain because she wants to be with other people if it's raining. This is the kind of pressure that people are continuing to carry with them. We want them to be able to get help and assistance and that $10 million will go to organisations that can provide a helping hand to people in need.
$5.8 million of the package will go to assist people with financial planning, as people are making the decisions that they need to to rebuild their lives, they need good advice and we want to help people get that good advice. The package will be targeted to those areas of Queensland where there is the most need and I hope, as Prime Minister, that it will make a real difference to those affected communities. I turn now to Premier Bligh for some comments.
PREMIER BLIGH: Well thank you very much Prime Minister and I welcome the support from the Federal Government as we take the next step in our journey of recovery here in Queensland.
This is $39 million worth of care for our community. This is a direct, hands-on, one on one support for people when they really need it. We know from international research and the experience after the Victorian bushfires, that research tells us that people often really start to hit to emotional wall around three months after a disaster of this size. The three month period after a disaster is when many people start to feel the full impact of the reality and their emotional and psychological wellbeing can be put at risk.
What this package of support will do is allow us to employ more councillors, more people to help, more people to be sitting down and being a listening ear, one on one. We've also got a $2 million component of the package that will provide extra respite for families who are caring for someone with a disability at the same time as they're trying to recover their homes and get themselves back on track.
For people who need just a little bit of extra support managing their responsibilities as a carer, while they also have to go and do all the other things, like get a builder, go to the insurance company, get an appointment with the bank -
[BREAK]
As we're rebuilding Queensland we are going to keep always in our minds that it's about people first. Bricks and mortar and railroads and roads and school buildings are all important, but making sure we look after people will be an essential part of ensuring that we get back on our feet in a genuine way. I'd like to invite Jeff Cheverton, who's known to a number of you. Jeff is the CEO of the Queensland Alliance for medical health to talk about some of these issues.
JEFF CHEVERTON: Thank you Premier. Good afternoon everyone. Thank you very much Premier. The Queensland Alliance for Mental Health is peak body for mental health in Queensland.
We represent more than 200 community organisations around the state that work in mental health. We advocate for services that support people's recovery in their own homes and communities. We advance the human rights for people with mental illness, and we promote mental health and wellbeing in the community.
We would like to welcome this announcement by the Premier and Prime Minister this afternoon. This is a very welcome investment is sustaining the resilience of Queensland communities. We heard when the floods first started, and then of course we've also had the cyclones up north, we heard about the amazing offerings and volunteers that came out of the woodwork to provide support to their neighbours, their friends and even to people they didn't know. We heard about community groups and community services that went above and beyond their ordinary work duties to meet the needs of people.
This is the great Queensland spirit that we saw at that time and that spirit has continued over the last few months but it is starting to flag and that's why this announcement is such a welcome boost and such a, such a good, a well-timed investment in sustaining that community effort.
It's not a heavy-handed bureaucratic approach. What we're actually seeing in the detail of this announcement is investment in those volunteers and in those community services that have been doing the hard work for the last several months. This is enabling them to keep going and this will enable them to in fact improve their services. We know that in a lot of the communities that have been affected, we're talking about people who take great pride in their independence and their resilience and their ability to meet the challenges that face them.
These are not people who want outsiders to come into their communities to offer them support, they want to support each other. And again, this announcement is investing in self-help, it's investing in providing those people at a local level, who have taken a leadership role, to be informed and to be equipped to promote people with mental health and wellbeing.
So we will see local people helping other local people. We will see Queenslanders doing it for themselves with the support of this investment, and we're very happy to welcome it today.
PM: We're happy to take questions and we'll stand back and hope we don't rattle that at all.
JOURNALIST: Who's paying for this?
PM: Overwhelmingly the package is being funded under the normal formula for our natural disaster relief and recovery arrangements, which is a 75 per cent contribution from the Commonwealth and 25 per cent from the state. But there are some elements of this that are directly state government funded and I will have Premier Bligh identify them.
PREMIER BLIGH: The $2 million component for extra disability respite services is a fully state funded component, and $1.2 million of the mental health package is state funds have already started to roll out. So overwhelmingly it's a partnership between the state and federal government under the federal and state guidelines but there are a couple of extra components to it.
JOURNALIST: And this is all on top of already announced assistance, is that right?
PREMIER BLIGH: Yes. This is all new investment and new funds to community services and agencies, particularly as we come up to Easter. The three month mark after a disaster is recognised as a very vulnerable time and this year that's going to start that period around Easter, a time when people would otherwise normally be out celebrating with friends and family and so we know that we're moving now to a time when people are more vulnerable and that's why we've put these extra resources in.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your assistant treasurer released the standard definition for floods yesterday, or a draft discussion paper for it. Do you think that one of the unintended consequences of that is actually insurance premiums will rise?
PM: I think it's very important that people are able to look at their insurance document, their insurance policy and understand what it means, that people, you know, aren't confronted with tens of thousands of words but they can understand what they're being insured for and what they should, can expect to receive if a natural disaster does strike and hit their home or hit their business.
So I do very much support Bill Shorten, the Assistant Treasurer's reform directions, looking for a standard definition of what it is to endure a flood and also having a key statements, key facts document, which will enable people to understand what their policy covers. Now I just think this is practical (inaudible) for people, so that in the future people, when they get to their insurance policies, will know what is being covered.
JOURNALIST: Is it too late for the victims of these floods?
PM: Well unfortunately we can't go back in time and rewrite people's insurance policies and I understand that there are many Queenslanders who are feeling ripped off by insurance companies - I've met some today and yesterday.
And to those Queenslanders, what I've been saying is I think it's important that the insurance companies come and talk to people face to face, which is why I'm so disappointed (inaudible) Bill Shorten, the Assistant Treasurer, yesterday, to go with him and to meet the people of Ipswich, hear what they've got to say, hear what they've got to say that's gone well for them with their insurance, but also hear the many stories where people are feeling ripped off and deal with it direct. So we'll be keeping the pressure on insurance companies to do just that.
JOURNALIST: So you would be angry about them increasing premiums after the floods and the cyclones?
PM: I think the insurance industry works on a calculation of risk and that's how premiums are struck but the equation has to work for both sides. The insurance companies know what they're liable for when they're issuing these very (inaudible) policy documents. Unfortunately, too many Australians don't know what they're paying for because they really don't understand the detail of what's in and what's out of their insurance policy. This is a simple consumer protection idea that people would be able to get a key facts statement that explains to them, ‘what are you insured for' so you can make the best possible decision you can about which insurance policy to select.
JOURNALIST: After speaking to the victims, do you wish you had the power to say to the insurance companies ‘pay up' (inaudible)
PM: Look, we don't live in a world where a government can come in a retrospectively rewrite contracts...
PERRETT: Wish you could.
PM: I can understand the frustrations of local members like Graham Perrett and I understand the frustrations of the Queensland community. I understand people are really feeling like they're being ripped off by insurance companies. I get that. We don't live in an economy though where government can come in and retrospectively rewrite contracts that people have entered into but we can have a name and shame policy of the people doing well and people doing badly, and we will in respect of insurance companies. We can put the pressure on insurance companies to look people in the eye and hear their complaints and we can (inaudible) for the future so people can get (inaudible) information they need (inaudible). Should I actually go and get a different policy, go to a different company. People deserve to have that information.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you feel, as leader of the government, ripped off by insurance companies because you've had to make up the shortfall of what otherwise might have assisted a lot of people, particularly in this area and in Ipswich.
PM: Tony, the sense of rip off that I'm referring to is the individual Queenslanders that I've met and that Premier Anna Bligh would meet every day and Graham Perrett as he goes about his work in this local community, and I'm sure Mick Slater and others meet people every day too who have got a personal story about their insurance policy.
So it's that sense of being ripped off for those Queenslanders that I'm referring to. On behalf of the government, we want to do the right thing to rebuild Queensland. That's why we are working so strongly with the state government, with the Queensland Recovery agency to get resources out there to rebuild. We've, you know, provided almost a million Queenslanders with direct cash support, we are working with the state government to rebuild roads and rail to get things moving again.
But I understand for individuals there's still a big difficult journey ahead for many, which is why I think the Premier is absolutely right in saying it's at this time after a natural disaster, when maybe the adrenaline has gone out of the individuals involved and the reality of how big a journey they've got in front of them is settling on them, that we want to be there to help with some things of the spirit and that's what this package is about.
JOURNALIST: You say you're willing to name and shame the insurance companies. It's three months now (inaudible) isn't it time to start actually naming them?
PM: Well look we will, as we deal with individual matters, using insurance company names and I think you would find...
PERRETT: I did two weeks ago I think.
PM: Local members like Graham have been doing it very consistently.
JOURNALIST: Insurance companies say they can't turn up to a public forum and start addressing individual concerns because of privacy restrictions?
PM: Well look I can't, I can't agree with that one. I mean I am not expecting that people at a public meeting like the one that was conducted in Ipswich yesterday would be there, giving their full name, address and policy number. What they would be there doing is saying look, you know, this is my experience and if people want to volunteer their experience in front of their fellow Australians, then I think they should be able to make that decision and to get an answer. Now it may be that there are some things that would then need to break up into face to face discussions. But we are not without experience on this. I mean we all have Community Cabinet.
I had a Community Cabinet in Perth very recently. People do come to Community Cabinet's and say ‘this is my problem with the social security payment I'm getting'. They're happy to say it in front of their fellow Australians. If they're happy to say it, I'm happy to answer it in front of their fellow Australians, and then if you need really in detail follow-up, or you need to know things about peoples income levels and bank accounts, then you can break into a one to one meeting. We do that all the time. I don't think we're asking insurance companies to do anything more than the sorts of things the Premier and I and our local members, local councillors, local state members would do every day of the week.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well we might just finish with any of the flood questions because we might then have some of the others step out of shot. Are there any more questions on floods, flood recovery, today's package? No? Okay. Thank you. So yes?
JOURNALIST: The latest sex scandal (inaudible) is there a culture (inaudible)
PM: I don't want to comment on a matter that is going to be subject of investigation by the Australian Defence Force and by the Australian Federal Police. But I am prepared to say, as Prime Minister, very, very clearly, I've got a lot of respect for Australians who decide to dedicate their lives to the Australian Defence Force and there should be no one who makes that decision and then has their trust (inaudible) and their dignity subject to assault. That is absolutely not what want happening in our defence forces. I meet terrific young men and women dedicating their lives to the protection of this country and I want them respected in every sense of that word.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried there is a culture?
PM: I certainly think that the Australian Defence Force leadership (inaudible) that in a modern defence force they want to see everybody treated with a culture of respect and they've got no tolerance for misconduct in the way that I've got no tolerance for misconduct. We've seen some incidents in the past that were unacceptable. I don't want to say anything directly about the matter in the media now because it will be the subject of investigation but I do want to make my attitude very clear.
You join the defence force whether you're a young woman or a young man because you want to dedicate yourself to protecting this country and we are (inaudible) of our defence force to do remarkable things for this nation. They join because they've got that (inaudible) and they shouldn't have their trust abused or their dignity stripped away from them.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look I can say at a leadership level of the defence force there is a (inaudible) that they want women (inaudible) enjoying work environment that values their contribution in the same way that the contribution of men in valued.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the Singapore takeover of the (inaudible) against the national interest?
PM: I suspect I'm going to disappoint you but I'm not going to be drawn on this matter. As has been (inaudible) reported, this matter is in a process that the deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer is responsible for and under the legislation we work under with foreign investment, it is he who's got the discretion in this area and I'm not, as Prime Minister, going to comment on it while the matter is still being worked through to finality by the Deputy Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think the Deputy Prime Minister does a remarkable job in all aspects of his responsibilities
JOURNALIST: Do you think it's inevitable that het Australian Stock Exchange is going to have to merge with another body because there's been like 13 consolidations across the world (inaudible)
PM: Nice try. But I'm afraid while this matter is still being dealt with by the Deputy Prime Minister, under the relevant legislation; I'm not going to be drawn on commentary on it.
JOURNALIST: The Premier of NSW is saying he wants to build a new rail between Sydney's North West rail link and (inaudible) federal funding?
PM: Well the new Premier of New South Wales, I see a wry smile on Premier Anna Bligh's face. I will at the appropriate time be meeting with Barry O'Farrell. I am more than happy to discuss with him his policies and plans for New South Wales. But when we work with state governments, as Premier Bligh Would now, we work through our infrastructure Australian process.
We work with hard costings and volumes of detail. So I will talk to Mr O'Farrell and look forward to that, but we don't deal with these questions in running commentary in the media. We're talking about, any big infrastructure in this country is billions of dollars of taxpayers' funds and we're very careful with it, as Premier Bligh would attest, having been through some of these processes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this morning Kevin Rudd, asked about his comments on Q&amp;A that of course (inaudible) said that they were appropriate and that he would, when he felt necessary, continue to correct the record from the period that he was in government. Does that concern you at all about discipline in your government and the sort of things that should be said about what might or might not have occurred during cabinet meetings?
PM: Look I've said earlier today that inevitably Kevin Rudd will get questions about his time-period as Prime Minister. He got asked such questions on Q and A on Monday night and that's been remarked upon in the media. What's been less remarked upon, I'd have to say, is his very clear statement on Q and A on Monday night, that his shoulder is to the wheel delivering this government's policy agenda.
Here we are, a big part of what the government's doing, working with the state government, with the Premier and rebuilding Queensland and of course, every day we pursue the policies necessary to make sure that this country is a land of opportunity for the future that every child, every Australian gets an opportunity for the great chance in life and tackling the challenges of the future, like climate change and like the National Broadband Network
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) solidarity though?
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: Hasn't he broken the rules of cabinet solidarity, though?
PM: I've said, I've said earlier today and I'm happy to say again, it's inevitable that Kevin Rudd will get questions from time to time about his period as Prime Minister and he's dealt with that.
Under my government we have a clear cabinet process and we have a clear policy of cabinet solidarity. But Kevin will be asked questions about the past and from time to time he'll answer those questions.
JOURNALIST: On the subject of the NBN do you think it's slipping on its timeframe with the latest resignation and the tender process (inaudible)?
PM: Well of course it has been reported today that a senior figure in the National Broadband Network has resigned and as he's gone to look for other opportunities, he said this is a courageous and visionary project.
It is both of those things. It is a project that will give us the technology we need for this nation to be a prosperous nation in the future, rather than export jobs to countries with better technology and particularly, in a highly regionalised and big state like Queensland, it will make a difference to service delivery in health and education. So we'll continue to rollout the National Broadband Network.
JOURNALIST: Time Magazine, (inaudible) poll on influential people has rated Ms Bligh above Justin Bieber.
JOURNALIST: And Oprah.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Okay, I've got to get this absolutely right. Above Justin?
JOURNALIST: But not quite Oprah.
PM: Well I think I haven't heard Premier Bligh sing but however good her singing voice is, I am happy to day that's an appropriate ranking above Justin. To be ranked above Oprah I suspect we'd have to find a way of making Premier Bligh truly global and she and I might go and have a little chat about that.
JOURNALIST: Ms Bligh?
PREMIER BLIGH: Well 2011 started as a very strange year, sorry, I'm determined to break of everything on there. 2011 started as a very strange and in my experience every week it just gets a bit stranger.



Friends, Australia's journey is a story of nation-building against incredible odds, creating a land of fairness and opportunity renowned across the world.
That achievement has not come without a price.
We live in a free country - and in a largely free world - only because the Australian people answered the call when the time of decision came.
From those early colonial engagements in the Sudan and South Africa, through the two most terrible world wars in history and 60 years of peace-keeping and regional conflicts, the Australian defence force has stood the test.
Not only a test of wartime courage.
But a test of character, that has helped define our nation and create the sense of who we are.
We call it the Anzac story  -  and proudly rank it as our nation's most enduring narrative.
It is a big story, with many layers and many interpretations.
It embraces all Australians, new and old. It tells of the defeats as well as the victories.
The times when our nation drew closer together, and the times when we forgot.
It is a big story  -  but it is also a generous story.
A story that is not diminished by the adding of new chapters or the amendment of old mistakes.
That is how we come to see more clearly the role of women in war, for example.
Or the role of those on the home front.
The generosity of the Anzac story has allowed us to look anew at the merit of men like John Simpson and Teddy Sheean.
And it has allowed us to bring overdue thanks to the veterans of Vietnam who were so regrettably treated on their return.
The same spirit brings us here today to acknowledge those from diverse backgrounds whose contribution was obscured by our nation's approach to issues of race and belonging.
Those policies, regrettable as they were, have long since been cast to oblivion.
And now the time has come for restitution and accord.
There are few groups more deserving than Australia's Chinese community.
The first Chinese came here nearly two hundred years ago.
Long before the ships took our young men to Gallipoli, the Chinese had grown deep roots in this land.
When the call of war came, the Chinese stood up to defend this land as their own because it was their own.
Yes, an Anglo-Celtic majority undeniably.
But look through the names on the roll of honour and there are Australians of Chinese heritage. Jewish heritage. Indigenous heritage. Lebanese and Afghan heritage. And so many others.
In fact, two of our very greatest soldiers in the First World War were Billy Sing and Caleb Shang.
Just as one of the most daring and resourceful soldiers of the Second World War was Jack Wong Sue.
And beyond those enlisted, there were many more refused enrolment because of their background, and they served in other capacities here at home such as civil defence or simply offered the silent service of uncomplaining loyalty deep in their hearts, putting aside any sense of dismay or offence.
The ANZAC story is a big story, and it embraces them all.
Friends,
That is why we dedicate this memorial here in Brisbane.
Not to stand outside the ANZAC tradition.
But to place the contribution of the Chinese diaspora community squarely within the ANZAC tradition.
Accepted. Honoured. And valued all the more deeply because while your journey has not always been easy, you never lost faith in the nation.
Today we honour that faith.
Not just in speeches and sentiment, heartfelt as they are.
But in the form of these bursaries, which will tell the story of our Chinese veterans to a new generation and, of course, this beautiful memorial.
I speak for the entire nation when I welcome this memorial and thank Graham Perrett and all who made it possible.
Here in this garden of remembrance, it will tell the Chinese story on great days and on quiet days.
In the bright light of early morning, and in the reflective shadows of a dimming day.
This memorial will invite comment and inquiry.
It will prompt reflection and gratitude from all who admire the simple beauty of Sarah Batchelor's design.
In a few days time, this memorial will be blessed and opened in ceremony and song.
But in truth, it has already been dedicated.
Not by a general or a politician.
But by the sacrifice of those it represents.
Loyal Australians who served their nation, despite its flaws.
Who helped our country become the better place they knew it could be.
And who take their rightful place in the Anzac story, where they have always belonged.
I proudly launch these bursaries, and commend this memorial to the people of Australia. 



HOST: Hello, and welcome to 612 ABC Brisbane.
PM: Good morning, Madonna.
HOST: Does Kevin Rudd want your job?
PM: Look, I know there's been a lot of media reporting of Kevin appearing on Q&amp;A, an ABC show, on Monday night. What I think has got less reporting is on that show Kevin was making the same points as a Government we're making right all round country, which is we've got to get on with a big reform agenda, and no bigger reform than pricing carbon, which is what I was doing yesterday in Queensland, as well as meeting flood-affected Queenslanders and seeing how they're going with recovery. I had the opportunity to go the Darling Downs power station and talk about putting a price on carbon with people who work generating the electricity you and I rely on.
HOST: But the reason people are talking about it is that Kevin Rudd said that some people around that Cabinet table wanted to abandon it, to kill it off. Were you one of those people?
PM: Well, Madonna, I'm consistently on the public record as saying I don't believe in talking about confidential discussions between Cabinet colleagues. Perhaps let's judge by what the Government's doing  -  the Government is determined to put a price on carbon. The Government is determined to get this nation to an emissions trading scheme. We'll get there via a fixed price for carbon for a period, effectively like a tax, but we will get to that carbon pricing emissions trading scheme I talked about in the 2010 election and Kevin and the team campaigned on in 2007.
HOST: But here you are selling it, and you're up here in Queensland selling it, wanting voters to support you with it. Don't you think they have right to know where you've stood in this issue?
PM: Oh, I can tell you where I've stood, Madonna, absolutely-
HOST: -So are you saying, though, can you just say, put this to rest and just say around that Cabinet table you were supporting it, you did not want it killed off?
PM: Madonna, I'm not going to talk about confidential Cabinet discussions. If you're asking me what I believe in, I'm certainly prepared to talk about that.
I believe climate change is real, and I've always believed that the best way of tackling climate change was by pricing carbon through an emissions trading scheme, and having always believed that, Madonna, I am now determined that this nation enacts this big reform, starting on 1st July next year.
HOST: But do you concede by not answering that question-
PM: -I just have.
HOST: But you're leaving open the perception that-
PM: -Madonna, I've just said to you, listen to the words, I've always believed climate change is real and I've always believed that the best way of tackling climate change, the most efficient way of cutting carbon pollution and creating a clean energy future for this country was through an emissions trading scheme.
As Prime Minister, I am travelling round the country advocating that we price carbon, that we get to that emissions trading scheme. That's what I'm doing, that's what the Government's committed to doing, and we will do that from 1st July next year  -  price carbon, and get our way to that emissions trading scheme.
HOST: Alright, moving on to another issue but staying with Kevin Rudd for a moment, the former Prime Minister went on to say that the ALP was fundamentally failing because factional leaders intimidate many in the Party, preventing it from being politically effective.
How do you, as the leader of the Party, address that issue?
PM: Well, I believe parliamentarians come to the parliament wanting to do the best for their constituency and the future of this country. That's what Labor members do  -  they come, they put forward their views in Labor Caucus, we make a decision and we go out and fight for what we think is the best future for this country. That's why we're out there, fighting for a price on carbon now.
HOST: That is not answering my question, though. Do you think the factions have too much of a say, too much of a role?
PM: Look, I think there will always be people who meet together who've got common views in political parties. It would be a bit odd if we didn't have that system. People get into political parties because they're interested in ideas-
HOST: -But their influence. How big is their influence on what you say and what you-
PM: -Well, if I can answer your question, Madonna, the only thing that ever influences me is what I believe is in the best interests of this nation. Nothing else influences me as our Cabinet deliberates on what matters for the country. The only thing we've ever got our eyes on is what is going to make this nation more prosperous in the future, fairer in the future, ready to tackle the challenges of the future.
People come to parliament; people join political parties, because they're desperately interested in ideas. There's no mystery that they reach out to friends with common views, that'll happen, but in terms of the Government's decision making, nothing drives me or influences me other than my judgement call about the best interests of this country.
HOST: Have you spoken to Kevin Rudd since Monday night?
PM: We have our regular meetings on foreign affairs. We had one on Monday itself, actually., so we regularly catch up-
HOST: - But  not since Monday night?
PM: Oh, look, Madonna, if rang Cabinet colleagues or political colleagues every time there was a media flurry I wouldn't get anything else done.
What I meet with Kevin Rudd about is foreign affairs. We have regular catch ups. The most recent of them was Monday.
HOST: How does the job differ from what you thought it would?
PM: I understood what this job was going to be about. I'd had some experience doing it as acting Prime Minister, so I understood the weight of it, the responsibility of it, but also the opportunity that it gives you to shape this nation's future, and I came into politics to make a difference. I particularly came into politics to make this country a country where opportunity is fairly distributed and every Australian, every child, gets a fair go at a great life.
HOST: Now, you've been up meeting victims of the flood, including the family of little Jordan Rice, and can I just remind everyone who's listening he was 13, he was frightened of water, and when rescuers came to get him he told them to take his little brother first, and then he died. How's his family going?
PM: It's pretty tough, Madonna, as you would imagine. Lovely people in an unimaginably hard situation, a great dignity about them but a lot of pain in their eyes.
HOST: Does it make you feel sometimes that what you do, what I do, isn't really important in the big scheme of things, or when you meet a family like that does it make you more determined to go back to Canberra and change things?
PM: Life is composed of those intensely personal things, grieving, loss of a loved one, and let's be frank Madonna, there's nothing that a government sitting in Canberra can do about that, when you lose someone you love in such dramatic circumstances, and that family is actually coping with two deaths. That is always going to be there, that human loss, human suffering.
What a government can do is we can't take away those human emotions, but we can help support families and communities to recover, and I'm determined to do that.
HOST: Then one of the ways you can, with respect, is on insurance, and we heard Bill Shorten, your minister, say yesterday that you're going to change the definition of flood, and we've heard this before. Maybe it will happen this time, but shouldn't a Government have the power to say ‘stop, pay up and quit playing games with people's lives'?
PM: Well, we are working hard to fix this problem for the future, and that does need to be done. That people can be struggling with the definition of the word ‘flood' and whether or not they're covered is something we want to fix for the future, and that's what Bill Shorten, the Assistant Treasurer, was dealing with yesterday.
Madonna, we don't live in a command and control economy, where from Canberra you can dictate to businesses around the country what they're going to do next, but what we can-
HOST: -But you do in many other areas.
PM: Well, we have laws and rules, but I don't sit in Canberra and say I'm going to take it into my head today to issue an edict that a particular business has to do a particular thing. We live in an open, competitive economy. That's what makes our economy strong, but Madonna, we are certainly using the pressure of government to name and shame insurance companies who do the wrong thing, and that's what Bill Shorten was doing yesterday.
HOST: So, which ones have been doing the wrong thing?
PM: Well, you would see Bill Shorten put a challenge out to all insurance companies yesterday to come and have a direct exchange with the people of Queensland to get the bouquets, if there were any being given away, to take the brickbats if that was what people were throwing, and they didn't stump up, didn't have the courage to go, and we are very, very critical of that lack of courage and ability to sit with Queenslanders and work their issues through.
HOST: What adjective would you use to describe the insurance companies and how they've treated many Queenslanders?
PM: Well, the performance yesterday was a cowardly one, and I think there's evidence that around Queensland individual claims have been treated in a callous way, and that should not be happening.
HOST: Certainly, the reconstruction effort will be front and centre this year here in Queensland, as is the change in Queensland politics. Being honest, does Campbell Newman make it easier or harder for Anna Bligh, do you think?
PM: Oh, look, I'm not a commentator on State politics. Obviously, there is a lot of commentary here about the unusual arrangement that has brought Campbell Newman to the leadership of his political party.
What I would say is Anna Bligh is doing a great job. She was a fantastic leader of this State during the desperate days of the natural disasters. She is showing that same fantastic leadership now as the State recovers.
HOST: Do you think Campbell Newman showed that same leadership of Brisbane during the floods?
PM: Look, I think Campbell, as a civic leader here in Brisbane, played his part working alongside Anna Bligh as this city faced the floods. Now we're in the recovery phase and I think Anna is doing a remarkable job leading the State in recovery, and of course she's doing it in circumstances where she's open to scrutiny, including parliamentary scrutiny, every day that parliament sits, and I think that's appropriate.
HOST: And by that you're saying Campbell Newman's not.
PM: Well, Anna's in the parliament. Campbell's not. That's true.
HOST: What do you say, though, to people who're listening who say ‘look, she's been in the job too long', that Labor has had its go and now it is time for a change?
PM: People will make their judgements about Queensland and its politics at the next State election, and I think when they come to make that judgement they will look at performance, they will look at what a government has delivered, and that is as it should be.
What I can do today is I can give you my view, and my view is I'm very happy to be working alongside Premier Bligh in the reconstruction efforts in this State.
HOST: Are you disappointed Anthony Chisholm isn't making the move to Canberra as the ALP National Secretary?
PM: Look, Anthony Chisholm, I think, is a very able man, a very able party campaigner, and as a political party we value people who are good at campaigning. He's made a decision about his family. I can understand that. Our National Secretary position is vacant, and just like when jobs are vacant in the community you get a few people throwing their hats in the ring and applying. We're going through that process now, and it'll be sorted through by the National Executive.
HOST: Just before I let you go, Kevin Rudd has invited the biggest diplomatic mission in Australian history into Queensland. 70 foreign envoys have taken up the invitation to see Queensland. What message would you like them to leave the State with?
PM: I'd like them to leave the State with the message that Queensland is open for business  -  never been a better time to come and visit Queensland and to see its delights, and to have a chat with its community.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thank you.
PM: Thank you very much 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today met with His Excellency Mr Jia Qinglin, Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference.
The talks between the Prime Minister and Chairman Jia focused on Australia's comprehensive and constructive relationship with China and explored areas where the potential exists to enhance our strong cooperation.
The Prime Minister and the Chairman discussed our shared commitment to working closely on regional and global challenges such as the global economic recovery and climate change. 
They also talked about the many great opportunities in our $90 billion trading relationship.
After their meeting, the two witnessed the signing of four agreements to further expand the strong cooperation between Australia and China in education, people-to - people links, trade, resources and financial services.
The agreements were:
 * 	A bilateral Arrangement on Higher Education and Qualifications Recognition to provide guidance for the recognition of each other's qualification for further study. This will support student, academic and professional mobility between China and Australia by facilitating mutual recognition of higher education degrees and qualifications, making it easier for students to pursue academic studies in eachother's countries.
 * 	A bilateral Memorandum of Understanding on Establishing a China-Australia Forum to formalise existing arrangements for an informal, high-level dialogue that will bring together senior figures from government, business and academia to consider the entirety of the bilateral relationship and generate ideas that will help guide relations into the future.
 * 	A commercial handover agreement to finalise Taiyuan Heavy Machinery Group's acquisition of the Sydney-based manufacturer and wholesaler of specialised underground coal mining equipment, Valley Longwall International Pty Ltd.
 * 	A general cooperation agreement between EXIM Bank of China and Westpac Banking Corporation to promote close cooperation that builds on the respective market strengths of each company, particularly in natural resources and agriculture.
Chairman Jia's visit to Australia from 5 to 10 April 2011 takes in Perth, Canberra, Brisbane and Sydney. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard opened the new headquarters of the Australian Federal Police (AFP) in Canberra today, paying tribute to the contribution of officers both at home and abroad.
The new AFP headquarters at the Edmund Barton Building on Kings Avenue provides police with the modern environment to continue its work as the Commonwealth's lead law enforcement agency.
At the opening, the Prime Minister welcomed home many officers who have recently been deployed to flood and cyclone response efforts in Queensland, as well as assisting our friends across the Tasman in the wake of the Christchurch earthquake.
The new headquarters includes a $13.2 million Operations Coordination Centre, which has already been tested in the wake of the Queensland floods and Christchurch earthquake.
The headquarters is also the coordination centre for the Criminal Asset Confiscation Taskforce that was launched last month to intensify the fight against organised crime by stopping the flow of criminal funds.
The AFP's new headquarters will be a focal point for law enforcement collaboration internationally and will support continued law enforcement development across the world.
Criminals don't respect national borders and that means our law enforcement agencies need to work closely with their international counterparts to stay one step ahead of offenders.
The latest AFP overseas post will open in Los Angeles tomorrow, following the establishment of a post in New Delhi in July last year. These new AFP bureaus add to a network of 31 international posts. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today launched the documentary Kapyong: the forgotten battle of the forgotten war to mark the 60th anniversary of the Battle of Kapyong.
The Prime Minister said the documentary was a fitting tribute to the Australian soldiers, sailors and airmen who fought alongside our allies in this defining battle of the Korean War.
On 23-24 April 1951, the Battle of Kapyong was fought by Australians of the 3rd Battalion, The Royal Australian Regiment (3 RAR), who helped to stop the Chinese spring offensive. This was crucial in preventing a Chinese breakthrough towards Seoul.
Kapyong: the forgotten battle of the forgotten wartells the stories of the Allied and Chinese soldiers during the Battle  -  it talks of their endurance and extreme bravery but also of the respect that they had for their opposing forces.
The Gillard Government will also develop a new interactive website on Australia's involvement in the Korean War to commemorate the 60th anniversary.
The website will include researched historical text, images, maps, topographical information, interviews with veterans, innovative animated battle maps, and education resources for teachers and students. There are also plans to translate the website into Korean.
Minister for Veterans' Affairs Warren Snowdon said the documentary and the website would provide Australians with a valuable source of historical information on Australia's involvement in the Korean War.
Mr Snowdon congratulated the producer of the documentary, John Lewis and writer/director Dennis Smith. Their work has been a fitting tribute to the Australians who served in the Battle of Kapyong during the Korean War.
In total more than 17,000 Australians served in the Korean War from 1950 to 1953, with 340 Australians killed in action, including 43 who are still missing in action. A further 1,216 were wounded and 30 were held captive in Prisoner of War camps. 
Thirty-two Australians died in the Battle of Kapyong, 59 were wounded and three were missing (taken prisoner). For its part in the battle, 3 RAR was awarded the United States Presidential Unit Citation.
Kapyong: the forgotten battle of the forgotten war was funded by the Department of Veterans' Affairs, Foxtel, Film Victoria and Screen Australia and will be broadcasted by Foxtel on The History Channel on at 8:00 pm on Sunday, 24 April 2011.
Editor's note: Historical images of the Battle of Kapyong are available on the DVA Media centre. Historical audio files and film footage of the Battle of Kapyong can be requested from the Australian War Memorial. Copies of the documentary are available on request  -  email dvamedia@dva.gov.au.  



The Gillard Labor Government has today given the green light to one of the biggest solar thermal projects in the world.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today confirmed funding to build a solar energy system on the site of an existing coal-fired power station near Chinchilla in Queensland.
When built, the $104.7 million Kogan Creek Solar Boost project will be the largest integration of solar technology with a coal-fired power station in the world.
The project, which relies on Australian-pioneered solar thermal energy technology, is an excellent example of the type of clean energy we want to encourage in Australia.
The integration of the innovative solar technology at the Kogan Creek power station will save 35,000 tonnes of greenhouse gas from entering the atmosphere every year.
With an extra 44,000 megawatt hours of electricity produced a year, Kogan Creek will continue to meet the growing energy needs of Queenslanders and Australians  -  but in a cleaner, more efficient way.
The project will create up to 120 jobs when building work starts later this year.  The technology supplier, AREVA Solar, plans to manufacture the solar hardware locally.
The Australian Government has committed $34.9 million to help build the project.
The go-ahead means solar-generated electricity from Kogan Creek will be powering Queensland homes and businesses by 2013.
Putting a price on carbon will help drive the investment we need in renewable and clean energy technologies such as solar thermal at Kogan Creek.
Further investment will continue to help make industrial-scale solar power more feasible, affordable and viable  -  which will benefit all Australians.
The Australian Government is supporting renewable and clean energy technologies through the $5 billion Clean Energy Initiative. 



Thank you Joe for your kind introduction.
Thank you Gerard and Anne and the Sydney Institute  -  for this unique Sydney opportunity at this unique Sydney venue.
I am delighted to be here tonight among so many of my Sydney friends. 
And Luna Park is a very special place! 
Now, I am just going to deal with this up front. 
Yes, I came in through the front gate tonight. 
Yes, I saw the teeth and the nose. 
I know they say any resemblance to any living person is coincidental and I want to assure you that I'm confident that's true.
While we gather in a place associated with fun, we are here for a serious purpose.
We are here to discuss the actions we need to take today to shape a better and fairer future.
Debating and determining the best steps forward is never easy.
And today's highly contested and partisan political debate and increasingly complex communications context creates special challenges for reforming leadership governing in the centre.
This means the Sydney Institute's empirical style and invitation to a community of reason has never been more important.
So the chance to discuss the issues and ideas that will influence not the next poll or the next panel show but the next decade is a very welcome one indeed.
So let's talk tonight about the long view.
The long term story of the Australian economy is a story of strength.   A story of twenty years of continuous growth.
Growth which has been nurtured by the policy reforms of successive Australian governments, from internationalisation to domestic competition to tax.
Wealth which has been created by the hard work of millions of Australian people, in our cities and suburbs, towns and bush.
And our economy is not just creating wealth, it is creating work as well. 
More than thirty thousand jobs last month, more than 750 000 jobs since Labor took office. 
Today, more Australians are working than ever before, in a period when advanced economies around the world have shed millions of jobs at a terrible human cost. 
This growth in wealth and work has been so continuous in the last twenty years that we could easily lose sight of how different this is from the economy we have been used to in the past.
These are remarkable days.
Over coming years we will live through an historic boom in mining investment, one which is genuinely comparable to the Gold Rush of the 1850s.
The boom is a good thing for Australia now and it is a great opportunity for Australia's future. 
This great opportunity is also a complex economic policy challenge. 
Good decisions now can nurture the boom so that it lasts, while making the most of the boom for our future. 
The Government invested in jobs in the downturn and it was absolutely the right call.  We see the economic and social benefits of this every day.
But as the Treasurer wrote on the weekend:
If we are going to be Keynesians in the downturn, we have to be Keynesians on the way up again.
That means hard decisions lie ahead. 
We are entering a period of record fiscal consolidation.
We will keep a tight rein on spending to return the Budget to surplus.
Fiscal responsibility is something we have long been committed to.   With every spending decision we make, I look from every angle, I hold these up to the light, I ask every question. 
We have put in place cost offsets worth around $85 billion across three years to meet the cost of key reforms.
We have put in place a strict spending cap, which will limit average annual real spending growth to around ¾ of one per cent from 2010-11 to 2013-14.
This has been Labor's approach in four years in office and it is our approach today.
Some have described our commitment to achieving a surplus as a political commitment.
Of course, this is true  -  my commitment to a surplus in 2012-13 was a promise made and it will be honoured.
But this political commitment was given and will be honoured because that's what prudent economic management now demands.
When the private sector was in retreat, the government stepped forward to fill the gap and over coming years as the private sector recovers strongly, it is the right time for the government to step back.
If government doesn't step back when the private sector employs more people, spends more money and builds more projects, we will be chasing the same scarce resources, driving up prices and adding to the inflationary pressures arising from the investment boom.
The time for government to step back is in this Budget.
If we defer these decisions, as the Howard Government did in the middle years of the last decade, we will make the inflationary pressures in our economy worse for millions of Australians.
Our Budget strategy reflects our best assessment of the course of the economy over the coming years.
And by not adding to inflationary pressures it reflects the best way of helping Australians manage cost of living pressures.
So we will be making hard decisions in this Budget: to prevent greater pain in the long term.
Friends, we have a fiscal framework aimed at making the boom last and not adding to the boom's inflationary pressures. 
And we have a policy framework aimed at ensuring all Australians benefit from the opportunities created by the boom.
To appreciate this policy framework, I think it is necessary to appreciate some of the contradictory elements of the economic context.
What I think of as “patchwork pressures” in our economy, where some parts of the economy are strained by growth while others risk being left behind.
Because mining is especially profitable at the moment, it rewards investors and pays workers well.
Investment, equipment and workers are drawn from other parts of the economy, like a magnet dragging iron filings towards it.
In mining areas, the boom has lifted housing costs, it forces non-miners to raise wages to keep workers and it puts pressure on infrastructure like roads, ports and rail.
The record high for the Australian dollar lowers prices for imports  -  which is good for consumers  -  but it does make it harder for our exporters to compete.
Mining's hunger for equipment and workers can also raise costs and make it harder for these non-mining sectors to compete, compounding the high dollar's effects.
All these pressures require careful management.
So to manage these pressures we have sought to bolster productivity and balance growth:
By improving vital economic infrastructure  -  roads, rail and ports so we better get goods to market and people to work  -  with the NBN providing the most vital infrastructure of the future. 
Connecting regional Australia  -  regions of growth and regions needing more growth  -  to the economic capitals of this country, and the world.
By cutting company tax cut and increasing tax breaks for small businesses, all funded by the mineral resource rent tax, so the most profitable miners increase economic reward and opportunity in other parts of the economy.
By revolutionising our approach to human capital  -  the most important asset for dealing with structural economic shifts  -  with deep integrated reform policies to improve the quality of education in schools today.
By record skills investments and growth and reform of universities.
By developing a new, detailed regional agenda so that we understand each part of the nation and engage its local leadership.
By reviewing the GST carve up in order to marry up the “fair go” principle which informs federal financial relations with the realities of today's economy and today's reform needs.
By reforming our skilled migration 457 visas to end the rorts and get skilled labour to employers who need it.
Friends, these are economic reforms and responses to deal with the “patchwork economy”.
But “patchwork pressures” are not only felt by industry or something to be distilled in a set of statistics.
These patchwork pressures have a human face as well.
I see these faces and hear their voices in my travels across our country.
In Kwinana and in our North West.
Kwinana is a suburban Perth community where unemployment is twice the national average and one in six adults is on income support.
Yet when I last visited the Gorgon project at Karratha in the state's north-west I met a worker on site who lives one block away from my home in Melbourne. 
Gavan works on the project on a fly-in, fly-out basis.  He's a good bloke and a great example of the boom at its best.  A skilled man doing rewarding work.
And of course a young unemployed person in Kwinana is not going to directly compete with Gavan for work.   But if we don't give that young person an entry level job he'll never achieve what Gavan has.
In Cairns and Gladstone.
Cairns in Queensland has twice as many university graduates as Kwinana yet similar unemployment and reliance on income support.  I have been there and met young kids struggling to get a chance or an apprenticeship.
At the same time, Gladstone's employers will tell anyone who will listen they need more skilled labour.
And in New South Wales.
Where large areas of this city's outer west havea double digit unemployment rate, higher than Kwinana or Cairns, nearly two and half times the national average. 
Unemployment levels which approach those the country as a whole endured in the 1982 and 1991 recessions.
These are places where I want opportunity to grow.
And in these and many other places I meet people  -  the people I am thinking of as we develop our policies.
The Salisbury teenager who has drifted from education. 
He could get a job if he got a trade. 
The Blacktown twenty-something who left school at 16.  
He needs to get his foundation skills right  -  to be able to read, write and do maths.
The girl in Woodridge, south of Brisbane, who didn't fit in at school, now she's alone with a baby of her own.
She needs more education and so will her child.
The mature aged man in Dandenong who lost his job and lost his way.
He can't lift and carry like he's twenty but it doesn't mean he never wants to work again.
These are the human faces of the patchwork economy.
The faces of Australians who can work.
I believe the test of our approach is what we see in those Australian faces, what we say to those Australian people.
The old way saw a victim, the old way offered an excuse.
Some today see a problem,  they offer blame.
I see a person, a person who can work.
I offer only opportunity, I ask only responsibility in return.
Give a chance, take a chance. 
It's the only way it can work.
Tonight, I want to explain the crucial links between these Australians, our economic needs and the Government's participation agenda.
Of course the participation challenge did not begin this year and neither did our Government's actions to increase participation.
Incentive to work and opportunity to work more draw together many of the Government's policy reforms. 
This is our record.
Extensive welfare reform. 
Income management, improving school enrolment and attendance, tighter eligibility and smarter employment services for adults with some disability.  Restructured employment services, investing more resources in those with more complex problems. 
Ensuring income support is not a place where people are left and forgotten.
Paid Parental Leave, an increase in the Child Care Rebate and more frequent payment of the rebate as well.
Along with Child Care Benefit, this means that low income families have around 80 per cent of their child care costs met by the Australian Government.
Pledging to increase family support by thousands of dollars a year to encourage teenagers to remain in school or TAFE. 
Our Learn or Earn compact, guaranteeing every young Australian under 25 a training place if they are not already in full-time education or work.
Tax cuts for low to middle income earners, including an increase in the effective tax free threshold for low income earners from $11,000 to $16,000.
Hundreds of thousands of training places, for Australians in and out of the work force.
Under our Language, Literacy and Numeracy Program and the Workplace English Language and Literacy Program we're offering 140,000 places in adult literacy and foundation skills programs for existing workers and job seekers.
The cap on publicly funded university places will be lifted in 2012, stimulating further growth in professional skills and qualifications.
While our record is strong, I know there is more we can do to build participation and make work pay.
Precisely because participation is so high and unemployment is so low, I see a new opportunity to break persistent cycles of social and economic exclusion. 
Our economy needs more workers, many Australians need work and our Labor values impel us to put the two together.
Welfare reform and workforce participation is an area where the facts of our economy, the demands of our society, new progressive policy and core Labor values can truly come together in a virtuous circle.
Friends, believing in the benefits and dignity of work is a deep Labor conviction.
Curtin's creed as the Battle of the Coral Sea raged was simple:
Men are fighting for Australia today. Those who are not fighting have no excuse for not working.
Chifley's Light on the Hill took the same straightforward view of Labor's task.  Not as
... putting an extra sixpence into somebody's pocket ...
But to
... give to some father or mother a greater feeling of security for their children ... a feeling that if a depression comes there will be work.
The party I lead is  -  politically, spiritually, even literally  -  the party of work. 
The party of work not welfare, the party of opportunity not exclusion, the party of responsibility not idleness.
That central purpose  -  work for all who seek it  -  stands, after all the transformation in our understanding of the economy in the decades since.  And it stands for the future.
Throughout our history many Governments have faced economic circumstances which forced them to question long-held personal convictions or cherished party platforms.
In this sense, I am fortunate: the boom, the participation challenge and the opportunity to cut long term welfare dependency mean that some of my own firmest political convictions are in fact the most urgent practical necessities of our day.
The values I learnt in my parents' home  -  hard work, a fair go through education, respect  -  find themselves at the centre of Australia's economic debate, in the challenge to cut long term welfare dependency.
As Prime Minister, I see a real chance, driven by the economy, to achieve goals I have always held dear.
I want young people to have a fair go, to have an opportunity in life, never to be held back by economic circumstance or social expectation.
I've worked to ensure this in education. 
Our reforms have been founded on high expectations.
That all children can learn.  
That you don't settle for failure or disguise failure with low expectations. That there is no one who cannot benefit from new skills.
I have fought the prejudice that said some kids can't learn, that they are better off at the back of the room doing busy work and being passed on up to the next grade.  That fight goes on.
And I am extending this campaign of high expectations to welfare as well. 
Our reforms are founded on high expectations.
That everyone who can work should work.
I will fight the prejudice that says some people's lot is drawing a fortnightly cheque, that we shouldn't expect anything more of them and it doesn't matter if they are forgotten by policy makers and the society around them.
The social and economic reality of our country is that there are people who can work who do not.
We know there are 230,000 people who have been unemployed for more than two years.
That there are 250,000 families where no adult has been working for at least one year.
And that the youth unemployment rate is still double the overall unemployment rate.
The Government's approach to this is practical and realistic.
We know that not everyone on a welfare benefit can work.
Some bear disabilities or caring responsibilities that mean paid work is impossible. These Australians deserve our greatest respect and ongoing support.
Others on a benefit can work but not right away. Some need practical help to overcome ill-health or meet family responsibilities. 
Some should take up obligations which may not involve working now but will prepare them for work in the future.
Things as simple as learning to read and write at a higher level.
The right mix of incentives is vital to all.
Relying on welfare to provide opportunity is no longer the right focus for our times. 
Our strong economy gives us a real chance to create opportunity from the cradle to the grave.
The problem of long term welfare dependency has been long discussed but the new realities of our economy create quite a different policy environment from the recovery of the 1990s or the growth of the last decade.
Because we have unprecedented demand for skills and labour, this is possible.
Because the people I am talking about have been bypassed by the economy for so long, this is difficult.
I want to help individuals, families and communities whose worklessness has seen them excluded from society and the economy through decades of economic growth.
Understand  -  the people I am talking about include people whose lives present “hard cases”.
There will always be an argument to focus on someone else.
But I am firmly convinced that the economic and social policy arguments for getting these people into work are overwhelming.
People whose problems keep them out of work ... and whose problems are made worse by the lack of work.
All of them people who will be better off with work.
In today's economy, inclusion through participation must be our central focus. 
It's not right to leave people on welfare and deny them access to opportunity.
And every Australian should pull his or her own weight.
It's not fair for taxpayers to pay for someone who can support themselves.
There is much the Government has already done.
The Budget will provide another way to extend greater opportunity and to put more responsibility into the system.
And beyond this Budget there will be more to do on the formidable participation policy challenge.  
For instance at the tax forum later this year, the Government will put improving work incentives in our tax and transfer system at the centre of discussion and debate.
Our participation reforms will not only nurture the boom, they will ensure the opportunities the boom creates are felt across our country and for years to come.
We can genuinely entrench a new culture of work and opportunity in families and communities who have been denied this for so long. 
I am determined not to let this chance go by.
Friends, for decades the Sydney Institute has offered a forum for reason and reflection in our national debate. 
This was valuable in the 1980s, I must say it is invaluable now.
Fair comment in a democracy serves our people well. 
But I'm increasingly sceptical of exaggerated and over determined claims about politics and public opinion from any quarter.
Remember when the NBN was going to break us? 
Or the flood levy?  Or health reforms? 
Each of these overhyped claims, each overcome by perseverance and patience.
As with governing progress, so with public opinion: the measure is in the years.
At the same time, in the face of this culture of confrontation, I will not accept a false choice between listening to our people and persisting with reform.
I do have a responsibility to listen carefully to Australians.
Because behind the wall of sound made by the commentators I know Australians do have genuine concerns about politics and government. 
And they always deserve a respectful ear.
But I will not go down a populist path, pursuing short term politics, lacking serious policy convictions, whipping up negativity, following the opinion cycle.
The Australian military scholar David Kilcullen has reminded us that Bernard Fall wrote fifty years ago:
A government that is losing to an insurgency is not being outfought it is being outgoverned.
I find the analogy with modern politics compelling.
Any government which tries to fight an opposition on its own ground of short term media pandering is doomed to policy and political failure.
My approach is quite the contrary.
Consensus and discipline, method and delivery, difficult decisions to meet the big challenges, my honest best judgement and leadership in the national interest.
As an optimist and an activist, I keep my faith that good policy and good politics converge in the long term.
The governing task for 2011 is clear.
To walk the reform road.
To govern well for the long term and to nurture the boom.
To take decisions in the national interest and to deliver for all Australians.
Ensuring a strong economy  -  and opportunity for all. 



The Prime Minister will visit Japan, the Republic of Korea (ROK) and China from 20 to 27 April. 
This will be Prime Minister Gillard's first bilateral visit to North Asia as Prime Minister, having attended the G20 Summit in Seoul and the APEC Leaders Meeting in Yokohama in 2010.
China, Japan and Korea are countries of vital strategic and economic importance in the Asia-Pacific region and to Australia. They are Australia's top three export destinations and three of Australia's top four trading partners overall. 
The Prime Minister's visit will promote our commercial and investment relationships, strengthen security relations, and reinforce our mutual commitment to strong and effective forums such as the G20, East Asia Summit and APEC. 
The Prime Minister will visit Japan from 20 to 23 April to reaffirm Australia's support for the Japanese government and people of Japan in the wake of the recent devastating earthquake and tsunami. 
The Prime Minister will have an audience with Their Majesties the Emperor and Empress of Japan and meet Prime Minister Kan.  Key topics will include Australia's support for Japan's recovery and ways to advance Australia's comprehensive security and economic partnership with Japan. 
In the Republic of Korea (ROK) from 23 to 25 April, the Prime Minister will lead the commemoration of the 60thanniversary of the Battle of Kapyong, one of Australia's key military engagements during the Korean War, and attend an ANZAC Day dawn service.
In meetings with President Lee Myung-Bak and Prime Minister Kim Hwang-sik, the Prime Minister will discuss the wide-ranging economic and security cooperation between the two countries and reaffirm Australia's support for the ROK's efforts to maintain peace and stability on the Korean peninsula.
The Prime Minister's visit to Beijing from 25 to 27 April will underline Australia's growing relationship with China, with a focus on enhancing trade, investment and people to people ties with Australia's top two-way trade partner.  There will also be a focus on regional cooperation.
During the visit she will meet President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao, attend a roundtable of CEOs of major Australian and Chinese Corporations and speak at the Australia-China Economic Trade Cooperation Forum. 



PM: I'm here today with Stephen Robertson, my Queensland colleague and pleased to be here at Kogan Creek Power Station. Can I thank all of our friends from CS Energy for having us here today and also the people from AREVA who are making the solar technology that I will be speaking about today.
We're here at Kogan Creek and outside we were bathed in beautiful Queensland sunshine and that's what we're here to talk about. I'm standing in a coal fired power station, but this is a coal fired power station that is about to get a solar boost. Over the next 12 months solar panels and new solar technology will be installed, so the power of this beautiful Queensland sunshine can be used to generate enough electricity for five thousand homes. That will mean that in generating that electricity more than 36,000 tonnes of carbon pollution will be avoided. Now this is the biggest project of its type in the world and I think we should be congratulating all involved on this innovation. A coal fired power station with a solar boost.
It's the biggest solar project in the southern hemisphere and we should certainly be congratulating all involved in that and this is showing us the way of the future for clean energy in this country. At the moment this project at Kogan Creek, a coal fired power station with solar energy to be harnessed to generate electricity is an exception. With the clean energy future I want for our nation I want it to become a norm and that's why we have to price carbon, to create the right incentives so that we do have that clean energy future.
I think we should be very proud that the technology that is being used here has Australian parentage and we can look at all of the benefits that this will provide to the local community as well as the clean energy it will provide for Queensland. There will be new jobs here, around 120 new jobs in construction, and the solar technology will be manufactured locally. This is an important benefit to the local community, but this is an important project for the whole of the nation, showing how solar energy can be incorporated with coal fired power stations, to make a difference for climate change and greenhouse gases, to make a difference for cutting carbon pollution.
I'm very pleased that the Commonwealth Government was able to support this project, with almost $35 million, this is a $105 million new development and we will see it coming on stream over the next 12 months. Now on the question of carbon pricing, people have of course been interested to know how the carbon pricing mechanism will work and what it will mean for them, Australian households. I've always said to Australians that when we introduce the carbon pricing, every cent that is raised by asking the biggest polluters in the country, the 1000 biggest polluters to pay for the carbon pollution that they release. Every cent raised from those big polluters will go to assisting households, protecting jobs and tackling climate change.
Today I can confirm that more than 50 per cent of the money raised will go to assisting households. That means that millions of Australian households will be better off with a carbon price, they will receive more household assistance, then the price impacts that they will see in the things that they buy. Of course the biggest price signal when we put a price on carbon is to industry, to the 1000 big polluters that will be required to pay for emitting carbon pollution and it's that price signal which will cause them to innovate and change. But I've always been very frank with the Australian people, that by asking those big polluters to pay, there will some impacts that Australians will see, which flow through to the things that they buy, which is why I am committed to providing generous assistance to Australian households, more than 50 per cent of the revenue raised from carbon pricing will be used to assist Australian households and millions of Australians will be better off receiving more in assistance than what will be required by them to deal with any price impacts.
Can I conclude by saying, today as well, we are seeing Australian businesses speak out in support of pricing carbon. Today some of our big businesses like GE, like BP, like Linfox, like IKEA, have come out publicly and said that they support pricing carbon. I thank them for indicating that support. In indicating that support they are indicating that they understand our country needs to price carbon and embrace a clean energy future. I'm very thankful to the people who have hosted us here today, so that we can see and understand more about that clean energy future. I'll now hand over to my Queensland colleague Stephen Robertson for some comments, then we'll be happy to take your questions.
ROBERTSON: Prime Minister, thank you. Ladies and Gentlemen, the Queensland Government is immensely proud to be hosting this project here are Kogan Creek. Being built in the sunshine state, being built in the smart state and putting those two descriptions of Queensland together really does encapsulate what this project is all about.
We set ourselves a target about 12 months ago here in Queensland, to create a virtual power station, that is to generate 500 megawatts of solar power. Already we are almost 80 per cent there , with nearly 400 megawatts of energy being generated by solar panels, solar hot water, but also in projects such as this, which are scattered throughout Queensland.
Our target was initially to reach 500 megawatts in 5 years, we'll actually reach it by the end of this year and that just speaks volumes about how important solar is to our clean energy future here in Queensland. The fact that we can partner with the Federal Government to put together a package to bring forward a project of this scale, here in Queensland, is also an important sign for the rest of the country and indeed the rest of the world, that in moving to a cleaner energy future, solar is an important part of that. This is just one of a number of projects the Queensland Government is rolling out at a large scale, solar farms in Cloncurry and Harvey Bay, the University of Queensland solar array  -  these are all large scale solar projects that point to a much cleaner energy future for Queensland.
PM: Thank you very much, happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I've been asked this question as recently as last week actually when I also had an opportunity to travel on the Warrego Highway. We have made some investments into the Warrego Highway, around $85 million to make a difference, and I understand that there's now some flood damage that needs to be addressed on the highway and that will be done through the work that we will do with the Queensland Government under our Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements. So I'm pleased we've been able to make a difference.
For the future of course, for big infrastructure projects, we do work with our Queensland state colleagues and we also have an independent process involving Infrastructure Australia to assess the merits of infrastructure proposals right around the country, as you imagine there are many communities that want to see upgrades in roads and that's understandable, which is one reason that we do have experts work with us to create a priority order on infrastructure.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) what happened with that (inaudible)
PM: Look I did have to opportunity to meet with Ian Macfarlane yesterday and I thank him for coming to talk to me about the Toowoomba situation, I'm familiar with it, I've been to Toowoomba three times this year. Ian Macfarlane has been a long time advocate of upgrading the road and creating the bypass. Indeed when he was in the former Howard Government he said he wanted to see it done by 2005, but despite him being a Minister in the Howard Government and his advocacy under the Howard Government, that didn't happen. That means that now we do have to work to assess this project under Infrastructure Australia, I indicated to Ian Macfarlane yesterday that I was very happy to work with him, to work with the local Council and local community to have them present their case direct to Infrastructure Australia and I believe that Mr Macfarlane will take that opportunity up.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the carbon tax compensation package (inaudible) today, does this mean there'll be less compensation for industry?
PM: Well I want to be very clear on what I'm saying today. We've been saying to Australians, I've been saying to Australians, that every dollar we raise from pricing carbon paid by our 1000 biggest polluters will go to households, to protecting jobs, to tackling climate change. Today I am going further and I can guarantee that more than 50% of the amount of revenue raised will go to assisting households. That means millions of Australian households will be better off with a carbon price. We will also work with industry to protect Australian jobs. We understand businesses will have to work differently, they'll need to innovate and change and we will work with them in this process. But standing here, having seen what we've seen today and talked about the solar project for the future, it certainly reaffirms my great optimism and confidence that we are up to this, that Australian business is very innovative, very creative, Australian people are very smart, very adaptable and we will be able to tackle this change just as we've tackled big economic changes and challenges in the past.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We are working on the full range of details of the carbon price package, I've announced the mechanism, I thought that was appropriate so Australians could see it, could debate it, could discuss it, could ask questions about it and we could consult Australian businesses, trade unions, the Australian community, the environmental movement about the details of the design.
We're in that process now and we will make further announcements in the middle of the year about the details of the design with a view to then legislating in the Parliament and we will have the carbon price come into effect on the 1st of July next year.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) beat Tony Abbott in the war of words over the carbon tax?
PM: Ultimately this is about Australia's future and your policies and plans. I'm standing here saying to Australians that I want to price carbon and I want to generously assist Australian households as we do it and millions of households will be better off. Tony Abbott is saying to the Australian people that he's got an idea that won't work, and that will cost Australians $720 per year. Now the Australian community will think that through, but we want to assist households, we want to provide money to them to help them through, Tony Abbott wants to take $720 a year off them for a plan that won't work.
JOURNALIST: Just on today's announcement as well, how can you basically tell us what we're going to get back in our households without knowing what the actual price (inaudible)
PM: Well what I'm announcing and being very clear about today is the design principles we are using as we work through all of the details of pricing carbon. So as we go through that process we will deliver to the principles that I am announcing today, more than 50 per cent of the revenue will go to assist households and millions of Australian households will be better off with a carbon price.
JOURNALIST: How will that (inaudible)
PM: How?
JOURNALIST: Yeah, what way.
PM: Well we will announce all of those details but clearly we can provide assistance to Australian households through our tax and transfer system.
JOURNALIST: Obviously the point of the carbon tax is to reduce carbon, is the compensation going to eat into things such as money for renewables?
PM: No, we've got some big programs to assist with renewable technology and those programs are rolling out right now. I wouldn't be standing here today if we weren't putting record investments into solar and renewable technology and amongst our record investment is the almost $35 million which is being devoted to this project to have solar power generation here working with a coal fired power station. So we will continue to invest in solar and renewable technologies. We need to price carbon so that we are sending a price signal to the 1000 companies and businesses which are the biggest polluters in our nation. At the moment they are able to put carbon pollution in the atmosphere for nothing; we will put a price on it and then being businesspeople, they will work out how do we reduce that cost to our business by innovating and creating less carbon pollution.
JOURNALIST: Is there (inaudible) in funding a project like this given it is the first of its kind (inaudible)
PM: Well we've had extensive and indeed independent processes to assess this project to make sure that it's a project of merit and value, and all of that's been done before we made the funding commitment. Can I say having been here today and having had the opportunity to talk to people from CS Energy and from AREVA, I'm very confident that this project is going to be a standout, a standout in Australia, a standout in the world about how power generation can be changed to give us a cleaner energy future.
JOURNALIST: Do you see the irony (inaudible) coal power plant possibly one of the (inaudible) of the carbon tax?
PM: What I think that's saying to you, that's a very important point and a good question, what that's saying to you is the there's not one technology or one way that is going to meet our clean energy needs of the future. Here we are, coal fired power station, going to be generating more electricity by integrating the power of solar energy and the amount of carbon pollution avoided is the equivalent of taking 11,000 off the road. It really is showing us how the future can work for Australia, certainly we've got coal resources and we want to have a future for using coal in a cleaner and different way and this is demonstrating to us what a part of that future could look like.
Thank you. 



JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you comfortable that this young man at the centre of the Skype scandal has been able to continue his studies and six mates (inaudible)?
PM: I certainly believe the Minister for Defence, Stephen Smith, has handled this matter appropriately. I welcome the reviews and inquiries that he announced yesterday; these reviews and inquiries have the full support of the Chief of Defence Angus Houston and our Service Chiefs. I think they are the right way to deal with this matter and its ramifications more broadly.
JOURNALIST: But on the question itself, are you comfortable with these men staying, pursuing their studies when the Commander of the Academy's been moved off, when the woman is on compassionate leave. What is the justification for leaving them in place?
PM: Look I am comfortable and supportive of the decisions that have been taken by the Minister for Defence, working with the Chief of the Defence Force and the Service Chiefs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did Angus Houston threaten to resign on the weekend?
PM: You will see that in today's media that suggestion is put and it's expressly denied by the Chief of the Defence Force Angus Houston, expressly denied. So I think it's a little bit disappointing that these false claims are still circulating in the media.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're putting out a new trade policy today, how important is that to your process of economic reform and what's wrong with the old approach?
PM: Trade equals jobs. We are a great free trading country. Free trade is good for Australia, it equals Australian jobs. I intend working with the Trade Minister Craig Emerson to pursue the free trade policy that we've outlined today. It comes from the reforming tradition of the Hawke and Keating Governments; it's about Australian prosperity and Australian jobs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, medical researchers are protesting today about the proposed cuts to medical research funding. What's your message to them and so where does medical research funding lie in your funding priorities?
PM: It's budget speculation season, it's April, I don't know whether budget speculation season has a formal opening date, but it has a formal closing date and that's when the budget is delivered by the Treasurer on budget night.
Inevitably we will see rounds of speculation about what will be in the budget, I'm not going to engage in budget speculation, I'm not going to play any rule in rule out games. But I will say this about the forthcoming budget; this will be a tough budget for the right reasons. We have an economy that is strong  -  yes, we've has to face natural disasters, not only here, but the impact of natural disasters overseas, like in Japan. And yes we do have circumstances where the growth of the resources sector, the high Australian dollar, has got implications for other sectors of the economy, like manufacturing, tourism and international education. But our economy is strong and the right thing to do with an economy that is moving towards full capacity and full strength is to deliver a budget surplus, that's actually the best way we can help Australian families with cost of living pressures, to help manage inflationary pressures, that's best for Australians and their families, that's what the budget is going to do.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on women in combat, do you have a view on as a seasoned shock trooper yourself?
PM: Look, I do have a view, I have a view that men and women are equal. A few years ago I heard Peter Cosgrove say that men and women should have an equal right to fight and die for their country, I think he's right about that and I think it's a good turn of phrase. It puts the choice very starkly, there are many Australian women who love their country, they want to be in the Defence Force, of course physical capability and intellectual capability has to be judged for every job, but if a woman has the physical capability and intellectual capability to do a particular job, then I do not believe it should be denied her on the basis of gender.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We don't talk about Cabinet discussions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if do you move to rein in middle class welfare in the budget, or at any time would you expect support from the opposition, given their rhetoric on the need for spending cuts?
PM: Well, that's a very good question, but one that shouldn't be put to me. I'm not going to engage in budget speculation, but I would say this about Tony Abbott and the Opposition he leads  -  on budget reply night he should have the decency to present to the Australian people a budget work that adds up. Mr Abbott has never as Leader of the Liberal Party presented a piece of economic work to the Australian people that adds up. In the campaign, $11 billion black hole, in response to our flood package to assist Queensland and rebuild around the nation, a package full of black holes which simply didn't add up and which he had to get inspiration from a One Nation email in order to put together. So Mr Abbott faces a big test on budget reply night  -  can he, for the first time ever as Leader of the Opposition, present a budget package that adds up. You can't run this country if you can't manage its budget, Mr Abbott has never shown the capability to manage its budget yet.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you intend to become involved in negotiations in order to secure gambling reforms, given that Andrew Wilkie's made it clear the fate of the Government rests on them and where do you see a compromise emerging between the clubs and other interest groups and the Parliament in relation to this issue?
PM: The responsible Minister, Jenny Macklin, is doing a very good job on problem gambling, working with the stakeholders and obviously I will work with her as necessary, but Jenny is the one engaging in direct consultations and I thank her for her work, it's high quality work and it will continue.
On problem gambling, can I just say this  -  I come from a part of Melbourne, my electorate is in a part of Melbourne where we know what it's like to see people who put so much money into poker machines that they break the family budget, they can't feed the kids, they end up with their houses being repossessed by the bank. Now that kind of problem gambling causes human misery, I don't think we want to see anybody profiting on human misery. People like to have a bet, of course people like to have a bet, but I don't think they like to see their fellow Australians suffer. So it's the right thing to do, to have an appropriate package to tackle problem gambling and Jenny Macklin, working with Andrew Wilkie and others keenly interested in this issue, I am sure will generate the right package.
JOURNALIST: If we would put these suite of Defence reviews aside, aside from that, do you have, as Prime Minister, concerns about the culture in the Defence Force?
PM: Look, I'm not going to be drawn on this matter further. I made some statements about the individual alleged incident last week, I'm obviously choosing my words carefully here, there's an Australian Federal Police investigation, so in those circumstances I don't want to speculate. I believe all of these investigations and inquiries have to work through, I did last week make very well known my view about any conduct  -  and I'm not centring on this incident, because I don't want to make a statement about it  -  but I did last week make very well known my view about any incident that robs a woman of her dignity and breaches her trust.
JOURNALIST: Why did it take a scandal to get equal opportunity for women in military though?
PM: The announcement yesterday was made by the Minister for Defence, obviously this is a matter that has been thought about and worked on for a period of time. I actually referred to a statement from Peter Cosgrove, so that's quite some time ago. But I promised you the last question.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it's fair, Andrew Wilkie's threatened to withdraw his support for you, even if despite your best efforts you fail to get these reforms through the Parliament. Do you think that's a fair threat to make (inaudible)?
PM: I've made an agreement with Mr Wilkie and I intend to honour that agreement. I'm also the Prime Minister of a Government that's been engaged with the problem gambling issue for quite some time. In the last Parliament we asked the Productivity Commission to inquire and report on the best way of dealing with problem gambling, so the Government's been engaged with this for a long period of time.Mr Wilkie's passionate about it, others in the Parliament are passionate about it, and we will work with Mr Wilkie and this Parliament to address problem gambling. I don't want to see people putting the money that would have been used to feed the kids through a poker machine and I don't think Australians want to see that either.
Thanks very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today discussed a range of important state and national issues with the new Premier of NSW, Barry O'Farrell.
The Prime Minister personally congratulated Premier O'Farrell on his recent election victory during their first official meeting at Kirribilli House this morning.
The Prime Minister also reaffirmed the Federal Government's commitment to work cooperatively with Premier O'Farrell's Government to achieve the best outcomes for the people of NSW.
During the positive and constructive discussions, the Prime Minister and Premier agreed to work together on key issues of concern to NSW including transport and infrastructure.
The Prime Minister and the Premier spoke about health funding arrangements for NSW.
The two leaders also discussed their commitment to the COAG process and ensuring the forum discussed key strategic priorities.
The Prime Minister thanked Premier O'Farrell for his commitment to support the national occupational health and safety laws reforms proposed by the Australian Government.
Creating uniform occupational health and safety laws is a critical piece of economic and regulatory reform which will boost productivity, reduce business costs and make sure workers are protected by the same high safety standards regardless of the state they live in. 



The Federal Government today announced the new membership of the Australian National Council on Drugs (ANCD).
Prime Minister Julia Gillard welcomed the addition of several new members to the ANCD who will bring fresh perspectives on ways to reduce harm caused by drug and alcohol misuse.
They will join a number of experienced members of the ANCD - which will continue to be chaired by Dr John Herron.
The ANCD has played a crucial role as the Australian Government's principal advisory body on drug and alcohol misuse since its establishment in 1998.
Members of the ANCD come from a wide variety of backgrounds and have experience in areas covering law enforcement, the health and social welfare sectors and the community sector.
The ANCD brings a broad, whole-of-society perspective to drug and alcohol issues.
It has helped inform the development of several Government strategies and campaigns which have succeeded in reducing the rate of drug and alcohol misuse.
The Prime Minister said ANCD members, past and present, have made a valuable contribution in tackling the issues behind drug and alcohol misuse.
The Council's membership will next be reviewed in 2014. 



The Gillard Government will be making a donation of $25,000 to Australia's Royal Flying Doctor Service (RFDS) to commemorate the wedding of Royal couple Prince William and Catherine Middleton on behalf of the people of Australia.
The gift was decided following a request from the happy couple to donate to one of their nominated charities instead of a wedding gift.
The Royal Flying Doctor Service has had the longstanding support of the Royal Family for many decades and we are extremely pleased to be able to add to this support through this gift.
It is a very generous gesture for the happy couple to ask for donations that will go directly to helping out Australians when they need it most.
Prince William visited the Royal Flying Doctor base in Cairns during his most recent visit to Australia so he knows firsthand just how important their service is to our nation  -  particularly for those living in regional Australia.
We would encourage anyone who wants to contribute to the wedding to consider donating to the RFDS.
To donate, people can go to www.royalweddingcharityfund.org or visit www.flyingdoctor.org.au. 



PM: [audio break] in my discussions with Prime Minister Kan at the time that we were ringing and offering assistance - you know, we sent the search and rescue team, we sent our C-17s over to help  -  I was saying to Prime Minister Kan then that he should be optimistic about the ability of the Japanese people to work their way through this, and I will be interested to see when I'm there in Japan the nature of the rebuilding efforts.
HOST: Will you offer more help from Australia?
PM: Well, certainly Prime Minister Kan has got a standing invitation from me as Prime Minister of Australia that if there's anything that they need that we can supply, to just ask. We have contributed to the relief efforts in cash, made a cash donation, as well as having our search and rescue team there and our C-17s up there. We've got three C-17's and they all went to help the people of Japan at the time with heavy lift aircraft capacity.
So, I believe Japan will continue to play its very important role in the region, but this is a huge natural disaster and I think it's a good time for me to be there and to be able to take the best wishes of the Australian people with me.
HOST: You'll be in South Korea for Anzac Day. There's been a lot of tension in the last 12 months on the Korean Peninsula, in particular threats of nuclear strikes and the like and military exercises as well. What assurances can you give South Korea about Australia's support and possible involvement in the event of armed conflict?
PM: As we've seen that aggression from North Korea, on each and every occasion we have made it clear that Australia views North Korea's conduct as unacceptable, that we want to see security on the Korean Peninsula, and that South Korea has our support as it deals with this insecurity.
I will take the opportunity when I am in South Korea to be briefed on the most recent situation there. This, of course, does worry us and it's very, very pressing for President Lee and his people in South Korea, so I will be pursuing dialogue on these security questions.
We do, of course, have military links with South Korea as part of what is a warm friendship, a strong economic relationship, and the sort of friendship that two middle power can have who work together in various forums, including the G20, the East Asia Summit and APEC.
HOST: But if it did come to conflict, would Australia be prepared to assist?
PM: Well, these aren't the kind of things that you do hypotheticals about, but certainly South Korea is aware of Australia's support. We have constantly expressed it.
HOST: Moving to China, which will arguably be the most important leg of this North Asia visit, Kevin Rudd's first visit to China as Prime Minister, he gave a speech in Mandarin at Beijing University, Peking University, where he publically lectured students on the sensitive, very sensitive issue of Tibet and spoke about human rights. Now, you don't speak Mandarin, but will you be delivering a similar sort of message when you're in China?
PM: I'm looking forward to discussions across the breadth of our relationship with China. We have a comprehensive relationship, a constructive engagement, and as Prime Minister on my first trip to China I want to add to that constructive engagement.
Of course, we raise human rights with China regularly. I raised it myself personally as recently as the visit of Mr Jia, one of the senior Communist Party officials who was here in the last few week, so it will be something that I raise whilst I'm there, certainly will raise human rights-
HOST: -But with the leadership? With the Premier and the President?
PM: Certainly, we'll be raising them in my discussions. I will be meeting President Hu and with Premier Wen, and I will be raising human rights as we talk through the breadth of our relationship.
HOST: Specifically, will you talk about the recent crackdown, which is one of the biggest crackdowns we've seen from China in recent decades on dissidents. Will you be expressing Australia's concern about that?
PM: I raised some events with Mr Jia when he was here, and I'll take the same perspective into my discussions in China itself, and when I spoke to Mr Jia when he was here I certainly said we did not want to see China taking backwards steps on human rights.
HOST: On climate change, China is doing a fair bit, investing a lot in clean energy, but not pricing carbon yet. What will you be seeking from China in terms of an assurance that if we price carbon in Australia, if we introduce a carbon tax, our industries won't be on unequal footing to their competitors in China?
PM: We need to price carbon here in Australia because it's in our national interest. This is the prism through which I'm making the decision about pricing carbon here. We have a high-emissions economy. The world is moving. Change is happening. It's not happening in one form in every corner of the world. It's happening in different ways in different countries, which is to be expected, but change is happening.
So, as the world moves to a cleaner energy setting, a cleaner energy future, we can't afford to be stranded with a high emissions economy. That's why I believe we must price carbon, get a-
HOST: -But China isn't pricing carbon yet. That's the point.
PM: But China is acting. China is acting on climate change and they've set very ambitious goals for reducing the amount of carbon pollution per unit of GDP.
HOST: Not as ambitious as our goals, and they're not pricing carbon, which the steel makers here make the very valid point, don't they, that if we price carbon they'll be at a disadvantage?
PM: Well, I think let's be a little bit clear about all elements of this debate here. There are bipartisan targets for cutting carbon pollution in this country. I've signed up to them and so has Tony Abbott - that is the unconditional target, particularly, of -5 per cent by 2020.
I say, let's get that done, and so does Mr Abbott, so let's get that done. So, we're not looking to China for a lead on whether or not there should be a commitment to that reduction for carbon pollution in our country-
HOST: -But there are two different ways of getting to that target-
PM: -Well, I was just about to yes, there are. There are a number of different ways of getting to that target, and the question in this country is do we choose the one we know is going to be the cheapest, and if you want the cheapest one that's pricing carbon.
So, in terms of making decisions for our nation, we've got a bipartisan commitment to reducing carbon pollution. The question then becomes how do you do it? Do you do it the cheapest way  -  by putting a price on carbon  -  or do it Mr Abbott's expensive way and ask taxpayers to pay more tax, $720 a year, so that he can fund it.
HOST: He [audio break] but it gets back to the question, though-
PM: -It's straight maths. It's not capable of being disputed.
Then, in China, of course they are acting in a range of ways to create a cleaner energy future-
HOST: -But not pricing carbon-
PM: -and of course, on my trip I will be keen to understand that range of ways.
Then, on the jobs questions, the steel industry in this country is under pressure. I understand that. It's not about pricing carbon in the future. It's about pressures now  -  high Australian dollar and the like, and I've said we're very happy to work with the steel industry, given the pressures it faces right now, not to do with pricing carbon.
Then, as we price carbon, of course we'll be working with Australian businesses to assist them in the transition and to protect Australian jobs-
HOST: -Will you consider an exemption for steel, given those particular pressures you talk about?
PM: We'll work through our business roundtable to look at the right ways of assisting industries and steel will be at the table, it is at the table, and participating in those discussions, but we've got to be clear about what is the impact of pricing carbon, as opposed to pressures that the steel industry is facing today and will face in 12 months' time, 2 years' time, whether or not we price carbon.
HOST: But getting back to that question, if we price carbon and China does not, our steel makers and other heavy-emitting industries are at a disadvantage.
PM: Well, we will get the design of the scheme right here, so you are talking about what's called in the carbon pricing world emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries, and the very reason you make special arrangements for them, the very reason we've got them participating in a business roundtable, is to make the right arrangement so that they can continue to sell their product to the world and we can continue to have the benefit of Australian jobs-
HOST: -They will be protected? They won't be worse off.
PM: Of course, we're working through the business roundtable to get these arrangements right, but can I just take a step back here  -  we are a Government that prizes jobs. We've created 750,000 of them since 2007. Of course I want Australians to have jobs, to have good-quality jobs, and so much of the reform agenda we're driving is about fair access to opportunity, a good education, a great chance at life, and that great chance comes by getting a good job.
HOST: So this-
PM: -So, in designing this scheme we are of course going to work with industry to protect Australian jobs, but the other jobs dynamic here is the clean energy jobs that come, and let's just be a little bit clear about where we are in our economy and with jobs creation.
I know it's easy for Mr Abbott and others to raise fear, but you open up your newspapers each morning and there's fear mongering about carbon pricing, then out in the big, wide world there's BHP  -  project worth more than $40 billion coming on stream, joining the likes of Gorgon and other projects, huge investments creating jobs.
I was in a coal-fired power station within the last few weeks. It's going to have solar boost technology, less carbon pollution, jobs in construction, jobs locally in manufacturing the solar technology that's going into that power station.
These are the opportunities that will be accelerated by pricing carbon.
HOST: A final question  -  you finish this visit in London for the Royal wedding. Tony Abbott did have a crack at you a while ago, saying that you're a Republican, you're an atheist and you're unmarried, why therefore are you going to the Royal wedding. For the record, are you in favour of the monarchy, marriage and protecting this relationship?
PM: Oh, look, I'm used to Tony Abbott taking some cheap shots, so I'm sure we'll see more of that. I'm going to the Royal wedding to represent this country and in representing this country I'll take the opportunity to share the delight for the celebration of two young people who are obviously very much in love.
At some point, this country will make a decision about its future as a Republic. I think that will happen at some time, that we will make that decision to become a Republic, but to date Australians have expressed their view and we haven't had a Republic proposal accepted, so I'm there as Prime Minister, representing this country under the constitutional arrangements Australians have wanted to keep and enjoying what I think will be a fine celebration.
HOST: Well, Prime Minister, good luck with the trip. Thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you very much.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that the Commonwealth Government will contribute $20 million over four years to the development of the National Arboretum in Canberra to mark the upcoming centenary of Canberra in 2013.
The Prime Minister joined ACT Chief Minister Jon Stanhope at the Arboretum to plant a tree grown from seeds taken from the ‘Tree of Knowledge' in Barcaldine, Queensland, before its death after being vandalised in 2006.
Australian Labor Party folklore identifies the tree as the place where the Party was founded.
The planting joins several trees planted by world dignitaries and Australian icons in the Arboretum's Central Valley, including most recently the former Prime Minister of Australia, Malcolm Fraser and former Governor General, Major General Michael Jeffery.
The National Arboretum, when completed, will join the other national institutions in Canberra which enrich the lives of the city and the nation. 
The Prime Minister said it is particularly appropriate for the Commonwealth Government to mark the centenary of Canberra, a capital of which all Australians can be proud, with a gift that will benefit both the people of Canberra and the Australian community as a whole.
It will not only become a national education, research and tourist resource but symbolises the journey of renewal for the people of Canberra as the forests replace the landscape scarred by the 2003 bushfires.
Mr Stanhope said today's planting represented the growing national importance of the Arboretum.
“The ACT Government's vision for the Arboretum is to create a unique and lasting legacy for Canberra and the Australian community,” Mr Stanhope said.  
“By its official opening in 2013 to mark the centenary of Canberra, the Arboretum will showcase 100 forests of rare and endangered species from across the globe, as well as a mosaic of permanent gardens.”
The Prime Minister encouraged all Australians to participate in the centenary celebrations in 2013.
“The celebrations will give people the opportunity to discover the many things that Canberra has to offer and to appreciate its beauty and distinctive character”. 



PM: Well I'm very pleased to be here on a beautiful Canberra morning with the ACT Chief Minister Jon Stanhope and with our two local Members, Andrew Leigh and Gai Brodtmann, and we're here for a very special celebration.
First, I'm here to announce that the Federal Government will provide $20 million to support the further development of this National Arboretum. That will be a gift from the Federal Government to the people of Canberra as Canberra moves towards celebrating its centenary, which will be a great event  -  not just for Canberra, but for the whole nation; another way we can celebrate our wonderful democracy.
I've also been here to plant a section of the Tree of Knowledge, the Tree of Knowledge being of such special importance to the Labor Party  -  the tree under which shearers gathered to talk about the future, to talk about fairness in our nation, and to talk about creating a political party to deliver that fairness in the nation's parliaments, the Labor Party, and I'd like to very much thank Peter and Norma for their donation to this place of this cutting from the Tree of Knowledge, which is now proudly already growing alongside us.
I do want to take this opportunity to congratulate Jon Stanhope on his vision for creating this National Arboretum. It is part of the original, wonderful design of Canberra. He's long fought for it as a place that would be a completion of that design, a special place for people to come to see trees that are endangered and can be cultivated and nurtured here, and to enjoy not only a wonderful view but a very special environment, and I believe as this place develops it will take its rightful place alongside the National Library, the Art Gallery, the Museum, the War Memorial, Parliament House itself, as a wonderful attribute of Canberra for people who live here locally and also for the many Australians and international visitors who come and spend some time here.
So, congratulations to Jon for his patience, persistence and vision with the development of this National Arboretum.
I'll turn to the Chief Minister for some comments, and then we'll be very happy to take anybody's questions.
CHIEF MINISTER STANHOPE: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.
I think you've said what I would say, that this is a very significant place for Canberra. It is being developed as a national institution, a place for the future for Canberrans and for the whole of Australia, and I am particularly pleased now and I thank the Prime Minister and the Commonwealth Government most particularly for supporting this vision and supporting it in a most generous way, with a commitment of $20 million to the further development of the Arboretum.
This place grew out of Walter Burley Griffin's vision for Canberra as Australia's great national capital, a great national capital of a great nation, and we Canberrans and we the ACT Government are very pleased to be playing what part we can in creating a national capital  -  not just our home, a place that we Canberrans love, dearly love and live with and have within our heart, but a national capital that we would hope that all Australians are and will become increasingly proud of.
This Arboretum and the concept and the decision to proceed with it did grow out of the devastation of the 2003 bushfires. The site that we're standing on now was a commercial pine forest which was completely obliterated within the bushfires. Canberra was enormously impacted through that event, and we Canberrans took a decision that we would, out of the devastation, grow as a community; that we would seek to restore those places that were devastated above and beyond what they were at the time of the fire and this Arboretum is a continuing part of the commitment by we Canberrans to rise, essentially, from those ashes, the ashes and the devastation of the bushfire.
But I'm particularly pleased today at the Commonwealth's commitment of $20 million to this project, a great vote of confidence in what is a very important project for Canberra; a place of, I think, enormous beauty, a beautiful city that will be enhanced by this place as it develops over the years, the decades and the century.
So, thank you, Prime Minister, for your presence here today and I acknowledge the symbolism and the significance of you planting here today a tree derived from the Tree of Knowledge at Barcaldine, a place and event very significant in Australia's history, of enormous significance to those of us within the Labor Party and committed to Labor Party philosophy and principles of fairness and equality, which is what those of us within the Labor Party joined the Labor Party for  -  a commitment, simply, to the fair go in every connotation of what the fair go is, that we are all entitled to share equally in the bounty of this great nation in every aspect of our lives.
So, thank you, Prime Minister, for being here. It's a great honour to be here with you and I thank you again.
PM: Now, I see some cold journalists in training, no doubt, for a long Budget session and mornings out in front of the doors, but we better reward some of you with a question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the boss of the South Australian Australian Workers Union, Wayne Hanson, has said that he thinks that Whyalla and Port Pirie could be wiped off the map  -  they're his words  -  if the carbon tax goes ahead. What do you have to say to him?
PM: Well, look, I'm going to have to respectfully but completely disagree.
Carbon pricing is the right thing to do for this nations' future. If we want to have a prosperous economy in the future, with all of the clean energy jobs of the future, then we've got to get on with pricing carbon, and of course we'll be working with business and unions to make sure that we're protecting Australian jobs as we price carbon and move to that clean energy future.
This is a simple scheme  -  you put a price on pollution, the big polluters pay, and you use that money to protect Australian jobs and to assist households, as well as to fund programs to tackle climate change.
That's what we'll get done.
Now I understand that there are people who want to know every detail of the scheme. That's absolutely legitimate, and we will stick to the process we outlined to the Australian people. We've described the mechanism. We're consulting now on the details. Business and unions are part of that consultation, and then we will announce the full design of the scheme.
JOURNALIST: They're pretty strong words. He's saying that these two towns will be wiped of the map.
PM: Well, strong words don't make it right, and that's completely untrue. We will be protecting Australian jobs as we price carbon.
We're going to get this done because it's the right thing to do for the nation's future. If you want to have a prosperous economy in the future, if you want to have the jobs of the future, if you want to do the right thing by our wonderful environment, then you believe in pricing carbon.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you make of Barnaby Joyce looking to take on Tony Windsor at the next election?
PM: Well, I understand Barnaby Joyce is now hunting around for a lower house seat. What I think this means is Tony Abbott should come clean about the nature of the team he will take into the next election.
Is Tony Abbott going to go to the next election saying to Australians that Barnaby Joyce would be Deputy Prime Minister if Tony Abbott is elected as Prime Minister, that Barnaby Joyce is the man who act as Prime Minister if Tony Abbott was overseas?
I think if that's Tony Abbott's plan for the future of the country, he should be crystal clear with Australians about it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you have to say to people with MS, those kind of illnesses, who are worried about cuts to medical research funding? Can you give them some certainty now?
PM: We're in Budget speculation season, and in Budget speculation season the media comes and the media goes and I anticipate in about a week's time people will be reading stories saying that we're going to sell the Sydney Harbour Bridge, those kind of things. Budget speculation season is well and truly in train.
What I would say to people is when they look at the pages of their newspaper or read reports online or hear them on TV or listen to the radio, first and foremost they should recognise this is just speculation and the moment to judge is on Budget night.
So, for those that have reacted and even gone out and demonstrated because of their concerns, I'd say the moment to judge is on Budget night, and I'd also say very confidently as I stand here to those that are concerned about medical research - and I can understand those concerns, we want medical research happening in this country, we want to make sure our very able scientists are there looking for the cures for the future and the science that will guide us in the future  -  what I can say very confidently to them is that there's never been more money invested in medical research in this nation's history than there is today, right now, under this Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why do you think voters, according to the latest Newspoll, prefer Kevin Rudd as leader?
PM: Look, I don't comment on the polls, and I don't spend much time wondering about them. Polls come, polls go. If I spent a lot of time studying polls I wouldn't get anything else done.
What I do instead is make the decisions, each and every day, that will make a difference to the long term future of this country. It's about the long-term future in pricing carbon - doing the right thing by the environment and creating the clean energy economy we need for the future; the right thing with the forthcoming Budget - it's the right thing to have a Budget that doesn't add to inflationary pressures which would make people's cost of living concerns even worse; the right investments for the future of education, the future of health, and future infrastructure like the National Broadband Network, so I'll spend my time focussed on those things rather than worrying or wondering about polls that come and go.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you worried that Tony Windsor may baulk about the carbon price in the face of a strong challenge from Barnaby Joyce?
PM: What I can say about Tony Windsor is he is a man who will always put his electorate first, not his political career. What Tony Windsor has made clear is he will look at the carbon price package, and when he can see the full details of it he will judge what's in the interests of his electorate and the interests of the nation.
That's a position I very much respect.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your message to some of your back benchers who are nervous, claiming that they've lost control, that you've lost control of the political agenda as a result of these attacks on the carbon tax?
PM: Well, I talk to members of the Labor Party all the time. I'm standing with two fine Caucus members here in the ACT, and what I find when I talk to my Caucus colleagues is a lot of determination to get this done. We believe in pricing carbon because it's the right thing to do for the country's future.
We're standing here today in Australia where a big polluter can put carbon pollution in our atmosphere and not pay any price at all. They can do it endlessly  -  any volume, any amount, any day, any time, no price at all. We've got to change that, and the way of changing it is to put a price on carbon pollution that those big polluters pay, and then they will innovate. They're smart business people. They will adapt, they will change the way they do business to create less carbon pollution, and that's the change we want to see for the future  -  a clean energy economy.
So, I find amongst my Caucus colleagues a lot of determination to get this job done.
JOURNALIST: You're heading to Japan tomorrow. Will you be raising the prickly issue of whaling with the Japanese leader, and when you get to China, Stern Hu, issue like that?
PM: Look, I'll be having comprehensive talks with my counterparts. I'm going to Japan, to South Korea, to China, and then of course on to the Royal wedding, so we'll be talking across the full range of issues in our relationship, so you should expect me to raise the full range of issues, including issues you've referred to.
But I do want to say, first and foremost, given that I am leaving for Japan tomorrow, that a big purpose of my visit is to spend some time with the leaders of Japan, with not only political leaders, business leaders, community leaders, and some time out in communities that have been so hard hit by the devastating earthquake and tsunami that we saw in Japan.
Australia has sought to be a good friend of Japan during this very, very difficult time. I think for many Australians the scale of this disaster is beyond our imagining. You know, the numbers of people lost, people killed, are just so high it's hard to get your mind around that kind of devastation.
I will be the first foreign leader invited to be in Japan since the earthquake and the tsunami. I'm hoping to travel in the regions most affected by the earthquake and tsunami, and so a prime purpose of my visit will be for Australia to say to the people of Japan ‘we're with you during these very difficult days'.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today welcomed the appointment of George Wright as National Secretary of the Australian Labor Party.
George was elected unanimously by the National Executive this morning.
George brings with him a wealth of experience in the business sector, as a Federal Government adviser and as a senior official at the ACTU.
He has a proven track record as an effective campaigner, having run the Your Rights at Work campaign in 2006 and 2007, and has a long and demonstrated commitment to the Labor Party and its values.
George is well regarded by all sections of our Party and will ensure that Labor's 2013 election campaign draws on the best possible talent from across the community.
He will do a fantastic job building our Party base and prosecuting our case for key reforms such as tackling climate change, rolling out the National Broadband Network and building opportunity through education and participation.
We are a Party that strives to shape the future and George Wright, with the support of the Assistant National Secretary Nick Martin and the National Executive, will be instrumental to our cause. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Innovation Senator Kim Carr today announced the appointment of Professor Ian Chubb AC as Australia's new Chief Scientist.
Professor Chubb has had a distinguished career in higher education and research.
Starting out as a talented neuroscientist, he then took on leadership roles in university administration and sector advocacy bodies. 
Professor Chubb recently retired after a decade as vice-chancellor of the Australian National University.
He will work closely with the Gillard Government to provide advice on science and technology issues that impact on Australia and the world. 
The Prime Minister said as a past advocate in the university sector Professor Chubb would effectively engage with industry, researchers and the wider community as part of important scientific debates
Senator Carr said a lifetime of work in the research community was recently recognised in Canberra when Professor Chubb was named the ACT's Australian of the Year for his contribution to higher education. 
“He also understands that government needs frank and objective advice and communities need strong advocates. Professor Chubb is an outstanding leader. I congratulate him on his appointment and look forward to working with him.”
We would also like to acknowledge the work of outgoing Chief Scientist, Professor Penny Sackett, and thank her for her contribution over the past two-and-a-half years. 
Professor Chubb will begin his three year term on 23 May 2011. 



CURTIS: Prime Minister, welcome to News 24.
PM: Thank you.
CURTIS: You're about to head off on an overseas trip to Japan, Korea, China and then to the UK for the Royal wedding. You're going to Japan first. How important is that symbolism of going there first, particularly after the devastating earthquake and tsunami?
PM: I think it is important. I arranged this trip to Japan some time ago. I was invited by the Japanese Government and was very happy to accept their invitation, but of course the context of it has entirely changed and the main purpose now will be to be there and to be saying to the Japanese Prime Minister and the people of Japan that the thoughts of Australia are with them.
I am intending, if it's possible, to go and look at some of the communities that have been so hard hit by the huge natural disaster  -  I mean, it's just so hard to get your mind around the scale of it - and we'll be there with a message of friendship and goodwill.
CURTIS: You were also planning to talk the Free Trade Agreement with Japan. Is that something you'll push less for, given Japan does, the Japanese Government does have a number of other things on its mind at the moment?
PM: I've had the opportunity to talk to Prime Minister Kan in the past about free trade, and of course he was taking some steps to look at liberalising agriculture in Japan and trading agricultural produce, but I understand and I think Australian people generally would understand that his first thoughts and efforts need to be on the recovery and rebuilding efforts in Japan.
CURTIS: Will you be taking any more promises of help? Is there anything else Australia can do to assist with the recovery?
PM: We've said to Japan and I've said personally to the Prime Minister that if there is anything we can do, then don't be afraid to ask. We, of course, provided a search and rescue team. We had our three C-17s up there helping with various parts of the relief. They're our huge heavy lift aircraft. We've got three of them and all three went and we've made a direct donation to assist with the recovery efforts, too.
But should we be asked for anything else then of course we've give it the most sympathetic consideration, but as this stage we haven't been.
CURTIS: You're negotiating Free Trade Agreements with Korea and China as well. The one with Korea seems to be moving along well. The one with China has been years in the making. Are you expecting to make more progress there?
PM: I am hoping to inject some momentum into the discussions with China about free trade. These discussions have been of long standing and I'll certainly be hoping to give a push along whilst I'm there in China. The Korean agreement, we've got a high degree of optimism about it being concluded this year.
CURTIS: Your Trade Minister came out with some principles on free trade a week or so ago, including saying [AUDIO BREAK] policy considerations should not override trade policy. Are you still able, will you still raise issues like human rights, given China's undergoing one of its biggest crackdowns on dissent in years and there are still a number of Australian citizens in jail in China?
PM: Well, certainly I'll be talking across the full breadth of our relationship with China, which is a comprehensive one and a constructive one. We do raise human rights regularly with China. I raised human rights as recently as the last few weeks, when Mr Jia, a senior Communist Party official, was here travelling in Australia.
So, I anticipate that I will be raising human rights in China as part of these broad and comprehensive discussions.
CURTIS: Are you satisfied with the explanations with the treatment of Australians in detention and particularly what happened most recently with the Australian writer Yang Henjun?
PM: Look, I will, of course, be raising human rights. I don't want to be drawn on individual matters in an interview like this, with respect. I think it's best for us to deal with those cases as consular assistance cases and if necessary take them up individually.
But our view, of course, is that we raise human rights. We have a human rights dialogue with China. That dialogue was in session as recently as December last year.
For individual cases, of course we represent Australians as necessary in China in the way that we represent Australians around the world.
CURTIS: You'll be out of Australia for two weeks. You leave behind a very crowded agenda. Do you think things are going well for your Government?
PM: We've got a lot of hard work to do and we're getting on with that hard work and my focus is on delivering the things that matter for the long-term future of this country. That requires us to confront a number of difficult issues.
Carbon pricing is certainly a hard debate and one in which my political opponent Tony Abbott is devoting all of his time to changing his position - he's had every position on carbon pricing you can possibly have - and then of course raising fear about pricing carbon, but we'll get on with this job because it's the right thing to do for the future of our economy; it's the right thing to do for our environment.
And of course we're shaping the budget in a set of economic circumstances where the outlooks for our economy are strong. We do have a strong economy, but we've got some short-term pressures arising from our own natural disasters, from Japan and its impact on trade, and so there is some short-term pressures in the economy, but strong prospects for economic growth.
So, we are delivering the budget in those circumstances. The right thing to do by people's cost of living, when the economy is in a situation like that, is to not add to inflationary pressures, so when people hear us talk about a tough budget, where we'll be bringing the budget to surplus in 2012-13, we're doing that because we don't want to add to inflationary pressures which would worsen the cost of living concerns of people.
CURTIS: If I could go to the atmospherics of the carbon debate, you said in the election you wanted to create a deep and lasting community consensus around carbon pricing. Do you accept that that does not exist yet and may well not exist by the time you put legislation into Parliament?
PM: I accept that with a vitriolic fear campaign being run by Tony Abbott - despite the fact that he has in the past supported carbon pricing, he thinks now it's in his political interest to stoke fear - I accept in that environment that that does cause concern amongst the Australian community, but we will be there, doing what I do as Prime Minister: working patiently, methodically, explaining it to people, giving them the opportunity to be involved in the conversation. That's why we announced the carbon pricing mechanism and now we've got the business roundtable and the non-government organisations roundtable to collect views about the detailed mechanisms for pricing and then we will be able to make full announcements about the details of the scheme in the middle of this year.
CURTIS: Do you need to do more though, to bring the community with you, because a lot of those meetings are happening behind closed doors and we won't know the outcome of them for some time?
PM: There is a considerable community outreach program. The Climate Commission is out there with the scientists explaining the science. Of course Professor Garnaut has been engaging people directly in meetings and also through the publication of his papers on various aspects of tackling climate change and pricing carbon.
But I believe that what will happen here is we'll work though, we'll deliver the details of the scheme, and Australians will look at it and judge it on the details. I particularly think what people will do is they'll look at the pricing mechanism, they'll see that the 1,000 big businesses who are our big polluters are paying the price for carbon pollution and I think people will conclude to themselves ‘that's the right thing to do.'
We don't want people putting pollution in the atmosphere endlessly, any volume with no price paid. We want a price paid to put pressure on businesses to work in a cleaner way and then people will look at the household assistance that we will provide, and as we've said, millions of Australians, when they look at the details, will find that they're going to be better off as a result of us pricing carbon, so I think people will digest those details and make their final decision.
CURTIS: We're seeing a lot of claims from business, business putting out markers for what they want, the unions doing it. Can you put a price on carbon and still protect every industry and every job, or is that impossible?
PM: We can certainly work with [audio break] to transition to a clean energy economy and in that clean energy economy there will be more jobs. We've got to be very clear about this: we're going to have a stronger economy with better job prospects for Australians if we price carbon, than find ourselves languishing behind the rest of the world with a high pollution economy.
CURTIS: But some jobs in the old pollution rich, or emissions rich industries might go while others are being created?
PM: I just think we're seeing in the newspapers some inflammatory claims, and then meanwhile, out in the real world, there's BHP announcing a new investment worth more than $40 billion; meanwhile, out in the real world, I've been to a coal-fired power station in the last few weeks which is going to have a solar boost project. That solar technology manufactured locally, jobs in construction, jobs in manufacturing, people still working in the power station, clean energy future and look at the jobs. We're talking there about something in Dalby is where the manufacturing is going to be, the construction work actually happening in Kogan Creek, so all of this giving people jobs in that region.
Now, I think when people look at those sorts of economic opportunities, the strength of our economy, announcements like the BHP announcement, perhaps some of the fear mongering will fall away.
CURTIS: As you put together the budget people are still concerned about cost of living pressures. Is it reasonable for people to think that you can do something about that?
PM: It's reasonable of people to look to the national government, to look to me as Prime Minister, and say ‘a big part of your job is getting the national accounts right, getting the budget right', which is why when we had the last election campaign that we made sure every dollar and cent added up, whilst Tony Abbott [audio break] $11 billion black hole.
I take my responsibility to run the budget well and properly very seriously. Clearly, Mr Abbott doesn't bring the same perspective to it, or he wouldn't have got himself in that $11 billion black hole position.
So, taking that kind of disposition that I showed during the election campaign, we'll get the budget right to not add to inflationary pressures. That's the right thing to do by people's cost of living.
CURTIS: You're focussing on building up workforce participation, getting the hard cases from welfare back into work. Given the pressures on the labour market, do you still believe that Australia doesn't need to have huge population increases, that you can rein in those population increases?
PM: We are a country that will always have an immigration program. We have an immigration program now with a focus on skilled migration, but in having this perspective about getting more Australians in the workforce, I want people to understand clearly: it's not acceptable to me that big resource companies in the north west of this country rush into my office and say ‘can we get some more skilled workers from overseas?', whilst at the same time I can have one of our good local members like Gary Gray, who represents Kwinana in Perth, rush into my office and say ‘we've got double digit unemployment, do you reckon we can do something about that?'
Well, we can and we should. We should find those kids in Kwinana the skills they need to get the opportunities that are there in the strong Western Australian economy.
Now, I use the Western Australian example because it's a stark one, but we've got comparable examples right around the country. We've got a strong underling economy, good jobs prospects, good growth prospects, we've created 750,000 new jobs since we were elected in 2007. We will continue to create jobs and I want those jobs to be opportunities for some people who otherwise would end up in a lifetime of disadvantage on welfare.
CURTIS: If we can finish up where we began, with your overseas trip, you'll be ending your trip attending the royal wedding. There's been talk in Britain of changing the line of succession so that the first born, if they're female, can inherit the throne. You've talked, your Government's talked about equal rights for the military. Should there be equal rights for women in the monarchy as well?
PM: As I understand this, technically if there was to be a change in the line of succession for the monarchy that would be a decision that the UK would need to take and then we would, Australia itself, would be asked to pass legislation to achieve the same effect, so as I understand the debate in the UK, they haven't made any decisions as yet, but Lyndal, you'd expect me sitting here as the first female Prime Minister of this country to say I believe in equal rights and opportunity for women.
CURTIS: Prime Minister, thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you.



PM: Well, I'm pleased to be here in Japan. This is the first leg of a visit to North Asia. On this visit I will be in Japan, in South Korea and then in China.
These are some of our most important bilateral relationships. We look at these three countries  -  China, Japan, and South Korea  -  and they are our three top export destinations. Indeed, in total, more than 50 per cent of Australian exports go to these three countries, so on the visits to these three nations in North Asia I will of course be talking about our economic relationships; about our economic relationships for trade and for freer trade.
With these three countries, too, we participate in the G20. The G20 has done a lot of good work fostering economic growth following the global financial crisis, and I will, in each country, be speaking about the outlook for the G20 meeting later this year.
I will also, in each of these visits, be talking about our regional agenda for cooperation, particularly cooperation through the East Asia Summit and through APEC. We want to see the East Asia Summit become the forum for dealing with political, strategic and security issues in our region, and for APEC to continue to play its proper role of trade liberalisation and economic integration.
So, these issues will be on my mind in each of these visits in each of these countries, and then, of course, too, I intend to raise security issues, particularly the security challenge for our region of the nuclear program of North Korea.
Here in Japan, tomorrow I am looking forward to calling on the Emperor and Empress. That is a very great honour, and I'm looking forward to my meeting with Prime Minister Kan, our bilateral discussions, and then our working dinner.
I intend, here in Japan, to focus on our economic relationship, which is about trade in resources and energy, but about so much more, particularly international education and tourism.
I will be talking to Prime Minister Kan about prospects for the free trade agreement between our two nations. I will be talking to him about my views and perspectives and his views and perspectives for the forthcoming G20 meeting, East Asia Summit and APEC.
And I will, too, be exploring with Prime Minister Kan the prospect of better Defence cooperation, including in the area of responding to natural disasters, but here in Japan, overwhelmingly, I want, through my presence here, to be expressing the condolences of the Australian people for the horror that the Japanese people have lived through. I think all of us were very, very shocked to see the size and scale of the natural disaster that the people of Japan confronted. To see counts like almost 30,000 people dead and missing, this is a horror almost beyond our imagining, and I think each of us, as we've watched the people of Japan, have been incredibly admiring of their resilience and their stoicism in the face of this huge natural disaster.
So, through my personal presence here I want to be carrying with me and conveying the condolences of the Australian people, but also our best wishes as Japan recovers.
I'm absolutely confident that Japan will rebuild stronger than before, and Australia, as a good friend, will be working with Japan as it goes through that process.
I'm very happy to take questions, yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what will be your message to the Japanese Prime Minister on the issue of whaling?
PM: The Australian position on whaling, of course, is well known. We are opposed to scientific whaling, and that's why we have taken action in the International Court of Justice.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you going to look to reassure the Japanese leadership about Australia as a reliable source of energy supplies, given the uncertainty that they're feeling at the moment in terms of their power supply, and particularly in the context of the demand out of China for our resources?
PM: Well, one of the key planks of our very strong economic relationship is that Australia has been a long-standing and reliable supplier of commodities and energy to Japan. During this time, of course, Japan will be looking for further supplies and further sources of energy as it overcomes the impact of the natural disaster.
So, I anticipate that our economic relationship, our trade and energy security, will be part of what I talk to Prime Minister Kan about.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what tangible benefits do you hope to leave Japan with once you move on to Korea?
PM: Well, firstly, as a good friend of Japan, I think it is important for me to be here carrying the best wishes of the Australian people. I'm very honoured to be the first foreign leader to be invited to visit Japan since the earthquake and the tsunami. We're good friends, and I'm here as part of conveying that spirit of friendship as Japan recovers from these truly horrendous circumstances.
Then, on our bilateral relationship, I will be hoping, through discussions with Prime Minister Kan, to be pressing ahead on discussions with our free trade agreement. We absolutely understand that the Government of Japan and Prime Minister Kan have had the recovery from the natural disaster first and foremost on their mind, but at the appropriate point we do want to continue to pursue the free trade agreement. We do want to continue with our partnership and collaboration in forums like the G20, the East Asia Summit and APEC, and of course I was last here in Japan, my first visit to Japan, for APEC, which was hosted by Prime Minister Kan, and I do want to be exploring the possibility for future Defence cooperation.
JOURNALIST: Do you think, Prime Minister, the chances and prospect for an FTA with Japan have been compromised by the Japanese preoccupation, predictably, with disaster recovery?
PM: I just think there is an absolutely understandable real-world constraint here, which is when a nation like Japan has faced this kind of challenge, of course everyone in government, all arms and instrumentalities of government, have had to be absolutely focussed on the emergency relief and on responding to the disaster, so I understand that that would have been the complete preoccupation of everyone here in Japan, so it's just a practical issue about when it is possible for Japan to start again processing things like free trade discussions, but I do understand that recovery from the natural disaster would be first and foremost.
JOURNALIST: Did you see it as important that you visited Japan, our closest ally in North Asia, before Beijing or any other major capital?
PM: Well, we are good friends and I am very pleased to be here. I have been here before as Prime Minister for APEC towards the end of last year, but I did want to come to Japan. We are good friends, good partners, and as Prime Minister I believed it was important to further that friendship and those discussions. We're cooperate across a broad series of areas.
Of course, this visit has taken on a new and particular significance, coming as it now does after Japan has had to face this tremendous natural disaster.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS]



PM: My partner Tim and I have just had the honour of an audience with the Emperor and Empress of Japan. It was a great privilege to see their Majesties.
They expressed to both of us their very sincere gratitude for the work that Australia has done to assist the people of Japan in the wake of the devastating earthquake and tsunami.
They also inquired about how we were responding and overcoming from our summer of natural disasters. They were very interested to hear how Queensland and other parts of the country were going to get over the impacts of flood and cyclone. It was a very great privilege to meet with them, and it gave me the opportunity to personally convey to their Majesties the feelings of the Australian people about the devastating natural disaster here. I wanted to assure them that the thoughts of Australians remained with them, that we'd been very happy to help in the immediate aftermath of the earthquake and tsunami, and that we remained very happy to help as Japan rebuilds.
I am now about to go to a lunch with leading business people in Japan. Amongst many, many others, the chairman of Nippon Steel, the chairman of Mitsubishi, will be there, and I'm looking forward to meeting them and having the opportunity to explain my perspectives on the economic relationship between our two countries and on the circumstances of the Australian economy, our underlying strength.
Later today, I will meet with Prime Minister Kan and have the opportunity to further explore our economic partnership, perspectives for a free trade agreement between our two countries, perspectives as we move towards the G20, East Asia Summit and APEC later in the year, and perspectives on future defence cooperation and the possibility of greater defence cooperation, including on our ability to respond to natural disasters.
So, I am very grateful for the opportunity to have had an audience with the Emperor and Empress of Japan, and I reiterate that I wanted to say to them the thoughts of all Australians are with the people of Japan at this time.
Very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, while you are here, will you be talking to some of those people from steel companies (inaudible) will you be talking to them about where you're at with (inaudible) price carbon, and whether that would have any effect on the ongoing viability of the Australian coal industry (inaudible)
PM: I'll be very happy to talk about our broad range of domestic reforms, including the Government's plans to price carbon. I am very confident that there is a strong future for our LNG industry as we also move to a cleaner energy future  -  very confident in the future of LNG.
JOURNALIST: But I said coal, Prime Minister.
PM: Oh, sorry, OK, I'm very confident in the future of our coal exports as well as we move to a clean energy future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) here today with your visit to the Emperor. You met in the private residence, which is unusual, and also Tim Mathieson (inaudible)
PM: Well, we met in the private residence because their Majesties have taken the view that during these days in Japan where there has been continuous disruption to power supplies and that there is less power available as a result of the circumstances with Fukushima, that it's appropriate for them not to also have the Palace in operation, but instead to receive people in their private residence, so that is a power cutting exercise that they've determined to do in solidarity with the Japanese people who are experiencing periodic power disruptions.
As I understand it, we are the first de facto couple to meet with the Emperor and Empress. The meeting proceeded just as I'm sure it normally would.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your reaction to events in Villawood Detention Centre overnight?
PM: It's not my intention whilst I'm overseas to comment in detail on domestic matters, but I would say our general principle in this area is that violence doesn't get anyone anywhere. Violence, in no way, makes a difference to the way people's claims are processed or assessed. Violence is always wrong, and anybody who thinks by acting a violent way in a detention centre that they will get some advantage in terms of their claim is absolutely wrong.
The Minister for Immigration has dealt with these matters in greater detail back in Australia.
JOURNALIST: Has the Government lost control of its detention centres (inaudible)
PM: Well, the Minister for Immigration, of course, has addressed the Australian media back home about that in detail. I do want to say, general principle: violence is wrong and it doesn't help your claim.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there are strong rumours doing the rounds that Kylie Minogue will be performing at tomorrow night's gala fundraiser. Can you confirm those rumours?
PM: Well, to coin a phrase, I understand this has the media spinning around, and to coin another phrase, we should be so lucky.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott's announced a mental health policy today. Firstly, what's your reaction to those, and basically he's saying that the Government's not doing enough on mental health even though you said at the last election it would be a priority this term.
PM: Well, it's well known that the Government's been working on a mental health package. Once again, I will leave commenting on the details to the relevant minister, in this case Mark Butler, but can I say last time we saw Tony Abbott come out with packages and policies they came with an $11 billion black hole associated with them.
What I can say is anything the Government announces in the area of mental health, or indeed any other area, will be properly costed and properly funded. That's a very different approach to Tony Abbott.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, I'm not going to speculate on timeframe, but people, I think, are well aware that the Government's been working with representatives of the mental health sector to develop a new package and approach to mental health funding.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) in the Budget then (inaudible)-
PM: -Well, I'm not commenting on Budget speculation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you acknowledge that on mental health you're coming from a fair way back? (inaudible)
PM: Many of our health reforms have made a difference for mental health, including, for example, the additional sub-acute beds which we've distributed around the country which have assisted mental health patients. Our GP Superclinics, our investments in primary care, all make a difference to mental health patients, too.
What I can certainly say is Tony Abbott's $1 billion cutback to public hospitals didn't do anybody any favours, including mental health patients.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you spoke quite frankly this morning about the best way to deepen the relationship between Australia and Japan is to finalise the free trade agreement. How would you characterise development on that? I know that you've been at pains to say reconstruction and recovery are prominent in Japan's mind, but when would you like to see it (inaudible)
PM: I don't want to set a timeframe, in the sense that we are very understanding that, first and foremost, the Government of Japan, the Prime Minister of Japan, must focus on reconstruction, rebuilding, recovery from this dreadful natural disaster, but I will be saying to Prime Minister Kan that whilst we understand that's got to be front and centre of what he's doing and what the Government's doing, when it is possible for them to put the time and effort into free trade negotiations again, that Australia is pressing to conclude a free trade agreement.
JOURNALIST: Are you heartened by the language as well, the fact that agriculture is being talked about in frank terms?
PM: I was heartened when I came here for APEC, at the end of last year, that Prime Minister Kan, shortly before had announced was is called the basic policy, his policy of trade liberalisation in agriculture. We welcomed that then and I continue to welcome it now. It's the right approach for there to be greater liberalisation and freer and freer trade.
Put simply, trade equals jobs: it equals jobs in Australia; it equals jobs in Japan.
JOURNALIST: But you need more, don't you? There's no point signing a dud deal. I mean, you need the Japanese to come forward-
PM: -The language I used when I spoke to members of the Japanese parliament earlier today is a comprehensive, high-quality free trade agreement. That's what we're aiming for.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) will we have funding in this term and (inaudible)
PM: I've identified mental health as a priority for this term of government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a common bond between you and Prime Minister Kan in that you're both struggling in the polls. Do you think your visit will perhaps restore some confidence in the way he's handled this crisis?
PM: Look, I'm not going to comment on domestic political situations in Japan in that sense.
JOURNALIST: On Defence, talking about closer ties or extending relations on that front, does that happen under the umbrella of the trilateral security dialogue (inaudible)
PM: Well, certainly, if you look at the way in which the recent natural disaster has been responded to here, Japan needed help. Australia responded, and we worked with the US to get it done. Of course, the US responded too.
So, a very practical example of how trilateral arrangements can make a difference when you're confronting a huge natural disaster.
What I want to see is an ability for us to work together on natural disasters. Generally, just look at this year. I mean, Japan certainly offered assistance to Australia from the summer of floods.
Then, of course, our search and rescue teams were working alongside Japanese search and rescue personnel in Christchurch. Then, with the huge natural disaster here, our search and rescue team responded, our C-17s came up here.
So, just in 2011 we've seen example after example about working together on natural disasters. I think we can explore ways of getting that cooperation so that we are ready to go for future natural disasters and able very quickly to work together.
JOURNALIST: Are you talking more broadly than humanitarian cooperation, though? (inaudible)
PM: My focus is on deepening defence cooperation, and I've identified preparedness for natural disasters for a very obvious reason, which is we've been called on to do that during this year, and called on to work together to do it, so it makes sense to deepen that cooperation for the future.
Thank you.



Earthquake and tsunami
1. Prime Minister Kan welcomed Prime Minister Gillard to Japan and expressed the sincere gratitude of the Japanese Government for the assistance provided by Australia in response to the Great East Japan Earthquake and tsunami, including the dispatch of an Urban Search and Rescue Team to Miyagi Prefecture, the deployment of Royal Australian Air Force C-17 aircraft to assist with relief operations, and the donation of $10 million to the Australian Red Cross Japan and Pacific Disaster Appeal.  He emphasized Japan's determination to overcome the recent tragedy and revitalize Japan, with a view to creating a new future.
2. Prime Minister Gillard expressed Australia's sorrow and grief over Japan's great losses. She affirmed Australia's friendship and solidarity with Japan and its people in the wake of the disaster and its readiness to support Japan's early recovery.  She emphasized the Government's confidence in Japan's ability to recover quickly and to continue to play a strong and active role in the international community and global economy.
Nuclear safety
3. Prime Minister Kan expressed his determination to resolve the situation at the Fukushima Dai-ichi Nuclear Power Station and confirmed that Japan would continue to provide information to the international community with maximum transparency in relation to the response to the accident as well as on the safety of Japanese products, calling for measured responses based on sufficient scientific evidence.  He also expressed his determination to thoroughly review the accident of the nuclear power plant in due course and to share the experiences gained from the accident with the international community. Prime Minister Gillard re-iterated the readiness of Australia to support Japan's efforts in resolving the situation.
4. The two Prime Ministers recognized the need to enhance their cooperation in the framework of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to globally strengthen the safety standards of nuclear power generation.
Energy and resources
5. Prime Minister Kan emphasized the importance of Australia as a longstanding energy supplier and close economic partner of Japan and expressed his expectations for continued stable supply of LNG and other energy and mineral resources to Japan.  Prime Minister Gillard assured Prime Minister Kan that Australia would continue stable supply through commercial market mechanisms. Prime Minister Gillard also welcomed further investment by Japanese companies in LNG development in Australia, which would contribute to the stability of supply to Japan.
6. The two Prime Ministers also emphasized the importance of further promoting the development and use of clean energy and confirmed that the two countries would continue bilateral and multilateral cooperation in this area.
Disaster preparedness and response
7. The two Prime Ministers confirmed it was timely to further develop bilateral cooperation and to strengthen coordinationin the civil and military areas on disaster preparedness and response. They also confirmed that Japan and Australia would continue to cooperate on disaster relief in international fora such as the Trilateral Strategic Dialogue (TSD), Security and Defence Cooperation Forum (SDCF), the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and the East Asia Summit (EAS), based on any bilateral framework on disaster relief and humanitarian assistance.
Security and defence
8. The two Prime Ministers renewed their recognition that Japan and Australia were natural security partners by virtue of their shared strategic interests and values.  They asked Foreign and Defence Ministers totake forward in the context of the next 2+2 meeting a vision for bilateral security and defence cooperation building on the Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation 2007 and other arrangements. They also expressed willingness to bring the Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement into force as soon as possible and to conclude negotiations on an Information Security Agreement by the time of the next 2+2 meeting.
Trade policy
9. The two Prime Ministers recognised that trade and investment liberalisation would be vital to the continuing health of the global and regional economy and to economic growth in the two countries.  Taking into account the current circumstances in Japan and their implications, they confirmed that the two countries would conduct further negotiations leading to a conclusion of a comprehensive and mutually beneficial bilateral FTA/EPA.  They also called for a successful conclusion of the WTO Doha Round negotiations as promptly as possible in light of the declarations at the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting and the G20 Summit last November.
Global issues
10. The two Prime Ministers confirmed that Japan and Australia should work together to achieve reform of the UN Security Council and other UN bodies to be more representative and effective, including enlargement in both the permanent and non-permanent categories of the Council.  They would also continue to work together bilaterally and in global and regional fora.  They confirmed the need to consolidate the G20 as the premier forum for international economic cooperation and to deliver strong outcomes at the G20 Summit to underpin the global recovery and job creation, including on the framework for strong, sustainable and balanced growth and on price volatility.  They welcomed the forthcoming participation of the United States and Russia in the EAS and looked forward to the first meeting of the expanded EAS in Indonesia later this year.  They confirmed they would work with ASEAN and other EAS members to support the development of a political, security and economic agenda for the EAS, while promoting existing priorities including CEPEA.  They also looked forward to taking concrete actions to realize APEC's goals of free and open trade and investment and the Yokohama Vision for sustained growth and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region particularly in the areas of regulatory cooperation, green growth and regional economic integration this year.
11. The two Prime Ministers also confirmed that they would continue to work together to combat climate change, to alleviate poverty to enhance human security and to advance nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.



PRIME MINISTER KAN: First, we have the first offshore guest of honour after the earthquake, we have with us Prime Minister Gillard and I'd like to extend my heartfelt welcome to her.
Prime Minister Gillard's visit to Japan shows that Japan is safe, she is communicating this fact to the rest of the world. In this respect we think her visit to Japan, perhaps is more powerful than one million words and including that point earlier, I expressed my heartfelt appreciation to her for her visit.
Also, Prime Minister Gillard, says that a 8-year-old Australian wants a letter delivered to me and she just hand delivered it to me, and this boy looked at press reports of Japan and there is an 8-year old child in Japan who lost the parents and because of this the boy wanted to deliver a (inaudible) that may be needed by this Japanese child and also he would like to visit Japan, he would like to live here, he really wished he could go to the same school with the Japanese child. The boy wants this Japanese child to come to Australia and live with him and go to the school with him, this is letter addressed to me and Prime Minister Gillard gave it to me.
I'd like to just say that this act should be well known to the Japanese community, so this is a very heart warming feeling that we have from Australia and I have been feeling the warmth of heart all along, since the beginning, we have had a 72 strong rescue team from Australia and also C-17s came over to Japan for transport and in Sanriku the Australian rescue team was quite active and Prime Minister Gillard will visit the town two days later.
So, she is scheduled to do that and I have to say how heart warming their support has been and I'd like to express my appreciation to them for their very strong solidarity, at the same time the airlift by the C-17s for Japan, in respect of supplementary support, the Australians, the US military were the only two forces that have extended support to Japan and it's going to be a 2+2, Japan Australia for defence minister consultations and in these talks disaster relief is included, the strengthening of our security cooperation will be discussed and Prime Minister Gillard says that this is a major step toward that and I fully concurred with her.
And furthermore, with respect to the nuclear accidents, I explained to her what has transpired, it's not the situation is totally steady, but a roadmap has been announced by the Tokyo Electric Power Company, and now there should be no delay.
The Government of Japan would also like to express also at the same time that all sorts of information about the nuclear power station accident would be communicated to the entire international community including Australia and also to IAEA - Australia is one of the members and we want to provide the international community with transparent information.
At the same time this is something that was mentioned by myself and also by Prime Minister Gillard that in the course of time Australia, the LNG is a kind of energy that doesn't produce (inaudible) CO2. Australia certainly provides us with that and also Australia is developing clean energy and also the development of rare earth is another field that we would like to cooperate with each other in and we have come to an agreement on these points and furthermore towards the resolution of the negotiations over Japan Australia EPA. The basic thinking regarding its need, I have been insistent in working on that, but at this point to the Prime Minister and I think we are doing the utmost in addressing the (inaudible) earthquake crisis and if possible we would like to see a resumption of the talks.
That's what I communicated to her and I got her understanding. After the earthquake we have this first official guest of honour and on behalf of the Japanese people I'd like to once again thank her. In the Asia-Pacific region we have these two countries and I hope these two countries will cooperate further and I'd like to deepen our relationship and I think the Prime Minister's visit to Japan at this point in time has represented a major step forward and I'm sure there's going to be a further leap forward, I'm convinced of this.
That's all I have to say at this point in time, thank you.
PM: Prime Minster Kan thank you for those words and thank you for the generous invite to join you in Japan. I very much feel privileged to be the first foreign leader to be invited by the Government of Japan to visit after the devastating earthquake and tsunami. The Australian people have been thinking of you and the people of Japan at this incredibly difficult time, and perhaps our heartfelt sentiments have been best captured in the words of an 8-year-old boy, who watched in Australia what was happening in Japan, who saw on his TV screen a Japanese 8-year-old boy who had lost his parents, and then thought the best thing to do was to write to Prime Minister Kan and to ask me to deliver the letter.
In a child's words, it's about offering to share his toys. In the words of adults, it's about the two of us working together, the Australian people and the Japanese people working together, to support the people of Japan at this very difficult time.
We were pleased to support you in the immediate aftermath of the crisis, and we intend to stay true friends of Japan as Japan rebuilds and recovers, and I have made an open offer to Prime Minister Kan on more than one occasion that Australia will do anything it can to assist during this very difficult period.
I believe it's very appropriate that we have agreed that at the next 2 + 2 meeting, the meeting of our foreign ministers and defence ministers, a key item of work should be future collaboration in disaster management and emergency management. We have worked together this year in Japan, we have worked together this year in Christchurch, we should work together on a framework for ongoing cooperation  -  not just going to each other's aid in circumstances of natural disaster or emergency, but going together to the aid of third countries that need that assistance.
I've also been very pleased to discuss with the Prime Minister today Australia's history as a reliable supplier of energy to the people of Japan, and the fact that we will continue to be a reliable supplier of energy into the future, and particularly now, as the people of Japan need new energy sources because of the nuclear emergency which was occasioned by the tsunami and earthquake.
I've been pleased to discuss with the Prime Minister the potential for collaboration on clean energy initiatives, and I look forward to that work together, as well as our working together on the question of rare earths. Australia has rare earths, these are very sought-after commodities, and we will work with Japan as we mine and export these commodities.
Can I say, too, to the Prime Minister I very much welcomed our discussions on the free trade agreement. We understand that for the Prime Minister and the Government of Japan at this time the work that is necessary to help the Japanese people overcome the impact of the natural disaster of this year has been first and foremost the work of the Government, but I very much welcome the Prime Minister's indication that at the earliest possible opportunity we will resume discussion of the free trade agreement, and I very much welcome and endorse the Prime Minister's perspectives on free trade as announced in November last year through his basic policy and views of trade liberalisation.
We've also agreed today that at the 2 + 2 meeting, we will work together on future defence cooperation, and I very much welcome that indication from the Prime Minister.
Can I conclude by saying it's been an enormous privilege to have this first discussion. I'm very much looking forward to continuing our discussions over a working dinner, and I do again want to say thank you very much for inviting me to come to Japan at this time. I hope by being here in person I can convey to the people of Japan the very best wishes and support of the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) to Prime Minister Kan, I have a question to your first. From tomorrow the 20km radius from the Fukushima Dai-Ichi, will be no-go zone, the people will be allowed to go there just for a few minutes.
Some people say it' too harsh, the criteria conditions for going back to their house, now you went to Fukushima to see the situation of the 50 people, you heard what they had to say, now based on what you heard with respect to the conditions for going back home, or going to review the conditions for not just for going back home but for (inaudible) permanently go back home. What are you going to do for the (inaudible), you talked about that thing going to plan, what specifics do you have to say?
Prime Gillard - Australia, Japan and the United States, the three countries have cooperated in the disaster and so on. In these fields of cooperation how do you think you are able to take of advantage of what you've learned now with respect to the nuclear accident and disaster, do you have anything to say about information disclosure?
PRIME MINISTER KAN: First, today I went near the nuclear power station in Fukushima prefecture, I visited the place where the affected people are escaping to and I had an opportunity to directly hear from them as to what they had to say.
The mayors of the village, the town and also I heard from the governor of the prefecture as well. To answer your question in respect to the set up of the evacuation zone, it doesn't really mean we're going to impose harsh conditions on the (inaudible), conversely the residents are concerned about for example the experience of thieves going into their houses, now legally by setting the evacuation zone in the area, if these people try to go into the area we can stop them, those people. So we have a legal ground to do that, a legal basis to do that.
When it comes to returning home temporarily, at the earliest possible date, however at the same time  -  rather than returning home - returning temporarily, being there for just a couple of hours, they were allowed to go back home, because they just left their homes without doing anything. So we'd like to provide them with an opportunity for them to get whatever they need from their houses, that is the intention of the (inaudible).
So at this point many people, including the Mayors of the communities, I believe that I have a good understanding from them and now of course these people would like to return to their houses permanently as soon as possible, of course the majority of them will have  - almost all of them  -  and in this respect TEPCo devised a roadmap and without any delay, is possible perhaps we should realise the roadmap, but in advance, the Government would like to do its utmost and the nuclear power plant has to go into the core shutdown and when that's achieved of course decontamination has to be done very actively.
In what area, when can people go back home? We would like to establish a situation where that can take place and for that to happen, first the roadmap has to be achieved, realised and everything must be done to do that.
PM: Thank you very much for your question. I recognise the unimaginable scale of the disaster that has hit Japan, including the circumstances that gave rise to the nuclear crisis that Japan has had to face and has had to deal with. Australia very much welcomes Prime Minister Kan's commitment to sharing of information, a commitment restated to me today. We very much welcome that.
And Australia stands ready to work with Japan through the International Atomic Energy Agency, to deal with this nuclear problem and also of course to review nuclear safety for the future. And we stand ready too to do anything further we can to assist, at an earlier stage during the nuclear problem, Australia did assist by flying some equipment that was needed, with one of our C-17s, one of our big heavy-lift military aircraft and if there is anything further we can do to assist then we'd be only too pleased to do so.
JOURNALIST: Hello, I'm Matthew Franklin from The Australian newspaper and I've got a question for both leaders. I'd like to ask whether you talked in your meeting about China and I'd like to ask whether in the context of the increasing military cooperation between Japan and Australia, you have concerns about the growing military spending in China and its security implications for our region and also their growing assertiveness in the world.
On a second issue, a question to Prime Minister Kan, Australia and Japan have been good friends for many decades now, five decades of close economic and political cooperation. I would like to know how you feel and how you think your countrymen feel about the fact that Australia, despite that long friendship, is taking your country to court over the issue of whaling.
PM: If I can perhaps answer your question first Matthew, and thank you for it. The Prime Minister and I are going to continue our discussions over a working dinner tonight. Australia and Japan have shared perspectives on our region, we certainly are constructively engaged with China and we share the view that we want to see China become a full participant in the rules based global order, including through forums like the G20 and in our own region the East Asia Summit.
We do have a longstanding defence cooperation between our two countries and a trilateral defence cooperation between our two countries and the United States. We've taken the opportunity of our discussions today to talk about furthering the bilateral defence cooperation between us and of course we will be working on a trilateral basis as the United States works its way through its Global Force Posture Review.
The Prime Minister and I at this point haven't had an opportunity to share perspectives on that Global Force Posture Review, but it's something I'm sure we will be able to discuss over our working dinner.
PRIME MINISTER KAN: With respect to the question about China, as Prime Minister Gillard mentioned just now, in the working dinner we would like to exchange our opinions with each other and also with respect to Australia, what sort of feeling I have on this question  -  a little more than 30 years ago I had a chance to visit Australia, I went and climbed Ayers Rock. Really, when I went there with a small interest, I thought the aircraft was slow that was the first time I felt that in my whole life, in others words it took quite a lot of time to get there. The country is blessed with good nature and also a good natured people and also you have a brave and bold people in Australia and in that visit I got to know that.
But as far as Japan is concerned, our relationship with Australia, at the grassroots level and other levels, I think Australia is one the most friendly countries in the world. I think many people judge most of the issues against this background.
I think basically we see eye to eye on most of the issues. When it comes to whaling, it is true that there are some differences of opinion, but because of this issue the entire bilateral relationship should not be eroded. So of course we have to share our thoughts frankly, but we have to be sure that it shouldn't be an impediment to our relationship.
So, Japan and Australia will establish a very strong relationship, as far as we exist, we'll establish a friendly relationship for five years, ten years, ten thousand years.



Ladies and Gentlemen
I want to begin by thanking you all for being present tonight.
Each of you who has chosen to be here represents a point of light.
You embody a message of reassurance and hope.
Of fellow-feeling and shared concern.
Tonight I bring the goodwill and best wishes of the entire Australian community.
United as one in support of a great nation and a great people.
Tonight is a moment for reflection.
An occasion that makes us realise how the worst of times can bring out the best in people.
That is something we have seen throughout the Asia-Pacific region these past months, in flood-stricken Australia or earthquake-devastated Christchurch, and then, when disaster struck Japan.
To say that the earthquake and tsunami shocked the world is an understatement.
The scale of damage and loss is still being calculated.
But Prime Minister Kan's assessment that this is the worst crisis facing Japan in 65 years is surely correct.
The test of any nation is not how much it suffers, but how it responds in adversity.
Despite the enormity of this heartbreaking event, the Japanese people have shown amazing grace and resilience.
The Japanese are a people of stoicism and strength.
And in Australia, we watched with admiration as Japanese society drew together in an embrace of compassion and concern the very same concern that Japan showed Australia after the Victorian bushfires and the Queensland floods.
Tonight, we return the favour.
We say again to our Japanese friends, as we said on the day the earthquake and tsunami struck, that you will not face this crisis alone.
And you have not.
Australia was among the first to come to Japan's aid.
Our relationship transcends trade and security ties. 
We have forged lasting human bonds through tourism, migration, sister-city relationships, education exchange and a shared vision for peace and prosperity in our region.  
That is why within 48 hours of the quake, the Australian Government deployed a team of more than 70 search and rescue specialists including search dogs, an officer from my own department, Emergency Management Australia workers and diplomats from our Embassy in Tokyo, to the town that became the face of this disaster, Minami Sanriku, a town that virtually ceased to exist after the tsunami.
The Australian Government also sent a team of Defence personnel and an Australian C-17 aircraft which flew round-the-clock missions in cooperation with the Japanese and US governments.
Two more C-17 aircraft delivered vital pumping equipment to the Fukushima nuclear power plant to bolster efforts to stabilise the reactors.
This meant that at one point, all of Australia's active military heavy airlift capacity was devoted to assisting Japan with the disaster.
These Aussies did an amazing job under the worst of circumstances.
In a parting gesture of friendship, the Aussie Urban Search and Rescue team left their equipment behind to aid in the continued recovery effort.
The Australian Government has also directly contributed humanitarian assistance to Japan, donating 10 million Australian dollars to the Japan Red Cross and Pacific Disaster Appeal and Australians, individuals and companies are sending support to their Japanese friends as well.
The Australian embassy staff in Japan, including those who flew in from around the world to assist have done the most outstanding job in the most demanding and traumatic of circumstances.   I want to acknowledge them and their work tonight and to pay particular tribute to our Ambassador Murray McLean. 
Of course, the Australian community in Japan has also been a source of great support to their new friends and neighbours.
I specifically want to thank Meat and Livestock Australia, represented here by Melanie Brock, for all their work in providing food supplies to displaced people, including to Minami Sanriku, which I will visit tomorrow.
They are also providing the Aussie beef for this evening. 
I thank them and the many other Australians here for being great ambassadors for our country. 
The mutual affinity between Australians and Japanese is at the core of our ties. 
And that means we have a very natural and clear desire to help each other in times of trouble.
This is what I call genuine goodwill and friendship.
Friendship for the tough times as well as the good times.
Friendship that brings us together across cultures and across traditions.
Friends, one of the ways in which Australia and Japan have developed common bonds is through the education links between our two countries. 
I am very pleased to be able to say that Japanese schools have more student exchanges with schools in Australia than with any other country.
Around 72,000 Japanese students visit Australia every year as part of their studies.
And Japanese remains the most widely taught language in Australian schools.
So I can think of no better area than education in which Australia can make a further small but heartfelt contribution to Japan's recovery.
That's why tonight I am pleased to announce a new program to help university students, academics and professionals from those areas most affected by this terrible disaster to spend some time in Australia.
The program will help fund travel, accommodation and tuition costs associated with living and studying in our country.
In doing so, we hope to play a small part in the rebuilding of lives and communities.
Australia also has a long tradition of student exchange with Japan.
Therefore the program will also encourage Australians to come here and study alongside Japanese colleagues from communities hit by the earthquake and tsunami to share the resilience of the Japanese people and to see this beautiful land for themselves.
I am also pleased to announce tonight an ongoing program of 10 Endeavour Scholarships each year for Japan.
These scholarships will support study, research or professional development.
And in their first year, we hope to target these scholarships in particular to students and institutions in earthquake and tsunami-hit areas.
Finally, many Australians who first came to Japan as school students later return to teach English under the Japan Exchange and Teaching or JET program.
Such exchanges help build strong and enduring bonds of friendship and collaboration.
That is why I am pleased to announce tonight that the Australian Government is commencing a feasibility study on a similar exchange so young people from Japan can live in Australia and teach Japanese in our schools:
Another way to demonstrate friendship and understanding.
Friends, the Japanese people have amazed the world with their dignity and courage.
Events like this remind them that they will not face the journey to recovery alone.
I know the generosity displayed here tonight  -  by Australians, Japanese and other friends alike  -  will underscore the message even more firmly.
Through our donations.
Through our thoughts and prayers.
Through our shared resolve.
Australia stands with you:
True partners.
True friends.
Determined to help you recover.
Determined to help you rebuild.
Confident that Japan will rise again  -  even stronger than before.
Thank you.  



PM: Thank you very much to Murray for the invitation to be here and to join you and I'm really here just to say a very big thank you to you, for everything that you've done over the past few weeks since the 11th March.
It's hard for us back in Australia to get a real vision of what is it that you lived through and worked through, but to try and give you one little insight into the way that we've seen the work that you've been doing  -  we have in Parliament House in Canberra something we call the situation room, which we go to to talk about emergencies.
Now when it was first constructed I did worry that perhaps someone that watched too many episodes of West Wing and just wanted to have a situation room so periodically they could announce ‘we've got to go to the situation room'.
But I was wrong, the room is actually a room of great functionality and it enables us to have video conferences with people around the world and to bring them together for discussions. And during one of the discussions we had shortly after the earthquake and tsunami, we had Murray on the screen and we're involved in an intense discussion and then we look up and realise that Murray appears to be shaking and then without saying anything he leans down and put the helmet on and at that point we said ‘Murray are you alright, I mean is there anything you should be doing, we should be doing, what's going on?'. He goes ‘look, it's just an aftershock, I'll just stay here and keep working through', rather than run out of the room screaming which I would have thought was any bodies natural inclination.
And I tell you that story because I think in one moment it captured for all of us the kind of stoicism and dedication to duty that each of you was showing during this period. Now I know some of you bravely went to Sendai and saw some of the worst things you'll ever see in your life and you did that above and beyond the call of duty to help your fellow Australians.
I know that a number of you went near the Fukushima reactor, once again above and beyond the call of duty to help your fellow Australians and I know that each of you here worked extraordinary hours to keep the Embassy going 27-7 so you could provide the best of advice and the best of your care and concern for Australians who were relying on you at that time and I genuinely want to thank you for that work it is deeply, deeply appreciated by me, by the Government and I think by the Australians you helped and their families and friends.
And I know that on top of that, we've asked you to organise a Prime Ministerial visit. Now normally when I travel and look at the Embassy staff they are in a state of exhaustion just from having organised the Prime Ministerial visit, let alone organising a Prime Ministerial visit on top of everything that you've lived through to date, so I do want to thank you for going that extra yard as well.
I know in some ways it's been a very difficult time to ask you to turn around and organise a visit, but in terms of the relationship between our two countries, it's been the best time for me to come and to be able to say to the Japanese Government, to the Prime Minister, to the Emperor, to the people of Japan, that the thoughts of all Australians are with them as they work their way through and recover from this huge natural disaster and we're very confident that they're going to do that.
So, thank you to you for everything that you've lived through and the efforts that you've put in, we got a very small taste of that last night when we experienced our own aftershock and with all of the naivety of newcomers Tim and I were saying to each other ‘do you think we have to go and sit under a table now, or can we just stay where we are?'. We did stay where we were and we knew that it was only something very small compared with the number of aftershocks you've lived through, the concerns that you've lived through about services in Tokyo, about the best way to support your families at this time.
So, thank you very much for all of that and today is a way of saying thank you and just getting to spend a bit of time with you. So, you've been great representatives of Australia, you've really done us proud. Thanks for that.



Thank you, Chairman Saito, for your kind introduction.
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentleman,
I am pleased to be back in Japan for my second visit in just ten months as Australia's Prime Minister.
I return not only to underline the “enduring peace and friendship between our two countries and their peoples.”
                                           [Article 1 - Basic Treaty of Friendship and Co-operation, 1976]
But to show Australia's full support and confidence at this difficult time.
Yesterday I had the very great honour of an audience with the Emperor and Empress of Japan.
I expressed to Their Majesties how deeply I have been touched by the courage, dignity and unity of the Japanese people.
And I assured Their Majesties that Australia would continue to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with Japan and work tirelessly to assist in its recovery.
Japan is Australia's closest partner in Asia.
But it is more than that.
Japan is also a friend  -  a country and people for whom Australians today feel genuine affection and warmth.
Just as Japan and its people were there for Australia as we faced our floods and cyclone, Australia is with you now.
Not simply because Japan is such an important trade and strategic partner.
But because our countries have built up such close and trusted linkages that we can genuinely call each other friends. 
And friends help each other.
That is why Australia moved quickly to help our friends in Japan when the tsunami struck.
The Australian Government donated 10 million Australian dollars to the Japan Red Cross and Pacific Disaster Appeal. 
And this was matched by members of the Australian public and many major Australian corporations, who collectively donated millions more to charities for emergency relief.
The day after the tsunami we were preparing a team of 72 search and rescue specialists, including search dogs.
Within days, this team travelled to Minami Sanriku, where the damage was at its worst, and where I will travel tomorrow to see for myself the devastation they encountered.
There, this team worked side-by-side with Japanese colleagues in the hard task of looking for survivors, or providing some closure for families through locating victims.
The team included specialists who just weeks before had worked alongside Japan's own Search and Rescue team in the rubble of Christchurch, New Zealand.
These specialists came to Japan on board an Australian C-17 aircraft, which subsequently flew round-the-clock missions in support of the recovery effort. 
On 22 March, Australia committed two further C-17 aircraft to support Japan, diverting one of them from the Middle East.
These two aircraft delivered vital pumping equipment from Western Australia to help stabilise the Fukushima nuclear power plant.
So we had Australian aircraft, working with the Japan Self Defence Force, ferrying Japanese supplies, while using US bases in Japan and with the support of the United States.
We talk a lot about trilateral Australia-Japan-US cooperation.
But this was the talk put into action, reflecting the close and enduring relations between our three nations.
Friends, as Prime Minister, I am committed to this most important security relationship.
Japan and Australia are close strategic partners.
We are lively Asia-Pacific democracies committed to the universal values of freedom, human rights and the rule of law.
As active members of the United Nations we share a commitment to the peace, stability and prosperity that derives from a rules-based global order, in our region and across the world.
 We face a number of shared security challenges, which we work closely together to address, such as our work to counter terrorism in South East Asia and against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, not least the DPRK nuclear problem.
Australia's relationship with Japan on security and defence issues has grown to become one of the closest and most important that either of us has.
The historic 2007 Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation provides the foundation for our security cooperation.
Under this Joint Declaration, our Foreign Affairs and Defence ministers meet regularly for ‘2+2' meetings.
This is the only ‘2+2' meeting that Japan has with any country other than the United States, and one of only two ‘2+2' meetings that Australia has in Asia.
The Joint Declaration has given rise to an increasingly active bilateral security agenda.
We have stepped up our participation in joint military exercises with one another.
And over the past year, Australia and Japan have worked closely together on peace-building activities in East Timor, humanitarian assistance in Pakistan, and counter-piracy surveillance in the Gulf of Aden.
Australia is keen to see new opportunities for co-operation.
The implementation of the Australia-Japan Acquisition and Cross Servicing Agreement, now endorsed by the Japanese Diet and the Australian Parliament, will enable mutual logistical support between our respective defence forces.
This Agreement marks the beginning of a new phase of more frequent, practical and ambitious bilateral security cooperation.
It will enable the Australian Defence Force and the Japan Self Defence Force to cooperate more quickly and easily with one another, such as by providing transport, supplies or support while on disaster-recovery or stabilisation operations.
Australia is only the second country after the United States to reach a treaty-level agreement of this type with Japan, and it reflects the importance of defence cooperation for both countries.
We are also working towards concluding an Information Security Agreement, which will help us share and protect classified information, so improving our inter-operability.
In our discussions yesterday, Prime Minister Kan and I agreed that, by the next ‘2+2' meeting, our Defence Ministers will develop a new vision for defence cooperation between our two countries.
This will be designed to continue the evolution of Australia and Japan as partners in defence and security.
We also agreed to negotiate a new framework agreement on bilateral disaster relief cooperation.
This will improve our mechanisms for bilateral cooperation in the event of another crisis or emergency, either in Japan or Australia or in the region more broadly.
Australia and Japan's economic relationship remains a fundamental plank of our partnership.
Japan is one of Australia's most important economic partners.
The complementary nature of our economies is long-standing, recognised as long ago as 1957, when our bilateral Commerce Agreement was signed.
For decades now, Australia has been a safe, reliable and price-competitive supplier of the energy and raw materials Japan has needed to drive growth and exports.
Japan has also contributed enormously to Australia's own prosperity over the past half-century, both through exports of its manufactures and through its extensive investments in Australia.
Those complementarities are not diminishing.
Indeed, yesterday I also discussed with Prime Minister Kan our shared interests in clean and renewable energy. We agreed to explore closer cooperation in this area.
Our economic relationship is also expanding into new areas such as financial services, infrastructure and education. 
But as the world economic order changes, we need to move quickly if we are to embrace these new opportunities.
We must remain committed to the principles of free trade, which are the very foundation on which our prosperity rests.
That is why I was so encouraged by the Kan Government's commitment to economic and trade policy reforms, as expressed in the Basic Policy on economic partnership agreements, issued last November.
In our discussions yesterday, Prime Minister Kan and I renewed our commitment to concluding a high-quality, comprehensive Free Trade Agreement between Australia and Japan.
Such a Free Trade Agreement would contribute to Japan's economic growth and could help pave the way for a new wave of Japanese integration into the regional and global economies.
A Free Trade Agreement would make us more prosperous.
It would make us more resilient to future shocks.
And it would bring our economies and our people closer together.
Australia understands that Japan's focus right now is on managing the aftermath of the earthquake and tsunami and on the nuclear disaster.
But, I also welcomed Prime Minister Kan's statement yesterday that negotiations on the Free Trade Agreement should resume at the earliest possible date.
Beyond our bilateral ties, Australia and Japan share common views on global challenges.
At the United Nations, we are close partners.
Australia has been a long-standing supporter of Japan's representation across the United Nations system.
We were firm supporters of Japan's election as a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Councilin 2008.
We have supported Japanese efforts to reform the Security Council to improve its effectiveness and legitimacy.
And Australia remains one of the most resolute supporters of Japan's rightful aspirations for permanent membership of the Security Council.
On nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, Australia and Japan are jointly leading efforts in support of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty, most notably through the work of the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
This body, chaired by former Australian Foreign Minister Evans and former Japanese Foreign Minister Kawaguchi, produced a report that revived debate ahead of the May 2010 NPT Review Conference.
This body of work has now evolved into joint Australia-Japan leadership of a cross-regional ministerial grouping that continues to provide impetus to nuclear arms control and non-proliferation.
Closer to home, Australia and Japan share the same vision for a stable and prosperous Asia-Pacific.
The Asia Pacific Region is the most economically dynamic in the world.
It is home to the world's three largest economies and accounts for much of global trade and global growth.
The coming decades in the Asia-Pacific will hold for us great opportunities but also great challenges.
Australia approaches these opportunities and challenges with optimism.
Australia has a strong, flexible and open economy, well-positioned to benefit from the dramatic growth rates being seen across Asia.
We have good relations across Asia, an alliance relationship with the United States, and are contributing to the building of a regional community and norms.
We do not take continued regional stability and prosperity for granted.  But we are optimistic in outlook.
Trade  -  across the Pacific and within Asia  -  has driven the region's growth.
So too has foreign investment.
Domestically, Australia and Japan both face challenges in maintaining our competitiveness in an economically dynamic region.
To keep driving this growth we need to continue to bring down barriers to trade and investment, lowering tariffs and tackling behind the border barriers.
And, at home, Australia's own competitiveness in this most competitive of regions must be assured through ongoing and ambitious economic reforms to keep our economy flexible and to raise our productivity.
As one of very few countries in the world to avoid recession during the global financial crisis, the Australian government well understands the need for continuous  reform if economies are to grow and remain competitive.
The resilience of the Australian economy through the crisis was due to 25 years of challenging economic reforms.
But we cannot afford to rest on our laurels.
To ensure our future competitiveness, further reform is necessary.
My Government has now put in place the major building blocks of a productivity agenda based on stability, flexibility and capability to position Australia for the future.
The Kan Government, I know, also has an ambitious economic agenda for Japan, and we welcome it.
Friends, our shared commitment to economic reform shapes our expectations for the wider region and the world.
Through the G20, Australia and Japan are working together to resist protectionism, support balanced and sustainable global growth, and strengthen the integrity of the global financial system.
These measures will have obvious flow-on benefits to the region.
In APEC, we are working together to reduce the barriers to trade, including ‘behind-the-border' barriers.
In doing so, we build on more than 30 years of shared effort to create an economic community in the Asia-Pacific.
It was Japan and Australia who in 1980 convened the meeting which led to the creation of the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council.
Nine years later, we were founding members of APEC.
We are also both strong supporters of a successful conclusion to the Doha Round of trade talks this year. 
A successful Doha Round would be an important boost to the world trading system.
One way or other Doha should conclude in 2011.
Australia is working with Japan to try and get this done.
Friends, regional prosperity cannot be assured through a strong economic framework alone.
It also requires a robust security environment.
As staunch US allies, Japan and Australia are as one in welcoming a continued forward presence of the United States in the Asia-Pacific as an important contribution to regional stability.
Stability and security depend vitally on the integral roleof the United States and on developing the right regional architecture to encourage cooperation on security challenges and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Working bilaterally and trilaterally, including through the Trilateral Strategic Dialogue, we are enhancing our own security and contribute more broadly to the stability of the Asia-Pacific region.
With Japan, we are also helping build and shape regional norms and institutions to ensure the long-term peace, stability and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region.
Australia and Japan are both founding members of the East Asia Summit.
We both welcomed its recent expansion to include the United States and Russia.
With the EAS, we now have an institution with the right membership and mandate to address the full range of security, political and economic issues facing the region.
The Asia-Pacific is a region in strategic flux, where changing power relativities are playing out against the backdrop of historical mistrust and conflict.
It is vital that we build a robust architecture of security and cooperation to guarantee the peace and prosperity of our people in the years ahead.
Yesterday I agreed with Prime Minister Kan to work closely together  -  and with the other members of the East Asia Summit - in managing regional challenges and promoting an inclusive community.
Australia believes it will be important to develop a practical security cooperation agenda in the East Asia Summit, including on issues like maritime security.
We would also like to see more direct links between the EAS and the ASEAN + 8 Defence Ministers meetings.
And a second Finance Ministers meeting under the EAS umbrella will be important, as will continued cooperation in education, including helping student mobility across the region.
Ladies and gentlemen,
We know that peace and prosperity cannot be taken for granted.
They are hard won and easily lost.
Today we reflect with gratitude on the history of reconciliation and understanding that has united our two nations and our two peoples.
We have achieved great things together that once would have seemed unimaginable.
We achieved them because we sought the best in each other, transcending the barriers of distance, culture and history to create something truly remarkable.
In the entry foyer of the Australian Embassy in Tokyo, there are tens of thousands of paper cranes.
These were folded by Japanese school students who have visited Australia on school trips and who wanted to show solidarity with those in Australia who have suffered in the floods.
Likewise, when the earthquake and tsunami struck, Australian students began making paper cranes to show their solidarity with Japan.
They didn't need to be told.
They just starting folding them.
I'm not sure our students are as fast as Japanese students at origami.
But I know they the folded those paper cranes with the deepest and most heartfelt feelings of friendship and empathy.
All Australians share these feelings.
We have the utmost confidence that Japan will recover from this terrible tragedy, scarred but stronger.
And from these difficult days, our remarkable friendship will grow stronger too.
It is a friendship we prize like few others.
A friendship of equals.
A partnership of peoples. 
Strong today.
And even stronger in the future.
A future of security, stability and prosperity that we willbuild together. 



JOURNALIST: The Asahi Shimbun. Thank you very much for your kind and encouraging messages. I am greatly impressed. I think Australia should be regarded as a founder, or maybe co founder of the APEC, so may I have your views or future projections on the APEC? I think the idea of free trade zone could make sense for creation of prosperous and (inaudible) Pacific area. So related to the TPP, what kind of views would you have?
PM: Thank you very much for your questions and of course my first visit to Japan as Prime Minister was to attend APEC, which was led by Prime Minister Kan. APEC, I think, has still a lot of good work to do, particularly on behind the border barriers. APEC has had some remarkable achievements at driving average tariff rates down across our region, but there remains work to do with behind the border barriers and it was a focus of the last APEC meeting and I anticipate that that work will be carried forward to Honolulu under the leadership of President Obama.
We also did, at the last APEC meeting, bring together the nations in the Trans-pacific Partnership. Prime Minister Kan attended as an observer and we very much welcomed that. We believe that this is an important process to see further trade liberalisation, we ambitious for a high quality agreement and we do welcome Japan's interest in the process.
As I indicated in my speech, I very much understand that for Prime Minister Kan, the Japanese Government and the people of Japan, their focus first and foremost must be on recovery from the earthquake, tsunami and the nuclear crisis. But I do very much welcome Prime Minister Kan's restatement yesterday of his ambitions in this area of free trade, the basic policy ambitions and that he does want to resume free trade talks between our two countries at the earliest possible date. We do believe that Japan and Australia concluding free trade agreement would be a good demonstration to the region that Japan is very interested in regional economic integration and the liberalisation of its own trade policy.
JOURNALIST: Hi I'm Matthew Franklin from the Australian newspaper. Prime Minister Gillard, you mentioned in your speech that your government had put in place the major building blocks of a productivity agenda. Your critics in Australia would say you've talked a lot about it, but haven't done much except perhaps with education, so could you please expand on your comments and tell me what you  -  as in your Prime Ministership, under your leadership  -  you've done to enhance Australia's productivity agenda.
PM: Thank you very much for the question, which is obviously about Australian domestic policy. As Deputy Prime Minister and now as Prime Minister I am committed to leading in revolution in our human capital agenda, a very, very significant contributor to productivity growth is the skills and capacity of the Australian people. That matters for the adult workforce and increasing skills in the adult workforce and we have had a major reform agenda there, including our higher education reforms following the Bradley Review, but increasing future prosperity and productivity also very much depends on improving the quality of what is happening in schools and preschools today, as we educate the citizens who will be the workers of tomorrow.
In addition to that human capital revolution, where we've got a big reform agenda, the government has been investing in infrastructure, particularly the new infrastructure we will need for productivity now - the National Broadband Network. And as you would be aware Matthew, under my Prime Ministership we have achieved the structural separation of Telstra, an important microeconomic reform for our telecommunication sector, which will enable us to get on with the job of delivering the National Broadband Network and delivering competition on that network and that infrastructure is very important to productivity.
I also believe a seamless national economy is vital to productivity, it's why I've lead developments like uniform occupational health and safety laws nationally, and we will continue to deliver those kinds of changes for a seamless national economy.
And then too for our future of productivity and prosperity, the quality of services like our health services is important. People need to be able to get health care and we need to deliver it without unsustainable fiscal burdens, which is why the National Health Reform Agreement that I struck with our premiers and chief ministers a bit earlier this year is in its own right important to our future productivity and prosperity.
It's no mystery that the government is working on further reforms, particularly focussed on labour market participation, which are also vital to our future prosperity and productivity. Making sure we use this special time in our nation's economic development to leverage it into a permanent change in our participation arrangements, particularly for the most disadvantaged Australians.
JOURNALIST: Hello Prime Minister, my name is Akiko Kimodo and I'm a reporter for TBS, we're television here. I wanted to ask you, what made you decide to go to Minami Sanriku tomorrow will you be meeting people, the victims there, and will you visiting any evacuation centres? Just the basic reason why you've visiting.
PM: Thank you. One of the things I wanted to do by physically coming to Japan was to say through my personal presence that Australia's with you, with the Japanese people at this very difficult time and I wanted to therefore personally take my greetings and expressions of goodwill to the most affected regions.
I'm particularly focusing on that region, on Minami Sanriku, because our search and rescue team worked there. Of course it is a very hard hit area and our search and rescue team were deployed there and so I thought it was the right place for me to go and take Australian's direct sympathies and greetings.
I am hoping to be able to meet with people who have been personally affected, including those who are now living in evacuation centres. I understand, I think every Australian understands, that this is a disaster of such proportions that it's almost beyond our ability to comprehend the scale of the numbers of people who have been hit by this natural disaster.
But even as we struggle to comprehend the scale of it, I did want to be out there personally showing Australia's best greetings and best sympathies and goodwill to the people who have been most affected by the natural disaster here.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Thank you very much for that question and just as I responded to the last question, this is a disaster of this huge size and scale. I mean unimaginably big, we understand that in that context the Japanese Government and Japanese people to also address the nuclear crisis at Fukushima has been an additional and very heavy burden for the government and the people of Japan.
I very much welcome the information that Prime Minster Kan and his government have made available to me and the Australian Government and he reiterated in our meetings yesterday that that information would continue to flow and we very much thank him for that. And we intend, as Japan does, to participate through the International Atomic Energy Agency, in a review of nuclear safety which I think should be properly done following this natural disaster and induced nuclear problem here in Japan.
For our own nation we do not have nuclear energy and we do not plan for it to be part of Australia's future energy mix. We are a country that has abundant energy resources and we are very focused now on the clean energy sources of the future. We are a country blessed with a lot of sunshine, a lot of ability to use wind power, tidal power, the emerging technologies such as geothermal and so we intend to place a great deal of focus on the development of a clean energy economy.We are already making record investments in solar and other renewable sources of energy and we intend to accelerate the movement to a clean energy future by putting a price on carbon from the first of July next year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, last night you said that you and your Japanese counterpart would discuss the presence of China, its growing influence in the region and your views on that. What was discussed and is there some concern within the Japanese leadership about the growing assertiveness of China in the region?
PM: Thank you very much for the question Kieran. My second stage of discussions with Prime Minister Kan focused very much on our engagement in multilateral institutions, particularly with a focus on the East Asia Summit, with APEC and on the G20.
Of course, as we talked through issues in our region, issues that impinge on the East Asia Summit and APEC, inevitably we talked about China's important role in the region and important role in regional affairs. Australia's perspective is that we have a comprehensive and constructive engagement with China, our relationship is a positive one, obviously from time to time we have differences and when we have those differences we put them clearly and we deal with them, but Australia's perspective is that a prosperous China, engaged in the region's affairs, is good for Australia, good for the region and it follows therefore good for Japan.
So, these are the perspectives that we bring to discussions, but the discussions last night focused very much on regional engagement at the East Asia Summit, regional engagement through APEC and also our engagement through the G20.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Thank you for that question. In what is a comprehensive, longstanding and deep friendship between Australia and Japan, there are some occasional differences of view and we obviously have a difference of view about whaling. The Australian position on whaling is of longstanding and is well known  -  we are opposed to commercial and so-called scientific whaling. And due to that opposition we have initiated the proceedings you refer to in the International Court of Justice and we do intend to continue with those proceedings.
On the conduct at sea, we have consistently said that everyone needs to obey the rules of sea, which are predominantly there for people's safety. We are obviously talking about a large, remote and inhospitable part of the world, where you can pursue if someone got into trouble, a rescue effort could be successfully mounted. So in those circumstances our consistent view has been that everybody should abide by the rules of the sea and have safety first and foremost in their minds, so that's the perspective that we bring to actions by anyone in the ocean, including by the Sea Shepherd.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Simon Benson from the Daily Telegraph in Sydney. You've made quite an emphasis on security relationships and defence ties and one of the issues that is clearly the significant one for the region is information security; we've (inaudible) with our policing in Australia. You mentioned that you had wanted to develop and share a protected classified information system; I'm assuming that you are referring to cyber security, security information and communications, ICT. Have those issues been raised in your meetings with the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister and Defence Minister in Japan and was China raised in that context?
PM: Thank you for the question Simon, somewhat disturbingly from my eye line it looked like you had a halo around your head there, which isn't something we'd necessarily expect. But on your question  -  yes, we are working through with Japan to conclude an information security agreement, which would enable us to better share information between our two countries as a part of our longstanding defence cooperation and as I indicated when I spoke at the press conference with Prime Minister Kan, we have asked defence and foreign ministers at the next 2 + 2 meeting to work on a vision for future defence cooperation.
I did not, in my discussions with Prime Minister Kan, directly speak about cyber security, but you are right to identify that cyber security is one of the transnational challenges that we do work through, transnational challenges like organised crime, transnational challenges like proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Clearly one of the focuses of discussions with Japan has been the conduct of North Korea, so like those transnational challenges, I would anticipate that we could have discussions with Japan on cyber security questions, but it wasn't directly raised in the course of discussion last night.
JOURNALIST: John Garnaut from the Sydney Morning Herald. Prime Minister, you talked a lot about security in the North East Asia region, and you mentioned North Korea (inaudible). I wonder if firstly, if you think that security links with South Korea could be elevated at some stage to the same high level that they are with Japan and secondly, what was your (inaudible) of North Korea with negotiations that seem to be about to come together with this whole Washington (inaudible). Is there any chance of a breakthrough in the next few months on nuclear weapons, (inaudible) nuclear weapons program?
PM: Thank you for the question. We have a defence cooperation with South Korea at the moment and we intend to continue that defence cooperation in its current form, so that's our future outlook for defence cooperation there, that we would continue as we are at the moment with the linkages that there have been between our two militaries.
I know that there has some speculation, indeed in your own writing, about potentially some changes to a quadlateral security arrangement, we've got no plans in relation to that, so that's (inaudible) perspective.
On North Korea, as I think everyone would be aware, there has been a significant step up over the last 12 months in unacceptable and aggressive conduct from North Korea. The Six Party talks have been the forum for discussing issues associated with North Korea and South Korea. The Six Party talks will continue to be the forum to do that, and how those talks resume and when they resume is necessarily a choice for the six countries involved, but I understand that there is no point in having talks for talks sake and that North Korea does really need to establish that it's on a path for change in order for those talks to be able to strike a meaningful outcome and a meaningful agreement.
This would be something that I will talk about, obviously, when I'm in South Korea and also when I'm in China, to gather the news and perspectives and sitting here today I can't say to you that I am optimistic for (inaudible) on change in the circumstances that we (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: (inaudible), back to (inaudible) the TPP if I may. US President Barak Obama has made a big goal to conclude the TPP negotiations by the time of the APEC Summit meeting in Honolulu in November this year. Prime Minister, do you believe it achievable? Also do you believe it's possible for Japan and Australia to reach an agreement on a bilateral FTA or EPA before November, given the very slow progress made up until now between the two countries after years of negotiations with companies, and also given the fact that Japan will need to focus on recovery and reconstruction in the coming months and years.
PM: Thank you, on the free trade agreement, the EPA between Australia and Japan, we do want to see progress made, one of the things that I've been consistently pressing in my trip is that we do believe it's in the interests of both of our countries  -  Japan and Australia  -  to have freer trade between us, it's in the interests of our two countries and in the interests of economic prosperity and therefore in the interests of our peoples. So we are keen to press on and to conclude a high quality and comprehensive agreement between our two nations, but I do understand that now is a time when the focus of all of the instrumentalities of government is properly on recovery from the natural disaster. But I am very welcoming Prime Minister Kan's statement last night that our free trade talks should resume at the earliest possible opportunity, so we understand the present focus, but we do look forward to those talks resuming.
On the TPP, I think it is appropriate to set a level of ambition to keep driving countries as we move toward the Honolulu meeting of APEC, to keep driving our negotiators and those who participate directly in the talks, I'm sure we can work through as quickly as possible. I am ambitious to see very substantial progress that can be reported at the APEC meeting, in Honolulu led by President Obama.  



PM: I'm here in Minami-Sanriku, which is the town that became known to the world as a heavily impacted area for the tsunami and earthquake and when you see the scenes behind me you can understand why.
We've just driven through the hills to get here and they are beautiful hills, with traditional Japanese buildings on the side of the road and then you move from those beautiful hills to the next moment seeing all of this. We can see where the tsunami had its destructive power and what it's done to these buildings and to this place.
I've just had a conversation with the Mayor, with Mayor Sato, who explained to me that he was in this building, this was actually a disaster management centre and they were in there because of the earthquake and then ran from the second floor up the stairs and onto the roof to try and survive the tsunami. Unfortunately most of the people he was with did not survive; this is the first time he's been back to this place. So, a very emotional moment for him to see this again.
I think it's telling us a lot about the force of the water, that you can see wrapped around this building a net from the ocean with all of the ocean buoys just thrown onto the building by the tsunami.
I think coming here and seeing these images is incredibly confronting, incredibly confronting to see how much damage has been done. It's like the place has just been bombed into oblivion, with so many people dead and so many people still living in evacuation centres. I am going to proceed to an evacuation centre, it's the one where Mr Sato, the Mayor, himself lives now and meet with some of the people there.
At his request, the Mayor's request, and at the request of the Japanese Government, we are making available a care package of some food and some soft toys for the children who now live in that evacuation centre, the children of this town. I'd like to thank some big Australian companies for helping us put this package together, it includes really well known Australian products, we're talking about Heinz Baked Beans and Campbell's Soup and Arnott's biscuits, Qantas has helped us get it over here and the soft toys are koalas and kangaroos for the kids.
This material has already landed in Japan and it will shortly be here, as a further expression of friendship between Australia and Japan and to provide just some relief for the kids and the people who have suffered through this amazing devastation.
JOURNALIST: Have you every personally experienced something like this before?
PM: Not on this scale, I've had the opportunity to go to the Lockyer Valley, where the flash flooding wrought such awful damage and to hear the stories of those kids who ran from the water to survive, ran for their lives literally. But the scale of this is just  -  it truly does just leave you speechless.
JOURNALIST: How does it make you feel when you see what's around you?
PM: Well, on one level you can't take it in, because it's just so much, but it's a scene of incredible tragedy and incredible sorrow. You just can't imagine that there could have been people in these buildings working, walking down these streets, one moment all of life is normal and everything is as you've known it and then literally within half and hour following the earthquake, the tsunami did this. It's just hard to take in, hard to imagine.
The Mayor was telling me that he clung on and survived, the people around him did not. The people who did survive, the very few went back into the building and they fortunately found one lighter, that wasn't wet and could still light. There'd been a blizzard, it was that cold and they used that one lighter and a neck tie to start a fire, otherwise they may not have survived from the cold. So, those sort of stories of human survival, it's just truly remarkable.  



The Australian Government will provide a package of food aid to the town of Minami-Sanriku in Miyagi prefecture, where the Australian Urban Search and Rescue Team was deployed in the aftermath of the recent earthquake and tsunami.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard said the care package would provide the people of Minami-Sanriku with some much needed food and comfort as they recover from the March 11 disaster. 
The request for food assistance and soft toys for the children came from the Mayor of Minami-Sanriku, Mr Sato, and the Japanese Government.
The Australian Government is very happy to be able to assist with this request on behalf of the nation.
We hope this food aid will help the people of Minami-Sanriku at this very difficult time, and in their immense task of rebuilding.
The care package includes:
 * 	7,000 cans of soup, baked beans and canned spaghetti
 * 	2,000 packets of chocolate biscuits (including Tim Tams and Chocolate Montes)
 * 	372 packets of dried fruit
 * 	5,000 Byron Bay cookies
 * 	4,000 packets of beef jerky
 * 	3,800 packets of canned Australian beef/curry pouches, donated through Meat and Livestock Australia
 * 	Soft toys including 1,500 koalas from Tourism Australia
The Prime Minister said the majority of the package was already on its way to Minami-Sanriku, having arrived in Tokyo this morning.
Much of the food package has been delivered free of charge by Qantas, in a very generous gesture by the Australian airline.
The Prime Minister visited the ruins of the town centre with the Mayor and the Japanese Foreign Minister Takeaki Matsumoto.
With them was Australian Search and Rescue team leader Rob McNeil who showed the Prime Minister some of the areas where they carried out the harrowing search for survivors.
The Prime Minister then visited a nearby evacuation centre to talk with families whose homes were washed away on March 11.
The Prime Minister said she brought the best wishes and support of the nation who will continue to support the people of Japan as they rebuild from this devastating event.



It is a great pleasure to be back in Seoul.
I last visited last November to participate in the G20 Leaders' Summit.
The success of that Summit was due in large part to the energetic and creative chairing by the host nation and especially the active role played by His Excellency President Lee Myung-bak.
Looking ahead, I believe historians of your country will see Korea's successful hosting of the G20  -  the world's leading economic forum  -  as a key to understanding Korea's true emergence on to the world stage.
History will record three great steps, the Seoul Olympics in 1988, Korea's admission to the OECD in 1996, and the G20 summit in 2010, three great steps which marked the path to Korea's coming-of-age as a true middle power.
While these events stretch over 25 years, the Australia-Korea relationship stretches back much, much further over 120 years.
Our first steps together were taken in the late 1880s by missionaries from Australia who landed in Busan.
Then we truly walked together in the trenches of the Korean War.
Together, Australians and Koreans gave their lives to defend the young Republic against North Korean aggression. 
More than 17,000 Australian troops served here during the Korean War, with 340 Australians sacrificing their lives.  Of those, 281 remain, resting in Korean soil, at the UN Memorial Cemetery in Busan. 
Tomorrow, I will honour their memory and their sacrifice, at a memorial service commemorating the 60th Anniversary of the Battle of Kapyong.
A recent Australian documentary describes it as a “forgotten battle” of a “forgotten war”.
Fought in the days following 23 April 1951, the Battle of Kapyong saw a small force of Australians and other allies defeat an attack by a Chinese division numbering some 10,000 soldiers.
The outcome of this battle helped stop the Chinese spring offensive and proved crucial in preventing a Chinese breakthrough towards Seoul.
The Battle of Kapyong was but one of many fierce engagements in which Australia's soldiers, sailors and airmen fought during the war.
So on Monday, I will attend the ANZAC Day Dawn Service  -  Australia's memorial day  -  at your National War Memorial.
I will also visit the Korean National Cemetery, to commemorate and honour all those Koreans who made the ultimate sacrifice for their country.
And following the Korean War, we walked together still: as natural partners in peace.
Australian raw materials and natural resources helped re-build Korea and drive Korea's industrialisation.
We were partners in one of the most remarkable economic success stories of modern times  -  Korea's growth.
A story which has seen Korea transformed from an aid recipient to an aid donor within a single generation.
Our militaries have walked together and our businesses have walked together.
Today, it is the strong and growing people-to-people ties that define our partnership every day Australians and Koreans walking together still.
35,000 Koreans choose to come to Australia each year to study.
More Koreans come to Australia as young working-holiday makers than from nearly any other country.
There are around 140,000 people of Korean heritage who have chosen to make Australia home, and they make a valuable contribution to our nation.
These steps we take together  -  in study, on visits, through work and by living in each other's countries  -  these steps together are the every day reality of the partnership we share.
Our economic partnership is also tremendously strong.
Korea is now Australia's fourth largest trading partner and third largest export market, from a significantly lower population base than Australia's two bigger export markets. 
Total merchandise trade in 2009-10 amounted to over $23.5 billion.
Australia is a safe, reliable and price-competitive supplier of many of the inputs that Korea has needed to drive its exports of automobiles, ships and electronics goods around the world and in turn to drive its economic growth at home.
As our economic relationship has grown, Korean companies have also prospered in Australia.  Hyundai-Kia, Samsung and LG have become household names.
Australia's liquefied natural gas trade with Korea is an essential part of this story.
This is why I welcome the agreement between Australian energy company Santos and its joint venture partner KOGAS to develop a project in Gladstone, with combined supply agreements worth more than $120 billion. 
It is expected to produce 7.8 million metric tons of LNG a year, and to create 5,000 construction jobs. 
Long-term supply arrangements, like this one, are clearly mutually beneficial.
They have helped Korean companies like POSCO secure access in a strong and growing market to iron ore and coal and, increasingly, to LNG.  And they provide certainty for Australian business.
Our economic relationship is now moving into new areas.
Korea is developing a reputation in Australia for innovation and high technology.  And Australia's increasing sophistication in services is a perfect match for Korea's new technological capabilities.
We have long said that the conclusion of a comprehensive FTA is the next logical step in the further development of our mutually beneficial bilateral relationship.
I am very confident that we can strike a mutually-acceptable agreement.  I will be discussing this with President Lee on Monday.
Australia and Korea are also working closely together to strengthen the global economy.
As trading nations, we are both strong supporters of a successful conclusion to the Doha Round of trade talks this year, seeing it as vital that the world trade agenda not fall backwards.
A successful Doha Round would be an important boost to the world trading system.
One way or other Doha should conclude in 2011.
Australia is working with Korea to try and get this done.
Australia and Korea worked closely together, along with others, to successfully establish the G20 as the premier global forum for economic cooperation.
This was a significant achievement, creating a new architecture to meet the challenges of our changing world.
The G20 saw unprecedented coordination among the world's major economies to arrest the global economic crisis, and then put the global economy back on the road to recovery. 
Australia worked hand-in-hand with Korea last year in its successful hosting of the G20, where significant progress was made.
This included advancing the G20 Framework for strong, balanced and sustainable global.  Simply put, that translates into jobs, more prosperity, and better lives for our peoples.
It also included landmark reforms to strengthen the global financial system against future crises, and historic reform to the IMF to ensure better crisis response mechanisms.
I would particularly like to highlight President Lee's leadership on a development agenda in the G20.
The benefits of the global economy need to be enjoyed by all people.  Wealthy countries must make special efforts to assist those in need. 
I am proud to be working so closely with Korea and other G20 members on this internationally.
Australia and Korea are building on these achievements to make sure that the G20 continues its significant role.
At home, Korea and Australia were two of only three developed countries to avoid dropping into recession during the recent global financial crisis.
Our countries benefited from our commitment to pursuing fundamental economic reforms that drive sustainable growth.
We both understand that the reform road leads to future prosperity.
In Australia, my Government is putting in place the major building blocks of a productivity agenda.
Continued macroeconomic stability and bringing the budget back into surplus.
Boosting productivity through well-targeted, direct investments by the Government in skills, infrastructure and innovation.
Improving workforce participation.  And addressing key long-term challenges such as climate change.
Our two countries share the challenge of building clean low-emissions economies for the future.
President Lee has shown great leadership in this area, driving the global clean growth paradigm and advocating for low carbon approaches to development around the world.
It is an area where Australia and Korea are working closely together.
Through the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Through the UN Secretary General's High-Level Panel on Global Sustainability, of which we are both members.
Through Australia's Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute initiative.
And I am pleased to announce tonight that Australia will contribute $10 million to Korea's Global Green Growth Institute, which has been established by the Korean Government to support the development of green growth strategies and policies in developing countries.
Australia will join the Institute as a core partner and will be represented on its board of directors.
Friends.
Australia and Korea walked together during the Korean War.
Since then, Australian and Korean troops have served together on combat and peacekeeping missions in many other places around the world, including Vietnam, Cambodia, the Western Sahara, the Levant, East Timor, Iraq and Afghanistan. 
Today, our countries share a common interest in the peace and stability of the Asia-Pacific, and especially the Korean Peninsula.
Korea was confronted again last year by provocative attacks from North Korea. 
Australia joined with Korea and the international community in condemning the North's unprovoked torpedoing of the ROK corvette Cheonan and the tragic loss of 46 sailors.
I was also deeply concerned by the North's artillery attack on Yeonpyeong Island last November. 
Australia strongly condemned this unprovoked attack.
These incidents followed worrying reports that North Korea was developing a sophisticated uranium enrichment program in defiance of UN Security Council resolutions.
Australia remains committed to the denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula, and will continue to stand alongside Korea in condemning North Korean aggression.
In this spirit, in 2009 Australia and Korea signed a Joint Statement for Enhanced Global and Security Cooperation.
This was Korea's first such bilateral security declaration with a country other than the United States.
It commits us to deepening our cooperation on defence and security matters, on regional as well as bilateral issues.
Given the region's dynamism, our common interests, and our growing inter-dependencies, it makes sense to cooperate to address these challenges.
We are determined to work  -  together with our friends and neighbours such as Korea  -  to help build and ensure the long-term peace, stability and prosperity of the Asia Pacific region.
For example, we are helping shape regional norms and institutions. 
Australia and Korea are both founding members of the East Asia Summit.
With the recent expansion of the EAS, we now have an institution with the right membership and mandate to address the range of security, political and economic issues facing the region.
We will continue to work with Korea to strengthen the role of the EAS in managing regional challenges and promoting an inclusive community.
We are committed to pursuing inclusive regional economic integration through the EAS, where we are discussing consolidation of the six ASEAN+1 Free Trade Agreements.
Genuine trade liberalisation and deeper economic integration across EAS members will benefit all member countries.
Australia and Korea are working together on global challenges such as climate change, clean energy, and the global economic recovery.
And we have consistently demonstrated our willingness to share responsibility for global, as well as regional, security.
Beyond our immediate region, Australia and Korea are both fully engaged in combating terrorism and countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
We are working with the United States and other allies in Afghanistan to prevent Afghanistan from becoming a safe-haven for terrorists. 
Together, we are working to meet the challenges of the 21st century.
And we are building that shared future, through a friendship that has stood the test of time.
This year marks the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Australia and the Republic of Korea.
To celebrate this, our two governments declared that this year would be the Australia-Korea Year of Friendship.
But we see this as a relationship “fifty years young” rather than ‘fifty years old”, forward-looking and vibrant.
Australia and Korea are natural partners.
We are similar-sized economies.
We are both free trading nations, committed to a stable, open and rules-based global trading order. 
Our trade links are intense and highly complementary. 
Australia's strengths in raw materials, energy and services have complemented Korea's strengths in mass production and heavy industry.
We are both committed to a stable and prosperous Asia-Pacific, dynamic economically and free from conflict.
We are both alliance partners of the United States, seeing the US presence in Asia as fundamental to regional stability.
We are G20 economies, members of the East Asia Summit, and active participants in APEC. 
As middle powers, we are committed to multilateralism and believe in doing our part to strengthen a rules-based global order.
Like Korea, Australia is seeking election to a non-permanent Security Council seat in coming years. 
Most importantly, we share values.
Our societies are vibrant democracies, with transparent and accountable governments.
Our economies are competitive and dynamic, based on economic reform and productivity growth. 
Our peoples believe in the value of hard work and education.
As natural partners and close friends, I am committed to building Australia's relationship with Korea.
This is a partnership full of promise and potential.
And I look forward to a rich future of Australia-Korea cooperation.



 Australian veterans of the Korean War.
And first in precedence for today veterans of the Battle of Kapyong
Members of the 3rd Battalion, The Royal Australian Regiment, 3 RAR.
Old Faithfuls. Australians who put Duty First.
You, the men of Kapyong, know your story.
I believe it is time more Australians did.
When you first came here, sixty years ago, you came in the ANZAC tradition.
You knew then the commitment Australians make every year.
We will remember them.
That is the commitment I am here to honour today.
Australia does not forget.
This is Kapyong.
This is where, on the 23rd of April 1951, you were preparing to remember the men of Gallipoli.
This is where you gathered wild azaleas to make ANZAC Day wreaths. This is where you planned to share a meal and have a beer or two with the Turkish brigade who were nearby.
Former enemies, now allies, but the celebration was not to be.
Because this is where duty came first.
That night, the Chinese Communist Army launched its spring offensive through the traditional invasion route of the Kapyong Valley.
It was the final attempt to take Seoul.
That night the defining fight for the Australians in the Korean War began. Kapyong, this great fighting withdrawal. This battle that stopped a breakthrough.
That night you fought them.
In the dark. Radios failing, telephone lines cut. Outnumbered.
And through the day and through another night, you fought on.
This is where the battle continued through ANZAC Day 1951.
This is Kapyong.
You came here as heirs to a tradition. 
You brought with you a legacy, left to you by the men of Gallipoli.
Mateship, courage, teamwork, initiative.
You were more than worthy of the tradition you inherited.
You added to it for the heirs you have today.
Training, discipline, professionalism.
You came here as the sons of ANZAC.
You left as the fathers of our professional Army.
And on operations in Afghanistan or East Timor, in training in Australia or overseas, the modern Australian Army is still Kapyong's child.
The US Presidential Citation awarded to 3 RAR spoke of “extraordinary heroism and outstanding performance of combat duties in action ”The Battle Honour “Kapyong” is now emblazoned on the Regimental Colour of each Battalion of the Royal Australian Regiment this is where you won that honour.
Our commitment to Korea was a sign of the future of Australia's security in the new post-war world.
We proved ourselves a reliable and courageous ally.
Among the United Nations with the United States in Asia.
Pillars of Australia's security still.
Australians made great sacrifices in Korea.
From our Navy, Air Force and Army, more than 17,000 Australians served in Korea, many of them here today, veterans of other battles, 340 Australians died, more than 1200 were wounded and 30 became prisoners of war.
I honour 3 RAR and your Canadian, New Zealand, British and US allies and I honour the part you played so South Korea could embrace the democratic freedoms it enjoys today.
A professional Army and a proud nation honour you too.
This is where, sixty years ago, the men of Kapyong prepared to remember the men of Gallipoli.
This is where we remember the men of Kapyong today.



His Excellency Mr Park Sung-choon, Minister for Patriots and Veterans Affairs, and Mrs ParkVeterans of the Korean War, and accompanying family members  -  and I am particularly pleased to see here this evening some of those Korean veterans and family members who fought alongside the Australian forces
Keith Payne, VC, Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie, Chief of Army.
Ambassador and Mrs Gerovich, serving members of 3 RAR, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This morning I had the privilege of travelling to the Kapyong battlefield with our veterans to commemorate the 60thanniversary of that decisive battle.
Sacred ground, forever honoured by courage and sacrifice.
After the emotion of today's events, we gather tonight in a spirit of comradeship here in this great city of Seoul, this dynamic, prosperous world city that stands as a lasting monument to freedom.
I'm proud to be here with some of the authors of that freedom.
And I'm prouder still to lead a nation capable of producing such individuals.
Those of us who inherit your legacy can only imagine what it means to have served in war.
To be one of those ordinary Australians called upon to do extraordinary things.
Australians like Ray Parry, who along with three mates defended an outpost against a major attack.
Ray Parry's stand is featured in the Kapyong diorama at the Australian War Memorial and the citation that accompanied his Military Medal praised his ‘brilliant leadership' and ‘determination to hold vital ground' as being directly responsible for ‘thoroughly disorganising the enemy'.
Or the nurses who put their hand up to go to war zones, like Nell Espie who was one of the first women to become a career military nurse and who not only served in Korea, but Malaya and Vietnam as well.
Or prisoner of war Private Robert Parker who, when captured, said that despite being terrified, he put up his hands and smiled at them.
He was listed as missing in action and for seven months his family didn't know where he was.
“The thing that kept me going was thinking about getting home one day,” he said.
Time and time again when we hear these stories of fortitude and courage, there is a common purpose, which our newest VC holder Ben-Roberts Smith put beautifully when he said:
"Everyone knows that the mastering of fear is the definition of bravery or courage but I feel it's also understanding there's something greater than yourself at risk which is your mates, the other people you're there for."
Mateship has been an overriding theme throughout ANZAC history and the Korean War was no exception.
Stories of men risking their lives for their mates, of great camaraderie, not just within their own ranks but with allied troops, particularly with our ANZAC brothers from New Zealand.
There is a wonderful illustration of how the larrikin spirit spans the Tasman. The story goes that a challenge was laid down between the Aussies and the Kiwis that whenever two of their vehicles passed each other, they had to embark on a water fight.
This had the locals quite puzzled. 
They would watch as the allies' vehicles, driving in opposite directions, would suddenly come to a grinding halt on roads that were jammed with military traffic.
Once stopped, waves of water would be exchanged between the trucks and then they would carry on.
Now, when the water fighting escalated, the lads became quite innovative.
They would empty their vehicle's fire extinguishers and fill them up with water because they made such excellent water pistols.
And there also seems to be another theme associated with the Aussies in Korea, and that is the few comforts that would remind them of home.
Major Ben O'Dowd, commander of A Company of the 3 RAR wrote of the problem of trying to keep bottled beer from freezing in the Korean winter:
 “For me it was a matter of cuddling my Fosters overnight in my sleeping bag. A warm beer went well with breakfast washing down my preferred combat ration of Ham and Lima Beans."
Believe it or not, a warm beer sounds preferable to the local moonshine called Wah Rang Brandy that Ben O'Dowd tried his hardest to steer clear of.
Friends, these are the human stories from days of courage and mateship, and of the deep friendship with the Korean people. 
I think the fact that, to this day, the Republic of Korea sponsors foreign veterans to come back here to revisit their battlefields speaks volumes for the esteem in which the Australian troops are held and I pay tribute to the Korean Government and the Ministry of Patriots and Veterans' Affairs for keeping faith over these six long decades.
We are proud to be your guests because we come to honour a great legacy.
And to do what is important: remember.
We remember the 17,000 Australians who served in Korea and the 340 who did not make it home.
We remember those Allied personnel who served and died.
And, of course, we remember the horrendous price paid by the Korean people, military and civilian, in defence of their homeland.
They asked no sacrifice from the UN forces that they were not prepared to make themselves, many times over.
No-one who fought  -  who suffered  -  who died  -  during those 1000 bloody days will ever be forgotten.
Those who served must be remembered because they are part of us; they are the best of us.
The Australian National Korean War Memorial in Canberra is an important part of this contract of remembrance we make as a nation.
I am pleased to announce today that a new interpretative panel will be installed in the Memorial later this year.
This panel will recognise those Australians Missing in Action during the Korean War whose bodies have not been recovered.
Importantly, it will also recognise the service of those Australians who served in Korea after the armistice in 1953 
At the end of the Korean War, Lieutenant General Sir Henry Wells, Commander-In-Chief of British Commonwealth Forces in Korea, issued a “Special Order of the Day”.
General Wells, a distinguished Australian soldier, issued the Order to mark the end of hostilities but also to summon the Commonwealth forces to continued vigilance during the Armistice period, when great uncertainty remained.
The panel will be added to the memorial before Remembrance Day this year.
I'm also very proud to announce today a special one-off group of ten “Kapyong Commemorative Scholarships”, under the Australia Awards program.
These will consist of five PhDs and five shorter Executive Awards to enable Korean students to study in Australia to honour this year's anniversary so that, in a small way, the significance of Kapyong will be remembered to a new generation.
They, like us, should never forget.
Friends,
The sun has gone down tonight, and tomorrow dawn will break on this beautiful land.
This land where generations of Korean children have grown up in security.
Hard-fought and hard-won.
Tomorrow we commemorate ANZAC Day and I know it will be as special for you as it will be for me.



PM: Well, I'm here today, in Korea, at the site of the battle of Kapyong. This is where it was fought 60 years ago and we're here to commemorate that very important battle in the Korean War. I'm delighted to have been able to bring with me some Australian war veterans, including veterans of the Battle of Kapyong itself.
The Korean War, in Australia, is a forgotten war. We don't remember it as we should. As Prime Minister, I've been determined to put a focus on the Korean War, to remind the nation of what our servicemen and women achieved here. This was an important war, where we fought for democracy and for the people of South Korea.
And I know from talking to the veterans who are with me today that it is remarkable for them to come back so many years after the end of the war and see this vibrant democracy.  Many of them have not come back here since they were fighting here. They left a country in ruins, and came back to a prosperous modern democracy. So it's been a special moment to be able to attend this commemoration to mark the 60th anniversary of the Battle of Kapyong, and I am certainly looking forward to the dinner that I will have with veterans here tonight.
I do also want to thank the Korean government and the Korean people; they host continuously a program to bring Australian war veterans back to Korea to thank them for their service and their sacrifice. It's a lovely program and I do want to say the Australian government is very grateful for that continued work.
In addition today, I will travel to the De-Militarised Zone for briefings and as I say, I will enjoy a dinner with the veterans tonight. Tomorrow, in addition to commemorating ANZAC day, I will be meeting with President Lee of Korea.
Our partnership with Korea is an important one. They are an important economic partner for us, our third biggest export market, our fourth biggest trading partner. And we want to add to that economic partnership with a Free Trade Agreement, which would be good for Australia and good for Korea. It would be particularly good for Australian agricultural exports. So I will be talking to President Lee tomorrow about getting on with that Free Trade Agreement, and moving it towards a conclusion.
I will also be talking to President Lee about our work together in the G20, the East Asia Summit and at APEC. Of course the last G20 meeting was hosted right here, in Korea, by President Lee. I will also be discussing our continuing defence ties with Korea.
Today's been a very special moment, a special anniversary. I'm very much enjoying having the opportunity to talk to the veterans. And I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, 3RAR was awarded a US Presidential Citation. Does it deserve to be receive or be considered for an Australian military citation?
PM: Well, I think it deserves to have the Australian people focus on what was achieved here, and that's the step that I'm trying to take today. I think Australia was weary of war after World War II, and then we came here to fight in Korea. And then, of course, the Vietnam War was so controversial that a lot of our political life has been dominated by debates about Vietnam, and a lot of our history-telling focuses on Vietnam and between the two - the significance of World War II and the controversy of Vietnam  -  the Korean War often gets overlooked and forgotten.
And I know that there is that sense amongst our veterans' community that here, at Kapyong, they fought a forgotten battle in a forgotten War. That's the sense I want to change.  So it's really the sense of the Australian people about the importance of this place and the service of Australian soldiers here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I was just talking to one of those guys-
JOURNALIST: One of the veterans said that this could be taught in schools.
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: One of the veteran's here says it should be taught in schools.
JOURNALIST:  And he would like you to do something about it.
PM: Certainly, I believe it should be a focus for how we tell Australian history and a very significant step has been taken on that. I did have the opportunity, back in Australia, to launch a new retelling of the history of the Korean War and this battle. It's a great documentary. It will be good for Australians to watch and to learn from, but it will be particularly useful as a teaching aid to explain to people the significant of the Korean War and the significance of the Battle of Kapyong, in this place.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, now you're going to the DMZ, obviously. How would you characterise the North Korean regime? Obviously people here have particular views, but what are your views? And what are your thoughts on the prospects for peace on the Peninsula?
PM: Well, the North Korean regime is a repressive dictatorship; an administration that continues to suppress the North Korean people, who battle daily just for the simple basics of life: for food and for nutrition. I mean, the contrast between these two places, North Korea, South Korea, could not be more stark. Here we've got a prosperous, vibrant democracy that has moved from being an aid recipient to an aid donor. This is a country of real prosperity.
And then across the border people live without freedom, and often they live without the very basics of life, a poor country where people are repressed and have no freedoms.
We are concerned about continuing North Korean aggression. We are concerned about their nuclear program, and we continue to call on North Korea to meaningfully participate in talks. That requires North Korea to indicate that it is prepared to change. There's no point getting people to talk for talks' sake. North Korea does have to indicate a preparedness to change, and come to the table and of course there are the Six Party Talks to enable that to occur, if North Korea is prepared to engage in them genuinely.
JOURNALIST: How big a threat is North Korea to our region?
PM: Well, the instability here on the Korean peninsula is concerning to our region, to regional stability. That's why I'm putting such a focus on it in my discussions in the region, in Japan, here in South Korea, and when I go to China. We want to make sure that there is a continued focus on this instability, because we want to bring continued pressure on the North Korean regime for change.
JOURNALIST: That's something, isn't it, that you discussed with President Obama a few weeks ago in Washington? And would you like to, or are you confident that in their Defence Posture Review that you've talked about, that they will continue to put the pressure on in terms of having the defence resources around here, in this region?
PM: Look I think they are, they are two separate issues. I mean the US periodically reviews its defence posture. It's going through one of those processes now and it's consulting its allies, including Australia. The pressure on North Korea isn't really bound up with the Global Force Posture Review. Rather, it is continuing pressure from the United States, from Australia, from countries around the world, by the United Nations, through resolutions, to try and keep sufficient pressure on North Korea. Or indeed, increase pressure so that North Korea does meaningfully participate in talks. Obviously the world responded with stepped-up pressure after acts of North Korean aggression in the last twelve months.
JOURNALIST: There's been quite a bit of criticism in the British press of you being invited to the wedding and your decision to go. What's your reaction to that?
PM: Well, I'll be there representing the Australian people. I think that's the appropriate thing.
JOURNALIST: As a republican though?
PM: Well, I'll be there representing the Australian people. The Australian people have a variety of views about the future constitutional arrangements for our country. There are many republicans in Australia. There are also many Australians who want to see our continued ties to the monarchy. That debate will play its way through, in our national life. We've had one referendum and we will continue to discuss our future constitutional arrangements. But we are, of course, currently, under our monarchy. We have not taken the step to be a Republic. I received an invitation to go to the Royal wedding, and I think  -  on behalf of the nation  -  that it's appropriate that I'm there.
JOURNALIST: Why not send the Governor-General, given your own personal beliefs?
PM: Well, both the Governor-General and I were invited to the Royal wedding and we'll both be in attendance.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, China is a key backer of North Korea. What, you said that you would talk about North Korea when you were in China, talking to Chinese leaders. What will your message to them be on North Korea?
PM: My message would be that it is not in China's interest to have instability on the Korean peninsula. So we have a shared interest in addressing the aggression of North Korea. We've got a shared interest in North Korea meaningfully participating in talks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's some are extracts in the papers today from Lindsay Tanner's new book, critical of the government, the election and your hair colour. Do you have a response?
PM: Well, I guess my response would be I'm driven as a Labor Prime Minister by a fair go for all Australians, and if I'm helping with a fair go for ‘rangers as well I think that's a good thing.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you the history you were talking about, Korean history. So General MacArthur landed in South Korea and he's a bit of a hero for pushing the Chinese back across the border. Then he continue up towards the Yalu River and then the Chinese came and pushed him back down again. Did General MacArthur make a mistake? Did he go too far?
PM: I'm not sure that I'm going to try and rewrite world history. What I do want to say about the history here is that Australian defence personnel fought bravely, and we are standing on the site of a Battle that played a significant role in the outcome of the Korean War. If our men hadn't stood here and held back the Chinese push, then Seoul could have been lost, and that would have changed the outcome of the Korean War. So it's their heroism, rather than debating past tactics that I'm here to do today.
JOURNALIST: What would you say to those veterans?
PM: Look, what I would say to veterans on every side of the conflict. The story of this Battle tells the tale of what we should say to veterans of China today. These soldiers, the soldiers who fought here in Kapyong were preparing for ANZAC Day. They thought they'd get a bit of a respite, and a break from the rigors of war. They were preparing to mark ANZAC Day and they were preparing to do this with the Turkish forces who were fighting alongside them here. It's a remarkable thing. There they were, getting ready to commemorate Gallipoli, where we had fought against the Turks, here, as they fought side-by-side alongside them. In a different struggle, a different age, a different time.
Now, what that says to us, I think, is we always honour and remember our history, but it doesn't define our present. Gallipoli doesn't define our present. It doesn't define our relationship with Turkey. It didn't define the relationship with the Turkish forces for the men who fought here, in Kapyong, alongside them. Obviously, this battle doesn't define our contemporary relationship with China, nor our understanding of the thoughts and sentiments of Chinese veterans themselves.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, How concerned are you by Andrew Wilkie's declaration that he'd mended his relationship with Tony Abbott and he thinks that he would make a pretty good Prime Minister?
PM: Look, I'll be happy to keep working alongside Andrew Wilkie on an issue of shared concern. The government, in the last period of government, got the Productivity Commission to look at the area of problem gambling because we were very concern about it. Now, Andrew Wilkie has a particular passion in this area. But I think many Australians are very concerned that they know people that do take their whole pay packet, or their whole pension and blow it by putting it down the pokies, and then they can't pay the bills when they come in or make appropriate arrangements for their kids. So I think this is an area we'll keep working on together. I've got very good working relationships with Mr Wilkie, and I've got every expectation that they'll continue.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, North Korea shows no sign of planning to resume the talks that you were talking about. Does the international community need to put more pressure on North Korea?
PM: Well, we need to continue the pressure on North Korea. North Korea is a hard regime to influence. It's one of the most opaque regimes in the world. I think we all understand that. It's a hard regime to influence, but we've got to keep the pressure on, for them to show that they're genuinely prepared to change. I understand that there's no point just saying ‘sit down and talk', if the talks are not going to achieve anything and there's no prospect of them achieving anything.
That's why it really is for all of us to keep pressure on North Korea, to indicate that it is prepared to change and to genuinely participate in the talks, and the Six Party Talks are the vehicle for it. Now, we are not one of the six countries, so ultimately the resumption of those talks is a decision for the six counties involved, but we can play a role in assisting with pressure on North Korea, and we're doing that.
JOURNALIST: How do you feel personally about being here today, and do you regret the fact that Australia has forgotten this war?
PM: I do regret the fact that we haven't paid, in my view, sufficient honour and attention to the men who are here today and the many other men who are still alive and fought in the Korean War. 17,000 Australians fought here. 340 died, 1,200 were wounded, and 30 had prisoner of war experience.
This was an important engagement for Australia. It was an important war in fostering and keeping democracy here, in this place where we stand today and I do want Australians to understand the importance of the Korean War. I want them to understand the importance of honouring our Korean War veterans who are still with us and I want them to put appropriate recognition on what was achieved here.
We are standing in a wonderful, vibrant, lively democracy. Seoul is one of the great cities of the world. You get the same sense of energy there you do when you visit great cities like New York. All of this has been built from ruins following the War and it wouldn't have happened if men, like these men here, hadn't fought and held back an advance, here in this place, and hadn't fought in the Korean War. The Korean people are very grateful and that's one of the reasons they consistently ask our veterans back, to come and experience modern day Korea, and to see what they fought for and what they achieved.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS]



PM:  Today I had wide ranging and productive talks with President Lee over a bilateral meeting and a working lunch. I also had the opportunity to meet with Prime Minister Kim. I thanked President Lee for the warm hospitality that has been shown to me during my visit to Korea. I informed him that I was delighted that I could visit in the 50th anniversary year of diplomatic relations between our two countries and also during the year we've designated as the Australia-Korea Year of Friendship.
I also described to him how important it was for me to be here with Australian veterans to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the Battle of Kapyong and also to commemorate our Anzac Day. Korea and Australia are natural middle power partners, we are similar sized economies, trading nations and we've got shared interests in a stable and prosperous Asia-Pacific. Our discussions covered a full range of bilateral matters. We focussed, of course, on the strong economic ties between our two countries. I noted specifically to the President that there were prospects for a significant increase in LNG exports to Korea.
I reiterated to President Lee my personal commitment to concluding the Free Trade Agreement between our two countries because it will be mutually beneficial for both of our countries. I am very pleased that out of our discussions we were able to agree that the negotiations on the Free Trade Agreement should be concluded this year. I welcome this outcome and I will be instructing Australia's trade negotiators to work to this timetable. A comprehensive, high quality FTA is good for both of us. Trade means jobs for both our nations. But we also agreed on the importance of high level visits to maintain the momentum of the relationship and, in that regard, we agreed that separate bilateral meetings of our foreign affairs and defence ministers should be held on a more regular basis.
We also agreed that we should work towards foreign and defence ministers meeting in what is known as a two plus two format, that is, regular exchanges involving the foreign affairs and defence ministers of both nations. I'm also pleased to announce that following our discussions, President Lee and I have agreed to revitalise the Korea-Australia Young Political Leaders Exchange Program. This enables young people who will be future leaders to have travel and exchange between the two countries. It's a great way of building people to people links. These young persons' exchanges were agreed to in 2005 but the program has fallen into abeyance since and I'm very glad that we will be able to reinstate it with exchanges this year.
We also had a comprehensive discussion on our cooperation with Korea on regional and global affairs. We are of course, working together to consolidate the G20's role as the world's premier economic policy forum and President Lee personally, and the nation of South Korea, played a major role in that through hosting the G20 here at the end of last year.
I underlined Australia's support for the development agenda that Korea put on the G20's agenda and for taking this forward when the G20 meets in France later this year.  We also agreed to work together and with other members of the East Asia Summit to further develop that forum and its political, economic and security agenda. Australia has been suggesting and we will continue to suggest that there are many ways of furthering practical cooperation through the East Asia Summit. Issues on which we can cooperate include disaster relief, non-proliferation, and maritime security. Australia is pursuing stronger links between the East Asia Summit and the ASEAN Defence Ministers + 8 meeting and we are also pressing for a second finance ministers meeting, to be held prior to the EAS meeting at the end of the year. We believe that such a finance ministers meeting could focus on economic resilience within our region. There is good continued cooperation in other fields including education, and President Lee himself was personally involved in pressing to have education as an area of cooperation for the East Asia summit and to have education ministers meet.
We, of course, discussed North Korea and I underlined Australia's support for South Korea against the background of North Korean provocations and aggression  -  the provocations and aggression that we saw during the course of last year. Can I conclude by saying I do want to thank President Lee, the Prime Minister, the officials who have worked with us in Korea for their wonderful hospitality and warmth towards us. It's been a very special time to be here, accompanied as I have been by Australian veterans and I'm very pleased about the wide ranging and productive talks I've had with President Lee today. I've very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST:  I am from the Diplomat Magazine.  Welcome to Korea. You visited Punmunjom yesterday. Can you tell me what your impression of Punmunjom visit? And second is, what is your view on re-election of UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon. Thank you.
PM:  Thank you. I did have the opportunity to travel to the De-Militarized Zone yesterday. It was personally a remarkable experience for me. I have never been anywhere like that before in my life, a unique experience for me. What it underlined to me though, is the sense of insecurity that the people of South Korea live with. It gave me a very clear personal experience of what it is like to know that you have a country along side you, a place alongside you that is periodically engaged in acts of aggression and provocation. Australia has been a strong supporter of South Korea and we've strongly condemned the acts of provocation and aggression we've seen from North Korea, including particularly the acts that we saw last year which caused the loss of the life of a number of Koreans, particularly the 46 sailors who were lost.
On the question of the US Secretary General I have on other visits from Australia had the opportunity to meet with the Secretary General and he's got a standing invite to come and visit Australia too.  
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, are there any obstacles in the way for the free trade deal? Like, how confident are you that it will be done by the end of the year?
PM:  I'm very confident that we can get this done. It is in both our countries' interest. I believed it got to that stage where it did need a political expression of will to get it done, a leader level expression of will and both the President and I have indicated that we've got the political will to get this done. It is in the interests of both of our nations, it's in Australia's interests, it's strongly in the interests of our agricultural exporters and it's strongly in the interests of services exports so I'm very determined to get it done and I'm very pleased that we have set a timetable for the negotiations out of my meeting with President Lee today.
JOURNALIST:  There have been a number of WikiLeaks cables that have been released, one that was suggesting that Manumdouh Habib was confessed under extreme duress, he was on the way to hijack a Qantas flight. What does the Government know about this information?
PM: Sabra, it is not going to surprise you when I say I don't comment on WikiLeaks, so I won't be deviating from the Government's policy about not commenting on WikiLeaks. As you would be aware following earlier decision making in Australia, the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security is having a review and investigation into a number of allegations made by Mr Habib, so those matters will be the subject of her report.
JOURNALIST: These allegations are not a surprise to you?
PM: Well I don't comment on WikiLeaks and I don't comment on intelligence matters and as a result I can't help you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what were the nature of the discussions with the President regarding China, were there any discussions?
PM: Well we had a comprehensive discussion about regional affairs and regional engagement including the East Asia Summit. Of course, in the context of discussing our region, China's role in our region was discussed, China's role in regional affairs. Our focus on the future agenda for the East Asia Summit in particular, comprehending as it does, the countries, the right countries sitting round the table with the right mandate to look broadly at issues across the political, economic and security area.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is that because if things get to the point where you are on, or the region is on, the brink of military issues or military intervention one way or the other that you have got a mechanism by which to deal with that?
PM: Kieran, I think that is a very substantial hypothetical, what we do as a government in terms of engagement in our region, of course we engage with countries, with our important partners on this trip. I'm engaged with important countries in our region, Japan, South Korea and China, important trading partners. Indeed if you add them all up, more than 50 per cent of our exports go to the three of them and also important partners in regional forums, like the East Asia Summit. to take one example. These are each important relationships in their own right. In the course of going to Japan, here in Korea we have talked across a wide range of issues  -  political issues, economic issues, security issues, clearly here in South Korea a focus is on the security of the Korean Peninsula. I'm looking forward to equally comprehensive discussions in China.  
JOURNALIST: If you were to raise human rights issues in China, are you worried about offending the Chinese Government?
PM: I will raise human rights issues in China, in the way that Australia regular raises human rights issues with China. For example, a senior communist party official, Mr Jia, recently visited Australia. I had the opportunity to meet with him and in the course of having a broad ranging conversation, did raise the question of human rights. The approach is that we raise human rights as we raise a wide range of matters in our bilateral relationship and we've got an ongoing human rights dialogue.
JOURNALIST: What has the response been so far when you do raise human rights issues?
PM: We obviously do it raise and I did raise it with Mr Jia and I'd refer you to the transcript of the time the questions I answered afterwards. We do raise human rights, we raise it in the context of seeking China's assurance that the freedoms that are guaranteed for its people in its constitution are being observed and China is not taking a backwards step on human rights.
JOURNALIST: Given the recent crackdown, do you think that strategy is proving effective?
PM: Well we raise these questions and we raise them in the context of seeking an assurance that China is not taking a backwards step. Of course, I'm concerned about recent reports and that's one of the reasons that we do raise human rights but this is subject to regular dialogue between our two countries including through a purpose specific forum, a human rights dialogue forum.
JOURNALIST: What is your stance on human rights violations among North Koreans and the role of China?
PM: North Koreans? We condemn North Korea's acts of provocation and aggression towards South Korea and we also condemn the way in which the North Korean people continue to suffer under this repressive regime. I've said before in the context of this trip that you couldn't get a starker contrast between two nations. The democratic, prosperous South and the repressive North in which people struggle for the basics of human life, so we do very much condemn the way in which the people of North Korea have been treated by the repressive regime which holds them down both in a sense of lack of human rights and freedom, and in the sense of often lack of access to the basics of life. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you that the protests are continuing in immigration detention centres in Australia (inaudible) have spread beyond Villawood and there are reports that (inaudible)
PM: Look, it's not my intention to comment in detail about domestic questions back home. The Minister for Immigration, Chris Bowen and the acting Prime Minister will obviously deal with this in detail. My perspective is a very clear one. There is no reward in the system for people behaving badly in our detention centres, so poor conduct in our detention centres is not rewarded. So people engaging in any acts of violence or destruction thinking that this is going to get them an advantage in the processing of their claims, then they are wrong, it will not get them any such advantage. On the question of self-harm, we obviously don't want to see people hurting themselves. We have mental health professionals, who are there to assist people in immigration detention, but I am a supporter of mandatory detention, we must have a system in which we can properly assess people's claims. As a Government, we've committed to the treatment of women and children in circumstances where we can best provide for their needs including by caring for them in quite different community based circumstances and the government is working to implement that policy.   
JOURNALIST:  Was there a request for food aid from North Korea?
PM: An aid request, food aid? I understand. On the question of food aid for North Korea, we are considering the question of food aid. We have not taken a decision on the provision of food aid.
JOURNALIST: You seemed to get along quite well with President Lee this morning. He described the relationship with you and with Australia, as a special relationship.  You also appeared to hold hands there at the start. How would you characterise the relationship?
PM: Look, I think it is a very personally warm relationship. I've had the opportunity to meet with President Lee and a number of a circumstances including here over a period of time during the G20 so I believe that our relationship has a degree of personal warmth to it. I think you saw that on display and I think there is a lot of personal warmth between our peoples as well, so it is not just a question of me and President Lee having a good friendship but I think with our veterans who have travelled here,  you've probably seen with your own eyes over the last few days, exhibitions of the real fondness with which Australians view the Korean people and the return of that fondness and thanks for the role we played here during the Korean War, having played proudly some part in the creation of what is a wonderful and vibrant country and a great democracy. Thank you very much.  



We gather here in silence, here in this great free city of Seoul. Here today, as the guests of our friends, the people of the Republic of Korea, we acknowledge the men and women of this nation who have so valiantly served their country.
We offer these words we mean so deeply. 
Yet on ANZAC Day, only our silence truly speaks for us.
From our war memorial in Canberra to our war graves at Gallipoli, silent Australians gather together to fulfil our great national covenant: in the morning, we will remember them.
In our silence today we remember those we have lost.
Over 100,000 Australians have died for us in war, from before the first ANZAC Day to the attack which took the life of Sapper Jamie Larcombe in Afghanistan this year - each of them one of us; each of them lost to us now; each in essence an ordinary Australian who we asked to do an extraordinary thing.
Lance Corporal Leonard Keysor was one of Australia's 98 Victoria Cross recipients.
A clerk before enlisting, he fought in the battle of Lone Pine in August 1915. Leonard caught Turkish bombs mid-flight before lobbing them back into the Turkish trenches. 
This was extraordinary.
Corporal Ben Roberts-Smith single-handedly assaulted two Taliban machine gun positions to enable his mates to continue with their operation. A typically reluctant hero and a humble man, Ben had been prepared to give his life for his country.
This was extraordinary.
Yesterday, I was honoured to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the Battle of Kapyong and spend time with another group of Australians and New Zealanders who did extraordinary things.
As the sun rose on 25 April 1951 their job at the battle of Kapyong was nearly done.  
Today, they return, silent.
On this ANZAC Day we particularly honour 3RAR and their Canadian, New Zealand, British and US comrades.  
Many of those veterans are here today.
Your presence here along with many other veterans of the Korean War makes this a special ANZAC Day indeed.
On a day when Australians are a people who remember, we remember the Australians who serve our country with courage and distinction in uniform overseas, the men and women of our Defence Force, Australians who are so much a part of our nation's story and soul that their hat itself is a great symbol of who we are, and the badge of shining swords they wear on it we call the Rising Sun.
This ANZAC Day I say to every member of our Defence Force:
I know that the Australians who came before you and served our nation in uniform in the past are proud of you. I know that because I am here with them today. You are their worthy successors.
On this day we remember also the Australians who come home, their lives changed forever.
We remember every family who mourns the loss of a loved one.
We remember the ordinary Australians who we ask to do extraordinary things.
We remember the Australians who died for us, the original ANZACs - young men of a young nation who forged a legend of courage and mateship on the Gallipoli Peninsula.
We remember the many who came after them. 
And, in particular, here today, the Australians who took their final breath on Korean soil 60 years ago. 
Australians do remember them. Australians will remember them.
We remember them with our silence.
Lest we forget.



PM:In Korea this morning I've had the opportunity to attend an Anzac Day commemoration.
This was a very special event, involving as it did many of the veterans who have been here for a journey to be in Korea, veterans who served here in the Korean War. I spent yesterday with those veterans, including veterans of the Battle of Kapyong. We had the opportunity to commemorate that major battle in the Korean War 60 years ago where our soldiers very bravely fought. It was a special event yesterday to commemorate that Battle, followed by dinner last night where I enjoyed some casual times with the veterans, and this morning it's been a special event to come together again, following yesterday, and to have our Anzac Day commemoration. 
Around the world, Australians are commemorating Anzac Day, a day that has become central to our identity as a nation; a day when we remember the Australian fallen; a day when we reflect on the price of war; a day when we reflect on our national identity - what it means to come together and fight, what it means to show courage, what it means to show mateship in adversity. I'm looking forward to a Gunfire Breakfast with the veterans.
Then I will be moving on to a series of meetings here in South Korea. Most particularly, I am looking forward to meeting again with President Lee. I've had the opportunity to meet President Lee of Korea before. Of course, I was here in Seoul when he hosted the G20 Summit.
In that meeting with President Lee, I will be talking about all the issues in our broad and deep relationship. I intend to particularly focus on our economic ties. Korea is an important trading partner for Australia and we want to add to that trade through a free trade agreement, and I will be talking to President Lee about the prospects for concluding that free trade agreement.
I will also be talking to President Lee about outlooks for the G20, the East Asia Summit and APEC. Of course, President Lee will have a special perspective on the forthcoming G20, having played the role as the host and the chair of the last G20. I'm also looking forward to talking to him about our important regional meetings later this year, including the East Asia Summit, with its broadened membership, and we hope of course that it will fulfill its role with its broadened mandate, engaging itself in political questions, economic questions and security questions. I will of course be talking about our defence links with Korea to President Lee, so I am very much looking forward to that meeting.
I will then leave Korea to visit China, and of course following China I will be attending the Royal wedding, before returning to Australia.
I'm very happy to talk questions.
JOURNALIST:  You will talk about defence ties. How much of that will focus on China?
PM:We have a strong defence ties with Korea, and of course we cooperate on a broad range of issues: on counterterrorism; on cyber-security; on a broad range of transnational issues, so it is going to comprehend the full breadth of our relationship.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you hoping that your presence here, at this Anzac Day service here today, will help raise awareness among ordinary Australians about Korean War veterans?
PM: I've been hoping throughout this trip, by being here for the 60th anniversary of the Battle of Kapyong, that I will be able to put a focus on that Battle and on the Korean War. The Korean War has often been referred to as the ‘forgotten war'. The Battle of Kapyong itself was referred to as the ‘forgotten battle' of the ‘forgotten war'. I'd like Australians to remember the heroism our veterans showed, our fighting personnel showed, in this place 60 years ago.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how does it feel that you're the first, how much impact do you think it has that you're the first Prime Minister to be here on Anzac Day?
PM:I think, particularly, to the veterans who fought here in Korea it has a real meaning. They have felt the burden of having their particular efforts not well remembered in Australia. Many of them have said to me over the last few days that they have felt that Australian history and the Australian nation has not appropriately appreciated their contribution here in Korea, so one thing I've wanted to achieve is to put a spotlight on the heroism and dedication of the Australians who served here, and I hope in a small way I've achieved that. 
We'll just go to Sabra and come across.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, how confident are you that you will actually have free trade deals signed and agreed to after today. Is that a real prospect, or-
PM:-Well, we're not looking to sign a free trade agreement today, but I am hoping that in my discussions with President Lee to inject momentum into the free trade agreement discussions between Australian and Korea. I believe we can reach agreement, and I certainly believe we should reach agreement. An agreement between Korea and Australia is in the interest of both our nations. It's in Australia's interests, particularly in the interests of our agricultural sector.
We won't be entering into an agreement today, I can guarantee you that. We won't be entering into an agreement today.
JOURNALIST:On a personal level Prime Minister, how does it make you, how special is it for you to be marking Anzac Day here in Korea?
PM:On a personal level, it really is a remarkable opportunity. I've commemorated Anzac Day in Australia all of my life. I've never travelled overseas for Anzac Day before. Since being a member of parliament, I've spent Anzac Day in my own constituency, including remembrances in Milton and then in central Melbourne. To be able to be here for Anzac Day does mean I'm missing those events back home, but it's a really remarkable experience to have spent yesterday in the site of a major battle in which Australians fought so bravely, and then to spend time here in this amazing war memorial, with Australian veterans, commemorating our Anzac spirit generally, but also particularly thinking about their special service here in Korea.
We'll go to Matthew and then come through.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, your program in China is heavily focused on business meetings, as well as the political stuff, but you'll be meeting with Australian businesspeople. How important is it for Australian to broaden, not only to increase its resource exports to China, but also to broaden its business links across a lot of areas, and how important is that to Australia's economic future?
PM:Well, China is an incredibly important economic partner for our country. Of course, it's our single biggest export market, taking itself, around 25 per cent of Australian exports. Certainly our economic relationship is going to be a key focus of my trip to China.
My trip is coinciding with events involving major chief executives of Australian businesses, people like Marius Kloppers from BHP, Sam Walsh from Rio Tinto, to name just a couple, who are attending a CEO forum, and then there is a major trade event as well, involving a far broader range of Australian business people. So, it's a key focus of my trip, to be there seeking to strengthen our economic relationship.
A prosperous China and a prosperous Australia trading together is good for both countries, and that trade can increase both of our prosperities. It's one of the reasons that I'll be there, with a focus on meeting Australian businesspeople, meeting Chinese businesspeople, and fostering links between the two.
PM:Prime Minister, yesterday you got to see the legacy of the Korean War up close and personal, and they got to see you up close and personal. Tell us what that was like, looking at these North Koreans looking at you, studying you?
PM:Yes, I did visit the De-Militarised Zone. I have remarked that that really is a great misuse of the English language. There's more military intensity in that zone, that 200-odd kilometres than I suspect in many other places on the planet. Certainly, military everywhere, and I had the unusual experience of being in a building and being so closely observed by North Korean soldiers. It's an unusual experience personally, to be stared at like that, but more importantly than that, it really is an emblem of the kind of insecurity that our friends in South Korea live with.
I mean, we're standing in this modern prosperous city, and in some ways you could think, we'll you're in a modern, prosperous and safe environment, but of course the South Korean people live day-to-day with insecurity because of the circumstances on the Korean peninsula, and what I saw yesterday, I think, is an emblem that reminds of all of that.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, can I ask you about ethnic Chinese who have been arrested or detained, Australians, in China? Are you concerned that there is a bit of a pattern developing with Stern Hu, Matthew, and some others. Could you give us any updates about their circumstances, and will you be asking for reassurances in China that just because your ethnicity is Chinese, doesn't mean you're not Australian?
PM:Look, certainly there are a number of individual cases where we continue to provide consular support, and, as necessary, we raise consular cases with the Chinese authorities. More broadly, of course, we engage in human rights dialogue with China. As I've said to you, during the course of this trip, I believe that a prosperous China that's strongly engaged with the region is good for the region, and it's good for Australia.
We've got a constructive relationship with China, but we do have differences, and when we have those differences, we're very clear in our raising of them, we're very clear in our raising of human rights questions, and we've got an ongoing human rights dialogue and we're certainly very vigorous in pursuing the interests of Australian citizens in China who may need consular assistance in any way.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, how much arm-twisting do you think Sam Walsh and Marius Kloppers will try on with you while you're in Beijing to try and secure a better deal for their own companies under your proposed carbon tax?
PM:I think Marius Kloppers and Sam Walsh know I'm a woman of determination.
JOURNALIST:Have you ever been to China before?
PM:Yes,I have. I led an Australian Political Exchange Council delegation there, a cross-Party delegation, and that was a fantastic experience, so I'm looking forward to going back.
JOURNALIST:When was that and how many times have you been to China since?
PM:I feared you were going to ask me that. When was that? It was, I believe, let me just think about this. It was around 2000-2001. We'll have to get the exact dates for you.
JOURNALIST:Are you expecting a warm reception?
PM:Look, I'm expecting, you know, it to be in pursuit of a constructive relationship. I have had the opportunity to meet both President Hu and Premier Wen before and personally found that I was able to engage with them so I think that that will continue on this trip to China.
JOURNALIST:Need to get some gloves on those hands.
PM:You're all distracting me by bobbing up and down in unusual patterns, so we better get you inside I think.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I just ask you about the American alliance? Do think there are concerns with China that Australia is strengthening the alliance at expense of the relationship? 
PM:Look, for Australia this is not an either/or question. We are a long-standing alliance partner of the United States. China knows, and that alliance will continue for the future, and China knows that as well. This is not an either/or question. We can have our strong, long-standing friendship and alliance with the United States, based as it is on shared values, as well as have a positive and constructive engagement with China.
OK, let's get you inside before we've got, you know, people dropping. 



1. On 25 April 2011, the President of the Republic of Korea, Lee Myung-bak, and the Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard, held bilateral talks at the Blue House. Prime Minister Gillard paid an official visit to Korea on April 23-25, 2011, in commemoration of the Golden Jubilee of the establishment of Korea-Australia diplomatic relations, as well as the 60th anniversary of Australia's participation in the Battle of Gapyeong.
2. The two leaders agreed that the Korea-Australia partnership had developed over the last 50 years into a broad-based partnership including significant commercial ties, strong security cooperation and wide-ranging people-to-people links. They renewed their commitment to further strengthen this partnership in the next 50 years on the basis of shared values, mutual respect and genuine friendship.
3. President Lee paid tribute to the sacrifices made by Australian soldiers to protect the democracy and freedom of the Republic of Korea and expressed gratitude for the Australian Government's unwavering support on issues concerning the Korean Peninsula. Prime Minister Gillard affirmed her support for the Korean Government's efforts to establish peace and security on the peninsula through positive progress in inter-Korean relations. She said Australia would continue to work closely with, and in support of, the Republic of Korea on this issue.
4. The two leaders condemned the DPRK's recently disclosed uranium-enrichment activities which violate UN Security Council Resolutions 1718 and 1874, and are contrary to the DPRK's commitments under the 19 September 2005 Joint Statement. President Lee and Prime Minister Gillard urged the DPRK to comply fully with its international obligations and commitments, and cease immediately all related activities, including its uranium-enrichment program.
5. Recalling the March 2009 Joint Statement on Enhanced Global and Security Cooperation between Australia and the Republic of Korea, and welcoming the strengthened security cooperation that had occurred since then, the two leaders agreed to further expand security cooperation under the framework of the Joint Statement. They agreed that the two countries' foreign ministers would review cooperation under the Joint Statement on the occasion of the Korean Foreign Minister's visit to Australia later this year. The two leaders agreed that bilateral defence minister talks would be held on a regular basis, commencing in 2011, and that the two sides would work toward establishing a regular “2+2” meeting of foreign and defense ministers.
6. The two leaders welcomed the revitalisation of the Korea-Australia Young Political Leaders Exchange Program, designed to deepen cooperation between the two countries' legislative bodies. They encouraged further bilateral exchanges between parliamentary leaders, including the Chairman of the Korean National Assembly and the Speaker of the Australian Parliament.
7. The two leaders agreed that Korea and Australia, as responsible middle-powers in the context of the shift of strategic and economic weight to the Asia Pacific region, would jointly seek to enhance regional stability and prosperity by promoting an active agenda for cooperation in fora such as the East Asia Summit, APEC and the ASEAN Regional Forum.
8. Pleased with the close cooperation between the two countries that ensured the success of the 2010 G20 Seoul Summit, the two leaders agreed on the importance of implementing the agreements reached at the Seoul Summit. In particular, in the context of ongoing global economic uncertainties, they agreed on the core importance of continued progress on the G20's agenda for strong, sustainable and balanced growth, particularly to further strengthen the global economy, generate employment, decent work and rising living standards, ensure more stable financial markets and narrow the development gap. They also agreed that their priority should be to successfully implement Seoul Development Consensus and its Multi-Year Action Plan, with a focus on infrastructure and food security this year, and welcomed France's leadership and efforts in this regard.
9. The leaders agreed that negotiations on an Australia-Korea free trade agreement were now in their final stage and reaffirmed their joint goal to conclude the negotiations this year.
10. The two leaders looked forward to building on a mutually beneficial and stable partnership in trade and the development of natural resources. Prime Minister Gillard expressed the hope that, following the signature of the Gladstone LNG contract between Santos and KOGAS, other LNG projects involving Australia and Korean companies could be brought to a successful conclusion in the near future.
11. President Lee expressed hope that Korean information technology companies with ample experience and cutting-edge technologies could participate in Australia's National Broadband Network project.
12. The two leaders agreed to work together to advance international climate change negotiations toward a strong, collective response. President Lee welcomed Prime Minister Gillard's announcement that Australia would contribute $10 million to the Global Green Growth Institute established by the Korean Government in 2010 to support the development of green growth strategies and policies in developing countries, and would join the Institute as a core partner represented on its Board of Directors.
13. In celebration of the Korea-Australia Year of Friendship, the two leaders expressed the hope that 2011 would serve as a new benchmark to bring the two countries and peoples even closer together through numerous cultural events and exchange programs.
14. President Lee encouraged the Australian Government to participate in the Yeosu Expo in 2012. The two leaders also agreed to work closely for the success of the upcoming Fourth High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness to be held late this year in Busan.
15. President Lee and Prime Minister Gillard also expressed a desire to intensify collaboration and information sharing on international issues of mutual concern and interest. They expressed their deep condolences to the people of Japan in the wake of the recent earthquake and tsunami disaster and affirmed their readiness to continue to support Japan's recovery efforts. They also agreed to work together in international fora on nuclear safety issues.  



PM: I'm here in Beijing on my first visit to China as Prime Minister. The relationship with China is in good shape, it's a constructive one and a comprehensive one. We have enjoyed a series of high level visits between our two countries at a quick tempo in recent times, and I'm determined to see that continue.
Of course our economic relationship is a vital one for Australia's national interest and it is growing in leaps and bounds. You can give any number of statistics, to evidence the rate of growth but to give you just one statistic, merchandise exports grew by 37 per cent to nearly sixty billion dollars last year. As a result of course, a key focus of what I am doing here in China is on our economic relationship and I will this afternoon proceed to a forum of chief executive officers that is being in progress and receive a report on the work that they have done today. I am also looking forward to receiving the views of the CEOs about way of strengthening our future economic ties. I'll have the opportunity following that to speak this evening, at the Australian-China Economic Cooperation Forum which is involving a broad range of people than those involved than those at the CEO Forum. Now of course we cooperate economically directly between our two countries and we cooperate through multi lateral forums. Including APEC and the East Asia Summit and through the G20.
This morning I had the opportunity for a good discussion with Premier Wen. It was a constructive discussion and a very comprehensive discussion. We did discuss our economic relationship but we discussed a number of other important areas, including our growing people-to-people links and the cultural exchanges between our two countries and we've been very focused on facilitating cultural exchange between Australia and China as a way of building the bonds between our two nations.
On the economic relationship which we talked about today, we did focus on trade and investment; we did focus on infrastructure development within Australia. Premier Wen did take the opportunity to explain to me the commitments that China has in its 12th Five Year Plan, which has a very strong emphasis on sustainable economic growth and a very strong emphasis on clean energy.
Premier Wen and I also had the opportunity to discuss our bilateral free trade agreement. I restated Australia's commitment to a comprehensive high quality trade agreement and both Premier Wen and I are of the view that we need our free trade agreement talks to continue and to continue with some pace to them. So I had the opportunity to discuss the prospects for improving trade through our two countries by a free trade agreement.
In addition, in the context of what was a very broad and far reaching conversation, I did have the opportunity to raise with Premier Wen issues associated with Australia's concerns with human rights. I recognise China's remarkable progress in lifting millions of people out of poverty and into better lives. I did express to Premier Wen my concern and Australia's concern about the treatment of ethnic minorities, about the question of religious freedom and about recent reports in relation to human rights activists. I indicated to Premier Wen that Australia hopes this is not a backward step being taken by China on progress on human rights.
I did also raise with Premier Wen matters associated with North Korea. I discussed with Premier Wen my recent visit to the demilitarised zone, and I did raise with him Australia's clear concerns about North Korea's nuclear program and aggressive behaviour. Australia has consistently called on North Korea to abandon its nuclear program and engage in constructive dialogue. I raised this question with Premier Wen in the context of saying it is not in Australia's interest, nor is it in China's interest to see acts of aggression from North Korea and instability on the Korean Peninsula.
In addition to these comprehensive discussions, I was pleased with Premier Wen, to witness the signings of a number of important agreements between our two countries, a number or memorandums of understanding. Among these is an agreement to establish an Australian-Chinese science and research fund to fund joint programs with a focus on clean energy, and I specifically discussed with Premier Wen prospects of collaboration on clean energy of which this is one. Australia and China will contribute nine million dollars over three years to this initiative.
Another important Memorandum of Understanding signed today was one on strengthening tourism cooperation. We are seeing large numbers of increased tourists from China. We want to continue to see that growth and facilitate what is obviously a good economic opportunity for our country, but also a good way of developing people-to-people links and that memorandum of understanding signed today will take us on a further path of development for tourism including tourism for individuals from China; we already see a large number of organised tour groups.
Another of the Memorandum of Understanding signed today was about establishing a sector promotion forum for the services sector. This is important work; we want to lift trade in services. In order to do that we need good advice on the impediments to services exchange, the regulatory and other impediments. This MOU will create a forum that brings together business people from both countries to provide advice on those regulatory impediments to trade in services.
I also witnessed, with Premier Wen, the signing of a customs agreement for closer customs engagement between our two countries as we increase the number of people who move back and forwards and goods which move back and forth having our customs services cooperate well with each other is important.
And finally, I witnessed a commercial agreement between Karara Mining and the China Development Bank. This is about establishing a major investment facility which is to support the development of an iron ore project.
All in all, I very much welcomed the discussions I had with Premier Wen today, they were comprehensive, they were constructive and I look forward, apart from attending the business oriented and trade oriented events that I have later today, to meeting with President Hu tomorrow. I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what is your message to Chinese business sector, and those who might be wondering about the carbon tax, and whether it will affect their interests in (inaudible) in Australian export?
PM: Well, if anybody raises that with me, and no one has to date, if any one raises it with me I will be very pleased to explain to them the government's policies and plans in relation to carbon pricing. Carbon pricing is good for the Australian economy, it's good for a clean energy future; we can't afford to have an economy that gets left behind as the world moves to a cleaner energy future. So it's all about future prosperity. It's good for Australians, it's good for business and I'll be happy to have that conversation.
JOURNALIST: Do you guarantee that businesses (inaudible)
PM: Well what I can to everyone, whether it's business people I speak to here in China, or whether it's people that I meet when I'm wandering through shopping centres in Australia, it's the same message, which is: It is good for our long term prosperity to price carbon. We want to be a prosperous country in the long term; we need to embrace a clean energy future. It's good for jobs, good for our economy and the right thing to do by our environment, and what is interesting, I think, is in the discussions I've had today with Premier Wen, clearly a focus of his work, and of the most recent Five Year Plan, the 12th Five Year Plan, has been a cleaner energy development. He specifically raised that with me in the context of prospects of collaboration on clean energy initiatives.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you are not addressing any part of my question, will the carbon tax cause commodity prices in Australia [inaudible] to go up?
PM: Well we are working as you are well aware through a business round table with what are called in the trade a mission incentive trade exposed industries and we will keep working with them to get the design of the carbon price right, so we protect Australian jobs. But across the countries that I've visited on this trip - Japan, South Korea, China - people are hungry for our commodities export, they are hungry for our energy exports, including LNG, and so I am very confident these export industries have a very bright future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about Premier Wen's response to your statements on human rights, did he give you an assurance that China hasn't taken a backwards step?
PM: Premier Wen did indicate, listened to the concerns that I had raised on human rights, obviously Premier Wen heard those concerns. He did indicate that his view is that China has not taken a backward step on human rights.
JOURNALIST: Is that something that you are comfortable with, are you comfortable with that answer, given that on Easter Sunday Christians for instance were arrested trying to hold a church service, so would you say that the response to you,  is that a response that you are comfortable with his response?
PM: Well I think the appropriate thing to me to do as the Australian Prime Minister, in discussions with Premier Wen in this country is to raise Australian perspectives. I have done that, I've raised our concerns about human rights and ethnic minorities, religious freedom and in relation to the treatment of human right activists.
JOURNALIST: Even though that has been no real assurance given by him that there won't be a further crackdown?
PM: Well what we do is we raise our concerns and I have done that very clearly with Premier Wen today.
JOURNALIST: Can you tell me about the consular cases, and names that were raised today or (inaudible) that you may have brought up?
PM: I did take the opportunity in my discussions with Premier Wen to raise two consular matters. We obviously have an agreement between Australian and China which goes to the way in which we can raise consular matters, and the support we can provide to Australians in China. My advice from the Ambassador is that that agreement is working well to enable us to address the concerns of Australian's in China who may need consular access and support. I did take the opportunity with Premier Wen to indicate my concern and my interest, and the Australian's Governments concern and interest in the matter involving Stern Hu and Matthew Ng and they were the two cases that I raised by name.
JOURNALIST: And Premier Wen did he give you any assurance on what is happening to those two gentlemen?
PM: Well I am not intending to be drawn on the details of these individual cases. I raised each of them in the course of speaking to Premier Wen, put more properly; I raised my concern and interest in these two cases directly with him.
JOURNALIST: And just to confirm Prime Minister, you didn't discuss a carbon tax with him at all?
PM: I discussed clean energy but in the context he was really keen to raise it with me in the context of explaining the Five Year Plan, the 12th Five Year Plan and its focus on clean energy and sustainability.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, just to clarify you said he was keen to raise it with you, is that clean energy?
PM: He was, clean energy. Yes sorry, I will be absolutely clear the topic of clean energy was and climate change, Premier Wen was keen to raise with me as part of explaining what is important in the forthcoming Five Year Plan. I did explain to him that in Australia we are working through a debate about pricing carbon and it is the Government's plan to do put a price on carbon.
JOURNALIST: Did he have any comment on that, as in you know-
PM: No he didn't, no he didn't.
JOURNALIST: So what was your general impression [inaudible]?
PM: That is a good question and you are right, we haven't been here very long but what I can say on the basis of the discussions that I have had with Premier Wen today, we have a constructive relationship and I have got a positive outlook for the future and in terms of the relationship between our two countries. I want to build on what is already a constructive and comprehensive engagement between our two nations and between the discussions that I have had today and the memorandums of understanding that I have signed today. I think we have taken some steps to build on what is already a comprehensive constructive relationship between the two of us.
JOURNALIST:  Overall how difficult is it to balance a key economic relationship like this, at the same time as to keep a strategic relationship with the United States given the concerns over China's rise, assertiveness and it how it will contain China and bring them into international framework. Do you share those concerns about Chinese rise, and how do you balance the two, when at times [inaudible]?
 PM: Well our policy is not to contain, that is your wording of the question, it's certainly not my word, our policy is not to contain, our policy is to engage. To positively engage with China, and a prosperous China that's fully engaged in our region, and I did that the opportunity to talk to Premier Wen about the East Asia Summit, he represents China at that summit, to have China fully engaged in our region is good for the region. It is good for Australia, it is good for China.
We have a long term friendship and alliance with the United States. The engagement of the United States in the Asia Pacific, is a good thing too, that has been a long term policy of successive Australian Governments and it is certainly is my policy. This is not an either or choice, we have our long standing friendship and alliance with the United States. They are engaged in our region, they will continue to be engaged in the region. It is their region too, the Asia Pacific and we can continue to build our constructive, cooperative arrangements with China.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in relation the change that Chris Bowen announced today regarding immigration, how is it actually going to stop the things that we have been seeing, for example in a place like Villawood?
PM: What Chris Bowen has announced I believe is appropriate so that people who commit offences whilst in immigration detention, have those offenses very clearly taken into account in the character test for migration visas. So I think the policy settings that Chris Bowen has announced back in Australia are right, and are appropriate so that people know that if you commit an offence in immigration detention that it will lead to failure of the character test.
JOURNALIST: But the Minister already has the power to do that under his ministerial discretion why is he this saying now?
PM: Well it is important to spell it out so that it applies in all circumstances. As you know of course there has been ministerial discretion but now it will be an automatic policy. It won't require a case-by-case assessment in that sense. No, it is all about making sure the rules comprehensive and clear. There won't be the kind of case-by-case assessment that you refer too. It will be an automatic consequence if you engage in something that is unlawful in immigration detention then you will fail the character test. 
JOURNALIST: You have been critical about temporary protection visas over the years, over many years, and now you are going to adopt TPVs?
PM:  I don't agree with the premise of your question. Temporary-
JOURNALIST: People found guilty of some offences in detention they are (inaudible)
PM: As I have just said, I don't agree with the premise of your question. Let's remember that temporary protection visas were not about the conduct of an individual, they were an automatic policy for everyone, an automatic policy that people would only qualify for a temporary visa. What Minister Bowen has announced and the policy of the Government is, if people do something in immigration detention that is unlawful then they will fail the character test. These are not the same thing, and ought not to be compared.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on that issue previous Australia Governments, including this one, have been accused by human rights groups around the world for violating human rights in terms of mandatory detention policy, is it a bit critical of us to be taking up with China their human rights issues, when we clearly have a problem in our own backyard?
PM: Well I don't agree with your analysis that there is a problem and I don't agree with your terminology about mandatory detention. As a nation we use a mandatory detention system for good reason, if people arrive unauthorised in our country then it is appropriate for us to take steps to detain people whilst we ascertain their identity, their health status, any security concerns and we work through whether or not they are a legitimate refuge for whom we should extend our compassion and concern. Mandatory detention is a longstanding Labor policy; it was introduced into Australia by a Labor Government for good reason. Of course when people are in immigration detention, we seek to treat them in a fair and decent way and successive Ministers for Immigration under this Government, Minister Evans and now Minister Bowen, have worked hard to ensure that is the case.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you saying there is no problem in Australia detention centres at the moment?
PM: No, I was asked about the mandatory detention policy and I indicating to you I am a very big supporter of mandatory detention. It is the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: That is what lead to this situation inside the Detention Centres [inaudible]
PM: Poor conduct by individuals has lead to this situation, and that poor conduct if it is unlawful, is conduct which will count in the character test under the arrangements that Minister Bowen has announced. If people, engage in unlawful acts then they will not be eligible for a visa which enables them to remain permanently in Australia.
JOURNALIST: Could you tell us about the Security talks that you might have had today with Premier Wen, did he raise anything [inaudible] about US alliance, Australia's involvement with Japan, Korea?
PM: I am afraid that whilst we had a long time together, there's only so many things that one can work through, so I have talked to you about the key issues in our discussions. Of course I am here in China tomorrow, and will also have the opportunity to meet with President Hu and I am looking forward to those discussions.
JOURNALIST: Defence security was not on the agenda today, will you be discussing that tomorrow?
PM: Look I'll have a further set of discussion tomorrow I didn't specifically canvas defence cooperation in my discussions with Premier Wen today. We did have a very comprehensive discussion both in a working bi-lateral meeting and then over lunch. What I would say about defence cooperation between Australia and China is that cooperation has been increasing, with things like for example annual meetings and exchanges between our Chief of Defence Force and his counterpart here in China; with work together that has included live firing exercises. So we have had a step up over time of our Defence cooperation, but I didn't have the opportunity in the course of today's meeting to deal with that, and look I have a further set of discussions tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what was Premier Wen's assessment on the North Korea situation?
(inaudible)
PM: I did indicate to Premier Wen that  -  don't take that personally Simon, ever since I've joked about the halo you've been anxious, and I think there's 
JOURNALIST: It's disappeared.
PM: It was only there on a very, very temporary moment, that's true. Now I think I've forgotten your question, I think you asked me about North Korea.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look I think, but I don't want to put words into Premier Wen's mouth but I think he accepted that there is, it is understandable for people, and it is understandable for South Korea to be concerned about the conduct of North Korea.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, did he though say I will that “I would use my influence to help, we want” or was he, was it more an off-hand thing [inaudible]
PM: No, his indication to me is that China is already engaged with the question of North Korea. Ok, Thank you.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today met Premier Wen Jiabao to discuss ways to advance the growing relationship between Australia and China in her first official visit to Beijing as Prime Minister.
The meeting focused on strengthening the bilateral trade and investment relationship as well as enhancing cooperation on challenges such as North Korea's nuclear program, climate change and furthering the global economic recovery through the G20.
The Prime Minister re-affirmed Australia's commitment to reaching a comprehensive, high-quality free trade agreement and agreed to continue talks to achieve this goal.
Following the meeting the Prime Minister and Premier witnessed the signing of a range of agreements that will broaden and deepen the strong Australia-China relationship in science and research, tourism, services trade, customs, resources and infrastructure. 
Prime Minister Gillard and Premier Wen launched a new Australia-China Science and Research Fund, which will include a focus on clean energy, to which both governments will commit $9 million each over three years. 
China is now Australia's third most important science research partner.  Over the past decade, the Australian and Chinese governments have supported more than 140 significant research collaborations in areas as diverse as medical research, disaster management, biodiversity, solar energy, water conservation, food security, wireless communications, new alloys for manufacturing and clean energy. 
The Prime Minister and Premier also witnessed the signing of a new Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on Strengthening Tourism Cooperation with China, which will increase tourism flows and strengthen people-to-people links between the two countries. 
This historic agreement builds on the Approved Destination Status (ADS) scheme which promotes travel for groups to China and Australia.
Today's MoU will encourage further cooperation for travel between the two countries for individuals, companies and students, expanding the scope of this important relationship.
This new deal will provide a further boost our most valuable tourism market, which is currently worth $3 billion per year, or around 13 per cent of total tourism exports.
The new memorandum will also facilitate greater streamlining of the visa process for Chinese travellers, making it more attractive for them to holiday in Australia.
The Prime Minister and Premier Wen also witnessed the signing of an Australia  -  China Services Sector Promotion Forum to boost cooperation in the trade in services, an MoU to facilitate greater customs engagement between Australia and China and the commercial signing of an agreement between Karara Mining Limited and the China Development Bank &amp; Bank of China on the development of the Karara iron ore project. 



AUSTRALIA AND CHINA
Thank you for your welcome.
I am delighted to be here in Beijing and to address this forum.
I am here as the leader of an economically vibrant nation whose current and future prosperity is bound up with China's.
China is one of Australia's most important relationships.
Tonight I want to underline my commitment to strengthening that relationship and to explain how I see it developing.
China's emergence as a leading nation of the 21st century is, of course, an extraordinary achievement. 
Not only are hundreds of millions of Chinese being lifted out of poverty, but China's contribution to global growth is huge.
While China's transformation has been taking place in the years since 1978, Australia has become a confident middle power, actively engaged in our region and delivering long term economic growth for our people.
Australia's role as a stable, reliable and high quality supplier of energy and mineral resources to China is the bedrock of a comprehensive economic partnership.
Australia's resources support China's ongoing development.
China's growth contributes directly to Australia's prosperity.
As our economies have developed, so too have our bilateral ties and our shared interests.   
And as our economies and our peoples become more interconnected, so the challenges we face grow more complex.
Those challenges include continuing with market-based reform that will make our businesses competitive and underpin future economic growth.
They also include institutional, social and environmental reforms to make growth sustainable by meeting social needs, protecting our environment and developing the skills and capabilities of our people, and they include cooperation to sustain the global recovery and maintain the stability and security that have allowed this region to prosper.
A prosperous China, fully engaged in the region, is good for Australia, the region and the world.
My argument today is that we can be positive about our relationship and that we should be ambitious for its future.
Australia's national interests demand this.
Of course, our two Governments will not agree on every issue. 
One area of difference is human rights.
Where there are differences we will be clear and robust about them. 
We do so in the context of what has become a comprehensive and constructive relationship between our two nations; a relationship grounded in a clear understanding of each other and our interests, and which is strengthened by hard work and deepened by mutual respect.
Approached this way, we can build on our remarkable progress to date. I am here to say that I am personally committed to doing just this.
A COMPREHENSIVE PARTNERSHIP
Australia's modern relationship with China, built on decades of hard work, began in the 1970s with the re-opening of diplomatic relations by my predecessor Gough Whitlam
This was a pioneering moment.
At that time, the value of our annual two-way trade was less than 100 million Australian dollars.
There were no students or tourists from the People's Republic of China in Australia.
Few saw clearly enough into the future to predict how dramatically China would change.
Together, we have both come a very long way since then.
Today, China is Australia's largest export market and import source.  
Last year, total two-way trade exceeded A$100 billion for the first time  -  a sixfold increase in the past ten years.
One quarter of all Australian exports come to China - one quarter.
Australia, in turn, is China's seventh-largest trading partner.
Recent analysis by the Australia-China Business Council shows that Australian trade with China generated income equivalent to more than $10,000 per Australian household last year.
Energy and minerals trade continues to grow, increasingly with the involvement of Chinese companies.
Just last week, Origin Energy and Conoco Philips signed a 20-year LNG export agreement with Sinopec worth an estimated $90 billion. 
In another recent example, Baosteel has been contracted to supply a 400 kilometre pipeline to the CNOOC/BG Group Coal Seam Gas plant in Queensland.
Of course, the economic relationship extends far beyond resources and minerals.
China has just become Australia's largest services export market, led by education and tourism.
2010 saw more than 167,000 enrolments by Chinese students in Australia. 12 years ago that number was just 9,000, and according to Tourism Australia there were nearly 450,000 arrivals from China in Australia last year.
Collaboration is now extending across science, finance, education, commerce and culture, between institutions in all sectors.
Australia-China bilateral engagement has grown to include every issue of mutual interest to our two countries.
Australia is committed to advancing the comprehensive, constructive and cooperative relationship between our countries, as set out in our 2009 Joint Statement.
In both countries, this is being led at the highest political levels. I was pleased to meet both Vice-President Xi on his recent visit to Australia and Executive Vice-Premier Li on their recent visits to Australia, and here in Beijing this week I have met with Premier Wen and renewed acquaintance with Vice Premier Li. We originally met on my first visit to China. I look forward to meeting President Hu again tomorrow.
A COMMITMENT TO ECONOMIC REFORM
Our economies may be becoming more complex and interconnected, but the reason for their growth is simple.
It flows from the economic reforms, sometimes difficult, that both our countries have undertaken.
China's decision to turn outwards and pursue market-based growth was a fundamental change in direction: an act of visionary leadership that has produced a transformative surge of national development.
That growth is now extending to the central and western provinces of China, including huge investment in infrastructure, services and economic development.  
China's export industries have fuelled its growth, and many of those industries are also moving rapidly up the value chain into innovative, high-value products and services.
This transition is driven in part by the Chinese Government's investment in research and development.
Australia, too, has walked the reform road, albeit from a very different starting point. 
Successive governments have deregulated the Australian economy, cut tariffs, floated the Australian dollar, privatised government-owned enterprises and opened our doors to foreign investment.
Reform can be difficult and unpopular, but in our country these changes have paved the way for two decades of economic growth.
ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH
Now both our countries face the challenges of future growth with confidence.
Australia stands in a position of economic strength.
As we look forward, we continue to walk the reform road.
Like China, we emerged from the Global Financial Crisis without dropping into recession.
This performance is explained by several factors. China's continued demand for our exports is one. Another is our effective use of economic stimulus. A third is our history of reform, which has created strong institutional foundations in our banking, financial and regulatory systems.
As a result, we have low public debt, a substantial investment pipeline, strong job creation and GDP growth prospects, stable prices and a rewarding environment for investors. 
But we know that further reform is required to achieve truly sustainable growth that benefits all of our people.
Of course, the same is true of China.
Rapid growth is a great achievement, but it brings with it new challenges.
As it goes through this great transition, China needs new infrastructure and new services to meet the needs of a changing population.
It must continue strengthening key institutions to maintain and underpin commerce, civil society and effective public administration.
Improving health, retirement, education and other services present a major challenge for both our nations, even though even though the scale and nature of the challenge is very different.
Our growth strategies should also be squarely focused on creating jobs and improving living standards.
In Australia we are pursuing reforms designed to boost productivity, lift the skills of Australians, raise workforce participation, and develop infrastructure, including a National Broadband Network that will underpin the innovation economy. 
We are also tackling climate change by introducing a carbon price and moving towards emissions trading.
Finally, we are undertaking fundamental reforms of education to lift the quality of education at all levels from early childhood to postgraduate education. Education is a driver of economic performance and the agent of opportunity. It is central to our economic future.
China and Australia come from different points, but our shared interest in this agenda for sustainable growth is increasingly obvious.
In this context we welcome China's ambitious economic strategy, as proposed in the 12th Five-Year Plan, for balanced and sustainable growth.
We support practical steps identified in the plan to rebalance the Chinese economy towards becoming more reliant on domestic sources of growth.
It also emphasises the quality of growth, as Premier Wen said to the National People's Congress in March this year, by focusing on an economy increasingly geared to the production of energy-efficient, high technology products, by focusing on social welfare, environmentally sustainable growth and reducing income inequality, and by increasing education spending and government supported research and development funding.
This is an ambitious plan and, of course, it will require sustained effort to implement. 
REFORM PRIORITIES 
Against this backdrop I want outline three particular priorities for our economic relationship: investment, trade and clean energy. 
First, investment.
Chinese investment is welcome in Australia, as is shown by the steady stream of proposals approved by our Foreign Investment Review Board.
As with investment from other countries, inward investment proposals are subject to consistent rules which serve our national interest.
Australia has 72 major resource projects at an advanced stage of development, worth around $130 billion. Many involve Chinese companies, and Australia seeks more investment opportunities offshore, including in China.
A more open investment environment should be supported by streamlined and consistent administrative processes. A clear, reliable legal and regulatory regime would be a major benefit that would provide a further boost to our economic partnership.
HIGH QUALITY TRADE AGREEMENT
Second, we should continue to pursue two-way trade.
Free trade means jobs and growth.
Concluding a high quality Free Trade Agreement would deepen our relationship further and create long term benefit.
Progress in five years of our negotiations so far has been slow.
We need to do better.
An FTA would complement our work for regional trade liberalisation in the multilateral system. 
I also encourage China to continue playing a constructive role in efforts to conclude the Doha Round. 
Multilateral trade liberalisation is one of the most important opportunities we have for shared global growth. 
Even where they are significant, we should not allow individual differences between nations to obstruct the potential for shared progress. 
If we cannot achieve full success in the round then we need to maximise what we can, particularly for the poorest countries. In this circumstance we must all take care to safeguard the world trading system.
CLEAN ENERGY FUTURE
Third, we have a shared interest in a clean energy future. 
Climate change is a persistent and long-term challenge to the world.
It is imperative that we decouple economic growth from emissions growth.
In Australia we see great opportunities in a clean, innovative, low pollution economy.
To drive change, the Government is determined to put a price on carbon from July 1 next year.
The 12th Five-Year Plan demonstrates China's commitment to energy efficiency, environmental conservation and tackling carbon emissions. 
It sets targets to reduce the emissions intensity of GDP growth and reduce water, soil and air pollutants. The Plan also refers specifically to carbon trading in China.
These are welcome developments, even though they will be challenging to implement and represent only part of the change that will be needed to significantly reduce China's impact on climate change over the coming decades.
Our bilateral cooperation on climate change and clean energy is progressing well.
We recently welcomed Vice-Chairman Xie of the National Development and Reform Commission to our Ministerial Climate Change Dialogue in Australia. The successful dialogue identified new areas for potential collaboration such as power transmission and renewable energy.
Scientific collaboration between Australia and China has already generated advances in areas ranging from medical research, disaster management, biodiversity, water conservation, to food security, wireless communications and new alloys for manufacturing.
In recognition of the depth, breadth and value of this relationship, today Premier Wen and I witnessed an agreement through which the Australian and Chinese Governments will each contribute $9 million over three years to an Australia-China Science and Research Fund.
SHARED GLOBAL AND REGIONAL CHALLENGES
I have spoken to you of common challenges and shared interests.
Those interests are at stake in cooperation to sustain the global economic recovery and in efforts to maintain the peace and stability that have allowed this region to prosper.
China, now more than ever, is an active participant in global and regional architecture, helping shape it and in turn being influenced by it.
As China's role in the world grows, so its role in supporting the international system will grow. 
We should expect no less. 
Australia welcomes and strongly encourages China's positive international engagement.
There is no better example of how Australia and China are working together on shared interests than in our cooperation in the G20 for strong, balanced and sustainable global economic recovery.
Establishment of the G20 as the premier global economic forum itself reflects the growing weight of China in the world, along with other emerging economies such as India and Brazil.
Australia strongly supported the G20 replacing the G8 as the global driver for resolution of the Global Financial Crisis, just as we played a leading role in reforming the IMF to give countries like China a larger say in our global financial architecture.
The G20 acted resolutely to arrest the crisis and trigger recovery, through $5 trillion worth of coordinated fiscal stimulus and historic reform to strengthen the international financial sector.
Australia is now working closely with China in the G20 to ensure global economic recovery and strong job growth into the future.
China's economic rebalancing outlined in its 12th 5 Year Plan is precisely the sort of action G20 economies have committed to, for strong and balanced global growth.  As are Australia's economic reforms.
This is a central part of the G20's agenda this year, to ensure that the world's major economies are pursuing economic policies that together lift, not just shift global growth.
That means more jobs, more opportunities: better lives.
Among other things, we are also working closely with China on continued reforms to strengthen the global financial system, to address energy and food price volatility and on a development agenda to ensure the G20 helps our most in need.
I look forward to working closely with China in the G20.
Just as we are engaged globally, Australia and China are increasingly working together in our region.
We both have strong and enduring interests in a stable, secure and prosperous region.
Ours is the fastest growing region in the world. It is also home to some of the world's most dangerous flashpoints.
I have just come from the Republic of Korea.
I took the opportunity to visit the Demilitarised Zone and was forcefully reminded of the security challenges in our region. To stand nose-to-nose with a North Korean border guard, with only a pane of glass in between, is a sobering experience.
So too is the idea of a conference table that literally straddles a demarcation line  -  one half in North Korea, one half in South Korea.
North Korea's strengthening nuclear program and developing long-range missile systems are a threat to regional stability and security. So are the unprovoked recent attacks on the Republic of Korea.
As the host of the six-party talks to address the problems of North Korea's nuclear program, China is an essential part of the solution we need.
We share an interest with all our partners in making sure that North Korea does not destabilise the security and prosperity of our wider region.
I would like to work more closely with China on common challenges like this one, and I encourage China to bring its influence to bear on North Korea.
Security on the peninsula can only come through dialogue, and for dialogue to be meaningful we all know that North Korea must create the right conditions: commit to de-nuclearise.
This is in the interests of all countries in the region, and globally.
Friends, pursuit of shared interests is often done through a framework to make sure that this is done in the best way possible.
That is why Australia is committed to building stronger institutions in our region for mutual benefit. 
We are all familiar with our successful regional cooperation on trade liberalisation and economic integration through APEC.
Australia is also working with China in the East Asia Summit, a leader-level process that involves all the major powers of the region and which has a mandate to pursue the broad spectrum of our growing interests: political, economic and security.
As of this year, the East Asia Summit includes the United States and Russia as members. This is an historic development.
We now have a regional institution comprising all the key players of the region.
Now we need to work together to strengthen the East Asia Summit's agenda. 
We need to continue to build habits of cooperation across our region, where differences can be sensibly managed on the basis of mutual trust.
The East Asia Summit has already developed an agenda from economic and education cooperation, to security and environmental cooperation  -  including on climate change.
This can be strengthened for our common good.
For example, last week I visited an area devastated by the destruction of the earthquake and tsunami in Japan. 
It was a merciless and savage natural disaster. 
Countries around the world did not wait to be asked.  They reached out to help Japan.  Australia did.  I know China did too.
In Minami-Sanriku, I stood on the broken ground of a lost town.
I met families still living in evacuation centres, their entire world defined by strips of cardboard marking their allotted space.
I felt the same for them as I did for those suffering great loss and grief from Australia's own summer of lethal natural disasters.
And I felt a responsibility to make sure we are ready with the best responses possible to major natural disasters in our region.
This is something we can do in the East Asia Summit.
An example of where together we become much more than the sum of our parts.
And the East Asia Summit can play a practical role in addressing other regional challenges, such as maritime security.
BUILDING LINKS BETWEEN OUR PEOPLE
At the heart of our relationship, are people.
The friendships and bonds between our peoples will ultimately define what we become; what we mean to each other.
And there are no stronger ties than those provided by education.
China is our largest source of overseas students. 
More and more Australians are also studying in, or about China, including through the 11 Confucius institutes now across our country.
These exchanges bring perspective, understanding and friendship, for Australians to appreciate China's ancient and remarkable civilisation, and its extraordinary achievements in recent years, and for people from China to appreciate modern Australia's dynamism and multicultural outlook  -  including the fact that after English, Chinese is the most-spoken language.
Education is a shaper of character and a driver of opportunity in the modern world.  I am passionate about strengthening my country's commitment to educational excellence.
Partnership with China in that endeavour is a precious part of our relationship.
Tomorrow at a meeting of Australia-China alumni, I will preside over the establishment of a Chair of Australian Studies in China at the University of Peking - a first for this world-class university, supported by BHP Billiton, one of our great Australian companies.
I am also pleased to announce that Monash University, in collaboration with Southeast University, is establishing a joint research institute in the Suzhou Industrial Park. This exciting collaboration will enhance the research performance of both universities, building academic talent and engaging with industry.
And in another significant development, the University of Sydney is establishing a China Studies Centre, bringing together the wide array of research disciplines at the University with extensive engagement with China.
Tourism also reinforces our people-to-people links with China, now our fastest growing market.
There were more than 470,000 Chinese arrivals last year - more than from the United Kingdom.
To reinforce this positive trend, we have taken a further step towards broadening the range of tourism options available for Chinese people to travel to Australia.
Through our people, so too our cultures will thrive, not just in our understanding of one another but in our influences on one another.
That is why Australia has been so proud this year to showcase our culture across China through the year long Year of Australian Culture in China, ‘Imagine Australia', and why we eagerly anticipate handing over the baton for the Year of Chinese Culture in Australia, which begins soon.
CONCLUSION: A POSITIVE SUM GAME
Friends, last month I spoke to the United States Congress about shared interests and common challenges.
I argued my guiding principle: that prosperity can be shared. 
The global economy is not a zero-sum game. 
There is no reason for Chinese prosperity to detract from prosperity in Australia, the United States or anywhere in the world.
There is no doubt that we are all living through a period of profound change.
The Global Financial Crisis showed how close we can come to collective disaster.
There is no major challenge that can be solved by one country alone. The North Korean situation is a clear demonstration of this reality. 
As our partnership with China grows, so does our interdependence.  
That is the nature of the world today and it brings great benefits as well as new challenges, and as we undertake that work, we build relationships which reinforce the potential for our economic life to be a positive sum game, for nations and their citizens.
What I mean by that is shared prosperity creates benefit for all of us. But more than just generating choice and opportunity through wealth, by working together successfully on clearly defined challenges we can also generate trust and mutual understanding.
These are precious goods in today's global environment. They are crucial to successful economic exchange, to social development and to international relations.
I look forward to working with you and many others to realise the potential we see before us.
Thank you very much. 



PM: This morning I've begun my day with a series of events based on education and people to people links between Australia and China. I had breakfast this morning with Chinese participants in the Higher Education Executive Leadership program. This brings to Australian universities, leading figures from Chinese universities. It's a great way of making links between our two educational institutions in both countries. I met with people who had been to universities in all parts of Australia. The program, in fact, has seen almost 200 Chinese and Australian senior university executives undertake short-term exchange placements in China and Australia.
After that, I then had the pleasure of being at an event attended by many Australian alumni and Endeavour Award Scholarship holders. I was particularly pleased to meet a number of young Australians who are here benefiting from Endeavour Awards, undertaking part of their study in China in areas as diverse as water, through into legal studies, through into scientific studies. I also had the opportunity to meet with a number of Chinese people who are also Endeavour Award holders and have undertaken part of their studies in Australia.
At the same event I was pleased to witness the signing of three new agreements which reflect our growing education cooperation. One is creating a chair of Australian studies at Peking University. This is the first such position in China. This has been supported by BHP Billiton and I thank them very much for the financial contribution that has made this possible. I also witnessed the signing of an agreement to establish an Australia-China Strategic Relations Institute at the University of Technology in Sydney. This has been made possible through the support of China Raybo and EG Funds Management and I thank them for that. I think across these two events we can see the importance of education in building people to people links between Australia and China.
I will now move to a tour of the Forbidden City. I'm very much looking forward to having the opportunity of seeing such an important and historic part of this great city of Beijing.
Later today, I will attend a lunch with senior Chinese business leaders. Clearly a focus of my visit here in China has been on our economic relationship given its importance to Australia. I attended the CEO forum yesterday. I attended a trade forum dinner last night and I'm looking forward to having the opportunity to further discussions on economic links between Australia and China at the lunch later today.
I will then have the opportunity, which I'm looking forward, of meeting with a woman called Ms Li. She is a translator. As many people would know, Gough Whitlam was the first Australian Prime Minister to open up diplomatic ties and relationships between Australia and China. He travelled here firstly in 1971 as Opposition Leader. He returned in 1973 as Prime Minister. Ms Li was his translator on that visit, when he came in 1973. I heard in Sydney at a lunch event attended by representatives of the Chinese community that Ms Li, a lady in her mid-seventies, was alive and living in Beijing.  I asked our Embassy if it would be possible to locate her so I could have the opportunity to say hello to her. I want to thank our Embassy staff. It wasn't an easy job, but they have tracked Ms Li down and I'm very much looking forward to meeting with her. She played a part in what was an historic moment for Australia-China relations, assisting Mr Whitlam. My understanding is that Mr Whitlam remembers her with fondness as he remembers that very important first visit as Prime Minister to China. So I'm looking forward to that.
I will then meet later today with President Hu and pursue a comprehensive discussion with him, having had the opportunity to meet with Premier Wen yesterday. So I'm looking forward to a discussion with him across the range of ties between our two countries including our economic relationship and our broader relationships including our defence cooperation.
Tonight, I will attend the opera. This event is as part of the Imagine Australia series of cultural events. This has been a year of bringing Australian culture to China. The banner for that is Imagine Australia and it has involved events right throughout China. We are about to see the baton change and it will become the year of Chinese culture in Australia, where Australians will have the opportunity to participate in Chinese cultural events throughout our country. Cultural exchange has also been an important way of building links between our two countries.
So with those opening remarks, I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you see it as necessary to raise the issue of human rights again with the President after you did yesterday with the Premier?
PM: Yes, I am intending to raise the issue of human rights with President Hu.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the defence cooperation (inaudible)?
PM: I will be remarking on the growing defence links and cooperation between our two countries. We have defence links in the sense that the Chief of our Defence Force, Angus Houston, comes here once every 12 months to visit with his counterpart, and to meet with him. We have participated in some joint exercises including live firing exercises. We've indicated that Chinese ships are welcome in Australian ports and we may see such visits later this year. So I will be talking to President Hu about these growing defence links between our two nations.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what will you say to President Hu on human rights and do you think the Chinese take Australia seriously when it raises concerns about human rights?
PM: I am intending to raise human rights with President Hu. More broadly, in answer to your question, what I would say is we raise human rights, as I did yesterday, with President Wen because of who we are and what we believe in. It is part of us to believe in human rights and consequently to raise our voice on human rights. When Australia raises its voice, of course, we are one of many voices. The international community engages in human rights dialogue generally and many countries raise such concerns. I do believe that China does listen to, and respond to, international opinion and we are one voice in expressing that international opinion.
JOURNALIST: Can you tell us about some of the questions that might be on your mind about China's military, particularly about avoiding the potential for accidents, maritime accidents, developing into conflicts because of an absence of communication channels with the PLA  -  particularly with the US but also other militaries including our own?
PM: An important part of building defence links is to build understanding so people know each other and have an understanding of each other at a human level, as well as at a very formal level. And I do think it's important that the Chief of the Defence Force come here each year and meet with his counterpart. Of course, we want to see increased military transparency. That is one of the agendas that we pursue. That helps build understanding about people's military methods and military protocols.
JOURNALIST: How do you rate your visit in terms of what you've achieved over the last week?
PM: Well, I've been pleased with each of the visits. Of course they've each been different. I wanted to come to North Asia - to Japan, to South Korea and China - to pursue a set of discussions about our economic interests. To pursue a set of discussions on defence issues, and we've done that in each location. To discuss free trade agreements. Each of the countries that I've visited has been a country in which we are actively engaged in discussions of free trade agreements. To talk about our cooperation in multilateral fora - the G20 - every country I've visited is a member of the G20 - the East Asia Summit, every country I've visited is a participant in the East Asia Summit - and to talk about further economic liberalisation, which we do through APEC. So I've been pleased to be able to engage in those discussions. I believe in each nation we've been able to make some progress, and for example, this morning we've announced, or I've witnessed, some important agreements that will make a difference on education.
JOURNALIST: Do you feel like you've kicked some big goals?
PM: Look, my job is to be out here vigorously pursuing Australia's national interests. I'm doing that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it's now a year since Kevin Rudd decided that he would turn his back on his proposal for a carbon pollution reduction scheme. Given that you're pursuing the same thing now, in retrospect was that the right decision?
PM: We've canvassed all of these issues up hill and down dale back in Australia. I think it's the right thing to do to price carbon. I've always thought it was the right thing to do to put a price on carbon; that Australia needed to tackle climate change and create a clean energy economy for the future; that the best way of doing that is to put a price on carbon and we'll do that from the 1st of July 2012.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you developing a liking for foreign affairs or do you still prefer to be in the classroom?
PM: You're referring to the most over-interpreted statement, I suspect, of all time. What brought me into politics was a passion about opportunity, about fair distribution of opportunity, and that drives me now. There's nothing more offensive to me than that there is a child in Australia who might miss out on a lifetime of opportunity because they don't get a great education. That's always going to be very close to my heart and what drives me. As Australia Prime Minister I'm driven by all aspects of Australia's national interest and pursuing the kinds of discussions I have in Japan, South Korea, and now here in China, is part of that.
JOURNALIST:  I know you've faced some criticism of your dress sense in the past.  Gai Waterhouse today has called for you to have a makeover, but the way she phrased it was that when she saw a photo of you in Minami-Sanriku, it wasn't the damage behind you that gave her the horrors but you.  That's pretty offensive, do you think she's stepped over the line there?
PM: My view is that this isn't about me and that it isn't about Gai. And I don't want anything to distract from the focus we should all have on the damage and devastation that I personally saw in Minami-Sanriku. I mean those images are going to live with me always. The horror of them. The grief that those people felt. The journey of recovery that they're going to have to undergo. To meet with kids who are literally living on a tiny little patch of space, the border of which is marked by a piece of cardboard. I mean these were truly moving events. And I don't want any collateral debate to distract from that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'm not going to add to what I've just said. My focus, when I was standing there in Minami-Sanriku was on the devastation around me and the grief of the people that you could see etched on their faces. To hear the story of the Mayor who stood with me and described how he clung for life at the top of that very tall building. What an amazing image as to how high that wave was that he was clinging for life at the top of that building. That's what's important and that's where my focus is.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, was the carbon tax raised yesterday during your meetings with business leaders, and specifically was it raised in terms of the impact on exports of Australian resources to China?
PM: No it wasn't raised with me at all.
JOURNALIST: At lunch today  -  I think Dr Raby's lined up the most extraordinary guest list I've ever seen. 
PM: Well, congratulations to the Ambassador. We don't get to do that very much publically, well done.
JOURNALIST:  It's pretty much the who's who of every company that matters in China.  What does that say about China's long-term demand for Australian resources and the ongoing resources boom in Australia?
PM: Well, Australia is a reliable supplier of the energy that China needs. This is a very important relationship to both of our countries. China alone accounts for 25 per cent of our exports and we've got a great future as a reliable energy supplier to China, including in LNG one of the clean energy sources of the future. So when I've met with Chinese business people to date - I already had the opportunity to do that yesterday in the context of the CEO forum and the trade dinner that followed - and when I do it at lunchtime today, I believe that they will continue to raise with me China's demand for the commodities that we have to sell and that is good for both countries.
JOURNALIST: Is Gough Whitlam still revered in this country, do you think? Do you think he's still remembered?
PM: I don't think I'm the right person to answer that question for you. You would need to ask some of the Chinese counterparts that I've met with. But I think from Australia's point of view, it was an important moment in history. A very brave and a very visionary decision for an Australian Prime Minister to come and travel here in 1973 and I do think that it will be very special to meet Ms Li playing as she did that role in Australia's history.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just quickly, I might have missed it but did you say that you want to extend defence links with China or do you just want to discuss them?
PM: I will be discussing with President Hu our defence cooperation, which has been growing over time. 
JOURNALIST: Are you open to relaxing visa requirements allowing Chinese labour and Chinese companies to come in and build infrastructure for Australia that can be built more quickly and more cheaply by Chinese companies?
PM: On skilled labour, I want to see a few things. People would have heard me say before that I want to make sure that Australians get the opportunity to fully benefit from this economic development in our country from the resources boom. And it's not satisfactory to me that I can meet with mining industry executives who are crying out for skilled labour in the northwest of the country and then I can go to suburbs in Perth where youth employment is at more than ten percent.
So I've got a very clear focus on lifting labour force participation by Australians and lifting skills - so a young kid sitting at home in Kwinana without a job and without any hope can get the skills he or she needs to get that opportunity in the northwest of our country. Now even with increased labour force participation and increased skills we will need skilled migration. I believe we've got the visa settings right particularly with short term 457 visas. There were some rorts in the system. They weren't as responsive as they needed to be to the needs of employers. I think we've made a difference to that. But I do also want to be very clear: we will never countenance people coming to work in Australia and being paid less than Australian terms and conditions, than Australian norms for treating employees.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you by what might be happening in Syria? And William Hague has raised the proposition that European nations will look at sanctions against Syria.  Is Australia considering anything similar?
PM: I would join with leaders around the world in condemning the violence that we are seeing in Syria. Of course it is absolutely unacceptable and we are calling for it to cease immediately. The United Nations Security Council is seized with this matter and we welcome that. And I would anticipate that in the course of the Security Council considering the question, sanctions may be something that comes out of that Security Council consideration. So we are very open to taking what action we can in line with the United Nations Security Council to send a message about this grossly unacceptable violence in Syria.
JOURNALIST: Further to my colleague's question before about defence cooperation, can you give us some examples of the sorts of things that you'd want to see happening - in terms of this growing link between our two defence forces.
PM: I'm pleased with the kind of developments that we're seeing to date. With President Hu, I will raise the sorts of developments that we have seen. I think we've take some good steps forward and at a leader level it's always important to talk about a relationship across the board and to talk about parts of it that are growing and strengthening, and this is a part that has grown with increased cooperation between our militaries.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) and there is real concern about conflict starting (inaudible) accidentally because of that.
PM: I think we've all got an interest in military links and military transparency. I think Australia's got that interest. I think the US has that interest too.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think the best way of working through these issues is to, a step at a time, engage in increased cooperation and links and I'm pleased we're seeing that between Australia and China in the defence area.
JOURNALIST: Is China behaving better this year compared to last year?
PM: I'm going to say John Garnaut is behaving worse and not listening to Sally's instructions. Absolutely last question.
JOURNALIST:  Last year there was a lot of criticism including in China about China's foreign policy creating unnecessary conflict with its neighbours for example.  Do you think that's died down, is there more kind of discipline from the Chinese side in foreign policy?  
PM: I understand what you're referring to from last year and some of the reactions to that across ASEAN countries, for example. So, look I understand those past events. What I think I can say about our present relationship with China is it's a constructive one. It's a comprehensive one. Yes, there are times when we have differences and you are referring to one of those times we had a difference. And when we have those differences we put our view clearly and we'll continue to do that.



HOST: Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time.
PM: My pleasure.
HOST: Australia's fortunes are now more closely linked with China's than ever before, as evidenced by the star-studded business delegation you had with you in Beijing, but isn't there a risk that China's great and growing power enables it to dictate terms to Australia?
PM: I'm very confident about the future of the relationship, and I'm very confident about the future of the commercial relationship. China is hungry for the things that Australia can supply. China needs energy to keep fuelling its remarkable economic growth and industrialisation, and we have the ability to supply that energy through a range of products, including, of course, now LNG as well, so I believe this is an arrangement of mutual benefit, and we've both got some ability to work through how the arrangement should work.
HOST: But with a quarter of all Australia's exports now going to China, [AUDIO BREAK] risks that if they stop buying, we're cactus, to use an Australian colloquialism?
PM: Well, nice Australian terminology, but I don't foresee any prospect of that, Jim. China needs energy to fuel its growth. It is rapidly expanding. The rate of growth in its economy is truly remarkable. China has just released its next 5-year plan, its 12th 5-year plan, and under that plan it is aiming to create 45 million new jobs, so with that kind of rapid economic growth China does need the resources that Australia has to sell.
HOST: At the opening of your meeting with Hu Jintao, he spoke glowingly of you wanting a pragmatic, friendly and cooperative relationship. You don't think that sounded a bit like he was suggesting a compliant relationship that wasn't too concerned about the political differences [AUDIO BREAK] the systems and the ideas that Australian and Chinese politicians express?
PM: Not at all. I didn't read it that way.
We have a positive relationship with China. We have a constructive, comprehensive engagement with China. We're also very clear about where there are differences, and where there are differences we put our views.
I've done that on this trip to China. I've done it back in Australia when we've had senior Chinese visitors, so this is a relationship with a lot of mutual benefits in it. We've just referred to the nature of the economic relationship between our two countries, and there's great prospects for growth in that relationship, but we don't agree on everything, we won't agree on everything, and when we don't agree we put our view clearly.
HOST: You did raise specific questions about two Australians behind bars in China, Matthew Ng and Stern Hu. Did the Chinese leaders provide you with assurances that they would follow up on your concerns?
PM: I think it's probably best for all concerned that I don't go into the details of conversations about individual cases. We do raise consular cases of concern, and I did raise the two you refer to directly with Premier Wen.
HOST: Let's talk more generally, then. Did you get the sense from either Hu Jintao or Wen Jiabao why it is that the Chinese leadership is so anxious about the possibility of dissent that it ordered this recent crackdown at a time when its policies have made Chinese citizens wealthier than at any time in the their history?
PM: In my discussions, I did raise Australia's concerns about human rights, about the detention of human rights activists, about the treatment of ethnic minorities, and religious freedom. I believe it is important that we do raise our voice. We, of course, are supporters of human rights. It's in us. It's an Australian value, and so we advocate for it on the world stage, and I raised human rights during my discussions here in China.
We're one voice. Many international voices are raised on this question, and I think ultimately the weight of international opinion does make a difference to China.
HOST: Wherever you've gone in North Asia  -  in Japan, in South Korea, and in China  -  you've been asked about Australia as a secure source of LNG. Why would there be any doubt of Australia continuing to be a reliable supplier of liquefied natural gas?
PM: Oh, I don't think there is any doubt. Every discussion I've had in Japan, in South Korea, in China, has been one where people have recognised Australia's history as a reliable supplier of energy and a cost-competitive supplier of energy. I think when we've talked about the future, the perspective being brought to it by those I've spoke to in Japan and South Korea and China have all been a perspective of looking to future growth and seeing really how much growth Australia is able to facilitate and accommodate.
HOST: I do know that the Chinese in particular were very concerned about the initial version of your Government's mining tax. Why wouldn't they be worried about the cost and certainty of future supplies of Australian LNG, given that the Australian industry is warning that your carbon tax could lead to the cancellation of some projects already in the pipeline?
PM: Well, Jim, the truth is I've been here in China for two days. I've met with Premier Wen. I've met with President Hu. I've attended an international business forum for chief executive officers, I've attended a trade dinner. I attended a lunch today with senior representatives of state-owned enterprises, huge businesses that have major investments in Australia, and in all of those discussions no-one raised with me carbon pricing in Australia.
HOST: So, were you able to assure the leaders of Japan, South Korea and China that changes in the Australian tax regime would not further increase the cost of Australian LNG, and for that matter Australian coal and steel?
PM: None of the leaders you referred to raised the question with me. Prime Minister Kan did not raise it. President Lee in South Korea did not raise it. Premier Wen and President Hu in China did not raise it.
So, I know, of course, that we are having a fast and furious domestic debate on the question of carbon pricing. I'm very determined that we will have a clean energy economy in the future, and that's why I am ensuring that we will price carbon from 1 July next year. It's the right thing to do by our future prosperity, it's the right thing to do by the environment, but none of the leaders I met with on this trip raised carbon pricing with me.
HOST: The benefits of new LNG contracts are in the longer term. In the shorter term, though, won't they simply mean more competition for labour and investment resources in Australia at the very time when inflation's already spiking?
PM: Well, the inflation figures have come out in the period I've been away, but Jim, a proper analysis of those figures would show that they are containing some one-off factors, which flow from the flooding and natural disasters in Queensland.
We've been explaining to people for some time now that we expected a one-off inflationary spike. That's what happened in the wake of Cyclone Larry, when we saw a huge spike in banana prices, and that fed into CPI. Now, following the Queensland floods and cyclone, we are living through a similar period, where the affects of those natural disasters on fruit and food prices generally show up in the consumer price index.
You are right to point to an issue for our economy, which is what I call the patchwork economy, where we're seeing huge growth in some industries and some parts of the country. I want to make sure that we've got balanced growth across the country, and that Australians throughout our nation have the benefits of opportunity.
That does mean that we've got to be investing in skills. It does mean we need to be sensitive to regional economic needs. It also means that during this period of economic growth, we've got to be doing everything we can to increase workforce participation and to enable Australians, some of whom have been outside the labour force for a period of time and faced a lot of disadvantage, to find a way back into the labour force whilst our economy is in this growth phase and people are hungry for workers to fill jobs.
HOST: You discussed defence and security with Hu Jintao. Did you express any concern about the relative lack of transparency surrounding China's rapidly increasing defence budget and the risk that that poses for misunderstanding, for suspicion, accidents and for conflict, too?
PM: The discussion we had on defence cooperation was one of noting that defence cooperation between our two countries has been increasing. We now have a system of annual meetings and exchanges between the chief of our Defence Force, Angus Houston, and his counterpart here in China.
There have been some limited, admittedly, but some examples of joint exercises, including a live fire exercise, and we have seen Chinese ships in Australian ports, and that may well occur in the future.
So, we are seeing increased defence cooperation. It's a step at a time. We noted that today in my discussions with President Hu, and said we were open to further cooperation. I think that this does assist in building an understanding between our two militaries about the way they work, the procedures they go through, the protocols they work to, and that is important.
HOST: My final question, Prime Minister  -  you're off to the wedding of the year. How does it feel as an unwedded republican to be attended a Royal wedding, and by the by, can you give us a hint what you might be wearing?
PM: No hints on the clothes, other than to say I will be wearing some Australian designers. Jim, if we were going to send a woman from Australia around the world to model Australian fashion I don't think I would be the first pick out of the 11 million-odd women who live in Australia, but I will be wearing some Australian fashion.
I will be there at the Royal wedding, representing Australia. I'm approaching it with a sense of excitement. I think that sense of excitement is being increasingly shared in many places in the world.
I'm here this evening China. I'm in a nation that doesn't have any natural connection to the Royal family, but I can tell you there's a sense of excitement here in China about the Royal wedding, too.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much indeed.
PM: Thanks, Jim. 



HOST: Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time. PM: My pleasure. HOST: Australia's fortunes are now more closely linked with China's than ever before, as evidenced by the star-studded business delegation you had with you in Beijing, but isn't there a risk that China's great and growing power enables it to dictate terms to Australia?
PM: I'm very confident about the future of the relationship, and I'm very confident about the future of the commercial relationship. China is hungry for the things that Australia can supply. China needs energy to keep fuelling its remarkable economic growth and industrialisation, and we have the ability to supply that energy through a range of products, including, of course, now LNG as well, so I believe this is an arrangement of mutual benefit, and we've both got some ability to work through how the arrangement should work. HOST: But with a quarter of all Australia's exports now going to China, [AUDIO BREAK] risks that if they stop buying, we're cactus, to use an Australian colloquialism? PM: Well, nice Australian terminology, but I don't foresee any prospect of that, Jim. China needs energy to fuel its growth. It is rapidly expanding. The rate of growth in its economy is truly remarkable. China has just released its next 5-year plan, its 12th 5-year plan, and under that plan it is aiming to create 45 million new jobs, so with that kind of rapid economic growth China does need the resources that Australia has to sell. HOST: At the opening of your meeting with Hu Jintao, he spoke glowingly of you wanting a pragmatic, friendly and cooperative relationship. You don't think that sounded a bit like he was suggesting a compliant relationship that wasn't too concerned about the political differences [AUDIO BREAK] the systems and the ideas that Australian and Chinese politicians express? PM: Not at all. I didn't read it that way. We have a positive relationship with China. We have a constructive, comprehensive engagement with China. We're also very clear about where there are differences, and where there are differences we put our views. I've done that on this trip to China. I've done it back in Australia when we've had senior Chinese visitors, so this is a relationship with a lot of mutual benefits in it. We've just referred to the nature of the economic relationship between our two countries, and there's great prospects for growth in that relationship, but we don't agree on everything, we won't agree on everything, and when we don't agree we put our view clearly. HOST: You did raise specific questions about two Australians behind bars in China, Matthew Ng and Stern Hu. Did the Chinese leaders provide you with assurances that they would follow up on your concerns? PM: I think it's probably best for all concerned that I don't go into the details of conversations about individual cases. We do raise consular cases of concern, and I did raise the two you refer to directly with Premier Wen. HOST: Let's talk more generally, then. Did you get the sense from either Hu Jintao or Wen Jiabao why it is that the Chinese leadership is so anxious about the possibility of dissent that it ordered this recent crackdown at a time when its policies have made Chinese citizens wealthier than at any time in the their history? PM: In my discussions, I did raise Australia's concerns about human rights, about the detention of human rights activists, about the treatment of ethnic minorities, and religious freedom. I believe it is important that we do raise our voice. We, of course, are supporters of human rights. It's in us. It's an Australian value, and so we advocate for it on the world stage, and I raised human rights during my discussions here in China. We're one voice. Many international voices are raised on this question, and I think ultimately the weight of international opinion does make a difference to China. HOST: Wherever you've gone in North Asia  -  in Japan, in South Korea, and in China  -  you've been asked about Australia as a secure source of LNG. Why would there be any doubt of Australia continuing to be a reliable supplier of liquefied natural gas? PM: Oh, I don't think there is any doubt. Every discussion I've had in Japan, in South Korea, in China, has been one where people have recognised Australia's history as a reliable supplier of energy and a cost-competitive supplier of energy. I think when we've talked about the future, the perspective being brought to it by those I've spoke to in Japan and South Korea and China have all been a perspective of looking to future growth and seeing really how much growth Australia is able to facilitate and accommodate. HOST: I do know that the Chinese in particular were very concerned about the initial version of your Government's mining tax. Why wouldn't they be worried about the cost and certainty of future supplies of Australian LNG, given that the Australian industry is warning that your carbon tax could lead to the cancellation of some projects already in the pipeline? PM: Well, Jim, the truth is I've been here in China for two days. I've met with Premier Wen. I've met with President Hu. I've attended an international business forum for chief executive officers, I've attended a trade dinner. I attended a lunch today with senior representatives of state-owned enterprises, huge businesses that have major investments in Australia, and in all of those discussions no-one raised with me carbon pricing in Australia. HOST: So, were you able to assure the leaders of Japan, South Korea and China that changes in the Australian tax regime would not further increase the cost of Australian LNG, and for that matter Australian coal and steel? PM: None of the leaders you referred to raised the question with me. Prime Minister Kan did not raise it. President Lee in South Korea did not raise it. Premier Wen and President Hu in China did not raise it. So, I know, of course, that we are having a fast and furious domestic debate on the question of carbon pricing. I'm very determined that we will have a clean energy economy in the future, and that's why I am ensuring that we will price carbon from 1 July next year. It's the right thing to do by our future prosperity, it's the right thing to do by the environment, but none of the leaders I met with on this trip raised carbon pricing with me. HOST: The benefits of new LNG contracts are in the longer term. In the shorter term, though, won't they simply mean more competition for labour and investment resources in Australia at the very time when inflation's already spiking? PM: Well, the inflation figures have come out in the period I've been away, but Jim, a proper analysis of those figures would show that they are containing some one-off factors, which flow from the flooding and natural disasters in Queensland. We've been explaining to people for some time now that we expected a one-off inflationary spike. That's what happened in the wake of Cyclone Larry, when we saw a huge spike in banana prices, and that fed into CPI. Now, following the Queensland floods and cyclone, we are living through a similar period, where the affects of those natural disasters on fruit and food prices generally show up in the consumer price index. You are right to point to an issue for our economy, which is what I call the patchwork economy, where we're seeing huge growth in some industries and some parts of the country. I want to make sure that we've got balanced growth across the country, and that Australians throughout our nation have the benefits of opportunity. That does mean that we've got to be investing in skills. It does mean we need to be sensitive to regional economic needs. It also means that during this period of economic growth, we've got to be doing everything we can to increase workforce participation and to enable Australians, some of whom have been outside the labour force for a period of time and faced a lot of disadvantage, to find a way back into the labour force whilst our economy is in this growth phase and people are hungry for workers to fill jobs. HOST: You discussed defence and security with Hu Jintao. Did you express any concern about the relative lack of transparency surrounding China's rapidly increasing defence budget and the risk that that poses for misunderstanding, for suspicion, accidents and for conflict, too? PM: The discussion we had on defence cooperation was one of noting that defence cooperation between our two countries has been increasing. We now have a system of annual meetings and exchanges between the chief of our Defence Force, Angus Houston, and his counterpart here in China. There have been some limited, admittedly, but some examples of joint exercises, including a live fire exercise, and we have seen Chinese ships in Australian ports, and that may well occur in the future. So, we are seeing increased defence cooperation. It's a step at a time. We noted that today in my discussions with President Hu, and said we were open to further cooperation. I think that this does assist in building an understanding between our two militaries about the way they work, the procedures they go through, the protocols they work to, and that is important. HOST: My final question, Prime Minister  -  you're off to the wedding of the year. How does it feel as an unwedded republican to be attended a Royal wedding, and by the by, can you give us a hint what you might be wearing? PM: No hints on the clothes, other than to say I will be wearing some Australian designers. Jim, if we were going to send a woman from Australia around the world to model Australian fashion I don't think I would be the first pick out of the 11 million-odd women who live in Australia, but I will be wearing some Australian fashion. I will be there at the Royal wedding, representing Australia. I'm approaching it with a sense of excitement. I think that sense of excitement is being increasingly shared in many places in the world. I'm here this evening China. I'm in a nation that doesn't have any natural connection to the Royal family, but I can tell you there's a sense of excitement here in China about the Royal wedding, too. HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much indeed. PM: Thanks, Jim. 



JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've just wrapped up your meeting with President Hu, what did you talk about and what did he say about human rights?
PM: This was a very positive meeting. We talked about the economic relationship between our two countries. We certainly talked about the free trade agreement and endeavouring to inject new momentum into the negotiations on our free trade agreement. We talked about collaboration in the G20, of course Australia and China both believe that the G20 must continue as the premier economic forum to continue to drive global recovery and growth. We did talk about our defence security cooperation and what is happening there with, for example, the Chief of our Defence Force now meeting annually with his counterpart in China 
I did also take the opportunity in the context of a broader discussion about the United Nations and the role that it plays and Australia's contribution in the United Nations to advocate our bid for election to the Security Council and I did mention the question of human rights during the course of these discussions.JOURNALIST: And how did the President take your comments about human rights? Did he give you any sort of response?PM: Look, I don't believe it is appropriate for me to put words in President Hu's mouth, but I believe his reaction clearly showed that he understands that Australia is concerned about human rights and has consistently raised these concerns.JOURNALIST: Premier Wen yesterday said that China wasn't taking a backward step. Are you satisfied with those assurances?PM: I think what is important is that we continue to raise our voice on human rights. We do that because we believe in it. It is part of who we are, it is part of our culture, our system, what we believe in as Australians, and I do believe whilst we are one voice in the international community, our voice should be heard and as the international community raises these issues, I do believe that China does listen to and respond to international opinion.JOURNALIST: How does it respond?PM: Well, I don't think you can just quickly draw lines between cause and effect, but I do believe that the views of the international community are important to China and so it is important, when we've got clear views, that we put them.JOURNALIST: You've said that you talked about defence and more cooperation on that. How is that likely to manifest itself?PM: Well, we have seen increased defence cooperation. This is taking the form of discussions between counterparts. It is also taking the form of some shared exercises, including live firing exercises.
JOURNALIST: And the free trade negotiations? You tried to inject some new enthusiasm into those talks. The reality, is it going to be a long way off? A year? Five years?
PM: This is not easy, and so it's going to take consistent work. These free trade negotiations have been going on for a number of years now  -  a number of years  -  but ultimately I believe free trade is good for Australia. Freer trade is good for Australia and China, so we will keep working through it, even though it is an agreement with some areas of sensitivity.
JOURNALIST: TBA, basically.
PM: Well, I do think that having political leaders meet and agree to inject momentum into the talks does help.
JOURNALIST: You've said on this trip that you would like to see Australia play more of a role in regional issues like North Korea. What kind of a role are you anticipating there? Is it kind of like a cop on the beat?PM: For example, the issue with North Korea, there is a forum for discussions on those security questions. That is the Six Party talks and we are not one of the six parties, but I do believe, as consistent with what I've said to you about human rights, that we should raise our voice on issues that we are concerned about and security on the Korean peninsula is an important issue to our region. We are part of the region. It is an important issue to us, so we should have our voice heard on the unacceptable nature of North Korean aggression, and we should have our voice heard, too, on calling on North Korea to seriously show that it is prepared to de-nuclearise, to abide by UN Security Council resolutions, and to get into meaningful dialogue on better security on the Korean peninsula.
JOURNALIST: And with Japan, you've talked about, while we were there, wanting a new vision on Australia-Japan defence cooperation. What exactly does that mean?
PM: We have defence cooperation with Japan now, so I did talk to Prime Minister Kan about continuing that defence cooperation, which has been of long standing, so we will continue working with Japan.
We did particularly talk at this difficult time about furthering cooperation on natural disaster preparedness. We've worked together in Christchurch. We've worked together in the aftermath of the devastating earthquake and tsunami, and we believe that we can focus on the best way to work together in the face of future natural disasters, not only in each other's country, but potentially in other third countries we could go to assist.
JOURNALIST: Did you that particularly difficult, visiting Minami-Sanriku? The cameras didn't show it, but when you left the mayor gave you a hug. What did he say to you?
PM: It was incredibly difficult, and the mayor was very generous in saying to me, at the end of the visit, that I had helped to cheer people up. It was pretty humbling to hear that, because you see people in such desperate circumstances, so I know it seems almost token in some ways to be there just shaking hands and playing with kids, handing out some koalas and kangaroos, but if that even raises one smile in such difficult circumstances then it's very much worth doing.
JOURNALIST: And you found it, it seemed to be at times you were pretty close to, keeping things contained, shall we say.
PM: It was just such a devastating scene, and I can summon a vision of it sitting here now. It will live with me for the rest of my life  -  just such amazing devastation, and then to see these incongruous sights like a boat on top of a building, a fishing net on the top of a 4-storey building, and to hear the mayor tell me about how he'd actually clung on to the stairs on that building, the outside stairs, for dear life, I mean, these are very emotionally powerful stories, and it's hard to imagine how you would feel if you lived in a township of around 20,000 people, to see half of them washed away never to be seen again.
JOURNALIST: Here in China there has been a lot of interest on your visit. Did anyone raise with you the issue of Kevin Rudd and why he wasn't prime minister anymore?PM: No, they did not, and look I've been here pursuing productive discussions with President Hu, with Premier Wen, with leading figures from the business community, advocating Australia's national interests, so our discussions have centred on that.JOURNALIST: Your styles are very different. When Kevin Rudd made his first appearance here as prime minister he went to Peking University and lectured them. You have taken a very different approach. Why?PM: Look, I am who I am and my style is my own.JOURNALIST: While you've been here as well, on your entire trip you've set aside a couple of hours every day; you've been working away on the budget. Wayne Swan has predicted that you'll take a political hit. What do you think?PM: Look, this is not an easy budget to put together and the Treasurer has made that clear back home in Australia. We are in a set of economic circumstances where our economy, our underlying economy, is very strong and we are going to move to a situation over the next few years where our economy is running at almost full capacity with all of the pressures that that can bring.At the same time, it is what I call a patchwork economy. We've got some areas with really strong growth, hungry for skills, hungry for infrastructure, hungry for new workers, whilst other parts of the nation really do need assistance to make sure that people have got the full benefits of economic opportunity and then, of course, we have got the immediate pressures on us from our own natural disasters  -  the cyclone, the floods - and then the economic consequences of the huge disaster in Japan.So it is quite a mixed scene as we put the budget together but we are working hard to get it right for the economy and for the opportunity and prosperity of Australians.JOURNALIST: Do you agree with Mr Swan? Do you think you'll take a political hit?
PM: Look, I'll allow Australians to absorb the budget and to digest and see what they think for themselves. I understand we are dealing in a difficult set of circumstances to put the budget together, and Wayne is reflecting that.
JOURNALIST: Does it irk you that as a republican, now, that you are getting on a plane and heading off to London to attend the wedding?
PM: It will be a delightful time, I'm sure. Two happy young people in love, a lot of pomp, a lot of ceremony and I'm sure I'm going to enjoy it.JOURNALIST: But does it irk you, though, that as a republican that you're going to this event?PM: I think if we look right around the world, whether people are republicans or not, whether they've got any natural connection with the United Kingdom or not, people are getting excited about the Royal wedding. Here in China I've had people talk to me about the Royal wedding, so the excitement is everywhere and I think I'll get caught up in that excitement too.
JOURNALIST: One last question  -  I know that you've said that your comments about not having a passion for foreign affairs are the most over-interpreted comments in history, but are you developing an attachment to it, given the warmth of the receptions you receive, not only in Japan, but also in Korea?
PM: I'll always be interested in advocating Australia's national interest. That's what I've been doing on this trip, and I'm always happy to do that.
Of course, I've always been interested in the affairs of the world, but I have made comments in the past which continue to be true  -  the thing that brought me into politics, the thing that first made me think I wanted to be involved in politics, was caring about opportunity, the fair distribution of opportunity, making sure that every child got a fair chance, and that will be what continues to drive me.
But I understand for Australians to have opportunity we've got to make our way in a competitive world. We're doing that, and having me out talking to our major trading partners and countries in our region is part of that.
JOURNALIST: How do you think this trip's gone? 
PM: Look, I've been very pleased. I set myself a number of objectives. Of course, I'm talking to three countries, in terms of export destinations the top three countries. Between them they take around 50 per cent of our exports, so I set myself objectives about working through our economic relationship, seeking to add to it with each country by talking about our free trade agreements and prospects for bringing them to conclusion. I wanted, on this trip, to talk to Japan, South Korea and China about collaboration in the G20 and the East Asia Summit, and I've been able to do that, as well as collaboration in APEC.
Each has had its particular characteristic. Of course, in Japan the natural disaster was such a big theme of what I did there; in South Korea, Anzac Day and commemorating the events of the Korean War, particularly the Battle of Kapyong; and here in China it's had a particular business focus because of the chief executive officers' forum at the same time as my visit.
JOURNALIST: Lovely. Thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you.



HOST: Prime Minister, good evening to you, London time. Good morning, Australian time. How is it to be here? Look where we are.
PM: It's fantastic, and look and this view  -  it's amazing  -  and I've been walking through the crowds, and such happy crowds, and lots of Australians out there. HOST: We saw you walking through the crowd. It took you a long time to get through. PM: It did, it did, because people are shouting out ‘Julia' and they're all from Australia, but there was one English woman who was keen to tell me about her holiday in Australia and how fantastic it was, and then asked me for a job, so I'm just not sure what we're going to do with her. HOST: The PM's going global. You've just also come from Clarence House. How did that go, with Prince Charles? PM: Well, it's the first time I've met him, and it was a lovely opportunity. We had a very, sort of, a discussion on the things that he's passionate about. He did want to talk to me about the Queensland floods and the cyclone. He was very generous at the time and very concerned. He wants to know how everybody's going in recovery, and he also wanted to talk to me about sustainability in our cities and our natural environment. He's been a lifetime passion of his, well before it was fashionable and on everybody's lips, so we've had a good discussion. HOST: That's good that he's still interested and conscious and concerned about Queensland and how the recovery's going, isn't it? PM: Oh, very focussed on it. He's clearly been following it in the media here, but wanted a first-hand account of how people are feeling. HOST: did he mention the wedding at all? Does he know about it? PM: When I turned up and met him the first thing I said was you must be looking forward to tomorrow, and he certainly agreed that he was, so yes. HOST: So, what happens tomorrow? What do you know about it? PM: Well, we get up the morning and run around and get ready, so getting ready right's very important. Then leave and go to the Lancaster House, where we'll wait, and then we'll get on buses - they're described as coaches, but they're not the kind with horses  -  and go to Westminster Abbey and then wait for the service to take place. HOST: It's a little bit of a wait, isn't it? You've got to be in there quite early? PM: You're loaded in there more than an hour in advance, which presumably is because of the numbers of people. HOST: Are you excited about tomorrow? PM: I'm really looking forward to it. I've had the opportunity today to meet with Prime Minister Cameron and those sorts of things- HOST: -Boring. PM: Well, there's a serious side to the trip, but I am really looking forward to being there tomorrow. I'm conscious I'm there representing Australians, who I think are sharing the sense of delight, so I will be there sharing the sense of delight, too. HOST: Are you going to be tweeting the ceremony? PM: I don't think you're allowed to. No tweeting, no rogue video, none of that, no. HOST: Biggest question of the day  -  what's a gal to wear? PM: Well, Australian fashion, definitely, but apart from that, you'll just have to wait and see. HOST: Oh, come on! PM: I'm taking a leaf out of Kate Middleton's book. HOST: This is me. We're good mates. PM: I know we're good mates, but, you know, you've just got to keep it to yourself until you stride out wearing it, and then you can pass judgement. HOST: Do you feel any pressure, because everyone is analysing what everyone is wearing to the wedding, and they do that with you anyway. We know Gai Waterhouse is going to be watching, as ill-timed as that was. PM: I think all eyes are really on Kate, so I'm not worried for myself. I think she's probably the one with the butterflies in the stomach tonight. HOST: That constant pressure, is it time consuming? Is it a hassle?PM: I don't really let it worry me. I think ultimately I judge myself, and I think people will judge me on what I get done, not what I'm wearing while I do it. HOST: Second biggest question of the day  -  what's Tim wearing? PM: A suit. You heard it here first, a suit. HOST: Is he excited? PM: He is excited, yes. He's looking forward to it. HOST: What's he said? PM: What do you mean? HOST: Well, you know, has he, what's he most excited about? PM: Right, OK, I thought you were going to do the wedding proposal hints, then. HOST: Well, I kinda was but you saw straight through it. PM: I could see where you were going. He's keen to be here and we're looking forward to spending the day. HOST: He's feeling extra romantic at this point? PM: It's their wedding, and we will be in the audience. Nice try, though, Karl. HOST: We're all looking forward to it. You know that the eyes of the world, I guess, are on her, but we have you as our representative and we'll be all spurring you on and hope you have a great time, and you know, a wedding's not a wedding unless someone embarrasses themselves, so, you know, if Tim wants to have a few too many drinks and carry on a little bit, don't worry about the diplomatic stuff. PM: He'd be in so much trouble, that won't be happening. Tim and I will be very well behaved, but I'm sure there'll be some stories to tell afterwards  -  but they won't be about us. HOST: Prime Minister, great to see you. PM: Thank you very much. Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard has extended her deepest sympathies to the United States on behalf of the Australian Government and people, following the terrible loss of life and suffering caused by severe storms that hit southern states this week.
The Government today offered to support the United States in any way possible as severe tornadoes claimed hundreds of lives across the southern part of the country. Australians have watched these tragic events with sheer disbelief, particularly in light of the events we saw in our own backyard over our summer. The magnitude and severity of this disaster has devastated communities and the livelihoods of so many.  States of emergency have been declared in Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, Missouri, Oklahoma, Tennessee and Virginia. Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd said Australians empathise with the suffering and loss being experienced by hundreds of thousands of Americans. The United States is one of our closest friends and we are always there for each other. If you have concerns for friends or family in this region, you should attempt to contact them directly in the first instance. The DFAT Consular Emergency Centre can be contacted on 1300 555 135 from within Australia or +61 2 6261 3305 from overseas 



President Obama today announced that Osama bin Laden, the leader of the terrorist group al Qaeda, has been killed in an operation conducted by United States forces in Abbottabad, Pakistan.
I join other world leaders in welcoming this great blow against terrorism.
On behalf of the nation, I thank President Obama and congratulate the United States officials and military personnel who supported, planned and carried out this operation.
Australia also acknowledges Pakistan's cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
Bin Laden waged war on innocent civilians.  Under his command, al Qaeda planned and executed the 11 September 2001 attacks in New York and Washington in which nearly 3,000 innocent civilians were murdered.
Bin Laden's al Qaeda also conducted, inspired or had links to numerous other terrorist atrocities in which Australians were killed and wounded.
Today, above all, we remember those who lost their lives in these attacks. These include:
 * 	10 Australians on 11 September 2001
 * 	88 Australians in Bali on 12 October 2002
 * 	1 Australian in London on 7 July 2005
 * 	 4 Australians in Bali on 1 October 2005
 * 	2 Australians in Mumbai on 26-29 November 2008
 * 	3 Australians in Jakarta on 17 July 2009
Our fight against terrorism does not end with bin Laden's death. We must remain vigilant against the threat posed by al Qaeda and the groups it has inspired.
We will continue our support for the counter-terrorism efforts of the United States and our partners and we will continue our efforts in Afghanistan to ensure that country never again becomes a safe haven for terrorism. 



PM: I'm here today at Turner Primary School and I'd like to take this opportunity to thank the Principal, Jan Day, and also thank the School Captains Anika and Charlie, who have shown us around today 
I'm joined by the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan, by the Minister for School Education Peter Garrett and by our local Federal Member Andrew Leigh. We're about a week and a day away from the Federal Budget. The Federal Budget is important, it's an important way of demonstrating that the nation can live within its means and that's why we are determined to bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13, as promised. But the Federal Budget is also important as a statement of value and priorities. You put taxpayers dollars behind the things you think are most important for the nation today and for the nation's future. And in this budget we will be continuing the priority I have put on education, I have consistently said that demography is not destiny and that our nation has to make sure that every child in every school is getting a great education. We're already implemented a number of important policies to make a difference to schools today, including My School to give parents and teachers more information that they've ever had before about the performance of their school, including our national curriculum, to make sure that kids around the country are studying a high quality national curriculum, including our investment in school buildings, in school libraries, in classrooms, in trade training centres, in school halls, to make sure that schools have the best possible facilities. And for many schools this was the first real investment they'd seen in a new building for decades. And also our investments in literacy and numeracy and to lift the standards in low socio-economic schools that are teaching our most disadvantaged children. We've invested in all of these things to make a difference for education today, because what's happening in schools today determines our future as a nation, our economic future, because the kids in schools today are the workers of tomorrow, but also our future as a fair society. In making all of those investments we've recognised that there's nothing more important to a child's education that the quality of the teacher standing in front of the classroom, we're met some great teachers today. And we've been investing in those great teachers, including through news schemes, one already operating in New South Wales, where the best teachers are being paid more to go to the disadvantaged classrooms that need them the most. We're investing in programs like the one in Western Australia, where state schools can become more independent  -  independent public schools, able to better deal to determine their own future. Today I want to confirm with the Federal Treasurer and the Minister for School Education that the forthcoming budget will deliver on our promise to invest in rewarding great teachers around the country. This is the next step to build on our education reforms. What that means is we will design a system where teachers who are performing well can get additional pay and additional reward to recognise that great performance. The number of teachers to be rewarded will be around 25,000 - that is 10 per cent of the teaching workforce. The level of the rewards will be around 10 per cent of salary, depending on the seniority of the teacher, that can be around $5000 or around $8000. We will build the system to measure great teaching, we will monitor teacher performance in 2013 and the first rewards will be paid in 2014. $425 million will be allocated in this budget to building this system and rewarding teachers. This will be an investment of $1.3 billion to 2018. This is our way of saying to Australian teachers we value what they do, we want to reward great teaching so that the individuals who are doing it experience the benefits of those rewards and so we can model what great teaching is to the rest of the teaching workforce. Academic studies have proved that quality teaching and monitoring and showing quality teaching does make a difference to the quality of education. That if you monitor and give feedback, so that you identify great teaching that does put you in a virtuous circle where great teaching becomes more and more prevalent and that's what we want to see. So this is another important tranche of something very important to this government, making a difference to school education. I'd also like to thank Turner Primary School for letting us watch kids today learn with some of the new interactive technology. I do want to say in addition to our other education investments, we're very proud to have provided more than 400,000 computers to children in secondary school and that program remains on track. Now in accordance with his usual negativity, of course Mr Abbott rejects this reform agenda. He went to the last election promising $2.8 billion of cut backs in education. He wanted to cut back computers in school  -  so 120,000 kids would miss out. He wanted to cut back our trades training program  -  so 1,800 secondary schools would miss out on the opportunity for a trades training education. He also wanted to cut our quality teaching investment and cut our money to low socio-economic schools. This would have put at risk the real reforms that are making a difference to Australian education today. So there is a real challenge for Mr Abbott, as we approach budget week as well  -  for him to verify, does he still believe in ripping $2.8 billion out of Australian education. I'll turn to the Minister for School Education for some comments and then we'll take some questions. MINISTER GARRETT: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. All parents know that the quality of the teaching their kids gets makes the biggest difference to their education, and today's announcement is confirmation that the investments that we want to see make a difference in the education that our kids get will particularly, in this instance, be directed towards recognising and rewarding those great teachers who do a great job in the classroom. This comes on the top of a number of reforms and national standard setting priorities that we have already delivered, as the Prime Minister pointed out, and in particular the decision by the ministerial council in December for national teacher standards and a subsequent decision just a couple of weeks ago when we met in Melbourne for national pre-service standards for teacher training at universities. So, what this Government is doing is placing quality teaching at the heart of the effort to make sure that our kids get a great education, and we're doing this by recognising that for teachers, if they are recognised for the great job that they do, we know from some very recent research they become more effective teachers. The community wants to recognise great teaching. The teaching community itself knows that it has teachers that make a huge difference to their kids, and today this announcement provides this Government's commitment to making sure that those teachers get rewarded. We will consult very widely with the education sector, with the school community, with a variety of experts, non-government organisations and others, and it is intended that the work to develop an Australian teaching performance management and principles system will be done by the Australian Institute of Teaching and School Leadership, and I expect that work to start unfolding in the future. And in terms of a model for assessing who is a great teacher, I think it's likely that we'll be looking broadly at those factors that take place in a classroom, not only the kind of education achievements that teachers may be producing for their kids, but the kind of work that they are doing in extracurricular activities, the way in which they relate and cooperate with their colleagues, and a range of other issues. They will be determined through extensive consultation with the Australian Institute of Teaching and School Leadership, but today this is a strong statement from this Government that we understand how important great teachers are, and we will recognise and reward them. PM: Thank you. Any questions? JOURNALIST: This bonus will be paid, we've just heard the criteria, with NAPLAN (inaudible) particular weight be given to the NAPLAN result? How will that work? PM: Well, on the weighting of the individual elements, that will be worked through in the consultation process that Minister for School Education's just spoken about. I know that there's some publicity about NAPLAN in today's newspapers, and I think we've got to be very clear that Australian NAPLAN is our own system. We didn't get it from anywhere else. In fact, our design of national testing is world leading, and our use of it on the My School website is also world leading, because we have on the My School website very important value-added measures. So, we're not looking at raw scores, we're not looking at just saying ‘well, how does an advantage school compare with a disadvantage school on raw scores'. We are actually able to see on NAPLAN the difference that a school is making to child, the value added to that child's education. JOURNALIST: Given this Government's commitment to educational outcomes, and in light of the review of the funding system, do you anticipate that reduction of funds to private schools, that would achieve a beneficial, good outcome at the end of the day? PM: We're a Government that believes in increasing funding for education. We've almost doubled the amount of money going into school education, and we've taken the view that this is about every child in every school. We aren't talking about school systems. We're talking about every child in every school getting a great education, so whatever school a parent determines to send their child to, they can be satisfied that it's a school that offers a great education. So, we're not interested in these old debates about public versus private. We're interested in improving standards and qualities and outcomes for every child in every school, right around the country. JOURNALIST: The teachers union, correct me if I'm wrong, weren't too happy about this plan at the time. Have they warmed to the idea (inaudible) PM: Well, this is the right thing to do. It's the right thing to reward good-quality teaching. I mean, making sure that teachers in classrooms are the very best that they can be is vital to a child's education. That's why it's so distressing that, for example, Mr Abbott has promised to cut away the money that's created Teach for Australia, bringing the best-performing graduates into teaching. Why on Earth would you do that? To cut away the money that has enable us to pilot programs to enable the best teachers to be paid more to go to disadvantaged schools; to cut away the money that enables public schools in Western Australia, in a pilot we funded, to have a greater degree of education and self management  -  these are important things for Australian children. We value them. We prize them. That's why we will put a priority on them in this Budget, and why are challenging Mr Abbott to walk away from his plans for these destructive cutbacks. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on another issue, the Government talks tough about sending home asylum seekers who aren't actual refugees. However, figures out today show that 70 per cent of failed asylum seekers are actually having their cases overturned on review. How is that actually sending asylum seekers home? PM: Well, we've got to make sure we're not confusing two issues here. First, we do properly and rigorously assess whether or not people have a legitimate claim to be a refugee. I believe that as a country we do want to extend our compassion to people who are legitimately refugees, so we need a robust system to assess people's claims and to work out who is legitimately a refugee. We've actually amended that system. There were some streamlining amendments in March this year, and the figures you refer to pre-date that change and that streamlining. On return of people who are not refugees to their country of origin, we work hard to return people who do not have legitimate claims to stay in Australia. The former government, the Howard government, also worked hard to do so. It requires international agreements and work with source countries so that returns can be made, and we've done that kind of work, for example, with Afghanistan. JOURNALIST: Is the AFP well resourced enough to investigate this criminal activity? Do they have the manpower to investigate all of the incidents that take place in the detention centres? PM: We're a Government that's been investing in additional resources in the Australian Federal Police, including additional officers, sworn officers. The Australian Federal Police work with their State counterparts. There is consultation and collaboration on dealing with any unlawful acts in detention centres. JOURNALIST: So you're confident nothing goes by the wayside, nothing (inaudible) PM: Anybody who has committed a crime in any circumstances - whether it's in a detention centre, whether it's in a suburb, whether it's in a regional town, whether it's in a capital city on a Saturday night  -  anybody who has committed an unlawful act should be caught and prosecuted. JOURNALIST: Just for the Treasurer, the Budget predicts falling unemployment and the creation 500,000 jobs.  Where exactly are the jobs going to come from and (inaudible) a squeeze on other sectors in the economy our resources regions. Are you planning to relocate people at all? TREASURER: Well, the first thing is that we are forecasting an additional 500,000 jobs over the next two years and a bit, and that comes on top of 750,000 jobs during our period in Government. This is simply an outstanding result for the country. We have a very strong investment pipeline over the next few years and whilst the economy is soft at the moment, in the years ahead it will grow strongly and we will see that job growth reflected in wide sectors of the economy. Naturally we'll see it in resources but we'll also see it in associated areas such as construction. We will continue to see it in the services sector as well. For example in the past year there's been over 300,000 new jobs in Australia, 98 per cent of those have been full time jobs. So we will expect to see it spread widely across our economy.  Now the challenge for us is that we don't have a person to waste. If we have an unemployment rate in a couple of years of 4.5 per cent and we have a very strong investment pipeline we are going to need more people and that's why the Government is focusing so closely on workforce participation, on making sure that those that are unemployed have the opportunity to get a job, to work a few hours, get the access to the training and the work experience, and there may be those that are out of the labour force who wish to come back in. So we're really focused on making sure that those people who can work more do work more and in that way we spread the opportunities that flow from the mining boom more widely across our economy. The Government absolutely understands that there are sections of our economy and there are people living in areas of the country where things are still soft, for example I spent some time in Cairns over the break. Unemployment there is high. What we have to make sure is the opportunities that arise from this boom and the investment that comes with it goes to all corners of our country. That's what the Government is really focused on. We've got a fantastic opportunity here in the medium term to make sure that everybody participates in the results of this investment which is coming through and to turn the investment boom in to an opportunity boom. JOURNALIST: (inaudible) has also warned about the impact of the high dollar and she's suggested that intervention with the exchange rate might be an option. What's your response to that? TREASURER: Well, first of all I don't speculate about the level of the Australian dollar but I do want to make some very important points. The first point is that the strength of the Australian dollar reflects the strength of the Australian economy relative to other developed economies. It also reflects the price that the world is paying for our commodities which at the moment is quite high and of course it reflects relativities with other major economies particularly other major developed economies. We understand that a high dollar does put pressure on sectors of our economy. It puts pressure, for example, on the tourism sector and you can see that in areas like Cairns. It puts pressure on the manufacturing sector, in particular that sector which is exporting, and that's why we have been focused for a long time on making sure we deal with the consequences of what some people have described as a two-speed economy but which we describe as a patchwork economy. That is why we were so focused over the past year or so on putting in place a resource rent tax so we could use that to cut the tax for many of the small businesses in our economy that are doing it tough. So we could build our national savings. So we could invest in our infrastructure.  These are the objectives of the Government in the context of the structural change which flows through our economy from having a higher dollar. That's why, for example, it's pretty important we come back to surplus in 2012-13. And I noticed Mr Abbott over the weekend slipped out very quietly the fact that he wasn't going to provide any savings in his response to our Budget. Well, Mr Abbott's out there with a wrecking ball trying to wreck a lot of positive plans for our economy. We've already heard what he's contemplated in the past in terms of education, but if he sets out in this Budget to wreck our surplus that will have dramatic consequences for the cost of living and price pressures in our economy which will flow if we don't bring our Budget back to surplus in the years ahead. JOURNALIST:          Do you have concerns that the dollar is overvalued?TREASURER: I don't speculate about the level of the dollar but what I can say, and everybody knows, is that the strength of the dollar reflects the strength of our economy relative particularly to our major trading partners. That's what it reflects and it also reflects the fact that there are very high prices for our commodities and it also reflects the relativities with other economies. JOURNALIST: Can I just ask one question on the carbon tax as well? PM: Yep, last one. JOURNALIST: If the Government has ruled out compensating steel based on fluctuation of the exchange rate, are you considering any other sort of special circumstances for the steel industry? TREASURER: I've made some commentary in this area today. We are involved in discussions with industry more broadly about the introduction of a carbon price which industry generally supports. They understand the need to put a carbon price in place. I notice that Mr Abbott's carbon price advisor couldn't find anybody in industry that was going out there to support his alternative proposals  -  if you could call it that  -  in any positive way.Industry understands the need, the need for our long-term prosperity to put a price on carbon in this country and to do it in a way that we make the transition which takes into account the various needs of various industrial sectors. And we are involved in a discussion, the Climate Change Minister and myself and the Prime Minister are involved in discussions with a range of industry associations and companies about how we go about doing that. That's what we're doing at the moment and when we've concluded those discussions we will announce the product of them. 



PM: Osama bin Laden declared war on innocent people and today he has paid the price for that declaration. Osama bin Laden was directly responsible for despicable acts of violence against innocent people and he inspired acts of violence by others.
Today of all days we remember the lives lost, particularly the lives of Australians. We remember the 10 Australians who lost their lives on 11 September 2001. We remember the 88 Australians who lost their lives in Bali in October 2002. We remember the 5 Australians who in 2005 lost their lives in London and Bali, and we remember as well the 2 Australians who lost their lives in Mumbai in November 2008.
These Australians died in acts of violence. They died alongside people of many other nationalities and many other faiths. Their families still grieve their loss. We, as a nation, still remember their loss and we remember it today.
I trust that today's news comes as some small measure of justice for those who still grieve the loss of their loved ones.
Just as people in Australia and around the world will always remember where they were when they first heard the news of 9/11, and just as we Australians will always remember where we were when we first heard the news of the Bali bombing, I believe each of us will always remember where we were when we heard of the death of Osama bin Laden.
I welcome the death of Osama bin Laden. I welcome this news, and I thank President Obama and the US forces who have made this possible, and I also take this opportunity to thank Pakistan for working with them on ensuring that Osama bin Laden was brought to justice in this way.
Can I say, too, about the death of Osama bin Laden, that whilst al Qaeda has been hurt today, al Qaeda is not finished. Our war against terrorism must continue. We continue to be engaged in Afghanistan so that that country does not again become a haven for terrorists. That work will need to continue. That work has already cost Australian lives, but that work is vital and we will continue the mission in Afghanistan. That's a mission I had the opportunity to talk to President Obama about when I visited Washington.
In addition to considering the continuation of our work in Afghanistan, we do, as a country, need to make continuing preparations against acts of terrorism, the kind of security work we do as a country. We must continue to do that work.
I think it's very important that Australians do not succumb to the impression that with Osama bin Laden gone that al Qaeda is gone. Its leader is gone, but al Qaeda still poses dangers for Australians and we will continue to make proper preparations in the face of those dangers.
I've the opportunity today, through the National Security Committee, to take advice from relevant agencies about the implications of Osama bin Laden's death. One of those implications that I want to draw people's attention to is we have updated the general travel advisories issued by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
People may have already seen on the television that the US Government has issued a worldwide travel alert. Our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has advised all embassies and consulates of the need for security awareness following the death of Osama bin Laden, and we are advising Australians in areas likely to be affected by gatherings outside hotels, gatherings and demonstrations, to exercise enhanced vigilance regarding their personal security.
They should continue to monitor the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade website for further information, and of course we always strongly recommend that Australian travellers register with the Department's website.
Can I conclude by saying that every Australian was touched and affected by acts of terror by al Qaeda; by the losses we saw in Bali; by the losses we saw in New York; by the losses of Australian lives we saw in other parts of the world.
Consequently, I believe every Australian will be touched by this news today. They will think about its implications. They will remember the grief of their fellow Australians. They will spare some time to think about them today, but they will also reflect on the fact that justice has been done.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: What level of information did you and the Government get on today's operation? Were you briefed on anything when you were in the U.S recently? Did you have any information in recent days, and have you spoken to President Obama today?
PM: I haven't spoken to President Obama. I have spoken to the American Ambassador to Australia, Jeffrey Bleich, and discussed with him the implications of Osama bin Laden's death, and I've also conveyed to him my congratulations on the work of US military forces in this matter.
Ambassador Bleich took the opportunity to thank me for Australia continuing to be a steadfast ally of the United States of America, and of course we will need to continue the mission in Afghanistan. The fight against terrorism is not over.
On, you know, being advised, I was advised a little bit earlier today in the course of a Cabinet committee meeting, I was in the Cabinet room, that President Obama was shortly to make a statement in relation to Osama bin Laden.
Yes, Andrew?
JOURNALIST: What foreknowledge, if any, did Australian agencies, intelligence agencies included, have of operations against Osama bin Laden in the context of the US President today saying that information started trickling through as long ago as August?
PM: Look, we never comment on intelligence matters and I'm not going to break from that convention today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I ask you to elaborate on that travel warning? You're not, it's not a general travel warning like the US, is it just (inaudible) specific cities where there may be-
PM: -Sorry, let me be clear about this. We are really asking people to just be more careful about their personal security.
We anticipate that there may be mass gatherings and demonstrations in some locations. We are obviously warning people not to become caught up, swept up, in those mass gatherings and demonstrations, so we are asking them to be careful in relation to their security if they're in a country where such mass gatherings are likely. We haven't nominated individual countries, but we will as, you know, any more information comes to hand, continue to update the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade travel advisory website.
We'll go to Phil and then come across.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is there any concern about security within Australia? You've talked about travelling overseas. Any concern within Australia?
PM: We have not upgraded security alerts in Australia but we always take a prudent approach and proper precautions in relation to the potential for terrorist activity in Australia. Nothing has changed in relation to that. I want to be very clear about that - nothing has changed. We have not upgraded any security warnings, so nothing's changed but we work consistently with our intelligence professionals, our counter-terrorism professionals, our security professionals, including the police, to make as prudent preparations as we can against any risks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say that the mission will continue in Afghanistan. Does the death of Osama bin Laden make that mission easier or more difficult?
PM: Well, I think what we'd see in Afghanistan is we've seen the leader of al Qaeda obviously brought to an end. Al Qaeda will continue, so circumstances in Afghanistan continue to be difficult for our soldiers who work there.
As I've had cause to say to you in the past, this is a very hard fight, very difficult fight, and we are moving again to what is tragically known as the fighting season. So, that will continue to be a difficult fight.
Al Qaeda has been hurt today but it would be far too early to make conclusions about what that might mean for the nature of the fight in Afghanistan. It will continue to be a difficult place for our soldiers to go and do their vital work. We've lost soldiers there. We've tragically lost lives. We've seen soldiers injured. It's a hard place, hard place to go and fight and that fight will need to continue.
Yes, I'll go to Mark.
JOURNALIST: Victories in the war on terrorism have been few and far between. Would you describe this as a critical morale victory and important in that sense?
PM: This is a very important day, which is why I think people will remember where they were when they heard the news. I think people remember where they were when they heard of the despicable acts of violence against civilians that Osama bin Laden wrought or inspired. People remember where they were on 9/11. People remember where they were when they first heard of the Bali bombing, when we knew Australians had been killed in such large numbers along with Indonesians and people of many other nationalities, people just out for a good night in Bali, a rite of passage of so many young people and we saw such despicable violence against them. I think as we remember those events we will remember where we were the day we heard this news.
This is important news. It is important news for those who sought some justice for the loved ones that they lost. It's also important news in the war on terrorism, as we've seen the leader of al Qaeda brought to an end.
But I do also want to be very clear - the death of Osama bin Laden is not the end of al Qaeda. That is why here in Australia we will continue to do what we need to do to keep the nation as safe as we can from threats of terrorism. We will continue to provide Australians overseas with our best possible advice, and of course we've added to that advice today and we will continue the very vital work we're doing in our mission in Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: Did Australian authorities or Australians embedded in other intelligence agencies or elsewhere play any role in the operation that saw Osama bin Laden killed?
PM: I'm not going to comment about intelligence agencies in any way, shape or form.
JOURNALIST: Could you just, Prime Minister, explain the process by which your Government was informed of his death? Who came to advise you? Who made the call? Was the call made from the US embassy to your office that the President was about to announce something, or were you-
PM: -Our agencies were advised and then they advised my office and my office advised me as I sat in a Cabinet committee meeting.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) US agencies, or?
PM: They heard directly from their US counterparts.
JOURNALIST: What about the safety of our troops in Afghanistan? Is there an upgraded alert for our troops there at risk of any retaliation attacks because of this?
PM: Well, for our troops in Afghanistan each and every day they work in a harsh and difficult environment and a very dangerous environment, so everything they do every day to keep themselves safe in that environment they will continue to do.
It's a hard fight and that hard fight does need to continue. We are moving to what is called the fighting season. It is always a more dangerous phase of operations in Afghanistan, but they make proper, professional, comprehensive preparations to do what they do every day in Afghanistan, and tomorrow will be no different.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I don't think we can, standing here today, make every comprehensive judgement about what this means for the fight in Afghanistan or more broadly, but what I can certainly say to you is the mission in Afghanistan needs to continue, and our soldiers will continue it with all of the professionalism and world-class fighting ability that they are famous for.
Thank you. 



The Gillard Labor Government today announced new funding to start the delivery of Australia's first national system of pay bonuses for around 25,000 of our best teachers. A great chance in life starts with a great education and one of the best ways to get a great education is to have exceptional teachers.
Whether students dream of going on to learn a trade, go to university or straight into a job every one relies on the skill and experience of their classroom teachers. The budget will deliver on Labor's election commitment and provide $425 million over the next four years of the $1.3 billion initiative to ensure every classroom teacher in the country is eligible for a bonus payment. This would mean around one in ten teachers will receive a bonus - about $8,100 for those with most experience and around $5,400 for a teacher in the first few years of their career. The first bonuses will be based on performance in the 2013 school year and paid in early 2014. Prime Minister Julia Gillard visited Turner Primary School in Canberra and said that this reward for our top teachers is another plank in the Gillard Governments' commitment to ensure every child gets the best possible education no matter what their background or where they live. She said that nobody would deny that our teachers are vital to ensuring that our kids get a great start and that while few are in teaching for the money most people in our community would agree we should reward our best teachers. We know that independent research conducted as recently as this year shows that a system of meaningful appraisal and feedback for teachers can increase their effectiveness by 20 to 30 per cent. The method of assessing a teacher's performance, the Australian Teacher Performance Management Principles and Procedures will be fair and equitable. It is expected to include a range of evidence such as:
 * 	Lesson observations
 * 	Student performance data (including NAPLAN and school based information that can show the valued added by particular teachers)
 * 	Parental feedback
 * 	Teacher qualifications and professional development undertaken.
 The Principles and Procedures will build on the first national Professional Standards for Teachers delivered by the Gillard Government earlier this year The Government has already embarked on reforms to better reward quality classroom teachers through the existing Teacher Quality National Partnership and our reforms have been making a difference: 
 * 	In New South Wales, a new category of Highly Accomplished teachers are already working in schools in disadvantaged areas and being rewarded for their hard work and high performance with six figure salaries.
 * 	Victoria is trialling models of school-based and teacher-based rewards in government and independent schools including an annual bonus to top performing teachers.
 Rewards for Great Teachers in every school delivers on the next stage of our commitment to recruit, train, retain and reward great teachers. This Gillard Government has made education a centrepiece of its agenda. It has already delivered new facilities including new language classrooms, science labs, libraries and school halls in every school in the country. In many cases the first new buildings in decades. The Government has also delivered over 413,000 computers and is on track to provide every secondary student in year 9 and above with access to a computer by the end of this year as promised. The Government is also rolling out the Trades Training Centre program so every secondary student will have access to a centre. Treasurer Wayne Swan said that although this will be a tough budget the Government will deliver on its election promises. He said that the Government will ensure that like families, we live within our means and direct our funding where it is most needed and can do the most good for all Australians. School Education Minister Peter Garrett said that in addition to the unprecedented investment in infrastructure and an almost doubling of school funding after years of Coalition neglect, the Gillard Government had embarked upon the largest reform of the school system in the nation's history. He said that for the first time Australia has a single national curriculum, teachers have consistent national professional standards and parents can view the progress and finances of their child's school on MySchool. Further information on the program can be found at www.deewr.gov.au 



PM: I'm joined today by the Minister for School Education, Peter Garrett, and by the local Member for Fraser, Andrew Leigh, and we're here at Harrison School. I'd like to thank Dennis, the school principal, who's made us feel so welcome.
I'd also like to thank Laura and Tyler, our school prefects who have assisted in showing us around the school today. We were just reflecting we've learnt a bit about colours and shapes that we didn't know before.
We're here a week away from the Federal Budget, and the Federal Budget is all about keeping our economy strong. It means that as a nation we've got to live within our means, just like families do, which is why the Budget will bring us back to surplus in 2012-13.
But the Budget is also about what we value as a nation, what we believe is important, and that's why in the forthcoming Budget, even in a tight Budget, we will be making new investments in education.
With the Minister for School Education and with Andrew Leigh, we announced one of those investments yesterday  -  to reward great teachers.
Here today, I want to announce a new investment to support students with disabilities. As a Government, we have already made record investments in supporting students with disabilities and their families. That includes increasing the carer payment by $100 per single per fortnight. It includes the $600 carer supplement to help with the pressures and cost of living that people face when they are caring for children with disabilities. It includes doubling the Commonwealth's investment in disability funding to $6.2 billion.
Of course, we've almost doubled school funding, and there are streams of support within that funding for the special needs of students with disabilities, and through our Building the Education Revolution program, we've made sure that special schools have access to the biggest building grants.
In addition, we have built on our $190 million package for autism and the forthcoming Budget will deliver our election commitment for early intervention funding for children who have hearing impairments, sight impairments, cerebral palsy or Dragile X syndrome. That means that their families will be able to access up to $12,000 of early intervention support, and that's at a total cost of $146 million.
But on top of these major investments, today I want to announce that in the Federal Budget we will provide a new $200 million allocation to support schools and students with disabilities. This $200 million will commence to flow in the next school year. It will be funding for 2.5 years. Of course, school funding beyond that period will be worked through in the context of the school funding review being led by David Gonski.
This $200 million of additional support will be available to assist schools right around the country - all schools in all school systems. The way in which the money will be invested will be in accordance with my vision that we want to make a difference for every child and every school.
The $200 million will go to support additional ways of assisting students with disabilities. These include enabling better access to specialist services, for example speech therapy and occupational therapy, better access to the equipment that can make a difference for students with disabilities. We've seen some of that equipment on display today. Some of the new technology is truly amazing, enabling students with disabilities to better communicate and better participate in class rooms than ever before.
The funding can also be used to assist with additional support in class. Students with disabilities obviously need access to additional teaching support and work with teacher aides.
And it can be used to adapt the curriculum to meet the needs of students with disabilities.
In addition, the money can be used to support teachers who need professional development and assistance to maximise their ability to do the best quality job for students with disabilities 
This is an important new investment - $200 million is a lot of money, and we are investing it in a tight Budget because we recognise that there's nothing more important to the nation's future than what's happening in schools today, and we want to make sure every child in every school gets a great education, and that includes ensuring that our students with disabilities also get the opportunity for a great education.
I'll turn now to the Minister for School Education for some comments.
MINISTER GARRETT: Thanks very much, Prime Minister.
Today is yet another clear example of the commitment that this Government has to making sure that every kid in school in Australia gets best opportunity to fulfil their potential, including those kids who have special needs or who have disabilities. 
I'm really, really pleased that we're here, able to make this announcement on the eve of the Budget, very aware of the fact that for many schools there is a considerable challenge in making sure that they are able to provide the best possible education that they can to kids, including those kids with disabilities. I want to put on the record my thanks to the special working group that we convened to provide advice to the Government as to how might best go about assisting kids at school who do have special needs, and I really want to say that their work was thorough and we've looked very closely at their recommendations and we've acted on them today.
We intend to deliver this special investment for kids with disabilities into schools though national partnership arrangements and direct funding arrangements with the non-government school sector. My expectation is that we will work closely with the States as they deliver into their schools the kind of support that we know will make a real difference to the teachers, to kids and to parents, who will know that their kids are getting that kind of support in the schooling environment.
It's important for us to really face up to the fact that if we want to make sure every child gets the best start in life, then that means every single child, including a child including a child with disability, and now, with this investment today, we're making sure that these kids get the support in our schools that they need.
It's a great day for the schools that work hard with these kids, a terrific day for the kids themselves. I'm absolutely thrilled and delighted that we're able to make this announcement.
PM: Happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, for the last month or so we've heard about how this is going to be a tough budget, there might be cuts to might be cuts to medical research, various other sectors, the public sector, for example. Today we hear you've announced a big new tranche of funding in the Budget. I'm a bit confused about what your Government's Budget message is. Could you actually just explain it to us?
And secondly, are you happy with how Wayne Swan is selling the Budget message at the moment?
PM: Thank you very much. Very simple, the Budget message - the Budget message is about doing what we need to do now to keep our economy strong. Of course, our economy is facing up to some short-term challenges, including recovering from the natural disasters we saw over summer and also the impact on our economy of the natural disaster in Japan, and the record-high dollar is putting some pressure on sections of the economy, but the record-high dollar is a reflection of the strength of our resource sector.
So, we know whilst the economy faces some short-term challenges that we are moving to a high-growth phase for our economy. We've got a record number of investments in the pipeline. That means our economy will be at close to full capacity.
The right thing to do when the economy running strong, when it's going at close to full capacity, is to bring the Budget back to surplus to make sure that Government doesn't add to inflationary pressures within the economy, because that would be bad for the cost of living of individual Australians. It would be bad for Australian families.
That's why we're determined to bring the Budget surplus in 2012-13. That's why we will make the cutbacks necessary in order to do that. We will live within our means.
But even as you live within your means, you make choices - choices about the things that matter to you the most, and what we are indicating today as a Government is education, supporting students, supporting students with disabilities to get a great education is one of the things that matters to us the most.
I've constantly said as Prime Minister that there is nothing closer to my heart than education, because a great education for students is about our future as a society; our economic future, because the people in this school and in schools like it around the country today, the children here are going to be the adults of tomorrow, the ones who keep our economy strong; but it's also a vital investment for fairness. I don't want us to be a country where some children miss out on a great education, and that's why we're making this new investment.
Now, I think people will judge us on our at the choices, and when we look at the choices that this Government's made - for example, in our record funding in disabilities - if you look at the last full year of the Howard Government, they had 40 per cent less in funding, direct funding, on support for people with disabilities than this Government does.
At the last election, Tony Abbott's policy was to assist 6,000 students with disabilities when we know that there are that there are more than 160,000 students with disabilities in Australian schools.
Well, we're making a different set of choices. It's important that students with disabilities get a great education. That's why I'm proudly making this announcement today on top of our record funding to support children, people, families with disabilities.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, since you raised Tony Abbott there, while you've been overseas and in the weeks beforehand, he's been visiting factories, work floors, to tell them we shouldn't have a carbon tax, that it would be bad for them. He seems to have had some effect on, certainly, the union movement in Paul Howes, hardening his rhetoric. Is Tony Abbott outflanking you on this issue and do you think that you're losing the battle to convince people of a need for a carbon tax?
PM: I don't comment on polls and I'm here today talking about a very important policy for our nation, a policy that will start making a difference in children's lives from the next school year on.
But on the question of carbon pricing, we will continue to explain to the Australian community how important this is for the future of our economy and how important it is for our environment.
It's easy to raise fear. It's easy to be negative. What's harder is to design the right solution to deal with a big challenge like climate change.
That's what the Government is about, and that's what we'll keep explaining to the Australian community. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the second half of my question from before, I mean, Wayne Swan, for example, angered steel producers over the weekend, saying that there won't be a great impact on them from the carbon tax, ‘bad luck', essentially. Are you happy with that sort of message? Is there a mixed message going out, mixed messages going out from your Government at the moment, about the moment about the impact of the carbon tax? Are you happy with his performance? 
PM: I'm smiling at the cheering coming in from one of the classrooms in school.
Wayne Swan is doing a first-class job as Deputy Prime Minister and as Treasurer. He's working incredibly hard in the lead up to the Budget next week and he's doing a first-class job as we lead towards Budget day.
Wayne has been making what I think about the important set of points about the impact of carbon pricing on Australian businesses. It's important for the facts to get out there. There's a lot of fear around. Tony Abbott is making it his business to generate a lot of fear.
The Government will be there, day after day, putting out the facts so people can understand what carbon pricing will mean and judge for themselves.
And let's remember what we're talking about is putting an impost on the 1,000 biggest polluters, businesses who are the 1,000 biggest polluters in this country and using that money to assist households, protect Australian jobs and to fund programs that tackle climate change.
This is the right thing to do to have a strong economic future with a clean energy economy. It's the right thing to do by our environment.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, or Minister Garrett, can you tell us how will the funding, the $200 million, be divided or be allocated between the schools, and secondly, a theme that's emerged in submissions to the school funding review is that students with disabilities who go to non-government schools aren't able to get the same levels of support, levels of funding, that students with disabilities in Government schools can get. Do you accept that that's the case, and if so, what do you intend to do about it?
PM: Well, I'll have Peter explain the distribution mechanism.
MINISTER GARRETT: Thanks, Dan.
The national partnership will deliver the funding to the States on a proportional basis according to the equivalent enrolments of each State, and then the national partnership will provide for the States those opportunities into Government schools to deliver funding on the basis of those student identified with disability, and in the non-Government sector, across those other sectors, in the same way.
My expectation is that they will be decisions that will be taken both by sectors and the States, as they do now in terms of do now in terms of making sure that there is provision for services and support for kids with disabilities in those schools.
JOURNALIST: PM, if I may, just one last-
PM: -Oh, sorry, on the-
JOURNALIST: -On the second question-
PM: Well, Peter can, sorry, deal with that, too.
MINISTER GARRETT: Look, it will be a question for the States and the sectors to deliver this funding in a way which they think best meets needs of supporting kids with disability who are in their school systems.
JOURNALIST: On the question of, do you accept that there's a disparity between the levels of support that students with disabilities can get in non-government schools compared to those in Government schools and, if so, do you intend to fix that?
MINISTER GARRETT: Well, I guess the point to make about this is that we've already got significant investment which can potentially be delivered to kids with disabilities in Government systems through some of the national partnership money that's already out there.
So, if you want to try to disaggregate where existing investment at the Commonwealth level is going, in terms of supporting students with disabilities, that's an exercise which will happen over time as we review those partnerships.
What I'm confident about is that this will make a significant difference to schools in both sectors, government and non-government, and that the education authorities or the school system drivers will make sure that they focus on kids with disabilities in a way which assists them in the teaching of those kids in their school systems.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the United States says that it's inconceivable that Osama bin Laden could have not had support within Pakistan. Do you trust Pakistan?
PM: Sorry, smiling again at the playground noises that are now going to come through to our press conference, even as we talk about some very important questions.
The United States has made statements, I think a very obvious, commonsense statement, that Osama bin Laden could not have been where he was in Pakistan without a support systems, so that's obviously true. President Obama has also made sure that he has thanked Pakistan for helping lead US forces, helping lead the United States, to where Osama bin Laden was so they could engage in the action that led to the death of Osama bin Laden.
Secretary Clinton has today confirmed how important it is to keep working with Pakistan on counter-terrorism. That's my view. That's Australia's view. We think it's very important to continue to work with Pakistan on counter-terrorism. We have a Memorandum of Understanding to drive that cooperation, and we will keep working with them.
We do need to recall that of the people who have suffered from the despicable violence led by Osama bin Laden or inspired by him, the people of Pakistan have very greatly suffered.
JOURNALIST: Will you be seeking assurances, though, from Pakistan? You haven't said whether you trust Pakistan as well, but will you be seeking assurances from Pakistan that nobody in the military base just down the road or in the Pakistani interservice intelligence agency knew that Osama bin Laden was living just down the road?
PM: We will keep working with Pakistan through our counter-terrorism and other cooperation. We do have good cooperation on counter-terrorism issues and we'll continue with that.
JOURNALIST: PM: I just wanted to go back, you said something about the carbon tax before. Anna Bligh today has said she doesn't back a carbon tax yet, either. When you've got people like Anna Bligh, and last week or the week before Paul Howes, good Labor people, saying they're now feeling nervous about this tax, and we need more detail, I mean, isn't it incumbent upon your Government to actually release more details sooner rather than later about the impacts of the carbon tax, the rate, the compensation that will be available? I mean, is that something on the cards?
PM: Well, the important thing here is to consult and get the details right, and certainly I understand that many Australians will judge their final view about carbon pricing when they can see all of the details. That's very, very understandable.
What is also very understandable is as a Government we wanted to take a highly consultative approach, to canvass views about the best way of getting this right.
Now, I invite you to consider the reaction to the alternative. If we had walked out and said, ‘Here is the full details of carbon pricing. We've created this in a black box. We haven't talked to anybody. Here it is, it's immutable, it's written in stone', then the business community, trade unions, indeed, State governments, would have said ‘How do we get a voice in this process? How do we get heard?'.
Well, we've taken a different approach. We've announced the way in which carbon pricing will work as a mechanism, and then we are intensively consulting - allowing business to have a voice, allowing trade unions to have a voice, allowing State governments to have a voice in the design of carbon pricing. That's the right thing to do.
The details will be announced when they're ready. I know - call me old-fashioned, but I think what Government should do is not march to the beat of the political cycle, but march to the beat of the policy cycle and get policy right.
Today is a great example of that. Minister Garrett has been working very intensively with stakeholders so that we could better understand the needs of students with disabilities and how we could better assist. That's the right thing to do.
It's a very stark contrast to how the Howard government used to do business. When we came to office, no clear national definition of students with disabilities. That continues to be so now, but the Minister is working through a process to ensure that we can better understand numbers of students with disabilities and where they are.
When we came to office, there wasn't a list of disadvantaged schools in this country. No-one in the Howard government had ever bothered to turn their mind to the question of education disadvantage and where it was, so we've worked through a proper process and now every Australian can see where disadvantage is through the My School website.
So, we take a proper policy approach. We've done it in other areas of policy, done it in relation to the policy we've announced today. We'll do it in relation to carbon pricing.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, are we at risk of a home-grown terror attack, and has that risk increased from the death of bin Laden?
PM: We have not increased our terrorism alert. It is still at the same level that it was before the news came through of the death of Osama bin Laden. Our security agencies continue to do what they do so well, which is be vigilant and prepared for any potential terrorist attack, so that work continues.
Our message to Australians overseas, and it is an important message, is if we start to see mass demonstrations in any country in the world protesting against the death of Osama bin Laden, then not to become swept up in those demonstrations. Don't go down and have a walk with the camera to go and have a look. That is not a safe place to be. That is our advice to Australians overseas, and obviously for our embassies and our consulates we have put them on alert. So, that's been the approach we've taken.
All of that advice is Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade website, and of course you can register if you are travelling overseas through the website. That is always a really smart thing to do, because if something happens, like the tsunami and earthquake in Japan, it means it's much easier for us to know where Australians are so we can go to their assistance.
So, if there's one message I can reinforce, any day you're travelling is a smart day to register with the DFAT website.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: One more question on Afghanistan.
PM: Alright, we'll be generous, Nino  -  we'll go here and here and then we're off.
JOURNALIST: Thank you. I just want to know, given that Pakistan has nuclear weapons and it may be the case that there were elements of the country that were supporting Osama bin Laden, does that concern you, that Pakistan is a dangerous country, and also, on another topic, the Future Fund has started dumping its  investments in cluster munitions. Does that mean the Government is now going to ratify the treaty it signed in 2008?
PM: Well, look, I'm not going to answer a question which is a speculation upon speculation in relation to Pakistan. I don't think that that would be an appropriate thing for me to do.
I'm also not going to speculate on investments that are made by an independent body.
JOURNALIST: Just on Afghanistan, we had a parliamentary debate earlier this year and you made your Government's pretty clear, that you support Australia's presence there, and obviously the Coalition also supports that presence.
There is already talk about pressure on President Obama to draw down US forces there earlier, because of the death of bin Laden, because there's a perception perhaps this will help the security situation. If that happens, how will your Government respond? Would you consider withdrawing Australian troops earlier, and, I guess, how would you arrive at that decision, as well?
PM: Well, once again I'm not going to speculate on a series of hypotheticals. I attended last year NATO's summit in ISAF format. What that means is that all countries participating in the mission in Afghanistan were around the table, including Australia. President Obama was there and the countries involved in the mission in Afghanistan agreed the strategy in Afghanistan. It is a strategy of transition. It is a strategy of training the Afghan National Army and Afghan Police so that we can move to security leadership by Afghan nationals of their own nation.
What I said yesterday, and what I'm very happy to repeat today, is the death of Osama bin Laden does not mean that al Qaeda is out of business. No-one should succumb to that analysis. Al Qaeda is a resilient terrorist network. We know that terrorists have trained in Afghanistan. They have hatched their evil plots whilst training in Afghanistan. Our mission there remains the same, and that is to make sure that Afghanistan does not again become a safe haven for terrorists.
Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Have you spoken to President Obama since came back from (inaudible)?
PM: No.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced new budget funding of $200 million to provide extra support for students with disability in Australian schools. The Prime Minister said that every student in every school deserves a great education and this extra funding will help ensure that students with disability get that same opportunity.
The Prime Minister made the announcement today with the Minister for School Education Peter Garrett at Harrison School in Canberra.  There are more than 164,000 students with disabilities currently attending Australian schools. The More Support for Students with Disabilities initiative will deliver new services, equipment and support. This will make a significant difference for thousands of children with disabilities at school and their families. The Prime Minister said this budget will be tough but the Government is determined to ensure that funding is available where it can make the most difference in vital areas like health and education. This initiative will build on the existing record investments in schools delivered by the Government, which is already supporting children with special needs in schools across the country. The Gillard Government initiative will provide many benefits for students with disability and their families including: 
 * 	new services such as speech and occupational therapy delivered at school by health and student welfare professionals
 * 	access to special equipment in classrooms such as audio and visual technology so that students can more easily learn and engage with their classmates and teachers
 * 	additional hours of in-class support from staff including teachers aides, health and allied health professionals as well as enhanced support through team teaching
 * 	adapted curriculum tailored to their needs based on the latest research and expert advice.
 It will also improve support for teachers so they can: 
 * 	improve the planning and delivery of programs, lessons and activities that enhance the way students with disabilities learn and are included in the classroom
 * 	better engage support staff, health and allied health professionals and curriculum experts to assist them in providing appropriate support for students
 * 	access expert advice to learn the latest skills and strategies to improve the education of students with disabilities.
 Government, Catholic and Independent schools that teach students with a disability are eligible so that students can benefit no matter what their background or circumstances. The Prime Minister said every parent has an expectation that their children will realise their potential at school and achieve the results of which they are capable. This latest initiative builds upon the Government's record of delivering: 
 * 	more support for families with children with disability
 * 	historic pension increases for parents caring for children with disabilities
 * 	double the amount of funding for more specialist disability services under the National Disability Agreement
 Mr Garrett said that under this new initiative, schools will work with families, support agencies and health and student welfare professionals to focus on students' needs. He said that the package has been developed after extensive consultations with school principals, disability organisations, unions, communities and other educational professionals. The Gillard Government will immediately work with the States, Territories and education authorities on how the new funding can be delivered to achieve maximum benefit for students with disability. Students will receive the benefits of the initiative by the time school starts next year. Funding arrangements to support students with disability are  also being considered by the independent Review of School Funding, which will report later this year. More Support for Students with Disabilities supports the Government's other commitments to supporting families and children with disabilities including the new $146 million program, Better Start for Children with Disabilities.  From 1 July this year, this program will provide eligible children under six years old diagnosed with sight or hearing impairment, Down syndrome, cerebral palsy or Fragile X syndrome access to up to $12,000 for intensive early intervention therapies and treatments from allied health professionals. The Better Start program builds on the Gillard Government's $190 million Helping Children with Autism package which has helped more than 12,000 children with Autism Spectrum Disorder access early intervention services. Further information on the More Support for Students with Disabilities initiative is available at: www.deewr.gov.au Further information on the Better Start for Children with Disabilities and Helping Children With Autism initiatives is available at: www.fahcsia.gov.au  



HOST: Prime Minister, the US counter terrorism adviser John Brennan has said it's inconceivable that bin Laden didn't have some sort of support within Pakistan. How concerned are you that the Pakistani army or intelligence service may have been giving that support?
PM: President Obama's words yesterday was that he thanked Pakistan for the assistance that helped lead the Americans to where Osama bin Laden was.So, we've got to remember that there has been counter-terrorism cooperation here and we do cooperate with the government of Pakistan in counter terrorism. We've got a memorandum of understanding and we will continue to do that - to work with the government of Pakistan to fight terrorism.HOST: But for John Brennan and Carl Levin to raise concerns, that must concern you somewhat. Does the Australian Government seek answers from Pakistan or do you wait to hear from Washington tells you?PM: Well, the reference there was to a support system in Pakistan and it's just simple, common sense, I think, that it would have been impossible for bin Laden to be there, in a compound, without some support system that was getting him the necessities of life, but we need to remember Secretary Clinton, President Obama have said that they will continue to cooperate with Pakistan in fighting terrorism, as will we.HOST: Will you be seeking answers, though, from Washington, or perhaps has the Foreign Minister, Mr Rudd had a briefing over night?PM: The Foreign Minister is in Washington and has seen Secretary Clinton, and of course will continue to collaborate with the United States of America, as we do on security matters generally.HOST: Given the concerns being raised about Pakistan, where does that leave the situation for Australian troops in Afghanistan? Are you more concerned about their position now?PM: Well, for our troops in Afghanistan we've got to see our mission through. Afghanistan is a dangerous place and we know from the death toll we've already experienced that this is a hard fight, a dangerous fight, and some very brave soldiers have lost their lives in this fight. We do need to see this mission through, though. The death of Osama bin Laden is not the death of al Qaeda.We're in Afghanistan to make sure that it never again becomes a safe haven for terrorists, a place where they can go and train and plan violent attacks. We need to see that mission through.HOST: What have you been told about the possibility of revenge attacks in countries, for example, like Indonesia?PM: Well, we've got no specific intelligence warnings at this point, no specific information. Obviously there is speculation here and indeed around the world that there may be revenge attacks.What I would say to Australians overseas is do not get swept up in any demonstrations or, you know, meetings of people in countries overseas protesting the death of Osama bin Laden. Do not engage in any of that, don't get swept up in it, don't go and have a look at it. That is not a safe place to be. Exercise common sense about your personal security.For all of us here in Australia, our terrorist alert system remains at the same warning level and our government agencies continue what they do all day, every day to be vigilant about the prospects of a terrorist attack.HOST: On the travel advisories, are we likely to see any issued for specific countries?PM: What we've got on the travel advisory now is a global warning in the terms that I've just described to you. People who are travelling should always get on the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade website, they should look at the travel warnings in the broad and for the countries they're intending to go to and they should also register. That is a smart thing to do any day that you are going to travel. It enables us to get information to people when they are travelling.To give you one example, it was very important in assisting us to locate people in Japan following the earthquake and tsunami. So, our message every day, including today, is if you are travelling overseas please register.HOST: On the domestic front, the latest Newspoll is showing that job satisfaction of Tony Abbott is up 6 per cent. Did his tour of the country last week while you were overseas contribute to that bounce in the poll?PM: I'm going to disappoint you. I don't speculate on polls. If I took to speculating on polls I'd get very little else done given the number of polls that we see.I've got a lot of hard work to do as Prime Minister. We've got a lot of hard work to do as a Government and we'll get on with doing that work.HOST: The Budget next week, do you expect that that will have implications for the polls as well?PM: It'll have implications for the nation and that's what my eyes are on - the future of this country. We've got to keep our economy strong and we've got to make sure that we are spreading opportunity to Australians.I don't want there to be individuals in this country that miss out on the benefit of this resources boom, who feel left behind. That's why I've been very passionate and determined to make sure people get the benefits of a great education system and people get the benefits of work. That's why we're so proud we've created 750,000 jobs in this country and we've got to keep the economy strong because there's nothing more important to a family than having breadwinners who are bringing pay packets back home.HOST: Prime Minister, thank you.PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins us now from Canberra. Prime Minister, good morning to you. We're running a phone poll this morning asking our viewers the question whether they feel safer now that bin Laden is gone. 71 per cent are saying no. What advice are you getting on whether bin Laden's death makes us any more or less of a terrorist target?
PM: Well, this has hurt al Qaeda and that's a good thing. It's a good thing for the world, it's a good thing for Australia, but it hasn't ended al Qaeda. Al Qaeda is a resilient network and so we've still got to take proper and prudent preparation against the potential for a terrorist attack and we are advising Australians overseas to not get involved in any mass demonstrations that there may be about this matter, any mass demonstrations of support, to stay right away from that and to be vigilant about their personal safety. HOST: So you're obviously concerned. I mean, words this morning being used include reprisals, sleeper cells, retaliation, there is obviously a fear. PM: I can understand that Australians are a little concerned, a little anxious, wondering what this means. My answer to that question would be as follows: first, we should welcome the fact that Osama bin Laden has been killed. That is a good thing in the sense that it's hurt al Qaeda and this man was a combatant in the war on terrorism. He'd taken a lot of innocent lives, including Australian lives. But we also need to recognise the death of bin Laden is not the death of al Qaeda, so people just have to take commonsense preparations. We should still go about our ordinary lives in Australia, the way we did yesterday and the day before that and we will continue to take the kind of preparations and remain vigilant, the way we have been over a number of years now, for the potential of a terrorist attack. HOST: Alright, is it time for our troops to leave Afghanistan? PM: Certainly not. We've got a mission to see through there, and that mission will take us through training the Afghan National Army. We have a timeframe there of 2014, where we are looking towards Afghan nationals being in charge of the security of their own country, but we need to stay the course in Afghanistan and to make sure that it does not again become a safe haven for terrorists. Once again I would say bin Laden is dead, but al Qaeda is a resilient terrorist network. We've got to get the job done in Afghanistan - and we will - and I think one message we should take from all of this is persistence pays. HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you for your time this morning. PM: Thank you. 



HOST: And we're joined now by the Prime Minister in Canberra. Ms Gillard, thank you for your time and good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Were you as shocked as everybody else when you learned the news that the world's most wanted fugitive was hiding in a relatively wealthy Pakistani city, just metres from that country's key military academy?
PM: Well, like the rest of the world I was surprised. Obviously the rumours had tended to be that he was hiding out in mountain locations, not in a populated area very close to Pakistan's capital. But my overwhelming sense when I heard the news yesterday was one of relief, that someone who had caused so much evil, so much harm, had been brought to justice.
HOST: How long do you believe Osama bin Laden had been in Pakistan?
PM: Look, I haven't got any information that can enable me to answer that question. I note that President Obama, of course, thanked Pakistan for assistance that helped lead the Americans to Osama bin Laden and the compound in which he was ultimately found and killed.
HOST: And just on that point, what information does the Australian Government have about the role of Pakistani security forces in the actual operation?
PM: Look, I don't speculate on any intelligence matters, but what I can of course refer to is President Obama's thanks for assistance in helping to lead the Americans to where Osama bin Laden was.
HOST: You might have just heard our reports on US counter-terrorism adviser John Brennan telling reporters in Washington this morning that is was inconceivable from the Administration's point of view that Osama bin Laden did not have a support structure in Pakistan. Do you share that view?
PM: Well, clearly, to be able to be there he must have had some support mechanisms, absolutely, but American officials, President Obama, Secretary Clinton have all been confirming that they want to continue close counter-terrorism operation with Pakistan, as do we. We have a Memorandum of Understanding with Pakistan. We need to work with them in the fight on terrorism and we need to remember that Pakistan has suffered grievously from the activities of terrorist organisations like al Qaeda. Many, many of the people of Pakistan have lost their lives in terrorist attacks.
HOST: And undoubtedly they have, but given you share John Brennan's concern, do you trust the Pakistani Government and do you trust its genuineness in the battle against terrorism?
PM: Well, what I think is the best approach from the Australian Government, and it is the same approach being taken by the Government of the United States, is we've got to continue to work with Pakistan on our counter-terrorism efforts. It's an important place for us to pursue the war on terror and we will continue to do that.
HOST: How, Prime Minister, in your view, does the killing of Osama bin Laden change the dynamic in the war in Afghanistan?
PM: Well, of course this has hurt al Qaeda. Its leader being executed had clearly hurt al Qaeda, but it has not killed al Qaeda. This is a resilient terrorist network. What this means is we've got to stay the course in Afghanistan. We are there to prevent Afghanistan once again becoming a safe haven for terrorists. We've got to see that mission through.
Now, I think a message we should take from the eventual death of Osama bin Laden is that persistence does pay. It can take a lot of time to successfully pursue a mission. It took a lot of time to pursue the mission to locate Osama bin Laden. We know that we are pursuing our mission in Afghanistan. We are making progress. We are looking towards 2014, where the Afghan Government has said it wants to take security leadership of the country, but we need to see that mission through.
It would be a very grave error to think that because Osama bin Laden is dead that somehow the terrorism problem or terrorism network that al Qaeda represents is finished as well.
HOST: In fact, a lot of security analysts are saying that the most potent al Qaeda leader is still very much at large and that, of course, is the deputy, Ayman al-Zawahiri. Do you believe that this  -  the fact that he is very much seen as the chief executive of al Qaeda, whereas Osama bin Laden was essentially the inciter-in-chief? Do you believe that he poses a much greater threat to Westerners and Coalition troops in Afghanistan?
PM: I think al Qaeda continues to pose a threat and this tends to be a multi-headed beast, if you like. There's more than one identity involved in al Qaeda.
Now, we don't want to underestimate the fact that the death of Osama bin Laden is a significant blow to al Qaeda, but it is not the death knell of al Qaeda. We've got more work to do and we do have to pursue our mission in Afghanistan as part of that work against terrorism and terrorism being able to incubate itself in safe havens.
Afghanistan has been a safe haven for terrorism in the past. We are working to ensure it is not a safe haven for terrorism in the future.
HOST: Prime Minister, Indonesia's anti-terrorism chief is this morning warning of possibly instant reprisals against Westerners in Indonesia. What precautions it the Australian Government taking against this?
PM: There are, of course, the possibility of revenge attacks, and that's been the subject of discussion, I know, on your show and on many other media outlets today. What I can say to Australians about that is we are urging Australians overseas to not get involved in any mass demonstrations which may emerge. It may be that in some countries in world there are demonstration that are decrying the death of Osama bin Laden. We're saying to Australians abroad do not get swept up or involved in any of those demonstrations and just show commonsense and vigilance about your personal security.
To Australians at home, to all of us here in Australia, we have not increased our terrorism warning system. We are still on the same level of warning as we have been and we continue, of course, through our government agencies, to be vigilant about the prospects of any terrorist attack, but we have not upgraded warnings at home.
HOST: Just given the concerns you've expressed about Australian overseas, would you consider following the American's lead and issuing a formal travel warning in the light of the events in Pakistan?
PM: We have already put a new set of words  -  warning words  -  on the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade website. That is where people go for travel advisories, so I'd urge anybody travelling to get on that website. It will of course direct them to this global warning that I've just repeated for you, and it always gives country-specific information.
There is the registration system, too, and we always urge Australians who are travelling overseas to register through the Departmental website, which means we have the ability to know where they are and to get information to them if we need to. Now, that's proved to be useful in a whole series of circumstances - for example, most recently in Japan, when we needed to locate people following the earthquake and tsunami, so it's always prudent to register if you're going to travel.
HOST: And just finally before you go, Prime Minister, you mentioned you've urged Australians not to take part in those mass demonstrations, a lot of which are taking place in America. Are you a bit unsettled by the show of triumphalism being shown by certainly some Americans, but also some of their political leaders in the wake of Osama bin Laden's death and the potential to further incite those reprisals we're all fearing?
PM: I believe President Obama has struck exactly the right tone on this and I understand that for so many people, people who have lost so much because of the violence that Osama bin Laden led and the violence he inspired, that this is an emotional time. So, I can understand there being outpourings of emotion by people around the world. Here in Australia, of course, there are many Australian families who continue to grieve the loss of loved ones, whether it's from 9/11, or Bali, either of the Bali bombings, indeed other terrorist events around the world. So, this is clearly an emotional time for many people.
HOST: And just quickly, one quick domestic question, talking about being unsettled, are you in any way anxious about Tony Abbott's jump in his personal approval rating in the latest Newspoll this morning?
PM: Well, of course, I'm going to disappoint you here and say I don't run commentary on the polls. I've got a lot of hard work to do as Prime Minister, we've got a lot of hard work to do as a Government, and we'll get on and do it.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thank you very much for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you. 



The Gillard Labor Government today outlined major increases in family payments for many thousands of Australian families if their teenage children stay on longer at school.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard announced the upcoming budget will deliver an increase in Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A for 16-19 year olds with families receiving up to an additional $4,200 a year for each eligible teenager that stays in school.
This will deliver on key a Gillard Labor Government election commitment that will be good for families and good for skills in the economy in the future.
The families of around 650,000 children turning 16 over the next five years will be eligible for the substantial cash increases if their teenager continues learning.
A great chance in life starts with a great education, which is why it is so important that teenagers stay at school and finish their secondary education.
The Prime Minister said the initiative will help many Australian families cover the costs of raising children and encourage teenagers to stay on at school.
From 1 January next year, the new maximum rate of FTB Part A for 16-19 year olds will increase by around $160 per fortnight - an increase of around $4,200 per year.
This will align with the 13-15 year old rate and ensure assistance for families does not drop when children turn 16.
The increases to FTB Part A will only be available for families where their teenager is in full-time secondary study, or the vocational equivalent.
Education is a central piece of the Gillard Government's reform agenda.
The Prime Minister is committed to building a strong workforce and economy based on a well-educated and trained population.
Since 2007, the Government has almost doubled schools funding and has made record investment in the training system to help more Australian children achieve their potential.
It has also introduced ‘earn or learn' requirements so young people in receipt of income support are working or studying to ensure that young Australians are doing all they can to build their skills and get ready for work.
The increased financial support for families outlined today builds on these initiatives.
The Government recognises that children do not get cheaper to care for as they get older. The cost of groceries, clothes and family activities can all increase as children grow.
We know these costs can be a barrier for low-income families to support their child's secondary education.
Research shows children from low-income families have lower levels of school completion. In 2006, Year 12 completion rates were 59 per cent for low-income students, compared to 78 per cent for higher income students.
By linking the increase to FTB Part A to school participation, we are ensuring families are able to better support their teenage children to stay at school.
New analysis by the Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs shows that thousands of Australian families will be eligible for extra cost of living relief when the increase to FTB Part A begins next year.
We expect more young people and their families to stay in the family assistance system as a result of these changes. This will mean they will also benefit from access to Rent Assistance and FTB Part B.
About 23,000 families will either receive Rent Assistance, or receive extra Rent Assistance, up to $3,600 a year. In addition, 28,900 families will be eligible for FTB Part B up to $2,900 a year.  
The increase to FTB Part A will cost $771.9 million over five years.
This initiative builds on and will help support the Government's robust targets for secondary school completion. The 2009 Council of Australian Governments (COAG) National Education Agreement aims to lift the number of people with a Year 12 or equivalent qualification to 90 per cent by 2015. 



PM: I'm joined here today by the Member for Reid, John Murphy, and it's a pleasure to be here with him.
We're now not many days away from the forthcoming Federal Budget. This is a Federal Budget where we will be returning the budget to surplus in 2012-13, as promised.
It will be a tight budget. It's important that the Government live within its means, that the nation live within its means, in the same way that it's important that families do.
But even in a tight budget we are working hard to put resources into those things that truly matter, those things that as Prime Minister I want to see change about our country. I am passionate about making sure that every child in every school gets a great education, and that's why on Monday this week I confirmed that we will, in this budget, honour our election commitment to reward great teachers. I want teachers who are doing the right thing by students in their schools to see greater rewards. It's why yesterday we announced a new program: $200 million to assist schools to meet the needs of students with disabilities, because I want those students, too, to have a great quality education.
And I'm very pleased to be here today able to talk about another election commitment that will be honoured, and that is one to assist families with the costs of teenagers.
Now, we should acknowledge that we are here at Southern Cross Catholic Vocational College. This is a state of the art, world-class facility. It's been made possible by our Trades Training Centre program, where the Government invested $11 million in creating this world class training facility - but we didn't do it alone. We did it working with Catholic Education and the local community and I'd like to take this opportunity to publicly thank Catholic Education for partnering with Government and making available $11 million too, so that together a $22 million facility could be created, and there are a numbers of individuals to whom particular thanks go. I'd like to thank Brother Kelvin for his work in making this possible. I'd also like to thank Dan White for making it possible and to our Principal, who's shown us the facility today, with very great an appropriate pride, to Patrick O'Reilly, thank you very much for having us here.
This is a facility where students can get a hands-on education from hair and beauty through to construction trades, through to business studies and media studies. We wanted, through our Trades Training Centres program, to create new options for students, because it's so important that kids stay at school. We don't was 16, 17-year-old kids drifting away from education into a life of unemployment and idleness. That's why facilities like this one are so important.
But to keep kids at school there's another part of the equation, apart from giving them options that engage them and give them real skills - the other part of the equation is helping families with the cost of teenagers.
Our current system of providing family benefits, payments that the Government makes available to assist families with the cost of raising kids, our current system makes the assumption that teenagers cost less than younger kids, that somehow a 16-year-old is going to cost less than a 15-year-old. It's an old-fashioned model that's really based on an assumption that kids are likely to leave school early.
Well, in the modern age we don't want kids leaving school early. We want them engaged in full-time education, getting the skills that they will need for the rest of their lives.
That's why in this Budget we will change our family payment system so that the maximum rate of assistance for a family with a teenager will be $4,200. That is, we will give more money to families who support their teenagers. We'll no longer make the assumption that somehow 16, 17, 18, 19-year-olds cost less to support than younger children.
That's the investment that we will make in the maximum rate of family payment, which goes to those families that need it the most, but more than 60 per cent of families get more than the base rate of family payments and those families with teenagers will benefit from today's announcement.
This will benefit around 650,000 families, teenagers, and make a difference for them, but it comes with the condition that these students are in full-time education. They need to be in school or in some form of full-time education.
We want to work with families to assist them with the costs of teenage children, but we want that to be on the condition that those kids are learning. It's good for families - additional help with cost of living. It's good for kids because it keeps them engaged in education, with the skills that they will need for a lifetime.
So can I conclude by saying a very, very big thank you for having us here today, and I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) carbon tax, Newspoll today shows that 60 per cent of people are against the carbon tax. Do you acknowledge that Tony Abbott's maintained offense to the carbon tax is cutting through, or is it that the Government plan to sell the carbon tax (inaudible)
PM: Well, really, neither of the above. What today's poll shows, and I don't normally comment on polls, but can I say this  -  if you look at today's poll it confirms very clearly that Australians believe that climate change is real. That's a pretty big contrast with Mr Abbott, who has said in the past that climate change is absolute crap. So, Australians believe climate change is real.
Now, I understand when a government, my Government, is putting forward a big reform, that that can make people anxious. That's completely understandable.
In the middle of this year we will be able to give everyone full details of how the carbon pricing system will work. They'll be able to sit at their kitchen table and work out all of the dollars and cents for them. Households will get generous assistance, so they will be able to work through what that assistance means for them and their family.
I think Australians, all Australians will ultimately judge carbon pricing when they have all of those details, but it's very clear to me that Australians do want to tackle climate change. I, as Prime Minister am very determined to make sure we drive this change - that we price carbon, so we have a clean energy future, a strong economy, do the right thing by the environment and the right thing by our future prosperity.
JOURNALIST: Why is that we have to wait until the middle of the year for the details? Why can't you produce those details now?
PM: Because we're working through with consultations. There were two ways of doing this, absolutely. We could have sat in a room with a locked door and worked out all of the details and then come out and announced them and then people would have rightly said ‘How come I didn't get a say? How come no-one listened to me? How come no one asked me what I think about the design of carbon pricing?'
Or we could do it the way we're doing it, which is we announced the general form of how we're going to price carbon and we are working intensively and in a consultative way with businesses, with unions, with environmental groups, to get all of the details right.
That's the right thing to do - to let people have a say, to hear their views, to respond to their views and to make sure that we get this important reform right. 
JOURNALIST: So is that what you're doing this evening, with the business sector, you'll be listening to them, or will you be giving them a message?
PM: Absolutely, I will be talking to businesses, both talking and listening during the course of tonight's meeting.
JOURNALIST: Just on national security, in light of the worldwide fears of retaliation by al Qaeda after the weekend's events, what's been done in this country to ramp up counter-terrorism?
PM: We have our counter-terrorism approaches in place all day, every day.
We haven't increased the security alert. Obviously, I've taken advice on that and the advice is that we do not need to increase the security alert, but we, through our security agencies, working of course with State governments, with police services, all day, every day, take a prudent approach and preparations for dealing with the possibility of a terrorist attack.
So, my message to Australians following the death of bin Laden has been a very clear one  -  this is a body blow to al Qaeda. That's a good thing. That's a great thing. Al Qaeda is a terrorist organisation that came and took innocent lives, innocent Australian lives and the lives of people from countries all around the world and people of many faiths.
So, it's a good thing that al Qaeda's been dealt this body blow, but that doesn't mean that terrorism is out of business, so we've still got to be prudent. We've still got to be careful. We've still got to be prepared and we work with our security agencies to keep Australians as safe as we possibly can.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) advising you that it's highly likely that al Qaeda would have planned for that day itself, in terms of its own strategy for the Taliban?
PM: Look, I'm not going to go into too much detail about the nature of security briefings or intelligence, but what I can say is on the basis of the very professional advice to me we do not at this stage need to increase out alert system here in Australia. All day, every day, we take a very careful approach to these questions of counter terrorism.
Overseas, for Australians travelling, we have said don't get swept up in mass gatherings, in demonstrations - you know, go down to have a look, have a gawk, have a see, take a few photographs. I can understand that people might want to do that if they see something, a gathering of people coming together, but the safe course is not to get involved and not to be in those places.
We've put all of this on our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade website. We say to Australians when they travel, please check all of the travel advisories. We also say to them, please register because in a whole lot of circumstances  -  most recently, for example, the natural disaster in Japan - it really helps us to assist Australians overseas if they've registered and we know where they're going.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you talked about the good things about bin Laden's death. Is it the right thing that we should be so jubilant, that we should be celebrating the man's death, irrespective of how (inaudible)?
PM: I understand that this is an emotional time for many people. I mean, there are Australian families, families right here in our own nation, in our own country, that lost loved ones in violent acts organised or inspired by bin Laden. Now, Australian lost their lives in 9/11. They lost their lives in two Bali bombings. They lost their lives in other terrorist events around the world inspired by or organised by bin Laden. So, I understand this is an emotional time, particularly for those families who lost loved ones.
So, I welcomed the news of the death of bin Laden. He was a combatant in a war. He was killed in a fire fight. He effectively declared war with the strike on 9/11, to use the American expression and the one that we tend to adopt. On 9/11 he effectively declared war and he's paid the price for that.
JOURNALIST: PM, as a leader of this nation though, do you think welcoming the death of a man is appropriate language?
PM: I think in these circumstances, when we are talking about an individual who dedicated his life to violence, who dedicated his life to killing innocent people, who dedicated his life to being a combatant in a war, the war that terrorism is, when we've seen those circumstances I think for us to welcome the news that in a fire fight he has been killed, that he has been located, that he's no longer in a position to organise and wreak violence against innocent civilians is the appropriate thing to do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) President Obama, or has he phoned you, or anyone from the Administration spoken to you about the weekend's events and the ramifications, more importantly about the terrorist threat (inaudible)?
PM: Look, I haven't had the opportunity to speak to President Obama as yet.
JOURNALIST: Has there been any suggestion that the operation on the weekend was delayed until after the royal wedding? 
PM: The operation- obviously, the organisational arrangements for the operation were made by the US Administration and American forces. They were appropriately kept highly, highly secret. I'm not going to speculate on considerations that went through the mind of the Americans in putting it together, but I suspect the foremost, in fact probably the only consideration in their mind was prospects of success.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, New South Wales police have confirmed they're investigating the discovery of home-made bomb at Villawood detention centre last month. The Immigration Minister found out about this morning after speaking to Ray Hadley. Are you concerned that there may be a lack of communication between the Department and the Minister, or he's being kept in the dark?
PM: Look, I'm not going to speculate on a matter that's happened on radio. Of course, we have our detention centres overseen by a contracted body, Serco, and there are a set of contractual obligations that require them to provide appropriate security in detention centres and there is continuing reporting and advice to the Department.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that's something that the Minister should have been told about?
PM: I'm not going to speculate off information on a radio station. We'll take appropriate advice about it. Sometimes things said on radio stations prove, on analysis, not to be 100 per cent right.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there's a report today in The Australian that Rio Tinto weren't invited to this carbon tax dinner. Are they (inaudible)?
PM: Look, let's just get a little bit of sense and perspective here. I have literally hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of meetings. I meet people in all sorts of circumstances. I meet them at breakfast; I meet them at lunch; I meet them at dinners; I meet them in my office; I meet them in their office; I meet them wandering around trades training centre facilities. We consult on the Government's agenda in all sorts of formats and forums.
This is not the only conversation I will have with the business community about carbon pricing. I've had dozens already, I'll have dozens more and we've got the business roundtable for consultation to continue and, of course, that consultation includes Australian's biggest businesses.
I see people from the mining sector very, very regularly, as recently as when I was in China, I was at an event with Sam Walsh and Marius Kloppers, to name just two.
Thank you very much.



HOST: Good afternoon to you Prime Minister
PM: Good afternoon Ben.
HOST: Where do I find you at the moment?
PM: I'm on the road from Campbelltown, I've been out there at a wonderful service, it's called Yummy's Cafe, and it helps teenage parents get on a good path for life.
HOST: Ok now this is the reason you wanted to come on today because as we read on the front page of The Daily Telegraph today: tough on teen mums, teenage mums who refuse to return to school or into job training will lose parenting payments. What's the motivation for this?
PM: Well this is all about opportunity and responsibility, there are around 11,000 teen parents on parenting payment, and most of them, 80 per cent of them, haven't finished Year 12, so they left school early, many of them were in fact on welfare benefits before they became parents. So we want them engaged, we want them with a plan to further their education, to get that all important Year 12, and also a plan to make sure that their child gets the services they need. So we'll be getting them to engage with Centrelink, we're going to roll out youth services, we're going to do it in ten trial sites around the country, a lot of new opportunities for teen parents, but it comes with some responsibility to step up and do the right thing.
HOST: Ok you had a very important dinner last night at Kirribilli House, you were hosting business and industry leaders to try and win them over on the carbon tax. How'd you go?
PM: Look I think this is all been a little bit hyped up, I have meetings all day every day, I do a lot of meetings, speak to a lot of people, and I very regularly speak to business leaders about economic issues and about carbon pricing so last night's dinner was another discussion in many discussions about pricing carbon. It's always a good thing to do, to make sure you're listening to people, talking to people, genuinely sharing views, that's how I lead, by trying to bring people together.
HOST: Ok I described it on air yesterday as a desperation dinner, and I also suggested that I think that the carbon tax is probably never going to happen based on not only the feeling out there in the community but also the reaction of a lot of your backbenchers who say, I mean we heard today from Graham Perrett, the Member for Moreton, who says 80 per cent of constituents who contacted his office in March and April opposed the tax. If you're really listening to people aren't people saying ‘we don't want it'?
PM: Well Ben I don't want to argue with you but you're dead wrong on both, dead wrong the description of last night's dinner and dead wrong on your call about carbon pricing, we will get this done. And you're referring to statements of one of our backbenchers, Graham Perrett, what you haven't mentioned is that he's gone on to talk about how he supports pricing carbon and how it's his view that the community will ultimately make up their mind when they've got all the details which will happen in the middle of this year.
HOST: Sure so at the moment, at the moment, you are losing that battle in selling your message.
PM: Well Ben I'm not going to agree with all of this sort of imagery, what we've done is we've said to the community we need to tackle climate change, it's real and overwhelmingly Australians agree with that, they do want to tackle climate change. And then we've said best way to do that is to price carbon, here's how the mechanism should work and people have looked at that and said ‘I am a bit anxious' and I understand that. Now we will answer that anxiety by giving people all of the details in the middle of the year, they'll be able to sit down and work out exactly what it means for them, and remember we will be providing generous household assistance.
HOST: Ok let's move away from the imagery and let's go to the cold hard facts here. As you know, when you announced this, obviously the first reaction from people was ‘well hang on a moment, she's broken a big promise here because Julia Gillard went before the last election, just a couple of days before, and very clearly said there would be no carbon tax under a government that she leads.' That was obviously the first problem. Then all of a sudden you'd know that on say this radio station for example, 2GB, that a lot of people, I mean we've never had so much feedback from people saying that we don't want this thing and we can't believe it's being brought it, but the worrying thing for you now is the fact that we read in Newspoll yesterday that it's the 35 to 49 age group, the group that most likely have families and mortgages, this group has overtaken older voters as the group most opposed to the carbon tax. Isn't that fatal?
PM: Well Ben I don't spend any time worrying about myself or worrying about the polls that come and go, I spend a lot of time worrying about the future of this country, and I've always believed that climate change was real and I've always believed that the best way of cutting the carbon pollution in our atmosphere is to put a price on it, because if we price it then the big businesses that generate the most pollution, and this is a price that will be paid by 1000 big businesses, those businesses will innovate, they'll find a way of doing what they do and creating less carbon pollution. So that's what is driving me, making sure we have less carbon pollution in our atmosphere, and we have the kind of change in our economy we need to be a prosperous clean energy economy for the future.
HOST: Sure but Prime Minister we know, I mean we all know the way these things work and as much as you say that you don't pay too much attention to polls, I mean polls have a huge impact on the way politics is decided and driven these days. When you read those numbers, when you read that you know, when you've got 64 per cent against and 30 per cent in favour, at the moment you are losing this battle so how can, how is this all of a sudden going to turn around, is it when the detail comes in, is it when you say ‘oh look we'll give you compensation, this is how much compensation you'll receive in return' and why are these policies announced before the detail is thrown out there?
PM: Well Ben it seems to me, as Prime Minister, what you've got to do is work out what you think is the best thing for the country, what you believe in. I believe in climate change, I believe in pricing carbon so I'm determined to get it done-
HOST: But Prime Minister you didn't believe in a carbon tax just a couple of days before the last election.
PM: Well Ben let's be 100 per cent clear about that. I've also believed in climate change being real, I've always believe in pricing carbon. There are two ways for pricing carbon: one's a market based system called an emissions trading scheme and before the last election I did talk to the Australian community about our need to have such a scheme. Another way of doing it is having a carbon tax, now I said to Australian community I want us to have an emissions trading scheme, well in the Parliament the Australian people voted for, to get to that emissions trading scheme, we will have a period of a fixed price. So in the Parliament people voted for, that's the way we can get this done, we'll get it done and we will get to what I always talked to the Australian community about: an emissions trading scheme.
HOST: Sure but the wording of what I just said before is you didn't believe in a carbon tax just a couple of days before the last election, you can't escape that can you?
PM: Out of the various mechanisms for pricing carbon, I certainly in the last election campaign said to the Australian people I think an emissions trading scheme's the right way to do this, not a carbon tax. In the Parliament that the Australian people have voted for, we'll get to that emissions trading scheme, but we'll do it by having a period where we have a fixed price. So I'm getting it done, and as I've said before, the analogy here is you probably drive home from your radio station every night, if you find your path blocked one day, you're not just going to sit there for the rest of your life, you're going to find a different way home. Well I'm finding a different way to the objective that this nation needs, which is to cut carbon pollution with an emissions trading scheme.
HOST: One last one on this obviously you need to take people with you on this at the moment and at the moment they are just not with you and I know that Mark Latham, used to be a friend of yours, he's not longer and I know that he sprouts a lot of stuff that wouldn't be based in common sense, however he did say on Sky News the other night, I heard him, and he said he's not seen an issue like this before where people have run away from it so quickly and he says even people he bumps into today and talks to today, he said they are sceptical, they are cynical about it and he says he doesn't talk to anyone who says right now they want a carbon tax.
PM: Well all I can say to that Ben is if you believe in something then you keep pursuing the argument, perseverance-
HOST: But the problem for you Prime Minister, I know I keep hammering it home, I know I keep hammering it home, but the problem for you-
PM: All of the detail.
HOST: The problem for you on this, Prime Minister, and as you know, I know I keep repeating it to you, but you say when you believe in something, you didn't believe in the carbon tax just a couple of days before the last election, you have to admit that from a sell point of view, from a marketing point of view, that's an issue for you.
PM: Well Ben let's just go through it again. I didn't intend to mislead anyone, I was saying very frankly to the Australian community I believe climate change is real, I believed that before the election, I believe that talking to you today. I believe the best way of dealing with climate change is to reduce carbon pollution by putting a price on it, I've always believed that. There are various ways of putting a price on it, my preference is for an emissions trading scheme and we will get there.
HOST: Ok just onto another issue, it was revealed on Ray Hadley's program about this homemade bomb device at Villawood detention centre, Chris Bowen your Immigration Minister says that he's annoyed that his Department didn't inform him about this even though it happened some time ago. Have you received a briefing on this in the last 24 hours?
PM: Look I've spoken to the Minister for Immigration and I saw him yesterday afternoon, that was a regular discussion and meeting, and of course he was disappointed and concerned that he hadn't been advised by his Department.
HOST: Are you annoyed about that kind of thing happening under your Government where you have crucial things going on, particularly when you have a potential explosive found in a detention centre before there was a massive fire and riots started, there may have been an opportunity there for people to say ‘let's let the Minister know about this because this thing could blow right up' and they're not even telling a bloke who is the Minister for Immigration.
PM: Certainly I am very disappointed by that, but Ben let's be frank and let's be clear, this isn't a party political issue if you like, Governments of all political persuasions have had times when they think the public service hasn't got the information they need as quickly as they need it, that's happened here, that's the wrong thing.
HOST: Sure so why are they ringing Ray Hadley and not ringing Chris Bowen?
PM: Well I can't explain why your caller made that choice, you'd have to ask them.
HOST: Ok on the East Timor solution just briefly, and I know that you are sticking to your guns on this despite since you announced it there have been very few people in East Timor, well not really anyone, who's indicated that it's going to happen. But President Jose Ramos-Horta has come out, I think, in the last five days, and said look he doesn't even think our two nations should have bilateral talks on this. Is it just time to admit on this, Prime Minister, that the East Timor solution was an idea that was floated and it hasn't got up and it's probably time to look at another one?
PM: We'll just keep working methodically as we do. All of this, let's remember the announcements I made and the things that I've spoken to the community about, people smuggling is a vile trade, it's profiting off human misery and I want to basically break the back of the people smugglers business, to take away from them the thing that they sell which gets them profit, now that's not easy to do and it can't be done by just endlessly wandering around repeating the same three word slogans, you've got to go through some hard work, working in the region, we've been doing that through the Bali Process for example and we'll continue to do it.
HOST: But don't people respect leaders who, and even business leaders, if you're in business and you're heading down a certain path and every indication is ‘no, red flags, red flags, it's not going to happen', don't people respect people who have that flexibility to go ‘no, you know what, we've hit a dead end here, I've got to onto another direction' as opposed to being stubborn and just keep on going because you don't want to admit. I mean I can tell you right now Prime Minister, I know it's no newsflash and you don't need to hear it from some talkback host on Sydney radio, but the East Timor solution's never going to happen, you surely know that.
PM: Well Ben in terms of leadership and finding different solutions, the words you've just used then are a summary of my argument about pricing carbon and I thank you for it, that's exactly what I've just described to you about an emissions trading scheme and what I've said about a carbon tax before the last election.
HOST: Ok, so are you going to admit that the East-
PM: Thank you for that, thank you for summarising that to your listeners.
HOST: Anytime.
PM: And Ben you're right, in this sense, people want to see us hard at work and achieving things and of course I'm determined to do that. In this area and every other area.
HOST: Ok so you're not willing to admit that the East Timor solution is never going to happen, do you want a little wager on it before you go?
PM: I'm not much of a betting person.
HOST: Alright listen my time is officially up, I've hit the 12 minute mark so thank you very much for sparing some time for us this afternoon on 2GB.
PM: Thanks Ben.
HOST: Have a safe drive.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: I'm here today with Minister Kate Ellis and we're at Yummy's Cafe which has well and truly lived up to its name. It is a great service, supporting this community, part of our Communities for Children program. And I've had the opportunity this morning to meet some young mums, some young mums who are relying on this service for personal support but some young mums who through this service are studying, they're studying to be childcare workers, studying to get that all important certificate that will get them a job, get them a great start, and which can lead to further education because a number of them have talked to me today about going on to the diploma level of their childcare studies. That's all great news.
And today I want to talk about a new program that the Government is announcing regarding teen parents. Of course we are only a few days away from the forthcoming Budget, and the Budget will be a tough budget, it will be about the nation living within its means, but even in a tough budget, it is very important for us to make the right choices to do the right thing for this country's future, and as I've made those choices with Treasurer Wayne Swan, at every opportunity we have put at the forefront of our decision making education and support for Australians to make sure that they get good opportunities in life; you make choices in a budget and we've made choices to prioritise education and opportunity for Australians.
This week I have confirmed that the Federal Government will in this Budget honour our initiative to provide rewards to great teachers, I've confirmed that we will honour our election commitment to provide additional family payment support to parents of teenagers. We've announced a new program to support students with disability; these are all important choices in the Budget.
Now I understand that we've been criticised for these choices, Mr Abbott would prefer to rip $2.8 billion out of education, well I simply say that's the wrong choice, it's a risky choice for the nation's future.
And Mr Hockey has criticised our plan to support low income families and middle income families who have teenagers. Well once again I think that's the wrong choice and a very risky choice in terms of supporting Australians who need a helping hand with the costs of raising a teenager and keeping that teenager at school.
Here today we are making a choice to work with teenage parents so that they get a good opportunity in life and so do their children. There are around 11,000 teenagers who are parents in this country, more than half of them were actually on welfare support before becoming a parent. 80 per cent of them have not completed Year 12 and they are eight times more likely to come from a disadvantaged area rather than an advantaged area. These teen parents are at risk of a lifetime of disadvantage if we don't try and make a difference for them, and if they're at risk of a lifetime of disadvantage, so are their children, because all of the research tells us that a child growing up in a home where no one works is far more likely to be a disadvantaged adult.
We want to break that cycle of disadvantage and we want to break that cycle of disadvantage through extending new opportunity and requiring new responsibility. That's why today I'm announcing that the Federal Government will require teen parents to engage with Centrelink, to be there engaging every six months, and the purpose of that engagement is to put together a participation plan. Put very simply, that's an education plan for the parent, a plan to make sure that they can get that all important Year 12 qualification or its equivalent.
We know that the jobs in today's workforce require you to have finished school or to have an equivalent qualification and that's what the plan for education will be aimed at. It will also require a plan for services, a plan for the child, a plan to make sure that that young child is getting the services they need, whether that's through playgroup, through engaging with health services, or other forms of support.
So this is about responsibility, but it's also about opportunity, new opportunities for teen parents to get the support they need.
What is happening in this service is young people with babies can come here, they can get childcare support, they can get personalised support, they can get access to education. We want to extend more of those opportunities, so as we roll out our new responsibility plan for teen parents in ten trial sites around Australia, we will also roll out support services; youth connection services to help people find the links that they need and get the personal support they need to develop their plan for their future. And more services like this one, our Communities for Children services that support teen parents, support their children, help them feel that support and get back into education and training.
So this is all about responsibility, it's all about opportunity, it's all about improving the life chances of teen parents and thereby improving the life changes of their children.
Now we will continue to be supporting education and opportunity for Australians, we'll do that whilst bringing the budget back to surplus in 2012-13 as promised. That's required the making of a lot of tough choices, the making of the right choices to support Australians.
Now I note yesterday the Shadow Treasurer, Mr Hockey, has effectively committed the Leader of the Opposition to announcing a plan to bring the budget back to surplus a year earlier. Now I do want to say following Mr Hockey's statements yesterday, that Mr Abbott next week faces a very big test, we announce the Budget on Tuesday, he responds on Thursday, and given the statements by his Shadow Treasurer yesterday, he must on Thursday, announce every dollar, and every cent, every column of figures, that would enable him to bring the Budget to surplus a year earlier than the Government.
You can't go round talking about it and then not show how you're going to do it.
Mr Abbott's failed on three occasions to show the kind of responsibility that is required of people who seek to lead this nation. On three occasions he's simply failed to make the figures add up.
He had an $11 billion budget black hole in his election commitments.
In his Budget Reply last year he didn't release any figures, deferring them to his Shadow Treasurer who then deferred them to the Shadow Finance Minister in what quickly became a laughable shambles.
And then earlier this year, when we were there making the responsible decisions to fund the work that needs to be done to rebuild the nation after the summer of floods and the cyclone, Mr Abbott yet again couldn't make his figures add up.
Well there's an old saying: three strikes and you're out and on that basis Mr Abbott already has three strikes, but he faces a new test next Thursday night to show the nation how he says he would bring the budget to surplus a year earlier than the Government, and if he fails that test, then Australians are entitled to conclude Mr Abbott is far too big a risk to be considered for leadership of this nation.
I'll ask Minister Ellis to describe the kind of support services we will roll out for teen parents and then I'll be very happy to take questions.
MINISTER ELLIS: Well thank you very much Prime Minister. Can I thank the organisers, the parents and the students, who join with us here today.
We are very keen to ensure that teen parents do not get left behind from the great opportunities which face the rest of the nation. It is absolutely essential that the most vulnerable young parents have educational qualifications that stand them in good stead in the labour market, and this is what today's announcement is all about.
It is not only good for individuals, it is not only good for these teen parents, it is good for the communities and it is good for our national economy, if we have more people engaging at an economic capacity. So, these new participation plans will help to ensure that parents are job ready, that they are tailored to the individual needs of the teen parent and to their children.
Of course, we know that teen parents have specific additional needs for parent support and that is why it is important that they will be given support to help them in meeting these extra responsibilities and milestones.
As the Prime Minister has mentioned, there will be support from youth connections projects, services through individualised case management of their TAFE, of their school and of their other training requirements. There will also be support through communities for children's services, bringing parents together through playgroups, through opportunities to come together and exchange learning and information.
But importantly, we will also help these teen parents by ensuring that they have access to early childhood education and care. We will do this by removing the barrier of costs and ensuring that almost 100 per cent of the childcare costs will be met through the Australian Government.
We know that this is important in allowing teen parents to go on and finish Year 12 to achieve their educational needs, but we also know that it is important for these children and that early child education and care is critical in these early years to give these kids every best opportunity for the future. These are the supports that we put in place, but we also know that with this support from the government comes responsibility on these parents, because we want to make sure that they meet every potential for them and their children as well.
PM: Thank you very much. So we're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister could you talk to us about what will happen to the people who chose not to participate?
PM: Well, the participation requirement here will be one to engage, to engage with Centrelink and to work out your plan  -  your plan for education and your plan for your child to get the services that you need. If people refuse to participate without reasonable excuse then they will ultimately face a suspension of benefits, but that's not what this is about, this is about engaging parents so they have a better life and their child has a better life.
Yes  -  there's compulsion, there's responsibility, but there's opportunity at the centre of this measure. I've met with some young mums here today and their kids, some fantastic young people and they are here to make a life for themselves and their child. They're studying childcare, it's a growth industry, they're going to get a job, they're going to get a good job and then they're going to go on to further study and a better job. Indeed some of them already have plans to go from the certificate level to the diploma level. Well that offers a better life for them and their child than endless years on passive welfare, that's what this measure is all about.
JOURNALIST: What are the test trial sites?
PM: The trial sites will be announced at the time of the Budget.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, many women take time off work to have a child, is this encouraging these young mums at six months to engage (inaudible) is a little bit early?
PM: Well let's be clear  -  when the child is six months old, the young mums will be engaged with Centrelink, but in terms of rolling out their plan for education, that won't happen until the child is 12 months old. So you just said to me many mums want to take the first 12 months off with their child  -  absolutely, caring for children is a big responsibility, a big job, takes a lot of effort and we understand that and this program has been structured understanding that people want that intensive time with their child. But understanding too that it's not in the interest of the teen parent or their child for them to not participate in education, not participate generally and then hit participation requirements in our current welfare system when their child is six and they've been disengaged from everything  -  education, work, everything for at least six years.
And let's just go through the stats again  -  11,000 teen parents, around half of them were on welfare before they became parents and 80 per cent of them don't have Year 12. So we're talking about people who would have been out of education, out of work for at least six years and possibly longer and then present having to look for a job, not even with a Year 12 qualification. It's not in their interest. It's in their interest to get involved, get engaged, opportunity and responsibility put together and that's what this measure is about.
JOURNALIST: How many people do you think this might help then?
PM: Well, we'll hit the ten trial sites first. Our estimate is that will cover around 4,000 of the 11,000 teen parents that I am referring to. The reason we want a trial it is this is a fresh start, this is a very new plan, an innovative plan that comes from the Government's desire and my personal desire to see the spread of opportunity in this country to everyone. To not have anyone branded as too hard a case and left on the sidelines, but to ensure we've got opportunity for everyone. So it's a fresh approach and because it's a different approach we're going to trial it first in ten sites.
JOURNALIST: You have to admit though, that some of these young mums would find it very difficult and especially if they are on their own and they have three children to spend the whole day at schools (inaudible)?
PM: Well, look at the service here to show how it all can work. Here in an integrated service and we are going to roll more of these services out, so that they've available to assist people in the trial sites. Here at this service, and I've talked to the young mums here today  -  you come, you bring your child with you, you're in a supportive environment, the cafe is there, the cafe actually makes money for this service, you can have a great cup of coffee, you can have a talk with your friends, the people that you've met here. So you're engaged with a friendship group and then you can study while your child is cared for, that's the model.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday you refused to comment on whether the Immigration Minister wasn't informed by his department about a homemade bomb at Villawood detention centre and you said that some things on radio aren't 100 per cent right. Would you apologise and acknowledge that the report was actually entirely correct and your Minister was kept in the dark?
PM: I'm smiling at the slippery dip noise behind us. No, I won't. I do find that it pays to check reports on radio and in the media generally and I'll continue to take the approach. The Minister has now explained this matter and indicated his dissatisfaction that he wasn't properly informed by his department, but when claims are raised in the media of course we need to investigate them first, it's the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you concerned that the Minister didn't know about it, that he was kept in the dark?
PM: Well, the Minister dealt with this matter yesterday and has indicated, he was concerned about it. So, yes I share those concerns.LARISSA ZIMMERMAN: Excuse me Prime Minister, just getting back on track  -  I wrote to you last week and all the State Premiers and Chief Ministers with regard to perhaps looking at prevention, as opposed to cure and I wonder if you're going to look at introducing financial literacy legislation and replacing the baby bonus with a pre-parenting program? I ran for the Sex Party last year for the Senate, my name's Larissa Zimmerman and I'd love to know if you received my letter.
PM: Well, Larissa I'll have to check. As you would imagine I get tens and tens of thousands of letters, so I'll have a check and have a look through and make sure we respond to you. On financial literacy, we invested more in financial literacy; I think it's really important that people have the skills they need to add their budgets up. We understand people are facing cost of living pressures and a number of the announcements I've made this week have been in recognition of that, particularly yesterday's announcement, where we're going to provide better support to parents of teenagers. So, financial literacy  -  I share your concern. On the details of the programs you're recommending I'll get back to you in the letter.
JOURNALIST: Have you spoken to the Pakistani High Commissioner, and if so what was said and if not, why not?
PM: No I haven't spoken to  the Pakistani High Commissioner, and you're obviously referring to the death of bin Laden and I've made very clear on behalf of the Australian Government that I welcome the news of bin Laden's death. I've also made it very clear that we do co-operate with Pakistan on counter-terrorism and will continue to do so.
JOURNALIST: Does the decision not to release a photo then of bin Laden give you some relief, in terms of reducing the risk of tensions across the world?
PM: This is a decision for the American President to make.
JOURNALIST: Why have you chosen Ambarvale to make the announcement?
PM: We wanted to come here because this is such a great service and such a great example of what we want to see in other parts of the country and I knew that coming here today, because this is such a great service, bringing together as it does so many of our not for profit groups, them working together in genuine partnership, that we would be able to see me personally and also through our friends in the media, be able to expose to the Australian community the kind of service that can make a real difference for teen parents  -  the focus of this announcement today.
JOURNALIST: How will you ensure that the parents who don't comply with the new reform, that they're not left in the cold when they're isolated as a teen parent?
PM: All they have to do is re-engage. So, this is a requirement to be engaged with Centrelink, to have a plan, to be going about your education, to be getting appropriate services for your child. If someone misses their engagement with Centrelink and has a reasonable excuse then of course that excuse will be accepted. If people don't engage and don't have a reasonable excuse then they could face a suspension of benefits, but then that will be made up to them once they re-engage. We are asking people to show that kind of responsibility in exchange for what is a new opportunity to support them and to support their child and if we think about the patterns of work and patterns of life for Australians generally: if you can't go to work on a given day, then you get in contact and you explain why, that's normal behaviour, thousands, millions of Australians every year have to do that, they go to work, if they've got a problem getting to work that day  -  they're sick, their child is sick, there's been a death in the family, something's gone wrong - then they ring their employer and they explain why. It's that kind of responsibility we're looking for here.
JOURNALIST: Back to the budget for a moment, do you believe ordinary Australians are experiencing unusual levels of stress in their family budgets?
PM: Out in Australia generally - here we are out in a wonderful suburb today  -  I think for people today there are cost of living pressures pressing on them. Absolutely, I understand that, for families it can be really, really tough to make ends meet and so the right thing for us to do as a Government when people are facing those cost of living pressures is provide support when we can, for example, yesterday's announcement to better support families with the cost of teenagers and the responsible thing to do is to bring the budget back to surplus so that we are not adding to the inflationary pressures in the economy, because that would be bad for people's cost of living, if we added to those inflationary pressures. So this budget is about recognising our responsibility to bring the budget back to surplus, not add to those inflationary pressures, not add to those cost of living pressures and also to directly assist people where we can. That's the approach I'm taking to the budget but I do want to say too, you don't get the budget back in surplus just by wandering around talking about it, like Mr Hockey did yesterday, you've got to spend hours and hours, days and weeks, in careful, methodical preparation, so that when you produce the budget it all adds up.
Now Mr Abbott has set himself a test, that he will need to acquit next Thursday. He said he can do that. Well, Mr Hockey has said on his behalf, effectively, that Mr Abbott can do that and bring the budget back to surplus 12 months early. Well, the job for Mr Abbott to do now is to produce the alternate budget which shows how that's possible.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Access Economics says the deficit could actually turn out to be a lot bigger than forecast. Is that (inaudible)
PM: We'll, I'm not going to speculate on Budget figures. You'll see them on Budget night.
JOURNALIST: Can you tell us about the dinner last night and any discussions around the dinner table?
JOURNALIST: Do you honestly believe that the people here believe that the inflation rate is 3.3 per cent?
PM: I'll take the question here and then I'll answer your question, it that OK? I just had a question from the lady over here.
I did have a dinner last night with some leading Australian business people, that's one discussion I've had about pricing carbon. I've had many, many other discussions with business leaders about pricing carbon and I'll continue to do so. We'll keep consulting, that's the right thing to do.
On the inflation rate, it's not me that works out the inflation rate figure. That's done independently by the Bureau of Statistics.
Thank you. 



A new Prisoner of War (POW) Recognition Supplement will provide former POWs with an extra $500 per fortnight in recognition of their special service and sacrifice.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard said the payment acknowledges the severe hardship suffered by our former POWs.
POWs were particularly subjected to horrific conditions and many returned home with physical and psychological scars that will stay with them for the rest of their lives.
The Minister for Veteran's Affairs Warren Snowdon said the new payment was an important initiative to show our gratitude and respect to these worthy Australians.
“We have all seen the footage and heard the stories of our diggers in POW camps.
“The way they looked out for their mates while in these camps reflects the Aussie spirit we are all so proud of,” Mr Snowdon said.
Twenty-one former POWs from the Second World War and Korean War joined the Prime Minister and the Minister for Veteran's affairs at Kirribilli House for the announcement.
The new supplement will apply from September 2011 and is in addition to current benefits available to former POWs.
The measure will be funded in the 2011-12 Federal Budget and will cost $27.2 million over the next four years. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Veterans' Affairs, Warren Snowdon today expressed their sorrow at the passing of Claude Choules, the last known veteran to have served in the First World War.
Mr Choules was also the last known Royal Navy veteran of the First World War.
Mr Choules passed away today at his residence in Perth, Western Australia.
The Prime Minister said his passing marks the end of a significant chapter in world history.
Mr Choules was the last known link to those who served in the Great War.
The Prime Minister said Mr Choules and his generation made a sacrifice for our freedom and liberty that we will never forget.
The Prime Minister also said we must now, more than ever, ensure that the contribution of those who fought in the First World War is never forgotten.
On behalf of all Australians, the Prime Minister and Minister Snowdon send their condolences to Mr Choules' family.
Minister Snowdon said with Mr Choules' passing, we strengthen our commitment to honour the service and sacrifice of all who served in the world wars.
Mr Choules made an outstanding contribution to Australia's and our Allies' wartime efforts.
Mr Choules was the last man known to have served in both world wars, serving the United Kingdom in the First World War and Australia in the Second World War.
His service history spanned more than 40 years, demonstrating his unwavering dedication and commitment to defending the United Kingdom and Australia.
Note: The family of Mr Choules have requested privacy at this time. Mr Choules' biography and images are available at www.dva.gov.au/media



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that the budget will contain new measures to make sure teenage parents and their children aren't left behind as we benefit from our strong economy.
The new approach will see teenage parents get the support they need to get a good education, finish year 12 and build life skills so they can go on to get a good job.
It will also help these young parents get the parenting skills they need to look after their children so they can also benefit from a better start in life.
The Government will invest $47.1 million over four years to trial this new initiative in ten disadvantaged communities across Australia.
From 1 January 2012, teenage parents living in these trial communities who have not finished Year 12 or equivalent and are receiving Parenting Payment from the Federal Government will need to meet an individually crafted participation plan.
These teen parents will also be given support to help them meet these extra responsibilities and milestones, including:
 * 	Support to access quality child care while they are studying or training with close to 100% of their child care costs covered.
 * 	Support from the Youth Connections services through individualised case management to help them enrol and attend school, TAFE or other training
 * 	Support from Communities for Children services to help teens with their parenting responsibilities through playgroups, parenting education classes, mentoring and support groups as well as early learning programs.
Many teenage parents leave school early without year 12 qualifications, meaning they are more likely to end up as long term welfare recipients, with negative long term consequences for them and their children. 
This new package will help them get a better job so they can provide for their kids as they grow older.
This new package builds on the welfare reforms the Gillard Government has already implemented including “Learn or Earn” Youth Participation Requirements, Income Management trials in the Northern Territory and parts of Western Australia and Queensland.
They are a further step in developing a welfare system which works actively to combine opportunity with responsibility, particularly for the vulnerable such as young people and those who are disengaged from the workforce and community.
HOW THE PROGRAM WILL WORK
From 1 January 2012, teenage parents in trial communities receiving Parenting Payment, with a child aged six months or older will be required to attend compulsory support and engagement interviews with Centrelink until they complete Year 12 or equivalent or until their youngest child turns six.
Through this service parents will work with Centrelink to develop a participation plan that includes compulsory activities designed to support them in their parenting role or help them gain a good education.
Teen parents will be required to undertake compulsory activities from when their child is one year old, to give teen parents time to settle into life with their new baby.
The types of activities will be tailored to the parent's needs as well as the needs and age of the child, so for a teen parent with a young child activities might include attending baby play groups or attending preschool for older children.
Teenage parents will be supported by their Centrelink case worker to ensure they receive the necessary support to meet their obligations.
If they do not engage with Centrelink when required, without a reasonable excuse, they will have their income support payment suspended until they re-engage.
Participants will be back-paid for any withheld income support payments if they re-engage.
The Government will work with community organisations and specialist service providers over the next six months to prepare for implementation of this new initiative.
The communities will be announced in the budget and will be chosen based on a range of factors that measure disadvantage including jobless families, youth unemployment, the level of welfare dependence, and the length of time recipients have been on welfare.
This trial in ten communities will be evaluated over two years in consultation with service providers.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare data shows that teenage birth rates are eight times higher in the most disadvantaged areas than the least disadvantaged.   



PM: Can I say thank you to John from MTA for having us here. I'm joined here today by Steve Georganas, our local Member for Hindmarsh, and by Mark Butler, the local Member for Port Adelaide, and we're here on the border of their two electorates looking at a great trades training facility and I want to thank John very much for having us here.
We're only a few days now from Federal Budget day, and the Federal Budget is about getting the nation's budget back into the black. That means we're coming back to surplus in 2012-13 as promised, but as you get the nation's budget back into the black, you do have to make choices about what you value and what you want to fund. We've been making those choices and we are particularly, in this budget, wanting to support jobs and opportunity for Australians. That's why, during the course of this week, each and every day I've been talking about opportunities for Australians, particularly young Australians.
On Monday I talked about better rewarding our great teachers because there's nothing more important to a child's education than the quality of the teacher in front of the classroom and there's nothing more important as getting a great opportunity in life than to starting with a great school education.
On Tuesday I talked about a new program to bring new resources into our schools to better support students with disabilities. I don't want any Australian child left behind and that's why we need to better support students with disabilities in their learning.
On Wednesday we talked about the Government's plans to better support families that have teenagers. Teenagers have not received the same degree of support through our family payments system as younger children. We want to make sure that kids get the opportunity to stay at school and supporting their family with cost of living pressures is one help to getting kids to stay at school, which is why we are changing the family payments system so that a family on the maximum rate can get an additional $4,000 to keep their child at school in full-time learning.
Yesterday, of course, we were talking about opportunity too, and particularly talking about opportunity for teen parents. There are around 11,000 young Australians who are parents and who are on benefits. I want to make sure that we bring opportunity and responsibility to those teen parents, that we don't have them left behind, we have those teen parents engaged in education and we have the appropriate support services for their children.
We don't want becoming a young mum to end up being the start of a lifetime of disadvantage, not only for the young mum but also for her child, because all of the research tells us that a child born into a family where no-one works can end up being a disadvantaged adult, too.
So, all week we've talked about opportunity, and I'm pleased to be here in South Australia today talking about opportunity for young Australians in getting apprenticeships and the skills they need for a job. We've met some of those young Australians today who are going to have a great future in our automotive industry, but studying for an apprenticeship is a long journey, and whilst we have many young Australians commence apprenticeships, we want more young Australians to complete. That's why I'm pleased to confirm that in Tuesday's Budget we will honour our promise to increase the bonuses that apprentices get for completing by $1,700. This will bring to a total of $5,500 the bonuses that apprentices get as they move through their apprenticeship. This will benefit around 200,000 apprentices.
I'm very pleased that we're able to provide that extra benefit, and of course this comes on top of our record investments in skills and training for Australians. Skills and training are so important to the future of our country. We need a skilled workforce, and for every young Australian that it gives opportunity to, it is so important for their lives, because we know if you get that trade qualification then it's a passport to a job for the rest of your life.
That's why we've been pleased to invest more than $10.9 billion in vocational education and training over three years. It's why I'm pleased to report that in 2010 we were at a 10-year record high for the number of Australians undertaking an apprenticeship. It's why I'm pleased to be able to say that we've increased trade apprenticeship commencements by 11.1 per cent in 12 months  -  that's fantastic news. It means, in total, that there are 440,000 apprentices and trainees currently in training  -  that's good news.
Now, we will continue to support opportunity: a great education; helping people get the support they need to get into the workforce; great skills and apprenticeships. They're the choices we've made in the forthcoming budget.
Unfortunately, these priorities are not shared across the parliament. Mr Abbott went to the last election promising to rip $2 billion out of our apprenticeships system. That's a lot of money and would have caused a reduction of almost half a million places in training places for apprentices, trainees and other workers.
Our nation can't afford that kind of assault on developing the skilled workforce we need for the future, and Australians can't afford to have that sort of opportunity ripped away from them.
So the Government, in delivering Tuesday's Budget, has made a different set of choices to Mr Abbott. We value Australians having opportunity. That means we value education and skills and we will be investing in education and skills as we bring the budget back into the black, back into surplus, as promised.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the Opposition Leader's also in Adelaide today talking about the carbon tax. Are you confident you're winning the debate on the carbon tax and if so why aren't you talking about it?
PM: Well, I'm always very happy to talk about the future of our environment and the future of country. We have to tackle climate change, and to do that we've got to reduce carbon pollution, and the most efficient way of doing that is to put a price on carbon.
So, the 1,000 businesses in this country that generate the most carbon pollution will no longer be able to put that pollution into the atmosphere for free, they'll have to pay a price, and if they pay a price then they will find ways of innovating and changing their businesses and their methods of work so they create less carbon pollution.
And we will use the revenue that's raised from putting a price on carbon pollution to generously assisting households, to protecting Australian jobs, and to support programs to tackle climate change.
Now, I know Mr Abbott is going around the country being negative and complaining, but let's remember his plan is one that would cost Australians $720 per year. That's a lot of money. So, I would say to Mr Abbott he's got a responsibility to come clean with Australians and describe just how much his plan would hit their cost of living, and he's also got a responsibility next Thursday in parliament. His Shadow Treasurer has committed Mr Abbott, effectively, to outlining how Mr Abbott would bring the budget back to surplus a year earlier.
So, next Thursday in parliament when Mr Abbott gets his opportunity to produce an alternate Budget, he will have to produce every figure, every dollar, every cent and show how he would bring the budget back to surplus a year earlier.
He's failed three times on his figure work: an $11 billion black hole during the campaign for his election commitments; a shambles last Budget Reply night where he said that the Shadow Treasurer would make it all add up and then the Shadow Treasurer said the Shadow Finance Minister would make it all add up and ultimately no one made it all add up; and then of course he failed earlier this year with the flood package which didn't add up either.
He's got a chance next week in the Parliament to show that he can add up. We'll be interested to see whether or not Mr Abbott can pass that test.
JOURNALIST: How close is the Government to striking an agreement for a regional processing centre in Papua New Guinea?
PM: As Prime Minister, when I first talked about the very complex problem of people smuggling, I said I was committed to a regional solution and we have been pursuing discussions in our region and with the United Nations High Commissioner of Refugees on a regional solution.
When I've got something to announce arising from those discussions, then I'll announce it.
JOURNALIST: Is Manus Island a live option for that regional solution? 
PM: Well, let me just say we pursue discussions across the region. We've been doing that very patiently and methodically and when I have something to announce arising from those discussions then I'll announce it.
JOURNALIST: But there are other regions that you're looking at, then, if that's the case? Are there other options outside of Manus Island?
PM: Well we've been working hard, working methodically, dealing with the complex problem of people smuggling and when, arising from discussions across our region, we've got something to announce, then we'll announce it, but at every stage of this I have been very clear with the Australian people: people smuggling is a complex problem; we need a regional solution; we need to be engaged with international agencies like the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. We've been doing that work.
Now, Mr Abbott's got a 3-word slogan. We have been working patiently do deal with this complex problem and when we've got something to announce, then I will announce it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) be flattered that you've adopted his Government's policy?
PM: Once again, when I've got something to announce arising out of those regional discussions, I'll announce it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Kevin Rudd been in discussions recently with the Papua New Guinean Government?
PM: Once again, we have discussions across our region. A number of our Ministers are involved. I'm personally involved. We have a long-standing engagement through what's called the Bail Process, as well as bilateral discussions. So, across our region the Government's been at work and when we've got something to announce arising from those discussions, then I'll announce it.
JOURNALIST: You were highly critical though, of the Pacific solution. Won't you be hypocritical if you go down that line?
PM: What I would say is when the Government's in a position to make an announcement about what has arisen from our regional discussions, we'll announce it and then people will have a full opportunity to analyse it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) confirm that you're exploring the option of Manus Island. You've sent some people there. There must be a reason why you've sent them there. Can you at least confirm that that is perhaps on the radar as an option?
PM: Ministers and officials travel extensively in our region. That's proper and appropriate. They go to have discussions with their counterparts. Of course, they travel widely. That's part of what we do across a whole range of areas where we engage with our region, of which engaging on trans-national crime, like people smuggling, is one.
So, yes, officials do travel in the region. We have been having discussions in our region on a regional solution to people smuggling. We had discussions, for example, through the Bali Process. We've had bilateral discussions. When I have something to announce arising from those discussions, I'll announce it.
JOURNALIST: It's a reasonably obscure part of the world to travel to unless you were looking at it for an explicit reason?
PM: I can't agree with that at all. We very routinely have officials and Ministers visiting in our region, all countries in our region.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on gambling, the Parliamentary Committee into gambling has recommended that you adopt pre-commitment on high-intensity poker machines. Will you be adopting that?
PM: There's a Parliamentary Committee report that's being released today and obviously the Government will analyse it and respond to it in due course.
I'm personally concerned about problem gambling. I don't want to see a situation where people end up not able to fund the necessities of life  -  pay the mortgage, pay the bills, pay the rent, put food on the table  -  because they put more money down a poker machine than their family budget can bear.
The Government's been concerned about problem gambling for a long period of time. We understood that we needed to act and that's why we asked the Productivity Commission to provide a comprehensive report on the best steps forward. Now we have a Parliamentary Committee that has also worked in the area and we'll have a good look at its recommendations, but I'm very personally committed to acting to address problem gambling.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the East Timor solution dead?
PM: Once again, when the Government has something to announce arising out of our regional discussions, then I'll do it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the State Labor Executive has suspended an MP over child sex charges. Do you think that's an appropriate course of action before he's proven to be guilty in the courts?
PM: That's a matter for the State branch.
JOURNALIST: But on State matters, Prime Minister, your Government in 2009 fought hard to introduce pensioner increases. This Government  -  this Rann Government  -  wants to take that away in rent increases for public housing pensioners, something Steve Georganas has complained about, Jenny Macklin. What's your take?
PM: We will continue to push hard to ensure that the historic increase we delivered in the pension is of real benefit to people. We are going to continue to press hard, here in South Australia, to make sure that that is true for pensioners in this State.
We understand that Australians are under cost of living pressure, pensioners are, families are. That's why we've been pleased we've been able to do things like provide an historic increase in the pension  -  more than $120 a fortnight for a single. We're pleased we've been able to provide tax cuts three years in a row, so if you talk about someone on, say, an income of $50,000, it's an 18 per cent reduction in their tax.
We've been able to increase the childcare rebate to 50 per cent to help with those childcare costs. We've been able to do things like provide the Education Tax Refund to help with the cost of getting the kids to school.
So, we'll keep doing what we can as a Government to assist people with cost of living and certainly bringing the budget back to surplus in this Budget is part of that. We don't, as a Government, want to add to inflationary pressures, which then add to cost of living pressures for Australians.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned by claims by the Pakistani ISI, that Kevin Rudd put their hunt for bin Laden at risk by saying that Umar Patek had been arrested in Pakistan?
PM: Look, I've seen these claims in the newspaper today and in respect of them the Minister acted entirely appropriately. The Minister spoke about this matter after receiving advice from Australian security agencies and when it was already being comprehensively reported in the media.
Thanks very much.
JOURNALIST: Skills Australia has asked for an increase in skilled migration to address those inflationary pressures that you mention. Will there be any increase in the skilled migration intake in next week's Budget?
PM: We'll deal with those matters in the Budget and, of course, all of the details of the Budget will be there on Budget night, but standing here particularly, can I say I believe that we need to put real efforts into training Australians and giving them the opportunities to get those jobs that business needs filled.
It is not satisfactory to me that we can have employers crying out for skilled labour and we can have young people here in South Australia  -  many of them living in Steve and Mark's electorate  -  who don't have a job, don't have an apprenticeship, don't have an opportunity, don't have a start in live.
Which is why, consistently across this week, I've talked about the Government's plans to increase opportunity. We have some challenges in our economy now, some softness in our economy, coming from the natural disasters we've experienced and the impact of natural disasters overseas, like in Japan, coming as an outcome of the global financial crisis.
But our economy, underlying, is strong. We've got an historic opportunity to use that strength to make a difference to the lives of Australians and better spread opportunity in our country. I'm committed to doing that and that's what we've been talking about all week, including here today with our apprenticeship completion bonus.
Thanks very much. 



The Prime Minister today confirmed that the 2011 Budget would include $281 million for additional tax free payments to encourage apprentices in critical trades to complete their qualifications.
The $1,700 Trades Apprentice Income Bonus is expected to support 200,000 trade apprentices over four years in skills shortage occupations to stay in their training and get a skilled job.
An additional 50,000 Australian Apprentices are expected to start and remain in their Australian Apprenticeship by 2014 as a result of the payments, increasing the number of skilled workers ready to meet the demand for high skilled labour.
As a result of the Gillard Government's investment in training there are now more than 448,000 apprentices and trainees studying across Australia.
Unfortunately, current experience tells us that only half of these students will complete their training.
When students fail to finish their training they miss out on achieving their full potential and employers miss out on the valuable contribution these individuals could make as skilled workers in our economy.
The Gillard Government is determined to boost the apprentice completion rate and provide practical support to apprentices during their training.
From 1 January 2011, eligible Australian Apprentices have received an additional tax exempt bonus of up to $1,700 as they reach milestones in their training, including an $800 completion bonus, bringing them to a total of a maximum of $5,500 over the course of their apprenticeship.
The incentive payments were announced in the 2010 Election as part of a package to support Australian Apprentices and as at May 2011, more than 34,000 Australian Apprentices have already benefited from this new payment.
The Gillard Government is committed to ensuring the Australian Apprenticeship system is simplified, streamlined and better targeted to meet the critical skills needs of the Australian economy.
That is why we will continue to work in partnership with industry, training providers and the states and territories toward a more simplified and nationally consistent system which provides relevant, quality training on and off the job. 



The Malaysian and Australian Governments have today announced a commitment to enter into a groundbreaking new arrangement to help tackle people smuggling and irregular migration in the Asia-Pacific region.
The Malaysian Prime Minister, Hon. Dato' Sri Najib Tun Razak, and the Australian Prime Minister, The Hon Julia Gillard MP, have agreed to enter into a new bilateral arrangement as part of the Regional Cooperation Framework agreed to at the recent Bali Process Ministerial Conference in Bali on 30 March 2011.
The complex nature of irregular migration, which is closely linked to the crimes of human trafficking and people smuggling, cannot be solved by acting alone but must be tackled by countries forming cooperative arrangements under the auspices of regional and international frameworks.
The bilateral arrangement will take the form of a cooperative transfer agreement that will see asylum seekers arriving by sea in Australia transferred to Malaysia. In exchange, Australia will expand its humanitarian program and take on a greater burden-sharing responsibility for resettling refugees currently residing in Malaysia.
Prime Ministers Najib and Gillard have agreed that core elements of this bilateral arrangement will include:
 * 	800 irregular maritime arrivals, who arrive in Australia after the date of effect of the arrangement, will be transferred to Malaysia for refugee status determination;
 * 	in return, over four years, Australia will resettle 4000 refugees already currently residing in Malaysia;
 * 	transferees will not receive any preferential treatment over asylum seekers already in Malaysia;
 * 	transferees will be provided with the opportunity to have their asylum claims considered and those in need of international protection will not be refouled;
 * 	transferees will be treated with dignity and respect and in accordance with human rights standards; and
 * 	Australia will fully fund the arrangement.
The implementation of this one off pilot project will be important to undermine the business model of transnational criminal syndicates, particularly in people smuggling and human trafficking in this region.
Australia and Malaysia are working closely with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) to operationalise the arrangement.
The Malaysian and Australian Governments have asked senior officials to finalise a Memorandum of Understanding in the near future to set out detailed arrangements. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Immigration Chris Bowen today announced a landmark new measure as part of a Regional Cooperation Framework that will help put people smugglers out of business and prevent asylum seekers making the dangerous journey to Australia by boat.
Today Prime Minister Gillard and Malaysian Prime Minister Dato' Seri Najib Bin Tun Razak issued a joint statement that outlined a groundbreaking cooperative transfer arrangement, that will mean any person who arrives irregularly by sea in Australia could be transferred to Malaysia.
After this agreement comes into effect, 800 people arriving in Australia by boat will find themselves taken to Malaysia instead.
For every person Australia transfers to Malaysia, we will take five refugees from Malaysia - adding an additional 4,000 places to Australia's humanitarian intake over four years.
These places will only be open to those already in Malaysia and will not be open to those who are transferred to Malaysia.
Australians are hospitable people and we believe in honouring our international protection obligations. 
But do not underestimate our resolve to break the people smugglers' business model and the trade in human misery that they rely on.
This landmark agreement will help take away the product people smugglers are trying to sell  -  a ticket to Australia.
The key message this will deliver to people smugglers and those seeking to make the dangerous sea voyage to Australia is: do not get on that boat.
Under this arrangement, if you arrive in Australian waters and are taken to Malaysia you will go to the back of the queue.
The Gillard Government believes that the only way to respond to what is a regional problem is to develop regional solutions.
That is why we worked closely with our neighbours to deliver an agreement for a Regional Cooperation Framework through the recent Bali Process Ministerial Conference.
As part of this framework, the Gillard Government is also engaged in ongoing talks with Papua New Guinea about the establishment of an assessment centre.
If this proceeds, it is the Government's expectation that Australia would maintain the centre but that it would be the first step towards a regional processing centre.
The understanding we have reached with Malaysia and the discussions with Papua New Guinea are examples of steps we are taking to progress the wider Regional Cooperation Framework that was agreed to with our regional neighbours at the 4th Bali Process Regional Ministerial Conference in March of this year.
While there is no quick fix to eliminating entrenched people smuggling networks, these are important steps in building a sustainable regional framework and a solid foundation upon which to continue engaging with our neighbours and the international community. 



PM: When I became Prime Minister I made clear the Australian Government's views and priorities when it came to people smuggling and asylum seekers. I made it very clear that what I wanted to do was to break the back of the people smuggling model, to take away from them the very product that they sell, to stop people risking their lives at sea and to stop people profiting from human misery. I wanted to see us do something to end the profitability of people smuggling.
Now I'm a migrant myself, and I've always believed in an orderly migration program for this nation. Certainly that's been my personal experience here in Australia, coming to this land and respecting its laws.
As Prime Minister I won't tolerate people smugglers attempting to bend and break the will of the Government to protect our borders and also our will to do the right thing as a country and to provide safe haven for those in need.
So I've always that we wanted to work to take away the product that people smugglers sell, and I made clear when I became Prime Minister that there was only one way to do that, and that was through a regional solution to a regional problem. Without a regional approach all other efforts end up coming to nought; without a regional framework, through the Bali Process, there's no long term solution to this problem.
Now I've made it clear that this was all not going to happen overnight, that it was something that was going to have to be worked on. I said that when I first spoke to the Australian people as Prime Minister about people smuggling; that it was something that would require patient and methodical work in the months since.
Now we have been doing that patient and methodical work, and at Bali in March we secured the agreement of all countries to a Regional Cooperation Framework. We said that we would work to implement that framework through bilateral agreements with other interested countries in the region. That agreement was an important step in forming the Government's approach and building a regional approach.
Today I'm in a position to make another important announcement about the Government's next step in tackling people smuggling. Now this won't be the last step but it is an important step and it will be a big blow to those who are involved in the evil trade of people smuggling.
Today I'm very pleased to be jointly announcing, with the Prime Minister of Malaysia, an innovative agreement on asylum seekers and transfer. It is a commitment to enter into a groundbreaking new bilateral agreement on irregular migration. Now this agreement, which will be concluded under the Regional Cooperation Framework agreed to at the Bali Process Ministerial conference in March is innovative, it's squarely aimed at the people smuggling business model.
From the time that the agreement comes into effect, 800 people seeking to come  to Australia by boat, hoping to have their claims processed in Australia, hoping to end up resettled in Australia, will be taken to Malaysia instead.
Those individuals will have their claims to refugee status assessed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and will be subject to those general processes of UNHCR.
Importantly this 800 will not receive any preferential treatment in terms of processing their claims.
So I want to be very clear about this, very clear about what this agreement means. Under this arrangement if someone seeks to come to Australia then they are at risk of going to Malaysia and going to the back of the queue  -  that's what it means.
It means that if anybody comes here under this arrangement in the expectation that they will be able to have their claims processed here and look to resettlement in Australia, then they will be wrong. They will not be able to assume that they will end up in Australia.
Now this is a very important message, it's a key message to people smugglers and to the people that they try to entice to get on boats, and the message is a very clear one. Under this arrangement, don't get on that boat, what it will mean is you've given your money to a people smuggler, you've risked your life at sea and you will be at real risk of ending up in Malaysia instead.
Now Malaysia of course is a country that already hosts a large number of refugees. So in return for taking the 800 we want to assist Malaysia by taking genuine refugees already residing in Malaysia. We will take 4000 of them. That is for every irregular arrival seeking to come to Australia, transferred to Malaysia, we will take 5 genuine refugees from Malaysia. Now that's 4000 places in addition to our current humanitarian quota, so they are new places for refugees currently processed and in Malaysia.
These places will not be open to the people transferred who were seeking to come to Australia.
So this is the clearest possible message that we are prepared to accept people in need of protection, but that no one should be able to subvert the orderly migration programs that Australia runs and buy their way into Australia.
This arrangement is also a genuine cooperation arrangement in our region under the Regional Cooperation Framework. Now there's been a lot of discussion about this arrangement between Australia and Malaysia, that work has happened over many months, it began in October last year.
I want to take this opportunity to thank the Prime Minister of Malaysia, Prime Minister Najib, for working with Australia and I want to thank him for co-authoring the joint statement being released between him and I today as Prime Ministers of our respective nations.
Our relevant Ministers and senior officials will conclude a memorandum of understanding to bring this agreement into effect in the near future.
Now I want to take this opportunity too to say something about our plans for a regional processing centre.
In July last year I made it clear we were committed to a sustainable regional protection framework based on genuine regional cooperation, and I made it clear that we wanted to build a regional processing centre in another nation in our region, a nation that at the time most likely to be East Timor. As has become increasingly clear, it is unlikely that East Timor will end up hosting such a centre. So for some time we've been investigating alternative options including Papua New Guinea. We've been exploring with PNG the possibility for an assessment centre to be based there.
Now if this proceeds it's my expectation that it would start as an assessment centre but it would be one step towards creating a regional processing centre. Those discussions with Papua New Guinea are continuing.
Now I understand that there are some in the community who may have some concerns and may have some concerns particularly thinking that this is something like the pacific solution. To them I would say this is a very different approach. The pacific solution under the Howard Government was a unilateral Australian approach, in contrast this solution has been borne of a regional process motivated by the region's desire to tackle this regional challenge and as I made clear last year when I first spoke on this matter as Prime Minister, this is a challenge that requires a regional solution. At Bali earlier this year we made a major breakthrough with the regional protection framework and that framework did outline having bilateral agreements and I'm pleased that I'm able today to join with the Prime Minister of Malaysia in detailing our approach to one such agreement. Both Malaysia and PNG have been part of the Bali Process.
Now this set of decisions made by the Government is all about having an orderly migration system, one that's run by the Government and not by people smugglers. I know and I share the anxiety that Australians feel when they see irregular arrivals by boat and they see disturbances in detention centres, and I know  that this can place strains on the support that people otherwise feel for migration in this country. But I also believe Australians are a generous people and we want to help those who are in real need, facing real threats and who are genuine refugees.
We've been a generous country in the past over our history, over many decades resettling people who were fleeing persecution and of course I believe we will continue to do that over the years to come.
That's one reason why I as Prime Minister and the Government is prepared to add 4000 places to out humanitarian intake.
But while we are all hospitable people and whilst Australia as a nation wants to honour our international obligations I do also want to say to all people in the region: do not underestimate the resolve of this Government to break the people smuggling business model, we do not want to see people trading in human misery. We want to remove the incentive for people to get on a boat.
Now the measure that I've spoke about today will strengthen Australia's borders, it will be a big blow to people smugglers. Nevertheless this is a complex challenge, I've always said that, I said it when I first spoke about these challenges as Prime Minister, and there are no quick fixes. I do want to say, to conclude, by revisiting some of the things I said in July last year.
At that stage I asked the Australian people for patience and understanding as we undertook efforts to deal with this complex problem. Now at times my patience and I think the patience of the Australian public has been tested since. I think my patience and the patience of the Australian public has been particularly tested when people have seen the recent disturbances at detention centres. I can understand why people have been angry seeing those disturbances, I've been angry seeing those disturbances at detention centres. This is happening in defiance of our laws and causing destruction of Government property.
While today's announcement is a step forward, I do want to say there are no easy fixes but we will continue working and building on the framework that we entered into at Bali and on the measure that I've announced today.
I also want to say something I said to the nation last July about the impasse that the political debate in this country has reached. There is now an imagery out there  that if you're hard headed you're hard hearted, and alternatively there's an imagery that if you're soft hearted that somehow you are also soft of border protection. This simplistic political stereotyping and the three word slogans that come with it aren't the right way forward for our political debate.
You can be very hard headed about the best way to protect our borders while still being very generous of heart to people who need Australia's assistance and that is my view at that is the Government's view. It's our responsibility as a Government and as a nation to do what we can to stop people risking a journey at sea that can cost lives. At the same time, it's our responsibility as a Government and as a nation to provide protection for those who genuinely need it and it's our responsibility as a Government and as a nation to protect our borders and we intend to continue doing just that.
I'll turn now to Minister Bowen for some comments and before I do I'd like to say that Chris Bowen has worked extraordinarily hard on the arrangement with Malaysia as well as discussions generally in our region, I thank him for that and I'll turn to him now for some comments.
MINISTER BOWEN: Thank you very much Prime Minister. Well this is a very significant announcement, the announcement of a commitment to reach a bilateral agreement between Malaysia and Australia. This is an agreement which will break the people smugglers' business model, at the same time it's an agreement which means Australia increases its humanitarian intake. Our humanitarian intake will now be the highest it has been since 1996 when the Labor Party was last in office.
As the Prime Minister said, Prime Ministers have agreed that 800 arrivals, irregular boats arrivals to Australia will be transferred to Malaysia for processing. These will be people who arrived at an offshore excised place in keeping with the current Australian law. In return, Australia will settle over the next 4 years 4000 refugees from Malaysia. This will mean that our humanitarian intake increases from 13,750 a year to 14,750 a year.
What this means is that people smugglers will need to find 800 volunteers, 800 volunteers to travel to Australia, to pay the money, to take the risk, to get a plane ticket to Malaysia from Australia. People smugglers will no longer have the ability to sell a guarantee of being processed and resettled in Australia if you're a genuine refugee. At the same time, Australia will play more of a role in assisting our regional partners and friends, in particular Malaysia, in dealing with the challenges of irregular migration and asylum seekers in our region.
As the Prime Minister said this has been work going on for a long time, methodically and carefully negotiated with Malaysia. I'd like to thank my colleague, the Malaysian Minister for Home Affairs Dato' Seri Hishammuddin bin Tun Hussein for his cooperation and his very constructive engagement over the last six months in reaching this agreement and making a recommendation to our respective Prime Ministers and Cabinets to endorse this agreement.
There is some more work to be done on implementation details and operationalising this agreement; that will occur over the coming weeks.
Our message is clear, there's no point in travelling to Australia by boat if you are seeking a guaranteed outcome because we will no longer provide that outcome. From today onwards  -  fair warning  -  you do not have a guarantee of being processed and resettled in Australia as a result of our bilateral discussions across the region with Malaysia, Papua New Guinea and others.
In relation to the cost of this agreement, the cost over the forward estimates of increasing our humanitarian intake will be $216 million, the operational costs will be $76 million over the forward estimates. The total cost for $292 million over the forward estimates.
Now I know this will be controversial, I expect protests, I expect legal challenges, I expect resistance. As the Prime Minister said nobody should doubt our resolve to break the people smugglers' business model, nobody should doubt our resolve to implement this agreement and to further discussions with other nations across our region to make sure that the message is clear to people smugglers. People are not a commodity, freedom is not something which you can trade, we will have an orderly migration program, a humanitarian migration program, but one which achieves our international obligations in an orderly fashion.
Again I'd like to thank of course the Prime Minister for her support in negotiating and settling these agreements over several months, my Malaysian colleague and the UNHCR and the International Organisation for Migration have also been consulted in recent times and who will be participating in this agreement with Malaysia, a bilateral agreement but with the participation of various international organisations.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how will you judge whether this has been a success, do you expect that the number of boat arrivals that come to Australia will go down and what will you say to people who say, ‘well this sounds like a bit of a refugee merry-go-round, they come here, we fly them to Malaysia, Malaysia flies 4000 back'?
PM: Well firstly I do expect this to have an impact, I expect that to take some time, but I do expect it to have an impact because this is a very hard blow into the people smugglers. You've got to put yourself in the position of the people who are there, asylum seekers, who are having people smugglers try and sell them a product, and the people smugglers go to them and say ‘give me your money, I'll get you on a boat, I'll get you to Australia and if your claim is processed you will get to stay.' Under this arrangement, what will be the truth and we'll make sure the truth gets through in the region, the truth is if you spend your money, you get on a boat, you risk your life, you don't get to stay, you go to Malaysia, and you go to the back of the queue. We will take people from the front of the queue, people who are already in Malaysia and already processed as refugees.
JOURNALIST: The figures here are over four years, is this a four year agreement or is it ongoing and if there's work to be done when do you expect to sign the actual deal?
PM: Well we will be working to finalise the agreement over the coming weeks, the increase of 4000 is over four years, that's right.
JOURNALIST: So the agreement with Malaysia will only last four years, is that-
PM: Well this is an agreement, 800 for 4000 and the 4000 will be received over four years.
JOURNALIST: And what happens when 800 people have come here and they've sent to Malaysia?
PM: Well the aim of this is to break the people smugglers' products, to take out of their hands the very product that they sell. When they go and try and ply their evil trade, the message will be received by asylum seekers ‘if I get on a boat, the risk I've got is that I blow all of my money, risk my life, and end up at the back of the queue in Malaysia' that is the force of this. Now we will finalise this agreement with Malaysia, we will implement this agreement, as the Minister says it won't be easy, there will be resistance, but we will implement this agreement. Of course we will see the impact that this has and if there's a need for further discussions and dialogue down the track then we will have that further discussion and dialogue, but this is an important step. We last took an important step forward in March at Bali when there was agreement to the regional framework, this is the next important step, this innovative arrangement to break the people smugglers' model, their business model, and to take out of their hands the very thing that they sell to people.
JOURNALIST: So you don't think there will be 800 volunteers willing to give it a shot anyway?
PM: Well do you think you would, you think you would? Sitting in Indonesia, you've only got one shot, you've only got so much money, you've only got one shot, so much money, you've only got one life to lose. And you do all your money, your one shot, do all your money, your one shot, potentially you lose your life and go to the back of the queue in Malaysia. I'll allow you to calculate those odds and see what the rational human conclusion is.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Malaysia, will everybody who you pick up in our waters go to Malaysia or will some go to PNG, will some go to Christmas Island, how will it work?
PM: Well we'll make operational decisions in the circumstances but the message for people who are thinking of getting on a boat is that they are running a very, very real risk that what they get for giving their money to a people smuggler is a plane trip to Malaysia and a spot at the back of the queue.
JOURNALIST: But Prime Minister, based on the number of people coming at the moment, if you're only sending 250 people a year to Malaysia, that's less-
PM: No sorry that's not right, let's correct that. So it's 800, not over time, just 800 to be used as we want to use them. The 4000 we are receiving the other way will come over 4 years.
JOURNALIST: So it'll be the next 800 to arrive.
PM: Well we will finalise the agreement and then of course we will make some operational decisions but we would be looking at the 800 people coming after the agreement is finalised. But the message from today is, because we are working on this agreement, because we are continuing to work on regional solutions, because we are continuing to have bilateral discussions, the message for people contemplating trying to make a journey to Australia is that they are at a very real risk that they don't have their claim processed here and they don't get to be resettled here. I'll just get the Minister too to address that point about the timing of the 800.
BOWEN: Yes thank you Prime Minister. The 800 is a flat figure, not over a period of time, it would certainly be our intention that after the signing of the final agreement with Malaysia that from that time forward people could work under the assumption that if they are in the next 800 the chances would be that they would be transferred to Malaysia for processing. The 4000 will be taken in conjunction with the UNHCR over the next 4 years.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) whether 800-
BOWEN: Correct, the 4000 is a clear commitment.
JOURNALIST: And do you know where those people are from, the genuine refugees?
BOWEN: There's about 92,000 people on the books in Malaysia as asylum seekers, they of course come from a range of countries around the world; Burma is very strongly represented in that group.
JOURNALIST: Are you seeking to make similar agreements with other countries?
BOWEN: Well I think this agreement does show the potential of bilateral arrangements under the Bali Process but clearly our focus has been on Malaysia and certainly we are happy to talk to any other country in our region as a result of the Bali Process but our focus has been Malaysia and that's the agreement we've reached.
JOURNALIST: Minister Bowen (inaudible) going to lift the refugee (inaudible) thousand-
BOWEN: 750 correct-
JOURNALIST: A year, so 14,700 but then 800 might go to Malaysia, some people would still say the odds there aren't too bad, that it would be worth-
PM: You've got to be really careful about the cohort here. The 800 do not count on our humanitarian intake, they don't get processed, they don't get to come here, so that 800 doesn't count.
JOURNALIST: You're still accepting 14,000 (inaudible)
PM: Yep but you've got the 800 going back to Malaysia, they do not count on our humanitarian intake, they don't get processed here, they get no preferential agreement and they will not be in the 4000 we take from Malaysia, they go to the back of the queue in Malaysia. Then of course we will continue to do what we do, which is take genuine refugees from around the world and we will add onto that these 4000 new places from Malaysia.
JOURNALIST: Minister Bowen how do you decide, because presumably you're not going to get 800, send them all back and then show's over, you're going to pick and choose, they're going to stick around on Christmas Island ‘till Malaysia says they'll take them back-
PM: They don't stick around on Christmas Island, they'll be straight back.
BOWEN: That's right, they'd be returned to Malaysia immediately once this agreement is functional.
JOURNALIST: By the Navy?
BOWEN: By operational decisions will be taken at the time whether to transfer them by boat or by plane et cetera.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) between now and the agreement being operational that that will act as a pull factor that people want to get in now rather than-
BOWEN: Well let us be very clear, from this day forward there is no guarantee of being processed in Australia and being resettled in Australia. It is the case that the 800 will be transferred after the agreement is signed and it will apply to people who apply after the agreement is signed, but we're making it very clear that the correct assumption that people have made up until now that they arrive in Australia, they'll be processed in Australia and resettled in Australia if they were genuine refugees no longer applies.
JOURNALIST: The 85 that arrived today?
PM: No this is from this announcement forward.
JOURNALIST: So based on the current rate of arrivals, how long do you think it will be until that 800 quota is used up?
PM: Well can I just say I think perhaps people need to think about the impact of this on the business model of people smugglers, the proposition people smugglers would end up trying to persuade people of is it's worth risking their life at sea, spending a lot of money with a real risk that all you get for it is at the back of the queue in Malaysia where, as you've just heard from the Minister, there are tens and tens of thousands of genuine refugees already processed and already waiting resettlement. That's why this system is a powerful blow to the very business model of people smugglers and just in terms of Sam's form of words before, these 800 do not come into Australian immigration detention, they are intercepted and taken to Malaysia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say genuine refugees, but most people who come to Australia are accepted as refugees. Aren't they genuine?
PM: Well we want to break the back of the people smugglers' model, we don't want people profiting on human misery, and that's why we're taking this step, why we've announced to today, jointly, I've announced today with the Prime Minister of Malaysia, this commitment to an agreement that would hit so hard the people smugglers' business model.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the 4000 we take from Malaysia, do they then go to detention centres for processing, presumably we have to check their-
BOWEN: No, we would process them in Malaysia and admit them as permanent residents once they're processed.
JOURNALIST: So they turn up and they're immediately on a permanent visa-
BOWEN: Correct, they'd get a protection visa just as the people we resettle from camps and settlements around the world, whether they be in Asia or Middle-East, the same rules would apply.
JOURNALIST: If you get the PNG centre going, would the people dealt with that had initially been just an Australian centre, would the people there be processed by Australian officials or international officials?
PM: Well we are working through with PNG but if we succeeded in entering an arrangement with PNG, and we are having constructive discussions, but such an arrangement would be for an assessment centre, if would be staffed by Australian officials and I would view it as a step towards a regional processing centre which I have discussed in the region and with the Australian people since I first became Prime Minister and gave my first speech on the matter.
JOURNALIST: Those Australian officials would do the processing?
PM: Obviously discussions are continuing with PNG, but the basis of those discussions is that we would create an assessment centre and yes it would be staffed by Australian officials. I would view that as a first and important step towards a regional processing centre.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) involved in those negotiations with PNG, have you spoken to the Prime Minister?
PM: Yes, I saw a newspaper report this morning, which I presume you're basing your question on, which was wrong.
JOURNALIST: You're talking about a queue in Malaysia, how confident are you that that's an orderly queue, that it will work?
PM: Well I might get Chris to talk about how that has been processed.
BOWEN: We will be working with the UNHCR and the Malaysian Government to identify the 4000 people who would be processed for settlement in Australia, just as we do with the UNHCR and governments around the world, as I say, at the various camps around the world where there are significant numbers of asylum seekers awaiting resettlement elsewhere in the world. So we would go through the applications and the UNHCR would mandate people and they would be referred to Australia for resettlement just as they are around the world, there's a small number who currently go through that process in Malaysia, we are very significantly increasing that number.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) asylum seeker arrives, or make their way to Australia be intercepted tomorrow morning, be placed in Australian detention and then get sent to Malaysia once this deal is done?
BOWEN: No, the situation is that we will be transferring people to Malaysia who arrive after the finalisation of the agreements with Malaysia, but what we're saying is this agreement, other agreements we are discussing and pursuing across the region, make it very clear if you're a people smuggler selling the product of guaranteed processing and settlement in Australia you cannot do so and you can not to that from today and we will be spreading that message throughout the places that people gather to consider coming to Australia, and we will be spreading that message from today.
JOURNALIST: You said you expect challenges, what do you think is most likely to be challenged in this deal?
BOWEN: Well look having been Immigration Minister for six months I've learnt that the Immigration Minister is the most litigated person in the country and I expect that to apply to this arrangement as well. I would expect that lawyers will be challenging this arrangement.
JOURNALIST: Which element?
BOWEN: Well that's a matter for them, I'm not in the business of giving them legal advice, I'm just making the point that nobody should underestimate our resolve.
JOURNALIST: Will this (inaudible) require legislation?
BOWEN: No it does not.
JOURNALIST: And who picks the 4000 in Malaysia, who get the lucky Australian visas?
BOWEN: The Australian Government in consultation with the UNHCR, in the same way that we do across the world, we take people who have particularly compelling cases who may have been waiting a long time for resettlement and who are regarded as being genuine refugees mandated by the UNHCR. There are 43 million displaced people around the world; Australia obviously has to prioritise our intake by we are doing this in conjunction with UNHCR in Malaysia as we do around the world.
JOURNALIST: What kind of facility with the 800 go to in Malaysia?
BOWEN: They would be detained for a short period of time, it has been the basis of discussions with the Malaysian Government, and then they would enter more broadly into the Malaysian community, but that would be something for those further details to be decided.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any indication whether that's a, you haven't checked whether that's a facility that would be up to Australian standards under-
BOWEN: Certainly there's been discussions about them being processed for a short period of time in existing Malaysian infrastructure, but the discussions have been that they would then of course, and in terms of the agreement between the two Prime Ministers and I quote ‘be treated with dignity and humanity.'
JOURNALIST: Won't the disincentive only last though until that 800 quota is filled and based on the current rate of arrivals is only a fairly short period?
PM: You're assuming that there are 800 people who volunteer to take that risk of going to the back of the queue in Malaysia.
JOURNALIST: So Tony Abbott might ask ‘will this stop the boats?'
PM: Well you should ask Tony Abbott has he ever had a policy to back his slogan in.
Thanks very much. 



I congratulate Jon Stanhope on his achievements as Chief Minister of the ACT and leader of the ACT ALP. Jon retires as the longest-serving and most successful leader of the ACT Labor Party.
Jon came to lead the ACT ALP following defeat in the 1998 ACT election and steered his party to Government in the subsequent 2001 election. 
In 2004 he secured the only majority Government in the Territory's history and in 2008 won a historic third term for Labor.
Under Jon, ACT Labor pursued brave and difficult reforms of the Territory's education system and has begun a total rebuild of Canberra's hospitals. These reforms and investments will serve Canberra for years to come. When fire came to Canberra's suburbs in 2003, Jon stood up for his city and led the rebuilding effort. 
For a decade in the Council of Australian Governments, Jon's has been a wise voice and I, along with many leaders of larger jurisdictions, have been grateful for the benefit of his experience and judgement.
It's fitting that my last public event with Jon as Chief Minister was to plant a tree cut from the Tree of Knowledge from Barcaldine in Canberra. Jon has been a trusted steward of Labor's vision and values and a fine servant of the city he loves. 
Jon's commitment to community service began years before he entered elective politics and I know it will remain for years to come. I am sure Jon and Robyn are looking forward to the next phase of their life very much and I wish them well. 



PM: [AUDIO BREAK] first and foremost, how nice does Phil Hudson look, baby-face Hudson they call him, and a very attractive look indeed. I'm very impressed.
So, I'm glad to be here with Phil, otherwise I would have had to have done five minutes of beard jokes, but I'm glad to be here with Phil to launch the Press Gallery Ball. An unkind person would say this is the only good thing the press gallery does all year, but I wouldn't be such an unkind person, to say that. There's one or two other pieces during the year that aren't bad, and then there's the rest of what you do, but this is a very important coming together for the Canberra community, and very important work for charity, and I think you should be very proud that the past 11 Balls have raised so much money for charity, and I'm sure this year is not going to be any different.
I am intending to make two personal contributions to the Ball. I don't think we've told Phil this.
I will do the traditional auction the Prime Minister for dinner routine, but we, in my office, have also been knitting a blanket. This started on a journey, when at the start of the last campaign we thought we would knit a campaign blanket; that in the office we would all knit squares and we would join them together to be a blanket.
Needless to say, all of my staff have done exactly what they promised, and I am the one who is lagging behind, but I am now two and a half squares into the five squares that I am knitting for the blanket, and when I finish my fifth square it will be whipped up into a whole blanket, where you will be able to see the contributions of the Prime Ministerial staff, as well as me, so we will separately put that up for auction, so if someone is looking for a colourful part of history the campaign blanket is definitely it, so I hope I've spruiked that well enough.
Now, I was going to send Nicola Roxon up here to launch the poster that is going to promote the Ball. There's a couple of problems with that, though: it's got a woman smoking on it; the band is called ‘Martini Club', and the other band is called ‘Boys in the Band', and I thought just the whole theme wasn't going to strike her as quite right, so I've come up to do it myself, and with no further ado, for those who like a martini, for those who like substances that now come in olive green packaging, and for those  -  olive being, as we know, a drab colour, unless of course, you're talking to the olive producers, in which case it's a very attractive colour  -  but for everyone who likes a good time and raising money for charity, this is the Ball for you, the 2011 Mid Winter Ball.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much. And so tickets, ticket seats, will go up for grabs sometime today. Thank you.
Razor gang got me.
PM: I wondered where Penny Wong had been in the last 24 hours. Righto, now, my mission, I think, is to get out of here, isn't it?
Oh, on what?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what would happen when the next boat arrives and there's children on that boat. What rules have you set up for sending children back to Malaysia?
PM: Well, as you've seen from what we've announced so far, there is a commitment between me and the Malaysian Prime Minister to finalise an agreement for 800 people who seek to come to Australia by boat to go to Malaysia. We'll obviously announce full details of all of this arrangement when the agreement is finalised, but we are intending to take a fairly tough approach  -  a tough approach to ensuring that we send a message to people smugglers right up the pipeline, that the can no longer say to people that they can get them to Australia. If you get on a boat, then the risk you run is that you end up in Malaysia, and I'm not going to put any conditions or caveats on that.
JOURNALIST: Will they be forcibly removed, if necessary?
PM: Well, as the Minister for Immigration said when he went with me to the press conference on Saturday, this is tough policy, and yes, we expect resistance, we expect protests, and no-one should doubt our determination to get this done.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how sure are you of the Government's legal position? Do you think you might require legislation to hold off on, let's say, a High Court challenge?
PM: We've sought advice, and no, we don't require legislation.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) getting children out of detention in Australia?
PM: Well, the Minister for Immigration's been continuing to work hard on new arrangements. Those arrangements that we announced some back, and as far as I'm aware that is proceeding on time and working well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) a boat gets intercepted, the boat will get escorted to Christmas Island, I take it. Will they be put straight on a plane and out? Will there be any exclusions for people who are sick, infirm, young, close to birth?
PM: We are not, at this stage, dealing with those kinds of details, but I do want to indicate we're going to take a very tough and rigorous approach. There is a message here for people smugglers, and that is you can't say to people you can get them to Australia, that anybody who pays a people smuggler, risks their life on a boat, is running a risk that they end up in Malaysia, where there are many refugees already processed, who have been there for a longer period of time, so they will go to Malaysia, to the back of the queue.
On the interception arrangements, they will be made on the basis of operational requirements.



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard today paid tribute to Australian boxing legend Lionel Rose.
Mr Rose was the first Indigenous Australian to win a boxing world title in any weight class when he defeated Japanese boxer Masahiko Harada in 15 rounds in Tokyo in 1968.
In recognition of this achievement he was named Australian of the Year in 1968, the first Indigenous Australian to be awarded this honour. Mr Rose was also made a Member of the Order of the British Empire in the same year.
Lionel Rose was an Australian champion in every sense of the word, and an inspiration to all of us.
The Prime Minister extended her deepest sympathies and those of the Australian Government and community to Mr Rose's family, friends and the Australian boxing community. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today said the 2011-12 Budget would deliver on a number of key election commitments made during the 2010 election.
The Government has already met more than half of its 2010 election commitments in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook (MYEFO). 
The 2011-12 Budget continues to deliver major policy initiatives committed to during the election in areas such as health, education and infrastructure.
Most of all, it honours our election commitment to return the Budget to surplus in 2012-13, which will underpin our long-term economic success.
Major election commitments delivered in this Budget include:
 * 	$771.9 million over five years to support families cover the costs of raising teenagers and encourage them to stay at school;
 * 	$425 million to reward great teachers through performance-based bonuses and $18.1 million to encourage bright, highly skilled professionals into a teaching career, over the next four years;
 * 	$222 million for the expansion of the school chaplaincy program to up to 1,000 additional schools;
 * 	$20 million to provide mentoring for trade apprentices to help them choose the right training pathway and supporting them to complete their training.
A complete list of election commitments delivered in the 2011-12 Budget and previously in MYEFO is attached. 



HOST: Well, Prime Minister, what would happen if the price of commodities falls over the next couple of years?
PM: Well, Chris, we base the Budget on the best projections available to us from Treasury. We've made conservative assumptions about the price of commodities in this Budget, with the terms of trade slightly falling away during the duration of the four years that the Budget covers.
HOST: In the 2007 election, Kevin Rudd liked to say quite a lot, well, are you planning for the end of the mining boom? It was a question he was asking of the Howard government. Are you planning for the end of the mining boom?
PM: Well, certainly we believe that this mining boom, mining boom Mark II, will last for some period of time. This is a very special opportunity for our nation to make a difference, particularly to long-term disadvantage and getting more people into the workforce.
HOST: Now, one of our panellists, Sarah, says that freezing family benefits payments puts $2 billion back in the pockets of Government, but of course then takes $2 billion out of the pockets of families. Is that a fair comment?
PM: Well, I'm not sure what income level Sarah is on, but let's be very clear here  -  family payments received by people are going up in the next financial year. If you are receiving a payment for your child now, that rate of payment will go up.
We have paused indexation of the income thresholds. That's obviously affecting a limited number of people at the upper end. We needed to make some tough choices in this Budget because it was important to get the Budget back to surplus in 2012-13 as promised, and that's about families and their cost of living, including the costs of raising children, because we didn't want government to be adding to the inflationary pressures in the economy.
I'd also remind, too, there's a special new payment for families with teenagers because there's been an historic anomaly where the family payment system assumed a 16-year-old cost you less than a 15-year-old, and I think we all know that's now right.
HOST: Back in 2007, you make much of kitchen table economics and cost of living arguments, rather than large economic arguments. Are you sorry that you did that now, because it seems that everyone believes that they deserve some sort of hand out from government?
PM: I think the two are connected, and their connected in people's real, lived experience, and they're connected in our minds, too.
I understand that families out there are under cost of living pressure; understand that people get utilities bills and they look at them and they wonder, you know, ‘how are we going to make all of this add up?', so I get that there's pressure out there on the shoulders of Australian families, but what we're doing in this budget is saying to Australian families ‘our priority is keeping the economy strong.' In order to do that we do need to bring the Budget back to surplus. That's you know, about not adding to inflationary pressures which would worsen those cost of living pressures for Australian families, but it's also about spreading opportunity, and families want an opportunity  -  get a job, get a training place, get a better job, see their young son get an apprenticeship, see their young daughter perhaps go on to university, see their younger children in a great school, see their baby in supported childcare if they need to, to return to work, and all of that's in this Budget.
HOST: Is a family on $150,000 a year rich, because it seems that the means testing is settling about there?
PM: Well, what I would say is I understand families on $150,000 a year still feel cost of living pressures .We have to target government payments to people in the most need, but for the family on $150,000 a year, I mean, let's be very clear, they'd continue to receive childcare tax rebate if they've got a child in childcare, and many families would. For those families, we'd be working with them to make sure that their children go to a great school. We've almost doubled the amount of money going into school education.
They, if they had an emergency medical situation, would be down at the local public hospital. We're investing to make that public hospital better, and of course we don't want to exacerbate their cost of living pressures by adding to inflationary pressures, and that's what a Budget in surplus is about.
HOST: And the people on our panel are pleased about the spending on health, but they do note with things like mental health that some of this is back-end loaded, that a lot of the payments start coming in later years.
PM: Well, this is unashamedly a 10-year roadmap for mental health. What mental health stakeholders said very clearly to us is that they wanted a clear way forward. They didn't want to be buffeted  -  you know, money this year then no money next year and then a changed program the year after. They wanted to get the settings right and build over a10-year period so we fundamentally improve our mental health system, and that's what we've delivered with a $2.2 billion package.
HOST: But when we look at that figure, too, and this is something that Lindsay Tanner has brought up recently, that's over five years, not four, which is the usual way that these things are measured, it includes $600 million of spending that's already previously been announced, so aren't there accountancy tricks in doing that just to get a big, headline number a the top?
PM: Well, there's complete transparency about this in the Budget papers, and yes, we have amended a program that mental health professionals and people who best represent the community that relies on mental health services told us wasn't working equitably, and particularly people in rural and regional Australia were finding it very hard to access, so we've made that program better. We've counted it in the $2.2 billion because it will be a better program.
HOST: When you look at the way that you've designed this and getting back to surplus in just a couple of year's time, even though it's a small surplus, have you been defined by what the Coalition says a good government is, a good economic manager is, that you have to have a surplus, because that's not always the measure, is it?
PM: I must admit I don't define myself by anything the Coalition says. If I did all I'd do is listen to relentless negativity all day, every day. We don't listen-
HOST: -And yet it appears as though, with this desperation to get into even a small surplus.
PM: This is nothing to do with the Coalition's critique. This is to do with my understanding the and the Government's understanding about what will best keep our economy strong.
When we had the global financial crisis  -  you know, the biggest global economic challenge the world has faced since the Great Depression  -  it was the right thing to do to have a deficit, to have a debt, to keep supporting jobs, keep Australians in work .I'm glad we did that and we kept this country out of recession.
Now, as we're moving up and the economy is coming to full capacity, the right thing to do is for government to reduce its footprint and not to add to inflationary pressures.
HOST: Over the next four years, the amount of money you're going to spend on detention is going to go up by $2 billion. That's one real growth area in the Budget. How much closer are you to a deal with Papua New Guinea?
PM: Well, we are continuing to have constructive discussions with PNG, and on the weekend that's just passed I released my joint statement with the Prime Minister of Malaysia about an innovative transfer agreement working under the regional framework that was agreed by all countries in the region at the Bali process. So, we will continue to work on this. The Malaysian agreement that Prime Minister Najib and I have said we will enter is one that would take away from people smugglers the very product that they sell, which is a passage to Australia and entering into our processing system.
HOST: So, in that you're admitting there are pull factors and that they have risen since you came to government, so doesn't show that your first attempts at this were abject policy failures; that you contributed to a rise in the number of boat people?
PM: Well, I'm going to disappoint you, Chris, by not agreeing with the premise of your question. We believe that there are push factors around the world, things that get people on the move. Look at Sri Lanka. We were seeing numbers of people come from Sri Lanka in the aftermath of civil war. Now, of course, it's stabilising and numbers have gone down, so people getting pushed by events around the world.
HOST: And they were being pulled by Australia?
PM: Well, I'm not agreeing with that. That might be your analysis, Chris, but it's not mine.
HOST: So why the change of policy?
PM: Well, my analysis is we need to send a very strong signal to people smugglers and to the people that try to ply into boats and sell their product to that if a people smuggler says to you ‘I can get you to Australia, if you're processed there you'll get re-settled in Australia', well, that's not true, because there's a risk, a real risk, that you'll end up in Malaysia at the back of the queue.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for joining AM.PM: Thank you for the opportunity. 
HOST: Isn't this just a good old fashioned Labor budget - take from the rich and give to the poor?PM: This is a budget with Labor values in it. No doubt about it. We're a political party that values jobs and opportunity and that's what this budget is all about. This is about getting our budget back into the black, back into surplus. That is what our economy needs now but it is also about getting Australians into work. We have got a proud track record of creating jobs - 750,000 of them.Now in this budget we look forward to creating half a million more over the next couple of years and getting into work Australians who are at real risk of being left behind and not having the benefits and dignity of work.HOST: For many families though, the Government is freezing eligibility thresholds and many benefits and tax concessions for higher income families. Those families will eventually lose those benefits altogether over time.PM: Well, this is a tough budget. We said it would be and it is. We are delivering what we promised - the return to surplus, back in the black in 2012-13 and that has required the making of tough choices. We've had to work through, make cuts in order to get into surplus and to prioritise spending on the things that really matter for Australia now and our future and a big thing there is getting more people into our workforce as our economy expands and grows.I don't want to see a situation where the economy is booming but we still have long term unemployed people who don't have a job, single mums who could work who don't have a job, with older children, children in high school. People with disabilities who want to work who haven't got the opportunity of a job.Now on family payments, what we're doing is we are not taking direct dollars off families. We have paused indexation arrangements and that will impact some families at the upper end of eligibility for family payments.HOST: And over time those payments will completely disappear for those families. For a family on $150,000 in Western Sydney that does help quite significantly.PM: Well, what I would say to families generally about family payments is yes, we are pausing indexation. That's true but we are providing new benefits as well. If you are a family with a teenager, what's been happening to you under the family payment system is when your child turns 16 the system somehow assumed they cost less than when they were 15.Now that's a crazy assumption in the modern age, particularly when we want kids to stay at school. So we are changing family payments so if you have teenagers in your family, you can be eligible for up to $4,000 more a year if your child stays at school.We don't want them wandering away from school and wandering away from a life of opportunity. To get that life of opportunity they've got to get through education.HOST: The newspaper coverage this morning has been pretty mixed for you. The Australian has a cartoon - Wayne Swan dressed like Crocodile Dundee with a headline that says, "This is not a knife Treasurer". The economist Craig James says this hits with the force of a feather and I think independent Rob Oakeshott even said that this was Tonka tough.PM: Well, and there has been plenty of commentary on the other side too acknowledging that this is a tough budget, referring to me as a person with guts. I have seen that commentary too but the commentators will say whatever is on their mind. That is a matter for them.It is, in terms of this budget, the real figures in it, let's have a look. We are talking about growth in spending at an average of 1 per cent. That compares to the Howard government having an average growth in spending of more than 3 per cent.We've got a year in 12/13 where expenditure will actually go backwards. The figure is a minus. The Howard government never delivered a budget with a reduction in expenditure in it. So we've got to get these statistics in their context. This is a budget where we will see expenditure growth at an average of 1 per cent while the economy is growing at 4 per cent.HOST: How will this take pressure off interest rates and inflation? The $22 billion in savings that you talked about has pretty much been matched in program spending the same amount.PM: Well, that's not true either. There is $22 billion of savings in this budget. There is more than $5 billion more of savings than there are new spending initiatives and the spending initiatives are very targeted on what our economy needs now - on getting people into work because our economy will be hungry for workers, on getting people new skills because our economy will need people who are skilled, on investing in infrastructure because we don't want the lack of infrastructure to be a capacity constraint.HOST: But how does this take the pressure off those families now?PM: Well, let's go through it. It is important for families at this time that the Government does not add to inflationary pressures in the economy. That's why it's vital to get the budget back into surplus and back into the black. That's what this budget has done. That is the best thing we can do to help families with cost of living pressures - not add to inflationary pressures and in this budget we don't.Then of course what drives inflationary pressures too, when your economy is coming to full capacity is not enough working people, not enough skills, not good enough infrastructure. These things become capacity constraints and that puts upwards pressure on inflation.The budget addresses each of those areas and this is a pretty stark contrast to the Howard government too that got warning after warning from the Reserve Bank to do something about capacity constraints in our economy and instead just went on a spending spree.HOST: There isn't much of a buffer for 2012-13 - $3.5 billion. If China sneezes or we have another unforeseen disaster like at the start of this year, your previous estimates for deficits have been out by 20 per cent, that surplus could well be non-existent.PM: Well, we've lived through an extraordinary period. The floods in Queensland, the cyclone in Queensland, the floods in the rest of the nation, the earthquake in Christchurch, the earthquake and tsunami in Japan, you know more than 10,000 people dead and an equal number missing. We've lived through an extraordinary period and the budget figures show some of that.On terms of trade, the terms of trade assumptions in this budget are conservative assumptions and they're assumptions that the terms of trade will slightly decline over the budget period.HOST: What is negotiable here? The Greens have already flagged that they want changes to some of your welfare to work measures; the independent Tony Windsor has raised concerns about your efforts again to have the private health insurance rebate means tested. Every budget is tinkered around the edges. What is up for negotiation here?PM: Well, before we get there, what level of responsibility is Mr Abbott, as Leader of the Opposition going to show in the face of this budget? This is a real test for Mr Abbott as to how big a risk he is to the Australian economy and the jobs and services that Australians rely on. This is the budget our economy needs now.Mr Abbott and Mr Hockey appear to be wandering around saying ‘we can create a surplus at the same time as oppose every cutback that the Government has in its budget.'Well, my challenge to Mr Abbott is a very simple one. If he says he doesn't like a cutback in this budget, nominate an equal cutback in another area. If he is not able to do that, he should vote for this budget as is.HOST: The challenge for you though is to get it through Parliament so what is up for negotiation?PM: Well, I'm not getting there until I see whether or not Tony Abbott is going to stand before the Australian people and say yet again he can't make budget figures add up.
He has already failed the test three times: an $11 billion black hole in his election commitments, a shambles when they tried to put together their own flood package earlier this year and then the farce we saw last budget last year when Tony Abbott said, I don't know anything about the figures. You'll have to ask Joe Hockey about that and then Joe Hockey said, oh I don't know anything about the figures, you'll have to ask Andrew Robb about that and then Andrew Robb went out for a press conference his own press secretary couldn't bear to watch. He was trying to bring it to an end.Shambles, farce - well now is the time for Tony Abbott to say can he add figures up. Track record is he can't. This Government can so he should be supporting this Government's budget.HOST: Prime Minister, thank you.PM: Thank you. 



PM: It's great to be here with the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan and I'm also joined by Chris Evans, who very importantly fulfils the Ministerial role dealing with skills. I've just had the opportunity to meet some young apprentices here in this fantastic trades training facility. These are young people doing exactly the right thing, they are here getting skills, they are here getting the skills that they will need to have a job for the rest of their life.
We want to make sure that Australians around the nation get the benefit of this kind of opportunity, and that's been at the centre of what the budget is all about. The budget's about getting the economic settings right, we are bringing the budget to surplus in 2012-13, back into the black exactly as promised. But at the centre of this budget are jobs and opportunities for Australians. We want Australians to have the benefits of work, we've created 750,000 jobs and we're proud of that, and we look forward to creating half a million more in the next couple of years.
And we want to use this opportunity to make sure that the benefits of work can come to Australians who have been disadvantaged, who have been left out of the mainstream of Australian life, and who at risk of facing a lifetime of disadvantage if they don't get skills, don't get a job, don't get into the workforce.
There are some very special measures in this budget for apprenticeships, as part of our $3 billion skills package. We know that the great apprentices we've seen here today are doing the right thing to get a ticket and get a trade for life, but unfortunately at the moment around only 50 per cent of our apprentices stay the course and complete the journey and end up leaving with that trade ticket in their hand. We want to make a difference to that. Mentoring is really important to helping young people, stay the course and stay the journey. So in this budget we've allocated around $100 million to support mentors who will work with apprentices and help them get through, an older person, a guiding hand who will help them get to the end of their apprenticeship.
And out of that $100 million we'll also be funding expert advice, because of the reasons people don't complete is they didn't pick the right trade at the start, so better advice will mean people are more likely to get into a trade that they love and that they complete.
Also in this budget we will be changing the apprenticeship system so that it meets more of the needs of the modern day. We don't want people just serving the time, we want people to get the skills, which is why competency based progression in apprenticeships is an important new reform  -  if you can get the skills more quickly, then you can move through more quickly, and a lot of people now come to apprenticeships having had some basic training, maybe through a school based program or through part time work, and they can get that recognised and move them through the apprenticeship more quickly.
Now these are two measures as part of our $3 billion skills package, but it all adds up to is a budget that is focused on jobs and focused on opportunity, with the resources boom in this country, we've got an historic time in our nation's history to make a difference to opportunity for Australians right around the nation, we don't want to see people left behind and putting jobs and skills and opportunity at the centre of this budget is about spreading the benefits of the boom.
We're very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you promised a tough budget. Why is that the Government couldn't match the $50 billion in cuts that Opposition says they can get?
PM: Because they were a figment of Joe Hockey's imagination. We've been dealing with real figures, real money, and making it all add up.
This Budget's got $22 billion of savings in it. This Budget has, on average over the four years, expenditure growing at one per cent when the economy will be growing at times by four per cent. Happy to do the track record comparisons: the Howard Government, on average, was increasing expenditure by more than three per cent.
Now, at some point Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey have to stop just making things up, and that point's going to come on Thursday night, when Mr Abbott has to walk into the Parliament as the Leader of the Opposition and give his Budget reply. He needs to present figures that add up.
He has a challenge. His Shadow Treasurer has said he can bring the budget back into surplus a year earlier than the Government in this Budget.
Well, he's got to show us the cut backs that make that possible on Thursday night.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the West Australian Premier has said that you shouldn't be milking the mining companies for their profits, and that West Australia and Queensland need a fair share of that revenue. What do you say to that?
PM: Well, the Western Australian Premier, of course, is referring to the Minerals Resources Tax that is in this Budget which will provide benefits to Western Australia: benefits in the form of infrastructure; benefits in the form of company tax relief, particularly for small businesses first; and benefits in the form of what government needs to do to back in superannuation for working people, and I'm sure the Premier of Western Australia is pleased to see, in this Budget, the measures which will get more Australians into work with the skills they need. He leads a State that's hungry for more workers; hungry for more skills; hungry for more infrastructure, and in this Budget we are investing in skills, in working people, in creating jobs and in providing infrastructure.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what is the economic benefit of giving pensioners free set top boxes, and have you learnt nothing from the insulation scheme where giving away things for free caused a lot of industry problems?
PM: Well, with this program with set top boxes, we have already rolled out 38,000 of them to pensioners  -  38,000 already done.
We are going to have a digital switchover in this country, and we've decided to assist the poorest pensioners, the ones on the full pension, who are least able to make the switch themselves.
Now, I know from being at home with my mum and dad  -  I had the opportunity to see them last week  -  they're in their early 80s, they're not great adapters to new technology, that's the truth. We sit there with my niece and nephew and they look in absolute wonder at the iPad, and they've got no idea how to operate it.
Now, of course, they are not pensioners on the full rate of the pension, but I think all of us intuitively know from common sense that a lot of older Australians find it hard to keep up with the relentless pressure of change with new technology. Well, poor Australians, full rate of the pensions, not necessarily able to adapt themselves. I'm not, as Prime Minister, going to have them wake up the day after the digital switchover with no TV.
JOURNALIST: Any chance of answering the question?
PM: Well, I am answering the question.
For many older Australians, the TV is their companion. They live at home by themselves. They're not that mobile anymore, and the TV is their window on the world. Well, it's the right thing to do to help them through into the new era of TV  -  38,000 rolled out already, and I've got the letters in my office from pensioners that have thanked us for doing it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the measures in the Budget, which are considerable, to provide support for the ongoing mining boom  -  you've got infrastructure, skilled migrants  -  Bob Brown said the other day that skilled migrants coming into the country were queue jumpers. You've got to negotiate your Budget through the Senate in negotiation with the Greens. How can you deal with a crowd that don't seem, at least in that respect, to be very interested in supporting and maintenance of the mining boom?
PM: Well, you're making an assumption, and the assumption is that Tony Abbott will be completely irresponsible about this Budget. The weight, first and foremost, is on Tony Abbott's shoulders.
Now, we have presented a Budget that is right for our economy now; presented a Budget which is all about keeping the economy strong. We presented a Budget which will see half a million jobs created. We presented a Budget that will get more Australians from disadvantaged circumstances into work, invest in skills, deliver new migrants where they're needed, as well as show the basic respect and care and concern I think Australians want to show for each other through the mental health package.
Now, Tony Abbott can wander around with his criticisms, but at the end of the day he's got to make a decision  -  if he himself can't add a budget up, and we've seen no evidence that he can, then he should pass this Budget, which is right for our economy now.
And let's be very clear about this  -  Tony Abbott's failed the test three times of adding: an $11 billion black hole during the election campaign; a shambles when he tried to put his flood funding package through; a farce last year when he delivered Budget reply speech, deferred to Joe Hockey on the figures who deferred to Andrew Robb who then engaged in a press conference even his press secretary couldn't bear to watch.
Well, the standard on Thursday night is more than that. If Mr Abbott wants to put a view about this Budget, if he reckons he doesn't like a cut back in this Budget, he's got to nominate an alternate cut back which passes the Treasury test.
So, first and foremost, you need to ask Tony Abbott how big a risk is he going to be to our strong economy; how big a risk is he going to be to the jobs of Australians; how big a risk is he going to be to the services Australians need funded from this Budget.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I'm really not trying to be rude or disrespectful, but I asked you about the Greens, and you-
PM: -And the question becomes relevant only if Tony Abbott is grossly irresponsible about this Budget, so let's deal with it in sequence.
JOURNALIST: On mental health, your plan, the $2.2 billion seems to include some re-prioritised spending. Are you able to state exactly how much new spending that's been included?
PM: The mental health package does include re-prioritised spending, that's right. It also includes new spending over the forward estimates, and we believe that that's the right thing to do. We believe that services needed to be done better, and that's been the advice to us from the mental health community and constituency that works on this all the time, but we have allocated new money. Very happy to give you all of the break downs.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, there's a billion dollars over the forward estimates that we are spending. There is a program that is making way because the view of the community that works in this area is that it wasn't an effective program.
JOURNALIST: Is the billion new, or is that existing?
PM: Well, the billion dollars is a new investment in the sense that we've put it into this package. There is another program we have determined to end because it just simply wasn't effective.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister would you consider a household with a combined income of $150,000 to be rich?
PM: I'd consider them to be a household that probably wants to have their child go to a great school, which is why we've more than doubled the amount of funding going into school education  -  so their child can go to a great school.
I consider them a household that probably really wants the public hospital system to respond to their needs. If they had an emergency health situation then they would want the public hospital to meet their needs in a timely way. That's why we've invested billions of dollars more in health, and we've engaged in health reform.
I'd consider them to be a family that wants assistance with their childcare costs, which is why we've increased the childcare tax rebate and under this Budget we will commence to pay it fortnightly. I'd consider them to be a family that's worried about cost of living, and so it's the right thing to do to bring the Budget to surplus in 2012-13, as promised, so [AUDIO BREAK] is not adding to inflationary pressures which will be in the economy as we move to full capacity. That would show in people's cost of living.
So, I'd consider them to be a family that's probably got some of those things on their mind as they look at the household bills and make everything add up.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on another issue, there's reports today that the World Cup soccer bid might have been rorted by bidders. Australia spent millions of dollars on that bid. Are you concerned that we were dudded out of the World Cup?
PM: Well, we pursued the World Cup bid. Frank, who worked with us, Frank Lowy, worked long and hard on the World Cup bid. We wanted to see this come to Australia. It's the world's biggest sporting event. I'm not here to give a critique on World Cup voting systems, but we were very disappointed, but we believed we put a bid in which was impressive, and we pursued that bid in an ethical and appropriate way.
JOURNALIST: Should they have another look at it, do you think. There's some very serious questions being raised about the ethics of other bidders, so there's an unfair playing field.
PM: Ultimately, this is a question that needs to be directed to FIFA, the governing body. What I can tell you is about the Australian bid, which was a quality bid, and of course we pursued it in an ethical way.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how many families are affected by the changes to the family assistance benefits?
PM: Well, I'm happy-
TREASURER: Yeah, sure.
There's a pause with the indexation of the top threshold, and around 40,000 families would be affected by that.
JOURNALIST: As there's bracket creep, won't that mean that more families, thousands more families, will be affected?
TREASURER: Certainly, over time that number will increase because the pause runs for some years. That's the case, but what we have to do is to target our payments, and we're targeting our payments to families on modest incomes.
You raised a figure before of about $150,000 a year. I don't believe those people are rich, but there are plenty of families on income of $60,000 or $70,000 a year, and, for example, a typical household will have a primary income winner, say $50,000 to $70,000 or $80,000 a year, and maybe a part time bread winner as well, so families come in different shapes and sizes and with different incomes, but what we do is we pay generous benefits to families on modest incomes and it goes a long way up the income scale, even when you combine those incomes.
We believe the pause here is justified in the circumstances we are in. We fundamentally believe in the family payment system. We believe in it because we think parents are doing the most important job in the country  -  bringing up the next generation of young Australians, but sometimes we have to tighten our belt a bit, and that's what we're doing with family payments at the top end.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think that skilled migrants are queue jumpers?
PM: No, of course I don't.
And Latika, last question.
JOURNALIST: Thank you. Why has the cost of your Computers in Schools program raised again? Why is that cost higher than initially forecast?
PM: Well, we've continued to provide computers in schools. We made an allocation some time back to provide the on costs, so there's a continued investment in that program, which is doing a lot of good work to provide computers to kids in schools.
Now, I know that our opponents like to look to this area for cut backs. Tony Abbott wants to rip $3 billion, almost, out of schools, and he still hasn't produced Budget papers which show that he can deliver a surplus.
Thanks very much. 



HOST: Prime Minister thanks for joining us.
Most people waking up this morning will wonder what's in the budget for them, but plenty of middle class families have taken a bit of a hit, haven't they?
PM: Well there are some important things for people to look at in this budget. Kochie, you're right, this budget is about jobs, jobs and jobs. We've got a proud track record of creating jobs, 750,000 created already and we're going to create half a million more.
You're also right that this budget is requiring people to step up and get themselves into work.
Sorry, I'm struggling there Kochie with the ear-piece, but I'll fix it while I'm talking.
We are going to get people to step up into work, we are going to see a strongly growing economy, Kochie, and when the economy is growing strongly what you do is you get the budget back into black, but you also recognise that the economy is hungry for workers and I don't want Australians left behind. Very long term unemployed people, people with disabilities, young people, not getting a job and getting into the mainstream of economic life in this country.
For families, for small businesses, there are benefits in this budget. You've referred yourself to the fact that families with teenagers will get new benefits under our family payments scheme, if they keep their kids in education, because that's an important message. Small businesses will be able to write off the first $5000 of buying that all important ute or van to keep the business on the road and very low income earners, through our low income tax offset, will see more money in their pay packet each week. We've brought forward those payments, so people can more directly see the benefits of getting out and working hard.
HOST: Yeah, the other tricky thing that you've done, which is quite smart is you've nipped and tucked middle class welfare, have you. You've frozen some payments and supplements and you've frozen the eligibility  -  not indexed it  -  so people will automatically, through pay rises, make themselves ineligible. Is that a target, do you think Australians were getting way too used to hand outs?
PM: We had to deliver a tough budget because that's what the economy needs now and Kochie, that means you've got to make some difficult choices. You can't just wander around as the Opposition is wont to do, saying the world surplus, you've got to make it all add up. So, yes, there are some cut backs in this Budget, but they are there to ensure we get the budget to surplus in 2012-13.
People are not going to directly lose dollars out of their family payments, but yes we are pausing indexation, that's true. But the importance of coming back to surplus is that means we're not adding to inflationary pressures in the economy and it will be bad for peoples' cost of living if government was adding to inflationary pressures by not getting the budget back into surplus.
HOST: Look, we read about the commodities boom, it's the biggest commodities boom in this country's history, but outside of WA I reckon most Australians would be saying to themselves ‘Hey, I'm not feeling any commodities boom here. My life's not getting easier, it's getting tougher'.
In this budget, show us where we all benefit from the commodities boom and how it's helping you make a better country for our kids?
PM: Kochie I think you're absolutely on the money. I think a lot of people pick up their newspapers, watch your TV show and say to themselves ‘Gee, I don't know where this boom is because it doesn't seem to be right here for my household, or my workplace'. We do have an economy that's got variable speeds  -  I call it the patchwork economy, some people call it the two speed economy  -  what that means is our resources sector is running ahead, our dollar is high, that puts pressure on some other industries.
The best thing we can do in those circumstances is to try and spread the opportunities from the boom and that means continuing to run the economy so we're creating jobs, half a million more is an important figure. That we're providing skills to people to get a better job or to get into work for the first time and there's a $3 billion skills package in this budget.
And also providing the quality services that everyone relies on  -  a great school for your child to go to, your hospital working well - and in this budget I'm really proud we've delivered a $2.2 billion mental health package. Australians are generous and fair people and whilst our economy will be running strong, I don't think we want to see Australians with mental illness left behind.
HOST: Could you have done more for the frayed bits of that patchwork economy, like people might be surprised our biggest exports in this country are coal and iron ore, everyone would know that, then comes education and tourism. Now those two are getting hammered at the moment, there's still GST on tourism exports. It's the only export that has a GST on it, foreign tourist coming in here, our student visas are down. They're two big industries that may be decimated.
PM: If I can start with the student visas and come back to tourism. Kochie, the truth is there was some big rorts in the student visa system and we acted to fix them and so some of the dramatic drop you've seen in numbers-
HOST: Did you go too far?
PM:- Oh, well, look, we're working through to make sure all of the settings are right, but I'm not apologising at all for getting the rorts out of the system. There were a lot of people coming here, who weren't really coming here for an education, they thought it was a backdoor into Australia's migration system. We inherited that from the former Government and we fixed it and so some of the dramatic drops you see are the product of fixing it.
For universities, we have ensured that they are better funded and they are growing, that they can offer more kids, more adults, the benefits of a university education, whilst keeping the quality up and we'll continue to work with universities on properly fostering international education, quality education, not rorts.
On tourism, we've funded some major tourism campaigns, taking our wonderful, wonderful country right to the world. Kochie, we do have a system to work with the GST and foreign tourists, but I understand this has been an important focus of yours and we're always happy to cadge some ideas from you, if you've got some more in that area.
HOST: Beauty, alright. We'll have a chat. Prime Minister, thanks very much for that, appreciate your time this morning.
PM: Thanks very much. Thanks Kochie.



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard said reforms unveiled in the Budget will help get more Australians into work and keep our robust economy the envy of the world.
The Budget reflects the key priorities of the Gillard Labor Government - giving people the security and dignity that comes with a job and maintaining a strong economy.
The Prime Minister, Treasurer Wayne Swan and Minister for Skills, Jobs and Workplace Relations, Chris Evans today met apprentices at the Fyshwick Trade Skills Centre.
The Budget contains fundamental reforms to the apprenticeship system which will help deliver the skilled workers our economy needs.
The Gillard Government will invest $3 billion in new skills and training programs over the next 6 years under the Building Australia's Future Workforce initiative.
This will help strengthen our workforce  -  ensuring more Australians can share in the country's growing prosperity.
The Treasurer said 500,000 new jobs will be created over the next two years  -  adding to the 750,000 jobs already created under this Government.
The skills package includes more than $200 million to boost apprentice completion rates, provide mentoring support and enable apprentices to complete their training more quickly.
These reforms will help create a smarter and faster apprenticeship system to tackle critical skill shortages and maintain Australia's global competitive edge.
To lift apprenticeship completions and speed up training for experienced workers, the Government will invest:
 * 	$101 million over four years for an Apprenticeship Mentoring package, helping individuals to choose the right training pathway and supporting them to complete their training; and
 * 	$100 million over four years for Accelerated Australian Apprenticeships, to support innovative training models that enable apprentices to move through their training and advance to the next level of learning and pay, provided quality standards are met.
Skills Councils and peak industry bodies will be encouraged to introduce innovative training models to support the apprenticeship reform measures.
This will ensure the modern apprenticeship system is flexible and responsive to industry needs.
It is anticipated that the first supported projects will be announced in the second half of 2011.
The Apprenticeship Mentoring package will see $79.9 million invested over four years to engage 300 mentors who will guide and support more than 10,000 Apprentices in selected occupations each year.
The mentors will work closely with students in their first year of training when the drop-out rate is at its highest.
A further, $21.5 million will be provided over two years to employ 140 Apprenticeship Advisors to strengthen recruitment into apprenticeships, guide applicants into the right trade apprenticeship and provide advice to employers.
Senator Evans said making sure people choose the right trade and then supporting them in the first years of their training are proven ways of lifting apprenticeship retention rates.
Increasing the number of Australian apprentices is critical to meeting the growing demand for skilled workers. 



HOST: Prime Minister thanks for your time-
PM: Good morning Kieran.
HOST: Is it your view that there has been a blowout in middle class welfare and that that had to be put to a stop in this budget?
PM: Well Kieran let's be very clear what's happening in this budget with family payments. We are putting a pause on indexation for the thresholds. Now I know that sounds complicated by what it means is that around 2 per cent of families, 2 per cent of families who have been eligible for family payments will not be eligible as their income rises. Now that means well more than 90 per cent of families will continue to see their family payments rise as they've experienced in the past.
HOST: But has it become too generous, did it become too generous in the boom years and it now has to be reined in?
PM: We had to make choices in this budget to bring the budget to surplus, we needed to make choices to make sure that our family payments system is not only sustainable now, not only over the next four years, but over the next forty years, so we have made some choices for the sustainability of the family payments system which will see more than 90 per cent of families continue to experience increases in their family payments.
And I know Kieran that Tony Abbott, as Leader of the Opposition, is now running around describing this measure as too harsh, but Kieran the truth is the Government introduced a comparable measure a few years ago and when we introduced that measure Tony Abbott described it as ‘too soft.' Now he can't have it both ways, he can't say to the Government two years ago ‘this is all too soft, you should be generating a bigger budget surplus' and then run round at the same time and say ‘well we're not backing in any of the savings measures'.
HOST: Newspapers across the country are running case studies of families earning around the $150,000 benchmark, the front page of the Telegraph, I'm not sure if you've seen it, but it's got a case study of the Curtains and it says ‘You're rich enough', a family in Sydney struggling to pay their bills. What's your message to the Curtains and people like them as I say, across the papers this morning?
PM: Well first and foremost I've never used that terminology about families earning $150,000 a year and I never will. I understand that many families earning money in that income range still feel the pressures of everyday life, they feel the pressures of the bills coming in, and I want to work with those families. Now let's just look at how the Government is working with those families  -  those are the families that want their children to do to a great school, that's why we are continuing to invest at record levels in Australian education.
Those are the families that want their kids to be able to get an apprenticeship, a university place, and that's why we are continuing to invest in that part of the education system. Those are the families that we're continuing to assist with childcare costs  -  many of those families, if they have an extra child, will be eligible for our parenting payment leave scheme, the PPL scheme. Many of those families too, are very concerned ‘how good is my hospital, my local hospital, if I had to take a child there in the middle of the night, what sort of service would I get?' Which is why we are continuing to invest and reform our hospital system.
So we'll keep working with those families, including by delivering a budget surplus, because a budget surplus is about not adding to the inflationary pressures in our economy and those inflationary pressures are a further risk to the cost of living of those families  -  I don't want to add to those cost of living pressures.
HOST: But what about, if we go lower down the income scale, people on $45,000 a year. Their end of year supplement is being capped, frozen for another few years and their income in real terms if going to fall as a result?
PM: What that means Kieran is they will continue to receive the same end of year supplement that they have, and then let's look at the budget overall. For many low income earners they will see more money in their pay packet than they used to as a result of us bringing forward the low income tax offset, that's so the money is available week to week, pay packet to pay packet, as people face their bills.
And of course we're working with those people too to keep our economy strong and to give them benefits and opportunity of work, and for all of the families that we've talked about, at every income range, life depends on a strong economy and having a good opportunity to get a job, keep a job, do more training, get more skills, get the next job, get a better job, and that's what this budget is all about: jobs and opportunity for Australian families.
HOST: But you're expanding support for those under the cap, for teenagers 16 to 19, at the same time that those above the cap miss out altogether. Is this not, well Tony Abbott says it's class warfare, are you punishing aspiration as Joe Hockey and Mr Abbott have asserted?
PM: Well this is just inflammatory terminology from a man who is continuously negative. What we are doing is making sure our family payment system is sustainable, the measure you refer to will affect around 2 per cent of families, the measure you also refer to, to increase benefits for teenagers, will affect around 650,000 teenagers, because I think people intuitively know kids don't cost less when they get older.
And Kieran let's just step back a little bit and actually look at where we are in budget week and what is going to happen today. You're asking me about the Government's budget, and what people know from this Government is we will bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13 exactly as promised.
Tonight is the night that the Leader of the Opposition, Tony Abbott, delivers his budget reply. And let's be really frank Kieran, one of the reasons Mr Abbott did not become Prime Minister is because Treasury found an $11 billion black hole in his costings. One of the reasons he's not Prime Minister is Treasury said he was an $11 billion risk to the budget surplus.
Now tonight Tony Abbott's got to square up all of the talk that he's engaged in. He's got to walk into the Parliament and either back the Government's savings or identify credible alternative savings of his own that pass the Treasury test.
HOST: You're calling for detail and an alternative budget pretty much, he doesn't have the resources of Treasury, Labor Oppositions never did, and yet you're setting a much higher benchmark for him?
PM: Oh Kieran that's completely untrue. I know exactly what Labor did in opposition when, for example, Kim Beazley delivered budget replies, he would identify what he would change about the budget. Now if Tony Abbott says he's not up to doing that, the he saying he's not up to doing things that have been done by Opposition Leaders in the past.
So Tony Abbott does have a test to pass tonight, he's got to walk into that Parliament and either back the Government's savings or identify credible alternate savings, and if he doesn't do that then he's a risk to the budget surplus, he's a risk to our economy, and he's a risk to the cost of living pressures on Australian families.
And when Mr Abbot has faced these questions this week with a kind of wave of his hand, he's referred to $50 billion of savings that he says the Opposition outlined last year. Well they're the $50 billions of savings where Treasury said $11 billion is completely wrong and the rest of it Mr Abbott has already spent on commitments he's given the Australian people.
So he walks into the Parliament tonight with no savings in his pocket and with a big challenge in front of him, is he going to outline alternate savings, if he can't then he has to back the budget and the Government's savings measures.
HOST: What do you say to the argument that's been prosecuted about border protection, that budget blowing out over $1 billion and that the families that you've hit in terms of capping the family payments, that they feel, you're saving about a billion dollars from that measure, that they feel they're paying for a dysfunctional policy?
PM: Well Kieran I'm not going to just adopt the wording in your question, the family payments measure, let's be clear about it, we are pausing indexation, it will affect around 2 per cent of families, well more than 90 per cent of families will see increases in their payments. Families with teenaged children will particularly see increases in their payments because we are ending the anomaly that said somehow older teenagers were cheaper to look after than younger children.
Now on border protection, I believe Australians, whatever income they earn, want us to have a tough border protection policy and we do.
HOST: OK on the issue of the Coalition's case in recent days, the Shadow Treasurer says ‘we're going to do everything we can to put pressure on the Government to call an election', one of your frontbenchers this morning suggest that that's a threat to try and block supply. Are all of your deals with the independents, with the crossbenchers, on supply and guaranteeing supply rock solid?
PM: Oh look I'm not going to engage in this kind of distraction, my view is Joe Hockey is only saying that because he knows he can't help Tony Abbott add his budget reply up. Now they want to do everything that they can to distract from the test that Tony Abbott faces tonight.
He walks into that Parliament, no savings in his pocket. One of the reasons he's not Prime Minister is Treasury found that he was an $11 billion risk to the budget surplus. Joe Hockey has engaged in some lazy talk suggestion ‘gee I'm such a good Shadow Treasurer; I could bring the budget to surplus a year earlier than the Government.' Well all of these claims come to their final test tonight. Tony Abbott walks into that Parliament, not one saving in his pocket, and he's got to outline if he isn't backing in the Government's savings measures, where do the new savings come from, and how is that he and his Shadow Treasurer reckon they can get the budget to surplus a year earlier?
On arrangements to pass the budget, of course we'll get the budget through, and let me say this, the test is really not on the shoulders of the crossbench today, it's on Tony Abbott's shoulders. Is he going to walk into that Parliament and say ‘here I am again with a strategy to smash the budget surplus and to increase cost of living pressures for Australian families'? Is that what he's going to do tonight?
HOST: Two quick questions before you go, I know you've got to get going, but electricians, the Master Electricians Australia have raised concerns about the set top box, scheme that this could lead to safety problems like the home insulation program. What's your response to that, this is the peak body, Master Electricians Australia?
PM: Well let's get the facts on the table Kieran and I'm very glad you've asked me. 38,000 of these set top boxes have already been installed. We've worked with the peak body on designing the scheme and the credentials for the people who do the installations  -  they have to have been in the industry for more than a year as well as pass other tests. When we're talking about the set top box, we're not talking about the cheapest one you can go and get from an electrical store, we are talking about a quality set top box that has the right design features so it can be used easily by older people and by people with disabilities, and of course the cost for this doesn't just include the set top box, it includes the full installation of it, it includes assisting the pensioner, someone on the full pension, some of the most poor people in this country, assisting them so they know how to use it, so they don't end up without TV, and then it comes with a 12 month support package, so if at any point they get confused, or something goes wrong and they've lost their television coverage, they've got someone to rely on.
So that's what is going into this program, and who's it for? Well it's for the poorest Australians, older Australians, full pension rate, disability pensioners who without assistance may, the day after the digital switchover on TV, no longer have perhaps the only companion in their life which is the TV set. Now I think Australians are pretty generous of heart and they know a lot of older people struggle with new technology and they would say it's the right thing to do to assist the poorest Australians with a new technology change.
HOST: So you reject the safety concerns from the people body then obviously?
PM: Well we've worked with a peak body in the design of this scheme, 38,000 done already Kieran.
HOST: Ok, and just one last question, the Opposition's making a lot of the fact that the Treasurer did not know when the last surplus Labor handed down was. Shouldn't he know that and, I mean, do you have the opportunity now to correct the record for the leadership of the Government? What was it?
PM: Oh Kieran I'm not going to play this silly game, distraction, distraction, distraction. Tony Abbott must come into Parliament tonight and talk about the surplus that matters now for Australian families. Anything else just silly game playing from an Opposition desperate to distract from the fact that one reason Tony Abbott isn't Prime Minister is he can't work out how to run the finances of this country.
The last time he tried in the election campaign, Treasury found an $11 billion black hole. Now let's just be clear, last budget reply night, Tony Abbott didn't give any figures, he deferred to Joe Hockey, who then deferred to Andrew Robb, who made such a hash of it his own press secretary couldn't bear to watch it. Then Treasury, an $11 billion black hole during the election.
One of the reasons Tony Abbott isn't Prime Minister is because of that black hole. Then the flood funding package earlier this year, couldn't add it up and huge divisions on the Liberal frontbench about how to do it and it just didn't add up in the end. Tonight's the test for Tony Abbott, is he going to be a risk to the budget surplus, toour economic strategy which is all about jobs, bringing the budget back to surplus and ensuring that we are not adding, through inflationary pressures, to cost of living pressures on the shoulders of working Australians.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, appreciate your time today, thanks.
PM: Thank you very much. 



PM: I'm here with Chris Evans, who's the Minister who will lead the implementation of the skills package we announced in the Budget on Tuesday night, and we're very pleased to be here at CIT, and I think the backdrop behind us is telling us the story  -  change the course of your life.
What our focus on the Budget, on jobs and skills is all about, is allowing people to get better opportunities in life, to literally change the course of their life. We know that if a young person gets an opportunity for an apprenticeship, that all-important trades ticket, then that will change the course of their life. It will mean that they've always got skills that can get them a job.
We've met today with some young apprentices who are doing remarkable things. Young people from the South Coast as well as here in Canberra, people who have decided to focus on getting an apprenticeship, getting skills, getting a trade.
We've also met today a mature-age apprentice, someone who had been to university, studied for a university qualification, but decided that they did want to go into the hospitality industry and into a trades apprenticeship. It's that kind of person we had in mind with our Budget reforms, so that you could move through your apprenticeship more quickly if you could show that you had the competencies needed to do the job.
In the Budget on Tuesday night, we announced a $3 billion package to focus on skills. It has at its centre nearly $560 million where we will partner with industry to provide new training opportunities  -  opportunities we know are relevant for the jobs of the future, because industry will work with us, using this fund.
It's part of a bigger package as our focus on opportunity in the Budget continues.
Now, the Budget on Tuesday night was all about getting the nation back into the black, bringing the Budget to surplus in 2012-13, exactly as promised, but the Budget on Tuesday night was also focussing on keeping our economy strong so that Australians could the have the benefits of jobs and opportunity - and opportunity starts with getting a job and opportunity starts with getting the skills you need to get a job, and for many of our young people an opportunity starts with a trade apprenticeship.
During the global financial crisis, we acted to protect jobs and also to protect apprenticeships. As our economy now moves to full capacity, we will be there, working to create jobs and create training opportunities, particularly for young Australians.
When Australia last had an economic downturn, it took more than a decade for trade apprenticeship completions to come back up to the level that they were before the decade. During the global financial crisis, we didn't want to see young Australians miss out on that trade opportunity; end up missing out on a start in life, because they came of age during an economic downturn, and I'm very pleased to report that because of our investments, trade apprenticeships are now at record levels. That's a very important part of the efforts the Government has made to ensure young people do get a start in life.
I'll turn now to the Minister, who will talk about the skills package, and then we'll be very happy to take questions.
MINISTER EVANS: Thanks, Prime Minister.
I'd just, I suppose, make a couple of points in relation to a couple of the key measures in the Budget.
Firstly, to say that the measures are designed to make sure that we have enough skilled people to meet the demands of industry. That's why it's very much an industry-led approach. We're working with industry, partnering with them, to produce the workers that they need, so people going directly into jobs that are in short supply.
Two of the measures that are keys to the Budget  -  one is the mentoring initiative, which is about addressing the very serious problem that we have very high drop-out rates among young people doing apprenticeships and traineeships. Up to 50 per cent have failed to complete their course of study, so the mentoring program is designed to make sure we support those people through their study; that we get more completions and therefore more tradespeople and more skilled workers.
The other aspect is the competency-based program funding, which is designed to assist the sort of person that the Prime Minister just spoke about, someone who's been out in the workforce for 10 or 15 years, looks to get a trade qualification. Under the current system, many are told you've got to do the full four years, the same sort of requirement we put on a 15- or 16-year-old, on someone's 30 and had 15 years' experience. It doesn't make sense. It's the sign of an old system that needs changing, and the reform program this government will look to provide better competency-based and accelerated traineeships and apprenticeships, so we get people with skills more quickly.
There'll be no loss of standards. We'll be assessing the competencies, but we shouldn't expect a 30-year-old to have to wait four years to get the same qualification if they can prove they've got the skills. That's a very important reform, and if you focus on the fact that we're heading for huge demand for skills in the next few years, any capacity we have to get people able to use those skills more quickly is a very important part of responding to that challenge of the skills shortages.
There are a lot of people working in industry, people who've worked as trades assistants and others who have been working for many years who, with a short period of time, 18 months, 2 years, could get up to trade qualification standard.
So, that's very much a key to the reform agenda. It's one of the measures the Budget's the very much focussed on, and it'll be a large part of what we do in terms of negotiating with the States to drive reform and cut through on some of the antiquated rules which prevent us graduating the skilled workers we need.
Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey say that you are, in the Budget, trying to attack aspiration. Should we really think that people are going to not make the best they possibly can for themselves and their children for the fear of losing a small, relatively, Government benefit that's actually really targeted at battlers?
PM: Well, first and foremost, let's deal with the facts, and then deal with what this Budget is about.
Of course, what you're referring to is some of the decisions the Government has taken on family payments. Let's just be clear about the decision the Government has taken. We have decided to pause indexation of the thresholds. What that means is that in the next year around two per cent  -  two per cent  -  of families who would have got family benefit will not get family benefit.
What it also means is well over 90 per cent of Australian families will get more family payments than they have in the past, because the rate of payment will continue to increase.
Now, the Government took this decision because we want our family payment system to be sustainable today; sustainable in 4 years' time; sustainable in 40 years' time. So, it's the right thing to do for us to make sure our family payments are sustainable. It's also the right thing to do to make sure that more than 90 per cent of families get increased payments.
And I would also note this on Mr Abbott's response  -  I mean, Mr Abbott, two years ago, when the Government took comparable measures, criticised the Government for being too soft. Now he's out there criticising the Government for being too hard.
Now, the reality the Budget the Government delivered on Tuesday night is all about keeping our economy strong, getting the budget back into black, extending opportunities to Australians: the opportunity to get a job; the opportunity to get training; as well as extending to Australians the kind of services that they want and need today, including an historic investment in mental health.
The challenge for Mr Abbott today and tonight isn't to carp about the Government's Budget  -  it's to explain to the Australian people what he stands for on budgeting. We know one of the reasons Mr Abbott is not Prime Minister is because Treasury concluded he was an $11 billion risk to the budget surplus.
So, tonight he's got to explain to the Australian people if he doesn't back our savings, what are the credible alternate savings measures he's proposing.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) budget, that message is not getting through. Why is that? Is Wayne Swan actually a good enough job? Do you have confidence in him as an economic salesman?
PM: We'll, I'm very confident you'll report the facts.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Just on the question on aspiration, do you think that, what do you say on Tony Abbott's claim that you are somehow attacking aspiration?
PM: Well, of course the claim is completely untrue and absurd.
The Budget is all about jobs and opportunity: jobs and opportunity to enable people to aspire to a better future and a better life; to enable people to get a better future for their children. So, I understand Mr Abbott is wandering round desperate to distract from his inability to make the figures add up.
Tony Abbott will deliver his Budget reply tonight. Well, that's got to be about the Budget, and it's got to explain what he would do as Prime Minister.
I mean, three times he's gone out to the Australian people with a set of figures. Last Budget reply night, complete shambles; during the election campaign, an $11 billion black hole, such a risk to the Budget surplus; and here, here earlier this year, in Parliament House in Canberra, they were unable to explain an alternate flood funding package.
Well, tonight, if Mr Abbott's got criticisms of the Budget savings that the Government has made to get the budget to surplus in 2012-13 as promised, then he has to outline alternate, credible savings or back the Government's Budget in.
JOURNALIST: How do you think he will go?
PM: Well, that remains to be seen, but if he doesn't walk out of that parliament having explained where his savings are coming from, if he doesn't accept the Government's savings, then he will have failed a very major test.
Let me just say it again  -  one of the reasons Mr Abbott isn't Prime Minister is because Treasury concluded he was an $11 billion risk to our budget. Now, that matters. It matters to cost of living pressures. It matters to adding to inflationary pressures. It matters to the strength of our economy.
Tonight he's either got to accept the Budget as it is, or he's got to explain the changes he would make and that has to be a credible explanation which passes the Treasury test.
No more laughable saves that Treasury just chucks out because they don't pass the laugh test, and Mr Abbott, with a wave of his hand if wandering around saying he's already got $50 billion worth of savings. Well, $11 billion of those Treasury concluded were simply wrong. They were a black hole. And the rest of them he's already spent on commitments he's made to the Australian people.
He walks into that parliament tonight with zero saves in his pocket  -  absolutely zero  -  so anything he says about the Government's Budget, if he wants to spend more, he's got to identify the save. If he wants to knock back one of our savings, he's got to identify the matching save.
And in truth, if we were going to hold him to Joe Hockey's test, he'd actually have to be explaining how he'd get the Budget to surplus a year earlier than the Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what message are you hoping to send to the Australian people by lifting the Government cap on borrowing up to $250 billion?
PM: Well, the legislation, of course, has been introduced to the parliament today. I think the Australian people understand we had a summer of natural disasters. They were directly impacted themselves, or they watched with horror those images on their TV screens, and whilst at the time, of course, all of our focus was what was happening to our fellow Australians, now we are seeing the economic impact of those natural disasters. They've hit the Budget in lost revenue. They've hit the Budget because we need to spend more, of course, to rebuild Queensland, rebuild the nation.
And then weren't the only ones that suffered over the summer. We also saw New Zealand suffer, and then we saw the tsunami and earthquake in Japan, and that, too, those natural disasters overseas, have hit into company revenues and hit into the Budget.
So, when they see the need for the Government to introduce this legislation, I think Australians will understand those kind of factors have hit into the Budget.
But, when we look the Budget we know that the Australian economy is going to be coming to full capacity. That's why it's very important to return the Budget to surplus, and we will, as promised.
We're waiting till tonight to see how big a risk Tony Abbott is to that budget surplus, consequently how big a risk he is to the economy, how big a risk he is to adding to inflationary pressures and cost of living pressures on Australian families.
JOURNALIST: Do you know how long it would take to repay a quarter of a trillion dollars in debt under your Government?
PM: Yes, the debt profile has been moved out by one year, so the debt will be repaid before the end of the decade.
JOURNALIST: Does the Coalition need to clarify, itself, on its foreign aid budget?
PM: Well, that's a very interesting point. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition has verified that the Coalition stands shoulder to shoulder with the Government with a bipartisan target about foreign aid. Now, I assume Tony Abbott, therefore, endorses our foreign aid expenditure, and anything else from him is just the usual kind of negativity we see from Tony Abbott.
On every statement made by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the Opposition fully supports the Government on our foreign aid expenditure.
JOURNALIST: Will you have the Treasury cost the Opposition's Budget in reply? Are you going to get Treasury to have a look at the figures?
PM: Well, let's see the Budget reply. I'm hoping that there are figures in it.
JOURNALIST: Will you be in parliament for the Budget reply?
PM: Yes, of course. I'll do what Prime Ministers traditionally do, which is attend the Leader of the Opposition's Budget reply.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Treasurer was asked this morning and couldn't answer the question, I was just wondering if perhaps if you were able to tell us the last time Labor delivered a surplus?
PM: Yes, I can. It's 1989-90, but very happy to play a pop quiz with you. Highest taxing government in Australia's history  -  anybody got the answer? Anybody? You've heard Mr Abbott talk about tax a lot  -  highest taxing government in Australia's history? What's the answer?
JOURNALIST: Would it be the Coalition?
JOURNALIST: I don't know.
PM: What's the answer?
JORUNALIST: You tell me.
PM: The Howard Government, of which Mr Abbott was a senior minister.
So, every time any of you, or indeed the Australian people, ever hear the word ‘tax' come out of Mr Abbott's mouth, in any context, the question to him is ‘what does he say, having imposed the highest taxes on this nation that have ever been imposed on it?'
JOURNALIST: Would you like to be a journalist?
PM: Well, all I ask for is accurate, detailed reporting. Highest taxing government? Tick  -  Tony Abbott.
JOURNALIST: Can I then ask you about the desalination plant in Victoria? Reports of very large increases in pay  -  is your Fair Work legislation enough to contain a wages break out, and are you worried about it, the possibility of it?
PM: I'm standing with the current Minister responsible for all of this, but the Fair Work system is an enterprise bargaining system, so people working on a job, whether it's a desalination plant or construction of a building or working in a factory or working for an office-based business can sit and bargain with their employer to work out what works for their business.
So, under the Fair Work system the outcome in one enterprise bargain does not flow to other enterprise bargains.
Now, of course we are seeing the economy come to near full capacity. That's what the Budget strategy is about, and we know when the economy runs hot that you can run into constraints  -  the economy gets hungry for workers, it gets hungry for skills, it gets hungry for infrastructure. That's why we've invested in each of them, and that's about addressing the inflationary pressures I presume you are concerned about and that has motivated your question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, where is the Treasurer? He was supposed to be here this morning, is he still recovering from busting a glass?
PM: Number one, the Opposition, with next to no notice, withdrew his pair. So you may want to ask them about that  -  hasn't been done before, to my knowledge, that a pair's been withdrawn on that kind of notice.
Number two, Wayne Swan did smash a glass this morning. That's less important than Tony Abbott smashing the Budget surplus tonight.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Manus Island, what's your advice? There are conflicting reports this morning that the PNG is Cabinet is going to sign off it, that there's a split. What has Chris Bowen told you about the solution or the deal that's being worked on at the moment? Are you going to get personally involved?
PM: Well, I read reports in the newspaper about my degree of involvement in PNG, and they're all wrong, so the Government will keep working through with PNG the way that we have been. The matter is under discussion.
Thanks very much
JOURNALIST: Have any of your MPs raised any concern about backlash from the Budget
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: Have any Labor MPs raised any concerns with you about potential backlash from voters on the Budget?
PM: No. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today said the Government's $2.2 billion mental health package will provide invaluable assistance to young Australians who suffer from a mental illness.
The 2011-12 Budget delivers a key election commitment made by the Prime Minister to make mental health a key second term priority for the Government.
This package includes $419.7 million over five years to significantly increase youth mental health services including the expansion of two programs pioneered by leading mental health expert Professor Patrick McGorry - headspace and Early Psychosis Prevention and Intervention Centres.
The Prime Minister, Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon and Minister for Mental Health and Ageing Mark Butler met with former Australian of the Year Professor Pat McGorry and CEO of Headspace Chris Tanti at the headspace centre in Sunshine, Victoria to see how important these facilities are to young people aged 12 to 25.
A total of $197.3 million will be provided to triple the number of headspace centres across Australia from 30 to 90 to provide young people aged 12 to 25 a place to go to get the care and support they need.
When fully operating, these centres will be able to help 72,000 young people across Australia each year, providing a youth friendly environment where young people can feel safe, respected and supported.
The Gillard Government's mental health package also includes $222.4 million in Commonwealth funding for 12 new Early Psychosis Prevention and Intervention Centres (EPPIC) to be delivered in partnership with the states and territories.
These new centres will be modelled on the existing EPPIC centre, an integrated psychiatric service for young people in Melbourne's west, to provide professional help for young people who require more specialised and intensive treatment.
Together with the four EPPIC centres funded in the 2010 Budget, this means that there will be a network of 16 EPPIC centres, subject to matching funding from the states and territories.
http://www.headspace.org.au/
http://www.eppic.org.au/



Prime Minister Julia Gillard announced Victoria will today receive $500 million in upfront funding to help with the rebuilding of crucial infrastructure damaged by recent flooding.
The Gillard Government has signed a National Partnership Agreement with the Victorian Government that will allow for the advance payment to be made today.
The Prime Minister made the announcement during a visit to the flood-damaged Victorian communities of Clunes and Creswick with the Member for Ballarat, Catherine King.
With the signing of the Agreement, the allocation of funding is being fast-tracked so the State Government can focus on providing assistance to Victorian communities most in need.
The $500 million will be used to help rebuild essential infrastructure such as bridges and roads.
The Prime Minister also announced joint funding of grants worth up to $25,000 to help Victorian small businesses and primary producers clean up after heavy rainfall in March. 
The Gillard Government has also extended the deadline for applications for the Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy until 31 May this year.
This extension recognises the fact that some primary producers who were inundated by floodwaters remain unable to raise an income from their land.
In Victoria, almost 100 townships across 27 municipalities and more than 3,000 properties were disaster-affected by floods.
The Federal Government is providing more than $6 billion to support communities in meeting the cost of floods, cyclones and bushfires that have devastated many parts of Australia over the summer.
Victorians affected by the flooding have already received more than:
 * 	$36 million in Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payments (AGDRP) to help them with immediate relief
 * 	$2 million in Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy payments to assist employees, small business operators and farmers who lost income as a result of the flooding.
Nationally, more than one million AGDRP payments have been made through Centrelink, providing around $812 million to people across the country who are in real need.
A further $72 million in income relief payments have been made Australia-wide.
Catherine King said some communities in the region were flooded three times in five months and Ballarat recorded its wettest January on record.
The communities of Creswick and Clunes were hard hit but locals are working hard to rebuild their communities.
The National Partnership Agreement provides for the Reconstruction Inspectorate, led by Mr John Fahey AC, to oversee reconstruction activity to provide assurance that value for money is being achieved in the disaster response in Victoria.
The Queensland Government has also signed a National Partnership Agreement with the Federal Government for natural disaster reconstruction.
For specific information about NDRRA assistance made available in response to specific disasters visit www.disasterassist.gov.au



The Prime Minister of New Zealand, John Key, will visit Australia from 19 to 21 June as a guest of the Australian Government.
During the visit Prime Minister Key will become the first New Zealand Prime Minister to address the Australian Parliament.
Ms Gillard became the first Australian Prime Minister to address the New Zealand Parliament earlier this year.
Prime Minister Key will hold formal meetings with Ms Gillard and other members of the Cabinet.
Australia's relations with New Zealand are the closest and most comprehensive we have with any country. The relationship is built on a firm foundation of strong government, business and people-to-people links and shared values and history. Prime Minister Key's visit will provide an opportunity to further strengthen and energise the trans-Tasman relationship. 



PM: Well I'm very much enjoying my visit to this headspace in Sunshine. I'm joined today by Professor Pat McGorry, who probably needs no introducing, but has been so important to ensuring that there are these kind of facilities around Australia for our young people.
I'm also joined by the Minster for Mental Health, Mark Butler, and by Bill Shorten who's here in his capacity as local Member. So we've much enjoyed the visit here today.
On Tuesday when the Government announced the budget we announced a $2.2 billion mental health package. As we've made clear it's been a pretty tough budget, there are cutbacks in the budget and we're absolutely determined to get the budget back to surplus by 2012-13 as promised.
But even in a tough budget we wanted to make available money for those things that we really value, and believe are of incredible importance to the community. As I said when I was with Pat earlier this week, I grew up the daughter of a psychiatric nurse and I did, through his eyes, have some understanding of the state of our mental health system then. It was a mental health system that was changing from being a very closed in system to one which was engaging more with the community. And then of course since my father's retired, change has continued to happen very rapidly and Professor Pat McGorry has been one of the leading Australians driving that change. And now we understand that if you can reach out to the community, if you can have people come in to a space where they feel comfortable like this one, if we can have them access services early then that can make a real difference to them and their lives. And through Pat's work we know that there's no more important time to reach out and offer a service to someone that when they're young, it's when people are young that they are most likely to actually confront some of the most serious mental health conditions, but Pat's work has shown that we can make a difference if we are there helping people and helping them early.
So headspace is about having a good opportunity to get involved and get a service, somewhere where young people feel comfortable, somewhere where they can get a range of services rather than getting referred all around town to get the services they need.
Here at this headspace in Sunshine today I've met with young people who have told me stories about their own mental health conditions and about how they got the service they needed here. They found out through school, they found out through school, they found out through the local public hospital, they found out through friends that this service was available here and everyone of them has talked about how much of a difference it's made. 
I've also had the opportunity to meet some great ambassadors for headspace, young people who have used the service and who are now supporting the service by being a young person's reference group, so a service for young people can also be capturing the ideas of young people about how to get better.
I'm very pleased that in our mental health package from Tuesday night's budget, that we are expanding the number of these services around the country from 30 to 90 and we are also expanding the number of EPPICs services which are there for young people who have some of the more profound conditions.
I'll turn now to the Minister for Mental Health Mark Butler to say a few words, and then to Professor McGorry, and we'll just at this stage if people have questions on mental health, and then when we've taken those questions we might ask Professor McGorry to step to one side and we'll take questions for the day.
MINISTER BUTLER:Well thank for Prime Minister and thank you Professor McGorry for being with us here this morning. Melbourne's west really is the birthplace of this type of innovative mental health service that's been pioneered by Professor McGorry and was a centrepiece of the mental health package released in this week's budget. As the Prime Minister has said, we are scaling up headspace services across the country in exactly the way that headspace has asked us to do. We're also significantly increasing the resources provided to each and every headspace service around the country so they can do more, provide more services, innovate more, reach out to schools and other places where young people congregate to provide an even better service to young people.
Mental illness is quite unique among major health conditions facing this country in the sense that it doesn't emerge in middle age or older age as most do, it emerges in youth. So, we need to find services that young people feel comfortable reaching out to, and this has been the wonderful thing that Professor McGorry, headspace itself and others have been working on for some years now and I'm just wonderfully proud of the fact that youth mental health services like this were at the centre of this week's budget so over to Professor McGorry but thank you very much to headspace for having us here today and for the work that you've been doing now for some years.
PROFESSOR MCGORRY: This is a fabulous Australian story, it's absolutely terrific to see the Prime Minister here today listening to the stories of the young people and one of the things we had to overcome in developing this whole area, which was a missing stream of care in our health system, was a sense of confidence that if we did actually put the right times of services on deck and provide timely treatment, timely help for young people, they could actually respond and their own resilience would come to the fore and we heard some wonderful stories this morning about that.
So this is a fabulous team effort, it's a great Australian story, and it's going to make a very big difference. Also in much broader ways it's going to strengthen our country because it's going to mean because it's going to mean that young people can rightfully take their place in the workforce, and contribute to the strength and productivity of the country because as the Minister just said, the big thing about mental health is that it does strike people in the most productive years of life, and we've just accepted that until recently, we've just been happy to sit by and watch that happen, but now I think we're seeing Australia, of all the countries in the world, is really showing the way in how that could be turned around and I think other countries are going to be looking to us for the results of this program. So I'm very, very grateful that we've received such tremendous support and I'd like to acknowledge all my colleagues and all the young people and everyone involved with headspace and EPPIC and Origin for making these things possible.
We've got a big job ahead of us, we've got to make sure the implementation of these decisions made by the Government this week is done in a very effective way, I think that these are precious dollars as the Prime Minister said, they've been hard won, we've got to make sure the implementation phase is done right just the way headspace is does right in the last three or four years. We've got 30 of them already scaled up in a very short space of time, working very well, they can really hit their straps now and they can be backed up what's absolutely essential which is the effective rollout of the EPPIC program to back them up as the Prime Minister pointed out too.
That will really transform mental healthcare in Australia, and shrink the number of people who do end up socially excluded and marginalised around the country, and it's really the antidote to failed deinstitutionalisation I think, we've really worked it out now and we've got to get on with the job.
So thank you very much.
PM: Thanks Pat.
Thank you very much, you would have heard me all week that the budget's been about jobs and opportunity as well as getting the budget back into black, it's also been about the things that we most value and it's a pleasure to join everybody here today  -  an example of the kind of service we most value and the kind of service Australians need available to them and we've heard some great stories.
So very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how much of this is actually new money, the Coalition says once you break it all down it's only about $600 million in new expenditure, how much is it?
PM: Well you wouldn't want to believe some of the figures you get from the Opposition, if you ever a figure, which is a hard thing to do, but I'll get Mark Butler to go through every dollar and cent for you.
MINISTER BUTLER: This package is $2.2 billion over five years  -  more than $1.5 billion announced in this week's budget and more than $600 million announced over the course of the last 12 months. Of that, that is all new money. There are some redirects incorporated in that $2.2 billion amounting to $580 million, particularly recalibrating the rebate general practitioners get for consults within Better Access. So, from now on they will get a rebate which reflects the standard consults in Medicare, which are time-based, plus a premium of 27 per cent for the fact that this is a mental health consult and not a standard consult.
So, there are significant redirections in the Better Access program, those redirections are based on an evaluation of the program that was received by the Government a couple of months ago and has been endorsed by a number of organisations including the Australian General Practice Network, Consumers Health Forum, Professor McGorry, and a number of others have endorsed that as a proper redirection of funds to areas of need.
So it's $2.2 billion of new measures, partly funded through a redirection of $580 million but otherwise all new money. That is in stark contrast to Tony Abbott's health policy last year which was entirely funded through trashing health reform measures that included the e-health record, better primary care infrastructure for local communities, more targeted funding arrangements for our hospital system instead of continuing to send states a blank cheque, and the after hours GP hotline. Now, Tony Abbott would have us believe last year that you could either have health reform or you could have mental health reform. What we've shown this week with our package is that you can have both and you should have both.
PM: Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is the West a priority area for the rollout of these mental health services considering the disadvantage?
PM: Well we're standing here in one great service and obviously the services are going to be allocated to areas of need. As I know from my capacity as local Member Melbourne's West is growing and so it's a great place to meet a lot of young people and we do have to keep up with that growth with services, but in terms of selections of the sites I'll turn to Mark to explain in detail how that'll be done.
MINISTER BUTLER:Thank you Prime Minister. headspace is an independent company with 5 owners if you like  -  Orygen, which is the organisation that Professor McGorry has headed up for some time, the University of Melbourne, the University of Sydney, APS, the Psychological Society and the General Practice Network.  It has a board, it is independent from Government and it takes applications, if you like, from local communities around questions like need. I can tell you when headspace board Members go to Parliament House, they are mobbed by local Members of Parliament of all parties because their communities are telling them that they need a headspace service in their community, so this will be an orderly process.
It is deliberately at arms length from Government so that local communities, GPs, mental health professionals, youth mental health services, can make an evidence-based application to the headspace board about their degree of need.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that Qantas' move to set up a business offshore might be a way to get around local industrial conditions?
PM: Well the Fair Work is the right system for Australia, it's of course overwhelmed the great disadvantage that Tony Abbott's Workchoices brought to working people in this country. Tony Abbott is fond now of talking about peoples' cost of living, well when he was a Minister of course peoples' cost of living was under assault because they didn't know week to week whether or not their pay packet would be the same, or they'd get ripped off by Tony Abbott's Workchoices.
So we've done the right thing by getting rid of Work Choices and creating the Fair Work system, it enables people to bargain, and to get the terms and conditions that best meet the needs of their business.
We want to see Australian jobs growing and they are growing, we've created 750,000 jobs since we were elected with half a million more to come in the next couple of years, so a strong record of jobs growth.
I certainly don't want to see any Australian jobs not continue in this country and we work with businesses to try and maximise Australian employment and I think having created 750,000 we've got a pretty good track record on doing it.
JOURNALIST: Is it the right thing to do though to establish yourself in Singapore so you don't have to pay your pilots and crew and everybody else, it's an Australian company and Australian conditions which it looks like Qantas is doing?
PM: Well I'm not going to comment on one business' decision, what I am going to say is of course, as Prime Minister, I want to see people properly paid and properly rewarded for the work they do, that's why I got rid of Work Choices and created the Fair Work system, so that could happen.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Tony Abbott's demanding an early election, Bob Brown said this morning that there will be no early election. Do the Greens have the power to dictate when an election will be?
PM: Well you're referring to Tony Abbott's statements during his budget reply speech last night. What the Australian people saw last night was 30 minutes of the mindless negativity that Tony Abbott has become known for. Just 30 minutes of absolutely mindless negativity. I mean this is getting to the stage where it's almost a national joke, if I announce today it's Friday, I anticipate Tony Abbott will ricocheting around the country saying ‘no that's not true.'
I mean that's all we heard from Mr Abbott, just negativity, mindless negativity.
But it's not funny because of the serious side, and the serious side is Mr Abbott did not step up and explain his approach to the Government's budget surplus. He's still a risk to that budget surplus and if he puts that budget surplus in risk, that's the same as just stomping down on the accelerator for peoples' cost of living.
So Mr Abbot, even though he failed to do it last night, needs to explain to the Australian people does he support the budget coming back to surplus? Is he going to support the Government's savings to get that done? Or is he going to be a risk to the budget surplus, a risk to the economy, a risk to jobs and a risk to peoples' cost of living?
JOURNALIST: Do the Greens have the power to (inaudible)
PM: This parliament will go full term. I will decide when the election will be, and it will be in 2013.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, the Greens, you'll have to negotiate with the Greens to get your Budget through. Are there any non-negotiables from your side of the fence? Company tax cuts?
PM: You're question is predicated on assuming gross irresponsibility from Tony Abbott. Now, I can understand why you'd make that assumption, given his track record, but first and foremost Mr Abbott has to answer the question he absolutely failed to answer last night.
I mean, he basically walked into the parliament last night and said ‘I don't want to talk about the Budget, I'm not going to talk about any Budget legislation, I'm not going to say anything about that, I'm just going to complain and moan for 30 minutes.' That's what he did.
Well, that's not good enough. He's putting himself forward to Australians to be considered as Prime Minister. Well, if you want to be Prime Minister you've got to make the Budget add up.
In terms of the Government's Budget legislation, the voice we've got to hear first is Tony Abbott's voice. You've heard from the Government. You know we're trying to achieve a Budget surplus in 2012-13. We need Tony Abbott, who's asking the Australian people to consider him as an alternate Prime Minister to say does he support getting that surplus and the Government's savings measures? Until we hear from him, I'm not going to be diverted into discussion about the Greens or the crossbenches. This weight is on his shoulders  -  is he a risk to the Budget, a risk to jobs, a risk to the economy and a risk to people's cost of living?
JOURNALIST: Will you guarantee that your set top box scheme won't end up being like other schemes, and why won't your population strategy have a target for (inaudible)
PM: Well, I'll take those questions in turn, and thank you for the opportunity to explain what's happening with the set top box arrangements, which I don't think have been very well explained in the media to date.
This is a program to make sure that some of our poorest and most disadvantaged Australians don't wake up the day after the switchover to digital TV with a blank screen in front of them.
For many of those Australians who aren't very mobile, who don't get to go out very much, the TV is their companion. It's very important to how they live their lives, and I know that Mr Hockey has been tossing his head and sceptical about all of this. Well, do Mr Abbott and Mr Hockey really want thousands of the poorest and most disadvantaged Australians to wake up with no TV service; to take away from them that very small pleasure in life? We'll, we've-
JOURNALIST: -The question, though, is about (inaudible)-
PM: -And I'm coming to the question. Well, it starts with, do you want to do it? What are your values? Do you care about poor and disadvantaged people? We do. We care about their access to TV. That's why we've got the program. Ask him the question - does Mr Abbott care about those poor and disadvantaged Australians?
So, step one: let's get the answer to that.
Step two, then let's talk about the mechanics of the scheme. The $350 is there to fund a quality set top box that is suitable for people who aren't good with technology and may have disabilities to use. That is, it is not the cheapest set top box on the market, and deliberately so. It's the set top box that will meet the needs of these Australians.
The $350 also pays for its installation  -  someone to come, put it in, make sure it's working and explain how it works to the pensioner in the home.
It also comes with Centrelink reaching out to pensioners. We don't want them just waking up the next day after digital TV going ‘what's happened to my TV screen?', reaching out to them, explaining digital TV, explaining the need for a set top box, and then getting them in the program.
And it comes with a full 12 months of support, so that if something goes wrong and the pensioner who's not understanding what's happened with the set top box can get the support they need to make sure they've continuing access to TV. That's what the $350 is for.
So, anybody who's just out there comparing this with the price of walking into an electronics store and buying a set top box is not understanding the scheme and not putting a fair comparison out.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask, PM, the Greens have suggested a $2 million pay cap for chief executives as a condition of getting through your exec pay reforms Bill - through the lower House yesterday, it's up to the Senate. Do you think that's in any way reasonable?
PM: We've got our own approach to executive pay, and we'll be sticking with it, which is we want shareholders to have more say on the pay of executives. We think that's important. We also think it's important that executive pay in this country is internationally competitive. We want to make sure we've got the best and brightest here in Australia running businesses in this country.
So, the Government will be sticking with its approach.
JOURNALIST: $2 million doesn't seem to be internationally competitive. (inaudible) 
PM: We've got our own approach and we'll stick with it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you about the incident on Sydney Harbour Bridge this morning, and is a national security concern?
PM: Look, I'm not aware of the incident on the Sydney Harbour Bridge. I've been in transit before I came here, so we'll get back to you on that.
JOURNALIST: You haven't been briefed on the Sydney Harbour Bridge-
PM: -I've come here straight from the airport and been here for the hour, as you've seen, walking around, talking to young people, so we'll get back to you on that.
JOURNALIST: Why have you sent Bob McMullan to be on the European Board of Reconstruction, or the Bank, sorry, of Reconstruction, a body you said you were going to abolish?
PM: Because Bob McMullan is a quality person. He left politics with an incredibly high reputation. He served this nation ably in very senior portfolios, including as Minister for Trade, and the Bank has gone under considerable restructuring and refocussing since the days of our earlier criticism.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Premier Ted Ballieu has labelled the Budget as a disappointment to Victoria, particularly because of the deferrals in the infrastructure program, including the upgrade of the Princes Highway. What's your response to his-
PM: -Well, what I would say to Premier Baillieu and to people around the country is we did work with State governments to agree the deferral of some infrastructure in order to free up the money we needed to engage in flood recovery, including here in Victoria. We needed to free up resources so that we could re-build the nation.
We also need to make sure that we weren't trying to roll out so much infrastructure at the same time that there weren't enough people around to build it and to get it done. That is, we didn't want to put price pressures on infrastructure.
So, we needed to resequence in order to have money to rebuild from the floods. We needed to resequence so that we could get the job done at a value for money price. That was the right thing to do.
In doing that resequencing, we went to governments like the Victorian State Government and asked them to work with us and to agree what could be resequenced, and Premier Baillieu and his people were directly involved in that process.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) your population strategy doesn't have any target (inaudible) why not?
PM: Well, my concern as Prime Minister is to make sure that we have a sustainable Australia, where community by community we are doing the right thing to meet people's needs. There are many parts of our country that want to grow; many regional centres that want to grow, and a big part of the Budget on Tuesday night has been investing in the things they need to help growth, to make that they've got a better quality of life. I've been to any number of regional centres where I've met great people like the local doctor, who have said to me ‘I love it here, but I'm not sure I'll be able to stay when my kids are older because I'm not sure whether they can get the high school they need or university place if I stay in regional Australia. I'm not sure I'd be able to healthcare they need.'
So, our more than $4 billion of investments in regional Australia in this Budget were about making sure we are improving the quality of regional Australia  -  fantastic place to live now, a better place to live in the future, and I don't want the first port of call for migrants to our country to always be the growing suburbs of Sydney and Melbourne. We want people to go to our regions where there are job opportunities, particularly in the resources boom, and that's why we've created more places for immigrants to go to regional Australia.
And then we know a lot of people are on the roads, because they've got to travel a long way to get from home to work. My electorate is a classic for that  -  people travelling from Werribee a long way to work because there aren't the job opportunities locally. Through a $100 million scheme we will be working to help create local job opportunities.
That's my vision of sustainable Australia.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)-
PM: -Well, I've just explained to you  -  it's not about figures, it's about working with communities in exactly the way I've explained.
Last question.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) rising price of houses, what would you consider to be a household income that makes you well off?
PM: Well, you're making some assumptions from things you've read in the media, and let me just debunk a number of those assumptions. I think Australians at all sorts of income levels feel cost of living pressures on their shoulders. I think Australians whose households earn $150,000 a year feel those pressures on their shoulders too, which is why I've been so determined to deliver a Budget in surplus, because that's the right thing to do by the cost of living pressures for those Australians, to get-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible)
PM: Well, I'm answering your questions, and I'll finish the answer, thanks.
So, on those Australians, $150,000 a year, there's been a lot of publicity about it. The right thing to do for those Australians was to bring the Budget back to surplus in 2012-13, to not risk us adding to inflationary pressures, to not risk us adding more cost of living pressures on their shoulders, and we've done it.
And I think those families who do face cost of living pressures want to know a number of things. They want to know that they're going to get decent support when they've got their chid in childcare. We've increased childcare support from the days of the Howard Government, increased it profoundly  -  from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. They want to know their child's going to a great school, and we've increased resources and driven reforms in schools so they're a better place. They want to know that their young person can get an apprenticeship, and we've increased supports for apprenticeships and they are at record levels. They might want to know that they're kids are going to get a place in university. We've increased support in universities and they are growing and offering increased support in universities and they are growing and offering more places for young Australians.
And I suspect they want to know if someone in their family had a mental health issue that there would be services available for them.
So, in this Budget, we've made choices, and I'm happy to be judged by the choices I've made, like investing in services like this one. We've had to make cuts, too. That's the responsible thing to do, and we've changed our family payment arrangements, which mean two per cent of families will lose payments  -  two per cent.
The rate of fortnightly payment for support for children will continue to grow, and two percent of families will lose payments. I'm happy to be judged on the facts of this, not the rhetorical flourishes that we are seeing around the place.
And can I conclude by saying the OECD has launched another of its reports. The OECD , of course, does very important work comparing circumstances in different countries, and what it's concluded in its report today is under the Labor Government, the Federal Labor Government, people are getting to keep more of what they earn and they are surrendering less of their money to Government.
I would suggest that people have a good look at that OECD report. This is important information for people to consider.
Thanks very much. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning. Welcome.
PM: Good morning, Barry.
HOST: And to that, you've said no election before 2013.
PM: Well, I think with his election call, what Tony Abbott was really saying to all of us is even he doesn't believe that his campaign of negativity can last all the way to 2013. That's why he's so desperate for an election now.
I mean, he was born to say no, and that's what he's been doing.
HOST: So you don't buy the argument that you need a mandate for a carbon tax?
PM: Well, I think all of this sort of melodramatic performance on Budget reply night was basically Tony Abbott needing to increase the melodrama in the moment, because he can't talk about the past - he can't talk about his support for Work Choices, his health care cuts, the fact that one of the reasons he's not Prime Minister is that he had an $11 billion black hole in his costings last election - and he's got nothing to say about the future, so the only option he's got is to puff up and be as dramatic as he can in the moment and just say ‘no, no and no'.
Ultimately, Barry, I think Australians are going to see through this and I think the fact that Tony Abbott is so desperate for an election shows that even he knows they're going to see through it.
HOST: But as it stands now, the carbon tax will be fully operational before people get their first opportunity to vote on it.
PM: Well, at the last election, Barry, of course I said to the Australian people we needed to tackle climate change by pricing carbon, and we will be pricing carbon.
Yes, of course, I also said that my preferred way of doing it wasn't a carbon tax. I wanted an emissions trading scheme, and we will get there, to that emissions trading scheme. I didn't mean to mislead anybody, Barry, but in the parliament that we have now, in order to get to that full emissions trading scheme with a floating price, we will go through a fixed price period, but that's about tackling climate change, and on climate change, of course, some days Tony Abbott believes in it, some days he doesn't, but to effective action to tackle climate he always says no.
HOST: OK, well, on the Budget now, and on the surplus, a surplus in two years, to what extent is that based on a wing and a prayer?
PM: Well, it's based on all of the normal modelling that Treasury does and Treasury forecasts, the same agency that Prime Minister Howard relied on and, you know, Prime Minister Hawke before him, and so the list goes on.
HOST: But did you take their most optimistic assessment and then run with that?
PM: No, we didn't. The terms of trade assumption in these Budget figures is a conservative assumption with the terms of trade actually slightly decreasing over time, so we've taken a very prudent approach, as advised by Treasury.
HOST: Now, on the family payments issue, indexing the thresholds, did you do that because the system is already unsustainable?
PM: Well, we did it because we want the system to be sustainable for the long-term, not just over these four years of the Budget period, but over the next 10 and 20 years, and Barry, I think there's been a fair bit of carry on and mischaracterisation of these measures.
This is a pause in indexation. It will affect around two per cent of families. Rates of payment, fortnightly, will continue to go up, so that's the sort of change that we've made.
We made a comparable change in the past, and then Tony Abbott supported it, and indeed said it didn't go far enough  -  it wasn't tough enough. Now, we can't have, you know, people like Tony Abbott lecturing on the one hand ‘get a bigger Budget surplus or a sooner Budget surplus', and on the other hand criticising every cut we make, and the media coverage which has suggested that somehow I or the Treasurer think people on $150,000 are rich is completely ill-informed. We've never said that.
What we've said is we need to make our system sustainable, and of course we will target benefits at families most in need. This is a measure that affects two per cent of families.
HOST: So, you're not saying that they're rich, but what are you saying about them, that their comfortable enough to get on without welfare, that it's time to stand on their own two feet?
PM: What we're saying to families on $150,000 a year is the best thing we can do for them is keep the economy strong, make sure that they've got the benefit of work and opportunities, make sure that we're not adding to inflationary pressures. We need to deliver a Budget surplus so we don't add to inflationary pressures as our economy continues to strengthen, because that would flow through to their cost of living.
Of course, Mr Abbott is a risk to all of that. He hasn't told us yet whether he will oppose or support the Government's cutbacks. That is, he hasn't told Australians yet whether it's his intention to blow the Budget surplus, to risk increasing inflationary pressures, and to risk greater cost of living burdens on people's shoulders, including people who earn $150,000 a year or more.
HOST: Yeah, but when I say ‘what are you saying to these people?', you are saying to them, aren't you, that at $150,000 they no longer need welfare?
PM: What we're saying to them is we have a means-tested system of support for families. We always have. There's always been a point at which benefits cut out. We are choosing to keep that point the same for two years so that we can get sustainability in the system. There will still be benefits-
HOST: -And just for two years?
PM: Well, we paused in the past Barry, so the current-
HOST: -And then extended it.
PM: And the extended it, that's right.
HOST: So you might extend it beyond two years?
PM: Well, Barry, we've made the decision in the Budget that you've seen, but we're still saying to those families, and let's be very clear about it, in terms of their access to things that government provides: they want childcare, and they get the childcare rebate at higher levels as a result of the actions of this Government; they want their child to go to a great school, and their school will be better because of the actions of this Government; they may need the public hospital system in the middle of the night with an emergency with one of their children, and that hospital will get the benefits of our new investments and new health reform; they may want their son or their daughter to get an apprenticeship or a university place, and we're investing in both of those.
HOST: But back to that question, though  -  you said it's a two-year freeze. If the Budget is in surplus at the end of two years, would you then lift the freeze?
PM: Our intention is to stay with what we've announced in this Budget, Barry  -  not to add to it.
HOST: For two years.
PM: That's right, so the family payment system would go back to the normal indexation arrangements after that.
HOST: Now, the newspaper have done case studies on people earning $150,000 and they constantly make the point that they don't feel as if they're rich. What have you been, your reaction is, to see these case studies through the week, and you see so many people stepping forward and saying ‘well, I don't feel rich.'
PM: Well, I'm not surprised by that, because no-one's every said they are. I haven't, and the Treasurer hasn't. We understand that people can struggle with cost of living pressures earning $150,000 a year. We understand that, and one of the reasons we're so determined to bring the Budget to surplus in 2012-13 is to make sure we're not adding to inflationary pressures and adding to the cost of living pressures which would go on their shoulders.
To do that, we've got to make a series of choices - tough choices, not easy choices  -  and pausing indexation and affecting two per cent of families was one of the choices we made, whilst we continue to increase the rate of family payments fortnightly for other families, and of course whilst we bring new benefits for families with teenagers, because the family payment system has been an old-fashioned model which somehow assumes kids are likely to leave school at 16 and draw their own pay packet. In the modern age we know that's not true, we need to keep them at school, so we've increased benefits for teenagers provided they're engaged in full=time education.
HOST: Can we talk about the surplus? The debt, the net debt, is at $106 billion, or will be next financial year. When will that start to fall, and when can you reduce it, when can you cut it out all together?
PM: Debt will be paid off by the end of this decade. That's what the Budget papers are telling you. We can only do that by returning the Budget to surplus, so once again we see the problem with Tony Abbott just engaging in negativity and saying absolutely no to everything.
If you no to the savings, then you put the Budget surplus at risk. If you put the Budget surplus at risk you risk increased inflationary pressures, increased cost of living, and of course you also increase debt.
HOST: Now, Tony Abbott's Budget in reply speech, and the reviews are in. I'll just give you a couple of things that people are saying.
Paul Kelly wrote ‘zero for economics but infused with the killer instinct.' Graham Richardson said ‘pathetic as a response to the Budget, but littered with little gems that strike chords in the lounge room.'
So, this is fairly typical, I think, of the commentary coming in. The consensus is that you're putting out policies but Tony Abbott is trashing you on the politics.
PM: Well, I just don't accept the thesis behind this commentary.
Australians, ultimately, don't judge politicians on whether or not they see them make a nice speech - they judge politicians on what they're going to do for people's lives.
People sit in their homes, they sit in their workplace, and they think ‘gee, I need a job. I need the economy to be strong. Who's got the best plan for that? I need my child to a great school. Who's got the best plan for that? I need decent healthcare? Who's got the best plan for that? I need to make sure my working conditions are fair to me. Who's got the best plan for that?'
And across all of those areas Tony Abbott's basically said bored by economics, bored by creating jobs, bored by health reform, except the cutbacks he's been historically associated with, nothing to say on improving schools  -  and the list goes on.
HOST: But there's this constant criticism in the media that your Government is not getting the message through. Why is that such a struggle?
PM: Well, we get the message out there, Barry, as best we can. We've explained this Budget up hill and down dale, and we will continue to do so.
Of course, in terms of newspapers and media outlets, they'll make a selection about what they want and what they put in these media outlets, but we will be there, patiently explaining.
Barry, I think in terms of the kind of commentary we see here, and the comparisons, you know, I'm determined to be building a better nation. I don't concern myself with the 24-hour media cycle and the day-to-day political plays. I'm there, out delivering the policies this nations needs for its future.
If you like, I'm there as the architect as we're building the nation, building this new building. Tony Abbott's interesting because he's like the kid with the baseball cap on backwards, going past shouting a slogan and spraying some graffiti. Well, it might be intriguing, but it's not leadership.
HOST: OK, on asylum seekers now, and the first boat has arrived since your new policy, in effect. The Malaysians are not ready to take them, I gather?
PM: Well, we are working on the agreement with Malaysia. Of course, last weekend I released the statement between me and the Prime Minister of Malaysia, with our commitment to enter this agreement.
HOST: So, where will they go, if Malaysia is not ready?
PM: Well, Barry, I don't think it's any mystery to anybody in Australia that we are in discussion with Malaysia, and I released the statement with the Prime Minister of Malaysia. We are working with PNG as well. We will hold these asylum seekers, pending removal.
The message here to people smugglers and to asylum seekers in the pipeline is don't come to Australia expecting to be processed, because you won't be. You will be held, pending removal.
HOST: So you're saying that you will hold them, perhaps, until Malaysia is ready to take them?
PM: We will hold them until we can remove them.
HOST: On the population debate now, no targets and no projections, but how do you properly put in place all the appropriate infrastructure and services ahead of time if you don't have numbers in mind?
PM: Well, you've got to understand growth patterns community by community.
We've got parts of this country that want more growth. There are some regional areas that are desperate to grow because they've got great job opportunities there. We can be working with them to get that growth, get more migrants there - that's what the regional visas are about - and working with them on the infrastructure they will need to support that growth. That's one of the things that will happen out of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
Then, in our outer suburbs, we've got pressures of growth. We can work with communities to deal with that congestion, and to deal with things like people driving a long time to get to work. We can bring more job opportunities locally, and there's a Budget measure to deal with that.
We, of course, can work, too, with our capital cities on innovative solutions for the pressure that inner city suburbs feel, and all of those things are dealt with in the population strategy, and many of them have been dealt with in the Budget.
HOST: But when Treasury says it's inevitable that Australia will have a population of 35 million by 2050, wouldn't it be prudent just to accept that and then plan for it?
PM: But the plan, Barry, is a plan that makes sense in communities. I mean, we are going to see growth in some communities. We will see other communities that don't grow. So, we've got to understand this community by community and be meeting need.
There's no point saying let's have a lot of people go where there are no jobs whilst communities that have got jobs are crying out for more people. That's that the population strategy that we've announced is about - sustainability and getting people where they are needed - and that's what the Budget measures are about, more migrants into regional Australia, more investment in regional Australia.
Regional town are already a great place to live, but many people think ‘gee, can I spend all of my life here? What about when my child needs a great-quality secondary education? What about when they need a university place?'
The investments that we are making in regional Australia will mean it's a great place to live throughout your whole life cycle.
That'll make a difference to regional growth rates, and often the jobs in our modern economy are in regional Australia because of the strength of the resources boom.
HOST: And, finally, I feel as if I should get down on one knee and ask this question - are you going to marry Tim?
PM: Barry, it's not necessary for you to get down on one knee. Indeed, I'm not sure what the viewers would make of that.
There's a lot of publicity about this this morning, Barry. We're very happy the way we are we. We've got no present plans. There is, to use the phrase of your panel, no rock on the finger, so I think everybody can just say, well, we're a happy couple and that's a good thing.
HOST: And he did actually say that, ‘we're happy with the way things are', and that's how you feel as well.
PM: Yes, that's how I feel as well, Barry. If we need to discuss this on the Insiders, that's how I feel as well. There may be some words exchanged during the course of the Bulldogs-Richmond match later today, though. Tim's a Richmond supporter.
HOST: Thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: Thank you very much to DB Schenker for having me here this morning. I've had the opportunity to talk to a number of people who work in this business, including a number who are upgrading their skills through training.
The recent Budget was all about jobs and all about opportunities for Australians. We want to make sure Australians have the benefits of work, and we want to bring more opportunity to Australians, including by investing in their skills.
The Budget contains a $3 billion skills package, and that's because as Prime Minister I want more Australians to enjoy the benefits and dignity of work. Our economy will be hungry for workers and I want those people who haven't had an opportunity who are outside our workforce to get the skills and training that they need to get into work.
But I also want to make sure that people who work for businesses like this one have the opportunity to upgrade their skills, to get the next job, a better job, to be on a great pathway in life. I've talked to some individuals who have been doing just that, and the Budget enables us to invest more in that kind of training.
We have, in the Budget, a special skills fund to work with businesses so that we can partner with business and create training opportunities that are what industry wants today. It will create 130,000 training places.
Now, I know on a lot of occasions Australians are anxious when they hear about training places, that maybe it's a lot of training but it's not going to lead to a better job for people. What's great about partnering with industry is we end up creating the training that industry needs.
We know that businesses want that training done, because we are working with them in delivering that training.
At the same time that we will be investing with industry in upgrading training, we will be investing to reform the system. Our training system does need reform. Around 1.7 million Australians study in our training system, but unfortunately, each year only around a third of students complete their course. Now that's telling us that we need to do better with our training system.
So, a big part of the Budget is investing for reform to make sure that our training system is higher quality, more transparent and more matched to the needs of industry.
This is all part of a Budget that was about bringing more opportunities to Australians, making sure Australians have the benefits of work. We are determined to make sure we keep our economy strong so Australians can enjoy its benefits through a job and through training, getting a better job for the future.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you been satisfied with the way the Government is selling the Budget?
PM: Well, we're out here today talking about something that's very important to all Australians - jobs and training. That's what the Budget's about: more jobs and better jobs for Australians through enabling them to get better training.
JOURNALIST: But do you think that message has penetrated? I mean, is it getting a fair go, in terms of reception?
PM: Look, we'll just be out there explaining to Australians what the Budget is all about. This Budget is the one our nations needs now. We have an economy that is growing in strength, and by 2012-13 it will be running at near full capacity. That means it's hungry for workers, and I want to see Australians get those opportunities, get the benefits of that all-important job, and through training be able to improve the jobs and opportunities that they have.
JOURNALIST: Are you frustrated with the Government seemingly just can't take a trick in terms various initiatives, like the Budget, like the Malaysian (inaudible)? Are you getting frustrated with the reception of all these?
PM: As Prime Minister it's my job to be explaining what we need for this nation's future, and that's what I'm doing with the Budget. There's nothing more important to me than making sure Australians have the benefits of work. There's nothing more important to me than making sure our education system is giving Australians opportunities.
I've been personally involved in reforming our schools education system and in reforming our university system. It's time now to turn our attention to vocational education and training.
So I'm very happy, as Prime Minister, to be out there day after day working to improve the opportunities for Australians. That's what the Budget's about  -  better opportunities for all Australians through access to work and access to training.
JOURNALIST: And yet day after day they're seemingly being rejected. At least, that's how the headlines would have it, and that's how today's poll results would have it as well.
PM: Well, I'm very happy as Prime Minister to be out explaining what this Budget means and what the Government's doing.
The important thing for Australians is for the economy to be strong. We know that our economy is strengthening, and that's a good thing, but it does bring with it pressures that need to be managed, and that's why we've been determined to return the Budget to surplus in 2012-13, determined to ensure Australians have the benefits of work. 500,000 more jobs will be created over the next couple of years, and that comes on top of three quarters of a million jobs that have been created since the Government was elected, and I'm passionate about making sure Australians get the benefits of education and training.
I'm turning my attention, through this Budget, to skills and training for Australians like the Australians I've met here today who are very enthusiastic about the opportunity to get a new skill and get a new qualification and improve their prospects at work.
JOURNALIST: Based on that poll result, though, can you claw this back in terms of your own popularity as Prime Minister? (inaudible) past the point of no return?
PM: I've got one focus, and my focus is on keeping the economy strong so Australians have got the benefits of jobs, and on making sure we're doing the right things to spread opportunity.
When I first spoke to the nation as Prime Minister I spoke about the benefits and dignity of work; I spoke about my passion for education; and I spoke about the kind of respect I want Australians to show each other.
In the recent Budget we've delivered on those things that I believe in  -  a strong economy, the benefits of work for Australians, bringing opportunities to Australians who have been left behind, my passion for education on display as we work to improve our skills training system, and of course the Budget is about the kind of respect I think Australians want to show each other, particularly through the new mental health package.
JOURNALIST: What does this say about your personal approval rating dropping today? Is that a reflection on the work you've done on the Budget?
PM: Well, we'll keep explaining what the Budget's about, the Budget is about one thing  -  it's about making sure the economy is strong and Australians have the benefits of that opportunity.
I'll keep working and explaining that. It's important for every Australian that we do the right thing to keep our economy strong. This Budget is the right budget for Australia today.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Particularly as Prime Minister, can I say this to you: the important thing is what happens for Australians in their workplaces and in their homes; what happens for them in their lives. There's nothing more important to making sure people have got a decent life, an opportunity in life, than having a job and having more skills and training to help them get a better job.
That's the focus of the Budget, and that's what I will keep working to do as Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: Do you think you need to change tack in how you communicate that to the people, and to stop them, you know, the Coalition, gaining momentum in the polls?
PM: Look, my focus is on getting the job done, that the economy needs today and that Australians need done today, and that focus is about having a strong economy, delivering more opportunities for all. That's what the Budget is about, that's what the Government is about, and we'll keep doing that work.
JOURNALIST: Well, aren't the polls a representation that you're not getting the job done, if you're losing favour with them?
PM: The real impact of this Budget will more jobs  -  half a million more jobs for Australians. Now, I think Australians understand very, very deeply that if they don't have the benefits of a job, if they don't bring home that all-important pay packet, that for them and their families life would take a fairly grim turn. It's very important for people to have the benefits of work.
It's also really important for people to have a hope in the future and that if they work hard, if they upgrade their skills, that they can get a better job, that they can progress over their working lifetime.
That's what we're here talking about today  -  a $3 billion skills investment which will help people who haven't had the benefit of work to get into work. It will also help working Australians like the ones I've met today to get an opportunity for a better job by getting a new qualification, and we will be reforming our training system. It's got to work to meet the needs of the Australians who study within it and Australian business. That's what the reform agenda is about and it's what partnering with businesses like this one is all about, too  -  making sure that training is right for the jobs of today.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) a number of Labor backbenchers who are feeling uneasy about how Labor is faring in the polls. Are you feeling under threat?
PM: I'm feeling very determined to keep doing what the Government needs to do to keep the economy strong, to keep Australians in work and to bring to them more opportunities.
JOURNALIST: Why do you think people are so unhappy with things as they are at the moment? (inaudible) good things about the Budget?
PM: Well, we'll keep talking about the good things in the Budget, and we're doing that here today.
JOURNALIST: Two significant wage claims are being decided upon today. What does that mean for the costs of government and business if they do go that way?
PM: Well, thank for the question, and in the middle of today we will have the outcome of an equal pay case for the social and community services sector, and what I'd say about that case  -  obviously, the outcome is to be decided later today and so I can't speculate on the outcome, and I won't  -  but that case has been made possible by the fact that I and the Government got rid of Work Choices.
Let's just remember what it used to be like under Work Choices, when Mr Abbott was in Government and was spruiking the benefits of Work Choices to Australians. What Work Choices meant was you could have your pay cut, have your overtime taken away, you could be sacked for no reason at all, and there was no effective way under Work Choices for people whose occupations had been historically undervalued, dismissed as women's work, to get anything that looked like pay equity.
Well, we fixed that when we got rid of Work Choices and replaced it with the Fair Work system, and I certainly don't want this nation to ever go back to the days of people going into work and wondering if that was the day that they'd get dismissed for no reason; wondering if that was the day that basic conditions would be stripped out of their pay packet, like an entitlement to overtime.
Of course, Work Choices was Mr Abbott's system. I got rid of it. We've replaced it by the Fair Work system, and that's what you'll see working today.
JOURNALIST: Do you think there'll be uncertainty surrounding Australia's borders and your move with Malaysia may be having an effect on how people are feeling at the moment?
PM: I believe in strong border protection and we have entered a commitment with Malaysia for an innovative, new agreement which will make a difference. I released around about a week ago now a joint statement with the Prime Minister of Malaysia committing us to enter an agreement which would help break the business model of people smugglers.
What they're trying to do is sell a ticket to Australia and processing of asylum claims in Australia. We are trying to take that very product out of their hand. That's why I've been very determined to send a message that claims won't be processed in Australia. There's no point getting on a boat because your claim won't be processed, but we will continue to work through with Malaysia, and it's also very clear to Australians we've been in discussions with PNG.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday a Brisbane man died in a new craze called planking. What's your message to people who are thinking of taking part in these kind of planks?
PM: Well, I guess there's a difference between a harmless bit of fun done somewhere that's done really safe and taking a risk with your life. This is a really tragic thing - there'd be a family that's just devastated today  -  a really tragic thing. So, my message would be everybody likes a bit of fun, but focus has to be on keeping yourself safe first.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) reports over the weekend, may you be attending your own wedding (inaudible)
PM: I dealt with those reports yesterday, but thank you for the inquiry.
Thank you very much. 



The Australian Government sends its best wishes to all Italians celebrating the 150th anniversary of Italy's unification this year.
Italy will officially celebrate 150 years of being a united country next month.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard said Australians have enjoyed and continue to cherish the wonderful contribution Italians have made to our community over many generations.
The Prime Minister said we have deep historical ties with people of Italian origin that even pre-date Italy's unification.
The Governor-General will represent Australia at a celebration event marking the anniversary of Italian national unity in Italy next month.
At the Prime Minister's request, the Governor-General will attend the event on June 2 in Rome following an invitation from the President of the Italian Republic, Mr Giorgio Napolitano.
The Prime Minister said it is fitting that Australia's Governor-General takes part in the celebrations, in light of the immense contribution the Italian community has made and continues to make to Australia.
The Governor General will represent all Australians, including more than 850,000 who have identified as having Italian ancestry.
During a wider visit to Italy, the Governor-General is expected to have an audience with Pope Benedict XVI as well as a meeting with the Secretary of State, Cardinal Bertone.
Her Excellency will also visit Domus Australia, the Australian Catholic Church's newly renovated building in Rome.
The Governor-General will participate at the Australian Pavilion for the Biennale and thank major Italian donors for their contributions to the relief effort for victims of the recent Queensland, New South Wales and Victorian floods.
Her Excellency has also been invited to visit Spain by King Juan Carlos I and Queen Sophia, who made a State Visit to Australia in 2009.
The Governor-General will take the opportunity to visit the Navantia dockyards at Ferrol, where HMAS Canberra and HMAS Adelaide are being constructed, and which supports our growing defence procurement program.   



Thank you very much for that introduction and can I say I'm very much looking forward to the panel discussion which will follow my opening remarks, and can I acknowledge my panellists, of course Paul Kelly who will be moderating the discussion, Kerry, Gail and Steven and I will do our best to shed some light on contemporary circumstances, but before we get there I've got the opportunity to speak to you about the Government's view following the Budget last week.
I and my colleagues, including Penny Wong, the Minister for Finance, who is with us today, came to the task of framing the Government's budget at a time of transition, a time of transition where we believe global economic might is transitioning from west to east. This is not a temporary phenomenon, though of course it has been on display during the global financial crisis, but it is the movement of our times. The history of this century will be written in the Asia-Pacific.
Second, it's a time of transition for our domestic economy, as we transition from sluggish growth following the global financial crisis, to facing capacity constraints as a huge resources boom comes to our nation, with literally billions and billions of dollars of investments in the pipeline  -  hundreds of billions of dollars.
Now, the fact that we're talking about a movement from sluggish growth to rapid growth, in and of itself, should be cause for congratulations, because so many countries around the world haven't experienced growth of any dimension in recent days.
We came out of the global financial crisis strong. We came out strong largely by working together - the Australian Government working with Australian businesses to preserve Australian jobs. We engaged in the right measures to protect employment whilst the world confronted the biggest global economic shock since the Great Depression, and now we move from that period in our domestic economy, to one where we will be looking at record terms of trade driving growth.
We know that this growth will be driven at different rates in different places. It's what I refer to as ‘the patchwork economy', and we understood that challenge of difference from community to community as we put the budget together.
The third transition that confronted us as we put this budget together was the transition in energy usage that our economy needs to make. We need to decouple economic growth from emissions growth - that is part of what we have to do to make sure that we have prosperity in the future.
And there was a fourth major transition also confronting us as we framed this budget: that is, the continued transition in technology, particularly in information technology, which confronts our nation and confronts our world. Increasingly economic success is defined by seconds  -  the seconds in which you can get information  -  and there's no prizes for coming second, and so our technology revolution in this country had to continue.
So, days of global transition, days of domestic transition, days of energy transition, days of technology transition. These were all in our minds as we framed the Budget announced on Tuesday night.
We're also confronting the impacts of natural disasters, not only here in our own country, but around the world. We've lived through a dreadful summer and I continue as Prime Minister to confront the Australians who still rebuilding their lives from that dreadful summer, most recently last Friday I was in country Victoria, meeting with people who had been flooded three times.
So, those tales of human misery have joined together to have a profound economic impact. So, as we put this Budget together we knew we were confronting circumstances that had written three quarters of a per cent off GDP; that was going to knock eight and three quarter billion dollars off the budget bottom line.
So, a challenging set of circumstances in which to deliver a budget that would stand the test of time and matter as we shaped our future, but I came to this task and the team I lead came to this task determined not only to confront these transitions but to shape that future.
We do not believe in allowing the future to be shaped by forces unleashed in our world and our economy. We believe that we have a responsibility as a Government to lead and to actively shape our future, and so we brought a spirit of can-do to these circumstances and you see the outcome of that spirit in the Budget document.
We decided to engaged in a transition of our own, a fiscal transition. The biggest fiscal consolidation this nation has been in 44 years, a rapid consolidation to a budget surplus in 2012-13, exactly as promised, because that is what our economy will require as we move to stronger and stronger growth and near capacity constraints.
That did require the making of tough choices and we didn't shy away from any of them. Inevitably that will cause some short-term commentary and we've seen some of that on display, but ensuring that we were not, as a Government, adding to the inflationary pressures which will be in our economy as a result of it coming to full capacity was the key driver in our fiscal choices in this Budget - the right thing to do by the nation and we're ensuring that it's getting done.
We also determined in this Budget to meet a resources boom with an opportunity boom, to make sure that across our nation Australians have the benefit of the opportunities that this resources boom could bring. That's why at the centre of this Budget you've seen participation and skills measures. I am very determined as Prime Minister that we harness this record period of economic growth to make a long-term difference to disadvantage in this country and to the opportunity of Australians in their own lives.
I determined most particularly that you would see participation measures at the heart of this Budget, because it is not satisfactory to me that I can meet with business leaders day after day and hear them talk about skills shortage and I can visit communities on the same day that continue to have double-digit youth unemployment rates and continue to be home to people who lead lives of quiet disadvantage outside society's mainstream.
So, we determined to meet a resources boom with an opportunities boom, with new participation measures for our young Australians, so it is very clear to them from the earliest of days that you must be learning or earning, there is no third choice of taking yourself outside the labour market and into what will be a life of disadvantage as a result.
That we could step up during this phase of economic growth, to offering more opportunities for people with disabilities, many of whom want to work, but who have not been extended an opportunity; that we could use this phase of economic growth to make a difference to the very long-term unemployed; that we could use it to make a difference to the participation rate of Australian women in work; and consequently we determined to engage in reforms for women who had been left behind by earlier welfare-to-work measures, particularly mums of teenage children.
And we determined to send a message, as well as make a saving, by the abolition for younger women of the dependent spouse tax offset. In the modern age, of course, we expect adults of capacity to work, and we sent a message, too, by bringing forward the low-income tax offset, so some of our most low-income workers could see, pay packet to pay packet, the benefits of their work.
And whilst the mental health package has rightly been reported as a health measure to meet the needs of Australians today, the health care needs that so many Australians have, the mental health measure itself is a participation measure  -  ensuring that we do not allow mental illness to take Australians, particularly young Australians, beyond the reach of the benefits and dignity of work.So, we determined to meet a resources boom with an opportunities boom by getting more Australians into work. We also determined that we needed to make sure that Australians had the benefit of new skills and new opportunities for training. That's important for people as they step up to work, but it's also important if we are, within our businesses and industries, to harness the best of this phase of growth.
People are crying out for skilled workers and we can in part assist with that by making sure that Australians have the opportunities to get the skills they need. That's why I'm very proud that there is a $3 billion training packages at the heart of this Budget.
We are using this money to make a difference to training now, but also to use $1.7 billion to drive long-term reform.
We want industry at the heart of our skills system. I think many Australians worry when they hear the language of training places, because they worry that too much training is done with too little outcome - people who don't complete or people who don't get a job having completed - which is why putting industry right at the centre of our training system is so important.
Industry and businesses know what the skills are that they need, and if we can partner with you in generating those skills then they will have immediate economic benefits for the business as well as for the individual who has gained those skills.
So, we've determined to grow the number of places where we partner with industry by 130,000. We are also intending to modernise apprenticeships, providing more efficient ways of people getting the technical and trades skills they need and making sure more of our young people finish that apprenticeship, because an apprenticeship ticket is the equivalent of a great start in life.
As structural reforms in vocational education and training will stand alongside the human capital reforms I have driven in early childhood education, in school education and in university education and you will see in this reform agenda we revisit some familiar themes.
We will work with the States, but we will require better performance. We will require that training is better matched to future jobs growth; that TAFE is revitalised and students can build the links they need for broader learning for life and also for new opportunities if they chose to move into other parts of tertiary education.
Our $1.75 billion will drive an ambitious reform agenda. I will require transparency and we will reward the training changes that make a difference to completion. I want to make sure that our training effort is geared to the needs to our economy now, and that's what the $3 billion is all about.
This structural reform will be led by industry demand and that is necessary if we are better to align our training system with the needs of our economy.
This Budget, too, is driven by a better understanding of place. An opportunity boom requires us to understand that this phase of economic growth and economic development is not going to change every community in the same way.
I've been to communities in this country desperate to see growth, desperate to see more workers join their community, because jobs are literally going begging and people need them done.
I've been to communities in this country that are suffering the burdens of congestion, where the only way of getting a job is to jump in a car and to drive for a long period of time to reach somewhere where you can work.
Now we need to bring an understanding of place and the differential impacts of this phase of growth in our economy to the way that government works. We know the resources boom, driving as it is a high Australian dollar, is having a set of effects on tourism, on international education and on manufacturing that we need to understand.
Those effects are experienced by industry, but they are experienced by Australians with a sense of place, where they are in their communities, which is why measures in this Budget are more finely calibrated to have a sense of place than budgets in the past.
For example, our focus on regional visas for new skilled migrants, our focus on enterprise migration agreements, which will enable proponents of major projects with capital expenditure of more than $2 billion and peak workforce for more than 1,500 to have a purpose-specific migration plan. These reforms are important to that sense for place and differential impact in our economy.
So, the budget in one word, or in one sentence, in a story for you, is about getting back in the black. It's about making sure that more Australians experience the benefits of the resources boom. It's about making sure we do the things we need to do to keep our economy strong.
We will pursue the reforms at the heart of this Budget in tandem with our other long-term and profoundly economy-changing reforms  -  particularly our reform to price carbon.
We all know that we need to break the nexus between economic growth and emissions growth, and despite all of the huff and puff one would see in the daily media, in fact cutting our emissions by 5 per cent by 2020 is a bipartisan objective.
So, the only question we're asking ourselves, really, is what's the best way to get it done, what's the most efficient way to get it done: using a market-based mechanism or using excessive regulation? Well, I'm in the cart for the market-based mechanism and that's the reform that we will drive and deliver from 1 July next year.
And we will continue to drive our reform in the information technology revolution, the National Broadband Network, because it, in and of itself, will unleash a new wave of economic productivity. When I meet with the business community people understand  -  understand in their bones  -  the profound benefits of the National Broadband Network and we are determined to bring this technology to Australians right around the country.
As we move to the discussion phase of this event, I want to conclude by talking to you about the partnership that I believe exists between the Government I lead and the business community. It's a partnership that's been tested. It was tested during the days of the global financial crisis. It wasn't easy to work together under all of that pressure to maintain Australians in work, but we got that done and I thank you for it.
Now we have an opportunity for some new partnerships; some new partnerships as we move to this phase of economic growth; some new partnerships in providing opportunity to Australians. At the core of our participation measures are a number of programs to involve the business community in extending opportunity to Australians.
We want people to have a chance. That requires them to take an opportunity when it comes their way, it requires them to show responsibility when that opportunity comes their way, but it also requires someone to give them a chance and we will be asking you to work with us in offering a chance to some people who have been left behind, some people who have been left behind and are long-term unemployed, some people who have been left behind on the disability support pension, people who could use an opportunity if given an opportunity  -  I'll be asking you to do just that and hopefully we can work together to make sure that we extend the benefits of opportunity more widely to Australians than they've been extended before.
As we move into the conversation stage of today, I do want to conclude by reinforcing the need to for reform conversations. As Prime Minister, I lead a Government committed to reform and we, day after day, work as consultatively as we can to put together those reforms. Ultimately we will lead, and we have done, by the budget, having collected views across the business community and beyond as to how the budget should be shaped.
But reform leadership requires not just the Government to be out there as a proponent of the reform conversation. It requires all elements of our community to be in the reform conversation. We are a nation, I believe, with not a day to waste, not a day to waste in some of the more frivolous conversations that beset our national life. We need to make sure we are having a deep reform conversation about the changes our nation needs now, as we move into this history-making period of economic growth.
So, my challenge to you, to the nation more generally, is to be in that reform conversation. There are inevitably many issues that are intriguing in the moment, but we've got to look beyond those issues that are intriguing in the moment and work through those things that are truly momentous together.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today said the new Tamworth Sports Dome will offer unparalleled sporting opportunities for people in the New England region.
The Prime Minister joined the Member for New England, Tony Windsor for the official opening of the Tamworth Sports Dome in northern New South Wales today.
The Gillard Labor Government provided $5 million through its $1.1 billion Regional and Local Infrastructure Program to help build the indoor sports centre.
The Tamworth Regional Council also contributed an impressive amount, bringing the total funding to more than $10 million.
The new centre will cater for basketball, netball, indoor hockey, indoor soccer, volleyball, badminton and other indoor sports and activities.
The Prime Minister said the investment will bring significant economic benefits to the region, with all of the sporting activities expected to attract more than 3,000 people per week.
An economic analysis conducted by Sportex Pty Ltd estimates a potential market of over $13 million for the centre per year from major sporting events.
The completed work includes construction of a main sports hall with four multi-purpose sport courts, access and facilities for people with a disability, change rooms, a function area that caters for up to 250 people, a cafe, retail space, administration areas and car parks.
The Gillard Government's $1.1 billion Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program is helping communities build significant local projects such as the Sports Dome across Australia and is supporting thousands of jobs along the way.
The Government is providing record funding to support people in regional Australia  -  committing $4.3 billion to invest in regional hospitals, health care, universities and roads.
These investments, along with the National Broadband Network, will help improve living standards outside the big cities and help regional communities reach their potential. 
This Tamworth Sports Dome project created 12 full-time jobs during the construction phase.
Many new jobs have also been created with Tamworth Regional Council employing two full-time staff, signing two full-time contracts for cleaners and caterers and bringing on around six casual workers.
This project will have many benefits for the region. Tamworth is home to more than 50,000 people and nearby population centres include Manilla, Barraba, Nundle and Kootingal and another 17 hamlets and villages. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the Gillard Government will provide $20 million over two years to help people in New England get local training for much-needed local medical places.
The Gillard Government will expand the medical training facilities in both Tamworth and Armidale. This includes:
 * 	$15 million for a teaching and training facility at Tamworth on the hospital site;
 * 	$5 million to be provided to the University of New England for a student facility at Armidale.
The Gillard Government is determined to provide opportunities for people in New England to train and work in local hospitals and other health facilities.
These new opportunities will ultimately lead to better health services for everyone in New England community.
Speaking following a tour of Tamworth Hospital with the Member for New England Tony Windsor, the Prime Minister also confirmed the funding for 8 new medical specialist trainees and 16 new GP registrars in 2011 as part of the Government's specialist and general practice training programs.
The Prime Minister said today's announcement would complement the Government's commitment to fund the majority of the $220 million major redevelopment and expansion of Tamworth Hospital.
The Gillard Government's contribution of $120 million for the stage 2 redevelopment will provide:
 * 	2 new operating suites/procedure rooms;
 * 	4 new operating theatre recovery units;
 * 	6 new emergency department treatment bays;
 * 	an additional emergency resuscitation treatment bay;
 * 	additional overnight bed capacity, increasing by 10 beds;
 * 	an additional labour birthing room;
 * 	5 new special care cots;
 * 	7 new renal dialysis chairs;
 * 	an increase in chemotherapy chairs from 8 to 14; and
 * 	doubling the number of dental chairs from 4 to 8.
Finding room in this year's Budget for these investments illustrates our commitment to boosting regional health services.
Our investments will provide more beds, more operating rooms, more elective surgery and more specialist doctors for the people of New England so they don't have to travel to Sydney or Newcastle for treatment.
These projects will also stimulate jobs for the community and boost the local economy. 



PM: It's great to be in Tamworth and I'm joined by Tony Windsor, the local Member. I've had the opportunity today, with Tony, to formally open the Tamworth Sports Dome. This was part of the Government's economic stimulus package and a great partnership between the Federal Government and the local community. The Federal Government contributed $5 million, but that was well and truly matched by a very sizable investment from the local council.
I'm very pleased I was able to be here today to take part in the celebration at the formal opening and to see some of the kids that are going to be using that facility and are using it already to play netball and to play basketball.
I'm now here at the Tamworth Hospital and this is a hospital that is meeting growing local need and every step of the way we've wanted to work with Tony Windsor, with this hospital and with his local community to make sure that the facilities at this hospital could keep pace with local need.
We've invested more than $30 million in the cancer centre. That will be an investment including the State Government contribution of more than $40 million and you can see from the fencing that we've walked past today that construction work is about to get underway. We've walked through the current maternity section and as a result of us dedicating $120 million, that part of the hospital will be able to be replaced by a modern facility as part of the stage two developments.
This is a development worth $220 million, with a $120 million contribution from the Federal Government and it was great to be able to meet some of the staff there, to meet a young mum and her very small, very new baby. Obviously the staff are doing a great job in that section of the hospital, but the facilities do need to be replaced and I'm very pleased that we are able to make a contribution to their replacement.
I'm also very pleased to be able to announce today a further $20 million investment. This investment will go to the School of Rural Health. We've been through the training facilities that are currently being used to train young medical and allied health personnel right here in Tamworth. This additional $20 million investment will provide $15 million of investment right here, for more training facilities and student accommodation. $5 million of the $20 million will be invested at the university in Armadale and it too will participate in the training effort.
What all of this means is that more of the health workforce that this community needs can be trained locally and all of the evidence tells us that if people get a great quality training experience in a regional centre, then they are much more likely to stay in that regional centre when they start their professional life. So, the more doctors, the more allied health professionals we can train right here locally, will make a difference for the workforce in this community for many years to come.
I'm also pleased to be able to announce today that we will be backing this investment in and this training with some more training positions, by supporting 8 new positions to train specialists and 16 new positions to train general practitioners. I've been hearing as I've talked to the staff here at this hospital about shortages and how they affect the provision of health care here locally, so training efforts here locally will make a difference for being able to meet the health needs of this community.
I'll turn now to Tony Windsor and then we'll be happy to take any questions.
WINDSOR: Well, thank you Prime Minister and thank you very much for coming today, the community appreciated you being here. The announcement that the Prime Minister has just made, or the announcements, are tremendous for this community, and not only for this community, because the investment in medical professionals is about the future of rural medicos and allied trades  -  that's the wrong word  -  allied people that will provide services right across the nation. So, we've got a unique opportunity, I think, in terms of the relationship between Newcastle, the University of New England and this particular hospital and the teaching arrangements that will take place in this hospital.
And that's built on a very successful structure, the university's department of rural health, and the relationship that's grown over the years with Newcastle and the University of New England. So, thank you Prime Minister, we appreciate it. The $120 million, in terms of new building in concept with the State Government, I think you can see today that it is needed and it will, again, add value, not only to this community but to the teaching of medicos and others that will take place in this particular facility.
I'd just like to thank those people who were involved in the planning process, I think too often we overlook the hard work that people do put in. So I think they deserve congratulations, because if they hadn't been shovel ready they wouldn't have been able to pass the criteria in terms of the health and hospital funding arrangements.
So, thank you to all those people who put in the hard yards and no doubt you'll have to put in some more now. Thank you Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you. Happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Greens seems to have named their preferred price on carbon. Greg Combet says it will be ‘well south' of $40 a tonne, doesn't this put you at odds with the Greens?
PM: It just means we've got some work to do and we'll continue doing it. It's the right thing to do to price carbon and that price will be paid by the thousand biggest polluters in the country. Big companies, who currently can put carbon pollution into our atmosphere for free, the most efficient way of reducing that pollution is to put a price on it. Businesses will innovate, they'll change, they will generate less pollution and of course we'll use that revenue to compensate households, protect Aussie jobs and to fund programs that will tackle climate change.
So we're still working through, as the Minister has said, Greg Combet, the Government is aiming well south of that $40 figure. That figure comes out of a report released by Martin Ferguson in his capacity as Minister, and it was exploring a range of options for transition for what would drive clean energy transition. So, no one should read that as the government's intention.
JOURNALIST: How far south, would it be half of $40?
PM: I'm not here today to name the carbon price, we've got work to do and we'll keep doing it, but Minister Combet is right, that the Government's aim is for a price well south of the $40, named in that report.
JOURNALIST: Is it true though, this report questions if it's not at $40, is it economically viable?
PM: Certainly, the carbon pricing mechanism that we've announced is there to drive a change to the clean energy future we need to have. We've announced the mechanism, a fixed price for a limited period, then moving to what's called an emissions trading scheme, where you put a cap on the amount of carbon pollution your economy will generate and the market generates a price.
We've announced that mechanism, that mechanism is to drive change to a clean energy economy. People want to do the right thing by the environment and cut carbon pollution, that's what it's all about, we also don't want our economy left behind as an emissions intensive economy, when the rest of the world is changing.
So, all of the details will be announced in the middle of the year. I understand that people will speculate, I also understand that Tony Abbott will continue his fear campaign. What we'll do is the patient work, the methodical work, that's necessary to get all the details right and then we'll announce the details.I'd say to Australians that they should have a look at all of this when all of the details are available and they can look at the compensation their household will receive.
JOURNALIST: You're confident once July does roll around and all these details are available that will put to bed any uncertainty for the business community?
PM: Absolutely. The business community will have all of the details. The only uncertainty that will then exist for business is Mr Abbott's scheme to repeal carbon pricing and to rip out of the hands of households the assistance we've given them. So he's got a plan, once carbon pricing starts, to make households worse off, that's going to make households uncertain, people around the nation uncertain and of course it's going to make business uncertain too.
But the Government will be there to provide certainty to business about the way the carbon pricing scheme will work.
JOURNALIST: Do you agree with the Deloitte report that says even $40 a tonne won't be enough to switch coal fire power stations to gas?
PM: It follows from what I've said that our aim is for a price well south of $40 and we will obviously be aiming for a price that works to drive a clean energy transition.
So, this is a report released by Martin Ferguson, people can have a good look at it, but we are working through, as a government and through the Multi-party Climate Change Committee, in consultation with business, to get all of the details right. So rather than speculate on the one hand, or have people fear monger on the other, as Tony Abbott is doing, the best thing will be for people to judge when we announce all of the details in the middle of the year.
JOURNALIST: But you can appreciate that this fear mongering, or this speculation, is going to continue until the details are released?
PM: Well there's no excuse for raising fear in the Australian community and there's no excuse for blatant misrepresentations and that's what Mr Abbott has been engaged in  -  plucking figures out of the air and trying to terrify Australian households and small businesses with them. That's not a good thing to do, it's not the right thing to do, it's not the right thing to do by the people you're feeding false information to, it's not the right thing to do by our country. Our country needs to change, we need to cut the amount of carbon pollution we're putting in our atmosphere, we need to become a cleaner energy economy, that's what I'm determined to do and carbon pricing is the most efficient way to do that, because it gets the 1000 biggest polluters in our economy to pay.
JOURNALIST: Mr Windsor, can I just ask you about the carbon tax. Previously you have said that the Government possibly isn't selling the message as effectively, but also not to get too swayed by the polls, how do you think they're going at the moment, since last poll, selling this carbon tax?
WINDSOR: Well, I think we've got a process in place and I'm more than happy to be part of that process and that process is unfolding  -  we've had a meeting in Canberra this morning - the Multi-party Climate Change Committee. The Productivity Commission will have a report sometime in the not too distant future, the Treasury  -  there's a number of different reports to come through.
I think we make up our minds when we've got all the information and I think what's happening  -  and it's easy politically to pick a spot and say ‘well this is where it's at, let's attack someone for taking a position'. The situation is we're working through this quite critical process and then there'll be informed decisions made and, as I said, I'm more than happy to be a part of that.
JOURNALIST: What about people in New England, how are they feeling about the carbon tax? Is the uncertainty being felt here as well?
WINDSOR: Well, if you ask people about how they feel about taxation generally, they'd probably suggest that it's probably not a great idea, someone else should pay it. But if you ask them, if it's part of the Murray Darling system, are they prepared to drop off in rainfall for future generations, they'd probably have a different idea. If you ask them about where some of the revenue might go in terms of landscape and some of the technologies that are out there in the farming and grazing community they'd probably have a different answer again.
So, ask someone whether they agree with taxation is a fairly simple question and I think you'll get a fairly simple answer to it.
JOURNALIST: I mean this report today, it said that - possibly scaremongering  -  but electricity prices could go well past $1100 a year, can people in New England afford something like that?
WINDSOR: Well, let's wait and see. I haven't seen that number you're talking about, I haven't seen the report you're talking about. Electricity prices seem to be going up quite dramatically without any taxation arrangements being imposed on them and I'd suggest that's probably the result of an underspend at a State Government level, more than some of the scare mongering that's going on a the moment.
PM: And just on that question, can I say anybody who is representing that they can tell someone the changing electricity price is from pricing carbon is making the number up. When we announce all of the details we will be clear with Australian families about every detail of carbon pricing, about the price per tonne, the biggest polluters in this country will pay for putting carbon pollution in the atmosphere, that price means businesses will innovate and change and generate less pollution and then we'll use that revenue to assist households.
So before we announce any of those details, anybody who's purporting to give someone a number is making that number up.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, about today's announcement, has this extra money that's been announced for Tamworth and Armidale been made because of Mr Windsor's support of the Government?
PM: Certainly, Tony Windsor is a great advocate of his local community and makes sure that his local community knows how to engage with government processes and makes sure that government understands what this community needs. But we've been through a set of decision making processes that involve experts, for example our health and hospitals fund makes recommendations about the best investments we can make in hospitals and they recommended the stage 2 investment that we've talked about here.
JOURNALIST: Can other regional hospitals, such as the Dubbo Hospital (inaudible) some of this money that's been thrown at Tamworth what would they have to do (inaudible).
PM: No, there are proper processes here and the investment here has been through that proper process. So the same process applies to everyone and that is that the health and hospital fund experts look at applications and judge where the money can best be put to use. So, we've got to be clear about this, we've got a process involving experts who make recommendations and therefore provide advice to government about the best way of spending precious heath dollars.
Of course, Mr Windsor is a very vocal advocate of his local community's needs, that's understandable and that's appropriate, but when we look around the nation and engaging with the health and hospitals fund, the rules are being equally applied.
Thank you. 



HOST: G'day, Julia.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Oh  -  Prime Minister. Does it matter how I address you?
PM: Either is fine.
HOST: Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard, welcome to 2TM.
PM: Thank you very much. It's great to be here.
HOST: Welcome to Tamworth, welcome to the North West, and welcome to the house of Windsor.
PM: The house of Windsor  -  I didn't know he was related.
HOST: Well, did he ask you to come to this area, or did you come of your own volition?
PM: Certainly, Tony Windsor's invited me to be in his federal electorate, and we've got to do some great things whilst I've been here.
Yesterday, I had the great honour of opening, officially, the Sports Dome, and then going to the hospital, seeing the Stage 2 redevelopment plans. We've been pleased to be able to provide $120 million of funding for that.
HOST: A lot of money.
PM: It is a lot of money, and I walked through the maternity section as it is now and met some great staff and some lovely mums, but it is an old-fashioned building.
HOST: It is.
PM: You do need a new facility, and I'm glad Stage 2 will get you that, and I was able to announce, too, $20 million for more clinical education here in Tamworth and also in Armidale, because if we train health professionals in this community they're far more likely to stay when they're in professional practice  -  and you need them.
HOST: Yes. The Sports Dome itself  -  your opinion on it? I haven't seen it. What's it like inside? It must be enormous?
PM: I was amazed by the size of it. When you drive up it just looks huge  -  it is huge  -  looks huge. We walked into one bit of it and really had to get up to the second level to get the full view across, but it's a very impressive, very sizable facility, and we met a lot of excited kids who were there to play netball and basketball.
HOST: I've got to say, you go over very well with the younger generation. They love you. The kids loved you yesterday.
PM: I like meeting kids. They're the future, and my big passion coming into politics was making sure every child got a great chance in life, so I always like mucking around with kids  -  and they ask you the hardest questions.
HOST: The good thing about kids is they're so innocent, and they're not going to plot against you, they're not going to, like some media  -  ours excepted. They're not out to get you.
PM: No, they're not, but they can ask, in all innocence, some of the toughest questions.
HOST: Difficult. All right, Prime Minister, you have a vision for rural Australia  -  what is it?
PM: I do have a vision for rural Australia. I think it's a great place to live. People love the lifestyle. They come here out of choice. They want to make their life here, but there are some things that have held rural Australia back, and our regional towns: the tyranny of distance  -  it's been harder to trade, harder to get your economy going, and the National Broadband Network is going to make a huge difference to that.
HOST: Absolutely.
PM: The world will literally be one click away, so that will make a huge difference for businesses, and then I think there's been this sense that if you live in a regional town, well, maybe you have to sort of put up with second-class services. We can make a difference to that. We are making a difference here with the hospital and with things like the Sports Dome, and we want to continue making that difference with more than $4 billion in the recent Budget  dedicated - healthcare, hospitals, university, roads  -  in regional Australia.
HOST: All right, after this, of course, you're off to Armidale and the roll out of the NBN  -  National Broadband Network. Why Armidale? Why is it starting regionally? Is that an idea of yours, or maybe Tony Windsor's?
PM: Certainly, Tony Windsor has pushed hard to get the National Broadband Network, but actually, the decision about early release sites was taken by the NBN Co, the company that we have charged with the responsibility of rolling out the broadband, and what they wanted to do was to have release sites of different types around the country, so from those early release sites they could learn some lessons about the broader roll out.
So, Armidale is one of the early release sites, but, for example, a growth corridor in Adelaide, a metropolitan growth corridor, is one of the early release sites  -  different kinds of terrain, different kinds of issues, and that will help NBN Co learn the lesson as the roll out broadens.
I'm going to Armidale to do the pushing of the button and turning the NBN on.
HOST: More schools?
PM: I'm going via a school, I'm going to Tamworth Public School first.
HOST: More schools, good morning here in Tamworth. Look, it's a lightening visit, I know you have commitments. I'm going to let you go, but I want to ask you this, after your first year  -  it's not a year yet?
PM: No, it's not.
HOST: But your first year, how have you fared, in your opinion, the Gillard Government, in your first year of office?
PM: I think we've set about doing some of the big things that needed to be done. They haven't been easy things, and I know debates like carbon pricing are controversial and people are really trying to think it through, but we're methodically going about the things that we need to get done to make sure this nation has got a strong economy in the future and we continue that wonderful Aussie fair go.
So, the nature of choices in a democracy is you face some very difficult choices, but I'm a great optimist about this country's future and there's no challenge that's too big that we can't conquer it together, so even things like climate change, which seem big, big challenges-
HOST: -Well, they are.
PM: They are big challenges, but we'll get there together and we'll get this job done.
HOST: Let's be patient, folks, huh?
PM: That's right, and certainly on carbon pricing I am asking people for a couple of months of patience, and then they'll be able to see all of the details, all of the assistance to their households, sit there with the calculator and work it out rather than believing some of the silly fear campaign that's going on at the moment.
HOST: From some people.
PM: From some people.
HOST: Some quarters. Your report card so far, out of 10, what do you give yourself out of 10? Just give us the number.
PM: Oh, look, I don't think I would go for a number. I'd put on a report card ‘working hard and a lot more hard work to do.'
HOST: And I hope the time to do it, too. You're going for full term, of course.
PM: Look, I'm very confident the Government will go to an election on the ordinary cycle in 2013.
HOST: Will you make me a promise right now?
PM: I'll see what I can do.
HOST: I've got to say you look as great as you do live than in the papers or on television or whatever  -  present yourself very well.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: Will you come back in January and officiate in the festival next year? It's our 40th  -  I know what's on the cards, people are shaking their heads  -  would you come back in January and officiate for our 40th festival here? Have you been to a festival?
PM: No, I haven't.
HOST: It's unreal. We'd love to have you.
PM: Everybody who's ever come has given me a glowing report. You would know Simon Crean's been a bit of a regular, so he always comes back talking it up, so we will see what we can do, but the one thing you don't want is you don't want me singing.
HOST: How about line dancing?
PM: I'm not sure about line dancing. I'd be the one at the end out of step with everybody else.
HOST: Prime Minister, it's been a great pleasure.
PM: Thank you very much. 



HOST: I'm pleased to say Ms Gillard joins us on the line this afternoon. Prime Minister, good afternoon, welcome to Statewide.
PM: Good afternoon and thank you for having me on.
HOST: How's Tamworth at the moment?
PM: It's terrific, thank you very much - a gentle evening light.
HOST: A light has kept you busy today - there's a number of visions that have presented themselves, but certainly around Tamworth you've been busy opening the official area for the new sports complex there, again, Government-funded, or partly Government-funded.
PM: A fantastic partnership between the Federal Government and the local government. We contributed $5 million, but the local government stepped up and made a huge contribution itself and well supported by local sporting associations, local businesses and it's had a real sense of celebration to do the official opening today, and I've had the opportunity to meet with some of the young kids who are going to be playing there, so that's been a very special moment for me.
HOST: They'll certainly welcome it, as will the hospital. The local hospital in Tamworth has received a funding boost for more places there, part of the initiative to get more money into regional Australian hospitals.
PM: That's right. The local hospital here in Tamworth has succeeded, through our regional round, through our Health and Hospital Fund, to get $120 million for its Stage 2 development, so I walked through the maternity ward where you meet some wonderful staff and excited new mums, but the facility is a very old one and they do need a more modern facility, so that's what Stage 2 will achieve, and I was able to announce that there would be $20 million put into the School of Rural Health - that's $15 million in Tamworth and $5 million in Armidale, and of course that's all about training medical and allied health professionals locally because all of the evidence tells us that if someone gets a great training experience in a regional centre, then when they're working out where they're going to practice, they're much more likely to return to the place they had a great training experience.
So, more capital to create student accommodation and more training facilities and some more funded places, too - 8 specialist places and 16 GP places.
HOST: Yes, so those places will be coming through in terms of, as you mentioned already, training places and also places for improved hospital care, but the NBN is also one of the other projects that will be launched tomorrow. That will be taking place in Armidale. Armidale's bringing on nearly 3,000 premises to the NBN. Somebody would also say that this is terrific move forward, but a lot of the concentration, we're already seen the money coming into one particular electorate, and of course we know that Mr Windsor is the representative of this electorate. Mr Windsor citing, of course, the NBN as a key factor that moved him across to support the Government. Shall we draw anything more from that, Prime Minister?
PM: Well, Tony Windsor is a great advocate of his local community. That's his job and he does it very well, but the money for the Tamworth Hospital is part of a $1.8 billion regional round of our Health and Hospitals Fund. We've had the first round and then there will be a second round, so that there's $1.8 billion of expenditure going into regional health care.
So, we're aiming to make a difference for regional communities right around the nation, and then on the National Broadband Network, I will have the opportunity to switch on the first mainland site tomorrow.
It's actually the NBN Co, the company that's developing the National Broadband Network for us, that picks the release sites. What they've tried to do is in different parts of the country, put the National Broadband Network sites into different sorts of terrain, so Armidale is one place that's going, but for example it's going into outer suburban Adelaide, so in a very different environment, an urban growth corridor. So, they've done all of this deliberately to learn lessons for the rollout when it happens right around the nation, but starting the rollout in a set of very different communities.
HOST: Yes, Prime Minister, I noticed the opt-in rate is quite remarkably high, some 90 per cent of the premises that it was offered to have taken it up, which suggests there's a keenness for this point too.
PM: It is going to transform regional Australia, that's my view. It's going to transform regional economies, because what has always stood in the way of businesses in regional areas is the tyranny of distance. Can they compete with the businesses in the big cities? Can they compete with businesses overseas, given they've got the transport costs associated with moving their products or their services from where they're based in regional Australia?
Well, the NBN ends that tyranny of distance. You will be able to trade in real time with someone who might be in the CBD of Sydney, or they might be in the CBD of Shanghai. I mean this is power, economically, of the NBN, and then of course it will also transform the way that people get health services and education services. If you need a very particular form of health speciality you will be able to have a face-to-face conference with that person over the NBN -  even if that means you're talking to the leading expert who lives in Perth, that will be possible.
And for school kids it means that they will be able to open the doors to libraries and museums across the nation and around the world.
HOST: Julia Gillard, the Prime Minister, is our guest this afternoon. She's visiting both Tamworth today and Armidale tomorrow for a look at a number of regional issues and to make a number of regional announcements, including the major announcement concerning the NBN.
Prime Minister, we did mention this to our listeners who were turned in to Statewide, if they'd like to put some questions through the SMS system, or the text system, to you and they've come up with quite a range of ones.
I suppose the most succinct one is: ‘Will Ms Gillard, will you let the people of Australia vote on the carbon tax'. Now that is the most succinct question. It sums up a whole range of questions concerning the carbon tax. It is of course the story today as you go about -  various Ministers talk about the pricing of the carbon tax. But that's the most succinct question: ‘will you let the people of Australia vote on it?'
PM: At the last election, as Prime Minister, I went to the Australian people and said ‘we need to tackle climate change, we need to cut carbon pollution' and the best and most efficient way of doing that is putting a price on carbon. That means businesses will innovate, they'll change, they'll cut the amount of carbon pollution that they generate, because there's a price on it, as opposed to being able to pump it out into the atmosphere for free.
Now, the mechanism that I was advocating at the last election is what is called an emissions trading scheme, where you cap the amount of carbon pollution your economy will generate and you let a market develop of buying and selling permits and there's a floating price. I did say that I didn't want a fixed price model. Now, the truth is in the parliament that the Australian people elected we will get to that emissions trading scheme, we'll get there via a fixed price for a limited period. So, yes, things have changed - I didn't intend to mislead anybody before the last election, but we will get to where I always wanted the country to get to, which is to an emissions trading scheme.
And we haven't got time that we can just allow to go by. Both sides of politics, you might be surprised to hear this given some of the terminology in this debate, both sides of politics are committed to reducing our carbon pollution by -5 per cent by 2020. The sooner we start, the easier it will be to get there and we've got the choice of the most efficient mechanism - pricing carbon - or doing it in a lot more expensive way. Well, you know I'm saying to the Australian people, let's get on with the job of using the most efficient mechanism: pricing carbon.
Tony Abbott some days says climate change isn't real, but on other days when he is acknowledging climate change is real, he is advocating a more expensive way of getting to our -5 target.
HOST: Well, Prime Minister, that is indeed the question today, whether it has been every sort of compass direction on the price, whether it be north, south, east, or west of $40 and that has been a figure that has floated, because a number of our other questions just related to the impact of the price, of pricing carbon, on the cost of living.
PM: Well, I can answer that. First and foremost if you hear any figure on the radio, on the TV, or you read one in your newspaper, don't believe it. People-
HOST: -Not even the one you're about to tell us?
PM: Well, no, I'm not going to use a figure. People who are out there saying ‘oh, the carbon price is definitely going to be this amount', people are just speculating. Indeed I think some people are just making things up.
You know, I see Mr Abbott from time to time go out there with claimed figures and he's just made them up.
HOST: Could you give a ball park figure, Prime Minister? In the sense of that people do have to make adjustments for what they'll be looking for?
PM: What I would prefer to do is what I am doing now, which is we are consulting with the business community. We will announce the full details in the middle of the year. People will be able to see the price that the 1,000 biggest polluting businesses in this country will pay for generating carbon pollution. They will be able to see the assistance available to their household for any price impacts that flow through and they will be able, dollar and cent, to sit at the kitchen table with a calculator and work it all out.
That's the best way that people can get certainty and know what it means for them and given some of the things that have been said publicly, with a lot of dramatic rhetoric and speculation, I think when people see the details they might be a little bit surprised that some of the drama has just been that  -  drama.
HOST: Prime Minister, time is going to beat us. I appreciate your time in joining us this afternoon and good luck with New England North West and rug up tonight. You might need to.
PM: Terrific, and having spent some time in Canberra-
HOST: -You'll know all about it-
PM:-I know all about it. That's right. Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard made history today after officially launching the National Broadband Network for the first time on mainland Australia.
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Broadband, Senator Stephen Conroy, launched the NBN in the regional city of Armidale today in northern New South Wales.
Switching on the NBN on mainland Australia will offer unprecedented opportunities.
It will help create jobs, provide greater training options, support regional growth and improve health and education services across rural and regional Australia.
The Prime Minister said the NBN will end the tyranny of distance between rural and regional Australia and our capital cities  -  it will literally change the way Australians live and work.
By delivering a fibre to home connection, the NBN will:
 * 	reduce the need to travel for health services;
 * 	allow local businesses to reach new markets and create new job opportunities; and
 * 	offer better access to education and training resources for young people.
The Prime Minister said residents and businesses in Armidale were the first on the mainland to get access to the NBN.
The Armidale NBN footprint will ultimately cover 4,882 premises, including the University of New England. There are around 2,900 premises covered excluding the University.
Senator Conroy said today's launch was an historic day for rural and regional Australia.
For decades people living in rural and regional areas have put up with slow, expensive and inadequate telecommunications services and that is changing from today.
Armidale has embraced the NBN with more than 87 per cent of people signing up to have fibre connected to their home or business.
Australian Bureau of Statistics data indicates the number of Australians who have never used the internet is higher in rural and regional areas.
31 per cent of people from non-metropolitan areas aged 15 and over did not use the internet from any location in 2008-09, compared with only 23 per cent of people in metropolitan areas.
The Prime Minister said the NBN will address this divide by providing affordable high speed broadband to every Australian premise.
It means people can stay in their home town and still get access to the health services, education and training and business opportunities that people in our capital cities take for granted.
Importantly, increased education, training and business opportunities means more jobs in local communities.
People in Armidale are being progressively connected to the NBN as part of trials being carried out by four telecommunications providers: iiNet, Internode, iPrimus and Telstra.
Commercial services will begin from September and more providers will be offering services from that time: AAPT, AARNet, Comscentre, Exetel, Nextgen Networks, Optus, Platform Networks, SkyMesh and Vodaphone Hutchison Australia.
Senator Conroy said the testing phase is an important part of the rollout. A similar testing phase was carried out in Tasmania prior to the launch of commercial services and this allows NBN Co to ensure the network is operating smoothly.
Senator Conroy said today is just the beginning with more and more people coming online over the coming months and enjoying the benefits of the NBN.
Armidale is one of five first release sites where the NBN is rolling out on mainland Australia.
The other sites of Kiama Downs and Minnamurra (NSW), Townsville (QLD), Willunga (SA) and Brunswick (Vic) will begin offering services progressively over the coming months.  



HOST: Good morning Prime Minister and welcome to ABC New England North West.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: You officially opened Tamworth's impressive new Sports Dome yesterday and you'll switch on the NBN in Armidale this morning. Two days in the region - it's been years since we've seen a Prime Minister, let alone seen one for two days, so is it a new Labor interest in the country, are you just trying to get a closer to the end of Tony Windsor's wish list?
PM: Well, I always like to travel around Australia and go to communities and talk to people directly. It's the best way of finding out what's going on and we've got a real commitment to regional Australia. I mean it's a great place to live and to work, fantastic lifestyle, but we want to keep building on that for the future.
That's what the NBN is all about: new economic opportunities; new ways of delivering health services and education; and it's what our major investments for regional Australia coming out of the Budget are all about - more than $4 billion to improve hospitals, health care, universities, roads, all of the things that we need to get to regional Australia to keep improving what's a great lifestyle now.
HOST: How critical is that relationship with Tony Windsor, for you, as you continue to make this Government work?
PM: Tony Windsor is a very important part of our Australian Parliament, and of course his support for the Government is important to me and to the Government. He's a great representative of this region. He always has been. I've known Tony Windsor before this parliament and before the time I was Prime Minister. He's always been a very vigorous representative of this region's needs.
HOST: Do you think you are close to seeing the end of his wish list at this stage?
PM: It's not a question of wish list - it's really him representing his local community's view to the Australian Parliament. That's the right thing to do. Of course, members around the country do that and as a Government we've got to make decisions about what are the most important things to us, particularly in a tight budget and we did deliver a tight budget last week.
In making our choices we've deliberately put a priority on regional Australia. We think making sure our regional communities are strong and viable is vital to the nation's future.
HOST: How would you describe the way he's handled this process?
PM: Tony Windsor, I think, is a very determined person, a very methodical person, so he works constructively with the Government, raising the issues of concern to the region and that's good to see. It's what we want local members to be doing. Labor members around the country are there advocating for their local communities, too, and we've got to weigh up the priorities and we do want to put a priority on building up services and economic opportunities in regional Australia.
We outlined last week our sustainable Australia plan, and a big part of that is making sure we can see growth in population in regional communities. We've got congested cities where we need to take some pressure off; we've got lots of regional communities that want to grow, we want to match that aspiration for growth, but in order to do that we do have to keep improving health care, services and education.
HOST: Prime Minister, to the issue of food security and the conflict between resource extraction and food production. How aware are you of the productivity of this region and the coalmining and coal seam gas extraction licences and the exploration that they're allowed and cutting across it at the moment?
PM: I think I'm fairly aware. Actually, as we flew in yesterday Tony Windsor took the opportunity to point and explain the local terrain and some of the issues. I'd had familiarity with them before, but it's nice to be able to come and see it.
I understand that here locally we've had long-term coal mining and we've also got great agricultural production, and now there's the question of new coal mining ventures, particularly coal seam gas and whether that's appropriate and how that fits in with the region's agricultural industry and how it works for water use in the future.
Tony Windsor has raised this issue with the Government in the past and we've agreed with him to fund a water study, so we can be guided by the science as to what this may mean for the local community.
HOST: Tony Windsor is preparing to introduce into Parliament legislation to protect what he is calling ‘sensitive land'. He's suggesting using the Corporations Act to get the Commonwealth into what has generally been a State government controlled issue. He says this was a part of the discussions he made with you when he was making the Government agreement, or the formation of Government. Is this crunch time for you? Where do you stand on the issue of food production and mineral extraction?
PM: Well, we will look at any legislative proposition that Tony brings to the parliament. In this parliament it is possible for an individual member to bring a piece of legislation for consideration and to have it actively debated. That's a big change from the past and I think it's a good thing. So, when Tony presents his legislation we will obviously consider its details and respond then.
As a Federal Government, at this stage under current legislation, we don't seek to take over State government and local government planning powers, but we do seek to protect the environment through our Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Act, which gives the Minister for the Environment special powers for major projects and things that would have a potentially large environmental impact.
So we're not without a role and we will continue to exercise that role. In terms of any expansion of that role that Tony Windsor wants to bring into the Parliament for consideration, we'd have a look at it when all the details are available.
HOST: And as Prime Minister, though, where do you stand on this particular issue, the issue of balancing the need of food production for the nation and Australia's role in global food production and that of the resource demand, especially in a region like the Liverpool Plains.
PM: I think the important word in that sentence is balance. We are a great producer of resources. We are a great miner of coal and we've exported a lot of coal to the world. We'll continue to do that.
We're also a great agricultural nation, a great trading nation in agricultural produce and we will continue to do that, too.
In order to do both - have the resources sector strong and our agricultural sector strong  -  we have to make the right land use decisions and so doing the planning properly, doing the environmental assessments properly, is pivotal to that.
HOST: Do you see the need to protect sensitive food production lands from mining?
PM: Well, I certainly see the need to protect our environment and to protect our great resources like water. I'm not here today going to nominate a project or a proponent and say ‘I've got a view about that project' - that would be the wrong thing for me to do as Prime Minister, wrong against the proper processes that we use to assess projects which come through to us if they are of national significance through the environment protection legislation.
But generally, I'm happy to say that I want to see a balance. I want to see strong, continued, food production, as well as us continue to be a nation that exports resources to the world.
HOST: Just to another issue, I guess there continues to be anxiety in regional and rural sectors about plans for a carbon tax and what the Government is proposing. Can you give a guarantee that farmers won't be pushed away from the land or pushed off their farms? What kind of compensation  -  and we keep hearing those words, that there will be that level in the tax that you're working on, or the proposal that you're working on - what will there be for rural areas in terms of compensation?
PM: For farmers, this is all upside. The agricultural sector will not be in the carbon pricing regime. We've already announced that, so farmers do not have to worry about a carbon pricing being imposed on their activities - they're outside the scheme.
But they do have opportunities. They have opportunities through what is called carbon farming, which is changing land management practices and soil practices so they are actually helping with the task or reducing carbon pollution, and if they do that they'll be paid for it, so this is actually a new stream of revenue for farmers that they haven't had the opportunity to access in the past.
HOST: If they're outside the scheme though, how do they qualify for compensation for things like transport and processing and other parts of their business in that area?
PM: Like other Australian households, for the things that they go and buy which may have seen some price impacts, farmers will be eligible for the assistance that we're providing. We've got to remember the whole way this scheme works is we need to do the right thing by our environment, we need to transition our economy into a clean energy economy, we need to cut carbon pollution. We'll be getting the 1,000 biggest polluters to pay the price of putting carbon pollution into our atmosphere and using that revenue to assist households, including of course farm households, to protect Australian jobs and to fund programs that tackle climate change.
For farmers, this is a proposition that's got a very clear upside  -  they're not paying a carbon price directly, they're not in that category of the 1,000 biggest polluters, so they're not paying the carbon price, but there will be a whole new stream of revenue that they can access. It's very good news for them.
HOST: I know you're in a hurry this morning, but we know you have a phone call appointment with Tony Windsor every Friday morning and I think he was a bit disappointed you ditched him a couple of weeks ago for the other House of Windsor, but we're wondering, within that agreement, is there any chance the ABC New England mornings could maybe take the other Friday?
PM: Well, we'll do our best to come on and say hello and to work through local issues and I don't think that Tony Windsor is related to the House of Windsor, but you might have to ask him that.
HOST: Thanks, Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: Thank you very much
I'd like to acknowledge my Parliamentary colleague, the Minister who has driven this project, Stephen Conroy. Can I also acknowledge Tony Windsor, we spent yesterday in Tamworth and knew that we were coming to another great day here today in Armidale.
Can I also say thank you very much to Deborah for having us in her school and thank you to all of the girls, from PLC who have joined us for this event.
On the way here in the car I was joking with Tony Windsor about my school days and during my high school days my mother thought that it was very important that I should learn to type. She came to the conclusion that a girl could always get a job if she could type, and so she got me over a number of school holidays to learn to touch type on an Olivetti Manual. Now, I think reflecting on that we can see a few things from that story.
Number one - I've come a long way since those days that I was learning to type.
Number two - people's perceptions of roles for women in our society have changed a fair bit from the days that my mother concluded the best way you could ensure that a girl could get a job was to make sure she could type.
And third - I think we can conclude that technology's come a long way too, from the days of the Olivetti Manual, and I was joking with Tony in the car that when I told that story at a school, about learning to type on a manual typewriter, a young boy in the audience helpfully added ‘I saw one of them once in a museum'. Thank you for that.
We're here to celebrate moving on from the Olivetti Manual typewriter, and we're here to celebrate it in a very great place, in this community of Armidale, and can I say thank you to the community for the enthusiasm and passion that you've brought to this project, to the roll out of the NBN. It's been made possible because of the great leadership by the local council, thank you for that; great leadership in the local university, thank you very much for that, too; and that support of our State government colleagues, thank you for their support.
Now, the NBN is the greatest infrastructure project in this nation's history. No better place for it to start on mainland Australia than here. Of course, this is a city, the city of Armidale that prides itself on being a city with energy, vision, opportunity as its mantra. Armidale says about itself that it wants to be clean and green, vibrant, dynamic, innovative, professional, accessible and globally linked. Now, that's a great aspiration for this city; it's a great aspiration for regional areas; and it's our aspiration for regions around the country.
We want to allow regions to build more diverse economies. We want to attract new families to live in great places like this one. We want to give young people the chance to build a future right here, rather than feeling that they need to move to a big city, and nothing is more important to achieving that vision of the future than the NBN.
This is a transformative infrastructure for our nation's future. It stands to radically change the way we live, the way we work, the way we study, especially in rural and regional Australia, which has been so often forced to put up with second best - but no more.
The NBN will connect regional communities with the best medical experts through e-health; it will connect regional communities with the arts and creative industries; it will enable people to work at home and create businesses where they live; it will equip firms to compete on the world stage no matter where they are; and it has the potential to transform every school and every campus, connecting them like never before.
Today we are going to witness a demonstration of the NBN's capabilities. Students from two regional communities - one in Tasmania, and right here - will be connected and we will see them perform together in a joined up choir in real time. Now if we can see that today, imagine what else can be done across this network  -  joint lesions, sharing teaching resources, excursions without ever leaving the classroom. The possibilities are absolutely endless and truly global.
Friends, the NBN rollout here in Armidale has gone from start to finish in just 10 months, with 105 kilometres of fibre optic cable laid, connecting almost 3,000 premises, making the NBN available to every school in Armidale - government and non-government alike - and joining up university and TAFE students, to bring the opportunities of further education to Australians, no matter where they live.
Later today, after this very important event, I will be announcing funding for a new education trial as part of our digital regions initiative, involving the University of New England and the New England Institute of TAFE. The trial will use the power of this technology to provide state-of-the-art virtual interactive training rooms, laboratories and a community learning capability.
This is education in our century, in the 21st Century. It's education that overcomes the tyranny of time and distance that has so often held regional Australia back. The trial will unlock the same possibilities that we are going to see here at PLC.
Today there will be an art lesson, which will show exactly what the NBN can do. In the past teachers could old show paintings from the pages of a book or on a slide  -  today you will pay a virtual visit to a great gallery, like the Tate in London, or the Museum of Modern Art in New York, and the feel will be as if you were really there.
And unlike the old copper-based internet service, slow connections will be a thing of the past. Multiply that experience millions of times over, in workplaces, schools, TAFEs, universities, homes and that's the NBN.
Today's connection ceremony is the beginning of a great journey for our nation. By decade's end, the whole of Australia will be connected by superfast broadband. The decades-long monopoly of Telstra will be broken, allowing all telcos to compete freely and fairly, and a new era of communications will arrive, with devices and applications we are only beginning to experience and to understand.
I have only one response to the critics of the NBN  -  come here to Armidale. The NBN is real, it's here, and we will not stop until the last cable is laid and the last home connected.
I very proudly launch the NBN at its first site in mainland Australia. A great day for Armidale, a great day for Australia. The future begins here and it begins today.
Thank you very much.



PM: It's a great pleasure to be here in Armidale today. I'm joined by Minister Stephen Conroy, who has put so much work into the National Broadband Network, and continues to do so. I'm also joined by the local member, Tony Windsor, and by the CEO of NBN Co, Mike Quigley.
We're all here today for a very special purpose, and that is to switch on the NBN in Armidale. Armidale is one of our early release sites, and today, in switching on the NBN here, we have done the first switch on on mainland Australia. The NBN has been switched on in Tasmania, now, after today, it is switched on here in Armidale.
This is an important historic moment, the first time the NBN goes live on mainland Australia. And it's here, in such a great regional community, because we will be able to demonstrate, through the NBN being here, the difference that this technology can make for regional Australia.
Regional Australia has lived with the tyranny of distance. That means that there have been economic opportunities that have passed regional centres by. That means that they have had to settle for second best in health and education services on too many occasions. With the NBN we end that tyranny of distance.
You can be a local business here in Armidale and be in contact with and trading with any other business in the country, or indeed any other business in the world, as if it was just next door. You can be in one of the schools in Armidale - and we're standing in a great school now, PLC - and be connected to the great education institutions of our nation and around the world, and we've seen that demonstrated today.
And you can have face-to-face health services with leading specialists no matter what part of Australia they are in. We've seen the power of that videoconferencing today. The National Broadband Network is a truly transformative technology. We are seeing the future, right here, right now, in Armidale.
I'm also pleased to be here today to be able to announce that we will fund an innovative project through TAFE and through the local university, the University of New England, to show what the NBN can do for skills and education. In particular it will show what can be done for trades education, through the power of virtual learning and the power of the NBN. This will be demonstrated, on a trial site, what will be able to be achieved around the rest of Australia as the NBN rolls out.
I'm passionate about every child and every school getting a great education. I'm passionate about every young person getting an opportunity to get a trade, get some training, get a university place, realise their dreams and their future. We are able to expand that vision through the power of the NBN and its ability to bring educational opportunities to people right round the country.
So I'm very pleased to be here today, and we're very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you say to Tony Abbott's remarks that it's $36 billion wasted money?
PM: Well, Tony Abbott just doesn't understand this technology, and he hasn't got any plans for the nation's future. I mean, Tony Abbott is in the digital Dark Age. He's still scrabbling around trying to put a policy together, as we are rolling out the NBN. And I think he'll still be scrabbling around trying to put a policy together as the NBN comes on board in more sites in Australia.
If Tony Abbott really wants to understand the NBN, he should come here and talk to the people we've talked to today - including meeting them through the NBN - about how it's transformed their businesses, their education, their local healthcare services, transforming the way that farmers go about managing their land because they've got more information and more contact with agricultural researchers and scientists than they've had before.
So, Tony Abbott might be in denial about the future, but the future is here, right now, and he could come and see it in Armidale.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why was it that this primary school met the criteria for the test period, are they pay for it and if not how long (inaudible)
PM: Well, I'll go on details to Mike, but the NBN is connecting every school in Armidale - public and private - with the power of this new technology. As we roll out the National Broadband Network around the country we will be connecting schools because that makes such a difference to the way that they can deliver the curriculum. We've seen that in arts education today; we've seen it in music education, but it does mean more face-to-face specialised teaching.
You won't have to have, for example, the specialist language teacher in every school, to offer that as a course of study to a student. It will mean that they'll be connected to the great resources of the nation, and the world, whether it's the National Gallery or whether it's the Tate Museum in London. I mean these are tremendous opportunities for change in the way that we deliver education, particularly education in regional centres; we can bring the big city benefits, the world, to the doorstep of schools like this one.
But I'll turn to Mike on the details of PLC's engagement.
QUIGLEY: We obviously had planned out this as one of the first five release sites we're doing across the mainland. Circumstances were such that we finished this one first, and we had a layout of an area of Armidale, which of course eventually will be expanded - this was a logical place to be: a good school hall, a lot of cooperation. The folks in Armidale are very enthusiastic, as we've seen this morning.
JOURNALIST: So this test period, for people that are connected, they're not paying for this?
QUIGLEY: No, for the first few months, as you do with any - when you're cranking things up, getting things going - we're not charging. And that isn't simply because we don't want to charge; you don't start charging until you really have all the systems in place to do that. And frankly it costs us more than the revenue we'd collect in that.
JOURNALIST: This might be a question for you as well. I spoke to Craig Gawler outside, and he's one of the seven that is connected to the NBN at the moment. And I asked him what the difference was, if he noticed any difference? And he's on ADSL2 - and he said he couldn't see any difference at the moment. And my question to him was, 'Well, if you had to pay for it, would you stay on it, or would you go back to ADSL2?' And he said, 'I'd go back to ADSL2'. So is that going to be something that you will be facing over the next weeks, days and months?
QUIGLEY: For a start, if you think about it, in terms of ADSL2+, we're not expecting our service on the broadband network to be radically different, in terms of retail costs. We've put our wholesaler costs where they need to be to be competitive. We've always said that. Which means with retail costs - while they are not in our control - we don't expect to be radically different, for a greatly superior service.
Now if you also speak to many people - some of them we saw - at the school in Tasmania, this morning, it's made a huge difference to them. So you will hear differences in opinions, just depending on what people are using. And as the years go by, clearly we're going to have more bandwidth hungry applications, and people will be using services that ADSL2+ simply can't do.
MINISTER CONROY: The other point that needs to be made is because these are the first-release sites they were designed and started before we had to deal with Telstra. And the deal with Telstra, as you'd know, is that we are decommissioning the copper network. So people, if they want to maintain a fixed line, they will be transferring onto it. They can choose to say, no; they can just say, 'We want to go wireless', but ultimately the deal with Telstra means that the copper connection into people's homes will be decommissioned, and the fibre will be the only available fixed line connection into people's homes.
So in the short term you'll have a choice, which is great, but over time, as the deal with Telstra rolls out, we'll be decommissioning the copper, and they'll be transferring across. So at the moment you're saying he'd be paying for his existing connection and a new connection. But in the future it will just be the one, and our prices - that Mike's indicated on a wholesale level - are very, very competitive, particularly when it comes to comparing a better product to ADSL2+.
PM: Can I just suggest too, we do have to summarise all of the feedback we've received today from test users. I spoke myself to the woman you saw appear in the video talking about the opportunities it's given her small business. It's transformed the way she does that business.
She can transfer files now of a size that she was never able to transfer before. Meaning she had to leap in the car and go and deliver them. Well the fact she can transfer them through the NBN, better for her business - even when she's dealing with people locally - but it opens up the door to dealing with people far further afield. She's no longer limited by the people that she can drive to.
The feedback we've had from the university, the feedback we've had from this school, about the transformation that it is going to bring to the way that they do things. And in terms of the usage of it, we've seen demonstrated today - I saw the demonstration myself - two televisions, a video conference in progress, lifelike, like you were having a conversation, an application where a YouTube was being downloaded as well as some other digital applications all going at the same time, and even, with all of that happening, they hadn't used the full capacity of the NBN.
So if you imagine this in people's homes, where you've got various adults looking at various screens - you've got one working with a video conference, you've got a child downloading something from YouTube, all possible at the same time, that's the power of this technology, and that represents the way that people will use this technology today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what about the practical, what about the lessons to be learnt. This is a trial, what practical, constructive lessons have been learnt so far from this trial?
PM: Well I'll turn to Mike for that, but I think you're pointing to something very important with the rollout of the NBN. This rollout is happening in a number of trial sites first, in different parts of Australia with different conditions so that we can learn the lessons and take them as the broader rollout happens. One of the sites, for example, is Noarlunga in Adelaide. It's an urban growth corridor, a beautiful seaside place as well, but an urban growth corridor. Very different terrain, very different community, from here in Armidale. So the fact that they're both early trial sites means that we will learn the lessons of the NBN being rolled out in different circumstances to inform the rest of the rollout. I'll turn to Mike in terms of specific learnings from here.
QUIGLEY: There is - in fact there are too many to really articulate this morning. It is all the way from community engagement, talking to people, physical infrastructure going in the ground, boring, trenching, how you put things on poles, operational issues. There's a whole range of things that we've learnt. Too great to really enumerate today.
And as the Prime Minister has said, you learn Armidale; you learn them in Noarlunga, in Kiama Downs in Brunswick - Brunswick in inner Melbourne city, different set of learnings. So we just keep building on that at each stage. We learned some things - obviously in the pre-release trials in the three townships in Tasmania, we'll learn some more things in the seven towns we've just announced too and this is, as I've said before, this isn't one off, this isn't like building a bridge or a tunnel. We're doing the same thing over and over and over again right across the country. It's like running a huge factory which means the opportunities for learning and improvement are vast.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
QUIGLEY: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
QUIGLEY: I won't comment on that. We have a process that's open at the moment, but yes, we enjoy a very good relationship with contractors, we're using a range of contractors across the nation, including Silcar who's done a great job for us here in Armidale.
JOURNALIST: Mr Quigley, you were quoted as saying you were disappointed that only seven customers have signed up in Armidale (inaudible).
QUIGLEY: I do not recall every saying I was disappointed with seven customers. That was always the plan, we were going to connect up a small number of customers and it would grow, just as it did in Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: Would you have hoped it would be more by now?
QUIGLEY: No, I wouldn't have (inaudible)
MINISTER CONROY: We weren't trying to get more.
QUIGLEY: We weren't trying to get more by now.
MINISTER CONROY: This is just turning it on and testing, making sure the light pings down to the knock in Melbourne, that sort of stuff. This is the very, very, early stages and by September, Mike, we'll have all the companies competing - including Vodafone, the world's largest telecommunications company, never offered fixed line service - mobile company in Australia, never offered fixed line services before. Vodafone - the largest telco are [audio break] the market here in Armidale.
This will be more competition, it will be faster speeds and lower prices and that's the sort of offerings you're going start to see for the 88 per cent of people who've signed up to be connected inside of their homes.
So you're going to start to see here in Armidale, competition in a way we haven't seen in the retail market ever before.
QUESTION: Was Armidale fast tracked because it's in Tony Windsor's seat and you needed his support?
MINISTER CONROY: Yeah, look we selected this - I think Tony mentioned this. I've been here a number of times. I was here over 18 months, two years ago. I had my first meetings with Alan Davies, the guy that Tony mentioned, and what happened was that Alan and Tony got a community group very active.
They lobbied the NBN Co and when we announced this six or eight months before the federal election - and when it was announced no-one batted an eyelid - this was announced long before New England became a pivotal seat. 
So to people who want to say, oh, this has just been done because of Tony Windsor, this is done because the community here in Armidale got together, lobbied the hell out of Mike and the NBN guys and said: we know how to use it, come here first and that's exactly what happened. But it was long before anyone knew that Tony Windsor was going to be a key vote in a parliament.
JOURNALIST: This was one of the first of five trial sites to go live, is that why? (inaudible)
MINISTER CONROY: I think it would be fair to say that if Cyclone Yasi hadn't hit Townsville, Townsville would have been finished first. But Cyclone Yasi slowed NBN Co down up in Townsville. So it's a question of natural circumstances that we are here.
JOURNALIST: Tony, can I just ask you a well - how are the people of New England receiving news of the NBN, knowing that they are going to get the NBN, do you think if they have to they'd pay more?
MINISTER CONROY: Well they won't have to.
JOURNALIST: If they had to, would they?
MINISTER CONROY: Well they don't have to. Let's be clear.
PM: No, they don't.
MINISTER CONROY: They will have a choice initially, particularly here because we didn't have the Telstra deal. But the actual offers that you're going to see - and it won't be long - before they're actually-
JOURNALIST: How long?
MINISTER CONROY: Well you'll have to ask the ISPs. Go and grab Telstra, iiNet, they won't tell us. They are all keeping these pricing plans to themselves because they don't want their competitors to know. Real competition is taking place. So the wholesale pricing that's been put in place is absolutely competitive with what's on the ground.
The people ultimately will be able to - even before the copper's cut - will be able to, if they're coming to the end of their - for instance Telstra broadband plan, they'll be able to quit that and take the whole range of new choices, that's what it's about.
So you keep suggesting they're going to pay more, that's not what's going to happen. If they choose to take two connections, obviously, that'd be the case. But ultimately when they're down to just the one connection the prices are competitive. Sorry Tony, I didn't mean to cut across but the premise of the question had to be challenged.
WINDSOR: People are generally delighted. I've had five towns come up to me and they want to get into Inverell, they want to get into Tamworth, everybody wants to be part of it. And I think what you could see there today was real enthusiasm for a lot of people in this community and others that want to be part of it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) enthusiasm from education sector, business sector, also health but not a lot just from people in their homes using the NBN.
WINDSOR: Well I've had quite the opposite actually and I think as time rolls on people will see the uses for this. Particularly, I mentioned the example the aged care sector, the obvious there is e-health. One of the things that the Prime Minister's announcing later on, it's about up-skilling people and these sorts of things, there's trials going on in terms of e-health at the moment. There's a whole range of things, it's almost exponential in terms of what can happen.
So I'd say people are delighted that this was chosen as a site, but it was basically chosen because people were very enthusiastic to drive it. And I think it's time we got over this thing that this is too dear and it's going to be too hard and whatever. I think the government needs congratulating for actually looking at this and regional people are going to be the major beneficiaries. It's quite obvious if you talk to any of the telco providers that a lot of the country towns wouldn't have been provided with the service if it had just been left.
JOURNALIST: To comments from a man who's probably got his own (inaudible) Barnaby Joyce, doesn't think it needs to be connected to every single premises, every single home?
WINDSOR: The man's a genius. Well everyone's got their own view. I think Barnaby would have been a lot better around seven years ago he probably would have been much more (inaudible)
MINISTER CONROY: He can explain to that small business woman that we saw earlier why he's going to cut it off. Like, he can explain to her why he's going to crimp her business, why he's going to stop her competing in the rest of the world. Barnaby can explain that to her.
PM: Just on that discussion. Let's be clear about this pricing question. I mean, more competition means cheaper prices and better speeds. That's what the NBN is going to deliver, more competition is going to enable people to do things they've never been able to do before and by definition, because there's competition, there will be real competition on price, enabling people to get good prices for what they want to do.
In terms of the enthusiasm of this community, we wouldn't be here if this community hadn't been enthusiastic for the NBN. In terms of people understanding every use that the NBN is going to be put to - well no-one understand that yet because there will be applications designed over the next few years that we don't even think about yet.
But we do know of the applications that are available whether it's video conferencing for businesses, whether it's e-health and the healthcare area. Whether it's changing the way we deliver education. These are incredibly valuable things for regional Australia.
And on the naysayers like Barnaby Joyce, I'd simply say he's out of touch. He's dreadfully out of touch with the way people want to live today and the kind of services they want to have in regional Australia. And he's very out of touch with what will drive productivity, wealth and better services in regional Australia.
And, you know, we've been here before in terms of changes of technology. I suspect you are never more than two inches away from that Blackberry. Well, when the mobile phone first came to this country there were many people who tossed their head and said ‘why would anybody want one of those? What will they ever use that for. That'll never catch on'.
My predecessor Barry Jones is famous for having said one day there will be more computers in Tasmania than cars and he was laughed at around the nation. What are there in Tasmania today? More computers than cars, and it was the first place for the NBN.
So, I've said it before, we're a country that has a go rather than has a whinge. I think people need to look at the power of this technology for change in our lives, changes in our wealth in the way we get health services, the way we get education services. And as Prime Minister I'm not going to let the kids that we've seen today down. We can't have our nation slip behind the standards of the world with technology. We can't have the kids of Singapore and other places using this technology whilst our kids get stranded behind the standards of the world with their education. We're not going to do that because we're going to build the NBN.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you a question on another topic?
PM: Sure.
JOURNALIST: The carbon tax and its impact on fuel, Bob Brown says that we should be taxing mines, taking away their rebates rather than - as a way of paying for savings for consumers. What do you say to that?
PM: We will work through and we will announce all of the details of carbon pricing in the middle of this year. And what I'd say to any speculation that people read in the newspapers is wait and see the full details and look at it for yourself and judge then.
I very much understand that there are families round the country facing cost of living pressures. That's why when we price carbon we'll be getting the biggest thousand businesses in this country. the biggest thousand polluters to pay. They currently can put carbon pollution in the atmosphere for nothing. We will get them to pay for polluting. That means they will change and generate less pollution and then for households facing cost of living pressures we will be providing generous assistance.
And I think too, it's important that as people work their way through when they have all of the details they do the comparisons. Mr Abbott is proposing a scheme that will be less efficient and consequently more costly for Australians than pricing carbon. And I understand his spokesperson, Greg Hunt, today for the first time has confirmed that they will effectively have a carbon price.
Well the difference between them and us is we're going to price carbon and assist households; they're just going to put a cost impost on Australian families with no assistance.
JOURNALIST: How critical is it to make sure that fuel doesn't (inaudible).
PM: Well we will work through, but you've just heard what I've said about understanding the cost of living pressures on the shoulders of Australian families, and we will give all of the details to Australian families in the middle of this year. And unlike some of the wild speculation that they've heard and the fear mongering that they've seen from Mr Abbott they will be able to sit down and have a good look at it themselves.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I've had a fantastic time. We've got a bit more to go before I leave this area. I'm looking forward to being at the TAFE and seeing the next thing we can do to innovate and use the National Broadband Network for skills training. But I've had a fantastic time in Tamworth and Armidale with Tony Windsor.
We've been able to do some important things for the local community and throughout they've been things that have been drive by community spirit. So the sports dome that I opened officially yesterday, something that had a great community spirit and the community contribution which made it possible when we partnered with the community to get it done. 
The hospital, fantastic staff, fantastic community support and we are able to improve it and I'm glad that we can meet that community spirit with a new redevelopment and new money for training.
And then of course we're here in Armidale because this community wanted the National Broadband Network because it understood the power of it. So Tony represents a great place in the Federal Parliament. It's been a privilege to be here for a couple of days getting to share in that great place.
JOURNALIST: Will the rollout spread outwards from the trial sites?
PM: Mike?
QUIGLEY: Yes, they will. We've announced a number of second release sites and included in those were the five first release sites and we will be expanding. So plans are absolutely underway. In fact, we're now rolling out to - in fact, just about finished - the rest of the university. And we obviously in short order will be rolling out to the rest of Armidale.
PM: We'll take one last question here, sorry you haven't had one yet.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) What is your reaction to the Wilderness Society decision to pull out of the Tasmanian forest peace talks down there, and do you believe that the Federal Government's done enough in those talks to hold it together.
PM: Well I certainly believe the Federal Government has done enough. What I would say to the people in Tasmania, the representatives who have been sitting around a table, is now is not the right time to walk away from that table.
We've always said, as a Federal Government, we want to work with the stakeholders down there, we want to work with them as they come to an agreement. We didn't want to impose something from the top. These are people who have been engaged in this issue for decades on different sides of the fence. They said they wanted to come together and work to generate a new agreement, a new way forward for Tasmanian forests.
We said we want to see you do that and we will partner with you with that agreement in place. We've helped facilitate the making of that agreement with having Bill Kelty there available, but ultimately the parties here need to sit round that table and see this job through and get it done. It is for them to use their best will and get round that table and resolve these differences. That's what they said they were prepared to do; we really want them to stay round that table and get it done.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon and Minister for Mental Health and Ageing Mark Butler today visited the Mental Illness Fellowship of South Australia (MIFSA) to see firsthand the impact local mental health services will have as a result of the Gillard Government's $2.2 billion mental health reform package.
Mental health needs a long term investment and a long term strategy and we are delivering both.
A key component of the Gillard Government's package will provide additional funding for personal helpers and mentors who can make a huge difference to the lives of the severely mentally ill and their families.
The Government will invest $208 million to expand the Personal Helpers and Mentors Program which provides practical one-on-one support to help participants find and retain employment, improve relationships with family and friends and manage everyday tasks such as using public transport and housekeeping.
Under this program, the number of personal helpers and mentors across Australia will increase by 425, to provide an extra 3,400 people living with a mental illness with the intensive care and support that they need to reconnect to health care, the work force and the community.
A further 18,000 Australians with severe mental illness will also be helped by the $19.3 million boost to the Day-to-Day Living program, which will help people experiencing social isolation by supporting them to access a variety of social activities in their local community.
This program will help people with persistent mental illness to participate in social, recreational and educational activities so they can start to live an independent and healthy life in the community.
Backing up both these programs will be funding of local care facilitation organisations, more flexible care packages and a new national assessment framework to help people with severe and persistent mental illness to better manage their health, participate in the community and stay out of hospital.
Greater coordination and integration of the services people with a mental illness and their families need is one of the cornerstones of this package.  This new package will go a long way to helping them properly manage their health, participate in the community and stay out of hospital.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today inspected new mobile training facilities and heavy vehicle simulators that will transform the learning environment for thousands of students in South Australia.
The Gillard Labor Government has invested $8.2 million towards the development of a state of the art training centre run by Civil Train SA which will allow civil construction students to train using technologically advanced simulators.
The simulators will help students learn how to drive and operate heavy machinery such as loaders and excavators.
The Prime Minister and Minister for Skills and Jobs, Senator Chris Evans visited the facilities run by Civil Train SA at Thebarton in Adelaide today.
The new equipment will also help students in regional South Australia when Civil Train SA begins operating 6 mobile units which include vehicle simulators.
Civil Train SA also contributed to the $12.8 million project which will enable the organisation to double its training places to more than 20,000 in three years.
The Gillard Government is investing directly in projects like the one at Civil Train SA to help improve the skills of Australian workers.
Investing in skills training is a down payment on our nation's future.
That's why the Budget invests more than $3 billion over six years in the Building Australia's Future Workforce package to ensure Australians of all ages are able to access the training and skills they need to get a job in our strengthening economy.
The Budget is focused on ensuring Australian workers have the opportunity to get the high skill, high paid jobs on offer in our nation and enjoy the dignity of work.
Improving the quality of the vocational education and training sector and ensuring graduates have the skills necessary to support a strong economy is a key priority for the Government.
The $8.2 million investment in Civil Train SA training facilities has been made through the Government's Education Investment Fund (EIF).
Through major capital infrastructure investment, the EIF has been transforming Australia's teaching and learning capabilities, and helping to meet the demand for skilled workers.
In the past three years, the Government has invested more than $4 billion in building new education, training and research facilities across Australia.
More information on the EIF initiative can be found at: www.deewr.gov.au/EIF



PM: I'm joined here today by Senator Chris Evans and I'm very pleased to be back in my home town of Adelaide. I'm also very pleased to be here today at Civil Train, a great training establishment here in South Australia and it's actually leading Australia in training in the civil construction sector. I'm pleased that the Government, through our Education Investment Fund, has been able to make available more than $8 million to redevelop the premises that we've seen.
But even as the premises are now, this training facility is doing remarkable work, the kind of work that we want to expand right around the country through the initiatives in our recent Budget. Here today we have met some Indigenous Australians who are here doing training, but it's not training for training's sake - it's training knowing that they have a job guaranteed on a major road works project here in South Australia. A great combination: an opportunity for someone to step up to new skills and to a job; an opportunity that isn't training for train's sake, but it's training to get that all-important job and to enable people who have been outside our labour market to enjoy the benefits and dignity of work.
The Budget we delivered last week is about jobs and it's about opportunity. That's why it comes with a $3 billion skills package, a skills package that Chris Evans will oversee. The skills package will be about getting back into the workforce people who have been excluded from work by giving them an opportunity and giving them the skills they need and in doing that we'll create 130,000 training places working with industry, the right kind of training because we're working with businesses to deliver it.
And we know with our economy increasingly becoming a patchwork economy, where different regions have different sorts of economies and different skill needs, that it's important to be able to take training to where people are, which is why initiatives like the one you see behind me, with mobile training going to where jobs seekers are, going to where workers are who need upgraded skills, are so important.
This is a great boon for regional Australia and fits well with the Government's plans to spread the benefits of training right around our country.
I'm here in Adelaide, apart from visiting Civil Train today, to join with my ministerial colleagues for a Community Cabinet in Modbury Heights. We look forward to hearing the views of people from Adelaide, who will come to meet with us later today and between now and then I'll be very pleased to join with my ministerial colleagues, Nicola Roxon and Mark Butler, Mark Butler a great South Australian, who as Minister for Mental Health has overseen the development of the mental health package we delivered in the recent budget, a package to meet the needs of Australians today. Mental illness presses on the lives of many Australians and we wanted to make available new resources in a $2.2 billion package to help those Australians and their families.
Can I conclude by saying, as we stand in Adelaide today, we've lived through a very important 24 hours in the debate about carbon pricing. Tony Abbott has been running around the country trying to scare Australian families, trying to scare Australian businesses, trying to scare people and convince them that they're going to lose their jobs.
Well, his scare campaign has come up against two big obstacles: his own colleagues. Greg Hunt, his Climate Change Spokesperson, has finally told us the truth  -  that Tony Abbott's plan to tackle climate change is to put a $15 a tonne price on carbon. That is, after all of this fear mongering, Tony Abbott's plan is to put a price on carbon per tonne of $15, but he won't be providing families with any assistance for the cost of living impacts that would flow from his price on carbon. So, very important yesterday that Greg Hunt finally let the cat out of the bag and that Mr Abbott stands for pricing carbon with no assistance to Australian families.
And then last night on Lateline, Malcolm Turnbull also told us the truth. He told us the truth that basically this plan won't work. He told us the truth that basically this plan won't work. He told us the truth that it would blow the budget. And he told us the truth that the rest of the world is acting too, even though Mr Abbott has been pretending to Australians no-one is acting on climate change.
If I could just use some of Malcolm Turnbull's words  -  he said last night, and I think these are very important words, when he was describing Tony Abbott's plan  -  he said ‘This is a plan where industry was able to freely pollute, if you like, and the government was just spending more and more taxpayer's money to offset it', that ‘it would become a very expensive change on the budget in the years ahead' - Mr Turnbull telling us that Mr Abbott plans to blow the budget.
And Mr Turnbull went on and talked about Prime Minister Cameron, a Conservative prime minister in the UK. He said that ‘conservatives, like David Cameron in particular, take the view that there is an enormous opportunity to get on the front foot and get into a leadership role in terms of clean technology, low emission technology, that is a coming technological revolution'. He went on to say that the “Prime Minister of Britain has vision and wants to be part of the change'  -  a very sharp contrast to Tony Abbott.
So, 24 hours on, we know Mr Abbott wants to price carbon, he doesn't want to assist Australian families, he's out of step with his Conservative colleagues around the world, he's out of step with the world in general.
We want to stay in step with the world. We want this nation to have a clean energy future. That's why we are moving to put a price on the 1,000 biggest polluters in our economy  -  big businesses who will pay the price of putting carbon pollution in our atmosphere.
With that price on carbon they will innovate and change and produce less carbon pollution and we will be able to use that money to assist Australian families to protect Aussie jobs and to fund programs that tackle climate change.
I'm very happy to take any questions. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Just on that issue of climate change, Bob Brown this morning has denounced the Murdoch press, saying they're the hate media, particularly when it comes to debate on this issue of climate change. Do you agree with that?
PM: Well, it's very important that we see accurate reporting on a major reform debate, like the reform debate about climate change and we've seen, even acknowledged, for example by, The Australian, that they have at times very inaccurately reported people's comments. One instance I can remember very recently was the headline which went with comments made by Gail Kelly, the CEO of Westpac, an error that The Australian newspaper acknowledged.
So, I think it's very important to get the facts to people. Tony Abbott's been trying to do the complete reverse, to scare people. I mean today, just to take one example of the scare, I understand Mr Abbott is at Sanitarium  -  we all know Sanitarium, it produces Weetbix. He's there trying to pretend the Australians that pricing carbon means an end to Weetbix. I mean, this is just getting ridiculous. What he hasn't told people is Sanitarium isn't one of the 1,000 biggest polluters in the country and Sanitarium won't be paying a price on carbon.
JOURNALIST: Speaking of scare tactics, the Climate Change Minister released some flood plain mapping for Adelaide this morning. How much will a carbon tax reduce the sea level rises in a place like Adelaide?
PM: Well, I think once again it's important to get the facts to people and climate change is changing our planet. The scientists tell us that it will bring rising sea levels, it will cause a problem for coastal communities, it will bring more extreme weather events, longer droughts, a greater prevalence of drought.
I think Australians do want to tackle climate change and they're entitled to the facts about what climate change will mean. They're also entitled to get from government a responsible plan to tackle climate change - pricing carbon is that plan, it's the most efficient way to do it.
And let's be really clear now about the nature of this debate. Let's put aside Mr Abbott's scare campaign, which after the 24 hours we've just been through has  been smashed around by his colleagues.
Both sides of politics stand for cutting carbon pollution by -5 per cent. We want to do it in the most efficient way. We want to assist Australian households as we do it. Mr Abbott wants to do it without assisting Australian households in a way that is inefficient and would blow the budget and which won't work.
I mean, what Mr Abbott is advocating is actually the reverse of what Australians want. Australians want action on climate change. He's out there with a plan that won't work. Australians want assistance given the cost of living pressures they face. He's out there with a plan with no assistance.
Well, we're putting forward a plan that will make a difference to carbon pollution and it comes with assistance for Aussie households.
JOURNALIST: The Chamber of Commerce has also said that setting a price on carbon ahead of the rest of the world will clear fell Australian industry. Do you think that's a valid concern?
PM: Well, let's just go to Prime Minister Cameron in Britain on this question of what the world is doing. David Cameron, the Prime Minister of Britain, he's a Conservative. If he was in Australia he'd be the holder of a Liberal Party ticket. They have had a price on carbon for a number of years and he's announced that he wants to see a 50 per cent cut in carbon pollution in the UK by 2025.
We are looking for a cut in our carbon pollution of -5 by 2020. He's saying -50 by 2025. So let's not make any errors here. The rest of the world is moving and the risk for Australia, because we have a high emissions economy, is that we will get left behind, that other parts of the world will have a clean energy economy, clean energy jobs and we'll get left behind.
Now, I'm saying that to the Australian people, but Malcolm Turnbull - also a Conservative, a member of Tony Abbott's political Party - was saying last night, he said about David Cameron that ‘he's taking the view that there is an enormous opportunity to get onto the front foot and get into a leadership role in terms of clean technology, low emission technology, that this is a coming technological revolution'.
Well, that's true. I want us to get the jobs from this revolution. Mr Abbott wants us to miss out on them.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) asylum seekers, is the Government processing asylum seekers until the deal with Malaysia is finalised?
PM: What we've done is asylum seekers arriving post my announcement with the Minister for Immigration about our commitment with Malaysia, the day that I published the joint statement from the Prime Minister of Malaysia and by me, from that time anybody who's arrived has been taken into detention pending removal and they will be removed to a third country.
JOURNALIST: Has that been confirmed with Malaysia, because there seems to some message out the Malaysian Government that this deal is still several months from being finalised and they won't be accepting anyone until (inaudible).
PM: Well, the second part of your question is a misreport of the words of the Malaysian Minister and I'd suggest people actually look at what he said. What he said, of course, and it's just simple common sense, is that people wouldn't be taken to Malaysia until the agreement's been entered in to  -  well absolutely, obviously. But that's been misreported today.
We are working with Malaysia, exactly as I announced we would when I released the commitment from the Malaysian Prime Minister on the Saturday before Budget week.
JOURNALIST: You've been accused of jumping the gun on this. Do you agree with that?
PM: We've worked patiently and methodically with Malaysia since last October, worked in a patient and methodical way, we went to Bali and worked with the countries in our region to get a regional framework. That regional framework has within it a reference to transfer agreements between two countries. We've been talking to Malaysia since last October about a transfer agreement.
So, we've been talking to Malaysia since last October about a transfer agreement, I thought it was appropriate when the Prime Minister of Malaysia was indicating his preparedness to issue a joint statement with me about the matter, that the joint statement should be issued.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) that's a pretty daunting increases to utility prices her in Adelaide recently. You're going to face a lot of angry people tonight at Community Cabinet. How do you do you expect to allay some of their fears about (inaudible)
PM: I don't think it pays to make assumptions about what people will come and talk about tonight. I think we'll get the full range. I think there'll be people there talking about child care and we've increased the child care rebate. There'll be people there talking about the quality of their child's school and we've brought huge new resources and new reforms to improve schools.
I think there'll be people there talking about the quality of their local hospital and our plans for health reform and our huge new investments in health. We had a lot of damage to fix up after Tony Abbott's stint as Health Minister and we've been investing in cancer care, in emergency departments and we will continue to invest to improve hospital care.
I think too, there will be people there raising cost of living and what I would say to them is, first and foremost, we are determined to bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13 because that's the right thing to do by people's cost of living pressures. We shouldn't be adding to inflationary pressure in our economy when it is coming to full strength. That's why we've got to bring the budget to surplus - so we're not putting extra pressure on people's cost of living.
And then in the recent Budget we delivered a number of measures that are important to people's cost of living: new family payments for families with teenagers; expanding our education tax refund so you can claim back a portion of the cost of the school uniforms, part of the cost of getting kids to school; bringing forward the low income tax offsets so lower-paid Australian workers see more money in their pay packet each week or each fortnight.
These are important measures for cost of living, but they come on top of three years of tax cuts and increases in things like support for childcare.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a Bill before parliament that would expand ASIO's powers to (inaudible) surveillance. There's worries that this could see groups like (inaudible)
PM: That's just nonsense, absolute nonsense. Our security agencies, including ASIO, do their work properly to address threats to Australian security. They are oversighted, including through Parliamentary oversight, so I think anybody who's trying to put those two things together is drawing a pretty long and fanciful bow.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it true that there are only seven customers hooked up to the NBN in Armidale?
PM: Yes, exactly as planned - exactly as planned. The NBN, which I switched on on mainland Australia yesterday, is a great boon for whole country and particularly for regional Australia. I went to a community yesterday, the community in Armidale, that had been campaigning to get the National Broadband Network. They know their town well: they know its economy well; they know its jobs pattern well; they know its health well; they know its education well.
And they, as a community, wanted the National Broadband Network because they knew that would give their businesses greater economic opportunities. They knew that it would change the way we deliver health care and give them better access to health care specialists. They knew that it would transform local education and connect the classrooms their kids are in to classrooms and museums and art galleries right around the world.
Yes, there are seven customers in the trial. That was absolutely planned - seven customers trying it out, you have a trial first, that's just a prudent approach and anybody who's trying to spin something out of that is really misrepresenting what happened in Armidale yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when will we know who the Chief of the Defence Force will be?
PM: We'll make an announcement at the appropriate time and, of course, Angus Houston is there as the Chief of the Defence Force, continuing to do a world-class, first-class job.
Thank you. 


2011-12 Budget; Carbon price; Set top boxes
HOST: Let's welcome Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Julia, thank you for coming in this morning.
PM: A great pleasure. Thank you for having me.
HOST: I did ask you privately, but I'll ask you publically, because I think it's fair  -  have you had a proposal put to you, yet?
PM: No, I haven't, Leon, so I can't report any big news here on that front.
HOST: So, you're waiting? Are you expecting one?
PM: We're very happy the way we are. Tim is actually here in Adelaide too, so that's a good thing.
HOST: Well, it might happen whilst you're here.
PM: Oh, stop it. You're just being naughty, now.
HOST: Alright, let's have a look at the Federal Budget. Now, according to the latest opinion polls, Prime Minister, most people are not saying ‘this is a great Budget.' Most people think they're going to be worse off. What do you say to that?
PM: I understand that a lot of families are worried about cost of living pressures. People are seeing big increases in their utility bills, particularly the price of electricity, so I understand it can be very difficult for a lot of families, but looking at the Budget, the central focus of it is jobs and opportunities for Australians.
I mean, people are trying to manage their cost of living pressures, but I understand that people need to come to that with a job. Nothing adds up unless you've got that all-important pay packet, so we're very proud we've created 750,000 jobs to date and we're looking to create half a million more, and I want to spread the opportunities of the mining boom right throughout the country.
I don't want to see people left behind, which is why there's a big focus on workforce participation and skills.
HOST: On this business of jobs, and I raised this with your colleague, Wayne Swan, yesterday, who did say, I mean, we've got a major training problem here in Australia. We've done our own investigation with some very good people like Dr Chris Hamilton and Gary Colless(*) and others, and there's a lot of training courses out there that you can pay a lot of money for but at the end the training's accredited, but you're not accredited at the end to get a job for which you've been trained, and I just think, Prime Minister, it's a very good thing for your Government to make such a commitment, but you need to seriously audit some of these training courses, because most of them or a lot of them are just ‘here's a broom and come and stack the shelves for a few weeks, and that's your training.' You've obviously heard this.
PM: Leon, I think you raise a very important point, and our training system does need reform, and a focus of the Budget is delivering money that will be used to buy reform. We can do this better. We should do it better.
HOST: So, you're going to audit a lot of these courses.
PM: We certainly moved to upgrade regulation for private providers. That first came to my attention when I was Minister for Education, where in the international education area, whilst we saw great-quality providers, a great reputation for Australia, we also saw some people who were doing the wrong thing, so we've moved to bring more regulation and better quality into the system, and we've got to keep building on that quality.
Around 1.7 million Australians engage in training. A lot of them don't complete because they're not satisfied with the course or they're not appropriately supported, so we will be focussed on reform and better quality, and out of the Budget, too, we're creating 130,000 training places in partnership with industry. Now, that means if business has got its money on the table, joining-
HOST: -That's not new though, we've been doing that for a long time.
PM: Well, we're expanding it, and we're doing that because if business has got its money on the table then it will be investing with us in the training that will really matter and get people jobs.
HOST: Alright, now, your Government, Prime Minister, has donated $200 million a year for three years to a climate United Nations fund from a tax that you are yet to collect and promised you wouldn't before the last election. Given that battlers are doing it tough in Australia, how do you justify that?
PM: Look, our contributions to climate change adaption for countries overseas come out of our overseas development budget, and we do want to help, for example-
HOST: -But this is extra money, though. Your own government websites have said this.
PM: Our development contributions are increasing, and that's a bipartisan political support. That has bipartisan political support in this country. It's as we work our way towards the Millennium Development Goals. We do need to support some of our neighbours who have major troubles. We live in a region with many low-lying island states who are going to be very challenged by climate change and rising sea levels.
Greg Combet's actually outlining that challenge for Adelaide here today.
HOST: I know he is, and this is something that was first mentioned in 2009, so it's not new, and some have argued that you're trying to scare people into submission to agree to a carbon tax.
I'll get back to that in sec, but Dr John Bruni from Sage International has pointed out that some of the countries for which will share this $200m million a year are actually countries that can't even be trusted with aid, let alone this kind of money.
PM: Well, we audit and have a rigour in our aid system, Leon. We've got a review underway at the moment, and that will be made public at the appropriate point, to make sure that aid money is well spent.
Of course, I want-
HOST: -We heard a scandal about aid, didn't we, not just recently, about how much money is going in to military juntas and others who are not entitled to it.
PM: But Leon, I think we've got to also remember our aid money does things like help with eradicating diseases like polio around the world.
HOST: Yes, it does.
PM: Wouldn't we want to live in a world where no child is afflicted by polio anymore, so we're getting vaccines literally into the arms of kids around the world.
HOST: But we wouldn't want to do, though, is take money off good people here who are doing it tough and give it to regimes that can't be trusted.
PM: Oh, I couldn't agree with you more, and that's we have all of the oversight that we do to make sure that that doesn't happen, but can I say to your listeners, too, Australians are very generous. Australians donate to Save the Children, many of them through World Vision have adopted a child overseas, and Australians, I do think, want us to do our fair share  -  not more than that  -  but our fair share under the Millennium Development Goals to stop kids dying of hunger and preventable diseases in our world.
That's what we're doing, and that has bipartisan political support in this country. I support it, and Tony Abbott supports it.
HOST: The major beneficiaries of Family Tax Benefit Part A are actually families earning $30-$40-$45,000 a year, Prime Minister. Their fuel and food costs are spiralling. Inflation is likely to be higher, but you're going to quarantine their increases for two years. They're going to find it very hard to survive. Do you acknowledge that?
PM: Leon, that's simply not true. If you are on-
HOST: -Paul Clithero said this only a week ago.
PM: Well, he's not right.
HOST: He's not right?
PM: He's not right, and people should not believe that. If you are receiving Family Tax Benefit A, and you are on an income of $30,000 or $40,000 a year, you will continue to see your payments indexed. Your payments will continue to go up. Anybody who's trying to tell you anything different is not explaining to you.
HOST: They'll go up by what, the CPI?
PM: That's right, they'll be indexed as usual Leon, and for the families of teenagers, and many families do have teenagers, they will see increases, if they're on the maximum rate, of more than $4,000 a year.
In South Australia, that's more than 50,000 families that will see a big boost in the amount that they get because they've got a teenager in the home, because the family payment system has assumed teenage kids are somehow cheaper than younger kids to support, and that's not true.
HOST: Utility prices right now in this State are enormous. We've just had announced last week, you might be aware of this, a 60 per cent increase in those who use the least water, a 55 per cent increase in their supply charge for water. When you add that to electricity consumption, and the prices are going up whether we have a carbon tax or not, power prices are the spiral, are you considering to compensate further those people now, listening to you, who are doing it absolutely tough, because these costs are going up well above CPI.
PM: I understand people are doing it tough, Leon, and what we've done, through this Budget and as a Government, to assist people is we've reduced tax, we've done that three years in a row. That's to help people. We've engaged in an historic increase in the pension to help people on fixed incomes.
In this Budget we are working with families on their cost of living. Family payments for the families you've just talked about will continue to go up. We've increased family payments for families with teenagers. We're increasing the coverage of our education tax refund, the thing that helps you with the cost of getting the kids back to school, so you'll also be able to make a claim on school uniforms, and we're bringing the budget back to surplus exactly as promised to keep our economy strong and to not add to the inflationary pressures which hit people and their cost of living, so they go into the shops and come out having paid more  -  getting the Budget back to surplus is very important to help us work with families to manage their cost of living.
HOST: Prime Minister, Adam's on the line. Adam, meet Prime Minister Gillard.
CALLER: Good morning. How are you doing?
PM: I'm good thanks, Adam. How are you?
CALLER: Well, thanks. Calling up regarding this carbon tax and how it will affect agriculture, so far as I'm sure food production is a big issue worldwide, but the world is starving and I just worry that the carbon tax will make agricultural lands perhaps more valuable to big business for planting trees more than it is for producing food. Is that something that's likely to happen, and what can be done about it?
PM: Adam, you don't have to worry about that at all. The approach we've taken for agriculture with carbon pricing is agriculture will not be included in the scheme, so there won't be a carbon price on farming, but there will be benefits for farming because there would be a carbon credit scheme. Many farmers are changing their land management practices. They're still growing food, but they're doing it in a more efficient way which actually stores carbon in the soil and through other mechanisms, and they will be able to receive money for doing that under our carbon farming initiative, so this is good news for farmers.
Can I just say on carbon pricing generally, I understand that we've got to keep explaining all of this to people, and we will. All of the details will be available in the middle of the year.
HOST: Will it include petrol?
PM: Well, all of the details, Leon, will be available in the middle of the year, and as we do it I will be very mindful of getting assistance to families to help them with cost of living, and I understand paying for petrol does matter to people's cost of living, but Leon, I think it's important for people to understand the alternative  -  I am going to be announcing details of a scheme: our 1,000 biggest polluters, big businesses paying; families being assisted with cost of living pressures.
What Mr Abbott is proposing, and this cat has only come screaming out of the bag in the last 24 hours, his spokesperson Greg Hunt has revealed they're planning a $15 a tonne carbon price, no assistance to families-
HOST: -What price are you planning?
PM: Well, we'll make the details clear, but we will give assistance-
HOST: -Be more than that?
PM: Leon, it will come with assistance. Mr Abbott is saying $15 with no assistance to families.
HOST: Is this about the environment or wealth redistribution, because, see, this whole, correct me if I'm wrong here, we're being told we must apply the carbon tax to act on climate change. Now, that's what I'm hearing, OK, we're all hearing this.
But we're hearing more about wealth redistribution than we're hearing about what affect it will have on the temperature of the planet.
PM: Well, Leon, I hope you're hearing about both. The aim of the scheme is to cut carbon pollution. That's what it's for, and the most efficient way of doing that, economists will tell you the most efficient way of doing that is to put a price on carbon pollution paid by big businesses that generate a lot of pollution. At the moment they can stick all of that into the atmosphere for free. When we price it, they will innovate. They don't want to pay the price, so they will innovate and generate less carbon pollution.
HOST: Ultimately, as I understand it, you want to move from a carbon tax to an emissions trading scheme, is that correct?
PM: That's right. That's what we've announced.
HOST: I have in front of me, this is hot off the press, that carbon credit fraud in the economic union is causing more than €5 billion damage for the European taxpayer. It says that the ETS there has been the victim of fraudulent traders for the past 18 months. Now, why on earth would we want to adopt a scheme that's been rorted like this?
PM: Well, we won't. We'll have our own scheme.
HOST: It'll be different to this, will it?
PM: We'll have our own scheme, and we've learnt the lessons from emissions trading schemes overseas, so-
HOST: -Which are?
PM: Well, Leon, we won't be importing any of the problems that other emissions trading scheme have had. But Leon, very important point that you've raised, because in the domestic political debate here Tony Abbott and others would have you believe no-one in the world is doing anything.
Well, Europe's got an emissions trading scheme.
HOST: Which they've suspended, because of all this corruption, and they're saying that organised groups are getting-
PM: -Well, hang on, Leon, that's actually-
HOST: -I've got it here, right in front of me.
PM: And I just want to get some more facts on the table.
Prime Minister Cameron, a Conservative Prime Minister in Britain  -  if he was an Australian he would be in the Liberal Party  -  they've had a price on carbon in their economy for a number of years now and they've just announced that they're going to cut carbon pollution by 50 per cent by 2025. Our aim here in Australia is -5 per cent.
So, don't let anybody tell you that the rest of the world isn't acting: 50 per cent in Britain by 2025.
HOST: So, you will avoid speculators getting hold of this and speculating on carbon?
PM: We, of course, have learned lessons from overseas, where people have had emissions trading schemes for a long time, and having learned those lessons we will design this scheme so that it is not able to be used by shysters to make a dollar.
HOST: OK, just quickly, the set top box, $350. Now, Harvey Norman, God bless him, or Gerry Harvey, has announced that he could install a set top box and give you plenty of change, probably for under $200, probably $150 or even $130, but we're paying $350.
PM: Well, it's not an apples to apples comparison.
HOST: It's not?
PM: It's absolutely not, and we've asked Mr Harvey to do an apples to apples comparison and to give us a price. Apples to apples, this is not your cheapest set top box. It's the set top box that will meet the needs of older people, people with disabilities who aren't very good with technology, so it's not the cheapest set top box you can buy.
It's fully installed. You get a 12-month support service so that if something goes wrong then that can be addressed and that can be-
HOST: -So nobody will profiteer from this?
PM: We've got a price here for a service which is far broader than the price of the set top box, so comparisons that have been done with the price of the set top box with an inferior box, with no support for 12 months, are not appropriate comparisons.
We've said to Mr Harvey ‘if you can do the full lot, not a little section of it, if you can do the full lot for cheaper, well, let us know', but it's got to be the full lot.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for joining us today. You're in Adelaide because?
PM: I'm in Adelaide because we've got our community cabinet here tonight. This is where people from South Australia will be able to come and meet directly with me and with Ministers, raise their concerns; we'll have a really good exchange with members of the community.
HOST: Good luck, Julia, and when you get the question you'll let us know, won't you?
PM: And I'm presuming the question you're talking about is, you know, how much will families pay for carbon pricing under Tony Abbott? That answer is $720 a year. We'll be assisting families instead.



PM: I'm having a fantastic morning at my old primary school. I've brought with me Chris Evans and also Senator Don Farrell, we've all walked to school together with some very enthusiastic kids. This is where I went to school in Mitcham, Mitcham School, it was a great school then, it's a great school today.
I've had a fantastic time talking to the kids, walking with the kids, addressing school assembly and also talking to the staff here. It's really been very heart warming to get to come back to my old school.
I'm very pleased that we've been able to make a difference to this school through our Building the Education Revolution program. More than $5 million of investment, but I was still able to locate my old classroom, though it looks a bit different than it did in the days that I was here at school.
This is part of the major investment we've made in schools right around South Australia, around $1.4 billion has gone in to make a difference to more than 700 schools, 2000 projects. We've been doing things like building new classrooms, almost 300 of them. We've been doing things like building new school halls, around 230 of them. We've been building new libraries, 170 more of those and it's all about making a difference for a child's education.
There's nothing more important to the future of our nation than what's happening in schools like this one today. I said to the kids when I spoke to them at school assembly, that for me what happened in this school made a difference to the rest of my life, having great teachers who inspired a love of learning, a love of reading, teachers like Mr Crow, who was a Deputy Principal here and I've had to opportunity today to meet some of his family members.
So, it's been terrific to be here  -  a big thank you to everybody for having me here and for everybody who's engaged in Walk to School Day, it's a tremendous thing, getting the kids out walking to school. Today is officially Walk to School Day, where we say we want to keep kids active and healthy, but we want kids being active and healthy on more days than Walk to School Day. So congratulation to all of those parents and volunteers that make walk to school programs like walking school buses work, that's a tremendous thing to do and is helping to keep our kids fit and active.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on a separate issue Western Australia has increased their mining royalties. What impact will that have on the Federal Government?
PM: Well, first and foremost, let me say what the Minerals Resource Rent Tax actually means for Western Australia, is it means more infrastructure, more support for businesses, for companies, particularly small businesses, by reducing the tax that they pay and it also means more support for superannuation for working Australians.
I would say that today we can say that the campaign that was run in Western Australia against the Minerals Resource Rent Tax by members of the Liberal Party has now turned out to be a pretty hollow campaign. It's Premier Barnett that is now increasing taxation on mining companies. Now the Treasurer said, this is an own goal by Premier Barnett and Wayne Swan is right, this is an own goal by Premier Barnett. He knows how GST works and he knows under the current system that this means that GST money will be moved away from Western Australia as a result of the work that an independent body does, the Commonwealth Grants Commission.
He knows that's going to be the result because he's been complaining about Western Australia's treatment under the GST and I've actually acknowledged that we do need to take a good look at it and I've joined with Premier Barnett in making sure that the whole system is reviewed.
But what Premier Barnett has done will actually end up costing Western Australia, they'll lose GST and they'll also lose infrastructure funds that would have flowed from the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
I am accompanied by our most senior Western Australian representative, so I'll actually turn to him for some comments as well.
MINISTER EVANS: Thank you Prime Minister. Look, I just wanted to make the point that this decision by Colin Barnett, the Premier of Western Australia, it exposes the complete hypocrisy of Tony Abbott and the Liberal Party. At the last election they campaigned against the Minerals Resource Tax, they promised to oppose it in the Parliament and they did so on the basis that West Australian miners could not afford to pay more, they could not afford to pay the extra tax and we have now the Premier of Western Australian exposing that hypocrisy by increasing taxation on mineral companies by $2 billion.
So, the argument that somehow our Resource Rent Tax could not be afforded by mineral companies is completely blown out of the water. The hypocrisy of the campaign against the tax is revealed and we have the Liberal Premier increasing taxation on mineral companies, not just the big companies, as would occur under our profits tax, if you like, but all of those companies will pay increased royalties, as a less efficient tax, a less fair tax. But all of those companies who donated to a Liberal Party campaign to oppose the resources tax have now been let down, if you like, by the decision of the West Australian Premier to increase taxation on mineral companies by $2 billion in West Australia alone.
So, the opposition's campaign against the tax is completely undermined, completely exposed for what it is, another scare campaign and the reality is the WA Premier concedes the Federal Government's position, which is the big miners could afford to pay more tax in Western Australia in order to support investment in community services in our state.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you admit that it will leave a black hole in the Federal budget?
PM: Well, the biggest risk to the Federal budget surplus is still Tony Abbott and his reckless and negative conduct in the Australian Parliament. I mean we're still waiting for Mr Abbott to actually reply to the Budget, he's done everything but and Joe Hockey, his Shadow Treasurer went to the National Press Club and didn't really reply to the Budget either. The only person who's tried a budget reply is Malcolm Turnbull and in all of that he was telling us that Tony Abbott's scare campaign against carbon pricing is a scare campaign and Tony Abbott's plan won't work and will blow the budget.
So, first and foremost, Mr Abbott has to come clean and say will he in the Australian Parliament oppose our budget legislation, which will get the budget back into surplus in 2012-13 as promised. We will deliver that budget surplus and, as a result of the actions of Premier Barnett, of course we will have to deal with questions like infrastructure funds for Western Australia.
JOURNALIST: It will leave a black hole though?
PM: We'll bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13, exactly as promised.
JOURNALIST: What impact will this have though, how many million dollars (inaudible).
PM: We will be adjusting infrastructure expenditure for Western Australia to protect the Federal budget, the budget is coming back to surplus exactly as promised.
JOURNALIST: The mining tax is a big part of the budget, the budget surplus, so is the budget then not fragile after this move by WA?
PM: The Minerals Resource Rent Tax legislation will be presented to the Parliament later this year and we will work to get it through the Parliament. The budget will come back to surplus in 2012-13; we've worked hard to make the responsible decisions to get that done. The real risk here is Tony Abbott's irresponsibility, he goes around promising all things to all people and he can't make it add up, he's never been able to make the budget add up. Flood package from Tony Abbott earlier this year, didn't add up, an $11 billion black hole in his election costings and last budget his budget reply was a big black hole too.
So, we're still waiting for Mr Abbott to say, will he do the responsible and pass the legislation that gets the budget back to surplus, as promised.
JOURNALIST: Do you think WA's decision might reinvigorate the war on the mining tax?
PM: Well, I actually think to echo what Chris Evans has said, this is undermined the Liberal Party's campaign against the Mineral Resource Rent Tax. The Liberal Party went to the last Federal Election saying to everybody in this nation, but must particularly the people in Western Australia, that mining companies couldn't pay more tax and here they are, the Liberal Party imposing more tax on mining companies  -  what a hollow campaign.
JOURNALIST: Will you be stripping the GST (inaudible)
PM: We don't do that, it's an independent body that works out GST distribution, the Commonwealth Grants Commission. Premier Barnett is very familiar with how this body works, he's complained about the way the GST is distributed and I've said I do think the matter needs a review and we're created that review, working with Premier Barnett and other Premiers and Chief Minister's around the country.
But Premier Barnett knows how this independent process works and that's why what he's done will cost Western Australia, because he knows that through the independent process GST money will be moved away from Western Australia because of this decision and I suspect he also knew that we would act on infrastructure for Western Australia because of this move.
Thank you. 


Modbury Heights, South Australia
This transcript contains excerpts from the Community Cabinet meeting held in Modbury Heights on Thursday 19th of May 2011. A complete transcript of the Public Forum detailing all questions and answers can be found via the Community Cabinet links on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet homepage http://www.dpmc.gov.au/community_cabinet
Narrator: On Thursday the 19th of May the Government held a Community Cabinet meeting in Modbury Heights, Adelaide. The Community Cabinet program provides the Government with valuable first hand information in relation to emerging issues to the Australian public.
Public Forum footage extracts
School Principal: Good evening as principal of the Heights School, Helen Calvert, I'd like to welcome you all this evening and to thank you for attending . . . as a pre-school to Year 12 site we operate very much as a community of learners with a relentless focus on high achievement and quality education for all.
Lewis O'Brien:  . . . . .On behalf of the Kaurna people I welcome you to Kaurna country and I do this as the ambassador of the Adelaide plains people, my brothers, my sisters let's work together in harmony. . . . .
Tony Zappia MP:  . . . .Can I invite and welcome Prime Minister Julia Gillard to the lectern and in turn she will take over the proceedings from here. Thank you very much.
Prime Minister: Thank you very much to our local member Tony Zappia for that introduction, Helen (School Principal) thank you for having us in your very great school, and for making all of the arrangements possible. . . . . It's fantastic to be back in my home town, it's fantastic to be in the place where I went to school and where I learned my early values which are still driving me as Prime Minister today. . . . . .I'm sure you've got a million ideas that you want to convey to us and some questions to ask us we will move to taking your questions now.
Community Member 1: Why does the Government feel that it is acceptable to send asylum seekers arriving by boat to Malaysia?
Prime Minister: Thanks for that question and to put it at its most simple, what we want to do is break the people smuggling business model.
Community Member 2: When will you be implementing the recommendations regarding the National Disability Insurance Scheme?
Bill Shorten MP: The Commonwealth should expand its role and look at the feasibility of a National Disability Insurance Scheme
Community Member 3: Is your Government committed to reducing population growth and thereby alleviating some of the pressures on our cities?
Prime Minister: Our view is that we need to understand different needs in different parts of the country.
Footage of interviews with community members:
Community Member 4: It's an opportunity for me and some of my friends who I am here with to congratulate the Government on their efforts to try and price pollution.
Community Member 5: I have very major concerns about the way government funds education.
Community Member 6: I listened because sometimes it is important not to talk too much, but listening is very important.
Community Member 7: I felt very proud that as an Australian that we have this opportunity to not only meet with our members, but to ask questions.
Community Member 8: It's more of a face to face thing.
Community Member 9: It gets the community involved.
Community Member 10: I think that's what democracy is all about.
Footage concludes (3mins)



The Prime Minister Julia Gillard is encouraging South Australians to make schools the heart of their local communities following a record Government investment in new facilities and equipment.
More than 600 South Australian schools have built education and recreation facilities which are now being used by local community groups as well as students and staff.
The Gillard Labor Government has invested more than $1.37 billion to modernise South Australian schools and the Prime Minister today inspected new such facilities at her former primary school in Adelaide.
The Mitcham Junior Primary and Primary schools, the oldest state school in South Australia, received a total of $5.3 million for refurbishment work, the construction of classrooms, a library and a multipurpose hall.
The new facilities are now being used almost every night of the week by members of the local community.
This is a great example of how communities are benefiting from the Government's investment in our schools.
School projects completed across South Australia include:
 * 	288 Classrooms
 * 	173 Libraries
 * 	26 Science centres
 * 	24 Language centres
 * 	234 Multi-purpose halls
 * 	250 Shade structures
 * 	61 Sporting facilities
 * 	202 Sporting grounds, and
 * 	42 Covered outdoor learning areas          
These projects have transformed the learning environment for thousands of students. Examples like these are also helping to meet the diverse needs of local communities across South Australia.
Funding for Tyndale Christian School in Salisbury East Adelaide, for example has allowed the school to support its most needy children through the provision of specialist support, therapy and sensory rooms. Meanwhile, the new school hall at St John's Lutheran School in rural Eudunda is serving as a valuable facility for the local community.
The multipurpose hall at Mitcham Primary School is being used for a wide range of activities while students have access to better facilities for physical education and drama classes.
Investments like these ensure students at Mitcham Primary and other South Australian schools have the best conditions to help them get a world-class education.



I see many state and Federal colleagues here today, far too many to name.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
And I see so many familiar faces too.&nbsp; Old friends, old colleagues ... old mates.
&nbsp;
So many good Labor people I've worked with over the years ... so many good Labor people who I know so well.
As Prime Minister I go to many rooms where I feel welcome.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
But it is very special to come back to a room where I feel so much at home.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
I know Victorian Labor gathers in this room in 2011 with renewed determination and great resolve.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Yes in Government, there were mistakes and there are regrets – no party is perfect and ultimately the people's verdict is always right.
&nbsp;
Yet we all know that your reflection can begin with modest satisfaction – a sincere self-esteem – in a job well done.
&nbsp;
500 new or rebuilt schools.&nbsp; Trade schools.&nbsp; Regional Rail. Casey Hospital, the Austin, the new Royal Children's and the Women's.
&nbsp;
A sound budget, a strong economy, opportunity in the regions, growth in jobs.
&nbsp;
After three terms in office, you can be proud.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
The record is clear and the legacy is strong.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Steve Bracks and John Brumby led Victorian Labor well.
&nbsp;
And under their leadership, Labor governed Victoria well.
&nbsp;
For eleven years, this was Labor as it should always be: always a party of Government and a party of ideas.
&nbsp;
I am proud of Labor's record in Victoria and you should be too.
&nbsp;
And as you look forward, you can be confident as well.
&nbsp;
Daniel Andrews will lead Victorian Labor with determination and fight.
&nbsp;
And Victorian Labor will be ready to govern in 2014.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
In Canberra, Labor is in a different phase.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
This is our year of decision and delivery.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Yet in your renewed determination and in our decisions and delivery we are each driven by the same progressive principles of Labor – these great things we share, these things which brought us all to rooms like this in the first place:
&nbsp;
The people we are, the people we represent, the things we believe in.
&nbsp;
Australian Labor: a party with history and a party of the future.
&nbsp;
All Australians: speaking for the “great mass of the people” still.
&nbsp;
A strong economy and opportunity for all: sharing and sticking together so the fair go is always fully paid for.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Friends, I saw my predecessor John Howard say a strange thing a few days ago.
&nbsp;
He said that I should not have called our Budget a “Labor Budget”, because I should have been speaking to “all Australians”.
&nbsp;
I thought this was very telling, because it betrayed the conservative failure to understand Labor's governing purpose:
&nbsp;
A Labor Budget is a Budget for all Australians.
&nbsp;
In our plans to spread the opportunities of the mining boom, in our plans to get more Australians into jobs, in our decisions to get the Budget back in the black, we have been driven by this great goal:
&nbsp;
Opportunity for all.
&nbsp;
Not entrenched privilege for the few.
&nbsp;
Australia's economy needs more Australian workers and many Australians need work.
&nbsp;
Our Labor values and our belief in spreading opportunity impel us to put the two together.
&nbsp;
When I think about this Labor Budget I think about a community venture I visited a fortnight ago.
&nbsp;
On the Thursday before the Budget I went to a Communities for Children service run by the Benevolent Society and UnitingCare Burnside in Ambarvale in Sydney.
&nbsp;
Co-located on site is the Yummy Cafe run by the YWCA. The Cafe is an innovative, award-winning hub in the community which provides a safe, child-friendly space and nutritious food.
&nbsp;
Young mums meet there to join in study groups with free accredited courses and access to child care while they are studying through the Happy Young Parents Program.
&nbsp;
I met teen mums who are studying their certificate three in child care services and some of the girls I spoke to are already planning to go on to get their diploma in early childhood education and care.
&nbsp;
These girls are seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, doing one of the hardest things in the world and too often doing it on their own.
&nbsp;
But they're not on their own at Ambarvale.
&nbsp;
It's a program which is breaking what could be generational cycles of disadvantage passed on from mother to child.
&nbsp;
It's a place where economic participation is creating social inclusion, where new skills and new work are creating a new life.
&nbsp;
Most important, the young women I met are helping themselves.
&nbsp;
Setting the alarm clock early, doing the hard thing, getting up and going every day, when the morning's cold, when they're tired, when bub is grizzling.
&nbsp;
And through that effort finding a life of purpose and friendship and warmth and fun as well.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
These young women will be joining footy tipping comps and going to work Christmas parties, their children are having baby-cinos and making little childcare buddies.
&nbsp;
It's the kind of life we expect for ourselves and I can assure you, these young women have the same expectations as every Australian.
&nbsp;
They won't be patronised or told they're not up to it – and if they have their way, they certainly won't be left behind.
&nbsp;
At Ambarvale, I saw hope, I saw opportunity, I saw young women learning and working and supporting each other, setting goals for themselves and for their kids.
&nbsp;
This is where Labor thinking has to be today.
&nbsp;
The old way saw these young women as victims, the old way offered an excuse.
&nbsp;
Some today see these young women as problems,&nbsp;they offer blame.
&nbsp;
At Ambarvale, I just saw people - people who can work, people who can seize opportunity.
&nbsp;
I left there really proud of those young women and really proud that our Labor Budget will help more young women like them.
&nbsp;
The conservatives can never truly comprehend this about us.
&nbsp;
But the response from people who work with disadvantaged Australians shows me that many good people understand our plans, do know that we are acting from our highest principles.
&nbsp;
I thought the words of Tony Nicholson of the Brotherhood of St Laurence following the Budget were powerful:
&nbsp;
The Budget has taken the initial steps of establishing a new welfare morality for our nation which is long overdue ...
... the most disadvantaged in our community have modest mainstream aspirations and ... they won't shy from increased obligations in welfare if they are matched with more and better assistance.
This is the test of the new welfare morality ... It's a test that the welfare initiatives in the Budget pass ... most will relish the additional support.
&nbsp;
Tony wasn't alone.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
A new welfare morality, a Budget for all Australians - a Labor Budget.
&nbsp;
A Budget in which I wanted to deliver, based on the values that drove me to politics, on my passion to create opportunity for all Australians.
&nbsp;
It is a passion I learned from my parents and our family's experience – and a passion that was fuelled by my experience of the Labor tradition – those around me and those who have gone before me who have fought for fairness and opportunity in our country's future.
&nbsp;
Belief in the benefits and dignity of work is the universal Labor conviction.
&nbsp;
Andrew Fisher said it in 1910:
&nbsp;
Isn't the typical labourer the typical Australian?&nbsp; I think he is.&nbsp; The future of Australia depends upon him.&nbsp; Whom else can you choose as typical?&nbsp; Not the idler.
&nbsp;
Curtin's creed as the Battle of the Coral Sea raged was simple:
&nbsp;
Men are fighting for Australia today. Those who are not fighting have no excuse for not working.
&nbsp;
In 1948 Ben Chifley's creed was simple too:
&nbsp;
Self-respect is born in people who have the opportunity to work ... and that benefits the community of which they are members.
&nbsp;
Your party, our party, the party I lead, is – politically, spiritually, even literally – the party of work.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Our Budget includes many sound Labor measures.
&nbsp;
$2.2 billion for mental health. 130 000 new training places and apprenticeships.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
The parents of hundreds of thousands of teenagers with over $4000 a year extra in family tax benefit.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Millions of low-income workers with more in their regular pay packet through the reforms to the Low-Income Tax Offset.
&nbsp;
But if the Budget has a face, the young women and the babies who I saw at Ambarvale are it.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Friends, we are the party of work, and we are the party of political courage.
&nbsp;
This Labor Party, this labour movement, was created by people who were prepared to face up to the challenges of the future and they haven't been easy.
&nbsp;
When this Party was formed the challenges of fighting two world wars were still to come.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
When this Party was formed the challenge of the Great Depression was still to come.
&nbsp;
When this Party was formed what we needed to do to modernize our economy and be competitive in the world was still to come.
&nbsp;
And people from the Labor Party and people in the labour movement looked inside themselves and found the courage to face those challenges.
&nbsp;
Now we must summon that courage again and tackle climate change.
&nbsp;
We must summon that courage again and win the fight to price carbon.
&nbsp;
We know climate change is real.
&nbsp;
We know we must cut carbon pollution.
&nbsp;
We know the cheapest, most efficient way to do that is to make big polluters pay.
&nbsp;
And we know that when big polluters pay that every cent of that money can be used to help families, protect jobs and fund programs to tackle climate change.
&nbsp;
Friends, it's been said before now but it's never been truer than of the fight to price carbon:
&nbsp;
This isn't a fight between right and left.
&nbsp;
It's a fight between right and wrong.
&nbsp;
Conservative Governments around the world are acting responsibly.
&nbsp;
The United Kingdom is not only committed to retaining a domestic carbon price and remaining in the European emissions trading scheme, it has this week announced deeper cuts in carbon emissions.
&nbsp;
New Zealand's emissions trading scheme began in July 2008 and last year its Government further expanded the scheme.
&nbsp;
Like me, Prime Ministers Cameron and Key understand that we must act to protect our environment and secure a strong clean energy future for our economy.
&nbsp;
Our opponents' campaign sets the future of our great country against the ambitions of one political elite.
&nbsp;
There is a reason they are begging for an election in 2011.
&nbsp;
And it is not because they think they can win in 2013.
&nbsp;
It is because they know that in 2012, this mindlessly negative campaign will be exposed before every Australian.
&nbsp;
When Australia has a carbon price, when households are generously assisted, when jobs continue to grow.
&nbsp;
When the sun rises in the east, cows keep giving milk, chickens still lay eggs.
&nbsp;
Our opponents know their campaign of fear will be exposed as a sham and then they will face the judgement of the Australian people in 2013.
&nbsp;
Friends, we are fighting to price carbon, to tackle climate change and to build a clean energy economy which is prepared and strong.
&nbsp;
But we are fighting for something else as well.
&nbsp;
We are fighting to show that our nation hasn't lost the ability to reform, to take the decisions reason compels us to take today to build a better future.
&nbsp;
Friends, many of us follow American politics with interest and think of the United States as a friend for Australia and a force for good in the world.
&nbsp;
Yet we are still often struck by the differences between us.
&nbsp;
We are confused by their health care debates – why can't they follow our Labor example with Medicare we say.
&nbsp;
We share their trauma when a congresswoman is shot and we are grateful that here, politicians do not live in fear.
&nbsp;
We are amazed that more than two years into his term, President Obama is still being challenged on his place of birth and we say to each other – “only in America”.
&nbsp;
But friends, while I am confident we will continue to be a safe nation proud of the health care system Labor designed for our country, I believe a more Americanised political style of debate has come to this country.
&nbsp;
Tony Abbott has said of himself that he is John Howard and Browyn Bishop's political love child.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Heaven knows that's bad enough but the truth is he is acting more like the love child of Sarah Palin and Donald Trump.
&nbsp;
So let me reply to his increasingly hysterical fear campaign with President Obama's words to his nation when answering the hysteria about his birth certificate.
&nbsp;
We do not have time for this kind of silliness.
&nbsp;
We don't have time for the politicians and shock jocks who deny the scientific conclusions of NASA and the CSIRO.
&nbsp;
We don't have time for made-up figures and shameless fear-mongering.
&nbsp;
We don't have time to waste on a debate that lacks facts and reason.
&nbsp;
Our national efforts and energies need to be focussed.
&nbsp;
We are a nation determined to keep our economy strong while spreading the opportunities our strong economy gives us.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
We are a nation at war and determined to prevail in Afghanistan.
&nbsp;
We are a nation determined to do our bit to tackle climate change and urgently needing to make a start to build the clean energy economy of the future.
&nbsp;
We are a nation that emits more carbon pollution per person than any other developed nation on earth.
&nbsp;
We live on a planet that's warming dangerously.
&nbsp;
We don't have time for fear mongering.
&nbsp;
Our national ethos is to have a go.
&nbsp;
And together we will tackle climate change, price carbon, provide assistance to families and protect jobs.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Friends, we have brought down a responsible Budget to create jobs and spread Opportunity.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
A Labor Budget for all Australians.
&nbsp;
We have embarked on a policy program to deliver a carbon price and a clean energy economy.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
A Labor reform for all Australians.
&nbsp;
And now every Australian progressive – everyone who wants Government to make brave decisions for the future of the country and persist in the face of populist opposition – has a campaign to be part of and a policy to support.
&nbsp;
We didn't sign up to these things because they are easy.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
But it is not in the DNA of this political party, it is not in the DNA of this labour movement, it is not in the DNA of this country we love, to be afraid of the future.
&nbsp;
We are called on today to face difficult challenges again.&nbsp;&nbsp;
&nbsp;
They require us to be simultaneously a party of government and a party of ideas.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
A party committed to methodical, disciplined progress and a party which reaches out to the wider community, seeking new ways to represent and to serve the interests of every Australian.
Friends, as our world keeps changing, so we have a responsibility to renew ourselves and our organisation, constantly focusing on the needs of the Australians who we are here to serve.
&nbsp;
But what mustn't change – what doesn't change – is our courage.
&nbsp;
We will be as bold in our future as we have been in our past.
&nbsp;
We will serve the cause of bringing opportunity to every Australian.
&nbsp;
We will pursue the historic mission of fairness that has created the Labor Party and for which we have endured all of these long years.
&nbsp;
We will meet the challenges of the future.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today paid tribute to the enormous contribution made by the late Bill Hunter who passed away in Melbourne last night after a long battle with cancer.
The Prime Minister said Mr Hunter was an Australian icon who will be missed. Mr Hunter played a key role as an acclaimed actor in helping to define Australian culture over five decades on screen and on stage.
He told us Australian stories in an Australian voice at a time when we were debating and developing our sense of national identity.
Bill Hunter brought Australian characters to life using his great talent in roles from Newsfront in 1978 to Strictly Ballroom and most recently in the film Red Dog.
On behalf of all Australians, the Prime Minister extends condolences to Mr Hunter's family and friends. 



More people are receiving Youth Allowance support than ever before according to new figures released today. 
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today said there had been an increase of 21,000 university students receiving Youth Allowance in just one year as a result of the reforms to the system made by the Government last year.
These changes mean more students from lower socio-economic backgrounds and rural and regional areas can afford to attend university and get a degree.
As a result, hundreds of students are becoming the first members of their families to attend university.
The Prime Minister and Minister for Tertiary Education, Senator Chris Evans today met students from the University of Canberra who have benefited from Youth Allowance support.
In April last year, the Gillard Government implemented reforms to Youth Allowance payments to give more students the opportunity to go to university by targeting financial assistance to those with the greatest need.
In just 12 months the reforms to Youth Allowance have seen a:
 * 	15 per cent increase in the total number of university students receiving Youth Allowance  -  135,000 students in March 2010 compared to 156,000 this year
 * 	108 per cent increase in the number of dependent university students from disadvantaged backgrounds receiving the maximum Youth Allowance rate
 * 	22 per cent increase in the number of rural and regional university students receiving Youth Allowance.
The reforms are driven by strong values of the Gillard Labor Government  -  to ensure that the opportunity of a high quality university education is available to all Australians, regardless of their background or where they live.
A key element of the reform package was to significantly increase the Parental Income Test threshold from $33,300 to $45,114 (indexed annually) to better target the assistance to those who need it most.
This has significantly increased the number of students from low income families who are now eligible for the maximum rate of Youth Allowance.
The cumulative effect of the Government's changes is that more than 107,000 young people are eligible for Youth Allowance for the first time or are receiving more money than before.
More than 36,000 of these young people are from rural and regional areas.
The Gillard Government's new scholarships program is also proving to be highly successful in helping more students overcome financial barriers to attending university. 
More than 240,000 university students have received Student Start-Up Scholarships towards their education costs over the last 12 months  -  each worth $2,194 in 2011.
This year, the Gillard Government will fund more than 480,000 undergraduate places at public universities. With the uncapping of student places in 2012, that is likely to rise to more than half a million places  -  a 20 per cent increase since 2008.
Commonwealth expenditure on higher education is projected to increase to $13 billion in 2012. That is an additional $5 billion, up from $8 billion in 2007  -  to support more research and even better teaching and learning.
That's a profound investment in Australia's future and our young people.
These reforms mean that many more Australians will have the opportunities to access the high-paid jobs of the future.
Helping young people achieve a university qualification is also vital to ensuring Australia meets the employment needs of a productive economy. 



PM: I'm here at the University of Canberra and thank you very much to the friends just over there who have shown us around this university. I'm here with Chris Evans, the relevant Minister.
We've had the opportunity today to meet with some students who are the first students in their family to go to university, people who have come here despite a disadvantaged background. There have been some great stories, and it's been wonderful to be able to meet with individuals who are the face of the change that we're bringing to universities.
In the last few weeks we've brought down the budget, and the budget's been all about jobs and opportunity, and they are jobs that people are filling today, they are opportunities that people are seizing today.
The budget, as it builds on jobs and opportunities, is building on our past reforms and we've come here today to talk about the importance of some of the reforms that we've brought into universities. As a result of our reforms the number of places for undergraduates at university has grown by 50,000, and the enrolment of students from low socioeconomic status backgrounds has also grown, as has the participation of rural and regional students, and as a result of our Youth Allowance reforms we are better delivering Youth Allowance support to students from lower socioeconomic status backgrounds and rural and regional backgrounds.
So, to give you just a few of those statistics: an extra 21,000 university students are now receiving Youth Allowance. That's a 15 per cent increase compared with March 2010.
The number of dependent university students from disadvantaged backgrounds has more than doubled. It's increase by 108 per cent.
The number of rural and regional university students receiving Youth Allowance has increased by 22 per cent, and the cumulative effect of all of these changes is that more than 107,000 young people have benefited either by becoming eligible for Youth Allowance for the first time or receiving more money than before.
More than 36,000 of these young people are from rural or regional Australia, and of course the scholarships that we've also provided are assisting students, too. More than 240,000 university students have received our Start Up scholarships. That's more than 55,000 from rural and regional areas and more than 36,00 university students have got the money to help them relocate when they need to move away from home to take an opportunity at a university and more than 15,000 of those are from rural and regional areas.
I'm very pleased that our additional investments in higher education have had precisely the effect that we wanted them to have. It's grown the number of places available, so it's grown opportunities for Australians to study at our great universities. It's directed support so we increase the enrolment of students from low SES backgrounds  -  I didn't want our university system to be one where some Australians couldn't get the benefit of opportunity. And it's also increased participation from rural and regional areas, and we know unfortunately under the Howard Government the participation of those students was going down. Now we see it lifting again and that's great news.
I'd like to thank the University of Canberra for helping us share this story by introducing some students who have lived this experience that I'm talking about today, people who have come from disadvantaged backgrounds and who are here now seizing the benefit of opportunity.
I also wanted to take this moment to say some things about the Climate Commission report that was released a little bit earlier today. It was formally handed over to me by our Climate Commission and I very much thank them for the work that this report represents.
Now what this report is telling us, it is confirming that this is a critical decade for taking action on climate change and here we are in 2011 and this is a critical year, this is the critical year in which I am determined that we will price carbon.
Now, the facts and figures in this report certainly bear study, but what they confirm is that climate change is real; our planet is warming; and that has huge effects for the Australian economy in the future and for our environment in the future, for the lifestyle that we want to have.
What the report confirms is that in the last 50 years the number of record hot days in Australia has more than doubled and the last decade was the warmest on record since 1961. It confirms that sea levels are rising and if they continue to rise as this report projects we may see a doubling of the risk of coastal flooding.
The report confirms the Great Barrier Reef has already sustained significant damage and the report says ocean acidity is expected to increase, which will have severe consequences for marine life.
All of the information in this report about the impacts of climate change, about how climate change is real and it's making a difference to Australia and Australians today strengthens in me my determination to make sure we price carbon. We have to price carbon to cut carbon pollution. We have to price carbon to address dangerous climate change.
I would say to everyone this Climate Commission work is a very good report confirming climate change is real and the time to act by pricing carbon is this year, so carbon can be priced from the middle of next year.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Given the dire warnings in that report are you now considering a higher starting price for the carbon tax?
PM: We will announce the details of the starting price and the design of the scheme in the middle of the year, as promised. This information is confirming information that we knew: that climate change is real and it's having a real impact. We need to get on and to price carbon to cut carbon pollution.
What this report is telling us is we need to cut carbon pollution and the most efficient way of doing that is to put a price on carbon.
JOURNALIST: So this report's telling you what you already know?
PM: Well, this report is a peer-reviewed work by scientists and it's confirming that climate change is real. Of course, it's building on past work, past work that's been available from climate scientists, and that work is verifying to Australians climate change is real, it has real effects, effects that we can observe now and effects that we can extrapolate into the future - effects about our planet warming, about sea levels rising, about ocean acidity increasing, about impacts on the Great Barrier Reef.
Of course, the scientists who have put this together have drawn together the most recent information and that's very welcome, but the central premise of the report was already known to Government and that's why we determined to price carbon. The central premise is: climate change is real and to address climate change we need to cut carbon pollution.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the young people that you have just met, there are various critics of your budget from various places, the Opposition, whatever.
When you meet people such as those as you met today, does it sort of reinforce in your mind your personal commitment to equality of education which is what you've been on about since ever you've been in Government, and does it confirm also for you that when you're writing a budget you need to make choices, this is a choice you're making?
PM: Absolutely, I mean I've been determined across my life, including my life in the Australian Parliament, to make a difference for opportunity and for education. I know what that's like from my own personal experience. I know what it's like to get a go and to get to go to university. I wouldn't have gone to university if it hadn't been for the reforms of the Whitlam Government.
We met today some students who are getting the benefits of the reforms that we are delivering, reforms to grow the number of students who get a chance at university, reforms to grow the number of students from low socioeconomic backgrounds who get a chance at university. At the moment, or in the past, they've all too frequently missed out. We are growing the numbers of poor kids who get a chance, that is poor kids who have got all of the wherewithal to get a university education but we're locked out of the gates of universities simply because of their family background  -  we're changing that, and we're changing the participation of rural and regional students. Now a lot is said about that but the figures don't lie - under the Howard Government the participation of rural and regional kids in university was going down, now it's coming back up; so our reforms delivering. This is a good example of how reforms to create opportunity can make a real life difference for Australians and the recent budget brings more of those reforms.
JOURNALIST: What does it say to you about the need to approach it from the school end as well, because if the kids from disadvantaged backgrounds don't apply or can't get through school to a point where they can get into an institution, then they can't, so what are you doing at the school level about improving their access?
PM: Well, that's a very important point and we are delivering more resources to schools than ever before and we are driving a huge reform agenda in schools  -  a reform agenda about transparency, about teacher quality, about attendance, about literacy and numeracy, about aspiration and a culture of aspiration and high expectations. This is the reform agenda we're driving for every child, in every school.
We've also deliberately made a stream of money that flows to universities contingent on them doing good work for low SES students and many universities are, as a result, buddying up with schools, buddying up with disadvantaged schools so they can take university professors, students, into those disadvantaged schools and they can show them that university isn't something that's beyond their reckoning of their live experience  -  university is something that's come to them and they should think about it as a choice.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the mining tax, have you or the Treasurer had any conversations with Colin Barnett over the weekend about (inaudible).
PM: No, I haven't.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, with the Commission's recommendation, it would appear to suggest that a higher carbon price is needed to force industry into more energy efficient production measures. Does this mean that the Government would think of a carbon price closer to $30, if not $40?
PM: Nice try, but we will announce the carbon price and the design of the scheme in the middle of the year, as announced.
JOURNALIST: How are the negotiations going with the Greens, though?
PM: Well, we'll announce the carbon price and the design of the scheme in the middle of the year and let's just be clear  -  the purpose of carbon pricing is, of course, to drive change, to cut carbon pollution, to have businesses innovate to cut carbon pollution. This is about the 1,000 biggest polluters, the businesses that create the most pollution, that they currently put into the atmosphere for nothing, paying a price, and if they pay that price they will innovate and change, they will cut carbon pollution. That's what the scheme is designed to do.
We are, of course, still consulting with business and other stakeholders to get the design of the scheme right and all of the details will be available in the middle of the year.
In the meantime, can I just offer these words of counsel  -  anybody who's speculating about what the price is, or what the price impacts are likely to be, is simply making figures up and anybody who's speculating about those things tends not to also explain that there will be generous assistance to Australian households.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it starting to get frustrating for you in a political sense, for the fact that you do have to wait until July, or whenever it is, for the details to come out? Because I think even as we speak your opponent, Tony Abbott, is out some place in Queanbeyan, presumably bashing you again about this. It must be frustrating.
PM: And I trust any claims made have a appropriately critical and sceptical eye run over them, because if he uses a dollar figure, he's making it up and if he's at a business, which isn't amongst the 1,000 biggest polluters in the country, well I hope people ask him about that as well and they might also ask him about Malcolm Turnbull's belling the cat last week, that of course, because Tony Abbott's a climate change sceptic, he's designed a scheme that won't work, but which will be very costly for Australian taxpayers.
JOURNALIST: I asked whether you were becoming frustrated, not about (inaudible)
PM: I'm very happy to keep explaining climate change and carbon pricing and in part, apart from celebrating today with some great young Australians about the opportunities in Australians universities today, of course today, with the Climate Commission report, is a day on which people will be talking about and thinking about climate change. It's real, it's here, it's making a difference to Australia, it will make a bigger difference in the future. We have to cut carbon pollution and to get that done we have to start cutting carbon pollution through making the decision this year and bringing it into effect next year.
What the report makes clear is the later you start, the harder it is going to be to cut carbon pollution by the amount we need to.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister?
PM: Sure, we'll just come over here first.
JOURNALIST: The Commission was tasked with building a consensus on the issue of climate change and the fact that it was real. You say that you already knew that, that those were the facts. Do you think this report is going to do it and what do you say to the critics of the report who say it's not worth the paper that the Government paid for?
PM: Well, this is a report from scientists, from scientists who have gone and put a report together which is peer reviewed. Now, to anybody who says ‘we'll they've got a better view of the science than the scientists who wrote this report', then I trust they submit any claim they're making to the same kind of rigour.
These are climate scientists. We don't have time - the point I made on the weekend  -  we don't have time for false claims in this debate. The science is in, climate change is real. The science is clear, carbon pollution  -  man-made carbon pollution  -  is making a difference to our planet and our climate. We don't have time for people who don't have the qualifications and don't submit their claims to proper scrutiny to try and distort this debate. We've got to get on with the job of cutting carbon putting and having a rational debate about it.JOURNALIST: Will the report build a consensus, do you believe?
PM: I think people always want to see work from experts, this is work from experts and of course the Climate Commission is also travelling round the country, meeting with local communities, so people have the opportunity face to face to talk to them about the science and to ask them any questions that may be on their mind.
I mean, let's be clear, this is of course not the first report about climate change. Climate change has been the subject of scientific inquiry and report for decades now. That's why politicians in the past, like Margaret Thatcher, were persuaded that climate change was real. This does bring together the most recent information, the very valuable contribution as a result and I'd say that it's very important for people to look at it and to digest it and people who want to make claims about climate science should look at this report and shouldn't be trying to distract people with false claims.
Now, I know for example, Dennis Jensen, one of the Liberal Party members, is out today with his climate change denial  -  well, that might be something that Tony Abbott agrees with. We understand that because Malcolm Turnbull says he's designed a scheme that won't work, but this is the credentialed scientific work in front of us now.
JOURNALIST: I'm just wondering what the next stage of negotiations is for your Government, with the West Australian Government, over the mining tax (inaudible)?
PM: Well, as we've made clear, the royalties increase that Premier Barnett has made, we are concerned about that. Of course I have regular meetings and discussions with Western Australia about a whole range of issues  -  about health, about education, about prospects for the economy, about mining as well.
So I anticipate this will be the subject of discussion too.
JOURNALIST: Do you endorse everything in the climate change report? Do you endorse it totally?
PM: I'm not a climate scientist and that, I think, is actually a question that leads us to thinking about how this debate should be conducted. If a doctor said to me that, after medical research, if a doctor came into my office and said ‘something causes cancer and we can make a difference to it', then I would accept it.
When I first met Ian Fraser and he told me he had a cervical cancer vaccine that could cut the rates of cervical cancer for women and girls, I didn't pretend to myself that I knew enough about cancer to second guess whether what he was telling me was right. I accepted it, he was right, he's a scientist.
We've got climate scientists here who are telling us exactly the same about the nature of global warming and the climate of our planet. I am not in a position to second guess what they say. We need to accept the science and our society in the past has accepted the science. We accepted that smoking caused cancer, that's why we acted on cigarettes. We've accepted medical inventions and we've integrated them into the way that we do things. Vaccines  -  a fantastic example. Why do we vaccinate kids? Because we know the science is right and here we are today, good credentialed scientists telling us our climate is changing and what the effects of it are. Of course, we've got to act on it and the cheapest and most efficient way of acting on it is to price carbon.
We can't let this debate be waylaid by people who don't accept the science. No-one in this country would have said it was acceptable to not fund Ian Fraser's cervical cancer vaccine because a radio personality thought that it wasn't going to be any good. No-one would have accepted that. Well, the same applies to this debate.
JOURNALIST: Is Tim Flannery a climate scientist?
PM: Will Steffan - as Tim Flannery has said consistently and publicly, and as he said to me today, this has been put together by the climate scientists on the commission and it's been peer reviewed.
Thank you. 



PM: [audio break] friends of Sergeant Brett Wood. Sergeant Wood was lost to us overnight. He was a very brave man, a brave soldier, a decorated soldier. He has been described by the Chief of our Defence Force this morning as a magnificent soldier. He was on his third deployment to Afghanistan.
Our hearts go out to his wife, who would be struggling to absorb this very dreadful news. Our hearts also go out to his family and friends, as they seek to come to terms with his loss.
He was a young man who had dedicated his life to the defence of this nation. This is a very difficult day for the nation, but most particularly a very difficult day for his family.
At the same time the nation needs to absorb the news that we have also had five soldiers wounded on Afghanistan. Two were wounded in the same incident as Sergeant Wood and they are seriously ill. Our thoughts are with them, they will receive the best of medical care and our thoughts are also with their families, who would be so desperately worried about them at this time.
Separately three other soldiers were also wounded; they too are receiving the best of medical care. Their families would be very worried about them and our thoughts go to their families and to those soldiers as they deal with their injuries. This is a very difficult day; this is a lot of bad news for the nation to hear all at the same time.
Every loss in Afghanistan hurts us as a nation and with so much bad news before the nation today, I know that there will be some who despair and wonder why we are there in Afghanistan and whether we are making any progress.
I think the best thing that I can say to people is to reiterate the words of Ben Roberts-Smith, our most recent VC winner. He said to me and he said to the nation ‘we are making a difference in Afghanistan' and we are making a difference in Afghanistan. Progress is being made, it's difficult, it's hard fought for and we are entering a fighting season which will challenge us. But progress is being made in Afghanistan and we are there for all of the right reasons, we are there to ensure that Afghanistan does not again become a safe haven for terrorists.
Of course, as we look at the progress that is being made in Afghanistan we know that it comes at a terrible cost, particularly today we know that it comes at the cost of Australian lives and it's the dedication and bravery of people like Sergeant Wood who enable us to make the kind of progress that we are making in Afghanistan.
So, this is a difficult and tragic day in the life of our nation. Once again I do want to convey my condolences and the condolences of the Australian people to the family and friends of Sergeant Wood, who would be just in unimaginable pain today, having heard this news overnight.
I'll take a few questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say that we're making a difference in Afghanistan. Afghanistan is really making a difference in Australia as well, with the loss of brave men like Sergeant Wood today. Osama bin Laden is gone, there is a sense that there's some fundamental underground shift has taken place. Can you suggest there's any revision of the timetable even to get us out?
PM: Well the timetable remains the same, that is we are there, training the Afghan National Army, we are there enabling the Afghan people to take security of their own nation. President Karzai has announced his intention that Afghanistan be in a position to do that by 2014. As I said to the Parliament when I spoke on this matter late last year, we will be there seeing the mission through.
There will be a process of transition  -  transition won't be a day or a moment in time, it will be a process  -  as areas of Afghanistan are sufficiently stabilised and sufficient local security forces are trained, that they can take over providing security themselves. So we need to transition when the conditions are right, there is no point going out, only to have to go back in because we have transitioned at a time that conditions aren't right.
We do confront a fighting season as we move to the warmer weather in Afghanistan. We know the intensity of fighting accelerates in that warmer weather and our soldiers will be out there doing some very brave and difficult things during this period.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one gasping measure of any war is the ratio of people killed and wounded on both sides. Can you take the Australian people into your confidence and tell them what ratio this element of the war experienced by Australian soldiers is with regards to the numbers killed or injured among the Taliban insurgents?
PM: Look, I'm not in a position to give you numbers in that sense. This is not a conventional war, where soldiers in uniform stand on battle lines and confront each other and consequently it's not the sort of war where one can do tallies of losses in the way that may have been done for conflicts past.
This is a very difficult struggle, in very difficult circumstances. We went to Afghanistan because of terrorism, we went to Afghanistan because terrorists who had been trained there took Australian lives and the lives of so many others and in making the place safe, what we are seeking to do is deny terrorists the opportunity to train there. So that's all about security on the ground, it's all about a conflict where people don't wear uniforms and don't identify themselves and so where it's a far more difficult place to fight, then perhaps some of the imagery of traditional warfare that people would be more familiar with.
JOURNALIST: That said, 24 have been killed now, 160 wounded. Can you confirm that many more have been killed and wounded on the other side?
PM: Look, I am absolutely confident that in terms of our losses versus the losses of the insurgents that the insurgents have lost far more, yes I'm absolutely confident of that. And that is one of the things that is enabling us to clear, to hold, to make a difference on the ground. We are there to train, we are training the Afghan National Army. We are training police, so the situation, when it's stabilised, and it is stabilising, big gains have been made, then security leadership can transition to local forces.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, CDF said earlier the death of bin Laden had had virtually no impact in Afghanistan. I'm wondering if you could characterise for us how you see the connection now between the Taliban today in Afghanistan and al Qaeda and is it worth stepping up negotiations with the Taliban.
PM: Well, we know that terrorism, global terrorism, is a complex multi-headed beast. Of course bin Laden was the face known to the world as the leader of al Qaeda, but as I said when we discussed the death of bin Laden, the death of bin Laden does not mean that al Qaeda is dead, it's been dealt a very big blow, but it doesn't mean that al Qaeda is dead. And certainly global terrorism doesn't come in one shape, or one organisation, or in one man, so we need to continue the fight against terrorism and particularly to deny Afghanistan as a place for terrorists to train.
What we know is that al Qaeda was facilitated for training in Afghanistan, that's well known, we've seen the consequences of that training, tragically in violent incidents in our world that have taken thousands of lives, including the lives of Australians. So we are there on the same mission of strategic denial.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are the clearest signs for you of progress being made in Afghanistan?
PM: The clearest signs for me are the reports that I get back from people who have been on the ground, which is why I took you to the words of Ben Roberts-Smith. What we measure in terms of progress on the ground is the degree of security that is experienced by our personnel and also by locals. We obviously measure the number of Afghan National Army personnel who have been trained and the level to which they've been trained.We measure the number of police who have been trained; we are also training police and the level to which they've been trained. We measure changes in governance and in basic conditions for the Afghan people; alongside our military effort is a considerable aid and development effort. Indeed they work in a combined team and I've met with them when I've travelled to Afghanistan myself, both the military commanders, but also our senior civilian representatives who are leading our aid teams there.
So we track all of this, but in terms of the powerful images, I think the powerful images come from the people who have been on the ground and can say to you, as Ben Roberts-Smith does say, that it is a different place from the Afghanistan that he first went to, that he can see that and feel that in terms of the security, he can see that and feel that in terms of the security for the local population, he can see that and feel that in the activities that the local population now feel they can do. Whereas before they cowered in fear, things we would take for granted, like having local markets and commercial activity where people can go and buy food and do the things that we just say are just such a normal part of daily life, we don't even think about them, but were not able to be done by local people when soldiers like Ben Roberts-Smith first went to Afghanistan.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard tonight hosted a reception at Parliament House to thank the Australian rescuers, medical experts, police and Australian Defence Force personnel involved in the emergency responses to the Christchurch earthquake and the Japanese earthquake and tsunami.
Attorney-General Robert McClelland and Minister for Foreign Affairs Kevin Rudd joined the Prime Minster at the reception, which was attended by around 80 representatives of emergency services agencies from around Australia.  
More than 800 Australian personnel were deployed to New Zealand and Japan following the devastating natural disasters in these countries.
Each one of these men and women did a tremendous job often in incredibly difficult circumstances.
Following  February's Christchurch earthquake, Australia deployed a total of three 72-strong Urban Search and Rescue (USAR) teams; a 24 person Medical Assistance Team including trauma surgeons and nurses; a 75-bed field hospital; 16 ambulance officers; and 500 police drawn from state and federal police agencies.
Many of these Australians remained in Christchurch for weeks after the earthquake, continuing to search for survivors with rescue teams from around the world and providing medical, policing and logistical support to New Zealand authorities.
A 72-strong NSW-based USAR Team was also deployed to the Miyagi region of Japan in March to help rescue efforts.  Members of this team were moved by the remarkable stoicism and generosity of local people who had lost everything.
Both the New Zealand and Japanese Governments have expressed their deep gratitude for the assistance provided by Australia in the wake of these disasters.
The Government acknowledges the important role of all state and territory governments in assisting with these emergency efforts.
On behalf of all Australians, the Government thanks these emergency responders and support staff for their selfless contributions to these rescue missions.
The Government also recognises the work behind the scenes of the Australian Defence Force, Emergency Management Australia and the Department of Foreign Affairs in coordinating the emergency missions to New Zealand and Japan. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard welcomed President Demetris Christofias to Australia. This is the first visit to Australia by President Christofias since his election in February 2008.
The two leaders agreed the bedrock of relations between Australia and Cyprus is shared values and close people to people links. Prime Minister Gillard acknowledged the important contribution the vibrant Cypriot community has made to the diversity of Australian life. Cypriot-born migrants and their families in Australia number over 80,000, the second largest Cypriot community outside Cyprus.
The President and Prime Minister agreed to continue to facilitate and encourage reciprocal visits and to explore further cooperation in areas of mutual interest. They noted strong cultural and educational links between Australia and Cyprus. Cooperation was particularly strong in the area of antiquities and archaeology, with Australian archaeologists working on the island of Cyprus since the 1930s. There are significant exchanges at the undergraduate and postgraduate level between universities in Australia and Cyprus.
Prime Minister Gillard conveyed her appreciation for the generous contribution by Cyprus to the 2009 Victorian Bushfire Appeal and updated the President on reconstruction efforts. The leaders noted the challenges both countries faced with fires and welcomed the deepening exchange between the Cypriot and Victorian fire and emergency services. A visit by the Cyprus Fire Department is foreseen later this year.
President Christofias expressed his sympathy for the victims of more recent disasters in Australia, including Cyclone Yasi; flooding in the eastern states; and bushfires in Western Australia. The Government of the Republic of Cyprus has made a donation towards the restoration of the Cyprus community building in Brisbane.
Prime Minister Gillard congratulated Cyprus on its forthcoming and inaugural EU Presidency and outlined Australian priorities in its relations with the EU. Australia attaches great importance to concluding an Australia-EU Framework Agreement. The President affirmed Cyprus's support for the Agreement, which was both timely and appropriate.
President Christofias welcomed Australia's active participation and strong engagement in a range of UN and other multilateral bodies. Australia and Cyprus both strongly support reform of the UN Security Council and its working methods to better reflect the modern world and ensure it is accessible to small and middle-sized countries. As nations with significant shipping interests, Australia and Cyprus strongly support the work of the International Maritime Organization and value our cooperation on issues such as protection of the marine environment and maritime security.
The Prime Minister and President discussed the challenges each country faced from irregular migration and people smuggling. President Christofias detailed to Prime Minister Gillard new EU initiatives to address this problem. Prime Minister Gillard updated the President on Australia's proposal for a Regional Cooperation Framework. The two leaders noted people smuggling was a global problem that required a comprehensive solution and agreed to continue to share lessons learnt in addressing it.
The leaders went on to discuss progress on the Cyprus issue and expressed their support for a just and lasting settlement, in accordance with the relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions, which reunifies Cyprus in a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation. This settlement must be based on a single sovereignty, a single international personality and a single citizenship.
Prime Minister Gillard reaffirmed Australian support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. Australia recognises the Republic of Cyprus as the only legitimate authority on the island. Welcoming progress so far, the Prime Minister commended President Christofias's efforts and underlined the importance of achieving a comprehensive solution.
President Christofias recorded his appreciation for Australia's long-standing and active interest in efforts to facilitate a peaceful settlement to the Cyprus issue and for its involvement in the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP). Australian Federal Police officers have operated in Cyprus as part of this force continuously since 1964. This year marks the arrival of the 100th Australian Police contingent at UNFICYP.
Prime Minister Gillard said Australia's commitment to the people of Cyprus remained undiminished. Australia has maintained a Special Representative for Cyprus since 1998 who follows developments in Cyprus closely and works to encourage support within the Australian Cypriot community for a settlement to the problem. The Australian Government supports community-focused initiatives such as the Cyprus Academic Dialogue.
As active members of the Commonwealth, the President and Prime Minister agreed to work closely together in the lead-up to Australia's hosting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Perth in October. The meeting will provide a good opportunity to discuss global issues of mutual concern, including sustainable development, food security and climate change. The two leaders underscored the importance of institutional reform in furthering the Commonwealth's effectiveness and influence. 



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today extended her condolences to the people of the United States and the tornado-affected communities in Missouri, Oklahoma, Arkansas and Kansas.
The tornados striking Joplin, Missouri alone have wiped out 2,500 buildings, damaged a further 10,000, and resulted in the tragic deaths of 125 people, with many more remaining unaccounted for.
Just as we did during the floods in Queensland, Victoria and in other states, Australians have seen images of the terrible destruction and been saddened by the tragedy as it unfolded.
After a terrible summer, the Australian community knows all too well the difficulty and challenges faced by those dealing with the immediate aftermath of natural disasters; the heartbreak of those who lose so much; and the determination and sustained hard work required to rebuild.
Those affected by this latest disaster remain in our thoughts at this difficult time. 



PM: Thanks David and I'll just say a few things and the Premier might say a few words too and then we'll be very happy to take your questions. I'm very pleased to be here in this beautiful Queensland sunshine with the Premier of Queensland and of course with David for the launch of this huge development here in Gladstone on Curtis Island.
This is a $16 billion project, it's going to mean 6,000 jobs, that is great news for Gladstone, it's great news for Queensland, it's great news for Australia and I've been very, very pleased and privileged to have the opportunity to be here for the opening and to launch this project.
This project is an example of what is happening in the Australian economy today. We are an economy in transition, we're in transition from the global financial crisis to an economy that is coming to full capacity and full steam. We are an economy that is going to be defined by the resources boom mark two, we've got an unprecedented investment pipeline in front of us: $360 billion of investment and we've seen part of that investment today.
That means that Australia can look forward to a future of opportunity. We want to make sure that that opportunity is spread right through the country and that opportunities flow to people who haven't had the benefits of being in the workforce before.
We also want to make sure that people get the skills they need so that they can move through and get better opportunities in our workforce and I'm very pleased that Santos, with its partners, has been investing in and will continue to invest in scholarships so people can get those all important additional qualifications. Congratulations to you David for that.
This is also part of Australia and the world moving to cleaner energy sources. LNG is a cleaner energy source and as we transition our economy from being a high emissions economy to a clean energy economy LNG will be an important part of our future and an important part of the world's future.
We will be driving that change to a clean energy economy by pricing carbon and we will be looking towards the cleaner energy sources of the future and LNG will be one of those sources.
As I said when we were on Curtis Island, I've had the opportunity to talk about this project around the world. When I was recently overseas in Japan, in South Korea and in China all of the talk was of Australia's ability to supply the energy sources of the future and particularly in South Korea there was direct talk about this project. So people around the world are looking at Australia, they're looking at this project, looking at this development and we are very pleased to be able to talk about the prosperity it will mean here in Queensland, here in Gladstone.
So it's great to be able to be here today, I'll turn now to the Premier for some comments and we'll take any questions.
PREMIER BLIGH: Thank you. After a very tough start to the year for Queensland it's just terrific to see this major project going full steam ahead. It's a project that means jobs and prosperity for every Queenslander. We'll see great investment and job creation here in Gladstone and right across central Queensland and into the south west, into the Darling Downs area, but the spinoff and ripple effects across the whole economy can't be underestimated. We're seeing contracts now going for supplies, materials and labour right across Queensland. It's a very exciting time as the Queensland economy recovers from our disasters and we see this project full steam ahead, on track, on course.
I congratulate Santos and all the partners and I look forward to seeing the investment that this project has promised for some time now begin to become a reality on the ground, creating new opportunities for young Queenslanders in a brand new clean energy industry.
This is part of Queensland's involvement in a lower emissions energy future, not just for our State but for the entire Asian region, so it's a very exciting moment in a big and exciting project and we look forward to seeing it continue to proceed as planned.
PM: Thank you. Happy to take some questions. We're getting some background noise as well which is fabulous.
JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee that the carbon tax won't affect any jobs in this industry or the coal industry?
PM: Can I say the carbon price is about driving a clean energy future and what have we looked at today?  We've looked at a project that is part of that clean energy future. LNG is a cleaner source of energy, a $16 billion project, 6000 jobs, all part of that clean energy future.
Now I know that there have been some wild and inaccurate claims made about Gladstone as part of a continuing fear campaign by the Opposition. Gladstone is a place that is going to be part of this clean energy future; $16 billion of investment in this project by Santos and its partners is spelling that out to the local community. We've got work to do with those who, like David and others in the industry who represent LNG in this country, and we are working through with them in close consultation as we design carbon pricing. But if you work from first principles, carbon pricing is about us moving to a clean energy future, we are talking about that clean energy future with this investment here today.
JOURNALIST: Earlier this week the Premier asked you not embrace any radical policies on the coal industry (inaudible) what can you tell the coal industry about how you see their future?
PM: Well I'm not sure that's exactly what the Premier did to be frank but she'll be able to clarify that herself, but there was obviously some statements made earlier in the week by Senator Christine Milne about the future of the coal industry, the Government disagrees with those statements, we made that disagreement very, very clear through the relevant Minister, Martin Ferguson, and subsequent to the Government making its reaction to those comments very, very clear, the Premier made her statements.
So of course we are a country that will have a future with coal, we are country that will have a future with coal seam gas and we're seeing part of that future here today. We will work to get the balance right including the environmental balance, and this project here today is a great example of that. An approval given by the Federal Government, 300 conditions, and Santos and its partners determined to do the right thing by the environment and the right thing by this local community. So this is a sustainable project in every way at every level.
So of course coal is going to be part of the energy mix for the future but we will be moving to cleaner and cleaner energy sources, the investment that we're talking about today is part of the movement to those cleaner energy sources. That's what we're seeking to achieve through carbon pricing, it's obviously a great investment and good news for a place like Gladstone and for the rest of Queensland.
I'll turn to the Premier.
BLIGH: Yes I'm happy to confirm that my comments were in relation to the proposals from Christine Milne that we would not approve any further coalmines and further that we would shut down the LNG industry. My view: just simply preposterous, they would spell economic and social catastrophe for Queensland and the national economy and our Government will be actively pursuing the LNG industry because it is a cleaner form of energy, but we will continue to work with the coal industry because frankly coal is going to be a part of the world's energy future for some time to come. The transition is important, starting the transition now is important, but you can't have a transition of one day, you have a transition of decades and you plan it and you get it right.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how much cleaner is LNG (inaudible)
PM: Well it is a cleaner energy source on emissions, there's no doubt about that, and so it's going to be part of the way our country transitions and the world transition to a cleaner energy future.
JOURNALIST: How much (inaudible)
PM: Well I can get you all the statistics on emissions I think you'd find depends a fair bit on sources and usage but if you want all the facts and figures we can do that for you, but compared with, for example, the dirtiest forms of power generation of course LNG is a cleaner source of energy for the future and that's why it will be part of the way the world transitions and our economy transitions to a cleaner energy future, and that's good news. I know so much of what has been said about carbon pricing comes from the continuing negative campaign from the Opposition, but today I want to offer some words of reassurance to the Australian people. We will be a nation that prospers as the world moves and we move to a clean energy future. We've got an abundance of resources that will enable us to do that, our resources in LNG are part of it, our abundant sunshine, our access to wind and tidal power, to geothermal, our investments in innovation to drive cleaner usage of coal, all of these things are things Australia is good at and will be increasingly good at in the future. So a clean energy future is building on our comparative strengths.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any concerns about (inaudible) this project?
PM: Yes we want to make sure that we keep feeding Resources Boom Mk II with the skilled workers it needs, with the workforces it needs generally and also working in partnership on the infrastructure that Resources Boom Mk II needs. As we said at the time of the budget we're moving in a transition from the days of the global financial crisis to days when our economy will be at full capacity and what that means is it's hungry for workers, it's hungry for skills, it's hungry for infrastructure and we've got to feed that hunger. Now I want to make sure as we feed that hunger that we are spreading opportunities to Australians. I've said before it is not satisfactory to me that I meet with employers who say, ‘I need more workers, I need more skilled labour' and yet there are parts of our nation where youth unemployment rates are in double digits. So we've got to make sure we're doing everything we can to spread opportunity and to get people, young people and older workers, access to the opportunities that are flowing from the Resources Boom Mk II, but we will also need to work with companies for appropriate forms of skilled migration which is why the budget contained, for example, our new arrangements for enterprise migration arrangements that are purpose specific to work to get skilled workers where we need them.
So we'll be training Australians first and also working with companies to access skilled labour as necessary on top.
JOURNALIST: Opposition to the coal seam gas industry is becoming, is either growing or becoming more vocal in western Queensland and northern New South Wales. What are your views on the concerns of farmers and other small communities out there?PM: I think as we've done with this project, in a very different setting of course, on Curtis Island, but as we've done with this project, you work to get the environmental considerations and the balance right. What happened here is that an approval was given with 300 environmental conditions and Santos and its project partners were enthusiastic about working strongly to make sure that the environment was properly sustained. We need to take that kind of spirit and working through to get that kind of balance to projects in other places.
So, to people who I would say who are concerned, I would say there are proper environmental approval processes that we work through. We are particularly providing some resources to study things like water flows and water management on the Liverpool Plains. That's appropriate so that that science can feed in to the environmental assessments as project proponents come forward.
JOURNALIST: So you're not rushing in you approval and do you have any concerns about the impact on the Artesian Basin?
PM: Well, I'm not going to agree with the premise of a question that suggests that we deal with these projects differently with other projects. Major projects that raise environmental issues under our environmental legislation always get dealt with carefully. That's whether they are coal seam gas projects or projects of another kind, we always work through on environmental issues in a careful and methodical way. That's been done here, that's appropriate and Santos and others obviously themselves are driven by a desire to make sure that the environment is treated respectfully and sustainably.
PREMIER BLIGH: I might just add there, if I can just add on that. The two approved LNG projects here in Gladstone were subject to environmental assessments that took over two and a half years. They are possibly the most rigorous environmental assessments done between State and Federal Governments ever in the history of our country and they are subject between them to more environmental conditions than have ever been imposed on any major project. So, they are in fact subject to stronger environmental assessments and conditions than have ever been foreseen.
I think the other thing that alarms people sometimes about this industry is simply the fact that it's new and people worry that that means that we don't know a lot about it. The reality is what's new with this project is that we are exporting coal seam gas to the world. Coal seam gas is not new in Queensland, we are using it right now to generate the power that's driving homes and businesses in Gladstone and every other part of Queensland.
Almost 15 per cent of Queensland electricity supply right now is supplied by coal seam methane gas, so it is something that we're using already, we've got quite a bit of experience in it and we understand a lot about this form of energy. So as it grows for export purposes we'll be monitoring it very,very carefully.
JOURNALIST: A Queensland farmer had a gas leak on his property last week (inaudible). Is it time to say that farming and coal seam gas (inaudible)?
PREMIER BLIGH: What we're seeing is coal seam gas projects and farming go together in a partnership right across the south-west of Queensland. The company concerned last week was an exploration permit, it doesn't have a project approval and we're currently investigating that particular incident.
If you actually look at the number of companies, the number of farmers and the number of projects that are now operational, I think it's fair to say that the safety record is a very strong one. But where that is breached, anywhere anytime, we had compliance officers on site within 12 hours, we're investigating it and just as we do in every other form of energy, which also is subject to breach of compliance by companies from time to time, we will be looking to throw the book at them if that's warranted.
JOURNALIST: Will you look at throwing stronger penalties at these people, considering this is the fourth one on that farm?
PREMIER BLIGH: We've recently improved the entire access regime for companies going onto farms and those companies that breach are now subject to very strong fines and this company will find itself, if we establish that they have breached any of the requirements, they'll find themselves in a lot of trouble.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if Jenny Macklin can't reach an agreement with the States and Territories on the pre-commitment on pokie machines, will you draft legislation next week to make it happen?
PM: Well, the meeting that you speak about is in progress as we're standing here, so I'm not going to assume what's going to come out of the meeting. I think everybody is concerned when they hear stories of their fellow Australians, people in their suburbs, in their towns, who have put all of their pay packet into the pokies, all of the family savings into the pokies.Australians don't want to see their fellow Australians under the pump because of problem gambling. So, that's as Prime Minister, the problem that we are trying to address, a meeting is in progress right now with Jenny Macklin as the Federal Minister, meeting with her state counterparts, so I'll leave it to Jenny to announce what comes out of the meeting, given it's in progress right now.
JOURNALIST: If that's unsuccessful do you think that you will personally have to step in?
PM: Look, let's not make any assumptions. Jenny Macklin's at the meeting and when there's something to say about what's happened at the meeting, she'll say it.
JOURNALIST: Premier, Is your Minister going to dig in and insist on voluntary pre-commitments?
PREMIER BLIGH: Queensland is represented at the meeting by the Deputy Premier, who is looking for what we regard as a balanced outcome here, one that balances the need to put restrictions that tighten up the arrangements for those people with a gambling problem, without tightening them so far that those clubs that are the lifeblood of so many communities across Queensland find themselves in an unviable position.
So, the meeting's in progress. We'll see what the outcome is.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the former Australian Human Rights Commissioner, Sev Ozdowski, says the Howard Government's Pacific Solution for asylum seekers at centre in Nauru is a better option than the Federal Government's asylum seeker deal with Malaysia. He opposed the plan, what do you make of his comments?
PM: Well, I don't agree. Our approach is a regional approach, working through the framework that was agreed at the Bali meeting. We've always said that the solution for people smuggling and movement of asylum seekers by boats, where people so often risk their lives and we've seen the tragic consequences of that, that the solution to people smuggling is not a solution that you can impose in one country, it needs to be looked at as a regional problem and we need to find a regional solution.
That's what we did when we went to Bali, we worked on a regional framework, with countries gathered there and we succeeded in that regional framework, including the authorising of transfer agreements and that's what the arrangement is with Malaysia  -  an innovative approach that would take out of the hands of people smugglers the very product that they're selling.
So, we will pursue the Malaysian agreement. It's the right thing to do to really send a message to people smugglers that they don't have a product to sell and to say to asylum seekers who may be thinking of risking not only their savings, but perhaps their very lives, don't jump on a boat and risk your life. What you risk is coming to Australia, only to be removed to a third country.
JOURNALIST: What certainty do you have that the Government has control of conditions in Malaysia?
PM: Look, we addressed all of that this week in the Australian Parliament. I announced a joint statement with the Prime Minister of Malaysia about the treatment of asylum seekers who are taken by us to Malaysia under the transfer agreement and their treatment with dignity and respect and with respect for their human rights.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are your thoughts on Moranbah being the most expensive Queensland town?
PM: Well, I'm just about to go there, so I'll be keen to talk to some of the locals and to also have the opportunity to address a conference for women in mining. We want women too to get their fair share of the opportunities that flow from Resources Boom Mark II. So I'm looking forward to it, what I suspect the pressures there tell us is about the huge growth that is happening here in Queensland, the growth that we're speaking about today, the huge inward pipeline of investment, the Resources Boom Mark II.
What I think that should cause people to think about is when they hear some of the sillier scaremongering that happens from the Opposition, they should look at what is happening here  -  the huge pipeline of growth, $360 billion of investment in the pipeline, Resources Boom Mark II moving into full swing, generating jobs and prosperity. Yes, of course that does put pressure on townships that are growing and we want to work with them to meet that pressure.
Here today I've had the opportunity to talk to the local council for example in Gladstone about engagement with our Building Better Regional Cities program, which is all about helping with the pressure that comes when you need more housing stock.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Labor MP's turning up to parliamentary votes?
PM: Well, the problems this week, as I think you know very well, and were verified spectacularly in writing are problems on the Coalition's side. I've come here to this beautiful Queensland sunshine after a week in Canberra, a parliamentary week, and at the end of that parliamentary week what we've seen is a Liberal Party at war with itself, the divisions on display for everyone to see.
Now, the Liberal Party at war with itself might be one thing. What's even worse is we now know Tony Abbott is at war with the national interest. He's the most negative opposition leader this nation has ever seen and if you want a source for that ask Nick Minchin.
Even Nick Minchin in the Coalition is challenging Tony Abbott about his relentless negativity and his rejection of everything this Government proposes. So, at the end of the parliamentary week  -  Liberal Party at war with itself and Tony Abbott completely at war with the national interest.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Malcolm Turnbull was hard done by the Liberal Party?
PM: You'd have to ask Malcolm Turnbull for his view.JOURNALIST: With the arrest of Bosnian Serb Ratko Mladic, what will it mean for Bosnian communities here in Australia?
PM: Thanks for that question and we do welcome the news of this arrest. We welcome the news on behalf of families who have suffered so much and we also welcome what it means in terms of the future stability of the Balkans. We believe that he should be extradited and that proceedings against him should be conducted in The Hague.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Queensland Premier Anna Bligh officially launched work on the $16 billion Santos Liquefied Natural Gas Project near Gladstone today.
The project, which is one of Australia's largest energy projects, is expected to generate $9 billion a year in exports and create more than 5,000 construction jobs and nearly 1,000 long term operational positions.
Speaking at the site of the project, the Prime Minister said it was a significant day for the people of Gladstone and Queensland, as well as Santos and its partners.
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) will play an important part in the global transition towards a cleaner energy future.
Australia is currently the world's fourth largest exporter of LNG and projects such as this one are projected to take this ranking to second by 2015.
The Gladstone project demonstrates the global attractiveness of Australia as an investment destination and as a reliable trading partner for energy commodities.
It is further evidence of the important role LNG has to play as we transition to cleaner fuel sources.
The Gladstone project will create jobs for Australians and deliver significant local, state and national economic benefits.
The project will also generate new training opportunities. Eighteen Masters degree scholarships will be offered at the University College London's campus in Adelaide as part of the project.
These new scholarships, jointly sponsored by Santos, KOGAS and UCL, build on Santos' existing $10 million contribution to establish UCL's School of Energy and Resources.
The Gladstone LNG Project is subject to more than 300 Commonwealth environmental conditions, in addition to those imposed by the Queensland Government.
The first cargo from the Gladstone Liquefied natural gas project is scheduled to be exported from 2015.
This project will be joint venture between Australian company Santos, Malaysia's PETRONAS, Total of France, and KOGAS of Korea (subject to regulatory approval).
Further information about the project is available at http://www.glng.com.au. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today launched Ravenswood School for Girls' campaign to encourage teenage women to support action on climate change.
The campaign aims to sign up 10,000 teenage girls to reduce one tonne of pollution in a year.  Ravenswood is one of 30 NSW schools who have so far pledged support.
The campaign was created by the climate change action group 1millionwomen, who are joining daughters, mothers, sisters and grandmothers together to take action against global warming.
Speaking at the school, the Prime Minister said the concept of getting young women together to act on climate change is a practical yet powerful example of what can be done now to set our country on a path to a low carbon future.
We all have to work together and we need to start now if we want our children and their children to live in a country with a clean energy economy that drives green innovation and still has natural wonders that are the envy of the rest of the world.
All the young women taking part in 1millionwomen campaign are helping make sure that 2011 is the year that Australia takes action on climate change.
More than 41,000 women of all ages and backgrounds have joined the 1millionwomen campaign over the last two years.
For more information on the campaigns, visit www.1millionwomen.com.au



PM: [audio break] we care about the environment, we know climate change is real, we know we have to act now or we will end up putting all of the burden on the shoulders of future generations. 10,000 teens is about 10,000 young women coming together and saying to their mothers and their grandmothers and their aunts, thank you for acting, thank you for understanding and we want to take action too, action to cut carbon pollution in our lives as teenagers.
This is a fantastic initiative and I congratulate Natalie for her leadership in bringing it together. I will be joining the 1millionwomen campaign, as Prime Minister I am focusing on cutting carbon pollution by 160 million tonnes by 2020. In order to do that we've got to accept what scientists are telling us: climate change is real. We've got to accept what the economists are telling us: that the cheapest way of cutting carbon pollution is by putting a price on carbon. This price wouldn't be paid by households, it would be paid by the 1000 biggest businesses who are the 1000 biggest polluters in our country. They would pay the price on carbon. At the moment they can put carbon pollution into the atmosphere for free, they would pay a price per tonne. And being smart business people if they have to pay then they will find a way of cutting carbon pollution and reducing that cost. We will use the revenue from the big polluters paying to assist households, to protect Australia jobs, and to fund programs that tackle climate change. 2011 is the year we will have the national debate, 2012 we will put a price on carbon. To use Natalie's words from a little bit earlier, we don't have time to waste, now is the time to act on climate change by putting a price on carbon pollution. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how concerned are you about Tony Windsor saying he may not have a decision this year? PM: Tony Windsor has consistently said, so there's absolutely nothing new in this, Tony Windsor has consistently said that he would make his final judgment about the carbon pricing package when he can see all details of the package. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry says there shouldn't be any price on carbon, it should be a true market system and that Australia should wait? PM: Well that's not accurate, what the Australian Industry Group has said today, is that who you referred to? JOURNALIST: Australian Chamber of Commerce- PM: Alright, well let's go through it, the Business Council of Australia has backed putting a price on carbon - that is they are rejecting Tony Abbott's subsidise the polluters approach. The Australian Industry Group is backing putting a price on carbon; they too have rejected Tony Abbott's approach of subsiding polluters. The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry of course is entitled to its views, everyone can participate in this debate and should participate in this debate, but as we participate in the debate we've got to be dealing with the facts, and the facts are climate change is real, and the facts are the cheapest way, the cheapest way of cutting carbon pollution is by putting a price on carbon rather than an expensive subsidies scheme for polluters like Mr Abbott's scheme which Mr Turnbull himself has said won't work and will cost taxpayers dearly. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the Greens today are putting forward a motion condemning the Malaysian asylum seeker solution, the Coalition, some Independents may back it, this will humiliate you today surely? PM: The Government will keep pursuing the right plan to take out of the hands of people smugglers the very thing that they're selling. People smugglers try and prey on desperate people and they try and say to them ‘I can get you to Australia and your claims will be processed in Australia.' Our work with Malaysia is about taking that very product that people smugglers sell away from them. We are saying to asylum seekers if you spend your money, if you risk your life on a boat, you will end up not having your claim processed in Australia; you will be removed to a third country. Of course in our arrangements with Malaysia we will extend generosity to genuine refugees, we will take 4000 refugees already processed in Malaysia who are effectively at the front of the queue. Now I understand people in the Federal Parliament have different views, but I am determined as Prime Minister that we will strike this arrangement with Malaysia, it's an innovative approach and part of a regional solution to dealing with the evil of people smuggling. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, sorry to jump around a bit, but with regards to climate, given your signing up with 1millionwomen  today and also with Cate Blanchett being the face of this other advertising campaign, is women the key to winning the PR battle with this debate? PM: I think this is about everybody having their voice heard, this campaign if course is about a million women and 10,000 teens having their voice heard, but people right around the country are concerned about climate change. Overwhelmingly Australians accept that climate change is real, and people do want to act. Now I understand that people are a bit uncertain, they want to know what is the best way forward to deal with climate change. Well, as Prime Minister I will keep explaining to the Australian nation the best way forward for all of us is to put a price on carbon pollution, to get the big polluters to pay and to use the money raised to help families, to protect Australian jobs and to fund programs to tackle climate change. A lot of people are going to have their voice heard in this debate, 140 leading Australians have signed an advertisement in today's newspaper for example, men and women, so men and women will be having their voice heard, but the 1millionwomen campaign is an innovative way of women having their voice heard. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you have to say about reports that three cadets were sleep deprived and detained for 17 hours when questioned and that their defence lawyers was manhandled by a high ranking officer? PM: Well my understanding is that these claims are denied but of course they will be the subject of proper processes within Defence. JOURNALIST: (inaudible) paper this morning your opinion piece on climate change, are you effectively calling climate change deniers flat earthers? PM: No I'm just saying very, very simply, the science is in and we've accepted the word of scientists in the past. A few generations ago scientists started saying to people in Australia and people around the world: smoking kills. Now no one seriously contests that anymore, it was contested at the time, but no one seriously contests it. We accepted what the scientists had to say and as a nation we got about reducing smoking rates and we've got more to do and that's what plain packaging's about. And then when I was a young person scientists starting saying to us the Australian sun would give you skin cancer, I'm from the generation that girls used to slather themselves in coconut oil and lie in the sun, and then we heard the voice of Australian scientists and scientists around the world and no one today would lie out baking in the sun slathered in coconut oil, and we say to the young people like the young people in this school, take care in the Australian sun. So we've listened to scientists before, we should listen to them now. They are telling us climate change is real, that is now beyond doubt, so we've got to get on and do something about it and the most efficient way of doing that is to price carbon. What I'm being very clear about is I don't want this debate hijacked by distractions, by people with no scientific qualifications, shock jocks and politicians, with no scientific qualifications who pretend they know better than the scientists do. That's a distraction from what we've got to get on with and that's tackling climate change, cutting carbon pollution by pricing carbon. JOURNALIST: (inaudible) pretty shocked at the amount of anger that has been directed towards Cate Blanchett and the attacks that have been sent her way following her putting the face to the ad campaign? PM: Well I think we've got to keep our focus on the very important issue at the centre of all of this and that's climate change, tackling climate change. I've been here at this school today, Ravenswood, it's one of 30 schools coming together in the 10,000 teens campaign. Now in 2050 when these girls are adults, children of their own, having made a life of their own, they won't look back on 2011 and say ‘let's talk about an individual going on an advertisement', they'll look back on 2011 and hopefully they'll say to themselves ‘that's the year the nation decided to get serious about tackling climate change.' That's where the focus has to be, on tackling climate change. Now Cate Blanchett has had her voice heard on climate change, that's appropriate, just as it's appropriate for one million women to have their voices heard through the 1millionwomen campaign. Just as it's appropriate for 10,000 teens, including the young women standing at the back today, to have their voices heard. Just as it's appropriate for the 140 Australians who have signed the advertisement in today's newspaper to have their voices heard.Just as it's appropriate for Australians right across this country, going about their daily lives today, to have their voices heard on climate change. Australians overwhelmingly accept the science, now we've got to get on with the job and put a price on carbon. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will the Government go to a double dissolution election if the lower House can't decide on a carbon price mechanism? PM: We are working through in very good faith with the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee, well if I can finish my answer to your question, we worked in very good faith with the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee on the weekend, we'll keep doing that. I'm very confident that we will deliver a solution that will put a price on carbon. Let's not go down the rabbit burrows here  -  our nation needs us, all of us, to keep our eyes on the central debate here. Climate change is real, it's going to have big impacts on the life of every Australian. We know to tackle climate change we've got to cut carbon pollution, we know the best way to do that is to put a price on carbon paid by the big polluters, that's exactly what I'm intending to do, that's the real debate here. Thank you. 



PM: Thank you.
I stood here a week ago to speak to the nation about the tragic loss of Brett Wood. I stand here just a week later at another heart breaking time for our nation.
We have had news overnight that we have lost two very brave young men in Afghanistan: one 25-year-old, one 27-year-old - very young men.
They were lost in separate incidents. The 25-year-old young man was lost in an incident where he was shot by an Afghan National Army soldier.
In the second incident, a Chinook helicopter has got into difficulties and we have lost a 27-year-old Australian Army officer.
The families who have lost these young men are in the depths of mourning today. They've asked us to respect their privacy at this incredibly difficult time, and in those circumstances they've asked us at this stage not to release the names of the two young men involved.
However, whilst we absolutely respect their need for privacy, we can at this time convey to them our heartfelt condolences. The nation will be thinking of these two families today. They will be thinking of them with warmth. They will be sending their sincerest best wishes at this incredibly difficult time for these two families and for our nation.
I, as Prime Minister, on behalf of the Australian nation and standing here in the Australian Parliament, on behalf of this parliament, send our sincere condolences to these two families in the depths of their loss.
In relation to these two incidents, the first occurred yesterday evening at a patrol base in the Chorah Valley. A member of the mentoring taskforce was undertaking guard duty in a security tower. He was shot by an Afghan National Army soldier, who was also manning the same security guard tower.
Despite receiving extensive and timely medical assistance, the Australian soldier subsequently died.
A security operation was launched at the patrol base to apprehend the Afghan National Army soldier, but he escaped and he has not been detained to this point.
Now, the circumstances of this incident are still very unclear, but it is very shocking and I think many Australian will find it very disturbing, but I can say to Australians is we will be investigating this incident, and as the Chief of our Defence Force has made clear and the Minister for Defence has made clear, when we are in a position to provide further information to people about what has happened here then we most certainly will do so, and we will be making very determined efforts, working with others in Uruzgan Province, to apprehend the perpetrator of this attack.
Now, I understand that there will be many questions asked, but I do want to say the following about the work that we are doing training the Afghan National Army. We have a strong, professional relationship with the 4th Brigade of the Afghan National Army. We have trained and mentored hundreds and hundreds of 4th Brigade soldiers. We partner with them in patrols throughout Uruzgan Province, and they are becoming a more capable and professional force.
This work is vital to our mission in Afghanistan. Indeed, we cannot succeed in that mission without doing this training. We are working towards the goal of Afghan Forces being able to take over security leadership of Uruzgan Province and to provide security for their own people.
So, the relationship between our soldiers and the soldiers in the Afghan National Army is one of the longest-running in Afghanistan, and this is the first incident of this nature we have faced. The Commander of the 4th Brigade, General Khan, has expressed his shock and his outrage at the attack, and the 4th Brigade, the Uruzgan Provincial Authorities and of course we are determined to do everything we can to apprehend the perpetrator and we will be working to understand the full details of what has happened here, and we will be conveying those full details to the Australian community when we can.
In the second incident, an Australian Army officer was killed when a helicopter undertaking a resupply mission crashed. Once again, we don't know the full circumstances as to what caused the helicopter crash. The 27-year-old officer was a qualified pilot. He was not the pilot of the helicopter at the time. He'd served in East Timor and he'd been part of Operation flood Assist in Queensland when helicopters were so relied on to assist Queensland communities at such a difficult time.
Five other ADF personnel were wounded in this incident. Their condition is satisfactory.
Once again, when we are in a position to provide further information to Australians about what has happened with this helicopter crash, then we will certainly do so.
I understand this is an incredibly hard day for our nation. It follows hard on the heels of a very difficult when we heard the news about Brett Wood. I understand that Australians will be feeling the burden of this today. They will be feeling the sadness that goes with the loss of these two brave young men, and they will be thinking about the burden being borne by the families involved.
We've stuck together on difficult days. I'm sure we will stick together on this very difficult day, and whilst we feel the weight of this, our determination to see the mission through in Afghanistan must continue. I am determined that we see the mission through, and we will keep working to do that in Afghanistan.
We should also keep in our thoughts the fellow members of the Australian Defence Force who will be bearing the burden of this news as well. For many of them, this is another very tough day, and our thoughts are with them.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the trust between Australian soldiers and the Afghan National Army, members that they are mentoring in the Chorah Valley at these patrol bases is often fragile. How do you think this betrayal will affect that level of trust?
PM: First and foremost we do need to remember that our soldiers are there working alongside, patrolling with and training members of the Afghan National Army, and we've done that in very large numbers, literally trained hundreds, indeed thousands, of members of the Afghan National Army, and this is the first incident of this nature.
Of course, it's shocking and it's disturbing and we want to understand exactly what's happened here, and that's why we it will be very fully investigated and we will be very clear with everyone, I think every Australian will want to understand what's happened here, but the thing really is to investigate and to get to the bottom of this so we can fully understand these circumstances.
General Khan has, on behalf of the Afghan National Army, expressed his shock and outrage at this, too. We do need to continue the training mission. We can't acquit our mission in Afghanistan without training the Afghan National Army.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, were there any witnesses to the shooting, (inaudible) investigate it?
PM: I'm not in a position to add to the details you've had from the Chief of the Defence Force and the Minister for Defence and I'm certainly not going to speculate on what the details could be.
As you've heard from the Chief of the Defence Force, this happened when the Afghan National Army soldier and the Australian soldier who tragically lost his life were together on guard duty. A full investigation will be implemented to get to the bottom of what's happened here and our ADF is a very professional organisation and they bringing their best expertise and resources to bear in the investigation.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned, Prime Minister, about what impact this might have on public confidence in its support for the efforts in Afghanistan, when soldiers from the country we're there to liberate and protect start killing our soldiers?
PM: Look, I understand many Australians will hear this news today. They'll be shocked and it will be causing them to ask questions. They will be disturbed by it. I very much understand that and I think we've all got a really shared want to get to the bottom of this and to understand it, but I will be asking people at this really difficult time to think about the full breadth of what we're doing in Afghanistan.
We have trained thousands of Afghan National Army soldiers. We've worked alongside them. Our soldiers have worked alongside them. I personally, when I've been in Afghanistan, have heard our soldiers compliment members of the Afghan National Army on their professionalism and their determination in the work that they've done alongside our soldiers, so all of that has been happening.
Then, of course, we've got this really troubling incident and we've got to get to the bottom of it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's the message that we've conveyed to the commanders of the Afghan National Army?
PM: The message that the General has conveyed to us, General Khan, is that he's shocked and that he's outraged, too.
JOURNALIST: Is there a concern about the recruitment for the ANA, that perhaps there needs to be greater scrutiny of the people that are being recruited to perhaps prevent any Taliban members enlisting?
PM: Firstly, I don't want to make any assumptions about this incident. I don't think that would be responsible for me to do so and I don't have any more facts available at my disposal than what the Minister for Defence and the Chief of the Defence Force had when they spoke to you a short time earlier today, so I don't want to jump to any conclusions about this incident. It's got to be fully investigated, but as the Chief of the Defence Force said to you today, obviously there's checking and processes that are gone through by Defence in Afghanistan as they work on the training and working with persons in the Afghan National Army.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the 25-year-old was shot about four times, I think, by the ANA soldier. What have you been told about incidents leading up to that, indeed, whether the Australian soldier shot back or whether the 25-year-old was shot?
PM: Look-
JOURNALIST: -Sorry, whether the ANA soldier was shot?
PM: The information I have available to me is that our soldier was wounded and subsequently died. The Chief of the Defence Force I think indicated to you that there were three wounds. As far as I understand it the Afghan soldier involved in this incident then fled and was fired at by another Afghan soldier, but I understand from information available to me that he was wounded in that incident, and of course all steps possible are being taken to now apprehend that Afghan National Army soldier, the perpetrator of this incident, which has led to the tragic death of a 25-year-old Australian soldier.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said that Australia would be asking questions today. What are the compelling answers that you have for them for staying the course?
PM: Well, the same answer I gave you last week is the same answer I would give today  -  in the hardest of circumstances, we need to be determined to stay the course in Afghanistan.
We're in Afghanistan because we don't want it to be a safe haven for terrorists. It has been in the past, and if we left a security vacuum in Afghanistan it would be filled by terrorist groups from around the world. We've seen that happen in the past. We would see it happen again.
In order to ensure that Afghanistan doesn't become a safe haven for terrorists, we need to see the mission through. We face a determined insurgency. We face a major training mission, and we've been acquitting that training mission.
The end point here is for Afghans themselves to provide security in their own nation, and of course we are not there alone. We are there under a United Nations mandate, under a UN mandate, working alongside other nations to bring security to Afghanistan so it isn't a safe haven for terrorists, and our nation has had to absorb shocking news in the past of the violence that terrorists trained in Afghanistan have wrought against the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said that the ANA does conduct checks. Will you be asking it to increase or improve its vetting in the light of this incident?
PM: Well, I actually didn't say that. My words to you, reflecting the words of the Chief of the Defence Force is that we, Australia, have our processes as we work with the people that we train. I'm not going to speculate what this incident may or may not mean in relation to those processes. I think that's getting ahead of ourselves. We need to understand what's happened here.
JOURNALIST: Does Afghanistan have the death penalty for murder, Prime Minister? Would you support it in this case, if it's proven this soldier was killed-
PM: -My understanding is that Afghanistan does have the death penalty, but let's deal with this a step at a time here. First and foremost, we are obviously seeking to apprehend the perpetrator here, and if it's (inaudible) being made to do that, and obviously we want to see that done.
Second, we want to understand what has happened in this incident, and in addition to those things today we want to solemnly stand shoulder to shoulder with some families who are just absorbing the worst possible news a family could get.
We'll make this the last one. Thanks, Brendan.
JOURNALIST: There have been incidents, a number of them, in the past, involving Coalition-
PM: -Yes, that's true.
JOURNALIST: They fall into two broad categories: sometimes they're planned attacks, infiltration by Taliban or other insurgents; or sometimes it might simply be a brain snap by an angry soldier. Have you been given any indication which category this could fall into?
PM: Brendan, you're right. There have been some incidents of this kind of nature involving other Coalition partners in Afghanistan. This is the first incident that we have seen of this nature.
I can't tell you, the Chief of the Defence Force couldn't tell you, the Minister for Defence couldn't tell you, on the information available to us now what category of incident this is, and consequently what implications it may have.
It's not responsible for me to speculate and I'm not intending to do so. What's the right thing to do is to have the incident investigated, and we will be transparent with people about the outcome of those investigations.
I think everyone will want to understand what this means for us, but as we go through those processes, as I just indicated to Mark, first and foremost on our minds today is the circumstances of these two families: 25-year-old, 27-year-old, very young men, a lot of grief.
Thank you. 



The Government is today announcing new command arrangements for the Australian Defence Force.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Defence Minister Stephen Smith are pleased to announce the following appointments to be recommended to the Governor-General in Council.
All appointments are to be recommended for three years and to take effect from 4 July 2011.
Lieutenant General David Hurley, AC, DSC to be the Chief of the Defence Force.
Air Marshal Mark Binskin, AO to be the Vice Chief of the Defence Force.
Rear Admiral Ray Griggs, AM CSC RAN to be the Chief of Navy.
Major General David Morrison, AO to be the Chief of Army.
Air Vice-Marshal Geoff Brown, AM to be the Chief of Air Force.
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Defence expressed the deep gratitude of the Government and the Defence Organisation to the retiring Chief of the Defence Force, Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, AC, AFC.
Air Chief Marshal Houston joined the Royal Australian Air Force as a cadet pilot in 1970.  He has served his country with distinction, providing exemplary leadership of the Australian Defence Force and the ADF community for the past six years. Air Chief Marshal Houston's leadership of the ADF has spanned a period of high intensity for Australia's armed forces, including our contribution to the missions in Iraq and Afghanistan and peacekeeping roles in East Timor and Solomon Islands.
Air Chief Marshal Houston has won the respect of successive Governments, the men and women of the Australian Defence Force and the Australian Community.
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Defence also thanked Vice Admiral Russ Crane for his service.  Vice Admiral Crane will retire as the Chief of Navy on 7 June 2011 after 40 years in the Royal Australian Navy.
Vice Admiral Crane has had a distinguished career and as the Chief has led Navy through a period of high operational activity, and implemented a program of wide-ranging and important cultural, leadership and structural changes to position Navy to meet future challenges.
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Defence also expressed their gratitude to Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie who will retire as the Chief of Army in July after 43 years in the Australian Army.
Lieutenant General Gillespie as Chief has led the Australian Army with distinction through an extended period of operations with peacekeeping roles in East Timor and the Solomon Islands and combat and training missions in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
Lieutenant General David Hurley will bring a wealth of experience to the position of the Chief of the Defence Force.  He has held several senior command positions within the Australian Defence Force including as Land Commander Australia, Chief of Capability Development Group and Chief of Joint Operations.  Lieutenant General Hurley is currently the Vice Chief of Defence Force.
Air Marshal Mark Binskin has extensive operational command experience having served as Chief of Staff at Headquarters Australian Theatre in 2003 and then as Director of Combined Air and Space Operations Centre responsible for the conduct of coalition air operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.  He is a graduate of the Harvard Business School Advanced Management Program and the Australian Institute of Company Directors.  Air Marshal Mark Binskin is currently the Chief of Air Force.
Rear Admiral Griggs has broad sea going and operational experience and has helped drive Defence's biggest reform program.  He has commanded the ANZAC Class frigate HMAS ARUNTA on operations in the Middle East and the Australian Amphibious Task Group.  He also has extensive capability management and development experience, and held a senior position in the Defence Strategic Reform Program.  Rear Admiral Griggs is currently the Deputy Chief of Joint Operations.
Major General David Morrison has wide ranging command experience having served as the Head of Military Strategic Commitments and Deputy Chief of Army.  In that position he led the review into Army's command and control structure which resulted in reform initiatives to ensure Army is able to sustain its current and future operational tempo. Major General Morrison is currently serving as Army's first Forces Commander.
Air Vice-Marshal Geoff Brown has extensive flying experience on helicopters, F_111 and F/A-18 aircraft. Air Vice-Marshal Brown has commanded at all levels of the Air Force, including as the Commander Air Combat Group.  During Australia's 2003 contribution to the war in Iraq, he commanded all F/A-18 and C-130 operations in Operation Iraqi Freedom.  Air Vice-Marshal Brown is currently the Deputy Chief of Air Force.
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Defence congratulate the incoming Service Chiefs, and are confident that they will carry on the excellent work of their predecessors, which was in the finest traditions of the Australian Defence Force and Australia's national security interests.
These appointments will involve the following promotions with effect from 1 July 2011:
Lieutenant General David Hurley promoted to General.
Rear Admiral Ray Griggs promoted to Vice Admiral.
Major General David Morrison promoted to Lieutenant General.
Air Vice-Marshal Geoff Brown promoted to Air Marshal.
Biographical details of the new appointments are available on the defence website www.defence.gov.au



PM: Thank you very much.
I'm very pleased to be here today with the Minister for Defence and with his team, his ministerial team, including Ministers Snowdon and Clare and Parliamentary Secretary David Feeney, for us to announce the new command arrangements for the Australian Defence Force.
As is well known, the appointments of the Chief of Defence, Angus Houston, and Vice-Chief and the three Service Chiefs all expire in the coming weeks. I wanted to ensure that we had a transition process which was orderly and that the incoming holders of those officers would be in a position to work alongside their counterparts before formerly taking on those roles.
So, in the interests of a smooth transition in leadership, we are announcing the new office holders today.
I'm very conscious that these changes in command come at a very testing time for the Australian Defence Force, a time of sorrow and loss, and a testing time for our mission in Afghanistan.
I'm absolutely confident the new leadership team will meet these challenges with the same professionalism and the same determination that has been demonstrated so strongly by their predecessors.
The following appointments to take effect from 4 July will be recommended to the Governor-General in Council.
First, Lieutenant General David Hurley to be appointed as the new Chief of the Defence Force.
Air Marshal Mark Binskin to be the new Vice Chief of the Defence Force.
Rear Admiral Ray Griggs to be the Chief of Navy.
Major General David Morrison to be the Chief of Army and Air Vice-Marshal Geoff Brown to be the Chief of the Air Force.
General Hurley is currently the Vice Chief of the Defence Force. He is going to bring a wealth of experience to his new position as Chief. He has held several senior command positions within the ADF, including as Land Commander Australia, Chief of the Capability and Development Group and Chief of Operations.
Air Marshal Mark Binskin is currently the Chief of the Air Force. He has extensive operational command experience, having served as the Chief of Staff at headquarters, Australian theatre, in 2003, and then as director of Combined Air and Space Operations Center, the centre that was responsible for the conduct of coalition air operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
He is a graduate of the Harvard Business School Advanced Management Program, and the Australian Institute of Company Directors.
Rear Admiral Ray Griggs is currently the Deputy Chief of Joint Operations. He has broad seagoing and operational experience. He commanded the Anzac Class frigate Arunta on operations in the Middle East and the Australian Amphibious Task Group. He also has extensive capability management and development experience, and held a senior position in the Defence Strategic Reform Program.
Major General David Morrison is currently serving as Army's forces commander. He has wide-ranging command experience, having served as the head of military strategic commitments and Deputy Chief of the Army. In that position, he led the review into Army's command and control structure, which resulted in reform initiatives to ensure Army is able to sustain its current and future operational tempo.
Air Vice-Marshal Geoff Brown is currently the Deputy Chief of Air Force. He's got extensive flying experience on almost everything: helicopters and F-111s amongst them.
Air Vice-Marshal Brown has commanded at all levels of the Air Force, including as the commander of the Air Combat Group. During Australia's 2003 contribution to the war in Iraq, he commanded the F/A-18 and C-130 operations in Operation Iraqi Freedom.
I want to offer my warmest congratulations to General Hurley and to his team. I am looking forward to working very closely with them on the challenging agenda that lies in front of us, an agenda that includes war fighting operations and peace operations, an ambitious capability development program, Defence's Strategic Reform Program, and the vital and ongoing task of nurturing what is the most important asset of the ADF - and that's its people.
Finally, I'd like to say a few things about the outgoing team, first and foremost about Angus Houston. We are going to have a number of occasions to mark Angus's remarkable service to the Australian nation. I've been joking that we will refer to it as the Festival of Angus. The Festival of Angus will be starting very, very soon.
Angus Houston, I think, is well known to the Australian nation. He's well known because of his remarkable record of service to it.
He was appointed Chief of the Defence Force on 4 July 2005. He is the second-longest serving Chief of the Defence Force, and I believe he could have claimed that record by serving a mere further 13 days. And he is only the third RAAF officer to reach the four-star rank of Air Chief Marshal.
In his six-year tenure as CDF, he has led our people during a period of sustained operational tempo, the most intense since the Vietnam War.
He was there when we recommenced our operations in Afghanistan in September 2005, and when we expanded our early operations to include the training work we are now doing with the Afghan 4th Brigade. He was there to oversee the deployments in Iraq and to East Timor and the Solomons. He's been there to support our border security operations. He was there to do the security necessary for the Commonwealth Games, to oversee the consular evacuations from Lebanon. He's been there to lead his people as they've helped Australians through natural disasters: Cyclone Larry, the Victorian bushfires and, most recently, our summer of devastation, particularly in Queensland.
He became known to the Australian people when I think his name became synonymous with honesty in the service of our nation. He is now even better known to Australians as a man of courage and compassion, and I really want to congratulate him for his service to the nation and I'm looking forward to the Festival of Angus.
I do want to thank both him and his wife, Liz. Every success as they move on to the next stages of their life, and I've enjoyed spending some personal time with them, as well as the professional time that we've spent together.
I would also like to thank Vice Admiral Russ Crane and Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie for their service to the nation.
Vice Admiral Crane will retire as Chief of Navy on 7 June after 40 amazing years of service to the navy.
Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie will retire as the Chief of the Army in July after 43 years in the Australian Army. He too has had a truly remarkable career.
They have held those jobs and performed their service to the nation with commitment and with an absolute devotion to duty. We honour them for that and we wish them well in the next stage of their lives.
I'll turn now to some comments from the Minister for Defence.
MINISTER SMITH: Well, thank you, Prime Minister.
Firstly, I'm very pleased to join the Prime Minister today to present the new Defence leadership team, the next generation of Defence leadership over the forthcoming three years.
They are big jobs. They carry with them heavy burdens and heavy responsibilities as we, together, work to protect and defend and enhance Australia's national security interests.        
But can I firstly, as the Prime Minister has done, pay respect and regard to the work which the Chief of the Defence Force Angus Houston has done over the last six years.
He has faithfully and effectively served five ministers for Defence. He was respected and held in high regard by the Australian community before he became Chief of the Defence Force and that regard and respect has only enhanced, and Angus will be a big loss.
And as the Prime Minister has said, at the appropriate time and the appropriate occasions, full respect and honour will be paid to not just his six years as Chief of the Defence Force, but for his very lengthy career in the Air Force itself.
Can I also acknowledge and pay tribute to the contribution of Lieutenant-General Ken Gillespie, a 43-year career in the Army and the Defence Force, and at his most senior positions at a time of very difficult and high tempo for the Australian Army and for the Defence Force, and he has been of great assistance to me and the ministerial team since we came to office, or came to our respective portfolios.
He has a most distinguished career, and his contribution also will be acknowledged for the credit that it brings to him and the credit that it has bought to the Australian Army and the Defence Force.
Can I also acknowledge the contribution of Russ Crane as Chief of Navy. Russ Crane has had over the last three years a very difficult job and a series of important challenges which he has to his great credit fronted up to and addressed. Whether that has been difficulties in our amphibious fleet, or cultural difficulties, he has not shirked the problems, and he deserves great credit for that.
Russ has asked me if he can retire on 7 June, slightly earlier, but that is his Navy service birthday - 40 years of contribution - and so from that earlier date, the new Chief of Navy will act in Russ's position.
Can I congratulate Lieutenant-General, soon to be General David Hurley on his appointment, and congratulate the team members. We met last night. I had a cup of coffee. They had a beer. But the Prime Minister and I and the portfolio ministers are very, very pleased with the new team.
We will hit the ground running. Lieutenant-General Hurley will accompany me to Singapore on the weekend for the Shangri-La Dialogue, an important meeting of Defence ministers and Defence chiefs of staff throughout our region, and later next week in Brussels we will have another NATO/ ISAF Defence Ministers' Meeting. General Hurley will accompany me on that.
General Hurley is a most appropriate appointment as Chief of the Defence Force, and he has a long and distinguished career. Most importantly he is very thoughtful about the challenges for the future.
In my view, the work that I have done with him, he is a man of decency and integrity, and I'm looking very much forward to working very closely with General Hurley over the forthcoming period.
Can I also congratulate his team. I have worked with them over the last six months and have a great deal of confidence in them to address the significant challenges that we have.
These appointments and announcements, given the events of this week, are made in difficult times. They are made in difficult times which underlines the seriousness and the responsibility of these jobs.
The men who have been appointed today have the responsibility of putting our men and women into the field in danger in the course and in the pursuit of our national interest. They have the job of ensuring their training and their equipment, and at a time of significant operational tempo, our mission in Afghanistan, our stabilisation and peacekeeping roles in East Timor and in the Solomon Islands, this is a significant contribution that we make for a country of 23 million people - but the responsibility and the burden is great.
There are some significant challenges ahead for us. I've referred to Afghanistan which speaks for itself, given the events of this week, but we continue to have significant challenges so far as accountability is concerned, both personal, and institutional accountability in Defence. We have significant capability and acquisition challenges, and we have significant Budget challenges through the 2009 White Paper, through our Strategic Reform Program, and our Force 2030.
One of the significant attributes that Lieutenant-General Hurley will bring is his previous experience as chief of the Capability Development Group, and if you speak to people in the system universally regard that as the best head of the Capability Development Group that we've had. That will be of considerable assistance as we face these challenges.
There are also new and emerging challenges and I cite but one example, and this will challenge Defence and challenge our nation as it does others, but new and emerging national security issues like cyber and cyber security will challenge us.
So we see what we regard as traditional challenges, military enforcement, combat, accountability, and Budget and capability challenges, but there are also new and emerging ones, and cyber is perhaps the best example.
The Prime Minister and I have every confidence that our new team is up to that challenge.
I'd like to ask General Hurley to make some remarks and then the Prime Minister and I and General Hurley are happy to respond to your journalists.
GENERAL HURLEY: Prime Minister and Minister, thank you very much for those kind words.
This announcement today in the shadow of the news of the death of three of our officers and soldiers in Afghanistan will serve as a powerful and constant reminder to this new leadership team of the enormous responsibilities that are being transferred to us.
We acknowledge our responsibilities to the Government, the Parliament and the people of Australia, but we are keenly aware that this can only be achieved through the commitment of the service men and women and their families that we will have the honour to lead. Our job is to lead these wonderful Australians, and to ensure that their service is valued and respected.
In that vein, on behalf of Mark, Ray, David and Geoff, I thank our wives and our families for their support over many years, and for their forbearance for the next three years. I also thank the Prime Minister and Minister for their confidence in us and for the great honour that they have given us, appointing us the leaders of the ADF.
We also look forward to working alongside the secretary, Dr Ian Watt, and continuing the strong, integrated approach to Defence leadership.
Today also marks the beginning of the final period of service for the CDF, as you have heard, Air Chief Marshall Angus Houston; for Ken Gillespie, the Chief of the Army; and for Russ Crane, the Chief of the Navy. They have not only been great leaders of the ADF in their respective services, but great mates through good and bad times. I thank them and their families for their hard work, their commitment, and their selfless service to Australia. They'll be a hard act for us to follow.
Thank you.
PM: So we're very happy to take questions on the announcement today and on Defence matters. For other issues of the day we'll take them a bit later, provided we don't freeze to death in the meantime.
Anybody got a question?
Yes, Dennis.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yourself and the Minister have mentioned new challenges. Is there any consideration, now that you have a new team, new challenges, to reviewing the 2009 White Paper?
PM: Well, I'll get to the Minister to answer that.
MINISTER SMITH: Well, as you know the White Paper was released in April 2009. The White Paper itself has an effective inbuilt review mechanism, it's called the Defence planning guidelines. There was no need to publish or to consider Defence planning guidelines in 2010 less than a year after the publication of the White Paper.
We are currently, as one of our projects, working very carefully through what we describe as our 2011 Defence planning guidelines, and any adjustments that we need to make as a result of changed strategic circumstances will be announced in due course as a result of the standard Defence planning guidelines consideration.
I wouldn't expect that to occur before the end of this year.
JOURNALIST: One of your existing challenges has been to handle the fall out of the Skype affair. Do you have any detail about when you think that inquiry into the affair will be finalised, and hence when will we get some clarification on the future of the head of ADFA?
MINISTER SMITH: Well, a number of responses.
Firstly, Mr Kirkham's inquiry is ongoing with this caveat - getting towards the end of his inquiry, Mr Kirkham wanted to interview the Vice Chief of the Defence Force, Lieutenant-General Hurley, who is responsible in a command sense for Commandant Kafer. As a consequence of that and so as to avoid any possible perception of conflict of interest, Lieutenant-General Hurley, as Vice Chief of the Defence Force, transferred responsibility for the inquiry to the Chief of the Air Force, Air Marshall Binskin, and the detail of that is being processed.
We are awaiting Mr Kirkham QC's report on all of the aspects of the so-called Skype affair. In the meantime, as you would be aware, two cadets have been charged with offences, and those matters are before the courts.
In the meantime Commandant Kafer is doing other duties, reporting to the Chief of the Australian Defence Academy, and he will continue in that role until Mr Kirkham's inquiry has been received and decisions made as a consequence of that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) not ask when,what his timetable might be?
MINISTER SMITH:   Well, I'm not proposing to seek to impose a timetable on Mr Kirkham. He is a well-regarded QC. He is diligently doing his work and I'm leaving him to it.
JOURNALIST: A question for Lieutenant-General Hurley. What's your reading of the situation in Afghanistan, as far as the timetable for Australia's withdrawal from that?
GENERAL HURLEY: Thank you. I think you'd be well aware of the Government's position, public position on the transition time frame in Afghanistan and the Prime Minister's own words about our continuing commitment to Afghanistan post 2014. We're in sync with what NATO ISAF are planning to do and all our campaign planning is done along those lines.
JOURNALIST: Are you confident we're making progress there?
GENERAL HURLEY: I certainly am and I think you've heard the CDF comment on that publicly recently.
JOURNALIST: Do you think General, your Minister has in recent months had some very public criticisms of the quality of advice and sometimes decision making in the senior levels, if not the top brass and leadership team of Defence. What assurances can you give him that anything will change or improve and has he asked you for such assurances on appointment?
GENERAL HURLEY: Well I think robust interaction between the Department and the Minister is something you would expect from us. We're asked to give frank and fearless advice. We do. I don't think that at times it should be taken as dissent or some sort of war between the Minister and the generals. We're doing our job and we will continue to do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a report today that a Pakistani journalist who's been found dead after publishing a report that there were links between the Pakistani military and al-Qaeda. He had allegedly told friends and colleagues that he'd been threatened by the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence. Can I ask what your response to that is and whether you have confidence that those links between the Pakistani military and al-Qaeda are being broken?
PM: Well, I'm not going to comment in detail on an individual case where it's impossible for me to independently know all of the facts, but just dealing with it from the point of view of first principles, of course we support press freedom around the world as an inherent check and balance in democracies and anything that stops press freedom, particularly the intimidation of acts of violence against journalists is obviously abhorrent.
Second, as you would have heard me say in the past, we are engaged with Pakistan on counterterrorism matters. We believe the best path forward is to continue that engagement and we will be continuing that engagement. We are involved in training and other work to assist Pakistan and we believe that that is important to continue.
You are right as you have in the past Karen to point to the importance of what's happening in Pakistan and the importance of what's happening there to our mission in Afghanistan. We're very, very conscious of that and we are on a strategy to stay engaged on counterterrorism questions.
JOURNALIST: Your response to reports that the Taliban are claiming that the ANA soldier  who shot our soldier yesterday or day before yesterday was an insurgent and a sleeper within the ANA ranks?
PM: Well, I'll get the Minister to comment too, but the Taliban are very canny purveyors of propaganda. We've seen that before and we'll see it again. So, you would expect them to be trying to make the most they can out of this incident in their cause and in the cause of the insurgency that they represent.
For the actual details of the incident we are going to investigate them fully. That's already underway and when we can give people full details then we will, but I'm not surprised that the Taliban is engaged in its cheap and very destructive propaganda.
MINISTER SMITH: Thank you Prime Minister. I think it falls into the category of ‘they would say that, wouldn't they.'
I've made and been at pains to make two points in recent week and months. Firstly, that we know we've made progress in terms of gaining ground in Oruzgan province but we've always known that as the northern summer fighting season commenced that the Taliban would seek to recover ground and that we had to steel ourselves for fatalities and casualties and terribly that has occurred.
Secondly, because we have made progress and taken ground and held that ground, we've also known that the Taliban, strategically, would look to high-profile instances to try and influence the views of the domestic constituencies of the international security systems force, nations including our own. So we've seen a number of high-profile propaganda efforts and attacks: attacks on the defence ministry in Kabul; assassination of a number of police commissioners to seek to undermine the political resolve so far as the Afghanistan effort is concerned.
So far as the terrible incident yesterday is concerned or the day before is concerned, I've made some remarks earlier today. We now have a slight variation to the facts which I've already put on the public record. I won't detail those unless people need or want to, but what we don't have at this stage an advance of an exhaustive investigation is what motivation there was so far as the individual Afghan National Army soldier was concerned. He'd been undergoing training for three or four months. He'd been with the 4th Brigade in Oruzgan for a month.
We don't know what the motivation was, but as I've said yesterday and today this is a jolt and a shock to our system but in the aftermath of that our resolve remains firm and the professionalism of our people on the ground in Oruzgan will naturally take over.
This incident also needs to be put within its proper perspective, which is we're currently training, as we speak, 3,500 thousand Afghan National Army member of the 4th Brigade and the entire Afghan National Security Force compliment in Afghanistan itself is close to 300,000.
This is a terrible incident. For us it has been the first one. There have been a handful, but if and when they occur in the future you would expect the Taliban and the insurgency to make the most of them in a propaganda sense irrespective of the actual facts.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) given there have been a handful of these cases, how concerned are you about the potential for the Taliban to infiltrate Australian and other coalition forces? Is enough being done on the background checks?
And secondly, President Karzai has again expressed concern over the civilian deaths. How worried are you about that and are enough safeguards in place?
GENERAL HURLEY: Thank you.
In relation to the recruitment process, the screening processes, the NTMA, which is the body that organises recruiting process in Afghanistan does, as we've mentioned before, biometric recording, recruiting and a screening process. We receive them through that process into the brigade in Afghanistan. We have processes in place to protect our people. Obviously as one of the repercussions of yesterday's event is they're being thoroughly reviewed now and I daresay enhanced after discussions between the Chief of Defence Force and the Chief of Joint Operations this morning. We won't go into the details of that for obvious reasons.
These sorts of events, you know, send messages right up through the chain of command for people to be looking at each of those steps again to ensure our people can be safe as they can be, but we won't be able to prevent all this in the future. I mean, 400,000 people, the Taliban are an active enemy and we've got to deal with this warts and all.
In relation to civil casualties we've said in the past as well that we're with one with the Afghan Government, that these are real tragedies and we try everything we can to avoid them, a lot of procedures, filters in place, steps in place that people must go through to avoid these, and we share with the Afghan people in just mourning the loss of those lives. It's certainly not our intention. We're there to help them.
PM: We'll go here and then here and then come across. Yes?
JOURNALIST: I'm just wondering about in Mashal itself, in this base where this took place, has there been any approach from the Afghan soldiers, the officers there, anything to indicate what their demeanour is in the aftermath of this tragic event? What they've been saying to their Australian colleagues?
GENERAL HURLEY: Look, certainly to our knowledge and what we've had reported the people there, the Afghan National Army leadership in Oruzgan province has been just as jolted as we have by this event. They have vigorously commented about the lack of support that this might say to us that they're going to give us. They've really recommitted themselves to us and they've put their troops out in the field straight away to try and hunt down this person. We haven't been controlling that operation. They've taken it on themselves. I think they realise how important it is to the relationship that they catch this person and bring him to justice.
JOURNALIST: An update on the search for the rouge Afghan soldier?
MINISTER SMITH: As General Hurley has just said there's an operation underway by the Afghan National Army in Oruzgan to seek to capture him. In addition to the local remarks or comments that General Hurley has relayed to you, you'd of course be aware of the comments of Brigadier General Kahn, the commander of the 4th Brigade in Oruzgan province absolutely condemning that which occurred and obviously in general partnership terms we're giving the Afghan National Army every assistance as they seek to capture the Afghan National Army officer who committed this atrocity.
JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied in Afghanistan with our force mix there, with our numbers of troops and the equipment they have? There were rumblings a few months back about extra artillery. Someone suggested tanks. There was talk of extra helicopters. Are you happy with what they have and how many there are in the mix, in the mix of the forces?
GENERAL HURLEY: For the task we have at hand at the present time, which is the training of the ANA 4th Brigade, we are quite appropriately postured and supported in relation to that both from our own Australian resources and from the US and other NATO and ISAF enabling capabilities that are there.
JOURNALIST: Minister, Mr Smith, the Air Warfare Destroyer contracts are showing some early signs of blowing out or having some problems, delays and so forth. Have you sought assurances from your new team that that will monitored closely and can you give Australians an assurance that this won't go the way of some other Defence contracts in the past and won't become an ongoing sort of series of delays and blowouts?
MINISTER SMITH: The Minister for Defence Materiel and I, the Secretary of the Department, the Chief of Navy and the CEO of the Defence Materiel Organisation have been working very assiduously at this issue since February-March of this year.
You may recall that in March of this year I went to the United Kingdom on other matters. I took the opportunity there of visiting BAE in the United Kingdom to impress upon them the importance of the project to Australia, both the Air Warfare Destroyer project but also the landing helicopter docks project in respect of which they are working on both, and I did that because it was clear at that time that the work that BAE was doing on both jobs was causing stress in their Melbourne shipyards.
Last week I made an announcement, which was essentially agreed between all the parties, to reallocate a range of blocks away from the Melbourne workshops to either Newcastle, to Adelaide and five blocks to Navantia in Spain.
On our estimation that has reduced the prospective delay from two years to 12 months. No-one is under any illusions, no-one in the air warfare destroyer alliance, none of the private companies concerned, no-one is under any illusions as to the seriousness and importance which the Government places on this project, and the action that I took last week reflected a number of months of work and the new Chief of Navy, the new Chief of the Defence Force, the Secretary and I, and Minister Clare, will be absolutely assiduous in bringing this project to a successful conclusion.
PM: I'll just go to Andrew and then to David.
JOURNALIST: Minister and perhaps Lieutenant General Hurley, just on the biometric testing which is obviously looking to identify people, of the people who have been recruited into the ANA, have any of those people who were rejected, were they rejected because of the biometric testing that identified them as possible insurgents, given that you do the same sort of testing for the detainees who are brought in to Tarin Kowt?
MINISTER SMITH: Well, I'll give you an answer then I'll ask General Hurley to add.
The point we've been making about the biometric testing is that we have biometric testing and therefore an identification of the ANA soldier who committed this atrocity. What that discounts is that this was, if you like, a last-minute infiltrator or imposter. We're not in a position to take it any further than that in terms of the motivation of the individual concerned, but I'll ask General Hurley to add on the detail.
GENERAL HURLEY: Just in relation to the biometric testing, obviously it gives us a means to track people who are in the ANA and when they move around the countryside. If we have had detainees who have been released in previous activities for a lack of evidence and so forth, they're biometrically checked. We keep matching databases, so it's one way for us to keep track of movement of people in and out of the ANA.
JOURNALIST: Have there been any exclusions?
GENERAL HURLEY: I'm not aware of any. I don't have that level of data.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask a question of the outgoing CDF? I'm not sure if we'll get another chance before you finish up. Just if you could reflect on-
PM: I'm sure you'll get an invitation to the Festival of Angus.
JOURNALIST: Just asking if you could reflect on the highs and lows of the last six years and whether you've got any advice for your successor?
AIR CHIEF MARSHAL HOUSTON: That's a very big question, David, but let me say that I think we've got a great team to carry the leadership of the ADF forward. I have immense confidence in this team.
In terms of the highs, well, it's all about the people of the ADF. We have a wonderful Defence Force. Okay, we're not perfect, but the vast majority of people out there act with great generosity of spirit in everything that they do, and you've heard the Prime Minister mention the operations. 58 operations, 69,000 people deployed, and every time I've gone out there and visited them, our people have uplifted me. They really have. And I think they perform superbly. It's been a story of success, what we've done on operations.
The low points: when we've lost people, and clearly what's happened the last couple of days and, indeed, last week, and all the other occasions, when we've brought brave, courageous people home after they've been killed on operations, most normally in Afghanistan, that's the low point.
Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Just regarding the ANA soldier, what will happen if he's captured? Will he be handed over to the Australians? If not, do you have faith in the Afghan legal system or the court martial system in Afghanistan?
MINISTER SMITH: It's always wise in these things to take it step by step. If he is captured he'll be dealt with in accordance with Afghan law.
PM: We'll just let Brendan have one, just because I'm soft of heart.
JOURNALIST: Angus, when you took over the job six years ago you set a number of priorities, but this followed the Senate inquiry into issues of bastardisation and military justice. You basically set as a goal sorting out a lot of these problems.
Now, how do you feel that that process has gone and how do you feel about the standard of the quality of people in the Defence Force at the moment and the impression that's been created recently that there's a high level of wrong attitudes towards women, and basically serious sexual problems through the service?
PM: That's taking a fair bit of liberty with the last question. That was about 10 in 1.
AIR CHIEF MARSHAL HOUSTON: Well, all I will say is that the outgoing leadership team has worked incredibly hard on culture. Russ Crane, with his new generation Navy, has done a remarkable job of changing the Navy from what it was to where it needs to go in the future. The emphasis has been on leadership and culture, signature behaviours.
And Ok, we've had a situation with Success, HMAS Success, that we all deeply regret, but I do not think that that is the norm for the Navy.
I visited many ships over my time as CDF and I've been deeply impressed by the dedication, the professionalism, and the commitment of those people and, indeed, most recently I have spoken to Navy people about some of these issues and a lot of junior Navy people would condemn what happened on Success just as I and the Chief of Navy have.
Now, more broadly, I think the Defence Force has turned around. There will always be incidents. We're talking about a force of 58,000 permanent people. About half that force are under the age of 25. There will be occasions when people misbehave and I think you've just got to accept that reality but, let me say again, we send these young people out on those operations. They put their lives on the line and they do it wonderfully well, they really do, and I know many of you have been out there on our operations and seen our people perform. I think that that's what you should focus on not the isolated incidents that we have from time to time.
Thank you.
PM: Thank you very much. 



Thanks for that introduction Peter.
It's a tribute to the significance of Minerals Week on the political calendar that so many Parliamentarians are here with you tonight.
Led by the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, my friend Wayne Swan; joined by my ministerial colleagues Martin Ferguson, Greg Combet, Gary Gray, Brendan O'Connor and Warren Snowdon and Senators Nick Sherry and Mark Arbib; with parliamentary secretaries David Bradbury, Mark Dreyfus, Richard Marles and Senator Ursula Stephens; as well as Chief Government Whip Joel Fitzgibbon, Sharon Bird, Sharon Grierson, Chris Hayes, Amanda Rishworth, Andrew Leigh,  Shayne Neumann, Deb O'Neill, Sid Sidebottom, Senator Mark Bishop, Senator Trish Crossin, Senator Steve Hutchins and Senator Glenn Sterle.
I know Mr Abbott addressed you at lunchtime today, and the Opposition is represented tonight by other members and Senators as well, and that the Greens Member for Melbourne and the Independent Member for Kennedy are here as well.
So, miners, members, friends, fellow Australians all: welcome back to Canberra for Minerals Week 2011.
Minerals Week has been bringing the industry and government together for decades and will continue to do so in future.
I know you've been hard at work today and that you've got a full program tomorrow with the Council meeting and AGM discussions with Ministers and others.
We come to this Minerals Week working off a shared understanding of what is happening in our economy and in your industry, Not just the scale of investment, the biggest boom since they panned for gold in Bathurst and Ballarat, but the pace of change, with investment eight times what it was six years ago, on levels which we all considered a boom at the time, now accounting for well over half of the country's export earnings, up from a third a decade ago.
The truth is I spend much of my time as Prime Minister explaining to people who aren't here tonight just why the boom is a good thing for all Australians, and why nurturing the boom is central to the Government's economic strategy.
Whether I'm talking to investors in China and the United States, or talking to teenagers in suburban high schools, I'm always emphasising the opportunities your industry is creating, opportunities for return on capital, opportunities for a lifetime of work.
My message to Australia and the world is consistent: the investment boom is good news and we celebrate it.
But you knew that.
What I really want you to take away tonight is an understanding of just how central your industry is to the Government's economic agenda.
First of all, nurturing the mining investment boom is central to the Government's budget strategy and overall economic policy.
This year the Treasurer has delivered a tough Budget which will see us back in the black in 2012-13.
We're offsetting new spending, we're banking upward revisions in revenue, we're limiting spending growth overall, we're making significant savings. There's a reason for all this: above all else, to leave room for the mining sector to grow.
While we have short-term weakness from the natural disasters and an economy recovering from the global financial crisis, our medium term prospects are very strong.
I think it's widely acknowledged that fiscal policy was too loose during mining boom Mark I. Throughout 2007 we saw the economic outcomes of dumping cash into a capacity-constrained economy, and that's a mistake this Government won't make.
As investment hits top gear in the years ahead, we don't want the government and private sector chasing the same resources.
These decisions do call for some courage and we've shown it. In a choice between getting the policy right and cheap populism, I'll go for the right policy every time.
We'll continue on the reform road, hold to responsible fiscal policy and make the right investments, to nurture the boom for the future of the Australian economy.
Secondly, while there's no quiet years in a business as big as mining or in a task as complex as governing Australia, I do believe that as Government and industry come together in Canberra this week there's more business on the table than ever before, issues vital to your industry, issues vital to the country, and they include difficult issues that we've been discussing at great length: putting a price on carbon and introducing a minerals resource rent tax.
On carbon, the best way to describe our fundamental approach is this: as a responsible national Government, we have to manage a long-term national risk - climate change.
You know all the arguments but I just make that point.
You're all leaders in industry, responsible leaders, you all manage risk every day. If there's anything that keeps leaders awake at night, it's that responsibility.
In this sense Government is no different and all of us who care about the future of our nation must work together as Australians to fulfil this fundamental responsibility of leadership, to manage risk for our nation.
In developing our plan, I know there are some in industry, including some here tonight, who have expressed support for a system like that adopted in the European Union.
My own judgement is that while the overseas experience provides some useful insights I see a number of elements which would not be in Australia's national interest.
Schemes which exclude substantial sectors of the real economy simply shift the first-round cost on to a smaller number of players, with a greater cost to the national economy over time.
Our overall approach is to achieve the lowest-cost, most efficient emissions reductions, to set incentives for the most productive investment possible.
So, as you all know, we're working through the process for developing the carbon price now.
The final Garnaut Review will be followed this month by the Productivity Commission review of international shadow carbon prices and the Treasury modelling of the impacts of a carbon price on the Australian economy.
We intend to announce the details of the carbon price in the middle of the year, to introduce the legislation to the Parliament in September and we're working for passage by the end of the year with the price to commence 1 July 2012.
Friends, the Government is doing all this because we believe that Australia needs to act now.
No question, it's not easy.
We respect that this requires industry to make a transition, and I know that in the face of the challenge there are some who resort to scepticism or argue for inaction or delay.
I have to say, in my life, I don't remember many difficult things which got easier the longer I left them, and in an economy like ours, there is never an easy time to make a big change, whether that's tariff reform or tax reform or pricing carbon.
I also know there's been discussion this week of the status of a global agreement to reduce emissions. What's clear is that with or without global agreement, our competitor economies are acting.
The Government's approach is not that Australia should lead the world in environmental policy  -  it is that Australia should not be left behind in economic transition.
If we can't act now to manage this risk - after decades of growth; with an economy which is fundamentally strong and has a solid pipeline of investment; after a long debate which at significant points had bipartisan agreement  -  I don't know when we can.
Just as I think we can share an understanding of the need for risk management on climate change, on profit-based taxation, I do believe we share a fundamental approach.
Profit-based taxation, rather than royalties, is the better approach to generating public value from natural resources.
Royalties don't support growth in the sector. They make it more difficult for new investment to get up and they remain high when conditions are tough, and because they are imposed from the first tonne that is dug up royalties are much less supportive of growth and of small ventures.
So, I will continue to push back on states that push up royalties. The recent decisions in the Western Australian budget frankly only demonstrate the weaknesses of a royalties system, because when a state like WA hikes their royalties, it is the many small and start-up ventures who pay the price.
By contrast, the minerals resource rent tax will not apply at all for smaller miners, those with profits under $50 million, and miners with low profitability, for example those setting up a project with high upfront costs.
By design, the MRRT recognises different businesses processes and the different profitability of mines and will only tax profits after deductions for investment and operating costs.
How we move to profit-based taxation is obviously the key.
The Government has accepted the recommendations of the Policy Transition Group and the initial public consultation on the draft MRRT legislation will begin in the next few weeks, and we'll be introducing the MRRT legislation towards the end of the year.
I put these two issues together, carbon and resource rents, not just because they've been issues where you have real interests at stake and where you haven't always been happy with our approach  -  though I do respect that.
I ask the Deputy Prime Minister and I ask ministers of the calibre of Greg and Martin to deal with the hard issues, not the easy things, and these are among them.
The reason I put carbon and resource rents together as issues to discuss is because while you're all here, I need to say this: I sincerely appreciate the way the industry is approaching our discussions. I can honestly say, every day I've been Prime Minister, I've seen respect and good faith on both sides of both these issues.
We're having a serious discussion that respects the facts.
That's vital for the national interest: we need an evidence-based, empirical public debate, not just to deliver these difficult reforms but to keep public policy on the reform road for the future.
And as well as respecting the facts in the discussion, I think industry and Government have respected our word.
Where we've made agreements, they've stuck, and in turn, this has allowed us to get to grips with the remaining matters.
We've seen this on the carbon price mechanism, where we have been engaging in detailed design work since February and you've worked hard with us.
We've seen this on the MRRT where the Policy Transition Group has done enormous work to get us to this point.
The Government won't pat ourselves on the back for consulting: it's what we should always do, it's the mark of a mature and methodical policy process, and we know industry has stayed at the table and been seriously engaged.
I know it's exhaustive  -  business roundtables, working groups, policy transition groups. I also know it's worth it.
The Government is also building partnerships with industry to strengthen the economy and create opportunity.
To build infrastructure, $400 million for the Regional Infrastructure Fund.
An Infrastructure Investment Incentive to attract up to $25 billion of private and superannuation investment by protecting the value of early stage losses and giving greater certainty that early-stage losses can be claimed.
To extend education and employment to indigenous Australians. This is an area where industry and government are partners in the drive to extend opportunity to indigenous Australia.
Developing a successful Indigenous employment model in the Pilbara that can be replicated in other regions  -  funding thousands of commencements into training and employment  -  forming specific partnerships from Gove to Gladstone.
Just today I joined with Rio Tinto and discussed the good work they're doing  -  one example among many in the industry.
To train Australians and make the best of skilled migration. Training our young people to work in industries like yours is not just nurturing the Australian boom, it is extending Australian opportunity as well.
Here I see a real chance, driven by the economy, to work with you to achieve goals we share  -  goals I have always held dear: for our young people to have a fair go, to have an opportunity in life.
That's exactly what's in our Budget:
 * 	An industry-demand-driven National Workforce Development Fund that will deliver 130,000 new training places over four years.
 * 	A national mentoring program to help 40,000 apprentices finish training.
 * 	Accelerating apprenticeships so people progress as they acquire the right skills.
 * 	Ambitious reforms of the vocational education and training system.
 * 	16,000 skilled migration places to the regions, Regional Migration Agreements, Enterprise Migration Agreements for large resource projects in return for a financial contribution to train Australians for the future.
And we're pleased that these have been well received.
Your own Council recognising the “the Budget makes ... important contributions in tackling emerging capacity constraints”.
The Mines and Metals Association praising Enterprise Migration Agreements for the sector as “a huge step in the right direction”.
I won't argue with that.
Friends, I also want to acknowledge the part the industry is playing rebuilding Queensland after the devastating natural disasters of this year.
The sector contributed over $18 million to the Queensland disaster relief appeal.
In those terrible days, we saw mining companies using their helicopters used to ferry evacuees, providing transportable buildings for medical practices  -  even funding the refurbishment of a senior citizens home.
It's been almost literally ‘all hands to the pump' dewatering mines, so it's good news for the industry, the state and the country that the vast majority of damaged coal mines have now returned to operation.
And you have borne a burden as well, and the drop in our gross domestic product reported today reflects the substantial costs to many of you of losses arising from the damage and disruption this summer.
The Government is doing our bit, providing $5.7 billion to help Queensland  -  the vast majority to repair damage to essential infrastructure.
Over 70% of damaged roads and 90% of damaged rail lines restored and recovery and reconstruction is well underway.
There is much work still to do, but we'll see the task through together.
It's no accident that last Friday while many of you were preparing for this week in Canberra I was up in Moranbah at a great event organised by Women in Mining and Resources Queensland.
There I spoke to some really inspirational Australians - geologists, engineers, a female mine manager - and we talked about what it must have been like to be one of the first woman to turn up at a mine site; the first woman to climb into the cab of one of those huge trucks; and we talked about the opportunities that flow from the mining industry to these hard working women.
Or that next week I'll be in Yirrkala in Arnhem Land to celebrate the signing of the agreement between traditional owners of the Gove peninsula and Rio Tinto which secures the operation of bauxite mining and alumina refining at Gove for four decades to come, and we'll talk about the opportunities that flow from the mining industry to Aboriginal traditional owners, surrounding communities and the Nhulunbuy community.
Your industry is so important to my daily work because you've become so important to the opportunities that all Australians seek.
I think about it this way: We are a country once described as the world's first suburban nation, where home ownership is seriously referred to as the national dream, and this year, Australian industry will invest more money into mining than the whole country invests in building new houses.
So we're together in Canberra tonight at a time when mining's never been more important to our country's future, when Government and industry have never had more to discuss: some shared fundamentals; yes, some big differences to work through; yes, real respect and good faith working through them; a boom to nurture; infrastructure to build; Australians to train; big risks to manage; big transitions to make; big opportunities to seize.
It's a good time for activists and a good time for optimists, and there's plenty of both in the room tonight in industry and in government: optimists who share a vision of a better future; activists who share a determination to build it; Australians who'll share a good night together. 



I am pleased to announced new arrangements for the positions of Secretary in the Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research and the Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities.
Mr Mark Paterson AO recently finished in the position of Secretary of the Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research in order to take up the position of Director-General of the Department of Trade and Investment in New South Wales. I wish to pay tribute to the contribution that Mr Paterson has made to the Public Service since he joined in 2002 as the Secretary of the Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources. In 2007 he was awarded an Officer of the Order of Australia in recognition of his service to business and industry, to the resources sector and to tourism development.
I am pleased to announce the appointment of Dr Don Russell as the Secretary of the Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research. Dr Russellhas had a varied and distinguished career in both the public and private sectors over a number of years. He is currently the Chairman of the NSW State Super SAS Trustee Corporation. He held senior positions within the Australian government during a period of significant economic reform. He served as a senior executive in the Department of the Treasury in the 1980's. He was principal adviser to former Prime Minister and Treasurer the Hon Paul Keating. As Australia's Ambassador to the United States he helped to promote Australia's interests with one of our key partners. More recently, he has also held a number of senior financial sector positions both in Australia and the US. I am sure Dr Russell's experience and knowledge and his ability to relate effectively to the private sector will be a considerable asset to the Commonwealth in his new role.
Following the early detection and successful treatment of cancer I am pleased that Ms Robyn Kruk AM will return to work and that she has agreed to take up the position of Chief Executive Officer designate of the National Mental Health Commission. The Commission was announced as part of the 2011-12 Budget and will be recommended to the Governor-General for establishment from 1 January 2012.
Ms Kruk comes to this position with a wealth of experience in public administration, including significant experience in health policy from her time as Director-General of the NSW Department of Health. During her time in that position, Ms Kruk oversaw major reforms to NSW Health's clinical governance and health services. Under her direction NSW developed and implemented significant reforms in mental health services. The new Commission will have the benefit of Ms Kruk's considerable expertise in developing this important health initiative.
In order to assist in setting up the Commission prior to taking up her new appointment, Ms Kruk has resigned from her position as Secretary of the Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities.
I am pleased to announce the appointment of Dr Paul Grimes PSM as the Secretary of the Departmentof Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. Dr Grimes has been acting in that position since September 2010. Prior to that appointment, he was the Associate Secretary of the Domestic Policy Group in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. He has previously held senior roles in the Department of Finance and Deregulation, the Treasury and other jurisdictions. Dr Grimes was awarded the Public Service Medal in 2010 for outstanding public service in the development of the Australian Government's response to the global financial crisis.
I thank Mr Paterson and Ms Kruk for their contributions and I congratulate Dr Russell and Dr Grimes on their appointments, which will each be for a period of five years.
I would also like to take this opportunity to announce that Dr Ken Henry AC has been appointed by the Governor-General as Special Adviser on a part-time basis in my portfolio. Dr Henry is currently on extended leave taking a well-deserved break after 10 years of outstanding service as the Secretary to the Treasury. I will be having further discussions with him on the details of the advisory role closer to his return from leave. I am pleased that Dr Henry's extensive knowledge and experience remains available to the Australian Government.  



A report released today has warned that Kakadu - one of Australia's World Heritage Listed sites - is vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.
The report projects that higher sea levels will increase saltwater intrusion in freshwater habitats, threatening the abundance of freshwater species in Kakadu.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard was joined today by former Prime Minister Bob Hawke and Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, Greg Combet for the release of the report, Kakadu  -  Vulnerability to Climate Change Impacts.
The report comes almost 20 years after the Hawke Government banned mining at Coronation Hill and laid the groundwork for its inclusion in the Kakadu National Park.
This report sounds yet another warning bell about the dangers of climate change.
Kakadu is one of Australia's most iconic places  -  its plant and animal habitats, rivers, wetlands and estuaries are unique.
The landscapes and native wildlife we know and love will inevitably change - our challenge is to minimise the dangers, the impacts and the risks.
The report shows why it is critically important to take action now to combat climate change with the same commitment that the Hawke Government showed in protecting Kakadu in 1991.
The report, prepared for the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency,modeled the impacts of sea level rise on Kakadu's South Alligator River system for 2030 and 2070.
It found there would be a series of environmental, cultural and economic impacts which include:
 * 	Higher sea levels and storm tide levels which will increase saltwater intrusion into freshwater habitats
 * 	A reduction in the extent of freshwater vegetation, monsoon rainforest and woodlands
 * 	A decline in the abundance of key species such as freshwater crocodiles, magpie geese and pig-nosed turtles in freshwater habitats
 * 	A decline in the abundance of mud crabs, yellow chats and threadfin salmon in estuarine habitats
 * 	A reduction in species of cultural significance including bush tucker
 * 	Less access to sites of cultural significance and increased damage to tourism sites.
The report is a stark reminder of the ongoing challenge Australia faces to protect its magnificent natural assets.
The Hawke Labor Government made the right decision to protect Kakadu in 1991 when it stopped mining at Coronation Hill, despite strong lobbying by the mining industry and business groups.
Sections of the mining industry argued that the Government would “make or break the development of Australia's resources by its decision on Coronation Hill”.
It is clear, 20 years later, that the Hawke Labor Government acted in the best interests of the nation  -  protecting the environment without the impacts claimed by opponents at the time.
Now, in 2011, it is again a Labor Government that is making the right decision to reduce Australia's carbon pollution through the introduction of a carbon price.
The Government is already taking a number of actions to plan for and manage the impacts of climate change on Kakadu.
This report will provide a helpful tool for Government and stakeholders as we continue to improve our understanding and put in place measures to manage these threats.
The full report can be found at www.climatechange.gov.au



PM: 20 years ago a very remarkable Australian decided to protect a bigger area and make it part of Kakadu National Park. Of course that very remarkable Australian was Prime Minister Bob Hawke who joins me here today. That was a big decision, a big decision to extend further protections to Kakadu and it was a big decision that was hotly politically debated at the time, it was very, very strongly opposed by the Liberal Party and the National Party and a fear campaign was run that if these protections went ahead and Prime Minister Bob Hawke extended Kakadu National Park, that that would be the end of mining in our nation.
In fact I have with me a clip from the Sydney Morning Herald, a news report from the time, that say ‘Coronation Hill to make or break the mining industry'; that was the nature of the fear campaign at the time being run by the Liberal Party and the National Party.
Now here we stand 20 years later with the mining industry in the midst of Resources Boom Mk II with more than $600 million of investment in the pipeline and I don't think you'd find one Australian who said that Prime Minister Bob Hawke made the wrong decision, I don't think you'd find one Australian in Parliament House behind me who would say that the wrong decision was taken 20 years ago, I don't think you'd find one Australian in any corner of our nation that would say that was the wrong decision.
And here we stand 20 years later and we're in the midst of another fear campaign by the Liberal Party and the National Party and they're trying to tell Australians that if we put a price on carbon that'll be the end of our economy, it'll be the end of mining, it'll be the end of life as we know it. And of course this fear campaign is as silly as the fear campaign that Prime Minister Bob Hawke stared down 20 years ago.
And we're here talking about Kakadu 20 years later but we're talking about the new challenge for Kakadu. Today I'm launching this report, this report that talks about the results that climate change can have on Kakadu, the real risks for Kakadu from climate change. It talks particularly about the risks that flow from rising sea levels, more salt water getting into the fresh water systems in Kakadu, changing the nature of the ecology, being a real risk for the native animals that live, being a real risk for Indigenous communities that still rely on this ecosystem for their bush tucker, and being a real risk for the tourism industry as parts of Kakadu would become inaccessible for parts of the year due to higher water levels.
So 20 years after Bob Hawke took a brave decision, we as a nation need to take a brave decision too, a brave decision to price carbon, a brave decision to tackle climate change; and yes we're in the midst of a fear campaign from the Opposition, just like Bob Hawke stared that fear campaign down, as a nation we need to stare this fear campaign down and get the right thing done by our environment, the right thing done by Kakadu and move to price carbon.
I'll turn now to a man who needs absolutely no introduction from me or anybody else, Bob Hawke.
MR HAWKE: Thanks Julia.
Well it's a great pleasure to be here with you Julia and it is a very appropriate anniversary of timing which has a very direct relevance to the challenges that you're facing. The first point I'd like to make is that Julia and her Cabinet are absolutely right in terms of the decision they're taking in being prepared to tackle the issue of climate change now and not obfuscate and give into fear campaigns. Political leadership requires the readiness to make tough and what may, at times, seem to be unpopular decisions. Julia referred to the fear campaign that I faced 20 years ago and I tell you what if was very, very solid. As usual, the Liberal and Country parties led that campaign of fear, the sky is going to fall in, the world would never be the same again. And then as now, as supported by the mining industry, and I'll just show you another of the time, that was from the Sydney Morning Herald, this was from The Australian: ‘Can we afford to let Mr Hawke make a $38 billion mistake?' That was the nature of the nonsense we were confronted with then, $38 billion was the assessment of the assets invested in the mining industry, and if I were allowed to go ahead with the decision that I made, then that was going to end the mining industry as we knew it. Investors were going to be frightened off from Australia, they were going to pull up stumps and go away. Now you recognise exactly the same nonsense again.
Now I want to say to you Julia I congratulate you on the fact that you, like we did 20 years ago, maintaining the tradition of the great Australian Labor Party. We are the Party, we have historically been the Party prepared to make the tough decisions, to change things that we did in Government when we grabbed hold of an economy that was just disappearing down the gurgler, made the tough decisions, a lot of opposition then, but we made the tough decisions. In the environment we made a decision about saving the Franklin, we had a marvellous record on the environment but it was a question of always taking into account the need to face the challenge of the environment and also taking account a need to ensure that we'd continue to have sustainable economic growth.
Now you are following, Julia, a very considerable tradition and the Opposition here led by Tony, as I've said, I don't mind Tony personally, I think he's not a bad bloke, but as I said during the campaign he's as mad as a cut snake and he is on this issue, he is on this issue, I mean totally irresponsible. This is a real issue about the sort of country this is going to be for his kids, his grandchildren and so on. This is what's the issue here and it's cheap opportunism, this fear that if this decision is taken it's going to be the end of the mining industry, it's going to be the end of everything else.
The decisions that are going to be taken will involve appropriate compensation which will protect households and industry and at the same time make sure that Australia plays its part in meeting what is undoubtedly the great challenge of our time. So I congratulate you Julia on your courage.
JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke correct me if I'm wrong but you didn't promise before an election not to do what you did 20 years ago, how does the Prime Minister overcome the perception that she's broken a promise?
HAWKE: Well what she has said, accurately, is that the circumstances have changed since she made that, certainly the situation in the Parliament has changed and if politicians were to be in a situation where because they'd said something beforehand and you've got a change of circumstances they felt absolutely inhibited from making any change then you wouldn't get very effective Government. You know what Lord Keynes said, the most famous economist, when he was being tackled for changing his mind, he said well ‘when circumstances change I change my mind. Pray sir what do you do?'
So I think to trivialise what is a fundamental issue for the welfare for our kids, their kids, and the future of this country and for the world, to trivialise and say no the Prime Minister shouldn't do something about this because she made a statement in another circumstance and that should hamstring her forever more about making the right decision. Come on.
JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke you were when you were Prime Minister renowned for your understanding of what the public was thinking, do you think that in this case the public understand the point that you've just put that the Prime Minister may have changed her position, but that the circumstances mean that it's not a basic betrayal of trust?
MR HAWKE: I don't think they understand it fully yet but they are in the process of explaining this and there's plenty of time for Julia and her colleagues to do that. Remember this, the Australian people basically in my experience are sensible when it comes to politics. I've made the point many times, I think generally speaking they've made the right decision in terms of who they return to government at the Federal level and I found when I was Prime Minister that when we explained to them the nature of the issues, the challenges, the dangers of just going on without change they responded. The outstanding example in my case was when we elected to have the economic summit and we ensured that every representative there, all the organisations in Australia, had the full details about the facts, the facts of how badly the Australian economy was going, the facts about what needed to happen, and when we explained all those I got unanimous communiqué  -  except for Joh Bjelke-Petersen, so that made it all the more compelling  -  but down there at the Old Parliament House, that was when you give them the facts, let them understand, then they respond.
PM: Yes Bonge. We've got sun in our eyes in you're wondering why we're going like that, but Paul.
JOURNALIST: Barnaby Joyce and others in the Opposition make the point that even if Australia went completely carbon neutral tomorrow, it's not going to change the (inaudible) so how would you (inaudible) if you do bring in a carbon tax?
PM: Well Bonge the problem for Barnaby Joyce is he's just ignoring the facts and the facts are the rest of the world is moving and my case to the Australian people isn't that we should lead the world, it's that we can't afford to be left behind. We've got a high emissions economy, that means we've got a lot to do, a lot of things to change, to be the clean energy economy we need to be for the future. As I said to the Minerals Council dinner in Parliament House behind me last night, across my lifetime I think I can say this: things have never got easier, difficult things have never got easier by putting them off. We've got to make changes, we've got to start now, we've got to change our economy to being a cleaner energy economy and that, in cutting carbon pollution, will be our contribution to tackling climate change.
I mean reduced to its base proposition, Barnaby Joyce is basically saying ‘don't do anything' and there's no surprise he's saying that, he's a member of a Coalition that really is in dispute with the climate change science, they really just don't accept the science and all of this is just spin and diversion to try and distract people from the fact that they don't accept the science.
JOURNALIST: He's also saying if the Coalition wins they will (inaudible)
PM: Well I think it's the most remarkable thing that Tony Abbott is going to go to the election in 2013 saying to Australians money that has been given to you by the Labor Government will be taken away from, we'll be ripping money off you.
Now decisions still have to be taken about the best way of assisting Australian households as we make this move to cut carbon pollution, I've said that tax cuts are a serious option  -  obviously we've got to look after people who are on pensions and benefits  -  but however we provide the assistance, whether it's through an increase in the pension or whether it's through a tax cut or a mix of the two, Tony Abbott is going to the next election saying to pensioners ‘you should have less money', he's saying to Australians ‘you should have less money.'
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister will you be using the carbon tax or the carbon pricing mechanism as (inaudible)
PM: Well I've just said to you about tax cuts, tax cuts are a serious  - 
JOURNALIST: More than just cuts.
PM: Well it's a serious option, I'm not here today to announce the details of the assistance package, that will be available when all details of carbon price are available in the middle of the year, but the principle here is we want to be there to help Australian families. I understand that they're struggling under cost of living pressures, so our proposition to Australian families is: climate change is real, we've got to cut carbon pollution, we'll do that by making the big polluters pay, and we'll use the majority of that revenue and give it to Australian families. Tony Abbott is saying: he doesn't really believe in the science, but if he's going to do anything he's going to take money off Australian families and give it to big polluters.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott's also saying that some Labor backbenchers are getting nervous and that you're starting to spook the party room (inaudible)
PM: Well he would say that wouldn't he.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) rock solid?
PM: Well I don't think we're going to accept Tony Abbott's commentary on these things and if we have a look at Mr Abbott's backbench and frontbench, I think today's the first time I've picked up the newspapers in a good while that they weren't in there giving each other a free character assessment.
JOURNALIST: Mr Hawke you were always a political salesman, almost above everything else-
HAWKE: I wouldn't have thought that was true, that was just an incidental plus.
JOURNALIST: How would you rate the selling of climate change policy by this Government, the actual getting through into the public sphere (inaudible)
HAWKE: I think Julia would say they're some things that could have been done differently and better, but I no one, I didn't do everything perfectly and wouldn't say that Julia and the Government has done this perfectly, but the point I would make is that I can't remember a more difficult subject for a government to sell than this because we don't have historical experience on which to draw, well not the same sense that you do when you're dealing with a straight economic issue and you have a situation where therefore you've got to think afresh, you've got no precedents to draw upon and you've got so many interests in the community, vested interests who are looking at this issue through the spectrum of their interests and not the national interest, and I can't think of really any issue in my political career of which that's been so true. There are so many special interests who are just saying ‘bugger the national interest, we are going to push a line which we see as being best for us.'
Now in that very complex situation I think a good job has been done and I am confident that with the two years there is to go to the next election that with a combination of the unfolding of the details, I mean after all, what the Government has done is really shown the bad bit, if you like, but the details of the good bits are still to come. And I think as the details are unfolded, as the science here and around the world continues to confirm the necessity for action, and then my confidence in both Julia and the Government and basically in the Australian people leads me to the conclusion that this argument will be won.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
HAWKE: Just one at a time.
PM: We'll go here and then back to Bonge.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) at any stage did your Government consider action on climate change including some sort of market mechanism?
HAWKE: Well it wasn't an issue then in the way it is now, we simply didn't have the substance, but the only point I would make in terms of environmental issues, I think I can assert, perhaps not without fear on confliction but without any possibility of the proposition being overturned, that no government in the history of Australia has done more on environmental issues possibly than my Government.
PM: Ok we'll take Bonge and make that the last question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister it may shock you to learn that talkback radio in Sydney has gone feral over the fact that a year ago you described Christopher Pyne as a mincing poodle. Do you regret that?
PM: One of the remarkable things about modern journalism is no one actually goes back and ever checks the source document, so they, with grand respect to every member of the press gathered here, there is a tendency to report what everybody else has said. I actually never used that terminology, I'd invite you to go back to the Hansard and see exactly what I said. I did engage in a humorous comparison of Christopher Pyne with Tony Abbott, and my clear recollection at the time is I, following the end of the Parliamentary week, got on a plane to Melbourne. Tony Abbott was on the same plane, and he walked from the gateway where we got off the plane all the way to the luggage carousel congratulating me on my characterisation of Christopher Pyne. So you might want to check was is the official position of the Opposition about all of this because it's not clear to me.
JOURNALIST: What did you say, I was there and I thought I heard you.
PM: Well have a look at the Hansard, have a look at the Hansard. It wasn't by way of interjection, so it will be there for you and a little bit of homework, little bit of original research.
Thank you very much. 



I warmly acknowledge: The Hon. Robert McClelland, Federal Attorney General
Mr John Robertson, NSW Leader of the Opposition The Honourable Andrew Constance - NSW Minister for Ageing, and Minister for Disability Services and other representatives from State and Local Government I honour Consul-General Benedetto Latteri and his diplomatic colleagues, who so proudly represent the nation that achieved its unity and freedom 150 years ago. I acknowledge those Australians of Italian descent in public life who are so emblematic of this community and its success:Senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, representing the Federal Leader of the Opposition;The Hon. Victor Dominello  -  NSW Minister for Citizenship and Communities, representing Premier O'Farrell;Mr John Sidoti  -  State Member for Drummoyne;Mr Charles Casuscelli  -  State Member for Strathfield Each of you are proud Italian-Australians who have brought great honour on your families and on this community. I pay tribute to Lorenzo Fazzini, Andrea Comastri and the team from Co.As.It. and the other wonderful groups who do so much to support the Italian community and promote Italian culture.You presence is a reminder that this event is not only a gathering of friendship and goodwill. We have work to do  -  raising funds for a much-needed dementia helpline, and I know everyone will respond with appropriate generosity. Finally I want to acknowledge Frank Coletta, such a familiar face on Sydney television and so generously acting as our Master of Ceremonies tonight. In acknowledging all these high achieving individuals, I honour an entire community who came to a great nation and made it even greater - Abundant proof that the sacrifices of those who travelled to this country bearing high hopes did not hold those hopes in vain. This is therefore a night to celebrate journeys: Italy's journey of nationhood over a century and a half; The journey of individuals and families across the seas to a new land; and
Australia's own journey to maturity as a nation at ease with itself and with the world. Friends, I'm from a migrant family and I know what it's like to sit around the kitchen table and weigh the arguments for emigration: whether to sacrifice the company of family and friends, leave behind the graves of loved ones, abandon ancient places and timeless rituals, and to travel to a new country, often just on the strength of a few brochures and photographs. Doing so when travel was costly and time-consuming and there was no guarantee you would ever be able to return. Thousands of Italians made that momentous decision. They braved the unknown, but they also came with hope - hope that this new land would repay their courage, repaid with opportunity and the chance to prove yourself, free of the old limitations of class and social distinction. Friends, Six decades later, we can affirm tonight that those hopes were realised  -  and were realised in abundance. They were right to have faith in this new land. But if Australia was a land of opportunity, it only came at a price. Years of backbreaking labour in places like the Snowy or the cane fields, working two or three jobs, sometimes facing misunderstanding and discrimination. But in spite of these difficulties, you held fast and saw Australia as it could be. Not just a nation that absorbed migrants, but a nation that would also be changed by them. That is why we must always regard immigration as a source of strength. Because it renewed and enriched our nation at its core, precisely at the time when the world was opening up and our old insular habits could no longer be sustained. In any case, Australia had always been diverse. There were Jews on the First Fleet  -  and one Italian. Our founding father, Arthur Phillip, was half German. The Chinese came here in the 1820s. Afghans and Lebanese followed throughout the 19th century. Diversity is as old as the nation itself. In the 1970s, we simply gave these things a name  -  multiculturalism  -  and came to see them as the benefit they always were. How else was it that in 1861 the citizens of Melbourne banded together and purchased a gift to mark Italy's Unification. It was, appropriately, a sword of honour, presented to Garibaldi, costing the handsome sum of 358 pounds. The Australian community, at the start of its own democratic journey, understood the significance of what had happened in Italy. After centuries of division and occupation, Italy had resolved to become united and to become free. It is that historic decision we celebrate tonight - 150 years of nationhood that enabled Italy to rediscover its place in the global community, paving the way for the prosperous, innovative country that stands as a force for good in a changing world. Friends, Italy has give many great gifts to the world: her culture, her food, her sense of style - but the greatest gift of Italy has been her people. Around 60 million people outside Italy claim Italian heritage. And for this gift, Australia will always give thanks. So friends, tonight we remember the places where our journeys began. And we honour this place where all our journeys have found their completeness and their end.
The place amid all the world where we can be safe and grow old and hand on a better future. Our land. Our home. Our sanctuary. Australia 



PM: I'm here today with Minister Jenny Macklin, our Minister for Indigenous Affairs, with my Ministerial colleague and the local Federal Member for this area Warren Snowdon, by this rather tall man here Paul Henderson, the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory and Karl Hampton the local Territory Member here in this community.
I've come to Alice Springs today to see for myself and to talk to the local community about what is happening here through the Alice Springs Transformation Plan. This is a $150 million where we are aiming to make a difference. We're aiming to make a difference on the social pressures that these communities face; grog, violence, getting kids in school, getting kids off the street at night. We're aiming to make a difference on housing and here we are in Hidden Valley, one of the town camps, where we are seeing some of the new housing that is becoming available; new houses being built and houses being refurbished.
And third we're aiming to make a difference on homelessness, on creating new places for people to go when they come to Alice Springs and it was my great honour to open one of those facilities a little bit earlier today which will be helping meet that need and particularly helping people transition from a life without secure accommodation into public housing with the skills they need to make that a sustainable solution for them.
All of this is about chaging peoples' life chances but what is also very, very clear to me and the all important fourth point is for us to keep building on what is happening here.  We have to keep engaging with the local community.
I'm seeing this with my own eyes but I'm trying to see it through the eyes of the people who live here. I've had the opportunity to speak to Nigel who is the president of the association for this town camp, and in his own words he's been describing to me what it was like and the difference that the new housing is making, the sense of community excitement about that new housing, and how he wants to see this place where we are look like a suburb of Alice Springs, have the things that people view as normal in communities: roads, guttering, garbage collection, street lighting and then of course the sense of participation, kids going to school, people in jobs. That's the vision that he's got for this community and that's the vision that we share for the future.
So a lot is being done but there is a lot more to do. Of course what's happening here in Alice Springs is one part of what we're seeking to achieve throughout the Northern Territory as we continue to work through the intervention with the Northern Territory and with local communities.
I'm also here to listen as we move to the next phase, I'll be meeting later today with elders and I'll be all ears to see what they want me as Prime Minister to know as we move to the next phase of the intervention, as we move beyond the current days to what needs to follow so we keep building on the foundations that are here.
Wherever I've gone today and whoever I've spoken to have basically given me a sense that there's good progress being made but there's a lot more to do and we intend to get on and keep making that good progress, keep delivering change in partnership with local communities.
I'm very happy to take questions. Paul did you want to say anything at this point?
CHIEF MINISTER HENDERSON: Thank you Prime Minister and it's great to have our Prime Minister in Alice Springs today because what we are seeing here firsthand for the Prime Minister is a transformation of Alice Springs. These town camps just 12 to 18 months ago were really a scar on this nation in terms of the deprivation and the squalor that people were having to endure right across Alice Springs. The commitment from the Australian Government in terms of $150 million to transform these town camps into suburbs of Alice Springs is unprecedented on a national scale and I'd really like to thank the Prime Minister and all of your team and Warren and Jenny for the support for this, but it is so much more. Right across the Northern Territory we're seeing massive investments in housing through the SIHIP program; $670 million is the first down payment of that to build 750 new homes right across the Territory.
As Karl and I and Warren and Jenny get out right across the Territory we're seeing new suburbs being built in remote communities, we're seeing investments in education and health like we have never seen before and as I said this morning for me as the Chief Minister finding the dollars in the budget is always really hard but it's actually about the people and it's about young Thomas this morning that we met who's doing his third year apprenticeship as a boilermaker. Seeing the work that he's done and the opportunity that he's getting as a young Indigenous man to get a trade and then to get a job. It's about the kids in Clontarf where we're going to see 24 kids graduate with a year 12 qualification this year, 4 or 5 years ago there were no Indigenous boys in Alice Springs getting to Year 12. So we are seeing real transformation here, that transformation is in partnership with the Australian Government and Prime Minister I really thank you, and importantly the people of Alice Springs.
Thanks.
PM: We're happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: The local Member Warren Snowdon has previously said he's happy to see a floor price for alcohol introduced (inaudible) grog use. Are there any changes you want to see to the way alcohol's drunk in Alice?
PM: Of course alcohol's a huge problem, it's been a focus of some of the work we've been doing through this Transformation Plan, but a lot more needs to be done. I am very supportive of the measures that Paul is putting forward that the Northern Territory Government is putting forward. We need to be working with individuals to change behaviour but we also need to be doing what we can to be turning the tap down, to be making a difference to the actual supply of alcohol that is flowing through these communities. So one of the things that I am absolutely sure we will be talking about later today when I meet with elders is what can be done to turn that tap, turn it down, turn it off, so that we don't see alcohol continuing to cause the tremendous social problems and pressures that we've seen in this community and around the Northern Territory.
JOURNALIST: Is there anything the Federal Government can do in terms of legislation on alcohol?
PM: Well the legislation, I'll turn to Paul in a second, but the legislation that needs to land next is the legislation that is in the Northern Territory Parliament and I know Paul and his colleagues are fighting hard for it, but it really is about making a difference for individuals who have clearly got problems with alcohol and alcohol abuse. So I'll turn to Paul for a description of that.
HENDERSON: Look thank you Prime Minister and we've got the national media here. We've introduced and passed in the last Territory Parliament the toughest alcohol reforms that this nation has ever seen. As of the 1st of July to purchase takeaway alcohol anywhere in the Northern Territory you'll have to show ID to be able to purchase takeaway alcohol.
In terms of targeting people who've got real problems with alcohol people who commit crime, people who commit acts of domestic violence, people who neglect to send their children to school because of alcohol abuse and for people who are taken into protective custody three times in three months, people who are picked up off the streets, can't get home, taken into protective custody, those people will lose their rights to access alcohol. There will be tribunals put in place that will provide for people a right to be able to get their access to alcohol back, after they've proven that they've undertaken relevant rehabilitation and they've got their lives together. But we are really going to be targeting individuals who abuse alcohol, who abuse their partners as a result of alcohol, who get taken off the streets night after night after night and as I've said if it was somebody in my family who was being picked up out of the street night after night into protective custody I would want somebody to do something about it. So these reforms we're putting in are courageous, they're certainly very tough, they are aimed at dealing with people who have problems with alcohol and that regime comes into force on the 1st of July this year. So nowhere in the Northern Territory will you be able to purchase takeaway alcohol without showing identification, there will be a banned drinkers register that will provide for the courts to be able to impose bans, police to be able to impose bans, and family members who have problems with somebody in their family abusing alcohol to apply to a tribunal to have their family also face a ban from accessing takeaway alcohol. So we're stepping up to the plate, this nation has never seen anything like it, and certainly we will continue to clamp down on people who abuse alcohol because at the end of the day not only are individuals suffering, their families are suffering, the community's suffering in general and certainly we're determined to do something about it.
JOURNALIST: What's your specific attitude (inaudible) establishing a floor price and having no takeaway on days of Centrelink payments?
HENDERSON: Well look I want to see the reforms that we're putting in place how they go first up. I'm not convinced about a floor price, what we have to do is tackle people who have real problems with alcohol, who abuse their partners, who don't send their kids to school, who get taken into protective custody and deal with people who've actually got problems with alcohol. So that's what we're doing. In terms of a day free from alcohol, again we're tackling the people who've got real problems with alcohol in the first instance. I'm not saying we're not considering further measures down the track but these reforms are tough, they're bold, they're certainly nothing like this has happened in our nation's history before and we're going to give these measures an opportunity to see how they're working in terms of really dealing with people who've got extreme problems with alcohol as opposed to the broader community.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister it's taken a long time to get to this point, 4 years, is there going to be an intervention mark II to continue the job?
PM: Well one of the reasons I'm here today is we will be discussing with people what lies beyond the period of the intervention. We want to work that through with local community members, I particularly want to have a discussion later today with indigenous elders on that precise topic. We need to hear the community voice to make sure that what builds on what has been achieved to date is the right thing to continue to make differences for the future and make sustainable differences. So there will be a process where we do some listening before we do some talking.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there was a lot of talk in Alice Springs earlier this year about the intervention, and particularly alcohol in relation to the fact that people out bush felt that alcohol was driving, they weren't allowed to have alcohol out bush so it was driving them to town, people in Alice Springs felt that that was really not addressing the problems, just dispersing it into town, what are your feelings on this?
PM: I think we've got to make a comprehensive difference to the amount of alcohol that is used and abused right throughout the Northern Territory and I don't mean by saying that that there isn't alcohol abuse in other parts of the nation but clearly today, standing here with Paul, with Jenny, with Warren and with Karl, we're focused on this place, what's happening in Alice Springs, what's happening in the Northern Territory. So we need to make a difference to the use and abuse of alcohol throughout the Northern Territory. Now in the course of the current changes that are being delivered, steps have been taken to work with people who have got problems with alcohol, and steps have been taken to take out some of the supply too. A specific part of the Alice Springs Transformation Plan has been to knock out some of the supply agency, some of the places of supply, takeaway supply. Paul, has in his Parliament, very tough new measures which he's just described. Now I am certainly open to hearing from the Northern Territory and from the communities within the Northern Territory what else needs to be done to dial down the amount of alcohol that is washing through communities.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We do need to listen, we do need to see these new measures come on stream, I think it's very important that this legislation gets through the Parliament and is delivered and we need to consult with communities about what next. The approach that I want to take here and to build into the next phase of what lies beyond the intervention is an approach of engagement, I'm not going to come and say this is definitely my plan as Prime Minister before I've had the opportunity to talk people locally and that's exactly what we're going to be doing today.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) ensure that this beautiful town doesn't (inaudible)
PM: I've got an itinerary today that's taken me through many different parts of Alice Springs and given me the opportunity to talk to a whole range of people, that's what I wanted to do today. Of course I could come to Alice Springs and spend three weeks going to places and talking to people, that would be very easy to do, but today what I wanted to do was maximise my ability to see some things for myself and to have conversations with people who've got real views about the future, and I'm particularly looking forward to the conversation with indigenous elders later today.
I'm well aware of the circumstances that town camps have been in, I'm well aware of the changes that Jenny Macklin working with the NT, working with the local council, working with local communities has been bringing into place. Today I've had the opportunity standing here today to see some of that through the eyes of the people who live right here in Hidden Valley, through Nigel, through Laurel who's just (inaudible), I know that there is more to do but it's important to do to get the best view, see some yourself, talk to people and learn from the locals who see it every day.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) houses in this town camp but there's others (inaudible) to get running water sometimes (inaudible) explain why it is no work's going on in those town camps?
PM: Well I'll let Jenny talk about the specifics at each town camp but I think you would be aware that the $150 million Transformation Plan for Alice Springs and much more broadly the many billions of dollars that have been committed through the intervention and the large new investments in housing are about making a difference against decades of undersupply, underinvestment, overcrowding, squalor and neglect. No we are seeing that difference around us but with more to do. I'll turn to Jenny for the specifics.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks Prime Minister as you'd be aware when we started the work on all of the town camps here in Alice Springs we did face the sort of horrific living conditions that the Prime Minister has just described. So what we're doing is working through each of the town camps to build new houses, to upgrade other houses, get the roads and lighting and all of these critical pieces of infrastructure built. We are working with the communities that you've described  -  Whitegate and so on  -  we do understand that they too face very serious needs but that's exactly what we faced when we decided to take on this task across the town camps of Alice Springs. So we're working systematically through it and we know that they're issues we'll need to address as well.
JOURNALIST: Do you have a timeframe Minister?
MACKLIN: Well we've got a timeframe for the Transformation Plan, we've got $150 million for this part of the project. As both the Prime Minister and the Chief Minister have indicated this is the first phase of the housing money that we're putting into the Northern Territory but in total, over a ten year period, we've got $1.7 billion to put into housing. So we'll work through those issues with the authorities here in Alice Springs.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) where does education rank and are there specific proposals on truancy that are on the table?
MACKLIN: Well just to go to that issue specifically you would be aware that our Prime Minister, our Government is absolutely commitment to the difference that education can make to children's lives and if you don't go to school every day it's impossible to get a decent education. So we want to do everything we possibly can to work with parents, work with teachers, community leaders to get more children to school here in the Northern Territory. The Territory Government have been doing just that with measures that they're putting in place, we too are using our welfare reforms to say to parents in six communities in the Northern Territory if you don't get your children to school after a period of working through the issues with parents we will suspend your welfare payments. So we've just extended that measure for another year but I can assure you this is a very, very important priority for our Government and for the Territory Government I don't think Paul would mind me saying, it's a very big issue for us and one that I'm sure will be talked about this afternoon.
JOURNALIST: On the issue of antisocial behaviour in town there's been a lot of national media and local media recently talking about problems within Alice Springs, I know the Federal Government committed a lot of money to lighting around town, is there anything else in the pipeline to address that?
PM: Well I'll go to Jenny for the further measures coming from the Transformation Plan but yes you have seen investment and the Northern Territory too has been working on policing, which is important, I did have the opportunity to speak to one of your police officers a little bit earlier today. But I did want to follow up the question about education and what Jenny's just said. People would see that the key theme of the recent Budget was opportunity and responsibility. The nation is going to extend the hand of opportunity to people, but we need to see people step up with the responsibility. So the balance there, you've seen it in the Budget and you've seen it in our approach to the intervention and beyond, is we want to give people a hand up but we're also requiring them to step up. And the foundation stone of that sense of personal responsibility is making sure you get kids to school. It was controversial when Jenny and I first proposed it, to say that if you didn't get your kids to school that could cause a suspension of your welfare payments but that was done because of the value that we put on getting kids to school.
So the theme here is a very clear one: opportunity comes with responsibility and there is a clear responsibility to make sure kids are in school.
I'll just go to Jenny on further words.
MACKLIN: As you are aware we are putting some of the Alice Springs Transformation Plan money into lighting areas that were identified by local people, the local council, to make places safer. We've also funded and health's been very important in this regard as well, a safe and sober group, so it's a group of people working through congress who are helping people who want to deal with their alcohol addiction, want to address the problems that that's creating in their families. But once again if people have specific proposals that they'd like the Transformation Plan to address then we'll certainly examine them.
JOURNALIST: In regards to that have you had any questions asked by the Action for Alice group which is now Territory wide, have you had any approach by them, I know they've got a huge issue with anti-social behaviour?
HENDERSON: Look in regards to the anti-social behaviour issues around Alice Springs I am the Police Minister of the Northern Territory and police advise me that 80 per cent of all of their works in Alice Springs is alcohol related. So that is why we're introducing these measures. We are cracking down on the people who abuse alcohol, the people who abuse alcohol will not be able to access alcohol. We are taking the toughest measures we possibly can. So these are multi faceted, the issues that police have to deal with on a day to day basis here in Alice Springs. The issue of kids not going to school, the neglect of children, the horrific domestic violence figures that we see; the root of all of these problems is alcohol and the abuse of alcohol so when we're talking about problems in Alice Springs and the Action for Alice group one of the clear measures that we're absolutely targeting is the people who abuse alcohol, people who abuse other people as a result of their over indulgence in alcohol, they will lose the right and the Prime Minister talked about opportunities and responsibilities, if people can use alcohol responsibly, they will be denied it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
HENDERSON: This is a long standing understanding, that 80 per cent of policing in Alice Springs is alcohol related.
JOURNLAIST (inaudible) what were some of the issues they raised with you?
PM: Bess very specifically raised the issue of education, about how important that is to the future and to changing future life chances, so we're right on the same page about that, there's nothing more important to changing future life changes that a quality education. She also talked about the possibilities of developing better economic engagement, put more simply she wants to see people have the opportunity for a job, the opportunity to work. Today as I've moved round I've obviously met some people who have had opportunities to work and opportunities to gain skills through working on the construction that we see around us and working on the facility that I opened earlier today. So we need every step of the way, to be thinking about how we can maximise people getting that all important job. And once again, going back to Nigel and trying to see this place through his eyes as someone who's been here a long time and is the president of the association here, his vision for the future of this place, obviously he want to see the roads go in and they will, he wants to see the guttering go in a it will, he wants to see the street lighting go in and it will, he wants this more and more to look like a suburb of Alice Springs but he also wants the people in this place to leave their homes in the morning and go to jobs and that is absolutely key to making a long term difference to disadvantage and you would have seen it was central to the recent budget.
JOURNALIST: Alice Springs is a service centre for some of the most remote parts of Australia (inaudible) how does someone exercise that sense of personal responsibility when they live in a remote place where there is just no work?
PM: Well firstly talking to representatives of the Chamber of Commerce today, right here where we are now, they were talking to me about labour shortages so we're actually in a place with the problem that employers say I can't get people to fill the jobs that I need filled and at the same time we know so many people don't have a job and don't have the opportunity in life that that job could give them. When we delivered the recent Budget we spoke about that problem right around the nation in our patchwork economy. I meet a lot of employers who say I need to import more skilled labour and I say to them well I'm really worried about that kid in that kid in this place who needs an apprenticeship, I'm really worried about that young man in Kwinana in Perth who hasn't got a job, I'm really worried about that young woman in Sydney's west who's on her way to a life of disadvantage. We've got to be able to put these things together.
The opportunities and jobs that the mining boom is bringing us in so many parts of the country with the real need for a life opportunity by so many Australians, so we want to facilitate putting the two together, that would change life changes here, we'll change life changes in other parts of the nation as well. Yes, for some remote areas the creation of a real economy where people have jobs presents further challenges, but we know there are things we can do to make a difference having met Thomas this morning, third year of his apprenticeship, he's on his way to a life of work, that's a difference.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what do you think of the major retailers that profit from very cheap alcohol in Alice Springs.
PM: Look I think this is a shared agenda for all of us, it's about responsible service by people whose businesses are to provide alcohol, so publicans who sell alcohol, it's about responsible conduct by the business community, it's about us getting the legislation right and having the services there and as you would see from everything we've said just during the course of this discussion today as well as everything that Jenny Macklin and Paul Henderson have said before this, we are working on each part of this, there's always more to be thought about, more to be considered and more to talk through and that is part of the reason that I'm here today.
Now I'm just conscious you didn't get a question so we'll make that last one.
JOURNALIST: Just wonder if you're concerned that the township of Alice Springs might be divided and fractured along some race lines, particularly in relation to the Action for Alice campaign that the Chief Minister spoke about earlier?
PM: I've been speaking as we've gone around to Warren as he's pointed out various people and places as we've moved through and I think the sense I've got from Warren is that there's a lot of community spirit for change, yes there are challenges and yes there are deep anxieties and we've got to work with that as change continues to be delivered but I would hope that people can see changes are happening and they've got the capacity to make a difference even as we consult and work through what else needs to be done and I've seen evidence of some of those changes with my own eyes today.
Thank you very much. 



One of the largest parcels of Aboriginal land in the history of the Aboriginal Land Rights Act (Northern Territory) has been returned to traditional owners.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today handed back the deeds to four parcels of land to traditional owners at a ceremony in Alice Springs.
Two of the four parcels - Finke Gorge National Park and Simpson Desert stage 4 - were some of the earliest claims lodged under the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976. 
Simpson Desert stage 4 is a parcel of two pieces of land, which together measure an area of approximately 1,827,600 hectares, making it one of the largest grants of Aboriginal land in land rights history.
This is a historic day for the Arrernte peoples of Central Australia and a milestone in the history of land rights in Australia.
Finke Gorge National Park, located approximately 138 kilometres west of Alice Springs, has been recognised internationally for its rich diversity of Central Australian flora
The Park includes a unique collection of rare and ancient plants. It also contains many sites of cultural significance to groups of the Arrernte people.
The park is the latest of 13 Northern Territory parks to be returned to traditional owners under joint management arrangements following a landmark agreement in 2004. 
Under this agreement, the land is leased back to the Northern Territory for 99 years for use as a National Park, ensuring it operates as a protected conservation area for the enjoyment of all.
The traditional owners will have a strong voice in the future management and operation of the park under a joint management partnership with the Territory's Parks and Wildlife Service. 
The Central Land Council and traditional owners are working to design community development projects that can be supported with the income received under park leasing arrangements.
Simpson Desert stage 4, located east of Alice Springs, forms the estates of various traditional owners of the Arrernte group of peoples and is rich in cultural history and biodiversity.  
The remaining two parcels in this package of four include two smaller grants of land in the vicinity of Hermannsburg.
The Australian Government acknowledges and respects the continuing cultural attachment Aboriginal people have to their landand will continue to work with them to deliver better outcomes for Indigenous Australians and their communities. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today visited Alice Springs to see first hand how the Federal Government's $150 million Transformation Plan for the Northern Territory town is helping to improve lives for Indigenous people.
The Prime Minister officially opened a new $8.3 million transitional accommodation facility today which is part of the plan to transform areas of Alice Springs and the town camps so that they are safe, healthy places to live in.
The Aherlkeme Village will provide 75 supported accommodation places to help homeless Indigenous people make the move into public housing.
It complements the 150 bed Apmere Mwerre Visitor Park opened in February this year and other accommodation upgrades.
AherlkemeVillage, meaning ‘new light, new day', will help break the cycle of homelessness and relieve the pressure of overcrowding in town camps.
The facility will also ensure that vulnerable people are given support and are equipped with the necessary skills to meet their long term housing needs.
The Prime Minister also visited the Hidden Valley town camp to see how a major housing and infrastructure program is helping local residents there.
The Government's Transformation Plan is helping to remodel the town camps so that they are like any other suburb.
It is providing decent infrastructure such as roads, power, water, sewage and drainage, improved street lighting and better community services.
Altogether, the new accommodation facilities and houses will see an extra 500 beds available for residents and visitors to Alice Springs.
To date, 34 of the 85 planned new houses have been built in the town camps and a further 35 are underway.
In addition, 77 of 134 rebuilds or refurbishments of existing houses on the town camps have been completed, and 20 are underway.
These projects are also providing jobs, with more than 50 per cent Indigenous employment as part of the housing and infrastructure workforce.
There are also 100 places that offer young people training and the opportunity to take part in community works under the Community Development Employment Program (CDEP).
The Government is also supporting measures to help deal with other local issues such as the devastating effects alcohol abuse.
More than $24 million is being spent in key areas of alcohol rehabilitation, early childhood services, domestic violence, improved patrolling services and tenancy management in the town camps. 
In recent months the Australian Government has also supported the Northern Territory Government to buyback a takeaway liquor licence from an Alice Springs outlet and is supporting negotiations to buy back further licenses.
The Government has also extended income management measures to Alice Springs, helping to protect children and vulnerable people by ensuring that money is available for the essentials of life such as food and clothing. 
Making changes to entrenched disadvantage takes time and commitment.
The Gillard Government will continue to work with the Northern Territory Government and the local community to transform lives in Alice Springs.
We are making an unprecedented investment in closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage, which is beginning to change the lives of Indigenous people.
The Gillard Government is working with Indigenous people to support personal responsibility as the foundation for healthy, functional families and communities.
Closing the gap requires a genuine partnership with Indigenous Australians at all levels. The Government is committed to a relationship based on trust and mutual respect. 



PM: The last fortnight has been one of tremendous sorrow for our nation. Last Friday we mourned and we all, I think, followed the funeral of Brett Wood. I attended that funeral, a family grieving a lost man, and yesterday we brought home to Australia both Andrew Jones and Marcus Case, two soldiers who'd lost their lives in Afghanistan.
Now we have more bad news to deal with so it's with a great sense of sadness that I offer my condolences to the family of a young man whose life has been lost in Afghanistan. Our loving thoughts are with them. They would be going through a tremendously difficult time today having heard this news.
The young man we lost was a 23-year-old soldier. He was participating in a partnered Afghan National Police and Special Operations Task Group mission when he was shot by insurgents.
He was a brave man and he was doing important work. In this operation they had discovered a major weapons store, weapons that would have been used, could have been used, to take the lives of other Australian soldiers.
So this very brave 23-year-old young man wasn't just fighting for our nation, he was fighting for the safety of his mates.
At this time, his family has asked that further details not be released and I'm sure everyone will respect their need for privacy at this very difficult moment but our thoughts are well and truly with his family as they try to come to terms with this dreadful news.
The Chief of the Defence Force has described this young man as a superb young man and a dedicated and professional soldier. We've lost a fine person and, as Prime Minister, I offer the nation's condolences.
This has been a hard time for Australia, these two weeks, one of our hardest in Afghanistan. Our resolve is being tested the way the resolve of our coalition partners has been tested on other occasions and I can't promise that there will be no more hard days. I can't promise that.
As we enter the fighting season in Afghanistan we have to prepare ourselves for the possibility of more hard days to come but I can promise you this: Afghanistan is not an endless war and it is not a war without a purpose. We are crystal clear on our mission and we have a defined time frame for our strategy. We are making progress towards our goal of an Afghanistan that will never again be a safe haven for terrorists.
As the Chief of the Defence Force has said earlier today, our soldiers on the ground believe they are winning. Progress is being made and this year we will see the first areas of Afghanistan begin to transition to Afghan-led security and in Oruzgan, the province where we work, we are on track to achieve this transition by 2014.
Now this progress is difficult but it's being made because of the courageous work of our soldiers in very difficult circumstances. Progress is being won because of their bravery and their service.
Our nation owes them a debt of thanks.
After the events of the last fortnight I want to say this to the Australian people: I know our resolve is being tested but it will not waver as we work to complete our mission in Afghanistan.
I turn now to the Acting Defence Minister for some comments and then we'll take questions on this matter. For broader issues associated with my visit to Alice Springs I'll be available later in the day.
MINISTER SNOWDON: Thank you Prime Minister.
Firstly I wish to express my deepest condolences to the family of this man who sacrificed his life for our great country.
I want to assure them that they will have the support of all Australians and the Australian Government and the Australian Defence Force's continued and ongoing support as they absorb this heartbreaking news and as they grieve.
I also ask all Australians to take a moment to think of the soldier's mates still serving in Afghanistan. They will be feeling his loss deeply.
As this brave young soldier has done, our people in the Australian Defence Force continue to do outstanding work in a very demanding and dangerous environment. They deserve our thanks and our highest praise.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you say our resolve has been tested, is public support for the war waning?
PM: Look I think our resolve is being tested. I use those words deliberately because I understand there would be many Australians who over the past two weeks have turned their eyes to the TV screen or listened to the radio or looked at the newspaper and seen there these soldiers' names, the soldiers we've lost, seen the death and seen the grieving that that's meant for Australian families, and that has probably meant many Australians have asked themselves what are we doing there, why are we still there, should our soldiers be there?
Which is why today as we absorb more very sad news, I do want to say to the nation we know why we're there, we are very clear about our mission and our mission is being accomplished. We are doing what we intended to do and we have a timeline for achieving our goal.
So for those who look at this news and feel perhaps a sense of despair or a sense of hopelessness, I do want to say to people this is not an endless war without a purpose. We are clear on the mission and progress is being made.
JOURNALIST: Do the number of deaths show that there needs to be a change in strategic approach in Afghanistan now?
PM: No, the strategy I believe is right and the strategy is clear. This is a fight against a determined and resilient insurgency and we unfortunately know, tragically know, that in Afghanistan when the fighting intensifies it is a very dangerous place and it is a very difficult fight.
But the fight has been breaking the momentum of the insurgency. That's why the soldiers who are there, the soldiers that you speak to, can tell you in great detail about the gains that they have made. That's why the Chief of the Defence Force has said today the soldiers on the ground believe we are winning. They can point to progress being made but it is a resilient insurgency, this is a dangerous time in the fighting season for our soldiers which is why I can't say to people that I can guarantee that there won't be more days like this.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you give any more details on the weapons that were found in Afghanistan?
PM: Look, I can give you the same details that the Chief of the Defence Force did. The big stock of weapons that the soldier who died, working in the partnered patrol, had identified included mines and ammunition and components that can be used to make roadside bombs. As many of you, I think, would be aware and the Australian people are very and tragically all too familiar with, we have lost a number of Australian lives in Afghanistan to improvised explosive devices so the kind of componentry that makes the building of those bombs possible was amongst this weapons store.
JOURNALIST: You talk about hard days to come, given it is the fighting season, do you think the country should brace themselves for more deaths?
PM: Well, I've always just tried to be as honest and frank with people as I can about this. It's a dangerous fight, it's a fight that is intense during the fighting season, when the weather permits the insurgency to try and regain and rebuild and so these are difficult and dangerous days in Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: Has the mission changed at all? What do you put this surge in deaths down to? Has Australia taken on more responsibility in terms of the dangers?
PM: Our mission is defined and clear. It's the mission I spoke to the Australian people through the Australian Parliament about last year. So there's nothing that's changed in our mission definition or our strategic settings.
What, of course, does change in Afghanistan is that with the long cold winters fighting tends to subside and in the summer season fighting intensifies which is why we use the disturbing in itself term: fighting season.
We'll have to make this the last one we do.
JOURNALIST: What have you been told about the progress towards the handover to the Afghan security forces and where that's at at the moment?
PM: What I've been able to speak to the Australian people about before is still the case. We are on a strategy of transition. Transition is not going to be a moment in time, there's not going to be transition day for Afghanistan. What there is going to be is place by place a transition to Afghan-led security. We are working to a timetable of transition in Oruzgan Province, where we work, by 2014. Of course some parts of Afghanistan will be able to transition during the course of this year.
Thank you. 



HOST: Julia Gillard, welcome. PM: Thank you very much Chris. 
HOST: There are 82 Indigenous cattle stations across the north of Australia, there are 54 in the Northern Territory, there a 700 Indigenous employees, what's going to happen to their jobs after today's decision? PM: Chris we understood when we took this decision that it was going to have an impact on the industry, but we needed to make the right decision here. I'm sure Australians right round the nation were very shocked to see the footage on Four Corners, I met with industry representatives in Darwin last night and they were shocked. These are the people who raise cattle and they don't want to see their animals treated like that, so we're going to go through this process of suspending now so we can get assurance about where Australian cattle end up and how they are ultimately treated. Yes, that does create difficulties for industry including the Indigenous cattle stations you refer to, we understood that and we'll keep working with industry during this process. HOST: But what does happen to their jobs, are you going to provide some sort of compensation? PM: Well Chris different places will have different alternatives, some are entirely reliant on live exports, some are not. We will work through and we will keep consulting with industry. I understood, the Cabinet understood, Minister Ludwig understood, when we took this decision that it was going to impact on industry but I think too, the industry that raises cattle in this country themselves were saying something needed to be done. The cattle growers I met with in Darwin last night have just been to a big meeting of people who raise cattle across the Northern Territory and the thing that come out of that was their concern about animal welfare, the animals that they raise. HOST: I guess the difference is that they want this industry to start again and the people who are pushing you, that's the RSPCA, Animals Australia, and some of your own backbench want it to stop forever. PM: Well we've made a very clear decision, this is a suspension and trade will be resumed when we've got the supply chain assurance so we know where Australian animals are going and that they are going to be treated in a way that we would believe is appropriate. HOST: So it will be resumed? PM: Absolutely, this is a suspension, I mean that in the genuine use of the word suspension. HOST: You speak a lot about the importance of education and one of your aims is to close the gap on Indigenous education and yet we see school attendance falling across parts of the Northern Territory. Does that disturb you? PM: Yes of course it disturbs me, there's only one place for kids to be and that's in school. We have to have kids in school so that we can improve their reading, their writing, their educational outcomes and consequently their life chances and getting a job. We're working hard with communities to make a difference, if I can use just one statistic Chris but I think it tells a tale, around 7,000 meals are being prepared and served in schools in the Northern Territory as a result of the intervention  -  better fed kids, this is a good thing, but there is more to do, more to do to work with communities, more to do to ensure that every child gets a great education. HOST: But when we look at some other measures like Year 9 reading rates they've gone backwards over the course of the last 2 years. PM: I'm very disturbed to see that Chris but let's be really, really honest, those kids got let down in kindy, and grade one, and grade two, and that's why we're seeing the problems that we're now seeing in Year 9. Now that's not to say that we can' t make a difference for those children or we should give up but we've got to recognise that literacy and numeracy requires us to be working with schools to make a difference so that in kindy you are learning your colours and shapes, and in grade one you are reading and you're taking that with you into the rest of your education. That's why we're very focused on investing more in education, on reforms like transparency so we know where problems are, on quality teaching as well as direct investments into literacy and numeracy. HOST: One of the things that we've heard repeatedly in the Northern Territory is that there are no consequences for your actions if you don't send your kids to school then welfare payments aren't stopped and that's something that you have threatened. PM: Well we've been trialling in a limited number of schools a program where you can ultimately lose your welfare payment, have it suspended, if your child isn't in school. Now the best way of measuring progress in that program isn't how many people get their welfare suspended, the program isn't about suspending welfare, it's about engaging with families when kids aren't going to school, holding that out as the ultimate sanction, but through the engagement getting kids back to school. So suspensions happen in a very limted number of circumstances, but more families are engaged through the process. Knowing that's the ultimate endpoint, if they don't do the right thing and get their kids back to school. HOST: If you make a threat you do have to carry through don't you? PM: We have suspended welfare payments in a limited number of circumstances and in more cases the engagement has got kids back to school before it's got to that stage. Now Chris I'm not going to hold that up and say that doesn't mean anything more needs to be done, a lot more needs to be done, but when Jenny Macklin and I designed that program and decided we would pilot it, it was enormously controversial, many people said ‘how on earth can you contemplate suspending peoples' welfare payments because their kids aren't in school?' and my answer to that as Education Minister then and as Prime Minister now is there's no excuse for not having your kids in school. HOST: Is welfare dependency killing Aboriginal Australia? PM: Of course passive welfare is corrosive, I believe that, you hear me speak frequently Chris about the benefits and dignity of work, about making sure Australians have job opportunities, and the fact that being on passive welfare can lead to a corrosive aimlessness in life  -  we want Indigenous Australians to have the benefit of work. We understand that means we've got to do things like see the groundbreaking agreement we've seen here in Gove today, one of our mining giants working with Indigenous communities to create job opportunities. That we've got to get the education and training system right so kids read and write and go onto further training and get a job. HOST: Yet if you travel to places like Alice Springs you see Sudanese refugees in jobs, you see backpackers in jobs and you rarely see Aboriginal Australians in those jobs, why is that? PM: Well I couldn't agree with you more and I was in Alice Springs yesterday, met with the Chamber of Commerce and they were keen to tell me ‘we can't fill the jobs we've got, we need more skilled labour, we need more migrants, we need more people to come here' and then of course I met with Indigenous Australians who don't have work and need work. We can do better than this Chris, we absolutely can. So when I talk about opportunity and responsibility I'm really talking about putting those two circumstances together; there are opportunities for jobs, we need people to step up and take the opportunity and take the responsibility that goes with it. We need to be there working genuinely, with respect, providing the training, providing the support, to help people get it done. HOST: There are more alcohol restrictions in the Northern Territory than any other part of Australia, do you think that more needs to be done? PM: I'm open to hearing what more should be done. We have, through the intervention, done things like funded the taking out of three takeaway alcohol places in Alice Springs, so we've done things like funded support programs for people who drink and abuse alcohol. I've heard from traditional owners myself on this trip their concerns about communities awash with alcohol. I've obviously spoken to the Chief Minister here in the Northern Territory who is going to roll-out the toughest alcohol laws this nation's ever seen, but I am all ears about what more needs to be done and I'll only be bringing one decision making prism to it: what works. HOST: Finally on Gove you witness an historic agreement here today. Are Aboriginal Australia's getting enough of Australia's mineral wealth? PM: I think what's happened today is a great example and we need to see more of it, this is a unique time in our economic history where we can see now the sorts of partnerships we've seen today between a mining giant and an Indigenous community, hungry for jobs, hungry to change. We are going to be in a phase of rapid expansion in our mining industry. One of the lessons that we've got to learn from today in Gove is let's make that count for Indigenous Australia the way we want it to count for Australia generally. HOST: Prime Minister thank you. PM: Thank you very much Chris.  



Friends.
We meet here, your country.
We meet here, on Australian soil, our country.
And we come together in this place, at this time, to celebrate a moment uniquely yours, uniquely Australian.
We celebrate an agreement between the traditional owners of this land and a mining giant.
We celebrate jobs and investment for the region.
We celebrate the long-term projects and investments which will benefit the indigenous community living in north-east Arnhem Land.
We celebrate the new leases for community use of buildings and the new lots at Nhulunbuy for traditional owner-funded construction projects, for medical facilities, shops and housing. 
We celebrate thecontracting opportunities for traditional owner entities and employment opportunities for Yolngu people across the region.
This is an agreement to be proud of because it heralds a better future which will be built together.
And today I am proud to be here with you.
Here with the traditional owners of this land and those who seek to develop its bounty.
Here with people who willsharethe benefits for better lives and better futures.
Here with Bakamumu Marika, a senior traditional owner of the Yirrkala community and a descendant of Roy Marika, champion of the 1963 bark petition.
Here with Galarrwuy Yunupingu, who has reminded the nation that when the first mining agreement was signed in Eastern Arnhem Land:
This tall, thin welfare man climbed on the 44-gallon drum and announced our future to us. 
Our shared future is no longer something for a Protector of Aborigines or a Prime Minister of Australia to announce.
Our shared future must be shaped by us together.
In making your agreement you did not submitto a distant decision at a cabinet table or in a board room.
Instead you came together, as people who shared a goal.
By negotiating honestly, you have delivered local opportunity and ensured strong governance.
Opportunity and responsibility hand in hand, side by side.
You teach us all lessons of great meaning.
That opportunity grows through being prepared to reach out to each other.
That moving from reaching out to reaching agreement requires hard work and understanding.
That our true goals will lie beyond our reach unless we show each other respect.
For as human beings we have spiritual as well as material needs.
Respect is the visible sign of the invisible imaginings we share.
An agreement struck between a mining company and traditional owners, a bark petition addressed from one Australian people to the nation as a whole, an act to constitute the Commonwealth of Australia.
I believe that in the coming years our nation can shape a shared future in which weco-operate to end the disadvantage in the lives of our people and mark that co-operation in the life of our nation with a spirit of respect. 
A spirit of respect that understands that as the first Australians learned to live on this land they also learned to imagine themselves in it, to draw it, to sing it, to dance it, to remember it. 
To learn its law.
And that the generations of Australians who followed, drawn here through centuries from all over the world, learned not just to live here but to imagine themselves here as well in pictures and poems and stories and song. 
And in law.
Over time respect grew and urged us on.
To the 1967 Referendum which demonstrated our faith in the equal human dignity of all.
To land rights and native title which demonstrated our knowledge of the fact of dispossession in our law of land.
To the National Apology which demonstrated our sorrow for the history of post-contact mistreatment.
And now it urges us on to shape a future of opportunity and responsibility together.
It urges us on to mark our respect for each other: from our daily personal dealings, to the design of national policy, to recognition in our constitution.
Recognising the unique and special place of the first Australians in the Australian Constitution can be a wonderful national goal.
An opportunity to recognise, in the founding document of our nationhood, our shared pride in being Australian and our shared pride in Australia's continuing Indigenous culture.
While before every step our democratic debates have been real and robust and in every sense Australian ... after every step our national consensus has been strengthened.
These are not steps anyone would now unmake.
So when that happens, when the first Australians take their place in the first document of all Australians, it will be an uplifting, uniting moment for our nation a day of great national pride, a day of shared respect. 
As we share this day of celebration, we look towards that day.
And we dedicate ourselves to a journey of shared effort to better lives, to achieve reconciliation, to show respect.
We are the custodians of the land we share ... of the values we cherish ... of the children who rely on us.
We are the oldest living culture joined with the many diverse cultures ofour Australia.
We are Welsh-born women and Arnhem-born men.
Australians. 
Us. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today witnessed an historic agreement reached between Indigenous leaders in the Northern Territory's Gove region and mining giant Rio Tinto Alcan.
The agreement secures the future operations of the Gove mine while providing a range of economic and employment benefits for the traditional owners.
Significantly, the Agreement ends years of historical grievances.
It is the first negotiated agreement with traditional owners in relation to the Gove mining operations since exploration began in the 1960s.
The Prime Minister today joined traditional owners, representatives from the Northern Land Council, Rio Tinto Alcan and the Northern Territory Government in Yirrkala to celebrate the signing of the Rio Tinto Alcan Gove Traditional Owners Agreement.
This is a historic day for the Gumatj, Rirratjingu and Galpu peoples of north east Arnhem Land and for all Yolngu.
Senior traditional owners Galarrwuy Yunupingu of the Gumatj clan and Bakamumu Marika of the Rirratjingu clan are to be congratulated for their vision for their people.
They have worked with Rio Tinto Alcan to negotiate an agreement that will deliver significant long-term benefits to all residents of the region and in particular to the Yolngu people of north east Arnhem Land.
The Agreement has been designed so payments from mining will be principally managed through two traditional owner entities, the Gumatj Future Fund and the RirratjinguAboriginal Corporation.
This will ensure payments are directed to projects that support local communities, by providing sustainable economic development and promoting local culture. 
The traditional owner entities also demonstrate good governance principles including independent directors with relevant professional skills, access to expert advisers and constraints on individual cash payments.
Other benefits to flow from the Agreement include a range of traditional owner funded construction projects at Nhulunbuy, such as medical, retail and residential developments. 
In addition, the Agreement provides employment opportunities for Yolngu people across the region and opportunities for Indigenous owned companies to act as contractors for construction projects.
This new Agreement redresses long standing grievances associated with the commencement of mining, which originally occurred without Aboriginal consent.
It paves the way for a range of financial, contractual, asset and employment benefits for traditional owners.
The Australian Government strongly supports the negotiation of agreements that provide long-term intergenerational benefits to improve the lives of Indigenous Australians.
This constructive approach enables government, industry and communities to work together in closing the gap in Indigenous disadvantage. 



PM: We're here today for a day of remarkable celebrations, remarkable celebration as we see signed between the Indigenous people of this place and Rio Tinto an agreement that is going to shape for both of them a better future.  This is really a symbol of what can be achieved when people sit around together, work with respect and focus on opportunity and responsibility. 
Through this agreement one of our mining giants is going to get access to a new resource but through this agreement the indigenous people of this place are going to get access to jobs and opportunity, to training, to facilities, to things that can help them shape better lives in their future. It's really been an absolute privilege to be here and share in this day. To everyone who has worked so hard over the last three years to make this possible I say a very big congratulations, and I also say to them that they have though the nations some lessons in what can be achieved when you seek to work together, what can be achieved when you work together with respect, what can be achieved when you focus on opportunity and responsibility. I'll turn to see if the Chief Minister wants to say anything, but you've heard from us today and we'll take questions. CHIEF MINISTER HENDERSON: Thank you Prime Minister, and it is absolutely magnificent to be here today. It's a very exciting day for the Yolngu people of Arnhem Land, for Rio Tinto as a company, for the Northern Territory Government and the Commonwealth Government because this is all about the future. For 43 years there hasn't been a formal written agreement between the traditional owners of this country and the mining companies that have mined here over those 43 years. Without a written agreement there was a lack of trust, there was a lack of respect, and certainly the opportunities that are now going to come this region's way as a result of this agreement could not be seized, and for me the highlight of the day was visiting the Alert training centre. Actually meeting those young Yolngu men and women, boys and girls who now see a future working in the Rio Tinto mining company, a future that we Rio Tinto are committed to providing for local people here and I've spoken with the Northern Land Council today and traditional owners today and certainly the Territory Government will be working as of today in partnership with the traditional owners and Rio Tinto to see the aspirations of people in this region realised and importantly, investment opportunities, business opportunities, job opportunities for the Yolngu people in Arnhem Land. So congratulations everybody, once again a formal agreement is really going to benefit people. This is about the future and it's a very significant day. PM: Thanks very much. We're happy to take questions. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the deal's been signed (inaudible) is there any guarantee that any of the benefits will go to other people? PM: Well, I will turn to Jenny Macklin who's very familiar with the process that led to the traditional coming together to enter this agreement. MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks, Prime Minister. As you'd be aware the responsibility under the Aboriginal Land Rights Act for consultation and identification of traditional owners rests with the Northern Land Council, and as the responsible Minister I am satisfied that that proper consultation has been adhered to. JOURNALIST: (inaudible) One of the traditional owners groups is already considering a legal challenge (inaudible). If he's not satisfied are you still satisfied with the process? MINISTER MACKLIN: Well as I've just outlined the responsibility for the consultation with traditional owners rests with the Northern Land Council and I am satisfied that they've met their responsibilities. JOURNALIST: (inaudible) those are finished and those agreement been signed.  We're talking about the actual training, the jobs, the money, et cetera. Is there any guarantee that that will be spread around or will it just be like all the other deals where one or two families get all the benefits? MINISTER MACKLIN: Well I think you'd have to talk with the parties about the details of the agreement but of course, the very exciting thing for today and you saw that at the training facility that we visited earlier, the job opportunities are spreading far and wide. Far and wide we're seeing young men and women from right across remote Australia, not just the Northern Territory. There were people there today from Queensland, people coming from Western Australia, to take the opportunities that this agreement offers to Aboriginal people in Australia, and I want to join with the Prime Minister and the Chief Minister in congratulating the traditional owners, and the company for giving those opportunities to people that did not exist before. JOURNALIST: Can I ask the Prime Minister about the live export trade? Particular the Northern Territory, Northern Queensland, North and West Australian industries are staying that a 6-month suspension is basically going to put them out of business. Is there any chance of compensation both for the producers and the (inaudible)? PM: I met with representatives of the cattlemen last night in Darwin. I asked for that meeting and I thank them for coming along at short notice and I thank Warren Snowden for arranging it for me. Taking them as representative of the concerns of industry, they themselves had been at a broader meeting that day with industry representatives from across the Northern Territory and the feeling in that meeting and the outcome of that meeting is they are people concerned about animal welfare. They work with these animals and they don't want to see their animals suffer the way we saw the suffering on that 4 Corners footage and I think, frankly, all Australians who have seen those images have been shocked - shocked and horrified that that can be happening to Australian animals and the people who raise those animals were shocked too.  So, we want to get this right. We want to get it right so that animals don't suffer that kind of cruelty. The best way to do it is to have the suspension we've announced and to work through so that we can have assurance about where Australian animals go in Indonesia and how they are treated. That's what we're going to work through. We'll obviously be in close dialogue with those who produce the cattle that go to market and those who rely on that trade as we do so. JOURNALIST: Did you talk to cattle growers, though, about compensation? PM: We talked last night and we'll continue to be in close cooperation and dialogue with the cattle growing industry. Their focus was on animal welfare. Their focus was on this trade continuing when we can get it right for animal welfare. That is, they want to see too that their animals are treated appropriately in Indonesia and that's what the supply chain assurance is all about., so we know where Australian animals are going we know how they are being treated. JOURNALIST: Is there any chance this decision will affect the price of beef in Australia? PM: We've got to work through this. The live animal trade is important to Australia. It's important to people who work in that industry, but we want to get it right. There were truly shocking images here, images of incredibly gross cruelty, and those images have shocked our nation and people rightly, including people in the industry, want us to something done. That's what the suspension is about and the process will now go through. JOURNALIST: People who run the holding yards are saying that there's a welfare crisis developing now on Australian soil because there's thousands of head sitting in yards in the sun with nowhere to go. What's going to happen to those animals? PM: Well, we will be working with industry and the relevant minister, Joseph Ludwig, will be working with industry to make all appropriate arrangements as the suspension comes into force. We did understand, inevitably, that there would be some producers who had started a journey for their animals and we would have to work very closely with them and we intend to do so. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, coming back to the Gove Agreement- PM: -Sure. JOURNALIST: What does this signal to other indigenous communities around Australia in terms of economic development and helping close the gap which is (inaudible) PM: Well, I'll ask Jenny Macklin to add, but I'd say this Gove Agreement signals to indigenous communities around the nation, but truly signals to all of us as Australians, what can be achieved when we get genuine respect, genuine working together and a real focus on opportunity and responsibility. We are very passionate about working towards closing the gap. We've set ambitious national goals, we are bring record investments to make a difference for the lives of indigenous Australians and to ensure as a nation that we can say to one another we are truly treating each other with respect, that indigenous kids are getting a chance, they're getting a great education, they've got the opportunity for a job, that the respect we want to see across our nation is being shown. So, we continue to work through to achieve those goals, bringing record investments into housing, new reform and new resources into education, new reforms and new resources into health.  I've had the opportunity to see with my own eyes during this visit some of the good that is being done, new houses coming on stream, for example, in the Alice Springs town camps where we were yesterday. So, I think what this agreement is symbolising is that change is possible, driving for opportunity and responsibility is possible, but it takes respect and the parties to this agreement have worked together in a spirit of respect for three years. JOURNALIST: This alumina refinery is one of the most carbon intensive industries in the whole of Australia. How will you make sure that your carbon tax doesn't put them out of business anyway? PM: We'll be working with industry. We understand that they are an emissions-intensive industries that are trade exposed, that there's a world price for their product and that's why we've been consulting so extensively through our business round table processes and a series of working groups that have come out of that business round table, and of course we understand that when you're talking about alumina, when you're talking about aluminium you are talking about industries that rely on a lot of energy and we will be working directly with them.  We want to protect Australian jobs and we've got to remember that this scheme, the whole carbon pricing scheme, is about asking Australia's biggest polluters to pay the price.  Currently, they put pollution in our atmosphere for nothing. They will be asked to pay a price and we will use that revenue to assist households to protect Australian jobs, including the sorts of industries you're referring to and to fund programs to tackle climate change. JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, back to the live export issue, there have been some criticisms that Minister Ludwig took too long to respond to the situation. Are you happy with his handling of Australia's live exports? PM: Well, I completely reject the premise of that question. We have acted quickly and appropriately to respond to the appalling footage and acts of cruelty that we saw on Australian television. JOURNALIST: Where does the Government stand on a floor price for alcohol? There are reports today that the Health Minister has a different one? PM: Look, we'll make this the last question and we did answer some of these questions yesterday. Yesterday when I met with traditional owners, their clear message was that alcohol continues to do tremendous damage to indigenous Australians and indigenous communities and they do want to see strong measures. Of course, through the programs we've been funding we have been funding programs to deal with alcohol. We've been funding programs to take out some outlets of alcohol supply - for example, three outlets in Alice Springs have been taken out through the Alice Springs Transformation Plan. Paul Henderson as Chief Minister, working with his government, is about to deliver the most restrictive alcohol laws out nation's ever seen, but we remain open to hearing what else needs to be done. The Minister for Health, of course, is in regular dialogue with health professionals and health professionals are raising with her concerns about alcohol being , to use their words, ‘dirt cheap' in indigenous communities. So, they've got a real focus on indigenous health, indigenous communities and the role of cheap alcohol in those communities. We'll remain open and in dialogue with people about this pressing issue for indigenous communities, but work is underway at the moment and the Chief Minister is delivering the toughest alcohol laws the nation has ever seen.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today opened a new medical teaching and education centre in Darwin that will for the first time enable students to undertake an entire four-year medical degree in the Northern Territory.
The centre at Charles Darwin University will play a crucial role in providing training support for medical students during their first two years under the new Flinders University Northern Territory Medical Program.
This program is helping to train more Indigenous doctors to work in Aboriginal communities in the Northern Territory.
This will help address the severe medical workforce shortages and retention issues in the Northern Territory.
Up to 24 students began the course this year, with enrolments increasing to 40 per year in the future.
Improving the health workforce is a vital part of the Gillard Labor Government's national health reforms.
These reforms ensure doctors, nurses and allied health professionals are trained and equipped to work in areas where they are most needed.
The Government is making it easier for people to see a doctor when they need one and is training an extra 6,000 extra doctors over ten years.
We know that positive training experiences often influence where doctors choose to practice. That is why giving trainee doctors positive experiences in the Territory is so important.
Flinders and Charles Darwin Universities and the Australian and Northern Territory Governments have worked together on developing the Northern Territory Medical Program.
The Gillard Government is providing capital funding of $27.8 million over three years for the Flinders University NT Medical Program, $14 million of which will fund the new teaching and education centre.
An additional $6.6 million is being provided over four years from 2010-11 towards running costs.
Only 1.6 per cent of the national health workforce is made up of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
As at December last year, there were 153 Indigenous doctors working in Australia - up from 90 in 2001.
The new teaching and education centre will help train more Indigenous medical students in the Territory and encourage a significant number to stay and practise there when they finish their degree.
This will contribute to closing the health gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced more than 900 new high quality apartments will be built in Darwin for single Australian Defence Force (ADF) personnel in the next two years.
The announcement is part of a $4 billion contract to build 3,000 new apartments at 14 defence bases across Australia.
The Australian Labor Government is investing in the Northern Territory to provide the new, high quality accommodation for our defence personnel.
Northern Territory based company, Sitzler Pty Ltd, has been appointed to build more than 230 apartments at HMAS Coonawarra, Darwin and more than 680 apartments at Robertson Barracks in Palmerston.
This is a further step in fulfilling the Australian Government's 2010 election commitment to improve Defence housing.
It will also help further relieve pressure on the Darwin housing market. 
This accommodation will be a great asset for our Defence bases and ultimately to our Defence Force.
The new housing will provide hundreds of Australian service men and women with a place to call home.
It will also provide a boost to the construction industry in the Northern Territory with many new employment job opportunities.
An additional 100 jobs, including sub contractors and permanent staff, will be provided through this project.
Construction starts on the 1st of September at Robertson Barracks and in November at Larrakeyah Barracks, with both projects to be completed in early 2013.
The new contract will see work commence on Phase 2 of Project Single Living Environment and Accommodation Precinct (Single LEAP). 



Julia Gillard has paid tribute to Australia's 16th Prime Minister, Joseph Benedict (Ben) Chifley, who died in Canberra 60 years ago today.
“Ben Chifley was one of our nation's greatest leaders  -  a statesman of humility and courage who laid the foundations for Australia's post-war success.”
Mr Chifley was born in 1885 and was brought up in tough circumstances in the Central West region of NSW. He became a train driver and union delegate, eventually losing his job for his advocacy of workers' rights.
He was elected to the Australian Parliament as Member for Macquarie in 1928, serving briefly as Minister for Defence before losing his seat in the federal election of 1931.
He returned to politics as Member for Macquarie in 1940, and became Treasurer in the Curtin Government (1941-45).
He succeed as Prime Minister upon Curtin's death in July 1945 and was re-elected in 1946 before being defeated by Menzies in the election of 1949.
In increasing ill-health, Chifley made his final major speech (“fight for the right, and truth and justice will prevail”) to the NSW Labor Party conference on 10 June 1951, and three days later died in Canberra Community Hospital following a massive heart attack.
His wife Elizabeth (“Lizzie”) lived until 1962. They had no children.
Mr Chifley's achievements included establishing the Snowy Mountains Scheme, the founding of ASIO, the Australian National University and Australia's post-war immigration program and, as well as key social reforms including the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, the first Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement and the Commonwealth Employment Service.
“Chifley's achievements will never be equalled. His vision of fairness and opportunity still resonates today.”
“I join the Chifley family and the whole Labor Movement in honouring the memory of Ben Chifley. He was a giant of Australian politics. He will never be forgotten.”



The Federal Government today released new reports that clearly show Australia is not acting alone or ahead of other countries when it comes to action on climate change. 
Fact sheets prepared by the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency show many countries, including all the major emitters, are acting now to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
The fact sheets show a broad range of countries have introduced or are planning market based emissions trading schemes and carbon taxes.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, Greg Combet released the fact sheets today, which confirm Australia is one of the world's top 20 polluters.
We release more pollution per person than any other country in the developed world.
It is yet further evidence confirming we have a national and global responsibility to act.
The fact sheets show the Gillard Labor Government's move to put a price on carbon follows similar steps in many countries, with others planning or in the process of introducing similar arrangements. 
For example, Australia's top five trading partners - China, Japan, the United States, the Republic of Korea and India and another six of our top twenty trading partners have implemented or are piloting carbon trading or taxation schemes.
The European Union has had an emissions trading scheme since 2005, which covers half a billion people.
China has announced it will introduce emissions trading progressively in a number of key cities and provinces, including Beijing and Shanghai, which cover more than 100 million people.
These fact sheets set the record straight on the level of international action on climate change and where Australia is positioned in comparison.
Australia is not going it alone on climate change  -  we are taking the right steps along with many other countries to protect the planet for generations to come.
The fact sheets also support last week's findings from the Productivity Commission confirming the world is increasingly acting on climate change and that a carbon price is the lowest-cost way to cut pollution.
These reports also highlight that far from striking out on its own, Australia risks falling behind the rest of the world if we fail to put a price on pollution. 
The fact sheets also point to the high levels of investment internationally in clean and renewable energy.
For example, India has a clean energy tax on coal that will raise more than half a billion dollars of revenue for clean technology development in its first 12 months.
In 2010, global investment in the clean energy sector totalled US$243 billion, including $54.4 billion in China and $34 billion in the US.
The Gillard Government is committed to maximising the opportunities that come from moving to a clean energy future.
Introducing a carbon price in Australia will make dirty energy more expensive and clean energy like solar, gas and wind cheaper.
The carbon price will apply to less than 1,000 big polluters, requiring them to pay for every tonne of carbon pollution that they emit.
This is the most effective and cheapest way for us to build a clean energy economy and protect our precious natural environment for future generations.
The international action facts sheets can be found at www.climatechange.gov.au



PM: I'm joined by the Minister for Climate Change and we're here today to launch three new facts sheets from the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency. These fact sheets are there bringing together the evidence for Australians on three important points.
Unfortunately, in this debate there are three things frequently said that are not right. First and foremost you would frequently hear that other countries are not doing anything. One of these fact sheets addresses what other countries are doing.
Second, you would hear that Australia's emissions are too small to make a difference. One of these fact sheets talks about our emissions in the context of the top 20 polluters in the world.
And third, these fact sheets make clear that international negotiations are making progress, where of course it is commonly claimed that international negotiations have failed.
If we go through those things briefly, first and foremost the false claims that other countries are not doing anything. The Productivity Commission report released last week clearly showed that our top trading partners are undertaking a substantial amount of action on climate change. Including our own nation, the Productivity Commission identified over 1,000 policy measures to reduce carbon pollution. The fact sheet which we are releasing today, this fact sheet here, provides further information on the actions that are being taken by our major trading partners, showing of course that the world is acting.
Then, secondly, we do frequently hear that Australia's emissions are too small to make any difference. The fact sheet here addresses that and shows very graphically for you that Australia is amongst the 20 top polluters in the world and actually, as Australians, we emit more carbon pollution per person than any other developed nation in the world. If you look closely at this it shows that there are a number of nations on par with Australia when it comes to emissions; nations like Italy, nations like the United Kingdom, and we know that those countries are taking action. You can't tackle climate change and say that the top 20 emitters should not act and Australia is amongst them.
Thirdly, these fact sheets show that international negotiations are making a difference, taking you through the details of what has happened through international negotiations. Progress was made at Copenhagen with a broad agreement that we needed to stabilise the climate with a change of less than 2 degrees Celsius; this is an important agreement. And then it was built on in Cancun, where nations agreed to further progress. At Cancun, 89 countries responsible for more than 80 per cent of global emissions pledged to reduce or limit their emissions.
So, we don't want Australia at the front of the world, I've never put to the Australian nation we should lead the world, but we can't afford to be left behind as other nations act and as international negotiations move forward.
To give you one example of the kind of false claims we see about international actions, in the Parliament just a couple of weeks ago both Julie Bishop and Joe Hockey suggested in question time that Russia, Japan, the United States and Canada had advised that they would not join a second round of carbon cuts under the Kyoto Protocol. That was put in Question Time to suggest that the world isn't acting, whereas the truth is those countries have said they won't sign up because they want an even stronger global outcome and each of them is acting on climate change.
So, this is important information we believe Australians should have to bust some of the myths that are being perpetuated in the carbon pricing and climate change debate.
Can I conclude by saying there's another myth out there as well, and that myth is that people, tradespeople, in our nation have something to fear from pricing carbon. I thank the tradespeople who came to meet with me earlier today; plumbers, electricians who see the opportunities for the future; the opportunities that are already being realised for greens skills, green jobs, more apprenticeships, more work in the trades that they represent. I thank them for presenting me with a letter that expressed their support for carbon pricing.
I'll turn now to Greg and then we'll be happy to take your questions.
MINISTER COMBET: Thanks very much Prime Minister. And it is very important for people in the community to have the information available to them that does demonstrate that other countries are endeavouring to come to grips with this difficult public policy challenge. And of course it does require an unprecedented level of international cooperation to effectively tackle climate change. We are working internationally, under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, to endeavour to contribute to an outcome. But when you are the highest per capita polluter amongst the developed economies and one of the top 20 polluters internationally in absolute terms, then other countries look to us to say ‘Well what are you doing? What responsibility will you take in order to contribute to an effective international response to the challenge of climate change?'
And so, the Government's now generated a significant degree of information. There has been for some months a catalogue, if you like, of measures taken by other countries on the Department of Climate Change website. Last week's release by the Productivity Commission of its report, I think, was a very important contributor to the understanding that amongst seven of our top trading partners there are, identified in that report, over a thousand policies endeavouring to reduce emissions and of course with varying levels of effectiveness. One of the key things to emerge from the Productivity Commission report is that a market mechanism, such as an emissions trading scheme, is the most cost effective way of reducing emissions in your economy. And that of course has been something the Government has been cognisant of in approaching this policy issue over recent months. But it is very important that the Productivity Commission has affirmed that position.
Today with the release of these three fact sheets there's further information now available. It is important to bear in mind that amongst our top five trading partners which include Japan, China, the US, South Korea and India, and another six of our top 20 trading partners all have implemented or are piloting carbon trading or taxation schemes of one form or another. And of course, across the EU there's been an emission trading scheme in place since 2005.
China has announced, importantly given it is our top trading partner, that it will introduce emissions trading progressively in a number of key cities and provinces, including Beijing and Shanghai. This would have coverage of more than 100 million people in these six pilot emissions trading schemes that China intends to pursue. And of course, the Government is working with the Chinese Government. We have a memorandum of understanding with them to share information and experience over matters such as that. It's also worth just finally noting that last year global investment in the clean energy sector, and this is represented in the fact sheets that we've provided, taking no less than US$243 billion including $54 billion in China and $34 billion in the US. And its investments of that nature that are going to make sure that economies in the future have the competitive edge and we cannot be left behind in this endeavour. It is very important that we provide the most efficient framework for carbon pricing in our economy, as the Government is proposing. That we're able to achieve emissions reductions at least cost, but that we also provide the impetus for investment in clean energy and of course that is a key policy objective for what the Government has been advancing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the Productivity Commission report listed 230 policies, if I remember correctly, on climate initiatives in Australia. It was also very critical of, well, implicitly critical of solar feed in tariffs, renewable energy targets, which were found to, I think in the solar energy tariff, had actually pushed up emissions and was costing $1,000 a tonne, too. When you finally produce the carbon plan, is the future of solar feed in tariffs and the renewable energy target on the table, in line with the Productivity Commission findings?
PM: Well, I think when looking at the Productivity Commission perhaps rather than getting into those individual details we should remind ourselves of the central message of the Productivity Commission report. The central message is that other countries are acting, and then of course the Productivity Commission went on to say pricing carbon is the most efficient way of cutting carbon pollution in Australia - that is, the way that will tackle climate change best for this country at the least cost.
So, on the inefficiencies of direct action measures, I'd suggest in part you have that conversation with the Leader of the Opposition, who is promising to Australians direct action measures which we know will be tremendously costly for Australian families and won't work.
JOURNALIST: Isn't the Productivity Commission effectively saying all those measures are inefficient and if you are going to adopt the most efficient measure you should dump all these other ones?
PM: Well I think first and foremost it's saying get on with the job of pricing carbon. We are getting on with the job of pricing carbon because we recognise that is the most efficient way of cutting carbon pollution.
JOURNALIST: When does the Government realistically think there might be a legally binding agreement on climate change? Are you now suggesting that it doesn't matter that there isn't one? And a second question, if I may: is the Government still saying that $1.5 billion is appropriate compensation for coal mines, and would it be enough to stop the closure of those couple of very, very gassy mines?
PM: I'll turn to Greg for some details but policy wise we've been very clear with the Australian community that we need to act now to price carbon. We need to act now to cut carbon pollution and that's why we're getting on with the job with pricing carbon to start on the 1st of July next year. That's because we have a high-emissions economy. We can't afford to be left behind as the rest of the world moves. We've got a journey of transformation to a cleaner energy economy and hard things don't get easier just because you leave them a long time. That's why we should start now.
On the coal industry, we've also been very clear, of course, that we're in discussions with coal about how we can best work with coal through carbon pricing. I'll turn to Greg for some details.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) about when you think-
PM: I'll turn to Greg for that.
MINISTER COMBET: I think it would be brave to predict when there might be a binding international agreement but the important thing is to ask ‘is there progress being made?' and the answer to that is demonstrably yes. And it's obviously difficult and as I said before, it requires an unprecedented level of international cooperation to tackle a diabolically complex international problem. But at Cancun late last year, the pledges that the major emitters had made in the context of the Copenhagen Accord were included for the first time under the UNFCCC framework in the decision of the conference. This year, in Durban in South Africa, we're certainly hopeful of being able to contribute to further progress being made in the international negotiations. And it's just important that we're mindful that progress has been made and that we're committed to continuing to try to work with others to achieve it. When, when you are one of the top 20 emitters internationally, that is what the international community also expects of you. And it is not really satisfactory, if one accepts the scientific evidence and respects it, to say that we're really not going to do anything serious about it as the Opposition has been suggesting.
On the coal industry issue, we're particularly mindful of the importance of course of the job security of coal miners. We demonstrated during the last term of Parliament, in the context of the CPRS, that the Government believed it was justified by assistance to the most affected coal mines. And I've made a couple of remarks over the last few days publically about this issue because if one takes an example of a $20 per tonne carbon price and has a look a the impact of that across the coal industry  -  the average liability per tonne of coal that is produced for methane emissions in the coal industry is about $1.60 per tonne, now that's in the context that coaking coal prices are in excess of $320 a tonne, steaming coal prices are around about and in excess of $120 a tonne. It is for the vast majority of the coal industry production not a particularly material cost to have a carbon price applied to fugitive emissions. However, there are a small small number of mines, they number less than 30. They're underground coal mines that have high methane emissions where the Government does accept the fact that it does have a material impact. And of course, in the context of the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee, we are discussing that particular issue.
JOURNALIST: Are you still looking at $1.5 billion?
MINISTER COMBET: Well I'm not in a position to speculate about the level of assistance, but it is an issue that is on the table of course.
JOURNALIST: Mr Combet, on the fact sheets you've released today, there's some pretty dire warnings in here for Melbourne, for example, (inaudible) facing 35 per cent less water going into the catchment, tripling the number of extreme hot days and specifically at Mount Hotham the ski season to go from 120 days to just 20  -  these are your dire warnings and the reason you say we need to do, have a carbon price and have action. If you have the carbon price, if you have action, how will those forecasts change, if you act, how those numbers will change?
MINISTER COMBET: The critical thing is that there's an international response at the end of the day. But that we play our part responsibly in that international response. We cannot  - as I think both the Prime Minister and I have indicated  -  you cannot have a position where we're one of the top 20 emitters, the highest per capita amongst the developed countries in terms of the pollution that we're producing and say that we're not going to be doing anything. Australia has a lot to lose from climate change and we've got a responsibility to act with others to deal with it. Of course it's a problematic question to go and try to identify how much our particular response might contribute to mitigation because it is an international issue. But I tell you one thing, we have to contribute to the international response, to mitigate the risk of damage to our own economy and our own environment.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) really been recently been quite a misleading impression that our actions will, for example, mitigate the effects on the Barrier Reef and areas like this. It's been the implication in a lot of what's been said when, as you say, it's not really the fact.
PM: I'll turn to Greg for a comment in a second, but I do want to pick Phil up on the language of dire warnings.
I don't stand here as Prime Minister and Greg doesn't stand here as the responsible minister issuing dire warnings. What we make available to you is the science.
If I stood here today and said smoking causes lung cancer, your reaction to that wouldn't be ‘gee, she's issuing a dire warning'. Your reaction to that would be ‘yep, I know that, the scientists have proved it'. If I stood here today and said ‘lying out in the sun for too long causes skin cancer' you couldn't say ‘she's issued a dire warning'. You'd say ‘yep, absolutely right, know that, that's why I make sure my child's wearing a hat every day when they go to school'.
Now, all we're doing with the science of climate change is giving you the science.
MINISTER COMBET: And I don't accept that the Government  -  I don't accept the presumption for both the questions. That is, that the Government has somehow or other been suggesting something that is otherwise than the case. We've been saying clearly, here are risks of climate change to our environment, to our economy, to our communities, to particular industries, as a basis for a case for us to take action as part of an international response.
If you accept the science, it comes back to some very basic propositions, if you accept and respect the science, you have a public policy responsibility to act, and to act as part of an international effort which the Government is doing, and to act domestically to reduce our own emissions, and in doing so, to do it at least cost to the economy, that is, as I said one of the key elements of the Productivity Commission report.
The policy response that the Government is advancing in the form of an emissions trading scheme starting with a fixed price period of between three to five years, is a market mechanism, that in our judgment, with proper design will deliver the mitigation effort in our own economy, the emissions reductions in our own economy at least cost, and what's more, it's in our long term economic future and benefit to do so, it is in our national interest to do so and as I've said before the economies that take action at least cost, drive the innovation towards clean energy are going to be those economies that will be the most competitive in the decades to come.
JOURNALIST: But you also accept that we might do all these proper things and the Barrier Reef still suffer devastating damage and the Murray Darling Basin be in a bad state, would you accept that?
MINISTER COMBET: What's the converse, to do nothing? No, we must take responsibility internationally.
JOURNALIST: I'm just asking you if you accepted that?
MINISTER COMBET: Well I don't necessarily accept that because there is action internationally. We have to play our part in it.
JOURNALIST: To take the Prime Minister's analogy a step further though, Prime Minister, what you're saying is that Australia doesn't just have to stop smoking for there to be benefits, the world has to stop smoking and for all of the things you say that the rest of the world is doing, why do emissions continue to grow? Can you tell us when they'll start to reverse?
PM: Well, if we can refer you to this fact sheet, Fact Sheet Number Three, which in very clear circles, the circles obviously showing the size of people's emissions, tell you what the top 20 countries causing carbon pollution are doing, what we're causing in terms of carbon pollution.
We are amongst those top 20 countries, so Australia is here with the Aussie flag on it and the Aussie map and when you see the size of that circle you can see clustered around us a range of nations with a comparable emissions impact on the globe.
Now what that is telling you is we all need to take action, that's true. What the other fact sheet is telling you is how these countries are taking action.
JOURNALIST: When will we start to see a reversal in the growth of emissions?
PM: Well, you would be aware different countries have different targets and they are in here for you to see, in terms of what is being aimed for. What we are aiming for is an unconditional target, is of course a -5 cut by 2020.
JOURNALIST: Why have you decided not to meet the Dalai Lama?
PM: Look, the Dalai Lama is a frequent visitor to Australia, I think he's been here four times in the last five years. On some occasions he's met with the Prime Minister, on others he hasn't. I've determined on this occasion that I won't be meeting with the Dalai Lama. He will meet with a member of the Government, he'll meet with Minister Garrett.
JOURNALIST: Has it got anything to do with China - not offending them?
PM: No, I make my own decisions and the Government makes its own decisions about meetings that we hold.
JOURNALIST: Power prices in New South Wales are going up 18 per cent, largely or partly because of the renewable energy targets. How do you explain to families that sort of increase?
PM: When we looked at the increases people are experiencing though electricity bills I'm very concerned about them. I understand what a great deal of pressure they put on the shoulder of families, absolutely, and when we analyse the various elements you'll see that a very big element, indeed the biggest element is needing to invest in infrastructure. We haven't been investing in infrastructure as we should, and what I don't want to see is us wake up in 10 or 15 years' time, where we've under invested in infrastructure again because there's no certainty about carbon pricing, and when you talk to those in the electricity industry they want to know with certainty how carbon pricing is going to work because they're investing in incredibly long-lived assets.
So, for us to do the best thing we can, to work with people, to make sure we've got electricity supply right, to make sure we've got the clean energy sources we need for the future, we've got to get on with the job of pricing carbon.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask about live cattle trade? Will you allow the live export of cattle, or the export of live cattle, to Indonesia if they do not apply stunning techniques, which is precisely what the three biggest live cattle exporters want? Paul Holmes a Court is saying that it's a no stun, no deal, and I note that the Caucus has passed a motion which effectively is not a no stun, no deal. Will you allow exports if they're not stunned before slaughter?
PM: The Minister will be dealing with these questions in detail, but our aim here  -  we've suspended the trade  -  our aim here is to ensure that cattle that go to Indonesia and are slaughtered in Indonesia are slaughtered under international conditions, the standards of the world, when it comes to slaughtering cattle and that we encourage the use to stunning.
Of course, individual producers may well make their own decision about where they want to direct their cattle to, but at the moment we don't have those standards in place and we don't have the ability to track where cattle have gone in Indonesia and consequently to monitor their treatment when they're there. But the Minister will obviously be in a position to deal with this in great detail for you.
JOURNALIST: The MLA says itself when it did its report last year that with the stunning of cattle you could actually improve the welfare of animals many times over. Do you think that Australia should demand of its major partner to accept Australian standards and not world standards, which applies to 178 nations, many of which processes its cattle from live animals in a way that we would regard as inhumane?
PM: Well, I'm not accepting your characterisation of world standards, and of course world standards have not been in operation in the abattoirs in which you've seen the footage that has generated so much concern amongst Australians and I can understand that concern. It was truly horrific footage. So, that is not animals being treated appropriately, it's not animals being treated in accordance with world standards.
I've just said to you, part of the policy here is to encourage the use of stunning. Clearly, Minister Ludwig will be able to go through all of these details.
We'll just go to the front and then we'll come back. Bonge.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, just back on this fact sheet - why is there no international comparison of carbon prices here, seeing that this is about pricing carbon? What is the average carbon price internationally and is your timetable for announcing a carbon price still the end of this month or the beginning of the next?
PM: You're a man with a lot of work to do, because you've got that huge Productivity Commission report to work your way through - many, many pages, very closely and densely argued, which takes you through the questions of carbon pricing, shadow carbon pricing and what can be done to assess comparable carbon prices in other nations, and the clear conclusion of the Productivity Commission is that other nations are acting, so that is the material we announced last week.
JOURNALIST: Isn't it a fact that Australia can't give investors any certainty while the Opposition is promising to repeal your carbon tax?
PM: That's a question you'd best direct to Tony Abbott.
What I would say is a fact about the policies that Mr Abbott has announced, the fact there is even members of the Liberal Party are horrified at his plans to claw back money from pensioners, money we will give them to assist with carbon pricing. So, even the Liberal Party today, Liberal Party ticket holders are absolutely horrified at his claw back plans and what I can say to Australians is we will be assisting Australians.
Mr Abbott has said however that assistance is provided, however it's provided to pensioners, however it's provided to families, whether it's provided through pensions, whether it's provided through family payments, whether it's provided through tax cuts, what Mr Abbott wants to do is claw that money back from people.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) his own tax cuts?
PM: Yes, and there might be a pig flying when I go outside and have a look at the window in Parliament House. A man who came up with an $11 billion black hole during an election campaign, I don't think is the first person you would look to, Paul, to generate something as complicated as a tax plan.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you get the feeling that you're sitting on top of a rebellion by the Left of your party?
PM: No, I don't. Look, I've got a very talented Caucus and a talented ministry, and when you've got a talented Caucus and a talented ministry they want to have policy discussions and of course that's a good thing and we do have policy discussions at Caucus. There is a core set of values that guide the Labor Party, that guide this Labor Government. As we make the difficult decisions each and every day about how to translate those values into action, of course reasonable people will differ about the best way of doing that. We have those policy discussions in Caucus, that's a good thing.
We'll just go to Laura and then come back.
JOURNALIST: Is Cabinet considering a compensation package, not for cattle producers, I know that's in discussions with MLA, but to look at the effects, the knock on effects of the cattle ban in Northern Australia?
PM: Cabinet discussions are confidential, Laura.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Ralph Norman from the Coal Association says he hasn't spoken to the Government for weeks. Tony Maher from the Mining Union says he feels the Greens are treating mining workers like a trophy hunt. What do you say to them to try and placate their concerns? You're not giving detail to Laura's question on compensation, what do you say to them about their concerns?
MINISTER COMBET: Well I think on the latter part of the question in relation to the Coal Miners Union, I'd say there's a good understanding of the Government's view about the issue, and as I said before the impact of a carbon price on quite a finite number of underground gassy coal mines has been a well traversed issue across the industry since the CPRS debate.
As to the Coal Association, I was in contact with one of the representatives of the Coal Association a couple of weeks ago and offered to have further discussions and meetings and the Association hasn't taken that up at this point in time but we're ready to talk any time because they're important issues.
PM: I think we said last question, but just in the interests of fairness, we'll have one from Katherine. It's discrimination in favour of red heads that doesn't necessarily get favour with the whole group.
JOURNALIST: According to our Caucus briefing a minute ago, you indicated to the Caucus that people, notwithstanding the general debate question, shouldn't get distracted with issues that should be resolved at the National Conference. Now, I'm a bit confused about the hierarchy of issues. What should be resolved by the National Conference and what is OK to discuss in Caucus?
PM: Well, I'm very clear on it, so I can help you with that.
National Conference, of course, deals with party renewal questions and there are a significant number of issues about renewing the Labor Party that we need to work through at National Conference. I've spoken about those matters before.
I obviously want to see our Labor Party stronger, number of members increase, different ways of working in the modern age with people who no longer see their political engagement as going down to a locality-based branch for a face-to-face meeting. I do want to see us strengthen the party, so there's a set of party reform questions that can and will be dealt with at National Conference at the end of the year.
National Conference sets the platform for the party  -  no news in that, that's ages old - and of course the Government sets the policies for the nation and we're doing that day after day in accordance with our Labor values, in accordance with the policy discussions we have at all levels of government.
Thank you. 



It's a great pleasure to welcome you to the nation's capital to share in this important Forum.
As CEOs of global companies, you are acutely aware of the opportunities and pressures facing Australia's economy at this remarkable time.
Most of your firms operate in the non-mining sector and so approach the current climate with varying degrees of optimism.
But I want to make this very clear:
Our economy is strong.
Strong investment  -  low unemployment  -  low inflation  -  low debt.
But we are never complacent.
We understand the pressures you face from international competitors.
The impact of a high currency.
The closing of the skills gap with Asia.
The continuous need for greater productivity, innovation and efficiency.
All of this occurring against the backdrop of historic economic change for this nation.
Friends, Australia is witnessing a deep and lasting structural change in our nation's economic fortunes.
We find ourselves located strategically at the right place and at the right time in world history, with the centre of gravity in the global economy shifting emphatically to our region.
As a result, terms of trade stand at their highest sustained  level in 140 years.
Per capita GDP in Australia is 10 per cent higher than Germany; 14 per cent higher than the UK and 17 per cent higher than Japan.
Treasury projects GDP growth rising to four per cent in 2011-12, with strong jobs growth over the next two years.
Opportunities in the Asian century
Friends, the rise of Asia is transforming our economy.
One quarter of our exports make their way to China alone, potentially rising to half by 2015.
This is good for Australia because it brings three distinct sets of opportunities:
Direct benefits from mining itself
 * 	Wider benefits from the spread of mining wealth
 * 	And opportunities as the Asian middle class expands.
The benefits of mining are obvious, such as higher wages, dividends, superannuation savings and spending on equipment and services.
Mining-related opportunities are also widespread.
Mining uplifts a whole range of sectors including construction and engineering, transport and logistics, financial and legal services, training and work safety.
Opportunities that many of your firms are well placed to exploit.
Of course, high terms of trade place strong upward pressure on our currency  -  that is undeniable.
These differential patterns of growth  -  which I call the “patchwork” economy  -  cannot be underestimated.
Our trade exposed sectors face real pressures.
And as CEOs heading the Australian operation of multinational firms, I know you want to deliver strong returns to head office, grow exports and gain scarce capital.
But the idea of “hollowing out” because of the high dollar needs to be carefully assessed.
For a start, a higher dollar eases pressure on domestic inflation.
It provides cheaper goods for those firms who rely on imported components.
And the inflow of export income washes right through our economy, creating many more opportunities here on shore.
Output from the services sector alone is projected to increase by about 35 per cent by 2020.
Great opportunities still exist for investors in areas such as:
 * 	Banking, finance and legal services.
 * 	Infrastructure.
 * 	Clean energy.
 * 	Carbon markets.
 * 	Creative industries, especially in the area of NBN content, video games and mobile phone applications.
 * 	And areas of discretionary spending such as personal services and domestic tourism.
There will also be big opportunities in health and aged care as the population ages and medical science advances.
With growing prosperity, our consumption of all these goods and services will rapidly increase.
But opportunities aren't just confined to the non-traded sector.
We can remain competitive in the export market.
Friends, with the weight of global activity shifting rapidly to our region, the Asian middle class will soon equal the size of the middle class in the rest of the world combined.
For Australia, that means strong demand for our commodities and the challenge of finding new opportunities for high-end services and manufactures.
We will need a renewed focus on innovation, on building stronger regional partnerships in education, science and research, and positioning Australian as a global R&amp;D centre.
Moreover we must support the development of firm capabilities that enable businesses to move up the value chain and compete effectively in these markets.
Our economic position will depend on the education and skills of our workforce and managers and continued productivity improvement.
Creating success
Friends, meeting the challenges of the Asian Century forms the heart of the Government's policy agenda.
We know the mining boom will place strain on those firms exposed to currency fluctuations.
Create skills shortages and cost pressures.
Lead to different growth patterns across industries and regions. But structural change is nothing new in any economy; it is a constant throughout history.
Australia has successfully managed shifts on this scale before, and we can do it again.
Macro-economic settings
First and foremost, we must get the macro-economic settings right.
That means getting the Budget back into surplus in 2012-13 so government is not competing with the private sector for the same resources.
That's why we're delivering the fastest fiscal consolidation on record  -  3.8 per cent of GDP over the next two years.
It also means fiscal and monetary policy are pulling the same direction, unlike the period between 2004 and 2007 when unchecked public spending fuelled inflation.
We will not make the same mistake.
I'm also pleased to see that Australia is embracing a culture of saving as households and business rebuild their balance sheets.
Household savings rose to 11.5 per cent of income in the March quarter, a level not seen since the mid 1980s.
This is a good thing because it means the next phase of growth will rest on firmer foundations.
We don't need another boom marked by excessive credit card debt, unsustainable housing prices and overreliance on home loan equity redraws.
We need solid growth grounded in prudence and commonsense.
Finally  -  and importantly  -  we are earmarking proceeds from the mining boom to boost savings and cut taxes.
With support from the mining tax, the Government will lift the superannuation guarantee from 9 to 12 per cent.                       
This will help raise superannuation savings by $500 billion by 2035.
We will also bring down the company tax rate to 29 per cent, to help those businesses not in the mining boomfast lane.
Building capacity
In building capacity for the years ahead, nothing is more important than skills.
That's why in last month's Federal Budget, we invested more than $3 billion in building the skills the economy needs.
At its heart is our new $558 million National Workforce Development Fund, which will deliver 130,000 new training places for which industry can bid to respond to the news needs of your workforces.
This comes on top of our doubling of school funding since 2007, a 20 per cent increase in university undergraduate places and a doubling of post-graduate places.
I understand that our economy needs more workers as well as more skills.
The Government's participation reforms are carefully designed to meet this need.
From phasing out the Dependent Spouse Tax Offset, beginning with partners under 40, to extending Earn or Learn requirements to 21 year olds.
Targeted wage subsidies  -  encouraging employers to hire those who have not worked for more than two years.
Strict new work tests for the Disability Support Pension alongside allowing more hours to be worked before payments are suspended.
Plus participation plans for teen parents, new requirements for jobless families, extending income management and developing new place-based programs to support local and regional employment.
I see a real opportunity here, to meet the demands of our strong economy and to include all Australians in the opportunities created by that economic strength.
At the same time, skilled migration also remains an option where domestic labour supply falls short.
The Government has consciously weighted the immigration program towards skills.
That is why we have recently provided 16,000 skilled migration places to the regions.
And enabled streamlined Enterprise Migration Agreements for large resource projects.
We will do our best to ensure the next phase of growth is not constrained by a lack of skills or workers.
Just as Government changes the way we do business in skills and immigration, so the Government is also strongly committed to helping firms change the way they do business through genuine R&amp;D.
In a tight budget, we will see more taxpayer investment in the innovation system than ever before.
In fact our innovation spend of $9.5 billion a year represents a 43 per cent increase on the best efforts of the previous government.
Our commitment to Commercialisation Australia will more than double in 2011-12 to $60 million.
It is a mark of our resolve to remake our economy, and our society, through innovation.
Likewise, we recognise the cost of doing business in a federal system  -  and we want to make it easier.
We have achieved landmark reforms like a single system for regulating occupational health and safety.
Around half of our Seamless National Economy deregulation reforms are completed or close to completion.
We've also streamlined the nation's 23 different transport regulatory authorities into just three.
Real reforms that will save time  -  save money  -  and cut red tape.
Friends, we can't be a productive nation without also building our infrastructure capacity.
The Australian Government is making record infrastructure investments in ports, roads and rail  -  $36 billion over six years.
We have also announced a new Infrastructure Investment Incentive to  encourage up to $25 billion of private and superannuation investment.
The Incentive will support investment in National Priority projects by exempting them from the Continuity of Ownership Test and the Same Business Test, and providing uplift at the government bond rate.
Most importantly of all, we are delivering the greatest infrastructure project in the nation's history  -  the NBN  -  that will radically change the way we live, work and study.
Driving productivity, fostering competition among telcos and lowering business costs.
The last phase of the boom saw lower productivity because of infrastructure constraints and skills shortages.
We will not make the same mistake.
Trade and investment
Likewise, we remain committed to the principles and practice of free trade.
Australia will continue to push for a decent outcome in the Doha Round.
And we will continue to pursue high quality bilateral free trade deals with nations such as Japan, Korea, and China, so long as they support the multilateral system.
Australia also remains a globally competitive location open to overseas investment.
We were ranked third on the 2011 Index of Economic Freedom behind Singapore and Hong Kong. 
At the end of March 2011, the total stock of foreign investment in Australia was over $2 trillion.
Since November 2007, the Government has approved around 2000 foreign investment business proposals worth over $500 billion.
Over 99 per cent of these were approved, and approved without any conditions.
Only one proposal has been rejected in 10 years.
Foreign investment applications will always be assessed on a non-discriminatory, case-by-case basis.
We are also committed to building Australia as a financial services hub in Asia.
We are actively pursuing a framework that will allow for the introduction of competition in Australia's equity markets, including the entry of foreign operators.
And we are currently working to develop a Funds Management Passport to support the cross-border marketing of funds across the Asian region. 
Australia's investment door remains well and truly open.
Labour market reform
Friends, I want to say a word about labour market reform.
Our Fair Work reforms have made huge changes to the way Australian companies do business:
We have replaced State-based industrial tribunals with a one-stop-shop for the private sector workforce and rolled 4000 awards and instruments into just 122 modern awards.
Most importantly, we have put enterprise bargaining back at the centre of industrial relations, where it should be.
We have consciously promoted enterprise rather than individual negotiation because it is in workplaces that inefficiencies can be addressed and new ideas embraced.
And let's be clear about the results.
The evidence is clear that wage pressures are not leaking from high wage industries like resources into other areas of economy.
The Labour Price Index rose by 3.8 per cent over the year to March 2011, unchanged from the average annual level over the last five years.
Enterprise bargaining is working as it should to ensure that the wages paid by firms and sectors reflect their unique needs.
At the same time days lost to industrial disputes continue to fall.      
Pricing carbon
But friends, alongside all these policies stands the profound challenge of shifting our nation to a low pollution, clean energy economy.
This is one of the greatest reforms of our history and one of the greatest reforms for our future.
Two weeks ago, Professor Ross Garnaut released his final report on climate change.
13 of Australia's most prominent economists described a carbon price as “a necessary and desirable structural reform of the Australian economy.”
With our abundance of renewables and our skilled workforce, Australia is well equipped to make the transition.
A carbon price will drive innovation to find better, less polluting ways of producing energy, goods and services.
In fact, Treasury modelling shows a carbon price will see gas-fired electricity generation expand by between 150 and 300 per cent by 2050.
Treasury's modelling shows the non-hydro renewable energy sector is projected to be six times bigger than it is today.
In short, dirty energy will become more expensive and clean energy cheaper under a carbon price.
The opportunity for some of the firms represented here today will be enormous.
Navigating the ‘new paradigm'
Friends, I know there some in the international business community who wonder if there ever will be a carbon price.
They are rightly concerned about the fractious state of Australian politics at the present moment.
So let me conclude with some observations.
These are certainly unusual times.
Yes we operate in the circumstance of a minority government.
But we remain committed to driving an ambitious policy agenda.
Despite all the doubts, our agreement with the Greens and Independents is working  -  and is working well.
Of the 112 Bills presented to Parliament since last September, all 112 have passed, including the Flood Levy Bill, loudly decried by our opponents and now sitting quietly on the statute books.
Not only has all our legislation passed.
Every amendment not supported by the government has failed.
In other words, a 100 per cent success rate in the Parliament.
The other key issue is the scope of our reform agenda, the most comprehensive since the Hawke-Keating era.
That our agenda is so full reflects our vision for the nation and the lost decade inherited from our predecessors.
It is necessarily broad and ambitious.
Friends, I spoke before Christmas about 2011 being the year of decision and delivery for our agenda, and I meant it.
This is a year of hard policy grind.
But a year that will ultimately pay rich dividends for our nation and its people.
The year of decision and delivery is now very close to paying off:
Our landmark health agreement was signed at COAG in February and the final details are now being worked out.
The NBN legislation has all passed, the Telstra agreement is close to signing, and fibre roll-out is underway.
The Murray Darling Basin plan is being worked through methodically, with genuine consultation designed to deliver a balanced policy outcome.
Our changes to superannuation and financial services are in the final stages of consultation and fine-tuning.
Our plan to break the people-smuggling business model through a regional processing system is likewise in its final stages of negotiation.
The architecture of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax has been agreed and the first draft legislation is now out for public comment.
And, of course, our carbon package  -  including assistance to industry and households  -  will be released soon.
We are substantially closer to completion on all these policy issues.
Reforms that all represent major structural reforms for Australia's future.
Reforms being purchased through the deliberate expenditure of political capital in the nation's long-term interest.
This is not the time for turning or trepidation.
We are on track.
On track to ensure that the year of decision and delivery will end with success.
In a dynamic and competitive world, we can afford nothing less.
Conclusion
Friends, I hold this confidence because Australia has done great things in the past and we can do great things again.
We are entering an age of opportunity.
An era of growth where the risks are greatly outweighed by the benefits, provided we get the big calls right.
Our settings are right.
Our policies are right.
It's time to hold our nerve.
Walk boldly on the road of reform.
Build a more productive Australia.
And meet the Asian Century with courage and confidence. 



It's terrific to address the National Business Leaders' Forum on Sustainable Development this evening in Canberra.
This isn't a political event but you all know that the issues you've been so dedicated to for so long are now at the absolute centre of national debate. 
It's a time that calls for courage, but it's an exciting time as well.
The fact that your forum is now in its twelfth year is testament to your work over many years to find better, more innovative and more sustainable ways to do business.
And your forum theme ‘Business Leadership in the New Global Innovation Economy: the race is on' rightly reflects the urgency of sustainable innovation  -  an open trading economy like Australia's cannot afford to be left behind in the world.
I know that your program today has been focused on discussion about how the advent of the low carbon economy will impact your business.
I hope you are all buoyed by the very real steps now being taken towards the development of more sustainable and cleaner energy sources.
And I hope you share my sense of excitement about the new era Australia is about to embark on as changes in the global environment open up exciting opportunities for our nation.
Australia is perfectly placed to make our way with confidence into the 21st century.
We have a strong economic record and robust institutions.
We emerged from the global recession with stronger employment growth, lower debt and lower deficits than all of the major advanced economies.
Yes, the summer of natural disasters here and overseas hurt our economy in the first quarter of this year, but the outlook is for solid growth in coming years.
These strong credentials, coupled with our geographic position, make us a place of opportunity for business and investment as the re-emergence of Asia's economic power heralds a new phase of prosperity for our nation.
And just as we see opportunity in the transition in the global economy from west to east  -  so we see opportunity in the transition in the global economy to low carbon growth.
89 countries responsible for more than 80 per cent of global emissions pledged to reduce or limit their emissions under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Our close neighbour New Zealand, a coalition of US states and 31 European countries already have emissions trading schemes in place.
Australia is among 20 major emitters which need to work together if we are to successfully tackle climate change.
More than half of these countries contribute similar levels of emissions as Australia does to the global whole, countries like the United Kingdom, France, the Republic of Korea and South Africa.
I am determined to ensure Australia and Australians are not left behind.
As you are all keenly aware, only a market-based solution can provide long-term investment and consumer confidence.
A market-based solution means a price on carbon.
A price on carbon is the most efficient means of achieving our bipartisan emissions target and our nation is well equipped to make the transition.
And a price on carbon will encourage businesses to invest in energy efficiency and clean energy and those businesses and industries that are preparing for the advent of the pricing framework now will be best placed to take advantage of the impending clean energy economy.
Investments in a clean energy future will improve our chances of competing in the global clean energy economy of tomorrow.
The Australian Government is committed to helping industry to realise future opportunities and enabling firms to harness their comparative advantage.
My Government has committed to returning every cent raised from carbon pricing to assist households, to help businesses make the transition to a low carbon future and to fund programs to tackle climate change.
Assistance to business will support jobs and competitiveness and encourage innovation.
And we will provide ongoing assistance to support zero emissions energy generation and renewable energy.
The new clean energy technologies that will be critical to achieving deep cuts in emissions from the electricity sector while maintaining the high levels of energy security and reliability that households and businesses expect.
Australia has bountiful supplies of renewable fuel sources - wind, solar, wave and geothermal and the Government has a range of measures in place to drive renewable generation.
These include the Connecting Renewables program, Solar Flagships and the Renewable Energy Target, the RET scheme as it is called.
The RET will help us meet our commitment of 20 per cent of our electricity supply coming from renewable sources by 2020. 
Large-scale renewable energy projects such as hydro, wind farms, and geothermal are expected to deliver the vast majority of this 2020 generation target.
With a carbon price in place, the RET is expected to drive $16 billion in new renewable energy investment in Australia by 2020.
This is great news for regional and rural Australia where much of this money is destined and the benefits will range from investment in local infrastructure to investment in training and employment.
Friends, the world is acting. 
The race is on, Australia does not want to be left behind.
In a few minutes you'll hear from your keynote speaker tonight, Kishor Chauker who'll speak to you about India's “innovation economy”.
I'm sure you'll learn much from Kishor and I'm sure you'll carry new ideas and new inspiration with you when you go home from Canberra.
Our Asian neighbour India is a country that is becoming a global powerhouse by seizing the opportunities from the transition to low carbon growth.
I've come tonight to make sure you all know this: I lead a Government which is determined that Australia will do the same.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today hosted Prime Minister Tuilaepa of Samoa in Canberra as part of his official visit to Australia as a guest of the Federal Government.
Australia's relationship with Samoa is one of the closest we have in the Pacific region.  It  embraces strong political, economic, and people to people links and a shared vision for a prosperous and democratic Pacific region.
The links between our two nations are further strengthened by the more than 40,000 people of Samoan ancestry living in Australia who make a valuable contribution to our community.
Prime Minister Tuilaepa's visit has provided an opportunity to continue the close partnership between Australia and Samoa.
The two leaders held a bilateral meeting this morning where they discussed important regional issues including the restoration of democracy to Fiji, climate change and economic development.  This was followed by an official luncheon hosted by Prime Minster Gillard.
The Prime Ministers also signed an agreement to increase funding under the Australian Sports Outreach Program (ASOP) Samoa.  This agreement will provide $1 million over three years to use village-level sport as a way of providing leadership opportunities for young men and women and to promote a healthy lifestyle in Samoa. 
Prime Minister Tuilaepa also used his visit to thank nine Australians who supported Samoa's recovery following the September 2009 Samoan tsunami.
At the peak of the tsunami response, Australia deployed 108 emergency and medical personnel and 29 tons of critical emergency supplies.  



Australian researchers could make many world-first breakthroughs that would treat and heal injured and sick people across the globe thanks to the new Bionics Institute in Victoria.
Announcing the Institute by video message, Prime Minister Julia Gillard said Australia had a proud history in bionic research and all Australians should be excited by the prospect of more discoveries.
The Prime Minister said our researchers have contributed significantly to global bionic research discoveries. In particular, our very own Professor Graeme Clark invented the cochlear implant, which is providing the gift of hearing to 200,000 severely or profoundly deaf people world-wide.
Bionic eye research holds similar promise with the potential to restore sight to thousands. That is why the Australian Government has provided $50 million to two research teams to develop a bionic eye in Australia.
Thanks to the Institute and the Government's record support for innovation, science and research, Australia has transitioned from the bionic ear to the bionic era of health and medical research.
Speaking at the launch, Innovation Minister Senator Kim Carr said he believed the research and development undertaken at the Institute was also inspiring for the future of high-value manufacturing.
“The commercial outcomes that may be spun out of this institute can potentially lead to high-skill, high-wage jobs.
“It is hard to imagine what you will create. We set no limits on your ambition. But we know you will help us face the big challenges of our time.”



PM: It's great to be here with Premier Anna Bligh, and I'm also here with Anil from Areva, and we're here to make a very important announcement for Queensland and for Australia.
Of course, we're in the Sunshine State, and the announcement I'm about to make is all to do with sunshine  -  using sunshine to create the clean energy future we want for Queensland and we want for this nation.
This is about what we are calling a solar dawn, a solar dawn here in Queensland.
It is the construction of a solar thermal power plant, a project to be called Solar Dawn.
If it was already built, it would be the largest solar power plant in the world on one site. This is tremendously good news. This Solar Dawn power plant is going to be built near Chinchilla. It is going to have a generation capacity of 250 megawatts, and the project involves Areva, represented by Anil today, and its partners, Wind Prospect CWP, CS Energy, and the University of Queensland.
This project is estimated to cost $1.2 billion, and I'm very pleased and proud that through the Federal Government's Solar Flagships program we are able to support this project with $464 million of funds.
Construction will start and the project will be commissioned by 2013. It will provide around 300 jobs, and of course it will be nearby the Kogan Creek project, a project I've been very pleased to visit, and that project, too, is using solar technology.
Now, having that located nearby is good news because it means people who have got their skills working at Kogan Creek will also be able to take their skills and work on the Solar Dawn project.
This is good news here for Queensland. It'll be very good news for the people in the local region near Chinchilla, who will be able to access these jobs.
It's also good news for our nation as it demonstrates how we can move to a clean energy future.
In addition today, there is good news for New South Wales. Through the same program, the Solar Flagships program, I am able to announce today that there will be a power plant, a renewable power plant, in Moree  -  150 megawatts of generation from there, and my colleague, Martin Ferguson, will be there today to deal with all of the details of the Moree project.
Now, when we look at these clean energy projects using our abundant natural resources, our wonderful and bountiful sunshine, we can see our clean energy future.
Pricing carbon is about accelerating our move to that clean energy future. It's about making renewables even more viable. I want to make sure that projects like Solar Dawn aren't the exception, that they increasingly become the norm about how we generate energy in this country from our abundant renewable energy resources.
I know Australians are very enthusiastic about solar technology. They walk out in our sunshine and they think to themselves ‘why can't we use this energy?'
Well, today, with this Solar Dawn project, we're able to say the abundant energy of the sun will be used in Queensland at this huge new facility.
I'll turn now to the Premier for some comments on Solar Dawn.
PREMIER BLIGH: Thank you, Prime Minister, and I welcome the Prime Minister here to Queensland this morning and I'm also pleased to be joined by Anil Srivastava from Areva renewable projects.
I welcome this announcement for Queensland. Our Government set out to make Queensland the solar State of Australia. With this new solar plant that will be achieved.
This will be the largest solar thermal power plant in Australia. It'll be here in our back yard, and it'll be generating power from our abundant sunshine.
Queensland doesn't just have sunshine  -  we have some of the world's best quality sunshine for generating solar power. We want Queensland to be the solar state of Australia, and with this plant the solar future for Queensland is secured.
Four years ago, when we set out to make Queensland a bigger solar player we had 1,000 Queensland households with solar panels on their roofs. Today, we have 85,000 Queensland households with solar panels generating clean, green energy off their roof.
This plant, however, is large-scale solar energy unlike anything we've seen in Australia before, and I'm very pleased that Queensland is going to be home to this very exciting plant.
The Queensland Government has contributed $75 million in partnership with the Federal Government to make this plant a reality. It is a very big venture. It will generate jobs in a new, clean, green energy field. This $75 million is an investment in a cleaner, greener energy form for Queensland, and we look forward to working with this company to make it a reality.
SRIVASTAVA: Prime Minister, the Honourable Julia Gillard, Premier of Queensland, Anna Bligh, it's a pleasure to be here. I share the passion, the vision of the Prime Minister and the Premier which you just heard.
I would like to just comment on a couple of things. First and foremost, I want to begin by commending your vision and your foresight into low carbon economy.
It takes courage, it takes leadership, and I see plenty of that here in Australia. I get an opportunity to go around the world and see how renewable businesses and projects are coming up. I have to say that as you rightly said, it is the largest of its kind being built anywhere in the world  -  not because of just the size. Also, it will be environmentally most responsible power generation anywhere in the world, so we are pleased with that.
Just by way of technology, I am pleased to say that this technology, called compact linear panel reflector, was conceived here several years back and is pioneered here in Australia. We are very proud of that.
What it essentially does, it combines zero-carbon solid energy with low-emission gas to build a hybrid power plant which will deliver energy when needed, as needed, even when the sun is not shining.
So, this is a unique proposition where in which we make a competitive, 7 x 24 power plant which is essentially a solar power plant.
Second comment I would like to make is the broader impact beyond the green energy generation. It will absolutely generate green energy, but it will have a significant local economy impact.
As in job creation, the Prime Minister mentioned 300 direct jobs. I can safely tell you that a multiplier of 4-5 on the supply chain will take it up to 1,500-2,000 jobs in total, so that's the impact on jobs.
It's about knowledge transfer. It's about research and innovation partnership with our partners University Queensland, who are here. It's about creating an industry.
I'm excited on behalf of the Areva group to be part of this great journey. As I was kidding with the Prime Minister before coming in here, this is actually a dawn of a new era. She didn't take my line, so I'm using it. Thanks a lot.
So, we are excited to be part of it. We are absolutely committed to make it happen. On behalf of Areva group and on behalf of the whole consortium, thank you very much for your support, Madam Prime Minister and Madam Premier.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think we have, we'll take your questions in one second, but I think there's a video just to look at to give you the details of the project, and then we'll take your questions from there.
[VIDEO PLAYS]
PM: If we can take questions on the announcement today first, and on Solar Dawn, and then we're happy to move to questions more broadly, so you had a question about Solar Dawn, and we'll get Anil to join us as our biggest expert.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) and business will be powered by (inaudible)
SRIVASTAVA: How many homes? A minimum of 300,000 homes could be powered with this power plant here. That's very significant.
The other point to note is it will save more than 50,000 tonnes of CO2 emissions every single year for 25 years of the life of the plant.
PM: Any questions on Solar Dawn?
JOURNALIST: I've just wondered if you've considered things like feed in tariffs for this kind of thing. (inaudible) Are you looking at those kind of measures?
PM: In terms of facilitating solar technology? The approach we've taken through the Solar Flagships program is one of assisting with ventures like Solar Dawn. We've had an expert independent panel work with us to assess the applications to the program, so our investment has been a direct investment.
My point about carbon pricing is as we change the equation for clean energy in the future and make it far more viable for renewable projects to come on stream, then we will move from this phase, where these projects tend to be an exception to how we generate electricity, to increasingly these projects being the norm, and it's fantastic to see this kind of technological innovation, which means we can use the power of the sun, we can reduce carbon pollution, and we can get the energy security we need with 24/7 power generation, where of course the traditional concern about solar energy has been ‘well, that's all very well and that's a good thing and maybe it can boost here and there but it's not able to meet our 24/7 energy needs.' A fantastic feature of this project is that it is going to be meeting 24/7 energy needs.
JOURNALIST: Premier, how's the State Government's previous forays into this (inaudible)
PREMIER BLIGH: We've seen a very strong take up of the State Government's incentive program for solar panels on the roofs.
We looked at, our previous kind of technology in Cloncurry that proved ultimately not to be suitable for that area, but we have now got a photovoltaic panel program that's currently out to tender for Cloncurry, and there's been very strong international interest.
This is new and emerging technology, and governments invest in it to get it up and running so that we can prove it up and then grow it up and see it spread right across the energy mix.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Cloncurry?
PREMIER BLIGH: This is different technology. This program, the Solar Dawn project, is to be located at Chinchilla. The company's done a lot of work proving up the area, proving up the technology, and we're very confident it's going to make a big difference.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) sensitivity in that area about coal seam gas. (inaudible) What do you say to farmers (inaudible)
PREMIER BLIGH: This is energy that comes straight from the sun. It is a cleaner and greener form of energy. It will be backed up with a gas program so that even when the sun isn't shining we'll see home and businesses being powered by it.
The south-west of our State is shaping up as a major energy corridor, and that is co-existing as it has already for a number of years with agriculture. This plant will be a very, very low impact plant because it won't be taking coal, it won't be generating emissions. This is new, 21st Century solar energy, and Queensland is the home of it. Queensland is going to lead Australia as a result of this plant in our back yard generating more solar energy than anywhere else in the country.
PM: Are there more questions on Solar Dawn, on the announcement today?
JOURNALIST: Just to double check, at Cloncurry, (inaudible)
PREMIER BLIGH: It's currently out to tender. Sorry, tenders have closed and they're being assessed at the moment. We've had quite strong international interest. We expect to have those tenders finalised I think somewhere in the next 6-8 weeks, and construction would commence after the tender has been awarded.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the polls today in Nielsen, is that a signal that perhaps the sun's setting on your time-
PM: -Before we move there, can I just check if there are any more questions on Solar Dawn? If not, I'm happy to take broader questions for the day, but before we do so I did want to make a statement about a national issue today.
Australians would have seen the news that Andrew Chan, who is in jail in Bali, has had his final legal appeal for clemency from the death penalty denied.
Clemency now lies in seeking clemency from the President of Indonesia.
Andrew Chan's family heard this news yesterday. We've been working with them through consular officials to support them during a very difficult time for their family.
The Australian Government is opposed to the death penalty, and we will be supporting Andrew Chan in his appeal for clemency.
JOURNALIST: Have you made a personal representation to Indonesia (inaudible)
PM: I'll be happy to do whatever is necessary to put as much force as we can into the appeal for clemency for Andrew Chan, including personally involving myself.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, we'll work through and make the appropriate arrangements, but of course we will work with Andrew Chan, his family and his legal representatives to make sure that we have the strongest possible claim for clemency for him.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) fair that Abu Bakar Bashir got 15 years and Andrew Chan (inaudible)
PM: Well, we're going to be making a claim for clemency, so please, let's just remind ourselves we need to be pulling together to be supporting his clemency claim.
I don't want to get into commentary about the judicial systems of other countries. That's not appropriate, but we've been very, very clear about our view of Bashir and the acts that he has inspired, the violence that he has inspired, directed towards Australians, and that that needs to be met with an appropriate sentence.
OK, so I'm happy now to take broader questions.
JOURNALIST: The Nielsen poll today, is it a sun setting on your time?
PM: Well, thank you for your question.
I don't judge by the opinion polls. I judge by how I'm pursuing my plan for the nation.
What drives me is that plan, fuelled by my values, by Labor values. It's a plan of opportunity for all in our nation, with a strong economy and also being a confident country that is out there meeting the challenges of the future. That's what we're doing right here today, meeting the challenges of the future - tackling climate change and ensuring we've got access to clean energy.
JOURNALIST: The poll shows that brand Labor is really on the nose, doesn't it? (inaudible) You must be worried.
PM: I don't comment on polls, and what I'm determined to do-
JOURNALIST: -The brand, is the brand-
PM: -Well, if I can finish my sentence, I don't comment on polls. What I'm determined to do is to see through my plan for the nation's future.
What I would certainly say about the question of carbon pricing, which I believe is on the minds of many Australians, what I would say about that is I can understand that at this point Australians are anxious about carbon pricing, they are concerned about what it means for them and their families. They do want to understand the full facts. They want to be able to sit down with the calculator and work out what it means for them, but I understand this is a period of anxiety for Australian families.
What we will do, and what I personally will do to re-assure Australian families is we will be ensuring that they get the full details of the carbon pricing package. We'll be explaining that package. We'll be enabling people to do their sums at home and to look at the generous assistance that they will get, and we will be explaining to them, too, what carbon pricing means for our clean energy future.
And let's just look at this Solar Dawn project. You've heard how this is going to use the power of the sun to provide the energy we need. You've heard how it's going to create 300 direct jobs.
I want project like this one to be the norm as we generate energy, that we are embracing renewables technology right around the country to generate the clean energy we need for the future, with all of the spin offs in creating jobs that projects like this one have.
In Canberra this week I met with plumbers, I met with electricians, I met with coal miners who came to Canberra to actually say to me they want a price on carbon. They want a price on carbon because they can see the possibilities of this clean energy future, its possibilities for creating jobs and opportunity for them and their families, and that's what we will be explaining to people as we work through carbon pricing.
JOURNALIST: So is brand Labor in good shape, then?
PM: I've just said the thing that motivates me is making sure our country has got a great future  -  a future with opportunity for all, a strong economy, ensuring that Australians get the benefits of prosperity and that we're confident enough and creative enough to meet the challenges of the future. I'm determined to see that plan through.
I understand that this is an anxious time for many Australians, and people are particularly anxious about pricing carbon, and we will be answering that anxiety with the full facts so everybody will be able to judge for themselves.
JOURNALIST: You're determined to keep going with the pitch on the carbon tax, even if you keep sliding in the polls?
PM: Pricing carbon's the right thing to do for our country's future, so I'm going to get it done. When I look at this nation's future, I see a country at the moment with a high-emissions economy, and in the future we are going to need a cleaner energy economy, and we can get there.
We've got a strong economy. We've got abundant sources of renewable energy. We've got great scientists leading the way, working through renewable technology. We can get there, to a cleaner energy future.
It's the right thing to do, to cut carbon pollution and tackle climate change. It's the right thing to do, to make sure we're a prosperous country in the future, and I'm determined to get it done.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) secure in your position, Prime Minister, or are (inaudible)
PM: Very.
JOURNALIST: Very secure, or very under threat?
PM: Very secure, very secure. I mean, let's, you know, be a little bit practical about this. I have a plan for this country's future. My Caucus colleagues are working with me to deliver than plan.
We don't underestimate the challenges and we don't underestimate the amount of hard work that we've got to do. We don't underestimate the degree of anxiety about carbon pricing.
We also believe very strongly in our vision for this nation's future, a vision about opportunity. You saw that in the Budget  -  new measures in a strong economy to bring opportunity right around the country. A vision about the future of education which makes sure every child gets a great education. A vision about the future of health which means we work together to get people the healthcare services they need in the future. And a vision about making sure we're a clean energy economy, a prosperous country with clean energy sources, and we've got the infrastructure of the future like the NBN.
I'm determined to deliver that vision. That's my vision. It's a vision shared by my Caucus colleagues, and we will keep working to deliver that vision. We don't underestimate how much hard we've got to do, and we'll get about doing it.
JOURNALIST: Are you a bit embarrassed that these poll results are worse that what Kevin Rudd faced?
PM: It's not about polls. It's about a plan for the nation.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) coming for you like they came for Kevin Rudd a year ago?
PM: I don't accept the premise of that question, and it's not about polls, it's about a plan for the nation's future.
JOURNALIST: What does it say about Australian politics when two of the most senior Labor politicians in the country are both on the nose in the polls, you and Anna Bligh.
PM: I think we can do all of these rather silly questions, or we can actually think-
JOURNALIST: -It's a legitimate question-
PM: -And I'm going to answer it if you allow me.
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible) women in the Labor party are both languishing in the polls?
PM: -and if you allow me to finish my sentence then I will answer your question for you, but in order to do that you've got to enable me to have some time to speak.
Look, we can do all of these dramatic media questions or we can actually grapple with the issues here, and the issues here are about the nation's future. That's the important thing.
I'm standing here today with Premier Bligh announcing that this State, this great State, with all of its abundant sunshine, is going to be home to one of the biggest solar generation plants in the world. That's fantastic news, and it shows us what the future can look like, and we'll get there through pricing carbon.
That will accelerate getting investments like this right around the nation. That's a good thing  -  a good thing for the environment, a good thing to cut carbon pollution, a really good thing to create jobs.
Now, I'm sure I can speak for Anna in this regard: we went into politics to make a difference to people's lives, to make a difference for people's lives today and for the future, to make sure they had the benefits of prosperity and opportunity and that we didn't cower before the challenges of the future, that we got out and met those challenges.
That's what I'm determined to do.
In doing it, of course you involve yourself in tough debates, but I'd rather be in a tough debate about the right thing for the nation's future than sitting idle, meaning this country, in the future, got left behind.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) in the Nielsen Poll by 60 per cent of people, and he also championed an ETS.
PM: Once again, it's about having a plan. I have a plan and I'm pursuing it with the support of my Labor colleagues.
JOURNALIST: When you assumed the leadership a bit under a year ago you said, in particular, Labor had lost its direction on the mining tax, the carbon tax and asylum seekers. Given they're still essentially unresolved, even add in the live exports, do you need another year?
PM: I don't agree with the premise of your question at all. When I became Prime Minister there was a very debilitating national debate underway about the Resource Super Profits Tax. I entered an agreement with Australia's biggest miners and resolved with them the shape of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. And, having seen how that debilitating debate about the Resource Super Profits Tax developed, I determined at that point, that as we delivered the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, at every stage, every stage of its development, we would work with the maximum degree of consultation.
So, yes, it's taken some time, but we're at the stage now that the draft legislation is there for all to see, and we will deal with it in the parliament towards the end of this year.
And then, on asylum seekers, when I first became Prime Minister I spoke to the nation about needing a new way, a new regional approach which enabled us to work with the countries of our region to address this very evil trade.
In Bali earlier this year we agreed a regional framework. We are now working under it, under the regional framework, and we are engaged in advanced negotiations with Malaysia about a transfer agreement, the most innovative solution that has ever been before this country to take out of the hands of people smugglers the very evil product that they try and sell. These are people who want to profit on the misery of others.
Then, on carbon pricing, we are there, soon to announce the full details of carbon pricing, having been through a consultative process which we're still engaged in, working with Australian businesses, unions, environmental stakeholders and others to get this right.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your response to refugee activist Ian Rintoul, who's branded you a racist?
PM: Well, he's wrong, and I'll keep pursuing this solution.
It's not humanitarian to see kids get on boats and lose their lives on the shoreline of Christmas Island or in the sea. We saw that just before Christmas this year. I remember that very vividly, what we all felt like when we saw the images of those people drowning, including children drowning, on the shore of Christmas Island.
So, the humanitarian approach is to do everything you can to stop people getting on boats, to stop people smugglers plying an incredibly evil trade and trying to profit on the misery of others, which is why I'm determined to keep working through with Malaysia on the transfer agreement.
It would send the most powerful possible message we could  -  if you get on a boat, you risk your life, you pay your money, where you're going to end up is at the back of the queue in Malaysia.
That's why it's a better solution than anything that has been advocated by the Opposition, which would enable people smugglers to say ‘yes, there'll be a delay and you'll be in Nauru, but you'll still end up in Australia.'
I want to send the most powerful message we can, and that's what the transfer agreement's about, and I think, looking at it from a humanitarian perspective, it's absolutely the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) travelling to Malaysia. Should the Government be doing the same thing (inaudible)
PM: I think that this is an incredibly destructive stunt by the Opposition. I am absolutely amazed. Not much about the negativity or irresponsibility of Tony Abbott amazes me, but I'd have to say this does.
It amazes me that anybody who would contend for national leadership in this country has authorised one of their spokespeople to go to one of our regional neighbours for the sole purpose of a media stunt and engaging in criticism of that regional neighbour.
The purpose of this visit is destruction: destruction of our discussions about a transfer agreement; ultimately, destruction of our ability to have a good bilateral relationship with the government and the people of Malaysia.
Just goes to show how you could not trust this Opposition with any form of public policy, and certainly not having constructive arrangements with our regional neighbours.
This is something that's never been done before in Australian politics, to my knowledge, that people have travelled as Opposition spokespeople for the sole purpose of embarrassing a country in our region, and for the sole purpose of destruction.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're in Kevin country today. How is your relationship with the Foreign Minister, Mr Rudd?
PM: Well, we work very closely together on foreign affairs questions, and I'm very confident Kevin's going to share my sense of disgust at this recent announcement by the Opposition, and I'm looking forward to addressing Queensland state conference today.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We're working very constructively together on foreign affairs issues, and of course this is an important one before us today. We'll keep working through on the Malaysia agreement. This is an incredibly destructive move from the Opposition.
JOURNALIST: Are you surprised Mr Rudd wasn't asked to speak (inaudible) in his electorate?
PM: I don't make arrangements for Queensland state conference. 



Australia will be at the forefront of global solar thermal research with the launch of a new facility in Newcastle today.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Resources and Energy, Martin Ferguson and Member for Newcastle, Sharon Grierson officially opened the CSIRO Solar Tower this morning.
The world-class facility will be an international hub for solar tower research, development and commercialisation.
It is the largest solar thermal research facility in the country and will ensure that Australia remains at the cutting edge of solar thermal technology.
The development of the facility has been supported by a $5 million foundation grant from the Australian Solar Institute.
Australia has some of the best solar energy resources in the world. Projects like this will allow us to maximise the potential of this resource and increase the use of solar power in our energy mix.
It also provides us with an opportunity to secure a greater share of the global solar energy market by creating export opportunities for technology, such as the solar tower.
Unlike most solar thermal power stations which require water, this facility will initially be used to develop and test a solar air turbine, which will generate electricity from air and sunshine only.
This offers real opportunities for cost effective and efficient energy solutions in our remote arid regions.
Its location in Newcastle underscores the potential for the clean energy industry in the Hunter region.
The Hunter region is already home to the CSIRO National Solar Energy Centre, the Australian Solar Institute, the Newcastle Institute for Energy and Resources as well as the Smart Grid, Smart City Initiative.
The project has enjoyed strong support from other Hunter region Federal MP's including the Minster for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, Greg Combet, the Member for Hunter, Joel Fitzgibbon and the Member for Shortland, Jill Hall.
The 30 metre high solar tower surrounded by 450 locally manufactured custom designed mirrors (heliostats) is capable of generating temperatures of up to 1,500° Celsius. The increased temperatures mean higher efficiency and lower costs.
The facility will also be used to research solar energy storage, high temperature steam generation, solarised fuels and thermoelectric generators.
Already the CSIRO foundation project has attracted partnerships with two of the world's most prominent solar energy organisations, Japan's Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and Spain's Abengoa Solar, with more international interest expected.
The Government's expanded Renewable Energy Target, together with a price on carbon will create market opportunities for greater investment in renewable energy technologies like solar.
Our support for research and development through the $5 billion Clean Energy Initiative will help commercialise the technologies to take advantage of these opportunities.
The opening of the solar tower marks an important step in the path to a lower-emissions economy for Australia.
Images, podcast and video available at www.scienceimage.csiro.au



The Federal Government will provide more than three quarters of a billion dollars to help build two of the largest solar power stations in the world.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Resources and Energy Minister Martin Ferguson today announced the record funding to support construction of the solar projects at Chinchilla in Queensland and Moree in New South Wales.
Solar Dawn and Moree Solar Farm have been selected as the two successful consortiums to build the power plants under Round 1 of the Australian Government's $1.5 billion Solar Flagships program.
Investment in clean energy projects such as these will continue to help make industrial-scale solar power more feasible, affordable and viable  -  which will benefit all Australians.
Putting a price on carbon will also help drive the investment we need in renewable and clean energy technologies such as solar.
The Gillard Labor Government will contribute $464 million for the project in Chinchilla worth an estimated $1.2 billion and $306.5 million towards the project in Moree worth an estimated $923 million.
Together, the projects are expected to generate enough power to support the electricity needs of more than 115,000 Australian homes per year.
The Solar Dawn consortium, led by Areva Solar, will build a 250 megawatt (MW) solar thermal gas hybrid power plant near Chinchilla.
Solar Dawn will be one of the largest power plants of its kind in the world as well as one of the most environmentally responsible.
At least 85 per cent of Solar Dawn's power generation will be entirely emissions free.
During construction, Solar Dawn estimates the project will generate $570 million in economic activity in the region and create 300 jobs on average.
The Moree Solar Farm consortium, led by BP Solar will build a 150 MW photovoltaic power plant near Moree.
This is nearly twice the size of any photovoltaic power plant operating in the world today.
It is estimated that the project will create on average around 300 jobs during construction.
Work will commence next year and the plants are expected to be completed and commissioned by the end of 2015.
Together, Solar Dawn and the Moree Solar Farm will bring Australia closer to a cleaner energy future.
Both projects will also provide jobs and economic growth in regional Australia.
The projects were selected in accordance with the recommendations of the independent Solar Flagships Council.
The Australian Government is helping drive this transition by directly investing in these and other projects under the $5 billion Clean Energy Initiative, through the expanded Renewable Energy Target and by pricing carbon. 



Thanks so much, Wayne, for that generous introduction.
I see so many of my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues here today, Federal and State, far too many to name; so many friends from Queensland's great labour movement.
And so many hard-working Labor Party people, people who've lived a life in Labor politics and who've sought as your reward nothing more and nothing less than a better Australia.
Thank you - for all you do for our Party and our people
This year in Queensland I've been to many places and met many people I'll never forget:
To Bundaberg on New Year's Eve, where Sandy Kiddle told me the city's flood crisis had almost broken her heart  -  almost;
To St George in the first week of January, where Linda Bradley needed a cuddle as she cried about her house that was underwater for the second time in a year;
To Picnic Point at Toowoomba on Australia Day, where Peter Taylor and I seemed to meet the whole town at the barbecue after the Awards.
So many different people in different places from different backgrounds - what they had in common was their uncommon courage.
LEADING FOR QUEENSLAND
There's another courageous Queenslander I've spent time with this year, someone I'd worked with before but who we all know a bit better now - your Premier, Anna Bligh.
And what I learned about Anna this year is what every Australian learned about Anna.
She's one of you. She's tough enough.
Hour after hour, Anna reassured the people and provided the leadership.
Day after day, Anna faced the floods with steel in her backbone and occasional tears in her eyes.
And as the months have gone on, Anna is still doing her job to rebuild the state.
It's one thing to say you ‘can-do' - Anna Bligh does.
I spent a lot of time with your Premier in Queensland in January and saw her up close.
Like in Grantham, where we sat a while with the residents in the space under the primary school, sheltering from the heat.
Anna's leadership was wonderful then.
But what's just as important is the leadership Anna still provides the Government and the state, every day.
I've seen what you've done together to rebuild, connecting the power, repairing the roads, opening the rail - after flood.
In City Hall in Toowoomba, where I visited in January and saw such shocking and emotional sights, and where I sat for lunch in April and heard such remarkable stories of recovery and resilience - after cyclone. 
In the tropical north, where the day after Yasi I saw trees and debris washed right across Townsville and power and water cut off, and where I returned just 10 days later, to Tully, where amid the devastated banana crops I met growers and businesses, from Mission and Caldwell and Tully itself, people already working with the Government and planning their fight back.
And I've also seen what you've done together to govern this great state:
When I visited Goodna to see a truly inspiring public school;
When I visited Redcliff to see the GP super clinic and the hospital;
When I visited Gladstone to see work begin on the Curtis Island gas project;
When I've travelled this growing state and seen what Queensland Labor has done to make that growth work, I've seen what you've done together for health, for education above all for jobs.
And I want you to know today that you should be proud of your Queensland Labor Government.
You have a record to admire and a case for re-election as strong as any I have known.
GOVERNING FOR ALL
Friends, a Queensland Labor Government is a Government for every Queenslander.
And an Australian Labor Government is a Government for every Australian.
We share a vision, for the state as for the country.
A strong economy  -  and opportunity for all.
This year's Budget includes many sound Labor measures.
$2.2 billion for mental health.
130,000 new training places and apprenticeships. 
The parents of hundreds of thousands of teenagers with over $4,000 a year extra in family tax benefit. 
Millions of low-income workers with more in their regular pay packet through the reforms to the Low-Income Tax Offset.
$1.8 billion for regional health facilities, investments in a sustainable Australia, new assistance for small businesses and manufacturers.
But these are not one-off measures to address isolated need.
They form a plan to make our vision reality: more jobs, more opportunity, better life chances.
And I have seen our plan at work in Australia today.
In Brisbane, where I've sat down with hard headed Australians, representatives of the state government, business and the community, who are backing in the hard decisions, like the flood levy, like our cuts to other spending, to rebuild Queensland while paying as we go.
I saw people who are rebuilding Queensland while getting the Budget back into black as our economy demands.
In Moranbah, where I've met women forging careers in the mining industry  -  geologists, engineers, a female mine manager, and we talked about what it must have been like to be one of the first women to turn up at a mine site; the first woman to climb into the cab of one of those huge trucks.
They aren't just proud to be coal miners' daughters anymore, they're proud to be coal miners.
And I didn't just see some really inspirational Australians - I saw people who are working hard, are getting educated, are seizing the employment opportunities the mining boom creates and the training opportunities government extends.
I saw people who are becoming the productive workforce that our economy needs.
In Brisbane's north, where I saw one of the fastest growing areas in the country, where congestion means parents spend more time in cars than they want and business isn't as productive as it could be, and so with Anna Bligh and Allan Sutherland I signed a $1.1 billion intergovernmental agreement to build the Moreton Bay Rail Link at last.
I saw an investment which means that when construction is complete in 2016 the State's south-east will have a critical new piece of economic infrastructure.
Our Labor Government is delivering  -  delivering our plans to spread the opportunities of the mining boom, to get more Australians into jobs, to get the Budget back in the black, to keep our economy strong and spread opportunity to all.
Friends, while it is our unchanging Labor values that drive our plan for the economy, it is our changing climate which demands we act on carbon pollution.
So we will put a price on carbon.
I believe Australians are a smart people, much smarter than either our opponents or some commentators give them credit for. 
Australians are right to believe climate change is real and to want Government to act. 
And at the same time they are right to ask us tough questions about our plan.
Like the workers did at Origin Energy's gas plant in Dalby, when we met in the tea room and heard about one of the cleanest baseload power stations in Australia. 
Like the staff did at CS Energy's power station at Kogan Creek  -  when I sat in the canteen and heard about the Australian-pioneered solar thermal energy technology system which will begin construction there later this year.
These were real conversations about the real issues with hard-working people who have a good grip on this debate and a good grip on their future.
So it's no surprise they cut through the relentless negativity and scare-politics to ask me the really important questions, the questions I think most Australians are asking.
Will a carbon price really make a difference to the climate?  Will it hurt my family budget?  Will it threaten my job? 
I believe these are absolutely the right questions for Australians to ask about our plan  -  indeed they are the tests the Government has set for ourselves as we develop our policy.
And I know our plan will answer these questions and pass these tests.
Friends, our plan will make a difference.
We are part of the key group of countries whose actions count  -  the 20 big countries which make up more than 80 per cent of the world's carbon pollution. 
Introducing a carbon price in Australia will make dirty energy more expensive and clean energy like solar, gas and wind cheaper. This is how we can do our bit.
Our plan comes with generous assistance for households.
All of the revenue from a carbon price will be used to provide households with fair and generous assistance, to support jobs in the most affected industries and to invest in clean energy.
The help we give will be generous and it will also be fair - assistance for the people who need it most.
And our plan will protect existing employment and create many new jobs.
Building more gas plants like the one I saw at Dalby.
Using more solar thermal technology plants like the one I heard about at Kogan Creek.
Like the Solar Dawn Project which Premier Bligh and I announced today: a 250 megawatt solar thermal gas hybrid power plant near Chinchilla that, when complete, will generate enough power to meet the electricity needs of more than 70,000 homes.
And let me say this very clearly: we will protect Australian jobs at the same time as we create new ones.
We are committed to helping Australia's trade-exposed emissions-intensive industries as the world transitions to a lower carbon future.
Action will protect jobs. Inaction will cost jobs.
For a Labor Government, there is only one choice.
Now,  you may have noticed that our opponents don't support our plan, and it is an opposition which is built on myths.
They say coal mining will be shut down.
Now put aside the fact that for the vast majority of mines fugitive emissions will create a liability which is less than one per cent of the average price of a tonne of coal.
And put aside the fact that Government is already working with the industry to support jobs and competitiveness and help the most affected coal mines.
I say: don't believe what the Liberals say  -  believe what the industry does.
You're Queenslanders, you're here where the investment boom is on - believe your eyes.
I've opened the projects, visited the plants, shaken hands with the workers - and so have you.
Could any Queenslander really believe the mining industry is on its knees this year?
Don't believe the silly scare campaign - believe your eyes.
A PARTY WITH A FUTURE
Just as we prepare our nation for the future, we prepare our Party as well.
This will never distract us from governing but we do have a responsibility to renew ourselves and our organisation.
The election review I initiated gives us a chance to renew our Party processes and make ourselves better.
On the day I ordered this review I was determined to create an opportunity for reform which this great Party would not squander.
I remain so determined.
When I think about party reform I think about what it was that attracted me to the Labor Party in the first place.
I saw the Labor Party as the Party of the people  -  of ordinary Australians looking a fair go in life. 
I remember my first branch meeting. 
It was full of people who valued civic duty  -  local school teachers and nurses, the local volunteers who make kids' sport possible.
My values have not changed from that first meeting and nor has my belief in Labor as the party of reform.
And in debating Party reform, I want Labor people to ask themselves that same question, to think about what it was that made you join the Labor party in the first place, because the Labor Party must always be more than just an exercise in counting numbers and holding ballots. 
It should be a party of genuine civic engagement;
For people who are engaged in civic projects in their street and in their neighbourhood;
For people who are engaged in nation shaping projects.
We must continue to reach out to new groups of voters and to those who have always supported us. 
Not just on election day, but on any day that a person is looking to make a difference to their street, to their suburb, to their town or to their country.
And as our Party reforms we must have reform with a purpose - not changes for their own sake or concessions to critics but practical steps to improve.
I believe there is a strong appetite for reform within the Party, and ultimately change will happen because the members want it.
Friends, never forget who we are and who we stand for: for working people, for every Australian.
And never forget that politics is a contest, where the life of our nation is ultimately defined not only by who we are and who we stand for, but by whether we can defeat those who we stand against.
We can be pretty tough on ourselves in the Labor Party and we don't mind talking about our own problems.
But at least we don't find ourselves where the Liberals are at, where when they looked for a former minister to take charge of party reform they found themselves with Peter Reith.
How'd you like to have been down at Liberal headquarters this week, where they were up all night knitting new balaclavas.
And just as we'll never need Peter Reith in charge of Party reform, we must never let Tony Abbott run industrial relations in Australia again.
Because of who we are and for the sake of who we stand for. 
Ask teachers in Victoria about our opponents. Before the election the Liberals promised they'd be the best paid in Australia - before the election.
Ask firefighters and nurses, public servants and community workers in New South Wales. Before the election the Liberals said nothing about their plans to put a lid on wage increases, to tear up rights and conditions enjoyed by every Australian - before the election.
Before your state election, you'll hear the same smooth words from the LNP - before the election.
And before the 2013 election Tony Abbott will say the same - “No Workchoices.”
He's good at saying no.
But listen to what his friends say.
Steve Ciobo from the Gold Coast:
Labor's changes to the unfair dismissal laws have created a disincentive for small businesses to employ people.
Joe Hockey, the Shadow Treasurer:
Unfair dismissal laws for small business are complex ...
The thought that you're going to have an industrial relations minister sit on the porch of Parliament House and smoke a cigar for three years is just ridiculous.
Julie Bishop, the Deputy Liberal Leader:
Bringing back inflexible working conditions such as the penalty rates regime is costing employers more.
Or who said this?
Workplace reform was one of the greatest achievements of the Howard government.
That's right - Tony Abbott.
We know Work Choices is in the Liberal DNA.
In Victoria, in New South Wales, in Queensland, in Canberra.
We know only the election of Labor Governments could kill it.
And we know only the re-election of Labor Governments can keep it that way.
Because just as Work Choices is in the Liberal DNA, fairness at work is in our party's blood.
A PARTY OF COURAGE  
Over the past year we have done good things together.
2011 is truly a year of decision and delivery:
Reforming hospitals and investing in mental health;
Creating jobs and expanding training;
Bringing high speed broadband to the Australian mainland;
Making the decisions to pay for rebuilding the state;
Making the case for action on climate change.
These things worth doing are hard today, but they've always been hard.
This Labor Party, this labour movement, was created by people who were prepared to face up to the challenges of their times and they were at least as hard as those we face now.
When this Party was formed the challenges of fighting two world wars were still to come. 
When this Party was formed the challenge of the Great Depression was still to come.
When this Party was formed what we needed to do to modernize our economy and be competitive in the world was still to come.
And people from the Labor Party and people in the labour movement looked inside themselves and found the courage to face those challenges.
Now we must summon that courage again:
The courage to rebuild the state;
The courage to act on climate change;
The courage to keep Work Choices dead for ever;
The courage to renew our party;
The courage to defeat our opponents in Queensland;
The courage to look to the future;
The courage to govern for all. 



of Today we offer our most heartfelt thoughts to the family and friends of Lance Corporal Andrew Jones, following the news of the death of his killer.
Nothing can take away the grief that they carry but this is small measure of justice for his loss of life. The nation is thinking of you today.
Twenty-five year old Lance Corporal Jones' life was taken when he was tragically shot and killed at a Combat Outpost in the Chora Valley region on Monday 30 May 2011.
He will be remembered by his colleagues and the rest of the nation as a fine soldier and an excellent cook.
We know that both the Australian and Afghan soldiers working side by side in Uruzgan Province have been shocked and saddened by this incident.  
They have been as anxious as the rest of the nation, and while there is no joy in the death of Shafied Ullah, we hope this brings some resolution at this difficult time.
Australia remains committed to its mission of training the 4th Afghan National Army to take the lead for security in Uruzgan Province. 



PM: Can I welcome Prime Minister John Key here to Canberra and we're very much looking forward to having him address the nation's Parliament later today. When I became Prime Minister I was very determined that the relationship between Australia and New Zealand should continue to go from strength to strength. We're like family and I suppose the temptation is with those closest to you that you take their bond with you for granted instead of continuing to nurture it; I'm sure many of us have experience that in our own lives.
I was concerned we were taking some of our relationship for granted, we had not maintained the annual exchanges between leaders that we should have and so I determined that we would put that back in place and was very pleased to accept Prime Minister Key's invitation to visit New Zealand earlier this year and to have the historic opportunity to address their Parliament.
In the ordinary course of things Prime Minister Key would have been in Australia next year for the annual exchange, but of course the fury of nature caused us to think again. When we experienced our natural disasters here in Australia, New Zealand boots were very quickly on the ground to give us a helping hand. And when New Zealand faced the shock of the earthquake in Christchurch, Australians were there almost immediately to provide a helping hand. And given what our friends in New Zealand have been through with Christchurch, the aftershocks, the distress that is still there, I believed it appropriate to ask Prime Minister Key to visit us now and to address the Parliament today and I thank him for accepting that invitation.
In the lead up to his Parliamentary address we've had the opportunity to talk about the important connections between our countries. When I spoke to the New Zealand Parliament I said we had to remain active and engaged on reforming our economies, on uniting our two countries across the Tasman, and reaching out beyond our two nations together to the world. We've taken some steps on each of those during the course of our discussions; on reforming our economies we've agreed to establish a single Australia-New Zealand Therapeutic Products Agency, it's another step forward in the closer economic integration of our two economies. We've also determined keep working on the Smart Gate system which is the technology which would enable travelling between Australian and New Zealand to feel like a domestic flight experience. In terms of uniting ourselves across the Tasman, we've determined that we will have officials work together on linking our emissions trading schemes  -  of course New Zealand prices carbon, has an emissions trading scheme which is working successfully; New Zealand's in front, we will catch up, we'll show the same determination they have and we will have officials working together on linking the two schemes.
On working together to have our voices heard in the world and to deal with global problems, New Zealand is hosting the Pacific Island Forum a little bit later this year, very closely associated with the World Cup, about which we're anticipating a very major difference of opinion, but we will be going into the Pacific Island Forum together with a united view about working in a spirit of friendship and partnership across the Pacific. We will of course see events in our region later this year, the East Asia Summit, APEC, and of course the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting here in Perth later in the year, and we continue to share the work in Afghanistan, as we are committed so New Zealand is committed to seeing the mission through in Afghanistan.
Finally I'd like to conclude by saying we've discussed a very special centenary which is coming up, the word ANZAC defines so much about both our nations and of course the centenary of Gallipoli and where the ANZAC legend was born is coming upon us, we need to make appropriate preparations now for 2015. Here in Australia we will shortly be forming an advisory board to guide the commemorations of the centenary of Gallipoli. We will want to work with New Zealand as we put those events together and have its advisory structures work with us so that some of these commemorations happen in each nation but some of these commemorations happen together as the word ANZAC properly implies they should.
And I am pleased to announce today that design work will commence soon for an Australian memorial in the proposed New Zealand Memorial Park in Wellington and we've begun to work together to plan for the Gallipoli Dawn Service in 2015.
So with those words of opening about our discussion and with a genuine spirit of welcome, I'll turn to Prime Minister Key for some remarks. Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER KEY: Julia thanks very much and firstly can I just say how wonderful it is to be here in Australia. Julia, I want to thank to thank you actually for your commitment and your warmth to the relationship between New Zealand and Australia. It's a very genuine commitment and our two countries are in stronger shape because of it. It's a real honour to have the privilege of being the first New Zealand Prime Minister to speak in the Australian Parliament; it's a great opportunity for New Zealand to put on the record the relationship with Australia, the strengths and the opportunities that lie before both countries.
I think it is entirely fitting that the first international Prime Minister's speech in our Parliament came from Australia and Julia I think you gave a stunning speech in our Parliament, you set the bench pretty high but we'll see if we can replicate this afternoon, but it was a real expression of the warmth and the family that is Australia and New Zealand, so I appreciate that and it was great for you to come over.
I do want to express my gratitude to the people of Australia for the way that they responded to the disasters that we've had in New Zealand, obviously the Pike River mine disaster last year, the two earthquakes that have taken place. It was extremely comforting to have not only the financial support of the people of Australia but actually their technical expertise and their good will and to feel that New Zealand wasn't isolated on its own as we were dealing with some of the worst natural disasters we've ever had was very encouraging and I'm very grateful for that.
Just to give you a sense of the magnitude of those earthquakes and the impact they've had on our economy, on our estimates this is the single biggest impact of any natural disaster on a developed economy that we can find, it's going to cost in the order of 8 to 9 per cent of GDP, around about $25 billion, so it's a very major event. It's had a huge impact on the confidence of the people of Christchurch, we've had approximately 7500 aftershocks with a magnitude of three or above since the 4th of September. So it's had a big impact.
But the country is coming together well, the government's totally committed to the rebuild of Christchurch and we believe that will occur. We've fully provisioned in budget 2011 for the earthquake costs, it's about $5.5 billion over and above the insurance and reinsurance that we had. So we're doing our best to go forward.
Can I also say how delighted I am that we've managed to sign today the Australia-New Zealand Therapeutics Agency, the work that our officials will undertake over the next five years, it's yet another step in the progress of CER between our two countries.
We are working very hard to try and make sure that we put some practical and sensible deliverables for the people of Australia and New Zealand as a result of our work. Smart Gate is a great example of that, a million and a quarter Australians will come to New Zealand every year, having a domestic like experience is a real benefit for them and equally it's true of the hundreds of thousands of New Zealanders that come across the Tasman. If we can make progress of roaming charges of communications for instance, again it's a practical deduction in costs for citizens of both countries and I think that's what our voters want to see, they want to see us actually making progress in things that really matter to them.
So we thank you for that. In terms of the Pacific Forum as Prime Minister noted we'll be hosting it from the 6th to the 9th of September; that's the fortieth Pacific Forum. New Zealand and Australia remain totally committed in our approach towards Fiji and wanting to see democracy restored to Fiji as fast as we possibly can. We do appreciate your commitment Julia to building a memorial in New Zealand at our national war memorial and the Government's looking at its own response there as well.
And finally just in the relation to the Rugby World Cup, as you're aware that is the third largest sporting event in the world, we're very much looking forward to hosting a Cup. All the indications are that with the way it could do it could well be (inaudible) Australia and New Zealand final. We have been thinking about what could be a possible bet for the relevant, Prime Minister one option we were thinking that maybe the Prime Minister of the losing country has to eat an apple from the other country. I would say let's say 60 seconds describing the merits and the benefits of that apple and why it's such a pleasurable and enjoyable experience. So that is an interesting challenge and all I can say is I hope the All Blacks don't lose.
PM: That's certainly spurred the spirit of Australian determination on. Now we'll take questions from media from each country. I think in the spirit of welcoming our New Zealand friends we should probably ask a New Zealand journalist first, I'll let you pick, John, and I'm happy to give a form guide to ours when it's their turn.
PRIME MINISTER KEY: Sure, Barry Soper from Newstalk ZB and Prime News.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard I'm just wondering when you look at New Zealand and the way we've introduced our emissions trading scheme with some envy given the problems that you're facing in this country, for one - he's riding high in opinion polls and you're not?
PM: Well thank you for that question and I would say to the people of Australia as we're standing here talking about all things New Zealand, we love Kiwis, they're family for us, but I think Australians would be asking themselves if the Kiwis have had the guts to go and price carbon, why can't we? Well my answer is we can, we can catch up with our Kiwi friends.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on a separate theme-
PM: I should just introduce, this is Andrew Probyn from our West Australian newspaper, so he'll probably ask you something about resources? No.
JOURNALIST: It's actually on the carbon price and I'd like to get a response from the two of you. Mr Key your nation has introduced an ETS, you've got the last stock price for carbon is about $19.50 which cruelly because of the Australian dollar is about A$15. What are the merits of having a low price, as opposed to a high price before there is a global agreement. And Prime Minister would you also like to comment on whether there is merit to having a lower price rather than the higher one.
PRIME MINISTER KEY: Let me start by saying it's not for me to determine what's the right approach for Australia, that's a matter for Australian politicians, but what I can tell you about the emissions trading scheme in New Zealand is it's worked, so that's the first point. In the time that we've had it in place, all of the applications for new electricity generation has been in the renewable space, so as opposed to about 50/50 coming from thermal energy, that price signal (inaudible) sending a strong message that renewable energy makes sense.
Secondly, we are seeing a change in behaviour when it comes to forestry. So, we've now had a period of aforestation, of planting more trees, as opposed to what had been a substantial period of deforestation. So those price signals are working in the marketplace.
Specifically to your point about costs, I think we're all conscious of the impact on consumers. By pricing ours with a cap at NZ$12.50, about A$10 at the moment, then we anticipated we'd have an impact of about $150 per household per year. We're about a year on in terms of the anniversary of that and the indications are that it's coming in at about $150 a year.
We've got a review taking place in terms of when the next move is because our scheme should (inaudible) up to $25 carbon charge by about 2013. It's a little bit early to tell you completely about that review, although one thing I can say is that generally speaking the feedback we're getting from businesses and the NGO sector is that they are more positive now that the scheme is actually in place, because they are confident it gives them surety of investment and we are just obviously conscious of what's happening around the world, including what happens in Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you like to see your scheme become a single scheme with Australia? You're talk of linkages, do you see a sole market?
PRIME MINISTER KEY: When we came into office there was an original scheme on the books passed by the previous Labor Government. That was a much more expensive and quite intensive scheme that we thought had some design flaws and we largely actually picked up the CPRS scheme that you are proposing over here so it has an (inaudible) that allows companies to grow and it arguably does make sense for there to be interoperability and to be able to trade emissions across the Tasman. Again, that is something our officials are working on, but you know our two economies are so closely related my view as New Zealand Prime Minister has always been I wouldn't want to see investment decisions moving across the Tasman, one way or the other, frankly based on climate change policy , it would seem to defeat what is a global problem.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, it was fitting for you to be the first leader to address our Parliament, Prime Minister Key is the eighth to address this Parliament, why has it taken so long?
PM: I think it's the right time for a New Zealand Prime Minister, Prime Minister Key to address our Parliament. It is a rare honour to be invited to address the Australian Parliament, it is not routine, it's not the norm. We have had people like President Clinton, we've had Prime Minister Blair, President Hu, President Yudhoyono, amongst others, address our Parliament, but it is a rare honour.
I think it's more important this year than any other time to extend that rare honour to the Prime Minister of New Zealand. I think our sense of family and the bonds between us were sharply reinforced this year in a time of great suffering, initially in our nation and then we turned our eyes to New Zealand, as we saw the horror of Christchurch, so it gives us a moment to reflect on those events, to reflect on how we jointly responded to them together and to talk about the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Key our Opposition Leader Phil Goff has said that Gerry Brownlee's fobbing off Christchurch business and questions if he's up to the job. Do you think it's his fault that he's not (inaudible)?
PRIME MINISTER KEY: Well I don't think Phil Goff is in a position to make those kind of statements. What I can tell you is that we are trying to deliver the best possible outcome for the people of Christchurch that are so badly affected by that earthquake. Now as I said last week back in New Zealand, we are getting much closer to identifying the land that needs to be abandoned.
We understand completely the anxiety that's creating for those residents but the single most important thing we can do for them is give them clarity and to give them clarity we need to be able to answer all of the questions, not just whether they can rebuild or not on their plot of land, but ultimately what their payouts is in terms of the insurance companies and how that process might work, what actually happens next in terms of their existing property.
What we do know is that there is in the order of about 12,000 homes in this category of being either likely to be demolished, and some of that land will be able to be rebuilt, and some will not. I really think in the interests of everyone for us to hold our breaths and for us to get through and get the people of Christchurch a finished product if we possibly can.
The officials and my ministers have been working over the weekend. I will be meeting and obviously on Tuesday when I get back we will be closer to coming up with a solution. But all I can say is that if we were to follow the approach that Phil Goff was talking about, we would end up in a position where we would be asking potentially those 12,000 homeowners to negotiate individually with both EQC and a their own insurers and I, for the life of me, cannot see how that would be a better outcome for the people of Christchurch.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Key, in the context of the interoperability that you said the officials were working on with the emissions trading scheme, what do you make of the Coalition's promise to roll back the carbon price and Prime Minister Gillard, why not a plebiscite?
PRIME MINISTER KEY: Well, in terms of your question, it's simply just not for me to determine what is the right approach for Australia and we acknowledge that every country has a different profile in terms of their emissions and different response.
At the end of the day, our two economies are very closely linked and if we can work together on this problem of climate change then I think that's a good thing. We already are working very closely together on the international market in terms of the Global Greenhouse Gas Alliance and the Coalition, what we are doing there in terms of the coal storage institute. We see that as a sensible way forward, but we leave that in the hands of the Australian politicians.
PM: And in answer to your question to me, I mean this is an $80 million stunt from Tony Abbott, that's all it is. It's not leadership, leadership requires you to define the problems of the future and to get about tackling them and that's what we're doing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Key, on Fiji, the Australian Opposition says that five years of sanctions and attempting to isolate the regime hasn't pushed Fiji any closer towards democracy. Do you think that New Zealand should reassess its approach and perhaps reengage more closely with the regime?
PRIME MINISTER KEY: Look, I think the first thing is we need to acknowledge that there has been a coup culture that has developed in Fiji. Now it's been in place for the last 20 years, we've had four of them. For a country the size of Fiji and its significance in the Pacific, we don't think that it's in the long term interests of the Pacific.
So in our view we do need to make sure that there is pressure on Fiji to restore the country to democracy. I don't think in the case of either Australia or New Zealand we've taken a terribly heavy handed approach here, from New Zealand's perspective we simply had travel sanctions on members of the regime and family members that are closely related to them.
We haven't applied economic sanctions; we for the most part do give waivers in terms of sporting contact and the like. So in my view we are slowly making progress and these things always take some time. Frank Bainimarama has given a clear commitment that he intends to hold elections by 2014 and from New Zealand's perspective we expect him to honour that.
JOURNALIST: Animals Australia says it gave Joe Ludwig the footage last year of Australian animals being mistreated in Kuwait. Did your Government receive it and do you think the response has been adequate and Prime Minister Key, given New Zealand's experience on this issue, do you think Australia does have anything to fear if it did go down banning live exports?
PM: I haven't had the opportunity this morning to see the footage you refer to obviously I've been engaged with Prime Minister Key in discussions. What I understand to be the case is that Minister Ludwig was alerted to footage of this nature last December. Minister Ludwig responded on animal welfare issues by saying to the industry in January that they needed to produce a better animal welfare plan. He received a response from them in March, which was inadequate. He received a response from them in May, which was still inadequate. Since then, of course, we saw the revelations on Four Corners and the Government has responded with the suspension of the trade to Indonesia and we are now taking the steps necessary to make sure we can track where Australian animals go and we know the conditions under which they are being dealt with in abattoirs in Indonesia.
We've also announced, of course, a more broadly based review, the Farmer Review, which will look at the entirety of this trade- all animals, all locations. But I will of course, when I get an opportunity, specifically direct my attention to this new footage. I'd want to understand exactly when it dates from and the circumstances that are there today before providing you with any further response.
PRIME MINISTER KEY: Look, it's a matter for the Australian Government in how they want to respond to the issue. All I can say is that New Zealand decided to stop the live export of animals for slaughter in 2003. It does cause some frustration to our Middle Eastern trading partners but the decision is unlikely to be reversed. 



The Australian and New Zealand Governments will establish a world leading agency to regulate medicines, medical devices and other therapeutic goods in both countries.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and New Zealand Prime Minister John Key today signed a statement of intent to implement the joint agency progressively over a period of up to five years.
The new agency will reduce regulatory costs for industry and improve the standard of therapeutic goods produced in our two countries.
Put simply, it will ensure that Australians and New Zealanders have access to medicines, medical devices and other therapeutic goods that are of world-leading standard.
The new scheme will also encourage economic integration of our pharmaceutical markets and enhance the reputation of Australian and New Zealand products on the world market.
The Prime Minister said the new agency  -  the Australian and New Zealand Therapeutic Products Agency (ANZTPA) -- will replace our Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) and the New Zealand Medicines and Medical Devices Safety Authority (Medsafe). It will be accountable to both the Australian and New Zealand Governments.
The staged implementation will begin straight away so consumers and industry can start benefiting from the new arrangements.
The TGA and Medsafe will take immediate steps to share information, training and expertise between our two countries to bring immediate benefits to both agencies.
As business operations become increasingly integrated and a following a review of progress, the single regulator will then be established.
Agreement for a joint regulatory scheme was first reached in 2003, however, negotiations between the countries were suspended in July 2007.
The new arrangements will build on reforms previously developed through to 2007, many of which are already underway within Australia's TGA. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, New Zealand Prime Minister John Key and Tertiary Education Minister, Senator Chris Evans today met students from Christchurch who have spent the past four months studying at Adelaide University at the generosity of the local community.
When Canterbury University's main buildings were damaged in February's devastating earthquake, University of Adelaide Vice-Chancellor Professor James McWha responded by offering to host students at their university, free of charge.
Some 170 first and second year undergraduate students studying Arts, Science, Commerce and Marketing have been warmly embraced by university staff and students, living on campus and in home stay arrangements.
The Prime Minister congratulated the people of Adelaide for their selfless generosity in Christchurch's hour of need.
The friendships formed between the students are testament to the enduring bond between Australia and New Zealand.
This is a great illustration of the genuine and enduring connection between our countries that is fostered by our ANZAC heritage but is shared across the Tasman in so many ways.
Through the generosity of the Adelaide University community, the New Zealand students have experienced everything from AFL and Rugby Sevens matches to orchestra concerts and vineyard tours. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today warmly welcomed New Zealand Prime Minister John Key to Canberra for an official visit.
New Zealand is one of Australia's closest and most valued partners.
Our relationship is anchored in the bonds of our ANZAC tradition, the warm ties between our people and the unique closeness of our economic ties.
Trade between our two countries is substantial - $15 billion in 2010  -  and New Zealand remains one of our top ten global trading partners. Two-way investment is significant.
Reflecting the closeness of the relationship, Prime Minister Key addressed a joint sitting of Parliament, becoming the first New Zealand Prime Minister to do so and one of only a small number of world leaders to have had this honour.
This reciprocated the historic occasion when Ms Gillard became the first leader to address New Zealand's Parliament in February this year.
Continuing the Trans-Tasman Agenda 
In February, Prime Minister Gillard and Prime Minister Key signed the investment protocol to the Closer Economic Relations (CER) agreement.
The Prime Minister was pleased today to sign with Mr Key a statement of intent to take a further step to deepen trans-Tasman ties through the phased establishment of a joint Australia-New Zealand Therapeutic Products Agency (ANZTPA).
ANZTPA will progressively establish common regulatory arrangements for therapeutic goods and a single trans-Tasman entry point for business. 
A single regulatory framework will provide health benefits for consumers, reduced regulatory costs for industry and greater efficiency for governments. 
The new scheme is expected to enhance the reputation of New Zealand and Australian therapeutic products on the world market.                                                                                                        
The Prime Minister also reaffirmed her commitment to further streamlining air travel between Australia and New Zealand and welcomed the commencement of a trial of integrated SmartGate systems in July.
The Prime Ministers welcomed cooperation to investigate the competitiveness of trans-Tasman mobile roaming rates, noting the potential benefits this could realise for consumers and businesses on both sides of the Tasman.
Centenary of ANZAC
Prime Minister Gillard welcomed agreement that Australia and New Zealand would work closely together in the lead-up to the centenary of the ANZAC landings in 2015 and other major First World War battles.
Australia and New Zealand have already begun joint planning for the Gallipoli Dawn Service in 2015. 
There will be close consultation in the development of national commemorative programs for the centenary of ANZAC. 
The two Prime Ministers agreed to commission advice on possible joint Australia-New Zealand activities and programs to complement national commemorative programs.
The Prime Minister also announced that design work would commence for an Australian memorial in the proposed New Zealand Memorial Park in Wellington.
This memorial will be completed by the time of the centenary of ANZAC in 2015 and will reciprocate the New Zealand memorial on ANZAC Parade in Canberra. 
Climate Change 
New Zealand has had an emissions trading scheme since 2008 and the Gillard Government is committed to introducing a carbon price mechanism from 1 July 2012.
Both Governments recognise that expanding and linking global markets provides the most cost effective approach to reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
To that end, the Prime Minister welcomed agreement to establish a senior officials group to work on arrangements to link our two emissions trading schemes at an appropriate point in the future.
Cooperation in the Pacific 
The Prime Minister confirmed she would attend the Pacific Islands Forum in Auckland in September.
The Prime Ministers noted with concern recent developments in Fiji and the continuing impact of the Bainimarama regime on the Fijian people.
Prime Minister Gillard underlined the importance of maintaining firm pressure on Fiji to restore democracy and address human rights concerns.
People Smuggling 
The Leaders discussed the need for regional cooperation to combat people smuggling. 
Ms Gillard expressed appreciation for New Zealand's support for the Regional Cooperation Framework and New Zealand's commitment to combating illegal migration.
Australia and New Zealand in the World 
Prime Minister Gillard reiterated Australia's commitment to the future of Afghanistan and welcomed progress toward the transition of security responsibility to the Afghan Government by the end of 2014.
Ms Gillard and Mr Key looked forward to advancing shared interests at the forthcoming CHOGM meeting and in the East Asia Summit and APEC.
With the rising strategic and economic importance of the Asia Pacific, the Leaders welcomed the important decision by the East Asia Summit in Hanoi last year to include the US and Russia as members, agreeing this represented a major opportunity to build the architecture needed for a stable and prosperous region.  
They also welcomed renewed efforts to foster regional trade, innovation and integration, including through Australia and New Zealand's participation in negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement.
Prime Minister Gillard confirmed the importance of concluding the Doha Round of world trade talks. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Indigenous Affairs Minister Jenny Macklin today announced the Government's next steps to improve the future of Indigenous Australians living in the Northern Territory.
Over the last four years we have made significant progress in improving people's lives in the Northern Territory, but the situation for many Indigenous families remains critical.
The Gillard Government will now start consultation on future plans to tackle this unacceptable level of disadvantage with a particular focus on improved education for children, expanded employment opportunities and tackling alcohol abuse.
We know that a stronger future can only be built in partnership with Aboriginal people and communities, because the issues we want to tackle are the issues which many Indigenous people confront every single day.
The Government's new discussion paper, Stronger Futures in the Northern Territory, will form the basis of this conversation over the coming months as the Northern Territory Emergency Response (NTER) winds up in mid next year.
The paper looks at where the previous response worked, where it could be improved and what the future priorities are including:
 * 	School attendance and educational achievement
 * 	Economic development and employment
 * 	Tackling alcohol abuse
 * 	Community safety
 * 	Health
 * 	Food security
 * 	Housing
 * 	Governance
Our unprecedented investment in the Northern Territory is beginning to change the lives of thousands of Indigenous people living in over 70 remote communities, town camps and urban communities through improved services, better houses and safer and healthier communities.
Feedback from these communities to date is that people now feel safer, children are being better cared for, alcohol and gambling abuse is lessening and indigenous job opportunities are improving.
But there is no quick fix to overcoming entrenched disadvantage.  It will take time, investment and a commitment to work together to deliver lasting improvements.
It is our intention to ensure that consultation is genuine and involves the advice and experience of people on the ground.
The Government will now hold one-on-one and group meetings across remote communities, regional centres and in town camps in the Northern Territory.
To view a copy of the discussion paper, visit: http://www.indigenous.gov.au/index.php/stronger-futures-in-the-northern…



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd today welcomed the reappointment of Ban Ki-moon for a second term as United Nations Secretary-General.  
The Secretary-General has implemented a number of important reforms in his first term. These include an enhanced role for the UN in responding to global crises and transitions, including recently in Libya.He has also driven a greater focus on budget efficiency to ensure that the UN is more transparent, accountable, efficient and results-oriented on behalf of its 192 member states.The Secretary-General has presided over the establishment of UN Women, to take forward in one central location the UN's important work on gender equality and women's empowerment.
Ban Ki Moon has demonstrated strong leadership by speaking out on issues of clear principle, whether they be the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals, the Responsibility to Protect or the promotion of universal human rights standards.Australia looks forward to continuing our close working relationship with the Secretary-General in his second term. 



PM: [audio break] already in discussion with the crowd, who is here in his capacity as the Minister to Indigenous Heath and also in his capacity as the Member for Lingiari.
A couple of weeks ago, two weeks ago, I visited the Northern Territory and I was there with Jenny and with Warren to see what progress was being made on the ground as a result of our policies to close the gap and the Northern Territory Emergency Response.
I got the opportunity to talk to a broad range of people, including particularly elders of Indigenous communities in the Northern Territory, as well as teachers and parents, community members, local business people, to get all of their feedback.
And the feedback that I got during that visit was that progress has been made through the Northern Territory Emergency Response. We are seeing women and children feeling safer, having more money to spend on the basics of life, on food and clothing for kids. We're seeing kids being fed through schools, 7000 meals a day being provided to children in schools. We're seeing programs coming into affect to deal with alcohol and the pressures that that brings to Indigenous communities. We're making progress on housing.
So, a difference is being made and I saw that difference with my own eyes, but I also saw very clearly that a lot more needs to be done. We talk about closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians, we talk about that right around Australia, but that gap is at its widest in the Northern Territory, the gap is at its biggest on life expectancy, on literacy and numeracy, on employment outcomes.
So there is still more to do. The Northern Territory Emergency Response is the subject of legislation, that legislation ends in August 2012 and the funding that came with the Northern Territory Emergency Response ends on the 30th of June next year.
So, today with my colleagues I'm releasing a discussion paper so that we can begin the process of consultation about what the next steps should look like. We want to make sure that we are consulting and working with Indigenous people to shape a stronger future for them and the consultation paper that we are launching today, the discussion paper is called ‘Stronger futures in the Northern Territory'. Now we want to have a genuine dialogue, but I do want to give the following commitments as we have that dialogue. I want to make the following commitments about the next steps: first, the views of Aboriginal and non-Indigenous people will be at the centre of shaping what we do to deal with these levels of disadvantage  -  huge levels of disadvantage. We are committed to ensuring that all future initiatives comply with the Racial Discrimination Act and the Government will continue to support the Northern Territory government to strengthen the capacity to meet the high levels of need for vital services. So, they are three core commitments that we make as we go about this process of discussion and shaping the next steps.
When you look at this document you will see that there are three clear areas of focus: kids being in school, dealing with alcohol and getting people a job. And we're focussed on those three areas because they're pivotal to turning around the disadvantage that we see in Aboriginal communities in the Northern Territory. For kids to get a good education, they've simply got to go to school, for people to have a decent life chance they've got to have the benefits and the dignity that comes with work and everyone that I spoke to in the Northern Territory had a very strong focus on the damage done by alcohol and we need to curb the alcohol. So, those three things are the subject of a very strong focus in this discussion paper.
I'll call on Jenny Macklin now for some comments and we'll be happy to take your questions.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister and this is a very important point for us.  We do know that the situation in the Northern Territory for Aboriginal people, particularly those living in remote communities continues, to be critical.  As the Prime Minister has indicated just a couple of weeks ago we were in Alice Springs and then up in Gove but in Alice Springs particularly, we heard from local Aboriginal leaders who made it absolutely plan to us that there is a lot more to be done.  But the situation for children, for women, and for families, particularly in remote communities in the Northern Territory still requires a significant commitment from the Commonwealth.  
If I can just share with you one plea that was made to us by Gina Smith from the Central Land Council who really said in the most plain terms to the Prime Minister, alcohol is killing our people, alcohol is destroying our families. And she said to the Prime Minister, to Minister Snowdon and myself, please help us to deal with what is destroying our families.  
We also have continued to get the very strong message from Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory that they want education to work for their children.   That they understand just how important it is that their children get to school, and when they get to school they get an education. That means that their literacy and numeracy, their educational attainment is the same as any other child can hope for around this country.  
And of course we also get the message loud and clear wherever we go that people want to work.  We got that so clearly when we were up in Gove witnessing the signing of the Gove Agreement and I welcome Senator Crossin.
When we were at Gove witnessing the historic Gove Agreement, central to that Gove Agreement was employment.  Getting people the opportunity to get the training that they need, getting the opportunities that they need to get work so that they too can be proud providers for their families.  This is what we want to do with Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory.   There's one really clear message we've got from all of these discussions, all of the work that we've been doing in the Northern Territory over the last four years.   It's that Aboriginal people want us to work with them, for us to listen to them, to work with them, to deal with these problems that they know are real, that they know destroy their lives, and that's what this discussion paper is about today.  It's about saying to Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory, we want to discuss the next steps with you, we know the situation is critical, we know that education and employment and alcohol abuse are critical issues for you and your families.  And we intend over the next period to get out and discuss these issues as widely as possible with Aboriginal people on the ground in the Northern Territory.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it seems to me some people who are critical of the intervention and see it as some, saw it as and still do, somehow punitive, are going to want an input. When you say that you're going to give Aboriginal people a greater input, can you just give us an indication of what your bottom lines are, for example, from what the Minister just said if you don't tackle grog, if you don't tackle welfare by putting strings on it, then you're not going to get an outcome. Can you tell us what you're not prepared to change, your bottom line?PM: I'll turn to Jenny for some comments, but we've been very determined to see change and we maintain that determination. The point Jenny is making and it was made very clearly to me when I was in the Northern Territory is Aboriginal Australians want to work alongside us because community leaders share that determination too. They want to see the kids in school, they want to see the alcohol address, they want to see people get good employment opportunities and have all of the benefits that come with work.
So, for example with the Gove Agreement, this has been a community stepping forward to enter a partnership with one of our mining giants, to bring the benefits that jobs bring to a community because they were so desperate to get those benefits. So, we can consult about how we realise the shared ambitions for people in the Northern Territory, Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory to lead lives where kids get a great education, where adults are in work, where we've tackled the scourge of alcohol and consequently we can see the closing of that gap between the life expectancy, literacy and employment levels of Indigenous Australians and non-Indigenous Australians.
MACKLIN: Just to take one issue, Matthew, the issue of alcohol controls.   Of course they are an important part of our current work but the message we're getting from Aboriginal people on the ground is that in many places they want more effective controls.  They know how critical it is to control alcohol.  But the message that we got from the leaders that we met with in Alice Springs a couple of weeks ago is that they want to work with us to have more effective alcohol controls.  And our commitment to them is to say, let's do what works.
JOURNALIST: So, you won't wind it back, but you might tweak it in accordance with the consultation?
MACKLIN: Well we may make changes that are more effective so I don't think there's any question from anyone that I speak to that people want effective alcohol controls, just to use one example.
PM: Can I just, in answer to that, in terms of philosophy, the guiding principles of this Government and you couldn't have seen them more clearly than you saw them on budget day, the guiding principles of this Government are about sharing opportunity and requiring responsibility.
And you will see that brought to every area of policy, you see Jenny in the work she does bringing that to our social security system and our welfare system far more broadly than the particular area we are talking about now - as important as it is  -  to be working with Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory for change. So, our philosophy, absolutely crystal clear  -  opportunity and responsibility hand in hand, every step of the way. That's how we define education policy, policies about welfare, we'll bring those principles to this discussion and you should expect this discussion to be had in accordance with those principles.
What I don't want to be seen to be endorsing is some division that we think that and the Aboriginal people of the Northern Territory think something different. The consultations I had when I was there, the discussions that I had were people did want to see the benefits of opportunity and they were more than ready to step up to the responsibility that comes with it.
Phil, Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, isn't it, for the very nature you're conducting a consultation for, is that an implicit criticism of the Howard Government's approach five years ago? And are any elements of the existing policy that is still outside the Racial Discrimination Act that would need to be changed?
PM: I'll turn to Jenny for a comment, but broadly on the start of the Northern Territory Emergency Response, we know that this was started without consultation with Aboriginal people and we know that starting it without that consultation did lead to feelings of hurt and feelings of shame. I saw that myself in the Northern Territory when I met with Aboriginal leaders with tears in their eyes as they recalled some of the emotions that they'd experienced at that time and, indeed, the Leader of the Opposition's acknowledged this too, I think it's now widely understood that there was that kind of reaction of hurt with the way that the Northern Territory Emergency Response first got going. But we're at a different stage now, we're on the ground, we're on the ground, we're there, things are working, things are being worked through and there's more to do, so that gives an opportunity to work in a consultative way to shape what comes next and that's what this discussion paper today is all about.
I'll turn to Jenny on the Racial Discrimination Act point.
MACKLIN: On, as far as the Racial Discrimination Act is concerned, our legislation is now consistent with the Racial Discrimination Act.  So that change was made some time ago and of course, all the changes to make sure that the actions that we're implementing on the ground are consistent have been done.  The Prime Minister indicated in her opening remarks that one of the principles for how we proceed in the future will be that any future action will be consistent with the Racial Discrimination Act.
JOURNALIST: Minister, will this require legislation and would you the new laws passed by the end of the year in order to kick off, say, 1 July next year?
MACKLIN: Well of course that's the purpose of consultation is to discuss these issues with people in the Northern Territory particularly.  There are a range of issues that people might like to discuss that go to the licensing of stores for example, issues around alcohol so there's a wide range of different legislative matters.  But we are starting a discussion so we want to take that forward into communities, with families and talk about it with them.
JOURNALIST: Do you have a general aim of legislation by the end of this year?
MACKLIN: Well first of all we want to have the discussion.
JOURNALIST: Minister, is six weeks enough time to properly consult with people in communities, on this very complex issues, will they to open door sort of meetings within the community, when will they start and where?
MACKLIN: They'll start very soon. Next week in fact.  So that's why we want to get the discussion paper out.  I'll be doing a lot of it myself with my colleagues here.  The Prime Minister was able to join us just a couple of weeks ago to really have a wide ranging discussion with people that the Central Land Council got together, so that was very productive.  They will be open to some degree, we will have some meetings that are for men and some meetings for women.  So in that sense there may be separate discussions but otherwise we'll be wanting to get these discussions happening with as many people as possible.  
If I can really emphasise one point and that is that I want those people who normally do not have a voice to have a voice in these conversations.  For those people who are the subject of domestic violence, for those children who are the subject of alcohol abuse, for their parents to be able to talk to me freely.   And so I will be doing everything I possibly can to make sure that people have that opportunity.
JOURNALIST: Isn't one of the problems though that firstly you often get mixed messages out of these communities and secondly, the voices that you're seeking to tap into are often undermined when you disappear and thirdly, do you think that the Indigenous community as a whole needs stronger leaders to speak up on these issues?
PM: I'll make a comment and then turn to Jenny too. Clearly when you go out for consultation on complex policy areas you get a variety of views, that's true on any proposition we take and talk to people about. That doesn't mean that the consultation's not worthwhile because you can see where general views are coalescing, you can get a sense of what is most broadly supported. You can often get a sense too of innovations and change that you wouldn't have thought of yourself sitting here in Canberra if you didn't get out on the ground. So we will be looking for that feedback through the community consultations and then obviously we'll weight it in the decision making process.
I think from what you've heard Jenny say she's got a particular personal determination in this process, working with Warren and with Trish, to not speak to the people who get the benefit of being asked the questions all the time but to get out more broadly and to hear views as directly as she can. And my experience even as recently as two weeks ago and I've had other experiences of a comparable nature across my life in Parliament, is if you make yourself available with the right demeanour  -  that is a preparedness to listen and learn, then people will respond with openness to those conversations and I think that's what will happen here.
MACKLIN:  Just on the leadership point, Michelle, I think we are seeing Aboriginal leaders step up.   More and more Aboriginal leaders are stepping up as Gina Smith did in the meeting with us just two weeks ago.  She stepped up and said alcohol is killing our people, and do something, you know do something about it, but do it with us.  So I think the demonstration is there for all of us that Aboriginal people are stepping up.
JOURNALIST: You talk about alcohol killing communities. One of the key things that a lot of people are recommending is a floor price on alcohol, but it's not mentioned in this discussion paper. Will you be contemplating introducing a floor price on alcohol in Indigenous communities and in Alice Springs?
MACKLIN: Well as this is a discussion paper of course, what we want to do is encourage people to put forward their views but what we will also do is look at the evidence of what works.  The floor price is one proposition that is around and has been put forward but of course we will be listening to other proposals that come forward.  Our test will be, what's the evidence of what works.
JOURNALIST: You say schools (inaudible) driving school attendance is a key priority and it's been a key priority since the start of the intervention. What can you actually do to improve this and will you consider expanding your pilot program which looks at welfare penalties for parents who aren't sending their kids to school?
PM: We're prepared once again to look at what works and we do need to remind ourselves there are some schools that made a huge difference on attendance, some organisations that have made a huge difference on attendance too- Clontarf and others that have put together very successful programs which combine a love of sport with the rigors and discipline of school and put them together in a way that works and keeps kids engaged. So there are things out there that are happening. Jenny and I did want to see whether a conditionality on welfare engagement could also make a difference and we'll be guided in broadening that program on what works. But we want to take a very rigorous approach here. I've been unbelievably clear and was at the time that the discussion of the school attendance welfare measure was quite controversial. There is no excuse for kids not being in school, we have to have kids in school  -  you can't get a great education if you're only in school a half or a third of the time and we need to do whatever we can and whatever works to ensure that kids get to school.
We'll go to the second row and then come back, just in the interests of, you've already had a question Phil haven't you?
JOURNALIST: I've got a very good question.
PM: Well what if we go to David first and then test your proposition that you've got a very good question and then we'll go to Katherine in the hope that the quality picks back up. It's the discrimination in favour of red heads showing yet again. David.
JOURNALIST: In principle, if any changes you do take out of this involve more welfare quarantining or punitive welfare measures, will that be specific to Indigenous communities or will it have to be across the board?
PM: Well I'm not going to pre-empt what comes out of the discussion but values wise you've seen from us a preparedness to take tough measures with disadvantaged communities in non-Indigenous Australia to get people to step up to responsibility. The measures in the recent budget were all about that- teen parents, young people with disabilities, very long-term unemployed - requiring people to step up.
We are at a unique time in our nation's economic history, this is a time of economic transformation, global economic weight's moving in our direction, it's moving from west to east. We've got a resources boom that is going to power our economy for many a long year to come. We've got to work out how we harness this period of economic transition and prosperity to make a difference to Australians who've been locked out of the benefits of that prosperity in the past. None of us can sit here after all of these decades of economic growth and say economic growth in and of itself fixes all disadvantage. Patently it does not, but we can use this phase of economic growth through the right policies of opportunity and responsibility to make a difference to that disadvantage. It requires us to provide the opportunities, it requires too, people to accept the responsibilities and we don't bring to that a soft ‘well if you can be bothered' approach.
We're bringing to it a very tough minded approach  -  I mean the world doesn't owe Australian's capable of work a living; they've got to get out and make that living themselves.
Yep  -  we've got to be there with the training measures and the support and the measures that give people opportunity and we will. So that's the underlying philosophy we've brought across the broad sweep of areas including working with disadvantaged communities which are not home to large numbers of Indigenous Australians.
Now this better be good after all the build up, no pressure.
JOURNALIST: On the politics of this- Tony Abbott, for whatever you may think of him, has expressed a genuine interest in this area. In the interest of actually getting bipartisan consensus on this and not allowing this degenerate into another fist fight between the major parties, would you be prepared to allow him in on the process in any way, shape or form?
JOURNALIST: Good question.
PM: Right ok, we've got to a stage in this press conference where we're becoming increasingly irrelevant to it and we can get questions asked on critiques of the questions given without us. But the answer to your question is we are working in a consultative way with the Opposition because we do want to see this beyond the hurly-burly of some fairly sharply partisan days in the life of the Australian nation. So Jenny takes very particular care and steps to involve her counterpart in this work and I'll turn to Jenny now for a comment.
MACKLIN: My office briefed Senator Scullion this morning, so as the Prime Minister has indicated, I think we do have a shared commitment to improve the lives of Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory. I think there is a recognition of just how critical the situation is, and as the Leader of the Opposition has indicated, the way that the Northern Territory Emergency Response started four years ago did hurt a lot of people.  It did leave people hurt and angry and it's something that I think we all want to address and that's why we are launching this discussion paper today and we certainly want to make sure we keep the Opposition engaged in that discussion.
JOURNALIST: Just in relation to the housing program. Obviously everyone acknowledges that there's been great building work done in the town camps and all of those refurbishments. But some of the more remote settlements, some of those renovations have been appalling in terms of value for money. What do you intend to do in this next phase of the intervention to get more rigor into the housing program given how much money and resources are invested in it and how people in remote communities are relying on you to provide decent housing?
PM: I was very pleased to see the work that's happening in town camps when I was in Alice Springs making such a difference to the lives of those Aboriginal people and I did get the opportunity to meet with Nigel who ran the Association for the town camp I was in and talked to him about how the new houses, and it's more than the houses, it's the transformation of those places into something we would recognise as suburbs - you know, all the things we take for granted  -  street lights, curbing, you know stuff that we just expect to see when we walk the streets of where we live, will also be in those town camps. So it is a big change but Jenny as you're aware has worked hard to make sure that we do get value for money and appropriate roll out of this program so I'll turn to her for a comment.
MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister.  And it is true that we had some difficulties at the start of this program and in any building program of this size you're going to find some issues that might need to be addressed.  But I think it does need to be acknowledged the enormity of the task that we faced when we came to Government and the huge commitment that is being made.  We've now got nearly three hundred new houses built, thousands of rebuilds and refurbishments, and where they are not up to scratch, I can assure you I expect them to be.  We know how critical it is to both get additional houses built, to get houses fixed up, to make sure that people have a decent bathroom and kitchen in their homes so that they're safe.  All of these things have been part of a concerted effort and if there's one part of this that I can assure people is ongoing, it is our commitment to housing.  We have a $1.7 billion commitment to build and improve housing in the Northern Territory and that is a ten year commitment.  So we will continue to deliver and deliver against an enormous backlog that unfortunately Governments of all persuasions left us with.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster you had four years of the intervention so what works and where is the evidence that it works?
PM: Of the things we believe are working, and I'll turn to Jenny for a comment too, but of the things we believe are working we believe that the changes in camp stores so that people get access to more fresh fruit and vegetables, more fresh food  -  that that's making a difference, I mean nutrition's obviously, you don't need to be an expert to know how important nutrition is for adults and for kids. The program that's putting meals through schools and getting kids fed, a very important program, that's making a difference. The programs that we've seen to develop new housing that Jenny's just talked about, the programs we've seen to deal with alcohol abuse and more needs to be done, but things are happening to tackle law and order issues and alcohol questions. The income management, the evidence to me, the direct observations to me, the direct observations of people is that that is working to make sure that people are safe from being humbugged and having their money taken away and better able therefore to make sure their money gets spent on food and clothing and the appropriate care of children. So these things are working, we know in the education area that there are things that are working too to lift school attendance, we just talked about that, and to better engage Indigenous students. And we know as well that there are some employment programs that work, but we've got to keep building  -  there is more to do, there are real issues, there is this tragically big gap to close and the gap is at its biggest in the Northern Territory.
MACKLIN: Just to add to the Prime Minister's remarks.  One of the important initiatives was to put additional police into communities where they had never had a permanent police presence and that transition from the Federal police to the Northern Territory police has now occurred.  So the numbers are increased and will be maintained and all of those increased numbers of police are now Northern Territory police.  The most recent Northern Territory Emergency Response monitoring report which I put out just a few weeks ago, indicates that for the first time we are now seeing a decline in the level of violent crime and that said, I would be the first to acknowledge that we still have a long way to go.  But I do think that the presence of police is very important.  There's been a separate piece of work done in the Northern Territory asking people their views about the additional police effort and of course, the vast majority of people are very pleased to have a police presence just like you and I are very pleased to have a police presence in our communities.  
If I can also emphasise the importance of employment. One of the unwritten successes of the last four year's work has been the transition of people off community development employment projects on to full time properly paid award wages.  Whether it's in child care centres, or aged care, or working for the local Government, working to fix the roads.  Whatever it might be, we now have a couple of thousand people who previously didn't have a decent wage to live on who are now properly paid, and I do think that's been a great success.  We've just published the evaluation of the community stores licensing.  That too, demonstrates just how important the licensing system has been that we've put in place to make sure not only that there's decent stuff in the stores on the shelves, but also that the stores are properly managed, properly governed, so that people know that their store in their community is delivering decent food for them. 
PM: Warren wanted to say something briefly, then we'll go to the front and the back and then we will have to call it a day.
MINISTER SNOWDON: I think the other area which we've not traversed is Indigenous health. The Aboriginal health services in the Northern Territory have improved dramatically over the last four years. We've got over 273 new primary care employees in the health system, in the health workforce. We're investing quite a considerable amount of money in new health infrastructure. We're providing the health checks, the follow-up health checks, the dental checks are all happening. And I think we're doing, and that's in collaboration, in partnership with the Aboriginal community controlled health sector as well as the Northern Territory Government and there are very strong positive signs that the impact we are having will make a difference.
PM: Ok question here at the front.
JOURNALIST: Just on that point you made about policing, the NT Police Association has issued concern over who's going to fund policing managing those 63 stations in remote communities and secondly the intervention has a negative connotation in the Territory, what do you see yourself doing to diminish that stigma?
MINISTER MACKLIN: Well taking the second question first.  We are launching today a discussion paper called Stronger Futures which is all about us getting out, talking with Aboriginal people in their communities, in their community centres, about what works and what they want to see done to address what they and we understand to still be critical problems for Aboriginal people in the Territory. So that's the first point. On the issue of funding, as the Prime Minister indicated in her opening remarks, of course these are matters that the Government will have to consider over the next six to twelve months and of course, we'll do that very carefully.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you concerned about Qantas jobs going offshore?
PM: Of course I'm always concerned that we have the maximum number of jobs in Australia. When you look at everything we've done as a Government it's been about supporting Australian jobs and keeping the economy strong, so we want to see Australian jobs wherever we can get them and I'm very determined that we're going to manage this phase of our economic growth to ensure that we're maximising job opportunities. We've seen 750,000 jobs created already, we're looking forward to half a million more in the coming couple of years. So nothing more important than making sure Australian's have got the benefits of work and that's going to keep driving us as a Government. Thanks very much. 



Super fast broadband for all Australians took another step forward today as the Gillard Government welcomed the landmark announcement by Telstra and NBN Co to enter into Definitive Agreements on the rollout of the National Broadband Network (NBN).
The Definitive Agreements will allow for a cheaper, more-efficient rollout of the NBN, which will mean Australians will begin gaining access to the NBN sooner and hasten the Government's delivery of super fast broadband to all Australians, no matter where they live across our vast country.
The Definitive Agreements are also an important step in the reform of the telecommunications industry, paving the way for structural separation of Telstra and construction of the NBN.
Telstra's structural separation is a critical reform that will enable the telecommunications sector to provide competitive and innovative services to Australian consumers.
The Definitive Agreements, valued at $9 billion, provide for the reuse of suitable Telstra infrastructure and for Telstra to progressively structurally separate by decommissioning its copper network and broadband HFC network capability during the NBN fibre rollout. This means less disruption to communities and less use of overhead cables.
The Definitive Agreements also include an interim agreement which provides NBN Co with immediate access to Telstra infrastructure  -  such as pits and pipes  -  to support the rollout of the second release sites on the mainland.
The interim access arrangements will mean rollout teams can start work in earnest on the design and construction of the second release sites.
The Definitive Agreements translate the Financial Heads of Agreement signed in June 2010 into detailed legally binding agreements.
Before the Definitive Agreements come into force, they require approval  by the shareholders of Telstra and NBN Co. The Definitive Agreements will also be reviewed by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) as part of its consideration of Telstra's Structural Separation Undertaking which Telstra is expected to lodge with the ACCC shortly.
In support of the Definitive Agreements, the Government has provided NBN Co with a funding agreement to enable NBN Co to enter into these substantial commitments and it has also provided guarantees to Telstra in respect of NBN Co's financial commitments to Telstra.
These support arrangements have been designed to complement each other and provide sufficient confidence to enable these Agreements - which are fundamental to structural reform of the telecommunications industry - to be entered into. 



The Gillard Government and Telstra today reached an agreement that will ensure basic universal telecommunication service standards during and after the roll out of the National Broadband Network  -  a critical assurance for consumers in the rollout of the NBN.
The important public safeguard is part of a package of measures agreed between the Government and Telstra that included an agreement to provide assistance to retrain Telstra's workforce to deploy the NBN.
The package also included the creation of a new government entity, the Telecommunications Universal Service Management Agency (TUSMA) that will administer the universal service obligation (USO) and other public interest services.
These measures were announced in conjunction with Definitive Agreements between Telstra and NBN Co that will see super fast broadband delivered sooner to Australians with less disruption and less cost.
The universal service arrangements will commence on 1 July, 2012.The TUSMA will ensure:
 * 	all Australians have reasonable access to a standard telephone service (the Universal Service Obligation for voice telephony services);
 * 	payphones are reasonably accessible to all Australians (the Universal Service Obligation for payphones);
 * 	the ongoing delivery of the Emergency Call Service by Telstra (calls to Triple Zero '000' and '112');
 * 	the ongoing delivery of the National Relay Service;
 * 	that appropriate safety net arrangements are in place that will assist the migration of voice-only customers to an NBN fibre service as Telstra's copper customer access network is decommissioned; and
 * 	technological solutions will be developed as necessary to support continuity of public interest services (i.e. public alarm systems and traffic lights).
These measures are vital to ensure continuity of basic services to consumers throughout Australia given the significant changes that will occur to the structure of the telecommunications industry from the rollout of the NBN, including the progressive decommissioning of Telstra's copper customer access network.
Telstra will submit a Migration Plan to the ACCC for public consultation and approval which will set out the process by which its existing copper customers, including customers of other companies using Telstra's wholesale services, will migrate onto the NBN.
Copper-based services outside the NBN Co fibre footprint will continue to be available to customers under the USO agreement, as well as the new fast broadband services provided through NBN Co's next generation wireless and satellite services.
To support the delivery of these new arrangements  -  which are in addition to its previously announced commitment to provide funding of $50 million per annum for the financial years 2012 - 13 and 2013 - 14, and then $100 million per annum thereafter - the Government will supplement its funding to TUSMA in the first two financial years. This will ensure contributors to the industry levy, with the exception of Telstra, will not face an increase to their aggregate funding contribution through the transition period.
The commitment to provide additional Government funding towards this important reform is an important measure that will provide industry with greater certainty to facilitate the transition to the new regime.
Senator Conroy also announced today that the government has entered into a further agreement with Telstra to provide funding to assist in the retraining and redeployment of Telstra staff affected by this very significant reform.
NBN Co, in conjunction with the industry and in consultation with the Commonwealth Government, will fund and undertake a public education campaign to inform consumers about the imminent migration of services from the copper-based infrastructure to the fibre optic infrastructure.
More information on the new arrangements for the delivery of the Universal Service Obligation and other public telecommunications outcomes is available at http://www.dbcde.gov.au/broadband/national_broadband_network/universal_…



The Government today announced an extension to the existing Australia Network contract, while additional information is sought from tenderers.
In the light of changed international circumstances since the Australia Network Request For Tender (RFT) was issued, the Government has decided that national interests should be addressed more broadly.
Tenderers have been asked to submit amended bids  to specifically address how their operation of the Australia Network service would meet Australia's national interests in the light of the increasing influence of key emerging markets on the global economy, significant political transformation occurring across the Middle East and North Africa, and the need identified during recent consular crises for strengthened associated information services through a range of sources.
The current contract with the ABC expires on 8 August 2011. Accordingly, the Government will exercise its option under the existing contract to extend the service operated by the ABC for six months until 8 February 2012.  The amended Australia Network Request for Tender will be released shortly and a decision on Preferred Tenderer is expected to be taken by September 2011.
In making this decision, the Government also considered the significance of the service to Australia's foreign interests and concluded that the decision on the Preferred Tenderer will be referred for Cabinet consideration. 



JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, good morning and welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning Sabra.
JOURNALIST: The Opposition has labelled today assassination day, one of your senior colleagues calls it liberation day. Is it a happy anniversary for you?
PM: I call it a day of more work as Prime Minister, so I am determined to make sure that our nation is a nation of opportunity right around the country. I am travelling today to Western Australia, of course, the state central to the resources boom.
Our economy is seeing now the resources boom is a good thing but I want to make sure we manage this phase of economic growth so we see opportunity right around the nation. So that is my focus today and my determination each and every day I do this job.
JOURNALIST: Your party's primary vote though is down to 27 per cent and that is a terminal figure for a government. There are some in your party that are predicting worse polling to come. Why is it so bad?
PM: Well I don't comment on opinion polls Sabra but I understand. We are in the middle of some tough reforms and as we work our way through those tough reforms I am not surprised that that is causing some anxiety in the community.
But can I certainly say this; anybody who thinks that I am going to fold because it is a bit tough out there has got me wrong, absolutely wrong and we are doing these tough reforms because they are right for the country's future.
It is what Australia needs to make sure we have got a strong economy and opportunity for all in the future-
JOURNALIST: -But when you took over, when you took over the leadership of the party last year, I mean the polling was a large part of that and you said that the party had lost its way. Your polling figures now are worse than what Kevin Rudd had at the time. Isn't he right to feel miffed about that?
PM: Well, I am not agreeing with the premise of your question and the important thing is delivering a plan that gets us to a better future for our nation. That is what I'm determined to do.
So I'm doing these things because they are right for the nation's future. They are huge reforms. I believe Australians can change, that we are up to making major reforms together in our economy and in our nation, but of course, day after day people are being invited by the Opposition to believe that we are not up to tackling the big reforms.
I'm not surprised that there is anxiety out there-
JOURNALIST: -Kevin Rudd was tackling those big reforms too. He was tackling the big reforms that you are talking about as well and he had bad polling figures. Isn't he right to feel - what on earth, why should you be given a reprieve and he wasn't?
PM: Sabra, this is about delivering a vision for the nation's future and you're inviting me to get on the political analysis side. I'll leave that to the commentators.
I judge myself and the progress of the government I lead by the difference we are making in the lives of Australians today and for the future.
That does require us to engage in and explain the big reforms in a context where the Opposition each and every day invites Australians to believe they are no longer up to big reforms. Well, I'm not going to put this nation's future in the too hard basket.
We are going to get this done and yes, it's tough and yes, it's got consequences in the political debate that people see and reflect on, but it is not the political debate in that sense that is happening today or tomorrow that concerns me. It is what is happening in the future of this country - next year, the year after, the year after that, having jobs, having opportunity for all, tackling the big challenges like climate change.
JOURNALIST: But on your own record in the weeks before you became Prime Minister, you said a leadership challenge was absurd, during the campaign you said the idea of doing a deal with the Greens was ridiculous and on the carbon tax, that you said there would be no carbon tax under a government you led.
In terms of what you say and what you do, there is a huge disconnect and voters appear to be very disappointed.
PM: Well, what I am saying is what I am doing. I'm saying the nation needs to tackle the big challenges of the future - climate change, we've got to get on with this job. It's big, it's tough, it's a major economic transformation.
I understand it's causing anxiety, but to be the kind of country we want to be in the future with the environment we want and the strong economy we want, we have got to get on with the job and price carbon.
So what I'm saying and what I'm doing - exactly the same.
JOURNALIST: Internal Labor Party research leaked to Fairfax this week suggests that people haven't forgiven you for the way that you became Prime Minister and they haven't forgiven you for the broken promise. Why not just say sorry?
PM: I've explained, of course, to the Australian people that I never meant to mislead anybody during the last election campaign about carbon pricing. I said during the course of that election campaign I believe climate change is real and I do. I believe the best way of reducing carbon pollution is to put a price on carbon. I've always-
JOURNALIST: -But why can't you just say sorry?
PM: Well, I've always thought the best way of putting a price on carbon was a cap and trade scheme, where you cap the amount of carbon pollution coming out of your economy and we're going to get there, Sabra.
We are going to get there through a path I didn't expect during the election campaign of a fixed price period for around three to five years.
So yes, the route to the objective is different. When I said those words during the election campaign I didn't mean to mislead anybody and I understand that people heard those words and they look at what's happening now and they perhaps look at me and say well, ‘what's going on, what did she mean then, what does she mean now'.
Well, what I meant then and what I mean now is climate change is real. We're up to tackling it. We're a nation that can tackle the big reforms. The big reform we need to reduce carbon pollution is to put a price on carbon.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that those same people would be saying all of that but also why can't she just say sorry?
PM: Well, I think the best thing I can do is explain my words and I've just done that.
JOURNALIST: When you took the leadership you said that the Government had lost its way and you nominated three issues; the climate change policy being one, the mining tax being another and asylum seeker policy. Those were the three top issues.
None of those are 100 per cent resolved and some would say that they are a mess. Tomorrow marks seven weeks since you announced the Malaysia swap and again before the election Labor said it wouldn't be involved in off-shore processing and this deal effectively is that.
Again, you gave an impression of one thing and did something else.
PM: Oh, Sabra. That is completely untrue. If you go back to my first speech to the Lowy Institute on the question of refugees and asylum seekers, I said we needed a regional solution.
We needed to aim to break the people smuggler's business model, that that was going to require us to work with our regional neighbours and partners and we are. We are in advanced discussions with Malaysia about a transfer agreement.
Our nation has never seen this innovation before. It has never been in contemplation before and it is a great idea for sending the strongest possible message to people smugglers - don't keep trying to profit on misery and enticing people to get onto your boats that can crash on the shores of Christmas Island or elsewhere and cause asylum seekers to lose their lives.
Don't do that. The message is if you do get on a boat, you'll end up at the back of the queue in Malaysia.
But of course the other side of that equation Sabra and so important is that we would take 4,000 more genuine refugees.
So, when I spoke about asylum seeker and refugee policy for the first time as Prime Minister, I was looking to a regional solution and we've worked patiently and methodically to deliver just that through the Bali process and now the transfer agreement with Malaysia. And on-
JOURNALIST:-But seven weeks ago, with respect-
PM: -Minerals Resource Rent tax, in the early days of being Prime Minister I entered an agreement with our biggest mining companies. They had complained very deeply about lack of consultation about the resources super profit tax.
And when I extended my hand to shake hands on that agreement I said to myself, I am going to make sure everything we do now is done with the maximum consultation. Yes, it's taken some time but the draft legislation is there for all to see. And carbon pricing, we've talked about; we are in the process of putting a price on carbon.
JOURNALIST: But on the Malaysia swap, you gave the impression seven weeks ago it would be done in a matter of weeks. It is still not signed on the dotted line. Is it going to happen or is this like the East Timor processing centre, going to die?
PM: Well, Sabra, I'm a little bit bemused that someone who works in the media would be advocating to me a lack of transparency. I was in a position to put out a joint statement with the prime minister of Malaysia about the intentions of our two nations and I'm in a position to advise the public of something as significant as that in a joint statement with the leader of one of our regional neighbours. It seems to me the right thing to do is to give people the information and I did.
JOURNALIST: On the carbon tax, Tony Abbott says that you can't be trusted on this, that it will just keep going up and up and up and based on the record with other previous policies, isn't he right here? That it will just go up and up and up?
PM: Oh, we all know Sabra that Tony Abbott is wandering around every day looking for what's this day's scare. What can he frighten people about today, so he'll say anything, he'll do anything, he'll claim any job is going to be lost, he'll claim any price is going to go up-
JOURNALIST:-But on your own policy performance, things that you've been adamant about-
PM: -Well, Sabra, I'll answer your question thanks. Tony Abbott is out there making ridiculous claims day after day about job losses, about price increases. He doesn't care about the truth in this debate.
The claims he makes are false and it is part of saying to the Australian people actually, you know, you the Australian people, the Australian nation, you're not up to reforming. You're not up to grappling the future. You're not up to this. Be afraid, stay with me in the past. That is what Tony Abbott is saying to Australians.
Well, yes, I'm saying something quite different. I'm saying we are a confident, creative country. We've worked our way through the big reforms in the past. We'll work our way through this big reform.
And when I meet with Australians what is on their mind, I mean of course they live hectic lives and there are daily pressures but when you get people to sit for one moment of stillness and say, what's the most important thing to you? Overwhelmingly people say to me I want to leave for my kids a better country so they can have a better life than I did.
Well, if you want to do that, leave a better future for your children, then you believe in tackling climate change and you believe in doing it the most efficient way and that's pricing carbon.
JOURNALIST: Will you be in a position to announce the details on this within the next fortnight given that we are at the midyear mark and are you confident that Australians will change their minds on this tax once you announce that price? Won't that just make people even angrier with you?
PM: I think we are working through with a great deal of goodwill to get all of the details of this big reform discussed and we are working for agreement on all of those details.
This is a big reform and consequently it's got many moving parts and many details to work through. The discussions in the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee are happening with a great deal of goodwill and people are working hard.
I've said that we would always aim to announce the details of carbon pricing in the middle of this year and, of course, that continues to be my aim. On the reaction of people when they see all of the details, well I think first and foremost, they'll be trying to work through and understand it and will be explaining it to people.
I think that that will take months and months and months of explanation. This is a big reform. It is not something that people will digest in the first five minutes of seeing the press conference when it is announced.
But we will work through and people will be able to sit at their kitchen table and work out what it means for them and how much assistance they are going to get and when they've worked that through, they'll see a dollar figure of assistance provided by me and a dollar figure of assistance that Tony Abbott is committed to taking away.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, thanks for joining us this morning.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: It's been great to have the opportunity to address the Western Australian Labor Party Conference and it's been great to be here in Western Australia. I came today to the Western Australian Labor Party Conference with a very simple message: I respect the voice of Western Australia and I have been listening to it.
That's why I have reshaped our Minerals Resource Rent Tax so that we can work with the great resources industry of this State and better tax and get a fair share for Australians from the mineral wealth within our grounds.
I've also listened to the voices of Western Australians on how best to provide health care and I'm pleased that we've entered into a health care agreement that will also bring this State into new arrangements that make available new resources, more doctors, more nurses, more local control and a lot less red tape.
And I've also listened to the voice of Western Australia on the distribution of the GST and that's why I've initiated a review so that we can work our way through to a new historic arrangement for GST distribution, which understands growth states like Western Australian.
As Prime Minister I'm determined that I make the right decisions for the nation's future. The right decisions like putting a price on carbon, the right decisions like assisting families through tax cuts, family payment increases and increases in the pension. We will be ensuring that when we announce all of the details of pricing carbon, we will announce all of the details as to how we will assist Australian families.
Standing here today Labor is the only political party with a plan to put a tax on pollution and to use that money to give tax cuts to Australian families. We're the only political party with a plan to put a tax on pollution and to use that money to assist pensioners. We're the only political party with a plan to put a tax on pollution and to use that money to assist those who receive Family Tax Benefit, in order to care for their kids.
Now, I get the opportunity as Prime Minister to travel the length and breadth of this great nation of ours, I get to meet a lot of people, I get to see a lot of things, but I can certainly tell you on thing  -  I've never seen a dollar appear out of thin air.
So, when you are going to spend money, you need to know where that money is coming from. Money doesn't grow on trees; we've got to make sure that the Federal budget is in the right shape to come back to surplus in 2012-13, as promised.
As we tackle climate change, price carbon pollution, reduce carbon pollution, we will assist Australians through tax cuts, pension increases and increases in family payments.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Can you go any further than that and give us any figures on how much pension will be increased and any of those sort of things?
PM: All of the figures will be announced when we announce the final details of pricing carbon and when we announce those details families will be able to sit and work out for themselves what the tax cut means for them, what the increases in family payments mean for them, what the increases in the pension mean for people who rely on the pension.
This will be a plan that takes money from polluters and gives it to Australian families. That's the right thing to do to tackle climate change and the right thing to do to assist Australian families. This won't be a scheme where we are pretending somehow money just magically appears out of thin air.
JOURNALIST: When do you expect to actually release those details then?
PM: We're working hard and with a lot of good will through the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee. We want to get all of the details right and we're working hard through the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee to discuss all of the details.
I want to get this information to Australians as soon as I can. And yes, as we're making these decisions there are some tough choices. There's no way that you can lead this nation and not make tough choices, and we will make some tough choices.
We've had to do that in the recent budget in order to get the budget to surplus in 2012-13.
We've had a debate in this country arising from the budget, some people have said that
$150,000 a year for a family, is that rich? Some people have said that. Well I certainly don't believe it is rich, but I also think you've got to make the tough choices about where assistance should properly go and whilst I understand people who earn over $150,000 a year feel cost of living pressures, there are other Australians who are doing it more tough and we will be directing our focus to assisting Australians who need that assistance the most.
JOURNALIST: What did you make of Tony Abbott's announcement this morning about cutting income tax?
PM: Well, money doesn't grow on trees. You don't wander round and see dollar coins somehow magically appearing out of thin air in front of your eyes.
You've got to know where the money is coming from. So, it's one thing to say ‘gee, you'd like to spend a lot of money', it's another thing to say where it's coming from.
When we price carbon we'll know where the money's coming from, it's coming from the 1000 biggest polluters in this country and that money will be used to cut tax, to increase family benefits and to increase pensions, as well as to protect Australian jobs and to fund programs that tackle climate change.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you take some responsibility for Eric Ripper's very low showing in opinion polls?
PM: Eric Ripper is doing a great job here, a courageous job leading the Western Australian Labor Party. He was a great Treasurer of this State, he's certainly someone who knows from having to slave over the State's budget that money doesn't appear from thin air.
We've got work to do in this State; Eric's got work to do in this State. We're full of Labor determination and courage and we'll get about doing that work.
JOURNALIST: He also knows that many of your policies are actually hurting him, has that been conveyed to you at this conference?
PM: I'm very happy to go through my policies for Western Australia. As Prime Minister I wanted to settle what had become a very divisive debate about the resources super profits tax and I wanted to work in consultation with Western Australia and the resources industry here and I have.
We've worked through, reached an agreement and now there's the draft legislation for everyone to see.
And then I was concerned as Prime Minister that people in Western Australia weren't going to get the benefits of our new resources and our new reforms into health. I've made sure we've got an agreement with Western Australia, so we get to give Western Australia more doctors, more nurses, more money, more local control and less red tape.
And I certainly heard from Western Australia that people feel that the current GST arrangements aren't fair, so I've acted to have a review of those arrangements, because I want Australians here and around the nation treated fairly when it comes to distributing the GST.
And I'm very pleased that we are continuing record investments into infrastructure in this place, in Western Australia we know that with the resources boom this is a State hungry for infrastructure and we want to feed that hunger. We also want to make sure we're bringing new skills and new opportunities here and that's what our measures in the recent budget were all about.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be providing compensation for producers affected by the live export ban, you did seem to be flagging it (inaudible).
PM: We'll have some things to say in coming days about working with the industry affected by the live export suspension to Indonesia. I did discuss this matter with Premier Barnett yesterday.
Of course Premier Barnett said to me that we needed to work to resume the trade as quickly as possible and I said to Premier Barnett that's music to my ears, because that's exactly what we are working to do  -  to get the trade back up as quickly as possible, whilst we have appropriate arrangements for animal welfare.
We've got to get this right, Australians don't want to see animals treated the way we saw animals treated on that 4 Corners program. People who work in the cattle industry don't want to see their animals treated like that. I want this industry to have a long term strong future, so we've got to get the animal welfare arrangements right now.
We're working to do that as quickly as possible, so we can get the trade recommencing as soon as possible. I'm on exactly the same page as Premier Barnett on this question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Labor Party today are expecting to reinstate their ban on uranium mining, your Resources Minister has made his views pretty clear on this, do you think that's economically responsible?
PM: Clearly debates will happen inside the Western Australian Labor Party Conference I've just addressed and that's a good thing. Labor's a party of government and a party of ideas.
For the Government I lead, we see the opportunities in mining uranium, where that occurs obviously involves State governments because they properly are the level of government with responsibility for planning and land use, but we see opportunities in mining uranium and that is happening in other parts of the country.
JOURNALIST: There are motions here today also contradicting your policy on asylum seekers, the deal with Malaysia, and also gay marriage. Is the divide between WA Labor and Federal growing?
PM: I think you'll find that around the country, whether it's here in Western Australia or in other places, Labor Party members come to Labor Party conferences full of ideas and wanting to have their say and that's a good thing.
People become active and decide to go and join their Labor Party branch down the street, or get involved through one of our Labor Party groups, because they're full of ideas about the nation's future. I want people to join Labor full of that enthusiasm and to get into a conference and have their say.
But my responsibility as Prime Minister, whether motions are being passed here in Western Australia, or whether it's Queensland, or anywhere else, is to make sure I'm making the right decisions for the nation's future.
The transfer agreement with Malaysia is the right decision for our future, it will break the people smuggler's business model, that's what it's aiming to do, take away from people who ply a very evil trade the product that they sell. So, we will continue to pursue that agreement with Malaysia under the Bali framework.
Now, I know many people are also concerned that we do the right thing as a humanitarian nation. We've been a generous country, resettling refugees, and through the scheme that we are determined to put in place we'll take 4000 more genuine refugees from the front of the queue in Malaysia.
JOURNALIST: It's not a done deal though is it?
PM: We are in very advanced discussions with Malaysia and of course we went to Bali when the region came together a little bit earlier this year and struck a regional framework, under which the agreements with Malaysia are being pursued.
JOURNALIST: New York has just legalised gay marriage, is Australia behind the times?
PM: We'll make our own decisions in this country, based on what's right for Australia. My views in this area are well known.
Thanks very much. Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just quickly, there's an energy drink called Cocaine on sale in Perth delis. Is that something you would look at under Federal labelling laws?
PM: On these questions, of course, on the technicalities, I'm always happy to look at the technicalities, but it does concern me that a drink would bear that kind of name. 



Thanks so much Stephen for that generous introduction.
I see my other ministerial and parliamentary colleagues here today - Chris and Gary; Melissa, Glenn, Mark and Louise.
I see your State Labor Leader Eric and his State Labor team and Eric I want to say publicly today what I said at dinner last night: In Government you proved a great Treasurer and you left the State in great economic shape and in Opposition you are proving a courageous Leader of a Party which will be ready to govern in 2013.
I see so many friends from Western Australia's great labour movement, so many people who've worked so hard for Labor.
Branch members and supporters and volunteers who helped us change Australia in 2007, who fought the good fight with us in Canning and Cowan, in Stirling and Hasluck and Swan last year and who I know will fight again for Labor in 2013.
Even a few people who I saw on a warm night in March this year at the Swan Yacht Club, where we shared a hot meal and a cold drink  -  well, we had some beer and some pizza anyway.
All of you, people who know what it means to be Labor,  because you are what it means to be Labor.
It's good to be here again, it's good to be among so many friends.
Friends, I'm sure we all thought of Bob Hawke this week and wished him a speedy recovery from pneumonia.
Today I'm particularly reminded of Bob because he was the last Labor Prime Minister to address this Conference, in 1991.
Now in 1991 Western Australians, per capita, were already bringing in twice as much in export earnings as the rest of us.
But today, twenty years on, Western Australians, per capita, are bringing in five times as much in export earnings as the rest of the country.
We all learned a long time ago that the world doesn't owe Australia a living  -  it doesn't owe any Australian a living.
But no State has better absorbed that lesson than yours  -  no Australians better show they understand that point than you.
That's why you've built a State which is so much more than a mine or a gas field.
When I think about the economy here I think about the State's exports of grain and livestock, the vibrant tourism industry and the world-leading science and research community.
About Barry Marshall and Robin Warren's Nobel Prize-winning medical research, Fiona Wood's skin technology and Fiona Stanley's work in child health,  these citizens of a creative, confident State which is making the most of its human as well as its natural resources.
And when I see WA's successful resources industry and modern economy, I see a good thing for you and a good thing for the country.
Every Australian worker, every investor, everyone with a superannuation account, every consumer, all feel some of the benefits.
You know this, but I want you to be sure I know it too:
It's not a problem to manage, it's an opportunity to seize.
I know that and so does the Government I lead.
And I want you to know this as well:
We have a plan to make sure the opportunities you're creating will build a strong economy here in the West and will spread opportunity to every Western Australian.
Because while we understand WA's strength, we also understand WA feels the “patchwork pressures” in our economy more than anywhere else.
The growth does create opportunities.
But it also strains infrastructure like roads, ports and airports, like hospitals and schools.
It tests the natural environment and it brings changes to suburbs and towns that aren't always welcome or easy.
It creates pressure on business.
During such growth in investment the resources industry struggles to find the workers it needs.
While other businesses struggle to compete with the wages resources can offer workers and the returns it can offer investors.
And it creates pressures on people too.
On the many people here who can see the benefits around them but don't feel them in their own lives.
The families I've met here feel the price pressures from growth and need practical help to meet increases in the cost of living.
Low- and middle-income earners who are being hit hard by the rising cost of the basics in life.
Who find it expensive to buy a house or rent a house, to eat out or go out. 
Who've faced record increases in electricity prices  -  and who've had no help from the State Government.
I know these pressures are very real.
And our Government has made decisions which are designed to help.
Paid maternity leave for young mums, extending the education tax rebate for young families, extra family payments for parents of teens.
Lifting the low income tax offset for millions of working people, a historic increase in the pension for millions of older Australians.
Friends, we will be making more decisions in coming weeks. 
Finalising our plans for tax cuts and increases in payments to deliver household assistance when we have a carbon price.
I know that many people are anxious about the impact of a carbon price and I understand that they expect to hear from me about what I am going to do about that.
That's why I will be explaining exactly what help Australians will get  -  and how they will get it.
Not everybody will agree with our plan  -  but we will deliver these tax cuts and payments to those who need it most.
I want to make sure that families can make a difference and help tackle climate change. 
We are the only party with a clear plan for delivering tax cuts  -  we will charge polluters to stop them polluting and we will deliver tax cuts to families.
And as we make those decisions let me say this clearly: we will act fairly ... we will not let Australian families down.
Friends, Western Australia is more important to our country than ever.
The hard work and creativity of Western Australians and the riches of the State's resource wealth are contributing more to our nation than ever before.
You've heard the statistics a thousand times.
Actually the most telling number would probably be this one:
The number of people who come over from the East every year to say things like “the hard work and creativity of Western Australians and the riches of the State's resource wealth are contributing more to our nation than ever before” - now that'd be a real killer fact!
And I'm happy to add to that statistic today.
But I'm not just here to talk about you and about the State.
I am here to talk about all of us and about the country.
About the things we can do for our future,  about the way we can work together to do those things.
And to really have that conversation, I do need to be candid about what Federal Labor has learned from the past.
Friends, when I became Prime Minister a year ago, there were things I wanted to do.
One of the most important was to build a better relationship with the community in Western Australia.
At the height of the Resource Super Profits Tax argument I extended a handshake and began to negotiate with the industry in good faith  -  and the industry responded in kind.
I did that not only because of the importance of the policy questions at stake  -  though they are real.
I did that because I was struck by how much the Federal Government and the Western Australian community had found ourselves talking past each other rather than to each other.
And because I was deeply disappointed that things had got to that point.
So in this last year, I have set out to lead a Government which genuinely listens to the ideas and the aspirations of this community.
A Government which genuinely respects the hopes and fears of this state.
I believe we have.
I know I've quite literally heard the community's voice, because whether I've been walking the shopping strip in Fremantle or leaning over a side fence in Cottesloe, or I've been down at the grain terminal at Kwinana or meeting bushfire survivors and thanking emergency workers in Kelmscott - I've been listening.
And I believe we have acted on what we've heard.
So I've come here today to be sure that you hear this from me:
You deserve the respect of your Federal Government  -  and you have it.
And because you have that respect, we have listened to you as we have developed our new plans.
Our new plan for the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
To sustain the investments, to deliver a share of record profits back to benefit all Western Australians.
I've driven a new approach, we've consulted thoroughly  -  and now we have draft legislation and a clear path ahead.
A path to extra contributions for everyone with a superannuation account, a tax cut for every small business and lower company tax, plus new infrastructure investment in resource regions.
And revenue to fund upgrading roads and access to Perth airport  -  the WA Gateway project which will receive up to $480 million in funding from the MRRT's Regional Infrastructure Fund.
Adding to our investments in better infrastructure in this great, growing State.
$280 million for widening the Great Eastern Highway from Kooyong Road to the Tonkin Highway.
$236 million for the City Link project between Perth and Northbridge.
$118 million for the Bunbury outer ring road.
$350 million for Kewdale's intermodal facility.
$255 million for a rehabilitation centre at the new Fiona Stanley Hospital. 
$195 million for infrastructure alongside the Ord River expansion program.
Along with health and hospitals reform.
I've worked to be sure that our plan is one where we build agreement across our country  -  never dictating from a distance.
Still delivering more doctors, more nurses, more beds  -  shorter waiting times and shorter waiting lists.
And still delivering reforms which unlock economic incentives and unlock the expertise of local health experts.
And we have announced that we will look hard at the distribution of GST revenue to the Territories and States.
Through a clear, honest process for an historic reform.
For reform to a system which so many of you have argued for so long doesn't serve Western Australia well,  for reform to arrangements which I agree don't properly deal with high economic growth here in the West.
I believe for our federation to be sustainable  -  for Australians right around the federation to have great opportunities and access to quality services  -  the system has to be fair.
Fair so that it rewards reform, fair so that people can feel the benefits of success, fair so that inefficiency in government isn't rewarded.
So I am glad that our review of GST has been so widely welcomed in the West and I look forward to the changes which will flow from it in time.
And because we've been listening, we have a plan for the economy that is designed to keep our whole economy strong.
We understand it is a tough time for local manufacturers, with the high terms of trade and costs of raw materials.
So this week my colleagues Brendan O'Connor and Craig Emerson announced new measures to prevent cheap imports being dumped on Western Australia's markets, to stop products being imported at prices lower than the cost of production and to give local manufacturing every chance to remain strong.
Manufacturing remains at the core of the Government's economic agenda, manufacturing remains integral to the modern Australian economy.
We also understand the importance of live cattle exports to employment in the State.
So this week my colleague Senator Ludwig travelled to Indonesia to advance our discussions to resume trade as soon as possible  -  and to ensure we prevent further disruptions in the future.
And in coming days, we will have more to say, outlining measures to assist producers and ensure the safeguards we need are in place as soon as they can possibly be.
So we are determined to keep the whole economy strong ... and we are determined to ensure opportunity for all.
When I last visited the Gorgon project at Barrow Island in the North-West I met a worker on site who lives one block away from my home in Melbourne. 
A great example of the opportunities our natural resources create  -  it's what we want for our nation.
But I also want those opportunities to be shared with everyone in the country and everyone in the State.
It is just not acceptable for opportunity to fly over the suburbs of this city.
For opportunity to be beyond the reach of this State's young people.
This drives our economic policy and our Budget strategy.
Not just tough decisions to get the Budget back into black so the private sector can grow, but investments and reform so we can train Australians to meet the needs of industry and fill the hundreds of thousands of jobs the private sector will create in coming years.
Because we understand the opportunities before the State and we are determined to do what we can to help you make the most of them.
So I believe we're listening better, thinking more carefully about the unique needs of this place, spending more time here.
In January in Carnarvon I heard I was the first PM to visit since the 1970s. 
It should be compulsory. I met some tremendous Australians up there.
Yes, it's twenty years since Bob Hawke as Prime Minister was standing here at your State Conference ... I can tell you it won't be twenty years before I'm back.
And later this year, when CHOGM comes, I'm not just looking forward to visiting.
I'm looking forward to governing the country from this great city, to showcasing the country from this great State.
And as I look forward to the rest of this year, I look forward to our National Conference as well.
The election review I initiated gives us a chance to renew our party processes and make ourselves better.
This will never distract us from governing but we do have a responsibility to renew ourselves and our organisation.
I believe the Labor party should be a party of government and I believe Labor governments must govern for all  -  for “the great mass of the people” in Ben Chifley's words.
In many ways, this is the true reason for the reform proposals we are considering for our party in this year: to revitalise our movement's connection with the communities we serve.
The Labor Party must be much more than a caucus of parliamentarians  -  even of parliamentarians who listen to their electorates.
We must be a movement which genuinely includes Australian communities.
Not simply listening to the community but being part of the community.
Truly understanding and representing people in every place  -  so that communities like yours are not just heard by our party but are part of our movement.
Being a party of genuine civic engagement in every suburb and town. 
Of people who are engaged in civic projects in their street and in their neighbourhood. 
Of people who are engaged in nation shaping projects.
We must continue to reach out to new groups of voters and to those who have always supported us.
Not just on election day.
But on any day that a person is looking to make a difference to their street, to their suburb, to their town or to their country.
On the day I ordered this review I was determined to create an opportunity for reform which this great Party would not squander.
I remain so determined.
Friends, we are Labor people gathered here and we share the Labor creed.
But we share a higher loyalty as well.
We are all Australians together.
My Government wants to work with all Australians to do great things,  to make the most of the opportunities we share.
With all Australians.
Now, I always enjoy my visits to Perth, though when they come on the heels of one of your teams flogging my beloved Bulldogs, my enthusiasm does occasionally wane.
And that has become more regular in recent times!
But anyone who's followed the Eagles or the Dockers over the years knows that even the strongest club has tough years as well as good years.
Years where you're flying high, years where you'll need a hand.
And just as any footy club has its lean years  -  and believe me, I should know  -  so has the nomic pendulum swung backwards and forwards through Australia's history.
I'm confident about the future of WA's economy but we all know that we must prepare for the future well.
I know how much Australia gains from the great strength of WA, and we all know WA gains from the insurance of being part of the strong and diversified Australian national economy.
And I know how much all Australians share from being one people with all the people in the West, and how much Western Australians gain from what you share with us.
I am passionately committed to WA's place in our nation's shared future.
Australians, together - I can't imagine us apart.
I can't imagine the Australian economy without the great firms and workers of the West.
I can't imagine my own footy club without Brad Hardie's Brownlow.
I can't imagine my own party without John Curtin's courage, my own bookshelf without Tim Winton's Cloudstreet, or our effort in Afghanistan without Ben Roberts-Smith.
That's why my plan for Australia's future is a plan which understands the West.
Which understands the State's challenges and opportunities.                                                            
	Which respects the State's hopes and fears.
	A plan to keep the whole economy strong, a plan to deliver opportunity for all.



HOST: Good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Did he impress you?
PM: I think Eric Ripper's doing a courageous job leading Labor in Western Australia, I also think he was a great Treasurer of your state-
HOST: Yes he was-
PM: Left the economy in good shape.
HOST: Courageous is an interesting word to use.
PM: Well look it's tough days for Labor in Western Australia, there's no point glossing over that, and I think Eric's showing a great deal of fighting spirit.
HOST: So you think he's got the job in front of him to win?
PM: From opposition you've always got the job in front of you to win and Eric's out there arguing the cause of Labor every day and doing a great job at it.
HOST: What was the feeling like, you were at the State Labor Party conference, how were you received?
PM: I thought the mood was upbeat and determined, is how I would have summarised it, people very focussed, very serious, very determined but also with an upbeat mood, a sense of enthusiasm.
HOST: If Eric felt that he wasn't penetrating the market place with the voters, would you support someone else and who would that be?
PM: Certainly Eric has my support and I can see him taking Labor to the next election in Western Australia.
HOST: Will you be part of that, was that discussed, that you would be part of the key element in attracting votes?
PM: Eric will be there doing the work for the state, when people elect their state Premier they'll be making a decision between Colin Barnett and Eric Ripper, that's the choice in front of them for state government and state parliament. The choice in front of them for the nation obviously involves me as Prime Minister so I'll be carrying the case as to why we're making the right decisions for the nation's future and for the future of Western Australia and I carried that case into the Western Australian Labor Party conference when I was there on the weekend.
HOST: Speaking of carrying cases it appears that Eric Ripper, I don't think there's too many voters in Western Australia that really believe that he could be elected as the Premier, do you believe he could?
PM: I certainly do.
HOST: Why?
PM: I think he's shown in government the capacities to deal with complex policy, to make the right decisions, certainly to make the right decisions on the economy as Treasurer and as Opposition Leader he is putting before the people of Western Australia policies and plans for their future. Now ultimately the people of Western Australia will determine that in the 2013 election.
HOST: Prime Minister you said that Labor's on the nose here in Western Australia, is that because of what has been done at a Federal level?
PM: Well they're your words not mine, but what I certainly said at the Western Australian state conference is I can understand that looking at the past the people of Western Australia would have thought to themselves there were times when they and Federal Labor were talking past each other rather than to each other. As Prime Minister I've been determined to change that which is why as Prime Minister I settled the disputation about the Resources Super Profits Tax with the new Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
It's why I also settled the dispute about the health agreement, I did want to make sure that Western Australia benefited too from out plans for more doctors and more nurses, more resources, more local control, less red tape, make sure all of that rolls out in Western Australia and I've done that. And I've also well and truly heard the voice of Western Australia about the Goods and Services Tax share and that's why we've got the high level review which got such a good welcome in WA.
HOST: So you're on the nose though, to be honest, you know you're on the nose, the Party knows they're on the nose, you've even acknowledged at the start of this interview you said that you were doing it tough in this state?
PM: Yes I did say that and I believe that.
HOST: But why not just come out and say ok-
PM: Well I'll use my own words not yours thanks very much, and I did say that we are doing it tough  -  absolutely. Tough because I think there's been a set of issues where Western Australia's looked at Federal Labor and said ‘are they really listening to us?', and I came to Western Australia on the weekend with the message: yes I am, and that's why I acted on the Resources Super Profits Tax, on health and on the GST.
Clearly in terms of the broad national debate at the moment with carbon pricing, these are difficult days in which I'm taking the right decisions for the nation's future. They're not necessary easy decisions but they are right and we are working to get carbon priced so big polluters pay the price and we use some of that money to protect Australian jobs, to tackle climate change, but overwhelmingly it will be used so that 9 out of 10 households in Australia get a tax cut or an increase in their payments.
HOST: Do you believe what Air Chief Marshall Angus Houston believes and that we're winning the war in Afghanistan, do you really believe that?
PM: Yes I do.
HOST: How are we winning it?
PM: We've broken to momentum of the insurgency, more ground is stabilised and controlled, we're training the Afghan National Army, we've shown great success at that, we're training Afghan police as well, and the aim is to transition to Afghan security leadership so that's why the training is so important.
I always judge this not only through the reports I get in Canberra from the Defence Force but I judge it through the eyes of our soldiers when I speak to them, the people who have been to Afghanistan and a great Western Australian, Ben Roberts- Smith, your VC winner, would tell you if he was on the radio now, having been to Afghanistan on a number of occasions, that progress is being made, that we are winning.
HOST: CHOGM is coming to this state, what role will you have and have you spoke to Colin Barnett about what role we'll take as far as the world's stage is concerned?
PM: Well CHOGM of course is a meeting for heads of government so I will be chairing the meeting as the Prime Minister of the host nation, Australia. So I will be there in the lead up to CHOGM governing the country from Western Australia, and then I will be there as the chair of the meeting showcasing Perth and Western Australia to the world. I've talked to Premier Barnett about what a fantastic opportunity this is to showcase Perth and Western Australia to the world and we will be working on that together.
The Leader's Retreat that is being constructed right now is a beautiful venue and that is going to show Perth in its best light, and then we will have literally thousands of visitors from around the world, so it's not just the heads of government, CHOGM will involve thousands of visitors from the around the world participating in the business event, in the associated youth and women's events, in the cultural events, there'll be sporting events. So this is going to be a huge festival-
HOST: I'm exhausted just listening to that.
PM: There will be lots for the people of WA to participate in, but that means there will also be lots of ways of showing WA to the world on the world's stage so it is tremendously exciting.
HOST: Prime Minister did you seek Nic Naitanui's mark on the weekend?
PM: No I didn't, I had a pretty busy weekend so not too much appreciation of any of the sporting contests on the weekend for me.
HOST: What about the Bulldog's, they've been away, can they still win the flag?
PM: Well I've spoken to you about tough days, I'm going to have to say tough days too, but we know what it's like at the Bulldogs to see our way through tough days, we're full of fighting spirit.
HOST: Who's got a bigger job, Rodney Eade or yourself?
PM: I think I've got the bigger job, but Rodney's got a very, very important job.
HOST: He has, on occasions.
PM: Certainly important to me.
HOST: Well it's good to see you over in the west, let's hope you spend a bit more time before CHOGM.
PM: I'll certainly be there on a number of occasions and I will literally by governing the country from Western Australia in the lead up to CHOGM which is going to be a fantastic set of events.
HOST: Alright, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning, Jon.
HOST: We'll come to carbon tax problems in a moment, but I understand today you're going to get for your anniversary a writ from Big Tobacco, who are opposed to your plain packaging legislation. Do you concede they at least have an arguable case?
PM: We're not going to be intimidated by any of this, Jon. We are very confident in our reforms - confident we can deliver them and confident that they will make a difference to the number of people who smoke and that's what this is all about. I mean, smoking kills. You don't need to do anything other than pick up the words of the cigarette warnings, smoking kills-
HOST: -Then ban it.
PM: -and if we can take a measure that stops people smoking, then we should.
HOST: They're relying on international free trade agreements and saying that you are infringing on their copyright and they're claiming billions of dollars in damages. This could break the budget.
PM: Well, we're very confident of our position, Jon, and we're not going to be deterred by the actions of Big Tobacco.
HOST: You're prepared to fight this tooth and nail?
PM: Absolutely. We're not going to be intimidated by Big Tobacco's tactics, whether they're political tactics, whether they're public affairs kind of tactics out in the community or whether they're legal tactics.
We're not taking a backwards step. We've made the right decision and we'll see it through and we're very confident we can deliver plain paper packaging.
HOST: So, you won't negotiate a partial plain packaging, a reduction in branding? There's no compromise whatsoever behind the scenes?
PM: No compromise. We're going to deliver cigarette packages in that drab green, with no logos, you know, nothing glitzy or attractive or enticing about the package. That's the aim.
HOST: Even if it costs billions of dollars, just finally, you'll continue even if it costs billions?
PM: Jon, you're making an assumption about the legal action I'm not prepared to share with you. We are very confident of our position.
HOST: Alright, the Lowy Institute this morning have released some statistics from a survey they've conducted showing there's a considerable reduction, a decline in support for any measures on carbon tax, anything that costs people money by way of reduction in people's household emissions and the like. You don't have the support you might have had if you'd done this a few years ago.
PM: I'm determined to see this through, too, Jon, because pricing carbon is the right thing to do to tackle climate change.
The price, of course, is going to be paid the 1,000 biggest polluters. They're smart business people and once they pay a price for carbon they'll find a way of reducing that bill by having cleaner, greener ways of working.
We are going to assist Australian families with tax cuts and with increases in payments. 9 out of 10 households will get a tax cut or a payment increase or a combination of the two, and the vast majority of Australian households won't pay a cent as a result of the price on carbon.
So, I understand there's cost of living pressures out there and the message from us is we will be working with Australians, 9 out of 10 households getting a tax cut or a payment increase, millions not paying a cent and for the lower income households we'll make sure that there's a safety net there - a buffer - so that they're actually getting 20 per cent more than the expected impact on them of a price on carbon, because we realise they're the Australians with the absolutely tightest budgets and the least room for manoeuvre.
HOST: OK, cleaner and greener must mean pricier. If you have this massive investment in infrastructure for cleaner and greener then it's going to be pricier, and how can you offer compensation into perpetuity, into the future forever? You just can't, can you?
PM: Yes we can, we can certainly offer permanent assistance - and we will, Jon. The assistance will be permanent. The carbon price will be here to stay and the assistance will be permanent and the carbon price will drive a behavioural change so that people do find cleaner ways of working and greener energy sources. That's what will reduce their bill when they pay the price for their carbon pollution.
HOST: You're going to have to pay a political price, too, and Bob Brown over the weekend in a series of interviews, as the Greens prepare to take the balance of power in the Senate starting from 1 July, says he wants to shut down the coal industry totally. Do you think that'll ever happen?
PM: I don't agree with Senator Brown on that. I believe coal's got a future in this country and we will be delivering measures to work with the coal industry as we transition into carbon pricing. I've been very clear with representatives of the coal industry, both employers and union representatives, that we will be working with them.
HOST: What is coal's future?
PM: Well, I think coal's future will be a way of working differently. There are cleaner coal-
HOST: -How different can it be? You dig it up and you burn it.
PM: Well, Jon, it can be different because there are ways of making the use of coal cleaner and there are of course carbon capture and storage technologies which are being innovated on, if I can use that form of words. The innovation is happening, literally, as we speak. There are projects around the world that demonstrate this technology and we'll see further innovation in it so that you can capture the carbon and sequester the carbon.
HOST: But clean coal is totally unproven technology and you're placing a great deal of faith in it.
PM: I'm placing a great deal of faith on our ability as a nation to be confident, creative and to innovate for the future. 
HOST: Will you compensate the coal industry for the cost of this so-called transition?
PM: We'll work with the coal industry in this transition, Jon. All of the details will be available when we announce the full carbon pricing package, but we will be insuring we work with coal, we work with the people who work in coal mining, to get the right policies and plans for that industry's future.
HOST: This is the magic pudding's theory of economics isn't it, Julia Gillard? That somehow there's always more there for everybody and no-one ever has to pay?
PM: They will be someone paying, Jon - big polluters -  
HOST: Well, are they going to be paying so much that everybody else is looked after and yet at the same time big polluters are coal companies and you're not going to penalise them, you've just said, nor compensate them.
PM: Jon, we will take the money from the big polluters. We will deliver a-
HOST: -But not coal? 
PM: Well, you're putting words in my mouth there, Jon, and I'm not going to allow you to do that.
I've said that we will work with coal so that the industry has got a future and we will do that, I'm very determined to do that, and to support the employment of people who work in the coal industry.
On how all this adds up, let me be very clear with you  -  big polluters will pay a price, we'll use that revenue to support Australian families with their cost of living pressures, to protect Australian jobs including working with industries around the nation to ensure job security, and to fund programs to tackle climate change.
HOST: Do you accept it's the magic pudding's theory of climate change? Somehow magically there'll always be enough money for everybody to be OK. It doesn't stack up.
PM: No, that's a completely ridiculous assertion with respect, Jon.
We will raise money from polluters and we will use that money for the purposes that I've just outlined. Dollars coming in and dollars being used for appropriate purposes as we tackle climate change. It will all add up, you'll be able to see the figures, run your own calculator over it.
HOST: It's just revealed in today's Australian newspaper that a Chinese coal company has bought forty three farms for more than $200 million dollars around Gunnedah in New South Wales, triggering a land boom, paying extraordinary prices  -  10-year gains for some people in five, ten years' worth of ownership. And they're going gang busters, they're building, they're counting on building more coal mines whilst you're talking about innovation of a kind that doesn't yet exist?
PM: Well, Jon, I'm not going to agree with that either. I mean there are projects with carbon capturing storage, there are people working and using technology, yes there's innovation that has to happen - absolutely.
But you know, Jon, can you really wake up every day in today's world and say to yourself in the mirror in the morning ‘innovation's not possible'? I mean the story of our lifetimes, Jon, we're around about the same age, the stories of our lifetimes have been a story of innovation. You know my life today is built around things that no-one could have even dreamed of when I was growing up as a girl. The new technology, we have the information technology, we have the blackberries, the internet, the speed with which we can move information around the planet, broadband. No-one knew anything about any of those things when I was growing up. The story of our lifetime has been innovation and that story will continue. I think we should have an unbelievably high degree of confidence about that.
HOST: Alright, well, we'll see, we'll keep our fingers crossed.
In the meantime, Tony Abbott  -  you offered to him over the weekend the chance to have Treasury run a ruler over his costings on his alternative for dealing with climate change. He says, ‘look, Julia Gillard is politicising the public service by making that offer'.
PM: We'll, you've used the terminology ‘magic pudding' in this interview Jon. Where that terminology rightly applies is to Tony Abbott's plans.
Tony Abbott needs to fund the climate change action he says he's going to take. Unfortunately, all of the experts say that it's going to be ineffective, but he's determined to fund that and that will be an impost on Australian families of $720 a year.
Then he says he's going to decrease tax. We'll I think Australian's would like a debate informed by the facts and figures, not by mystical and magical assertions, and I'm giving Tony Abbott the opportunity to do that, and he says-
HOST: -Until the next election your costings, his costings will both be subjected to independent scrutiny. What's wrong with that?
PM: Well, unfortunately, Jon, last election Mr Abbott didn't appropriately submit his costings to independent scrutiny. When they were the subject of independent scrutiny after the election, there was an $11billion dollar black hole.
So, rather than go through a process like that again I think Australian's are entitled to a debate informed by the facts and figures, not by, sort of, empty words and sloganising. So, I'm simply saying to Mr Abbott, and it's a generous offer not normally made by a government, why don't we end up in a situation where I put out my carbon pricing plan with every dollar and every cent for Australian households. People will be able to see how it all adds up, every figure they need will be there, and why don't I give you the assistance of Treasury officials, so, Mr Abbott, you can put out policies and plans as detailed, and Australians can compare.
HOST: I mentioned a moment ago about the deals up in NSW where Chinese companies are buying properties for prospective coal mines. Meanwhile, in the Western district here in Victoria, Qatari interests are buying up farms for food production. Are you prepared to even look at the rules on foreign ownership of, in particular, farming assets and land in Australia as they currently stand?
PM: The first thing we're doing is looking at the facts. This may surprise you, but as a Federal Government we don't automatically have a complete set of information about what is happening with land holding in our nation. That's of course because land transactions continue to be transactions overseen by state governments.
HOST: But foreign investment's controlled by the Commonwealth?
PM: Yes, yes it is, Jon, but it obviously has to be foreign investment at a particular level and a number of these land transactions happen and they don't trigger the Foreign Investment Review Board work that does happen for major foreign investments.
HOST: Is that a loop hole?
PM: Well, first and foremost we're saying ‘let's get the facts'. Obviously people's eyes always go to the things that are changing, so the transactions that you've referred to, rather than the total picture of who owns what in Australian land. We want to get that total picture. Bill Shorten is working on that right now and obviously that total picture can then go to inform a policy conversation I think the nation probably wants to have and policy action by Government if that's necessary.
HOST: Over the weekend, Julia Gillard, New York State in the USA has finally approved gay marriage, and as best as I know civilisation hasn't come crashing to an end, the sky hasn't fallen in. Are you changing your mind as more and more jurisdictions around the world, including some European and Catholic countries, accept gay marriage?
PM: Well, Jon, I've never suggested that a change would cause the sky to fall in or civilisation to come to an end, but I have said that it's my view that the Marriage Act should stay in its current form and my view is unchanged.
HOST: And there you are, you're the first unmarried couple to be living in the Lodge, you present your de facto partner to other heads of state. Some people thought this would usher in some era of inclusion, and you're shutting the door, slamming the door on gay couples.
PM: Well, Jon, that's not a fair characterisation either. The Government's very broadly worked to ensure that the discrimination that was in federal law against same-sex couples and de facto couples has been removed. The really practical things about superannuation, immigration, social security that used to tie people up in knots as they went about their lives, we have addressed.
Now, of course, there's community debate about the Marriage Act. I expect that that community debate is going to continue. I've made my view clear and my view is unchanged. I've made my own life choices under Australian law as it is now.
HOST: Is it what you really believe or is it what pragmatically and politically you think you think you have to say in order to not look like you're too progressive and frightening people in the electorate?
PM: No, it's what I believe, Jon.
HOST: Really?
PM: Yes, really. You can use that querulous tone of voice with me but it's not going to change my view.
HOST: And just finally, my time, I know is nearly up. The Malaysia plan  -  Scott Morrison Shadow Minister for Immigration is visiting Malaysia. He'll be speaking to us shortly on the radio this morning. There's still no flesh on the bones of your plan for Malaysia and it doesn't seem to pass the most basic human rights test.
PM: I don't agree with that either, Jon, and I don't want to argue with you today but there's a number of things I can't agree with.
We've been clear all along that our arrangement with Malaysia would respect the human rights of the asylum seekers transferred, and we've been clear all along too, that we would take 4,000 more refugees from Malaysia to Australia.
And I've seen some of the publicity generated by Mr Morrison's visit today. He seems to have had conversations and the journalists travelling with him seem to have had conversations with people who have been found to be genuine refugees and been waiting periods like 10, 15, 20 years for a resettlement opportunity. Well, we are going to give 4,000 of those people the resettlement opportunity they dream of - to come here to Australia.
HOST: Julia Gillard did you see any of the SBS program Go back to where you came from?
PM: Unfortunately I didn't. I've had many, many people talk it up to me and say what a wonderful program it is, so when I can, Jon, I'm going to settle down and have a look, but I haven't been able to watch it when it's been on the TV.
HOST: It humanises the refugee experience and takes it away from statistics and slogans and lets us see the real people who we're talking about here. We're not talking about abstracts, we're not talking about policies, we're talking about people and their lives and the hardship that they face.
PM: Yes we are, Jon, talking about people and their lives. We're talking about people who have got into boats and lost their lives. We're talking about children who have drowned in sight of the horrified population of Christmas Island. We're talking about an evil trade in people smuggling and we're talking about people around the world who have been processed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, found to be refugees and are more than a decade later still waiting for a resettlement opportunity and a start to their lives.
HOST: And a compassioned vacuum from Australian political leaders from both sides, it would seem.
PM: I do not agree with that, Jon.
It's not compassion to have people get in boats and lose their lives. It's not compassion to have refugees in Malaysia and other places around the world 10 years in, 20 years in, still not getting a resettlement opportunity. I don't want to see people on boats. I do want to see more refugees here.
HOST: I'm grateful to you. I've exceeded my allocated time. I'm grateful to you for speaking to 774 this morning.
PM: Thanks for the opportunity, Jon. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins me now. Prime Minister thanks for joining us. We had one of our big guns of politics Tony Burke on the show two weeks ago saying the deal is imminent. Now Bob Brown is saying it's a long way away. Are you frustrated by this? 
PM: We are working as hard as we can, Kochie, so no I'm not frustrated. I'm determined to get every detail of this package right. And yes, it's taking some time but pricing carbon is the right thing to do to tackle climate change. And Kochie, I'm well aware that these things can cause anxiety and I'm well aware there is a lot of concern out there and people want the details, but we are working hard and we will get there, Kochie, to price carbon. 
HOST: When will we get the details? Can you tell us or do we have to wait for Bob Brown to tell us? 
PM: Kochie you will hear from me and as soon as we can get the details right we will be giving them to you-
HOST: When? 
PM: But I am going to announce a package that has every detail worked through so we can answer every question.
HOST: But you've got no idea when  -  weeks, months? 
PM: Well I would adopt the language of weeks but we are working hard on this we will do it as soon as we can Kochie. I'm not going to delay an extra day. We are going to get this done and give people the details. And of course, the details will include the details of the tax cuts, the increases in family payments and the increases in pensions which will help people with cost of living pressure.
HOST: See it's fair to say you have lost us all, I think, because we have no idea where we are at the moment. We are all thoroughly sick of the carbon tax because it just seems to be a whole lot of hot air at the moment and so much speculation, it's getting ridiculous, it's confusing. 
PM: Kochie I can give people some details which hopefully will help them understand the direction we are taking this package. We're of course going to get polluters to pay the price of polluting. At the moment they can put carbon pollution in the atmosphere for absolutely nothing so why wouldn't you put it up there and up there and up there? We're going to say big polluters pay a price and because they pay a price they're smart business people, they will say how can I reduce that price, by making my production processes cleaner? 
So the 1,000 big polluters will pay and then we're going to use that money to assist households. Nine out of 10 households will get a tax cut or a combination of an increase in family payments or an increase in pension. That is 7 million Australian households getting a tax cut or payment increase. And Kochie, today I can tell you too, three million of the lower income households will get a safety net buffer of 20 per cent more than the expected impact on them of the flow through of the carbon price, because we understand they are the ones with the tightest budgets and most at risk. 
HOST: I can understand the theory of it, that you tax big polluters so they are forced to put up their prices which make it more expensive for us, which will change our habits, 'cause hopefully we will buy something that has a renewable energy base, an alternative that doesn't have alternative that doesn't have a bigger carbon footprint. But if you are compensating nine out of 10 families to cover that, how does it change my behaviour to go greener because you are actually subsidising me, I don't need to make that decision?
PM: Well the people whose behaviour we principally want to change are the 1,000 big polluters. So they're-
HOST: But they will put prices up, to me. The only way to change their behaviour is to change the behaviour of the customers who say ‘I don't want your product or service anymore because it's now too expensive because you put the prices up'.
PM: Kochie I think polluters will change their behaviour. If you put a price on carbon, they will work out how to generate less carbon. So they won't just flow costs through. We are in a competitive world, if one of their competitors moves and says I can do this cleaner, I can do it greener and therefore I can do it cheaper, that is going to force other competitors to move as well. So they will look at their production processes, they will look at where they get energy from they will look to do things cleaner and greener. So the price on pollution will impact on behaviour there. 
But Kochie, in terms of individual behaviour and it's a good point you've raised with me, we will be providing the assistance that I've talked about. So the vast majority of households won't lose a cent. Now they will be able to go on buying exactly the same things they but today and not lose a cent or they can choose to buy greener things which will be cheaper things and keep a bit of extra money in their pockets for something else that they want.
HOST: Ok. But we are weeks away of getting any detail on this, so it's still all talk.
PM: It's going to happen, Kochie. So it's something that I'm determined to do for this nation's future. I understand this isn't necessarily instantly popular. I understand it's a tough decision, but it's the right decision.
People believe climate change is real. They want us to do something effective. The most effective thing we can do is put a price on the big polluters, get them to pay and they will work out how to reduce their carbon pollution. I want to look after families on the way through; that's why 9 out of 10 Australian households are going to get a tax or some other form of assistance.
HOST: Alright Julia Gillard, thank you very much for joining us. We will be following it, as usual. Thank you.
PM: Thanks, Kochie.  



HOST: Prime Minister, welcome to the studio.
PM: Good morning, Lyndal.
HOST: If we can start with the Newspoll first. Anthony Albanese said last night that Labor's internal polling reflects the published polling. Presumably, then, your polling is telling you your primary vote's slumped, your dissatisfaction rating's very high. Do you have any choice but to push on with your agenda regardless, because changing strategy like Kevin Rudd did would only push your support lower?
PM: I'm determined to push on with the agenda because it's the right thing to do for the country's future - that's what's driving me, Lyndal. We're in the midst of a tough reform with pricing carbon. We need to tackle climate change as a country. That means we have to cut the amount of carbon pollution we're putting in the atmosphere.
HOST: So you won't be backing away at all from that?
PM: This is a tough reform and it may get even tougher before it gets easier, but I'm going to do this because it's the right thing to do for the country's future. I'm not going to put this country's future and the problems with climate change in the too-hard basket and just hope it'll go away.
We come to this tough reform, and it is a difficult reform, but we come to this reform with a strong economy so we can act and get this right. We also come to this reform with people under cost of living pressure wondering, if they're going to see the benefits of the strong economy, and we can support them through tax cuts and increases in family payments and the pensions to help them manage their cost of living pressures - and that's what we'll do.
HOST: Other polls have shown that Kevin Rudd is preferred to you. What do you think when you see those sorts of numbers?
PM: Well, look, I'm not someone who governs with one eye on the polls. My eyes are firmly trained on the future and what is right for this country and I'm not going to be Prime Minister and say it's too tough for this nation to tackle climate change; it's too tough for us to get to the clean energy future we must have if we're going to be a strong economy; it's too tough for us to protect our environment.
I'm going to get on with that tough reform. It could get even tougher before it gets easier, but I'm absolutely determined to get it done.
HOST: You said during the election you wanted to develop a lasting consensus on climate change. You're far away from that, aren't you?
PM: Well I believe that once carbon pricing is in place, people will see how the system works and the benefits of it. We're a long way from that. That's why I think we're in a tough period now and there may be some further tough periods ahead, but ultimately I believe Australians will recognise the need to price carbon and how the reform works. They will see the price being put on the 1,000 big polluters. They will see those big polluters responding rationally. They're rational business people. They look at all the dollars and cents in their profit and loss statements and they'll see this item that says ‘carbon pollution price' and they'll go ‘how can I make that less?' They'll do that by cutting carbon pollution, and people will see in their purses and their wallets the benefits of the tax cuts and the family payments increases and the pension increases.
HOST: We don't know the carbon price yet, but do you need to set it low because of the wariness in the community and because of things like the carbon price in the EU collapsing?
PM: We'll set the price at the right price for the economy and the right price to drive change to a clean energy future. I'm not managing all of this based on the politics. I am coming to this task based on my determination to lead this nation to a clean energy future. It's the right thing to do by our environment. It's the right thing to do by our economy. It's a tough period, but we're going to get it done.
HOST: You've said you expect the carbon price to be announced in July. Is that still what you're aiming for?
PM: Look, we're certainly aiming to get this done as soon as we can and all of the details out there for people to see, but we're going to get every bit of this right, too, Lyndal.
HOST: So it may be longer than that?
PM: Look, we'll get it out there as soon as we can, but this is a big transformation for our economy as we move to a clean energy future and of course this is a big package of help for Australians, with 9 out of 10 households getting tax cuts, increases in payments, increases in the pension. 7 million Australian households won't see a cent lost through carbon pricing, and for those at the lower income ends we are going to provide a safety net, a buffer, because we understand they are the ones with the least manoeuvrability in their budgets, so they will be provided with 20% more than the expected impact of the carbon price.
HOST: Which is what happened under the CPRS?
PM: Well you'll be able to see all of the details of the tax cuts and payment increases when we do the package, and Lyndal, importantly you will be able to see exactly where the money is coming from. It's coming from the big polluters.
HOST: You mentioned cost of living. Australia has low unemployment, jobs growth in the hundreds of thousands over the last few years, relatively low interest rates, higher wages and as your Treasurer is so fond of pointing out, the economy is healthier than other developed nations. Why are political leaders like you spending so much time talking about how tough it is for people? Is that the reality, or are you feeling a pain that compared to other countries isn't really there?
PM: Our economy is the envy of the world. We've come out of the global financial crisis strong with the benefits of employment for Australians. That's a good thing - that's a great thing. We are seeing a resources boom with huge investment projects, multi-billion dollar projects like Gorgon in Western Australia coming on stream. This is great for creating jobs for the future.
HOST: But are people really feeling cost of living pressures when they're in work, the economy's going reasonably well. Are those pressures real or are you talking it up because it's bad politics to acknowledge that people are doing relatively well?
PM: No, those pressures are real. So, macro economy – we are the envy of the world with strong job creation now and big investments materialising before our eyes like Gorgon, like some of the huge projects in Queensland. I went to one myself at Curtis Island just outside Gladstone, a huge project coming on stream and creating jobs.
But in households around the country, round the kitchen table, people are looking at the bills, are looking at the cost of living and are finding it pretty tough. That's why we've provided assistance to work with families: tax cuts; our education tax rebate, including helping you cover things like cost of school uniforms; child care tax rebate [AUDIO BREAK] are now being paid fortnightly so you don't have to wait to the end of the year to get your money back.
These things do make a difference for households, and then as we price carbon we will, in a Labor way as a Labor government, be pitching our assistance package, our tax cuts and payment increases so they help people who need that helping hand the most, and 9 out of 10 households are going to see dollars available to them.
HOST: Finally, the asylum seeker swap deal with Malaysia's yet to be finalised, but when you joined the Labor party, as you made your way through, did you think you would ever be arguing that it's a good thing to be tougher on asylum seekers than the Coalition?
PM: Whatever stage I've been at in my political career I've always thought it was a good thing to protect Australia's borders. There's nothing more important to being a national leader than getting national security questions right and of course we need to have strong border protection and we are providing that. We've got [AUDIO BREAK] assets patrolling our borders than ever before.
HOST: But as we've seen in recent TV programs, a program on SBS and Four Corners last night, there's another side to the refugee story about people fleeing atrocity, about the fact that when you go to refugee camps there's really no such thing as an orderly queue. Is it right as a Labor Prime Minister to be arguing that you're tougher than the Coalition?
PM: As a Labor Prime Minister I think you can have both a hard head and a soft heart. A hard head – I don't want to see people arriving here on boats unauthorised. A soft heart – I don't want to see children getting on boats and then have people watch them drown on the shores of Christmas Island, and I don't want to see refugees who have been processed, who are genuine refugees, languishing for decades before they get a resettlement opportunity.
So, the package we have put together around Malaysia, yes, it's tough. It's going to send the toughest possible message to people smugglers- you can't ply your evil trade anymore. But yes, it also is humanitarian. We're hoping it will stop people getting on boats and risking their lives, and we'll also take 4,000 more genuine refugees from Malaysia.
So, if people's hearts have been moved by some of the footage they've seen of refugees waiting years and years and years for resettlement opportunities, what they'll see is 4,000 more of those people get a new life and a new chance in our country.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks Lyndal.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today confirmed Casuarina residents and businesses in Darwin will be among the first on mainland Australia to discover the benefits of the National Broadband Network.
The landmark agreements reached between NBN Co and Telstra last week have provided the green light for the NBN to be rolled out in Casuarina faster and more efficiently.
The agreements allow NBN Co to get early access to Telstra's infrastructure  -  such as pits and pipes  -  to support the rollout of the fibre network to second release sites.
It means NBN Co can now get on with the job of rolling out the NBN fibre in the most efficient way in Casuarina and 18 other second release sites on mainland Australia identified by NBN Co last year.
This will make a significant difference for residents and businesses in Casuarina.
They will be among the first in Australia to benefit from NBN Co's fibre-based high speed broadband.
The NBN will be a wholesale only open-access network, delivering genuine retail competition and innovation to consumers, leading to new and affordable services.
The NBN will change the way we live and work in Darwin and across Australia whilst ensuring our economy keeps up with the rest of the world.
It will give our children access to world-class education resources, deliver better health care services and close the distance between our regions and cities.
It will also give local businesses like those in Casuarina a better opportunity to expand and reach new markets anywhere in the world in an instant.
The NBN will allow faster, more cost effective data exchange for all Australian businesses  -  it will create a platform for productivity growth across our economy.
The agreements represent real micro-economic reform in the telecommunications sector  -  offering greater retail competition and better value for more Australians.
The Northern Territory will also see NBN Co's new Interim Satellite Service (ISS) commence on 1 July.
This new service offers eligible regional and rural Australians the opportunity to access fast broadband where they are unable to access a metro-comparable broadband service.
The ISS replaces the Australian Broadband Guarantee, and represents a significant improvement in broadband performance for tens of thousands in remote areas.
It will offer peak speeds of up to 6 Mbps download and 1 mbps upload, which is around 6 times faster than typical satellite services currently available.
The cost of installing the satellite dish and equipment will be covered by NBN Co.
The ISS will serve as a transition until NBN Co launches two cutting edge, high-speed broadband satellites in 2015.
This is a clear delivery on the Commitment to Regional Australia that the Gillard Labor Government signed with the Independents last year to bring forward the introduction of enhanced broadband in remote and rural Australia.
It is yet another step in the delivery of the Government's National Broadband Network for regional Australia.
This is all in stark contrast to the Opposition Leader, Tony Abbott who doesn't appreciate the potential of the new technology and has made it clear that he wants to “demolish” the NBN.
Tony Abbott would rip up the fibre out of the ground.
The choice could not be clearer - faster broadband to support a modern society and economy or the same old slow lane where Australia falls behind the rest of the world. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Agriculture Minister Senator Joe Ludwig have today welcomed an industry contingency fund of up to $5 million to address cattle welfare requirements during the temporary suspension of the live animal export trade to Indonesia.
The contingency fund will be financed from the Cattle Disease Contingency Fund and is available to assist with the management of welfare for cattle affected by the suspension outside the farm gate. The Fund was established by the Cattle Council of Australia, the Australian Lot Feeders Association and Animal Health Australia in 2002 from producer levies.
The Prime Minister said she was pleased that industry has stepped up and has been able to secure up to $5 million that will deliver on the welfare needs of cattle displaced as a result of the suspension.
This money will be used to assist off-farm animals destined for export to Indonesia but currently held up in the supply chain.
The Government is doing all it can to get the trade back up and running as soon as possible, but it is important the welfare needs of these cattle are addressed while this work is done.
We thank the Cattle Council of Australia for helping facilitate the establishment of this fund.
Funds will be used to cover some of the costs associated with:
 * 	transport of animals to the nearest practical market point;
 * 	costs associated with the regulatory requirements to move cattle;
 * 	animal husbandry costs including feed, animal health or biosecurity treatments.   
Minister Ludwig said affected cattle owners will be able to apply to the fund for reimbursement of these costs.
We want to see producers supported during this period. This commitment from industry does just that.
The decision to suspend the trade has had an impact on the industry, but the Government wants to see an industry into the future. The only way to achieve this was to suspend trade while safeguards are established.
This commitment from industry also builds upon the income recovery subsidy announced by the Government on Monday.
The fund will be managed by industry to support industry, ensuring the welfare of the cattle remains the key consideration and meeting the Minister's request for industry assistance.
While focus of this fund is outside the farm gate, the Cattle Disease Contingency Fund will also be able to monitor on-farm welfare issues.
Impacted cattle owners will be contacted directly by the Cattle Disease Contingency Fund shortly. For any queries relevant cattle owners can call (02) 6273 3688.  



Australian patients will be able to have Medicare funded consultations with any medical specialist via a video conference for the first time starting this Friday.
Telehealth will transform the way health care is delivered in Australia by removing distance, time and cost as a barrier to accessing care – delivering better health outcomes for patients.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Health Minister Nicola Roxon previewed Telehealth services today through a joint video conference in Darwin and Adelaide – delivering on one of the Government's key election commitments.
Telehealth services are a key part of the Gillard Government's National Digital Economy Strategy, strongly supported by the rollout of the National Broadband Network.
The Gillard Government's $620 million Telehealth initiative will allow patients in rural, regional and outer metropolitan areas to ‘see' their specialist close to home without the time and expense of travelling to major cities.
Often these are the areas where specialists are in short supply.
From 1 July, Australians in those areas that cover 62% of the population and 99.9% of the Australian landmass will receive Medicare rebates and incentives for medical video conferencing.
The video conferencing can take place in their local GP clinic and other health care facilities in their local area to a specialist at another location.
Medicare funded Telehealth services will also be available to residents of eligible aged care facilities and to patients at Aboriginal Medical Services anywhere in Australia.
Today's demonstration shows how a patient who can't see a specialist dermatologist locally will be able, with the help of their local general practitioner ‘see' that specialist via videoconferencing without having to travel interstate or wait for months for a locum specialist visit.
Participating health practitioners around the country will receive attractive Medicare rebates from 1 July to compensate them for their time invested in the consultation, and some support for the technology required.
These include increased Medicare rebates for Telehealth, payments to cover start up costs of installing the technology, and bulk billing incentives.
Payments are applicable for both the specialist and the GP, nurse, midwife or Aboriginal health worker assisting the patient during the consultation.
The Gillard Government has set a goal in the National Digital Economy Strategy that 495,000 Telehealth consultations will have been delivered by July 2015.
Improving access to quality health care for all Australians is a key priority for the Gillard Government.
It is unacceptable that if you live in rural and regional Australia, you are up to three times more likely to die within five years if you are diagnosed with cancer than other Australians.
Improving access to services and health care professionals through initiatives like Medicare funded Telehealth services will help change these outcomes.
This builds on the Gillard Government's health reforms that include investments in eHealth records and regional cancer centres to reduce the divide between metropolitan and regional Australia.
Further information is available at www.yourhealth.gov.au



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today went online to officially open new facilities at the Katherine School of the Air in the Northern Territory.
The Prime Minister spoke with parents and students and witnessed some of the new facilities in Katherine via the internet from the NT Open Education Centre in Darwin.
The new facilities include the school's very first classroom which boasts electronic whiteboards, the latest wireless technology and 16 new computers.
Katherine School of the Air continues to help connect teachers and students separated by thousands of kilometres since it first began classes for students in remote areas in 1966.
The Prime Minister joined Minister for Tertiary Education and Skills, Senator Chris Evans, Member for Lingiari, Warren Snowdon MP and NT Minister for Education and Training, Dr Christopher Bruce Burns for the opening.
Access to modern technology means students and teachers can now see each other and share learning materials using the internet.
Lessons are beamed across 800,000 square kilometres - an area twice the size of the United Kingdom.
Each year, the school teaches about 250 students ranging in age from preschool to Year 9.
The new purpose-built facilities provide a vastly improved teaching and learning environment which is benefiting both teachers and students.
Teachers are now able to access professional development and leadership opportunities while the new classroom enables them to cater for students of all ages.
The school also has new shower and bathroom facilities for visiting students.
The new facilities are part of the Gillard Labor Government's commitment to ensuring regional Australians have the services they need to reach their full potential, no matter where they live.
Katherine School of the Air received $975,000 through the Australian Government's National School Pride program and Primary Schools for the 21st Century (P21) elements of the $16.2 billion Building the Education Revolution.
The school's new computers were provided under the Digital Education Revolution National Partnership.
In the Northern Territory alone, the Australian Government is funding 388 projects worth more than $270 million under the BER.
The Government's $1.28 billion National School Pride program is funding more than 9400 eligible schools in every state and territory for minor infrastructure and refurbishment.
The $14.1 billion Primary Schools for the 21st Century program funding more than 7900 eligible primary schools in every state and territory for major new infrastructure.
The Australian Government's $2.2 billion National Secondary School Computer Fund is on track to deliver more than 788,000 computers by the end of this year.



The Australian and the Northern Territory Governments and the Northern Land Council today signed an historic agreement that paves the way for the resolution of the Kenbi (Cox Peninsula) Land Claim.
The Kenbi Land Claim, lodged in 1979, is one of the longest running land claims under the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976.
The Heads of Agreement outlines the transfer to the Northern Territory Government of certain Commonwealth properties in the northern portion of the area subject to the Claim, by 30 September 2011.
Most of this land will subsequently be transferred, as Northern Territory freehold land, for development by the Larrakia Development Corporation.
This is in line with the innovative framework agreed between the Northern Territory Government and the Northern Land Council in 2009.
Other land in the northern portion of the claim area will be transferred to an Aboriginal land trust to be established under Northern Territory legislation.
This is a historic day for the Larrakia people and a milestone in the history of Aboriginal land rights in Australia.
This Agreement will allow Larrakia traditional owners greater opportunities for economic development including those linked to future expansion of Darwin on the Cox Peninsula.
A section of land on the western side of the Cox Peninsula requiring significant remediation will continue to be held by the Australian Government pending assessment and further consultations. 
Following the finalisation of surveying and associated processes, the southern portion of land will be considered by the Minister for Indigenous Affairs, Jenny Macklin, for grant as Aboriginal land under the Land Rights Act.
The Heads of Agreement provides for the negotiation of leaseback arrangements to the Australian Government, ensuring the ongoing operation of essential Commonwealth facilities and enabling remediation work to continue.
This announcement follows many years of negotiation.
In 2000, the Aboriginal Land Commissioner recommended that a substantial area of the land under Claim be granted as Aboriginal land.
In 2009, the Northern Territory Government and Northern Land Council announced an In Principle Agreement. 
The Australian Government congratulated parties on reaching a negotiated outcome and undertook to finalise outstanding issues in relation to the Claim.
The Australian Government acknowledges the significance of this historic outcome for the Larrakia people who have fought long and hard for recognition of their traditional lands.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced a $30 million Live Exports Assistance Package to provide short-term help to individual primary producers and related businesses affected by the temporary suspension of live cattle exports to Indonesia.
This assistance is in addition to the support already provided directly to industry workers, and complements the $5 million animal welfare support package announced by the Cattle Council yesterday.
The Prime Minister announced the assistance, to be delivered directly to businesses to assist with the management of the suspension, following discussions with live export industry representatives.
The Government will provide immediate grants of up to $5,000 for eligible businesses, with further grants of up to $20,000 also available.
This short-term injection is designed to help alleviate some of the immediate pressures on businesses associated with suspension. The Government will continue to work closely with the industry, as well as the Northern Territory, Western Australian and Queensland Governments, to manage the impact of the suspension.
Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Senator Joe Ludwig said that the Government remains committed to the live export trade.
No-one wants the suspension to last a day longer than it needs too. It is clear individual producers are under pressure. These grants represent an immediate response to some of those pressures. 
The Government remains committed to supporting this industry through the suspension. These grants provide some immediate short-term relief to producers and business doing it tough. 



An innovative partnership between industry, government and community is training skilled workers for the Northern Territory's burgeoning oil and gas industry. 
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Skills Minister, Senator Chris Evans, today toured the Larrakia Trade Training Centre which is delivering accredited qualifications, traineeships and apprenticeships to Indigenous and non-Indigenous Territorians.
The Centre is a partnership between the Larrakia Development Corporation, Kormilda College and Advanced Training International (ATI).  
Inpex and Total, the joint venture partners in the Ichthys LNG Project, contributed $3 million to fund construction of the centre which will help train its future workforce.
This is a great example of how industry can work in partnership with training providers and communities to help build the skilled workforce it needs. As Darwin's oil and gas industry is developed there will be many opportunities for locals to get well paid, high-skilled jobs.
A skills qualification is a passport to a job and the Gillard Government is determined to ensure that Australians has the opportunity to access the training they need. Partnerships like this benefit the whole community.
The trainees at the Centre are getting the skills they need to get great jobs and a secure future. ATI conduct industrial trade apprenticeship training at the Centre in conjunction with Kormilda College, which provides students with basic remedial reading, writing and maths tuition. Apprentices are trained to meet specific jobs needs of the petroleum industry.
Partnerships with industry are a key element of the Government's $3 billion budget commitment to skills and training. The industry-led National Workforce Development Fund will provide $558 million over four years to support training and workforce development in areas of current and future skills need. 
The Fund will foster direct partnerships with industry to deliver 130,000 high quality training places. The Australian Government is also increasing its focus on apprentices with an historic investment to lift completion levels and the supply of skilled workers to the economy.
The purpose-built Larrakia Trade Training Centre is the biggest cross training facility under the one roof in the Northern Territory.
It provides skilled workers for industry and remote communities across the Territory and is currently training 700 students each year. The Centre, opened in February this year, also provides specialist support to young people who have struggled at school or been in trouble with the law.
The skills training provided at the Centre is changing lives and helping build the skilled workforce the Northern Territory needs to spread the benefits of the current economic development. 



PM: I'm here with the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory Paul Henderson. I've had the opportunity to tour this wonderful training facility with the Minister for School Education, Peter Garrett, and with Chris Evans, who covers tertiary education and skills education like what we are seeing happening right here.
I'm also very pleased that we've been joined today by Senator Trish Crossin from the Northern Territory and Warren Snowdon, the Member for Lingiari, is also here, and of course I've been visiting with Warren in his capacity as Minister for Veterans Affairs and for Defence Personnel, as well as Indigenous Health, over the last few days.
Can I start by saying here we are in a training facility with its connection to INPEX. INPEX is a fantastic project for the Northern Territory, I'm very pleased that earlier this week Minister Burke was able to announce that the final regulatory hurdle for INPEX has been cleared and INPEX can go ahead a create jobs and wealth right here in the Northern Territory.
I'm also pleased that during this visit I've been able to announce that we have entered into Heads of Agreement to settle the Kenbi land claim. What that will mean is a new suburb will be delivered in Darwin, more housing for the people of Darwin, and a great economic future for the Larrakia people.
I've also this morning had the opportunity to visit new Defence Force housing that is being constructed. Since 2007, we've provided more than $600 million to develop new Defence Force housing. We've got more than 1,000 new residences to come online. That's a great investment in the local economy and local jobs.
So, if you look across each of those areas - INPEX, the settlement of the Kenbi land claim, the investment into Defence Housing  -  for each of those areas it means there will be a demand for skills and trades; there will be new jobs. Which is why I'm so pleased to be here at this training facility operated by the Larrakia Development Corporation where we are seeing young people get the skills they will need to get these jobs which are going to be part of the continuing prosperity of the Northern Territory. It's exciting news.
And I'm also pleased that we were able last night to talk to a large number of members of the local community about their vision and their plans for the future of this place. It was a great opportunity to exchange views about the future of the Northern Territory.
During the course of this visit I've also had the opportunity to talk for a second time to representatives of the live cattle industry. I've talked to industry representatives and I've talked to a number of individuals involved in the live cattle trade.
At the conclusion of my visit in the Northern Territory I want to say this about the live cattle trade: the live cattle trade does have a strong future. The best thing we can do for the live cattle industry is work hard to resume the trade with Indonesia, and the best thing we can do for the sustained strong future of this industry is get the animal welfare issues right now - which is why we are working hard to address the animal welfare issues and resume the trade with Indonesia.
But I understand that there is pressure on people now, and so I want today to announce a $30 million live cattle industry assistance package. This is a package to meet the short-term hardship that the industry is facing now. It is a package which will enable people to get direct monetary support. It will enable people to get an immediate injection of $5,000, and it will enable them to make a further claim for $20,000 against expenditure in their business.
In order to get the money to hit the ground as soon as possible, it will be provided through Centrelink, and this assistance will be provided to those directly in the live cattle industry - the growers in the industry, the people who run the live cattle farms - but it will also be available to businesses that rely on the live cattle industry for their work, so for example the trucking businesses whose business it is to transport cattle, the helicopter businesses who make available helicopters and pilots to work with the live cattle industry when they're mustering. This money will be available quickly through Centrelink.
Now I want to stress this is a short-term hardship package. The best thing we can do for the industry is get the trade resumed with Indonesia with the animal issues addressed and we are working hard on that, and the best thing we can do for the industry so it's got a strong, sustained future is get the animal welfare issues right now.
I'll turn now to the Chief Minister for some comments, but I do want to say this before I do so: we've been working strongly on this and I thank the Chief Minister for that. He has been advocating to me the needs of the live cattle industry, as has the Member for Lingiari, Warren Snowdon, who represents so many of them in the Federal Parliament.
We are working together on resuming the trade in Indonesia. The Ministers of the Federal Government directly involved, Minister Ludwig, Minister Rudd and Minister Emerson have been working directly with Indonesia on getting the live trade resumed. Minister Ludwig has travelled to Indonesia and we are taking a ‘team Australia' approach and working together to get this done.
So, I'll turn now to the Chief Minister for some comments, and then we'll be happy to take your questions.
CHIEF MINISTER HENDERSON: Thank you Prime Minister and first of all can I say I welcome the assistance package, this is going to help people who are really hurting out there in the Northern Territory at the moment. Today, I'm also announcing that our Primary Industry Minister, Kon Vatskalis, will visit Indonesia next week to see firsthand what is happening on the ground to upgrade facilities in partnership with the Indonesian Government.
I can assure Territory families and reassure Territory families that work is happening right now, today, to upgrade facilities in Indonesia. MLA have a budget of $9.2 million to upgrade abattoirs, to put in non-slip floors, better restraining boxes, a whole heap of infrastructure to upgrade these abattoirs to ensure we never see again the sort of images that we saw on the Four Corners program.
Kon is going to visit these facilities to see firsthand what is being done and how quickly the work is progressing in Indonesia, and then he will report back to Territory business and industry and if there are issues that aren't being addressed, if there are issues that need to be moved on further and quicker, I'll be talking to the Federal Government and to industry about how we do that because Territory families want certainty; Territory families want their jobs back, want their livelihoods back; want to be able to sleep at night knowing that they can pay the bills and this trade is back on track again.
So, it is working in partnership with the Prime Minister and all of the Federal Ministers that the Prime Minister just mentioned, I'm in constant contact with those Ministers, the Australian Embassy in Jakarta meeting daily with our industry representatives here, and Kon will also have meetings with other Indonesian Government officials to assure them that the friendship that exists between the Northern Territory and Indonesia is only going to be strengthened through us working together to get this trade back up and running to benefits of people here in the Northern Territory and people in Indonesia - and back to the PM for questions.
PM: Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the previous funding that was announced to assist farmers, a lot of them were complaining that we ineligible for it. Will this funding also be means tested?
PM: Well, can I say this is the third piece of assistance for the industry, so what we have done is provided the income subsidy support. Second, we provided through the industry - and I thank the Cattle Council again - the $5 million animal welfare fund to meet the needs of cattle that have been moved off farm, expecting to be exported.
Now, this is hardship grants directly for business. The key criteria here is that expenditure is being made. So what I would say, people should be checking eligibility with Centrelink, but I know the means-testing issues you're referring to with the income subsidy arrangement and those means-testing issues on the income subsidy arrangement do not apply to this package.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) costly decision for the Government. Do you still maintain it was the right move to make banning live cattle exports?
PM: We suspended the trade, and it was absolutely the right decision. I want this industry to have a long-term sustainable future, and the only way we could say to ourselves as a nation that this industry would be there providing wealth and prosperity in 5 years' time and 10 years' time, 15 years' time and into the future beyond that, is to get the animal welfare issues right now.
The worst thing that would happen for the industry is that we didn't resolve the animal welfare issues now and in 2 years' time there's another problem and in 4 years' time there's another problem and so on so that there are continuing disruptions to the trade. This is the time to get the animal welfare issues right so the Australian community can be assured that this trade is meeting their expectations about the treatment of animals and we don't see the kind of cruelty to animals that we saw on that Four Corners show.
And I would also say, having had the opportunity on two visits now to Darwin to talk directly to representatives of the industry, everyone has started those discussions with me by saying words to the effect ‘I work with cattle, I've worked with cattle all my life and I don't want to see my animals treated like that'. I've had people tell me that they watched that footage in tears. I've had men, strong-looking men, tell me they couldn't take it and they walked out of the room because they couldn't watch that footage. That's the view from industry - they don't want to see animals treated like that. We don't want to see animals treated like that. The suspension was necessary to make sure Australian animals aren't treated like that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: This is a different structure to assistance. Monday's assistance was for individuals who have lost their principle livelihood in this period of suspension and we used income subsidy arrangements that have been used on other occasions in Australia when people have, for a short period of time, been unable to ply their normal trade in life.
So to give you an example of that, in the days of the Queensland floods, there were coal mines that were either flooded or the access routes to those coal mines were flooded. People couldn't get to work, they couldn't go and ply their normal trade as a coal miner, so we made income subsidies available and we structured Monday's announcement in the same way.
This is a different announcement. This is about supporting businesses as they are in a situation where costs continue but income is not available to them as a result of the suspension of the trade. But let me reinforce this is a short-term hardship package. What we are aiming to do, what my eyes are on as Prime Minister, is getting the trade back up and going. That's the best thing we can do for the industry and making sure that when it is back up and going, it's back up and going under conditions which mean it's got a strong, sustainable future.
JOURNALIST: Should both packages been announced on the same day to save a lot of grief amongst cattle farmers who were concerned they weren't eligible for the first lot? Wouldn't it have just been easier to announce both on the same day so everyone knew they were going to get help?
PM: I think the best thing to do when you're working with an industry that is facing days of hardship is to work in consultation, so I wanted to come up here and get the view from the ground. I wanted to listen to people who are in the live cattle industry. I did that directly with industry representatives. I did that at Community Cabinet last night. As people would have seen at Community Cabinet, the vast majority of the questions were about the live cattle trade, from people involved in the industry. I think it's good thing that I can be here as Prime Minister directly listening, and having directly listened, responding with a short-term hardship package to assist people.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) some of the traditional owners here quoted in Community Cabinet are saying they're not supporting the plan for housing and they don't want their land developed once the claim is settled?
PM: Well, the claim has been settled now, with the Heads of the Agreement. We've talked to representatives of this development corporation, the Larrakia Development Corporation, who are determined to deliver housing because it will make a difference to the people of Darwin. It will also generate an economic stream for the Larrakia people, and there is more land settled under this land claim than the land that is going to be used for housing. There is land that can be collectively used by the Larrakia people for their future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister John Symond, also John Singleton, has called on a snap election. They say the country's miserable under your Government. What do you say to that?
PM: Well, I read those comments and they were complaining, as I saw it, about negativity. Well, I'm very positive about this nation's future and every day we are putting in place plans for our nation's positive future to keep the economy strong and share the benefits of that strong economy with Australian's and create opportunity for all Australians. That's what our economic policies are about, our education policies, our health policies  -  sharing the proceeds of this booming period in our nation's economy with every Australian. So, it's a very positive vision for the future and I'm determined to pursue it. Yes, there's a lot of negativity around and I suspect people would need to direct questions about that negativity to someone other than me. I'm not the cause of it.
JOURNALIST: There are also reports today that the final details of the carbon tax are locked in. Any idea on when the public might know these details?
PM: There is a lot of speculation today about carbon pricing, and when we're in a position to make a full announcement about carbon pricing and give people all of the details, then off course I will do so as Prime Minister. And we are working hard on carbon pricing to get all of the details right, so I understand that there is speculation around today.
But I do want to confirm as people think about carbon pricing that my aim as Prime Minister has always been to have an emissions trading scheme. That's an aim that I share with John Howard and Malcolm Turnbull - an emissions trading scheme for our nation's future.
An emissions trading scheme is the best of cutting carbon pollution and making sure that we tackle climate change. It's the cheapest way of cutting carbon pollution and making sure we tackle climate change.
Now, what Tony Abbott likes to refer to as a carbon tax, a fixed priced period for an emissions trading scheme, is a period I believe should be as short as possible. I've always been determined to create an emissions trading scheme, and I've always been determined that the fixed price period would be as short as possible and we would get to that emissions trading scheme, and as Prime Minister I've been determined to do that because it's through pricing carbon and creating that emissions trading scheme that we will create the clean energy economy of the future.
So, people have heard a lot of debate about a carbon tax, and today can I say to Australians the debate that they are hearing about a carbon tax is a debate about what Tony Abbott calls a carbon tax, which will be for a limited period of time and then we will move to an emissions trading scheme which I support, John Howard supports, Malcolm Turnbull supports, and the period of time before the emissions trading scheme is something I'm determined to make as short as possible.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) decide that it would be okay for INPEX to blast Darwin Harbour where the threatened snub-finned dolphins live?
PM: Well I'd refer you to all the environmental conditions that have been attached to this project. Minister Burke who deals with the environmental management questions under the federal legislation for the environment has attached a wide range of conditions to this project including the protection of the marine life you refer to.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you disappointed you're leaving before Territory Fireworks Night tomorrow night?
PM: Well, I am a bit disappointed.
CHIEF MINISTER HENDERSON: There you go  -  you're more than welcome to stay. Wanguri is a pretty good place to watch the fireworks from, Prime Minister. You're more than welcome.
PM: I like fireworks. I would have liked to have stayed, but I've spent a lot of time in the Northern Territory, loved every minute of it, fifth trip as Prime Minister, but it is time for me to get on and do some things in other parts of the country, but I hope everybody enjoys the fireworks and enjoys the Centenary. It is a special event for the Northern Territory.
Thank you.



After hours GP advice will only be a phone call away for Australian families with the launch of the after hours GP helpline tomorrow.
The new helpline is one of the Gillard Labor Government's key health initiatives that will provide late night reassurance for families, carers and anyone else needing medical advice after hours.
Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon today visited a call centre in Sydney to talk with doctors and nurses who will be providing support through the helpline.
The after hours GP helpline will be open when GPs may not be  -  at nights, on weekends and on public holidays  -  365 days a year.
The Gillard Labor Government is making it easier for families to contact a doctor when they need to through initiatives like the after hours GP helpline.
It is another example of how Labor is delivering services that matter to families.
Our health reforms are already delivering more doctors, nurses and hospital beds across the country. We are also upgrading more than 400 GP clinics and building 64 GP Super Clinics to provide even better health care for all Australians. We understand the worry of looking after a sick kid and nothing is more reassuring than being able to pick up the phone and talk to a doctor at the other end.
In the middle of the night, mums and dads will be able to speak to a nurse or GP to get advice and, if needed, be referred to their nearest open after-hours service.
One of Australia's most trusted health brands, Medibank Health Solutions, will operate the after hours GP helpline with a team of about 100 GPs and more than 240 nurses on staff to answer calls.
The after hours GP helpline will be added to existing telephone-based nurse triage, information and advice services currently available across the country.
The service will be free to callers from landlines within Australia and will operate between 6pm and 8am Monday to Friday, 6pm Friday to 8am Saturday, 12pm Saturday to 8am Monday, and on all national and state/territory public holidays.
The after hours GP helpline number is 1800 022 222.
The service will be available in most states and territories from 1 July 2011, and in Queensland from early 2012, building on Queensland's existing nurse advice line.
The Gillard Government has offered to connect the after hours GP helpline to Victoria's nurse advice line, and is awaiting a response from the Victorian Government. Media note: Further details and examples of the advertising for the GP after hours GP helpline are available at www.yourhealth.gov.au  


Prime Minister Julia Gillard today visited Larrakeyah Barracks to see first-hand some of the housing investments the Australian Government has funded for Defence personnel in Darwin.
The Gillard Government has invested more than $650 million in new projects and constructed 543 new homes since 2007 with plans for more than a thousand new residences for Australian Defence Personnel in Darwin.
These investments will provide first class housing for ADF members.
They will support the recruitment and retention of our ADF personnel and at the same time help relieve the tight local housing market here in Darwin.
The Prime Minister toured permanent live-in accommodation for single members at Larrakeyah Barracks which will soon be replaced with 230 new apartments onsite, with another 680 to be built at Robertson Barracks.
The tour with the Minister for Defence Science and Personnel, Warren Snowdon also included a visited to a construction site at Larrakeyah Barracks where 97 new houses are underway in a separate $63.8 million project.
In total, these investments in Defence Housing in Darwin will provide more than 900 jobs for Territorians.
Defence contributes more than $800 million a year to the Gross State Product in the Northern Territory, and stimulates over an additional 4,500 non-Defence jobs in local business.
Business across the Top End benefit significantly from the Government's housing plan in Darwin.



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, welcome to the studio.
PM: Thank you very much.
HOST: Nice to see you here so bright and early. Well, this late for you, isn't it?
PM: I've been up for a while already.
HOST: Am I introducing you to Busby Marou? Have you ever heard those Rockhampton boys before?
PM: No, I haven't, so you are introducing me and it sounded fantastic.
HOST: You had a Community Cabinet meeting last night. There was a great deal of media around it, of course. How did it go for you? What did it prove to you about the Northern Territory and its Territorians?
PM: I thought it was a great exchange of views. Of course, there was a big focus on what's happening now with the live cattle trade, and I think that's a good thing. This is a big issue for the Northern Territory and for me to be here face to face with my Ministerial team, listen to questions, respond, give answers, have a really deep exchange with people I think is a great thing.
HOST: Obviously in this program in the last few days we've had Joe Ludwig on a couple of times and we've also had Nick Xenophon on and we've heard the heat coming out of the cattle industry. One of the big ones is about this $5 million in assistance. Cattlemen still were saying to us it's not enough. Is there any more compensation likely to be announced today?
PM: One of the reasons I'm up here is to talk again with industry about their needs. I came here a few weeks ago to talk to industry directly about the suspension. I thought if we were going to announce the suspension that I should be here talking to people face to face, not having them hear it second hand or through the media, but hear it direct from me. And when I had that first meeting with industry they said to me ‘look, we do not want to see our cattle treated with the kind of cruelty we saw on Four Corners' but they also said a suspension would be a lot of pressure on them.
HOST: Financially it's difficult for them, they're looking for compensation, you've offered some and there's small amounts around, we're still waiting for others to come. Are we going to see an extension of that $5 million?
PM: Well, one of the reasons I've been here is to talk about further assistance and I will have something to say about that just a little bit later today, responding to the dialogue that I've had with industry yesterday. So, to date we've had the income subsidy package, the $5 million that's been made available through industry, through the Cattle Council, for animal welfare needs. I've had discussions directly about what else may be able to assist in the short term while there are these days of hardship as we work as quickly as possible to resume the trade and get it flowing again, and I'll have something to say about that just a little bit later today.
HOST: How much heat was in the meeting last night. I obviously wasn't there, you had to get a ticket to go, you had to announce that you were going to be there. Did you feel that there was still anger at the way in which you'd dealt with the suspension of trade?
PM: I felt real concern and I felt real concern in my various other meetings with industry up here in the Northern Territory, so I'm under no illusions here. I know that the suspension has created tough days for the industry.  My message to the industry I hope has been one of reassurance in this sense, but I see a strong, sustained future for the live cattle industry. To get to that strong sustained future we need to resolve the animal welfare issues. We are doing that as quickly as possible, and I want the trade with Indonesia resumed as soon as possible. We won't let an extra day go by. As soon as we can satisfy ourselves on the animal welfare issues, the trade will be resumed.
HOST: Let's talk about immigration because obviously here we are one of the major landing points, we're very close to what most of the country in the south is talking about and that is the arrival of people on our shores.  Obviously, yesterday the Minister announced, well, I wouldn't say the closure of the Asti Motel, but certainly the withdrawing of detainees from the Asti Motel. Yesterday, also, we've seen protests, we've seen breakouts, we've seen semi-riots, we've seen suicide attempts, and that's all in Darwin's regional area, I mean we're talking about in our suburbs. Is that why that is tied to the notion of an immigration centres being put out at Wickham Point with 1,500 beds and it's away from the centre of Darwin?
PM: No, that's not what's driving the selection of Wickham Point. Clearly, there are only so many places in the country that are appropriate for detention centre facilities, that is where we can make arrangements and get access and Wickham Point is one of them.  On disturbances in detention centres, as long as there's been mandatory detention in this country, which is more than 30 years now, there have periodically been problems in detention centres, so that is true now just as it was true 10 years ago and 10 years before that. My message, of course, is always that people don't get anything out of behaving badly; they don't get their claims processed more quickly; they don't get their claims processed more sympathetically; you don't get any advantage by behaving badly; and people need to conduct themselves properly.
HOST: Is there any chance we'd see children detained in Wickham Point?
PM: We're moving to get children out of heavily secured detention facilities and Minister Bowen, who is with me in the Northern Territory, was able to announce yesterday that we have acquitted our promise to get the majority of children out by 30 June this year.
HOST: 1300 057 222, we've a short time with the Prime Minister this morning so we'll try and take what calls they are taking in, but also I've got a gift here for you Prime Minister-
PM: -Oh, thank you very much.
HOST: I'll give you this halfway through. There's a lot of discussion of course about the intervention and about the things that have gone on and there's obviously a lot of discussion about the bad or the difficult processes that are going on. This was sent to us by the company who represent Geoffrey Gurrumul Yunupingu -
PM: -Thank you very much.
HOST: There we are, there's both his first album, you can get it on vinyl, probably suit your age range-
PM: -Am I getting called old on the ABC? Heavens.
HOST: It's of an era, and there's Rrakala there, so that came to us, so that's Geoffrey Gurrumul Yunupingu and a great representative of the Northern Territory and really that's sent to say there are good things happening in Indigenous communities in the Top End.
PM: There are some great things happening in Indigenous communities in the Top End, I absolutely know that and I've seen some of that with my own eyes. Progress has been made through the days of the Northern Territory Emergency Response: kids are getting food in schools; there being fresher food in community stores; more money being spent through income management on the welfare of kids; better approaches to policing and community order, some moves on alcohol, but more needs to be done and we're going to shape that in discussion with Indigenous people in the Northern Territory.
HOST: It's a huge discussion and obviously it's very difficult to squeeze it into a small amount of time, but there has been some criticism from some people who were involved in the original Little Children Are Sacred report, who say that the current consultations that you're doing and the announcements that you're making about what you're going to do in the second part of your intervention is same-same. We've seen it all before, we've said it all before, and there's nothing new in the way that your Government are approaching Indigenous issues.
PM: Well, I sat down with Indigenous leaders myself yesterday, with Jenny Macklin, as part of the consultations that we're having on our Stronger Futures discussion paper to shape the next phase, and that wasn't the response at all. The response was that this was a good opportunity to directly engage at the highest levels of government, with me, with the Minister responsible, Jenny Macklin, and have a say and people in that meeting seem to me to be hungry to have that say.
HOST: Julia Gillard, I know that you're minders are waiting for you to be taken away; busy, busy, busy the whole time you're here. I do have to ask one question, though, because myself, personally, I put out on my social media of choice I said I'll be interviewing the Prime Minister tomorrow morning, what questions should I ask the Prime Minister? And this is a very important question because it came from my nephew, and the question is for the Prime Minister ‘how do magnets work?'
PM: How do magnets work? Oh gee, it's going to have something to do with the line up of electrons isn't it?
HOST: You're the PM. This is why you get the big gigs.
PM: Well I'll check my high school science, or was it my primary school science, because you've pointed out that I'm from the vinyl era. When I did science in school, that was quite a long time ago.
HOST: There's a magnet in the piece that you play the record with, (inaudible) has a magnet in it.
PM: I doubt that the science of magnets has changed since I was in school. What's changed is my ability to remember that science. I'll go and refresh myself.
HOST: Julia Gillard I'll let the hard edge of communications in the ABC talk the hard stories, at the moment we thank you for coming in this morning and we wish you well for the next few hours that you're in town before you move on to your duties.
PM: Thank you very much.
HOST: Question before you go - we were trying to find a song that you wanted to play, anything Australian. I pulled out the Skyhooks Living in the Kevinties which was the one I pulled out, but you want to hear a bit of Midnight Oil, you're going with your Minister?
PM: I'm going with my Minister, Peter Garrett's up here with me doing a great job on school education, and the song I've picked is Blue Sky Mining. I was, before this life, as lawyer at Slater &amp; Gordon and whilst I wasn't directly involved in the case, Slater &amp; Gordon did the Wittenoom asbestos cases and got some justice for the families who lost loved ones because of asbestos and mesothelioma, and Peter Garrett was singing about it as we were doing those cases, so that's a nice connection from the past and we're still here together now.
HOST: And you've still got that social conscience?
PM: Absolutely.
HOST: This is Midnight Oil. Julia Gillard, thank you.
PM: Thank you. 


Palmerston Senior College, Northern Territory
This transcript contains excerpts from the Community Cabinet meeting held in Palmerston on Wednesday 29 June 2011. A complete transcript of the Public Forum detailing all questions and answers can be found via the Community Cabinet links on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet homepage http://www.dpmc.gov.au/community_cabinet
Narrator:  On Wednesday 29thof June the Federal Cabinet met in Palmerston, Northern Territory. Over 40 individual meetings between Ministers and the local community took place followed by a Community Reception and Public Forum in the school hall.
Footage of the school, Prime Minister and Ministers arriving greeting students, Community Reception, members of the public mingling, music and entertainment.
Student: Today is a Community Cabinet which is where the public can come and ask questions of the Prime Minister and her Parliamentarians.
Kevin Quoll: (speaks in local Aboriginal language to deliver the Welcome to Country) ending with “I hope you people enjoy your discussions tonight”
Senator Trish Crossin: The average age in Palmerston is 28, it's a very young and emerging area of the Northern Territory. So this seemed to me to be the perfect place in the Northern Territory to have my parliamentary colleagues come. It's my pleasure to introduce then to you, our Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
Prime Minister: Can I start by saying to you that this is my 5thvisit to the NT since I became Prime Minister and every time I've come here I have been absolutely struck by the spirit of opportunity in the Northern Territory.
Narrator: At Community Cabinet the Prime Minister spoke about an important land rights agreement announced that day.
Prime Minister: The Federal Government has entered into a heads of agreement with the Northern Territory Government and with the Larrakia Development Corporation to settle the Kenbi Land Claim after 30 yrs.
Applause
Prime Minister:  This means that there will be a new suburb, more housing. So that's good news for Darwin and it also means that there will be a strong economic future for the Larrakia people.
And now over to you, we will start taking questions.
Community Member 1: What are you doing to remedy the terrible situation the Minister for Primary Production has put the cattle producers in, in the Northern Territory at the moment?
Prime Minister: The Government put the suspension in place because we saw shocking evidence of animal cruelty in Indonesia.
Community Member 2: Minister what is stopping you from issuing an export permit to those exporters who can apply those approved standards?
Minister Ludwig: What we recognise is that we need to put in place a model which requires regulatory underpinning to ensure that we do provide both the transparency that I spoke about but most importantly the safeguards for animal welfare outcomes.
Prime Minister: Thank you to everyone who has made tonight possible from this wonderful school  -  we very much enjoyed being here, thank you.
Footage of interviews with community members
Community Member 3: I'm glad we had the opportunity of going tonight and actually talking to the Ministers.
Community Member 4: You get people on board you're half way there.
Student:It gives our people a voice, one that we generally wouldn't have because of our isolation.
Community Member 5: Because we don't see our federal government all the time.
Community Member 6: It's at a level that people feel quite comfortable.
Community Member 7: The Ministers making decisions are real people, hats off to them for doing it.
Community Member 8: People really appreciate the fact that an effort has been made.
Student: It's definitely a good opportunity.
Ends with musical interlude
Footage concludes (3 minutes)


Palmerston Senior College, Northern Territory
This transcript contains excerpts from the Community Cabinet meeting held in Palmerston on Wednesday 29 June 2011. A complete transcript of the Public Forum detailing all questions and answers can be found via the Community Cabinet links on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet homepage http://www.dpmc.gov.au/community_cabinet
Narrator:  On Wednesday 29th of June the Federal Cabinet met in Palmerston, Northern Territory. Over 40 individual meetings between Ministers and the local community took place followed by a Community Reception and Public Forum in the school hall.
Footage of the school, Prime Minister and Ministers arriving greeting students, Community Reception, members of the public mingling, music and entertainment.
Student: Today is a Community Cabinet which is where the public can come and ask questions of the Prime Minister and her Parliamentarians.
Kevin Quoll: (speaks in local Aboriginal language to deliver the Welcome to Country) ending with “I hope you people enjoy your discussions tonight”
Senator Trish Crossin: The average age in Palmerston is 28, it's a very young and emerging area of the Northern Territory. So this seemed to me to be the perfect place in the Northern Territory to have my parliamentary colleagues come. It's my pleasure to introduce then to you, our Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
Prime Minister: Can I start by saying to you that this is my 5thvisit to the NT since I became Prime Minister and every time I've come here I have been absolutely struck by the spirit of opportunity in the Northern Territory.
Narrator: At Community Cabinet the Prime Minister spoke about an important land rights agreement announced that day.
Prime Minister: The Federal Government has entered into a heads of agreement with the Northern Territory Government and with the Larrakia Development Corporation to settle the Kenbi Land Claim after 30 yrs.
Applause
Prime Minister:  This means that there will be a new suburb, more housing. So that's good news for Darwin and it also means that there will be a strong economic future for the Larrakia people.
And now over to you, we will start taking questions.
Community Member 1: What are you doing to remedy the terrible situation the Minister for Primary Production has put the cattle producers in, in the Northern Territory at the moment?
Prime Minister: The Government put the suspension in place because we saw shocking evidence of animal cruelty in Indonesia.
Community Member 2: Minister what is stopping you from issuing an export permit to those exporters who can apply those approved standards?
Minister Ludwig: What we recognise is that we need to put in place a model which requires regulatory underpinning to ensure that we do provide both the transparency that I spoke about but most importantly the safeguards for animal welfare outcomes.
Prime Minister: Thank you to everyone who has made tonight possible from this wonderful school  -  we very much enjoyed being here, thank you.
Footage of interviews with community members
Community Member 3: I'm glad we had the opportunity of going tonight and actually talking to the Ministers.
Community Member 4: You get people on board you're half way there.
Student:It gives our people a voice, one that we generally wouldn't have because of our isolation.
Community Member 5: Because we don't see our federal government all the time.
Community Member 6: It's at a level that people feel quite comfortable.
Community Member 7: The Ministers making decisions are real people, hats off to them for doing it.
Community Member 8: People really appreciate the fact that an effort has been made.
Student: It's definitely a good opportunity.
Ends with musical interlude
Footage concludes (3 minutes)



Today is an important milestone in Australia's first national Paid Parental Leave scheme that will help new parents stay connected with the workplace when they take time off to care for a baby.
Australian businesses are now required to provide Government-funded Paid Parental Leave to their eligible employees who have babies born on or after today.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Families, Jenny Macklin met with parents and their new-born babies in Melbourne today  -  many of whom will benefit from the Labor Government's Paid Parental Leave initiative.
Since Paid Parental Leave began on 1 January this year, more than 69,000 parents have claimed the payment, including casual workers, part-time workers, the self employed and contractors.
Almost 31,000 new parents are currently receiving parental leave pay and almost 10,000 have finished receiving the payment.
Under the scheme, eligible parents receive up to 18 weeks Paid Parental Leave at the National Minimum Wage, currently around $590 per week, giving them the financial security to take time off work to spend with their newborn babies.
Paid Parental Leave helps employers retain skilled staff that they have invested time and money in training.
Many Australian businesses have already embraced the scheme.
More than 9,500 businesses have registered to make payments and many are already providing Government-funded Paid Parental Leave to their eligible employees.
The Government has made it straightforward for businesses - they get the money upfront from the Government and pay their employees through their usual pay cycle. There is no need for special bank accounts or special reports.
A recent Centrelink poll of a sample of employers providing Government-funded Paid Parental Leave found that 83 per cent of employers thought the registration process was easy, simple or quick.
The same number described their experience of providing Paid Parental Leave to their employees as being ‘business as usual'.
In addition, 96 per cent of employers surveyed believed that Paid Parental Leave would benefit their employees.
The Productivity Commission recommended the employer role in the scheme because it would help business retain skilled staff.
In any year, around three per cent of small employers and nine per cent of all employers are expected to be involved in the Paid Parental leave scheme.
Employers only need to provide Government-funded Paid Parental Leave to employees who have been with them for at least 12 months.
Employers can get more information by calling 13 11 58 or downloading the employer toolkit from www.centrelink.gov.au
Parents can find out more by visiting the Family Assistance Office at www.familyassist.gov.au or calling 13 61 50.



Today is an important milestone in Australia's first national Paid Parental Leave scheme that will help new parents stay connected with the workplace when they take time off to care for a baby.
Australian businesses are now required to provide Government-funded Paid Parental Leave to their eligible employees who have babies born on or after today.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Families, Jenny Macklin met with parents and their new-born babies in Melbourne today  -  many of whom will benefit from the Labor Government's Paid Parental Leave initiative.
Since Paid Parental Leave began on 1 January this year, more than 69,000 parents have claimed the payment, including casual workers, part-time workers, the self employed and contractors.
Almost 31,000 new parents are currently receiving parental leave pay and almost 10,000 have finished receiving the payment.
Under the scheme, eligible parents receive up to 18 weeks Paid Parental Leave at the National Minimum Wage, currently around $590 per week, giving them the financial security to take time off work to spend with their newborn babies.
Paid Parental Leave helps employers retain skilled staff that they have invested time and money in training.
Many Australian businesses have already embraced the scheme.
More than 9,500 businesses have registered to make payments and many are already providing Government-funded Paid Parental Leave to their eligible employees.
The Government has made it straightforward for businesses - they get the money upfront from the Government and pay their employees through their usual pay cycle. There is no need for special bank accounts or special reports.
A recent Centrelink poll of a sample of employers providing Government-funded Paid Parental Leave found that 83 per cent of employers thought the registration process was easy, simple or quick.
The same number described their experience of providing Paid Parental Leave to their employees as being ‘business as usual'.
In addition, 96 per cent of employers surveyed believed that Paid Parental Leave would benefit their employees.
The Productivity Commission recommended the employer role in the scheme because it would help business retain skilled staff.
In any year, around three per cent of small employers and nine per cent of all employers are expected to be involved in the Paid Parental leave scheme.
Employers only need to provide Government-funded Paid Parental Leave to employees who have been with them for at least 12 months.
Employers can get more information by calling 13 11 58 or downloading the employer toolkit from www.centrelink.gov.au
Parents can find out more by visiting the Family Assistance Office at www.familyassist.gov.au or calling 13 61 50.



HOST: Prime Minister good morning, welcome.
PM: Good morning Barrie
HOST: Well Tony Abbott's talking there about a shattering defeat for Labor off the back of the latest opinion polls. Does that sort of rhetoric make your nervous?
PM: The Leader of the Opposition's grown so arrogant here Barrie that he's forgotten Australia's a democracy. The Australian people will decide the election in 2013. I will go to that election having delivered big reforms to tackle climate change and in health and education with a budget in surplus, having helped people with cost of living pressures and rolling the NBN out around the country. The Leader of the Opposition will go with his plan to bring back Work Choices, to smash the budget surplus, to take money out of education and health and to rip up the NBN. We'll let the Australian people decide.
HOST: The point he makes though that if you were to lose you'd be so demoralised that you give up the fight on a lot of those policies including the price on carbon.
PM: Well all of this seems to me a bit rich Barrie. We've got a Leader of the Opposition who won't tell us basic things about his policies and plans for the nation and he's somehow asking me to speculate about the days beyond the next election. Well I won't do it. I'll keep leading the nation in accordance with my vision for this country's future, enhancing our prosperity and using that prosperity to bring new opportunities to every Australian- new choices in life, new education opportunities, a better chance and a better start for Australian kids.
HOST: But is it unreasonable though to ask what you would do on a carbon price if the Coalition was to win the election because that would surely be seen, if there's ever going to be an issue at the next election that would be almost the referendum issue, it would be that. Would you not regard that as a clear mandate for Tony Abbott's policy over yours?
PM: I'm not going to speculate about the next election and Barrie by the time of the next election carbon pricing will be in place, we will be tackling this big challenge of climate change, we will be moving towards a cleaner energy future and Australians can judge it then. And of course we'll continue to be talking about and campaigning on carbon pricing, but I suspect the next election will be about a lot more, Barrie. It will be about the Leader of the Opposition's plans to return Work Choices, it'll be about keeping the economy strong, which is what I'll be advocating. It will be about enhancing opportunities for Australians which is what the Government will be delivering and what we will continue to put before the nation for their judgement.
HOST: But if you ask that question of Bob Brown he says ‘Well I'll stick with what my constituents want', in other words ‘I will go on supporting a carbon price'. So would that be your position or do you accept the Government's mandate?
PM: Barrie, every day I'm in politics I'll do what's right for the nation's future. But I'm not going to sit here two years before the next election allowing Mr Abbott to say the debate is about the days beyond the next election. The debate is about right here, right now and whether or not our nation is up to the challenge of tackling climate change and pricing carbon. And Mr Abbott in that debate has been deliberately misleading the Australian people. For example, he's claimed more than 20 times that petrol prices would go up as a result of pricing carbon and I'm in a position today to say to you petrol prices will not be touched by carbon pricing. Families, tradies, small business people do not have to worry about a petrol price increase. So let's have a debate on the facts about carbon pricing right now.
HOST: And is that forever? That, including when it transfers onto an ETS?
PM: The design of this scheme is that petrol pricing- petrol will be out now and out for the future. And to explain that to you Barrie, I represent an outer urban electorate, I know what it's like for people to have no choice but to jump in their cars to get places and I do too want to acknowledge the role played here by Tony Windsor. He has put forward a powerful case for people in country Australian who've got no choice but to jump in their cars to get places and I hear that all the time from regional members like Warren Snowdon in the Northern Territory who I spent some time with last week. So we are not going to have petrol included in the scheme now or in the future.
HOST: Okay, so Tony Windsor's happy but is this one in the eye for Bob Brown and the Greens?
PM: Well we are working to finalise the details of carbon pricing. It will be a different package from the carbon pollution reduction scheme. It will be a package focused on doing the right thing by our environment-
HOST: But we know that petrol's out. How have the Greens taken to that?
PM: Well the scheme overall, and we're working to finalise it still Barrie, so there are still some discussions and conversations to come, but the package when you see it as a whole, when we're in a position to announce every detail, I believe will stack up to the test of doing the right thing by our environment, the right thing by our economy and the jobs that Australians have and the right thing  by Australian families struggling with cost of living pressures who will get the benefits of tax cuts, payment increases and will not see petrol prices increase as a result of pricing carbon.
HOST: But the Greens and others have said in the past that petrol's a bit pollutant. It takes a fair bit of the purity out of the system?
PM: Well I think when all of the details are available the package should be judged as a whole. But I do believe it's good news for Australian families and small businesses, tradies, it's good news for people in outer urban communities and particularly in regional communities that petrol is not going to be included in this scheme.
HOST: Now what of the point that GeorgeMegalogenis raised about these quarterly payments to the self-funded retirees and the pensioners, when will that kick in?
PM: Well what we've said today is self-funded retirees who have got a Commonwealth Health Care Card will get the same assistance as pensioners. We will deliver that quarterly, they get quarterly supplements from the Government -
HOST: But starting when?
PM:  - and it will be added in.
HOST: Starting when?
PM: It will be started as the carbon pricing scheme is started.
HOST: So from July next year? You don't feel you need to deliver it perhaps three months ahead of time so that they've got the money there when the first bills start to hit the table?
PM: Well people will be able to see all of the dates of delivery, but the ongoing mechanism will be the quarterly supplement.
HOST: And the same with the tax cuts, they'll come in at the same time?
PM: Well we have said that Australians will get the benefit of tax cuts, you'll see all of these details, Barrie, after carbon pricing is finalised. This is a major reform, a big scheme, we're still working to get every detail right but the principles here that Australian families can rely on  -  petrol will not be covered in the scheme, households will be compensated, nine out of ten households will receive tax cuts or payment increases or a combination of both. Today we've confirmed the way in which self-funded retirees with Commonwealth Health Care Cards will get assisted.
HOST: So all of the details then are how far away? A week or so?
PM: Barrie I'm not here to confirm the date, we're working hard to finalise the scheme.
HOST: Why did you re-open the debate about when a tax is a tax, surely that could not have been helpful?
PM: I was trying to make a broader point Barrie, and you know, people can quibble with the words and you know, that's politics, day by day. But the important point under all of this is whatever terminology you use, whether you talk about a fixed price scheme, whether you talk about a fixed price scheme that works effectively like a tax or whether you just call it a carbon tax. Whatever words you use to describe it, that will be for a fixed period of time. It will be temporary and the emissions trading scheme, which I support, John Howard supported, Malcolm Turnbull supported. The emissions trading scheme will be permanent.
HOST: But what you said is that Tony Abbott calls it a tax when in fact everybody calls it a tax. You've called it a tax.
PM: And I'm happy to say- yes I have called it a tax. I was seeking to make a point that Tony Abbott is out there misleading the Australian people about a set of fundamentals here. As Leader of the Opposition he certainly believes in that word  -  opposition, Barrie. And what he is doing in this debate is trying to persuade Australians that a carbon tax will be permanent - that's not true. He's been trying to persuade Australians that petrol prices will go up - that's not true. He's been trying to persuade Australians that they won't get assistance  -  nine out of ten households will get tax cuts or payment benefits or both. And he's been trying to say to Australians somehow he's got a magic pudding and everything he does comes for free. Well it doesn't, it comes at a cost of $720 a year. Let's get the facts on the table.
HOST: Another rally in Sydney yesterday, we noticed that the ‘ditch the witch' placard got another run. There were people turning up with Pinocchio noses and so on, it's all pretty charming stuff. How do you feel when you see that?
PM: I've seen the Leader of the Opposition go to a rally attended by Pauline Hanson. I've seen the Leader of the Opposition open a conference that Lord Monckton was speaking at. Not much about the modern Liberal Party surprises me Barrie.
HOST: But does it seem though for you, is it a lack of respect for the office when these sorts of events are held? Do you see it that way?
PM: I think that in the contemporary political debate and I'm not talking about people who go and hold placards at rallies, I'm making a broader point. I think in the contemporary political debate we've seen a bit of a lack of respect for reason, for that fact that we are a nation of reason, a community of reason. We've dealt with big reforms in the past, tough reforms, hard reforms by having a discussion nationally based on the facts. We're still up to doing that. As a nation we can get that done, we'll get it done in relation to carbon pricing and do the right thing to make sure we cut carbon pollution, look after our environment and have the clean energy economy we need for our future prosperity. That does require people to get the facts on the table.
HOST: We'll you're about to put the facts on the table on carbon pricing. That wait is almost over but there are others where the wait still goes on. So let's go to them one by one. The mining tax, now that's still not legislated, what's the timetable for that?
PM: Well Barrie I'm not going to allow you to characterise that as something we're somehow waiting. We are going through an appropriate process. On the day I put my hand out to the big miners in this country and shook hands and said ‘That's a deal', I decided that every step that we needed to take to bring the mining tax into reality would be taken with the maximum consultation. And I don't make any apologies for having had a policy transition group that laboured over a number of months and included people, draft legislation which people will now have the opportunity to respond to. We're going to go through all of that process, get the legislation into the Parliament and deliver the outcome on time, which is in the middle of next year at the start of the next financial year.
HOST: Well I think we can characterise the asylum seekers deal with Malaysia as something that we're waiting on because that was announced some weeks ago  -  still waiting?
PM: Look, the approach I took there was when I was in a position to signal to the nation, our nation, that we were in discussions with Malaysia about this innovative proposition to break the people smugglers business model and to get 4000 more genuine refugees to our nation. I decided when I was in a position to tell Australia about that and to have Prime Minister Najib of Malaysia tell Malaysia about that, that we should do it. So we put out a joint statement, very transparent, this is what we're trying to achieve. Now we're in advanced discussions about achieving it.
HOST: And waiting for how long, weeks, months?
PM: Well we are in advanced discussions, we're working with Malaysia and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as we always said we would.
HOST: So it could be weeks?
PM: Well Barrie, you're not going to be able to get a timeframe out of me. We're working to deliver this with Malaysia and we're in very advanced discussions.
HOST: A lot of people behind you in the Parliament would probably like an answer to that right now?
PM: Well Barrie this is taking the time necessary to get the details right and to have the appropriate discussions with Malaysia and with UNHCR, the International Commissioner for Refugees.
HOST: Okay, the resumption of the live cattle trade to Indonesia, I presume that is still your short or medium term objective? How long away will that be?
PM: It's certainly my objective to resume this trade with the animal welfare issues addressed. And Barrie let's just go back and explain why we are in the position we are today. We, without suspending the trade, we could not have said to Australians that we had a circumstance where Australian cattle going on boats to Indonesia would not end up being subject to the kind of cruelty we saw on Four Corners. So we had to suspend the trade so that we didn't risk a repetition of that kind of cruelty.
Now I've spoken to people in industry and they've said to me they don't want to see their cattle treated like that. Certainly Australian's don't want to see animals treated like that. But the aim here is to resume the trade as soon as possible with the animal welfare guarantees in place. That's what we're working to do, we won't wait one extra day, we are absolutely working full-bore on that. In the meantime we are providing some short term assistance to people in the industry who need that assistance right now.
HOST: But those in the industry right now whose livelihood depends on this, they really need a clearer signal than that about how long they need to wait before they can resume their business?
PM: Those in the industry need two signals. They need a signal from me that it's the objective of this Government to resume the trade as soon as we possibly can with the animal welfare concerns catered for and I can certainly signal that to the industry. The other signal they need, Barrie, is that this is going to be an industry for the long term and it can only be an industry for the long term if we get the animal welfare issues right now. The worst thing for this industry would be to resume and just have this problem again in 12 months time and then in two years time and then in three years time. We've got to fix it now, get the tracking and tracing in place now so people can be reassured about animal welfare standards and that is what we'll guarantee when we resume the trade which we are aiming to do as quickly as possible, that it will be a sustained trade for the long term.
HOST: Now you've thrown Work Choices in, clearly you've decided that that's going to be an issue at the next election. But surely with issues like this there comes a time when all sorts of prescriptions have to be reviewed. There's a lot of pressure coming on from small business, they want it reviewed. What's wrong with both sides of politics having a fresh look at it?
PM: It's not me who's thrown Work Choices in Barrie, it's a combination of Peter Reith and Nick Minchin and Eric Abetz and I think Malcolm Turnbull was out having a bit of a talk about it.
HOST: They're not talking Work Choices, they're just saying tweaking it a bit to take care of some of the concerns that small business have.
PM: Barrie, Work Choices isn't just a name, Work Choices is a policy about making it easier to sack people. About ripping away basic conditions like penalty rates and overtime. Already we've had Liberal Party spokespeople say ‘Yep we want to make it easier to sack people'. That's what happens when they're talking about unfair dismissal laws, all of that's a pretty way of saying  -  you can get sacked, you can get sacked unfairly, get no remedy, no ability to raise the issue at all  -  too bad you've just lost your job, that's it for you and your family. That's what they're talking about. And we know from Work Choices it starts with talking about sacking people more easily and it ends with penalty rate and overtime rip offs that cost real people, real money.
Under Work Choices casual and part time sales assistants, the kind of work a lot of women do, their pay packets were hit by 12%. Working women, full time working, those on Work Choices agreements were getting $87 less a week than those on Collective Agreements, the kind of agreements I support. Real people with real families talking about real money and it is the Liberal Party that is hankering for a return to this policy. The debate they've just had at their national conference, Peter Reith versus Alan Stockdale- Peter Reith wanted them to be honest about returning to Work Choices, Alan Stockdale wanted to return to Work Choices but not talk about it. Common underlying theme here: let's go back to Work Choices.
HOST: Andrew Wilkie during the week said that when he wrote up the agreement with the Government he had them change the wording because it was an agreement between him and Labor and he said ‘No, this is an agreement between me and Julia Gillard'. Does that make you feel a little more secure because that's the way the Independents see this agreement?
PM: Look my leadership of the Labor Party is not ultimately about how the Independents see their agreements with me or with the Labor Party. It's more about my leadership and my vision for the country and my Labor colleagues are working with me to deliver our vision of a strong economy, keeping our economy strong understanding that even as our economy is strong there are many families who feel they don't get the benefits in their daily lives of that strong economy. That's why our vision is keeping the economy strong but sharing the benefits and opportunities that should come with that strong economy with all Australians.
HOST: The other thing that he said that if you went he'd be hard pressed to support a successor. Now I guess that's a compliment for you, but it doesn't say much for the rest of them?
PM: Barrie, I'll let you get intrigued by all of this, I'm not intrigued by all of it. My daily interest is in leading the nation in this period of economic transformation, making sure we share the benefits of prosperity and making sure too that we are up to dealing with the challenges of the future. We've got a strong economy, there will never be a better time to tackle climate change than right now. It's what we need to do to cut carbon pollution, have a better environmental future and a better economic future. We can't get left behind as the world moves to clean energy jobs. Now is it tough? Yep, you betcha it's tough. Am I determined? Absolutely, we're going to get this done Barrie.
HOST: Thanks for coming in this morning.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: As Parliament starts this week, inevitably we will be continuing to debate climate change and pricing carbon. That debate will not only happen in Parliament House - it will happen around the nation. Debate is a good thing, but debate needs to be informed by the facts. For our nation to continue to be a nation up to the big reforms, we have to have a public debate informed by the facts.
That's why, at the start of this sitting week, I wanted to draw - sorry, about that, there's some noise in the back there - that's why, at the start of this sitting week, I wanted to draw peoples' attention to some recently made available information about the science of climate change.
Addressing climate change all starts with the science. The science is telling us that climate change is real. The Government accepts the science. We accept the science from our own CSIRO. We accept the science from our own weather bureau and I would draw peoples' attention to information released two weeks ago by the CSIRO and by our weather bureau which is available to members of the public in an easily understood form. That data shows that carbon dioxide is now at its highest level in more than a million years. It's an unambiguous fact - carbon dioxide at its highest level in more than a million years, and to tackle climate change we have to cut carbon pollution, we have to cut those carbon dioxide levels, with that carbon dioxide generated overwhelmingly by human activity. 
What this science is telling us is if we look to the days before the industrial revolution, before the industrial era, if we look, say, to the year 1800, at that time carbon dioxide was 280 parts per million. Now, in late 2010, post the industrial age and world we live in today, carbon dioxide is 387 parts per million. That's an increase of almost 40 per cent, which the CSIRO says it largely due to human activity.
Now the measurement of this carbon dioxide isn't the province of scientists in lab coats. People can access this information themselves through the CSIRO website. There, they will find a graph that updates air samples recorded from Cape Grim in Tasmania. They've been recorded since 1976. Cape Grim is one of the three premier air pollution monitoring stations in the world, and that graph shows rising carbon dioxide levels.
Now, what does all of this mean? Well, it means that our climate is changing. The advice indicates that if we do not cut carbon pollution average temperatures around Australia could increase by between 2.2 to over 5 degrees Celsius by 2070.
Now this is a huge change. It's equivalent to the climate of Cairns being the climate in New South Wales. It's equivalent to the climate of Melbourne being the climate of southern Tasmania. It means the number of extreme heat days in Australia will increase with all of the stress that that puts of the young and elderly. It means that global warming would see sea levels rise by possibly up to a metre by the end of this century. That's a huge risk to many parts of our country, and it would also see the Great Barrier Reef threatened by increasing ocean temperatures and acidification, and of course that's a threat to natural wonder in the world, but it's also a threat to the tourism industry in Queensland and the 54,000 jobs that it supports.
There's also a risk to infrastructure from higher temperatures, altered groundwater and soil conditions, including the potential failure of urban training and sewerage systems, more black outs, transport disruption and greater building damage.
Having accepted the word of our scientists, their research that our climate is changing and it is caused by carbon pollution generated by human beings, I am determined to act. I'm determined, as the Australian economy is strong, that this is the right time to act.
I also understand as our economy continues to be the envy of the world there are many Australian households who aren't feeling the benefit of that strong economy in their ordinary lives, which is why of course as we move to price carbon we will also move to assist Australian households and 9 out of 10 households will get the benefits of tax cuts or payment increases or a combination of both.
During the course of this week I anticipate we will see many claims and counter-claims made about climate change and pricing carbon. As we move through the week, my message is we need a debate that is governed by reason and governed by facts. The facts are clear. The science is in. We must move to address carbon pollution by putting a price on carbon.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what is the net foregone revenue of your decision not to apply a carbon tax to families and small businesses et cetera, and will that be netted out by the removal of the fuel excise concessions for business, and won't that cost anyway be passed on to people through higher transport costs and higher food costs and higher services costs?
PM: Right, well, there's a million assumptions in that question-
JOURNALIST: -Three or four, not a million.
PM: Three or four, and it's three or four too many. When we're in a position to announce the full details of carbon pricing then we will, but I was in a position yesterday to assure the Australian community that petrol's out of the scheme and petrol will continue to be out of the scheme. That means, of course, that the Australian community has been misled by Tony Abbott on this question time after time after time - more than 20 times. In this Parliament and right around the country he has claimed that petrol prices were going up as a result of pricing carbon. That claim is wrong. Mr Abbott should take the opportunity in Parliament House today to admit he was wrong, and Australians might want to think to themselves ‘well, if he was dead wrong about that, how much else is he dead wrong about?'
JOURNALIST: How is it, though, you can announce the headline without the story. We can't do that. Is this Cabinet-level committee that you're chairing allowing you to come out and make these announcements without the detail. Is it an agreement among all the party that you do that?
PM: Well, when I'm in a position to give people details, then of course I will. I think it's important that Australians understand that petrol is not covered by the scheme. There's been a lot of fear around about petrol prices, that Australian families, for small businesses, for tradies, I'm in a position to offer the reassurance that I offered yesterday - petrol is out.
Everything Australian families have heard about petrol prices going up as a result of pricing carbon is dead wrong.
JOURNALIST: It's out for households, so implicit in your statement is that it's going to affect businesses. Is it a fair assumption, then, for us to believe that fuel excise concessions and subsidies are going to be reduced to offset the two billion cost of not applying it to petrol?
PM: Can I suggest that you'll be in a position when the full scheme is announced, and obviously we are working hard to finalise carbon pricing and to announce the full package. When we're in a position to announce the full package you'll have the full details.
The details you have now, though, are significant, they're important to Australian families and I believe it's important that they're understood, and those details include that petrol used by householders and used by tradies and business people, the petrol you get a the petrol pump, that will not be in the carbon pricing scheme; that 9 out of 10 households will get the benefit of tax cuts and payment increases; that the vast majority of households, carbon pricing will not cost them a cent; and of course more than 3 million lower-income households will have the benefit of what has been referred to in the media as the ‘battler's buffer'. That is, we understand their budgets are tight, that there is not much room for manoeuvre, so they can expect to receive 20 per cent more than carbon pricing will cost them.
I'll come here and then go to the back.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you come in here today and said the debate needs to be informed by the facts. Now, are you telling us about the households because that's a poltical point or because you can't tell us about the business side of things because it's not been decided yet by the committee?
PM: I'm telling you about the households because it's a fact.
Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've mentioned the buffer for battlers. Did you consider extending means testing or compensation through petrol, given that you're providing compensation for electricity prices? Isn't there an inconsistency here  -  you're providing a means test for compensation on power, but not on petrol?
PM: Well, petrol's out and that decision has been made, because I understand the circumstances of Australian families who have got no choice but to jump in their car. I represent in this Parliament an outer urban electorate, and we're working hard as a Government to improve public transport to outer urban electorates like mine. In Melbourne, in outer urban electorates right around the country, there are major public transport investments right around the nation, but even as we do those investments and improve public transport, I know in outer urban communities people really have no choice but to jump in their car. And then, of course, in country Australia people have no choice but to jump in their car. Having petrol out is a recognition of that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you were talking about the increase in the (inaudible) outside the atmosphere that has already occurred, scientists are also talking about the fact that even if we meet our targets, even if all the other countries meet their targets that they've got on the table, that increase will continue to go on. So, what's your best advice on how far are things going to go in the red anyway, and how much are temperatures going to rise anyway, even if we do what we say and everyone else does what they're saying as well?
PM: Well, the aim here, of course, is to prevent the continued growth of carbon pollution and its impact on climate change. You're right  -  a lot of damage has been done already. We can't go back into the past and fix that damage. What we can do is we can change our future, and I'm certainly saying to the Australian community we need to change our future and we can change our future through a scheme that protects Australian jobs, where households  -  9 out of 10  -  have got the benefit of tax cuts or payment increases, and we have the 1,000 biggest polluters in this country paying a price for carbon pollution so they innovate and change, and all of that adds up to a clean energy future.
JOURNALIST: The question is, you've warned about what will happen if we don't do anything, but how much of that warming is already in system? how much (inaudible) about even if we take all the actions that you're talking about?
PM: Well, obviously, having gone to 387 parts per million in late 2010  -  yes, you're right that carbon dioxide's already in the atmosphere, but I don't believe that you can use that and say ‘well, we shouldn't act in the future.' Of course we should act. We can make a choice between a future with increased levels of dangerous climate change, or we can act to address that. I'm for action.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said that you want the debate to be informed by facts, but twice there Lenore asked you what your advice was one the net effect of our action, taking into account action or lack of action in the rest of the world. Will you provide that fact?
PM: We're one of the 20 biggest polluters on the planet. Per head of population, we are the biggest generator of carbon pollution per head of population in the developed world. That means we have to act.
Is the rest of the world acting? Well, we've been through those facts and figures before, and I'm happy to supply them all again, but, yes, the rest of the world is also acting on climate change and we can't afford to be left behind.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've accused the Opposition Leader of misleading on the question of petrol. Over several months he's been making comments about petrol. If it was not true at any point, why wouldn't you say that then, or has it just been decided, in which case he's actually possibly had a win?
PM: I've consistently made the point in this Parliament and beyond that every number the Leader of the Opposition has used in this debate has been a number he's made up. Well, we've just seen that he's been making up numbers about petrol over a long period of time now. Petrol is out of the carbon pricing scheme.
JOURNALIST: But when did you make that decision?
PM: We've been working on this over a series of months, as you well know. I'm not going to track decision making in all of this.
We are working towards the final package coming out, but let's just be a little bit practical here  -  the fact we were working in a Multi-Party Climate Change Committee on the scheme does not give someone license to wander around the country making stuff up.
Of course, when Mr Abbott has seen the full details of the scheme, if he wants to criticise it, then as Leader of the Opposition he should, but that would be based on facts.
The fact that we have been working carbon pricing is not a license to go around scaring the Australian community with figures you make up.
Michelle?
JOURNALIST: You say petrol is out. Is it simply excluded or is it out by a more complicated mechanism using excise?
PM: It's simply excluded.
Lyndall?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, isn't it the case that given your political position, particularly in the Parliament, you just can't afford to have a fight on petrol, and could it be too that with pressure in other areas, particularly in something like the steel industry under pressure from the dollar, that you can't afford to have a fight over that either, and that in the tax relief is much weaker that it could have been?
PM: The only prism I'm brining to the decision making here is the right decisions for the nation's future and I've just described to you I know what it's like to live in a suburb away from town. I know what it's like to be a member of a community that lives more than 30 kilometres from the centre of the city, to be a member of a community where there aren't that many jobs available locally.
One of the most frequent discussions I have with local councils in my area is how can we get more jobs where people live, which is why we had the budget measure in the budget to attract jobs to suburban corridors like the one that I represent in this Parliament.
I know what it's like, day in day out, after more than 10 years in this Parliament, to represent a community where people have got very little choice except to jump in their car. That has been what's informed the decision on this from my perspective.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Sheldon the other day raising concerns about the impact of the carbon tax on his members, Paul Howes has done the same thing, Tony Maher - are you confident of holding together the labour movement on this as this moves into the critical stage, and what is your message to the labour movement on this? They obviously have concerns about it.
PM: I believe it's appropriate for people to raise concerns in the union movement from their members. That's their job. My job as Prime Minister is to make the right decisions for the nation's future - and I will.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Indonesian Government has indicated it won't issue import permits for Australian cattle until October. What's your Government going to do on that and have you still have full confidence in Joe Ludwig to resolve this crisis?
PM: Well, the summary in your question isn't right. In terms of the decision that's been taken, there is nothing to prevent import permits being issued during this period, and the decision that's been taken applies to all nations, not just Australia.
So, we will continue to work as we've been working, with our Indonesian counterparts and with industry here, to get this trade back up and running. I want this trade resumed. I don't want one extra day to go by before the trade's resumed, but when it's resumed I want it to be in circumstances that mean the industry has got a strong and sustainable future because we have addressed the animal welfare issues.
The wrong course would be to say, ‘well, let's just get back up and running', animal welfare issues aren't addressed and then in six months' time the industry has another problem and in 12 months' time it has a problem again and in two years after that it has a problem. The right thing to do for the industry's future is to get the animal welfare issues addressed now so that the industry, with confidence, can know that it's going to be there in 5, 10, 15 years' time because the animal welfare issues have been addressed right.
And yes, Joe Ludwig is doing a good job in difficult circumstances. Let's look at the spectrum of community opinion in Australia about this. There are people on one end of community opinion who say we shouldn't eat animals, people shouldn't kill animals for food. There are people on the other end of this spectrum that say ‘let's just get the trade up and running and let's not worry too much about the animal welfare issues'. I'm not surprised that Joe Ludwig, as the minister responsible, is getting a bit of free advice from both extremes in this debate.
We are, in this debate, determined to do the right thing, that is to enable there to be a live cattle trade  -  creates jobs, good for Northern Australia, we want that trade, we want it to be under sustainable conditions, which means that the animal welfare issues are addressed.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could you just clarify for us, on live cattle, what are we trying to do? We've talked about scanning and barcodes, talked about stunning. What's the government actually  -  which of those, or all of those are you trying to achieve with the Indonesian Government?
PM: You've got to be able to track and trace, so in order to do that you need an identification system which means you literally know that that animal at that farm has gone via a journey to Indonesia, has ended up in a particular feed lot and then ended up in a particular abattoir.
So, you need to be able to track and trace where the animals are going and then, for the abattoirs that they end up in, we've got to make sure that the standards are appropriate and the appropriate standards are the international standards.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you saying-
PM: -Sorry, we'll come  -  I feel like I've discriminated against this corner here, so we'll go over.
Chris?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe that News Limited treats your Government fairly?
PM: I'll let others do the media commentary. I've got no shortage of experts in the room to help with that.
My only view as Prime Minister is that news reports should be accurate and they should be balanced. Commentary can be whatever commentary people want to make. Opinion writing is exactly that - opinion writing - but as for the newspapers of every paper, every blog, every website, every TV report, I think they should accurately portray the facts and that should be done in a balanced manner.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this morning Bob Brown said the Greens are the new face of democracy in Australia. He's raised that the prospect of the Greens supplanting Labor in the future. Do you agree with him and how do you distinguish the Labor Party from the Greens.
PM: Well I'm very proud to be Prime Minister of a political party that is the oldest political party in our democracy. What that means it that we come to our task of governing with our Labor values etched deep into our bones, and those Labor values are about generating prosperity, keeping the economy strong and then sharing the benefits of that strong economy fairly with Australians.
Now, at an earlier point in time, when shearers stood under a tree, that debate about keeping the economy strong was all about people's working conditions; and then during the 60s and 70s that debate was about keeping the economy strong and providing appropriate welfare and income support payments.
In the modern age that debate is about keeping the economy strong and spreading the benefits of opportunity to all Australians, and it's also about being ready to meet the challenges of the future, having the courage to meet the challenges of the future.
So, as a Labor Prime Minister driven by Labor values in the modern age, it's not acceptable to me that somewhere out there in this country there is a kid from a poorer household getting a substandard education whose got the capacity to be the next Fiona Stanley, but they're not going to get that opportunity. And as I think is well known, I've gone to hell and back and I'll go there a 12 times more to change the distribution of opportunity in our nation.
That's not right - we don't have to be like that as a nation and I'm determined to change it, I'm proud we're changing it: early childhood policies making a difference; schools policies making a difference; university policies making a difference; the skills package from the budget will make a difference; the opportunity package from the budget, getting people to step up to the responsibility that comes with work but also the opportunity that comes with work, making a difference.
And in terms of the challenges of the future, I'm not going to chuck pricing carbon and climate change in the too-hard basket and I'm not going to let Tony Abbott and others tell us we shouldn't have the same infrastructure competitor nations have. Australians deserve to have the National Broadband Network.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
PM: Yes, we'll go to David at the back.
JOURNALIST: Can you explain the need for a Productivity Commission inquiry into the way fuel is taxed? Are you open to change on that front? And secondly, will we see the full details of the carbon tax before Parliament rises for the long winter break?
PM: I'm not open to change about petrol. Petrol's out. On the details of carbon pricing, we are working hard to finalise what is a package where every detail has to be right, and as soon as we're in a position to announce it we will.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
PM: Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you accept the suggestion on the front page of The Age today that the Government may have not acted appropriately in relation to the tender process for Sky and the ABC for ABC's broadcasting, and do you have full faith in the integrity of Dennis Richardson as the head of DFAT?
PM: Of course. Dennis Richardson is a fantastic servant of the Commonwealth of Australia and has done that in a large number of capacities over a long period of time, and he's doing a great job as the Secretary of DFAT in the same way as he did a great job as our Ambassador in the U.S. before that, and then of course the list of Dennis' achievements would cause me to stand here all morning, if we were going to go through them, so he's a terrific servant of the Commonwealth.
On the tender process, the tender process is working appropriately. It will work to conclusion. The Government made some decisions about additional factors in asking the tenders for additional information in relation to those factors. Cabinet will have a role in this decision making, the ability to play a part in discussing this decision, and then it will be made by via the Minister for Communications.
JOURNALIST: Why has the process been changed? why is it being (inaudible)
PM: Well, that's been explained and I'm happy to explain it here.
As you may have noticed, and it certainly appeared day after day, as it properly should in the pages of our newspapers, some things have changed about our world during the course of this tender period. Particularly we've seen unexpected events in the Middle East and in North Africa. If you'd got a tribe of foreign policy experts together a year ago or even, you  know, eight or nine months ago and said ‘give us your predictions for 2011', I don't think too many of them would have predicted what we've seen in the Middle East and North Africa. That has changed international circumstances. It's also meant we've had changed circumstances in terms of consular work, getting messages out to Australians in difficult situations in that part of the world. So, we want to weigh all of that into this tender process. We're talking about the voice of Australia to the world. It pays to do it comprehensively and carefully - and we are.
JOURNALIST: But how does that account for the movement of the (inaudible)
PM: Well, all of those things have happened since the tender was originally put out.
I'll take this as the last question.
JOURNALIST: You began by talking about the justification or the need for change for action on climate change. Is it a question about the scale of the action that you take? Is your policy now more all-encompassing in terms of the size of the economy, that the carbon tax will involve, that's acting in a bigger way than other nations? What's your justification to voters about why you need to do that?
PM: We are determined to price carbon - the most efficient way possible and the way that will keep our economy strong, and that is about putting a price on carbon. I accept the science when scientists talk. I accept the views of responsible economists. I believe that as Prime Minister the right thing to do is to listen to the best expert advice.
Now, I know others dismiss this out of hand, never met a scientist they wanted to listen to, never met an economist they thought was worth their salts. I think that's an irresponsible approach.
So, we're determined to price carbon the most efficient way possible. That's by putting a price per tonne of carbon pollution, putting it on the businesses that generate the most carbon pollution, the 1,000 biggest polluters, and then acting to protect Australian families and work with them on their cost of living pressures and protect to jobs.
In terms of the reach of the scheme, you'll need to wait until we're in a position to announce full details. Obviously, petrol is out as I described yesterday. Then, we want to see the price paid by the 1,000 biggest polluters in this country.
Thank you. 



This weekend the Gillard Government plans to announce a price on pollution as the central element of a comprehensive policy to tackle climate change, cut pollution and drive the transformation of the Australian economy to a clean energy future.
After hearing a report on the discussions of the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee, Cabinet agreed tonight that sufficient progress had been made to allow an announcement date to be set for Sunday 10 July 2011.
Considerable common ground has been achieved in the MPCCC talks in recent weeks.
This reflects the genuine commitment of members of the MPCCC to tackle climate change to protect Australia's environment and support the economy.
While there will be additional discussions with the MPCCC this week, followed by further Cabinet consideration, it is expected that the remaining details will be finalised in these discussions ahead of Sunday's announcement.
The Gillard Government's priorities in designing the carbon price have been cutting pollution, protecting household budgets, and supporting jobs.
A carbon price is an important reform that will create incentives to lower Australia's carbon pollution at the lowest cost to the economy.
It will do this by putting a price tag on the pollution of fewer than 1,000 businesses.
More than half the revenue raised will be used for tax cuts and increased payments to households, which will be generous, fair and permanent and will keep pace with cost impacts from the carbon price in the future.
After announcing the policy the Government intends to introduce legislation to Parliament later this year.
This will be an opportunity for all MPs to decide whether they accept the scientific advice that climate change is real and whether they accept the economic advice that a market mechanism is the cheapest and most effective way of reducing pollution.
Arrangements for media will be released this evening. Arrangements for stakeholders will be announced in the coming days.



PM: Good morning. Our nation today is mourning the loss of a brave man, another brave man lost in the fight in Afghanistan.
We are mourning the loss of Sergeant Todd Langley, who was killed yesterday in Afghanistan. He was a Commando, one of the best of our best in the Australian Defence Force. He was a decorated soldier and a very brave man on his fifth tour of Afghanistan, having been deployed overseas on other operations as well.
As you've just heard from the new Chief of the Defence Force, he was a brave and exceptional soldier, very highly regarded by his mates and friends in the Defence Force.
Todd Langley was not just a soldier - he was also a family man, and there is a family in Australia today who is grieving his loss. This is for them a time of tears and a time of pain.
Today I want to say to them that we respect their desire for privacy, but we do want them to know that the nation stands with them during this time of incredible loss and grief and we honour the service of Todd Langley for the nation.
In addition, his regiment will of course feel this blow very keenly. It's not the first loss that they have seen in Afghanistan, so our thoughts, too, are with his mates; the mates he fought alongside; the mates he trained with; the mates he would have had a sense of family with. They, too, will be grieving his loss today and our thoughts are with them.
A second soldier lies wounded and our best wishes are with him for a speedy recovery. We obviously want him to understand we are thinking of him as he faces up to this time of pain and challenge and we are thinking of his family, too, who would have heard this news overnight that he is wounded, now in hospital receiving the best of care.
These are tough days for our nation in Afghanistan, and we've seen these tough days before and there will be tough days to come, but we are making progress in our mission in Afghanistan. Our mission is clear, our timeline is clear and we are making progress.
As we make progress I do want to say a few words about the special operations task group work that Sergeant Langley was pursuing in Afghanistan.
This work is vital to our mission in Afghanistan. It's hard, but it is work that is countering the insurgency. It is work that is eliminating safe havens. It is work that is detecting weapons stores. This is important work to give us the space and the time to train the Afghan National Army and to ensure that the people of Afghanistan are in a position to take over responsibility for security of their nation.
Today, I understand that on another day of loss, many Australians will be thinking to themselves, ‘why are we still in Afghanistan?' They would be feeling the weight of the toll of the number of causalities we have seen.
To those Australians, I offer this reassurance - we are very clear that our national interest lies in pursuing our mission in Afghanistan. We are very clear what that mission is. We are very clear about the timeline, about transitioning security leadership to the Afghan nation by the end of 2014, and we are making progress in that mission, as is so often spoken about by soldiers who have been there on the ground.
Can I conclude by saying on this very hard day, our loving thoughts are with the family and friends of Sergeant Todd Langley. Our thoughts too are with the soldier who is wounded and his family as they struggle with this news and as he receives medical care in Afghanistan.
I'll take questions on this matter.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, you say that you are very confident in reassuring Australians that progress is being made in Afghanistan. Are you absolutely confident that that progress is permanent, that it's not able to be rolled back once we leave?
PM: When I spoke to the Parliament about our mission in Afghanistan last year I made this point particularly that the moment to transition particular areas in Afghanistan is when we are sure that the security gains are irreversible. I used the terminology then, and I'd repeat it today, that we shouldn't transition out only to have to transition back in, which is why as we pursue this mission and move towards transition we are training the Afghan National Army, we are training Afghan Police, we are working alongside them to assure ourselves that they have the capabilities to step up to the leadership of security in a particular area. And I remind again there will be no transition day - there will be a transition process as place by place security leadership moves to local forces.
JOURNALIST: When do you expect the Parliament to have its next debate, and what would you like the tone of that debate to be?
PM: I think the tone at the last debate was entirely appropriate. It was a very in-detailed consideration of our mission in Afghanistan, of our strategy there, a reflection on our losses but also a stock-take of our progress, and people expressed views from all perspectives and that's a good thing, in a democracy that's a good thing and this is the right place for those democratic expressions to occur.
So, the debate will be, obviously, in the second half of the year. It would be my aspiration to have it around about the 12-month mark, so it won't be a fixed anniversary day but around about the 12-month mark.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: I'll go to David in the back and come forward to Paul.
JOURNALIST: We've lost another Commando, it follows Brett Woods.
PM: Yes, it does.
JOURNALIST: A particularly heavy toll on Special Forces. Australia has the third largest number of Special Forces in Afghanistan. Are we doing too much of the heavy lifting with this sort of work?
PM: We've made a determination as Government, as a nation, that being in Afghanistan is in our national interest. We have tremendous Special Forces. They are lauded around the world for their capabilities and as Prime Minister attending international events including the NATO Auspice Summit in Lisbon at the end of last year I've had many, many foreign leaders comment to me on the quality of our special forces. So, we should really be very proud of them.
We need them in the numbers that we have them in Afghanistan because they do take the fight up, push back the insurgency; they do clear areas that have been safe-havens for insurgents; they do find and detect stocks of weapons and improvised explosive devices that if they weren't found and seized could be used against our forces or against local people. So, the work they do is vital to the mission and that's why we have them there in the numbers that we do.
Paul?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you accept that the only lasting solution is, in fact, a political solution and what can you tell us about the Americans discussions or negotiations with the Taliban?
PM: We've long said that in order to get a political solution, political discussions have to be part of what is pursued in Afghanistan, and as you would be aware former Secretary Gates and others from the United States have talked about political discussions with elements of the Taliban.
We need to be realistic here, in terms of progress with discussions with the Taliban. This is in its early days. We should anticipate that there will be setbacks along the way and we should also recognise that the impetus on people to come to the table in part depends on the success of the military mission.
That is, these two things need to work together - military pressure needs to be sustained, so we need to keep pursuing our mission in its current form in Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: Sergeant Langley died on his fifth tour of Afghanistan. Is there a point at which an individual soldier has done enough for his country and shouldn't be put in harm's way again?
PM: This has to be a case-by-case assessment and discussion and it's not a discussion I have as Prime Minister, but properly the chain of command in the Defence Force has with members of Special Forces and members of the Defence Force generally. I met with a number of soldiers who have been to Afghanistan three, four, five times and they talked to me about their enthusiasm to go back again.
Now, not everybody would feel like that and that's why, of course, the command has to respond to the circumstances of an individual, and I think you've seen the new CDF, General Hurley, today make some remarks about that, but many of the people I've met with who have been on multiple occasions want to go again, want to keep pursuing the mission in Afghanistan. This is what they've trained to do, this is what they've determined will be their life's work - being out there in Special Forces, in danger, using the training and their elite skills.
So, I think our great admiration has to go to them, but that's their motivation, that's their life's work, it's what they want to do.
Well go, and come across.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a question put to the CDF today about the toll of the (inaudible) insurgency, and the CDF replied that he wouldn't go into those details, that we would know about that in the wash-up. Well, history tells us that Australians are told very little about the circumstances of fights, fighting in Afghanistan, unlike in America, for example, where they're told a blow-by-blow description. Do you think that Australians are owed more information as to the battles that our soldiers get involved in, or is it that Australia just fears that the public would be against the conflict if they knew exactly what they were doing?
PM: I actually don't think it's any of those things, frankly. We're talking here about an operation that clearly there's caution about because of the circumstances in Afghanistan right now. So, there's always that security concern when we report the loss of a soldier and there is an operation which may have ongoing elements.
Then following, at a greater remove in time, when that immediate safety concern is not there any longer, there continue to be security concerns in the sense that, I think we can all, from a common sense perspective, understand; that if you go blow-by-blow through some of the operational manoeuvres that our Defence Force engage in in Afghanistan, that that information doesn't just go to your ears and the ears of Australians, that information also goes to - 
JOURNALIST: -But my point is-
PM: -well, I'll finish my sentence  -  that information goes to people who mean us harm and they may learn something from having that information.
So I think there's just a proper operational set of reasons as to why there is some filtering, if you like, of information. I think people can accept that.
JOURNALIST: I think I'm suggesting there's more filtering on the Australian side than elsewhere in the world, and that Australia's involvement in Afghanistan is routinely not told and in fact that we only hear sometimes if some of the things that are going on, when certain people are awarded medals?
PM: I think you can understand that, too. When the nation comes together to honour an act of bravery, then people do hear the circumstances.
I don't think, in fact, there's probably a difference between us. I think you would understand there can be legitimate security reasons of an ongoing nature why details aren't given. I'm happy to tell as much of the story as can be told and I think it is important that Australians do understand the remarkable acts of bravery that people perform in Afghanistan, as well as the days of due diligence.
Of course there are the highlights, the remarkable acts of bravery like Ben Roberts-Smith, where we now know the story in a great deal of detail, but there's every day when our personnel in Afghanistan get up again and do a hard day in a difficult place, in danger, and every day I think we respect them for those efforts, and we do try and tell the story of that those days are like, and periodically, of course, journalists do get the opportunity to visit so they can help tell that story, too. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've said that the transition will come and we're sure that security gains are irreversible; you've also given the date of 2014. Is it intellectually honest at this point, three years away from that, to say that in 2014 we will know that the security gains are irreversible? We could be more honest to say if that's the test, that they must be irreversible, but we simply don't know when there'll be transition.
PM: 2014 is of course the date that has been worked through. It's the desire of the Government of Afghanistan, and President Karzai has spoken of that date, and then at the NATO Auspice Summit in Lisbon, and at other strategic meetings there has been discussion of 2014 as the timeline, and of course people are identifying that timeline because the best of advice to them is that the mission can be completed in that timeline and that that accords with the best of advice to me.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, beyond 2014, you've suggested in the past we'd be involved in Afghanistan for a decade, or decades. Is that still your vision?
PM: Yes, it is. Yes, it is.
I've spoken to Parliament last year, and I've spoken on other occasions about how the nature of our involvement will change, but we should anticipate being involved in Afghanistan, assisting with capacity building and in other ways, to the end of this decade, at least.
I have spoken clearly about the training mission we're on, the aim of having local Afghan forces step up to security leadership of their country. I've spoken as well, that ultimately the work of building the nation of Afghanistan must be the work of the Afghan people, but we can assist them with that work and we will. We will have an ongoing partnership with Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the carbon tax-
PM: -I won't take any other questions.
JOURNALIST: In 2009, the timeframe in Afghanistan was updated to three to five years, so that is 2012-2014 that withdrawal will happen. Is it still possible it will happen before 2014, from next year?
PM: The transition will happen place by place, area by area, so it will be a process and obviously when we use the date, the end of 2014, we are looking to full transition by that time, though as I've just answered to Chris's question, we will stay engaged in a partnership with Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: So the withdrawal could start happening 2012, next year?
PM: I think it's important to use the word transition, because it gives the right sense that we are not talking about a day when people step back and everybody leaves  -  that is not what will happen.
What will happen is within the province where we work, within Oruzgan province, place by place, so various bits of the province, place by place security leadership will move.
So, that's the process that we're going to be going through. We've always said, and I'm happy to restate it now, that Oruzgan province will not be one of the first to transition, or have any part of a transition, but we are working, training, so transition can start place by place in the province that we work in and so transition has fully happened by the end of 2014.
I'll make this the last question.
JOURNALIST: What's the transition timeframe for the Special Forces? Is that different to training issue?
PM: Special Forces need to be there working alongside soldiers who are doing the training. So, their mission needs to keep -  sorry, I'll put it differently. They need to be there as part of the mission that we are seeking to equip.
JOURNALIST: They could be there longer than 2014?
PM: No, I'm not saying that. I'm saying our mission is clear and the timeline is clear and Special Forces will continue to be involved in delivering that mission on that timeline.
Thank you very much. 



I thank Agnes Shea for the Welcome to Country and pay my respects to the traditional owners of this land on which we gather.
In making that acknowledgment, I honour the dignity and resilience of all Indigenous Australians.
And I recall with pride today the fact that eight recipients of the Australian of the Year Award have been Indigenous, including the late Lionel Rose whose loss we mourned in May.
I also acknowledge:
Ministerial and parliamentary colleagues
Adam Gilchrist, Chair of the National Australia Day Council and fellow Council members
Australia Day sponsors and supporters.
Australian of the Year, Simon McKeon
Young Australian of the Year, Jessica Watson
I also acknowledge Professor Ron McCallum, 2011 Senior Australian of the Year, and Don Ritchie, Australia's Local Hero for 2011, who can't be with us today.
Friends, for more than 50 years now, the Australian of the Year Awards have played a vital role in our community  -  helping us to find outstanding role models for us all to admire.
And they do so in a way that is so deeply grounded in our Australian outlook and values.
Donald Horne once wrote that Australians are notoriously reluctant to reward “eminence without excellence.”
In other words, they will not doff their caps merely because someone holds an office or a position.
And that is how it should be.
That is something truly special about the society we have created here under southern skies.
We are not a people of hierarchy or deference or fine gradations of social status.
There is comparatively little pomp and ceremony in our public life.
I love a nation where the Prime Minister can walk down the street and grab a coffee and have people yell out “Julia give us  a wave.”
The Australian of the Year Awards are a way of manifesting our democratic temper.
A way for our society to hold up a mirror to itself and discern the qualities and characteristics that are most valued by our community.
The Australian of the Year Award in fact tells a consistent and faithful story of what we value:
As I've noted, eight awards have gone to Indigenous Australians.
Sportspeople are well represented but by no means as much as one might imagine.
There is a generous selection of artists and performers.
A very large number of scientists and medicos.
Two churchmen.
And only one politician!
The 51 years of this award indeed show a grown up nation able to make mature and insightful choices.
A nation that can honour Steve Waugh but also Manning Clark.
John Farnham but also Neville Bonner.
And this year, a unique moment in the history of the awards - the appointment of our first Australian of the Year acknowledged for social entrepreneurship.
Making the point that as we become a wealthier nation,we must also become a more generous nation.
Friends, the single thread uniting five decades of this award is their connection to the Australian community.
Nominations come from the community.
They are not imposed from above.
All Australians have a chance to have their say by nominating someone who they think reflects the qualities that we admire.
I encourage all Australians to take advantage of this opportunity to share the stories of people that they know,or know of, by nominating them for the Awards.
The criteria are very simple:
 * 	Demonstrated excellence in their field
 * 	Contribution to the Australian community and the nation
 * 	An inspirational role model for the community
Sometimes that brings forward obvious and outstanding names like Mark Taylor or Peter Cosgrove.
Sometimes those whose brilliance doesn't always occupy the headlines like Gus Nossal or John Yu.
But there is always a deep wisdom in the names chosen.
The abiding wisdom of a free people in a democratic and egalitarian society.
That is what these accolades celebrate.
Our better angels.
Our nation as it can and should be.
Friends, in launching these awards, I thank our major sponsor, the Commonwealth Bank, for more than 32 years of generous support.
I thank our newest supporter, ABC Television, who have just come on board as the Awards' broadcast partner.
I also thank our other corporate partners:Fairfax Media; Qantas; Holiday Inn; ABC Local Radio and SBS Radio.
I thank Adam and all his colleagues at the Australia Day Council and across government who support these awards and the wider Australia Day celebrations throughout the year.
Nominations for the Australian of the Year Awards 2012 will close on August 31.
That's plenty of opportunity for all Australians to get involved.
So log on to the Australian of the Year website and have your say.
In that great Aussie tradition, ‘have a go'.
If there's someone you look up to or admire, put their name forward.
You never know where it might lead.
It is now my pleasure to declare nominations for the 2012 Australian of the Year Awards officially open. 



HOST: Prime Minister welcome, I want to start with the live cattle trade, it's now been reopened to Indonesia, are you able to say now that no Australian cattle will be subject to the sort of brutal slaughter that we saw in the Four Corners program?
PM: Well we're certainly able to say that we've worked hard on animal welfare standards and there will be auditing and tracing of where animals go and the abattoirs they go to will be independently audited, so people should expect to see full information about where cattle are being handled from when they leave the farm, through transport to the ship, on the ship, into the feedlot, into the abattoir  -  all traced, all tracked, all transparent and with welfare standards at every point.
HOST: It doesn't guarantee that we won't see a repeat of these shocking conditions though does it?
PM: Well it does mean that we've got abattoirs that are audited and we're able to trace what happens to each animal, so it will be transparent if there's a problem. We've never been in this position before, we haven't been able to say what's happened to Australian cattle when they've got to Indonesia, and we saw that shocking footage on Four Corners as a result, now we've got these systems that will attached to export permits to give people reassurance that the trade is meeting animal welfare standards not just in the coming weeks after all of this media scrutiny, but it all of the years to come.
HOST: Have any Australian officials though actually been in to have a look at any Indonesian abattoirs?
PM: The abattoirs will be independently audited, so they won't be Australian officials, there are international companies that do this work and can independently audit. So an exporter, and Elders and a number of others say that they are very close to being in this position, will be able to seek an export permit saying ‘yes I can track my cattle all the way through the chain, I can make that transparent to the Australian public and I can say that the abattoir that they're going to is being independently audited.'
HOST: But wouldn't you prefer to have an Australian Government official have a look?
PM: Well I think the main thing is to have a credible figure have a look and an independent auditor is a credible figure.
HOST: Now as you know there's been a great deal of angst on your own backbench about this issue and still is, a number of Labor MPs wanted to see stunning made mandatory in Indonesian abattoirs before slaughter, why haven't you gone that far?
PM: Well we've been clear all along that we were aiming for the international standards, stunning is not mandatory in Australia and we've said all along we're aiming for the international standards, we want to encourage stunning and we will and our policies have been about that but we've said that Indonesia needs, we want abattoirs treating Australian animals to be at the international standard and that's what the export permits will be about.
HOST: Was there consultation with the backbench before you announced, or before the Minister announced the reopening of the trade?
PM: This issue's been the subject of discussion at a number of Caucus meetings and in smaller committees and groups in the Caucus.
HOST: But why wasn't there a meeting or some sort of consultations, a working group in Caucus that was set up to deal with this, why weren't they consulted before this announcement?
PM: Well David our internal processes are a matter for us and we do work in a consultative way with Labor Members. Yesterday we found ourselves in a position where the three things that needed to come together to enable the trade to be resumed had come together, that is Minister Ludwig had led a process where he had agreed standards with industry, he was able therefore to have the new regulatory framework with the export licenses. A number of Australian producers like Elders said to us that they either could or very shortly would be able to meet those new standards and Indonesia had said that it was prepared to issue import permits for our exports  -  when those three things came together, they were the three things we needed to come together to resume the trade. As soon as they came together Minister Ludwig announced that the trade could be resumed under these conditions. We obviously wanted to give that message to industry as quickly as possible because people have been understandably very, very anxious.
HOST: Can I turn to the carbon tax which you'll unveil in a few days time, you've been saying for months that it will apply to up to 1000 companies, the biggest polluting companies, it's now going to hit only 500. Why?
PM: Look we've made coverage decisions, all of which will become apparent on Sunday when you and many of your media colleagues are required to work so hard to report the new arrangements to the Australian people. We've made decisions about coverage arrangements; some of those have been under discussion this week. For example our decision to exclude the petrol that Australian families buy and that tradies buy and people with light commercial vehicles, but I think this figure of 500 strongly reinforces the point that this is a price being paid by big businesses, a limited number of big businesses, it is not being paid by Australian families.
HOST: Well they pass on the costs though to Australian families?
PM: Yes and we've always been upfront about that but I think there's been some confusion as to who actually pays the direct price for carbon pollution, who needs to pay the price per tonne and this figure of 500 makes it very clear the people paying the price per tonne are big polluters and a very limited number of companies.
And I just think David we've got to be clear about this because there is some anxiety around, there are a lot of small businesses who are thinking to themselves gee maybe it's a bit like the GST and I'll have this new business activity statement and heavens knows when the GST came along that almost drove me nuts because a lot of small businesses really struggled with the business activity statements. What this confirms to them today is there's nothing new they need to do as a small business, there's no new form, no new paper work, no more red tape, they don't have to do anything except keep operating their small business-
HOST: -Just a higher costs for electricity and their other inputs.
PM: I'll come to the cost but on the who's in the system filling out the forms and paying the price, it's the 500 big polluters, they're big businesses so they're well places to deal with the new system. Yes, costs will be passed through, I'm absolutely transparent and upfront about that, and that's why we are providing tax cuts and pension increases and family payments increases to 9 out of 10 households.
HOST: But what do the small and medium businesses get to help them, I understand in the original CPRS package that Kevin Rudd and Malcolm Turnbull were negotiating there was a package of assistance worth $1.25 billion for small and medium business to help them with the transition. What do they get this time?
PM: Well obviously all details of the package will be available on Sunday.
HOST: So they will get something?
PM: Well, I'm not going to pre-announce Sunday for you, we're going to make you work on Sunday as the package is unveiled, but what I can say about small business is there's no new red tape or forms for them-
HOST: -There is a cost.
PM: And costs will be passed through, can be passed through to Australian households and that's why there is tax cuts and family payment increases and pension increases for 9 out of 10 households.
HOST: By limiting, by taking petrol and agriculture out of this scheme and limiting the impost to just those 500 companies, it doesn't sound like the sort of broad based scheme that Ross Garnaut and other economists have been arguing for.
PM: Well I don't agree with that, this is a scheme where we've made coverage choices but it's focussed on our biggest polluters, the companies causing the biggest pollution for our nation and in our economy and in driving change and innovation in those businesses.
HOST: There's also reports this morning that the carbon price will start at $23 a tonne, are you able to confirm that?
PM: David, I'm inevitably going to disappoint you and say that you will need to wait until Sunday.
HOST: Can you tell me this, is there anywhere in the world that has a carbon price that high, $23 a tonne?
PM: Well David I'm not going to play any games about the carbon price, you will need to see the full details of the scheme.
HOST: But even if it's more than $20, is that higher than elsewhere?
PM: Well you're not going to get me to speculate on the carbon price-
HOST: It's not about this package; it's about what other countries are doing, like New Zealand.
PM: David you would be aware in the media environment we're in at the moment that if I start speculating about pricing any way, that will be read as me confirming an individual price, I'm not going to do that, you will need to wait until Sunday to see the full details of the scheme.
In terms of what price has been selected, I can certainly confirm to you that we have thought long and hard about the right price to ensure that we reduce carbon pollution, but also the right price to ensure that we can continue to enjoy an economy that is an envy of the world and as we put the scheme together we've also understood, even as our economy is strong and we've come out of the Global Financial Crisis as the envy of the world, there are many Australian families struggling with cost of living pressures and that's why 9 out of 10 households will get tax cuts, payment increases, or a combination of both.
HOST: You're going to brief your Caucus colleagues on Sunday morning about this as well, before the announcement. We hear this morning that the Greens MPs will get their briefing on Saturday. Can you understand some of your backbenchers being a little bit miffed about that?
PM: Well once again Labor Party arrangements are for me and the Labor Party to decide. Our Caucus colleagues will be out there from Monday on putting the case for a price on carbon up and down the streets and town halls of this country-
HOST: -But do they deserve the detail before the Greens?
PM: My Labor colleagues get from me the upmost respect, they are people who believe in changing this nation, they're people who believe that Australian families deserve to have a strong economy with the opportunities that should come for all from that strong economy. They're people who believe that we can tackle these big challenges of the future.
We've worked with our Labor caucus, we'll make all of the necessary arrangements so they will be out there explaining carbon pricing from Monday on, right around this great nation of ours.
HOST: As part of that sales pitch, when will the tax payer funded ads start?
PM: Well there will be advertisements that will start sometime after the announcement on Sunday-
HOST: -Before the legislation is introduced?
PM: Ah, yes it will be before the legislation is introduced-
HOST: -Why?
PM: In order to enable people to prepare for carbon pricing. I want Australian families to understand all the details of this. I want them to understand what they're getting in tax cuts and payment increases. I also want them to understand the small changes they can make that actually cut carbon pollution in their own lives.
HOST: But if it doesn't start for another 12 months, why do you need to advertise now?
PM: Because I believe people are entitled, when a big change is happening in our national economy and for our environment for the future, to understand that change. And there will be people, I think, who jump on websites, think about it, get information about how they can cut carbon pollution in their household while still enjoying the same creature comforts we all rely on and they'll start making some changes to light bulbs and those kind of things that mean when carbon pricing comes into effect, they will have cut carbon pollution in their own lives already.
HOST: As you're often reminded, you said to voters before the election that there would be no carbon tax, your explanation for that is that you didn't realise the hung Parliament situation you'd be faced with. But surely you knew you'd need the Greens in the Senate, you didn't think Labor was going to have control of both Houses?
PM: Well, political parties in this country campaign on the basis of what they want to do if they're elected to government. I've never known anybody to campaign on the basis of what they thought they could do faced with the Senate that they might be faced with after the election. I don't recall for example John Howard campaigning for the GST on the basis that he'd have the GST Meg Lees would let him have. So you put forward your policies and plans as someone who is contending to lead the nation.
HOST: But you gave an emphatic guarantee there'd be no carbon tax, wouldn't it have been more honest to say ‘My preference is for an emissions trading scheme but if we have to deal with the Greens then we will consider a fixed price'?
PM: Well I think David, with respect, you're making a series of assumptions. There's no leader in this nation's history who's campaigned on the basis of what they think the Senate may or may not do. So I don't know why that test should be peculiarly applied to me and not to anybody else. Number two, you're making some very big assumptions about what the position of the Liberal Party might be from moment to moment, a Liberal Party that's been-
HOST: -It was pretty clear from the point Tony Abbott took over wasn't it?
PM: Well, and it was very clear from the day before he took over that they were in favour of an emissions trading scheme and Prime Minister Howard couldn't have been clearer, Tony Abbott sitting alongside him in Cabinet, they were all in favour of an emissions trading scheme.
So I don't have a good enough crystal ball to work out the twists and turns of Liberal Party politics. I went to the last election saying to people climate change is real, we do need to price carbon, that's the most efficient way to do it, I want an emissions trading scheme.
David, we will get to that emissions trading scheme. Yes, we're getting there in a different way than I predicted, there will be a temporary carbon tax and the emissions trading scheme I wanted and which the nation needs to have to have a clean energy future will be permanent.
HOST: Couple of other issues just finally, the Private Health Insurance Rebate, the Government's again trying today introducing legislation to means test the Private Health Insurance Rebate. At the moment it looks like you're going to struggle though in the Lower House, Tony Windsor has suggested he's not going to back this. If it doesn't get through does that leave a hole in the budget of around $2.8 billion?
PM: Well we will keep pressing to get this through and remember we're in this position because of the complete fiscal irresponsibility of the Liberal Party. This is the fastest growing area of health expenditure and it's skewed towards upper income earners. That means that there are people who work in factories in this country who are subsidising through their taxes the private health insurance of the CEO of their business.
HOST: But you can't convince your minority Government partners on this, clearly there's a problem.
PM: Well, I simply don't think that's right, it's not the right thing to do to require lower income Australians to subsidise the private health insurance of high income Australians and under this scheme we're talking about people being able to claim some part of the rebate until their family income is a quarter of a million dollars. And we're talking about the fastest growing area of health expenditure, we need that money for other areas in health and we will keep putting that pace
HOST: Alright, but if you don't get it through will the budget still get back into surplus, on track?
PM: The budget will be back in surplus in 2013 as promised, even if we continue to face these wrecking games from the Liberal Party that tries to promise all things to all people on the budget, that they can have bigger surpluses, bigger tax cuts, knock back every saving, shovel money out the door for their latest fad programs and still make it all add up, it doesn't add up. To get a budget in surplus you've got to take tough decisions, we'll keep taking them.
HOST: And a final one, gay marriage. The New South Wales Labor Conference is on this weekend, it's expected a motion to support gay marriage will be passed, it's been passed by a few other state conferences in recent months. Are you listening to the Party on this or is your position unchanged?
PM: My position's unchanged but I do think that it's a good thing that Labor people come together and talk about ideas. They do that at state conferences, they do that at branch meetings, they increasingly do it online, they do it in policy interest groups and they'll throw out ideas and work their way through them, that's a good thing. So I think having state conferences that have big debates is actually showing a vibrancy in the democratic culture within the Labor Party. For me, I've got my own view.
HOST: At the National Conference at the end of the year, if it's passed then does that change anything or is it still a matter for you and your Caucus colleagues. Can the conference actually change the government's position on this?
PM: The National Conference doesn't ever set government positions. What National Conference does is it sets the platform, the aspirations for our political party but always government, Labor Caucus in government makes decisions on government policy.
HOST: And this won't be changed regardless of the Conference?
PM: Well let's have National Conference at the end of the year. I'm not as Prime Minister going to sit here and dictate who can come to National Conference and say what. That wouldn't be in accord with my general view that we're a party of government and a party of ideas and it's a good thing that passionate Labor people come and debate ideas. I've made my personal views clear.
HOST: And you'll ignore the National Conference if it decides in favour of gay marriage?
PM: Well David, I've made my personal views clear and they'll continue to be my views.
HOST: Alright, just a very final one. You are in a difficult political position at the moment, no doubt about that. How important will the next few weeks be for you?
PM: The thing that matters to me is this nation's future and fighting for what's right for that future. Now I understand people will do the political commentary and political analysis but I feel energised and determined to fight for a change that is in this nation's interest. I want us to be a nation that has the benefits of a strong economy and is doing the right thing by the environment. We can achieve that through carbon pricing, protecting jobs now, getting the clean energy jobs of the future, cutting our carbon pollution and helping Australian households with cost of living pressures on the way through.
I know we've had a big political debate to get here and there have been some harsh words spoken on all sides, now is the time to get on with this job. We are a confident, creative nation, we're a people that's been up to big change and big challenges in the past, we can get this done and I'll be out there explaining to people what it means and leading the nation through this change.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



I'm delighted to be here today at this haven of books and ideas.
Earlier on, I was delighted to meet our new National Librarian, Anne-Marie,and on behalf of all Australians, I congratulate her on being appointed to our country's pinnacle role in the care and custodianship of books and information.
Anne-Marie gave me a quick tour of the Library's online resource, Trove.
Appropriately named because it is indeed a treasure trove of information that used to require trawling through microfiche and dusty old records.
It's easy to see why this resource was the winner of the 2011 Excellence in eGovernment Award.
I congratulate the Library on reaching out to all Australians, no matter where they live, something we'll see a lot more of as the NBN makes its way into every Australian community.
This is the democratisation of information, and it points to some of the measures that will be embodied in our National Cultural Policy that Minister Crean has just mentioned.
Friends, we live at a time of tremendous change and transition for the arts, publishing and media.
For much of our history, human story-telling occurred through word of mouth  -  myths and sagas told and retold down the generations.
Today, we live in an era where for the first time in almost 600 years, the book is no longer synonymous with paper.
But lest we fall into a slump of existential despair, I'm here to say the demise of books has been vastly exaggerated.
Yes we might increasingly download our books on electronic devices.
Yes the big end of our book industry has taken some blows in recent months.
But the death of the book is vastly overstated.
We've seen Melbourne designated by UNESCO as a City of Literature.
And at the Sydney Writers Festival in May, we saw 80,000 people turn out to hear 400 authors and panellists talk about books and ideas.
And why?
Because books will never surrender their ability to capture our hearts and our imaginations.
Books are an antidote to isolation, boredom and ignorance.
Add a glass of red and a box of chocolates, and books can be the ultimate pleasure.
Books are a refuge and consolation.
They are a joy and a tonic.
Sometimes they are a weapon.
Affordable, portable, mass-producible books have literally changed the world.
A book can never be unprinted.
Its ideas can never be unthought.
The critic David Ulin once said literature at its best slices through the noise and ephemera of life.
Sometimes drawing us deep into reflection.
At other times, impelling us back into the world aglow with energy and indignation.
Friends, in Australia, the act of story-telling is as old as the human occupation of this land itself.
The printed word was carried deep in the holds of the First Fleet, amid the convicts and supplies.
Our first novel was published in 1831.
And long gone are the days when Australia needed to apologise for the quality of its writing, if we ever did.
Friends, if awards like the various Premiers' Awards and the Miles Franklin came into being in earlier decades to encourage a growing and somewhat uncertain industry, these awards now exist to celebrate success.
To celebrate a mature and confident publishing industry of which our nation can be very proud.
In 2011, the Prime Minister's Literary Awards continue to recognise the very best in Australian writing.
This year, for the first time, our prize money has been redistributed so all shortlisted authors achieve some financial benefit to help acknowledge their efforts and sacrifices.
Friends, I know many of you are also keen supporters of the proposed National Year of Reading in 2012.
This is an initiative of libraries and library associations around the country, and has quite rightly garnered support from many of you here today.
Of course, every year is a year of reading in this most literate and literary of nations.
But in 2012, we can take time out to affirm the place of books, reading, ideas and libraries in the fabric of our nation.
To that end, I'm proud to announce that the Australian Government will provide $1.3 million in funding to help make the National Year of Reading a success.
Minister Crean and I especially want to bring a culture of reading to all Australians, especially those who are reluctant readers and those who struggle with literacy.
Initiatives such as the One Country Reading program and the workplace literacy project will help achieve this.
Every Australian who is physically able to read deserves the chance to learn to read.
I feel it deeply that too many Australians still lack the gift of words and reading.
My hope is that the Year of Reading will be the catalyst for many to discover and rediscover the joy of reading.
It is such a fundamental aspect of our social compact and our vision of ourselves as a nation of fairness and opportunity.
Above all, that we should be a nation that values its own writers and itsown stories.
That is why I'm here today  -  amid a testing week in my political life  -  to celebrate with you and to extend my gratitude.
Today we honour 20 shortlisted books and four winners.
But in truth we celebrate the whole industry:
Its resilience. Its self-belief. Its success.
And how we could never imagine the contours of our nation without you.
To all the nominees, my sincere congratulations.
You have each enriched and enlarged our nation and brought us that little bit closer to our better selves.
So keep writing.
Keep thinking.
Never cease believing in what you do.
The journey is always, always worth it. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the winners of the 2011 Prime Minister's Literary Awards at the National Library of Australia in Canberra.
Debut novelist Stephen Daisley won the fiction prize for his novel Traitor and the award for non-fiction went to Rod Moss for The Hard Light of Day.
The young adult fiction category was won by Cath Crowley for Graffiti Moon.
The children's fiction award went to authorBoori Monty Pryor and illustrator Jan Ormerod for their picture book Shake a Leg. 
The Prime Minister congratulated the winners who were selected from 20 shortlisted books across four categories.
The quality and originality of the entries demonstrates the literary talent of our writers.
Now in its fourth year, the Prime Minister's Literary Awards is one of our most prestigious cultural events.
For the first time, shortlisted authors share in the prize. Each winner receives a prize of $80,000 while each shortlisted author will receive $5,000.
The Prime Minister also announced that the Gillard Government will be providing $1.3 million to support the National Year of Reading in 2012.
Australia is already a nation of readers but more can be done to encourage people and families to re-engage with reading.
Run by libraries and library associations across the country, the National Year of Reading will connect people across Australia through shared reading experiences.
The funding includes money for a special workplace literacy program designed to encourage working adults to improve their reading skills in a supportive environment, as part of the National Year of Reading itinerary.
For more information about the Prime Minister's Literary Awards: www.arts.gov.au/pmliteraryawards
For more information about the National Year of Reading: www.love2read.org.au 



The Prime Minister announced today that the official theme for the 2011 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) will be “Building National Resilience, Building Global Resilience”.
The Commonwealth is unique as an international organisation. Its membership is diverse, spanning all six continents of the world, encompassing all major faiths, and including both developed and developing countries. The Commonwealth represents one-third of the world's population and more than one-quarter of the world's countries.
Most importantly, however, the Commonwealth is an organisation built on shared values and principles. The countries of the Commonwealth share a commitment to democracy, freedom, peace, the rule of law and opportunity for all.
As host, Australia will seek to strengthen the Commonwealth's effectiveness in supporting democracy, the rule of law and good governance amongst the Commonwealth membership, thereby strengthening national resilience within member states. Australia will look to the recommendations of the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group and the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group to strengthen the Commonwealth as an institution.
Australia will use CHOGM 2011 to address challenges of food security, sustainable development and natural resource management  -  challenges that lie at the heart of national and global resilience for many member states.
Australia will also tackle global challenges at CHOGM, including the promotion of strong, sustainable and balanced economic growth, recovery from the global financial crisis, and climate change. Australia will also ensure a prominent Commonwealth voice on these issues is heard in the G20, of which we are a member.
Australia's chairing and leadership of the Commonwealth over the next two years will provide a significant leadership role for us on the world stage.
CHOGM 2011 will be held in Perth from 28 to 30 October 2011. It will bring together leaders from up to 53 Commonwealth nations and up to 3,000 delegates. Around 1,000 representatives from the media are expected to also attend. The event will provide an unparalleled opportunity to showcase Western Australia to the world. 
For more information visit www.pm.gov.au



Thanks so much Michael Lee for that generous introduction.
I begin with honouring the Gadigal people, the traditional owners of this land - we walk with you on the road of Reconciliation together.
I acknowledge all my Federal Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues here today.
And I offer a special greeting to the heroes of 2010 who held our marginal seats and helped Federal Labor continue its journey in government: David Bradbury, Mike Kelly, John Murphy, Deb O'Neill, Michelle Rowland, Craig Thomson.
I acknowledge also, the man who helped destroy Workchoices, John Robertson.
The families of NSW can have no better champion or friend.
I acknowledge all of John's team and especially the new MPs who will share Labor's long road back.
I acknowledge Michael Lee, Sam Dastyari, John Graham and the whole NSW Party office team.
I honour all the proud and faithful party members who are here today to join John and his team on that long road back.
I offer a very special greeting to those attending their first conference or who are new Party members.
Welcome to the ranks of the “true believers”.
Delegates, the ALP is Australia's oldest political party.
We formed the world's first Labor Government.
Matters for pride today as much as they were then.
But friends, we are not here to discuss history.
We are here to make history.
And we make history by learning from it, especially the recent past.
Labor has always been a Party of reform.
And if we are to reform the nation and the State, we must also reform ourselves.
Reform begins by understanding what happened in March: a defeat as bad as we've ever known.
NSW Labor cannot  -  and should not  -  ever be the same again.
Let's not imagine we can just ‘move on'.
That would only be denying the judgement of the people.
Rather let's absorb the lessons and learn what it means to be Labor once again.
In 16 years of government, the NSW Labor Government did a lot of good: the best ever Olympics, great school literacy results, historic environmental achievements like saving the South East forests, the remarkable victory over James Hardie, and so much more.
Be proud of these achievements.
Hold fast to them.
As for the faults and failings, learn from them.
Understand what happened.
Ask the hard questions.
And use this time in Opposition to renew.
Because, friends, NSW Labor will renew.
NSW Labor will rebuild.
On the path of reform, we know that Labor's values can never change.
But our rules and practices can.
In fact, as the ALP National Review argues, they must change.
We need to find what the poet Robert Frost called “the courage to be new”.
We need to shape a new party.
With more members in revitalised branches.
Who represent a wide cross-section of society.
Who are more engaged with their local communities.
And who enjoy a greater say in a more democratised party structure.
Renewal is not an end in itself.
This is about ensuring that Labor remains a Party which reflects and represents the aspirations of the Australian people.
That makes the progressive case for reform over the back fence, over the shop counter, street by street, suburb by suburb.
A Party also capable of making the case for reform over the digital “back fence” of the new social media where so much of our public conversation now occurs.
That convinces ordinary Australians that Labor has their interests at heart and can be trusted to represent them on the big issues.
I know Sam Dastyari has proposed some reforms for the NSW Party.
They are significant reforms deserving of consideration.
And for those who think reform needs to go further, I say build on these reforms in the years leading up to Labor's return to office in NSW.
Let us be the party of reform in all that we do.
A party always determined to be its best self.
Delegates, if we are a party of reform, we are also a party of ideas.
Labor's greatest achievements  -  and toughest decisions  -  arose from passionate engagement and debate.
I remember the epic debates about uranium in the 1980s, and economic reform in the 1990s.
We've become a better party for the debates we've had.
I know there are people who are frustrated their voices aren't always heard.
And I say to them: I want the Australian Labor Party to be a place where you feel you belong.
A Party where you can express progressive views in a wider conversation about Australia's future.
A Party where we have free and open debates conducted in a climate of respect.
A Party that can discuss complex policy proposals at the same time as governing for all Australians.
Because friends, if we are a party of reform and a party of ideas, we are also a party of government.
It is the very core of who we are.
When our forebears created the ALP in 1891, they deliberately created a party that would seek to gain and hold elected public office.
We would not be a fringe party or a party of protest.
We would be a party of government with all the compromise and gradualism that entails.
But also a party of vision and leadership capable of delivering the big reforms that only governments can achieve.
Being a party of government means balancing the need for a strong economy and strong national security with Labor's progressive intent and values.
That is why John Curtin took a tough decision on conscription.
Why we must take a tough decision on the security of our northern borders.
These are the responsibilities that come from being in government.
And with those responsibilities come great opportunities.
Delegates, we stand at a remarkable time in Australia's history.
Our export income is at a 140-year high.
We've created over 750,000 jobs since Labor came to office.
And profound structural change in the world economy is opening up amazing possibilities.
Think about it.
Having led the nation through the biggest global downturn since the Depression, Federal Labor now gets to govern in times of hope.
To be the “navigators to the future” we have always wanted to be.
A future that honours the dignity and potential of every Australian.
Friends, the truth is that even at the peak of the last boom when unemployment fell to 4 per cent, there were still places where 12 or 14 per cent of people were out of work.
Still families that had not known employment for three generations.
It offends me to think that behind the windows in so many poorer homes are young people who could be tomorrow's Peter Dohertys or Fiona Stanleys.
But the cycle of generational disadvantage means they never get the chance.
Friends, I want every Australian to have the chance.
Just as our predecessors sought ‘cradle to grave' welfare, I want to see ‘cradle to grave' opportunity.
I want every Australian child to grow up with the certainty of a great education.
A place in training or university if they want it.
Incentives to retrain and relocate as the workforce changes.
Capacity for older employees to stay in a job if they wish.
And a welfare system that doesn't allow people to lapse into the corrosive aimlessness of long-term unemployment.
In Labor's Australia, no-one should be left behind.
Friends, to be a party of government requires the vision to see things not just as they are, but as they could be.
Being a party of government also requires courage.
The courage to make decisions for the long term.
And the courage to stick to them.
If we didn't have leaders in the past who were prepared to do this, we would not have had post-war migration.
We would not have ended capital punishment.
Abolished the White Australia Policy.
Or opened up our economy in the 1980s.
This country never got anywhere without hard decisions.
And do you think Labor ever made any hard or big decisions without the Liberals opposing them at every turn?
The Snowy scheme  -  opposed.
Medicare  -  opposed.
Saving the Franklin river  -  opposed.
Universal superannuation  -  opposed.
Native title  -  opposed.
They resisted every one.
Always on the wrong side of history.
Always on the side of fear and negativity.
Delegates, democracy is not one long opinion poll.
It is about leadership.
And on climate change, Labor chooses to lead.
We know we must lead because the science says we must.
And friends, we've known for an awfully long time.
Bob Carr warned of climate change in this very hall back in 1988.
Even Margaret Thatcher and John Howard recognised the danger and accepted the need to act.
And yet our opponents have the temerity to call our carbon price a toxic tax.
When the only thing that's toxic is the carbon pollution warming our planet and threatening our children's future.
Friends, as members of the Labor family, you know all too well that our opponents have thrown everything at us for the past year:
Stunts and gimmicks.
Lies and distortion.
Attacks on our economists and scientists.
A cynical campaign of fear designed to scare Australian families.
And a nonsense of a policy that subsidises big polluters off the backs of ordinary taxpayers.
After all that, I simply say to our opponents: Is that the best you can do?
Because if you think that's enough to knock us off course, you've got another think coming.
We're still here. We're still ready to fight for the nation's future.
In fact, after months of calm and methodical preparation, I'm proud to say our carbon package can now be placed before the Australian people.
Friends, for the first time in Australian history, we will put a price on carbon pollution.
No longer will the nation's biggest polluters be able to pollute our atmosphere for free.
From July 1 next year, the freedom to pollute our skies will cease.
Two decades of denial and delay will come to an end.
Polluters will have to pay.
And friends, as we set Australia on the path to a clean energy future, we will do it in the Labor way - with fair and generous assistance to ease the path of change
We will stick up for the people we have always stuck up for.
We'll look after the families.
We'll look after the battlers.
We'll look after the pensioners.
We'll look after the people who need that extra bit of help.
The people who are doing it tough.
And why?
Because our plan to price carbon pollution comes from deep within Labor's progressive roots.
It is about our responsibility to Australians right now  -  and our responsibility to future generations.
I know that many Australians are worried.
Tomorrow, the facts will be laid out for all to see  -  and they will tell a very different story to the one our opponents have tried to tell.
Nine in ten households will get a combination of tax cuts and payment increases.
Most people will find that when all is said and done, they are not a cent behind.
And many will come out ahead.
Millions of households struggling with tight family budgets will get an extra 20 per cent safety net.
Millions of pensioners will come out ahead, with extra money for the essentials we know they sometimes struggle to afford.
The most exposed industries will receive assistance to protect jobs.
Because jobs are what Labor is all about.
We will cut pollution, we will protect the household budget, and we will support jobs.
We will do it because it is right for this country.
And we will do it the Labor way.
Because friends, if cutting taxes for the rich and slashing workers' entitlements are deep in the DNA of the Liberal Party, progressive reform in the nation's best interests is deep in Labor's DNA.
We are a Labor government doing unmistakably Labor things.
We are the ones who dumped Work Choices and protected workers' entitlements.
We are the ones who have doubled education funding.
And delivered the nation's biggest ever mental health package.
We are the ones who are investing $3 billion to skill Australians for the mining boom.
And bringing high speed broadband to every community.
We are the ones spending more on public transport than all previous Commonwealth Governments combined.
And putting an extra $4000 a year into the pockets of families with teenagers at school or TAFE. 
And, friends, we are the ones who will do even more as the budget comes back to surplus to extend opportunity in this country to every Australian who will grasp their chance.
My great predecessor, Ben Chifley, in this very hall, talked about “the things worth fighting for”.
These are the things worth fighting for.
These are the things that make us who we are.
Friends, Chifley said something else in this place too.
It was 60 years ago last month.
Chifley was in failing health but there was no self-pity.
Just the uncompromising message:
“Fight for the right, and truth and justice will prevail.”
Delegates, six decades later, the nation has been lastingly transformed by the work of successive Labor governments, but Chifley's message endures still.
Fight for the right.
Never give in.
Never lose faith.
Because, friends, this is our time.
Time for Labor to govern in an age of prosperity.
Time for Labor to drive fairness and opportunity deep into the fabric of Australian society.
Time for our nation to build the clean energy economy of tomorrow.
Friends, we are heirs to great history.
Let us be makers of history too.
A Party of reform.
A Party of ideas.
A Party of government.
And always finding the “courage to be new”. 



The Australian Government has today formally recognised the Republic of South Sudan as an independent state.
South Sudan declared its independence today.
Australia warmly welcomes South Sudan into the community of nations.
Independence reflects the clear aspirations of the South Sudanese people, as expressed in January's credible and peaceful referendum.
We congratulate in particular Australia's large South Sudanese community, with Australia the largest voting site outside of Africa.
Australia will shortly establish diplomatic relations with South Sudan.
Australia will be represented at today's celebrations in Juba by the Hon Michael Danby MP.
Mr Danby is the Chair of the Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee for Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade and was appointed by the Prime Minister to be Australia's Special Representative at the independence celebrations.
Working with the international community, Australia stands ready to support the people of South Sudan and Sudan build a viable and secure future.
The Australian Government is pleased to announce $16 million to assist South Sudan over the next two years to deliver basic services such as education, maternal health, sanitation and also to support rural livelihoods.
While today is a day of celebration, the people of South Sudan face substantial challenges.
Australia is gravely concerned about ongoing serious violence and insecurity in parts of Sudan, particularly in Southern Kordofan state and the Darfur region, and in parts of South Sudan.
Australia has contributed peacekeepers to the United Nations Mission in Sudan since 2005, and intends to make a contribution to the new United Nations Mission in South Sudan, expected to be established shortly.
Australia urges the peaceful resolution of all outstanding matters by negotiation, not unilateral action. The protection and safety of civilians must be the highest priority.



PM: Good evening.
I want to talk to you tonight about why the Government is putting a price on carbon and what this means for you.
The decisions I announced today mean:
 * 	Around five hundred big polluters will pay for every tonne of carbon pollution they put into our atmosphere.
 * 	By 2020 this will cut carbon pollution by 160 million tonnes a year.
 * 	And because some businesses will put prices up, there will be tax cuts, increased pensions and increased family payments.
We have had a long debate about climate change in this country.
Most Australians now agree our climate is changing, this is caused by carbon pollution, this has harmful effects on our environment and on the economy  -  and the Government should act.
Economists and experts agree that the best way is to make polluters pay by putting a price on carbon.
The first Australian Government to announce a plan for a carbon price was John Howard's back in 2007.
A lot has happened since then; the debate has been difficult and divisive.
And no government  -  no political party or leader  -  can claim to have got everything right during this time.
But we have now had the debate, 2011 is the year we decide that as a nation we want a clean energy future.
Now is the time to move from words to deeds.
That's why I announced today how Australia's carbon price will work.
From 1 July next year, big polluters will pay $23 for every tonne of carbon they put into our atmosphere.
They now know how much they will pay unless they cut their pollution. 
And they can start planning to cut pollution now.
By 2020 our carbon price will take 160 million tonnes of pollution out of the atmosphere every year.
That's the equivalent of taking forty five million cars off the road.
Some of the cost paid by big polluters will be passed through to the prices of the goods you buy.
The price impact will be modest but I know family budgets are always tight.
So I have decided most of the money raised from the carbon price will be used to fund tax cuts, pension increases and higher family payments.
These will be permanent, matching the carbon price over time.
Not everyone will be financially better off  -  there is no money tree. The budget has to add up. But I want people who need help most to get the help they need.
That's why 9 in 10 households will get a combination of tax cuts and payment increases.
For almost 6 million households this will fully meet your average extra costs.
And of these, 4 million Australian households  -  including every older Australian who relies solely on the pension  -  will get a “buffer” for your budget, with the extra payments being 20 per cent higher than your average extra costs.
When you have some time, you should have a look at the cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website.
It'll help you find out what you're entitled to.
And it will link you to ideas for how to cut power bills and cut pollution without cutting back on life's essentials.
I also understand that there is nothing more important to families than having a job.
So I have decided we will take special measures to support jobs and keep Australia competitive internationally. And some of the money paid by polluters will also fund billions of dollars of investments in clean technologies like solar, wind and geothermal.
All up, the carbon price will support $100bn worth of investment in renewables in the next forty years.
Putting a price on carbon is a big change for our country.
I know we can do it together.
Our economy is the envy of the world.
We have world-leading renewable technology, a coal industry determined to cut pollution among the world's richest reserves of natural gas. 
And we are a confident, creative people. 
I see a great clean energy future for our great country. 
I know we can get there together.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet and Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research Senator Kim Carr today announced a $300 million package to support jobs in Australian steel manufacturing. 
This package comes in addition to the assistance for businesses within emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries under the Jobs and Competitiveness Program, also announced today. 
The Steel Transformation Plan will be complemented by a small increase in free permit allocation for the steel industry from 2016-17 onwards. 
Australian steel makers are currently facing considerable pressures from external factors other than a carbon price, including a high Australian dollar, increases in 
raw material costs and weak growth in the Australian construction industry. 
Through the Steel Transformation Plan, the Gillard Labor Government will provide $300 million to encourage investment and innovation in the Australian steel manufacturing industry. 
This will assist the sector to transform into an increasingly efficient and sustainable industry in a low-carbon economy. 
As part of our package to support jobs, the steel industry will be eligible for 94.5 per cent assistance under the Jobs and Competitiveness Program to shield it from the full impact of a carbon price. 
The Jobs and Competitiveness Program has been carefully designed by the Government to provide generous industry assistance measures for jobs and 
business to assist a smooth and manageable transition to a clean energy future. It will provide assistance of $9.2 billion over the first three years. 
The Jobs and Competitiveness Program from 1 July 2012 will support businesses within emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries that face international competition from companies in countries yet to introduce comparable costs on carbon. 
The Productivity Commission will review the treatment of the steel industry as part of the EITE assistance review in 2014-15, and three years' notice will be provided of any changes to assistance arrangements consistent with the treatment of all EITE activities. 
Further information in relation to the Government's clean energy future and carbon price announcement is available at www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au  



More than half of the revenue raised by putting a price on carbon pollution will go to households to help meet price impacts. This means Australians can do their bit for climate change and look after their household budgets. 
Australian households will receive assistance through: 
• Increases in pensions, allowances and family payments; and 
• Personal income tax cuts. 
Nine out of ten households will receive assistance through tax cuts, extra payments or both. For two out of three households, this assistance will be enough to cover their entire average price impact. 
Over four million households will receive assistance that exceeds their expected average price impact, leaving their household budget better off. 
Almost six million households will receive assistance that covers all of their average price impact, and around eight million households will get some assistance. 
The assistance will be permanent and will rise over time through indexation. The Government will review the adequacy of assistance each year and will increase it further if necessary. 
On average, households will see cost increases of $9.90 a week, while the average assistance will be $10.10 a week. Households won't pay the carbon price on the price of fuel as the Government recognises filling up the petrol tank is a major expense for many family budgets. 
Households that improve their energy efficiency can help the environment and save money. They can do this by cutting power use and buying less carbon-intensive products, which will become relatively cheaper under a carbon price. Households that make savings in their budget in this way will still collect their full entitlement of carbon price assistance. 
The tax reforms being introduced as part of the package will increase the tax-free threshold from $6,000 today to $18,200 from 1 July 2012, and to $19,400 from 1 July 2015. This will mean that over a million Australians will no longer need to lodge a tax return. 
Increases to family payments, pensions and allowances 
A new Clean Energy Supplement will be paid, equal to a 1.7 per cent increase in pensions, allowances and family payments. 
The assistance will mean: 
• Up to $338 extra per year for single pensioners and self-funded retirees, and up to $510 per year for pensioner couples combined. 
• Up to $110 per child for a family that receives Family Tax Benefit Part A. 
• Up to $69 extra for families that receive Family Tax Benefit Part B. 
• Up to $218 extra per year for single income support recipients and $390 per year for couples combined for people on allowances. 
• Up to $234 per year for single parents in addition to the increased family payments they receive. 
Households will receive these extra payments initially in the form of a lump sum advance payment in May-June 2012 in order to make sure Australians have extra money in their pockets to help adjust to the carbon price. 
For pensioners and most allowees, this advance payment will be equivalent to nine months  -  or in other words, about three quarters  -  of the extra annual payment. 
For families, this advance payment will be equivalent to a full year of the extra payment. 
Payments of the Clean Energy Supplement will be paid on a fortnightly basis from March 2013 for pensions and most allowances, July 2013 for family payments and January 2014 for students on Youth Allowance. 
Some low-income households  -  such as retirees under pension age who are not paying any tax on their superannuation income  -  might not receive enough assistance through tax cuts or Government payments to offset their average expected cost impact under a carbon price. These households will be able to claim the new $300 annual Low Income Supplement to ensure they receive assistance as they adjust to changes in their costs of living after the carbon price is introduced. 
A special Single Income Family Supplement of up to $300 will assist single income families with income between $68,000 and $150,000, recognising that, unlike dual income families, these single income families only get one tax cut. 
Tax cuts 
From day one of the carbon price on 1 July 2012, every taxpayer with income below $80,000 will receive a tax cut, with most getting at least $300 a year. 
These tax cuts will be permanent, and they will increase. On 1 July 2015, a second round of tax cuts will apply, increasing the saving to at least $380 a year for most taxpayers earning under $80,000 compared to now. 
The combined changes mean headline tax rates will better match the effective rate that a lot of taxpayers are actually paying at the moment. All taxpayers under $80,000 will pay less tax. 
No Australian will pay more tax as a result of these changes. 
As well as providing help to Australian households for cost of living pressures, this is major reform that will simplify our tax system.  



The Gillard Government is pleased to announce that it intends to appoint the former Reserve Bank Governor and former Treasury Secretary Bernie Fraser as Chairman of the new Climate Change Authority (CCA). 
The CCA is to be established by legislation as an independent body to provide expert advice on key aspects of the carbon pricing mechanism. 
Mr Fraser  -  who has indicated his willingness to take up the position  -  is uniquely qualified to chair the CCA. 
He has decades of experience in public economic policy and business having 
held the positions of Secretary of the Treasury from 1984 to 1989, and Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia from 1989 to 1996. Mr Fraser was previously Director of the National Energy Office from 1981 to 1984. 
Mr Fraser is currently Chairman of Members Equity Bank. Until recently, he was a director of two of Australia's largest superannuation funds, AustralianSuper and Cbus, positions he held for 15 years. 
When the carbon pricing mechanism moves to a flexible price emissions trading scheme, the Government will put annual caps on the amount of carbon pollution that can be released into the atmosphere by entities covered by the carbon price. 
The CCA will play an important role in the governance of the carbon pricing mechanism. 
One of the CCA's responsibilities will be to make recommendations to the Government on future pollution caps under the carbon pricing mechanism. 
These recommendations will have regard to, among other matters: 
• the Government's announced medium and long-term carbon pollution targets; 
• progress towards emissions reductions; 
• the impact of its recommendations on the Australian economy, including on specific industries. 
The Government will make final decisions on these pollution caps, based on the recommendations of the CCA. 
The CCA will also provide advice on the performance of the carbon price and other climate change initiatives and will track progress towards Australia's pollution reduction targets. 
It will conduct regular public reviews and its reports will be made public. 
The CCA will complete its first review  -  which will provide recommendations on the carbon pricing mechanism's first five years of pollution caps  -  by February 2014. 
Mr Fraser will bring to this new role an unparalleled combination of business, financial and economics experience and a long history of contributing to responsible implementation of economic reform. 
The Government will appoint another eight members to the CCA. They will have experience in climate science, economics, emissions trading, climate change mitigation, investment and business.  



PM: Thank you.
I'm joined today by the Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, and by the Minister for Climate Change, Greg Combet, and I'm here today to announce how Australia will seize its clean energy future. My focus will be on explaining how we will build that clean energy future, but I want to talk about two things that have brought us to this moment today.
First, the avalanche of science that tells us our climate is changing. The science is in. We know that our planet is warming. We know that that warming is changing our climate: causing sea levels to rise; meaning that there will be more days of extreme heat; meaning that we are at risk of more bushfires and droughts; meaning that great icons like the Great Barrier Reef are at risk.
So we are here today because the science is in. The science is clear - our planet is warming. That warming is caused by carbon pollution, by human activity, and we need to cut carbon pollution.
The second thing that's brought us to this moment has been more than a decade of debate. Another female leader, Margaret Thatcher, warned the planet about the effects of climate change. John Howard, when he was Prime Minister, determined to put a price on carbon pollution.
This has been a difficult debate that has brought us to this moment and there have been false starts and there have been missteps, but we are here now and now is the time to get this done. As a nation we need to put a price on carbon and create a clean energy future.
So, how will this all work? I know that there are many Australians who think to themselves ‘This is really complicated. Will I ever understand how carbon pricing works?' Well, in its essence it's incredibly simple: we will require around 500 big polluters to pay a price for every tonne of carbon pollution they put into our atmosphere.
At the moment, those big polluters can release that pollution into our atmosphere for free. We will require them to pay a price per tonne. The price will be $23 at the start of the scheme.
Because something they used to do for free now costs them money, they will innovate, they will change, they will find a way of reducing that bill and in doing so they will reduce their carbon pollution.
This all adds up to a reduction in carbon pollution of 160 million tonnes by 2020. That's the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road. It's a big difference in carbon pollution, achieved by requiring polluters to pay the price.
The mechanism will be a fixed-price mechanism for three years. That works effectively like a tax; it means the government set the price. At the end of the three year fixed price period, the period that works effectively like a tax, we will move to an emissions trading scheme, where the amount of pollution our economy can create will be capped and a market mechanism will set the price.
Now, that's the essence of pricing carbon. Of course there are other effects that we need to deal with in this scheme. First and foremost some of the costs that will be incurred by the businesses as they pay their price for carbon will be passed through to households. So, we will use more than 50 per cent of the money paid by big polluters to provide assistance to households on the form of tax cuts and payment increases.
Nine out of ten households will get a tax cut, or a benefit increase, or a combination of the both. What that means is around 6 million households will receive enough through a tax cut or payment increase to enable them to meet the average cost of carbon pricing on them and their family. That is, to fully meet the expected impact of carbon pricing on them and their family, as big polluters pass through some of the costs for things that families use every day.
4 million Australian households will get a buffer, a 20 per cent buffer. This is pitched at lower-income Australians and that's because we understand that for low-income Australians their budgets are tight and we want to provide them with the benefit of that buffer as we move to pricing carbon and they see some flow-through price impacts.
All in all, the price impact is the equivalent of 0.7 per cent of CPI - that is, less than 1 per cent of CPI. The modelling to give us that figure has been done by the same people who did the modelling for the GST. They were right when they modelled then and they have provided the modelling for this package.
We have determined, in providing tax cuts to Australian families, that we will also reform the tax system. As I believe is well known, as Prime Minister I have put a strong emphasis on increasing workforce participation. I believe in the benefits and dignity of work. I believe in creating jobs. I believe in getting more people into our workforce so that they can enjoy the benefits that come from working - not just the financial benefits, but the sense of purpose that comes from having a job.
That's why the mechanism we have used to provide tax cuts is through increasing the tax-free threshold. It will go from $6,000 per year to $18,200 a year. By using that mechanism, what we are doing is creating better incentives for people to participate in work, particularly people who are making a journey from welfare to work, and particularly second-income earners in households who may be returning to work on a casual or part-time basis.
This is an important tax reform. I want us to have a clean energy future. I want us, as a nation, to have higher workforce participation. We, in this package, are achieving both.
Then, of course, as a result of this package, we also have to work to support Australian jobs. We want to work with businesses and industries as they make the transition that carbon pricing will bring, to a clean energy economy.
That's why in this package you are seeing support for important industries, like the coal industry, like the steel industry, like manufacturing, like many of our businesses that generate high levels of carbon pollution but trade internationally and effectively take the world price for what they produce.
In this package, clearly today we are focussing on explaining the way that carbon pricing works. Carbon pricing is the foundation stone of this package, but this package has three important additional elements.
It's got a focus on energy efficiency. It's got a focus on renewable energy. These are also important ways of us tackling climate change. And it's got an important focus on the land sector.
Out of all of those, today I want to particularly highlight the huge investments in renewable energy that this package brings - billions of dollars of new resources to help build that clean energy future for Australia.
Now, I understand, standing here as Prime Minister, this is a big day in Canberra. A lot of people in the room - it's a bit day in Canberra. It's a big day as we transition our nation to a clean energy future.
But I also understand it's Sunday and right around the country Australian families are doing what families do on Sunday  -  hopefully getting the benefit of a little bit of rest and respite and some family time, and for many of them, they will be sitting there thinking ‘what does this mean for me?'
Well, I want Australian families to understand what it will mean for them. Information is available to them through our cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website. I want them to understand we are seizing a clean energy future: we will cut carbon pollution; we will be tackling climate change; we will be putting a price on carbon pollution that our biggest polluters pay.
Standing here, as Prime Minster, I understand that this has been a long, complicated and at sometimes a very difficult debate for Australians to follow and to listen to. My message to Australians today is: we are now moving from the days of words to deeds.
We have the right package. It will be in the Parliament and legislated later this year. We are going to get this done. We are going to create a clean energy future.
I'll turn now to Minister Combet for some comments, to be followed by the Treasurer.
MINISTER COMBET: Thank you very much Prime Minister. And as the Prime Minister was pointing out there are four key elements to our plan for a clean energy future that we are announcing today. Firstly, the carbon pricing mechanism, secondly the support for renewable energy and clean energy in the future, and thirdly the support for energy efficiency, and finally the support that the package offers for the storage of carbon in the landscape. All of these are important elements of the plan released today that will cut pollution in our economy. It will drive investment in clean energy in the future whilst at the same time providing important assistance for households and supporting jobs.
I'd like to spend a little bit of time explaining a bit further how the carbon price mechanism itself would work. We all know that the world is releasing too much pollution into the atmosphere and it is contributing to climate change. The problem now, as the Prime Minister indicated, is that it is free of charge for large industrial facilities to put carbon pollution into the atmosphere.
There is no incentive effectively to cut pollution and to innovate to produce things more efficiently.
That means at the end of the day that the whole of society bears the economic and environmental cost of climate change. So the Government will put a price tag on the pollution produced by around 500 of the largest polluters in our economy.
A carbon price then means that those businesses will pay a price for each tonne of pollution that they release into the atmosphere and it will create an incentive to cut pollution and to innovate. If a business reduces their pollution they won't pay as much and that's how the carbon price drives innovation. It does encourage businesses to adopt new technologies which will allow them to produce the same goods and services while generating less pollution.
It's important to emphasise as we have been in recent months that this must be done at the cheapest cost to our economy and that's what a market-based approach achieves. Letting the market provide the price signal to cut pollution, through a carbon price, means that the Government does not prescribe to individual businesses or industries how they are going to reduce pollution. A market-based approach is the cheapest in our economy, it is the most effective and it is the most efficient way to deal with this issue.
The carbon price will start next year on 1 July. Around 60 per cent of Australia's pollution will be covered by the carbon price. It will include pollution from electricity generation, stationary energy, some business transport, waste, industrial processes and fugitive emissions.
As the Prime Minister has indicated, the price will be fixed during the first three years and then transition to a fully flexible emissions trading scheme. Businesses covered by the scheme will need to buy and surrender to the Government a permit for each tonne of pollution they produce. As the Prime Minister indicated, the price will start at $23 per tonne and rise slightly over the fixed-price period.
From 1 July 2015 when we move to an emissions trading scheme, the price will be set by the market and the number of permits issued by the Government each year will be capped  -  and that means there will be a cap on pollution each year.
All revenue, as we have committed, will be used to assist households, to support jobs and competitiveness and build our new clean energy future. In fact, we're expecting that this will drive 100 billion dollars' worth of investment in renewable energy to 2050, and as a result we will be able to reduce our net national emissions to 80 per cent below their year 2000 levels by 2050.
The carbon price mechanism will also be accompanied by the establishment of a new body, the Climate Change Authority. The Authority will provide expert advice on key aspects of the Carbon Price Mechanism and the Government's other climate change policies. However the Government and the Parliament will still retain the final authority for setting the pollution caps and these decisions will of course be informed by the advice of the Climate Change Authority.
Importantly, this package contains strong support for jobs. For a Labor Government, this is always an important priority. To support jobs and industries that face international competition and yet produce a lot of pollution, the Government will establish a Jobs and Competitiveness Program. It will be a program of $9.2 billion of support over the first three years of the scheme and be specifically designed to support the jobs in those important industries like steel and aluminium smelting and many others that are both emissions-intensive and trade-exposed industries.
The package announced today also announces some additional measures to support the steel industry which is feeling some severe pressures at this time due to the high value of the dollar, high commodity prices and patchy local demand for steel. Recognising this, the Government is announcing a four-year Steel Transformation Plan worth $300 million over that period.
The Government has also been very concerned to ensure that the jobs in the most effective coal mines will also receive strong support and there is in the package today $1.3 billion worth of support for the most affected coal mines and the people who work within them.
The electricity sector of course is also fundamental when considering the pricing of carbon. The Government will help transform the electricity generating sector while securing the energy supplies for Australian households and businesses.
We will seek to negotiate the closure of up to 2000 megawatts of highly-polluting coal-fired electricity generating capacity. This will make room for investment in new cleaner electricity generation capacity.
The Government will also provide assistance to some electricity generators to underpin energy security in our market.
Most of the manufacturing sector will see small cost impacts due to the carbon price. Many of the manufacturers in this country will be in a position to receive support under the Jobs and Competitiveness Program. For those that aren't, there are additional measures that have been announced today including a new Clean Technology Program that will provide over $1 billion to help manufacturers and with co-contributions from the manufacturers themselves we're expecting that that will result in up to $4 billion in new investment in saving energy and reducing pollution in the manufacturing sector
In summary, this is a package that will create the right incentives to clean up the pollution in our economy over time. Households will be looked after especially low- to middle-income households.
The Government will support jobs and competitiveness in Australian industry and the electricity generation sector will be assisted in a long-term transition to cleaner energy. It's an important economic reform in the Labor tradition.
TREASURER: Thank you very much, Greg. It's great to be here with my colleagues today to talk about what is a very important environmental reform but also a fundamental economic reform. We simply cannot allow our country to become a technological backwater. We've got to price carbon pollution to drive the investment in innovation, and to provide the incentive for energy efficiency, and to develop renewable energy  -  failing to do so means that we would be passing on lower living standards to our children and to our grandchildren. So this is one of those fundamental reforms that we require to our economy to ensure that we pass on a better world and a stronger economy to our children and to our grandchildren.
Australia can't power ahead without clean energy. To be a first rate economy in the 21st century you must be driven by clean energy.
I do want to say a few things about the Treasury modelling, and I certainly look forward to all of your questions about that. But essentially the Treasury modelling shows that the economic cost of pricing carbon is small and it's small if we act now. The longer we delay the greater the cost and the more difficult the transition. So under a carbon price we can see strong growth in the economy. We can see strong jobs growth. We can see strong growth in incomes. And we can do all of that while making deep cuts in carbon pollution.
Now what the modelling shows is that the economy will continue to grow with average growth in gross national income per capita of 1.1 per cent a year, only one tenth of a percentage point less than what it would be without carbon pricing. Average incomes will grow rising by around $9,000 per person by 2020 and of course jobs will continue to grow strongly with 1.6 million more jobs created by 2020. At the same time, we cut domestic emissions in half compared to what they would have otherwise been in 2050 and as Greg said before we will drive $100 billion of investment in renewable energy.
The introduction of a $23 carbon price will also lead to a small increase in the price level of 0.7 per cent in 2012-13. Now that's a modest price increase from a scheme that applies to the 500 largest polluters. And of course in coming weeks, we'll see all sorts of claims made about price impacts, about jobs impacts. What we have published here today is comprehensive modelling done by the most professional people in the business  -  the most professional people in the business who have been through these exercises before and have worked with the previous government to put in place modelling of this type. This Treasury modelling is important and I do urge you to spend some time looking at their conclusions because what it shows is that we can make the transition to a clean energy economy whilst we maintain strong growth, create jobs and look to the industries for the future. And of course in this regard the assistance packages are quite important. As the Prime Minister said before 9 out of 10 households will get assistance through tax cuts or extra payments or both. Almost $6 million households will get assistance that covers the average price impact from the carbon price. And over 4 million households will get assistance that is 20 per cent more than the average price impact, and of course there will be an increase in family payments and other payments of 1.7 per cent. For pensioners this will mean an extra $338 for single pensioners, up to $510 for pensioner couples combined and it means $110 per year for Family Tax Benefit Part A per the child. And of course it does mean tax cuts for everyone below $80,000 with most getting a tax cut of at least $300.
So these are not just tax cuts, they are also tax reform. Over 1 million extra people will be removed from the tax system. Over 1 million extra people will no longer have tax withheld from their pay packet and therefore they will not have to lodge a tax return. That is tax reform, fundamental tax reform and the tax cuts will be permanent. The extra payments will be permanent. And of course assistance will grow over time. Now the Government has been able to deliver substantial reforms and we remain on track to bring the Budget to surplus. The reforms have a net cost of $4.3 billion over the next four years but the bulk of this $2.9 billion is in the first year as you would expect with a reform of this magnitude. Now once the scheme is up and running, the impacts are broadly budget neutral and have only a modest impact on Budget surpluses. So this is a very big economic reform for Australia. The type of reform we require so we can have a clean energy future, create jobs and lift living standards.
Thank you.
PM: Thank you. We'll be happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: The overall economic modelling (inaudible) is for continued growth, but it doesn't necessarily tell us about the short and medium term after you've (inaudible) some industries. What's your analysis of where that will occur and to what extent? 
PM: I think the design of the scheme means that industries will be able to plan for it and they will be able to adapt. We're announcing the package today, including the price. People will start thinking about what they need to do from the 1 July next year. The assistance package for businesses that Minister Combet has just outlined is a comprehensive one.
And now I think we've just got to be a bit clear here - this is a big reform, leading to a clean energy future, but it is not the only wind of change in our economy. Our economy is seeing change coming because of the resources boom; because of the high Australian dollar; because of the pressure that that is putting on some sectors of the economy - manufacturing, international education, tourism, amongst others.
So there will continue to be those economic forces driving change in conditions for businesses across the country, but in terms of the impacts of pricing carbon, they are laid out in modelling and of course we want to get a start on 1 July next year so that we can deal with those impacts in a measured way, rather than delaying action and having more costs and more dislocation down the track.
Phil Coorey?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what public inquiry do you (inaudible). Bob Brown said he would like some sort of inquiry before the legislation goes forward. Have you got an inquiry in mind or (inaudible)?
PM: Well, let's be clear - we're going to get this done. So this will be the package that comes to Parliament and this will be the package that goes through the Parliament.
Of course we'll have proper parliamentary processes for people to make submissions and make comments on the details of legislation. I've got an open mind about how that should occur between the House of Representatives and the Senate. It may well be by joint committee between the two, but this is the package that will start on 1 July next year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbot has been, as you know, running very hard on this and you've been somewhat constrained in responding to his claims, which you've described as a scare campaign, because of the lack of detail. Now that we have the detail, how confident are you that you will be able to explain this change to Australians and work through the scare campaign positively?
PM: Motivation here is to do what's right by the nation and create a clean energy future. It will take a lot of explanation. That will happen, not just in the weeks ahead, when I've talked about wearing out my shoe leather - that will happen over many, many months ahead. We will keep explaining this to Australians.
But this is the right package for the country's future. We're standing here, having seen a difficult divisive debate in our nation. There have been false starts, there have been missteps, there's no doubt about that, but it's time to get on with this.
We are going to get this done.
Phil Hudson.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're introducing a new tax, yet the documents show that some families and households types will be up to $1,000 a year better off. What do you say to people who say this is too good to be true, when they look at those numbers for them, and your advertising campaign, when does that start and what's the message?
PM: The essence of pricing carbon, the absolute essence of it, is the price paid by the big polluters. So, in terms of getting a transition that cuts carbon pollution, that moves us to a clean energy future, the thing that works is putting a price on carbon pollution per tonne, for the big polluters to pay, around 500 of them. That's the core of this package.
Yes, we brought our Labor values to assisting families and households in relation to the price impacts that will flow through on some things that people buy and consume, and so we've deliberately pitched that in a Labor way, 9 out of 10 households seeing some assistance, but taking particular care for people in lower income ranges, for whom the budget is always tight, which is why they've got the benefits of the 20 per cent buffer.
On the question of advertising, in the weeks ahead people will see advertising to assist them to digest this big change to the Australian economy, and of course they can also access information through the clean energy future website.
Latika?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you explain why there was some (inaudible) on steel and coal assistance and also (inaudible)?
PM: Well, the funding is laid out in the budget tables that's in the material supplied to you. There are three measures which are Government measures, Government-only measures that we are determined to deliver because they're the right thing to do with this package.
One is special assistance for the coal industry. Overwhelmingly coal mines are not big generators of carbon pollution, but there are some mines, referred to as gassy mines, that do generate carbon pollution and we want to be working with those gassy mines. That's what the coal package is for.
The steel industry is in a pressurised situation in any event. In relation to Lenore's question, I talked about the other winds of change in our economy  -  commodities boom, strong resource sector, big investment pipeline, high Australian dollar, going to be sustained over a long period of time, putting pressure on manufacturing, putting pressure on steel. Given that, we are working with the steel industry through the steel package that you see here.
And then thirdly, we will deliver a change to heavy vehicles and their treatment under carbon pricing two years after the scheme starts. Scheme starts 1 July next year, that change will be delivered on 1 July 2014.
So, the Government will deliver those measures. In terms of the assistance for coal, that will be delivered through cash grants. The assistance for steel we do want to legislate, we'll bring that to the Parliament and the heavy vehicle change will be delivered by regulation change in time for a start on 1 July 2014.
Andrew.
JOURNALIST: The graphs that you've got the modelling that you've been presented, which show that the heaviest lifting will not be done by what we do as Australians, but by the purchasing of international credits. Is that a bit concerning, that we will be relying on the veracity of places like Equatorial Guinea and when it's the Australian money that actually buys these permits?
PM: In designing this package we've brought our economically responsible tradition, the great Labor tradition of economic reform - what led us to float the dollar, what led us to reduce tariffs - and that is how do you change and modernise your economy at the least cost. It's what's driven us every step of the way, and if you're going to modernise your economy at the least cost and get a clean energy future, then you accept the advice of economists: the best way to do that is to put a price on carbon, to be paid the big polluters.
But you also accept the advice of economists that an internationally linked scheme, we will get to an internationally linked scheme, which will mean that businesses here in this country have the ability to buy abatement from other nations. That means that the Australian price transforming our economy to a clean energy future will be the same as the international price.
Now, you will see in the documents provided to you that we will ensure that we are only acknowledging the buying of credits where they have met quality tests. We understand that we will have to have particular rules to make sure that the abatement that is being purchased is the abatement of a tonne of carbon pollution and that will be done so it's quality abatement that's being purchased.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, almost all the effort in energy innovation in this package is toward renewables. Has the Government given up on carbon capture and clean coal?
PM: No, we haven't and Minister Ferguson will continue to oversight and implement carbon capture and storage programs, including the global institute that we sponsored and including working with proponents of carbon capture and storage schemes to get them off the ground.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We're here on Sunday. I stand for hard work and I thank you for joining me for another hardworking day. Our Press Gallery putting in some hard yards - it's a good thing to see.
In terms of the market sensitivity of the information, this is a scheme that comes into effect on the 1 July next year, so markets and businesses will have plenty of time to digest and react and work out what their reaction should be.
So, I'm not going to be engaged in any speculation about share prices or anything like that, but comprehensive information is available for people here today, that's appropriate businesses have all the way to the 1 July next year to digest that information, as do investors and people who engage in markets.
I did say, we'll go here, here and then go to Mega at the back and then we'll come over this side.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when will we know whether or not this has all been worthwhile? How soon before we see a substantial fall in greenhouse gas emissions?
PM: We'll 160 million tonnes of carbon pollution reduced by 2020 at least-
JOURNALIST: -So we'll have to wait til 2020 before we can  - 
PM: -This is a big change and like all big changes, of course, you've got to bring it into affect and then it starts to do its work, and let's remember we come to this big change in an Australian economy where we generate more carbon pollution per head than any other people in the developed world.
Now, if you want to use an analogy about a running race, we're about to run a marathon and we're starting a few kilometres behind the start line. We've got a lot of work to do to hold our place in the race that the world is running.
That's why we're starting on 1 July 2012. You'll see at least 160 million tonnes of carbon pollution out of our atmosphere, and 2020 we'll have reduced the amount of carbon pollution by that amount. That's the equivalent of 45 million vehicles. I don't know if you can get a picture of 45 million vehicles in your head?
JOURNALIST: I've only got one.
PM: Well, imagine it times 45 million. That's a lot.
Well go here, then go across.
JOURNALIST: The carbon (inaudible). Firstly congratulations, thank you for the biodiversity stuff, thank you for the low-income stuff, thank you for the offsets on transport. Now the carbon captured in a tree - have you put a price on that?
PM: The carbon?
JOURNALIST: Captured in a tree.
PM: Carbon captured in a tree, sorry I didn't hear you.
JOURNALIST: Yeah for forest, and are we going to protect biodiversity by reducing native forest logging?
PM: Right, look I'll turn to Minister Combet for some specifics. Thank you for setting a new standard of feedback at Press Gallery conferences. Something tells me it won't catch on, but thank you for that game endeavour. The land sector measures here, there's the Carbon Farming Initiative where the details are already known, which give farmers the opportunity to benefit through new and changed practices to store carbon in their land. This package has the best part of a billion dollars allocated to a biodiversity fund which can work with landholders to support biodiversity, creating wildlife corridors and the like. I'll turn to Minister Combet for some more details of that.
COMBET: The Prime Minister has already mentioned the Carbon Farming Initiative, which is an important complementary measure to the carbon price mechanism we're announcing today. The Carbon Farming Initiative provides the incentive for foresters and land holders, farmers and others in the land management area to store carbon in one way or another.
Those credits that are generated will be supported through the carbon price mechanism in two ways.
Firstly, for those of you who are aficionados about the Kyoto Protocol, those that are not Kyoto compliant, that are offsets, will be supported with the disposition of some of the funding revenue from the carbon price mechanism, and also entities amongst the 500 that will have a responsibility under the carbon price mechanism will also be able to purchase Kyoto compliant credits for their compliance under the emissions trading scheme arrangements including during the fixed price period. That's very strong support for carbon storage activity on the land.
JOURNALIST: Minister Combet, given the (inaudible) and the access to the $800 million capital investment contribution fund. I mean would you agree that BlueScope Steel for instance would be paying virtually zero of the carbon tax for at least the next three years and would you agree that they're going to be left in pretty much a better position as a result of this package?
COMBET: Well, you can ask them as to their assessment of their liability under the carbon price mechanism of course because there are a number of elements to it. What the Government has been concerned about are the combination of issues that are impacting the steel industry at the moment and they are predominantly the high value of the dollar, iron ore prices are very high, and coking coal prices are very high and that is impacting on OneSteel and BlueScope's performance in their publicly reported results. We've been very conscious of the importance of those companies in the regions in which they employ a lot of people and not solely but particularly in Port Kembla and Whyalla where they've got their steel making operations, and the Government has had a lot of engagement with the steel companies to try and put together a plan which we have announced today that will support innovation in their operations, research and development, assist them make changes, assist them in relation to capital investments to upgrade their facilities and we've been mindful certainly of the carbon price issue in those discussions.
I imagine those companies will be making some observations about what we've put forward but we believe that it's strong but adequate and appropriate support for the jobs in that industry.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Was it what companies needed to avoid losing money under the carbon price?
COMBET: Well, we've been through a process of negotiation with the companies and given consideration to all of the issues that are impacting upon them, carbon pricing is obviously one of those that's been discussed.
PM: We'll take some questions here and then we'll go back to Mega because I did promise him a question before. Yes?
JOURNALIST: What do you say to people who say this is all about income redistribution? how many Australians actually will be worse off financially and what's your message to them? (inaudible)
PM: OK, well the advertising is going to start in the weeks and days ahead, so yes, there's going to be advertising. Yes, I think it's appropriate to advertise such a big change and to enable people to get details about their own particular circumstances, for example there is a household estimator on the website which will enable people to interrogate for their own particular circumstances.
On the way the scheme works, you've got to remember the centre of it is the price paid by big polluters. That's what drives the change and cuts carbon pollution, that's why it works.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We're using the terminology 9 out of 10 households are getting some assistance. Yes, that means there are households who don't get assistance. There's no money tree. The budget's got to add up and we've made choices about who needs assistance the most and we'll obviously stand by those choices. I understand many Australians right up the income scale feel cost of living pressures but we have directed assistance here to those families and Australians we believe need it the most.
Yes, we'll go Dennis here, Michelle and over to Mega, and then we'll have to start making a move.
Dennis.
JOURNALIST: Just two questions, first of all you talk about net growth in jobs over time. What are the estimates of job losses in the hardest hit sectors? I assume the modelling's done that as well. And secondly on the question of buying back the 2000 megawatts, closing down power plants, the figure for that's not in these papers, not disclosed. Can you give us an idea of that, when that will take effect and where is the money coming from?
PM: Dennis I can't and won't give you that figure because it's a tender process and if I disclose the Government's budget envelope then guess what - every tender that came in would come in for the maximum that's available under the envelope, so we're not going to do that to the Government's budget and to the Australian taxpayers so we will have the tender process. I'll just see if Minister Combet wants to say some more about that.
COMBET: Oh well what the process that will be followed is that in the not too distant future we'll initiate an expression of interest process so that this is a decision for electricity generator operators themselves as to whether they wish to participate. We're indicating that we're prepared to negotiate the closure of up to 2000 megawatts of some of the high emissions electricity generation capacity and I anticipate that it will take some time before we reach a concluded process, however the important thing  -  and this is something I think a message for the Latrobe Valley in particular where I know that people are apprehensive about carbon pricing coming in. These will be carefully discussed.
We are not anticipating any significant changes for some considerable period of time, and it is important that if we do successfully negotiate the closure of some capacity that that will occur at some point before 2020. It will allow sufficient time for additional investment to be made in electricity generating capacity, including potentially in regions such as the Latrobe Valley, and the Government has also announced to a structural adjustment package of support for regions that may be affected in the future. And in the Latrobe Valley and some other areas of the economy where people are considering these issues, we'll be very careful to consult with local communities, the employers and the workforces in the region as well as regional development authorities and local government. And we've already commenced that process in the La Trobe Valley in particular.
JOURNALIST: How bad is (inaudible) job losses (inaudible)?
TREASURER: I'm happy to do that. Look, there is a lot in the modelling and what the modelling looks at is the changes in the Australian economy with or without a carbon price. So what you will find in the modelling is estimates of output through to 2020, through to 2050, by industry sector, and estimates of employment share by sector 2020, 2050. So all of those figures are there but there is no detailed information by individual components of each sector. It's simply not possible to do that but what you can say here is that the impact on output and the impact on employment of a carbon price is very, very small compared to the impacts that are going on more generally in our economy.
And as you will have seen, Dennis, in the Budget where we talked extensively about this, we outlined the future structural pressures impacting on the Australian economy and their consequences for the shape of our economy in 20 and 30 years. And what we are seeing is an economy where employment is growing strongly in services. What we are seeing is an economy where employment and output is also growing very strongly in mining. And what we are seeing in other sectors is that they are not growing as fast and some are slipping back slightly.
But what you do see absolutely in the modelling is that the impact of a price on carbon is not the predominant factor influencing those changes. Greg spoke about this before. The Prime Minister spoke about this before. We are all acutely aware that the level of the currency is imposing upon our economy a very substantial structural change and that is something the Government is acutely aware of. It explains in part what Greg was talking about before in terms of the steel industry. We are a Labor Party. We're a Labor Government and our first priority is jobs but our first priority is jobs that are sustainable for the future and jobs that grow, and jobs that create the wealth so that we become a more prosperous country.
So what we have to do is respond to all of these changes and what we've seen through these modelling exercises is that we can grow strongly with a carbon price but other factors are much more important when you look at changes in the output share and the employment share.
PM: OK, we'll go to Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Could I ask again one of the three of you tell us how many, numerically, households will be worse off and if you prefer not to do this why you (inaudible)
PM: Well, it's not a question of prefer not to.
When you see the tax cuts and assistance have been pitched at families earning less than $150,000 a year, around 1 in 10 households earn more than $150,000 a year, so Michelle, you can do that maths, I'm sure.
What that means is that there's no money tree. There's no endeavour here to try and pretend that everybody's better off or everybody's in the same position. There are some Australians who are not getting tax cuts and family assistance sufficient to compensate them for the likely impact of carbon pricing on them, and we have structured this package deliberately so that we are assisting lower-income families and middle-income families taking the approach that we would put assistance where it's needed the most.
JOURNALIST: You say there's no money tree and the budget has to add up. Can I ask the Treasurer, the scheme will cost, what, $4 billion more over the forward estimates than it will raise - where is that money coming from and will it threaten or at least reduce the surplus substantially?
TREASURER: (Inaudible) and the Budget has to add up. Can I ask the Treasurer, I mean the scheme will cost what - $4 billion more over the forward estimates than it will raise. Where is that money coming from and will it threaten or at least reduce the surpluses going forward?
TREASURER: No it doesn't in any way threaten our surplus. So as you can see $2.9 billion is upfront and that's entirely appropriate for a change of this magnitude. It's entirely appropriate that we give households the assistance early so they can have confidence that they will make this transition and they can do that with some degree of confidence, and certainty and the same goes for industry. So when you take out the advance payment that we're putting in now at the beginning, the impacts on our surpluses over the surplus years are quite modest. And that's why we say the scheme is broadly Budget neutral. Modest impacts across the surplus years, higher upfront costs because this is a very big structural change for our economy.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
TREASURER: What we will do is meet all of our fiscal rules and we will be presenting a MYEFO later in the year as we usually do but these are modest costs when you look at them against our surpluses. I think, from memory, a charge on the surplus in the last year of only $109 million. What we will do is meet our fiscal rules, which is to bring our Budget back to surplus in 2012-13  -  absolutely critical. We'll meet our tax to GDP target and we will continue to follow those fiscal rules.
The fact is there are lots of things happening in a budget at any one time. I have just spoken at length about some of the structural forces impacting on our economy as a whole and they are all budget related as well. We can't at any one point in time take a static view. So we update our budget as we are required to do under the Charter of Budget Honesty in MYEFO. We'll take into account all of those things that are going on but I think you would see from the record that we've had in recent years, we have applied fiscal discipline in accordance with our budget rules.
PM: OK, we'll take the last two questions. I'm going to go Karen and SBS because I think I should and I'm going to go Mega because perseverance pays. Karen?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, several compensatory measures weren't supported by the Multi Party Committee. How big of an obstacle is that going to be (inaudible) and also the diesel fuel temporary exemption, I understand, wasn't supported. Do you have to legislate any of those? Do you still face an obstacle in getting this up and running?
PM: There are three things which are Government-only measures: coal, steel and the changes for heavy vehicles. The changes for heavy vehicles are a change to regulation. They will be dealt with in the next Parliament. Coal is the provision of cash grants and can be done by the Government. Steel is something that we will bring to the Parliament to legislate so there is security for the steel industry. I believe we will be able to secure that through the Parliament, but there is a question here clearly for the Opposition. Are they going to stand up for the jobs of steel workers or not?
Mega.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister comparing this package to 2009, (inaudible) 1.7 per cent with the CPRS, 0.7 per cent for this one, so with that (inaudible) package superior or inferior to 2009, and you mention of missteps, what's the big takeout lesson of the 2009 period?
PM: Well firstly you're a man who loves the difference between a base and a percentage, so you and I could have a nice convoluted discussion here and lose the rest of the audience, but you can't do a comparison here of the percentage figures because the base has changed in the meantime. You'll be able to regress that against pi and some ABS data runs and give us a story tomorrow I'm sure. But you can't just compare the two figures. They're off a difference base.
In terms of the impact on pollution, got to remember the impact is on the polluters who are paying  -  1 July next year, $23 a tonne, that's what drives change. 30 June next year, $0, putting pollution into the atmosphere by those big polluters. 1 July, $23 a tonne, smart business people think, ‘gee, I want to bring that price down. What am I going to do? How am I going to innovate? How am I going to change my processes so that I reduce the carbon pollution I'm generating?', and they will and that's what gives us the reduction in carbon pollution that we've talked about.
In terms of differences between the two schemes, first and foremost the CPRS ran into a brick wall. I've knocked the brick wall down. This is going through, this done - full stop.
Second in terms of differences between the schemes, this has got a greater level of ambition, 80 per cent at 2050. It's got a greater commitment to clean energy, $1.3 billion. It's got a greater commitment to our land sector, $1.7 billion, and it has this mechanism that Minister Combet has spoken about to retire the dirtiest energy producers out of our electricity system. That's a big difference.
In terms of supporting jobs, this has got new initiatives in it for steel, for metal forging and the foundry industries, and of course this has got a tax reform associated with it.
We believe in work, we value work, this package values work. I want to see a nation with a clean energy future and higher workforce participation. This is the package that is going to drive both of those things - cleaner energy, more people in work. That's the Labor way
Thank you very much.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan, Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet, Minister for Resources and Energy Martin Ferguson and Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research Kim Carr today outlined new initiatives to support innovation in clean and renewable energy. 
Together with a price on carbon pollution and the Gillard Government's expanded 20 per cent by 2020 Renewable Energy Target, the three new measures will create economic incentives for businesses to invest in low and zero emissions innovation. 
The measures include: 
? a $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation 
? an Australian Renewable Energy Agency to manage $3.2 billion in funding 
? a $200 million Clean Technology Innovation Program. 
The Clean Energy Finance Corporation will invest $10 billion in businesses seeking funds to get innovative clean energy proposals and technologies off the ground. 
It will also invest in the transformation of existing manufacturing businesses to re-focus on meeting demand for inputs for these sectors, for example, manufacturing wind turbine blades and solar photo voltaic panels. 
The Australian Renewable Energy Agency will independently administer $3.2 billion in existing Federal Government grants for research and development into renewable energy technologies and initiatives to bring them to market. 
The Clean Technology Innovation Program will provide $200 million in grants to support business investment in renewable energy, low emissions technology and energy efficiency. This could support manufacturers to develop new clean technology products. 
The Clean Energy Finance Corporation will be part of the Treasury or Finance and Deregulation Portfolio. 
The Australian Renewable Energy Agency will be part of the Resources, Energy and Tourism portfolio. 
The Clean Technology Innovation Program will be administered by the Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research. 
Further information about the Government's clean energy future and carbon price announcement is available at www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet and Minister for Resources and Energy Martin Ferguson today announced a $1.3 billion Coal Sector Jobs Package to support jobs in the Australian coal industry during the move to a clean energy future. 
The Prime Minister said the impact of a $23 a tonne carbon price on the industry will be low  -  around $1.80 per tonne of coal produced for coal mine fugitive greenhouse gas emissions. 
However, a small number of gassy mines will face significant cost pressures as a carbon price is introduced. 
The Government's Coal Sector Jobs Package will assist the operators of these mines to support jobs and local communities, some of which rely heavily on coal mining employment. 
The Coal Sector Jobs Package will provide financial assistance over six years to Australia's most pollution-intensive coal mines and assist them to reduce their pollution. 
The $1.264 billion assistance package will be designed to reward those coal mines that reduce their emissions, based on their historical emissions intensity. 
This means that if a mine operator takes steps to reduce carbon pollution it will be able to decrease its liability under the carbon price and pocket the assistance. 
The Government also announced today the details of a $70 million Coal Mining Abatement Technology Support Package to assist coal mines in developing and deploying new technologies to reduce their carbon pollution. 
The long term viability of the coal mining sector depends on innovation and the deployment of new technologies and the Coal Abatement Technology Support Package will provide additional support to the advances that will ensure coal mining will play a valuable part in our clean energy future. 
Funding will be provided through grants on a co-contribution basis. 
Both the Coal Sector Jobs Package and the Coal Mining Abatement 
Technology Support Package will be administered by the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism. 
Further information in relation to the Government's clean energy future and carbon price announcement is available at www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government Simon Crean today outlined support to assist Australian communities and regions to move to a clean energy future. 
The Government is committed to supporting local communities to make the adjustment to a clean energy future. 
New funding to assist communities and regions includes: 
? $200 million over seven years in assistance for strongly affected regions and communities. This will include employment and training support, community development and economic diversification and a range of other activities. 
? An expansion of the Government's Low Carbon Communities program to $330 million to improve the energy efficiency of council and community buildings and low-income households. 
? $40 million over five years for the Remote Indigenous Energy Program to assist Indigenous communities access clean, affordable and reliable 24-hour power supply. 
If we don't act to reduce carbon pollution the impacts of rising temperatures and changing weather patterns could severely impact regional Australia. In addition, if we fail to transform our economy to one which can compete in a 
carbon constrained world, we risk falling behind the rest of the world and jeopardising our future economic prosperity. 
The Gillard Government's plan for a clean energy future will tackle climate change by putting a price on carbon pollution, driving innovation in clean energy, encouraging energy efficiency and creating opportunities on the land. 
It will also transform the heaviest polluting developed economy on a per person basis into a clean energy economy where the link between carbon pollution and economic growth has been broken. 
This fundamental reform will bring challenges and opportunities around the nation's communities and regions. With the Government's help, our regions, as well as the rest of the community, will prosper in our new clean energy future. 
Further information in relation to the Government's clean energy future and carbon price announcement is available at www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan and Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet today announced the Gillard Government's plan for a clean energy future.
Scientific evidence has confirmed our planet is warming. And after years of debate and deliberation, most Australians agree the time to act is now. Australians want to do the right thing by the environment. We are a confident, creative nation that's up to the challenges of tackling climate change.
That is why the Gillard Government is implementing a comprehensive plan for a clean energy future for our nation. Under our plan, Australia will cut 159 million tonnes a year of carbon pollution from our atmosphere by 2020. That is the equivalent of taking over 45 million cars off the road.
The comprehensive plan announced today to reduce carbon pollution and secure a clean energy future includes:
 * 	putting a price on carbon pollution
 * 	promoting innovation and investment in renewable energy
 * 	improving energy efficiency
 * 	creating opportunities in the land sector to cut pollution.
The Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan said the carbon price is a fundamental economic reform that will help maintain our living standards and future competitiveness as the world moves to tackle climate change.
The carbon price will change Australia's electricity generation by encouraging investment in renewable energy like wind and solar power, and the use of cleaner fuels like natural gas.
Households will be looked after with tax cuts, higher family payments and increases in pensions and benefits, to help meet the costs passed through by some businesses.
Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet said the Government is committed to supporting jobs as the economy is transformed. That is why we will support industries like steel, food processing and the broader manufacturing sector.
Carbon pricing is a reform we need to make to keep our economy competitive, to protect our environment and to do the right thing for our children and future generations.
With this plan, the Gillard Government is acting to help Australia meet the environmental and economic challenges of competing in a low-pollution world.
Further information about the Gillard Government's clean energy future and carbon price announcement is available at www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet and Minister for Resources and Energy Martin Ferguson today announced two significant new initiatives to maintain energy security, ensure market reliability and support the transformation of the energy sector. 
As part of its plan for a clean energy future, the Gillard Government will establish an Energy Security Fund and a new Energy Security Council. 
The Energy Security Fund includes three key initiatives to support Australia's 
electricity sector: 
? Payment for closure - the Government will seek to negotiate the closure or partial closure of some of Australia's most emissions intensive generators to remove up to 2,000 megawatts of capacity before 2020. This will start the process of replacing existing, highly emissions intensive electricity assets with cleaner energy generation and give new investors time to develop replacement generation capacity. The payment for closure will be on an agreed basis and managed in an orderly way so as to not risk energy security. 
? Assistance for strongly-affected generators - there will be transitional assistance provided to the most emissions-intensive coal fired power stations in Australia, which would be most impacted by the carbon price. This assistance will be provided as a mixture of payments and permits. 
? Loan support - the Government will offer short-term loans to generators to help finance their purchase of carbon permits and support the re-financing of existing debt if commercial loans are unavailable. 
A new Energy Security Council, consisting of energy and financial market experts and energy market bodies, will also be created to advise the Government on support measures to address energy security risks. 
Finally, the Government will request the Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO) to expand its planning scenarios for the future development of the electricity grid to prepare for the clean energy transformation and greater integration of renewable energy. 
Further information about the Government's clean energy future and carbon price announcement is available at www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au  



 The Gillard Government today released extensive modelling that shows Australia's economy will continue to grow strongly at the same time as we cut carbon pollution. 
The Strong Growth, Low Pollution report models the impact on the economy of putting a price on carbon pollution. 
The modelling shows incomes and jobs will increase substantially while our country takes action to reduce the risks of dangerous climate change. 
Average income per person under a carbon price is forecast to rise by about 16 per cent by 2020 to be around $9,000 higher in today's dollars. 
National employment is projected to increase by 1.6 million jobs by the end of the decade. 
The modelling also shows that the cost of living impacts of a $23 carbon price are modest, with an overall price increase of 0.7 per cent in 2012-13. That compares to a price increase of 2.5 per cent as a result of the GST. 
The price of most goods will increase by less than one half of one per cent as the result of a carbon price. That is less than half a cent in every dollar. 
Delaying action on climate change will only lead to dramatically higher costs, will undermine our competitiveness and will ultimately hit jobs and living standards. 
Putting a price on carbon will drive innovation and investment in clean energy technology, moving production towards less pollution-intensive processes. 
The report shows that without action Australia's pollution is forecast to nearly double by 2050. A carbon price will deliver an absolute reduction in emissions and drive the expansion of the renewable energy sector so that it is 18 times larger than its current size. 
This extensive modelling has been prepared by the Treasury in consultation with other departments over recent months, and will be updated to reflect the specific finalised policy agreed by the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee ahead of legislation being introduced into the Parliament. Any updated modelling is expected to closely match the results of the core policy scenario modelled in the Strong Growth, Low Pollution report. 
Differences between the MPCCC agreement and the scenarios modelled include the starting price, availability of international permits, the binding 100 per cent facility allocation cap and the treatment of fuel. 
The Government extends its thanks to the Treasury and other government departments for the hard work and world-class expertise that has underpinned this important report.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet and Minister for Indigenous Affairs Jenny Macklin today announced a range of programs to assist Indigenous Australians and communities to participate in Australia's move to a clean energy future. 
The Government is committed to supporting Indigenous people make the adjustment to a clean energy future. 
In addition to household assistance and tax cuts, a new $40 million Remote Indigenous Energy Program will help remote Indigenous communities access clean, affordable and reliable 24-hour power supplies. 
The program will help Indigenous Australians to manage their energy efficiently and will build on the success of the former Renewable Remote 
Power Generation Program by providing financial support to install renewable energy generation systems such as solar panels and wind turbines in around 50 remote Indigenous communities. 
Many of these remote communities currently rely on diesel generators for their power supplies. 
It will also include training in system maintenance and the provision of energy efficiency information to encourage ongoing energy management. 
Additional support will be provided to assist Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders to participate in the Government's Carbon Farming Initiative, through the $22 million Indigenous Carbon Farming Fund. 
Indigenous Australians manage around 20 per cent of Australia's land mass, drawing on traditional knowledge of the land and its responses to fire, flooding and drought. 
Funding will also be provided for specialists to work with Indigenous communities on carbon farming projects. There will also be funding for research and reporting tools for Carbon Farming Initiative methodologies that will create real and lasting opportunities for Indigenous Australians. 
Indigenous Australians will also benefit significantly from the substantial investment that the Government is putting into land sector research, abatement and biodiversity totalling around $1 billion over the first four years. 
Further information in relation to the Government's clean energy future and carbon price announcement is available at www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au  



The Gillard Government's household assistance combines tax cuts to help household budgets with significant tax reform that will simplify the tax system and free over one million Australians from having to lodge a return. 
The reforms will create a more efficient tax system and strengthen our economy by improving incentives to work. 
From 1 July 2012, every taxpayer earning up to $80,000 a year will receive a tax cut, with most getting at least $300 annually. A second round of tax cuts will apply from 1 July 2015, increasing this annual saving for most taxpayers earning below $80,000 a year to at least $380. 
The tax-free threshold will be more than trebled, increasing from $6,000 to $18,200 from 1 July 2012, and to $19,400 from 1 July 2015. 
The changes will deliver a simpler, more transparent personal tax system in line with the Australia's Future Tax System Review. 
Regular wage earners with incomes below the new tax-free threshold will not have any tax withheld from their wages by employers, which will mean higher take-home pay and better incentives to work. 
The changes will particularly benefit part-time workers and workers on low incomes, ensuring that they pay less tax. 
Rolling the Low Income Tax Offset into a higher tax free threshold means better interactions with the transfer system. It will also mean statutory tax rates are more in line with the effective tax rates people actually pay, making the tax system easier to understand and fairer. 
Under the new tax scales, every taxpayer below $80,000 gets a tax cut, and no Australian taxpayer will pay a cent more tax. 
The changes build on the measures introduced in the 2011-12 Budget to boost workforce participation  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan and Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet today announced the Australian Government's carbon price. 
The carbon price will be $23 for each tonne of pollution beginning on 1 July 2012. 
The price will rise by 2.5 per cent a year in real terms during a three-year fixed price period until 1 July 2015. The carbon price mechanism will then transition to an emissions trading scheme where the price will be determined by the market. 
The Prime Minister said the carbon price was a central element of the Government's plan to move Australia to a clean energy future. 
A carbon price will create economic incentives for the biggest polluters to reduce their emissions of greenhouse gases. 
Around 500 businesses will be required to pay for their pollution under the carbon pricing mechanism, with more than half of this revenue used to assist households with tax cuts, increased family payments and higher pensions, benefits and allowances. Carbon price revenue will also be used to support jobs and to invest in clean energy and climate change programs. 
Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet said the 
Government's carbon pricing mechanism would be implemented in two stages. 
For the first three years, starting from 1 July 2012, the price of each tonne of carbon pollution will be fixed, like a carbon tax. 
Then, from 1 July 2015, the carbon pricing mechanism will move to an emissions trading scheme where the price will be set by the market. 
Mr Combet said market mechanisms were the most environmentally effective 
and economically efficient way of reducing pollution. 
A carbon price creates a competitive advantage for businesses, investors, researchers and innovators who find cleaner ways of doing business. In this way it creates powerful incentives and uses the market to deliver benefits for the community. 
The Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan said the three-year fixed price period would provide stability and predictability across the economy. 
It will give businesses time to understand the new system, their obligations within it and to start planning ways to reduce their pollution. 
"We know a carbon price is the most cost-efficient way to cut carbon pollution." 
"Putting a price on pollution will encourage companies to innovate and invest in new technologies to use energy more efficiently." 
This is a significant reform that will tackle climate change and keep Australia's economy prosperous and competitive as the world moves to a clean energy future. 
Further information about the Government's announcement of a carbon price and mechanism is available at www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au  



The Gillard Government understands fuel costs are a significant share of many household budgets and will ensure that households, tradies, farmers and many small businesses do not face a carbon price on the fuel they use for transport. 
However the Government recognises that pollution from transport is a major contributor to Australia's overall carbon pollution, which is the highest per person of any advanced economy. 
Many businesses receive tax credits that currently mean they do not pay fuel excise in the same way as households. From 2012-13, fuel tax credits will be reduced for businesses  -  with some exceptions  -  so that they face an effective carbon price like other heavy polluters. 
Businesses in the agriculture, fisheries and forestry industries will be exempt from the reduction in fuel tax credits and therefore shielded from the effective carbon price on their transport fuel costs. 
Heavy on-road vehicles like semi-trailers will also initially be exempt from the fuel tax credit reductions. However the Government intends to apply these arrangements to the heavy on-road vehicle industry from 2014-15. 
As aviation fuels do not receive fuel tax credits, domestic aviation fuel excise will be increased by an amount equivalent to the carbon price to provide an effective carbon price from 2012-13. 
To find out more information on the treatment of fuel under the Government's carbon price, visit: www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au  



The Gillard Government will provide Australia's 3.4 million pensioners with extra payments that at least offset all of their expected price impact under a carbon price. 
Around 90 per cent of pensioner households, including all full rate pensioners, will also benefit from a buffer of at least 20 per cent over and above their expected average price impact from the carbon price. 
About 280,000 self-funded retirees who are Commonwealth Seniors Health Care Card holders will receive the same amount of assistance as age pensioners. 
Australians receiving Age Pensions, Disability Support Pensions, Carer Payment, Service Pension and the Seniors Supplement will all receive assistance with the costs of the carbon price. 
Age pensioners and self-funded retirees have worked hard all their lives to build our nation, so the Gillard Government is determined to provide cost of living help as we go about cutting carbon pollution. 
The assistance the Gillard Government is providing will mean senior Australians can do their bit to tackle climate change while also looking after the household budget. 
Assistance for Pensioners 
Pensioners will receive a new Clean Energy Supplement equal to a 1.7 per cent increase in the maximum rate of pension. This is an annual increase of up to $338 for singles and $510 for couples combined. 
Pensioners will receive lump sum advance payments of up to $250 for a single pensioner before the carbon price begins, to make sure they have extra money in their pockets to help meet price impacts. 
For pensioners, this advance payment will be equivalent to nine months  -  or in other words, about three quarters  -  of the extra annual payment. 
The advance payment will be made in May and June 2012. Regular payment of the Clean Energy Supplement will begin in March 2013. The assistance will be permanent and will rise over time through indexation. 
The Government will review the adequacy of assistance each year and will increase it further if necessary. 
Assistance for Self-funded retirees 
Self-funded retirees who hold a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card will benefit from the same assistance as pensioners, including the lump sum payment. They will receive an annual increase of up to $338 for singles and $510 for couples combined and will also receive the first 9 months of assistance as a lump-sum advance payment. 
Pensioners and seniors who have income from work or investments may also receive additional benefit from tax cuts. 
All taxpayers earning up to $80,000 a year will get a tax cut, with most getting a cut of at least $300. 
Essential Medical Equipment Payment 
The Government understands that some people have high electricity costs due to their use of essential medical equipment, such as those using a dialysis machine or other life-support equipment at home. 
Around 110,000 Australians who hold a Commonwealth concession card and who rely on certain medical equipment will be eligible for this payment. These Australians will receive an annual cash payment of $140 a year, in addition to their other assistance, which will cover the average electricity price increase from the use of their medical equipment due to the carbon price. For more information, see the fact sheet on essential medical equipment. 
Support for aged care residents and their providers 
Arrangements will be introduced to ensure that assistance is shared fairly between aged care residents and providers. 
Aged care providers bear many costs for their residents, including electricity, and will receive around half of the assistance paid through the age pension. Age pensioners living in aged care will receive the balance of the payment to help them with increases in their other costs of living. For more information, see the fact sheet on aged care residents. 
Public housing tenants 
Assistance is not intended to be included in state government public housing rent setting calculations, so that public housing residents get the full benefit of assistance.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet and Minister for Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities Tony Burke today announced a new Biodiversity Fund to protect Australia's unique species from climate change impacts. 
We need to take action to protect Australia's diverse environment from the threats posed by climate change. 
The ongoing fund will initially provide $946 million over six years for a range of projects to foster and preserve biodiversity around Australia. 
The fund will support farmers, community groups and natural resource management bodies to take action on-ground that will protect biodiversity in the landscape. 
It will support restoration and management of areas of the landscape which can store carbon while also achieving biodiversity outcomes including: 
? reforestation and revegetation in areas of high conservation value 
? management and protection of biodiverse ecosystems, including publicly owned native forests and land under conservation covenants or subject to land clearing restrictions 
? action to prevent the spread of invasive species across landscapes. 
These measures will ensure the protection of Australia's ecosystems and improve the resilience of Australia's unique species to the impacts of climate change. 
Biodiversity plays a crucial role in maintaining the productive capacity of our landscape and protecting our natural ecosystems. 
Further information in relation to the Government's clean energy future and carbon price announcement is available at www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet today outlined a suite of new energy efficiency measures, which form part of the Government's plan for a clean energy future. 
While the most effective way to reduce pollution is through a carbon price, measures to promote energy efficiency will also play an important role. 
The Gillard Government will implement the following new measures to help households, communities and business better understand their energy consumption and how to make savings: 
? Energy efficiency information grants  -  the Government will provide $40 million in grants over the next four years to industry associations and non-government organisations to promote energy efficiency measures among small businesses and community groups. 
? Household advice line and website  -  the Government's LivingGreener website (www.livinggreener.gov.au) will be expanded to provide information on how households can improve energy efficiency to save money. 
? Low Carbon Communities program  -  the Government's Low Carbon Communities program will be expanded from $80 million to $330 million to improve the energy efficiency of council and community buildings and low-income households. 
? Clean Technology Investment Program  -  this program will provide grants to manufacturers totalling $800 million over seven years. The grants will enable firms to invest in energy-efficient capital equipment and low-pollution technologies, processes and products. 
A further suite of energy efficiency measures will be developed in response to the report of the Prime Minister's Task Group on Energy Efficiency. These include: 
? Undertaking further policy work on a national energy saving initiative, or ‘white certificate' scheme. This scheme would place obligations on energy retailers to help their household and business customers find and implement energy savings. 
? Expanding the successful Energy Efficiency Opportunities program, which requires large energy users to find and publicly report on opportunities to save energy in their operations. 
? Improving the governance arrangements for energy efficiency so that opportunities to improve energy efficiency become nationally consistent, and it is clear to business and the community who they should speak to about energy efficiency. 
? Implementing mandatory CO2 standards for light vehicles. 
For more information on the Government's plan for a clean energy future visit www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au  



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard is in our Sydney studio. Welcome to the program.
PM: Good morning Fran.
HOST: Prime Minister what will the price of carbon be in 2020, because in the documents you released yesterday, and there were many of them, Treasury's default escalator estimates $48 a tonne by 2020. Is Tony Abbott right when he says this carbon price is just going to keep going up and up and up?
PM: The carbon price does go up Fran, of course by then the scheme will be internationally linked, we will be in an emissions trading scheme and so the Australian price will be the international price. That's a good thing, because it means that Australian businesses are able to abate carbon pollution at the least possible cost.
That's good for Australian jobs, good for Australian businesses. Fran, the carbon price does go up and so does the household assistance and there will be a second round of tax cuts, so we will ensure that we keep moving the household assistance and the tax scheme so that the degree of assistance that we've promised to Australian families flows through.
HOST: That's going to be key to your selling of this package because householders generally, voters generally, are concerned about two things. Will this cost them and how much and will it do any good, will it help the environment?
Now you say nine out of ten households will be compensated, but why so much compensation? Is it unreasonable to ask all of us to pay something to reduce emissions, isn't that how you change behaviour?
PM: Well, the behaviour we're principally aiming to change is the behaviour of the big polluters, the around 500 big businesses that will pay the price for putting carbon pollution in the atmosphere. At the moment of course they do that for free, from 1 July next year they'll pay a price, $23 a tonne and that will go up over time. And what the means is that they will think of ways to innovate and change so that they do what their business does, generating less carbon pollution. That's what gets us a clean energy future as well as catalysing investment in renewables which we are doing through an around $13 billion dollar package to make sure this nation gets the benefit of solar and wind and geothermal and tide  -  all the wonderful new sources of renewable energy.
As for consumers, of course individuals can do their bit, they can make choices to buy products that have got less carbon pollution associated with their production. I wanted to make sure that households in low and middle income ranges were in a situation where they had from us tax cuts and family payment increases which help them with the cost of living, which is why we've designed a package so nine out of ten households do get some assistance and around six million households have basically come out square and I've determined to associate that with a tax reform.
We're lifting the tax free threshold from $6,000 to around $18,000. That will mean a million Australians are no longer in the tax system, having to do a tax return at the end of the year. It will also better reward people for making a choice to go to work, particularly to move from welfare to work, or for second income earners, to go back into the workforce. So I'm aiming here, Fran, for a clean energy future and for a high work force participation Australia.
HOST: I'll try and come back to the tax packages, tax income  -  the thresholds, because the Coalition has some problems with that. But just to stay with the compensation for householders, of course, inevitably, there are some losers and it appears that some middle income earners will slip through your compensation cracks. The Opposition gives the example of a policeman and a nurse each earning $70,000 a year with one child who will be $230 a year worse off after compensation.
PM: Fran, there's no way of sugar coating any of this and I'm not going to try to. Yes, there are some people who will not receive tax cuts or family payment increases that bring them out square, that is they will pay a price themselves. That price -
HOST: -And they're not all rich people.
PM: Well, that price will be very modest. We are talking about a change in cost of living in the Consumer Price Index of 0.7 per cent, 0.7 per cent. And I had to make choices about who needed assistance the most, I've determined that lower income Australians, more than four million lower income households, pensioners and the like, should come out with a 20 per cent buffer. Their budgets are very tight and consequentially they don't have much money to move around so we've protected them by giving them 20 per cent more than the expected impact of the carbon price on them and then, as I've said, around six million households will come out effectively square.
HOST: Okay, the other criticism of this whole plan is that it is a money-go-round and considering the levels of assistance to heavy polluting industries, emissions intensive trade exposed industries will receive almost 95 per cent of their permits free of charge. How exactly, can you explain to everyone listening, how that will drive a change in behaviour in industry?
PM: Well we know this will drive a change in behaviour and that's why we can say to people that in 2020 there will be 160 million tonnes less of carbon pollution, that's the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road, that is a very big number.
HOST: Does it matter that 100 million of those tonnes will be from abatement offshore, overseas?
PM: A tonne of carbon pollution out of our atmosphere is a tonne of carbon pollution out of our atmosphere.
HOST: But it's not a behaviour change in the Australian society is it?
PM: Well there will be changes in the way that we do business. Big polluters will change the way they do things, we will drive more investment in clean energy for the future that will change things in our own country, changing things in terms of the amount of carbon pollution.
Yes, there is international linking in the scheme and so there should be because I want to see less carbon pollution in our atmosphere, I want to achieve that result at the least possible cost and international linking is pivotal to achieving that result at the least possible cost.
Anybody who is telling you that there shouldn't be international linking is effectively saying Australian businesses should pay a bigger price and Australian workers should be at bigger risks than, in my view, they should be. We're talking about a system here where we're protecting Australian jobs, where we are working with businesses and where we are getting the lowest cost abatement, including through international linking and through the very design of the scheme, which is the most efficient way of cutting carbon pollution.
HOST: Okay, let's run through a couple of things if we can. The steel industry says it's pleased with the $300 million assistance it will receive on top of its 95 per cent free permits. In effect steel companies like BlueScope and OneSteel will be pretty much fully shielded from the impact of the carbon tax, like households, for the first few years. Why did you do that? Was it the Australian dollar and does that mean if the dollar drops so might the steel compensation package?
PM: The steel industry's doing it very tough in Australia at the moment and that is partly as a result of the very high Australian dollar. I mean we live in a time of enormous economic possibility, great resources boom, record terms of trade. The consequence of that though is a sustained high Australian dollar and that does put pressure on some industries particularly manufacturing and it's put pressure on steel. So we wanted to work with the steel industry and with manufacturing and other industries to make sure as we price carbon we're working with those industries and doing our best to protect Australian jobs.
HOST: And Prime Minister does this package mean that no new coal fired power stations will ever be built again in Australia?
PM: Certainly this package changes all of the incentives for energy for the future, so what we'll see is the development of renewables rather than dirty coal fired power stations.
HOST: So no more new coal fired power stations?
PM: My expectation is we will see from this package more renewable energy, we will also see more gas used, rather than coal-fired power stations that are very big emitters.
HOST: OK, in a moment we'll be joined by Brad Page from the Energy Supply Association for electricity generators. He's concerned that generators are going to have to pay upfront for their pollution permits under this scheme, sometimes up to three years in advance which is, he says, could lead to a lot more expensive and volatile power prices. Do you acknowledge this is a problem because it is a change from Kevin Rudd's CPRS package, the way that worked.
PM: We have changed the way that we're working with electricity. Particularly what we've done is put in place a system to retire some of the highest carbon pollution creating parts of our electricity generation sectors so we will go to market and tender to retire some of the energy generation that creates the most pollution, but we will do that in a way that works over time, is measured over time, so that we are swinging in new renewable energy and of course there is enough electricity and there are no problems about energy security.
What we've also done in this package is effectively pulled forward the assistance that goes to the electricity sector.
HOST: Just finally, the 160 million tonnes out of the atmosphere by 2020, I think, is that your aim?
PM: That's right.
HOST: That's the plan. What about in the short term, what about in two years time, in three years time? Because I think people want to know, be able to see this is going to make a difference. What are the figures of how many tonnes of carbon, how much less carbon will be emitted say in three years time?
PM: Well my answer to that Fran is of course it's going to take people some time to change processes and to change the way that they work, but effectively the starter's gun has gone off.
For businesses now, for around 500 big polluters, the first shot has been fired, they've heard the starter's gun, they know on 1 July next year they start paying, so right from today they will be saying to themselves ‘What changes can we make that reduce our carbon pollution?'. And we've got to get on with sending that price signal to people otherwise here we are, sitting in Australia, talking to each other and per head of population we generate more carbon pollution than anyone else in the developed world.
That means our economy has got a big journey of transition, it's not going to be achieved over night, but it's never going to be achieved unless we start and that's why we've got to get on with pricing carbon from 1 July next year.
HOST: Prime Minister thank you very much for joining us.
PM: Thank you.



The Gillard Government today outlined an easy way for Australian households to understand the assistance provided for the cost of living impacts of the carbon price.
The online household assistance estimator is a guide to help families understand the impact a carbon price is expected to have on their budgets, as well as the assistance being provided.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today visited a family at Emu Plains in western Sydney where they viewed the online assistance estimator and discussed the Government's planned assistance that will be provided through a price on carbon.
It is important that Australians have access to direct information about what a carbon price means for them.
All a householder will need to do is visit the Clean Energy Future website at www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au, answer a few simple questions and they will see an estimate of the amount of assistance a household like theirs is likely to receive.
The assistance estimator uses a set of typical household types to provide an indication of the assistance different households will receive from May or June next year.
It doesn't give an exact result given everyone's circumstances are unique, but it provides a good guide to help households understand what the carbon price will mean for them.
The assistance estimator is secure and will not retain any personal details.
More than half of the revenue raised through a carbon price will go to households in the form of tax cuts and increases in pensions, allowances and family payments.
This means Australians can do their bit for climate change and look after their household budgets.
Nine out of ten households will receive assistance through tax cuts and/or payment increases under the carbon price plan.
Almost 6 million households will get tax cuts or increases in payments that cover the entire average price impact.
More than 4 million Australian households will get an extra buffer with assistance that covers 120 per cent of the average price impact of the carbon price.
On average, the carbon price will cost households $9.90 per week but they get $10.10 per week in assistance.
This assistance is permanent and will increase. The Government will review the adequacy of assistance each year and will increase it further if necessary.
The Government's assistance package will help households deal with any cost of living impacts caused by the introduction of a carbon price as we move towards a clean energy future.
In the vast majority of cases, households will not need to apply for assistance as it will be automatically delivered to them through the personal income tax and Government payment systems.
Under the package, more than 1 million Australians will no longer need to lodge a tax return.
The household assistance estimator and other information is available at www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au



PM: I'm joined today by David Bradbury and I'm very pleased to be with him in his electorate of Lindsay and I've had the opportunity today to spend some time with a family, most particularly with Craig and Michelle.
And Craig and Michelle have talked to me about why they think as a nation we should tackle climate change and get a clean energy future. They've got three big reasons for doing that, their names are Hannah, Max and Luke and they are concerned about their kids' future and that's why they want to see our country tackle climate change. They are three pretty good reasons there behind us.
Yesterday I announced how our country is going to tackle climate change, how we are going to seize that clean energy future. From 1 July next year we will get around 500 big polluters to pay the price of putting carbon pollution into our atmosphere. At the moment that pollution can go into our atmosphere for free, from 1 July next year big polluters will pay a price - $23 per tonne. And what that will mean is that those big polluters will look for different ways of doing business, different ways of getting cleaner energy, so that they cut the carbon pollution that they generate.
By 2020 that means we will see a reduction of 160 million tonnes of carbon pollution. That's the effect of what I announced yesterday. It's the same as taking 45 million cars off the road and to give us a sense of the scale of that there are around 12 million cars on the road in Australia today.
Australians want us to act on climate change and we are going to get this done  -  get Australia the clean energy future that Australians want to see. Now, of course Australians are asking the question ‘what does this mean for me and my family?'.
And as we're seen Craig demonstrate today, you can get on the cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website and use the household estimator to give a direct figure for you and your family, what it will mean for you.
Nine out of ten Australian households will get tax cuts, or payment increases, or a combination of the two. What that means is almost six million households will receive sufficient, so that they come out square for the expected flow through of the price that big polluters pay.
Over four million households, our lowest income households, are going to get the benefit of a 20 per cent buffer. We know that for Australians, like older Australians who live on the age pension, that the budget is tight, so we want to make sure they've got the benefit of that 20 per cent buffer, as we move to price carbon and there are some price impacts that flow through.
Those price impacts will be modest. We are talking about a 0.7 per cent increase in the cost of living  -  less than 1 per cent. On average that means a change of $9.90 and on average people will receive through tax cuts and family payment changes and pension increases, $10.10.
Now families are different households are different, they've in different income circumstances, different numbers of kids and so people should use the household estimator to be able to look at what this means for them and their family.
But we do know that there are families around the country who will find that as a result of being eligible for tax cuts, or family payments, or increases in compensation in pensions, that they will come out in front. To give an example of that, a single pensioner, maybe an older Australian woman, who is a single pensioner on the maximum rate of the old age pension. She will receive $134 more than the expected average impact of the flow through of carbon pricing.
For a pensioner couple, they will receive $226 more than the expected average flow through impact of carbon pricing, and if we took a family $85,000 family income, a few kids, a couple of kids that are very young, under five years old, they will receive $378 more than the expected average impact on them of the flow through of pricing carbon.
Now, there will be some people who get on the household estimator and when they look at it they will see that they are not receiving sufficient amount through tax cuts or family payments, so that they come out square. There will be some families in that position. Nine out of ten households are getting some assistance, but obviously some households will see that they haven't been fully assisted.
But the impact of this on prices will be modest, 0.7 per cent of CPI and families that are in the category of not being fully assisted will find when they work through it, that the average impact on them is 0.5 per cent of their income.
So, I'd urge families not to guess, to actually get on the household estimator and have a look. I'm determined as Prime Minister that we get on with the job of pricing carbon, of getting our big polluters to pay. We've had a long debate, at times it's been a difficult debate, now is the time to get this done and we will get it done from 1 July next year.
I'd like to very, very much thank Craig and Michelle for having us here today, for welcoming me and David into their home and I'd like to thank Hannah and Max too, for sharing some of their stories and Luke for doing a bit of building around us.
OK. Thank you. I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will the Coalition have a mandate to repeal the carbon tax if it wins the next election?
PM: Well, the important thing is getting this job done and introducing carbon pricing on 1 July next year. Of course, in 2013 people will vote and they will vote seeing what difference pricing carbon and tackling climate change means, they'll see the around 500 big polluters paying and they'll be able to have experienced themselves what the tax cuts and changes in family payments and pensions mean for them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how do you feel the package is being accepted out in the community?
PM: We've got a lot of explaining to do and I'm going to keep explaining. Yesterday when we launched the package, of course I wanted to explain the way it worked to Australians, I'm doing that today and I'll be doing that for many days, many weeks, many months ahead. I want Australians to understand how we are going to get that clean energy future.
But I have been keen to say to people today, that at the very heart of this is something quite simple and the thing that's quite simple is as we stand here in this beautiful sunshine today, carbon pollution is being put on our atmosphere for free, by big polluters. That could happen forever, there's no incentive to change that behaviour, you can do it for free.
Well, from 1 July next year it will cost the big polluters and that will drive change, that will cut carbon pollution.
We were talking about how near public transport we were, that was a great example.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will this be put to a public inquiry and would you accept any recommendations that may come out of any inquiry, whether it's public or a Parliamentary Inquiry?
PM: This is the package we will take to the Australian Parliament to be legislated. I expect that there will be proper parliamentary processes, including a Parliamentary Inquiry and people will be able to put submissions and there may be some commentary about the details of the package. But the package I announced yesterday is the package we will deliver.JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the carbon price sufficiently high the big polluters might change their ways?
PM: We've started this at $23 and it will drive change. It will particularly drive change so that we see more clean energy become available, by pricing pollution we are effectively saying that dirty energy will be comparatively more expensive and clean energy will be comparatively cheaper  -  that will turbo-charge the development of clean energy in our country.
We're already seeing some great projects commissioned. I had the opportunity, for example, to announce the government support that is enabling huge solar projects to go ahead. In Moree here in New South Wales and Chinchilla in Queensland. That's the start, by pricing carbon we will turbo-charge the development of clean energy for the future.
And of course this package has special measures to support the development of clean energy. $10 billion in a Clean Energy Development Corporation, which will work to provide commercial loans, but generate more clean energy for our future and of course there is also the support available through a new body called ARENA to help get clean energy developed more quickly.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Labor holds this seat by 2.2 per cent. How concerned are you about you about losing marginal seats like this one at the next election, because of a cost of living worry among the community?
PM: What I'm concerned about and I'm sure I can speak for David in this regard, what we're concerned about is doing the right thing for the country's future. Our country has debated long and hard tackling climate change and as we stand here today I'm very confident in saying the vast majority of Australians believe climate change is real. They believe it's caused by carbon pollution and human activity and they want to see a government like us take effective action and we will.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've been critical in the past of Tony Abbott's direct action plan, saying it's using the taxpayer's money to pay the big polluters. Given the assistance for coal and steel now has to come out of the budget, not the carbon tax revenue, is that being a little hypocritical?
PM: The criticisms I've made of the Opposition's policies are that they'll be very costly and they won't work. They'll cost families $720 per year and they won't work.
The package I put forward yesterday is a package where it's not families who are paying a new tax, it's big polluters who are paying a price for every tonne of carbon pollution they put in our atmosphere. This package will work to cut carbon pollution. That's the difference.
JOURNALIST: But at the same time taxpayer's money is being paid to polluters?
PM: And we are supporting Australian jobs, as we make this make this transition. If we look at our Australian economy today, what it means is per head of population Australians generate more carbon pollution per head than anybody in the developed world. Now, what that is telling you is that our economy's got a big journey of transition, as we move to a clean energy future.
So, to get on that journey of transition means we've got to put a price on carbon and get the around 500 biggest polluters to pay that price.
It also means we've got to work with industry as they adapt to that change and protect Australian jobs and so we are providing assistance to the coal industry, to steel, to manufacturing, to industries that are emissions intensive and take the world price  -  that is they trade in the world system. We're doing that to protect Australian jobs, that's absolutely the right thing to be doing.
But, let's do the contrast between what the Government is saying and what the Opposition is saying. Under our plan polluters pay, under the Opposition's plan it's families that pay.
Our plan will work to cut carbon pollution, under the Opposition's plan you'll endlessly subsidise polluters as they pollute.
So, contrast couldn't be clearer. Our plan will work to cut carbon pollution.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the price is currently $23 per tonne and at the moment a lot of families may be better off under the plan, but as the price increases will the Government be changing or adjusting the amount that families were being reimbursed to help them with that? I'm sure they have long term concerns.
PM: Yes, the answer to your question is yes, absolutely. The carbon price paid by big polluters will go up, as will the assistance provided to Australian households  -  that will go up too.
So, the assistance will be permanent and it will increase over time, so that it matches the carbon price.
JOURNALIST: How difficult do you think it's going to be to sell this package to the electorate?
PM: I'll be out explaining it, David will be here in his community explaining it, we'll be explaining it right around the country. This is the right package for our nation's future.
We will deliver it on 1 July next year and of course I'll be explaining it to Australians around the country in the days, weeks, and months ahead.
JOURNALIST: You say the tax is budget neutral, if not what areas would come under, what would be looked at to take money away from?
PM: We'll do new complete accounting when we publish the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, but the Government has shown by the work we've done at the recent budget and during the election campaign and before that, that we've run a budget where we found savings.
So, the budget is coming back into surplus in 2012-13 exactly as promised.
JOURNALIST: Are there any areas that you've highlighted though that would be (inaudible)?
PM: Well, we've worked through for prudent savings in the past and we'll do it again, but the budget's coming back to surplus in 2012-13.
JOURNALIST: Now, David's a big passionate supporter of the carbon tax, you know that. Out of everywhere in Australia where you could have come this morning, what has brought you to Emu Plains?
PM: Well, I always like coming out and visiting David and his community and I wanted to come and have a chat with a wonderful family and had the opportunity to do that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) shopping malls and street walks and slightly more spontaneous (inaudible)?
PM: I actually do a lot of street walks, a lot of out and about with the Australian people. I don't always take my friends from the media with me, but of course we'll be talking to Australians in all sorts of circumstances.
JOURNALIST: I just had a question, it was 160 million tonnes, was that per year, or was that by 2020?
PM: That's the figure in 2020, in the year of 2020.
JOURNALIST: By 2020?
PM: In the year of 2020.
JOURNALIST: Within that 12 months?
PM: That's right.
JOURNALIST: So what before then?
PM: Well, obviously, you'll start to see change. I mean, I believe the race has already started, businesses will have watched the announcements made yesterday, they will have watched what I said yesterday that there is a carbon price, that will be paid by big polluters from 1 July next year. So, smart business people aren't simply going to sit there waiting for 1 July next year twiddling their thumbs, they're going to be saying to themselves from today on ‘what can I do in my business to cut the amount that I'll have to pay when this price comes into effect on 1 July', they'll already have started the smart thinking we need to reduce carbon pollution.
Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: David Bradbury, how concerned are you about losing your seat because of the carbon tax?
DAVID BRADBURY: You gave me an extra per cent, a bit earlier. It's only 1.2 per cent. So, I should invite you back more often.
But, look, can I say that everything we do in politics has consequences, but the consequences that I'm more concerned about are the consequences for my children and my children's children.
When an overwhelming majority of scientists tell us that we need to act, and an overwhelming majority of economists tell us that the way to act is to price carbon, then frankly it would be negligent for us to do anything other than what we are doing, and that is to price carbon.
We are doing this, not because we want to hurt people, we are doing it because we know that in the future we need to secure our energy for the future. It needs to be a clean energy future and the best way for us to do that is to send a price signal to the big polluters, to do what you do differently, so that you don't have to pay for pollution, stop polluting and in doing so you too will join us in being a part of a clean energy future.
JOURNALIST: So, David you'd lose your seat for your children's future then?
DAVID BRADBURY: Look, as I said, there are consequences that flow from everything that we do, or we chose not to do in politics, but we are determined to do this because it is the right thing to do. It's the right thing to do because all of the concern about cost of living today will become concerns about a cost of living and a lack of standard of living in the future if we don't act.
It's important that we act, so that we can drive a clean energy future and I'm very pleased to get out there on the ground in my community and to explain to people why this is needed and why this is the best way for us to tackle action on climate change.
And whatever consequences flow from that, we'll deal with them when we deal with them. But in the end I'm elected to represent my community, its best interests and to get out there and to make the decisions that I believe are right and I've never been more convinced of the correctness of a course of action that we're embarking upon than now.
Thank you.



HOST: Julia Gillard, welcome.
PM: Thank you, Chris
HOST: Now, is the aim of this plan to cut taxes or to cut carbon?
PM: It's to cut carbon pollution and tackle climate change and so by putting a price on carbon pollution and getting around 500 big polluters to pay that price, being sensible business people they will find a way of innovating, of reducing the amount of carbon pollution they generate and that will cut carbon pollution by 160 million tonnes in 2020, the equivalent of 45 million vehicles.
HOST: 100 million tonnes of that though will come by buying permits to pollute from offshore though won't it, it won't come in Australia?
PM: Yes, this is going to be an internationally linked scheme and so it should be. I want our economy to transform to a clean energy economy and I want us to cut carbon pollution at the lowest possible cost and international linking is part of having the lowest possible cost.
It's the way you protect Australian businesses, the way you protect international competitiveness and therefore protect Australian jobs. Anyone who is telling you that they don't want an internationally linked scheme is saying to Australians, ‘Do this for a higher cost than you need to pay'.
HOST: How do you think Australians will feel though, that $3 billion of Australia's wealth will be exported overseas and how can we be certain with what they buy overseas will be worth?
PM: Certainly in the design of the scheme that we've announced today, for any credits that are bought from overseas there will be rigorous processes to ensure that that's a quality credit and that there is a tonne of carbon pollution that is not going in the atmosphere attached to that credit. But, Chris, if I can re-engineer your question, why should we pay more to get the job done of cutting carbon pollution than we need to? Why on earth would you do that?
HOST: Certainly, but I think most Australians might be a bit surprised to learn that in fact our emissions will rise til 2020, in fact they'll double by 2050, even under an 80 per cent reduction target.
PM: Well, I think Australians probably have the sense, the intuitive sense that the way in which our economy has developed is as our economy's grown, our carbon pollution's grown. So, every year our economy grows, more carbon and that would happen literally til the end of time if we didn't take a step to decouple economic growth from growing carbon pollution.
That's why you price carbon to send a price signal to big polluters that investment decisions they make in the future, the growth they make in the future should be growth that is looking to clean energy sources and doing the job with less carbon pollution generated.
HOST: Is $23 a tonne the highest carbon price in the world at the moment?
PM: Well, $23 a tonne we believe is the starting price for our economy. We are making decisions for Australia. That's what the government has had its eyes on, our future, our economy, as we've made decisions about this scheme. We've picked a starting price of $23 because it will give us a smooth path to when we go to a full emissions trading scheme and then, of course, with international linking, we basically take on board the international price.
HOST: The international price at the moment though if you were looking at the European Union with be $17 a tonne?
PM: But if you're looking at the futures market, at the market predictions of what carbon pricing will be at the time we move to an emissions trading scheme, you will find that's $29 which is why we've picked a starting point of $23, so over the three years of the fixed-price period, working effectively like a tax, we move smoothly to what we anticipate to be the price when we go to an emissions trading scheme.
HOST: You say the market is the best way of doing this, but in fact you've got a mix of things - you've got a market which covers part of the economy and you've got direct action, so why isn't your direct action as inefficient as you say that Tony Abbott's is?
PM: What we've got is a market-based mechanism, pricing carbon and complementary measures. They're called complementary measures deliberately because they need the carbon pricing mechanism to do the work that we want done. So, for example, in our energy sector, through putting a price on carbon we will be sending a message right throughout electricity generation that we want this done in a cleaner way.
As a complementary measure, yes, we will take some special steps to retire the dirtiest coal-fired power stations out of the system but the two work together as a transformation of our electricity system. Other people would suggest to you, well you don't price carbon, maybe you just walk around and say, ‘Oh, I think I will shut that power station or that power station'.
That's not going to transform our whole energy sector.
HOST: But you are making a decision, you're going to shut a brown-fired coal station somewhere, probably Hazelwood, something like that, what happens to those jobs?
PM: We are going to ask people in the energy generation sector to tender to us as to retiring of assets and of course we will be looking to retire the assets that generate the biggest amount of carbon pollution. We would certainly do that in a measured way, over time, so that we that we are bringing new technology, new clean energy into the electricity grid so we've got energy security for Australians, and to the extent that we need to work with particular regions in the nation for that kind of structural adjustment, then we will, and there is $200 million set aside in the package for that kind of structural adjustment.
HOST: Why do you need to over compensate people?
PM: Well, for our lowest income Australians, take for example an elderly Australian who lives on a full pension, their budget is really tight and of course we can model - the experts in Treasury can model the expected impact on them of us having put a price on carbon paid by the big polluters. But we know their budgets are tight and so we want to give them that buffer, of compensating them, assisting them 20 per cent more than the expected impact of the carbon price.
HOST: But doesn't it just look then like income redistribution dressed up as a carbon tax?
PM: I think what it looks like is what it is, that we have taken special steps and special care to make sure that our lower-income Australians have sufficient, in their pension or in their pay packet or through their family payments, to make sure that the carbon price that they will experience in their lives, they have assistance for.
HOST: Right, a couple of quick things, the six cents a litre cuts to the diesel fuel rebate, will that also be levied on mines so they have to pay a carbon tax and that price as well?
PM: Yes, for fuel that is used in mining activities there will be a change in the fuel credit system so that they will feel the impact of that change, as well as-
HOST: -Isn't that a double hit?
PM: Well, we want fuel generally used in mining and aviation to feel the effect of what is a carbon price, a shadow carbon price. You get there through a different mechanism by changing the fuel credit scheme.
HOST: Will domestic air travel costs rise?
PM: Yes, you will see some flow through impacts and of course that's modelled into the anticipated rise in the Consumer Price Index of 0.7 per cent, less than 1 per cent, and of course when we've designed the package of tax cuts and increases in family payments and pensions, we've done it on the basis that we want to assist people knowing that we will face rises of 0.7 per cent in the Consumer Price Index.
HOST: Finally, can you sell this? Does your job depend on this?
PM: Well, the nation's future needs to be a clean energy future. Now, I understand that people will write about the politics and the political contest and people will talk about that on the TV, Chris. That's for you to do.
What my eyes are on is that clean energy future for this country. We've had a long and difficult debate. Now is the time to get this done. I announced the package today. I will bring it to the Parliament, we'll legislate it and it will start on 1 July next year.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thank you.
PM: Thank you.



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins me now, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Kochie.
HOST: The compensation is just amazing, more than most people expected. Is it a sort of a bribe to get us on the carbon tax band wagon?
PM: It's the tax reform that I thought was really necessary for the country. Kochie, people would have heard me say before that I understand there's nothing more important to individuals or the future of this nation than people having a job, have the benefits of work. So as we design the best way of cutting carbon pollution, I also said to myself what is the best way of showing people that we value work? And that's why the tax reform that comes with this package is about lifting the tax free threshold from around $6,000 to around $18,000, that is trebling it. That means one million tax payers will come out of the tax system, they won't have to scrabble around looking for receipts at the end of the financial year, that's an important tax reform in its own right, valuing work. And of course that also works through the tax system to provide people with a helping hand with the price impacts they will see from us putting a price on carbon pollution.
HOST: As Australians though we're always weary about a new tax. We don't trust politicians, we didn't trust John Howard with the GST. He had to give us a rolled gold guarantee he wasn't going to increase that 10 per cent level and under the carbon tax you've got a lot of exemptions: agriculture, transport, petrol are all exempt. Will you give a rolled gold guarantee that you will not expand the carbon tax and overdo those exempts? Will you guarantee those exemptions will stay?
PM: The only plan to add an additional piece to who pays for carbon pollution was announced yesterday and that's to bring the heavy vehicles into the scheme from 1 July 2014. So, that's it Kochie, that's the only expansion that's planned. But Kochie I'm going to be really honest with people here and I think it's important people do understand, the price the around 500 big polluters pay for the amount of carbon pollution they put into the atmosphere, that price does go up. It's starts at $23 and then it does go up over time, but so does the household assistance and there will be a second round of tax cuts.
HOST: Okay so you'll guarantee no carbon tax on petrol or agriculture forever.
PM: Correct.
HOST: Great! Well we're also getting a lot of people say ‘Hey, when prices go up with the carbon tax we get the GST wacked on top of it as well'. Is that a tax on a tax?
PM: Well, you will see a cost of living impact Kochie, yes you will, a 0.7 per cent increase in the Consumer Price Index. So that is a modest price impost, so that's all in, all up that's what will change and all in, all up 0.7 percent of the CPI and that's what the tax cuts and increases in family payments are for.
HOST: OK. Also, obviously a lot of businesses are going to use a carbon tax as an excuse for putting up prices, what's the guarantee we're not going to be ripped off by businesses who just pass on too much, who make a profit on this?
PM: Well, we'll have the same cop on the beat as was on the beat when the GST came into effect and Kochie let's get a sense of scale here, the GST was a far bigger change, more on people's household bills, far more on people's household bills. The same cop will be on the beat and that is the ACCC, they'll be out there monitoring to look and see if anybody is trying to use this as an excuse to profiteer.
HOST: And just one last quick question, while everyone is focussing on compensation and how big it's going to be, on the other side of it, a lot of money is going into developing clean technology industries in here, in Australia, which is about time.
PM: Absolutely. Everybody is going to want to work through all of the details of this and that's a good thing. They'll want to know about the tax cuts, they'll want to know about the family payment increases, they'll want to know about the pension increases, they'll want to know about what's happening in coal and steel and manufacturing. All of that's a good thing Kochie. But you're right, at the real heart of this is a clean energy future for our country. How do we move to use the renewable energy sources our wonderful country has in abundant supply  -  solar, wind, geothermal, tidal. So, right at the middle of this is the carbon price to make dirty energy more expensive and $13 billion to help us catalyse the renewables industry. More solar, more wind, more geothermal, more clean energy.
HOST: Why do we have to be first in the world to do this? What other countries are doing it, why do we lead the way, why can't we come in the middle of the pack after everybody else?
PM: Oh Kochie we are not leading the world. There are emissions trading schemes in other parts of the world already. Europe's got an emissions trading scheme, New Zealand's got an emissions trading scheme  -  I almost said Kochie then, ‘even' New Zealand, then all the New Zealanders listening would probably be upset. But a small country like New Zealand has moved to an emissions trading scheme.
We are actually starting this race to a clean energy future behind the pack in the sense that we generate more carbon pollution per Australian than any other country in the world does, in the developed world. So, compared with countries in the developed world that we compete with, we've got a longer journey to get a clean energy future, that's why we've got to make a start and we'll make that start on 1 July next year.
HOST: We just need China and India to get onboard and all those countries. Prime Minister thanks very much for joining us.
PM: Well China and India are acting Kochie, so we've got to keep pace. I'm not going to have this country left behind.
HOST: Alright, thanks for joining us this morning.



HOST: Julia Gillard, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Lisa,
HOST: Now, Prime Minister a lot of people are pointing out this morning that if the tax is designed to get people using green energy why are you over compensating so many households, aren't we supposed to feel the pain of the tax so that we can reduce our carbon emissions?
PM: The essence of this Lisa is actually the price signal to the big polluters, so around 500 big polluters who are going to pay the price and we want those big polluters to change their behaviour and to do things in a cleaner way and create less carbon pollution as they work.
As for households, of course we are providing tax cuts and increases in payments to households. Many people will want to do their bit, make greener choices, cleaner choices, that's a great thing. What that means is for almost six million households they'll have the amount of money they need to fully assist them with the flow through of the carbon price. If they want to make a greener choice then they can save some money as well.
HOST: Now you acknowledged last night that this conversation on a carbon tax has been going on since 2007, so why do you think that after four years so many Australians are still completely confused by it?
PM: I think it's my job to keep explaining it and at its core it really is quite simple. At its core we at the moment as a nation put carbon pollution into our atmosphere for nothing. A big polluter can just keep chucking it up into the skies and not pay anything. The core of this is those big polluters will pay a price. They're smart business people, when a bill comes in for carbon pollution they'll say ‘How can I reduce that bill? How can I change my processes so I generate less carbon pollution?'. If people understand that, then they understand the real driver in this package that cuts carbon pollution.
HOST: OK, well Tony Abbott pointed out yesterday one example of a single mum, one child, a single income on $60,000 a year, so budget is tight. She's not going to be better off, she's going to be paying more. What do you say to people like her?
PM: Well in that example, yes there is a slight cost, it's less than a dollar a week and what I would say to Australians generally is we have made sure in providing assistance to households that we've reformed our tax system.
A million tax payers will no longer have to pay tax, they'll no longer have to do tax returns with all the inconvenience and shuffling through receipts that means at the end of the tax year. For almost six million households they will come out effectively square. Our four million lowest income households will come out slightly better off, with a buffer because their budgets are tight. Yes, there are around three million households who are not fully compensated, of those 80 per cent get something and for all of them the impact is quite modest, we're talking about 0.5 per cent of their income as a difference. We're asking them to do their bit to combat climate change.
JOURNALIST: Alright, well we asked viewers yesterday after both of your broadcasts if they had any questions for you so let's go through some of those now. Phillip Brown wants you to clarify your statement last night that quote “Australians want this carbon tax”. Now the most recent poll by the Lowy Institute said it was only supported by 41 per cent of voters?
PM: Well, overwhelmingly Australians believe climate change is real. Overwhelmingly they believe that it's caused by carbon pollution that humans generate and overwhelmingly they want the Government to act, then it's up to me, up to the Government as the nation's leaders, to work out what's the best way to act. We've opted for the cheapest way of cutting carbon pollution. The economists tell us putting a price on carbon is the cheapest way to cut carbon pollution, that's why we've designed the scheme the way we have.
JOURNALIST: Alright, well Matt Teasedale asked ‘Why don't you call an election so that voters can decide on this policy, which would effectively give you the mandate that most decisions of this size would require?'
PM: The nation has been talking about this for years. Another female leader, I made this point yesterday, Margaret Thatcher, she was the Prime Minister of Britain a long time ago, she was warning the world about climate change and carbon pollution.
John Howard as Prime Minister decided to put a price on carbon pollution. We've got to get this done and by the time people vote at the next election they'll know what this means for them and their families because they will be living with the new system in operation, they'll be able to see big polluters paying the price, they'll be able to see the tax cuts and payment increases that their family is getting. So people will be able in the 2013 election to vote with actual knowledge of what it means to address climate change and tackle carbon pollution.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister I'm sure you won't be surprised to know that a lot of the questions that viewers were asking were very much shaded with the whole issue of you going to the last election saying that there would be no carbon tax under a government you lead and this one from Alice Gorman is along those lines, she says why should she trust your word or your figures on this carbon tax or that your figures won't go up given past performances on the pink batts debacle or the BER cost blow out.
PM: Look I'm very happy to answer that and they're all very legitimate questions. In terms of the modelling what it will cost, the 0.7 per cent impact on the cost of living, those figures are generated by our Treasury experts. They're the same people who modelled the impact of the GST which of course was a bigger price impact and they got it right, so that's where the figures come from. In terms of the implementation of the scheme, we will be saying to 500, around 500 big polluters, you've got to pay the price of your carbon pollution and then the tax cuts and the changes in family payments will flow.
JOURNALIST: Well, Prime Minister you've obviously got a very busy day and a lot of shoe leather to wear out. Just quickly, are you gambling your Prime Ministership on getting this ahead for voters, voters really supporting it?
PM: Look the thing that's driving me is getting a clean energy future for this country. People will talk about the politics and the political commentators will go through all of that. What this is about is this nation creating a clean energy future for itself. We generate more carbon pollution per person than any other developed nation on earth. We've got a long race to run to create a clean energy future. It's time to start, we've got to get this done, I'm determined to do it  -  that's what's driving me and that's what will be driving me to wear out some shoe leather as I explain that to the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: Okay very quickly, are you going to clear out a space for Lady Gaga on A Current Affair tonight?
PM: Well, you never know! I suspect I'm going to be a little bit busy, but I also understand that for many people in Australia today, they'll be thinking about pricing carbon but they'll be thinking about Lady Gaga too.
JOURNALIST: We wouldn't want to think about what her carbon footprint is but Prime Minister we do thank you very much for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today acknowledged an important milestone in Australia's strong and vibrant democracy as the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (PM&amp;C) celebrated 100 years of service.
The Prime Minister said that for 100 years the department has played a vital role in coordinating government business and in delivering the highest quality of advice and support to government.
Over this time, PM&amp;C has become recognised as one of the key departments of state within Australia's federal system, playing a key role in supporting the Prime Minister, Cabinet and Ministers.
PM&amp;C is at the centre of government and plays an important role in shaping the Australian Public Service (APS) as well as being a proven training ground for future leaders of the APS.
To mark this occasion, the book From postbox to powerhouse: A centenary history of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet by Professor Patrick Weller, Professor Joanne Scott and Bronwyn Stevens was launched by Senator John Faulkner on behalf of the Prime Minister. This book shows the evolution of the department and the evolving nature of government administration in Australia through photos, historical fact and anecdotes.
Senator Faulkner said that From postbox to powerhouse was a fitting record of the department's history and those who have served prime ministers for a century.
Both the Prime Minister and Senator Faulkner congratulated and thanked past and present PM&amp;C officers for their service to successive Australian governments and their important role in Australia's robust democracy.



HOST: Julia Gillard, good afternoon to you.
PM: Good afternoon.
HOST: Now, the Newspoll today shows primary support for Labor down to 27 per cent, that's a fall of something like 12 per cent on the last election. How are you going to convince, you've got to convince at least 12 per cent of the population, who have deserted you since the last election, to come back, how are you going to do that?
PM: Long after opinion polls are forgotten, our nation will be pricing carbon. So, what I've got my eyes on is delivering this big reform that our nation needs. We will get the biggest polluters to pay a price for putting carbon pollution in the air from the first of July next year.
And that will mean that we have a clean energy future, a better environment and a stronger economy. So, that's what I'm focussed on.
HOST: Yeah, I'm sure you've got the numbers in the Parliament to do it and the legislation will go through, but do you accept you're doing it against the will of the vast majority of the Australian populous?
PM: Big reforms are always hard and they're always controversial. If you look at the big reforms that explain today's prosperity for us, the opening up of our economy to the world that happened in the 1980s and into the 1990s, all of that was controversial; not liked at the time. But we wouldn't be a prosperous country today if we hadn't done those things. So, this is the reform, this time, which will make us a stronger economy and a better environment for the future. So, I am determined to get it done.
HOST: See I covered a lot of those, and in most cases what was being planned was flagged at an election. We had the flagging of tax summits; we had, of course, the flagging of the GST and yet for a lot of people, I would suspect the majority of the audience here, they can't get past you having said before the election you wouldn't do something and then after the election you did it.
PM: Well, we've been talking about pricing carbon in this country for the best part of a decade. Prime Minister Howard went to the 2007 election determined to create an emissions trading scheme, a price on carbon.
I went to the 2010 election determined to create an emissions trading scheme, a price on carbon, and we will get to that emissions trading scheme three years after the start of pricing carbon on 1 July next year.
Yes, we'll get there via a three year fixed price - effectively a tax, a carbon tax - I didn't foresee that during the last election campaign but it will get us where we need to go. Putting a price on pollution that big polluters will pay and then we will reach a full emissions trading scheme which puts a cap on the amount of pollution our economy can generate.
HOST: See, I've got your quote from the last election, and I know you keep hearing the quote, the television quote ‘I will have no carbon tax under a government I lead.' But the quote which headlined The Australian newspaper on election day was ‘Julia's carbon price promise' and the headline and the front page story was you said you would ‘view victory in the election as a mandate for a carbon price provided the community was ready for this step'.
You don't rule out the possibility of legislating a carbon pollution reduction scheme in the next parliament but then you said ‘I rule out a carbon tax'. There is a pretty clear distinction there, where you have said I will do this, but if the public is with me, and plainly the public isn't with you.
PM: Well, we've worked to explain what we are trying to achieve and it has been a long and bitter debate, I am aware of that.
HOST: But you said in the election you wouldn't do it unless there was a deep community consensus. There plainly isn't, is there?
PM: Look, what we've had is, I think, a difficult and at times very confusing debate and I said frankly to the nation in my address to the nation on Sunday night, this is a debate that's been characterised by some missteps and false starts and I take my fair share of responsibility for how the debate has gone so far-
HOST: -You have framed your language very badly all the way along haven't you?
PM: Let's get our eyes on the outcome here; do we want to live in a country with less carbon pollution? That is a yes/no question. Well, I can achieve for us a nation with less carbon pollution, with the economy still growing strongly, with there being more jobs for people to have, and of course with nine out of ten households receiving some assistance for the price impacts that will flow through from the biggest polluters starting to pay a price on carbon.
Yes, it won't be an immediate emissions trading scheme, we will have three years fixed price for carbon tax but we'll  get to that emissions trading scheme I spoke about in the last election. And I believe the best way to demonstrate to the community, after what has been a very long debate in our nation, and at times a very difficult debate, is to show people how the scheme will work and when we start it on 1 July next year people will be able to see exactly what it means for big polluters and how they'd change the way they do their business because they are paying a price for their pollution and they will be able to see exactly what it means for their families with tax cuts, family payments and pension increases.
HOST: What do you say to people who have looked and seen that there is very little in it for them, and in fact they might be worse off.
I have got an email here from George, he says, married person with one income, earning $85,000 has an impact $463 and government assistance was just $3 but a married couple with the same income but there is two of them working, they get a lot more assistance, significantly more government assistance. Isn't that skewing things away from the single income family where the wife generally stays at home?
PM: Well I would suggest he checks again on our household estimator on the cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website, because from what you have told me there, and obviously it's hard-
HOST: -It is just an email that has just come in.
PM: Sure, sure and obviously it's hard talking through people's incomes on the radio but from what you've said there it seems to me he has only looked at the tax cut and he also needs to consider family payments, if he's got a child in the family.
So, the best way of doing that is on the household estimator on the website, but the broader response to your question John is, we are all better off if our nation has a clean energy future. This is about cutting carbon pollution, we will all be better off as a country if we reduce the amount of pollution we create and what we will do through the scheme I announced on Sunday is reduce carbon pollution by at least 160 million tonnes in 2020.
That is the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road, we will be better off for that in terms of our great Australian environment, as well as getting our fair share of the clean energy jobs of the future.
HOST: Some of the questions people have asked, how is that measured? Who actually does the measuring of the emissions? 
PM: The emissions, we already have a system where companies track on their carbon pollution, that's been part of dealing with the challenge of climate change and starting to-
HOST: -So, they self report, is that right?
PM: There will be appropriate systems, and there are already systems applying now. So, getting companies to look at their carbon pollution will not newly start on 1July next year.
HOST: Isn't there a possibility of people trying to rort it by saying they're under report what they're doing so they won't pay as much?”
PM: There will be proper monitoring, the way there is for every system that government operates. We have proper monitoring for our tax system, proper monitoring for our welfare system, to make sure that people do the right thing.
HOST: You know I can hear the listeners screaming, saying well hang on there are supposedly property monitoring of the insulation scheme and that's immediately what you get back.
PM: John, that is a complete apples to oranges comparison-
HOST: -But, you understand don't you, that's how people feel? 
PM: And I'm very happy to answer that, but I do think we have got to do the apples to apples comparison. We run a very big tax system with people paying tax, millions of Australians and businesses right around the country.
Do some people try and do the wrong thing? Yes, they do. When we have proper monitoring people get caught, and they get busted for tax fraud. We've got a very big social security system with millions of people eligible for all different sorts of payments. Do some people try and do the wrong thing and engage in a bit of welfare fraud? Yes, they do and we've got a system that busts people and they get charged and some of them go to gaol.
Now we will take the same rigour to, obviously, making sure that the biggest polluters in this country, 500 of them, properly monitor and report and pay for the carbon pollution that they generate.
So, the right comparison is with the other systems that we operate to get people to pay the right amounts or to receive the right amounts. Now, on home insulation, that was urgent economic stimulus to keep Australians in work during the biggest financial crisis the globe had seen since the Great Depression, in the late 1920s into the early 1930s when the world economy turned on its head.
Now, yes, there were some very big problems in the delivery of the scheme, absolutely I have acknowledged before, it became a mess and we have learned from that, but you can't draw a comparison between the provision of urgent economic stimulus with a Great Depression style economic event engulfing the globe, and setting up for a long term system like big polluters paying for carbon pollution.
HOST: But they do draw the comparison, which is one of the reasons why the opinion polls are so bad for you.
PM: Well, John where's the logical conclusion of all of this? As a government-
HOST:-There isn't necessarily logic in it, it is just that this is the way it is-
PM: -Yes, but as Prime Minister, I have got to make the decisions for the right, for the nation's future.
So, I could say ‘gee, this is all pretty hard, let's put it in the too hard basket forever, let's have climate change spiral out of control, let's have endless amounts of carbon pollution in our atmosphere;' or I could say as Prime Minister: ‘gee this is pretty hard but we better get this done and we better use the best of our efforts and the best of our intelligence, having learned some of the lessons of the past.'
Some of the things that you have pointed to that haven't gone well, having learned from that and taken those learnings into better designing government programs for the future; let's actually get this done the very best way we possibly can. Well, I am determined to do that.
HOST: I know you're pressed for time but Tony Abbot's talking about debating you, I think you're doing a people's forum; he's doing a people's forum. Is there any prospect of getting the two of you together so you can debate the issues?
PM: Look, there will be any number of debates over the legislation in the Parliament.
HOST: So, you won't do a debate?
PM: Well look, and what? Hear Tony Abbot say ‘no no no,'? Hear Tony Abbot falsely claim that petrol is going up by 6.5 cents? Hear him falsely claim that Whyalla is going to be wiped off the map? Something he has backed down from today.
HOST: Well, if he's got no arguments, isn't that a no brainer for you that you can win the argument quite easily.
PM: Isn't it better for me to get on with the job of creating a clean energy future for this country. We've had a long debate in this nation, 10 years debating pricing carbon. 2007 election, then Prime Minister Howard and Kevin Rudd, both went to the election promising to price carbon. I went to the last election saying we needed an emissions trading scheme to address climate change.
HOST: But you also said no carbon tax.
PM: Yes, and we've just been through that John. But as Prime Minister, my job, and it's not always easy, but my job is to do what is right for the nation's future. What's right for this nation's future is to address climate change by cutting carbon pollution.
I will get legislation through the Parliament to do that. I will start it on 1 July next year. People can vote in 2013 with actual experience of the new system. We will have the Parliamentary debates along the way, but we have got to get this done for our future.
HOST: Are you concerned - I have got my little four year old here because I have no one else to look after him and he's freaking out, I don't know if you can hear it through the studio door, because he's just seen a vacuum cleaner which frightens him, so I am sorry about that.
PM: I can understand that, scary noises. John, it's about your four year old and it's about-
HOST: -I am aware of that. We do need to do something. I actually accept the science, it's just that I look at the language you have used and I look at the opinion polls and I take the calls here and I wonder if anyone is listening to you.
PM: And John, when you look at your son, having thought about all of that, and having listened to your listeners and you've read the newspapers today with opinion polls and you've listened to the debate over the last 12 months and further into the past. When you have got your son there, do you want him to grow up in a nation with less carbon pollution or more carbon pollution? I say less, let's get it done.
HOST: I've got to ask you final quick one if I can? The British Prime Minister, David Cameron, has said that too many politicians got too close to Rupert Murdoch and were scared and were kowtowing to Rupert Murdoch and his media organisation. It's no secret that your government has been the subject of a campaign by a number of News Limited newspapers. Do you see a change, a sea change, that perhaps your government may be emboldened in dealing with News Limited and some of the criticisms they have made?
PM: Every day I feel emboldened to go and make the hard decisions-
HOST: -No but I am asking specifically about News Limited and Rupert Murdoch.
PM: And, I am saying to you, the only thing I ever expect of media outlets, whoever they're owned by is that they report accurately, and they report in a balanced way. I think we will-
HOST: -Is that what they're doing? Are they doing that?
PM: I think we will, as a result of what's happened in the United Kingdom, probably have a debate in this country about media. I am sure that debate will flow through as a result of some of the events in Britain.
We've tended to start debates on comparable subjects to our British friends in the past. I will let others engage in that debate. I have got a very big job, being Prime Minister of the country, is not about looking to see how I am reported in the newspapers; it's about getting things done.
HOST: But have they treated you unfairly, the News Limited newspapers?
PM: John, I am not interested in getting into a debate about it.
HOST: Certainly Stephen Conroy thinks they haven't-
PM: -Well, I will let others deal with all of that. My job is to get things done, not to worry about how it's reported the next day.
HOST: OK, Prime Minister, we have taken a lot of your time, I thank you.
PM: Thank you.



The Gillard Government will invest up to $32 million to help tradespeople and professionals learn vital green skills that will be in strong demand as Australia moves towards a clean energy future.
The Clean Energy Skills package will deliver integrated green skills training and clean energy knowledge, advice, products and services to transition Australia to a low carbon economy.
For the first time, the sustainability skills of professionals such as engineers and others with the technical ability to deliver energy efficiency solutions will be targeted as part of the Government's comprehensive Clean Energy Future plan.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Member for Wills, Kelvin Thomson today met apprentice plumbers in Melbourne who are being trained to work with the latest technologies to tackle climate change.
Touring the Plumbing Industry Climate Action Centre in Brunswick, the Prime Minister viewed innovative technologies which have been put to use in a 5 Star Green-rated home used to train apprentice plumbers.
The Centre is an excellent example of an industry-led training organisation that is providing vital green skills to our workforce.
Under the package, specialised energy efficiency skills sets will be developed in occupations such as building and construction, facilities management, engineering and financial management and auditing.
Teaching resources will be developed to support high quality delivery of these skills sets by VET practitioners.
There are four key components to the package:
·         A baseline map of existing sustainability knowledge and skill needs in key clean energy and energy efficiency products, services and advice will be developed
·         Specialised skills sets in energy efficiency will be developed for existing workers in building, planning and construction
·         Undergraduate engineering students will get the technical skills required to deliver and promote energy efficiency solutions in the workplace
·         Up to $10 million in funding based on co-investment with industry will be provided to undertake training that supports the use of low emissions technology or clean energy skills.
The Gillard Government is investing in energy efficiency, green innovation and skills and workforce development.
These policies, combined with a price on pollution, will ensure Australia's continued prosperity as we move towards a cleaner energy future.
The Plumbing Industry Climate Action Centre provides world class facilities for plumbers to learn the skills required to deliver clean energy services.
As we move to a greener economy, we will see increased demand for grey water recycling and water-wise plumbing and irrigation systems.
Water conservation and energy efficient plumbing, grey water recycling, natural waste water treatment and solar technologies are all on the curriculum for apprentices studying green plumbing courses at the Centre.



HOST: Julia, thank you for being on the show this morning.
PM: Good morning Leon.
HOST: Now, first of all, let's talk about the Newspoll and that is that it's looking pretty ordinary for you at the moment, to say the least and I guess if it doesn't get any better, are you hoping that you're taking the carbon tax information you're putting around the country, do you think that will improve your position and the Government's position?
PM: Leon, what I'm focussed on is cutting carbon pollution, tackling climate change and getting Australia a clean energy future. What's motivating me here is the best thing for our nation's future in terms of our environment and our economy. Now, long after the opinion poll of today, or any other opinion poll has been forgotten, I want this nation to be cutting carbon pollution. That's why I made the announcement that I did on Sunday, that's what I'm determined to deliver and it will start on 1 July next year.
HOST: OK, now of course we all know that Kevin Rudd was more popular than you when he was taken from his position and replaced by you. So, is the likely scenario to be repeated or are you going to definitely be there for the next election? 
PM: I don't agree with that analysis, I'm not going to pick over the past. I'm going to lead our nation to a clean energy future, Leon. Yes, when you're talking about a big reform it can be difficult for people to understand, if people want information I'll be out and about explaining the information. When we look at the big reforms of the past, internationalising our economy, the Goods and Services Tax, these were hard reforms and they weren't instantaneously popular, but we are a more prosperous nation today because we faced up to those hard reform. Today, we have to face up to this reform and cut carbon pollution.
HOST: Alright. Now, you and your Treasurer Wayne Swan have consistently said that the carbon tax package would be revenue neutral. We now learn that there'll be a $4 billion black hole in the forward estimates over four years. How could you allow this to happen and this of course will make people cynical, don't you think?
PM: When you look at the package that I announced on Sunday, you're right over the forward estimates there's an impact of just over $4 billion. Almost $3 billion of that is in the first 12 months, you would expect a big new reform to have a start up cost and it does. Then of course as it gets into full gear it moves to being broadly revenue neutral.
So, in terms of the budget, we'll make the right decisions to bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13.
HOST: Alright. The Greens revealed yesterday, Prime Minister, that part of your package hasn't been modelled correctly by Treasury. They modelled some of the package based on $20 on a carbon price, rather than $23. How credible is this?
PM: Let's be very clear. The price impacts that we've been talking to Australians about will be less than one per cent impact on people's cost of living was modelled on a $23 carbon price. Some of what are referred to as the macroeconomic indicators were modelled on a $20 carbon price. But Leon, we can price carbon and still have a strongly growing economy, strongly growing employment and cut carbon pollution.
HOST: Now, the Greens have revealed that your $10 billion financial assistance program for renewable energy projects hasn't been properly costed either?
PM: I don't agree with that at all.
HOST: You don't?
PM: No, I don't.
HOST: So that's just completely wrong?
PM: In what way, Leon? $10 billion will be put into a Clean Energy Finance Corporation, that's properly accounted for in the figures that I released on Sunday. That Clean Energy Finance Corporation will have a board, obviously people with business experience will be on that board. They will make loans on commercial terms, so the purpose will be to catalyse the development of clean energy sources in this country.We're already seeing cleaner energy sources coming on stream. The Government's work, for example, to develop some huge new solar projects in New South Wales and Queensland. But I want to see more of that right around the country, using hot rocks in South Australia, sunshine in Queensland, wind power in Victoria, tidal power in WA and the list goes on.
HOST: You need baseload-
PM:-$10 billion investment is about and yes, we need baseload and the huge new solar projects that I've had the pleasure of announcing in Moree and Chinchilla are projects that use the sun and also have the capacity to generate electricity that can be used as a baseload.
HOST: It has been reported that 2000 megawatts of coal-fired power is to be removed from the southern grid. What's going to replace this for South Australia?
PM: Well, we will go to market, we will ask people to tender to retire some of the dirtiest coal-fired power generation in our country, 2000 megawatts. As we work our way through that process, at every stage we will be taking proper advice from the industry regulators, so that we've got security of electricity supply.
In terms of what will generate more and more of our power in the future, gas will play a big role, as will the renewable energy sources of solar and wind and geothermal and the like.
But, of course Leon, at every stage we will do everything we need to to guarantee security of electricity supply and that the lights stay on in South Australia and round the nation.
HOST: Alright, coal has been demonised while we can't dig it up quick enough and sent it up to China, who use it to, and are opening a lot of coal-fired power stations, about one a week. Is it hypocritical?
PM: I don't agree with the premise of your question, again. Coal has a great future in this country. Look at the front page of today's Australian, it's telling you that a big American company that already operates in Australia is going to make an acquisition, the biggest ever purchase of an Australian coal mining company. Now, why have they done that? Hard headed business people, because they know there's great future in coal in this nation.
HOST: Ms Gillard, the problem is Bob Brown recently, and it was only a week ago, confronted the Australian media and public with his wish to shut down the coal industry, because it's dirty.
Now don't you think that sends shock waves through many thousands of families across the country, worried about their futures, their employment futures?
PM: Well, Bob's completely wrong on that. Coal has a strong future in this country.
HOST: But he's your partner, without him you can't govern?
PM: I've made the decisions necessary to get this package right, to create a clean energy future and of course as part of that, I've made a decision that there will be a strong future for coal in this nation. We will work with the coal industry, the Government has set aside $1.3 billion to work with the particularly gassy mines that generate a lot of carbon pollution. The coal industry will continue to grow, we will continue to see more people employed in the industry and if you look at the front of today's Australian newspaper what it's telling you is hard headed business people, who watch every dollar and cent, want to make a huge acquisition of an Australian coal company because they know there's a great future and they'll make profits from it.
HOST: Oz Vege have warned that food prices will soar, as their power bills climb into orbit. You've got Adelaide Brighton cement warning that they may have to rely more on cheaper imports, as power costs make the local product less viable. Are we staring down the barrel of job losses here?
PM: No, we're not. If you look at the impact of carbon pricing, we will price carbon, we'll get carbon pollution out of our atmosphere, that's the right thing to do for our environment and employment will continue to grow. You will see lots of claims made in the public arena Leon, lots and lots of claims. But we have worked through this with the same experts in Treasury who did the modelling for the GST-
HOST: -And they underestimated that revenue, Prime Minister.
PM: And they got the modelling effects right, the price impacts for families. Those modelling effects were right. Now, what we know from that Treasury modelling is that the price impact will be less than one per cent in cost of living and of course nine out of ten households will get assistance and employment will continue to rise.
HOST: OK, we've got a couple of calls here, Prime Minister. Gary, you're talking with Julia Gillard, the Prime Minister. What's your question?
CALLER:  G'day Leon, thanks (inaudible). Good or bad, Ms Gillard, you'd have to admit this is probably the biggest upheaval in Australian history. Why won't you, and the joint Prime Minister Bob Brown, give the people the right to say yes or no through a vote.
PM: We've been debating putting a price on carbon in this country for more than 10 years. The world's been struggling with this issue for even longer. Another female leader, Margaret Thatcher, stood up in Britain and warned the world about global warming. Prime Minister Howard went to the 2007 election saying he'd put a price on carbon pollution.
Now we need to get this done. We come to this task as per head of population the biggest emitters of carbon pollution in the developed world. I'm not going to put climate change in the too hard basket. We're going to price carbon pollution, make our big polluters pay, we're going to get a better environment as a result and we're going to get the clean energy jobs of the future.
HOST: Prime Minister, has your Caucus been at all intimately involved in any of this discussion, or was it presented to them as a fait accompli after you discussed with your committee, on which Nick Xenophon is very upset that he didn't get membership, but that's another issue. And he rang me this morning and asked me to point it out to you, which I've done.
But did you take Caucus into your confidence and let them have an input into this before you announced it?
PM: Of course Leon, I work with my caucus colleagues, I work extensively with my ministerial colleagues and in terms of the Government making the right decisions here for the country's future, I've worked with a range of ministers, obviously particularly Greg Combet doing climate change, Wayne Swan, the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, Martin Ferguson, with his special insights into resources and energy and tourism, Kim Carr with his special insights into industry and innovation, Joe Ludwig working from the perspective of agriculture and fisheries.
HOST: So they were part of this negotiation, were they?
PM: They were part of the government decision making. The Cabinet and Cabinet Committees worked on this package, Leon.HOST: Alright. Where's the money going to come from to pay this compensation, once the carbon price goes up from $23?
PM: The big polluters will pay the carbon price. The carbon price will go up over time, as will the household assistance. The household assistance, at every stage, will be funded by the money raised from big polluters.
HOST: So, you're not accepting that  -  there's James here, who's I understand a dairy farmer. James, meet the Prime Minister. What's your question?
CALLER: G'day Prime Minister. The dairy industry yesterday released some figures saying that the impact per farm in Australia is going to be between $5000 and $7000 per farm. South Australia's got larger farming operations here, so we're looking at between $10,000-$14,000 extra on our costs per farm.
We've got Coles and Woolworths keeping the price of food down, to keep your cost of living pressure down, which you find so precious, and we're the only lever that can be used to do that and we're stuck with a situation where our costs are going to be impacted, our electricity cost's going up. ABARE have done data recently in April this year, saying a $29 carbon cost will reduce cash incomes on farms by between 12 and 25 per cent. This is going to be another nail in the coffin of Australian agriculture. What do you want us to do, Prime Minister, do you want us to pack up and go to another country and produce food, or do you want us to stay here?
PM: Of course I want you to stay here, doing all the great work you do to provide the fresh produce we all enjoy. On the prices received by dairy farmers from our big supermarket chains, I have consistently said that supermarket chains need to appropriately reward dairy farmers and they should not be the people who are paying the price for discounting. The supermarket chains publicly responded to that and said that they will not make dairy farmers pay the price of discounting. You will pass any additional costs through, they will be passed through to the consumer and that's what the household assistance is to help with.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for joining us today. That's Julia Gillard, Prime Minister, answering some questions.



HOST: Thank you so much for your time.
PM: No problems.
HOST: You've launched, and I apologise Anne we'll get back to you. You've launched major changes here and there are doubts about whether the compensation will be enough as international uncertainty on the stock market, our own stock market dropped seven billion dollars. Is there any way you can be convinced to take this to an election before introducing it?
PM: Neil we've got to get this done. We have been debating pricing carbon and tackling climate change in this country for more than a decade. Prime Minister Howard went to the 2007 election saying he was going to put a price on carbon and introduce what's called an emissions trading scheme. Of course, in the last Parliament the carbon pollution reduction scheme ran into a parliamentary brick wall. In the 2010 election I said to people I wanted an emissions trading scheme and we're going to get there Neil, not by the route I expected but by a three year period we will have a fixed price, effectively a carbon tax. Now what's the aim of all of this? Well it's to get pollution out of our atmosphere, we've got to start on that, we've got to get going and 1 July next year is when we start.  
HOST: So is there any way that you can be convinced to take it to an election before introducing it?
PM: We'll have an election in 2013 after it's introduced on 1 July 2012. People will be able to judge by their own lived experience. They won't have to look in the newspapers or listen to people on the radio Neil, with respect. They'll be able to judge in their own lives, what has it meant for me, what has it meant for my family, what have I seen the big polluters do, how have they reacted, what's it done to create new renewable energy, what can I see coming on stream in the future for the clean every we need for the future. 
HOST: So do you think that people will swing to support this because the polls are appalling today aren't they?
PM: Well, long after people have forgotten about today's opinion polls, we will live in a nation where we are reducing carbon pollution, that's what matters to me, getting a clean energy future for this country.
HOST: Even if it costs you Government?
PM: I'm determined to get this done Neil and I am getting it done. It's the right thing for the future of our country. And Neil if I can just perhaps reverse engineer this question, I put forward on Sunday a plan which means we will take at least 160 million tonnes of carbon pollution out of the atmosphere in 2020, the equivalent of 45 million cars. We'll do that whilst our economy continues to grow strongly, whilst employment continues to grow strongly, 1.6 million new jobs will be created by the end of the decade and when we're providing assistance to nine out of ten households. Now if you can have a strongly growing economy- 
HOST: There is debate about that.
PM: - more jobs, nine out of ten households assisted and cut your carbon pollution, why wouldn't you do it?
HOST: Well there is debate about that as you're aware. What percentage, you talk about reduction in carbon, what percentage of the world's emissions will that be?
PM: Well we will be reducing at least 160 million tonnes of carbon pollution. Neil, I'm not going to play the Andrew Bolt game with you-
HOST: I think that I'm - it's a legitimate question regardless of who asked it. 
PM: And it makes an assumption in the asking of the question that other countries aren't acting when other countries are acting on their carbon pollution. We've got all of Europe in an emissions trading scheme, ten US states, President Obama with a very ambitious clean energy goal, Prime Minister Cameron in Britain with a very ambitious goal for change, China acting, India acting. In fact, we come to this needing to get a move on because we are the people who generate more carbon pollution per head than anyone else in the developed world.
HOST: Prime Minister, why aren't the people with you?
PM: Well it's a big change, it's a reform. Reform's not easy. The big reforms of the past haven't been easy.
HOST: Shouldn't the people approve a big change, a big reform? Shouldn't that be approved by the people not sprung on them? PM: If we look back in history Neil, the big reforms in this nation, floating the dollar, cutting tariffs, the GST itself- 
HOST: The GST went to an election Prime Minister.
PM: But other big reforms have been made too, floating the dollar, cutting tariffs- HOST: The GST was voted on an election, be fair.
PM: Absolutely, the GST was, but that's not the point I'm making.
HOST: (inaudible)
PM: That's not the point I'm making Neil so if I'll finish my sentence.
HOST: Please. 
PM: The big reforms in this country- floating the dollar, cutting the tariffs, not popular at the time, very controversial. GST  -  very controversial and here we stand today in a prosperous Australia because past political leaders and past generations of Australians had the guts to make the big decisions that put the nation in a better position for the future. Well climate change is real, this is the big decision we need to make today to have a better future for our country and our kids.
HOST: Italy's shaky, Greece shaky, Wall Street down, the Australian market down significantly. There is international economic nervousness, even potential that we're heading to another financial crisis. Is this the right time to do it?
PM: We have a strong economy. We've come out of the global financial crisis the envy of the world. We've got record terms of trade, 140 year highs, we've got unemployment with a four in front of it, we will create half a million new jobs in the next two years. We are living through a resources boom that you and I have not seen the like of in our lifetime. If we're not going to do it now Neil, when are we going to do it, when the economy is strong like this? And I understand with today's strong economy there are lots of people who don't feel that economic benefit in their daily lives and that's why we're taking particular care and concern to work with Australian families and to provide them with tax cuts and payment increases to assist them with the modest price changes that will flow through from putting a price on the big polluters. Neil, just on our economy you referred to the stock market, you would have seen today's Australian, I'm just looking round to see if there's one in the room. You would have seen today's Australian telling us big American mining company wants to do the biggest takeover ever of an Australian coal mining company. Do you reckon they're doing that Neil because they reckon there's going to be no more coal mining? 
HOST: Did you see the other Murdoch paper? Get real Julia, it says.
PM: Well, you asked me about economic issues, I'm answering, pointing to the front of the Australian. And Neil, what's interesting about that is the mining companies involved, Peabody is the big America miner that operates here now and wants to do this major takeover cause they clearly see a profitable future for mining, Peabody is where Tony Abbott has been standing including as recently as yesterday and saying there's no future for coal mining in this country and there'll be no jobs. Well, he should retract that today, the evidence is in, it's on the front page of today's Australian.
HOST: Prime Minister was some of the modelling done on a $20 a tonne tax rather than $23? PM: Not the price impacts, no.
HOST: What about the job impacts and the outlooks?
PM: The macro economic impacts were done on $20, that's right.
HOST: So what's affected by that? 
PM: Well there'd be a modest difference. The price impacts though Neil and I want to be very clear about this because you said before there's doubt about the figures. Well, on the price impacts, the flow through to the cost of living of 0.7 percent, less than 1 percent, that figure was modelled by our experts in Treasury. They're the same people who did the modelling when the GST came into effect and they got it right.
HOST: What is the $20 modelling? Is that in fact growth and jobs?
PM: Yes, that's right they're the macroeconomic indicators.
HOST: Based on the wrong figure?
PM: But the difference between modelling on the $20 and the $23  -  we'll still be growing, we'll still be creating jobs Neil.
HOST: But not as many as predicted in this?
PM: Well, 1.6 million jobs is the prediction. We'll create-
HOST: What should it be do you think? PM: Well I think the variation would be very modest indeed.
HOST: It's still jobs, real jobs.
PM: Yep. But we're talking about 1.6 million jobs Neil.
HOST: And what about the growth, how wrong is that?
PM: Well once again I think it would be a very modest difference.
HOST: Why was it done on $20 rather than $23? 
PM: I think the Treasury picked various points to do the modelling, so they obviously picked $20 and further possible price points. But Neil, let's not try and mislead anyone here. With a $23 a tonne carbon price, our economy will continue to grow. Jobs will continue to grow, people will continue to mine coal in a profitable industry, that's what will happen.
HOST: We'll let's do a deal, neither of us will try to mislead people. Are you concerned by the polls?
PM: I'm interested in the country's future Neil. You know, these polls will come and go, polls will be forgotten.
HOST: So that doesn't worry you at all? Seeing that you've got the worst figures of any Labor government ever?
PM: I'm absolutely convinced what I'm doing is right.
HOST: And you're not concerned by the polls?
PM: I'm absolutely convinced what I'm doing is right.
HOST: That's not an answer Prime Minister.
PM: Yes it is, it's an answer as to motivation. You're asking me to be motivated by the polls-
HOST: No, I was asking whether you're concerned- 
PM: As I said on Saturday democracy is not one long opinion poll Neil. Democracy is leaders making the right choices for the nation's future. I've made one.
HOST: Prime Minister one of the reasons you replaced Kevin Rudd was appalling polls, these are worst. And you are seriously telling me that the polls don't matter to you?
PM: I don't agree with that analysis Neil, thank you very much.
HOST: One of the reasons, one of the reasons. PM: Well I- HOST: Why do you think Caucus wanted to get rid of him, because they thought they could lose an election.
PM: Well, I'm not going to pick over history but I'm also not going to accept that analysis. You're asking what is motivating me, Neil.
HOST: No, I was asking whether you're politically concerned by these disastrous polls.
PM: I'm determined to build a clean energy future for this country and I'm happy to be judged on it Neil.
HOST: Have you read the reports that Bill Shorten's been sounded out for your job?
PM: Oh Neil, you know, you can play all the games, not going to worry me.
HOST: It was reported, seriously did you read that?
PM: Well, look, lots of things get reported Neil.
HOST: Did you ask (inaudible)?
PM: Oh of course not, Neil, don't be so silly. 
HOST: Okay. But you read the reports, they don't concern you.
PM: Look, there's lots of things in the newspapers, I don't claim to read all of them Neil. A lot of silly things are written in the newspapers, I don't read every Australian newspaper every day. What I do is I work hard to shape this country's future. I want to see a country generating less carbon pollution, I want to see a country with a strong economy and more jobs, and I want to see people enjoying the rewards of work which is why we've structured the household assistance package so people will better see the rewards of work by having a higher tax free threshold.
HOST: Could I ask you, a higher tax free threshold, now who benefits from that?
PM: People who benefit from that are people who are making a journey into work, often from welfare. They'll see the upfront benefits of working, they'll be outside the tax system, no money out of their pay packets taken out in tax, they'll directly see the rewards of working. It's also something of particular benefit to second income earners generally women who have been out of the workforce for a period of time raising kids and who are looking to go back into it casual or part time.
HOST: But you keep saying it's trebled, it's not really is it for low income earners? They were already on $16,000, it's just going up to $18,000 tax free.
PM: Well there's two effects and this gets into tax law so if people can bear with us, there's two effects, there's the tax free threshold, there's what's called the low income tax offset and they work together. One of the problems-
HOST: Yeah, if you're on low income you're getting $16,000 tax free now you're going to get $18,000. It's not a big difference.
PM: But there's a question of when, because the way the low income tax offset has historically worked is people get the adjustment at the end of the tax year, not in their pay packet week by week as they go to work-
HOST: So how much extra will they get?
PM: And then Neil the other benefit of course is people still needed to file tax returns to get the adjustments under the low income tax offset. Now a million people won't have to collect receipts and scrabble around and you know, sit in the back room doing their tax pack while their family's a good time on a Sunday. 
HOST: But it's not really-
PM: They'll be able to just, you know, enjoy time with the family, not filling that tax return.
HOST: Prime Minister this isn't just about tax law it's about credibility. It's not really a trebling of the tax free  -  it goes from $16,000 to $18,000 for low income earners.
PM: Neil, I'm not going to allow you to get away with that characterisation as if I've been less than frank about this. It's not fair-
HOST: Well what about middle income earners?
PM: It's not right. Well let me finish my sentence. It's not fair and it's not right and you shouldn't do it.
HOST: Okay well tell me.
PM: When this was announced on Sunday it was absolutely clear in the material that was announced that we were trebling the tax free threshold, we were changing the way the low income tax offset worked and -
HOST: (inaudible)
PM: And the benefit overall- not one Australian will pay more tax, lower income Australians in to middle income Australians will see tax cuts-
HOST: Prime Minister who-
PM: That was all very clear on the material, Neil.
HOST: Who gets extra out of the trebling?
PM: People who are moving from welfare to work or a second income earner going into work don't have to fill in a tax return, get directly the rewards of work rather than having some adjustment at the end of the year and Neil, you are putting these questions as if, somehow, between the two adjustments people have come out square, that's not true-
HOST: Well Prime Minister -
PM: Taking into effect trebling tax free threshold and the changes we've made in the (inaudible) people are going to keep more money, more of their money as tax free.
HOST: Prime Minister middle income earners are in fact losing what you're giving them by the increase in the tax rates.
PM: That's completely untrue Neil.
HOST: But we've got independent modelling of it as well.
PM: Neil, you cannot sit here and tell me you've got modelling that any Australian-
HOST: Oh, it was opinion. We've got opinions from accountants, not from me. PM: You're opinion's wrong. 
HOST: But you're increasing the tax rate?
PM: And let me explain it Neil. Not one Australia will pay a dollar more tax. When you change the tax free threshold that is more money-
HOST: But that's not what I said Prime Minister. Whatever you're giving them in the $18,000 you're taking away by increasing the tax rate at the higher end.
PM: That is not true.
HOST: Isn't it?
PM: Not it's not true. Do you want to go through an example Neil?
HOST: I'll give you the figure.
PM: Okay, I'm very happy to do figures about how all this works Neil.
HOST: Well, at what level does the rate increase?
PM: People should be getting the full figures. Let's go through and look at people, for example on $20,000 a year. They'll get a $600 tax cut a year. $25,000, they'll get $503. $30,000 - $65,000 they'll get $303.
HOST: $80,000?
PM: $70,000 they'll get $253. $75,000 will get $128, $80,000 it's $3.00 and we haven't really claimed that as a tax cut. So what we've been saying is people-
HOST: So you've actually taking it back?
PM: No, nothing is taken back Neil.
HOST: Alright. 
PM: No one pays a dollar more tax and they are the tax cuts people get.
HOST: Can I ask it this way, how much less income tax will you bring in as a result of this?
PM: We will bring in less income tax, I don't have that figure with me Neil, I'm happy to supply it to you.
HOST: Is it a significant (inaudible).
PM: I'll have to supply it to you Neil, I don't have it with me.
HOST: That's the bottom line, whether less tax is taken or not, isn't it.
PM: Well I'm happy to account for that. This is an assistance package between the tax cuts and the payment increases of $15 billion. I'll get you break down between the tax cuts and the payment increases, happy to do that.
HOST: Can you explain the can of tomatoes to me?
PM: Certainly. HOST: How does it work?
PM: There's a can of tomatoes, you go and buy it. What's the impact of the flow through from big polluters paying a price on carbon pollution? It'll be less than half a percent.
HOST: What if the fruit is imported and the can's made here?
PM: Well if the can's made here then obviously you're seeing less than half a percent, the less than half a percent for food includes the packaging. But Neil, let's just get really clear about this-
HOST: What about if it's imported?
PM: Well, Neil, let's get really clear about this. Less than half a percent, let's just say that again. That's less than a cent in a dollar. So in terms of something that's imported, if you are going to do comparisons, the shipping costs of getting a can of tomatoes here from anywhere else in the world is going to be a greater cost than a cent in a dollar.
HOST: Get's a bit complicated depending on where you import the fruit from, where you buy the fuel and where you bring the stuff from, surely?
PM: It doesn't get complicated at all. You go to the shops and you will see, for food, you will see an impact of less than half a percent. Generally, in your cost of living you'll see an impact of less than one percent.
HOST: Well, I have this caller and if you have time we'll take a caller now.
PM: Sure.
HOST: But I had a caller earlier who asked the question of whether with the tax free level going to $18,000 you'll be able to  -  family trusts will be able to put that money into their kids name if it was $6,000 previously can they now put $18,000 in?
PM: No we have special tax arrangements for unearned income because we had some tax avoidance problems a few years back where people were distributing income to children to try and fiddle the tax system, so there are particular arrangements for that.
HOST: Do you agree young families are carrying a lot of the cost of this? I was mean looking at the figures in the Age today, self funded retiree, $80,000, they'll get $2,289 from the Government, it costs them $501. Single person earning $80,000 losing $441 and gets $1,600 back. Do you think young families are carrying the burden here? 
PM: When we're talking about young families they get the benefits of family payment increases too. So if you want to go through an example, $85,000 a year income, two young kids you know pre-school kind of age. Dad's working, probably mum working part time. They're getting assistance between tax and family payment changes of $948 a year. The benefit that we think they'll come out on top, that is more than the average impact of the price changes on them, is $378 per year as a family Neil. Families' benefit generally from the payment system as well as tax cuts.
HOST: One of the examples I saw, single income, $90,000 one child under five, you get $409 in assistance, cost of living impact is $546, $137 worse off? Worse off, $90,000 one kid, not much?
PM: Neil, there will be households that do not get full assistance.
HOST: But they're not rich?
PM: Absolutely correct and we've worked with our tax and transfer system so that we are putting our assistance through the family payment system and the tax system. When you've got two taxpayers in a household they get the benefit of two tax free thresholds, though there is a particular supplement for single income families. Neil, what I would say is this, we are talking about tackling climate change. Let's talk about that family and that child that lives in that family, do you want them to grow up in an Australia with more or less pollution? Well I say less. And we will achieve through this system less carbon pollution in our atmosphere. So there is a benefit for everyone. In terms of the flow through impacts for prices. Yep, we've taken our Labor values and our Labor way and that means we've particularly had our eyes trained on low income families, pensioners, middle income families because we want them to have assistance. What I'm absolutely amazed about is Tony Abbott was on TV this morning, he was asked whether he was going to take the money back from pensioners and he avoided the question there.
HOST: Yes he that with me yesterday. Do you mind taking a quick call?
PM: Happy to.
HOST: If you don't mind. Simon, go ahead please Simon.
CALLER: Neil, Prime Minister, how are you?
PM: I'm well thank you Simon.
CALLER: Listen, I've got to tell you I'm getting very, very tired of all the spin that you're putting on things. Here you are trying to say that you're showing leadership, well you're not showing leadership because leadership means you should be listening to what the people are saying.
HOST: Question please Simon. 
CALLER: You should also be taking into account what people are asking and what they are doing and you're not doing that at all. Here you are coming out with all these figures.
HOST: Simon.
CALLER: Yep.
HOST: Do you mind, a question.
CALLER: Sorry?
HOST: You had a question to the Prime Minister?
CALLER: I want to know if you're so confident about all of these things that you're talking about, call an election, let the people vote.
HOST: Okay, it's the election point that I raised earlier.
PM: Simon, leadership is about charting a course for this nation's future and I'm doing it. Of course I'm happy to explain and talk things through with people, that's what I've been doing yesterday, that's what I'm doing now. Obviously Neil and I are talking about figures because he's asking me about the household assistance package. But I think, at base, I've got a different view from you about leadership. Leadership's about charting a course for the future. Leadership's about getting things done.
HOST: Is your leadership unequivocally safe?
PM: Yes Neil. I will be leading this nation to a clean energy future. We will bring this package into effect on 1 July next year. I have determined to get this done, I will get it done.
HOST: But you seem irritated by the question, I mean, it's a reasonable question.
PM: I think it's a distraction from the big question about this nation's future. I mean in ten, 20, 30, 40 years time, what are people going to be remembering about this period in Australian history? A little bit of talk between Neil Mitchell and the Prime Minister about poll questions and leadership questions or are they going to be remembering this was when the nation decided to cut carbon pollution. I believe they'll be remembering that, Neil-
HOST: Well, I think it will depend-
PM: And they'll live in a better environment and a stronger economy as a result of me and the Government having taken this decision.
HOST: I'd suggest it'll depend what happens, anyway. Just one last question- 
PM: Well this is happening Neil, it's coming into effect 1 July next year.
HOST: Are you punishing aspiration? When you look at the figures, people who are earning reasonable money but not a hell of a lot of money, are being punished.
PM: Absolutely not Neil. I want people to aspire in this country. One of the reasons I've been so determined to make sure we've got the benefits of a better education system, a growing university system, more apprenticeships, more skills training  -  one of the reasons I've been so determined to do that is I want people to aspire in life. My own life journey Neil is about aspiration, it's about education and the opportunities education can bring-
HOST: Why are they punished then?
PM: And as you aspire and then you get a better job and you earn more, I think, for a Government, I've got to take the decisions that look at that and say across the broad sweep of Australians, who needs our assistance the most? I don't need assistance Neil to deal with carbon pricing, you don't need assistance to deal with carbon pricing. Nine out of ten-
HOST: No but I think people on $90,000 a year with kids do.
PM: Nine out of ten households need assistance, we're providing it. Someone with kids gets family payment increases, there are tax cuts. Not everybody comes out square or in front Neil, but almost six million households do.
HOST: I know you need to get away, two other areas just quickly. What's happening with Rupert Murdoch's empire in the United Kingdom? Does that have implications for this country? Are you concerned about their operations in this country, of News Ltd?
PM: I've been fairly amazed to see what's happened and what's been exposed in the UK, particularly the telephone tapping for people who are grieving and lost loved ones in dreadful circumstances. I suspect here in Australia it will lead to people talking about media ethics and that's all to the good, it's always good to have discussion and political debate and analysis with how we get our media. Of course, the truth is though people get their information from so many more sources than they used to in the past. The newspapers are one still strong source, but people listen to radio, they watch TV, they blog, they tweet, there's all sorts of ways people get the information.
HOST: So do you have any concerns about the operations of News Ltd in this country?
PM: Well I know that the CEO of News Ltd has issued a statement in relation to their conduct. I do expect that there will be a broad debate about media in this country, you know, debate's a good thing.
HOST: And Lady Gaga. The same?
PM: Look, I can't claim Neil that I sit at home at night with Lady Gaga music on. I don't, obviously I know who Lady Gaga is and I've seen some of the more extraordinary outfits that she's worn, so I'm conscious that she made a statement yesterday on TV about same sex marriage in Australia.
HOST: She won't convince you to change your mind on same sex marriage?
PM: Lady Gaga will continue to have her view and I'll continue to have mine. And no one will confuse the two of us, there's no way in the world anybody's going to get confused which one's which.
HOST: Thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thank you Neil. 



HOST: Prime Minister Good morning.
PM: Good morning
HOST: Beyond your determination to wear out shoe leather, what do you have to do to counter bad polls and an impression many people have stopped listening to you?
PM: What I've got to do is keep explaining the reason that we're putting a price on carbon pollution. I'm determined that we make this change so our nation can have a clean energy future and yes, it requires explanation and I will keep doing that.
But at the centre of all of this is really a fairly clear concept, around 500 big polluters, today can put carbon pollution into the atmosphere for nothing, but there is no incentive to stop putting it into the atmosphere. There is no incentive to reduce the amount that is going into the atmosphere. It is all done for free.
From 1 July next year they will pay a price per tonne. That will drive a change in behaviour where businesses look for cleaner energy sources and they look to reduce their carbon pollution. That's what I want to achieve for our country's future.
HOST: You are saying to the rest of Australia, you're seeking to reassure us that we will be suitably compensated for things like electricity prices rises; but already airlines have said they will be passing on costs to passengers. Builders have said the home and land package is now potentially $5000 more expensive. The Food and Grocery Council is saying that bills could rise by three times your estimate and the new Commodore could rise by several hundred dollars. Isn't that twenty cents of saving and of advantage going to disappear very quickly?
PM: We've modelled here, through our experts at Treasury. I expect you'll see all sorts of claims in the public domain, of course you will. But, what we've done is we've had the experts at Treasury look at this and work out what will happen in terms of costs being passed through to Australians who buy things at the shops, or perhaps, buy an airline ticket. And the same people who have done this modelling are the people who modelled when the GST was introduced and they got the effects of it right.
That's why I'm very confident when I say that our Treasury modelling, looking at the factors, the things that Australians buy has concluded that the flow through from putting a price on carbon that big polluters pay is less than one per cent of the Consumer Price Index. A less than one per cent increase in the cost of living, and then of course we are working with families and households to deal with that flow through price impact. That is why we're providing tax cuts and payment increases to nine out of ten households.
HOST: Are you actually saying that Treasury might have done some modelling on how much an air ticket between Perth and Sydney might rise as a result of Qantas putting up their prices in a post-carbon tax world?
PM: Yes, Treasury has modelled through all effects including the effects on transport and air travel.
HOST: Whether or not this is scare mongering or self interest talking, it's a powerfully damaging argument isn't it? Because you have to convince an anxious public, firstly that there is not going to be personal financial detriment here, and then beyond that that there is a greater good. Now, we understand the notion of greater good, but all politicians understand the hip pocket. Is that an area of great concern to you?
PM: Firstly, I do think Australians are interested in what you're referring to as the greater good. Overwhelmingly, people believe climate change is real, that it is caused by human beings and that it is caused by us generating carbon pollution. And I think overwhelmingly people say well, can we do something about all of this carbon pollution and the change that it is making in our climate? We can do something, we can put a price on carbon, we can drive change that means by 2020 we will reduce the amount of carbon pollution by 160 million tonnes, the same as taking 45 million cars off the road. Now there are 12 million cars in Australia driving around today. You imagine all of the cars in Australia in one place and then try and imagine 45 million, that's the difference we're making.
On the cost of living impacts, I understand people are rightly concerned about making ends meet and how they are going to pay the bills, which is why we have provided and will provide real assistance in the form of tax cuts, and pension increases, and family payment increases to nine out of ten households. And, almost six million households will receive enough money so they're either square or better than square in terms of the flow through of price effects.
HOST: My guest this morning is the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard. We were told a carbon tax would be budget neutral, how is it that Wayne Swan is now admitting the package is going to cost more than$4 billion in those first four years?
PM: Well, that's the figure over the four years of the government's budget period.
HOST: But we accept that's not budget neutral.
PM: Well, when you break that down, almost $3 billion of it is in the set up, the start up costs. In the first part of the forward estimates; that is in the first financial year, so it's understandable I think for people, when you are setting up something that's big and new that there are start up costs.
Then, of course, as the scheme gets up and running it becomes broadly budget neutral. And, just on the question of what's this all about? Can I perhaps just say to you, let's look at it another way, I do believe people want to cut carbon pollution. Well, we can do that whilst our economy grows strongly; whilst employment grows strongly.
1.6 million new jobs will be created by 2020, and whilst we assist nine out of ten households with the flow through of price impacts. Now if you can cut 160 million tonnes of carbon pollution by 2020 whilst the economy grows, employment grows and people overwhelmingly get assistance with the flow through price impacts, why on earth wouldn't you do it?
HOST: I'd like you to consider a couple of comments. Gina Reinhart was speaking at a mining conference in Perth yesterday. She said the combined impact of resource rent tax and a carbon tax will really hurt the competitiveness of the mining sector.
PM: Well, front page of today's Australian has got a big story about the biggest ever take over of coal mining business in Australia. Now, I think when we're talking about commercial prospects and the outlook for businesses, it pays to have a look about where the money is going. That's a big mining company saying it wants to take over an Australian coal mining company because it knows coal has got a great future in this country; that's after we announced the package on Sunday.
HOST: And, at the same time because this is such a debate about statistics and how they are interpreted something like $7 billion of value was wiped off the ASX yesterday.
PM: Look, I am not going to comment on share market movements, I don't, and I don't ever, but I am commenting on the story on the front page of today's Australian, because I have said consistently that mining, including coal mining, would have a great future in this country, that jobs would continue to grow in mining, people would still run hugely profitable mining businesses.
The amount that is paid for a tonne of coal is basically doubled over the last few years and I think we are seeing on the front page of one of our big newspapers today the fact that people in the industry obviously see a great future for coal mining, otherwise why would you be shelling out for the biggest takeover of an Australian coal mining company we have ever seen?
HOST: That bloke who sells a lot of televisions, Gerry Harvey, reckons no one is going to save the compensation handout to pay the electricity bills anyway and that they will just go and buy a new television with it.
PM: Look, people will make their own decisions about how they want to arrange their budgets, people do that all day, every day and they will continue to do it as we provide assistance in the forms of family payments and pension increases and tax cuts.
We live in a free society and people have got the opportunity to work out how they are going to spend their money.
HOST: Would you be advising those people, given the cost rises that are likely to come, to be rather circumspect with that money?
PM: Look, I think Australians are smart people, they manage their budgets all day, every day and they will continue to manage their budgets all day, every day. They will see a consumer price effect, a cost of living effect of 0.7 per cent, and of course the way we are providing compensation means over four million households will get more than they need to, to assist them with that flow through price impact. For example, pensioner households will come out $210 in front. People will make their own decisions about how to spend that money.
HOST: Prime Minister, my last question. Whatever the merit of this carbon tax plan, there is that great shadow of an election promise broken and questions as to whether you truly have a mandate to impose such a huge reform on an Australian electorate. How do you convince those people otherwise? Because today, and from what I saw on Q &amp; A last night, people remain deeply sceptical about you?
PM: I would say to the Australian people, we have been debating pricing carbon in this country for the best part of a decade. Prime Minister Howard went to the 2007 election saying that if he was re-elected he'd put a price on carbon. After the 2007 election we did everything we could to get the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme through the Parliament and it ended up smashing into a brick wall.
I went to the 2010 election saying that we need to act on climate change, it's real, it's threatening for our country; we're a hot dry place and we need to get to an emissions trading scheme, a system where you price carbon and you cap the amount of carbon that your economy will produce.
Now, we are going to get to that emissions trading scheme, not by the route I originally foresaw. There will be a temporary carbon tax followed by a permanent emissions trading scheme. Acting on climate change is the right thing to do for this nation's future and I am doing it.
HOST: Are there times you look in the mirror and think ‘I will be able to introduce this in to law and this great new reform will arrive but I might not be Prime Minister beyond two years'?
PM: The important thing for me is doing what we need to today, to make sure our nation has got the best possible future; a clean energy future where we are doing the right thing by our environment. And a clean energy future where we're getting our share of the jobs of the future that will come from turbo-charging investment in renewable energy.
So, the thing that drives me as Prime Minister is doing what is right to create that future and I am Prime Minister of a country that has got a strong economy and I look back in history and I know we've got that strong economy today because Prime Ministers in the past had the guts to get the big reforms done. This is a big reform; we are going to get it done.
HOST: I hope when you come to Perth you might be in a position to come into the studio and take some questions from our listeners. Thank you for speaking to me today.
PM: Thank you.  



HOST: Good morning, Julia.
PM: Thank you very much, Eddie - good to be here.
HOST: Welcome aboard. Let's get straight into the carbon tax issue.
First of all, can I ask, I don't want to debate whether who's going to come off better and all that sort of thing, because that'll all flesh itself out and far stronger economic minds than mine have done the actuary on it, all the rest of it. Can you tell us why, tell the Triple M listeners why is this is the most important thing that's dominated government over this period, at the expense of maybe other things to do. Why is this so important to our country?
PM: We are working on other issues at the same time, but this is vital for our country's future because it's about climate change. We live in a hot, dry place. That means we are particularly at risk of the change in climate driving more extreme heat days, more bush fires, more droughts, loss of agricultural land in the Murray Darling Basin, devastating effects for the Great Barrier Reef, for Kakadu.
We are among the biggest polluters in the world per head of population. We generate more carbon pollution that any other people, per head, in the developed world. That means we've got a lot to do and we've got to get started and by asking big polluters to pay a price on carbon, they'll find ways of cutting carbon pollution and we will cut carbon pollution that we're putting in our atmosphere by 160 million tonnes in 2020. That's the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road. There are only 12 million cars in this country, so imagine every car in Australia  -  12 million - then try and imagine 45 million. That's how much pollution we'll be getting out of the atmosphere.
HOST: (inaudible) the changing nature of launching a new policy in this country. It used to be done on the floor of Parliament. Now you have to go on a presidential-style campaign to get your message across. Is this because of the ferocious nature of our press? Why can't you deliver this on the floor of Parliament, as we used to do?
PM: I think people get their information in more ways now. I think it's really as simple as that. Way back when, when the principal source of information was you watch the six o'clock news and that's how everybody found out what was happening in the world, if you did a parliamentary address and it went on the six o'clock news, people would have the information. Now, of course, it's everything from getting through a tweet, to listening to your radio show, to going and reading a blog, or some other way of getting information.
So, we've got to be out in more ways, talking and explaining.
HOST: You're like Lady Gaga on tour, that's what you are.
HOST: We'll come back to Lady Gaga in a moment, but-
PM: -I don't think I'm dressed the same way.
HOST: She's got a question for you we're going to put to you very shortly, but we get a lot of our information via the News Limited press, Prime Minister. I'm sure you've been following the story, the News of the World scandal with great interest. Do we need to be concerned about the amount of influence that Rupert Murdoch appears to have over government and police and people all around the world.
PM: I think we always need to be concerned about quality in our media. I want people to get accurate information, balanced information. Clearly in the modern age people have a lot of choices, people will continue to buy newspapers, but they'll go online, they'll use the iPad, I can see you've got your iPad in front of you there. They'll listen to radio, they'll follow tweets, they'll engage in blogs. So, lots of ways of getting information and finding out what's going on.
And increasingly I think people like to just go in direct and get it themselves, which is why on carbon pollution we've put a lot of information on the cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website, and I think people will get on there and Eddie was saying before they'll work out about tax cuts and family payments, they'll go in, they'll use the household estimator and spew their own figure out and work it out for themselves.
HOST: Nice sidestep. News Limited have given you a belting over this. The Herald Sun had a countdown towards it, and on the front page again today saying it's useless, hang on, I'll just grab the paper, pick out exactly what it says here, well, The Australian says ‘miner bets $5 billion on future of coal', and the Herald Sun says ‘get real Julia, how your compensation is going up in smoke, new homes up $,5000, grocery bills up $120 a year', carbon tax fury has been the headline every day. Do you feel that what's happening in England is a little bit indicative of what's happening here in Australia, where the Murdoch's have now been exposed to have been right into politicians? We've heard today that Gordon Brown's phone had been hacked as well, there are allegations towards that.
How do you view this in the world where the media is so important to everybody in this country?
PM: I think people are bright enough to think about it themselves and work it out themselves. I don't think people will just pick up the newspaper and believe every word they read. They've got their own critical thought processes.
On the front of the Herald Sun today, what I'd say is we've had our experts in Treasury model the prices that will flow through from putting a price on carbon pollution paid by the big polluters - it's 0.7 per cent of the cost of living. Now, these are the same people that modelled the impacts of the GST and got it right. They're the figures I'm relying on. People can work all that through for themselves as well.
On the front of The Australian newspaper, a somewhat happier story today  -  it's telling us that a business is interested in buying a big mining company in this country, a big coal mining company. Why are they interested in that? Because they're smart business people and there's good a future in coal, so don't let anybody tell you that somehow we're seeing the end of the Australian coal industry.
HOST: 19 minutes to 9, it is the Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard, is with us. 1 333 53 if you want to ask her a question you can do that next, as Lady Gaga did yesterday.
HOST: We've got Lady Gaga firing questions at the Prime Minister, and you too. Come back right after this with the Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard for Dodo Electricity on Triple M's Hot Breakfast.
[BREAK]
HOST: 16 minutes to 9 on Triple M's Hot Breakfast for Dodo Electricity.
Wayne from Craigieburn's got a question that I was going to put to you Prime Minister, but Wayne's going to do it for me. Go, Wayne.
CALLER: Yeah, good morning Julia. I just want to know, I have solar power, now, you guys currently contribute 6c per kilowatt to what I get. Now, are you going to give us more because this carbon tax to offset the electricity prices that are going to go up?
PM: That solar scheme is probably a Victorian Government scheme. We've helped people put solar panels on as well. What carbon pricing will do is make sure you enjoy some rewards from having made that decision. Yes, it's going to mean that renewable sources of energy are comparatively cheaper and energy from dirty coal-fired power stations is more expensive, so you've done the right thing and you'll enjoy some benefits from it.
HOST: Prime Minister, I've just renovated our house and I want to go solar and it is too expensive and too hard to do and it's more complicated than Chinese arithmetic to try and figure out. How can we not make this easier, and if we are going to go for let's get rid of brown coal, or take it down, why don't we spend more money  -  I mean I'd be prepared to take no tax deductions or anything else, if you said in 20 years time we're going to have the best solar industry in the world and given me something to aim for for my kids, rather than just muck around with a bit of tax breaks here and there and all the rest of it. I'd like to see something really big and go for it.
PM: Well, Eddie, I'm glad you said that-
HOST: -It's not a Dorothy Dixer, is it?
PM: -because we've got something really big and we're going to go for it. We're creating a $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation, so we've already been in the business of working with our great innovators to create new solar and renewable energy projects. I've has the opportunity to talk to people about a big one at Moree in New South Wales, another in Chinchilla in Queensland - some of the biggest solar plants in the world. We've already achieve that
With $10 billion in this Clean Energy Finance Corporation, we believe that our use of the renewable energy, of clean energy, will increase by 1,700 per cent. So, you're going to see a big shift towards using our beautiful sunshine, wind power, hot rocks, tidal-
HOST:-Don't forget us here in Victoria, because we're going to put people out of business down in Yallourn and places like that. We need to have a new industry ready to go to help those people as well.
PM: Yes, and we're going to see gas increasingly used and, of course in Victoria, wind as well.
HOST: We've got Warren on the line from Ormond. You're talking to the Prime Minister of Australia, Warren.
CALLER: Good morning, Prime Minister. Thank you for allowing me the opportunity this morning and also thanks Hot Breakfast.
Prime Minister, I have two quick questions for you: one  -  where's the money going that you'll anticipate receiving for this new carbon tax, and two  -  on Andrew Bolt's show, the Bolt Report, on Sunday morning I saw a report that reported a gentleman that Ross Garnaut holds in great esteem, it actually showed that the impact of Australia reducing its carbon emissions is not going to have any impact on the planet's climate for about 500 years and that was inclusive of every other country doing the same thing at the one time, so what real impact is this carbon emissions, is this going to have other than to incur yet another tax on the Australian business and the Australian people?
PM: Sure, happy to answer those two questions.
Where's the money going? Well, all of the money that's paid by the around 500 big polluters who now have to stump up and pay the price for their carbon pollution, all of that money is going into assisting households, working with industries to make the transition into the cleaner energy future so we protect Australian jobs, or in programs to drive the uptake of clean energy. That's where it's going - full stop.
On what difference will it make  -  well, there's a very simple proposition here: do you want your kids to grow up in a country that's generating more pollution, or less pollution. I'm for generating less pollution, and by putting a price on carbon we will generate less carbon pollution and stuff it up into our atmosphere.
HOST: PM, can I just quickly maybe edit some of the other callers that are on the line. LPG  -  why don't we give more incentive for people to have LPG in cars, for example?
PM: LPG you put in your vehicle won't have a carbon price effect on it. We understand that people have to fuel their cars. People will make choices between petrol and LPG, people will make choices for cleaner motor vehicles. We are going to have motor vehicles emissions standards, fuel standards, from 2015.
HOST: OK, I'm tipping you want to talk about something other than carbon for two seconds. So I'll throw one in from-
PM: -I'm happy to keep talking about carbon pricing. I could do it all day.
HOST: You will be. Lady Gaga was on A Current Affair last night, an excellent performance she put on, not only as an entertainer, but she had some interesting things to say. She was asked Tracy Grimshaw, first of all she was very complimentary of the fact that we do have a woman who's in the number one job in Australia and she was very complimentary of you. But she had this to say about the gay marriage scenario:
LADY GAGA: I believe in marriage equality. So, I would just encourage all of you to mobilise your voices so that the Prime Minister of Australia can hear you scream and speak and say we want to be fully equal. We want to get married.
HOST: It's a vexed question. Why is it that seemingly open-minded politicians baulk at this question? Ted Baillieu, we put it to him in the lead up, he was against it, and your Government has not been for it either. I don't quite get it.
PM: I think there's a big community debate going on and people have got different views in the community and you'd expect that to be true of politicians too, representing the community. For me I believe in equality, in the sense that making sure the law doesn't discriminate against people's choices. So, we've gone out of our way to fix things like the social security law, the superannuation law, so same-sex couples aren't discriminated against.
But for me, I think marriage and the Marriage Act has had a particular status in our society and it should keep that status, but I understand people have got different views.
HOST: You don't really believe that do you. Turn it up.
HOST: I reckon I've got something-
PM: -Yes, I do.
HOST: -Prime Minister, I'm just looking at her entourage out here and they're a fairly scrawny looking bunch, the boys in security. I reckon that she needs, trying to sell the carbon tax, she needs to get her big mate Barry Hall, he's probably just got one year to go and take him around on the hustings and you'll get this through in a matter of weeks, Julia. You need to get big Baz back out there.
PM: Alright, we'll I'd be happy to take big Baz back out, but I think you might have accidentally insulted people who do security, because the two lads you're pointing to actually work in my office.
HOST: Sorry, boys.
PM: That very formidable woman at the back of the pack is actually doing security.
HOST: You and me Mick, we've got the evil eye coming our way.
HOST: I have had a run in with the Prime Minister's security team, so happy that they haven't recognised me.
HOST: What happened? Come back after the break and tell the story one more time.
Prime Minister, thanks for coming in this morning. Obviously everyone's going to be watching this with great interest. I'm not buying your same sex things there, but that's for another day and Lady Gaga had plenty to say so I'm sure you'll get another go on the hustings today, but thank you for coming in, we always appreciate your time on The Hot Breakfast.
PM: Lady Gaga and Julia Gillard - different views
HOST: Who would have though?
PM: Who would have thought.



PM: Can I say it's a great pleasure to be here with my Caucus colleague Kelvin Thomson, the Member for Wills, we're in his electorate and can I thank Earl and Scott and Ken for sharing their stories with us here and can I thank all of the apprentices and young people I've met as I've walked through this fantastic facility.
 We, of course, are here talking about the effect of putting a price on carbon and in the last few days I've been explaining that it will be around 500 big polluters who pay that price for putting carbon pollution into our atmosphere.  
And over the last few days people have said to me well, how can they change their behaviour so that they can cut the amount of carbon pollution that they generate, how will this lead to the reductions of at least 160 million tonnes of carbon pollution in 2020? 
Well, walking around this great facility I think you can start to see the amazing changes that can be made and the new technologies that will be brought to greater life by putting a price on carbon.  
I mean, who would have thought that here in suburban Australia, we are in Melbourne, we are not that far from the centre of the city, that you could be generating heat through geothermal. Not out in a desert in remote Australia, but right here in this building, generating heat through the geothermal power of the earth itself, not needing to have electricity generated any other way. 
That small insight into new technology that is available today, but can be turbo-charged by putting a price on carbon, I think helps us think about the sorts of changes that our big polluters can make as a result of putting a price on carbon. 
But clearly, when we have priced carbon, right around the nation people will be thinking about cleaner energy choices. We will see an explosion in the development of clean energy technologies and it's been great to be here today to talk to the people who will have the skills to deliver those technologies to us. 
I've met young apprentices who are learning the green skills that they will need for the future. I've met people who have been a plumber for 20-25 years, who were here for a refresher course. Great opportunities in the new green skills, in plumbing and in trades right across the board, whether it's being an electrician, or being a welder, what people do today will be done differently in the future in a clean energy way. 
And then we will see new jobs created as well, not only will we do traditional jobs differently, we will see new jobs created, as we see this explosion in a clean energy future. 
It's been fantastic to be here today and to see the possibilities that carbon pricing can lead to. Carbon pricing will create the right incentives to drive the take up of clean energy.  
Can I also say  -  acknowledging Michael Long  -  who is with us today, another thing that's really impressed me, apart from the technology and the new skills, is the sense of opportunity that the people training here have, including the young Indigenous Australians who are training here.  
A great future, with the skills they will need for today and tomorrow's technology and the skills they will need so our nation can seize a clean energy future. 
So, thank you very much for having me here and I'm very happy to take questions. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what about the workers in Hazelwood and their families who now face an uncertain future, what do you say to them and can you tell them if Hazelwood power station will definitely close under this package? 
PM: The package we announced on Sunday has funding to retire 2000 megawatts of the dirtiest energy that the nation produces. We will have a tender process, we will get power stations to come forward to work with us in retiring 2000 megawatts of dirty energy production. Of course in doing that we will work carefully to make sure that the lights stay on and we've got energy security and energy supply and we will, of course, work with affected communities. 
My Ministerial colleague, Martin Ferguson, has been talking about working with communities to replace current dirty coal-fire powered generators with cleaner gas electricity generation. We'll be happy to keep speaking to and working with communities. Overall, for the employment picture for the future, we will cut carbon pollution by putting a price on carbon that big polluters pay. We will generate 1.6 million jobs by 2020, half a million of them in the next two years. 
We have an unemployment rate with a four in front of it, we will continue to see employment grow. And just generally on the question of employment, there's been a lot of anxiety caused and a lot of fear has been around, but let's just go through some of the truths that I think help people recognise the fears that have been raised unnecessarily. 
Tony Abbott yesterday stood at a Peabody Mine, a coal mine, and said basically coal mining didn't have a future in our country. Today we wake up to newspapers that say that very company is poised to engage in the biggest coal company takeover our nation has ever seen. Now they're doing that because they know there's a great future in coalmining in this country. 
So, fear raised unnecessarily. Tony Abbott was predicting Armageddon for the coal mining industry yesterday  -  the future of the coal mining industry is bright.
And it's not the first thing he's got wrong. 
He said to Australians they'd be paying 6.5c more a litre for their petrol. Wrong. 
He said to Australians yesterday that coal mining would end in this country. Wrong.
Coal mining has got a great future and it will continue to grow.  He said to the people of Whyalla that their town would be wiped off the map. Today he's acknowledged that's wrong, because we're working with the steel industry as we price carbon. 
Petrol fear campaign. Wrong. 
Coal mining fear campaign. Wrong.
Steel industry fear campaign. Wrong. 
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, Tony Abbott also he is staking his political career on stopping the carbon tax. Are you staking your political career on implementing it?
PM: As Prime Minister, what I am doing is leading this nation to a clean energy future. We have to realise the possibilities of new technology, it's about jobs, it's about skills. We've seen that today and it's about doing the right thing by our environment.   
Australians think climate change is real, and they're right, the scientists have told us it's real. They know it's caused by carbon pollution that we generate as human beings and they want us to cut carbon pollution. Well we will do that by putting a price on carbon, as our economy continues to grow strongly, as jobs continue to grow strongly and as we provide assistance to nine out of ten households. We can realise this clean energy future while still getting the benefits and jobs that come with economic growth. That's what I'm leading on and that's what I'm going to achieve.
JOURNALIST: Is your job at risk though, given the latest opinion polling and the opposition to the carbon tax opinion polling? 
PM: Look, my focus as Prime Minister is on driving a clean energy future and today's opinion polls will be forgotten in this sweep of history. What will be remembered is when we seize the opportunity to create a clean energy future and to cut carbon pollution. When we seize the opportunity to do the right thing by Australia's kids today and the kids that they will have in the future, to create the conditions we need to protect our environment to have the clean energy jobs of the future, that's what I'm focussed on. 
JOURNALIST: You were asking the apprentices downstairs for an assessment of their teacher, but how many voters are going to assess (inaudible)?
PM: I think the people look to leaders to lead. I'm leading this nation to a clean energy future.
JOURNALIST: Why do you think the carbon tax is so unpopular?  
PM: This is a big reform and the reality is when our nation has faced up to big reforms in the past, we found it pretty hard, but it was the right thing to do. We wouldn't be living in a prosperous country today if we hadn't taken big decisions, globalising our economy, floating the dollar, cutting tariffs  -  big decisions, not popular at the time and they are the authors of today's prosperity. Well today we need, as a nation, to face up to another big decision  -  cutting carbon pollution and addressing climate change. We're going to get this done, starts on 1 July next year.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed in Australians, with their reaction? 
PM: I'll keep explaining this big reform and I'm not at all surprised that when a big reform is talked about, that people feel a sense of anxiety, that's understandable. People-
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed? PM: No, people feel anxious about change, absolutely understandable. I'll keep explaining this change and the possibilities of a clean energy future  -  the new jobs, the new skills, the economic growth, and a better environment.
JOURNALIST: Will you explain the change in a public debate with Tony Abbott?
PM: Will I? 
JOURNALIST: Public debate?
PM: There'll be any number of debates when Parliament gets back together and we put this legislation through the Australian Parliament. And let's be absolutely clear here, our nation has been debating tackling climate change and putting a price on carbon pollution for around a decade.  Prime Minister Howard went to the 2007 election saying he wanted to put a price on carbon pollution. I went to the 2010 election saying I wanted to cap carbon pollution, put a price on it through an emissions trading scheme. Well we will get to that emissions trading scheme, following three years of a fixed price, effectively a carbon tax. We've talked about this a lot, now's the time to get it done and I'm going to get it done.
JOURNALIST: Will charity groups like the Flying Doctors be exempt from the tax? 
PM: Thank you for raising that. The Flying Doctor does amazing work, and because the Royal Flying Doctor Service does such amazing work, we've been very pleased and proud as a government to work with them and to fund and support the work that they do. 
In the package I announced on Sunday there is a dedicated fund to assist not for profit organisations, as we make the change to pricing carbon. For the Royal Flying Doctor Service, of course we will work with them to deal with any impact that they feel from pricing carbon. We'll be very pleased to continue working with them and providing the support that they need.
JOURNALIST: So they are not exempt? 
PM: The Royal Flying Doctor Service, like other not for profits may feel some impacts from pricing carbon, that's why we've got the dedicated fund for not for profits, but if the Royal Flying Doctor Service needs further direct assistance then we will provide it.
JOURNALIST: Back on Hazelwood, are you guaranteeing that Hazelwood won't close until there's something which can generate that extra power and will that construction delay the closure of Hazelwood (inaudible)?
PM: Look, we are going to have a tender process here. So I'm not in a position to talk about particular power stations because that would be me prejudging the tender.
But what I can say to you, about the outcomes of the tender, is any change will be done in a measured way, so that we have continuity of electricity supply, so the lights stay on. We'll work with the regulators to make sure this has got absolutely right, so it will take some time and I direct you to our Ministerial colleague's words, Martin Ferguson, we'll obviously be working to replace capacity in dirty coal-fired power stations with cleaner energy sources like gas. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) already for organisations, which are (inaudible) are they guaranteed funding from the carbon tax revenue?
PM: Well, where they carbon tax funding is going is, before your eyes, in the package that I've released on Sunday.
So, the money that the big polluters pay for putting carbon pollution in our atmosphere will go to funding the assistance to households; more than half the money will be used for that purpose, will go to work with industries, so we can support Australian jobs, and to fund programs to tackle climate change and the programs are outlined in Sunday's package.
I think you're probably referring to a number of organisations that are funded from other parts of the Federal budget, skills money and the like. So, obviously we can talk to you about the specifics of the individual organisations.
JOURNALIST: What kind of impacts will the carbon tax and your plan have on reducing global temperature? What is (inaudible)? 
PM: The impact of pricing carbon in this country is we will reduce carbon pollution in 2020 by at least 160 million tonnes, so the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road. There are around 12 million cars in this country today. Ask people to try and get a picture of how many cars 45 million is, we will be taking that amount of carbon pollution out of our atmosphere and we can take this carbon pollution out of our atmosphere as we continue to have a strongly growing economy, growing jobs and we assist nine out of ten households.
And if I can just say on the question of household assistance, we have obviously directed household assistance so we will be supplying to pensioners, who live on say the full old age pension, more in their pension than we expect the impact of the flow through of carbon pricing to be on them. We will be giving them extra money.
Now I do note that Tony Abbott was asked on television this morning whether he'd guarantee to let pensioners keep that money and he didn't give that guarantee. He's obviously looking to take money off Australian pensioners. Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: What about a temperature though, what about how is- PM:-The question  -  I've answered this question a number of time and I'm happy to answer it again. The question doesn't make any sense, because is assumes the rest of the world isn't acting. The rest of the world is acting, we've got to keep pace. Thanks very much. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning. Is the problem for you that voters aren't listening to the details of your compensation in this package; they're still stuck on your broken promise?
PM: I'll keep explaining the details and what this is all about. It's about cutting carbon pollution. Most Australians believe that climate change is real, it's caused by human activity, it's caused by carbon pollution and we can cut the amount of carbon pollution we generate.What I want to do is reduce carbon pollution by 160 million tonnes in 2020. That's the equivalent of getting 45 million cars off the road. And I want us to have an emissions trading scheme, and we will get there, that puts a cap on the amount of carbon pollution our economy generates. So it's-HOST:-But you could explain all these points-PM: -about the future and I'll keep explaining it.HOST: You could explain these points until you're blue in the face but people just don't seem to listen or want to listen to what you've got to say; don't you have a political problem here?PM: Well Sabra, long after today's opinion polls are forgotten we will be a nation that is cutting carbon pollution and tackling climate change. Climate change threatens our country. We live in a hot, dry place, the scientists tell us that climate change is going to mean more days of extreme heat, more extreme weather events - bushfires and droughts. It's going to threaten great icons like the Great Barrier Reef and agricultural production in the Murray Darling Basin.We've got to do the right thing by the future of our country and cut carbon pollution which is driving climate change. That's what I'm determined to do.HOST: You mentioned the polls, Newspoll figures today show that you and Labor are deeply unpopular - your primary vote is at 27 per cent. Your colleagues say if there's no lift in that in the next couple of weeks it will show that voters are not listening, and if that continues for months that your Government's as good as gone.PM: Well, this is about the future of the country and making the right choices for that future. Reform isn't easy Sabra, it can be tough, tough to deliver, tough to explain. But if you are going to do the right thing for the country's future you've got to stump up to the big choices and I've made a big choice for this country's future.I don't want to see us endlessly increasing carbon pollution in our atmosphere. Just saying that climate change is in the too hard basket and we're prepared to see global temperatures run out of control. I've made the choice that we can act and should act, and we will act by putting a price on carbon that big polluters pay from the 1 July next year.HOST: In your compensation package for families, most of it seems to be skewed towards those with a mortgage, with kids out in the suburbs who have the means to change their behaviour. What about renters, they can't go and change light-bulbs, they can't go and install solar panels?PM: Well we will be working with low income communities through a low carbon communities initiative, which is part of the package. It will be a way of bringing to people who may be renting in lower income households the tools that they need to reduce the amount of carbon pollution they generate in their lives.HOST: But not all renters are low income workers either.PM: Well, Sabra let's be very clear about this package though, the price is going to be paid by around 500 big polluters. They will innovate and change and cut their carbon pollution, we will drive investment in renewable, clean energy like solar and wind.Yes, there will be some flow-through price impacts for households. They will be modest, at less than one per cent of the cost of living of the Consumer Price Index, and we are providing nine out of ten households with some form of assistance and almost six million households will come off at least square and over four million will come out better off. That is-HOST: -Some families will say though that $500 isn't a modest impact at all. You paid a visit to a family in Western Sydney yesterday who were quite supportive of your package, why not visit a family who isn't and convince them of your argument?PM: I went to Western Sydney yesterday, I met with a family in their own home, very generous to me to give me a cup of tea and have a chat. And then I went from there to the local shopping centre and walked through and talked to literally hundreds of people with different views about different issues, including different views about pricing carbon - part of explaining to the Australian people what we're seeking to achieve here.And on the question of the costs of this, of course the price impact is less than one per cent and households, nine out of ten of them, will receive assistance. But the focus of all of this is on the future of our country. What are we leaving to this generation of Australia's children and the generation that lies beyond them? I want to leave them a nation generating less pollution than we will if we don't do anything.HOST: What about coal mines? Will you be visiting them as well as Tony Abbott? Some of the loudest criticism of your package has come from the coal industry; it still maintains that 5,000 jobs will be lost. Do you believe them?PM: I'll be talking to people in different occupations in different places around the country. But I'm really glad that you've raised the future of coal because today's newspapers record, the front page of the Australian particularly, that we are seeing the biggest takeover bid in Australia's history for a coal company. Now you couldn't get a better indication that business people see a good future in coal mining in this country. I see a good future in coal mining in this country...HOST: So do you think they've been crying wolf?PM: We will be working with the coal mining industry. We've got $1.3 billion in the package to work with gassy mines and we will continue to see employment in coal mining grow.HOST: So, Prime Minister do you think that they've been crying wolf? Do you think that they've been truthful in their arguments?PM: I think it does pay, when you're looking at businesses, to track where the money's going. And where's the money going today? Well it's going into buying an Australian mining business. People would only do that if they thought it had a great future.HOST: Regarding uncertainty, I spoke with a small business woman last night, she lives in Wollongong and was hoping to expand her business to employ five to six more people, but she won't now because of the uncertainty and questions over costs to her business. As they rely on aluminium products, isn't this kind of thing happening right across the country?PM: There's more certainty now than there was before Sunday. The package is there for everyone to see. People can look at it, think about what they will do as we price carbon from 1July next year. So, if you like, for our big polluters the starter's gun has already gone off. They know from 1 July next year they'll be paying $23 per tonne of carbon pollution they generate. That means they will be thinking and acting now on how they can reduce that carbon pollution.For someone in a small business who of course isn't caught up in the pricing of carbon, someone in a small business is not paying the price per tonne, but they will see some impacts, for example on the electricity they use. They can start figuring now what that means for their business, perhaps how they can move to dealing with electricity differently so that they're cutting the amount of electricity they use.HOST: Last year you said you'd only put a price in place if there was a deep and lasting consensus on climate action. 30 per cent support is not a deep and lasting consensus is it?PM: Well change is difficult. Reform is difficult. I talked to the Australian people about walking the reform road and I do that because this nation is a better place today because hard reforms were faced up to yesterday.We've got the same obligation for our nation's future, we've got to face up to the hard decisions today, like putting a price on carbon pollution and tackling climate change, driving investment in renewables.So Sabra, I'll continue to be out there explaining it, but we've debated pricing carbon for more than a decade now. The time has come to get this done and we will get it done from 1 July next year.HOST: Prime Minister, returning to the polls, the numbers are dire for the party and you personally. Would there come a time when you'd countenance for your party's sake, stepping aside for someone else?PM: Sabra, I will be leading this country to a clean energy future. That's what I'm determined to do.HOST: Would there ever come a time that you would that? Last year, when you took on the Prime Ministership you said you were putting your party first; would you do that again and step aside?PM: I'm putting my nation first and that's why I'm leading us to the clean energy future that this country needs.HOST: Prime Minister thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you.



HOST: I'm joined now by the Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Prime Minister one of the men who put you in your job, Paul Howes from the Australian Workers Union says that if one job goes as a result of this package, he'll oppose the carbon tax. Can you guarantee now that not one job will be lost?
PM: Well, don't agree with the premise of your question but I'm very happy to talk about Australian jobs. What our Treasury modelling shows is that employment will increase, there will be 1.6 million more jobs by 2020, there will be half a million more jobs in the next two years and on creating jobs the Government's got a very proud record. We've created more than 750,000 of them since the Government came to office in 2007 including a period of the global financial crisis which around the world literally knocked millions of people onto unemployment queues. So there will be more jobs, we have worked in this package to provide assistance to industry to make the transition, there is assistance for coal, for steel, for manufacturing and of course we will be working with our industries that trade on the world stage, take the world price but generate a lot of emissions.
HOST: Yeah, look I'm sure you'll create plenty of jobs in the finance sector from people who are going to trade in these carbon permits, but can you guarantee -
PM: There'll be growth in jobs in coal, for example.
HOST: How will that happen?
PM: Well the demand for coal will continue very strong. In terms of the impact of carbon pricing on coal mining, average impact is $1.40 per tonne. This is in a situation where coal prices have more than doubled so we will see continued growth in jobs in coal mining. So jobs will continue to grow and there is assistance in this package to work with industry to do the transition we need to, to realise a clean energy future.
HOST: So it's okay if Australian carbon's burned overseas, but it's just not okay to burn it here at home?
PM: Well, what we've got to do is cut carbon pollution. The vast majority of Australians believe that climate change is real and they understand that that's caused by human activity and carbon pollution. The essence of this package is that we will be asking around 500 big polluters to pay a price for the carbon pollution they put in our atmosphere. You and I are having a chat today and as we're having a chat, that carbon pollution is going into our atmosphere for free. From 1 July next year there will be a price of $23 per tonne. That means businesses will find ways of cutting the pollution they generate, there'll be a price signal to take us to a clean energy future and we will see in 2020, 160 million less tonnes of carbon pollution.
HOST: Here, yes, but you just told me that jobs in the coal industry will increase. Now that's clearly, what you're telling me there, is that we're going to be exporting more coal, is that right?
PM: Of course we will continue to export coal and the coal industry's got a good future and the coal industry itself is working through ways to cut its own pollution.
HOST: Where's the net gain for the planet if we're sending more coal to be burnt elsewhere?
PM: Well the net gain for the planet is around the planet, the world is hungry for energy and as nations address climate change, they are looking for a cleaner energy future. So there is an emissions trading scheme in Europe, there's an emissions trading scheme in ten American states, there's one in New Zealand, China is acting, India is acting to realise a cleaner energy future.
HOST: None of these do anything do they? The New Zealand one's just been cut in two because it's ineffective. I mean the one in Europe's-
PM: I don't agree with that at all and that's not what the Prime Minister of New Zealand said when he can and addressed the Australian Parliament.
HOST: The one in Europe's just exported coal industries to China and I think you've just told us that we're going to be exporting more coal to China anyway, so China just burns more coal. I go back to that argument-
PM: And China is moving to change some of its dirty energy pollution into cleaner energy, it's also a huge investor in renewable technology, in the renewable energy of the future.
HOST: Prime Minister from the look of what you've offered us yesterday this is a softly, softly start to a reduced carbon future and the real financial slugs come down the track in a few more years time, would you agree with that?
PM: This is a  -  well I've made the right decisions for the nation's future. We're going to get this done, we're going to get it started, it's going to start at $23 a tonne, that'll be the price paid by the big polluters. Yes, that price does go up as does the household assistance which will help Australian families with the price impacts that flow through. Those price impacts will be 0.7 percent of the consumer price index of cost of living, 0.7 percent, less than one percent.
HOST: You say a single income family on $65,000 with one child is worse off now, how much worse off will it get for them when the full impact is recognised?
PM: Well compensation is going to keep increasing so that as the carbon price moves, household assistance is permanent and it will continue to increase as well.
HOST: But that group's worse off now.
PM: Of the family you're talking about, yes there are people who are not being fully compensated for the flow through price impact, the 0.7% increase in cost of living, that's true. Nine out of ten households are getting some assistance. Nearly six million households are getting enough assistance to come out square. Over four million households are getting more assistance than the impact of the flow through price of carbon on them so, for example, a pensioner who relies on the old age pension is coming out in front, but you're right there are families that aren't getting fully compensated. You've used an example of one and I think you'll find the impact on them is less than $1 a week.
HOST: Well, yes and that is if you believe the Treasury modelling but -
PM: On the Treasury modelling, we have got the same people to do this as did the modelling when the GST came into effect-
HOST: Yeah and they underestimated the inflationary effect of the GST two fold?
PM: That's not right, that is not right. These are the same people who did the modelling when the GST came into effect, of course that was a far, far bigger price impost of 10 percent increase, we're talking about 0.7 percent on the consumer price index. But when they did the modelling on the GST they got that modelling right.
HOST: Prime Minister you haven't been able to fund this scheme out of the revenue from the tax, you've had to go to the budget for $4.3 billion. How do we know that you just won't have to keep going back to the budget for top up funds because the scheme can't generate enough revenue?
PM: Well we've been very transparent about this and when you look at those budget figures you will see that most of that cost is in the set up period of the scheme. It's the big change for the Australian economy to come with start up and set up costs and it does, so more than two billion dollars of the four billion you referred to is in the first year of the scheme and when you look as the scheme gets up and running, then it becomes broadly budget neutral.
HOST: Yes that's right, that's on the projections but I mean, we have to take that on trust?
PM: Yes, done by the same Treasury that has provided professional advice to this Government in the same way they've provided professional advice to governments in the past and done by the same people who modelled the impacts of the GST and got that modelling right.
HOST: You're putting $10 billion into subsidising renewables, we've just seen a series of state governments pull back on solar schemes because they were economically unsustainable, aren't you just going down the same path?
PM: No, that's a complete apples to oranges comparison. What you're talking about are solar feed-in tariffs at the household level and yes, you're right, a number of state governments have chosen to wind back those schemes. What this is about is working at the production level of renewable energy and clean energy, so to give you an example of some of the things we've done already, we've announced that we are providing some support to major solar developments in Moree in New South Wales and Chinchilla in Queensland, they will be amongst the biggest solar energy generating capacity in the world. So $10 billion is going in to a clean energy development corporation, it will be run by a board that will make commercial loans but the purpose of this will be to turbo charge the development of clean energy for our future.
HOST: I just mention that $4.3 billion dollars which, for initial industry assistance, which is outside the scheme and comes from the budget. You plan to buy back 2000 megawatts of coal fired power capacity, that's about six reasonable sized power stations. Where will the money come from for that?
PM: We have made provision in the contingency reserves so we've put some money aside for that-
HOST: So that's out of the budget?
PM: Well, we've put some money aside for it.
HOST: But it's out of the budget, it's not out of the scheme?
PM: Yes, we've put some money aside for it, it's to retire dirty energy capacity. We can't tell you what that figure is because we are going to get businesses that run dirty coal fired power stations-
HOST: I understand that.
PM: Well just so your listeners understand too, we are going to get businesses that run dirty coal fired power stations to tender, so obviously we can't publicly say how much money we set aside otherwise everybody would tender for that amount of money and we don't want that, we want people giving the best price tenders that they can.
HOST: Yeah, I'm just establishing that's a drain on taxpayers again?
PM: Yes, but if you look at the scheme, you've obviously studied the forward estimates in detail and that's a really good thing. If you look at the last year of the forward estimates of the Government's budget period, you will see that the scheme is basically revenue neutral in that year, so beyond start up it becomes broadly revenue neutral.
HOST: When do you hope to get those power stations out of action?
PM: Look, we will be taking the tenders and seeing what people tender to us. We anticipate that it will take some years for progressive close down and the swinging in of new clean energy sources, because at all times we've got to have our eyes firmly trained on making sure that there's energy security and sufficient electricity supply.
HOST: Just finally on the transport industry, you've put off that fight til after the next election. Is that something you really would have liked to have had included in this package?
PM: Look we've taken a Government decision that we want to include heavy vehicles and we've said the start up time for that would be 1 July 2014.
HOST: Okay, I know you're pushed for time, thanks for your time this morning Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you.



PM: Thank you. I'm here in Brisbane today, in the great state of Queensland. Queensland's got a lot to lose from climate change. This is a state with fantastic natural assets like the Great Barrier Reef. This is a state with a long coastline. And this is a state that in the past has seen the impact of extreme weather events. 
What we know is that climate change is real. The scientists are telling us it's real and climate change will mean in the future, if we allow it to just spiral out of control, that we face more days of extreme heat, more bushfires and droughts, more extreme weather events, coastal flooding, things that threaten the Great Barrier Reef with rising water temperatures.
So, Queensland, a great state, has a lot to lose from climate change. But Queensland is also a state that's got a lot to gain from a clean energy future and it's that clean energy future that I want to seize by putting a price on carbon pollution. I've travelled in Queensland to places like Hogan Creek, where solar is being used to boost power from a traditional coal-fired power plant. I've been here to announce our investments in a huge solar energy development in Chinchilla.
And I'm here today at LNS, and I thank them for having me here, looking at how at this place they are generating electricity from landfill. Landfill, as it decomposes, creates the kind of carbon pollution we're worried about, it particularly creates methane gas. Here at this facility today, instead of that gas simply going into the atmosphere as pollution, it is being captured and it's being used to generate electricity. You can see the facility behind me. 
And that electricity is powering more than 4500 homes. This kind of clean energy future is probably a bit unexpected, people have heard about solar and they've heard about wind, they may have heard about geothermal, but here is another innovative way that we will see a clean energy future using the gas from the landfill to generate electricity.
It's this kind of clean energy future that will be turbo-charged by putting a price on carbon, as we create the circumstances where new clean energy ventures can proper. I've been very pleased to learn about this clean energy venture today and it's why I'm so determined, because I know these things are possible, that we as a nation seize a clean energy future but putting a price on carbon. As I've travelled round and spoken to people and listened to their concerns about putting a price on carbon, I've been explaining to people that it's around 500 of our biggest polluters who will pay the price of putting carbon pollution in our atmosphere. 
But I've also been explaining to people there will be some flow-through price impacts onto the things that families buy, impacts of less than one per cent on the cost of living. But we want to make sure that businesses around the country do the right thing. Overwhelmingly businesses do do the right thing, but we don't want anybody trying to use a price on carbon as an excuse for jacking up their prices.
So, today the Treasurer has announced that the ACCC will be a tough cop on the beat, cracking down on anyone who tries to gouge new prices as a result of us putting a price on carbon. We have changed the consumer laws, fines are now up to $1.1 million for trying to rip customers off. Businesses have a million reasons not to do the wrong thing. And we will provide $12.8 million of new resources so the ACCC can go about this work. Now businesses overwhelmingly will do the right thing and the only cost they will pass through is the less than one per cent cost of us putting a price on carbon. But the message is very clear, if any business tries to do the wrong thing and rip Australians off, then there's a tough cop on the beat, fines of up to $1.1 million waiting for anyone who tries to rip consumers off.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've made a lot of comparisons between the GST and the carbon tax. Now, on the GST, the government at the time put the ACCC in place to say that they would also do the same things, make sure the GST and people couldn't price gouge there. At the time you said ‘there's no way in the world any government bureaucracy can be in every store at every point', so how is the ACCC be able monitor this in this case, and wasn't able to do it under the GST?
PM: I was sceptical when the GST was introduced, that the ACCC would be able to do the job and that the ACCC would be able to crack down on any one who sought to rip people off as a result of the Goods and Services Tax, but the ACCC did get out there and did do the job and since that time we have increased the penalties that the ACCC can impose on businesses that try and price gouge. Particularly, from the start of this year, we put penalties up to $1.1 million. So, for any business that tries to do the wrong things, there's a huge risk here, of an up to $1.1 million fine. That's a million good reasons to do the right thing every day.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) renewable, how does the carbon package (inaudible)?
PM: The government is continuing to invest in carbon capture and storage. I believe it will be a big part of the way we deal with energy in the future and with carbon pollution in the future. The government has sponsored the creation of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute and we will continue to invest billions of dollars in working with firms to develop up the technology of capturing carbon pollution and then storing it. In terms of the new announcements that were made on Sunday, with the $10 billion in the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, it is possible for a coal business to make application, for example it might be determining that it will have gas as a co-generation possibility. Those applications can go to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, separately to that stream of money we will continue with the major investments to drive innovation in carbon capture and storage.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this morning at Fairfield you saw firsthand the tension and the emotion that this debate is generating. Do scenes like those concern you, that that's what it's generating?
PM: Australians have different views about putting a price on carbon. I've been out every day talking to Australians, I was at a workplace yesterday, obviously I've been on Q &amp; A, on Channel 2, I'll be at a community meeting tonight, I've been in shopping centres. I've been talking to Australians about their concerns about putting a price on carbon and explaining the government's plan. So, I'm not at all surprised that there are Australians in favour, and Australians against. But this is the right thing to do for a clean energy future for our country, the right thing to do to seize the possibilities in our nation to make energy from this wonderful sunshine, to even make energy from gases that come off landfill, to make energy from our tidal power, from our wind power, from geothermal, from all of the clean energy sources of the future. So, I want to see a future for this country with less carbon pollution and more clean energy, that's why I've determined we will put a price on carbon from 1 July next year that the biggest polluters will pay.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said on radio this morning selling carbon permits (inaudible). What happened to that scheme under your plan and will (inaudible)?
PM: This company will have two big things happening after 1 July next year. For the gas that comes off new waste after 1 July next year there will be a reason not to put those gases into our atmosphere, that is that they will pay a price per tonne for that carbon pollution. But there will also be an incentive for a business like this one to do the right thing and to use that gas to generate electricity and that is that they will be able to get renewable energy certificates, so that's a credit. If you like there'll be a stick, they'll be avoiding paying the price for putting a tonne of carbon pollution into the atmosphere, but there will also be a carrot, which is the renewable energy certificate.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, for a past scheme, we'll obviously for a New South Wales scheme, you'll have to talk to the New South Wales Government about that. So, the way in which we are dealing with these kind of operations will change on 1 July, they will continue to be eligible for renewable energy certificates, so there will be a carrot there, but there will also be a stick  -  don't put the carbon pollution from waste, after 1 July, into our atmosphere, there will be a price that you'll pay if you do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're out on the road a lot. You've seen Tony Abbott this morning with his whole family out in Melbourne. Are we just at the start of a two year election campaign?
PM: I've got a lot of governing to do and a lot of things I want to achieve for this country. We have a strong economy and I want to keep investing to make sure our economy is strong and I want to use the strength of that economy to build new opportunities for Australians.  My vision is that Australians around the country share in the new opportunities we can create from the resources boom. So, I'll be continuing to deliver changes and reforms in education - in schools, more apprenticeships, more university places, in health care - more doctors, more nurses, more local control of hospitals, more money into health, the National Broadband Network - rolled out around the country. But at the same time I will be doing what I'm doing today  -  out talking to Australians about the government's plans to put a price on carbon pollution and the opportunities for a clean energy future that gives us.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister two thirds of Australians are against the carbon tax (inaudible) there are a number of polls that always seem to be coming out. I know you get asked this question a lot but how are you going to turn the polls around? And you often say that you'll go out and talk to people and explain the carbon tax but do you have a back up weapon here if that doesn't work?
PM: I obviously see the commentary on the polls and Tony Abbott made it clear last night that for him this is all about the polls and all about the politics. Well for me it's all about the nation's future and having a clean energy future that's why I am determined that from 1 July next year we start realising that clean energy future by putting a price on the carbon pollution that goes into our atmosphere today for absolutely nothing.
JOURNALIST: So you expect to see the same polls at the level they are until July next year?
PM: Well I've made it clear what I'm motivated by is getting a clean energy future for our country. As Prime Minister of this nation I've got to make some tough decisions and engage in hard reforms, that's what you do the job for, to create a better future for our country, for the kids of today who will be the adults of tomorrow. That better future is a clean energy future and I'm determined to lead the nation and seize that clean energy future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) on the Malaysian asylum seeker deal?
PM: Look it's been clear for some time now that we've been involved in advanced negotiations with Malaysia on the transfer agreement and obviously when we're in a position to make further announcements about it, we will. We're in advanced negotiations.
JOURNALIST: You said on radio this morning that the makeup of Parliament (inaudible) the influence of the Greens and Independents, is the reason that we have the carbon tax-
PM: Sorry, who said that?
JOURNALIST: Apparently you said this on ABC radio this morning that the reason that we have it instead of the emissions trading scheme- the reason that you said at the last election there would be no carbon tax and then have gone back on that is because the makeup of Parliament and (inaudible) the Greens and Independents-
PM: Well perhaps I'll put that in my own words the way I did on ABC radio this morning and what I said on ABC radio this morning is I've always wanted us to have a clean energy future where we put a price per tonne on carbon pollution, where we didn't just have carbon pollution endlessly going into our skies for absolutely nothing. I want to see this country have what's called an emissions trading scheme, where you put a price per tonne on carbon pollution and you cap the total amount of pollution your economy can create. We are going to get there by having a three year carbon tax, a temporary carbon tax and then get to a permanent emissions trading scheme.  It's right that at the time of the last election, to get to that emissions trading scheme I didn't necessarily foresee that we would get there via a three year fixed price on carbon. But we will get to that emissions trading scheme. But we can talk about that, but I think we've also got to think about the outcome.  As Prime Minister of this country, after the last election, I faced a choice. It was a really clear choice. I could act to put a price on carbon pollution and get us a clean energy future or I could have held to what I said in the last election campaign. I did think through that choice and I decided the right choice was for us to get a clean energy future. So faced with a choice between getting nothing done in this Parliament and actually getting a clean energy future by putting a price on carbon, I've determined that the right thing for the nation is to put a price on carbon pollution and get this done, following what is a ten year debate in our country.
JOURNALIST: So the makeup of this Parliament has affected the way you've gone about this?
PM: I've been clear about this in the past and let me be clear about it again. To put a price on carbon requires a law to go through the Federal Parliament. In the last Federal Parliament the carbon pollution reduction scheme ran into a brick wall. We'll I've smashed that brick wall down. We are putting a price on carbon and getting an emissions trading scheme.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On Sunday we announced as part of the package to get us a clean energy future that we would be working with electricity generators to make sure that we had security of electricity supply. I certainly want to see us as a nation move away from the dirtiest forms of generating electricity to the clean forms of generating electricity and we're talking about some of that today, remarkably, generating electricity of the gas that comes off landfill  -  an amazing thing. So as part of what I announced on Sunday we did talk about measures to ensure that change in electricity by putting a price on carbon whilst we have security. That means that there is money available to work with current electricity generators, we will also be going out to tender so that we can retire out of the system some of the dirtiest energy generation capacity. I've seen figures floated in the newspapers and I'm not going to confirm any figures because this is a tender process and for me to confirm any figure would distort the tender process.  On the question of state owned electricity generation, given our purpose here is to ensure continuity of supply, of course state governments are going to keep state generation happening so that there is continuity of supply. On asset prices for state owned generators, well a great state like Queensland generates electricity from gas, it generates electricity from cleaner sources, the values of those assets has just gone up as a result of us putting a price on carbon.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well the aim here is that you can with great confidence put your lights on because there is energy security and energy supply. Your state owned electricity generation assets will continue to play their part in that electricity security and supply. As for asset values, your pointing to some asset values, let me point to others. Here in Queensland, some electricity generation assets owned by the state government are more valuable today as a result of us determining to put a price on carbon.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well it's about electricity generation and energy security, what I want you to have, I want you to have confidence that there's energy security and of course we will achieve that through the package we announced on Sunday. And as for state owned assets and their values, well there are some that have gone up in value.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'm going to be happy to be out and about talking to communities right around the country.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: That's because jobs are going like that. There'll be half a million in the next two years. Jobs are going up. There will be 1.6 million by 2020. Anybody who's trying to tell you that the job numbers in this country are somehow going down isn't telling you the truth.
JOURNALIST: Do you agree that Queensland will be one of the worst hit states by the carbon tax?
PM: How on earth would you have reasoned that? Give me one factor that would lead you to conclude that?
JOURNALIST: Mining.
PM: The mining industry has got a great future here in Queensland, absolutely great future. Let's talk about your mining industry here in Queensland and your resources. I've seen coming on stream huge projects, huge gas projects, they will be built and provide jobs in Queensland. You've got a fantastic coal industry which will continue to grow and have more jobs in it in the future.  Let's talk about the announcements from just a couple of days ago. People woke up to newspapers yesterday that told them a huge coal mining company, Peabody, wanted to buy another, well it's an American company  -  it wanted to buy an Australian coal mining company, the biggest ever takeover of a coal mining company in this country. You know why they want to do that? Because they're absolutely confident that there's money to be made in mining coal they're absolutely right. The coal industry's got a great future here in Queensland.  And standing here, you know I could have been in Canberra today, but instead I'm standing here bathed in Queensland sunshine. Think about the possibilities for this state, it's not called the sunshine state for nothing. This is energy coming out of our sky, a clean energy source for the future and you've got it here in Queensland.
JOURNALIST: So Bob Brown's wrong when he says the end game of the carbon tax is shutting down the coal industry?
PM: I've just been as clear as I possibly can be on the future of the coal industry. The coal industry will continue to grow, it will continue to employ people. It will employ more people and we say this week after the Government announced putting a price on carbon, we saw this week that a huge coal mining company from America wanted to come and buy a big Australian coal mining company because they know how bright the future is.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is the perceived-
PM: We'll make this the last question.
JOURNALIST: Is the perceived power of the Greens or otherwise damaging this sell for you or making it more difficult for you and is there any indication from Bob Brown that the Greens will support the $300 million extra assistance for steel?
PM: I've put forward what I believe is the right package for the nation's future, to get a clean energy future. That's the package I announced on Sunday. You're right; it contains $3 million to support steel workers' jobs. I sat with steel workers in their cafeteria yesterday and talked to them about how I want our country to continue to make steel and I'm prepared to make $3 million available to support their jobs. Tony Abbott sat in that cafeteria and said to them they were all going to lose their jobs. Well, Tony Abbott is the one who wants to vote against the $300 million package to support steel worker jobs, I think he's got to answer for that. And on the announcement I've made today about the ACCC and making sure there's a cop on the beat, Tony Abbott to has been basically saying people can blame any increase in prices on the carbon tax. Well, I'm saying to Australian businesses, don't use the carbon tax to gouge prices from consumers. If you try, you'll face the penalty. Tony Abbott is encouraging businesses to do just that, try some price gouging.  Well they can't do it because the ACCC will be out there with fines and penalties of up to $1.1 million dollars and Tony Abbott should not be encouraging businesses to try it on. Mr Abbott simply should be encouraging businesses to try on gouging consumers. Thank you very much. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning and welcome to Brisbane.
PM: Good morning Madonna.
HOST: One from me which encapsulates many that have come in overnight, without political speak?
PM: Sure.
HOST: Why did you say there would be no carbon tax six days before the election and now you're going to introduce one without a mandate to do that?
PM: That's a good question. What I talked about at the last election was having an emissions trading scheme, that's a price on carbon, but where you also put a cap and say our economy is not going to generate more carbon pollution than a particular figure. Now I didn't foresee before the election the Parliament that we have. In this Parliament I faced a choice, either I said, right, only an emissions trading scheme and that would have mean we wouldn't have acted, nothing would have got done. Or I had to make a hard choice and say right, we'll get there-
HOST: -To get the support from the Greens and the Independents? 
PM: That's right, to work with the Parliament that people voted for. Yes, we'll get there, to an emissions trading scheme, we'll get there through a three year period of a fixed price, effectively a tax. So we are going to start with that price on carbon 1 July next year. It's not the pathway I saw, but it's a pathway that's going to cut carbon pollution, give businesses certainty and get us to that emissions trading scheme with a cap on our carbon pollution.
HOST: Anthony from Morningside says who are the 100 Queensland polluters, will they be publicly named?
PM: The 100 polluters, the industries that these big polluters are in, are named on the Clean Energy website, I don't think any of the industries will surprise people. They're things like electricity generation, aluminium, zinc, cement, some of those industries.  We also have a website that is our national greenhouse gas reporting, that will give you lists of companies that generate a lot of pollution and use a lot of energy. We have some specific material which is commercial-in-confidence, which why we just can't publish a finite list. But if you want to look at some business names, get on that National Greenhouse Gas website.
HOST: Two different Peters from two different sides of Brisbane but a similar question  -  under your Treasury estimates, Australia currently emits 578 million tonnes. With the carbon tax that will be 621 million tonnes in 2020. Why do it for such little effect?
PM: Because the future we face is of ever escalating growth in carbon pollution or making a difference to the amount. So, the concept here is as our nation's economy is growing, every day it's growing we put out more carbon pollution, that will happen 'til the end of time - growing economy, more carbon pollution, growing economy, more carbon pollution. With a price on carbon we will ultimately break that nexus and be able to have a growing economy and not generate as much carbon pollution. So, yes we continue to see growth but at a lesser rate and we will break the nexus between economic growth and growing carbon pollution. 
HOST: Ingrid from Kenmore, she says why have you decided to not tax petrol and exclude forestry when these are two main contributors to Australia's greenhouse emissions. If Australians can still drive their suburban four wheel drives and not have to pay the carbon tax on petrol and be compensated, where is the incentive to change behaviour?
PM: Well, the incentive is on the big polluters. It's around 500 big polluters that are paying the price. So, if you just think about it today they get to do something for absolutely nothing, pump carbon pollution into our atmosphere. From 1 July next year they'll pay, that's a powerful incentive for change on the big polluters. For households I had to make some decisions about the right shape of this scheme for our nation, we're a big country, we're a country where people live in big cities, many of them in outer suburbs. We've got big communities in regional Australia, no choice but to drive and so I decide we shouldn't put it on the petrol that households buy.
HOST: More of your email questions coming up. Let's just go to Ava from Yeronga, what is your question Ava?
CALLER: Hi, thank you Madonna. I've got a question  -  will the Government review the $150,000 family income test because $150,000 for two people working after tax isn't a lot of money these days, as it was a few years back-
HOST: Alright.
CALLER: (inaudible) it's not a lot of money.
HOST: Prime Minister?
PM: Look I understand people right up the income scale can feel cost of living pressures and find it hard to make everything add up, but I've still got to make the right choices. The reality is one in ten households in this country earns more than $150,000 a year so whilst those people can feel pressures, there are other Australians doing it tougher, which is why I brought my very traditional Labor values and Labor principles to the design of the household assistance package.
HOST: Are you saying one in ten households in Australia earn more than $150,000?
PM: That's right.
HOST: Essentially that's two teachers, a public servant and a teacher?
PM: Well, yes but there's a lot of people who are earning less than that. So our package is going to assist nine in ten households, and yes I understand that people who are earning $180,000, $200,000 can still feel cost of living pressures, but I've got to use government money where it's going to do the most work and so I've directed it to Australians who are doing it that big tougher. That's, you know, sort of Labor values, the Labor way.
HOST: Richard from Teneriffe what's your question?
CALLER: My question is  -  the money taxed under the carbon tax will it be fenced off in government accounts or will it go into consolidated revenue where it can be diverted off into other activities not related to carbon production?
PM: It will not be diverted off. We don't run government accounts generally on the basis of saying, well, you know, there are jam jars that we'll put one dollar into and another jam jar we'll put another dollar into, but you will always be able to see on the government's budget money coming in from big polluters paying the price of carbon pollution and where it's going and I can tell you exactly where it's going, it's going to support households. More than half of it will be used for that purpose. It's going to work with industry in the transition so we protect Australian jobs and it will go to fund things like clean energy sources for the future.
HOST: Thank you Richard. Back to the phones in just a moment, on the email John says the Greens plan to scrap the Australian coal industry in three years, does the Prime Minister agree the Greens are stupid to think that our buyers will stop using coal if we stop exporting it. Does she agree that they will just shift to other sources  -  India, China, Indonesia, Brazil, where the coal may not be so clean.
PM: It's completely stupid to say that our coal industry will close down, it will not close down. Coal has a great future-
HOST: -But that's what the Greens have said they want?
PM: Well they can say whatever they like, it's stupid. There's a big future for coal in this country and let's look at the evidence before our very eyes this week. Peabody Coal, big American coal company, works here in Australia and it is engaging the biggest ever takeover of an Australian coal company. Hard headed business people doing that after carbon pricing was announced because they know there's going to be good money in Australian coal, there's a great future for the coal industry.
HOST: Still on the international questions, Peter on the email and this is with China expected to pump out more perhaps as it grows over the ten years, has the modelling taken into account the extra global pollution to be created by other countries when they take up the slack caused by Australian jobs and industries being lost overseas?
PM: Look, we're certainly looking at what's happening around the rest of the world and I'm very happy to talk about all of the things that are happening around the rest of the world. Our Productivity Commission identified 1000 separate policies that other countries are putting in place to cut carbon pollution. But we've got a choice here too. We're one of the twenty biggest polluters on the planet, more pollution per head of population than any people in developed countries on earth. If we put one tonne less of carbon pollution into our atmosphere that's one tonne less. Well I want to put at least 160 million tonnes less.
HOST: Roslyn from Harvey Bay, your question?
CALLER: Good morning Julia, there's a lot on carbon tax. I'm actually changing the question  -  I'm a self funded retiree, I've worked all my life, I'm 67 and as you know we saw with global recessions-
HOST: -Alright but what's your question Roslyn?
CALLER: My question is what is provided for self funded retirees in all this package?
PM: I can certainly tell you that and self funded retirees will be helped in two ways, they will get a supplement that gives them the kind of additional assistance that pensioners will see and self funded retirees are often in the tax system, they pay some tax on money that they get from superannuation or perhaps investments and other sources, people will get a tax cut.  So self funded retirees who have the Commonwealth Seniors Card have been catered for in this package. Please get onto the cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website, there's a household estimator there, you'll be able to type in your own details and it will show you what you will get.
HOST: Thank you Roslyn, that also answers Bill from Coorparoo's question. Greg says what is your personal prediction for the increase in the rate of the carbon tax from its current level in say ten years from now?
PM: Well it will go up and you can see some of those figures in what we put out on Sunday, so it will start at $23. At the end of the third year when we move to the emissions trading scheme it will be at $29 and it does keep going up, you'll see prices there modelled out til 2020, but as the carbon price goes up so does the amount of assistance provided to households.
HOST: Let's go to Stephanie from The Gap, Stephanie your question?
CALLER: Yes, hi. Look I was just wanting to make the comment that have you actually taken into account the psychological factor that the fear of the carbon tax alone has had a huge impact on consumer confidence. (inaudible) construction business and our phone just don't ring, we're down to one staff member.
HOST: Alright, Julia Gillard?
PM: Well certainly as Prime Minister and as a member of a government we've gone out of our way to support the construction industry during the hard days of the global financial crisis and global recession to keep people in jobs and working. I am very well aware as Prime Minister that this has been a divisive debate with a lot of fear generated, a lot of scare campaigns and with the facts on the table now, there's no reason for people to worry, they can just get the facts and work out what it means for them. I wanted to give businesses certainty, that's very important to confidence, and now I have.
HOST: Paul says the Government has put taxes on Australian export industries, why isn't there a carbon tax on goods that come from countries that don't have a carbon tax?
PM: Well we obviously are able to put taxation arrangements on people within Australia but let's just be clear about the magnitude of this. I was getting questions on another radio station, admittedly Madonna, on another radio station as was Wayne Swan about what does it mean for the price of a can of tomatoes made in Australia versus one from overseas? We're talking about less than half a per cent compared with the cost of getting that can of tomatoes here from overseas, this is very modest.
HOST: Alex and Joe ask a similar question; to what extent will the carbon tax reduce average global temperatures.
PM: Well this is a question that first put into the public debate I believe by Andrew Bolt and it's a question not capable of answer because it assumes other countries aren't acting. Other countries are acting. Emissions trading scheme across Europe, ten American states with an emissions trading scheme, Prime Minister Cameron in the UK, ambitious target for change, President Obama, ambitious target for change, India putting a tax on coal to fund clean energy, China in its five year plan with clean energy work as well. Even New Zealand's got an emissions trading scheme, so the rest of the world is acting.
HOST: Pam says data shows the Federal Government is one of Australia's largest and growing greenhouse gas emitters, what changes are in place to reduce government emissions or is the carbon reduction just a case of ‘do as I say, not as I do'?
PM: Carbon pollution is being addressed, the carbon pollution emitted by the 500 biggest polluters, so if you're a big polluter then you are in this scheme. Of course people in their own workplaces can make change to use less energy and people in Federal Government workplaces are doing that.
HOST: Please ask the Prime Minister, this is from Rachael, why she won't go to an election if she is so confident the carbon tax is the answer?
PM: We've got to get this done. We've been debating it for more than ten years now. Prime Minister Howard went to a federal election promising a price on carbon. I've got a lot of governing to do and a lot of decisions to make in the interests of this nation and -
HOST: But this is a bit different because you just looked down the barrel of the camera and said there will be no carbon tax under a government I run and we're here talking, you're here with me selling the your carbon tax.
PM: Absolutely, and in 2013 people will have lived under the system, direct experience, real experience, looked at what it means for pollution, looked at what it means for them and their families and then they will be able to decide.  But Madonna, I think we've got to look at the right reason for all of this, I mean I saw Tony Abbott on TV last night saying, he's going to devote the rest of his political life to fighting the carbon tax, this is all for him, about the politics of the next election. For me, it's about the future of our country, that's why we're going to get this done.
HOST: Steve from Browns Plains  -  will the GST apply on top of the carbon tax?
PM: Well for the big polluters paying a price per tonne for carbon pollution, getting a permit to put up a tonne of carbon pollution, there's no GST on that. Yes, by the time you see flow through impacts into the price of goods, of course, the GST applies to the whole price of the good. But all of that is modelled in, in the less than one per cent increase in cost of living.
HOST: Clinton says what are you going to do if these 500 polluters pack up shop and go to another country?
PM: It won't happen. We have looked at all of this, we've worked with business, we've worked with industry to make sure we're protecting Australian jobs and let's just get a sense of how the scare campaign here has been so different from reality. Tony Abbott stood in Whyalla and said ‘this place will be wiped off the map'. Well, the people who make steel in Whyalla said they are satisfied with the way we've consulted with them and worked with them and we're devoting $300 million to keep, to deal with the effects of carbon pricing on steel. Tony Abbott had to climb down from that silly claim yesterday.
HOST: If the carbon tax modelling goes all wrong and Australia has to pay more across the board will you take the blame or blame government bureaucrats?
PM: Well, I'm relying on exactly the same bureaucracy, Treasury, the same experts who modelled the impact of the GST and got it right. So, I've got a high degree of confidence that that modelling is right.
HOST: And a final question, several people have asked, have you done an analysis on how many extra public servants you will need to administer this?
PM: Yes, we will have people in the Climate Change Authority and the like, this is a big change and of course we're going to have the right people doing the right jobs to make it work, that's the best thing we can do for the nation's future.  I would ask Madonna, next time Tony Abbott's in here, you ask him how many thousands, tens of thousands of public servants is he going to employ to be out there picking their favourite polluter to give taxpayers money to?
HOST: Happy to do that in the next couple of days when Tony Abbott will do the same thing and take listeners calls here at 612 ABC Brisbane. Prime Minister, thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you Madonna. 



The Gillard Government today announced new funding for the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) to crack down on any business that seeks to gouge its customers by making misleading claims about the impact of putting a price on carbon pollution.
The ACCC will use its powers under the newly introduced Australian Consumer Law to investigate and prosecute any such business with the power to impose penalties of up to $1.1 million.
The carbon price will have only a modest impact on most prices and the ACCC will be keeping a watchful eye out for any shonky attempts to jack up prices and falsely claim it is related to the carbon price.
The Government will direct the ACCC to give the highest priority to:
 * 	Investigating and taking action against any business that makes false or misleading representations about the impact of the carbon price on the price they charge consumers
 * 	Educating businesses on their obligations to not make false or misleading statements to consumers about the impact of the carbon price on the price they charge consumers.
 * 	Raising awareness amongst consumers by informing them that businesses are prohibited from making false statements about the impact of putting a price on pollution.
The Government has provided ACCC new funding of $12.8 million over 4 years to carry out this role as part of the Clean Energy Future package.
We recognise the vast majority of businesses will do the right thing. This funding will help stop the small number of businesses that may seek to take advantage of their customers with false and misleading claims about the impact of the carbon price.
As we put in place the arrangements over the next 12 months, we will work with the ACCC, consumer groups, businesses and the broader community to ensure appropriate protections are in place for Australian consumers.
The carbon pricing mechanism will apply to around 500 of Australia's largest polluters. Some businesses will pass on the carbon price, leading to modest rises in prices.
In 2012-13, this price increase is expected to be 0.7 percent according to extensive Treasury modelling.
The GST and related changes to the tax system pushed up prices more than three times as much as the carbon price is expected to.
Many prices, particularly for food, will hardly be affected. The average grocery bill for a household will go up about 80 cents a week.
To help meet the price impact on households, more than half of the revenue raised by putting a price on carbon pollution will go to fund tax cuts and extra payments and allowances. This will mean:
 * 	Nine out of ten households will receive some assistance through a combination of tax cuts and increased payments
 * 	Almost 6 million households will get assistance to cover their entire average price impact
 * 	Over four million households will receive assistance that exceeds their expected average price impact, leaving their household budget better off.
This assistance is designed to help low and middle-income households and pensioners do their bit to tackle climate change and look after their household budgets. 



HOST: We'll get to answer some of your questions directly from the Prime Minister, who joins me now. Good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: You are on this tour selling the carbon pricing scheme. Are the people you're talking to still struggling with the whole concept?
PM: I think people do want more information and it's my job to be out there explaining it. And, of course, we've come into this after a long debate and there's been a lot of fear mongering that's gone on.
At its heart, carbon pricing works because around 500 big polluters, who today can put pollution into our atmosphere for free, will from 1 July next year, have to pay a price to do it.
And once they have to pay a price for putting that pollution in the atmosphere, then they'll look for ways of innovating and changing to cut that carbon pollution, and that will add up to a reduction of at least 160 million tonnes in the amount of carbon pollution in 2020; the equivalent of 45 million cars.
So it's a bit like in the old days, when I was young you used to be able to go to the tip for absolutely nothing. Just put whatever you wanted to into the tip, then of course fees got introduced and that made people think ‘Can I reuse this rubbish? Can I recycle this rubbish?' How can I reduce the amount that I am going to take to the tip?' It's a similar concept.
HOST: We've had a lot of calls come through in the last half hour, since I made it known that I would be talking to you this morning, with people with questions.
So I will try and get through as many of these as possible. First of all, we have been reporting in the local news this morning that the member for Flynn, Ken O'Dowd, has bought ten 10,000 shares in East Energy Resources, do you see that as a show of support for the carbon tax?
PM: Well, I think it shows that the fear mongering by the Opposition is one thing, but even they know it is wrong. They know that there is a great future in energy in this country, a great future in coal in this country, and they're prepared to put their dollars in.
HOST: Will you be visiting central Queensland during this campaign?
PM: Look, I will be getting to as many places as I can. Obviously I can't be everywhere at once, but I have been a pretty frequent visitor - I had the opportunity to talk to people in central Queensland where, of course, a great future is unfolding as our resources boom continues to drive economic growth and economic change, and that resources boom will continue to be with us as we cut carbon pollution.
HOST: David from Claremont asked, if the coal mines are the major contributors to carbon pollution and the Greens want to phase them out, why is the Federal Government so keen to open new mines in central Queensland?
PM: I see a great future for coal mining in this country. I think we've got to be clear about coal mining and carbon pollution. In fact, mining coal doesn't generally create huge amounts of carbon pollution. There are some mines, a limited number of mines that are referred to as ‘gassy' mines, because they generate more carbon pollution than coal mining generally.
In terms of the way we are going to ask big polluters to pay a price for their carbon pollution, for the coal industry, on average that‘s around $1.40 a tonne in circumstances where we have seen coal prices double in the last few years.
So, coal is going to keep growing in this country, we will see more jobs in coal mining and through our $1.3 billion scheme we will work with the coal mining industry on those ‘gassy' mines.
HOST: Can you guarantee that no jobs are going to be lost from mines in central Queensland?
PM: I can certainly say coal mining is going to continue to grow and there will be more jobs in coal mining in the future.
HOST: What about short term?
PM: There will be, you will continue to see growth. Today, tomorrow, the day after - you will continue to see growth in coal.
HOST: Before nine I had in the studio with me Kay Becker who is the CEO of the Capricorn Helicopter Rescue Service. Obviously they've got concerns about rising prices of aviation fuel and how that will impact on them, basically a service that is community funded.
Also small business are concerned about funding for them, especially new small business. How do you help those sorts of people?
PM: Well on not-for-profit organisations we understood that there would be some modest impacts from carbon pricing on not-for-profit organisations. I mean, we have got to get a sense of the flow through impacts here, so the big polluters are paying the price of putting carbon pollution in the atmosphere.
Some of that flows through into the prices of things that people buy. That impact is less than one per cent on the cost of living, so less than a cent in a dollar.
For not-for-profit organisations we have, in the package we announced on Sunday, a particular fund to help us work with not for profit organisations as they adjust to there being a price on carbon, with this less than one per cent flow through.
HOST: What about small business?
PM: Well, For small business - sorry I just want to be clear - I should have been clearer about the impacts there for not-for-profit, there is a special fund there, so that's the answer.
For small business, small business will see some flow through in things like electricity prices, so we have said in the announcement on Sunday there will be impacts on electricity prices.
What small businesses will be able to do is pass those costs on to consumers and consumers, households, Australians are getting the benefits of tax cuts and family payment increases.
So, what that means is nine in ten households are getting either tax cuts or the benefit of payment increases and almost six million households will get sufficient, but the amount of extra money they get is equal to or more than the expected impact of the flow through of carbon pricing on them.
HOST: Really interesting question from Philip from Yarwun. He says if the scheme goes ahead and we do actually use less coal powered energy, will the coal then stay in the ground or is it open to be exported.
PM: Coal mining is going to grow. We will continue to export a lot of coal. All of the Treasury modelling and expert advice shows that.
Perhaps the best way of thinking about that is yesterday in the newspapers we saw reported that a big coal company, big American coal company, Peabody, was there saying it wanted to engage in a takeover of an Australian coal company. The biggest takeover of a coal company the nation's ever seen.
They're going to do that even though they have heard all about carbon pricing on Sunday, because these very hard headed business people see a great future for coal in this country.
And Peabody, that's the same mining venture that Tony Abbot has been out saying well this is all going to close down, whereas the people who run that company are showing that they believe there's a great future in coal because they want to do this takeover.
HOST: The carbon policy was the demise of two political leaders in the past and as we have seen in the polls, your popularity is at an all time low. Will you be our Prime Minister at the next election?
PM: Yes, I will and I will be guiding the nation to a clean energy future. We need to get this done. Yes, we come to it after a long, divisive and sometimes very difficult debate. Now is the time to act, so in a great state like Queensland where you've got a great environment you want to keep for the future, we are doing what we can to cut carbon pollution for the future of the environment.
And, of course, with your great strong economy including your clean energy sources, we can see all of the investments that we want to see in clean energy, and Queensland is not called the sunshine state for nothing. Queensland has got a lot to gain from this clean energy future. 
HOST: Are you concerned about your support in Queensland?
PM: I'm doing this because I believe it's right for the nation's future. I saw Tony Abbot on TV last night talking about his political life and the next election. For me, this isn't about the politics; it is about getting something done that is the right thing for our country's future.
Tackling climate change, cutting carbon pollution, doing the right thing by the environment and having a strong economy with the clean energy jobs of the future.
HOST: Prime Minister, I appreciate your time this morning. Thank you.
PM: Thank you.



I condemn the deadly terrorist attacks over night in Mumbai, which have killed more than 20 people and injured many more. 
Our thoughts are with the Indian people and in particular with the families who have lost loved ones and who are grieving today.  Our thoughts are also with the many injured.  
Mumbai is a brave city that has already known great sorrow at the hands of terrorists, including in the 2008 attacks in which two Australians lost their lives.  
Australia stands with Mumbai and the people of India today. 
We know their strength and are confident they will meet this latest challenge with courage and determination to stand against such senseless acts of violence. 



Thanks for that kind introduction.
The issues that have brought me here to the Press Club as Prime Minister have been big ones. Laying out my vision for Australia in a national election campaign and making my case in the leaders' debate. Reflecting on the formation of a new Government and announcing our plan to rebuild Queensland.
I come here again today because pricing carbon is surely as important as these.  As Joe Biden no doubt wishes he'd said: this is a big deal.
In my own service in Government, I stand on my record as a reformer. A new workplace relations system which locked in modern Labor values: fairness at work and flexible enterprise bargaining.  Education reforms which gave parents information and offered them choices they'd never had before.
Difficult reforms  -  reforms I knew were in the long term national interest, and under our Fair Work Act, employment is growing.  Under our school reforms, school performance is improving. Time has vindicated the reform case.  It always does.
Now, pricing carbon is this Government's biggest reform yet.
When I look at this decision in the context of Australia's post-1983 reform project it does take on interesting dimensions. Compared with a change like the GST, it's smaller in the short term and more important in the long term. Vastly less complex, applying to hundreds of businesses  -  not millions. Modest in its impact on household budgets, estimated to add 0.7 per cent to CPI  -  not 2.5 per cent as did the GST.
But for the long term it achieves a change of far greater structural significance: decoupling the growth of carbon pollution from the growth of our economy.
Amara's law is the idea that when we think about a new technology, we tend to overestimate its effect in the short run and underestimate its effect in the long run. 
Real structural reform is often like that.
The dollar float is the paradigm example: the big enabling decision, the big change which sets the ball rolling for all the others, the big call for the future which demands courage at the time ... and which when we look back, no one would seek to undo.
The carbon price is our dollar float.
A vital economic reform which will build our clean energy future.
So I want every Australian to know why I am pursuing this.
Yes, climate change is a threat to our environment. Yes, being left behind as the world moves is a threat to our economy. But I am not just doing this to protect Australia against threats.
I am doing this because I see a great opportunity we can seize.
I see a great clean energy future for our great country.
Within a few years, we'll be seeing big changes on the energy supply side, big changes in industrial production, changes among consumers and households as well.
Energy producers investing more and more in gas and in renewable, manufacturers and commercial buildings and hospitals converting boilers from coal-fired to gas. Tenants chasing space in energy-efficient buildings and chemical plants installing “scrubbers” to reduce nitrous oxide emissions.
The capture and use  -  or “flaring”  -  of emissions from mining and gas extraction, industry installing more efficient motors. And yes, we'll see smart light bulbs in every home and probably every beer fridge in the country will have a five star rating too.
These are the changes we can already predict.
And I know these changes are upon us because I have seen them beginning already.
This week I've seen geothermal power at work in Brunswick in Melbourne's inner north.  Where a source of energy which we usually associate with hot rocks in the central desert is at work in a city we hardly think of as hot in July.
This week I've seen energy being produced from landfill in suburban Brisbane. Where rubbish from households and businesses generates methane gases  -  gases which in the past have been carbon pollution released into the atmosphere.  Gases which are now being captured for power to feed the city's electricity grid.
These are the changes we can already see  -  and there are changes coming which we can hardly imagine today.
In our lifetimes, think of how information technology has transformed itself and transformed our lives.I wrote my first university essays on a manual typewriter.
I remember the first mobile phone I saw, as big as a brick, and I wondered why anyone would want such a thing. Now I visit classrooms where children use a phone to take a photo of me and share it with the world via the internet before I'm in the car and on the way back to the office.
We walk around with more computing power in our purses and jacket pockets than NASA used for the moon landings. And we apply that technology to new purposes which were never thought of until the power to do them existed.
Information technology has given us the productivity and prosperity which means our children can afford to travel before they've even really started a career. It has given us social networks which let us look at the photos they took of themselves in Thailand an hour ago and then we can send them an instant message saying “is that another tattoo?” And it has created whole new occupations and industries for them to work in when they come home and settle down in life.
Clean energy is sure to transform itself and in turn transform our lives in just such extraordinary ways.
We talk about “baseload power” today but smart grids and distributed energy production may fundamentally reshape the way we move energy from the production point to the power point. In less time than we can know, millions of homes may be powered by renewable energy.
Tidal in WA, solar in Queensland, wind in New South Wales, geothermal in South Australia, clean coal in Victoria,  cogeneration in Tasmania. But behind all those changes, behind what we do see, will be the big reform  -  the price on carbon pollution.
Revenue from the carbon price will be funding new investments in clean technology.
The economic incentive the price creates will be driving private investment.
We can already forecast $100 billion going into renewables by 2050, the power of a market mechanism driving investment in the power of the earth, wind, water and sun.
We've heard a bit of talk about how carbon permits are “an invisible product”.
They're not  -  they're just the “invisible hand”.
This decision, to put a price on carbon, is a major reform to build a clean energy future, and because I lead a Labor Government, it is a reform done fairly.
Economic and environmental reform, with help for those who need it most.
Because that is how Labor does reform, that is how Australia does reform, that is the way that reform works best.
As we did with currency and trade liberalisation, as we did with indirect taxation, we have had a long debate about the clean energy future of this country.Barry Jones and Bob Carr  -  overseas, even Margaret Thatcher!  -  spoke about this in the 1980s.  We debated Rio and then Kyoto in the 1990s. And through the 2000s, there was growing public support for action on climate change, public support which did ultimately lead to bipartisan support for pricing carbon.
To the then-Coalition Government and the then-Labor Opposition both taking carbon pricing plans to an election.
To 2007 when John Howard decided to price carbon, supported by Tony Abbott, Julie Bishop, Joe Hockey and Greg Hunt, to 2008 and 2009 when Kevin Rudd tried to negotiate with Malcolm Turnbull in good faith to get a bipartisan reform.
Now in the final weeks of 2009, the last Parliament had its Maxwell Smart moment, we missed it by that much. And what followed was the 2010 campaign as difficult and divisive as any we have known.
It has been a long debate.
And as Isaid on Sunday, no government  -  no political party or leader  -  can claim to have got everything right during this time. But the Parliament the people elected in 2010 has found the path to the clean energy future our country so badly needs.
Some were sceptical, but from the day I formed Government I had no doubt this Parliament would prove capable of the task.
I know that for the aficionados the mechanics of how we got here are fascinating: the cross-party nature of this process is unusual and the makeup of the House of Representatives in particular is novel.
I accept that's interesting to the commentators.
But for me, this is a reform.
And in reform, what matters is having the right vision for the country's future, making the big decisions which get us there, bringing people together to get it done.
So now we have had the debate.
Now we move from words to deeds.
We're going to get this done.
This will be the package that comes to the Parliament and this will be the package that goes through the Parliament.
And there will be a price on carbon from 1 July 2012.
And here's how it works.
I wanted a modern policy approach with efficient allocation and incentive to innovate. 
So the price on carbon operates as a market mechanism, creates incentives we need.
For the first three years, the price for each tonne of pollution will be fixed at $23 per tonne then rise by 2.5 per cent in real terms, effectively a carbon tax. I wanted the end point to be a flexibly priced emissions trading scheme.
So from 1 July 2015, there'll be a “cap and trade” market creating the incentive to cut pollution at the lowest cost. I knew there was no environmental benefit in emissions intensive, trade exposed production simply moving offshore. 
So we will allocate some permits to some businesses without charge, supporting jobs and competitiveness, and helping strongly affected industries make the transition to a clean energy future.
I also wanted to link our carbon price to the emerging international market, keeping Australian industry competitive. So Australian business will be to be able to buy permits which represent credible, additional, offshore pollution reductions.
I wanted our emissions reduction targets to be based on the best expert advice. 
So the independent Climate Change Authority, headed by Bernie Fraser, a great servant of the Australian public, will recommend on the year-by-year steps, as well as the longer-term path, that Australia should take towards the 2050 target.
This is how our carbon price will work.
A fixed price for the first years, a well designed market from 2015, assistance for emissions intensive, trade exposed industries.
Evidence-based emissions targets, abatement at the lowest economic cost.
A new bottom line, where polluters pay.
Our plan makes polluters pay but we know some of the costs will be passed through, and while the price impact will be modest we do know family budgets are always tight.
So in the last few days, as many people have asked me how their family will benefit, I've said this often.
People who need help most will get the help they need.
That's why 9 in 10 households will get a combination of tax cuts and payment increases. For almost 6 million households this will fully meet the average extra costs. And of these, more than 4 million Australian households  -  including every older Australian who relies solely on the pension  -  will get a “buffer” for the budget, with the extra payments being 20 per cent higher than their average extra costs.
Because delivering this help to households meant cutting tax and lifting payments, I decided at the outset we would take the opportunity for tax reform as well.
I saw an opportunity to use a new tax on pollution to cut an old tax on work.
Just as I did in the Budget, so in this household assistance package, I wanted to reward work.
So we've more than tripled the tax free threshold  -  lifting it from $6 000 per year to $18 200 per year.  And combined with other changes, this means that 450 000 people  -  who earn between $16 000 and $20 500  -  will have all their tax cut.
They will now pay no tax.
This doesn't just help people moving from welfare to work.
It also helps women who work part-time as well.
Take a family where the kids are at primary school and mum is working part time earning, say, $16 000 a year. Currently she has no net tax liability.  But she does have some tax withheld from her take home pay  -  and she can't claim it back until after the end of the financial year. What's more, if she gets an extra shift or takes on extra regular hours worth, say, an extra $4 000, that'll lift her over the tax free threshold and cost her $600 a year in tax. Now, because of our tax cuts, she'll pay no tax at all on that extra income and have very little tax withheld as well.
She's among half a million people who go from having to pay tax to paying no tax  -  and of those, three hundred thousand are women. And while forty four per cent of taxpayers are women  -  sixty per cent of the people who get this tax cut are women.
This is a tax cut for working women.
A tax reform which rewards work.
And it builds on our Budget reforms to lift workforce participation and build the capacity of our economy to grow faster over time.
And because we do want to reward work, we've also made special provision for self-funded retirees.
I think by now many people will know that our plan will help pensioners  -  but our plan also ensures that many self-funded retirees  -  all those who have a Commonwealth Health Care Card  -  receive a payment equivalent to the pension increase. And some others will also benefit from our tax cuts and other payment increases as well.
Australians understand the importance of cutting carbon and understand how their own household budget works, so the best question I'm often asked is this: If so many households are compensated, how does the price signal work  -  isn't the shoe meant to pinch?
There are two key points here.
First, the price signal operates on the polluters.
They compete against each other and if they pollute less they'll pay less tax compared to other polluters.  And they compete against producers who don't pay the tax, so if they pollute less their disadvantage will be less. That means there is a very significant incentive effect on the “supply side” of carbon emissions.
Second, the price signal operates on consumers through the relative costs of goods.
So yes, the overall increase in consumer prices is just under ten dollars per week, and yes, the average household assistance is just over that. But that help is provided in cash and it can be used to buy relatively lower carbon products which will cost relatively less.
So yes, you may be no worse off if you stay with your existing basket of goods, but you do have an incentive to save by switching to other products.
And the bottom line: with this price signal in place, we will cut at least 160 million tonnes of carbon out of our atmosphere in 2020.
That's the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road.
Or put another way: in just nine years' time, that is a cut in every Australia's carbon footprint of almost one quarter , compared to where we would be without a price on carbon.
That's why we're doing it.
To cut our carbon pollution, to build the clean energy future we need.
I've met some interesting people and heard some interesting things in the last few days.
When you give Australians a chance, they give it to you pretty straight. I love that about our country. I enjoy the scepticism and respect the scrutiny. And I also love that Australians in our suburbs and towns are taking on the serious task of judging what is the best approach for our country's future.
Everyone involved in politics and government can learn something from that.
And if we listen to Australians, we're going to learn a lot more in the coming months, we're going to learn about more than the carbon price.
We're going to learn something about this country's capacity for reform.
I don't agree with those who say this country is not up to it and I certainly don't agree with those who say we were a better country thirty years ago. No  -  I just believe this is what the reform road is. What reform is always like for Labor.  If change was easy, a conservative government would already have done it.
I talk a lot about walking the reform road.
About the fact our country should be walking it together, with government bringing business, workers and communities along with us. About the fact it's a long walk, not a short sprint, a road toward long term goals for the good of our nation, where the measure is in the years. But I still think some of you picture the reform road as an easy way through a wide gate.  It is anything but.
The reform road has many obstacles, pot holes to get around and hard hills to climb, the wind is not always at your back.
But I've got my walking shoes on.
Because as I think about Australia at the end of this year, and beyond in the decade ahead, I don't only see a country which will be building a clean energy future, I see a country which will have rebuilt its faith in its own capacity to reform.
It'll be a realistic faith  -  which knows what the reform road is like.
It'll be a determined faith  -  an optimistic and activist creed  -  that drives us forward.
And it will be a faith shared between a creative and confident people and a Government ambitious for the future we share.
I've been Prime Minister for a year now and as well as governing and reforming, it has been a period of learning.
I'm learning more about Australians, meeting people and getting to know them. 
It's really a great privilege.
Australians do want to know more about me and how I'll lead this government in coming years.
Especially when confronted with new challenges in the future, and that means they do want to know what kind of person I am. And look, I'm a decision-maker by nature and I have tended to let the decisions speak for themselves.
It doesn't come easy to me to expose my feelings as I make these decisions. I was the shy girl who studied and worked hard, and it took time and effort but I got from Unley High to the law and as far as here, where I am today. I've brought a sense of personal reserve to this, the most public of professions. And the rigours of politics have reinforced my innate style of holding a fair bit back in order to hang pretty tough.
If that means people's image of me is one of steely determination, I understand why.
But I don't forget where I come from, why I'm here, or what I've learned along the way.  I don't forget Unley High, where I saw kids who sat at the back of the room and did “make work” and were left behind. I don't forget how I felt at Slaters when I won my first case on behalf of an outworker, I got her paid what she deserved, and she just said, quietly, “thanks”.
I don't forget September 2008 when the world stood on the brink of economic disaster and it took a Labor Government and urgent action, decisions right in the moment, to save jobs and businesses.
What I learned and believed through all of that was that it's one thing to hang tough and hold a bit of yourself back.
But nothing hard ever gets easier by putting it off to later.
And because of that, in the moment I truly believed I was going to be Prime Minister I told myself: don't ever put off a hard call, because it will only get harder every day. 
Be a Prime Minister, a leader, who sees the future our country can have and has the strength to put in place the plan to get us there, that's the leader I'm determined to be for you.
So I'm walking that road now, walking the road of reform.
This reform is necessary for our country.
We must look beyond the next opinion poll and the next election to the clean energy future of the next generation.
It is time to get on with it.
This has been an issue in Australia for a decade.
There have been plenty of missteps and false starts, no leader of Government has been perfect, I take my share of responsibility for that.
And I said what I said before the election and I can't unsay it.
But when it became clear the only way to achieve action on climate change was to introduce a temporary carbon tax moving to an emissions trading scheme, the choice was this: I either stuck exactly to what I said just before the election, got no action on climate change, and did the wrong thing for the nation or I found a way to get climate change action, to do right for the country and to deal with the consequences.
And what I knew in my heart was this.
Nothing hard ever gets easier by putting it off.
And if you don't do what is right for the nation, then you shouldn't be Prime Minister.
So it's now time to get in and get this done, time to deliver the action on climate change we need.
Time to focus on the crucial debate now facing this country, because in reality, the choice I faced after the elect ion is the same choice Australia faces.
To do what is best for Australian families, what is best for future generations, what is best for this country.
To act on climate change.  To cut carbon pollution. To build a clean energy future. 
I can't  -  I won't  -  just say no.
That's why I'm putting a price on carbon.
I know this is a big change for our country, I know we have the courage to do it together.
And as we do it together, I think we're going to prove to ourselves that the courage to reform isn't beyond us and that there are more opportunities for us to seize together.
I see a great clean energy future for our great country and a great reform agenda for this country's government too.  I know we can get there. 



PM: I'm in the Latrobe Valley today and I've had the opportunity to speak to the workers at Hazelwood as well as to meet with representatives of the relevant unions, the CFMEU and the Metal Workers Union and I'm looking forward to continuing my discussions with local community members this afternoon.
I understand that the policies of both sides of politics have raised anxiety here in the Latrobe Valley. Last Sunday I announced our carbon pricing plan and of course our carbon pricing plan is about reducing carbon pollution and about securing a clean energy future for our nation.
As part of that plan we will be working with electricity generation here and around the country and as part of that plan we are looking to retire 2000 megawatts of energy capacity that generates a lot of carbon pollution from our electricity grid and to replace it with cleaner energy sources.
I understand that having heard that policy announcement last Sunday, there is anxiety here in the Latrobe Valley.  I also understand there's anxiety from Mr Abbott and Mr Hunt making it clear that they are determined to close Hazelwood.
So I've come here today to have a conversation direct with the Latrobe Valley and with the workers here. In that conversation, some hard questions got asked and that's appropriate. I wanted to come and explain my perspective on pricing carbon pollution, on securing a better environment for the future and a stronger economy for the future.
I've explained that in order to take 2000 megawatts of dirty energy generation out of the system, we will engage in a contract for closure process. Businesses will be able to come forward and tender to work with the Government and to close over time. Any such closure would take a number of years.
And I've also said to the working people here in the Latrobe Valley that I understand that they come to this process with some anxiety because they lived through the era of privatisation in the 1990s. I remember what happened to this community in the 1990s when Jeff Kennett and Alan Stockdale had privatisation come and hit this community like a sledgehammer, with little support for adjustment in this community.
The perspective I am bringing to change as we go about pricing carbon and dealing with the 2000 megawatts of the dirtiest electricity generation is a perspective about standing alongside communities. Making sure we work with communities, we listen to their voice and we generate for them a strong economic future.
The questions I've taken today have included questions about the mechanics of pricing carbon, about what it will mean for families, about what it will mean for the global- well for the national economy, how we fit in with the global economy and what it will mean for this local economy.
I am very confident that the Latrobe Valley has a bright future. I am very confident that it has the community leaders who will have their voice heard as we work with this local community and have their say in developing a bright future for the Latrobe Valley.
I'm very happy to take people's questions.
JOURNALIST: What was the mood like inside Prime Minister?
PM: The mood was anxious, there's a lot of anxiety there and that's why I'm here, to talk issues through with people, to be there directly available to have a conversation. You'd be expecting people having lived through privatisation to think about another period of change and to be anxious about that period of change, but as Prime Minister I've been able to say to them that we will be working alongside communities, standing with them, that certainly didn't happen when the Liberal Party engaged in privatisation here.
JOURNALIST: The community's been concerned (inaudible).
PM: The process that we will go through is a tender for closure process so we need to work through that. But I've been very happy to say to the workers here that we will be working with local communities not just on the first day, but over time. We've allocated $200 million through our carbon pricing plan to work with local communities to secure their future. And I do see a very bright future for the Latrobe Valley.
JOURNALIST: How much of that $200 million is likely to come to the Latrobe Valley?
PM: Well you're making some assumptions about the tender process, the tender for closure process. I'm afraid I can't make those assumptions with you, we've got to go through this process a step at a time, but obviously the Latrobe Valley is synonymous in people's minds with electricity generation and that's why it was appropriate to come and talk about our plans here in the Latrobe Valley.
JOURNALIST: So do you see that continuing, I mean what sort of electricity generation do you see occurring in the Latrobe Valley down the track once the carbon tax is introduced?
PM: Well the process we're going to go through is to seek to retire 2000 megawatts of capacity out of the system which is generated with high amounts of carbon pollution. You generate far more than 2000 megawatts of electricity out of the Latrobe Valley.
Now as we work through this process, obviously this being such an important place in Australia for the generation of electricity, people are thinking what does it mean for me, what does it mean for my family? That's why I'm here today to start a conversation with this community with an assurance that we will keep working through with them. It's not my intention to leave this community or indeed any other community in the country in the lurch the way we saw them left in the lurch in the era of privatisation under the Victorian Liberal Government.
JOURNALIST: You said you're going to (inaudible) consulting with the community today, you're out here to talk about it, but I don't see one member of the Latrobe Valley community here-
PM: Well I've been in the meetings and then come out to speak to the media.
JOURNALIST: Is there any consultation with them at all or is it purely a media circus?
PM: I've been in meetings for a number of hours now and I've come out of those meetings to have this conversation with the media.
JOURNALIST: As I said this isn't the community (inaudible).
PM: No I understand that, I've been in meetings for hours now with community members and I've come separately to here to have a conversation with the media.
JOURNALIST: Who else will you be meeting with Prime Minister?
PM: I've met with Hazelwood workers and there were large numbers of workers there, I've had conversations with the union representatives. I'm going to be meeting with the local council and I'll also be sharing a bite to eat with some local community members.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster there's been quite an emphasis on Hazelwood, what about some of the generators like Yallourn which is ageing infrastructure as well and Loy Yang. What sort of conversations are you having with them?
PM: Well clearly in talking to the unions, they represent workers across all of power generation here in the Latrobe Valley and I'll be talking to the community more broadly through the local council, so the message for the local community is a constant one, which is we will be working with this local community. I understand that when they hear me talking about pricing carbon and a cleaner energy future they wonder what it means for them. I understand when they hear Tony Abbott and his spokespeople talk about closing Hazelwood they wonder what it means for them. I wanted to come here directly as a show of good faith to say I want to work with this community, I want to engage with this community, I certainly do not want to see this community dealt with as it has been in the past by Liberal governments.
JOURNALIST: What are the plans to protect the workers' jobs, is there anything on the table as yet?
PM: We will go through this contract for closure process and then of course we are working strongly with the electricity generation industry to support the transition in electricity generation to a cleaner energy future. The package I announced last Sunday has in it $5.5 billion of assistance to electricity generators. It has in it the capacity to offer loans if that is necessary to electricity generation. It has the contract for closure of 2000 megawatts of dirty electricity generation and of course, as well there are funds to support innovation as we move to cleaner energy technologies.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, realistically how many jobs though do you think will be lost eventually from the tax in the Valley?
PM: Well this is a question that we need to work through and I want to be as frank with you as I can. But we've got a tender process to go through, I can't pre-judge the outcome of a tender, it requires companies to come forward, it requires appropriate objective decision making and it would be quite wrong of me, legally wrong and wrong in every other way to try and pre-judge the tender round.
But this is a part of the world associated in people's minds with electricity generation, that's why I wanted to come and talk to the community here.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned you might be preaching to the converted by meeting with the unions here today?
PM: I've met with workers who were anxious, prepared to ask some very hard questions, prepared to have very direct exchange with me. I wanted to do that, come and meet with the people who are likely to be the most anxious so that I could look into their eyes as they looked into mine and we could have a conversation.
JOURNALIST: Did you reassure them that there'll be a job for them in say ten years' time?
PM: What I said to them and what I absolutely believe is that there is a strong future for the Latrobe Valley including a strong economic future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister would this have to be one of the toughest weeks you've had as Prime Minister. It's been such a massive week selling the carbon tax, how's it been?
PM: I'm always happy to come out and have a conversation with people because we've got to get this done. We have to, as a nation, seize the opportunities and possibilities that come from a clean energy future. We do need to cut our carbon pollution to do the right thing by our environment and also to have the jobs of the future. Very determined we're going to get that done as a nation, I understand that a lot of explaining is needed and I've been very happy to come out and about doing that explanation myself.
JOURNALIST: How much are you going to be spending explaining to people about the tax, we notice there's some sort of campaign?
PM: Not sure that I follow your question?
JOURNALIST: An advertising campaign or something like that, I mean we haven't seen all that much this week, are we going to see something like that down the track?
PM: You will see advertisements starting tomorrow night and just as I personally, this week, have spoken to workers at Hazelwood, I've sat with steel workers and spoken to them, I've spoken to people in a community forum in Brisbane, just as I've done all of that to provide information to people, we will advertise to provide information to people. Australians want to know what this big change means for their future, we will provide that information to them through direct engagements like the one I've had today as well as providing them good quality information through advertising.
JOURNALIST: Are there plans for you to appear at a community forum here in the Latrobe Valley sometime in the future?
PM: Are there?
JOURNALIST: Plans for you to participate in a community forum here in the Latrobe Valley sometime in the future?
PM: I believe this is the start of a conversation, I've got more to do today before I leave the Latrobe Valley so I'm looking forward to doing that first. This is the start of a conversation and we will continue to work very strongly with the Latrobe Valley community. Minister Simon Crean has been here already this week, now I'm here personally and you should expect to see us continue to be engaged in the Latrobe Valley.
JOURNALIST: So you'll be back?
PM: Well, what I'm indicating to you is I'm intending to stay engaged with the Latrobe Valley.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott has said today something along the lines of the people feel ripped off by the carbon tax package and it hasn't been based on proper modelling? What do you say to that?
PM: Well, I'm smiling because it would amaze me that Tony Abbott would raise questions about proper costings. Let's be really clear here, both I and Mr Abbott are committed to reducing carbon pollution in this country by minus 5% by 2020. He says he believes in that target too. The difference is I have a fully costed modelled package available for the Australian people so they can judge every detail of it. Mr Abbott's got a magic pudding that won't work and will smash the budget and smash into Australian tax payers. We believe that that cost will be $720 per household per year. Now Mr Abbott needs to explain to Australians why they should pay all of that.
Economists are saying the most efficient way to grab a clean energy future for our country is for us to put a price on carbon. I'm determined to act in the most efficient way with every figure on the table and it all adding up. Mr Abbott's got this hocus-pocus where he pretends that he can cut carbon pollution, match tax cuts without a revenue source, it just doesn't add up. It's up for Mr Abbott to put his figures before the Australian people too.
JOURNALIST: Just on a separate issue, Westpac's now forecasting that the Reserve Bank will cut interest rates next year by 100 basis points with the first cut late this year, what's your reaction to that forecast?
PM: The interest rates are set by the Reserve Bank independently so it's not proper for me to comment on the future direction of interest rates. What I would say about the Australian economy is its fundamentals are strong. We've come out of the global financial crisis stronger than any other developed country. That's a good thing. But what I've also talked to the Australian people about is the patchwork nature of our economy today with some regions and industries booming ahead and other regions and industries feeling pressure. That's why we've put the budget together in the form that we did, we understood the patchwork nature of the economy, we want through the minerals resource rent tax to be sharing the benefits of the resources boom and we do too want to be working with regions that are feeling under pressure so they get the benefit of the jobs and opportunities of the future. So the patchwork nature of our economy is putting pressures on some places and we are responding to those pressures.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister as someone who works and lives in the Valley, what might happen if Labor starts this process now with the carbon pricing plan, a Coalition government comes in into the future, we've got the ball rolling somewhere along the line to transition this community, what might happen should there be a change of government?
PM: What I would say to the people of the Latrobe Valley and it's been reinforced today for me in some of the discussions I've had- people have been anticipating that there would be change in the Latrobe Valley for quite a long period of time now. People have been anticipating that there would be a price on carbon, people have been anticipating that that would make a change for the Latrobe Valley. I'm in the business of giving the people of this community, and the nation generally, certainty, that's why I spelt out the package that I did last Sunday. Mr Abbott is determined to rip that certainty away from Australians because he would rather see all of that chaos if it helps him be Prime Minister, than do the right thing to help people plan for a clean energy future.
Thank you very much. 



OAKES: Prime Minister welcome to the program.
PM: Good morning Laurie.
OAKES: We've got a debt crisis in Europe, in America unemployment's rising, there's even talk of a recession, in Australia we've got a collapse in consumer confidence.  How worried are you about the economy?
PM: There are some signs of increased risks from Europe and the United States Laurie, you are right. And here we do have cautious consumers, they've lived through the global financial crisis, they've seen some huge natural disasters in Queensland, New Zealand, Japan and obviously people have increased their savings. I'm very conscious of that, but I'm also very conscious that the underlining fundamentals of our economy are strong, we are in the right part of the world, the part of the world where economies are growing. For example, the economy of China is still growing very strongly, we come to this with a good budget position, with low unemployment and with a huge pipeline of investment coming through, $430 billion - so I'm very confident in the underlying strength of our economy.
OAKES: But if the world is facing an economic crisis, if there's fear and uncertainty about the economy here, is it the right time to put extra strain on the economy with a carbon tax?
PM: Look Laurie, I think we've got to look at our economy in our position, you are absolutely right to say we are not immune from global events but let's look at our region of the world where we are trading strongly with growing economies like China, and as a result in our recourses sector alone $430 billion of investment planned. So a strong economy, low unemployment, a good financial system and we come to this with a strong budget position. Now for me Laurie in terms of timing the change that we need to make for a clean energy future, the time to act is now. The sooner we act then the easier the transition will be and we do come to this with a strong economy-
OAKES: Why at a time when the economy does seem to be at some risk? Why take an extra risk?
PM: Well Laurie if I can put it this way, we've got an economy that's growing, we've got low unemployment, we've got a good government budget position, we've got a strong financial sector. We know that there is hundreds of billions of dollars of investment in the pipeline, they are good conditions in which to act for a change in your economy. And Laurie if I can also say this to you, let's remember in all of this debate with all of its kind of heat and fury, both sides of politics agree we should be cutting our emissions by minus five percent by 2020. So really what we are debating is when to start and how to do it. If you are going to do something by 2020 the best thing is to start soon and to do it in the most economically responsible way. That's the plan I put forward last Sunday.
OAKES: Now you've got this advertising campaign starting today, $12 million bucks worth to start with, I mention, if it'll help, you'll spend more than that. Now why, that's another broken promise isn't it? You promised that you wouldn't do what John Howard did and spend tax payers money pushing a party political line?
PM: Well this advertising campaign is about getting people information.  Let's be clear about-
OAKES: That's what John Howard said of course.
PM: Well, let's be clear about the figures here Laurie. We've been very upfront with people that there would be $12 million of television advertising and another $13 million allocated to getting people the information they need. This is a change for our economy, it's a change for households, there are tax cuts, pension increases, family benefits, things that people will want to understand. There has been a lot of fear around, a lot of misconceptions so we want to get to people the accurate information they need to prepare for this change.
OAKES: And John Howard said exactly the same about the Work Choices ads, about the GST ads, and Labor didn't accept that.
PM: Well Laurie let's get a sense of size and scale here. You remember as I remember the more than $100 million used in Work Choices advertising and I don't recall the figure for the GST but I do recall that it was all about Joe Cocker signing ‘Unchain your Heart'. These advertisements are bout getting people information they need about our clean energy future-
OAKES: Is this spending capped at $12 million though, or could you go higher?
PM: We've said $12 million for the advertising campaign and there will be another $13 million in getting information to people.  I've been out and about this week Laurie talking to a lot of people. They do want information, they want to understand what it will mean for them and their family, they're quite relieved to hear that there is a website they can get on, a household estimator they can use to work out what it's going to mean for them and their family. I think it is appropriate to get people that kind of information.
OAKES: As you say you have been charging around selling as hard as you can go, have you detecting any change, are you making any impact or do people still either not listen or hate you for it?
PM: I believe Laurie that when you give people the facts, the facts make a difference. And the facts are on our side. In community meetings and in meetings with workers when I've been able to explain to them the facts of our plan, that we are going to seize a clean energy future, we are going to assist families and many families will be better off as a result of that assistance, jobs will continue to grow, industries like steel have been assisted, the coal mining industry is still going to be strong, people are reassured to hear those facts. 
OAKES: Now you, I think are making a particular thing about seniors and the benefits for seniors in your package, that they'll be over compensated, quite a lot of them, what's the big selling point there, why are you so intent on making that an issue?
PM:  Well 1.8 million pensioner households in this country and on average they will be $210 a year better off, that is after they've paid the average cost of the carbon price flow through to the things that they buy. And then there are self funded retirees who will not only benefit from a $300 a year tax cut but will benefit from a further $200 that comes to them from the special tax arrangements for seniors. And a number of them will also qualify for the same bonuses as pensioners, that's $338 for a single pensioner, $510 for a pensioner couple. Now Laurie what does this all add up to? Well there will be millions of Australians who will receive more money than they need to address the price impacts flowing from putting a price on the biggest polluters, and on 1 July next year Tony Abbott is going to have to look those millions of Australians direct in the eye and say I'm taking that money which makes you better off, off you. I'm going to claw that extra money away from you.
OAKES: But the polls would indicate that this doesn't worry them, that they dislike the tax so much, that they favour Mr Abbott.
PM: Well Laurie, as I said last weekend democracy isn't one long opinion poll, it's about making the decisions that are right for the nation's future and about giving people the facts. I think Australians are entitled to understand what benefits there are flowing through tax cuts and pension increases. What special benefits there are for seniors and they're entitled to understand that Mr Abbott is saying to them when you get those benefits on the 1 July next year that he wants to strip those benefits away. The extra money that we are giving people he wants to take it back.
OAKES: But democracy is all about elections and Mr Abbott says that if he wins the next election he will repeal this carbon tax legislation, well why shouldn't he do that, if he has got the mandate, what right does the Labor party have to stop him?
PM: Well I'm not going to make assumptions about what happens in the election in 2013, but I do believe Mr Abbott has to be very frank with the Australian people that the logical consequence of his policy is he will rip money, that is benefitting people, away from those people. They will have it in their purse, they'll have it in their wallet, it will be more money than they need to address any price impacts from carbon pricing and he will rip it away.
OAKES: But he is talking about going to a double dissolution election if necessary, having a joint sitting to get rid of your carbon tax, he is obviously quite confident they he has won this argument.
PM: Well for Mr Abbot this is all about the politics, for me this is about the nation's future. I want us to have a strong economy, I want us to have the clean energy jobs of the future, and I want us to do that while we are reducing carbon pollution and doing the right thing by the environment. So Laurie, that's what I've been out explaining last week and what I will continue to explain. I believe most Australians accept climate change is real, they do want us to take effective action to reduce carbon pollution, of course they worry about jobs and cost of living, but with this package we can reduce carbon pollution, do the right thing by our environment, see our economy continue to grow strongly, have more jobs in our economy and help nine out of ten households with the flow through impacts of pricing carbon.
OAKES: Now seems to me there are two issues hurting Labor at the moment, one is the carbon tax, the other is Julia Gillard. What are you doing about the second issue?
PM: Laurie, I'm here as Prime Minister saying to the Australian people that I'm prepared to take the hard decisions that are necessary for us to have a prosperous future and for us to give people the kind of opportunity in the future that Australians want for themselves and their kids. They want a strong economy, I think they want a clean energy future. They want a better environment-
OAKES: But what about the problem of Julia Gillard? When John Howard's ratings were diving in 2007, he went into his cabinet and he said, ‘It is me?' Have you asked your ministers is it you?
PM: My ministers like me are determined to see us stump up to the hard reform, and no-one in the Labor Party has been under any illusion about how hard it would be. But we are doing this because it is the right thing for the country's future.
OAKES: But your problem is not just about the carbon tax is it? It goes back to well before that, to the election campaign. I just wonder - how confident are you that you have the support of your party and will keep it? Because I understand you were actually ringing around in the last week of parliament just checking on your support, ringing Caucus members.
PM: That's completely untrue Laurie.
OAKES: Not true?
PM: Completely untrue. Of course, I speak to Caucus members all the time about things like campaigning on carbon pricing, about our plans for health and education, what we are doing the keep the economy strong, talking to them about issues in their own electorates. Laurie, this is about a big decision for the nation's future. And as Prime Minister, I have never underestimated how tough this was going to be. And I could have taken the politically easy course. I could have said, ‘Let's just put climate change in the too hard basket', a lot easier for me as Prime Minister to just park a hard issue. Not the right thing for the nation's future. So I've stumped up to do what I believe is best for Australians - a better environment, a stronger economy. It is tough now. There's a lot of fear and anxiety around and I will keep combating that fear and anxiety with simple facts. Now, I know Mr Abbott brushes the facts away as if they are confetti - you know - don't worry about the facts. Well, the facts matter. The facts about cutting carbon pollution by 160 million tonnes, the fact that nine out of ten households will get assistance, the fact that millions of Australians will be better off, and Mr Abbott wants to rip that money away from them. But jobs will keep growing-
OAKES: But politics is also about leaders being able to win support and to persuade voters. What is the difference between your position now and that of Kevin Rudd when you tapped him on the shoulder, except that the Government is now less popular than it was then and the leader is now less popular than the then leader was? What's the difference?
PM: Laurie I'm not going to go back in time and talk about those events. I have talked about them frequently-
OAKES: But you haven't you see, you have always refused to talk them. 
PM: Well I explained why the Labor team made the leadership decision that they did last year. And what they have now-
OAKES: And what is the difference now?
PM: What they have now is me as Prime Minister, pursuing with determination, a plan that the Labor team believes in. We never thought it was going to be easy. We knew it was going to be tough. We knew we would have to go out and campaign and persuade and get people the facts. And we are determined to do that.
OAKES: But you see, what they had a year ago was a leader who had been told by you in February he shouldn't go to a double dissolution on pricing carbon, and he had been told by you in April that he should shelve that plan. And now you are out there saying, ‘I've always believed in pricing carbon.'
PM: Laurie, you are making a lot of assumptions and I'm not going to share those assumptions with you. I've always believed-
OAKES: But don't you think you need to answer those questions if people are going to have any faith in you.
PM: And I'm very happy to answer all of those questions, Laurie. I've always believed climate change is real, I've always believed the best and most efficient way of addressing it is to put a price on carbon. We are pricing carbon with a three year fixed price, effectively a carbon tax and then getting to an emissions trading scheme, a cap and trade scheme. I spoke to people in the last election about getting to that cap and trade scheme. Yes, we are in different circumstances than I envisaged in the last election campaign but the nation's interests require us to seize the opportunity to address climate change.
OAKES: You say we're in different circumstances but it seems to me that your excuse for breaking the election promise is that the Greens made you do it. Now do you really believe that Bob Brown would have supported Tony Abbott if you said, ‘I'm not going to break my election promise.'
PM: Laurie, once again, I'm not agreeing with the premise of your question. My case here is we've got an opportunity in this parliament to do what the nation needs done to put a price on carbon. The way our democracy works is if the majority of people in the parliament agree, something needs to be done, you can get it done.
OAKES: But the way a majority works is politicians go to an election, they set out their policies, people choose between rival policies. You set out a dishonest policy. You promised this would not happen. Your excuse for breaking the promise is that the Greens made you do it. I want to know how did they make you do it?
PM:  Laurie, I'm not saying that at all. You are putting words in my mouth and it is not fair to do that. Laurie, at the last election, I said to the Australian people, ‘Climate change is real. We need to put a price on carbon, I want a cap and trade scheme.' And I did say to them that there would be no carbon tax. I didn't want to see us have a system that was taxing but not getting to a cap and trade scheme. That is what I wanted for our economy to know that it wasn't going to generate more carbon pollution than a particular cap. Now, in this parliament, I have worked to get this done. And, yes, it does mean that we will have a three year carbon tax, a temporary carbon tax to get to a permanent emissions trading scheme. Now, I've made the decisions to do this, and I knew politically it wasn't going to be easy for me or for the Labour Party. But I've made these decisions because they're in the nation's best interest.  And the alternative, Laurie, was for me to look at this parliament and to say, all too hard, shove it in the too hard basket, lose another three years where we are not tackling climate change and getting ourselves the clean energy future.
OAKES: We're out of time Prime Minister.
PM:  I wasn't prepared to do that.
OAKES: But you had promised in the election, no carbon tax and no action at all until you had a consensus. There's no consensus, except against your tax. You misled the people.
PM: Well Laurie, you can put it all like that or you can say to yourself, ‘What is in this nation's interest today?' It is in our nation's interest to tackle climate change and get the clean energy jobs of the future. By the time people vote in 2013, they will know exactly what this scheme of pricing carbon means for them and their families and for the biggest polluters in our country.  People will be able to vote in 2013 not on the basis of scare campaigns or things they've been asked to believe that are not true. They will be able to live it and judge for themselves.
OAKES: We thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Mental Health and Ageing Mark Butler today met with local pensioners in Adelaide to discuss the Gillard Government's household assistance package and how it will support older Australians.
More than 2.2 million age pensioners and 280,000 self-funded retirees across Australia will receive assistance to help them do their bit to tackle climate change and look after the household budget.
Our age pensioners and self funded retirees have worked hard all their lives to make Australia the great nation it is today. We want to help them with household expenses as we go about cutting carbon pollution.
Pensions will increase by $338 per year for singles and $510 per year for couples combined to help older Australians deal with extra costs in their budgets.
This means that after the impact of the carbon price is taken into account, pensioner households will have, on average, $210 more in their pockets.
Every senior who relies solely on the age pension and 90 per cent of all seniors who receive a part pension will receive a buffer of at least 120% of their average price impact.
The Prime Minister said that around 150,000 self funded retirees and part-rate pensioners will also receive tax cuts of more than $303 as well as their pension increase or Seniors' Supplement of $338 for singles and $510 for couples combined.  
Self-funded retirees over the age of 65 with a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card will benefit from the same assistance as age pensioners.
Self-funded retirees without a concession card may benefit from tax cuts. This equates to more than $300 for a single retiree on an income of $55,000 and more than $600 for a retiree couple jointly receiving $85,000.
We will ensure that older Australians have money in their pockets upfront. Pensioners and eligible self-funded retirees will receive the first nine months worth of their increased pension payments in a lump sum payment before the carbon price starts on 1 July 2012.
This commitment comes on top of a number of important measures the Australian Government has already delivered to support pensioners, including:
 * 	Increasing pensions by $128 per fortnight for single pensioners on the maximum rate and a $116 per fortnight increase for maximum rate pensioner couples.
 * 	Increasing the Utilities Allowance (now part of a new increased Pension Supplement) by around $400 per year.
 * 	Delivering a new system of pension indexation  -  the new Pensioner Living Cost index  -  which ensures that pensions keep pace with pensioners' living costs.
 * 	Ensuring that age pensioners who work can keep up to $6,500 extra per year through our new expanded Seniors Work Bonus.
 * 	Introducing reciprocal transport arrangements to ensure pensioners with state seniors' cards can benefit from public transport concessions when travelling interstate.  



HOST: Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Steven from Waitpinga Beach is worried that if the carbon tax means we have more imported coal, we have more imported food, that that will be counterproductive, effectively.
PM: I don't think he needs to worry about that. Obviously, as we've explained to people and we're going to keep explaining, this is a price that is paid by around 500 of our biggest polluters. There are some flow through impacts but less than one per cent of the cost of living. So, if you were talking about, an item of food, maybe a jar of jam or something like that, the cost impact for that food item is far, far less than the cost of getting imports here from overseas.
HOST: So, what will the cost impact be on a jar of jam?
PM: Well, less than one per cent, indeed less than half a per cent for foodstuffs.
HOST: OK, Prime Minister, the latest poll out today, the Nielsen Poll, shows that Labor's primary vote is down to 26 per cent. Clearly the hard sell of the last week hasn't helped you.
PM: We'll keep out there explaining it. I'm not surprised that with so much anxiety around that we have got to keep out there explaining this to people. I said a while back that this was tough and it's going to get tougher. This is a big reform for our country's future.
I am determined to deliver it because it will mean, for the long term, a better environment and a stronger economy. A lot of fear has been raised, a lot of anxiety has been raised and we have got a lot of work to do to get the facts to people; but the facts are on our side
HOST: Prime Minister, you're saying you're determined to keep selling this. Your personal approval rating according to the Nielsen polls has plunged. Tony Abbott has now opened a big lead on you as preferred Prime Minister. Is the best way for you, to sell this tax for your party, for you to get out of the way? Because, these polls appear to show that you are the problem. And so how can you sell a tax, when you're unpopular? How can you sell an unpopular tax, when you Julia Gillard, are unpopular?
PM: Well politics is a marathon, it is not a sprint and democracy is not one long opinion poll, it's actually about showing the leadership that's necessary for the country's future; and that's what I am doing as Prime Minister.
I was determined to make this change for the country's future and remain determined to deliver it, because I know it's the right thing to do. I have well and truly got the courage of my conviction-
HOST: -I know you have.
PM: -and I will be out there providing the leadership that's necessary as we tackle this big reform and, as of course, we do the other things that we need to get done to ensure that we keep our economy strong; and keep spreading opportunity right around the nation.
HOST: Prime Minister would you come to a point, if this is a most important challenge as you see it, facing our nation, what if it comes to a point where you come to the conclusion that ‘I am the problem and the best way for me to get this big reform up is for me to get out of the way?'
PM: Well, you're asking a question based on opinion polls and I don't judge what the government is doing, or what I'm doing against opinion polls.
HOST:  Well, you did when you rolled Kevin Rudd, if you don't mind me saying so Prime Minister.
PM: There is an assumption in that question I will not share. So, this is about providing the right leadership for the nation's future. I mean what I want to be able to do is look Australians in the eye today and look future generations in the eye and say that in this year, in this time, we made and delivered the decisions that were necessary to give them the best possible environment, and the strongest economy.
HOST: Prime Minister, the carbon tax and carbon reform is more important than Julia Gillard, I think you'd agree with that.
PM: Well, I'm leading it, so it's very important to me and I will keep providing the leadership necessary to deliver it.
HOST: But, if the carbon tax and carbon reform is more important than you, and if perhaps unfairly, perhaps fairly, perhaps that's just life, you have plummeted in the opinion polls, it's irrecoverable; then you see the end point of Matthew's question. Do you get to the point where you say: ‘look, this is more important than me, I will step down and let somebody else have a go?'
PM: Oh look, you know a million assumptions in that question and I'm not sharing any one of them. I'm here as Prime Minister, providing the leadership that we need on hard reforms like climate change and pricing carbon and I will continue to do that.
HOST: But, Prime Minister, there aren't assumptions in that question. If you don't mind  -  we'll move on to some other issues in a moment  -  but if you don't mind us saying so, the biggest risk to a carbon tax would it not be, would be Tony Abbott becoming Prime Minister; and these polls at the moment show that that is a very real threat.
Now, you say polls don't matter, but you know they do matter. You know the ALP spends a lot of money on polling internally and a lot of time thinking about polls. So they do matter. The question is, is that the big risk, that you can blow up the carbon tax; you can have Tony Abbott as Prime Minister, if you continue in the job.
PM: Well, I think you've forgotten one very important point which is the next election will be in 2013 and I will be very happy to fight that election on who's got the best vision for the country's future and who's got the best policies and plans to keep our economy strong and to keep spreading opportunity. Who's got the best plan to tackle climate change and price carbon and who's got the best plan to keep improving the nation's schools? Who's got the best plan to keep improving our hospitals? Who's got the best plan to do things like make available technology we need for the future, the National Broadband Network, and of course, who's got the most profound commitment to fairness and decency at work?
So, we'll fight the election in 2013. The task for now is to deliver this big reform for the country's future, and to be out, talking to Australians and answering the fear that's been raised and the anxiety that's been raised with the simple truths and facts that people need to understand to get a handle on how carbon pricing will work; and what impact it will have for their families.
I mean a lot of people have been told ridiculous things about what it means for their cost of living and what it means for their job. I'm not surprised that people are anxious, but the facts are on our side and we'll keep explaining facts.
HOST: Prime Minister, on the weekend I heard one commentator say that your tax of $23 a tonne is substantially more than the cost of carbon under the European trading scheme currently. Is that the case? Would we be paying more at $23 a tonne than Europeans are trading carbon at the moment?
PM: Well, the European price is a floating price; it's a cap and trade scheme, that's what we will get to three years after this system starts. So the price moves around-
HOST: -But is it substantially lower at the moment?
PM: I'm just about to explain that to you. We've done the best possible modelling of what the future will hold for the international price. We believe when we go to a floating scheme it will be around $29, so we have started at $23 so we can do a steady increase to what we believe will be the international price at the time that the scheme moves to a cap and trade scheme.
HOST: What is it at the moment though? That's not a gotcha question by the way, I heard a commentator say that it's a lot cheaper in Europe at the moment. Is that correct?
PM: It's gone up and down and there have been days when it's been cheaper than $23 but the important thing is where we think the price is going to be when our scheme goes to a floating scheme; and consequently what is the right place to start so we can go on a rational movement up, towards that anticipated international price.
HOST: Prime Minister, how much will the carbon tax cost to administer?
PM: Oh look, there are administration costs absolutely but-
HOST: -But what are they?
PM: I can send you the table and the sheet and you can look at all of the allocations for things from the Climate Change Authority-
HOST: Do you have a round figure?
PM: Look, there's money allocated, of course there is, and it's in the millions of dollars, of course it is, for things like the Climate Change Authority that will be led by Bernie Fraser, former Governor of the Reserve Bank. Now, this is a big shift for our economy. We want it to be properly administered and it will be.
HOST: How much will it cost to collect and redistribute?
PM: It's necessary, of course, to have the system that collects what businesses are paying. But before you go on what I think is going to be an allegation about a money go round, let me be very clear here-
HOST: -No I just want an answer.
PM: Yeah, well I'm going to give you an answer. The principle price signal in the carbon pricing scheme is to be around 500 big polluters who will pay the price. So, that's the thing that changes behaviour,  gets people to change industrial processes, generate cleaner energy and consequently cut carbon pollution by around the equivalent of 45 million cars in 2020.
HOST: Well, with all due respect that hasn't answered the question either. The question is quite a simple one, how much will it cost to administer, in other words how much will it cost to collect the money and then churn it through the system, in other words go back to in terms of compensation and what have you, all the other bits of the scheme. How much is that going to cost?
PM: Well I'm happy to send you the amount that the regulator will cost and the amount that the Climate Change Authority will cost, but of course, these costs are necessary to drive a scheme that will cut carbon pollution and enable us to secure a cleaner energy future.
HOST: And Prime Minister, what - this is a question I know you were asked by a pensioner as well when you were in Adelaide - what impact will it have on electricity prices in South Australia?
PM: The impact will be around 10 per cent and, of course, we've taken that into account in providing the household compensation and when I talked to pensioners in Adelaide yesterday, I obviously wanted to explain to them that for a single pensioner, we are talking about providing $338; that's more than we expect the flow through impacts of pricing carbon to be on their household budget.
And, we've made special arrangements for self funded retirees as well. Look at the 1.8 million pensioner households in this country, we anticipate that on average they'll get $210 more than they need to; to keep buying the same basket of goods, after the price impact flows through. So, I wanted to get all of those figures in front of people so they could think about what it means for them, and their household budget.
And, of course, Tony Abbott is committed to taking all of that money away from pensioners and from families that we will provide it to.
HOST: Of course, I think it's about 285,000 self funded retirees won't qualify for any compensation.
PM: Completely untrue, completely untrue; and that information should not go out to your listeners because it's not right. Self funded retirees, who qualify for a part pension, will get the same increase as pensioners, $338 for a single pensioner, $510 for a pensioner couple.
Self funded retirees who are in the tax system, and many of them are because they have got earnings that are taxable, will get the benefit of a tax cut, probably around $300 and then, many self funded retirees, around 100,000 of them will get an additional $200 from the senior Australian's tax offset.
So, any self funded retiree listening to this program should get on the cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website and have a look for themselves. But, your statement is completely untrue.
HOST: OK, so the organisation that represents them is lying.
PM: It would have it wrong and I understand with all of the confusion that's around, people in the best of faith, doing the best that they can to absorb the information, can still make an error but I didn't want you repeating that false information that is not right.
And I don't want self funded retirees in Adelaide listening to your program thinking that they're not getting assistance. They should get on the clean energy future website and check for themselves.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you very much for your time this morning
PM: Thank you. 



PM: Thank you. I'm here today with Tanya Plibersek, in her electorate of Sydney and we are visiting together this amazing building, 1 Bligh Street, Sydney. This is the future for Australian office buildings, this is Australia's most sustainable office tower, making the best possible use of the clean energy technologies that are available today, making the best use of the sunshine for generating power, making the best use of design so that the building minimises its energy costs, making the best use of water recycling too. This is a building that has been put together with energy efficiency, sustainability and clean energy at the forefront of everybody's thinking.
And it's a building that has used great Australian technology, so for example the solar technology we were just looking at on the roof, is great Australian technology.
Putting a price on carbon will mean that this increasingly becomes the norm  -  people will look for a clean energy future, they will look to reduce their energy costs, so they'll look for the best ways of using the sun's power, they'll look for the best ways of using clean energy sources, they'll look for the smartest design to cut their energy needs. It's been a great privilege to be here today and to see some of this fantastic technology on display.
As Tanya and I walked out here, Tanya said it's looking very space age, as the door went up and yes it is looking very space age, but it's here today, working in Sydney as an office tower, where people go about their daily business and we will see more of this in the future as a result of putting a price on carbon.
We're putting a price on carbon so we can do the right thing by our environment and have the clean energy jobs of the future, like the Australian jobs that are in making the technology that this business uses. We are aiming to cut carbon pollution by at least five per cent by 2020.
Now, I do note today that Mr Abbott is also in Sydney and he's been talking to a group of older Australians and he's been criticising the target of cutting carbon pollution by minus five per cent. Well, I'm fairly amazed to hear that from Mr Abbott, because until today he has said to the Australian people that he shares the target of cutting carbon pollution by at least five per cent by 2020. So, if today Mr Abbott has changed his policy and he no longer believes in cutting carbon pollution, then he should say that very directly to the Australian people.
If he still supports cutting carbon pollution by at least five per cent, then he should explain why he's sitting with a group of older Australians and criticising that target.
The government has made the decisions that are necessary to cut carbon pollution. We've got a very clear plan for the nation's future  -  a plan to put a price on carbon from 1 July next year, that around 500 of our biggest polluters will pay, a plan to reduce carbon pollution by at least 160 million tonnes by 2020, a plan to secure the clean energy jobs of the future, like the jobs that have been in making the technology for this building, and a plan to assist nine out of ten households.
For example, the senior Australians Mr Abbott was talking to today are the kind of the people who will see an increase of $338 in their pension, $510 if they're a couple, and on average pensioner households will come out $210 in front of the amount of money they need to assist them with the flow through impacts of pricing carbon.
So, I hope Mr Abbott said to them today too, that he wants to take all of that money away from them.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: PM, in today's poll and also compensation measure that you have announced, why do you think the carbon tax policy is struggling (inaudible)?
PM: As I've said before, democracy isn't one long opinion poll and as I've said before I always expected this to be tough and to get tougher. We are explaining a big reform that our nation needs for its future. A big reform, which means we will have a better environment and we will have a stronger economy.
Yes, there's been a lot of fear around and that's why I've been out around the country explaining our plans to put a price on carbon, create a stronger economy, get the clean energy jobs of the future and do the right thing by the environment.
I am determined that we can look in the eyes the children of Australia and the generations to come and say we made the right decisions for their future. And I'll continue to be out explaining this to the Australian people.
Now, the Australian people will get their opportunity to decide in two years time, at the election in 2013, and I'll be very happy to fight that election on who's got a vision for this nation's future  -  a vision for a stronger economy, a vision for opportunity for all, a vision for tackling carbon pollution, continuing to improve schools, ensuring we're got better hospitals, making sure people have got the technology of the future, the National Broadband Network, and making sure people are secure with fairness and decency at work.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, as Deputy Prime Minister, you wanted to shelve the emissions trading scheme because it wasn't politically popular. Have you suddenly become more politically principled or less pragmatic, as you're Prime Minister now?
PM: The assumption in your question isn't an assumption I share.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a suggestion in today's Herald, in the opinion pieces, there's a piece by Phil Coorey, he's saying that the Coalition has traded a policy for various lobby groups. What do you make of that, number one and number two, would you guarantee that Labor wouldn't have done anything similar if this story by Phil is correct?
PM: As Prime Minister, I can absolutely say I'll always make the decisions that are right for this nation's future. I have seen these reports and what I'd say about these reports is if this report is true then Mr Abbott has some very important questions to answer. If this report is true, then it just reinforces that Mr Abbott is all about the politics, not about making the right decisions for this country's future.
JOURNALIST: Are you feeling safe in your position? Much of the political climate, was much the same when Kevin Rudd was axed as Prime Minister, given the opinion polling, are you not the slightest bit worried about you own standing with the Australian public?
PM: I'm very determined and my colleagues are very determined to make sure that we deliver the policies and plans which will give us a stronger economy, give better opportunity to Australians and tackle climate change. We always expected it to be tough. I've said in the past it would be tough and get tougher, so we'll be out there making sure that people have got the facts that they need to decide for themselves.
JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee that you'll be leading Labor to the next election?
PM: I'll very much look forward to the 2013 campaign, where I will be there as Prime Minister, continuing to outline a vision for this country's future, a vision for a stronger economy and better opportunity for all. I'll be very happy to fight the next election as Prime Minister, on that vision for the nation's future.
JOURNALIST: John Howard has just described today's (inaudible) polls as ‘absolutely appalling', he said (inaudible) the carbon tax, but Australians are (inaudible) about  the way the Greens have been described as extremists, (inaudible). How does that sit with you (inaudible)
PM: You'd expect Prime Minister Howard, former Prime Minister Howard, to be doing the things he's done all of his political life, which is advocating for the Liberal Party. Of course, Prime Minister Howard, when he was actually in this job, said to the Australian people, that we should put a price on carbon, that we should have an emissions trading scheme, that there was an advantage in being one of the first to move.
Now, here we are in 2011, we're not talking about being one of the first to move, we're talking about the risk of being left behind if we don't act and put a price on carbon to secure our clean energy future.
JOURNALIST: Didn't he say on Insiders, though, that was pre-GFC (inaudible) pre-Copenhagen?
PM: Well, I think his quotes from the time speak for themselves, where he talked about if he was going to continue as Prime Minister after the 2007 election, introducing an emissions trading scheme, and where he very proudly talked about the benefits he saw for being a first mover.
JOURNALIST: In your speech today, you said the economic instability should be no excuse not to move, so why are you being so stubborn, why shouldn't economic circumstances be taken into account?
PM: What I said in my speech this morning and what I'm very happy to repeat here, because it's an important message about our economy  -  yes, we have seen continuing signs of unease in Europe, and yes, we've seen unease in America too. There are European nations still struggling with big debts and high unemployment and there's some nervousness in the American economy as well. But when we look at Australia's economy we are in the part of the world that is continuing to grow strongly. Our underlying economy is strong; we're got a huge pipeline of investment coming down the track at us in resources, $430 billion in the resources sector alone. We've got low unemployment, we've got a strong budget position, so the underlying fundamentals of the Australian economy are strong.
And we have those strong underlying fundamentals today, because governments in the past have had the courage to step up to the big reforms that the nation needed. They haven't always been popular  -  floating the dollar, reducing tariffs, introducing superannuation, some of the big changes that were made in the past, bitterly contested at the time. But we're standing here in a strong and resilient economy because of those earlier waves of reform. Well, the responsible thing for me to do as Prime Minister, and I'm determined to do it, is to deliver the big reform our economy needs now, which is putting a price on carbon pollution, so we've still got a strong economy in the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think that your Labor colleagues are nervous about where the party is heading and are nervous with your leadership (inaudible)?
PM: I think everybody's determined to be out there explaining our policy to the community and we'll continue to do just that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, emotionally how do you handle being unpopular?
PM: I'm very determined to get this job done for the nation's future. I'm very determined to continue to have the courage of my convictions. This is absolutely what the nation needs for a stronger economy, a clean energy future, and to do the right thing by the environment for future generations of Australians.
Thank you very much. 



PM: Oh, of course farming will be viable and our modelling is showing that, for example, with food production, what you will see is people pass costs through the consumer, which is why we are ensuring that nine out of ten households get assistance through increased pensions, increased family payments, and a tax cut, which comes with a major tax reform.
Farmers themselves and their families are going to see those benefits and may people in farm families, who go and work in town, potentially part time, are going to see some big tax benefits through our tax reform process.
HOST: You say the costs will be passed on to consumers, but farm groups say that the costs will be passed down to farmers and research released from the National Farmers Federation shows that even with few exclusions from the tax, farmers could pay up to $10,000 a year in extra costs. Are you comfortable hearing these figures?
PM: Look, I simply don't accept those figures and I had noted that there are some spokespeople on TV from the food industry, who say all at the same time that farmers will have to bear the costs, that food producers will have to bear the costs, and that consumers will have to bear the costs. Well, those three things can't be right. Where we will see costs flow is they will flow through in prices that consumers pay and understanding that we are providing the household assistance.
And of course we will see businesses, particularly the around 500 big polluters in this country, who are paying the price for carbon pollution for the first time, innovating and changing so that they are doing things in a cleaner way and generating less carbon pollution.
HOST: But dairy processer Murray Goulburn says that it will pass its costs on to farmers, so what will you do to stop that happening?
PM: We've been very clear, of course, that there is household assistance, which can deal with the limited consumer price impact of putting a price on carbon. We anticipate that to be 0.7 per cent, so less than one per cent.
HOST: OK, let's move on to fuel. In 2014 the government wants to include fuel for heavy vehicles in a carbon price, giving industry two years to adapt, use cleaner fuels and convert to rail. The problem is that there isn't the rail to cope with current needs, so what's going to change in three years?
PM: Well, I think we've just got to be clear here, we are talking about the petrol and fuels that households use and people operating light commercial vehicle use, not being covered at all.
We are talking about heavy trucking coming into the scheme on 1 July 2014. We believe that with heavy trucking in the scheme. We will see over time, greater innovation and reduction in carbon pollution. We know that's possible, because some of our big trucking companies have already engaged in very big emissions reductions, so we know change is possible and that putting a price on carbon will provide that change.
HOST: What about rail though? If you're anticipating a conversion from trucking to rail, where's the-
PM: We're not anticipating, and I don't want to disabuse you of that, no one has ever said we are anticipating a complete conversion in the two years before heavy road comes into this system, no one said that. This government has a proud track record of investing in ports and road and rail.
HOST: The agricultural sector is one of the bigger emitters in Australia, with 15 per cent of emissions coming from the industry. Can Australia afford to exclude agricultural emissions forever?
PM: Yes, we can and we're intending to. So, we've deliberately designed this scheme to meet our needs as a nation and so we've looked at our great farming nation and determined it's appropriate to agriculture to not be included, but we do want farmers to benefit from the fact that our nation is moving to a cleaner energy future, with less carbon pollution, which is why we've got the carbon farming initiative.
This all comes with a huge land package; we're talking about $1.7 billion. So, a new income stream for farmers through carbon farming and of course new funds for land holders to do the right thing by the environment, in terms of better biodiversity.
HOST: So, are you saying that agricultural emissions will never be included in a carbon price?
PM: Look, we've announced the scheme. It's there for all to see and it doesn't include agriculture.
HOST: OK, so that's putting on the table, never-
PM: That is the design of the scheme and we've made that decision deliberately.
HOST: On live cattle exports to Indonesia, the suspension has been lifted, but no cattle have left the country yet. When will the trade resume, can you give us some days, weeks, months?
PM: Well, this is now a question for our exporters and we are continuing to work with them to get the live export industry up and running. Now, exporters can go back to the live trade, they've got to get an export permit which ensures that we can track and trace animals and that there's reporting and accountability and independent auditing. As soon as people are in a position to do that, they can have an export permit and as we know from Indonesia, they are prepared to grant import permits. The advice to me is that there are exporters who believe that they will be in a position to meet those conditions and meet them quite promptly.
But, it's now a question for those individual exporters. Our role, of course, is to set up the right system to ensure long terms sustainability of the trade, because we know that animal welfare standards are being dealt with appropriately. 



HOST: Joining us this afternoon our Prime Minister, Julia Gillard.
PM: Good afternoon.
HOST: Prime Minister, I was talking to someone the other day who went from not liking the carbon tax to thinking it wasn't such a bad idea, honestly, in a matter of seconds. Are people confused or is the opposition just running a much better campaign?
PM: I think there's a lot anxiety around, a lot of fear, and there's been a lot of false information peddled as well, so I'm going to keep working through to explain to people the facts of our package. I believe the facts are on our side.
We're putting forward a plan that will cut carbon pollution by a big amount: by 2020 we will see the equivalent of 45 million less cars on the road. Australia's only got around 12 million, so try and imagine 45 million cars and the amount of pollution they generate. 
And this is a plan which will protect Australian jobs as we secure a clean energy future, and where 9 out of 10 households will see assistance in the form of tax cuts or family payment increases or pension increases.
HOST: Now, you have been saying this, though, for quite some time. Why isn't it resonating with a lot of voters?
PM: I think when you're going to have a big reform and a big change of course it takes some time to work through. I'm not surprised by that.
When we've done big reforms in the past in this country - floated the dollar, reduced tariffs, created universal superannuation, indeed created Medicare - it's taken time to explain. Big changes always do take some time to absorb, and so we'll keep working through in an environment where people have seen so many shameful claims made that are there to generate fear.
HOST: People in the Northern Territory think they're going to get slugged more because of transport costs. Can you make any guarantees that those costs won't be passed on here, that we and people in regional areas won't be penalised?
PM: Well, first and foremost the petrol or fuel that people use in their car or in light commercial vehicles is not in the scheme at all. Second, heavy vehicles come into the scheme but not until the 1st July 2014, so when the scheme starts on the 1st July next year, what people should expect to see is around 500 of our biggest polluters paying a price for the first time for the carbon pollution they put in our atmosphere, which will cause them to innovate and change and reduce pollution. People will see a flow through on some goods that they buy. That affect will be less than 1% of the cost of living and that's where the household assistance comes in-
HOST: -If people actually start saying to us that's costing you more because of increased in transport costs, we can argue the toss with them quite comfortably?
PM: Oh, Anne, you can argue the toss and if you think someone is trying to sell you a pup and claim that a big price increase is due to carbon pricing, then you can ring up the ACCC, they will be there as a cop on the beat against false claims and we have ensured that they can fine people, they can take them to court and get penalties levied of up to $1.1 million for each false claim, so there's literally a million reasons for businesses to do the right thing.
HOST: So while we're talking about a fuel, our farmers of course are very, very unhappy here. You said that farmers will be exempt from carbon tax on fuel. However aviation fuel's taxed and so many of our station owners and farmers are concerned about that because of course they use planes and helicopters in their work.
PM: Yes there will be an effective carbon price on aviation fuel that's achieved through changes in fuel credits and taxes. What I would say to farmers who use that fuel in their daily pursuits is, of course, we do expect that there will be a flow through to prices that households pay, and that's what the assistance is there for - to assist households to meet those costs.
HOST: But you won't consider any exemption for farmers using aviation fuel?
PM: No, we've made clear exactly how the scheme's going to work and they're the announcements that you saw not yesterday but Sunday last week.
HOST: Now, what's the latest on the ground in Indonesia re the abattoirs?
PM: Well, we are working strongly with exporters to get the trade back up and running. Of course, they now know crystal clear the conditions under which the trade can get back up and running, so we need to track and trace animals and have reporting and accountability and independent auditing. 
A number of exporters are working through to meet those conditions and Indonesia will grant import permits - it said that very clearly. So, we do want to see this trade resumed quickly under conditions where we know it's going to be sustainable for the long term.
HOST: Moving along, we had a priest on last week, Father Paul Webb, who described the conditions in detention here as worse than being in jail, not so much physically but that people who've been passed by immigration are still waiting sometimes over a year for ASIO to give them a full pass. They're dragging the chain. Is there any way to move that forward?
PM: Well, I don't make any apology for ensuring that we have our security agencies like ASIO security checking people. We have worked with ASIO and the Department of Immigration to ensure that this can happen as efficiently as possible, but there are cases where it takes some time and us doing the appropriate thing to check security issues is obviously right by the nation.
HOST: But if we've got, if Immigration has passed these people and it's taking 18 months or something for ASIO, there are still people in prison who are waiting and they're protesting, they're stitching their lips together, people are attempting suicide, surely there's some way of fast tracking that, having more people staffed in ASIO to do these checks, etcetera?
PM: People don't get any change or advantage in processing because of conduct like that in detention centres. It makes absolutely not difference to the time their claim takes or the way their claim is treated. I'm trying to do this as efficiently as possible, but there are circumstances where it does take some time and we do want to take a very rigorous and effective approach to security checking.
HOST: Would you consider upping the staff levels in ASIO departments so that this could be fast tracked?
PM: Well, look we've made our decisions about resourcing of our security agencies.
HOST: OK, you made a promise, we're moving to get children out of heavily secured detention facilities. You said you'd get them out by June 30th. Has that happened?
PM: Yes, the Minister met the commitment that he gave.
HOST: Malaysia's facing unrest, as you are well aware, of violent protests this weekend, people actually liking it to the unrest in Arab countries. How's that going to affect the Malaysia solution?
PM: Well we continue to be in advanced discussions with the Government of Malaysia about this innovative plan to break the people smugglers' business model and we are working through in those advanced discussions.
HOST: So nothing's going to change?
PM: No, we'll continue to be engaged in those discussions with the Malaysian Government.
HOST: Prime Minister re the Intervention, your Minister Jenny Macklin got a beating up here last week in Maningrida. People are still unhappy. They feel humiliated by the Basics Card and probably more the general emphasis on their shortcomings with little or no change to their living conditions. Are you going to take this response, which is quite unusual for Aboriginal people to speak out in such a fashion, are you going to take it seriously or is it another token consultation?
PM: This consultation is a real consultation. Jenny Macklin is leading it for the Government. 
As Prime Minister, I've said I understand some of the feelings of hurt and shame that were caused by the way in which the emergency response first started. I also understand that there are things that have happened in the emergency response that have made a difference to the lives of indigenous people in a positive way. I've had direct feedback myself when I've met with people in the Northern Territory about some of the improvements, including more fresh food in camp stores; some of the improvements with kids getting meals in schools; some of the improvements in housing that have been delivered, and I've seen some of those houses myself; and I've also heard from people who do feel under less pressure in terms of being humbugged out of money as a result of income management. 
But we are engaged in a genuine consultation process so that we shape the next phase in strong consultation with local people.
HOST: What about the proposal of keeping the outstations? What do you think of that?
PM: Well, look, these are the things that Jenny Macklin's obviously working and consulting on, so if you are going to consult and work through with people what the next stage should look like, it's really inappropriate for me to prejudge.
HOST: Do you get shocked when you visit some Aboriginal communities and town camps?
PM: Oh, look, I've visited communities over, you know, all the years I've been in parliament. I've been in parliament since 1998 and for a period of time, admittedly a quite brief period of time, but for a period of time I was shadow minister for indigenous affairs, and yes I've seen some shocking conditions.
I've also seen some improvements. I did go to a town camp outside Alice Springs a number of weeks ago to see the improvements that have happened there. That's a town camp where literally people have died because of dog attacks, and now we are seeing that town camp getting more houses with the aim that it gets the sort of services that suburban Australia takes for granted, but there is more that needs to be done.
HOST: On a more personal level, I know you'll say as everyone does that polls are fickle things, but how do you actually feel when you read that your popularity's going down, you know, that men don't like you as much as they used to; that it might be your turn to get the boot; that, you know, history could repeat itself and you might suffer the same fate as Kevin Rudd, you might get your comeuppance.  How do you cope with that?
PM: Well, I'm spurred on by my determination to make sure we do the things we need to do today to ensure that we have a strong economy and better opportunities for all Australians in the future, so it's a sense of determination.
HOST: What about you? What about your spirit?
PM: That is my spirit.
HOST: Thank you, Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you, thanks very much. 



I thank Jeff for his acknowledgement of the traditional owners of this land.
And on behalf of us all, I pay my respects to the Gadigal people, whose long journey of caring for this land continues proudly to this day.
Friends,
That's why we're here today
Because we love this land.
We respect its people.
And we care profoundly for its future.
Since 1972, the Total Environment Centre has been at the forefront of preserving our precious natural heritage.
Working with visionary leaders like Neville Wran and Bob Carr, you've achieved miracles:
The great forests of north-east and south-east NSW protected forever.
The Blue Mountains not only saved but inscribed on the World Heritage List.
A world class chain of marine parks.
But what we didn't know in 1972 was that greenhouse gases were threatening the future of our environmental wonders.
We know now, and we've known for some time.
Leaders like Bob Carr and Margaret Thatcher raised the alarm in the late 1980s.
By 2007, even John Howard found it prudent to respond as the tide of evidence continued to grow.
Just like the conservative leaders of the UK, France, Italy, Germany and New Zealand have as well.
Today, in 2011, we know in abundant and undeniable detail the threat that carbon pollution poses to our way of life.
And I can tell you this: there is no leader on earth who is getting briefings that tell them anything different.
All of them have faced or are facing the same tough choices we are, with all the political difficulties they entail.
And each of them needs to answer to their own people  -  to humanity at large  -  and to the future ... for the decisions they make or fail to make.
When I am advised that we will face more days of extreme heat, more bushfires, more droughts, coastal flooding, loss of agricultural land in the Murray Darling Basin, devastating effects for the Great Barrier Reef and Kakadu, then the time has come to act.
And act we will. I won't let this country surrender in the face of the challenge of climate change.
Our nation will act to cut carbon pollution and seize a clean energy future.
The costs of acting are manageable.
And the opportunities from acting are great.
Indeed, it is those very opportunities that bring us here today.
New investment and new technology.  New jobs and new skills.
Since 2002, the Green Capital program has connected business and NGOs to debate how we make these opportunities a reality. 
And I'm here today to affirm your great work and to say:
The time for words is over. 
The time for action has arrived.
The environmental imperative to cut carbon pollution is strong, the economic imperative to modernise our economy is strong too.
And I say this with full awareness of global economic conditions.
As we have been reminded this week, Europe is still struggling will high unemployment and excessive sovereign debt.
The US recovery is also showing renewed signs of weakness.
We are not immune to developments in the global economy.
Here, consumers are still more cautious than they were before the global financial crisis, and credit conditions remain tight for some borrowers - and this is not surprising.
At the same time the strong dollar and competition for labour puts pressure on the non-mining sector and contributes to softness in the short-term.
Yet while there are heightened risks in the US and Europe, the fundamentals in Australia and our region are very different.
We are located in the right part of the world at the right time.
The prospects for our region remain much stronger as the weight of global activity continues to shift in our favour.
Just last week we saw China reporting growth of almost 10 per cent for the past year.
Our fundamentals are strong - we have low unemployment, strong job creation, and record terms of trade that are driving an unprecedented pipeline of business investment - $430 billion forecast in resources alone.
We also have a strong budget position, very low debt and a resilient financial system which all position us well for the future.
This fundamental economic strength has its ultimate roots in our creative and confident people ... but thirty years of economic modernisation has been vital.
The floating dollar is a vital safety valve on inflation in our resource-rich, export-oriented country.
Flexible enterprise bargaining lifts productivity and competitiveness in every sector of the economy.
Successive reforms to education and training and the system of skilled migration help lift the productivity of our people.
Superannuation ensures the country's savings, and insures the country's future.
And just as we are economically stronger now for the modernising reforms of the past three decades  -  so we must embrace economic reform now to have a strong modern economy in decades to come.
Just as this Labor Government took steps to protect jobs during the Global Financial Crisis - and just as we have kept the economy strong since, while hundreds of thousands of jobs have been created - we will continue to undertake the reforms this country needs to keep jobs growing.
Pricing carbon will have powerful economic effects.
It will mean we use our energy more productively - producing more output for a given level of energy input.
It will direct domestic capital - steering it towards new clean industries which will thrive in a carbon constrained world. 
It will attract billions of dollars of international investment from firms looking to produce in economies which have certain, efficient policies to tackle the carbon challenge.
In years to come, carbon productivity will be as important to luring investment from multinationals as labour costs, tax rates, human capital, and levels of technological sophistication have been in past decades.
That's why carbon pricing is part of our broader economic agenda - because it will give us a stronger economy, because it will put us on a stronger competitive footing, and because it will allow us to take advantage of economic opportunities as they arise - rather than playing catch-up in the years to come.
This is an important part of our broader economic agenda for the country.
Such as building high speed broadband - to ensure Australia thrives as global growth is increasingly driven by the production, distribution and exchange of information.
Or reforming our schools, universities and TAFEs to drive faster accumulation and more efficient allocation of our human capital.
And introducing an efficient price to fund hospital services, so this large sector of our domestic economy remains efficient  -  and so our long-term fiscal settings are not threatened by the challenges of our ageing society.
And increasing superannuation, to ensure that the benefits from the mining boom continue to be felt in the Australian economy well beyond the mining boom itself.
In the midst of uncertain global economic conditions, we should not lose sight of this country's strong economic backbone - a backbone that has been constructed by reforming governments over decades.
And we should not lose sight of the need to ensure that backbone stays strong in the years to come.
The costs of inaction are greater than the costs of action - both immediately, and in the longer term. 
That is true of climate change - as it is true of economic reform more generally.
One of the messages of recent economic history is this: stay on the reform road  -  keep modernising your economy  -  or pay a high price.
Retreat is not an option.
Friends, the contours of the Government's “Clean Energy Future” plan will be familiar to you all.
It can be summarised in a single concept:
Making the biggest polluters pay.
Or in the language of economists - pricing externalities.
Pricing carbon is a catalyst for a clean energy investment boom.
As a result of the government's plan, renewables (excluding hydro) will grow by 1700 per cent to 2050.
At that stage, renewables will make up 40 per cent of electricity generation, from a base of just 10 per cent today.
The bulk of that transformation will be driven by our price on carbon.
Starting at $23 a tonne next July and moving to what we expect will be around $29 a tonne when the emissions trading scheme commences in 2015 and reinforced by a nation-wide cap on the total amount of emissions allowed in the Australian economy.
That will change behaviour and therefore drive investment.
And to give the transition an extra boost, we have decided to establish a Clean Energy Finance Corporation to drive private investment.
Call it a catalyst  -  call it an impetus.
It will do amazing things for renewables in this country.
Similar to the UK's Green Investment Bank, CEFC will invest in the commercialisation of renewable and clean energy technologies.
It will provide loans, guarantees and equity to help make these projects a reality.
The Corporation will be independent from government like the Future Fund and be run on a commercial basis.
Investment decisions will be made on a rigorous case-by-case analysis.
And projects that are financed will be expected to pay their own way.
Alongside the Corporation, we'll also establish a new independent Australian Renewable Energy Agency or ARENA to manage $3.2 billion in clean energy initiatives.
This represents funding that is currently being administered at the departmental level across different programs and agencies.
We want to bring that funding together and put it on a more transparent and systematic basis.
The $10 billion allocated to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation will go to mature technologies that are ready to be scaled-up.
The $3.2 billion to ARENA will go to more early stage technologies to assist them towards commercial viability.
As a third complementary measure, we will also close down 2000 megawatts of
high polluting electricity generation in south-eastern Australia.
To preserve market integrity, this will be done by tender.
And no generator will be turned off until we are satisfied that alternatives are in place to keep the lights on.
And we will stand shoulder to shoulder with affected workers and communities.
Friends, put those measures together:
Closing down the worst sources of coal fired power
$13.2 billion for new investments
Our 20 per cent Renewable Energy Target
Plus the impetus from the carbon price, and clean energy will be turbo-charged in this country.
Solar, wind, geothermal, tidal power, natural gas, co-generation.
And, yes, clean coal too.
I've seen some of these projects for myself and glimpsed through the curtain what a clean energy future will look like.
Some, like the CSIRO experimental solar facility at Newcastle, almost seem like something out of sci-fi.
The trial plant at Mayfield West has 4000 square metres of mirrors all facing onto a single tower where compressed air is heated to 900 degrees in order to drive a turbine and create electricity.
Because it doesn't use water, this will be great for remote towns and villages in dry regions of Australia and indeed the world, allowing them to replace diesel generators with clean, green power from the sun.
Other models, like piping methane out of rubbish dumps and using it to generate electricity are so simple it's hard to think why we didn't do them before.
Last week I went to the Rochedale Renewable Energy Facility in Brisbane and saw exactly how it works.
I know the clean energy industry is ready to roll.
And my message today is: “Go for it”.
I thank all of you at Green Capital for playing such a central role in helping to define the way Australian business thinks about sustainability.
You have shown courage.
You have shown responsibility.
Today, I stand with you on the side of science and reason.
On the side of good economics.
On the side of the future.
With you, I'm focused on cutting carbon pollution, tackling climate change and getting Australia a clean energy future.
Long after the opinion polls have been forgotten, I want to look the next generation of Australians in the eye and tell them: we did the right thing by you.
In the years to come I want Australia to be a nation that finds itself standing on the right side of history.
A nation secure in the knowledge that it has risen to the challenge and tackled carbon pollution.
A nation with a clean energy economy that gives our people the jobs and the opportunities of the future.
We're closer to that future because of the great work of the Total Environment Centre and the Green Capital program.
Thank you. 



I thank Jeff for his acknowledgement of the traditional owners of this land.
And on behalf of us all, I pay my respects to the Gadigal people, whose long journey of caring for this land continues proudly to this day.
Friends,
That's why we're here today
Because we love this land.
We respect its people.
And we care profoundly for its future.
Since 1972, the Total Environment Centre has been at the forefront of preserving our precious natural heritage.
Working with visionary leaders like Neville Wran and Bob Carr, you've achieved miracles:
The great forests of north-east and south-east NSW protected forever.
The Blue Mountains not only saved but inscribed on the World Heritage List.
A world class chain of marine parks.
But what we didn't know in 1972 was that greenhouse gases were threatening the future of our environmental wonders.
We know now, and we've known for some time.
Leaders like Bob Carr and Margaret Thatcher raised the alarm in the late 1980s.
By 2007, even John Howard found it prudent to respond as the tide of evidence continued to grow.
Just like the conservative leaders of the UK, France, Italy, Germany and New Zealand have as well.
Today, in 2011, we know in abundant and undeniable detail the threat that carbon pollution poses to our way of life.
And I can tell you this: there is no leader on earth who is getting briefings that tell them anything different.
All of them have faced or are facing the same tough choices we are, with all the political difficulties they entail.
And each of them needs to answer to their own people  -  to humanity at large  -  and to the future ... for the decisions they make or fail to make.
When I am advised that we will face more days of extreme heat, more bushfires, more droughts, coastal flooding, loss of agricultural land in the Murray Darling Basin, devastating effects for the Great Barrier Reef and Kakadu, then the time has come to act.
And act we will. I won't let this country surrender in the face of the challenge of climate change.
Our nation will act to cut carbon pollution and seize a clean energy future.
The costs of acting are manageable.
And the opportunities from acting are great.
Indeed, it is those very opportunities that bring us here today.
New investment and new technology.  New jobs and new skills.
Since 2002, the Green Capital program has connected business and NGOs to debate how we make these opportunities a reality. 
And I'm here today to affirm your great work and to say:
The time for words is over. 
The time for action has arrived.
The environmental imperative to cut carbon pollution is strong, the economic imperative to modernise our economy is strong too.
And I say this with full awareness of global economic conditions.
As we have been reminded this week, Europe is still struggling will high unemployment and excessive sovereign debt.
The US recovery is also showing renewed signs of weakness.
We are not immune to developments in the global economy.
Here, consumers are still more cautious than they were before the global financial crisis, and credit conditions remain tight for some borrowers - and this is not surprising.
At the same time the strong dollar and competition for labour puts pressure on the non-mining sector and contributes to softness in the short-term.
Yet while there are heightened risks in the US and Europe, the fundamentals in Australia and our region are very different.
We are located in the right part of the world at the right time.
The prospects for our region remain much stronger as the weight of global activity continues to shift in our favour.
Just last week we saw China reporting growth of almost 10 per cent for the past year.
Our fundamentals are strong - we have low unemployment, strong job creation, and record terms of trade that are driving an unprecedented pipeline of business investment - $430 billion forecast in resources alone.
We also have a strong budget position, very low debt and a resilient financial system which all position us well for the future.
This fundamental economic strength has its ultimate roots in our creative and confident people ... but thirty years of economic modernisation has been vital.
The floating dollar is a vital safety valve on inflation in our resource-rich, export-oriented country.
Flexible enterprise bargaining lifts productivity and competitiveness in every sector of the economy.
Successive reforms to education and training and the system of skilled migration help lift the productivity of our people.
Superannuation ensures the country's savings, and insures the country's future.
And just as we are economically stronger now for the modernising reforms of the past three decades  -  so we must embrace economic reform now to have a strong modern economy in decades to come.
Just as this Labor Government took steps to protect jobs during the Global Financial Crisis - and just as we have kept the economy strong since, while hundreds of thousands of jobs have been created - we will continue to undertake the reforms this country needs to keep jobs growing.
Pricing carbon will have powerful economic effects.
It will mean we use our energy more productively - producing more output for a given level of energy input.
It will direct domestic capital - steering it towards new clean industries which will thrive in a carbon constrained world. 
It will attract billions of dollars of international investment from firms looking to produce in economies which have certain, efficient policies to tackle the carbon challenge.
In years to come, carbon productivity will be as important to luring investment from multinationals as labour costs, tax rates, human capital, and levels of technological sophistication have been in past decades.
That's why carbon pricing is part of our broader economic agenda - because it will give us a stronger economy, because it will put us on a stronger competitive footing, and because it will allow us to take advantage of economic opportunities as they arise - rather than playing catch-up in the years to come.
This is an important part of our broader economic agenda for the country.
Such as building high speed broadband - to ensure Australia thrives as global growth is increasingly driven by the production, distribution and exchange of information.
Or reforming our schools, universities and TAFEs to drive faster accumulation and more efficient allocation of our human capital.
And introducing an efficient price to fund hospital services, so this large sector of our domestic economy remains efficient  -  and so our long-term fiscal settings are not threatened by the challenges of our ageing society.
And increasing superannuation, to ensure that the benefits from the mining boom continue to be felt in the Australian economy well beyond the mining boom itself.
In the midst of uncertain global economic conditions, we should not lose sight of this country's strong economic backbone - a backbone that has been constructed by reforming governments over decades.
And we should not lose sight of the need to ensure that backbone stays strong in the years to come.
The costs of inaction are greater than the costs of action - both immediately, and in the longer term. 
That is true of climate change - as it is true of economic reform more generally.
One of the messages of recent economic history is this: stay on the reform road  -  keep modernising your economy  -  or pay a high price.
Retreat is not an option.
Friends, the contours of the Government's “Clean Energy Future” plan will be familiar to you all.
It can be summarised in a single concept:
Making the biggest polluters pay.
Or in the language of economists - pricing externalities.
Pricing carbon is a catalyst for a clean energy investment boom.
As a result of the government's plan, renewables (excluding hydro) will grow by 1700 per cent to 2050.
At that stage, renewables will make up 40 per cent of electricity generation, from a base of just 10 per cent today.
The bulk of that transformation will be driven by our price on carbon.
Starting at $23 a tonne next July and moving to what we expect will be around $29 a tonne when the emissions trading scheme commences in 2015 and reinforced by a nation-wide cap on the total amount of emissions allowed in the Australian economy.
That will change behaviour and therefore drive investment.
And to give the transition an extra boost, we have decided to establish a Clean Energy Finance Corporation to drive private investment.
Call it a catalyst  -  call it an impetus.
It will do amazing things for renewables in this country.
Similar to the UK's Green Investment Bank, CEFC will invest in the commercialisation of renewable and clean energy technologies.
It will provide loans, guarantees and equity to help make these projects a reality.
The Corporation will be independent from government like the Future Fund and be run on a commercial basis.
Investment decisions will be made on a rigorous case-by-case analysis.
And projects that are financed will be expected to pay their own way.
Alongside the Corporation, we'll also establish a new independent Australian Renewable Energy Agency or ARENA to manage $3.2 billion in clean energy initiatives.
This represents funding that is currently being administered at the departmental level across different programs and agencies.
We want to bring that funding together and put it on a more transparent and systematic basis.
The $10 billion allocated to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation will go to mature technologies that are ready to be scaled-up.
The $3.2 billion to ARENA will go to more early stage technologies to assist them towards commercial viability.
As a third complementary measure, we will also close down 2000 megawatts of
high polluting electricity generation in south-eastern Australia.
To preserve market integrity, this will be done by tender.
And no generator will be turned off until we are satisfied that alternatives are in place to keep the lights on.
And we will stand shoulder to shoulder with affected workers and communities.
Friends, put those measures together:
Closing down the worst sources of coal fired power
$13.2 billion for new investments
Our 20 per cent Renewable Energy Target
Plus the impetus from the carbon price, and clean energy will be turbo-charged in this country.
Solar, wind, geothermal, tidal power, natural gas, co-generation.
And, yes, clean coal too.
I've seen some of these projects for myself and glimpsed through the curtain what a clean energy future will look like.
Some, like the CSIRO experimental solar facility at Newcastle, almost seem like something out of sci-fi.
The trial plant at Mayfield West has 4000 square metres of mirrors all facing onto a single tower where compressed air is heated to 900 degrees in order to drive a turbine and create electricity.
Because it doesn't use water, this will be great for remote towns and villages in dry regions of Australia and indeed the world, allowing them to replace diesel generators with clean, green power from the sun.
Other models, like piping methane out of rubbish dumps and using it to generate electricity are so simple it's hard to think why we didn't do them before.
Last week I went to the Rochedale Renewable Energy Facility in Brisbane and saw exactly how it works.
I know the clean energy industry is ready to roll.
And my message today is: “Go for it”.
I thank all of you at Green Capital for playing such a central role in helping to define the way Australian business thinks about sustainability.
You have shown courage.
You have shown responsibility.
Today, I stand with you on the side of science and reason.
On the side of good economics.
On the side of the future.
With you, I'm focused on cutting carbon pollution, tackling climate change and getting Australia a clean energy future.
Long after the opinion polls have been forgotten, I want to look the next generation of Australians in the eye and tell them: we did the right thing by you.
In the years to come I want Australia to be a nation that finds itself standing on the right side of history.
A nation secure in the knowledge that it has risen to the challenge and tackled carbon pollution.
A nation with a clean energy economy that gives our people the jobs and the opportunities of the future.
We're closer to that future because of the great work of the Total Environment Centre and the Green Capital program.
Thank you. 



HOST: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Richard.
HOST: You're well and in our neck of the woods with a tough job ahead of you trying to sell this carbon tax. Look, I noticed there's an article in the Newcastle Herald today, Prime Minister, with your name on it and it says, quote ‘people who live and work in the Hunter know we have to tackle climate change'. I mean, a lot of people would disagree with you on that one Prime Minister.
PM: I think Australians generally do believe climate change is real and do want to do the right thing by themselves but also by their kids and the future and cut carbon pollution so that we do tackle climate change and I'm here today in the Hunter and I'll obviously be talking directly to people who worked in mining, I think there's been a lot of fear spread and a lot of misrepresentation. There is a good future for the coal industry as we tackle climate change and we're going to be working with coal companies to achieve just that and really in many ways the coal industry has spoken, we've seen big businesses like Peabody engage in takeovers of Australian businesses because they know there's a good future in mining coal and of course we've had big unions come out too and say they see a bright future for industries like coal and steel even as we price carbon and do the right thing, not only by the environment but by our economy because we're giving investors certainty and attracting new investment in our nation.
HOST: Right, well look, you're saying that and obviously your Government, I spoke to Greg Combet last week, but in our neck of the woods yesterday Ralph Hillman who is the Australian Coal Association executive, I mean he obviously disagrees with you. Nikki Williams who's the boss of New South Wales Minerals Council prior to the details of the carbon tax suggesting that there'd be several mines closing and thousands of jobs lost. Yeah, sure the fear factor's long and loud, but you know, a little bit of confusion and a lot of money being spent on, well from the coal industry trying to ram home their point of view, you're spending, I believe your Government, about $25 million to get the message across. It would appear that people are hearing their message rather than your Government's message, Prime Minister?
PM: I'll be out there continuing to talk with people and I think people are smart enough to think through and they'll look to get the information. But if on coal I can just give you some simple statistics which I think help paint the picture, coal prices have doubled in the last few years from $150 a tonne to $300 a tonne. The big companies are making profits in the order of a million dollars per worker, the average impost on coal from us pricing carbon is less than $2 a tonne, so that's against a back drop of prices having doubled. Yes there are some mines which are gassy which generate more carbon pollution than others and we've set aside $1.3 billion to work with those mines and to work with the coal industry. So I think when people are thinking this through they may want that kind of information, which I think helps give a sense of the scale of what we're doing, less than $2 a tonne against a backdrop of prices having doubled to $300 a tonne.
HOST: Yeah, do you think that part of the problem here in selling the message is that it is all about the environment and pollution and yet it's been reduced to an economic debate, Prime Minister?
PM: Well it's about both. We want to do the right thing by our environment and cut carbon pollution so this is (inaudible) we are doing the right thing by your environment is also doing the right thing by your economy. I want us to have the clean energy jobs of the future. I don't want us to fall behind the standards of the world and see those new industries and new jobs go to other nations. And other nations are acting and capturing that new investment from those new opportunities by giving people certainty about how we are going to price carbon in this country, we can unlock new investment here which will create new jobs and new opportunities for the future. So as we price carbon our economy's going to continue to grow, employment is going to continue to grow and we will be doing the right thing as we cut carbon pollution.
HOST: Greens leader Bob Brown, when you made the announcement of the details of the carbon tax Sunday prior to last, was crying about the fact that if it hadn't been for the Greens we wouldn't have this carbon tax, I mean you obviously disagree with him on that?
PM: Yes I do. We've talked as a  -  well in this sense I do, we've talked as a nation about pricing carbon for the best part of a decade. So if we go back and look at how this debate brought us here, we've had people like Margaret Thatcher warning the world that temperatures were warming and we needed to do something about it. We had John Howard go to the 2007 election saying that he wanted an emissions trading scheme and to put a price on carbon. In the 2010 election I spoke to people about an emissions trading scheme and pricing carbon. Where we will get to is from 1 July next year we'll have a three year period with a fixed price, effectively a carbon tax and then we'll get that emissions trading scheme which means we will cap the amount of carbon pollution that our economy can generate. So it's been a long journey and many people playing many different roles in the long journey, Margaret Thatcher, John Howard, you name it.
HOST: Oh yes.
PM: But we're here and we've got to make this decision and get this done.
HOST: Tony Abbott did at one stage say that he thought that pricing carbon was the best way to tackle the problem. He's certainly moved away from that. There has been up until now a commitment from both sides of politics for a 5% reduction by 2020. Are you surprised that Tony Abbott from what he said yesterday seems to be moving away from that commitment?
PM: I'm astonished. Tony Abbott has been in many different positions in this debate. He was of course in John Howard's cabinet when they all agreed that they want an emissions trading scheme and then during this period in Opposition he's been for an emissions trading scheme and for a carbon tax and now he's against the carbon tax. But up until yesterday he was certainly saying he was for cutting carbon pollution by 5% by 2020, that is he shared the Government's ambition that we cut carbon pollution by that amount. Yesterday he performed this amazing back flip and now he's saying he doesn't want to cut carbon pollution at all. We'll I think he needs to explain that incredible back flip to the Australian people.
HOST: Thank you very much for your time Prime Minister and enjoy your time in our neck of the woods today, you're off to Centennial Coal at Mandalong a little later this morning I believe?
PM: Yes I am and I'm enjoying your beautiful sunshine in the meantime.
HOST: Alright, make the most of it. Thanks for your time, have a good day.
PM: Thank you. 



I was sorry to hear the news today that Barry Hall will be retiring from AFL footy at the end of this season.
I want to take the opportunity to congratulate Barry on his achievements and wish him good luck for the rest of the season and in the next phase of his life.
Barry Hall has worked hard and earned great respect in the West.
Barry's been a proud competitor at three AFL clubs and Bulldogs fans have been proud to call him ours since 2010.
It was an honour to have Barry present me with a supporters' jumper at the start of this year.
Barry's kicked a century of goals in red white and blue  -  five on the weekend  -  and the pace he showed for his goal in the second quarter on Sunday makes me think he could play on forever. 
I'm sure I'll see him on the field in one last finals campaign later this year.
Barry's life in footy has been through many phases  -  from a tearaway rookie, to ultimate success in 2005, and then playing on as a respected veteran in the West. 
He has friends and fans at each of the clubs he's played for and has been a worthy servant of each.  
Very few footballers will equal Barry's achievements: more than 250 games at the elite level, four-time All-Australian, 2005 premiership captain for the Sydney Swans.
It's lovely to hear Barry talk about how he remembers growing up in Broadford, racing home from school, kicking the ball around the back paddock, pretending he was Simon Beasley, getting handballs from Doug Hawkins. 
I'm sure tonight there will be children in back yards and back paddocks imagining themselves as Barry Hall, getting a handball from Matty Boyd.
Well done Barry. 



HOST: Good morning, Julia Gillard good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: We, obviously, won't have too many minutes with you. We want to, obviously, start with the carbon package. With now maybe one in four voters voting for the Labor Party, do you have to face the fact that perhaps the messenger is on the nose and therefore it's going to be difficult to get it across?
PM: Well, I'm determined to do this because it's the right thing for the country's future. We've got to cut carbon pollution and protect our environment; we've also got to make sure that we see the clean energy jobs of the future.
HOST: But that doesn't address the issue Prime Minister, of the messenger, is that something you've got to face up to?
PM: Look, I will continue to provide the leadership which will enable us to get this done and, obviously, I will be around the country, I'm in Newcastle today, I was in South Australia on the weekend, talking to people about any fears and concerns that they might have about putting a price on carbon.
HOST: You know there's a vehemence about the issue of the messenger, we've just had a text recently that says ‘how do you feel about accomplishing that which the Liberals have tried to do so often but failed, killing off the Labor Party for all time?' I mean is that, are we at the point where really, the future of the Labor Party is at stake here as well?
PM: Oh look, no, of course not. The Labor Party is more than a hundred years old and we will be here for long, long, long time to come in the future, as long as there are Australians that believe in fairness and decency and opportunity for all, there will be people attracted to joining the Labor Party and putting their shoulder to the wheel.
Look, this is a tough reform; I always expected it to be tough. I said that it would get tougher; we're in a period now where there's been a lot of fear raised, a lot of anxiety, a lot of false claims. I mean, South Australia's suffered from that almost more than anywhere else in the nation, being told that Whyalla is going to be wiped off the map, and Port Pirie is finished; none of these things are true.
And I will just keep working through, talking to people, answering questions and, ultimately, people will make their own minds up and they'll vote in the 2013 election. But by then people will have experienced exactly what carbon pricing means to them and their families.
HOST: Prime Minister, the government is spending millions of dollars in an information campaign, as you're calling it, but is there yet another problem? This is complex reform; it can't be done in 30 second grabs.
PM: I do think it's appropriate to get people the facts, and so we are providing information through advertising and also through the cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website, where people can get on a household estimator and see exactly what kind of tax cuts they're going to get, what family payment benefits they're going to see, what pension increases they're going to see. And, many people will be able to get on there and work out that they're going to come out in front.
HOST: Prime Minister, a listener question, just on how the scheme works. They ask ‘what happens when polluters, the big polluters, reduce their carbon emissions and therefore their tax impost is reduced; where does the compensation money come from then?'
PM: We certainly worked all of this out on the basis that people will reduce their carbon pollution, so that's already factored in to the scheme and to all of the figures that we've put out there. We believe that by putting a price on carbon, and our Treasury has provided all the expert advice we need on this, by putting a price on carbon from 1 July next year, we will see carbon pollution cut by at least 160 million tonnes in 2020. That's the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road, and all of the figures for the scheme have been worked out, with that kind of cut in carbon pollution being achieved.
HOST: Julia Gillard, the industry groups are now warning in the Fin Review today that companies with long term supply contracts may not be able to pass on the cost, and that's the theory isn't it, that you pass on the cost. If they've got long term supply contracts that don't allow them to do that, they then become susceptible, do they not, and jobs become susceptible?
PM: Well, we have factored all of this in, in the scheme design, but let's be really frank here, I mean this nation has been talking about putting a price on carbon for a decade. Prime Minister Howard went to the 2007 election saying he wanted to have an emissions trading scheme, then of course, we had the work in the last parliament, me in the last election talking about pricing carbon and an emissions trading scheme, and we will get this job done from 1 July next year.
When I talk to business people, and I had the opportunity to meet with a large number at a breakfast meeting yesterday, what they talked to me about is how relieved they are to have the certainty of knowing what the price will be and how the scheme will work.
These are people who make very long lived investments, they can only do that if there is certainty, and so giving them that certainty is going to help us get the investment we need for the future, particularly in clean energy.
HOST: If they can't pass it on though, they're stuck with it and therefore jobs could be at risk, couldn't they?
PM: No, I'm certainly not going to agree with that, and no advice to me has ever said that. Jobs are going to continue to grow in this country, we are coming to this path with an unemployment rate with a four in front of it; less than five per cent and as we price carbon we will create 1.6 million jobs in this country by 2020, half a million of them in the next two years.
That's against a proud track record of having created more than 750,000 jobs since the government was first elected, even during the darkest days of the global financial crisis.
HOST: Given that we're in, obviously, campaign mode, it's the subject of every day; are there now other very important tasks of government at risk of going on the back of the stove?
PM: Certainly not, I am out and about talking to Australians and the work of government continues at the same time.
HOST: We've got to finish, Prime Minister, with a question which I am sure you know is coming, you might have read this morning that the ABC is planning a four part comedy series which is about you at home. First of all, a reaction to that, are you looking forward to it?
PM: Well, I have read those reports this morning, I have seen the actress involved, Amanda, impersonate me in the past and I think she's been pretty funny as she's done it. So, I will sit at home when it's on the TV screens and I am sure Tim and I will have a laugh as it rolls through.
HOST: And the producer said, if you could somehow manage to hang around for a couple of months he'd be very grateful.
PM: Well, I'll be there, and out and about, talking to Australians, obviously, providing leadership as Prime Minister and we'll work our way through to the 2013 election, where I'll be talking to Australians about continuing to implement the changes we need to achieve the vision I have for this country's future of a strong economy and opportunities for all Australians, right around this great nation; and we will achieve a clean energy future as part of that.
HOST: Thanks for joining us this morning.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: I'm here in the federal electorate of Charlton with Greg Combet, who's here as local member, but of course as the Minister for Climate Change as well, and I'd like to say a very big thank you to the people at Centennial, the mine that we are at.
We're had the opportunity to talk today to people who work in this coal mine and we've had the opportunity to address some of their fears. Clearly, a lot of nonsense has been spoken about the future of coal mining as we price carbon. There's a lot of fear around because people have been told that coal mining won't have a future if we move to price carbon.
Both Greg and I have been here today to talk to the workers in this mine and to assure them coal mining's got a great future in this country.
When we put a price on carbon pollution on 1 July next year, on average, for the mining of coal, that will mean a cost of less than $2 a tonne of coal. This is against a backdrop where coal price have doubled from $150 a tonne to $300 a tonne. This is an industry now where businesses are making profits in the order of $1 million per worker. There's a lot of money to be made in coal mining.
There are some coal mines, including the one that we're at today, that produce more carbon pollution than others  -  gassy mines  -  and we will be working with mines like this one through our $1.3 billion package for the coal industry. I've been able to speak to the working people here today, to the men who go and mine coal, and say to them that they can be secure in the knowledge that they've got a future working here at this mine and if their sons want to follow them to this industry, then they will have a future coal mining, too.
In this community as well, clearly people would be thinking about what does carbon pricing mean for them and their cost of living, and I've answered some questions today from the workers here about what it will mean for them and their families, and some who are approaching retirement, what it will mean for them when they retire.
In this local community here, in Greg's federal electorate, around 45,000 people will get tax cuts; around 45,000 people will see an increase in their pension or family payments. When we look at all of those figures, what that means is for someone earning up to $80,000 a year they'll see a tax cut, with most receiving tax cuts of $300. For people who have got kids, they'll see increases of family payments, up to $110. For pensioners, they'll see an increase if they're a single pensioner of $338, a pensioner couple $510. Indeed, for the 1.8 million pensioner households around the country, they'll come out $210 in front. That is, they'll get more assistance than they need to meet the price impacts that will flow through from us putting a price on carbon pollution - and the increase in the cost of living will be less than one per cent, less than one cent in a dollar.
Now, I'm very aware that around the country are concerned about pricing carbon. There's been a lot of fear raised. There's been a lot of inaccurate things said. It's important that as I move round the country, and as Minister Combet does, and the Labor team, that we're talking to people about their fears and concerns. Australians are bright people, they're smart people, they will work through the information and I'm very determined that they get access to the accurate information they need.
Can I conclude by saying a big thanks to this mine for having us here today, to Centennial, a big thanks to the coal miners that have had a chat today. I thank them very much for raising with me what's on their mind and I'm very clear that I can look them in the eye and assure them there's a great future in coal mining here and around the nation.
We're happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say there's a lot of nonsense around, and a fear about the future coal mining, but do you blame that more on Tony Abbott, or more on Bob Brown?PM: Well, I certainly blame a lot of the fear on the very false and misleading claims that Mr Abbott has made. I mean, let's just go through the list. Mr Abbott was out telling Australians they'd be paying 6.5 cents more per litre of petrol  -  completely wrong.
Then he was out telling Australians we wouldn't make steel in this country any more, that Whyalla and Port Pirie would be wiped off the map  -  once again completely wrong. We've worked with the steel industry and you've seen both the employers and the employees in the steel industry say that they can work with carbon pricing.
And then Mr Abbott's been out claiming that there's no future for coal in this country. He did that wearing a Peabody mining jacket, and Peabody, a huge company, since we've announced our plans to price carbon pollution, has announced that it's interested in the biggest ever takeover of an Australian coal company because it knows there's a great future in coal mining.
Now, of course Senator Brown said things about the future of the coal industry, too, which I don't agree with. Coal's got a great future in this country. It's got a great future as we price carbon pollution and do the right thing by our environment and the right thing to keep our economy strong and to get the clean energy jobs of the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I get you to comment please on Peter Leahy's comments that Australia is only running half a strategy in Afghanistan, and that time is running out. Do you have any response to that?
PM: I've seen those comments in today's newspaper. Can I start by saying first and foremost I am full of respect for anyone who served with our Defence Force and obviously full of respect for anyone who has served at such senior levels as Chief of the Army.
On the current strategy in Afghanistan, what I can say to Mr Leahy and to Australians generally is we are working a comprehensive strategy. Here in Australia through our National Security Committee we co-ordinate across all relevant arms of government, so what we're doing in Defence is co-ordinated with what we're doing through the aid program, which is co-ordinated through the legal support that we're providing through the Attorney-General's Department and so on.
Actually, in Oruzgan province, where our Defence Force is deployed, they work in a combined team that brings together Defence personnel with civilian representatives, including aid workers, so there is co-ordination in the strategy.
So, here we'll keep the right decision-making structures to make sure the strategy is co-ordinated. On the ground in Oruzgan in Afghanistan the team works combined, civilians and Defence personnel working together on a co-ordinated strategy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, should Centennial be able to pass on its carbon tax costs to the power station?
PM: Look, I'll get Greg to address that, but just to make sure people understand the specifics about this mine, of course this is a mine that produces some coal for export, but it also produces coal that's used in the local power station, and so the arrangements between the mine and the power station are important.
For the people who flick on the lights and use power, we have of course factored in a 10 per cent increase in power costs, which is what we expect to happen, into the household assistance package.
So, people will see tax cuts and family payment increases and pension increases to deal with the full cost of living pass through, which we expect to be less than one per cent, relying on the same expert advice that guided the nation when the GST came into effect. That expert advice was right then and I'm full of confidence it will be right now.
Greg might want to say something specific about this mine and this area.
MINISTER COMBET: There are several things that are important when you're thinking about the carbon price liability of a mine like this. One of them is its contractual ability to pass through costs to the electricity generators that it supplies coal to, and of course that's a feature of the terms of the contract and I'm in discussions with Centennial Coal and with (inaudible) about that issue, but it is a contract term that's important.
The second issue that's important for a mine like this, though, is the $1.3 billion in assistance that the Government has put aside for coal mines that have high methane levels and Mandalong is one of those, so that will be important for the future of this mine as well.
But, thirdly, is the investment in new technology to abate the methane emissions themselves and Centennial Coal is working on technologies to reduce their methane emissions at the moment and that's another thing that's important for the future of a mine like this.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we've seen a lot of doom and gloom sort of messages from the Coal Association that conflict with what you're saying this morning. Are they just deceiving people, or are they misinformed, what's your take on those?
PM: I think the best thing when we're talking about the future of the coal industry is to look at the actual reactions from coal companies. When we can see a big coal company like Peabody, having heard everything about carbon pricing, decide that it's a great investment to see to take over an Australian coal company, then what we're seeing is hard-headed business people who chase all the dollars and cents down, who care about profits and the bottom line, saying to themselves ‘gee, there's a great future in coal mining in Australia.'
So, I think if we look at the actions of the people that make money out of coal, know about how to make money out of coal, those actions speak for themselves: they clearly see a great future for coal mining - as I do.
JOURNALIST: So, what's your take on the Coal Association advertisements?
PM: Well, look the Coal Association will have to speak for itself, but what I would say is there's clearly a great future for coal mining. We're hearing that, we can see that, it's not a question of hearing, we can see that with our own eyes by the actions of big coal companies.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you spoke to a number of workers inside, what were most of their questions to you? And do you think you left that room and they were in support of the carbon tax?
PM: Look, because people have heard so many false claims, it's understandable people are anxious. So, people were asking me what does pricing carbon mean for this mine? This mine's got a life in front of it 20-25 years. What does it mean for this mine, and I was able to say to them, this mine will continue to work for those 20-25 years, it'll continue to be here til the end of its productive life.
Then they were asking me, ‘well what does it mean for coal mining generally? My son might want to be a coal miner. Will there be coal mining in this country?', and I was able to assure them coal's got a great future in our nation.
And then a number asked me what it would mean for their cost of living and I was able to talk to people about the tax cuts and family payment increases and the cost of living impact being less than a cent in a dollar.
So, people will think that through and they'll make up their own minds, but I think it's important people get the right information.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, coal has a great future, but can you one day in the future where coal mines won't exist in this country?
PM: What I can see in the future of this country is we'll continue to mine coal and we'll see developing the clean energy sources as well. So, if we look forward to how we're going to get power in the future, we'll see power coming from solar and wind and geothermal and tidal. We'll see a clean energy investment cycle turbo-charged by having put a price on carbon, and also by our decisions to invest in the Clean Energy Finance Corporation with $10 billion available to make sure we get the clean energy jobs and clean energy investments of the future. We'll be mining coal and we'll be seeing energy from those clean sources.
JOURNALIST: So, did you guarantee workers this morning that not one job would be lost at this coal mine?
PM: I was certainly able to say to them they'll be here mining coal as long as this mine lasts.
JOURNALIST: If I could just ask Mr Combet, sorry, Mr Combet, what's your electorate saying to you? We know Tony Abbott, the very next day after the carbon tax details were announced, went to Joel Fitzgibbon's seat and was warning of doom and gloom. What's your electorate saying to you on the ground about the carbon tax?
MINISTER COMBET: Let's not forget, as the Prime Minister said, what happened the day after Tony Abbott went warning of doom and gloom at a Peabody mine, Peabody announced a $4.7 billion takeover of Macarthur Coal.
Tony Abbott has been putting on one of the most unprincipled display in Australian political life  -  putting fear into people's minds about their jobs, and his words were that there'd be unimaginable cost of living increases.
All of it's wrong. He forecast a rise in petrol prices  -  wrong. He's forecast the end of the coal industry  -  wrong. He forecast the end of the steel industry  -  wrong. He forecast an unimaginable price increase  -  wrong. It's only a 0.7 per cent increase in prices, in consumer prices, and there's a strong household assistance package that the Prime Minister's outlined.
I think what's ahead of us here is the Government will just continue to go about and explain to people calmly and rationally what carbon pricing is about; that it will be environmentally effective; that we will be able to cut pollution, drive investment in clean energy, support households at the same time and make sure we assist important industries like the coal industry along the way.
Now, Tony Abbott's going to be shown up to have engaged in widespread misrepresentation and deceit and the people in my electorate here have heard the same sort of messages and I'm spending as much time as I can here, too, talking to people about the facts and when people hear the facts they recognise that it's the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: Mr Combet, have you submitted these costings to Treasury, and how confident are you of the numbers that you're putting out to the media today?
MINISTER COMBET: Well, the Treasury has done all of the costings of the Government carbon price package and the Treasury does independent modelling, comprehensive modelling, highly regarded modelling, unimpeachable modelling.
It did it for other major reforms, like the GST, and of course it got it right, and we have complete confidence in the modelling that Treasury has done and the numbers we're putting here today are based upon that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you confident that the Australian people will come around to the carbon tax?
PM: This is a big reform, it's a tough reform and I warned that it would be tough and it would probably get tougher. We have seen Tony Abbott out there trying to make people afraid.
Ultimately, I believe Australians will judge this when they see it in operation on 1 July next year, when they wake up on 1 July and they see that there are benefits flowing through to them and their families through tax cuts and family payment increases. There will be people who are currently in the tax system now, who because we triple the tax-free threshold as part of all of this, won't have to pay tax anymore. There'll be a million Australians who do a tax return now, who won't have to do a tax return any more. People will be able to go to work and see what it means for their workplaces, they'll be able to see what it means for our nation, as we price carbon pollution.
So, Australians will decide for themselves and they'll vote in 2013, but they'll be able to make that decision having seen carbon pricing in operation and having seen so many of these false claims shown up as just fear mongering.
JOURNALIST: It's not making you very popular though, is it?
PM: This is the right decision for the nation's future. I said in a speech in New South Wales not that long ago, democracy's not one long opinion poll - democracy's about making the decisions today which will mean tomorrow we will be stronger and better.
To make that decision today is to make a decision to put a price on carbon pollution. I'm here as Prime Minister to show the leadership we need on those tough decisions.
Thanks very much.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I have one last question, please?
PM: Yeah  -  you were so polite. Teach something to your Canberra colleagues.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned with the escalation of the Qantas pilots situation?
PM: Look, in all situations of industrial disputes and talks, my message is always that these things best get solved when people sit round a table in good faith and work it through.
JOURNALIST: And are you likely to force the two parties to arbitration?
PM: We have a Fair Work system. As people would probably remember I went to hell and back to get rid of Tony Abbott's Work Choices, as did the man standing alongside me. The Fair Work system has its mechanisms to help people work through in circumstances of dispute.
Thank you.
MINISTER COMBET: Thanks a lot. 



HOST: Visiting us in the Hunter today, the Prime Minister Julia Gillard, she joins us in studio. Good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: This is a traditional Labor stronghold, we've been having the debate prior to your arrival this morning, are you going to receive widespread support today, or a great deal of negativity towards your new tax?
PM: Well, I'm happy to take it as it comes and I'm happy to be out there speaking to people about what this means to them and their family. There's been a lot of misrepresentation here, a lot of fear generated. Australians are very smart people, they'll be thinking about it, they'll be working through the details. I particularly wanted to be talking to people who work in coal mines, there's been a number of very irresponsible claims suggesting that the coal industry was going to shut down. Of course that's not true, there's a strong future for coal mining in this country, it will continue to grow, employment will continue to grow and I want to be out and about telling people about that directly and taking any questions they've got.
HOST: OK, but talk the people of the Hunter through the logic, the specific purpose of this tax is to curtail carbon usage and creation. We are, if you equate coal with carbon, the biggest carbon export port in the world. How can that not have a negative impact on economic growth in this region?
PM: Well, first and foremost the aim of this is to cut carbon pollution. I believe climate change is real, it's caused by human activity, it's caused by carbon pollution and we've got to cut it. The aim is to cut it by at least -5 per cent by 2020, 160 million tonnes. So, but putting a price on carbon we'll see the behaviour of around 500 of our biggest polluters change and we will be asking the coal industry to look to do what it can to make its processes cleaner and we've been investing in assisting with cleaner coal.
But, of course, we'll still mine coal and we'll still export it overseas. Other nations will continue to buy Australian coal, even as they too look to grow and to move to a cleaner energy future.
HOST: Again, though, logically does that not mean at best a contraction, at worst a reduction, in local industry?
PM: I don't see how that logically follows at all. What we're talking about-
HOST: -Well, if China takes less of our coal-
PM:-Let's go to the question to China and there's no suggestion that it will take less. China is a rapidly growing country; it's been through a big period of industrialisation and that's going to continue, it's on a journey of lifting hundreds of millions of people out of poverty. So, China's going to continue to grow and consume coal. I will consume more energy from all sources-
HOST: -Carbon still gets burnt, Prime Minister-
PM: -But let me actually talk to you about what's being achieved in China. So, they're growing as a nation, with many people coming out of poverty, but China itself is aiming to look for cleaner energy source too  -  so growing, still taking coal, but looking for cleaner energy sources, and against a business as usual case, they are looking to cut their emissions by 22 per cent in 2020, against a business as usual case, we are looking to cut out emissions by 23 per cent, or -5 per cent, against the 2000 base.
So, the world is changing, but the world will still have a role for coal. So, there will still be coal mining here and the prosperity that comes from it.
HOST: When you're talking to Melbourne or Sydney, that's one equation, but here, just yesterday the Australian Coal Association has launched an advertising campaign, saying 5000 direct mining jobs will be at risk, 18 coal mines at risk of closure if the tax goes ahead. That speaks very directly in this market place, in this part of Australia, in a way that it doesn't in big cities in other areas.
PM: Well, let's directly assess that and can I say this to you: I say the same things in every part of the nation and I'll come back to that in just a moment. I say the same things in every part of the nation and what I say about coal in every part of the nation, is it's got a strong future. Coal prices have doubled in recent years, from around $150 a tonne, to $300 a tonne. Our coal companies are making profits in the order of $1 million per worker, the burden from putting a price on carbon, per tonne, will be less than $2, in circumstances where coal prices have doubled to $300. So, let's be clear about what this means for the industry, big coal companies like Peabodys are engaged in huge new investments in Australia, because they're hard headed business people and they know that there's a good future in mining coal here.
HOST: OK, Ben speaks partially to your point there, in this question, he says: Prime Minister, will a family of seven with a smaller carbon footprint per person than a three person family get compensated as well on electricity costs, as a smaller family. I don't want you to answer that question, what I do want you-
PM: -I can very quickly answer that question.
HOST: It's certainly speaks to the level of confusion as to what it means for the individual.
PM: It does and everybody who wants to know exactly what it means for them should get on our cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website. It will talk to you about tax cuts you're eligible for, it will talk to you about the family payments increases you're eligible for, up to $110 per child and obviously a bigger family have more eligibility under the family payments regime.
And, in terms of the aim here of cutting carbon pollution, something very significant happened yesterday. I know Australians do think that climate change is real and do want to cut carbon pollution and as we've had this debate around the country, both sides of politics have been saying ‘look, we support cutting carbon pollution by five per cent by 2020'. Yesterday Tony Abbott back flipped and walked away from that. yesterday Tony Abbott apparently decided cutting carbon pollution is crap. Yesterday Tony Abbott apparently decided that he's going to bandwagon with Lord Monckton and say this nation should do nothing about cutting carbon pollution.
Well, I think Australians do want to cut carbon pollution. They've got a lot of questions for me about how carbon pricing will work and I'm very happy to be answering them.
HOST: You and others in the government have accused Tony Abbott of being a political animal, of not taking the big picture, of not having a vision for a greener future for Australia. Is not the reverse true; is this not the perfectly awful time for a government in your position to be trying to introduce such complicated and difficult plans?
PM: Let's look at this, hopefully through the prism of the day before Tony Abbott's back flip. The day before both sides of politics were saying that they wanted to cut carbon pollution by five per cent by 2020. So, then if you're going to say let's cut carbon pollution, climate change is real  -  the question is: do you start soon, or do you start later when it will be harder and do you do it in the most efficient way?
Well, if we're going to get it done, I'm for starting soon and doing it in the most economically efficient way. Up until yesterday, Mr Abbott appeared to be saying start late and do it in the most costly way you can think of, around $720 per family, would be the charge that he's looking for. Yesterday, he now appears to be saying, we'll he doesn't want to be doing anything at all, and he needs to answer for all of that.
HOST: Prime Minister, I know it's been a tough couple of weeks. Are you aware that there making a sitcom about your life from today?
PM: I am aware of that, yes.
HOST: Have you had any input in what life is like at home with Julia and Tim?
PM: I haven't had any input. I have seen Amanda, who will be playing me, in that show Double Take a while back and I thought she was hilarious and did a very good job. I'll be looking forward to seeing it and it may come in handy having a double, because there could be days where that extra commitment I could field her to go and do.
HOST: Evidently there are sex scenes set in the Prime Minister's office?
PM: Lots of work gets done in the Prime Minister's office. Lots and lots of work.
HOST: I will look forward to you vouching for the authenticity or otherwise of the sitcom.
PM: Something tells me that if it's going to be laugh a minute, then it's not going to be very true to real life. But being Prime Minister's a lot of work and a pretty serious job.
HOST: And we appreciate being here to answer our questions in the Hunter today. Enjoy your time here.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: And thank you for talking to with us this morning. Why does it seem that over a week into this discussion, you are losing the debate about convincing people they won't be worse off under this tax?
PM: We will keep out and about talking to people about what all of this means. As I have said publicly, this is a big reform, it's a tough reform, I expected it to get tougher; there's been a lot of fear raised, a lot of people have been told, for example that this will cost them thousands and thousands of dollars more when they go to the supermarket, whereas in truth, the impact on people's cost of living is less than one percent. Less than a cent in a dollar, we don't even have one cent coins anymore so I can' hold one up; less than a cent in a dollar and then people will find that they are assisted with tax cuts if you earn less than $80,000 a year, a $300 tax cut.
Many people, who work part time or casual, will find they no longer pay tax at all, and family payments and pensions are being increased too. So, look we're out there talking to people about the facts and we will keep doing that over the weeks and months ahead.
HOST: And Prime Minister, that is the policy argument, and yet what we know is we produce the cleanest energy in Australia in Tasmania, and we know fact, our power bills will go up by another ten per cent. That seems to be the fact of it, and people aren't convinced about the savings that might come on the other side.
PM: Well, I would suggest, on the income support people are getting, the pension increases, the family payment increases, the tax cuts, that people do get on the cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website and have a look for themselves.
I think many people haven't realised things like family payments are going up by up to $110 per child, or pensioner households on average will be $210 in front; so people can get that information there. On the impacts for the environment, I think, people in Tassie, like people around Australia, generally, do believe that climate change is real, they do want to see us get something effective done. We've only got one atmosphere and they are concerned about the amount of carbon pollution we put into it; and by pricing carbon we will cut carbon pollution by at least 160 million tonnes in 2020.
HOST: But, if we price carbon and yet there seems to be a contradiction, the motive of the tax is to reduce pollution, but we give polluters, and we have some here in Tasmania, massive subsidies so they're not affected. If the issue is so important, why the massive subsidies?
PM: Well, the price, of course, is being paid by around 500 of our biggest polluters. For some of those biggest polluters who are trade exposed, that is for what they do they take an international price, and they're very emissions intensive. We have worked with them to make sure we protect Aussie jobs and protect competitiveness, while still keeping a signal to them to reduce carbon pollution. So we're doing that with industries around the country, including in Tasmania.
HOST: Can you explain your poll numbers in the context of this debate at the moment? It sometimes seems a long way to Canberra from Tasmania; you're trying to win the argument but the sliding poll numbers suggest a lack of authority in carrying it, does that concern you?
PM: Look, democracy's not one long opinion poll, it's about getting the right things done for the nation's future. If we look at what's created our nation today, big decisions that were made in the past, whether it was floating the Australian dollar, or creating Medicare; whether it was reducing tariffs or introducing universal superannuation, a number of those things were bitterly politically contested at the time; with all sorts of claims about how they'd ruin our nation if they went ahead.
Here we are and we know we're a stronger country because we've got Medicare, we're a stronger country because we internationalised our economy, we're a stronger because people have universal superannuation. Big, hard reforms are necessary to make sure that we continue to have the kind of prosperity tomorrow that we aspire for. So, the judgement calls here that I make, are about what's best for the nation's future.
HOST: On the subject of the leadership at the moment, and in the context of the polling, do you take comfort in the fact that your leadership might be safe because Andrew Wilkie, Tasmanian member for Dennison, has said he'll only support the government while you're in the top job?
PM: None of that worries me, or is something that I need to deal with. The Labor team is supporting me because they want us to tackle this big challenge; all of us in the Labor government believe that the country cannot put climate change in the too hard basket.
HOST: There's a big rally planned today by forestry workers in Hobart, they're anxious to find out what compensation will be available to them from the federal government. Under the Kelty statement of principles, that is in your government's hand at the moment, when will the Federal Government make an announcement on this?
PM: Look, we've been strongly engaged with the various stakeholders in Tasmania, obviously, with the union, as well as, with the environmental stakeholders; indeed Bill Kelty is on the job because we're determined that he should be. And we will continue to be engaged strongly with Bill Kelty, with the groups that he's working with and with the Tasmanian Government, to work towards a resolution of this big issue which, of course, has been a huge issue for Tassie and for the nation for a long period of time.
HOST: Does the government see a future for native forest logging in Tasmania or are we at the point now where we're paying workers to get out altogether?
PM: Look, I think the best, and most responsible, thing I can do at this stage where negotiations, of discussions, are ongoing is not to play sort of, rule in, rule out, games or be pre-judging.
We want to work strongly, in good faith. There's been a process here, led by the groups involved in the industry, led by the unions and the environmental stakeholders, and they are the ones that have said ‘we want to sit around the table and work towards a good conclusion' and the Kelty process has been a part of that. So, I am respecting that by not engaging and answering questions like the ones you've just asked me.
HOST: What about then a timetable for government involvement? Many workers are desperate to see compensation flow, exits take place, when will the government be in a position to declare its hand on this?
PM: We continue to engage in this strongly, and continuously with a lot of work happening, so I am not going to set a timetable; but I can offer people who are listening, a reassurance that we are directly and strongly engaged.
HOST: Presentations at our major hospitals, Prime Minister, continue to rise at around six and seven percent a year, and yet at the moment, the Tasmanian Government is trying to cut $100 million out of a $1.8 billion service. How is Tasmania and the state government going at the moment, particularly in health, in your view?
PM: Well, I'm not going to offer commentary on another level of government, on Tasmanian State Government decisions; of course, you should talk to Premier Giddings about that.
HOST: But you care deeply about health, having served in the role.
PM: Yes, yes I do and I can certainly answer to what the Federal Government is doing, which is we are looking to invest $16 billion, stepping up to being an equal partner in the growth of health care costs in hospitals, training more doctors, more nurses. All of this reform, with the aim of making sure that we're cutting the amount of time for people waiting in emergency departments or for elective surgery. So, we are giving more people local control, more doctors, more nurses, more resources and less waiting, that's the objective of our health reform agenda.
HOST: And just on the issue of the media at the moment, we're all watching with interest the saga of the News of the World, in the UK. Would your life be easier if the Murdoch empire came crashing down?
PM: Look, I'm not going to; you know, obviously, we are all watching events in the UK and it's being reported on strongly here in Australia. Look, I dealt with some questions about the media when I was at the Press Club last week, and my simple message is I think it's important that the media is reporting the facts and that people get the benefits of good information.
HOST: Appreciate you talking with us this morning.
PM: Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet visited Centennial Coal's Mandalong mine today to meet with management and shift workers and discuss the recently announced carbon price package.
The Mandalong mine, located in the Newcastle coalfields on the south-western side of Lake Macquarie, employs around 320 local workers to run its longwall mining operation.
Treasury modelling shows Australia's coal industry has a strong future, with its output to more than double between 2010 and 2050 with a carbon price in place.
The Gillard Government's plan for a clean energy future will support jobs in mines like Mandalong through the $1.3 billion Coal Sector Jobs Package.
This will provide assistance to “gassy” mines  -  mines which release relatively large amounts of fugitive emissions of methane and other greenhouse gases when coal is produced.
Mandalong is a gassy mine but its owners have already started looking at ways to lower methane emissions.
The Government has also committed $70 million for grants to the coal mining industry to help with development and introduction of technologies to lower pollution from gassy mines.
These developments show that far from causing the economic ruin that Opposition Leader Tony Abbott has been carrying on about, a carbon price creates the incentives for investment and innovation.
It is this innovation that will ensure the coal industry prospers in the future. 



HOST: Now the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, rang in earlier this morning requesting a spot on this show. Now, this is quite unusual, it's often very difficult to get federal ministers to come on the program, they're very busy, obviously. The Prime Minister's visiting the Gunning wind farm today, on her round the country carbon pricing sales pitch and we are very privileged to have Julia Gillard on the show.
Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning Andrea.
HOST: So has this what it's come to, ringing into local radio stations, looking for every opportunity you can get?
PM: Oh that's a fantastic thing, I said I wanted to be out and about, talking to Australians about our plans to put a price on carbon, and to cut carbon pollution, get the clean energy jobs of the future. So, in order to do that, talking to local radio stations is a great way of making sure we're touching base with communities right around the country.
HOST: Tell me what you're doing at Gunning today.
PM: Well I will be having a look at what is a major wind farm, of course, with a price on carbon, and with our major investments through entities like the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, which is going to have $10 billion in it, to invest in clean and renewable energy sources, we will see the renewable industry turbo-charged in this country. That means you and I will be able to use more renewable energy but it also means that we will attract our fair share as a nation of the clean energy jobs of the future. As the global economy moves to look at cleaner energy sources, I don't want all of the jobs associated with that huge new industry being jobs that are overseas.
HOST: This is a make or break time for renewables, like wind farm developers and your carbon pricing scheme needs to provide a certainty and security that is not being felt within the region yet. How can you sell that? Are you trying to sell the unsellable?
PM: No, a big by-product and a big reason that we've moved so hard to get a price on carbon and the full details of the scheme announced is I understand that investors want certainty. One of the clearest messages to me from the business community has been that they can't put hundreds of millions, billions of dollars on the table in long lived assets unless they understand what the underlying rules are going to be. So as we price carbon from 1 July next year, we will be saying to the business community, here are the rules of the game, it's absolutely crystal clear now, and you can get on with certainty into making these new investments.
HOST: From a regional perspective, wind farms have divided communities with possible health issues, there's been a bit of debate as you would be well aware, is there any type of inquiry underway? And, if not, would the federal government fund that type of inquiry to put minds at rest?
PM: Look, there will always be local planning issues that need to be worked through, I mean that's true whatever energy source we're using, there'd be planning issues, if people decided that they wanted to build a traditional power station as well. So I don't think we should pretend that somehow planning issues only arise when we're talking about renewable or clean energy. So, planning schemes, the work, local councils will do what they do, but around the country there are plenty of places that are perfect for clean energy investments where people want to see the clean energy development and they want to see the jobs. And I've seen those with my own eyes, obviously, I'll see a big wind farm today but I've been in Queensland, Darling Downs where I've seen a power station being supplemented by solar. We're making huge investments in Chinchilla, at Moree, to bring what, by today's standards, are the biggest solar investments in the world, to this country and I want to see more of that around the nation and that will be achieved by pricing carbon.
HOST: Some residents in regional areas have felt a little bit like lab rats. You mentioned there about planning issues, I was talking more about the health issues, and the health debate that renewables such as wind farms have brought up in the past.
PM: Look, I'm always prepared to be guided by the science. I'm guided by the science now and that's why I'm just so determined to act on climate change and to put a price on carbon pollution and to get a cut in carbon pollution by at least 160 million tonnes in 2020. So, being guided by the science on that, I'm happy to be guided by the science on all other things.
HOST: You mentioned the electricity grid there. Will there be, will there need to be, a major upgrade to electricity grids in order to cope with renewable energy implementations around regional Australia?
PM: At the last election campaign, we announced a billion dollar scheme to connect renewables to the electricity grid. Now, many sites that are actually perfect for renewable energy are very near where the electricity grid is now so there isn't a big challenge about connecting up to the grid. But, obviously, some sites are quite remote and that does mean that we have to look at the grid extension, which is why we put a billion dollars on the table at the last election to work with private industry on those necessary expansions.
HOST: Super market prices, cost of living, these are being thrown up constantly by the Opposition. Should Australians be concerned?
PM: Well there's been a lot of nonsense talked and a lot of fear induced, and I'm very determined that people have the opportunity to work this all out for themselves with the facts at their fingertips. Tony Abbott has talked about unimaginable increases in the cost of living. Well of course, the truth is that the increase in the cost of living will be less than one percent of the cost of living of the consumer price index. That is, less than a cent in a dollar and this will be in circumstances where nine out of ten households get assistance and so if we go through that, I mean people earning less than $80,000 a year, the vast majority of them will see a tax cut of around $300. If we're looking at our 1.8 million pensioner households, they'll come out $210 in front, having dealt with any of the price impacts from putting a price on carbon pollution and we've associated tax reform with this package, so that the first $20,000 that people earn will be tax free. And around a million Australians now who have to do a tax return won't have to do it anymore. So, people can get the facts for themselves on the cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website and I'd recommend people have a look, it's got an estimator so that they can see what their household is entitled to.
HOST: Australians are nervous, they're not spending their money. New figures are showing that we're hanging onto our money because we're nervous about the future and a lot of that has to do with the carbon pricing scheme that the Government has proposed. I mean, you're not likely to go to an election for another couple of years, is this going to be sold to the Australian public by the time it's implemented? Are you confident of that?
PM: Well, people will get the opportunity before they vote in the 2013 election to actually live with us having put a price on carbon. They can see what the biggest polluters are doing because now they face a price for putting carbon pollution in our atmosphere. They can see what's happening as new investments start being discussed in clean energy, they'll be able to know exactly what it means for them and their family and their household. So, people will have the opportunity to see it as a fact, rather than worry about some of the needless scares that have been out and about in the community.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard is my guest. Prime Minister, a couple of text messages here from Mark, he says can you please list the renewable energy sources that can provide base load power?
PM: Yes, I certainly can, of course, clean energy sources, there's investment in wind, in solar, in tidal, in geothermal, of course there is investment in gas too. There is a lot of work being done about using these renewable energy sources so it can provide reliable base load. I've seen, for example, the CSIRO project in Newcastle, which is all about capturing solar energy and having it available in a reliable way. I've seen geothermal, the heat that's in the earth's crust, used in Brunswick, in inner city Melbourne, to provide the heat necessary to warm a building. So these technological developments are around us. What we need, of course, is the investor money on the table, to upscale them into commercial projects and putting a price on carbon will help with that, and the complimentary measure of having $10 billion in a Clean Energy Finance Corporation will certainly push that along.
HOST: And another very straight forward question from Anton - what is carbon pollution and what is the worst outcome from it?
PM: Well, carbon pollution is the set of gases, greenhouse gases that go into our atmosphere and are causing the world to warm. Now, CO2 is one of those gases, carbon dioxide, but it's not the only one. Methane, for example, is another greenhouse gas. Now, what this does, according to the scientists, is as it goes into our atmosphere, it creates a layer which means more heat is trapped around our world and that is what is warming global temperatures. The last decade has been the hottest decade on record, and the scientists then point to all of the problems that stem from global warming including increased sea levels, which makes a difference to coastal areas including the likelihood of more extreme weather events, more droughts, more bushfires. And, consequently putting at risk some of our big icons like the Great Barrier Reef and Kakadu, as well as putting at risk prime agricultural land, like the land in the Murray Darling Basin.
HOST: And, we've had a tweet Prime Minister, saying do you agree with former Chief Minister John Stanhope that Canberra residents can sometimes be wealthy whingers who can afford to pay more? Slightly off topic but-
PM: Look, I'll let John Stanhope, for whom I've got a great deal of respect and affection, use his own words. On the carbon pricing and us cutting carbon pollution, what I do believe about Canberra residents is overwhelmingly, people believe that climate change is real. Overwhelmingly, they want to see government do something effective to address climate change and cut carbon pollution and that's exactly what I'm determined to get done.
HOST: Finally, Prime Minister, I know you're busy and you need to take off. Do you have any regrets about announcing policy so early? I'm not going to talk about the fact that you said there would not be carbon tax, and now that there is, but do you regret announcing it so early and has it left the Government open to what you may consider to be uninformed debate?
PM: Well, I'm happy to talk about the election campaign, and I certainly did say there would be no carbon tax and when I said that I mean every word of it. I spoke to people about the need for pricing carbon and for an emissions trading scheme, a scheme where you put a cap on carbon pollution. In the Parliament that Australians voted for, I confronted changed circumstances, so yes, I did change my mind. If we were going to address climate change in this Parliament, then we needed to work with the Parliament and get through a scheme to put a price on carbon. We will reach that emissions trading scheme. There will be a three year fixed period, effectively a carbon tax and then we will reach that cap and trade scheme. On the way we've gone about designing that scheme, we did need to have a period where we consulted with people, having announced the framework and if we hadn't done those consultations, we wouldn't have got, for example, the real information we needed to make sure we got arrangements for the coal industry right or arrangements for the steel industry right. So, that time was well used. Of course, a lot of fear has been generated in that time, people have been told petrol is going up six and a half cents a litre, completely wrong. People have been told that the coal industry is closing down, completely wrong. People have been told the steel industry is shutting down and towns will be wiped off the map, completely wrong. So now is the time to just go around calmly and methodically, making sure people have the facts.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you very much for joining us on the show today.
PM: Thank you.



HOST: Julia Gillard, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning, Chris.
HOST: We've had plenty of questions come into us over the past week and a half, Ms Gillard. Some of them I'll pass onto you, some of them are questions we want to ask here but let me start by saying firstly, welcome to, sort of, the region.
PM: Thank you very much.
HOST: You're in Gunning, I believe.
PM: That's right and I will be looking at a clean energy project today and of course as we put a price on carbon pollution from 1 July next year, one of the big reasons for doing it is to turbocharge investments in the clean energy sources of the future.
We're also investing $10 billion in a clean energy finance corporation to make sure we see the projects and as a nation we get our fair share of the clean energy jobs of the future and we're investing more than $3 billion into research as well, through a new agency to be called ARENA.
HOST: Now, does that mean that when the carbon tax comes in that green energy which currently costs more for consumers will cost less for consumers, so people, average punters like myself, would be able to pocket the difference if we change to those certified green programs?
PM: Well, what you will see is more clean energy coming on stream. Obviously, getting big projects, huge projects up takes some time, but by 2020, 20 per cent of our energy will come from clean energy sources, by 2050 40 per cent will, and by putting a price on carbon we are giving investors certainty. They're putting often hundreds of millions of dollars, sometimes billions of dollars, on the table and they need to know what the rules of the game are.
Now. people will see an increase in electricity prices from having put a price on carbon. We've been very upfront about that. The increase will be 10 per cent, and that has all been factored in to the cost of living changes people will see which will be less than 1 per cent - that's less than a cent in a dollar - and millions of households will qualify for tax cuts, family payment increases and pension increases to deal with those cost of living changes.
HOST: So the main premise of the carbon price is targeting the big emitters, the big end of town if you like, but the bulk of the press seems to be about the individual tax package changes meaning that most people will either be the same or a little bit better off.
Is it any wonder, though, that many people I speak to still have the perception that the net result for them is little change to the personal bottom line, there won't be any change to carbon emissions? Does that still -  do you see where I'm coming from with that?
PM: Yes I do and I get this question put to me a fair bit when I'm out and about talking to people. People talk about a money-go-round, isn't this just money going from here to there and to explain that to people I always say the big price signal in all of this is the price signal to the around 500 biggest polluters.
So, if you imagine you're the CEO of a ginormous company, at the moment you can put carbon pollution in the atmosphere for absolutely nothing, so why wouldn't you do it endlessly? Why wouldn't you put more in the atmosphere next year and more the year after that, because it's not costing you anything?
When we put a price on carbon per tonne of $23 from 1 July next year, then you as a rational man, CEO of a big company, you'll say to yourself, ‘gee, I want to put less on the bottom line, I want to save some money, I don't want to be paying that price, how can I cut the carbon pollution my business generates?', and it's those rational decisions by big business people that will ensure that we see a cut of at least 160 million tonnes of carbon pollution in 2020. That's the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road.
Now, yes, there are some flow-through impacts and that's why, as you say, we are providing assistance so many, many people will see themselves at least square and many will be better off.
HOST: One of the claims from the Coalition and indeed from opponents to the carbon price plan is that we're doing under this plan way more than many other countries that generate far more carbon dioxide, and I'm talking about overall levels, not per capita, here. What will happen to Australia economically and environmentally if other countries continue to do less than we do?
PM: Well, let me just talk about this ‘other countries doing less' question. For example, we, by putting a price on carbon, will cut our carbon pollution by -5 per cent in 2020.
Now, that -5 is against where we were in the year 2000, but against a business as usual case, if we did absolutely nothing, it's a cut of 23 per cent.
China, for example, is planning a cut against business as usual of 22 per cent. India's putting a tax on coal. America's got emissions trading schemes in a number of its States, so does Europe, and Prime Minister Cameron in Britain has announced a very ambitious target for cutting carbon pollution.
So, around the world people are acting and I don't want to see us left behind as they go around snaffling the clean energy jobs of the future.
But the other thing, too, is it's been bipartisan politics in this country - both me and the Opposition to say that we should cut carbon pollution by 5 per cent in 2020. Now I see earlier this week Tony Abbott back flipped on that and said ‘no, we shouldn't do anything' and then he back flipped again and said no he does want to cut it by 5 per cent now, so I'm not sure what he's saying today given he's said different things over the last 48 hours, but it has generally been bipartisan politics to cut carbon pollution by 5 per cent, so if that's our national aim, the question is ‘when do we start and how do we do it?'
I believe we should start soon and we should do it the most efficient way possible, whereas Tony Abbott is structuring the most expensive way to do it, a charge of around $720 per household.
HOST: Why is it then that your plan is being effectively pilloried, while his plan doesn't seem to be getting anywhere near as much questioning?
PM: Well, I think because an approach has been taken by the Opposition where they've just gone round raising fear. They've been prepared to do and say anything no matter what audience they're speaking to, so you know they'll say one thing to one audience and a different thing to another audience and they'll just make false claims and then not retract them, so people have been told, for example that petrol's going up 6.5 cents a litre - that's wrong. People have been told that the coal industry is shutting down - that's wrong. People have been told that the steel industry is going to be closed down and whole towns will be wiped off the map - that's wrong. And people have been told there will be an astronomical increase in their cost of living. Well, the increase is less than a cent in a dollar, 9 out of 10 households are getting assistance and literally millions of Australians will come out square or better off.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, lots of farmers and primary producers have been in touch with us over the last couple of weeks. The thrust of what they've got to say I think is summed up in a couple of messages here, one is that farmers buy their inputs retail, they sell their products wholesale, they pay for freight both ways, how can those increased costs be passed on, and another caller earlier this morning saying that after the toughest drought in living memory, farmers don't need, and I'll quote here, ‘another kick in the guts'. Is there any thought to giving some payment for the costs of increases to farmers there?
PM: Well, there are huge opportunities in this package for farmers. There's dedicated new money for what is called carbon farming which will get farmers an additional revenue stream. That means for certain land practices people can be rewarded with cold, hard cash, so I think that's very important.
Farmers are big land holders, and there's also the best part of a billion dollars in a biodiversity fund so we can work with landholders on biodiversity. Once again, cold, hard cash.
And then as farmers go about their daily work, of course agriculture itself is not directly in the carbon pricing scheme, heavy vehicles do not come into the scene until 1 July 2014, and I do believe that for some of the costs farmers will see they will be in a position to pass those costs on, which is why we've focused so much on providing household assistance so people have the dollars in their hand as they go about their supermarket shopping.
HOST: I'm guessing this is probably the final question I'm going to get to ask you Prime Minister - what do you say to the people of south-west of New South Wales who do feel as though they've been repeatedly let down by governments and politicians over the years. There were the huge delays in the hospital for Wagga; many feel they were largely ignored with the Murray Darling Basin plan; there's the medical zoning issue which people don't feel they've necessarily been listened to; there's been the uni student allowances issue. People in this part of the world are very sceptical about politicians. What do you say to those people who are now very sceptical about how they will fare under the carbon price plan?
PM: What I would say is I'm always interested in community views, but I think I'm entitled to say we've done some things in the local community which make a big difference.
People would have seen the improvements in local schools, part of supporting jobs in the global financial crisis. People would have seen the new investments that we've made into health. People would have seen some of the benefits of our record investments in road and rail - we've been very focused on that. People would have seen the benefits flowing through as we've worked to support families and support jobs during the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression.
So yes, are there always more things to be done? Absolutely, but the approach we've taken as we've delivered benefits whether it's building the education revolution or whether its investments into health, is to look equitably around the country and make new investments as they're needed.
We are also very focused on the circumstances of regional Australia and improving opportunities there, as well as services. The National Broadband Network is about that and for example some of the things I did in education as Minister were about that. I know the student income support changes were controversial, but what we can say to people now is more students from regional Australia are getting student assistance than ever before as a result of these changes.
HOST: Indeed. Prime Minister, I appreciate your time this morning. Hopefully you'll actually be able to visit the Riverina or the south-west a little more closely during your wearing out of the shoe leather tour.
PM: You never know. Thank you.
HOST: Thank you, good to speak with you.
PM: Thanks.



PM: It's a great pleasure to be here for the launch of the Gunning Wind Farm, a project from ACCIONA. It's been a great pleasure to participate in the opening.
What we're seeing here is part of Australia's clean energy future, and I do thank the global CEO of ACCIONA, Jose Manuel, who has made clear to us how around the world other nations are seizing a clean energy future. Today he's described to us how in Spain 35 per cent of its energy is coming from renewable sources, and, as he remarked, we are a nation perfectly positioned to seize this clean energy future  -  a nation with a lot of land, a nation with a lot of wind, a lot of solar, with the power of the waves, and with geothermal.
Putting a price on carbon will help us turbo-charge this clean energy future. What it will mean is it will drive investment into clean energy sources, and we will be working, too, to maximise that investment through the Clean Energy Finance Corporation - $10 billion, where a commercial board will work with private sector partners, so we see more clean energy developments.
And we'll continue to invest in research, because the research today will matter so much for our clean energy future. There will be more than $3 billion in a new agency called ARENA to work on proving up new technologies.
So, right across the spectrum of seizing a clean energy future  -  we've got pricing carbon as the foundation stone, to cut carbon pollution, to give investors the certainty they need to make the big investments that will give us a clean energy future, to change the commercial equation so it's more profitable for businesses to put money into clean energy.
Then, of course, Government standing alongside, with $10 billion of investment, and Government continuing to work with our great scientists and great researchers, to keep proving up the proving up the new clean energy technologies of the future.
Pricing carbon is the foundation stone. Putting a price on carbon pollution will start from 1 July 2012, but I'm very pleased to have been here and to have this insight into how we can generate the clean energy we need for the future.
And I'd also like to say thank you to Alan, who is the farmer whose land we're standing on. It's a father and son enterprise, both of them called Alan, and what they are seeing here and what they've long fought for is a new income source for the farm. They've said to me today that they understood that part of drought proofing for the future was about making sure they had more income sources as a result of using their land. Well, this is a new income source for them and it's showing the way for Australian farmers.
We'll want to be working with famers, too, as we put a price on carbon through our carbon farming initiative - a new source of income and revenue for them from different land management practices, different ways of using the land, so it, too, helps us deal with carbon pollution.
So it's been a great pleasure to be here today and I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your carbon pricing plan has been given a ringing endorsement here today; you're clearly among friends here, but the Australian public's not so friendly, (inaudible) toxic and now Tony Windsor seems to have lost a bit of faith in you as well, the comments on radio this morning, he said he's not convinced that you could win the next election. What do you say to Tony Windsor?
PM: Tony Windsor's made an election prediction and I'm not going to agree with him on the election prediction, but Tony Windsor said in making those comments that he is continuing to support me as Prime Minister, because he wants to support a government with the courage and guts to get a clean energy future for us; that he didn't want to support Mr Abbott and his relentless negativity telling us to turn our backs on this future and to live in the past.
So, I'd thank Mr Windsor for the endorsement of the plans that we are bringing for the nation's future. Yes, it takes courage and yes, it's politically tough and I've always said it's likely to get politically tougher, but this has never been about the opinion polls - this has been about what's doing the right thing to get our nation a clean energy future.
JOURNALIST: How long will you be doing this quasi-election campaign? What's the end point?
PM: We'll continue to be talking to people around the country. Of course, as Prime Minister I'll be continuing to do all of the other things that I need to do to ensure we've got a strong economy, to make sure we're spreading opportunity in this phase of the mining boom, to be improving education, to be improving hospitals, to be rolling out the National Broadband Network, all of the responsibilities as Prime Minister, but I will be taking the opportunity when I can to talk to Australians.
There's been a lot of fear and concern raised about pricing carbon, so I want to be out there talking to my fellow Australians about those fears and concerns and answering any of their questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott yesterday, on the radio in Gippsland said he's never believed or supported a carbon tax or an ETS. He's lying, isn't he?
PM: Tony Abbott, with these words, has deliberately misled the Australian people and this comes against a backdrop where day after day he has misled Australians. He told them petrol would go up 6.5c  -  wrong. He told them the coal industry would close down  -  wrong. He told them the steel industry would close down  -  wrong. He told them they would experience an astronomical increase in their cost of living  -  wrong.
The cost of living changes from pricing carbon will be less than one cent in a dollar and 9 out of 10 households will get the benefits of assistance through tax cuts, family payment increases and increases in pensions.
He will do or say anything to fuel his negative campaign. He will do or say anything to keep this nation in the past and away from a clean energy future. And in terms of what he said yesterday, I've got the words here. He said, Mr Abbott speaking: ‘I've never been in favour of a carbon tax or an emissions trading scheme', where we know that in the past he said: ‘if you want to put a price on carbon, why not just do it with a simple tax?', and then of course he said ‘you can't have a climate change policy without supporting this emissions trading scheme at this time', and he said we don't want to play games with the planet, so we are taking this issue seriously and we would like to see an emissions trading scheme.
So, Tony Abbott, in presenting this negative campaign to Australians, comes out of John Howard's Cabinet, where he supported a price on carbon. In opposition he supported a price on carbon, he supported a carbon tax, he supported an emissions trading scheme. Now, every day he's going round misleading people to try and stop us putting a price on carbon.
This all just goes to show Mr Abbott will do and say anything to keep his negative campaign up, because he's all about the politics, not about the nation's future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) fuel excise for heavy vehicles?
PM: Sorry, I didn't hear the first few words.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: When we put a price on heavy road users, from 1 July 2014, that will be done by regulation.
JOURNALIST: So you don't need the support of parliament (inaudible)
PM: My advice is that that can be achieved by regulation. Obviously, as you would be aware, regulations can be disallowed, so there's still a parliamentary process that's engaged in when you make a regulation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I understand the same company, ACCIONA, has tried to put a similar wind farm in Allendale in South Australia, but that's been halted by the Supreme Court because of health concerns (inaudible) to the wider community. Is there is the same concerns here, or (inaudible)?
PM: I've stood under one of these wind turbines and they're remarkably quiet, but of course on everything I'm guided by the science. That's why I'm standing here today, determined to tackle climate change and put a price on carbon pollution, because I've listened to the scientists and on any issues we always listen to the best science.
JOURNALIST: Have you been warned about any health concerns for the communities surrounding these (inaudible)?
PM: No, I haven't. There's no advice to me about that.
JOURNALIST: The AFP have been called (inaudible) tear gas on Christmas Island. Are you losing control (inaudible) and what will you do to regain that control?
PM: Yes, there has been an incident at Christmas Island and I've got a very clear message to anybody involved in that incident, which is: you don't get any changes to the process or to the treatment of your claims by misbehaving. Indeed, if you misbehave and commit a criminal offence that can count against you, because there's a character test for getting a visa. 
So, people in detention centres should do the right thing, they get absolutely no advantage by behaving badly, indeed it can prevent them getting a visa if they commit a criminal act.
JOURNALIST: Just in relation to that, how far are you from signing the final deal with Malaysia and sending those people on Christmas Island to Malaysia?
PM: We're in very advanced discussions. When we're in a position to say some more about that then we will.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask you about that Sharia law case in Sydney? Does that sort of thing have any place in our society?
PM: There's only one law in this country  -  Australian law.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, it doesn't. There's only one law in this country, the law of Australia. That's what binds us together and everybody's got to abide by Australian law.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) community affect o these wind developments, residents cites the loss of rural amenity, as well as noise and (inaudible) concerns. What do you say to communities like this one who are bearing the economic and lifestyle cost (inaudible)?
PM: I've talked to Alan today, from this place, it's his farm that we're on and obviously he's seen this as a great development for rural Australia. I understand that there are people who may have different views. Any claims should be tested against the most robust science. What we're guided by on all occasions is the science.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry, you'll just have to be a little bit louder.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) testimony of Rupert Murdoch last night (inaudible)
PM: Looking at all of these events in the United Kingdom, I think Australians have been disturbed by them and I think they've been disturbed to see the reports in the UK and the kind of things that have been happening with telephone hacking and the like and I think that does mean that Australians here look at News Limited and they've probably got some hard questions that they want answered.
On the individual testimony of Mr Murdoch, or anybody else who appeared, I'm not going engage in running commentary on that, but of course I would say the act that we saw with pie, conduct of that nature is grossly objectionable.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, I'm not going to engage in running commentary on testimony, but I do believe Australians watching all of that happening overseas with News Corp are looking at News Limited here and wanting to see News Limited answer some hard questions.
JOURNALIST: Are you saying that News Limited papers here have to answer some questions, or just the British tabloids?
PM: I think it's inevitable and it happens on other areas of policy in life. When we see a big thing happen overseas it causes us to reflect on circumstances in our own nation, so I'm saying no more or no less than that. When we've seen big things happen overseas we've then had them influence our national conversation, what we're talking about. I anticipate that that will continue to happen here.
JOURNALIST: I guess I'm asking, are you casting aspersions on News Limited papers here?
PM: Well, all I'm saying is when big things happen overseas, I'm certainly not making up any conclusions, quite the reverse. All I'm saying is when there's been a major discussion overseas, when people have seen telephones hacked in to, when people have seen individuals grieving, had to deal with all of this, then I do think that causes them to ask some questions here in our country, some questions about News Limited here, and obviously New Limited's got a responsibility to answer those questions when they're asked, and I would say if the boot as on the other foot and there was some major political scandal in the United Kingdom involving politicians, journalists from all newspaper stables, including News Limited, would be beating a path to my door to ask me all about it and what the implications are for Australia.
So, I'm really saying no more than what journalists themselves would view as proper conduct if there was a political scandal overseas.
JOURNALIST: Will you be going on these field trips until Parliament sits again, or until you get another bounce in polling?
PM: This is about the nation's future and I will be out as necessary talking to Australians to make sure they get the information they need. Of course as Prime Minister, I've got a lot of things to do, but one of the things I want to do is make myself available to answer people's questions and concerns.
JOURNALIST: How will you know when you've won over the public?
PM: This is about the nation's future, full stop.



The Australian Government is responding rapidly to the emerging crises to provide food rations and other emergency relief to some 6.7 million people caught in the Horn of Africa's worst drought in 60 years.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd have today increased Australia's assistance to the crisis by $30 million to provide urgently needed food rations and shelter to the millions affected by the drought, including nutrition supplements for malnourished women and children.
More than 10 million people in Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and Uganda have been severely affected by the consecutive droughts and a lack of food. UNICEF estimates that there are 480,000 severely malnourished children in drought-affected areas
The situation in Somalia is especially dire as continuing violence, compounded by natural disasters and waves of drought, generate an acute humanitarian crisis. A third of children under the age of five in southern Somalia are malnourished.
Australian assistance will support the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) deliver relief packages to an additional 126,000 of the worst-affected people in Southern Somalia.
Australia's funding will be provided through the World Food Programme, the UNHCR, as well as to Australian NGOs, which are already working on the ground in some of the worst-affected areas, complimenting Australia's funding to UN partners. 
The latest funding builds on a package of assistance announced on 13 July, which is already supporting the World Food Programme to feed Somali and Sudanese refugees in Kenya, as well as helping the UN Food and Agriculture Organization to assist farmers with their livestock.
Australia's total commitment to the crisis is now $41.2 million. Australia's assistance is helping to fill urgently needed gaps as the situation continues to escalate.
The UN estimates total humanitarian requirements for the response to this crisis to be around US$1.8 billion, of which only one half is currently funded.



More than $470 million will be injected into repairing roads in the hard hit Lockyer Valley and Ipswich regions as part of Operation Queenslander  -  the largest reconstruction task in the state's history.
More than 100 kilometres of state roads were damaged following the unprecedented Queensland floods.
Over 1,400 jobs will be created by this vital work to reconstruct damaged sections and will be delivered over the next three years.
Across the region up to 14,000 jobs will be sustained throughout the reconstruction task, at a time when jobs and job security are needed most. This funding will include the reconstruction of 62 kilometres of the Warrego Highway between Marburg and Withcott, set to be completed over the next couple of years.
The Gillard and Bligh Labor Governments are jointly funding the reconstruction of these vital roads under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements. The Commonwealth will be funding 75 per cent of the project, with the state government contributing 25 per cent of the funding.
In the initial response to the disaster, roads were kept open for locals, tourists and industry through an injection of up to $56 million on emergency road repairs in the Lockyer Valley and Ipswich regions.
This funding will support making Queensland roads better, safer, stronger and more resilient than before. Local companies, regional companies and state-wide Queensland companies will also benefit from the jobs created as the massive task of rebuilding Queensland continues. 
Work planned as part of the reconstruction includes: 
Lockyer Valley
Mt Sylvia Road
Murphy's Creek
Road Gatton - Clifton Road
Gatton - Laidley Road
Laidley - Plainland Road Mulgowe Road
Forest Hill - Fernvale Road
Ipswich
Rosewood - Laidley Road
Ipswich - Boonah Road
Ipswich - Rosewood Road
Rosewood - Warrill View Road
Haigslea - Amberley Road
Rosewood - Marburg Road. 



PM: I'm here in Brisbane today and I'm joined by Graham Perrett, our Federal Member for Morton and we're here at a petrol station where we've had the opportunity to have a few quick chats with people who are filling up their cars. And I just wanted to make the point to them that there is no impact from putting a price on carbon pollution on the price of petrol.
The Leader of the Opposition was peddling a false claim that petrol prices would go up 6.5 cents a litre as a result of Government's plans to put a price on carbon pollution. This claim just simply isn't true. There is no impact from the Government's plans to put a price on carbon pollution on the price that people will pay at the bowser. There's no direct carbon pricing impact on petrol itself, despite the claims that have been made of a 6.5 cents a litre impact from pricing carbon.
Now this is just one false claim that's been made by the Leader of the Opposition but it heads what is an increasingly long list. The Leader of the Opposition claimed that there'd be 6.5 cents a litre on petrol, that claim's wrong. He's claimed that the increases in cost of living would be astronomical, actually the increase is less than a cent in a dollar and of course there are tax cuts, family payment increases and pension increases to assist families. He's claimed that the coal industry would shut down, whereas the coal industry is going from strength to strength and will continue to do so. He claimed that steel would shut down and that there would be some towns that were wiped off the map, of course this claim is completely untrue and has been shown to be untrue by the people who make steel in this country. He claimed that zinc would be over as an industry in this country, and once again the company that deals with zinc in this country has shown this claim up to be completely untrue.
And the list continues, the Leader of the Opposition this week was out saying he didn't support a -5 percent target for reducing carbon pollution by 2020 and then he changed his mind and said no he does support that target again. So within 24 hours we had two different views from the Leader of the Opposition about whether or not he supported cutting carbon pollution.
And then we've seen claims in the last 24 hours where the Leader of the Opposition has been out saying that he doesn't support closing down any dirty coal-fired power stations, but less than 24 hours before he made those claims, his Shadow Minister for Finance was saying they did support cutting coal fired power stations, particularly they supported the closure of Hazelwood.
And this comes on top of another false claim made by the Leader of the Opposition where he claimed that he'd never supported a carbon price, never supported a carbon tax, never supported an emissions trading scheme. Where the truth is that as a member of the Howard Cabinet he did support an emissions trading scheme and in Opposition he support both a carbon tax and an emissions trading scheme when it suited him.
Now what this all adds up to I believe, is that the Leader of the Opposition needs to stop this Chicken Little routine. He needs to stop claiming the sky is going to fall in. He needs to stop making false claims to the Australian people.
Australians are entitled to the facts and to judge our plans to price carbon pollution based on those facts. So, I will continue as Prime Minister to be out talking to people about the facts of our plan. But they shouldn't believe any of these false claims, about 6.5 cents a litre on petrol, about the coal industry closing down, about the steel industry closing down, about zinc closing down, about the cost of living impacts being astronomical, all of these claims are false. And then the Leader of the Opposition has been saying anything that he thinks an audience wants to hear this week. It's time he stopped that Chicken Little routine.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Another claim Mr Abbott is making, that hospitals will be severely impacted in terms of power price charges from the carbon tax. How will you compensate hospitals as they face rising power costs?
PM: Well I'm very happy to take that question. Of course this false claim comes from the very same Mr Abbott who ripped a billion dollars out of hospitals when he was in a position to make a difference as the Minister for Health. He's a very long serving Minister for Health in this country and the only thing people remember his time as Health Minister for is ripping a billion dollars out of hospitals.
On the impacts of putting a price on carbon pollution, of course the Federal Government indexes payments to hospitals and to schools based on increases in cost of living, so we will be, through that indexation providing money to hospitals and to schools that flow from the effect of putting a price on carbon pollution into the Consumer Price Index and the indexes we used as a basis of increasing grants.
So, no one should believe this false claim either. It just seems to me this list continues to grow - false claim after false claim. Now Mr Abbott seems to have forgotten that we index payments to hospitals, maybe there's a reason he's forgotten that, when he was Health Minister he actually cut that indexation as a way of getting a billion dollars out of the public hospital system.
JOURNALIST: These new newspaper ads from the trade and industry alliances, are they making your carbon tax selling harder?
PM: Once again I think Australians are entitled to the facts and the facts are on our side. There's been a lot of fear and a lot of scare mongering, a lot of false representations; I simply want Australians to have the facts.
I've seen those advertisements today and to take just one example of the things that are said in those advertisements, there's a claim in them that employment growth will slow because we put a price on carbon pollution. This simply isn't true. Jobs in Australia will increase by 1.6 million by 2020 with our plans to put a price on carbon pollution.
JOURNALIST: The very fact though that you've actually  -  you know that these business groups are teaming up together, they're booking out newspaper ads, it's got to hurt your campaign?
PM: Well I think we've got to be very clear, there are many businesses in this country that are embracing the possibilities that come from a clean energy future and have welcomed the Government's plans to put a price on carbon. There are many businesses in this country that have been anxious about investing, they simply didn't know what the rules of the game were going to be and now they know what the rules of the game are going to be because we're announced our carbon pricing plan.
And then of course there are businesses like the businesses in the steel industry and zinc that have said they are able to work with the Government's carbon pricing plan. Yes, we've seen some business organisations put advertisements in today's newspapers and as I say, just dealing with one of the claims in those advertisements, simply not true.
JOURNALIST: You've said petrol won't be included now or down the track, does that mean in particular when an ETS comes in, the Government will have to subsidise petrol?
PM: No it doesn't, it means that petrol won't be directly included in putting a price on carbon.
JOURNALIST: Does that make driving a car relatively cheaper than going (inaudible) public transport (inaudible)?
PM: Well, I think just common sense would tell us people make their public transport decisions for a whole variety of reasons like cost and convenience and getting them to where they need to go, so people will continue to make all of those decisions.
For any flow through impacts into public transport fares, of course, that's been taken into account in the assistance that we've provided to households, and let's just go through that assistance for Queensland.
Just looking at the tax cuts alone, so there are family payment increases, and pension increases, but just looking at the tax cuts alone, there are 1.9 million tax payers in Queensland, 1.6 million of them will see a tax cut and 1.3 million will get a tax cut of $300.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)/
PM: Sorry I didn't hear that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You're going to have to say that again.
JOURNALIST: Morris Iemma has said that he criticised the carbon tax, a senior Labor figure, does that disappoint you?
PM: Look, I just think Morris Iemma has called this one wrong.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are the hard questions News Limited has to answer?
PM: Well, look, can I say on that, as I remarked yesterday, people are seeing a very big scandal overseas, and seeing all of the reporting of that, and consequently I think it's just once again common sense, that having seen the kind of reports we've seen from the United Kingdom, that people would be asking themselves ‘could that happen here? What does this mean for us in Australia?' Very simple questions like that.
I'd also note that the CEO of News Limited in this country, John Hartigan, has actually been asking some of those questions himself. He made the point, very forcefully, that he's got no reason to believe that there's conduct of the sort that we've seen with News of the World, in this country. But, he has ordered a review, and he's asked that review to, obviously, pursue issues and questions that he thinks should be answered.
So, the CEO of News Limited asking some questions himself, it's not surprising Australians are asking themselves the question too; what does this mean for Australia? I do note that the superannuation industry is also out today asking itself some questions about what this means for corporate governance.
JOURNALIST: Going back to the issue of public transport, putting aside the compensation, they have that money to spend it on things so, petrol is exempt, public transport has a carbon tax, doesn't that make it relatively-
PM: -Well, I think we've got to get a sense of size and scale here. I mean, the less than a cent in a dollar cost of living impact, any impact that flows through to public transport fares will, obviously, be very, very, very modest and to suggest that that is going to change the cost equation between driving and catching public transport just simply isn't right.
JOURNALIST: Isn't the point of changing costs, isn't that the point of a carbon tax?
PM: But you've got to get a sense of costs and scale, I mean you're putting to me a proposition that somehow the cost equation between catching a bus, or driving a car, will change that's simply not right.
JOURNALIST: Where is the global action on climate change that you're banking on, when even the UN Security Council can't agree on whether climate change is a threat?
PM: Oh, let's go through it. 89 countries covering 80 per cent of emissions, 90 per cent of the global economy have pledged action. In our own region we are seeing China going to move to carbon pricing and emissions trading schemes in a number of its provinces. If we actually look at the business as usual case, we are aiming for a -5 per cent cut in 2020, against the year 2000 levels. But, for Australia that actually means we're aiming for a 23 per cent cut against business as usual.
China is aiming for a 22 per cent cut against business as usual. India is taxing coal. There are emissions trading schemes in American states, and President Obama's got a very ambitious target. There's an emissions trading scheme in Europe. Of course, Prime Minister Cameron in the UK has announced very ambitious goals for change.
So, the world is changing, and what that means is we are at risk of being left behind and not getting the clean energy jobs of the future. I'm determined those jobs come here.
JOURNALIST: Are you troubled by the UN Security Council's stance, or lack of stance, I guess, on climate change?
PM: I think the important thing here is to look at what countries are doing. We asked the Productivity Commission as part of all of this, to have a look around the world and see what was happening. They reported on 1000 different policies to tackle climate change, that's the degree of action that they found looking at a number of countries; 1000 different policies.
And, having looked at those 1000 different policies, what they said is the most efficient way of cutting carbon pollution is to put a price on carbon; that's the cheapest way of doing it. Well, standing here today, it appears that the Leader of the Opposition, despite back flipping earlier this week, has now back flipped again into his original position and is saying that the Opposition agrees with the Government, we should cut carbon pollution by -5 per cent in 2020.
So, we've got to ask ourselves two questions if we're going to achieve that: When do we start? And how do we do it? Well, I'm for starting early and doing it in the cheapest way possible. The Leader of the Opposition's for starting late and doing it in the most expensive way possible; which is why his plan is going to cost households $720 a year each.
JOURNALIST: Do you agree Australia needs stronger privacy laws?
PM: You would have seen today that the relevant Minster, Brendan O'Conner has said that we do need a conversation, and work done, on privacy protection. This stems from some work done a while back by the Australian Law Reform Commission on privacy. They came out with a comprehensive report, around 300 and something recommendations. We've acted on a number of them, this was another of their recommendations, and so we are seeking views on that. Of course, we want privacy, people care about privacy and so they should; they also care about freedom of the press, and so they should. So, we'll obviously be seeking views on how these two things can best work together.
JOURNALIST: Why did you not decide to face up to the coal seam gas protesters this morning in your speech?
PM: Well, land use planning issues are State Government issues, so I understand that there are communities that are concerned about coal seam gas. In terms of immediate planning decisions in local communities, they're decisions made at the State Government level. Some very big projects do come to the Federal Government, but overwhelmingly these planning decisions are taken at State Government level.
JOURNALIST: Can we -not have senate inquiries-
PM: Thank you-
JOURNALIST: -not have senate inquiries-
PM: Sorry We'll make this the last one, I didn't hear you.
JOURNALIST: The Senate Inquiry into CSG, they said that there's no Federal laws, like Federal environment laws protect plants and animals, but it doesn't protect the underground water, and that's the thing that farmers are concerned about. Are you looking to, I guess that's a loophole, do you think it is?
PM: Look, I understand people are concerned about these issues but directly on planning for where coal seam gas extraction is done, that is overwhelmingly, a matter that is dealt with by State Governments. Thanks very much. 



PM: I'm here with Senator Jan McLucas in Townsville. We're at Town High and you can hear the sounds of the school in progress behind us.
I've come to this school today to speak to some of the senior students about our plans to tackle climate change. These are people who within a few years, a couple of years, will be in our workforce and I wanted them to have the opportunity to ask questions about our plan to put a price on carbon. This will matter for their future, because our plans are all about ensuring that when they are the workers of tomorrow, our nation is securing a clean energy future.
I'm also here with Senator McLucas to make some announcements about investments in local road funding. I had the opportunity to come to Townsville the day after the cyclone, today it's a very different place. But of course across North and Far North Queensland and we are continuing to invest, to help people repair the damage that came with Cyclone Yasi, so I'm pleased today that I am able to announce a $155 million injection into road funding for North Queensland.
This new road funding is directed at the repairs we need because of the damage from the cyclone. As roads are being repaired, they will actually be repaired to a better standard, to make them more resilient for the future. This will make a difference for around 2000 kilometres of road, and it will make a difference in supporting jobs, 570 jobs, as these road works are rolled out.
We have wanted to work with the people of North and Far North Queensland from the day the cyclone came and we've wanted to work with the people of Queensland since the first days of the flooding. In order to do that we have made savings in the Federal Government budget and we've also won the argument about having a flood levy.
I wanted to make sure that we could properly fund the reconstruction works in Queensland. It wasn't east to ask people to pay a flood levy, but it was the right thing to do so that Australians around the nation could contribute to rebuilding here.
So, we have continued to work with people here through emergency payments initially, through road works, through rail works, through necessary reconstruction and now we are in a position to do some more, to repair 2000 kilometres of road.
So, it's great to be here today, a great opportunity. I also, here today, want to reinforce to the people of this part of the world, that as we go about pricing carbon, putting a price on carbon pollution, I see huge opportunities for the people of Queensland. There's literally no better place to seize a clean energy future than right here in Queensland; with abundant sunshine, and the ability to attract investment into the clean energy projects of the future.
We are investing in one of those projects, $460 million for a project in Chinchilla called Solar Dawn. If it was constructed today it would be the biggest solar project in the world. I think this is a demonstration of the kind of clean energy future that can happen right throughout Queensland. Putting a price on carbon, investing $10 billion in our Clean Energy Finance Corporation, and more than $3 billion in a new agency called ARENA, so that we can do more research and work in the innovations of the future that will bring us clean energy. It is the right thing to do for the nation but it's of particular benefit right here in Queensland.
Of course, as I've talked to people, people have asked me, as around 500 big polluters pay the price of their pollution, what will it mean for me and my family? There will be some price impacts, less than a cent in a dollar and people will see tax cuts, family payment increases and pension increases. People earning less than $80,000 a year will see a tax cut and the vast majority of them will see a tax cut of $300. Pensioner households will come out, on average, $210 in front, and people with kids will see increases of up to $110 in family payments. People can find out what it means for them and their family by looking at the cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website where they will be able to use a household estimator to generate the results as to what their family will get in tax cuts or increased payments.
So, it's a great pleasure to be here and I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how is your relationship with the Premier today, given that she actually prefers Kevin Rudd's abandoned scheme over yours?
PM: On the scheme that I announced two Sundays ago, first and foremost it's better for Queensland, better for Queensland because of the $10 billion investment in the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, there's no better place for a clean energy future than right here in Queensland. The opportunities are almost endless, and the package I announced does come with this huge new ability to turbo-charge our clean energy future. It also comes with tax reform, and that's good for Queensland. Many parts of Queensland, we have a small business economy, in many parts of Queensland people are making decisions about taking up some work, casual work, part time work, some more work. Through our tax package that comes through pricing carbon, we will be tripling the tax free threshold from $6000 a year to $18,200 a year. And what that will mean is a million Australians will come out of the tax system, they won't have to do tax returns anymore, easier for them, easier for the businesses that employ them and they will better see the rewards of work.
JOURNALIST: But how does it make you feel when our Queensland Premier is out there criticising your tax?
PM: Well I'm very happy to be speaking to everyone about the benefits of this package for Queensland, standing here in this wonderful sunshine, just reinforces there's no better place for a clean energy future than right here in Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Is she trying to distance herself from yourself given the late polls recently?
OM: I think I understand that people whether they're the State Premier or whether they're kids here in this school at Town High will have questions and want information, and of course we'll sit down with the Queensland government and provide it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, where exactly is that borrowed money going?
PM: I can take you through that, we've got the Bruce Highway between Townsville and Home Hill, there's five sites there, an 80 kilometre section; that's a $19.5 million investment. The Flinders Highway between Townsville and Pentland, eight sites across a 150 kilometre section, $30 million. There's the Gregory development road, there's six sites there, a 50 kilometre section, that's $48 million. And then there's three sites to the west of Townsville a 40 kilometre section with a $20 million investment.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is this actually new money or is this part of the counter-disaster funding that already exists?
PM: Well this is an announcement that of the package we put together and funded, that out of that package, this allocation will be made. This funding flows on the basis that three quarters of it comes from the Federal Government, one quarter of it comes from the Queensland Government.
Earlier this year I took the decisions, the hard decisions to make available more than $5 billion for reconstruction work, in order to do that I had to take some tough decisions to make savings on the Federal Government's budget. And, I had to take a tough decision to have a flood levy, to ask upper income earners to contribute right around the country, to reconstructing here, in Queensland.
People would recall it wasn't popular at the time, it was contested at the time; it was bitterly opposed by the opposition, but it was the right thing to do so that there is money available for making announcements like the announcement I am making today.
JOURNALIST: What I'm driving at is this money that councils already knew was coming?
PM: No, this is newly announced.
JOURNALIST: Alright.
PM: Thank you.
JOURNALIST:  What about the areas of Ingham and Cardwell, I mean; they go under, those towns, at the drop of a brick- (inaudible)
PM: Well, we'll continue working to invest in roads and rail. Already, major investments have been made in roads, to get over the damage that's been done. This is not the first road investment that's been made since the dreadful summer we lived through. So we've been investing in bringing roads back up to standard, in getting rail up and running again; this is a further development on top of that.
JOURNALIST: And how long will it take for these repairs to get underway?
PM: Well, we'll be happy to get it underway as soon as possible; we'll be looking to local companies, to regional companies to get involved in doing this work. We'll also be looking to state wide Queensland companies. So we will want to get it underway as soon as an appropriate work force and company can be found to start the various parts of work.
JOURNALIST: Given the level of spending and, the fact that as you say, the tax was very hotly contested, can you afford to have another, if we have another Yasi, can the country actually afford it?
PM: Look, I think I've shown by doing what I did earlier this year against bitter opposition from Tony Abbott that I'm always prepared to take the tough decisions that are right for the nation's future. It was a tough decision to ask people to pay a flood levy, it was bitterly opposed in the Parliament, I made the decision and then pushed through with that decision because it was the right thing to do by the people of Queensland.
And I did consistently say to Tony Abbott, I didn't understand why he thought a levy was good enough to pay for his election promises but he wasn't prepared to support a levy to rebuild Queensland. I decided to have that levy, and it has made the necessary funds available.
JOURNALIST: I guess what I'm getting about, would you put a levy on the levy if we went through another summer like we had?
PM: Well I'm certainly not making predictions about living through the kind of summer we just saw. And, let's remember how extraordinary that summer was. How extraordinary in the life of our nation, the most costly natural disaster in economic terms, that the nation's ever seen.
So, it was appropriate given that huge devastation through floods and cyclone, to take the tough decisions necessary to rebuild.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how are you going to win back the votes after the live cattle export decision and then back flip? It seems you have lost quite a few up in North Queensland, up in Hewenden, Richmond and Mount Isa.
PM: Well there was, your terminology is not right. There was one decision taken, and one decision pursued. And that decision was, having seen the graphic images of animal cruelty shown on Four Corners, that if we were going to have a long term sustainable trade in the live cattle industry to Indonesia, we needed to get animal welfare standards right.
So, one decision taken, one decision pushed through. The way in which we pursued that decision was to work with live cattle industry, and now we do have the regulatory framework where people in the live cattle industry can get export permits, as long as they can show transparency and accountability. They can track where cattle are going and they're auditing the animal welfare standards, and Indonesia is prepared to grant the import permits.
So, it was only one decision, the decision to get animal welfare standards right, that's the decision that's been delivered. For the industry, it was a vitally important process, because for the industry to have a long term future, you know the next five, ten fifteen, twenty years. For the industry to have that long term future, animal welfare standards needed to be got right. He worst thing for industry would have been to have this problem now, not get it right and then in two years time we have another problem, and a year after that we have another problem, and five years afterwards. So we've worked to get animal welfare standards right.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you concerned about the breach of security at Rockhampton airport yesterday?
PM: Any security breaches, obviously, do concern me and the responsible Minister, Minister Albanese, but we do have good airport security standards in Australia.
JOURNALIST: Is anybody concerned about these activists? I mean, damaging military helicopters.
PM: Well there's concern in terms of any security breach, but we do have good standards of airport security and, obviously, good people are on the job to advise government about what else may need to be done.
JOURNALIST: The carbon tax is proving a pretty tough sell with the adults, how is, I guess, the next generation of voters going?
PM: I think they were interested and asked a number of questions, some very, very smart and perceptive questions and that's a great thing. I always like talking to young people. They've got a view about the world, a view about their future in it, so I enjoyed the conversation today.
JOURNALIST: Your visit here is quite unexpected today, as far as business leaders are concerned. Was it, in a way, to beat Tony Abbott's announced visit on Sunday?
PM: Well I'd actually have to say I wasn't aware of that, so you've brought some news to me.
No, we intended to come to Townsville and I did ask Senator McLucas to bring some business people together and I had the opportunity to talk to them this morning.
JOURNALIST: You said you'll wear out the leather on your shoes, at what point do you say everyone knows about it, and now we can put the issue away for a while?
PM: Of course the ordinary business of government continues to go on. So as I'm around the country talking to people about pricing carbon, all of the work we need to do to keep our economy strong, to make the right decisions, to spread opportunity around our nation are still being worked on and taken. I will keep talking to people as long as there are questions that people want answered.
JOURNALIST: What do you believe are the hard questions that news Limited have to answer?
PM: I dealt with that yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have a message for the Appleby family whose son died playing a rugby match in Brisbane?
PM: Well, the death of any young person is, obviously, tragic and for a family that's grieving my best wishes are with them, and heartfelt wishes.
Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We were chatting before, Jan and I have been chatting, and having had that chat we should say one thing while we're together. Jan's been talking to me about how many Australians she knows and right around our country people are getting some very late nights watching Cadel Evans, and so as that moves to its final stages over the weekend, best wishes to Cadel Evans as he gets the rest of the journey. So, like every other Australian, particularly Jan, I'm saying Go Cadel.
JOURNALIST: Will everyone get the day off on Monday (inaudible)?
PM: I think I will refer that to former Prime Minister Bob Hawke for you. Thank you.


Australia condemns the brutal and shocking attacks which occurred in Norway overnight.
A  number of people have been killed and many more injured.  Survivors have lived through a nightmare.
Norway is a good friend and partner of Australia.  Our sorrow and concern are with people of Norway and in particular with the families of those who have lost loved ones and those who have been injured.
Norway's Prime Minister has said that Norwegian democracy will not be shaken by these events and has expressed his determination to bring the perpetrators to justice.
Australia stands ready to assist in any way we can.



PM: Good afternoon. First I'd like to make a few comments about the events in Norway. Australia condemns the brutal and shocking acts of evil we've seen in Norway overnight. People have been killed, many more have been injured and from the tales that are now being told by survivors, it's clear that many have lived through absolute nightmares.
Australia and Norway are countries which are good friends. I've taken steps to convey to the Prime Minister of Norway the sadness and concern of Australians as we watch these events unfold. The family and friends of those who have been killed and injured have our most sincere sympathies. And of course Australia stands by prepared to help in any way that it can.
We are not advised that any Australians were involved in these incidents. Clearly anyone who is concerned about a family member who may be travelling in Norway should contact the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, but at this time we've got no advice suggesting any Australians were caught up in these brutal acts of evil.
So, out thoughts today are with the people of Norway, as their Prime Minister has said, they are a very strong democracy, they are a resilient country, but this is a very, very tough time for them, living through these acts of evil and trying to now come to grips with the number of people who have died and been injured in these events.
On a very different and far happier topic, I'm in Tasmania today and I've had the opportunity to come here via King Island. I'm the first Prime Minister to visit there, apparently, since 1961 when Robert Menzies visited. I had the opportunity to talk to locals community members and I also had the opportunity to see how they are using the renewable energy sources and clean energy sources of the future.
The island was originally powered by 100 per cent diesel and they've taken steps over time to harness the abundant wind and the solar energy that falls on the island, so now 40 per cent of the power used is generated by renewables. They want to take further steps to increase their clean energy mix, moving to 60-70 per cent.
It's this kind of movement to clean energy sources that putting a price on carbon is all about. What we want to see is less carbon pollution, what we want to see is a clean energy future and putting a price on carbon pollution will drive new investments and new opportunities in that clean energy future.
I had the opportunity to share breakfast this morning with a number of community members and to be able to talk to them about our plans to put a price in carbon pollution. A number of people expressed support for our plans, a number had questions, a couple asked me about our plans and were very concerned.
And that's what being out and about talking to Australians about putting a price on carbon pollution is all about. So, for the couple of people who raise concerns with me and I had the opportunity to talk to them, that's what I want to do  -  be there providing information to people about our plan to put a price on carbon pollution.
One of the people who raised concerns with me questioned how this can all be done in the most efficient way. Economists have told us and told us consistently that putting a price on carbon pollution, to be paid by the biggest polluters is the most efficient way of cutting carbon pollution and creating a clean energy future.
Our plan is very different to Mr Abbott's plan. Treasury has modelled Mr Abbott's plan, Treasury has modelled what a carbon price per tonne would be under Mr Abbott's plan and it's clear from that modelling that Mr Abbott's plan, if you add it all up and work it all out, would mean an additional tax burden of $1300 per family in 2020.
Now, it's as high was $1300 because Mr Abbott has ruled out any international linking of his plan. That is, he's ruled out the mechanism that economists say is the way of making sure the costs of getting a clean energy future here in Australia are the same as the costs being faced by people in other nations.
$1300 of extra tax in 2020, so if you compare the two plans, Mr Abbott's is all about putting a tax on families and giving money to polluters. My plan is about getting polluters to pay, to give money to families, it's about cutting carbon pollution, cutting tax and increasing the pension. And I think people will want to contemplate this $1300 additional tax figure that Mr Abbott's plan implies in 2020 for Australian families.
Can I conclude by saying that I'm here in Tasmania today and will be meeting with the Premier of Tasmania and others to talk about Tasmanian forests. As we know over decades there's been disputation in Tasmania about forestry, then the commercial conditions changed, the commercial arrangements changed, and stakeholders who had spent many years in bitter opposition to each other, came round a table to talk, to see if they could find a way to a shared future. That involved employers, the union and of course environmental stakeholders as well.
Arising out of those discussions from people who had in the past been fierce opponents of each other, a statement of principles was brought together. We were pleased to support Mr Bill Kelty working with the groups that had nutted out that statement of principles and facilitating brining that to a further stage of detail.
Now Minister Burke, the relevant Federal Minister, has been in Tasmania for a number of days, involved in intense discussions around the statement of principles. I am here today personally to engage in further discussions. There's a real opportunity to be seized here and I believe we should seize it.
And that's why I'm in Tasmania's today and I'm looking forward to the discussions to come.
Given I will be involved in discussions during the course of today it's not my intention at this stage to deal with any questions of detail. I will look forward to those discussions first.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be staying until there is an agreement on forests?
PM: Well, there's an opportunity to seize here and I think we should seize it. That's why I'm here personally.
JOURNALIST: The Australian Trade and Industry Alliance is going to start a TV advertising campaign against the carbon tax from tomorrow morning. So, how do you feel about that, what's your response to that?
PM: Well, there has been some print advertisements already and as I remarked during the course of the week looking at those print advertisements, to take just one point  -  a false claim was made about employment, there was a suggestion in those print advertisements that employment was going to somehow slow or go backwards under pricing carbon, simply not true. Employment in this country will go up by 1.6 million jobs by 2020, half a million of those new jobs in the next two years.
So, I think it's important that Australians get the facts and, of course, that facts are on our side, the facts support our plan to put a price on carbon pollution, to cut carbon pollution, to cut taxes as we do it and to support Australian families.
JOURNALIST: What did you make of the comments by business saying some of your big policies have a whiff of illegitimacy about them?
PM: Well, I'm very happy to deal with some of those comments in detail. First and foremost, there's been today, from some business people, criticism of our plans to put a price on carbon pollution  -  well, there are many, many Australian businesses people who have endorsed this plan, endorsed this plan because they wanted certainty, endorsed this plan because they can see the investment opportunities and the jobs which will flow from it, as we seize a clean energy future.
And then I see amongst these comments today, there's a comment that the NBN is a thought bubble. Well, I suggest before people make comments like that they might want to come here, to Tasmania, and talk to people for whom the NBN is now a way of life and supporting the way they want to live their lives.
And then there was a comment too, about our Fair Work laws. Well, I suggest anybody who wants to make those comments might want to have a conversation first with the Australians who lost basic pay and conditions, and lost their jobs unfairly under Work Choices.
As Prime Minister, I'm standing up for a clean energy future, for the technology of the future, the National Broadband Network, and for fairness and dignity at work and I will continue to stand up for those things.
JOURNALIST: How is the Government's relationship with business?
PM: Well, as I've just made it clear, I this week have spoken to many, many business people who have  welcomed the fact that they now have certainty, have welcomed the fact that they can now get on and make long lived investments for the future, including in clean energy, because of our plans to price carbon.
On the specifics of the criticism today, as I've just made it clear, I will stand up for decency at work, I will stand up for a better environment and a stronger economy in the future and I will stand up for continuing to roll out the National Broadband Network.
JOURNALIST: When can we expect a forest industry package, given that (inaudible) you're here now, is it fair to say that it's weeks rather than months, days? What's the timeframe we're looking at?
PM: Well, I'm here today. I think there's an opportunity to be seized and that's what I'm here for.
JOURNALIST: Julia, have you gotten involved because they were (inaudible)?
PM: I'm here to engage in discussions. It's obviously my job as Prime Minister to be involved on behalf of the Federal Government, so I'm coming here with Minister Burke already having been here for a considerable period of time.
JOURNALIST: What percentage of funding should be State and Federal in any package-
PM:- As I indicated, I'm not dealing with any matters of detail.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the deal with Malaysia, has agreement been reached on where the 520 people who arrived in Australia since May will be processed?
PM: Well, the Minister for Immigration dealt with that matter yesterday and I haven't got anything to add to his comments.
JOURNALIST: So, you're personally confident that the human rights issues will be dealt with?
PM: I've dealt with that in the past and the answer has always been yes.
JOURNALIST: Who exactly will you be meeting today, you said the Premier, but will you be meeting with-
PM:-Look, I've got a set of meetings today, but I will certainly be meeting with the Premier.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott made some comments about the state of Tasmania's economy earlier in the week. Have you any comments about what he said?
PM: Mr Abbott believes his job is to talk our nation down and to talk our economy down. He does it day after day. He's made some very specific comments about the economy of Tasmania, and I think Tasmanians would be pretty upset to see Mr Abbott talking down their state the way he's talked it down this week.
As Prime Minister, I believe my job is to be working with people, so we can secure a good future for them and a good future for jobs. Mr Abbott thinks his job is to simply talk everything down, including this very great state of Tasmania.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Tasmanian Premier Lara Giddings today announced an historic agreement on the future of forestry in Tasmania.
In the face of changing market conditions, both in Australia and around the world, it has become clear that the pressure on the Tasmanian forestry industry in its current form is not sustainable.
Today's agreement will secure jobs, ensure a sustainable forestry industry, and achieve iconic environmental outcomes by protecting High Conservation Value forests and remaining old growth forests for future generations.
The Heads of Agreement, backed by up to $276 million, will also support workers and their families affected by industry restructure.
Under the Heads of Agreement:
 * 	The Australian and Tasmanian Governments will provide up to $85 million in immediate assistance for workers and contractors who are losing their jobs and livelihoods as a result of industry restructure. This will include employee assistance, retraining and relocation support and assistance for voluntary permanent exits from native forest operations for haulage and harvest contractors;
 * 	Facilitate sustainable opportunities for the Tasmanian forestry sector with the Tasmanian Government guaranteeing at least 155,000 cubic metres per year in wood supply, 12,500 cubic metres per year of speciality timbers, subject to verification and 265,000 cubic metres of billets, with existing wood supply contracts to be honoured and the Australian Government to fund a voluntary exit mechanism to enable further native wood supply capacity to be retired and reserve areas increased when suitable plantation wood supply is available;  
 * 	The Tasmanian Government will reserve and protect 430,000 hectares of native forest from within the 572,000 hectares nominated through the Statement of Principles process, and place the full 572,000 in informal reserve subject to an independent verification process of conservation values and compatibility with yearly guaranteed wood supply, led by Professor Jonathan West. The findings will determine the area of High Conservation Value forest to be reserved, with $7 million a year for their ongoing management to be provided by the Australian Government following incorporation into formal reserves;     
 * 	$120 million in Australian Government investment over 15 years, including $20 million in 2011-12, to develop and diversify the Tasmanian economy to drive new job opportunities for Tasmanian families, including through job-creating projects in communities affected by forestry restructure. A new ministerial advisory council to be chaired by Mr Bill Kelty AC will drive new regional development opportunities and a new place-based investment Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the two governments; and  
 * 	The Australian Government will provide $43 million to implement the Heads of Agreement including funding for a range of activities such as working with communities through the transition and provide voluntary compensable exits to sawmillers wishing to exit the native forestry industry.
The Heads of Agreement is consistent with the Statement of Principles agreement between environment non-government organisations, the Tasmanian forestry industry and the CFMEU, which was presented by independent facilitator Mr Bill Kelty last month. 
It means the forestry industry can continue on a sustainable footing, and guarantees ongoing supply for existing businesses that are critical to supporting jobs and regional communities in Tasmania.
The Australian and Tasmanian Governments thank the signatories to the Statement of Principles and Mr Kelty for their commitment and hard work.
The Statement of Principles process and the Heads of Agreement reached today creates an opportunity to move forward after decades of conflict and build a stronger future for Tasmania.
Governments recognise the significant challenges faced by the industry in the face of global economic and market conditions as well as the historic opportunity provided by forestry and environmental parties coming together to agree on a framework for delivering a sustainable future for the forest industry and the environment.
We also recognise that these challenges, as well as the decision by Gunns Limited to exit from native forestry, will have significant impacts on workers, communities and the Tasmanian economy.
The Governments clearly expect that following today's historic agreement environment and industry stakeholders will end the long-running conflict over native forestry.
The Governments also expect that the Tasmanian Parliament will pass the required legislation by 30 June 2012.
The Australian and Tasmanian governments will work together to identify and support regional economic development through a partnership to create investment and jobs opportunities, particularly for regional communities.
The Australian and Tasmanian Governments will also work together to examine and identify potential opportunities from increased reserves from the Commonwealth Biodiversity Fund.
In October last year, the Tasmanian forestry industry and several environmental non-government organisations reached a Statement of Principles for protecting native forests and developing a sustainable timber industry in Tasmania.
The Australian and Tasmanian Governments appointed Mr Bill Kelty as an independent facilitator to facilitate talks on the Statement of Principles agreed to between environment non-government organisations, the CFMEU and the forestry industry in Tasmania. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Sport Mark Arbib today congratulated Australian cyclist Cadel Evans, who is now all but certain to become the first Australian to win the Tour de France after a stunning individual effort overnight.Evans, in third place going into the final time trial stage, overtook brothers Andy and Frank Schleck with a superb ride.All of Australia was cheering Evans as he took to the road last night after showing amazing determination in the gruelling mountain stages of recent days.He overcame mechanical problems in the 19th stage and put in a dogged and gutsy ride to finish on the wheels of the Schleck brothers, allowing him to go into the time trial 57 seconds behind the leader Andy.
Evans gave the time trial his all, finishing second in the stage, relegating the Schleck brothers to second and third.Tonight, Australian time, Evans will ride into Paris wearing the coveted maillot jaune, the yellow jersey, to officially claim his Tour de France victory.Senator Arbib said Evans' inspirational effort had won him the admiration of all Australians in going one better than his two second places in the Tour in 2007 and 2008."It will be a very proud moment to hear Advance Australia Fair playing in Paris for Cadel Evans - he has shown amazing determination to win the most prestigious bike race in the world," Senator Arbib said.Evans was a scholarship holder at the Australian Institute of Sport between 1995 and 2000 for Cross Country Mountain Biking.He has been the Australian male road cyclist of the year for the past five years and won the world championship road race in 2009.



The Prime Minister and Foreign Minister today announced the Government will provide $20 million in additional emergency humanitarian support for the 11.6 million people affected by the looming catastrophe in the Horn of Africa.
The United Nations estimates that this is the most severe food security challenge in Africa for 20 years. But if we learn lessons from the past and act fast, we can save hundreds of thousands of lives.
UNICEF has labelled the situation the "children's famine", with reports saying that two million young children across the Horn of Africa are malnourished and in need of immediate help.
Minister Rudd visited Gedo region in southern Somalia, one of the worst affected areas in the crisis. In parts of this region, more than 50% of children are malnourished. 
There are more than half a million Somalis in the refugee camps, and 50,000 arrived last month alone  -  with nearly half of the children under five starving. 
Minister Rudd, who is travelling with World Food Programme (WFP) Executive Director Josette Sheeran, witnessed firsthand the difficulty in delivering aid to the region and paid tribute to World Food Programme and other humanitarian agencies that are working in difficult conditions.
Operations in Somalia are among the highest risk in the world. Tragically, since 2008, fourteen WFP relief workers have been killed there.  The Australian Government channels its support through trusted partners to get life-saving help to those who need it most. Australia's additional support will help the WFP scale up their operations to assist an additional 2.2 million people in the previously inaccessible south of the country.
The WFP have also allocated $22 million to the Horn of Africa famine from Australia's annual core commitment to the agency. This brings Australia's total commitment to the crisis to more than $80 million. The UN estimates total humanitarian requirements for the response to this crisis to be around US$1.8 billion, of which only one half is currently funded. 



The Australian and Malaysian governments today signed a groundbreaking arrangement to combat people smuggling and provide protection to an additional 4,000 genuine refugees.
The arrangement demonstrates the resolve of Australia and Malaysia to break the people smugglers' business model, stop them profiting from human misery, and stop people risking their lives at sea.
The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, and Malaysian Minister of Home Affairs, Dato' Seri Hishammuddin bin Tun Hussein, signed the arrangement documents at a formal ceremony in Kuala Lumpur today.
The arrangement provides for the transfer from Australia to Malaysia of up to 800 irregular maritime arrivals and formalises Australia's commitment to accept 1,000 additional genuine refugees from Malaysia every year for the next four years. This increases Australia's overall annual humanitarian intake to 14,750 places.
This is a bold and innovative arrangement between two countries that have a long-standing and strong cooperative relationship.
After today, 800 people arriving in Australia by boat will not be processed in Australia. They will instead be taken to Malaysia where they will have to wait alongside more than 90,000 other asylum seekers for their claims to be assessed.
Meanwhile, an additional 4,000 people considered by UNHCR to be most in need of resettlement will be given the opportunity to start new lives in Australia.
The arrangement reaffirms Malaysia's commitment that transferees will be treated with dignity and respect in accordance with human rights standards, that it will respect the principle of non-refoulement, the key tenet of the Refugee Convention, and that asylum claims will be considered by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).The transfer arrangement between Australia and Malaysia also provides that:
 * 	Arrivals will be subject to pre-transfer assessments to ensure fitness and suitability for transfer, along with basic biometric testing;
 * 	Transferees will be lawful in Malaysia and provided with exemption under the Malaysian Immigration Act and Passports Act;
 * 	Transferees will be initially accommodated in a transit centre in Malaysia for up to 45 days, with support from the UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration;
 * 	Following initial processing, transferees will move into the community, with work rights, access to education and health care; and
 * 	Transferees will receive no preferential treatment in the processing of their claims or arrangements for resettlement over other asylum seekers in Malaysia.
The UNHCR has been closely consulted on the transfer arrangement, and both the UNHCR and the IOM will play a vital role in its implementation.
Oversight and advisory committees, including representatives from Australia, Malaysia, UNHCR, IOM and others, will provide ongoing advice to both governments on day-to-day management of the arrangement and the ongoing welfare of transferees.
Under the arrangement signed today, those who arrived in Australia before 25 July will not be transferred to Malaysia. Consequently, the people who arrived prior to today's announcement, currently being detained on Christmas Island, will now be processed in Australia.
Malaysia is a key regional partner in the Bali Process and this arrangement represents a significant step under the Regional Cooperation Framework established at the Bali Process Ministerial Conference in March this year.
This is a true burden-sharing arrangement in line with the principles of collective responsibility and cooperation that underpin the Regional Cooperation Framework.
The Australia-Malaysia transfer arrangement documents are available at:
The Arrangement - http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/media-releases/_pdf/20110725-arra…
Operational Guidelines - http://www.immi.gov.au/managing-australias-borders/border-security/_pdf… 



PM: Good afternoon.
Earlier today, the Minister for Immigration, Chris Bowen, signed an agreement with his Malaysian counterpart, the Minister for Home Affairs, Minister Hishammuddin. This is the agreement about transferring asylum seekers to Malaysia that has been under negotiations since it was first announced by me on 7 May.
This is a ground-breaking agreement which is designed to smash the business model of people smugglers. People smugglers prey on the desperation of others, and what they are seeking to sell is the hope of having their claim processed in Australia. This will smash that people smugglers' business model.
From today, my message to anyone who is considering paying money to a people smuggler and risking their life at sea, and perhaps the lives of their family members as well, is do not do that in the false hope that you will be able to have your claim processed in Australia.
Under this agreement, up to 800 asylum seekers will be transferred to Malaysia.
Now I am happy to work my way through the details of this agreement, but I do, before going there, want to make the following point. On 7 of May we announced that we would seek to enter such an innovative approach with Malaysia. We announced that that would be auspiced under a regional framework; the framework that was agreed in Bali. At the same time, the Government made it clear that there were discussions in train with PNG.
Since that time, 7 May, people who have arrived unauthorised have been held pending removal to a third country. The situation, of course, is that the Malaysia agreement, entered into today, has a date of effect following the signing of the agreement, and whilst discussions continue with PNG, this has been a difficult time in the life of that nation, with Sir Michael, a giant of that nation, unwell, so in these circumstances the around 500 persons who have arrived since 7 May will have their claims processed in Australia.
In relation to the Malaysian agreement there has been considerable speculation and discussion on the questions of Human Rights; I understand that. This is a tough measure, but we have worked hard to ensure that there are appropriate protections in place on human rights. Asylum seekers who are transferred to Malaysia under this agreement will have their claims processed by UNHCR - the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
It should be noted that there are around 90,000 persons in Malaysia who are seeking to have claims processed and to be treated as genuine refugees. The persons transferred to Malaysia will not get preferential processing. They will take their place alongside these 90,000 asylum seekers and they will wait their turn.
Malaysia has affirmed that it will not send any of the persons transferred back to persecution in their countries of origin. That is, if people are genuine refugees, and have a fear of persecution, then they will not be sent back to their country of origin, in breach of the Refugee Convention. This is, in fact, the central tenant of the Refugee Convention.
Those sent to Malaysia will be treated with dignity and respect, in accordance with human rights. That's a clear commitment of the Malaysian Government as part of this agreement.
What that means in practice is that the persons transferred will be there with the permission and agreement of the Malaysian Government. That means they will not be subject to any of the penalties imposed on illegal entrance; this means they will not be arrested and they will not be caned.
They will be allowed to live in the community after a short period for health and identity checks. They will be allowed ongoing access to employment opportunities and will have access to appropriate medical care. Children will have access to education.
To ensure the welfare of the asylum seekers transferred, there will be an oversight committee which will include representatives of UNHCR and also of the International Organisation for Migration, IOM, as well as officials from both countries, from Australia and from Malaysia.
I want to make it clear that we will assess the circumstances o individuals prior to transfer, but there will be no blanket exemptions. UNHCR, along with IOM, have been consulted strongly during the course of this agreement's negotiations, and they will have a strong role to play in its implementation.
Then, of course, as part of this agreement, Australia will take 4,000 genuine refugees from Malaysia. As I said, there are around 90,000 asylum seekers in Malaysia as we stand here today. The 4,000 persons will be taken at the rate of 1,000 a year. They will be genuine refugees, and they will be people who have been registered in Malaysia by today. That is, the 800 people returned will not be part of the 4,000, and people who arrive in Malaysia seeking asylum after today cannot be amongst those people eligible to take a place in the 4,000. They need to have been in Malaysia and registered by the time of today.
We will continue to work closely with the UNHCR, obviously, on the selection of the 4,000 people to come to our country.
I believe that this agreement meets our nation's needs in two ways. We obviously want to work in our region in a cooperative way, to ensure that we don't see people get on boats and risk their lives trying to come to Australia. So, this agreement will better secure our borders and will also mean that we are sending the strongest possible message: do not risk your life at sea; do not pay a people smuggler; do not get on a boat.
Ours is also a nation with a strong history of offering resettlement opportunities for refugees from around the world, and a number of our leading Australians got here as refugees. This agreement offers 4,000 more people, who are genuine refugees, the opportunity to come to this country and make a new life within our nation.
I've always said that the appropriate way to tackle people smuggling, a regional problem, was through a regional solution, and the Malaysia agreement is taking place under the framework which was agreed in Bali. It's a true burden-sharing agreement, in line with the principles of collective responsibility and cooperation that underpin the regional cooperation framework.
Can I conclude by saying there are a number of people that I would like to thank for their work in bringing this agreement to conclusion.
Of course, I would like to thank Prime Minister Najib of Malaysia and his Minister, Minister Hishammuddin, for agreeing to enter these negotiations with Australia, and seeing these negotiations through to today's agreement.
I would also like to offer a very big thanks to the Minister for Immigration, Chris Bowen. He has worked hard on this innovative agreement, on this breakthrough agreement, and I'd like to convey my thanks to him. I'd also like to thank Ministers Rudd and O'Connor, who have worked to support the conclusion of this agreement.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Some of the people who have arrived since, in principle, the announcement on May 7, have claimed that they were not told by the (inaudible) when they got on a boat. How are you going to prevent that happening? Is the Government going to step up its efforts, information campaigns in Indonesia and other places, to spread the message around this deal?
PM: Yes, we will. There will be a communications effort in countries that people set sail from, and countries in the pipeline to where people set sail from. Our practical experience is that the people smuggling pipeline is in fact very sensitive to changes, and that the fact that this, something as big as this, has been done will flow up the people smuggling pipeline.
But we won't be relying on that just happening organically - we will be resourcing a campaign to make sure the message gets through.
JOURNALIST: The nature and cost of that campaign, do you have those details?
PM: The nature of that campaign is like campaigns run in the past, so it does, obviously, involve information in languages, in a number of languages that people need. In terms of costs of it, it's being run by the Department of Immigration. I can get you those figures.
JOURNALIST: In terms of first people subjected to this project, there was a boat intercepted on Saturday with 40-odd people. They are yet to get to, or be taken to, Christmas Island. Are they going to be the ones who will be first sent to Malaysia?
PM: No, they won't. The agreement signed today becomes operational tomorrow, so it becomes operational, if you like, at one second past midnight tonight.
JOURNALIST: In your press release you talk about people being on Christmas Island, those who are actually on Christmas Island. These guys aren't there on Christmas Island. Is it to do with boats intercepted after midnight tonight?
PM: Yes, so those interceptions which have already occurred, and people are in transit to Christmas Island, those people will be processed here in Australia. This is for interceptions that occur after midnight tonight, or occur tomorrow, or in the days following.
JOURNALIST: Given that the flow of boats has slowed up a little bit, how long do you think it will take to fill these 800 places?
PM: Well, the aim here is to smash the people smugglers' business model, so the message gets through that people shouldn't get on a boat - that is what we are seeking to achieve.
You're right, the very fact that this was in prospect appears to have made a difference to the number of people getting on boats. The figures available to me, in terms of comparing this period last year with this period this year, is it's the difference between 1,700 and 500, but we from today are sending the strongest possible message we can to people who might be thinking of paying a people smuggler and risking their life on a boat - they shouldn't do that in the false hope that they'll have their claim processed here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, up until the weekend, as soon as the weekend, your Government was saying the people who arrive in between the time that you announced the deal and today would be sent to a third country. I heard what you said Sir Michael Somare, but are you seriously saying that just today, the decision was made that these people would not be going to a third country, that you only realised that today? If it's been apparent for a long time there's no deal with PNG, because of Michael's condition, why did you keep telling people that they would be going to a third country when the probably wouldn't be?
PM: Well, I've worked through, actually in very recent days, in the last couple of days, with the Minister for Immigration, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and with appropriate departmental officials and advice about what we should do for the around 500 asylum seekers who were on Christmas Island now. So, that decision has been made in the last couple of days.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's the arrangement for people who arrive after today, who don't want to get on a plane to go to Malaysia, and once they're on the plane, don't want to get off the plane? Can you explain exactly what will happen?
PM: Certainly, we would be absolutely looking to people to abide with instructions that are given to them; instructions obviously to board a plane, and then to disembark a plane. I would certainly hope that that's the case. If it's not the case then appropriate measures will be taken to ensure that they deliver on this agreement.
JOURNALIST: What are they?
PM: Well, obviously they include making an appropriate use of moving people around if they need to moved around other than by their own state.
JOURNALIST: So will it be Federal Police, will it be Australian authorities or Malaysian Police that would be dragging people on and off planes, is that what-
PM: -Australia is responsible for the transfer.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you draft a proposal early last year for a bipartisan solution on climate change that was not a CPRS or a carbon tax? And if you did, does that show that you're not, you don't seriously believe in the policy you're now pursuing?
PM: Well, thank you for asking that question, and, of course, I don't talk about Cabinet decisions, but I'm certainly happy to talk about my beliefs, and in doing so I'll make it very clear that those matters reported today have no veracity or truthfulness to them.
I've always believed that climate change is real. I've always believed that carbon pollution caused by human activity needs to be cut. I've always believed that in order to do that, the most efficient way of doing it, the best way of doing it, was by putting a price on carbon, and I have never believed that this nation could reach its -5 per cent emissions reduction target other than by putting a price on carbon.
So, let me be very clear about that - I've always believed that to reach our -5 per cent we needed to put a price on carbon. Any report or statement to the contrary is simply untrue.
JOURNALIST: Did you draft a proposal called ‘the bipartisan solution'?
PM: Well, I'm not going to play a game of fishing. You've put a position to me and I've just answered it for you.
Now, on the question of bipartisanship, let me say this and say it very clearly, and I've had the opportunity to say it to a number of Australians as I've moved around the country in the last couple of weeks: of course, it would be better if this big economic reform was bipartisan. Of course it would.
I offered Tony Abbott a seat on the NPCCC. Of course it would be a good thing if, like the big reforms of the past, floating the dollar, and tariff reductions, this was a bipartisan reform, but it's not - it's a bipartisan target but there's no bipartisanship about reaching that target in the cheapest and most effective way possible.
That's why I'm standing here for a price on carbon which would cut carbon pollution, enable us to cut taxes and enable us to increase pensions, and Tony Abbott, if you look at the Treasury modelling, is supporting a proposition which means he will have to require Australian families to stump up $1,300 additional in tax each year, so that's the difference.
The point I've been making as I've travelled around the country in the past few weeks is, in the absence of bipartisanship, this is a bit more like Labor's fight to have Medicare in this country; it's a bit more like Labor's fight to have universal superannuation in this country, both of which were bitterly opposed by the Liberal opposition.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) before the election Labor had a policy of deferring a carbon price until 2013 or later, so what you just said then, does that mean you knew at that time you probably weren't going to meet your target under that policy (inaudible)
PM: Well, it depends. Your question is making an assumption about when it would have started. Of course, the sooner you start the easier the start up of the scheme can be. You could start later, this is the point you're putting, but the point I've made consistently as I've travelled around the country is with bipartisanship around the -5 per cent target  -  I note Tony Abbott had a collywobble about that last week as part of attempting to say different things to different audiences depending on what he thinks they want to hear, so sometimes he says he doesn't agree with the 5 per cent target, sometimes he says he does, my understanding is that today he does agree with the bipartisan 5 per cent target  -  so the point I've been making as I've travelled around the country is if there is bipartisanship around the target, then the nation's asking itself two questions in all of this debate: when do we start, and how do you get there? Well, I'm for starting soon and doing it in the cheapest way possible.
JOURNALIST: Can I just take you back to the Malaysia deal and ask you the same question I asked you at the press gallery boxes two and a bit months ago about who would be  -  you, and this about (inaudible) exemptions-
PM: -I'm trying to remember every question you've asked me in the last few months.
JOURNALIST: I'm sure you would, Prime Minister, but it's to do with the exemptions. You say there'd be no blanket exemptions, but what of children, the infirmed, the elderly, pregnant women and the like. I mean, surely you cannot send these people on a plane in the expectation there may be trouble with people who don't want to get off, on the plane, let alone get off it?
PM: Well, let me say it again - there's no blanket exemptions. There will be an assessment process here and we have, through this agreement, worked to have special levels of support available for people who might have particular issues in Malaysia, but there are no blanket exemptions.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
PM: I'll go to Michelle at the back and then come forward.
JOURNALIST: Going back to carbon, the Queensland Premier and sections of business including the AIG group have called for some changes to the package and negotiations. Various Ministers seem to be saying various things on this. Could you just clarify whether you are willing to negotiate aspects of the package in response to those groups?
PM: Well, the package announced will be the package delivered. Of course, as we put out legislation people will be free to make points about details in the legislation, so Michelle what I've got in mind is exactly the same process I went through when I got rid of Work Choices and enacted the Fair Work Act, which is I came into Government with a comprehensive policy. We delivered on that comprehensive policy, so that wasn't open for negotiation, but of course, as we did the fine details of the legislation, people said, well that clause would be better drafted this way-
JOURNALIST: -And Anna Bligh could get something?
PM: I've just said to you, Michelle, the package we announced is the package we will deliver. On the question you're obviously raising about state electricity generation, let me say this: Queensland is a state with a lot to gain from a clean energy future. Those gains can start with the asset appreciation that their clean energy generation assets will experience as a results of our package to put a price on carbon pollution. I don't hear the Queensland Government volunteering to send that asset appreciation back to the Federal Government and nor would I expect them to.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, back on the Malaysian solution, in the deal it says transferees will be given access to health and education. How would that work? For example, will minors be going into the public school system in Malaysia?
PM: All of this of course will be overseen by the advisory committee that I've spoken of. Children will have access to education that can occur through community schools and in part through the IOM.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
PM: We'll just go here.
JOURNALIST: Just on the Malaysia deal, why did the Immigration Department publish information on its website saying that the deal would be backdated to the date of the announcement and it would be the 800 people after then who would be affected, when that doesn't ever seem to have been part of the deal? And also just on the Tasmanian Forest Agreement, Bob Brown and Nick McKim last night immediately rejected it, saying that it didn't ensure conservation outcomes, so doesn't that mean your deal, that deal, is dead in the water before it begins?
PM: Always the apocryphal statements at press conferences.
On the first, you'll have to talk to the Department of Immigration about that. Obviously when we announced on 7 May we needed to work through with Malaysia on the details of the agreement, we're in discussions with PNG, we now need to make decisions about the people who have arrived since, and those decisions have been made in the last couple of days and I'm announcing them now to process in Australia. So, on information on the Department website, please direct that to the Department.
On the major agreement that I announced yesterday in Tasmania with the Tasmanian Premier, this is a process that has been fundamentally about the stakeholders. That is, the environment group and the industry groups, the employers, the contractors, the union, that over decades, longer than some reporters in this room have been alive, over decades, have been in disputation about the future of Tasmanian forests.
What this agreement is about is recognising, as those stakeholders did, that conditions in the market had changed, that people were going to lose their jobs, that if we did nothing this would be a very difficult time for people who get their living from forestry and for forestry communities.
So what those stakeholders did in great good faith given the history, is they sat round a table and said can we work this out? Can we work it out so that the workers and the contractors who are going to lose what they've done as their livelihoods get a better deal? Can we work it out so there's a sustainable future for forestry? Can we work it out so literally hundreds of thousands more hectares of forests are protected? And they came up with a statement of principles.
It didn't answer all questions, so it has required some leadership from me and from the Premier of Tasmania to answer those questions and we did in the agreement that we signed and released yesterday.
So, others have got their views, Senator Brown's got his view, Mr McKim may have his view, but we will implement the heads of agreement that was signed yesterday and it will be worked up into a comprehensive agreement in 14 days' time.
In terms of the influence of, say, Mr McKim on this matter, he's in the Tasmanian Parliament. As I understand it there will be two propositions go to the Tasmanian Parliament. There will be a regulation change that reduces the amount of quota for forestry from a minimum of 300,000 hectares to a minimum of 155,000 - sorry that's not hectares, that's cubic metres of wood product, so 300,000 versus 155,000.
When that regulation is made by the Premier, Mr McKim and his Greens Party will have one choice - do they seek to disallow and keep it at 300,000 or do they not disallow it and have it at 155,000? Seem to me very curious indeed if they voted for the greater amount.
And then legislation will be presented in the first six months of next year to move forests into better levels of protection. Would seem to me, once again, a very strange result indeed if Mr McKim and his political party voted against that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the Malaysian solution, when do you expect the first of the 4,000 to arrive in Australia? And do you need any legislation to put this Malaysian thing in place?
PM: No, we don't, and the 4,000, it's 1,000 a year. The years are financial years, so that's 1,000 in this financial year.
We'll do what we do when we take refugees from around the world, which is work with UNHCR and obviously identify people to come and go through the appropriate processes to bring them here and to support them in settlement here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr O'Connor announced the other day an examination of the privacy issues from the Australian Law Reform Commission report, and Senator Conroy's got another inquiry going and the Greens have asked you to think about a further inquiry. Can you bring us up to date on whether you have spoken to Senator Brown about that and whether or not you've made a decision? What do you think some of the other issues related to privacy or media that the Greens have raised that might not be part of the existing inquiries?
PM: I haven't spoken to Senator Brown about it and what I said at the time is I imagine when the Parliament resumes people may want to raise such a proposition and I'll consider it at that time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your understanding of the costs of administering the Malaysian deal? Fourth line of the deal outlines that Australia's got responsibility for the health, welfare, the refugee determination, any related appeals and deportations from Malaysia of people who are transferred there, so do you have an idea of what the cost of that may be? And secondly, is there a review mechanism or will you review the deal should any asylum seeker transferred to Malaysia be subject to Ministerial reviews?
PM: Well, we have the advisory committee that will be working to oversee what occurs under the agreement.
The costs are, you would see that there's been discussion about a figure of $300 million. It's important to be clear what components of that are for resettling 4,000 more refugees in this country as opposed to work that needs to happen for the transfer agreement.
The figure for the work that needs to happen for the transfer agreement is $76 million. As a nation, we do bring refugees to this country, we've got a proud history of doing it. It does take some resources and when you're going to take 4,000 more then of course that takes some resources too and we've budgeted those resources.
I would say this come against a backdrop where people might recall that Tony Abbott, in his discussions with Mr Wilkie following the election, was prepared to double this nation's quota of refugees at a cost of $3 billion.
JOURNALIST: Just on clarifying that question though, I think Joe asked is there anything within the agreement that can be activated that if someone's human rights are infringed and your answer I think was that in part it did, there was a committee. What power does that committee have and is there in fact a provision that can actually be triggered so that if there is an invasion of human rights, something happens?
PM: Well, have a look at the agreement yourself, but can I say I'm not sharing the assumption that both nations to this agreement won't honour the obligations that they freely entered into.
JOURNALIST: The retailer Premier Investments says it's going to close 50 stores today, some of them Just Jeans stores, those sort of things, because of disappointing sales. Is there anything you can offer those stores or those workers?
PM: Well on the situation of workers, obviously it's dreadful when anybody loses their job and one of the things that we've sought to do through getting rid of Work Choices and making sure that there's a fair work system is to provide people with some protections when they do face redundancies.
So, you know, it's a really tough thing for people when they get that awful news that they're being made redundant and our work place relations laws support people in getting access to some entitlements and rights at that time. In addition of course there's a Government program to assist people if the employer is in circumstances where it cannot pay those appropriate entitlements.
More generally on the question of economic management and the situation in our economy today, we know that the underlying fundamentals of our economy are very strong indeed.
People may have seen for example some reports in today's newspapers about the resources sector and it thinking about how much skilled labour it's going to need in the future, how many people it's going to need in the future because of the growth that it's undergoing - more than $400 billion worth of projects in the pipeline - but we also know a feature of our economy today is that we've got a high Australian dollar which is likely to be sustained at high rates. That does put pressures on other parts of the economy. Consequently, that gives rise to what we call the patchwork effects around the economy and we do know that there are sections of retailing particularly that are feeling the brunt  from high Aussie dollar, cautious consumers and the like. So the best thing we can do as a Government, apart from getting the workplace relations laws right - and we have - is to continue to provide strong economic leadership and management of our economy, including during this remarkable time of transition.
Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on the Tasmania deal again-
PM: -Yes.
JOURNALIST: Do you need the Federal Greens support to fund it, to legislate it and fund it, and if so how can you possibly expect to get that support, and also why did you agree to a deal that sees taxpayers funds go to Gunns Ltd to compensate it for a commercial decision that they made to withdraw from native forests?
PM: Well, as I made clear in Tasmania yesterday the Tasmanian Government has a set of discussions to have with Gunns. Those discussions won't involve the Federal Government.
Yes, I've got a very different view from Bob Brown about this issue. My view is this is an important step forward in what has been a very-long running and vexed debate. As a Labor person I come to this with a view about supporting working people, particularly working people who haven't done anything wrong but a facing a very difficult situation, and of course I come to it with a view about wanting to have the best environment for the future, so I'm for practical, real-world change and that's what this agreement is about. It does not require federal legislation for us to deal with it.
JOURNALIST: It will require Greens support though to get, to pass it through, so how will get -
PM: -Well it doesn't require Federal legislation to deal with it.
JOURNALIST: In Tasmania it will though?
PM: And I've just made those comments I've made about the situation in the Tasmanian Parliament, so you probably need to now ask Mr McKim whether he's intending to vote against a reduction in wood quotas or whether he's intending to vote against reserving more area as protection forest area. They're questions you should ask him.
Thanks very much. 



PM: Good afternoon to everyone and can I offer a very sincere welcome to Tony Blair, who is with me today. Tony is here to speak to Australians in various ways, he will be on a speaking tour, but we've had the opportunity today to spend some time together talking about events around our world which matter so much for Australia.
I've enjoyed our discussions, which have included talking about climate change and how the world is acting to cut carbon pollution; our discussions which have included circumstances in Europe with the European economy. We've spent some time reflecting on the tragic events in Norway, and we've also had an opportunity to discuss the work that Tony Blair is doing in the Middle East, work that is of importance to that region and to the world in general.
I've joked with him as I've walked down the stairs that I'm here all the time and you, the journalists in the room, will be more interested in listening to him so I'll turn to Tony now for some comments and we'll take questions.
You'll be intriguing because you're not always here.
BLAIR: Thank you very much Prime Minister, Julia, for this real pleasure to be here with you in Australia, Melbourne, and I think you've very accurately summarised the content of our conversations.
Perhaps I'll just say one word in particular about what's happened in Norway which is appalling and tragic and I think it's just important people in Norway know that today right round the world everyone is standing with them in sympathy and solidarity. Norway's a wonderful country, it's a country with a beautiful and deep spirit to it and I think the way that it's come together over these past couple of days has also indicated the underlying strength of the country and the essence of that spirit, so I echo fully the sentiments the Prime Minister has given and are standing with the people of Norway at this point.
As for everything else, ask away. Is that right thing? I'm a bit out of practice with Prime Ministerial press conferences but anyway.
JOURNALIST: On the hacking scandal in the UK, do you think the Murdochs themselves should be held responsible for what's happened there?
BLAIR: Look, I think there's going to be several inquiries that are underway in the UK now. I think all of these issues are going to be gone into in depth, which they should. Obviously what happened in relation to the hacking was pretty despicable, what happened there, but as I think both the Murdochs said when they went to the select committee in the House of Commons, you know, they take responsibility for that and it's important that we now get to the bottom of what has happened and work out a right way of trying to get these relationships on a sound footing for the future.
JOURNALIST: Have you received any assurance that weren't hacked? Your Chancellor looks like he was?
BLAIR: I actually, well when I was Prime Minister of the UK I never had a mobile phone, which nowadays I think was a real advantage for me, so I've never thought that it's possible that I would be but I honestly have no idea.
JOURNALIST: How much trouble do you think Mr Cameron is in on this matter, and you're one of several British Prime Ministers that have been close to the Murdoch press and seen as being close to the Murdochs, is there an element for you of ‘there but for the grace of God go I', that something like this didn't blow up on your watch?
BLAIR: I think I feel that more generally about positions of Prime Ministers. Anyone who's been in the position of Prime Minister knows that these things always come to you when you're in the job, but I honestly don't know. I mean, I haven't really got anything to comment on it.
JOURNALIST: Could I ask another Murdoch-related question? Did you require Mr Murdoch to enter Downing Street by the front door or the back door?
BLAIR: I can't honestly remember.
JOURNALIST: The second question is do you agree with Mr Cameron that political leaders should keep media proprietors at arms' length, and the third question is what advice would you have for Ms Gillard about her relations with media proprietors?
PM: And front doors and back doors, you know, anything you've got to say?
BLAIR: Or any door. No, I think I'll leave that to her.
Look, let's be honest about it. The problem is when you're a political leader, never mind a prime minister, you get your message across, you have to get your message across, through you guys, so whatever I say today the whole of the public's not going to be watching every word I say. What happens is you will write about it, or you'll put it on your television and you know, therefore of course it's going to matter to have relationships with people in the media.
But I think one thing that is very important is to try and get those relationships right in the sense that the media is an important part of our democracy, on the other hand governments should govern for the public interest. And I think it's sensible therefore and in light of what's happened in the UK at least, we'd look at that and how we can put it on a better footing, but for most politicians I think the key thing is the distinction between news and comment, you know, and if you have that distinction clear then it's easier for you to have a relationship that is acceptable with the media people because they're powerful people within society, but in circumstances where you don't feel that those media outlets are going to be used as instruments of policy but they essentially remain instruments of news.
JOURNALIST: Mr Blair, on a different topic, yesterday Australia signed a deal to send 800 asylum seekers to Malaysia. What do you make of our asylum seeker solution?
BLAIR: I really think, look, I had enough problems with these types of issues when I was British Prime Minister in Britain. I think I'll leave that one for the Prime Minister, thank you.
JOURNALIST: Did you talk about the carbon tax during your conversations with Ms Gillard today and what do you make of Australia introducing a price on carbon?
BLAIR: Again, let me say right from the outset that these are decisions for Australians, for Australian people, for the Australian Government and not for me, but obviously I've experience with these types of issues because we have a European emissions trading system. Round the world right now people are moving towards a low-carbon economy as the future. I mean, that's what's happening and the only way you do that in the end is you put some sort of price on carbon.
So, I think that's- obviously, I had to deal with these situations when I was Prime Minister. I was there when we created the European emissions trading system. These things are always tough to begin with, but the central decision that you have to make is ‘are you going, over time, to move to an economy that is less dependent on carbon?' If you are. then you usually set a target, round the world people have set targets and you've got one here. 2020, it's going to be five percent less than the year 2000?
PM: That's right.
BLAIR: Now, that's over business as usual is what, is 20 percent or there abouts-
PM: -Yeah, 23.
BLAIR: -Rise, so you inevitably are going to be in a situation therefore where you're going to have to adjust and change your economy, so that's what we're doing in Europe, California, right round different parts of the world, even China's doing in its new 5-year plan, so you then have to choose your policy solutions and see that's a matter for you, but I think round the world right now there is a sense that it is intelligent to try and move away from over-dependence on carbon.
JOURNALIST:  You described the actions of News Ltd, News Corporation rather, as despicable, do you think it's right- do you think it'll be better for the company if Rupert Murdoch was to step aside (inaudible).
BLAIR: Look, I think everyone agrees the hacking of that poor girl's phone was despicable, I don't think there's anybody who would dispute that - including the Murdochs, by the way - but what happens to News International is a matter for them.
JOURNALIST: Are you surprised that there's still a debate in this country over the science of climate change, since that's been settled in Europe, seemingly (inaudible)
BLAIR: Look, I'll tell you what I think about this, because as I say I've handled this many years ago myself and I put the issue of climate change on the 2005 G8 agenda. What I think, I mean I'm not a scientist and I'm aware of the fact there are still people who dispute the science of climate change.
All I know is that both of my chief scientific advisors told me when I was in government that their view was, the overwhelming probability was that changes in climate were manmade and that we should act.
Now my view, very simply, was in circumstances where that's been said to me and to other heads of government, it would be irresponsible of me to simply sit there and say ‘I've got a hunch you're all wrong', because I'm not qualified to say that.
So I think, back our way, at least, I think this argument is about climate change, it's also for us about energy security as well frankly, and there's a view that the consensus is that this is a real problem, we've got to tackle it. So how you tackle it, as I say you can debate that, but I would say if anything in the world today, and this is despite Copenhagen not resulting in agreements and so on, that there's a pretty clear move worldwide to shift away from dependence on carbon. Now, that, I think is, that's the future, and for us therefore in Europe particularly, we've put a lot of effort into developing clean technology industries for the future.
I mean what is interesting in a place like California now is I would say there is a paradigm shift going on from information technology to clean and green technology as the new wave of innovation for the future and all of this I actually find immensely exciting, so I think it's got tremendous potential.
Now, whenever you then embark on the policy process that brings about these changes, I mean, it's tough. I remember we introduced the climate change levy in the UK and then the emissions trading system, and both were very difficult and very fraught whilst we were doing them, but I think today, probably, there would be a consensus around it.
JOURNALIST: So you're not necessarily surprised that the Prime Minister's poll rating and the Government's poll ratings are suffering while trying to introduce this change?
BLAIR: Look, my experience of politics is that if you try to take difficult decisions you always end up causing yourself a certain amount of problems, but that's what you're there for and the question is, as I say this is a decision for you guys and not for me, but the question is what's the right position to have for the future.
JOURNALIST: Do you have a view on whether News should be able to buy that remaining stake in BSkyB?
BLAIR: He's pretty keen on this subject. I mean, I know  -  but I've kind of  -  I think I've said all I've got to say on it really.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any, sorry, do you have any advice for Prime Minister Gillard in terms of selling her carbon-friendly policies?
BLAIR: No, and one of the things, by the way, I've discovered since leaving office is how much easier it is to give advice than to take the decision, so, all I ever do when I'm with a prime minister is express my respect and solidarity for the fact they're doing the job because I know how tough it is.
But this is a, these debates are big debates, you know, but what I always think about a country is if your politics is about big debates, I mean, that's a plus in a way, and by the way if you were in Europe right now, in any country in Europe or in the US, we would be having a debate that you're not having here. I think, are you not due to return to fiscal balance in, what is it, 2013 or something?
PM: Yeah, '12-‘13.
BLAIR: We'd be pretty happy to be in that situation back in Europe at the moment or in the US.
So, this debate over the carbon policy, of course it's going to be a big debate, but that's what democracy and politics is about.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, just on the Malaysian deal.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: How can you guarantee that people will be treated a certain way, guarantee that treatment, when they're being held in another country? Is that unrealistic to expect that country will live up to that standard?
PM: We've entered an agreement with Malaysia. The agreement was made public yesterday and signed yesterday. It's got protections of human rights for people who are transferred by Australia to Malaysia, and of course we've entered that agreement on the basis that both governments signing the agreement will honour their obligations under it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think you could learn a thing or two about policy and political salesmanship from Mr Blair?
PM: I've had the opportunity to meet with Mr Blair before.
Everybody around the world has always got something to learn and it's always good to have an exchange with people from other parts of the world and see the world for a moment through their eyes, so I've enjoyed our discussions.
Here, on pricing carbon, I will keep explaining to the Australian people how this will work, that it will enable us to cut carbon pollution, cut taxes, increase pensions and of course it also enables us to seize clean energy opportunities.
Mr Blair before referred to California - I remember visiting California a number of years ago and when I did I came back struck by the fact that people were talking about reducing carbon in the language of opportunity, the opportunities for the future, the opportunities for a clean energy future. Well, there's no better country on earth to realise those opportunities than Australia, and the package that I announced will enable us to realise that clean energy future.
JOURNALIST: Mr Blair, just on the European debt crisis, at what point do you think taxpayers in other countries should stop bailing out countries like Greece or Spain, and are we getting there?
BLAIR: I think the measures that the European Council announced last week are really important in helping stabilise the situation, particularly because the European  Stability Fund is going to be used now both to offer precautionary lines of credit and also to be able to recapitalise the banks.
But what people understand, whether they're in Germany, or in France, or in Greece and Ireland, is that people are in the single currency together, and the impact of whatever measures are taken on the single currency effects everybody. So, sure, I mean, you know, if you're a taxpayer in Germany, you want to make sure that the reforms that have been promised are actually going to take shape, but on the other hand, you're also going to be impacted if the Euro's in difficulty.
I think, long term for Europe, the central thing is there will have to be measures of fiscal coordination put alongside monetary union, and secondly and very clearly, I think, there is a need for time to reform the European social model in order to make sure that we can afford the liabilities that we got; and, in particular, in the like of changing demographics between the European Union.
JOURNALIST: President Obama has just made an address to the nation in which he's warned of a deep economic crisis if the debt ceiling isn't increased. How concerned should the world be about potential US default?
BLAIR: I think everybody hopes and believes that shortly before midnight the deal will be done that allows this situation to stabilise, because obviously, it's dramatically important for everyone that it does. I think what President Obama is trying to do there is correct, in saying he wants a big deal that actually sorts the problem out, not one that kicks the can down the road  -  actually, not very far down the road, either - because that's not going to help anybody.
And this is all about, for us both in America and in Europe, this is all about taking some of the long term decisions that in a way the financial crisis has exposed; they've not necessarily created the need for these changes. So one of the reasons why I think it's important that is President Obama is saying to look at some of these major tax and spending questions within the American budget is precisely because if we want the situation to be stable in the future, we have got to sort some of these long-term problems out. Same is true in Europe.
The financial crisis may have accelerated the need for change, made it more urgent, but the need for change is there, and has happened, really, as a result of things that have been building up over a long period of time. But, you know, this is a troubling and anxious moment for the world economy, for sure.
PM: If I could just respond to that, too, I think all of this discussion reminds us that we've come out of the global financial crisis strong.
Yes, we've got some short-term softness in our economy, and the summer of natural disasters we lived through has cost us as a nation and cost our economy, but the underlying fundamentals of our economy are strong: a big pipeline of investment; strong economic growth to look forward to; and as we go about the job of pricing carbon a clean energy future to look forward to as well.
So, we're not immune from the global economy, but we are in very different economic circumstances from the US and from Europe, and the discussions we've had privately today, as well as what's been said here, I think, remind us that Australia is in a very different position, with a strong economy that is the envy of the world.
I joked when we met privately that whenever I talk to leaders from overseas and most of them would happily cut their right arm off in order to have the kind of economic indicators we've got in this country. That's something that we should take some pride in, but also look at the opportunity that it brings.
Yes, we will go through here.
JOURNALIST: Just on asylums seekers, the Department of Immigration has confirmed over the weekend teenagers in the Broadmeadows facility engaged in self harm. How long before all children are out of immigration detention as promised by you Government?
PM: Well, Minister Bowen has worked hard on this, and we acquitted the objective we set ourselves by the 30th of June. Obviously, I do want to see the treatment of children through community detention and other arrangements, and Minister Bowen has worked hard on that.
I'd also say we do support people in detention with support services including mental health services; and I would make the point that whether it's an act of self harm or whether it's an act of misbehaviour, nothing that people do in detention centres changes the processing of their claim.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
PM: We'll go here, and we'll come to the front and then come back.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) reform, one of your Ministers last night was booed at a Sydney Leagues club. Are you worried that you're picking a fight with the clubs movement?
PM: Pokies reform is important. I mean, I'm obviously from here, I'm from Melbourne, I'm from Melbourne's west and I've heard a lot of stories about people who have lost their homes, lost their families, as a result of pokies addiction. So, we want to have a system where people have got a bit more power in their own hands, that it's actually very transparent to them the amount that they are risking through putting money into the poker machine.
In the same way, if you go and bet on a horse race, it's very transparent to you what you could win, but also what you could lose. I want it to be transparent to people when they're using a poker machine what they could win, but also what they could lose. That's the force of the reforms that we're talking about. Minister Macklin is working on this and it's a consultative process, of course a consultative process with clubs in New South Wales, as well as gambling venues around the nation.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: I wonder if I can ask you to put your Middle East hat on briefly. What can be done to persuade or dissuade the Palestinians pressing for UN endorsement of Palestinian statehood at the forthcoming session of the UN General Assembly? Or maybe you don't think they should be dissuaded?
BLAIR: Well I think the problem is that, as indeed the President of the Palestinian Authority has recognised, the problem is that anything you do unilaterally is not going, effectively, to deliver what the Palestinians want, and what we want to see, which is an independent and a sovereign Palestinian state.
So what we are working on right now is to try and see if we can establish some principles of guidance to renew the negotiation. We know what the issues are: borders, security, Jerusalem, refugees are the key issues. President Obama has set out in a speech a couple of months ago the basic analysis for this. If we could get agreed a set of principles that would then allow a negotiation to be credible, then I think that would enable us to manage any actions that are taken at the UN a lot more easily.
JOURNALIST: It's not really very promising, is it, it must be said?
BLAIR: Right now, I mean, it's tough, very challenging to do, but we're going to carry on working on it, and by the way every time you look at this issue to do with the Israelis and Palestinians, you realise 1) it is of fundamental importance to the whole stability of the region, and 2), there is only one solution, which is the two states.
So, whatever, however many different iterations we go through in crises and challenges, you always come back to that basic point, and somehow we've got to restore the credibility of that negotiating process and that's what we're going to spend time working on, but the only way you will get a Palestinian state is through negotiation, ultimately.
JOURNALIST: Mr Blair, you've visited Australia often over the years. Are you pleased to be back and what will you be doing in whatever downtime you might have this time around?
BLAIR: First of all, I adore Australia, I am a total fan of all things Australian, and it's fantastic to be back here. I'm not sure how much downtime I've got actually, but I will be probably paying a visit to the gym at some point.
PM: There's lots of other things to do as well.
BLAIR: I know, but I thought, maybe I shouldn't tell the media about those things.
PM: Oh, right OK.
JOURNALIST: Now that the Malaysian deal has been finalised, is the Government looking at finalising similar deals with other countries in our region?
PM: Malaysia is the country who we've been in discussion with, and the agreement's been finalised. We continue to be in discussions with PNG about having a centre there, and those discussions will continue. As everybody, I think, is aware this is a difficult time in the life of the nation of PNG, with Sir Michael, a giant of that nation and its politics so very unwell.
So, we understand that the people of PNG, and the leadership of PNG, is more focussed on those matters at the moment; but we will continue discussions with PNG on a centre there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) patience with the Greens over the forest deal in Tasmania?
PM: Well, it's done, so it will be delivered. People express different views about it but it's done and it will be delivered, in my view, through the Tasmanian Parliament, as it properly should, and everything we need to do as a Federal Government to honour the arrangements, we certainly will do.
JOURNALIST: The Greens are saying they want an extra 140,000 hectares protected. Is that something you would consider?
PM: No, it won't happen. The deal's done.
JOURNALIST: Just quickly on Malaysia, sorry, by funding education, health and services for the asylum seekers, will you spend more than the $300 million allocated in the budget?
PM: No, all of this was properly and transparently disclosed. I think it's very important to be clear on the money here, and describing the money has been out there for a number of weeks now. It is $76 million that supports the transfer of asylum seekers from Australia to Malaysia, and the support services for them when they are there.
Overwhelmingly, the money of the almost $300 million that's allocated is about settling 4,000 genuine refugees from Malaysia in our nation. Running a refugee program takes money. we do it now, it takes money to settle people here. When we take 4000 more from Malaysia, that'll take money and the money's been allocated. People should not confuse those two figures - the figure in relation to the people transfer to Malaysia is $76 million over the Government's budget period, the forward estimates.
So, we will take this as the last question, and then we'll go.
JOURNALIST: Would you like to talk about the world, where the privacy laws need replanned, this is not just limited to News, it seems to be taking on a much broader bent, including here. Do you think there's a need for that?
BLAIR: Again, I don't want to get into any discussions you may be having here. I mean, I think what the enquiry will allow us to do in the UK, which is sensible, is to look at what are the guidelines of proper conduct or not.
Even though, like most politicians, I've had what I would consider quite a tough time with the media from time to time over the years, nonetheless I respect the fact that the majority of journalists want to do a decent job and want to be true to the principles of their profession.
I think what is necessary is to, from our perspective in the UK, to recognise there have been practices that have transgressed those basic principles and we need to eliminate them, and get to a situation where you've got a set of standards that apply that people adhere to, and that, by the way, I think, makes it easier for journalists then, because they know everyone's obeying the same rules and the difficulty you get into is where people, you know, the competition is so intense.
I mean, I made a speech about this four or five years ago, where the competition is so intense that standards become a casualty of that, and that can happen in any walk of life. So, that, I think, that's the thing you focus on and get right, and then lots of other issues to do with privacy, and so on, I think, in some ways flow from getting those basics standards in place.
PM: Thank you very much.
BLAIR: Thank you. 



Today Australia is mourning the loss of a great artist and a true Australian national treasure, Margaret Olley.
On behalf of the nation we extend our deepest sympathies to Margaret's family and friends at this difficult time.
Famous for her colourful and sensitive works that focused on everyday objects and domestic interiors, Margaret led an extraordinary career that spanned over six decades and included numerous solo exhibitions around Australia and abroad. 
Margaret will also be remembered for her spirited and candid character, her passionate and generous mentoring of young Australian artists and her many donations to the arts.
In 1990 she established the Margaret Hannah Olley Art Trust which funded many important acquisitions by public art institutions in Australia. 
Margaret also donated a great number of her own pieces and those by her artist friends, including Arthur Boyd and Donald Friend, to be enjoyed by all Australians.
Margaret was twice the subject of an Archibald Prize-winning painting, first at the outset of her career by William Dobell in 1948 and again, six decades later by Ben Quilty in 2011.
The symmetry of these prize-winning portraits is fitting of a woman with such a fine career.
In 1991 Margaret was awarded the Office of the Order of Australia for service as an artist and to the promotion of art and in 2001 was awarded the Centenary Medal for services to Australian society and art.
In 2006, Margaret was awarded our nation's highest civilian honour, the Companion of the Order of Australia, for service as one of Australia's most distinguished artists, for support and philanthropy to the visual and performing arts, and for the encouragement of young and emerging artists. 



The Prime Minister today joined friends and colleagues to mourn the death of Rob Chalmers, the longest serving member of the Canberra Press Gallery.
As the longest-serving member of the Press Gallery, Rob's name stands alongside the greats such as Alan Reid, Don Whitington and Wal Brown.
Rob first came to the Press Gallery in the old Parliament House in 1951, and since then has reported on countless chapters of Australian political history.
Rob has reported on the Federal Parliament for more than half the period since Federation, having covered 12 Prime Ministers and almost 30 election campaigns. He relished the policy debates that lie at the heart of our democracy and his reputation for insightful and independent political commentary goes unchallenged.
On behalf of the Federal Government I offer my deepest condolences to Rob's family and friends at this difficult time.
Rob will also be greatly missed in the halls of Canberra's Press Gallery where he has been a wise and determined presence for over six decades. 



HOST: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Welcome to the program and thank you for taking all the calls.
PM: No problems at all, my pleasure.
HOST: Prime Minister before we cross to all the listeners, there's a lot of anger in the community at the moment, a lot of disillusionment with politics in generally, why do you think there's so much hostility directed towards your Government?
PM: I think we've lived through some anxious and uncertain times, following the global financial crisis I think people have looked around the world and seen a lot of uncertainty and that's made them feel uncertain. People also know that we're facing up to big challenges like climate change, and we've lived through some very difficult days over the course of this year, particularly in Queensland, so all of that I think has impacted on community mood.
HOST: Don't you think you're avoiding the big one though, people just hate this carbon tax?
PM: Well I think people do want to see us get on and do something effective to tackle climate change. I have been out and about talking to community members and overwhelmingly people do think climate change is real, they are unsure about our carbon pricing scheme, absolutely, I'm not trying to pretend that that's not a big factor on peoples' minds, but I have found as I've gone and explained the details to people, that people have felt more comfortable when they've understood both how the price is going to be paid, that it's going to be paid by the big polluters, that it is going to drive clean energy investment and new jobs, and that people are going to get assistance in the form of tax cuts, increased family payments and increased pensions.
HOST: Alright, okay, let's talk to our listeners, an opportunity for them to talk to you. Peter of Cedarvale, yes Peter, what would the question be?
CALLER: Morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
CALLER: I was just wondering, how much money have we got in the bank?
PM: Well our Government finances are very strong, the budget's returning to surplus in 2012-13 exactly as we promised. We did of course get hit by the global financial crisis, that hit Government revenue, the amount of money that comes into the Government, and we also moved to stimulate the economy to protect Australian jobs. What's the right thing to do now that our economy in its fundamentals is strong, is to put some money in the bank and that's what returning the budget to surplus is all about.
HOST: We're all very concerned about the debt crisis in America, that could have huge ramifications here in Australia.
PM: Look this is a very important week for the US and for the global economy and I know people are looking at what's happening in Washington and then they also look at events in Europe, in Greece and Portugal and other places and worry about that, I can understand all of that. Here in Australia we do get impacted by global economic events, but we should have some confidence that our economy has got strong underlying fundamentals, you know when we look at what's happening in our economy we've got a huge pipeline of investment, more than $400 billion coming on stream, we've got low unemployment, we've got sound Government finances, we've got good regulation, we're in the part of the world that is still growing, and it's hungry to buy the things that we've got to sell, so those things I think in our own economy, should help people face this period with confidence.
HOST: Ok we'll try and get to as many calls as possible. Lorna at Capalaba good morning.
CALLER: Good morning premier.
HOST: Prime Minister.
CALLER: I'm in small business and I can assure you that we have not been through hard times, we are going through hard times, and can you explain to me please how the normal person weighs carbon, we're all being accused of using it, but I can see where I can weigh it or how I know what I'm using?
PM: Right well thank you for that question. I understand even as the economy when you look at the big economic indicators, the so-called macroeconomic indicators, when we look at them and we see that they're strong, that that still means people in their own lives can be really struggling to make ends meet and to pay all of the bills, and we wanted to take a little bit of pressure off with new measures to help with the cost of getting kids to school for example, new support for families with teenagers, new ways of helping with childcare costs, but I get that there's lots of days that people open up a new bill and just shake their heads and think how I am going to make all of this add up.
In terms of pricing carbon, it's not the amount of carbon pollution that an individual generates in their life that is being, the price isn't being paid on that, the price is being paid on the carbon pollution generated by around 500 big companies. What that means is they'll change the way they work so that they generate less carbon pollution-
HOST: Yeah but we'll all be affected by it because the charges-
PM: Absolutely, but I do think it's really important, some people do think that somehow this is a tax being paid by them, it's a price being paid by big polluters-
HOST: Which we'll pay for in the long run.
PM: Yes there will be some flow through price impacts, we've been very upfront about that, the flow through price impacts will be less than one per cent, that's less than a cent in a dollar and to help people through there will be tax cuts, for example people earning under $80,000 will get a tax cut, the vast majority of them will see a tax cut of around $300. There'll be pension increases of $338 for a single pensioner, and there will be family payment increases of up to $110 per child and people can get all of their individual details by getting on the Clean Energy Future website, there's a household estimator there, you put in your details and it spits out what happens for you.
HOST: I'll just take a few more questions. Charles, good morning Charles.
CALLER: Good morning, how are you?
HOST: Good thanks.
CALLER: And Prime Minister?
PM: Good morning Charles.
CALLER: Good morning Prime Minister. My question's really relatively simple, could you tell me the total federal debt, how much we're in debt for and is the carbon dioxide tax, it is a carbon dioxide tax, designed to pay that off?
PM: Absolutely not, no. The price that is paid by the around 500 big polluters will go for three purposes. Number one, more than half of it will go to assist households to fund the tax cuts and pension increases and family payment increases that I've spoken of. Another section of it will go to support Australian jobs, and a third section will go to help assist with clean energy projects for the future. This is not about revenue raising for the Federal Government.
HOST: Alright, let's talk to Phil of Shailer Park, he may have a different question. Yes, Phil?
CALLER: Yeah, good morning Prime Minister. I'm a Vietnam veteran, served in the service for 30 odd years, served in two wars, risked my life many times and now I'm trying to survive on the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefit Pension, because of unfair indexation. Now we give the old age pensioners fair indexation, but this bill was sunk by Senator Lundy, I believe in the house, just in the last month and we've got to live below the poverty line, the 55,000 veterans that are earning the DFRDB pension. Can you give me an answer why we're being fairly untreated, or being punished?
PM: Look, there are special arrangements for veterans pensions, that are different to other pensions and of course, there are special health arrangements and things too, for example many veterans qualify for the Gold Card. What I think might be the best thing to do, is if I could ask perhaps if our radio presenters don't mind, but if we get your specific details through the producer, I'm happy to follow that up with you directly and then able to have a real discussion about your personal circumstances.
HOST: Love to do that, thanks Prime Minister and Phil.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: Alright, that would be good of you. Barbara of Albany Creek, good morning Barbara.
CALLER: Good morning, Julia, how are you?
PM: I'm good thank you.
CALLER: Keep your head up.
PM: Thank you very much.
CALLER: Okay Julia, my question is this: I have a daughter who graduated from teaching in 2010, with two degrees. The government isn't able to place her at this stage, she is categorised as a supply teacher and is also holding down a permanent part time position at a local supermarket, which she has been doing since the end of Year 10. Now, the whole issue is, being a supply teacher, you get the call at quarter to seven, between quarter to seven and 7:30 that morning, can you work today  -  yes, I'm happy to work today and off she goes. And then she starts at 4:30 at the local supermarket. Now that's, you know Julia, off and on, off and on, off and on. She may get a call for a one days school and that same day she'll get a call for a contract for a school for maybe three weeks, she is unable to take it, because she has already put down to do that one day at a school.
What are we going to do Julia?
PM: Look, this is, this is tough  -  I actually know a little bit about this from my own family life, my nephew's girlfriend is in exactly the same position, so I know what it can be like. The decisions about how employment works for state schools, are obviously decisions for state government and then the catholic sector makes the same decisions and independent schools make their own decisions. I've been keen to invest in upgrading our view and our resources for the teaching profession. We've made more than half a billion dollars available to do that, because I do want to see great teachers have a secure future. So I don't have an automatic answer for you, I do know that there's a lot of teachers in a similar position and it is very tough, but we have been keen to work with state government's on better valuing our teachers.
HOST: Hey, we'll take, we've got time for two quick callers. Yes Ken?
CALLER: Thank you Prime Minister for taking my call. In relation to Queensland floods and there's still a lot of victims out there who haven't even got a house to live in at the moment. At that time you gave a lot of lip service to the Queenslanders and saying how you're going to stand behind them. You give Indonesia $500 million. Indonesia's full of multi-millionaires and they've got a lot of money and a lot of them officials are corrupt over there  -  why couldn't you've just given them $250 and help Queenslanders out more.
Because, I'll tell you what Prime Minister, they're still suffering today and as I said, a lot of them are still living in their houses and they've got a lot of bills to pay and they haven't got much money.
HOST: Thanks Ken.
PM: Ken, thanks for that and I know, having recently visited Queensland that there are still a lot of people doing it tough. I was out in Ipswich particularly, talking to people who had been flood affected. We made available a funding package of $5.6 billion to rebuild from the natural disasters of summer. So, we have been investing in Queensland and we will continue to invest in Queensland.
In making sure that we're working to rebuild the roads and the rail, working with communities-
HOST: Yeah, I guess the big question is why so much aid to Indonesia though?
PM: Well, let's just get a sense of size and scale here, though. $5.6 billion is the funding package that I struck to respond to the natural disasters we had over summer. So, a lot more than has been pointed to in terms of aid to Indonesia. So, let's get a sense of size and scale.
Then on why do we fund schools in Indonesia. We fund schools in Indonesia because it's fundamentally in our national interest that people in Indonesia, young people in Indonesia, get a rounded, balanced education. We obviously want to make sure that people don't get distortions in their education, which can leave people at risk of being radicalised and involving themselves in terrorist organisations. A balanced, decent education for those people is in our nation's interest, that's why we do it.
HOST: OK, and just one very final question. G'day Craig.
CALLER: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
CALLER: How are you?
PM: I've very well, thank you.
CALLER: That's the way. I just want to ring up and say thank you and congratulations for brining a new reform to Australia. It makes me very proud to be Australian.
PM: Oh, thank you very much.
CALLER: I remember the reforms of the early 80s and 90s and that set us up for what we are today and I think this reform will do exactly the same thing in a few years time. So, I hope you get this through, Prime Minister.
HOST: There's one supporter for you, before we go.
HOST: Prime Minister, we have a resident, our local Member in Canon Hill here is the Foreign Minister, Mr Kevin Rudd. He goes in for aortic valve replacement surgery today. Like to wish him a cheerio?
PM: I've personally spoken to Kevin about all of this and he's a very  -  I think businesslike is the right word, because he's been through it before and he knows exactly what to expect. But, I think we'll all be wishing him the best. Any operation obviously has its stresses and strains, so we'll be wishing him all the best as he goes through it.
But, he's got a real sense of confidence about it all. I think having been through it before means there aren't mysteries and surprises.
HOST: Alright, do you think Anna Bligh  -  there's rumours that Anna Bligh might be moved, might be ousted. What are your thoughts on that one?
PM: I think Anna Bligh's doing a great job leading Queensland, leading it as it recovers from the summer of natural disasters and leading it as it seizes, what I think will be a great economic future. I've made the point when I've been in Queensland and I'm happy to make it here today  -  there's no state that can look forward to more benefit from a clean energy future than Queensland.
And whenever I'm there, Anna Bligh not only reminds me you've got a lot of sunshine, but you've got great quality sunshine when it comes to generating solar energy. So, Queensland's got a lot to gain from a cleaner energy future.
HOST: Alright, we appreciate your time this morning. 
PM: Thank you very much. 



HOST: The Federal Government's Malaysia solution for asylum seekers is facing its first test, with a boat carrying 54 asylum seekers due to arrive at Christmas Island later in the week.The agreement calls for people to be sent to Malaysia within 72 hours of arriving in Australia, but the Government is already saying it could take longer than that to make the arrangements for the first group.The issue will certainly take some attention away from the Government's carbon tax.
To discuss these issues, and the local implications for the US debt crisis, the Prime Minister is in our Canberra studio, and she's speaking to Naomi Woodley.HOST: Prime Minister, good morning. Welcome to AM.PM: Good morning.HOST: How worried should Australians be about the US debt crisis and what special preparations if any have you made to address the possible fallout?PM: This is an important week for the global economy and many Australians of course will be watching with a great deal of interest and concern events in Washington. Whilst of course our economy is not immune to world events, including events in the US economy, the underlying fundamentals of our economy are strong and that should give us confidence.We know that we've got a huge pipeline of investment. We've got low unemployment. We've got strong government finances. We've got world class regulation so those underlying fundamentals of the economy will stand us in very good stead.HOST: But if there is another global financial crisis you don't have a $40 billion surplus to call on this time for an economic stimulus package do you?PM: Well I'm not going to speculate in those kind of terms. What I am going to do is point to the very clear facts about our economy. Of course, we're not immune. We've never been immune from events whether they be in the US or Europe or both of them. They do touch us and touch our shores but our economy has its own strength and that should give us confidence even as we see these events around the world.HOST: The first boat of asylum seekers to be covered by the Malaysia solution is due to arrive on Christmas Island a bit later this week. Can you guarantee that all those onboard will be sent to Malaysia?PM: What I can guarantee is that we will do exactly what we've announced we were going to do, letter by letter, word by word. The Minister for Immigration has been very clear about what will happen here. There will be pre-assessment procedures. Then there will be returns to Malaysia.We are in the first phase of this. This is the first boat so those returns will take some time. When the system is up and in full operation those returns will happen in 72 hours, but the Minister for Immigration has been very clear about exactly how all of this is going to work and occur.HOST: But why is it going to take longer this first time? You've had, been working on this agreement for two months. What more arrangements need to be put in place?PM: Well I think it just stands to common sense that the first time you do something, obviously you learn along the way and there are things that need to be done for that first time that then for the second time are more routine. So it's really nothing more than the simple common sense that applies to any human activity.HOST: But is it realistic for those sorts of security checks that need to be done before it's decided where these people go, is it realistic that that can take 72 hours when we know that processing times in Australia stretch out for months and months?PM: Yes it is and the agreement was struck in full knowledge of the work that would have to be done.HOST: How many children are onboard this boat and are you personally comfortable with the images we might see of AFP officers manhandling them onto a plane to Malaysia?PM: Well I'm not in a position to discuss the caseload on this boat. There are pre-assessment procedures and they'll be gone through properly by the relevant officials. On the question of blanket exemptions, which I believe you are asking me, as the Minister for Immigration has frequently said, there are no blanket exceptions but of course we do have this pre-assessment procedure and we'll go through that.HOST: But what sort of force has been authorised for the AFP to use to send these people to Malaysia? Presumably they are not going to want to go.PM: Well obeying instructions here is not a question of volunteering. We are determined to get this done. The Australian Federal Police can speak on operational matters but we will do what is necessary to ensure that people who should be taken to Malaysia under the agreement are taken.HOST: But what does that mean to take whatever steps are necessary? Precisely what will they be doing?PM: Well it means taking appropriate steps to get people to board the plane and to disembark the plane the other end.HOST: Is that in terms of, we've seen tear gas and so-called beanbag bullets used on Christmas Island, is that the sort of force that is necessary?PM: Well I think we're getting a little bit carried away here. First and foremost people will be given an instruction to board a plane. We will be obviously looking to people to obey that instruction. If it's not obeyed then we have security personnel. We have the Australian Federal Police. We also have counsellors available to talk things through with people but ultimately, obeying that instruction is not a question of volunteering.HOST: On the carbon tax, over the weekend we saw a letter from the UK Prime Minister David Cameron praising the initiative but there was also another anti-carbon tax rally in Sydney. Doesn't this illustrate the problem for you that all the international support in the world is very welcome but it is not winning you votes here on the ground and that's ultimately what you need.PM: Well, ultimately what this nation needs is a clean energy future and that's what pricing carbon is all about. So looking at the letter from the UK Prime Minister, it's another piece of evidence in a mounting pile, a pile as high as Mount Everest, that nations around the world are acting and we can't afford to be left behind. We can't afford to be the nation that hasn't moved to seize a clean energy future with all of the opportunities that that gives us for new investment and new jobs.So for me as Prime Minister this is about leading the nation to get that clean energy future. If we put a price on carbon we will send a signal to domestic capital to invest in clean energy projects. If we put a price on carbon we will send a signal internationally that here in Australia the rules are known, the rules are certain, this is a great place to invest in a clean energy future.And for Australians that means new jobs and new opportunities and I'm determined we get those new jobs and opportunities for Australians.HOST: The South Australian Premier Mike Rann has indicated he'll step down after being told by factional leaders that he'd be dumped if he didn't. What should voters make of the fact that Labor factions have again installed a leadership change without going to voters about it?PM: Well once again, I think we should deal with this a step at a time in view of the known facts and the facts are these; I speak to Mike Rann regularly. I've spoken to him recently, and Mike Rann's focus, as it always is, is on what's best for the future of the great state he leads.When he returns to Australia, he is leading a trade mission to India at the moment, when he returns he's indicated he'll make some statements about his future and obviously decisions will be made by Mike and by the Labor parliamentary team he leads.HOST: But it sounds like decisions are being made by Labor factional bosses again taking it out of the hands of voters.PM: It sounds to me like Mike Rann, who's always been focussed on what's best for South Australia, continues to have that focus and he'll make some statements about his future working with his parliamentary team.HOST: So you don't think he's necessarily stepping down as Premier?PM: I'm not speculating on what Mike Rann is going to say about his future but I am certainly saying this; I know Mike Rann well. I speak to him frequently. The thing that motivates him in public life is the future of South Australia, making sure that that state's got the best of opportunities. That's what will continue to motivate him in any statement he chooses to make.HOST: Prime Minister thanks for your time.PM: Thank you. 



The Prime Minister today paid tribute to former Federal Minister and Victorian Opposition Leader, Clyde Holding, who passed away in Castlemaine overnight aged 80.
Mr Holding's distinguished political career spanned 36 years, starting with his election to the Victorian Legislative Assembly in 1962. He served as Leader of the Opposition from 1967 until 1977. In this capacity, he supported Gough Whitlam's reforms to the ALP and the cause of public funding for non-government schools which greatly assisted Labor's return to office federally in 1972.
Mr Holding was elected to the House of Representatives in 1977 for the seat of Melbourne Ports, and between 1983 and 1987 served as Minister for Aboriginal Affairs in the Hawke Government, where he appointed the first Indigenous head of the then Department of Aboriginal Affairs, Charles Perkins.
Between 1988 and 1990, Mr Holding was Minister for Transport and Communications, then Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs, Minister Assisting the Treasurer, Minister Assisting Prime Minister on Multicultural Affairs and finally Minister for the Arts and Territories. He remained on the backbench until 1998.
Mr Holding was a consistent supporter of Indigenous rights, and also campaigned hard against the death penalty. He co-founded the law firm now known as Holding Redlich, a leading advocate on social and industrial issues.
Mr Holding was widely regarded as an exemplary local Member and a strong friend of the Jewish community. He was a leader of integrity who showed passion for the values he believed in, whether they were popular or not.
Today we honour an outstanding servant of the Australian people whose loss will be deeply mourned by his family and friends, former colleagues and all who valued his significant contribution to public life in this nation. 



PM: I'm here at Godfrey Hirst with Darren Cheeseman the member for Corangamite and I'd like to thank everybody, both management and staff, for making us feel so welcome here today. We've had the opportunity to tour through and see how they make carpet in this factory. We've also had the opportunity to talk about pricing carbon and Australian manufacturing.
I'd firstly like to congratulate this business, Godfrey Hirst, because they've already been thinking about how they can make this place work and have their product a greener product. Indeed, they now have a carpet on the market that is 37 percent made from corn starch. That's a remarkable thing and Darren and I have had the opportunity to see that carpet today. Making it from a renewable resource of corn starch means the amount of carbon pollution, carbon dioxide, generated in making the carpet is cut by 60 percent, this is smart thinking from a great Australian manufacturing business.
I've had the opportunity here today too, to talk about the support available for manufacturing through our carbon pricing package. We've allocated around $800 million to work with manufacturing businesses and around $200 million in an innovation fund. And what I think coming here today has proved to me is that innovation is possible, indeed Australian businesses are already innovating to make their products cleaner and greener, to ensure that their products have less carbon pollution associated with their manufacture. So, it's been good to be here today, to have the opportunity not only to talk to the people who manage this place, but also to say hello to some of the people who work here, many of them have worked here a long period of time.
I know that a lot of negative claims have been made, as we've talked about pricing carbon as a nation. Many of those claims have talked the future of Australian manufacturing down. This is a tough period for Australian manufacturing because of our sustained high Australian dollar, but I am very confident in the future of Australian manufacturing because I'm confident in the ability of our businesses to innovate and I'm confident in the skills and capacities of the people who work in our manufacturing enterprises, including this one.
So I am very happy to take questions, I do just before I get there want to say having talked to Darren today, I think it's important to explain the household assistance package and the impacts for the greater Geelong region.
Of course, when we put a price on carbon there will be a modest increase in cost of living for Australian families. The price paid for carbon pollution will be paid by around 500 of Australia's biggest businesses that currently put carbon pollution into our skies for nothing, they will pay the price. There will be some flow through impacts onto the things that people buy, that's less than one percent and families and Australians will get assistance.
So the statistics for the greater Geelong area are 23,000 families in greater Geelong will receive household assistance through their family payments, that is the payments we make available to families to assist with the costs of raising kids. Around 100,000 people in the greater Geelong area will get a tax cut. 70,000 of these will receive a tax cut of at least $300 and 50,000 pensioners in the Geelong area will receive an increase in the pension of $338 per year if they are single and up to $510 for pensioner couples. They're the local statistics of the household assistance package. I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Have the powers that were (inaudible) the powers, are they going to be too strong or draconian as some are characterising them today?
PM: I make absolutely no apology for having tough powers to stop any rip-offs. I don't want to see Australian families ripped off and so we will have a tough cop on the beat, with tough powers to go after any businesses that are thinking of ripping people off. Now, I understand that Mr Abbott today has criticised these powers, that's remarkable to me, that he would criticise powers to make sure Australian families don't get ripped off. But that's consistent with the way that Mr Abbott is approaching putting a price on carbon. I believe in asking our big polluters to pay and using that money to assist Australian families, Mr Abbott believes in taking money off Australian families and giving it to big polluters and today he's apparently endorsing rip-offs as well.
JOURNALIST: Are the penalties too steep?
PM: The penalties are absolutely right, no one should do the wrong thing and if people do the wrong thing then they should feel the full force of the law including high fines and penalties, that's appropriate if people try any rip-offs.
JOURNALIST: What can you tell us about what happened in Tarin Kot?
PM: As has been reported there was an incident overnight with insurgent activity in Tarin Kot. No Australians have been injured or killed in this event, but clearly our thoughts are with the local Afghan people who have sustained this violence.
JOURNALIST: And what's your understanding of what role Australians played?
PM: My advice is that the Afghan security forces responded quickly and professionally to this event.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there's enormous interest in your launching Christine Nixon's book, will you just explain the thinking about that please?
PM: Sure, I'm happy to explain my thinking about that. Christine Nixon joined the New South Wales Police Force in the early 1970s. When she did, less than 180 women had joined that police force since they allowed women to join in 1915. Now I think it's quite remarkable that someone who joined at that time when our police forces hadn't embraced women as part of their ranks in any meaningful way, that someone who joined at that time could rise to become Police Commissioner. I think her individual story is interesting, it's also a story about a change in Australia during that period of time from the 1970s to now.
Obviously in launching her book that doesn't mean that I agree with all sentiments expressed in the book, they are Christine Nixon's sentiments, but I think Christine Nixon's life has been one across a considerable period of change in our society and particularly in policing and I think people will show some interest in the book because of that.
JOURNALIST: So will you be there next Wednesday?
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: You will be there next Wednesday?
PM: Yes I will.
JOURNALIST: Do you think she's being targeted (inaudible)?
PM: Christine Nixon can deal with her own life's events herself. I've never read an autobiography or a biography where I've picked it up and said every decision the person the centre of the book has made was the right decision. I've never had that experience reading any book, I'm not having that experience reading Christine Nixon's book. The purpose of people writing a book is they put their version and of course it will be debated and considered by others, that's appropriate.
JOURNALIST: So have you read the whole book?
PM: I'm about two thirds of the way through and will finish it before I launch it in the middle of next week.
JOURNALIST: Do you think a leader's role is to lead during a disaster, to be on deck?
PM: Of course leadership requires showing people what the right thing is to do in all sorts of circumstances. I'm not going to second guess things in Christine Nixon's book; people should ask her those questions. But for me, leadership as Prime Minister of this nation means leading the nation and charting a course to its future, that's precisely what I've been doing and will continue to do.
JOURNALIST: Do you agree with the need for a Commonwealth Ombudsman's (inaudible) for investigation of self harm in detention?
PM: Well one of the things about the Commonwealth Ombudsman, it's very important that the Ombudsman's work is independent from anything that Government says so I'm not going to comment on the appropriateness of the investigation, once I make a comment that could be seen to be trying to influence the Ombudsman one way or the other and that's precisely the kind of thing I don't want to do as Prime Minister. I understand the Ombudsman will be investigating.
JOURNALIST: But he's already said based on his visits to date he was shocked and surprised by what he's seen and also the rates of self harm, I think it was just over a thousand instances last financial year. Does that shock you?
PM: Well first and foremost we've taken a big step earlier this week to smash the people smugglers' business model. I don't want to see people in detention because I don't want to see people arrive on our shores in leaky boats having given their money to a people smuggler and potentially risk their lives and their children's lives. That's why we entered the innovative agreement with Malaysia on Monday this week.
When people are in detention we do have special services and supports to assist people with mental health issues. Obviously the Ombudsman's going to have a look at this and when the report's available we'll consider the report but we are quite a long way away from that happening at this stage.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, just with those figures, does it shock you or trouble you to learn that those rates of self harm, or attempted self harm are there at the moment?
PM: I'm well aware of mental health issues in detention centres which is why the Federal Government has actually stepped up the supports that are available. We are guided by a set of detention values as to how people in detention are treated and both the current Minister for Immigration and his predecessor, Minister Evans, have done a lot of work so that our detention centres are guided by those kind of values with appropriate support services in place.
JOURNALIST: Just back to the carbon tax, do you think you've been doing enough to get it out and explain it to workers and families? I mean, there's obviously still quite a few who have concerns about it, do you think (inaudible)?
PM: I did see some criticism emanating from Mr Abbott overnight. First and foremost can I say Mr Abbott's basically got all of the calls wrong about carbon pricing. He told families that petrol would go up 6.5 cents a litre, that's wrong. He told people who work in the steel industry it would shut down, that's wrong. He told people who worked in the coal industry it would shut down, that's wrong. He's told families there would be astronomical increases in the cost of living, that's wrong too. Now he's trying to make some reflections about the Government's campaign to explain carbon pricing, it follows from all those examples, he's got that wrong as well.
I will be out in the years ahead explaining the Government's carbon pricing package but I'm able to, and the Government's able to, walk and chew gum at the same time which is why this week what you've seen Government do is enter a historic agreement in Tasmania to better protect forests and secure jobs, enter an innovative agreement with Malaysia to better secure our boarders, release the carbon pricing legislation, release the paper that will guide the tax forum later this year. Wayne Swan's out today with the Minister for Communication releasing a new National Broadband Network site and I'm here talking about carbon pricing. We're able to walk - sorry to chew gum and walk at the same time.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott was here a week or two ago in Geelong, walking through factories like this, more like a union chief than a Liberal leader, is he still winning the war of deception?
PM: Well I hope he was explaining to him why he loved Work Choices and I hope he was explaining to them why he rejoiced in workers having their pay cut and I hope he was explaining to them why he thought it was good that people could be sacked with no remedy and no reason given and I hope he was explaining to them his intention to bring all of that back. I hope he was also honestly saying to them I haven't told you the truth about petrol, I haven't told you the truth about steel, I haven't told you the truth about coal, I haven't told you the truth about cost of living impacts. I hope he was going through all of that as well.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) selling his own climate change policy?
PM: The last thing Mr Abbott ever talks about is his climate change policy. I mean does anybody really believe Mr Abbott's got a climate change policy that stacks up? I mean Mr Abbott's become so negative in recent weeks he's at war with himself. Now it's one thing to constantly criticise what the Government does, Mr Abbott's now got so negative he criticises his own policy. He was out in the last week saying oh, five percent target to cut carbon emissions, how crazy is that? Then had to remind himself it's his target too. This is the hallmark of a man who doesn't have any policy, all he's got is a negative campaign against the Government's plans, inclusive of misrepresentation every step of the way.
JOURNALIST: And is the Government going into discussions about a possible congestion tax with an open mind, I mean, good faith? Tony Burke's already been out publicly today talking down the idea.
PM: We've seen a newspaper report on the front page of the Daily Tele this morning, I hope they enter it for one of our fiction prizes in Australia, we have a number and they may have a winning entry because it's entirely a work of fiction. The Federal Government has ruled out support for congestion taxes in the past and we've ruled it out again. In any event, these are questions for state governments.
JOURNALIST: So what's the use on it being on the agenda then, for a future meeting with state leaders, if you've already ruled it out? (inaudible)
PM: Well we've ruled it out but you would expect a paper that is canvassing questions including questions that may be addressed by state governments to use the words. What I wouldn't expect is for the Federal Government's position to be misrepresented, it's been crystal clear, we've ruled out any action on congestion charges. As for the attitude of state governments well you would need to speak to them about that.
Thank you. 



The Gillard Government today signed off on the final details of national health reforms with all States and Territories to secure the future of health in Australia.
This historic agreement will deliver the funding public hospitals need, with unprecedented levels of transparency and accountability, less waste and significantly less waiting for patients.
The reforms, agreed to by COAG in February and finalised today, will see the Australian Government invest an extra $19.8 billion in public hospitals through to 2019-20, rising to a total extra $175 billion to 2029-30.
This extra Commonwealth funding will mean our hospitals will be able to take on millions of extra services that would never have been possible under the old arrangements including:
 * 	2.9 million extra cases in our emergency departments
 * 	2 million additional in-patient services, such as major surgery or treatment for severe conditions such as kidney failure or a heart attack
 * 	19 million more outpatient consultations, such as minor surgery or physiotherapy.
Over the last decade the Commonwealth's share of public hospital funding has been in sustained decline, and States and Territories have had to enter negotiations over health funding with the Commonwealth every five years.
Today's agreement permanently puts an end to the uncertainty of public hospital funding.  It is money the States  -  and Australian patients - can depend on.
Specifically, the agreement will deliver:
 * 	Faster access to emergency department and elective surgery procedures, through the establishment of:
		 * 			A 4-hour target for emergency waiting times, with the aim that 90 per cent of patients across all triage categories are seen within four hours.
		 * 			A 100 per cent elective surgery target, aimed at ensuring all patients waiting for elective surgery are treated within clinically recommended times.
 * 	Less waste with hospitals funded for what they actually deliver.
 * 	Greater local control of hospitals.
 * 	Unprecedented new levels of public reporting on health services and expenditure for every hospital in Australia.
The Australian Government will step up to permanently pay for 45 per cent of growth in hospital services in 2014-15, increasing to 50 per cent in 2017-18.
This means the Commonwealth and States and Territories will share future funding growth for hospitals in an equal partnership.
In fundamentally changing the way that governments pay for hospital services, the final agreement is the biggest change to public hospital financing since the introduction of Medibank and its successor Medicare.
Less Waiting and Millions of Extra Patient Services
Under the final agreement reached today the Commonwealth will provide at least an additional $19.8 billion to 2019-20, supporting millions of additional hospital services.
Over $1 billion of this has already been provided to States and Territories  -  resulting in new beds and services already being rolled out around the country.
States and Territories have agreed to open new hospital beds and work towards tough new national targets for elective surgery and emergency departments. 
In 2009-10, 16 per cent of the 606,255 elective surgeries performed in Australia were not carried out within clinically recommended times.  Under the final deal reached today, the States and Territories will work to ensure that by 2016 everyone needing surgery will have their operation within a clinically appropriate time.
Similarly, in emergency departments, 36 per cent wait more than four hours. In this final agreement, the States and Territories will work to ensure that 90 per cent of all patients presenting to an Emergency Department in a major public hospital will receive all necessary care or have been admitted to hospital within four hours by 2015.
Less waste and increased transparency and accountability
In exchange for improved funding arrangements, states and territories have agreed to unprecedented transparency in our health care system. 
The new National Health Performance Authority (NHPA) will ensure that Australians can access accurate and up to date information on the MyHospitals website about how their hospitals perform so they can choose the best care. 
Australians will also have access to greater information about their primary health care system through healthy community reports.
To improve the transparency of public hospital funding a single National Health Funding Pool will be established.
The Administrator of the pool will report on Commonwealth and State funding flowing through the pool and the services delivered by this funding.
This will ensure that all hospitals are funded under the same arrangements, allowing all Australians to clearly see where and how their tax dollars are being spent.
A new Independent Hospital Pricing Authority will set the national price for public hospital services and will develop a national activity-based funding system. 
This will ensure that public hospitals are properly funded for each and every service that they provide, based on a fair price. It will also mean much greater efficiency in hospital funding than ever before  -  no more blank cheques.
New Local Hospital Networks will ensure decisions about hospital management are devolved to the local level.  In addition, local clinicians will be engaged to advise about patient pathways which best meet the needs of the local community.
Improving GP, Primary Health Care and Aged Care
The Gillard Government's new investments in hospitals are being supported by significant Commonwealth investments in primary health care services  -  including after hours services, new GP training places, and new GP Super Clinics  -  to help take pressure off public hospitals.
New Medicare Locals will support the day-to-day delivery of better integrated GP and primary health care services in the community ensuring more patients can get the care that they need in the right settings.
Reforms to aged care will see the Commonwealth becoming directly responsible for funding basic community care in most States and Territories for people aged 65 and over, in addition to its existing responsibility for community aged care packages and residential aged care. 
This will enable simplified access to a wider range of care for older people. The reforms also ensure clearer lines of accountability for care of younger people with disabilities and older people requiring care.
More information on this announcement is available at www.yourhealth.gov.au.



PM: I am joined by the Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon. In February this year I sat in this building with premiers and chief ministers from around the country and we entered an agreement to fundamentally reform our health system, an agreement to deliver better services to patients and an agreement which meant over the months to come we would work on the details and get the details right.
Today I'm in a position to announce that I have entered a health reform agreement with every state and territory in the nation. What this new agreement means, put simply, is more money, more beds, more services, more local control, greater accountability, less waste and less waiting times around the nation.
Today we are able to publish that agreement so the nation can see the health reform that has been struck. It's got three major components, first looking at proper funding. This agreement places an obligation on the Commonwealth to properly fund its share of hospital services. When we came to Government the Federal Government was funding nationally less than 40 per cent of hospital services and of course there were periodic meetings where people would see health ministers storm in and out of rooms as the then Federal Government, state and territory governments, blued about what should go into health.
In this agreement we have agreed that we will properly fund hospitals, we will become an equal partner in the growth costs of hospitals, funding firstly 45 per cent of growth and ultimately moving to 50 per cent of growth. This is a commitment of $16.4 billion extra between now and the end of this decade. It's a commitment of $175 billion extra by 2030 over the next decade and a half. What that means is that states and hospitals can reliably plan knowing that the Federal Government will be there and will be an equal partner in growth.
What we've also agreed is that this funding will be transparent and accountable. Australians have rightly feared when they've heard about health agreements in the past that one level of government has been putting more money in at the top of the bucket but there's a hole at the bottom of the bucket as the other level of government takes funding away and people have not known in a transparent and accountable way where extra money was going. This agreement changes all of that. As a result of this agreement money will go into a transparent pool. Federal money and state money, there will be clear transparency and accountability about where that money goes to and how it is spent. People will be able to see the Federal Government's contribution and state government contributions. The days of the blank cheque are also gone. This money is being devoted to get major reforms to our hospital system. Indeed this agreement delivers the most fundamental change to health care in this country since Medicare. It comes with clear transparency and accountability, it comes with more local control through local hospital networks and through Medicare locals. And those local hospital networks and Medicare locals will work with local clinicians who know what is happening on the ground and can help best direct services in their locality.
But also at the centre of this agreement is less waste because money will be dispersed in accordance with an efficient price. People have rightly feared that money in health has gone on administration, money in health has gone to services but services have been delivered with more or less efficiency around the country. And of course there is evidence that in some hospitals work is done much more efficiently than in other hospitals. So money will follow an efficient price, set by a national authority, set independently and enabling us to see where the best and most efficient hospital practice is being pursued and then to spread that best practice.
It won't just be government that can see all of these things, Australians themselves will have their own window on what is happening in the hospital sector. They will be able to see where the money goes, they'll also be able to see what is being delivered at their local hospital through the My Hospital website.
Then there is less waiting for patients as a result of this agreement and this is very important, for people to experience change on the ground, what they want to see is less time spent waiting in emergency departments and less time spent on elective surgery waiting lists. In February this year we decided that the best way of ensuring that we had targets in the system that could be met and achieved and were meaningful for patients was to ask the experts. So we asked the Chief Medical Officer together with an expert panel to go and work and provide advice back to the Council of Australian Governments on what the appropriate targets should be. They have provided that advice and it has been accepted.
What it means for emergency departments is that the appropriate target will be 90 per cent of all patients seen within a four hour period. Now that is a change from a target that has been discussed earlier. But there's a substantial difference here. The earlier target of 95 per cent applied to a selected group of patients. That 95 per cent target applied to a group of patients when you had already removed people who it was determined were clinically appropriate to not be in that group. We've got away from all of that complexity to make the system more transparent, more understandable and more meaningful. So the 90 per cent target is for all patients who go to emergency departments.
We understand that there are some patients for whom it is clinically appropriate that they are not admitted to a hospital bed or discharged within a four hour period. To give a common sense example of that, if someone for example had taken a drug overdose it may be appropriate to keep them under observation in the emergency department for longer than a four hour period whilst that drug overdose wore off. Recognising that, the experts have said to us the appropriate target is 90 per cent of all patients recognising that there will always be around 10 per cent of patients for whom it is clinically appropriate to be in emergency departments for a longer period of time.
The target for elective surgery is now a 100 per cent target. People would be aware that the earlier target under discussion was to say that 95 per cent of patients would get their surgery on time in the public hospital system and 5 per cent would be referred to private hospital beds. The experts have advised us that that could have perverse and unforeseen outcomes. In particular it would not enable public hospitals to make long term reliable arrangements with private hospitals they want to have work with them. So the target has been changed from 95 per cent to 100 per cent of patients on elective surgery waiting lists getting their surgery on time.
Around the country this is a very different way for our hospitals to work. What it means is that the political blues people have got used to seeing every few years between federal governments and state governments are over. They're over because funding is certain into the future. We will be an equal partner in growth. For the system it means more efficiency, transparency and accountability than ever before and for patients it means less waiting time for the services that they and their families need.
I'll turn now to the Minister for Health for some comments and then we'll be happy to take questions.
MINISTER ROXON: Oh, thank you very much.
I'm delighted to be here with the Prime Minister today to announce the finalisation of this health reform agreement. And I thought, in addition to the comments that the Prime Minister has made, it might just be worth taking you briefly through, of course, the benefits that are already flowing to patients from the agreements that have been struck and that this agreement, finalised today, is standing on the shoulders of services that our Government is already delivering to the community.
For example, as part of this agreement, 1300 new sub-acute beds are being delivered across the country. A significant number of those are already up and running and providing services. For example, you could look in New South Wales at ten new beds at Mt Druitt Hospital. You could look at 16 new sub-acute mental health beds at St George Hospital. We can look in Victoria and have examples in South Australia similarly. So it is already, while some of the detail needed to be finalised, starting to deliver to patients in communities across the country.
Similarly of course people would know that our health and hospitals fund has now allocated four and a half billion dollars to 148 projects across the country. These infrastructure investments complement the ongoing funding that has now been negotiated by the Prime Minister with every premier and state and territory leader.
Of course, it is also building on the investments that we committed to the states that we would deliver in the area of primary care. So you have seen, for example, in the last month, our new GP after hours service open. In the first month, that GP after hours service has taken 10,000 calls from across the country, showing that there is a great need to provide good advice and reliable advice to patients across the country, particularly at a time when their GP might be closed, that otherwise would mean they would be presenting at our emergency departments across the country.
These are all complementary investments and reforms that are coming to fruition through some pretty dogged determination of our Government and certainly some very dogged determination and negotiation by the Prime Minister in delivering this final outcome that we can announce today.
Of course, you also are aware that other investments like our e-health investments, our tele-health consultations have come online from the 1 July. This modernisation of the health system is a critical part of being able to deliver better services to patients across the country. And now, with the finalisation of the emergency department targets, the elective surgery commitments, patients can see the plan that we will work on with the states and territories, over the next few years, to deliver constant improvements as we work our way to those targets over the coming years. And that's good news for patients as well as good news, I think for all governments that we have a clear partnership outlined that is delivering to patients as we speak today and has enormous potential for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I don't understand something you said so I was hoping you could (inaudible) it. You said that in regard to the 95 per cent target for elective surgery, the experts advised it could have perverse and unforeseen outcomes and this is part of, you said that they believed that this could somehow prevent them entering into the long term arrangements with private hospitals that they want to enter into. Have I understood that correctly? Can you just  -  I don't understand it. And also, sorry, the reason I'm asking you is that Catholic Health Australia say they've got, they're ready to go right now  -  they've got beds right now, so why not use them?
PM: Yes, absolutely, so I'm happy to explain it and I think when I do explain it you'll see the beds that are there ready to go can be used. The way the old target was talked about was that you would get, if you weren't meeting your target, then you would scramble around and get someone a private hospital bed. Now it's that scrambling around that we were told by experts could have perverse and unforeseen consequences. So if you imagine the old system, the old way of thinking about it, could have put a public hospital in a situation where it says to itself, gee, we're not going to hit targets we've got to quickly make arrangements with the private hospital down the road, let's run down, let's try and get them to admit Matthew and get his surgery done. That was the kind of conception about thinking about it.
With the new target, what we're saying is we are not going to mandate from here the best set of arrangements for meeting the 100 per cent target. But certainly the expert advice is some hospitals will enter long term contracts with nearby private hospitals to help them with their case load. So it won't be a question of scrambling around for an individual case in the face of being concerned about your target, you'll enter long term arrangements to deal with case load so you know you can acquit 100 per cent of people being dealt with in clinically appropriate time.
JOURNALIST:  Why not just mandate the arrangement?
PM: Because we - all of this, when you look at it, is us not saying standing here in Canberra, I can absolutely tell you the best way for a hospital in Perth to work, it's actually saying local hospital networks, local control, local clinicians involved in the process, making the right arrangements so that patients get seen on time. The outcome for patients is getting seen on time, the best way of doing it, there will be different arrangements in different parts of the country, it's the outcome that matters and we received and I'll use the words, ‘the expert panel found that the national access guarantee flagged in 2010 may have unintended consequences and perverse incentives and that it was not appropriate'. Once you've received advice like that, clearly you have to think about a better way of doing it and the expert panel gave us advice on a better way of doing it.
MINISTER ROXON: Prime Minister, I might just briefly also comment. That report from the expert panel is being released today. That will be available on the website. Chris Bagggoley is here, who chaired that group. He's happy to talk with you at any point during the day if people have questions.
There is another important commitment that flowed from that recommendation and that is that we're not just looking at who tips over clinically recommended time and there needs to be, as the PM says, you know, a scramble to find a bed to provide that surgery. We're also looking at those people who have - are on the waiting list and have been waiting too long. So the recommendation is actually now that we need to have both an emphasis on those who have been waiting for too long, and clearing those lists, as well as looking at anyone that from tomorrow or, you know, in the future, tips over to having waited too long for their surgery.
So it's actually a much more ambitious target, but it's been prepared now with the clinical advice about what is realistic to be able to be delivered and I think it's very good news for patients that you won't tip over. Once you're on the list, you don't just get forgotten about so that the next lot of people get their surgery. You need to actually look at those on the list now, as well as those who might wait longer into the future.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
PM: We'll just go one at a time, Paul.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the states have kept their GST, where does this extra funding come from and how critical is the health insurance rebate change that you want?
PM: We've made provision in the forward estimates for this agreement, so that's already been done. Separately to that we continue to pursue the Private Health Insurance Rebate savings that Minister Roxon's brought to the Parliament. So Paul it's not right to say that one depends on the other, we've already made provision for this in the forward estimates. But what we continue to say to the Parliament about the Private Health Insurance Rebate savings is that they are appropriate savings, we're talking about the fastest growing area of health expenditure is my understanding and we believe that we can make savings there which free up money for other parts of the health system. It's not necessary to fund this but there are other parts of the health system that obviously need new resources and we believe in a saving which means people aren't subsidising my private health insurance for example, is an appropriate saving to make.
Yes, Lyndal.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this is at least the third time that the Labor Government has announced a historic agreement on health, each time it's announced it's been a little bit less ambitious if you look at the original plan which (inaudible) have the Commonwealth as the dominant funder of health, or of hospitals, what's to say we won't be back in two years time if the states are unhappy, that there's another historic agreement that waters it down a little more?
PM: Well this is signed, this is done and it's agreed to by all states and territories, we've never been in a position to say that to you before, we're in that position now. And this isn't a block of funds, you know, a cheque here, have this for five years and then come back in another five years and we'll have another ding dong blue and then we'll wander around talking about health agreements again, this is embedding into the system for the future how funding shares will work between the Federal Government and State Governments-
JOURNALIST: Does it end the blame game?
PM: Absolutely, if you look at the blame game, let's go back. You would have reported on meetings in this building under the Howard Government where health ministers stormed out halfway through. You would have reported on COAGs in this building, ones overseen by Prime Minister Howard, I remember one particularly clearly, I was Shadow Minister for Health at the time, where the premiers stormed out mid-morning because of health. You would recall all of that, what was that blame game and those blues about? They were about money. What does this solve? It solves into the future, the shares of money. So what we've seen is the states rightly objecting to the fact that under the Howard Government the percentage of funding of our hospital system from the Federal Government was going down and down and down, what this agreement says is we will be an equal partner in growth, we will get there in two steps: 45 per cent first, equal partner second, 50 per cent. And because it's activity based funding, it's not a capped cheque, only do so much activity and once you've spent the money it's gone and let's start fighting again. Because it's activity based funding, decisions will be made about the services that need to be provided in order to meet the targets that we outlined and funding will flow to the provision of those services.
So activity will match demand, we will be funding activity and we will be an equal partner in growth, that's what's difference about this agreement.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister it does resemble a much diminished package of the model that was announced by Kevin Rudd a year and a half ago. Is there a lesson in this that you need to better consult first on these types of reforms, not just with the state but with the expert groups such as that which advised you on elective surgery? Looking back, should there have been better upfront consultation on this to avoid the last 18 months?
PM: Well if I can invite you to look through the eyes of patients who use hospitals and I know people in this room have had cause to use hospitals for themselves and their family. When you walk into the emergency department what do you want? Well you're pretty anxious, you want to be seen quickly, you want to know what's going on with your health or with the health of the family member you've taken to the emergency department because they're unwell.
What this agreement means is that 90 per cent of patients will be seen within a four hour period, yes there are times when it's clinically appropriate to keep people for longer, but people will experience less waiting. And then looking through the eyes of patients, if you need elective surgery, so you're on a list and you're waiting for that surgery that can transform a lot of your life - the hip replacement, we met a young man at Canberra Hospital this morning who was talking about how his hip replacement had made a big difference for him. You want to know that you are going to get that in a clinically recommended time. This agreement has in it the target of 100 per cent of people getting that surgery in the appropriate time.
So if you look through the eyes of patients, that's what's been achieved. Of course when you look at the arrangements that then Prime Minister Kevin Rudd talked about, they had with them a set of transactions in relation to the Goods and Services Tax, and that set of transactions was not agreed with state governments and in my estimation was never going to be agreed right around the nation. So I have taken a different approach but at every step of the way have held true to the reform agenda that makes a difference to the long term and held true to the objectives that Australian patients want to see when they go to the hospital. Less waiting time, less waste, more local control, delivered through this agreement and then the reform drivers here, efficient price, incredibly important, transparency  -  I fought long and hard for transparency in the schooling system because it makes a difference. Transparency in health will make a difference and it is here, fully delivered, and then a key understanding of quality and monitoring it, not in reports that just I get to see or Nicola gets to see or even you get to see, but quality benchmarks that people around the country in their lounge rooms can get online and have a good look at, so they get to see them about their local hospital.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you stood here last year and said that 60 per cent of the funding was the foundation stone of the agreement, so how can you move the foundation stone and you're actually saying that the states and the Commonwealth will never argue over health funding again, given they may well argue over what constitutes an efficient price?
PM: Well what is an efficient price will be decided by experts through the pricing authority and I'll get Minister Roxon to comment in a second about that process of setting up the authority and striking the efficient price for various sorts of activities. On the structuring of this health reform agreement, this has got the reform drivers in it, the GST transaction was not agreed and it wasn't going to be agreed, this will drive reform in healthcare, make a difference for patients, more money, more beds, more services, greater transparency, more local control, less waste, less waiting times, all in this agreement, that's what we wanted to achieve to make a difference for Australian patients and we've achieved it in this agreement.
On the efficient price determination I'll turn to Nicola.
MINISTER ROXON: Chris, you're right to zero in on the efficient price being a very big change, something that we negotiated long and hard to have delivered - because without a national efficient price, the confidence that taxpayers expect that every health dollar is being spent sensibly, I don't think, can be met. With this agreement we now will be able to have that confidence.
We've negotiated in the period from February to now the details of the legislation establishing the hospital pricing authority. It will be introduced into the Parliament when we return. We have the support of every state and territory including the Liberal state and territories to the terms of that legislation. And I am very confident that all of the background work that's being done in the meantime will be able to be quickly transferred to that new authority, with one exception.
There is actually something that potentially stands in our way - and that is if Mr Abbott is determined to be a wrecker when this legislation that has the support of all the Liberal Premiers, not just all the Labor Premiers, if Mr Abbott wants to play silly buggers with it and object to the legislation, that of course has some potential to delay the establishment of the pricing authority.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
MINISTER ROXON: But I would hope-
JOURNALIST: You're confident that in two years time as the states have the lived experience of their efficient prices, there'll be no arguments over what constitutes a-
MINISTER ROXON: Well I'm confident that every state and territory has now agreed that it is right for taxpayers and patients to expect that an efficient price will be paid for services and the growth in services. That's the big benefit for the states and territories. We are not going to back away from our view, and every state premier has agreed to this, that an efficient price should be the foundation. That is a very big reform. It's a technical one. It's one that patients don't necessarily talk to us about when we walk to our hospitals. But it is one of the foundations for delivering a more efficient health system, and for us being able to be confident that extra investments in health are going to deliver extra services - not be absorbed into the system.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
PM: We'll take them one at a time and I'll just add a comment to Chris' and then we'll go here, I'm happy to make this prediction: that just like we see on the days that we release the national testing results in schools, you see premiers hunting down a TV camera in order to say ‘we won, we're better than the other state, we're more efficient that the other state, we're doing it better than everybody else' you'll see the same outcome in health.
David.
JOURNALIST: If this does end the blame game, who is to blame if something's going wrong in a hospital?
PM: Well hospitals will be properly funded, that's our role, to step up to 50 per cent of growth and we will. States are the system managers of their hospital systems and they will take that responsibility, local hospital networks will drive arrangements in their locality. So what you will do is if you have experienced a problem in your local hospital, people will in the first instance raise that complaint with their local hospital, it would be dealt with immediately for them or if it wasn't dealt with they may choose to pursue it at the local hospital network level, or they may choose to pursue it with their state government because they're the systems managers. What we won't see is the cycle that we've seen in the past where something goes wrong in hospitals, premiers say it's because the Federal Government doesn't fund them properly, the Federal Government says ‘no it's because the States don't do a good job managing them' and on and on and on it goes because this agreement delivers certainty about funding for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister will there an advertising campaign to sell this reform and on a totally unrelated matter, are you meeting News Limited editors and executives today and if so what will you tell them?
PM: Right, on this reform obviously the reform is before you today, we do raise with the public and we'll continue to do so the ways in which they can access services for example the afterhours hotline and other things that people need to know in order to navigate their healthcare system and understand what's happening with their healthcare system are things we'll continue to bring to public attention, it's important that Australians understand how the system works, how they fit into it, where they can get information, where they can get services. So in terms of public communications we'll continue to do that kind of work.
Yes I am meeting this evening with News Limited editors, I was invited the do so by John Hartigan who brought his editors across the group together as I understand they periodically do, such meetings have been addressed by Prime Ministers and Opposition Leaders in the past so when I was invited by Mr Hartigan I accepted the invitation.
JOURNALIST: What will be your message to those editors Ms Gillard?
PM: We'll I'll be happy to have a discussion in the room with people, it's a private meeting, but you would expect me to be talking about the Government's reform agenda and my vision for the nation's future.
JOURNALIST: Just following up from David's question, what will happen to hospitals if they're not meeting their targets, what will happen and I'd also like to ask why are riot police needed to help transfer 54 asylum seekers to Malaysia?
PM: Well they're two quite different questions.
On the first of them, people will be able to transparently see who is not meeting targets and to demand that it be addressed, so the force of transparency is it always keeps before decision makers and the public what's going well and what's going badly and it always informs a will for change because what's going badly is transparent to everyone.
On the question of Australian Federal Police and the movement of asylum seekers, I dealt with this matter yesterday, yes we do have security personnel and Australian Federal Police available to assist with the transfer of asylum seekers to Malaysia, my view is that people will be given instructions to board a plane and they should obey those instructions. As for operational matters and requirements for the Australian Federal Police including training exercises they're a matter for the police itself.
JOURNALIST: Further to Joe's question-
PM: Yeah we'll go and then we'll come to Mr Farr.
JOURNALIST: Ok, so me first?
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Sorry Malcolm-
PM: But I just know out of the respect that you would show, you'll now keep your question very brief because you know Mr Farr-
JOURNALIST: Further to Joe's question, there is a single child on the latest boat that's been intercepted, now I understand that he's part of a family group. What will decide as to whether he is sent to Malaysia or whether he's allowed to stay, is it the fact that he's in a family group, the fact that he's not unaccompanied, what will be the kicker?
PM: In terms of who is on the boat I think that is best finally ascertained and dealt with when people get to Christmas Island and disembark the boat. On any details in between I'd refer you to Minister for Immigration.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: You've nominated this as the year of delivery, are you open to the charge now that you've downgraded your ambitions in health, and in asylum seekers simply to make it the year of delivery, to deliver something?
PM: Just explain your question to me Malcolm, what do you say has been downgraded?
JOURNALIST: Well there's huge differences between what your predecessor said should be done in the health area and what you've just outlined now.
PM: But from the point of view of patients what do you say has been downgraded?
JOURNALIST: Well, certainly the Federal Government is not going to be taking up 60 per cent of funding-
PM: But when I go to hospitals people don't talk to me about financing transactions, they sit in emergency departments and say when do you reckon someone's going to come and see me, when I talk to patients in hospitals they don't talk about financing transactions, they say my mum's on a waiting list for a new hip, how long do you reckon she'll have to wait. So looking at it through the eyes-
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: Well I'm challenging the premise of your question and if it's got a-
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: Well hang on, we'll deal with Malcolm's question first. So rather than just make an assumption I'm asking you from the point of view of Australians who use hospital services where does your question take us?
JOURNALIST: Well I return to what the original program of the Government of which you were Deputy Prime Minister, there is a vast difference between what was proposed then and what you've just announced.
JOURNALIST: What was promised during an election campaign.
PM: Well let's go through this and let's be really practical about it. What was promised was at least $16.4 billion of new funding, what's being delivered? Precisely that. What was promised was reform, accountability, transparency, efficient price, more local control, what's being delivered? Precisely that. What was promised was that people would wait less time in emergency departments or on elective surgery waiting lists, we've asked the experts, there's no point having a view about targets sitting in a room here in Canberra, we wanted to know that the targets we struck could live and breathe in Australian hospitals, they could be delivered, and we asked the experts and the experts came back with their advice and we've accepted their advice. Their advice is go for 100 per cent of elective surgery, go for 90 per cent of the entire patient group going into emergency departments rather than chopping up that patient group and then applying targets to a section of it, that's what we've done.
We'll go to Sue's question and then come back through.
JOURNALIST: The difference between your agreement and Kevin Rudd's is he gave a guarantee that you would get your elective surgery, you seem to have got a target. If you were to be treated on time under his system you have to have found a bed within five days if you were a category one patient. Under your agreement there is no guarantee that you will get treated within five days of passing the deadline, can you tell us why that isn't a difference to the patient outcome?
PM: It's a difference that has been struck on expert advice, because let me refer you to the words: that access guarantee by the experts was seen as having, may have unintended consequences and perverse incentives and that it was not appropriate. Having received advice like that from an expert panel, I believed it appropriate as Prime Minister to accept that advice.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on page four there's a reference to reward payments to the states being brought forward as facilitation happens. I thought the overall objective here was to give the states a big incentive to improve efficiency and performance and then they would get reward payments, but here it looks like some of the reward payments are being paid in advance. Does that not represent a weakening of the pressure on the states to get results?
PM: No, I think we've got to be clear about the time sequence, and you may be just juxtaposing those words against a different notion of the time sequence. We've got a national partnership agreement that has been signed again. So, we had national partnership agreements, we've got a new national partnership that we've struck with states and territories. It is about getting change into the system, lifting the system up so it is doing better, before these new arrangements which apply from 2014-15 come into effect.
Most particularly, that national partnership money is about sort of turbo-charging change around the 4 hours in emergency departments and around 100 per cent in elective surgery. What we've agreed with the states is that there is reward money payable off those targets under the national partnership, we want people to move up, to step up and then they step into the new system off that higher and better base.
In that agreement, and the details are before you, you've got the 4 hour target, as described in the emergency department, we've got the 100 per cent target, as described in the elective surgery. We've agreed with the states that reward money will be paid at a 98 per cent achievement level, against the 100 per cent target, because we do recognise you can have a completely random event that can make a very marginal difference to hospital performance.
To give you an example of that, if we had a big emergency in one part of the country, and asked a lot of specialists from other parts of the country to go to the emergency site, that would make a modest difference to elective surgery performance and so we've recognised that. So, national partnership agreement is there before you. It's not correct to say that reward money is being paid in advance of change.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, under the initial, not even Kevin Rudd's proposal, but as I understood your post-February COAG meeting, and the initial legislation establishing the new health authority, it was going to be answerable to Commonwealth. As I understand now that's been changed, so that the states have greater input, I think, through COAG. What is the specialist advised reason to do that, or is it the case that the states wanted to have a greater say in how that was run, who runs it, how much they get paid and the setting of the targets?
PM: No, no, the targets are set and they are as described to you today.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, (inaudible)?
PM: I'll go to Nicola on the details of the legislation and discussions there, but I want to be very clear  -  this agreement today delivers on the Heads of Agreement I entered into in February. It delivers on it in full, so any suggestion that there's been concessions made between February and now is simply not right.
Yes, we have worked through new levels of detail and with all the details in front of you today, you can see the full agreement. On the structuring of the Performance Authority I'll go to Nicola.
MINISTER ROXON: Yeah, look, I think you're confusing two different things. There is the National Health Performance Authority which was always going to be a body which had accountability to both the Commonwealth and the states. The negotiations and the public coverage of changes to that legislation all turned around how that was delivered.
It was agreed in February that there would be an independent National Performance Authority. There was to-ing and fro-ing over what the legislation would say in order to deliver that, but it is now agreed and it was announced more than a month ago that that National Health Performance Authority would have certain accountabilities that provided reporting to the states and the Commonwealth and to the public.
The commitment made in February has been delivered upon, and I think if you ever understood that that was just a Commonwealth-only body, that was a misunderstanding because it's always been agreed that that was a body that would provide performance information to the states, to the local hospital networks, to the Commonwealth and to the public. And separately, the Hospital Pricing Authority, that legislation has not been introduced into the Parliament. It's been being negotiated in detail before it was introduced into the Parliament. It is now agreed to in detail and is ready for introduction when we return.
JOURNALIST: Minister, can I just draw you out on what the consequences or penalties may be for hospitals that don't meet the targets?
MINISTER ROXON: Well, I think the Prime Minister made absolutely clear that one of the big drivers of change is the accountability and transparency, so a hospital that is not performing is going to very quickly and very publicly know that it's not and its community will know that it's not. Similarly, a hospital that is performing very well is going to very publicly be recognised, and for the first time we'll be able to say, that hospital's performing really well, what is it doing that we want to be able to deliver in this hospital that's not performing well and will drive the changes in process, the changes in clinical practice, the changes in administration that improve those services.
Ultimately, the penalty is whether or not the states will get their reward payments, but every hospital will be paid its efficient price for the provision of services. If it is operating inefficiently, it will have a bigger burden to find the costs and funds elsewhere. So it is the driver that we've never had before that says if your hospital is not performing well, you need to be able to improve your performance to make sure that you can make the most of the money that's available through this new system.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) the local hospital networks, I mean are they answerable to the states, or to the Federal Government. It does seem that the states have been the really big winners here, you've conceded much to them-
PM: Once again Paul, what? What do you say we've conceded to them?
JOURNALIST: Well, it did seem that one of the crutches of the reform was that local hospital boards, especially in New South Wales, or networks as they were called, would have more autonomy, more say and it would be a way of delivering real needs. Now the states, in a sense, were seen as the villains of the piece here previously, but it would seem that they have still got the major say in the way in which these boards may even be set up?
PM: I'll go to Nicola for an in detail answer, but once again before we get to the analysis, let's actually just digest facts, because maybe they might inform the analysis. On local hospital networks what we've said is we will deliver structures that would give better partnership arrangements for health care in communities, so metropolitan communities in particular have a number of hospitals within their reach, they can better collaborate, better co-operate, to meet community needs and they need to be answerable to their community, they need to be transparent and they need to involve the best of local advice, including clinicians advice.
That was what we set out for local hospital networks and what is going to be achieved through this agreement.
On the technical structuring of them, I'll turn to Nicola.
MINISTER ROXON: Well, just to make the point, you've chosen a good example. In New South Wales, the area health services, I think you've rightly said, were not popular. But in New South Wales, the local hospital network legislation has been passed. The new local hospital networks are up and running. The new independent chairs are established and in place. This actually occurred under the previous state government with the support of Mr O'Farrell who was then the Leader of the Opposition.
This is actually a reform that has already started delivering in New South Wales, one of the states where there was the most common complaints about the area health service being too distant from local service providers.
So those changes are already starting to deliver very significant change to the way services are structured and delivered and supported. And in New South Wales, that reform is already done and dusted.
PM: So, it's perhaps Paul a little hard to suggest it's somehow been watered down.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible).
PM: We'll go to the last three, we'll go to Chris first, then to Katherine up the back and call it a day.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) local hospital networks were accountable to, more to the dominant funder, which was going to be 60 per cent funded by the Commonwealth, so how are they accountable (inaudible)?
MINISTER ROXON: Well, the mechanism is that they are creatures of the state. We have been-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: That's not true. That's not true, let's just deal with the facts. The local hospital network structure that Nicola has described, for example in New South Wales, the one that applies now was the one that was always going to apply.
So, any suggestion you're trying to weave into this change in the operation of those networks, I think you've got to test against the facts.
MINISTER ROXON: I think that's right. I mean, it was always explicit that they were creatures of the state. Yes, we have a say and we negotiated with the states and territories boundaries to try to make the Medicare local boundaries and the local hospital network boundaries as complementary as they could be. But the Medicare locals has always been ultimately our responsibility and the local hospital networks have always been ultimately the states' responsibilities.
I think the point that you're making is that is now clearer, it is clear, and the Prime Minister made clear and this was made clear in February, that we acknowledge that the states are the system managers. We don't resile from that. What the Commonwealth is delivering is appropriate and proper funding for the system into the future and demanding more transparency and accountability. But the states ultimately are responsible for hospital services, and that's something that we have made public since the February agreement was struck.
PM: And if I can, we'll take some other questions, but if I can just invite some comparisons here, because there was the discussion before about targets. I'd invite people to reflect on the differences that have been made in education  -  we don't run schools, states run schools, catholic system runs schools, independent bodies run schools, the independent schools around the country. We introduced better funding, better quality standards, better transparency and it has catalysed change.
Now, look at this reform together with things like the efficient price, big drivers, it will cause change. There's no reason to be sceptical about that, you've actually seen that happen before your very eyes with Australian schooling, transparency made a difference, it's made a difference to performance, the schools that came up with a sea of red, people scrambled around, including state governments to make a difference to performance in those schools. I've had conversations with people in this room about change programs in the school that their children go to, because of bad results on My School. So, transparency, accountability, quality, efficiency, price, pooled arrangements, no mystery about where Federal money goes, where state money goes, clear standards for patients to rely on and to track delivery against. That's what these reforms are about. 
Katherine.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given your meeting this evening with News Limited executives, have any of the major media companies made representations either formally or informally to the Government about the privacy reforms, or about the desirability or otherwise of a Senate or other inquiry into the media?
PM: Not to me personally. On the privacy reforms you would have to check with Minister O'Connor, whether he's had direct discussions with newspaper editors on the announcements he made the other week. I can't help you with that. So, he's obviously in charge of the consultation process.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: I think we did say one here and then we'll come - and that's it. Yes up the back.
JOURNALIST: Thank you. This will start in 2014, seven years after Labor was elected, it's a long time for patients to be waiting for the blame game to end, isn't it?
PM: You're not going to hear Nicola Roxon go through the list of what's been achieved in the meantime. Settle in.
MINISTER ROXON:Despite those threats, I won't take you through each and every one of the hundreds of projects that are already having an impact across the country. But I do need to challenge the assertion the targets, the ultimate targets come into force, as you say, in 2015 and 2016 in some of the smaller states for the elective surgery targets.
But just for example - and this is released in all of the materials that are being provided today - the emergency department targets that are being introduced as we go to lead up to 2015, in New South Wales, for example, only 62 per cent of patients in emergency departments are currently seen within four hours. By next year, that target will be 70 per cent, and each year after those targets increase, so the patient will see a benefit straight away. And I can take you through each of those figures in each state, but I fear that many of you won't want to stay here for the 20 minutes or so that that will take me. But that is publicly available.
So not only are the investments that we've already made starting to deliver a difference across the country, you also have a phase-in of the targets which commences straight away, which patients will see the benefit from as each and every one of those targets is implemented.
And from Western Australia you will know, where there is experience in implementing the four-hour rule, as soon as that was introduced there was massive change immediately in hospitals. The target wasn't reached in the timeframe that the West Australian Government had set but there was, you know, a 20 and 30 per cent increase in some hospitals over a period of just 12 months.
So I don't accept that patients will be waiting to see change. There are already 70,000 patients across the country who have had their elective surgery that they wouldn't have had if our reforms were not introduced. There are already GP super clinics providing services across the country that wouldn't have been delivered if we weren't already implementing our reforms. There are sub-acute beds that are operating across the country in different parts of the country that are already treating patients as we speak, and that will continue to grow over the coming years. There won't be a sitting around waiting until 2015, although the ultimate targets kick in at that time.
PM: And of course once the agreement, 2014-15 to the end of the decade, two million more admitted to patient episodes of care, 2.9 million more services in emergency departments, 19 million more outpatient consultations. That's what the funding will enable.
Now, we said last question before. Mr Riley.
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much. What's the Government's response to Dr Philip Nitschke's plan to bring Nembutal into Australia and prescribe it to patients with terminal illnesses?
PM: I'll turn to the Minister for that comment.
MINISTER ROXON: I haven't seen reports of that. Obviously Dr Nitschke has been a public figure for some time. I would have to take it on notice, Mark. I haven't seen the current reports of what he is planning to do. 
Obviously there are very tight restrictions about what sorts of medications can be imported. We have a tightly regulated system here for what is legal and what is not. But I'll have to take it on notice and get back to you, which I'm happy to do. Thank you.
PM: Thank you.



I want to begin by thanking Melbourne University Publishing for making this event possible.
MUP has for decades played an extraordinary role in our national conversation.
You've given our country its greatest work of scholarship  -  the Australian Dictionary of Biography.
You've published works by distinguished writers such as Gore Vidal, Barry Jones, Don Watson, Paul Kelly and Stuart Macintyre.
And you've published controversial works, including the book the subject of today's launch.
And that is no surprise because Fair Cop canvasses some of the very deepest-seated issues in contemporary society:
The role of women.
The nature of policing.
Changing styles of leadership.
Our response to nature's cruelty.
Accountability in public life.
Any of these topics would be the subject of understandable discussion on their own.
To raise all of them in one volume has made controversy inevitable.
I am not here today to adjudicate that controversy.
Readers will be able to judge for themselves.
I am here because Christine Nixon is a high-achieving Australian whose long journey of public service deserves our attention and regard.
That journey begins in the first chapters of this book, which portray a rich and fascinating snapshot of life in postwar Australia.
The years when a sleepy and insular nation began to wake up to the realities and challenges of a changing world.
This book tells the story of a kid who grew up on Sydney's northern beaches in the house where her beloved parents Ross and Betty still live today.
Who enjoyed a childhood of “security and structure.”
Who acquired a strong sense of community in a close-knit, caring neighbourhood.
Who spent long summer days on the sands of Manly beach.
But who also saw the world changing around her in the late 60s and early 70s, and who wanted to understand and master that change.
Mum Betty was a Methodist church elder who conveyed a “formidable work ethic” (p.8) and whose expectations of her three children were “unapologetically high”. (p. 21)
Like my mother, Betty Nixon worked  -  which was uncommon in the 1950s and 60s but provided an invaluable role model for a smart, inquisitive daughter.
Christine's dad Ross was a police officer, just like both my parents were back in Wales. 
Ross Nixon was a clean-skin  -  a so-called “white knight” in an era of deplorable corruption and brutality, who feared that his daughter's choice of a police career would bring her face to face with the “dark side”.
In fact, so uncertain was Ross that he insisted Christine gain a qualification in case policing didn't work out  -  which she did, obtaining a TAFE certificate.
And indeed, Christine and her two brothers all ended up earning Masters' degrees, proving the power of education to transform lives and unlock opportunity.
Perhaps the most defining moment came at the end of high school when Christine applied for a management trainee-ship at Coles but was knocked back because of her gender.
So policing it was.
In her NSW Police Academy class, there were just two women in a cohort of 70.
Predictably the new graduate was fobbed off on a series of light duties like visiting schools and directing traffic.
Not for the last time, Christine Nixon would have none of it.
She moved to mainstream policing, starting with the possibly roughest police station in Australia  -  Darlinghurst.
She found mentors among the ranks of the honest cops like the legendary Merv Beck and John Avery.
And she firmly and patiently rose over 30 years of hard work to the rank of Assistant Commissioner before moving to Victoria as Chief Commissioner in 2001.
Christine chose policing because she understood profoundly that no Australian can succeed if they live in the shadow of violence, crime and fear.
That policing must both serve the community and reflect it, rather than standing above or apart.
It was these insights that captured the attention of the selection panel for the chief commissionership in 2001.
When Premier Bracks announced her appointment, it was with these words:
“[Christine Nixon] was the stand-out candidate for her vision, her leadership and her views on modern policing, experience as a police officer and impeccable integrity”.   (p.122)
From that day a remarkable series of challenges and events followed:
September 11 and the war on terror.
The fight against corruption.
The struggle for cultural change.
The gangland wars.
The 2006 Commonwealth Games.
There were the good days like seeing corrupt officers drummed out of the force or crime figures falling.
Or the bad days when you had to go and visit a widow whose husband had just been killed in the line of duty.
And, of course, there is that most infamous of days  -  Black Saturday  -  February 7, 2009.
A day Christine will reflect on for the rest of her life.
A day our nation has reflected on, including through the important work of the Royal Commission.
Friends,if this book has any theme that unifies its different stories and different chapters, it is leadership.
In Fair Cop, Christine muses at length on the changing leadership styles in policing, drawing on her reforming work in NSW under John Avery, her postgraduate studies at Harvard and her secondment with the Metropolitan Police in London.
Indeed, Christine notes that being a leader has been “the vocation at the core of [her] professional life and identity.” (p. ix)
Friends,among all the discussion and debate, let us remember this salient fact:
Christine Nixon has dedicated every phase of her adult life to the honourable calling of public service and leadership.
Her book is a vivid reminder that such leadership is the ultimate high-wire act  -  no hands, no safety net.
Few forms of leadership are harder than leading an organisation through change -  be it cultural change, economic change, social change.
And, of course, no worthwhile change is ever straight-forward or simple.
The easy way is to pretend that an organisation  -  or indeed a nation  -  can make its way in a demanding world without the need for change.
That road is easy.
It is enticing.
And it is wrong.
There is no way that the old NSW or Victorian police forces could have justified staying the same.
Home to thousands of honest, dedicated officers whose work was at ever present risk of being overshadowed by instances of corruption, alcohol abuse and brutality.
In a modern and rapidly changing world an old-fashioned command-and-control culture which even the military had discarded, could not have remained untouched.
And again, just as Fair Cop is a record of this change, it is also a record of Christine's leadership.
Leadership was Christine's job for three decades from the day she got her sergeant's stripes.
That journey has included triumphs and mis-steps.
Memorable days and forgettable ones.
All on the public record to be judged by friend and foes alike.
As a sustained reflection on a lifetime of leadership, this book asks us only to understand and judge that record in its entirety.
To read each of these 366 pages.
Examine all her 40 years of public service.
See the whole person and the whole story:
Of the second-generation cop with policing in her veins.
The tough achiever who sought to be judged only on her merits.
The person of integrity who opposed corruption at every turn.
The reformer who sought to build an evidence-based model of policing grounded in our shared values as free citizens in a democratic society.
Whatever your standpoint, this book records the life of a significant Australian whose achievements - from the day she stepped into the Police Academy in 1972, to the day she left the Bushfire Reconstruction and Recovery Authority last year, are worthy of attention and respect.
It is a life told frankly and fluently by its authors.
Thoughtfully edited by Cathy Smith.
And superbly published by Victory Press.
Controversial  -  certainly.
But indispensable for all who want to understand the recent history of our nation.
I declare Fair Cop, written by Christine Nixon in collaboration with Jo Chandler officially launched.



Patients at Maroondah Hospital will benefit from better access to elective surgery, emergency treatment and sub-acute hospital bedsas a result of the Gillard Government's historic national health reforms.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard said the national health agreement will deliver a better deal for patients: more beds, more money and more services.
In visiting Maroondah Hospital today, Prime Minister Gillard was joined by Federal Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon and Local Federal Member for Deakin Mike Symon and said the local community would benefit from faster access to emergency department and elective surgery procedures.
Under this agreement, the elective surgery target for patients to be treated within clinically recommended times has been increased from 95 per cent to 100 per cent by 2016.
Patients will also benefit from reductions in emergency department waiting times with the new target ensuring that by 2015, 90 per cent of all patients presenting at an emergency department will be seen to within four hours
This is on top of the 20 sub-acute beds already announced for Maroondah Hospital.
Patients at Maroondah Hospital and around the nation can be confident that these health reforms will deliver world class care in their community.
Victorians will benefit from up to $822.1 million of Commonwealth Government funding including over $12 million for Eastern Health to improve elective surgery and emergency department services, increase the availability of sub-acute services and to undertake clinical redesign projects across the region over the next five years.
As part of the funding for Eastern Health, in November this year Angliss Hospital will commence work on creating ten new sub-acute beds and in February 2012 Maroondah Hospital will begin work on 20 new sub-acute beds. These new beds are being funded under one project totaling $5.7 million.
“This is a great example of what this new health deal will deliver  -  more Commonwealth investment in public hospitals, which means more beds, more services and better care for patients”, Ms Gillard said.
The Australian Government will step up to permanently pay for 45 per cent of growth in hospital services in 2014-15, increasing to 50 per cent in 2017-18.
This means the Commonwealth and States and Territories will share future funding growth for hospitals in an equal partnership.
Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon said that this year alone the Victorian Health and Hospital System will receive up to $179.5 million from the Commonwealth, building on $250 million already received by Victoria to begin work on 160 projects.
“The benefits Victoria has already received demonstrate this Commonwealth and State partnership is providing the resourcesneeded for much better health services closer to home,” Ms Roxon said.
Local Federal Member for Deakin Mike Symon MP said that new funding for Maroondah Hospital demonstrates that the Gillard Government is investing in services where they're needed most.
“These new beds are particularly important here in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne where the population is growing and more and more health services are required.”
Ms Roxon said more Australian Government funded health and hospital projects would be announced as national health reform continues to deliver for the people of Victoria.



PM: I'm here today at Maroondah Hospital and I'm joined by the Minister for Health, Nicola Roxon and of course by our local Member Mike Symon, and I'd like to say a very big thank you to all the staff and patients here at Maroondah who have made us feel so welcome today, as we had the opportunity to walk around and talk to people.
Here in Victoria today I am talking to people about the difference that our health reform agreement will make. Yesterday the Minister for Health and I were in a position to announce that we had struck an agreement right around the country to improve health services for Australians.
In Victoria that means that there will be more money, more beds, more services, more local control of hospitals, greater accountability and transparency, as well as less waste and less waiting time.
In terms of more beds, hospitals like this one are already seeing benefits flow through. The Eastern Health Division will see an investment of $12 million, part of that investment will be used for 20 more beds right here, with construction to start in 2012. A local example of the kind of changes people will see around the country, as new resources are flowing into our health care system.
For Australians what this means is less waiting time, less waiting time in emergency departments and less waiting time for elective surgery. To give the examples for Victoria: currently at the moment around 66 per cent of people who go to an emergency department are seen within four hours and have their case dealt with. We want to increase that to a target of 90 per cent. And we will see that change progressively, so that in 2012 that 66 per cent will increase to 72 per cent and continue the journey to meeting the 90 per cent national target in 2015.
For elective surgery, in Victoria today 73 per cent of people are seen and have their surgery within the clinically recommended times, that will go to 100 per cent as our national target and that will be rolled out here in Victoria in 2015 as well.
But in 2012 people should expect that to rise from 73 per cent today to 79 per cent. So, real benefits flowing already, with more benefits to come as people experience less waiting time, either in the emergency department or for elective surgery.
So, it's been good to be here today, it's been good too to talk to the staff as to how they are already changing work practices and procedures so people wait less time in the emergency department and they move to other parts of the hospital that can meet their needs including their needs for further assessment and very intense care, for people with the medical conditions that require that.
So, I'm very pleased to be here. I'll turn now to the Minister for Health for any comments she might want to make and then we'll take your questions.
MINISTER ROXON: Look, I'll just make some brief comments. I'm pleased to be here again with Mike, we've been regular visitors out at the hospital during the course of the health reform process, starting with a round table a number of years ago. And to be able to come back and see the changes at the hospital in the course of that time, I think is a real credit to your staff and I wanted to just put on the record that I know you're in a area of Melbourne that has very high demands, an ageing population and as your local Member well knows, the services that you provide here in conjunction with the other hospitals is very, very valuable and we're pleased that our health reforms will continue to back that wok, not least of course having the national activity based funding. Of course, a form of that already applies in Victoria, but it will mean that the Commonwealth continues and increases its share of funding for every bit of activity, so if you're a busy hospital, if you're a hospital that does and expensive range of procedures because you have particularly sick, or particularly elderly patients, you will benefit more from these reforms than the agreements that have been in place in the past.
So, I think at Maroondah Hospital that's good news and I really just wanted to be here to add to the Prime Minister's comments and thank you for the work that you've been doing. Of course, there's many more challenges into the future and we think these health reforms will really support that work and give you the ability to be able to provide even better services to your community.
Thanks for having us here.
PM: Thanks, and on Mike's recommendation I think Melissa's getting the first question.
JOURNALIST: What will it mean for Maroondah residents and Maroondah patients?
PM: What it's going to mean here in Maroondah is people will see construction starting next year, which will bring 20 extra beds here. That means, of course, that people will see extra services being able to be provided from this hospital and here in this hospital and right around the state people will see less waiting time in the emergency department and for elective surgery.
This is a hospital that's doing a great job, great staff, we've had the opportunity to meet with them today as I've moved round and when we're talked to patients the first thing they've said to all of us is that they are so impressed with the care that they're getting from the staff here.
But we want to make sure all of that energy and goodwill from local staff is matched with new resources and that's what the health reform agreement is about, making the Commonwealth Government an equal partner in growth, so that there's more money in the system that can go to meeting local needs.
I'm very happy to take other questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what was discussed in your meeting last night with News Limited editors?
PM: Thanks very much for that question. I was invited to meet with News Limited editors last night, by John Hartigan the Chief Executive Officer in Australia. I accepted that invitation.
We had a private meeting, it was a broad ranging discussion, it was a good discussion canvassing a number of topics.
JOURNALIST: Did you ask any hard questions?
PM: I'm not going to go to individual matters discussed, but we talked about a broad range of topics and it was a good discussion.
JOURNALIST: You did say that Australians would have questions for News Limited, and you did say that the company had a responsibility to answer those questions. So, as the Prime Minister, elected by the Australian people, did you ask those hard questions?
PM: And I think you'll find in my past doorstops and transcripts I've dealt very directly with that matter.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Melbourne University Press was very critical of the tabloid media and the campaign that she said that they've run against the Nixon book and you were sitting there listening to that and launching the book, surely this wouldn't have helped your relationship with News Limited at the moment?
PM: I did launch Christine Nixon's book today, Fair Cop, and I made the remarks that I wanted to in my speech in launching the book.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Premier here says that patients (inaudible), what's your response to that?
PM: I have heard those remarks from Premier Baillieu and let me say first in relation to that remark  -  if this had just been a question of putting our some more money and giving Victoria a blank cheque with no other changes, you'd wonder why Premier Baillieu just didn't accept the money on the very first day.
Of course, that's not what this is about, there's no blank cheque  -  there's a big reform agenda and because of the breadth and depth of that reform agenda, there have been many, many meetings and conversations over a number of months to get this agreement right. This agreement will drive big reform in our hospital system and it needs to.
More transparency, more accountability, clear targets, more local control, the Federal Government stepping up to being an equal partner in growth. So, those benefits will come to Victoria.
And in practical terms and this statistics I've just given you, they will see, Victorians will see less waiting time in emergency departments and less waiting time on elective surgery lists. That's very real change in areas of health that people are very concerned about.
Everybody worries and wonders what it would mean for them if they had to go to an emergency department and get care for themselves or their families, how long they'd have to wait. These reforms will drive less waiting time and people wonder too how long they'd have to wait if they or a family member ended up on an elective surgery waiting list. There will be less waiting time as a result of these reforms.
JOURNALIST: Are these targets achievable though? The language has gone from guarantees to targets, why is that and do patients really expect (inaudible)?
PM: We struck these targets on the best of clinical advice, I think that's very important to recognise. This is not a process where politicians have sat in a room tossing numbers around, this is a process where we said to an expert clinical panel lead by a Chief Medical Officer, please go out and tell us, work with hospitals, give us your best clinical advice on what can be achieved. They can back and we adopted those targets.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: There's very practical work that's happening here so that those targets will be met and we've had this discussion here in this hospital and certainly it's happened in other parts of the country, that when you strike a clear target, when you're held to account against it, when it's absolutely transparent whether or not you've met it, the hospital reengineers the way it works so that it delivers to the target. It's happening here in this hospital, it's happening around the country. We are rewarding those changes with real money through our national partnership agreement and we will continue to drive those changes with $175 billion of new resources in the next decade and a half. So real money, a real reform agenda, absolute transparency and accountability for what happens in local hospitals.
JOURNALIST: Do you regret your decision to launch Christine Nixon's book, you didn't actually address any media about that event (inaudible)?
PM: Well I made a commitment to launch Christine Nixon's book, I've done it today and the comments I've wanted to make are contained in the speech I gave when I launched the book.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister a large number of patients that arrive at emergency departments do so, we've been told, because of lack of GPs in the local community. How will your announcement address this?
PM: Well I will get the Minister for Health to comment too. But we understood when we were first elected as a Government that our nation was short of general practitioners. Those shortages arose because of cut backs undertaken by Tony Abbott and the Howard Government. If you cut back the number of GP training places that shows. That shows in our community when people can't get a doctor. So we have worked to address that shortage of GPs, we will train 6,000 more GPs by the end of the decade. We'll also work to bring new services through GP super clinics and part of the reforms that we have worked on and are part of what was announced yesterday is of course local hospital networks to give better local control of what is happening in hospitals but also Medicare Locals so people who work in first instance care in the community including general practitioners can work together to fill service gaps for local community members. So we've got a big reform agenda for primary care. I'll turn to the Minister for Health for some comments as well.
MINISTER ROXON: Yes, thank you very. And as the Prime Minister said we've been steadily increasing the number of GPs being trained across the country, we've delivered already the halfway mark, we've increase from the cap that was in place when Mr Abbott was the Health Minister of 600 GP training places across the country, we committed to double that. We've this year placed 900 GPs, so the highest number ever, in training places across the country.
Here at Maroondah Hospital there are five GPs in training, this is the highest number of GPs that have been trained in this area and of course there are other practices that are participating. Our Medicare Locals strategy, the first 19 have been announced and commenced on 1 July this year. Part of the region that Mike's electorate covers is in the first of those 19, the other parts of course will be bidding for the next Medicare Locals that will commence from 1 January next year.
In addition to that the General Practice Network in this region just received $1 million last year to enhance all of their infrastructure and training programs so that they are better placed to be able to train new GPs in the community. So I think if you look at lots of different things that we've already done because our reforms that we announced yesterday build on very significant investments where we've been targeting shortages in the community and GPs has been one area where there have been shortages, we're doing a lot in that space already. We've just launched on 1 July the new after hours GP service. It's commenced around the country so that people can call in the middle of the night, get advice from the nurse or GP, make a decision whether they need to come to emergency department, we're still waiting for confirmation from the Victorian Government when they will join that service, they have indicated that they will, but across the rest of the country, that is now operational. 10,000 calls have been received just in the first month. So these important reforms really are tackling some of the problems that are real for patients in this community and we know that having enough GPs is just as important as funding our hospitals and that's why our reforms do both.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Minister Roxon just on plain packaging of cigarettes (inaudible).
MINISTER ROXON: Yes well we've introduced into the Parliament the world's first legislation to introduce plain packaging for tobacco products. That will be debated in the Parliament when we return in the coming weeks. Of course we've said from day one that we expected that big tobacco companies would fight this tooth and nail and indeed that is what they are doing. I've made it very clear that I'm not going to provide a running commentary and debate on legal issues, there are many people who will want to do that over the course of the coming months.
The litigation that is currently underway, just to give you the information rather than argue the legal case, is a Freedom of Information request. We have had a very large number of requests from tobacco companies. We believe they are using Freedom of Information to try to take up an awful lot of my department's time and they are certainly are being successful at that doing that. But this is a case that is requesting advice that was sought by a previous government nearly two decades ago and they are arguing in the Federal Court I understand today, whether or not they should have access to that advice.
The only point that of course I'm keen to make is that a lot has changed in that time. It seems to me a little bit of a strange exercise to invest so much time and energy in and of course it would surprise you that the legal advice that we take has been carefully taken, we're very confident of our ability to introduce these laws. We are equally confident that the tobacco companies don't like it and no doubt will try to challenge us and fight us along the way but we are determined to proceed with something which we know can save lives, can make the work of people like in this hospital much easier if we can prevent the serious disease that is caused by tobacco smoking.
JOURNALIST: Minister why won't you release that document (inaudible)?
MINISTER ROXON: Well it's standard practice for the Government not to release its legal advice, I think there are a lot of good reasons for that. The point that I am making simply is that the world has also moved on, for example the Convention for the control of tobacco has since that time added to its terms that states should consider introduce plain packaging legislation. We are indeed doing that and we are the first country in the world to take that action. We're proud of that because we believe we can reduce smoking rates across the country and that will save some of the thousands of lives that are lost every year to tobacco related disease.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Mike can I just ask you whether or not you support the carbon tax given that the head of your union (inaudible).
SYMON: Well I certainly do support what we're doing with the carbon tax, I think it's been something we've been arguing for for so long, since before we got into Government. It's been consistent right through and it's great to be able to stand here now and say this is something we've achieved, will go to Parliament, it will be debated but we now have a package there that looks after people Australia wide with decent compensation for those that are affected and I think that's where we needed to be with this debate the whole way along, is to be able to say yes this is the changes we needed to make, but these are also the benefits that flow from it, not just what the benefit for environment is but also the benefits for individual households. What the Electrical Trade Union decides to do or not do, they're not affiliated with the Labor Party these days and it's really a matter for them to decide.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on the carbon tax, Victorian State Treasury estimates the cost to this hospital under the tax could go up about $170,000 per annum. Are you worried the extra money may, given these extra health reforms, will be eaten up by the carbon tax?
PM: Well thank you for that question and it enables me to address another Tony Abbott false claim that has been made about our carbon pricing scheme. Mr Abbott was out claiming that our carbon pricing changes would have flow through costs for hospitals and that there would be no assistance from the Federal Government for that. Now Mr Abbott probably remembers a bit about indexation of heath care arrangements because that was the mechanism he used to cut $1 billion out of our public hospital system. Of course the health care agreements that we have, have indexation in them, a component of how that indexation is struck is the Consumer Price Index. We've made it clear all along that the impact on the consumer price index will be less than one per cent, less than a cent in a dollar and the CPI is part of how our payments to hospitals are indexed. So it's simply not true as Mr Abbott has claimed to say that there is impact here that hasn't been taken into account in the way that the Federal Government disperse money to hospitals.
Thank you very much.



The inner Melbourne suburb of Brunswick today became the first location in Victoria to benefit from the National Broadband Network (NBN).
Prime Minister Julia Gillard was joined by Senator Stephen Conroy, Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, to launch the NBN in Brunswick, making it the third mainland Australian site to go live.
Switching on the NBN in Brunswick is the beginning of unprecedented opportunities for Victorians as we rollout the super-fast broadband network. The NBN will create jobs, boost productivity, provide new and improved online health and education services and improve government service delivery.
It will provide new opportunities for small and medium businesses, opening up gateways into interstate and global markets that previously may not have been accessible. The NBN will also enable more people to work from home  -  which equals less time travelling to and from work and more time with family and friends.
As with the other first release sites, Brunswick residents will participate in a trial phase ahead of delivery of commercial services.
The testing phase is an important part of the rollout. The first release sites, including Brunswick, will provide crucial information to assist the NBN rollout.
Brunswick joins Armidale (NSW) and Kiama (NSW) as the third mainland site to be switched on to the NBN as part of customer trials.
The other first release sites of Townsville (QLD) and Willunga (SA) will commence customer trials shortly. 



HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.PM: Thank you, Tony.HOST: Do you think Australian voters will by and large applaud images of asylum seekers being forcibly removed to Malaysia?
PM: Tony, what this is about is smashing the people smugglers' business model. I don't think Australians want to see people risking their lives on a dangerous journey. They certainly don't want to see a repeat of the kind of scenes we saw at Christmas Island around Christmas time when asylum seekers drowned in the water.HOST: Prime Minister, it's about politics too, isn't it? I mean, surely you wouldn't disagree with the proposition that you're trying to neutralise a hot political issue?PM: Tony, what I'm trying to do is send the people smugglers the strongest possible message that they cannot say to people ‘jump on a boat, pay me some money and I'll take you to Australia and your claim will be processed there.'What I'm trying to do is stop this evil trade because I don't want to see people being preyed on and I don't want to see them risking their lives in a boat. I also do want to bring more genuine refugees to this country, and through the arrangement we've entered into with Malaysia, we will bring 4,000 people who have been waiting in Malaysia for an opportunity to start a new life in a new land.HOST: If these people are taken away in handcuffs, in distress, resisting onto that aircraft, do you think Australians will be happy at those kind of scenes?PM: Well, look, how individual people feel about any footage is a question for them, Tony. But my responsibility as Prime Minister is to do what I can to stop people smugglers preying on people, preying on their misery, taking their money and getting them to risk their lives at sea. What this is about is smashing the people smugglers' business model.HOST: If some of these people are potentially vulnerable - which is the great fear of the UNHCR: that they'll be vulnerable in Malaysia - how will you be able to assess that within such a short period of time, 72 hours?PM: Tony, on the position of the UNHCR, what we've always said is that the UNHCR has been involved in the discussions which led to this arrangement with Malaysia and they will be involved in the implementation.And what we've said consistently is that there will be no blanket exemptions. There are no blanket exemptions. There will be pre-transfer assessments and they will be undertaken properly by the relevant officials. 
HOST: Are there any children in this group? If so, how many and are any of them unaccompanied?PM: The Minister for Immigration will deal with all of the details here. Tony, my understanding is that there are some children in the group. Obviously officials will need to work through to ascertain who's who on the boat and also which are family groups and who is accompanied.HOST: Let's look at what happens briefly when they get to Malaysia. Under the deal, Australia will be paying to house and feed these people, along with their health care and the education of their children. Is that time-limited?PM: Tony, we've released all of the figures and the commitments here. When the Minister for Immigration and I first announced this package, we said $76 million would be devoted over the Government's budget period, that is the four-year of the forward estimates, to making the necessary arrangements for the transfer to Malaysia, so that's the costs of the transfer and of providing some support for the people who have been transferred.Then the balance of almost $300 million is the costs associated with taking 4,000 genuine refugees from Malaysia and resettling them here. As you would know, Tony, we have a refugee resettlement program.We're a generous nation, we take people in need from around the world. That does have costs, and if you're going to take 4,000 more, then you need to make appropriate provisions for those costs-HOST: -I don't mean to interrupt you. I mean, we know that the people who come here will be taken care of; the big question is what happens to the people sent to Malaysia.Evidently their health care and the education of their children is part of the arrangement. And I'm asking how long for? Is there a time limit? Will it be one year, two years, 10 years?PM: Well, for the persons who are taken to Malaysia, they will then be able to have their claims processed by UNHCR and they will have some services provided to them by the International Organisation of Migration.The cost of us supporting all of this is the $76 million that I've referred to. There are around 90,000 asylum seekers in Malaysia and these people returned will take their place alongside those 90,000 asylum seekers.Their claims will be processed. If they're genuine refugees, then, alongside the other genuine refugees in Malaysia, they will wait for a resettlement opportunity. If they are not genuine refugees, then arrangements will be made to return them to their country of origin.HOST: So very briefly, just on that point: they'll be cut loose once they're processed by the UNHCR from Australian responsibility-PM: -No, no - no, that's not what I've said, Tony, and that's not right. We have said we will provide some continuing support through UNHCR and IOM for persons transferred, so no, Tony, there's not a time limit on that, but what I was trying to explain to you was what would happen to the people in Malaysia.
So they would be processed by UNHCR. They may not be refugees, in which case they would be returned to their country of origin. If they are genuine refugees, then alongside the 90,000 other asylum seekers and refugees in Malaysia, they'd take their place looking for a resettlement opportunity.HOST: Alright, let's move on to other issues. Australia's heading for a demographic and budgetary crisis as the baby boomers retire from the workforce, and now the aged care industry is saying you need to shift to a user pays model. Do you agree with that?PM: Well, Tony, I spoke on these matters a bit earlier today and I confirmed that on Monday we will release the Productivity Commission report on caring for older Australians.The point I made today is that we really have two generations of older Australians. We have people who are retired now, living longer, many of them lived through the days of World War II, and they are a generation with certain outlooks and attributes.Then we have the baby boomers moving into retirement phase, and we know because they changed what it meant to be young and they've changed what it's meant to be a family and adult relationships, they've had a big impact on society and its views, that they will change what it means to be an older Australian.And across each of these demographic groups, I view older Australians as an asset to be valued, but we need to make sure that as a nation we are supporting them, providing security, making sure no-one gets left behind and also providing them with more choice and control over their lives as older Australians than perhaps the system has provided them in the past. And we do need to make sure that the financing is fair and sustained.HOST: Alright.PM: Tony, when we announced the Productivity Commission report-HOST: -Can I just ask you about the financing issue, because-PM: -Sure. 
HOST: Just to get to the point the aged care industry is talking about? Are we likely to see a system where old people are forced to commit equity currently held in their family homes to pay for their care?PM: Tony, what you're going to see is precisely this: the final Productivity Commission report you'll see on Monday. You will not see a government policy response at that time.We will release the final Productivity Commission report, and I suspect that there will then be and there should be and I will be encouraging a national debate on aging and caring for older Australians.Out of that debate the Government will appropriately respond, so we will work through the Minister, Mark Butler will be out there strongly engaged and consulting.HOST: OK, but can we rule out for example certain things, like the-PM: -Oh, Tony, I'm not going to play rule in, rule out games against a Productivity Commission report that hasn't been released yet.HOST: Well there has been reporting, for example, about the use of reverse mortgages to help pay for things like this which eat up the equity in people's houses.PM: Tony, you can-HOST: I mean, that's something you could rule out now. If there's going to be debate about it, let's start the debate now.PM: Tony, I'm not playing a rule-in, rule-out game against a Productivity Commission report that hasn't been released yet. That report will be released on Monday in its final form.HOST: Joe Hockey last night threatened to axe the Department of Climate Change if he won government because it had been providing, he says, false data on the cost of the Coalition's direct action policy. What would happen if he carried out that threat?PM: Well, isn't this what we've come to expect from the Opposition? If you don't like what scientists say, then get in there and criticise the scientists.If you don't like what Australian economists say, then get out there and criticise Australian economists.Now, when professional public servants say things that the Opposition doesn't like, they threaten their jobs.Where this leaves the Liberal Party is that their policy proposition for the Australian people is, ‘we're going to have a big slush fund. We, the Liberal Party, are going to have a big slush fund, we're going to give that big slush fund to polluters and we're not even going to have any professional public servants to provided advice about how to do this.'Presumably, Tony Abbott's just going to sit down with Joe Hockey and a big bucket of money and chuck it wherever they think they can.HOST: But why is the Department of Climate Change being used to model the costs of a Coalition policy? I mean, that sounds like you're putting public servants in the middle of a very fierce public policy debate.PM: I believe the Australian people are entitled to information about policy propositions in the national debate. I think that's a good thing. I think they should be able to look at the Government's policy and plans and see how it adds up and stacks up, see what the Treasury modelling is, see what it means for them.They're also entitled to see what it is that the Opposition is saying to the Australian people and the costs of that.HOST: You've promised to close down the dirty coal-fired power generator in Victoria's Latrobe Valley.Mr Hockey says he might actually support you on this if you replace the coal-fired power generator with a gas generator, which of course would be logical because you could actually use the same location where there's a coal-fired power generator to put a cleaner one.The people working there would then have jobs to replace the jobs they would likely lose. So why not seek bipartisanship on this issue and go down that path?PM: Tony, I don't like to correct you, but you've misconstrued the Government's policy.What the Government has said is that we will have a tender process where we will say to coal-fired power stations, to the people who generate energy with the most emissions ‘come forward and offer a contract for closure.'We will go through a tender process and then we will select what is the best value for money to reduce emissions, and of course any closure process would have to happen over a period of time so that we had energy security and certainty and we would have a structural adjustment process for any affected region.So, we haven't picked a power station; that isn't right. Now I've said - precisely those words that I've just said to you - I've said that to concerned power workers in the Latrobe Valley who work at Hazelwood and I'll say it to anybody who asks me about our policy.The problem with talking to the Opposition about all of this is you'd need, Tony, to tell me who I should speak to. Should I speak to Andrew Robb, who says that they want to close a power station and in fact the Government's stolen their policy; or should I speak to Tony Abbott, who went down to the Latrobe Valley and promised people that the Coalition wouldn't close any power stations?Who would you suggest I speak to, Tony, given that they've got diametrically different views, pursuing, as they do, a different message for different audiences? They never say the same thing twice, they just say what they think people want to hear and then hope they don't get caught out on the contradictions.HOST: We've got a few other issues to deal with. On the issue of high-speed rail, after the BER and NBN, does your government really have the energy to try to create another giant infrastructure project in Australia that could cost up to $100 billion, according to some estimates?PM: Tony, let's just be clear about what we've done. Australians, I think, have talked and thought about high-speed rail for a long period of time. I think many Australians over cups of coffee and maybe a few drinks as well have talked about ‘wouldn't it be good to have high-speed rail and we could have the trains run here and the trains run there.'Well, we have published a document which informs that national conversation. I think it helps get a sense of perspective into that national conversation about the costs of this, and, yes, there are very considerable costs.So the information is out there. The Minister for Transport and Infrastructure has released this information. We think that as people consider the merits and opportunities of high-speed rail, they should have the facts and figures in front of them.HOST: Yes, but we keep having conversations without outcomes. We want to know - I guess the public wants to know when the outcomes will appear, when will you make a decision on whether you close down Hazelwood? When will you make a decision on where you're building and when you're building high-speed rail?PM: Oh, well, Tony, I can't agree with your question, and really, frankly, I think that's a little bit of an odd analysis in Australian politics. What we said to people at the last election is we understand you want more information about high-speed rail, we'll do a study and release it. That was our election commitment, and we've done it.On pricing carbon, well, Tony, we couldn't have had more action on putting the policy proposition together; it's out there for all to see, including the tender process in relation to closing dirty coal-fired power stations.And then of course, as a government, we've acted on a series of other fronts. The Malaysia arrangement that you and I have just spoken about, the health reforms that I've announced recently, the opportunity and participation package out of the federal budget, the mental health package out of the federal budget, the reconstruction of the nation through the flood levy and other financing mechanisms, the structural separation of Telstra and the rollout of the NBN, and the list goes on.So I said this year was a year of decision and delivery and it has been. We continue to decide on big questions and deliver, but of course there are also topics where it pays to go out to the community and say ‘we believe these are things that are on your mind and we're interested in your views.'We're going to make some big decisions for the nation's future about questions of aging and questions of dealing with Australians with disabilities and making sure they get the services they need. Going out to consult the public is the right thing to do in those circumstances, Tony, and we will.HOST: OK. Alright. We're nearly out of time. You met with News Limited editors just the other night. Senior Labor figures say Murdoch is at war with your government. Is it true you called for a truce?PM: Tony, I went to an editors' meeting. Prime ministers, opposition leaders have talked to such meetings in the past. I went at the invitation of John Hartigan.It was a good discussion, it was a broad-ranging discussion, it was also a private meeting, and so it's not my intention to go through the topics discussed there, but you would expect, as Prime Minister, when I go and meet with fellow Australians, I talk about my vision for this country's future and my policies and plans.HOST: You said that News Limited had some serious questions to answer. Did you ask those questions at that meeting?PM: Well, as I've just said, it was a private meeting and, Tony, I've been asked about this-
 HOST: -I'm only asking if you asked the questions; I haven't even asked what they are.PM: Tony, I've been asked on these questions publicly. I've made publicly the very simple point - and I genuinely do think it is a very simple point - when we see something big happen overseas - and we've seen of course the News of the World telephone hacking scandal - when we see something big happen overseas, then those things influence the discussions and questions that people are asking here.HOST: Just briefly on that, do those questions warrant a new inquiry into the concentration of media ownership in Australia?PM: And what I've said on that, Tony, is when Parliament resumes, I understand there'll be people who'll want to raise the issue with me and I'll have a conversation with them then.HOST: So, there could be an inquiry into media ownership in Australia?PM: Tony, what I've said is some parliamentarians want to raise an issue with me, when Parliament resumes, I'll have the discussion with them then.HOST: Julia Gillard, I've learnt not to pursue those questions without getting the same answer over and over and over again, so, we'll leave you there. We thank you for much for taking the time to join us tonight.PM: Thanks, Tony. 



I am pleased to announce new arrangements for Departmental Secretaries, which will take effect from 5 September 2011.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet:
The Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Mr Terry Moran AO, informed me of his intention to retire in January 2011. Mr Moran agreed to my request to stay while seeing through a number of critical projects for 2011, notably health reform, the development of our carbon pricing package and the 2011 Budget's skills and participation package. 
Mr Moran has been an outstanding Secretary to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, a position that he assumed in March 2008. 
He has proven to be an excellent public sector leader and manager and I am profoundly grateful for his support and counsel. 
He brought to his tenure a passion for innovative thinking in policy development and the development of good policy, a strong commitment to traditional Westminster values in public administration, and an unrelenting focus on achieving a collaborative culture within the public service that places citizens and their needs at the centre of policy development and delivery.
He chaired the Advisory Group on the Reform of Australian Government Administration which developed a comprehensive blueprint for reform of the Australian Public Service.  The recommendations were accepted in full by the Government on 8 May 2010 and implementation is well advanced. 
He has made a major contribution to effective government in senior leadership positions over some twenty four years in a number of jurisdictions and across a broad range of economic and social policy. This includes a distinguished career in leadership positions in the public services of Victoria (on two occasions) and Queensland, with senior roles in public policy development and public sector management. He was also the first Chief Executive Officer of the Australian National Training Authority for over five years until August 1998.
Mr Moran has been an active contributor to the COAG reform process, and has had a long standing interest in building public policy capacity. He led the establishment of the Australia and New Zealand School of Government (ANZOG) in 2003, the formation of the Grattan Institute in 2008 and the Wheeler Centre: Books, Writing, Ideas.  Most recently he was actively involved in the formation of the Australian National Institute of Public Policy at the ANU. 
Mr Moran was made an Officer of the Order of Australia in June 2006 in recognition of his service to public sector leadership in key policy areas. 
I have very much valued Mr Moran's wise counsel and support and his passion for good policy. I trust that his services can be called upon by the government from time to time in the years to come. 
Dr Ian Watt AO will succeed Mr Moran. I congratulate him on his appointment.
Dr Watt has served successive governments in senior leadership positions in the APS, most recently as Secretary of Defence.  Previously he served as Secretary of the Department of Finance and Deregulation (formerly Finance and Administration) and Secretary of the Department of Communications, Information Technology and the Arts. 
He brings to the position a wealth of experience in both policy development and implementation and administrative reform. 
Dr Watt was made an Officer of the Order of Australia in June 2008 for service to the community through the development of public policy and administration in the areas of finance and governance, budget and expenditure policy, taxation reform, and through contributions to international professional finance organisations. 
Department of Defence:
Mr Duncan Lewis AO, DSC, CSC will be appointed Secretary of the Department of Defence.
Mr Lewis is currently the National Security Adviser, a position he has held at Associate Secretary level in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet since 4 December 2008.
He had previously held senior policy advisory roles in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet after a very distinguished career spanning some thirty years as an officer in the Australian Army. 
For his service as Commander Special Forces and as the inaugural Special Operations Commander Australia, Mr Lewis was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia in January 2005.
The Australian Public Service is an important institution in our democracy. It is peopled by men and women dedicated to improving our national life. It has been well and capably led by Mr Terry Moran and I am confident that this calibre of leadership will now be displayed by Dr Watt. 



PM: Thank you. Thank you very much. I'm joined by the Minister Steve Conroy, and also by Harrison from NBN Co. You've just had the opportunity as we have to participate in the launch of NBN in Brunswick. It's been an exciting event. In the course of that event there's been a lot of discussion about the possibilities the NBN is going to bring to this place, Brunswick, and around the nation.           
I'm very pleased to have been here for the first launch in a capital city.    
We've seen launches in regional Australia and in Tasmania, but today, the NBN comes to a big city in Australia. It's part of what will be rolled out around the nation. We're very happy to take questions on the NBN, and then a little bit later we'll move to other questions if people have them.           
But can we take questions related to the National Broadband Network first. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you disappointed that only 14 people have signed up? I know you've talked about it's good to go slow at the start. But I would have thought Brunswick would be an ideal demographic - (inaudible) people and businesses here. It seems still a very small number.
PM: Well look, I'll have Minister Conroy comment as well. But as Harrison said during the course of the launch, these are deliberately structured as trials. We're rolling out the NBN around the nation. We know that the technology works. The roll out is being done in different places so that we can learn the lessons of how to do the roll out in quite different terrain. Obviously, suburban Brunswick, with many of its historic features and laneways, is quite different terrain to Armidale, which was quite different terrain again to Tasmania or to Kiama.           
So we're learning different lessons in different parts of the country. Then we want to learn any lessons from engaging with customers. And that's why we expect to see a very limited number of customers at this stage.           
But I'll turn to Minister Conroy for some comments, too.
MINISTER CONROY: Let's look at - we've limited the number of customers for a trial. It's not open slather. It comes open slather in October. And we were hoping to, by October, have about 200 people in each of the sites around the country. So it's not a question of, oh my goodness, only 40 people.         
We didn't want to any more in the first few days.          
We're building this up slowly. But let me be clear about this. The Telstra deal with NBN Co and the government means that every, virtually every single fixed-line in the 93 per cent will be an end piece of copper. Because we are closing down the copper network.           
Next year when we start the roll out after the Telstra deal's been endorsed by their shareholders, we start turning off the copper.          
So we'll be taking the copper away and replacing it with fibre.         
So small numbers for the first few months here really aren't relevant to the way the roll out will take place in the future.           
That Telstra deal changed the game about the take up rate argument - because it becomes absolutely across the board NBN fibre into your home.           
Also as I've mentioned yesterday in another announcement, we actually will have the very first new housing estates go live with NBN-only fibre. There's no copper.           
These are new homes that are being built around Australia, the first ones will be in Sydney which will only have the NBN fibre - so as each new housing developments gets... people move into over the next 12 months, 18 months, two years, and onwards - they're all NBN fibre.
JOURNALIST: But Minister, are you fighting apathy? Are you finding that a lot of people, there are reports of people in Brunswick just not caring?
CONROY: Look, I'm not finding it at all. Everywhere I go in Australia, the only question people have for me is can you do my house first, can you do my street, can you do my suburb. I'm not finding apathy at all.         
And I think if you talk to some of the people here today, there's nothing apathetic. There is an education process that we do have to go through. One of the reasons that I said today was we've given grants to councils - we're giving grants to small businesses - is to begin that education process.           
So do I think that every single person in Australia or even here in Brunswick understands yet the potential for the National Broadband Network? Absolutely not.          
And we are working with local communities, local small business organisations, local councils, local regional development groups to begin that education process.           
So we have a lot of work to do on the education process, but if you talk to the people that are using it now today - whether they're the users here, and I'm not sure if sambo9 from one of the Whirlpool threads sites - David Liffe will know who I mean - he's here today. But this is a bloke who's been online, and saying God, can you hurry up and connect my house. Can you hurry up and connect my business. I am dead keen to do it.           
But we're finding that with the education process once people have begun using it and experiencing it, they don't want to go back.
JOURNALIST: What do you mean by education process, though, what-
CONROY: Well there'll be training for small business about how to create a website.           
We've still got something like a third of small businesses in Australia who don't even have a web presence, never mind an interactive website with a bit of video on it.          
So we've got a lot of educating still to do. This is small business, I'm not being critical there - they've got, you know, they're struggling, they're surviving, they're got a day to day business to run. But they're going to need to jump into the 21st century - as their rivals start developing websites, they're going to get left behind.           
So if you're a tourism business in Tasmania for instance, and four of your customers in a bed and breakfast, they've all got an online video presence that you can do a tour of the house - you can look at the food being cooked as part of the presentation on the website, compare that to here's my phone number and a picture of the house out front - I mean there's an education process for the broader community, but particularly for small business.
JOURNALIST: And what about older residents? I've spoken to a lot of older residents today who said, oh look, I don't really know too much about it. 
CONROY: No look, I think if you talk to a couple of the elderly groups that are working with us, they will tell you this - once you've begun this education process, and I can get, I think Nan Young's here name, I can get her to give you a ring - she will dispel this myth that older people just aren't interested. 
Yes, there is an education process for those who've never used it before.         
And if they don't want to, they don't need to. They can just unplug from the wall and plug in to the new box and just keep on making phone calls.         
It's not - we're not forcing people to take broadband. They'll still just be able to make a phone call. But where you've got a couple of programs the government currently run for pensioners in particular, they're very, very successful.           
So once they get a taste of it, they'll - like everybody else - they just don't ever want to go back.
PM: I think just before we move to the next question if I can make a comment there - we do need to remember that some of the health applications that can make such a difference even to the major question as to whether people can stay in their own homes or need to move to a different form of accommodation, that those health questions are impacted by the NBN. Stephen and I have seen living examples of that where people - because of the NBN in Tasmania - are able to monitor their health conditions from home, be in contact with their GP, older Australians for whom this gives independence and more time in their own home than they would otherwise experience. And the other point I wanted to make is the Mayor of Moreland pressed the button with us. He later presented me with a storyboard that they are using as part of the educational efforts here.           
This is wonderful multicultural Brunswick. There are many people here who fit the description that you've given - young, urban professionals, tech-savvy.           
But this is also home to a lot of people who migrated to this country and who will need assistance in their original languages to understand the power of the National Broadband Network. But once they do understand it, imagine the transformative power for their lives - these are people who want to keep in contact with family overseas.         
And this will give them a range of choices about being in contact with grandkids back in Greece and Italy and Turkey and other places that they've never had before.         
Yes - there was a question here. 
JOURNALIST: Some would say that (inaudible) isn't needed, that the take up rate (inaudible) that you don't need this for metropolitan areas. And the take up rate of only 14, which I know is just a trial, doesn't give much confidence about (inaudible) right.
PM:     I'll get Minister Conroy to answer, but I fear I should say to you at this point - settle in.
CONROY:     Look - let's be clear. You obviously don't live in a rim. You're not blocked by, in a street or a suburb that's blocked by a rim. You're obviously not blocked by a pair gain.          
Telstra have deployed all of this technology over the last 10 or 15 years that actually blocks broadband. One point two million Australians who live in metropolitan Australia can't get access to broadband better than bare minimum ADSL. Not ADSL2 plus - 1.2 million Australians are blocked by what's known as rims, which are cabinets that don't allow broadband to go through them, or pair gains which block it in your street.           
So this argument, the private sector will do it, well 11 and a half years John Howard and Peter Costello said the private sector should provide it, and what do we get after 11 and a half years, 1.2 million Australians in metropolitan Australia couldn't get any form of broadband at all. Not to mention the 40 per cent of Australians in regional Australia who can't get any access to competition, decent DSLAMs - that's those boxes they put in exchanges to send it along - so the private sector had its chance. And they failed monumentally for 11 and a half years under John Howard's broadband plans.          
And all we're seeing from Malcolm Turnbull yesterday is more of the same. We'll invite the private sector to tender for it. Well, actually, they don't need you to invite them to tender for it, they could be deploying if they wanted to. And because of the industry structure, because of the way Howard sold off Telstra, vertically integrated monopoly, we had no serious investments since the '90s, when the HFC competition collapsed and Optus went broke $5 billion.           
If you talk to Optus, they will tell you the idea that the private sector will step in and compete with the incumbent just didn't happen. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Young, if I could ask you, you mentioned in your speech about units and high rises. There's a number of those sort of buildings here. What are the challenges for the units and so forth? 
HARRISON YOUNG: Sorry. Oh, well for a multi-dwelling unit, you typically have to run wires up through the thing and you have to get permission from the body corporate, or if it's a rental - if they're rental apartments you have to deal with the owner of the apartment building. So it's a sort of indirect process.           
I would mention this number 14 keeps coming up. More than half of the people in this test site have asked to be connected already; have said please run the wire and put the device on the side of my house. So 14 isn't an indication of take-up. The right indication of take-up is 1400.
JOURNALIST: But I guess in this suburb there's a growth of units going up and so forth, so is that going to (inaudible) it, or you need a lot of cooperation by the sounds of it.
HARRISON YOUNG: If there are new units, I think it's not a problem. It's old units.
JOURNALIST: Okay. So existing units, you do need-
HARRISON YOUNG: Yeah. 
JOURNALIST: a certain degree of cooperation. 
HARRISON YOUNG: You need a degree of cooperation. 
JOURNALIST: And how - I mean is that forthcoming? Have those people that have signed up, are they unit holders?
CONROY: Well, yeah, we've been talking with the - there's an association representing, you know, multi-dwelling units, so we are in conversation with them about a whole range of things; whether it's switching the antenna so you can receive the new digital signals and making them digital ready for the new TV signals that have been probably been turned off in other parts of the country, to also talking about broadband.           
So we're in conversations with them. Obviously, if they ultimately say no, well as I said, this is not something we are forcing people to take. If they say no in the short-term, then life will go on. But at some point down the track there will be a message from Telstra we're turning off the copper in your exchange, which means your phone line will stop working. And then, at that stage, they are still able to come and say, okay, let's connect up fibre now.           
So ultimately, as the copper, the ageing copper that's degrading in the ground, blocked by winds and (inaudible) - sorry if you're not a tech head or a geek. I spend all my life in geek websites nowadays - then you haven't been able to get broadband, but your phone line's going off now, so you can either go mobile - you can make the decision to go mobile wireless, or you can take the connection from the NBN fibre, where you can just do phone calls if that's all you want to do. 
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: In Brunswick you've got about 52 per cent take-up rate so far. The Real Estate of Victoria wants the government to actually consider an opt-out system. So, basically - because they're saying that renters can't actually sign up and how people that own the houses aren't actually getting a chance - what are you going to do? Do you actually agree that it would be a good idea introducing an opt-out?
CONROY: We would welcome that. We - in Tasmania, the Victorian Government, I think, have said no. Disappointed in that. But that was under the old roll-out methodology where we didn't have the agreement with Telstra. Once we reached that agreement just a few months ago with Telstra, which was we would decommission the copper, so the argument about whether or not you said yes or no this month, or last month, or six months ago, becomes irrelevant.          
The choice will become, as we turn off the copper in your street, do you want a fixed line fibre connection, or do you want to go wireless? And that will be the choice that people will ultimately make. And owners of properties will quickly discover that - and if you look at America you can already see this, where there's fibre in new suburbs versus copper in older suburbs, the property values rise in the fibre areas. There's three to four sometimes five per cent differential already in America for sites that have got fibre versus sites - suburbs right next door that don't.           
So I think there will be an economic incentive for homeowners- 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
CONROY: an economic incentive- 
JOURNALIST: call for NBN to actually contact homeowners themselves, rather than allowing it to go through whatever are the temporary-
CONROY: We knock on doors. We - the way it works here in Brunswick, I think was to contact a renter directly, as well as try and track down the owner. So we actually - we're trying to communicate with both. Obviously if you own the home and you get the knock on the door, or you get the pamphlet, then you can deal with it yourself, straightaway. But we have been trying to contact directly homeowners. This is just an extra step of complexity, but all of that was in the way we were rolling out previously.           
The deal with Telstra means that everybody will need to opt one way or the other; whether they want to keep the fixed line, the new fibre line, or they're happy to go wireless and that's a choice we're happy for people to make and landlords will need to make that choice too.
JOURNALIST: What's the timeline on taking away the copper then?
CONROY: I think once the - the way it works, about - within 18 months of what we call saturation of the suburbs - so we've covered most of it, so you've got the exchange covers an area - within about 18 months of the completion of that, we begin the decommissioning. So it's not imminent. It's not going to happen in the next six months. We start that process after the Telstra agreement's ratified by shareholders and we move into next year. 
But I would think, that sometime next year, you'll begin to see some places, their copper decommissioned.
PM: You had a question back here.
JOURNALIST: I was going to ask was the Brunswick roll-out too engineering focused? Did you not put enough effort into the community engagement, because people are aware that something happened, given the disruption on the street - the concrete being ripped up - but they say something's being installed, but we don't know what's happening there.
CONROY: Yeah, look, there's always more education processes the government, the council and the NBN can go through. I - these were trials. People seem to forget these were the first five anywhere in the country. They were our trials. We were learning about the engineering. We were learning about the communication. And as I've said before, there is more that we need to do - more as a government, more as the local councils, or the local communities and more that NBN can do.          
We're not saying what we've done now was perfect and that's it we don't need to do any more. We are absolutely committed to that engagement process, to ensure that people understand the benefits of the NBN into the future. And I think, as word of mouth begins to spread about the capacity - if you talk to the people down in Tas, they're just excited. If you talk to the new users of our satellite - interim satellite network. We've got about 200 people now hooked up to NBN's interim satellite - and the best comment I saw came from a - somebody in Mudgee - it was the Mudgee Guardian - and they said, with the new interim satellite, our broadband with this new interim satellite is as good as my family get in Sydney.           
So you're beginning to see, around the country, people realising the potential and the capacity of the National Broadband Network.
PM: All right, we had a question here and then we'll go. 
JOURNALIST: Many of Telstra's rivals have expressed concern about Telstra's undertakings that they can see in the lead-up to the NBN and whether they'll get a fair go - whether in - in comparison to Telstra's retail arm? Does the government have a view on the adequacy...
CONROY: We're in the middle - we're in the process. I've had a look. I talked with the ACCC. They'll put out a discussion paper in the next couple of weeks. There's a four week formal consultation process that you have to go through and then the ACCC will consider that.         
So we're in the middle of a process and this is a sector unlike any others. In most sectors I've ever dealt with in politics, there's usually a united common view, not on everything, but on some core issues. This is a sector where there is no united common view on any issue. So it's no surprise to see that there's robust comments.           
But the ACCC are the independent umpire. And the ACCC have this right and this role and we're not going to be second guessing the role of the ACCC. Do I always agree with it? No. Because, as you saw, in the points of interconnect decision, NBN Co and the Government felt 14 was right. ACCC took 121.           
So the ACCC are an independent entity. 
JOURNALIST: So are you prepared to- 
CONROY: Well, they're an independent entity. We obviously, at the end of the day, make judgments but you have an independent competition commissioner for this purpose.
JOURNALIST: Two quick questions. How much has the Government budgeted in education in trying to get people take and on and use the NBN? And the second one is Harrison appeared to suggest in the presentation that the current free connection is going to change in the interim, people might be charged to connect up. Could you expand on when that might happen? 
HARRISON YOUNG: Not clear yet. 
JOURNALIST: Pardon? 
HARRISON YOUNG: Not clear yet.
CONROY: If, for instance, three years after the NBN's moved through - and I'm just picking a random number - three years after we've moved through, every worker's moved on to another city, and you suddenly put up your hand and say, hey, we'd like to be connected, then the NBN will have to make a decision how they'll handle that.           
But there's an 18-month period, as I mentioned, roughly, 12 to 18 months where the connections are still taking place, before the copper's cut and I would imagine for all that period you could still take it up. But NBN ultimately have to make a business decision about that.          
To get new connections on homes, Telstra charge at the moment, to get new gas connections people charge, after you've done the initial rollouts, so this is not unusual but we're offering a free connection for a long period into the future when the NBN's in and around. 
JOURNALIST: Up to 18 months then. 
CONROY: As I said, the decommissioning process is 12 to 18 months so any stage there, while you're in the neighbourhood, in the fibre serving area, as we call them, or exchanges as Telstra call them. Again, sorry for the geek stuff. So - so that's a business decision ultimately NBN will have to make. 
JOURNALIST: On the education?
CONROY: Look, we've got some more announcements to come on that and I don't want to give you a scoop today. 
PM:     Yes.
JOURNALIST: There seems to be growing disquiet in the industry about the number of points of interconnect. Is there any (inaudible) for that decision?
CONROY: The ACCC weighed up all of the arguments. Let me be clear about this. I'm on the side of some of the people who are complaining about this. We lost the debate. The ACCC have made the debate and the world has moved on but, having said that, some people said that there'll be no aggregators come into the market but only Telstra and Optus. We've already seen aggregators come into the market. A whole new business - set of businesses have been created to deal with this issue. So I think people need to draw and deep breath and just see how the market unfolds. It's already unfolded and surprised some people and even some of those critics have recognised that the aggregators that have come in that aren't Telstra and Optus, will ameliorate some of that.           
But I also think the NBN are always very conscious of these issues and have been considering all of the arguments but reconsidering the POI decision, not something the Government is going to do. We made our views very clear. NBN made their views very clear. The ACCC made that call.
JOURNALIST: We heard some announcements this week about some of the new sites that are going to going, sort of a road map now for the NBN for the next year. What's the number, was it 55,000 premises?
CONROY: Yes.
JOURNALIST: That's a much slower rollout than I think a lot of people were expecting. I guess a question to the Prime Minister, are you confident in two years when you're facing an election you're going to be able to stand up and say we have come as far and as well as we were expecting when we announced this, you can point to this as clear progress?
PM: I'll go to the Minister, but I'm very confident with what is happening with the National Broadband Network and I'm also very confident that people will see the possibilities and opportunities of the National Broadband Network.     
Like Minister Conroy I've had the opportunity to have a window on the journey in Tasmania where we started first and having a window on that journey clearly showed that as the NBN was being rolled out there was excitement and interest as people got involved and then there was word of mouth in local communities. People came to understand more and more what it could mean for them.           
We're going to see that happening in other parts of the country, in the regional centres where we've seen rollout and now right here in Brunswick.
CONROY: There's two - two factors. When the corporate plan was put out back in December, and it was written a few months before that, as you'll remember, there were two factors that changed since that corporate plan.
The first was the POI decision. The point decision, again, apologies for the geek stuff. The POI decision caused a bit of a redesign of the network because instead of not having to access any of Telstra's exchanges, or other equipment and ducts and things, we needed to so we physically have to check whether the Telstra exchanges around these 121 POIs and that was a whole new process. So about three months or so was lost to the kick-off of the build because of the POI decision and about three months because the Telstra deal, which was very complex, to about three months longer than expected.           
So I still think we'll be past a million homes - and when I say past that doesn't mean they've taken a connection. Some people keep making this mistake but we'll have probably about half a million Australians using the National Broadband Network by the time of the next election and it's those half million people that Malcolm Turnbull has to give an assurance to that prices aren't going to go up.           
Because Malcolm Turnbull is cutting up the business case for NBN and selling it off. So what is going to happen to those half a million Australians using an NBN based on the cross-subsidised price across the country, the $24 that NBN are charging for the base product, which feeds into the $34, $35 prices that Exetel and Dodo are talking about.         
What is going to happen to half a million Australians' price of their broadband if Malcolm Turnbull cuts up the NBN? So he's not demolishing it any more he's just cutting it up and selling it off. So half a million Australians need Malcolm Turnbull to answer that question. 
JOURNALIST: Do you think, when (inaudible) he'll be jumping on NBN's shoulders and saying well, we've got it here -  
CONROY: Yeah, no, I've enjoyed the fact they voted against the structural separation of Telstra a couple of months ago but now they're passionate advocates for it.         
I think Paul Keating once said it would be like all the financial reforms, we built the Empire State Building and they came along and put a brick on top and said, hi, look what we've done.         
We've done the hard yards on structural separation and, worse, Malcolm Turnbull yesterday indicated they're going to go backwards.       
They'll invite Telstra. Well, the Howard government invited Telstra a few times and we saw what happened there.   
He'll invite Telstra to structurally separate and if they choose to say no we've gone back 10 years, we've gone back - all of the hard yards, the hard reforms, the microeconomic reforms that we've delivered on - we've delivered on even in minority government despite all the predictions we'd never be able to get legislation through the Parliament, we've got Malcolm Turnbull promising to go backwards.           
This is like Malcolm Turnbull's vision is like if he was in charge of building the Sydney Harbour Bridge in the 1920s, he'd have built it one lane. One lane because he's not building for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in regards to aged care. 
PM: We'll just check if there's - if we've come to an end of the broadband questions before we move to other issues. Yes? 
JOURNALIST: You've obviously got a concern there with what Turnbull's saying. You admit there's an education deficiency there as well and a recent security scare. Is there a perception problem with the NBN at the moment amongst ordinary Australians? 
CONROY: Look, there was no security scare. If I can just absolutely make this point clear. NBN was never compromised and never threatened. People were confused, I think, by the term retail service provider, thinking that that meant they provided services to the NBN.           
The company involved was a customer of the NBN that provide services to individuals in Brunswick, not to the NBN.           
So when they - the phrase was they tunnelled in under the firewalls. They tunnelled in under the firewalls of that company, not of the NBN. They weren't even connected to the NBN when the breaches took place. There was no security scare. 
JOURNALIST: But a lot of people wouldn't know that, exactly, so it would add to a public perception that maybe the NBN isn't going as good as you say it is. 
CONROY: As I said, I agree there was a misconception almost entirely created by inaccurate reporting. Now, some of that was, to be fair to the journos involved, some of that was because of some of the language being used by the police - and I'm not being critical of the police. If you looked at the cutting, like literally the cutting of the tape that was done of Neil Gaughan's interview, you got the perception because of the way it was cut that he was talking about the NBN. He wasn't. And even by the end of his interview he said he wasn't but people were using the clip at the beginning which was he was specifically referring to the company that had been penetrated, not the NBN.
PM: And I do think on community perceptions of the NBN, what we've seen as the NBN's been rolled out in different parts of Australia is a great degree of enthusiasm and enthusiasm growing as understanding's grown.           
Now, there was a last question on the NBN and then we'll move to other issues. Yes? 
JOURNALIST: A quick one just clarify how many people, come October, in Brunswick will be able to sign up? 
CONROY: In Brunswick we'll turn it on for competition. At the moment we actually, as part of the trial arrangements, we don't allow people to go round poaching. So, again, this perception that we've only had 40 - we are limiting it by design.
JOURNALIST: Yeah, but when that's lifted? 
CONROY: When that's lifted it's open slather. 
JOURNALIST: As many as can- 
CONROY: As many as want to start coming on board can contact their RSPs and it's the state- 
JOURNALIST: Is it a trial site? 
CONROY: It is a trial site, yes, because we've only got NBN in the trial site. So we'll be opening up in October for competition to start.         
Now, as people have made the point, people often have two-year contracts so you may have it connected already but you may have got six months to go in your Telstra contract. You're not going to break your contract and take up NBN Co, so it's not like every single human being will suddenly decide they're going to take the new service right there on day one but people will start pounding the streets. You'll see Optus, you'll see Telstra, you'll see Primus, you'll see iiNet, Internode, knocking on doors, selling new packages and I've got to tell you, in a couple of weeks' time there's some very exciting new packages going to come online.
PM:     Okay, so this is the absolute last one on broadband, and then we'll see if there - you've got another question?          
Yeah, last one on broadband. 
JOURNALIST: The internet's already disrupted the retail industry to an extent. Will the broadband, will the NBN accelerate that disruption and are some established retailers concerned about that, have they expressed any concern?
PM: Well, just can I say on the question of retailing, first and foremost, I wouldn't adopt your language. There are great Australian companies who are retailers, who are making the most of the internet to sell their products in a different way. Indeed, some of today's media records the journey of some of those companies.           
So, I think many people would be very familiar with how their favourite Australian retailer is changing the way they work and they can now go into the shop or they can make an order online.           
On the question of sales overseas and the GST, that has been the subject of discussion. The relevant minister referred that for advice, and, of course, the advice is becoming available and it will then be able to have that discussion informed by that advice.
CONROY: I think the Access Economics' report, when I think the Prime Minister quoted earlier was 80,000 jobs, I think you said, being created as part of the growth of the internet. So, it's not a - all the jobs are being lost in one area and none are being created. This is something that is generating growth, and you've just got to look that Access Economics' study yesterday to see that things are changing.          
But it's disrupted the music industry, it's disrupted the film industry, it's disrupted the book industry, it's disrupt... car yards, it's disrupted the vehicle sales industry. The media themselves, the online - so this is, as Ross Gittins described it yesterday in the - writing about the Google report, this is a disruptive thing that's just beginning, and it's going to continue to spread. But, at the same time as it's disrupting some areas, new areas are coming through. 
PM: I think we've just got to remind ourselves, you know, the creation of the telephone, certainly, caused a change for the messenger boy industry. I'm not sure too many people would want to go back. 
So, if that's the last question on NBN, we might say farewell to Harrison and what else have we got?
Yes. 
JOURNALIST: Just a quick one on aged care.
PM: Sure. 
JOURNALIST: What are you actually supporting? I mean, are you backing bonds?
PM: Well, I'm very glad to take that question. On Monday next week, we will release the Productivity Commission report into the future [break in transmission]. No-one should make any assumptions about the government's position. And the government's position will not be released on Monday.           
What will happen, following the release of that Productivity Commission report, is I think there will be a national conversation, a national debate around its findings and that's a good thing.          
But what I want to make clear is the values we will bring to making the decisions following the receipt of that advice from the Productivity Commission, and those values are- 
[Technical problems with microphone] 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) you can't say? 
PM: No, no, I was just saying, I'm going to - the values we're going to bring to responding to the Productivity Commission report are that we are, of course, going to make sure that we look after those older Australians who need our assistance the most. We won't be leaving anybody behind.           
Second, we will be making sure older Australians enjoy security.           
Third, we will be bringing new choice for older Australians, new choices compared with anything that they've had before.          
So, we want to see new choice and control over their lives for older [audio break] which is different to what people have experienced in the past. New choice and new control. I think that's very important too.
And finally, of course, we will bring our values about making sure that there is a fair and sustainable funding arrangement for the future.          
But I'd stress again, no-one should make any assumptions here about the advice that will be in the Productivity Commission report or the government's response to it.           
The report will be delivered and - well, the report's been delivered. It will be released on Monday. And then, of course, we will have a national conversation that follows. But I wanted to be very clear about what will drive me as we deal with this debate.
JOURNALIST: The government's proposing to ban commissions paid to stock brokers for share trades. The industry says there's no evidence of any problem with commissions in that area as distinct from other parts of the services industry. Why is the government proposing a ban where there doesn't seem to be a problem?
PM: Well, look, Minister Shorten's been working through a process here to make sure, obviously, that there are always the right incentives to do the best thing by Australians who, you know, seek to be involved in the share market and so many do. So Minister Shorten's still working his way through that process.         
Yes. 
JOURNALIST: Is a fast-rail link still on the agenda given it's going to cost $100 billion? 
PM: Minister Albanese is releasing an important report, which puts a lot of facts and figures on the table about high-speed rail.          
Now, I can understand that many people are very enthusiastic to see high-speed rail as part of the nation's future. I think, with all these facts and figures on the table, we are going to have a national discussion about what all of this can mean for people who want to move between cities and regions and between cities and cities quickly and by rail.           
The report is there to inform a national conversation. I think people have talked about high-speed rail for a long period of time. What we haven't had is the good [break in transmission] good statistics that this report provides.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) one, would you choose that over plane travel?
PM: Well, you're talking about something a long way in the future. As this report makes clear, this is a very, very big project, considerable cost. Also, major planning issues to be thought through. That's why it's right for us to inform the national debate.
JOURNALIST: New South Wales - sorry, just on the carbon tax. New South Wales Treasury modelling has found that the carbon tax will cost 31,000 jobs and wipe up to four billion off their economy. Was - is that what you anticipate?
PM: What we believe will happen is what our Treasury has done, modelling this carbon pricing package. What our Treasury has said is that 1.6 million jobs will be created.           
And in respect of all of this, what I would say to Premier O'Farrell is he should stop trying to find a way to blame increases in state charges on the federal government, and he should take the necessary responsibility for doing the right things to run his state. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just your response on the horrific story that everybody's talking about today in Sydney about the 18 year old girl with the (inaudible) and what your thoughts are on those extreme tactics coming to Australia. 
PM: Well, as Prime Minister and as an Australian, there's no place for violence in our country. People are rightly appalled when they see any reports of violence. So, there's no place for violence and I'd utterly condemn any new ways of thinking about hurting fellow Australians.          
So, no place for violence in our wonderful country which, of course, we always want to be a peaceful and safe place.
JOURNALIST: You'll stand by your modelling which shows a 10 per cent increase in the electricity costs? 
PM: Yes, of course. And these are the same people who modelled the impact of the GST and got it right.
Thanks very much. 



Thank you Josh. Can I acknowledge also Per Capita's Board, Fellows and friends, as well as Corrs, our hosts.
It's good to be with the Per Capita circle again this morning.
And here with all of you, I do want to pay particular tribute to David Hetherington's thoughtful, progressive leadership, which has driven Per Capita's growing success for four years now. 
In 2007, in your post-election Memo to a Progressive Prime Minister, youreminded us:
Successful government demands strategic vision, policy experimentation, embrace of risk and most importantly, an articulation of values.
And in 2010 you wrote to me:
A successful government delivers a small number of outstanding reforms each term.  
If you are able to kick-start productivity, unlock ‘hard' and ‘soft' infrastructure investment, and put a price on carbon, you will have played your part in a proud Australian tradition of progressive reform.
Good advice at the time  -  and a year on from the election, a measure I'm happy to be tested against.
Because we've achieved agreement for a carbon price, to cut carbon pollution and build a clean energy economy
Inked a once-in-a-generation reform to health financing, unlocking the quintessential “soft infrastructure” investment.
Passed the flood levy, to pay for rebuilding the nation's devastated “hard infrastructure”.
And the long-term push to get productivity growth going again informs every area of our reform.
From cutting taxes on low-paid workers and improving training and incentive to get into work, integrating enduring Labor values and the economy's contemporary needs  -  through to the structural separation of Telstra, a real “white whale” which has escaped many a reformer's harpoon in the past.
While doing what needs to be done.  A good solution, a regional solution, to the difficult problem of people smuggling.
So David, if you're adding a one year report card to your Memo, I'm sure you'll be kind!
But the real test for Government is not resolving issues on our to-do list or getting good reviews from commentators.
I don't seek elegant policy solutions for their own sake: I seek better Australian lives.
And I also seek to make enduring changes, changes which will command the support of the community as a whole in the years to come.
So for policy to make a difference now and for it to endure for the future it must be grounded in a deep and sympathetic appreciation of the way our people live.
This is why the reform agenda for the Government I lead is alert to the hope, but also the uncertainty, felt by many Australians about the course of future events.
We know the fundamentals of the Australian economy are strong  -  very strong. 
The Treasurer made some similar observations when he spoke at Per Capita following this year's Budget.
Growing employment, low inflation, interest rates still well below those when we came to office four years ago.
Low public debt, a stable and liquid financial sector, $1.3 trillion under management in our super funds.
A strong pipeline of mining investment.
And we are in the right part of the world at the right time.
Ours is an advanced and educated economy at the outset of a new Asia-Pacific century  -  poised for long-term prosperity through trade with the new Asia-Pacific middle class.
The long-term story is one of long-term strength and I believe Australians know this.
But we are not immune to the uncertainties and risk in the global outlook  -  there are patchwork pressures in our own economy  -  the natural disasters of the summer have cost the economy more than we anticipated even in their immediate aftermath.
Australians sense these things too and are making adjustments in their own behaviour.
After the global financial crisis, there's a new understanding of economic fragility: if we dodged a bullet in the GFC, perhaps it's no surprise that when a car backfires, people duck again.
As the real economy globalises, so does economic and political sentiment.
We can see similar trends, indeed more sharply expressed, at work throughout the English-speaking world, in southern Europe and elsewhere.
And while the fundamentals of the economy remain strong, it's also clear things aren't as they were in the 2000s. 
In the last decade, personal debt rose as people spent more than they earned but enjoyed the lifestyle benefits.
We had a long period of rising asset prices and rising superannuation returns.
Ten Budgets in a row starting in 2001 cut income tax.
In the last term of the former Government, revenues were so high and grew so fast that the Commonwealth Treasury had its own group who joked their job as the Budget was put to bed was to dump out the cash and keep the surplus down.
No more.
Decades of reform and a well-managed stimulus did mean no descent into recession  -  but with that, no soft gains in recovery. 
Utility bills are the new petrol prices.
Decades of infrastructure underinvestment deliver not just the reality of increased costs but a ‘sticker shock' which many suggest is having a disproportionate impact on sentiment and behaviour.
Australians are conscious of the importance of China's demand for our resources and concerned about the malaise of the American economy.
They understand that our strong dollar is a true mixed blessing, both a reflection of strength and a cost to many sectors.
And from the Cabinet table to the kitchen table, fiscal consolidation is the order of the day.
This economic story  -  rich in opportunity, complex in detail, promising for the long term, challenging in the present  -  is of a piece with Australians' wider experience of our times.
Consider our national security. 
We have a “continent for a nation” with an enviable diplomatic and military strength, in a strong alliance with the strongest democracy, but we recognise the new threats of terrorism, rogue states and cyber attack, while the old threat, nation-state rivalry, never went away. 
And it is rightly sobering to the national mood when Australians are dying for us in uniform overseas.
We had our summer of sorrow, as natural disasters here, in New Zealand and in Japan transfixed us and left us troubled about how violent and unpredictable our world can be.
Yes, these are rich and complex, promising and challenging years.
And as for individuals, so for nations:
Faced with challenge and change, we can pull the doona over our heads and leave the blinds closed all day, or we can get up and get our boots on.
I know what I'll do.
Because we've got a chance now to do something pretty amazing:  To take a once in 150 year mining investment boom and make of it a once in 150 year opportunity boom.
Offering a good education for every kid, a good job for every family, good choices and true security for every older Australian.
And also providing more information and choice  -  creating options for communities, citizens, parents  -  empowering them to insist on better, to insist on productive change.
My Child, My School, My Skills ... My Unis, My Hospital.
Helping mortgageors to switch banks.
Empowering regional communities to direct the various instruments of three levels of government in the one place they call their own.
Consider the way our Minerals Resource Rent Tax will fund future savings. 
Funding contributions to 10 million sovereign wealth funds in which 10 million Australians make super investment choices of their own.
Not dumping cash into one big sovereign wealth fund controlled by the eminent and the grey.
Or the way we'll cut carbon pollution through a well designed market, aggregating competitive responses on the energy supply side and price-driven consumer choices.
Not a giant taxpayer funded slush fund to pay polluters to do the right thing.
You'll see the same approach over time as we work though new ways to extend the fair go to disabled Australians.
As we consider the best polices to provide reassurance to people with disability, and those who love and care for them.
It's right to aspire to be a country where disability services are based on people's need for those services, not the lottery of what kind of disability they have, how they acquired it or what postcode they live in.
Where parents of children with disability know that their children will be safe, well caredfor and happy when they grow too old to provide that care themselves.
And where Australians with disability have good choices in their own hands  -  taking away the barriers to finding work, to being involved and active in their communities.
I believe seizing opportunity and offering choice lies at the heart of progressive responses to the emerging social reality of having two senior generations.
The ageing of our population is a big new change all over the developed world and I want to discuss it at some length today.
A cause of uncertainty  -  people see it in their own lives and know in part what it means for them.
But at the same time, they wonder what it means for the nation.
And an issue people do identify  -  and do nominate as a big challenge.
Not least, because Australia's former conservative Government saw and said that this was a “problem”.
Now I don't think the “burden” theory of ageing is right at all  -  nor do I think we have a “problem” of “too many old people”  -  or a “solution” which lies somewhere in the population policy menu.
I see a change: one driven by wonderful good things, by last century's amazing collective achievements, victories over disease and squalor and want, with rising life expectancy for all.
People are living longer than ever before.
When Australian Labor introduced the aged pension and I won't tell you what the conservatives said about the aged pension in 1909 but here's a hint, it started with n and rhymed with “go” when Australian Labor introduced the aged pension, life expectancy  -  57 years  -  was lower than the age for the pension itself  -  which was 65.
In the century since, life expectancy has gone up twenty years.
We hear that so often that we can race over the thought.
So for a moment, pause and think about it: twenty more years in your own life.
All the books that you can read, the time to teach nieces and nephews to sing or knit, the time to work with wood or to fish with grandchildren, the extra day to reconcile with your parents or partner or friend. 
Time to see the Bulldogs win another flag.
Years of productive work, years of volunteering and caring, learning and leisure and years with loved ones too.
It's an incredible change when you think about it.
Longer lives, more older Australians, this will never be a bad thing to me. 
And as people live longer, we'll have two senior generations.
A new group of people are retiring, while the already retired are living longer too. 
Over the next forty years, the over 65 population goes from one in six Australians to one in four  -  a big change in our lives.
But the over 85 population will go from one in two hundred Australians to one in twenty  -  almost a new way of living.
For now, those two senior generations in practice are the parents of the baby boomers, and the boomers themselves.
Think of the 90 year old woman with the 65 year old son.
And that younger senior generation is the healthiest, best resourced and best educated ever to stop full-time work.
For the first time, there'll be more part-pensioners than pensioners by 2030  -  which tells us both what a significant shift there is to more affluent ageing but also the limits of that shift.
That private wealth will create new choices  -  while the state will retain a vital role in guaranteeing income and security for all.
Not everyone will have a Winnebago or a trip around the world.
Many will work hard: some will share caring responsibilities for frail parents and young grandchildren at the same time.
We will not do away with hard times or the long responsibilities of life, but ageing will change.
And the baby boomers do bridge a historic change in human life.
Their grandparents were born in the nineteenth century and their grandchildren are born in the twenty first.
Even fifteen years ago, retired Australians had lived through a period defined by Depression and war, today, people retiring whose life was defined by post-war prosperity and the sexual revolution.
They're going to want different things. 
Not just security, they're going to want choice.
They changed what it meant to be young and they changed what it meant to form families and adult relationships and they'll change what it means to be old in just the same way.
These two senior generations are with us now: we are living this way already.
It's a big change, based on good things we have done together, creating a new opportunity in turn.
An opportunity to make choice and security the hallmarks of every older Australian's life.
Where individuals, couples, families, will want new ways to make decisions for themselves  -  while no older Australian should be left behind.
This goal is implicit in many measures the Government has delivered since 2007.
Lifting the pension rate and lifting super, while lifting the pension age from 65 to 67 between 2017 and 2023.
Cutting effective tax on older workers who get the pension through the Work Bonus.
Broadband for Seniors, an amazingly popular grassroots initiative to introduce older Australians to the internet.
Almost 100 000 older Australians have used the popular Broadband for Seniors kiosks. 
More than a third had never used a computer before, and almost half had never used the internet.
It's a very good thing.
We're also seeking new ideas.
Wayne Swan has appointed an Advisory Panel on the Economic Potential of Senior Australians, chaired by Everald Compton, to push along solutions as well as to sell the benefits of a seniors' workforce to sceptical employers.
The Panel will examine how we can best harness the life experiences and intellectual capital of the older members of our community.
We need to look at our older Australians as an asset to be valued, rather than as a problem to be solved.
Next week, I'll release the Productivity Commission's final report on Caring for Older Australians.
We asked the Commission to make recommendations, not with a view to the next five years, but the next twenty, in one of the important areas that arise from two senior generations: caring for Australians as they age.
What I want to emphasise as we begin that debate  -  not just the debate on the Productivity Commission's report but the debate about the wider implications of our two senior generations  -  is the values this Government will bring to judging the proposals.
Choice for each older Australian  -  and security for all older Australians. 
New opportunities  -  while no one is left behind.
And we'll apply some practical principles to new ideas as well.
First, older Australians have earned the right to be able to access the care and support that is appropriate to their needs, when they need it.
Second, older Australians deserve greater choice and control over their care arrangements than the system currently gives them.
And third, funding arrangements for aged care must be fair and they must be sustainable  -  both for older Australians themselves, and for the broader community.
I believe we can seize this opportunity of our ageing society  -  this new reality of the two senior generations  -  to build choice and security into the lives of every older Australian.
I know we can do this because of the things we have done before.
I think of what Australians did together when we created the aged pension in 1909.
The very meaning of ageing, what it meant to get older, changed, changing how people felt about their own future, by offering better standards of living, offering freedom from want.
I think of what Australians did together when we created universal superannuation in the 1980s.
The very meaning of ageing changed again, changing how people prepared for their future, by offering better standards of living again but offering new choices as well.
And I look forward to the things we will do together in coming years to seize the opportunity of the two senior generations.
Years when what it means to age will change again.
As a generation retires which changed everything it touched, we can be sure that what it means to age will never be the same.
Yet we can also be sure that the values we share will be our guide. 
Just as they have been through the great changes of the past.
Opportunity for every older Australian.
Choice for each older Australian.
Security for all older Australians. 
And leaving no one behind. 



The inner Melbourne suburb of Brunswick today became the first location in Victoria to benefit from the National Broadband Network (NBN).
Prime Minister Julia Gillard was joined by Senator Stephen Conroy, Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, to launch the NBN in Brunswick, making it the third mainland Australian site to go live.
Switching on the NBN in Brunswick is the beginning of unprecedented opportunities for Victorians as we rollout the super-fast broadband network. The NBN will create jobs, boost productivity, provide new and improved online health and education services and improve government service delivery.
It will provide new opportunities for small and medium businesses, opening up gateways into interstate and global markets that previously may not have been accessible. The NBN will also enable more people to work from home  -  which equals less time travelling to and from work and more time with family and friends.
As with the other first release sites, Brunswick residents will participate in a trial phase ahead of delivery of commercial services.
The testing phase is an important part of the rollout. The first release sites, including Brunswick, will provide crucial information to assist the NBN rollout.
Brunswick joins Armidale (NSW) and Kiama (NSW) as the third mainland site to be switched on to the NBN as part of customer trials.
The other first release sites of Townsville (QLD) and Willunga (SA) will commence customer trials shortly. 



PM: I'm joined today by Ministers Roxon and Shorten and we are here at the Braybrook-Maidstone Neighbourhood House. I've had the opportunity to have a tremendous morning tea with people in this neighbourhood house and to answer their questions about the impacts of carbon pricing on them. I'd like to thank them for the opportunity to share some conversation and some very good cake, we've all enjoyed that, and to give them some of the information that they need to work out the impact of carbon pricing on them.
Here in Braybrook and Maidstone and in many parts of Melbourne's west, people are of lower income compared with the Australian, and I've been making the point to people today that as we price carbon, our 500 biggest polluters will be paying the price. There will be some flow through impacts, less than 1 per cent on the CPI, that's less than a cent in a dollar, and people will see assistance, with around 4 million households actually coming out better off, with  more assistance than they need to meet the average impact of carbon pricing on them and their family.
So we've talked today about the tax cuts for Australians earning less than $80,000 a year, and that the vast majority of them will see a tax cut of around $300. We've talked about the increase in the tax free threshold, meaning a million Australians will no longer be in the tax system, no longer have to file a tax return and will see a tax cut. So for example someone on $20,000 a year will see a tax cut of $600. We've talked today about the increases in family payments of up to $110 per child, and we've talked as well about the impact for pensioners, will pensioners seeing an increase in their pension and on average pensioner households coming out $210 in front.
So it's been a good discussion, I very much enjoyed it, and we're very happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On the current economic climate can I say this, obviously Australians are seeing some turbulence in global financial markets and in local markets, in the share market. It's not my intention to engage in running commentary on share market movements. But I do want to say something about the Australian economy. We are not immune to global events, but I think we should have confidence, we should have confidence that our economic credentials are amongst the best in the world, we should also have confidence that we have handled in the past global instability. This Government has a proven track record of handling global instability. And we should also have the confidence of the strong fundamentals of our economy. We have low debt, low unemployment, the budget coming to surplus in 2012-13, a AAA credit rating, and we are looking to strong economic growth. And we are in the right part of the world, a part of the world that continues to grow, that means we will continue to see economic growth in our region, we've got a strong pipeline of investment, more than $400 billion of investment in the pipeline, and that means our economy will continue to experience economic growth.
Now I understand that many Australians will looking and this news and be thinking what it mean for them, I would say to Australians look to the strong fundamentals of our economy.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) how concerned should retirees be about their super funds?
PM: People did see impacts on their super funds during the days of the global financial crisis and many Australians will be looking now on impacts here on super funds and on their direct share investments. It's not my intention to have running commentary of movements on share markets, but I would say to self-funded retirees that of course they have the ongoing support of the various benefits that we provide to self-funded retirees, many of them are part pensioners too, so they've seen the benefits of the flow through from the historic pension rise that we put in place. So people will continue to work through themselves what all of this means for them, but I would say to Australians the fundamentals of our economy are strong  -  low unemployment, low debt, a budget coming to surplus, we are going to continue to experience economic growth, that is what will happen in our economy. 
JOURNALIST: But can you understand though why this kind of thing does make people nervous?
PM: Certainly, I can understand people watch TV and they wonder what it will mean for them, and then they reflect back to our economy and they say what's happening here, and when they do that reflection back to our economy people would see that we've got a low unemployment rate, I mean if you compare our unemployment rate with the US or the UK or parts of Europe people can see the huge stark contrast. We've got an unemployment rate of less than 5 per cent, we've got low Government debt, we've got the budget coming to surplus in 2012-13, we live in the part of the world that is continuing to grow and demand the things that we have for sale. We've got a huge pipeline of investment and we will continue to experience economic growth.
JOURNALIST: Regardless of the relative strength of the Australian economy in global terms, there have been mixed messages out of the States overnight. There was some small fall in their unemployment rate, but Standard and Poors has just downgraded long-term US debt which might be said in some circles is bordering on catastrophic, is it still the case that if the US sneezes Australia catches a cold despite the strength in our region? 
PM: Well let me just talk about events in the US and then come to the strength in our region. First let's look at the facts here, it is true that Standard and Poors have downgraded their rating of the American economy, now Standard and Poors had been signalling for some time that unless they saw a certain figure of budget cutbacks out of the discussion that there's been in Washington about the American budget and fiscal consolidation, that they were intending to do that downgrade. At the same time, the other two major ratings agencies, Moody's and Fitch, continue to have the American economy rated at AAA. So I think people just need to look at all of the facts. 
On our own economy when we look at our own economy, people I think understand now that a quarter of our exports go to China with its huge demand for our resources, that what we are therefore seeing are the best terms of trade in 140 years, and as a result of those best terms of trade and the profitability of the resource sector, we've got a pipeline of investment of more than $400 billion. This is the circumstance of the Australian economy. 
And let me just say again very clearly, people should look with confidence at our economic credentials and fundamentals and people should look with confidence at the ability of this Government to deal with global instability, we've done it before, we came out of the global financial crisis without having gone into recession, the only advanced economy in the world to have achieved that. We achieved that because of the Government provided economic stimulus and because of the hard work and resilience of the Australian community, and now of course we've got economy with strong fundamentals, growth, low unemployment, low Government debt. 
JOURNALIST: Just on the issue of asylum seekers do you reject claims that it's a breach of the UN Convention of the Rights of the Child to send unaccompanied children to Malaysia? 
PM: Look we've worked through all of this and made the determination that we would enter the agreement with Malaysia. As you have seen from the arrangement we struck with Malaysia there are protections for the asylum seekers returned.
JOURNALIST: What have you been told (inaudible)
PM: Look I've seen reports that effect, obviously our Immigration Department officials will handle any issues, but as we've made clear all along, the returns to Malaysia aren't a question of volunteering, this will be done.
JOURNALIST: Is three days long enough to properly assess those arrivals before they're sent on to Malaysia?
PM: When the system is in full operation we anticipate 72 hour turnarounds, we always said that the first turnaround would take slightly longer than that and it is taking slightly longer than that, and yes it's a satisfactory amount of time to do what needs to be done for pre-transfer assessment. 
JOURNALIST: Despite criticisms of the UN that it's too short? 
PM: Well we've made determinations on the best of advice from our officials about what be achieved in that time period. And let's be clear, our aim is to smash the people smugglers business model, our aim is to not see people put themselves in boats and be at risk of losing their lives. At Christmas time this year, the Christmas that's just gone, that we saw those tragic scenes off Christmas Island as people including children drowned, we do not want to see people getting on boats, we want to smash this evil trade. At the same we will take 4000 genuine refugees from Malaysia and of course included in that number will be children.
JOURNALIST: It's been commented upon in Canberra in particular, that you seem more confident in your public performance in the past week, do you agree with that?
PM: I'll let the commentators do their commentary, that's what they get paid for.
JOURNALIST: You've got a few things that you've rolled out now, you have an agenda, a program that you're pushing hard, Tony Abbott's been out of the country (inaudible) the phrase relaxed and comfortable-
PM: Look I'll let the commentators do what they do. 
JOURNALIST: Do you think public sentiments changing with regards to the carbon tax? 
PM: With carbon tax what I've said all along is we're doing this because it's the right thing for the nation's future, I want us to have a clean energy future, I want us to have the jobs and investment that go with that. Carbon pricing will start on 1 July next year and it will mean that from 1 July next year we are embarked on the same sort of economic reform, hard economic reform, which this country has fronted up to in the past and which explains today's prosperity. So we need to continue to engage in hard economic reform so that we can enjoy prosperity into the future, and a big part of the prosperity is going to be a clean energy future with new investment and new jobs that will flow. As I've talked to people about pricing carbon, I've just been wanting to make people have got all of the information to judge for themselves, and I've talked about that here this morning, and people can get that information from our cleanenergyfuture.gov.au website.
JOURNALIST: As a footy fan do you have any thoughts for Jim Stynes at the moment? 
PM: Look I've had the very great privilege of meeting with Jim Stynes and talking to him about the remarkable work he does for young and disadvantaged Australians, and I've been very pleased that the Government's been able to partner with him in some of that remarkable work, which is so close to his heart and which he's continued to do even as he's confronted illness. So I think we're all thinking about Jim, he was a tremendous footballer, he's a great Australian, and a person of remarkable courage, just amazing courage, to keep coming out, being there with his beloved football team, and doing so much great work amongst the Australian community, so our thoughts are certainly with him and his family.
Thank you very much. 



PM: I'm here in Tasmania today and I'm joined as you can see by the Premier and the Deputy Premier.
I came to Tasmania two weeks ago to work with the Premier and Deputy Premier on the future of forestry in Tasmania and on job security for workers in this state. We worked on a heads of agreement and signed it that weekend. That heads of agreement committed us to entering a full and detailed agreement in 14 days. Here we are 14 days later and Premier and I have just signed that agreement.
What this agreement responds to is changing market conditions, particularly the decision of Gunns to exit the native forestry industry. What that meant was a wave of insecurity for people who work in the industry and also contractors in the industry. It also meant that Tasmania needed to face up to the challenge of further diversifying its economic base and at the same time there was a major opportunity here to secure new forest reserves and better protection for some special areas of the forests in Tasmania.
So the agreement has been building on the work of stakeholders from all sides of this debate, from industry and from the environmental movement. People who have spent a long time arguing but came together in the face of new market conditions to see if there was a path forward. Well today this agreement delivers that path forward. It commits a total of $276 million which includes $15 million from the state government. That money will be used in the following ways.  $85 million will support contractors and their families affected by the downturn in the industry and will also provide assistance to employees. $43 million will facilitate protection of new areas of high conservation value forests. There will be $120 million devoted over 15 years including an initial payment of $20 million to identify and fund the appropriate regional development projects. And there will be $7 million ongoing to manage new reserves. The industry support package I referred to does include up to $25 million for the immediate assistance of workers who do lose their jobs as a result of changing industry conditions.
Now I believe, with this agreement delivered, Tasmania can focus on its economic future, particularly on diversifying its economic base. We have worked with the Tasmanian Government to deliver things like the National Broadband Network and I'll continue to work with Premier Giddings to deliver things like new investments in skills. This stream of regional development money will enable further economic development here, so Tasmania can seize a future with secure jobs, with economic diversification, with high-skill, high-wage jobs in the future.
I'll turn to the Premier now for some comments.
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Thank you very much Prime Minister and thank you once again for your role in helping to negotiate and bring to some finalisation what has been a long, drawn-out but very historic process that's been occurring here in Tasmania for the last 14 months or so, where we've seen a process with industry and environmental groups sit around a table and go through some very tough negotiations over that long period to try to get to a point where we could find the right balance between protecting a forest industry here in Tasmania, protecting jobs within that forest industry here in Tasmania but also finding a new way forward for the future of our communities across regional and rural Tasmania as well, in terms of new jobs that we'll be able to create through the regional development funding that has been provided by the Commonwealth here today.
I want to just also make the point that this is probably one of the first times, if ever, that we've had a process occur where environmental groups have stuck with that process to the very end day. In the past what we've found is where we have engaged environmental groups that they have walked away from the process prior to that process being completed. We believe that the environmental NGOs will stand by this IGA as will industry as well. Both of those groups are absolutely critical to ensuring that this IGA does in fact have a life well beyond today. 
In fact there is a durability clause within this intergovernmental agreement as well which ensures that on a 12 monthly basis all the parties get back together again and reassess where we are at, what has been achieved, what progress has occurred and whether or not there is a need to address any of those elements of the terms of agreement.
So I believe that this is a good day in terms of those workers who have faces so much uncertainty for such a long period of time now. Those workers associated with the Gunns productions that have occurred in the native forest industry, that those workers will be able to get some certainty and some assistance today. And not just those who are directly affected by Gunns withdrawing but also those in areas like silviculture for instance that have been indirectly affected by this decision by Gunns too.
First and foremost in our minds has been the impact on forest workers in Tasmania. First and foremost in our minds has been what is the future in Tasmania for native forestry, as well, how do we ensure that we do maintain certainty, how do we ensure that we also allow for a process of transition when there is an obvious change that is occurring, in markets, expectations about what timber they are willing to have within their stores and the like.
So we believe now we have a good strong framework to be able to move forward and give that certainty while also protecting some of those iconic areas that have been a topic of division in Tasmania for far too long.
So once again I thank the Commonwealth for their assistance and support and the breadth of this agreement that touches so many Tasmanians today, everything from those workers directly affected through to very important mental health program through Rural Alive and Well which is there out on the ground everyday providing support to those who have been finding it so tough over these few past months and will continue to be there as we continue to transition through this difficult period.
But we're open now for questions.
JOURNALIST: What changes if any have occurred between the (inaudible) and this agreement and in particular are there more funds tied to passage of legislation through the (inaudible)? 
PM: Because we've have the benefit of some advice over the last 14 days including advice from Jonathan West who is going to be guiding and leading the verification process and bringing his expertise to bear. What we've been able to do in this agreement is provide some clear immediate protection for 430,000 hectares of forest while still meeting industry's need for wood supply for the contracts that are there at the moment and which have been acknowledged by all sides to this debate as needing wood supply. 
On the question of contingency funds, yes there are some elements of the funding that are contingent on the Tasmanian Parliament post the verification process then dealing with the appropriate legislation to provide the protections recommended. But of course we do start all of this with a degree of confidence. This has been the subject of a lot of discussion and debate between parties in Tasmania that have historically not seen eye to eye, indeed they've seen the world very, very differently and there have often been long and bitter exchanges. They've come together and based on that work Government is delivering what we need to do to bring that work to life so we do approach this with a great degree of confidence.
JOURNALIST: Do you think this will stop the protests in the forests?
PM: Well we have certainly spoken to the environmental organisations and I'll turn to the Premier for comment too, but we have certainly spoken at length to the environmental organisations and they have worked around a table through the statement of principles process with industry to get a final settlement and to get peace.
Now of course we live in a wonderfully vibrant democracy and people have got the ability to make their views known, but for the organisations that have sat around the table, part of the commitment here is that they explain to their membership and more broadly that this is obtaining the outcomes that they have long sought, that is, it is better protecting a large section of forest including very important areas that have been the subject long campaigning like the Styx and the Tarkine and the Huon. So in those circumstances the environmental organisations have a responsibility on their shoulders to explain to their membership and beyond that this is the arrangement that they fought for and look to.
At the same time we've worked hard with industry, both being Labor leaders, we don't want to see working people lose their jobs and feel like they've got no prospects for the future and contractors, many of whom are not high income earners and have done it pretty tough, lose their businesses and feel like they've got no prospects for the future. That's why in this agreement we've taken so much care to make sure that we are supporting people during this journey of transition and whilst we'll continue to take so much care to support this state in its journey of transition to a broader economic future.
JOURNALIST: Have the Greens concerns been addressed in this final agreement and do you expect them to be satisfied with what you've signed off on here today?
PM: I think you'll have to ask them. Clearly, and I'll turn to the Premier for a comment here, clearly within the Tasmanian Government there's been discussions between the Premier and the Greens political party.
PREMIER GIDDINGS: The Prime Minister quite rightly says of course, that will be up to Nick McKim as the Greens leader to make their position known publicly in relation to this, but I can assure that we've had ongoing discussions with the Greens party around this IGA in the attempt to bring them with us and my hope is we will have an agreement that the Greens party will be able to support through the Parliament.
But we are still just the politicians in all of this. This is an important day but the work does not stop here. The work of the signatories does not stop here. The environmental groups and the industry groups will be absolutely fundamental to keep the spirit of this agreement alive and functioning, so in all respects it will be down to industry that helps us get this legislation through the Legislative Council.
It will be up the environmental groups, the leaders that were at the table, to try to help bring other parts of their constituency with them on what has been a very difficult but historic journey that we are achieving today. So as the Prime Minister said, nobody controls people in our democracy, that is the beauty of our democracy. But we certainly have the ability to stand up and articulate a point to try to bring others in the community with us. So I would hope to see the Wilderness Society, Environment Tasmania, The Australian Conservation Foundation and others standing up for this agreement, talking about the positives in it, talking about the transition that's occurring and trying to discourage others from continuing their attacks on important industries here in Tasmania, both in the saw logger industry but also in the billet industry as well. It is important that our existing forest industry is allowed to operate in an environment of support rather than continual attack and that is what the spirit of the statement of principles is about, that is where the leadership is now required from both industry and the ENGOs.
JOURNALIST: Is there money for Gunns in this agreement?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: This issue of Gunns continues on as it has at this point. I hope in this next week that I might be able to make some further announcements around processes that we'll be engaging with Gunns in. But the issues as I've said continually have been quite complex around the company and we continue to try to work through those.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you mind answering that question too because I think Bob Brown has said that he's received some assurance that there won't be funding for Gunns under this package but one would anticipate that they'd have the right to some compensation? 
PM: I think we have to be fairly careful in comments here so I'll just echo the comments the Premier's made. Obviously there are some legal issues of concern here that the State Government will work its way through.
JOURNALIST: Premier do we know any more about Triabunna and its future?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Of course what we have is very strong expectation that in fulfilling the statement of principles that we will see Triabunna reopen. That is what we understand was a condition that was part of the sale of the Triabunna wood chip mill. We of course don't control that mill, it is in private hands and it's up to the owners to open the gates but it would certainly be our strong wish that those gates are opened and that that mill does operate within this intergovernmental agreement.
JOURNALIST: Has anything happened in the last two weeks to give you confidence that it's going to reopen?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Following the heads of agreement there's obviously been a lot of discussion from various aspects across the environmental movement and industry as to what the heads of agreement meant. Through those discussions there's been further negotiation and you will see some difference in some of the clauses that has tried to work through some of those issues that have been raised.
I am confident that this IGA is the right way to go, that is within the spirit of the statement of principles, it catches the right balances that we need to achieve and in my view those gates at Triabunna ought to open on Monday morning.
JOURNALIST: Premier you mentioned yesterday that not all signatories had signed on yet, can you please just outline what's occurred in the past 24 hours to reach this point today and whether or not they are all onboard?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: My understanding is that there's been a number of conversations with the signatories to ensure that they are comfortable with the progress that has been made and again I can't speak on their behalf but I would expect them to come out in support of the IGA.
JOURNALIST: Can you just clarify how much of the industry assistance money as opposed to the regional development money is upfront for industry right now?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Yes I can. Basically we have a package of $85 million which is upfront, there's about $45 million of that which will go to our silviculture, haulers, contractors and others. There's also up to $25 million which will be made available for the training and education aspects of helping these workers find new work outside of the forest industry as well as the $15 million of the state government which will be going to forest works which will be there to administer transition support payments for workers and contractor employees and of course there's also the $1 million that we've referred to for Rural Alive and Well. 
JOURNALIST: So none of that money is (inaudible).
PREMIER GIDDINGS: No it is absolutely imperative that those workers who now have been out of work for some months and are in absolute distress get their support as soon as possible to help them move out of the forest industry and to find new opportunities in their local areas, that's what we want. We do not want to see our rural communities wither and die through this transition process, that's why the Commonwealth are immediately giving us $20 million to begin our regional assistance work and also giving us access to a further $100 million over the next 15 years which is in addition to the opportunities that we will have that every other state has available to it through the Regional Development Fund operated by Simon Crean.
JOURNALIST: What aspects of this will have to go through Parliament- 
PM: Can I just perhaps add one comment there. I know that there have been some participants in this debate who have said that the Commonwealth should not convey any money until the verification process has been gone through and then legislation has been passed by the Tasmanian Parliament. I am not of that view. As a Labor leader and a Labor Government we were not going to leave working people in distress for many months while other processes were engaged in. So that assistance has to be upfront, it has to be made available now and it will be.
JOURNALIST: And can I just ask, you know we've had these agreements in the past, how confident are both of you as leaders that this is the agreement to end all agreements if you like?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: I don't know that you ever have an agreement that ends all agreements because my hope is that this one lasts the lifetime of the Prime Minister and myself and-
PM: And we're intending to live long lives aren't we? 
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Exactly. But this is a very important agreement and as I've said what makes this agreement stand out from agreements of the past is first, it's actually come from industry and the environmental groups themselves, it's not being imposed by government and it's also been a process which has kept those groups together right to the very end, and I'd also make the point of course to the end of this chapter. There are many more chapters to come that rely on those groups staying together for many years. Now the personalities may change around the table but the industry and ENGOs as organisations are very much an integral part of ensuring that this agreement does have longevity.
PM: And can I just say from the Federal Government perspective, over many years now there's been engagement between the Federal Government and Tasmania on forestry issues. A lot of that engagement has been done on the basis that we've decided in Canberra, someone's decided in Canberra that we're going to come and tell you something about Tasmania. I've taken a very different approach and the statement of principles process has enabled us to take a very different approach. So this hasn't been like some past engagements from Canberra, this hasn't been a process of people sitting in Canberra and saying what do you think we should do about Tasmania? This has been a process where people have come in Tasmania, worked together and then we have engaged and joined that process and for the future, the $120 million of regional development money, that's about Tasmania, that's about you. It's about a process that will work from the ground up so people in this state get to design their economic future.
JOURNALIST: There have been a lot of groups that haven't been a part of this process (inaudible). Are you worried about their reaction to the deal? 
PREMIER GIDDINGS: We obviously have a lot of communication that we need to build around this agreement and through this agreement we'll have the ability to do that and it's not just other groups that are involved in industry or involved in the environment movement, but also the wider Tasmanian community which has a stake in its own future and the real keys to this agreement in my mind are that it does secure jobs, it finds a way forward for new jobs off the back of important infrastructure like the roll out of the National Broadband Network and how that will help link rural communities to other parts of the world let alone other parts of Australia and what jobs can come off that back of those sorts of innovative industries that can build off the back of the NBN, so it's about jobs, it's about community and its about Tasmania's future. And to ensure that the community understand and come with us, we will have to spend quite some time communicating with them and bringing them on this journey.
PM: Now I'm very conscious I've got a speech to give so we'll take a last question and then we might have to move.
JOURNALIST: And the upper house, how  -  sorry Prime Minister. The upper house, how do we get them on board and what needs to go through both houses of Parliament? 
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Well there is in the first instance the 155,000 cubic metres of sawlog, there is a requirement to have a regulation change from the 300,000 that's currently in legislation, so that will be subject to a disallowance motion in both the House of Assembly and the Legislative Council. The industry will be very important in terms of helping to lobby the Legislative Council to get that through. There may be a need to legislate for the 265,000 peeler billets that are available to Ta Ann at this point in time, but that needs to go through the independent verification process before we know whether legislation will be required, but the contracts are secured under this agreement.
There's also the 12,500 cubic metres of specialty timber which is protected under this agreement which is also subject to the independent verification process. So in terms of other roles of the Legislative Council around the industry side, we can't answer that completely yet. Around the reserves, absolutely, whatever comes out of the independent verification process will need to go through the Legislative Council for that reserve to be made under law. So again the role of industry will be absolutely critical to helping to get that reserve agenda through the Parliament.
JOURNALIST: By failing to tie industry assistance to (inaudible) you require aren't you leaving yourself wide open for this deal to be shot down in Legislative Council?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: If we don't get that reserve agenda through we will not get the $7 million which has now been indexed by the Commonwealth Government to help look after these areas and we will also not get the remaining $100 million of regional development assistance which is a significant amount of money for the Tasmanian community.
We also of course, then have a very strained relationship potentially with the Commonwealth that we need to also be thinking about in terms of our future in our relationship with the Commonwealth who have really come to the party here to try to help us as a community, heal some of those divisions that have been so deep for so many decades. So I believe that it's not just about the money here, it's also about what we're trying to achieve for Tasmania and where Tasmania is going. Now what people consistently say to me is what's your vision? Where do you see the future of Tasmania? Well where we see the future of Tasmania is in a diverse economy, an economy that builds on our agricultural strengths, our aquacultural strengths, our innovation behind the NBN and what the NBN will bring to the Tasmanian economy.
What we can do in down streaming other primary source material that we have in the mining industry for instance in this state as well. All of these elements, tourism of course is important in Tasmania, but tourism will never been the one and only industry and God forbid that ever happens because it is such a volatile industry as we're experiencing right at this very moment. We need a diversified economy, we need one that also has a strong forest industry in it, a forest industry that has certainty around native forests and a forest industry that has certainty around the future of plantation forestry as well and that's what this agreement delivers.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what did you make of the state of the Labor party here in Tasmania at the moment? We saw all of the protests and fighting yesterday?
PM: I think probably the best thing is for me to go and address the Labor Party here and have a look.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Tasmanian Premier Lara Giddings have this morning signed a landmark agreement that will provide certainty for Tasmania's forestry industry, support local jobs and communities, and protect the state's ancient forests.
The agreement has been reached between the Federal and State Labor Governments after a long period of collaboration and consultation with key industry and environmental stakeholders.
The agreement will help the forest industry adapt to market changes while protecting the communities and families that rely on the sector to survive.
Under the agreement a total of $276 million, including $15 million from the State Government, will be provided in the following key areas:
 * 	$85 million to support contractors and their families affected by the downturn in the industry, and in particular Gunns Limited's decision to exit native forest harvesting
 * 	$43 million to facilitate protection of new areas of high conservation value forests
 * 	$120 million over 15 years, including an initial payment of $20 million to identify and fund appropriate regional development projects
 * 	$7 million per annum ongoing to manage new reserves.
The industry support package includes up front funding of up to $25 million for immediate employment and training support for redundant forest workers.
Those made redundant from eligible companies in the forestry industry will receive intensive and accelerated support through Job Services Australia and other providers.
In recognition of the impact of the forestry industry changes on the people in the timber communities, the Agreement also provides $15 million to ForestWorks Ltd to administer transition support payments for workers and contractor employees as well as $1 million in support through Rural Alive and Well.
The Australian Government will provide $45 million in assistance for voluntary exits from public native forest operations for haulage, harvest and/or silvicultural contractors. 
Significantly, the agreement guarantees protection for Tasmania's most iconic ancient forests.
Tasmania will immediately place 430,000 hectares of native forest into informal reserve, subject to verification, which the governments will protect under a Conservation Agreement.
Reserves will include areas such as the iconic forests in the Styx, Upper Florentine, Huon, Picton and Weld Valleys and the Great Western Tiers, Tarkine and Wielangta areas. These forests will not be accessed for harvest while verification takes place.
An Independent Verification Group will be established to provide advice to the Prime Minister and the Tasmanian Premier on sustainable timber supply requirements and areas and boundaries of reserves from within the ENGO-nominated 572,000 hectares of High Conservation Value native forest.
For the first time, this process will provide an independent and robust assessment of the definition of high conservation values and recommendations of the areas that should be protected in permanent reserve.
Once this process is complete the State will develop legislation to formalise reserves and guarantee annual sustainable timber supply from production areas in public forests of at least 155,000 cubic metres of high quality sawlog per year.
Contracts for 265,000 cubic metres of peeler billets will be honoured and protected. In addition, specialty timber will be provided and all contracts for native wood supply will also be honoured.
The Agreement is consistent with the Statement of Principles agreement between environment non-government organisations, the Tasmanian forestry industry and the CFMEU, which was presented by independent facilitator Mr Bill Kelty last month. 
The Federal and State Governments urged all parties to recognise the opportunity to move forward after more than 30 years of bitter conflict in order to build a stronger future for Tasmania.
This agreement marks a new chapter in the diversification of the state economy and the protection of Tasmania's precious environment.  



Thanks Nick for that warm Tasmanian welcome.
It's so good to be among so many friends.
Some friends I've known for so many years that it's best we pass over the detailed chronology, some friends I made here last night and I see again today.
It's good to see my Federal colleagues.
Dick and Geoff, Julie and Sid, Anne and Catryna and Carol, Helen and Lisa and Nick.
I see them too rarely down here but I see them very often in Canberra. 
And believe me when I tell you this is an unusual occasion, one where I'm talking and they're listening.
Friends, Tasmania has the ten strongest voices in my ear in Canberra, every one of them is a Labor voice.
It's good to be here in a Labor State and among so many state colleagues.
And it's really good to see Lara. 
I remember the first time I met your Premier.
A young EMILY's List activist speaking passionately about her State.  And as I listened, I thought “this one will go a long way”.
But as I've worked with her this last year  -  on health reform, on broadband, on forests  -  I've come to believe Lara will go all the way.
Your Premier, Lara Giddings, is not just going to govern this state well for the next three years, with your help I know she is going to lead this Party to victory in 2014.
I love coming to Tassie.  It's my kind of place.
In the faces I see and the places I go, I don't just meet people I like, I find values I recognise.
Because hard work, education and respect run through the spine of the State.
Through this place where people work hard: in the trucks and the laboratories, the wineries and restaurants, at the factories and on the farms, feeling the benefits and dignity of making their own way. 
And where people understand that everyone who can work, should.
Those values run through this place where people chase the fair go for the future by chasing education for their kids on the long drive to lift school retention rates.
And this is a place where respect is a thing to show not just a word to say.
Where you can feel in every pub and workshop and office that great Australian belief that just because you're better-off doesn't mean you're better.
And these values of hard work, education and respect don't only shine through in the people of your State.
They burn brightly in the Government of your country as well.
And they illuminate our vision for Australia.
We're building a strong economy, where future growth is secured.
A new-technology, clean-energy, high-skill, high-wage economy for the future.
An economy where a small manufacturer of generic pharmaceuticals has a video conference with his supplier in Delhi and Shanghai every Monday.
An economy where an engineer visiting a mill in the northwest doesn't have to drive back to Hobart to get in for a check up with his GP.
An economy where great ideas in a digital age aren't born in Burnie and then raised in Seoul or Boston, they come to maturity in innovation hubs of our own.
An economy where carbon finally has a price, where economic growth is decoupled from emissions growth, where the clean energy jobs of the future are created here and created now.
And while we work to secure growth, we are determined to leave no one behind.
To build a fair society for the future, where all our people can make the choices which build them and their family a better life.
Where every principal has the authority and the incentive to lift school performance every year and every parent has the information to join in the task of school improvement too.
Where local clinicians can run the local hospital, responding to the economic incentives of our health reforms and where patients feel the benefits, in the emergency ward and in the operating theatre.
Where a teen mum can be studying her certificate three in child care services while her own baby is taken care of close by and where through the opportunity of new skills and new work she can create a new life for herself and her child.
Where every older Australian has security and choice where our two senior generations enjoy productive, positive older ways of life.
And where security and choice extend to every Australian person in every Australian State.
And it is when we govern well, driven by these Labor values, that this vision becomes reality.
When we make the hard decisions to build a strong economy. 
Getting the Budget back into the black, walking the reform road.
Creating hundreds of thousands of jobs, lifting the living standards of millions of families and pensioners.
Not reforming policy for its own sake but modernising the economy to secure our strength into the future.
We have seen significant declines on markets over the week as Australia has been affected by events in both Europe and the US.
We know we are not immune from global developments - but we know our economic credentials are among the strongest in the world.
Low unemployment, low public debt, a strong pipeline of future investment and positioned in the region with the strongest growth.
And we know we have dealt with global instability before, through sound economic policies and the hard work and resilience of the community.
No economy is better placed than ours to remain strong in this environment.
This is the strength which enables us to continue making the investments which ensure no one is left behind.
$2.2 billion for mental health.  
130 000 new training places and apprenticeships. 
The parents of hundreds of thousands of teenagers with over $4000 a year extra in family tax benefit. 
Millions of low-income workers with more in their regular pay packet through the reforms to the Low-Income Tax Offset.
Not just a Labor Government led by a Labor Prime Minister, a Labor Budget brought down by a Labor Treasurer.
We do these things for the living standards of our people, to give a hand to families, to give a hand to pensioners.
And these things we do speak not only of our Party's deepest purposes at its founding, they speak of our practical priorities today.
Because we are a prosperous country we have the resources, because we are a Labor Government we have the will to do what is necessary to make sure no one is left behind.
So Labor people can be proud that we are governing well. 
Can be pleased with the decisions we have made and reassured by the delivery we have achieved already this year.
We've switched on the National Broadband Network on the mainland, in Armidale and Kiama and Brunswick  -  and we've signed up hundreds more subscribers across this State.
We've created new incentives and new support to extend the benefits and dignity of work to families and communities who have been excluded for far too long.
We've signed the national health reform agreement, created a single funding pool and a new efficient price, and the benefits are flowing today.
And this Federal Parliament has done what the last could not: made the decisions to put a price on carbon. 
To cut pollution, to support the household budget, to protect Australian jobs, to build a clean energy future for Australia.
A strong economy  -  opportunity for all  -  no one left behind.
This is the vision we seek to build through so many areas of policy.
And this is the vision at the heart of the historic agreement on the future of forestry in this State.
You know well that changing market conditions, both in Australia and around the world, have created pressures on the industry which cannot be ignored.
And we know Gunns Limited's own decision to exit from native forestry will have significant impacts on workers, communities and the Tasmanian economy.
So the State and Federal Governments, the representatives of industry, workers and the environmental organisations, all recognise the need for change.
But together we've recognised that there is an opportunity here as well.
And that's why we've taken deliberate steps forward together, to end the long-running conflict over native forestry in the state.
The Statement of Principles, the Heads of Agreement and now the Intergovernmental Agreement have brought certainty to Tasmania's forestry industry.
And they bring  hope of settlement in Tasmanian society as well.
The State's been divided, sometimes bitterly, for decades. 
There is a genuine chance now to heal that divide. 
Not to abolish democratic differences, but to end the social conflict.
I don't agree with those who say we can't protect native forests and develop a sustainable timber industry in Tasmania.
I don't agree with those who say the people of this State can't settle this issue for the future.
I know there are political players still wanting to fight the war but I believe this community has had enough.
Tasmania is ready to move on.
The signatories to the Statement of Principles, the people who have endorsed the Heads of Agreement  -  the representatives of industry, workers and the environmental organisations  -  they see this possibility.
And I know many of you can see the opportunity as well.
A historic opportunity, now before each party in the Tasmanian Parliament, as it considers the passage of the required legislation between now and the end of June next year.
Under our agreement, the State Government will reserve native forest and both Governments will support workers and their families affected by industry restructure.
Immediate assistance for workers and contractors who are losing their jobs and livelihoods as a result of industry restructure.
Employee assistance, retraining and relocation support and assistance for voluntary permanent exits for haulage and harvest contractors.
But more than this: a genuine partnership to develop and diversify the Tasmanian economy.  To build resilience in the economy here, to add more strings to the economic bow.
With new opportunities for Tasmanian families, with job-creating projects in communities affected by forestry restructure.
A regional economic development partnership to create investment and jobs opportunities.
Tasmania's economic future is a picture of Australia's economic future: diversifying, adding value, balancing growth. 
The whole economy strong, modernising for the future, driving clean energy, high technology, and productivity growth.
The Agreement is the end of a long policy debate. It can be the beginning of a new era in Tasmania's public life.
As Prime Minister I'm proud of the opportunity we have created together because it is good for the State.
But as Federal Labor Leader I'm particularly proud of this process  -  and this outcome  -  because it shows so distinctively the Labor way.
Only Labor Governments could bring the whole community to the table  -  no other Party could genuinely include industry, workers and environmental organisations in the discussion.
Only Labor values could bring the solution to reality  -  no other Party has so deep in its DNA our faith that we can make prosperity, fairness and sustainability come together.
Only Labor's vision  -  a strong economy and opportunity for all  -  could ensure that in our progress toward these good things we leave no one behind.
The contrast with our opponents could not be more clear.
Sometimes we're pretty tough on ourselves in the Labor Party but gee, things could be worse. 
How'd you like to be the Liberals, who had a party review after the last election and had to turn to Peter Reith to do it! 
And if having the godfather of Workchoices tell you what went wrong isn't bad enough, what is seriously scary is that he actually made some good points!
Like the good point he made, when he said that the Liberals' 2010 election Tasmania package  -  put out just 3 days before polling day  -  was “more insult than policy”. 
But even more, the point he made when he agreed with the Leeser review of the Liberals' policy on broadband, which said:
In the view of many, the [Liberal] Party's policy amounted to a threat to come into people's homes and rip the internet out of the wall ... 
Tasmanians could see the NBN being rolled out, Tasmania is often behind the mainland in receiving new technology so being at the forefront of the NBN was seen as a boost to Tasmania ... 
Jobs for Tasmanian contractors, people to Tasmania from the mainland, flow on effects for Tasmania's tourism, hospitality and service industries ...
The [Liberal] Party needs to make a clear and unambiguous statement about its intentions on Broadband infrastructure in Tasmania in the future
Clever bloke, Peter Reith, and Tasmanians are pretty smart too.
They know Liberal policy on broadband is already clear and unambiguous.  It's the original one-word slogan: NO.
These things we have done together, not just in forests, but in health and education, in clean energy and new technology and so much more, they say something about who we are.
Not just about Labor's vision for the kind of country we are determined to build but about Labor's determination for the kind of governments we are determined to be.
Not just what we are doing and why but how.
Yes, having a plan: seeing a vision, pursuing it with passion.
Not always taking the easy path, always putting the national interest first.
And also, governing for all: bringing people together.
Listening carefully, speaking honestly, showing respect.
That unique combination of progress and unity  -  of new ideas and sticking together  -  which has always been the Labor way.
In the 1890s, they called it “just being mates”.
When we do that, we can do good things together  -  good things like ending the conflict over native forests.
When we respect each other, respect the facts, and get on with the job, our country can reform health, deliver the NBN, get more Australians into work.
That's how we'll put a price on carbon as well.
And that's how we'll deal with the big challenges to come and how we'll seize the big opportunities that lie ahead.
As the world changes, working together, to master change, and protect the things we hold dear.
Friends, ours is a great country. 
And throughout our history, whenever our great country has had a government worthy of its great people, we have done great things.
And in this decade to come, we must do them again.
We live in a world in transition.
And in that world, the only way we can keep hold of the things we love about Australia today is to shape change to the purposes we choose for ourselves.
To recognise the need for change and to take deliberate steps forward together to get us ready for tomorrow, to keep us strong.
To secure the things we all hold dear for all the years to come.
In the strong economies of the future, high speed broadband will be a matter of fact.
In the strong economies of the future, everyone who should work will work.
In the strong economies of the future, health systems will be sustainable.
In the strong economies of the future, economic growth will not mean pollution growth.
I am determined that Australia will be a strong economy like that.
That determination is written into everything we do.
And I am determined that in Australia there will be opportunity for all  -  that no one will be left behind.
The opportunities of new technology won't only go to the people and places who get them now.
The opportunities of new jobs won't only be created for those who already have a chance.
The opportunities of new kinds of care, new cures for disease, won't only be there for people who can afford them.
The opportunities from new sources of energy, from the power of the wind, the water and the sun, will be driven through our whole nation in the best and most efficient way.
And I know, we know, that these good things will not just happen to our country. 
We must make them so, together.
Together, I know we will. 



I would like to thank Mike Rann for his service to the people of South Australia as Premier, following the announcement today that he will retire as Premier on 20 October this year.
Mike has made an historic contribution to his state, as Premier since 2002 and before that as Labor leader since 1994.
Mike became Labor Leader under the most difficult of circumstances following the December 1993 state election.
From his first day leading the so-called “cricket team” of Labor members; to the day of Labor's return to office in 2002; to his national leadership in bringing social inclusion onto the national agenda; to today, still  leading the State in negotiations for the expansion of Olympic Dam, Mike has been a great Labor leader.
Mike will leave his State economically stronger, socially fairer and environmentally more sustainable than it was when he began. He has more than proved a worthy successor to Don Dunstan as a great Labor Premier of South Australia.
I wish Mike well in this new phase of his life. I also welcome and congratulate Mike Rann's designated successor as leader of the South Australian Labor Party and next Premier of South Australia, Jay Weatherill.  
The State will be well served by Jay Weatherill's leadership in the future. 



PM: Good afternoon. I'm joined by Minister Butler and we are obviously here to release the Productivity Commission Inquiry Report into Caring for Older Australians, but before we speak specifically to you about this report I'd like to make comment on a number of other issues.
Firstly, I'd like to say a few words about Mike Rann. Mike Rann is a great South Australian and a great Labor leader. Obviously today he has made some announcements about his future. He's been a very long term Labor leader and a very long term Premier of South Australia. He can be very, very proud of what he has achieved in that time period, including putting the great State of South Australia on a better economic footing.
But I'd particularly like to offer my congratulations to Mike Rann for putting social inclusion on the national agenda. I served as the first ever Federal Minister for Social Inclusion. I did that because I wanted to inject into our national political debate more of an understanding about Australians who are at risk of being left behind.
Mike Rann had pioneered much of that debate with his social inclusion work in South Australia. In that way he has changed, not only the State of South Australia, but also changed the way we approach national decision making in our nation. I think that that's a very great tribute to his leadership.
Mike is also a great campaigner, a great source of political insight and advice and I'm sure that for whatever the future holds for Mike beyond his days of Premier of South Australia, he will be making a great contribution.
I'd also like to congratulate Jay Weatherill on looking forward to becoming Premier of South Australia. I've had the opportunity to work with Jay, most particularly in his capacity as Minister for Education, where for a period of time we collaborated as education ministers together on a major reform agenda for Australian schools.
I know that he will bring energy and ideas to his role as the Premier of South Australia and I look forward to working with him in that capacity.
Then on an entirely different note, can I pay my tribute and the tribute of a grateful nation to Nancy Wake. Nancy Wake died in London yesterday, she was aged 98 years old. Nancy, of course, is best remembered by Australians for her heroic efforts during World War II. Literally hundreds of allied personnel are alive because of her efforts and because of the world she did in Occupied France. So, I know many Australians have seen her life as an inspiration and will be thinking of her role model today and I did as Prime Minister want to pay a very direct tribute to Nancy.
Now, moving to the Productivity Commission's Report on the Caring of Older Australians. I'm pleased to be here today to launch this report.
It's rightly said that you can tell a great deal about a society by the way in which it treats its older members and against that standard Australia's aged care sector has a lot to be proud of. There are a lot of people working in aged care who have done tremendously good work over many years.
But there are many challenges and many opportunities that lie ahead, as our society ages and as the choices and needs of those Australians who are becoming older involve.
Understanding that ageing was changing, that the number of older Australians were changing as a proportion of our society, that their choices and options would need to be different that those of the past, I asked the Productivity Commission in 2010 to get on with the job of looking at aged care for us and presenting the Government with very detailed options for reform.
I'm very pleased that we're in a position today to launch this report as a result, Caring for Older Australians. Now, we know that in the future Australians are going to live longer, they are going to be healthier as they age, they are going to be more prosperous than previous generations.
Indeed, last week I remarked in a speech that we are really dealing already with two generations of older Australians, with our most elderly Australians and now with the retiring generation of baby boomers. And as I remarked, those generations have got different outlooks and different aspirations and in particular as the baby boomers age, they are likely to reshape what it is to be an older Australian, the way they reshaped what it was to be a younger Australian and the way their generation has reshaped the understanding that we have of adult lives and the choices within adult lives.
So, as a nation we face the challenge of providing care to these older Australians knowing that the number of older Australians will grow.
We'll bring our principles to determining the future as our society ages and in terms of the treatment of older Australians.
Firstly, we will recognise that older Australians are rightly viewed as an asset to our nation. We will also recognise that every older Australian has earned a right to access appropriate care as they age. We won't be leaving anyone behind.
Also, want to see a system that offers more options than the past has. A system that is financially sustainable and is fair for those being cared for, as well as for the rest of society, and a system which meets the highest standards of quality.
Now, I recognise that the question of ageing is not only a question for Australians ageing themselves, but also for their family members. Many Australians of my age concerned about their parents as they age, so I understand the interest in the report that we are releasing today will be wide and deep in Australian society.
And I want to say that what we will do as a government in dealing with this report is we will be ensuring that there is a proper process of review, discussion and analysis of its recommendations. That won't be a process just within government, though of course within government we'll be thinking about it very deeply, it will be a process that engages the community and will be led by Minister Butler.
Minister Butler will be assisted in consultations and conversations about this report by the National Aged Care Alliance and the Ageing Consultative Committee. We will be working through what the recommendations of this report mean in a conversation with Australians.
The Government will do that work before we respond to this report. 
Can I say that all of that work means today we are not responding to the recommendations of this report. And we are not going to rule things in or out arising from this report. I know that it would be simplistic to rule things in or out before they've been subjected to appropriate review, analysis and discussion. So, we will not be taking the course of ruling things in or out today.
And I'd say to anyone who wants to take that kind of simplistic approach, that in my view that would be letting the community down at this critical point for our aging population. We need, as a society, to have this conversation. We owe it to our parents and we owe it to the current generation of baby boomers, as well as to Australians who are already retired, to ensure that we treat this report respectfully and that we work through the complex and comprehensive issues that it raises, mindful of all of the difficulties of finding solutions in this area.
I'll turn now to comments from Minister Butler and then we'll take questions.
MINISTER BUTLER: Thank you Prime Minister and as the Prime Minister has outlined, aged care reform is an incredibly important part of the Government's broader approach to ageing. The sustainability of our aged care system will be a very significant challenge as Australia's population ages. I think the statistics are fairly well known.
Over the coming decades the number of Australians over 65 will increase from about three million today to over nine million. The number of Australians over 85 will more than quadruple, from about 400,000 today to almost two million.
As people live longer, we know that their care needs become more complex, so we'll see an increase in prevalence rates of chronic conditions like diabetes and dementia. That growth feeds into the demand for aged care. The Government accepts that the aged care sector will increasingly struggle with that growth in demand, which is why we asked the Productivity Commission to deliver us a range of options for long term reform in this sector.
The final report is indeed comprehensive. I think the Prime Minister is only holding up the initial volume, it's comprehensive nature runs to fully 750 pages, plus appendices with 58 very far reaching recommendations.
But an important theme of the report is that of independence. We know that older Australians overwhelmingly want to live independently in their own home as long as possible and preferably, if possible, for the rest of their lives.
This report emphasises the need to gear our aged care and our health system around that preference, as well as a more general emphasis on greater consumer choice.
The report obviously deals also with financing arrangement for residential aged care  -  what we used to call nursing homes and hostels. Now, this will inevitably raise a degree of speculation about the role of accommodation bonds in aged care. It's important to be very clear about how the system currently operates and has operated now for many years.
Right now, almost 40 per cent of older Australians in residential care or in nursing homes have had to pay a bond to get their bed. Bonds currently average about quarter of a million dollars, the Productivity Commission Report tells of many bonds in excess of $500,000 and even in excess of $1 million.
They are usually raised through people having to conduct effectively a fire sale of their own home at the point when they realise they need to enter residential aged care.
Now the Productivity Commission was urged by some providers to extend that arrangement of lump sum entry bonds to the rest of the residential aged care sector, particularly to high care beds. It is important to note that the Productivity Commission has not recommended an extension of lump sum accommodation bonds, instead it's proposed other options for older Australians to be able to contribute to the cost of their accommodation and those options will obviously be a very important part of the conversation that we have now with the aged care sector, and more importantly with older Australian and their families themselves.
It's also important, I think, to say that the report recommends much stronger links between the aged care sector and the broader health system. Links which are much easier to comprehend now in light of the Government's reforms in primary care, emphasis on preventative health and development of a 21st Century e-health system.
This report in broad terms is incredibly complex, it has very significant ramifications, not only for government, but more importantly for older Australians themselves, in the way in which they manage their own affairs.
The Government's approach, as the Prime Minister has outlined, has been to release the report quickly, in order to allow a conversation to begin immediately with older Australians and with the aged care sector about its recommendation and I start that conversation tomorrow morning.
Thank you, Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I know you're not ruling in or out, but this report does seem to present at least one palatable option to selling the home, that is this government extended credit scheme. Are you, can you at least say you're attracted to that in principle, or something similar to that, does it hold any appeal for you?
PM: Look, we are going to go through the process I've just outlined. The journey to date, obviously we as a government asked for this report, I in the last election campaigned, said to the Australian people, that we did want to make a start on aged care reform in this period of government and now of course after a draft report we're here with the final report.
And we genuinely believe the right thing to do, given the significance of this issue to the Australian community, is to have the review, an analysis and discussion of these recommendations. Some of that work being done within government, but much of it being done by Minister Butler out in the community.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) timetable for actually announcing decisions?
PM: We will start the conversation out in the community. I understand, Michelle, that there would be a number of people in the aged care sector who would say to themselves, ‘Well, there's been reports in the past and many of them are now on people's shelves gathering dust. So, what's going to be different this time?'
That's going to be different this time is we are determined to start this reform agenda in this period of government, but we are also determined to do it the right way and that is in a consultative way, out in the community and with providers. There are many people who want their voices to be heard here, so it will take the time necessary to get that done, but we will be making a start on aged care reform in this period of government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Your Minister's just talked about a fire sale, people having to sell their homes. Won't that make it harder for the government to walk away from the recommendation that says people shouldn't have to sell them homes?
PM: There's about a million assumptions in that question and I'm not going to share any of them.
JOURNALIST: Are you expecting to start these changes (inaudible)?
PM: We will work through, I mean this is clearly a big fiscal sustainability challenge and let's remember, we asked the Productivity Commission to give us a report, not just for the next few years, but for the next 20 years. And the Productivity Commission itself says the phasing in period would be around five years and many of the experts and stakeholders have said that they think it would actually take longer than that and some of them are publicly talking about periods like 10 to 15 years.
So, we are talking about a major and profound reform. So, I'm not at this stage going to set time scales for when this will be dealt with in a budget context. We will start aged care reform in this term of government.
But, I do want to say something about the way in which the money works and the financial sustainability works and I'll actually go to Minister Butler on this as well. For me and for the Government this is not a savings exercise, this is not about savings.
Now there are some conclusions in the Productivity Commission Report. Obviously all of its costing would need to be comprehensively worked through as part of this process of review and analysis within government. But I may turn to Minister Butler for some comments, just on these issues in the Productivity Commission Report.
MINISTER BUTLER: It is important to say that one point on which we don't agree with the Productivity Commission is their modelling about the fiscal impact of their proposed recommendations in the first three years. I think in the overview they say that there would be significant sums saved in the Commonwealth budget in those first three years.
Now, the assumptions underlying that modelling firstly are that a new user contribution system would start on 1 July next year, even though the Productivity Commission itself says that at the earliest that should start in the third year. Also, it assumes that there would be no grandparenting arrangements for existing residents or recipients of aged care, even though in its recommendations it says that there should be.
It contains no modelling for workforce initiatives, which are a significant part of the report, no allowance for things like implementation costs and such likes. So, our initial look at that through the Department of Finance indicates that those savings the Productivity Commission says are available in the first few years are not there. As the Prime Minister has said, this is not being approached by the Government as a savings exercise, there are structural increases built in in the aged care budget that simply reflect the ageing of the population.
So, it's important for us to be clear that we don't agree with those savings outlined in the Productivity Commission's overview.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I'm going to ask  -  maybe I'm old  -  but I remember the last time the Howard Government did this, Jenny Moylan was the minister, it was very divisive and painful to put in place the current system. You seem to be very seem to be very sensitive today not to give your position, is this out of concern for how older people might think they will be affected? What is your message to older people who are thinking ‘oh, what's the government doing'?
PM: The position we're taking today is borne of a determination to get this right and we understand that this is a big issue for Australians, it's a big issues for older Australians, it's a big issue for people of my generation and dare I say it, this Minister's generation, some younger people, who are concerned about ageing from the perspective of looking at their parents and wondering what the journey will bring. And we do know of course that people are looking for more options now, overwhelmingly, people want to live independently, hopefully to the end of their lives. A lot of society attitude towards residential aged care has changed over my lifetime and I've had a little window of that working as I did way back when in a part time job in residential aged care, so the level of frailty of people going to the system is very different now.
So our approach today of not ruling things in and out is borne of a determination to get this right and to get it right we believe we do need to do the reviewing and analysis of the recommendations in this report but we also need to do the discussions out in the community.
I too, Matthew, am old enough to remember the earlier debate and I would say a number of things have changed since the earlier debate particularly the attitudes of many involved in the sector about the need for reform have changed since the earlier debate. But I'm also well aware that if you wanted to take a simplistic approach to this and pick it up and start challenging the Government to rule things in and rule things out then that could happen. My words would be the best way to have this conversation, in a respectful way, so we do the right thing by today's older Australians and the generations of older Australians to come is to have the open conversation in a mature way about every aspect of this report.
We'll go to Andrew and then come over to Philip then-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) do you agree with the basic premise that older Australians who are rich or wealthier than others should pay more for their aged care?
PM: I believe the system has to have sustainability in it and before I indicated to you the various principles that we would bring to bear and let me just indicate the relevant one, that the system is financially sustainable in a way which is fair for those being cared for as well as for the rest of society.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) pay more for their aged care.
PM: No that's the aim and obviously in all complex areas of public policy there's not one way of realising an aim and part of the conversation will be about the best way of realising that aim informed by this report.
JOURNALIST: But we shouldn't be ashamed by that, expecting the richer people to have to pay more? Will you express that?
PM: We've got to remember that this is an area where we are talking about older Australians' health care needs and the like and obviously we take a view about a community of interest in having good quality care for everyone, so for example when we are talking about our public hospital system, we take a view point of having good quality care for everyone. So the report is obviously asking us to reflect on all of these issues, the recommendations are there and we're not going rule things in or out of predetermine the conversation now.
Phil.
JOURNALIST: Can I try and pin you down on a principle at least. Do you agree with the broad thrust of the report that emphasis should be put on keeping people out of residential care- allowing them to stay in their own homes for as long as possible but when they have to move into residential care that there should be some sort of user pays system and there should be an alternative to having to sell your house to pay for that care.
PM: Well you keep inviting me to make specific responses to the recommendations and we're not going to do that today. But what I can say to you is it's obvious that people want, in the modern age, to stay in their home, living independently for as long as possible and we are going to be increasingly dealing with a generation of retirees who will be healthier, better educated, more prosperous and demanding of more choices than the older Australians who have gone before them. The Baby Boomers will bring a different view of what it is to be an older Australian to ageing than earlier generations of Australians. So we will need to be answering the questions about how best to look after people and I think people will be very determined to live independently for as long as possible.
I made a reference before to working in aged care myself, I did it as a part time job when I was in high school so it was a long time ago, I'll invite you to reflect on how long ago, but when I worked in residential aged care when I was in high school in a facility for women, there were women who lived in that residential aged care who could still drive. Now the whole world has changed, many of them had gone from their parental home to their martial home and then on the loss of their husband moved straight into residential aged care and spent 20 years of their life in residential aged care. When they first went in they were still physically very hale and hardy and able to do things like driving.
Now no one in today's society would say to themselves that with 20 years of life in front of them and able to do things like drive, that they would move into residential aged care. Thos attitudes have changed across my life time. Attitudes are going to keep changing and keep evolving where people will want to be more independent with more choices.
The Minister might want to just comment on that as well.
MINISTER BUTLER: Well, no I think that's entirely right, with respect Prime Minister. Consumers overwhelmingly-
PM: If you say something about young now you'll be in a lot of trouble.
MINISTER BUTLER: Consumers overwhelmingly are telling us that they want a range of options to choose from but the overwhelming choice that they want to make is to able to live at home independently for as long as possible and if possible for the rest of their lives, so gearing an aged care system and a health system that supports older Australians to do that is going to be something that increasingly older Australians expect of their Government.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
PM: I did promise Mark so we'll go there first.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what will you do to end the massive waste in Indigenous spending?
PM: Well Mark you're obviously referring to your report on TV last night and I know you had this concern at a press conference last week that perhaps people weren't watching your report so I did watch your report last night.
The report you refer to was one that was received by the Government at the start of 2010. Since it's been received by the Government, as the Minister has made clear, the Government has been embracing it and responding to it. But the report that you refer to is an analysis of a decade of work by Government for and with Indigenous Australians and yes it makes clear the considerable, huge scale of the task and the degree of difficulty. And as Prime Minister, when I've stood in the Parliament and done things like presented the annual Closing the Gap statement and in my life before, particularly as Education Minister, working out the education content around our Closing the Gap strategy, I've always understood the dimensions of this challenge. It is big, it is a huge challenge for our nation, yes when we reflect back as that report did, we can see some things that have gone right and some things that have gone wrong and we learn from that and keep working with Indigenous Australians for change.
JOURNALIST: You're the Prime Minister who's very interested in education. (inaudible) said on the weekend he didn't want Mickey Mouse education in the Indigenous communities, they wanted real teaching, real education. Are you concerned that the levels of education opportunities being provided in Indigenous communities are very much substandard compared to non-Indigenous communities?
PM: I've been concerned by a mindset that suggests we should have lower expectations and I have as Education Minister and I believe I've used these words as Prime Minister as well, I've adopted a George Bush saying about the soft bigotry of low expectations. We should aim high for every child in every school, we should aim high for Indigenous children, we should aim high for every child.
I've been incredibly impressed by the work of Indigenous educators like Chris Sarra who leads The Stronger Smarter Institute and his whole philosophy is high expectations, that it's not right to say Indigenous kids are going to find it hard at school therefore lets some how lower the standard, dumb down the curriculum to give people a false sense of achievement. His whole system as a school principal and now as a leading educator has been to say the bar is right up here and we're going to get every child, every Indigenous child to clear that bar and he's shown how it can be done and he is now leading a lot of work to do it.
Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, Kevin Rudd has recommended that Australia take a neutral position on a UN vote concerning the Palestinian issue. What is your position on that, is Australia going to do that or will we take a position in line with Israel?
PM: I'm not going to refer to anything that may or may not be dealt with in internal correspondence within Government. But what you're referring to is a Palestinian statehood resolution that has been the subject of discussion internationally to come up at the UN. At this moment in time no such resolution has hit the deck, there isn't a resolution available for people to read or respond to. If such a resolution does hit the deck then obviously in deciding how Australia will vote, we will bring our very long standing principles about questions in the Middle East, that is we are long standing supporters of a two state solution, we are long standing supporters of Israel's right to exist behind secure borders and we have also said for a very long time that this question is only ever going to be resolved by people sitting around a table and negotiating it to resolution.
Yes we'll go to the back.
JOURNALIST: Will you be introducing, will your Government be introducing a national disability insurance scheme?
PM: Well there is another Productivity Commission report that they've been working on on national disability insurance and we will at the appropriate time be releasing that one too and we'll make some comments about it at that point.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible) a decision as yet?
PM: Well we'll deal with that at that point, we're dealing with this Productivity Commission report today.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the Forest Industries Association has abandoned support for the Intergovernmental Agreement with Tasmania saying there's no resource security and no future for the industry. Hasn't it now gone pear shaped that there's no industry support and green groups are also critical?
PM: There are industry stakeholders that have been very supportive of the agreement that I signed with the Premier of Tasmania yesterday. I think there's been perhaps some misunderstanding about the agreement yesterday and resource security and I do want to be clear about that.
When I first signed the heads of agreement with the Premier of Tasmania a fortnight ago what we said was that there was 572,00 hectares that had been under discussion and under discussion for a long period of time for further protection and of those there were particularly 430,000 hectares that environmental groups were concerned about and then industry rightly concerned about resource security and supply and the honouring of all contracts. When we signed the heads of agreement what the Premier and I said was in terms of honouring those contracts, they would be honoured and people would look for resource firstly from outside the 572, then if that wasn't possible that all resource could come from outside then within the area but outside the 430 and that people would only use resource in the 430 as a last result.
And then in the fortnight in between signing the heads of agreement and signing the final agreement we received technical advice that contracts that would be able to be acquitted with sufficient resource security without going within the 430,000 area, which is why you saw the conservation agreement around the 430,000 that was in yesterday's agreement because we'd received that advice.
And then to give industry further security there's also a clause in yesterday's agreement that is about supporting them if there's any problem with resource security, so I think across the heads of agreement and then the in detail agreement yesterday, we've worked hard to ensure that there is a long term sustainable future for Tasmanian forestry, that we do better protect some of the iconic forests in Tasmania, or actually the iconic forests overall, that there's better protection for iconic forests in Tasmania, that there's immediate resources available to help workers who are at risk of losing their jobs and contractors who are at risk of losing their businesses because of a change in industry conditions and most particularly the exit of Gunns from native forestry.
JOURNALIST: Are you saying that the Forest Industries Association misunderstands-
PM: No I didn't mean that comment specifically about the Forest Industries Association. I did see some reports this morning about the agreement and why it varied from the heads of agreement which weren't quite correct.
JOURNALIST: Those environmental outcomes that have been put in were put in quite late in the deal, why did you and Lara Giddings give ground at the expense of industry wishes?
PM: Well this is what I'm explaining to you, we had technical advice which we had not received before from Jonathan West who is the person who will get on and do the full verification process and has the confidence and trust of all players in this debate, which is a very big thing to say, but he does have. Jonathan West in the 14 day period in between was in a position to make a recommendation to us about the treatment of the 430.
JOURNALIST: Will you support any Federal Government funds going to pay Gunns' compensation claim?
PM: Well the funds that we're paying are in the agreement that you received yesterday.
JOURNALIST: What happens if the High Court challenge on the Malaysia swap deal is successful?
PM: I'm not going to speculate on outcomes of the High Court, I know that there's some possibility, it's all becoming transparent publicly as we stand here so I'll take the opportunity when the decision's available to study and reflect on it before I give any comments.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said before that there was a lot more support in the aged care sector for these reforms than there had been-
PM: Not necessarily these reforms but for reform, certainly.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that you have the sector behind you now?
PM: I think there's inevitability more than one view but I think there is a reform mindedness in the sector because they understand that if the status quo continues to wheel itself out year after year after year, that we will see increasing problems in the sector, but I'll go the Minister who's obviously in very close contact with the representative groups.
MINISTER BUTLER: Well I think to hark back to Matthew's point about the attempt in the late ‘90s for reform, back then significant parts of the provider sector particularly non profit groups like the Catholic health groups, most of the consumer groups, the aged care unions were all opposed to a significant reform in aged care which I think was a significant reason why it didn't proceed.
This period, there is an alliance that includes all of these significant providers and consumer and aged care union groups as well as a number of other service providers involved in the sector, who have signed up to a vision, they call it, through the alliance, of reforms. So while there might not be complete stakeholder agreement with the Productivity Commission recommendations, we'll hear from them later today I guess, there is an appetite for reform in the sector that I just don't there was ten or 12 years ago.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you're asking for a respectful debate on this but this issue does lend itself to a vigorous political scare campaign. Do you have the Opposition on side on this issue?
PM: Well you'll have to ask Opposition spokespeople about their view, but I do believe that  -  I would hope, that looking across not just politics in the sense of people who are in representative politics, that is members of the House of Representatives or the Senate, but more broadly across the political voices that get heard in our debates, stakeholder voices that the Minister's just gone to and more broadly, I would hope that there's a recognition that there is a need for reform, that the status quo simply can't continue year after year after year, with the nation doing the right thing by older Australians, so the status quo locked in forever will not meet the needs of older Australians over time, therefore we do need to have a reform conversation and I would hope that we could have that reform conversation in an open way. What people now have before them is a Productivity Commission report. The Productivity Commission is widely respected, now that doesn't mean that whether it's in this area or any other area that they get everything right, we know we've had Productivity Commission reports before, we've worked through and discussion issues with people and reflected on them, we want to do that again and we want to do that in an environment where people are engaged in the conversation. So I would hope that's the way that this can roll out. For specifics from Opposition spokespeople you'll need to talk to them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on asylum seekers again, just given the political change in PNG and the potential that the High Court could delay things or block the Malaysia deal, what's your back up plan now for asylum seekers beyond the 800 or if you can't get the deal across the line.
PM: I'm not going to make any comments on the High Court decision until we see the decision and have the opportunity to reflect on it.
On PNG, as has been indicated by me and Minister on a number of occasions, we've continued to have the aim of having a centre in PNG. Obviously PNG politics has been in a period of change as a result of Sir Michael's illness and we'll continue to have the conversations with PNG, understanding that of course they've been through a period in their nation's life where they needed to make arrangements and focus on issues associated with replacing Sir Michael.
JOURNALIST: Are you looking at any other options or that and what's the time frame on PNG?
PM: We've always been clear the conversation we're having now is with PNG. I'm not going to put a time frame on it given the sorts of circumstances and change we've seen in PNG politics.
JOURNALIST: Mike Rann clearly wanted to stay until March next year. For such a long serving Premier do you think he's been treated fairly by factions in South Australia?
PM: My view of Mike Rann is as I outlined to you before, I think he's been a great Labor leader. Ultimately these matters are questions for him and questions for the Labor team in South Australia.
Thanks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
MINISTER BUTLER: I assume that's a facetious question. I think Jay Weatherill will be a wonderful Premier.



The Gillard Labor Government today released the 2011 Productivity Commission Report, Caring for Older Australians.
The Government thanks the Productivity Commission for their final report, which provides analysis of the aged care sector and detailed proposals for aged care reform. The recommendations in the report will be considered as part of the Government's broader ageing agenda.
The Government will develop its response to the report's recommendations guided by four overarching principles:
 * 	First, every older Australian has earned the right to be able to access quality care and support that is appropriate to their needs, when they need it.
 * 	Secondly, older Australians deserve greater choice and control over their care arrangements than the system currently provides.
 * 	Thirdly, funding arrangements for aged care need to be sustainable and fair, both for older Australians and for the broader community.
 * 	And finally, older Australians deserve to receive quality care from an appropriately skilled workforce.
The Government is determined to begin to make the necessary reforms to our aged care system in this term of government as part of a broader ageing agenda.
The Government will seek the views of the community as it develops its response to the final report. Minister Butler will tour the country to engage in conversations with the broader community about care and support for Australians as they age.
The Government will also engage with industry stakeholders through their peak bodies, the National Aged Care Alliance and the Ageing Consultative Committee.
With older Australians leading longer, healthier and more prosperous lives than ever before, it's essential that government looks carefully at how to provide the best possible care and support for older Australians.
There is huge potential to provide older Australians with greater choice and control over their lives than has been afforded by the system in the past. We are also focused on ensuring older Australians are provided the ability to age with dignity and security.
The release of the Commission's report will form an important part of the national conversation about how to promote opportunities for healthy and positive ageing.
Further information on the inquiry can be found on the Productivity Commission's website at www.pc.gov.auor by contacting the Commission on (02) 6240 3223. 



The Prime Minister today paid tribute to war heroine Nancy Wake, who passed away in London yesterday aged 98.
New Zealand-born Ms Wake grew up in Sydney and after a brief stint as a nurse, worked as a journalist in Europe, where she married a French businessman in 1939.
Trapped in France when the Nazis invaded, Ms Wake worked with the Resistance as a courier and later as a devastatingly effective saboteur and spy.
She became the Gestapo's most wanted person, receiving the enduring nickname “The White Mouse”.
Nancy Wake was a woman of exceptional courage and resourcefulness whose daring exploits saved the lives of hundreds of Allied personnel and helped bring the Nazi occupation of France to an end.
Today our nation honours a truly remarkable individual whose selfless valour and tenacity will never be forgotten. Nancy Wake will remain an abiding inspiration to generations of Australians. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Mental Health and Ageing Mark Butler today met with local seniors at a fitness and leisure centre in Canberra in the lead up to a national conversation on how to promote opportunities for healthy and positive ageing.
The Gillard Labor Government is engaging in the national conversation with older Australians, their carers and families to help inform its response to the Productivity Commission Final Report, Caring for Older Australians.
In the future, older Australians will lead longer, healthier and more prosperous lives than previous generations.
It is essential we provide older Australians with care, support and encouragement to continue contributing to our community - whether in work, in retirement or in caring roles.
Older Australians deserve security, but they also deserve more choice and control over the way they live.
We also need to make sure financing arrangements are fair and sustainable, for the individual and for society as a whole.
The recommendations in the Commission's report will be considered as part of the Government's broader ageing agenda. 
The Government will develop its response to the report's recommendations guided by four overarching principles:
 * 	First, every older Australian has earned the right to be able to access quality care and support that is appropriate to their needs, when they need it.
 * 	Secondly, older Australians deserve greater choice and control over their care arrangements than the system currently provides.
 * 	Thirdly, funding arrangements for aged care need to be sustainable and fair, both for older Australians and for the broader community.
 * 	And finally, older Australians deserve to receive quality care from an appropriately skilled workforce.
The Government recognises that Australia's ageing population presents enormous potential to provide them with greater choice and control over their lives, as well more opportunities than they've been afforded in the past.
The national conversation about aged care services, as part of a broader ageing agenda, will help us understand how to harness this potential. 



The Gillard Labor Government today announced that it will start work immediately with states and territories on measures that will build the foundations for a National Disability Insurance Scheme, following the release of the Productivity Commission's final report into the matter.
The Government asked the Productivity Commission to examine reform of disability support services because we believe that the system we have today is not delivering the kind of care and support Australians expect for people with disability.
The main recommendations of the Productivity Commission are:
 * 	A National Disability Insurance Scheme should be created to provide all Australians with insurance for the costs of support if they or a family member acquire a disability.  The scheme will provide individually tailored care and support to around 410 000 people with significant disabilities.
 * 	A National Injury Insurance Scheme should be created to provide no fault insurance for anyone who suffers a catastrophic injury.
The Productivity Commission's report finds that it would take at least seven years to transform disability services.
The Australian Government supports the Productivity Commission's vision for a system that provides individuals with the support they need over the course of their lifetime, and wants reform of disability services that is financially sustainable.
The Productivity Commission outlines the creation of these schemes would ensure that every Australian can have confidence that they will receive the care and support they need if they acquire or are born with a disability.
However, the Productivity Commission makes clear that important work needs to be done before further progress can be made  -  and we want to get that under way.
While we have a lot of work to do before the Government could determine the design of a scheme, we believe it is important that work begins now to lay the foundations for this reform.
In line with the Productivity Commission's recommendations, the Government, with the States and Territories, will start work immediately on building the foundations for reform. We will:
 * 	Deliver an immediate, additional $10 million, consistent with the PC recommendations, to support this technical policy work;
 * 	Move to establish a COAG Select Council of Ministers from the Commonwealth, States and Territories to lead reform in this area at COAG next month;
 * 	Take steps to establish an Advisory Group to the Select Council, led by Dr Jeff Harmer, to provide expert advice on delivering the foundations for reform and preparation for launch.
The current system is not delivering the kind of care and support Australians expect for people with a disability.
Care and support should be based on people's needs, not a lottery of what kind of disability they have, how they acquired it or where they live.
That's why the Government put disability reform on the agenda and we thank the Productivity Commission for their work.
Future reform of disability services will require investment from all levels of Government. 
Further policy work
The Productivity Commission recommended that foundation reforms were a necessary precursor to the establishment of a functional and efficient national scheme. Work is required to:
 * 	develop common assessment tools to determine eligibility for support
 * 	develop service and quality standards so that people with disability can expect high quality support irrespective of what disability they have or how they acquired it
 * 	develop a national pricing structure
 * 	build the capacity of the disability sector
 * 	build workforce capacity
Work on these foundation reforms will recognise the roles and responsibilities of governments as outlined in the National Disability Agreement and recently reaffirmed in the National Health Reform Agreement.
Select Council
The Prime Minister will seek to establish a Select Council on Disability Reform at the next meeting of the Council of Australian Governments. This would bring together Commonwealth and State Treasurers and Disability Ministers to do the work needed to lay the foundations for change.
The Select Council would be chaired by the Treasurer and Minister Macklin, and would be supported by an Advisory Group of experts and leaders on disability reform.
In response to the Productivity Commission's recommendations for the states and territories to harmonise their approach to catastrophic injury, the Government will also convene a working group led by the Assistant Treasurer to work with State and Territory Governments, lawyers and other stakeholders to progress this important complementary reform.
Advisory Group 
The Advisory Group will be led by Dr Jeff Harmer AO, and the Commonwealth will nominate highly regarded national disability advocates Mr Bruce Bonyhady AM and Dr Rhonda Galbally AO to this Advisory Group.
Suggestions for additional nominees to this group have also been sought from the states and territories.
These reforms will be delivered in a way that is consistent with the Government's fiscal strategy.
For a copy of the Productivity Commission report visit http://www.pc.gov.au/projects/inquiry/disability-support/report



PM: I'm here with Ministers Macklin and Shorten and with Parliamentary Secretary Senator McLucas and we're very pleased to be here at Noah's Ark, and a big thank you to everyone who said hello to us this morning. We're actually in Jenny Macklin's electorate, so it's great to be here, and this is a very exciting day and we're joined by some very excited people.
Today we are launching this Productivity Commission Report on Disability Care and Support, so it is an exciting day.
I'd like to thank at the start the people who have contributed to this report, most particularly John Walsh, who has worked so hard on the report  -  thank you very much John - and to the people with disabilities themselves and their families and carers that contributed to this report through their submissions, a very big thank you to them. Around 1,000 submissions were received, so there was a great deal of interest as the Productivity Commission went about its work.
And what the Productivity Commission was asked to do was to look at the area of support and services for people with disability, and we did that for three reasons. First, we were very concerned about the circumstances of people who are getting older themselves, but who are the principle carers of a child with a disability. We meet in the community right around the country so many families in those circumstances, not knowing who will care for their son or their daughter when they become too old to do it themselves.
We're also concerned about individuals with disabilities who weren't able to get the services they need, and certainly around the country we've met with people who have been in that position.
And third, of course, this report was motivated by our concern about the circumstances of all Australians, because depending on life's chances any one of us could meet with an accident, have an illness which resulted in a long lasting disability, or any one of us could have a family member, a new child born, a child, a grandchild, a niece, a nephew, someone in our family, someone amongst our friends, who has a lifetime disability. So, this is a report of importance to every Australian.
So, we asked the Productivity Commission to look at what we can do better, and the Productivity Commission came back and found that the current system is unfair, it's underfunded and it's fragmented, and they certainly very powerfully make the case that at the moment access to services is a very cruel lottery: it depends where you live; it depends on the kind of disability you have; and it depends how you got that disability - a very cruel lottery with too many Australians missing out on the basic services that they need.
So, the Productivity Commission has recommended that the nation move to a new model of funding disability  -  a National Disability Insurance Scheme. It's sort of the same concept as Medicare. Medicare is the way in which as a nation we all come together and insure ourselves and each other against the risk of being unwell, and of course Medicare is a great system to make sure people get the services that they need.
So, looking at that kind of insurance model the Productivity Commission has come back and said we should work towards a National Disability Insurance Scheme and a new way of dealing with people who get catastrophic injuries in circumstances where they cannot get compensation through a worker's compensation arrangement or a transport accident arrangement.
Today I'm in a position to say the Government shares the vision of the Productivity Commission. We share the vision that our nation needs a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Of course we realise that to get to a stage where the nation has a National Disability Insurance Scheme will be a long journey. First and foremost the Productivity Commission itself has said that implementation would take around seven years.
Then of course everything we do as a Government has to be fiscally sustainable. As a nation we've always got to live within our means and as a nation if we start on a new system we've got to make sure it can be funded and it can work over time.
And third, the Productivity Commission report does show us that a lot of work needs to be done to set up for any National Disability Insurance Scheme, a lot of fundamentals need to be worked through, a lot of details need to be worked through to get this right.
So, today I'm in a position to announce that we're going to make a start. We're going to make a start on doing the things that are necessary to take us towards a future that would have a National Disability Insurance Scheme. So, today I can announce first and foremost that I will go to the next meeting of the Council of Australian Governments that will be held at the end of next week and propose a Select Council where governments come together to work together on this important reform.
We've got to remember of course that it's state governments now that are the primary drivers of services, so primary drivers of services  -  we make money available but it's state governments who are there on the ground providing services.
So, this does need to be a shared effort and collaborative work and that's why I'm proposing a COAG Select Council and will take that to COAG in just over a week's time.
Second, we will create an Advisory Committee. It will be overseen by Jeff Harmer, who is a distinguished public servant. We will also appoint to that Advisory Committee Rhonda Galbally, who is with us today and is well known for her advocacy and work in the disability area, and we will also appoint to that committee Bruce Bonyhady, who is also very well known for his expertise and work in this area, and then we will work with state governments for the further appointments.
And we will also make $10 million available for the foundation work that needs to be done, the technical work that needs to be done. This builds on the $7.6 billion National Disability Agreement, in which we embedded a reform agenda, but new resources are needed for the technical work to support the things we need to do which would enable us in the future to look towards a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Now, I'm not pretending any of that work is glamorous - it's not glamorous - but it is the technical work that needs to be done.
Finally, let me conclude by saying why I believe today is an exciting day and this is an important reform.
As a Labor Leader, as a Labor Government, we are informed by our Labor values, and if you were going to summarise them they're about giving people the opportunity to get ahead, but they're also about making sure that no-one gets left behind.
So, as we go about reforming important areas  -  disability, ageing, health, education  -  we're always informed by those values of giving people the opportunities they need to get ahead, but making sure people don't get left behind. And I think it's an appropriate kind of fairness to say if someone met with a dreadful moment in their life, an accident, an illness, the birth of a child with a disability, that meeting with that moment, that chance in life, shouldn't cost them the ability to have a decent life. We don't want people left behind, and that's why I'm so enthusiastic to see us work towards a better way of looking after Australians with disabilities.
I'll turn now to Minister Macklin for some comments, and then to Minister Shorten.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thank you very, very much Prime Minister.
If I can just thank you very much for your leadership today on what will be the transformation of the lives of people with disability and their carers. This is a very, very significant day.
I do want to also, of course, start with thanking Noah's Ark, all the staff, the parents, and especially the children for having us here today. This is my electorate. I'm so proud of you, so thank you for having us.
It's also a wonderful opportunity for us to thank the Productivity Commission for what is a landmark report. An enormous amount of work has gone in to this, an enormous amount of intellectual and technical work and like the Prime Minister, I do want to particularly single out John Walsh for his extraordinary intellectual leadership, not just over the last 18 months, but over many, many years developing the ideas around this very, very important reform.
I'd also like to indicate the Government's thanks to the independent panel, which was established to work with the Productivity Commission, chaired by Bruce Bonyhady  -  so Bruce, if you would pass on the Government's thanks to all the members of the independent panel, who so willingly gave of their time.
I do think the biggest thanks go to the people with disabilities, the advocates, probably none stronger than Rhonda Galbally, who have really led the way and who have insisted that this reform needed to be done and we're so pleased to be able to be here with all of you today to make this very, very significant commitment.
It is a transformational change. It is a day that we'll look back on and remember that this is the day we started to transform the care and support of people with disability to make a difference to their lives.
I do want to just touch on some of the reforms that we have, as a Commonwealth Government, already put in place to deliver improvements to people with disability and their carers. Of course, in 2009 we delivered very significant increases to the disability support pension and the carer payment - improvements to that income support that people depend on that's made a real difference to people's lives.
We're now updating the impairment tables for the disability support pension to emphasis the things that people can do, not the things that people can't do  -  a completely different way of thinking about opportunities for people with disability and making sure that we're keeping up with current rehabilitation practice.
We're building new supported accommodation places. We've dramatically expanded  -  in fact doubled  -  the funding that we're providing to the states and territories through the National Disability Agreement, and now providing decent indexation of that funding to the states and territories.
So, all of these changes have made a difference, but we know that that's not enough. That's why it was our Government that gave the Productivity Commission the task to look at the feasibility of a long-term care and support system for Australia, and they have recommended to us that not only is it feasible, but that it should and must be done, and as the Prime Minister has just indicated, we intend to start now.
There is a lot of technical work that needs to be done and the $10 million that the Prime Minister has announced today will go to making sure that that technical work can be done. There's also an enormous amount of work to be done with the states and territories that we have already agreed to do through the National Disability Agreement: the development of national assessment tools; the development of quality standards; the development of individualised funding approaches, just to name a few.
These areas must be delivered to make sure that the disability support system is what we might call ‘NDIS ready' and I've spoken to all of my state and territory colleagues today to make sure that we have a renewed commitment to get that work done and to get it done very quickly.
As the Prime Minister has indicated she intends to recommend to the Council of Australian Governments that we set up a special select council on disability reform. This does need to be a shared effort between the Commonwealth, the states and territories. The recommendation will be that the Commonwealth Treasurer and I will chair that select council and will have state and territory treasurers and disability ministers on that select council.
We will also establish an advisory committee and the Prime Minister's gone through the membership that we were announcing today, but we do want other members recommended to us from elsewhere.
We know how important it is that people from the disability and carer sector are able to continue to provide the advocacy and leadership that they have so far and the advisory committee will enable to do exactly that.
So this is a very, very exciting day, an exciting day that so many people have worked so hard for, for many, many years. This is your day, a day for you to celebrate the time when Australia finally recognises that we can do what needs to be done to deliver for people with a disability and their carers. Thank you so much for your contribution, your advocacy. It's now for all of us to get on and deliver.
I'll now pass over to Bill Shorten.
MINISTER SHORTEN: Good morning everyone, it's a pleasure to be here.
 As part of the Productivity Commission report they've looked at a National Disability Insurance Scheme, but they've also identified that 1000 Australians every year suffer catastrophic injury but only about half of them are covered by some form of no-fault insurance scheme in either worker's comp or traffic accident injuries in some states.
So, we have a system in Australia where you can suffer a severe brain injury or a spinal cord severing of the C5, C6, and depending on which state you suffer the injury and the manner in which you suffer the injury, it will determine the care you get. This is a crazy lottery which has existed for too long.
The Government, in response to the Productivity Commission's discussions about federating a national catastrophic injury scheme involves me leading a discussion with the states to ensure that the schemes that are working well and workers comp and traffic accident, of course, are supported and maintained, but a discussion with the states  -  how do we extend catastrophic insurance to that one in every two people, or 500 people a year, who may suffer a catastrophic injury through being a victim of violence, through sporting injuries, through areas not covered by the motor vehicle or traffic accident laws in some jurisdictions.
Impairment is a fact of life. It's what you do with the impairment which is what determines whether or not Australians have a second-class existence. We want to end the midnight anxiety of ageing carers who wonder who will look after their adult children when they no longer can. We want to end the second-class exile which too many Australians exist in.
We look forward to working with the states to ensure that the people who suffer catastrophic injury are supported regardless of the manner in which they are injured or where they are injured, and indeed of this 1,000 people a year, 60% of them are men under 30 who have long life expectancies despite their injury and are in many cases the most deplorable of circumstances.
We look forward to working with the states to improving the deal which these people, who have impairment, get from Australian society on the basis that it could happen to any of us. This is a reform not just for those who are catastrophically injured, but in fact for every Australian to have peace of mind.
PM: Thank you very much and we're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Is this a commitment to implement all of the recommendations in this report?
PM: This is a commitment to start the work that is needed to make the system, as Jenny Macklin has just said, National Disability Insurance Scheme-ready. The Productivity Commission has made a range of very in-detailed recommendations and of course as a Government we will work through, we will review, we will analyse, we will respond to those recommendations over time, but we did want to get started, so today we are announcing how we're going to get started and that is by the work with our state colleagues, but also through getting the foundation stones right that are needed for any National Disability Insurance Scheme.
JOURNALIST: The Commission proposes or suggests that it would cost $6.5 billion a year in additional funding to create a NDIS. Can you see a Federal Government grant or do you support that amount of money coming from general revenue as the Commission suggests or recommends?
PM: We've got to get this in the right order and we've got to do it a piece at a time. Certainly what the Productivity Commission has said is that there are things that need to be worked on now for any later introduction of a National Disability Insurance Scheme. They are things like a common assessment tool so that we can have a common understanding of what disability is for an individual. We don't even have that at the moment so there's no ability to get really good information about what is happening for people in comparable circumstances and to make that transparent, and obviously I am a big believer in transparency and understanding and unveiling the facts.
So, we need to do that kind of work and we need to respond in detail to the recommendations of the Productivity Commission, but we did want to make a start through the announcements that I've made today.
Yes, we need to manage the money here. Our nation has to live within our means. We've got to make sure that any reform can last and endure and it can be funded not only in the immediate future but for the long, long, long, long term. That's why we'll take the time and do the work necessary to get this right and the Productivity Commission understood that this was no overnight journey. The Productivity Commission, on its own recommendations, is talking about a 7-year period, but you have to start with the work that we will fund through the $10 million that we are announcing today.
JOURNALIST: You said the scheme's going to take seven years. What's the point in having (inaudible) need help now?
PM: The Productivity Commission's recommendation and estimate is that it would take seven years.
Of course we're very concerned about the circumstances of people today, which is why we have continued to work to improve those circumstances. The $7.6 billion in the National Disability Agreement is a huge jump forward from the kind of resources that have been made available in the past. When we came to Government, in fact, in real terms, in real money, you were seeing the Federal resources through the Disability Agreement go backwards, so we've moved to increase resources, we've moved to increase resources in schools, we made a commitment in the election campaign to provide $200 million extra and we've done that.
We've also made a commitment in the election campaign which has been delivered to better fund early intervention services for children with disabilities because we know that if you can intervene early you can make a difference for someone's lifetime so work will continue across all of those ranges as we work through on the Productivity Commission report's recommendations and the report we need to start on now.
JOURNALIST: Seven years (inaudible) two Federal elections (inaudible), are you at all confident that you will gain bipartisan agreement for this both at the federal level and at state levels?
PM: I can't speak for other people so you'll need to ask them, but what I would say is our political party, the Labor Party, has a good track record of fighting long and hard for big reforms.
I used the analogy when I described insurance of Medicare. Well, Medicare was fought for over a very long period of time. Medibank introduced, Medibank taken away, then Medicare introduced by Labor again, so we understand what it's like to battle for big reforms over time. That's part of our heritage. As a Labor Party and who we are, we believe you've got to get the big things done, you've got to take the right amount of time to do them and you've got to get the money right and that's the perspective we'll bring to the this reform agenda.
As for the responses of other political parties, you will need to ask them.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect there'd be bipartisan commitment on such an issue-
PM: -You need to direct those questions to them. I think every member of Parliament is concerned about the circumstances of people with disabilities. Clearly we as Government, since we were elected in 2007, have been the ones that put the foot on the accelerator to deal with a change agenda. We've already done that through the measures I outlined before, so I think all members of Parliament are concerned, but it takes a will and it takes determination to get things done and we've been showing that as a Government during the days we've governed and we're showing it now with a commitment to a transformational reform agenda.
JOURNALIST: Will the Commonwealth proceed with the scheme if all states don't sign up?
PM: We're well away from being there. What I would hope is that our state colleagues would see the merits of doing better for people with disabilities. Our state colleagues have signed up to a National Disability Agreement with a lot more money in it from the Federal Government but also with a reform agenda embedded in it so they knew that we were looking for reform in disability services.
JOURNALIST: Do you unequivocally endorse a National Disability Insurance Scheme for Australia?
PM: I certainly want to see a Disability Insurance Scheme, a National Disability Insurance Scheme. I share the vision of a National Disability Insurance Scheme as the right way forward for our country.
We've got to get it right, we've got to get every detail right and that will take some time and we've got to get the money right and that will take some time and some decision making. So of course we're going to take the in detailed recommendations of the Productivity Commission, work through them, hold them up to the light, look at them from every angle, make the right decisions as we work through, but we didn't want to not start on the foundation reforms necessary and we didn't want to do that without involving our state colleagues given they are primarily the service providers for people with disabilities.
JOURNALIST: It has broader implications too for the skills shortages, maybe freeing carers from full-time caring responsibilities to take on paid work. Do you see, I mean we talk about the $6.5 billion being the economic cost, but do you see there being some economic benefit in a NDIS?PM: I think that's a very perceptive question, and often people come to the Government decisions and they've got two baskets in their mind: they say there's economic policy and there's social policy there. What I think that doesn't recognise is that so much of what we think of as social policy really is an economic policy too.
I've talked in recent days about ageing, about keeping people healthier for longer, active for longer, productive for longer, in their own homes for longer - that's got an economic benefit for our nation.
We've talked of course about education reforms. Education is profoundly about giving people an opportunity in life, but of course it's an economic reform agenda, too. The wealth of our country in the future is largely being determined today by what's happening in Australian schools and the skills and capacities of those young Australians when they become the workers of tomorrow.
If we look at health, health too is a productivity participation agenda. If we can get people the services they need, if we can keep them healthy, if we can keep them productive, it's wonderful for them, it's great for the economy and it is true about disability as well, that's why our focus is on what people can do not what they can't do. Our focus is on giving them the keys that they need to be full participants in the life of our nation, including in work, and of course if we can do better in services, that does make a difference for carers who now are out of the workforce entirely, where if we could do services differently many of them may be able to combine some work with caring or indeed return to full-time work. So we're not going to -  everybody's in a different position, every circumstance is different, and embedded in these reforms, actually central to these reforms is giving people with disabilities and their families more choice and control than they've had before over their individual circumstances.
JOURNALIST: Just a question for Bill Shorten if I could, you were key in getting this scheme off the ground. Is this the sort of scheme that you envisaged?
SHORTEN: Well let's be clear: people with disabilities and their carers have been calling out for this for 30 years. It's taken a Labor Government to get this debate on the agenda. It's taken Minister Macklin and the Prime Minister to have the discussions which have led to today's announcement.
I think it's fair to say that we're building the foundations. We share the vision of the Productivity Commission. We want to make sure that the States are participants in whatever is worked out. We want to make sure that whatever is worked out is sustainable. The worst thing you could do for people with disabilities and carers is come up with ideas which aren't sustainable.
But having said that it's been the Labor Government, the Gillard Government, that's recognised that the status quo is irretrievably broken and that the future has to be very different to the past and it's going to take a lot of work from people with disabilities and their carers to continue to get the best scheme possible. We believe that there's a lot of interesting ideas in the Productivity Commission about governance, about engagement, about giving people with disabilities employment opportunities and there's a range of other measures beyond the PC report which the Government's initiated and will continue to do, right down to the issue of legal rights and the ratification of the United Nations protocols and conventions of rights of people with disability.
Disability is a daily journey. Very hard to say that one particular day is a particular turning point, but I do believe that when you look in the rear vision mirror about where people with disability and carers have come from and where they're going, that this is a milestone.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, you're Assistant Treasurer. Is $6.5 billion a year, which is the Productivity Commission's estimate of the extra costs for the scheme, good value for money? Is what it provides enough reassurance for people with disabilities and how can we afford it?
SHORTEN: I'd like to echo the Prime Minister's wisdom in terms of the debate about the costs.
The Productivity Commission has spelled out a range of options and range of ideas. What the Government's announcing today is the first step as spelled out by the Productivity Commission. You've got to walk before you run. You've got to fire up the boilers of the old steam train before it can leave the station.
In terms of all of the costs and all of the issues going forward, I think it would be premature and probably unhelpful for people with disabilities to start putting a final number and saying x is the number. What I do know, though, is that the Productivity Commission report looks as the fiscal costs but it also looks in one of its chapters at the economic benefits. It cannot be in the interests of a small country of 23 million people, which Australia is, to have literally hundreds of thousands of people with disability and their carers locked away out of sight doing it hard from birth to death and everywhere in between.
The Productivity Commission clearly, and I would encourage people to read their chapters carefully on this, clearly draws the conclusion that the economic benefits of giving proper citizenship to people with disabilities and their carers will deliver dividends into the future which are well worth weighing up in the equation of final fiscal costs.
JOURNALIST: What will it mean for the disability support pension at the moment, for those receiving that?
SHORTEN: Minister Macklin's in charge of the disability support pension.
MACKLIN: As I indicated before we have put in place a number of reforms already to the disability support pension - first and foremost, giving a very significant increase to make sure that people have a more reasonable standard of living. We're introducing new impairment tables that will start on 1 January that do go to the whole question of what people can do rather than what they can't do, and I think the overarching issue is really as Minister Shorten has just set out that's in the Productivity Commission report, the economic benefit that comes from seeing more people with disability and their carers getting the chance to work because the service system is more efficient.
JOURNALIST: Will the system be means tested?
MACKLIN: Well, certainly the recommendations of the report are that it wouldn't be.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you support the Productivity Commission's recommendation that the Commonwealth fund 100 per cent, because it does give some other options (inaudible)
PM: And let's be clear here: the Productivity Commission has done some great work, very in-detail recommendations and we will review and analyse them and we will respond to those recommendations.
What we're saying here today is we do share the vision of having a National Disability Insurance Scheme. Now, in terms of putting together that big, big reform a lot of work has to be done, has to be done by us, it has to be done by state governments, it has to be done working with people with disabilities, which is why we formed the advisory committee and made some announcements about who will be on that committee today, but we know that there's also work that needs to be done that you can't even really envisage how this can all happen without this foundation work happening, the foundation work to get the whole system ready and that's what we are funding today, that's the reform agenda we embedded in the national disability agreement.
So, things like, you know, the common assessment tool  -  yes, it's not glamorous and it's going to take a lot of technical work and lot of people with expertise, but unless you've got that then you can't really talk about a National Disability Insurance Scheme being part of the nation's future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) I mean one of the, what lessons do you take from the health reform experience given that it did seem to trip up on these precise funding questions, so won't the states be keenly interested up front on that funding question?
PM: Look, I don't agree with that analysis at all. I mean we took our reform tools to health reform. They're comparable to the reform tools we took to education to make a difference and they're a big focus on transparency, a big focus on quality, a big focus on enabling people to have the information they need to make the choices they want to. So in health, a big focus on efficient price. and of course these reforms too look at transparency, quality and choice and control and efficiency in pricing, all of those reform tools are here too.
So, if you like, I think the experience of health reform and the fact that we got there as a nation for a very big reform agenda should give us confidence for other reform agendas that are big including this one.
We've delivered big changes in education people didn't think were possible like the transparency and accountability of My School. People said no you'll never get that done  -  we've got that done together with other profound education reforms.
I was told that there's no way in the world that we'll be able to negotiate a national health reform agreement, particularly with the political composition of a number of states and territories now. Well, we've got a national health reform agreement that will drive major change in the system, that people will experience as less waiting time in emergency department and less waiting time on elective surgery lists. We'll bring that reform drive to this, and also having got some of those big reforms, confidence that we can work with the states to do this too.
JOURNALIST: Do you see a trial of the NDIS starting as early as 2014 as the Productivity recommends, or is that up to Mr Harmer?
PM: Well certainly the Productivity Commission recommends a number of launch sites is the terminology they use so that we can get experience of such a big change in the system. We're going to need to work through in detail on these recommendations in the way that I've described.
JOURNALIST: Just on another matter if I could, in the past hour or so a Senate hearing in Canberra has heard allegations from a Liberal Senator in regards to the cattle exports and in regards to that footage we all saw on Four Corners. The suggestions been made that an Indonesian taxi driver has paid, or paid an abattoir worker to falsify the footage, to make the footage happen in the abattoir. Have you heard anything about this and do you think that has anything, these allegations have anything to do with your decision to suspend?
PM: I think you're going to be very unsurprised to hear me say that I heard the very briefest summary of these media reports before I came to present this Productivity Commission report, so I haven't had the opportunity to study the comments made by the Senator and I've clearly had no opportunity to assess the merits of what's been said, so I can't make any further comment.
JOURNALIST: Should the allegations be investigated though?
PM: Look, I would prefer to have a good look at what's been said and to make some considered remarks. The only opportunity I've had today is to be informed that this story was breaking into the media cycle, so I'm not going to make detailed comments on that basis.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) in terms of the footage that's been released from Turkey, what are your thoughts on that (inaudible)
PM: We've got the Farmer review led by Bill Farmer working on live animal export issues across all nations that we send live animals to, so this material obviously will be looked at, will be studied, but we understood at the time that we responded to circumstances in Indonesia that we did have to look at the animal export trade more broadly, and that's why we put Bill Farmer's review in place.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried about (inaudible)
PM: Well we have Mr Farmer there doing the work I think needs to be done.
JOURNALIST: With the trade resuming today, are you confident that the action you've taken over the last couple of months has actually made a real difference?
PM: Look I'm very confident that what we've done is imposed a new set of conditions, and it hasn't been easy, but imposed a new set of conditions that will ensure there's accountability and transparency across the supply chain so we will know what standards are being adhered to and the standards that should be adhered to are now described, so people are only given export licenses by the Australian Government if they're in a position that they can meet those standards and can meet those requirements for tracking and tracing which enables to see that those standards are being adhered to for every animal that leaves Australia's shores to go to Indonesia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Premier of the state, Ted Baillieu, finally came out today and made a comment about the carbon tax saying that he believes these are uncertain economic times is not the time to be introducing a carbon tax. Do you have a response to that and are you concerned that the global economic circumstances may actually have an impact on your plans?
PM: Well I think Premier Baillieu got it right the first few times he spoke about this matter, where he was an advocate for putting a price on carbon. I think he got it right then, so he might want to adhere to his original view and the view that he spoke to the Victorian people about when he was leader of the opposition. So, he has on the record very clearly in favour of putting a price on carbon.
On the global economic circumstances, can I say this: I'm not commenting in detail on share market movements but I do understand the kind of share market movements we've seen affect Australians, it affects many, many Australians directly particularly self-funded retirees, but when we see the sort of share market movements that we saw yesterday, down then up, big changes, big volatility, I think what that reinforces in us is that there is that volatility we're seeing on the stock market, but the fundamentals of our economy are strong.
So, we're seeing that volatility but that is not a commentary on the fundamentals of our economy. The fundamentals of our economy are that Australia is the envy of the world. We came out of the global financial crisis as the envy of the world. We've got low unemployment, people have got the benefit of jobs, we've got low debt, strong public finances and of course we've got a huge pipeline of investment flowing and what that means is more projects, more jobs, more economic growth for this country.
Now I think Australians are rightly proud of what we've achieved together with the strength of our economy and I think Australians can be confident that together we can build on that strength and build on our nation's abundant endowment of economic resources and wealth.
JOURNALIST: Is that volatility going to have any impact on (inaudible) to return the budget to surplus in 2012-13?
PM: Well, Treasurer Wayne Swan has been dealing with this question, of course we are working to return the budget to surplus in 2012-13 and it is our expectation we will return the budget in 2012-13. The circumstances we've seen in Europe and in the US of course mean that there's an impact from those circumstances on global growth and that makes the challenge more difficult, but we are working to return the budget to surplus and we expect to do so.
JOURNALIST: Warren Truss said yesterday that the Government was never going to return the budget to surplus and you were looking for an excuse and this is the excuse. What would you say to that?
PM: It never ceases to amaze me the reckless indifference of Opposition spokespeople to the truth about what is happening in the global economy. We've seen incredibly reckless remarks made by both Warren Truss and Joe Hockey on circumstances in the global economy. They really shouldn't be talking Australia down. Our economic fundamentals are strong. They know that we've got low unemployment. They know that we've got low debt. They know that we've got strong economic growth and a pipeline of investments flowing through to our nation and they should simply tell Australians that they are the facts, rather than trying to make comments all about the politics, like the one you refer to. 



PM: It's a great pleasure to be here in Albany today. I'm here with Tony Crook, the local member who invited me to visit his electorate. I started this morning in Esperance and had the opportunity there to meet with the local council and other local representatives and to tour the port as well as to look at the foreshore and discuss the potential redevelopment there.
I'm here today at this wonderful facility  -  ACTIV - which works with people with disabilities focusing on what they can do and keeping them actively involved in work.
I'll go from here to working with and spending some time with the Albany Alliance, which is focused on Gallipoli and focused on the 100-year commemorations, and of course the special connection of Albany with Gallipoli as ships set sail from here to take soldiers to Gallipoli, so it's great to be here today.
I did want to come to this facility because it's got such a great reputation. Yesterday with Minister Macklin and Minister Shorten I released the Productivity Commission report into disability, and what that report has found is that the current system for working with people with disabilities is underfunded and it's fragmented. It's not giving people the support that they need.
In particular, much of the support people gets depends really on a lottery, on the circumstances in which they acquired their disability. I think this is an issue of interest to all Australians, because whatever our family circumstances it's possible for us or a family member to have an accident, to have an illness which leaves them with a disability, or it's possible for a child to be born into our family circle or circle of friends with a disability. I believe our nation wants to do the right thing to make sure that anyone with a disability isn't robbed of the chance of a decent life.
That means that we do need reform. We do need to work towards a National Disability Insurance Scheme. This is a huge reform. In the same way that Medicare was a huge reform for our health system, this is a huge reform for to contemplate. We've made a down payment in getting the work done that would make us ready for this kind of reform, but it's great to be here today and to see what is being achieved when we focus on what people can do.
I grew up in South Australia. I grew up the daughter of a psychiatric nurse who worked in a major psychiatric facility, in Glenside Psychiatric Hospital, and it was routine in those days, in the days that I was growing up, for people with intellectual disabilities to live in a facility like Glenside Psychiatric Hospital for all of their lives - to not live in the community, to not be viewed as people who could work or make a contribution, but to live in that kind of institution.
Attitudes have changed. Now, we focus on the things that people can do, but we've got to keep changing, we've got to keep reforming to make sure that for everyone with a disability we are enabling them to get the services they need so that they've got the best possible supports in their life. So, it's been a great pleasure to be here today to meet with the very hard working staff, thank you very much for showing me around and thank you very much to everyone who stopped to say hello during the course of this visit.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Can we ask about Manus Island?
PM: Sure.
JOURNALIST: Do you believe that that's going to become a reality now? Are you concerned with the High Court injunction on Christmas Island that none of this can happen? What are your thoughts?
PM: As has been known for a very considerable period of time now, we've been pursuing discussions with the Government of Papua New Guinea on having a centre at Manus Island. Good progress is being made.
Of course, during this period of time PNG had to confront a major change for its nation. Sir Michael, a giant of politics in PNG, announced his resignation from being Prime Minister due to ill health. We now have a new Prime Minister, Prime Minister O'Neill, and we are working through with the Government of PNG.
So, this is something we've talked about for a considerable period of time. There was a number of weeks in which it wasn't appropriate for us to pursue discussions because PNG rightly had to focus on its own circumstances and the loss of Sir Michael as Prime Minister. Now we're in a situation where good progress is being made.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned, though, about a High Court challenge effecting this as well, or is it a matter of waiting to see if the next few weeks-
PM: -As Minister Bowen has made clear, our legal case before the High Court, we believe, is sound.
JOURNALIST: Just on the latest job figures, an increase in unemployment - is this evidence that the economy is finally slowing down?
PM: I think when we look at these unemployment figures, so the rate for July has come out today and it's at 5.1 per cent, of course by the standards of the world this is a very low unemployment number. When we look to America it is almost double this rate. When we look around countries in Europe we see nations that are struggling with unemployment rates in 20 per cent ranges.
So, 5.1 per cent is further proof that our economy is strong, that we have low unemployment, we've got low debt, we've got sound public finances, we've got a strong banking system and we've got a huge pipeline of investment flowing into this country.
So yes, when we look at these results, a slight move up to 5.1 per cent, we do see some reduction in full-time jobs, but that comes against a very big increase the month before. What it means all up is we've seen 188,000 jobs created over the past 12 months. That brings the total of jobs created since we came to Government to 750,000.
JOURNALIST: Are you confident that you can reach surplus by 2012-13?
PM: As I've made clear and as the Treasurer has made clear, we are working to achieve surplus in 2012-13 and we expect to achieve surplus in 2012-13. Yes, the instability we've seen in markets in the United States and in part of Europe and the implications that has for global growth does make it more difficult, the circumstances are challenging but we expect to reach surplus in 2012-13.
And I know Australians have watched what's happened on stock markets here and around the world, but it is true to say Australia's economy is the envy of the world - we've got strong prospects for growth, a huge pipeline of investment, low unemployment and low debt. That puts us in a good position to keep building on our fundamental economic strengths. We should all take a lot of pride as a nation in the economy we've built together.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: In relation to the share market, is the Government making any plans in its budget to pay for people who'll be forced to go on a pension?
PM: Well, of course the pension is a demand-driven system, so if people become eligible for the pension then it will be paid to them. I know a lot of people who are in retirement and are self-funded retirees or who may be at an age that they are contemplating retirement have watched stock market movements with a great deal of concern. I'd certainly echo the advice that is coming from advocacy groups for self-funded retirees and from financial planners that people should get advice about their own situation rather than hurriedly react to market movements.
JOURNALIST: So, does the Government understand the anxiety of the retirees at this moment?
PM: I can understand when people watch markets and they see them go down and then of course we saw, over a day, we saw the market go down, the market go up. I'm not going to engage in running commentary on markets, but of course I do understand the concern for people who are reliant today for their income on the proceeds of their share investments or people who are contemplating retirement and looking to live on that income stream either in whole or in part. I do understand that anxiety, but I would say to people please get full professional advice before people make any decisions about their investments.
JOURNALIST: The carbon tax here in Western Australia  -  there's a lot of opposition to it. You talked about wearing out the shoe leather. Is that something you're going to be doing here and how are you going to convince Western Australians about the carbon tax?
PM: We'll continue to be out there explaining to everyone what putting a price on carbon means for our nation and means for our economy.
Put at its most simple, it means that we'll realise a clean energy future. We're here in Albany today getting bathed in beautiful sunshine outside and that's just one way of reminding ourselves that we live in a country with fantastic clean energy potentials. With the sun, with the wind, with tide, with geothermal, I want us to get those clean energy jobs of the future.
In order to do that, we need to put a price on carbon. The price will be paid by around 500 of our biggest polluters. The money used will be going to cut taxes, increase pensions and increase family payments, as well as ensuring we can fund a clean energy future through new investments and protecting Australian jobs.
JOURNALIST: In a mining state like Western Australia, though, we had the miners come out against the Mineral Resources Tax. Are you worried about a campaign gearing up against the carbon tax?
PM: People will have their own views and people will make their views clear.
I'm determined to do this because it's the right thing for our nation's future.
There is actually a national objective held by both sides of politics to cut carbon pollution by 5 per cent by 2020. So, if we're going to do that, the question becomes when should we start and how should we do it? Well, if we're going to cut pollution by 5 per cent by 2020 I think let's start soon, 1 July next year, and let's do it in the cheapest way possible, that's the way that economists have advised us to go, that's putting a price on carbon pollution.
JOURNALIST: Just one more on reaching the surplus by 2012-13. Tony Abbott's come out and said that reaching that would be dream. Is it a dream?
PM: We will work to reach the surplus and we expect to reach the surplus. As the Government has put its budgets together, including the last budget, we've shown a great deal of discipline in identifying savings - identifying savings so that we can fund the things that we believe are most important to Australians.
So, by identifying savings and working hard on the budget, we have already engaged on a lot of fiscal consolidation, as the economists would call it, fiscal consolidation working on the Government's budget, and we will continue to work on it to achieve surplus in 2012-13 and we expect to achieve that surplus.
JOURNALIST: Just going back to Manus Island, will unaccompanied minors be sent there?
PM: Well, we've made clear we're going to take this a step at a time. We've been in a circumstance where we haven't been able to have real discussions with the Papua New Guinea Government because they've rightly been focused on their internal work and on a new Prime Minister being selected. Now we're making good progress and when we get to a stage that we can announce details for people, then we will.
JOURNALIST: Just getting back local, you're about to witness the last landfall seen by the first ANZACs. What are you feelings on that?
PM: I'm really looking forward to seeing it myself and of course meeting with the people who are so passionate about making sure that this special site plays a big role in our nation's 100-year commemoration of Gallipoli. The Government's already made some resources available so that the plan that is being contemplated can be worked up to a greater level of detail, so I'm pleased that we've been able to make those initial resources available and I did want to come and see it for myself and talk to people directly. 
Thank you 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Member for Brand Gary Gray today officially opened new facilities worth more than $2.5 million at Perth's Bertram Primary School, funded through the Commonwealth Government's Building the Education Revolution.
The five-classroom early childhood block and enclosed covered assembly area were funded under the Primary Schools for the 21st Century and National School Pride elements of BER.
These are essential facilities for a fast growing suburban school whose enrolments have more than doubled since it opened in 2007.
The classrooms are providing new learning environments for children from pre-primary to Year 3, as well as a much needed work room for teachers.
Enclosing the existing undercover area is allowing the school to use the space for a broader variety of activities.
Bertram Primary received $2.5 million under the Primary Schools for the 21st Century (P21) element of BER for the new classrooms and enclosing the undercover area, plus $150,000 under the National School Pride (NSP) program for refurbishments including painting and paving.
BER is a key element of the Government's $42 billion Nation Building  -  Economic Stimulus Plan to support jobs, stimulate local economies and invest in important infrastructure for the long term.
The $1.28 billion NSP program is providingfunding to more than 9,400 eligible schools in every state and territory for minor infrastructure and refurbishment.
The $14.1 billion P21 has delivered funding to over 7,900 eligible primary schools across Australia for major new infrastructure.
In Western Australia, 97 per cent of BER projects worth a total of more than $1.8 billion are now complete. The program has funded almost 3,000 projects across the state.
Facilities like these at Bertram not only benefit the school  -  they support stronger social networks and community cohesion.
This project has also supported the employment of local workers, the essence of the Economic Stimulus Plan.
Further information about this project and all schools funded under the BER is available at www.buildingtheeducationrevolution.gov.auor at: www.economicstimulusplan.gov.au. 



I welcome the comments made today by the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea confirming agreement to establish an assessment centre in Papua New Guinea.
The Australian Government thanks Prime Minister O'Neill and his newly formed Cabinet for giving prompt consideration to the proposal for an assessment centre on Manus Island and providing its approval for the proposal to proceed. 
This announcement follows ongoing discussions between the Australian and Papua New Guinea Governments.
Arrangements are being made for a high-level delegation of Australian officials to travel to Papua New Guinea in the very near future to finalise a Memorandum of Understanding regarding the centre. 
We are committed to working in partnership with Papua New Guinea to examine how such a centre might operate, including how it might best complement broader regional activities. Our officials will now work together to examine those options.
Like this government, the Government of Papua New Guinea is acutely aware of the need for cooperative approaches to addressing irregular migration while also providing opportunities for asylum seekers to have their claims for protection considered in safety and dignity. 
The Bali Process Ministerial Conference earlier this year demonstrated our region's resolve to better work together on the issues of people smuggling, human trafficking and irregular migration.
The Government is committed to the development of a lasting regional response to irregular migration. We will continue to work with our international partners to examine further opportunities to enhance the region's response to refugees and asylum seekers. 
Through this arrangement, Australia and Papua New Guinea can make a valuable contribution to regional efforts to counter people smuggling and address irregular migration more broadly. 



PM: I'm here at Erindale Leisure Centre and I'm very pleased to be joined by the local member Gai Brodtmann and by the Minister for Ageing Mark Butler. We've had the opportunity today to talk to some older Australians who are here exercising using the benefits of the leisure programs here. It's giving us a vision of healthy ageing, of what it means to be growing older but still striving to keep your health, to keep your mobility and to be able to stay in your own home as long as possible.
Yesterday we released the Productivity Commission report into caring for our older Australians. And last week I made the point that our nation now has two generations of retirees, our older retirees and the baby boomers moving into retirement. With these twin generations in retirement, people will be looking for more choice as they age. The baby boomers are very likely to change our conception of what it means to be old and of ageing.
We want to make sure that as Australians age they have security. That no one is left behind. We also want to make sure that people enjoy more choice and control over their lives as they age than they have in the past.
That means that we need to make sure we've got a sustainable financing model for ageing and the Productivity Commission report released yesterday makes important recommendations about financing and about ageing generally.
We said yesterday that we would pursue the recommendations in the productivity commission report in a national conversation about ageing. Mark Butler will be leading that national conversation. It's been good to come here today and to meet with people who are living it, who are showing what it is to think about your health, think about ageing, think about your lifestyle and consequently be able to age independently and to enjoy that sense of personal security as you age.
So I'll turn now to Mark Butler for some comments and we'll be happy to take questions.
MINISTER BUTLER: Thank you Prime Minister. The Prime Minster and I said yesterday that allowing and supporting older Australians to live independently in their own home for as long as possible will be central to our approach to ageing generally and to aged care in particular. And staying physically healthy is central to that capacity for older Australians. 
In a facility like this you will see retired Australians undertaking weight training, resistance training, which not too many years ago was an utterly foreign concept to people in their retirement. You'll see older Australians doing aqua-aerobics, doing swimming and things like that to make sure that they can stay as physically fit as possible in their older years but also they can keep the physical strength and the balance to avoid things like falls which can often create the sort of injuries that lead people into residential aged care. 
This Government, with its focus on preventative health, the establishment of the Australian National Preventative Health Agency, has been working in this area now for some time. In 2008 we concluded a record agreement with the states on preventative health which included health promotion for older Australians as a central focus with money going to groups like local governments, the Heart Foundation, to conduct in addition to activities you see in this facility, walking groups and things like that, for older Australians.
Now, not only is this incredibly important in terms of maintaining physical health, but it's also incredibly important in terms of opportunity to maintain social connections, to build new friendships and to stay connected to your community on a daily or weekly basis. So, this will be the sort of thing that we want to see more of, opportunities for older Australians who stay at their home to be able to come out to a facility like this, stay physically healthy for as long as possible and to maintain the sorts of social relationships that they enjoy through working.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: During the election campaign you spoke a lot in response, I think, to public concern about the need for a sustainable Australia, not a big Australia. However, as you are now confronting this issue of an ageing population and how we're going to pay for all the older people as they leave the workforce, aren't the  -  don't we actually need a big Australia to be able to sustain our economy?
PM: Thank you for that question, but we actually have to be a bit careful about how these issues are connected. As has been made clear through population discussions in the past, of course migration programs do change, you're dependency ratio immediately in terms of numbers of tax payers and numbers of older Australians, but they don't over time  -  migration doesn't over time change your need to deal with ageing because those migrants too will age. So, we have to as a society confront the challenge of ageing. It is upon us as we see these twin generations of retirees.
As for our appropriate migration settings, what I've made clear is I do believe in a sustainable Australia, I do believe we need skilled migrants but it's a question of getting people to the places they are needed and when we look across our nation, I've talked at length about our patchwork economy, about different demands in different places, some places crying out for more workers, hungry for growth. Other places, obviously working through as some industries and sectors are under strain due to our sustained high Australian dollar and other economic conditions. So we've worked hard to get our migration program right so it meets regional demands and enterprise demands where growth and skills are needed and I believe that's the right setting.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you, with trouble on financial markets, do you believe the world's seeing another Lehman Brothers moment at the present time and do you think that the budget  -  your surplus promise is under threat?
PM: Clearly Australians are continuing to see the impacts of some global insecurity and people are seeing that in the stock market. I'm certainly not going to engage in running commentary on stock market questions and what I can say about all of this is of course we're not immune to global economic events, we're not immune and we're seeing that on the stock market over recent days.
But we should also get a degree of confidence from the strong fundamentals of our economy. We have low unemployment, we have low debt, we've got a strong pipeline of investment coming through and that will mean economic growth. We are located in the right place of the world where we are still seeing and will continue to see economic growth.
So, Australians should approach this period with a degree of confidence in the fundamentals of our economy.
JOURNALIST: Are we seeing another GFC?
PM: Well, what we're seeing is some instability arising from circumstances in the US around fiscal consolidation and how that has obviously worried markets and some continuing concerns about parts of Europe, that's what we're seeing.
I think it's very important to deal with the facts of it and to be explaining the facts of it rather than trying to put a label on it, which is what you're inviting me to do. We are seeing some insecurity factors out of the US and out of Europe but it's important to be very clear about our economy here, the fundamentals are strong  -  low unemployment, low debt, big pipeline of growth. We avoided recession during the last global financial crisis, we live in a country with a well regulated financial sector and of course unlike the kind of gridlock you've seen in the United States, we've been able to deliver fiscal consolidation through our Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you, as the IMF said you had the capacity to do, if you needed to would you be prepared to delay a return to surplus in the promised time if it came to that?
PM: As the Treasurer has made clear, events impacting on global growth make the challenge more difficult, but we are working to return the budget to surplus in 2012-13 as promised.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) has anyone from the Government spoken to the High Court to try and expedite this asylum seeker case before the 22 August?
PM: It would be completely improper for anybody from the Government to speak to the High Court. So, no, of course not.
JOURNALIST: The Immigration Minister yesterday said that the government was trying to see if the High Court can move the case forward?
PM: What the Immigration Minister says  -  let's be very clear about this  -  what the Immigration Minister said is that the Solicitor-General would go through the appropriate proceedings to seek a more urgent hearing by the Court. Certainly no one in government is communicating directly with the Court.
JOURNALIST: Has there been any progress on that (inaudible)?
PM: Look, the Minister for Immigration's been dealing with this matter this morning and obviously it's a work in progress and he's been explaining to people exactly what's happening with that. So, I'd refer you to his more detailed statements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Penny Wong has announced she and her partner are having a child (inaudible)?
PM: Well, Penny Wong is a colleague of mine, she's also a very long-term friend. So I'm very pleased for Penny and her partner Sophie as they look forward to a new baby and the next phase of their lives which will be as parents raising a new child.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, under what circumstances will it take for the return to surplus pledge to be negotiable?
PM: Well, what you do is you deal with the facts and you deal with the economic circumstances and that is what the Government is doing, the economic circumstances in this country are that we've got low unemployment, we are looking forward to growth, we've got a strong pipeline of investment, we've got strong public finances, that's the economic circumstances in Australia and we are continuing to manage those economic circumstances.
JOURNALIST: So would the Government consider under any circumstances a return to stimulus or would you only use the existing monetary policy levers?
PM: I don't think dealing with hypotheticals helps here, what helps is to deal competently with the economic circumstances that face our nation and we are dealing with our economic circumstances  -  big pipeline of investment, economic growth, economic growth being particularly experienced in some parts of the country, a resources industry that's hungry for skills, hungry for people, hungry for infrastructure, low debt in the Government with rapid fiscal consolidation under way and delivered through the Parliament. These are our circumstances and we'll continue to manage those circumstances.
Of course our economy is not immune from global events but we've got to be very clear about the strong fundamentals of our economy.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) it's fair that Penny Wong's child will have parents that cannot get married?
PM: Clearly there are strong views about same-sex marriage in the community, there are strong views in the political party I lead and we'll have a debate at National Conference about those strongly held views, I've made my views clear.
JOURNALIST: Yes you have, but do you believe that the likely outcome here is a conscience vote?
PM: Well National Conference will deal with this debate as is appropriate; I've said all along that I want the Labor Party to be a party of ideas as well as a party of government. I think it's a good thing that Labor people come to Labor meetings, want to talk about ideas and we'll talk about them at National Conference in December.
JOURNALIST: Labor Party Conference doesn't decide whether it will be a conscience vote, you do, so you think (inaudible)?
PM: That's not technically true, so technically you've got the question wrong and in any event the National Conference will work its way through these issues. I've always said that I think it's important people can come along and have a debate, have a conversation and they will.
JOURNALIST: Your standing in the polls and indeed the Government's standing appears to have stalled today, has the carbon tax, the message, selling the message of the carbon tax stalled as well? Is this where you foresaw that you would be at this point?
PM: We've got a lot of hard work to do and we've got a lot of hard work to do getting the big things right that we need for our nation's future, and of course putting a price on carbon and seizing a clean energy future is one of the big things we need to get done and we're getting it done, and continuing to explain to the Australian people what it means for them, that it's a tax on our biggest polluters, that people will be assisted, that literally millions of Australian households will come out in front as a result of our carbon pricing plan.
Whilst we're getting that big thing done, of course we're continuing to do the other big things that our nation needs: health reform, delivering a budget with opportunity and participation at its centre, dealing with our economic circumstances in this nation, getting people the skills they need so that they can get the job that they want. And here we are today dealing with another big question for our nation's future, the question of ageing and of course in coming days I'll have things to say about other big questions including the Productivity Commission report on disability.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's some commentary today that the debt crisis in Europe and the United States could flow over and impact on China, and the fact the Chinese economy has demand for commodities including Australian economies. Do you concede that what we're seeing could have negative impacts for the Chinese economy? And secondly are you saying that the return to surplus 2012-13, that's non-negotiable, that's definitive regardless of what's happening?
PM: What I'm saying is that they economic circumstance of our country, which is the one we should understand and make sure people do understand, is one where we're looking to strong growth through a big pipeline of investment, low unemployment, we've got strong government finances, we've been able to deliver fiscal consolidation which will bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13, the budget we announced in May has the budget coming to surplus in 2012-13 as promised.
At the same time, of course, we are seeing instability in the US and in Europe and we're not immune from that, global growth is not immune from that, we understand that. We're also a government with a good track record of managing our economy in circumstances of global instability.
So we are dealing with the economic circumstances but I'm not going to be drawn on hypotheticals because I think they've got the capacity to mislead people about what is happening in our nation today. What is happening in our nation today is we stand here in a nation with low unemployment, low public debt, a well governed financial sector, a government that's been able to deliver its budget without the kind of gridlock we've seen in the United States, a strong pipeline of investment and of course we came out of the global financial crisis without having gone into recession. Our economic fundamentals are strong.
So as we continue to analyse the impact of instability in Europe and the US on the global economy, we come to that analysis knowing our economic fundamentals are strong.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Therese Rein has resumed her personal business presence in Australia, circumstances previously were well understood, are you happy that Kevin Rudd would be able to avoid any conflict of interest issues in the light of this?
PM: Certainly, certainly he will be able to and what Kevin's done in the past for example when we were in Opposition to take one example, is he would excuse himself from discussions that had any impacts for employment services in this country and he'll do the same obviously in view of Therese's re-entry into the Australian market.
JOURNALIST: Are you shocked by the images coming out of London, Prime Minister?
PM: I like many other Australians have been very, very disturbed to see the images coming out of London, there's no excuse for the kind of violence we're seeing on our TV screens. So, they are disturbing images and obviously we'd wish our UK friends well and that the situation be brought under control as soon as possible.
We'll take the last two questions and then we'll go. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Just on the school chaplaincy program, is the Government facing a potential second blow in as many days in the High Court?
PM: Look, I'll have to refer that to the Minister for Education for an answer, school education. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what should Australians in the UK be doing?
PM: Well, look, obviously just taking advice from local authorities about what's the best thing to do in the circumstances.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister this is a question on the High Court and the injunction, do you think people smugglers are going to try to exploit this, take advantage of it and try and send more people out here before that August 22 deadline and will it damage the High Court? Does this decision damage the High Court in any decision to determine this illegal, would that damage the High Court?
PM: I think the High Court's independent of government and the High Court's got to do what it does, which is be our highest court and highest part of our judicial system. The Minister for Immigration has made clear the Government's perspective about the interim injunction that's been granted by the High Court, he's also made clear that we will, through the Solicitor-General, be seeking to bring an application to expedite the hearing.
Thanks very much. 



PM: I'm very pleased to be here with my ministerial colleagues Minister Brendan O'Connor and Minister Gary Gray. Gary Gray is here in his capacity as representing this part of the world in Western Australia, and we're here today to celebrate signing a major new contract with Austal. This is a contract to build new patrol boats for our waters. We already have more assets patrolling our borders than ever before, but we do want increase the capability and reach of the vessels that patrol our borders, and so as a Government we are investing $350 million in a new class of patrol boat, the Cape Class.
This will be 8 new patrol boats joining the efforts to patrol our borders, and of course when we have these border patrols they're about a series of potential challenges: they're about the importation of illegal substances like drugs; they're about combating people smuggling; it's also about potential environmental threats; and of course about illegal fishing.
I'm very pleased that we were able to make this investment and make it right here in the skills and capacities of this workforce. This investment will support 500 direct jobs and indirectly will support around 1,000 more. It will of course go to support further training efforts - more apprentices, more skills coming on stream. I've had the opportunity to talk to people who work here, people who started their apprenticeship and are still here building the vessels that we can see behind us.
I'm very pleased that Austal will now more into generating the Cape Classpatrol boats. This new fleet will be fully available and in the water by September 2015. Construction is going to start in 2012 and we will progressively see these vessels come onto active use and come into our fleet.
I'll turn to Minister O'Connor for some comments on the key capability differences of this new class of patrol boat.
MINISTER O'CONNOR: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.
Well, the Prime Minister's already outlined the threats that our border protection must deal with each and every day. The Cape Classvessel of course is an enhanced-capable vessel. It will advance its capability compared with the Bay Classvessel and there's no doubt as a result of the new design these vessels will be able to sail longer - they'll be able to sail 4,000 nautical miles compared to 2,700 nautical miles. That allows them to have up to 28 sailing days. They'll also be approximately 18 crew on each vessel compared with 10 crew now, which again allows them to deal with certain challenges in a more effective manner, and indeed these vessels are much larger, which provides not only better amenities for crew but of course also the capability of carrying other passengers, particularly either dealing with people smugglers but most likely responding to safety-of-life-at-sea situations.
So, there is no doubt as a result of the contract being won by this Australian-owned company Austal we will see from early 2013 new vessels working with Customs and Border Protection to protect our waters, to protect not only our mainland coastline but to protect the coastline of our external territories. This is indeed a magnificent project, not only jobs for Western Australia but it means that Customs and Border Protection, who do a fine job now, will even be able to do a better job once these vessels hit the water.
PM: And before we take questions can I just say a big thank you to everyone who's made us so welcome here today, to Andrew and Tim and Courtney and Russell thank you very much.
So, we're very happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you seemed to get a pretty positive reception last night at the People's Forum. Do you think that's an indication that people are starting to accept your carbon tax message, or the message is getting through?
PM: I certainly enjoyed the People's Forum last night. I thought there were some great questions and it was a good discussion.
I'll continue being around the country, talking to people about the need to put a price on carbon, how it will enable us to realise a clean energy future as we support Australian jobs, cut taxes and increase the pension. So, I was pleased to have that discussion last night and I'll continue having them right around the nation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you seem to be changing, or your Government seems to be changing, the language about returning the budget to surplus in 2012-13. Can you guarantee the budget will actually return to surplus in that time?
PM: Clearly we've seen some instability in global markets and some stresses and strains coming out of the US and also out of Europe, and we believe that will have an impact on global growth and we're not immune from that. It makes the challenge of bringing the budget back to surplus in 2012-13 more difficult, but it is certainly our objective to return the budget to surplus in 2012-13 and we expect to achieve that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) rock-solid guarantee, though, previously (inaudible) can you still maintain that rock-solid guarantee?
PM: I think you are possibly confusing me with Tony Abbott giving an iron-clad, rock-solid guarantee about the medical safety net at one election and then immediately breaking that promise afterwards.
Of course, we've consistently said that our economy's needs in 2012-13 will be to have the budget in surplus. So, we had the days of the global financial crisis and it was the right thing to do during those days to put stimulus into the economy and to support Australian jobs, and we came out of the global financial crisis stronger than any other developed country. We didn't go into recession, and the fact that today we have solid growth prospects, low unemployment, good Government finances, all of these economic fundamental strengths are in part because we came out of the global financial crisis so strong.
As we came out of the global financial crisis we said the right thing was to have fiscal discipline, fiscal rules that would return us to surplus in 2012-13. We are determined to keep pursuing a budget surplus in 2012-13 and we expect to achieve that surplus.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on asylum seekers, how concerned are you that we're not going to have a rush of boats (inaudible)?
PM: As the Minister for Immigration has made clear and I'm perfectly happy to make clear, we have entered an arrangement with Malaysia. We believe in the proceedings before the High Court we've got a very solid legal case, so anyone who is contemplating paying a lot of money to a people smuggler and risking their life at sea should thing again because the risk that they are running is that they will promptly be taken to Malaysia.
JOURNALIST: In regards to the asylum seekers that might be sent to Manus Island, will they then be sent to, if their refugee status is approved, will they be sent to Australia?
PM: We'll deal with all of the details of this arrangement following further discussions with PNG. What we've said for a fair period of time now is that we wanted to have an assessment centre in PNG. We were in active discussions with the Government of PNG, and then of course Sir Michael, the then Prime Minister and a very pivotal figure in the life of the nation of PNG, became more unwell, causing, of course, the PNG Parliament and the PNG people to focus on their own circumstances and issues.
Now, of course, a new government has emerged and Prime Minister O'Neill has made it very clear that he is very positive towards the proposal and wants to work with Australia on it, so we'll take it to the next step and we will look to conclude arrangements with PNG and obviously when we have we'll make full details of those arrangements available.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
PM: We'll deal with all of that a step at a time. What we've got now is a new Prime Minister in PNG. He has said very publicly that he's very positive about entering into an arrangement with Australia for a centre, so we'll get about entering that arrangement.
JOURNALIST: Will the Cape Class vessels be better able to respond to tragedies such what happened at Christmas Island?
PM: I'll get the Minister to comment on that.
MINISTER O'CONNOR: Can I say in relation to the awful tragedy that occurred on 15 December, the vessels in question that went to the assistance of that vessel in distress that foundered on the rocks were in fact larger vessels, they were not Bay Class vessels. ACV Triton and one of the Armidales went to the assistance, so it's not a situation that would most likely engage a Cape Class vessel. Cape Class vessels are replacing Bay Class vessels and the Bay Class vessel type was not in the position to go to the rescue of those people. As I say, they were larger vessels in question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you concerned about the scathing report from Comcare into the conditions inside immigration detention centres?
PM: This Comcare report was received a number of months ago and the Department of Immigration has already acted to respond to its recommendations. Of course, working in a detention centre environment is challenging - it's always been a challenging job across the long history of mandatory detention in this country.
Comcare has made a series of recommendations and the Department of Immigration is responding to them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott's (inaudible) this morning that he's given the opportunity to rescind a carbon tax that things like the pension increases, the tax rebate (inaudible) and the family payments, those sorts of things will go with it. What's your response?
PM: In the last federal election campaign the Opposition got itself into an $11 billion black hole. Its promises just simply didn't add up.
Now, from leaked internal documents from the Opposition, it's clear that they're in a $70 billion black hole. To give people a sense of the size and scale of that, $70 billion is the same as not paying out any Medicare money for four years - no Medicare money for anyone for four years. Or it's the same as not paying the age pension or any other payment to senior Australians for two years.
$70 billion is a lot of money, and when you've got a black hole that big, that huge, when you have to see the size and scale of that black hole, you know, what is the Opposition proposing to do? Not pay pensioners for two years? Not pay anybody a dollar in Medicare for four years? That's the size of the black hole they're talking about, so I think they've got some questions to answer about how on earth they got themselves into this position and how on earth they're going to get themselves out of it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Joe Hockey says the Coalition will find the savings it needs by looking at Government waste. Do you accept that?
PM: How ridiculous - $70 billion. Not just aged pensions - every amount of money we pay to senior Australians, for two years. Every dollar we pay out in Medicare for four years. $70 billion is a huge amount of money.
We're here today talking about building new vessels, important new vessels for patrolling our borders. It's big investment. It's $350 million. I ask you to imagine $70 billion in comparison.
I mean, you can only find that kind of money in the Government's budget if you say ‘we'll smash education right across the board, we'll smash into aged pensioners right across the board, we'll smash into Medicare right across the board'. That's the kind of thing you have to do to find $70 billion.
Any other suggestion is simply laughable.
JOURNALIST: Do you find it significant that this leak came from the Shadow Cabinet in the first place?
PM: That's really a question for the Opposition to answer. Maybe it indicates that there's someone in the Opposition who is very concerned that they've got themselves into such an irresponsible position.
JOURNALIST: On the Manus Island solution, will the Australian Government be the only country to fund it, or could you see there's scope for other international agencies?
PM: We've always said that this was a bilateral discussion between us and PNG, so of course we'd make the appropriate provision to fund it - and we did. In the budget that we brought down in May made the appropriate provision to fund it. We'll now get about talking to PNG about all of the details.
JOURNALIST: Why has the Government sidelined the UNHCR in terms of the running of Manus Island?
PM: It's not a question of that. UNHCR makes its decisions about what it chooses to be involved in. It has been involved in the discussions leading to the arrangement with Malaysia and it will be involved in the implementation of that arrangement. We've never had the slightest expectation that UNHCR would be involved in the discussions with PNG.
JOURNALIST: What are you hoping to achieve in the US leadership dialogues over the weekend?
PM: That's an important event right here in Perth. This is a big year for international events in Perth. Of course we've got the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting later this year. This weekend we've got the Australian American Leadership Dialogue. This is a dialogue of longstanding between Australians, parliamentarians, business people, people from education, people from public policy think tanks, people from business and research institutes with counterparts in the United States. It always helps us draw closer as nations to have that kind of dialogue, so I'm looking forward to participating in it tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Will you be having a sit down, one-on-one, with the head of the World Bank?
PM: I'll be meeting with a range of participants at the leadership dialogue, so right across the board I'll be seeing people, and yes, there are some attendees of some very considerable status there.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the surplus by 2012-13, is that a core promise from you (inaudible).
PM: We've just got to show a bit of common sense about all of this, and the common sense is of course we've seen events over recent weeks that will have an impact on global growth. We're not immune from that, but at the same time we stand in a country with great economic fundamentals, and here in Western Australia, more than any other part of the nation, you know about growth: you know about the growth coming from the resources sector; you know about the huge pipeline of investment, more than $400 billion. We've got low unemployment, we've got strong public finances, our economy is the envy of the world.
What we do is we update economic forecasts at budget time and also at the time that we publish the Mid Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, and we'll do that again, but our continued objective is to come to surplus in 2012-13 and I expect to do so.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Let's just show some common sense about this. Of course, we update our economic forecasts. We're not immune from what's happening in the globe. We've seen events in recent weeks. Obviously we take those into account, our experts at Treasury do in terms of our economic forecasts, and our economic forecasts will next be updated in the Mid Year Outlook. Standing here I can certainly say to you it's our expectation that the budget will return to surplus in 2012-13.
JOURNALIST: There is a picture in a number of papers this morning of an 18-year-old asylum seeker (inaudible) think how could you send somebody like that to Malaysia, what would have to say to those people?
PM: Well I'd just repeat the words the Minister and I have said consistently about this arrangement - there are no blanket exemptions. There is a pre-assessment procedure but there are no blanket exemptions, and no-one who is contemplating giving their money to a people smuggler, getting on a boat, risking their life, potentially risking their child's life, no-one should do that assuming that there's an exemption in place for them or their child. There are no blanket exemptions.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today welcomed the participation of students from Perth high schools in a combined choir that will perform during the Opening Ceremony of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2011. 
The full 100-piece student choir will be drawn from Public, Catholic and Independent high schools throughout metropolitan Perth.   
Some of the students met for their very first rehearsal today at Perth Modern School in Subiaco, where they tested their vocal chords in front of the Prime Minister.  
The Opening Ceremony for CHOGM 2011 is an integral part of the meeting and will be held in the Riverside Theatre at the Perth Convention and Exhibition Centre on Friday 28 October 2011.
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, as Head of the Commonwealth, will officially open the 2011 Meeting during the Opening Ceremony.
The Prime Minister joined Terry Crane, Head of the CHOGM 2011 Taskforce, Lois Joll, Perth Modern School Principal, and representatives from Western Australia's education sector in thanking the students for taking part in the Opening Ceremony.
The Opening Ceremony is a unique opportunity to showcase Western Australian talent, youth and also celebrate music as a shared activity in Commonwealth countries. 
As a committed and active member of the Commonwealth, Australia takes enormous pride in being the first nation to host CHOGM three times.
On a recent visit to Australia, the Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma advised Prime Minister Gillard that that not only was this CHOGM the best prepared, it was also the most anticipated.
CHOGM 2011 will be the largest gathering of world leaders in Australia, with as many as 3,000 delegates and 1,000 media representatives expected to attend.
For more information visit www.chogm2011.org.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Defence Stephen Smith today announced that the Royal Australian Navy's newest ship, the ex United Kingdom Royal Fleet Auxiliary ship Largs Bay will be commissioned as HMAS Choules.
This name is in honour of Mr Claude Choules, the last known veteran to have served on active service in the First World War.
Mr Choules served in both the Royal Navy during the First World War and the Royal Australian Navy in the Second World War.  He represented the last living link with those who had served in the First World War.
Mr Choules passed away in Perth, Western Australia, on 5 May this year at the age of 110.
The Prime Minister said that the naming of HMAS Choules recognised the service of a loyal and dedicated man in two different Navies over 40 years. 
Mr Choules and his generation made a tremendous sacrifice for our freedom that we will never forget.
Minister Smith said that Mr Choules was very proud of his Navy service and was a well-regarded Western Australian.
HMAS Choules is scheduled to arrive in Australia in December to be commissioned into the Royal Australian Navy.
As with Mr Choules, HMAS Choules will serve Australia having completed service in the fleet of the Royal Navy.
The purchase of HMAS Choules from the United Kingdom was announced on 6 April this year.
HMAS Choules is a Landing Ship Dock commissioned into service in 2006. 
It became surplus to United Kingdom requirements as a result of the UK Government's 2010 Defence Strategic Review.
The ship weighs 16,000 tonnes, it is 176 metres long and 26 metres wide.  Its flight deck has room for two large helicopters and can also carry around 150 light trucks and 350 troops. 
HMAS Choules is a proven capability having provided humanitarian relief as part of the international response to the Haiti earthquake in 2010.
The ship was been acquired for £65 million (approximately $100 million). 
Sea trials conducted in April confirmed the materiel state of the ship and that the acquisition was value-for-money. 
The HMAS Choules is expected to be operational in early 2012.
Photographs and footage are available at: http://video.defence.gov.au/#searchterm,0,largs,All



PM: It's a great pleasure to be here today. I'm joined by the Minister for Defence Stephen Smith, I'm also joined by Jason Clare our Minister who assists Stephen Smith and joined by our Chief of Navy Ray Griggs and we are all very pleased to be here with members of the Choules family for a very special occasion. And it's the Choules family in a mighty number around us so thank you very much for coming along today.
We're here today to make an announcement and that announcement is that the newest vessel to join our Navy will be named in honour of Claude Choules and that is why the family is gathered here today.
Claude Choules sounds like an amazing man from his family's stories and we know from Australia's history that he led a truly remarkable life.
Claude served in World War I and World War II. He was born in the United Kingdom and first served with British Navy and then migrated to Australia and served with our Navy. He lived to a remarkable age, he passed away in Perth in May this year at the age of 110.
He was our last known link to the people who served in World War II. He was consequently very special to the Australian community as well as to his family, to all of his family who are gathered here today.
I'd like to particularly acknowledge his two daughters with us today, Anne and Daphne. They are representing many generations of the Choules family, through grandsons and granddaughters to great grandsons and granddaughters and beyond, we have many generations of the family gathered with us today.
We believed it was appropriate to honour the memory of Claude Choules, to honour him as an individual but also to honour what he represents to the Australian nation. A person who showed sacrifice, a person who showed courage, a person who has become an emblem of those Australians who went and fought for us in World War I and in World War II. Our nation is going to move to a commemoration of the centenary of Gallipoli in a few short years. That will be a time of very deep reflection about what it means to be Australian, about what it means to endure, what it means to show courage in the face of battle. We are doing that here today too by honouring Claude Choules. The vessel that will be named in his honour is of course a vessel from the United Kingdom, just like Claude himself, made in the UK but coming to serve here in our own Navy. It is a vessel that has been known in the UK service as the Largs Bay. When it comes to Australia it will be known as the HMAS Claude Choules. I'm very pleased to be here today with so many of his family to recognise the great man and to ensure that he is recognised for all time through the naming of this vessel.
I'll ask the Minister for Defence now to make a few comments.
MINISTER SMITH: Prime Minister, thank you very much. This is a great day for Navy, it's a great day for the Choules family. It's also a very significant day for HMAS Stirling and a day which the community of Western Australia and Australia I think will respond with warmth at the naming of the Largs Bay as HMAS Choules.
I had the great honour of representing the Government at Claude Choules' funeral in May of this year. Claude, as is well known, lived to 110 years of age, as the Prime Minister has said, started his service in the Royal Navy and completed his service in the Royal Australian Navy. That day was a tremendous celebration of a great life and the warmth with which he was held, the respect and regard with which he was held was very much on display on that day and the great pride that his family had in him as a person, as a father, as a grandfather, as a great grandfather and also the great pride they had in his service to two navies. So this is a celebration, it's a terrific day for the family and when I met Anne and Daphne and Adrian, Claude's son, I wasn't expecting to be introduced to an extended family of hundreds. Some of whom, a small number of whom, are on display today. But over the years this base, HMAS Stirling, has come to be very close to the family, supporting Claude, being close to Claude, and the Prime Minister and the Chief of Navy and Minister for Defence Materiel and the family and I have just come from having looking at a portion of the Claude which will hang in the mess here and part of the mess will be officially named the Claude Choules Room, so there's a lot of warmth at the HMAS Stirling for Claude and the family.
So we're very pleased to make the announcement today, I'm also pleased to indicate that on our current plan, HMAS Choules will arrive in Australia in December. It'll arrive in Fremantle and in Fremantle we will formally commission the ship into the Australian Navy and that will be another cause for tremendous celebration. This is a significant year for Navy, it's Navy's centenary, its one hundredth year of Navy and there are a number of reasons linked to the centenary which make it appropriate for the Largs Bay to be named the HMAS Choules and I call on Ray Griggs the Chief of Navy to make some remarks in the that respect. Thank you.
CHIEF OF NAVY: Thank you Minister, and Prime Minister thank you for coming down to Stirling today to make this announcement. It is truly a great Navy day, the naming of this ship is a very, very important part of the fabric of the Navy. The ship, its name, the story around the name and the symbolism of that story is critical to the identity of a ship. It's critical to the men and women who serve in that ship, it binds them together and gives them a great sense of purpose, so it's important that when we do name a ship that the name is significant and I think you've already heard from both the Prime Minister and the Minister that naming the ship after Claude Choules, is certainly significant. It's significant, his last links back to World War I, it's significant that he spent 40 years of his life devoted to two navies, serving two navies and two nations and it's very significant to me in our centenary year that Claude represents, the name not only represent his story but the story of tens of thousands of other sailors whom make this Navy what is, what it has been and what it will be in the future. What we do is largely unseen. This morning there are about 1000 sailors in the RAN at sea, doing their business out of sight and sometimes out of mind, but they're there, they're doing it every day and they will find this naming today incredibly powerful, that it recognises not only the exceptional man that Claude was but the exceptional people that have made up this Navy over the last 100 years and that make up the Navy today.
About two weeks ago with Minister Clare, I was very privileged to be on board the future HMAS Choules in the UK. It is a fantastic ship, it is extremely well designed and it will do what it needs to do for us in terms of humanitarian assistance and disaster relief exceptionally well. It will help evacuate Australian nationals should they get into trouble in trouble spots around the region. It is exceptionally well designed for that purpose. I'm very, very eagerly awaiting its arrival in Fremantle in December and very much look forward to formally welcoming HMAS Choules to the Royal Australian Navy.
PM: Thank you very much and thank you once again to the family, to Daphne and Anne and everyone who is gathered here today. We had the opportunity before to have a few brief reflections on what is it to have lived such a long life and some of Claude's secrets  -  cod liver oil, molasses, wheat germ, a few things like that. But it's a great honour to be with you today for announcing the name of the HMAS Choules. We're very happy to take questions on this announcement and following that we'll move to broader questions of the day.
JOURNALIST: When is the boat, or ship coming to Australia?
PM: I think with all of these Naval Officers around you, you'd better say ship or you'll get into all sorts of trouble. It will be arriving in December.
JOURNALIST: Is it going to be based here?
PM: I'll turn to our experts to tell you all about its duty.
MINISTER SMITH: It'll arrive in Australia in December, it'll arrive in Fremantle, our proposal is to formally commission the ship in Fremantle. The formal commissioning of the ship essentially sees the ship's company boarding the vessel. Whilst there is certainly a capacity to port the ship at HMAS Stirling, our current plan is to port the ship at Fleet Base East in Sydney but given its primary task is heavy amphibious lift for disaster relief, humanitarian assistance, we're expecting in the fullness of time it'll see time in a range of ports across the length and breadth of the country.
JOURNALIST: That will be its main use?
MINISTER SMITH: It's providing a heavy amphibious lift capability for us until the arrival in the middle of the century of our two large landing helicopter docks from Spain. A heavy amphibious lift vessel gives you the capacity to move supplies for disaster relief and humanitarian assistance, but also to move troops and equipment as required. For example we have stabilisation missions in the Solomon Islands and in East Timor, when those missions were established you need heavy amphibious lift and also heavy airlift to move the equipment and personnel concerned. We are expecting that the HMASChoules will be ready and available for disaster relief purposes at the commencement of the cyclone season early next year.
PM: Any other questions on today's announcement? No? Are there other questions on issues of the day?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We are determined to smash the people smuggler's business model through our arrangement with Malaysia, of course that arrangement is now the subject of High Court proceedings and we believe we have a legally sound case. So we will work through before the High Court so that we can implement our arrangement with Malaysia but I would send this message very loud and clear to people smugglers and to asylum seekers who are contemplating paying a lot of money and risking their own life and potentially the lives of members of their family, and that message is no one should get on a boat and assume that they will have their claim processed in Australia. We will be looking to remove people to Malaysia and of course we are concluding discussions with PNG about the opening of a centre there, so no one should make the assumption that if they come by boat that their claim will be processed here and that they will be able to remain in Australia.
JOURNALIST: The Government's latest statement on this latest arrival says that they're being assessed before being removed to another country, why doesn't it say the country  -  is it Malaysia?
PM: We used the terminology ‘third country' in the past, obviously our aim is the return people to Malaysia, we cannot do that until the High Court proceedings are concluded. We believe we have a legally sound case and once those proceedings conclude then people should assume that they are liable for transfer to Malaysia. We've been very clear indeed, our aim is the smash the people smuggler's business model so we have a concluded arrangement with Malaysia and we are working through for a concluded arrangement with PNG.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We've made it consistently clear there are no blanket exemptions. There will be pre assessments, pre transfer assessments but there are no blanket exemptions. So no one of any age or gender or family circumstance should make the assumption that if they get on a boat they'll have their claims processed in Australia.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) the Comcare report, about the ability of Serco to train staff, does the Government have any concerns (inaudible)?
PM: I think we have to be clear about the separate arrangements here, we've since early May have been speaking about our desire to conclude an arrangement with PNG. Of course there was a lot of change in the politics and the life of that nation as a result of Sir Michael's illness and now a new Prime Minister has emerged and we are speaking to the new Prime Minster who has indicated that he is very receptive to having a centre in PNG. On the Serco issue and the Comcare report that was made public, became public a couple of days ago, this is a report from a few months ago and the Department of Immigration has said it is already responding to the recommendations in that report. Working in a detention centre is a challenging environment and obviously Comcare has pointed to some things that need to be done differently and the department is already responding to that.
JOURNALIST: Are you going to try and bring forward the High Court hearing?
PM: There is a directions hearing on Monday, so that's the next proceeding in the High Court.
JOURNALIST: Since the Malaysian deal was signed or announced at least, there have been 260 arrivals. Does that mean the solution has already failed?
PM: We are yet to fully implement the Malaysia arrangement because of the High Court proceedings but obviously we need to argue the legal case in the High Court, we believe we've got a strong legal case, beyond the court proceedings we want to implement the Malaysia arrangements which means people will be taken to Malaysia, they'll take their place alongside 90,000 other asylum seekers in Malaysia, that is where people should be assuming they will end up.
JOURNALIST:  Will the Manus Island plan make a difference and (inaudible) be up and running?
PM: We expect it to be up in running in a number of weeks, we need to conclude an arrangement with PNG, but as the PNG Prime Minster has made very clear he is very supportive of us entering such an arrangement.
JOURNALIST: But will it make a difference?
PM: Our whole aim here is to smash the people smugglers business model, to end any expectation that asylum seekers have that if they come to Australia they will have claims processed here and be able to stay, that is at the heart of the arrangement we've come to with Malaysia.
We also said under the Bali framework that we would look for other bilateral discussions, we entered into them with PNG and now they are working their way to conclusion.
JOURNALIST: The Federal Government has an energy star rating on homes, are you concerned that some people say (inaudible) may affect their retail value (inaudible)?
PM: I think it's very important to have some facts on the table here. The story you refer to is a reference to a consultation paper under a Council of Australian Governments process that is through the Ministerial Council on Energy where the Federal Minister and the relevant state ministers come and sit round a table. They've issued a consultation paper, nothing more. If people have got views then of course they can respond to the consultation paper, that's what it's for and absolutely no decisions have been taken by the Federal Government on that matter.
JOURNALIST: Can I get your reaction to the Cairns Liberal Nationals candidate Paul Freebody calling you evil and hoping you'll end up like JFK? (Inaudible).
PM: Well you would need to ask him that. What I think needs to happen here is that the LNP needs to investigate this matter and determine for itself whether they believe this man is a suitable candidate and representative of their political party.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'll leave that to the LNP to make that decision as to whether he is a suitable candidate for their political party.
JOURNALIST: He says his email has been doctored but he actually mean to that you should get the same treatment as Kevin Rudd. Either way do the comments -
PM: I'm not going be drawn on the details of this, this is a matter for LNP. They're putting him forward to people as a candidate that people should consider voting for and sending to the state parliament in Queensland. If the LNP is presenting him as a candidate for election as a parliamentarian then it's for the LNP to be satisfied that he is a suitable person.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) lack of respect?
PM: Once again it's the LNP that are presenting him as someone people should vote for, it's a question for the LNP to see if he's a suitable candidate to enter an electoral race bearing their party mantle.
JOURNALIST: Earlier this morning Tony Abbott (inaudible) saying that basically the Government is anti-West Australian because of the mining tax and carbon tax. What do you say about that?
PM: Here we go again, that's what I say about that. Here we go again -  Mr Abbott and his relentless negativity, here he is plying it again in Western Australia. But I think the major problem for Mr Abbott here is he will say different things to different audiences, he's here in Western Australia today at a party conference, last time he went to a party conference he told Peter Reith that he'd vote for him as party president then voted for Alan Stockdale. He's here in Western Australia saying that he's the best friend of the mining industry at the same time he's telling farmers in NSW and Queensland that he's on their side. He says on the one had that mining is all an issue for state government, that's what he says to Colin Barnett, at the same time he's talking about regulating mining and taking it out of state government hands and making it a matter for him. So typical conduct where different things are said to different people. What I believe Mr Abbott should be focusing on at this point is his $70 billion black hole and telling Australians is he going to, if he's ever elected as Prime Minster, do what? End Medicare payments for four years, people would have pay to go to the doctor, there would be no more Medicare money? Stop aged pensioners getting paid the aged pension for two years? What would they do for two years without the aged pension? They're the kind of measures you'd need to enact to save $70 billion.
JOURNALIST: On the coal seam gas comments, should farmers have the right to deny miners access to their land?
PM: This is a question on your mind today because Tony Abbott has made some comments. On the one hand he says to miners I'm absolutely in lock step with you, anything you want, then he makes these comments obviously sending a message to farmers. I think it's for Mr Abbott to explain how this all possibly adds up.
JOURNALIST: Do you and your Government appreciate how important WA is to the national economy?
PM: We certainly do and let's go through it, I'm very happy to. As Prime Minister because I understand the contribution of WA to the national economy and its legitimate concerns about GST revenue, I've put in place a review of the distribution of GST responding to those concerns. I also understand here in Western Australia, the resources industry is growing, it's growing rapidly, it's hungry for skills, it's hungry for infrastructure, it's hungry for people. That's why in the recent budget we enacted a $3 billion skills package, one that will work in direct partnership with industry including the resources industry.
It's why we are determined to keep building infrastructure in Western Australia, it's why we've tailored our migration settings so major projects in Western Australia through enterprise migration agreements can get the people that they need.
It's why as we've designed the Minerals Resource Rent Tax that we've listened to the voices of miners in Western Australia to get all of the details right. It's why we want to give other businesses in Western Australia the benefits a lower company tax rate, why we want to help small businesses with special tax breaks, why we want to make sure people in Western Australia get a better superannuation deal. Why we want to make sure WA gets infrastructure from proceeds of that tax and of course on all of these issues that are on the minds of Western Australia we've worked to deliver, for a long period of time there wasn't delivery of a health reform agreement here, now there is, with literally extra hundreds of millions of dollars, indeed billions of dollars flowing into the hospitals of Western Australia. So it's one thing to do the relentless negativity, it's another thing to actually act to get things done that matter to the people of Western Australia as they go to work, as they take a family member to the local hospital, as they think about the their retirement income and their future, as they use the infrastructure that this state needs.
Thank you very much. 



A West Australian ship builder has been selected to construct and support the next generation of Customs and Border Protection patrol boats.
The Australian-owned company Austalhas been awarded the $350 million contract to build and support eight new Customs and Border Protection Cape Class patrol boats.
The new Cape Class boats will replace the ageing fleet of Bay Class vessels. The new vessels will be equipped with greater surveillance technology and will be able to travel longer distances between refuelling. The next generation vessels will allow the simultaneous launch of two response tenders that are bigger, faster and have greater capacity to carry out rescues.
The Cape Class patrol boats will help protect Australia's borders from prohibited imports and exports, irregular maritime arrivals, compromises to biosecurity, illegal exploitation of natural resources, piracy, maritime terrorism, marine pollution and illegal activity in protected areas including Ashmore Reef and the Great Barrier Reef.
It is estimated that this contract will support about 500 jobs at Austal and the jobs of 1,000 other local workers at various stages of the contract.
We know that Australia is currently experiencing a patchwork economy and the ship building industry is one sector that is facing challenges right now.
This $350 million contract provides an opportunity for continued employment in Western Australia and the stability of the local shipping industry.
The vessels will be named after eight Capes across Australia: Cape St George (ACT); Cape Byron (NSW); Cape Nelson (Victoria); Cape Sorell (Tasmania); Cape Jervis (SA); Cape Leveque (WA); Cape Wessel (NT); and Cape York (Queensland).
It is anticipated that the first Cape Class patrol boat will be operational by early 2013 and the full fleet is expected to be operational by September 2015.  



I thank Diane Kerr for the Welcome to Country, and honour the traditional owners of this land, to whom Clyde Holding was such a true and faithful friend.
Former Governors-General Sir Zelman Cowen and Dr Peter Hollingworth.
My distinguished predecessors, Bob Hawke and Paul Keating.
The Honourable Ted Baillieu, Premier of Victoria and your eminent predecessors John Cain, Steve Bracks and John Brumby.
Ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, state and federal, past and present.
Distinguished guests.
And above, members of Clyde's family.
We gather today to express equal measures of sorrow and celebration.
We are sad that a loved and familiar figure is no longer among us.
Yet celebrating that he lived such a long, vivid and productive life at the heart of our nation's affairs.
Clyde Holding was part of an extraordinary generation of Victorians, born in the years before World War Two, who so greatly and distinctively enriched our country:
I think of figures like Zelman Cowen and Barry Jones, John Button, Frank Crean, Jim Cairns and Peter Karmel.
Great Australians, many from modest homes, who flourished through the transformative power of education and who saw the primary purpose of their lives as being dedicated to public service and the common good.
Clyde Holding was just such a man.
He grew up in ordinary circumstances, the son of migrant parents.
He won scholarships for school and university places.
And like so many of us, he sought expression of his impulse for community service in the Labor Party and the law, leading, in due course, to elected public office.
Clyde Holding was made for politics.
From first to last, from 1962 to 1998, he was  -  above all else  -  a proud and effective local Member.
But someone as pugnacious as Clyde Holding could not remain on the backbench for long, and he did not.
Instead Clyde found himself leading the Victorian Opposition in some of Labor's darkest days.
The days following the turmoil of the split.
The days when our community confronted the issues of public morality surrounding the death penalty.
Dark days, but also purposeful days, because they were the years of soul-searching that restored Labor to relevance.
Clyde Holding paid a price for being part of that modernisation.
But the years of success under John Cain, Joan Kirner, Steve Bracks and John Brumby are unthinkable without the Holding decade.
In 1977, Clyde joined the federal Labor caucus as it began the long journey back to office.
And when Labor achieved that goal in 1983, he did a remarkable thing:
He sought the portfolio of Aboriginal Affairs  -  a true measure of his commitment.
In typically blunt and unromantic terms, Clyde likened his new job to being a tail gunner on a bomber during World War Two.
And indeed it proved to be a harrowing ride.
There were great victories along the way:
The appointment of Charlie Perkins, who was to become one of Clyde's dearest friends.
Commencing the long and difficult process of repatriating Indigenous remains from museums.
Protecting much of Kakadu for the people as a national park.
Completing the hand-over of Wave Hill station begun by Gough Whitlam and Vincent Lingiari.
And securing the agreement to hand Uluru over to its traditional owners.
But on land rights, his greatest ambitions were dashed.
And yet disappointment in 1986 led quickly to triumphant vindication with the Mabo judgement and the Native Title Act a few short years later.
Indeed, Clyde had helped fund Eddie Mabo's case at crucial points, despite the Commonwealth actually being the defendant.
It was cheeky and courageous  -  and it put Clyde Holding where he will always be remembered: on the right side of history.
Clyde said of the Mabo judgement that it provided our nation with a matchless opportunity to:
“redress Australia's oldest and most continuous social wrong and to recognise the depth, nature and spiritual attachment of Aboriginal people to this land.”
And nothing could have given him greater pride than to be one of those 78 Members of the House of Representatives who inscribed the Native Title Act into law.
Our nation is truly capable of great things.
Friends, after holding the Aboriginal Affairs portfolio for a record term, Clyde held other portfolios, including the Arts, where he was a staunch supporter of a robust and generous cultural policy against the cost-cutting impulses of his Cabinet colleagues.
And Territories, where he gave self-government to a somewhat reluctant Australian Capital Territory that now treasures its local democracy.
From 1990 until 1998, Clyde served proudly as a backbencher.
He saw great dignity in the role of a local MP and once told John Howard of the contentment he found in that role.
I think that speaks so eloquently of this remarkable man and his career in public life.
It was a career with more than its share of setbacks and disappointments.
He didn't get to be the father of national land rights legislation that he ought to have been.
Or the great Premier of this State he might easily have been.
And yet through it all there persisted an unwavering spirit of integrity and duty, informed by a passion for social progress that bespoke a true Labor heart.
In the end, it was enough for Clyde Holding to be a faithful servant of his party and his nation.
To have done some good.
And to always believe that Australia was at its best when we took the counsel of our own better angels.
I think it was for these reasons that Bob Hawke described Clyde Holding as “pre-eminently a good, decent and remarkably brave man.”
And why his successor in Melbourne Ports, Michael Danby was able to say: “we have lost a true hero of equality and justice.”
We have lost such a hero.
We have lost such a man.
Clyde Holding's remarkable life of 80 years is at an end.
And he leaves us honoured and remembered.
Much-loved and very greatly missed. 



Can I acknowledge my Ministerial colleagues Nicola Roxon and Mark Butler ...  the Leader of the Opposition ... and all our federal parliamentary colleagues gathered here tonight.
Dr Steve Hambleton, AMA Federal President and Mr Francis Sullivan, AMA Secretary General
Dr Christine Bennett, who is so well known to all here and has been such a fine servant of the public good in health.
My old friend Dr Mukesh Haikerwal; Mukesh I was so pleased when I knew that we'd be seated together tonight.
And all AMA Councillors, members, supporters and friends
Welcome to Canberra and I thank the AMA for the opportunity to join you at this important time in the history of the Australian heath system.
Labor and the AMA haven't always agreed on policy  - that's no state secret.
But we have always agreed on the need to give the Australian people the quality health care they rely on the care that each of you work so hard to deliver each and every day.
In this land of the ‘fair go', the provision of universal health care lies at very core of our nation's social compact.
Our system of universal health care is fundamental to the security and dignity of every Australian.
And it must be strengthened and renewed as we face the ageing of the baby boomers and a rising tide of chronic illness and disease.
That is the whole aim and purpose of the 2011 federal-state health agreement.
It is a once in a generation reform that will set our nation's health system up for decades to come.
Reform that will buttress the principle of universality with the equally important principles of sustainability, transparency, high performance and value for money.
Let's take a moment to consider the scale of this agreement, because it is truly extraordinary: an extra $19.8 billion to the states in the first six years, rising to an extra $175 billion by 2030.
Be very clear:
This is $175 billion in extra funding that the Commonwealth was not obligated to provide.
Money that the States and Territories would otherwise have had to find themselves from their budgets or else money the system would have gone without.
Remember when we came to office in 2007, the Common-wealth's share of funding had slipped under 40 per cent.
With this Agreement, we will fund 50 per cent of the growth costs of our hospital system.
For the first time in Australia's history, half of every new dollar in our public hospital system will be paid by the Commonwealth, come what may.
In so doing, we have defused the time-bomb that has ticked away inside our state finances for years and made the Commonwealth an equal partner in growth.
Not only does the Agreement underwrite the fiscal sustainability of the States and Territories.
It will make a real difference to doctors caring for patients every day.
Less time worrying about where the next dollar will come from.
Instead more staff, more beds, more services.
Between 2014 and the end of the decade alone, our new funding will deliver:
 * 	2.9 million extra cases in our emergency departments
 * 	2 million additional in-patient services for major surgery or severe conditions
 * 	19 million more outpatient consultations, such as minor surgery or physiotherapy.
In other words, more opportunity for you and your colleagues to do what you were trained to do: Treat and support patients.
But, friends, in creating this Agreement, we knew that more money on its own was not going to be enough.
We need the system to be accountable in ways it has never been before.
That is why state and federal funds will go into a single, transparent National Health Funding Pool.
It sounds technical  -  but, in fact, it addresses one of the most fundamental concerns that doctors hold: the fear that extra money will be skimmed away by revenue-hungry State and Territory treasuries.
That will not happen because the National Health Funding Poolwill act like a transparent and arms length repository for public hospital funding.
The funds for public hospitals  -  jointly contributed by both levels of government  -  will go into one centralised locked pool, overseen by an independent Administrator.
They will be tracked transparently to the last cent.
The money trail will be there for all Australians to see.
In turn, funds will flow from the National Pool directly to each Local Hospital Network  -  no skimming, no leakage.
That leads to the second element of this package: The creation of localised health bodies that respond to the unique circumstances of their own communities.
We've moved away from the highly centralised health bureaucracies that for too long stifled innovation and flexibility in our system.
Clinicians will take the lead in planning and delivering health services locally, as they should and must.
Importantly, those local health authorities will not be given blocks of money as they have been for decades.
The days of the blank cheque are over.
Instead funding will be distributed according to an efficient price, backed by a new performance authority to monitor results.
Poor performance will have nowhere to hide.
It will be found out.
Finally, we've put in place achievable targets for emergency department and elective surgery access, based on medical expertise.
In other words, making our reforms real for every patient who needs a hospital for emergencies or elective surgery.
They may not know the details of our health agreement.
But they will see the concrete and tangible results that matter to them:
 * 	90 per cent of patients across all triage categories being seen within four hours.
 * 	And 100 per cent of patients waiting for elective surgery being treated within clinically recommended times.
Those targets have the blessing of an expert medical panel, and they have the resources and structures required to back them up.
Friends, the battle since April last year has not been about dollars.
It has been about reform.
Five key interlocking reforms that make sense only when taken together as a whole:
 * 	more funds driven by activity, efficient pricing, performance monitoring, achievable targets and localised control;
 * 	each addressing the weak points that had made our health system progressively more inefficient and unsustainable.
That is the true battle that has been fought by the Commonwealth  -  and won.
Instead of a paper fight over funding shares, we have secured fundamental reforms that reshape our health system to its very core:
 * 	We have secured the right to expect every health service to be delivered at an efficient price.
 * 	We have secured the right to track where every dollar, state and federal, goes via the National Health Funding Pool.
 * 	We have secured the right to expect that health system performance shall be reported publicly by an independent umpire, without fear or favour.
 * 	We have secured the creation of new Local Hospital Networks that break the old model of centralised control.
The significance of these measures cannot be over-stated.
They are the biggest changes to health policy in Australia since the introduction of Medicare.
In fact, they represent the saving of universal health care as we face three decades of unprecedented demographic pressure.
But, friends,
None of us in this room tonight imagine for a second that the health and longevity of our community can be solved entirely within the walls of our acute care system or without substantial parallel reforms to aged care and disability services, of which I spoke earlier this month.
Never has there been a greater need for prevention, early intervention and care based in the community.
That's why we've focused so hard on tackling smoking and alcohol abuse  -  and I'm grateful in that regard for the AMA's unwavering support.
We've also got a growing burden of chronic conditions like high blood pressure and diabetes, much of it manageable while patients continue to live at home.
In fact, it is a tragedy that so many Australians go to hospital when they do not need to.
It is a human and financial waste.
That's why under the National Health Reform, we want to shift the centre of gravity of the health system from hospitals to primary care.
General Practitioners will remain front-and-centre of primary care, backed by Medicare and the PBS, which remain the cornerstones of our health system.
To complement and support those cornerstones, Medicare Locals will take responsibility for the primary health care needs of each local community. 
Medicare Locals will work in partnership with GPs and other professionals to ensure each community has the right mix of services to meet its health needs.
For example, by working closely with Local Hospital Networks to make sure that primary health care services and hospitals work well together.
Helping ensure GPs are supported to provide after-hours services or visits to nursing homes.
Identifying where local communities are missing out on services and coordinating services to address those gaps.
And taking advantage of the new opportunities which high speed broadband will create  -  to extend health services into every corner of the community and into every home.
Friends, I know the AMA and the Government don't not have a complete meeting of minds on this issue at the moment.
It was the same in the early days of Medicare.
But through dialogue and lived experience, we can give Medicare Locals a chance to prove themselves.
Our hardworking doctors in the nation's 7000 GP practices might just find they have acquired a new and valuable friend.
Because colleagues,
We haven't just gone through months and years of painful reform to achieve some aesthetically-pleasing new bureaucratic structures.
We did it to change health care in this nation for the better.
To put an end to the arguments that have distracted and debased our health system for so long.
To stop doctors and their representatives worrying about funding and structures so they can give their attention to the thing that really counts: patient care.
Every Minister since Neal Blewett has tried to address these issues.
And every Premier and State Treasurer has prayed daily that someone would.
Well, that someone is us.
The process wasn't pretty.
It wasn't fast.
But it has delivered a result of which all Australians should feel proud.
I hope, in time, the AMA and its members may come to feel proud too.
As these reforms work, and as we work together, in good faith and good will, together we will ensure our great health system remains great for the years and decades to come.
The Australian people deserve nothing less. 



Australia's leading clean technology companies were showcased today at an event launched by Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Innovation Minister Senator Kim Carr.
The Clean Technology Showcase presented work from innovative Australian companies who are already at the cutting edge of new green technologies.
The Gillard Government is helping Australian businesses develop clean energy technologies as part of our Plan for a Clean Energy Future.
Through our Clean Technology Program we are providing $1.2 billion to help our manufacturers make investments into clean energy opportunities here in Australia.
A new $10 billion commercially oriented Clean Energy Finance Corporation will also be established to drive innovation through commercial investments in clean energy through loans, loan guarantees and equity investments.
This support is in addition to our record investment of $9.4 billion into science research and innovation this financial year.
Putting a price on pollution will also encourage companies to innovate and invest in new technologies to use energy more efficiently.
The Prime Minister said that investment in clean technologies was good for businesses, good for jobs, good for our environment and our economy.
Innovation here at home will also open up huge opportunities on the international market were we can become leaders of technologies of the future.
Minister Carr said the power and potential of clean technology was demonstrated by Carbon Revolution (CFusion Pty Ltd), an exhibitor at the Showcase.
This Australian company is commercialising the world's first one piece carbon fibre automotive wheel, which offer huge weight savings and therefore efficiency and performance benefits to the global automotive industry.
Carbon Revolution is now collaborating directly with the world's largest and most sophisticated vehicle manufacturers in Europe to bring this technology to the market in large volumes.
This is just one example of how embracing clean technology can open up huge global opportunities. Through Clean Energy Future and the innovation agenda, the Gillard Labor Government will help many more Australian firms transform and access these opportunities. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Veterans' Affairs Warren Snowdon today said the 45th anniversary of the Battle of Long Tan was an opportunity to reflect on the service of the men and women who served during the Vietnam War.
Some 60,000 Australians including ground troops, air force and navy personnel served in Vietnam for over a decade from 1962.
As a result of this war, 521 Australians died paying the ultimate sacrifice for their country.
Ceremonies held around Australia today will honour the service and sacrifice of these brave men and women.
Vietnam Veterans' Day is commemorated each year on the anniversary of the Battle of Long Tan, one of the most significant Australian actions of the Vietnam War.
On 18 August 1966, 18 service personnel were killed and 24 were wounded at Long Tan when Delta company of the 6th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, engaged a much larger force of North Vietnamese army regulars.
The Battle of Long Tan demonstrated the courage, determination and teamwork of our Australian soldiers in the face of overwhelming adversity.
A unit citation of gallantry was awarded by the Governor-General to the Delta Company 6RAR at a ceremony at Enoggera today.
The Vietnam War caused the greatest social and political unrest in Australia since the First World War and for many veterans, the treatment they received on their return to Australia left enduring scars.
For the 47,000 surviving veterans, time has not always healed the physical and psychological scars, which have often been shared by loving family members.
Today, we recognise and honour these fine Australians and their families.  



Their Excellencies Ms Quentin Bryce, Governor-Generalof the Commonwealth of Australia and Mr Michael Bryce.
Former Governor-General Michael Jeffrey.
His Excellency, Major General Martyn Dunne, High Commissioner for New Zealand.
Mr Jason Hyland, Representing the Ambassador of the United States.
The Hon. Warren Snowdon, Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister for Defence Science and Personnel.
Leader of the Opposition, Chief Minister and other parliamentary colleagues.
General David Hurley, Chief of the Australian Defence Force, your distinguished predecessor Sir Phillip Bennett and fellow Service representatives
Chaplain Geoff Webb.
And above all, to every Vietnam Veteran and your representatives who have come to this sacred place; we are honoured by your presence today.
Friends, the Australian historian Paul Ham wrote a few years ago that “the last act of war is to grieve.”
Grief  -  and its sister emotion, remembrance  -  are what is left when the guns are put away and the gaze of history turns to other stories and other events.
It's a long time since anyone fought in Vietnam or indeed protested against its waging.
The chief actors  -  John Kennedy, Robert McNamara, Ho Chi Minh, Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, Bob Menzies, William Westmoreland, General Giap  -  are all gone.
And the very Cold War which gave rise to the conflict is itself now just a page in the history books.
And yet here, on a very cold winter's morning, we gather.
In fact, we gather in growing strength and numbers.
We gather with a renewed sense of this day's value among the anniversaries our nation's calendar.
And why?
To perform that last and most noble act of war:
To grieve.
And to remember.
Repeating it often never diminishes the power of saying that in this nation, we do not glorify war.
If any nation had earned the right to do so, it would be us:
The nation of Villers-Bretonneux and Milne Bay, Kapyong and Long Tan.
The nation that brings forth men like those of D Company, 6 RAR  -  rightly honoured with a unit citation this day.
We honour  -  but we do not glorify.
We who have never served suspect it.
Those who have been there know it.
Michael Jeffrey said as much on this anniversary five years ago when he remarked that:
“War is a dirty, frightening and totally unpleasant business and never to be glorified as such.”
For that reason, our days of commemoration are solemn, not triumphant.
We wear rosemary, to prompt remembrance.
The Ode cautions against forgetting.
And our chief shrine is a tomb to a nameless soldier plucked from the mudof northern France.
We do not glorify war.
But we do remember.
Friends, we remember that eighteen of our personnel died at Long Tan;  521 in Vietnam as a whole.
We remember each of them, and judge that they made the ‘supreme sacrifice'  -  because that is what it is.
Parents and siblings, girlfriends and wives, children and mates  -  grieving then and grieving still.
Long lives and brilliant careers and happy retirements cut short and never known.
And so we remember.
This was Australia's longest war yet we treated the returning veterans with shame.
And so we remember.
Three thousand of our own fellow citizens were wounded in body and spirit.
And so we remember.
Sixty thousand served, many against their will and by the casting of lots.
And so we remember.
Her Excellency's predecessor, Paul Hasluck proclaimed our nation's involvement in Vietnam at an end on the 11th of January 1973.
And yet, for many of the 60,000 Australians who went there, the Vietnam War will never end.
As another wise Governor-General once reminded us:
“The past is never fully gone.It stays to shape what we are and what we do.”
We are a different nation because of Vietnam.
We are a different nation than if those men had stayed at home and workedand married and built their lives.
But we don't always get to choose.
History and circumstance sometimes choose for us.
What counts is our response.
Our response as reflected in the qualities and character of those who go  - 
What Michael Jeffrey in that same 2006 speech called the “courage, compassion and professional skill” of the Australian personnel who served in Vietnam.
And also the qualities and character of those of us who stay behind:
Our willingness to understand what it is for men to go to war.
To accept that some will return broken or changed, and some will not come back at all.
That is Vietnam.
That is war.
And so we gather.
And so we remember. 



PM: Thank you very much. I'm joined by Minister Carr and we're here at a Clean Energy Exhibition, at an exhibition of the kind of products that we as a nation are going to rely on in the future.
I've been speaking to the nation for many months now about a clean energy future, about putting a price on carbon, so that we drive innovation and jobs in the future. Today we've got companies with us, companies like Boeing and a number of others that are at the forefront the innovations we need for that clean energy future.
There's some remarkable technology on display, businesses that are able to show you that something that they used to throw out as a waste product, they're now using to generate energy. Businesses that can show you how to create pure drinking water, how do to desalination just using the power of the sun. Businesses that can show you the new lightweight products of the future, less embedded carbon pollution and on your motor vehicle, the lighter it is obviously the less energy it needs to power it.
There are some remarkable things on display here. Part of our clean energy future, part of innovation by Australians, part of our economic future as they go on to use these new products and ways of doing things to create new jobs and new economic opportunities.
I'll ask Minister Carr, who is very familiar with each of these products to make a few comments and then we've got time for a couple of questions.
MINISTER CARR: Well, just quickly, what we are seeing today is a real glimpse of what's possible in this country. Take Boeing  -  Boeing have given CSIRO a special (inaudible), that is a player of the year award from amongst their 17,500 suppliers from around the world.
And it highlights the point that our science and our research institutes are going to be on the frontline of the great transformation that's underway in his country, as we move towards a new economy, as we build new opportunities, new jobs, high skilled, high wage jobs, for Australians into the future.
And what we've seen today are the sorts of opportunities that are available so that we can ensure that the prosperity that this country has enjoyed will be maintained and that we can share the benefits of a new way of doing business through innovation.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) discuss the allegations against Craig Thomson with you?
PM: I certainly talked to Mr Thomson and I made a statement to the Parliament about these matters yesterday and I'm happy to stand by and repeat that statement.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Ted Baillieu doesn't seem to agree with your clean energy future package and says that it's going to cost jobs, there will be less jobs than would otherwise be created. What will you be saying to the premiers tomorrow about all this?
PM: What I'll be saying to Premier Baillieu and to all of the other premiers is that we will be putting a price on carbon, we will continue to grow economically and we will create more jobs  -  1.6 million more jobs by 2020 and we will ensure that our nation is part of the clean energy future.
We actually, as we've talked to the people staffing these displays, brining their products and know-how and innovations to Canberra, we had one person talk to us how they missed out and our country missed out on an early wave of innovation and how determined they are to make sure we as a nation don't miss out on this wave of innovation.
I'm absolutely determined this nation doesn't miss out, that we've got the clean energy jobs of the future, we've got the know-how, we've got the ingenuity, we've got the expertise, what we've got to do is have a price on carbon to drive that transformation in our economy.
What I'll also be saying specifically to Premier Baillieu in relation to the so-called modelling that he released today, no one should be confused about the statistics put out by Premier Baillieu. He has purported to model putting a price on carbon, without factoring in any of the billions of dollars of assistance to protect Australian jobs  -  he knows are part of the package.
This isn't an age for political stunts; this is an age for getting on with the job.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, were you consulted when the New South Wales Labor Party provided Mr Thomson with money to cover his legal costs?
PM: Look, I've dealt with these matters in Parliament yesterday, I've indicated in Parliament yesterday I've got full confidence in Mr Thomson. Let me indicated again today I have full confidence in Mr Thomson.
JOURNALIST: Would you like to see Mr Thomson, Prime Minister, make a statement to the Parliament? Does he have an obligation to do that?
PM: Look, Mr Thomson will obviously deal with these matters as a Parliamentarian and as he sees fit. He's made the appropriate declaration. I made the comment in Parliament yesterday: he's not the first parliamentarian to declare matters late and members of the Opposition who are speaking about this matter might like to consider that. Everyone of course should abide by the rules, but he's not the first Parliamentarian to make a late declaration.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Greens have been questioning the emissions reductions qualities of gas over the last couple of days. Are you still confident they're 100 per cent behind the package and doesn't gas have a key role to play in cutting emissions?
PM: Yes, gas does have a key role to play in cutting emissions. Yes, I'm absolutely confident we'll get a price on carbon through the Parliament and yes, the single biggest threat to the coal seam gas industry, standing in this Parliament House has been Mr Abbott and his ridiculous ill-thought through statements.
Thank you very much.  



The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) today agreed on the need for major reform of disability services in Australia through a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
This follows the release of the Productivity Commission's final report into Disability Care and Support last week.
The Gillard Government has already made it clear it supports the Productivity Commission's vision for a system to provide individuals with the support they need over the course of their lifetime and that reform of disability services needs to be financially sustainable.
The agreements reached today means governments and the community can take the next step on the road to reforming disability services.
COAG will develop high-level principles by the end of the year to guide consideration of the Productivity Commission's recommendations regarding a National Disability Insurance Scheme, including for foundation reforms, funding and governance.
The Council of Australian Governments also agreed to form a Select Council of Ministers from Commonwealth, States and Territories to start work immediately to lay the foundations for a National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS).
The Select Council will be supported by an Advisory Group, chaired by Dr Jeff Harmer AO, and the Australian Government has also sought nominations for further representatives from states.
Before the COAG meeting, the Prime Minister Julia Gillard, the Minister for Families, Community Services, Housing and Indigenous Affairs Jenny Macklin, the Parliamentary Secretary for Disability and Carers Jan McLucas and First Ministers met with representatives from the ‘Every Australian Counts' group.
They were presented with information about how important a National Disability Insurance scheme is for Australians with disability and their carers, as well as campaign badges and t-shirts.
Every Australian deserves to have confidence that if they acquire a disability or if their children are born with a disability they will receive the care and support they need.
All governments must work together to deliver the kind of care and support that Australians expect for people with a disability.
The states and territories deliver disability services under the National Disability Agreement and have primary funding responsibility for disability support services.
The agreement means that State and Territory Treasurers and Ministers responsible for disability will now work with the Commonwealth through the Select Council to begin to lay the foundations for long-term change. 
This foundation work is consistent with the recommendations made by the Productivity Commission to get Australia NDIS-ready.
Foundation reforms include developing common assessment tools, so that people's eligibility for support can be assessed fairly and consistently, based on their level of need, no matter which state or territory they live in.
They also include putting in place service and quality standards so that people with disability can expect high-quality support; building workforce capacity so we have more trained staff to support people with disabilities; and
developing rigorous timelines, milestones and benchmarks to support the delivery of these and other essential foundation reforms.
The Select Council will report at COAG's first meeting in 2012. 



The Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments have today agreed to fundamental reform of the national vocational education and training (VET) system to boost productivity and increase participation.
Reform of the VET sector is vital as the Australian economy undergoes a major economic transformation, with new opportunities arising from the mining boom, our plans for a clean energy future and major infrastructure investments such as the NBN.
A strong VET sector will also help Australians develop the skills that will drive a more productive and dynamic economy.
The reform agenda will be developed and considered by all governments in early 2012. It will look to:
 * 	provide Australians with the opportunity to develop the skills they need to participate fully in the economic life of the nation;
 * 	deliver high quality training that is flexible and demand-driven so that it can respond to the needs of employers;
 * 	ensure our national training system meets the rapidly changing needs of the Australian economy and businesses; and -
 * 	help Australian businesses take up new opportunities emerging in the economy and improve their competitiveness in global markets.
COAG also agreed that reforms to improve the quality of the sector through the newly established Australian Skills Quality Authority will be a priority.
Transparency of the sector will also continue through the implementation of the My Skills website, the introduction of a Unique Student Identifier and greater accessibility to VET data to lift the accountability and performance of the VET system.
The Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills and Workplace Relations, Senator Chris Evans will be consulting extensively with stakeholders to ensure their input is fully considered in the development of the reform agenda.
The Australian Government has shown its commitment to improving and reforming the VET sector by establishing a national regulator and investing more than $10.9 billion over the last three years, including more than $700 million on capital work to improve facilities.
These reforms are already paying dividends with an increase the number of students studying at Diploma level and above has also increased over this period by 40 per cent. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon today announced the appointment of the inaugural chairs of health reform bodies to drive transparency, accountability and efficiency.
Council of Australian Governments' have agreed to the appointment of the Chairs and Deputy Chairs of the National Health Performance Authority (NHPA) and the Independent Hospital Pricing Authority (IHPA).
Ms Patricia Faulkner AO and Mr John Walsh will be the Chair and Deputy Chair of the NHPA after the legislation passes the Parliament.
Patricia and John both bring a wealth of knowledge and experience and a commitment to improving the transparency and accountability of the health system.
Under their guidance, the NHPA will ensure that all Australians will be able to see how their public and private hospitals and Medicare Locals are performing.
Mr Shane Solomon and Mr Jim Birch will be the Chair and Deputy Chair of the IHPA.
Shane and Jim have a very deep and thorough understanding of health financing and are ideally placed to lead the transformation of Australia's public hospital system.
Their work leading the IHPA will ensure that every public hospital is properly funded for each and every service they provide.
There will be an interim IHPA established as per the national health reform agreement, prior to the establishment of a permanent statutory body.
The Prime Minister said today's appointments were the next step in the implementation of the National Health Reform Agreement.
This historic agreement will deliver the funding public hospitals need, with unprecedented levels of transparency and accountability, less waste and significantly less waiting for patients.
Further details on each of the appointments are available in the COAG communiqué. 



Three agreements signed at the Council of Australian Governments today reduced the number of Australian transport regulators from 23 to just three.
After nearly a century of competing standards and regulations, intergovernmental agreements on heavy vehicles, maritime safety and rail safety reform have reduced the number of regulators to just one for each industry.
The financial benefit to the economy is expected to be up to $30 billion over 20 years for heavy vehicles alone.
Heavy vehicle operators previously had nine separate regulatory regimes to deal with, leading to increased productivity and efficiency for operators.
For railways it will mean getting rid of seven separate regulatory authorities, 46 pieces of State and Territory and Commonwealth legislation, including seven rail safety Acts, nine OHS Acts and seven dangerous goods Acts. 
For maritime there will be one regulator and law replacing 50 pieces of maritime legislation and seven State and Territory regulators, allowing the seamless movement of domestic commercial vessels and crew around the country.
The agreements make a significant cut to the red tape faced by our $61 billion transport industry. For instance:
 * 	A rail operator running services from Melbourne to Brisbane will no longer be required to have three different accreditations and pay three separate sets of fees to Victorian, NSW and Queensland regulators.
 * 	A truck driver transporting cattle from Queensland to NSW will no longer have to unload some of the livestock at the border or transfer them to a second truck in order to meet the lower mass limits in NSW. This is stressful for the livestock and inefficient, adding up to $9 per head to freight costs.
 * 	A Tasmanian shipping company which builds catamarans to the national standard, and is subject to survey during construction, can sell them around the world with the supporting documentation accepted without question. However, when they sell the vessels domestically to a buyer in Queensland or SA, additional documentary and physical inspections may be required by maritime authorities in those states. This will no longer be the case under these reforms.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Mental Health and Ageing Mark Butler today welcomed the Council of Australian Governments' decision to develop a National Partnership Agreement on Mental Health to help address major gaps in our mental health system.
The Gillard Government will deliver major reforms in mental health through our $2.2 billion mental health package, announced in the 2011-12 Federal Budget.
The States and Territories have a vital role to play in the provision of this record mental health package.
Through this new partnership the Commonwealth will provide $200 million over five years to the States and Territories to help address service gaps in accommodation and emergency department planning.
The Prime Minister also welcomed COAG's decision to develop a 10-year roadmap for mental health reform.
In order to achieve lasting reform in mental health we must look beyond our immediate priorities.
The roadmap will chart what Australia's mental health system should look like in ten years, setting out the priorities and sequencing of reforms across a range of government services.
The Gillard Government's mental health package, the largest ever delivered by a Federal Government, will:
 * 	identify and treat mental illness in the early years;
 * 	support young people who struggle with it in their teens; and
 * 	help those who have severe and persistent mental illness with intensive support in the community.
The National Partnership and the roadmap will help achieve these crucial reforms.
As part of the meeting, the First Ministers' had an opportunity to hear from leading mental health experts Pat McGorry, David Cappo and Frank Quinlan about the challenges facing mental health in Australia. 
The experts talked about their involvement in the Mental Health Expert Working Group which informed the development of the Commonwealth Government's $2.2 billion mental health package.
COAG also acknowledged the leadership of Premier Rann in driving improvements to Australia's mental health system.
Both the National Partnership and the Roadmap will be considered again by COAG towards the end of 2011.  



PM: Can I start by starting where our first discussions were in COAG today, when COAG met this morning we'd just been informed that Paul Lockyer, Gary Ticehurst and John Bean had lost their lives, so COAG took a moment to reflect on that. They are known to First Ministers and we did want to express our condolences and our loving thoughts to those who would be grieving the loss of those people today and certainly we wanted to take the opportunity too to express our very sincere condolences to everyone in the ABC who would be feeling this very, very deeply.
COAG met today and welcomed some new members, particularly a new Premier of New South Wales and a new Chief Minister in the ACT. We took some time, too, to farewell some old friends - Premier Mike Rann, this is his last COAG, we also took some time to farewell the Secretary of Prime Minister and Cabinet Terry Moran, and this is his last COAG meeting as well.
First Ministers today spent some time discussing the circumstances in the Australian economy and we had discussions about the Australian economy and global economy last night. Out of those discussions clearly First Ministers reflected on the volatility that we've seen in global markets. We also reflected on the fact that Australia has low unemployment, low debt and a pipeline of investment; that we are well placed to see through any global challenges. We had a discussion about the continuing confidence we have in the Australian economy.
We also reflected on the fact that the growth in the Australian economy does pose challenges for many Australian firms, and consequently we have collectively resolved to continue on with economic reform to keep strengthening our economy for the future, even though our economy is well placed to meet the challenges of today. We have determined to press on with reforms in education, training and skills to help Australian firms to adjust to changes in the global economy and to take advantage of new opportunities.
Specifically on the economic reform agenda, today COAG signed three agreements on heavy vehicles, rail and maritime safety. This is a major economic reform.
Now, I understand that the question of heavy vehicle regulation doesn't necessarily sound all that interesting to some, but from the point of view of our economy what the signing of these three agreements means is that the number of regulators in heavy vehicles, maritime safety and rail safety has been reduced from 23 to just 3. This means we are cutting a lot of wasteful red tape and delivering a $30 billion boost to the Australian economy for the next 20 years for heavy vehicles alone, and we are dealing with a very sizable section of the Australian economy.
For railways, it means getting rid of seven separate regulatory authorities, 46 pieces of State and Territory and Commonwealth legislation, including seven rail safety acts, nine OH&amp;S acts and seven dangerous goods acts.
Heavy vehicle operators will not have to have nine separate regulatory regimes to deal with their compliance work, and that's going to lead to increased efficiency and productivity for operators.
It will mean that there is one maritime regulator and law replacing 50 pieces of maritime legislation and seven State and Territory regulators.
So, this is a very significant reform, meaning people will no longer bear and burden like a rail operator running services from Melbourne to Brisbane will no longer be required to have three different accreditations and pay three separate sets of fees to Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland regulators. It does mean things like those in shipping have national standards that they can construct vessels to. So, this is an important reform.
We will continue to press on with these kinds of reforms for a seamless national economy because it helps bolster productivity and economic growth.
We've also committed ourselves to a major reform agenda in skills. Australia is undergoing a significant economic transformation: we've got the clean energy economy emerging; the resources boom; technological change; high-speed broadband; the increasing importance of services to our economy.
In order to make sure that Australians can get the best of the opportunities that flow from this economic transformation, we do need to ensure that our VET system is as agile as possible, as responsive as possible, meeting the needs of businesses and industries, so First Ministers are committed to a VET reform agenda. Provision was made in the May budget for a VET reform agenda and we are determined to get this done.
However, we did note that good progress has been made to date through collaborative work by the Commonwealth with the States and Territories. We have increased by 24 per cent the number of people studying higher level courses of Certificate III and above, and we have increased by 40 per cent those studying at diploma level, so this is good news that we already have more people studying higher qualifications but more needs to be done.
On the question of disability, First Ministers had a discussion arising from the Productivity Commission's work a National Disability Insurance Scheme. COAG has agreed on the need for major reform of disability services in Australia through a National Disability Insurance Scheme and I thank my colleagues for taking that decision today.
We will, as First Ministers, as COAG, develop high-level principles by the end of the year to guide this reform process including foundation reforms, funding and governance. We've also agreed to establish a select council of ministers from the Commonwealth, States and Territories to start work laying the foundations for a National Disability Insurance Scheme, so that's working on the kind of matters that Minister Macklin and others have been talking about, like common assessment tools which are necessary before you can contemplate wider reforms and deliver them.
We've all acknowledged this is a very complex area of work. As the Productivity Commission told us, this will take a lot of time, a lot of thinking, a lot of careful preparation and a lot of collaboration between the jurisdictions - Commonwealth, States and Territories - but we have resolved today that we do want to see this major reform.
We also had an extensive discussion on mental health, but I may ask my colleague Premier Rann to speak to that, because the discussion on mental health occurred at COAG as a result of his suggestion at the last meeting.
This is of course the first time COAG has met since COAG delivered the landmark health reforms that will deliver more beds, more doctors, more nurses, more funding with less waste and waiting time and less red tape. Today we took some steps to implement those reforms, some further steps, by agreeing that Ms Patricia Faulkner and Mr John Walsh should be the Chair and Deputy Chair of the National Health Performance Authority, and Mr Shane Solomon and Mr Jim Birch should be the Chair and Deputy Chair of the Industry Hospital Pricing Authority.
COAG also had a discussion about carbon pricing and the Government's package to price carbon. I think it won't amaze anybody in this room to say we didn't strike grand agreement on this question, so we've had an extensive discussion. I think the views of First Ministers are well known, but we did have the opportunity to discuss the Federal Government's carbon pricing package which we are committed to and will deliver through the Parliament before the end of this year.
In the absence of Chief Minister Paul Henderson, who is the Chair of the Council of the Australian Federation - he's already had to leave in order to travel back to the Northern Territory - we all thought it was appropriate to ask Premier Mike Rann to speak on behalf of the state colleagues and then we'll be happy to take any questions.
PREMIER RANN: Thank you Prime Minister.
I think it's been a very strong work program today across a range of issues, and on mental health this is an area where I think a number of us and certainly I felt that during the discussions over the past five or six years on national health reform and funding that really the missing link was mental health, and we're obviously delighted that in the Federal budget this year that there was a strong commitment from the Commonwealth to mental health, but clearly there's a lot more work to be done by all of us. We're, in South Australia, currently undergoing a major reform of mental health and I think that the message that we got from our invited experts today is that rather than a one-size-fits-all approach that really more acute beds are not what is needed in mental health but in fact intermediate care beds and community based mental health care. Also a much stronger focus, if you look at the diagrams of the incidence of mental illness, a much stronger focus on young people and also a very, very strong focus on mental health issues related to Aboriginal people as part of our closing the gap efforts. So, I think that was a terrific discussion and I think that that discussion today is likely to shape future direction in terms of mental health reform across Australia.
In other areas we obviously did deal with the transport issues. It's incredibly important. It's the modern equivalent of dealing with separate gauges, railway gauges between the states in terms of signing off today on reforms that will benefit the national economy by billions of dollars.
In other areas, of course, it's been mentioned about further reform in the areas of training. I think that's critically important in terms of what's happening to the changing nature of our economy, but also looking at the issue of international students. We think that there's some real work be done there. We've done incredibly well. In fact in my State and number of other States international students are now about our third-biggest export, and obviously in order to correct some of the problems that have arisen in recent years we've seen some pressures being placed on that, and obviously that's something we should address on the Knight review coming up over in coming months.
In the area of the price on carbon, if I could just say this: in South Australia, we have experienced record employment growth and strong infrastructure and economic growth in recent years, and it's interesting that if you look at the last nine years I think about 20 times the full-time jobs growth of the previous eight or so years, and we've done that at a time that we've seen a drop in emissions, so it can be done. I mean, South Australia has about 7.2 per cent of the population of Australia but has 54 per cent of the wind power and we're also doing a lot of effort in the area of solar energy and geothermal, so we strongly support a price on carbon. It has to be done. It's about a transition to a new economy, a new economy that means jobs, and we've demonstrated in South Australia that you can have strong jobs growth, strong commitment to the environment and a strong commitment to reducing emissions and embracing renewable energy.
PM: Thank you. Yes, Phil.
JOURNALIST: Questions for Premiers Baillieu, O'Farrell (inaudible) were any of you not so much persuaded or were your views changed at all by the Prime Minister's presentation on the carbon package?
PREMIER BAILLIEU: Can I make a comment there? I think the Prime Minister's views weren't changed by our presentations.
PREMIER BARNETT: Well, if I can just, I think everyone recognises that the Commonwealth Government's determined the progress this legislation. What probably came out of some of the discussions today was issues that certainly those three States mentioned see as anomalies, there are a number of anomalies in this scheme.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) expressed a concern about the effect on their asset values. My understanding was that you were happy to work with them on that. Did you make any progress on that today and Premier Bligh, that's an issue that I think you may be interested in - did you make any progress?
PM: Well, I'm happy to address that and then handover to Premier Bligh.
We do have in this carbon pricing package a differently constructed energy security package from the former CPRS, and we have deliberatively focussed on the key energy security questions which we believe arise from highly emissions intensive energy generation. So, the package has been pitched to do that - ensure continuity of supply as we change our energy mix increasingly towards cleaner, renewable sources of energy, and yes, that has been a point of dialogue and discussion between me and state premiers.
We will deliver the package that we announced and has been the subject of so much political commentary and debate within this building and beyond because we think it is correctly put together to do what we need to do in the electricity generation sector to move us to cleaner and renewable sources of energy. But yes, there's a variety of views amongst my colleagues about it and I'll turn to Premier Bligh.
BLIGH: Thank you.
While, as the Prime Minister said, there wasn't universal outbreak of agreement on all points. I think everybody would agree it was a constructive opportunity for States to bring to the Commonwealth's attention some of the issues that we believe affect us.
There's no doubt that there are some parts of this package, well, particularly in relation to generation, that fall disproportionally on states that have a high level of public ownership of coal-fired generators. I certainly felt I got a good hearing, that the Prime Minister heard the points that we were raising. I don't believe I've persuaded her yet but I don't believe the conversation is over.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BLIGH: The negotiation.
PM: The conversation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what were the other anomalies that were raised, perhaps my question should got to the Premiers, including the West Australian Premier, what were some of the anomalies, the other anomalies that were presented and what was the answer that was given?
O'FARRELL: Look, I think the answer that was given was that this woman's not for turning. That was very clearly stated and I took advice from the Premier of Western Australia that once she's made that decision she's not going to be moved, but I am concerned about the impact on jobs in New South Wales. I'm concerned about the impact on prices. I'm concerned about the impact on our publically owned generators. You know, under this scheme if you're privately owned, if you're foreign owned, you get compensation. If you're publically owned you don't. We're going to lose $700 million in dividends and tax equivalents. That's $700 million that won't be available to invest in New South Wales services. So, I never came here today expect that we'd go away with everything. We certainly had a hearing, but it was also certainly clear that the Prime Minister was not for moving on this issue.
BAILLIEU: Can I make a further observation? We've said publically and stand by it we don't believe the package will be good for Victoria, but given that the Prime Minister is committed to this course of action we asked specific questions about compensation. Victoria is inadequately compensated to the extent of hundreds of millions of dollars, and the Prime Minister's made it clear that there's no further compensation, there's no compensation that we haven't yet heard about and nor will there be any consideration of further compensation. Now, we think that's disappointing.
PM: We are, I'd have to say, at odds on the analysis as well, but anyway. Yes?
JOURNALIST: To the three Coalition premiers, do you still have a five per cent reduction target by 2020. On the way in this morning you said that now is not the time to bring in a carbon tax, but you still have that target?
BAILLIEU: We have a piece of legislation passed by our predecessors, which we (inaudible) at the time, and that was essentially an aspirational target with some commitments involved in it. The Prime Minister has made it clear if this legislation goes through then States should be looking to adjust their own commitments so that we have a central focus.
O'FARRELL: I stand behind the timing comment, whilst the fundamentals of New South Wales economy are firm, it's clear that it's been mismanaged over the past decade and a half. We have a big job to do there, it's clear too as COAG has said today that the fundamentals of the Australian economy is good, but the fact is that we're facing uncertain international times and I don't think now is the time to bring in this major change. But that's an issue on which I lost today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, was there any discussion at the meeting about the coal seam gas industry underdevelopment and on associated issues? Have you got any doubt that gas, to (inaudible) electricity produces less carbon emissions than coal?
PM: Gas is going to be an important energy source, it generates less carbon pollution than coal and it's going to be an important fuel. I believe it's going to be a particularly important fuel as the world transitions to cleaner and cleaner energy sources. So, we see a strong future for the gas industry here in Australia, we'll use some of that gas, we'll export a lot of that gas. It's got a very bright future. I've had the opportunity with some of the people gathered here, Premier Bligh and I, for example, went and had an opportunity to look at a huge emerging project on Curtis Island. So, this is an important energy source for the future.
There was no discussion around the COAG table today of any sort of substance about the land use questions which I think you're referring to, that wasn't before us.
BLIGH: Can I add to that, the CSIRO, which I think is one of the most well respected science organisations on the planet, considered this issue in 1995 and I think put beyond any doubt that the emissions from coal seam gas are considerably less, between 50 and 70 per cent, than coal fired generation.
There are numerous other scientific reports that back that, some of the reports that have been relied on by the critics of CSG this week, if you have a look at them, are actually about extracting gas from shale, which is not what's happening in Queensland and nor am I aware of it happening here in Australia.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you Prime Minister, and perhaps Mr Rann, I see there's no response to the call from the mental health advocates this morning for mental health to be treated in funding on the same basis as treatment of physical illness. The fact you haven't responded to that call, does that mean it's a no from the States and Commonwealth?
PM: I'll turn to Premier Rann for some comments, but something that certainly happened in our discussions today is we reflected on the additional efforts that people have been putting in place in mental health. In the Federal Budget, obviously there was a multi-billion dollar package to make a difference in mental health, including more services through Headspace organisations and what are called EPICs, which are early intervention centres for young people and when we had the presentation today and we talked about this and more  -  actually whilst we had lunch  -  Professor Pat McGorry presented what is a very startling slide which shows you the burden of disease of mental illness on the shoulders of young people and hence his advocacy for an early intervention model.
So, we've been lifting effort, we lifted it in our budget, Premier Baillieu discussed in the room how his budget was delivered, I think, a week before ours and they'd auspiced a major package on mental health, so people have been lifting effort.
What you should conclude from the COAG documents is that we not only understand the need to lift effort, but we understand the need to be working together and to have a long range vision here, which is why the road-map is expressed as a ten year road-map.
RANN: None of us have had budgets in the last few hours, I mean it's silly. The fact of the matter is that in my state we put in an extra $300 million into mental health reform based on the recommendations of Monsignor David Cappo, who made recommendations to us and also addressed COAG today.
So, really it's about a change in approach and as I mentioned how the focus for years was on the acute end of things, actually in fact the expensive end of things, but it didn't take into account the needs of people getting better or people becoming unwell. It's about a staged approach, we're calling it the stepping up approach and so this is about, I guess, a very firm message to us about have a look, much closer look at community based care, also have a look at the needs of young people, this giant spike of our young people around the age of 20 and also on indigenous health, rather than just looking as we've done for years and years at hospital beds. So, it's about a different philosophy, more than a demand for us to announce new funding today, given that we just recently all announced new funding.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a little off topic, but was anyone from your office in contact with Craig Thomson yesterday to ask whether lying or misleading Fair Work Australia was going to be an issue?
PM: Look, members of my office are in contact with Labor caucus members all the time, you would expect that. Members of my office are particularly in contact with Labor Caucus members dealing with media matters, so of course my office was in contact with the Member for Dobell yesterday.
JOURNALIST: What response did they get, Prime Minister?
PM: In what sense?
JOURNALIST: To the inquiry about whether lying or deceiving Fair Work Australia was going to be an issue?
PM: Look, I'm not in a position to talk to you about all contacts between staff members in my office and the Member for Dobell. You asked me if staff members would have been in contact with him and the answer is yes, of course and my staff are very routinely in contact with all Labor Caucus members and assist Caucus members who are dealing with media inquiries including from your own organisation.
JOURNALIST: Not to be cute but you are confirming that that question was put to him directly?
PM: I can't confirm for you sitting here that contents of questions or individual communications with the Member for Dobell.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is there anything in the carbon price package that requires mirror legislation by any of the other states and were you given any assurances?
PM: No, there's not.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) specific measures COAG will take to tackle indigenous mental health?
PM: I'll turn to Premier Rann, but the main discussion around the table was, as we go through this road-map and planning and national partnership and as we lift effort, which we've just talked about how people have been budgeting for increased effort and we certainly have been with a more than $2 billion package. As we lift effort we need to understand that it's not a one size fits all way of delivering services, so what works in the CBD, or in and around the CBD of Sydney, is not going to work for Chief Minister Paul Henderson in some of his remote indigenous communities.
So, we had that sort of conversation around the table and that's been reflected in the Communiqué, but Premier Rann might want to add to that.
RANN: What today was about what, and when you think about the recent hospital and health funding reforms and there was a hinterland of years of work today was about putting mental health reform firmly on the national agenda as a shared responsibility. And so, I've been to many, many COAG meetings, not just during my nine and a half years as premier, but also as an adviser back in the 1970s and 80s and so it's very unusual to actually invite people who are not from the government or not first ministers to actually come into COAG, so this was an extraordinary opportunity from three eminent Australians who are experts on mental health to have dialogue with us about the changing nature, not only of mental health in terms of youth and indigenous, but also about changing ways of dealing with it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have any concerns that the truck convoy on Monday morning could have the potential to disrupt the operations of Parliament, or indeed make it difficult for you to get to work?
PM: I'm very confident everybody's getting to work, including our journalist friends.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) on the National Disability Insurance Scheme, did you give a sort of in principle support today to work with the other states on the development of a scheme, or are you still a bit reluctant to get involved?
BARNETT: No, I did give in principle support and, if I can say so, I have always had an open mind. The point to me, which I think has been resolved to my satisfaction, is that at the level of the Prime Minister and premiers the principles  -  and as the Prime Minister said the governance of what will be determined. One of the mistakes, in my opinion, that happened with so-called health reform, was that a package was put on the table before there had been an agreement across the Commonwealth and the States on how they should proceed and what nature it should take. That's why essentially version 1 fell apart.
So, I'm happy that now we've got agreement that the Heads of Government level the principles and structure and overall governance will be determined and then it can progress. That's what I sought.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) reducing stamp duties and so on, commensurate with what you spend on disability. Is that, are you still against that?
BARNETT: I would be, but we haven't even discussed that and that's exactly the sort of point, if we're to talk about a national scheme, then pretty quickly you have to get on to some sort of discussion about how it's going to be funded. And those issues need to be dealt with at this level. That's the point I make here.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the heavy vehicle regulator, what will it take for you to actually sign up to that by January 2013 and Prime Minister, can I ask, there's a lot of exemptions across those reforms and the lack of a signature from WA at this point weakens the regime potentially further. How do you get around these, I mean doesn't it undercut your reform agenda if you have picking and choosing across a reform like that?
BARNETT: Can I just  -  Western Australia will sign that. We agree with the principles of it, we certainly agree on interstate transport, there are a couple of detailed matters and they primarily come from the fact that 95 per cent of West Australian heavy haulage is within the state, related primarily to big resource projects. So, that's just a particular issue, but broadly we agree with it and we will sign it.
PM: This, on anybody's accounting, is major reform. $30 billion of benefit to the economy, making sure that people don't have a crushing burden of red tape because they trade across state lines, in businesses that are very focussed on trading across state lines  -  rail, heavy vehicles, one of their principle purposes is to get things across state lines and to have different compliance mechanisms, different signals. If you're looking at a signal for safety in one state then another state, those signals mean different things.
So, they have to train the drivers to recognise that the meaning of the signal has changed. This is not something we confront driving ordinary cars, we know that a stop sign means stop whether we're in New South Wales or in Queensland or Western Australia or the ACT. We actually don't have that level of convergence currently in the regulation of heavy vehicles and rail. So, this is a big reform, productivity unlocking of real economic benefit and I'm very pleased we were able to secure agreement to it today.
JOURNALIST: Premier Baillieu, you, just to clarify your comments earlier, will you, if the Federal carbon price legislation is passed, will you seek to remove or reduce the State's emissions reduction target and just on a, in line with the Federal target and in second point, just in terms of the modelling you released yesterday, your office has put out a statement saying it does include the compensation outlined in the Federal Government's package, despite a number of questions put to you on this topic yesterday. Can you confirm that it includes all industry compensation that has been outlined in the clean energy package and secondly, will you release the full modelling document as your colleague on New South Wales has?
BAILLIEU: There's a whole bunch of questions there. Let me just talk about the modelling first and we were, I think most of the States were keen for the Commonwealth to release the modelling that's been undertaken and the Prime Minister's made it clear that that's not going to happen.
And the Prime Minister's made it clear that from the Commonwealth's point of view, the Commonwealth modelling can't be assessed on a regional basis. Now, I think most of the States would like to see the modelling on a state by state basis.
In terms of the modelling that we commissioned, Deloitte Access have made it clear that's been conducted in accordance with the same modelling protocols or assumptions that took place under the Commonwealth's modelling. So, the degree to which compensation is involved is the same as the Commonwealth's modelling.
Now, I'm sorry, I just-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) just to paraphrase  -  comments about the state 20 per cent target. When you were talking before about how that would-
BAILLIEU: -No, I was making the point the Prime Minister made to all the states that if the legislation goes through then the states should be looking at their own packages to make sure that everything is as we wish it to be. Under the legislation that exists in Victoria, we are required to review the legislation in the event that the Commonwealth passes such legislation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, was there any discussion or update on GST sharing?
PM: No.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) explanation just now from Premier Baillieu, regarding modelling?
PM: I think Premier Baillieu and I are a little bit apart on these things. I am very confident in the Treasury's modelling. A lot of information has been released for people to see. I've made an offer to my colleagues around the table that their officials can be further briefed by Treasury officials. In respect of the modelling that Victoria gave to the media, the only information available to me to date has been the media reports, when I first looked at those media reports it appeared to me that they hadn't taken into account the industry assistance. I understand that Deloittes has put out a press release since. I haven't had the opportunity to read it myself, but I understand it refers to the main elements of assistance, so it's not clear to me what, if any, parts of the assistance are still not included.
But, at the end of the day, it becomes very difficult for me to in detail go through modelling, the only information that I know about it is that it's been in the media report.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) there's a fair chunk of the initial part of the Communiqué devoted to the economy. Was there any consideration from the States of future Federal stimulus funding in the event of a downturn, was that raised at all in State discussions with Canberra?
RANN: No it wasn't, but what was recognised is that Australia is in much better shape than just about anywhere else on the planet and that obviously puts us in a much stronger position, you look at, when you look at issues relating to AAA credit ratings and what's happened in recent weeks and you look how Australia is, you look how a State like mine is in terms of a AAA credit rating, you look at the banks of Australia, we're in very much stronger state than most of the rest of the world.
PM: Right we'll just discriminate in favour of redheads and then we might take one more question and then I'm a little bit anxious that some of my colleagues have planes to whisk them home. Katherine.
JOURNALIST: With apologies to the Premiers, I'm sorry Prime Minister, in relation to Mr Thomson there are some significant new allegations in the media this morning about the use of his credit card. Can you explain, given these allegations continue to surface why he has your full confidence?
PM: Mr Thomson is a very active and good representative of his constituency in the Federal Parliament, so he is someone who is very, very keen to argue on behalf of the people of Dobell and to secure for them a better deal and that's what Federal Parliamentarians should do and Mr Thomson does it. I understand that there is an investigation, I understand from media and other reports that there is an investigation by Fair Work Australia. Obviously that investigation will have to work its way through, it's not unknown, indeed it can be common for people to be investigated and then have no adverse conclusions drawn against them so we'll just see the investigation work its way through, but I deal with Mr Thomson in his capacity as the Member for Dobell representing that community and he does a good job.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look my focus today has been sitting with my colleagues working through these major issues on the national agenda.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you support Mr Thomson remaining as Chair of the Economics Committee going forward?
PM: Mr Thomson's got my confidence as I've expressed here today and in the Parliament yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Premier O'Farrell I just wondered-
PM: We will make this the last question or we will get more anxious Premiers.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) is it your position that the scheme, the emissions trading scheme or the carbon tax, should be delayed and if that's the position that you'll be advocating in respect of the Coalition's policy as well?
O'FARRELL: No I'm opposed to a carbon tax, what I'm arguing is if we're going to have a carbon tax, which I'm opposed to, there should be proper compensation otherwise families, businesses and taxpayers in New South Wales take a significant hit. I'm happy to support the Federal Opposition's approach to these issues but look don't expect me to do other than come to these forums and stand up for my state, it's about time we were listened to, it's about time we competently made our case. I've missed out today, the Prime Minister's been very clear about that, but it won't stop me arguing what I think is in the best interests of New South Wales.
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Prime Minister before we wrap up, just as a State that has supported you on carbon I just think it's important to make that point this afternoon as well, that we've heard from the States who are opposed to a price on carbon but in fact there are a number of States at the table who supported the work that you're doing and concede the difficulty of a tough decision like this one that you are going through. But from Tasmania's perspective we have been heard through that process and we are comfortable with the work that's been progressed with a carbon price and we support you with that.
PM: No better note to leave on. Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Tasmanian Premier Lara Giddings today welcomed the release of Terms of Reference for the verification of guaranteed wood supply and high conservation value forests under the Tasmanian Forests Intergovernmental Agreement.
The document, which was endorsed yesterday by all signatories to the forestry Statement of Principles process, is the next step in progressing the joint objectives of environmental protection and support for a strong and viable forest industry.
Professor Jonathan West has been appointed to lead the group, in recognition of his extensive knowledge and understanding of Tasmanian industry as the head of the Australian Innovation Research Centre.
Other relevant independent experts, including those with expertise in geology and mineralogy, will be jointly appointed by both governments, following consultation with the Reference Group of Signatories. 
The group will independently verify the wood supply needs of the industry, along with the high conservation values of native forests identified by the environmental non-governmental organisations.
The Terms of Reference are designed to ensure that all stakeholders and the wider community can have confidence in the independence and veracity of the process.
The signatories will be asked to endorse the design and underlying methodology of the verification process and, in doing so, provide a commitment that they will accept the results once it is completed. If they do so, the governments will agree to be bound by the outcomes of the verification process.
Forestry Tasmania has welcomed the Terms of Reference and has committed to supporting the verification process as much as it can while honouring contractual obligations to supply its customers.
The group of experts will also consult widely with other external stakeholders including the Tasmanian Aboriginal Centre, the Local Government Association of Tasmania, the Tasmanian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association.
The Verification Group will submit a draft report to both governments before 1 December.
A final report, taking into consideration feedback supplied by governments will be submitted to the Prime Minister and the Premier by 31 December. 



The Gillard Labor Government will provide immediate and practical support to affected workers and communities following BlueScope Steel's decision to reduce its operations.
These support measures are in addition to the new advance facility announced by the Government today that will allow BlueScope to bring forward up to $100 million of payments under the Government's Steel Transformation Plan.
The Gillard Labor Government is standing shoulder to shoulder with the communities of the Illawarra and Mornington Peninsula in these tough times, with practical support to help workers find new jobs and strengthen local economies. The Government's package of worker and community support includes:
 * 	An Investment and Innovation Fund of $30 million to support new business ventures and create innovative, high-skilled jobs, predominantly in manufacturing and manufacturing services in the region. This fund will be made up of $20 million from the Commonwealth Government and further contributions of $5 million from the NSW State Government and $5 million from BlueScope Steel.
 * 	Assistance of up to $10 million from the Commonwealth Government for immediate access to intensive services by Job Services Australia providers and training assistance to help affected workers find work in industries where there are more job opportunities.
 * 	The appointment of Dr Don Russell, Secretary of the Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research, to lead a whole-of-Government response to the BlueScope announcement and to work with local stakeholders on a coordinated structural adjustment strategy for the region.
 * 	A Local Employment Coordinator to provide practical advice at the local level and ensure workers get the help they need when they need it.  The Local Employment Coordinator will also build partnerships between government, business and the community to generate economic activity and jobs in the local economy.
 * 	Onsite visits by Job Services Australia staff, Local Employment Coordinator and Centrelink. In addition, a dedicated hotline to fast-track referrals to Jobs Services Australia or alternative service providers who will help individuals to find new employment, taking into account their specific circumstances.
 * 	Fast-tracked relocation assistance for BlueScope workers who have been made redundant and who find employment in another location.  Normally, a person must have been unemployed for three months before becoming eligible for this assistance - however BlueScope workers who have been made redundant will be immediately eligible for payments of up to $6000 of relocation assistance, with an additional $3000 in the case of families with dependent children.
 * 	Free financial advice provided through Centrelink's network of Financial Information Service Officers, and other personal support through Centrelink's network of Social Workers.
This comprehensive response will be monitored and reviewed to ensure the measures are effective in meeting the needs of businesses, workers and the communities. The Government will respond further if necessary to ensure the affected communities make a successful economic transition.
For information about any of the assistance available in this package, call the Australian Government Bluescope Support Hotline on 1800 107 233.
As the causes of BlueScope's decision are a result of broader economic factors  -  particularly the high Australian dollar - which are impacting in different ways right across Australia, the Gillard Government has been taking action at a national level to strengthen our patchwork economy.  For example, the Gillard Government has announced measures to:
 * 	Cut company tax to 29 per cent, with a head-start for small businesses, using revenue from the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, if passed by the Parliament, to boost businesses which are not in the mining boom fast lane.
 * 	Provide a major tax concession to small business in the form of an up-front instant asset write-off, using revenue from the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, if passed by the Parliament.  This tax relief will be available for each and every asset under $6500 purchased by a small business, as well as for the first $5000 of the cost of a motor vehicle.
 * 	Deliver a $3 billion skills and training package in this year's Budget that will put industry and business at the heart of our national training system, including through new measures to boost apprenticeship completion.
The Gillard Government is determined to continue strengthening our economy and providing practical measures to support employment, businesses and communities in our patchwork economy.



I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and in a spirit of reconciliation pay my respects to their elders past and present.
I also acknowledge my colleagues: Chris Bowen, Minister for Immigration &amp; Citizenship, Senator Kate Lundy, Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs and other parliamentary colleagues here today.
Andrew Metcalfe, Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, Judge Rauf Soulio, Chair of the new Australian Multicultural Council, the members of the Council and Dr Helen Szoke, Race Discrimination Commissioner.
I also see my dear old friend Laurie Ferguson, who began this process more than two years ago, and who should be very proud today.
But most of all, I want to acknowledge the many people here who have worked so hard for so long toward this moment.
I'm standing before you today because of the brave decision my parents made in 1966 to migrate to Australia 
I arrived here, aged four, the guest of a generous nation.
Being British, it was easier for my parents than for many others. 
But without higher education, obtaining even their moderate level of prosperity involved a lot of hard work.
I think that's why, in my first speech as Prime Minister, I said
I believe in a Government that rewards those who work the hardest, not those who complain the loudest.
I believe in a Government that rewards those who, day in and day out, work in our factories and on our farms, in our mines and in our mills, in our classrooms and in our hospitals, that rewards that hard work, decency and effort.
The people who play by the rules, set their alarms early, get their kids off to school, stand by their neighbours and love their country.
Because those are the values my migrant parents taught me.
That everyone is equal and worthy of respect. 
That it's wrong to view yourself as better than the person who waits on you in a restaurant. In fact, I used to be the person who served tables in a restaurant.
And with that value of respect, my migrant parents gave to me two unshakeable beliefs.
First, the importance of hard work; the obligation that we all owe to ourselves and others, to earn our keep and do our best.
Second, the transformative power of education.
Education is the route to opportunity and self improvement; in today's Australia more so than ever.
And while my parents didn't say it, their life stories are testament to the power of the saying ‘fortune favours the brave'.
The future is to be seized and shaped, not something to be scared of.
Bringing these beliefs and values to the role of Prime Minister has shaped my determination to lead the work we must do together to keep our economy strong today and modernise it for tomorrow.
So that we can be a nation that truly provides opportunity for all and makes sure no one gets left behind.
Belief in equality stands proudly at the heart of this country's character.
Here, we believe that each person deserves acceptance for their contribution, not being judged for the circumstances of their past.
And in building a nation, we've developed a work ethic that's about putting in your fair share.
You have a go, you earn the fair go.
I am determined this ethos will guide us as we live in days of transition and contradiction. 
We live in an economy that is the envy of the world and in a nation perfectly placed to realise the economic prosperity that will flow from the Asia Pacific Century. 
Yet we also live in an economy that is multi-speed, a patchwork, in which some industries and areas feel the reward for their hard work, while others feel as a burden the high Australian dollar and new competitive pressures.
So as a nation we are witnessing some employers cry out that they cannot find enough workers at the same time as others lay workers off. 
As I lead our nation during these days of change I am determined that we will use growth to maximise opportunity for Australians.
And I am determined we will not leave behind those who live and work in regions and industries feeling the strain.
And as we build economic inclusion, ensuring we don't leave Australians behind as our economy changes, I am determined that we continue to build social inclusion.
Because when I think of the Aussies who “play by the rules, set their alarms early, get their kids off to school, stand by their neighbours and love their country”, when I think of Aussies whose lives are marked by hard work and education and respect, I inevitably think of the migrant experience.
I think of our multicultural Australia.
Because from Phillip and Bennelong, to convicts and freemen, to pastoralists and small holders, as diggers, on the goldfields, in trench or jungle.
Australians have a proud history.
A proud history of overcoming difference, of finding common ground.
Through all these long years, our people have stuck together: as friends, as neighbours, as citizens, as Australians.
It's never been perfect  -  but no people in the world have done so well.
Multiculturalism is the word that we use to capture our love of the things that bind us together and our respect for the diversity that enriches us. 
A concept caught so well by the words school children sing: “We are one but we are many.”
A fierce determination that we share opportunity and we don't leave any one behind.
So today, I am very proud to launch the Australian Multicultural Council.
The Council will be ably chaired, I know, by Judge Rauf Soulio.
I've greatly valued Rauf's advice and counsel in his previous roles and I look forward to a continuation of that fine community service as Council Chair.
I know Rauf will find in Gail Ker a very sound deputy.
And the other members of the Council, Ms Yassmin Abdel-Magied, Dr Tanveer Ahmed, Dr Hass Dellal, Ms Carmel Guerra, Dr Tim Soutphommasane, Mr Peter Wertheim, Prof Samina Yasmeen and Mr Talal Yassine are strong and vibrant voices all.
The council will also benefit from the advice of two ex officio members: Andrew Metcalfe, Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, and
Dr Helen Szoke, who has recently been appointed Race Discrimination Commissioner.
The new Council will play a key role in advising me and the Government I lead.
It will not just advise the Government on multicultural affairs, though this is vital.
It will take a formal role in a strengthened access and equity strategy, play a research advisory role for public policy and lead cultural diversity celebrations and Harmony Day activities.
Our new Council will ensure multiculturalism lives in the heart of government.
And today, I'm also delighted to announce that the Council will also implement a People of Australia Ambassadors' program.
These Ambassadors will be local champions for the values we share in our multicultural Australia, and any Australian can nominate a person who they think should be an Ambassador.
This is our way of recognising that multiculturalism really lives because of the millions of Australians who every day make sure they smile to welcome the new arrived family on that first day at school.
Who take the time to understand their neighbours' culture or make a point of teaching their children that putting out a hand in friendship is always better than repeating ugly labels.
These Ambassadors and the Council act as the stewards of the values we share and make our country, our people, stronger for the future.
As Australians, we offer opportunity to all ... we ask responsibility from all.
Give a chance, take a chance.
It's the only way it can work.
It's the way it has worked.
Opportunities seized, responsibilities embraced.
The people who have come here, the people we have become, makes us who we are.
Australians, together. 



The Gillard Labor Government today launched a new local ambassadors program to champion inclusion and highlight the benefits of Australia's diversity.
The People of Australia Ambassadors program was formally announced by Prime Minister Julia Gillard today at the launch of the new independent Australian Multicultural Council.
The Prime Minister encouraged Australians to nominate local champions from their own neighbourhood and communities who have helped to promote inclusion and participation in their community.
Up to 40 people will be selected as ambassadors to provide grassroots advice to the Australian Multicultural Council (AMC) about effective initiatives which promote inclusion and leverage diversity in our communities.
The AMC will provide advice to Government on multicultural policy and emerging issues and ensure Australian Government services respond effectively to the needs of Australia's diverse communities.
The Council was appointed as part of the Government's new multicultural policy, The People of Australia, released in February this year.
The former advisory council recommended the new independent body be set up to advise and consult the Government on multicultural issues and inform national policy.
The 10 member Council will have a formal role in a strengthened access and equity strategy, play a research advisory role for public policy, and lead cultural diversity celebrations and Harmony Day activities.
The launch of the new AMC demonstrates the Gillard Labor Government's commitment to policy and programs that build on the strength of Australia's cultural diversity.
The new Council will provide a strong voice on multicultural issues and contribute constructively to the broader deliberations of Government.
Information in relation to the AMC and the People of Australia Ambassadors program can be found at www.amc.gov.au



The Gillard Labor Government will introduce a new advance facility into its Steel Transformation Plan (STP) to provide further support for Australian jobs and to help ensure the future of the Australian steel industry.
This new facility will allow eligible participants to draw down an advance of their future entitlements under the STP in order to address short-term cash flow issues and help the industry become more efficient and sustainable.
It will allow BlueScope to bring forward into 2011-12 up to $100 million of the payments nominally allocated to it under the STP.  BlueScope would need to exercise its right to activate the advance facility in time for funds to be drawn by 30 June 2012.
Provision of the new facility hasbeenmade available after BlueScope made a number of commitments to the Government in relation to its restructure announced today, including:
 * 	Any de-activation of the Port Kembla blast furnace No. 6 and metal coating line No. 5 at Western Port must be in a manner which will enable themto be reactivated in the event of a sustained improvement in steel markets that enables profitable sales to resume.
 * 	Any workers which BlueScope makes redundant must be paid all their legal entitlements in accordance with applicable workplace relations legislation, modern awards and the National Employment Standards and any applicable industrial instrument.
 * 	BlueScope must commit to continuing as a significant employer in the Illawarra region over the term of the Steel Transformation Plan.
 * 	BlueScope must remain committed to steel production in Australia.
The Government will finalise the legislative design of the new facility in consultation with relevant industry stakeholders.
The Australian steel industry is facing a unique set of challenges, including a high Australian dollar, continued weak domestic demand, higher raw material prices and excess supply in international steel markets.  
Given these unique circumstances, in July this year the Government announced the STP which will provide assistance worth $300 million over five years from 2012-13.
The STP will encourage investment and innovation in the Australian steel manufacturing industry and help the sector transform into a more efficient and sustainable industry in a low carbon economy.
It is important to note that during these consultations BlueScope has made it very clear that its proposed restructure is in no way attributable to the introduction of a carbon price, and is instead driven by other factors such as the exchange rate and slowing global demand for steel products.
The Government stands shoulder to shoulder with the Australian steel industry, and is delivering a comprehensive package of support measures  -  in addition to the STP advance facility -  to help workers find new employment and to ensure local communities have a strong economy and a bright future. 



PM: Thank you. I'm joined today by the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, Wayne Swan and by the Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research, Minister Carr. As a Government we have been explaining to the Australian people for some time now that the fundamentals of the Australian economy are strong. We have low unemployment, we have strong public finances, we have a huge pipeline of investment coming on stream and we have strong banks. We've also been explaining to the Australian people that our economy does have patchwork pressures.
Though the economic fundamentals are strong, there are pressures on some industries and some regions. Those pressures arise in part from our very strong Australian dollar. It's a benefit for some but for some industries including manufacturing, that does put pressure on. And there are other competitive pressures and changes in the global economy that have impacts for some industries, regions and firms.
It's against that backdrop that today we have seen BlueScope announce that it will reduce jobs by 1000; 800 of those in the Illawarra and 200 in Hastings. Now this is an issue that affects us nationally, it affects those two regions and of course it affects the individual workers who are now understandably very worried about what their future will hold.
Nationally it affects us because we want to be a nation that produces steel, we want to be a nation that has a strong manufacturing sector and that offers the opportunity of high wage, high value adding manufacturing jobs.
For the regions involved, it is obviously a big blow to their local economies. For example, if we look at the Illawarra, more than 600 local firms contract with BlueScope, the firm BlueScope purchases more than $1.2 billion per annum in goods from the local economy and BlueScope provides goods worth more than $600 million per annum to the local economy.
So understanding this, the Government has made a set of decisions that we'll announce with my colleagues today and explain. We've decided to make this announcement because there's no higher priority for us as a Labor Government than supporting jobs. We've got a proud track record of supporting jobs, of managing the economy so that we create jobs and we intend to keep supporting jobs.
We also intend to keep managing the economy in the right way as we face these patchwork pressures, so that we spread opportunity for all and so that we do not see regions or individuals left behind. So the Government has determined to make available out of the Steel Transformation Plan money, a facility of $100 million. The Government has also determined to make available a package that totals $30 million as an investment and innovation fund. The $30 million is composed of $20 million flowing from the Federal Government, $5 million flowing from the New South Wales Government and $5 million flowing from BlueScope itself.
We've also determined to make available $10 million worth of services and support to the individual workers involved. We want to make sure that people do get the services and support they need to help them get the next opportunity, the next job, the next change in their life. This is a difficult day for many working people and their families, we understand that. We'll always be determined to support Australians and their jobs and consequently we are making these announcements today.
I'll turn now to the Treasurer first for some comments and then to Minister Carr.
TREASURER: Thanks very much Prime Minister. Minister Carr will deal with the detail of the programs and I'm happy to answer questions about that as well. Firstly, I want to say what an awful day it is for those workers that are involved in these decisions down in the Illawarra and elsewhere in Victoria. It's a terrible day and we feel their pain, but the fact is that our economy is changing and what we have to do is understand the broader economic context in which these events are happening.
We do need to recognise that the global economy is changing and of course the Australian economy changes with it. Now, these changes are going to bring great opportunities for our country and for our economy, great opportunities for the country in the longer term. But what we are also seeing is the challenges and some of the downside today. What we are seeing is some of the painful adjustments that take place in parts of our economy as part of that wider change.
What we are seeing is that the weight in the global economy is moving into Asia. Now this is not just the massive development in China but it's right across our region, and we all know this is pushing up demand for our resources, and along with our other strong economic fundamentals, what this does mean is a higher Australian dollar. Now on the one hand that means cheaper goods for Australian consumers but the higher dollar puts a lot of pressure on our trade-exposed industries, and BlueScope is an example of that and they have made that very clear in their announcement today. 
And what it means to companies like BlueScope is they do have to look for a sustainable business model, and of course, as I said, we are seeing the harsh consequences of that today. And this is part and parcel of having a patchwork economy. The Government has been talking about the patchwork economy for a long time. We began talking about it first in the Budget last year and we made it the centrepiece of our discussion about the future of the economy in the Budget this year. And it's instructive whilst you have this announcement today from BlueScope, you also see another announcement today from OneSteel with an expansion of their operation in South Australia. And we saw over the weekend further announcements in Queensland in terms of investments. Now none of that is great comfort to the workers involved in this announcement today. But what it means for Government, what it means for our country is we do have to face up to the challenges of the patchwork economy and we have to design our policies very carefully because of that patchwork economy. And that's why we identified the challenges of that patchwork economy in the Budget this year.
You might recall the centrepiece of the Budget was a $3 billion investment in skills and training, and you might also recall that last year we commenced the process of putting in place a resource rent tax. And what we want to do with that money is to give tax cut to businesses elsewhere in the economy that are not in the fast lane, recognising the reality of the patchwork economy. So what we have to do as we go forward is we have to continue to adjust our policies and our policy settings to ensure we do the best that we can for all of those in our economy including those that are not in the fast lane. 
I would just like to draw a contrast between our position on this critical question and that of Mr Abbott. Mr Abbott wants to abolish the MRRT. He doesn't want the revenue that will flow by way of lower company taxes to businesses in our economy. He thinks the mining companies are paying too much tax. What we've put in place through this arrangement with the MRRT - tax cuts for small business, tax cuts for corporates generally - is absolutely essential to ensuring that those businesses that aren't in the fast lane get a fair go. 
So as we go forward, I think Australians should be assured of the fact that we have jobs at the very core of our economic policy settings. We acted to keep this country out of recession during the global financial crisis and the global recession. We are determined to ensure that Australians stay in work. There's been something like 750,000 jobs created since the Government was first elected. And what we're about with our policy settings is ensuring that jobs and opportunities from the mining boom are spread around our country. 
And the last thing I want to say is the Government is absolutely committed to ensuring there is a future for manufacturing industry in this country. We do expect that the manufacturing industry will continue to grow and will be stronger as we go forward but what we're determined to do is to ensure we get the right policy settings in place that cater for the whole of our economy, not just those in the fast lane. And that's why we're announcing the policy responses today that Minister Carr will detail. 
Thank you.
MINISTER CARR:Well thank you Wayne. The Government has done three things in response to the decision by BlueScope to restructure its operations. Firstly, we have ensured that there is a full range of services and support, and that that's available for every worker and every family that is directly affected by the decision both in the Illawarra and the Western Port.
We've also put in place, with the support of the New South Wales Government and the company BlueScope, an Illawarra Innovation Investment Fund to create new jobs and to strengthen the economic base of the Illawarra region which of course has had much higher levels of unemployment than other parts of the country. We continue to work with the company to ensure that the capacity within the steel industry is maintained and that it can be brought back on line when economic conditions improve.
We are looking to strengthen the industry as a whole. The Government is in the business of helping workers, of helping regions and of ensuring that we manage the change that is necessary as we go through this period of adjustment. This in our view is the best option to follow. We have, of course, faced up to many difficulties in the past. The Treasurer and the Prime Minister have indicated during the economic crisis, we were able to manage the change and produce a much stronger economy as a result. And I am very confident, and I share with my colleagues the confidence about the future of manufacturing in this country.
So we will provide immediate and practical support to affected workers and communities by delivering a comprehensive package of support measures to help workers find new employment and to ensure that local communities have a strong economy and a brighter future.
What we are doing is providing a package including a $30 million Illawarra Regional Innovation Investment Fund to make that transition easier. In addition, the Government has asked Dr. Don Russell the Secretary of the Department of Innovation Industry Science and Research to lead a whole of Government response to the BlueScope announcement and to work with local Government and with the New South Wales Government to ensure that we have smooth transition arrangements.
We are also providing a local employment coordinator to provide practical advice at a local level to ensure workers are able to get the help that they need. The local employment coordinator's job will be to ensure that there are onsite provisions by job services Australia staff and local employment coordinators and of course Centrelink to ensure that they have dedicated services available for each and every worker affected by the decision.
We have also instituted a dedicated hotline to fast track referrals to Job Services Australia (inaudible) fast tracking relocation assistance for BlueScope workers and will provide payments of up to $6,000 for relocation assistance with an additional $3,000 in the case of families with dependent children.
What we are also doing is providing additional support through the Australian Steel Industry Scheme to ensure that BlueScope, upon request, is able to have necessary financial support if it is required. Such a facility will also be available to OneSteel.
PM: Yes Phil.
JOURNALIST: There's been a growing (inaudible) two speed pressures for some sort of incentive for the mining industry to spend more on local manufactured products, and then talking about mandating the 5-10 per cent of Australian steel products used in mining infrastructure. Are you considering measures that could facilitate or at least encourage the resources sector to help out the other sectors of the economy?
PM: I'll go to Minister Carr for some detailed comments but I do want to make the point, we have been talking about patchwork pressures in our economy for months and months and months. So whilst I understand that there's been media reporting on some calls over the last few weeks, this is something we've understood for a long period of time which is why we did calibrate the May budget in the way that we did, we understood that there would be differential pressures in our economy, these patchwork pressures and we wanted to be strongly engaged with regions and industries.
It's also why we've created the department that Minister Crean oversees so we can get more of an understanding of the differences in communities around the nation and how their economies are going and responding. Minister Carr has been on these questions of working with Australian industry and procurement for a quite extended period of time now and I turn to him for some detailed comments.
MINISTER CARR:The Government has provided in excess of $50 million to support a Buy Australian At Home and Abroad Campaign. We provide support through the industry advocates through the industry capability networks, through Enterprise Connect and a range of other measures so that we can try to get our local firms to work with international firms particularly in the resources sector. We will have more to say about this later in the week, but it is our intention to match our capabilities with opportunities and we've got to ensure that people understand the benefits of buying Australian at home and abroad and that's very much at the core of the approach. The direct result of that has been many billions of dollars of work for Australian industry than otherwise would be the case. These are arrangements that were not in place under the former Government. These are new arrangements, and they are producing results for Australian firms.
JOURNALIST: Just on this patchwork economy, when you look at some of the numbers you've got for the (inaudible) $1 billion profit, BHP $30 plus billion, these are huge profits, you've got BlueScope minus $1 billion. Isn't the proper policy response to give these people a financial incentive not to go with Chinese suppliers but supporting their east coast brethren?
PM: Let me just make a few comments and then I'll turn to my Ministerial friends and I can tell they're itching to get into this. Because we've understood for a long period of time that our economic future was going to be one of an economy in transition, a strong resources sector, that's a good thing, that's a great thing, it means literally hundreds and hundreds of billions of dollars of investment coming down the pipeline, it means jobs, it means jobs in construction and jobs in mining themselves. And it means the services that mining needs also have a bright future. We've understood that for a long period of time. We've also understood that that was going to create these differential pressures including the impact of the strong Aussie dollar on other sections of the economy, manufacturing, tourism, international education.
Because we've understood that for a long period of time we've been calibrating our economic settings to respond to it. This is the foundation stone of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, understanding that we've got a turbo charged section of the economy likely to be very, very highly profitable and we wanted to ensure that we got a fair share of those profits and we're able to use those proceeds to help balance economic activity in other parts of the Australian economy. That's why we're reducing the company tax rate, that's why we're offering small businesses special tax breaks, that's why we're investing in infrastructure and why of course we're backing in growth in our pool of national savings, precisely to deal with these questions. And then on the advocacy of Australian industry, as Minister Carr has indicated, we'll have something more to say about these questions during the course of this week but we have already been working to bring that advocacy for Australian industry into these projects so that locals can best maximise these opportunities.
Now everything we do has to be compliant with our role as a great trading nation that needs to comply with the rules based trading order, the World Trade Organisation rules and so we will always work within that because our future is as a great trading nation. And I turn now to the Treasurer first.
TREASURER: I've spoken to many of these large investors who indicate to me that they are keen on sourcing product locally where they can but when you go out and talk to industry sometimes you find that they put a contrary proposition. Minister Carr and I had a meeting only on Friday morning with a significant number of local manufacturers who suggested that this wasn't always occurring in the way in which it should. Nobody is looking here for a solution which is not market based. We want to see Australian suppliers who do a good job and produce good product, get a fair go in terms of accessing this investment. Some of those that we spoke to said they didn't think that was the case on Friday morning. So Minister Carr and I are going to follow up on that. We have a range of other initiatives in place that Minister Carr spoke about before but I think Australians would expect that where possible many of these large investments should be sourcing product domestically where that product tis competitive. 
So there's a pretty strong conversation going on about this in our community and there should be. And we're going to engage with it further with industry and with the investors.  What we want to ensure is that everybody gets a fair go on a competitive basis.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Gina Rinehart has got a contract for the supply of Chinese-made rail tracks which is actually using steel that might have been sourced from Australia in the first instance.
TREASURER: No, I don't agree with that one way or the other because I'm not aware of the commercial detail. I also know that it is unrealistic to expect that these major projects won't be sourcing a significant amount of product from overseas because they are very big investments and of course product will be sourced from overseas, that's just common sense.  I was referring to something else. I was referring to the fact that I've run into a number of people in manufacturing who have suggested to me that there may in fact be some impediments that where they're competitive they may not necessarily be getting a look in, if you like. So as a Government I think we've got to go through those issues responsibly with the industry. I'm not suggesting any solution that is not market based but I think we've got a responsibility as a country to ensure that our manufacturers get a fair go in these commercial contracts.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
TREASURER: No, it's not necessarily steel specifications. I don't think OneSteel thinks that it is a competitor in some of these contracts either and it is indeed not necessarily saying that. So what we're looking for is market-based outcomes but I think what people will responsibly want to know is local product being sourced where it's competitive or not? And if people raise with me or Minister Carr, these questions, we're happy to have a look at it. 
We have already been working in this area. Minister Carr spoke before about the program that we put forward in the Budget to assist industry in this task of sourcing contracts from these very big investments. And if you go around the country you'll find that state governments have been involved in discussions with companies as well as industry groups and we're going to have a good discussion about that with the industry and with the investors because this is a very important investment phase for Australia. It's important that investors make a profit and it's important that Australians understand that the opportunities that are flowing from these investments are to all our advantage.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one of the Ministers spoke, I think Senator Carr spoke before about this is an issue of (inaudible) and change and if you listen to Mr Howes for example he says ok, so one sector's great fortune is a problem for another. Do you think it's the case as he says that manufacturing in Australia is in a crisis and that the change will be semi permanent or move onto a different footing, or are we going to perhaps come back the other way in the future, (inaudible)?
PM: I'll respond first and then we'll go to Michelle after that.
We live in a world of important transitions that will shape out nation's future. One of those transitions is the movement of global economic weight from west to east. We are in the region of the world that will see strong growth, I mean the Asia-Pacific century.
We are also in transition in our own economy, as we see the spectacular growth of resources and pressures on some other industry sectors, so there is a transition there. And of course, we're in transition too, to a cleaner energy future.
On the transition within our economy as the resources sector grows, when it's hungry for people, for skills, for infrastructure, when we're enjoying record terms of trade and the Australian dollar is so strong. That does put pressure on other industry segments. But we shouldn't conclude from that that we won't be a country in the future that manufactures things. We will be a country that manufactures goods. We've got to keep working to make sure we maintain competitiveness, we've always got to be looking to take ourselves up the innovation and value chain. That's good for our national economy, it's particularly good for the people who work in manufacturing who have the ability to get those high wage, high skill jobs.
And so when you look across the broad sweep of manufacturing in Australia you can see some remarkable success stories, even as we see this economic transformation with the strength of resources and the high Australian dollar. So I'm very determined that we will be a nation that has a diverse economic base and that's one of the reasons why we have worked and will keep working to ensure that our economic management is about spreading opportunity, spreading jobs, spreading skills, making sure no one's left behind, that we don't just say ‘well it's satisfactory to us that some industries and some regions fall by the wayside', that's not satisfactory to me as Prime Minister. That's why we will be strongly engaged with regions and with industries during this time of transition.
JOURNALIST: Sorry Prime Minister, in today's case, the things you've announced are a response to something that's happened to help them get over the result. But what is your Government doing, or can't you tell us until later in the week, to attack things beyond (inaudible) about  -  what is your response?
PM: I'll turn to Minister Carr for further responses, but as a Government we have been strongly engaged with manufacturing. It's what the new car plan is about, with more than $5 billion, that's recognising that being involved in manufacturing automobiles brings a set of skill sets into your economy that if you lose them they are very hard to replace.
So, very strongly engaged with the manufacturing of cars and the transition of our car manufacturing into a cleaner, greener future, because that's what people are going to want to buy, those cleaner greener cars, and we see that in the market place at the moment.
We've been strongly engaged too on manufacturing innovation and Minister Carr has led the way with his agenda about powering ideas, enterprise connect, cooperative research centres, which means that we can take innovations, things that matter to productivity and competitiveness and spread them so that we've got that competitive edge.
Our skill settings have been more and more finely calibrated, so we are working direct with industry and training to meet their needs. You saw some of that in the budget before last and then you saw more of it in the last budget.
And then of course, we have a workplace relations setting which enables enterprise bargaining for productivity, meeting differential needs for workplaces around the country.
But I'll turn to Minister Carr for some further comments.
MINISTER CARR: Let me just talk about my bit because the Prime Minister has indicated there's a whole lot of activity going on here from training to right through to workplace relations. From the very point at which this Government was elected, we were in the business of managing change. That's why we set up the Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research. That's why we've increased the support for those areas by 43 per cent. This Government is spending $9.4billion per annum on science, research and on innovation because we are in the business of managing change. This is an economy that simply will not survive if we do nothing, if we just let things bubble along, if we just allow things to continue as they are. We are in the business of working with companies, with universities, with the CSIRO and all our science agencies because they are very much at the cutting edge of this great transformation that is occurring in our economy, as we move from what we used to be to what we are going to be, and be able to face up to the huge challenges of the twenty first century. That's how we maintain prosperity, that's how we maintain living standards, that's how we make sure everyone in this country gets a fair go. And that's what this Government has been doing, whether it's in climate change or in any other area, we are in the business of managing change.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, in view of the stark contrast we're seeing in the patchwork economy, both at a sector level and at a company level, isn't there an argument that you gave away far too much to the mining companies when you renegotiated the mining tax?
PM: No, there's not. We've designed a tax that we can implement and we're getting about implementing it.
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much. What impact has the carbon tax produced on these job losses today? What, if any, impact from the carbon tax?
PM: Absolutely none and I'd refer you to BlueScope's press release in that regard, which makes that crystal clear.
I understand that there will be people who will seek to distort this for their own political purposes. We are talking about 1000 job losses, what we should be doing it making sure people have the accurate information, this is not related to the Government's carbon pricing policy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is one answer to the patchwork economy finding new ways to let, or encourage workers to move to where the jobs are? I know that you've said you want to support manufacturing, but right now demand for jobs is in resources, you've got a relocation bonus in the package today, do you really want a workforce culture change in a sense, so that the future for steel worker in Wollongong might be becoming a FIFO worker in Queensland or WA?
PM: One of the things we've been thinking about, and obviously developing some programs to trial and see outcomes, is about relocation. Now, people have a strong sense of place and deep community roots, so I think we can all just from a common sense perspective understand that a family with two people in the workforce with kids in schools, with a network of friends, with nearby family, with all of those things that go to make up a life, find it hard to just pull up stumps and move across the country.
So, I think we can all understand what puts some pressure on the ability to move around. But we have wanted to trial some approaches to see if people who are unemployed and are in regions with high unemployment, can prosper in another part of the country. We put in place a program there and we upped the ante to assist with getting the workforce necessary to rebuild Queensland after the Queensland floods.
Look, I indicated as I sat round the COAG table with premiers and chief ministers on Friday, where we talked about the underlying strength of the Australian economy, but we also talked about these patchwork pressures. I indicated there I'm obviously open to discussions and ideas about labour mobility, recognising though the real constraints that there are for people.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the original steel transformation plan was based on the steel industry being trade exposed, now if you're not exporting will they have to be (inaudible)?
PM: Well, they're still trade exposed, obviously. Trade exposed is trade exposed in both the exporting sense and competing with imports sense. Yes.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) suggested that there should be a new version of the accord to help enlist the unions into things like raising productivity at the same time that manufacturers union says that there should be closer consultation on industry plans and things like this. Is there a need or a justification for some sort of new mechanism like an accord to deal with the unions and help enlist them to raise productivity and things like that?
PM: I think the days of an accord in the way that we used to understand it are gone, because it relied on being able to deliver wage outcomes through a highly centralised wage fixing system, and we no longer live in a country with a highly centralised wage fixing system. We are proudly deliverers of, creators of the enterprise bargaining system that the Fair Work Act has at its heart, but if you mean accord in the broad sense of is there always a role for us to be strongly working with employers and their organisations and unions  -  of course there is and each of us, everyday in our own way, stays in good touch with both employer organisation and union organisations to foster that culture of cooperation, competitiveness and productivity.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your Government used some procedural chicanery today to prevent the Parliament from voting on whether it believes Craig Thomson should make a full explanation to the House of Representatives. Can you explain to us please why you believe that he doesn't need to make that explanation, why the people don't deserve that?
PM: Questions of parliamentary statements are a matter for the parliamentarians involved. But what I would say more broadly on this matter is, for a long period of time here, there's been a Fair Work Australia investigation in train, I think the right thing to do is to await the outcomes of that investigation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if you've got complete confidence in Mr Thomson, would you then be happy for the Coalition's call for a police investigation to go ahead, if you're completely confident?
PM: I happen to be a believer in democracy and the separation of powers and I'll never believe in a day where a politician can tell a police officer what to do about a criminal investigation. That's absolutely wrong under the Australian system, Westminster system as we understand it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the developments in Libya, (inaudible)?
PM: Even, I'm just conscious even as we've stood here, events are moving very, very quickly. But it obviously appears that the rebels are in Tripoli, that the rebels are about to secure Libya overall, obviously the task is not yet done, but from what we've seen on our TV screens that appears to be what will happen. We will, as a nation, continue to support the people of Libya, on what we want to see as a journey to peace and democracy. We continue to call on Colonel Gaddafi to get out of the way and of course we believe he should face the international charges that are against him.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned measures to help industries and business that aren't in the fast lane. I was just wondering in your discussions with business figures how frequently do they express concerns about the Government's workplace laws?
TREASURER: Well it is raised from time to time but it's not raised as frequently as many other issues are raised. I think there's a whole basket of issues that business raise and the Government is intent on discussing all of these issues with business. One of the discussions we'll have, for example, at the Tax Forum will be on the most appropriate form of corporate taxation given the fact we've got a patchwork economy or a two-speed economy or whatever you want to call it. These are all matters that do need to be discussed if we want to maximise all of the opportunities that are flowing from this mining boom. Thanks.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: (audio break) and was from the 2nd Battalion of the Royal Australian Regiment based in Townsville. He was on his first tour of Afghanistan. He was supporting a mentored patrol in Uruzgan province when he was killed by an improvised explosive device. An International Security Assistance Force soldier, not an Australian, was wounded in the same incident. At the request of the family the soldier's name has not been released at this time but we don't need to know this soldier's name to know that we've lost a brave man and we don't need to know this soldier's name to know that there is a family in the depths of grief tonight.
As Prime Minister I offer them the nation's condolences, our most loving thoughts are with them as they absorb this, the most dreadful of news.
I also want to not that this would be a very hard time for this soldier's mates, his comrades in arms and particularly his fellow soldiers at 2RAR in Townsville. We're also thinking of them tonight.
I did want to say a few words about the role that our mentoring taskforces play in Afghanistan. Members of our mentoring taskforces do very difficult and very dangerous work, but it's also vitally important work. Indeed it's the work of these very brave Australians that is one of the foundation stones that will enable us to transition in Afghanistan. Without an effective and capable Afghan National Army, security post-transition cannot be guaranteed and consequently we could not realise our goal of an Afghanistan that will not again become a safe haven for international terrorism. So what these mentoring taskforces do is patiently, carefully and with all the superb professionalism we've come to associate with our Defence Force, they build a capable Afghan military force. Now that's difficult work, it's dangerous work, and we've lost a soldier doing that work today. But that is work that needs to be done so the Afghan people can take security leadership of their nation.
On behalf of the nation I want to thank the members of the mentoring taskforces for their dedication and their bravery as they continue to perform this critical task.
This fighting season in Afghanistan has been a very hard one for our nation. We've grieved for too many lives lost, too many young lives lost. As I've said before I can't promise the Australian people that there won't be another day like this, but I can promise that we're making progress, that Australia's national interests are served by being in Afghanistan, that we have a clear goal, a defined mission and a timeline of the end of 2014. That transition is already beginning to occur in the first areas of Afghanistan and that in Uruzgan, the province where we work, we are on track to achieve transition by no later than the end of 2014. We remain determined to see this mission through, we remain determined to ensure that Afghanistan does not again become a safe haven for terrorists, but this is a difficult day, a difficult night, particularly for one Australian family. My condolences go to them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister when can we expect the next update to Parliament about Afghanistan?
PM: It will be before the end of this year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is there any information on the nationality of the other soldier who was injured?
PM: I'm not in a position to take that any further than the Chief of the Defence Force did.
JOURNALIST: It appears we are still losing several soldiers to improvised explosive devices, is there anything else that you can do to secure or to ensure the safety of our soldiers in Afghanistan in relation to them?
PM: We take the best of advice from our Defence Force about the force protection against IEDs. Every incident is of course analysed and looked at to see if there is anything further we can learn or do to protect our forces but we have responded to the very best of advice about the force protection we can provide.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what have you been told about this man, anything about him that you haven't already said?
PM: Look I'm not in a position to give personal details, this is at the request of the family that needs some time to absorb this news before personal details are made public.
Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister good morning and welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning. 
HOST: First up, your reaction to the events in Libya; will - after the euphoria subsides this country will have to move from a dictatorship to a democracy, will Australia have a role in a post-Gaddafi Libya?
PM: The regime of a tyrant has come to an end and so we are seeing remarkable scenes on our television screens from Libya. But the fighting and risk of bloodshed is not yet over.
So we do call, as other international communities have, for Colonel Gaddafi's forces to lay down their arms, for fighting to cease, and then we will work with the international community to help Libya transition to being a peaceful, inclusive democracy without reprisals taking place for this era in Libya's history.
Now that's going to take a lot of hard work. There is an economy to be rebuilt, a society to be rebuilt, a democracy to be built.
These are all big challenges but we have already provided humanitarian assistance to the people of Libya and, of course, will stay engaged as a member of the international community as Libya moves to the next stage.
HOST: Turning to domestic issues now, BlueScope announced the axing of more than 1000 jobs yesterday. Manufacturing in Australia is in a pretty bad way, how many more jobs do you think will be lost in the months ahead; there are predictions that 1000, sorry 100,000 jobs will go by mid-next year?
PM: I think it's important here to understand the forces and pressures in the Australian economy. We believe that jobs will continue to grow in the Australian economy.
What we're seeing in our economy is the result of global economic weight moving from west to east, to our region of the world. That gives us huge opportunities, huge opportunities through our resources boom and through the provision of services to a growing Asian region and a growing middle class.
So there are great prospects for the Australian economy, but it's also true to say in these days of transition, there are sections of the Australian economy under great pressure.
Manufacturing is one sector of our economy that is feeling as a burden the high Australian dollar, even though the high Australian dollar does some good things in other parts of the economy and is good for consumers as it makes imports cheaper.
So we've been working with manufacturing through our Australian Procurement Statement; working to get manufacturing a fair go and a fair share in the big procurement decisions that are made by government and also by other businesses in this nation.
HOST: But thousands more jobs will go-
PM: Well look I'm not endorsing any of these projections that we're seeing in today's newspapers. We believe that we can work with manufacturing so that it's got a bright future in this country. We are working to modernise and strengthen our economy.
Our economy in the future is going to be different from the past. It's going to be a clean energy economy - that will be different. We'll have an even higher level of technology through the NBN - that will be different. People will have different skills and higher levels of skills - that will be different.
But as we move to that new economy we believe we can take traditional industries, like manufacturing, with us. Getting them the benefits of the clean energy future, which will require things to be manufactured, the benefits of higher level skills, the productive benefits that come from new technology, as well as the direct advocacy and assistance as procurement decisions are made.
HOST: Manufacturers want tax cuts and further IR reform to help them through this tough time, will you help them examine those things?
PM: We've worked hard with manufacturing. So when you look at our policies and plans over all, we have the 'Buy Australian At Home and Abroad' campaign; we have our Australian Industry Procurement Plans which have literally leveraged billions and billions of dollars into manufacturing. We'll continue to do that.
This week we will announce some new modest measures and then we'll stay strongly engaged with manufacturing, with employers, with unions, as manufacturing goes through this period of transition.
HOST: You're saying modest, not on the scale that you forked out yesterday?
PM: Well yesterday we wanted to respond to a situation about working people's jobs. There's nothing more important to me as Prime Minister than Australians having the benefits and dignity of work. I've spoken to the nation a lot about spreading opportunity and making sure no-one feels, or is at risk, of being left behind.
I know, in these days of transition in our economy, that there are some people and some regions feeling like they're being left behind or at risk of being left behind. We don't want to see that, we will always work with those people and those regions and that's what you saw us do yesterday.
HOST: With this package that you're flagging, will it help places like Cairns? I mean Cairns has got an unemployment rate that's double the national average at the moment, they're suffering because of the high dollar too.
PM: When I've spoken about the patchwork economy, one of the areas I've often pointed to as I've tried to explain this to people, is Cairns because, yes, it does have a high unemployment rate, and tourism there has suffered from the high Australian dollar. We've got to be strongly engaged with those industries that are feeling pressures and are in transition. Manufacturing's one, tourism's one, international education's one.
But I'm an optimist for the Australian economy. We are here in the region of the world that is growing, our fundamentals are strong, the growth in our region gives us huge opportunities, not just in resources but in services too, and in food production. Yes, there are pressures on other parts of the economy, but they too can play a strong part in Australia's economic future.
But we've got to keep strengthening, we've got to keep modernising and that does mean we've got to keep taking the hard decisions now, which will pay dividends tomorrow.
HOST: Turning to the Manus Island Memorandum of Understanding. In 2007 you said that Labor would end the so-called Pacific solution, and to quote you, you said "we would not have off-shore processing in Manus Island and Nauru". Why are you breaking that promise?
PM: We've determined at this stage to act hard to break the people smuggler's business model. That's what the Malaysian arrangement is about, that is before the High Court at the moment, and of course there's a strict limit to what I can say about a court case that's in progress.
HOST: But sure, on Manus Island, you broke a promise.
PM: Well we've decided that it's appropriate, with the Malaysia arrangement and it's very, very tough message to people smugglers, to also have a centre in PNG.
But it is a different model from the model of the Howard government. That was strictly a model that Australia engaged in as a one-out set of decisions under a great deal of pressure with the Tampa. What we've done instead is worked regionally to get the Bali Framework. We will have a bilateral arrangement with PNG now, but we will stay engaged with our region on the question of a regional assessment centre.
So we've taken a regional approach because we've always understood that this is an issue for our whole region; whereas the Howard government dealt with this just one out in Australia without that kind of overarching approach.
HOST: The Human Rights Commission says the Government, your government, shouldn't proceed with this because this sounds like the Pacific Solution. A policy, it says, was expensive and it caused significant hardship and mental harm to the people that ended up there.
PM: Well I'm going to have to take a different view. We've worked through the Bali process to get a regional framework. Then under that framework we've negotiated the transfer agreement with Malaysia. And, under that framework, we are looking to a bilateral arrangement with PNG now.
But as we look to that bilateral arrangement, we will continue to work with the region for regional solutions, including, as auspiced by the Bali process, regional assessment centres.
HOST: To Craig Thomson now. Tony Abbott says he's a protected species, the Shadow Finance Minister, Andrew Robb, used Parliamentary privilege last night to describe him, Craig Thomson, as a thief and a liar. Why did the New South Wales branch of the Labor Party pay his legal bills?
PM: Look, this is a question for the New South Wales branch of the Labor Party.
HOST: We've rung them, we're not getting calls back.
PM: Well that is as it may be Sabra, but decisions by the New South Wales branch of the Labor Party are their decisions. But more broadly can I say, in relation to the Opposition here, I don't think people appreciate hypocrisy.
As Prime Minister, what I've said about the Member for Dobell is that there is an investigation in train by Fair Work Australia, and we should await the outcome of that investigation.
There is only one Member of Parliament who's been charged with a criminal offence, it's not a member of my team.
HOST: Well Fairfax has revealed this morning that the mobile phone used to call escort agencies was also used to call Stephen Smith and Mark Arbib. This casts doubt on Mr Thomson's denials - he's previously said that the credit card used to pay for these things was used by someone else, and the implication too was that his phone was used by someone else, have you sought an explanation from him?
PM: There's an investigation by Fair Work Australia in train-
HOST: But have you sought it?
PM: I've certainly spoken to Craig Thomson, of course I have, but there is an investigation in train by Fair Work Australia, and I believe that it's appropriate that that investigation work its way through.
Let's remember here in this very Parliament we've had members of Parliament, members of the Howard government investigated by the Australian Federal Police and ultimately the police found that they had no case to answer.
So, Fair Work Australia will work its way through, we'll await the outcome of that investigation. In the meantime the Member for Dobell is doing his job as the local member in this Parliament.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard stood up for quite a long time yesterday with Industry Minister Kim Carr as well as Treasurer Wayne Swan to talk about what they're going to do to support workers and steel communities and the Prime Minister joins us now, you're at 97.3 ABC Illawarra, Julia Gillard good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Wayne Swan yesterday talked about our patchwork economy and if I can extend the metaphor a little further, it looks like the seams are starting to come apart in some places such as the Illawarra. Is the pain of job losses in manufacturing worth the economic value of the resources boom to Australia?
PM: We've been using the terminology ‘patchwork economy' for a while because I think it does help explain what's happening in our economy today. We are seeing transition in the world economy where economic weight is moving to our region from West to East. That has got huge opportunities, big opportunities in resources, in exporting services to a new Asian middle-class which is growing rapidly, it's also got big opportunities for food production but it does mean our Australian dollar's strong and it's going to stay strong and that puts pressure on and we've seen the outcome of some of that pressure yesterday with the announcement from BlueScope. So I do understand that for many in the Illawarra yesterday would have been received as devastating news and we will be there working with the people of the Illawarra as they go through this period and we will be working to secure new economic opportunities in the Illawarra. I'm an optimist about the Australian economy, I'm an optimist about a long-term role for manufacturing, but we do live in a time of change where we need to keep working to strengthen and modernise our economy with the new opportunities of the future including clean energy, including higher value added and new skills and including the opportunities of new technology and manufacturing can be part of that and benefit from that.
HOST: Are we truly modernising our economy if moves such as we saw yesterday mean we're less of a manufacturer, less of a value-adder, and simply more of a sandpit for China?
PM: I don't think that is the future vision of our economy. Yes we will have a strong resources sector, we've got hundreds of billions of dollars of projects in the pipeline, that means jobs in construction, it means ongoing jobs in mining, it means we've got very strong terms of trade, record terms of trade, it also means we've got a high Australian dollar. That will be a strong and growing part of the Australian economy but it will be part of the economy. We will be a nation that makes things, that manufactures goods, we will be a nation that provides services, we will be a nation that seizes the opportunities that flow from a cleaner energy future, from higher skills and higher value adding as well as from new technology like the NBN, but to get there requires work and there are, in the Illawarra and around the country, there are industries and regions facing very painful transitions. I very much understand that pain which is why yesterday I made the announcements with Wayne Swan and Kim Carr about our support for the people of the Illawarra and why today I want to say to you and through you to the people listening we will be there working alongside the people of the Illawarra during this period.
HOST: Part of it was to bring forward $100 million of payments under the Government's steel transformation plan, now this is supposed to be to help companies such as BlueScope adjust to what you're calling a clean energy future, to cope with the carbon tax, but BlueScope says the decision to cut those 800 odd jobs has nothing to do with the Federal Government's proposed carbon tax. Can you explain how this makes sense, that this money goes to them?
PM: Well certainly BlueScope said that yesterday's announcement's got nothing to do with carbon pricing-
HOST: So what are they getting carbon pricing money?
PM: Well when we sat and talked to our steel industry as we were putting together the carbon pricing plan, we were alive to the fact that there were other pressures on the shoulders of the steel industry, pressures from the high Australian dollar, pressures from competition, pressures from costs. So we understood that this was a period of transition in the steel industry already and consequently we worked on the steel transformation plan and it's been appropriate to access some of that money early to make a difference for BlueScope now.
We've also announced a package of $30 million, $20 million from us, $5 million from the New South Wales State Government and $5 million from Blue Scope itself to work with the region for economic diversification and the creation of new jobs and new opportunities, and there's $10 million of immediate support for people who lose their jobs, who need employment services, opportunities at new skills, support to get a new job for the future.
HOST: Ok so what you're telling me is the Government's Steel Transformation Plan is not just about adjustment to a clean energy future and to the imposition of a carbon tax, it's about coping with the high Australian dollar as well?
PM: Look it was understanding that we already had a steel industry in a big time of change and of course further change is going to be brought by pricing carbon and so we though what is the best way we can help our steel industry transform for the future, given all of these pressures.
HOST: You've also, as part of this help to the workers, said that you're going to fast track relocation assistance for BlueScope workers, that could be up to $9,000 for families with dependent children, are we just going to see these 800 fly directly to Western Australia?
PM: No of course not, there will be different decisions made by different working people and we want people to have options. It may be that some people want to relocate, that they see a new opportunity and a new future in another part of the country and if people see that then of course we will work with them so that they can seize that new opportunity. But in the Illawarra I want to see new jobs, new opportunities right there and that's what the $30 million of investment is about, diversifying the economic base of the Illawarra. So I see a strong future for the Illawarra but we do want to facilitate people making the choices that are right for them and their families.
HOST: Prime Minister I have a question here from a listener of ours called Colin, Colin go ahead mate.
CALLER: Simply matter might be to put a tariff on imported steel, seeing we've got billions of dollars of expansion which requires a hell of a lot of steel, and as far as pollution goes the rate that steel is producing worldwide are we going to see much reduction in that?
HOST: Ok, Prime Minister the question is why haven't we put a tariff on imported steel?
PM: I thank Colin for that question. We wouldn't put tariffs on because if we start building up trade walls then other countries do the same and our great exporting industries, whether it's resources, or whether it's agriculture, or whether it's manufacturing, because we do export manufactured goods, then our great exporting industries pay the price as other countries retaliate and start building up their tariff walls as well.
So, we've taken a different approach to supporting manufacturing. We did in 2009 announce the Australian Government Procurement Statement, that was a $50 million plan, it brings with it the buy Australian at home and abroad initiative, so that's about encouraging the use of Aussie goods, including Aussie steel.
We have what we call industry participation plans, so when Government goes out and says we want to buy big things, then the people we deal with have to have a plan about how they're involving-
HOST: -the Australian Steel Institute says those regulations are completely flimsy and are flouted all the time. We need to strengthen that Australian Industry Participation Plan to ensure that Australian manufacturers, steel industry in particular, gets a fair go at a tender.
PM: Well, we have had these new initiatives put in to place. They have levered new investment, so in the past 18 months we've seen around $2.8 billion, almost $3 billion worth of announced contracts that have had these plans, Australian Industry Participation Plans. We've used other government policy areas too, for example there are some firms that seek to have some concessions on import of goods  -  we say well, if you're going to do that you have to have an Australian Industry Participation Plan. That's meant that there are those plans in place for Aussie firms for around $11.2 billion worth of projects.
And we also have what we call the Supplier Access to Major Projects Program. That embeds procurement specialists who are there advocating for local businesses and local industries. And that's resulted in $3.5 billion worth of contracts flowing, which may not have otherwise flowed.
But there are these special measures in place to support Australian procurement. During the course of this week we will announce some further modest measures, and of course we're going to stay strongly engaged in manufacturing  -  employers, employees, employer organisations, unions  -  during this time of change.
HOST: Right, even though you're encouraging people to buy Australian and you say we have these plans in place, I'm sure Australian manufacturers get a fair go at contributing to some of these resources projects. The bigger issue and even Paul O'Malley agrees, that - he's a believer in free markets - that we are not on a level playing field, particularly where the Chinese currency is concerned, this is a major problem.
Is there anything the Australian Government can do to put pressure on the Chinese Government to float their currency in a fair way?
PM: We advocate through all of the international forums that I attend and the Deputy Prime Minister attends in his capacity as Treasurer, for balanced global growth, for making sure that economies, including our own, can continue to grow and of course questions of currency and currency value have been raised in those discussions. So, we will continue to have our voice heard on that question, whilst we take the practical measures here in Australia today that can make a difference for local manufacturing.
HOST: OK, back to the Investment and Innovation Fund, is $30 million, some of which actually comes from BlueScope Steel. How many jobs do you envisage that actually creating?PM: Well, yes, $5 million does come from BlueScope. I think, to be frank, we're at a stage before that yet, we've got to use this $30 million in great consultation with people of the Illawarra and the businesses of the Illawarra, about how best to structure the future. It's not going to be a question of us sitting here in Canberra and saying ‘gee, we know what's good for the Illawarra, let's go and tell them'. That's not how it's going to work. It's going to be a process that involves the people of the Illawarra working with us, with the State Government, with these funds through Local Government, local employers, local unions, working together to design a shared vision of the future.
HOST: BlueScope say that they're already one of the world's most efficient plant, they spend hundreds of millions of dollars on R&amp;D. Can simple funds just create innovation in the Illawarra and actually create jobs?
PM: Well, you can certainly catalyse innovation and I've seen that all around the country. I mean we are a nation of very smart people, very smart people with great ideas and when we put those great ideas into effect then that can make a big difference for our competitiveness and our ability to sell things to the world. So, one of the reasons I'm such an optimist about the future of the Australian economy, is I'm such a great believer in the skills and capacities of the Australian people. I, as Prime Minister, get to see that on display every day.
HOST: Many economics commentators, including the ABC's Stephen Long on 7.30 last night, said that we're suffering a resources curse, or the Dutch disease, that this boom in resources, inevitably is going to squeeze other areas of the economy, whether it's retail, or tourism, or manufacturing, as we've seen yesterday.
Are we making enough out of our resources to ensure that the rest of our economy is not simply squeezed out of existence?
PM: One of the reasons we designed the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is precisely this  -  we've understood for a long period of time now that this was going to be a time of opportunity, as we saw huge demand for our resources in the region in which we live, as we saw record terms of trade, and a time of opportunity, as we saw a growing Asian middle class, wanting many of the services and products and food that Australia's got to sell. So, there are great opportunities around, but we also understood this would be a time of sharp adjustments and adjustments with pain associated with them in other parts of the economy. So, we designed the Minerals Resource Rent Tax so that we would take more tax from the turbo-charged super profitable section of the economy, resources, and use that to support other areas in the economy, by cutting company tax and by providing special tax breaks for small business, as well as by increasing out national pool of savings through superannuation, which is good for individual workers when they retire, a bigger retirement income that's a good thing, but it's also good for our national economy to have a greater pool of national savings.
So, our framework in making decisions about taxation for the resources sector has been about supporting and balancing growth in other areas of the economy.
HOST: OK. Finally, you've suggested that you would wear out your shoe leather travelling around the country talking about the carbon tax, and while we do appreciate your time on the phone this morning, when are we going to see that shoe leather on the footpaths of the Illawarra?
PM: Look, I'm making it my business to travel widely. Of course I travel widely for a whole variety of purposes, including talking to people about carbon pricing. We will stay very strongly engaged with the people of the Illawarra during this period. You've got great local members in Stephen and Sharon, who every day will be advocating the case for the people of the Illawarra, so I'll look forward to a future visit, but the work of designing that economy of the future is starting right now, arising from the decisions that we announced yesterday.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thank you for your talking to us this morning.
PM: Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Health Minister Nicola Roxon today heard how Australia's first Medicare Locals are on their way to better coordinating local doctors, nurses and allied health professionals to provide more responsive and targeted services for patients.
Leaders from 19 Medical Locals have showcased the benefits of the Australian Government initiative at a forum held at Parliament House in Canberra today.
The Prime Minister and Minister Roxon welcomed the representatives from Medicare Locals and encouraged them to share the innovative ways they are responding more effectively to the health care needs of their communities.
Medicare Locals are a key part of the Gillard Labor Government's national health reform measures.
They are primary health care organisations working to make it easier for patients to access the services they need by better linking local GPs, nursing and other health professionals, hospitals and aged care, and maintaining up to date local service directories.
There is no one-size-fits-all for Medicare Locals. What works in Western Sydney won't necessarily work in Bunbury, which is why the locally-run organisations are looking at the health needs of their community and targeting services to meet these needs.
More than four out of five Australians see a GP or other primary health care provider at least once a year.
A key priority of the Government's national health reforms is to shift the centre of gravity from hospitals towards primary health care and Medicare Locals will be front and centre in this process.
Under the reforms, Medicare Locals will deliver home-grown solutions to local health problems and make it easier for Australians to see and contact a health professional, closer to home.
Examples of how Medicare Locals can make a difference include:
 * 	easier access for patients to see an afterhours GP close to home
 * 	better access local programs to combat obesity or diabetes support services
 * 	targeted referrals to specialist services such as a local physio or psychologist.
There are a range of initiatives amongst Medicare Locals that are already making a difference like e-Health patient records in Brisbane, Closing the Gap services in Western Sydney or increasing access to Mental Health services in Geelong.
Medicare Locals have the important role of working with GPs, nurses, allied health professionals, Indigenous health organisations and Local Hospital Networks to ensure that the patient can move seamlessly throughout the health system.
In particular, Medicare Locals will play a key role in helping to improve access to after-hours care, chronic disease prevention and management programs and mental health initiatives.
Today's forum in Parliament is a prime opportunity for the first 19 Medicare Locals to share their experiences and showcase to the Australian community the great work they are now doing.
More information on Medicare Locals can be found at www.yourhealth.gov.au



PM: [audio break] We are expecting some divisions, so if the division bells go we will of course go and attendto that in the House of Representatives.
We're here today to announce the opening of the next round of the Health and Hospitals Fund. It's a round dedicated to regional Australia, it's a round valued at $475 million. It's a round that regional Australian will be able to participate in, applications will be judged and the applications close in October and the decisions will then flow through into the budget next year.
This is part of our continuing investment in regional health and we're making that investment because we know that health circumstances in regional Australia are very different from metropolitan Australia. To give you just one example, life expectancy in regional Australia is one to two years lower and for remote areas it is up to seven years lower compared with major cities.
We have continuously invested from the Health and Hospitals Fund, a fund totalling $1.8 billion. In making these allocations to regional Australia we have been guided by their differential health needs and of course we've received strong advocacy from Labor Members who represent regional electorates as well as from Mr Windsor and Mr Oakeshott.
I'll turn now to the Minister for Health who will be able to outline some of the projects that have benefitted in earlier rounds.
MINISTER ROXON: Thank you very much Prime Minister, people will recall that $3.2 billion was originally allocated to this fund from a range of different projects, they are all starting to come to fruition across the country, for example I visited the Nepean Hospital where the new intensive care unit has opened and is starting to provide services to the community.
Of course following those initial allocations, where over 30 per cent were already dedicated to regional Australia, our Government announced the dedicated funding that the Prime Minister mentioned for $1.8 billion worth of investments in regional health services. That has been allocated as you would have seen in the previous budget, already a number of the smaller projects like the Inglewood medical centre in Queensland is up and running, has already attracted a second doctor to a small community and has established links with allied health professionals. You go from those quite small projects to much larger scale projects like the $44 million project at the University of Tasmania, their Menzies research facility hosting 300 staff and research students and of course you can look across the country and see that plans, construction and services are being provided as a result of this dedicated focus that we have on health and hospital infrastructure across the country with a very heavy emphasis on the shortcomings that have been in the past in regional areas and our recognition that they needed to be turbo-charged, if you like, to make sure that regional Australians can get the health services that they need.
We had a lot of applicants last time round, we had many successful applicants but many others who were disappointed that they were not chosen, they will be able to reapply, many of them will have reconsidered their projects, seen whether they can have other partners, many, Simon may want to comment, have been working with universities and local councils and others to make sure that the projects are the best projects for local communities.
Our independent board will again assess each of those projects and give advice to the Government which ones are appropriate to be considered for funding and those announcements would be made in the budget context next year. So, I know there's an enormous amount of interest in regional Australia for this $475 million and we're looking forward to high quality applications which the board can consider and then the Government will consider in the budget process.
MINISTER CREAN: Thank you, this is another important commitment by us to supporting regional Australia. The health dimension is one aspect, obviously the education round as well as well as the Regional Development Australia funds. In think the interesting thing that we're starting to see now happen is that because there are opportunities on a number of fronts for regions to identify their needs and prioritise their needs, we're getting a lot of effective dot-joining.
The Launceston Hospital is a great case in point, I was down there recently and what they've been able to do because of access to the National Broadband Network, is to provide from the Launceston base a hubbing arrangement to eight remote locations around the northern part of Tasmania. This enables diagnosis to be done without people having to travel into Launceston for the initial check and obviously depending on what the diagnosis establishes then booking in a time for them to come. We're also seeing great opportunities emerge in the regions where teaching hospitals and nursing facilities are also being combined with the health service delivery mechanisms.
So this is an exciting time for regional Australia, this is an important new investment, another $475 million going in, when you think of it together with the half billion dollars in terms of the education infrastructure fund and the opportunities that present themselves from the National Broadband Network and the connectivity that links those three important areas, no wonder regional Australia is embracing this, not just enthusiastically, but in a creative way and that's what we're challenging them to do and they are rising to the challenge.
PM: We're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why shouldn't Mr Thomson make a statement to Parliament?
PM: It's a matter for Mr Thomson.
JOURNALIST: Shouldn't Mr Thomson though, should he give his 70,000 former low-paid workers in the HSU, his members there, doesn't he owe them an explanation for his behaviour?
PM: Well, Parliamentarians making statements to the Parliament is a judgment for each Parliamentarian involved. Let's get a little bit of perspective into this debate, the only person in this Parliament who is charged with a criminal offence is a Liberal Senator, charged with a offence against property, an offence against the person, charged with theft and assault. No statement, in my understanding, has been made by that Liberal Senator, indeed no statement called for. Because the approach we have taken, which was exactly the same approach Mr Abbott used to take in Government - exactly the same approach - is that there are proper processes here and they ought to be gone through.
JOURNALIST: But Prime Minister Mr Abbott's not setting the standards for you or your Government and even thought it's the responsibility of every individual Member, isn't it your responsibility to ensure that the integrity of your government, of your party is upheld and that the rights of the people to hear from this Member should be exceeded to?
PM: The best of ensuring proper standards is to engage in proper processes. There are proper processes in train in relation to the Liberal Senator who faces criminal charges. I don't think that's a matter that I should be commenting on, she's entitled to a presumption of innocence and so I have never commented on it and I won't. Proper processes should be gone through. The same applies to the Member for Dobell, there is a process in train here, it is a Fair Work Australia process and people should allow it to go through in exactly the same way that is a process is being gone through for the Liberal Senator involved in criminal proceedings.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister given that Andrew Wilkie said in Parliament this week the he was concerned with your emphatic public support for Mr Thomson, has he raised this issue with you in his regular dialogue with you?
PM: I was aware that Mr Wilkie was making a statement and I was aware of the contents of the statement, that's a matter for Mr Wilkie.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, do you think it's part of your responsibility as the enforcer of standards within your government to personally get a full explanation from Mr Thomson and I think you have declined to say whether you have done that, can you say that?
PM: Well that's not true Michelle, I've said publically that I've discussed these matters with Mr Thomson and obviously he has said to me as he has said publically that he denies the allegation against him.
JOURNALIST: What do you make of the allegations overnight that he spent hundreds of thousands of dollars overseas on Health Service Union credit cards?
PM: Well once again there's a proper process in train in relation to this matter and the proper process should be gone through. If there was a further allegation that had been made overnight in relation to the Liberal Senator charged with criminal offences I would have said exactly the same thing.
And the point here of course is that this isn't a matter for complete hypocrisy the way that we've seen it shown by Tony Abbott. In relation to his Liberal Senator he says proper processes should be gone through. When he was Leader of Government Business under the Howard Government and large numbers of ministers got themselves in various scrapes and scandals, Mr Abbott was always the first to say that proper processes should be gone through. All we are seeing from Mr Abbott in relation to the Member for Dobell is an exercise in hypocrisy.
JOURNALIST: Have you or your office assisted Mr Thomson in constructing a statement that he would give to Parliament in case that he is asked to address and explain himself and secondly what's your comment on the propriety of revelations today in the Sydney Morning Herald that the New South Wales Police Minister directly addressed this issue with the Police Commissioner?
PM: Well on the first statement, any statement by a Parliamentarian is a question for that Parliamentarian. On the revelations in the Sydney Morning Herald, I am deeply concerned about what's reported in the Sydney Morning Herald, our system of democracy, our system of government relies on the fact that office bearers like Police Commissioners independently of political processes exercise their best judgment, that's how the system works, and it appears from the Sydney Morning Herald report that a member of Mr Abbott's team, Senator Brandis, has dialled up a Liberal Party mate, the Minister who is responsible for Police in the New South Wales Government, and then that person has called the Police Commissioner when it is known that the police are involved in an assessment process in relation to the Member for Dobell. So, I am very concerned about the conduct of Senator Brandis in this matter.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) you have had a discussion with Mr Thomson about this-
PM: -No, I've said that publically before.
JOURNALIST: You did. Do you believe him?
PM: Mr Thomson has denied the allegations that have been made, I've said before that I've got confidence in him, he continues to work as a local Member of Parliament, I've also said there are proper processes here and they should be worked through.
JOURNALIST: Have you had a full discussion about the details though or is it just I deny all this and has your faith-
PM: -Well I'm not going into details of discussions between me and Mr Thomson or indeed any other member of my Parliamentary team. We'll have discussions, confidentially as we see fit, but clearly Mr Thomson has consistently denied allegations against him.
JOURNALIST: Are you confident in your judgment of believing him in, light of all that's come out day by day?
PM: There are proper processes here. It would be completely inappropriate for me to volunteer a view as to whether the Liberal Senator charged with theft and assault is guilty of those charges, completely inappropriate and I won't do so. And I will bring exactly the same standard to bear in relation to the Member for Dobell. And the difference between the approach I'm taking and the approach Tony Abbott is taking, is I am taking a consistent one in relation to every Member of Parliament, Mr Abbott is playing cheap politics.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've just said you have expressed confidence in Mr Thomson in the past, but can you look people in the eye today and say he retains your full confidence, today?
PM: I stand by the statements I've made-
JOURNALIST: -No, today.
PM: Look I'm not  -  Mark, I'll finish my sentence thank you and I'm not getting myself involved in your semantic games, I must admit I was pretty amazed at the construction of my statement in the Parliament yesterday. I've express full confidence in the Member for Dobell. I yesterday in the Parliament said that I stand by the statements that I've made and I do so today, there is no semantic difference here and no quibble should be engaged in in relation to it.
Yes, Sue.
JOURNALIST: You talk about proper processes, but how long are those proper processes going to take, hasn't Fair Work-
PM: Fair Work Australia is an independent agency and it will decide the timeline.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible), Prime Minister, for MPs in general to have to make a statement to Parliament and what is that benchmark, what does it take to, do you think, for an MP to have to be compelled or feel like they have to address Parliament to explain themselves?
PM: I think people need to use their best judgement in a wide variety of circumstances, I don't think that there's a simple ten word rule that can be announced here. I suspect that if you go and get your House of Representatives Practice or the equivalent in the Senate you'll find many pages of edification, but it's a question for the Parliamentarians involved.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: You said you're very concerned with Senator Brandis' conduct, are you suggesting that political influence has been brought to bear on the New South Wales Police, is that-
PM: -Well, all I've done is read the Sydney Morning Herald, so I am presuming but do not know whether or not the report is accurate. I like to bring the cheerful assumption when I read my newspapers that reports are accurate, I find myself so often disappointed against my natural cheerful disposition.
But bringing my natural cheerful disposition to reading the newspapers this morning, I read the Sydney Morning Herald, I presume the report is accurate, if the report is accurate then the chain of events here is it was publicly known that the New South Wales were assessing matters in relation to Mr Thomson. Liberals Senator Brandis picked up the phone and rang a member of his political party who is the State Minister in New South Wales. That person then picked up the phone and rang the Police Commissioner. Now I think, if the report in the Sydney Morning Herald is accurate, that that is deeply concerning.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if you had your time again would you stand firm and answer a few more questions in Question Time. It did look on television that you were running away?
PM: Well, what a load of old nonsense. There's one clear rule here, they muck up and they're silly in Question Time and they lose their rights to ask questions for that day. We consistently apply that rule and we applied it yesterday.
And let's just pull back a little bit and look at the week that was. This was a week in which BlueScope announced 1000 workers were losing their jobs, 1000 workers. And as Government we had worked on a response package and we announced it on Monday. This is a week in which, as a result of those job losses, Australians were concerned about the patchwork pressures in our economy, something that we've been talking about for a long period of time. So, we made the further announcement about Peter Beattie acting in an advocacy role to make sure that Australian manufacturing gets the benefit of more work and more jobs.
During the course of this week in the health area, the Health Minister, against trenchant opposition, has succeeded in her plain paper packaging reforms, a world first. And today, of course, we're announcing $475 million more for health. During the course of this week too we've been dealing with explaining the economic pressures that there are in some industries in some parts of the nation and pursuing the Government's reform agenda across the board.
Against that backdrop, people have been very interested in the question of jobs this week, understandably concerned having seen 1000 workers lose their job. The only job Mr Abbott has been interested in all week is whether he can lever himself into my job. So if he'd used Question Time to come along and ask questions about the jobs and prospects of individual Australians, and used Question Time to come along and talk about what more can be done in health, what more can be done for regional Australia, what more can be done to improve a local school, we would have been there with bells on.
As it is, what we saw, cheap stunts fuelled by hypocrisy. There's a price and the price is we don't have the rest of Question Time.
JOURNALIST: But in a democracy the opposition (inaudible) generally?
PM: Certainly not, but I can make points about whether they're on self interest or the interest of the nation. They're on self interest this week, it is shining through in everything that they do, self interest first and foremost. This is Mr Abbott solely concerned about himself, while we get on with the business of doing what's necessary to lead this nation.
JOURNALIST: How much is the fact that this is a hung Parliament affected the way you've dealt with this matter and how much do you think it's affected the way Mr Abbott has dealt with the matter?
PM: Well, it hasn't affected the way I've dealt with it at all. I would have in any circumstances said proper processes needed to be worked through and interestingly when he was a member of a majority Government, Mr Abbott used to say that proper processes had to be worked through in relation to the large number of ministers who got themselves in scrapes under the Howard Government. So, that's my standard, it's true for a Liberal Senator, it's true for the Member of Dobell, it's true in this Government circumstances, it would be true in different circumstances if we were a majority Government.
The person who cuts their views and values to suit the circumstances of the day is Mr Abbott but are we surprised by that? The man who goes to a climate forum and says, ‘a five per cent target, what a load of old nonsense, this is weightless, odourless gas' and then sits there on Mamamia knowing that he's talking to people who believe in climate change and says ‘I couldn't be more passionate about a five per cent target'. He's a man who will do and say anything, that's what we're seeing on display in the Parliament this week.
JOURNALIST: On manufacturing, Ms Gillard, are you going to do more? Your own backbench is saying that what's been announced so far this week is not enough and I think Paul Howes is also arguing very strongly that you should take more radical measures-
PM: -We'll continue to deliver our big plans for manufacturing, more than $5 billion for the car industry for example, the enterprise connect program, the powering Australian ideas agenda, the Australian Procurement Statement, the buying Australian at home and abroad. We've been strongly engaged with manufacturing and we will continue to be strongly engaged with manufacturing. And of course, in this Parliament we will resist Mr Abbott's cut back agenda because he's always happy to be photographed next to a manufacturing worker, what he's never going to do is put his hand up to assist their jobs.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask Ms Roxon one question. Do you foresee the $475 million program having any effect on Indigenous health and then after that Prime Minister, can I ask you what your thoughts are on the coming Indigenous disadvantage report that was released?
MINISTER ROXON: Thank you very much. This certainly has the capacity to have an impact and in fact both of our previous rounds have allocated funding for Indigenous services and you may also be interested to know that a number of our clinical training grants have also been provided to Aboriginal medical services, to bolster the training that they can provide for health professionals working both in the Aboriginal medical services and in mainstream services, but providing support for Indigenous patients.
We have a lot of work to do here but I think we're seeing some creative options coming forward and we would absolutely encourage any of the Aboriginal medical services or those health services providers who particularly support Indigenous communities to make applications because this is a good source of funding for them.
PM: And on the report, I've had cause to talk to you in this room before about the area of Closing the Gap and other reports that we've had. Every report we get reinforces in me just how hard this is. Every report we get reinforces in me how vital this is. But every report we get too gives me hope for change and I see changes as I move around Australia and talk to people in Indigenous communities and who are working for change.
I mean, there are some miracles out there in health care, in schooling, there's so much to do but you can see projects and plans around the nation that are making a real difference and there's never been a time where corporate Australia brought more goodwill to the table to help Indigenous people get into work and that's a fantastic thing.
JOURNALIST: One of the points that it made is that there are increases or betterments to infant mortality rates, but two of the areas where the gap is widening is incarceration rates and mental health, is that a cause for concern?
PM: Of course it's a cause for concern and you would be aware that as a government we're focusing on mental health for the community generally, but including for Indigenous Australians.
JOURNALIST: Paul Howes also mentioned a call for a return to protectionism, would you consider going down that path?
PM: No, we won't and when I gave an account of the week one of the things I obviously forgot is us breaking the desire of Mr Abbott to take Australia outside the world based trading system.
Mr Abbott had come to the Parliament this week with a bill of economic destruction to take us outside the world based trading order that would have put us in the world. We are a great trading nation, turbo-charged resources sector and it would have put us in the world where we were subject to trade retaliation and once these things start it's a slippery slope and it's a very, very hard landing at the bottom. So, we set an objective this week of making sure that we put sufficient pressure on Mr Abbott that Mr Cobb's bill was withdrawn, we succeeded with that.
Now we will put sufficient pressure on Mr Abbott that the palm oil bill is withdrawn, once again a threat to our participation in the world rules based trading order. So, we won't go down protectionist paths, it's bad for Australia, it's bad for Australian jobs. Mr Abbott, because he will do or say anything and has got no concern at the end of the day about Australia jobs will be engaging in this cheap populism and at every point we will meet his cheap populism with economic rigour.
Last question, here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in light of record profits reported by BHP, did the government have it right with the original design of the mining tax?
PM: We will deliver the Minerals Resource Rent Tax that I negotiated. Can I suggest you better put that question to the Opposition, is this really the time for anybody to come to this Parliament and say that a Minerals Resource Rent Tax should be opposed? Can anybody credibly come to this Parliament in view of the profitability of mining and the pressures we know are on other sections of the economy because of the high Aussie dollar, come to this Parliament and exercise their vote against the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. That's a strategy for wrecking and I suspect that's something that should be asked of the Opposition during the course of today and beyond.
Thank you very much. 



Patients and families in regional communities across Australia are set to benefit from the next round of the Gillard Government's $5 billion Health and Hospitals Fund, with applications now open.
The Prime Minister said this new round of the HHF would see $475 million invested in regional hospitals around Australia.
These funds will go towards projects such as new equipment or better buildings for local hospitals, new chronic disease management services and new or expanded mental and dental health services.
Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon said the Gillard Government's Health and Hospitals Fund was providing communities with 21st century health systems that can meet patients' needs.
This capital funding round will complement the 148 other Health and Hospitals Fund projects totalling some $4.5 billion that are already underway in health services and hospitals all around Australia.
Minister for Regional Australia Simon Crean said this new round was the third to give priority to regional, rural and remote areas.
More than 50 per cent of the HHF funding already allocated is being directed towards regional Australia, helping to make a big difference in the day-to-day lives of country Australians.
When this latest round is allocated, regional and rural areas will be assisted by health projects worth more than $2.9 billion through the HHF to help close the gaps that exist between health services in the city and the country.
The guidelines for this new funding round will be largely the same as those drawn up for the 2010 Regional Priority Round, with projects with local community support being a priority.
All projects funded under the regional priority round will be fully offset by savings measures to meet the Government's fiscal rules. 
Applications close on 19 October 2011 and will then be assessed by the independent, expert HHF advisory board. Successful projects will be announced as part of the 2012 Budget.
Further information about the HHF is available from: www.health.gov.au/hhf



Today we gather to honour the central role of good public administration and sound public policy in shaping our nation's future.
Nobody represents those things more completely than our first great public servant, Robert Garran.
Garran was the “trusted confidant and counsellor of eleven Attorneys-General and sixteen governments”.
Departmental head for 31 years, a record unlikely to be broken.
So great his influence that when the Nationality and Citizenship Act was passed in 1949, Ben Chifley was the first to receive a citizenship certificate and Robert Garran the second.
The stories of Garran are the fireside tales of our public service, told and retold.
How for a brief moment he was the Commonwealth's sole public servant.
How all the documents of that early Commonwealth fitted into a single leather satchel.
Garran was not only a brilliant administrator.
He was a skilled barrister, a translator and linguist, a gifted diplomat, a patron of the arts and of higher education. 
And, of course, a founding father of our Federation.
The late Professor Robert Parker, one of the greatest scholars of public administration in Australia, said of Robert Garran:
His personality, like his prose, was devoid of pedantry and pomposity and, though dignified, was laced with a quizzical turn of humour.
He was capable of strong and decisive administrative action when required.  What people of all kinds most remembered were charity, modesty, courtesy and charm.
It is hard to imagine a more perfect description of public sector leadership as we wish it always to be.
I'm determined that our public administration will remain as strong in the future as it has been in the past.
The Blueprint for the Reform of Australian Government Administration, released this year, contains many sound modernising proposals, designed to preserve the best features of our past in the future we can see.
And I know that no one is more committed to that future than the tens of thousands of Australians who work in public service.
Their working lives are dedicated not just to good public administration and policy in the abstract, but to a living culture of careers in service to Australia.
What began in Robert Garran's satchel lives today, from the Cabinet ante-room in Canberra to the Centrelink office in Sorell.
And it's fitting I recognise everyone who works in public service in Australia today.
You have never been more important.
Because it's only through the work of great public servants, in a world class public service, with courageous political leadership, sharing a vision for Australia's future, that our country can seize the opportunities of these rich and complex, promising and challenging years.
For these are years rich in opportunity and complex in detail.
Promising for the long term and challenging in the present.
And this winter, the economic challenges of the present have been very apparent to all Australians.
The debate over European debt and the near-gridlock in the US, the wild stock market swings that followed along with the growing realisation that for good or bad a strong dollar is here to stay, set the scene through July and August.
And this week, Australians woke to the news of significant plant closures and job losses in heartland regions of working Australia.
Some look at the troubles of the global economy and see Australia as an economic sanctuary: not immune from the world, but still strong in the world.
Certainly, many investors continue to see us in this light.
But Australians know their superannuation savings have shrunk with the fluctuating stock markets.
They remember the Global Financial Crisis and how much work was required to steer Australia away from the economic abyss.
And while Australia has been growing overall, while over the last two years we have created new jobs and lifted take home pay across the board, many Australians haven't felt the benefits in their own lives.
So I understand when people worry about their livelihoods, worry that opportunities might not be there for their children, that it will become harder to make ends meet and make the family budget add up.
When they suspect they are already being left behind, that some parts of the country are getting ahead while others struggle with rising prices and a lack of opportunity.
And I respect the caution and concern Australians feel when they consider the uncertain global environment, uneven domestic economy and the pressures our strong dollar creates.
But caution and concern must be measured against and proportionate to the facts  -  and to the challenges we confront.
This is what Australians should know today: Our economy is fundamentally strong.
There are some problems in the world  -  and there are some challenges at home.
We are strong enough to resist the problems.
We are smart enough to master the challenges.
Today, I'll say more about where the challenges lie.
More about the Government's plan do master them.
And I'll also say more about what that means for all Australians.
Because if we do these things well in this period of change, I can see an evenstronger economy for us in the years ahead.
Understand, first of all: the long term story of our economy remains a story of long term strength.
We have strong fundamentals: low unemployment, low public debt, a deep, stable and liquid financial sector.
And an unprecedented investment pipeline, still building, with a staggering $430 billion planned in resource investment alone.
Projects like Gorgon, Gladstone, Queensland Curtis and Australia Pacific are happening now. 
Long-term investments, driven by decisions over time horizons well beyond the global market turbulence.
And the Australian economy has created jobs while others were losing them. 
Around 750 000 since Labor came to office.
In a period where US unemployment almost doubled, we have more people in work than before the global financial crisis.
This is the most important thing we have done together.
Creating jobs is not just a sign of a good economy, creating jobs is the whole point of a good economy.
Life is given direction and purpose by work. 
Without work there is corrosive aimlessness. 
With the loss of work comes a loss of dignity.
Believing in the importance of jobs for all who seek them  -  of work in every household  -  is deep in our own national culture and deep in my Government's beliefs.
Only Labor Governments will always put jobs first.
Sixty years ago, Chifley's Light on the Hill took a straightforward view of Labor's task.
Not as
... putting an extra sixpence into somebody's pocket ...
But to
... give to some father or mother a greater feeling of security for their children ... a feeling that if a depression comes there will be work.
Two years ago, the global financial crisis came  -  and with it came bad news for jobs.
And Labor in office had one priority: we put the jobs of Australian families first.
We restored confidence in our banks, we provided stimulus payments to families, tax breaks for small business, and delivered investment that ensured jobs for tradespeople and built new road, rail and port infrastructure across the nation.
It wasn't what everyone wanted to hear. But it was what we knew was right to preserve jobs.
And it did the job. We saved two hundred thousand jobs.
Now, in the last two weeks we've seen some bad news for jobs again.
Nothing can diminish the bad news for families in Wollongong and Western Port.
To those workers and families the Government hasn't just extended sympathy. 
We've extended a helping hand  -  providing immediate and practical support.
But I also know the news in the Illawarra and on the Mornington Peninsula was not just heard by those directly affected.
Many people saw the fear of these Australians and thought  -  “that could be me”.
Now, we do have a dynamic economy.
Around 300,000 businesses start up and close down in a typical year.
Half a million workers change industries.
And every day, Australians navigate economic change in their own lives. How?
They get a full understanding of their own situation, they think through their goals, and they do what's required to make it so
Changing job, retraining, moving industry, sometimes even city, all to build a better future for themselves and their families.
The task for the nation is the same: understand the whole economy's story.
Understand the whole nation's goals.
Make the decisions  -  deliver the policies  -  which will get us there together.
So first, we must understand that what we've seen this week at BlueScope Steel is only part of the story of the future of the economy.
The global demand for our resources is changing the structure of our economy.
That does mean some jobs are no longer there  -  but at the same time it lifts our national income and creates many new jobs as well.
What is happening in the Australian economy right now reflects long-term global forces which have powerful effects at home.
Big changes in global growth patterns are simultaneously creating new wealth and new opportunities while putting added pressure on some industries and parts of the country.
Global growth has long been shifting from West to East  -  and this is accelerating again.
A decade ago, Australia's national income surged off the back of increasing demand for Australian commodities  -  especially coal and iron ore  -  as the Chinese and Indian economies awakened from a generational slumber. 
While the global financial crisis punctuated this boom, it did not end it. 
Indeed the changes which fuelled the boom of the 2000s have continued and in this second mining investment boom have proven even more resilient.
And in the post GFC world, the North Asian giants' appetite for our resources is stronger and more assured than ever before.
Developing countries in our region like China and India emerged from the crisis strong. 
They are generating growth still at historic highs  -  and that growth is not just driven by their own manufacturing exports, but it is increasingly driven by their own internal demand.
Demand emerging from a rapid urbanisation and growing domestic middle class, hungry for the goods and services that mark a better quality of life.
So growth in our Asian export markets keeps parts of our economy surging. 
On top of this, current weakness in Europe and the US makes us more attractive for investment.
And both these changes drive our dollar to its greatest strengths: a climb of unprecedented duration and speed.
Driven by the resources boom, the exchange rate has moved some 45% in the space of two years. 
This has been good for businesses which rely on imports. 
And good for many Australians: it's not just cutting the price of overseas travel or luxury imports; it helps with household necessities like washing machines and clothes dryers.
However, many businesses are finding the higher exchange rate extremely difficult to handle. 
In effect, many exporters have had to put up their prices by nearly half in just two years.
Amplifying pressures that already existed, where long-established business models were feeling the pressure of innovation and competition.
Asian growth, European and US weakness, a boom in mining investment, are all driving our dollar higher.
That puts many sectors of our economy, like education, tourism, some parts of retail, and especially manufacturing, under pressure.
The changes that can release that pressure are driven by decisions we can make.
We have long known that Australian prosperity depends not just on raw materials but on our ability to improve productivity through knowledge, skills, competition and innovation.
So at the heart of my approach to economic management is a long term approach to creating, and sustaining balanced growth for the whole of our nation.
A long term plan to keep the whole economy strong.
As Deputy Prime Minister, two great projects drove me that form part of this long term plan.
The first: to lift the nation's human capital.
To give our people more knowledge and skills and get more out of that knowledge and skills as well.
Universities. Fundamental reform with demand-driven funding, investment in much-needed capital  -  and new support for research.
Schools. Investing in teacher quality, developing a national curriculum  -  and new transparency through the MySchool website.
Early years education. Improving the quality of childcare, making it more affordable  -  and expanding access to preschool education.
The second: to reform the nation's workplaces.
To use flexible enterprise bargaining to lift productivity across our national economy.
Setting up Fair Work Australia  -  creating National Employment Standards  -  harmonising occupational health and safety.
So I got rid of WorkChoices and its plan to compete with the world on wages and conditions.
I got rid of WorkChoices and its plan to end job security.
And I put in place a plan to compete with the world on knowledge and skills.
I put in place reforms to unlock the real drivers of future productivity.
And as Prime Minister, I am still pursuing reforms to unlock productivity and to drive balanced growth across the whole of our economy.
Clean energy. New jobs in new industries  -  a price signal leveraging billions of dollars in new investment.
High speed broadband. Linking every part of Australia to every part of the world.
A tax on mineral resource rents. Taking the value we all own in the strongest sector in our economy  -  to cut company tax for every Australian firm  -  to add to the national pool of savings through higher superannuation  -  and to build regional infrastructure.
Skills and participation. Lifting the capacity of all Australians to get good work and support a growing economy.
Personal tax reform. To reward participation in work.
Supporting every Australian region. With new infrastructure, investment and partnerships  -  indeed we are making new announcements in Tasmania today.
And this is a long term plan for balanced growth which did not begin this week.
This Government has long been on the reform road, has worked methodically over our term in office to keep the whole economy strong.
When we came to office, investing in human capital and reforming workplace relations.
During the GFC, saving 200 000 jobs and steering us away from recession.
Today, meeting the problems in the world  -  the challenges at home  -  making the decisions and delivering the policies which will grow Australian jobs.
Today, building a clean energy future, a high technology future.
The clean energy revolution is poised in the way the information technology revolution was poised a few decades ago. 
And the brutal truth is if you didn't get in on the ground floor then you got left behind.
I won't allow us to get left behind and lose the jobs and prosperity a clean energy future will bring.
Managing our economy today and building for our future cannot be done if we try to live in the past.
While the pressures faced by some of sectors of the economy are real, and painful, we must stand firm against calls for protectionism. 
We know they do not work.
There can be no return to protectionist policies of the past.
The Australian economy has been the great beneficiary of open trade in the world  -  our economy has changed, our firms have adapted, our people have prospered.
Instead we will use our effort, our influence, our reputation, to advocate international action for global stability and balanced growth.
And our challenge, as exposure to the global market grows, is to build new capability which allows us to prosper.
None of that means “leaving manufacturing behind”.
The investments and reforms we are making create great new opportunities for manufacturing.
More productive enterprises and more skilled workers will make manufacturing stronger than almost anything we can do.
A clean energy economy with economic incentives for new clean jobs will see new goods manufactured for new markets.
And a high technology economy with high speed broadband around the country see manufacturing performed in much more sophisticated ways.
And these benefits hold true -  not only for manufacturing but for retail and tourism and education  -  for every part of our broad and diverse economy
Not hiding away from the world  -  but becoming ever stronger in the world.
We know doing the right thing for the long term isn't easy  -  and it isn't automatic.
I'm proud to live in a nation with a vibrant political culture that enables us to let off steam and express our egalitarian spirit.
Governments should listen  -  but in the end, they need to lead.
Australians don't respect governments that tell them only what they want to hear.
And governments that tell people only what they want to hear can't build the future that people want to live in.
So, we'll stay on the reform road.
If Robert Garran could build a nation's institutions from a satchel, we can find a way to be a strong economy with a strong dollar.
And we can do the right things together for the country we share as well.
We must chart a course which does not rely on wistful reflections of the past but does not abandon or forget the achievements of our economic history.
Our agenda is modernising reform to strengthen our economy and create jobs.
We have a proud Labor tradition: to take on the hard economic decisions, and take them on in ways which mean that all of Australia benefits and no one gets left behind.
We will continue that commitment as we work towards strong, balanced economic growth and jobs for our great country.
We can be a strong economy, modernised for the future.
With a balanced budget, high speed broadband, clean energy.
Skilled workers, productive workplaces, competitive firms.
Always directed toward the great purpose of a great nation's economy: jobs for all who seek them. 



PM: It's great to be here in Hobart. I'm joined today by Senator Carol Brown and by Julie Collins, the Member for Franklin. I'm very much enjoying being in Hobart, I've had the opportunity at this great school to speak to students about their future in Tasmania and to speak to them specifically about addressing climate change and about putting a price on carbon pollution. It's been a wide-ranging discussion.
I will, later this morning, sit down with the Premier of Tasmania and sign the Memorandum of Understanding between our two governments on the $120 million which we are making available to build a broader economic future for Tasmania. So, the thing that links the two together, had the opportunity to talk to these students today about the jobs they will do in the future, including clean energy jobs, with the Premier, I will be signing an agreement which is all about jobs for Tasmania.
I've been a very frequent visitor to Tasmania in the recent period and that's because I've been working with the Premier and with our local Members and representatives to strike an arrangement about the future of forestry in this state, the future of the environment here and the new jobs that Tasmania needs.
The economics of the forestry industry was changing and I was pleased that parties involved in forestry and environmental groups came together to discuss a new future. I entered a forestry agreement with the Premier of Tasmania, which is about having a sustainable forestry industry, as well as better conservation outcomes, supporting workers as the forest industry changes and supporting contractors whose livelihoods will be lost as the industry changes. So, it's a tough time for many families in Tasmania.
But as well as supporting those families I did want to make sure that we were investing so Tasmania had a good economic future. We want to broaden the economic base here and that's what the Memorandum of Understanding is all about  -  investing $120 million to do just that. But this is a plan that won't be typed up in Canberra, it will be written through community consultation here in Tasmania, the people who best know what the future of this state should hold are the people of this state.
So, I'm looking forward to signing that Memorandum of Understanding and I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Does that mean the money is secured, or does it still need to pass the Upper House?
PM: We will be  -  yes, in line with the first agreement, the money will be made available contingent on the forest agreement that I signed with the Premier being delivered and that does mean legislation needs to go through the Upper House.
JOURNALIST: Once that legislation goes through we understand there to be $20 million provided upfront, is that the case?
PM: There is $20 million provided upfront and then the balance of the funds are contingent on the agreement being honoured by all parties and that's including the agreement to pass the legislation which will flow from Professor West's verification process.
JOURNALIST: Given that the Upper House is likely to be hostile to this, what happens if it doesn't pass the Upper House?
PM: Well, I think that's first and foremost a question for people in the Upper House. I mean, let's be clear about the facts here  -  we are seeing a time of change in forestry. Whether we like it, or whether we don't the economics of the forestry industry is changing and whether I had done nothing or done the actions that I have taken, we would have seen jobs lost in forestry and we would have seen contractors go out of business.
Well, as a Labor Prime Minister I wasn't going to sit in Canberra idly by as workers lost their jobs and contractors lost their livelihoods without acting to support them. And so we have been here building on the process that brought the warring parties in forestry together, building on it for the future and for the future economy of this state.
That's what's at stake and that's what should be on the minds of State Upper House Members.
JOURNALIST: The State Government is expected to make a compensation offer to Gunns today for its native timber contracts. Do you think it's a good idea that taxpayer funds should be going to a company that yesterday announced its financial result and some analysts are predicting its ripe for a takeover?
PM: Look, this is a matter for the State Government and also involves legal issues between the State Government and Forestry Tasmania and Gunns, so I won't be drawn on commentary in relation to it.
JOURNALIST: On the Craig Thomson case, Prime Minister, at what point do you as Prime Minister say that a Labor MP should go?
PM: There's an investigation in train here and the investigation should be allowed to do its work. Can I say on this matter, we've seen a lot of hypocrisy and double standards being brought to bear by Tony Abbott in relation to the question of Craig Thomson. There is a Liberal Senator who is facing police charges. I believe the appropriate thing is to give her the presumption of innocence and to watch those processes go through to their conclusion.
In relation to the Member for Dobell, there is a Fair Work Australia investigation in train. I believe the proper processes should go through as well and people should not be making assumptions about what has happened here. One standard for everyone  -  it is Tony Abbott who is there arguing for double standards and that's not appropriate.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) as a matter of principle, Prime Minister, as a matter of principle- 
PM: As a matter  - 
JOURNALIST: What is your bench mark (inaudible)-
PM: I'm happy to tell you. As a matter of incredibly high principle, when there are investigations in train, people should let the authorities get on with those investigations without politicians seeking to run interference with how those investigations happen.
JOURNALIST: Are News Limited reports right, that your Chief of Staff was involved as early as 2009?
PM: I'm very glad you asked me that question. First and foremost, let's be very clear about the facts here, the matter involving Mr Thomson was first public in April 2009. That is, any Australian who had picked up the Sydney Morning Herald which reported it could have had that information. My Chief of Staff, it's reported today my Chief of Staff made a call to the Industrial Registrar. I don't remember that and that's unremarkable because the event is unremarkable.
For a Chief of Staff to check a fact with a public servant is an unremarkable event. Now, I know that Tony Abbot is jumping up and down today about all of this, but let's be clear about the double standards and the hypocrisy here. Number one: Mr Abbott has a Liberal Senator who has been charged by police. He first knew about that in May and did not make the matter public until he was asked a question by a media representative in July. Number two: this morning Mr Abbott told media that Fair Work Australia should bring its investigation to a conclusion quickly and then Senator Ronaldson has said that the responsible Minister should interfere in this investigation.
Well, seems to me there is a world of difference between checking a fact and saying politicians should interfere with investigations and actions being undertaken by public servants.
And third: we've had Senator Brandis ringing around police commissioners, Liberal mates and ministers, so that they ring a police commissioner. It's all very strange conduct indeed.
Now, what this all adds up to, is I don't believe that Tony Abbott should be trying to bully authorities in relation to anything. I also think we should really be clear about what's going on here  -  Tony Abbott is very angry that he didn't win the last election and that he is not Prime Minister and he thinks to himself if he throws enough mud maybe he will get the job. That is Mr Abbott's motivation in all of this.
While Mr Abbott is motivated by going to rallies and by throwing mud about scandals and about parliamentary games, we will continue with what motivates us, and that's about jobs and opportunity for Australians today and for their future.
JOURNALIST: Just to clarify then, you first became made aware of the scandal when the Sydney Morning Herald published the allegations in 2009, or did you have knowledge before then?
PM: Look, I don't remember events related to Mr Hubbard's telephone call and nor would I. Completely unremarkable for a Chief of Staff to ring a public servant to check a fact and completely different from seeking to bully or interfere with investigations.
JOURNALIST: So, you're not sure if he called before or after it was published (inaudible)?
PM: As is public today, Mr Hubbard has no memory of the call, but completely unremarkable. If you made a completely unremarkable call  -  I don't know what calls you make most commonly  -  but a completely unremarkable call more than two years ago, would you remember it? It is completely unremarkable for a Chief of Staff to ring a public servant to check a fact, and let's do the comparison here  -  Mr Abbott's been out there today claiming that somehow that means I had knowledge of these events in relation to Mr Thomson, and didn't speak about them publicly and I was the only one who knew. These things have been on the public record since April 2009.
And let's look at the double standards and hypocrisy here  -  Mr Abbot jumping up and down, he knew about circumstances involving a Liberal Senator and charges against her for weeks and didn't make the matter public until he was asked by the media.
Second, Chief Of Staff checking a fact, unremarkable. There we've got the Leader of the Opposition trying to tell Fair Work Australia how long it should take in an investigation, a Liberal Senator, Senator Ronaldson trying to go through the Minister to get the Minister to interfere with that investigation, Senator Brandis ringing up Liberal mate, ringing up the Police Commissioner, all on this question. Well, I don't think it's proper for politicians to be seeking to bully authorities that are going through investigations.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Gunns Pulp Mill is one of the biggest (inaudible) that's happening in Australia. Are you confident (inaudible)?
PM: All of the environmental approvals that are necessary have been provided. This went through the proper process with the relevant Minister, Tony Burke and before him, of course, Peter Garrett, dealing with the matter. So there are stringent environmental conditions in place, but all environmental approvals necessary are in place.
So, now this is a commercial question for Gunns. I believe the mill would bring jobs and economic opportunity to this State.
JOURNALIST: On the other hand, if it doesn't happen, and you're talking about the State's economic future, what would it mean for the State if the mill wasn't to be built?
PM: Well, whatever happens with the mill and as I say, I believe the mill would bring jobs and economic opportunities to this State, but we want to invest $120 million in strengthening and diversifying this economy, because we're all about the people of Tasmania having jobs.
JOURNALIST: The forestry industry thinks that the deal was significantly greened up at the eleventh hour, did you have that feeling when you, from the Thursday to the Sunday?
PM: No, what happened here, we entered the interim agreement and in order to enter the interim agreement there was a question about making sure that contracts for wood supply were honoured. In the time period between the interim agreement and the final agreement we received some advice from Professor West, that's what happened, we received that advice. But of course, contracts for wood supply should be honoured and they will be honoured.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Pontville Immigration Detention Centre is about to take its first clients. Looking at the capacity of Australian detention centres now, are you satisfied that the need is being met at the moment, or may there need to be future detention centres opened around the country?
PM: I'm confident that the Minister's made the appropriate arrangements for detention centres. Of course the Department of Immigration keeps all of this under a very watchful eye, but I believe the Minister's made the appropriate arrangements.
JOURNALIST: Are you at all concerned about State Government money going to Gunns, given Gunns' poor balance sheet. I know it's a State Government issue, but surely (inaudible) where their money comes from?
PM: I'm not going to be drawn on a question about the State Government and Gunns, particularly given it involves legal issues.
Thank you. 



The President of the European Commission, His Excellency José Manuel Barroso, will visit Australia from 4 to 7 September as a guest of the Australian Government. This will be the first visit to Australia by a Commission President since 1982.
During the visit, President Barroso will hold formal meetings with Ms Gillard and other members of the Cabinet.
The European Union is Australia's second largest trading partner and our largest investor.  Australia is cooperating with the European Union on a number of global challenges, particularly through multilateral forums such as the United Nations, G20, the Asia Europe Meeting and the World Trade Organisation.  This visit will be an opportunity to further strengthen this partnership.   



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: And thank you for coming in this morning. Significant amounts of health union money spent on funding prostitutes, many of the low wage workers that fund those health union dues live here in Tasmania. I'd like to know how you feel looking at this issue this morning and knowing that you're going to meet some of those Tasmanians over the next couple of days.
PM: Well, I feel first and foremost that people shouldn't make assumptions and that there should be a proper process of investigation here and one is underway through the industrial umpire Fair Work Australia.
HOST: But we know that health union funds were spent on prostitution, that has been acknowledged out of the events that have come out of the Craig Thomson affair. People would like to know how you feel about that, given that many of the people that you have represented over your career are wondering ‘what's going on with my dues?'
PM: I certainly as Prime Minister always want to see the right thing done by working Australians. My job is to make sure that we've got a bright economic future and people can get the benefits of having a job, that's my focus. It's my focus today in Tasmania where I'm here to talk about making sure we can diversify the economy of this state and that we use wisely $120 million which we have allocated to work with the community on new economic prospects for their state and of course-
HOST: -Prime Minister, my question is how you're feeling about the Craig Thomson affair at the moment and how you think listeners this morning are feeling about that affair as they look at it from afar?
PM: I think people are probably, this morning, thinking about their job, going to work, they're probably on their way to work now or are at work already. They're thinking about their economic future, the next job, getting a better job, how secure the job is that they have today, they're thinking about the quality of their child's school. They're thinking about what would happen if they or a family member needed to go to an emergency department later today. They're thinking about what would happen if one of them, themselves or a family member had an accident or an illness that left them with a disability. These things are the things that I'm focusing on-
HOST: -Prime Minister they're thinking about the $400 that comes out of their pay cheque each year that goes to the Health Services Union, the biggest union in Tasmania. They look at that $400, in the past now, we know that it's gone, and in part, been spent on prostitution. How should they feel about that and that continuing expenditure out of increasingly tight budgets.
PM: Well you're asking me what I think the community is focusing on and I'm saying to you I think the community is actually focused on some broader questions. Yes, we've had a week in Federal politics where the Opposition has been focused on rallies and parliamentary games and focused on scandal. What I've been focused on during this week, what I'm focused on today and what I'm focused on everyday is jobs and opportunities for Australians now and into the future and making sure that no one is left behind.
HOST: Can you confirm that one of your office staff back in 2009, Ben Hubbard, called the Industrial Registrar to ask about a possible investigation into Craig Thomson?
PM: Well my Chief of Staff Ben Hubbard has made statements about this that are reported in today's newspapers, he says he doesn't have any active recollection of that telephone call.
But let's be clear about this, my Chief of Staff, chief of staffs in other ministerial offices, now and for decades and decades in the past and for decades and decades to come, ring public servants to check facts.
HOST: And did you know about that conversation at the time that it was happening? Did you know about those concerns at the time that they were being raised in your office?
PM: Look, like Ben Hubbard, I've got no active recollection of any of this, we're talking about things a few years ago. But let's be very clear about all of this because I know some very incorrect things have been said by the Leader of the Opposition on television today.
The Leader of the Opposition is trying to suggest that somehow this report means that I knew about matters involving the Member for Dobell for a long period of time before the public did. Well the facts of this matter are, and I actually think the facts matter, Tony Abbott mightn't but I do. The facts of this matter are that these matters involving the Member for Dobell were first publicly reported in April 2009. Any member of the public, every member of the public has had access to information about these matters involving the Member for Dobell since then.
Now what I think Tony Abbott's got to answer is he's always very keen to jump up and down and make allegations in relation to other people, what I think he's got to answer, is the only person in Federal politics facing a police charge today is a Liberal Senator. Now Tony Abbott is on the public record as saying he knew about that in May, but he didn't disclose it publicly until he was asked in July.
HOST: This is the woman with the diagnosed case of depression?
PM: This is a person facing a criminal charge and I make no assumptions about the circumstances or what should happen when that comes to trial or fruition. That's a matter for proper process. And I am entitled to make the point and I will, Tony Abbott's got one standard for his team, the Liberal member facing a charge he says let the proper processes-
HOST: -Prime Minister what people are wondering about (inaudible)-
PM: -I believe in the same standards.
HOST: (inaudible) your standards?
PM: Well let me answer that, I'll answer it very clearly-
HOST: I'd like you to listen to what Chris Brown from the Health Services Union had to say on-
PM: -Well can I answer your question first and I will answer your question. My standards are this, whether it's the Member for Dobell or a Liberal Party Senator, I think the standards are the same and the standard is if there is an investigation in train by a proper authority then that investigation should be allowed to run its course before people start making assumptions about what may or may not have happened. I have been prepared to do that every day in relation to the Liberal Senator, I'm asking Tony Abbott who says that that should be the standard for his Liberal Senator, to apply the same standard to the Member for Dobell.
HOST: Have a listen to Chris Brown, this is the head of the Health and Community Sector Union, a very well placed gentleman within that, has been part of the discussions over this issue in past years, this is what he told us yesterday.
CHRIS BROWN: What I do know, because I had a lot to do with the initial internal investigation that uncovered a lot of the serious questions that we've got to have answers for, is that about $100,000 of cash withdrawals took place, of which there is no account for, that there's clearly a number of transactions on a credit card that we didn't even know existed that were undertaken in brothels. There was a whole lot of expenditure that seemed to have absolutely nothing to do with the objects of the union or what the union is there for or what we're doing and we need answers to all of those questions about who was responsible for that and if they were responsible for it, I would hope that they will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. The fact that the Gillard Government might fall is consequential.
HOST: Well, there we are. And so he thinks that the Member for Dobell should speak on this and indeed that you should regardless of the-
PM: -Well that's not what I just heard him say, thank you very much. That's not what I-
HOST: -What do you take out of it Prime Minister?
PM: Well, let's not put words in - I think the name was Mr Brown. Let's not put words in his mouth. What he's just said then and I'm very happy to say I can agree with his sentiments, what he's just said then is he's concerned about a set of matters and they should be properly investigated and if someone has done the wrong thing then they should be held to account for doing the wrong thing. That's what he's just said. Happy to endorse every word of that. I don't think you should put words in his mouth.
HOST: This is what Andrew Wilkie told us yesterday.
ANDREW WILKIE: Now this in no way cuts across the presumption of innocence and the fact that the inquiries which are underway about him should be allowed to run their course, but as a Member of Parliament I agree with the Opposition in this case, it's entirely appropriate for the Member to stand up and to say as little or as much as he wants, even if he just simply says ‘look there are inquiries under way, and I should leave all my comments until those inquiries are finished'.
But at the moment such serious allegations swirling around the issue, I think he should stand up and have the opportunity to clear his name or just to make a simple statement.
HOST: That's what Andrew Wilkie thinks. Do you risk losing the support of the Independents over your stance on this?
PM: Well, let's just be very clear here, I think let's leave the melodramatic tone behind and just go through the facts. The Member for Dobell, there are a set of assertions, there are a set of things that have been in the public domain for a long period of time, as I said first published in April 2009.
There's a Fair Work Australia investigation in process. I think that investigation should be allowed to run its course free of political interference. That's what I think is appropriate. Now I know that Tony Abbott thinks if he can throw enough mud about this, you know he's still angry about the results of the last election. So, Tony Abbott still angry about not being prime minister thinks that if he can throw enough mud-
HOST: -But that's what Andrew Wilkie thinks-
PM: -Well let me finish my sentence. Tony Abbott thinks if he can throw enough mud about this then somehow he can get himself the job as prime minister, the only job in the country he cares about or is it focused on or has been focused on during this parliamentary week when we've been focused on the jobs for Australians.
And apart from bringing hypocritical standards to bear there, what he has done today is he's actually said that he believes that Fair Work Australia should hurry up, that is he is starting to try and interfere with what the independent industrial umpire is doing-
HOST: -But Andrew Wilkie thinks Craig Thomson should speak on the floor of the Lower House.
PM: And that's a matter for Mr Thomson as a parliamentarian-
HOST: -You can't be part of that process, direct-
PM: -That's a matter for Mr Thomson as a parliamentarian. And I do note, once again, Andrew Wilkie of course, entitled to his views, he's put his views, he's also put his views about the presumption of innocence. I do note that the only Member of the Federal Parliament who is charged with a criminal offence has not made a statement to the Parliament.
But if I can come back to this question of standards, because I think it's the one at the centre of all of this. The standard here is that if there is an investigation by an appropriate authority that is underway that that investigation should be allowed to work through to its conclusion without people making presumptions about what may come out of that investigation and without people trying to influence that investigation.
Today we've had the Leader of the Opposition trying to say ‘well, get on with it'. Well I think the independent authority should be allowed to set its own timeframe. And we've had Senator Ronaldson, one of Tony Abbott's Liberal Senators, actually saying the Minister should get involved in this investigation before Fair Work Australia and that is completely inappropriate.
HOST: Prime Minister, just briefly, do you have the support of your own Tasmanian Lower House Members on the forestry deal that you've struck with the State Government over the last few weeks. All of them?
PM: Of course and I've met with them, they are great advocates for their local communities, absolutely great advocates for their local communities-
HOST: -And they're all on board for this deal-
PM: -Well, I'll answer your question if you'll allow me to do so. I came to this state to strike an interim agreement and then a final agreement about the future of a sustainable forestry industry and supporting workers, supporting contractors who are losing their livelihoods and also getting an economic future for this state, through providing $120 million to help diversify the economy.
Of course, in an area where people have been battling each other for decades, as we seek to deliver that agreement there are anxieties and concerns. And our Lower House Members have represented those anxieties and concerns to me, they'll continue to do so and they'll work through with me-
HOST: - Is Barack Obama coming to Australia in November?
PM: Well let's just finish-
HOST: -We've only got seconds left.
PM: Sure, and I'll use those seconds if I can, so my Lower House Members are working with me on the delivery of this new economic future, it's all about jobs.
On President Obama, of course he is welcome in Australia whenever he wants to come but making announcements about the President's travel plans are a matter for the White House.



Australia condemns the brutal bomb attack on the United Nations building in Abuja, Nigeria, last night which has killed and injured many innocent civilians. 
The United Nations is dedicated to preventing conflict, maintaining peace and helping the world's poorest and most disadvantaged. An attack on the United Nations is an attack on us all. 
On behalf of the Government and people of Australia, I extend sincere condolences to the families of those killed and injured.  Our thoughts are with these families.  Our thoughts are also with the men and women of the United Nations, who serve with bravery and dedication around the world and who too often find themselves the victims of the conflicts they are working to solve. 
Australia has conveyed its condolences to the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
We have also expressed our support and sympathy for the Government and people of Nigeria, who today are mourning many of their own citizens.  



Australians can now nominate their own local champions who have helped to promote inclusion and strengthen community relations under a new ambassador program set up by the Gillard Labor Government.
The People of Australia Ambassador program will see up to 40 local champions selected from nominations submitted by the public across the country.
The ambassador program is a key initiative of the Gillard Government's new multicultural policy -The People of Australia - announced earlier this year.
People of Australia Ambassadors will champion inclusion and provide advice to the new Australian Multicultural Council and to the Government about effective initiatives which promote belonging and leverage diversity in our communities.
Prime Minster Julia Gillard today encouraged Australians to nominate outstanding individuals from their neighbourhoods who have encouraged participation in their community.
Ambassadors will be appointed for a 12-month period and have key roles in annual community events and celebrations including Harmony Day on 21 March.
Communities and individuals can nominate a representative who has contributed to promoting the benefits of social cohesion and diversity, or has played a pivotal role in building strong community relations in Australia.
Nominations for the Ambassador roles need to be submitted before 7 October.
All nominations will be considered by the Australian Multicultural Council.
For more information on the program and nomination process, go to www.amc.gov.au



The Prime Minister today congratulated Steve Gibbons MP on his long service to the Bendigo community following his announcement that he will not seek preselection for the Federal election due in 2013.
As the longest serving federal MP for Bendigo since Federation, Steve leaves a strong legacy.
Since Steve won his seat for Labor in 1998 he has been the best kind of local member: representing his party in his community, and representing his community in the Parliament.
I know that commitment will be undiminished in the coming two years.
And beyond the next election, I'm sure he is looking forward to some good times noodling on his bass guitar and working on his motorbikes.
While I will be sorry to see Steve go, I will wish him well when he does embark on this new phase in his life. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard met with BlueScope Steel workers, business leaders and union heads in the Illawarra today to discuss plans to keep the region strong and prosperous.
After listening to workers at BlueScope Steel's plant at Port Kembla, the Prime Minister hosted a business and union roundtable in Wollongong.
The Government's assistance package was discussed at the meeting along with potential opportunities for the local community to work together to create a sustainable manufacturing future in the region.
The Prime Minister was joined by Innovation Minister Kim Carr, Member for Cunningham Sharon Bird, Member for Throsby Stephen Jones, NSW Minister for the Illawarra Greg Pearce MLC, local business owners, unions and other key members of the Illawarra community.
The Prime Minister confirmed the Government's commitment to developing a prosperous local economy and sustaining high-wage, high-skill jobs in the region.
The $30 million Illawarra Region Innovation and Investment Fund will strengthen the Illawarra region by stimulating investment and diversifying the economic and employment base now and into the future.
The fund is a joint initiative between the Australian and New South Wales Governments and BlueScope.
The Gillard Government will establish a Taskforce made up of key local business, community and civic groups and representatives.
Its job will be to inform the Government's Working Group overseeing and co-ordinating the entire government support package.
This process has worked successfully in other regions around the country.
For example, more than 2,500 jobs have been created through Innovation Funds in regions such as Adelaide and Geelong where major plants have closed.
The Government is providing immediate support and assistance to workers affected by BlueScope Steel's recent decision to restructure its operations.
In addition to immediate relief, the Government is working closely with local businesses, the community and the New South Wales Government to help people find work in new businesses that produce long-term high quality jobs.  



PM: [AUDIO BREAK] and I'm very pleased to be here with local representatives Sharon Bird and with Stephen Jones.
Last week when I announced the package of assistance for the workers at BlueScope and the assistance for this region I said we would be standing shoulder-to-shoulder with the people of the Illawarra during this time. I'm pleased that I've been able to be here today; having a look through BlueScope; having a talk to the workers there; meeting with union representatives and delegates and then meeting with a broad range of community representatives to talk about the future of the Illawarra.
It's all about jobs. Nothing is more important to me as Prime Minister than protecting and supporting Australian jobs. We've got a proud track record of doing so, we did so during the global financial crisis, the country pulled together and we saved Australian jobs, we saved Australian apprenticeships as well.
Now, in this phase of our economic development, we are seeing an economy that's got strong fundamentals, we're seeing a mining industry that is going ahead by leaps and bounds, but we're also seeing pressure on manufacturing, pressure on industries like tourism and that is showing in some parts of the country, and it's showing particularly here in the Illawarra.
Now, we have been strongly engaged with manufacturing since our first day as a Government. We've always believed that manufacturing was going to be part of Australia's economic future. We've worked strongly with manufacturing on developing skills, on providing the infrastructure that manufacturing needs, on working on research and development and innovation, on advocating buying Australians at home and abroad, at using our purchasing power as a Government to make sure that Australian industry got a fair go through Australian industry participation plans. We have moved to appoint a steel advocate and a resources advocate to help Australian companies get a fair go as sections of our economy like the mining industry expand.
So, every day we've been in office we've been focused on jobs and focused on manufacturing. I want us to be a country in the future that has a strong manufacturing sector. I want us to be a nation that makes steel.
That means that during this period of economic change we will stay strongly working with manufacturing, we will continue to step up to these challenges as they present, and we will certainly be here locally in the Illawarra working with this community as it designs its economic future. Steelmaking will be a part of that, coal mining will be a part of that, but there will be a diversity in this economy as well and we will be working with the local community towards that diversity.
These are tough days for a number of working people who are contemplating their futures and what to do next for them and their family. We are making available $10 million to provide specialist support services to those workers as they make those choices. I do want to be very clear that the specialised support services that are available through that $10 million package, those specialised support services are there for the direct employees of BlueScope. It's also there for the employees of suppliers who are reducing employment because of their reliance on BlueScope and because of the change that BlueScope has announced, and that package is also there for contractors who are making employees redundant because of BlueScope's decision. I wanted to be clear about that so people can rely on those specialised services.
We will continue to work with BlueScope as it continues to make steel to support the ongoing jobs there, and we are of course providing, with the collaboration of the State Government and the collaboration of BlueScope, a $30 million package to work with the local community to diversify the economy here.
Don Russell, the head of Minister Carr's Department, has already come to the Illawarra and started liaising with people about that new future. Today I'm in a position to announce that Professor Gerard Sutton, the Vice-Chancellor of this great university where we have met today, will work as an advocate alongside Don Russell for this region and we will be working with the local community through regional engagement and a regional advisory group.
The future of the Illawarra will be written by the people of the Illawarra, but we will be here every day to support the people of the Illawarra as they write that future. I will be relying on our local Members, on Sharon Bird and Stephen Jones. They are great advocates of this local community. We will be staying in close touch with them, in close touch with people in this region to design this new future for the Illawarra.
These are difficult days but I am optimistic that we will see a bright future here and we will see a strong future for steel making and manufacturing around Australia.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you seriously considering, can you just clear this up, whether you will look at an inquiry into the manufacturing sector?
PM: I can certainly clear this up for you. I met with representatives with manufacturing yesterday including employer representatives and union representatives. It's possible for people to take some different takes out of a conversation.
My focus is on what we need to do. We have been acting every day as a Government to support jobs and to support manufacturing. We are working now on what else we need to do during these days of economic change to work with manufacturing. To give examples of that, we made some important announcements last week about Peter Beattie being involved in advocating to mining companies and to the resources sector working with Australian manufacturers-
JOURNALIST: -Will this include an inquiry?
PM: Well my focus is on action. I don't want to be held back from acting by an inquiry which would inevitably take some time. Now, that doesn't mean that we won't take the best of expert advice along the way, but I don't want to be held up from acting by an enquiry.
JOURNALIST: Paul Howes and Dave Oliver were surprised by these comments this morning. They had an indication from you yesterday that you were looking at or moving towards putting an inquiry in place?
PM: Look, people can get different impressions from a conversation - that's human, that's natural. What I said yesterday is I wasn't looking at a free-ranging, freewheeling inquiry into manufacturing; that my focus was on the actions that we needed to take, and can I just say of the actions that we have taken so far, we have been advocating very strongly the merits of Australian manufacturing. We're advocating strongly buying Australian at home and abroad. We are seeing spectacular growth in our mining industry, and I think it is fair for our mining industry to be working out how they can best work with Australian manufacturers so they get a fair go during this process of expansion in Australian mining.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) says it's economically irresponsible and politically dumb not to have an inquiry. Are you unhappy he's made these comments?
PM: Look, people will make their own comments.
I'm sure Doug would also agree with the proposition that we don't want to be held up by having an enquiry, that there are things we need to do now, there are things we need to do in the Illawarra.
We have many policies and plans that have been announced and are out there now to support manufacturing. We need to keep delivering that policies and plans and of course as I said in the meeting yesterday, and I've been making the point here in the Illawarra today, we will have an open door for manufacturing during these days of change to be strongly engaged with people about support for manufacturing. There's a lot happening: a lot happening in Government procurement; a lot happening in industry participation plans; a lot happening with buying Australian with home and abroad. We took steps forward last week with the appointment of the steel advocate and the appointment of Peter Beattie. We will keep working with manufacturing as we have been working with them and of course engage with them to understand their perspectives and their needs during these days of economic change.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Cameron says he'll take it to the next Caucus meeting, and if there's enough support there he'll put pressure on the issue in Caucus.
PM: Well, look, I've just announced the Government's view.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will the Government commit to a regional stimulus package should the Government's working party and Gerard Sutton tell you that that's what's needed, that the support that's been announced last week isn't enough?
PM: Well, I think we've got to go through this in the appropriate order.
We made the announcement we made last Monday because it was the right thing to respond immediately. We understood there'd be many people in this area devastated by the news and feeling a real sense of pressure for themselves and their families, so we wanted them to know that we'd be there with assistance, personalised support, working with them.
We also wanted to people of the Illawarra to know more broadly that we would be working with this region for its economic future. Now we are bringing local identities together, including of course Professor Sutton to help design that future. I very frankly said to people today the future of the Illawarra will not be written by me sitting at my desk in Canberra typing it into a computer. It will be written here in the Illawarra, people working locally.
There's $30 million on the table. That is on top of everything we've done so far to invest in this region.
We're in the university now. It's seen the best part of $100 million of capital injection from the Government, to take just one example. Let's bring people together locally, work on that vision for the future and the best use of the $30 million before we get to other questions about what else may need to be done.
But let's be clear too - this is $30 million on top of all the things that Government routinely does to engage with the Illawarra.
JOURNALIST: You're right, it is $30 million, but Stephen Jones has told Parliament he expects the hit to region's economy will be in the order of $1 billion, so do you believe that that assistance would really cover that gap?
PM: I think that's an apples to oranges comparison.
What we're talking about is investing in this region to diversify its economic future. People will still make steel, people will still go coalmining. What I also want to see is people having other employment opportunities so that they've got jobs, so that they're earning a wage, so that they're spending that wage in the local shops. That is what will replace the economic activity taken away by the loss of the jobs at BlueScope.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you say in the release that there's 2,500 jobs have been created in areas like Adelaide and Geelong, where plants have shut down. What kinds of areas can Wollongong see, where have these jobs, be specific, where have these jobs been created? Is it tourism? I mean, what can we look forward to?
PM: Look, I'll turn to Minister Carr for some direct commentary on this, but let me just say the following.
I've had the benefit of a meeting today where people have talked about manufacturing in this region and future for manufacturing in this region, including Sharon was giving me an example of a manufacturer that's making parts for wind turbines, part of a clean energy future, manufacturing right here.
People have talked upstairs, when we've had the meeting, about the things that can come with the National Broadband Network and obviously the advocacy for this region in getting the National Broadband Network and the difference that will make to the local economy.
Already working in this region there is a group that's come together, a network that's come together on innovative industries, and so much of the work of this university is now focussed on that innovative industry approach, including manufacturing. I've heard reports of the group that works locally, an ICT cluster, to talk about the difference that that can make, and of course you know this regions got other tremendous advantages - its spectacular beauty which rightly brings tourists and people who enjoy the features of this region. There's a lot of cutting edge creative work here too. So, this is a region with a lot of strengths on the table.
What we found when we've had major changes in other parts of the nation, if I can use the Adelaide example and then get Kim Carr to add to it.
I grew up in Adelaide. I grew up in Unley. I grew up knowing people whose dads worked the Chrysler factory as it then was before it became Mitsubishi - maybe showing my age a little bit here - but that was a long-term employer in that part of Adelaide, working from the same factory, a long-term employer there, and then it shut down. Now that was a major change for Adelaide and a major shock for a part of Adelaide.
We worked with them on a future. There's been manufacturing replace some of that. There's been new industries replace some of that. People have taken their skills and gone to new jobs. People have retrained and added to their skills. People have designed a new economic future, but what's happened with those Mitsubishi workers should give people some cause for optimism that we can manage our way through these sorts of economic circumstances.
And to give you of course that national example, during the global financial crisis we pulled together as a nation. We supported Australian jobs. The Government did what it needed to do to support Australian jobs and we were met with goodwill from Australian employers and Australian unions who wanted to support and protect Australian jobs, too.
That happened right around the nation and it worked. Now we're going to see, I think, that same sort of coming together and goodwill here in the Illawarra, but I'll turn to Minister Carr for some more details.
MINISTER CARR: Can I just indicate that these programs, these innovation funds, have been a pride and true across the country. This is a way of turning adversity to advantage.
What we've seen with the use of these funds is that a government, often in connection with the state government, will invest a dollar and attract two or three dollars from the private sector. So, we've seen over 5,400 jobs created through these funds across Australia.
Now, it could be that they are in direct manufacturing, predominately they will be in manufacturing, but they'd also be in manufacturing services, they'll also be for instance in electrical, they'll be in a whole range of areas but they're predominantly blue-collar jobs. These are high-quality jobs, these are long-term jobs, these are secure jobs, these are quality jobs and the program is aimed at providing that stimulus to the region so that businesses invest in themselves and we see the regions make great opportunities in what is very great periods of difficulty.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what pressure has your office been putting on News Limited to pull a story about allegations about your links?
PM: What a completely absurd question. The only issue here yesterday was one I dealt with personally and that is that News Limited  -  actually, The Australian newspaper, let's be clear - The Australian newspaper had published a false report in breach of all known standards of journalism. They'd made no approach to me to seek a comment or to check what was asserted. They clearly realised they had done the wrong thing and published a retraction as a result, so the only question here really is how is it that a false allegation about the Prime Minister is published in The Australian newspaper without anyone from The Australian contacting me or my office for a comment?
And it does raise in me the question, I'm the Prime Minister of the country, I can get up on Monday morning and get the mobile numbers for people like the editor of The Australian newspaper and make a call to get something like that clarified. I do really wonder what happens to an Australian, perhaps someone who lives in the Illawarra or one of the suburbs of our great cities who for whatever reason is caught up in a news story and has a false allegation made about them and no one's bothered to contact them about it either. How do they actually get it fixed given they're not in the same position as me to make calls to the editor of The Australian newspaper?
So this is a question of ethics and standards for The Australian, so your questions would be best directed to the editor of The Australian.
JOURNALIST: So do you think it goes far beyond that one story?
PM: Well I just think there's a question of ethics and standards here. I mean, you're a journalist. You understand, I would have said, as a basic ethical premise of the trade you ply, that if you are going to make an allegation or assertion about someone that you've got to give them the opportunity to comment on it. If you didn't do that I think you'd be disappointed with yourself at the end of the day. Basic standards - they should be adhered to.
JOURNALIST: Just on your meeting this morning with steelworkers, how many did you meet? Did you meet anyone that was in the firing line, and why weren't cameras allowed into this meeting?
PM: Well, jobs are at stake here, jobs are at stake, so I'm out there talking to workers. I'm not worrying or wondering whether cameras-
JOURNALIST: -But you have met in other areas with workers whose jobs were at stake, and we were allowed into those meetings.
PM: Look, jobs are at stake here and the thing that's important to me is talking to the workers involved, not whether or not cameras are taking pictures of me while I do it. So, I had an opportunity to talk to the workers involved.
Because of the process that is being gone through with BlueScope here, this is a decision-making period where people will put forward expressions of interest about whether or not they want to be the subject of a voluntary redundancy, so it's at that stage, so it's not a question at the moment for BlueScope workers of them knowing that Kim Carr's name is on the list.
What is happening here is that people are thinking ‘should I put my hand up? If I put my hand up what would it mean for me and my family? What would I do next? What job would I do next? Would I stay in the Illawarra, if I stayed in the Illawarra where would I go, what would I do, how would I access the retraining and re-skilling?' That's what the $10 million is about.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) would be a great stimulus for this area, any chance of a building decision on that?
PM: You're not the first person who's said that to me today, so look, I understand that there are many local views about what could assist during this period.
Today I was here to listen. Today I was here to say to people we'll have a whole of Government response and we will be working with the people of this region. We will bring people together and I'm sure they will give us the best of their expertise and ideas.
JOURNALIST: Paul Howes said this morning there's going to be a mass meeting of union workers at WIN Stadium on Thursday. It's not clear whether they're legally entitled to that, do you support a mass meeting of workers to discuss all these issues?
PM: I support people staying within the industrial relations law, I'm not going to make an assumption standing here about the legal status of a meeting on Thursday, I'd need a lot more details.
JOURNALIST: Do you believe BlueScope should be offering redundancy packages similar to what was offered to Newcastle in the late ‘90s, so a far more generous package that what they're offering at the moment?
PM: Look I understand that this is a question of discussion between the union and workers it represents and BlueScope. It's not appropriate for me to intervene in that discussion.
What I can say more generally of course is my motivation in public life and as Prime Minister has been to see working people treated fairly and decently. That's why we got rid of Work Choices and replaced it with the Fair Work Act-
JOURNALIST: -Do you think they are being treated fairly (inaudible)
PM: You're not going to draw me on a question of a discussion between BlueScope and the relevant unions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a meeting of union delegates last Thursday, which was pretty heated, they said that BlueScope has been planning what they did over six months and they went in at 6am when a whole bunch of workers finished night shift and said ‘800 of you (inaudible) lose your jobs.' Is there any way the government can stop companies on the future from, you know, this kind of action?
Newcastle was told two years before the steel works shut down that everything was going to change  -  these guys found out when they finished night shift one morning, after a whole lot of speculation. Is there anything you can do as a government to prevent companies doing this in the future?
PM: I think we've just got to pull back a little bit here and work out what it is we do as a government.
What we do as a government is we make sure that we've got fair working conditions through the Fair Work Act, and of the many reasons I wanted to get rid of Work Choices - stripping penalty rates away, hurting working people - of the many reasons I wanted to get rid of Work Choices it meant that a worker could be given an Australian Workplace Agreement, one of Tony Abbott's hated workplace agreements, could be given one of them, which stripped away their entitlement to redundancy without a cent of compensation. So, people can end up in the circumstance where maybe they worked for a business for 20, 30 years, they were out the door without a redundancy package.
Now, we fixed that, but what we fix is the creation of standards right around the workforce, so minimum standards that apply to everyone and then employers and employees bargain on top of that to create other standards.
The conversation you're going to is a conversation about one workplace, so as Prime Minister I don't walk around defining working conditions for one workplace, but like the question I answered here, I'm obviously strongly motivated by seeing working people treated decently and with respect. That's why we went to hell and back to get rid of Work Choices and that's why we resist every day the reintroduction of Work Choices as is advocated by Tony Abbott and the Liberal Opposition.
JOURNALIST: Do you think there was an expectation that you would come here today with cash rather than just a morning of words, because I think that was the public's expectation, that you would come here, help (inaudible).
PM: I think the public's expectation would rightly be that when a region has an economic shock like this, that the government responds. I did that last Monday. I did that on the same day that it was public that workers were losing their job at BlueScope. That was the right day to do it.
JOURNALIST: So, that's the extent of the financial-
PM: -Just let me finish my sentence.
That was the right day to do it. I didn't want people hearing that news and then going to bed that night and the night after and the night after not knowing what it is that the Australian Government was going to do to work alongside them. So, we announced it on the same date.
We're here today, I'm here, in part to say to people by my very physical presence that we will be working with the people of the Illawarra during this period and we will do that by being strongly engaged with the local community. I've started some of that engagement today and of course we will have appropriate structures for that ongoing engagement and that will work through how the $30 million, for example, best gets used.
JOURNALIST: How will that apply to contractors, the $30 million? A lot of them are left out of the picture, not being full-time workers employed by BlueScope, so how will they be able to get access to some of those funds?
PM: Right, we've just got to be clear about sources of funds here.
We have provided a facility of up to $100 million for BlueScope. That is because we want to see the continuation of steel making in this region and we want to see as many jobs as possible continuing at BlueScope. So, that's number one.
Number two, we have provided $10 million to provide extra employment services. They are employment services above and beyond what any Australian worker would normally be entitled to. So, we have an employment services system, people have entitlements under that system, we are adding to that system $10 million to give specialised support. That is available to direct employees of BlueScope who are no longer employed by BlueScope as a result of all of this; employees of suppliers who don't have their jobs because the supplier doesn't have the business any longer because of this change at BlueScope; employees of contractors who provide services to BlueScope and those services are no longer required, or required at a lesser rate, because of this change at BlueScope. That's the $10 million.
Then there's the $30 million: the $30 million is about the economy of the region and working with the local community on that, as we have  -  South Australia was the example given, as we did with Mitsubishi.
JOURNALIST: Just on another matter, Prime Minister. I just wanted to ask you, do you think that the Health Service Union has a case to answer from reports that they received rent concessions during your re-election campaign last year and I'm wondering if you see an end point of the Health Services Union being in all this hot water?
PM: Look, declarations to the Australian Electoral Commission should of course be properly made. On the other matters you raised there's a Fair Work Australia investigation underway.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned there about support for the steel making industry and how you'd like the public expectations for you to work with BlueScope Steel to make sure they're continuing in that industry. If that's the case, why can't we see more local use in Australia?
PM: Why can we see?
JOURNALIST: Why can't we see more local steel used in Australia?
PM: Look, I'll take that as the last question and it's a good question and we are, through our various policies and plans, advocating for the steel industry in this country, and I do want to say very clearly to the mining industry, which is undergoing a huge expansion, I believe the mining industry should be working out what else it can do to work with Australian manufacturers.
Thanks very much. 



Peter Maher, Chairman of the Financial Services Council.
John Brogden, Chief Executive Officer of the Financial Services Council
I thank Craig for that warm welcome.
It's great to be here to speak with an industry that is so fundamental to the security and prosperity of our nation.
I want to acknowledge from the start of my address that my Government appreciates the contribution that the Financial Services Council and all of your members make to the reform agenda in superannuation, financial services and financial advice.
This month we celebrate 20 years since the introduction of the Superannuation Guarantee, the birth of modern superannuation.
Universal superannuation is one of the greatest social and economic reforms in Australia's history.
And one of the major reasons we can stare global economic uncertainty in the face with confidence.
Behind it all were two remarkable Australians, described by David Love as the ‘Rudolph Valentino and Mickey Rooney' of Australian politics  -  Paul Keating and Bill Kelty.
This remarkable pair charted a path of productivity and reform that helped set up the strong, open economy that today is the envy of the world. 
Friends, because of those reforms and their continuation under successive governments, Australia's economic outlook is strong.
Strong fundamentals based on sustainable growth, and low public debt.
A deep, stable and liquid financial sector.
Rapidly rising levels of education and skills.
An unprecedented investment pipeline, still building, with a staggering $430 billion planned in resource investment alone.
An economy that has created jobs while other nations were losing them - around 750,000 since Labor came to office.
All underpinned by our location in the right part of the world at the right time.
While fundamentally strong, the Australian economy is not immune to developments on international markets.
But it is essential to recognise that the real change underway in the Australian economy is that being driven by a sustained, unprecedented increase in Australia's terms of trade.
A change which is reshaping the structure of our economy.
Global growth has long been shifting from West to East  -  and this is accelerating again.
Developing countries like China and India emerged from the GFC strong.
They are generating growth still at historic highs  -  and that growth is increasingly driven by their own internal demand.
This is driving our dollar to a new high - a push which is currently being exacerbated by the relative strength of the Australian economy, compared to the rest of the developed world.
The appreciation of the dollar has been good for some businesses which rely on imports, and good for many Australians purchasing cheaper overseas travel or imports.
But it is also putting many sectors of the economy, like education, tourism, some parts of retail and especially manufacturing, under pressure.
A reason that while much of our economy is booming, many Australians feel as though they have been left behind.
Doing what we can to relieve that pressure is essential.
Those decisions are in our hands.
Economic management must focus on unlocking productivity and enhancing Australia's competitive position in the world  -  so that enough Australians have what we prize most  -  jobs and opportunity.
I am determined to make sure we not only put in place policies which drive us to do the things we do now more effectively; but also that we gear our economy to compete on the basis of its superior capacity to innovate, and seize new markets.
To help Australians to get ahead, by making sure that Australia gets ahead.
With this approach, we are building a dynamic, high-income modern economy.
An economy driven by:
 * 	Investments in skills - to make sure we have the smartest workforce, providing the services most in demand in the world.
 * 	Clean energy - to attract international capital, and lure direct investment from businesses which want to set up long lived assets in economies like ours which will be managing the carbon challenge in the cheapest way possible.
 * 	Technology, especially high speed broadband - to support advanced manufacturing, and allow our services industry to access clients anywhere, anytime.
 * 	Tax reform  -  to drive growth in the non-resource sectors of the economy by using our resource wealth to fund company tax cuts across the board; and lifting workforce participation by tripling the tax free threshold.
And of course super reform.
Friends, superannuation used to be the preserve of the wealthy or of tenured public servants and academics.
Universal super changed all that.
Jeremy Cooper called it “part of the democratisation of finance.”
In fact, it is the democratisation of wealth.
Until universal superannuation came along, most Australians had one source of wealth  -  their home.
With super, they can have two.
But perhaps even more amazing is the role super plays in the wider economy.
Today superannuation provides a nest egg bigger than the size of our annual GDP or the entire market capitalisation of the ASX - $1.4 trillion.
As a result, Australia has the fourth-biggest pool of pension assets in the world.
About 40% of superannuation investments are in Australian shares or Australian fixed interest securities.
Our wealth management industry employs 60,000 people.
All of you are part of that achievement and should take immense pride in being part of Australia's success as a modern, confident nation with an incredible story of reform to tell the world.
In the midst of global economic challenges, I want to focus for a minute on the crucial role that superannuation savings have come to play in Australia's economic stability.
Superannuation savings have come to play a key macro-economic role alongside fiscal and monetary policy.
Our pool of superannuation savings has real consequences for economic management.
For a nation with a long-standing propensity to spend more than we earn, a super pool bigger than our GDP helps offset our current account imbalance, and fosters liquidity and stability.
For example, when the global financial crisis hit in 2008, our national savings were sandbags against the leakage of capital we saw elsewhere in the world.
At a time of desperation for many companies, super savings helped our listed companies overcome capital scarcity and recapitalise.
Almost $40 billion was raised in institutional share placements in 2008-09 alone, helping to keep Australia in business, our banks strong and our people in jobs.
15% of capital raisings in 2008/09 globally were here in Australia.
And the companies that recapitalised employed 1.6m Australians.
Since then:
 * 	Super fund investments accounted for nearly 30 per cent of total market capitalisation of the ASX in the 2009-10 financial year.
 * 	Super funds are the largest contributor to managed funds. As at the June quarter 2011, super funds accounted for around 70 per cent of all consolidated assets in managed funds.
The global economic uncertainty we face now should be a reminder to us of the importance of super.
In rocky international seas, super is an anchor.
And it should be a reminder to us that increasing super  -  increasing the weight and heft of that anchor  -  is the right goal.
Some say that in the current economic environment we should be considering establishing a sovereign wealth fund.
I take a different approach.
I believe that superannuation is already our trillion dollar sovereign wealth fund  -  but with market benefits.
That's because it's privately managed by thousands of trustees instead of a sovereign wealth fund managed centrally by a Canberra-appointed manager.
Or alternatively, you could say that Australia has 8 million sovereign wealth funds  -  the superannuation accounts of Australians across the country.
These are the very same superannuation accounts we want to make massive injections into.
But we can't do it without an important piece of policy architecture, and that is the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
We can only get to 12 per cent by 2020 if we use part of the proceeds of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax to mitigate the lost revenue incurred by taxing super at concessional rates.
Neither the goal of increasing universal super contributions from 9 to 12 percent, nor the MRRT itself, are supported by our opponents.
A risk for every Australian heading towards retirement  -  for every Australian under 65.
And a risk for our future economic stability  -  not now, but in decades to come.
And a risk to jobs.
Our opponents, as usual, are willing to squander long-term economic stability and jobs for Australians for the sake of short-term political gain.
Hacking into the retirement savings of generations to come would be an act of social and economic vandalism that we cannot allow.
Superannuation is also starting to have the fiscal benefits envisaged by Keating and Kelty.
Superannuation has helped ensure Australia spends one of the lowest amounts on age pensions as a percentage of GDP of any advanced economy.
Latest Treasury estimates are that 12% super will mean $10bn saved each year on pension outlays in 2030. 
Our superannuation savings pool, standing at an incredible $1.4 trillion, has doubled in just seven years.
That wealth is held in retail and corporate funds, industry and government funds and self-managed funds.
No model has a majority.
Each model has its benefits.
What unites us all is the understanding that universal superannuation is here to stay.
Like Medicare, it is now a fundamental part of Australia's social compact.
A glittering economic achievement which has created jobs and opportunity for millions of Australians.
And more proof, if anyone needed it, that strong economic management is not an end in itself  -  but a means to build a better nation, to provide work and the dignity that comes with it.
Our task is to build on that legacy.
To borrow a Keatingesque sentiment, superannuation policy is an unfinished symphony.
The Keating generation created the fundamentals of a system that will endure for decades.
It is up to us to take the next steps.
As our population ages, our expectations of quality of life in retirement will rise.
More than half of Australians now working would prefer to retire on an income of at least $40,000 a year, compared to the single age pension of just $17,000 a year.
Yet currently less than 10 per cent of Australians aged over 65 have incomes over $40,000 a year.
It must be the goal of government to do better.
And the fact is we can't address that gap without increasing super contributions.
That is another reason we will increase superannuation contributions from 9 to 12 per cent over the next decade, adding half a trillion dollars to national savings by 2035.
This increase is affordable and sustainable for businesses if introduced in the right way.
That is why we have staged the increases with a gradual ramp up so they start from next year and reach 12 per cent by the middle of 2019.
I am thankful for your support in achieving our national goal of lifting superannuation.
Friends, our other key task is to make the system more transparent and efficient, so that fund members obtain the best possible service and value  -  and importantly have trust and confidence in the system
It doesn't matter whether an employee is a member of an industry fund or a retail fund, they deserve good service and real value for money. They also deserve to be placed in a super fund because it is in their best interests, not because of sales commissions being paid to advisers.
We need to strip away inefficiencies to ensure that as much money as possible flows into the hands of retirees.
Our SuperStream reforms address some of the most basic issues of improving the creaking back-office of the super industry.
On my advice SuperStream could deliver $1 billion worth of efficiencies, as well as giving employees greater peace of mind that their contributions have been paid securely and on-time.
Let's get moving on SuperStream  -  an important part of the productivity agenda for the wealth management industry.
The other big reform, of course, is MySuper.
The reality is that most Australians are not active managers of their superannuation.
They should not have to pay for advice or products they simply don't require.
For most employees, simple and reliable no-frills, low-cost super funds will be all they need.
And all parts of the superannuation industry have a role to play in providing them.
I know that many in this industry have already responded to this challenge by launching simple, commission-free super products.
And we as the Government have a role to play as well. To listen to your concerns and explain our policies.  Our efforts in this respect have been spearheaded by the Minister, Bill Shorten, but I want you to know that my entire Government is committed to working with you to deliver a competitive superannuation industry.
I understand that the issue of how administration fees will be calculated in relation to MySuper products as well as the manner in which existing superannuation accounts will be treated following the introduction of MySuper, is a significant matter for the FSC and your members.
I know the Minister is consulting with you and the Government looks forward to continuing our engagement with each of you on these important issues.
It is in this spirit that we also recently released the first tranche of legislation for our Future of Financial Advice reforms on Monday. We will be releasing further details in coming months and are on track to introducing the legislation into Parliament later this Spring.
A competitive superannuation industry benefits all Australians.
It is the right policy at the right time in our history.
Friends, private savings through super, backed by public saving through tough budget rules.
It's all part of a whole.
A plan to modernise our economy for the future so Australians have jobs.
A plan to create opportunity for every Australian - the opportunity that comes through having a job.
A plan to transform innovation, skills and training  -  so Australians can get a better job.
A plan to build the infrastructure of the future, the NBN, to unlock the opportunities of the digital economy so we don't export jobs to countries with better technology.
A plan for a clean energy future in which economic growth is decoupled from carbon growth, and Australians have clean energy jobs.
Tax reform, to better reward Australians who get a job and to help non-mining companies create jobs
Building the road and rail infrastructure that will reconnect and re-energise our cities, and create jobs.
And, of course, reforms in health, ageing and disability to meet the demographic demands of tomorrow and make sure we don't leave Australians behind.
In uncertain times, it is these things that will decide the outcome.
These are the things that will secure our future as a nation.
A nation confident in the world  -  and confident in itself.
If, on the other hand, political short-sightedness wins the day, then Australia will lose the future
If we allow the insidious belief to creep in that Australia is not up to reform  -  that we should punch below our weight, rather than above - that we should always put off to tomorrow what we'd prefer not to think about today  -  then it is ordinary Australians who will feel the pain of that failure of confidence.
Just as it is those ordinary Australians who are benefiting today from the reforms in superannuation undertaken twenty years ago.
I am optimistic about Australia and Australians. I believe that our best days are ahead of us, and that the choices we make today will make that true.
Australians are rightly proud of our economic achievements.
We did big things before in tougher times than this.
Achievements like Medicare, tariff reform and universal super.
Walking the reform road together, there is nothing but fear preventing us from doing great things once again. 



The United Nations Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, will visit Australia on 3 September and then from 7 to 9 September as a guest of the Australian Government.  Australia is a founding member of the United Nations and is the twelfth largest contributor to the UN regular and peacekeeping budgets.  This will be the first visit by a UN Secretary-General in over a decade.
The Prime Minister will meet the Secretary-General to discuss Australia's support for UN-endorsed missions, including in Afghanistan and East Timor, developments in North Africa and the Middle East, the global response to the humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa, the impact of the global economic crisis, as well as international action to address climate change and sustainable development.  


Yeronga State High School, Queensland
This transcript contains excerpts from the Community Cabinet meeting held in Yeronga on Thursday 1 September 2011. A complete transcript of the Public Forum detailing all questions and answers can be found via the Community Cabinet links on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet homepage http://www.dpmc.gov.au/community_cabinet
Footage of the school, students, Community Reception, members of the public mingling, music and entertainment.
Narrator: On the 1st of September the Gillard Government held a Community Cabinet at Yeronga State High School.
Student: Well we are at Yeronga State High School and we are hosting a Community Cabinet meeting with Julia Gillard.
Footage of one-on-one meetings
Narrator: The Community Cabinet provided local residents with an opportunity for one-on- one meetings with the Prime Minister.
Graham Perrett MP: Ladies and gentlemen please make welcome the Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard.
Applause
Prime Minister: I did want to open up by saying to you that we have a lot to be thankful for as a country, a lot to be proud of. We are a peaceful nation, we are a prosperous nation and we've got an economy that is the envy of the world and we very much prize that fair go. And even when nature throws challenges at us, like it did last summer, we pull together and show that Aussie spirit.
It's always best to come and talk to communities face to face and see what's on your mind, so this is your opportunity to put before us the issues that matter to you and we will do the best we can to answer any question that you've got.
Community Member 1: It seems to me at the moment that you're almost on a daily basis on the campaign trail and is this affecting the government's ability to govern the country as a whole?
Prime Minister: What you don't see is those hours and hours and hours spent in meetings and doing paperwork! And maybe just as well cause I'm not sure it would make all that interesting watching!
Community Member 2:  Do you think Prime Minister, that some of the revenue raised through carbon pricing initiatives will be used to assist poor communities overseas?
Prime Minister: We've already detailed that that money is going to be used to assist Australians with the less than a cent in a dollar flow through impact onto costs for things that they buy.
Community Member 3: Will the Federal Government be providing funding to Cross River Rail?
Minister Anthony Albanese MP: That is currently being developed in terms of the planning stage by the Queensland Government.
Prime Minister: Ladies and gentleman thank you very much for coming along tonight. Thank you.
Community Member 4: I'm here to like see them and hear what they have to say.
Community Member 5: It's a wonderful idea, so that they come to see us and we get to talk to them about the things that are really important within the community.
Community Member 6: I really think the reforms that they have done for mental health, her (the Prime Minister) and Nicola Roxon, really make an improvement to our vulnerable people.
Community Member 7: I also got the opportunity to tell what we as students think as well about social justice issues.
Community Member 8: It's my first time to see the Prime Minister face to face. I'm very proud to see that.
Community Member 6 (continuation of comments): It's what democracy is all about.
Footage of the Prime Minister mingling with members of the public, pans of the Public Forum and One-on-One meetings.
Ends with musical interlude
Footage concludes (3 minutes)



PM: I'm joined today by Chris Bowen, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and we're here today to speak about some of the implications from yesterday's High Court decision. Can I say at the outset, yesterday's High Court decision was a deeply disappointing one. The Government had worked for some period of time on the arrangement with Malaysia, we had done that because we wanted to send the strongest possible message to people smugglers that we wanted to put them out of business, that we wanted to break the people smugglers' business model.
We had been advised and understood from the past that the most effective thing you can do, the strongest possible message you can send to people smugglers is to deny them the product that they sell, they are selling people a passage to Australia and we had taken advice and considered all options and possibilities and believed that the arrangement with Malaysia would take that product out of the hands of people smugglers. They would no longer be able to say to people that they were able to get them to Australia because people would come here only to be taken to Malaysia.
The Government therefore pursued this agreement because we thought it was the strongest possible message we could send to people smugglers to end the plying of this very evil trade. The Government first discussed internally the arrangements with Malaysia last year and the Minister made the first contact with Malaysia in December last year. Over a considerable period of time we worked through the details with Malaysia and internally to Government and of course along the way we took the best possible advice including legal advice. Our legal advice was that our ability to do this was in the current law, we were advised that our legal case was strong, we were advised that our legal case was strong in part because the courts have considered similar questions in the past and looking to those precedents we were advised that if those precedents were followed our legal case would be a strong one.
Yesterday in the High Court what we saw was the High Court enter into a different construction of the relevant section of the Migration Act. Effectively, if you like, yesterday the refugee and asylum seeker law of this country changed, changed from how it had been known and understood before with a different interpretation of the legislation. The High Court's decision basically turns on its head the understanding of the law in this country prior to yesterday's decision.
In that case we of course need to consider as a Government what is the best way forward. Last night Cabinet met for a consideration of this matter and we received oral advice from the Solicitor-General, now I do want to stress that his advice is preliminary and it was oral advice, I have requested the Solicitor-General to provide advice in writing as soon as it is possible for him to do so and as a matter of urgency, however I do want to say based on the general understandings we have at this point of the meaning of yesterday's High Court case, that it appears that the following is its meaning. I do want to caution that advice of course is preliminary, but I do believe that it's worth saying, that there are questions over the future of offshore processing arrangements that must be considered and it's far from clear, it is far from clear, whether the Court's ruling would practically speaking permit the operation of offshore processing in other locations even in locations where offshore processing has been conducted in the past.
Now it's on these matters that of course the Solicitor-General's written advice will deal and it is our intention when that advice is received to release that advice publically.
Can I say looking at yesterday's High Court decision I believe that it represents a missed opportunity in preventing us from transferring asylum seekers to Malaysia at this time it represents a missed opportunity. A missed opportunity to enhance our region's response to the evil of people smuggling, a missed opportunity to make a real and important contribution to the region's approach to the transnational crime of people smuggling through the Bali framework, the framework that the Minister for Immigration and of course the Minister for Foreign Affairs worked on in Bali earlier this year with our regional friends and neighbours and it is a missed opportunity, a missed opportunity to send the strongest possible message to people smugglers, a missed opportunity to send a message to asylum seekers not to risk their lives at sea and get into boats and we tragically saw at Christmas Island around Christmas time what that can lead to with the loss of life of men and women and children.
The Government will received the written legal advice from the Solicitor-General and we will digest that advice and at the appropriate point make a comprehensive statement about the Government's plans following the High Court decision.
The Minister for Immigration yesterday made his first instance responses to the High Court case, I'll turn to him now for some comments on an aspect of the case that to date hasn't been as publically reported on as other parts.
MINISTER BOWEN: Thank you very much Prime Minister. As the Prime Minister said, yesterday's judgment casts into question a range of matters in relation to offshore processing. One matter which there has been some questioning about is the situation of unaccompanied minors. It's quite clear from yesterday's judgment again that the situation with unaccompanied minors has changed under law. Yesterday the High Court ruled that no unaccompanied minor could be removed from Australia to any other place without the written permission of the Minister for Immigration as guardian and that would be a matter which would in all likelihood be judicially reviewable which would make the removal of unaccompanied minors to any offshore location under any regime one which is highly problematic. That again, as the Prime Minister said, is something the Government will need to consider in the light of revised advice from the Solicitor-General and of course it would impact on any offshore processing scheme that was conducted by this Government or any future government.
PM: We're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: So it's the end of offshore  processing for asylum seekers?
PM: As I said we have received oral advice from the Solicitor-General and we will receive his written advice, however what I can say at this stage is that there are very clear questions over whether or not this judgment permits offshore processing, practically speaking, in other locations including locations where offshore processing has occurred before. Now we're in a situation, preliminary, oral advice from the Solicitor-General to Cabinet last night, we will receive his written advice and we will publically release it.
JOURNALIST: You presided over the failed East Timor solution, you jumped the gun on the Malaysian solution, how much responsibility do you bear and do you owe the people of Australia an apology?
PM: Well let's get the facts right because it always helps to do that. We worked hard on this Malaysia arrangement, an innovative arrangement, an innovative arrangement to transfer people back to Malaysia so we could send the toughest possible message of deterrence to people smugglers who ply a very evil trade. Now we acted on legal advice, on legal advice that our case was sound. The High Court decision yesterday has effectively changed our understanding of refugee and asylum seeker law in this country. Now of course, based on further legal advice from the Solicitor-General we will respond to that decision.
JOURNALIST: Has Minister Bowen offered you his resignation at all?
PM: Well let's be clear about what's happened here. The High Court yesterday took a decision that has effectively changed refugee and asylum seeker law in this country. 
JOURNALIST: So that's a no?
PM: Well I'll finish my sentence thank you, and if you look at the public reporting of this today there are now many legal experts out there commenting on the decision, some of them are saying that they are greatly surprised by this decision, some of them are saying that they find the decision in comprehensible, beyond understanding, some are obviously saying that they do understand the decision, but when you've got that wide diversity, that really wide diversity of legal responses after the judgment is taken, I think that's telling us something about the nature of this decision.
Minister Bowen at all times acted on the best advice available to him and acted with a clear determination and resolve to break the people smugglers' business model and that's what I asked him to do as Minister.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard have you spoken to the Opposition or any of the crossbenchers about what happens next?
PM: No I haven't.
JOURNALIST: Would you consider amending the Migration Act?
PM: As the Minister made clear yesterday we will work through all options but we'll do it with a careful and methodical approach, and so the first thing that you need to do is get legal advice on the meaning of this decision. As soon as we Cabinet took oral advice from the Solicitor-General, that happened last night, the evening the decision came down. Understandably the Solicitor-General needs some time to put his advice in writing, that is being done now, when that advice is received then we will release it publically. 
JOURNALIST: How embarrassing is this for you as Prime Minister?
PM: Well we are not the first Government to go to the High Court and to have legislation overturned, it's happened to governments in the past, it'll happen to governments in the future. What you need to do as a government is respond when the High Court has made a decision and we will, we will respond with our determination, to act on people smuggling. What I don't want to see as Prime Minister of this country, is men, women and children getting on boats and potentially losing their lives, and it was our determination to not see men and women and children get on boats that drove us over the many months that we worked on the arrangement with Malaysia. Now the High Court's made a decision-
JOURNALIST: But Prime Minister you haven't been particularly successful in achieving that or trying to achieve that have you?
PM: Well let's once again deal with the facts because they come in handy. Dealing with the facts, and Minister Bowen can give you all of the statistics on this, we have seen a far less number of arrivals in the past few months since we announced the arrangement with Malaysia than we saw in the same period last year. We had been aiming of course to send a tough message to people smugglers, we have been acting on the legal advice that we had been provided with. Now yesterday the High Court changed from interpretations of the past, and to give you just a flavour of that because I think it's important, the current Chief Justice of the High Court, His Honour Mr Justice French, considered comparable legal questions when he was a judge of the Federal Court and made different decisions to the one that the High Court made yesterday. So we acted on legal advice, we've seen yesterday's decision from the High Court, we will respond to it but we will respond in the way in which we go about our work; carefully, methodically and that means we'll get the written advice from the Solicitor-General.
JOURNALIST: So have you spoken with Malaysia (inaudible).
PM: I'll go to the Minister on that question.
MINISTER BOWEN: Yes, I've been in - 
JOURNALIST: Are you still committed (inaudible).
MINISTER BOWEN: I've been in contact with my ministerial counterpart Minister Hishammuddinas you would expect he understands the legal situation in Australia, he is very supportive of our position, he has recommitted Malaysia to working very closely with Australia on all these issues of people smuggling and border security and he has indicated that from his point of view this does not in any way diminish or effect the very warm working relationships between Australia and Malaysia.
JOURNALIST: Will you still have to accept those refugees from Malaysia?
MINISTER BOWEN: As I indicated yesterday, this was an arrangement negotiated in good faith with Malaysia. The High Court decision yesterday is in no way down to any action of the Malaysian Government so we would view it in that light and our inclination would be to continue with that. What we have said is that we will reserve the right and consider our position in relation to the overall humanitarian intake.
JOURNALIST: Minister are you considering resigning (inaudible)?
MINISTER BOWEN: Look my response to that question is the same as it was yesterday. I have a job to do, I have an obligation to this Prime Minister, to this Government and to this country to see this job through. This Prime Minister gave me a job to do and I intend to continue to do it. The easy option would be to resign, the only thing that would happen if I resign would be my quality of life might go up but nothing else is going to be impacted by that. I have a job to do and I intend to continue to do it. 
JOURNALIST: Who (inaudible) that this was announced before it was signed, sealed and delivered?
PM: Well with respect, what's the relevance of that to the High Court decision yesterday? Nothing.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard what's your advice on an increased risk of additional boats arriving in Australian waters and has there been any preparation for that?
PM: Well we maintain a constant vigilance when it comes to the prospect of boats making their way to Australia, we obviously invest heavily in efforts in our region to detect and prevent people getting on boats, paying a people smuggler, giving their money over to what is a transnational crime and risking their life at sea. We've got more assets patrolling our border than we've ever had before as a result of the actions of the Labor Government, so we'll continue to do everything that we do to patrol and protect Australia's borders.
I used the language of missed opportunity before and I think it is the right language. This is a missed opportunity through transferring people to Malaysia to send a very strong message of deterrence to people smugglers.
JOURNALIST: Is there an increased risk because of this decision and have you taken any steps as a result of that and have there been any steps taken to step up security or make preparations at Christmas Island?
PM: We are always on the highest possible alert in terms of patrolling our borders, that's what we do and I do believe that this is a missed opportunity. I am obviously concerned that in a circumstance where we can't transfer a plane load of asylum seekers to Malaysia and send that very tough message, I am concerned about what that means in terms of boats trying to make their way to Australia and so of course we'll continue to do all of the prudent work that we do in relation to patrolling and protecting our borders.
JOURNALIST: Have you guaranteed to the left factions of your party that you'll rule out using Naurr and temporary protection visas?
PM: The only guarantee I ever give is that every decision we take will be taken in the national interest.
JOURNALIST: You went down the path of off-shore processing when increased boats were a real (inaudible) headache. (Inaudible) for you?
PM: It's not about that, it's about doing the right thing in circumstances where we are dealing with people smuggling, we've got people who are making money, profiting off the misery of others and we all watched some dreadful, dreadful images on our TV screens around Christmas time last year of children losing their lives at sea. Our motivation here has been to stop that evil trade, to stop the risk of those drownings, that's what motivated us in putting together this arrangement with Malaysia, that's what will motivate us as we look at options following the High Court decision.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard why are temporary protection visas still an option, that's something Labor's (inaudible).
PM: We will make a comprehensive statement when we're in a position to. I think the prudent thing now is to work through and get the written legal advice from the Solicitor General and we'll do that.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: Just one second, we'll go here first, yes.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Clearly we can work through questions of cost, we are focused at the moment on dealing with the consequences of this decision so any of those issues we'll deal with at the time of the comprehensive statement.
JOURNALIST: There's speculation that Peter Beattie might run for Federal politics and even has his eye on your job. Are you shaking in your boots at that prospect?
PM: I've got a lot of important things to do and I don't much worry about newspaper idle gossip and speculation.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, also on cost, the part of the cost that was announced before associated with sending the 800 asylum seekers to Malaysia, are we still spending that money?
PM: Spending the eight?
JOURNALIST: The money that paid for sending the 800 asylum seekers to Malaysia, setting up infrastructure and all the related costs with that. Are we getting some of that-
PM: I think it's best for us to give a complete accounting of all of these questions when we do the comprehensive statement, but obviously, given that there won't be people transferred to Malaysia following yesterday's decision, we were ready for a transfer. As you know, that transfer cannot go ahead. Given that transfer is not going ahead, clearly some costs that would have been associated with that transfer won't be incurred, but we'll give a complete view about costs and consequences at the time that we respond to the High Court decision.
JOURNALIST: Has Australia already made commitments to spend money in Malaysia (inaudible)?
PM: It's not a question of that, no. The money was associated, the money for facilitating people being transferred was about facilitating people being transferred so clearly we're in a situation where the transfer we had hoped to do will not be going ahead.
JOURNALIST: Will any of the 4,000 go to Western Australia?
PM: Well we'll make a statement about that matter at the relevant time as the Minister said during the course of this press conference.
JOURNALIST: Are arrangements being made a detention centres around the country to accommodate more asylum seekers?
PM: Look I'll turn to the Minister about detention management arrangements but obviously the Minister keeps all of these things under daily watch and prudent preparation.
MINISTER BOWEN: As the Prime Minister said, this is something we manage on a regular basis. Of course over the last three months we've seen a significant reduction in the number of people in detention facilities around the country, it was over 6,000 people just three months ago, it's now around 4,000 and falling, that's as a result of a number of measures this Government has taken  -  faster processing, better security processing, the movement of families and children into the community and of course the reduction of boat arrivals particularly since the announcement of the Malaysia arrangement. All have contributed to a very substantial reduction in the number of people in our detention centres and facilities across the country.
JOURNALIST: About less than 20 rooms were burnt out in the Northern Immigration Detention Centre yesterday or the day before, sorry, what's happening to those people that were staying in those rooms, where are they being moved to?
MINISTER BOWEN: There have been people who were involved in that that have been moved to the correctional facility in Darwin in conjunction with the Northern Territory Police and those investigations will continue-
JOURNALIST: It wasn't 20 people involved in the fires so however many, I'm asking the people that were staying in those rooms not the people that lit the fires.
MINISTER BOWEN: More than 20 people have been moved to the correctional facility at Darwin.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) open for six months, will that stay open longer now?
MINISTER BOWEN: No.
JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen how many of the 4,000 have been settled in Australia already and does this decision impact in any way on the rate at which those people will be resettled here?
MINISTER BOWEN: Some have already been transferred to Australia and that's a great thing and I think it's been very important to see those people who didn't have the money to pay a people smuggler, couldn't dream of having enough money to pay a people smuggler to come to Australia, to have the chance of a new life in Australia.
In terms of the exact number that had been already resettled in Australia we could provide you that figure but the, as I've said, and my inclination, the Government's inclination would be to continue as we had agreed with the Malaysian Government
JOURNALIST: You said earlier that the numbers in detention had gone down, does that include the numbers that have come from Malaysia?
MINISTER BOWEN: Well they're not going into detention because they are genuine processed refugees who get immediately settled into the community.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned earlier that you had discussions with your ministerial counterpart in Malaysia and your inclination is to proceed with receiving those refugees. Did he tell you that he expects you to continue (inaudible)?
MINISTER BOWEN: No, he told me that he regarded the arrangement as a good solid and sound one and that he was committed to working with Australia on these and related issues into the future.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
MINISTER BOWEN: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
MINSTER BOWEN: It's just around 4,000 in detention facilities and then there's other people living in the community, families and children in particular.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) warn you internally that the Malaysia deal might fall over prior to the High Court challenge?
PM: Our legal advice was that our case was sound.
JOURNALIST: So there was no internal-
PM: Our legal advice was that our case was sound, in terms of the way in which our case was put, I'd refer you to the submissions of the Solicitor General before the High Court. But included, of course, in those submissions was relying on earlier precedence of courts dealing with comparable questions including precedence authored by the current Chief Justice of the High Court to take just one example.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned that fewer asylum seekers have arrived since announcement of the deal. Now that the High Court has made this decision do you feel the reverse? 
PM: Well as I made clear in answer to the question from over here, we are obviously concerned about the prospect of further arrivals. We had sent a message of deterrence by the announced of the Malaysia arrangement. We wanted to send an even bigger message by the implementation of the Malaysia arrangement. We're obviously concerned now that the prevention of the transfer that we were positioned to do sends a different message to people smugglers. We are concerned about that.
JOURNALIST: Have there been any discussions with the leader of Papua New Guinea related to the Manus Island centre or with Nauru or any other country in the region?
PM: As has been a matter of public record for some time now we've been in negotiations with PNG-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) decision?
PM: No, not to my knowledge.
MINISTER BOWEN: As the Prime Minister says we have a Memorandum of Understanding signed with Papua New Guinea for the Manus Island detention facility. Of course we've indicated to Papua New Guinea that this High Court case will need to be examined and its implications will need to be considered and Papua New Guinea completely understands that.
JOURNALIST: Have you spoken with other countries?
MINISTER BOWEN: No.
JOURNALIST: How long will it take to get this advice in writing?
PM: We've asked the Solicitor-General to do that as a matter of urgency.
Thank you very much. 



HOST: Prime Minister good morning and welcome to 612 ABC Brisbane.
PM: Good morning Madonna.
HOST: Is it in Labor's best interests for you to remain leader?
PM: Madonna I'm not going anywhere, I've got a lot of things to do, I work every day to realise my vision for this country's future and I do have a very clear vision about a stronger, more modern economy, giving people the benefits of jobs and opportunity right around the country.
HOST: That doesn't actually answer my question, my question was is it in the Party's best interests in your view for you to remain in that top job?
PM: Madonna I'm not going anywhere, I'm the best person to do this job and I'll continue to do it, and what this job is about is leading the nation to a better future. I've got a very clear vision of that future, I've been driven all of my political life by a series of goals about spreading opportunity and making sure that no one gets left behind and we are delivering important policies and plans to do just that, to give people the benefit of jobs, the benefit of better opportunity through better education and of course important reforms to make sure we don't leave people behind because they have a disability, or because they have a need for healthcare.
HOST: You said you're the best person to do the job, what do you think you bring to the job that is important?
PM: I bring a very clear vision of the nation's future, a driving sense of purpose about making sure that we are a country that does spread opportunity for all. It offends me Madonna, and it always has, that life's chances can be defined by which area you are born into, by your postcode, by the circumstances of your birth.
HOST: And we'll come to some of that in just a moment, but you've seen the headlines across the country this morning, at what point do you say it might not be in the Party's best interests for you to continue?
PM: Madonna I've just explained that to you, I'm the best person to do this job, I'll keep doing it, and the important thing here is the sense of purpose and vision for the country, that's the important thing for Australians. They're waking up this morning, going to work and what they're focussed on is jobs and opportunity for their families.
HOST: But is there a point where you would say in your self assessment look someone else might do this better or are you saying you will remain in the top job no matter what?
PM: Madonna I'm saying to you very clearly and very precisely I'm not going anywhere, I've got a lot things to do, a lot of things to do to keep realising that vision of the nation's future.
HOST: Has anyone in Caucus told you of their frustration with your leadership?
PM: No Madonna.
HOST: No one has raised what we're seeing in the newspapers today?
PM: Madonna you can be intrigued by fevered speculation in the newspapers, I'm intrigued by whether or not people around the country today can get the benefit of a job, whether or not a child going to school today is walking into a great school, whether someone sitting in emergency departments around the country is going to get the care they need in the time that they should have it.
HOST: But surely your job is also to listen to what people in the Party might be saying or thinking?
PM: My job Madonna is to act in the nation's interest, my job as Prime Minister is to lead with a vision of the country's future. I have a very clear vision of the country's future, it does mean we have to take some tough decisions now so we've got a strong and modern economy for the future, and it does mean we have to take some bold decisions to ensure that we are spreading opportunity around the country and making sure that people don't get left behind, for example, because they are born with a disability and that's what the National Disability Insurance Scheme is about.
HOST: Do you think that some in your Party may be struggling to understand your vision or those bold decisions you refer to?
PM: Madonna I am out there arguing and delivering on these policies and plans and when I speak to my party colleagues, I speak to them about the historic mission of Labor, our historic mission has been about spreading opportunity and of course the way we have done that has changed through different ages, it used to solely be about wages and working conditions, now it's about more than that though of course it still remains about wages and working conditions and fair work not Work Choices. I speak to my colleagues about those things.
HOST: But is part of the problem that some of your colleagues are not understanding that vision?
PM: Madonna once again you can get intrigued by fevered speculation in newspapers, I'm about getting a job done that matters to Australians and of course bringing to it Labor's values, our historic mission about spreading opportunity and making sure people don't get left behind.
HOST: But one of the criticisms, even made by your supporters about Kevin Rudd was that he was out of touch with how people were thinking, what they were seeing, could the same criticism be made of you this morning?
PM: I'm not going to be canvassing matters of Labor history Madonna, I'm about the future and about building that future.
HOST: Alright speaking about the future, Kevin Rudd's name's been bandied about on a ticket with Stephen Smith, can I ask when last you actually had a conversation with Kevin Rudd?
PM: Look Kevin's been on sick leave Madonna as you're well aware.
HOST: Yeah but he'd been ill, have you sent him a card, picked up the phone to see how he is?
PM: I did send him some books, I thought it would be a good thing as he was recuperating to have some good books to read so I sent him some books. He's been on sick leave and will make a return at the appropriate point when he feels strong enough.
HOST: What were the books you sent him, any titles-
PM: Madonna let's not get involved in all sorts of trivia, I sent him some books I thought he might be interested in just as part of spending some time recuperating.
HOST: Peter Beattie is being touted as a party saviour by some sectors in Queensland, now we'll hear from Anthony Chisholm in just a moment, he was the person who went to dinner with Peter Beattie, but irrespective of what Anthony Chisholm says, would you like to see Peter Beattie in a safe Labor seat, do you think that he could be an asset federally?
PM: I think Peter Beattie's a good bloke, I think he's done a great job for Queensland and the fact that we are very admiring of Peter's skills is reflected in our selection of him as an advocate for our manufacturing sector to the resources sector. Madonna a big issue in our country today is our patchwork economy, people see the resources sector, mining leaping ahead whilst manufacturing is bearing the burden of the strong Australian dollar, we've asked Peter to see if we can do some more to put the two together so manufacturing can get the benefit of that mining strength. So of course that's the job we've given Peter now, I think if he wanted to be a candidate he'd be a good candidate but the question for today is Peter working on that special job we've given him because I don't want to see manufacturing left behind in this country, I think it can have a great future and making sure that it is working as closely as possible with our strong mining industry is part of that good future.
HOST: Can we come to the High Court decision and former Labor powerbroker Graham Richardson said it proved your Government was in a mess, that it would be impossible for you to recover and there's no way you can turn this around, that the Government, he goes on to say, would not survive for the remainder of the term. Now you would agree he's a fairly seasoned operator, what doesn't he understand, what's he got wrong here?
PM: Well, he'll be proved wrong and we will keep governing to the 2013 election and we will keep delivering on the policies and plans that I have shaped for the nation. During the past 12 months we've delivered some important changes, things that matter to the future of the country, like a better telecommunications sector, like a national health reform agreement, like a budget focused on jobs and opportunity, like the big flood recovery package we need to put together for Queensland and we did, making all of the tough financial decisions necessary to get that done.
And in the coming months we will deliver on legislation necessary to modernise our economy, putting a price on carbon, so we can seize a clean energy future, and delivering the Minerals Resource Rent Tax-
HOST: -And presumably also you have to come up with a new policy on asylum seekers, his comments were on the back of the High Court decision. What are you going to do now? How do you decide what is the correct avenue to go down in light of what the High Court said?
PM: Well, the way we decide Madonna, is the way we do business  -  carefully, methodically, taking the best advice. So, as I indicated yesterday we've received preliminary oral advice from the Solicitor-General. We'll get written advice from the Solicitor-General, we'll release that publicly, so you Madonna can have a look at it and all of your listeners can have a look at it and then based and guided by the best advice we'll announce a comprehensive plan to respond.
HOST: But it has been a big issue since you were elected, or indeed beforehand, the left is expected today to call for the resumption of processing in Australia and also for asylum seekers who arrive by boat to be treated the same way as those who arrive by plane. Why shouldn't they be, do you think?
PM: Madonna, this has been a big issue for our country over several decades. Labor first introduced mandatory detention back in the days of the Hawke Government, so this has not been an easy area of policy for a very long period of time. I know that personally and directly having served in the portfolio for Labor when we were in opposition, immediately after the 2001 election and the incident with the Tampa-
HOST: But that's not answering my question-
PM: -I will answer your question Madonna, but you sort of created an impression that somehow this is an area of policy that's only come into focus now, this has been an area of policy of extreme difficulty over many, many years and what makes it difficult is we are dealing with a crime here of people smuggling and we want to do everything that we can to combat that evil trade, whilst of course maintaining Australia's reputation and pride in ourselves as a generous country that does look to resettle genuine refugees and we do that from refugee camps around the world.
HOST: Do you believe there is going to be a rush of boats heading here now because of the confusion?
PM: We are obviously concerned that with the High Court decision stopping us making the transfer we had planned to Malaysia. We are obviously concerned about how that is received by people smugglers in the pipeline that bring people to Australia. So, yes Madonna, there's a sense of concern and I showed that yesterday when I responded to the High Court decision.
HOST: Do you think there is a date, or do you have a date circled in your diary where you think you can tell the Australian public that this is the new policy and this is how it will be dealt with? Are we talking a week, a month, three months?
PM: Well, we'll do it appropriately and carefully Madonna. So, the first thing is to get the written advice from the Solicitor-General. Obviously the Solicitor-General is working on that and working on that hard.
HOST: You essentially have two choices, when you consider what the High Court decided: the Pacific plan you inherited, or mainland processing. Are you determined to continue to process asylum seekers offshore?
PM: Well Madonna I think you are making a set of assumptions in that question which may or may not turn out to be right.
HOST: So, what other options then, share that with me-
PM: -If I can answer your question Madonna and it goes to what I said at the press conference yesterday. As I indicated yesterday there are some real questions raised here in the High Court decision about processing offshore, including processing offshore in places where it has happened before, which is one reason why we need the Solicitor-General's advice.
You are making an assumption about what policies and plans may accord with the High Court decision. I'm counselling you against making that assumption until we've got the benefit of the full legal advice.
HOST: So that I get it right and I understand it, do you believe the High Court's criticism are also, might also extend to Nauru?
PM: What I indicated yesterday is as far as I can take it on the current advice before me, which are that there are real questions here and consequently that's why we're seeking the further advice. 
HOST: OK, so what would make you reconsider mainland processing, doing it here?
PM: Madonna, I'm not going to be drawn on possibilities until we've got the legal advice and we go through our proper processes. This is an important area of work for the nation. We'll make the right decisions in the national interest, but I won't do that on a radio show before legal advice has been received-
HOST: But surely people have a right to know what you're thinking and whether you would reconsider mainland processing?
PM: People have a right to see their Prime Minister make complex decisions, informed by all of the information and that's exactly what I'll do.
HOST: Is there an argument to sit down with Tony Abbott and together come up with an immigration policy that's based on what the public broadly wants and what might be what you say is the right thing to do, that's policy not politics, or am I just being naive?
PM: Look, I think it's incumbent upon all parliamentarians to work on important issues in the national interest. First and foremost I'd say it's incumbent on all parliamentarians to make sure they've got the facts and the benefit of advice. I am, of course, concerned that members of the opposition are rushing to judgement about what the High Court case may or may not mean. I'd counsel them against that, I believe we should get the legal advice before people rush to judgement-
HOST: -But with respect that had nothing to do with my question-
PM: -I think it did in this sense Madonna, that step number one is for people to absorb, digest, take the best possible advice and fully understand the High Court decision. That's step number one for everyone. I'm suggesting everyone go through step number one before we can see what follows next.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thank you Madonna. 



The Australian Government today offered $10 million to support the UN Children's Fund's (UNICEF's) humanitarian relief work in response to the Horn of Africa crisis in Somalia.
UNICEF is calling this a children's famine. UNICEF estimates there are over 2 million malnourished children in need of urgent, life-saving actions in the Horn of Africa, including an estimated 1.25 million children across southern Somalia.
Australian assistance will contribute to UNICEF's work to meet the needs of women and children across Somalia. UNICEF will:
 * 	- provide treatment to severely malnourished children in more than 500 outpatient therapeutic centres that are aiming to reach 400,000 children over the next 6 months;
 * 	- deliver supplementary food to 150,000 households over the next few months;
 * 	- undertake immunisations targeting 2 million children from 6 months to 15 years of age for measles vaccination;
 * 	- upgrade water supply and sanitation facilities for internally displaced people and host communities, to help prevent the spread of water-borne diseases such as cholera; and
 * 	- protect internally displaced children by establishing primary schools and child friendly spaces in camps and neighbouring communities.
Australia's total funding in response to the drought and famine in the Horn of Africa now stands at $98.2 million.   



PM: I'm delighted to welcome today the Secretary-General of the United Nations.  We've had good discussions today. I did start by conveying to the Secretary-General the condolences of the Australian people following the attack on the United Nations Mission in Nigeria with the loss of life.  We've both reflected that this is a very concerning development where the United Nations was directly targeted and so our condolences as an Australian nation go to the Secretary-General following that attack.
Australia is a strong supporter of the United Nations.  We were there as a founding member, we are there today with the decades of collaboration and work together in between.  We are strong supporters of the United Nations and its work because we understand that the work of the United Nations brings our world together to address some difficult problems.  Australia will continue to pursue its bit for election to the United Nations Security Council because we believe in the work of the United Nations and its importance.  We believe in the work of the United Nations Security Council and its importance and we believe Australia's voice should be heard there.  Of course, the UN Security Council has mandates that govern our deployment and work in Afghanistan and in East Timor. Sanctions that we have engaged in against Iran and North Korea have been under a United Nations Security Council resolution and we have provided strong support to the work of the Security Council in relation to its actions to protect civilians in Libya.  We talked across many of these issues today, the Secretary-General and I.  We've particularly talked about the recent meeting of the Libya support group that the Secretary-General has just attended and literally flown from to be here in Australia.  We talked about the escalating crisis in the Horn of Africa, a humanitarian crisis that I conveyed to the Secretary-General so many Australians are individually concerned about and have made direct donations to.  Today I am able to announce that we will provide an additional $10 million to the United Nations Children's Fund for its work in addressing this crisis.  This brings the assistance from Australia for this crisis to almost $100 million and separate to that work by the Government, Australians themselves individually have dug deep.
I was also pleased to offer to the Secretary-General today the services of up to 25 Australian Defence Force personnel and 10 Federal Police to the UN Mission in South Sudan and we have talked about South Sudan in our discussion today.  And also, to support the UN's crucial peacekeeping and peacebuilding role I am announcing today that we will make available a further $4.5 million to support the UN Department of Political Affairs' work.  It's this work that goes to conflict prevention and conflict response. 
The Secretary-General has changed his program, he needed to do that in order to accommodate attending both the meeting on Libya and then being here in Australia but we're pleased to welcome him and we are delighted that he will proceed from here to the Pacific.  He will be going to Kiribatipersonally, he will be going to the Solomon Islands and then he will attend the Pacific Islands Forum in New Zealand.  He is the first Secretary-General of the United Nations to do so and we very much value the fact that he is taking the time and the trouble and travelling the distance to be physically present in the Pacific.  This is a of course a region vital to Australia, it's the region in which we live.  I'm looking forward to attending the Pacific Islands Forum and I thank the Secretary-General for attending that forum and being the first to do so.  So, Your Excellency, you are very welcome here.  We're very honoured to have you and I invite you to make some remarks now.
UNITED NATIONS SECRETARY-GENERAL: Thank you madame Prime Minister for your very warm welcome.  This is a great pleasure for me to visit Australia at the beginning of Spring.  It's a wonderful place and this is not my first visit to Canberra or Sydney.  In my previous capacity as a foreign minister and other capacities I have visited many times and it's a great pleasure for me to visit as the Secretary-General of the United Nations for the for the first time and I thank you very much for your flexibility for me to be able to participate in the Paris meeting on Libya and to make up for the loss, I'm going to visit twice in just one weeks time Australia.  So I hope this will be a consolation for that.  In fact, I like it so much I'll try to come back as soon as possible. 
Australia is a strong voice in international affairs working together with the United Nations in addressing many challenges which we face.  In my meeting I highly commended the work of the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, for her leadership to work together with the UN in addressing all peace and security issues, development and human rights and always make a very important contribution.  Australia is one of the strongest supporters of the United Nations and one of the best examples of how and what UN member states should and can do for the common interest of the international community. 
You may be known as ‘Down Under', but when it comes to contribution and commitment you are well above and beyond.  Australia is a founding member of the United Nations and Australians were instrumental in helping to formulate the United Nations Charter and I have many good historical records of how distinguished Australian diplomats have made contributions to the drafting of the Charter, human rights and women's empowerment and also the first president of the United Nations Security Council was served by a distinguished Australian.  You continue this proud tradition with a record of leadership across a full range of our work from peacekeeping to global development to nuclear disarmament and I thank you very much for your announcement of providing distinguished soldiers and police officers to South Sudan. 
Australia's support for our operations in Timor-Leste has been indispensable.  Australia is critical to peacekeeping efforts from Afghanistan to Cyprus where you set the UN record for the longest UN deployment by any country.  This is the 100th continuous deployment of peacekeeping operations in Cyprus, it is the highest record so far in the history of the United Nations.  On foreign aid, Australia is increasing cooperation at a time when too many countries are pulling back and I thank you very much for your very generous contribution to the humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa by donating an additional $10 million.  This will put you one of the very few - within number five, I think you are number four strongest supporter of this Horn of Africa crisis. 
Australia's impulse for global cooperation that positive (inaudible) in people is what we need as we face the big challenges of our time.  From here I will visit, as has been announced by the Prime Minister, the Solomon Islands and Kiribati before heading to the Pacific Islands Forum Leaders' Meeting in New Zealand.
Building a more sustainable future will be at the centre of my visit.  Australia know better than many others how critical it is to live in balance with nature.  The floods in Queensland and other natural disasters here show how extreme weather and climate change are real and growing threats.  Your neighbours are even more vulnerable.  Whole islands could be lost if sea levels continue to rise.  Later this year, countries will meet in Durban, South Africa.  We need ambitious targets to keep the rise in average global temperatures below two degrees centigrade.  We need to move forward on adaptation.  That means countries must live to their abilities and responsibilities.  Time is of the essence.  It has been nearly two decades since the world met in Rio de Janeiro for the first summit.  Next year the leaders of the world meet in Rio de Janeiro for (inaudible) meeting and I have invited Prime Minister Gillard to participate herself.  I hope you will take my invitation positively.  With so much at stake this is not the time for gamesmanship.  This is the time to work together to get real results. 
Finally, since I am coming from the Paris meeting on Libya, let me say a few words about the situation there.  I continue to urge all countries to come together to help the Libyan people.  The United Nations' response rests on three fundamental principals.  First, national ownership.  The future of Libya should be decided by Libyan people and I have met with the Chairman of NCT, Mr Jalil and head of (inaudible) together and we discussed what their needs and priorities would be and we will reflect on and respect these priorities.  Second: Rapid response and delivery.  We are working to make sure the United Nations can respond swiftly to requests by the Libyan authorities.  This includes restoring public security and order and promoting rule of law, promoting inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation and protecting human rights, particularly for vulnerable groups and assessing electoral processes and also facilitating the constitution making.  Our third principal is effective coordination.  We are working closing with the country's leadership to ensure that confusion and duplication of effort are kept to a minimum. We have to avoid all duplications.  On these challenges and many others we depend of the support of Australia.  At this critical moment in history when so much is at stake for people in developed and developing countries I am here to say to Australia, we need your ideas, your experience and your continued commitment.  I count on Australia to be a vital partner is meeting the expectations of the world's people for freedom, opportunity and a life of dignity everyone deserves and I thank you very much.
PM: We'll take questions. Yes, Misha?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how secure is your leadership and if you believe it is secure, why are we now seeing members of your own party backgrounding against you in the form of floating alternative leadership tickets in newspapers?
PM: Misha, I will be leading the Labor Party ‘till the next election.  Every day between now and then I will be fighting for Labor values, for the things I believe in, for jobs, for education, for opportunity.  That's what you'll see me doing.
JOURNALIST:  Mr Ban, you mentioned Australia's record on human rights, Australia was planning to send asylum seekers to Malaysia, a country that's not a signatory to your convention on refugees.  What does that say about Australia's human rights record and are we fit to be on the Security Council given that?
UNITED NATIONS SECRETARY-GENERAL: Australia is one of the model countries in many areas which the United Nations is promoting.  Peace and security, as I said, development and human rights.  Of course, there are some concerns on how to deal with immigrants, asylum seekers and refugees and of course, you know, I highly commend the recent endorsement of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. I hope that the Australian Government, under the leadership of the Prime Minister, will translate all of these principals and endorsements on the rights of indigenous peoples into policies, into real actions and again, for all of this human rights related issues, I believe that Australia can lead by example.  If you have any specific questions, the United Nations is always ready to walk together through the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees and Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and  I'm also discussing this matter with all the member states of the United Nations.
JOURNALIST:  Your Excellency, how was your meeting with Mr Rudd and following on from that question, do you think that Australia does deserve a temporary seat on the UN Security Council?
UNITED NATIONS SECRETARY-GENERAL:  Well I am aware of very ardent aspirations and wishes of the Australian Government to contribute further to common interests and ideas of the United Nations by serving on the Security Council of the United Nations. In fact, this is something which needs to be determined by the member states and not by the Secretary-General but as far as I'm concerned, as the Secretary-General, I'm very grateful for what the Australian Government has been leading by example in addressing in the forefront of peace and security and development and human rights and I hope that the Australian Government and diplomats will work hard to convince member states to get those contributes recognised by the member states.  This is my wish. Thank you.
JOURNALIST:  Are you concerned that Turkey has expelled the Israeli Ambassador and also, how likely is it that Libya would descend into chaos at this juncture?
UNITED NATIONS SECRETARY-GENERAL:  I sincerely hope that Israel and Turkey will improve their relationship.  During last the last year, particularly since the instance of the flotilla on May 31st last year happened, I have been really trying to help them to improve their relationship.  All the countries are very important countries in the region and their improved relationship, normal relationship will be very important in addressing all the situations in the Middle East, including the Middle East peace process, not to mention their bilateral relationship.  As you know, I have established the flotilla panel of experts led by the former Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr Palmer.  The report is out  -  I'm not is a position to say any specific comments on the substance of the findings and recommendations of panel reports.  My only wish is that they should try to improve their relationship and do whatever they can to implement the recommendations and findings of this panel's report.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how long will the asylum seekers on Christmas Island (inaudible) have to wait before you let them know what's going to happen to them.  Will you accept Tony Abbott's invitation to work with him on an option in Nauru and what should Australians read into the fact that you and the Secretary-General met separately with Mr Rudd today?
PM: Well taking the questions in reverse order, absolutely nothing.  As you would be aware, it is very, very common indeed when we have honoured visitors, for them to meet with the Prime Minister and Ministers separately.  If the Secretary-General had been on his original program, which he diverted from because of the need to attend the meeting on Libya, if he had been on his original program then yesterday he would have met with a number of Cabinet Ministers.  We would have, in effect, had a Cabinet meeting with him and he would have talked to a large number of people.  That program wasn't possible because of the movement from Friday to Saturday stemming from the Libya meeting.  So arrangements we've made have been purpose specific, given the move of day but completely in line with how we do events normally when we have international visitors.
On your other questions, first and foremost what we've got to do is get to grips with the real meaning of the High Court case.  That's what we're doing through seeking advice from the Solicitor-General and I am concerned that Mr Abbott is wishing away the facts here.  We need to get legal advice so we know what courses of action are available and open to the Government that are sound legally.  You can't just make that stuff up and unfortunately, Mr Abbott I think is making that stuff up before we've got the benefit of that legal advice. So I would counsel Mr Abbott to say, let's get the legal advice, we'll put it out publically and then any comments he makes after that will need to accord with the legal advice.  This is not a situation like ones seen in the past where you can pretend scientists say something other than they really do say, or economists say something other than they really do say.  This is a situation where we need to get to grips with the legal meaning of the High Court case and then people can make responsible comments following that.
JOURNALIST: Has your Government received that advice yet and given the concerns already raised about Nauru, can you rule that out today as an option?
PM:  We are still awaiting the final legal advice.  As I've just confirmed, when that advice is received it will be released publically and we will respond after the advice on all policy questions.
Thank you.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)
UNITED NATIONS SECRETARY-GENERAL:  I have not yet received the letter, that specific letter but I'm sure that I'll receive it and I'll read and try to find out what I should do but even before reading the letter I can say that this mining and reprocessing of this mineral like uranium, this very important, very serious issue should be done according to all scientific processes ad recommended by the IAEA.  That is why I'd like to emphasise the importance of the high level meeting on nuclear safety and nuclear security which I am going to convene on September 22nd in the United Nations.  I visited Fukushima, Japan and I had discussed this matter with the former Prime Minister Naoto and many other leaders of the Japanese Government and scientific communities.  My visit to Japan and my recent visit to Kazakhstan last year as well as Ukraine where I could see all the impacts of how important this nuclear management and disasters.  It has strengthened my conviction that the international community, particularly the United Nations, led by the IAEA, should do all we can to strengthen the safety codes of nuclear materials and nuclear energies and that is why I'm going to discuss this matter.



The Australian Government today offered to contribute up to 25 Australian Defence Force (ADF) and ten Australian Federal Police (AFP) personnel to the new United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
The Prime Minister made the offer to the United Nations Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, during their meeting today. The Secretary-General thanked the Prime Minister for the offer, and noted Australia's enduring support for UN peacekeeping missions.
This contribution is part of the Government's commitment to support the people of South Sudan build a viable and secure future, following South Sudan's declaration of independence on 9 July 2011.
It also complements the Government's $16 million of development support to assist South Sudan deliver basic services such as education, maternal health and sanitation, and to support rural livelihoods over the next two years.
Australia is a long-standing supporter of the UN's peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations. Australia has contributed approximately 180 ADF and 84 AFP peacekeepers to the United Nations Mission in Sudan since 2005. More broadly, we have provided more than 65,000 personnel to more than 50 UN and other multilateral peace and security operations since 1947.   



PM: Thank you very much, and to our friends from the media, I'm sorry to have kept you waiting, our discussions ran over time. Can I start by saying a very big welcome to Australia to President Barroso, who leads the European Commission. This is his first visit to Australia and you are very welcome here.
It's also the first visit of a President of the European Commission in 30 years, so long overdue and we are very pleased to see you here. Of course, His Excellency will proceed from Australia to participate in the Pacific Island Forum in New Zealand, which is also a good opportunity to further co-operation between us, the European Commission and Pacific Island nations.
Today we've had comprehensive discussions across a wide range of areas, I have had the opportunity to speak to His Excellency informally last night, more formally today and we've also had a discussion with a number of Cabinet ministers.
All of this underscores the importance of the bilateral relationship between us, which is built on many pillars of shared history and values, our great people-to-people links and our strategic and economic interests.
We are working through a framework agreement, a treaty-level agreement between us. We believe that is appropriate given the strength of the partnership between us and we seek to build on that partnership, and we've talked today about expediting those discussions for that treaty-level agreement.
We've also talked extensively about challenges facing the global economy and the need for co-ordinated efforts, particularly as we move towards the G20 meeting later this year, where we will be seeking to strengthen the global framework for balanced growth and economic resilience in the global economy.
These have been testing times in Europe. Australia certainly welcomes the important steps European authorities have taken to address sovereign debt problems and to press on with reform. We know and understand these are difficult decisions, but we know the tough decisions are needed to stabilise financial markets.
We share a recognition that free trade is essential if the global economy is to be restored to health, that we do need to resist protectionist moves and that we do have an aspiration for further trade liberalisation and I thank your Excellency for your personal leadership on these questions.
We've discussed climate change and we've noted the significant action that has been taken and continues to be taken around the world. We've reaffirmed out commitment to tackle climate change in the most cost-effective way. Both Australia and the EU recognise that carbon markets are the most cost-effective way of reducing greenhouse gasses and creating clean energy jobs for the future.
Europe, of course, has been a pioneer in global efforts to reduce carbon, putting in place an emissions trading scheme six years ago. Given our mutual interest in developing carbon markets to drive efficiencies, the President and I have agreed today to establish senior officials talks to discuss economy-to-economy measures we can jointly undertake to link our emissions trading schemes at the appropriate time in the future, and working together on international action to develop carbon markets.
We've also discussed the partnership we have between us and the shared goals on development assistance. We want to make sure that we are working together in providing development assistance around the world, and we will be working together on an innovative arrangement where we will assist the EU in the provision of development assistance in the Pacific and look to their assistance for the provisions of development assistance in Africa.
We've also today renewed the nuclear safeguards agreement between Australia and the European Atomic Energy Community that's been in force since 1982. The new agreement strengthens existing safeguards and reinforces our commitment to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
So, we've had comprehensive discussions today. I very much enjoyed them. Let me conclude by once again thanking the President for making this visit and I'll turn now to him for some comments.
Thank you.
PRESIDENT BARROSO: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.
I'm indeed very happy to be in Australia. Australia is one Europe's most like-minded partners - we share a common heritage, core interests, core values, democracy and human rights, but also openness, tolerance and global responsibility, and in an integrated world that is not a small feat.
The excellent discussion today with the Prime Minister and with an important number of Cabinet ministers reflects the rich and dynamic nature of the European and Australian partnership and our shared interests. I hope that my visit will contribute to a further strengthening of our vibrant co-operation, both bilaterally and in multilateral institutions.
The joint statement that we have just issued illustrates the depths and breadths of our increasing co-operation. On a bilateral level, we agreed last year to upgrade our partnership by means of a framework agreement that will put our relationship on a new footing.
Your visit, Prime Minister, to Brussels was very much appreciated and that's when we decided to start this process to have a framework, treaty-like agreement between Australia and the European Union. Therefore the European Commission has sought a mandate from our 27 member states to negotiate such a new, ambitious agreement and I hope this mandate can be approved next month. We could start talks with Australia right after that.
This agreement will serve as an umbrella for the many areas of our thriving co-operation, from the field of nuclear safety, Prime Minister and I signed a new agreement on this today, to the exchange of passenger name records, which is crucial for the security of our travellers and we'll also expect to sign a new agreement by the end of the year.
On the point of climate change, we spoke about our shared commitment to tackle this challenge. Australia's decision to put a price on carbon emissions is, in our view, an important step both environmentally and economically, because it is in our European experience the most cost-efficient way to reduce emissions and also a great green business opportunity. We'll not continue our joint work for a global climate regime and also on a bilateral basis we will see what we can do together, as Prime Minister Gillard just mentioned.
We also discussed our co-operation in the Pacific Region, where the European Union is the second biggest donor, after Australia. We share the same strategic objectives of (inaudible) democracy and promoting prosperity. I will have the opportunity later this week to meet in New Zealand the Pacific Forum.
Ladies and gentlemen, we did of course also speak about the global economic situation. We exchanged views on the G20 summit, November in Cannes, France, which should focus on rebalancing global growth, international monetary reform, financial regulation and tackling the volatility in commodity prices. We also share a commitment to open trade, which is obviously crucial in the current crisis and I'm very happy to see that Australia and the European Union are working together to resist any kind of protectionism and do everything we can to indeed deepen the liberalisation of trade.
I also briefed the Prime Minister and her Government on the economic situation in Europe and (inaudible) measures that the European Union and your area are implementing to address the sovereign debt crisis.
I want to be very clear here - the European Union and the euro are strong and resilient and we are doing all it takes, from tackling the underlying budget problems to strengthen the governance of the euro zones from tied to financial regulation to improving our overall competitiveness.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you can see relations between Australia and the European Union are becoming more substantial day by day. There is still great potential and I'm confident that my visit is a further step to using these opportunities together, because in our global world you don't have to be a neighbour to become a good friend.
PM: Thank you. Very happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: President Barroso, Rob Taylor from Reuters. I just wanted to quickly ask you, there were reports from the Greek Government and international donors last week that Greece is failing to meet its budget deficit target and the asset sale plan was in doubt. I'm just wondering, do you have a comment on whether Greece has done enough to keep the EU and IMF bailout on track? And secondly, recent data showing the EU growth is at a standstill, are you concerned? What chance of a recession in Europe at the moment? Do you think that current monetary and fiscal policy is too contractionary?
PRESIDENT BARROSO: First regarding Greece, as you know we are making a mission to Greece, so together the European Commission, together European Central Bank and IMF and we are now in the process of analysing what Greece has been doing, so it's premature now to make an assessment about exactly the efforts of the Greek Government. But we are in contact with the Greek Government and just now they have made some important remarks, saying they will comply with their commitments and this is certainly very important for Greece and also important for the area.
Regarding the second question, we don't anticipate a recession in Europe. The latest forecasts by the European Commission show that there will be growth, modest growth it's true and even across the European Union, but in fact growth  -  that's our analysis and our assessment.
PM: Yes, here.
JOURNALIST: Yes, just in regards to the carbon pricing, what do you think - President Barroso and Prime Minister  -  what do you think of the prospects of a global carbon market within say the next decade or so, particularly given what Australia's just about to do?
PRESIDENT BARROSO: I think it's very important to enlarge this carbon market. In Europe, as the Prime Minister just mentioned, we started it some time ago and we believe it is important and positive. We have been reducing emissions, that is the reality, but also we believe that this kind of regulation and this kind of market is the most cost-efficient way of promoting innovation and to promote new business in terms of green growth.
Of course, in the current economic situation, probably people did not pay enough attention to this, because we are in a difficult economic situation also in Europe, to be honest. But in fact our assessment is that it has been very positive - the regulations that we took in Europe to deal with climate change and the fact that we have this market.
So, we welcome the decisions taken by the Government of Australia and certainly with other partners we will do everything to enlarge this market. I cannot at this stage make a kind of forecast about when we will have a global market, but certainly the fact that many parts of the world are now wishing to go on this road, gives us better anticipation of what we believe is the right way to deal with a global problem. Is it a global problem, climate change, and it has to be dealt globally, so the more likeminded partners work in this direction the better.
PM: And those perspectives are shared. We will start our carbon pricing regime on the 1 July next year. It will then move to a market-based system and it's in that period of being a market based system, a cap-and-trade system, that we will be looking for these linkages, which is why it makes sense to have officials working on it now and we will be raising our voice in the same way that the President has described for the enlarging of global carbon markets and for action on climate change.
But I think what the President has said reinforces the depth of the actions that have happened around the world and continue to happen around the world, and as I've consistently said to the Australian people, the risk for us, with our very carbon intensive economy, is we get left behind as the clean jobs, green jobs of the future are created.
Yes, Phil?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I ask you on asylum seekers, are you prepared to contemplate the offer by Tony Abbott to pass any legislation you may deem necessary to keep offshore processing alive?
PM: Look, I've seen Mr Abbot's comments today and what I'd say in relation to them is as follows.
First, I believe it's very important that Mr Abbott and his team come to grips with the legal advice that's been provided to Government and now is available publically. What that legal advice means is that we do need legislation to put beyond doubt offshore processing arrangements.
It is not correct to say, based on that advice, that for example Nauru, which is Mr Abbott's plan, could be proceeded with without legal risk and the Solicitor-General points to that legal risk.
The legal advice also goes to the circumstances of unaccompanied minors and what it makes crystal clear - absolutely crystal clear - is that in order for unaccompanied minors to be sent to a location outside Australia you would need legislative change. Without that legislative change the risk you would run is that you would send a signal to people smugglers to fill boats with children, and no-one wants to see that.
So, first step for Mr Abbott and his team to come to grips with the legal advice that Government's been provided with and which we've released publically.
Second, I believe if Mr Abbott is sincere about this offer, then he needs to make it very clear that he is talking about working with the Government on offshore processing generally, not on his narrow solution.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on that same issue, given that the High Court has effectively ruled that Section 198A of the Migration Act is an embodiment of Australia's commitments under the refugee's convention, then wouldn't you as a Labor Party getting in cahoots with the Coalition to amend or axe that Section, be in contravention on 57 years' worth of commitment by Australia to the refugee convention?
PM: Absolutely not and we won't do things that are in breach of the refugee convention - of course we wouldn't - but there isn't one way to acquit our obligations under the refugee convention. We will always acquit those obligations.
JOURNALIST: In light of your previous answer where, you said Mr Abbott couldn't just negotiate on his terms, would you envisaging that such legislation cover not only Pacific recipients but also Malaysia? Would that be your condition?
PM: Michelle, I've given my answer and we are at a stage where first and foremost Opposition needs to come to grips with the legal advice. That's a foundation stone. We need everybody to understand the legal advice that has been provided to Government.
Second, I do clearly want Mr Abbott to clarify whether he is talking about a sincere desire to work with Government on offshore processing broadly, or whether he's talking about his narrow plan.
JOURNALIST: Mr President, could I ask you on the same issue of asylum seekers, given Europe's experience in this regard, what do you make of the debate in Australia and how important and effective are strong messages of deterrence?
PRESIDENT BARROSO: I'm not familiar with the discussion in Australia. I was just listening to you and thinking about, it's complex, the rule of law, and in Europe we have now a very important debates also on the issue of migration, and in fact we are working together now. The member states recognise that it makes no sense to have different national regimes, for instance in terms of refugees, because we have an integrated space in Europe so we can travel freely from one country to the other, namely on the signatory countries, so it's not even needed to show a passport, so what makes sense is to have as much as possible an integrated area of freedom of movement, and for that we need of course to have, with balance, what you believe it's common borders, external borders, managed as much as possible in a cooperative way and of course in full respect of the principles of freedom of circulation in European Union.
But I understand the situation is different, very much different, so I don't want to make any comment that may relate to your internal discussions. I very much respect your democracy. What I want to tell you is in fact this is a matter of the highest priority in the internal debate in Europe and our line in Europe has been one of trying to combine our tradition of freedom and our commitment to the values of non-discrimination at the same time with proper security in terms of proper management of the external borders.
PM: OK, Laura?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I just clarify - are you as a preference looking for a solution offshore on offshore processing rather than onshore, and if I could just also ask while I've got the opportunity, what the implications of putting the footing of the relationship with the EU on a treaty basis, on a more formal treaty basis?
PM: Well, look I've taken that matter as far as I'm prepared to take it today in relation to your first question.
In relation to your second question, I formed the view as Prime Minister and when we first met we had this discussion, that is was appropriate to formalise the partnership between us and to look for further areas of cooperation. Today we have discussed some of those further areas of cooperation - the aid cooperation where we partner and become cooperative agencies for each other in different regions of the world. We are here able to do the work we do in the Pacific and to assist the EU with its aid provision into the Pacific. The EU does so much work in Africa, they are obviously well positioned to assist us there, so aid cooperation.
We've talked today about scientific and research cooperation. There already is a pattern of strong links on these questions but we believe that they can be furthered in the future, including around the research that needs to go with the clean energy future and clean energy jobs.
Third, you've seen the practical examples of cooperation today. There will be further practical examples that we need in the future to facilitate trade, investment links, people-to-people links and the like.
And then fourth, climate change and carbon markets poses a very big area of cooperation for us. We share a strategic outlook. We share an economic outlook: as the President has said today, an economic outlook about strengthening global growth, about trade liberalisation, about making sure that the world doesn't take a step backwards towards protectionist measures which ultimately destroy jobs. So, I believe it's important for us to step up to a new level of formality in the relationship, and that's what the framework agreement at treaty level is about.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) both leaders-
PM: -And we'll make this the last one.
JOURNALIST: Just regarding the G20, can you go into some of the discussion you had and did you discuss the financial transactions tax which is one of the concrete things that particularly Europe wants to see out of the G20?
PM: Well, we did discuss the G20 and of course our perspectives about doing what is necessary to enhance global growth and global economic resilience, so we talked across the range of issues likely to come before the G20.
On the financial transactions tax, we are not on the same page and think that was known before our discussions yesterday and today and we continue to be not on the same page but this is an issue that will be pursued by the President so I'll turn to him for comments on it.
PRESIDENT BARROSO: Yes we have been very active in our cooperation in G20 because Australia and European Union share the same analysis of the situation, and we are promoting actively an agenda for global governance, with commitment to resist protectionism, to the need to have to improve financial regulation to promote growth in a sustained manner all over in the world. 
And I think one of the- Australia was in fact very lucky. Australia was the only developed country that has escaped recession. That's reality. I think you should be proud of it in Australia, but in fact one of the lessons of the crisis is we are very much interdependent today.
What you have been seeing with the financial markets is a crisis in one country, sometimes a very small country can affect a whole continent and that can be felt across continents - when there is a downgrade of one country is can also have consequences. So it makes sense more than ever to cooperate globally and the G20's an appropriate forum for that because we can take decisions at the same time there is a real willingness of all the major partners to do it. So, that's why basically Australia and European Union are on the same line.
It's true on the financial transaction tax that in Europe there is a very special sensitivity about this, because of what happened in the financial sector. We believe the financial industry should give a more important contribution to the community. The European taxpayers, after what happened in the financial sector, believe it's not fair in terms of the burden sharing so all sectors of the activity pay, for instance, the VAT, but not financial sector. That's why we are going to start with some moves in Europe. The Commission is going to propose a financial transaction tax for the European Union and we are ready, of course, to engage in discussions about this with our partners, recognising that there are different sensitivities.
But the point I want to underline is that the very good cooperation that we are having in the G20 and that we certainly want to keep and reinforce in the future.
PM: Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and European Commission President José Manuel Barroso emphasised the new phase of closer cooperation between Australia and the European Union (EU), during bilateral talks in Canberra on 5 September 2011.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Barroso underlined the shared values and strong cultural, historical and people-to-people links between Australia and Europe. They also noted the depth of the economic relationship, with EU Member States as a group being Australia's largest source of foreign investment and EU companies creating some 500,000 jobs in Australia.
They affirmed the commitment of Australia and the EU to work together on major global challenges and to cooperate in international forums such as the UN, the G20 and the World Trade Organization (WTO).
They pledged to strengthen and position the Australia-EU partnership for the long term. To that end, they looked forward to starting negotiations in the very near future on a broad-ranging, treaty-level bilateral agreement, noting this would provide an overarching framework for joint action in areas such as foreign and security policy, development cooperation, trade and investment, climate change and environment, research, science, innovation and education.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Barroso exchanged views on major international developments, including the democratic transitions in North Africa and the Middle East and economic trends in the Asia-Pacific region. They agreed on the importance of supporting Libya in its democratic transition and economic reconstruction, together with the international community.
They also exchanged views on the global economy, including recent developments in financial markets, and reaffirmed their commitment to strengthen economic cooperation in international fora. Looking towards the G20 summit in Cannes,they affirmed the importance of vigorously pursuing the G20's work to achieve strong, sustainable and balanced growth, strengthen the international monetary system and continue financial regulatory reform, which will contribute to addressing the causes of the current vulnerabilities and preventing future crises.
They reaffirmed their strong commitment to free trade and investment and opposition to protectionist trade actions. They agreed it was imperative to sustain and advance economic reform and trade liberalisation, including through the conclusion of the WTO Doha Round.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Barroso also stressed their joint responsibility in addressing climate change, and the need for urgent action by the international community to keep global average temperature increases below two degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. They committed to working together to promote an ambitious global regime to combat climate change through the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. They welcomed each other's commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, noting the importance of market mechanisms to reducing carbon emissions at the lowest possible cost and stimulating investment, competitiveness and innovation in clean energy.
Noting the European Union has had an emissions trading scheme since 2005, and the Australian Government plans to introduce a carbon price mechanism from 1 July 2012, they agreed that both sides had a strong mutual interest in working to expand and deepen global carbon markets. They agreed to establish Senior Officials Talks to exchange experience on design and implementation and to address cooperation on economy-to-economy measures, including the conditions which would allow for linking of our emissions trading schemes at an appropriate point in the future.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Barroso welcomed progress in the following areas:
Building on the strong development cooperation relationship, Prime Minister Gillard and President Barroso welcomed the establishment of delegated cooperation arrangements for aid delivery and looked forward to the implementation of this agreement in developing countries. Delivering programs on each other's behalf will enable AusAID and EuropeAid to capitalise on each others' expertise, including in the Pacific, Asia and Africa, and deliver significant aid outcomes for developing countries. This demonstrates the convergence of values and deep trust that unite Australia and the EU on development issues and, more generally, in the wider international arena.
Noting the significant contribution both sides have made to nuclear safeguards, they were pleased to sign a new agreement between Australia and the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM), which will spur a further deepening of cooperation in the areas of nuclear safeguards, security and safety.
They welcomed the entry into force of an agreement on the exchange of classified information, as well as the progress towards an agreement on the exchange of air passenger name record (PNR) data. These accords will allow for even closer cooperation in combating terrorism and serious transnational crime, in the full respect of individual human rights.
They welcomed increased cooperation in education, training and culture, which would be reflected in the future Framework Agreement. To further deepen educational links, Australia and the EU agreed to work together to develop joint degree projects, which will bolster current work on projects to foster student mobility. These projects will complement the ongoing EU-Australia policy dialogue on education and training. Noting the importance of cultural exchange, the EU was pleased to include Australia as a partner country for cultural cooperation projects in its Culture Programme in 2013.
Australiaand the EU will follow up on all these engagements through high-level dialogue at the political and officials levels. 



If I can just say a few words and then I'm happy to take a few questions.
I've just arrived in Auckland. I'm here for the Pacific Islands Forum.
This is the 40th year of the Forum. We've always been a strong supporter and the Forum continues to have a contemporary meaning and relevance.
I'm looking forward to the discussions over the next few days. There will be a range of issues raised, but I will be particularly focussing on four areas.
First, on the question of economic growth and jobs and education, as I say in Australia when I'm back home, having a decent life starts with the opportunity to get a great education and to get a job. The same is true in our region, so I will be particularly focussed on education and skills, on labour mobility, on trade and the power of trade to improve job opportunities, and on the question of remittances: the ability of people who are working in another country to send money back home in a cost-effective way.
Second, I will be focussed on the questions of development aid. A quarter of Australia's aid goes to the Pacific region, and around half of the aid of most of the region flows from Australia. We have the Cairns Compact, and we will continue to work on that because we want to strengthen the effectiveness of our aid in the region.
Third, I'm intending to focus on climate change. This is a meeting that brings together some nations that are most at risk from climate change: they are small, they are low-lying, and most at risk from rising sea levels.
Fourth and finally, I will be talking to the nations participating in this forum so that I can reflect their voice when I go to the G20 and to other meetings around the world.
So, they are my objectives for the Pacific Islands Forum.
Can I say, too, I'm very pleased to be back here in New Zealand, and I'm looking forward to seeing Prime Minister John Key, and to his chairing and leadership of this important event.
This has been a year in which Australia and New Zealand have been brought and bonded incredibly closely together. We are always family for each other, but that family relationship has clearly been shown this year as we have stood by each other in times of trouble - for us, our summer of natural disasters with floods and cyclone; for our friends in New Zealand the shock of Christchurch.
This is my third visit to New Zealand this year, which I think shows the strength of the bond that is always between us, but has been particularly on display during the course of this year.
I'm happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, do you plan to speak to the Nauruan president about us building an asylum seeker there, and asylum seeker centre there?
PM:I'm here for the Pacific Islands Forum and I've just outlined my objectives in relation to that Forum. I'm not intending to raise the issue of people-smuggling. Obviously, if leaders want to raise the issue with me, then I will discuss it with them, but it is premature for me to be pursuing that agenda here at this Forum, given the High Court case of last week and that the Government is still preparing its response.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you disappointed that today's poll shows that less than a quarter of Australians are happy with the job you're doing as Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't do this job as Prime Minister because I want to see it reflected in opinion polls. I do this job as Prime Minister because I want to do what's right for the nation's future: that's a focus on jobs, a focus on opportunity, and a focus on making sure that no-one gets left behind. That's what's driving me and I'll continue to do it.
JOURNALIST: But you can't keep ignoring the polls, can you, Prime Minister?
PM:Well, democracy isn't about looking at fortnightly opinion polls - it's about making the decisions that give people opportunities and prosperity today: things like getting a job or getting an apprenticeship, and the benefits of opportunity and prosperity tomorrow and making sure that we are organising our nation so we aren't seeing people and regions left behind.
And I do, as Prime Minister, particularly understand at this phase of our economic growth and development, that there are many Australians who feel that they are at risk of being left behind, or the industry that they work in is at risk of being left behind, or their region is at risk of being left behind.
Managing our economy so we see growth and opportunity and jobs right around the nation is what I'm pursuing and what I'm focussed on.
JOURNALIST: Can you admit that you're a little bit disappointed, or are you happy with the way you're polling?
PM:What I judge myself by is making sure that we are achieving the vision for our nation's future that I aspire to. People will judge that at the 2013 election. That's their democratic right, and they'll go in to polling places then and cast their votes.
For the time in between I will be continuing to strive to realise that vision of the nation's future. I came into politics driven by a vision of opportunity for all. It starts with a great education; it must include having the ability to get a job. That's what's driving me.
Thank you very much. 



New Zealand Prime Minister John Key and Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard and have reaffirmed their commitment to improving education in the Pacific by extending funding for language and literacy education across the region.
Australia and New Zealand are aiming to ensure 500,000 more children in the Pacific are enrolled in school and 75 per cent of all children in the region can read by age 10 by 2021.  Almost one million school-aged children in the Pacific currently do not attend school.
New Zealand will provide NZ$145 million and Australia will provide AU$124.5 million in addition to existing funding over the next four years. New Zealand will also invest NZ$122 million for scholarships and training over the same period.
Mr Key says the theme of this year's Forum is converting the Pacific's potential into lasting prosperity, and ensuring young people in the region have access to quality primary school education is vital to achieving this. New Zealand and Australia are committed to working with Pacific governments to address barriers to education, and make sure children are able to complete a minimum of six years of basic education. 
Ms Gillard says Australia and New Zealand have agreed to focus on improving literacy and numeracy, better benchmarking of education systems and enhancing education management information systems to improve schooling for children across the Pacific.
Under the Cairns Compact for Development, New Zealand and Australia cooperate closely on aid and development in the Pacific and will align their efforts in education to ensure positive outcomes for Pacific youth.
The two leaders also announced Australia and New Zealand will provide six postgraduate scholarships to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the Forum. Each country will provide three scholarships.
The scholarships will be in areas aligned with the Pacific Plan, including economic growth, sustainable development, good governance, and security. The Pacific Plan identifies these areas as major challenges that the region needs to address to achieve better living standards, increase opportunity and stimulate economic growth across the Pacific.
New Zealand and Australia are committed to working with Pacific island countries and partners including the World Bank, United Nations agencies and non-government organisations to improve education across the Pacific. 



The government and people of Australia unreservedly condemn the bombing at the New Delhi High Court on 7 September, which has killed at least nine people and injured many more. 
This act of senseless violence, directed at one of the institutions of government, appears to have been planned to cause a high number of casualties among the general public. 
We extend our sympathy and concern to the government and people of India at this time. Our thoughts are with the families of the innocent people who have been killed, and with those injured by the blast. 
The Indian government and people have Australia's full support as they continue to combat terrorism.   



PRIME MINISTER KEY: Good morning and welcome. I want to take this opportunity to welcome the Prime Minister to New Zealand. It's the third time that Prime Minister Gillard has been in New Zealand in the last seven or eight months, so you're always a  welcome visitor over here, it's great to see you here.
We have one small announcement to make this morning in relation to education. New Zealand and Australia obviously see the critical and crucial importance of education. That's why we're stepping up our investment in the Pacific.
Today we're setting a target of getting over 500,000 more children in the Pacific in education 2021, ensuring that 75 per cent of children in the region can read by the age of 10. Currently we believe there's around about one million children who are currently not involved in formal education in the Pacific.
In relation to New Zealand that will mean that we're making a $145 million investment in education in the Pacific over the next four years, aimed at increasing literacy and numeracy rates and improving education standards and the management of schools. In addition to that, we'll be investing another $122 million for scholarships and training over the same period of time, so $267 million over four years.
New Zealand and Australia are also going to provide three scholarships for postgraduate studies to students in the region to commemorate the Forum's 40th anniversary here today, and I would point out that there are currently 350 scholarships available annually for Pacific students to study in New Zealand within the region.
Finally, just to say that we are looking forward to hosting the Forum over the next 48 hours. We had a good meeting with the leaders last night and at dinner. Today we have an formal opportunity to hear from the UN Secretary-General, obviously from the European President, and an opportunity to speak to Kamalesh Sharma, the Commonwealth Secretary. So it's going to be an interesting and exciting 48 hours, and the chance for the Pacific countries to discuss and debate the issues which are crucially important to them.
So Prime Minister can I pass over to you, and then take any questions.
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: Thank you very much. Well, first thank you to Prime Minister Key. This is the third time I've been in New Zealand this year, and Prime Minister Key had the opportunity to come to Australia and to address the Australian Parliament, so I think we're creating a new record in terms of visits to each other's nations during the course of one year. That is of course because of the strong bonds between our two countries. It's also a reflection of the year we've both lived through: us with our floods and cyclone, and New Zealand with its devastating earthquake. So the fact that we have been so much in each other's country is in part a reflection of the times we have lived through together, and the way we have supported each other during those difficult times.
I'm looking forward to the discussions at the Pacific Islands Forum, which will commence in earnest today, under the leadership of Prime Minister Key. As I said yesterday, there are four main areas that I will be seeking to discuss while I am here.
One of them is our aid system, and particularly the Cairns Compact about the way in which we deliver aid to the region. We are the biggest donor to the Pacific, as you would expect. It's our region and very important to us, and stability and prosperity in the Pacific is very important to us.
So firstly I'll be focussing on aid, secondly on climate change, given the risk factors that so many of these nations face with rising sea levels. Third, listening, so I can take the voices of the Pacific to meetings like the G20, but fourth, and particularly, education and jobs and opportunity for the future, which is why I'm so pleased to be able to join with the Prime Minister of New Zealand in announcing this initiative that will get half a million kids the education they need for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, has Tony Abbott accepted your invitation to meet bureaucrats today, and when will it be happening?
PM: Tony Abbott has accepted my invitation to be fully briefed, and it will be happening later today as I understand it, in Brisbane. I'm glad that the Leader of the Opposition has accepted this invitation.
Earlier this week, the Leader of the Opposition made a broad statement about working with the Government to ensure that the Government can make the decisions necessary on the transfer and processing of asylum seekers, so he made a very broad offer to work with the Government on legislative changes.
I believe it's also important that the Leader of the Opposition has the facts, and he will be able to get the facts in briefings directly from officials later today. 
JOURNALIST: When will you meet the President of Nauru?
PM: The President of Nauru was at the function that the Prime Minister hosted last night.
JOURNALIST: I mean a bilateral meeting.
PM: Look, we're working through the schedule still, but obviously I have plenty of opportunity to see all of the Pacific leaders during the course of the next two days in the various forums and discussions that we'll be in.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you speak to him last night? The President of Nauru, did you have a chance to speak to him?
PM: Yes I certainly did. And as I made clear to you yesterday, I haven't come here to talk about questions associated with people-smuggling. That would be premature. We will work through in Australia our response to the High Court case.
JOURNALIST: Was the issue raised or discussed with Richard Marles and members of the Nauru Government?
PM: Look, that's a question you'll have to direct to Parliamentary Secretary Marles.
JOURNALIST: Was the issue discussed between yourself and Prime Minister John Key?
PM: Look, I haven't come here to talk about people-smuggling, so it's not an issue on the agenda between Australia and New Zealand. It would be premature to have discussions with New Zealand or anybody else on these questions. We are going to work through and respond to the High Court case.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, he is a member of your Government. Did it happen, or are you saying you don't know whether or not it happened last night, whether he discussed this issue?
PM: Look, you'll have to ask Richard Marles for details. I wasn't in attendance at the same event. I was in attendance at the event with Prime Minister Key. If you've got a question for Parliamentary Secretary Marles, please feel free to put it to him. But let me make it very clear, I have not come here to discuss questions associated with people-smuggling. I made that clear to you yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Is that what he's come here for?
PM: No one from the Australian Government is here for that purpose. We are here to participate in the Pacific Islands Forum. You would expect Parliamentary Secretary Marles to be here, given he particularly focuses on our work in the Pacific.
JOURNALIST: How much longer until Federal Cabinet agrees on a new border protection policy? Is it going to be days or weeks?
PM: Look, I'm here for the next few days, representing Australia at what is a very important Forum, and the 40th time that this Forum has met. When I return to Australia we'll deal with those issues in due course.
JOURNALIST: Mr Key, can I just ask about the apples situation [inaudible]?
KEY: I think from New Zealand's point of view we fought very hard for access to the Australian market, and both Australia and New Zealand are beneficiaries of the WTO system. We believe in the end that's an impartial system that's been to the mutual benefit of both countries.
From New Zealand's perspective we accept rulings from the WTO and that would be our expectations out of Australia; that's why the Australian Government has acted in the end. There's more to be gained by observing those rules than not, and I think it's been a long-fought dispute, but I think it's one that's now behind us.
JOURNALIST: Could I ask domestically, the Urewera raids charges, where they've been dropped. How does this reflect on the Crown and its initial actions in laying those charges?
KEY: Well I'm not in a position to comment on that. As you're aware, there's still four members that are facing legal action. That matter is before the courts and it wouldn't be appropriate for me to comment on that. The solicitor-general I think is making some comments in relation to the overall process, and I'd refer you to him.
JOURNALIST: Do you think those who have had the charges dropped against them deserve an apology though?
KEY: I'm not in a position even to comment on that. I haven't seen actually that advice, but I would be surprised if that was the case.
JOURNALIST: Howard Broad commented before the [inaudible] disposition that that would be a possibility.
KEY: For an apology?
JOURNALIST: Yes, for an apology from the Crown if the charges were dropped.
KEY: Well look I think it would be taking a step back. The Police were acting in what they believed to be a very serious situation. They are charged with the responsibility of keeping New Zealanders safe, and they have a responsibility to act where they believe that people are at risk. And it's my view that the Police acted because they believed that people were at risk. Now that's not the basis for ruling to come out, in terms of whether information is missing; it's a completely different issue.
But for the primary reason whether there might have been 20 people, and if the Police believe they face information that at least communicates to them there's a risk, then they have to act, and that's why they acted
JOURNALIST: So compensation is also a ‘might be'.
KEY: Well I haven't had any advice on that, but all I can say is I believe that the Police would have acted with the best of intention, because of (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, could I just ask about the PNG MOU on asylum seekers. I know you're not here to talk about it, but given that you're meeting with the PNG Prime Minister, are you going to raise the issue given they have an agreement with Australia?
PM: I'll be clear with the Prime Minister and he would have of course heard this news himself, that there was a High Court case last week, and we are responding to it.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you a quick question about the New South Wales Budget? They've increased their mining royalties. What do you make of that?
PM: Well, what I make of the New South Wales Budget is that the Liberal Premier of New South Wales is not in favour of supporting jobs. I certainly am. That's the difference.
JOURNALIST: Has the Giddings Government mucked up the Tasmanian Forestry Deal?
PM: That is still being worked on in terms of its implementation. The inter-governmental agreement was reached between me and the Premier, and it will be implemented. We always expected along the way that there would be moments where parties to the agreement, to the statement of principles that supported the agreement or affected by the agreement would have their say publicly. We've been seeing that over the last few days, but we will be working through to implement the agreements.
JOURNALIST: So they're still liking it?
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: They're still liking it?
PM: Oh yes, absolutely.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you concerned about Opposition threats to delay the carbon tax legislation again?
PM: Well the carbon tax, carbon pricing legislation will be before the parliament next week. It has sufficient support to go through the parliament and start on the 1st of July next year, as we've been talking about for some time now. I do expect, as we see constantly from the Opposition, that we'll see all sorts of wrecking tactics, but we will work our way through and ensure that the legislation does go through.
Can I say on the question of climate change, being here at the Pacific Islands Forum, I had the opportunity yesterday to meet with the President of Kiribati. Anybody who's in any doubt about the devastating effects of climate change should have a conversation with him. They are living with it every day in a nation that is so at risk from rising sea levels.
We need to act to cut carbon pollution. We need to do that because it's the right thing to do by the environment, but also to secure clean energy jobs. That's what putting a price on carbon is all about. And whatever wrecking tactics the Opposition chooses to play, the legislation will go through and carbon will be priced from the 1st of July next year.
JOURNALIST: Are there any plans to guillotine the debate on carbon tax?
PM: We will work to get the legislation through the Parliament.
JOURNALIST: So does that mean a guillotine potentially?
PM: Well, we'll work to get the legislation through the Parliament. I'm not going to talk now about parliamentary tactics over the weeks to come, clearly I can't do that, but we will work to get the legislation through the Parliament, and everybody in the Parliament knows from the statements that are being made by Parliamentarians that the legislation has sufficient support to go through, and it will.  



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today announced the Australian Government will increase its assistance to help prevent and control chronic diseases like diabetes and cardiovascular disease across the Pacific.
Ms Gillard is attending the 42nd Pacific Islands Forum in Auckland, New Zealand
Australia will provide $25 million over the next four years to help Pacific nations tackle these serious health problems.
Ms Gillard said that Australia has a great health system and as the largest nation at the Pacific Islands Forum we will play our part in assisting our smaller neighbours keep their populations healthy and productive.   
Non-communicable diseases are a leading cause of death and disability in Pacific countries. They put a burden on local health systems and they reduce productivity and household income.
Australia will work with Pacific Island nations to tackle health issues and the funding will help prevent non-communicable diseases through healthy lifestyle campaigns including school nutrition, assist countries to introduce tobacco and alcohol legislation and fund diabetes clinics.
This builds on previous programs that have funded 21 Pacific Island countries and territories to implement their national non-communicable diseases strategies and provided 73 grants to non-government organisations in the Pacific for community activities focusing on disease prevention.
As part of the program Australia will also provide an additional $1 million to expand its existing Australian Sports Outreach Program (ASOP) to help tackle disease in the Pacific.
The ASOP is already working with to increase physical activity as well as improve diets and control tobacco and alcohol use.
A sport program on Aniwa Island in Vanuatu that recently introduced football and volleyball to communities has already achieved great results with a 50 per cent reduction in obesity among participants between 2009 and 2010.
Kiribati will also receive $500,000 to encourage residents to participate in exercise and fitness more.  This program will train sport volunteers to run regular volleyball, football and basketball activities in and around the capital, Tarawa.
With a strong focus on increasing physical activity these additional funds will expand existing sports programs using sport to deliver vital health messages. They will bring sports, health ministries and development partners together to accelerate the delivery of non-communicable disease action plans. 1



PETER BAXTER: Welcome everyone. My name's Peter Baxter and I'm the Director-General of AusAID and I'd like to particularly welcome the Honourable Prime Minister Tuilaepa of Samoa and, of course, Australia's Prime Minister the Honourable Julia Gillard.
Improving education across the Pacific region is a priority for Australia and its partners and we're all gathered today to launch another phase in Australia's support for education in the region.
Vocational education and training play a key role in development. The Australian Pacific Technical Colleges provide Australian standard qualifications and skills for a wide range of vocational careers throughout the Pacific. And since its inception in 2007, more than 3,000 students have graduated from the colleges with internationally-recognised qualifications. I'd now like to call on Australia's Prime Minister Ms Julia Gillard to launch the next phase of our support for the APTC.
PM: Thank you very much and can I say it's a great pleasure to be joined by the Prime Minister of Samoa for this announcement. As I said at the start of the Pacific Islands Forum, one of my key priorities here was to focus on jobs and education and economic growth. And in order to focus on those things, I've worked with and announced with New Zealand additional resources to support the education of school children across the Pacific, around half a million school children.
I've also announced an extension of Australia's Labor Mobility Trial, a Pacific workers' Labor Mobility Trial in the horticultural industry. We have extended that to another four nations, bringing as it does workers needed in the horticultural sector in Australia and enabling people from our Pacific neighbours to get the chance of a job in Australia, and the ability to remit money back to family in their home nation.
I'm very pleased to be able to make a further announcement, and to do it with the Prime Minister of Samoa, and it is that we intend to build on our current work with the Australian Pacific Technical College. Now this is a college that has campuses across the Pacific, providing Australian qualifications. We intend to dedicate $152 million to supporting the next round of training - 3,450 places. These are places which give Australian qualifications and are very prized in the region, and the Prime Minister and I have had the opportunity to talk about that privately, how these training places are prized and give people the skills and capacities they need for further employment.
I'll take this opportunity too, to just make some general comments on the leaders' retreat and the Pacific Islands Forum, which has concluded its leaders' deliberations today. I came here with a priority for a focus on jobs and economic growth in education and that has featured in the leaders' discussions.
The feature of the discussions was also on aid and development, including on the Cairns Compact, which Australia sees as a very important mechanism for ensuring that aid in the Pacific is doing the maximum amount of work that it can.
We had very detailed discussions on climate change, given many of the nations who attend this forum are particularly at risk from climate change and the manifestations it brings of rising sea levels, of more storm activity. We have had a major discussion about climate change, about the need for resources for adaptation money. This is an area in which Australia plays its part, but of course it's a challenge for our world, for the developed world generally, to provide appropriate aid and assistance to small nations particularly at risk from climate change.
We've also had a focus in these discussions on taking the voice of the Pacific Island nations to the world. I was able to speak at the leaders' retreat today about the G20 and to make an offer to the leaders there to carry their concerns to the G20 which will be held in France later this year. Of course, featuring on the G20 agenda will be matters associated with development, with climate change, and with food security.
We've also had discussions about issues like women's participation and women's representation in Parliaments around our region, and you would see that the communiqué features an agreement for leaders around the Pacific to work on that, and that Papua New Guinea has taken some steps forward on the representation of women.
So it's been a good opportunity to meet with leaders around the Pacific. I do also want to note that leaders gathered today continued to take a strong stand on Fiji. In particular, leaders gathered today calling for a genuine inclusive political dialogue in Fiji, with no pre-conditions and of course an early return to democracy. Fiji remains suspended from the forum.
But can I conclude by saying it's a great pleasure to be here with the Prime Minister of Samoa, and I'll ask him to make some comments on the impact that the technical college work has had in his nation. Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER TUILAEPA: Well I want to thank Prime Minister Gillard for extending the funding for the next phase in the technical college development in Samoa.
The campus in Samoa has produced about 349 graduates since its inception and there are about 150 students studying presently, and would be graduating by the end of this year. The college, or the campus, in Samoa has proven to lift the skills and standard of skills of our people in vocations that are of importance to the development of our country. And we do hope that the high achievers could find further opportunities for further training in Australia.
The value of gaining a certificate which carries an Australian label in our own country is so important for the graduates in terms of employment creation as quite clearly the person who graduates from an Australian technical training is always given priority by any employer compared to any other certificate awarded by an institution within our own countries.
So without further ado, Prime Minister, I thank you very much for your generous effort in helping education in our country. Thank you very much.
PM: Thank you. Can I ask if there are questions on today's announcement, or on the leaders' retreat today, before we move to any Australian domestic matters, so the Prime Minister of Samoa is not involved in that press conference. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Sorry, just very briefly on the seasonal workers program, there was a very slow uptake from Australia. By opening this up to other countries to be involved, that won't necessarily mean more Australians are creating jobs for seasonal workers to come in. Is there something being done in Australia to make sure that the demand for those seasonal workers is there?
PM: Our experience with this scheme was that it did get off to a slow start. I mean it was a wholly new venture, it was the first time we had done anything like this, and so in its first version it did get off to a slow and modest start. Obviously we've learned as we've gone and there have been some new flexibilities introduced into the system, and since then we've seen greater uptake.
So now we're moving from the first four countries to another four countries. It's still a pilot and we're still learning, but it's an industry sector in Australia where routinely employers are telling us that they cannot get the workforce that they need. And that has been a constant cry, irrespective of economic conditions in Australia, that it is difficult for them to get the workforce that they need.
So we hope to continue to learn as we go in this pilot, and as we do, to provide opportunities for people. The evidence to us has been that people who have come have enjoyed it in the sense that it's given them a work opportunity and enabled them to send money back home.
JOURNALIST: Just a question on Fiji: can you explain what you mean by the dialogue you talked about before that needs to take place?
PM: Well, this has been our consistent position and it is a consistent position of this forum. We want to see Fiji return to democracy. We want to see that done at the earliest possible opportunity. Obviously that requires within Fiji and more broadly, a dialogue to start without pre-conditions being drawn, but the ball is there in Fiji's court to make moves forward towards a return to democracy.
JOURNALIST: Did all the island leaders agree with that sentiment, because some here have expressed - they're saying that Fiji should be returned to the forum as soon as possible?
PM: Well the best thing I can do there is refer you to the communiqué and the very clear statement within it.
JOURNALIST: Could I ask Mr Tuilaepa, because he's been very outspoken on Fiji, you've seen the opinion poll that was published this week, which seemed to show that Bainimarama has a high level of support within Fiji. Is this the sort of thing that might make you change your mind about your own assessment of what's happened?
TUILAEPA: Well first of all the opinion poll was carried out by the Lowy Institute using some polls companies in Fiji, and of course we all know that people in Fiji are very, very frightened to say anything contrary to what the leader wants to hear. So I cannot take the results of that poll to be completely reliable. That's my brief answer.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you just about the Seasonal Workers' Program? What benefit will it bring to Samoa with Samoans now being able to take part in that?
TUILAEPA: The increase in income for those who would be benefiting from the scheme cannot be minimised, but I think the great benefit would be as we have known from our participation in the New Zealand scheme, is the knowledge of the work ethics in a horticulture industry. And that is very advantageous when they go back to work on their own plantations and having been exposed to the work environment in New Zealand, it gives them a totally new outlook on what it means to work hard in a plantation where you expect to produce and sell the fruits of your labour.
I just want you to also know that in our discussions with the farmers, the employers here, they have found that since the inception of the scheme, the people that have come with the experience acquired have resulted in increased productivity and they have recommended to me that the next batch that follows should have a higher percentage of those who have been before. So that there is less time to retrain, and that the benefits to the farmers would be even greater.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the poll results that we were talking about: how do you feel about the Fijian Government saying that Bainimarama is three times more popular than you? Are you concerned about statements like that?
PM: This isn't a question for opinion polls, this is a values question, and the central question is whether you believe in democracy or not. I do, and that's why we're pressing Fiji for an early return to democracy.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) question of the reliability of the Lowy Institute poll.
PM: I think some good points have been made by the Prime Minister. It is, I suspect, hard for us from Australia to imagine how people feel living in Fiji and then having an opinion poll taken of them. For us that's routine. Obviously, we have a lot of opinion polls and people feel free to say whatever they want to say and they understand that they're confidential and those sorts of things and that there's not an ability to trace back who said what.
I suspect that the understanding of those things and the sense of pressure is quite different to Fiji. But at the end of the day, whatever caused people to give the answers that they gave, this is not a question for opinion polling. You believe in democracy or you don't. We believe in democracy.
TUILAEPA: Can I also mention that very similar kinds of polls have been conducted in my country during periods leading up to elections for the last eight elections that were won. And every single poll of those eight polls were completely wrong.
PM: Well said! Have we finished with Forum issues and issues associated with the Australia Pacific Technical College?
JOURNALIST: Just one about bilaterals if I could.
PM: Okay sure.
JOURNALIST: Did you speak with the Papua New Guinean Prime Minister at all about asylum speakers? Were there words mentioned in-
PM: -We are yet to have our bilateral, so I've had the opportunity during the course of the day in the margins of the leaders' retreat to talk to the Prime Minister of PNG, but we will sit down for a further conversation after this media conference.
JOURNALIST: Asylum seekers wasn't mentioned in that sidelines chat?
PM: The Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea is aware that we are debating these issues within Australia and we have a court case to respond to.
JOURNALIST: And on West Papua, would you agree with West Papua's attempts at becoming [inaudible] of the Pacific Island community?
PM: I'd refer you to the communiqué and what was done in relation to applications for observers by the whole group. So is that it?
OK, so they were going to ask me some domestic questions now. You may not want to be involved in Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in light of the New South Wales Police not proceeding any charges against Craig Thomson. Do you have full confidence in him and should the opposition apologise to him?
PM: Look, I've consistently expressed my confidence in the Member for Dobell. He is there working for his local community. Police matters are a matter for the Police, and I'm not going to comment on them.
JOURNALIST: The opposition says that he should address Parliament as early as Monday to explain himself. What do you make of that?
PM: I've consistently said in relation to this matter  -  and other matters involving Federal Parliamentarians, including a Liberal Senator - that it's a question for proper processes. Proper processes need to be gone through and clearly the Police are going through their relevant processes.
JOURNALIST: Should George Brandis apologise?
PM: Look, these are a question for the proper processes. That's my position in relation to all parliamentarians. I've taken a consistent view, whether the person is a Liberal Party person or a Labor Party person.
JOURNALIST: Are you saying he hasn't been cleared yet? You're saying he still has questions to answer (inaudible)?
PM: I'm not saying that at all, and please don't put words in my mouth. I'm saying that there are proper processes, as people are aware, in relation to the Member for Dobell. There's a Fair Work Australia process in train. Matters that are  -  commentary from the Police is for the Police to deal with  -  not for me.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Tony Abbott to not say that he'll give him a pair to attend the birth of his child?
PM: I am fairly amazed by that statement. You know, employers, people right around the country now make arrangements for men to attend the birth of their children. People do it in all sorts of extraordinary circumstances: footballers shaping up for a grand final. All sorts of extraordinary circumstances people still want to make sure that a dad can get to the birth of his new son or daughter. I would hope Mr Abbott would reflect on this and share that sentiment.
JOURNALIST: PM, Mr Abbott says that they would support the Government's offshore processing policy as long as it didn't include Malaysia and it was only based with Nauru and PNG. What do you make of Mr Abbott's comments?
PM: Look, Mr Abbott made a very open offer at the start of this week to consider these questions and to work with the Government. I'll be holding Mr Abbott to that open offer. He now has some facts at his disposal that he didn't appear to have earlier this week  -  because we've made briefings available to him. It's now crystal clear to Mr Abbott that legislation is required. It's now also crystal clear to Mr Abbott that Malaysia has a strong deterrence value. I hope he would weigh these facts in the national interest.
JOURNALIST: Do you agree with your Immigration Department head, who says that if offshore processing doesn't take place, that we'll end up with social problems that we saw like in London recently?
PM: Well the Government at the appropriate time will deal with our response to the High Court case. Having heard of all that advice from our independent officials, including the Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship.
JOURNALIST: Bob Brown said today, he's called those officials “turkeys” today and says that you're further to the Right than John Howard. What do you make-
PM: -Sorry, who?
JOURNALIST: Bob Brown's called the Immigration Department's officials “turkeys” and says that you're further to the right than John Howard now on asylum seekers and he can't bite his tongue any longer. What's your reaction?
PM: Well Senator Brown's completely wrong. It's the wrong thing to do to criticise officials. They are giving the best of their advice and experience, and I ask them to give the best of their advice and experience to the Leader of the Opposition as well as me, in circumstances where our nation needs to respond to last week's High Court Case.
For my position on asylum seekers, what I want to see is the people-smugglers' business model smashed. I believe that's the right thing to do, in attacking a trans-national crime of a great evil, and it's the right thing to do from the humanitarian perspective of not seeing people, including women and kids, get on boats and potentially risk their lives. And our nation saw that only too graphically around Christmas time this year off Christmas Island, and I'd invite people to remember what they felt like, when they saw those images.
JOURNALIST: The Immigration Department says that offshore processing is the only way to go to tackle this problem. What did Labor dismantle the offshore processing regime, and what did you support that?
PM: I think you're putting words in the Immigration Department's mouth. They are saying and advising both us and Mr Abbott that Malaysia has a great deal of deterrence value; it's a very strong deterrent. They're also very clearly saying that to avoid legal risks and doubts, legislation is required. The Government will respond fully to all of this, having received proper advice at the appropriate time. I'm not doing it today.
JOURNALIST: But was it the wrong thing to do to dismantle the offshore processing regime?
PM: Well we'll provide our response to the High Court case at the appropriate time. I'm not doing it today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on that advice that you got from the department, have they told the Government that if it has to be onshore, that you will get 600 people a month arriving?
And on a completely matter of the trends, I appreciate you're here and you're not watching Australian television, but have you see the new show about yourself and Tim? What do you make of it and it's supposedly a ratings hit in Australia? What do you think about that?
PM: I haven't seen the new show, because I've been here in New Zealand. I have recorded it, so I will watch it, and I hope that I will be laughing as I do.
JOURNALIST: Just on the-
PM: -Look, the Immigration Department has provided advice to us. It's provided advice to the Leader of the Opposition. We're going to respond to that advice and we'll crystallise the reason we came to our conclusions when the Government has fully dealt with this matter, which isn't today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, [inaudible] on that program?
PM: You're asking me to make a comment about a program I haven't seen, but I think people who know me well know I've got a pretty good sense of humour, so I expect to be laughing when I watch it.
JOURNALIST: Have you had bilateral discussions with Nauru about processing?
PM: Look I made comments about this yesterday, and I've spoken to the leader of Nauru who's been here. At a meeting of this length, you get a lot of opportunities to have discussions in the margins, when you're having a cup of coffee or over lunch or dinner or whatever. We have had those discussions and he understands that there's a High Court case in Australia that the Government's responding to, and that that's an Australian domestic question.
JOURNALIST: So you did speak to the Nauru President about the issue?
PM: He raised the matter with me over dinner, saying he had been asked by Australian journalists to comment, and in those circumstances I explained that we had a High Court case that we were working through our response to.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask you one question (inaudible)?
PM: I was never scheduled to attend the post-Forum dialogue, and it's not normal for Prime Ministers to do so. I did want to catch up with the Wallabies while I was here, and I'm able to do that today, still get back tonight and be available for a full working day in Canberra tomorrow. So I thought that was the best program.
JOURNALIST: Do you have meetings planned tomorrow?
PM: What I had intended to do was stay overnight and meet the Wallabies tomorrow. As it's turned out, I've got the opportunity to do that this evening and get back tonight. So just in terms of being in Canberra for the full working day rather than travelling for part of it, that best suits my program.
JOURNALIST: Can I just clarify an answer you gave earlier? Did you raise it with PNG or did they raise it with you, the issue of asylum seekers?
PM: Look, it's been a conversation in the margins. I suspect, but do not know, members of this press pack have been asking for commentary as well. I suspect that's right, and so you'd expect it to be raised over a cup of coffee, no more than that, and it's once again a question that there's a High Court case, and we're responding to it.
This, of course, for us in Australia, it's a big issue, it's a big part of our national conversation at the moment, but it hasn't been a big feature of my discussions whilst I've been here. It's been the subject of a couple of conversations in the margins, because press interest obviously then also plays into the forum itself.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) resignation of the Chief Trade Advisor, who's a key player in the regional PACER Plus negotiations?
PM: Yes, I understand that the Chief Trade Advisor has resigned and that we will need to replace that position, which needs to continue to be resourced. Thank you.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that Nauru, Samoa, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu have been invited to join the Pacific Seasonal Worker Pilot Scheme.
This will provide an important economic boost to communities in our Pacific neighbourhood and offer Australian producers an avenue to source workers, where seasonal demands outstrip the local supply of labour.
Workers from Nauru, Samoa, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu will have the opportunity to join those from Kiribati, Papua New Guinea, Tonga and Vanuatu participating in the pilot scheme.
Under the pilot scheme, Pacific workers come to Australia for four to six months to work for horticultural enterprises who demonstrate that they cannot find enough local labour to meet their seasonal harvest needs.
With over 560 workers recruited so far, the pilot scheme is delivering benefits to participating Pacific countries.  Workers remit money back home, benefiting their families and broader communities.
In Australia, the pilot scheme is delivering productivity gains for the horticulture industry, particularly in regional areas where access to a reliable labour supply has been a longstanding challenge.
Demand for Pacific seasonal workers by the horticulture industry is increasing following the introduction of more flexible arrangements by the Australian Government in December 2010 and as the horticulture industry recovers from the severe drought and floods.
The expansion reflects strong support for the scheme from Pacific countries and the Australian horticulture sector.
Further information about the Pacific Seasonal Worker Pilot Scheme is available at  www.deewr.gov.au/pswps



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today announced new funding which will help more than 3,400 students build vocational skills and employment opportunities throughout the Pacific.
Australia will provide $152 million over four years from the aid program to continue to support the Australia Pacific Technical College.
Ms Gillard said this latest funding will help thousands of students graduate from the college between 2011 and 2015 and will focus on streamlining administration to ensure better value for money.
She said that ensuring that Pacific nations are prosperous, successful and stable is in Australia's national interest and this training will help these small nations with their development.
The program helps transform people's lives through international standard technical training, leading to further training opportunities and access to better jobs.
Since the APTC program began in June 2007 more than 3,000 people from Pacific Island countries have graduated from the college with qualifications that are recognised internationally.
The qualifications give graduates the chance to put their new skills into practice anywhere in the world, and especially in the region, which improves trade opportunities and people-to-people links across the Pacific.
College campuses have been established in Papua New Guinea, Fiji, Samoa and Vanuatu. A Scholarship Fund has also been set up for disadvantaged students including those from remote areas and countries without a campus. 
Australian-standard training is delivered in eight industry sectors including the automotive, manufacturing, engineering, construction, health, tourism, hospitality and community services.
Ms Gillard also announced Australia would provide $2.7 million to support research on technical and vocational education and training costs and financing across the Pacific.  This research will be used to inform national and donor-decision making on education and training for the region.  



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today announced that Australia will help the Pacific Island states to improve their food security and economic development by boosting funding for fisheries programs.
Ms Gillard said today that Australia will provide an additional $4.7 million to help Pacific Island countries maximise their returns from fish resources while safeguarding stocks for future food security.
The funds will support sustainable fisheries for inland and coastal communities in the Pacific and will be provided over four years.  
Australia's support will improve the monitoring and assessment of snapper stocks. The funding will also strengthen the monitoring of the region's tuna stocks to support their effective management.
Ms Gillard said it is vital we conserve and sustainably manage coastal fisheries to ensure the food security of the region.
For many Pacific Island populations, 70 to 90 per cent of animal protein comes from fish, principally from subsistence and small scale coastal fishing. Offshore fishing is also a critical part of many Pacific Island economies, accounting for an estimated 10,000 jobs and contributing around US$244 million to the region's Gross Domestic Product. 
A strong, economically stable Pacific region is important and Australia should do its part as the largest economy in the South Pacific region.
Australia will work with Pacific island states to support strengthened fisheries management and combat the illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing that poses a real threat to the sustainability of the region's fish stocks.
This latest funding forms part of Australia's commitment in 2009 to increase Pacific fisheries assistance by $23.5 million over four years. It builds on Australia's ongoing support for regional fisheries organisations including the Forum Fisheries Agency and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community.
Ms Gillard is in Auckland for the 43rd Pacific Islands Forum. 



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today announced the Government will provide an extra funding to help Pacific Island nations improve services for women who have experienced violence.
Ms Gillard today said the funds will help governments, civil society and United Nations agencies prevent and respond to violence against women in the Pacific.
Violence against women affects all countries around the world, including Australia. It violates basic human rights and causes immeasurable trauma for women, families and the community.
Australia's latest support will help expand and improve services for women across the Pacific through counselling, crisis accommodation and legal support.  Australian funding also aims to help raise awareness and change community attitudes to violence.
Violence against women is still pervasive in our region. Recent research shows more than 60 per cent of women in some Pacific Island countries have experienced physical violence or sexual abuse.  In Australia, around one in three women have experienced violence and almost one in five have experienced sexual abuse since the age of 15.
Violence against women and the fear of violence has significant impacts on development. It affects families and communities and limits women's participation in social, political and economic life.  Violence against women also puts a strain on health care, social, policing and justice systems.
In the Pacific Australia has supported civil society and governments to promote women's rights, prevent and respond to violence, and increase access to justice for women survivors. Australian support has assisted the Governments of Kiribati and Solomon Islands to endorse national policies and action plans to address violence against women.
Australia has also supported the Fiji Women's Crisis Centre to meet the immediate needs of survivors of violence in Fiji and advocate for women's rights in Pacific countries. 
In 2009, the Crisis Centre in Suva and three district branches provided counselling and support services to more than 3,700 women subjected to violence.  The Centres also supported men to raise awareness of the impact of violence and to challenge attitudes that condone such violence.  



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today announced further details on Australia's commitment to small Pacific nations over the next two years to help the region plan for and respond to the unavoidable impacts of climate change.
As the region's largest nation Ms Gillard said it is important that Australia help its smaller neighbours deal with the effects that climate change will have on their island nations.
Pacific Island countries are among the most vulnerable to climate change. The funds will be provided through Australia's International Climate Change Adaptation Initiative.
Australia's support has helped build understanding of climate change in the region. It has also supported practical activities including helping Pacific countries develop climate change plans, install rainwater tanks and plant mangroves to protect riverbanks and shore lines.
The Prime Minister announced three activities funded under this phase of support for the Pacific Islands:
 * 	$7.35 million for the Pacific Adaptation to Climate Change Program, implemented by the United Nations Development Program and the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Program. Australian funding will expand adaptation projects in water supply, coastal management and agriculture in 13 Pacific countries;
 * 	$5.1 million to work with the Government of Kiribati and the World Bank to improve resilience to climate change impacts on water supply and coastal infrastructure under Phase 3 of the Kiribati Adaptation Program. This will include mangroves being planted to help ease coastal erosion, extension of sea walls and installation of water tanks; and
 * 	$1 million to help Tuvalu implement its National Adaptation Program of Action. The plan aims to help Tuvalu build its resilience to climate change through better management of its coastal, agriculture and water resources. This will include mangrove planting, new food plantations and the installation of water tanks.
This phase of the International Climate Change Adaptation Initiative is part of Australia's $599 million global commitment to responding to climate change from 2010-2013. At least 25 per cent of Australia's fast start package will go to help our Pacific neighbours.
Australia will also commit $3 million to support the Pacific Standards and Labelling (Energy Efficiency) Assistance Program. The Program will work with several Pacific Island countries to align with the energy efficiency standards and labelling program in place in Australia and New Zealand, initially targeting products such as fridges, air conditioners and lighting. 



The Government will hold a one-day forum next month to discuss how Australia can build on its outstanding record of economic growth and job creation in recent years, and best position our nation to benefit from the changing global economy.
The Future Jobs Forum, to be held in Parliament House on October 6, will bring together around 80 representatives and experts from business, unions, government and academia.
The global economy is changing. Technology is changing. The world is moving to clean energy. Our demographics are changing. Each of these poses challenges  -  but each of them also offers us the opportunity to create new jobs and prosperity.
The Government believes it's important to discuss the opportunities and challenges our economy faces in the years ahead as we look to build on our already strong foundations. This will involve responding to the patchwork pressures currently facing our economy.
The major agenda items at the forum will be:
 * 	The changing structure of the Australian economy
 * 	Drivers of job creation and investment
 * 	Manufacturing: the next decade
 * 	Adapting to the high dollar
 * 	Seizing new opportunities through innovation, competition and effective partnership.
The forum will take place in the same week as the Tax Forum and have a complementary focus on supporting growth across the Australian economy.
While the mining boom and the transformation of Asia are delivering tremendous benefits to our nation, they are also bringing challenges, with the high Australian dollar making conditions tougher for our trade-exposed industries.
Different sectors and regions are growing at different speeds. Even within sectors, like the services sector, some areas - like tourism and international education - are facing particular challenges.
The Government is already implementing many reforms to deal with the pressures in our changing economy. Investing in skills and training, building new infrastructure like the NBN, better taxation of the mining sector, and putting a price on carbon are all about setting Australia up for the challenges of the future.
The forum will look at further ways to best position our economy for the years ahead and how to best spread the benefits of strong growth to all corners of our patchwork economy.
Attendance at the forum will be by invitation and the Government will release further information on the program in due course. 



Thank you very much to my parliamentary colleague Joel Fitzgibbon for that welcome. Can I also acknowledge my Federal parliamentary colleague Sharon Grierson and Jill Hall who are here, as well as state and local members.
I specifically want to acknowledge our colleagues and friends from the CFMEU, Tony Maher the National President, Grahame Kelly the District Secretary and Peter Jordan the District President of the United Mineworkers' Federation.
And I want to acknowledge every unionist here today, their family members and friends and those who have come to mourn and reflect .
This is a sacred day for this place, a day that you gather to mourn and reflect and you've chosen to do it today, a day when the world is gathering to mourn and reflect on events which changed our world ten years ago.
I'm sure all of us here will always remember where we were when we first heard news of the terrorist attacks in the United States.
We felt the shock, we felt the sadness , we felt the grief, and then we felt the sense of resolve that we never again wanted to see lives lost, including Australian lives lost through acts of terror.
Unfortunately, tragically, in the decade in between we have seen lives lost, including Australian lives lost, through acts of terrorism.
So on this day, on this day that marks an event that changed our world, I know that we gather here thinking of the people in the coal mining industry , but also thinking of those Australians who mourn lost loved ones in terrorist attacks ten years ago and on tragic days since.
This is a fitting place for us to gather and to reflect. 
We are here to gather and reflect on those lost directly to you through mining.
Paul Keating first led the first service here in 1996.
I feel deeply privileged to follow in his footsteps today.
On that day, Paul Keating stood alongside the greatest son of these coalfields, Jim Comerford, who is sadly no longer with us.
I honour Jim's memory and I pay my respects to his widow Mabel, who is with us today.
Remember Before God the Men and Boys Who Gave Their Lives in Northern District Mines
These are the words inscribed upon this wall.
Solemn words.
Words that even in this desensitised age are still able to move us and to disturb us.
Because the men and boys killed here in these coalfields number more than 1800.
More than all the soldiers killed in Korea, Vietnam, Iraq and Afghanistan combined.
The youngest of them was just 11. The oldest 73.
And reflect on this fact:
Coal mining began in the Hunter in 1801.
Yet according to the former State Member John Mills, there was no year before 2001 where a miner was not killed in NSW.
Two centuries.
Two centuries of relentless loss and death.
Deaths that have left fatherless children and grieving partners and shattered mates.
Deaths that have diminished us as a nation and as a people.
But friends, those 1800 deaths are not just historic events lodged in a more primitive and distant past.
They are, to our shame, a contemporary reality in this Valley and in this industry.
Four men were killed in the Gretley disaster in 1996.
And three since 2009, including one man  -  Peter Jones  -  killed at Lake Macquarie just 13 weeks ago.
It is well that we mourn them.
We must always do that.
But for a Labor Government and the Labor Movement, it is not enough to be sorry after the fact.
Every employee has the right to leave for their job in the expectation they will return safe home, they will be there for their family and friends when the working day is done.
It is as fundamental a right as there can be in our workplaces and in our laws.
For over 100 years, the union has preached the message of safety at every turn.
Thankfully we now have some of the best mine safety laws in the world.
But in the Labor Movement we know that our duty of solidarity does not stop at Australia's shores.
Workers everywhere deserve the same high protections that the nation now enjoys.
We know from the recent mining accidents overseas how far some countries are yet to come.
And we know that journey will be accomplished faster if the global community speaks with a united voice.
The International Labour Organisation has proposed a Convention Concerning Safety and Health in Mines, known as Convention 176.
While Australian laws exceed this standard, we must play our part in lifting standards in other mining nations.
I can therefore confirm today that Australia will ratify Convention 176.
And having ratified it we will work with other mining nations around the world to ratify it as well.
Friends, consistent with long-standing practice on ratification, we will of course consult State and Territory governments and your union, but we will get this done.
Friends, we should lead.
This wall shows us why we must.
Too many lives lost.
Too many futures stolen.
Too many homes that received a knock at the door or a phone call and the realisation that a morning's hurried kiss goodbye was an unintended last farewell.
Such irreplaceable, wasteful, needless loss.
A tragedy. A reproach.
And a call to do better.
Because there must come a day when no more names are added to this wall.
May that day be soon.
There has been enough pain and enough loss. 



Distinguished guests.
Friends of Australia, from many countries.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
This weekend many Australians read the story of a young New York firefighter  -  James Dowdell.
He wears his father's uniform.
Ten years ago today, Kevin Dowdell was one of the hundreds of firefighters  -  New York's bravest  -  who were killed when the towers came down. 
Kevin led his men in there. 
And his life of service lives on in his sons.
Today James Dowdell is a firefighter like his father before him. 
Patrick Dowdell has worn his country's uniform in Afghanistan.
The Dowdells' story is one among hundreds, among thousands, which we remember today.
Lives lived out in years of service and of peace, lives lost on days of terror and of courage.
Not only on that dreadful day in New York and Washington and Pennsylvania  -  but in the long decade since, from Bali and Jakarta to London and Mumbai and beyond.
But Australia has a special link to the Dowdells' story  -  and it holds special meaning for our American friends as well.
So I am glad Rob Frey is among us today.
Rob, your part in this story is important.
Everyone should know it  -  so I want to share it again.
Many Australians and Americans worked together in the late 1990s to be ready to protect the 2000 Sydney Olympics from possible terrorist attack.
One group of Australians spent two months in New York training and working, including a long time with New York's Fire Department Rescue 1.
They worked hard together and became more than colleagues ... they became mates.
So when it was time to go home the Australian commander gave Rescue 1's chief his Australian Army “slouch hat”  and the chief presented the Australians with a battle scarred fire helmet.
Dated December 1998 and signed by members of the Rescue 1 crew, including Kevin Dowdell.
After September 11, Kevin Dowdell's remains could not be found.
But that helmet was found in Australia.
And Rob Frey found Kevin's sons.
Rob went to America to return the helmet their father signed. 
Rob and James stood proudly together in the Congress of the United States as a symbol of the friendship between our countries.
And so today, I think of two good men.
Rob and James.
Far apart for now, friends forever.
Just as we think of two great nations.
Australia and the United States.
Whose people believe that “all men are created equal”, that “Jack's as good as his master”.
And as we mark two anniversaries.
The 60th anniversary of the Alliance between Australia and the United States.
When the ANZUS treaty was signed in San Francisco.
And the 10th anniversary of the attacks on America.
When the ANZUS treaty was invoked for the first time.
September 11 was truly a dreadful day, a day which saddened and changed our world.
None of us who lived through it will ever forget.
And our peoples mark it today in many ways.
From here, in Reconciliation Place, where we light a candle.
To Sydney's Botanical Gardens, where a tree is dedicated.
To many Australian cities where interfaith services take place.
To New York, where many bereaved families gather.
We remember all the victims. 
Thousands of Americans  -  ten Australians  -  so many other innocent people  -  from so many peaceful nations.
In all these places, meeting in a mood of reflection  -  marking as we do shared sacrifice and loss.
But in all that reflection, finding resolution as well.
Australia and the United States have worked together for peace in the world for many years.
September 11 changed many things but it could not change that.
We will make decisions in coming years to ensure our work in the world  -  and the co-operation between our forces  -  only grows in the future.
And while our fight against terrorism did not end in May, a great blow was struck against terrorism when Osama bin Laden was killed.
Our work together around the world goes on.
But today, around the world, we pause from that work, to remember.
To remember the courage and the suffering our two countries have shared.
To remember that in our darkest days we have been glad to see each other's face and hear each other's voice.
In our days together under attack in the Pacific.
In our decades together from Korea to the Gulf.
On September 11. in Washington and Pennsylvania and New York. 
And so on this day, on behalf of millions of Australians, I say this:
We do not forget. We never forget. 
United always in remembrance.
United always in our resolve. 



PM: I had the opportunity to speak to Sam Stosur and congratulate her on her remarkable win. She is a woman who is heading for a celebration and I assured her that the whole Australian nation would be celebrating with her. This is a remarkable achievement, Sam is the first woman to win a grand slam title since Evonne Goolagong in 1980. She's the first to win one in the US since Margaret Court in 1973. So a great achievement. I did have to say to her that I was unable to watch all of the match, I was having the scores yelled out to me this morning but it reached a point where we had some other work to do so I wasn't able to watch it all, but I know around the nation there would have been millions of Australians transfixed and watching it point by point, so congratulations to Sam Stosur.
I'm here with the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship to deal with another matter and that is the Government's response to the High Court case. The Government has been working and considering its response for a period of time. As is well known a number of months ago the Government announced that we were intending to seek an arrangement with Malaysia to transfer asylum seekers to Malaysia. We determined that that was the best course of action to smash the people smuggler's business model. We determined it was the best course of action to make sure that we sent the maximum message of deterrence and stopped people getting on leaky boats where they could lose their lives - men, women and children, and tragically we've seen men, women and children lose their lives on our shoreline.
We determined to pursue the arrangement with Malaysia because we also believed that it opened up a good dialogue within our region, that it was based on a regional process which came to fruition in Bali and abled us to work through regional solutions. And finally we determined it was the best approach because it would enable our country to take 4,000 refugees from Malaysia, people who have waited often for many years to get a chance at a new life and a new start in a country like Australia.
Malaysia offered the best answer to the issue of asylum seekers and people smuggling then, it offers the best answer now. And so we are determined to pursue bringing to life the arrangement that we have made with Malaysia. So today I can announce that the Government has determined that it will bring to the Parliament amendments to the Migration Act that enable the Government to make the decisions necessary to have asylum seekers transferred and processed in third countries.
These amendments will be broad in nature. They will enable the government of the day to design and implement its best solution. The best solution from our point of view is the arrangement with Malaysia with a complementary centre in PNG. But the amendments we will bring to the Parliament will be broad amendments which will restore to executive government the ability to make the arrangements that it sees fit for the transfer and processing of asylum seekers in third countries.
There's been a lot of discussion about what works when it comes to deterring boats and I want to talk for a moment about what works. There have been a lot of claims in the public domain that having a processing centre on Nauru would work. The advice to Government consistently has been crystal clear, that having a processing centre on Nauru would not have the deterrence effect that we seek.
The Howard Government did process asylum seekers in PNG and on Nauru and the outcome of that arrangement was that around 95 per cent of those who were resettled who had been processed on Nauru were resettled in Australia. People smugglers have got that message and they now understand that a processing centre on Nauru is really just like another Christmas Island, it's a place where you are processed but if your claim is accepted you will be settled in Australia. What that means is that people smugglers are able to say to people that going to Nauru is the same as getting a ticket to Australia.
Well we've been determined to send a stronger message of deterrence than that, which is why we are determined to implement the arrangement with Malaysia. The arrangement with Malaysia means that people will not see their claims processed in Australia. It's very different from the circumstances with Nauru.
Now I understand that views vary across the Parliament on these questions and the Opposition, despite expert advice to the contrary, continues to pursue Nauru as its option. That is as it may be and if there is a future Liberal government that has that as a perspective then under the amendments that we will bring to the Parliament, that future government would be able to enact that plan. But the Government, based on expert advice, does not agree that Nauru is a deterrent. Our advice couldn't be clearer and that's why Malaysia, when we announced it, was the best option for smashing the people smugglers' business model and it remains the best option today.
In terms of the Parliamentary proceedings I do note that the Leader of the Opposition said last Monday and I quote his words, “I think that our country should have the best border protection policy that the government of the day thinks that it needs and I'm prepared to work constructively to give the Government, to restore to the Government, the option of a third country offshore processing which it says the High Court and the Solicitor-General has denied to it.”
Well on these words Mr Abbott and I are in agreement and the amendments that will be brought to Parliament will reflect those words, it will put executive government in the position to make the decision that it sees fit and our decision is that Malaysia says you will not get to Australia, Nauru says you'll get a ticket to Australia, that's why we are determined to implement our arrangement with Malaysia.
I'll turn now to the Minister for some comments and then we'll take questions.
MINISTER BOWEN: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. As you know, in 2001 the Parliament passed legislation to allow for offshore processing. This was legislation supported by both sides of the Parliament at that time. The clear understanding of both sides of the Parliament until the High Court decision was that this enabled the Minister for Immigration of the day to nominate a country for third party processing where the Minister had made the determination that the protections in place were appropriate. Indeed, under that existing legislation, a declaration was made for Nauru and Papua New Guinea by Minister Ruddock, which were thought until the High Court decision to still be valid and still be in effect. The High Court not only ruled invalid the declaration of Malaysia, but the legal consensus is that the reasoning of the High Court also meant that Minister Ruddock's declarations of Nauru and Papua New Guinea should also be held to be invalid.
The High Court found not only was the Minister's decision reviewable, but there are a range of circumstances which should be taken into account, going to the legal enforceability of protections, work rights, health and education, which in the views of many eminent legal commentators have meant that New Zealand would be the only country in our region in which third country processing could occur. It's been the view not only of the Solicitor-General, but of Mr Kennett, Mr Lloyd, Mr Merkel and Mr Estcourt, all Senior Counsel or Queen's Counsel, that the High Court judgement ruled out not only Malaysia, but Papua New Guinea and Nauru as well. The legislation that we will introduce into the Parliament will seek to return the Migration Act to the previous understanding of both sides of the Parliament, from 2001 to 2011.
In relation to unaccompanied minors and children, obviously the High Court made a number of findings there as well. The result of the High Court's finding was that no unaccompanied minor could be removed from Australia without the written agreement of the Minister and that that written agreement was judicially reviewable and it must be established it was in the best interests of the child to be removed. Importantly, our advice is that that ruling applies not only to asylum seekers, but to failed asylum seekers. That is to say an unaccompanied minor who claims protection in Australia, they are found not to be a refugee by the department, they appeal that to an independent review, are found not to be a genuine refugee, go through the courts and fails, and then if the Australian Government took steps to return them as a failed asylum seeker, they would be able to claim under the High Court's ruling that it was not in their best interests and they should not be removed from Australia, and that would be a claim which would be likely to succeed. Now, in our view, that is clearly not sustainable as public policy and we will also seek to return the law to its previous understanding that the Minister for Immigration of the day has the discretion to deal with these matters as appropriate.
Now, of course we are working very carefully through the proposed legislation. We've been working on options since the High Court decision, but the Cabinet has today approved this way forward. We are testing proposed legislation to ensure that it's as robust as possible. It's being tested not only with the Solicitor-General and the Attorney-General's department, but with eminent Senior Counsel from the private sector to ensure that it is as robust as it possibly can be. I would envisage that the Opposition would be briefed on the proposed legislation in the coming week, that we would move to introduce legislation into the House of Representatives in the next sitting week.
Prime Minister.
PM: Thanks. Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Minister Bowen, are you comfortable with trying to reverse the ruling on unaccompanied minors, especially people found to be genuine refugees, surely you do feel some obligation to them and secondly, are you yourself or Ms Gillard going to have face to face negotiations with the Opposition to try to ensure that you can get bipartisanship on this whole package?
MINISTER BOWEN: In relation to unaccompanied minors, Michelle, these are very emotional and difficult issues, of course. And I know how strongly people feel those issues and I know that the issue of how to deal with unaccompanied minors has weighed on many Immigration Ministers because there are important decisions to be made. I think the overriding obligation is to stop unaccompanied minors risking their lives on that dangerous boat journey to Australia. The overriding obligation is to say to parents, ‘Do not risk the lives of your children to get the prospect of a visa in Australia.' These are difficult matters. As I've said before, unaccompanied minors have a range of backgrounds and a range of circumstances. They vary in age from people who are very clearly children to people who may say that they're unaccompanied minors but on further testing it appears apparent that they are not. But I think all these issues need to be weighed up and it's important that the Government of the day have the discretion to deal with them as appropriate.
PM: We'll take it one at a time and Michelle, in answer to the second part of your question, in terms of the wording of the amendments, the Government is taking expert advice and we will brief the opposition on the wording of the amendments.
On the principle though, there's nothing to negotiate. The question for Mr Abbott here is a crystal clear one  -  does he believe executive government should have the power to implement its policy on asylum seekers and refugees  -  full stop, yes, no.
Laura.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister and Minister, can I just clarify given what the Opposition has said about these issues, is there any point in having another look at the agreement with Malaysia to try to address some of the concerns that they have expressed about that agreement in order to get a bipartisan position on this legislation?
PM: Let's be clear about what we're talking about bipartisanship on. We're talking about bipartisanship to pass legislation which enables executive government to put into place its policy. I am not asking Mr Abbott to agree with us on Malaysia. He can criticise Malaysia up hill and down dale and I will maintain my objection to Nauru, it's costly and it won't work, and I don't believe that Mr Abbott should be agitating for a solution that is costly and doesn't work. But that is as it may be and that's a debate that will continue in our national conversation.This is something else, this is about government having the power to act. We will seek the power to act, we will use that power to implement our arrangement with Malaysia and a complementary centre in [PNG]. Mr Abbott may choose to say to the Australian people that if he is ever Prime Minister he will sweep that away and put a centre in Nauru, that is a matter for him, but the discussion now is around the legislative amendments. Mr Abbott has said on the public record that he believes that executive government, to use his words: “I'm prepared to work constructively to give the Government, to restore to the Government, the option of third country offshore processing”.
I'm not asking him to do anything more than honour those words.
Latika.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you agree with John Faulkner that this is against Labor Party platform and Minister, after, could I just specify with you, are you planning to remove the requirement that you be a legal guardian for unaccompanied minors?
PM: Latika, if you are asserting  -  and you may be  -  that John Faulkner said that in Caucus, then that's not true, number one. Number two, this is in accord with Labor's platform.
Yes, Karen. Sorry, I missed out going to the Minister then.
MINISTER BOWEN: Briefly, in response, the legislation we will propose would return the situation to being that commonly understood, which is that the Minister for Immigration has responsibilities under the Immigration Act to ensure appropriate removals, and also that the Minister for Immigration's role as guardian would involve the Minister taking into account the best interests of the child but the Minister's overriding responsibilities would be as previously understood.
In relation to whether guardianship should change, that is of course something the Government would consider down the track. There are a range of options, but clearly, whoever is the guardian, the Minister for Immigration must have the ability to apply discretion to appropriate removals.
PM: OK, we'll go to Karen and then we'll come to this side. Karen.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you and the Minister are dealing with legal issues, but there are many people, including many in your own party, believe there is also a moral question here, what do you say to those people, including those in your own party, who are argue that it's morally reprehensible for Australia to be turning people away and insisting on offshore processing? How do you respond to that?
PM: Well when I spoke to Labor Caucus today, and I should say that Minister Bowen and I took the proposition that we've outlined to you this morning to Cabinet and it was endorsed and then took it to Labor Caucus and it was endorsed. I don't normally go to Caucus discussions, but I will say this, I have said to my Caucus colleagues that we are a political party that has multilateralism in our DNA, we believe in global engagement, we believe in multilateral engagement, we believe in doing things like signing and honouring the Refugee Convention and the proposal that we have put as a Government, and the one we are determined to implement, does acquit our obligations under the Refugee Convention.
Secondly, we are a political party that has always been prepared to take the steps necessary to have border protection and to ensure that we had an orderly migration system. I refer you in that regard to the creation of mandatory detention by Minister Gerry Hand way back when. I take you in that regard to the statements of Kim Beazley and others made as Labor Leader in Opposition  -  Kim Beazley, Kevin Rudd, all made statements about how focussed we were on border protection. That is our heritage, that is who we are.
This is an innovative proposal that brings together the maximum possible deterrence effect to smash what is truly an evil  -  people smuggling  -  whilst holding true to the Refugee Convention and extending our compassion to people who are beyond our line of sight, that is the people who are waiting in Malaysia, as genuine refugees seeking a chance of a new life and we'll give that new life under this policy to 4,000 of them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition has clearly opened the suggestion that they would insert an idea that a country to receive asylum seekers has to be a signatory to the UN Human Rights Convention. Now that would obviously rule out Malaysia, would you accept any such amendment, which would in effect rule out Malaysia?
PM: Let me firstly go to the detail of the Opposition's proposal there and then go, I think to the attitude. Firstly, to the details, my very clear recollection is that the Leader of the Opposition Tony Abbott, during the 2010 election campaign, said that he was committed to boat phone. That is he would sit in Kirribilli, looking over Sydney Harbour and he would issue instructions to patrol boat commanders to turn boats around and see them return to Indonesia, a country that is not a signatory to the Refugee Convention and beyond that he would never trouble himself about the fate of the people on that boat.
Now, boat phone, of course was laughable at a series of levels. Number one, failing to understand that people smuggling has mutated as a crime, people don't sit there and allow their boats to be turned around now, they disable the boats. Number two, that Indonesia does not receive such boats. So it was always a laughable policy proposition.
But it does seem to me interesting that that was the Leader of the Opposition's policy and plan during the election campaign, but now he is saying something completely to the reverse.
And then can I say more broadly, the Leader of the Opposition conducts himself, not as the alternate Prime Minister, but as the leader of a protest party. He seeks to wreck, he seeks to be negative on every occasion. Well, negativity has its consequences  -  this is serious. What Tony Abbott decides on this matters. This isn't about slogans, it's not about sound bites, it's about solutions.
This is a big test for Mr Abbott and on this occasion I hope he passes the test.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) if Tony Abbott just says no, that he's not going to (inaudible) anything that would allow you to go Malaysia, do you have a fall back, or is it this or nothing?
PM: We will bring these amendments to the Parliament. This is a test for Tony Abbott. It is a test as to whether he is guided by the national interest, or he is always guided by his political interest.
Now we know on most days Mr Abbott gets up and thinks to himself ‘how can I wreck something today?' and on most days he gets up and says ‘what facts can I pretend don't exist today?'. He does that on climate change day after day. I don't expect any of that conduct to change, but his negativity here would have a cost for this country. This is not about the politics, this is about Australia controlling our immigration settings and particularly Government controlling our immigration settings. And I am not asking Tony Abbott to give me any more power as Prime Minister than he would seek for himself if he were ever Prime Minister.
Now, what can be the reasonable argumunt for denying that as legislation through this Parliament.
Paul Bongiorno.
JOURNALIST: A direct implication of that answer is that much at stake here is offshore processing, if this bill goes down that's the end of offshore processing?
PM: Well the High Court decision as interpreted for us by our legal counsel, the Solicitor-General, and we have released that advice, it is very clear from the Solicitor-General's advice that without legislation you cannot proceed with legal confidence about offshore processing. Whether that offshore processing be in Malaysia or PNG or Nauru, you cannot proceed with legal confidence. You can also not deal with the circumstance of unaccompanied minors and I'd be dreadfully concerned and I believe this would be shared by many, many people that we wouldn't want to embark on a policy or proposal that potentially risks sending a message to people smugglers that they should fill boats with kids. So we need to legislate and because we need to legislate, we've made a decision about what that legislation should look like.
I'm asking Tony Abbott to seriously consider the Government's proposal that this legislation gives executive government the power it needs for offshore processing and following that serious consideration, where we will help him every step of the way with any briefings he needs, we've already made one available, we'll make briefings on the legislation available. When he's working his way through he should be able to say yes to the Government's proposal, it's actually a point of principle should executive government have this power and actually in his words last Monday he basically answered it. I'll turn to the Minister for Immigration to see if he wants to say anything about the High Court case and offshore processing.
MINISTER BOWEN: Well clearly as I've outlined, and has been commonly commented upon, the High Court's tests have made offshore processing need to comply with a new high bar  -  a bar so high that several eminent commentators have said that New Zealand would be the only country in the region to qualify as an appropriate country for offshore processing. So if this legislation did fail, it would make offshore processing very, very difficult indeed for any government, this Government and succeeding governments, to implement in any meaningful way.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister thank you, you're effectively at the moment, I don't think we have any deterrent do we, because the law is in limbo so how urgent is it that you get this legislation dealt with, are you planning to fast track it and are you worried that there may be attempts by say the Greens to confound its passage?
PM: Well on timing I'll go to the Minister.
MINISTER BOWEN: As I indicated we would be looking to introduce the legislation into the House next week. Mr Abbott has previously said that he would, in the national interest, work to ensure its expeditious passage through both Houses of Parliament. If he sticks by working in the national interest he'll stick to that commitment.
PM: And can I say on the second part of your question the test here is for Tony Abbott. Andrew.
JOURNALIST: One of the criticisms that the Opposition have put is that the 800 that you would send back to Malaysia under the deal would be quickly exhausted, what advice have you been given either by the Minister or the Secretary or both as to the effective deterrence of this and is it, have you been told that you would never get to 800 because the deterrence would be so great?
PM: Well we've received very clear advice, I'll turn to the Minister to deal with the advice question and then I'll make a comment too.
MINISTER BOWEN: The very clear advice we've received is that arrangements like the arrangement with Malaysia are by far the most effective deterrent for all the reasons the Prime Minister outlined, that other arrangements which simply involve offshore processing with a very good chance of being settled in Australia do not provide that deterrent.
Also, importantly the advice to us has been that the very announcement of the Malaysia arrangement had some effect, but for it to have full effect  -  for it to be fully recognised throughout the region, it would need to be implemented. People weighing up whether to make that journey to Australia would need to see the transfers occurring - the planes dropping people off in Kuala Lumpur, in order for it to have full effect and until and unless it is fully implemented we wouldn't see the full disincentive effect because people would be weighing up is this measure going to pass the Parliament, will it get through the courts, they have reserved their judgement.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) that it would be exhausted, I mean 800 people over 4 years?
PM: If I can deal with that point. That is as it may be, and Tony Abbott can claim that every day, every minute, every second from now until kingdom come, that's a matter for him. What we're asking him to consider, what we're asking him to do, what we believe he should do in the national interest is join with the Government in amending the legislation so executive government can make the decisions it believes necessary to transfer asylum seekers to third countries. I do not ask Mr Abbott to endorse or applaud the Malaysia arrangement, I do not expect him to do that, what I do ask him to do, what he should do, is he should come to this Parliament and say he will join with the Government in putting the legislation in the right form so Government can make the decisions. I will make a different set of decisions to him, he will contest those decisions, that is what the democratic system is for, but he shouldn't deny executive government the ability to make these decisions and if he goes down that path, he is effectively denying himself the legislative foundation stone he will need for the policy he says he supports.
We'll go to Speersy and then we'll do one or two more, Phil Coorey's clearly going to need some form of medical aid if we're out in this cold for too much longer.
JOURNALIST: Just back on Matt's question, what happens as of this announcement to any boat arrivals, are they held pending deportation or are they processed in Australia?
PM: I'll go to the Minister.
MINISTER BOWEN: Until the legislation is passed, it would be appropriate to process in Australia.
PM: And just because Phil, we'll do last three and Phil asked, yes one here, one here, one here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you mentioned multilateralism just before, during the negotiations with Malaysia did you try and encourage them to sign the UN Refugee Convention or during these coming months will there be some sort of move by the Australian Government to encourage them along that track?
PM: Well I'll go to the Minister specifically on Malaysia. Of course in discussions with the region we encourage people to become signatories to the relevant conventions, that's one of the things we do and we'll continue to do it but we're also not under any illusions about the likelihood of major nations in our region moving to become signatories to the refugee convention. I mean we will continue to put that and to advocate for it, but we're also realists about the prospect of it happening. Minister.
MINISTER BOWEN: As is well known, we've had very intensive negotiations with Malaysia over a period of six months, and in those negotiations we made our position clear to the Malaysian Government that it would be important for the fundamental tenant of the Refugee Convention, which is non-refoulement, to be applied to the 800 people we transfer and also that there be appropriate safeguards and standards for human rights and people being treated with dignity and respect, that was the focus of the discussions.
There was also a focus of our discussions with Malaysia, the role of the UNHCR in Malaysia. Malaysia has had the experience of the biggest increase in asylum seekers on its shores of almost any nation in the world over the past decade. And we talked to Malaysia about the UNHCR, we involved the UNHCR in discussions and I think one of the reasons the UNHCR found this to be a workable arrangement was that it involved Malaysia in the discussion about better protection outcomes across the region, something Malaysia was very keen to be involved in, because Malaysia recognises this is a regional issue and recognise that consistency of approach is important.
So the discussions didn't go to Malaysia signing the Refugee Convention, we don't lecture other nations about what they should and shouldn't sign, but what we did have is a good and productive discussion about protection outcomes across the region.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister have you put a price tag on the cost of onshore processing, a budgetary impact and just to clarify with the unaccompanied minors issue, will that require other amendments to other acts other than just the Migration Act?
PM: The Minister will deal with those.
MINISTER BOWEN: In relation to costs, clearly if there was onshore processing and the Government revised its projections as to the number of arrivals that would have an impact on the budget bottom line and that impact would be in the order of $4 billion over the forward estimates if we returned to the sorts of arrivals we've seen in previous times.
In relation to the amendments, there would be consequential flowing amendments, it wouldn't just simply be one amendment to section 198A of the Migration Act, there would be consequential flowing amendments but they would be of more a technical nature.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
MINISTER BOWEN: No, $4 billion total cost  - 
JOURNALIST: Total offshore processing, not over and above. Do you have an extra cost?
MINISTER BOWEN: Well if you compare that to the various costs in the budget estimates that already exist, but we're talking a very significant increase in the order of billions of dollars.
PM: Ok we'll take last question from Phil.
JOURNALIST: A couple of answers ago you said you didn't expect Tony Abbot to applaud or endorse the Malaysia plan. If he gives you the power to do as you wish and send asylum seekers to Malaysia, do you undertake if there are problems or failures with the policy to accept full responsibility for that and not try and share it with others who supported the legislation?
PM: Look the Government's policies are the Government's policies and we take responsibility for them. Mr Abbott's political approach is if I said the sky's blue he would say no it's not, now we that that's the case, we see it on evidence every day and if someone comes up with a fact he finds inconvenient then he simply denies it's a fact, he does that with climate change, all of the time, simply denies that facts exist. So I expected that to be Mr Abbott's political approach, that relentless negativity, that's what he will do.
On this question I anticipate his relentless negativity will continue about the policies that the Government implements so however well Malaysia works the he will say it's a failure, that is what Mr Abbott will do. Well all of that can happen, that's what Mr Abbott wants to do with Australian politics be relentlessly negative. But what I am pointing out today is the real costs if he goes so far that he uses that negativity to stop Government having the power it needs to implement the arrangements it believes are best to deter boats. Now we've got the clearest possible advice that Malaysia has got a strong deterrence effect, the clearest possible advice that the message from Malaysia will be ‘you don't get to Australia'. I want to send that message, I need to have the legislation changed to do it, and the proposition for Mr Abbott is, will he vote for that legislative change understanding that he needs that legislative change too if he were ever Prime Minister to implement the solution that he advocates to the Australian people.
Thank you very much. 



The President of the United States of America, Barack Obama, will undertake a bilateral visit to Australia on 16 and 17 November.
I look forward to welcoming President Obama to Australia. The United States is Australia's closest ally and partner. The Alliance is fundamental to Australia's security and a cornerstone of stability in the Asia-Pacific region. This year marks the 60th anniversary of the Alliance.
The United States is also a vital economic partner for Australia. In addition to its status as the world's largest economy, the United States is Australia's largest source of foreign investment and our third largest two-way trading partner. 
President Obama's visit will come immediately after he chairs the APEC heads of government meeting in Honolulu and before his historic participation in the newly-expanded East Asia Summit in Bali.  
The President's visit will be an important opportunity to renew our close ties and take forward shared objectives, including restoring the health of the global economy and promoting growth and jobs, planning for transition in Afghanistan and developing strong institutions which can help address the region's political, security and economic challenges.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Sport Mark Arbib today congratulated US Open winner Samantha Stosur on her outstanding tournament.
Sam Stosur became the first Australian woman to win a Grand Slam title since Evonne Goolagong-Cawley won Wimbledon in 1980 and the first Australian woman to win the US Open since Margaret Court in 1973.
Her 6-2 6-3 win over Serena Williams topped off an outstanding tournament, including prevailing in the longest-ever women's match at the US Open.
She displayed great skill and poise to overcome obvious nerves to beat the crowd favourite.
She has shown great determination and skill to win the US Open and everyone involved with tennis in Australia will be celebrating with her today.
Her win will encourage the next generation of young Australian players to take to the court.
This is a great achievement and shows the future of Australian tennis is on the rise following other Grand Slam successes earlier this year, with Ashleigh Barty and Luke Saville winning the junior titles at Wimbledon.
The Gillard Labor Government provides almost $1.5 million annually to support Australian tennis, with $960,000 targeted towards increasing participation in the sport. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris Bowen today announced that the Government will introduce legislation to enable the transfer of irregular maritime arrivals to third countries for the processing of their asylum claims.
The amendments will restore the understanding of the third country transfer provisions of the Migration Act that existed prior to the High Court's decision on 31 August 2011.
They will ensure the government of the day can determine the border protection policy that it believes is in the best interests of the nation.
Legal advice has made it clear that the High Court's reasoning would also likely preclude transfers to third countries such as Nauru or Papua New Guinea under the current legislation.
The amendments will ensure the executive is able to fulfil its role of managing an orderly migration program by putting beyond doubt the meaning of the relevant legislative provisions.
The Government's amendments will make absolutely clear Parliament's intention to provide the government of the day with the ability to control Australia's borders by transferring asylum seekers arriving at excised offshore places to third countries.
The amendments will ensure appropriate public accountability from the Minister for any transfer arrangements that are entered into.
The Immigration (Guardianship of Children) Act will also be amended to enable decisions to be made with respect to minors.
These amendments will provide for the Government to proceed with transfers under the Arrangement with Malaysia and the Memorandum of Understanding with Papua New Guinea.
The Government remains fully committed to the Malaysia Arrangement, which, in combination with the proposed assessment centre at Manus Island, provides a genuinely effective plan to remove the product people smugglers are able to sell.
The Arrangement with Malaysia, the first under the Regional Co-operation Framework, provides an opportunity to improve protection outcomes for refugees in the region at the same time as reducing people smuggling activity.
The Government also remains committed to increasing the humanitarian program to 14,750 places per year, should the amendments pass the Parliament and transfers to Malaysia proceed.
The Government intends to introduce the amending legislation into Parliament next week. 



I'm Australia's first female Prime Minister.
And I didn't get here alone.
Today I think of all the women who made my journey possible, all the women who made our journey possible:
A lifetime of support from colleagues and family, mentors and friends like Joan Kirner.
A century of activism by women of matchless courage and resolve.
Some have an honoured place in history like Edith Cowan and Catherine Helen Spence, but there are also the unknown, unnamed women who through countless acts of defiance affirmed the right of every woman to a life of opportunity, freedom and choice.
They did these things inspired by faith in women they would never know and a future they would never see.
We are those women. We are that future.
Today we speak for the women of a thousand generations.
We owe them a debt of gratitude, and we owe to them a responsibility: a responsibility to build on their foundations; to do more, to be more, and to make life better for the women who will come after us; to say and do in our own time the things that were once held to be unthinkable and unachievable.
Friends,
April 25thhas a sacred place in the Australian imagination.
But 19 years before Gallipoli, it was already a significant day in our nation's story.
It was the day Australian women first cast their vote.
The place was South Australia, a laboratory of progressive social change in the late Victorian era.
The Adelaide Advertiser expressed its faith that women would not “leave their electoral privileges unexercised for fear of losing the bloom of their delicate and retiring femininity.”
While the Adelaide Observer pointed out the “air of responsibility” on the faces of the newly enfranchised voters.
That was how our journey in Australian political life began.
Those women are long gone now, and it easy to think of them as quaint figures in their bonnets and elaborate petticoats.
But remember this was the age of Mary MacKillop and Louisa Lawson - strong women in a harsh land.
And whether they knew it or not, they were doing more than just casting a ballot.
They were taking the remarkable and rendering it unremarkable, opening the way toa transformative century that would forever change the way human beings live, govern and think.
The 20thcentury was a century of big political movements and ideologies such as fascism, socialism and modernism.
And yet the movement that outlasted them all, and surpassed them all in what it has achieved for humanity, is feminism  -  the struggle for women's emancipation and equality.
Pioneer Australian feminist Rose Scott observed that the vote itself was only a “piece of machinery” in “battling for the liberty, for the freedom of women”.
It was the key that unlocked the door to everything else:
The right to learn, to work and demand a fair day's pay;
To choose our partners and our family structures, and manage our own health;
To strive to live free of coercion and violence;
And to shape the destiny of the nations in which we live.
Friends,
It was not enough for women to have the right to vote.
Our system of government must reflect the community it serves.
A political system without adequate representation of women is profoundly incomplete, and it is surprising that Australia, with our robust history of pragmatic social reform, and our early heritage of women's rights, didn't get there earlier.
Many countries  -  including places more traditional than our own  -  had a woman serve as prime minister long before we did, like India in 1966, Israel in 1969 and Britain in 1979.
But we've done it now, and I'm not so much proud that it was me as I am proud that it finally happened.
Proud that decades of waiting came to an end.
Proud that having a second, third and fourth female Prime Minister will not have to be anything unusual.
Taking the remarkable and rendering it unremarkable.
Friends,
I didn't set out to be the first female Prime Minister.
If it came from anywhere, it started with two hard-working Welsh migrants who'd been denied opportunity in their own lives and who didn't want the same for their own children.
That those children were both girls only reinforced their determination.
My sister and I were taught by our parents from childhood to think big and imagine we could do anything.
I acted on that belief all my life, whether as a school student resenting the fact that the girls were forced to study home economics while the boys did woodwork and metal work.
As a lawyer standing up for low-paid migrant women in the clothing industry.
Or as a candidate who took three attempts, against a wall of ingrained factional hostility, to enter federal politics.
I was supported by people close to me who told me to believe in myself, but I was lucky that I was never taught my gender would hold me back.
Perhaps it also had something to do with coming from a family where there were no boys, a family where mum worked, and where neither parent ever suggested that our lives or aspirations should be limited by our gender.
Whatever the reasons, I never conceptualise my Prime Ministership around being the first woman to do this job.
I conceptualise my job as being about delivering the things that make a difference for the nation.
But if visibly having a woman to do this job means even one woman or one girl sees a more expansive future, then it is worth it.
I've become so used to high-achieving blokes approaching me somewhat sheepishly, and I know straight away what they're going to ask:
they want an autograph for their daughters.
Because dads like that know the future has to be different for their daughters' generation than it was for their mothers' generation.
No longer can girls and young women be told, as our predecessors were, that politics and the other professions are “no fit place for a woman”.
The first female MP in NSW, Millicent Preston-Stanley, had the perfect riposte when she said:
 “Parliament clearly is a fit place for a woman provided she is fit for Parliament.”
Then and now, women must come to politics with few illusions and sleeves rolled up.
I believe with all my heart that women, as well as men, can thrive in the adversarial atmosphere of politics.
As women, we must never allow ourselves be held to a separate, lower standard because that is just a cruel delusion.
When I look at a Parliament that contains people as diverse as Jenny Macklin, Julie Bishop and Christine Milne, these are not women who received special treatment - nor would they accept it.
They are tough women, resilient women.
They are necessarily tough because politics is tough, and politics is tough because politics is important.
It shouldn't be easy, and it's not.
Not for the women  -  not for the blokes.
The late Virginia Chadwick told a great story about how she mentioned her political aspirations to a senior male MP and was promptly told that she was “the wrong age, the wrong sex and from the wrong place.”
Chadwick proved him wrong in the only possible way  -  by entering politics and becoming a successful and distinguished NSW Cabinet Minister.
It is our best and only response.
Friends,
The women's movement did not free us from every problem.
It simply gave us the means  -  and the opportunity  -  to solve them.
The key to a room of one's own.
Now that so much of the work has been done, let's not allow a myth to develop that women's rights were somehow inevitable.
Or that they are somehow embarrassing or out of date.
We should never allow the gains of the gender revolution to be reversed, whether in health, education, employment, law reform, or politics.
They are too precious.
Too many women gave up too much to achieve them.
Our female pioneers weren't detached intellectuals.
They were practical women with practical goals - goals deeply grounded in principle and informed by centuries of lived experience.
Those have been our goals, too, in the Labor Party and Emily's List.
We sought to bring issues like child care and domestic violence to public attention, not just as women's issues but as issues affecting the whole community.
And we sought to create an embracing range of policies that would bring opportunity to the lives of women every day.
Modern choices for modern women.
Not just those women who are seen as high fliers, but women who work hard every day in the so-called “pink collar” industries such as child care, retail, executive support and the community services:
The women with young children juggling work and family responsibilities;
The women are the sandwich generation  -  looking after growing children and older parents and relatives;
The migrant women struggling to find their way in a new land and new culture;
The senior women who have spent their lives looking after others but find themselves lacking the resources for a dignified old age.
These women trust Labor to deliver the polices that will bring security and opportunity to their lives.
That's why I'm proud to be part of the government that introduced Paid Parental Leave, increased the Child Care Rebate and put Work Choices in the dustbin of history.
I'm proud to lead a government that has introduced the National Carer Recognition Strategy and has committed to a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
I'm proud to lead the Government that is lifting universal superannuation to 12 per cent, and I'm proud to lead a government that is recognising the value of community sector work through the Equal Pay Case.
These are great reforms. They will touch every Australian woman in some way, and they are enduring proof that good government really can change lives.
But our empathy mustn't stop at Australia's own borders.
Women's rights, being human rights, are universal and indivisible.
The suffering of millions of women diminishes us all and obligates us.
As one of the world's top 20 economies, we have a responsibility to contribute to women's equality globally.
That's why we're making new investments in gender equality through the aid program directed towards reducing violence against women.
Indeed, Australia's National Plan to Reduce Violence Against Women is being used by the UN as a template for countries around the world.
We've got a chance to show real global leadership.
Just as in the past we've shown global leadership on issues like landmines, nuclear disarmament and free agricultural trade, so too we can be a leader on women's rights
That's why I was very proud to announce the appointment of an Ambassador for Global Women's Issues this morning.
Australia has a great story to tell, and we should tell it to the women of the world who need our help.
Friends,
When we look at these achievements at home and abroad we see a nation that's come a long way.
We've done great things, especially since the time of the Whitlam government.
Today, 30 per cent of our nation's parliamentarians are women; four of our nine First Ministers; our Governor-General and two State Governors.
We've got more than 30 per cent of board positions across Federal Government agencies held by women, on track to our target of 40 per cent by 2015, and we're changing the regulations so that women can participate in all aspects of military life. 
In the words ofGeneral Peter Cosgrove, men and women will now have an equal right to fight and die for their country.
But the journey of securing women's rights is far from done.
We best honour our achievements by never taking them forgranted, and by ensuring they are passed on  -  intact and augmented  -  to our daughters and our nieces.
This is no time for the momentum to stop.
Friends, there are still too many barriers to women's participation in “last bastion” fields like engineering, mining or the military.
Very few of those roles have essential physical requirements that necessarily exclude women, and many of them are jobs in expanding sectors where the opportunities are abundant and the wages are high.
There is no reason why women can't have their full share of the mining boom.
But perhaps understandably, most attention goes to the corporate sector because it is the most connected and educated leadership elite in the nation.
Yes, we have seen some welcome progress in recent times.
But 115 years since women first cast a vote in this nation, there are still some public companies with not a single woman on their boards, and many more with only one female board member.
Just 13 per cent of corporate board members are female.
Only 3 per cent of ASX 200 companies have female CEOs.
Less than 9 per cent of key executive management positions in ASX 200 companies are women.
This is simply unacceptable and I say to those companies: this is 2011, not 1911 - just get on with it.
There is overwhelming evidence that gender equality is a strong driver of corporate profit and success, but the impact of women's participation is much wider than individual firms. It affects the health of our whole economy.
Australia's participation rate of almost 60 per cent for women is extremely low by international standards.
The World Economic Forum places us 44th in the world for labour-force participation.
That's too many women missing out on the dignity and benefits of work, especially those like single mums and older women who want to work but don't always have the chance.
As the economy grows, our country will need even more skilled workers if we are going to take advantage of the minerals boom and manage the challenges of our ageing population.
In fact, research by Goldman Sachs released demonstrates just what a difference women's participation can make
The study showed that lifting female workforce participation has boosted economic activity in Australia by 22 per cent since 1974, and if we move to European levels of participation, it would boost economic growth by a further 13 per cent - or $180 billion a year.
That's bigger than the size of the whole mining industry combined, which comprises 10 per cent of Australia's GDP
The source of that productivity is right here amongst us, in the suburbs and towns of our nation just waiting to be included, waiting for the skills and the incentives to connect them with the workforce and make them part of Australia's opportunity story.\
And that's exactly what I'm determined to do, because women's political emancipation is not complete unless we also enjoy economic emancipation.
Friends,
Nowhere is the message of women's participation more important than in our political system, because it is our political system which embodies the way the nation sees itself, and women have the right to see themselves in the public face of our nation.
It's all well and good to have a woman in the top job, but that is no substitute for widespread and lasting change across our system of government.
We have 15 houses of parliament in this nation, along with 565 local councils.
The time is coming, if it hasn't already arrived, when anything less than 50 per cent representation will be unacceptable.
That's where Emily's List retains every part of its original urgency and relevance.
I worked on the constitution of this organisation. I was there at the start, and I can say our job is not done yet.
I know it's been a long haul.
I think of stalwarts like Joan Child, Labor's first female MP in the House of Representatives, who turned 90 this year.
Joan has walked a long road and set a wonderful example, and I'd like to tell her that the journey is complete - but it isn't.
This is no time to fold up the banners or put away the cheque book.
There's plenty more to do - and we do it in the same spirit as the women who wentbefore us: with optimism and with pride.
On the historic day that women won the vote in NSW, Louisa Lawson recorded in her scrapbook:
“I have always loved my countrywomen, always admired them, and believed in them.” 
Louisa Lawson believed that Australian women were the most capable women in the world, that they belonged to a nation capable of truly great things.
This is my belief too.
A belief that abides.
A belief that grows stronger every day.
A belief I will hold as long as I live. 



I thank you for your welcome today and for the opportunity to speak with you at a time when the Australian steel industry is thinking deeply about what the future holds.
Steel, of course, is a major player in the national economy.
In 2006-07 all major Australian steel manufacturing activities employed a total of over 91,000 people and generated revenues of $29 billion.
As a government, we are determined to keep the whole economy strong.
Every region.
Every sector.
Including manufacturing and including steel.
The health of the Australian steel industry is critical to our infrastructure, energy, defence, transport, automotive, communications, construction and consumer goods industries. 
In the new high-tech, low-carbon economy we're creating, Australian steel has a strong and sustainable future.
It will continue to be a source of well paid, high skill jobs for Australian workers.
Because nothing matters more than bringing the dignity and benefits of employment to all who want to work.
Friends, with the high dollar and lingering global instability, creating a new economic future won't always be easy.
But it is also a time of incredible opportunity as the rise of Asia brings the weight of global economic growth right to our doorstep.
As we prepare to meet the future, our economic picture is one of fundamental strength and resilience.
Last week's National Accounts show our economy grew by a robust 1.2 per cent in the June quarter, the strongest quarterly growth in four years.
Manufacturing was up 2.8 per cent and Transport, Postal and Warehousing rose by 4.4 per cent.
Importantly for this gathering, metal products rose 14 percent for the quarter and 16 percent in the year to June.
These quarterly results reinforce the broader signs of underlying economic strength we have seen since the GFC.
Strong growth in corporate profits, rising incomes, strong savings, solid consumption growth, unemployment levels that remain low by world standards.
And interest rates lower than when we came to office in 2007.
Above all, business is investing with confidence.
A record $120 billion in 2010-11, with a record $150 billion to follow in this financial year already underway.
Now despite the strong growth figures released last week, it is true that not all sectors of our economy are growing as much as we would like.
Many industries are doing it tough due to consumer caution and the higher dollar, and it is no secret that steel is one of those industries.
That patchwork pattern is a reflection of a global economic transformation taking place all around us.
Friends, for the first time in our history, Australia is not prisoner to the tyranny of distance.
Over the last two centuries, Australia was stranded far from the centres of growth in Europe and North America.
In this century we are in the right place at the right time.
The shift of global growth from West to East is perhaps the biggest economic realignment since the Industrial Revolution.
China is now the second largest economy in the world, and is expected to surpass the US in size by 2020 while India is on track to surpass the US by mid century.
The transformation of the Asian economies from developing to developed economy status represents a massive and lasting shift in the global economic order.
Asia's growth will continue for decades as the nations of the region build homes, factories, roads, railways and power supplies to service billions of people.
That growth means rising demand for Australia's natural resources, lifting our terms of trade to unprecedented levels.
In the longer term, those billions of people will also demand the goods and services that come with life in a more advanced society.
Goods and services like high-end manufactures, pharmaceuticals, legal and financial services, education, health care, fine food and wine.
It is mixture of opportunities and challenges.
The challenges are real and they are painful.
We can face them with courage and determination, shaping events to meet our own ends.
Modernising our economy to meet the demands of the future.
An economy creating new jobs, new opportunity.
With no person, no place, left behind.
Friends, there's been much talk about inquiries and reviews.
Certainly the Coalition's policy review is no answer to the hundreds of millions they pledge to cut from industry assistance.
I believe that manufacturing industry in Australia deserves action now.
That is why this Government has a set of policies to lift productivity and to drive balanced growth across the whole of our economy.
High speed broadband  -  linking every part of Australia to every part of the world.
A tax on the minerals we all own to cut company tax, boost national savings and build regional infrastructure.
Skills and participation, to lift the capacity of all Australians to find work and support a growing economy.
Personal tax reform to reward participation and lift people out of welfare.
Supporting regions like Tasmania and the Illawarra with new infrastructure, investment and partnerships.
And direct support to help industry face the world and achieve its best.
Friends, with world-class research, innovation and infrastructure, we can build a vibrant manufacturing sector as an integral part of the new economy.
We want to see Australia manufacturing investing in new technologies, new business processes and new skills.
Moving up the value chain, and accessing global supply and design networks.
Manufacturing based on comparative advantage and value-adding.
Building on our record of creating value-added products like Colorbond that meet a real market need.
We know that you shouldn't be left do all those things alone.
Targeted, practical, effective assistance will help you get there.
Targeted, practical, effective assistance that's on the table right now.
I am proud that the Australian Government is now spending $9.4 billion on R&amp;D and innovation, 43 per cent higher than the level of spending when we came to office.
Proud that we have redesigned the R&amp;D Tax Incentive to make it a tax credit which will provide assistance to innovating companies when they need it most.
And proud that we are making record investments in the CSIRO and continuing the Cooperative Research Centre program as engine-rooms of innovation in this nation.
Indeed, there are six CRCs working in steel and steel related areas. 
But by far the biggest impact will come from our bold decision to set Australia on the path to a clean energy future.
Friends, in a few hours time I will be introducing historic legislation to put a price on carbon and accelerate our transition to a low carbon economy.
For the first time since the Industrial Revolution, we will start decoupling emissions growth from economic growth.
It's an historic opportunity to propel our manufacturing sector to the forefront of smart, low emissions technology.
Those who stand against the clean technologies that come with a price on carbon are no friends of Australia's manufacturing sector.
The Government understandsthat there is nothing more important to our economy than building strong industries that provide jobs and opportunity for all.
So our carbon package contains special measures to support employment and keep our nation competitive internationally.
Targeted assistance measures to ensure that our industries are in the best position possible to manage the journey.
Forty per cent of the revenue raised from pricing carbon will go towards this purpose.
Our $1.2 billion Clean Technology Investment Programs and the $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation will also provide a major stimulus to a whole new range of manufacturing businesses.
As a result, Australia will be able to seize a competitive advantage in developing and applying the cutting edge technologies of the clean energy future.
Make no mistake, future prosperity lies with those countries that grasp the new frontier of clean energy technologies.
Australian manufacturing is well placed to gain its share of those opportunities.
We saw last month at the Clean Tech Showcase 15 Australian firms telling the world what they can do.
Each producing high-tech, clean energy products such as new lightweight materials that cut energy use.
Exporting to the world. 
Employing high-skill staff  -  in high wage jobs.
And giving a glimpse of what a clean energy future can look like.
But for manufacturing and steel in particular, the challenges of transition demand a more targeted and immediate response.
Friends, I know today there are hundreds of steel workers facing a different future as they leave the industry.
There are more remaining in the industry who wonder what will happen to them as well.
That's why as soon as Blue Scope announced its plans, we were immediately on the ground with $130 million in assistance including $100 million as an advance facility of our $300 million Steel Transformation Plan: the first steel plan for Australia in almost 30 years.
Friends, innovative and efficient manufacturing has great prospects in Australia's economic future.
That's why we've made our Jobs and Competitiveness Program a centrepiece of the Government's carbon pricing scheme.
The Jobs and Competitiveness Program will provide assistance of $9.2 billion over the first three years.
In addition, we will provide free permits to the steel industry covering 94.5 per cent of the impact of the carbon price.
The Government will kickstart investments in energy efficient capital equipment and low-pollution technologies, processes and products through the $1.2 billion Clean Technology Investment and Innovation Programs.
This will assist the sector to transform into an increasingly efficient and sustainable industry in a low-carbon economy.
That is what the Government's Steel Transformation Plan is all about: transformation.
Like the Button plans, it is a bridge to build industry resilience and competitiveness.
It is not a handout.
It is a way of helping your industry muscle-up and face the world with confidence.
For Australian industry to compete in a global market, it must have access to opportunities and be internationally competitive.
The Government has been assisting the sector to access these opportunities and we recognise that more can be done.
We have already worked with almost 500 steel and metal fabricator businesses through Enterprise Connect in business development and technology access.
We have provided $34 million for the Buy Australian at Home and Abroad initiative to ensure that local suppliers directly benefit from strong growth in the resources sector.
And $19.1 million of investment through the 2009 Australian Government Procurement Statement.
In support of those measures, we've appointed the Honourable
Peter Beattie as Australia's first Resources Sector Supplier Envoy to champion Australian industry participation in the resources sector.
We're also appointing respected industry leaders as Supplier Advocates, to champion suppliers in the government marketplace and help industry raise the competitiveness of firms and supply chains.
Supplier Advocates have been appointed for the rail, IT, water and the built environment sectors, while Mr Dennis O'Neill was recently appointed as the Steel Supplier Advocate.
We hope to appoint additional advocates in the coming year, including in the clean technologies and in the resources sector. 
Friends, we are serious about Australian industry being able to compete for work.
From 1 January 2010, an approved Australian Industry Participation Plan has been required for all new Australian Government contracts worth more than $20 million.
We are already working with the Western Australian Government on monitoring the implementation of AIP plans for Chevron's Gorgon and Wheatstone projects and now it's time to look at the next steps.
Firstly, we are considering publishing of AIP plans and outcomes.
This would give industry more confidence about the effectiveness of the AIP approach.
Secondly, we introduced AIP frameworks for Commonwealth procurement items with a value of over $20 million.
We are now considering how to extend the AIP to other Commonwealth- funded projects and programs.
These steps would create more opportunities for Australian industry to compete for the lucrative contracts being let in the resources sector and across the economy more generally.
We also want to ensure that Australian manufacturers aren't forced to unfairly compete against product which has been dumped on our shores.
In June we announced a balanced reform package that will better protect our industries and workforce from unfair trade practices.
The reforms will improve the way we administer global anti-dumping rules and better align our laws and practices with other countries, while ensuring we meet our World Trade Organisation obligations.
The changes will improve access to anti-dumping remedies for businesses, and investigations will be resolved more quickly.
Greater resources and expertise will ensure greater consistency with anti-dumping practices in other countries.
It's one thing for a free trade nation like Australia to face fair competition in the global marketplace.
But we won't let our manufacturers be undercut by nations who supply goods below production cost.
It's not fair, and it's not on.
Friends, these are powerful measures, and they stem from the Government's abiding commitment to strengthen Australian manufacturing and exports.
Reflecting that commitment, the Government we will engage in a series of events between now and the end of the year to support our manufacturing and export industries.
In November, Peter Beattie will organise a resources sector forum to provide practical leadership in linking Australian suppliers to opportunities in the resources sector.
In October, the Tax Forum will have a strong focus on the issues of a two speed economy and whether the tax system can help to address them.
And immediately afterwards, we will also host a Future Jobs Forum to generate a shared understanding of the opportunities and challenges in the economy, with a special focus on sectors under pressure.
During this time of rapid change, dialogue between government, business and unions is essential to bullet-proof Australian jobs.
This day-long event will discuss how Australia can build on its outstanding record of economic growth and job creation in recent years, and best position our nation to benefit from the changing global economy.
It will focus on how to move manufacturing and other sectors further up the value chain - driving business innovation, accessing global export markets, and using the most advanced approaches to management and workforce development.
Friends, in these first decades of the 21stcentury, the global economyis changing more rapidly and completely than any of us imagined was possible.
Technology is also changing.
So is the way we use and create energy.
Each of these poses challenges.
But each of them also offers us the opportunity to create new jobs and prosperity.
My call to you is to continue working to turn this time of change to our advantage.
Together we can build a new economy where manufacturing will always have a place.
A strong economy  -  modernised, open, competitive.
Unafraid of the world.
Unafraid of the future.
I believe Australia is up for that challenge, and together we will succeed. 



Australia will be at the forefront of global efforts to promote the role of women and girls with the creation of an Ambassador to advocate on their behalf.
The Gillard Government today announced career diplomat Penny Williams will be Australia's first Global Ambassador for Women and Girls. 
The Prime Minister said that in the role, Ms Williams will ensure the needs of women and girls are properly represented in Australia's overseas development program and in foreign policy more broadly. 
Women and girls make up two thirds of the one billion people in the world who lack basic literacy skills, with almost 35 million girls world-wide not getting even basic primary-level education.
By improving access to education and health services for women and girls, we are able to lift families and communities out of poverty.
Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd said that the evidence shows that aid spending is more effective when women are central to our investment.
The Ambassador's priorities include co-ordinating and promoting Australia's work to eradicate violence against women, improving access to services for women, the protection of women and girls in conflict zones and increasing the representation of women in leadership roles.
Minister for the Status of Women, Kate Ellis, said as a prosperous and wealthy nation, Australia has a responsibility to work for the safety and opportunity of women and girls across the world.
The gender equality initiatives the Australian Government has driven over the past few years are significant, most particularly the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children which is being used by UN Women internationally as a model for other countries.
Ms Williams will focus particularly on the Asia Pacific region which was ranked lowest in the world by the United Nations Development Programme on a range of gender indicators including access to education, employment and political participation.
At home, Ms Williams will champion the needs of women and girls in Australia's foreign policy thinking.  On the world stage, she will be an international advocate for the Australian Government's work.
On 16 September, Mr Rudd and Ms Williams will attend the APEC High Level Policy Dialogue on Women and the Economy in San Francisco at the invitation of the United States Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton. 



Mr Speaker, this House has been debating climate change for decades.
Parliamentary debate of this issue predates this building itself.
My predecessor as Member for Lalor, Barry Jones, once said this about climate change:
If we are only prepared to plan five years, 10 years, 15 years or 20 years down the track all the dangers that are feared can be avoided. 
Those words were spoken twenty four years ago next week.
We have now had decades of heated public argument and political opinion.
Alongside decades of enlightened scientific research and economic analysis.
After all those opinions have been expressed, most Australians now agree:
 * 	our climate is changing
 * 	this is caused by carbon pollution
 * 	this has harmful effects on our environment and on the economy
 * 	and the Government should act.
And after all that analysis has been done, most economists and experts also now agree the best way is to make polluters pay by putting a price on carbon.
So that is the policy of the Government I lead.
And that is the plan which is before the House now.
A plan for a carbon pricing mechanism which means around five hundred big polluters to pay for every tonne of carbon pollution they put into our atmosphere.
A plan to cut carbon pollution by at least 160 million tonnes a year in 2020.
A plan for tax cuts, increased pensions and increased family payments.
A plan for clean energy jobs and investment ... a plan for a clean energy future for our country.
Today we move from words to deeds.  This Parliament is going to get this done.
There will be a price on carbon from 1 July 2012.
The carbon pricing mechanism which begins its course through our Parliament today is the product of years of public policy discussion and development.
In the late 1990s, the Australian Greenhouse Office published papers setting out how a carbon price might work and sought public submissions.
Then the National Emissions Trading Taskforce established by the States and Territories, and the Shergold report set up by the Howard Government, embarked on extensive consultation processes.
Each generated wide ranging recommendations on designing the mechanism for a carbon price.
Further consultation on detailed design issues occurred through the Garnaut Review, the Green and White Papers, and in response to draft legislation supporting the former Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, defeated in the Senate.
In September 2010, the Government convened the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee to agree a way forward.
In February this year, the Government released a Climate Change Framework for public discussion.
In July, the Government announced the carbon pricing mechanism and, later that month, released draft legislation. 
We received over 300 submissions on the draft bills and had extensive discussions with businesses, non-government organisations, other governments and legal stakeholders.
All adding to the literally thousands of submissions which have been made to Government on this issue over the years.
Many advocates and advisers have worked enormously hard. 
I am grateful for the tremendous energy and seriousness with which so many have treated these exhaustive  -  even exhausting  -  discussions.
All part of the years of research and analysis which underpin the policy embodied in the legislation I introduce today.
I firmly believe no stone remains unturned, no voice unheard.
So this is the plan for Australia's carbon price.
A modern policy approach, with efficient allocation and incentive to innovate, linked to global markets.
A fixed price for the first years  -  a well designed market from 2015.
Assistance for emissions intensive, trade exposed industries.
Evidence-based emissions targets.  Abatement at the lowest economic cost. All adding up to a new bottom line: Where polluters pay.
Mr Speaker, let me turn to the main features of the Clean Energy Bill 2011.
 The Bill provides that the carbon price will be paid by liable entities, which have facilities that emit 25,000 tonnes or more of carbon pollution a year.
It will also cover landfills that emit 10,000 tonnes or more, where these are within a specified distance of landfills that emit 25,000 tonnes or more.
Large users of natural gas will be liable parties in their own right, while natural gas suppliers such as retailers will pay a carbon price for the emissions that arise from the use of the natural gas by smaller customers.
Around 500 entities will have mandatory liabilities under the carbon pricing mechanism.
Around 500 polluters will pay.
To determine liability, the carbon pricing mechanism will draw on information reported under the National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting System, an established measurement system for greenhouse gas pollution developed under the Howard Government and which commenced on 29 September 2007.
The carbon pricing mechanism will not apply to agricultural emissions, legacy emissions from landfill facilities, and emissions from landfill facilities closed before 1 July 2012.
The Bill recognises that there are different ways in which businesses structure their affairs. 
It specifically deals with joint ventures  -  a common feature of resource and energy projects.
And it allows businesses to transfer liability under the mechanism within their corporate groups.
The Bill provides for a fixed carbon price for three years, starting at $23 per tonne of carbon pollution.
A fixed carbon price, set out in legislation, provides business with certainty as our plan begins  -  and allows for a manageable transition to carbon pricing.
After three years, the scheme automatically transitions to a fully flexible cap and trade emissions trading scheme.
From this time on, a cap will be placed on national emissions and the carbon price will be determined by the market.
The Bill also provides for a price cap and a price floor to apply for the first three years of the floating price period.
This will limit market volatility and reduce risk for businesses as they gain experience in having the market set the carbon price.
At the heart of an emissions trading scheme is a cap on carbon pollution.
These caps will guarantee reductions in carbon pollution and allow us to achieve our long term target of an 80 per cent reduction from 2000 levels by 2050.
Achieving this target will take more than 17 billion tonnes of carbon pollution out of the atmosphere between now and 2050.
In 2050 this will cut 9 out of every 10 tonnes of pollution compared to what would happen without our plan.
Under the arrangements that this Bill would put in place, pollution caps will be set by the Government with advice from the expert, independent Climate Change Authority.
If caps are not set, then default caps will apply, which reflect Australia's unconditional, bipartisan commitment to reduce our greenhouse gas pollution by 5 per cent below 2000 levels in 2020.
To provide stability and notice for business, cap-setting regulations will be made well in advance.
The Bill makes provision for the Australian carbon pricing mechanism to interact with credible international efforts to reduce carbon pollution.
International linking gives liable parties access to a broader range of abatement opportunities, which helps contain costs and helps promote international action on climate change.
Liable parties will be able to meet up to half of their obligation through the use of international carbon units.
This will ensure that only robust, environmentally credible international units are allowed to be used for compliance.
The Government understands that there is nothing more important to families than having a job.
So we will take special measures to support jobs and keep Australia competitive internationally.
The Bill makes provision for certain industry assistance measures, which will ensure that our industries are in the best position possible to manage a smooth transition to a clean energy future.
The Jobs and Competitiveness Program will assist emissions-intensive, trade-exposed industries in making that transition to a low-emissions economy, while protecting Australian jobs and competitiveness.
It will allocate around 40 per cent of the revenue raised by the mechanism to this purpose.
The effectiveness of the Program will be subject to ongoing review by the independent Productivity Commission.
The many activities the Program may cover are dealt with in Regulations, to be published in draft by the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency later this month.
These regulations have been designed in close consultation with the affected businesses and can be adapted over time as needed.
The move to a low-emissions economy will pose an adaptive challenge for our energy supply industry. 
The Government will implement measures to underpin a successful energy market transition and maintain secure energy supplies.
The Bill provides for an Energy Security Fund to provide assistance to Australia's most emissions-intensive coal-fired generators.
This will underpin ongoing confidence in the sector and support new  -  and much needed  -  investment in new energy sources and infrastructure.
Assistance will be conditional on meeting tests relating to maintaining energy security, as well as publishing Clean Energy Investment Plans setting out their intentions for new investments and other matters.
In addition to these legislative measures, the Government will seek to close around 2000 megawatts of highly polluting generation capacity by 2020.
Closing down some of our high pollution coal-fired capacity makes room for investment in low pollution plant and starts the transformation of our energy sector in a responsible way.
The carbon pricing arrangements will be supported by robust and independent governance arrangements.
The Clean Energy Regulator will work with liable entities to ensure compliance with the mechanism and is specifically charged with educating and advising them about it and how they may comply.
The Regulator will have appropriate and proportionate powers to monitor compliance, and where problems emerge, to take action to address them.
Enforcement and penalties are focused on those who have obligations under the mechanism  -  not on the general public.
The Regulator is a public body, bound to act in the public interest and in accordance with the constraints imposed by the Bill and by other Commonwealth laws.
In addition to the specific advice to be provided to the Government on issues like pollution caps, the Bill provides that the mechanism will be reviewed over time by the independent, expert Climate Change Authority.
This scrutiny will ensure its ongoing relevance, robustness and integrity.
This Bill is part of the Government's total package of clean energy legislation implementing the carbon pricing mechanism and related reforms.
The Clean Energy Bill 2011 sets out the core provisions of the carbon pricing mechanism  -  its architecture and its review arrangements.
Consequential amendments are made to other Commonwealth laws to integrate the carbon pricing mechanism with existing laws on climate change, economic regulation and taxation.
These changes are set out in the Clean Energy (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2011.
The implementation of an effective carbon price on transport through the fuel taxation, customs and excise system is achieved through the Clean Energy (Fuel Tax Legislation Amendment) Bill 2011, the Clean Energy (Excise Tariff Legislation Amendment) Bill 2011 and the Clean Energy (Customs Tariff Amendment) Bill 2011.
Charges under the carbon price mechanism are dealt with in the Clean Energy (Unit Shortfall Charge - General) Bill 2011, Clean Energy (Unit Issue Charge - Fixed Charge) Bill 2011, Clean Energy (Unit Issue Charge - Auctions) Bill 2011, Clean Energy (Charges - Excise) Bill 2011, Clean Energy (Charges - Customs) Bill 2011,and the Clean Energy (International Unit Surrender Charge) Bill 2011.
The price impact of the Government's plan will be modest  -  but I know family budgets are always tight.
So most of the money raised from the carbon price will be used to fund tax cuts, pension increases and higher family payments.
The Government has taken the opportunity to give pensioners extra help. 
Every older Australian who relies solely on the pension will be among the four million Australian households who get a “buffer” for the budget, with the extra payments being 20 per cent higher than their average extra costs.
And the Government has taken the opportunity for tax reform as well.
We've more than tripled the tax free threshold.
Combined with other changes, this means that 450 000 people  -  who earn between $16 000 and $20 500  -  will have all their tax cut.  They will now pay no tax.
A tax reform which rewards work  -  which builds on our Budget changes to lift workforce participation and spread the benefits and dignity of work to every Australian.
The assistance to households provided through the tax and transfer system is delivered through the Clean Energy (Household Assistance Amendments) Bill 2011, theClean Energy (Tax Laws Amendments) Bill 2011 and the Clean Energy (Income Tax Rates Amendments) Bill 2011.
The Climate Change Authority is set up by the Climate Change Authority Bill 2011, which also sets out its functions.  Similarly, the Clean Energy Regulator is established by the Clean Energy Regulator Bill 2011.
Mr Speaker, we govern in a world of change, a world that is transforming.
My task as Prime Minister, my Party's task in Government, this Parliament's task as it meets today, is to lead our country through this transformation.
Not to hide from change, to make change work for us.
To use our strength today to build strength for the future.
The jobs of the future are clean energy jobs.
Employment is projected to grow strongly with a carbon price.
Around 1.6 million jobs to be created to 2020 ... a further 4.4 million to 2050.
The investment of the future is clean energy investment.
All up, the carbon price will support $100 billion worth of investment in renewables in the next forty years.
The Australian economy will continue to prosper while cutting carbon pollution.
Real gross national income per person is expected to increase from today's levels by around $9,000 per person to 2020 and more than $30,000 per person by 2050.
If we can do all this:
Cut carbon pollution.
Keep growing our economy.
Keep growing jobs.
Why wouldn't we act?
So the Government will act.
And the Parliament should support us.
Mr Speaker, there is a reason votes on legislation in this House are recorded.
There is a reason these matters are decided in an open vote.
It is so every member in this place can be judged.
Judged on the decisions they make here, judged on where they stand on the great issues of our national debate.
Judged by every Australian. 
Judged now, judged in the future.
Because the final test is not: are you on the right side of the politics of the week or the polls of the year. 
The final test is this: are you on the right side of history.
And in my experience, the judgement of history has a way of speaking sooner than we expect.
To newer members of this place, I say, just ask those more senior members who sit opposite.
Ask those who voted in this house against Medicare in 1983.
How smart did that look in 1984?
Ask those who voted in this house against universal superannuation in 1992.
How smart did that look in 1993?
Ask those who voted for Work Choices in 2005.
How smart did that look in 2007?
Yes, the judgement of history comes sooner than we expect.
And the demand for policy leadership comes hard on its heels.
Mr Speaker, nothing hard ever gets easier by putting it off.
And if you don't do what is right for the nation, then you shouldn't be in Parliament.
It's time to deliver the action on climate change we need.
To do what is best for Australian families, what is best for future generations, what is best for this country.
To act on climate change. 
To cut carbon pollution. 
To build a clean energy future. 
To create clean energy jobs.
I see a great clean energy future for our great country. 
I know we can get there.
I commend the Bill to the House.



HOST: Julia Gillard, welcome.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: What will you do if Tony Abbott rejects your call to amend the law to allow offshore processing?
PM: Well I'm going to keep speaking to Mr Abbott and providing briefings to get him to work with the Government to amend the law. So Chris let's take this in order, the position is we will bring amendments to the Parliament next week to the Migration Act, we'll brief Mr Abbott on those amendments on Friday, it's our expectation he'll be able to sit there and have a full briefing and we are simply saying to Mr Abbott whatever is his preferred plan in relation to refugees and asylum seekers, the Migration Act needs amending to give government the power to have people processed offshore with legal certainty and he should work with us to do that.
HOST: Surely, but what if he says no?
PM: Well I'm going to keep putting that position to the Leader of the Opposition.
HOST: But it looks likely that he will say no and you must have a fallback position?
PM: First things first, it's a matter for the Leader of the Opposition and his judgement.
HOST: Do you regret dismantling the Pacific Solution?
PM: This is not an easy policy area, it's been vexed in our national debate for a long period of time. When Chris Bowen came forward with this innovative plan to work with a third country, to work with Malaysia for a transfer agreement, I did think it was a new way forward, I do think it sends the strongest possible message of deterrence and that's why we're working to implement it including amending the Migration Act.
HOST: That's all been patched up because you had a solution that did stop the boats, 288 boats in five years before you came into government, after you came into government  -  288 people I should say, after you came to government, 11,600. You had a solution, you dismantled it, surely that's where the problem started?
PM: Well Chris I think that's a gross over-simplification of all of the things that have happened, for example you've forgotten the civil war in Sri Lanka which got people on the move, so there are a broad range of circumstances here, global circumstances, that cause people to move. Regional-
HOST: So it was all push factors?
PM: Regional circumstances that cause people to move-
HOST: It had nothing to do with you?
PM: Chris, I don't think you can pretend that there wasn't unrest in Sri Lanka that caused people to get on the move and cause us-
HOST: Can you pretend that the changes that you made had no effect?
PM: Chris, let's be frank about this. There will always be global factors and regional factors that cause people to get on the move, we've seen one in our own region in the last few years in relation to Sri Lanka, we are still seeing people from Afghanistan turn up on our shores in boats, we're seeing increasing numbers from Iran, so this is a problem that moves and changes depending on global circumstances and what's happening in different parts of the world. So that is the circumstance that we deal with.
There will always be one big pull factor for Australia which is it's a very desirable place to live, we understand that. We've got to get our regional settings right which is why we work through a regional process and we've got to work for new innovations that send strong deterrence messages and that's what the Malaysia arrangement is.
HOST: At the heart of this, when people look at this externally and they see a solution (inaudible) and they see the boats start to rise up with your Government coming into power, then they hear about East Timor and now the Malaysia solution, isn't the question one of competence, that your Government has not handled this competently?
PM: Well at the moment the question is one of law and that is the circumstances we find ourselves in after the High Court decision and Chris we are looking to put ourselves back in the position we believed we were legally before the High Court decision and which the Howard Government believed itself to be in and acted upon. So the High Court decision was unexpected and I thought it was disappointing, now we do need to act to amend the legislation so that we can implement this new and innovative arrangement with Malaysia which will send a strong deterrence message.
And let's be very clear about the advice to us about past policies and plans. The advice to us is that boat turn arounds worked, the advice to us is that the Pacific Solution obviously had a sort of shock factor when it was first put into effect but now people smugglers know that you go and you get processed in Nauru, well, you know you can get resettled in Australia.
HOST: Now on carbon tax, of course you said that you are on the right side of history but again, isn't the problem that you've got there not one of whether or not you've got a good policy, it's the problems you've got with your own legitimacy on the question because before the last election you said there wouldn't be a carbon tax?
PM: Well Chris, once again let's have a go at the facts, I know that they're not fashionable sitting here in Parliament House when we go to Question Time everyday and listen to some of the nonsense spoken by the Opposition. At the last election I spoke to the Australian people about action on climate change. I've always believed that putting a price on carbon was the best way of doing that. I've brought to the Parliament a package that has a fixed price for the first three years, effectively a carbon tax, and then gets to the emissions trading scheme that I spoke about during the election campaign.
HOST: During the election campaign you talked about community consensus and a citizen's assembly, that you need to build community consensus before you've moved on.
PM: During the election campaign I talked about the need for action on climate change and when I said the words during the election campaign about not having a carbon tax I meant every word of it. Then in this Parliament, which I didn't expect, I had the opportunity to act and to achieve what this nation has been striving for for a long period of time now. When I had the opportunity in the Parliament yesterday to introduce the legislation I spoke of words of my predecessor Barry Jones more than 20 years ago taking about action on climate change. So this is the time to get it done and we will legislate through this Parliament.
I talked yesterday about the judgement of history but Chris I think we are going to get to a situation very soon where Mr Abbott is in a position that is not only on the wrong side of history but he's going to be going to Australian families and saying ‘I want your tax cut back, I want your family payment increase back'.
HOST: The questions that have been put to you are perhaps questions of competence and legitimacy that go beyond any policies that you might have. How do you overcome those sorts of problems, that the questions are about you and not your policies?
PM: Well, and how do you put that Chris? I mean let's get real about examples here. Of course the Opposition uses language about legitimacy, it is still smarting -
HOST: You don't think you have any questions for that?
PM: Well the Opposition is still smarting from not being the government and so they use words of abuse and they speak about legitimacy. Our democracy is one where government is formed in the House of Representatives and government has been formed. And I serve as Prime Minister because I command a majority in the House of Representatives, that's how our democracy works. And I really think it's probably  -  people should think to themselves when they hear these cat calls from the Opposition, well what's their actual answer to some of these policies? Mr Abbott came to the Parliament today to give his speech on carbon pricing  -  30 minutes, one sentence about his alternate policy which was factually incorrect.
HOST: But you reject any suggestion of any notion that there is a problem with your Government in convincing the people of the Australian electorate that you have problems with competence and legitimacy?
PM: I'm well aware, Chris, that we are Government with a lot of hard work to do, but we are a Government that is governing legitimately in accordance with the rules of our democracy. Mr Abbott's insults are about his political advantage rather than bringing to the Australian people any alternate policies and plans and so his insults should be seen as a thin veneer to cover up that lack of policy alternate.
HOST: Is being Prime Minister what you'd imagined it would be?
PM: Look I had a very good insight into this job before I took it; I understood what it would be and I understood the weight of the responsibility that would come with it. And this job isn't about wandering around doing what's popular and it's not about worrying about next fortnight's opinion polls, it's about working through the best thing for this nation for the long term and we are doing that. And I understand how difficult the carbon pricing debate is, no one would understand that more than me, but when I spoke those words yesterday about being on the right side of history I was absolutely convinced they were true, I am convinced they're true, just the same way they were true when Labor brought Medicare in and just the same way they were true when we brought superannuation to this country, bitterly contested by the Liberals every step of the way.
HOST: Julia Gillard thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



Business and union leaders in the resources sector have committed to work in partnership with the Australian Government to increase productivity and competitiveness, create jobs and improve the skills of workers in the sector. 
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Jobs, Skills and Workplace Relations, Senator Chris Evans, industry and union representatives today discussed the challenges of labour and skills demand, attraction and retention of employees, enhancing productivity and collaborative workplace relations.
The Australian resources sector is facing a number of significant challenges at a time when there are historically high levels of capital investment.  Many of these challenges relate to employment in the sector.
At a meeting held at Parliament House in Canberra, all participants acknowledged their common interest and shared responsibility in supporting initiatives and strategies to ensure sustained growth in this economically vital sector.
To this end, the parties agreed to form the Resources Advisory Council.
The participants acknowledged that the challenge of productivity, skills and labour supply will require a multi-faceted approach.
Membership of the Council will include key business, employers and unions in the resources sector. The Australian Mines and Metals Association and the Australian Council of Trade Unions will be represented on the Council and will provide recommendations to Government on final memberships.
The Council will meet twice per calendar year and will have the ability to develop recommendations to inform government and industry as appropriate.
The Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations will provide secretariat services for the new body.
Terms of Reference were agreed which will see the new body discuss and develop recommendations where appropriate for industry and/or government to:
 * 	Boost multi-factor productivity and competitiveness;
 * 	Promote meaningful and collaborative workplace relations practices;
 * 	Reinforce Australia's role as a competitive and reliable supplier of resources;
 * 	Enhance skill development, job readiness and industry attractiveness for prospective employees;
 * 	Address sector workforce challenges including labour and skill shortages;
 * 	Strengthen employment pathways into the resources sector including by training, apprenticeships, up-skilling or re-skilling workers who have recently become retrenched and/or unemployed;
 * 	Increase the employment of suitably skilled Australian workers for major projects;
 * 	Facilitate and enhance skills development opportunities for existing employees;
 * 	Retain skills and knowledge through effective employer/union and employee engagement strategies;
 * 	Promote the sector as a long-term career destination for a diverse range of Australians;
 * 	Enhance both the attraction and retention of Indigenous workers and women workers in the sector at all levels;
 * 	Receive reports on the work of the Steering Group overseeing the implementation of the NRSET recommendations and monitoring the work of the House of Representatives inquiry into the use of fly-in fly-out workforce practices. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins me on the line this morning. Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning Philip.
HOST: Big week for you, carbon tax bills, it's fair to say that the fate of things hangs on these bills, isn't it?
PM: This is a very important piece of legislation and I was very pleased to bring it to the Parliament on Tuesday. This is about cutting carbon pollution, the right thing by our environment, but also making sure we've got the clean energy jobs of the future. Now of course we've been having a vigorous national conversation about this and that is continuing in the Parliament. Mr Abbott made his address yesterday, but I do note today in the newspapers the Australian Industry Greenhouse Network is confirming what the Government has said for some time, that Mr Abbott's carbon plan is twice as expensive as the Government's and we are concerned that his plan would cost families $1300 a year.
So we'll keep having this debate, but the legislation will go through the Parliament and what people will see on 1 July next year is a price on carbon, they'll see taxes cut, family payments increased and pensions increased.
HOST: It's not a policy that you were once enthusiastic about, I can understand that people change their minds and that's fair enough, that's what politics is about and to some degree your hand's been forced by the agreement with the Greens. Why do you think this policy though has been so hard to sell to the public? The public think we should do something about climate change, they don't think we should have a carbon tax and that's been pretty clear. Why is that gap there?
PM: Philip I'm not sure I'm going to accept your version of history, but I will say this-
HOST: I'm happy for you to contest it, you're on record as being not enthusiastic about the carbon tax from the beginning.
PM: Look, let me just go through that. When I spoke to in the Parliament, I referred back to my predecessor, my very great predecessor in my local electorate, Barry Jones, who was talking to the Australian Parliament about carbon pollution 24 years ago, so this has been a long debate.
Prime Minister Howard went to the 2007 election with an emissions trading scheme-
HOST: Exactly. We were all in agreement once, but we're not anymore. Why?
PM: I think we're in agreement about some of the central points, I believe Australians generally agree that climate change is real, that we should accept what the scientists are saying to us and they do want to see Government do something about it, they want to see action. Of course across all of those many years of debate there's been policies and plans put and during the last election campaign I spoke to the Australian people about an emissions trading scheme, where you cap the amount of carbon pollution in your economy and a market which buys and sells permits sorts it all out.
Now we're going to get to that cap and trade scheme, via a mechanism I didn't foresee in the election campaign, a three year fixed price, effectively like a tax, but we will get to that emissions trading scheme. But what's it all about, what is this mechanism for, why would you put a price on carbon? Well it sends a signal to the big polluters who are paying the price to change, to innovate, to work out how to do what they do whilst generating less carbon pollution. And one of the great privileges of this job is I get to meet really smart business people who are already designing the policies and plans that they'll swing into operation to cut carbon pollution and cut the amount they have to pay for that carbon pollution.
Whereas at the moment they can just put that carbon pollution into the atmosphere for nothing, so there's no incentive for change.
HOST: Do you accept that the message, if that is the message, has not been sold well, that it's not been communicated well and do you accept yourself, personally, responsibility for that?
PM: I'm always happy to accept responsibility for my role and my actions. There's been a huge fear campaign here, a huge fear campaign and a concerted attempt to distort the facts. We've seen revealed in the newspapers over the last two days, and there's more in today's Sydney Morning Herald, about a plan basically involving Premier O'Farrell's office and the Daily Telegraph, where a story was run  -  striking fear into people's hearts about public transport fares rocketing up  -  and it simply wasn't true. And all of the emails between the political staffers in Mr Abbott's office and Premier O'Farrell's office are now there for everybody to read about how this story was concocted.
But what we don't know yet is what Premier O'Farrell did personally and what Mr Abbott did personally to help concoct this story. There are some questions there for them to answer.
HOST: Do you hope that once the bills are passed, the numbers are there to pass it, do you hope that once the bills are passed and the earth doesn't end and the sky doesn't fall in, that you might hope for a reversal in poll fortunes on this issue?
PM: Big reforms aren't easy. If we look across our history, whether it was Medicare when Labor introduced that against the bitter opposition of the Liberal Party, or whether it was superannuation where we were told by the Liberal Party this would bankrupt the nation. Big reforms aren't easy, this is a very big reform and it's a vital reform for our nation's future, for our environment and to create clean energy jobs.
I think the best way for Australians to judge this reform is through their own lived experience and I'm very confident on 1 July next year, when people get up in the morning and rush round and get ready to go to work and get the kids to school and all of the things people have to do in the early hours of the day, that people will find the world the same, except they will see a cut in their taxes and they will see an increase in their family payments and they will see an increase in their pensions and we will see businesses changing so they create less carbon pollution.
HOST: There's been a lot of comment about the level of vituperation directed against you personally and the Office of the Prime Minister, with that show on television etcetera. There been many people who have pointed to the level of debate at the moment being of a nasty edge that's almost unprecedented in Australian politics. Some have said it's due to some deep seated misogyny in the Australian public. Do you think that's right?
PM: This is a debate that I know is going on in media and in the community. For me I don't spend much of my time thinking about that-
HOST: Might be hurtful for you though?
PM: Look, I've got very broad shoulders and what I spend my time thinking about and doing is implementing the policies and plans our nation needs. I didn't come to this position hankering for people to say nice things about me every day, I came to this position absolutely determined to do what we need to as a nation to make sure that we've got opportunity for all, right around the country, whether that's the chance to get a job, the chance to get a better job, the chance for a kid from a disadvantaged home to get a great education. And to make sure we don't leave people behind, which is why I'm so passionate about things like a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
And I also don't think it's in us as a nation to really cower in the face of the challenges of the future, which is why it's so important we stump up to big changes, but important changes, like pricing carbon. So it's those things that drive me every day, not debates about what is said in politics, or personal matters. It's not what drives me.
HOST: Just a couple of things, because we are running out of time. The Reserve Bank, Glenn Stevens recent pay rise, the Treasurer, Mr Swan says it wasn't in line with community expectations and he's intervened to strip the Bank's independence in relation to setting these salaries. Do you think the Glenn Stevens pay rise was warranted?
PM: I'd absolutely agree with the words of the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan.
HOST: Poker machines, are you going to push ahead with this? Andrew Wilkie says he'll pull out from the agreement if you don't pass this poker machine legislation early next year. Are you going to the wall on this one?
PM: Look, the important thing here is the problem gambling that we see and the way it impacts on people's lives. We started on this policy thinking about change before the last election, before Mr Wilkie was elected to the Parliament and that's because so many Members of Parliament, including me, in my capacity as a local member, see too many people turning up at our electorate offices absolutely desperate, because they or a member of their family has a big problem with poker machine addiction. And what we're trying to do here, the aim, is simply to make it transparent to people how much they're at risk of losing. If you do to the horse races and you say I'm going to put a bet on a horse, then you know how much you're going to lose-
HOST: So the legislation's going ahead?
PM: Yes, but I do want to be clear about the purpose, because I think there's some misunderstanding here. It's about people setting limits for themselves, so if you go to the horses and say I'm putting a $10 bet down, you know you can lose $10, this is about going and using the poker machines and saying how much is it that I am prepared to gamble today.
HOST: We'll have to leave it there Prime Minister. But you're backing yourself and from your point of view I'm sure you hope your wagers come in. I do appreciate your time this morning. Thank you very much.
PM: Thanks Philip. 


Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, friends and fellow Australians.
In September last year I was in Ben Chifley's Bathurst home.
In a room where the self-educated author of Labor's greatest words  -  “the light on the hill”  -  once read in the evening.
In March this year I was in John Curtin's Cottesloe home.
In the suburb where a gun carriage stood in 1945, bearing Australia's greatest leader, under the stars of Australia's flag.
Today we are in the city where John Curtin and Ben Chifley worked and lived and served our country.
On the street where they walked to work.
To witness a humane and humble tribute to two great men.
And they were great men.
Two great men of courage and conviction in their ideas.
Yes, John Curtin was jailed in Victoria in 1916 fighting conscription in the Great War.
Yes, Ben Chifley was a “lily-white” who lost his job in the New South Wales rail strikes the following year.
And they were two great men of vision for all Australians.
Men of politics, leaders of party.
But more than that, Prime Ministers, patriots.
Leaders who served the whole nation, in war and in peace.
And two mates whose trust and sympathy speaks to us still.
Whose mateship shines in Don Stephens' famous photograph and is enshrined in this tribute we unveil today.
Looking at his icon of these men, it's impossible not to reflect on what were they saying to each other as they walked to work that day.
They were men of their time. 
They might well have been talking about billiards and pipe smoke.
Reminiscing about the fall of the Bruce Government fifteen years earlier the way old Billy Hughes led dissidents away from the conservative Government, including one wavering MP, who he locked in a long billiard game in Old Parliament House so the government loyalists couldn't get to him during the dinner break.
They were Labor politicians. 
There's every chance they were talking about how to manage the colleagues!
When Curtin made Arthur Calwell Minister for Information he said: “He's been fighting with newspapers all this time  -  now he can learn to live with them.”
Of course, we can't know.
But here today I like to think I do bring some insight.
From my own knowledge of Curtin and Chifley.
From what I've seen in the houses they lived in at home.
From what I feel of them in my Canberra lodgings now, where they must have met so often, where Curtin lived and died.
From the share I take in their succession.
Because they were true leaders, I can't help but believe they would have been talking about the future.
And in turn, that means, they would have been talking about us.
So I hope this remarkable tribute serves not only to prompt reflection on what they might have been talking about then.
I hope it also serves to prompt reflection on what they thought we would be doing for Australia now.
Friends, life is long.
With history's hindsight, we see two great Australians, without fear or blemish.
But Curtin and Chifley were tested by their times.
One biographer wrote of Chifley's failures in Opposition “he had responsibility far too long ever to be a destructive oppositionist”.
The engine-driver who became a nation-builder couldn't become a wrecker.
Another writer reminds us that Curtin lost an election in 1937 “when he stood for air strength for Australia”.
Four years later the bombing of Darwin brought a terrible vindication  -  and an education in the bitter ironies of politics and war.
Tested by their times, but history judges them well.
Their courage became its own reward.
John Curtin died in Canberra, in the Lodge. 
At his grave in Karrakatta we can read this tribute:
His country was his prideHis brother man his cause.
Ben Chifley died in Canberra, in the Hotel Kurrajong.
On his tomb in Bathurst we can read this tribute:
If an idea is worth fighting for, no matter the penalty, fight for the right, and truth and justice will prevail.
John Curtin and Ben Chifley live in our minds and hearts still.
I am very proud to unveil this new tribute now.



Friends. I'm with you today, as your Labor Leader, to discuss our Labor values.
Values 120 years old, values that have shaped this nation.
Values that inspire us today and will inspire us tomorrow.
Values that we have fought for in the past and that we will fight for to our last breath.
Every day, Australians demand that we answer the most important question they can ask of any government: What do you stand for?
They are right to ask.
It is their Government, not ours.
And we should welcome the question, because our answer is clear.
Opportunity for all, not as a theoretical concept but as a call to arms, to be expressed every day in making sure men and women have jobs and that every Australian, child and adult, has access to the transformative power of education, no matter where they come from or what their circumstances in life.
Not leaving any one behind, once again not said as a platitude but as a powerful statement that age, disability, ill health shouldn't spell the end of decent life.
Recognising our responsibility to the Australians of the future, to Australia's children. 
Just as parents work hard to give their children a better life, we work hard to give Australian's children a better life.
Our sense of love and responsibility for the nation's children drives us on to make the social, economic and environmental reforms which will create Australia's future prosperity and share its benefits. 
Proud to call ourselves a Labor Government and proud of our union heritage and union links, always ready to fight against conservative forces, who simply don't accept our core values and who represent the interests of the privileged and the powerful and friends, they are circling again, as the Liberal Party prepares to launch another attack on the rights of Australians at work. 
These are our values, our Labor values, the values I have put at the centre of our government and at the centre of what we strive to achieve for the nation.
They are my answer to that great question, ‘what do you stand for', in words.
But we must always answer that question with deeds as well.
As we did three days ago, when I stood in the House of Representatives and introduced the Clean Energy Future Bill 2011.
As we did four years ago, when I stood in the House of Representatives and introduced the Fair Work Bill 2007.
On our best days our values and deeds come together to dramatically change lives and change futures.
Being our best means learning from the days when we could and should have done better.
My responsibility as the Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party is this: To do everything in my power to ensure our Party is always its best self.
Being our best means facing up to some hard truths.
We meet in difficult days for social democracy  -  at home and around the world.
We have lost government in Western Australia, Victoria and New South Wales.
In the United Kingdom and New Zealand our sister political parties are in Opposition.
In Europe the tide runs against the Centre-Left.
And President Obama, whilst confronting far more grievous economic challenges, faces comparable problems with hard right wing activism that is long on complaints and conspiracy theories and short on solutions.
The grand paradox of this lean season for social democracy is that it is occurring when the catastrophic global costs of markets focussed on profit but devoid of responsibility have never been more evident.
And when the power of ideas about social and corporate responsibility enlivens so many individuals and so much of public debate.
It falls to us to analyse and understand this contradiction of our age.
We live in an age which at its best is one of individual empowerment and at its worst is one of stress, anxiety and confusion.
A primary school child using a computer at school has more information available at his or her finger tips than was conceivable at any other time in human history.
That child will grow to be a citizen who expects, indeed who cannot even imagine, a world that fails to offer immediate answers, customization, options, choice.
But at the same time, for too many people, the lived reality of a world of so much promise is actually one of feeling adrift in a sea of information and overwhelmed by too much change. 
The lived reality is one of feeling that they have lost control of their own lives.
Indeed, I believe this clash of the choices of modernity with our need for security in life is one of the reasons that there is a sense of anxiety in the community.
These trends of our age are much discussed and analysed.
And in that analysis, many commentators have predicted that the social democracy has past its use by date.
That our notions of collective action, solidarity, unionism, are incompatible with today's individualism. 
Friends, I am here today to say to you, that fashionable thinking is a mistake  -  indeed a grave error driven by a misunderstanding both of our collective traditions and of our ability to apply them to the contemporary world.
Our collective tradition began more than a century ago.
Working men and women came together in trade unions, understanding that collective action gave them a power they would never have alone.
And that tradition of unionism and collective action gave birth to our political party.
Ours is a political party unashamedly built with collective action as our foundation stone.
Its mission, to end want for working people. 
Its method, to stick together.
A collective method, given expression in many forms, from locality branches, to affiliation with trade unions, to the binding discipline of Labor caucus. 
At every level we gave expression to our belief that numbers bring strength.
To end want we have argued for collective action through Government, through a fair distribution of risk.
Think of the great Labor achievement of Medicare. 
At its heart Medicare was born because we said that the cost of ill health should not fall on and break an individual, it should be shared by each of us. 
That the most healthy amongst us had an obligation to share the burdens of the most unwell. 
That life is so full of unknowable risks and we would share those risks so that sudden illness won't bankrupt a family.
And in our historic mission of ending want we have achieved so much. 
From the creation of the old age pension to our plans for national disability insurance.
In the second half of our existence, we aimed higher.
We have never left our concern about defeating poverty and sharing risk behind but we have rightly worked for more. 
We have striven for a fair distribution of opportunity. 
We have worked to ensure we have a resilient modern economy that offers people not just a job but the prospect of better jobs and we have worked for an education system that gives working class kids a chance.
As others have put it before me: the light on the hill now shines from a lamp on the desk.
Friends, this mission of fairly distributing opportunity and sharing risk is not yet done.
It won't be done until a child born into welfare passivity and family dysfunction gets as good an education as the child of a multi millionaire.
It won't be done until an Indigenous boy or girl has the same ability to get a job, a house, to build a good life as their non-indigenous friends.
It won't be done until we fairly share the costs of addressing risks, like the risk of being born with a disability or the risks of mental illness or of the incapacity that can come with ageing.
Because fairly sharing opportunity and risk requires constant effort.
Working together to strengthen and modernise the economy so Australians have the benefits of jobs and ever better jobs. 
Yesterday's Snowy Hydro scheme is today's national broadband network. 
Yesterday's dollar float is today's carbon pricing.
Working together as well to revolutionise education, from early childhood through schools to apprenticeships to university. 
We should never rest and settle for second best in the world when it comes to quality and equity in education.
I feel this deeply with every fibre of my being. 
If I lived in any other age it would have been impossible for me to be standing here. 
Education made me. 
Without great schools and Whitlam's reforms of university education, I would not be here today. 
Every child today deserves this same chance.
The need for collective action is with us today and it will be with us tomorrow. 
But even as we still strive to achieve these great things together, our understanding of our mission needs to deepen and our aim needs to be higher again.
Understand, collective action was never simply an end in itself: we saw strength in shared endeavour in politics, we saw value in sharing risk through government, for a reason.
Because we wanted to empower “the great mass of the people”, all those the conservatives would leave behind. 
And as communities, families and individuals have embraced the benefits and empowerment collective action has brought them, they have embraced new opportunities and demanded new choice.
So today our ethos of collective action must respond to individual needs and demands for choice and control.
For a long period of time, our great movement believed that if you could lift incomes and end poverty that everything else necessary to get people on the road to a better life would follow. 
Now we understand that for our most disadvantaged, welfare support alone is not the answer. 
Of course, ensuring people have life's basics is necessary but change only comes by marrying a requirement for personal effort and responsibility with the customised supports that give people a hand up and out of poverty and dysfunction. 
For a long period of time, our great movement believed that the highest aspiration of working people was for a decent job. 
Now we understand it can be to run a decent small business.
Protecting rights at work will always be central but building skills, rewarding enterprise, encouraging the embrace of risk, helping people be their own boss, is part of the dream of working people too. 
And for a long period of time, our great movement believed that one size should fit in all in service provision, that those seeking choice were undermining collective aspirations.
Now we understand that desire for choice is rightly strengthening not abating.
In this age we need to pursue our historic mission while also embracing choice and creating ways to give individuals more control.
Australians want to make their own choices and control their own lives.
But this can only happen if the power of collective action, in creating opportunity, sharing risk and not leaving any one behind, is joined to meaningful individual empowerment, joined to personal choices and control.
This is our Labor mission today.
Cradle to grave opportunity.  Cradle to grave care for each in the face of life's risks.
Cradle to grave shared expectations of personal responsibility met with a shared resolve to leave no one behind.
Collective action used to create great jobs, to build great infrastructure, to deliver great public services  -  and then collective action used to empower individuals to choose between these good things.
Some Australians have always had the resources to make every choice they want.
It is our task to ensure that every Australian has every choice.
That the choices made by our people are never limited by the circumstances of birth or where they live or what they do for work.
So at every stage, our great party of collective action must embrace new ways of enabling individual empowerment.
Friends, we are a movement in politics, not a school of philosophy. 
So we must answer the question, what does this mean in practice for policy and Government? 
The example which is closest to my heart is MySchool.
Publishing data on school performance has been both popular and controversial  -  everyone knows that.
But what I hope everyone also knows is why I did it.
Because this is a reform which reflects my deepest determination and is based on the experiences of my own life.
I don't forget Unley High, where so much of my success in life began, but where other kids sat at the back of the room and did “make work” and were left behind.
And this is a reform which exemplifies Labor's modern approach of joining collective action with choice for individuals.
Because it combines public funding for the education of every child with publication of new information about every school.
MySchool isn't just a conversation starter motivated by education quality and equity.
It is an enabler of millions of choices powered by more information than ever before.
It enables individual choices about which school is best for your child, community choices about how to make a school better, national choices about how to improve all schools.
It is something I believe in, something I fought for, something which together we have achieved.
And MySchool  -  along with many other policies we have pursued and many more which lie ahead  -  rests on my confidence that social democrats, with our understanding of social solidarity and our sympathy for individual freedom, are best placed to respond to the needs of today.
Working with my team, it is my job to shape our shared future.
But I also keenly understand that in this age, as our Government writes the story of our collective future, every individual Australian wants to write the story of their own lives with more choice and control than ever before.
This approach  -  combining the strengths of collective action and the opportunities of individual choice  -  needs to live and breathe in our political party as well as our government.
Just as the Australian people demand customisation, options and choice in policy, so they demand this in politics as well.
Some hold that the historic structures of the Labor Party are sufficient to the complex and personalised politics of today.
I do not. 
I believe we must also embrace choice and control within our political party  -  not just collective action.
Our National Conference at the end of this year is an important opportunity to do this.
This will never distract us from governing but we do have a responsibility always to renew ourselves and our organisation.
I look forward to the debate in December in Sydney.
I am determined that we have a fair dinkum Labor Party conference, not an American-style convention.
I want there to be debates, I want there to be votes, I want there to be surprises. 
And so that the debate can be a real one, and the openness genuine, I do want to put forward my proposals for Party reform today.
Not brought down from a mountain and written in stone.
But brought up from the members, through an election review I initiated, in a process I began.
Here's what I'll propose.
First, we should aspire to be a growing Labor Party with new and active members.
So I'll set the Party a challenge  -  recruiting eight thousand new members next year  -  and I want the Party Conference to sign up to the challenge.
Second, we should embrace a community organising approach to ensure that we are growing and that we are connected to the community.
So I'll move that we increase our local connections to Labor supporters by trialling community preselections, or primaries, in some seats. 
I understand and respect the concerns of those who want to ensure that primaries are about community not a vehicle for maximising the voice of special interest groups.  The trials will be a genuine learning experience and are important to working through these concerns.
Third, we have to offer a richer experience for members of the Labor Party, including by giving them more opportunities to have a say and a direct vote in important decisions.
So I'll move that we embrace the party members empowerment reforms proposed in the Faulkner-Bracks-Carr review  -  including the proposal that the National President elected by members serve a full, three-year term without rotation.
And fourth, we need to modernise our structures and recognise that the old branch structures alone are not the future.
So I'll move that we embrace online membership and opportunities for supporters to become more involved.
So members and supporters can hear directly from me and their Labor Government  -  and so I can hear directly from them.
Friends, this is what I propose to reform and modernise our Party.
And this is what I want discussed at the “open conference” I look forward to this year.
I don't want to get my own way on every precise detail. 
I don't want everything sewn up by some meeting at midnight the night before. 
I do want change.
This is vital if we are to strengthen our party and be a party of ideas.
On the day I ordered our review I was determined to create an opportunity for reform which this great Party would not squander. 
I remain so determined.
This is my approach to our great Party's future.
Not change for its own sake, but progress for a purpose.
So our Party and our movement are always their best, so we fight for our values in the future just as hard as we have in the past.
So we always stand for opportunity for all. 
So we always insist no one be left behind.
These values are the measure of our responsibility to Australians not yet born  -  the motive for the nation-building reforms we pursue  -  but they are more than this.
They are a statement of hope for the future  -  a statement of our enduring optimism for this great country we love.
They are the tenets of our abiding Labor faith that we really can build a “workingman's paradise” in this land.
I am optimistic by nature  -  but as an Australian and a Labor person I am more than that.
I am optimistic by experience  -  because of what has already been achieved by our people to make Australia what is today.
I am optimistic by observation  -  because of the millions of Australians who each, in their own way, do so much to make this a better place tomorrow.
And my optimism is determined, specific, real.
Because I don't only see that better country we can be in the future very clearly in my own mind.
I want kids like those at the back of the room at Unley High to see it as well.
I want them to see a country where their education is the best in the world and where their education is as good as any Australian child's.
I want them to see a country where they can find a job, and keep a job, get a better job and where their boss respects their rights at work.
I want them to see a country where they are cared for and protected if they become mentally ill, if they become disabled, and when eventually they age and become frail.
I want them to see a country which is courageous enough to act on the threat of climate change.
For them to see all that  -  for our nation to be all that Labor must be true to its values.
Labor must be at its best.
When I knew we would meet at Old Parliament House today, I began to look forward to the opportunity of coming to address you all, in this historic place.
It's a grand thing to come to this old House of the people, this home to so many of Labor's grandest days.
Here where we enacted Medicare  -  and Medibank before it.
Here where we legislated the Snowy Hydro scheme.
Home to grand days of Labor courage and conviction as well.
Here, where Calwell lost the 1966 election and won his place in history speaking “as a voice for reason and right” ... “when the drums beat and the trumpets sound”.
Here, where Curtin's courage kept us free in times of war and Chifley's convictions built a nation for the peace.
Here, where Labor caucuses met after hard fought election victories understanding the responsibilities that came with governing for the nation's good.
And it's a grand thing to address the Labor faithful as well.
Because ours has never been solely a parliamentary caucus or a campaigning organisation. 
Labor in Australia is a movement.
A movement of people, in a great cause for change.
A movement for the future and a Party of hope.
That is what we have been on our best days.
That is what we have been on our bravest days.
I firmly believe it is what we remain on this day in this House.
I absolutely know it is what we will remain in all the days to come.



NEWSREADER: Australia's Prime Minister says she expects the Aussie dollar will hold its own against the US currency. Julia Gillard spoke to Bloomberg's editor-in-chief Matt Winkler.
PM: We've got to understand where our economy is now. We have record terms of trade at 140 year high, we have a resources sector that is turbocharged by the growth in our region, we've got more than $400 billion of investment in the pipeline. That does mean that our currency is very strong, very strong against the US dollar, I mean we first hit parity against the US dollar in November last year and now as far as the eye can see in terms of predictions we will be very strong against the US dollar. That is putting pressure on other parts of the economy - manufacturing, tourism  -  and so the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is really about taking a fair share of taxation from the highly profitable companies in the sector of the economy that is turbocharged and using some of that to bolster growth in other sections of the economy.
HOST: What do you expect to achieve with this just announced inquiry into Australian media?
PM: Our ways of getting information, the media industry is changing, and like any major industry in a phase of change it's appropriate to look at how regulation best works as the industry changes.
HOST: Do you see Australia as being under a similar threat as the UK because of the recent hacking scandals in that country?
PM: No I think things are different here, there is no evidence available to me or indeed to any Australian to suggest that we have had telephone hacking by journalists in the country or by newspaper organisations, so I don't believe we're seeing any of that kind of problem here. What I do believe is happening here and is comparable to what is happening in the rest of the world, whether it be the UK, the US or anywhere else, is that the economic model which has supported newspapers is changing.
HOST: You know in that context, you said that Rupert Murdoch's News Corp has, your words ‘hard questions to answer', how much of a concern is News Limited's 70 per cent ownership of the nation's newspapers here for you?
PM: I think it is something that people have talked about over a long period of time now, media concentration, media ownership, but the truth is we can't go back in time and reengineer the ownership of newspapers in this country today. So we're not in the business of trying to unpack media ownership.
HOST: What is the one thing that you wish to be remembered for?
PM: If I had to pick one thing I would hope it would be the work in Australian education because my life is explained, how I got here, is explained by a strong, loving family but a great quality education and if you don't have access to that, whether you come from the most humble of origins or the most privileged of origins then everything else about your life will be different and will be poorer and we can change those things and make sure everybody gets that opportunity. 



Their Royal Highnesses Crown Prince Frederik and Crown Princess Mary of Denmark will visit Australia from 19 to 26 November as guests of the Australian Government.
I look forward to welcoming the Crown Prince and Princess to Australia. This is their first official visit to Australia since 2005. They also visited together privately in 2006 and 2008.  
I know their visit will be highly anticipated by the people of Australia, giving them a chance to welcome the Crown Prince and Australian-born Crown Princess Mary to our shores once again. 
We are very proud of our ties to Denmark.  Their visit is a sign of the strength of the friendship between our two nations.
The Prince and Princess will be leading a business delegation focussed on green energy, sustainable living and food technologies.  
This delegation will provide an opportunity to enhance trade and business ties between our two countries in this important area. Hosted by the Governor-General, their Royal Highnesses will visit Sydney, Melbourne and Canberra. 



Hon. Tony Abbott, Leader of the Opposition.
Ministerial colleagues Robert McClelland, Joe Ludwig and Brendan O'Connor, my Parliamentary Secretary, Kate Lundy.
Representatives of the Australian Parliamentary Friends of Police Group, Chris Hayes MP and Senator Stephen Parry.
Federal Police Commissioner Tony Negus and all your fellow State and Territory police leaders.
Vince Kelly, President and Mark Burgess, CEO of the Police Federation of Australia, and your union colleagues from around the nation.
Most importantly  -  to our National Police Service Medal recipients and your families
It is my great pleasure to welcome you all to Parliament House.
I welcome you today as Prime Minister.
But I also welcome you as the proud daughter of parents who were both police officers.
And I approach today's ceremony knowing this is our opportunity to pay the highest respect for who you are and what you do for our nation's safety and security.
Our opportunity to pay this respect anew with the first National Police Service Medals.
Friends, everyone who wears the uniform in any of our military, police or emergency services does so because they are honoured to serve.
They do not seek recognition.
But a grateful nation must be always ready to provide recognition.
Friends, this award has its origins in a long-held belief among our police community that officers should be recognised for the quality of their work, not just the length of their tenure.
It is a belief that this Government shares.
We embodied that belief in an election commitment four years ago.
And it has finally come to fruition today.
It has admittedly been a long journey.
Deciding the criteria and rules for any award is never as easy as it first appears.
The Police Federation of Australia have been making submissions to Government to establish this medal since 2004 and I pay tribute to their persistence and resolve.
You have succeeded in your mission, and the nation owes you its thanks.
I also express my gratitude to current and former colleagues John Faulkner, Joe Ludwig, Kate Lundy, Brendan O'Connor and Bob Debus for helping to see this commitment through.
Most importantly, I honour Rick Steinborn and James Cheshire for their work on designing the medal and ribbons.
Both serving officers.
A medal designed by police for police.
A fact that makes this award all the more significant as it assumes its rightful place in the Australian Honours system.
Friends, this is not a medal to measure the length of service alone.
This medal is also a measure of the quality of that service.
Of the many thousands of police officers whose service and commitment warrant this recognition, today we recognise 16 officers who set the benchmark for ethical and diligent service.
Sixteen police officers who have dedicated their lives to serving their community.
But more than an award for service past, the National Police Service Medal is also a commitment to the future, because this medal also commits the recipients to maintaining the standards they have set in order to retain the medal.
The National Police Service Medal sends a strong message of support to the 50,000 men and women who serve across this country.
They are the men and women who keep our communities safe and allow fellow Australians to go about our lives with the freedom we cherish.
It is true that we sometimes take for granted the responsibility that goes with putting on the uniform.
We can forget that it means sacrifice and you only have to look at the memorial across the lake and ponder the 749 names inscribed there to understand the depth of that sacrifice.
We can also forget the strains and demands that are the daily obligation of every police officer.
Being called out in the middle of the night to witness families torn apart by violence and discord.
Knocking on the door of a family home to tell parents a son or daughter has died in a car accident.
Working, sometimes for years, to crack cases so that victims of crime can see justice done.
Police officers rarely know what each working day will bring.
They see the best of human nature and also the darkest.
They investigate.
They counsel.
They console.
And then, after all they see and all they experience, they go home to their own families and contribute more to our society as partners, parents, friends and community members.
It is not so much a career as a vocation.
A call to service that requires commitment and demands excellence.
The medal recipients we honour here this morning represent the best of Australian policing.
These officers have given their nation the ethical and diligent service that befits the uniform they wear.
I thank you all for setting an example for other officers to follow and for living up to the trust your community places in you.
Today we award the first, honouring 16 outstanding Australia police officers  and beginning a tradition that will last for decades and perhaps even centuries to come.
I know our nation will never be short of worthy recipients.
And our police will always have our gratitude and our respect. 



PM: Good afternoon. I'm joined by the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship. For a number of months now the Government has been working to implement the most effective policy we can in relation to refugees and asylum seekers.
What has always guided us through this process is implementing what will work, is protecting Australia's borders while protecting the values that we hold dear as Australians and particularly upholding our obligations under the Refugee Convention. That means over a number of months we've worked on an arrangement with Malaysia, we've worked on that arrangement because we believe it will be the most effective deterrence, it will protect our borders whilst at the same time honouring the obligations we have under the Refugee Convention. The arrangement with Malaysia is the equivalent of turning boats around but without any of the risk of losing life at sea. It's a arrangement that has been founded on a regional framework, one that we worked with countries in our region to strike at the meeting in Bali. It is one that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was prepared and remains prepared to be involved in implementing. It's also one which would see 4000 more refugees come to this country, people who are genuine refugees and many of whom have been waiting for years.
As is well known the Opposition has opposed this arrangement. But since the High Court case that hasn't been the debate. Since the High Court case the important question that has presented to our nation is whether Executive Government should have the power it needs to strike and implement the offshore processing arrangements it believes are best. That has been the question that we've faced up to since the High Court case. It's not a question of whether it should be Malaysia or whether it should be PNG or whether it should be Nauru, the question is whether government should have the power it needs to make offshore processing arrangements as it sees fit.
This poses for our nation a profound national interest question. It's the kind of question on which people expect political leaders to work together. It's the kind of question on which Australians want to see a solution, they don't want to see business as usual politics, they want to see us working together to get something done, to get a solution in place. In line with that sentiment since the High Court case the Government has been prepared to show the Opposition the work that it needs to come to its conclusions in relation to legislating. First and foremost we made Departmental officials available and then on Friday we made a legal briefing available to the Opposition. During the course of that legal briefing draft amendments were presented to the Opposition. It was clear in that briefing that those draft amendments were one way of a number of ways of making sure that the Government could get legislation that would give Executive Government the power it needs so that it can do offshore processing.
Today I've met with the Leader of the Opposition and I've provided him with a new set of draft amendments. This new set of draft amendments has the same ultimate legal effect, that is it would enable Executive Government of the day, this Government or any government in the future, to make the arrangements it needs to or believes desirable in relation to offshore processing. But it makes it clear in these arrangements that the Minister in determining that offshore processing would occur in a particular country would need to have regard to the national interest and specifically would need to have regard to whether or not the country that asylum seekers were being taken to met the principle obligations under the Refugee Convention, that is the obligation of non-refoulement, which means that people should not be returned to a place where they would face persecution, and secondly that their claims would be processed.
I've provided those amendments, that new draft, to the Leader of the Opposition today and they will be released publically.
The Leader of the Opposition is now considering those amendments as drafted, as I say they have the same ultimate legal effect and when a legal briefing was held on Friday it was clear that there were a number of ways of reaching this outcome.
I've also said to the Leader of the Opposition if it assists his consideration, the Minister of Immigration and the Attorney-General will work with their counterparts, the Shadow Attorney-General and the Shadow Minister for Immigration to work through the amendments that have been presented to the Leader of the Opposition today.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister will your changed amendments expose your Malaysia policy to another High Court challenge?
PM: Well we've worked hard with our legal advisors to get amendments that are legally sound and our advice is these amendments are legally sound.
Yes we'll go here first and then come back through.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) slightly farcical given that we were told a week ago, two weeks ago, that the issue was returning the law to what we know before High Court and the non-refoulement was the key phrase, the key issue? Given that your amendments, proposed amendments that were released on Friday went well beyond that, removing natural justice, then why should we have any faith that this one is actually going to satisfy the test that you've set before?
PM: Well I think first and foremost you've misunderstood the High Court case frankly. The High Court case was ruling on the Migration Act and the decision was unexpected as has been made clear, ruling on the Migration Act and ruling on whether or not a set of things had to be what are called jurisdictional facts and they included in that set of things, things like not just whether transferees from Australia had to be the subject of particular protections but whether all asylum seekers in that nation had to be the subject of particular protections. Clearly the amendments that we are circulating to you today do not equate with the High Court's current construction of the Migration Act, it is different to that, it would require the Minister to have regard to the national interest, would require the Minister to have regard to the two core obligations of the Refugee Convention. We've always in the Malaysia arrangement made sure that those obligations in the Refugee Convention and a number of others beside would be honoured. I'll turn to the Minister who may want to say something about that too.
MINISTER BOWEN: Well I think as the Prime Minister says the draft that was released on Friday made it clear that the Minister must weigh up the public interest and the advice to us clearly is that in weighing up the public interest the Minister would need to weigh how to comply with the international obligations. It is clearly open to the Government to also more expressly provide that in weighing up the national interest the Minister must have regard to the principals of non-refoulement and access to processing to make it crystal clear so that there can be no doubt and so that some of the concerns expressed over the weekend are dealt with. That's a perfectly appropriate course for the Government to take, to say well if you've got some concerns we're happy to make it more explicit in the legislation that our international obligations will be complied with in this way while returning the common understanding of the Migration Act to its pre-High Court position.
PM: Yep we'll go to Michelle and then come back, yes?
JOURNALIST: I'm just wondering how in drafting this legislation, or giving orders for it to be drafted, you overlooked some basic human rights question in the first place and you did this over the weekend-
PM: That's complete nonsense Michelle, complete nonsense. We have worked with our legal advisors throughout this process always on the basis that this nation would honour its Refugee Convention obligations  -  always. Now in drafting the amendments there isn't one way to do that, there's rarely one way to draft a piece of legislation, there are always a number of ways of drafting a piece of legislation-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: That's completely untrue Michelle, completely nonsense. Throughout all of this, whether we go back to the original announcement that the Minister and I made about the arrangement with Malaysia we have said this nation would honour its obligations under the Refugee Convention, we have always said that. And when you look at the specifics of the Malaysia arrangement it does honour our obligations under the Refugee Convention, and since the High Court case in working with our legal advisors we have always said we would honour our obligations under the Refugee Convention. It is unsurprising that there are more than one way, there's more than one way of drafting that into the legislation. The draft that we are releasing publically today and which I have given to the Leader of the Opposition has greater assurance on the face of it about that, that is there are more words, but the Government was always going to honour its obligations under the Refugee Convention, to contend anything else is simply incorrect.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott, to some extent and certainly quite a few Coalition MPs I suppose we've all spoken to, say that the simple bottom line is that they don't like the Malaysia solution, it's bad policy and they won't support anything that allows you to proceed with it. Was that the position that Mr Abbott put to you today in your meeting?
PM: Look, I'm not going to other discussions in the room. Mr Abbott said he would consider the amendments that I presented to him today.
Yes, Chris.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just to be absolutely clear on this new amendment that you're proposing, you're saying that there are more words but they are meaningless words because they have the same effect as what you proposed-
PM: I'm saying outcome wise, is the same. This Government was always, is always, will always honour its obligations under the Refugee Convention. The amendments presented on Friday required the Minister to have regard to the public interest. We would say, of course, the public interest goes to these questions. These amendments require the Minister to have regard to the national interest and then gives specific examples of what the national interest is.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is natural justice still in, or has natural justice been taken out? Has that phrasing been changed at all?
PM: I'll turn to the Minister and you'll be able to have the specifics.
MINISTER BOWEN: That amendment remains as it was on Friday and just to clarify what that means: that means, in effect, that decisions to transfer individuals to countries that are designated under the Act, would in effect be at the discretion of the Minister and that makes it clear that that is not in effect a matter for judicial review and that's the intention of those provisions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) whether you're saying that this is about protecting, among other things, protecting values that we hold dear as Australians-
PM: The values we hold dear. Well there are a lot of values we hold dear. Domestically we hold dear things like the fair go, but what I am referring to here is we are a nation that for many long years, decades, has been a signatory to the Refugee Convention and what we do needs to be in accordance with our Convention obligations and everything this Government has ever proposed has been in accordance with our Convention obligations.
JOURNALIST: Did you get the impression that Mr Abbott's willing to work in a bipartisan way on this?
PM: I'm not going to impressions.
Yes, Phil.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Matthew's question, do you have any measure of confidence that Mr Abbott will, is prepared to allow the Malaysia situation to happen, or did he give you any sign of hope in your meeting, that if you get the wording exactly right that could happen?
PM: Look, Mr Abbott left the meeting saying he would consider these amendments. So, they're the words I am saying now, I don't think it's appropriate for me to speculate on demeanour or motivations and I'm not going to do so. Paul.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I just wondered if you could clarify on natural justice, as I understood your answer that would mean if any government wanted to send asylum seekers to Nauru, the same amendment would need to apply?
MINISTER BOWEN: As we've said, as the Prime Minister said very clearly, the whole intention of this process is to restore the common understanding, the pre-High Court position, the pre-High Court position was that the Minister of the day had the opportunity to designate or declare a country as an appropriate country for third party offshore processing if the Minister was satisfied with the arrangements in place, and that then people who arrive in Australia by boat would be transferred to that country and that while the government may be in a position to consider individual circumstances, that is not something that is open for judicial review.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) key intent of the Howard legislation was precisely to take away from asylum seekers their ability to seek judicial review, of them being sent away?
MINISTER BOWEN: With respect Paul, I think that mainly refers to other legislation, the excision legislation, which is related to but separate to the designation of a third country.
PM: Can we just, I believe people are getting themselves confused here and so let me address some of that confusion.
First and foremost we have believed under the current Migration Act that it was a decision for Executive Government about offshore processing. Yes, the Migration Act has sections in there that required the Minister to turn his mind to a set of things, but it was believed until the High Court case that those matters were not capable of judicial review. And in the past that section has enabled asylum seekers to be transferred to countries that are not signatories to the Refugee Convention, for example under the Howard Government that section enabled asylum seekers to be transferred to Nauru.
As is now a matter of record, the High Court took a more expansive interpretation than that. In our view, as advised by the Solicitor-General, that puts at risk the ability of Executive Government, this Executive Government or any Executive Government in the future, to make offshore processing arrangements. Our aim is to put the Act in a form which enables Executive Government to make offshore processing arrangements.
Now, any Executive Government, whether it's this one, or one in the future, would be bound by its Refugee Convention obligations as well, and of course we'd make offshore processing arrangements that also acquit the Refugee Convention.
Now the draft that was presented on Friday used the language of public interest. This draft uses the language of national interest and specifies two matters that the Minister needs to consider. But let's be clear about the aim here, the aim here is to have as a decision for Executive Government, not for the High Court, how offshore processing arrangements are made.
Yes, it would enable the Malaysia arrangement; it would enable a government of a different persuasion, should one ever be elected, to make arrangements with Nauru. They are properly decisions for Executive Government. But what will come before the Parliament is this concept  -  that it should be the decision of Executive Government, not the courts.
Yes, Andrew and then we'll come over this way.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott said in a statement on Friday, I think he might have repeated it today, he said the Solicitor-General confirmed in the briefing the recent High Court decision did not rule out offshore processing in Nauru, and to say he said this was inaccurate. Do you think that he is verballing-
PM: No, no, no, I just used the language of risk and I've used it deliberately. And I direct you to the Solicitor-General advice which we publicly released and the Solicitor-General, in going through all of these things, looked at circumstances in Nauru and basically said it was not without legal risk-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Then  -  I'll direct you to the words of the Solicitor-General  -  and if you want legal words, I think the best words of the Solicitor-General are his. So it's not without risk.Then you get to the other question, the other question relates to a complex set of matters involving unaccompanied minors and I'd also direct your attention to the Solicitor-General's advice on that.
What that all adds up to is if you were - and we are not -  but if you were a government that wanted to implement processing on Nauru, then if you took heed of that Solicitor-General advice, you would want to amend the Migration Act. That's the fact, that's the case.
Yes, Sabra.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) have you talked to Mr Abbott about timing now that you'd like this legislation ideally before Parliament, and when you'd like an answer back from him?
PM: It's the Government's intention to introduce this legislation on Wednesday. It will be introduced in the normal course, that is it will be introduced and adjourned following the Minister's second reading speech.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Is it your understanding that Tony Abbott's biggest concern is the refoulement-
PM: I think it's, questions are best directed to Mr Abbott about his concerns. What we've done is presented a new draft of the legislation. Mr Abbott has publicly said that he has had on his mind some questions about protections. Well, this further draft I believe gives him further assurance on that, in that we've got this draft with national interest and with these matters the two key obligations in the Refugee Convention specifically referred to.
We'll just, despite Sean's heroic efforts we'll take Karen, because we haven't had one from SBS.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how do you reconcile the changes proposed in this draft with the platform of the ALP that suggests that asylum seekers must have their claims processed under Australian law on Australian territory?
PM: I'd direct your attention to all of the Labor Party's platform and I don't have it in front of me, so I can't give you the clause number, but if you read all of the section you will find a clause that talks about making arrangements within our region and within countries within our region. I remind you that the Malaysia arrangement is one that stands on the regional framework negotiated in Bali, it's part of our working in the region, the first bilateral arrangement under that regional framework.
JOURNALIST: Isn't the platform internally contradictory then?
PM: Well, have a look at it in its entirety and it's clearly my view that the Malaysia arrangement is in accord with Labor's platform.
Thank you very much. Yes, Phil.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) guardianship provisions, will that be tied to the, is it one bill, one package, or will the two measures be tied together through the-
PM: They'll be brought together in the same bill. Correct. 



Today marks an important day in the recognition of long-serving police officers with the awarding of the first National Police Service Medals (NPSM).
Sixteen serving officers  -  two from each State and Territory  -  have become the first to be honoured with the newest medal in the Australian honours system.
The NPSM recognises police officers who have provided the highest standards of ethical and diligent service over a period of 15 years or more.
The medal also commits the officers to dedicated duty for the duration of their policing career as recipients must maintain the high standards of conduct in order to retain the medal.
NPSM holds up to our nation the fine example of police officers who set the benchmark for ethical and diligent service.
The medal is not only a measure of the length of service but a measure of the quality of that service.
This morning's presentation of the NPSM at Parliament House was the realisation of a 2007 election commitment to honour police officers who serve their community with dedication and integrity, and is the culmination of the hard work of the Police Federation of Australia and Australia's police commissioners to bring the NPSM to fruition.
The medal and its ribbon were designed by serving officers from the NSW and Australian Federal Police forces.
For more information on the NPSM, go to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet website www.itsanhonour.gov.au



Thanks Lucio  -  not only for your kind introduction, but for your thoughtful discussion of the issues at hand.
Can I acknowledge Heather Ridout, AI Group Chief Executive.
Members of the diplomatic corps, and members of the academic community.
My ministerial colleagues and parliamentary colleagues, far too many to name.
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Canberra's a meeting place and it's good to meet not just people but ideas.
And Lucio, as you've observed already  -  we meet in interesting times.
Times of sustained economic transformation  -  rich and complex, challenging and promising  -  when we must make change work for us.
Yes times of strong fundamentals: low unemployment, low public debt, a deep, stable and liquid financial sector. 
But also times when Asian growth, European and US weakness, a boom in mining investment, are driving our dollar higher and in turn putting many sectors: education, tourism, some parts of retail, especially manufacturing, under pressure.
You know that better than anyone  -  you live it every day. 
I want you to know that in Government, we live it too.
Here tonight you have a brief respite from those pressures, but you'll be heading back soon enough, back to work where you're working so hard to make change work for your firms and for your country.
I can assure you, we're doing the same, heads are down, evidence and proposals are open on the table.
And we're working through our plans to deliver the policies which will see industry through.
Evidence and options, policies and plans, to modernise the whole economy  -  to keep the whole economy strong.
Based on our long term approach to creating, and sustaining, balanced growth for the whole of our nation.
Driven by our long term vision of a new technology, clean energy, high skill, high wage economy.
It's important to understand what we're already doing, what we've been doing for four years now, to modernise and strengthen our economy.
Because the work we've already done sets the foundation for our plans for the future as well.
In our first years in Government, two great projects drove me.
The first: to lift the nation's human capital.
To give our people more knowledge and skills and get more out of that knowledge and skills as well.
Universities and vocational training.
Fundamental reform with demand-driven funding, investment in much-needed capital  -  and new support for research.
And in coming days, Minister Evans will be announcing some important new measures, designed to underpin both growth and quality in this tertiary sector.
Schools. Investing in teacher quality, ending our national complacency about leaving disadvantaged kids behind ... developing a national curriculum  -  and new transparency through the MySchool website.
Early years education. Improving the quality of childcare ... making it more affordable  -  and expanding access to preschool education.
I want every Australian child to have opportunity  -  and you want every new worker to be ready and able to work.
The second: to reform the nation's workplaces.
To use flexible enterprise bargaining to lift productivity across our national economy.
Setting up Fair Work Australia  -  creating National Employment Standards  -  working to harmonise occupational health and safety.
As part of a plan to compete with the world on knowledge and skills. 
A plan to unlock the real drivers of future productivity.
And in our year of decision and delivery, I am still pursuing reforms to unlock productivity for the years to come.
Clean energy, to create new jobs in new industries  -  a price signal leveraging billions of dollars in new investment.
High speed broadband, to link every part of Australia to every part of the world.
A tax on mineral resource rents, to cut company tax for every Australian firm  -  to add to the national pool of savings through higher superannuation  -  and to build regional infrastructure.
Skills and participation reforms, to move people from days of exclusion and idleness into work and to lift the capacity of all Australians to get good work and support a growing economy.
Personal tax reform, to reward participation in work.
We're delivering a long term plan for balanced growth  -  one which has long been in train.
We're also walking the reform road in Government every day.
I lead a modern Labor Government  -  we know no other way.
Because Labor charted this reform road ourselvesin the great days of Hawke and Keating.
And because the great lesson of the 1980s is that reform isn't easy, but it works.
That while the pressures are real, and painful, industry and Government have to stand firm against populist voices. 
I know industry is standing firm. I know you understand: There can be no return to closed door policies.
Because the Australian economy has been the great beneficiary of open trade in the world  -  our economy has changed, our firms have adapted, our people have prospered.
Because our challenge, as exposure to the global market only grows, is to build new capability which allows us to prosper anew.
And just as we all understand we can't look back, we also all know none of this means “leaving manufacturing behind”.
The investments and reforms the Government is making create great new opportunities for manufacturing helping them climb the value-add chain.
More innovative enterprises and more skilled workers will make manufacturing stronger than almost anything we can do.
A clean energy economy with economic incentives for new clean jobs will see new goods manufactured for new markets.
A high technology economy with high speed broadband around the country will see manufacturing performed in much more sophisticated ways.
These benefits hold true  -  not only for manufacturing but for retail and tourism and education  -  for every part of our broad and diverse economy. 
So Government and industry will be working together to do just that. 
At the Tax Forum, at the Future Jobs Forum, we'll bring good people together, get the best evidence and ideas.
And we're working through practical new steps, like our reforms to the anti-dumping system, the first of which are expected to pass the Parliament this week.
But the most important decisions won't be made at Cabinet, in Parliament, or in a Forum.
The most important decisions will be made in boardrooms, in corner offices, as every business and every firm makes the decisions which will make change work for them.
Your decisions will be the most critical to our future.
Decision made by leaders and firms who will survive and thrive not just by understanding the long term structural change that the economy is undergoing, but by bravely embracing the right risks to pursue the rich rewards from change.
Through new strategies: to diversify into new goods and services, to find a new point of connection to a production process, to restructure your operations or team up with an old competitor or a new supplier.
Making an old business new, or starting a new business from scratch, requires new investment decisions which embrace sound risks.
New investment, not just in machinery and equipment but in developing new goods and services and skilling and re-skilling people as well.
So you need to weigh up the returns on a range of potential investments in deciding how to proceed in a changed economic environment.
And while you live the risk and rightly reap the reward, it's vital that public policy settings don't hold business back  -  that they don't hinder businesses taking smart risks.
Perhaps no system of policy settings is more central to business planning than business tax.
We need new flexibility in the tax system now if business is to thrive in an economy undergoing significant structural change.
We need to be sure that Australia's business tax system doesn't hold industry back.
The Henry Review outlined some of the specific problems.
When the tax system hinders investment in a struggling business, or discourages lending to a business with a new idea, it does more than add to patchwork pressures.
It harms national productivity as well.
Giving workers more capital, more and better machines, new technologies and smarter ways of doing business  -  all this investment adds to productivity.
And it is vital for making change work for us as well.
For business to grow when the competitive winds are with them; to stand fast when the winds are against them; and to change when they can stand fast no more.
You need investment flows to be flexible if business is to thrive in an economy undergoing significant structural change.
You deserve the flexibility and incentives to do your job  -  to make the decisions which you know will help your businesses to seize the opportunities change creates.
This is something I want the Tax Forum to consider next month.
The Tax Forum will be an opportunity to start to discuss options for a business tax system which supports decisions to change.
To start discussing new ways to ensure our business tax system adds to the flexibility of the Australian economy  -  not just now, but for the future challenges and opportunities that we may face.
Let me give one example of the kind of change we have already made  -  a change which could be a model for further reform in the tax system over time.
In the 2010-11 Budget, the Government made an important change to the tax system to make investments in long lived infrastructure more attractive.
We recognised that the tax system was getting in the way of much needed investment in infrastructure. 
As you all know, traditionally, business profits are taxed immediately.
But when a business is in a loss position, expenses associated with investment are not recognised in the same timely way.
Instead, they are carried forward to offset future profits  -  but at their face or nominal value.
So for long lived investments, where it takes some time for projects to move from loss making to profit making endeavors, old expenses don't have much value by the time you can cash them in.
This is a distortion which can make what would be viable infrastructure projects unattractive after tax.
And this is why in the Budget we announced that from next year, tax losses incurred in investments in eligible infrastructure projects will be “uplifted” to maintain their value over time.
For the first time, these losses will also be able to recouped even where there is a change in ownership of the project.
A smart and practical change to the system  -  but more.
A model for reforms to enhance flexibility.
The type of flexibility which I'd like to see discussed more at the forum next month.
A model for further reform in the tax system over time.
Removing distortions, lifting barriers, delivering flexibility, making change work, encouraging enterprise, rewarding risk.
Friends, I don't shareMargaret Thatcher's values.
But one of her most famous remarks does rather summarise the position of the Australian economic debate today.
There is no alternative.
What government and industry have done together in the past few years, what we'll do together in the coming months: growing jobs, getting back into the black, staying on the reform road, making the decisions for the long term. It is the only way.
We won't solve patchwork pressures by giving in to populist pressures.
We won't create jobs by always telling people what they want to hear.
What we're working on together is the serious economic plan, with the serious economic team, charting the serious way forward.
We're optimistic and determined, confident and ready to work.
To modernise the whole economy ... to keep the whole economy strong. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan, Innovation Minister Senator Kim Carr and Minister for Defence Materiel Jason Clare today met with leaders from the manufacturing industry, Australian Industry Group, unions and the Innovation Council to discuss the challenges and opportunities facing our manufacturing sector.
The Gillard Government sees a bright future for an internationally competitive manufacturing sector and is committed to working with industry to achieve that future.
Today's discussion focussed on the challenges facing Australian manufacturing including the impact of a high dollar and the opportunities presented by the rise of Asia and by innovative new technologies and practices.
The group explored ways to build the capabilities of the sector, to boost productivity, progress strategies to transition to a low carbon economy and develop a vision for the future of manufacturing in Australia.
Australia has always been a clever and creative country and it's this ingenuity and innovation that will be vital in securing our future prosperity.
The Gillard Government envisages a flexible, highly skilled, high value-adding manufacturing sector which is able to capture niche markets, enter into global supply chains, and make more specialised and highly valued products.
We want to help businesses and individuals build capabilities through innovation, science and research, commercialisation and collaboration.
The roundtable complements the Gillard Government's ongoing discussion with stakeholders about how to best secure the future of the manufacturing industry in Australia.
Today's meeting comes ahead of the Government's Tax Forum on October 4 and 5 which will discuss the next steps in Australia's tax reform journey, particularly given the patchwork pressures in our economy.
The contributions at today's meeting will feed in to the October Future Jobs Forum on 6 October which will focus on moving manufacturing and other sectors up the value chain in the context of increasing global competition. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning and welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning, Sabra.
HOST: What on earth made you think that Tony Abbott was going to break the habit of a lifetime and say yes?
PM: I believe Australians have been looking at us and saying to their national leaders that they want us to put politics aside, they want us to work together, they want us to resolve this issue for the nation. I think Australians are sick of it.
I made those points yesterday, made them publically and also when I talked to Tony Abbott. I believe Australians want us to resolve this issue.
Now I gave Tony Abbott an opportunity to do that yesterday. Unfortunately he turned his back on the national interest when given that opportunity. And let's be clear about why he's turned his back on the national interest - it's all because of his political calculation.
What he is actually terrified of is that the Malaysia arrangement will work to stop the boats. That's what this is all about.
HOST: And to be clear you won't accept Tony Abbott's amendments.
PM: No we won't. We will bring to the Parliament the amendments that we showed Mr Abbott yesterday and released yesterday. And the important point there Sabra is the amendments that we will bring to the Parliament enable Executive Government to make the choices that it believes are in the nation's interest, this Government and governments in the future.
Mr Abbott's amendments, in contrast, are him playing political games because he is terrified that Malaysia will work. He's slammed the door on the national interest and pulled it wide open to his view of his own political interest.
HOST: Why are you going to persist with this now? The opposition says it won't support it, the Greens won't. So that you can say to the voters we tried, we did the best that we could?
PM: Because I believe that Tony Abbott and every member of the Liberal Party and National Party should walk into the Parliament and have their vote recorded so that the pages of history can show that when they were called on to choose between this nation's interests in protecting our borders, and their narrow political interest, they chose their narrow political interest.
They should record their votes name by name, person by person, stand up in the Parliament and say that they are people who believe their cheap politics is more important than protecting our borders and protecting our Australian values and the way that we deal with refugees
HOST: And you hope that voters blame Tony Abbott and the opposition for every new boat that arrives?
PM: Well, I'm making the point Sabra that is in the national interest. This is not for me, about the politics of it, this is about protecting our borders as well as protecting refugees. The Malaysia arrangement is about sending the strongest possible deterrence message.
I don't want to see people losing their lives in boats. I don't want to see that happen. I want to see boats stopped because I don't want to see lives risked. I don't want to see people smugglers profiting. And I do want to take 4,000 more genuine refugees from Malaysia.
HOST: And you categorically rule out Nauru?
PM: Oh, let's be clear about this, Tony Abbott has been clutching for Nauru to try and give himself some policy credentials in this debate. He has received the clearest possible advice, from the experts that advise government and indeed advised the Howard Government, the clearest possible advice that Nauru won't work and it will cost a billion dollars.
Well Sabra, I am not going to waste a billion dollars of taxpayers' money on a solution that won't work while Mr Abbott, for his political reasons tries to take away from the Australian people the mechanism and arrangement that our expert advice tells us sends the strongest possible deterrence message.
Now, if Mr Abbott is ever prime minister of this country, and he wants to waste a billion dollars on a solution he's been advised doesn't work, well that's a matter for him. And in fact, the legislation I will bring to the Parliament would enable a future government to make that decision if it chose to.
But it enables this Government to make the decision to implement the arrangement with Malaysia and we have the clearest possible advice that that is the strongest deterrence - that's what's in the national interest and Tony Abbott is terrified it will work.
HOST: The effect of this now means that processing claims will happen onshore.
PM: Well we will bring this legislation to the Parliament, but yes Sabra, you're right, the logical conclusion of Mr Abbott's political game playing, the logical conclusion of Mr Abbott's slamming the door on the national interest is that offshore processing is at risk in its entirety.
HOST: You're slamming Mr Abbott, but you are the government, you are the Prime Minister. It's not-
PM: -Yes I am-
HOST: -his job to provide you with the majority numbers.
PM: Well, I believe it's the job of every parliamentarian to act in the national interest. I believe its Mr Abbott's job to weigh the national interest in making his decisions. I don't believe and I've never believed that it's the job of an opposition leader to just say, national interest here, political interests there, I could do the right thing by the nation or I could do something cheap and chose something cheap.
Let's be very clear here about the decision Tony Abbott is making. I am not asking him and I have never asked him to endorse the Government's plan for Malaysia. What I am asking him to do is to put this Government and future governments in the same position that the Howard Government was with the same degree of options and powers.
Now why would Mr Abbott say no to that other than hypocrisy, opportunism and a deep, deep fear that the Malaysia arrangement will work? And what that means is he is sitting there calculating it is in his political interest to see more boats come to this country. That's how reckless he is being.
HOST: You talk about political opportunism, but up until 12 months ago you wouldn't countenance sending people off to a country that hadn't been a signatory to the UN Convention either.
PM: I wanted to see our convention obligations upheld. Yes I did. And Minister Bowen has worked with worked a non-convention signatory country to do that. Now, when Minister Bowen first started talking about this transfer agreement there were lots of people who said it wasn't possible and it couldn't be done.
But he has done it. He's negotiated an arrangement with Malaysia which means that even though it is not a Refugee Convention signatory country, that for the asylum seekers we transfer to Malaysia, Refugee Convention obligations will be upheld. That is, they will not be returned to a place where they could be persecuted. And they will have their claims-
HOST: -But those protections aren't legally enforceable under the legislation that you will put to Parliament tomorrow and that's a "why bother" clause because it's not, you're not endorsing the UN Convention there.
PM: Oh well, Sabra I absolutely reject that. The arrangement between Malaysia and Australia is an arrangement between two governments, freely entered into. On what evidence, and I know that Tony Abbott is out there bashing Malaysia, on what evidence can he say to the Australian people that he doubts Malaysia will live up to obligations it freely entered into. No one made them do it.
They could have said to Australia, no not interested in having a talk with you. But what they did over months and months of patient work was negotiated obligations they were prepared to uphold. That's the situation. There is no reason to assume Malaysia won't uphold those obligations.
HOST: On the flipside now, the left in your party will be happy because it does mean that claims will be processed here onshore. If any of them abstain or vote against this bill in Parliament, will they be penalised?
PM: Well you're making a set of assumptions about what will happen in the Parliament, and Sabra I'm determined we will bring this legislation to the Parliament. I'm determined that we will say in the Parliament, as I am saying to you this morning, that where the national interest of this country lies is in having this legislation pass the Parliament.
Now Mr Abbott has slammed the door on the national interest yesterday, we will obviously in the parliamentary debate be challenging him for once, for once to put this nation's interests first in front of his political opportunism and reckless negativity. For once to actually go into the Parliament and do the right thing by the Australian people so we can protect our borders as well as protect our values and protect the way that we deal with refugees.
HOST: When you became Prime Minister last year you nominated the carbon pricing scheme, asylum seekers and the mining tax as three issues that you needed to fix.
The carbon scheme is pretty much where it was when Mr Rudd left it - on ice. You've given away billions more in the mining tax and now the asylum seeker policy has resulted in this. Voters would be right to conclude nought out of three wouldn't they?
PM: Well Sabra that's a completely fallacious analysis. The carbon pricing legislation is before the Parliament and it will go through. Carbon pricing will start on 1 July next year. The legislation couldn't go through and didn't go through the last Parliament; it will go through this Parliament.
It will go through despite Mr Abbott's relentless negativity and wanting to keep this nation in the past. It will go through despite Mr Abbott arguing for an alternative which would cost Australian families $1,300 a year.
On this arrangement with Malaysia, a new, innovative, regionally-based solution to the issues of asylum seekers and refugees, we've worked hard and then we got a High Court decision which was unexpected and I'm bringing the legislation to the Parliament that will address that. And yes, we are seeing Tony Abbott, grand hypocrisy, opportunism, they're not prepared to look at the national political interest but we will bring this legislation to the Parliament.
On the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, I entered an agreement with Australia's biggest mining countries to work on this in a consultative way. We've been doing that. The legislation will be brought to the Parliament, that's on track and on time as we envisaged it would happen.
HOST: Ms Gillard, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you very much. 



HOST: Prime Minister, are you there?
PM: Yes I am John, good morning.
HOST: Good morning and clear as a bell I might say.
PM: That's very good indeed, given the troubles we had earlier.
HOST: Yeah, are you very happy with Wayne Swan?
PM: Yes, I am. Wayne is to be congratulated on this, but as Wayne has been making the point this is really a reward for the Australian people for the work that we all did together to keep people in jobs during the global financial crisis. So, it took Government action and certainly Wayne Swan played an incredible role in making sure that Government supported jobs, but it also took action by employers right around the country and trade unions working with those employers to keep people in work.
HOST: OK, I'll just read you an email that I have here from a fellow called John Rowles who is in Surfers Paradise - I don't think John Rowles the singer, I think he's in Honolulu - but I'll read this to you: ‘John, Swanny's award is arrant nonsense. It's an award for Coalition surplus and for China. This bloke's pink batts and school halls waste overstimulated a sound economy and way too long. The result was an extra percent of interest rates which killed retail last November. Swan backed the full mining tax which killed Rudd off , then your thoroughly decent bloke knifed Rudd over the phone and wouldn't even look him in the eye.'
That's a cranky email, so obviously some people are cranky.
PM: Inevitably, in a democracy of more than 20 million people, people are going to have a variety of views, John.
HOST: Good, isn't it?
PM: It is good. It is good and absolutely we want people to be able to express their opinions and that opinion is expressed very sharply. It's also factually wrong in many, many respects, not a correct analysis of our economy, not a correct analysis of what has led our economy to a point where the International Monetary Fund overnight, in what is a report that is a very sharp critique of the global economy and has some warnings about the global economy and particularly pointed things to say about US and Europe, that that IMF report points to Australia as the standout economy that can look forward to more rapid growth than major advanced economies anywhere else in the world.
HOST: Why are we the standout economy, Prime Minister? Tell me all the good things about Australia.
PM: We're the standout economy because of our growth rates. You would have seen in the June quarter that we had a growth rate of 1.2% - very solid growth.
Of course, our economy was disrupted by our summer of natural disasters with so much of economic infrastructure brought down in that time, but our economy has recorded solid growth and we can look forward to more growth.
Our economy has low unemployment by the standards of the world. There are many nations with double, triple, even as much as four times our unemployment rate.
We've got strong public finances with low government debt. We've got a strong banking system which is well capitalised, and we are in the region of the world which is growing at this time and will be the powerhouse of growth in this century, and that's why our resources are so much in demand, our great mineral resources. It's why our terms of trade are so strong, but our century here in Asia won't be simply about selling minerals to Asia - we will be living in the part of the world with the world's biggest middle class and they will demand services and tourism, fine food, fine wine, all the of the things that Australia is so good at and has to sell.
HOST: Tell me this, you reel all that off in a wonderfully articulate way. Do you rehearse?
PM: Well these are just the simple facts. They're very easy to list.
HOST: No, no, but I mean, do you rehearse? Do you have to go through it? Do you make a point of memorising all this stuff - you must?
PM: John, I talk about this every day to people, so of course it comes easily to my tongue. I would have a conversation about the Australian economy every day. Many days I would have hundreds of conversations about the Australian economy.
I already today, for example, have been to a tourism and transport forum to talk to people about the Australian economy. Yesterday I was in a manufacturing round table with representatives of all kinds of manufacturing businesses and their trade unions talking about the Australian economy. The night before that I was addressing the Australian Industry Group dinner talking about the Australian economy. So, John, this is what I do all day, every day  -  think, worry and design policies to make sure that we've got the benefits of jobs and prosperity for the future.
HOST: Can I ask you a personal question? I mean we know each other fairly well.
PM: Sure.
HOST: What's your IQ?
PM: I've got no idea John. I don't sit round doing tests.
HOST: I thought you might have had one done when you were younger. Most of us have to have one done. Anyways, I would imagine it would be very high because you are very articulate and you're admired by many people for that.
Sadly, you're not all that admired for some of the ideas you have about governing our country, otherwise we wouldn't perhaps do constantly hear these polls being taken and some of them don't look good. Do you take any notice of the polls?
PM: My focus is on doing the things we need to do for our nation's future. We're a nation of never-ending polls. They come frequently, and yes, of course, they're a talked about by commentators and in the debate about politics nationally, but what I do John is I sit here as Prime Minister working on the things we need to make sure that we do have jobs and prosperity in the future and that those things are shared, and as I've described the Australian economy to you, there's a clear risk that we will see some parts of the economy leaping ahead  -  the resources sector, the mining sector, more money, more wealth  -  with other parts of the economy left behind.
HOST: Yeah, that can't keep going. The mining sector and the resources sector can't keep going forever and a day, can it?
PM: Well, it will be sustained for a long period of time, the resources boom, but yes, we do have to be planning today for what our economy will look like beyond the resources boom, and the point I was just about the make John, I've talked about jobs and prosperity, but there's a lot of work to do to make sure that's shared, that we don't see some industries and some regions left behind: manufacturing, tourism, those kind of industries left behind because they are experiencing the burden of the high Australian dollar which flows from the strength of our mining industry.
So, as Prime Minister the things that I focus on are managing our economy so we've got jobs and opportunity for all right around the nation, as well as bringing in the new policies and plans which mean people aren't at risk of having their life ruined by an event like an accident which means they have a disability. That is, that we look after each other and we do that now through things like Medicare - great Labor invention - but we look after each other in the future for things like disability and obviously the challenges that will come with ageing of our society.
HOST: It's going to be a long day for you in parliament, well for everybody today in parliament, debating the Migration Act. How will the day end, do you think? Is Tony Abbott simply outplaying you?
PM: Well, just a factual correction John. The migration changes have been introduced into the parliament today-
HOST: -Will they be approved?
PM: They won't be debated today, it's not normal for-
HOST: -Sorry I used the wrong word, but will they be approved?
PM: The debate is not happening today, there are no votes happening today, so just to clarify that.
On the question of will they be approved, well, I will continue to put the argument that our national interest requires that politicians come together and deal with these amendments in the nation's interest. I believe people are sick of the politics, they're sick of watching all of the politics around this. They want the nation's representatives to work together so our nation can make the decisions we need to to protect our borders as well as properly protecting people who are genuine refugees.
The legislation that Minister Bowen has introduced in the parliament this morning does that. It would enable the Government to implement our arrangement with Malaysia. It would enable Tony Abbott, if he is every Prime Minister of this country, to implement his plan with Nauru, and my simple case to the Leader of the Opposition is we are not trying to do this legislation so we rule out his plans about Nauru. He should not insist that this legislation is amended so it rules out our plans about Malaysia.
HOST: OK, but he's assumed that? Will Nauru cost $1 billion?
PM: Yes, it will.
HOST: That's a lot of money.
PM: Yes, it will, for a plan that the best possible expert advisors have told us won't work.
We are advised, John, by the same experts who advised the Howard Government. They still work here in our great public service. They are not people of politics. They are people of expert advice, and what they say to us is that Nauru won't work.
Certainly, when the Howard Government enacted the Pacific Solution it had a lot of shock value. It obviously sent a lot of shock value up the people smuggling pipeline, but now people smugglers know that if you get on a boat, if you end up in Nauru, that you are far more likely than not to be resettled in Australia. They will be able to say that to people. They will be able to point to the fact that of the people who were found to be genuine refugees, who were processed on Nauru under the Howard Government, they went to Australia and New Zealand. They will point to all of that and that is why our expert advisors are saying it won't work, and that our arrangement with Malaysia has a far stronger deterrence value.
But the legislation before the Parliament is not ‘yes to Malaysia'. What it is is giving executive government the power it needs to make decisions about offshore processing of asylum seekers. Prime Minister Howard had that power in his hands when Tony Abbott served in his Cabinet. The High Court has changed and reinterpreted the law. I believe as Prime Minister I should have that power in my hands and the hands of this Government, and it should be in the hands of prime ministers to come and governments to come, and I think it is just political game playing for Tony Abbott to seek to deny that power to government and to effectively end offshore processing.
HOST: Are you going to win?
PM: Well, we will bring it to the parliament, John, and people will have to come into the parliament and stand up in the eyes of the Australian people, stand up and if they want to vote for the destruction of offshore processing then they will be judged by that.
HOST: What's the most humane way to handle the refugee crisis?
PM: Well, the most humane way to deal with asylum seekers and refugees is to do everything you can to deter people from getting on leaky boats where they can lose their lives-
HOST: -They've got to be desperate to do that, haven't they? I mean, you wouldn't put your kids on a leaky boat unless you were absolutely desperate?
PM: Well, John, I think when we're talking about people getting on boats, they are getting on boats out of Indonesia. We are talking about people who have fled places like Iran or Afghanistan or Pakistan, so they've been on the move for some time. Many of them would have come through Malaysia on their way to Indonesia.
What we don't want to see is people getting on boats, paying basically a criminal figure, a people smuggler, someone profiting from crime, paying them all of the money they've got and then running the risk of losing their life at sea. And tragically, we've seen people do that on the shores of Christmas Island not that long ago.
So, that is what the Malaysia arrangement is about - sending the strongest possible message of deterrence to stop people getting on boats but extending the compassion that Australians are known for to genuine refugees, so out this arrangement we would take 4,000 more refugees, people who are in Malaysia now who have been processed and been found to be genuine refugees, but at the moment have no prospect of getting a new life and new opportunity in a new land.
HOST: Yeah, well they should be given the opportunity shouldn't they, I believe?
PM: Well, we would make that opportunity available to 4,000 more as part of the Malaysia arrangement, but to implement the Malaysia arrangement we need the laws changed, so we need the Opposition to come in and to cut the political game playing and to vote for legislation which enables government to act, and if they were ever to form the government in the future, would enable them to institute Nauru if that's what they believe in.
HOST: OK, Prime Minister you've been very, very generous with your time and I'm sorry about the mess up earlier but these things happen, and it was very good to talk to you. I appreciate it.
PM: Thanks very much, John.
HOST: Goodbye.
PM: Bye-bye. 



HOST: The Prime Minister joins us now live from our Canberra studio this morning. Good morning to you Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Lisa.
HOST: Now first up, a dire warning from the International Monetary Fund overnight, warning of a dangerous new phase in the world economy. How are you going to protect Australia from rising unemployment and higher inflation?
PM: Lisa, this is a stark warning from the IMF about the global economy, but it also gives a ringing endorsement to the Australian economy and says we can look forward to growing faster than any other major advanced economy. We are in the part of the world that is growing, we've got low unemployment, we've got strong public finances and of course we've got a huge pipeline of growth coming into our resources sector. So Lisa, we're not immune from world trends, but this is a strong endorsement of the Australian economy.
HOST: But they have cut the growth rate from 3 per cent back to 1.8.
PM: Yeah, the focus of the IMF in this report, and it is a stark warning, but it's a warning very focussed on what is happening in the US and in Europe and a warning to decision makers there to make sure that they get their budgets in order, as they sustain growth in their economies. It does make a point about the Australian economy, and that's a ringing endorsement. We're not immune from global trends, but there's nowhere else in the world you'd rather be than in Australia as the global economy goes through this phase.
HOST: But if we're not immune, is it the right time to be bringing in a carbon tax and a mining tax, when so many Aussie families are really feeling the pinch? We do know that there's a two-speed economy.
PM: There is a two-speed economy, there's a multi-speed economy, a patchwork economy. Resources burning ahead, turbo-charged, hundreds of millions of dollars, hundreds of billions of dollars of investment in the pipeline, other industries feeling the pressure of the high Aussie dollar. The Minerals Resource Rent Tax is actually designed to meet the needs in the economy now, to take some more tax from that bit of the economy that is charging ahead, the mining sector and using it to support growth by cutting company tax and cutting taxation for small businesses in other parts of the economy, so that's definitely the right economic policy now.
As for putting a price on carbon, we need to get started on this, we've got bipartisan targets of cutting our carbon pollution by five per cent by 2020. The sooner we start, the easier it will be to do, the easier the economic adjustment and we'll be working with businesses to protect jobs every step of the way.
HOST: Alright, well let's move on to the standoff over asylum seekers. If you know that the Greens and the Coalition won't support you on this legislation, is it just a waste of time introducing the legislation today into Parliament?
PM: I'm sitting in Parliament today and this is the home of our democracy Lisa, this is where people come to represent their constituencies and have their names recorded in the pages of history for how they have voted. So it is the right thing to do to hold every member of this place to account and to require them to record their votes on this issue of national importance. And let's be very clear about what will be voted on, the Government's legislation doesn't rule out Tony Abbott's preferred policy of Nauru, he shouldn't act to rule out the Government's preferred policy of Malaysia and Tony Abbott has criticised us all ways here, some days he says we're too soft on asylum seekers, other days he says we're too hard.
Well people are sick of the politics of this, they want us to act and that's why I believe Mr Abbott should reflect again when the legislation comes to the Parliament. I'd suggest that he thinks about how he felt when he saw those dreadful images of a boat crashing against the rocks of Christmas Island. He should think about the national interest here, as he votes on this legislation.
HOST: Why aren't you asking Bob Brown to reflect, I mean you made a deal with the Greens, Bob Brown is your partner in Parliament but we haven't heard a word of criticism for Bob Brown on all of this.
PM: Well that's not true either Lisa. I was asked a question by a Greens member in the House of Representatives yesterday and made the very direct point, that every Member of Parliament should be reflecting on their obligations in the national interest here. Every Member of Parliament, but I don't expect Senator Brown to change his mind, he's opposed to offshore processing. What I do think is a bit amazing in all of this is Tony Abbott, after a year of frothing at the mouth about the Greens voting with the Government, is now intending to vote, sitting alongside Bob Brown, to end offshore processing for this country.
HOST: Prime Minister, don't you think it's unusual that we have a Labor Prime Minister trying to circumvent the High Court and the United Nations when it comes to the human rights of asylum seekers?
PM: Everything I do, everything this Government will ever do, will be completely in accord with our United Nations obligations under the Refugee Convention. Labor always has and always will uphold our Refugee Convention obligations, that's who we are, it's in our DNA to be a kind of political party that looks to multilateral work, that looks to the United Nations, and that accepts important conventions like the Refugee Convention. And everything I am proposing with the Malaysia arrangement is in accord with our obligations under that convention.
HOST: But Prime Minister, the High Court ruled against you, that's why you're having to make these changes and the fact is Malaysia is not a signatory.
PM: Well let's be clear about what the High Court ruled about Lisa. The High Court didn't consider the merits of the arrangement with Malaysia, it was construing the Migration Act, and it took a different construction that what has been done in the past and it's put this Government in a different position than government's were in the past. So Mr Howard's Government was able to send asylum seekers to a non-refugee signatory country, the High Court has now made a different set of decisions. What I am seeking to do is to have this Government and governments in the future in the same position that Prime Minister Howard's Government was and that is able to make appropriate decisions about offshore processing. In making a decision about Malaysia we have worked with Malaysia to make sure that the things that are really important about the Refugee Convention, the things that are pivotal to the humane treatment of refugees are catered for. That is people won't be returned to a country where they could be persecuted, their claims will be processed and they will have access to the ability to work and to schooling and health services and the like.
So we've worked hard on that, but we want to enter into this arrangement because I don't want to see boats, Lisa. I don't want to see people risking their life at sea and paying a people smuggler to do it, that's what this is about. Now, I understand that Mr Abbott doesn't agree with the Malaysia arrangement and that's a matter for him, but what he shouldn't do in a destructive way, is use his votes in this Parliament to stop the Government having the same power that he sought for the Howard Government to have. He had that power when he was in government, this Government should have that power too. I'm not ruling out his solution in this government legislation, if he's ever Prime Minister, based on this legislation he could implement the solution that he prefers. He shouldn't rule out the Government's solution in an act of negative and reckless politics.
HOST: OK, alright, just finally Prime Minister, you would know that the third episode of the sitcom At Home with Julia is on the ABC tonight. One scene depicting you and a character like your partner Tim, naked under the Australian flag. Are you offended by that image?
PM: Look, Lisa I won't be watching it and I'm not intending to comment on it.
HOST: No comment at all? You don't think you should put on the public record, because there's been a lot of talk about it over the last 24 hours?
PM: Lisa, I've got some bigger things on my mind, so I'm not intending to comment on it.
HOST: OK, you certainly do have a busy day ahead and Prime Minister thank you very much for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks Lisa. 



HOST: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins me in our Canberra studios at Parliament House. Prime Minister good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Jon.
HOST: The deadlock on asylum seeker policy seems to means that we're going to end up with a policy that neither major party wants and that you, in fact, say also won't work. Why won't you compromise?
PM: Jon I've worked hard and worked to extend to the Leader of the Opposition the ground he needs and the information he needs to make the right decision in the nation's interest. I've made sure he's fully briefed, including by legal advisers, I met with him personally and I am continuing to say to the Leader of the Opposition that he should act in the national interest. The legislation that we will bring to the Parliament does not rule out his Nauru option and he should not be seeking to rule out the Government's preferred option of Malaysia, which we have strongest possible advice is the best deterrent to people getting on leaky boats and potentially losing their lives.
HOST: But last night on 7.30 he was asked about this issue and his answer was fairly straightforward in articulating what he sees the role of opposition to be:
ABBOTT: Well, the Executive Government will put its proposals to the Parliament and the Parliament will deal with them, but there has never been any principle that says that the opposition has got to support bad policy from a bad government to give a blank cheque to the Executive.
HOST: Bad policy from a bad government Prime Minister.
PM: Tony Abbott, playing politics when the national interest requires him to do something else. This is a time for something more than politics as usual. Australians are sick of this Jon, they want to see their national leaders working together to get something effective done on the question of refugees and asylum seekers and I'm determined to do it.
We will bring the legislation to the Parliament and Tony Abbott appears to want to just slam the door on the national interest, that was clearly what he did on Monday when he basically said he would slam the door on the national interest. I continue to say to him and to members of the Liberal Party and the National Party, that they will have to walk into the Parliament and vote, their votes will be recorded and if they vote against offshore processing effectively, they will end offshore processing in this country-
HOST: Your version of it. Your version of it-
PM:No Jon. They will be voting against legislation which is not my version of it. They will be voting against legislation which empowers Executive Government, this Government or governments in the future, to have the same range of choices that the Howard Government had in the past, that's what they're voting against.
HOST: And your job  -  and you lose face, not him  -  your job is to deliver outcomes, his job is not, his job is to articulate what might make him the next Prime Minister. So you failed to get your policies through, he then promises at the next election  -  this is his strategy surely  -  to say well I'll fix the problem that Julia Gillard failed to fix, leave it up to me and I'll do it. And that leaves you looking vulnerable and him looking as if he's got a solution? That's the strategy.
PM: Well, first and foremost, I don't agree with your characterisation of the job of the Leader of the Opposition. I believe the job of the Leader of the Opposition is to pay regard to the national interest. Now Tony Abbott might think the national interest should never trouble his mind and the only thing he should ever think about is the political interest, his own political interest. But I do not believe that that is the right characterisation of his job, he's got an obligation to the nation-
HOST: No, his-
PM: -second Jon and I am going to make this point, because it's very important for you to understand and your listeners to understand  -  Tony Abbott cannot put in place his Nauru option without legislation. You just said to me, well he'll go to the next election saying he'll fix the problem, well he cannot put in place his Nauru policy without a change in the legislation. A change in legislation that I will bring to the Parliament, the change that I will bring to the Parliament, that the Government will bring to the Parliament, would enable Tony Abbott if he was ever Prime Minister of this country to implement the Nauru option and he can't do it without huge legal risk without legislation-
HOST: Don't you think-
PM: All he is being asked to do is to vote for legislation which would enable him, if he was ever Prime Minister to put in place the Nauru option, even if that is in the teeth of very strong expert advice that it won't work and it will be very costly. My simple point to him is he should not rule out the Government's option, we are not seeking to rule out his, we are just seeking to give Executive Government the power it needs to act and if Tony Abbott smashes that then he effectively smashes the ability of this nation to have offshore processing and I think he'll be judged by that.
HOST: It's ridiculous, isn't it, that this issue that ought be a third or fourth tier of political significance is dominating our national agenda when there are so many more important things that ought to be occupying your mind?PM: I continue to work on all areas Jon. Of course this is dominating the public conversation and it's a very important issue in the nation's interest. At the same time, we continue to debate the carbon pricing legislation and we will deliver a price on carbon and a clean energy future. At the same time I spend my days, and I will today as well, speaking about the economy and about jobs and prosperity for Australians and how we best manage this patchwork economy of ours  -  strong overall, but obviously with pressures in parts  -  to ensure that people have jobs and prosperity for the future.
So that continues, as all of that work continues, as the national debate on asylum seekers rightly dominates a lot of the media coverage. This is dominating because of the recklessness being shown here by the Leader of the Opposition. He had an opportunity on Monday to act in the national interest, every request he had made of government had been responded to, he wanted a briefing, he was given it, he wanted a legal briefing, he was given it, he made some remarks on the amendments he was presented with, we presented him with new amendments which addressed some of those concerns and in the face of all of that he has still decided to go down this reckless, negative path. And we all know what it's about Jon  -  he actually wants to see more boats because he thinks that's in his political interest and he's absolutely terrified that the Malaysia arrangement would work and that's why he wants to try and stop the Government implementing it. Well it isn't good enough, the Leader of the Opposition has an obligation to conduct himself in the national interest and we will keep calling on him to do so and the pages of history in Hansard will record whether or not he's met that obligation.
HOST: You're continuing to put your climate change agenda through the Parliament and the debates will through this session continue to dominate. The state governments, Liberal state governments by and large, are doing their best to help their Federal opposition colleagues. Yesterday Ted Baillieu was again mentioning the Deloitte Access Economics report claiming, as did the Treasurer here in Victoria Kim Wells, that Victoria will be hit hardest by your climate change legislation.
PM: I think Premier Baillieu and his Liberal colleagues interstate would be better off sticking to their day job and actually doing what they should do as state premiers, than doing Tony Abbott's bidding and being out there pedalling false claims and fear.
HOST: What's false about it?
PM: What's false about it? Well, there's a long list Jon, but I'll whizz through it as quickly as I can. Firstly, it doesn't model in our jobs and competiveness program in its entirety, that is the program that supports businesses to make sure they are internationally competitive and can keep offering people jobs-
HOST: So it's talking about the debits, but not the credits, if you want to put it in those terms?
PM: Correct. Second, it overestimates the growth in emissions, so does that more than any other modelling. So once you say emissions are growing far higher, then obviously the task of cutting them five per cent is a far biggest task, so it makes a whole different set of assumptions on that than has been by any other modelling.
Third, it assumes that all electricity price rises are the result of putting a price on carbon, whereas Jon you and I know electricity prices have been going up in Victoria and they will continue to go up for factors not in any way associated with pricing carbon, so it makes the wrong assumption there.
Then it purports to give regional effects, sub-regional effects for smaller geographical areas than the State of Victoria and the consistent advice of Commonwealth Treasury has been that you can't do that with reliability.
HOST: OK, my time's running out. Have you yet had a chance to have a look at any of the episodes the ABC's screened of the comedy about you, At Home with Julia?
PM: I did watch the first episode, not on the night that it was shown, but at a later time. I'm not intending to watch tonight's episode, I've got more to do Jon.
HOST: Did you laugh when you saw it?
PM: Look Jon, I think aspects of that first episode was funny, but seriously I've got more to do than sit around watching ABC TV, with respect.
HOST: I don't doubt that. Was your partner Tim Mathieson offended?
PM: Look Jon, I'm really not going to be drawn on lots of commentary about this. I've got some very serious issues on my mind that are about the national interest.
HOST: Well, on that  -  Liberal backbencher Theresa Gambaro says the ABC should be punished or even some say it should be stopped this episode from going to air, that involves you and  -  well, the comedian playing you and the comedian playing your partner engaged in a little bit of a romp in the prime ministerial suite. Do you think the ABC should be punished?
PM: Jon, I'm not engaging in commentary on this and I'm not going to help you with a cross promotion.
HOST: I think you just did. Well, I don't know that it's a cross promotion either, it's also about whether or not you are able to accept that people might be getting a laugh at your expense or whether you think it's wrong, I suppose.
PM: Jon, you know me fairly well, you know I've got a good sense of humour, but I'm not going to be drawn on further commentary on this matter.
HOST: My favourite bit in the first episode, at the risk of pushing it just too far, is when the character playing you had a sip on a mug that was a Kevin 07 coffee mug and went “Oh, bitter”. I actually thought that was one of the funniest things I've seen for quite a while.
PM: Well Jon, I'm glad you enjoyed it.
HOST: I can't even draw out of you whether you thought that was a funny moment?
PM: Jon  -  end of commentary. Full stop.
HOST: We'll be doing our TV analysis later on and maybe we'll get more from David Knox than we have with the Prime Minister this morning. I'm grateful to you for your time this morning in our Canberra studios Julia Gillard. 



It's a great pleasure to welcome you to the nation's capital to share in this important gathering.
TTF is a serious organisation with a serious agenda.
Through your advocacy and research over 21 years, you've earned a front seat in the reform conversation.
I'm proud to share and extend that conversation here with you this morning.
With our historic Clean Energy Future Bills currently in the Parliament, there couldn't be a better time to emphasise the timeliness and urgency of reform.
Reform is what we do to ensure the future is better than today.
Reform means taking care of the nation's business.
The hard tasks that never become easier with deferral and delay.
As advocates for infrastructure, you understand what I mean.
You watched through the 2000s as the project list grew longer and the political will grew shorter.
An infrastructure deficit compounded by a skills deficit.
By repeated, failed plans to roll out nation-wide broadband and deal with Telstra's market domination.
By a tax and welfare system that penalised effort and kept too many working-age people out of a job.
And a succession of false starts on dealing with the scientific and economic reality of climate change.
Labor came to government to do the nation's work.
It hasn't always been perfect.
But that decade worth of backlog is now being broken away, piece by piece.
Our reforms have always been the right thing for the nation.
But they take on an even deeper significance as the Asian century unfolds before us.
Yes, we are in period of uncertainty due in part to events in Europe and the US, and I don't underestimate their seriousness for a moment.
But it is precisely our location in the Asia Pacific, at the right time in history, that positions us very differently than before.
Thanks to the work of reform since 1983, and really since Whitlam cemented ties with China in 1972, our fortunes have increasingly been connected to the dynamism of the region in which we live.
Well and truly within our lifetimes, the economies of China and then India will surpass the United States economy in size.
By just 2030, two-thirds of word's middle class consumers are expected to be located in the Asia Pacific region.
Like us, they will enjoy access to international travel, purchase consumer goods and services, and seek excellent levels of education.
To put it simply, Asia will not only be the world's biggest production zone but also the biggest consumption zone.
As a result, the Australian economy of the future will look different to the economy of today.
The demand for minerals that results from Asia's growth is not a short-term mining boom like the late 60s or the early 80s.
Our terms of trade are high and may remain high for decades.
We need to be honest about the change that this is bringing to our economy.
This long-term transformation is creating pressure on sectors that export or compete with imports, and that pressure is unlikely to recede.
Industries like manufacturing and tourism will have a place in the future Australian economy, but only if they continue to become smarter.
With investments in quality, technology and innovation, we know that they can be.
Indeed, we should be confident that with Asia's transformation comes Australia's opportunity.
It means rising demand for minerals and petroleum products.
But it means so much more.
Asia's rise means growing markets for our services and quality manufactured goods.
In fact, it's worth keeping mining in some perspective.
Despite the big increase in mineral prices, Australia earned more from providing services to China last year than it did from selling coal.
Since 2003, the mining sector has grown at an annual average rate of 1.8 percent, while the services sector has grown by 3.1 percent.
Services exports to China have grown at an annual rate of about 20 per cent over the past decade.
Jobs in mining itself don't even begin to exhaust the opportunities that are emerging from Asia's expansion.
There is a rich cluster of associated industries such as engineering, logistics and transport, chemical products such as explosives, and information technology.
Add to it finance, accounting and legal services.
Tourism and education.
Fine food and wine.
Creative industries and media.
Things Australia is good at.
Things Asia will want to buy.
Our priority, as it has always been, is to create jobs and seize opportunities for Australia:
To achieve sustained prosperity for the whole nation, brought about through balanced economic growth.
But only the reform road takes us there.
Reform for our needs and reform for our times.
I am frequently disappointed, but never surprised, when I hear pundits say that all we need to do is raise the GST and bring back WorkChoices and all will be well.
It is a narrow analysis that completely misreads the circumstances in which Australia is placed.
An illusion that misrepresents the past and endangers the future.
It misrepresents the past because the prosperity of the 2000s, though real, was in many ways lazy prosperity.
Productivity fell behind.
We didn't invest in the capabilities that could make the Asian century work for us.
If we are to build a modern, strong, resilient economy, it will take more effort on the things that have not been a big part of our economy in the past.
Like clean energy, innovation, infrastructure, skills.
That is how we create jobs and opportunity in the 21st century. 
The things we didn't do in the 2000s.
The things that will modernise our economy to make it more productive.
That's why our Government from day one in 2007 has put in place the building blocks to gear our economy to unlock competitiveness and enhance growth.
Addressing patchwork pressures, and keeping our whole economy strong.
We will continue to invest in people through better training so they can get new jobs and better jobs.
That's why in the last budget we outlined a $3 billion skills package and measures to promote workforce participation.
With the NBN, we will make Australia the most connected continent on the planet.
The NBN is expected to generate some $37 billion of economic activity over the life of the project.
Remember that innovation from ICT is the single biggest driver of business productivity.
It drives 78% of productivity gains in service businesses and 85% in manufacturing businesses.
Not cutting wages and conditions.
We will continue building the infrastructure that gets our goods to market and our people to work.
We're making long term infrastructure investments
Like urban rail projects to unclog our cities.
Port facilities to free-up our exports.
Tackling the big legacy projects like completing the Pacific Highway upgrade by 2016.
And improving the quality of infrastructure through reforms to taxation and the way we plan for the future.
We will protect our ‘soft infrastructure'  -  our people  -  with health, disability and aged care reforms that shield them from the misfortune that can touch us all.
Reforms driven by transparency, quality and choice.
We will create a seamless national economy, where federalism works for our nation's interests not against them.
A national school curriculum to help families who move interstate.
National regulation of the medical and legal professions.
National workplace and OH&amp;S laws.
Single national regulators for the transport sector.
A one-stop shop to register business names instead of separate systems in every State and Territory.
We will keep reforming the tax system to reward effort and foster innovation.
We've cut taxes most for the lowest paid and to attract those outside the workforce.
We will help maximise the benefits from the mining boom to increase competitiveness across the entire economy through a cut to the corporate tax rate and tax breaks for small business.
At next month's Tax Forum, we will discuss options for a business tax system that supports, rather than inhibits change.
A business tax system that adds to the flexibility of the Australian economy will help us make the most of challenges and opportunities that we face.
And friends, we will create a future where economic growth is decoupled from emissions growth, and carbon finally has a price.
Not just because it's right thing for the environment and for future generations.
But because our economic prospects demand it.
Global investment will flow to countries that have made the switch to a low carbon future and have efficient and modern industries.
Australia's businesses will find increasing international demand for their research and technologies that generate less pollution and reduce energy consumption.
Don't let anyone tell you our carbon price legislation won't lead to change.
It will put change on steroids.
By 2050, the share of Australia's electricity coming from renewable sources will increase from 10 to 40 per cent.
We'll see $100 billion invested in renewable energy.
We will see sweeping changes in our energy supply, in our industrial production and consumer behaviour.
The nations that succeed in the 21stcentury will be those that decouple economic growth from carbon pollution growth.
The rust bucket, smokestack economies will be those that get left behind.
I don't want Australia to be one of them.
That's why pricing carbon truly is a “generation-defining policy decision”.
Friends, the legislation to achieve these things is before the House of Representatives, literally today.
The fourth time this issue has come before the Parliament.
Two decades since the need for action was signalled at the Rio Earth Summit.
After all those years of discussion and debate, the time for words is over.
The time for deeds has arrived.
Business always claims that it seeks certainty and fears its absence.
I offer these two certainties today:
 * 	The carbon price will be law by Christmas.
 * 	The carbon price will commence on July 1 and today's claims that the sky will fall in, will be shown to be silly, reckless and wrong.
That is the certainty I bring to the table.
The uncertainty comes from the other side of politics who are not just content with denying the science and denying the economics.
They are prepared to surrender our nation to the chaos and confusion of ripping this carbon price out of the Australian economy:
Rescinding tax cuts.
Rescinding pension increases.
Destroying private property rights.
Unravelling commercial loans.
Creating another decade of uncertainty.
And only ensuring that we have to go through it all over again.
Just like Fraser junked Medibank and we had to go through it all again under the Hawke Government to reinstate Medicare.
Because the science won't go away.
The economics won't go away.
Therefore this is our best and last chance to get this right.
To get it right.
And keep it right.
Friends, this conference is about leadership.
My Government's task is to lead our country through this period of transformation.
To help navigate us towards a better future.
We are a young nation with an incredible capacity for self-renewal.
We did it in the postwar era with the immigration program.
We did it in the 60s and 70s through progressive social change under Dunstan, Whitlam and Wran.
We did it in the 80s and 90s with the Hawke-Keating reforms to our economy.
This is a nation capable of thinking big and looking far ahead.
It is not the fearful nation that others are appealing to.
I don't recognise Australia in that version of our nation.
It is not the Australia I know and believe in.
My Australia is a nation that has done great things and will do them again.
We will manage change.
We will face the world.
And together we will succeed.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Mental Health and Ageing Mark Butler today paid tribute to founder of R U OK? Day Gavin Larkin who passed away on Wednesday afternoon. 
The Gillard Government offers our condolences to Mr Larkin's wife Maryanne and children Gus, Josie and Van. 
Under Mr Larkin's leadership, R U OK? Day has become a national day of action for suicide prevention in just two years. 
Mr Larkin's unwavering passion and determination to give a national focus to suicide prevention has generated enormous community awareness of the role individuals can play to help reduce the tragedy of suicide. 
Mr Larkin's work has ensured that many Australians, both at home and in the workplace, have received much needed help and saved many lives. 
The success of R U OK? Day is testament to Mr Larkin's commitment to his vision that a conversation truly can change a life. 



PM: Good afternoon.
As the Minister for Home Affairs has advised, we have interdicted a suspected illegal entry vessel and the HMAS Pirie has responded to a distress call at sea. So, we have confronted two boats - one that has been interdicted, one that was in distress.
It's against this backdrop that I want to explain is a crystal clear way what happened in the Parliament yesterday and what Australia faces on border security.
Yesterday the Government commenced the debate on its amendments to the Migration Act. These amendments are necessary following the High Court case. Without these amendments no government could process asylum seekers offshore.
When faced with the Government's amendments, Mr Abbott moved - or has indicated he will move - an amendment to the legislation which would confine the options of government, this Government and governments in the future, in relation to offshore processing. Specifically, it would prevent the Government putting into operation the arrangement that we have made with Malaysia.
During the course of yesterday's Parliamentary proceedings it became obvious from statements made in the parliament and beyond the parliament during the course of those proceedings that Mr Abbott's amendment will fail in the Parliament. Mr Bandt, Mr Wilkie, Mr Oakeshott and Mr Windsor have now indicated they will vote against the Leader of the Opposition's amendment and the Government will of course vote against the Leader of the Opposition's amendment.
This means as we left the Parliament last night it was crystal clear that when the Parliament resumes and this debate resumes that Mr Abbott's amendment will fail.
That means the choices in the Parliament are also very clear. There are only two: passing the Government's legislation and enabling executive government to make appropriate arrangements for offshore processing of asylum seekers; or seeing that legislation fail, in which case this Government and governments in the future would have no option except to process asylum seekers onshore. That is the choice.
Now, there have been many weeks now of debate and discussion about the merits of various options for the processing of asylum seekers. That debate in many ways is now at one side because the proposition that will come to the parliament once Mr Abbott's amendment fails is a very clear one: either government has the power to act - or it doesn't; either Australia can process offshore - or it can't; either the Government has the power to enter into the arrangement with Malaysia and put it into effect and future government has the power if it chooses and is elected to implement a policy in relation to Nauru - or no government has that power. That is the choice before the parliament.
There are now two weeks before the parliamentary session resumes. In those two weeks I believe every Member of the Parliament should reflect on the clarity of this position. I believe the Leader of the Opposition should reflect, and so should every member of the Liberal Party and the National Party.
This is not a time for Mr Abbott to simply press the ‘no' button again and just say no.
This is a time for Mr Abbott to reflect on whether or not he will use his vote and the votes of the Liberal and National Parties in the parliament to prevent this Government or governments in the future from having the power to process asylum seekers offshore.
He has no hope of his amendment getting up, so that is the only choice that he is making.
The right to vote in Parliament comes with responsibilities and when you exercise your vote then you need to be responsible for the consequences.
If Mr Abbott exercises his vote so no government has the power to process asylum seekers offshore, then that comes with a responsibility. It comes with the responsibility of Mr Abbott saying to the Australian people very clearly that when he has said that he wants to stop the boats, that wasn't true, and whenever he says it in the future it should never be taken as being true by the Australian people.
The right to vote in this Parliament comes with responsibility, and if Mr Abbott ends the ability of government to process offshore, then he must also take the responsibility for the consequences that lack of resolve will send to people smugglers. They will be watching this parliament to see what resolve this parliament has. If they see no resolve then that means that we will see more boats and Mr Abbot will need to take the responsibility for that.
Mr Abbott will also to take the responsibility for the expansion of detention and processing in this country. If he has exercised his vote so it is not possible to process offshore, then he takes the responsibility for onshore processing arrangements being extended.
So, we need to very clear after yesterday's parliamentary debate and after the circumstances of these two boats.
Mr Abbott is frequently heard to say that he wants to stop the boats. Today I believe Mr Abbott should be reflecting on whether those words have ever had any meaning to him or and whether they will have any meaning to him in the future. He will be judged on how he casts his vote in the House of Representatives when it resumes.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, hasn't it always been the case with parliamentary democracy that absent a majority in both houses, a government has never had a right to automatically get its legislation through both houses of parliament unchanged and without negotiation? Are you prepared to negotiate at all, as governments in the past have had to do on every Bill they've put through in a minority situation?
PM: You seem to have forgotten that I sat in my office on Monday with the Leader of the Opposition. I gave him amendments, amendments that had reflected and been amended because he'd expressed concerns over the weekend following a legal briefing we'd made available to him.
So, let's go through the course of dealing here. I've been in Opposition and I don't remember too many circumstances where a government extended such courtesy to the Opposition. He asked for a briefing from the Government's experts - he was given that briefing, and every day since he has made statements that are untrue against what he was told in that briefing.
He asked for a legal briefing - he was given that legal briefing. He expressed some concerns following that legal briefing, and the Government changed the amendments that it was going to present to the parliament.
When I gave him those amendments in my private meeting with him he said to me he would consider them. I assumed that meant he would consider them in good faith. We had a discussion about the timeframes in which he was likely to come back to me. The first I heard that he had rejected those amendments was when he chose to give a media conference about it.
So the Government has at all stages acting in good faith here and the legislation we have before the parliament represents common ground; represents common ground in the sense that it would enable Mr Abbott, if he was ever Prime Minister of this country, to implement his preferred plan.
I mean, one of the grand ironies here is Mr Abbott's proposed course of action would deny him the power he would need to process asylum seekers on Nauru if he were ever Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is it your understanding that the legislation can pass the lower house if the Oakeshott amendment is attached to it?
PM: There is speculation in today's newspapers and I understand that this is inevitable about the position of the crossbenchers on the legislation and we are still in discussion with some people, but we only get to that question if Mr Abbott walks into the Parliament to trash the national interest and to end offshore processing. We only get into that position if Mr Abbott's view is that there should be more boats.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're talking about responsibility here, so who takes responsibility for these two boats today?
PM: Well, let's be very clear about where I think responsibility lies. If the parliament, when it resumes, doesn't send a message of resolve to people smugglers, if Mr Abbott prevents us sending that message of resolve, then that will send a message up the people smuggling pipeline to send more boats and that will be Mr Abbott's responsibility.
Second, if Mr Abbott denies the national interest and denies government, this Government and future governments, the power to process offshore, then he will have to take the responsibility for the onshore detention network and processing expanding. We had been advised post the High Court case that people smugglers would be watching, they would be waiting, they would be assessing what was going to happen next in Australia - and we've seen these two boats.
Yes, Sid.
JOURNALIST: Why didn't you put the vote last night, Prime Minister? We've got two weeks now of limbo and people smugglers arriving, so why not put it last night?
PM: Well, the Government did want to get on with the debate with all due expedition. The Opposition had indicated earlier in the week it was prepared to do that. It became apparent during the course of yesterday that that was yet another false set of words from the Opposition and they had no meaning. So, in those circumstances the Government determined that the best course was to have the debate when parliament resumes, rather than perhaps trying to get people to sit all night and for days to deal with the legislation.
JOURNALIST: Did you have the numbers last night?
PM: Well, as is clear on the public record, the House of Representatives will defeat Mr Abbott's amendment. So, the question before the Parliament becomes, ‘will the legislation pass', that's right, and that question can only be answered in the House of Representatives when we vote and when we see whether or not Mr Abbott will be exercising his vote and the vote of the Liberal Party and the National Party to deny this Government and future governments the ability to process offshore.
JOURNALIST: But did you have the numbers last night?
PM: I'm in discussion with the crossbenchers and those discussions will continue, but to be frank, why should Independent members of this Parliament shoulder a responsibility when Mr Abbott, as the alternate Prime Minister of this country, has absolutely none that he is prepared to shoulder?
I'm asking the crossbenchers about those things and having good conversations with them, they are people concerned about the national interest, but doesn't that just beg the question that we're only in that position because the alternate Prime Minister of this country, having campaigned on four slogans in the last election, one of which was ‘stop the boats', is now saying to the Australian people he'll do anything he can, apparently, to ensure that there are more boats.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you confident that every member of the Labor Party will vote for your legislation, with no-one abstaining, and on a second point, your criticisms of Mr Abbott, you don't make them of Bob Brown. Why isn't it in the national interest for Bob Brown to give Executive Government the power it needs?
PM: Let's be clear - it's in the interest of every member of the House of Representatives, and that's what we're talking about at this point, to vote for this legislation. I'd be urging every member of the House of Representatives to do that, Mr Bandt and every other member of the House of Representatives.
I'm also very realistic that Senator Brown's policy position is that he supports onshore processing, so I presume he will vote in accordance with that policy position. Mr Abbott's policy position is that he supports offshore processing and he's going to use his vote in this parliament to destroy the ability for all time for this nation to process asylum seekers offshore.
It therefore seems to me most logical to say to the person who has got a policy of offshore processing that they should exercise the responsibility of voting to give government the ability to process offshore.
I'd also say this: in terms of national responsibility I do believe the alternate Prime Minister is in a different position from Senator Brown. I do believe that he has more responsibility on his shoulders. Now if it's the position of Tony Abbott that he views himself to be Senator Brown's equivalent, or perhaps in terms of responsibilities something less than Senator Brown, then he should make that very clear to the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: Just on Phil's question on abstentions?
PM: Labor Members of the House of Representatives will vote in accordance with the Labor Caucus position. People will vote in accordance with the Labor Caucus position.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if I may, you've sat opposite Tony Abbott in various guises for many years in this parliament. You seem to be, in what you're saying today, acting in the belief that he is still in some way persuadable. What gives you any confidence from what you know of this man that he is for turning now?
PM: Well, I believe this is for more than Tony Abbott. When we have this vote in the parliament every member of the Liberal Party and every member of the National Party will be required to record their vote. This includes many people who over the years have advocated offshore processing. For example, it includes Phillip Ruddock. What is being proposed now is that Phillip Ruddock would walk into the parliament and vote to end for all time the ability of our nation to process asylum seekers offshore - Phillip Ruddock, who worked for years on offshore processing.
I believe it's not just Tony Abbott who needs to think on these questions: it's every member of the Liberal Party and every member of the National Party who will have their vote recorded for all time.
It's also every person who supports those political parties in this country. Many active members of the Liberal and National Party would have a very determined view about border security. Well, this is an opportunity for them to make their voices heard to their Liberal and National Party representatives.
Dennis.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) common ground and the fact that Mr Abbott's position will rule out offshore processing. Isn't the choice between the Government's Act and Mr Abbott's amendments, both include offshore processing but they had different destinations  -  Malaysia and Nauru. What's the practical effect of accepting Mr Abbott's amendment and continuing offshore processing but effectively in Nauru?
PM: Firstly, Mr Abbott's amendment is doomed to fail. By the time we vote on the legislation, Mr Abbott's amendment will have failed in the House of Representatives. Mr Abbott doesn't have that as political cover any more. He should stop pretending to the Australian people that he does.
The vote he will face in the House of Representatives is yes, no, offshore processing. That's it. No nuances, no cover up, no spin, no slogans - yes, no, off-shore processing.
Should Mr Abbott's amendment in a different world be carried by the parliament, and it won't be, but should it be carried by the parliament it would mean more boats.
Yes, Andrew.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) I know you don't like answering hypotheticals, but assuming it doesn't go through - 
PM: -So you want me to assume the alternate Prime Minister of the country trashes the national interest? Yes?
JOURNALIST: How sustainable is it for you to run a political campaign where by every boat that arrives from here on is Tony Abbott's fault?
PM: It won't be a political campaign. It will be a matter of fact.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: What explanation, if any, have you sought from Kevin Rudd's supporters and from the Foreign Minister himself for the suggestions that his supporters are canvassing among the backbench to replace you with him?
PM: This was a Liberal distraction from a national interest question yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Have you sought any explanation from the Foreign Minister?
PM: Why would I bother seeking an explanation about a Liberal distraction?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you talk about Tony Abbott taking responsibility, but shouldn't Kevin Rudd take some as well for ending offshore processing in the first place?
PM: Well, let's be clear about ending offshore processing.
Of course, the Government takes responsibilities for decisions it's made. When Nauru was closed there were people there who had been processed and were genuine refugees and needed to be re-settled and a number of them were re-settled in Australia and people had been re-settled in Australia from Nauru by the Howard Government and some had been re-settled in Indonesia.
What that meant was that the message had gone to the people smugglers that if you end up being processed in Nauru then there's a fair chance that you'll get an opportunity to re-settle in Australia. That message had already gone up the people smuggling pipe-line. 
Now, we are being told very clearly by the same experts who advised the Howard Government  -  people they trusted, people they relied on, people that they very directly dealt with  -  we are being told by the very same experts that Nauru does not send the same deterrence message. I don't think that in the face of that advice today you should make some assumption that somehow it would have continued to have sent a deterrence message when people smugglers knew that if you got processed there you had a fair chance of getting to Australia. 
So, you're making an assumption that I think you need to think about given the clarity of the expert advice today that Nauru does not have a deterrence message. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you about the turmoil in the markets, the financial institutions, at the moment? 
PM: We are seeing turmoil on international markets, you're right. Many Australians would be seeing that and would be concerned about it and I understand that it does make people concerned when they see that turmoil on international markets. 
It's very important though, that people understand, even as they see that turmoil, that here in Australia the fundamentals of our economy are strong. Whether it's today or yesterday or the day before or whether it's tomorrow, whatever we see on international markets in the time in between, the fundamentals of the Australian economy are strong  -  low unemployment, low public debt, a strong banking system, growth, employment prospects, record terms of trade, hundreds of billions of dollars in the investment pipe-line. 
So, if you go back 48 hours, if you go forward 48 hours, those fundamentals are there throughout. People should remember that even as they see this turmoil on international markets.
Phil.
JOURNALIST: In the letter that you co-authored with the other non-European members of the G20 to Sarkozy overnight you've warned that if they don't sort themselves out the contagion will spread. Are the fundamentals of our economy strong enough, do you believe, to withstand that, and what your fears have warned against?
PM: We are raising our voices to say that leaders in Europe need to resolve the sovereign debt questions that we have seen manifest in Europe. Clearly I had the opportunity to talk to the President of the European Commission about that when he visited here, and I believe it was important to make that point very clearly, too, by co-authoring this letter. So, the world is looking for Europe to show the leadership necessary to solve the difficulties there. The IMF during the course of this week has effectively made the same point.
But here in our economy, our exposure to Europe, whilst of course we're not immune - we're not immune from global economic events, we're not immune from the impacts that has on global growth - our growth is predominantly powered out of the growing region where we live and our trading partners like China, for example.
So we are a nation with strong economic fundamentals, the envy of the world. We do have strength and resilience even as we see these things in other parts of the world, but it would be better for the global economy if Europe could show the leadership necessary to resolve the difficulties there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the leadership question, has anyone conveyed to you that you will be given until Christmas to turn the polls around and then the Caucus might have another look at that question, and can you understand why Labor backbenchers might be feeling really nervous about the way your leadership is at the moment?
PM: What I can understand is that there was a Liberal distraction yesterday. Tony Abbott didn't want the Australian people clearly understanding during yesterday's debate that he was proposing to exercise his votes in the Parliament in the certain knowledge that his amendment was going to be defeated to trash the national interest.
So yes, we saw a Liberal distraction campaign. I can understand that causes excitement and chatter amongst the parliamentary press gallery, but you wouldn't want to get confused between a Liberal distraction campaign and the realities.
The answer your question is no.
Thank you very much. 



Her Majesty The Queen and His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh will visit the capital cities of Canberra, Brisbane, Melbourne and Perth during their visit to Australia next month.
The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh will arrive in Canberra on Wednesday 19th October before travelling to Brisbane on Monday 24th October and Melbourne on Wednesday 26th October. It will be a great opportunity to visit these state capitals.
The Royal couple will conclude their trip in Perth from Wednesday 26th October to Saturday 29th October, which will include the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.
Visits by The Queen are etched into the collective memory of the Australian people. Many Australians can recall Her Majesty's previous visits as landmarks in their own lives.
It will be with great honour that I welcome The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh back to Australia.
I particularly look forward to their attendance at CHOGM and look forward to our discussions to further the ideals and goals of the Commonwealth.
The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh last visited Australia in 2006 for the opening of the 2006 Commonwealth Games. 



Can I acknowledge today:
David Whitely, Chief Executive, Industry Super Network.
Ged Kearney, President of the ACTU.
Jeff Lawrence, Secretary of the ACTU.
The Honourable John Cain, Former Premier of Victoria.
I see Garry Weaven. 
Garry doesn't need an introduction from me to a room like this  -  a giant in this industry  -  still working for the good guys too.
And I see so many other comrades and colleagues, allies and friends.
Friends, there are some rooms where you feel like a visitor, some like a friend, some where you feel like you're at home.
For any Labor Prime Minister, a room full of industry super funds people is a good room to be in.
Because universal superannuation is a great Labor achievement.
Universal super is a great Labor reform.
Some people in Australia had always had superannuation, it took Labor in Government to make it universal.
That is how we govern.
Informed by our values  -  and walking the reform road.
Determined to spread opportunity to all and determined to leave no one behind and determined to bring those values to concrete reality through visionary economic reform.
Every Australian is better off because of the decision to introduce universal superannuation.
It's built greater security for every Australian worker.
Lifting income in retirement.
And it's built a savings pool for the whole Australian economy.
So the world's seventeenth biggest economy  -  has the fourth biggest pool of managed funds on the globe.
The founders of universal superannuation saw the opportunities on the reform road  -  and measured them with hard headed analysis of the economic environment of their day.
We do the same now.  And hard headed analysis is required.
Despite Australia's strong economy, we've all been given pause for thought  -  frankly, cause for concern  -  by recent developments in Europe and the United States.
There's concern at the kitchen table.
Australians are acutely aware of the escalation in volatility in global financial markets in recent months  -  and of the direct implications for each of them through their superannuation and through the investments in many portfolios.
I know many Australians are watching these developments anxiously. Some retired, some about to retire. To them I say:
In this period of uncertainty, the Government I lead will manage the economy in the interests of every Australian.
We will leave no one behind.
There's concern at the global economy's top table too.
The International Monetary Fund has warned that “the global economy has entered a dangerous new phase” and that downside risks are growing.
The Treasurer is in the United States this week, as you know.
There, he's told global policymakers that while some important steps have been taken, there remains much more to do.
That we cannot ignore the risk that a financial market dislocation in Europe could be transmitted through the global real economy via a big hit to confidence and a reduction in world demand and output.
That while the developing world continues to grow strongly, a loss of confidence could further impact on the already soft recoveries struggling to keep momentum in advanced economies.
That swift and credible action is required to restore confidence among global markets that governments particularly in Europe do have the capacity to resolve this situation.
And as the Treasurer and I have spoken in recent days, we have reflected that in a period where so many are uncertain, these messages must be sent very clearly.
In the world  -  and at home.
So the message to the world is clear:
There is a problem in Europe.
Solutions must now emerge to restore the confidence that markets need. 
Governments must now act.
The message at home is clear as well:
Australia is playing a global role in encouraging a solution.
We are not immune, but we are strong  -  no country is better placed in this challenging economic period.
And we are strong for simple reasons.
First, we have a strong economy, with strong fundamentals.
And second, we have a plan for the future: a plan for growth, a plan for jobs.
The economic story is unfolding day by day  -  with implications for the economy as a whole and for a sector such as yours.
So some background to the current market situation is warranted  -  though many of you here are more than familiar with the course of recent events.
The recent volatility and uncertainty has hurt confidence and increased speculation that downside risks to world growth are beginning to crystallize. 
Two key issues are fuelling the current uncertainty.
First, concerns about the very high levels of government debt in the Euro area and the US.
Second, fears that steps to reduce this debt will retard the patchy recovery of the global economy.
And this combination of circumstances is fuelling significant volatility in European financial markets.
Markets which have been concerned about the private sector's ability to repay debt  -  and which are now worried about whether overseas Governments can meet their debt obligations.
And the EU's measures to increase the flexibility of the European Financial Stability Facility, announced two months ago, remain un-ratified by 12 of Europe's 17 parliaments.
So in the Euro area, markets are now closely examining the potential for a default by one of the highly indebted EU economies  -  and they are weighing up the implications of such an event.
Despite the range of institutional reforms and fiscal adjustments that have been announced across the Euro area, sentiment has deteriorated.
While across the Atlantic markets are genuinely concerned about the strength of the United States' domestic recovery and the likelihood that successful interventions will kickstart jobs and income growth.
In this way, events in the northern hemisphere are conspiring to create a most uncertain outlook.
Australia is playing a global role in encouraging a solution.
Restoring sustainability to European public finances will take years  -  so while that long term repair begins, we need to see solutions emerging to restore the confidence that the markets need.
We are encouraged by the resolve among countries to arrive at a pragmatic solution.
There are signs they are putting the blame-game to one side and working to return confidence and stability to the global financial system.
And European leaders are discussing the need for further changes to institutional frameworks to better align fiscal and monetary policies, including stricter fiscal rules.
But the time for Governments to act is now.
We will continue to take a cooperative and practical approach with our international partners and friends.
Pressing hard for a coordinated global response. 
This week in the US, the Treasurer has been doing just that. 
At home, Australians understand we are not immune from these global developments.
The globally connected nature of financial markets means that volatility in international markets will be felt in Australia, including through returns to superannuation accounts.
But Australians should take some reassurance when these effects  -  and their impact on Australia  -  are seen in their proper perspective.
First, our fundamentals are strong.
Just last week, global ratings agency Standard &amp; Poor's reaffirmed our top-tier AAA-credit rating on the basis of our fiscal strength, strong balance sheet and public policy stability.
We have very low debt  -  our net debt will peak at less than one-tenth of the major advanced economies.
We also have low unemployment because we acted decisively during the crisis  -  in fact the economy has created more than seven hundred thousand jobs since the Government came to office.
We've got some $430 billion of planned investment in our resources sector alone  -  which is stunning relative to our $1.4 trillion economy.
Second, the latest data from our regulatory authorities indicates our banks have negligible direct exposures to peripheral European sovereign debt.
And our advice is there is no Australian bank exposure to Greek public debt.
They also have low exposures to European banks and other borrowers that might be affected immediately by a major financial shock in Europe  -  below 2 per cent of total assets.
Our regulatory environment is the envy of the world.
Our banks survived the global financial crisis  -  they are now better-placed than they were before it.
Stronger capital buffers.
Stronger funding positions than 2007.
Increased holdings of liquid assets  -  up almost half since 2007.
Plus solid profits and relatively low levels of non-performing loans.
We've got a strong and stable banking system which came through the crisis in very good health after many years of tough supervision.
So as they consider the current financial environment Australians can be confident that our banks are well placed.
And third, as they examine their own superannuation, Australians should remember that it is a long-term investment.
Yes, super funds invest widely  -  including in global and local share markets, which have historically generated the greatest long-term returns to investors.
But the majority of super funds also diversify their investments over different asset classes to help minimise the impact of a volatile share market on their members' investments.
Share markets move in cycles and recover from downturns over time, as they did following the GFC.
I know this is no immediate comfort to Australians who've retired recently, or who are about to retire.
They need their savings now  -  and for them, a fall in returns is a cut in take home pay.
This is one reason the government is introducing MySuper.
Not only to ensure workers won't be paying unnecessary fees or charges that erode their retirement nest eggs.
MySuper providers will also be given the option of offering so called “lifecycle strategies” that automatically reduce the level of investment risk when the member reaches a certain age.
So, for example as theyreachretirement their cash allocation automatically increases.
A smart solution for the kind of complex economic situation which is playing out now.
Looking at the global economic situation, Australians can be reassured.
This country, this government, my economic team, have seen uncertain times and even global crisis before and we have demonstrated our resilience as well.
Australia is not immune from the world, but we are strong in the world.
I would not swap our economic position with that of any country.
We have a flexible economy.
We have a strong mix of trading partners.
We have rich resources and their prices are at all-time highs.
We have talented, hard-working, innovative people.
And we have a plan for the future: a plan for growth, a plan for jobs.
Friends, we have a plan for the future of super as well.
Because the future of super is the future of every Australian.
When the aged pension was introduced, the average lifespan was less than the pension age.
Today, living to eighty is the norm  -  a great thing.
And one British scientist, Dr Aubrey De Grey, has ventured to say that the person who will live to 150 has already been born.
Perhaps true, perhaps not.
But we are certainly living longer.
And while our working lives are becoming shorter than our non-working lives  -  the choices we hope for and the security we seek in retirement are only growing.
Financial experts generally believe the average worker will need between 60 and 70 per cent of pre-retirement income to live comfortably.
Nine per cent super is simply not enough to get there, especially for women, who have breaks in their career.
This is why the Government I lead will lift compulsory superannuation contributions from 9 to 12 per cent.
Delivered in a manageable way  -  rolled out over the next eight years  -  but wewill get this thing done.
But just increasing super from 9 to 12 isn't enough.
It's not enough for super to be adequate  -  it must be secure.
As a lawyer I acted for female clothingworkers to get their super paid, and it was a privilege to work with those women.
But employees shouldn't need to turn to lawyers or unions to secure basic entitlements like superannuation  -  it should be a normal part of every workplace.
That's why I'm proud of our Securing Super reforms.
Minister Shorten announced the Securing Super reforms last week, so every employee can see with his or her own eyes that super is being paid, in full and on time.
Employees will receive information on their payslips.
So they know when their superannuation will actually be paid into their accounts  -  and so they can monitor their contributions as well.
We're also ensuring that superannuation concessions flow to those who need them most.
It's of particular concern to me that whilst women live longer than men, their super balances are around 35 percent lower.
It is tragic and unnecessary that the financial independence women treasure so much in their working lives should be lost in their retirements.
Currently, around 2 million women get no tax benefit from super because the 15 per cent contribution tax is higher than their income tax rate.
That's why we are acting on the Henry Review recommendation that superannuation tax concessions be distributed more equitably. That starts from 1 July next year.
60 percent of the beneficiaries of this policy will be women.
It delivers $830 million in additional wealth every year to low income Australians  -  the very people who would otherwise struggle to set this money aside.
It's a Labor policy.
A policy I'm proud of  -  a policy with a very simple core:
To make sure no one is left behind.
I do see many friends in the room today, I see many leaders too.
Because when universal super was introduced, Labor introduced another innovation alongside it:
Industry super funds.
This wasn't just a vision of what could be done differently in this country  -  it was a vision of how it could be done differently as well.
Of how the savings of working Australians would not have to be handed to the big banks and old financial houses at the cost of high fees.
A vision of how those savings could be managed by the representatives of working Australians themselves.
A vision that we could spread opportunity to all, that we could leave no one behind and a vision that we could do it our way. 
By sharing, by sticking together.
Today the industry super funds are multi-billion dollar entities.
With the confidence of our community through their good management, strong returns and low fees.
And in a global economic environment where many feel uncertain  -  in a period where many Australians are anxious about their retirement savings and their retirement income  -  industry super funds have a vital role to play.
Adequate retirement income for every working Australian.
Secure retirement savings for every working Australian.
Australians looking to retirement are looking to you.
A great responsibility  -  but a cause for great pride.
You should feel proud that under David Whiteley's leadership, you stood with us from the earliest days in our determination to secure a better retirement for all Australians.
You stood with us to get rid of the conflicts of interest and the excessive fees.
You stood with us to secure the iconic “opt-in” policy to bring fairness to financial advice.
You stood with us to bring simple, low fee super accounts to every worker who needs one.
You stood with us to distribute super tax concessions more fairly so that all Australians benefit.
You play a role in broader policy debates, on occasion at the vanguard of public policy debates.
Through ISN, you're working with us now on issues from the upcoming tax forum, to banking competition policy and nation building infrastructure.
So yes, universal super is a reform of which Labor Governments are rightly proud.
But universal super is a reform built by leaders in many places and at many levels.
Leaders in unions, leaders in industry, leaders in workplaces, leaders in financial institutions, leaders in ideas.
Many of you here today.
Still leading, still building the future for Australia, still doing it together.
Still spreading opportunity to all, still working to make sure no one is left behind.
Still working for the good guys.
Still walking the reform road. 



The Government has today commissioned a White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century. 
The shift of economic and strategic weight to Asia has never been more rapid or more profound for Australia's interests than it is now.
The White Paper will provide a national blueprint for Australia at a time of transformative economic growth and change in Asia. It will help Australia navigate the Asian Century  -  to seize the opportunities it offers and to meet the challenges it poses.
Specifically, the Paper will consider:
 * 	the current and likely future course of economic, political and strategic change in Asia, encompassing China, India, the key ASEAN countries as well as Japan and the Republic of Korea;
 * 	the domestic economic and social opportunities and challenges of the Asian Century for Australia;
 * 	opportunities for a significant deepening of our engagement with Asia across the board, including in the economy, science and technology collaboration, clean energy, education, business-to-business and people-to-people links and culture;
 * 	the political and strategic implications of the Asian Century for Australia; and
 * 	the role of effective  economic and political regional and global cooperation.
Dr Ken Henry AC, former Secretary of the Treasury, will lead the project, which will be informed by extensive public consultation. 
The White Paper will lead to specific initiatives for implementation during this term of Government.   The White Paper will also provide a framework for medium to longer-term policies to increase Australia's engagement with Asia and maximise the economic and other net benefits to Australia of the Asian Century.
A Committee of Cabinet will be established to oversee the development of the White Paper.  This committee will include external advisers.
The White Paper will be considered by the full Cabinet in the first half of 2012 and will be released during the middle of the year.  



Senator the Honourable Stephen Conroy, Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy
Professor Glyn Davis, Vice-Chancellor and Principal, The University of Melbourne
Professor Rod Tucker, Director, Institute for a Broadband-Enabled Society and your Institute colleagues.
We are living in a time of sustained global transformation where the nations that survive and prosper are those that modernise their economies.
We face an ageing population, increasing globalisation and the currency impacts of our mineral exports.
We can only meet those challenges if we increase our productivity.
And that means envisaging a whole new economy.
A high tech, high skill, clean energy economy anchored in innovation and creativity.
Boosting Australia's productivity doesn't mean cutting wages and conditions, as if shaving a dollar or two off the hourly rates of shop assistants will make a bit of difference.
It isn't about snatching a few lazy moves out of the Thatcher-Friedman play book.
The big movers of productivity are the capacity investments like quality infrastructure, a skilled and flexible workforce and the ability to innovate and capture new opportunities.
Few investments will bring us a greater return than broadband.
The United Nations has stated that “broadband is the next tipping point, the next truly transformational technology.”
That's why this Government has put the National Broadband Network and our Digital Economy strategy at the heart of our policy program.
The NBN will make Australia the most connected continent on the planet.
Broadband is an economic game-changer.
Allowing us to do old things better, and to do new things not even yet imagined.
A Deloitte-Access Economics Report released in August estimates that the Internet contributes around $50 billion a year or 3.6 per cent of Australia's GDP.
That's the same size as our agriculture industry.
And it's set to grow by around 7 per cent a year by 2016.
Further, research being released yesterday in Europe by Ericsson and Arthur D. Little finds that every doubling of broadband speed increases GDP by 0.3%
To put this into perspective; the basic service offered under the NBN has a speed of 12 mega bits per second - significantly faster than the 1 to 5 mbps speeds most Australians experience today.  
And think about this:
The single biggest driver of business productivity isn't cutting wages or working longer hours.
It's information technology.
Working smarter.
Information Technology drives 78% of productivity gains in service businesses and 85% in manufacturing businesses.
As exposure to the global market grows, only businesses that innovate and build new capacity can prosper and survive.
We know that embracing new technologies is one of the best ways to achieve that.
Clearly more businesses are making the attempt; clearly many need more help to login.
The most recent ABS survey of business IT use reveals that just 40 per cent of Australian businesses had some sort of web presence in 2009-10.
And among our smallest businesses, the figure was just 29 per cent.
These businesses should not be left behind.
If a search engine can't find you  -  then it is most likely that your customers can't either.
And yet, here we are in the second decade of the 21stcentury, and more than half of all Australians businesses aren't on the Web.
A recent global study by McKinsey found that SMEs with a strong web presence grew more than twice as quickly as those that didn't.
They also had twice the export revenue and twice the jobs growth.
For businesses, the online environment renders distance irrelevant and opens up once unimaginable national and international markets.
Like digital supply-chain systems that allow bottlenecks to be identified in real time and shortfalls in stock to be met.
These are the very real benefits available to business today.
But think of the next wave of innovation that will develop as the NBN brings high speed broadband to all Australian homes and businesses.
The NBN will provide the basis for new methods, processes and products to drive efficiency and productivity growth.
To create and commercialise a whole range of new products and processes that enhance the way companies go about their business.
We know that not all businesses have the skills and confidence to participate.
That is why the Government has committed funding to the Digital Enterprise program, and its predecessor - the Small Business Online program  -  which Senator Conroy will speak more about shortly.
But there are many businesses who are ready to take the next step and see their ideas become reality.
This is why I am delighted to be here today for the launch of the Australian Broadband Application Laboratory.
This laboratory - ABAL - will enable the application and development of new broadband ideas and service offerings.
It will provide the right environment to help companies  turn their ideas into new products and services.
And I congratulate the Victorian Government for its funding and support not only of this laboratory but also their ongoing support for the Institute for a Broadband Society. 
Friends, we know Australians have great skills.
We are smart, innovative, adaptive people.
But our people and our firms need the framework and the opportunity to prosper.
We celebrate stories like Bill Gates the university drop-out who'd started mucking around with computers as a 13-year-old kid.
Or Steve Jobs, building the first Apple computers in his parents' garage.
I sincerely believe that there are people like Steve Jobs and Bill Gates in this country.
In our schools and universities and businesses.
But they need the hardware and the innovative climate to succeed.
People like Lars and Jens Rasmussen who invented Google Maps in their Sydney garage.
They are the sort of people who are writing Australia's economic future.
Just like ABAL will.
Productivity begins here.
In our labs.
In our classrooms.
In our small businesses
In our minds and our creative instincts.
We need a new economy.
It is Australia's non-negotiable passport to the future.
To be up there with the best.
Not stuck behind with the rust bucket, smoke stack economies of the past.
It will be an amazing journey.
The Australian Broadband Application Laboratory will help take us there.
And I very proudly declare it launched. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy Stephen Conroy today opened Victoria's first Broadband Application Laboratory at Melbourne University.
From today, businesses wanting to explore new online opportunities will be able to use the laboratory to test and develop their ideas in a trial environment.
Speaking at the launch, the Prime Minister called on Australian businesses to take advantage of the new laboratory to help them translate their broadband ideas into new products and services.
The Federal Labor Government's National Broadband Network (NBN) will provide speeds of up to 100Mbps, making it easier for many more businesses to increase their productivity and tap into both interstate and international markets.
A recent global study by McKinsey found that small and medium-sized businesses with a strong web presence grew more than twice as fast as those with minimal or no web presence.
The research also showed those businesses with a strong web presence had twice the share of revenue from exports and created more than double the number of jobs.
Minister Conroy said the Federal Government's NBN would contribute vast economic benefits to the Australian economy.
Recent economic reports have estimated that by 2016, the internet will contribute $70 billion per annum to the Australian economy.
It will create jobs, boost productivity, provide new and improved online health and education services and improve government service delivery.
The NBN will also enable more people to work from home  -  which means less time travelling to and from work and more time with family and friends.
A new study released yesterday by Ericsson and Arthur D Little found that GDP can increase by 0.3 per cent every time broadband speeds are doubled.
This is because faster broadband supports more automated and simplified processes and higher productivity, according to the research.
It also provides a platform for real-time information allowing quicker, more informed decision making, problem solving and monitoring.
The study confirms that broadband speed is a highly important factor to spur economic growth.
The new broadband laboratory is part of Melbourne University's Institute for a Broadband-Enabled Society (IBES).
IBES is dedicated to promoting innovative strategies that maximise the benefits of new broadband technologies across the areas of education, health, business, services, network deployment, economics, smart communities and infrastructure.
The Prime Minister and Senator Conroy congratulated the Victorian Government for its funding and support of the laboratory and its ongoing support for IBES.
For more information on IBES visit www.broadband.unimelb.edu.auand for the NBN visit www.nbn.gov.au



Here I'd first like to acknowledge Sid Myer, Group Chairman of Asialink and the Asia Society  -  and of course a leader in philanthropy in Australia  -  along with Jenny McGregor, Asialink and the Asia Society's Group CEO.
Richard Woolcott, Founding Director, Asia Society AustralAsia Centre, one of this country's most eminent diplomats.
Professor Glynn Davis, Vice Chancellor of the University of Melbourne.
Professor Ross Garnaut, now Vice-Chancellor's Fellow, University of Melbourne and who was “present at the creation” of the modern Australian economy.
The Secretary of my own Department, Ian Watt and the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Denis Richardson, two very trusted counsellors.
Murray McLean, my former Ambassador to Japan. Good to see you again Murray, under less trying circumstances.
John Brumby, a great Premier of Victoria and who remains a great friend.
Robert Doyle, Melbourne's Lord Mayor.
Members of the diplomatic corps.
And can I particularly acknowledge my old colleague Gareth Evans.
Now the Chancellor of the Australian National University  -  and who in a past life set the mould for great Labor foreign policy in a great Labor Government.
Friends, the work of Asialink  -  promoting public understanding, providing information and training, building professional networks  -  only mirrors the good work done by the many people I see here today.
Not only the distinguished guests who've joined us, but by the great variety of Australians in our audience, joined by visitors and friends from overseas.
Reflecting the deep engagement of our people in our region.
And reflecting Asialink's vital mission, working with business, government, philanthropic and cultural partners to initiate and strengthen Australia-Asia engagement.
And given the deep and educated engagement in our region which all of you here represent, I know that the great phases of the Asian story  -  the curves of the arc of our region's rise  -  are more than familiar to you as well.
Two decades of rapid post-war growth and industrialisation in Japan  -  from the ashes of 1945 to be the world's second largest economy in 1968.
Then the years in which South Korea and Singapore, Hong Kong and Taiwan emerged as the ‘Asian tigers'.
Next Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and Vietnam opening their markets and pursuing export-led growth.
And now  -  the dramatic emergence of China and India  -  defining our new century in entirely new terms.
You're also more than familiar with the sheer scale of that story as well.
Not just the absolute scale, but the scale in the world as well  -  the way the changes have accelerated  -  the extent to which China and India are increasingly to the fore.
Consider:
As recently as 1990, the Australian economy was larger than the ten economies of ASEAN combined.
Today, we're about two-thirds the size of ASEAN's economies in market exchange rate terms.
Or this:
On the eve of Australia's long run of economic growth, before our two decades of reform-driven prosperity, ours and China's were economies of roughly comparable size in market exchange rate terms.  
Now, remember Australia's been growing for twenty years since and yet on the same basis China's economy is today close to four and half times bigger than ours.
In twenty years, China and India have grown so fast they've almost tripled their share of the global economy  -  and increased their absolute economic size almost nine-fold.
Just two countries, which have grown from less than a tenth of the global economy to almost a fifth, in just two decades  -  and which, over the next two decades, are projected to grow from a fifth to a third.
This incredible economic growth in our region is driving economic and strategic change in our world too.
Asia has never been of greater global significance and as global economic and strategic weight shifts from west to east, global institutional frameworks reflect this in turn.
With no better example than the emergence of the G20 as the global economic forum proper, one where Asia has its proper seat.
The existing habits of co-operation within our region are becoming deeper.
New institutions have emerged and new issues are discussed at them.
And a new shape of interconnections is emerging too.
Creating friendships and partnerships considered unlikely in the recent past, as rivals and even former foes combine to drive regional change in areas as diverse as girls' education, climate change mitigation and capacity-building through aid.
These are changes of type, not of degree.
I summarise our new strategic environment as simply as this.
Australia hasn't been here before.
Here, with our largest export market and largest trading partner neither a democracy nor part of our alliance system, a nation whose economic transformation is in turn transforming the economic and strategic balance of our world.
A new China.
Here, with an English-speaking democracy with 1.2 billion citizens, rising to find its place in the world and our region and on an ocean whose shores we share.
A new India.
Here, with the world's largest Islamic population living in the world's third largest democracy, one remarkable and too little remarked-upon country, every day disproving the millions of words spent arguing that Islam and democracy are incompatible.
A new Indonesia.
Here where new powers are rising and where power relativities are changing too.
Now, it's certainly true that the United States' absolute lead in military power will remain clear for some time to come.
And those who underestimate the power of the American economy to innovate and adapt are very mistaken.
There is always someone predicting the eclipse of America  -  they're yet to be proven right.
So too with the strength of our friend and partner, Japan.
By any measure, a major power, the third largest economy in the world with industry synonymous with quality and innovation.
Yet for all the strength and resilience of Japan and the US, we are now seeing the most profound rebalancing of global wealth and power in the period since the United States emerged as a major power in the world.
Just one illustration of that shift: the emerging and developing world could well be a net foreign investor, while developed countries become net foreign borrowers, as early as 2025.
While so much is new, many old tensions remain  -  and the classical world of inter-state rivalries never really went away.
With no better example than the Korean peninsula.
Where a Republic whose friendship Australia greatly values, at once prospers with a free future and remains threatened by its neighbour.
A rogue state which is a threat to its near neighbours, to the region as whole  -  and to its own captive people above all.
Australia, like every country in our region, is touched by the changes.
And the changes touch some of the most central elements of our national policies.
So for example, much is written on the potential tensions inherent in our economic relationship with China and our Alliance ties.
I'm a decision-maker, not a commentator, and I don't by nature reach for the jawbone or the megaphone. 
But I do say this:  The Government's approach comprehends the challenges and risks.
Certainly, these relationships will not manage themselves and we are far from complacent about them.
But we are far from pessimistic too. 
Because there is nothing in our Alliance relationship with the United States which seeks to contain China, because a growing, successful China is in the interest of every country in the region, including our own and because our national strength, and that of our ally, is respected in the region and the world.
I have no doubt: We can stand strongly in our changing region.
Standing as a mature and confident power.
Strong in the Asian century  -  with an ally in Washington and respect in Beijing.
For our nation and our people, the implications of this Asian century are profound. 
It brings strategic, social, even environmental challenges.
But for Australia, the economic opportunities are how the Asian century begins.
The historic boom in mining investment in the Australian economy is fuelled by Asian demand.
The increase in commodity prices has lifted our terms of trade to a 140-year high.
Driving the biggest resources boom since the 1850s gold rush.
Since 2004, mining investment has increased fivefold.
Just this week, Chevron gave final investment approval to the $29 billion Wheatstone liquefied natural gas development in the Pilbara in our north-west.
It's the fourth multi-billion dollar gas project to gain investment approval in Australia just this year.
Each of them, single projects which over their life attract a scale of investment equal to that of whole industrial sectors in some years.
But there are real challenges in managing the investment boom's effects on the economy.
The patchwork pressures are very real.
It is remarkable that in an economy as developed and diverse as ours, four big mining companies and four big banks could generate seventy five percent of reported pre-tax profits of our largest fifty firms in the last twelve months.
Seventy five percent of profit  -  ninety nine per cent of profit growth.
An extraordinary illustration of the challenges we face, where some parts of the economy are strained by growth while others risk being left behind.
Above all, through the pressures created by our strong dollar, driven in turn by high commodity prices and high terms of trade.
Parity with the US dollar late last year was a first since the 1983 float  -  and now for the foreseeable future, a strong Australian dollar is a new status quo.
A strong dollar, making it harder for our exporters to compete in the markets of the world  -  while mining's hunger for equipment and workers can also raise costs and make it harder for these non-mining sectors to compete for resources at home.
We've made plans to meet these challenges  -  we have an ambitious agenda to modernise the Australian economy.
Investments in skills, so Australian industry can climb the value chain and compete on quality not cost.
Tax reform, using our resource wealth to fund company tax cuts across the board and build our pool of national savings.
Technology investment, especially in high speed broadband, allowing every business in the country to do business more cheaply and more quickly.
Transforming our economy for a clean energy future, with a price signal to deliver change and innovation at the lowest economic cost.
And practical steps to ease patchwork pressures, like streamlining visa processing arrangements for Australian universities and strengthening the anti-dumping regime for firms facing unfair competition from overseas.
But these are only the challenges of the present.
We know that Asian demand creates historic change in Australia and historic opportunities as well.
In the Asian century, what used to be considered our traditional disadvantages  -  our reliance on natural resources, our location in the world  -  become great new strengths.
For much of the post-war period, we were seen as an ‘old' economy.
Overly dominated by primary industry, overly reliant on extraction for export, through a long period when commodity prices were on a steady but continuous decline.
But since 1970, close to four hundred million Chinese have moved to cities, with another two or even three hundred million expected to do the same in the next twenty years.
Now urbanisation may be an elegant, Latinate noun, but it describes a muscular, industrial reality.
It doesn't mean a person moving to a new town, it means a nation building new cities.
And you don't build cities without commodities  -  without, for example, a lot of iron and coal.
A typical Chinese apartment needs six tonnes of steel.
A kilometre of railway needs about seven and a half thousand tonnes.
Each tonne of steel needs more than one and a half tonnes of iron ore and more than half a tonne of coking coal.
Australia has plenty of both and we are reaping the benefits accordingly.
No longer an old economy and no longer subjects of the ‘tyranny of distance' either.
Asia has turned this on its head, giving us what The Economist has neatly termed ‘the advantage of adjacency'.
For the first time, we are closer to the fastest growing and most economically dynamic region of the world than our competitors.
This drives new investment patterns here.
Twenty four years ago, the government of China committed to invest in the Mt Channar iron ore deposit in Western Australia, the first major mining investment outside China. 
By 1990, Chinese investment in Australian had reached $1 billion in today's dollars and from that low base has increased almost tenfold in twenty years.
And it drives new advantages in trade as well.
The sailing time from the Pilbara to Qingdao in China is just 11 days  -  it's 35 days from Brazil.
And it is not only in natural resources where we stand to be beneficiaries of our adjacency to Asian growth.
Here is the paradox:
Yes, Asian growth and Asian demand is driving a rise in the dollar and the rise in our terms of trade which put sectors under pressure.
Education, tourism, parts of retail, manufacturing in particular. 
But while Asian growth is creating new conditions, new competition, it is creating the future demand as well.
Because yes, the new Asian middle class lives in apartments and catches urban trains built on our coal and iron.
But they'll do more. 
They'll fill those apartments with high-end manufactured goods, dine on clean, high quality produce and drink premium wine.
They'll look to countries like Australia for tertiary educations and for technical skills, they'll travel in new ways, seeking new custom-made holiday experiences, not the package tours of former years and through life they'll want sophisticated financial advice and the benefits of the world's best medical services as well.
And in doing all this, the new Asian middle class will give Australia an opportunity to make our whole economy strong.
The challenges for Australia are significant, the structural adjustments forced on us are real.
The economic opportunities are enormous as well.
The Asian century has begun and my Government is leading Australia through its challenges and towards its opportunities now.
Investments and reforms to keep the whole economy strong.
Easing patchwork pressures, creating jobs and spreading opportunity, so no person and no place is left behind.
And pursuing our interests in the world.
That means maintaining economic openness.
The key to growth in the region and jobs at home  -  working in the G20 to deal with structural imbalances, at APEC to open the region as a whole, alongside a Free Trade Agreements agenda to deepen country-to-country economic ties.
It means developing effective regionalism.
Groups with the right membership and mandate to address the full range of security, political and economic issues facing the region. We've got the EAS off the starting blocks now but there's a long race ahead.
It means maintaining strong bilateral relations with our key regional partners. 
Strengthening new relationships while nurturing existing ones.
It means a strong Australia-United States Alliance.
A continuing, strong stabilising role for the United States in our region, the vital role it has played now for sixty years. 
It means a strong defence force to reinforce Australia's strategic influence, founded on the principle of self-reliance.
Delivering the significant new capabilities developed through the Force 2030 White Paper.
These are the things we do now, the things we must do.
They are the usual business of government  -  but in the Asian century, business as usual is not enough.
Because what we know clearly is there isn't a single aspect of government policies and national planning that won't be touched by the great changes to come.
Food security and foreign investment, immigration and education, stock market structures and financial regulation, energy policy and environmental standards.
This is a vast landscape of change.
Some parts of this landscape we can see already, and the challenge there is to set our course, while some parts are uncharted still.
Now, perhaps that is no surprise.
The growth and change in Asia is something really new, to adapt an expression from another century, this is a change of “world-historical” significance.
When Great Britain industrialised, it took seventy years  -  the whole period from 1830 to 1900  -  for its economy to quadruple.
I'm Welsh, by birth, and the things that happened for good and ill in that industrialisation are the mythology of my own family and are marked in the families of millions.
It was an industrial revolution which changed almost everything. 
It redrew the map of Africa and painted half the atlas pink.
It created industrial politics and Labor Parties and defined the essential outlines of the democratic structures we live with today.
It remade private life, changing everything from the shape of the family home and the layout of cities to the experience of childhood and what it meant to be a woman.
Now that happened when the economy of Great Britain, a nation of millions, grew by a factor of four over seventy years.
In the last twenty five years the economy of China, a nation of 1.3 billion, has grown by a factor of twenty.
Already the world's largest manufacturer, the world's largest exporter, the world's largest consumer of energy, already the world's second largest economy, on some projections, on track to be the world's largest in twenty years.
And India is rising too.
Set to surpass the US economy for size by mid-century in purchasing power terms.
Enormous economic changes.
At these rates, China doubling the size of its economy every eight years ... India every eleven years and Indonesia every fifteen.
Enormous economic changes  -  human changes too  -  creating enormous human opportunity.
Millions of people leaving absolute poverty absolutely behind.
While Asia now has a large and rapidly growing middle class.
Within a few years, it will be bigger than that of the rest of the world combined, North America and Europe included.
China is already the world's largest consumer market for automobiles and for computers  -  not the largest maker, the largest buyer.
With the world's greatest number of internet users and the most users of mobile phones as well.
Now when a person first gets a car, a computer and a mobile phone, it changes their life.
When hundreds of millions of people first get these things, it changes the world.
As I recall the histories I read as a child, I can't put aside this thought: chapters of great change often seemed to open with the words “the middle classes were rising”.
This rapid growth in much of Asia will change the social and economic, strategic and environmental order of our world.
And while Asia's rise has been with us for a lifetime, China and India remain relatively poor countries in per capita terms, with decades of growth ahead.
These changes have barely begun  -  these changes will define our future.
That is why I announce today that the Government has commissioned a White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
To ask and answer the great national questions through this period of great national change.
There will be plenty of hard questions  -  and not all of them will have easy answers.
We have asked one of Australia's finest public servants, Dr Ken Henry, to lead work on the preparation of this White Paper.
The task we have set Dr Henry and his team is substantial.
There is the intellectual task of the White Paper itself: fully to comprehend the implications of the Asian century, fully to describe its opportunities and risks.
There is the public task of the process of its development and discussion: to ensure these implications are understood in every part of our nation.
And there is the task to set the pattern for more work over time.
Providing the analysis and understanding which will ensure that every part of Government is working with the same approach.
Offering the information and advice which allows every part of our business community to make the most of their ability to prosper and profit in this new world.
The Asian century ideas which define a financial market reform or test the priority for an education investment.
The Asian century approach which comprehends the economic and environmental context for getting the cleanest energy at the cheapest price to the customers who need it most.
Naturally, I expect a person of Dr Henry's policy credentials will offer some well defined and immediate insights  -  and that these will lead to some specific initiatives for implementation during this term of Government and the next.
But the real aim is higher.
The White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century should generate a set of general propositions to guide policy development over the long-term.
To guide preparations over the next five years for major policies and projects which would become reality over the next ten to fifteen.
This will be a thorough and traditional White Paper process.
Formal terms of reference and details of the governance of the White Paper are being released today.
The terms of reference are wide but it should be noted the White Paper will not review the decisions outlined in the Defence White Paper Force 2030. 
A new Defence White Paper is due in the first quarter of 2014 and preliminary planning for this is already underway.
The terms of reference also reflect my view that we are not on a quest for more regional or indeed global architecture.
Our challenge is to ensure new institutions like the G20 and the EAS have growing meaning and purpose.
As my advisor, Dr Henry will lead work on the preparation of the White Paper.
A Committee of Cabinet including external advisers will be established, supported by an appropriate Secretaries Committee to review progress.
Dr Henry will be supported by an officials taskforce based in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet with representation from the Treasury and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and other agencies as required.
The White Paper will include an intensive process of consultation with the Australian community, business, academia and international partners.
A series of public consultation forums will be held and the process will call for submissions from interested parties.
The White Paper will be considered by the full Cabinet in the first half of 2012 and released during the middle of the year.
The White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century will make a major contribution to public debate and establish major new directions for public policy.
A national blueprint for a time of national change.
These are historic changes.
Change isn't easy, change has never been easy.
But Australians always make change work for us, turning our creativity and co-operation to the task.
We haven't been here before.
We truly are already a decade into an Asian century.
A great future is there for us  -  there for us if we understand and explain these great changes  -  there for us if we make great decisions as well.
Australians should be optimistic.
Not because change is always good  -  but because Australia is always good enough to make the best of change.
And Australians should be determined.
Because the prize is rich indeed.
A peaceful, open, rules-based Asian system.
Effective regional institutions, respect for all countries of the region, large and small.
Space for a rising China.
A robust alliance between Australia and the United States.
That is the Asian future we seek in the Asian future we face.
That is the task, one together we share.
To build a great future for our own great nation. 



PM: It's great to be here today in my own electorate at QB, one of our fantastic community centres. I'm here actually in a kitchen and restaurant facility that was built with Federal funds and it's part of a vocational education and training program in partnership with Victoria University. But it's also been great to meet with the kids who are here on their school holiday program, enjoying all of the creative pursuits and having some fun together and they were very kind to sing me Happy Birthday.
So I do want to say to everybody who works here, to Norm, to Mary, to the people who put in volunteer time as well, the local committee that keeps this community centre going  -  it's fantastic work making a difference to kids lives and making a difference to our local community's life and a very nice place to celebrate your birthday.
Very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how are you coping with the 50?
PM: 50 feels fine, thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: OK, so what did Tim get you for your birthday?
PM: Well Tim has arranged for us to get a dog, a poodle, so that will come in a few weeks time, but I'm also sporting some new jewellery that Tim and his family gave me. So the bracelet and the necklace and the earrings all arrived this morning, so I've been very, very spoiled.
JOURNALIST: And any plans for tonight?
PM: We'll be spending some quiet time, just looking forward to spending a bit of time with Tim and over the days to come, some time with friends as well.
JOURNALIST: You'll be going to the Grand Final?
PM: I will be going to the Grand Final, I'm going to barrack for Geelong. Of course I would have liked it if the Western Bulldogs had made the Grand Final, that was my dream, but there's always next year.
But in the absence of the Western Bulldogs I'm going to barrack for Geelong. Geelong, of course, has Podsy as a team member, Podsy came from the Werribee Tigers, so I'm going to barrack for Geelong and I'm going to back them in. I reckon they'll be up by 29 points and I do want to say something about the performance of Stephen Conroy, one of my ministers, this morning. He was on national TV singing the Collingwood theme song, so I am now going to make it a ministerial rule that apart from Peter Garrett no one sings.
JOURNALIST: Will he be penalised for that?
PM: Well he certainly won't be able to repeat that performance in the future and I think Australians will be very grateful not to have their ears assaulted by Stephen Conroy's rendition of the Collingwood Club song.
JOURNALIST: What are your thoughts about the Andrew Bolt case yesterday, Prime Minister?
PM: I understand from today's media that the Herald Sun is contemplating an appeal of the Federal Court ruling, so in those circumstances I'm not going to comment.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott has wished you a happy birthday, but has also said he doesn't think there willl be many more in The Lodge, have you got a comment on that?
PM: Tony Abbott, always playing politics and always inclined to say no. I suppose we're going to see that on display on my birthday, as well as every other day.
Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: Words of wisdom on turning 50 (inaudible) milestone?
PM: It is an important milestone in your life. I think any birthday with a zero at the end of it causes people to take stock and think about their life. I am living an amazing life, this is an incredible privilege to be Prime Minister, but of course my focus, whether it's my birthday or any other day, is making sure that we've got jobs for the future, jobs for the kids that I've met today, we've got prosperity and we've got that sense of fairness, that we're not leaving anybody behind. That's the great Labor tradition and that's what drives me. Thanks very much.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'll be looking forward to future birthdays to come and fighting that 2013 election. Thank you. 



More than 160,000 Australians per year will benefit from the Australian Government's decision to provide subsidised access to 48 medicines, including treatments for serious heart conditions including heart failure in infants and children, rare but serious infections like tuberculosis, and cancer.
These listings include drugs that were deferred in February and new drugs recently considered and approved for listing by Cabinet.
When some listings on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) were deferred in February, the Government said it would reconsider these drugs when fiscal circumstances allowed.
Budget savings created by price reductions arising from more competitively priced medicines, as well as a number of recent Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) recommendations, mean that it is now possible to list these medicines.
These PBS listings come as the Government also agreed with consumer and industry groups to improve the certainty around the PBS listing process.
As part of our commitment with the Consumers Health Forum, Generic Medicines Industry Association and Medicines Australia:
 * 	The Government, industry and consumer groups agreed to work together to discuss ways to manage deferrals into the future.
 * 	They also agreed to work together on further savings for the 2012-13 Budget and other savings following the expiry of the memorandum of understanding between industry and Government.
 * 	The Government committed to not defer any drugs that cost under $10 million a year for the coming year, while it works with all parties to achieve longer-term PBS sustainability.
 * 	Industry has also agreed to legislative amendments to complete price disclosure reforms, which will help to end anomalies in the current pricing system.
This builds on the Gillard Government's strong track record of working productively with industry and consumer groups to deliver a sustainable PBS that provides Australians with access to affordable medicines.
New listings on the PBS and price changes 
Most listings will take effect from 1 December 2011, subject to final listing arrangements being met by the suppliers of these medicines and will include:                                                                                                              
 * 	paliperadone palmitate (Invega Sustenna®) - for the treatment of schizophrenia
 * 	oxycodone/naloxone (Targin®) - for the treatment of severe cancer pain
 * 	budesonide with eformoterol (Symbicort®) - for the treatment of lung disease
 * 	botulinum toxin type A (Botox®) extension - for the treatment of severe axillary hyperhidrosis
 * 	dalteparin sodium (Fragmin®) - for the treatment of blood clots in patients with cancer
 * 	nafarelin (Synarel®) - for the treatment of patients undergoing in-vitro fertilisation
 * 	alendronate (Fosamax®) - for the treatment of osteoporosis
 * 	asenapine (Saphris®)- for the treatment of bipolar 1 disorder and schizophrenia
 * 	bortezomib (Velcade®)- for the treatment of multiple myeloma in patients with severe acute renal failure
 * 	capecitabine (Xeloda®)- for the treatment of patients with advanced bowel cancer
 * 	darunavir (Prezista®)- for the treatment of HIV infection
 * 	denosumab (Xgeva®)- for the treatment of bone metastases from breast cancer and hormone-resistant prostate cancer
 * 	losartan (Cozavan®) - for the treatment of hypertension
 * 	magnesium aspartate (Mag-Sup®) - for the treatment of hypomagnesaemia and chronic renal disease in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander persons
 * 	rituximab (Mabthera®)- a high cost medicine for the treatment of a specific form of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. 
The Government has also agreed to increase the price of 23 medicines currently listed on the PBS including:
 * 	digoxin oral solution (Lanoxin®) - for the treatment of serious heart conditions including heart failure in infants and children
 * 	dothiepin (Dothep®) - for the treatment of depression
 * 	oxprenolol (Corbeton®) - for the treatment of high blood pressure, particularly in pregnancy
 * 	rifampicin (Rimycin®) - for the treatment of rare but serious infections including tuberculosis and as a prophylaxis for close contacts of patients with meningococcal disease
 * 	ritonavir (Norvir®) - for the treatment of HIV infection
 * 	erythromycin lactobionate (Erythrocin-IV®) and erythromycin ethyl succinate (E-Mycin 200®, E.E.S. 200®, E-Mycin 400® and E.E.S. Granules®)  - for the treatment of bacterial infections
 * 	acarbose (Glucobay®) - for the treatment of diabetes
 * 	Glucose indicator - urine (Diastix®)  -  used by diabetes patients
 * 	Hexamine hippurate (Hiprex®) - for the treatment of bacterial infections
 * 	Pancreatic extract (Creon 10,000®, Creon 25,000® and Creon 40,000®) - for the treatment of enzyme deficiency in children and adults
 * 	Sucralfate (Ulcyte® and Carafate®) - for the treatment of peptic ulcers.
Pradaxa
The Government has also considered the advice of the PBAC of March 2011 with respect to the medicine dabigatran (Pradaxa®), which will cost the budget up to$1 billion over the forward estimates.  PBAC advised that, based on the results of the pivotal clinical trial, Pradaxa represents a safe, efficacious and cost effective therapy for some ‘at risk' stroke patients.  
However, PBAC also raised some important questions about listing Pradaxa on the PBS that require further consideration. Importantly, PBAC advised the Government that the benefit of Pradaxa® observed in a clinical trial context may or may not be reflected wholly in the Australian population which may lead to this medicine being over prescribed without an adequate education campaign for doctors, pharmacists and patients.
Following this advice, the Government will commission Emeritus Professor Lloyd Sansom AO, the former Chair of PBAC, to inform the Government on options for improving the health outcomes of patients treated with anticoagulation therapies, including optimising the use of currently available treatments in Australia as well as the future role of newer therapies for the treatment of atrial fibrillation, such as Pradaxa®.
The terms of the commitment made between the Australian Government, the Consumers Health Forum, Generic Medicines Industry Association and Medicines Australia is available from www.health.gov.au.
For media inquires about specific drugs listed on the PBS, please call: (02) 6289 7400



Thank you very much, and can I start by acknowledging all of our friends at North Melbourne who make today possible, to James, to Eugene, and of course to that well known Shinbone supporter Simon Crean, my very great friend.
Can I also acknowledge our friends from Geelong who are here today, Colin Carter and Brian Cook, a great day for Geelong. And can I acknowledge all of the people from Collingwood as well, and when I say people there's really only one person, it's Eddie McGuire.
Eddie McGuire likes to be known as a man of the people, but of course he's football royalty. This came through to me very, very strongly at last year's grand final, where an AFL assistant was out with another assistant saying ‘We should get some water to people. There's Andrew, we'll get a water bottle to Andrew. There's Eddie, we'll just get this woman to pass a water bottle to Eddie.'
It was a member of my security team who said ‘That woman's the Governor-General and she's not here to pass water to Eddie McGuire'. He's definitely football royalty.
I sat at the grand final last year next to Andrew Demetriou, who barracked for a draw from the moment the ball bounced, right ‘til the end. I've never sat at the footy before when someone is screaming, absolutely screaming ‘hit the boundary' when the scores are level. That's what I had to put up with last time. So no one's saying draw today, we don't want a draw.
But it did give me the opportunity to go and spend the second grand final with our troops in Afghanistan and I know when the national anthem is sung today we'll all be spending a moment thinking about them.
But I do want to say that I've got some problems, Andrew, that I wanted to raise today with you. I've got some problems with the new teams, I've got some problems that we're using Kevin Sheedy, as much as I love him, as the person to take the great game of AFL to Western Sydney. After all, he talks like Yoda  -  no one is going to understand him.
And what about Gary Ablett? He can't even win the tipping competition. I did better than him in the tipping competition. Well, I suppose that's what happens when you have to tip the Suns every week.
Andrew, you've got these new teams wrong. I gave you the advice a few years ago and it's not too late to take it. One of the new teams should be called The Rangas, that's what we need a team of rangas. A few stalwarts on the ball, Dustin Fletcher down back, he's going to play forever. Bluey McKenna in the coaching box and Brownlow winning captain Adam Cooney, the original ginger ninja himself. The Rangas could be a great team, Andrew. It's not too late.
But there are no rangas and no Dogs playing today, so I've had to make a decision between the two teams available  -  Collingwood and anyone but Collingwood. So yes, I've gone for anyone but Collingwood. I'm going for Geelong. I'm consoling myself that I'll get to see Podsy play. We used to watch him at the Werribee Tigers, he was a legend then and he's going fantastically now. So Geelong for Podsy, Geelong for today.
I've had some great footy moments this year, even if I haven't had the grand final that I wanted. I did get to teach President Obama how to handball, I did get to spend some times at the Presidents Lunch at the Werribee Tigers, as well as some Dogs games. So I've has some great footy moments.
But I'm actually here for another great footy moment, because it's my incredible honour to be able to announce to you the Football Personality of the Year. Everybody would say he's big, some would say he's bad, I would say he's beloved. The Football Personality of the Year - Barry Hall.
[ENDS] 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the start of stage three of the rollout of the National Broadband Network  -  creating up to 800 new jobs.
The stage three rollout will extend to a further 90,000 homes and businesses in Burnie, Devonport, Launceston and Hobart, employing around 800 workers at its peak.
By June next year, the NBN will be rolling out across 12 sites in Tasmania with each site employing around 40 workers.
At the peak of activity in 2015, there will be 20 sites under construction with 800 Tasmanians working on the massive infrastructure project.
The Prime Minister also announced today that from Tuesday, Tasmanian businesses can apply for grants under an $8 million Tasmanian Innovation and Investment Fund to help them create long term, sustainable jobs.
The fund is part of the $120 million package recently announced to support regional development projects under the Tasmanian Forests Intergovernmental Agreement.
The fund is a vital part of the economic package to improve the diversification and breadth of Tasmania's economy.
In particular, it will assist areas affected by the restructure of the forestry sector with innovative and ongoing job creation projects.
The Gillard Government has invested more than $100 million in skills training and job services in Tasmania in the past year, providing greater opportunities for Tasmanians to up-skill and re-train. 
To celebrate the inaugural National Skills Week, the Prime Minister and Member for Franklin, Julie Collins today met apprentices training for a new career at the Skills Institute in Hobart.
They were joined by Australian Apprentice of the Year, Hobart electrician Jason Bryan.
The apprentices will meet the growing demand for skilled workers in the renewable and sustainable energy and sectors and for the NBN.
NBN Co is working with Government employment and training agencies to develop a coordinated approach to build a trained labour pool for the NBN rollout.
Around 50 per cent of the new NBN jobs will require semi-skilled labour, meaning unemployed or displaced workers could be quickly prepared to undertake these tasks.
A further 30 per cent of the new NBN workforce will be cablers who will require a Certificate 3 accreditation, which can be achieved with 18 months of training, including time on the job.
The rollout of the NBN will have a significant impact on the Tasmanian economy with the new jobs and opportunities for businesses to provide additional supplies, transport and other services.
Record numbers of Tasmanians are seizing the opportunity to get training and formal qualifications for the skilled jobs emerging in the economy, including more than 12,000 apprentices and trainees.
These students are among a record number of nearly 47,000 Tasmanians studying to gain formal qualifications through Vocational Education and Training.
The Gillard Labor Government will host the Future Jobs Forum this week, attended by industry and union leaders.
All parties will work together at the forum, exploring practical and innovative measures to create the jobs of the future. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today launched the Stage Two roll out of the NBN at Kingston Beach in Tasmania.
The NBN will deliver speeds of up to 100 Megabits per second to the 950 houses at Kingston Beach within 12 months.
The Stage Two roll out in Tasmania will employ 146 workers to take the NBN past 11,150 homes and businesses, including in Sorell, Deloraine, Triabunna, as well as Kingston Beach.
The roll out will allow Tasmanians to take advantage of the next generation of economic development in Australia, including health, education, entertainment, business and environmental management.
The Stage Three roll out will extend to a further 90,000 homes and businesses in Burnie, Devonport, Launceston and Hobart, employing around 800 workers at its peak.
Construction will begin at sites in Hobart, Launceston and Somerset over the next 12 months and further work will take place at Kingston over this period.
Almost 4,000 homes in Tasmania are able to get access to the NBN fibre network and almost 800 services are in operation, delivering high-speed broadband to more than 660 premises.
The NBN is available to nearly 14,000 premises on the mainland and more than 650 trial users are already connected.



A new arts precinct in the heart of Glenorchy was officially opened by Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Tasmanian Senators Carol Brown and Lisa Singh today.
Stage One of the $15.9 million Glenorchy Art and Sculpture Park features an open recreation space designed to connect communities and boost tourism.
The park boasts new lighting and sound infrastructure, a boardwalk, seating, shelters and barbecue facilities.
The Federal Government invested $2.7 million in the Stage One development through the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program (RLCIP), partnering with the Tasmanian Government and Glenorchy City Council.
Last month, the Federal Government announced it would provide $2.32 million to fund Stage Two works as part of the first round of the $1 billion Regional Development Australia Fund (RDAF).
Stage Two works, commencing next year, include the construction of new shared paths, additional landscaping, and a building to service the ferry jetty.
The ferry jetty will help connect the park to the Museum of Old and New Art and the city of Hobart.
The Prime Minister said the precinct combined social, environmental and economic benefits.
The Federal Government is committed to ensuring all Australians have access to arts and culture, no matter where they live.
More than 50,000 people are expected to visit the park every year, with that number expected to grow to 100,000 over the next five years.
Stage One design and construction works created 50 short term jobs and the opening of the park will support 10 long-term positions. 



The Prime Minister today announced further details of the Future Jobs Forum, to be held at Parliament House on Thursday 6 October 2011.
The Future Jobs Forum is an opportunity for the Government to hear from business and unions on the opportunities and challenges facing the Australian economy. 
The forum will bring together almost 100 representatives and experts from business, unions, government and academia to discuss how we can build on our outstanding record of economic growth and job creation in recent years.
The forum will also provide participants with an opportunity to look at how industry sectors can work together to turn the current and future challenges facing the domestic and global economies into new business and job opportunities.
The Prime Minister will make the opening address in the first session of the forum, which will be facilitated by Professor Peter Shergold AC, Chancellor of the University of Western Sydney and CEO and Macquarie Group Foundation Professor of the University of New South Wales Centre for Social Impact.
The international key note speaker will be Mr Andrew N Liveris, Chairman and CEO of the Dow Chemical Company and Co-Chair of US President Obama's Advanced Manufacturing Partnership.
Australian-born Mr Liveris has a wealth of business and manufacturing experience and will provide a unique insight into the global trends affecting the Australian economy and how these trends are being addressed in the US.
Mr Liveris will participate in the forum via videolink from Michigan.
The Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer will speak about how global trends are changing the shape of the Australian economy and the types of jobs it creates.
Professor Roy Green, Dean of UTS Business School, will present on the future of manufacturing in a panel session about the opportunities and challenges for the industry in the next decade.
Mr Steve Vamos, President of the Society for Knowledge Economics will open a panel discussion on services in the next decade, which will focus on the skills and capability drivers of success.
Mr Tim Rourke, Country Executive for GE Energy Australia and New Zealand will provide his insights on clean energy business opportunities and jobs prospects over the next ten years.
The final panel session will include a presentation by Dr Megan Clark, CEO of the CSIRO, who will share her experience on the role of innovation and collaboration in driving jobs growth.
The Future Jobs Forum forms part of the Gillard Government's ongoing work to drive job creation and give national prominence to the importance of keeping Australians in work.
It is expected discussions will focus on practical efforts to support and create jobs both in emerging industries of the 21st Century, and in industries where we have a long and proud history.
A focus of the forum will be how we can drive sectors further up the value chain  -  fostering business innovation, making use of digital technologies, accessing new export markets and improving workforce development.
 * 	Future Jobs Forum - Agenda [PDF 191KB]
 * 	Future Jobs Forum - Full Program [PDF 622KB]
 * 	Future Jobs Forum - Participant List [PDF 344KB]
 * 	Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research - Trends in manufacturing to 2020 
Presentations
 * 	Prime Minister's presentation  [PDF 503KB]
 * 	Innovation and Jobs : Dr Megan Clark - Chief Executive CSIRO [PDF 350KB]
 * 	Future Manufacturing : Future Jobs - Professor Roy Green [PDF 676KB]
 * 	Leadership, Culture and Management Practices of High Performing Workplaces : Society for Knowledge Economics [PDF 543KB]



Thank you very much, and can I, too, start by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and in the spirit of reconciliation pay my respects to elders past and present.
Can I welcome each and every one of you to this tax forum, particularly my Federal Parliamentary colleagues. We are here mob-handed to participate in the events over the next two days.
What I wanted to do at the start of this forum was to set the context for its discussions and to outline the principles that I believe we should bring to the discussions in the forum over the next two days.
In doing that, I wanted to talk to you about what's happening in our nation, what's happening in this Parliament House, and what I believe should happen in this room during the course of the discussions.
First, to what's happening in our nation. It's a nation worthy of tribute and we often forget to pay that tribute to the great nation we live in. I want to pay a tribute to the work that we have done together over 30 years of hard economic reform, ensuring that the Australian economy is the envy of the world and is a resilient economy. We've done it together and it's been painstaking work driven by a reform zeal and I want to thank the people in this room for their participation in much of that painstaking work.
I also want to pay a tribute to our nation and to the people in this room and beyond who worked together so that our nation came though the global financial crisis strong. We did it together, each and every one of us, Government playing its proper part, but working with employers and unions, working right across this great land of ours to keep people in work during such a profound global economic shock, and I thank you for the work that we've done together to ensure that our nation came through that strong.
The backdrop to today's discussions, consequently, isn't one of doom and gloom. If we were meeting in almost any other Western democracy we would be having a very different dialogue - a dialogue against a backdrop of high unemployment, of low growth, of great anxiety.
We aren't having that discussion here today because our economy has emerged strong from the global financial crisis. Instead, the backdrop to our discussion is one that is a rich tapestry of opportunities and we need to focus on those opportunities over the next two days.
But like any great era of opportunity there are risks - risks we need to understand and navigate and discuss over the next two days.
So, let me take you to the five factors that I believe are shaping our nation and our economy today, as the backdrop to these discussions.
First, the overhang from the global financial crisis and the continuing volatility that we see in the world economy. Because we came through the global financial crisis strong, we often underestimate its continuing effects on our economy and on the psychology of our nation. We are continuing to see direct, tangible effects for Government and for businesses, but we are also seeing intangible effects on our economy and the participants within it.
There has been a knock to confidence, a greater understanding of risk and a greater feel of what changes in the world economy can bring. Against this backdrop of loss of confidence we've seen continuing volatility on world financial markets, concerns about the sluggishness of the US economy and concerns about the need for Europe to get its house in order.
As a result of all of these factors we do continue to see an economy in which people lack confidence and are concerned about the future. It's important in this age that we are reliable interpreters to the Australian people of the strengths and opportunities in our economy, as well as what is happening in the global economy. It's important that people have a deep understanding of the trends in the global economy, but that we aren't spooked - understanding, but not frightened.
I'm always struck as Prime Minister, as I travel this great nation of ours, how much people are now attuned to movements in the global economy. I think an overhang of the global financial crisis is people are now more strongly attuned to global economic events and to messages of risk and we need to understand that in our discussions today about our economy and about how our tax system can best serve it.
Second, our economy, our nation, is being shaped and reshaped by the Asian century. We are 10 decades in to that century and the story of this century is one of Asian growth.
It means that even in difficult days in the global economy we live in the right part of the world. We have an advantage of adjacency - being in the region of the world that continues to grow strongly.
That presents continuing economic opportunities for us.
The economic opportunities flowing from the demand for our resources is very clear to all of us. As China, as India, as the nations in our region continue to grow, they will be strong demanders of the things that we have to sell  -  of coal, of iron ore and of resources beyond that. This is a great opportunity for our nation and one we are seizing now, but we also understand that this opportunity brings pressure to other parts of the economy, that the record terms of trade and continuing strong Australian dollar are putting pressures on manufacturing, on tourism, on international education and other trade exposed sectors.
So, the story of today's economy is of a patchwork, and we need in our discussions to be very clear as to what that means for opportunity right around our nation, and what that means for pressures on jobs and businesses in parts of our nation and sections of our economy.
Describing this phase of economic transformation and growth we use the language of boom, but the language of resources boom often gives us the impression that this will be short-lived. Indeed, a lot of this nation's history has been written around resources booms inevitably followed by busts.
We are in a different economic phase, and we shouldn't let the language of boom deceive us. It is a boom. It is a huge opportunity for growth in our resources sector and great opportunities for jobs and wealth creation as a result, but it is likely to be sustained for a very long period of time, and that means that transformations in our economy that it is driving will be deep and occasionally painful.
So, working through our tax settings needs to understand the dimensions of this change and the patchwork economy that is resulting from it.
But the story of the Asian century will be more than the story of this resources boom. It will also be the story of a rising Asian middle class. It is anticipated by 2020 that we will see 1.2 billion people join the middle classes of Asia. That is a huge opportunity for our economy, as those middle classes desire and want to purchase the things that we aspire to ourselves, whether it's the best of food, the best of wine, the best of education, the best of tourism opportunities, the best of legal services, the best of financial services, the best of manufactured goods and beyond, this is a great opportunity for our nation.
So, during this period of our economic transformation there's a challenge for us to nurture the boom, a resources boom, hungry for skills, hungry for people, hungry for infrastructure, to maintain the diversification of our economy during the days of the resources boom and beyond it, so that we are sustaining industries beyond resources despite the contemporary pressures upon them, and we are making sure that we are seizing the opportunities presented by this new, rising, Asian middle class.
Of course, these are the questions we've squarely asked Ken Henry to work through in the Asian Century White Paper, and they form the profound second shaping factor of our nation as we meet today.
Beyond the overhang of the global financial crisis, beyond the resources boom and the patchwork economy, we meet during days when globalisation and the revolution in information and communications technology is reshaping our nation. In this age of mobile capital, we've always got to be conscious of our competitiveness in a ruthless world, and in this age of ever-faster change in information and communications technology, we've got to make sure our nation is keeping up with the best.
The fourth factor shaping our nation is the move to a carbon-constrained future, and despite all the heat and fire in this debate in our contemporary politics, the reality is sensible people from all political parties agree that climate change is real, that we need to address it by cutting carbon pollution, and that the best way of doing that is putting a price on carbon - and we will achieve that in the House of Representatives when it sits next week.
And fifth, the fifth great factor shaping our nation as we meet today, are the changes driven by ageing, being an ageing society, and the changes driven by different burdens of disease in our contemporary society.
We know that our society is ageing. That requires us to do smart things to increase participation in the workforce so that we do not see unsustainable changes in the dependency ratio that close down peoples' abilities to have options and choices as they age, and recognising today that the burden of healthcare falls as a result of chronic disease and disability we need our health system to be more agile and connected in meeting the needs of people with chronic diseases, and we need to do better by Australians who confront a life with a disability, with all of the implications that means to them and their family.
So, they are the factors shaping our nation, the context in our nation as we meet today. The context in this Parliament House is of a parliament that is working and addressing some of the biggest challenges that confront our nation; of a Government that is determined to navigate our nation through this age of change and transformation, driven by two abiding Labor principles: one, of ensuring opportunity for all right throughout our nation; and second, of ensuring that during this phase of economic growth and change we don't leave people behind.
Bringing those principles to our decision making, we have already embarked on a series of major changes to meet the needs of our nation today as it changes, as its economy changes. This includes addressing what I've referred to as the global financial crisis overhang - it means we, as members of the Government, need to be very good explainers to the Australian people of the opportunities in the Australian economy now, of the risks in the world economy, and of what they might mean for us, but also of the resilience of our economy and we are determined to do that.
We are determined to deliver the fiscal consolidation that our economy requires today, and consequently our drive towards a budget surplus continues with determination.
And we are also very motivated to make the best of the opportunities we have on the world stage, including in the G20 and beyond; to have our voices heard as the global economy struggles through what the International Monetary Fund has referred to as a dangerous phase.
Second, we are determined to assist our nation to navigate the opportunities of the Asian century. The White Paper will play a major role, but we have not waited for the White Paper in order to act. We have structured the Minerals Resource Rent Tax because this is the right time for the turbo-charged section of our economy to pay more tax to assist with the other sections of the economy through cuts in the company tax and support to small businesses. It's the right time to grow our pool of national savings through increased superannuation, and it's the right time, too, to be better investing in infrastructure, particularly the infrastructure the mining industry is hungry for.
We're also maintaining our reputation as a great trading nation - out there in the world advocating for trade and trade patterns that will advantage the global economy. This is not an era in which we should turn back to the practices of the past, but as we maintain our role as a great trading nation, we also understand the unfair pressures that can be brought to bear in the Australian economy, which is why we have moved on the anti-dumping regime and we continue to have a good dialogue with business and unions on manifestations of unfair competition.
We are also strongly working with those sectors under pressure as a result of the strong Australian dollar. Whether it's the New Car Plan or whether it's the Knight review of international education, we are determined to work with those sectors of our economy under pressure to sustain diversification during these days of change and in the days that lie beyond the resources boom, however far away those days are.
We're also very determined in these days of change to take a spatial and regional approach to understanding our economy.  We use the language of patchwork deliberately because we know that parts of the nation are travelling very differently; that if you journey around this nation you can go to places screaming for more people, screaming for more growth, and you can also go to places that are screaming about continuing high unemployment and there people worry about a future for their kids, so we've got to bring an understanding of regional economic development and space to our work.
And we've got to be working to sustain the boom with all of the settings in skills and infrastructure that implies, as well as appropriate work on immigration, and we have determined to be guided by that work through the resources round table which brings together participants in the resources industry.
We are also continuing the human capital revolution which I started as Deputy Prime Minister and which is driving us now. In these days of globalisation, even with our natural endowment of minerals wealth and other assets, we increasingly compete on the world stage on the basis of knowledge and capabilities. To ensure that we can always hold our head up high in that competition, we need to be continuing our human capital revolution, from the earliest days of learning for our smallest children through the days of school, through the days of skill acquisition in apprenticeships into the days of university. That reform agenda will continue unabated and the next tranche of major reforms in the human capital revolution is the skills work we have embarked on with states and territories to be delivered using the $3 billion that we set aside in the May budget.
We will address our carbon constrained future through the carbon pricing legislation next week, but also by working with industry, with unions, with all sections of our economy to unleash the forces of a clean energy future, and I believe this is an age of great possibilities for us.
And we have continued to use our market-based reform tools to ensure that we better provide services, whether it be in health or whether it be now in the journey towards a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
This is the Government's reform agenda to meet the great reshaping of our economy and our nation which is going on today, but it has been partnered with a major tax reform agenda as well, and my colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, will explain to you what has been achieved in tax reform to date, but I would just put an emphasis on one part of what we have achieved in tax reform, and that has been the deliberate decision we made as we put a price on something that we want to see less of - carbon pollution - to put an extra value on something we want to see more of - participation in work.
That is no accident. We have deliberately structured that reform so that it triples the tax-free threshold to send the clearest of possible messages to Australians that we value work and we want them as participants in the Australian economy to see a greater benefit from their labours, whether they be someone on a welfare-to-work journey a woman making a decision to return to work after a period of caring for children. This is an important reform and it is spelling out to you the kind of principles that we bring to tax reform.
So, against that backdrop, what's happening in our nation, what's happening in this Parliament House, what's happening in the Government offices here and what is driving us as we do our work as a Labor Government, we now come to the deliberations in this room, and these deliberations will be wide and they will be broad but I do want to say something to you about the priority I put on the discussions over the next two days.
I want to make sure as our economy is in this time of change that during the two days of this tax forum we are clearly turning our minds to how we can ensure that the tax system does not inhibit the changes we need to make. I've explained some of the forces that are reshaping our economy. Those changes are experienced by individual businesses and individual workers. People will need to adapt in order to prosper, and I want to make that our tax system is not sending them perverse messages as they seek to adapt and change. Indeed I want our tax system to facilitate that change. We have to have a tax system that positions us to take full advantage of the opportunity that growth in our region presents, a tax system that enables us to see the innovation in our businesses that we will need as our economy becomes ever more flexible and ever more responsive to the new opportunities that present themselves. This is a key challenge that faces this tax forum during its deliberations over the next two days.
Now, there is no attempt here to constrain the discussions, but I do want to remind of some things that the Government will bring to bear in its understandings of the work of the Tax Forum and how the discussions today should be taken forward.
First and foremost, we will, over the next two days, be talking about tax, but we shouldn't forget that tax, it has to be raised fairly and it has to be raised efficiently, no-one on their deathbed ever says I wish I'd spent more time with my tax accountant. We understand that, so - fairly and efficiently.
But in raising tax we shouldn't lose sight of the purposes that it's used for. We will be talking about tax, but let's not forget that tax is the money that enables us to be a society together, whether it's meeting our needs for defending our nation or whether it's ensuring that a child can get an operation in a hospital or a disadvantaged kid can get a great start in life through a great education. We need to bear both sides of the equation in mind.
And whilst there are no fetters on what you discuss today, there are two things that will always guide this Government in proposals it takes forward. We are a Labor Government, and that means we will never agree with increasing the tax take or tax burden on the poorest in our community - never have, never will, and no proposition that advocates for that will be taken forward by this Government.
Second, we are a prudent Government, a Government determined to return the budget to surplus, so things that cost have to be paid for, and it is not properly paying for things to say I'll do the spending and someone else can pick up the tab. I'm absolutely sure if you turn to the person next to you and said ‘What about I race down to the shops and spend $1,000 and you give me the money to do it?', you'd probably have a fairly difficult conversation at your table.
Well, life is like that in Government, too. Money spent has to be paid for, clever ideas about spending money have to be managed with clever ideas about where that money is coming from, and that is a challenge for this Forum over the next two days.
Can I conclude by wishing each and every one of you two days of good discussions. We are going to be here in force as a Government and indeed as Parliamentary representatives during the next two days, eager to tap into your insights, eager to hear your perspectives, eager to shape a work agenda that is practical and capable of being taken beyond this room.
Thank you very much. 



The Gillard Government is today delighted to congratulate Professor Brian Schmidt of the Australian National University for winning the 2011 Nobel Prize for Physics, shared with his two fellow laureates, Americans Saul Perlmutter and Adam Riess.
Professor Schmidt led one of two teams to make a remarkable discovery that the universe is actually blowing apart at an ever-increasing rate.
This discovery turned some of our most stable notions of the universe on its head and challenges our understanding of its very composition.
The Prime Minister said last night's award was a testament to the rigour and determination of these astronomers and their teams. 
They stuck with their observations and made the theory fit the facts, however revolutionary and inconvenient.
Congratulations must also be extended to the international teams involved in the discovery including Australia's Dr Brian Boyle, Director of our bid to host the Square Kilometre Array radio-telescope, and Professor Warwick Couch of Swinburne University.
It is another day on which Aussie researchers make Australians proud.
With only 0.3 per cent of the world's population we produce 3 per cent of its knowledge  -  and as this recognition shows, a lot of that is absolutely world-class.
Innovation Minister Senator Kim Carr said the Prize illustrated Australia's great strength as a centre of scientific research excellence; a country where the spirit of discovery was valued.
It is that spirit of discovery that has driven every genuine revolution in understanding in human history.
And it is the same spirit that drives Australia to seek to host the Square Kilometre Array, to deliver maximum discovery to the world.
The Square Kilometre Array (SKA) is the largest science experiment our hemisphere has ever seen. It will deliver untold new insights into the universe, and spin off countless new technologies and provide high tech job opportunities along the way. 



The Australian Government today welcomed the beginning of the inaugural Indonesia-Australia Dialogue, to be convened from 5-6 October in Indonesia.
Announced during the visit to Australia by President Yudhoyono in March 2010, the dialogue brings together leading Australians and Indonesians from a wide range of backgrounds to promote people-to-people links and foster a closer understanding of each other.
The Prime Minister said the inaugural Indonesia-Australia Dialogue was a significant development in our growing strategic partnership with Indonesia, our close neighbour and an important regional leader.
It complements annual leaders' summits, our governments' agreement to launch Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement negotiations and annual foreign and defence ministerial discussions  -  a format Australia has with close partners.
Foreign Minister Rudd said Indonesia was in the top tier of Australia's core relationships, and this forum would take the partnership to a new level. 
The dialogue will promote a better understanding between Australia and Indonesia at the people-to-people level, one area of the relationship President Yudhoyono identified as lagging during his visit to Australia.
Twenty Australian participants have been drawn from a wide cross-section of Australian society including politics, business, academia and media.  Participants were chosen because they are prominent in their fields and can help impart understanding of a modern, dynamic Australia to the Indonesian participants in the Dialogue.
The Australian participants will be led by co-convenor John McCarthy, AO.  Mr McCarthy is a former diplomat with a distinguished career, including ambassadorial postings to India, the United States, Japan, Indonesia, Thailand, Mexico and Vietnam. 
Mr McCarthy's Indonesian counterpart, Dr Rizal Sukma, is the Executive Director of the prominent Centre for Strategic and International Studies think tank in Jakarta. 



JOURNALIST: Can I just ask you a very important question first up on jobs and yours in particular. Let's talk about Mark Bishop and Alan Griffin, have you spoken to them, do you believe the (inaudible)?
PM: I'll let the ex-Labor politicians and the commentators all chatter about that, the focus here is on Australian jobs, jobs today and the jobs of the future.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that's all it is, just chatter?
PM: I'll let the people who do all the commentary on the 24 hour TV worry themselves about that.
JOURNALIST: On the Jobs Forum today, the industry, the unions were calling for an inquiry into manufacturing, is this the Plan B and will it produce what, possibly an inquiry would have?
PM: Every day we've been in Government we've been working on jobs and we've been working to make sure that we not only protect Australian jobs today but we've got the jobs of the future. I want to, in this resources boom, make sure we share the benefits of that boom around the nation and I want to come out of the resources boom with a more diversified economy than we went into it, not with less diversity. That means that we do have to address the pressures on areas like manufacturing and Australians are living through those pressures, they know about them, it's not an academic debate.
Now we've already done a number of things but today is about learning where to next, what else we can do to build on what we've already put in place to achieve a clean energy, high skills, high value-add future for the Australian economy.
JOURNALIST: Can we expect a concrete announcement?
PM: Well let's go through the Jobs Forum, but I think what you've seen over the Tax Forum and into this Future Jobs Forum today is that it is always worthwhile getting people together with their diverse views, having them come round a table and have a genuine discussion about issues. It worked in the Tax Forum for the matters that you saw announced by the Deputy Prime Minister last night, we're going through a similar process today.
JOURNALIST: You seemed to be quite upbeat and optimistic in your opening address despite the softness in those various sectors that you spoke, is that correct?
PM: I am very optimistic about the Australian economy. Optimistic because of the resilience we showed during the global financial crisis. Optimistic because we live in the region of the world that is growing and is not only driving today's resources boom but will drive a consumption boom, the provision of things to a hugely growing Asian middle class over the  next decade and beyond.
We're talking about growth of 1.2 billion people in the Asian middle class by the end of this decade, there are huge opportunities. Now every era of opportunity also comes with challenges and we face those challenges today in areas like manufacturing, but as we've heard in the opening session, we can ensure we have a manufacturing future, we're going to have to innovate, we're going to have to go up the value chain, we're going to have to focus on skills, that's what Government policies today are already about, but the Future Jobs Forum is about working through how we can build on those policies.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said this morning, I think you said this morning that the business tax changes, the losses write off and so forth, you'd have those in the May budget next year but the threshold lifted, the $21,000 threshold  -  is that also going to be in the May budget do you envisage or are you-
PM: As we made clear yesterday we will make that as our first priority move in personal tax reform when budget circumstances permit but what I can certainly tell you about time frames is on 1 July next year the tax free threshold will be tripled from $6,000 to $18,200 and then we have identified as our first priority in personal tax reform going the rest of the way to $21,000.
JOURNALIST: PM, just quickly, do you have any comment on the death of Steve Jobs  -  Apple CEO. It is confirmed that he has passed away.
PM: I've been saddened to hear that news, I mean here we are at a Future Jobs Forum and the jobs of the future are going to be shaped by innovation and we hear the news of the loss of an incredible global innovator. I mean it's not too much to say he literally changed our world. All of us would be touched everyday in our daily lives by products that he was the creative genius behind. So this is very sad news and my condolences go to his family and friends.
Thank you very much.



HOST: Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning Alison.
HOST: First to the broader economic outlook, overnight we had the IMF warning a world recession can't be ruled out in 2012. Do you believe that the threat of a global recession is now as serious as it was in 2008?
PM: We're in different circumstances to 2008. Of course that was a global financial crisis triggered by problems in the banking system, the subprime mortgage market of the United States being a prime example. This is of a different order, this is about concerns re sovereign debt in Europe, that is countries like Greece and their ability to get themselves back into a better financial position.
We will certainly be raising our voice, my voice at the G20, the Deputy Prime Minister's voice at the international meetings for finance ministers, to say that Europe does need to get its house in order.
HOST: But if Europe doesn't get its house in order and the IMF warning does come to fruition what would that mean for our job market, would you expect it to hit, a global recession to hit the Australian economy harder than at the height of the GFC in 2008.
PM: We're never immune from global trends, we weren't in 2008 and we're not immune now, but we are in the region of the world that continues to grow and is growing strongly. And consequently our outlook is one where we have resilience in our economy, we came out of the global financial crisis strong and we are trading with the region of the world that is continuing to grow. So we're never immune, but there's no better place to be than Australia as we see this kind of volatility and concern about the global economy.
HOST: Well looking at the Future Jobs Forum that the government will be hosting today, should the public be expecting any real outcomes from today's deliberation that will lead to job creation, can we expect a single new job to be created as a result of the talks?
PM: Alison, as a government each and every day we work on creating jobs, that's been our prime motivation and purpose during the days of the global financial crisis we worked to protect Australian jobs. Since, we have been working to harness the new phases in our economic growth so that there can be more Australian jobs.
Now every Australian knows that we're seeing spectacular growth in the mining industry and people work in it, or see the growth in their own neighbourhood, they know someone who's going mining, is on a fly-in-fly-out basis. At the same time, Australians recognise that other industries are under pressure, in part because mining is so strong and our dollar is so strong. So today we want to talk about how we are working right across the economy to get jobs growth, we don't come to this from a standing start, we've been working every day, strongly working with our manufacturing sector, strongly working with tourism, to give two examples of industry sections that are under pressure, but today is about bringing people together to see what else can be done.
HOST: And manufacturing is certainly the sector which is grabbing all the headlines, the manufacturing unions have issued a wish list of demands, they want accelerated depreciation, an independent audit of government procurement policies, the naming and shaming of resources companies that don't use locally manufactured products on major projects. Can you tick off any of those demands, they're not necessarily particularly radical, are they?
PM: Alison I'm not here to pre-empt discussions at today's Job Forum. But what I can say it this, the focus of the government has been on making sure that we seize the opportunities that come with this period of change in our economy. Yes, there are risks, because the high Australian Dollar is putting pressure on manufacturing, for example.
But there are huge opportunities, we living in the growing region of the world. To give you just one statistic  -  the Asian middle classes are going to grow by 1.2 billion by the end of this decade, now just think about that number  -  1.2 billion people demanding all of the things that you and I want in our lives, which will include manufactured products of high quality.
So there is a future for manufacturing in this country, it's about moving up the value chain and so our economic vision, and that's what we will be discussing today, is of high tech, high skills, clean energy, is the future of our economy with industries that some might think of as old, like manufacturing, having a place in that future, because they've gone up the value chain and they've seized the opportunities that this phase of economic change brings.
HOST: Well, taking full advantage of the Asia boom will mean that we need to employ more people in this country, the broader labour market is suffering a different problem from manufacturing job losses and that is a skills shortage. BHP was warning recently that the resources sector will need more than 150,000 extra workers over the next five years, does that mean that unless we find those workers we would be in danger of missing out on the mining boom, not taking full advantage of it?
PM: Alison I think your questions have really encapsulated the issue here, you've asked me on the one hand about job losses in manufacturing and now you're asking me about not enough workers, not enough skills and the fact that you can ask those two questions in the one interview is because you know, as I know, and as Australians are experiencing in their own lives, we live in an economy which is a patchwork. There are different pressures, different growth rates, consequently people who live in manufacturing regions are feeling the pressures of changing manufacturing, people who live in mining regions, or who are associated with the mining industry are saying ‘more, more, more, we want more people, more skills, more infrastructure and we need it now'.
As a government we've got to be responding to these sets of different pressures in our economy. So yes, we will need people with skills, in the right places to nurture the resources boom. I want the mining industry to be strong. At the same time we've got to be nurturing skills in manufacturing, because I don't want it to be an old industry, I want it to be an industry with a high skills, high innovation, clean energy future. We can achieve that and that's what the Future Jobs Forum today is about.
HOST: But it's not just mining, it's also health, they need an extra 300,000 workers by the middle of the decade, construction close to 200,000. Where are you going to find all of these workers, how are you going to skill them? Could it be necessary to return to Kevin Rudd's notion of a big Australia and increase skilled migration?
PM: We do have a skilled migration program and-
HOST: But is it big enough?
PM: Well we've made some recent changes to it, so it best responds to these patchwork pressures. You go to some regions of Australia and unemployment rates are incredibly low and people are screaming for more workers, you go to other parts of our country  -  you referred to BlueScope in your questioning, for example, the Illawarra, where people have just lost their jobs.
Now we've got to get the settings right for both areas. So, yes there will be people that we need to bring from overseas and in the budget we moved to a better way of doing that through enterprise migration agreements for those parts of the economy that are growing spectacularly and need more people now.
But I'm also very determined that we don't in this phase of economic change and growth, leave a kid in Kwinana in Western Australia, on the unemployment queue without skills, whilst the people who operate big mines in the north-west of the state say ‘can you import a plumber, or a cook, or an electrician for me'. I want that kid to get that opportunity and that's why we've put $3 billion into skills in the budget to build on all of the things we've already done to increase the number of apprenticeships in this country and to deepen the skills that our Australian people have.
The future's going to be about skills, it's going to be about clean energy (inaudible) too, it's going to be about the best of technology and that's what the NBN's about.
HOST: Well, the future is also about taxation, if we could mop up the Tax Forum, your government has put together a working group to further explore business tax reform. One option is targeted measures for companies struggling as a result of the mining boom. This working group delivers its interim report in November, does that mean that you could announce some tax relief for manufacturing firms as early as Christmas?
PM: Well we want to get on with this as quickly as possible. What we've asked is a working group to look at this question of how you deal with losses and that might sound a little bit odd for your listeners, they'd think we'll losses are a bad thing. We know in this period of economic change businesses are going to have to change and that means there may be a period when they're making a loss because they're reequipping for the future, getting that new big piece of equipment that will make them competitive for the long term. Or they might be a business person who's starting a new venture, come out of an industry or a section of industry where opportunities are closing and going to a new opportunity where demand is increasing. That means for a period of time they'll make losses, we want to make sure the tax treatment rewards that kind of prudent risk taking behaviour, getting in there with new opportunities. That's what the working group's about and we're determined to do it and move as rapidly as we can, but these things do require in-detailed work.
But certainly I want to see this working group reporting back and we are looking to changes in the forthcoming budget.
HOST: Now the Government is also committed to lifting the tax-free threshold to at least $21,000 and to abolish the low income tax offset, but there's no timetable for the tax cut. Wayne Swan says it won't happen until it's affordable, does that mean you'll have to wait until the budget is in surplus? And the very fact that you're talking about tax relief, does that mean you are increasingly confident that you can deliver on your promise of a budget surplus 2012-2013.
PM: I can give you a very clear timetable for the tripling of the tax-free threshold, it starts on 1 July next year-
HOST: But not to $21,000?
PM: But let's just be clear about the reform here, we are going from $6,000 tax-free, to $18,200 tax-free on 1 July next year. One million people not in the tax system, people seeing a tax cut, people earning less than $80,000, people at the lower income end, often women going back to work after having a child, working part time, seeing bigger tax cuts than that, better reward for work.
Yes, I want to go the rest of the way, from the $18,200 to the $21,000 and we have identified that as our first priority for change in personal taxation. But the big lift will start 1 July next year.
HOST: Well Prime Minister, finally and briefly, your leadership continues to be a talking point. The former Labor minister Graham Richardson says two of your backbenchers, Mark Bishop and Alan Griffin, are actively undermining your leadership and ringing around behind your back doing the numbers for Kevin Rudd. Are you watching your back?
PM: Oh Alison, ex-Labor politicians who have become media commentators are going to chatter about insider gossip because the media wants that-
HOST: But is he right?
PM: My focus is on jobs, today we are having a major Future Jobs Forum, dealing with this period of economic change that you and I have just talked about, huge opportunities, yes risks, but my focus is on that and jobs for people today, but also for their kids.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time.
PM: Thank you.



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thanks very much for waiting. Good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Perhaps the best news for, particularly for people on low incomes, part time earners, is that there will be a raising of the tax free threshold after yesterday's and the day before's discussions. Can you confirm that you will look at raising that or you will raise it?
PM: Certainly. What will happen on 1 July next year is the tax free threshold will triple, will go from $6,000 to $18,200. That means there will one million people not in the tax system. They are not paying tax. When they look at their pay packet and say how much has the tax man taken the answer will be nothing. We want to go the rest of the way and put the tax free threshold up to $21,000 and we've said that will be our first priority for personal tax reform.
HOST: When will that happen do you think?
PM: Well we obviously need to manage the budget carefully but we will get right up to $18,200 on 1 July next year and then, in the context of making sure we manage the budget well, our top priority will be getting the rest of the way to $21,000. So people don't have to wait to see the big jump from $6,000 to $18,200, that will happen on 1 July next year.
HOST: There is a lot of agreement round the table from all sides of politics and economics yesterday that the Newstart, the job allowance, is just far too low. People in their 40s and 50s who are out of work can't live on it, that's a stress on the budget but can you fix it?
PM: I think the best thing we can do is focus on creating new jobs, so people get the opportunities they want, people don't want a life on Newstart, they want a job and so today we've moved from the Tax Forum to the Future Jobs Forum. Now we live in a country that has come out of the global financial crisis strong and we should be proud of the economy that we have created together, compared with countries like the United States we have low unemployment. But we're also living in a huge period of economic change, it's got great opportunities, we live in the growing region of the world  -  Asia, we live in the section of the world where the middle class is growing by leaps and bounds. By the end of the decade we're going to see 1.2 billion more people in the middle classes of Asia and they'll want to buy things like great quality wine from South Australia, they'll want to buy good manufactured goods from Australia, high quality ones. They'll want to be tourists to our country, they'll want banking services, legal services, so this is full of opportunities for us, but there are also challenges for growth in mining which South Australia is looking to share in. The growth in mining is keeping our Australian dollar very strong and high, that's putting pressure on other parts of the economy like manufacturing and so that's why we've got the Future Jobs Forum today.
HOST: We want to come back to that Prime Minister, but still on the question of Newstart, it is agreed by everybody it is too low to live on, can you fix it, will you fix it?
PM: My focus is on job creation. 
HOST: So you're not going to fix it?
PM: Well, all I can say to you is I think the best thing I can do for someone on Newstart is to get them a job.
HOST: Well that's not much satisfaction to the thousands of people who haven't got one now. And they're not going to get one of those fancy jobs, we're talking about, you know, manufacturing is, we know, under pressure and people simply cannot get those low skill jobs now. Is there no sense after yesterday that you have to do something for them?
PM: Well I think we've got to be a bit careful about what we mean by jobs growth and economic growth. I do want to see us being a country that's got a high skill, high wage, clean technology, clean technology and the best of new technology like the NBN as our future. You know, we do want to see those clean energy jobs, but I think you would be making an error to think that they are only jobs for people in a particular occupation. I mean I want to see growth in jobs right around the country. We know we've got growth now in mining and in construction, some very traditional jobs and traditional trades including unskilled or semi-skilled labour that is in demand. We do have pressures in other parts of the economy and we want to be working with manufacturing, with tourism, with other parts of the economy so we are being as competitive as we can now and making the best of today's opportunities and also building for that future where the Asian century will create so much new demand for the things that we can make and sell.
HOST: This is, I guess, a question about both sides of the question, the tax side and the jobs side. One of the things that came out of the Tax Forum was that we do face an increasing welfare and family payments crisis as one speaker put it. Do we get out of jail there by growing the economy rapidly and if that's the answer what do we do? How do we get there?
PM: Well I certainly wouldn't adopt that language but of course it's true that we need to make sure our economy is strong, so together through the tax system we can fund the kind of services that make us a great Australian society. I mean Australians do want to know that the hospital is going to be there for them if they need health services, they do want to know if they age or their parents age, that there are options and choices for them.
I want to make sure we're doing better for people with disability than we've done in the past which is why I'm very committed to a National Disability Insurance Scheme. That does mean we've got to have economic growth, prosperity, productivity  -  the Tax Forum focused on that in this time of economic change and the Future Jobs Forum will focus on it too.
We're not coming to these forums as if the starter's gun has just fired, we've been working on these things every day of government  -  a focus on jobs, a focus on supporting jobs today, a focus on what are the jobs of the future, that's why we're rolling out the NBN, why we're so focused on clean technology, why we're so focused on skills. But these events have given us an opportunity to look at what's been achieved and to talk about how we can build on it.
HOST: Prime Minister, a listener question on a slightly different tack. How can MPs grant themselves a substantial pay rise when the average Aussie is struggling to more than ever to make ends meet?
PM: We've changed the system so that MPs don't have a role in deciding what MPs get paid. That's independently of MPs by the Remuneration Tribunal. I think that's appropriate, that we don't adjudicate on our own salaries or benefits.
HOST: There's another question that comes up about the issues of trying to get more money into the till, what will happen on 1 July next year, how do you fund this new tax free threshold, carbon tax?
PM: Yes, that is how we are funding it so it's part of assisting people with the less than one cent in a dollar flow through impact of asking the big polluters to pay for putting carbon pollution into our atmosphere and thereby reducing the amount of carbon pollution. So the tax free threshold is associated with carbon pricing but so are the clean energy jobs of the future, making sure that we are a country that is getting in on what is happening around the world as the globe moves to cleaner energy sources and I do note, I'm talking about that here in Australia today on the phone to you in South Oz, Malcolm Turnbull was talking about those clean energy job opportunities last night at a lecture that he gave overseas.
So in fact, people on both sides of politics are recognising this clean energy future and Malcolm Turnbull is a well known supporter of putting a price on carbon as the only way to realise that clean energy future.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you. 



Thank you very much to Wayne for those words of introduction, and thank you to all of you, particularly the people who have been on the 3-day journey, for your fortitude and you contributions.
I'd also like to thank Peter Shergold for doing the moderating this morning. To everyone who's engaged in presenting today, to all of the staff who have kept us organised and supported during the course of this event  -  thank you very much.
First, I'm going to start with a sad reflection, which is whilst we have been meeting today, the news has broken that Steve Jobs, the creative genius behind Apple, the iPad, the iPhone, the iPod, has died today, and so as we've sat here talking about innovation, the world has in fact lost one of its leading innovators.
Now, words of condolence are being spoken all around the world for Steve, and I would join in those words of condolence. Flowers are apparently being left outside Apple stores, and already someone has launched on the internet an Apple logo with his face silhouetted against the black background of the Apple logo.
Now, all of this is going to be big news and cause for reflection over the next few days, but as we remember his life it should reinforce in us the belief that innovation can change the world. He changed our world.
As I've moved from session to session today I've thought to myself, knowing about this news, how many people were sitting there on their iPads, taking notes, doing emails in their bit of down time. He's changed our world.
So, innovation can change the world and it can lead to prosperity and opportunity, one of the things that we've been reflecting on today.
Friends, I've taken a number of important insights and reflections from today. Before getting into the meat and potatoes of this concluding address, I want to point out, too, Andrew Liveris said to us this morning “passivity isn't a growth strategy”, and Steve Vamos said, during his session, “whether you want to grow a business or grow an economy, you have to say we want to do this and will do this'”.
I want to assure you that it's not in this Government's nature to be passive, and we are very determined, during this phase of economic transformation, to spread opportunity  -  the opportunity for work through our nation during this phase of change; to seize the huge opportunities which will come from the growth of Asia, the resources boom, a clean energy future and the National Broadband Network; that we're very determined to nourish the diversity of our economy during these days of change; and to emerge from the resources boom with an economy more diverse than when we entered into the boom.
And we'll also want to make sure, during these days of economic transformation, that we don't leave people behind.
When I spoke to you this morning I said that my aims for the day included, first, deepening our understanding of today's trends and tomorrow's opportunities, and I believe we've done that. I was particularly struck by Andrew Liveris telling us, in a most compelling fashion across the video link - which came back for us, fortunately  -  he told us about how countries around the globe are preparing for an era of even more intense globalisation, and he urged us to think about how we can fit into this age of globalisation through innovation; through falling in love again with science; through building genuine partnerships between Government and industry.
I think we have shared and deepened our understanding of today's trends and tomorrow's opportunities. We will continue to work with you on that as we develop the Asian Century White Paper. That is, in essence, what it's for.
I also wanted us to emerge with more of an understanding of the future vision for industry sectors under pressure during these days of economic change. I've received good feedback during the course of the day about the great work that has been undertaken by the Future Manufacturing Industry Innovation Council under Kim Carr's leadership, and we need to build on that work.
In relation to another sector under pressure, the tourism sector, I can commit to you that an updated tourism strategy will be released before the end of the year, but we will take two immediate steps for tourism.
First, we will extend business support through Enterprise Connect to tourism, and second, I will ask Nick Sherry to work further on ensuring tourism is ready to capitalise on the advantages that the NBN will bring, given, of course, that today, looking for a tourist opportunity, working out where you want to go, is being driven by the information you can get by going on the internet, and that will be turbo-charged by the NBN.
I can also commit to you, in relation to another industry under pressure, international education, that following the well-received Knight review of international education, Chris Evans will shortly appoint the International Education Advisory Council to continue defining and realising the best vision for the future of that vital sector of the economy.
This morning, I also spoke to you about the aims for today, including having a sophisticated discussion about productivity, and we've done that. The next iteration of the important work about management and improving productivity that is being done by Steve Vamos will emerge from a workshop being held in December, and I will ensure that that important work is shared as quickly and as widely as possible.
Finally, this morning I talked to you about leveraging the resources boom so that it benefits the rest of the economy. That's critical to spreading opportunity right throughout our nation during these days of change.
We've heard, during the course of the day, from right around the room, how urgent it is to support manufacturing during these days of change: to enable it to compete in the new global landscape, and with the headwinds that it is experiencing with the high terms of trade; to enable the sector to move up the value chain; to enable it to more actively link with high-quality research and development taking place in our unis and TAFE; to build the skills that the sector needs to ensure it can access the capital it needs to re-tool and re-equip.
Now, I believe that this task is urgent and it requires a whole-of-government approach. I will therefore establish a Prime Minister's taskforce, drawn from manufacturing industry leaders and unions, to co-ordinate and catalyse the work occurring across government. We need to be in a position to rapidly respond to this structural adjustment.
I will personally chair this taskforce, and Minister Carr will be the deputy chair. Other senior ministers, because this is a whole-of-government task, will be members of the taskforce.
I do genuinely believe that we can be a country that continues to invent things and make things. I want our economy to be one that includes high-quality, good-paying jobs for Australian workers in manufacturing. It's a vital part of our economy, and it's got to be a long-lasting part of our economy.
In addition, I talked to you this morning about some of the work we're already doing through the buying Australia at home and abroad work, and the supplier advocates that we have working to get manufacturing a share in the work being generated by mining, and Peter Beattie has been here as a participant throughout the day.
Today, to build on those efforts, I announce that the Government will move to extend the requirement of Australian Industry Participation Plans for Federal Government grants of $20 million or more, and for grants of $20 million or more to the states and territories where they do not apply their own industry participation plans.
We already require these plans for our own major procurements, the Commonwealth's major procurements, and we will now work with states and territories to ensure Australian suppliers have opportunities to compete for projects and work.
The Commonwealth provides billions of dollars in grants each year. Some of these go direct to industry, some go to infrastructure projects, some are delivered through states and territories. Requiring Industry Participation Plans as part of those grants, I believe, is an important new initiative.
This measure will be consistent with our international trade obligations. We are not taking a step back from our firm belief in the value of open markets. We will work to ensure local suppliers have an opportunity to compete on the level terms in bidding for Government-supported projects.
Now, to get this done we will appoint an implementation working group, and they'll be working very quickly indeed. I'm hoping no-one wanted Melbourne Cup Day off, because the working group will report and finalise what it needs to do by the end of this year.
It will include representatives from industry, unions, Commonwealth agencies, as well as the states and territories.
In addition, the Government will also extend opportunities for Australian industry participation in the enhanced project by laws scheme. Now, this is a tariff concession scheme that provides eligible projects with relief from a five per cent general tariff that applies to imported goods. To be eligible for this concession, major projects have to provide Australian industry with an opportunity to compete for work, but there have been criticisms of the operation of this scheme, and we intend to tighten it so it works better to provide Australian manufacturing with opportunities.
We will be requiring more comprehensive evidence of opportunities being provided to Australian industry. We will be requiring project proponents to list opportunities for Australian industry to participate in major projects on a public website.
We will be requiring project proponents to more regularly report on how their industry participation plans are working and their outcomes, and we will be amending the guidelines to require approval of eligible goods as an additional step for large projects.
In getting this concession, it is important that people respond by being clear and transparent in their conduct. This is something that a number of stakeholders have agitated for. There's no point in having rules unless people can, each and every day, clearly and transparently see that they are being abided by. Consequently, we will require these Industry Participation Plans to be published on a website so I, you, anyone can check on progress against the plans.
This is all about giving Australian business the fair go that it deserves. If you want Australian taxpayers' dollars, then you're going to have to give Australian business a fair chance to compete for work.
In addition to those measures, one of the things that has struck me today in the discussion has been the focus on skills - something very close to my heart. As many of you are aware, we are engaged in a major reform process through COAG on skills development, and we've got reform work also occurring through the National Workforce Development and Productivity Agency. Chris Evans has recently announced some steps to broaden and bring forward the work of this agency and I'll be working with Chris to see what we can do to accelerate that work, and to ensure that in the skills reform process we are responding to the industry sections that we've spoken about today.
We particularly need to be ready to nurture the resources boom with the skills that it needs. We need to be ready to focus on the new skills we will need for a clean energy future. We need to have a focus on the skills development required to take manufacturing up the value chain, and then of course we need to be providing the skills necessary for other industries, including tourism and the huge growth that we are expecting in sectors like health and community services, and also in the professional and technical sections.
So friends, with those words I want to thank you once again for participating in this work. This is not a one-off day. We didn't start with a clean page. We came here having worked with many of you through different arms of government - supporting jobs, thinking about skills development, working on productivity, working on responses to the patchwork economy. I believe through the efforts today we've catalysed that work, we've driven it further, and it's certainly my intention to stay in very close contact with this group and beyond as we continue to drive that work forward.
The transformation in our economy brings challenges, but let's leave this room reminding ourselves of the opportunities. We've got an amazing opportunity to spread wealth from the boom in resources, during the days of the boom to use that wealth and those opportunities to drive depending and diversity in our economy even as we face some strains from the high Australian dollar. We've got a great opportunity through the resources boom and beyond to strengthen our economy for the future so that we emerge with a diversified economy: high skill, high wage, clean energy, high productivity.
That's the journey we've been on today and I thank you for your contribution. 


Kingston High School, Tasmania
This transcript contains excerpts from the Community Cabinet meeting held in Kingston, Tasmania on Monday 3 October 2011. A complete transcript of the Public Forum detailing all questions and answers can be found via the Community Cabinet links on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet http://www.dpmc.gov.au/community_cabinet
Footage of the school, students, community reception and members of the community meeting the Prime Minister.
Narrator: On the 3rd October the Gillard Government held a Community cabinet meeting at Kingston High School where the local Tasmanian community were given an opportunity to speak with the Prime Minister and other Ministers.
Student 1: Julia Gillard is coming to our school and you know, having Cabinet, which is pretty cool.
Student 2: I think it's great because instead of staying in Canberra and saving people going there it gives more people a chance to go and see what they do and we have this great new school. I think it's a great opportunity.
Footage of Kingston High School and one-on-one meetings
Community Member 1: Many (people) wanted to know what the Federal Government is doing for young Africans and looking at what happened recently in Libya and Somalia and even in South Sudan.
Footage of one-on-one meeting participants
Community Member 2: She (the Prime Minister) was kind enough to take up some of our proposals, some of our ideas to have a look at. So that was very encouraging
Community Member 3: We don't often get a chance to see or meet the Prime Minster, we generally can't afford to get to Canberra to go and talk to her, so the fact that she has come down here to talk to us is a good thing. We emphasised how important it is for people with a disability to get access to employment, as there are huge barriers for people with a disability who want to work. She also sent someone after us to get some more information, so hopefully they will.
Footage of the public forum, questions from the community and answers from the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Helen Gourley, Principal: It is with much pleasure that I welcome the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard and members of her Cabinet to our wonderful new school.
Prime Minister: Thank you very much. Thank you, for that warm welcome. Thank you to my colleague Julie, for introducing me. Can I too start by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and in a spirit of reconciliation, pay my respects to elders past and present. Can I thank Helen for having us in her very beautiful, very new school.
Community Member 4: Thank you Prime Minister and Minister Bourke for your efforts to deliver the Inter-Governmental Agreement on Tasmanian forests. Will you work with the Tasmanian Government to make sure that they are aware of the benefits of the agreement?  Which there are many.
Prime Minister:  We're very happy to work with the State Government, we're very happy to work with the Tasmanian Parliament, we're very happy to work with the Tasmanian Upper House. We will be very focussed on delivering the Inter-Governmental Agreement, including through the Tasmanian Upper House.
Community Member 5: With all these major industries being taxed for all their emissions, why aren't we taxing the 1000's we get from our own cars?
Minister Greg Combet AM MP:  The short answer is that a lot of fuel, or all fuels have excise taxation essentially applied to them.
Prime Minister: The level of understanding about climate change and about policies to deal with carbon is incredible amongst young Australians.
Community Member 6: It was the first time I have seen Julia Gillard in person and I was just interested to see what she had to say, particularly about Tasmania and its future.
Community Member 7: By creating the opportunity for individuals to speak directly to government,  they can get a greater sense of what's going on in a place.
Footage of the community reception. Ends with musical interlude
Footage concludes (3 minutes)



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Member for Ballarat Catherine King today announced work will begin this month on a new centre that will provide cutting edge manufacturing training for students at the University of Ballarat.
The Gillard Labor Government has provided more than $18 million through the Education Investment Fund to help build the new Manufacturing Technology Training Centre in Ballarat.
The centre will provide specialist training spaces to help provide new skills in areas such as robotics, mechatronics and manufacturing computer animation.
The centre will also house labs to teach computer assisted design.
The Prime Minister visited the University of Ballarat today to inspect the site and meet apprentices who will benefit from the new centre when it is built.
The new facility will enhance the University of Ballarat's capacity to meet the training needs of the diverse and rapidly evolving manufacturing sector in western Victoria.
The announcement comes a day after the Gillard Government's Future Jobs Forum, which looked at further ways to position our economy for the years ahead.
The forum, hosted by the Prime Minister, also canvassed innovative ideas to spread the benefits of strong growth to all corners of our patchwork economy.
Manufacturing is the third largest category of employment in the Central Highlands of Victoria and the major driver of regional growth and development.
The new centre is a good example of how targeted investment will help secure a vibrant manufacturing industry and provide the jobs of the future for the Ballarat region.
The investment will help with the diversification of the region's manufacturing base by creating smarter, more innovative manufacturing technologies.
A key activity of the centre will be the training of apprentices for modern-day manufacturing. 
Already, the University trains 200 apprentices in manufacturing and when the centre is fully operational, this number is anticipated to increase to 300.
These additional apprentices will be available for employment in Ballarat and throughout the region.
The Manufacturing Technology Training Centre will be a vital resource in maintaining, growing and leading manufacturing technology in western Victoria.
The University has worked closely with local industry representatives in the planning of the centre to better understand and respond to local business needs.
Construction of the centre is expected to commence this month and 145 jobs for local tradespeople and professionals will be created in the construction phase.
Since 2007, the Government has committed more than $6.2 billion in capital funding for infrastructure to support landmark investments in higher education, research and vocational education and training, as well as campus renewal, modernisation projects and improved student amenities.
So far 57 projects funded through the Education Investment Fund have been completed and a further 121 projects are underway.
This historic investment has allowed our universities and TAFEs to build state-of-the-art learning and teaching facilities equipped for the challenges of the 21st Century.
More information on the funding of higher education infrastructure programs can be found at:
http://www.deewr.gov.au/HigherEducation/Programs/Funding/Pages/Home.aspx



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today opened a $500 million fund to build world class education and training facilities for students in regional Australia.
The special Regional Priorities Round of the Education Investment Fund will provide a major boost to higher education institutions and vocational education and training (VET) providers across regional Australia.
The $500 million fund will ensure regional students have better quality education and training opportunities and this in turn will support increased participation in tertiary education.
This targeted investment will also contribute to economic growth and development in regional Australia by addressing the skills needs of regional communities.
The Prime Minister announced details on the fund during a visit to the University of Ballarat today.
More Australians than ever before are now able to benefit from a university education thanks to the Gillard Labor Government's historic investment in higher education.
More regional students now have access to financial support through Youth Allowance.
The number of regional students accessing Youth Allowance is up from 28,875 to 36,310  -  an increase of 25% in just more than a year.
Campuses have also benefited from an additional $110 million in increased regional loading to help them meet the higher costs of delivering services in regional areas.
The Government has committed more than $6.2 billion in capital funding for infrastructure to modernise Australia's universities.
Under the Regional Priorities Round, a total of $480 million will be allocated to higher education institutions and VET providers in a competitive round, while $20 million has been be earmarked as seed funding for a multi-partner campus on the mid-north coast of New South Wales.
Higher education and VET providers will now be able to apply for the funding to construct new facilities or to refurbish and extend existing facilities.
They will also be able to access funding for technical equipment or information and communication technologies to support teaching and learning.
Funding in the EIF Regional Priorities Round is also available for research-related capital costs integral to proposed teaching and learning or VET infrastructure projects.
So far, 57 capital projects funded through the EIF have been completed and a further 121 projects are underway. 
This historic investment in infrastructure has transformed our universities and TAFEs, providing modern, state-of-the-art learning and teaching facilities.
The Regional Priorities Round will involve a two-stage application process. Initial Expressions of Interest close on 4 November 2011. Applicants successful at the Expression of Interest stage will be invited to submit a full application in 2012.
Guidelines for the Regional Priorities Round of the Education Investment Fund can be found at www.deewr.gov.au/eifrpr



The Australian Government today expressed its deep concern at the violence and resulting loss of life and injuries that took place in Cairo overnight.
According to current estimates, up to 23 people have died and over 150 were injured during clashes between protestors and security forces.
The Government expresses its condolences to the friends and families of those killed.  
Last night's violence follows an increase in sectarian tensions and violence affecting Coptic Christians in recent months, including attacks on churches.  
The Government calls for calm and for clear respect for religious freedoms, human rights and the rule of law.  
As Egypt's historical transition to democracy continues, now more than ever is a critical time for peace and stability. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard was pleased today to welcome the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, The Hon. Peter O‘Neill, to Canberra for an official visit, his first since becoming Prime Minister.
Papua New Guinea is Australia's nearest neighbour, a friend and a genuine partner.
The largest Pacific Island nation, Papua New Guinea today stands on the threshold of an historic opportunity to develop its significant natural resources wealth in a way that delivers lasting benefit for its people.
A new chapter in Australia-PNG relations is beginning.
In discussions with Prime Minister O'Neill today, the Prime Minister committed Australia to a strong and close partnership geared towards supporting Papua New Guinea through the period of change ahead.
Managing Resource Revenues
PNG's $15 billion ExxonMobil-led Liquefied Natural Gas project is scheduled to commence in 2014.
Australia is providing technical assistance to support the establishment of a PNG Sovereign Wealth Fund through which to invest resource revenue for the long-term benefit of all Papua New Guineans.
Australia will continue this support. As part of Australia's assistance, officials from Papua New Guinea's Sovereign Wealth Fund Secretariat will undertake placements in our Future Fund and relevant Government departments. The first placements are expected to occur in the second half of 2012.
Australia will provide additional assistance, including in economic modelling and policy advice, under the Joint Understanding on Further Cooperation on the PNG LNG Project. 
Delivering Results through our Aid Program
The Prime Minister and Prime Minister O'Neill welcomed the considerable work that has been done to re-shape Australia's development cooperation program for PNG to focus strongly on education and health.
The Prime Ministers welcomed today's endorsement by the PNG-Australia Ministerial Forum of Partnership for Development schedules covering education, health and HIV/AIDS, transport and law and justice.
The Prime Minister shared Prime Minister O'Neill's strong focus on increasing access to education and improving its quality.
Under the Partnership for Development, we have agreed to work towards a higher net enrolment rate in basic education by 2015 and 52,000 graduates from higher education institutions between 2011 and 2015. We are working together on stronger quality assessment processes for PNG schools and higher education institutions.
The Prime Ministers welcomed the release by our Foreign Ministers of the Universities Review and its endorsement as a blueprint for future cooperation in the tertiary sector.
The Prime Minister was pleased to advise Prime Minister O'Neill of 20 Australia-Papua New Guinea Prime Ministers' Awards for rural students in Papua New Guinea to gain teaching qualifications.
Support to PNG's female leadership
Participation by Pacific women in regional parliaments is very low. The Prime Minister commended Prime Minister O'Neill on the introduction to the Papua New Guinea Parliament of ground-breaking legislation which will ensure 22 reserved seats for women. In partnership with the Australian National University, the PNG Office for the Development of Women and the United Nations Development Program, Australia will support efforts through a new $1 million project to help women in PNG gain skills in democratic politics.
A New Economic Chapter 
Our trade and economic relationship is vibrant and growing. Australia is PNG's largest export market and two-way merchandise trade is worth around $5.7 billion. Australian firms are an active presence in PNG's growing economy. Reflecting a maturing bilateral relationship in which economic ties and cooperation take on a greater role, the Prime Ministers tasked officials to  move quickly to commence negotiations on a proposed Economic Cooperation Treaty.
Our Policing Partnership 
Stable and secure societies promote economic opportunity. Australia will therefore provide ongoing support for the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary (RPNGC).
We have been working with Papua New Guinea to develop the next phase of the PNG-Australia Policing Partnership.
Australia will provide a range of training and support services to improve the capabilities of the PNG police.
The Prime Minister also agreed with Prime Minister O'Neill that Australia will place Australian Federal Police officers into in-line positions in the RPNGC.
These positions will be subject to PNG needs and officers will work in senior, strategic roles. They will not undertake front-line policing. Final details will be determined in discussions with Papua New Guinea.
The Prime Minister also agreed that Australia will provide support for the conduct of the 2012 Parliamentary elections in Papua New Guinea. This support will include assistance with planning, police communications, command and control mechanisms and training of RPNGC officers.
WWII commemorative events
The 70th anniversary of the critical WWII campaigns in Papua New Guinea will be commemorated next year  -  an historical milestone for our two countries.
Australia will send two commemorative missions in 2012: one in September to commemorate the Battle of Milne Bay and another in November to commemorate the Kokoda campaign and the Battle for the Beachheads at Buna, Gona and Sanananda.
Defence cooperation and peacekeeping
The Prime Minister congratulated Prime Minister O'Neill on the impending first ever deployments by the PNG Defence Force to a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
Australia has provided pre-deployment and force preparation training to ready PNGDF members for deployment to the UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the African Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
Australia is supportive of both missions. We look forward to working with our PNGDF partners through UN peacekeeping missions.
Working together in the region and beyond
The Prime Minister agreed with Prime Minister O'Neill that we should work closely together on regional issues, in support of shared democratic values and to promote security and economic development.
The Prime Minister noted with concern recent developments in Fiji and the continuing impact of the Bainimarama regime on the Fijian people.
The Prime Ministers agreed on the importance of maintaining firm pressure on Fiji to restore democracy and address human rights concerns, and the important role that Australia and Papua New Guinea  -  as leaders in the region  -  could play.The Prime Ministers also discussed the need for regional cooperation to combat people smuggling. The Prime Minister thanked Prime Minister O'Neill for PNG's ongoing preparedness to work with Australia and the region to deal with irregular people movement.The Prime Minister looked forward to welcoming Mr O'Neill to Australia for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Perth and to working with him to strengthen and reform the Commonwealth. 



Today I am announcing the membership of a high-level advisory panel for the White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
The shift of economic and strategic weight to Asia has never been more profound for Australia's interests than it is now.
The White Paper will provide a national blueprint for Australia at a time of transformative economic growth and change in Asia. It will help Australia navigate the Asian Century.
The advisory panel brings together an exceptional array of experience from business, academia and government in meeting the opportunities and challenges the Asian Century poses for Australia.
The advisory panel will provide guidance to the whole-of-government task force, led by Dr Ken Henry AC, which will develop analysis and proposals for consideration by the Government.
I am particularly pleased to welcome three prominent Australians from outside government to the panel.
Professor Peter Drysdale AM has spent a lifetime working on Asia. He is widely regarded as the leading intellectual architect of APEC and has written extensively on international trade and economic policy in East Asia and the Pacific.
Ms Catherine Livingstone AO is a leading Australian business figure. She is currently Chair of Telstra Corporation and a director of a number of top Australian companies. Through her past leadership of the Australian Business Foundation, she has encouraged research and policy development to boost Australia's capabilities and global competitiveness.
Mr John Denton is a partner and the Chief Executive Officer of Corrs Chambers Westgarth. He has extensive working experience in Asia. He is a board member of the Asia Society AustralAsia Centre and one of three Prime Ministerial representatives on the APEC Business Advisory Council.
Dr Henry, Professor Drysdale, Ms Livingstone and Mr Denton will also sit on a Committee of Cabinet which will be established to oversee preparation of the White Paper.
Three senior government officials will serve with the non-Government representatives on Dr Henry's advisory panel: Dr Gordon de Brouwer from the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Dr David Gruen from the Treasury and Dr Heather Smith from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
The development of the White Paper will include an intensive period of consultation with the Australian community, business, academia and international partners.
Dr Henry's taskforce is due to report to Cabinet in the first half of 2012, with the White Paper to be released in mid 2012.
The White Paper will make a major contribution to public debate and establish major new directions for public policy.
I congratulate the advisory panel members on their appointment. They will be playing an important role in helping to shape Australia's future prosperity over the coming century. 



Prime Minister O'Neill.
High Commissioner Lapani and other members of the Diplomatic Corps.
Your ministerial colleagues and their Australian counterparts who have been meeting in the Ministerial Forum.
Departmental secretaries from PNG and Australia who've been similarly co-operatively engaged this week .
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen  -  welcome all.
Prime Minister, it is my particular pleasure to welcome you to Australia on your first official visit here as Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea. I sincerely appreciate the significance of your visiting Australia so early in your term of office.
We also met at the Pacific Islands Forum last month.I was struck by the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's remark pointing out that of the ten Parliaments in the world which have no female representation, half of them, that is five, are in our Pacific region.
So I particularly appreciated your leadership in the discussions at the Forum about the need to increase the number of women in regional parliaments. And I want to congratulate you on the leadership you are showing through your Equality and Participation Bill designed to reserve 22 seats in your Parliament for women, and warmly wish you and your Government every success in that endeavour. For our part, Australia will support your efforts through a new one million dollar program to help women political leaders in PNG gain skills in democratic politics.
Prime Minister, PNG stands at a threshold of historic change and opportunity.
And you stand at that threshold with a partner in Australia. A new chapter in the story of our bilateral relations is beginning.
Our nations are each rich in natural resources, our governments each seek to ensure investment in mining and energy resources delivers opportunity for all. With that in mind I am pleased PNG officials working on the development of Papua New Guinea's Sovereign Wealth Fund will soon be able to undertake short-term secondments with a number of Australian institutions. A most valuable and practical form of partnership, and one designed to reinforce your work to strengthen governance and transparency in all your nation's institutions.
We work together for the continued development of Papua New Guinea through our aid program.
I am passionate about education and its capacity to transform the lives of individuals and of nations. So I am very pleased to be able to announce today an additional 20 places for students from rural areas of PNG to obtain teaching qualifications. Another area where partnership is vital.
We are also partners in pursuit of peace and regional stability. Papua New Guinea is an important leader in our region, so I want particularly to acknowledge your encouragement of Fiji to return to democratic government and your significant contribution to the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands.
We respect your historic  -  and continuing  -  preparedness to work with us and in the region to deal with irregular people movement.
We also work together in the wider world. So I am pleased Australia has been able to assist Papua New Guinea Defence Force personnel to prepare for peacekeeping missions in Darfur and South Sudan historic deployments, as the PNGDF prepares to make its first ever contributions to a UN peacekeeping force.
Prime Minister, I spoke recently about Australia's future in the Asian Century.
In the Asian Century, my nation looks north, and when we look north, we see a friend in PNG; we always have. Next year, we will particularly reflect on our history as friends.
I do want to acknowledge, Prime Minister, your announcement yesterday of a generous contribution towards the memorial to mark the sinking of the Japanese transport Montevideo Maru] in 1942. That awful tragedy saw the loss of more than a thousand prisoners of war, mostly Australians captured at the fall of Rabaul, when a US submarine torpedoed the Japanese ship unaware of her human cargo. Thank you for your generous support as we remember one of the saddest moments of the war.
2012 will be a time when both our nations commemorate the seventieth anniversary of many other sad and proud moments of 1942.Those hours when the best among both our peoples were quite literally arm in arm, those days when our freedoms were ours alone to save, that year when we set the course by which we prevailed.
Our two nations were neighbours and friends then and we were partners as well. And we remain partners now as we look to the future together.
Prime Minister, it was good to meet you in Auckland, it is great to have you here in Canberra, and it will be wonderful to welcome you to Perth soon.
Welcome to Australia. 



HOST: Good morning Prime Minister. Welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: You will usher through this package today. Polls show that it's deeply unpopular. Voters seemingly can't wait to vote you out. Has it been worth it?
PM: It's not about the polls, Sabra. It's about our nation seizing a clean energy future.
This is a significant day for the Australian nation, not only for Australians today but for the generations of children to come who will live in a cleaner environment as a result of today's legislation. And we will also see thousands of people getting clean energy jobs.
That's what this package is about, as well as providing tax cuts and increasing pensions.
HOST: This has cost two opposition leaders their job, it cost Kevin Rudd his. What makes you think that voters, or even your own caucus, will spare you?
PM: Sabra, this legislation is going through today. The House of Representatives will vote today and the legislation will go through. The nation has been debating this for years.
And, yes, it's been a difficult debate. This is a major reform. And when we look at the opposition to the reform today - at the Leader of the Opposition for example - he's on the record in the past as having supported a price on carbon.
So, yes, it's been a difficult debate but the debate is now concluded. We need to act to seize a clean energy future, to make sure that our biggest polluters are paying the price of their carbon pollution, and that we see the reduction of carbon pollution by 160 million tonnes in 2020 - the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road.
HOST: If the polls are correct, you'll be turfed out of office in two years. What makes you think that you can turn those voters around?
PM: Sabra, you're obviously focused on the politics of this. I'm focused on the nation's future.
You know, you might be asking me questions about how many green jobs will we see, clean jobs? How many billions of dollars will see invested in clean energy and renewable energy? The figure there is $100 billion.
What will we see in terms of the conduct of the biggest polluters in our nation? Well, we will see them reduce their carbon pollution.
What will we see in tax cuts? Well, we'll see people earning less than $80,000 getting a tax cut most of them a tax cut of $300. We'll see pensioners, on average, $210 better off for pensioner households.
So that's the magnitude of this reform.
Let's not get distracted by the political chatter. Let's actually focus on what this means for the Australian economy and the Australian nation and our environment for the future.
HOST: Well Tony Abbott is promising to repeal this if the Coalition does win the next election and he says this promise to repeal the tax is a pledge written in blood.
PM: Well, heavens above, Sabra. I remember the 2004 election campaign where Tony Abbott then gave a pledge - rock solid, iron clad guarantee - that he wouldn't change the Medicare safety net.
And guess what, immediately after being elected he changed the Medicare safety net.
HOST: What about your own promise just before the last election that there would be no carbon tax under a government you led? You can' talk about promises-
PM: -Very happy to explain that, Sabra. And when I said those words I meant every one of them.
And then the Australian people voted for this Parliament, for the House of Representatives that will vote today. And in this House of Representatives I had a choice between acting or not acting to get us to the emissions trading scheme that I talked to the Australian people about during the last election campaign.
HOST: Do you regret-
PM: -I chose to act and we are acting today.
And on Tony Abbott and repeal - let's be very clear about this. Half of the Liberal Party members who walk into Parliament today to vote against this legislation believe in putting a price on carbon.
Every living Liberal leader except for Tony Abbott believes in putting a price on carbon. Tony Abbott, in earlier days, has said he believed in putting a price on carbon.
For Tony Abbott, this is all about the politics and political theatre. People should not take his assertions about repeal seriously. They don't deserve to be believed.
HOST: Do you regret using those form of words now, though, given how much trouble it's caused you?
PM: Oh Sabra, what's done is done. My focus is on the future. We will ensure through this legislation that we cut carbon pollution. We'll give people tax cuts.
I'm very proud of the fact that associated with this package we will be using money paid by our biggest polluters to increase the tax free threshold to better reward people for working. That will mean a million people won't be in the tax system.
It means women coming back to work after having kids will see more money in their pocket.
It will be easier and more rewarding to make a journey from welfare to work.
These are reforms that the Australian nation will benefit from, and that's my focus.
HOST: How many years will it actually take, though, before we know that emissions are actually decreasing under this scheme?
PM: Well, you will see carbon pollution reduced by at least 160 million tonnes in 2020.
HOST: When will we see it start to work?
PM: Well, already, Sabra, I can talk to you about businesses that are factoring in the carbon price and changing their plans about how they'll do business.
HOST: But when we will see those emissions drop?
PM: Well, Sabra you will be able to go out with your television cameras and equipment over the next few years and see things like landfill - where we put our rubbish - instead of just having carbon pollution and methane going into the sky, capturing it to make electricity.
You'll be able to go to coal mines that are doing the same thing - capturing fugitive gases, carbon pollution methane, to make electricity.
You'll be able to see our biggest polluters changing their conduct and behaviour.
You'll see more solar, you'll see more wind and you'll be able to report on it to Australians.
HOST: What about being able to see a graph and emissions dropping?
PM: Well, Sabra, all of the numbers are in the Treasury modelling and other information that we have given out with the carbon pricing package.
And what that shows is in 2020 there will be at least 160 million tonnes less of carbon pollution - the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road.
Of course we're on a journey to that, year by year, step by step.
HOST: Given the Opposition's Sophie Mirabella's been thrown out of Parliament for 24 hours, are you tempted now to bring forward the debate on the migration changes to allow your Malaysia swap deal? 
PM: Look, I anticipate that the migration legislation will be dealt with tomorrow.
The focus today will be on putting a price on carbon, a big reform for our country. If you care about the economy. If you care about the environment, this is an important day for our nation.
HOST: Sure it's an important day. But also this is an important piece of legislation. Are you tempted to bring it forward?
PM: Well, Sabra I've just answered your question. I anticipate that the migration legislation will be debated tomorrow.
HOST: If you can't get the numbers to support this bill through the Lower House, will you pull this bill from being voted on on the floor?
PM: Well, Sabra let's deal with the important reform before the Parliament today, and we'll deal with the migration bill in due course.
Yes, they are both important pieces of legislation. They're both pieces of legislation where Tony Abbott is entirely motivated by saying no and by the politics rather than by the national interest.
But the focus today will be on putting a price on carbon pollution, having our biggest polluters pay for something that they now do for nothing, and consequently there is no incentive to change.
With a price on carbon pollution we will see less carbon pollution. We'll be able to cut taxes, we'll be able to increase pensions. That's the work of today.
HOST: Just on the 14-year-old Australian boy in custody in Bali. You've been criticised by former diplomats for speaking to the 14-year-old. Do you regret doing that?
PM: I think, Sabra, it's important that people understand the circumstances here.
I've been staying in touch with our ambassador, as people would expect me to do. This is obviously a distressing situation for this boy and his family.
When I rang our ambassador he was with the father of the boy. He said to me “Do you want me to hand the phone over to the father? He's just here.” And it seemed to me a very natural thing to do to say yes.
The father in turn then said “Would you like to speak to my son?” And of course I said yes.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you. 



The Prime Minister is pleased to announce this year's Prize for Science has been awarded to Professors Ezio Rizzardo and David Solomon from the CSIRO and the University of Melbourne.
The $300,000 prize recognises their work in reinventing polymer science by devising a means of custom building plastics and other polymers for plastic solar cells, drug delivery, paints, adhesives, lubricants and everything in between.
Their techniques are employed in the laboratories and factories of DuPont, L'Oréal, IBM, 3M, Dulux and more than 60 other companies. Their work has been cited more than 12,000 times in the scientific literature and is integral to more than 500 patents.
The $50,000 Prime Minister's Prize for Excellence in Science Teaching in Primary Schools is awarded to Mrs Brooke Topelberg from Perth's Westminster Primary School.
Using puppets, a garden, boundless enthusiasm and an initial science budget of just $1,500 a year, she has bypassed language barriers, bringing science to migrant students and turning her school into Western Australia's Science School of the Year in 2008.
Last year Mrs Topelberg was Western Australian Primary Science Educator of the Year.
The $50,000 Prime Minister's Prize for Excellence in Science Teaching in Secondary Schools is awarded to Dr Jane Wright, science co-ordinator at Adelaide's Loreto College for leadership in her school and amongst her peers. 
Dr Wright recently led her 26thannual camp in the Flinders Ranges, introducing her students to ecology, landforms and Aboriginal knowledge.
Her broader service has included presidency of both the South Australian and the Australian Science Teachers' Associations.
Innovation Minister Senator Kim Carr awarded the Malcolm McIntosh Prize for Physical Scientist of the Year to Professor Stuart Wyithe of the University of Melbourne.
This young theoretical physicist is writing the history of the early Universe and defining the questions to be researched by the next generation of telescopes.
The Science Minister's Prize for Life Scientist of the Year is awarded to Associate Professor Min Chen of the University of Sydney. She has discovered a new form of chlorophyll  -  the molecule central to photosynthesis  -  on which we depend for food, shelter, and the oxygen we breathe. Her discovery has implications for solar energy and agriculture.
The achievements of these scientists and teachers remind us of the critical role of science in creating a sustainable economic future for Australia.
In particular, the work of Professors Rizzardo, Solomon and Chen is contributing to Australia's clean energy future, while Dr Wright and Mrs Topelberg are nurturing the science literacy needed to make informed decisions about our future directions.
Our congratulations go to all recipients of this year's Prime Minister's Prizes for Science.
Full citations, photos, videos and overlay are available at www.innovation.gov.au/scienceprizes



HOST: Good morning to you. Welcome back.
PM: Good morning Mel. Thank you.
HOST: You've said this tax is simple, but there's so much confusion our Soap Box has said people still don't understand it. Is that your fault?
PM: I think when there is a significant change like this we have to keep explaining it. There is information for people to absorb but today is a significant day, it's a significant day for Australians today and the Australians of the future who want to see a better environment and for the thousands of people who work in clean-energy jobs. And at its heart it's simple, getting big polluters to pay and using the money to help out families and pensioners and to protect Australian jobs.
HOST: There is no doubt it is massive economic reform also, we've got polls showing 80% of viewers slash voters don't want it. We're in a middle of a massive economic GFC, is the timing right?
PM: This isn't about the polls, Mel, this is about the country's best interests and it's in our best interests to seize a clean energy future and with that clean energy future we're going to see jobs grow by 1.6 million by 2020; average incomes rise by $9,000 and people get money in their pockets as we use the money big polluters are paying to help out families and pensioners. Now we're in a nation whose economy is strong and we know if we delay even to 2015, that that will cost us more. Experts have told us it will cost $5 billion more. So delay is costly, now is the time to act and this Parliament, this House of Representatives is going to act today.
HOST: We hear that. We know that you say that, but everyone's balking. If I could show you our e-mails on the Soap Box and people are saying, “we don't understand it, we're confused it's a tax, we don't want it." How do you deal with that perception, that anger?
PM: It's a tax on the biggest polluters in this country, so for all of your viewers watching today what they can expect to see is pensions increasing by $338. Pensioner households, 1.8 million of them will come out $210 in front. Lots of people watching this more are getting ready for work, they earn less than $80,000 they'll see a tax cut, most of them, of $300 and we're going to triple the tax-free threshold, that means a million people will come out of the tax system; they won't be paying tax, they won't need to put in a tax return.
So these are big reforms, if people want all of the information it's there on our Clean Energy Future website, but my simple point to Australians would be overwhelmingly, people believe climate change is real, through doing this we'll take the equivalent of 45 million cars off the road.
HOST: Ok, Sophie Mirabella, kicked out last night, will that change things today and is it right, there's speculation you may bring forward the Migration Act debate and do that today as well?
PM: Well Sophie Mirabella was taken out of the House by the person acting as the speaker for poor behaviour, so you shouldn't behave like that and if you do then you pay the price, and that's a 24 hour suspension. For putting a price on carbon, getting a clean energy future,  there is a majority for it in this Parliament whether Sophie Mirabella is there or not and that's our focus today.
HOST: Ok so you're not going to bring anything forward, you're not going to try and do any of the Migration-
PM: Look the important thing today Mel is the clean energy future and putting a price on carbon and all of that is completely unchanged-
HOST: So that's a no?
PM: Today the focus is on the climate change package, so that's what we're going to be debating, that's what we're going to be voting on-
HOST: If you get time you going to bring anything else in?
PM: The migration legislation is likely to be debated tomorrow rather than today. The focus today is on seizing this clean energy future. It's a reform the nation has been talking about for more than ten years. This is a significant day for Australians who want a cleaner environment.
HOST: OK. It is going to be a big day. We know you have got a lot to do so I'll let you go. Thank you very much for joining us this morning and we'll see how the day pans out.
PM: Thanks Mel, thanks very much.
HOST: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.



PM: I'm here with the Minister for Immigration to provide an update on immigration policy, and particularly policy relating to asylum seekers and refugees.
Let me just re-cap matters associated with refugee and asylum seeker policy to date and the Government's response.
The High Court recently found, in what was a decision that took the Government by surprise and certainly many legal commentators by surprise, the High Court found that the power that had been relied upon by governments in the past to transfer asylum seekers to third countries for processing were more limited in their application than had formerly thought to be the case.
Indeed, the outcome of the High Court's decision was that it would not be possible for the Government, without amending the Migration Act, to implement its arrangement with Malaysia.
The outcome of that High Court case, too, was that it would not be possible, without amendment to the Migration Act, to have a processing centre for asylum seekers in PNG or Nauru.
Faced with that High Court decision, the Government determined to bring to the Parliament amendments to the Migration Act. The purpose of those amendments would have been to enable executive government to act; executive government to make the decisions that it saw fit in relation to the processing of asylum seekers in countries other than Australia.
As is now clear, those amendments will not pass the Parliament. Mr Abbott has made it abundantly clear that it his intention to block these amendments.
Mr Abbott is doing that in circumstances where he continues to claim publically that he believes that there should be offshore processing, but Mr Abbott, in his conduct, is acting to end offshore processing.
Mr Abbott has his own amendments which he has brought to the Parliament. It is also abundantly clear that those amendments will fail in the Parliament.
So, in these circumstances, as a result of the decisions taken by the Opposition, it is clear that the migration law of this country will not be amended and as a result the Government is not in a position now, and future governments without amendments to the Migration Act, will not be in the position to have asylum seekers processed in third countries.
In these circumstances, I believe it is important to update Australians on what we will do, how we will respond to this set of circumstances.
First, I want to make it clear that at every step of the way the Government has been guided by a set of principles in making decisions about refugee and asylum seeker policy.
First, we are committed to strong protection of our borders.
Second, we are committed to doing everything possible to deter people from risking their life at sea and getting on boats. That is why we have been, and continue to be, determined to break the people smugglers' business model and to do everything we can to deter people from risking their lives at sea.
Third, we have been committed and will continue to be committed to upholding the Refugee Convention.
Fourth, we have been committed and will continue to be committed to working on arrangements in our region.
And fifth, we have been committed and we continue to be committed to a mandatory detention system.
We are also committed and will continue to be committed to working on law enforcement activities to apprehend and stop people smugglers and the evil trade that they ply.
So, they have been the Government's principles as it's made decisions in this area. They continue to be our principles as we confront the circumstances in the Parliament as the result of the conduct of Mr Abbott and the Opposition.
In these circumstances, the Government has determined the following.
The Government remains committed to the arrangement with Malaysia. We believe it is the best policy outcome for this country, that it would give the maximum deterrence effect; that it would give us the maximum ability to deter people from getting on leaky boats and risking their lives.
The Malaysia arrangement is an arrangement that is the product of discussions in our region, and has been worked through under the Bali Framework. It is an arrangement born of a regional process, so it will continue to be the Government's policy that the Malaysian arrangement should be implemented, with an associated processing centre in PNG.
That means the Government will continue to press the Opposition to pass the amendments to the Migration Act before the Parliament.
The Leader of Opposition is fond of saying that I should make various phone calls on the question of refugee and asylum seeker policy. Well, let me say this to the Leader of the Opposition: if he wants offshore processing to continue, and he says he does, if the Leader of the Opposition wants offshore processing for Australia then he only needs to make one phone call  -  he needs to ring this Prime Minister and say that he will vote for the amendments before the Parliament.
Whilst we are committed to the Malaysia arrangement and believe it is the best policy outcome, clearly until Mr Abbott faces up to the national interest we will not be able to implement it.
In those circumstances, we are determined to continue to work in our region with our regional neighbours to do everything we can to combat people smuggling. We are also determined to continue our law enforcement work to combat people smuggling.
We are determined to maintain a mandatory detention system, and we will maintain a mandatory detention system.
We currently have unused capacity in our mandatory detention system, but I want to be very clear and very frank about this  -  as a result of the conduct of Mr Abbott, and as a result we are not in a position to implement the arrangement with Malaysia, we are at a real risk of seeing more boats.
If we do see more boats, whilst we have unused detention capacity now, that will put pressure on the detention network. We will manage that pressure on the detention network, by I do want to indicate we will use existing tools to make arrangements as necessary to manage pressure on the detention network. That is not an immediate issue because there is unused capacity, but we are at real risk as a result of Mr Abbott's conduct of seeing more boats.
Before turning to the Minister for Immigration, I do want to say this: we are at a real risk of seeing more boats, and I understand that that will cause community anxiety. I believe it is very important, if we do see more boats, to separate in the community's mind, in all of our minds, the problem of seeing more boats from the people who are on those boats.
It is not in my mind a question of blaming the people who are on those boats. We are a generous country. We are a compassionate country. Of course, we want to extend that compassion to genuine refugees, and in those circumstances it is not a matter of blaming the people who are on the boats for these circumstances.
I'll turn now to the Minister for Immigration for some comments, then we'll take questions.
MINISTER BOWEN: Thanks very much, Prime Minister, and as the Prime Minister indicated, I will deal with some of the practical implications of the Opposition's failure to act in the national interest.
As many of you know, there have been a reduction in the number of boat arrivals to Australia over recent months, particularly since the announcement of the Malaysia arrangement. That, combined with faster processing arrangements put in place by this Government, have meant less people in immigration detention facilities over recent months. At the moment, we have 3,555 people who've arrived in Australia by boat in immigration detention facilities. We have a further 1,145 irregular maritime arrivals being accommodated in the community. That does mean because of those factors we do currently have some excess capacity in our detention facilities. In addition, I have previously announced the commissioning of detention facilities at Wickham Point in Darwin and at Yongah Hill in Western Australia, and they are due to come online later this year, providing further capacity. Of course, that means that we do have some short-term capacity availability.
The Government is not inclined to open more detention centres, more detention facilities. What we will do is continue to manage the network prudently and efficiently. There are a range of mechanisms available to the Government to do that. As you know, we currently have been moving families and children into the community. That has been an ambitious task, but it has been a task that we have fulfilled, moving the majority of children into the community. We'll continue to do that. We'll also continue to do that as we do at the moment with some vulnerable adults. In addition, there are a range of powers available currently to the Government that are used regularly for people who arrive in Australia irregularly by air or are visa overstayers and are used from time to time for people who arrive by boat. Of course, they will be used more regularly as we manage the detention network so that we avoid opening more detention centres. There, of course, I'm referring to bridging visas, as well as the current community detention availability that we have been implementing over the last 12 months.
As I say, we can expect, as the Prime Minister has said, we can expect the possibility of more boat arrivals after the success and the various factors which have led to reductions in boat arrivals over recent months. Because of Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison failing to act in the national interest, that does mean that we will need to continue to manage our mandatory detention system and our network in such a way that ensures we maintain mandatory detention for health, identity and security checks, but we also manage people as appropriately in the community as they proceed on their processing.
JOURNALIST: What's the state of legislation, Prime Minister?
PM: Well, it is apparent that the legislation won't pass the Parliament. It is apparent that Mr Abbott's amendments would not pass the Parliament. It is also apparent the legislation, unamended, will not pass the Parliament. That's the situation there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it the case that, acknowledging that but leaving, as I understand, the legislation out there, that you are really saying to us here that the circumstances that will arise, that you fear of more boats coming, are really Tony Abbott's fault and that you're leaving that there in the hope that he will come around?
PM: Well, there is only one reason that we are not in a circumstance to have offshore processing, and that's because of Mr Abbott and his determination to trash the national interest. The legislation will be there, on the notice paper and before the Parliament, and if there is ever a day when Mr Abbott wakes up and is prepared to act in the national interest, then the legislation will be immediately brought on, but I believe it's important that Australians understand where this conduct leads us to.
Mr Abbott's conduct leads us to circumstances where we are at real risk of seeing more boats. That is very, very clear.
If we do see more boats, as the Minister for Immigration has said, we have capacity in the mandatory detention network now, but if we do see more boats, then we may have to confront the circumstance  -  indeed, it's quite likely we will have to confront the circumstance  -  of how we manage the mandatory detention network under increasing pressure.
The Minister has outlined those directions today, and we will more to say about those directions in the weeks to come. Of course, in the coming weeks we continue to have capacity in the detention network to use.
PM: We'll go to the back, then to Michelle, then come to the front. Chris?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) do you take any responsibility at all for the circumstances you find yourself in now?
PM: Well, I certainly take responsibility for having worked alongside the Minister for Immigration to structure a new, innovative and I believe the most effective response that we can have to asylum seekers coming by boat. That is the arrangement with Malaysia.
We should be clear that the advice to us from all experts within the Government has been that that is the most effective approach we can take. In circumstances where the High Court effectively changed our understanding of the law in Australia, I brought amendments to the Parliament. Those amendments need a majority to pass the House of Representatives, and with Mr Abbott playing wrecker, then it is clear that they will not get that majority.
Michelle?
JOURNALIST: Are the people now in the community on bridging visas and what capacity do you have left and how quickly do you anticipate that you'd have to be siphoning people into the community?
MINISTER BOWEN: The majority of people who are irregular maritime arrivals in the community are in what is known as community detention. It is detention only to the extent that they must live in a place designated by the Minister for Immigration. They are free to come and go from that place.
JOURNALIST: So the bridging visas is new?
MINISTER BOWEN: The bridging visas are currently used as a matter of course, particularly for people who have arrived irregularly by air. They are used less frequently for people who arrive by boat. I'm indicating that you could imagine and expect that they would be used as part of the suite of measures to respond to pressures on the immigration detention network going forward.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
MINISTER BOWEN: Look, obviously, as I said before, it's been a substantial and ambitious task to move a very substantial number of people into the community. As I said, there are currently 1,145 people living in the community. More than that have been moved into the community over the last 12 months; they've subsequently been granted permanent visas, been found to be refugees.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
MINISTER BOWEN: For community detention? For immigration detention facilities? Currently we have excess capacity in centres of 1,100 and in alternative places of detention of 1,300.
PM: OK, we'll come across the front. We'll go Andrew first.
JOURNALIST: It appears that there's absolutely no deterrence any more for people wanting to come to Australia except for a great, big dangerous sea, if you do have the interests of those taking these enormous risks at heart, wouldn't you at least choose something that some deterrence, and that might include Nauru?
PM: Well, I don't agree with the premise of your question and I don't agree with the conclusion of it, either. The premise of your question about deterrence, is of course we work in our region through our law enforcement agencies to act with our regional partners to detect and disrupt people smuggling networks. We have been vigilant about that and we intend to continue that vigilance. We've been very determined to work with our regional neighbours, on things like working with Indonesia, which has now legislated people smuggling as a crime. Obviously, that acts as a deterrence, that something that wasn't viewed as criminal conduct in Indonesia before is viewed as criminal conduct now.
On the question of Nauru, the very clear advice to us from the experts that have advised this Government and past governments, who were relied on at the highest levels of the Howard Government, the advice from those experts is Nauru, by itself, won't work; that it does not have deterrence effect. That is clearly the advice for anyone, and I understand that Mr Abbot does, for anyone to claim anything other than that is to not tell people the truth.
Phil?
JOURNALIST: Those same experts said about Nauru (inaudible) about 600 people a month arriving by boat (inaudible) are they the types on numbers you'll be expecting in the short or medium term?
PM: Well, we're not going to start forecasting numbers, but we do believe there is a real risk that we may see more boats as a result of Mr Abbott preventing their being offshore processing arrangements.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Police, particularly in Indonesia, around those areas, in order to have that deterrence effect?
PM: Sorry, I didn't catch the first few word of your question?
JOURNALIST: Are you going to throw more resources at intelligence and policing, given that's your only deterrent now?
PM: We are certainly keeping a very close eye on resources and work in the region and work on disruption and detection. We will continue to do that. We will give active consideration to what more we can do in that area.
Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given that you are now going to use bridging visas, effectively treating illegal boat arrivals in a similar way to people who overstay their visas, have you given any consideration to a new visa class to try and make it a stronger deterrent?
PM: Well, before we get too many premises into the question, let's just be very clear here: what the Minister has said to you is that we have capacity in our detention system now. Obviously, we are concerned about a real risk of more boats. We will need to manage mandatory detention in those circumstances. We're determined to see mandatory detention continue. I've made the point before and I'm happy to make it again  -  mandatory detention in this country was created by a Labor Government.
Mandatory detention must serve its purpose for having people who arrive unauthorised detained, and to make sure we do appropriate health, security and identity checks. The Minister has referred to a number of existing policy instruments that are used in circumstances where people have made asylum claims, so we are obviously giving consideration to the full set of policy tools that the Minister has at his disposal, and we will have something more to say about those things in the weeks to come.
JOURNALIST: Can you just explain what would a bridging visa  -  on what conditions does that (inaudible)
MINISTER BOWEN: There are a range of bridging visas available under the Immigration Act which also goes to Dennis' question and there is no need for a new category because there's a range of bridging visas available. The bridging visa which is most regularly used, for example, for people who arrive in Australia by air that I've referred to, has for example the ability to seek work but only a very limited availability of asylum seeker support scheme for some basic access to payments in situations where that's necessary.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: We'll just answer here and then we'll come across.
JOURNALIST: My understanding is that they will have work rights but they would also (inaudible) payments, housing. What about (inaudible) like Medicare?
MINISTER BOWEN: No, somebody on the type of bridging visa that I referred to doesn't not have access to the type of arrangements that are in community detention where a house is procured through the Red Cross, for example, and care is provided. Somebody on a bridging visa, and again as I emphasised there are various types of bridging visas available with various conditions the Minister and the Department for that matter have available to them at any time to issue to an individual and they are taken on an individual case by case basis. So for example it's open to the Department to look at the types of needs of a particular asylum seeker and either make a decision to recommend that they be placed into community detention or a various type of bridging visa. Bridging visas generally have work rights, generally speaking the access to payment support is limited to situations where it's means tested and it is necessary for somebody's ability to continue to live in the community and it's available at a rate of 89 per cent special benefit.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on a slightly side issue, Bob Carr today has written on a blog that he believes the Ombudsman should resign because it was inappropriate for him to be scripting questions to the Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.
What comment do you have about Mr Asher's conduct, and is his job safe?
PM: Well, there are a set of procedures and processes that apply to the Ombudsman, as you would expect. They are not there, if you like, by prime ministerial command, in that sense. So, from my point of view, I do have some concerns about this conduct, but there's a set of proper processes and they need to be gone through.
Yes, at the back. We'll go to Latika and then come to Phil.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will there be any adjustment to the refugee intake, and specifically on the 4,000 (inaudible) some of those have already started, is that still going to continue in the future?
PM: I have determined that we will honour the 4,000 places from Malaysia. We are intending to do that within our current humanitarian quota.
Phil?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did any of your MPs or Ministers today suggest that you abandon Malaysia all together, or did any suggest that you adopt Nauru?
PM: Look, I'm not going to canvas discussions that happen within Government, but I want to be very clear with you about what the policy of the Government is.
Having the arrangement with Malaysia has been discussed by our Cabinet and relevant Cabinet sub-committee on a great number of occasions. It's also been discussed by Labor Caucus now on a number of occasions. The policy of the Government is that Malaysia is the best way of putting people smugglers out of business. The Malaysia arrangement is the best way of stopping people getting on boats and risking their lives.
If Mr Abbott ever wakes up with the national interest in mind and passes the legislation before the Parliament we will implement the arrangement with Malaysia.
Yes Catherine.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in relation to Mr Asher you said the proper process has to apply, I don't know what you mean by that-
PM: As I understand there are some bureaucratic processes within PM&amp;C about these matters so I'm not intending to get drawn on running commentary about it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No I'm not.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you've spoken about more boats, bridging visas, community detention  -  how sustainable is this position, do you think the community will accept it and won't you have to arrive at a firmer position at some point down the track?
PM: Well let's be very clear before we put out information that isn't accurate. This Government created community detention because we wanted to do everything we could to ensure that women and children, children in particular were not kept in high security detention. Anybody who remembers the days of the Howard Government would remember that it was a matter of huge community concern that children were literally kept behind razor wire and we gave a set of commitments about that, about community detention and we have worked to honour those commitments, that is what Minister Bowen has been referring to. So that has been the policy and the actions of this Government over some period of time now to have community detention.
On maintaining the mandatory detention system which we are determined to do, I have said to you during the course of this press conference, we have capacity in the mandatory detention system so we will use that capacity. We are obviously concerned if boat numbers rise, and we believe there is a real risk of that, that that will put pressure on the system. We will manage that pressure on the system with existing policy tools and we will have something further to say about that in the weeks to come.
Lenore.
JOURNALIST: The processes, the PM&amp;C processes regarding Mr Asher that you referred to, to what end are they, they're not disciplinary action what are they for?
PM: We'll get some further advice for you.
Yes, hang on, we'll just be fair and go to the back first and then come forward.
JOURNALIST: The Human Rights Commission has recommended the use of bridging visas for asylum seekers who've gone through the refugee process and it failed, that they can't be sent back. I'm sure there's a large group of Iranians that fall into that category, is that the type of use that you're looking at?
MINISTER BOWEN: I wouldn't flag the particular policy response in relation to failed asylum seekers as you say Kirsty that is a particularly vexed area because you do have people in relation to Iranian asylum seekers in particular where returns are very difficult, where they have failed to meet the criteria for a refugee. What I am flagging is as part of managing the detention network, as the numbers, if they increase, that that would be one of the suite of measures that are currently available to the Minister and the Department, I'm just flagging in an open and transparent way that they would be considered for various people in the immigration detention network.
JOURNALIST: Minister what's your view of Mr Asher's conduct?
MINISTER BOWEN: As I said this morning I think integrity and openness and transparency are key values for the office of the Ombudsman, it's up to the Ombudsman to explain how his conduct meets that criteria.
JOURNALIST: Just back on the 4,000 from Malaysia. (Inaudible) Prime Minister that we'll still take those within the existing quota. Does that mean we won't be expanding our quota by 1,000 a year and there will be 4,000 fewer from other camps-
MINISTER BOWEN: Prime Minister.
PM: I want to be clear about this, we made a commitment, there are genuine refugees in Malaysia who have been waiting a long period of time. For the Government's policies, we have a humanitarian quota so we will manage it within the humanitarian quota.
Can I just be clear though, well I just want to be clear. It is always the aspiration of, I think, it's always the aspiration of the Government and I think it's genuinely always the aspiration of the Australian community to extend our compassion to genuine refugees in need. So of course we want to do the best we can to assist people who are in very difficult circumstances, there are people in Malaysia who have been waiting a long period of time for a resettlement opportunity. They, many of them, are Burmese, but there are people of other origins who have been there waiting for a long period of time. I think Australians understand that there is real reason why people have to get on the move from Burma given the nature of the regime and so we do believe it's appropriate to continue to honour the 4,000 places. They are, I would stress, at a rate of 1,000 places over four years.
JOURNALIST: That won't be additional to the humanitarian intake though they'll be part of it?
PM: Correct.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: We'll do the last three questions and then we'll go. Well, you haven't asked a question yet so in the interest  -  oh hang on, we'll go here and here and then just get the lads and that's it.
JOURNALIST: The Shadow Immigration Minister Scott Morrison has called for your resignation again, he says you botched this Malaysia solution, he's holding a press conference in another few minutes, he'll no doubt say that again. Did you botch it and will you resign?
MINISTER BOWEN: Mr Morrison said some pretty ridiculous things in his time but that really takes the cake. He won't act in the national interest and he calls for my resignation- I think that says it all.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you're (inaudible) not to blame the people that are arriving on the boats. Are you concerned that more arrivals could lead to cultural clashes and civil unrest?
PM: It's not a question of that, no. It's always a concern in our domestic political debate to, in leadership positions like mine, to be clear with the community about asylum seeker and refugee policy and to be clear too about why people come here in leaky boats and take real risks. I'll always remember taking the phone call that advised me of the tragedy on the shoreline of Christmas Island and a lot of Australians are always going to remember where they were when they first saw that come through on the TV news. I think it's important for us to keep in our mind that this is not about laying blame on the people who get on those boats, that is why our focus has always been on smashing the people smugglers' business model and our focus has always been on doing everything we can to deter people from putting themselves in that kind of danger. So we've always had a focus on making sure that we have border protection but that we are also protecting our values in relation to the treatment of refugees, that's my point.
Dennis.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why did you wait two weeks to make a decision today that the amendments couldn't go ahead and try and look at working within the system now? Why would you not abandon them two weeks ago?
PM: Well there was speculation Dennis about what would happen in the House of Representatives but there was not certainty until Mr Crook announced his decision.
So we'll take the last two and that's it.
JOURNALIST: The new shape policy is going to have a lot of reliance on the NGOs, the Red Cross that you mentioned and a few other community housing organisations. Given that they will be having to find housing, having to find resources for asylum seekers while  -  the ones that are on bridging visas. What extra money will you be giving them?
MINISTER BOWEN: Let's be clear, there's a formula for community detention which currently is administered on our behalf by the Red Cross and can I say they do that very well and we'd obviously pay their expenses in that regard. People on bridging visas as I've said before, most of those bridging visas, it's not an automatic availability of any provided housing and of course there's availability of asylum seeker support scheme which has a set formula for funding to that individual. I have engaged of course with the Red Cross over recent times about various options, now that the situation in the Parliament is clear that enables me to have further engagement with the Red Cross and other organisations.
PM: Last question from Latika.
JOURNALIST: -on this policy question (inaudible) has now found it's way?
PM: Look Latika we found a good policy. The Malaysian arrangement is a good policy. I believe you are one of the people who's had the opportunity to be briefed by the experts who advise Government and when you got that briefing they would have left you with absolutely no doubt about the degree of innovation in this policy, about the strength of this policy, about the difference it has from past approaches. They would have left you in absolutely no doubt that in their expert opinion, given the options from which we are choosing as a nation, that is the best option to do everything we can to really hurt people smuggling. I want to implement it, I'm very determined to implement it, the person who is preventing me implementing it is Tony Abbott.
Thank you.



HOST: Well let's start with the first Prime Minister, the Leader of the Labor Party. Bob Brown, Leader of the Greens joining us shortly.
Julia Gillard in Canberra, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Jon and you've got the only Prime Minister.
HOST: Thank you. The failure of the migration legislation yesterday, is this a failure of leadership on your part, to strike a compromise with the Opposition on offshore processing?
PM: This is a failure of responsibility on behalf of Tony Abbott. Of course I was working with Tony Abbott to deal with this legislation, I had direct discussions with him, the amendments we seek would enable the Government to implement our arrangement with Malaysia. It would also enable a future government to implement arrangements like a processing centre on Nauru.
So what we have here is Tony Abbott deciding to pursue his political interest to such extremes that he is determined to vote down legislation he would need if he was ever Prime Minister to implement the policy solution he says he believes in.
HOST: Yes, but you have the carriage of the legislation, he doesn't. He's there to respond, you're there to succeed with your agenda as Prime Minister and therefore it's up to you to initiate the compromise, not him.
PM: My belief Jon is that everyone in the Parliament is here to serve the national interest and let's be very clear here  -  I have never asked Tony Abbott to endorse the Government's policies or plans in relation to Malaysia. What I have asked him to do is to support amendments that enable the government of the day, this Government, and future governments, to make appropriate choices about offshore processing.
So what Tony Abbott has done is voted to end offshore processing, that is the result of his conduct. And let's be very clear about what that means Jon  -  I believe we are at a real risk of seeing more boats, of seeing men and women and children get on boats and putting their lives at risk-
HOST: We've already seen this, Scott Morrison last night on Lateline had this to say about exactly that scenario:
MORRISON: She hasn't been able to command the confidence of the Parliament on this measure. Now of course Mr Bowen should resign and of course Prime Minister should resign, but what they must do now is simply call an election.
HOST: That's Scott Morrison last night saying if people drown, or if there is misadventure at sea, he says fair and square it's your fault.
PM: Well just listening to that clip from Scott Morrison, doesn't that tell you the full tale, doesn't that tell you that every action of the Opposition here has been about politics and about themselves. There's Scott Morrison on Lateline, seeing how he can politically profit from this and Jon, that's what it's all been about. It hasn't been about border security, it hasn't been about appropriate treatment of refugees, all it's ever been about is the political interest of the Opposition.
I mean we have legislation that would enable the executive government to act, for us to implement the Malaysia arrangement, if Mr Morrison was to ever find himself as Immigration Minister in this country, for him to implement the arrangement he says he believes in. But they have acted to end offshore processing through their negativity and Jon I was saying before and I do want to clearly make this point  -  we are at risk of seeing more boats, we are at risk as a result of this conduct by Tony Abbott of seeing more men, women and children getting on leaky boats. And if we do see that there is one person to blame  -  Tony Abbott for this mindless negativity, this wrecking strategy, which has brought offshore processing to an end.
HOST: Well no, is it a wrecking strategy or an electoral strategy? A short while ago on ABC News 24, Tony Abbott was interviewed about exactly this and explained it in this way:
ABBOTT: This week we have seen the Gillard Government adopt Green policy twice  -  first they've got the carbon tax, which is Bob Brown's policy, now they've got onshore processing, which is Bob Brown's policy.
HOST: So he's setting you up here and saying ‘I can, if you elect me as Prime Minister at the next election, I can sort all this out'.
PM: Well, once again Jon, doesn't it strike you that both times you've played excerpts of the Opposition, Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison, what they've been talking about is politics and things associated with their political interest.
When I talk about carbon pricing I talk about our clean energy future, I talk about having those clean energy jobs, I talk about reducing carbon pollution, I talk about the need to make sure we are shaping the future, rather than just drifting into it.
That is, I talk about the national interest and on the question of border security and refugee and asylum seeker policy, what has always driven me is my belief in strong border protection, my belief that we should honour the refugee convention and show appropriate compassion, genuine compassion, the deep compassion Australians are capable of, towards people who are genuine refugees.
That we should work in our region to get the best possible regional arrangements and we should go hard after people smuggling. That is what has driven me every step of the way, that is why we designed the Malaysia arrangement. I believe and continue to believe it would be the strongest possible deterrence. In answer to that, what we have seen from Tony Abbott is a wrecking strategy against the national interest, in his political interest, and if we do see more boats, if we do see more men and women and children taking risks by getting on those boats, then there is one person to blame and that is Tony Abbott.
HOST: Do you have to make Australian reception and arrival and welcoming procedures somewhat less hospitable if you're going to have an adequate deterrent, before we move on to other issues, Prime Minister? For instance, offering welfare payments to people whilst they're awaiting processing, does that make Australia just too inviting a destination for asylum seekers?
PM: Well Jon, let's be very clear, I believe in mandatory detention and of course we will have a mandatory detention system. If people arrive unauthorised they will be detained-
HOST: (inaudible)  - processing we've heard that already from Minister Bowen.
PM: They will be detained for processing to check health and security and identity. What Minister Bowen and I indicated yesterday, is we have spare capacity in the detention network, but if we see more boats as a result of Tony Abbott's conduct then we will see pressure on the detention network. We have at our disposal a range of policy measures we can use, including community detention and bridging visas.
HOST: Moving on to other issues, how much is the government going to spend on its campaign now to spin or sell its climate plan?
PM: Jon, I think getting information to people is appropriate-
HOST: How much are you going to spend?
PM: Well, Jon, we've made some allocations for advertising and the provision of information and you will have seen that on your TV. And we will continue to provide information. Jon, let's be very clear, there are a lot of businesses out there that want information about how this is going to work-
HOST: And they are entitled to it-
PM: I took a question in question time yesterday from a Liberal Member of Parliament, from a business that clearly thought that the impact of carbon pricing on them was far greater than the reality. I know there's anxiety out there and we will keep providing information as necessary.
HOST: How much are you going to spend, tens of millions, hundreds of millions? What's it going to be?
PM: Oh Jon, the only people who ever spend hundreds of millions on advertising was the Howard Government in relation to WorkChoices. 
HOST: They spend vast sums of money explaining the intricacies of the GST and quite rightly too. Are you going to match that?
PM: No Jon, we are not going to match that, but we are going to provide information to the community. I do think people want to know things like what is happening with their pension payment  -  it's going up. What is happening with family payments to assist people with kids  -  well there are increased family payments available. What is happening with tax cuts  -  well people earning less than $80,000 a year will get a tax cut.
And of course we are tripling the tax free threshold and many people will want to understand that in detail, because there are people, predominantly second income earners, women who have been out of the workforce having kids and caring for children, for whom this is a huge benefit and really changes the equation about going back to work.
HOST: How about an ad that says ‘Wondering why your power bill's soaring? Here's the reason.'
PM: Well, that would be very silly, because that statements isn't true, Jon. Why would you give people information that isn't true?
We have been very upfront with the Australian community that the carbon price will be paid by the big polluters, there will be some flowthrough impacts, including a 10 per cent increase in electricity that has been factored in in the compensation arrangements for people and those compensation arrangements have been struck so that there will be millions of Australians who receive more than the average impact of carbon pricing on them. For example we will see pensioner households come out in front.
HOST: I realise my time is running short and the other Prime Minister Bob Brown, I know you don't like that description, but I'm sticking with it.
PM: It's just a stupid description Jon and-
HOST: It's a bit theatrical, I'll accept that.
PM: No, well it's just wrong. Let's go through what has been done this year by this Government, if you want to have the discussion.
I, as Prime Minister, structured the flood levy and the package to rebuild Queensland and Victoria after our summer of natural disasters. I, working with my team, including Wayne Swan, delivered the Budget with a focus on participation and opportunity measures. I, working with my team, and particularly Stephen Conroy, achieved the structural separation of Telstra and the further rollout of the National Broadband Network.
I, directly in the room with premiers, including Premier Baillieu, struck the new healthcare agreement. I'm working with those same premiers now to change our approach to skills, to meet the needs of our economy today. I'm working with those premiers now to structure a National Disability Insurance Scheme and Jon I can tell you're trying to interrupt me, but perhaps before you make some silly statements you should be reflecting on the way in which I govern Australia and what this Government has directly done.
HOST: I want to cover pokies, but first Qantas. Why should the government get involved in an industrial dispute between unions and a publicly listed, privately owned corporation?
PM: Our Fair Work Act enables the government to play a role if disputes escalate. This dispute is at the stage where both parties say they want to negotiate a settlement, my view is they should get around a table and do it.
HOST: So why would the Government, Martin Ferguson says maybe the Government will get involved because of the national interest, but that's ridiculous isn't it? They're just (inaudible)
PM: I would refer you to that section of the Fair Work Act, Jon and I don't want to be here talking about industrial law over the ages, though I could if you want to have that discussion, and you will find that for a very long period of time in our industrial relations system there has been the ability of government to get involved in major disputes which have implications for the national economy, or implications for health and safety. That's been a long standing feature of workplace relations law. We have a comparable section in the Fair Work Act, of course the schema of the Fair Work Act is proper protections for employees, they've always got a safety net to rely on, that was the safety net that WorkChoices ripped away. 
And then the schema of the Fair Work Act is standing on that safety net, working people through their unions, discuss with their employers and negotiate their arrangements.
Qantas and the relevant unions are saying they want to negotiate this dispute. Well I think they should get on and do it.
HOST: Alright, the Financial Review today reports on its front page that a $40 million war chest is being established by the clubs and pokies industry to do a seat-by-seat campaign against Labor sitting members in Queensland and in New South Wales over your pokies reforms.
PM: I've seen that report too Jon-
HOST: Are you going to buckle to their demands to avoid this campaign?
PM: I've seen those reports too Jon. I am concerned about problem gambling Jon, you know where I come from and you know what Melbourne's west is like and in Melbourne's west I'm aware that there are big venues and there are places where unfortunately lots and lots of people have a good time, but at the same time there are people who have problem gambling-
HOST: Are you prepared to compromise in order to save those marginal seats and their members?
PM: What we will do here Jon is what is right. That is what is guiding us in terms of problem gambling. Of course we want to work on a scheme that can be properly implemented and we want to ensure that people who are out and having a good night out and just having a flutter on the pokies, in the same way that people will go to the races and have a bet and have a good time, that's all good fun, very Australian and if that's what people want to do, then of course they should be able to do it-
HOST: But this is a campaign against 18 sitting Labor Party members just in New South Wales. They are going to spend a fortune to knock off your backbench. Surely that is political death for your government?
PM: Jon, we will do what is right and I am concerned about the circumstances of problem gambling. We want to make sure that we have a system that assists people to not get into problems with pokie addiction and problem gambling, whilst at the same time of course allowing venues to operate and people to get out and about for a good night out, that's what's driving me.
HOST: So you'll stick to your guns?
PM: Well, I just indicated that to you Jon, so you can ask the question a number of different ways, but I've just indicated to you what is my view.
On the view in relation to the story that you refer to, I understand that there will be people campaigning about reform, that is clear from the front page of today's Financial Review. I do think people will ask the question, well if they've got $40 million to spend on that campaign, doesn't that tend to indicate that some of the claims we are hearing about the profitability of venues aren't quite right.
HOST: I'm grateful to you for your time this morning, we've run over and I'm sorry about that and thank you for joining us.
PM: Thanks Jon. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning, John.
HOST: No surprise that the legislation didn't pass, I suppose.
PM: I had worked hard with members of the House of Representatives in order to secure passage of this legislation, and I had worked hard, too, with the Leader of the Opposition, Tony Abbot, to try and convince him to do the right thing in the national interest and pass this legislation.
But it became clear in the last couple of days that Tony Abbott was not going to act in the national interest, that he was going to act to end offshore processing and that the legislation wouldn't succeed.
HOST: Could I ask you why you blame Tony Abbott for the failure of the Malaysia swap deal? I mean, the Greens also oppose the plan, but you don't seem to mention them too often.
PM: I've never asked Tony Abbott to support the Malaysia arrangement - our plan to transfer people who arrive here unauthorised by boat to Malaysia, and to take more genuine refugees from Malaysia who have been waiting there for years. I've never asked Tony Abbott to endorse that plan, even though all of the expert advice available to us is that that would have the biggest affect to smash people smuggling.
What I did ask Tony Abbott to do, and John, I did ask every Member of Parliament to do  -  Greens members, independent members, so I've asked everyone to do this - to vote for amendments which put this Government and governments in the future in the same position that governments in the past have been.
The High Court made a decision which was an unexpected decision and changed the migration law in this country. As a result, this Government and governments in the future don't, under current legislation, have the power effectively to have asylum seekers processed offshore.
I asked the Parliament, including Mr Abbott, to pass amendments which would have enabled this Government to implement the arrangement with Malaysia, and if he were ever prime minister to implement his plan for Nauru. So even though if he were ever Prime Minister he needs this legislation, he refused to pass it just because he wants to play politics with it.
HOST: Have you spoken to him since?
PM: Look, I spoke to him in the run up. John, I couldn't have done more. The High Court case happened, we offered Mr Abbott briefings from our legal advisers, we offered him briefings from the experts that have advised this Government on people smuggling and asylum seeker policy and advised the Howard Government. These are people the Howard Government relied on as well.
We made all of those briefings available to Mr Abbott so he had all of the information, including all of the information about the need to amend the law. I then sat down and spoke to him personally. He said he would consider the question and come back to me and the next thing I knew he was on the media saying ‘No, not going to pass the Government's laws', but because this is a circumstance where, whilst Tony Abbott frequently yells ‘stop the boats', those words are hollow. 
HOST: So, you're telling me that Tony Abbot is simply being bloody minded?
PM: I think he is being very political, very, very political in this matter, and instead of acting in the national interest, which is to enable offshore processing, he has acted to destroy offshore processing because he thinks it's in his political interest to see more boats.
The problem with that John, of course, is that it effectively means Tony Abbott would rather see people put their lives at risk getting on leaky boats, than work with the Government to put this issue behind us.
HOST: So the more boats that come, the worse you look in his mind, is what you believe?
PM: I think that is exactly what is motivating Tony Abbott. It is certainly not the national interest, it is certainly not smashing people smuggling and it's certainly not keeping men and women and children off boats, where they could see their lives endangered.
HOST: What about the Greens?
PM: Look, I think the Greens have got the wrong perspective here too, absolutely.
HOST: What's their motive?
PM: They have always had a policy position of onshore processing for asylum seekers. So, they've always had that policy position. Why they have that policy position John, you'd need to ask them.
So, yes, I think the Greens have got the wrong approach here, but let's just be very clear about Tony Abbott's position and this is why I'm very focussed on it  -  Tony Abbott goes around saying to Australians ‘stop the boats', Tony Abbott goes round saying to Australians he supports offshore processing, and then, when his vote was needed to enable offshore processing in this parliament, he voted to end offshore processing.
It's that hypocrisy and action in his political interest that I am obviously putting a spotlight on.
HOST: OK, and I understand you putting a spotlight on it, but given that he's done this, I'd still like to know what you consider the motive for his actions might be. Just to be bloody minded?
PM: I think the motive for his action is entirely political. He believes, indeed, he wants to see more boats, because he thinks that that is politically bad for the Government. That is his motivation. He has not thought for one second of any day of this about the national interest.
HOST: Yeah, well, it's an extraordinary situation and Tony Abbott has been very vocal about it, he's called your Government shabby and miserable and divided and directionless. What's your-
PM: -Doesn't that tell you, we just talked about motivation, doesn't that tell you everything you need to know, John? All of those words, all of those words about the Government, him pursuing his political interests about the Government. What Tony Abbott can't say to you, John, is what he would actually do to stop the boats.
If he was on your show now he would say ‘Oh, I would have a processing centre in Nauru.' Well, he can't have that centre without legislation and he's determined to vote against the legislation that would make that possible.
HOST: So, all this has been done simply to make you and the Government look bad?
PM: I think the motivation is entirely political. Correct.
HOST: When you say that he should be perhaps looking at himself, would you call the Opposition shabby and miserable and divided and directionless?
PM: I would call them, as I just have to you, I would say they are being motivated by what they perceive to be their political interest, not the national interest. I would say that they are exercising their votes in the parliament against, at the end of the day, the policy they say they believe in.
They go round at say to Australians that they want to stop the boats, they go round and say to Australians that they want offshore processing, and then they determine to exercise their votes in the parliament to end offshore processing.
HOST: This Western Australian, Tony Crook, turned out to be just that, as far as you were concerned. He was really your last hope, wasn't he?
PM: I certainly wouldn't adopt that terminology about Tony Crook, and let's be clear-
HOST: -I'm not suggesting for a moment he is a crook, but you wouldn't be terribly happy with him at the moment.
PM: But let's be very clear, Tony Crook has got one vote in this parliament. He ended up on that position because of the decision that Tony Abbott took, and Mr Crook has pointed out, and it is right, there are 150 members of the House of Representatives, there are only two who say publicly that they are opposed to offshore processing. Mr Abbott says publicly he supports offshore processing, but he's not prepared to vote for it.
HOST: So, he's being deceitful?
PM: I certainly think when he said to Australians in the last election campaign that he believed in stopping the boats  -  well, if you say that, then you need to show how you are acting, and when action was called for by Mr Abbott in this parliament, he says ‘stop the boats', he says he believes in offshore processing, but he then determines to use his vote to end the ability of this country to process people offshore. That is what he's done.
HOST: Prime Minister, there will now be a risk that we'll see far more asylum seekers arriving here, I imagine. How will we-
PM: -I think there is a real risk that we'll see more boats, that's right. 
HOST: How do we handle the increase?
PM: We will make appropriate preparations and plans, as the Minister for Immigration and I said yesterday.
HOST: So, does that mean building more detention centres?
PM: No, as the Minister for Immigration and I said yesterday, we have capacity in our detention system now. We have some capacity that can be used.
We do believe there is a very real risk that we will see more boats. We, consequently believe that there is a risk that there will be increased pressure on our detention system, and we will manage that so that we have mandatory detention, that people who arrive unauthorised are detained and have appropriate health, security and identity checks, and then we will use existing policy measures which are in the system, like community detention and bridging visas.
HOST: OK, but there's a possibility that you can't squeeze all these people into the detention centres that are there, so do you build more detention centres or do you reconsider Nauru? What do you do, because-
PM: It is not our intention to build more detention centres. We will manage the system just as I have explained-
HOST: -Well, if they won't fit they won't fit.
PM: Yeah, well I've just explained John that we have a range of measures available-
HOST: But you haven't told me what the measures are? What are the measures?
PM: Yes, I did I just mentioned before John, we've got a range of measures available to us, including community detention and the use of bridging visas after a period of mandatory detention for health, security and identity checking.
Then, on the question of, you've just said to me ‘would you use Nauru?', because Tony Abbott is determined to vote against the legislation it is not possible for this Government or any government in the future to have a centre outside of Australia. Tony Abbott's vote means that is not possible.
HOST: But aren't you the Government? I mean, aren't you running the place?
PM: Yes we are, John, and I am not the first Prime Minister to have problems getting legislation through Parliament. Prime Minister Howard went through that. Indeed he went directly through it in relation to migration legislation, where he could not secure through the Parliament a piece of legislation he wanted.
HOST: The statistics aren't good - one boat in 2002 during the Pacific Solution and more than 2700 people arriving in 2009. They're legitimate statistics.
PM: Absolutely, and that's why I'm very determined, and if Mr Abbott ceased playing politics and acted in the national interest and voted for the legislation, I would immediately implement the arrangement we have with Malaysia, which the same experts who advised the Howard Government have now told us is the best deterrence policy we have.
I think we need to be very clear, John, because there's a lot of false claims made in this debate. When the Howard Government determined to have the Pacific Solution, of course it sent a big shockwave up the people smuggling pipeline, but now people smugglers know for sure that if you have something like a detention centre in Nauru, then it is more likely than not the people who are found to be refugees will be resettled in Australia-
HOST: -They'll come right back here.
PM: Exactly, so people smugglers understand that now, because they saw what happened with Nauru last time. That is why the experts who advise Government say to us that having a centre in Nauru, for example, would not have the same deterrence effect now.
That is why those experts have been so enthusiastic about a new and innovative approach, like the arrangement with Malaysia where the message would be to people smugglers that if you represent people you can get them to Australia actually what you're doing is you are sending them to Malaysia.
That is what I wanted to do, and clearly Tony Abbott, for his own political reasons, has determined to stop the Government doing that. The great irony of this is in making that wrecking decision, he has also wrecked his ability, were he ever Prime Minister, to implement what he says is his preferred policy, having a centre in Nauru.
HOST: Well, he certainly couldn't do it now could he?
PM: He could not do it with the legislation unamended.
HOST: Community detention, is that putting them in the community even before they've been processed?
PM: No, people will be  -  sorry, we've got to be very clear here - mandatory detention will be there. People will be detained for health, security and identity checking.
We have community detention now. We have it particularly to meet the needs of children. You would recall John that under the Howard Government it was a matter of great community concern that children were held in high-security detention centres behind razor wire and that is why we have brought on-stream some community detention capacity where children are not held in circumstances like that.
HOST: But they would still be with their parents?
PM: Yes, John. We of course do everything we can to keep family groupings together.
HOST: OK, just quickly on a different subject, you've been very generous with your time as usual - what about Qantas? This dispute seems to be worse by the day. Have you got some plans in place in case it does get worse, and I think it will?
PM: Well, the dispute is at the stage where both Qantas and the relevant unions are saying that they want to negotiate a solution to the disputes. My words to them are get around a table and get it done, get the negotiation through. If disputes escalate, then the Government does have some abilities under the Fair Work Act.
HOST: OK, well, let's hope it doesn't get worse for the sake of Australia because it doesn't do our tourist trade a lot of good and doesn't do our reputation a lot of good either, does it?
PM: I think it's very important that people get round a table and get this sorted out. Both of the parties to the dispute are saying that they want to negotiate an outcome. Well, the best thing to do would be to get round a table and get it negotiated.
HOST: OK, a lot of people who listen to the program and subscribe to the program have been mentioning something I'm sure you don't want to mention - the kiss.
PM: Well, I mean John I'm here as Prime Minister of Australia focussing on the big issues for our nation, seizing a clean energy future, or ensuring we've got jobs in this phase of economic change. If people want to talk about that, John, then that's a matter for them.
HOST: Yes it's funny when we've got plenty of other problems that they're fascinated by the kiss. Was it awkward?
PM: Oh John, I'm not going to get involved in discussion about these very, very trivial matters compared with working out the things that I need to. We're undergoing a major economic transformation in this, the Asian century. I work on that. 
I've always been motivated by making sure we improve education and give kids a genuine chance. I work on that. We're delivering the biggest health reform since Medicare. I work on that. We're delivering the technology change our nation needs today, the NBN, and of course this week we delivered a clean energy future, and now you and I are talking about profound matters associated with border security. That's my job as Prime Minister. I'll leave the trivia commentary to others.
HOST: Well, I think I will too, but it's something that for some extraordinary reason people want to talk about, and I've got to say to you that when you gave me a list the other day of the good things about Australia, I kept that list and I remind people of it frequently.
PM: Good, thank you. We live in a great country.
HOST: Yeah and I think it's important that, I mean not everybody's going to like the way the Government does things, but nonetheless in the overall scheme of things this is a pretty good country, best in the world, and we've got to thank somebody for that. It mightn't be totally this Government, it must be a series of governments, and I'm sure you would agree over a period of time that has made Australia what it is.
PM: I think this, we live in a wonderful nation. It's been built painstakingly by the work of generations of Australians and successive governments and what we've learned from all of that is you've always got to take active steps to shape the future.
Australians are an incredibly decent people and even in vexed and contested areas of policy, like policies involving refugees and asylum seekers ,I think at the end of the day our compassion shows, and I think that there is an important point to keep in mind in this debate - we are at real risk of seeing more boats, but if we do see more boats then we need to separate that problem of more boats arriving from what we think about the people on the boats, many of whom are genuine refugees that are fleeing torture and persecution.
HOST: Yeah, the people are more important than the boats, aren't they?
PM: When we know that more than 400 people have lost their lives in recent years trying to get to Australia by boat, we've got to keep at the forefront of our mind that this is about human beings. Yes, it's about a very evil trade, too - people smuggling and doing everything we can to smash up what people smugglers do and their business model and the trade that they try and ply - but it's also about human beings.
HOST: OK, Prime Minister thank you once again for your time. I appreciate it greatly and I know the people who listen to the program appreciate your generosity with your time. 
PM: Thanks, John. 



HOST: Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning Deborah.
HOST: So battled hardened or battle weary?
PM: I'm made of pretty tough stuff.
HOST: The question of onshore processing is now the biggest question I guess facing the Government, you're hostile to the idea yourself, it was proven through the debate and everything that proceeded it, the reality though now is that you've arrived at a position dictated by the High Court and backed by a lot of good people in the community. So do you now face the position of making onshore processing work as a principle priority of the Government?
PM: Deborah I think there are a lot of good people in the Australian community, in fact I think the Australian community right throughout our nation is filled with decency and compassion, we are a compassionate nation which over the ages has settled a lot of genuine refugees in this country and we have seen them prosper. My view is that we should be implementing the arrangement with Malaysia, it would send the maximum deterrence message, it would be the greatest blow that we could land on people smugglers and it would be the greatest deterrence to stop people risking their lives at sea and getting on leaky boats and unfortunately in recent years we've seen more than 400 people lose their lives trying to get to Australia by boat.
So I remain determined that we should implement the arrangement with Malaysia. Of course in this Parliament we have seen Tony Abbott chose his political interest over the national interest and he has acted to wreck offshore processing. That means we are making appropriate arrangements for onshore processing and we will continue to do that. We are at real risk Deborah of seeing more boats, and the person responsible for that will be Tony Abbott.
As we see those more boats I think it's very important in terms of the reaction of the Australian community and the very good people that make up the Australian community, that we separate the problem of seeing more boats arrive, and it is a problem, from our views of the people on the boats, many of whom are genuine refugees fleeing circumstances like torture and genocide.
HOST: Now because most of them in fact do end up being granted asylum in Australia and many people applauded the High Court's decision to call, to try and call time on what has been deeply politicised area of policy. Are we, I don't know how you de-politicise this area of policy now, but is that now something that both you and the Opposition have wound up in the situation where that's the reality, it would be better if it were de-politicised, but it's still trying to be political underneath?
PM: Deborah my view about this area of policy has always been that it's important to get the facts on the table and work through those facts in designing policies. I've never been someone who's wanted to go with the overblown rhetoric about how many people arrive by boat, it's Mr Abbott who has used terminology like armada of boats and peaceful invasion, not me. And I've been keen to get to the Australian people that facts about the risks people run losing their lives at sea, the facts about how people smugglers try and profit off this human misery, and the facts about what would create the biggest deterrence effect and what would put the biggest blow we can on people smugglers and that's this innovative arrangement with Malaysia, where we have worked with the Malaysian Government, we would take more refugees from Malaysia, people who have waited literally for years for an appropriate resettlement opportunity, but we would transfer to Malaysia people who have arrived here unauthorised, to send a message: don't get on that leaky boat, to smash the people smugglers business model.
Now I remain committed to that, but in this Parliament it is absolutely clear that Mr Abbott will continue to play to what he thinks is his political interest, even though he supports offshore processing he is determined to end offshore processing to play politics with this.
So in these circumstances we will make appropriate arrangements so that we are of course keeping our borders strong and secure and we are also doing what we need to do to protect genuine refugees who deserve our compassion.
HOST: It's interesting though Prime Minister because trying to pin this on the Opposition is going to be very difficult, to the extent that voters will lock on to it in a couple of years time when they come to vote, it'll probably be interpreted as a Government responsibility that went wrong. I don't know how you think you can pin it on the Opposition when you're the Prime Minister.
PM: Well I think people are entitled to the facts and people will judge those facts Deborah and that's absolutely appropriate, that's what our democracy is all about, and the facts are these, we designed this arrangement with Malaysia, the High Court then spoke about the migration law in this country and took a different view from the view that had been taken in the past. We then went to the Parliament and said here are amendments to put executive government back in the position everyone believed it was before the High Court case, we didn't ask Mr Abbott at any stage to endorse the Government's policy of having an arrangement with Malaysia, we never asked him to do that. What we did ask him to do was to support amendments to the Migration Act which would enable this Government and future governments to make appropriate choices about offshore processing, indeed Mr Abbott says as he hollers stop the boats, that what he would do if he was Prime Minister is have processing in Nauru. Well in order to do that he needs an amendment to the migration law and our amendment would have enabled a future government if there was ever such a government, to make that kind of policy choice.
So Mr Abbott has actually come to the Parliament and said he won't vote in favour of amendments which would enable him, if he was ever Prime Minister, to do what he has said he believes is the best thing to do. I mean how crassly political and destructive can you get, and that is Mr Abbott's track record. I believe Australians are entitled to know that.
HOST: Now the hostility between the two of you is there for all to see, on full display in Parliament and at it sort of spread to the galleries this week, you were shouted down during the debate by the public gallery, there was some very foul mouthed insults against you personally broadcast on the TV a couple of nights ago. Now it's robust and that's expected, but has it gone over the top between the two of you and then that's set something off in the community that's really quite unsettling to watch?
PM: Well my approach Deborah is to be out there talking to Australians about the facts, and to be out there as Prime Minister working through the big issues that we need to resolve to shape our nation's future. We've had a long debate about carbon pricing, it hasn't been an easy debate, at times it's been a rancorous debate, but we need to shape our future, to cut carbon pollution and to seize clean energy jobs. So I've been out there talking to community about the best and cheapest way to do that and that's putting a price on carbon. We've seen on the other side of politics Mr Abbott calling for a peoples' revolt, we've seen very overblown claims about our democracy, I mean claims that are just really very silly when you hold them up to the light. My view will always be as Prime Minister that my job is to act in the national interest, my job is to face up to the tough decisions, my job is to go out and explain those decisions to the Australian community and the community will decide in the 2013 election on all of that.
HOST: Now the manufacturing industry is obviously feeling the pressure, grocery prices it's said in research today, will more or less stay where they are at supermarkets because the feeling obviously among the supermarkets is that they can make food manufacturers hold those costs in their realm rather than passing them on to consumers.
Now that will come as no comfort whatsoever to manufacturers who are deeply worried and of course it is a wider concern that Australian food and grocery suppliers might be caught in this when food security is an issue worldwide.
PM: Well Deborah let's just once get the facts on the table here. We have as part of our clean energy future package and putting a price on carbon, an investment of more than $1 billion to work with manufacturing for a clean technology future. We've particularly got an investment of $150 million for food processing, it's a very important industry. We do expect to see some flow through costs from putting a price on carbon, and let's just remember it is the biggest polluters in our country that are paying this price, but we do expect to see some flow through, it is 0.7 per cent of CPI, that's less than a cent in a dollar, and that is why we are providing tax cuts and increases in the pension and increases in family payments.
HOST: Now you promised at the outset a decision and delivery year this year, and we all remember the good government had lost its way, reasoning behind your challenge to Mr Rudd. Now this week also yielded perhaps one of the pictures of the year, some have called it the Judas kiss, you and Mr Rudd embracing each other in the Parliament. Now exactly what is the score between the two of you at the moment, was that a genuine kiss from his side of the equation?
PM: Deborah I mean what a load of old silliness that people are going on with. The Labor Party has been committed to pricing carbon for a long period of time, it's been a hard debate, when Kevin was Prime Minister her pursued this hard debate with the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, as Prime Minister I have pursued this debate. This week we saw the legislation go through the House of Representatives, we saw that legislation then going to make its way through to the Senate, it is going to be passed. After more than a decade of debate, after all of us being out there advocating the need to put a price on carbon, to cut carbon pollution, all of us out there talking about the science, about global warming, about how our planet is warming and the dangerous impacts that could have for our country, you would expect Labor members to mark the moment and that's the only thing that happened.
HOST: Now Mr Rudd will obviously be front and centre in a month or so when President Obama comes and he's going to be addressing Parliament. The US has long seen Australia as its principal friend in this region and obviously you've got a great deal of attention now focused on China, but I'm interested in Indonesia. The national interest there is frequently derailed by the behaviour of Australians on holiday or in transit and I'm wondering whether or not it's Indonesia, policy with Indonesia, that is the most unsettled, the most tremulous at the moment?
PM: I don't agree with that analysis at all Deborah. We have a strong partnership with Indonesia, we will be working with Indonesia as we have the East Asia Summit, so you just referred to President Obama's visit, President Obama will come from the APEC meeting in Honolulu which I will also attend which will focus on trade and economic matters, he will come and visit Australia and then he and I will go to the East Asia Summit in Indonesia, chaired by the President of Indonesia, the first time that a US President has attended that summit. It is a very important event where we will work on strengthening relationships in our region and getting round a table and talking through the economic agenda, through issues associated with the security agenda, through development questions, disaster management questions and the like. Our relationship with Indonesia is a very strong partnership and I'm looking forward to working directly with the President at that East Asia Summit.
HOST: Prime Minister thank you very much for taking the time this morning to speak to us.
PM: Thank you Deborah.  



Three major announcements today show the Gillard and Bligh Governments are continuing to re-build Queensland following the devastating summer of natural disasters.
Speaking at the Queensland Reconstruction Authority today, the Prime Minister and the Acting Premier announced over $1.1billion in joint government funds to rebuild Queensland including:
 * 	Up to $18 million to better protect the town of Grantham against future flooding
 * 	$700million to repair more than 1,000 kilometres of roads in the South West of Queensland
 * 	Almost $435million to reconstruct more than 200 kilometres of roads across the Darling Downs region.
Strengthening Grantham
The Gillard and Bligh Governments will provide up to $18 million to establish vital community infrastructure including water, sewerage and roads at a new residential development on higher ground in the town of Grantham.
This development will allow local residents to relocate to an area that is better protected from flood events in future.
This special joint-government grant will prepare the town for the future, create jobs, business opportunities and commercial development.
Last summer, we saw an inland tsunami tear through the town, destroying everything in its path.
In the wake of this we want to see a stronger more resilient Grantham come out of this natural disaster and we are working with the Lockyer Valley Council to deliver it.
The Strengthening Grantham initiative will also create jobs and business opportunities for the people living in and around the town.
This grant comes in addition to the work already underway to help residents rebuild and repair their homes, with some residents preparing to move into their new homes soon.
Throughout the Lockyer Valley 10 houses were completely destroyed; 19 damaged beyond repair; and a further 119 sustained significant damage.
More than $1.1billion for Darling Downs and South West
The badly hit Darling Downs and South West regions will be given significant funding for road reconstruction, creating jobs, fixing roads and getting on with the task of rebuilding a stronger Queensland.
Up to $700million will be injected into South West Queensland's roads as part of the reconstruction effort. This will repair more than 1,000 kilometres of roads and create 1,500 jobs which will boost the economies of towns such as Roma, Charleville, St George, Cunnamulla and Thargomindah.
In the Darling Downs region, almost $435million is being injected to recover and rebuild disaster-damaged roads in the state-controlled network. This package will reconstruct more than 200 kilometres of roads across the region will sustain more than 1100 jobs in four local government areas  -  Goondiwindi, Southern Downs, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
The Gillard Government will provide 75% of the funding for these projects, with the Bligh Government contributing 25% through the long standing natural disaster arrangements. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning. Are you there, Prime Minister? Are you there, Prime Minister?
PM: Good morning, Madonna.
HOST: Yes, I'm sorry. I don't know what happened with the phones then, my apologies.
Can I go to Qantas first? The Government says it will act to resolve the dispute. Qantas pilots this morning are accusing the airline of walking away from negotiations. Several aircraft have been grounded. When is it time to use any emergency powers you might have?
PM: Probably we just redial the number.
HOST: No, I can hear you, Prime Minister.
PM: Hello Madonna. I was just contemplating whether we should redial the number, because-
HOST: -We all heard that conversation, yes.
PM: I could hear you, but you couldn't hear me.
HOST: Alright, so you can hear me clearly now.
PM: Absolutely.
HOST: Alright, let's start again. Qantas  -  the Government says it will act to resolve the dispute. Qantas pilots this morning are accusing the airline of walking away from negotiations. When it is time to use any emergency powers you have?
PM: The powers under the Fair Work Act for the government are to make application if a dispute escalates to the stage that it threatens the national economy.
We are still at the stage in this dispute where both parties say they want to negotiate a conclusion to it, so my message to them has been loud and clear: they should get round a table and get it done.
HOST: Do negotiations have to break down before you consider the emergency powers, or could you think that the Australian public is being so disadvantaged, so put out, that you would step in?
PM: Well there's a clear legal test here Madonna, under the Fair Work Act, about threats to the national economy, that's what the law provides. We are still at the stage in this dispute where the parties say they want to work it through. Well, they need to get that resolved and get it done. Like you, I am very concerned about the impact that it's having on passengers.
HOST: Are you concerned? Are you cranky? Is one party, either management or the union, not doing enough to resolve this?
PM: Well, the last thing I'm going to do, Madonna, is pick sides. What's important is that both parties get to the negotiating table and get it sorted out.
HOST: Alright, let's move on to other issues. There's so many to get through this morning. Is a leadership contest with Kevin Rudd now inevitable?
PM: Oh Madonna, let's move on.
HOST: But it's a genuine question, given what you're reading, what you're hearing day in, day out. Can you say ‘look, it is not inevitable' or are you thinking perhaps it is down the track.
PM: Madonna, I will be Prime Minister until the 2013 election and then the people of Australia will have their say.
HOST: Do you believe you have his support?
PM: Look, I've just answered your question Madonna and Kevin Rudd's answered that question.
HOST: But you're stopping short of saying yes, he does have your support.
PM: Oh, no, that's because I'm asking you to rely on Kevin Rudd's words in direct answer to that question.
HOST: So is it fair to say you believe Kevin Rudd, you have Kevin Rudd's full support?
PM: Madonna, I'm referring you to Kevin Rudd's words, because he's said that. So Madonna, we can spend all of this interview talking about those kinds of questions and speculation on the polls, or we can talk about things I believe matter to Australians. I'm actually here in Queensland, going to the Queensland Reconstruction Authority today.
HOST: But you say you're here to look at reconstruction and these are things that matter to people. You've had a win on the floor of Parliament on the carbon tax, but that's so different to the public, which isn't supporting you on this carbon tax, or indeed your leadership. If you look at the polls, how do you convince voters that you're right on both counts?
PM: Well, leadership's about making the hard decisions that are necessary for the nation's future. If you look at the things that have built this nation, they've often been hotly contested at the time. I mean, things we just wouldn't be without now - Medicare, compulsory superannuation, all very hotly contested at the time.
Things like floating the Australian dollar and reducing tariffs - deeply unpopular at the time, but the right decision for that nation's future.
HOST: Are you over the worst of this, then - the carbon tax is essentially done, it will get better from here?
PM: Oh Madonna, you're putting it in the frame of ‘what does it mean for me'. The appropriate thing here is what does it mean for the nation. And what-
HOST: -But you want to keep your job.
PM: Well, Madonna, I do this job because I'm motivated to make the big decisions, the tough decisions that will ensure that we've got the best possible future for this country. I want to see people having the benefit of jobs and work. I don't want to see us being a nation that's left behind as other countries around the world and in our region seize clean energy jobs and we are left with an old-fashioned economy.
HOST: Just before I get on to the asylum seekers, when will we see a complete list of these 500 companies that will have to pay the carbon tax?
PM: Well, the system will start on 1 July next year, Madonna, and then of course it will be clear who is paying the carbon price and it will be the biggest polluters.
HOST: We understand that, but is there a list being drawn up? Can we look at what companies are from Queensland on that list, for example?
PM: Well there's information available on one of our government websites, a greenhouse website, so there has been tracking of carbon pollution emissions from businesses for some time. The way the carbon pricing works is it goes to what is happening at a site level, so that is a new piece of information and of course that will be worked on and worked through before carbon pricing starts on 1 July next year.
But Madonna, the important thing here, the really important thing, is our nation is a nation that generates more carbon pollution per person than any other developed nation on earth. What that means it we are at real risk, unless we change, of being stuck with an old-fashioned economy, as people move to a clean energy economy.
HOST: But don't you have to take the public with you? You say that's the important-
PM: -If you let me finish my sentence, let's actually got through the merits of this. I think the merits of this are really important to the public debate.
It's about clean energy jobs and it's about reducing carbon pollution, and if you ask most Australians do they believe climate change is real, they will say yes. If you ask most Australians do they believe that carbon pollution is causing climate change and it's made by us, human beings, they would say yes to that.
This will reduce carbon pollution by 160 million tonnes in 2020.
HOST: You and I have talked about this many times. Let's move on to the asylum seeker issue. It is as though your government is lurching from one crisis to another. The asylum issue, can you explain to my listeners what you are doing with asylum seekers from here?
PM: Well, I can Madonna, but I did want to pull you up on the question of carbon pricing. We will keep talking about this. We will keep talking about the merits of putting a price on carbon because this is such a big change to our economy-
HOST: -You've made that point-
PM: -If I can finish my sentence  -  but I don't think it's a question of just explaining it on your show once, or indeed on many media outlet once. I think people still are hungry for information, so we will keep describing it and the benefits of cutting taxes and increasing pensions that come with it-
HOST: -Alright-
PM: -On asylum seekers, the policy of the Government is that we want to implement our arrangements with Malaysia. We believe that this would send the maximum deterrence message-
HOST: -But in the meantime, ‘what are you doing?' was the question. How are you treating asylum seekers now?
PM: Well, in the meantime what we will do, Madonna, is we will continue our work in the region, with our regional partners to detect and disrupt people smugglers and we've had success in that. we've worked strongly with countries like Indonesia in law enforcement and you should expect to continue to see us have a very strong focus on that.
HOST: But boats arriving now, are they dealt with onshore?
PM: Boats arriving now will be processed at Christmas Island, or at detention centres in Australia. We will not be adding to the number of detention centres. People will be detained on a mandatory basis for health checks, security checks and identity checks.
HOST: And they will be put into the community then, once the detention centres are filled?
PM: Well, we have already, even though we have spare capacity in detention centres, we have already moved, particularly for women and children, to a community based model of detention. That is because Australians, I think, were rightly distressed under the Howard Government when they saw images of children being kept in high-security facilities, literally behind razor wire. We already have asylum seekers who arrive by plane living in the community on bridging visas, so these instruments are all known to our current immigration policies-
HOST:-Alright, so in the -
PM: -and we will continue to make use of them.
HOST: How many ministers supported the Nauru solution in the Cabinet meeting?
PM: I'm not talking about things that happen in Cabinet, Madonna. That's confidential.
HOST: What is wrong with the Nauru solution?
PM: Well, Tony Abbott has consistently said that he wants a detention centre on Nauru, not with the Malaysia agreement, just as a standalone, a detention centre on Nauru. The very same experts who advised the Howard Government at the most senior levels, and were very trusted by the Howard Government, are telling us crystal clear that that won't work. And they've told Mr Abbott that that won't work.
HOST: But you said onshore processing won't work either.
PM: What I've said Madonna, is my preferred solution is the innovative arrangement with Malaysia, but because of Mr Abbott's obstructionism we can't implement that-
HOST: -Well, because of the High Court you can't implement that.
PM: Well, the High Court certainly changed our understanding and everyone's understanding of Australian law, so we brought to the Parliament legislation which would have put this Government in the same position as the Howard Government was. And the great irony here Madonna, is that this legislation would be needed by Mr Abbott if he were ever Prime Minister and he wanted to put asylum seekers on Nauru.
HOST: Alight, have you hauled in every minister and questioned them whether they leaked the Cabinet discussions, because surely you admit that hurts your authority?
PM: I'll obviously deal with Cabinet matters confidentially, as they should be dealt with.
HOST: But as a strong leader, do you think every minister should say to you they were not responsible for leaking that information?
PM: Well, as Prime Minister I've been very determined to make sure we have a proper Cabinet system of government. I've rebuilt a proper Cabinet system of government. That does enable minsters to have frank and fearless discussions within Cabinet. That right comes with the responsibility of confidentiality.
HOST: Alright, what about the meeting in your office with Bill Shorten and Stephen Conroy and Mark Arbib. Presumably that doesn't come under Cabinet confidence. You met with them last Thursday. What was their issue?
PM: Look, I'm not going to engage in this scuttlebutt, Madonna, and think you've seen some direct denials in the newspapers about some of those things, too.
HOST: You said you expect the number of asylum seekers to rise quite dramatically if they are processed onshore. Have you done any analysis on how many we can expect?
PM: Look, what I've said is we are at a real risk of more boats coming because of Mr Abbott's negativity and obstructionism. I mean, the great issue here is we wanted government, this Government and future governments, to have the same powers available to it to make choices about offshore processing that the Howard Government had, that Mr Abbott believed the Howard Government should have, but in order to play political wrecker Mr Abbott has decided to block this legislation.
But my preferred position is Malaysia, but Mr Abbott's wrecking the ability of this country to have offshore processing-
HOST: -And so your second choice is onshore processing here in Australia?
PM: Well, you need to understand Mr Abbott is blocking the legislation-
HOST:-I understand that-
PM: -that would enable offshore processing anywhere.
HOST: I understand that, so you're saying that that's what you're left with?
PM: Well, without the legal ability to process asylum seekers offshore, whether it's this Government or any future government, there is no ability to process asylum seekers offshore. So whenever Mr Abbott says Nauru, he is actually now deliberately deceiving Australians. If he became Prime Minister he would not have the legal ability to send asylum seekers to Nauru.
HOST: Alright, just a very quick question before I let you go - poker machines will come up before the end of the year, the community groups that now rely on funding from these clubs, if Wilkie's poker machine proposals get through, special schools, sports groups, the Scouts, St Vincent de Paul - will there be compensation for groups like that?
PM: Well, I think we need to back up that truck a fair bit, Madonna. We are in discussions with the gaming industry and of course we're open to discussions with groups of all types. We want to get this right. We want to get it right so that it works for everyone.
I think generally Australians think that it's a good thing to have entertainment options, what you want to do on a Friday or a Saturday night, people will make different choices, but some people will decide to go and play pokies and have a meal and have a bet and that's fine, that's part of entertainment, part of life.
But I think at the same time many Australians are concerned about the circumstances of problem gamblers, and probably too many Australians know someone who's wrecked their life because of poker addiction and probably they want to see a better way of dealing with that. Well, so do I, and we'll work through to get the scheme right.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: I'm here today with the Acting Premier of Queensland, Andrew Fraser, and we're here at the Queensland Reconstruction Authority and I very much thank the CEO Mr Graeme Newton for his briefing of me and the Acting Premier today and I also thank Richard Wilson for having us here today.
Since the first days when Queensland was impacted by the summer of natural disasters, the Federal Government has been standing alongside the people of Queensland. I've had the opportunity to visit here on many occasions in the immediate aftermath and since, and every time I've been here I've been impressed by the spirit of courage that people are bringing to the rebuilding task and also the spirit of organisation that is working to get things done.
We have played our part by making resources available so we can work with the Queensland Government and with local communities to rebuild Queensland. We particularly worked to make $5 billion available and it wasn't easy, hotly contested in the Federal Parliament, directly opposed, but we were determined having extended a hand of friendship to Queensland during its darkest days that we would not be letting go.
We've advanced more than $2.2 billion of that money to boost immediate recovery and reconstruction efforts, and that money has been used for a variety of things including the payment of personal hardship payments, money to assist small businesses and not-for-profits, money to assist our primary producers, and there's been assistance provided in low-interest loans.
As we've been briefed today, a lot has been achieved to date. About 92 percent of effected roads are now back online and able to be used, and 96 percent of the rail network is back online. These are significant achievements and a tribute to the people of Queensland that they've been got done so quickly, but there is more to do and today I'm here with Andrew Fraser to announce what will happen next.
Firstly, to Grantham. We have Mayor Steve Jones here and Kathleen from Grantham, who's described her own personal journey, has described him as Australia's best Mayor today. He's been working hard with his community, with the Queensland Government, with the Queensland Reconstruction Authority to envisage a new future for Grantham - particularly, a new future where people move to higher ground. This is a remarkable vision and it is a tribute to the people of Grantham that it is being realised, that their town will be there but there will be people living in a safer place on higher ground.
I was very honoured at the Local Government Association's meeting in Canberra to meet with Steve Jones and to present to him the Grantham Flood Flag, which became for the Federal Parliament and Australians beyond the Federal Parliament a symbol of the devastation but also the courage Queensland showed during its summer of natural disasters.
I'm very pleased to be here today and able to announce that we will work with Steve and his community in the Strengthening Grantham Initiative. In partnership with the Queensland Government we will make available $18 million, and that $18 million will be used to support the building of new town infrastructure which can work alongside the new housing on higher ground to help with the creation of a new community.
In addition today, I'm here with the Acting Premier to make an announcement about further resources being made available to reconstruct roads in the south-west of Queensland and in the Darling Downs. Particularly, in those areas we will be making available $1.1 billion for further works that are necessary on flood-affected roads.
This will be divided so that South-West Queensland will receive $700 million for road reconstruction and repairs, and $435 million will go to roads in the Darling Downs. This will enable work to happen in the South-West that will reconstruct more than 1,000km of roads and that's going to boost local communities and particularly local jobs with over 1,500 jobs to be created. In the Darling Downs you will see 200km of roads across the region reconstructed with over 1,100 jobs being created in that region.
This will make a difference to economic activity in towns like Roma and St George, it will make a difference to places like the Southern Downs and Toowoomba and the Western Downs. It will go towards repairing roads including the Warrego Highway, there will be work on the Carnarvon, on the Castlereagh, on the Landsborough and Mitchell Highways.
This is an important new investment to get those roads up to the condition they need to be in, and I'm very pleased that we will be working with the Queensland Government on this in the spirit of partnership that we've brought to date to the necessary work to reconstruct Queensland.
I'll turn now to the Acting Premier for some comments.
ACTING PREMIER FRASER: Thanks Prime Minister, and thank you for coming to Queensland today and to visit the Reconstruction Authority and to visit the nerve centre and to talk to those staff who are working hard to conduct the reconstruction effort across Queensland.
Importantly, the announcement today about providing the $18 million jointly between us and the Federal Government to Grantham means that for those Grantham residents who are in the rebuilding phase, who are attempting to not only rebuild homes but rebuild lives, that's $18 million that won't reside on their rates bill into the future. The $18 million from the State and Federal government will meet the cost of that local government infrastructure to ensure that those new developments are taken place with funding from the State and Commonwealth to ensure that Grantham can take a step forward.
As the Mayor said earlier and we welcome his support for this project and indeed pay tribute to his leadership in that community and indeed across the Lockyer, as he said earlier some people are hoping to be in their homes by Christmas and it would a great thing if by Christmas time the hardest decision that some Grantham families have to make is where to put the Christmas tree. It's been a tough year for many people, it's been a particularly tough year for Grantham and what this means is potentially we've got people in their homes, in new homes by Christmas and I think that would be something that would not only be great for them but I think the whole of Queensland and the whole of Australia would like to see that come to pass.
PM: Thank you. So, happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, with the reconstruction effort, this will be a long-term project as will Queensland's economic recovery. State election due in the next six months, do you have any concerns that a change of government might destabilise that process?
PM: It's not for me to comment on how Queenslanders want to vote in their state election, but I do want to say this: every step of the way we have worked in a very strong partnership with Premier Bligh and her team, including Treasurer Fraser, and that partnership has enabled us to come together to have an agreement which means resources have been able to flow in a timely way to do all of the work that is needed.
We understood in the very early days of flooding, even before we'd seen the damage of the cyclone, we understood then that this was going to be a long-term journey of recovery which was going to take a long-term partnership for us to get the job done, and we've been working side by side ever since, and I do want to say both to the Queensland Government and to the people who work here in this Reconstruction Authority, coming back from something as big as this was never going to be easy and there are so many continuing stories of personal hardship and distress, but a lot has been done very quickly and very efficiently. That's a tribute to the Queensland government, to local government leaders like Steve Jones, but also to the people who work here in this authority.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, last week the Queensland Floods Commission of Inquiry heard from several Mayors that said they wanted Federal assistance to buy back flood-prone properties. Will the Federal Government be helping them with that?
PM: We've made clear through the national partnership arrangement and the guidelines we operate to help the Federal Government and State Government and local governments work together in the face of natural disasters, the kinds of things that we will assist with. But we always want to collect the best of local views and local input, so we're always willing and I think Steve Jones, for example, as a local Mayor, would have seen us do this.
We're always willing to listen to what people have to say, but for the guidelines as to what we will fund, they are clear under the national partnership arrangement. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are you planning to say today regarding Cabinet leaks when you meet? 
PM: As Prime Minister I have worked to ensure that we have a proper system of Cabinet government. That comes with responsibilities and it comes with rights. It particularly comes with the right to participate in what should be free and frank discussions. That comes with the responsibility to keep those discussions confidential.
JOURNALIST: Do you know who the leaker is? Is it Kevin Rudd?
PM: Look, I'm not going to get involved in media scuttlebutt about any of this. Cabinet's confidential and it should be kept confidential.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that it hasn't been kept confidential?
PM: Well, clearly I believe that a proper Cabinet system of government is best. That means that we work through our Cabinet structures, our Cabinet committees and our Cabinet to make the decisions that the nation needs. Cabinet should be kept confidential.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Queensland roads  -  92 per cent of them are fixed, but only to the point where their trafficable. Is there a possibility that in next year's budget the Federal Government will be looking at supplying more funding for the long-term project of getting roads back to the state they were, pre-summer?
PM: When we did the costings to inform how much money we needed to set aside in the budget and working out how much money we needed to set aside in the budget and working out how we were going to pay for that, we did that on the basis of bringing the roads up to the appropriate standard under the guidelines.
So, the guidelines for how we work together to repair roads is that they come back up to the standard they were before, or there is room for betterment, particularly if that's going to assist in the future if they face flooding in the future, so we've already factored and costed that in.
ACTING PREMIER FRASER: So there's two phases: one is to get roads obviously open as quickly as possible for the importance for communities and the economy; but then to go back and do the full rebuild, which is obviously what's going to take quite some time given that we're dealing with more than 9,000kms.
JOURNALIST: And that's about a 3-year time frame, is it?
ACTING PREMIER FRASER: That's correct. So, obviously out in the South-West in particular where a lot of the water was, roads don't like sitting under water and getting them up and running and replacing culverts is one thing, but going back and repairing the bases and the sub structure of roads is obviously something that takes a lot longer and for those of us who have been out there like you, you know that it's basically an ongoing task, it's like painting the Sydney Harbour Bridge.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, picking up on what you said before about leaks, obviously you'll set an example by not talking about any discussions you'll have in Cabinet, but outside of Cabinet, are you confident that your voice can be heard above all the other voices we have in the political debate, whether they be the Greens, any leakers, or Tony Abbott? How do you make sure your voice is the one that the Australian people hear?
PM: My view as Prime Minister is it's not about my voice so much as what I get done. I'll be content to be judged in the 2013 election on what I've achieved and during the course of this year we've worked hard to achieve decisions and implement them that will make a difference for the nation's future.
We're here talking today about rebuilding Queensland. Well, let me assure you getting the money to do that wasn't easy. We made bit cut backs, but we also decided that it was important to have the flood levy so that a contribution could be made, particularly by higher income earning Australians, and that was fought every step of the way. Mr Abbott and his team fought every step of the way to deny Queensland the money it would need to rebuild. Well, we delivered that.
And since then, of course, we've delivered the Health Agreement that I worked with Premier Bligh on to improve health services in this State and right around the nation. We delivered the budget, focused on skills and opportunity for the future with a huge mental health package because I was persuaded this was the area of health care that had been neglected for far too long.
We've continued to roll out the National Broadband Network. There's not going to be a State in the Commonwealth that's not going to get more benefit from this than the highly regionalised state of Queensland.
We've delivered carbon pricing. Once again there's not going to be a State in the Commonwealth that benefits more than Queensland with its incredibly high-quality sunshine, and whenever I come here Premier Bligh is always keen to describe it not just as a lot of sunshine but great quality sunshine for making clean energy.
These are all-important decisions for the nation's future and the future of this State, so I'll just keep getting on with the job and making sure that the future of this country is one of prosperity and opportunity that is shared.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) some people within your Cabinet seem to be more distracted by playing politics and leaks than actually doing, as you say, doing the job?
PM: Well, I've described to you my approach of doing the job and that Cabinet's confidential.
JOURNALIST: The Bureau of Meteorology has warned a wetter than usual  -  bad weather again this wet season and possible fires. Do you agree with the Government's decision not to draw down Wivenhoe Dam?
PM: Decisions about policies in relation to the dam are matters for the State Government, but I do know that the State Government has been taking a large number of steps to be engaged in a big provision of information to the people of Queensland so that they get ready and people understand what they can best do to prepare in view of likely weather conditions.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, there was a report a few weeks ago you're unable to ensure Queensland (inaudible) disasters. Is there a plan B? Perhaps enlisting the support of the Federal Government?
ACTING PREMIER FRASER: Well, as you would be aware we've got the Queensland Government Insurance Fund which provides the self insurance for the road network of Queensland, but as was in the public area at the time, going out there and getting re-insurance as opposed to insurance which we already have, getting re-insurance is something that obviously has to meet the market.
Now, going out there with a road network that stretches from here to London and back is a pretty different proposition to ensuring the network in other, smaller parts of the country. Obviously, there's not a market for that out there, but what the State's done is obviously look through the due diligence process, at all of that, to make sure that we've got sufficient provision in the Queensland government insurance fund to meet those costs into the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the (inaudible) of the Torres Strait are seeking autonomy. (Inaudible) Anna Bligh has written to you seeking your comments. What would you like to say to the people of the Torres Strait who are wanting autonomy?
PM: Well, I'll also get the Acting Premier to make a comment about this, but clearly this is a major decision that would change things for the people of the Torres Strait forever. It's a big, big change and as a big change it needs to be thought through and considered respectfully and in dialogue with local people. We obviously would need to have discussions between governments, but most importantly with local people about what their vision is for their future.
ACTING PREMIER FRASER: I think we should just say on this point that we're talking here about a very proud culture that goes back thousands and thousands of years and that's remained largely intact, and these are the legitimate aspirations of an indigenous people that represent one of the true enduring cultures that is part of our land, and these legitimate aspirations do have a place. It's obviously not going to happen overnight and that's why we're happy to talk to the community. We had a community cabinet  -  our last community cabinet was on the Torres Strait and obviously the community spoke very forcefully in favour of their legitimate aspirations and that's something that will take time but it needs to be led by the local community. Governments have a role to play in auspicing that conversation, but I note that the Federal Opposition Leader was up there yesterday practising his own unique form of politics, and I just say there's no real room for cheap, vapid politics when it comes to the legitimate aspirations of Torres Strait people. It seems to me that more and more the Federal Opposition Leader is just a sound bite looking for a cause, and I think on this issue alone he should take one step back and allow the people of the Torres Strait, the proud people that they are, to have their own voice in this debate.
PM: We'll definitely make this the last one, thank you.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) about to face opinion polls?
PM: Look, I'm here getting on with the things that matter. The commentators will write a million words about a million opinion polls between now and 2013. In 2013 I will be judged on what has been achieved for the Australian people and I'll be happy to be judged on that.
Thanks very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Innovation Minister Senator Kim Carr today announced that the Illawarra Region Innovation and Investment Fund was now open for business.
From today, businesses with innovative projects in and around Wollongong can apply for financial assistance that will help strengthen the local economy and create new high-skill high-wage job opportunities.
The $30 million fund is jointly funded by the Australian Government ($20 million), the NSW Government ($5 million) and BlueScope Steel ($5 million) over three years to 30 June 2014.
The fund will also be matched by at least $30 million in private sector investment.
Focussing on the manufacturing industry, the Innovation and Investment Fund will favour projects which offer long-term growth potential in order to grow the Illawarra's industry base.
This support will help offset the effect of BlueScope Steel's decision to de-activate one of its blast furnaces at Port Kembla, which will result in the loss of 800 permanent and 200 temporary jobs.
The minimum grant under the Fund is $50,000, matched dollar-for-dollar by the successful applicant. There is no maximum funding limit.
Funds will be available for applications received through up to three rounds. The first round opens on 18 October 2011 and closes on 16 December 2011.
Further information is available from the AusIndustry hotline on 13 28 46, by emailing hotline@ausindustry.gov.auand from the Illawarra Region Innovation and Investment Fund page at www.ausindustry.gov.au.
Information is available from AusIndustry's Illawarra and South Coast regional manager, Peter Masterson, who is based in Wollongong and can be contacted on 02 4254 5534 or 0451 632 141 or by email at peter.masterson@innovation.gov.au. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced construction will commence over the next twelve months to connect almost half a million new premises to Australia's world class National Broadband Network, providing massive economic and social benefits.
In the biggest rollout of the NBN so far, the fibre network will be delivered to 49 sites around Australia in the next 12 months. This includes 28 new locations.
This rollout builds on the 81,700 premises that are either already connected to the NBN or where connection work is currently underway.
The Prime Minister made the milestone announcement in the Illawarra today which will see the NBN rolled out in Dapto and Wollongong over the next 12 months.
This is an important day. Over the next year, NBN Co will have commenced construction of a high-speed fibre broadband network to a further 485,100 homes across Australia.
All Australians deserve the benefits that will be delivered by our world class NBN.
It will enhance every aspect of our lives  -  the way we care for our families and ourselves, the way we share knowledge and information and the way we trade our goods and services.
This announcement puts them on the path to receiving the essential infrastructure that will bridge the digital divide, provide better educational outcomes, improve health service delivery and increase economic opportunities.
The NBN will be a massive boost for the Australian economy, opening up previously inaccessible national and global markets.
A recent Access Economics report found that the internet contributes $50 billion to the Australian economy and that over the next five years that figure will increase to $70 billion.
Importantly, the NBN will allow local communities to thrive as businesses grow without the need to move to major metropolitan cities.
This will mean jobs growth in regional Australia and mean more people will be able to be employed locally.
The release of the 12-month schedule marks the end of the preliminary systems trial phase at the five first releases sites and the beginning of the volume NBN rollout to Australian premises.
NBN Co's 12-month construction program will be updated quarterly, which means in three months, a new rolling 12-month schedule with additional locations will be released.
The first annual indicative three-year schedule will be released early next year.
The Gillard Labor Government is committed to transforming Australia into a leading broadband nation.
The release of the 12 month construction timetable proves this is a reality and well underway.
NBN Co expects it will take an average of 12 months from the beginning of construction in each location for the owners of premises to receive high speed broadband and telephone services.
Detailed mapping information is expected to be made available once network design documents for each area are finalised. 



HOST: Julia Gillard joins us now, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Can you confirm that the NBN is coming to the Illawarra and we're going to be the first major metropolitan area to be wired with fibre optic cable?
PM: Yes, I can confirm that I'm here today to make an announcement about the NBN and that the NBN will be coming to you, to Dapto and the Wollongong areas. This is great news for the region. The NBN is about transforming our economy because it literally bring the world to your door, as well as about transforming the way we provide health and education services.
So, this is good news for the long-term economic future here. It's also good news because people will be employed in the construction, and around 500 jobs will be created at the peak of the construction of the NBN in the Illawarra.
HOST: And are there local jobs in the construction phase, or is it more about the long-term plans?
PM: There's both - there's the 500 jobs at the peak of the construction and then there's the support for jobs in the long-term by transforming the economy so that it is connected to the world.
HOST: Now you're also coming to Port Kembla Port Corporation at one end of what would be the Maldon-Dombarton line. Can you also confirm that there will be more money to get that line built?
PM: Yes I can. I can confirm, I'm confirming a lot of things for you this morning, Nick. I can confirm that we are going to take the next step.
This is a project that was basically put to one side by the Greiner Liberal Government more than 20 years ago, so for more than 20 years it's been there waiting for someone to come along and say we need to do something on this rail link and to make a difference for the port.
So we have already had a feasibility study, and now we are going to take the next step, which is to invest $25.5 million in all of the detailed design and preconstruction work that needs to be done so that it's shovel ready.
HOST: OK, is this yet another study, or is this the next logical step towards completing the line?
PM: This is the next logical step. You can't get the line done without doing this work.
HOST: The main campaigner for the line's quite sceptical. He doesn't want another report that goes nowhere that doesn't finish the project. Can you guarantee that this is going to lead to construction and the start of construction within your term of government?
PM: Look, what we do is we engage in very proper processes for the expenditure of large amounts of money, so we've done the feasibility study - that was important. We're talking about a project that the former State Liberal Government knocked to one side for the best part of 20 years, so we've done that.
I've received the very loud advocacy of your local members, of Sharon Bird and Stephen Jones, about the ability of this rail link to make a real difference to the local economy. So what this money will fund, $25 million, is the preconstruction work. That includes all of the detailed design work, the work for the civil and structural work, the track work, all of the detailed design that would be necessary for the construction of the project, and it will finalise a construction timetable and a cost estimate for the project.
So, you can't take the next step without getting that work done.
HOST: Both the NBN and the Maldon-Dombarton Line, are they going to be jobs which come from outside the area, particularly the NBN, or are they going to be real jobs that benefit workers within our region?
PM: Well, the leader of NBN Co will be with me today and he, I'm sure, will be asked that question too, and he will indicate that what NBN seeks to do is to source people to work locally. We're talking about people who need all of the right skills - obviously you're working near power poles and electricity lines, all of that kind of thing - but NBN Co does look to source people locally, and in other parts of the country where the NBN has rolled out, for example Tasmania has been the first roll out site, because we wanted to trial it there in Tasmania. I've met with local people who have been rolling out the NBN.
HOST: On the carbon tax, it was only a week or so ago we saw the victorious applause in Parliament as the carbon tax was passed in the lower house. At the same time you can't ignore your own polls going down and down. Does this lead to the conclusion that Australians are not going to sacrifice their own lifestyles for the greater good of the world?
PM: Look, I'll leave commentary on polls to the people who get paid to do it.
For me, putting a price on carbon is about creating the clean energy jobs of the future - making sure that we've got those jobs here, rather than overseas. And what it will also mean, of course, is that we will be in a position to cut taxes and to increase pensions.
Now, I know this has been very controversial. It's been the subject of debate in our nation for more than a decade now, but with the passage of the legislation through the House of Representatives and the its passage in a few weeks' time through the Senate, we will be on track to start carbon pricing on 1 July next year.
And whilst we see a lot of huffing and puffing from the Opposition, the truth is the Opposition will not repeal carbon pricing. For all of the vigour in his campaign, Tony Abbott is on the record as being in support of putting a price on carbon, and I did note yesterday that his climate change spokesperson is now saying if they were ever elected to government in this country, they'd have a White Paper. That is, they'd have an expert study, and that is code for they'd have an expert study to help them climb down from all the false promises they're now making about repeal to the Australian community.
HOST: So regardless of the promise in blood, the carbon tax and legislation is set in stone and it's going to be with us forever?
PM: Look I've heard Tony Abbott in the past give the Australian community a rock-solid, iron-clad, guarantee before an election and then march away from it afterward, so I'm not someone who's going to succumb to puffed up words from Tony Abbott.
Let's just look at what's happening today: his spokesperson Joe Hockey, is basically sending a message today that he wants to destroy clean energy jobs. He's sending a message today that he wants to see power prices go up. They are in the business of creating as much uncertainty at the moment as they can, because they think that that's in their political interests.
But if we step back from that 24 hours in the media and the Opposition huffing and puffing, every Liberal leader in this country, every living Liberal leader in this nation, has been in favour of putting price on carbon, and so has Tony Abbott in the past.
HOST: We've seen, just quickly, in the Financial Review today, that the electricity industry is severely concerned about the Coalition carrying out its threat, quote, ‘to abolish the carbon tax' because they want certainty. So are we entering a period where businesses don't know what to do with the future?
PM: Well, Tony Abbott is continuing to play a wrecking game. That's his style of politics: no policies, just say no. But for businesses we, as a Government, are providing the certainty that businesses need. The legislation will be the law of this country from 1 July next year.
HOST: Alright Julia Gillard, thank you very much for joining us this morning on the morning show.
PM: Thanks very much, Nick. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced an additional $25.5 million to advance the Maldon to Dombarton Rail Link project for the Illawarra.
The announcement follows a recent feasibility study which concluded a new rail line would support the rapidly expanding resources sector in New South Wales by giving the mining sector more direct access to Port Kembla.
The study found the railway line would also free up capacity along the existing Illawarra Line for additional passenger services.
The final project would involve laying 35 kilometres of standard gauge track connecting the Main North South Line directly to Port Kembla via Dombarton.
This new piece of rail infrastructure would also consist of two passing loops, bridges over the Nepean and Cordeaux Rivers and one of Australia's longest tunnels (see attached map).
Commencing this financial year, the pre-construction activities will include:
 * 	preparation of detailed design work for civil, structural, geotechnical and track work necessary for the future construction of the project
 * 	finalisation of a realistic construction timetable and cost estimate for the project.  
This preparatory work will ensure that the Illawarra region and NSW more broadly is well positioned to act quickly to meet any increased future freight demand.
The additional $25.5 million in Federal Government funding will ensure that this important project is “shovel ready” for the Illawarra.
Once the pre-construction activities are completed, the project will then be considered for inclusion in the next Nation Building Program.
Confirmation that the project will advance to the next stage is a tribute to the local community's long running campaign and the tireless lobbying efforts of their elected representatives, Sharon Bird MP and Stephen Jones MP.
First mooted in 1979 and then cancelled in 1988 by the incoming Greiner Liberal Government, the Maldon to Dombarton Rail Link has the potential to further cement the Illawarra's importance as an industrial powerhouse, central to Australia's continuing economic success.
The Gillard Labor Government's investment in this project reflects a broader commitment to the renewal of rail in Australia.
Building a faster, safer and more reliable network will boost national productivity, take pressure off the nation's highways and reduce carbon pollution.
All up, Federal Labor's unprecedented $3.4 billion rail freight capital works program is rebuilding and modernising more than a third of the Interstate Rail Network  -  or some 3,800 kilometres of existing track.
The full study and its findings are now available at: www.infrastructure.gov.au



The Australian Government warmly welcomed Gilad Shalit's release from captivity today.
Mr Shalit was captured in a raid by the armed wing of Hamas in June 2006.
He has been held in the Gaza strip by Hamas since that time.
Gilad Shalit's captivity was as inhumane as it was unjustified. 
In addition to his detention, he was deprived of the right to be in contact with his family.
Through five long years, Gilad Shalit was in the thoughts of Australians, many of whom campaigned for his release.
We wish Gilad and his family well for their reunion and for their future. 



PM: Thank you very much, I'm joined this morning by our local Members, Sharon Bird and Stephen Jones and I'm also joined for the Minister for Infrastructure and Transport, Anthony Albanese.
We also have available to answer any technical questions the CEO of NBN Co, Mike Quigley, and I thank him for being here.
I'm here today in the Illawarra and I've got three important announcements to make. One is the announcement you've just seen made about the next stage of the roll out of the National Broadband Network. This is an announcement for the nation. It is the 12-month rollout plan of the National Broadband Network Company, of NBN Co. This plan will be updated on a quarterly basis so Australians can see where the National Broadband Network is going to be rolled out next.
Today, the plan that is being launched has 49 sites for the rollout of the National Broadband Network. Included in these 49 sites are 28 new locations, so there will be 28 communities very happy to learn today that they are being included in the roll out of the National Broadband Network over the next 12 months.
The National Broadband Network is about jobs. It's about the future of health services and the future of education. It's about making sure that our nation can be competitive in our world and is not at risk of being left behind. It is about opportunity for all - about economic opportunities and job opportunities right around our nation.
It is about ending the tyranny of distance that so many people in regional areas have felt for far too long.
I'm very pleased that included amongst the new sites for rollout of the NBN are Wollongong and Dapto. I'm here in the Illawarra, and this is a community that is redesigning its future. It's had to absorb some tough news with the loss of jobs at BlueScope, and I came to this community to talk about that tough news and to work with Sharon and with Stephen and the local community, to stand in partnership with the Illawarra as it moved beyond the announcement of the job losses to looking at the economic future for this region.
The NBN will play a big role in that economic future. It will bring new productivity to businesses who are here today and it will enable the creation of new businesses, too. Businesses that need the connectivity that the National Broadband Network will bring, and this region will be able to work in partnership with this great university and its steady stream of ICT graduates, because we are standing in a university that graduates more people in ICT than any other university in the country.
So, the NBN will be an important part of this new future for the Illawarra. In direct construction of the NBN here in Wollongong and Dapto, at peak construction there will be 500 jobs, so that is welcome news, I believe, for the region, as people are thinking ‘what are the job opportunities here following BlueScope's announcement?'
Second today, I want to announce that we are taking the next step in the Maldon to Dombarton Rail Link. This is a project that has been talked about for many, many long years. It was more than 20 years ago that the Liberal Greiner Government stopped this project and put it to one side. To breathe new life into this project, into this rail link, has required the dedicated work of your local members, Sharon Bird and Stephen Jones, and it's required us as a Government to make a determination that this rail link is an important project that requires work.
First and foremost we had a feasibility study. Now, today we are taking the next step and that is allocating $25.5 million to make this project shovel ready. After more than 20 years of being set aside it would be of no surprise to people that what we need to do now to make this project shovel ready is in-detailed design work for civil, structural, geotechnical and track work - all of the work necessary to realise this project.
And we do need to do work to finalise a realistic construction timetable and to make sure that we have a realistic costing of the project. For those in the community who are wondering what this mean for the local area, I can say to them it means that the Maldon to Dombarton Rail Link will be shovel ready.
For anyone who is sceptical about what this means for the future, there are 25.5 million reasons to take us seriously. We are working on this project to make it shovel ready because we understand how it can be an important part of the future of this region.
Third, when I last came here to talk to local community members following the loss of jobs at BlueScope, we talked about working in partnership for the future of this region. On that day, together with State Government colleagues, I announced that we would be making available a $30 million fund to assist in innovation and investment in the region.
We have used this model in other regions undergoing change, and when we've used this model we have found that local businesses have stepped forward; that we've been able to work in partnership with them to create new job opportunities.
I'm pleased to be able to announce today that the fund is now open for applications. The first round of applications from local businesses can now come forward - they open today and they close on 16December. For people locally who want assistance with making an application, or to understand everything about the application process, Peter Masterson, the AusIndustry Illawarra and South Coast Regional Manager, is standing by to assist people.
People can also obtain assistance from the AusIndustry hotline, which is 13 28 46. We want businesses to step forward and make the most of these innovation funds to help with designing the next future for the Illawarra, full of the job opportunities that it should contain.
I'll turn now to Minister Albanese, who might want to say something about the rail link, and then we'll take questions.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Thank you, Prime Minister. I'm very pleased that we're able to take the next step in the realisation of the Maldon to Dombarton Rail Link. Today we're also releasing the feasibility study, is available on my Department's website.
We did that study because after the decision of the Greiner Liberal Government, the project had been dormant.
This project could be vital - 35km of rail line. Of course, the corridor has been preserved, but what we need to do is to do further work, the study shows, in terms of the geotechnical and other preconstruction work.
It is also the case that the feasibility study highlights what will improve the BCR, the benefit-cost ratio analysis of the project. We know that this will link the Illawarra region with the south-west and into the western mining region.
So I've been approached, not just by people in the Illawarra, but people across the other side of the Great Dividing Range, could receive great benefit from this, in terms of Lithgow, in terms of that region and also the potential for iron ore deposits in the Wagga Wagga region and the potential that is there.
Lastly is this project isn't just about freight. If you separate freight from passenger rail you have a big benefit for commuter transport as well here in the Illawarra.
So, I think this is an important next step. We'll give consideration to future funding, both private sector, but also under the Nation Building Program of the future, but we need to get this work done. This announcement today will make sure that can occur.
PM: We're happy to take questions. Yes?
JOURNALIST: You said this will create 500 jobs, the NBN roll out in the Illawarra, but it's saying here in this timetable that it will roll past 5,600 premises. Is that enough premises to create that many jobs?
PM: I actually think you'll find, we'll have to make sure that we're all working off the same figures, but with the roll out here locally it will be rollout past 10,000 premises. That's the roll out for Wollongong and Dapto, and you've already got the more than 7,000 premises that are being rolled past because of the works that you're already familiar with that are displayed on these boards.
JOURNALIST: So 10,000 homes (inaudible)
PM: Mike just might want to make a comment there.
QUIGLEY: That is in the first stage. The rollout keeps going and once we put what's called a (inaudible) we start expanding out from that, and I've just confirmed with Peter that's, what we're talking about is a much larger number of premises over the next years. We're only talking here about the first 12 months, making and starting and growing from there. So, that's where the numbers come from.
JOURNALIST: So the 500 jobs will come a bit further down the track?
QUIGLEY: Yeah, they'll start, and then they'll keep going. If fact, if you see in Kiama the numbers of people who were employed, and they were local people who were employed in Kiama, you've just got to scale that up.
JOURNALIST: So will that peak be reached in the next 12 months? Is that the peak job period?
QUIGLEY: Yes, over, it starts in 12 months. Over the following 12 months that should then start. So you're looking at probably at 24-month period getting up there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will those jobs offset the steel jobs that have been lost in the region?
PM: Clearly, we're wanting to bring jobs to this region, not only in the next 12 months, or next two years, but jobs that will be here for the long term and for the future. So, in this economy what I want to see is the benefit of the direct jobs that we've just talked about in the construction of the NBN, but also the benefit that will come from the productivity advantages of the National Broadband Network; productivity advantages for current businesses, access to new markets for current businesses, because they'll literally be able to deal with the rest of Australia and the rest of the world as if it was at their door, and also that generation over time of new businesses which will come into existence because of the speed and power of the National Broadband Network.
Now, that's one important strategy for job creation. Obviously, continuing to work on local infrastructure is another important strategy for job creation, which is why today we've announced the next stage in the rail link. And third, and important strategy in job creation is this partnership for innovation with local businesses, which is where the $30 million fund is so important.
So, there's not just one thing here that will help generate jobs and opportunity. There are three important announcements today that can work together in combination with the great work that's been happening locally amongst community members and community leaders to make sure that the Illawarra has a strong and vibrant future.
And of course Sharon and Stephen have been very involved with other local community leaders in that work of discussion about what the future looks like.
JOURNALIST: Could a steel worker who's lost their job walk into one of those construction jobs?
PM: In terms of the skills sets for rolling out the NBN, and Mike will add, I've had the opportunity to see people rolling out the NBN, I saw that in Tasmania.
There are electricians involved, obviously some of the work is very close to live power lines and you need the skill sets that come with being an electrician. There is also some unskilled work involved, there is obviously the driving of the trucks that take the fibre around, so those kind of jobs. Mike might want to add to that  -  the kind of jobs that are involved.
MIKE QUIGLEY: Yes, Prime Minister, there are obviously a lot of work, construction work, which is both electrical  -  trenching, boring, operating machines, it's really quite compatible with the types of skills that are in this part of the country.
PM: Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) BlueCcope announcement play in the roll out happening here in Illawarra?
PM: Of the NBN? Well, the thing that played the big role here is the local community advocacy and the advocacy that this community wants to be part of the National Broadband Network. Now ultimately NBN Co, Mike and his team, make selections about sites and there's a series of technical criteria that Mike is far more expert in than I am and which you've seen him describe today. But one of the things that they take into account is the willingness and preparedness of the community to work with NBN Co and to embrace the National Broadband Network, and the presence of the university here has also been of significance in the decision. So, Sharon Bird and Stephen Jones, as local advocates, have been consistently saying ‘this is a community that wants to see this future; this is a community that's ready to go; this is a community that if the NBN comes here will jump on it, embrace it, use it and can imagine the possibilities of it.' That's part of the mindset of your community. It's obviously reinforced by the work that happens at this university.
JOURNALIST: In relation to Maldon-Dombarton, is construction going to go ahead or is it possible that (inaudible) engineering issues could turn up in this next phase that make it unviable?
PM: We are taking a prudent approach here. and that's the approach we take to infrastructure. You need to make sure that you have done the studies, and that's what the feasibility study was all about, and then you need to make sure you've done all of the work that makes it shovel ready.
I don't think that it would be surprising to anyone that a project that as a result of the actions of a State Liberal Government has been dormant for more than 20 years needs detailed work done, planning and design so that it can be a project that meets the standards of the modern age. Now, we are obviously very focused on this project or we wouldn't be committing $25.5 million to make it shovel ready.
In terms of the kind of design work that happens, I'll get the Minister to comment on that. 
MINISTER ALBANESE: There are three phases to any infrastructure project.
The first is the feasibility  -  done.
The second is the pre-construction work. What will engage in detailed design work costings, because the Federal Government doesn't go out there, I don't have a department of civil construction, we obviously tender out these arrangements.
What we'll be doing is sitting down with the Australian Railtrack Corporation, as well as the State Government in terms of planning issues but there is nothing to suggest -  this isn't a project that's come from thin air. This is a project which everyone in the Illawarra knows has been around for a very long time. There is nothing to suggest that there will be any geotechnical barriers to its construction. There are two bridges involved. There is a long tunnel involved. That information's all in the feasibility study. Construction standards have changed since the original project was proposed in the 1980s by the State Labor Government.
This is a part of the $3.4 billion we are investing in rail freight around the country. We have rebuilt or are rebuilding one third of the interstate rail freight network - a remarkable achievement. Part of our commitment, as well, to rail freight is of course part of dealing with the challenge of climate change: urban congestion.
There are a range of benefits from putting freight onto rail, getting trucks off roads, improving productivity and improving the way that our ports operate with our national freight strategy, and this morning we had the benefit of visiting the port, and certainly Port Kembla very much welcomes the announcement today.
JOURNALIST: What about bipartisan support? Do you need support from both sides of politics for the project to go ahead?
MINISTER ALBANESE: I spoke to the New South Wales Liberal Minister - National Party Minister actually - last night, Duncan Gay, and informed him as a courtesy of the announcement this morning. We are not seeking any co-funding for this announcement today. We want to make sure that it got done and it is our commitment. We of course will be talking to the State Government about potentially them making a contribution to this project, but we'll have those discussions down the track.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you confident that the Telstra shareholders will vote to pass this NBN deal when they vote today?
PM: The Telstra shareholders are meeting today and clearly it's a meeting for the shareholders to make a determination.
As a Government we are awaiting the outcome of the shareholders meeting which we hope will give a green light to the agreement that we have reached with Telstra which is of benefit both to the Government, to the rollout of the NBN, and, we believe, to Telstra shareholders.
This is an arrangement which enables us to get access to Telstra's infrastructure as we roll out the National Broadband Network and makes a series of arrangements about the movement of Telstra customers onto the NBN, and the shareholders meeting is today and we'll  -  I believe it's probably in train as we're standing up here now so I'm not going to give a running commentary on the meeting - but we will have the conclusion by the middle of today.
JOURNALIST: On the carbon tax, the Coalition wants to abolish the Clean Energy Finance Corporation if it's elected. What effect would that have on investment if the Coalition did go ahead with it?
PM: The statement of the Coalition today would destroy jobs and the whole purpose of making the statement is for Mr Hockey and the Opposition to send a message that they want to destroy clean energy jobs. And at the same time they're sending a message that they want to see electricity prices go up. The Business Council of Australia has warned today that the Coalition's strategy will put electricity prices up, and at the same time we've got experts who advise government in Senate estimates saying that the Coalition's strategy will put electricity prices up and create more bureaucracy.
So let's go through the list of what the Coalition's talking about today: destroying jobs, electricity prices up, and more bureaucracy - that is what the Coalition is aiming for.
But I do also want to say this: Tony Abbott and his team, I believe, will continue this campaign of fear between now and the next election because Mr Abbott believes that's in his political interest. But, we should also remember the days when Mr Abbott was in favour of putting a price on carbon. That is, Mr Abbott had the same position as every other living Liberal leader in this country, that he wanted to put a price on carbon, and I was very interested to note yesterday that the environment spokesperson for the Opposition is now saying that if they were elected to government they'd have a white paper about all of this. Well, we all know that that is code for in government they will look to walk away from these blood-oath promises to repeal the pricing on carbon.
Underneath all of this, all of this carry on, all of this feverish campaigning, Mr Abbott is on the record as supporting a price on carbon. His so-called promises to repeal it are absolutely hollow.
JOURNALIST: On another matter, have you seen the (inaudible) by the RSL for a (inaudible) with Vietnam? Is that something the Government would support?
PM: Look this is a matter for the RSL and its members to work through.
JOURNALIST: If the Opposition walks away from the NBN, how would that affect the rollout that you've just announced today?PM: Well, there would be no NBN, so the only way of having the National Broadband Network is for the Government to continue rolling it out. Tony Abbott has been crystal clear with his spokesperson Malcolm Turnbull and with the Australian people: he's on a mission to wreck the National Broadband Network.
JOURNALIST: And on the Maldon-Dombarton study, I understand the feasibility study was actually going to look at (inaudible) engineering cost modeling, that sort of thing, so why do we need another phase, and is this just a stalling tactic given that the Government's (inaudible) to return to surplus (inaudible).
MINISTER ALBANESE: No, not at all.
The feasibility study looked at the circumstances, including it found a BCR of 0.5, and it was therefore in terms of the economic case, but it also outlined the circumstances which could change to lift that BCR. Now, they involved a range of issues including what happens at Sydney Port in relation to goods at Port Kembla. It is determined by what happens in the resources sector in particular in the West and other parts of New South Wales. It also looked at a range of issues in consultation with the consultative group that was established of representatives here in the Illawarra.
That's a very different thing from looking at the detailed work in terms of precise costings, construction schedules. Looking at that sort of work does cost money. The feasibility study, from memory, was $3 million. What that provides is, if you, like an academic work.
That is very different from having engineers go down drilling, doing all of that preconstruction work that needs to take place. Once the preconstruction work has taken place, then it will be absolutely shovel ready and ready to go.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the issue of the Sri Lankan Ambassador, what did the Government know of allegations of war crimes against the Sri Lankan Ambassador? Before the appointment, did they check that out?
PM: Thanks. As I'm advised, these allegations have come to light since the Sri Lankan High Commissioner has come to Australia. These allegations are now being looked at by the Australian Federal Police.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) question from our Canberra bureau. There's been the republican debate is once again raised its head. With the Queen visiting, do you think it's a time that that is revisited?
PM: I think what will happen with the Queen here is there will be many, many excited Australians who will want to be involved in the events that she will be attending, not only in Canberra but around the nation, and then of course in Perth at CHOGM.
Thanks very much. 



Eddy De Gabriele, Chairman of the RDA Illawarra committee.
Rev Fr Chris Riley.
Our distinguished guest, Professor Howard Armitage.
Local business and community leaders.
I thank Sharon Bird for that generous introduction.
Sharon and Stephen Jones are outstanding advocates for this region -  and I pay tribute to them today.
I honour the traditional owners of this land, the Dharawal people.
They wrote the first chapter of this region's development and we're going to write another great chapter in that very long and proud story.
Friends, it's a great honour to be back so soon after my last visit and I'm here for one reason:
To keep faith with this region and its people.
As you undergo this process of change and transformation, you will not walk that road alone.
We will build a prosperous local economy that sustains high-wage, high-skill jobs for the region.
And we will do it together.
I know the job losses announced by BlueScope have been a bitter pill for this region.
I know there are many families who have been sitting around their kitchen tables thinking about what their future will hold.
But I also know this: in tough times we can turn adversity to advantage.
Challenges to opportunities. 
That's exactly what Australians are good at  -  we are a smart, adaptable, resilient people.
This is a smart, adaptable, resilient region.
A region familiar with the task of transformation.
From the 1840s, the dairy industry eked out a living along this coastal plain.
The coal industry began to supplant dairy from the 1870s.
Then came steel-making in the 1920s.
And then the big wave of economic reform in the 1980s, now being revisited in our own days.
Wave after wave of change.
That's the history of this region.
The history of our nation.
A trading nation open to the world  -  and thus a nation always subject to the forces of change.
Friends, I look back on the changes that occurred here in the 1980s and at the time it must have been hard to envision any sort of future at all.
Employment in the steelworks fell steeply from a peak of 20,000.
Eight thousand jobs were lost in just three years alone - 1981 to 1984.
But the Illawarra didn't give up hope.
With support from federal and state governments  -  and the ongoing commitment of BHP, now BlueScope  -  you found a way through.
It is my belief that you can do it again.
I'm an optimist about the Australian economy.
 I'm an optimist about a long-term role for manufacturing.
But in this time of change, we need to keep working to strengthen and modernise our economy with the new opportunities of the future.
Here in the Illawarra we are reminded that global events, even those a long way away, do affect us in Australia.
As is well known, Asia's demand for our resources is not only boosting national income; it is also pushing up the Australian dollar.
This puts a lot of competitive pressure on trade exposed sectors of the economy  -  including industries vital to regions like the Illawarra.
More broadly, the Australian economy  -  like all economies  -  is being buffeted by sovereign debt problems in Europe.
Over the weekend, the Treasurer met with other G20 Finance Ministers.
And in three weeks I will meet G20 leaders in Cannes  -  a meeting which will hopefully place important ballast under the global economic recovery.
But between now and then, European leaders must take decisive action to put an end to the sovereign debt crisis when they meet this weekend.
The crisis of confidence in global markets being caused by the situation in Europe must be expunged.
The time for muddling through is over.
Substantial and comprehensive reforms must be put in place. Nothing less.
The world is watching - including from the shores of Australia
And as we work together with the world's leading economies to encourage global stability and growth, I am also here to say again that the Australian Government is working with you to help make this a regional economy that thrives in the 21st century.
That is why we've brought forward the Steel Transformation Plan and made up to $100 million available as an advance help BlueScope adapt to the current economic conditions.
And why we have, with the State Government and BlueScope, created the $30m Illawarra Region Innovation and Investment Fund.
Funds for economic diversification and the creation of new jobs and new opportunities.
And I'm proud to say the Fund guidelines were approved on Friday and the scheme is now open for business. 
The Fund is backed by a high-powered Regional Task Force and Advisory Committee to ensure that any proposed solutions are solutions made by this region, for this region.
A process that involves the people of the Illawarra working with us, with the State Government and with Local Government, local employers, local unions, working together to design a shared vision of the future.
I know there are purists who sit in their think-tanks and decry any cent of money invested in particular regions or industries.
But like those who have stood in the way of planning for a clean energy future, they are wrong.
When a region and an industry wants to build a bridge to the future, I will be there to ensure you have the tools to do it.
To create high quality new jobs.
To create new business opportunities.
To renew technology and update skills.
Not a hand out  -  but a hand up.
We know from your experience in the 1980s and the lessons from other regional centres like Newcastle that this transformation is possible.
Newcastle has transformed itself from a one-company steel town to a leading centre of knowledge and innovation currently enjoying near full employment.
Not only stronger, but more diverse.
Because diversity is the missing strength in some of our regions.
Diversity equals resilience.
So the Illawarra will keep making steel  -  but it will be cleaner, smarter steel-making.
The Illawarra will keep manufacturing  -  but the goods you produce will be based increasingly on innovation and value-adding.
The Illawarra will keep producing coal; indeed we've seen old mines reopened in recent years.
Mines that will be cleaner as our carbon package clicks into place next year.
The Illawarra will keep building on the region's growing presence in industries likeinformation technology, tourism, financial and property services, and the arts.
I travel all over Australia, and few regions have the assets that you do.
A truly world-class university, led by a great Vice-Chancellor. 
A university, incidentally, which has the highest number of IT graduates of any university in the nation.
Facilities like the Innovation Campus, which saw its first commercial building opened just last month, boasting tenants like BHP Billiton.
The brilliant new $30 million headquarters for the Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute opened last year.
Or the $60 million SMART Infrastructure research and training centre at the University of Wollongong.
Wollongong is home to major financial players like Oasis Asset Management and the Pillar superannuation administration corporation.
You've got a great port facility that I know has just undergone a major expansion, with a further expansion now underway.
And the $350 million TRUenergy gas-fired power station opened on the shores of Lake Illawarra.
So even before BlueScope announced its decision, this was a region on the move.
A region determined to shape its own future.
So as you digest the news of BlueScope's restructuring, and the wider economic implications of Asia's rise and the high dollar, I say:
Be confident.
You have so much going for you.
And because you do, the support and backing will follow.
Not just the $100 million we're providing under the Steel Transformation Plan.
Or the $30 million from the Illawarra Region Innovation and Investment Fund.
The Illawarra will get its fair share of our national infrastructure too.
Earlier today I announced the next big move for the National Broadband Network.
We've seen successful trials in several regions, including just south of here in Kiama and Minnamurra.
Now it's time to begin the volume rollout of fibre to 93 per cent of Australian premises. 
Today the NBN Co released its inaugural one-year construction schedule which will see high-speed broadband delivered to half a million premises by this time next year.
The Illawarra is central to those plans  -  and here's how it will work.
The NBN's 12 month schedule will include the fibre network passing through 10,900 premises in the Dapto and Wollongong areas.
In addition, six exchanges from Corrimal in the north to Nowra/Bomaderry in the south will made fibre-ready for the rollouts to continue into 2013.
This builds on the rollout that has already commenced in Jamberoo and Kiama where connection has been completed or is underway at 7700 premises.
And along the way, the NBN rollout will create more than 500 in this region.
So get ready because the NBN is coming to the Illawarra.
It will be one of the first regions in Australia to be fully connected.
Enabling people to work from home.
Create businesses at home.
Connect their firms to overseas clients.
Undertake education or cultural activities online.
The possibilities are limited only by the imagination.
Like the expansion of Port Kembla, the NBN is an opening on the world.
A chance to reach out and grasp the opportunities that the Asian century is bringing to our nation.
Friends, if ever a region stands to benefit from infrastructure investment, it is the Illawarra.
I mentioned the expansion of Port Kembla  -  a visionary decision by the Carr government that has turned the Illawarra into this State's hub for vehicle importation.
Infrastructure that unlocks opportunity because it brings people, goods and ideas to where they need to be:
The new infrastructure of the NBN.
And the more traditional infrastructure of ports, roads and rail.
If there is one great unfinished story in the history of Australian infrastructure, it is right here in the Illawarra.
A rail line begun with high hopes almost 30 years ago.
A project that was regrettably suspended when construction was already well underway.
Friends, I'm very proud to announce that after this project has sat dormant for 23 years, the Gillard Labor government will take the next vital step toward the realisation of the Maldon to Dombarton rail link.
Because of the time lag, we'll need to review the planning and design work to meet today's engineering standards.
So we will allocate $25 million to get that work underway.
And that work will position this project to meet all the preconditions for major construction to make it shovel ready.
We are prepared to make this new investment because the Maldon to Dombarton line makes even more sense today than when it was first conceived.
Not only is coal mining undergoing a resurgence.
Not only is Port Kembla undergoing a major expansion.
The Maldon to Dombarton line now also fits intrinsically as part of a holistic freight strategy throughout the Sydney region and indeed right along the nation's east coast.
The line will link with the Northern and Southern Sydney Freight Lines, the proposed intermodal facility at Moorebank and the expansion of Port Botany.
So the Illawarra can continue doing what it does best.
Manufacturing.
Creating.
Exporting.
Making your own way in a challenging and uncertain world.
So friends, what does this all add up to?
A strong regional economy with jobs and opportunity for all.
In fact, RDA Illawarra's own vision statement puts it well.
“A sustainable region that offers a higher quality of life, socially, economically and environmentally, through high levels of employment with a highly skilled, adaptable, productive and inclusive community operating in a diverse, vibrant and growing economy.”
That's our vision for the Illawarra.
They're the values that bring us together today.
In fact, they're the fundamental values I've fought for my whole political life.
There are times when history puts those values to the test.
Like when Paul Keating faced the ‘banana republic' moment in 1986.
When this Government confronted the GFC three years ago.
Or when this region heard the news of BlueScope's job cuts back in August.
And friends, we're going to meet that test.
We're going to meet it with courage and resolve.
We're going to meet it in partnership
Building on this region's proud past, to give the Illawarra the bright future it so richly deserves.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Innovation Minister Senator Kim Carr today announced the membership of the Gillard Government's new Manufacturing Taskforce, announced at last month's Future Jobs Forum.
The new high-level Taskforce will map out a shared vision for the future of Australia's manufacturing sector and help strengthen local firms as they adapt to changes in our economy, including the rise of Asia.
We want to see the sector move up the value chain. To do this we need to build the skills and innovation that the sector needs for a new era of manufacturing. 
The Prime Minister will personally chair this taskforce, with Minister Carr as deputy chair.  Because this is a whole-of-government task, a number of other senior ministers will work on the taskforce.
Membership of the new group will also include manufacturing industry leaders, academics and unions.  The list of initial members of the taskforce is below.
Senator Kim Carr said the new taskforce would help ensure manufacturing remains a key part of our economy for generations to come.
It will identify a plan for how best to leverage existing efforts, including Government policies and programs, to best capture the opportunities and respond to the challenges facing manufacturing.
The taskforce will meet for the first time in November 2011. 
Prime Ministers Taskforce on Manufacturing - Members
Government
The Hon Julia Gillard MP, Prime Minister (Chair)
Senator the Hon Kim Carr, Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research (Deputy Chair)
The Hon Wayne Swan MP, Deputy Prime Minister
Senator the Hon Chris Evans, Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Jobs and Workplace Relations
Senator the Hon Penny Wong, Minister for Finance and Deregulation
The Hon Craig Emerson, Minister for Trade
The Hon Jason Clare MP, Minister for Defence Materiel
Industry
Mr Philip Binns, Vice President and General Manager, Agilent Technologies
Mr Geoff Plummer, CEO, OneSteel
Mr Ian Thomas, President, Boeing
Ms Heather Ridout, CEO, AiG
Mr Mike Devereux, Chairman and Managing Director, Holden
Mr Chris Jenkins MD Thales
Mr Phil Butler, MD, Textor Technologies
Ms Rebecca Dee Bradbury, CEO, Kraft Australia
Unions
Mr Jeff Lawrence, ACTU
Mr Paul Howes, National Secretary, Australian Workers Union
Mr David Oliver, National Secretary, Australian Manufacturing Workers Union
Mr Michael O'Connor, CFMEU
Mr Charlie Donnelly, NUW
Ms Michele O'Neil, TCFUA
Science and Technology
Professor Roy Green, Professor and Dean of the Faculty of Business, University of Technology Sydney
Dr Megan Clark, Chief Executive, CSIRO
Professor Jonathan West, AIRC, University of Tasmania



PM: It's fantastic to be here, I'm joined by my Parliamentary colleague, the Member for Chifley, Ed Husic, who's been asking me to come and have a look at this fantastic facility.
I had hoped to be at the opening of it, but I am going to be overseas, so it's great to actually be here today and able to get a sneak peek before it's opened. And I'm of course joined here too by Alan Pendleton, the local Mayor who has been so responsible for this new facility, by very enthusiastic library staff, by people who have been involved in the building, the architect, we've all had an opportunity to look round today.
And I do want to say thank you to Alan and thank you too to his predecessor, to Charlie Lowles for the efforts that they've put in to the development of this, the Mount Druitt Hub, as you've chosen to call it.
This is a terrific partnership between the Federal Government and local council. We came together making a contribution of $4 million each, to enable the development of this new facility here. And just having a look at it, it is going to make a great contribution to education and learning in the local community with this new library space, including the new computing technology, as well as the area for kids, it's going to make a fantastic contribution to education and learning.
And upstairs it's going to make a great contribution to community cohesion, giving people a place to come together, to meet, for senior citizens, for local community groups to come together and have their activities. So it's a great new facility.
It's also been a facility that has created jobs in construction and we want to make sure around the country that we are bringing to people the benefits of work, so for us there is a theme here. It is about education and learning and it is about jobs. It's also about a clean energy future, because in this design, from the solar panels in the roof, to the rest of the way the building has been designed, it's been done thinking about energy use and a clean energy future.
And this building is going to be able to feed electricity back into the grid, as well as power its own activities, as it welcomes people to the library, children to the kids corner and community groups in here.
Today I've had the opportunity to spend some time with Ed, talking about his local electorate and their needs. Clearly this is meeting a need, but in this area too there is a need to be defining the future of manufacturing. As Ed is always very proud to say, he represents an area in the Federal Parliament that is in the top 10 for manufacturing jobs.
Ed has been a very consistent advocate of the future for our manufacturing industries. Ed Husic and a number of other Labor Members have been meeting locally with people who work in manufacturing and considering the future of manufacturing, and have said to me that they are very determined to see manufacturing in their local areas prosper.
I'm determined as Prime Minister to make sure that manufacturing prospers around the country too. We are living in a time of economic change, economic change in the form of a resources boom, being driven by the huge growth for our resources out of China, out of India, out of the countries in our region.
We've come out of the global financial crisis strong as a nation and that's a good thing and our region which continues to grow wants to buy the minerals commodities that we have to sell, that's a good thing too, it mean jobs and prosperity for Australians.
It also means that our Australian dollar has been very high and when we look into the future we see that the strength of the Australian dollar is very likely to be sustained. That does put pressure on trade exposed industries like manufacturing.
We've been conscious of that pressure and conscious that we need to work with manufacturing now, to assist it during these days of transformation and to make sure that in the days that lie beyond the resources boom, that we emerge from the resources boom with a more diversified economy, not a less diversified economy.
It's that thinking that has driven us to do things like budget in the May budget for the Buying Australian at Home and Abroad Package. It's the work that we've been doing through that package, whether it's been in advocating for the steel industry, or though Australian Industry Participation Plans, that is us reaching out to manufacturing and making sure it gets a fair share of the resources boom.
We've also has policies and plans like the New Car Plan, which has been so important to sustaining our automotive industry. We've invested in Enterprise Connect and in a series of other Government programs that support businesses and support manufacturing.
Recently in Canberra I had a Future Jobs Forum, so that we could share strategies as to what else we can do to support manufacturing in the future. I said at that Future Jobs Forum that we would take some immediate steps, including using the power of government money to ensure that when government funds are used to purchase and build new facilities that there is an Australian Industry Participation Plan, that growth in the economy is being used to help support manufacturing.
But I also said we were open to doing more and that we would have a Prime Minister's Manufacturing Taskforce. So I'm very pleased to be here with Ed Husic today, in a great manufacturing part of the country to announce the Terms of Reference and personnel who will serve on that Manufacturing Taskforce, who will advise me and advise government on what more can be done to support jobs and a future for manufacturing.
I do believe we've brought together some great expertise from business, from trade unions and from the academic world; people who are going to be able to help us keep defining a future for manufacturing.
Some great work has already been done by Minister Kim Carr and by the Innovation Council that works with manufacturing. We want to keep working and building on that, we want to catalyse further change, we want to make sure that we are supporting manufacturing industries.
So I'm pleased today to be able to circulate to each of you the names of who will be on the manufacturing taskforce and its terms of reference and I look forward to working with those union leaders, business leaders and those with policy expertise as well as continuing to stay in good touch with vocal advocates for manufacturing like Ed as we continue to support our manufacturing industries during these days of change.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister could you shed some more light on the Federal spin unit that's been created to promote the carbon tax?
PM: We've been bringing information to people about carbon pricing and we'll continue to do so.
JOURNALIST: Today economic modelling showed that the average Australian will be about $2.50 better off under the carbon tax which is higher than the Treasury estimates, does that vindicate your argument that it won't impact on families?
PM: Treasury of course always makes very prudent and careful assumptions and so the Treasury modelling is there for all to see. But NATSEM, which has been described by many people including by me as a very reputable modelling agency, today has released work that shows almost 70 percent of Australian households will come out better off. Now I think that this gives the lie to Mr Abbott's fear campaign. He's been saying to Australian families whether it's here locally or anywhere else in Australia that they should be afraid, he's been trying to whip up fear. I think these figures today are further evidence that Mr Abbott's fear campaign is without foundation; that many Australian families, people who are reliant on the pension, people who get family payments, people who earn less than $80,000 a year, people who are women who are coming back to work after having had kids can look forward to tax cuts, increased pensions and increased family payments as we seize a clean energy future, just like a clean energy future is being seized right here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what can you tell us about the latest boat arrival and what will happen to those onboard?
PM: I understand that a boat has been intercepted, it will be taken to Christmas Island for processing. If the boat has on it asylum seekers they will be detained for health and security and identity checks in the Christmas Island facility.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, an Australian AusAID worker's been killed in Libya. Do you have a message for their family and what's the Government doing in response to that?
PM: At this stage we have our consular officials and our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade staff working as fast as they can to investigate this matter and to make sure that we've got full details. And so until we're in a position to confirm the full details I'm not going to speculate about the matter. Obviously if there has been any loss of life that is a tragedy for the family involved but we're at the stage where we don't have full details yet.
JOURNALIST: How many more boats do you expect, Prime Minister, in recent months to come? Will it be a flood of boats?
PM: I have said to Australians that as a result of Mr Abbott's very reckless strategy that we will see more boats. We want to be able to implement the arrangement with Malaysia. If we were able to implement that arrangement with Malaysia, then when we saw a boat like the one that has been intercepted we would be transferring asylum seekers on that boat to Malaysia, that's what I want to do as Prime Minister, transfer those asylum seekers to Malaysia to send the strongest possible message that you shouldn't get on a leaky boat, that you shouldn't risk your life, you shouldn't give your money to a people smuggler because they cannot sell you a passage to Australia.
Mr Abbott has denied our country that. And I do note in today's papers we've got the former Minister for Immigration, Phil Ruddock, saying that Mr Abbott's policies and plans are not enough. We have been advised by experts that Mr Abbott's plan about Nauru won't work. And now the former Liberal Minister for Immigration is saying Mr Abbott's plans are not enough to deter boats. I think that's a very significant development given how long Phil Ruddock was Immigration Minister in this country.
Second, today we've seen the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees say that Australia has seen a 19 percent reduction in asylum seekers whilst other developed countries have seen an increase. I think that's an important statistic too and the fact that the Government was preparing to implement the arrangement with Malaysia did make a difference. So they're the facts for the Australian people: former Liberal Immigration Minister says Mr Abbott effectively doesn't have the answer, Mr Abbott blocking the legislation which would enable the Government to transfer asylum seekers to Malaysia and evidence that our arrangement with Malaysia did already have a deterrence effect.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what's your response to the release of Gilad Shalit?
PM: Well this is a very heart warming moment for him after so many years, five long years of being held unlawfully. So a remarkable moment for this young man, an amazing moment for his family and a great moment for the nation of Israel. So as a human being I've been very touched looking at the photos today and seeing that young man returned to his family.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the debate of Australia becoming a republic should be revisited at all?
PM: I think while the Queen is here in Australia what Australians will be doing is enjoying and celebrating her presence here. I believe she is very well respected by Australians and I think she's going to be tremendously, warmly received from the moment that she sets foot on Australian soil as she will do a little bit later today in Canberra.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today officially opened a new training centre in Blacktown that will play a key role in training more doctors and nurses for Western Sydney.
The Gillard Labor Government has contributed $20.6 million to build the Universityof Western Sydney Blacktown Mt Druitt Clinical Schoolin one of the fastest growing areas of the country.
The Prime Minister was joined by Health Minister Nicola Roxon at the opening along with Western Sydney Federal MPs Michelle Rowland, Julie Owens, Ed Husic and Chris Hayes.
The world class Clinical School will offer more people the opportunity to train to become doctors, nurses and allied health professionals in Western Sydney, where they are most needed.
The Blacktown Mt Druitt Clinical School has capacity for around 150 medical students that will train at both the Blacktown and Mt Druitt Hospital.
This is a significant achievement compared to six years ago when there were no medical students training at either hospital.
The Gillard Labor Government has made an enormous contribution to improve health services and medical training opportunities in Western Sydney.
The Government's health reforms are delivering greater investment in hospitals including beds, surgery and emergency departments, more GP's and specialists and higher investments in primary care.
Western Sydney residents are also benefiting from the Gillard Labor Government's new GP After-Hours telephone line that has handled more than 41,000 calls since it was launched on 1 July this year.
Around a third of all calls have involved the care of children aged up to 5 years, providing parents with advice and peace of mind when they need it.
The UWS Blacktown Mt Druitt Clinical School is part of the Government's commitment to provide a sustainable health system by training the next generation of doctors and nurses.
The school provides on-site education and research facilities for medical students including a library, theatrette, seminar rooms, a laboratory and space for clinical trials.Students will also have access to equipment such as human patient simulators, atraining mannequin used for teaching CPR and an infant patient simulator.
The new medical simulation technology is world class, comparable to equipment used at Harvard University.
The $20.6 million of Commonwealth funding for the new training facilities was provided from the Health and Hospitals Fund and the Department of Education Employment Capital Development Pool.
The Health and Hospitals Fund is the single largest investment in health infrastructure ever made by an Australian Government.
It is a key part of the Government's reform agenda to reshape Australia's health care system for the future. 



Julia Gillard and Federal Member for Chifley Ed Husic MP today visited the $8 million Mount Druitt Community Resource Hub in Dawson Mall.
The Hub will be partly powered by a commercial solar panel system as part of the Blacktown Solar City project. Once connected to the grid, the 32KW commercial system will generate clean solar electricity for the Mt Druitt Community Resource Hub, a centre that will house a library, cafe, study rooms and multi-purpose rooms for community use.
The Mt Druitt Hub is jointly funded by Blacktown City Council and the Australian Government under the Australian Government's Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program Strategic Projects 2010.
The solar panel system has been funded by Blacktown Solar City and is the sixth council building in Australia  to have a solar power system installed. 
Blacktown Solar City is one of seven Solar Cities funded by the Australian Government under the $94 million Solar Cities initiative. The Solar Cities program is a partnership between governments, industry, businesses and local communities to trial sustainable energy solutions.
Each of the Solar Cities roll-out a range of solar and energy efficiency products and services within their communities, including:
 * 	energy efficient appliance and lighting installations;
 * 	home energy audits that recommend energy saving actions solar photovoltaic and solar hot water installations;
 * 	 various pricing offers that encourage sustainable energy use; and
 * 	educational campaigns that engage local communities on energy sustainability issues.
The Gillard Labor Government understands that many families are struggling with the rising cost of electricity. Programs such as Solar Cities have already created clean energy jobs, reduced electricity costs for families while at the same time reducing emissions.
For example, since its launch in July 2007, Blacktown Solar City has contributed to an estimated $4.5 million in electricity savings to the residents of the Blacktown Local Government Area and reduced greenhouse gas emissions by approximately 25,000 tonnes.
Solar Cities are just one of the many ways the Federal Government is investing in a clean energy future for Australia.
The recently expanded Low Carbon Communities  -  announced as part of the Government's Clean Energy Future Plan - will further assist local councils and communities to take-up the opportunities to reduce their energy costs.
Applications are expected to open before the end of year for the $200 million Community Energy Efficiency Program providing support, through competitive grants, for local councils and community organisations to improve energy efficiency in council and community-use buildings and facilities.
Further information on Blacktown Solar City and Low Carbon Communities is available at www.climatechange.gov.au



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
HOST: I've got to ask you, meeting the Queen last night, did you consider curtseying?
PM: Look, we do get protocol advice, Neil. I mean it's great to have the Queen here. I'm delighted she's here and it was a fantastic reaction from the kids and the crowd. It was really nice to watch.
The protocol advice to us was you either curtsey or you bow your head. You should do what you feel comfortable with. I felt most comfortable with bowing my head and the Queen extended her hand and so of course I shook her hand.
HOST: So it's all within protocol, but did you think about curtseying?
PM: Look, no I didn't. Obviously I felt most comfortable doing what I did.
HOST: Do you feel curtseying is a bit demeaning or something?
PM: Look Neil, some things are you, some things aren't.
HOST: It's just not you?
PM: No, look it's not. I made a choice and I thought I would feel most comfortable with bowing my head. Obviously when she extended her hand to have me shake her hand I certainly did that with enthusiasm, so Neil the advice was do what comes most comfortably and naturally.
HOST: Perhaps you can advice me on this too - wearing a hat. Are you supposed to wear a hat?
PM: I think that's a completely personal choice too.
HOST: Oh that wasn't a matter of- I remember, Michelle Obama got into trouble for not wearing, oh no that's silly, was criticised for not wearing a hat, but the protocol said that was alright too did it?
PM: Yeah, absolutely, so some people chose to, some people didn't.
HOST: Now, I know you're a republican but you're an admirer of the Queen, aren't you?
PM: Look, I am an admirer of the Queen. I think many Australians hold her in a great deal of affection and respect and so do I. I mean what a life, what an incredible life she's lived over so many generations of change and to see someone play such a steadfast role over so much change I think is remarkable.
HOST: How do you sense the future? Do you think this could be the last tour of Australia by a British Monarch who is actually Queen of our, or King of our country as well?
PM: Look, I'm not making any predictions Neil. I just think people will be wanting to enjoy the moment when the Queen is here, and because she's travelling large numbers of Australians will get the opportunity to see her.
HOST: One would hope there's no protests or anything, wouldn't you?
PM: Well, I certainly don't get any sense of that. I get a sense of welcome and enjoyment and delight that she's here and watching the school kids yesterday, I mean people with bunches of flowers and things to give her and just very excited. It was very heart warming.
HOST: Can I ask you about another matter? Alan Joyce from Qantas says jobs of innocent parties are about to go in that dispute. Are you close to intervening yet?
PM: I am concerned about this dispute. Qantas has put a new offer on the table to get the dispute resolved, so the parties are still negotiating and my message continues to be that parties have to get around a table and get this fixed. So, with Qantas making a new offer yesterday, parties should come together and get this resolved in the interest of Qantas, in the interest of people who work for Qantas, in the interest of the travelling public and all of the businesses that rely on Qantas and our airlines doing everything they do to get people to tourist locations.
HOST: Alan Joyce has suggested that effectively the future of Qantas is on the line here, and the future is the company to run itself. Do you think it's that important, the future of Qantas is on the line?
PM: I don't think it's for me to second guess Alan Joyce's words. I think for me, under the Fair Work system, what is the best thing I can do is say to the parties our Fair Work system is about people having a safety net at work, we've made sure that's there and then for conditions above the safety net people need to get together, bargain it through, get a solution and that is what's needed to happen here.
HOST: The boy in Bali on the drug charges, have you heard anything further on him on just where that stands now?
PM: I've stayed in touch with our Ambassador in Indonesia. The news continues to be that prosecutors are working through what they consider would be the appropriate charge. This is obviously a delicate matter where we are being very careful and very methodical in our work with the family and our work with Indonesian authorities. It's obviously Indonesian law that applies and so we're carefully working through in the best interests of this boy.
HOST: Given the reports now that he did have an issue with cannabis, in fact, in Australia and was having some treatment. Does that change your mind on the way he should be dealt with?
PM: I'm certainly- I'm not going to be drawn on any of that Neil and it wouldn't be in the best interest of this boy if I was drawn on any of it.
HOST: OK, and any regrets about speaking to him on the phone?
PM: Neil, what happened there was I was talking to our Ambassador. I've spoken to him regularly about this matter to get continuous updates and reports. He was with the boy's father and asked if I would like the phone handed over to the father to say hello and that the father was very happy to say hello to me, so I had a chat to the father, a man obviously under a great deal of pressure with his son in these circumstances, and then the father said ‘well, I'll hand the phone over to the young boy at the centre of it'. So of course I said yes to that just as a human gesture to say hello.
HOST: No regrets?
PM: No, well, I mean in those circumstances Neil I was hardly going to say to a father under that degree of pressure when he asked me whether I would like to speak to the son and he wanted to hand the phone over to the son, that I wouldn't speak to him. I certainly wouldn't do that.
HOST: Now, I know cabinet shouldn't leak. I know cabinet does leak at times, they all do. But I know a Prime Minister can make an authorised statement for the Cabinet. Did you give them a bit of a spray this week for leaking?
PM: Neil, Cabinet's confidential.
HOST: Ah, OK. Do you know who leaked?
PM: Neil, Cabinet's confidential.
HOST: No, I'm not asking what happened - I'm asking what's happened outside Cabinet. Are you aware who leaked?
PM: Look, I'm not going to speculate on any of that and Cabinet is confidential and should be kept confidential.
HOST: OK, does what happened change the nature of Cabinet discussions?
PM: I believe it's very important that we have a proper Cabinet system of government; that we do have people coming round the table giving their full view, their frank view, and able to do that in an environment of confidentiality, so I'm going to continue to have a proper Cabinet system and continue to say that obviously the right to come around that table and have your frank say comes with the responsibility of confidentiality.
HOST: Do you believe the leak was designed to undermine you?
PM: Look Neil, not going to be drawn on any of it.
HOST: Are you investigating it?
PM: Neil, I've made my views clear about Cabinet being confidential and-
HOST: -I'm not talking about what happened in Cabinet. I'm talking about what's happened since.
PM: Yeah, but as far as I'm concerned, Neil, that's the only thing I'm intending to do - to remind people that Vabinet is confidential and obviously I've done that talking to you today and I've done it publicly this week.
HOST: It's not a good sign though, is it, when something like this happens?
PM: Look Neil, I'll let commentators deal with that.
We'll get on with the job of doing the important things that are necessary for our nation's future in these days of economic change where we want to make sure that we're fostering opportunity and jobs right around the country and getting the economy to work in the interests of working people.
HOST: Is it true you've lost confidence in the Ombudsman, Alan Asher?
PM: I've indicated my concerns about the conduct of the Ombudsman and said I think it is a matter for him to explain how this conduct fits with the values that drive the office of Ombudsman of impartiality and independence.
HOST: Has he offered his resignation?
PM: Look Neil, I'm certainly not aware of that. I've said that I have concerned and indicated those concerns to the Secretary of my Department, who subsequently spoke to the Ombudsman.
HOST: Do you want his resignation?
PM: Neil, the view I've just put to you is the limit of my view. I've indicated concern. I've had those concerns conveyed. I believe there are some matters there for the Ombudsman to deal with and explain.
HOST: There are reports today the New South Wales Police have widened an enquiry into your backbencher Craig Thomson and his time as a union official. Do you still stand by him?
PM: Look, Craig Thomson is a member of the team. He's doing his job representing his electorate. On any questions about police investigations, the police will do what they properly do and I don't think it's appropriate for people to be commenting on the matter under investigation and we should wait until the outcome is known.
HOST: I agree with you on the commenting on the investigation, but do you stand by Craig Thomson as a member of your team?
PM: I certainly do.
HOST: The asylum seekers, it's reported today the head of the Navy is concerned about the possibility of turning back boats, see them as a danger. Do you agree that's a danger?
PM: Oh there are very clear risks here, and we've just got to separate sloganeering from some simple facts in this matter. The chief of the Navy has made it very clear the risks involved to Australian personnel in turning boats around, and Indonesia has made it very clear that it won't take these boats back, so you can sloganeer all you like but they're the facts of the matter.
HOST: So once we get asylum seekers to this country how quickly can we get them into the community?
PM: We are very committed to mandatory detention and to making sure that if people arrive unauthorised they are detained, and during that period of detention health checking is done, security checking is done, identity checking is done. We obviously want those things to happen as efficiently as possible.
The amount of time they take varies a great deal from case to case and depends very much on the circumstances of it. We have operated a system of community detention. That was to respond to real community concern that they didn't want to see kids in high-security detention facilities living their lives behind razor wire, so we've moved to community detention models to make life better for kids and for families, and we do use bridging visas for asylum seekers. They've been used for asylum seekers who've arrived by plane and that is another tool that we can use to assist.
HOST: Just quickly, Tony Abbott says perhaps Japan is more important than China in terms of a free trade agreement, which seems to be a change in what the John Howard approach was. Where do you stand - Japan or China?
PM: Well, we have free trade negotiations with both China and Japan. With Japan, the negotiations did get set back by the need for the Japanese Government to put all of its energy and all of its focus into recovering from the devastation of the earthquake and tsunami, and I saw that with my own eyes so we very much understood that the Japanese Government would be absolutely focused on that.
But on these musing from Tony Abbott, I suspect the purpose of the musings is he wants to send a populist message to manufacturing workers, but at the same time he is selling those workers out. He came into the parliament and voted against assistance for the steel industry, so he voted against steel workers' jobs, and he's committed to taking half a billion dollars of support out of manufacturing and that would cost manufacturing jobs.
HOST: Thank you for your time. Polls not much better, are you sure you're going to last til the next election?
PM: Yes Neil, I am.
HOST: Unequivocally, you will be leading them at the next election?
PM: Absolutely right, Neil.
HOST: Have you told Cabinet?
PM: Well, I'm telling you as well.
HOST: Thank you for your time.
PM: Thanks Neil, bye-bye. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
HOST: I've got to ask you, meeting the Queen last night, did you consider curtseying?
PM: Look, we do get protocol advice, Neil. I mean it's great to have the Queen here. I'm delighted she's here and it was a fantastic reaction from the kids and the crowd. It was really nice to watch.
The protocol advice to us was you either curtsey or you bow your head. You should do what you feel comfortable with. I felt most comfortable with bowing my head and the Queen extended her hand and so of course I shook her hand.
HOST: So it's all within protocol, but did you think about curtseying?
PM: Look, no I didn't. Obviously I felt most comfortable doing what I did.
HOST: Do you feel curtseying is a bit demeaning or something?
PM: Look Neil, some things are you, some things aren't.
HOST: It's just not you?
PM: No, look it's not. I made a choice and I thought I would feel most comfortable with bowing my head. Obviously when she extended her hand to have me shake her hand I certainly did that with enthusiasm, so Neil the advice was do what comes most comfortably and naturally.
HOST: Perhaps you can advice me on this too - wearing a hat. Are you supposed to wear a hat?
PM: I think that's a completely personal choice too.
HOST: Oh that wasn't a matter of- I remember, Michelle Obama got into trouble for not wearing, oh no that's silly, was criticised for not wearing a hat, but the protocol said that was alright too did it?
PM: Yeah, absolutely, so some people chose to, some people didn't.
HOST: Now, I know you're a republican but you're an admirer of the Queen, aren't you?
PM: Look, I am an admirer of the Queen. I think many Australians hold her in a great deal of affection and respect and so do I. I mean what a life, what an incredible life she's lived over so many generations of change and to see someone play such a steadfast role over so much change I think is remarkable.
HOST: How do you sense the future? Do you think this could be the last tour of Australia by a British Monarch who is actually Queen of our, or King of our country as well?
PM: Look, I'm not making any predictions Neil. I just think people will be wanting to enjoy the moment when the Queen is here, and because she's travelling large numbers of Australians will get the opportunity to see her.
HOST: One would hope there's no protests or anything, wouldn't you?
PM: Well, I certainly don't get any sense of that. I get a sense of welcome and enjoyment and delight that she's here and watching the school kids yesterday, I mean people with bunches of flowers and things to give her and just very excited. It was very heart warming.
HOST: Can I ask you about another matter? Alan Joyce from Qantas says jobs of innocent parties are about to go in that dispute. Are you close to intervening yet?
PM: I am concerned about this dispute. Qantas has put a new offer on the table to get the dispute resolved, so the parties are still negotiating and my message continues to be that parties have to get around a table and get this fixed. So, with Qantas making a new offer yesterday, parties should come together and get this resolved in the interest of Qantas, in the interest of people who work for Qantas, in the interest of the travelling public and all of the businesses that rely on Qantas and our airlines doing everything they do to get people to tourist locations.
HOST: Alan Joyce has suggested that effectively the future of Qantas is on the line here, and the future is the company to run itself. Do you think it's that important, the future of Qantas is on the line?
PM: I don't think it's for me to second guess Alan Joyce's words. I think for me, under the Fair Work system, what is the best thing I can do is say to the parties our Fair Work system is about people having a safety net at work, we've made sure that's there and then for conditions above the safety net people need to get together, bargain it through, get a solution and that is what's needed to happen here.
HOST: The boy in Bali on the drug charges, have you heard anything further on him on just where that stands now?
PM: I've stayed in touch with our Ambassador in Indonesia. The news continues to be that prosecutors are working through what they consider would be the appropriate charge. This is obviously a delicate matter where we are being very careful and very methodical in our work with the family and our work with Indonesian authorities. It's obviously Indonesian law that applies and so we're carefully working through in the best interests of this boy.
HOST: Given the reports now that he did have an issue with cannabis, in fact, in Australia and was having some treatment. Does that change your mind on the way he should be dealt with?
PM: I'm certainly- I'm not going to be drawn on any of that Neil and it wouldn't be in the best interest of this boy if I was drawn on any of it.
HOST: OK, and any regrets about speaking to him on the phone?
PM: Neil, what happened there was I was talking to our Ambassador. I've spoken to him regularly about this matter to get continuous updates and reports. He was with the boy's father and asked if I would like the phone handed over to the father to say hello and that the father was very happy to say hello to me, so I had a chat to the father, a man obviously under a great deal of pressure with his son in these circumstances, and then the father said ‘well, I'll hand the phone over to the young boy at the centre of it'. So of course I said yes to that just as a human gesture to say hello.
HOST: No regrets?
PM: No, well, I mean in those circumstances Neil I was hardly going to say to a father under that degree of pressure when he asked me whether I would like to speak to the son and he wanted to hand the phone over to the son, that I wouldn't speak to him. I certainly wouldn't do that.
HOST: Now, I know cabinet shouldn't leak. I know cabinet does leak at times, they all do. But I know a Prime Minister can make an authorised statement for the Cabinet. Did you give them a bit of a spray this week for leaking?
PM: Neil, Cabinet's confidential.
HOST: Ah, OK. Do you know who leaked?
PM: Neil, Cabinet's confidential.
HOST: No, I'm not asking what happened - I'm asking what's happened outside Cabinet. Are you aware who leaked?
PM: Look, I'm not going to speculate on any of that and Cabinet is confidential and should be kept confidential.
HOST: OK, does what happened change the nature of Cabinet discussions?
PM: I believe it's very important that we have a proper Cabinet system of government; that we do have people coming round the table giving their full view, their frank view, and able to do that in an environment of confidentiality, so I'm going to continue to have a proper Cabinet system and continue to say that obviously the right to come around that table and have your frank say comes with the responsibility of confidentiality.
HOST: Do you believe the leak was designed to undermine you?
PM: Look Neil, not going to be drawn on any of it.
HOST: Are you investigating it?
PM: Neil, I've made my views clear about Cabinet being confidential and-
HOST: -I'm not talking about what happened in Cabinet. I'm talking about what's happened since.
PM: Yeah, but as far as I'm concerned, Neil, that's the only thing I'm intending to do - to remind people that Cabinet is confidential and obviously I've done that talking to you today and I've done it publicly this week.
HOST: It's not a good sign though, is it, when something like this happens?
PM: Look Neil, I'll let commentators deal with that.
We'll get on with the job of doing the important things that are necessary for our nation's future in these days of economic change where we want to make sure that we're fostering opportunity and jobs right around the country and getting the economy to work in the interests of working people.
HOST: Is it true you've lost confidence in the Ombudsman, Alan Asher?
PM: I've indicated my concerns about the conduct of the Ombudsman and said I think it is a matter for him to explain how this conduct fits with the values that drive the office of Ombudsman of impartiality and independence.
HOST: Has he offered his resignation?
PM: Look Neil, I'm certainly not aware of that. I've said that I have concerned and indicated those concerns to the Secretary of my Department, who subsequently spoke to the Ombudsman.
HOST: Do you want his resignation?
PM: Neil, the view I've just put to you is the limit of my view. I've indicated concern. I've had those concerns conveyed. I believe there are some matters there for the Ombudsman to deal with and explain.
HOST: There are reports today the New South Wales Police have widened an enquiry into your backbencher Craig Thomson and his time as a union official. Do you still stand by him?
PM: Look, Craig Thomson is a member of the team. He's doing his job representing his electorate. On any questions about police investigations, the police will do what they properly do and I don't think it's appropriate for people to be commenting on the matter under investigation and we should wait until the outcome is known.
HOST: I agree with you on the commenting on the investigation, but do you stand by Craig Thomson as a member of your team?
PM: I certainly do.
HOST: The asylum seekers, it's reported today the head of the Navy is concerned about the possibility of turning back boats, see them as a danger. Do you agree that's a danger?
PM: Oh there are very clear risks here, and we've just got to separate sloganeering from some simple facts in this matter. The chief of the Navy has made it very clear the risks involved to Australian personnel in turning boats around, and Indonesia has made it very clear that it won't take these boats back, so you can sloganeer all you like but they're the facts of the matter.
HOST: So once we get asylum seekers to this country how quickly can we get them into the community?
PM: We are very committed to mandatory detention and to making sure that if people arrive unauthorised they are detained, and during that period of detention health checking is done, security checking is done, identity checking is done. We obviously want those things to happen as efficiently as possible.
The amount of time they take varies a great deal from case to case and depends very much on the circumstances of it. We have operated a system of community detention. That was to respond to real community concern that they didn't want to see kids in high-security detention facilities living their lives behind razor wire, so we've moved to community detention models to make life better for kids and for families, and we do use bridging visas for asylum seekers. They've been used for asylum seekers who've arrived by plane and that is another tool that we can use to assist.
HOST: Just quickly, Tony Abbott says perhaps Japan is more important than China in terms of a free trade agreement, which seems to be a change in what the John Howard approach was. Where do you stand - Japan or China?
PM: Well, we have free trade negotiations with both China and Japan. With Japan, the negotiations did get set back by the need for the Japanese Government to put all of its energy and all of its focus into recovering from the devastation of the earthquake and tsunami, and I saw that with my own eyes so we very much understood that the Japanese Government would be absolutely focused on that.
But on these musing from Tony Abbott, I suspect the purpose of the musings is he wants to send a populist message to manufacturing workers, but at the same time he is selling those workers out. He came into the parliament and voted against assistance for the steel industry, so he voted against steel workers' jobs, and he's committed to taking half a billion dollars of support out of manufacturing and that would cost manufacturing jobs.
HOST: Thank you for your time. Polls not much better, are you sure you're going to last til the next election?
PM: Yes Neil, I am.
HOST: Unequivocally, you will be leading them at the next election?
PM: Absolutely right, Neil.
HOST: Have you told Cabinet?
PM: Well, I'm telling you as well.
HOST: Thank you for your time.
PM: Thanks Neil, bye-bye.



I would like to thank Mike Rann for his service to the people of South Australia and Australia as Premier.
Mike has led Labor in South Australia for 17 years  -  almost 10 of them as Premier.
Since 1993, Mike has been a great Labor leader, bringing social inclusion onto the national agenda, sealing negotiations for the expansion of Olympic Dam and providing leadership on tackling climate change.
Mike's legacy will be a stronger, fairer and more sustainable South Australia.
No-one thought South Australia would find a Premier to fill Don Dunstan's shoes, but in Mike we did.
On behalf of all my Federal ALP colleagues, I wish Mike the best of luck.
I also welcome and congratulate the next Premier of South Australia, Jay Weatherill. 
Jay and I worked closely together in our former roles as education ministers, and I know that Jay will deliver the energy and leadership that will serve South Australia well into the future. 



PM: Can I start by saying a very big thank you to Silvia and the team here at Dyesol, for making me so welcome today and for taking the time to explain to me what they are achieving here, and by letting us take this tour, they're giving us a sneak peak of what our clean energy future can look like.
A lot of Australians are thinking about a clean energy future. They know that putting a price on carbon will drive us towards that future, and they are wondering what that will look like.
At the same time, many Australians are concerned about the future of manufacturing and we have been responding to that, including by announcing my taskforce on manufacturing yesterday. Here today we can get a sense of both that clean energy future and what the future of manufacturing can look like.
Australians are very familiar with seeing solar panels on roofs - that happens in homes, it happens in businesses. What we're looking at today is the work leading to the next generation of solar technology, where you won't have a roof and a panel on top of it. Instead, you will have a dye which is part of the roofing material which is collecting the sunlight and turning it into energy.
The applications for this are amazing, mind-boggling, and really without limit. We can talk about cars being painted with a dye that can collect solar power to help power the car. These are the kind of applications coming from the work here. It's a new future in clean energy and it can also be a new future for Australian manufacturing, as things we make, like roofing materials, can have this innovation embedded in them.
So, a very big thanks to Dyesol for showing us this work here today.
Coming here today is on a day when we have had the Investor Group on Climate Change, a body that represents four major international investors in a clean energy future, a body which has at its disposal some $20 trillion, talk about the positive investment opportunities that can come in Australia from having put a price on carbon.
This investor group representing $20 trillion of assets sees the economic opportunities right here in Australia which will come from putting a price in carbon. That interest from international investors, as well as looking at this innovative work today, is telling us the story of what a clean energy future can look like and how that clean energy future can be seized by putting a price on carbon.
Unfortunately, Tony Abbott is a risk to this future. Businesses this week have said that his reckless attempts to create negativity, to wreck this clean energy future, are putting at risk future investments and putting at risk Australian jobs.
Mr Abbott is in the business of creating the maximum uncertainty now, and that has direct consequences. It's like rolling a wrecking ball through the creation of this clean energy future. Businesses are pointing to the risk that the uncertainty generated by his statements causes.
His statements are causing uncertainty and that's a direct risk to jobs. His statements are causing uncertainty and that's a direct risk to investment. His statements are causing uncertainty and that's a direct risk to power prices.
At the same time as he causes that uncertainty, we've had a modelling organisation that he himself has described as reputable and professional verify that carbon pricing means that an average household will be better off, that the flow through impact from putting a price on the big polluters will be $8.50 a week, whereas the benefits received will be $10.90 a week, that almost 70 per cent of households will be better off.
Now, this information from a modelling organisation Mr Abbott has described as reputable and professional puts a lie to his scare campaign on cost of living - a complete lie to that scare campaign.
We are very determined that we seize the clean energy future represented by the great research happening here, and right around this country scientists and researchers working with Australian businesses are designing that clean energy future for us.
But to make it happen we need to put a price on carbon; to make it happen we've got to make sure that Mr Abbott's wrecking strategy comes to an end. And the great irony of this wrecking strategy is Mr Abbott is engaged in wrecking now, even as he and his team prepare to back flip on their promise to repeal carbon pricing.
Mr Abbott is wandering around saying he will repeal a price on carbon, but at the same time his environment spokesperson, Greg Hunt, has announced that if they're ever a government they'll have a white paper on repealing the carbon price. That's political code for getting ready for a back down.
So, all of this negativity is in pursuit of absolutely nothing. If Mr Abbott is ever elected as Prime Minister of this country he will not repeal the price on carbon, but his wrecking strategy and negativity now has a cost in Australian jobs, investment and potentially power prices.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: What would you have Tony Abbot do? He's the Opposition Leader and you're blaming him for the uncertainty, but isn't the uncertainty caused by the situation in Parliament at the moment?
PM: No, it's not. It's caused directly by Mr Abbott's statements. That's what business is pointing to. Reputable businesses this week, like Virgin, like AGL, have directly pointed to Mr Abbott's statements.
This legislation has gone through the House of Representatives. It will go through the Senate. Parliament will have played its role and done its job. Mr Abbott is out there with these wrecking statements because he wants to cause the maximum amount of damage now in pursuit of absolutely nothing because if he's ever Prime Minister he will not repeal the price on carbon.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) detecting a tide turn over carbon pricing (inaudible)
PM: Australian businesses have consistently said that they want certainty; that they understand climate change is real; they understand the really negative impacts it can have for our country - business is concerned about those risks, rising sea levels, more extreme weather events. You would expect major Australian businesses to be concerned about what they means for them and what it means for the Australian nation. So they've consistently said we need to seize a clean energy future and reduce carbon pollution, and economists have consistently said the cheapest way to do that is to put a price on carbon. That's why we've acted.
Now they're pointing to the risk that Mr Abbott's statements today and yesterday and the day before actually pose to a clean energy future right now. He is introducing a note of uncertainty whilst the Government has provided the certainty and investment framework business wants and needs.
JOURNALIST: PM, Alan Joyce has today warned of job losses at Qantas as a result of the consistent strike action. When do you think is the appropriate time for the Government to intervene in this dispute?
PM: Look I am concerned about the Qantas dispute. I am concerned about its impact on Qantas itself, on other businesses, and of course on passengers. Parties are still negotiating this dispute. Just yesterday Qantas put an offer on the table to its workforce to resolve the dispute, so my message remains to the parties: get around a table and get this fixed.
JOURNALIST: How about Webjet's email that's been leaked to the Herald today suggesting that they may stop selling Qantas tickets as a result of the uncertainty of its flight schedules?
PM: Of course third parties are being affected by this dispute. Third parties do have their role and their own rights under the Fair Work system if they want to take them up, but what is in everybody's interests is to get this dispute resolved. Qantas and the relevant unions are still negotiating. Qantas has put an offer on the table, and so my message still is get around a table and get it fixed.
JOURNALIST: I understand the Government (inaudible) when the national economy might be affected. At what stage in a dispute like this does (inaudible)
PM: Well, parties are still negotiating here. Our Fair Work system is about industrial parties bargaining in good faith to get an outcome that works for both the employees and for the business, so Qantas has an offer on the table. My message is: get this fixed. The parties themselves need to come together, negotiate and get this done.
JOURNALIST: Do you still have faith in the Ombudsman?
PM: Look, I've indicated publically that I have been concerned about the conduct of the Ombudsman. I think it remains for the Ombudsman to explain how this conduct meets his obligations of independence and impartiality. That's a question for the Ombudsman himself.
JOURNALIST: Is it appropriate he resigns?
PM: I've made my concerns clear. The Secretary of my Department has spoken to the Ombudsman about those concerns.
JOURNALIST: Before we run out of time Prime Minister, there's been a lot of chat over the TV, radio airwaves today about your bowing to the Queen, not curtsying (inaudible)
PM: Look the advice to us was very clear that in terms of dealing with the Royal Family, whether you want to curtsy, whether you want to bow is a question for you, that they are happy with what people are comfortable with. As I greeted the Queen she extended her hand to shake hands and obviously I shook her hand and bowed my head.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The advice to me was very clear that you can make a choice with what you feel most comfortable with, that's what I felt most comfortable with. The Queen extended her hand and I shook her hand.
JOURNALIST: Should we be pursuing a free trade deal with Japan rather than China, as Tony Abbott seems to (inaudible)
PM: I've seen that this morning, and isn't this typical - Mr Abbott mouthing populist platitudes that he thinks will be music to the ears of manufacturing workers, while at the same time he's in the Parliament voting against support for the steel industry, voting against steel workers jobs and at the same time he's planning to cut half a billion dollars out of Government support for manufacturing in this country.
So, none of these statements can be taken seriously. This is a man who's put his hand up to destroy steel workers jobs. This is a man who wants to rip half a billion dollars out of manufacturing in this country and cause job losses.
Thank you very much. 



The death of Muammar Qaddafi is an historic moment for the people of Libya.
It brings to a definitive end the repressive and bloody 42-year rule of a cruel dictator who, to the end, refused to acknowledge the legitimate aspirations of the Libyan people. 
The defeat of the regime was achieved by ordinary Libyans who, during the many months of their struggle for freedom and democracy, have demonstrated their immense courage and determination. 
We recognise the huge sacrifices they have made to achieve their longed-for objective.
The work ahead to unite Libya, to establish law and order, and to re-build its economy and its towns and cities will be challenging. 
Now it a critical period for unity, respect for law and order, reconciliation and rebuilding.
We welcome the statements by National Transitional Council (NTC) Chairman Jalil emphasising that the new Libya will be inclusive, just and democratic. 
The NTC has set out a clear timetable for the transition period, including the drafting of a new constitution and the holding of free elections, the first in over 42 years. 
All of this work must be led by those who battled so hard for their country, by Libyans themselves, with the international community, led by the United Nations, providing the support that the new Libyan Government requires.
Australia is proud to have been a strong and active supporter of the Libyan people's struggle for freedom. 
We were among the first countries to support a no-fly zone in Libya and are the third-largest donor of humanitarian assistance. 
And we will continue to stand by Libya during this next chapter of its transition to a new future.  



On an autumn day in Cape Town 64 years ago, a remarkable address was given.
It was the speech of a young woman who knew a life of duty stretched before her.
A life she accepted with courage and with grace.
In that address, Princess Elizabeth pledged that her “whole life whether it be long or short” would be devoted to the service of the British people and the Commonwealth.
Your Majesty, You have kept that pledge with unbroken constancy of purpose.
And the life upon which you were venturing has turned out to be long, eventful and greatly productive.
So it is that we greet you on the sixteenth time you have honoured us with a visit to our shores.
Many heads of state and government are welcomed within these walls.
But in this home of Australian democracy, you are a vital constitutional part, not a guest.
Just as in this nation, you can only ever be welcomed as a beloved and respected friend.
Your Majesty is the longest-lived sovereign in British history.
And surely history's most travelled head of state as well.
You are also the first and only reigning monarch to venture upon these shores.
Not merely to visit  -  but to share and understand the life of this nation.
You have witnessed our evolution from a small agricultural economy to an open, modern trading nation at home in this region and the world.
A vibrant multicultural democracy that has welcomed people from every corner of the globe.
A nation that honours its First Peoples and speaks the truth about its past.
A nation that more fully embraces the rights and aspirations of all its people, women and men alike.
And it is perhaps a sign of our progress that Your Majesty was welcomed at Canberra Airport by a female Governor-General, a female Prime Minister and a female Chief Minister.
These have been remarkable decades indeed.
My eminent predecessor once spoke of a lady passing by.
Far from passing by, you have endured.
You have endured with dignity and abiding strength of spirit.
As heir and monarch, you have walked fully two-thirds of Australia's national journey with us.
Understanding with clarity and sympathy our growing maturity as a nation and as a people.
Visiting every corner of this Commonwealth.
And sharing great national moments like the opening of the Opera House, the Bicentenary and this very Parliament building.
Now you stand at the gate of a truly extraordinary year;
An anniversary experienced by only one other monarch in our long history: because in 14 weeks time, the people of Britain and the Commonwealth will mark your diamond jubilee.
We will celebrate that jubilee with sincere gratitude and joy.
We will honour a wise and gracious sovereign who has spent her life in the cause of duty.
And we will honour the consort who has stood so constantly
at your side, himself a true friend of this country in peace and war; an outstanding supporter of science, innovation, and the education and support of our young people; and man whose robust humour and commonsense have always resonated with the Australian character.
Your Majesty, we do not know where Australia's path of nationhood may lead in the times to come.
We are, as you once so rightly said, “a country on the move and will go on being so”.
But we know this for a certainty: your journey of service will continue all the length of your days.
Keeping faith with the pledge made in Cape Town so many years ago.
And keeping faith with us, the people you have so long served.
And who give you, in return, our lasting affection and our very deep respect. 



PM: Good morning, everyone. I'm joined by Minister Peter Garrett and we're here at the opening of the Commonwealth Youth Forum.
I want to say a few words about CHOGM and then I want to make an announcement about mental health services in Australia for young people.
Firstly, the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. I arrived in Perth yesterday and I will, for this week, be governing Australia from WA.
The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting is a huge event, for Perth, for Western Australia and for Australia. It will bring to Perth around 3,000 delegates from around the world. Those delegates will attend forums, including this Youth Forum, the Business Forum and Civil Society forums.
The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting comes with outreach events to the community of Western Australia, including arts events, sports events and cultural events.
Having walked around the city last night, there is a buzz of anticipation in the air. Later this week, the leaders will meet at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. The purpose of this meeting is to focus on the future of the Commonwealth. It has stood for a long period of time for the Commonwealth values, for democracy, for the rule of law, for human rights.
But this meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government will strive to ensure that the Commonwealth (inaudible) remains relevant for the future and that we find new ways of pursuing those values of the Commonwealth into the future.
This is a great opportunity not only to speak about renewal of the Commonwealth, but a great opportunity to showcase Western Australia. In particular, with the Business Forum we will be able to bring together business leaders from around Australia, and particularly Western Australian business leaders, with business leaders from around the world. It is anticipated around 1400 business leaders will come together.
It is very appropriate that as we look to a rise of development in Africa, particularly focused on mining, that there is collaboration between business leaders of this great mining state with business leaders from Africa.
I do want to say a few things about the Youth Forum that the Minister and I have just had the opportunity to go to and to participate in the opening ceremony.
This is a very special part of the Commonwealth's agenda. Right across Commonwealth countries, around half of the people who live in Commonwealth nations are under 25 in vibrant growing societies. So the outlook of youth will be the shaper and driver of change in those nations for the future. That's why we thought it was so important to start the week with this Youth Forum, to bring Commonwealth young people together to discuss issues of concern to them and to enable me to present that feedback directly to Commonwealth leaders when they meet later this week.
One of the issues I anticipate will be discussed by the young leaders from across the Commonwealth are questions of mental health. We know that mental health issues blight the lives of too many young people here in our own country and around the world. The research tells us that for those who will develop a profound mental illness, it is most likely to have its onset between the ages of 12 and 25.
In Australia, we have responded to this by embracing the work of Professor Pat McGorry, a former Australian of the Year, who's been an Australian leader and a world leader in the creation of mental health services for young people. And I think it's important to note that it's not just Australia that has adopted Professor McGorry's models of care. They have been adopted in other countries overseas because of their impact on mental health issues for young people.
In the budget in May, the Government announced that it would devote $2.2 billion to a mental health package. A big part of that was a focus on mental health for young Australians and, in particular, the creation to bring to a total of 90 the numbers of headspace services that there are for young Australians.
These are primary care mental health facilities where young Australians experiencing difficulties can come and can interact with health professionals and get the support that they need. They are an outreach model particularly focused on the needs of young Australians. 
Already we have announced where 40 of those services will go. Today, as a government, we announced the next 15 locations, the next 15 communities around the country that will see aheadspace service developed in their community.
Here in Western Australia, that will mean two headspace services, one in the City of Swan in Perth's northeast and one in Bunbury and the locations of the services around the nation are available today.
In addition, I am able to announce today that eheadspace, a service that brings a telephone helpline and a website to bring information to young people in need, will commence operation later today. The telephone service is particularly dedicated to helping people during the hours of the night when people may be feeling the most distressed.
So the telephone service will start at 10:00pm tonight eastern states time and the telephone service will be in operation from then on to help young Australians and the website will be there as a continuing presence to help people access reliable trusted information and get advice about where the services they need can be accessed.
I'm very pleased today to be joined by Liz who is the acting CEO of headspace. I thank her for being here with us.
I also particularly thank Caitlyn and Helen, two young women from Western Australia who have personally used headspace services, who have had the need to rely on the work and support of others as they confront mental health issues in their own lives and who can speak powerfully about what it's like as a young person to feel that need, but also what it's like as a young person to find the support that makes a difference.
So I do very much thank them for having the bravery to come along today and to say hello to our friends from the media. I know that's not a - it's a normal experience for us, but it's not a normal experience for others, so I do thank you very much for that.
So with those words, I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on a CHOGM issue-
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: And also partly CHOGM and partly you mentioned, mining, Mike Rann said last week that he's thinking about selling uranium to India and I'm wondering whether the Government's position on that has changed and whether you or your officers are likely to talk about that to the Indians in the next week.
PM: The Government's position was outlined as recently as last week by the relevant minister, Minister Ferguson, that is that we do not have a policy that is particular about India, but we do have a policy about the nuclear proliferation treaty and that continues to be the view of the Government.
In bilateral dialogues that I've had in the past with representatives of the Indian Government, the issue has tended to be raised and it may be raised with me this week. But, of course, a breadth of issues are raised as well including circumstances relating to Indian students studying in our nation which was the subject of a great deal of public attention here and in India, as well as the important strategic ties between our two countries, both politically, economically and, increasingly, cooperation between our defence forces.
JOURNALIST: So is there no way around the non proliferation treaty? Unless they sign it, it's not on?
PM: Look, the position of the Government remains as I've just outlined it and it was outlined by Martin Ferguson.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: I'll go to Andrew.
JOURNALIST: On Manmohan Singh I've got another question as well. On Manmohan Singh, do you have a reason from him, an official reason as to why he can't come and has it got to do with the education problems that we had with some of the (inaudible).
PM: No, certainly no. It was simply a scheduling issue for him. He will of course be at the G20, which follows time-wise quite hard on the heels of CHOGM. So absolutely no is the answer to your question. It was simply a logistics issue for him.
JOURNALIST: And secondly, David Cameron is going to be using this occasion, we think, to raise that issue of male primogeniture I think it's called whereby males can jump the queue when it comes to the monarchy. What is the perspective that you will bring to this debate?  Because I think that he needs the agreement of 16 countries to agree to change this.
PM: Well you would expect me, as the first female Prime Minister of our nation, to say I believe women are equal to men in all regards and, consequently, to say that I do support a change to the act of succession which would enable the person who succeeds to the throne to be the oldest child, irrespective of gender.
In Australia, that requires me as Prime Minister to consult with premiers because, of course the Queen, the Monarch is also the head for our states as well as for the Commonwealth, so their views are important and I have already written to them canvassing their views.
Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect to have talks with the Malaysian Prime Minister about the Malaysian solution and the future, your future course in trying to revive that? And do you think that this is going to be a major election issue, the whole boat people issue, and how would you proceed, what would you be arguing at the election?
PM: I have kept Prime Minister Najib informed of circumstances in the Australian Parliament so he is aware of the circumstances we're confronted as a Government. I will have the opportunity to speak to him as he attends the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.
For our policy now and into the future, our policy is that we believe we should be able to implement the arrangement with Malaysia. It is the most effective deterrent available to this country, and that's important because we don't want to see people risking their lives on leaky boats with all of the potentials for disaster that that entails.
So that is the policy of the Government now, it will be the policy of the Government in the future.
In the meantime, because of the very destructive conduct of the Leader of the Opposition and because he has destroyed the ability of this country now to process asylum seekers offshore, we will get on with the job of making sure that we have appropriate border protection and mandatory detention and associated management.
JOURNALIST: But you would be seeking a mandate for that policy?
PM: It is the policy of the Government, it will be the policy of the Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just very quickly, firstly, how important is security going to be at CHOGM this year and, also, are you concerned about the drop in support for the Independents, especially Rob Oakeshott?
PM: Well there are, you know, a number of very important themes in this meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government; first and foremost, renewal of the Commonwealth itself, second, of development. This is a body that brings together developing and developed nations. It brings together nations from other smaller places like Tuvalu right through to giants like India with more than a billion people. So development will be a very big part of the agenda and within development food security will be a big element of the discussions. You would expect after the events the world has lived through and continues to live through, that food security will be an important part of these talks.
Then, this meeting of CHOGM is at a very important time, enabling leaders to come together and project a Commonwealth voice into the forthcoming G20 meeting, to have some discussions of climate change as the world prepares for the next meeting in Durbin and also to have some discussions as the world prepares for the Rio+20 meeting next year.
The theme of the Commonwealth is about building resilience and, of course, building resilience does come within each of these agendas, but particularly the development agenda.  And a special theme of this CHOGM, too, is empowering women as agents of change and we will see some very special events that bring women, particularly, together to talk about women's leadership and women's rights.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
JOURNALIST: And on the Independents?
PM: Look, I'm sure that there'll be a million words of commentary written about that and I don't intend to add to them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you be hoping for the Commonwealth (inaudible) on the issue of (inaudible).
PM: We might just, for fairness sake, go to you and make that the last question.
JOURNALIST: On the earthquakes, (inaudible) Australian offered assistance and are there any Australians involved in that?
PM: We are still working through with our officials who are obviously working as hard and as fast as they can to ascertain whether or not any Australians are involved in this dreadful earthquake. To the best of my advice currently, we have not been notified of any Australian involvement, but our officials will continue to work very hard to get all of the information we need. As part of that, we will assess what we can do to assist.
This is a very big earthquake with a lot of damage associated with it and so we're very focused on getting all of the best possible advice about the circumstances of Australians and what we can do to best assist in the days to come.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: Alright, one for WA. You don't count, Mr Probyn?
JOURNALIST: Of course I do. Are you confident that European leaders can sort out their financial difficulties? Because in The Australian newspaper this morning you didn't seem to hold that confidence.
PM: Look, my message is that European leaders need to get this fixed. We have seen discussions on the weekend that have led to a commitment to a resumption of discussions in a few day's time.
What all of this adds up to is there is no more time left for muddling through; European leaders need to get this fixed in the interests of their own economies and their own prosperity and in the interests of the global economy.
So the days of just, you know, hoping and muddling through are gone. Decisive action needs to be taken by European leaders.
JOURNALIST: What are the consequences for-
PM: Thanks very much.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the further expansion of the successful headspace program with 15 new sites and two outpost sites to be set up across Australia.
This is part of the Gillard Government's record $2.2 billion Delivering Mental Health Reform Package, with $197.3 million allocated over five years to expand the number of headspace sites to 90. This brings the Government's total investment in headspace services to $359 million.
Speaking at the Opening Ceremony of the Commonwealth Youth Forum in Perth the Prime Minister said the Gillard Government was committed to boosting the availability of mental health services for young people, right across the nation.
Mental health is the single biggest health issue facing young Australians. In any given year around Australia one in four young people will experience a mental health disorder.
Early intervention is crucial to prevent issues from becoming more serious and longer lasting, which is why these additional headspace centres are so important.
The announcement of the 15 locations will take the number of headspace sites around the country to 55. An additional 35 locations will be announced over the next four years.
Once up and running, the 90 sites will help up to 72,000 young Australians each year.
The new sites have been chosen in conjunction with headspace, and in consultation with State and Territory governments on the basis of community need, youth populations, access to existing services and local capacity.  The new sites are listed below.
The Gillard Government has almost doubled funding to existing headspace sites from $450,000 to an average of $842,000 per site per year, to ensure that more young people are able to access services.
Also beginning today, headspace will provide free, confidential and anonymous counselling services over the phone or online to young people between the ages of 12 and 25 years with, or at risk of developing, a mild to moderate mental illness.
This service, run by headspace on behalf of the Gillard Government,will provide online and telephone counselling services, referrals and advice about possible next steps in receiving treatment.
“E-headspace” will be an integral supplement to headspace sites, extending the reach of the model to more young people, particularly kids in regional and remote Australia.
To contact eheadspace visit www.eheadspace.org.au or call 1800 650 890. 
NEW HEADSPACE SITES
NSW:
Sydney - North Sydney and Hornsby;
Sydney - Outer West and Blue Mountains;
Newcastle(Lower Hunter);
Port Macquarie and Tamworth.                     
VIC:
Melbourne- South East (Dandenong);
Melbourne- Outer East (Ringwood/Knox);
Shepparton and Ballarat.
QLD:
Mackay, Ipswich and Sunshine Coast.
WA:
City of Swan Perth - North East; and Bunbury.
SA:
Upper Spencer Gulf.
Outpost Services:
QLD:
Mount Isa
TAS:
North WestTasmania.
The two outpost services will be overseen by existing headspace centres and  headspace will work with local organisations to explore how the outpost can best improve care and support for young people.   



I welcome you all to Australia, to Western Australia, and to the magnificent city of Fremantle.
I acknowledge the young people in the working group who organised this forum.
Your efforts are very much appreciated.
Appreciated and timely.
Because young people are our source of hope and inspiration for the challenges of tomorrow.
The future of our world as well as the future of the Commonwealth will be shaped by you.
Looking around this room today, there is great cause for optimism about that future.
I see that optimism in your faces.
I think of the life journeys that have brought you here from over 40 countries.
You've come from so many backgrounds and circumstances, many involving adversity.
And I know how passionate for change each of you have become in your own lives.
There are delegates here involved in peace building, climate change networks, social enterprises, peer education, health work.
Each of you has a remarkable story to tell.
Like John Loughton from Scotland, who grew up in a community where crime and youth exclusion was high.
He had first hand experience of being bullied, drug abuse taking hold of the family, and growing up in a home where no-one had ever worked.
But instead of giving in, John used his difficult beginnings to create positive change.
He became an anti-poverty campaigner at the age of 10 - yes 10.
And he's here today because he believes in a Commonwealth where your life chances are defined by your ambitions and abilities, not by your background.
Al-Karim Khimji tells another extraordinary story.
He grew up in Canada and received vital skills and motivation from the Duke of Edinburgh's Award.
From there he took a very non-traditional path to work in micro-finance and development funding in Afghanistan and Egypt.
Al-Karim's high-achieving life has shown what young people can achieve when they have the chance to participate and engage.
I am also deeply inspired by a courageous young Indigenous woman from the great State of Western Australia, Madeline Anderson.
Growing up, Madeline saw first hand many of the issues affecting her community.
And she was inspired to develop a program that empowered young people to encourage their family members in breaking the cycle of poverty and disadvantage.
Today Madeline mentors young mothers completing their secondary education.
She also helps women who are affected by domestic violence and inspires them to develop into leaders in their communities.
Friends, these are stories of achievement.
Stories of hope.
And they reflect the boundless energy that exists in every corner of the Commonwealth.
They also reflect the fact that half of the Commonwealth's population is under 25 years of age.
Never have so many young people been alive at one time in the history of the world.
And never have they been more interlinked.
Our world is already being remade by the combination of young people and social media.
Young people are demanding their freedoms.
They are refusing to accept old excuses and old limitations.
And they are determined to make a difference in their own lives and their own communities.
Because our world needs a difference to be made.
We are not succeeding as we should in meeting the great challenges of our time:
Global warming.
Food security.
Financial stability.
Poverty alleviation.
Women's rights.
Progress is too slow on all these things.
And young people have every right to feel a sense of urgency.
So be active.
Let your voice be heard.
And be informed by the values we hold dear as a Commonwealth.
Those defining values of fairness, democracy, equality and opportunity for all.
We call these Commonwealth values.
But in truth, they are human values.
Values that draw from us dreams of a better future; that draw us together in idealism.
At age 50, I am more idealistic than at any point in my life.
Yes, more realistic about the means to get there and the constraints along the way.
But no less idealistic about the brighter future that is within our grasp.
So be idealists.
Speak with passion and commitment.
Because you represent the future, and the success of that future depends on you.
Thank you all for making the journey to Perth.



HOST: Good morning to you Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning and I'm not planning any karaoke.
HOST: You're not? I thought (inaudible) might get together at some stage and let your hair down, so to speak.
PM: It's definitely not on the agenda.
HOST: It's not. Just tell us your role as, is it the Chair-in-Office, is that correct?
PM: That's right, I am the chairing the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. This is a fantastic opportunity to showcase Perth and Western Australia to the world, so I'm here in Perth already. I'll effectively be governing Australia from Perth for this week and the week will involve a series of events, a Youth Forum, a Business Leaders Forum, there'll be plenty of civil society representatives talking about aid and development issues. Of course there's an arts display and sporting events that people can go to, there'll be plenty of life on the streets and then at the end of the week the Leaders Meeting actually starts and I will be chairing that.
HOST: So have you got control techniques, have you been talking to the Speaker in order to work out how to keep control of such a wildly (inaudible)?
PM: Well I've chaired quite a few meeting in my lifetime, so I'll be bringing those skills with me.
HOST: Is there any particular countries you're worried about though, as far as keeping control over?
PM: No, not at all. I think we will see some fairly intense discussions, but people will be very focussed on the future of the Commonwealth and the Commonwealth has a great reputation for bringing together countries from around the world. Every continent is represented, nations large and small, from Tuvalu with 11,000 people, to India with 1.2 billion, developed and developing nations. So it's a good forum to be talking about the values that we share of democracy and the rule of law and human rights.
But also a good forum to be talking about development questions, how we help the world's poorest and also how we project the Commonwealth voice into events like the G20, which will happen very soon.
HOST: It's fair to say though, that not many would have been to every single country that's in this particular gathering and that would be you as well, would that be correct?
PM: Certainly I have not visited many of the countries who will be represented here.
HOST: So I suppose that gives you the opportunity to network with a few of those and might see some opportunities?
PM: I think the networking will happen at every level, of course I'll have a lot of opportunity to talk to the leaders who are assembled, but the Commonwealth Business Forum is also going to be a great opportunity to bring Australian businesses and particularly Western Australian businesses together with business leaders from around the Commonwealth. And here in WA, where you have got so much expertise in mining, it's a great opportunity to be forging links with African nations who are growing, developing and have economies focussed on mining.
HOST: You got a bit of flack last week in regards to the Queen and at the inability to greet the Queen in the way that others wanted you to greet. Have you made a comment in relation to that yet?
PM: Look the only comment I've made is the clear advice to us about protocol was that you do what comes naturally and so I did what I thought was the most natural thing for me.
HOST: And of course others will get the opportunity to meet her this week. How did you find the Queen?
PM: She is in very good spirits, very interested and engaged in everything about Australia, as well as very focussed on this Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. She has been a point of stability in a changing world, I think our nation has looked to her as that point of stability, but so have Commonwealth nations from around the world.
So she was very focussed on what will happen here in Perth and she'll get the opportunity to see Perth at its best, as it welcomes all of these visitors from overseas.
HOST: Do you reckon we're scrubbed up alright? They've been planting trees and gardens have been, with the emblems for the City of Perth and CHOGM and all of that all around the place. Have you noticed anything as you've been driving around?
PM: I certainly did, I went for a walk yesterday and saw all of the set up happenings for the fireworks last night and the big Perth sign and the gardens looking absolutely beautiful, just full of colour. So you will have around 3000 people here, looking at your city, looking at Perth, looking at our nation and I'm sure they are going to leave delighted.
HOST: And you're planting another tree in Kings Park, you don't think we've got enough?
PM: There's always room for another tree. I will later today be planting a tree which will be a living symbol to this meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. It is grown from a tree that the Queen planted in 1953, so a seed has been taken and we are planting a new tree that is drawing a link with that past, as well as being a living symbol of this event for the future.
HOST: Alright, would you like to officially launch CHOGM for our 6PR listeners in Perth, to say I'd like to declare the week open and have a good time?
PM: I'm very happy to say I'd like to declare the week open and to the people of Perth  -  get involved, there are any number of activities for people to feel a connection themselves with the Commonwealth and I'm sure people in all of their day-to-day lives, as they move around the city and do what they normally do, will have the opportunity to interact with people who are visiting for this event. So I'm sure they're going to give them a great Perth welcome.
HOST: Alright, well I'm sure you and everyone else will do our country proud. Just before you go, Prime Minister, the situation in Turkey overnight, awful. Do you know whether any Australians have been caught up in the earthquake?
PM: Look, all of our diplomatic people are doing what they do so well, so we don't have any advice at this stage. If any advice comes through about Australians being involved then of course we'll be doing all the appropriate things to help families through, but I don't have that information now.
HOST: Alright, let's hope the week goes well. Thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you. 



We gather to discuss important matters  -  and the setting could not be more appropriate.
Perth is a beautiful city  -  as you all now know.
But it is more.
Perth is a vibrant multicultural city.
A centre for Australia's burgeoning minerals and resources industry.
A fitting symbol of the future of prosperity in the Commonwealth and the world.
Here among so many people from so many places, even some from beyond the Commonwealth, I am very strongly reminded of the distinctive things which we really share.
We share a distinctive way of doing things internationally.
Consulting and co-operating, in the common interests of our peoples, supporting international understanding and world peace. 
Events in the world and the issues I discuss with leaders of governments, with leaders of business and civil society, regularly remind me:
Not every country in the world shares this way of working.
So it's good to be here with so many Commonwealth partners.
We also share a distinctive set of international concerns.
International peace and order. Liberty for individuals. Deep opposition to racism. Addressing climate change.
An ever-growing commitment to development.
So it's good to be here with so many Commonwealth friends.
The nations and peoples of the Commonwealth  -  nations and peoples of six continents and five oceans  -  are of course enormously diverse. 
Taking in one quarter of the UN's members, one third of the world's population and including some of the smallest countries in the developing world.
Yet these values we share, our distinctive way of doing things and our distinctive set of concerns for the world's people, unite us in a way that is truly wonderful.
Our association of sovereign nations shares a remarkable international friendship.
We've seen that friendship this week. 
CHOGM has drawn together not only heads of government, but artists and athletes, school children and of course business leaders.
All people in different phases of life, with different callings and professions, each engaged in enterprise which can make a positive difference in the world and at home.
You are truly very welcome tonight.
I know you've come to Perth looking forward to the opportunity to work and network to meet and talk as business leaders and friends, to find new ways to strengthen prosperity and spread it to all.
To make a difference.
As Chair of CHOGM, I want Australia to make a difference for the small and medium countries of the world. 
No-one should have a monopoly on global decision-making. 
No country should be left behind by human development and economic growth.
Australia's history and geography combine to give us a unique perspective: a perspective of both the North and the South. 
Ensuring small and medium states have a voice in international decisions is an important priority for CHOGM.
That is true in all the elements of international society.
I want you to know tonight that I am firmly convinced it is true in international trade.
True, that every country should have a say.
True, that every country should share in the benefits.
Australia recognised the value of free trade long ago.
I think it would be fair to say that opening up to the world was one of the best peacetime decisions any Australian government has made.
And I am confident that Australian business would agree.
Opening up to trade has improved the international competitiveness of our industry sectors and firms.
Opening up to trade has helped to drive economic growth and with it, better jobs and better opportunities for our people.
Growth and jobs is the enduring purpose of government and business leadership in the economy.
And our experience here in Australia has taught us a pragmatic conviction in a simple equation:
Trade equals growth which equals jobs.
Something we know is true in Australia ... something we know is true in the wider world.
But to deliver the terms of that equation demands new leadership from all of us in today's world.
Recovery from the global recession of 2008-09 in much of the northern hemisphere has been weak and stuttering.
While economic growth has been much stronger in Asia, continuing softness in the United States and Europe is affecting the global economy as a whole.
All of us here at CHOGM have an interest in achieving a sustainable global economic recovery. 
We all share an interest in jobs and growth.
In turn, we all share an interest in trade.
The global economy needs the shot in the arm, it needs the stimulus that greater openness and increased trade would provide.
New sources of economic growth need to be activated.
And millions of the world's poorest citizens can be liberated from poverty, while creating more jobs and growth worldwide, through trade.
So, simply put: we need to fix world trade.
But of course, as you and I know, realising our simple equation is not simple at all.
The Doha Round of the World Trade Organisation has to be part of the solution.
Yet global trade talks under the Doha Round have been going on for a decade now, with no sign of a breakthrough. 
Worse, there are disturbing early signs that the world is retreating towards closed-door policies. 
A new way for global trade negotiations needs to be found.
If we keep doing what we're doing, we'll keep getting what we're getting.
So if we want to see something different in the news from Doha, we can't just press rewind and replay.
And after a decade of discussion, just waiting for a better climate for negotiations is not an option  -  it certainly isn't leadership.
So if we can't just press rewind and replay  -  well, we can't press pause either.
No, if we want to get a better outcome at Doha, we need to stick a new disc in the machine.
The elements of a new approach have been laid out by Australia.
We do so as a friend  -  as a nation committed to the multilateral trading system and the World Trade Organization  -  and with a Trade Minister who has been tireless in his pursuit of a conclusion for Doha.
But we also do so with conviction that we need a new way.
First, it is time to consider breaking the Doha Round into more manageable parts and bringing them to successful conclusion as negotiations are completed.
We know that some issues are very close to resolution.
It makes sense to conclude and implement these.
For other, more intractable issues, such as market access, we need to consider alternative negotiating approaches.
We should also contemplate negotiating new issues, in parallel with Doha but beyond the existing Doha mandate, to ensure the WTO keeps pace with the demands of the modern economy.
Second, a commitment to refrain from increased protection along the way to the completion of the Round.
In May this year the WTO, OECD and UN Conference on Trade and Development reported a rise in protectionism greater than in any other period since the global financial crisis hit. 
And just last week the European Commission found the overall picture had not improved. 
G20 countries had applied yet more protectionist measures  -  131 in total. 
These signs of a return to closed-door policies should worry all governments, all businesses, who see the benefits of trade liberalisation, and to global economic recovery.
Third, we should make a down-payment for the world's least developed countries  -  this year.
In its founding and origin, Doha was explicitly intended to be a development round.
If Doha is a development round  -  then it must deliver greatly improved market access for the world's least developed countries.
Almost a third of them, Commonwealth nations.
At a meeting in Hong Kong in 2005, as part of the Doha Round, countries indicated a willingness to provide these countries access to their markets for up to 100 per cent of tariff lines.
Most countries have not done this, Australia has.
Since 2003, Australia has voluntarily been giving access to our market for least developed countries entirely free of tariffs and quotas.
At the time, the decision was taken by Australia as part of efforts to move the Doha Round forward.
In effect, we already offer all goods produced in the poorest countries entry to Australia free of tariffs and quotas.
I believe this is a path other developed economies should pursue  -  and it is one they could pursue now.
 And to encourage global action, Australia is prepared to keep leading the way in opening doors for developing nations.
Tonight I pledge that the world's least developed countries will have access to Australia's market free of tariffs and quotas for 100 per cent of the goods they export to our country. 
That is, Australia will continue the strongest possible commitment to market access for the world's poorest countries - irrespective of the settlement of other issues in the Doha Round.
In making this pledge, I am calling on other countries to make similar ambitious commitments ahead of the biennial meeting of Trade Ministers in Geneva in December.
To make their best possible pledges, whether it be for market access or in combinations of duty-free, quota-free access and direct financial assistance for trade facilitation.
These pledges should be unconditional; they shouldn't be contingent upon the settlement of other issues in the Doha negotiations.
Australia is also willing to play a leading part in the global fight against protectionism.
Tonight I therefore also announce that my government will make a commitment at the WTO Ministerial meeting to no increase in protection while the Doha negotiations proceed  -  a commitment to what we'll call a “standstill”.
This is an essential policy prescription if an enduring global economic recovery is to be achieved.
Again, I encourage other countries to do the same.
Economic growth and trade is the surest way out of poverty the surest way to create jobs and spread growth.
We owe it to these countries and their people to do the right thing.
Because they are our partners.
They are our friends.
And CHOGM 2011 brings us together as friends.
Friends who share certain values and ideas and friends who share a vision of the world we want to see.
A world of peace and order among nations and a world of liberty for people.
A world free of the scourge of racism and secure against the threat of climate change.
A world where development and prosperity are shared  -  where trade, jobs and growth leave no country behind.
We can bring that world a little closer through what we achieve here in Perth.
Together.
In partnership.
As a Commonwealth family.
As friends. 



It is a pleasure to be here for the opening of the 2011 Commonwealth Business Forum in Perth.
This Forum is an important member of the Commonwealth family.
And it's great to be able to welcome you as friends to our country.
We meet at a time of challenge and opportunity.
At a time of transformation as the economic and political weight of our world shifts from West to East.
Over the past two decades alone, China and India have almost tripled their share of the global economy.
This transformation is affecting us all, big and small, poor and wealthy.
It matters for Australia and I am determined our nation makes the most of this, the Asian century.
But other parts of the world are growing quickly too.
Africa is home to one billion people and already has an extraordinary story of growth to tell.
One day perhaps we will talk of an African century too.
Ghana's economy, for example, is over 9 times larger than it was 30 years ago and Botswana's is over 16 times larger.
Both countries have enjoyed average growth rates of 8 to 10 per cent, rivalling those of some of their Asian counterparts.
Sub-Saharan Africa as a whole is expected to grow by 5.3 per cent this year and 5.8 per cent next year, well over twice the pace of the developed world.
I heard something of this story in my meeting yesterday with the Commonwealth Business Council.
They project that Commonwealth investment flows are expected to reach $220 billion in 2015, more than double the level of 1997.
Commonwealth trade is expected to triple in value over the same timeframe.
Our friends in the Business Council call it the "Commonwealth factor", the web of connections, friendships and values that drives opportunity among the 54 nations of our fellowship.
It is a story of growth that resonates so greatly here in this dynamic metropolis of Perth.
This city that looks so optimistically to the nations of Asia and Africa to our north and west.
It is a city where introspection and gloom are seldom entertained.
But it must be admitted that the story of growth I just described is tempered by considerable uncertainty and risk.
As a measure of the challenges we face, consider these facts:
The IMF has spoken of a “dangerous new phase” in the global economy.
The Bank of England chief Sir Mervyn King has talked of a decline that could be even worse than the Great Depression if events get out of control.
And the International Labor Organization records a human tragedy of 200 million people without a job around the world.
Uncertain times.
Threatening times.
So we look to the world for action.
We look to the United States to support President Obama's jobs package, while charting a path towards fiscal consolidation in the medium term.
We look to our friends in the big emerging economies, including China, to rebalance their economies towards domestically driven growth and market-driven interest and exchange rates.
But our deepest uncertainty comes from Europe.
All of us as Commonwealth member nations stand to suffer if the correct response is not forthcoming:
Those of us in Commonwealth countries who have worked so hard to maintain prudent financial oversight and balanced growth.
Those of us who have worked so hard, especially in Africa, to boost governance, democracy and the rule of law.
Those of us who rely upon the flow of remittances from our workers abroad to sustain our economies at home.
It's time for Europe to respond.
And yet global financial markets continued to fluctuate as we watch for a convincing plan from the second European leaders' summit on Wednesday.
Yes, we acknowledge the steps Europe has taken and how painful they have been.
But much more needs to be done, and needs to be done fast.
European leaders will need to stabilise the situation by resolving sovereign debt issues and ensure there are adequate safeguards to avoid contagion.
Europe also needs to ensure that its private banks are adequately capitalised to ensure stability and growth.
This is no time for delay.
This is the message I will take to the G20 summit in Cannes in nine days time.
G20 leaders will need to strike the right balance between addressing short-term risks and pledging reforms that promote growth into the future.
Australia has long been a vocal advocate for structural economic reforms on a global scale.
That is why I have written to the French President and 2011 G20 chair, Mr Nicolas Sarkozy, urging decisive action in Cannes.
The G20 Action Plan will need to outline the commitments and measures required to achieve stronger economic growth. 
The G20 also needs a strong development agenda, particularly in areas such as food security, infrastructure and remittances.
The crisis in the Horn of Africa reminds us of the urgency of addressing the challenge of global food security, and Australia supports a comprehensive approach.
We need concrete initiatives for improving productivity, market transparency and crisis management.
I will also be advocating strongly for G20 leaders to commit to reducing the costs of sending remittances.
The needs of the developing world must be central to the G20 agenda, not something peripheral or remote.
So friends, for all of you who do business within the Commonwealth  -  and those of us in government who support you  -  these are critical days.
Challenging times for Europe and the world.
Times in which we must prove ourselves equal to the task.
It's a great opportunity for the G20 to once again play a decisive role in shaping our response to the global economic situation.
And remember one-quarter of the G20's members are also Commonwealth members, so we have a real voice.
Like 2008, we face a moment of choice that requires absolute clarity of thought and action to keep the global economy from slipping backwards into a new crisis and to build the foundations of sustainable growth through partnership and reform.
The road to recovery will not be easy but I remain optimistic.
I believe that world leaders have understood the most fundamental lesson of the Global Financial Crisis:
That in this interconnected world, economic problems do not begin and end at national borders.
So we must not only meet our current challenges.
But ensure the next phase of world growth is very different to the last:
Greater balance and less debt.
More investment in the drivers of human capital like skills and health care.
Rebuilding our cities and our infrastructure.
Freer trade and fewer barriers.
Less attention to creating exotic financial products and more to creating the goods and services that sustain real growth.
Above all, making the transition to a clean energy future that is the only way we will avoid the disastrous consequences of global warming.
Of course, you already know all these things: they are the very topics that form the agenda for this Forum.
Now I know you've all come to Perth with your sleeves rolled up, ready to strike deals and form new business partnerships.
And I would simply say: Go for it.
Seize the moment.
With 1200 participants, 16 heads of government and 150 business leaders here in Perth, you'll never have a better time.
As you network and deal, let me just leave you with the assurance that my fellow leaders and I will be fighting for youat the G20 and beyond.
Fighting to build a world where those of you in business, who work hard, innovate and take risks - have the best possible chance to succeed, create wealth  and foster jobs and opportunity for the people of the Commonwealth.
With these thoughts in mind, I wish you every success in your deliberations.
I look forward to meeting with you at tonight's dinner and the roundtable on Thursday.
And I take great pleasure in declaring the 2011 Commonwealth Business Forum open. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: You're giving the opening address at the Commonwealth Business Forum this morning? What will you be telling them?
PM: In my address to the Commonwealth Business Forum I'll be very much focussing on today's circumstances in the global economy. We are bringing 1,400 business leaders together in this Business Forum at the time that all eyes are on Europe, and we need to see Europe emerge from its discussions and talks with a credible plan for action on sovereign debt problems.
So my address will be very focussed on the need to see action in Europe to address sovereign debt issues and to address banking issues.
HOST: How vulnerable is Australia to the European debt crisis?
PM: The Treasurer and I have consistently said we're not immune. We have a very resilient economy, we've come out of the global financial crisis strong and we're in that part of the world that continues to grow, so for example in this great State of Western Australia with so much mining activity, you're seeing that mining activity because demand from China and other countries in our region continues to be strong.
We do have a resilient economy, but we're not immune from global events and we are putting the pressure on European leaders to stop muddling through and to get their house in order.
HOST: Will Australia be one of the countries to refinance Europe?
PM: Well, first and foremost we need European leaders to emerge with a credible plan to address sovereign debt and to recapitalise their banks. I know that there is discussion in newspapers today about an injection of funds into the International Monetary Fund. You only get to that stage if Europe emerges with a credible plan to address its economic woes.
HOST: Prime Minister, this CHOGM meeting, what does it have to achieve to restore the belief that CHOGM actually matters?
PM: I believe the Commonwealth does matter. It's a unique grouping of nations bound together by history, but bound together, too, by shared values  -  values of democracy, human rights, the rule of law, and over its lifetime the Commonwealth has been very active in the advocacy of those values and addressing issues like apartheid in South Africa.
So those values are enduring, but like any organisation the Commonwealth needs to keep reforming and changing to meet modern demands, and of course reform and change are on the agenda for discussion when leaders meet over the weekend.
HOST: And what do you make of the fact that Melbourne lawyer Rob Stary is seeking to have action taken against the Sri Lankan President and have him face possible war crimes charges? This often cuts to the core of, when we talk about fundamental and shared values, it's a statement everyone makes, but there are some very, very important issues at the heart of this, aren't there?
PM: Yes, there are. On the direct question you raise, no such legal action can be taken on an issue like this without the consent of the Attorney-General, and the Attorney-General hasn't received any request in relation to this matter, so that's on the direct question you raise.
On the broader issue about human rights, Australia and like-minded countries have been urging and will continue to urge Sri Lanka to address the serious allegations that have been made of human rights violations during the end stages of the conflict in Sri Lanka, and we will continue to do that.
HOST: My guest the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard  -  1300 222 720 is the number to call.
Prime Minister, you touched very briefly on mining and the Financial Review is saying today that your mining tax has hit an 11th-hour hurdle. Exactly when will you introduce it to the Parliament?
PM: We are working very cooperatively with representatives of the mining industry. The approach that we've taken is to work with them on every detail of the legislation. We're still engaged in that process so that we can deliver the agreement that I stuck with some of Australia's most major mining companies, so we'll keep productively working through and the mining industry has been engaged in those discussions and details are still being worked through.
HOST: The key issue seems to be the point at which the tax will cut in. That's what all the miners want to know. Can you tell us, are you seeking to redraft it because of concerns that you won't make enough money from it?
PM: We will deliver the agreement that I entered into with the biggest mining companies in the middle of last year. I've deliberately taken the approach here that we wanted to work every step of the way in consultation with the mining industry, and we're continuing to do that in what has been a very, very constructive set of engagements.
HOST: What expectation do you have that maybe Indian delegates at CHOGM might attempt to lobby you to end the ban on uranium exports to India?
PM: That may be an issue raised, but the partnership we have with India is a very broad one so whenever I've met representatives of the Indian Government we've had discussions across a broad range of fronts from economic matters and trade partnerships through to education and the number of international students here, as well as the number of Australian universities that are actively working in India, through of course, to discussions of democratic values and participation in the global forums where we work together, particularly the G20.
HOST: Would the message be that for now at least the ban continues?
PM: Look, the position of the Government is as I outlined it yesterday and was outlined as recently as a week ago by the relevant minister, Minister Burke.
HOST: You're listening to the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard. Our talk back number - 1300 222 720 if you'd like to comment on any of what you've heard so far.
You've just touched on the phrase ‘democratic values', and I wonder what you think about the Occupy movement. It began in Wall Street, it moved to Sydney and Melbourne and now it's come to Perth.
PM: People have a right to protest. Of course, the protest must be peaceful and people need to obey all of the instructions of the police, so that's my general view on people raising any issue in a protest.
More broadly, I understand that working people in this country and in the nations of the world want to make sure that the economy is working to provide dividends to them, and that's my focus as Prime Minister. We want a strong and prosperous economy so we can offer people the benefits of jobs right around the country - not just in one industry or one region, but in a diverse and resilient economy that offers opportunity for all; and that we have an education system, an apprenticeship system, a university system that also gives people those opportunities; and at the same time we're making sure we're providing services families need and individuals need so they're not at risk of being left behind because they face a health care issue or a disability.
HOST: Well, Prime Minister, as the Prime Minister of the host nation, do you have a message to those who will see CHOGM as an opportunity to protest?
PM: Well, my message to anyone who is contemplating protesting about any issue is: we live in a wonderful, peaceful democracy and that gives people the opportunity to have their voice heard including by attending a protest if they choose to do so, but of course we want that democracy, our wonderful democracy, to always be a peaceful one and that applies to protesting as well.
HOST: Four Corners last night declared the Curtin Detention Centre the worst in the country and your Immigration Minister told the program it would be the first to close when detention numbers are reduced. So, when will you close it?
PM: We've worked hard to make sure that we are dealing with detention issues in a way that offers appropriate services, like mental health services, and we have stepped up the mental health services for people who are in detention. We've also moved to community detention models because we were concerned, and I believe many Australians were also concerned, about the circumstances of kids being held in high-security detention. People would remember the images under the Howard Government of kids literally being behind razor wire and we-
HOST: -You also have to accept that people have this very strong perception that there was a possibility that kids would be sent from Christmas Island to Malaysia under the Malaysian solution, so is it a bridge too far for you to be suggesting it was the previous government that sought to incarcerate children or not look after their well being when your own Government is being roundly accused of the same thing?
PM: Well, the only thing I've just said then is a simple statement of fact - children were held in high-security detention under the Howard Government, so nothing changes that fact, that is a fact, and, motivated to see change, we created the community detention model and we have moved families with children into community detention. Now, of course we have announced in the last few weeks that we will also make more use of bridging visas, so after mandatory detention for health and security and identity checks people will be able to live in the community-
HOST: -And that's a very interesting point, of course, and I wonder just how soon will the people on those boats picked up in recent days in Australian waters, once those checks are passed, how soon will they be living in the community?
PM: Checks have to be made, and the length of time for checks depends on individual cases. The Minister for Immigration has been clear - we do have spare capacity in our detention system but we will be looking to make continued use of and more use of community detention and bridging visas.
HOST: Prime Minister, does the defeat of your Migration Act amendment mean that whatever blame is apportioned when the next boat is set to arrive in Australian water, whatever blame between you and Mr Abbott, this is the new reality, that offshore processing is dead?
PM: There's just two simple truths here. Number one: Mr Abbott and the Opposition have destroyed the ability of this country to process asylum seekers offshore. Number two: with that done by Mr Abbott we will continue to appropriately manage Australia's borders and our detention system in a way that protects our borders and also protects our values of compassion.
HOST: Enjoy CHOGM, thanks for talking to us.
PM: Thank you very much.



It is my great honour to be here this afternoon for the opening ceremony of the 2011 Commonwealth People's Forum.
I welcome all of our visitors from across the Commonwealth and especially those who will be participating in the People's Forum over the next three days.
The Commonwealth is one of the world's great associations, with a strong legacy and an optimistic future.
It is first and foremost a free association of nations, working together to promote democracy and the rule of law, in fair and open societies providing opportunity for all.
These values go to the heart of civil society, which is the lifeblood of the Commonwealth.
Because in the final analysis, the Commonwealth is its people.
In fact, I am told that The Queen recently dubbed the Commonwealth “the original world wide web”.
We are a family of two billion people from different races, languages and faiths.
From our diversity we gain strength.
We gain also strength from our pasts, because our journeys to nationhood have not always been easy.
So when we speak of our Commonwealth values, we speak from hard won experience.
And our experience makes us a force for good in the world.
Friends, civil society brings Commonwealth values to life on a daily basis.
You bring creativity and imagination to bear on some of our most difficult social problems.
I know that across the Commonwealth, NGOs number in their millions.
Here in Australia alone we have 600,000 not-for-profit organisations.
Each making a difference.
Each helping people in need.
Each a beacon of resilience and hope. 
The theme you have chosen for this forum is Driving Change for a Dynamic Commonwealth.
I am pleased that this theme links clearly with the reform agenda my fellow leaders and I will discuss here in Perth.
I also acknowledge your Civil Society Statement, an important snapshot of the fundamental concerns and priorities facing the people of the Commonwealth.
I thank you all for your hard work in preparing this Statement, including your wide consultations across the Caribbean, Africa, Asia, Europe and the Pacific.
In your statement you say that the time has come to review and refresh the Commonwealth - and you are right.
So I will be asking my fellow leaders to consider carefully the opportunity for reform presented by the Eminent Persons Group.
Its recommendations align with many contained in your own Civil Society Statement, including how we can improve human rights, good governance, economic development, and respond to climate change.
I believe we can bring about change.
For example, by welcoming EPG recommendations to strengthen the core values on which the Commonwealth rests.
By urging members to implement all major international human rights instruments.
By meeting development challenges like polio, which should have been relegated to the pages of history long ago.
By doing more unlock the tremendous potential of our citizens, including women and youth, who make up so much of the Commonwealth.
Our ambition is nothing less than to change the world.
And to believe that we can be part of that change:
-        in the nations and organisations we represent,
-        in the cities, towns and villages where we live,
-        and through the courage and conviction we show in our daily lives.
Friends, a vision for a better Commonwealth has brought you here.
I know you would not have travelled so far if your ambitions were not so high.
Good luck as you work through your impressive program over the next few days.
You will achieve great things here in Perth.
And I'm sure you will return to your home countries enriched and emboldened, knowing that when people call for change and ask where it will come from, we will be ready.
Because we know the answer: The change will come from us.
It gives me great pleasure to declare the 2011 Commonwealth People's Forum officially open.


 * 	The Honourable Kamla Persad-Bissessar, Prime Minister of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago and outgoing Chair in Office of the Commonwealth, and the Honourable Julia Gillard, Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia and incoming Chair in Office of the Commonwealth, held talks on 25 October 2011 in Perth Australia. The Prime Ministers welcomed the opportunity to exchange views on a range of important international and bilateral issues.
 * 	The Prime Ministers acknowledged the great friendship between Australia and Trinidad and Tobago underpinned by shared membership of the Commonwealth and the UN, newly established links through the Caribbean Community, CARICOM, as well as long-standing ties and mutual respect established through cricket.  The two leaders looked forward to further strengthening of bilateral relations.
 * 	Recognising the strength of Trinidad and Tobago's economy and its success in becoming a major regional financial centre, the two leaders welcomed a vibrant and growing bilateral trade and investment relationship. Trinidad and Tobago is currently Australia's largest trading partner in the Caribbean and has attracted significant investment by BHP Billiton. Prime Minister Gillard welcomed the further momentum in relations generated through the opening of Australia's High Commission in Port of Spain and implementation of the Australia-CARICOM Memorandum of Understanding.
 * 	Prime Minister Persad-Bissessar and Prime Minister Gillard welcomed progress by members of the United Nations towards an Arms Trade Treaty and committed to continue to work together to conclude the treaty in 2012. The two leaders recognised that the absence of agreed international standards on trade in conventional arms is a contributing factor to conflict and crime, undermining the peace and development of many countries.  The two leaders expressed confidence that their governments' joint cooperation on the January 2011 arms control workshop in Trinidad and Tobago had built further support for the treaty in the region. Both leaders confirmed their support for future collaboration during the upcoming March 2012 CARICOM regional workshop in Trinidad and Tobago.
 * 	Prime Minister Gillard recognised the influential and constructive role Trinidad and Tobago played as Chair in Office of the Commonwealth and as the previous host of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. Prime Minister Persad-Bissessar congratulated Prime Minister Gillard and expressed confidence that CHOGM 2011 would be successful in taking forward issues of concern to the Commonwealth. The Prime Ministers agreed that a commitment to recommendations in the Eminent Persons Group report commissioned in Trinidad and Tobago would be an important legacy for both countries.
 * 	As the past and incoming chairs of the Office of the Commonwealth, the Prime Ministers committed to working together to further strengthen the Commonwealth and to deliver major outcomes on issues such as food security, natural resource management, remittances and climate change. The two leaders considered it important that any such outcomes should meet the needs of small states.
 * 	The two leaders recognised that this is the critical decade for action to tackle climate change. Prime Minister Persad-Bissessar commended Australia's Clean Energy Future package as an important demonstration of how a country can play its full and fair part in the global climate effort while maintaining strong economic growth and providing new opportunities for business. Prime Minister Gillard welcomed Trinidad and Tobago's engagement in the work of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute to accelerate deployment of technology to reduce carbon pollution. The two leaders agreed on the importance of access to broad and well-functioning international carbon markets in assisting countries to commit to, and achieve, ambitious mitigation objectives.
 * 	The Prime Ministers emphasised the importance of prioritising the poorest and most vulnerable countries for assistance in adapting to the impacts of climate change. In this regard, they affirmed their commitment to ensuring the voice of small island developing states is heard at the UN climate change conference in Durban. The two leaders called on that meeting to take concrete steps toward the new global climate regime by taking forward the Cancun Agreements.
 *
 * 	The two leaders acknowledged the work of Commonwealth Health Ministers to promote the outcomes of the United Nations High Level Meeting on non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and the leading role played by members of the Caribbean Community in driving global momentum and action to address NCDs.  The Prime Ministers recognized that governments must continue to emphasise strategies aimed at the individual, the family and the community in order to prevent and control rising rates of NCDs.
 *
 * 	Prime Minister Gillard updated Prime Minister Persad-Bissessar on discussions leading up to the Cannes G20 Summit in November 2011 and leaders agreed on the importance of ensuring that Commonwealth countries have their voices heard by G20 leaders.
 *
 * 	Prime Minister Gillard applauded Prime Minister Persad-Bissessar's tireless advocacy of women's empowerment and political participation. The Prime Ministers agreed to work together to encourage all leaders yet to do so to sign the Joint Statement On Advancing Women's Political Participation at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Perth. The Prime Ministers committed to promote women in political leadership as an important issue in both the Pacific and Caribbean regions. A visit to Trinidad and Tobago in 2012 by Australia's Global Ambassador for Women and Girls, Ms Penny Williams, will be a welcome opportunity for further cooperation.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today launched the Australian Government's Mining for Development Initiative to help developing countries use their natural resources to improve their economies in a sustainable manner.
Australia is an expert in developing mineral commodities using environmentally responsible practices. 
This initiative will draw on expertise from across government, industry and academia in Australia to help more than 30 developing countries in Africa, Asia-Pacific and Latin America address mining-related challenges.
We want to make sure resource-rich developing countries use opportunities generated by mining to create much needed education and job opportunities for some of the world's most vulnerable people.
Well-governed mining, gas and petroleum sectors can not only help reduce poverty but also reduce a developing country's dependency on aid.
The centrepiece of the initiative is the International Mining for Development Centre which will be based in the University of Western Australia's Energy and Mineral Institute. It will operate in partnership with the University of Queensland's Sustainable Minerals Institute.
Speaking at the University of Western Australia, the Prime Minister said there was no better place for such a centre.
The first-class expertise on offer at both of these universities will mean this new centre will be a valuable resource for developing countries around the globe.
Through this centre Australia will provide up to $31 million for practical advisory, education and training services to developing countries. 
We expect this to include 1,870 training places in Australia and in developing countries and 24 research fellowships.
The centre is part of a broader mining for development initiative launched during CHOGM which will include: 
·         New funding of up to $29 million for short-course undergraduate and post graduate Australian Mining Awards scholarships.
·         $20 million over four years to see Federal and State Government agencies to work more closely with their counterparts in developing countries to improve public sector capacity in mining regulation and administration.
·         $22 million to support select NGO's already active in social and environmentally sustainable activities in mining.
Further elements of the package will be announced in coming days.



PM: I'm here with the Minister for Defence, Stephen Smith, but I'm actually here with him in his capacity as local Member for the electorate that we are in, and he is doubling up as a media assistant at this stage, so well done to the Minister for Defence.
We're here with the Hofmann family in their family business. I first heard the story of this business at the Future Jobs Forum. This is an Australian manufacturing success story. This is a business involving 8 Hofmann family members across three generations, and they have built a manufacturing business that today employs 600 Australians, that is exporting to around 20 countries overseas, that is working for our mining industry, our defence industries and our clean energy future.
The story of success here is about a family focused on building a business, focused on innovation and the best possible package of service to their clients. What they've been able to do is build a reputation with mining companies for solving problems, for making the equipment that the mining company needs, for ensuring that the equipment works, and if the equipment is having some problems, for fixing those problems and coming up with a better solution. They've taken that know-how around the world, to other nations that are involved in mining, and with that kind of precision and expertise they've been able to make their way, working for Defence and working for our clean energy future.
We've walked today past wind turbines that are being tested, tested on the ground before the cost of putting them at the top of the wind tower is experienced.
So, this is a great story. It's a story of innovation and it's a story of investing in people, because this is a business that drives itself too on training apprentices and retaining its staff. I've walked around today with Stephen Smith and we've met apprentices in training, we've met tradesmen who did their apprenticeship here, we've met people who have worked here for periods as long as 35 years, we've met a man who is working here 9 years past traditional retirement age. This is a business that has invested in its people and its people have shown loyalty to it as a result. 
So, we are here today looking at what can be the future of Australian manufacturing. To ensure that we realise that future we've got to make sure that our manufacturing industries get the possible opportunities out of the resources boom.
As we've been talking about for some time now, we have a patchwork economy with the mining industry leaping ahead with more than $400 billion of investment in the pipeline, more than $80 billion this year, but the mining industry's strength is causing us to have a high Australian dollar and that is putting on pressure on other industries like manufacturing.
To work with manufacturing and sustain it today and make sure we have a strong, diverse manufacturing industry for the future, we want Australian manufacturing businesses to do what this business is doing - to partner with resources companies to get the opportunities that will flow as our resources companies build the projects of the future.
So, today I'm pleased to be here announcing that as part of the Buy Australian at Home and Abroadcampaign that we launched as part of the May budget, $1.2 million will be allocated to the industry capability network so that Australian manufacturing can get the best go at being part of four huge projects which are under development now.
And those four projects are: the Woodside project, the Browse Basin project, the LNG project in Western Australia, INPEX in the Northern Territory, BHP Billiton's proposed Olympic Dam mine in South Australia, and the LNG projects in the Gladstone area and I've had the opportunity to look at the project at Curtis Island myself.
What happens through the industry capability network is specialists are embedded with the procurement teams that work for our resources companies so that they can have an eye to putting the resources companies in touch with the right Australian manufacturing business that can meet their needs. It's really about the right hand of our economy working with the left hand; our manufacturing industry knowing what the opportunities are flowing from the spectacular growth in resources. 
As Prime Minister, I want to make sure in these days of economic transformation, as we see the resources boom unfold, that the economy is working in the interests of working Australians, that we are truly offering opportunity for all. To do that, we have to sustain our manufacturing sector and a big part of its future will be working for our resources sector, getting the best opportunities that can flow from the huge era of investment in resources.
I want to say thank you very much to the Hofmann family, the generations all here, youngest, middle, oldest, in front of our eyes. Thank you very much for having us here and thank you for everything you do to show what the future of Australian manufacturing can look like.
And we're very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, should companies and unions that are concerned about the future of manufacturing and some, not all, wanting protection measures, come and have a look at this place and is this the example of what you say when you want people to concentrate on innovation?
PM: This is a great example and whilst they would have to be in touch with the Hofmann family and get all of the appropriate permissions, other sections of manufacturing would do well to look at the track record of this place, how it's stayed in the forefront of research and development, how it's met its customers' needs and how it's invested in skills and training every step of the way.
These are the key ingredients that has made this business a success and this business is now drawing from the wealth of the resources industry, and that's what I want to see across Australian manufacturing as our resources giants demand manufactured products that Australian manufacturing is there, able to meet their needs.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) about Anna Bligh coming over here to poach WA workers to take them over to Queensland.
PM: We do have skills shortages in some important parts of our nation, and we need to make sure that we are training Australians. That's why we allocated $3 billion in the budget to build on our already record investments in skills and training. I've said before, and I'm happy to say it again, in this era of the patchwork economy, it is not acceptable to me as Prime Minister that I can meet with mining CEOs who tell me we don't have enough skilled labour and I can talk to my Labor members in States like this one and they can point to an unemployed young person who hasn't got a chance of an apprenticeship. We can do better than that, and our $3 billion investment in skills is part of doing better than that, so we are giving people opportunities to participate in the wealth flowing from the mining boom.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) your reaction to Tony Abbott's comments on pokies, and specifically is that going to make it harder for you to get it through Parliament?
PM: Well, heavens above, Tony Abbott saying no to something, who'd have thought? Look, I'm unsurprised. You know, any proposition that's ever put in the public policy debate Tony Abbott says no.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: -Yes, Phil.
JOURNALIST: When you meet the Sri Lankan President today, will you be directly raising human rights concerns with him and do you have any information about the death of a Tamil in immigration detention overnight?
PM: Thank you for those questions.
I will be meeting the President of Sri Lanka later today. Clearly the courteous thing for me to do is to have the discussion with him first, rather than publicly canvass matters which may be raised in that discussion before I have it, but I have been clear about Australia's position in relation to allegations of human rights abuses in Sri Lanka. We believe that this is a serious question. The nation of Sri Lanka is going through a process known as the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission process. That process needs to pay regard to the work already done by the UN on human rights issues in Sri Lanka in the final stages of the conflict there.
On the question on the death of a man in Villawood, I have been advised of that death. The circumstances are being investigated so I'm not in a position to give further details.
JOURNALIST: You said that, Prime Minister, that the next Commonwealth (inaudible) go ahead in Sri Lanka, but some countries are threatening to boycott. Do you think that that's going to be a real problem, that there will be a number of countries, and what would Australia's attitude be?
PM: My understanding is that there is no proposal to revisit the hosting of the next Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.
JOURNALIST: Do you think there are any problems hosting it there though?
PM: Well, look, my understanding is there is no intention to revisit the question of hosting of the next CHOGM meeting.
On the question of human rights abuses and allegations of those abuses in Sri Lanka, the Government's position is, as I've just outlined, that we have consistently raised our concerns about human rights questions in the end stage of the conflict. These need to be addressed by Sri Lanka through its Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: -Yes, Phil.
JOURNALIST: Yesterday you broadly recommended the adoption of the EPG recommendations. Do you specifically endorse the appointment of a Commissioner for Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law?
PM: Our focus at this meeting is on strengthening the Commonwealth and on reform. We know that the Commonwealth's values have spoken loud around our world for a long period of time. Like every organisation, the Commonwealth needs to keep improving and changing and reforming to meet the needs of the modern age. Indeed, the Secretary General has talked about some of these questions like the creation of the website, the online connection process that there now is for Commonwealth countries and for organisations within Commonwealth countries.
So, in this meeting of CHOGM I believe the Commonwealth does need to address strengthening for the future. Leaders will have the opportunity to be informed of all of the findings of the Eminent Persons group and have a robust discussion informed by that work.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: These discussions will be held in the Leaders meeting. We have said that we believe that there is a need for reform. On the specific proposals of the Eminent Persons group, and they are many in number, they will be the subject of discussions in the room, in the Leaders meeting. It's not my intention to canvass what will be said in that room prior to the meeting being held.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on a lighter note, how is Perth looking ahead of CHOGM?
PM: I think Perth continues to look wonderful ahead of CHOGM. I have been particularly impressed by the flowers everywhere in the city. The city is certainly putting its best face forward. We are waiting for some sunshine and we have been promised some sunshine later in the week by the weather bureau, so what we want now is some clear, beautiful Perth skies as well, so sunshine is coming down on a city that's certainly looks very fresh-faced and welcoming for all of our international guests.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask a quick question to Stephen Smith if I could?
PM: Sure.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any update on the circumstances surrounding the soldier, sailor's death rather, in India?
MINISTER SMITH: There's no update. ADFIS officers are in India. They're conducting their investigation and given the circumstances it would be inappropriate to comment in advance of that.
The only other point I'd made is that I've seen suggestions in today's media that Indian authorities, in particular Indian police authorities, were not advised of the death on board the ship. Of course a death occurring onboard the ship means it's Australian jurisdiction and a matter for us, but my very strong advice is that all of the usual diplomatic procedures were followed carefully to ensure that Indian authorities both at state and national level were advised of the death in an appropriate time.
JOURNALIST: And how long will the investigation take do you think?
MINSITER SMITH: I'm not proposing to put on a timetable on it. It's a matter entirely for the investigators.
The family released a statement yesterday. They had asked for the details not to be disclosed until they were in position to do it themselves. They've also indicated they'd like their privacy respected in an ongoing way.
We've of course expressed our condolences to them as well as our condolences to his mates on board the ship and generally, but it's inappropriate to either flag any possible outcome or to put a timetable on it. It's important these investigations are done carefully and methodically.
PM: Thank you very much, and I think Phil Coorey is now a little bit anxious that you're not going to give his - 
JOURNALIST: -No, that's yours. That's the PMO one.
PM: Oh OK, alright.
MINISTER SMITH: I thought I was acting for you!
JOURNALIST: No, by proxy.
PM: Right.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask a question about Hofmann Engineering and the carbon price regime? This place uses an enormous amount of gas, it uses an enormous amount of electricity. Is it one of the 500 (inaudible) polluters that would pay for pollution permits, and what protection would there be for the more than 450 people who are employed by this-
PM: -Well, let's be very clear about our carbon pricing package. The price is paid by the biggest polluters. For our manufacturing industry we have set aside, in addition to the more than $9 billion of assistance in the jobs and competitiveness package, more than an extra billion dollars so that manufacturing can seize a clean energy future, and let's remember, as we've walked around here seeing all of the remarkable things that are made here by Hofmann's, amongst them they are testing wind turbines, part of our clean energy future.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Is this one of the 500 biggest polluters? 
PM: Well, as you know the assessment of those paying the price will be finalised as we move to carbon pricing on 1 July next year. It is about who is generating carbon pollution when the carbon price comes into effect.
Thank you. 



Australian manufacturers and suppliers will have a greater opportunity to supply the needs of major resources projects as a result of new initiatives announced by the Prime Minister today.
The Gillard Government will provide over $1.2 million to connect Australian companies with supply opportunities on four of our largest multi-billion dollar projects through the Industry Capability Network (ICN) program.
The four projects ICN providers will now start working on are:
 * 	Woodside's proposed Browse LNG project in Western Australia
 * 	INPEX's proposed $25 billion Ichthys LNG project in the Northern Territory
 * 	BHP Billiton's proposed Olympic Dam mine in South Australia
 * 	LNG projects in the Gladstone area of Queensland with a combined value of $50 billion, that have reached final investment decision.
Speaking at Hofmann Engineering in Perth, the Prime Minister said the Gillard Government's support for the ICN program was an innovative way to help Australian manufacturers win contracts on major resource projects.
There are immense opportunities for Australian industry to benefit from one of the largest resources sector investment booms and we want to make sure Aussie businesses have the best chance at securing these contracts.
In 2010-11, the ICN helped Australian companies secure more than 150 contracts valued at more than $750 million.
Without this assistance these contracts could have gone to overseas companies.
Capital expenditure in the resources sector is predicted to reach a record of over $82 billion this year, up from $47 billion last financial year.
The Australian Government funding to the ICNs is part of the Buy Australian at Home and Abroad package announced in May to link Australian suppliers with major resources and infrastructure projects.
Today's announcement complements steps to strengthen Australian Industry Participation Plans announced recently. These measures include:
 * 	Extending the requirement of Australian Industry Participation Plans for Federal Government grants of $20 million or more, and for grants of $20 million or more to the states and territories where they do not apply their own industry participation plans.
 * 	Requiring more comprehensive evidence of opportunities being provided to Australian industry for companies participating in the Enhanced Project By-law Scheme.
 * 	Appointing four additional Supplier Advocates to target capability gaps and opportunities in key sectors, including steel.
 * 	The appointment of the Hon Peter Beattie as the Resources Sector Supplier Envoy to maximise Australian participation in the resources sector. Mr Beattie will visit Perth in November to hold industry consultations and facilitate the inaugural Resources Sector Supplier Advisory Forum meeting.
Further information on the new SAMP projects is below. 
Latest Buy Australian at Home and Abroad grant recipients
 * 	Industry Capability Network Western Australia ($382,300)  -  this grant will increase opportunities for Australian industry to access tier 2 opportunities in Woodside's proposed Browse LNG project. As well as linking Australian businesses to work packages, this project will look for opportunities for overseas manufacturers of leading technologies to enter into joint ventures with Australian companies.
 * 	Industry Capability Network South Australia ($326,000)  -  this grant will link Australian companies to Engineering, Procurement, Construction and Management firms that will be involved in the proposed expansion of the Olympic Dam copper and uranium mine in northern South Australia. ICN is prioritising work packages to focus on those with highest impact and value to Australian suppliers. The ICN will also support Australian industry entry into BHP Billiton's global supply chains.
 * 	Northern Territory Industry Capability Network ($298,000)  -  this grant to NTICN is for its work in maximising the number of Australian suppliers tendering in the proposed $25 billion INPEX Ichthys LNG project. To date, NTICN has linked Australian companies to 286 work packages and more than 4000 Australian and New Zealand companies have registered their interest in participating in the project. The grant will allow NTICN to keep working with INPEX until 2013.
 * 	Industry Capability Network Queensland ($198,900)  -  this is the second grant to ICN Qld for its work in helping Australian industry access supply opportunities in LNG projects in the Surat Basin, Bowen Basin and Gladstone areas in Queensland. Three projects in the Gladstone area, with a combined value of $50 billion, have reached Final Investment Decision and are under construction.
For further information please visit www.icn.org.au



HOST: Hello Prime Minister, how are you?
PM: I'm very well, Howard.
HOST: Good. You've been to enough, probably, parties in recent days, have you? Or cocktail functions and whatever else?
PM: I've been at the Commonwealth Business Forum for the concluding session, but I'm very pleased to see that the clouds have parted and there's a bit of sunshine in Perth for the State Reception for the Queen.
HOST: You know there's usually sunshine in Perth?
PM: I know there's usually brilliant sunshine in Perth, and so the past few days have been really unusual for your weather, but it looks like we're moving to a sunnier period now.
HOST: We are, we need the rain, we always need the rain here.
PM: Yes, rain's good too.
HOST: You know I'm a bit of a sceptic and I think you have all these get togethers of all these international leaders and nothing much will happen, nothing much of account will happen, but you might like to tell me otherwise. What is going to be, hopefully, the result of this meeting?
PM: Well, Howard I think you are a bit of a sceptic.
If I can just say already what's been achieved, the Business Forum's been in train for the past few days  -  1,200 business leaders, around half from Australia and the rest from Commonwealth countries, and indeed from some countries beyond the Commonwealth, like China. And having had the opportunity to speak at the opening and the dinner and then attend the concluding session, I can tell you that new links have been formed between businesses that are going to result in profits and deals in the future, and new ways of countries working together has also come out of the Business Forum. For example, we are going to create a Trade and Investment Council with Nigeria, which is a growing powerhouse in Africa.
So, this is very important for our future prosperity, to have these kind of business-to-business links and country-to-country links that facilitate trade and investment, because put most simply that equals jobs for Australians.
HOST: Alright, Andrew Forrest of Fortescue, of course, fame, said we should we should bring China into the Commonwealth. Is that possible?
PM: No, it's not, but it is possible to collaborate between the Commonwealth and China and the Business Forum has been doing precisely that.
Then, of course, we've seen the People's Forum, too, working through important issues about aid and development, important issues for our society and for Commonwealth societies around the world.
We've seen young people providing us with inspiration in the Youth Forum. We've seen all of the focus on Perth from nations around the world, your huge Perth sign and outlooks in Perth featuring on news coverage around the world-
HOST: -So you think there'll be a residual effect on that, there'll be a residual effect, flow-on of that?
PM: Look I think this is fantastic for Perth and fantastic for Western Australia. I mean you've got 1,000 media representatives here, all beaming stories back to their home countries about what Perth is like, what happens here, what the economy is like here - the fact it's a great resources state, a great place to do business and full of friendly people, as well as a beautiful place for tourists who are considering a holiday down under. so I think that is fabulous for Perth and Western Australia.
HOST: You delivered a pretty terse message to the European people the other day about they better get their financial and economical and corporate act in gear, and you'd be pretty happy about the result of what's happened with Greece and all the money that banks are going to forego to try and get them back on the rails again?
PM: Howard, I'm happy to talk about that, but if I can just say, you asked me about the benefits of the Commonwealth, I just wanted to say those benefits are already being realised and that's before we even have the formal opening of the Leaders' Meeting, which will happen tomorrow.
On European leaders, Howard, they met late into the night in Europe. They have come out of that meeting and announced the framework for the plan we believe we need to see. We need a comprehensive plan that delivers a lasting solution to the excessive debts problems we see in Greece, to the need to recapitalise European banks and to make sure that they've got a war chest large enough to stop any fears that sovereign debt issues will start a contagion that spreads across Europe and through its banking system.
HOST: Those financial institutions over there, and even in the UK, need a boot up the backside don't they? They need the government to start to come down heavy on them, because it seemed to me, even (inaudible) the global financial crisis was coming to and end, hopefully it is, that they were still up there looking after their senior executives with amazing pays and salary rises and all that sort. They didn't seem to have learnt any lessons at all.
PM: Well Howard, you've heard me use some very stern words about the situation in Europe, and so has the Treasurer. We need to recognise that the European situation is one where the debts of countries, particularly Greece, is a huge concern and when you've got that kind of debt problem then you obviously worry about what it means for the banking system as well.
So, our response to the steps that European leaders have taken overnight is that we welcome those steps, we think they are important, we think what that means is that they've got a framework there. Now they've got to get on and deliver the concrete plan under that framework.
HOST: Alright, human rights is an issue which has been brought up by a number of people attending here. I had a talk with a lady from Uganda the other day, said she was going to try and meet with you and have your champion the rights of woman farmers, of all people, in Uganda. Did she get to see you?
PM: No, I haven't met her Howard, so sorry I can't say I have. But the Commonwealth does have a focus on democracy, human rights, the rule of law. If you like, they are the Commonwealth values that have bound the Commonwealth together and have been what it stood for for all of these years, and we are looking to revitalise the Commonwealth here in Perth and to make sure that those enduring values are pursued by the Commonwealth in a new way in the future. Obviously our world continues to change and the way that we work as a Commonwealth needs to change with it.
HOST: How are we going to hold countries like Sri Lanka to account when we're going to have the forum there next time round?
PM: I've made it clear that we are concerned about allegations of human rights abuses, particularly in end stages of the conflict in Sri Lanka. There is a process in Sri Lanka underway. It's called the Lessons Learned and Reconciliation Commission-
HOST: -Sounds good.
PM: Well, look, Howard I know you can be a sceptic about these things, but there have been other nations that have used reconciliation processes to move beyond huge and traumatic experiences in their past and I'd point, for example, to the work that was done in South Africa after the end of apartheid.
Now Sri Lanka has its Lessons Learned and Reconciliation Commission. The message we have sent loud and clear is that this needs to be a process that deals with the findings and work of the United Nations Secretary General Advisory Panel that has had a look at the question of human rights abuses in Sri Lanka in the end stages of the conflict there.
HOST: You're still trying to resolve your Malaysian people swap deal and since Chris Bowen won't ever talk to me these days -  I wonder why that is, by the way. Do you know?
PM: I can't help you with that Howard, no I don't know.
HOST: You're his boss, so you tell me. Are you going to stitch up a deal with Malaysia? Why won't they sign this United Nations human rights contract, or whatever it is? That would remove all opposition, wouldn't it? If they'd sign that the courts would have to approve it?
PM: Howard, we have an arrangement with Malaysia-
HOST: -They're not a United Nations-
PM:-Well no, if you'd let me finish Howard.
We have an arrangement with Malaysia. It is an arrangement that if we are able to implement the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees will involve themselves in the implementation of it. So, in terms of the views of the United Nations, the part of the United Nations that deals with refugee questions if prepared to work with us and Malaysia on the implementation of the arrangement that we have struck.
The fly in the ointment, if you like, the stumbling block, is that Tony Abbott has thought it was in his political interest to stop all of this happening.
HOST: But most people agree with him.
PM: Well Howard, this is a question of getting the best possible deterrence to stop people getting in boats and risking their lives-
HOST: -No-one wants that to happen, Prime Minister, but if you-
PM: -No-one does Howard, and if you listen to the people most expert in this area of policy and I'm talking about senior public servants in the federal public service - who were relied upon by the Howard Government at the most senior levels to give them advice, and who are being relied upon by my Government now - those experts in the public service, non-political, they've worked for all governments and been relied on by Prime Ministers in the past, like Prime Minister Howard, those experts say the best possible deterrence message we could send is through implementing this arrangement with Malaysia.
HOST: Well, when he was in office, John Howard had people going to Nauru and Papua New Guinea, so those same people must have been advising that was a good idea, because-
PM: -They were, yes, clearly they were advising John Howard on that course of action and they couldn't be clearer in their advice now, Howard-
HOST: -Why don't you choose-
PM: -If you let me finish my sentence I'll explain precisely why.
The same people who have provided advice to governments in the past now say in relation to Nauru, that the people smugglers have worked it out that what happened with Nauru last time was that when people's claims were processed there and then people were resettled, many of them in Australia, the people smugglers have seen that happen and they now recognise that Nauru is a weigh station to Australia, so it no longer has a deterrence effect and that is why those same experts that advised the Howard Government are saying the best way forward now is the arrangement with Malaysia.
HOST: Alright, I've got to leave you there. Time for me to say I appreciate you calling in, enjoy the rest of the stay you're having here in the best city in Australia.
PM: Thank you very much, I am enjoying myself. 



We welcome the important steps taken by European leaders to put in place the key elements of a plan to resolve their sovereign debt and banking crisis, however more needs to be done to quickly finalise and implement this plan in full.
At recent meetings of G20 Finance Ministers, the Australian Government made it very clear that our European colleagues needed to take swift, decisive and credible action to prevent the crisis spreading further in their region and throughout the global economy.
We called for a comprehensive plan to deliver a durable solution to address Greece's excessive levels of sovereign debt, recapitalise European banks and build a war chest large enough to end fears of the sovereign debt contagion spreading to other European countries. 
Today we have seen the broad framework of such a plan, and a strong political consensus among European policymakers to finalise a definitive strategy over the coming period.
Of course, while today marks an important step forward, there is still much work to be done.
We call on European leaders to finalise their plan and take swift action to implement it, so as to restore confidence in global markets and build growth in Europe.
Global markets will swiftly demand the full detail and a clear plan for implementation.
Europe is building its war chest, but the war has not yet been won. 
It still faces a difficult period ahead, which means global volatility is likely to continue for some time.
The situation in Europe will continue to have an impact on our region, our economy and our budget bottom line.
However, Australians should remain confident about our prospects, based on our rock solid fundamentals, our very low debt, low unemployment and our massive investment pipeline.
Our situation could not be more different than that facing Europe.  Australia's public net debt is less than a tenth of that facing major advanced economies, our unemployment rate is around half that of Europe and our banks are well regulated and well capitalised.
The global community must support Europe as it moves forward from here.
That's why we have been advocating through the G20 a plan to ensure the adequacy of IMF resources to support adjustment in Europe and stability in the global economy.
This is the message we will again take to the G20 Leaders' Summit in Cannes next week.  



PM: I've just come from the opening ceremony of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting which I think went fantastically well and we've just had the first session of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, the first executive session.
In that session we heard the President of Rwanda because that is the nation that has just joined the Commonwealth, joined since the last Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.
We had a brief discussion around the theme of this Commonwealth, about building resilience. We also received the reports of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group, firstly a report on its general work where they particularly noted their focus on Fiji and I expect the circumstances in Fiji to be debated and discussed by leaders when the leaders retreat happens over the next two days.
We also received the report of the Foreign Minister meeting from the Australian Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd who has acted as chair of that meeting. We received a Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group report on strengthening the role of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group. This report is about reform of the Commonwealth. It has been discussed too by Foreign Ministers. It contains 35 reform proposals and I'm very pleased to be able to report that all of the reform proposals recommended by the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group have been accepted by leaders.
The purpose of these reform proposals is to enable the Commonwealth to act when a country is veering off course in terms of democratic values and the rule of law, rather than waiting until a country has gone to a grossly unacceptable stage and leaders only having options of suspension or expulsion in front of them.
So already this Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting has dealt with some major reform proposals for the future working of the Commonwealth.
This afternoon we will receive further reports including the report of the eminent persons group and the report from the global sustainability panel. Unfortunately, my time is very brief, but I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott is saying that you should somehow intervene in the Qantas dispute. Will you be doing that and what difference could you make anyway?
PM: I am maintaining regular briefings with the relevant ministers about the Qantas dispute so I'm making sure that I am continuously informed about it. I believe Australians expect the parties to this dispute to get it resolved and get it fixed.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) The expanded role of CMAG (inaudible)?
PM: Leaders are yet to receive the eminent persons group report, that will happen this afternoon but this is an important set of reform proposals emanating from the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group about strengthening their own role and giving them the ability to get involved when a country is veering off course rather than waiting for a country to have gone over the cliff.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister does the CMAG reforms lead (inaudible)?
PM: I think it's very important to just get our sequence right here. The Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group has provided a report about strengthening the Commonwealth for the future. That report and all of its reform proposals and recommendations have been adopted. I think that that is good news because it means that this meeting has already acted to embrace reform and strengthening of the Commonwealth.
We still have the eminent persons report to come. I will be in a position this afternoon when I conduct a press conference with the Commonwealth Secretary General to provide further details of what the reform agenda of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group means.
JOURNALIST: Will you decide on the eminent persons report this afternoon?
PM: No, the eminent persons group will provide its report to leaders this afternoon, it will then be subject of discussion during the leaders retreat.
This is the last question.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) if countries like Australia (inaudible)
PM: Well, Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group is a body of nine ministers drawn - foreign ministers, drawn from across the Commonwealth representing all regions of the Commonwealth and they are seeking - sought from leaders the agreement to strengthen their role to become involved if a country was going off the rails and leaders have given them that new mandate.
Thank you very much. 



PM: Thank you very much, I'm delighted to be able to introduce Prime Minister Cameron, who has an important announcement to make.
Prime Minister.
CAMERON: Well, thank you very much and I'm grateful to Prime Minister Gillard for hosting the meeting that we've just had today. This has been, I believe, something of an historic moment. This has been the first time that the Queen's 16 realms have acted together as one single group. From the Pacific to the North Atlantic we are diverse countries, united not just by our association through the Commonwealth, but by sharing one head of state.
For us in Britain, some of the issues we've been looking at date back to the very beginnings of the English Crown. Others to the Bill of Rights in 1688 and the Act of Settlement in 1701.  All 16 realms here today share this rich constitutional inheritance, but at the same time, the great strength of our constitutional approach is its ability to evolve.
Attitudes have changed fundamentally over the centuries and some outdated rules, like some of the rules on succession, just don't make sense to us anymore: the idea that a younger son should become monarch instead of an elder daughter simply because he's a man, or that a future monarch can marry someone of any faith, except a Catholic. This way of thinking is at odds with the modern countries that we've all become.
People have been talking about changing the rules for some time, but when there are 16 countries sharing the same head of state and each have their own constitutional, legal and political concerns, it's absolutely right that we should all discuss this together. That's why I asked Prime Minister Gillard for the opportunity to chair this meeting today with the heads of government from all 16 nations. I'm very pleased to say that we've reached a unanimous agreement on two changes to the rules of succession.
First, we will end the male primogenitor rule so that in future the order of succession should be determined simply by the order of birth. We've agreed to introduce this for all decedents from the Prince of Wales. Put simply, if the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge were to have a little girl, that girl would one day be our Queen.
Second, we've agreed to scrap the rule which says that no one who marries a Roman Catholic can become monarch. Let me be clear, the monarch must be in communion with the Church of England, because he or she is the head of that church. But it is simply wrong that they should be denied the chance to marry a Catholic if they wish to do so. After all, they're already quite free to marry someone of any other faith. We agreed today that this has to change.
Across the 16 realms we'll now work together through an international group and within each country to bring forward the necessary measures to implement these changes at the same time. For historic reasons, the UK needs to publish its legislation first and we'll make sure that what we bring forward is acceptable to all countries. Of course, Her Majesty will play her normal role in any legislation, her Private Secretary, Sir Christopher Geidt, was present at this meeting and we will now advise Her Majesty of this unanimous agreement.
Finally, let me say a word about Her Majesty the Queen. I know we're all delighted to see Her Majesty with us here in Perth and we're looking forward to the many celebrations that will mark Her Majesty's Diamond Jubilee, 60 years on the throne, next summer. Today, Buckingham Palace has announced the creation of the Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Trust, which will be chaired by Sir John Major. This will honour 60 years of extraordinary public service by Her Majesty The Queen, and it will seek to further Her Majesty's work across the Commonwealth, reflecting her commitment to helping those in need, including by tackling curable disease and promoting education and culture.
I'm delighted that Prime Minister Gillard and I can confirm that both the British and Australian Governments will play their part in supporting this Trust, and for our part, we'll be making a multi-million pound donation. We're encouraging other countries that are here today to make a contribution too. At the same time, we hope individuals and businesses across the Commonwealth may also choose to mark the Jubilee by supporting the Trust in their own way. Together, we will help make this a fitting tribute to a very, very special anniversary. 
Thank you. 
Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you, Prime Minister Cameron. Prime Minister Cameron, can I congratulate you on leading this initiative. Can I offer you that congratulations both as a prime minister and as a woman, and can I say I am absolutely delighted that this moment in history is happening here in Perth. To our modern minds these seem like simple and very rational changes, that there would no longer be a discrimination against women in the way in which the line of succession works, and that we would not continue the religious prohibition against marriage to a Catholic.
These things seem straightforward, but just because they seem straightforward to our modern minds doesn't mean that we should underestimate their historical significance, changing as they will for all time the way in which the Monarchy works and changing its history. So I'm very glad this moment in history has been made in Perth.
Prime Minister, I am in a position where I can inform you that I have consulted with each of our State Premiers and each Australian state gives its in principle agreement to these changes and the Australian nation gives its in principle agreement to these changes, and we look forward to working with you and with your officials on now doing the technical work that needs to be done to ensure that we, along with other realm countries, enact the necessary legislation. In Australia that does need to be legislation at both the Federal and at the level of each state.
Prime Minister, can I also congratulate you on the initiative to set up the Diamond Jubilee Trust, the Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Trust. The Queen has been received here in Australia on this visit with a great deal of affection and I know that Australians will be very excited to celebrate her Diamond Jubilee next year.
It seems very appropriate and fitting to mark a lifetime of dedication and service through a Trust which will honour the things that the Queen has been so passionate about. So as an Australian Government, we will make a contribution and we will be doing everything we can to encourage businesses in Australia to also make donations to this Trust.
Prime Minister Cameron, with the Queen here this week in Perth, I want to just reflect very briefly when she first came to Australia as Monarch. She came in 1954, it was a very extensive tour. She went to every Australian capital city, apart from Darwin, she crisscrossed the country, she went to some 70 country towns on that visit. When she came here to Perth, Perth was in the grips of a polio epidemic.
Now, I mention this historical footnote because you and I tomorrow will be saying some things about our dedication to see the global eradication of polio in the four countries where it still continues to exist, three of them Commonwealth countries.
But once again, thank you very much for your leadership on this change. I'm very enthusiastic about it, you would expect the first Australian woman prime minister to be very enthusiastic about a change which equals equality for women in a new area.
We'll turn now to take some media questions. I understand that Prime Minister Cameron has some questions to take from the British media, which we'll take first. 
CAMERON: Thank you. James Kirkup.
JOURNALIST: James Kirkup from the Daily Telegraph. A couple of questions for David Cameron, one for Julia Gillard.
Mr Cameron, just to take you back from the new world to the old and Europe, your Government has a coalition agreement to examine the balance of power between London and Brussels. I was just wondering, can you just tell the British voters what you mean by that, what you're doing about it, when they might sees the results of that examination? Are you looking at every aspect of the relationship between Britain and the EU, not just the areas you've already talked about; social employment legislation and fisheries, say?
Second question, it's shortly going to be Remembrance Day, when we'll mark the sacrifice of service personnel from across the Commonwealth. At that time, are you comfortable with St Paul's Cathedral in London being closed in the site of what to some people looks like a fairly untidy protest?
A question to you, Julia Gillard, relative to a lot of countries around the world, the Australian's economy doing okay at the moment. Do you have any advice for David Cameron on anything he should be doing at the moment?
CAMERON: Thank you. First of all on the Europe issue, I suggested to Julia she might want to come and chair some of our meetings in the European Union; we seem to get through things in the Commonwealth at a very good pace. We are looking at the balance of powers, that is in our coalition agreement. That work is now underway in Whitehall. I think it's right that it looks at the balance of powers, it looks at the different powers that are exercised at Westminster and Brussels.
The coalition agreement also says that there's no question of powers being passed from Westminster to Brussels, I think that's an important point to make, and I'm happy that that work is underway. I would just make this point, which is that as the 17 member states who are members of the Euro push ahead with the things they quite rightly need to do in terms of having separate and extra meetings, having extra governance, having extra processes, as I've said many times, it's important that we safeguard the integrity of the single market of the 27.
That is our key national interest that Britain, a historic trading nation, has its biggest markets open and continue to have those markets fairly open and fairly governed. So irrespective of this balance of powers work, it's very important we make sure that the single market is protected in the European Union. That's a point I made at the European Council on Sunday and again on Wednesday. I'm sure when we have the next one I'll be making it again. There are other members who are not in the Euro who care very deeply about the single market who agree with this approach.
On the issue of St Paul's; I agree with the thrust of your question. I'm very concerned about the continuation of this protest meaning that St Paul's is not open to the public; it's a key national site, it's a key tourist site. It's very important in the whole history and psyche of our country and I think it's very concerning that it's not open. I hope that it can be resolved and I hope that the authorities, the church, the mayor, the police, the Home Office, everyone can work together to make sure this happens. I do think there's a broader issue here. I'm all in favour of the freedom to demonstrate, but I don't quite see why the freedom to demonstrate has to include the freedom to pitch a tent almost anywhere you want to in London.
I've got a feeling that if you or I decided to pitch a tent in the middle of Oxford Street, we'd be moved on pretty quickly. I do think, of course we need the right to protest, but these tents, whether in Parliament Square or whether in St Paul's, I don't think is the right way forward and I think we do need to look at this whole area and I'm very keen that we do. It's vitally important that important places like St Paul's Cathedral are open to the public, open to tourists. As has been written many times, it was not closed since the war, why is it closed now? So I think the pressure is on to try and deal with this and deal with it rapidly. I think the third question was for Julia.
PM: Thank you very much for that question. We did come out of the global financial crisis with a strong economy; it's something we achieved together as an Australian nation, government playing its part, but employers playing their part, keeping people on. Some of them with very innovative short time working arrangements and trade unions playing their part too, cooperating with the employers to get those sorts of arrangements in place. So we are proud that we came out of the global financial crisis strong. We obviously, in the modern age too, have a benefit to being in this region of the world.
What used to be tyranny of distance, the distance from European markets, now is a benefit of adjacency as we are in the part of the world where we continue to see strong economic growth. That means that there is a hunger for the minerals that we have to sell and we are selling that into China and more broadly into our region. That does mean our dollar's very strong and that puts pressures on other parts of the economy and we're working to manage those pressures so we can have opportunity for all. Whilst we are in the growing region of the world we are not immune from global economic pressures, which is why we have raised our voices.
My voice as Prime Minister, the voice of the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, Wayne Swan, on the need for Europe to address its sovereign debt and banking questions. Of course, we're very determined too, to see the American economy engage in a lift, that's what the world needs to see and we need to see balanced growth. These will be the discussions at the forthcoming G20.
FACILITATOR: Do you want to take one of-
PM: I'll take Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST: Mr Cameron, Phil Coorey from the Sydney Morning Herald. One of the red hot political issues here in Australia is the government's policy to put a price on carbon to fight greenhouse gasses; you're of a sympathetic view as I understand. Could you tell us is what Australia's doing of any support or leverage to your own policy intentions in Britain? Or is it regarded in the Northern Hemisphere as inconsequential?
CAMERON:I think when you visit another country and you're told there's a red hot political issue, I think - to misquote the Monty Python sketch, this is an issue for laying down and avoiding as it were. So look, my views of climate change are well known, it's important that we deal with this global issue. It's important that countries take the steps that they need to themselves, reflecting their own conditions and positions. But those steps do need to be taken on a global basis. Nick.
JOURNALIST: Nick Watt from The Guardian. A question for Prime Minister Gillard and a question for Prime Minister Cameron please. Prime Minister Gillard, you've been involved in discussions about the Royal succession. Can I ask you do you think that the Queen will be the last unelected Head of State in Australia? If that is the case, can I ask you how you personally feel about that given that you were born as a subject of her Majesty in the United Kingdom? 
A question to Prime Minister Cameron, there's a report today saying that executive pay has risen by 49 per cent back in Britain. There's also another report in The FT which says that civil service bonuses have increased by £4 million. Can I ask you how you feel about those, given that obviously, you're central message is belt-tightening? Can I ask you what do you feel about the High Pay Commission, Deborah Hargreaves, talking about the closed shop of remuneration committees, sitting around sorting out their own pay? Do you agree with Vince Cable that the time has come for specific action on this?
PM: Well if I can canvas my personal history I'm the daughter of a man from a Welsh mining village. I'm the daughter of a woman whose maiden name was McKenzie and I've lived in Australia since I was four years old. So I am an Australian. So any of the perspectives that I bring on questions about our constitutional arrangements I bring through the eyes of being an Australian. You don't get an accent like this, from being anything else.
Ultimately, I think the Australian people will work their way through changes to our constitutional arrangements, but there is not a great deal of focus on this in our current, national discourse. We did have a Republican referendum some time back and I think it is fair to say that in contemporary times there is less focus on the issue than there was back then.  The Queen has certainly been received with a great degree of affection on this visit. Literally, thousands of Australians turning out to see her wherever she's gone. So there is a sense of personal connection with the Queen which has been very on display and I'd have to say a sense of excitement about the young Royals as well.
CAMERON: Thank you. This is a concerning report, particularly at a time when household budgets are very tight. When people have difficult circumstances, the increase in food prices and fuel prices. Six million public sector workers on a pay freeze. So it is an issue of concern.  Let me take you to the three parts of your question. First of all on public sector pay. I believe this Government has actually led by example. All ministers coming in to this Government accepted a five per cent pay cut and a freeze for the whole of the Parliament. We are trying as hard as we can to apply the concept that people shouldn't be expecting to be paid more than the Prime Minister. That has actually had quite a downward thrust on a lot of jobs in the public sector and also right through local government, where you can see a number of local councils now cutting the pay of their chief executives. 
So I think, actually, the public sector is giving a lead from the top by example. The second point you raised about the closed shop, about remuneration committees. This has been a problem. There's no doubt about that. One of the things we're doing and it's becoming a bit of a theme today about the empowerment of women, is making sure that there are more women non-executives on boards. I think at the moment there's too much of a closed circle of the people made available to be non-executives and by opening this up, by increasing the number of women on - in our boardrooms, I think that will have a beneficial effect.
In terms of executive pay more generally, I think there are three important principals here. Transparency, accountability, responsibility. Transparency, we need all these figures published. All these figures known, so that you can compare and contrast. So that shareholders know what they are paying for. You need accountability so that is to strengthen the hands of shareholders. So that they feel that they are taking responsibility for remuneration in the boardroom. I think that is important.
But above all there is responsibility. I think boards have got to think, when they are making pay awards, is this the right and responsible thing to do? Of course, you've got to attract the best talent to run the business that you are accountable for as a non-executive director. But is what you are doing responsible? Many organisations do now look at the multiple in terms of the lowest paid in an organisation and the highest paid in an organisation. I think everyone whether they're in public life, whether they're in private enterprise, they've got to be able to justify the decisions they make about pay.
So I welcome the debate about his. I welcome the transparency. I want to see proper accountability. I believe in a responsible society and that is responsibility exercised by everybody including in the boardroom.
PM: So I think we owe the Australian media a question. We'll take David Speers.
JOURNALIST: Thanks Prime Minister. David Speers, from Sky News. I just wanted to return to the climate change issue if I could to you Prime Minister Cameron, simply do you believe there is international momentum towards putting a price on carbon? Prime Minister Gillard, has there been any progress at these talks here in Perth?
CAMERON: Well on the price on carbon, we've put a carbon floor-price in through our budget. We think other countries are looking at this. If you want to get control of global emissions, if you want to deal with this issue then the market is an effective way of doing that.  It's often not enough on its own. There are changes in rules and regulations you also need to make. My belief in Britain's case, and with our economy, that actually there are opportunities in green technology and green jobs that we want to take advantage of. We want to be leaders in this field in the new technologies.
So we've taken the steps that we've taken. We've given some international lead on this, but it's for other countries to make their own decisions in their own way.
PM: I will be holding a press conference with the Commonwealth Secretary General to discuss the events of the day. But as I indicated a little bit earlier today, the meeting has adopted the recommendations of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group on strengthening its role and work in the future to make sure that there are ways of getting involved if a country is starting to experience problems rather than just watching that get to a situation where the only choice that leaders could be confronted with is suspension or expulsion. On the details of that, I'll be canvassing them with the Commonwealth Secretary General at a later event. Thank you very much.
CAMERON: Thank you very much indeed. Thank you Julia.



The President of the United States of America, the Honourable Barack Obama, has accepted the Prime Minister's invitation to visit Darwin as part of his State Visit to Australia next month.
The President will travel to Darwin on 17 November where he will be met by the Prime Minister. The Darwin visit will follow the President's visit to Canberra where he will address Parliament. 
Darwin is Australia's gateway to Asia and this visit is an opportunity to showcase the trade and investment opportunities in Australia's north.
In this 60th anniversary year of the ANZUS alliance, the President's visit to Darwin is also a chance to remember the long and shared history of the two nations' Defence Forces in the Northern Territory and the contribution of the United States to the defence of Australia.
Following the Darwin visit the Prime Minister and President Obama will attend the East Asia Summit in Bali.  



Your Majesty
Your Royal Highness
Her Excellency the Governor General
His Excellency Mr Bryce
Secretary General
Fellow Commonwealth leaders
Premier Barnett
Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues
Delegates from around the Commonwealth
Other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen
I extend a very warm welcome to all leaders and delegates to this great city of Perth.
A city so emblematic of the resilience and optimism of the Australian character.
A city that looks out along the arc running from Asia and the Subcontinent to Africa where so much of the Commonwealth's history has been written.
It is the story of an Empire with a complex past, that chose to reinvent itself as a free association of nations, drawn from all six inhabited continents, and from many backgrounds, faiths and cultures.
The strength and success of our fellowship is no accident.
It comes from a commitment to make Commonwealth values real and present in the life of each member nation.
And to ensure those member nations that fall short understand that their peers want to see change.
Unlike other global bodies united by practical concerns such as commerce or trade, we are also joined by a very different motivation.
We are a "Commonwealth of values".
Shared values of peace, democracy, racial equality, the rule of law and a commitment to social and economic progress.
Shared values freely embraced and consensually expressed.
Values we can put to work in addressing some of the most pressing concerns that face our world like climate change, financial stability and food security.
The Commonwealth is vital to addressing such challenges.
Representing 54 nations and one-third of the world's people, how could it be otherwise?
But we also must be a more agile Commonwealth, equipped to respond when our values are tested and to speak clearly when our voice needs to be heard.
At Port of Spain we re-affirmed the special strengths that come from our unique heritage but we also resolved to make the Commonwealth stronger.
Friends, 2011 is a fitting moment for reflection and renewal because it marks the 80th anniversary of our association.
80 years since our predecessors endorsed the Statute of Westminster in 1931.
That year saw Gandhi imprisoned in the struggle for India's freedom.
Australia marvelled at the batting feats of a young cricketer called Bradman.
And a baby named Desmond Tutu was born in a remote town in the Transvaal.
Recently Archbishop Tutu celebrated his 80th birthday, and it is amazing to think of the changes that have occurred in just one lifetime:
The Cold War has come and gone.
New challenges like Aids and climate change have emerged.
Marvellous new technologies like the Internet have transformed the way we live.
The world has changed, and a wise institution changes too.
So as the Commonwealth journeys towards its centenary, it is time for renewal.
To answer the question posed of our organisation  -  how do we best pursue our timeless values in a world of change?
Let us make CHOGM 2011 memorable for answering this question.
Memorable for being the Meeting that gave the Commonwealth the direction it needed at a time of global uncertainty and risk.
In so doing, we will be faithful to our values, and faithful to the people who have sent us here.
May we prove worthy custodians of the trust they have placed in us.
And ensure our Commonwealth values speak as clearly to future generations as they have to the past.
On behalf of the Australian people, I am deeply honoured to be your Host.
And I wish this for our meeting  -  that we each give our best to achieve the best for all of our nations.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced a new initiative to share Australia's world leading expertise in food production with the people of Africa.
The Government will set up a new Australian International Centre for Food Security to provide valuable agricultural research and advice to African countries in need.
Africa holds 60 per cent of the world's uncultivated farmable land however one in three people still go hungry there every day.
Under-investment in agricultural research and innovation, along with a decline in agricultural productivity, are key factors affecting Africa's ability to bring about food security.
Australia has an important role to play in supporting African countries confronting the challenge of food security.
The new centre will offer greater support to help African countries strengthen their agricultural practices.
Australia has unique agricultural and scientific expertise and world class teaching and research institutions that are well-suited to African agriculture and food security.
This expertise includes dry-land and tropical farming, climate change adaptation, commercialisation of agricultural research and water and soil management.
The new centre will give farmers, government agencies and the private sector access to this expertise and other support from a large network of Australian, African and international research bodies.
The Australian Government will provide more than $36 million to establish the centre which will be led by the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR).
The new centre will be set up in Canberra and an office will be established in Africa to provide further support.
As an important first step, the centre will host an international conference, Food Security in Africa: Bridging Research and Practice next year.
The conference will bring together a range of Australian and African research partners, as well as international experts, to identify opportunities for cooperation.
Australia will also support the ‘Research in Business' program of the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa.
This funding, together with the work of the centre, will help put research products into the hands of farmers to improve their productivity.
This package of assistance builds on Australia's existing $100 million initiative that is working with African and Australian partners, including ACIAR and the CSIRO, to improve crop yields, livestock health and rural livelihoods in Africa.



PM: Good morning everyone. It's a great pleasure to stand here today in support of global efforts to eradicate polio. I'm especially pleased to be standing here with Prime Minister Cameron, President Jonathan, Prime Minister Harper, and Prime Minister Gillani, who have all shown tremendous leadership and personal commitment in this cause of eradicating polio.
Commonwealth countries have a strong history of working together on many important global challenges, and so it's very fitting that we're here this morning in the spirit of partnership and commitment. Partnership not only with each other, as national governments, but also with our civil societies, including the inter- and non-governmental organisations which continue to play a vital role in overcoming polio.
There are many representatives of those organisations here today, and I warmly welcome them for their extraordinary work. Thank you for being with us. One of these organisations is the Global Polio Eradication Initiative. Since the Global Polio Eradication Initiative was launched in 1988, 99 per cent of polio cases have been eradicated worldwide. That is great progress, but while polio remains anywhere in the world, it is a threat to everyone, and so we're here today to demonstrate our commitment to ending the fight against polio - that is, ending polio for all time.
I'm very pleased to announce this morning that the Australian government will make a new funding commitment of $50 million to the Global Polio Eradication Initiative to help end polio. We're very optimistic that contribution will make real results. It will help purchase vaccines, it will help carry out monitoring activities, it will help in containing outbreaks. It will be an investment in saving lives, and although polio affects a smaller number of children today than it used to, we need to keep this action going.
We know that this will yield real results. At the end of the day, vaccinating against polio happens through the very simple action of putting some vaccine, a few drops of vaccine, in the mouth of a child. We can do that in our world and end polio forever.
I'm very pleased to be here with my fellow leaders, and I will call now on President Jonathan to make some remarks. Thank you.
JONATHAN:Thank you, your Excellency, our host, the honourable Prime Minister of Australia, and other Prime Ministers here with me. Ladies and gentlemen, I'm particularly pleased to be here this morning with Commonwealth leaders to talk about polio, how we will get it eradicated in the world.
I'm particularly happy because Nigeria is a country that will still have vestiges of polio, and to be with them this morning, to plan the complete eradication of polio, is a major achievement for us.
I promised, when I met with Bill Gates earlier this year, that Nigeria will make sure we eradicate polio in the next two years. We had very bad cases of polio, but government has worked so hard that out of the 36 states of the federation, polio is now limited to seven states. As of 2010, we've reduced it by about 95 per cent. There are only 11 cases that were recorded, but somehow, last year, we recorded about 38 cases, and we get worried.
I insisted that I must set up a special task force, and am going to integrate it in November, led by my Minister of State for Health. They will work with the governors and traditional religious leaders, and I promise the world that in the next two years, surely, we will eradicate polio.
We are stepping up our funding in polio from $17 million to $30 million in the next two years, and rightly, as $30 million every year in the next two years, to make sure that, with global assistance, we'll be able to eradicate polio. We have no choice, because polio is quite debilitating. It separates the victims from the rest of society, and makes the families very miserable. As a leader, you don't want to see that among your children, especially knowing fully well that it's a disease that you can completely eradicate and prevent.
So today I am happy. Let me thank the Prime Ministers that are here with me for showing interest, and of course all of you that are here. Journalists, members of the civil societies and other organisations that are quite interested in eradication of polio. I will work with you to make sure that we end this debilitating problem that is a problem to developing countries. I thank you.
PM: Thank you, your Excellency. Could I now invite Prime Minister Cameron to make some remarks?
CAMERON: Thank you very much, Prime Minister, and I'm delighted to be here and to welcome that commitment that President Jonathan has just made. Today, for the vast majority of countries, polio has been eliminated, and the harrowing image of children in iron lungs banished to the past. Today, there are eight million people who would otherwise be paralysed and are now walking because of polio vaccination.
Annual infection rates have fallen over the second half of the century from 350,000 to around 1000. We are in sight of the great goal of eradicating polio. There are now just four countries where polio transmission has never been stopped. That's India, Nigeria, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, but in India, they haven't had a case since January of this year.
For all this progress, we haven't quite finished the job, and the truth is that nearly eradicated is just not good enough. Why? Well, what can be more of a moral imperative than stopping children dying from diseases that we have in our power to prevent? When we have the vaccines and the tools to save the lives, there can be no excuse to put this off until tomorrow, because while we are waiting, children are dying. That isn't acceptable.
If that isn't enough of a reason, just consider this. Polio is a highly contagious disease. A single person with polio can infect hundreds before it's even been identified. So if we fail to get rid of polio completely, we run the risk that the disease will spread back to countries where it's been eliminated. That is not just some theoretical risk. For example, Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and Chad were once all free of polio, but have now seen cases re-emerge.
Put simply, as long as one child remains at risk, all children remain at risk, and that isn't a risk we can take. In January, the UK pledged a further £40 million of matched funding, doubling our contribution over this year and next, and bring out total contribution since the inception of Global Polio Eradication Initiative to £540 million. We challenged others to match our extra funding with £5 for every extra pound, and that target has already been more than exceeded in the first year.
Britain is also the first ever G20 country to set out a clear plan to hit the UN 0.7 per cent aid target from 2013. I know in the long term we have to help countries not just by giving them money. No country has ever pulled itself out of poverty through aid alone. But fewer ideas are more powerful than the eradication of human disease. Just as people now live free from the fear of smallpox, so a polio-free world is within our grasp. What is missing is the political will to see it through.
In this week that marked World Polio Day, let us resolve to finish the job, and let us eradicate polio once and for all. Thank you.
PM: Thank you very much. I would now like to invite Prime Minister Gillani to speak.
GILLANI: Madam Prime Minister, Excellencies, Pakistan fully supports the Global Polio Eradication Initiative. We appreciate the commitment of Australia for this timely initiative. We hope that the strategic plan, 2010 to 2012, will help in protecting every child from polio. We are seriously concerned that polio, which was eradicated from Pakistan, has resurfaced in the country during the past six to seven years. This situation is totally unacceptable for the government.
There are certain reasons, that there are a lot of cross border movement, from Afghanistan to Pakistan. We are in the middle of a war, and because of this situation, even the doctors can't reach those areas, in which even the terrain is so difficult.
We have launched a national emergency action plan for polio eradication in the country. The goal of this campaign is to interrupt transmission of polio while it is in Pakistan by the end of 2011. Every three months a three-day campaign is launched to administer polio drops to 33 million children across the country.
The importance that Pakistan attaches to this task is reflected by the fact that the President of Pakistan's daughter, Asifa Bhutto Zardari, is designated as a goodwill ambassador for eradication of polio since she was the first child to receive polio drops from her late mother, Prime Minister Bhutto. We are according high importance to eradication of polio in our country. I have set up a polio monitoring cell in the Prime Minister secretariat. Monitoring cells are also functioning at the provincial and district levels.
We hope to see positive outcomes of our efforts and commitment by December of this year. We are closely coordinating the anti-polio campaign with UNICEF and WHO, who regularly monitor the results. No doubt we have a huge task ahead of us, but we remain determined to eradicate this virus and protect every child in Pakistan from the scourge of polio.
There's another one reason, which I want to explain at this forum. There are people, because of the militancy and because of terrorism, we are fighting a war. At the same time, the people who belong to those areas, they are true Orthodox and so fanatic, they don't let even the doctors to within those areas. We are trying our best, and we are taking the religious scholars on board to help us. Thank you very much.
PM: Thank you very much. If I could now invite Prime Minister Harper to speak, thank you.
HARPER: Merci beaucoup, thank you, Prime Minister Gillard, and thank you for leading this important announcement here today. Fellow heads of government, ladies and gentlemen, the Global Polio Eradication Initiative is a remarkable coalition of volunteer effort, philanthropy, and enlightened government programming. In the scope of its vision and the size of its accomplishment, it must surely be reckoned as one of the most successful examples of international cooperation since the Second World War.
The government of Canada is proud to have supported it for many years. When Rotary International first began the campaign that would lead to the 1988 WHO resolution to eradicate polio, poliomyelitis was still a devastating disease all over the world, crippling those it touched for life. Then, as David Cameron mentioned, more than 350,000 people in 125 countries, mostly children, were infected.
People who cared had the courage to dream big dreams. Nothing less, in fact, than a world without polio, one in which children would grow up able to walk, where none would know the pain of stunted limbs and the poverty that so often went with paralysis. So they got to work, and something remarkable has happened. They found that actually this problem that looked so large and so intractable could be solved. It could be solved, one child, one vaccination, one small dose at just 13 cents a dose, at a time.
Ladies and gentlemen, when doing good is that easy and that inexpensive, doing nothing is really inexcusable. Today the number of countries where polio remains a serious threat is, as has been mentioned, down to just four. One, I should add, is Afghanistan, where Canada has made polio eradication a key priority of Canada's mission there. I'm happy to report that while polio is still categorised as endemic in Afghanistan, 85 per cent of the country is actually polio-free. Now is the time for the final push.
I congratulate the organisers of the global initiative, the many donors whose deepened commitment we welcome, and the hundreds of volunteers who have brought polio so much closer to final extinction. I'm happy to be here today to confirm that the government of Canada will make a further investment in the world's children through an additional grant to support and strengthen global polio surveillance and immunisation systems.
Once again, I want to thank you, Prime Minister Gillard, for the opportunity to be here as we make the final push for polio eradication. Thank you.
PM: Thank you. Thank you very much. I'd like to thank my fellow leaders for their words. I'd like to thank and acknowledge some other very special people in the audience. I'm delighted that Dr Chris Maher, as Acting Head of the initiative, has joined us here today from Geneva to receive this commitment in person. Polio must be a thing of the past, and Chris is working hard on that.
I'd also like to acknowledge [Ramos Feras] who is with us today. He is a polio survivor with a truly inspiring story, and he is working to build community awareness and support for polio eradication around the world, and I want to particularly acknowledge his efforts today. Thank you very much.
I also want to acknowledge the efforts of Rotary in what has been a long-standing global initiative for change, and I'd like to remind everyone in this room that change is possible. When the Queen first visited Perth in 1954, it was in the grips of a polio epidemic. Of course, circumstances have changed in our country.
Amongst the people who were the victims of that polio epidemic were former Labor leader Kim Beazley, now our Ambassador to the United States, and I learned for the first time this morning that Dr Ian Watt, the secretary of my department, also suffered polio as a child.
I say these words because it reminds us that this is an issue which within our lifetime was a problem right around the world, including in our own country of Australia. Now we are within grasping distance of the end of polio worldwide, and that is what we are determined to do. Remarkable change across our lifetimes, and what a great privilege it would be, to be the generation that could say we had ended polio for all time.
I'd now like to direct your attention to the video screens and we will hear a message from Bill Gates, who, through his foundation, has done so much work on vaccinating children, including against polio.
GATES: Good morning. I'm sorry I can't be there in person with you in Australia. I'm really grateful to all the leaders there for their visible leadership on a very important global health goal - polio eradication. I particularly want to thank Australia for its critical role in putting this issue on the agenda during the Commonwealth meeting.
This is a great opportunity to build on the progress that has been made in health and development over the last decade. It's particularly exciting to look at the opportunity we have to save millions of additional lives through immunisation. At the very top of our priority list is the campaign to eradicate polio. It shows how powerful vaccines are. In fact, I'm sure you all know we're 99 per cent of the way there to stopping polio.
But we're at a crossroads, and we need more urgency to finish that last one per cent. We saw recently that cases in China prove again that if we have polio anywhere, there's a risk of polio spreading back and being everywhere, and so despite the challenging economic environment, it's important that we double down and make the commitment to finish this fight. For the countries where polio is a threat, we need a pledge for sustained action.
The Commonwealth is showing great strength today in uniting against this common enemy. I'm sure the action of the Commonwealth countries will encourage others to step forward with all the resources we need and the political commitments we need to finish polio eradication. Our Foundation is proud to join you in making commitments by providing an additional US$40 million to the funds announced today.
We're excited to be working in partnership with you, and we really appreciate your leadership on this critical issue, and the other health issues that will improve the productivity of people worldwide.
PM: Thank you very much. We've got time for a couple of quick questions on this initiative, and then we'll have to go to the leaders' retreat. Yes, you.
JOURNALIST: Tessa Mays, I'm a reporter from London. Given there are so many problems today, surely we need more democracy. Isn't it time that the Head of the Commonwealth position was an elected position, and not based on hereditary rule?
PM: Well, I'm not sure who that's a question to. It might be you.
CAMERON: Well, I think-
PM: I'm not sure about the relationship with polio.
CAMERON: I'm not sure of the links between polio and - I think one of the things that unites the Commonwealth, this extraordinary organisation, a voluntary organisation, that countries agree to come in and join. One of the things I think that unites us, and we saw it very clearly at the dinner last night, is huge admiration and respect for Her Majesty the Queen, and the leadership that she has given to the Commonwealth, and the passion that she has for the Commonwealth.
I think, actually, that it's something that brings us together and unites us, and I think in this, the year that's about to be her 60th year on the throne, we should be thanking her for the leadership she's brought to the Commonwealth on these issues, rather than thinking of changing things.
PM: Thank you. We'll take one question here and one there, and then we'll have to go. Just one here.
JOURNALIST: David Aikenson, media in Canada. Prime Minister Gillard, two questions for you. First, and forgive me for being cynical, but I wondered if the seat on the UN Security Council is worth more to Australia than playing a little hardball this afternoon in the work you have ahead of you with many African countries, developing world countries, and pushing harder to adopt all the recommendations in the Eminent Persons report.
Secondly, I understand some leaders are departing early, Prime Minister Cameron and Prime Minister Harper may not be here for the finish tomorrow. I wonder what you make of that.
PM: The Commonwealth is an organisation that works by consensus; that's been part of its long term strength, so as I chair the leaders' retreat over the next two days, we will be striving for a consensus. We have been working on reform proposals and already yesterday, during the course of discussions, we adopted a major set of reform proposals about strengthening the work of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group.
So my priority as chair is coordinating the discussions we will have today as we address issues like the Eminent Persons Group and work through to the consensus we can achieve on recommendations from the Eminent Persons Group. I would remind people that progress has already been made during the course of the discussions.
On the attendance of leaders, I understand, let me assure you, I understand the pressures on leaders' time. I particularly understand it during this period, where there are a number of international meetings of great significance. Prime Minister Cameron, for example, I think he is amazing Australians by appearing to simultaneously be on their TV screens in Europe and here as our TVs continue to carry the reports of the European meeting and now he's here in Australia.
Look, there are a lot of pressures on people's time, given issues in the global economy, that we're moving to the G20 very quickly after this meeting, so I understand that leaders come and participate to the extent that they can, given the other pressures on them. Yes, you, sir.
JOURNALIST: I'm [Sali Lafur] from Pakistan. Ma'am, one can't help but to appreciate the initiative which you were talking about just now. As Prime Minister Gillani has pointed out, that cross-border movement from Afghanistan and the presence of militants who are opposing, rather resisting this immunisation campaign and vaccination efforts in some parts of northern area in Pakistan.
I wish to know, from you and Prime Minister of Britain and Prime Minister of Canada, since you three are present in the region, that have you chucked out any strategy to stop these two points? First, the cross-border movement from Afghanistan, which is also causing instability in Pakistan, and second, to stop the terrorist and the militant elements from coming in the way of immunisation and vaccination campaign. Thank you, sirs.
PM: Well, I'll answer first and then turn to Prime Ministers Cameron and Harper. Australians are deployed in Afghanistan today, as we stand here talking about polio. We have Australian soldiers deployed there; we have them in considerable numbers. For a nation our size, we have sustained a very considerable deployment to Afghanistan, and we are there because we want to ensure that Afghanistan does not, again, in the future, become a safe haven for the training of terrorists.
We're there particularly training members of the Afghan national army and Afghan police so that they can provide the security for their nation, but we work, in the province where we are predominantly focused, in Uruzgan Province, we work in a combined team which not only combines the efforts of our military, but it brings our development workers there too, because we understand that it's about security, but it's also about development in Afghanistan, including the provision of vital healthcare services like immunisation from polio, and about the provision of education and capacity-building, particularly education for girls.
We have enabled girls to attend school in a way which has not been possible in the past. I have said, as Prime Minister of Australia, to my nation that our deployment in Afghanistan will transition on a conditions basis. People would be aware that President Karzai has spoken about 2014 as the transition time for Afghanistan, but I've said to the people of Australia we will stay engaged in Afghanistan in some form to the end of this decade at least.
That means, of course, that we will have an ongoing partnership with the people of Afghanistan, including on aid and development questions. I think that by building capacity in Afghanistan we can address, over time, some of the issues that you raised. I'll turn to Prime Minister Cameron for some comments.
CAMERON: Obviously in Afghanistan we are supporting not just the British military presence; we're also supporting the governance in Afghanistan, and that includes the infrastructure needed to distribute vaccines.  In Pakistan, we're also now - that's our largest single aid program.
In terms of the specific points you make about cross-border problems and the militancy problem on both sides of the border - we want the closest possible cooperation with Pakistan, and the closest possible cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan, so we squeeze the problem of militancy and support for terror from both sides of the Durand Line.
That is exactly what is required, and Prime Minister Gillani and I have spoken about this many times. The closest possible coordination, the closest possible effort, so we deal with these problems on both sides of the border.
GILLANI: May I explain this position? In fact, there is two questions you have raised. One is the cross-border movement. For the cross-border movement, there is another problem which the world has forgotten about. When the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, there were 3.5 million refugees. Those who are now in Pakistan at the moment, for the last 30 years, and the world, they have forgotten about those refugees.
If the world helps us, those refugees, 3.5 million who had married in Pakistan, who have businesses in Pakistan, who have studied in Pakistan, they should go back to Afghanistan and the relief camps should be inside Pakistan. That would help at least 70 per cent of cross-border movement.
The second is the biometric system through which they cannot go to each other's country without the thumb impression, and that has not been encouraged by the other side. I think that would also be possible. The last is that there is extremely difficult -- there are about more than 2000 kilometres terrain, and that is so difficult you can't defend it. As far as the militants are concerned, who are objecting, that's the job of the Pakistan government, to negotiate with them, to negotiate at least with the local tribes to keep them away from the militants.
Therefore, we are very successfully - we have been able to isolate the militants from the local tribes, and the local tribes are helping us for this polio campaign. Thank you.
PM: Thank you. Prime Minister Harper.
HARPER: Since our government took office, we have been dedicated to what we call a 3D approach to our engagement in Afghanistan, an integrated approach between defence, development, and diplomacy. One of the - as I mentioned, one of the top priorities of that engagement has been polio eradication, notwithstanding, obviously, the difficulty of the security situation.
The fact of the matter is, as Prime Minister Cameron mentioned earlier, if we don't stamp out polio we risk its re-occurrence, not just in Afghanistan, but all through the region and ultimately all over the world. That is the risk we're trying to prevent.
In terms of your question about cross-border movements and cross-border terrorism, obviously we encourage and expect all governments to work together to eradicate not just polio but to eradicate the terrorist influences on both sides of the border.
PM: Thank you very much. Now, we must leave or we are going to be late for future events, but I thank everybody who's attended today, particularly those who have worked for a long period of time on polio eradication. Thank you for everything you do. 



PM: I've just finished the deliberations at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. During the course of the day I've been kept continuously informed about the circumstances with the Qantas dispute.
Clearly during the course of the today this dispute has escalated in a dramatic way. As a result of that dramatic escalation of the dispute, the Government has taken the decision, indeed a rare decision, that the Government has taken the decision to make application to Fair Work Australia to have the industrial action terminated and to have Fair Work Australia deal with this dispute.
This is an application rarely made but I believe it is warranted in the circumstances we face with Qantas. With the rapid escalation of this dispute today, what we are seeing is a circumstance with this industrial dispute that could have implications for our national economy.
Of course we are also seeing a circumstance where Qantas and its employees and trade unions continue to be in dispute, I believe Australians want to see this sorted out. Businesses want to see it sorted out, passengers want to see it sorted it out, I want to see this dispute sorted out. That's why we have approached Fair Work Australia under the Fair Work Act.
The urgent hearing that has been generated by our approaching Fair Work Australia will be conducted in less than an hour's time from now, that will be the first hearing of this matter.
So my message to Qantas, the employees and trade unions is: Australians do want to see this dispute sorted out. Qantas is an iconic Australian brand, it is the employer of thousands of Australians, thousands of people rely on it for their livelihoods and we do need this dispute to be brought to an end.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) earlier as Tony Abbott claims?
PM: Well let's be very clear about the circumstances here. I understand Mr Abbott will do anything to pursue his political case for Workchoices and so he'll twist and turn, he'll misuse any circumstance to argue for Workchoices, I'll leave that to Mr Abbott.
Looking at the Fair Work Act and the tests for having Fair Work Australia deal with the dispute, I do not believe we reached the appropriate point in this dispute for Fair Work Australia to intervene until we saw the escalation of the dispute today.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed with the action by Qantas? Were you given any prior notice? And is this embarrassing for Australia given 17 world leaders are on Qantas flights and at the same time you're trying to promote Australia as a destination?
PM: Well Minister Albanese dealt fully with the question of notification from Qantas in his press conference today so it's not my intention to add to those remarks.
On the question of CHOGM and world leaders returning home at the end of the meeting; I myself briefed heads of government about the Qantas dispute during our meeting today. They took it in good spirits when I briefed them about it, they are working on alternate travel arrangements. Our staff who have made the arrangements for CHOGM are working to assist them to make alternate arrangements.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Anthony Albanese encouraged the conclusion that this was a premeditated piece of action by the Qantas board, is that your conclusion?
PM: Well I've just said that I'm not going to add to the comments that Minister Albanese made in his press conference today about notification from Qantas.
Yes, Mark.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Alan Joyce today said that he was grounding the fleet from today as a precautionary measure because he was concerned about the actions of his staff. As a Labor leader do you think that is an appropriate suggestion for a CEO?
PM: Look, I'm not going to make conclusions about any of that, I'm actually not sure what you're referring to in your question. What I am doing is not looking at this dispute through the eyes of Mr Joyce or indeed one of the trade union leaders, I'm looking at this dispute as Prime Minister and its implications for the national economy. The dispute has escalated in a dramatic fashion today. I am concerned about the implications of that for the national economy so today in consultation with ministers I've taken the decision that we will approach Fair Work Australia to terminate the industrial action here and to bring the parties together to resolve this dispute. Fair Work Australia is the industrial umpire, it has powers under the Fair Work Act to deal with disputes that get to a stage that they do have these kinds of serious implications.
We have a bargaining system that works so parties bargain together and the system requires them to bargain in good faith. There is an ability for Fair Work Australia to deal with disputes that reach a major stage like this one. It is very rare for a government to make an application of this kind but we've chosen to do so in the circumstances of the escalation of this dispute.
JOURNALIST: Who's fault is it that it's escalated to this point?
PM: I'm not going to involve myself in making statements about either sides of the dispute. My message to everyone involved is that Australians want this sorted out.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) can you give Australians some idea then of when planes can be expected back in the skies, so what other steps from here?
PM: Well to be frank Chris that's a pretty silly question.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: It is a very silly question. Yes I take absolute responsibility for the Fair Work Act, I am incredibly proud of it. I'm incredibly proud of it because it introduced fairness into Australian work places and we ended forever the spectre that young Australians and Australians at risk would have an Australian Workplace Agreement shoved into their hands that ripped their penalty rates away or that they could be unfairly dismissed without reason, so I'm very proud of the Fair Work Act.
On the section that you refer to, the section in the Fair Work Act that we've relied on is substantially similar in its terms to sections that have been in earlier versions of workplace relations legislation and they enable the Fair Work Industrial umpire, Fair Work Australia, to deal with a dispute that has got implications for the national economy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) when those planes will be up in the air again?
PM: Well let's just deal with the process here. We've made application to Fair Work Australia. They have called an urgent hearing at 10pm eastern states time, so that is less than half an hour from now.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Alan Joyce or Qantas representatives and ministers of government including yourself. Have they ever asked you to intervene in this dispute and if not do you feel that they've done this to force you to intervene?
PM: I'm not going to get drawn on speculating about the motives of any parties in this dispute. My aim as Prime Minister is to see this dispute resolved, that's why we've taken the decision today for the Government to make application to Fair Work Australia.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well you can talk to Minister Albanese about his discussion with Qantas. Obviously in his press conference today he talked about notification from Qantas today. I have not been asked by Qantas to take the steps that Government has taken today.
JOURNALIST: Can you tell us anything of the alternative arrangements made for leaders departing?
PM: Look, we're looking at the full range of alternate arrangements. Clearly international flights from other airlines are still flying and so in the first instance what is being looked at is rebooking people on alternate airlines. I just want to be clear here, I have advised heads of government in the meeting today, they are looking to make their own arrangements but as you would expect we are standing by with our liaison officers ready to assist if they need that assistance.
JOURNALIST: If the dispute is not resolved do you still plan to go to the G20?
PM: Look my intention is to go to the G20. We have made this application today. Clearly I will monitor circumstances; the first hearing will be in less than half an hour of where we are now.
JOURNALIST: How much has this distracted your activities today and the CHOGM agenda?
PM: I'm well used to doing more than one thing at a time.
JOURNALIST: Unions have to give 72 hours notice when they conduct industrial action. Is it fair that the company pulled a wild card in industrial action of its own without any notice?
PM: Well I think you will find that the company gave notice about its final action and that was timed for Monday but look these are questions you can go through with Fair Work Australia, that's really not my concern. My concern, having heard that this was Qantas' announcement today and assessing what that would mean for the national economy, is that it was appropriate to go to Fair Work Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how embarrassing was it when you had to tell the world leaders that  -  find another way of getting home?
PM: Look, not at all. People took it in very good spirits. People have been aware that there has been industrial disputation within Qantas so I advised them that the disputation had taken a step up today and that we would work with people if they needed assistance to make alternate bookings. So people did take it in very good spirits.
JOURNALIST: Will that be including military planes if you can't get them home?
PM: We're working through the advice to me from the head of the CHOGM taskforce is we are talking about 17 heads of government who have bookings on Qantas. Now clearly there are more people in Perth for CHOGM than heads of government themselves so we will work through-
JOURNALIST: So you could charter a plane-
PM: Well I'm not going and I suggest it wouldn't be proper for anyone to speculate on these matters. We're working through a step at a time. The CHOGM meeting is still in session tomorrow so people in the ordinary course will be attending the session tomorrow in any event. People are predominantly travelling from here back overseas and as you would be aware there are other options and choices for international travel out of Perth.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced new funding to help eradicate polio - a debilitating disease that continues to strike the world's most vulnerable people, especially children.
Australia will provide $50 million over four years to the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) to help purchase vaccines, monitor outbreaks, and respond when and where needed.
The Prime Minister said Australia's support will help take the final steps to achieve worldwide polio eradication.
Ms Gillard was joined in Perth today by United Kingdom Prime Minister David Cameron, Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan, Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper and Pakistan Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani while at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) to make the announcement.
Bill Gates joined the leaders via video to announce a new $40 million USD contribution to the Global Polio Eradication Initiative on behalf of the Gates Foundation and in support of the Commonwealth commitments.
Significant global progress has been made over the past two decades to reduce the number of polio cases by 99 per cent since the GPEI was launched in 1988. 
Polio remains endemic in only four countries, three of which are members of the Commonwealth  -  India, Nigeria, and Pakistan.
The Prime Minister applauded the leadership shown by India, Nigeria, and Pakistan in their ongoing efforts to eradicate polio.
We welcome global progress and encourage Commonwealth members to remain committed to overcome the final hurdles in polio eradication.
The importance of strong partnerships between affected countries, donors and organisations like the Gates Foundation, Rotary International and the Global Poverty Project, in achieving eradication must also be recognised.
The work of the Gates Foundation and Rotary International has been vital, including the personal contribution of many Australians to this cause such as Sir Clem Renouf, who in the 1970s, as Rotary President led the international campaign to vaccinate every child against polio.
The Global Polio Eradication Initiative is a public-private partnership led by national governments in partnership with the World Health Organisation, Rotary International, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the United Nations Children's Fund, with support from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
Australia's contribution to polio eradication is part of our broader commitment to saving the lives of children and women in developing countries and our $1.6 billion commitment to maternal and child health over the five years to 2015. Increasing routine immunisation around the world has helped reduce the number of child deaths from 12.4 million in 1990 to 7.6 million in 2010. 



Fellow Commonwealth leaders.
Commonwealth Secretary General.
President, Vice President and Honorary Secretary of the Commonwealth Games Federation.
Distinguished guests, Aussie athletes, ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted to join the President of the Commonwealth Games Federation, Michael Fennell and all of you here present, to celebrate the unifying power of sport, evident here as I see such an amazing array of sporting talent in this room.
I hope many of you may have caught the sporting events associated with CHOGM held over the past week with thrilling netball and hockey matches showcasing the incredible talent that exists within the Commonwealth.
And our loss in the recent World Cup semi-final reaffirming that the overwhelming objective of Australia's foreign policy is to beat the All Blacks in the rugby!
But friends, for many people around the world the word ‘Commonwealth'is synonymous with the Commonwealth Games.
Little wonder, given these Games have produced some of the great moments in sporting history.
From ‘The Miracle Mile' at the 1954 Vancouver Games, where John Landy and Roger Bannister both beat the four minute mile.
To Dawn Fraser winning four gold medals right here in Perth in 1962.
Precious McKenzie  -  a 4 foot, 9 inch giant  -  winning the weightlifting gold in Christchurch in 1974.
I couldn't possibly comment on the legend that The Queen was late for an official engagement because she was so determined to watch McKenzie take the prize.
And the most recent Games in Delhi, when history was made by Botswana, the Cayman Islands and Samoa when they celebrated their first Commonwealth gold medals.
Our Games are a truly special international event.
Not because of medals won, but because of a shared history and the enduring friendships forged.
Our people and our nations love to compete.
We even take this sporting spirit to our bids to host the Games themselves. 
For Australia's part, we have a proud history of hosting Olympic and Commonwealth Games to a surpassing standard of excellence in which international friendship and the good of sport come first.
We are indeed ready and willing to host an outstanding Commonwealth Games in 2018.
But friends, the 2018 Games are a little way down the track.
In the meantime, we are all looking with excitement to 2014 when athletes from throughout the Commonwealth meet on the field of competition in Glasgow.
New heroes will emerge.
Great friendships will be established.
And old rivalries will be renewed.
This morning we have the opportunity to reflect on and reaffirm the strong belief we share in the importance of not only the Commonwealth Games but more broadly the power of sport to help turn around the lives of individuals and the wellbeing of nations.
Nelson Mandela once said that: “Sport has the power to change the world. It has the power to inspire, it has the power to unite people in a way that little else does”.
Sport can allow nations to overcome traditional barriers through goodwill and commitment which is why Australia is committed to working with our Commonwealth partners so that they can foster and develop their sporting participation, through programs such as:
 * 	the Australian Sports Outreach Program,
 * 	the Pacific Sports Partnerships,
 * 	and the Papua New Guinea-Australia Sport For Development Initiative.
I know that the sports men and women of the Commonwealth share our belief in the enduring power of sport to transform communities.
It is global language that every nation speaks and understands.
A language of effort and commitment.
A language of excellence, inner strength and endurance beyond all odds.
And for us in this unique fellowship of nations, sport is a reminder that the Commonwealth is not just something we are.
It is something we do - something we create.
Through our participation.
Through our goodwill.
Enriching each other.
And making this a ‘common wealth' in fact as well as in name.
Thank you for showing your support here today.



PM: Thank you very much, I don't have much time available as I am due upstairs for the final session of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. I just wanted to make a few statements about the Qantas dispute.
Yesterday the Government stepped in to see this dispute resolved. We made application to Fair Work Australia to have our industrial umpire deal with this dispute. Our industrial umpire commenced to deal with this dispute late last night. Our industrial umpire adjourned proceedings until today and those proceedings are in train as we speak.
The Government in this matter is seeking to bring industrial action to an end and to have the dispute resolved so that we can proceed with certainty with our iconic airline Qantas proceeding properly and with circumstances where employees and Qantas know what the future holds for them.
As I made clear yesterday we took this action when the dispute escalated. We did it because we were concerned about damage to the national economy. So the hearings at Fair Work Australia are in train as we speak as a result of the Government's action.
Can I say again to Qantas and to the trade unions involved in this dispute: I believe Australians want to see this dispute settled, I want to see it settled and wehavetaken the appropriate action before Fair Work Australia to bring the matter before the industrial umpire.
I'll take a few questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does the Government support a suspension or a termination?
PM: The Government is arguing for an end to industrial action before the Commission and for the Fair Work Australia to then be seized with resolving the dispute and the legislation enables after the end of industrial action for there to be conciliation processes and if they do not work for there ultimately to be a determination process to end the substantive matters in dispute. So we are seeking an end to the industrial action.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: If the Commission, if Fair Work Australia rules a suspension this afternoon are you prepared to use, I think, is it section 431 to order a termination, is that-
PM: I'm not going to speculate about matters beyond the proper hearing by Fair Work Australia.
JOURNALIST:  Can you just clarify is that termination that the Government is arguing for in Fair Work Australia?
PM: Yep, we're seeking an end to the industrial action.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) how the leaders that have been stranded by Qantas are going to be able to leave Perth, any arrangements?
PM: We've been working with leaders on this matter. Our CHOGM Taskforce has through our liaison officers been offering assistance, so we're continuing to work with leaders on alternate flight plans. I understand most leaders have found alternate arrangements but we are continuing to work with leaders to ensure that everyone can get where they need to go next.
JOURNALIST: Senator Xenophon's called for an independent judicial inquiry, the powers of the Royal Commission to look at the books of Qantas. He's got support from the major union groups to do that, do you support that?
PM: Look my interest here as Prime Minister is to see this industrial disputation resolved and for us to know that Qantas is functioning and that employees are being properly dealt with within Qantas that's why I took the action that I did yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you angry at Qantas for taking this action in this manner without informing the Government first? 
PM: Well Minister Albanese dealt with the question of notifications in his press conference yesterday.
Thanks very much. 



PM: Thank you very much.  I'm here with the Commonwealth Secretary-General to provide some remarks on the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting today, when the leaders met in a retreat session.  In retreat today, we have had the first and second session of the leaders' retreat.  This morning we had a very good set of discussions on sustainable development, climate change, food security and issues facing small states.  
 On climate change we agreed that the threat of climate change is a threat to all of us, large and small states, developed and developing.  We talked about our approaches to the upcoming UN Climate Change meeting in Durban.  Of course we do have, within the Commonwealth, the President of South Africa and that meeting is in South Africa.  We agreed to advocate for legally binding outcomes on emissions reductions.  We also recognised the importance of markets in maximising global emissions reductions at least possible cost and the need to facilitate international funding for mitigation and adaption.
We also recognised that food security is one of the most difficult and pressing challenges facing the world.  Half the world's one billion hungry are in the Commonwealth and we've all seen incredibly distressing humanitarian situations in the Horn of Africa and that crisis in the Horn of Africa highlights the challenge. 
Leaders noted that population growth and scarce land and water are intensifying pressures on food security.  The challenge is simply huge.  Global production will need to increase by 70 per cent by 2050 to feed an expected global population of 9.3 billion people.
Leaders agreed to the Perth Declaration on food security, setting out principles that should guide us as we grapple with this challenge.  The declaration commits us to the importance of reducing barriers to trade in agriculture, improving agricultural productivity and making it easier for farmers in developing countries to grow food and to get it to markets.  That is, it addressed food security both in the sense of immediate issues of aid, but also in the sense of improving capacity for food security through agricultural research, lifting productivity and through the better functioning of markets.
In our afternoon retreat leaders addressed the Eminent Persons Group report.  Leaders welcomed the report as a timely contribution to leaders' efforts to ensure the Commonwealth continues to be relevant and vital both today and into the future.  Leaders warmly thanked the EPG members for their dedication and hard work. 
I'm very pleased to be able to announce that leaders agreed that there should be a charter of the Commonwealth.  This was a central recommendation of the EPG report.  There will be a process of consultation on the content of the charter as was recommended by the EPG.  The charter will be finalised in 2012 and it will bring together the Commonwealth's values, principles and aspirations in one clear and powerful statement.
Leaders also addressed the EPG recommendation for a commissioner for democracy, human rights and the rule of law.  Australia and a number of delegations indicated that they were supportive of this proposal, but there were a number of delegations concerned by it, and the Commonwealth is an organisation that involves consensus for its decision making that works by consensus.  Amongst the concerns raised was the possible overlap between the role of such a commissioner and that of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group and the Secretary-General.  To address these concerns leaders agreed that the Secretary-General and the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group should further evaluate this proposal and report back.
Leaders also considered the other recommendations of the Eminent Persons Group.  There are 104 recommendations in all.  Leaders have discussed these recommendations and have determined that they will continue that discussion tomorrow.  In the intervening period, leaders have asked foreign ministers to do some further work on those 102 recommendations.  Leaders did this because they wanted to make sure that in the leaders' meeting there was the most comprehensive discussion possible about the vast range of recommendations here. 
There are a large number of recommendations, 102.  A number of them do have financial matters associated with them so they will need to be worked through, but leaders wanted to have the best possible material in front of them for the most comprehensive discussion possible, and that's why we've asked foreign ministers to meet tonight. 
With those words, I'll hand over to the Commonwealth Secretary-General.
SHARMA: Thank you, Prime Minister.  I pay tribute to Prime Minister Gillard for her skilful and effective way in chairing all the sessions of the Perth CHOGM.  Not every international summit day finishes 10 minutes early and her commitment to the continuing process of putting in place reform and renewal of the Commonwealth to ensure relevance and to build resilience.
What was striking about the meeting was the level of collective wisdom which the leaders brought to bear in evaluating the report of the Eminent Persons Group.  Do not underestimate the value and impact of the Perth Declaration of the food security principles.  In 2009 the CHOGM agreed to promote a fast start fund for small and vulnerable states affected by climate change.  That Commonwealth contribution became a significant outcome of the global summit in Copenhagen.  This declaration today has similar potential. Thank you.         
PM: Thank you.  We're happy to take questions. 
JOURNALIST: Thank you Mr Secretary-General and Miss Prime Minister.  Given that two key recommendations which were supposed to come out of this forum, one to decriminalise homosexuality and two to introduce a commissioner for human rights democracy and law have failed, has this forum got the potential to be known as a failure rather than a success?  Thank you.
SHARMA: It's not at all a failure.  The gains made in substance by the earlier agreement by the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group about which we spoke yesterday, in which the template of engagement in the area of the culture of democracy and the rule of law and human rights has been lifted.  In the Commonwealth, there has to be a matching mechanism.  The matching mechanism has to be deliberated and studied in the way it is now required to meet the higher ambition levels of the organisation.  It is not sufficient to say that a post or the other which may have been recommended in another context, whether or not it was approved, constitutes a failure or success.  It is a recommendation in the same direction but it has to be evaluated in the totality of the need which has now arisen, which is why the heads have said this recommendation is fine but let it now be evaluated by the Secretary-General and the Chairman of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group, the two personalities on whom devolves a responsibility of carrying the expectations of the new template to which I referred.  They will look at it.  They still have to do a job description.  Please do not forget that in the report of the Eminent Persons Group, it says only creation of such a commissioner but the report is entirely silent on what you might loosely call the job description and responsibilities.  So, all of this work has to be done in a comprehensive and coherent way.
PM: Can I just make a comment on that too. With respect, I don't accept the premise of your question.  If we were solely to look at the area of strengthening the Commonwealth, and remember that was one of the themes that we set ourselves to talk about in this Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting.  We said we would be talking about strengthening the Commonwealth.  We said we would have a big focus on the development agenda, and we said we would have a focus on bringing the Commonwealth voice together to project into important forthcoming meetings like the G20 Durban and the Rio+20 summit next year. 
But if we just look at that top stream, given your interest in it: strengthening the Commonwealth, the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group, more than 30 recommendations to strengthen its role, all about strengthening the Commonwealth.  Every one of them got the tick. 
Eminent Persons Group recommendation about charter, a charter for the Commonwealth with a further process of consultation, the Eminent Persons Group recommended that, that has got the tick.  On the commissioner position that you've spoken of, we've outlined the further process here and the Secretary-General has taken you to some considerations about role and mandate that need to be worked through. 
On the other recommendations of the Eminent Persons Group, the leaders are still deliberating and have asked foreign ministers to do some work overnight to assist those deliberations. 
JOURNALIST: Miss Prime Minister, correct me if I'm wrong, but Sri Lanka faced a lot of static as the next host about the Sri Lanka's human rights record, etc.  On the subject of the Human Rights Commission, correct me if I'm wrong, but was this (inaudible) because of the majority of the membership which backs Sri Lanka felt that this was an unfair witch hunt coming at this time, coinciding with this moment in time where Sri Lanka has got so much static, that this Human Rights Commission is being mooted now?  It has been rejected in a sense, because it wasn't approved at this CHOGM.  Is this because a majority of the membership felt that this was unfair to Sri Lanka?
PM: I think you are drawing a connection between two questions when, in the deliberations of leaders, that connection was not there.  To go back in time, the Eminent Persons Group was created by the last Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting to provide a report and recommendations on strengthening the Commonwealth.  That is what is because leaders and we are dealing with it, and we've dealt with the charter today and we've dealt with the proposition about a commissioner too, so those things have been dealt with.
In terms of leaders' motivations for making decisions in this area, I think you would be wrong to suggest you can guess what leaders' motivations were.  I think you're trying to draw a link there in your mind, which I don't think you can assume was there in the minds of leaders.  Leaders have been talking about the appropriate way of strengthening the Commonwealth and that is what has driven the conclusions that we've announced here this evening. 
JOURNALIST: Can you give us an idea of the time frame involved for sorting out this issue of the commissioner?
PM: The report back on the charter - I've just got to make sure I'm getting it right - the charter will be finalised, so it's been agreed that there'll be a charter.  The process for the charter takes us through to a meeting of foreign ministers in September 2012 with approval then to happen by leaders effectively on the papers.  There won't be need for a further meeting. On the work of the Secretary-General and CMAG on the role of the commissioner, that work will happen as CMAG and the Secretary-General defines. 
JOURNALIST: So just on the EPG report, in retrospect, do you think the report should have been released much earlier given that the criticisms of the members of the group and could you have given them a bit clearer direction on the process of producing that report?
SHARMA: In the course of the preparation of report, it has been one of the most open processes.  What's coming as main recommendations in the report were included.  In fact our website and responses were received from civil society, citizens, and institutions.  A good 600 responses were received to the initial query, which we put on the website.  It's been one of the most participative exercises that have been undertaken. So the outside world knew very well the direction in which the report was going and it was not just only keeping them informed but it was also seeking their opinion on this exercise. 
As far as the leaders are concerned, the leaders have commissioned the report to come to them in order to take decisions on it and deliberate on it, which is what they've been doing.  The whole of the day today was taken up in this exercise.  Leaders have gone through the report line by line and before that the foreign ministers did a similar exercise.  In New York, the foreign ministers had had a discussion on it as well.  The significant results are now beginning to come out. So, it is quite to be expected that, having commissioned the report for themselves, the leaders study the report, examine it, take the decisions required before it becomes a public document.  But as I said, for the large part what's in the report was well known much in advance.
PM: Okay.  We'll take a question here and then come to the front. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Eminent Persons Group sat in here earlier today and said that many of the CMAG recommendations for the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group had actually been in place; the powers were available to the group since 1995 but had lacked the political will to actually carry them out.  Now given that you have said that Australia was keen to see this commissioner stand up, isn't the risk now that with a new charter for the Commonwealth, it'll be seen as a charter without any teeth?
PM: I think there too on the question of political will, clearly I wasn't here for the Eminent Persons Group press conference so I can't deal with really detailed statements that were made at that press conference.  But in terms of the broad proposition that you put, I think you saw an exercise of political will when leaders accepted all of the recommendations of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group about strengthening its role and about strengthening its role in a way which would enable the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group to get involved when a country was starting to veer off the path of democracy and the rule of law, rather than waiting until it had gone entirely off the path and was in a category for suspension or expulsion. So I think you've seen political will shown by the adoption of every part of the recommendations of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group. 
Leaders are still working through the Eminent Persons Group report, but you would see from the two items discussed today that the charter has been approved with a process involving the kind of consultation the Eminent Persons Group recommended. 
On the commissioner, it's certainly true to say that there were a variety of views amongst leaders.  The Commonwealth is a consensus organisation and so the proposal has been referred to the Secretary-General and the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group as we've outlined.
SHARMA: I just want to add.  These two things are separate and linked at the same time.  They're separate in the sense that the charter is a document of aspiration for the Commonwealth and will collect bits from all the documents and conventions which the Commonwealth has entered into in terms of its principles and values since 1970, so that's a charter, as it were, of aspirations. 
But the Ministerial Action Group and what it has been mandated to do, is linked in the sense that if this is your ambition levels, how are you going to realise it, and now we have a very credible aspiration template for that as well in practical terms.
PM: We'll take a question, one here and then we'll take one more and then we'll have to go because we are actually due at another commitment. 
JOURNALIST: This is (inaudible) from Amar Ujala, India. My question is to Prime Minister Gillard.  In the morning, as you already had said, that you were not present here but I was present here in the press conference.  Certainly the Eminent Persons Group felt that the kind of treatment they should have got at the hand, they did not get that.  They felt a little I think upset and they said that apart from two of the 106 recommendations have not been touched at all. So a) whether more recommendations have been touched upon and b) that they said that we are not reporting to the foreign ministers, we are reporting to the head of states.  Therefore they were very cheesed off when the CMAG references came about.  So what is the stand and whether they were mandated properly in the beginning itself to whom they will report and how the report will be examined, there is confusion about it.
PM: Okay.  Well I'm happy to deal with that.  The Eminent Persons Group was commissioned by leaders.  It has reported to leaders.  The Eminent Persons Group met with leaders yesterday in executive session.  They were able to report there and were able to be asked questions by leaders.  The Eminent Persons Group was also invited to attend the barbecue lunch, the informal lunch at the leaders' retreat today.  That was so that they could be there, mingling with leaders and able to answer questions if leaders had those questions, so that did happen. 
The leaders, in the afternoon session today, have focused on the Eminent Persons Group report.  We've dealt with two of the recommendations.  There are 102 others, that's correct and that is why there is more work happening overnight and the leaders will consider the Eminent Persons Group work again during the course of the retreat tomorrow. 
We'll take the last question over here and then we seriously will have to go.
JOURNALIST: Just in terms of the suggestion of appointing a human rights commissioner to improve the Commonwealth's record on addressing human rights abuses within the Commonwealth, are you concerned that key amongst the very few countries which actively opposed and therefore blocked the creation of a human rights commissioner was Sri Lanka? This is a country which itself would very much expect to be one of the first topics to be discussed by such a human rights commissioner, because of course the government there is itself accused of severe human rights abuses, crimes against humanity and war crimes, the fact that the country which perhaps focuses the need for a human rights commissioner is the country which was itself able to block that?
PM: Well, can I say the following.  First, in accordance with the conventions of the Commonwealth, there is not reporting out from the leaders' retreat session about the position of individual leaders, so I'm not going to breach that convention by reporting out of the discussions held by leaders today. 
What I can say is the report we received from foreign ministers when were in executive session yesterday did indicate to us that there had been a broad range of concerns raised about the commissioner position and that range of concerns was reported to us by foreign ministers after they had had their discussions.  Consequently, when leaders met today, they were aware that concerns had been raised from across a broad range of countries and had to work their way through as to what to do in those circumstances. And what I've announced to you is what leaders have determined.
On the question of Sri Lanka, I've been asked this question over the last few days and let me state Australia's position again here.  We are concerned about reports of human rights abuses during the end stages of the conflict in Sri Lanka.  We are aware that Sri Lanka has underway its Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission process.  We've been very clear that that process has to address the material that was comprehended in the UN Secretary-General's Advisory Panel report, so there is an expectation there about what should be done through the lessons learnt and reconciliation process. 
I think I said yesterday and I'm very happy to say again, it seems to me to stem from the very title that if you are going to learn lessons, if you are going to achieve reconciliation, then that starts with truth telling. 
Thank you very much.
SHARMA: Just one word, Prime Minister.  It's worth emphasising that the new elevation position of CMAG is all about engagement, of stepping up the level of engagement at all times.  This will happen because one of the concerns was that this body appears to be too (inaudible) and too punitive.  After all, it's not sufficient to point to a train wreck.  Everybody can see it.  But it's when the wagons are wobbly on the rail tracks, that's when you have to take an interest.  It's easy to point to broken crockery but when it's rattling on the shelves, that's when you have to take an interest.  So there will be engagement with all the countries in this positive way. 
One last fact it is worth remembering, the CMAG which recommended to the heads that they be allowed to work on a higher template of expectations in the field of rule of law, Sri Lanka was a member of that group.  Thank you.
PM: Thank you.  Thank you very much. 



PM: Thank you. Today is a bitter day for Australia. I don't know a better word than the word bitter to describe how we feel today. Three Australian soldiers have lost their lives in Afghanistan in an incident overnight. Seven Australian soldiers have been wounded, some of them seriously. An Afghan interpreter has also been killed.
I join the nation in the sense of grief we are all feeling as we digest this news. I particularly offer my most sincere condolences to the three families who are in the depths of grief today. We are thinking of them, our thoughts are with them as they deal with this terrible and distressing news.
Our thoughts are also with the families of the wounded who would be so anxious about the circumstances of their loved ones. We are certainly thinking of them too as they deal with news that their loved ones have been hurt in Afghanistan.
The Chief of the Defence Force and the Minister for Defence have described the circumstances to you of this horrible incident overnight. Of course we will learn more in the days and weeks ahead about the details of this incident but as has been described an Afghan National Army soldier opened fire on Australian and Afghanistan personnel who were attending a regular parade. Details are still coming in and we will know more in the days ahead.
But we may never know the answer to the most searching question and that is the question of why.
Now I recognise the circumstances of this incident are going to raise many deep and troubling questions in the minds of Australians. Attacks like this are designed to do just that, to corrode trust, that's the purpose of these attacks. It's an attempt by our enemy to strike at the core of our training and mentoring mission in Afghanistan. So I do also want to say this: our partners in the Afghan National Army are shocked and horrified by what has occurred. The people of Afghanistan are trying to build a nation. A nation free of violence and free of fear. We know the act of this Afghanistan member was not in the interests of the people of Afghanistan.
Can I also say this to the Australia people: we cannot judge the progress of our mission by this one dreadful incident. This attack does not change our mission in Afghanistan and that is to ensure that there is no safe haven there for terrorism. And it doesn't change our determination to see the mission through.
I've asked the Minister for Defence to engage in a full examination of the circumstances of this incident and to advise us if there are any additional measures we can take to reduce the risk of similar incidents occurring. The Minister for Defence will undertake that task.
For now I want to say this: our dead will come home with honour and the nation will grieve their loss. The wounded will receive the best possible care that we can provide. We will do everything we can to get them the best possible medical care.
The three soldiers who died were fine Australian professionals. Fine Defence Force personnel and very brave men. The soldiers who are wounded are fine members of our Australian Defence Force. They go into the Defence Force because they want to fight for their country, they go into the Defence Force because they want to fight for their mates. In this dreadful incident they were denied that right to fight, coming as it did whilst they were on parade. That is part of the true horror of this incident overnight. But our dead will come home with honour, we will mourn their loss and we will not forget them.
I will take questions solely on this matter.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: Yes, I'll go to David and then down the line.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you described this as an attempt by the enemy to strike at the trust (inaudible). Do you therefore believe this was a Taliban attack and what do you say to Australian soldiers whether they should be trusting their Afghan counterparts.
PM: I can't tell you standing here now what the motivations for this attack were. As I've indicated we will get more details in the days and weeks ahead, it takes some time to establish the facts. But the truth is we may never know the direct motivation of this individual but I did want to make the point that attacks of this nature are designed to corrode trust, to corrode trust between our soldiers and the soldiers that they train. We need to remember that we are training soldiers in large numbers in Afghanistan and across the nation of Afghanistan there are some 300,000 Afghan soldiers. So attacks of this nature are about corroding trust.
For our soldiers I can understand the shock, the horror, the pain as they absorb what has happened to their comrades in this incident overnight but our training mission is vital and we should note that the Afghan National Army has reacted with a sense of horror and distress to this incident too.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given the scale and shocking nature of this attack, do you think that this will damage the Australian public's support for the Afghan campaign more than anything else that has come before?
PM: I believe Australians will be asking themselves some troubling questions. I think people will look at this with a sense of incredible distress and shock. And so I did want to make the point and let me say it again because I believe it's very important: we should not judge the progress of our mission from this one incident. Despite the gravity of this incident and the horror of this incident, we are making progress in training members of the Afghan National Army, we are making progress in training members of the Afghan National Police. Our mission is a defined one, we know precisely what it is we are there to do, we are on a training and mentoring mission. And we also have a clear strategy and a clear timeline for that mission and you've heard me speak to you, to the Australian people and to the Australian Parliament about that mission and that timeline in the past and our mission and timeline remains the same. So we cannot the judge the progress of that mission through one incredibly distressing incident. And we can't allow our will to be undermined by incidents like this, we can't allow our will to be undermined by the kinds of attacks that are aimed at corroding trust.
I'll go to Chris Uhlmann.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Osama Bin Laden was killed in Pakistan, the Taliban (inaudible) what's Australia's clear national interest in continuing in Afghanistan?
PM: As I've described to you before our clear national interest is that Afghanistan was used in the past as a nation in which terrorists were trained and those terrorists did come and visit upon the world including violence that resulted in the loss of Australian lives. We went to Afghanistan for the purpose of ensuring strategic denial, that is denying terrorists who would seek to use Afghanistan as a place to train for acts of terror the ability to do that.
Now we have never said that it is only in Afghanistan that we see terrorism in operation, of course that's not the case but we do know Afghanistan has been used in the past as a terrorist training base and we are there to deny terrorists that safe haven in the future. Our mission therefore is one of training so that the Afghan nation can step up to its own security needs. If we were to leave at this stage then we would leave a vacuum which would be filled again by terrorists and by the Taliban.
Yes, we'll come over here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you now have the unhappy record of, under your Prime Ministership, having suffered more fatalities than either John Howard or Kevin Rudd, and yet (inaudible). Now that we are creeping our operations beyond Oruzgan and in places like Kandahar should we be prepared now for even higher rates of fatalities in the months and years to come?
PM: Well I'm not going to allow the language of creeping to go unchallenged. As the Minister for Defence has described to you, there are occasions on which we take operations outside Oruzgan province. The purpose of those operations is because they assist our mission within the province in which we work, within Oruzgan. I think the Minister for Defence and the Chief of the Defence Force have described to you that this incident occurred in northern Kandahar, just south of the border with Oruzgan and was about a supply route, a route into Oruzgan province so that's why our forces were there. So we have said in the past that there are times that we work outside our principal province because it assists us with our mission in our principal province and indeed the Minister for Defence has made public mention of these missions including in his Parliamentary contributions to keep the Parliament updated on progress in Afghanistan.
On the tempo of causalities that we have seen in Afghanistan, we have been a nation that has suffered very, very deeply this year with casualties in Afghanistan. I am unbelievably conscious of that, I'm unbelievably conscious of the suffering of the families, of the nation as we see these losses. I'm also very conscious of the need to see the mission through.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) that carrying that mission through is becoming too difficult because you don't know who the enemy is? Four of the eleven people killed in Afghanistan this year were killed by ANA soldiers.
PM: As I've indicated we can't judge the progress of our mission in Afghanistan from one incident but yes you're right, this is the second occasion this year that we face the very bitter spectre of our soldiers being attacked by someone who was in the Afghan National Army and someone who apparently was participating in our training mission. So that is a very, very bitter prospect for the nation to digest which is why the only word that  -  the best word to describe the emotions of today and this situation is that it is a bitter one. But to me, in terms of digesting this news it is important to recognise that attacks like this are about corroding trust and corroding will.
Yes, Lyndal.
JOURNALIST: Given the nature and impact of this incident, how important is it that reports into this incident (inaudible) not only the Defence Force but the people of Australia can understand why this occurred and how to prevent it if it's possible in the future?
PM: Certainly it's my view that the best possible information should be got to families as soon as it is possible but I also understand that when we are trying to fact find and get to the truth and get to all of the details in Afghanistan that that can take some time. So there is a balance here that Defence needs to work its way through of timeliness and accuracy because we want to make sure that the information given to families is accurate information but I am conscious of the need to get the best possible information to families as soon as it can be given to them and I've had occasion to speak directly to families who have lost loved ones in Afghanistan about precisely that.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) stepped up negotiation (inaudible). In the wake of this sort of incident how do you feel about the prospect of our principal ally in Afghanistan (inaudible)?
PM: Look I think we've got to be a bit careful about our terminology here. I've spoken in the past about the need for political reconciliation in Afghanistan and the processes of political reconciliation. We shouldn't view that, the processes of political reconciliation as somehow disconnected to the military efforts that we are engaging in in Afghanistan and our efforts to defeat the insurgency there. I mean to be very frank, and it seems to me quite a common sense point, that when you are making progress on the ground you maximise the chances of political reconciliation talks being successful. People are not going to sit around a table and talk if they feel like they are making progress on the ground. So political reconciliation in Afghanistan is important. The building of a secure nation there is important. The Afghan people building their democracy and governance capacity is important and we've spoke n about each of these threads of what we do in Afghanistan to the Australian people in the past and I'll continue to do so in the future.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we don't know the cause of this incident at this stage but the Minister has previously said that the Taliban have insurgents involved in high profile attacks, shows that they're on the back foot. That just doesn't really pass the logic test surely, I mean if they're high profile attacks that have been successful the public perception is they're not on the back foot and we're not winning so how does that scenario make sense with the Defence Minister says things like that  - 
PM: Well I actually think in your question you've explained precisely why it does make sense. The Minister's point is that the insurgents are on the back foot on the ground in Afghanistan, considerable progress has been made in the province in which we work in bringing security. I've had an insight into that through the eyes of our soldiers who are there and have been there on more than one occasion. We talk about the great West Australian Ben Roberts-Smith who's been there on a number of occasions. He can describe to you through his own work there and his own time there how he has seen security strengthened over the time he's been going-
JOURNALIST: But if we're seeing more attacks-
PM: Yeah, I'm answering your question. And so as you see security strengthened on the ground, those who would seek to corrode our will in Afghanistan look for other ways to corrode our will including engaging in high profile attacks so it does cause people to question our mission in Afghanistan. So what the Minister is saying to you is with their lack of progress on the ground we have seen movement to some of these high profile attacks, which is about corroding will and corroding trust by nations like our own that are involved in Afghanistan. What I think that means for Australians is we've got to be clear as we assess our mission in Afghanistan and the progress in Afghanistan which is why I say to the Australian people: as shocking and distressing and grave as this incident is, we cannot judge the progress of our mission by one incident, we must judge the progress of our mission based on all of the facts including the work that we are doing in training and the completion of some of that training work. So the training mission is underway and we are meeting progress that we set ourselves in that training mission.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when you meet Prime Minister Gillani will you be urging him to crack down on terrorist safe havens within his country?
PM: Of course. We talk to our partners all of the time about participation in counter terrorism and counter terrorism work and work that supports our mission in Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: Do you think you're going far enough though  - 
PM: Well I'm not going to pre-empt publicly a discussion with a leader when I haven't had that discussion yet.
JOURNALIST: When you spoke to Stephen Harper (inaudible)?
PM: I have had occasion both here and in the past to talk to the Canadian Prime Minister about Afghanistan but when I've talked to him about Afghanistan it's been about the progress of the mission there, it's been about transition and it's been about the timetables for transition and change in Afghanistan.
In terms of the attitudes of the Australian people, I well and truly understand that when we see losses in Afghanistan and particularly when we see losses of this kind that it does cause the Australian people to question our deployment in Afghanistan. As Prime Minister I believe it is very important for me to speak to the Australian people about why we are there and the progress we are making. We are there because it is in our national interest to be in Afghanistan. We are making progress, we have a defined mission and a defined time line.
Can I conclude this press conference where I started by saying that I do want to extend my very deepest condolences to the Australian families who are in the depths of pain today. Our thoughts are with them.
Thank you very much. 



HOST: The Prime Minister joins me now. Julia Gillard, welcome to Breakfast.
PM: Good morning, Fran.
HOST: Prime Minister, what confidence do you have that Qantas and the unions can sort this out in the next 21 days? The animosity runs pretty deep.
PM: Well, they do have 21 days to sort themselves out, but as a result of the action we took in Fair Work Australia, industrial action has been terminated. That, I believe is a win for the travelling public and for the Australian national economy and the million people who work in tourism.
Now they have 21 days to sort themselves out. If they don't, then our industrial umpire will impose an outcome on them.
HOST: Now, talk of imposing an outcome, Prime Minister, why didn't you intervene? You have the powers, existing powers under the Act to force the parties back to work, don't you?
PM: Let's be very clear about this Fran - under the Fair Work Act there is a section, Section 431, which enables the Minister to make a declaration. It has not been used, not been used under the Fair Work Act and not been used under earlier legislation. It's never been legally tested, and if we had used that power we could have ended up in a world of legal uncertainty with the matter then going to the courts, with all of the potential time delays and confusion that that would have caused.
HOST: Can I just get clarification, though - with all of that that might have unfolded afterwards, in the short term, would it have kept the planes flying?
PM: Well, that would have been a question about what the court did when it ended up before the courts-
HOST: -But before it got to the courts.
PM: Well, let's be clear about the timeframe here Fran, because I think that in part answers your question too, so let's go through the legal issues and the practical issues. Legal issues  -  section has never been used before, so there is no legal precedent. It could easily have ended up in the courts, with all of the confusion and potential time delays that that would have caused.
What we chose to do instead was to make application to Fair Work Australia and we have succeeded in having the industrial action brought to and end. Now, the parties have an opportunity to sort themselves out, and if they don't the dispute will be fixed by Fair Work Australia.
Can I just say, in terms of the practicalities of this, Fran, as late as Friday Qantas was reassuring that they were in negotiating their way through this dispute. At 2 o'clock on Saturday, Alan Joyce contacts the Minister for Transport, Anthony Albanese, and says he is grounding the planes at 5pm  -  no ifs, no buts.
I believe that that action by Qantas was an extreme action to take. It has caused chaos for the travelling public and Qantas had other options available at its disposal, including taking the same sort of application to Fair Work Australia that we, the Government, took.
HOST: Well, Alan Joyce just told us that he had three options, one was to sit by and do nothing, one was to struggle on and allow this interrupted industrial action to take place over the next year, or the other was to go on strike effectively itself and force it to this sort of intervention under the Act-
PM: -And one was him and Qantas then making application to Fair Work Australia. The Government determined to make application to Fair Work Australia, and we have got exactly the outcome we wanted and we sought, which is the planes will be back in the sky, the travelling public will be back on the move, employees will be back at work, tourism operators will be back doing what they do best.
HOST: Nevertheless, it's taken what you yourself describe as an extreme action to take. Alan Joyce says in his view it needed to take that extreme action to meet the threshold, if you like, of Fair Work Australia, the Fair Work Act.
PM: Before you go down that path Fran, first and foremost, as late as Friday Qantas was saying that they were negotiating this dispute, so let's be very clear about that.
Then let's be very clear about the provision under the Fair Work Act that is being used here. It is comparable to provisions that have been in earlier pieces of legislation. We've seen in industrial history before - this is not a product of the Fair Work Act - we've seen in industrial history before unions taking protected industrial action, employers engaging in lockouts, the industrial umpire having a jurisdiction when the dispute gets to the stage of jeopardising the national economy.
That is not a new feature of our industrial relations law. It's not newly introduced by the Fair Work Act.
HOST: Prime Minister, Alan Joyce just told us that over the last few weeks he had several conversations with several ministers, on several occasions, saying that the only option ultimately available to them might be ground the fleet. Were you aware of those conversations?
PM: What I was aware of was, as recently as Friday, Qantas was saying it was working its way through to negotiate this dispute, then the first advice to Government that the fleet would be grounded at 5pm on Saturday was at 2 o'clock on Saturday to the Minister for Transport, Anthony Albanese, and I do believe that that was an extreme action by Qantas and that they had other alternatives available to them.
HOST: If Fair Work Australia forces the implementation of arrangements which Qantas says would make it financially unviable, will the airline have any recourse? What then?
PM: Well, the industrial umpire resolves the dispute. Qantas has got the ability, within the 21-day period, to get round a table and to work through this dispute. If they are unable to do that, if Qantas and the unions are unable to reach agreement during those 21 days, then Fair Work Australia as the industrial umpire will impose a solution upon them.
HOST: So you say this is an extreme action. Assistant Treasurer Bill Shorten says the Qantas grounding was over the top. Labor Senator Glen Searle has said previously Alan Joyce should resign. If you think it shouldn't have come to this, what do you think is going on here? Do you believe this was a planned, predetermined strategy by Qantas management to achieve something longer term?
PM: Look, it's for Qantas to answer what its strategy is, how long it's been planning it, and why it was that as recently as Friday they were saying they were negotiating and then we saw this happen on Saturday.
HOST: You keep talking about on Friday Qantas was saying they were negotiating. Alan Joyce has said to us now, and previously on Friday they were upbeat after the AGM, but then the unions came out and said they were going to continue this, a slow bake, effectively, is what one of the unions described it. Can you accept that that might change Qantas's position in this?
PM: Well, I accept that all of this is a matter for Qantas to explain and it's particularly a matter for them to explain why they chose to act on Saturday, on Darby Day, Melbourne Cup weekend, with effectively no notice to the travelling public.
HOST: Have you, yourself, spoken to Alan Joyce yet about this?
PM: No, I haven't. I thought it was proper Fran, once I took the decision on Saturday that we were going to Fair Work Australia not to engage in conversations with any of the parties to the Fair Work Australia proceedings.
HOST: Is it proper and perhaps appropriate for the Prime Minister to engage with conversation before that action is taken, to actually have a phone call once you knew that this was what Qantas was planning? I know you're involved in CHOGM, but this is a significant event that's going to cause a lot of chaos around the country, and around the world, in fact.
PM: And so what I did, Fran, was immediately to take the application to Fair Work Australia, to ensure that the industrial disputation was at an end. That was the thing that I could do to do something that would, in effect, get the planes back in the sky, get the travelling public on the move again and no longer inconvenienced and in the grip of this chaos that had been caused by Qantas's grounding of the fleet-
HOST: -So you think the prime ministerial blast to Alan Joyce might have been in order?
PM: Well, let's be very clear here Fran - when Alan Joyce contacted Minister Albanese he said the planes would be grounded. The matter was not up for discussion. It was happening.
I responded to the actuality it was happening by getting the matter before Fair Work Australia and we have succeeded in getting done at Fair Work Australia exactly what we wanted, which is an order to terminate industrial action, and that means the planes will be back in the sky, Qantas will be working, its employees will be working, the travelling public will be on the move and our tourism operators will know that the people who want to come and use their services and stay in their beautiful hotels and resorts and bed and breakfasts and go to their restaurants will be able to get there.
HOST: Prime Minister, just a couple of quick ones before the news in a minute or so, do you think it was unhelpful for Alan Joyce to get an effective pay rise of $2 million on Friday?
PM: I'm not commenting on Mr Joyce's salary packaging and I think it's a matter for him to explain how that fits in with Qantas' negotiating strategy in this dispute.
HOST: And just briefly, Prime Minister, plenty of industrial agreement coming up. Do you think we could see this kind of action across other industries, ending up in more centralised arbitration?
PM: Well, let's looks at the record of the Fair Work Act  -  we have not seen, in general, industrial disputes on the rise. The Fair Work Act has been there, it's been working, we've not seen a general rise in industrial disputation, but what we have seen, Fran, and this is very important, we've seen an end to the rip offs which used to see under WorkChoices: workers at most risk in our workforce, young people, women, people with low skills, walk into work one day and be told ‘you're not getting your penalty rates anymore, you're not getting your overtime anymore'. That is what used to happen under WorkChoices, a gross unfairness to working people and the Fair Work Act ended that.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you very much for joining us on Breakfast.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins me now.
PM: Good morning, John.
HOST: Thank you very much for giving me some time. You must have had one hell of a weekend - I would think a very busy weekend.
PM: It was a busy weekend, but I'm very happy to speak to you, John.
HOST: That's very nice of you. It's been one of the most appalling examples of industrial terrorism I can recall. What was your reaction on Saturday night, and did you have any pre-warning?
PM: What happened with this, John, is Alan Joyce contacted the Minister for Transport, Anthony Albanese, at around 2pm on Saturday, saying that he would ground the Qantas fleet at 5pm. He was not putting it as a matter for discussion - he was just telling Mr Albanese that that is what he would do.
I believe that that was extreme action from Qantas when they had other options available to them, and it has of course caused such amazing inconvenience to the travelling public. The Government's reaction to this extreme action by Qantas was to immediately make application to Fair Work Australia. That application has succeeded.
Fair Work Australia has issued an order to terminate all industrial action and that means that during the course of today planes will be back in the sky, employees will be back at work, the travelling public will be moving around, and our tourism operators can be reassured that their customers can get to where they are.
HOST: Not surprisingly, Tony Abbott has suggested that the Government showed a bit of reluctance to intervene in this dispute. Do you accept that?
PM: Tony Abbott has got that wrong. What Tony Abbott is doing is pointing to a different section of the Fair Work Act, Section 431, which enables the Minister to make a declaration to end industrial action. That section and sections like it in earlier legislation have never been used, and if we had used that section we could have ended up in a world of legal uncertainty with proceedings before a court.
Now, we thought that, rather than end up in that world of legal uncertainty, we would take an application to Fair Work Australia, we would get the job done and we have got it done.
HOST: The Fair Work decision, is that a decision that you have any influence in?
PM: No, Fair Work Australia is the independent industrial umpire, as it should be.
HOST: Have you had any talks with Alan Joyce over the weekend, or anybody from Qantas?
PM: I haven't spoken to Mr Joyce. As soon as I decided we should make an application to Fair Work Australia to get industrial action terminated, I also decided it wouldn't be proper whilst those hearings were in train for me to speak to any of the sides to this dispute.
HOST: Had this decision not been made, and thank goodness it has been made, but had it not been made, what would you, or could you have done?
PM: Well, I'm not going to engage in hypotheticals, John - the system worked.
HOST: OK, but there would have been an alternative line you could have taken.
PM: Well, I'm not going to engage in hypotheticals.
We created the Fair Work Act and the Fair Work system. We did that to get rid of the hated WorkChoices and to end the rip offs that used to happen under the Liberal Government, where people would just get their penalty rates taken away, their overtime taken away and not a cent of compensation, and people could get dismissed unfairly and have absolutely no remedy.
So, we ended all of that. We created Fair Work Australia and the Fair Work Act. Some sections of the Fair Work Act are like earlier versions of industrial relations law. It's been possible in the past for unions to get protected industrial action. It's been possible in the past for employers to lock the people out.
The industrial umpire, in the past, has had the ability to intervene in disputes that affected the national economy in a significant way. That is what has happened here - we took an application to Fair Work Australia and it has terminated industrial action. That is a win for the travelling public and a win for the million people who work in tourism in Australia.
HOST: Under the provision of the Fair Work Act, you did have the power to order the end of the dispute. People are saying ‘why didn't you use that power?'
PM: Because that power has never been used before - not under the Fair Work Act, or under earlier versions of the legislation. That power can be capable of being taken to court, and we would have ended up in court proceedings-
HOST: -Yes, I understand that, but what's the point of having the provision if you say it's never been used before and by the sounds of things will never be used anyway? What's the point of having the provision there?
PM: Well, the provision is there as an alternate, but it does have, in terms of us acting on Saturday, there we are on Saturday, we have been told by Qantas they are grounding the fleet, no ifs, no buts. We've got to make a decision about what is the best way forward. We thought the best way forward was to use the provision that has been used before: to go to the industrial umpire, to get the industrial action terminated, and we have succeeded in what we wanted to achieve.
HOST: When you look across at your Cabinet members, it is literally dripping with former union heavyweights. Is there not somebody there who could have brokered an arrangement by simply getting around a table with Qantas?
PM: Well, clearly Qantas was saying, as recently as Friday, it was negotiating this dispute, then 2 o'clock Saturday, first advice to the Government that the lock out and grounding of the planes will take effect and take effect at 5pm with effectively no notice to the travelling public.
Our mission then was to get the planes back in the sky and we have succeeded in that, and John, I would remind in us getting an order from Fair Work Australia to end all industrial action, that applies to all sides of this dispute, to Qantas and to the unions.
HOST: What role do you believe a government should have in a dispute like this, which can potentially impact on our national economy and certainly our reputation worldwide, can have an impact on tens of thousands of people who have nothing to do with the dispute other than being unlucky enough to be a customer at the time?
PM: Well John, I believe the role government should play is the role we have played-
HOST: -Is that sufficient?
PM: -And that is to take effective action to get the dispute terminated, the industrial action terminated, to create a circumstance where the parties now must get around a table and talk this dispute through, and if they fail then Fair Work Australia can impose a solution on them.
HOST: It's really a hell of a mess, when you think about it. I mean there's no good will there. Nothing seems to have been achieved, either to the airline or the unions. You know, this could all come undone very quickly all over again, couldn't it?
PM: Well, no John. Let's be very careful here about what the Government has done.
HOST: Yes.
PM: We took an application to Fair Work Australia. The first part of that application is terminate the industrial action. That has happened.
The second thing that happens as a result of the Government's application is there is a 21 day period in which the parties must sit around a table and try and work their stuff out, work their dispute out and get it resolved. If they fail to do that, then Fair Work Australia will act and impose a solution on them.
Now, that is the path we are on now  -  no industrial action, 21 days, sort it out. If you can't sort it out Fair Work Australia will sort it out for you.
HOST: People are correctly looking to you for leadership. Could you have been more proactive in this, before Alan Joyce grounded the entire airline and inconvenienced literally thousands and thousands of people all over the place?
PM: Well John, let's just go through the timeline here  -  Friday, Qantas was saying that was in the business of negotiating this dispute.
HOST: True.
PM: Friday. Saturday, 2pm, Minister for Transport is advised the fleet is being grounded at 5pm - no ifs, no buts, it's being grounded.
HOST: So, no discussion at all?
PM: Minister Albanese was advised by Alan Joyce - he was not asked by Alan Joyce, he was advised it was happening. So, that was the circumstance the Government faced on Saturday, advised by Alan Joyce that this extreme action would be taken. The Government immediately responded by taking an application to Fair Work Australia and here we are, Monday, and planes are getting back in the sky.
HOST: Did Alan Joyce call you?
PM: That had been reported today, and Alan Joyce has been on radio today denying those reports as misleading and saying he has very good access to government.
HOST: OK, what now? As I say, there's nothing seems to have been achieved by this.
PM: Well John, let's  -  I'm going to stop you there  -  we had on Saturday, as a result of the grounding of the Qantas fleet, we had thousands of passengers stranded; we had Qantas not working; we had tourism operators not knowing what would happen with their business next.
Today, we have planes getting back in the sky; Qantas will start working; people will get to where they need to go.
Over the next 21 days, as the planes continue to fly and Qantas services are provided, the parties will have to come together and see if they can sort the dispute out. If they can't, as planes continue to fly and Qantas does all of the things it normally does, then at the end of the 21-day period Fair Work Australia can impose an outcome on them.
HOST: OK, just back to Alan Joyce and his supposed call to you. We all know that he denied the reports, but did he call you? Yes or no?
PM: Alan Joyce spoke to Minister Albanese-
HOST: -Not you?
PM: Let me be clear about this  -  Alan Joyce spoke to Minister Albanese, he spoke to my Chief of Staff. He did not seek to make direct contact with me, and John, for what purpose, when he had told us the planes were being grounded.
HOST: Yeah, we'll you'd-
PM: -And he has specifically denied those reports in today's newspapers as misleading.
HOST: Has Alan Joyce been badly behaved in your mind?
PM: I think Qantas's strategy in this has been extreme. I think it took extreme action on Saturday in grounding the fleet with effectively no notice to the travelling public on what is a key weekend for Australian tourism - that is, Melbourne Cup weekend.
HOST: Yeah, what about compensation? The insurance industry says it won't compensate anybody. Can you force the industry to do something in that regard?
PM: Well John, we'll have to work our way through a set of issues. My objective has been to get Qantas working again and it will be working again today.
HOST: What chance compensation?
PM: Look John, I'm not in a position to talk to you about what would be millions of different  -  well, maybe not millions - thousands of different travel insurance policies. The best thing I could do as Prime Minister is get the airlines moving again, get Qantas moving, and I've achieved that.
HOST: Tell me this, would you applaud the idea of people being compensated?
PM: Look, I didn't want to see thousands of people in the travelling public inconvenienced, clearly I didn't want to see people stranded, and that's why I took the action I took.
HOST: OK, Prime Minister thank you very much for your time. I hope the coming week is a little more relaxing than the weekend obviously was.
PM: Thank you very much, John.
HOST: Nice to talk to you Prime Minister, thank you very much.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: Bye. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard is in Canberra. Prime Minister, good morning to you. Now, despite the overnight ruling from Fair Work Australia there has been a lot of criticism of your Government for not intervening sooner. Why didn't you act earlier?
PM: Thanks for the question Kochie, and it gives me an opportunity to explain some of the circumstances of this dispute, which I don't think have been clearly understood.
Kochie, the circumstances here are that on Friday Qantas was reassuring that it could make progress in negotiations. On Saturday, around 2pm, Alan Joyce contacted the Minister for Transport, Antony Albanese, and said he would be grounding the planes at 5pm.
There has been discussion about us using Section 431 of the Fair Work Act and the Minister issuing a notice to terminate industrial action. That section has never been used in Australia's history and if we had tried to use it, we would have ended up in a world of legal uncertainty, with the prospect of court action and uncertainty continuing for Qantas, its staff and people who rely on it to get around Australia and around the world.
So what we did instead was make application to Fair Work Australia to end the industrial action and that application has succeeded. That's a win for people who need to get where they need to go  -  that is, the travelling public. It's a win for the travelling public and it's a win for the million Australians who work in tourism.
HOST: Prime Minister, newspapers this morning claim Alan Joyce tried to phone you on Saturday, but you didn't return his call. Should you have phoned him back?
PM: Qantas has contacted my office this morning and said those reports are misleading. Mr Joyce, at some point today, will make a clarifying statement about those reports, but those reports basically take us back to the same point, the point about Section 431 of the legislation - should the Government have used it? Well Kochie, the problem with the Government using that section is it's never been used before in Australia's legal history and would have put us in a world of legal uncertainty, with all of the consequences that could have had for causing Qantas to not know what's happening, workers to not know what's happening and passengers to not know what's happening, as courts work their way through. Instead, we went to the industrial umpire and we have succeeded in the application we took.
HOST: OK, and you're saying Alan Joyce didn't try and call you directly. He'd been in contact with Anthony Albanese, one of your ministers, constantly all along and he will clear that up a little later this morning.
Now, Qantas and unions have 21 days to negotiate now. What happens if they don't reach an agreement?
PM: Our industrial umpire, Fair Work Australia, can then make a determination to end the dispute. That is, they effectively arbitrate the matter and impose a solution on Qantas and the unions. It would, of course, be far better for Qantas and the unions to use this 21-day period to sort it out themselves.
HOST: OK, at the end of 21 days, if they haven't sorted it out, though, under our industrial relations laws the umpire's decision stands, everyone's got to accept it?
PM: Absolutely.
HOST: OK. Unions are worried this decision sets a precedent for business to quash strikes. Do you share those concerns, or is, you know, everyone just has to abide by the system?
PM: Everyone has to abide by the system and the order that's been made by Fair Work Australia stops everyone's industrial action  -  the unions are not able to take industrial action and Qantas is not able to continue its lock out.
But Kochie, I do want to say I believe that Qantas took an extreme approach on Saturday. On Friday it was saying that there were prospects for negotiating this dispute. On Saturday, with very little notice to Government or passengers, it grounded planes. It did that in circumstances where it had other options open to it. It could have take exactly the same application that the Government did and have industrial action terminated by the industrial umpire.
HOST: Do you feel as though you've been blackmailed by Qantas?
PM: I've done what I needed to do to get this dispute brought to an end, to get planes back into the sky, and it's now up to Qantas and the employees of Qantas and the unions to get round a table and sort this dispute out, but I am making the point, Kochie, that Qantas had other options available to it on Saturday than grounding planes without any effective notice to passengers on Melbourne Cup weekend.
HOST: OK, sounds like they're in your bad books. We'll wait and see how that pans out. Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: It's a question of the grand inconvenience for passengers and the impact for the national economy that's concerning me.
HOST: OK, alright Prime Minister, we'll have to leave it there. Thank you again for your time this morning.



PM:  Thank you very much. I am joined by the Minister for Transport, Anthony Albanese and the Minister for Workplace Relations, Chris Evans.
Earlier this morning, Fair Work Australia granted the Government's application to terminate all industrial action relating to Qantas. This is a win for passengers stranded around the country and around the world. This is a win for the one million Australians who work in tourism, and of course were so anxious that their customers could not get to where their holidays were going to be.
In making this application, the Government wanted to see industrial action stopped. That is, by going to Fair Work Australia, we have achieved what we set out to do: planes will be back in the skies, Qantas workers will be back at work.
We wanted to end all industrial action because we were very concerned about the circumstances that had left Australians stranded.
As Prime Minster, and the Government overall was concerned about the extreme action taken by Qantas that had stranded tens of thousands of passengers far away from home. We wanted to make sure that those passengers could get flights and were able to return home.
We wanted to see this industrial action at an end.
We also took this application because we were concerned about the risk to the national economy caused by this disputation and the industrial action.
This morning, I have spoken to a number of the participants in this dispute. I'm in the process of speaking to all of the participants in this dispute. I have made it very clear to them that my expectation now that industrial action has ceased is that they will get around a table and get this sorted.
There is a 21-day period now for the industrial parties to come together and to resolve this dispute. In that 21-day period, it is clearly my view that they should act quickly, they should get together and they should work this dispute out.
If they are unable to do so, then Fair Work Australia will impose a solution on them at the end of the 21-day period.
Before I pass over to Minister Albanese, I do want to affirm that the Government's action taken on Saturday was taken swiftly. We wanted to see this industrial action resolved.
The industrial action has now been resolved. That means that Qantas planes will be returning to the skies later today, and for a description as to how that will occur, I'll turn to the Minister for Transport now.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Thank you, Prime Minister.
Qantas safety case was received by CASA, hand-delivered at 10.23am this morning. The CASA safety team is currently reviewing this material. They're assessing the serviceability of aircraft, the management of the dispute issues arising from it, and sequencing of returning aircraft.
CASA is allowing Qantas to position flights. That is, empty planes flying to where their departure point will be for passenger services, as we speak.
CASA believes that Qantas passenger flights will commence around about 3pm this afternoon. The first priority has been Sydney to Melbourne, because it is on that route that there are most stranded passengers at the present time.
The Department and CASA estimate that Qantas will not be at full operation until Wednesday. There is a delay period because of the cessation of flights from 5pm on Saturday.
It's also the case, I should indicate, that Virgin Australia will be providing an additional 3,000 seats today. Virgin have moved over 75,000 people domestically and internationally between 5pm Saturday and midnight last night. So they've added 58 services to the network. That has, of course, been of great assistance as well to the travelling public.
PM: Just before we take questions, I'll ask the Minster for Workplace relations just to describe what will now happen at Fair Work Australia.
MINISTER EVANS: Thank you, Prime Minister. I think most of you are aware now that the effective decision of Fair Work Australia full bench last night is that all industrial action is ordered to cease. There is now a period of 21 days in which the parties are required to negotiate a settlement to their enterprise bargaining agreement.
If that's not successful, if they can't reach agreement, then the Fair Work Australia will make a declaration. In the old language, they'll arbitrate the decision, arbitrate the matter and make a decision which will be binding on the parties. But there will be no industrial action, either by Qantas or the unions - the three unions affected - during that period until they either reach an agreement or there's a declaration made by Fair Work Australia.        
The Government stands ready to support the negotiation process. Obviously, it'll be managed by Fair Work Australia. If there's anything we can do to assist, we will, but the Prime Minister has delivered a very strong message to the parties, as we have been doing for some time, is that they ought to get on and maturely fix it.         
It's highly regrettable that it got to this, but the responsibility on them is now to fix it and that's the government's expectations.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there is criticism today that you didn't do enough, quickly enough to step in and stop the fleet being grounded at all, that you could have stopped it happening at all. Could you answer that, and could you and the Ministers also answer exactly when you and/or your office first knew of the possibility of the fleet being grounded? 
PM: Okay, I'll take both of those questions. 
On the first of them, the swift action the Government took has brought the dispute to an end. Flights will be in the air this afternoon. We have achieved what we set out to do, which is the end of industrial action and Qantas getting back to its business of flying passengers where they need to go - and that is a win. 
It is a win for those stranded passengers around the nation and around the world, and of course, for our tourism operators. 
In terms of timeliness of the actions taken, we were advised around 2pm on Saturday that Qantas was grounding its fleet at 5pm in preparation for a lockout. That was the advice that the Government got from Qantas at 2pm. We did not have any earlier advice that planes would be grounded at 5pm. 
Having heard that, we took immediate steps to get the matter to Fair Work Australia.
Fair Work Australia commenced its hearings that night. Fair Work Australia continued its hearings yesterday, and concluded them early this morning. As a result, planes will be back in the sky this afternoon. 
Now, I know that there has been discussion about another section of the legislation, Section 431. Let me make it very clear the issues about Section 431; it is a section which enables a minister to make a declaration about industrial action. It appears in the Fair Work Australia Act. It has appeared in earlier versions of industrial relations legislation. It has never been used. It is capable of judicial review. 
If that judicial review happened, you would have to have a hearing with all the facts put on the table. That is, all the facts put on the table the way the facts were put on the table before Fair Work Australia.
The Government therefore faced a choice: whether to use this procedure which we have used which worked, or whether to use this last-resort procedure in Section 431 which has never been used and which would have taken us into new legal terrain.
We determined to use the section that we did use, and it has got the result that we wanted.
I would note, too, that we received the clearest of possible advice from our departmental advisors to take the course that we did take.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
PM: On the advice questions, with timing of advice, I'll turn to Minster Albanese on that.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Can I indicate that the first time in which I was informed that there would be the grounding of the aircraft through a lockout was when a staff member from Mr Joyce rang one of my staff on Saturday afternoon.         
In terms of the timing of that, my staff member was rung at 1.26 PM. At 1.38 PM, my staff member rang me and told me to expect a phone call from Mr Joyce. I didn't receive one so I rang him at 1.51 PM. I still didn't receive one, so I rang him at 1.55 PM. I still didn't receive one, so I rang him at 1.58 PM. Apparently, through security measures, it's harder to get phone calls in, so I'm not sure what time Mr Joyce rang me, but it was certainly after 1.58 PM, after I had tried on a number of occasions to get hold of him.         
That was the first occasion in which Mr Joyce or anyone else from Qantas had ever raised the issue of a lockout.         
Now, I listened to Mr Joyce on Fran Kelly's program this morning, and as a result I rang Mr Joyce, and he will confirm that at no stage did Qantas, Mr Joyce, or anyone else raise with me the possibility of a lockout of the Qantas work force until we had that conversation that afternoon.
JOURNALIST: But if (inaudible) Mr Albanese, he raised this on several occasions with the Government and you shouldn't be surprised in the least. Who did he say he raised it with, and when?
MINISTER ALBANESE: Well, I indicate to you that I had a phone conversation with Mr Joyce about an hour ago after he finished his press conference. I indicated to him that this was my recollection of events, that I did not recall him ever raising the possibility of a lockout of his work force. He confirmed to me that that was also the case. I also indicated to him that I would be making that public given that there was some speculation about that. He agreed that he would, he agreed with my account that it had never been raised publicly, the possibility of a lockout.
JOURNALIST: Well how did he explain the discrepancy from his earlier- 
MINISTER ALBANESE: -That's not up to me to explain. 
JOURNALIST: But did he explain to you?
MINISTER ALBANESE: Well, what it's up to me to explain is to put the facts out there.
Qantas had certainly raised with me, on a number of occasions - we had face to face meetings, phone conversations - the problems they were having with the fleet and the grounding of the fleet in terms of the grounding of particular planes, and seven aircraft had been grounded.
As you would be aware, Mr Joyce has indicated, and we have a difference as with regard to interpretation of that in terms of timing, but he indicated that obviously if planes kept being grounded at a rate of two a week it would reach some point whereby there were a range of aircraft grounded, and therefore the airline would not operate.         
But at no stage  -  at no stage - did he indicate the possibility of a lockout of the workforce which has precipitated his announcement of a 5pm shut down of Qantas, both domestic and internationally. 
JOURNALIST: Minister and Prime Minister, Minister when you spoke to Mr Joyce on Saturday, the Prime Minister has said today that he had alternative options that he didn't use.          
Did you put that to him in that conversation on Saturday, and if so, what did he say to you, and has the Government, either the Prime Minister or the Minister, had that conversation with him since - and what reason does he give for why he chose that option and not others?
MINISTER ALBANESE: I don't intend to go through song and verse of all the details of conversations that I have with CEOs, but suffice to say that it is fair to argue that Mr Joyce put it very clearly that this was a decision that had been made by the Qantas board. He acknowledged that at no stage had he asked for government intervention, either up to that time or indeed at that time. He informed me that he was simply letting me know of the decision of the board that was made that morning. I certainly indicated to him my concern about what the board had decided, and about the timing of it.
PM: Thank you, before we take any questions, I'll actually ask the Minister for Workplace Relations to describe some of the options that are available under the Fair Work Act. 
MINISTER EVANS: Thank you, Prime Minister. Just to make the point that the suggestion that there was no other option open to Qantas is not right. The advice I have from my department is that they had a range of options. They include accessing a number of provisions in the Act which would have allowed them to seek intervention and termination of industrial action because of the threat to, the economic threat to Qantas and its employees.          
Or they could have applied under the 424 provisions, which we used, which went to significant economic damage to an important part of the economy.          
Or they could have made application for a suspension of industrial action to enable a cooling off period.          
There were a range of measures open to Qantas under the Fair Work Act other than the one which they chose to use, and I'd just make the point that I, when I received the call from Mr Joyce on what was still Saturday morning in Perth, it was to advise me as a courtesy that they were taking that action; that that was a decision that had been endorsed by the board; and that they may have to shut the airline down earlier, if the information became public, because of their concerns that they would have to close the airline rather than keep flying after announcement.         
So, the clear implication to me was that it was, decision had been taken, and that would apply at 5 o'clock or earlier if required, and when I pressed Mr Joyce as to whether or not there had been a change in circumstances given that the aircraft engineers had suspended their industrial action for three weeks, whether there'd been a change of circumstances on that day, he was not able to answer that, and he just made it clear that I should be aware of their circumstances.          
But I pressed him as to whether anything had changed to bring about this course of action and he said that his only, his answer was that this was the only option available to Qantas.
PM: Thank you.
Just before we take the next questions, though, can I - in terms of that discussion, say - I do not accept that Qantas's only choice on Saturday was to take the extreme action of grounding all planes and leaving tens of thousands of passengers stranded.
I do not accept that.           
Just in terms of getting the facts on the record, because there have been some other claims made which should be corrected, there are claims in newspapers this morning that Mr Joyce was seeking to speak to me, and had I taken his call, the planes would have not been grounded. That is untrue, and Mr Joyce has confirmed today that that is untrue, so those reports in today's newspapers are wholly wrong.
There's also been some speculation - and reporting - that Mr Joyce requested the Government in his telephone calls on Saturday to use section 431 of the act. Any reporting of that nature is wholly untrue as well.           
Yes. Yes, Dennis?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 431, you've mentioned the legal uncertainty of using it, when did the Government actually look at using 431. What was your legal advice on that, and when did you get that?
PM: Well as the Minister for Workplace Relations has made clear, the advice we received from the relevant department on Saturday was that the appropriate course was to use the section that we did use, section 424.
I also think perhaps the best thing to do would be to look at the outcome. What is the outcome?
The Government wanted to see industrial action cease. We wanted to make sure stranded passengers could get their flights. We wanted to make sure this damage to the national economy was brought to an end. And we have succeeded.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 431, using 431 before Saturday?
PM: Dennis, you misunderstand the nature of 431 in asking that question. 431 requires the same test of damage to the national economy as section 424 does, the section that we used, until the dispute escalated. 
And let's remember, Friday, Qantas was talking about negotiating this dispute through. That was the advice on Friday. Saturday, the nature of the dispute changed when Qantas decided to ground the fleet at 5pm and to proceed with a lockout. 
It wasn't until that change of circumstance, Qantas moving from talking about negotiation to that escalation of the dispute, that any of these questions presented as live questions for government determination.
Anybody who puts any other version of the facts in relation to that is simply not telling you the truth.
Phil Coorey?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) response Tony Sheldon said today that there, the union is considering a legal challenge to the Fair Work ruling.
In your conversation with Mr Sheldon that you've either had or are about to had, are you going to tell him to drop that as part of your wish to have this sorted out?
PM: Well, no appeal has been filed to Fair Work Australia's ruling.
The advice to us is that it is a robust ruling, it's in operation now and it will continue to be in operation, so the industrial dispute has been terminated. The opportunity is there now for parties to get around a table and sort this out. If they're unable to, then Fair Work Australia will sort it out for them in 21 days' time.          
But let's be very clear for members of the travelling public - Qantas planes are moving back into the sky. As this 21-day period of conciliation goes through, Qantas planes will be travelling in the sky. They will be working as people expect Qantas to work.           
If the parties don't resolve it and Fair Work Australia arbitrates it, Qantas will continue to function as normal during the days of that arbitration.          
Mr Joyce in his press conference today used the terminology - as you would expect him to as CEO - that people can now book Qantas flights with confidence.          
Yes, Latika?
JOURNALIST: A couple of questions. Firstly, on Section 431, if it's never been used and it is open to appeal, what's it there for, and can you describe a situation where it would be used or could be used?           
Secondly, in terms of the industrial dispute, one of the criticisms Qantas had was that the unions were asking for things about company decisions and management that they should not be asking for. Do you think there's any room in Fair Work Act to maybe include - re-include an allowable strike provisions clause?           
And thirdly, Qantas gave evidence in the hearing yesterday that they decided on 26 October that talks with the TWU had failed. Do you think they'd planned this for more days than they're letting on? 
PM: Well on matters related to the TWU, I might refer to Minister Albanese.         
On the other questions you ask, the current section in the legislation replicates sections in earlier versions of the Act - it is there as a last resort. It has never been used, and consequently, because it has never been used, there's not, you know, certainty about the way in which courts would deal with that provision. So you know, it's there as a last resort should a last resort circumstance ever present.           
What the Government determined to do quickly on Saturday afternoon, with the first hearing Saturday night, was to use a provision of the Fair Work Act, which would enable us to get an order that the industrial action be terminated, that passengers could start moving again, that people would no longer be stranded. 
We achieved what we set out to do, and that is a win for passengers who will be able to start getting back on planes rather than being stranded, and of course, we were motivated by our concerns about the national economy and the economic damage, including to the tourism industry.         
Now, you had three questions - one's going to Minister Albanese. What was the second?
JOURNALIST: The other one was Qantas had decided on the 26th that their talks with the TWU had failed- 
PM: -Minister Albanese will respond to that. 
MINISTER ALBANESE: I read this morning in The Daily Telegraph that Mr Joyce had a meeting in my Marrickville office the Friday before last. I don't normally disclose private meetings, but given it's appeared in the press, on this occasion I will, and confirm the fact that I have had three face-to-face meetings with Mr Joyce in the past eight days prior to his announcement.         
The Government wasn't sitting back doing nothing here. The Government was attempting to facilitate discussion between the parties.         
I had a meeting between myself, Mr Joyce and Mr Sheldon on the Friday before last in my Marrickville office. I chose the Marrickville office so it wouldn't get out because I attempted to have a without-prejudice discussion to see where two people who I have a good relationship with could get to. In terms of the details of those discussions, it's not appropriate to reveal them.           
It is however, notable that after that meeting, Mr Sheldon and the TWU called off, as they said they would, the planned industrial stoppage they had scheduled for Wednesday.           
I then had a further meeting with Mr Joyce in my office later that afternoon about the economic impact of the dispute on Qantas, and I had a further meeting with Mr Sheldon and Mr Joyce on last Wednesday afternoon.          
It was my view that considerable progress was being made, and you will note that there were reports indeed in the newspaper early last week about the progress that had been made with spokespeople from both Qantas and the Transport Workers Union indicating that that was the case.         
Under those circumstances, that is part of the reason why I found quite extraordinary - quite extraordinary  -  that I received the notification that I did from Mr Joyce on Saturday afternoon. I believe that if both parties, both the employer in Qantas, and the employees, act like adults, they can certainly get this done. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in terms of the issues in this dispute that have to with Qantas' proposed restructuring of its international division, does the Government have a view on that, and specifically, do you have a view about whether anything that the company proposes to do runs foul of the Qantas Sales Act? 
PM: Well on the Qantas Sale Act, I'll go to Minister Albanese. 
I'm not going to be drawn as the conciliation process unfolds over coming days on individual issues in this dispute. What we need now, and I've conveyed this directly to the parties myself this morning, is we need them to get around a table and use this opportunity to get this fixed; to get this done. They have a 21-day period. It's in their interest that they start and they get it done as quickly as possible.
On the Sale Act, I'll refer to Minister Albanese.
MINISTER ALBANESE: With regard to the Qantas Sale Act, the Government has made our position very clear: that we will not countenance any breach of the Act. We have a watching brief, and as Qantas makes announcements or makes its position further clear as issues develop with regard to its plans for restructuring, the Government will seek advice as that is made. But we've made it very clear that we intend to uphold the Qantas Sale Act.           
At the moment there is nothing that has been proposed that I have advice is in breach of the Act, but we of course have not seen the full detail of that because many of those details have not been finalised.
PM: We'll go over there. We'll go over to Lenore and then come back to Michelle. Lenore? 
JOURNALIST: Whatever. 
PM: Sorry. Just don't trade places I'll be in even worst straights. Laura?
JOURNALIST: Hello. Could I just clarify, some of the employers and others have been suggesting that this dispute itself is, shall we say, a love child of the Fair Work Act because it's given greater powers to the unions to pursue a wider range of issues beyond workplace conditions. I was wondering whether you could address that particular point please.
PM: I'm happy to address that particular point.
It's certainly true that the bargaining system we introduced under the Fair Work Act does enable working people to bargain on things like job security, and so they should - they should be able to bargain on job security.          
It's not appropriate, and I don't think it's right for Australian workplaces that, for example - and this should not be taken as a reference to the Qantas dispute, I'm using a hypothetical example, so please note that - but it's not acceptable to me that we could have a situation where an employer agrees with his or her employees that they are to be paid a certain wage, and then during the life of that agreement, when the employees are obligated to not take industrial action - that's the rules under the Fair Work Act - the employer starts employing contractors at cheaper rates and making those employees redundant.         
That is not acceptable to me. I can understand that people want to bargain on job security matters. 
Now, let's remember bargaining doesn't mean agreement. It means that you get to raise the issue and you get to have the conversation. Work Choices was all about leaving employees without any ability to pursue issues on their own behalf, without any real ability to really have a voice.         
The express desire of the Howard Government and the Liberal Party, of Cabinet Ministers like Tony Abbott, was to make sure that employers had all of the say and working people had none of the say. That wasn't right, and working people rightly rejected it in the 2007 election.           
I owe Michelle a question. 
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, you said that you're now talking to all the parties. Do you think it would've made any difference if you had become involved in this in a more high-profile way, getting the parties together as your minister did but with the extra clout coming from being a Prime Ministerial meeting, or do you think you did everything that you could've to get this dispute resolved before the weekend? 
PM: I believe I did everything that I could and I believe the Government pursued the appropriate strategy. At every point, I have been in contact with and briefed by my Ministers. I was obviously well aware of Minister Albanese's discussions; well aware of Minister Evans' discussions and the like. They were using their good offices to see what could be done, as I think should be very transparent to you now from the information made available during the course of this press conference.           
Clearly, that wasn't going to lead to an outcome because Qantas determined on Saturday to take the extreme action that we have seen. Now, my view is with the Government having taken the right steps quickly to bring this industrial disputation to an end; with the Fair Work system delivering a termination of the industrial action; with the Fair Work system delivering a 21-day conciliation period, it is now in the interests of all of these parties - and I put obligations on their shoulders equally - it's in the interests of all of these parties, each trade union and Qantas, to get round a table and get this fixed.   
Thank you very much.



HOST: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard says the decision from Fair Work Australia gives certainty to the travelling public.She's also denied newspaper reports that Qantas chief, Alan Joyce tried to contact her hours before he grounded Qantas to say he would be willing to keep the planes in the sky if the Government intervened directly in the dispute.
The Prime Minister is speaking here to our reporter Stephen Dziedzic.PM: Well, arrangements are being made by Qantas now to put planes back in the sky so that will happen during the course of today. That is happening because last night the industrial umpire terminated industrial action.That happened because the Government took the issue to the industrial umpire so we have succeeded in what we wanted - getting planes back in the sky, workers back to work and that is a win for the travelling public that has been so inconvenienced by all of this over Melbourne Cup weekend and a win for the million people who work in tourism in Australia.HOST: Why didn't the Government directly order the end of industrial action instead of going to Fair Work Australia?PM: There is a section in the Fair Work Act, Section 431 that enables a minister to make a declaration. That section has never been used in Australian industrial history, not once, not ever and if we had used that section we would have ended up in a circumstance of legal uncertainty where the minister's declaration could have been taken to the courts with all of the time delays and uncertainties that would have meant for Qantas, its employees and the travelling public.What we chose to do was to take the matter to the industrial umpire and our application has been granted, industrial action is at an end.HOST: But why, why legal uncertainty? Why is this section 431 written into the Act if it can't be used?PM: Well, it has been in industrial law for a long period of time and never been used in industrial relations history. So using a section that has never been used before would have put us in a world of legal doubt. Instead we took the course that was going to get the matter before the industrial umpire and that has succeeded to do exactly what we wanted it to do - to get industrial action ended and the planes back in the sky.HOST: But if there are passengers being inconvenienced, millions of dollars every hour that the planes are grounded, why not go to the section that seems to give you the quickest resolution possible?PM: Well, you're making an error in saying the quickest resolution possible because you are not factoring in the prospect that the ministerial declaration would then have been the subject of legal proceedings with all of the uncertainty that that would have meant.HOST: Prime Minister, did Alan Joyce try to contact your office in the hours before his 5pm announcement on Saturday?PM: Alan Joyce will make clear later today that those reports in today's newspapers are misleading. Already Qantas has contacted my office this morning to say those reports are misleading.Alan Joyce contacted the Minister for Transport around 2pm on Saturday and said that he was going to ground the planes at 5pm. I want to make it clear my view is that Qantas did take an extreme step on Saturday when it had other options open to it including making the same application to the industrial umpire that the Government made which has resulted in the end of industrial action and planes going back to doing what they should be doing - flying passengers around.HOST: So there was no attempt from Mr Joyce to contact your office? Have you checked with your office staff on this?PM: Of course I have and Alan Joyce did contact my chief of staff. He did not make a request to speak to me about these matters. He understood that I was at CHOGM. But in any event he had made it crystal clear to the Minister for Transport that he would be grounding the planes at 5pm - no ifs, no buts.HOST: When you drafted the Fair Work Act did you anticipate that a company would be able to self-sabotage itself in order to end a protracted industrial dispute?PM: I anticipated that companies may engage in lockouts so we drafted the act to deal with industrial action that could harm the national economy and the section of the Act that we drafted has worked to end industrial action, as it should.HOST: But it has ended it after enormous cost and after a large number of passengers, thousands of passengers have been grounded for a substantial amount of time. Did you anticipate that this is a tactic that could be used and do you think that we are going to see a troubling precedent being used here?PM: I think you are making an error to suggest that this is the first time that we've seen lockouts happen in Australian industrial history. That is not true. Under earlier versions of industrial relations law before the Fair Work Act, you could see industrial disputation with big costs and consequences and you could see the industrial umpire ending that disputation because it could damage the national economy.The Fair Work Act has worked exactly as it should in this case. We took an application to the industrial umpire, the industrial umpire has ended this damaging industrial action. Now it will be up to the parties, Qantas and the unions, to sort themselves out over the next 21 days and if they can't sort themselves out the industrial umpire will impose a solution upon them.HOST: Business groups argue that this was the showdown that we had to have, that because they are constrained under the Fair Work Act, they don't have the flexibility that they need, that we've got a situation upon us now where companies will have to be taking steps like this in order to get the unions on side. Do you accept that analysis?PM: Frankly, the analysis you've just put to me is complete nonsense, complete nonsense. Under the Fair Work Act we are seeing industrial disputes going down, they are not going up. So yes, we've had a high profile dispute this weekend, I understand that but we are not across the nation seeing industrial disputes go up.HOST: But business leaders are warning, Prime Minister, that we are going to see more disputes like this because there has been a rumble of uncertainty for some time on this.PM: Well, that is complete nonsense. Everybody knows their legal position under the Fair Work Act. Industrial disputes have not been going up under the Fair Work Act. The Fair Work Act took away the hated WorkChoices legislation because that enabled workers to be ripped off.Some of the workers most at risk in our society, to walk into work one day and be told that their pay was going to be cut, that they weren't going to get their penalty rates any more, their overtime was gone, that they'd lose public holidays and other conditions that they relied upon. That was wrong and the Fair Work Act ended that.On industrial action, before the Fair Work Act and now it was possible for unions to take protected industrial action. Before the Fair Work Act and now it was possible for employers to lock workers out so it was possible to see the kind of industrial disputation we've seen this weekend.Fair Work Australia has done what it should do and ended that industrial action. But I do want to make this very clear - I believe the action that Qantas took on Saturday was extreme. On Friday Qantas was reassuring that they were negotiating the dispute and obviously they were doing that because they saw the prospects of getting to a negotiated settlement. Then on Saturday at 2pm with very little warning to Government or any member of the travelling public, Qantas grounded the planes.They did that in circumstances where they had other options open to them. They could have taken exactly the same application to the industrial umpire the Government took and got industrial action brought to an end. They could have gone to the industrial umpire and sought assistance with arbitrating the dispute, working together with the industrial umpire to get it resolved.Instead they took the action with very little notice to anyone of grounding the planes and stranding passengers around Australia and the world.HOST: One of the main actors in this, Tony Sheldon from the TWU is a candidate for the ALP national presidency. Did the Government dither on this because it didn't want to offend powerful union allies?PM: What a very silly suggestion. The Government went to Fair Work Australia, got industrial action ended, everyone's industrial action - the unions' industrial action, Qantas's lockout. 



HOST: Prime Minister, welcome to the program.
PM: Thank you Leigh.
HOST: How do you explain the discrepancy between transport minister Anthony Albanese's account of his dealings with Qantas and the accounts of the Qantas CEO Alan Joyce?
PM: My understanding from Minister Albanese and he has said this publicly is he spoke to Mr Joyce this morning and Mr Joyce will verify that what Mr Albanese says is a correct account of their conversations.
HOST: Has Alan Joyce misled the government in any way, do you believe?
PM: Leigh, I'm not going to get drawn on commentary about these kind of matters. I wanted to ensure and I believe Minister Albanese wanted to ensure that the correct version of events was there on the public record. We faced some circumstances today, for example, with newspaper reporting that Mr Joyce very clearly and quite early this morning said was incorrect. Then following Mr Joyce's press conference, Minister Albanese spoke to him and arising out of that Minister Albanese has been able to clarify the position and that is that the question of locking out all of the Qantas staff and grounding all of its flights was not raised with the Government until Saturday when Qantas and its board had already determined to take that very extreme action. 
HOST: And do you think that that was the right behaviour by Qantas, do you believe that they should have raised that prospect with you earlier?
PM: Well I've been crystal clear, Leigh, that I think Qantas's conduct on Saturday was extreme. I believe Qantas had other options available to it. I've made my views very clearly known to Mr Joyce and of course I've made them known publicly as well. Tens of thousands of people were stranded. We faced a circumstance that had implications for our national economy as a result of what Qantas determined to do on Saturday. This was against a backdrop where as late as Friday Qantas was saying that it was negotiating its way through this dispute.
HOST: If Qantas was saying as late as Friday that they were negotiating, how is that not misleading the government?
PM: You are going to have to direct that question to Alan Joyce or other Qantas representatives. 
HOST: Well can you trust Qantas in future dealings with them?
PM: My door is always open to major Australian businesses because they provide jobs to working Australians. I'll always be there prepared to listen and to talk to major Australian employers about what they are doing in their business and how we can work with them. My focus as Prime Minister is on making sure people have got the benefits of work, the dignity of work, I've been very clear about that- 
HOST: But on the specific point about Qantas, have they breached your trust?
PM: Leigh, I will continue to work with Qantas as I work with other major Australian businesses.
HOST: Do you have faith in Qantas's leadership?
PM: I will work with Qantas with Alan Joyce as CEO with Qantas representatives in the interests of the Australian nation and in the interests of Australians having the benefit of jobs. Qantas is a major employer. It's an iconic national brand and of course my door is always open to Qantas, the way it is to other major employers in this country. And indeed, as I'm available to, to the representatives of small businesses that I meet with. 
HOST: Today you've repeatedly described Qantas's actions as extreme and you've done it again now. But wouldn't it be more apt to describe their actions as savvy given they've effectively played your industrial relations laws to give themselves the upper hand in their dispute with the unions? 
PM: Everybody is in the same circumstance in this dispute now, Leigh, as a result of us taking an application to Fair Work Australia and Fair Work Australia terminating the industrial action. Qantas is not able to pursue the lock-out. Unions are not able to pursue their industrial action. Everyone is required to have the dispute in conciliation for 21 days and if they can't sort it out, everyone will have the industrial umpire's decision imposed upon them. Everyone is in the same position. 
HOST: But isn't Qantas in the better position, though, because it means within 21 days, the negotiations are going to have to end. Industrial relations experts say that if it goes to compulsory arbitration the outcome is most likely to favour Qantas management?
PM: I won't make assumptions about what Fair Work Australia may do if it ends up imposing a decision on Qantas and the unions involved. My message to Qantas and the unions involved today has been very loud and very clear. The onus is on their shoulders now to get around a table and get this fixed and the sooner the better. 
HOST: We know that the Government chose to make an application to Fair Work Australia instead of issuing a ministerial order to force the industrial action to end. And you said today that that's because the use of a ministerial directive hasn't yet been tested in law. Haven't you now though signalled to every employer in the country that in industrial disputes in the future the Government will baulk at using that ministerial provision?
PM: Leigh, I've just said publicly what anybody could've worked out for themselves if they'd pulled an industrial relations textbook off the shelf and turned to the right page. It's no secret about this. That provision which is in the Fair Work legislation and was in the legislation before Fair Work has never been used. And anybody who wanted to look at industrial law would've worked out, too, that if a minister made a declaration under that section then it's capable of judicial review, causing most likely a court case to proceed- 
HOST: But then in which case are you likely to actually use that then?
PM: Well on Saturday Leigh, I faced a choice in this Qantas dispute about what was the best thing in the interests of the travelling public and the Australian nation. And I determined the best thing we could do was go to Fair Work Australia, have the arguments out and seek an order for termination of industrial action and in that strategy we succeeded. Got what we needed done, achieved and as a result, the travelling public can see planes back in the sky-
HOST: But what I'm asking is, when are you going to be prepared to test that legislation? You've said you're anxious that it's going to be open to a legal challenge if you use it. Under what circumstance then will you test it? What's the point of having it there if you're not prepared to use it?
PM: Leigh, I think you're in error in using the terminology legal challenge. I am not concerned about that section of the legislation somehow being subject to legal challenge as if the legislation has a problem. It's a ministerial declaration, subject to judicial review. What that means is you still end up or are very likely to still end up having legal proceedings. So you then face a choice. What's the best thing to do in the circumstances that present themselves? On Saturday, I determined the best thing to do was to go to the industrial umpire, Fair Work Australia, and that has absolutely worked to get us the result we needed for the nation and that is Qantas planes back in the sky.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thank you very much for joining us.
PM: Thank you.  



HOST: Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Now, Alan Joyce has claimed that he would have abandoned his decision to ground the airline had you taken his call and he waited three hours. Is that right or not?
PM: That is reported in today's newspapers, and Alan Joyce has already been on radio this morning saying those reports are wrong - and they are wrong.
HOST: Prime Minister, did Alan Joyce want you to declare the industrial action as illegal?
PM: Alan Joyce did not ask the Government to do that. Let's be very clear here about the timeline and what happened.
On Friday, Qantas was saying it was in the business of negotiating this dispute. Two o'clock Saturday, Alan Joyce contacts our Minister for Transport, Anthony Albanese, and says the planes will be grounded at 5pm. It wasn't put as a topic for discussion or as an option - he was just advising Minister Albanese it was happening.
What the Government then immediately did was make an application to Fair Work Australia to have the industrial action terminated, and it has been terminated, and as a result of what the Government did the Qantas planes will be back in the sky later today.
What will also happen, and I think this is important, is as Qantas continues to work, planes flying, stranded passengers getting to where they need to go, tourism operators seeing people turn up for their holidays, as all of that happens, the parties  -  Qantas and the unions - will have 21 days to sort themselves out. If they can't sort themselves out, then Fair Work Australia, our industrial umpire, will impose a solution on them. That is all happening because of the application the Government took.
HOST: OK, so you said the Minister responsible received the phone call at two o'clock. Were you also briefed on that phone call at two o'clock?
PM: Yes, I was continuously briefed by my ministers over the weekend.
HOST: And so you knew that those planes were going to be stranded at five o'clock?
PM: We knew that Qantas was grounding the planes at five o'clock, following the phone call to Minister Albanese.
HOST: Shouldn't you have reacted in that situation, given that you had three hours to do something? 
PM: Well, we did act. We took the application to Fair Work Australia.
There's been a lot of discussion about using an alternate section under the Fair Work Act, a section that's in the legislation now and has been in earlier legislation where the Minister makes a declaration.
The problem with that is that section has never been used before, and consequently we would have been in a world of legal uncertainty where the Minister's declaration could then have gone to a court with all of the potential time delay and confusion that that would have caused.
So, we took the course to get this done and go to Fair Work Australia, get an order. We have succeeded in that. That is a win for the travelling public and it's a win for the million Australians who work in tourism.
HOST: Prime Minister, given the acrimonious nature of the relationship between the three unions and Qantas up to this point in time, how confident are you that they can reach a resolution on their issues within the next 21 days, and will you or a representative of the Government be sitting in on any meetings and guiding them to resolution?
PM: No, they will have the industrial umpire there seeking to guide them to a resolution, and if they can't do it then the industrial umpire will impose a solution on them. So, either they fix it themselves or the industrial umpire tells them what the outcome is.
HOST: Are you confident they'll fix it themselves in the next 21 days?
PM: Look, that is a matter for Qantas and the unions. I am obviously concerned about the extreme action that Qantas took on Saturday, but my attitude now is Qantas and the unions have got 21 days to sort this out themselves. They should be using those days to get it sorted out. If they fail, then Fair Work Australia will come in over the top of them and tell them what to do.
HOST: I just can't believe that you couldn't have done something in that three hours. You realise this was going to be extreme, you realise that planes were going to be grounded and people were going to be sitting on tarmacs - you had three hours to talk them out of that situation.
PM: Let's be very clear here. Alan Joyce made it crystal clear to Government that this was not open for discussion. He was grounding the planes at 5pm.
That is why I am describing Qantas' action as extreme. It had other options open to it on Saturday, including taking the same sort of application that the Government took to Fair Work Australia and getting the same sort of order. That is, an order to terminate industrial action, to get on with sitting round a table and sorting it out, and if that doesn't work to get on with having Fair Work Australia fix it.
HOST: This has been going on since July. Why weren't they ordered to Fair Work Australia before this?
PM: Well, Qantas said that they were in negotiations up till Friday.
HOST: Prime Minister, on a personal level, how embarrassing is it to sit as leader of the CHOGM meeting over the weekend and see the international representatives and leaders from all around the country potentially stuck in our nation?
PM: Well, I advised the heads of government who were here personally about the Qantas dispute. They took it in very good spirits. They took it in their stride and then the wonderful staff and team that made the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting possible worked with them to make alternate travel arrangements.
HOST: Alright, thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you very much. 



HOST: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins us. Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Thanks for joining us Prime Minister, the questions about Qantas of course still remain strong and Premier Baillieu in Melbourne with the Melbourne Cup Carnival really badly affected says you should have intervened earlier. How do you respond?
PM: Well Premier Baillieu hasn't got the facts of this right and I'm not surprised really that he's joined common cause with Tony Abbott's political campaign. We're used to all of this negativity from Tony Abbott and the Opposition. Let's just get the facts clear here, as late as Friday Qantas was saying that it was negotiating this dispute, two o'clock Saturday Qantas contacted the Government, not for a discussion, not to ask our opinion, but to tell us that they were grounding the planes at 5pm.
HOST: It was put out strongly, Prime Minister, yesterday by one paper in particular that they tried to contact you at CHOGM and you didn't respond.
PM: And that paper, The Daily Telegraph, you're right, that story ran yesterday and as early as 7:30 yesterday morning Alan Joyce was on the radio saying that story was untrue. So don't be misled by false reports here, that report was wrong.
HOST: What about going back to that basic point though, regardless of the politics of the other side, that this was coming, this was getting worse, Qantas was getting badly affected, therefore the economy was badly affected. Why didn't you use your powers under Fair Work Australia to say: take it to the tribunal?
PM: We did take it to the tribunal, so let's just get the facts right here and the law right here, you can't just chuck the Australian law in the bin and pretend it's not there, which some of the commentary from the Opposition has done. So, Qantas on Friday saying that they were negotiating the dispute, on Saturday contact us at 2pm and say ‘we are grounding the planes', that is a Qantas decision. They were not seeking to discuss it with the Government; the board had made the decision. As soon as we heard that, we made application to Fair Work Australia to get the industrial action terminated, it was terminated and planes were back in the sky yesterday afternoon.
Now we all know that in this country, in the past, we've seen industrial disputes that have lasted weeks, that have lasted months, here we are Qantas starting to engage in a lock out on Saturday and we had planes back in the sky by Monday afternoon.
HOST: Fair Work Australia, of course, the Federal Government was a major party in that hearing-
PM: -The hearing happened because of the action of the Government.
HOST: And you were there and you will be there, presumably. What will the case, what will the Federal Government take to Fair Work Australia, what will it ask for now?
PM: Well the parties now sit in a room and see if they can sort it out and I believe they should sort it out and I made that perfectly clear to them yesterday. If they can't sort it out, then the industrial umpire will sort it out for them and tell them what to do and tell them what their working conditions are going to be.
But the significant thing for the travelling public and people are getting planes now and people who have been stranded are making their way back home, so Fair Work Australia's decision was a win for the travelling public. The significant thing for the travelling public over the 21 days of discussions and then if the industrial umpire has to sort it out, the period that it takes is that the planes will be in the sky, because industrial action has been terminated.
HOST: Just one more on the Qantas issue, Prime Minister. The question of whether we can have the old Qantas back, is the Government going to try to affect an Australian owned airline and keep it that way, or does it have to ride out the way it is in the economy?
PM: Well there is a Qantas Sale Act, that puts obligations on Qantas about its Australian identity, so I think that the provisions of that piece of Australian law are very important, Qantas is an iconic Australian brand. But we are not intending to resume Government ownership of Qantas, no, we're not, that's not the way Government engages in the modern economy.
HOST: Interest rates, of course on everybody's lips today, with the Reserve Bank decision coming down in a few hours time. How strongly will the Government pressure the banks  -  Wayne Swan's already been out there, but how much pressure do you want to put on the banks to make sure that they pass on any cut?
PM: Just to put it in order, the Reserve Bank of course is independent from Government, so they'll make the decision this afternoon. The Reserve Bank has indicated that they have got room to move and the Government's been playing its role by engaging in the greatest, fastest fiscal consolidation the country's ever seen. What that means is getting the budget back into surplus, we're getting that job done and that plays its role in not putting upwards pressure on inflation and the Reserve Bank keeps a very big eye on what is happening with inflation, as it does interest rate settings. So the Reserve Bank will make its decision, if the Reserve Bank determines to cut rates today, then I think Australian banking customers will look at their banks and say they've got no excuse for not passing that cut on.
HOST: Do you feel that, that as Prime Minister they have no excuse?
PM: I certainly do, I don't believe that the banks would have any excuse for not passing the rate cut on, in full, if a rate cut occurs today.
HOST: Just looking back, it seems such a long time ago now, with all the events of the last couple of days - CHOGM, is it unfair to call it a multimillion dollar talkfest, that just talked about talking some more?
PM: Oh, I think that is unfair. Let's have a look at what happened, a first for Perth, for Western Australia, for Australia, we had more than 50 heads of government, representatives of nations, come to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. That actually meant that there were 3,000 people in Perth, 1,200 of them at a Business Forum, Australian business leaders meeting business leaders from overseas, forming bonds, doing deals, working out joint investments, so that's good for Australia.
There was also a big Youth Forum, so I think that's great for young people around the world and a People's Forum, where people could come and raise issues that concern us and concern nations around the world as well.
HOST: And Prime Minister, when it to came to a big issue, like human rights, it's effectively put off, isn't it?
PM: Well there were steps forward taken at Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. This is an organisation, it's more than 50 nations, it works by consensus, so no one meeting changes the world, but progress was made. On human rights questions there was a new empowerment of a body called the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group. In all of the history of the Commonwealth, until this time the only kind of choice the Commonwealth had if a nation was off the path of democracy and the rule of law and human rights, was to let it run until it was really bad and then decide to suspend of expel them. Now this group is empowered to intervene when the nation is first starting to veer off that right path, rather than waiting for it to go over the cliff.
HOST: Meanwhile Prime Minister, another very important matter to be dealt with today, the race that stops the nation. Does it stop Parliament? Do you get to watch the Melbourne Cup?
PM: We don't stop Parliament. We're in the process of making some arrangements so that question time starts early and finishes early, so people can canter  -  that would be the right word today, wouldn't it-
HOST: -It would.
PM: So people can canter to the their TV screens and watch the race.
HOST: This could be a rare moment when the Government and the Opposition get together?
PM: Well, I think you'll find people in all sorts of combinations and iterations round the building watching the Melbourne Cup.
HOST: We've got to get a tip too, Prime Minister.
PM: I've gone for Manighar, with Damien Oliver. Having spent so many days in Perth, having seen Perth put its best face forward to the world during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, I've gone for a Western Australian jockey.
HOST: Thanks very much. Thanks for your time today.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Julia Gillard good morning.
PM: Good morning Deb.
HOST: First of all you're flying out this evening for the G20, you've already put your cards on the table regarding European debt and the likely impact on the world economy, now what position does Australia take to this meeting?
PM: The G20 is an important meeting, it's the biggest economies of the world coming together and for our economy and making sure that we're managing it the interests of working people, what happens in the global economy is significant. So I will go to this meeting with a number of messages, first and foremost on European debt, we've seen European leaders act, now we need the G20 to back that in and to ensure that there is implementation of the framework that European leaders have outlined.
Second I want to pursue an agenda on trade, we've reached gridlock effectively in the global trade talks, trade is good for Australia, it equals jobs and we need to push through with the trade discussions.
And then thirdly there will be a question of more resourcing for the International Monetary Fund as part of backing in the global economy, dealing with the problems like sovereign debt problems in Europe and getting us back on a global growth phase. And we want to see more balanced growth in the global economy, that means developed nations around the world need to do what we're doing, looking to new sources of growth like clean energy and the things that can come with new technology like the NBN, and developing nations need to take action like moving to market based currencies.
HOST: Now as with CHOGM though, overshadowing the G20 and indeed underpinning much of the debt and many of the economies of the G20 are China and Japan. Now to what extent is Australia able to leverage its long term and strengthening relationship with those two countries in meetings with Europe and indeed later with the US?
PM: I think when we go to the G20 we have a voice in our own right as a significant nation and I want Australia's voice to be heard in the councils of the world and so I will take our voice to the G20. We can also as we raise our voice be pointing to our region, we are in the region of the world that is still experiencing economic growth, so when you mention countries like Japan and China, they are very substantial trading partners for us, of course India will be there as well, another very significant nation in our region and important trading partner.
I've also made very clear our view on the US economy, we need the US economy to get back to growth, we want the US economy to be vibrant and solidly growing because that's good for the global economy, and therefore good for us, which means we need to see the US overcome the kind of political gridlock that has faced President Obama in his Congress.
HOST: Now President Obama has started to shift his gaze much more solidly towards the Asian region, recently signing a free trade agreement with South Korea, and there is a case to say that the US has been missing on the beat in Asia in recent times, distracted by many other worthy events to take their attention in the Middle East and elsewhere. It'll take a lot of skill though for them to finesse their position while China and Japan finesse theirs, while everybody makes room for India, while Indonesia gets credit for its growth. Exactly how do you anticipate this sort of phased series of meetings that you are on now having gone from CHOGM to the G20, but then coming back to the East Asia Summit and dealing with President Obama?
PM: Deb thanks for that question, I lost sound for the first couple of words but I understand your question and just explaining the series of meetings. Yes we've had Commonwealth leaders here in Perth, that's been pursuing the traditional Commonwealth agenda of democracy and the rule of law and human rights, the G20 is centrally focussed on what we need to do on the global economy now, though it will also talk about development questions and we've made a contribution on food security. Then I will go to APEC, APEC is a meeting of economies, it's an institution we are very proud of with both Prime Minister Hawke and Prime Minister Keating having played such a major role. The agenda in APEC is always freer trade and that's not just about trade deals in terms of tariffs and quotas, it's actually about the barriers that can be behind the borders that stop people getting their products in. And then the East Asia Summit is an important and expanding piece of regional architecture, this will be the first meeting where we've got the US at the table, President Obama there we'll have Russia at the table, China is there, the major countries of our region are there and we believe that that's got a full mandate across not just economic questions but into strategic questions too. And in the meantime between APEC and the East Asia Summit we'll have President Obama here in the sixtieth anniversary of our alliance with the United States.
HOST: Now can I take you to the question of the mining tax. You've struck the deal with the big miners in the shadow of the overthrow of Kevin Rudd, and clearly it was a top order priority for you personally, but those high profits and the long order books of the mining industry are now leading lots of people to say well they've got a lot more to give, there's 100 year investments that need to be made here in Australia at the moment in rail, new sources of energy, all of those things. It leads many to sort of back the inescapable logic that the miners actually need to pay more.
Now are you prepared to reopen those negotiations for more fine tuning?
PM: Deb it leads many to come to the conclusion that we should be better taxing the mining industry and using those profits and that source of taxation to balance up economic growth and to make sure that we've got opportunity for all. It leads many to that conclusion, unfortunately it doesn't lead the Leader of the Opposition to that conclusion who seems to be one of the few people in this country who doesn't understand that there's a patchwork economy and doesn't understand that there are some sections of our economy under pressure whilst the mining industry is turbocharged by the growth in our region-
HOST: (Inaudible) you will-
PM: Deb, let me answer your question, I do understand that, I struck the mining tax arrangements understanding that and we will deliver the agreement we made with the mining industry, so we will bring the legislation to Parliament this week, replicating the agreement that I made with Australia's miners. That means we will be better taxing mining, getting a better dividend for the Australian people from the mineral wealth in our ground and we'll be using that to bolster economic growth in other sections of the economy as well as investing in super, a great long term source of savings for individuals and our nation and in infrastructure, the infrastructure we need as a growing economy particularly a growing resource economy.
HOST: Now Tony Windsor, the country independent, has opened the batting on the coal seam gas question and about 35 per cent of Australia's black coal reserves are right here under the Sydney basin, so this feels pretty close to us because that is also inescapably where the coal seam gas is. Can the concerns of Tony Windsor be accommodated in the mining tax negotiation?
PM: Well first Deb let's just remind ourselves that when the legislation comes to Parliament the Government will be voting for it, Tony Abbott will be voting against it because he'd prefer to see big miners keep these profits than to have them shared by the Australian community. Tony Windsor has said consistently he's got concerns about land use questions and coal seam gas and mining in his area of the world, I know those concerns are shared by many. Predominantly this is a state government matter, to manage land use and resources, but of course we will discuss Tony Windsor's concerns with him.
HOST: Prime Minister to Afghanistan, the bodies of three young Australian soldiers will be home soon, now your own backbenchers are questioning Australia's engagement there, yesterday you used the word ‘bitter' to describe the way that Australians would take this news, now what if our presence in Afghanistan is fermenting bitterness there, are you sure you are right to keep Australia there?
PM: I am sure and I am determined that we see our mission through. When I assess what's happening in Afghanistan I have the special privilege and opportunity to effectively look at the situation through the eyes of Australian soldiers. I've spoken to a number of our soldiers who have been there on more than one occasion and they are able to tell me in the most personal, detailed and graphic terms about the progress that is being made in countering the insurgency and bringing greater stability to Afghanistan and the progress that's being made in training Afghan National Army soldiers and police. I did describe what happened as bitter because this was an Afghan soldier turning on Australian soldiers and causing such devastating loss of life and so many soldiers to be wounded. But I have asked the nation to remember that we are talking about an Afghan National Army that now has 300,000 people in it and they, the Afghans, reacted with shock and horror to what happened to our soldiers.
HOST: Prime Minister I wanted to touch on Qantas before going to a lighter subject, Qantas has been backed by many big business interests in its aggressive final act to precipitate the Fair Work Australia intervention in the dispute that it's engaged in with its union. How do you feel about the response of big business, does it infer to you that there'll be more of this?
PM: Well big business can put their own case and speak for themselves but I've got a very clear view, I believe the action that Qantas took on Saturday was extreme, Qantas on Friday was talking about continuing to negotiate this dispute, on Saturday it made the decision to strand tens of thousands of passengers around Australia and around the world and it needs to take responsibility publically for that decision to strand its passengers. For the Government's part we reacted immediately and effectively, we brought the matter to Fair Work Australia and the industrial umpire had the industrial action terminated by Monday morning so we reacted Saturday afternoon having been told by Qantas that it was grounding its planes and by Monday afternoon planes were getting back in the sky and stranded passengers were being returned home. Deb you and I would remember that there have been industrial disputes in this country that lasted weeks, that lasted months, lock-outs and that's what Qantas was doing, locking its staff out. We have seen lock-outs in the country that have lasted months, for this the industrial action to be resolved from Saturday when Qantas started it, by Monday with planes getting back in the sky shows that Fair Work Australia did the right thing following the Government's application to it.
HOST: Now Prime Minister it's Cup Day, and the question, do you intend to have a flutter and on what?
PM: I think I'll end up in some sweeps along the way and I'm going to back in Manighar which Damien Oliver is the jockey for, I've just spent some wonderful days in Perth for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, Perth, Western Australia did us proud as we welcomed these three thousand visitors to our shores and so on that basis I've gone very pro-WA and therefore pro-Damien.
HOST: Ok an omen bet, thank you very much Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you. 



PM: I have just arrived in France for the G20 meeting, bringing together the leaders of the biggest 20 economies in the world.
This G20 meeting comes at the most testing time for the global economy since the depths of the global financial crisis. Leaders at this meeting need to come together and show the leadership the world needs to lock in behind jobs and growth.
Australia has a strong and resilient economy but we are not immune from what happens in the rest of the world.
Even before coming to this G20 meeting, for a period of time I have been raising Australia's concern about the situation in Europe. We have been consistently raising our concern about European financial stability and also about the sovereign debt problems in Greece.
When European leaders came together on 27October and put together a plan, Australia was supportive of that plan. We said then and we continue to say now that the plan needs to have all of its details finalised and the plan needs to be implemented.
Now I would have come to the G20 to say that in any event, but circumstances in the last 36 hours with the announcements from Greece means that there is now new uncertainty in the European situation.
That means it is important for European leaders to shore up the plan that they have developed and to ensure that all details are finalised and that the plan is implemented. Now it is more important than ever that words become deeds.
What Greece has announced has effectively put the European crisis on fast-forward. That means that inevitably over the next few days the focus will be on how the European plan can be implemented and what else needs to be done in Europe to get stability and growth back into Europe, and European economies.
Now this is an issue for European leaders to deal with - front and centre for European leaders. But of course the G20 won't be sitting on the sidelines. I believe it is important for the G20 to be addressing questions that can increase confidence during this period.
I particularly believe it is important that the G20 look at the question of IMF resourcing. That would be one thing that the G20 could do which would increase the confidence of markets and show that there is sufficient resourcing to deal with anything else that may flow, arising out of the European problems.
I will be raising the need to increase IMF resourcing, both at the G20 meeting itself, and at my bilateral meetings, starting today at my bilateral meeting with the President of Brazil.
For Australia's part, we stand ready to participate in an increase in IMF resources. I am here in France attending the G20, to make sure that the voices of Australians are heard on the global economy, because the global economy does matter to Australian jobs, and Australia's future.
I am very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, have you got a figure regarding what Australia is happy to contribute further to the IMF?
PM: Well clearly I have just arrived and I will be participating in discussions over the next few days but I am indicating Australia is standing ready to play its part in any increase in IMF resources.
And I do believe that the G20 does need to address increasing IMF resources. Now from Australia, this is not a new perspective. People would recall that the Treasurer has been talking about IMF resourcing for a substantial period of time and I have also raised it directly in the run-up to this G20 meeting. 
But now of course, with the circumstances in Greece effectively pressing the fast forward button, it becomes more critical for the G20 to address IMF resourcing.
JOURNALIST: Given that the domestic, political situations in Greece, Italy and Spain and so on, are really crucial to getting action, is there much point to the G20 over the next couple of days?
PM: European leaders do need to resolve the situation in Europe. What the G20 can do is assist with making sure that there is the political will for European leaders to resolve the situation in Europe.
From Australia's part, we believe that when European leaders meet on 27October and struck their plan, we were supportive of that.
Now the plan has to have all of its details finalised and it needs to be implemented, words on a piece of paper are one thing, actions are another.
Yes Dennis.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you that the European crisis is now overshadowing what the G20 can do for the medium and longer term for global security?
PM:I believe the G20 needs to look at medium term questions too, we have this European problem and it is for European leaders to address, and in the last 36 hours we've seen a new uncertainty, a new set of questions arising from what has been said by Greece.
It is pivotal that European leaders address how their plan is going to be implemented and what else they are going to do to reform European economies and put them on a path of growth.
Standing here right now we don't have the answers to either of those two questions and European leaders must provide those answers. So that has to be done. I believe the G20 can play a role in bolstering political will and on the question of IMF resourcing, but I also think the G20 needs to address a set of medium term questions that would make a difference to global growth.
Trade is one of those, getting freer trade would be like a shot in the arm to the global economy and make it stronger, but putting pressure on everyone to keep reforming their economies, for developed nations to be looking to new sources of growth, as we are with our Clean Energy Future and the National Broadband Network, and for developing countries to also be looking at questions like market based exchange rates.
Andrew.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on a domestic issue we've had a dreadful situation with the death of at least seven people possibly 20, and then the arrival of two more boats since then. What's your reaction to the deaths of these asylum seekers and your response to the, what has been a quite a bitter political fight since you've been in the air?
PM: Well thedeaths, the tragedy here, the loss of life, is obviously quite devastating. I obviously haven't been able to see the TV images or the people who survived interviewed. I haven't been in a position to do that given that I've just arrived.
But even reading the words that they've said tears at your heart, so this is a tragic situation.
Being over here in France I'm not intending to run commentary on parliamentary domestic debates.
JOURNALIST: But Prime Minister would you consider any compromise as far as your offshore legislation which in still on the books to try and have a strong deterrence. All your
Ministers are saying that there is a need for stronger deterrence?
PM: The position of the Government is that we want to implement the arrangement with Malaysia and we want to amend the legislation which would give this government and future governments the powers they need to implement the arrangements that they believe fit, the arrangements that are their policies.
JOURNALIST: NAB has put up their interest rates. Do you have any comment on whether that was a good move by them, given that other banks have decided to cut theirs in line with
what the Government wanted?
PM: Imade my position clear before I left Australia in the Parliament as soon as the news of the interest rate reduction came through, which is that Australian banking customers, the people who go to banks, the people who use banks, the people who rely on banks, would expect banks to pass these interest rate reductions through.
JOURNALIST: That's must be pretty grubby isn't it, behaviour-
PM: -Well look I've made my position clear. We'll just take just one last question here.
JOURNALIST: Just on Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder. It has been decided by the High Court in London that he will be extradited to Sweden. He has expressed concerns that he fears execution if he is then extradited on to the United States. What is your reaction to the decision of the court today?
PM: I was advised of this matter literally in transit here, it's only just happened. So we'll get briefed and understand fully what's happened here and make a statement if necessary.
JOURNALIST: Do you share his concerns?
Well, I am not going to deal with it. I have literally heard five, ten minutes ago so we will get you an answer when possible.
Thanks very much.



Thank you very much and thank you for inviting me to join you.
Congratulations to everyone who's been involved in the important work of the B20. I certainly believe that it's very important alongside the G20 meetings, we have a vehicle to bring together the voice of the business community. So, congratulations to everyone for participating in it and I can see some Australians hanging around and I hope they haven't been giving you any trouble and that they've been making good contributions, I'm sure that's true.
What I wanted to do is proffer some thoughts about where we are in the lead up to this G20 and then some thoughts directly on the question of youth employment.
As we start this G20, I quickly have to recognise that we're facing the most testing time in the global economy since the depths of the global financial crisis and of course that testing time is being shown by market volatility, but it's being experienced by real people, as joblessness. You use the global statistics and they are truly startling, but even here in the Eurozone we're talking about 16 million people being unemployed and in the United States  -  and I see Andrew here  -  in the United States the unemployment rate above 9 per cent.
So, the issues that we are confronting, will cause people to talk about all sorts of complicated financial transactions and vehicles, but at the end of the day it matters to people because it manifests as joblessness for real human beings.
Here in Europe, Australia has been consistently raising its voice to say it is critical that European leaders come together to resolve the problems of European financial stability and the sovereign debt problems in Greece.
We certainly were supportive of what European leaders came together to do on 27 October and said the challenge was then to make sure all of the details were defined and that the plan was implemented. In the last 36 hours a new challenge has arisen, with the statements from Greece and I believe one of the things that will be a very big focus of attention during the next few days will be how that plan for Europe can be implemented, given the announcements that have been made by Greece.
And sitting here right now, I'm not sure we know the answer to that question, how the plan can be implemented and what else can be done to drive growth and life back into Europe's economy. But those questions need to be answered and answered quickly and I believe the answers will flow from implementing the work that European leaders did on 27 October defining these details and getting on with the job of implementing it.
I do think at the G20 meeting, leaders assembled can assist European leaders by bolstering political will to act, but I also think we can also assist in a practical way. The issue of increasing the resourcing of the IMF, I think is squarely in front of us. The IMF does need more resources in order to be ready and prepared in case there is a bigger spread of problems and certainly Australia is prepared to play its role in increasing IMF resources and I've already conveyed that in some discussions today and I intend to take that perspective into the G20 meeting itself.
So, that is a view about the immediate crisis that confronts us and that is going to be a pressure on everyone as we move into the next few days, but here at this forum you've been talking too about longer term drivers of growth and what can be done to stimulate employment and I wanted to touch on those briefly as well.
We do need to see across the global economy, countries both developing and developed nations focus on new sources of growth.
For developed countries it's very important that people get their house in order and make sure that their budget position is sustainable. I'm thinking here, obviously of nations like the US and Japan, where we do need to see fiscal sustainability and we need to see a focus on new sources of economic growth.
For developing economies and surplus economies there is a need to focus on lifting domestic consumption, whether that be individual private consumption, or whether that be consumption in the form of new social protections that flow to the population and of course we do also need to see a move towards market based exchange rates and that's another issue that presents in the context of the G20.
For all economies, whether developed or developing, we need to see the political will to keep pursuing structural reforms. I very much agree with the perspective that has clearly been developed around this table, that there does need to be advocacy of social protections, social protection floors across the global economy. This is important as a matter of social justice to people around the globe, but it's also important as a driver of demand in its own right, that by better sustaining populations people will better sustain the ability of individuals to consume and to prosper within their society.
The focus on skills that you have obviously come to is one I very strongly endorse. Human capital reforms are central to any economic strategy. They are central to our own economic strategy in Australia and in the long term there is nothing more important to the productivity and prosperity of any economy than the performance of its human capital and the investments that have gone into the skills and knowledge of its people.
In terms of driving new growth, we believe at the G20 and beyond there needs to be a very strong focus on the trade agenda. It is increasingly apparent that after many long years of trade ministers having many detailed discussions, that the Doha Round has hit gridlock. Our Trade Minister and Australia generally have been pursuing in global forums the need to move beyond that deadlock and if it appears, as it does now, that it is not possible to get a trade round which will have trade changes for everyone, then what we need to do is focus on what can be done  -  segmenting the round so that for those countries who are able to do some things, we at least get some things done, rather than being in continuous gridlock.
For Australia's part, we have unilaterally confirmed that we will give the less developed countries tariff and quota free access to our markets and we have unilaterally confirmed that we will hold to a standstill with the G20 auspiced on protectionist measures and we believe in the context of this G20 that we do need to see leaders grappling with the fact that the Doha Round isn't going to come to fruition and we need to find some new ways forward for freer trade and to make sure that we don't see a retreat into protectionism.
For the Australian economy, we are in quite different circumstances to our friends on Europe and in the United States. We did come out of the global financial crisis strong. We did not have a recession, that was partly as a result of the advantages of being where we're located in the world, of being a resource rich nation, demand for our commodities was sustained.  It also was the result of a timely and targeting government stimulus and it was the result of thousands, indeed tens of thousands, millions, of employers and employees striking cooperative working arrangements to sustain employment during the most difficult days of the global financial crisis.
So we have come out of the global financial crisis in quite a different position than many other economies. We have low debt, low unemployment. We have strong public finances with our budget returning to surplus in 2012-13. So we are in quite a different position to other economies.
Even being in that different position to other economies, we are seeing some differential effects in our own economy during this phase of growth. Because our resources sector is so turbo-charged, with more than $400 billion of investment in the pipeline, that does mean that our Australian dollar is very strong, putting pressure on other industries, particularly industries like manufacturing and that is requiring us to respond with economic policy that helps sustain those sections of the economy that are feeling this pressure.
As Prime Minister I am very determined that during this phase of our economic transformation, that we do maintain a diversified economy and indeed come through the resources boom with a more diversified economy than we went into it.
We are at the start of what will be a profound change in Asia, we have dubbed it the Asian Century, where we will see the rise of the Asian middle class, with everything for consumption and Australia's economic opportunity that that implies, which is why we want to make sure our diversified, resilient Australian economy can respond to those demands.
But with the patchwork we see at the moment, we do also see a patchwork in youth unemployment and it's true to say that there are some parts of Australia that have always had unemployment rates greater than the national average and have tended to have quite high youth unemployment rates and in this patchwork phase of economic development, we are obviously anxious that we could see more of that.
We are therefore focused very strongly on skills development for young people, we are in a stage of major transformation in our education system, we call it the education revolution, where as a government we have focused on improving quality in education at every level, from early childhood education for kids in the years before they go to school, through to improving the quality of school education, lifting both the number and quality and performance of apprenticeships, of young people getting trade and other skills, putting our universities on a pattern for growth, so that they are not constrained by government funding, but can respond to the demand patterns of young Australians and indeed older Australians through university education.
And we have regeared and are still in the process of regearing parts of our social security system, so that particularly for young people the obligations to engage in order to qualify for income support payments are very clear. We refer to this as the ‘learn or earn policy', that there's no third way, there's no ability to just stay at home receiving benefits, people either have to be engaged in training, or they need to be engaged in the workforce. Being out on the sidelines, the economic margins, not earning at all and not learning is not an option open to people.
And in taking that approach we've been very driven by the research that if young people leave school early, if they spend the years immediately post-school unemployed, then that is far more likely than not to lead to a lifetime of disadvantage, if someone does not make a successful school to work transition and is kicking around unemployed at the age of 22, 23, 24, 25, then they are probably on a journey to being at best only intermittently engaged in the labour market for the rest of their lives.
So it's been a very strong focus of our policy work and I can tell it's a very strong focus of work around the table. So with those words, can I once again say congratulations to the B20 for doing all of this intensive work and I'm very happy to listen to and participate in the discussion
Thank you very much. 



PM: Good evening and I'm sorry to have kept you waiting, I know you have been here for some time.
This G20 meeting comes in the most difficult days for the global economy since the depths of the global financial crisis. Leaders today have had a comprehensive discussion about the circumstances of the global economy.
Arising out of that discussion there is the will to work together to address global economic circumstances. There is the will to see arising from this meeting a plan of action to address circumstances in the global economy.
In relation to the crisis in the eurozone this is a matter for Europeans to address and that was very clearly spelt out in the room today. But it is also clear from the discussions in the room that non-European G20 countries have a role to play.
Specifically, non-European G20 countries have a role to play in bolstering and supporting European will to insure that the 27 October compact, the framework that was agreed, is implemented.
It is very important, indeed it is crucial, that what was agreed on the 27 October now is spelt out in detail and is implemented. And non-European G20 countries also have a role to play, in working on IMF resourcing to send a message of confidence to markets that the world is prepared to come together and come together through the International Monetary Fund, to ensure that it has the resources available to deal with any emerging problems in the global economy.
For my own part on behalf of Australia in the meeting today, I wanted to make a very clear point that we are grappling with a lack of confidence in markets, that leaders will act.
It is therefore very important for leaders to act, to not only talk at this meeting but to ensure that what is determined out of this meeting is implemented. And that in order to do that we need to be very focused on what the G20 as a whole can do to address current circumstances in the global economy and particularly what we can do to ensure that the IMF has the appropriate resourcing that it needs.
In addition to broad ranging discussions about the global economy, there's also been discussions today about development questions and trade questions. There will be a continuation of the discussion of trade questions into this evening's dinner.
On trade, Australia's position is also very clear.  We believe that we cannot continue to desist with the current gridlock in the Doha Round. That if we just keep doing the same things over and over and over and over and over we will get the same result, which is no resolution of the round.
Consequently, we do need to bring some fresh thinking to how to pursue global trade talks, including segmenting the round, so that we can work with those countries who are in a position to achieve some results in some sections of the round.
On Australia's part too, we are very focused on the circumstances of least developed countries and giving free market access to those countries.
And in that regard I was very pleased to see the announcement by China today that it would give better market access to the products of the least developed countries.
I am very happy, with those words, to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what was the message that you give to mum and dad investors who feel very uncertain, particularly given the Greek situation, what's your message to them, what they will see out of this (inaudible) to give them confidence?
PM:Look this is a time of great uncertainty, that's why I've described it as the most difficult global economic circumstances since the depths of the global financial crisis.
Markets are looking to the G20, they are looking to leaders to act, they're looking to leaders to grapple with this sense of uncertainty and to answer it with a plan of action.
First and foremost that plan of action does need to be European leaders detailing and implementing the plan of 27 October and doing that even in circumstance where there are new problems and uncertainties arising from, for example what's happening in Greece.
So getting that plan of action implemented is very important, its details need to be spelt out, but more broadly through ensuring that there is appropriate IMF resourcing, I think the G20 can send a message of confidence and certainty to markets and to mum and dad investors.
What's this all about at the end of the day, well inevitably when you are talking about the global economy and when you are talking about IMF financing, when you're talking about financial stability in Europe and recapitalisation of banks and haircuts on bonds, inevitably you are using the jargon of economists and financiers, but behind all of that jargon is one central message, it's about jobs.
Because if the global economy does not work the way it should, if we don't stabilise the global economy and get it back on a path of growth then that will cost jobs. And for Australians whilst we live in a strong and resilient economy because we're not immune from the global economic circumstances then of course measures to strengthen the global economy mean more Australian jobs.
Yes Steven.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, from your talks today, what's your understanding about Greece's position on the bailout and referendum and if there isn't a resolution of this issue by the end of the summit, does that mean the G20 Summit has failed?
PM:I think for the G20 what is important is laying out a plan for the global economy which gives people a sense of certainty.
Leaders need to grapple with the issues here, the full package of global economy issues, clearly here has been a sharp focus on Europe, but I do want to stress that the discussions about the global economy today were wider than the issues in the eurozone.
For the circumstances of Greece, the important thing there is that the Greek nation recognises that its best future is by remaining within the eurozone and by seeing the agreement of 27 October implemented.
Dennis.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, you've mentioned that the Greek crisis obviously, but you also come here wanting to talk about longer term issues, job creation and so forth. Are you disappointed that this meeting has been overshadowed somewhat and do you see any way of changing the G20 so it can move away from crisis management?
PM:I think in the question you've really inappropriately segmented what is happening here.
Of course there is a focus on what is happening in the eurozone and particularly what is happening with Greece and that is understandable. As this meeting has come together there has been a set of dramatic events and it wasn't until 27October that European leaders came together and struck the framework for addressing the problems in the eurozone.
So having that focus is understandable and important for the G20. But in the economic discussions we have had today about the global economy, people have been focused on medium term factors as well. I wouldn't want anyone to get the impression that the only thing that has been talked about is responding to the eurozone problems. 
People have talked about the need to find new sources of growth in developed countries, people have talked about the need to find new sources of domestic growth in developing nations. There have been mentions of the need for a market based exchange rates, this has been an important issue that the G20 has been dealing with and then the trade question and particularly getting to a stage where we've got some resolution, better resolution of global trade circumstances is about medium term growth, it's about getting a shot in the arm for the global economy, which would mean more jobs and more prosperity over the medium term.
Yes.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, with regards to resourcing of the IMF, what discussions were had by other nations, excluding Australia, in terms of what additional resources they would give the IMF, and regarding China what's your reading on where they're placed to assist in a further European support?
PM:I think there are, the view - there's a broad view amongst G20 leaders that there does need to be additional IMF resourcing - clearly that will be worked on overnight and into tomorrow, but I do believe there is a broad view about the need for additional resourcing.
I think that's because leaders recognise that is an appropriate move at this point in the global economy, an appropriate move to send a message of confidence, an appropriate move so people could be reassured that the IMF had sufficient resources available to it should it need to address newly emerging global economic circumstances. That is, if there was some broader issues that came onto the horizon that the IMF needed to deal with.
For Australians part, we've been supportive of that. I indicated on the way into the G20 that Australia was prepared to play its part in increasing resourcing for the IMF.
Now we would do that because ultimately global economic stability, global financial stability, using the central institutions of the global economy, like the IMF, is about jobs and prosperity in Australia, that's why we're prepared to do it.
For the circumstances of other countries I think it's probably better for me to leave very direct questions to those leaders.
Yes. 
JOURNALIST:What sort of magnitude of increase in IMF resources are we looking at? Doubling possibly? Are we talking about increasing SDR's or borrowing power and finally are these going to be linked to governance reform (inaudible)?
PM:Well the G20 has already spoken prior to this meeting on the need for IMF governance reforms. In terms of arrangements, the actual mechanisms that would be used, work is still being performed, we've just had the first day of the G20, we have more to do tonight, more to do into the night and more to do tomorrow to strike agreement on what would be the best mechanism.
But in these circumstances, from my point of view, I think it's very important that it's a mechanism that can be bought to fruition quickly and make new resources available quickly. 
I'd remind that in London, when there was IMF resourcing raised, there was a particular mechanism settled upon at that time.
Yes.
JOURNALIST:You talked about fragmenting the trade agenda rather than having a big round, are there any particular topics that you think might be able to be advanced in this new approach and secondly the IMF's a big investor in Greece, do you like the idea that Australia will be lending money so the IMF can invest in Greece?
PM:OK, I'll take both questions. On the trade agenda, we come to it with the maximum level of ambition. We are a great trading nation and so we've got nothing to fear from freer and freer trade. 
On all of the reports available to me from our Trade Minister, and this was certainly replicated in the room during the G20 discussions, the Doha Round has proceeded on the basis that everyone needs to agree all things and it is, before anything is settled, everyone needs to agree all things and it is clear and it has been, I think, clear for some time now that that's not going to be possible. And so segmenting the round, whether it's on a topic basis or whether it's limiting the number of countries that are prepared to strike an agreement, we are open to both possibilities and combinations of those possibilities in order to maximise agreement and progress. 
On the question you put about Australian money in Greece, that is a complete misunderstanding of the way in which IMF resourcing works and I do want to address this because as I understand that in Australia the opposition has been peddling some falsehoods about this and let me be clear as I explain this about the IMF.
I am not going to make any apology for striking appropriate arrangements to support Australian jobs. Because at the end of the day, this is what this is about.
The way in which additional resourcing from Australia for the IMF would work, is like IMF resourcing now, Australia says that it will make available a certain amount of money. If that is drawn down upon, then the money is conveyed. 
Because it is a loan, it is an asset on our balance sheet and because it is a loan on which interest is paid - very important to recognise that - a loan on which interest is paid, it is an asset on our balance sheet. 
So this misapprehension that the opposition has been trying to peddle, that this is money out of the Australian budget going to other countries is completely untrue. This is resourcing for the IMF; it would be made available as a contingent facility. If it was drawn down upon then it is an asset on our budget sheet because it is a loan and we would receive interest on that loan. 
And anybody who is standing in the way of discussions here at the G20 about better resourcing of the IMF is effectively standing in the way of a strong global economy and Australian jobs. 
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, on the question of jobs, there is speculation about yours. Are you confident you will remain as Prime Minister?
PM:Yes
JOURNALIST:And are you angered that you are answering questions about your job when you are here to protect other Australian jobs?
PM:Look, I'm at the G20 focused on what is a very difficult set of global economic circumstances and the appropriate response.
JOURNALIST:What will it take to quell the Caucus unrest about the leadership?
PM:  Look, I've just dealt with the question.
JOURNALIST:Could I ask about the bilateral with Brazil? I'm wondering, in particular there has been evidence that the global slowdown is affecting Australia's iron ore exports, is that something that you managed to talk about with the Brazilian President?
PM:Look we did both reflect that we have some similar economic challenges, we're both great resources nations and so we both have resources sectors that are steaming ahead and that is a good thing to have.
Our resources boom is a great thing for our economy and for jobs and opportunity in Australia, but it does mean that our currency is strong, our Aussie dollar is strong and that puts pressure on other parts of the economy including manufacturing.
Brazil is in a comparable set of economic circumstances so we did reflect on the similarities in our economies. We didn't get to the point of talking about individual commodity prices.
JOURNALIST:What did you make about the Bill Gates' presentation on development and alternative ways of funding development and do you have any ideas of your own and what were some of the ideas he presented?
PM:As you would've seen in Perth at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, we have partnered with Bill Gates and his foundation on the all important task of eradicating polio from the world.
We did that at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting because three out of the four remaining countries that have polio are Commonwealth nations. And so Bill Gates, when he spoke today and presented his development agenda, did talk about vaccines. He's brought to this task some of the things from his life as an IT guru and he talked about that today.
He talked about the agility that the IT sector has, he talked about the real-time information that the IT sector has, always feeding into better products and better applications because it is so in touch with its customers; and taking that into the development agenda he is obviously very focused on things that are cost effective with demonstrable and measurable returns, and there's no doubt in the world that things like vaccinating a child absolutely have got demonstrable and measurable returns and you can show it in terms of the number of children who live and you can show it in the eradication of diseases so that no one has to worry about them anymore.
He presented some work for G20 leaders to digest. We in the lead-up to this G20 have focused on some important development questions. One of them is the cost of remittances, in the world that we live in now and we will live in the future, many people will go to other nations to work and the cost of people getting money back home is quite prohibitive at the moment. If we can bring that cost down then that in and of itself, means that there is a more reliable stream of income for developing countries, for those members of the country who either permanently migrate or for a period of their lives work overseas.
JOURNALIST:Have you had any cause to rethink your position on his call for a Robin Hood tax?
PM: Look Australia is not supportive of financial transactions tax. And we've got to think about purpose here, when people talk about a financial transactions tax, the two main purposes people say they want one for is they say, firstly they say they want it to fund development and aid monies, well we are already increasing our aid money and on a journey to meet out Millennium Development Goals.
And then number two people say that they want a financial transactions tax in order to finance clean energy, investments and action on climate change, well we've done that through carbon pricing.
Yes.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister how can you be confident that the world is on the right path when you've got such chaos in Greece today for example we didn't know for several hours who the Prime Minister was, we can't be confident for the next couple of days who the Prime Minister will be, what the constitution of government will be. What gives you that optimism that there is a solution?
PM:It's not for me to make pronouncements about Greek politics, and who the Prime Minister should be or who should form the government, that is for the people of Greece to address.
But here at the G20 where we are considering circumstances in the global economy and particularly the circumstances in the eurozone, I could certainly offer the advice that Greece will have a more prosperous future within the eurozone than outside it; and the agreement, the framework struck by European leaders on 27 October helps Greece achieve that, by reducing their indebtedness through the haircut that was agreed upon and that seems to me to be very important to the future of Greece.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, regarding your bilateral with the Turkish Prime Minister, I gather that the centennial celebration in 2015 came up. Can you take us through what's planned, whether you will have trips with him, whether you'll be hosting him in years to come and what those centenary celebration, how they're shaping up, and if you could take us through, blow by blow, your bilateral with Angela Merkel too that would be wonderful.
PM:Well I can't promise that, but what I can say for Australia and Turkey, we are moving towards a very important commemoration,n one hundred years since Gallipoli.
I did very much thank the Turkish Prime Minister for how welcoming they are of Australians, they see Australians in such large numbers, they've been very generous about infrastructure development in order to facilitate Australians who want to go to Gallipoli memorial services and he certainly said that they were looking forward to working with us very strongly in the lead up to 2015.
So both of our nations could take their proper part in the commemoration of Gallipoli, and he was obviously very generously saying that the kinds of things that Turkey has been prepared to do in the past to facilitate the many Australians who want to go, that they'll do again, when I anticipate numbers will swell to new records. 
JOURNALIST:And Merkel?
PM:We have had a comprehensive discussion about circumstances in the eurozone.
I thanked Chancellor Merkel for her strong leadership. There is a lot on her shoulders and I think her fortitude in those circumstances is to be very much admired. So we shared notes on that, and talked generally about the bilateral relationship between Australia and Germany which is a very strong one. 
I indicated that any time she'd like to visit Australia she'd be more than welcome.
Thank you very much.



World leaders today agreed that Australia will host the G20 in 2014.
The G20 will be the most significant gathering of international leaders Australia has ever hosted.
It will allow Australia to shape the international economic agenda, while showcasing Australia's economic strengths and providing a boost to Australian businesses.
G20 leaders meeting in Cannes unanimously endorsed the choice of Australia as host, recognising Australia's active role in the G20 and our strong record of hosting successful international meetings.
Hosting the G20 will allow Australia to set and shape the international agenda on issues of fundamental importance to our national interest, including the health of the global economy, financial regulation, trade, jobs and clean energy.
The G20 will also offer an unparalleled opportunity to showcase Australia's fundamental economic strengths. It will provide an excellent platform for the business community to promote Australian commercial interests, including with international business leaders who attend the parallel B20 business forum.
The G20 is the world's pre-eminent forum for global economic cooperation and decision-making. It contains the world's largest economies, accounting for some 85 per cent of global GDP, and all of our major trading and investment partners.
As an open and liberal economy, Australia's economic fortunes are closely linked to those of the global economy. A healthy and growing global economy is fundamental to Australian jobs, living standards and economic opportunity.
A decision on which city will host the G20 will be made in due course. 



PM: Good afternoon. We've just concluded the G20 meeting, and this G20 meeting came in uncertain circumstances for the global economy given the concerns in Europe.
Over the past two days the G20 has made significant progress to send a signal of confidence to markets. Most importantly the G20 has begun the work of putting in place firewalls to protect contagion from Greece spreading throughout other parts of the global economy. 
Now this is an important result and should be viewed that way. If I can take you to four aspects of the result which I believe are important.
First, this G20 meeting shored up the plan, outlined by European leaders on the 27 October, and ensured that rapid steps are taken over the next few weeks to detail and implement that plan. 
Second, this meeting brought Greece back from the brink; the uncertainty surrounding Greece earlier this week has been reversed.
Three, strong steps have been taken to get Italy back on track.
And fourth, and most significantly, this meeting laid the basis for IMF resources to be increased, so the IMF can play its role as bulwark of the global economy.
Now this was a view that Australia put some weeks ago and it has now finally been embraced by leaders.
However I do need to be clear that there is still more to be done. It's a point I made very strongly to my counterparts and which I stand by. But that shouldn't detract from the important results this meeting has delivered.
In total, the outcome is consistent with my strongly held views that Europe needs to get its own house in order, but equally the rest of the world has a role to play in shoring up the global financial system.
Australia is a great trading nation, so on the area of trade I am very pleased to report progress was made at this meeting. Trade means jobs and there is nothing that I'm more focused on as Prime Minister than creating jobs.
Australia has been at the forefront of arguing that we need to find a way forward on trade. We need to get that done because that will mean extra jobs in Australia and around the world.
At this meeting we achieved what we set out to achieve. Firstly a recognition that consensus on Doha is eluding us, and that we need to find a way to move forward.
An agreement that retreating to closed markets is not the answer to the challenges we face, and an agreement therefore to take a fresh approach to move Doha forward by breaking it into manageable goals.
At CHOGM when I spoke on trade last week in Perth, I said we can't just press rewind and replay on trade, we can't press pause either, we need to stick a new disk in the machine and that is what the G20 has agreed to do.
This is a breakthrough. It's a win for Australia which has been advocating a new and practical approach to advancing the trade agenda. Then, on the action plan for jobs and growth it is encouraging to see that action plan agreed today. It's the first time that countries have committed to each other and the world to properly pursue steps that they have identified to bolster growth and jobs in their own economies.
So these are steps that countries have indicated that they are prepared to take, but now there will be a way of every country being monitored by other countries to make sure that people hold to their pledges and promises.
Leading international organisations have also been tasked to work together to ensure that nations are taking the most effective action possible to create jobs around the world.
Of significance to Australia in the action plan for jobs and growth is the recognition of the importance of market based exchange rate systems, given that has been an issue for Australia as we trade in, and work within our region.
The G20 also identified Australia's decision to transition to a clean energy economy through an effective carbon price as a critical structural reform.
And then, finally, can I say, I am very proud to announce that Australia will host the G20 in 2014.
This is a significant opportunity for Australia and it's recognition of our economic strength and leadership.
It will bring world leaders and business leaders to Australia at a time when our economy is the envy of the world. It will give Australian businesses a boost, it will give Australia a central role in shaping the G20 agenda and therefore shaping the agenda for the global economy, not only in the year in which we host the meeting but for the two years either side of that year because this G20 meeting has formalised what is called the Troika, that is each set of three chairs of the G20 working together.
So this is a fantastic opportunity for Australia to showcase itself to the world by hosting the most important meeting that the world has for the global economy, to bring business leaders to Australia because alongside the G20 comes a set of business events to shape the agenda for the G20 in 2014, but to also play a role in shaping the agenda working with other chairs in 2013 and 2015.
So I am delighted to be able to announce that this G20 meeting has agreed that Australia will host the G20 in 2014. I am very happy to take any questions.
Yes, Andrew.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the IMF resourcing, have we got any quantum on what the leaders have agreed to as a whole and what Australia will do, and can you confirm that Perth would be the ideal-
PM: -Nice try on Perth, but, what we will do when we return back home is I'll obviously consult with my state colleagues, with state premiers. No decision has been taken yet about which city in Australia the G20 would be hosted, and I'll seek views from state premiers about which city would like to be involved in being the venue for the G20 in 2014, so that's the answer to the second part of your question.
On the first part of your question, it's dealt with in paragraph eleven of the communiqué and in that paragraph leaders have committed and I'll use the words ‘to ensure the IMF continues to have resources to play its systemic role to the benefit of its whole membership, building on the substantial resources we have mobilised since London in 2009. We stand ready to ensure additional resources could be mobilised in a timely manner.'
What that means is that leaders have come together and said that they stand together ready to provide additional resources to the IMF.
Finance Ministers, which in our parlance means the Treasurer Wayne Swan, will come together with his counterparts in February, or potentially earlier, to focus on that question of additional resourcing.
Now I want to be very clear about this, we've said all along, that Europe needs to get its house in order, and Europe does need to get its house in order, the eurozone needs to resolve the problems within the eurozone.
But Australia put the issue of IMF resourcing on the agenda some time back now. We thought it was important that the world addressed the issue of making sure that the IMF had additional resources to face any contingency that may arise and that has been dealt with in this communiqué and will be dealt with by the finance ministers.
JOURNALIST: You wanted some sort of quantum I gather, so it's not, are you disappointed by the fact that you haven't got actual commitments from member nations?
PM: I'm pleased that having put the issue on the agenda, we have now got it acted upon, and acted upon in a timely way. That is you've got the statement in the communiqué and finance ministers coming together, either at the scheduled meeting in February or potentially earlier.
JOURNALIST: Just on the Jobs Taskforce that has been set up. What's your understanding of how that will work in terms of Australia? And will there be any Australian involvement in that? And just more generally, how effective do you think that will be?
PM: Look the purpose of all this is to make sure that people have got the benefits that come with work, the dignity that comes with work, across the globe following the global financial crisis.
We've got millions and millions of people unemployed. In Australia compared with nations that are comparable to us we have a relatively low unemployment rate, but around the world, tens of millions of people need work and there is always a challenge for every economy to keep creating the new jobs it needs as young people come of age and they need that first opportunity in the labour market.
So in the lead up to the next G20 meeting in Mexico, there will be a particular focus on jobs and youth unemployment. That means countries will share experiences, policies, practices, plans that have made a difference.
I think we've a pretty good story to tell. We are on a journey of change in relation to youth unemployment. We've particularly focused on learn or earn, on making sure that our education and our support systems work so young people are either in training or they're in the workforce, they're not just lost on the margins of society and left by the wayside.
So we will be sharing that work that we have done. But of course we are always open to looking at good ideas from around the world and this will be the way of sharing those good ideas.
JOURNALIST: Will there be an Australian representative on that taskforce? Does every G20 country get (inaudible)?
PM: We will certainly be working with Mexico as the G20 agenda is shaped by Mexico. So we will have an official, for example, who will work with the Mexican Government, and of course across the Australian Government, the right linkages will be made, so on the policy settings for youth unemployment that is particularly, the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, you've said that Wayne Swan will probably fill in the gaps in the details about the increased IMF commitments, maybe as early as January. Events may precede that but there is a potential need for billions and billions for Italy, possibly Spain if things go badly.
Are you prepared for Australia to put extra money in very, very quickly to the IMF should that eventuate?
PM: Let's just be clear on the sequence here, because I think that's important and I'll directly address your question.
We came into this G20 meeting saying that it was vital that Europe get its house in order, that the eurozone resolve its problems, and that in particular leaders drive through to make sure that all of the details of the October 27 framework are agreed and that the October 27 framework is implemented.
Of course, coming into this G20 there were some new factors to consider arising out of the statements made by Greece about the referendum. And as I said at the outset, we're pleased to see that Greece has come back from the brink.
But that still means that the details of the October 27 framework need to be put down and agreed. And out of this G20 meeting, the eurozone has said it will do that at a meeting of its own finance ministers in December. That's very important. So that's number one in terms of resolving the problems in the eurozone.
Separately, we raised the issue of IMF resourcing and IMF resourcing has been addressed by leaders in this communiqué and will be addressed by finance ministers, the regular meeting's in February but it is possible for the meeting to happen earlier than that.
So that's the work program forward. First and foremost, the eurozone sorting itself out, and then, leaders having made this statement today, tasking finance ministers to deal with it at their meeting.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the G20 has recognised Australia's progress on carbon pricing. Would you have liked to have seen more discussion about climate change at this conference and a bit more advance from other G20 members?
PM:There was a session of the discussion which was on climate change questions so, in the room there was discussion of climate change. There was a report from South Africa on outlooks and prospects as we move to the meeting in Durban at the end of the year, so climate change was on the agenda.
The substantial talks about climate change will happen at that meeting in South Africa. I'm pleased to see that leaders did note the progress we've made in Australia to change our emissions intensive economy to a clean energy economy so we can have a clean energy future and that jobs that come with it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, this was clearly a difficult summit for the delegates including yourself. A short time ago lots of non-government organisations held a press conference.
They have described this summit as a wasted opportunity; they say that Greece and the Euro has been served a financial feast while the world's most vulnerable people are left with the crumbs. How do you respond to that?
PM:There was a discussion about development questions in the room and some important agreements about developments issues. Bill Gates reported to G20 leaders on development work that he is doing and his perspectives for development generally. And there was, I raised myself, the question of remittances and making sure that money can flow around the world more cheaply so that people who are earning money can send it to their families back home and not lose too much on the transaction. 
So there was a discussion about development. For Australia's part, of course, we are substantially increasing the amount of resources we put into aid and development as part of meeting our Millennium Development Goals, and that does mean we are able to do a lot of good work. For example, the announcement I made last week about better participating in the program to eradicate polio so children no longer have to suffer death or disfigurement as a result of a disease we know we can prevent.
JOURNALIST:But would you personally have liked this to be a more proactive summit as opposed to a reactive one dealing with these crises that are being discussed over the last few days? Clearly, Greece has stolen the show, for want of a better phrase.
PM: In the circumstances, I believe the G20 did what it needed to do to weigh up the amount of time that was required to respond to immediate circumstances. Of course, you would expect the most important body in the world that addresses issues in the global economy to be focusing on the risks to the global economy from what is happening in Greece and what is happening in the eurozone.
And I don't think we can just say well there is a hard barrier between talking about those things and talking about aid and development. We know from the global financial crisis, that if problems develop in the global economy, it is often people in the poorest parts of the world who pay for those problems through the loss of employment. 
So sustaining the global economy is important to everyone, including important to the poorest countries on Earth.  So the meeting did focus on those questions, as it should, but it did also discuss a range of broader questions.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, with regard to the extra funding for the IMF, were there non-European countries that also agreed to come forward, like Australia, with more money? Because it has been reported that in fact that hasn't happened in the way that was hoped, and markets have apparently responded negatively to that. And in particular, what's the situation now with China?
PM:  Well you wouldn't get a statement from leaders that says we stand ready to ensure additional resources could be mobilised in a timely manner. You wouldn't get that statement from leaders, if there hadn't been a preparedness amongst a number of countries to step forward to assist with additional IMF resourcing, and around the G20 table there are a number of countries that have indicated in the discussions that have happened through the G20 their preparedness to do that.
JOURNALIST:Are they non-European countries?
PM:Countries around the table. Let's be clear, I mean Europe needs to focus on resolving the issues out of the eurozone. So that has to be the focus of European leaders.
Then there is a role for the G20 generally and for non-European G20 leaders to play a role in ensuring that the IMF has the resources it needs to respond to any emerging problems in a timely way, to play its proper role as a cushion for the global economy.
That's what Australia has been advocating. Effectively this issue of IMF resourcing was dormant until Australia commenced to raise it in the lead up to this G20 meeting as an important way for the world to respond to circumstances in the global economy.
So against that backdrop I'm very pleased that it became an issue of discussion between leaders, that we've got this section of the communiqué and that finance ministers will be brought together to deal with this specific question of IMF resourcing.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the only country that has actually promised, the only non-European country to actually promise that it will to cough up more money?
PM:No, no, other countries  -  we've got to be a bit clear here. What I've said, as Australian Prime Minister, so I don't want you to misunderstand what it is that I've said, I've said Australia would be prepared to make available additional IMF resources.
There are a number of leaders including from non-European nations who have indicated in discussions around the G20 a similar preparedness. Leaders have put together these words about standing collectively together, ready to provide more resources, and finance ministers have been tasked to address that specific question.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, on monitoring, you mentioned that it would be a country by country monitoring to check (inaudible). Can you give us a little more detail of what commitments that will be monitoring and what was China's attitude given that they have previously resisted monitoring within China?
PM:Well that is a reference to the Action Plan for Growth and Jobs. And that Action Plan provides that there will be annual reporting against this and it will be done, not just countries doing it themselves, but if you like, the whole making sure that each individual nation is following up on what they have agreed to do.
In terms of China's attitude, they obviously have agreed to this Action Plan and they have made some substantial commitments in here. The commitment about more flexibility in exchange rates comes from this Action Plan, the commitment about looking to increasing domestic consumption, domestic sources of growth, comes from this Action Plan and the commitment to social protections actually comes from this Action Plan too.
JOURNALIST:Are there any targets in that or was that (inaudible)?
PM:Well you can have a look at all of the words yourself. I'm not sure what you mean by targets in that sense.
JOURNALIST: As far as jobs targets or growth to (inaudible).
PM:  OK, well I can take you to the words:'China will rebalance demand towards domestic consumption by implementing measures to strengthen social safety nets, increase household income and transform the economic growth pattern. These actions will be reinforced by ongoing measures to promote greater exchange rate flexibility to better reflect underlying economic fundamentals, and gradually reduce the pace of accumulation of foreign reserves.'
So that is a significant commitment I would draw your attention to. 
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, did you get a sense-
PM:-Sorry we'll just go to the back, you haven't had a question. We'll be fair.
JOURNALIST:I believe agriculture is something that has been bought into the G20, and I believe that there is some-
PM:-Sorry I didn't hear your - something bought into the G20, but I didn't hear-
JOURNALIST:  -Agriculture.
PM:Agriculture.
JOURNALIST:Agriculture and there was some concern about, I haven't had the benefit of reading the communiqué, but there's some concern about speculation and derivatives markets in agricultural exports. That's something Mr Sarkozy has been talking about and it's something I would have thought that would be an issue for Australia with a big farm sector.
PM:In the lead up to the G20, President Sarkozy made it very clear that he had a focus on food security. He was concerned about food prices and concerned about the circumstances for the many of millions of people around the world who don't have enough to eat. 
We participated in an agricultural workshop. We played a leadership role there, bringing our expertise in agricultural productivity to bear in that workshop and the G20 leaders did discuss food security questions and agriculture questions in the room, so you'll see that in the communiqué too.
Once again Australia can help other nations around the world here. If we look at the circumstances, for example, of Africa, where our hearts have been touched by what's happened in the Horn of Africa. When you look to the long term solutions for food security in Africa, it does mean we need to increase agricultural productivity, and we've got a lot of expertise at doing that as a great agricultural nation.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, did you sense around the table that there's going to be a new round of austerity measures in the G20 members, as sort of budget cuts and so on and what effect might that have on, into the forward estimates?
PM:Well, there's no doubt that a number of G20 countries need to engage in fiscal consolidation. And standing here, of all places, after the few days we've been through, the importance of fiscal consolidation should be right at the forefront of people's minds, which is one of the reasons we are so determined to bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13.
Australia is in a far happier position than so many of the G20 countries around the table. We've got strong public finances and we've got our commitment to bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13.
Our public finances and our ability to bring the budget to surplus are things many nations around that table wouldn't even dream of, it's so beyond their ability to imagine being in that position. But standing here I think it reinforces in us how important fiscal consolidation is and we will get on with our own fiscal consolidation and clearly other nations, including the US and Japan are looking to drive fiscal consolidation as well.
JOURNALIST: International union leaders had a press conference earlier today and they were saying that more austerity measures are going to lead to more of this social unrest we're seeing around the world, and that - they call them the deficit hawks - shouldn't rule, shouldn't be in charge. What's your response to that?
PM:Well, my response to that in the context of what the G20 has decided is to point to the language and discussions about social protections. That is significant, to have G20 leaders talking about social protections which has often been viewed as just something that countries are too different from each other, so countries wouldn't come together and talk about social protections.
That has been broken down at this G20 and social protections have been squarely talked about. In the language of President Sarkozy, that means we have broken through the psychology that you can do growth or you can do fairness, you can't do both.
This G20 is effectively saying you can do both and that social protections play an important role in looking after individuals and families but they also play an important role in building economic resilience because they put a floor under demand, even in the most difficult economic circumstances.
Last one.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, the US President looked very pleased to see you on the summit floor. What did he say to you about his upcoming visit to Australia?
PM:Well, I was pleased to see him as well and we're going to be pleased to see him in Australia in not too many days time.
Thanks very much.



The Gillard Government has today secured a clean energy future for all Australians.
For the first time, Australia's biggest polluters will have to pay for every tonne of carbon pollution they emit, which will deliver:
 * A cut to carbon pollution of at least 160 million tonnes a year in 2020;
 * Tax cuts and increases to household payments and pensions for millions of Australians;
 * A clean energy economy with new economic opportunities and clean energy jobs.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard said the passing of our Clean Energy legislation through the Senate was a major milestone in Australia's efforts to cut carbon pollution and seize the economic and job opportunities of the future.
This history-making vote turns years of discussion into a reality.
Both Houses have now approved the Gillard Government's Clean Energy plan which will cut carbon pollution by at least 160 million tonnes a year in 2020  -  the equivalent to taking 45 million cars off the road.
We will do this by putting a price on pollution, fostering renewable energy technologies, encouraging energy efficiency and creating opportunities to reduce pollution on the land.
Our Clean Energy legislation will also deliver fair and generous assistance to householders while giving certainty to business and investors about Australia's move to a low pollution economy.
Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan said the 18 Bills comprising the Clean Energy legislative package represented one of the most important economic reforms in the nation's history.
Treasury modelling shows the Gillard Government's carbon price will reduce emissions and drive investment in clean energy while ensuring the economy continues to prosper, with 1.6 million jobs to be created by 2020.
For most people, the Gillard Government's comprehensive household assistance package will cover, and in many cases exceed, any price rises passed on by businesses:
 * Nine out of 10 households will receive compensation from a combination of tax cuts and increases to family benefits;
 * Almost six million households will receive assistance that covers all of their average price impact;
 * Over four million households will receive assistance that exceeds their expected average price impact, leaving their household budget better off.
Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency Greg Combet said the carbon price mechanism would apply to around 500 of the country's biggest polluters. It is a charge on pollution, not a tax on households or small businesses.
A fixed carbon price of $23 a tonne will apply from 1 July 2012, moving to a flexible price after three years.
The initial fixed price stage will provide stability and predictability. This will give businesses time to get used to the new system, to understand their obligations and to start planning ways of reducing their pollution.
Passage of the legislation means the Government will now focus on implementing the carbon price and delivering the substantial household, industry, renewable energy, innovation, land sector and energy efficiency measures contained in the Clean Energy Future Plan.
For more information on the Government's Clean Energy Future Plan visit www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au



PM: Good afternoon. I'm joined by the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, I would alert you to the fact that the Deputy Prime Minister has to leave I believe at 20 past two to commence his journeys to APEC.
Today for the first time both Houses of Parliament have voted to put a price on carbon. Today Australia has a price on carbon as the law of our land. This comes after a quarter of a century of scientific warnings, 37 Parliamentary inquiries and years of bitter debate and division. Today our nation has got this done, it has taken the most effective step it can to cut carbon pollution. Today's vote means that the hard work now begins to cut carbon pollution and we will do that, cutting carbon pollution by 160 million tonnes in 2020, the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road. Today's vote means we will begin to address the devastating impacts of climate change including more severe droughts, more severe floods, more extreme weather events and coastal erosion. Today's vote does mean that we will commence creating our clean energy future with all of the jobs and opportunities that come with that future, and today's vote also means that working Australians will see tax cuts, families will see increases in family payments and pensioners will see an increase in their pension. Today's vote is a win for Australia's children, it's a win for those who will seek their fortune and make their way by having jobs in our clean energy sector. It's a win for those who want our environment to be a cleaner environment and to see less carbon pollution.
Today we have made history. After all of these years of debate and division our nation has got the job done and from the 1st of July we will see a price on carbon pollution.
I'll hand now to the Deputy Prime Minister for some remarks.
DPM: Thanks very much Prime Minister.  Today is an historic day for economic reform in our country.  This is one of the great Labor reforms on par with the floating of the exchange rate, the bringing down of the tariff wall, the introduction of compulsory superannuation.  It is one of those reforms that owes a great deal to the tenacity and commitment of the Prime Minister and the Minister for Climate Change.  They have fought for this against the odds.  Against entrenched interests that have no interest in reform in Australia.  It is a great reform that will lock in future prosperity, it will support jobs and job creation, it will drive investment in clean energy and most importantly, it will look after the environment which we leave to subsequent generations.  This is a very important intergenerational reform for our economy and for our environment.
MINISTER COMBET: Thanks very much Prime Minister. The first thing I would actually like to do is to congratulate the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister because this has obviously been a very difficult issue to prosecute and yet it is such an extremely important environmental and economic reform. I would also like to thank the Prime Minister for having the confidence in me to have carriage of this particular portfolio. I'm very pleased that the legislation has passed the Senate today and that we're going to be able to undertake the work of cutting our pollution and innovating and driving investment in cleaner energy sources in our economy. It's a very important thing for the future of our country and for future generations.
Importantly with the Clean Energy package, it will be environmentally effective for the reasons that we've articulated so many times. At least 160 million tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions cut from our economy in the year 2020, with the capacity to do more. It will be economically responsible because this will drive investment in clean energy sources, it will drive innovation and it will drive productivity. And thirdly this set of reforms will be socially fair, and is strongly in a Labor Party tradition. Of course more than half of the revenue from the carbon price will go towards an important tax reform. That means, tax cuts for people earning up to $80,000 in particular and it will also finance of course an increase in the aged pension, an increase in family tax benefits and other Commonwealth payments. It is socially fair because the people who need help the most will receive the assistance that they need. So on those three fronts  -  economic responsibility, environmental effectiveness and social equity, this is a very important reform for this country.
PM: We're happy to take questions, Mark.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you say it's a historic day for reform, you say that work begins now in terms of cutting Australia's carbon pollution (inaudible) deeply unpopular at this stage according to the polls, what do you intend to do now differently to turn this debate around and can you turn it around?
PM: This reform is right for our country's future, it's the right thing to do, it's the most effective way we can cut carbon pollution and create a clean energy future. So of course we will keep explaining to people what putting a price on carbon means, that it means less carbon pollution, that it means new clean energy jobs and opportunities, that it means more money in the pockets of families that need that money the most. We will be getting the information to people that they do need. I understand this has been a bitter debate and that there are Australians that still view carbon pricing with a great deal of anxiety, they will have the opportunity to see carbon pricing in operation for themselves from the 1st of July next year, they will be able to see what the tax cuts mean for their family, the family payments increases, what the pension increases mean for their family. They'll also be able to see the move Australia will be making to a clean energy future as we cut carbon pollution.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Senator Abetz in the absence of his leader today said that the Opposition would maintain its opposition to this tax, it will turn the next election into a referendum against it and it will seek a mandate to repeal it lock, stock and barrel and ask the Labor Party to respect that mandate.
PM: And your question is?
JOURNALIST: How do you react to that?
PM: How I react to that is let's be serious here. Every living Liberal leader supports a price on carbon including the current Leader of the Opposition if the truth be told.
PM: Yes, Phil.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the ACCC has already caught a couple of businesses trying to pass on carbon tax price increases to consumers already. A liquor store put up prices by 20 percent, some taxi drivers were adding carbon fares to their fares. What do you say to business and consumers about all of that? What message do you want people to (inaudible)?
PM: Well we've ensured that there's strong enforcement here so that anybody who makes a misrepresentation that a price increase is somehow about carbon pricing but really they're just profiteering, can face penalties of more than a million dollars. So there is strong enforcement here, anybody who's thinking of doing the wrong thing should think about how they're going to feel when more than a million dollars comes out of their pocket.
Lenore.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you regret not seeking a clearer mandate at the last election for a carbon price instead of talking about a citizen's assembly and that sort of thing, do you regret not just coming out and saying ‘we're going to do it'?
PM: Look, I've made the decisions in the nation's interests, certainly acting on putting a price on carbon in this Parliament, getting this legislation through, having the price start on the 1st of July next year is in the interest of Australia.
Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, will there be a new advertising campaign and when would that start and secondly would you repeat for us what I think Mr Combet has said in the past and that is that in Opposition Labor would continue to support a carbon price and would try to stop a Liberal Government rescinding it.
PM: Labor supports our nation having a clean energy future and the best, cheapest way of doing that is putting a price on carbon, so yes we support putting a price on carbon because we want to cut carbon pollution, have a clean energy future and we've done this reform in a Labor way, making sure that we are looking after working families and pensioners. So Labor supports this legislation now, we will support it into the future, but before we get to that question Michelle, comes the issue about the huffing and puffing we're seeing from the Opposition, the statements about signatures in blood, all of that is to disguise the fact they've got their fingers firmly crossed behind their backs, they've got really no intention of repealing this. Every living Liberal leader including the current Leader of the Opposition is on the record as supporting a price on carbon.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
And Wayne will add to that.
DPM: I would just like to add to that because we've had the Leader of the Opposition take off with his tail between his legs today after all of the tough guy talk.  I mean, what a spineless retreat.
JOURNALIST: And the advertising campaign though?
PM: We will do what is necessary to get correct information to people. There have been any number of ridiculous and false claims made during this debate to cause anxiety amongst working people, to cause anxiety amongst small and medium businesses and indeed to cause anxiety for some bigger businesses. So I want people to have the right information about what carbon pricing means for them.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Your scheme is putting a proper price on carbon here, it's about twice what the market rate is overseas. Is that putting a bigger load onto Australian companies and does it highlight that your system here should be more flexible in terms of pricing?
PM: Well as you all know I've been to the G20 and I'm not surprised that we are seeing volatility in all the markets in Europe, not surprised at all. And so yes we're seeing volatility in carbon markets too, but in designing this scheme we've obviously made decisions about the long term trends for carbon pricing, so when the scheme moves to being an internationally linked emissions trading scheme, we've made projections about pricing at that point.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Senator Milne said that the carbon package that just passed the Senate was superior to CPRS, do you share her assessment?
PM: This is the right carbon pricing package for our nation, key amongst its features: it will cut carbon pollution, it does that by putting a price on the biggest polluters in our nation, getting them to pay the price of putting carbon pollution into our atmosphere, what they currently do for free.
As a result of that I've already met with business leaders who are thinking of the innovations and work practice changes they will bring to cut carbon pollution and that's the whole point because it's that carbon pollution that is damaging our environment. But we have done this scheme in a Labor way, making sure that as we deal with that big challenge for the environment in which we live, we have given assistance to those who need it the most, so I am particularly proud, I'm proud of all of this package but I am particularly proud of the tax reform elements of this package which means working people, particularly people who are coming off welfare into work, particularly women who are returning to work after caring for their families won't lose a cent of what they earn in tax.
Yes, Phil Hudson. Phil Coorey. You're looking curiously alike today, I'm not quite sure why. They've both taken that as a compliment.
Yes, Phil Coorey. Sir.
JOURNALIST: You're government's had a pretty rough trot for the last 10 months, do you regard today in any way as a turning point? Would you like to see an upturn now (inaudible)
PM: This is about what's right for the nation's future. That's what's guided us every day of the last 10 months as we've worked on this package and it's what will guide us as this package is delivered and implemented from 1 July on.
Latika.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I know self-analysis is always a little risky, but I'm wondering if you can identify what it is about you as a Prime Minister, you as a person, as a leader, that has made this reform which has eluded so many others come real today?
PM: I'm not someone given to a great deal of self-analysis or self obsession, I'll let all of my friends here do this.
DPM: Let me have a go.
PM: Alright.
DPM: The reason this legislation is passing is because the PM is as tough as nails and as you know, putting in place long-term reform, tough reform in this country is always hard.  And this has been hard, it's been a really tough debate.  But when you look at this today, this has been a victory for the optimists, and a defeat for the naysayers.  Because the one thing you can say about the Labor Party is we have an optimistic view about the future of our country and what we can achieve.  And we've got positive policies for the future and sometimes, that means you're going to have a really difficult type of debate.  And we've had a really difficult public debate.  But because of the leadership of the Prime Minister in this debate and the Minister for Climate Change, we've got this legislation through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're talking about tough debates. You've won this one, you've got the mining tax debate. How confident are you of getting through that mining tax legislation through the House my years' end?
PM: I might get the Deputy Prime Minister to answer that, given he's been working on it whilst I've been at the G20.
DPM: Well we're going to give it our best shot because there's a really strong case for this legislation.  Mining companies are super profitable because the Terms of Trade are at 140 year highs, and we need to spread the benefits of that to every corner of our country.  So we think there is a very strong case for the resource rent tax, in particular to look after those sections of the economy that aren't in the fast lane.  To build up the superannuation savings of low paid Australian workers.  To invest in infrastructure.  And to give a very significant tax cut for small business.  I think that case is very appealing to the minor parties and the independents in the Parliament and we're going to argue to them and talk to them about why this case is strong, but also have that discussion in the wider community as well, because as is the case with the carbon price, vested interests are out there mounting unsubstantiated scare campaigns, which are unravelling by the day, with the MRRT as well as the carbon price.
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan, can I just ask-
PM: Your excellency Ms Tingle, yes.
JOURNALIST: Your excellency Prime Minister. Can I just ask Mr Swan a question on MRRT. Does the concession by Andrew Forrest that he doesn't think he'll have to pay any MRRT suggest that there's a bit of a hole in your evidence?
DPM: No what it suggests is he's changed his position.  Because his previous position was that he would have to pay and it would be very damaging for his company.   He's now changed his mind.  The fact is Mr Forrest has been running an unsubstantiated fear campaign about this, that is unravelling as we speak, I'm looking forward to all of the evidence being presented over the next couple of days before the hearings that are going on before the House.  The fact is that we've put in our estimates what we expect to receive, the great bulk of that will be paid by very large companies.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, following on Michelle's question earlier, you've spoken about the need for business certainty. Will you give a clear guarantee today that Labor in opposition would vote for with the Greens to stop Tony Abbott repealing the tax?
PM: This is our package. We will support out package. We'll support it today, we will support it tomorrow, we will support it in a year's time, five year's time, ten year's time. We will support our package.
But I am inviting you to ask yourself a question before you get there, which is do you think in circumstances where every living Liberal leader has supported putting a price on carbon, that any of the overdramatised statements of the Leader of the Opposition can really be taken seriously.
Yes, he sees not it to be in his short term political advantage to keep his protest campaign going on carbon pricing, but he is on the record as supporting putting a price on carbon. So before we get to any of this analysis about Labor's position, let's do the analysis that lies in front of it: do you seriously think that Mr Abbott who has been on the record as a supporter of carbon pricing, is really going to try and repeal this package. I think that's the question for focussing on.
Sorry we'll go here and then come across. Yep.
JOURNALIST: I wonder whether you're a little overly cautious in responding to Phil Coorey's question, because given the polls, you've got a reform through, you've had successful international summits and some more to come, surely, do you feel that things are finally starting to turn your way after a tough year?
PM: Every day what I get up and do is think about what's in the nation's interests. On carbon pricing, this is in our interests to cut carbon pollution, to create clean energy jobs, to give families more money in their pockets, to have a major tax reform, this is in our nation's interests. Then the MRRT, in these days of the patchwork economy where we're seeing growth but we're seeing differential growth, to share opportunity for all, that's the right policy for the nation's future. To make sure that opportunity means something for every child, our education reform agenda, very important, that's what I get up and think about. I think about how we can make sure we don't leave anybody behind during these days of economic growth which is why we're passionate about the health reforms we've delivered already, we're very, very fixated on delivering the mental health package from the budget and we are starting the hard work that would lead this nation to a national disability insurance scheme. They're the things on my mind.
SO we'll just go here and here and then we'll go. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the determination of the Australia at work tender is casts doubt on the Government's entire tender process?
PM: Look there's an Australian Federal Police investigation in train, we received very clear advice from the Australian Government Solicitor and we've acted in accordance with it.
Last question.
JOURNALIST: Mr Combet there are various claims circulating today that electricity prices are now going to rise inordinately as a result of this new carbon price, what do you say to that?
COMBET:  Well we published Treasury modelling which showed what the price impact of the clean energy package would be and of course those price increases over the economy are only a 0.7 per cent increase in the CPI. And as we have been at pains to make very clear to people, low and middle income households will receive assistance in the form of tax cuts and increases in family tax benefits and other Commonwealth payments. We had the curious spectacle though in the Senate here today, which was somewhat related to this issue, where we've had Tony Abbott claiming in recent weeks that businesses shouldn't be engaging in the purchasing of forward permits or forward purchasing of carbon permits and yet the Liberals supported an amendment today with Senator Xenophon that was encouraging the purchasing of forward permits, at least that was their argument. So I think all of that side of the discussion is pretty confused by the Coalition.
JOURNALIST:  Why did you not support that amendment just quickly?
COMBET:  Well because we've put measures in place in the clean energy package to deal with that issue. We've had months and months in the preparation of this policy in dialogue with electricity generators. And there are measures in place that we have a great degree of confidence in, that will work in the electricity generating sector including, at the end of the day, access to working capital if that is needed to assist generators purchasing permits. But we believe the private sector will provide that facility for the generators quite efficiently.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today opened a new campus at the Western Autistic School in Laverton to help autistic students build social networks and help them transition to mainstream schools and programs.
She was joined by Member for Maribyrnong, Bill Shorten, whose electorate houses the Niddrie campus of the Western Autistic School.
The new facilities were built as part of the Gillard Government's Building the Education Revolution, with over $2 million provided for the work. 
The purpose built campus includes a swimming pool that will be used to help teach children swimming skills and water safety as well as giving them an opportunity to participate in structured physical activity.
Speaking at the school, the Prime Minister said the project was a fantastic example of how the Government's Building the Education program could deliver real benefits, not only to students but also to their families and wider community.
Across Australia through BER we have invested $16.2 billion to upgrade more than 9,000 schools and support jobs in local communities.
In the Western Melbourne electorates of Lalor, Maribyrnong, Gorton and Gellibrand we have invested almost $423 million in new and upgraded facilities for local schools.
Through our More Support for Students with Disabilities initiative, announced in this year's budget, the Gillard Government is also providing $200 million to provide greater support for teachers and schools working with students with disabilities or learning difficulties.
In Victoria this amounts to $48 million over the 2012 and 2013 school years.  
This funding will help teachers invest in new tools and technologies including:
 * 	new services such as speech and occupational therapy
 * 	special equipment in classrooms such as audio and visual technology so that students can more easily
 * 	more hours of in-class support from staff
 * 	more training for teachers so they can learn the latest skills and strategies to improve the education of students with disabilities. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced a proposal to significantly redevelop the RAAF Williams, Point Cook Base on the outskirts of Melbourne.
The Prime Minister and Minister for Defence Materiel Jason Clare visited RAAF Williams today and confirmed the Government's ongoing commitment to maintain the base, which is the oldest continually operated military flying base in the world.
The redevelopment proposal involves replacing obsolete engineering infrastructure to support the future development of the base.
It also includes making the museum and heritage areas at the Point Cook Base more accessible to the public.
The redevelopment plans are expected to cost around $100 million and will generate many job opportunities during construction.
A public consultation process will be conducted during the design development stage.
Construction is expected to commence by the end of 2014, following planning approval, and is likely to take around three years.
In the interim, Defence will commence maintenance work worth nearly $2 million to improve several heritage structures including the Bellman hangars at the base this financial year.
The Prime Minister also announced that a contamination remediation project will be undertaken at the former fire training area located in the south east section of the base.
The remediation will involve the excavation and treatment of soil contaminated with approximately 950,000 litres of liquid hydrocarbons known as Dense Non-Aqueous Phase Liquids (DNAPL) and will address potential safety and environmental risks.
The works will ultimately restore the site to a natural looking state and in a condition that supports continued Defence use. 



PM: Overnight we've seen another highly distressing incident in Afghanistan, three Australian soldiers have been wounded as a result of the actions of a rogue Afghan National Army soldier who using an automatic weapon and a grenade launcher fired upon our troops wounding three.
The three wounded soldiers have been medically evacuated to Kandahar, their condition is serious but they are receiving the best of possible care. This incident following the dreadful, dreadful circumstances of the 29th of October when three Australians were killed and seven were wounded by an Afghan National Army soldier will cause a lot of Australians today to question our mission in Afghanistan and to feel a real sense of distress. These attacks corrode trust, and I am very conscious that this attack, coming so soon after the dreadful killings of the 29th of October, will work to cause Australians to question our mission in Afghanistan and the trust we should have in Afghan National Army soldiers.
To the people of Australia on this difficult day I do want to say the following: I have just been in Afghanistan meeting with our troops and with our commanding officers. Progress is being made in Uruzgan Province, progress is being made to expand security there. Training the Afghan National Army and the Afghan National Police is pivotal to our mission, our purpose there is to train Afghan people so that they can provide security for their own nation and so we can transition to Afghan led security and ultimately bring our troops back from Afghanistan.
There are around 300,000 Afghan National Army soldiers and so our training mission is Uruzgan is on track to train Afghan National Army soldiers at the pace we had determined to do that training and work is happening across Afghanistan to train Afghan National Army soldiers.
As distressing as these incidents are, as dreadful as these incidents are, our mission in Afghanistan does need to continue, training is pivotal to that mission and our purpose is Afghanistan is to deny Afghanistan as a country in which terrorists can train to reap violence around the world.
I'm very conscious that today three Australian families have received to the news that their loved ones have been wounded in such dreadful circumstances. To those Australian families I say my thoughts and the thoughts of the Australian nation are with them as they deal with this dreadful news today.
I'll take questions on Afghanistan before we turn to any other issues for today.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: These incidents do corrode trust, I think that's obvious, we don't know yet the motivations of this Afghan National Army soldier, he has escaped and obviously has been pursued in Afghanistan right now, we don't know the motivations, but I also know from meeting with our troops in my visit there earlier this week that our troops are highly motivated to see the mission through and to get the job done.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) working alongside (inaudible).
PM: That is the purpose of their mission, the purpose of their mission is to push back the insurgency, to make the area of Uruzgan province secure and to train Afghan National Army soldiers and we also have police training Afghan National Police so that the people of Afghanistan can provide the long term security for their nation.
JOURNALIST: How do we avoid this going forward?
PM: After the 29th of October incident I tasked the Minister for Defence with fully investigating that incident and making any recommendations necessary to better assist our troops. Some measures have already been taken and if there's anything more we can learn from this incident which will also be investigated by the Minister for Defence then we will take whatever measures are necessary. As the Chief of the Defence Force has made clear earlier today, it's too early to make assumptions about what has happened here, it does need a full investigation and I had the opportunity to be briefed by the Chief of Defence earlier today. The Minister for Defence is on his way to Perth and will be in a position to make a public statement later today.
JOURNALIST: What's your message to their families?
PM: My message to their families is this is the most shocking of news to know that your loved one is wounded and so far away from home but they are receiving the best of medical care and the mission that they are on is an important one for Australia and the safety of Australians. Having met with the troops not that long ago, having shared a barbeque lunch with them, even in all the difficulties and dangers that they face they are highly motivated, highly focussed and determined to see the mission through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said this erodes trust, when does trust run out and if this continues to happen will you remove troops from this kind of training duty?
PM: We've got to remember why the troops are there, the troops are there to ensure that we engage in strategic denial in Afghanistan, that is we deny terrorists the ability to use Afghanistan as a place to train and we know that terrorists trained in Afghanistan have taken Australian lives and so we are there in our national interest denying terrorists a safe haven for training so that we prevent them from getting the training that they need to come and take Australian lives. The mission needs to be accomplished by training Afghan National Army soldiers, this is not an extra to the mission we are on, this is the mission we are on. Training Afghans so they can provide the long term security for their nation and deny it as an operating base for terrorism.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Ok, as is clearly obvious from the backdrop and surroundings I'm here at the carbon expo meeting with people who will be part of leading us to a clean energy future and I'm happy to take questions on that or other questions of the day.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Australian companies to pay a global price, yet your scheme sets a floor and cap to prevent that happening.
PM: Well we have set a floor and cap so that there can be stability in pricing but by internationally linking the scheme we will see the Australian price linked to the global price when we move to the emissions trading scheme in three years time, but we did think it was appropriate, because people are making very long term investments, to have a band in which the price will move so that we've got the benefits of linking with the international price but also the benefits of stability.
JOURNALIST: You said opposition to these kinds of great reforms such as Medicare always fail, would you extend that to Labor's opposition to the GST in 1998?
PM: The GST was introduced against trenchant Labor opposition and by the time of the next election it was apparent to us as a political party that there was no taking it back. We made some promises at the following election for limited changes to the GST but we knew that you couldn't go back and the reality is Tony Abbott knows you can't go back.
This is a great Labor reform in the tradition of Medicare and superannuation, all opposed by the Liberal Party at the time with lots of huffing and puffing but the truth is they didn't roll them back, they didn't take them back and now no Australian would walk out their door and say they want to see the abolition of Medicare or superannuation taken away.
This is a great Labor reform and for all of the theatre now, Tony Abbott has absolutely no intention of repealing this legislation.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect the Mining Council (inaudible) scare campaign to end now. There are companies that are still worried about the detail and the regulations, so  - 
PM: With carbon pricing? 
JOURNALIST: Yes, related to carbon pricing and secondly when will we see the energy white paper and what else is there to say?
PM: Well what people say about carbon pricing is a matter for them but it is done. The legislation is through the Parliament, the price will start on 1 July next year, people will see the tax cuts in their pocket, everybody earning less than $80,000 will see a tax cut, for most of them that will be at least $300 a year. People will see pension increases, family payment increases, they'll see the tax free threshold tripled so people will better see the rewards of working. It's done. It's happening. It's starting. What people say about it is a matter for them.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, you gave an answer then that the job is done (inaudible) good job now convincing not so much the various interests groups that people (inaudible) established position but rather telling voters that this is the right thing to do, that it won't hurt them?
PM: Australians will be able to judge carbon pricing through their own experience. After 1 July next year they will be able to see what carbon pricing means for them. They will hear what businesses are doing to cut carbon pollution, they'll be able to see that happening and understand how carbon pollution is being reduced and it be reduced by the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road in 2020. They'll see tax cuts, they'll see family payment increases, they'll see pension increases and they'll be able to assess what carbon pricing, with our biggest polluters paying the price, means for them and their family.
And they'll be able to think about their kids' future and their kids' future in an Australia that is generating less carbon pollution. So Australians will ultimately judge, with the best possible information available to them, that is their own day to day, lived experience of carbon pricing.
We'll go here and then come back, yes.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that it's going to be politically difficult for you if the difference between the Australian and the international carbon price continues to remain large and are there any circumstances such as an extended and deeper recession in Europe for instance where the Australian Government would reconsider the fixed price?
PM: Carbon pricing is done, it's finished and it'll start on 1 July next year so the scheme that's gone through the Parliament will be the scheme. On volatility in carbon markets in Europe, let's be very clear, markets are volatile in Europe  -  all markets are volatile in Europe as a result of the sovereign debt crisis we're seeing in the Eurozone. Where the international pricing matters in our scheme is after the three year fixed period when we move to a floating price and there is international linking. So people looking at today's volatility need to just think forward three years, we are talking about long term trends and long term pricing here.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) one of the transitions here (inaudible) was natural gas. The Greens seem to be talking in very absolute terms about the value of coal seam gas, does that concern you at all?
PM: We believe coal seam gas will be part of the energy mix of the future. There will be a diverse range of energy sources for the future. We are very focused on clean energy sources and on renewable energy. Coal seam gas will be part of the mix. There is a set of issues about coal seam gas including land use issues and planning issues which are overwhelmingly within the domain of state governments.
As a Federal Government, what we can do on coal seam gas is continue to provide scientific information, our CSIRO for example does provide scientific information, we can continue with coordinating work in the states, obviously we play a role in bringing ministerial councils together where these questions are discussed. And when projects are of a particular significance and scale and environmental importance then they come under our federal Environment Protection and Biodiversity Act and Minister Burke has been very rigorous on conditions on coal seam gas projects.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: Do you have a problem with the rhetoric?
PM: Look the position of the Government is the position I've just put to you.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We will push at the forthcoming climate change talks and we will continue over time to keep pushing for a comprehensive global agreement, but let's not make the mistake of assuming that action isn't happening in current circumstances. Action is happening around the world. China, moving to trialling emissions trading in a number of its provinces. A number of American states moving to emissions trading and putting a price on carbon. A comprehensive scheme in Europe which has been there for a number of years now. Emerging powers like India, taxing coal so that they can fund clean energy. New Zealand with an emissions trading scheme, President Obama with ambitious clean energy targets, Prime Minister Cameron in the United Kingdom with very ambitious clean energy targets. So action is happening around the world. The risk for Australia without our carbon pricing legislation would be that we fell behind the standards of the world and didn't get a fair share of the clean energy jobs of the future. I'm here at a carbon expo where people who innovate, people who provide services for a low carbon future are poised and ready to do business, I want to see that happen because I want those jobs here in Australia and carbon pricing will enable that.
Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: One last question Prime Minister  -  just on Mark Butler's (inaudible) in the Sydney Morning Herald about the importance of the Labor Party actually taking (inaudible) position on same sex marriage. Are you now convinced that a conscience vote is the better way to go to resolve that issue?PM: Look we'll deal with that as a Labor Party at National Conference.
Thanks very much. 



Friends, just after noon yesterday, the government's Clean Energy legislation was passed by the Senate.
This is an historic day in Australian public life.
One of those moments where the federal parliament landed our nation on the right side of history.
When our nation strode forward to embrace the future with confidence.
We've had a quarter-century of scientific warnings.
We've had 37 parliamentary committee inquiries.
We've had a carbon price proposed by every government since Paul Keating.
We've had legislation presented to the parliament four times.
The job is now done.
Carbon pricing is the law of our land.
This has been a long journey.
The work of a whole generation.
When climate change first became a major policy concern in the mid 1980s, some of you in this room weren't even born.
If this has been a long debate, it has also been complex.
Perhaps the most complex policy debate in Australia's peace-time history.
This was a scientific problem in need of an economic solution.
Because climate change is the ultimate externality.
It is the result of millions of energy-use decisions over three centuries, each of which made sense on its own.
But together those decisions have come to pose a grave threat to the global environment and economy.
We are a community of reason.
So we listened when the scientists told us that the world is warming dangerously, and that the worst effects of climate change can largely be avoided if we act soon.
We are a nation of reform.
So we listened when the economists told usthat by usinga pricing mechanism to curb carbon pollution, we could capture the genius of the free market to drive change.
Through good public policy in Labor's tradition of rigour and reform, we've responded by creating a package that sets us on the path to a clean energy future.
It is now the legislated policy of this nation that our biggest polluters should pay, and should pay through a market mechanism.
A modern policy approach, with efficient abatement at the lowest economic cost.
An inbuilt incentive to innovate, linked to global markets and aimed at meeting evidence-based emissions targets.
The carbon price has a small beginning  -  less than one-third of the price impact of the GST.
Yet the scale of the transformation it unleashes will be immense.
Within the space of just 38 years  -  2012 to 2050, well within the lifetime of most of us in this hall, our nation will cut 9 out of every 10 tonnes of the carbon pollution we would otherwise have released into the atmosphere.
It is a change that will touch every home and workplace.
A new industrial revolution that will change the way we live and change it for the better.
I've had a glimpse of that future in my visits around this nation.
I opened a wind farm at Gunning that will power 23,000 homes.
I've seen a factory that makes paint which acts like a solar panel when painted onto steel and glass.
I've seen a new office tower in Sydney that produces 25 per cent of its own power on-site.
I've seen geothermal power at work, not in central Australia but in the streets of suburban Melbourne.
And these are just a down-payment.
These are what we have achieved under today's modest and fragmented policies.
Imagine what we can achieve after July 1 next year when the carbon price comes into force.
Today's leisurely stroll towards a clean energy future will become a sprint as we close the innovation gap with the rest of the world.
Friends, in getting to this point, we've seen some of the less favourable aspects of political life on display: fear-mongering.
The distortion of facts and the trashing of science.
The playing to short-term political advantage to the detriment of the national interest.
But ultimately reason has prevailed.
And while many Australians remain anxious about this change, they accept the cost of not acting is too great to accept.
Because not acting means more and longer droughts.
Rising sea levels.
More severe storms and cyclones.
Lasting damage to the Murray Darling food bowl.
To the Great Barrier Reef.
To Kakadu.
No nation can accept such threats.
We must act.
And we will act.
The time for words ended yesterday.
The time for deeds begins today.
It will be a time of creativity and innovation.
We will see new ideas and new products from our universities, the CSIRO, our company research labs and even from backyard sheds.
We will see our factories equipped with new technologies and new processes.
Our workers will be trained up with new skills.
We will create new jobs and transform old ones.
High skill, high wage jobs in the industries of tomorrow.
All up, the next forty years will see $100 billion worth of investment in renewables.
Six million jobs will be created.
Real gross national income per person will almost double.
And friends, this change will have all the characteristics of a true Labor reform.
Bringing together economic, social and environmental imperatives in a way that only Labor can.
Looking forward to the future.
Protecting jobs.
And making sure no-one is left behind.
So from mid next year, Australians will see pension increases and tax cuts in their pockets.
We will assist small business, boost manufacturing and build competitiveness in the steel industry.
We will look after the regions.
Yes there is talk of repeal.
Rash, irresponsible talk by those who have absolutely no intention of following that talk up with action.
Their sole intention is to cause damage by corroding certainty and seeing investment deferred.
They have convinced themselves that they will profit politically by maximising immediate harm to the nation.
But history shows that spoilers always fail.
We saw it with Medicare.
We saw it with universal superannuation.
Reforms loudly opposed at the time.
But when the chance for repeal come, our opponents did nothing.
They squibbed it.
Because they knew that Australians had come to understand these reforms and accept their value for the future of our nation.
Because they understand governments must walk the reform road and make the big calls.
The big decisions that demand courage at the time and which, when we look back, no one would seek to undo.
So in a bizarre parallel universe, there is juvenile talk of repeal and promises etched in blood, with fingers firmly crossed behind their backs as they are made.
In the real world, carbon pricing now moves to become part of the social and economic fabric of this nation.
The Carbon Farming Initiative has already passed the Parliament.
The Clean Energy Bills passed the Senate yesterday.
The legislation establishing the Australian Renewable Energy Agency is expected to pass the parliament this year.
And we will legislate next year to establish the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, following an independent review led by Reserve Bank Board member Jillian Broadbent.
But that is just the beginning.
The Government will rollout a number of transitional assistance programs in advance of the start of the carbon pricing mechanism.
These include the:
Coal Sector Jobs Package
Low Carbon Communities Program
Clean Technology Programs
Energy Security Fund
Energy Efficiency Information Grants for small business and community groups
We are also establishing a number of the key institutions which will oversee carbon pricing.
The Climate Change Authority, which will provide expert advice on key aspects of the carbon pricing mechanism, will be established by mid-2012.
Former Reserve Bank Governor, Mr Bernie Fraser has already been announced as its Chair.
The Energy Security Council, which will provide assurance and advice to the Government in the event that systemic risks to energy security emerge.Former head of the Victorian Treasury under Jeff Kennett, Dr Michael Vertigan has been appointed Chair of the Council.
The Clean Energy Regulator, which will administer the carbon price mechanism, will be established well in advance of 1 July 2012.
We have commenced the Contract for Closure Program to retire 2000 megawatts of the nation's most polluting coal fired power stations, with Expressions of Interest closing three weeks ago.
And of course, we will put money in the pockets of Australians to help meet the impacts of the carbon price.
Nine out of 10 households will receive compensation from a combination of tax cuts and increases to family benefits.
Almost six million households will receive assistance that covers all of their average price impact.
Over four million households will receive assistance that exceeds their expected average price impact, leaving their household budget better off.
And that assistance is just around the corner.
In seven months, the “Clean Energy Advance” payments will begin flowing to pensioners and families.
And from 1 July 2012, income tax cuts take effect, so that all taxpayers earning $80,000 or less will get a tax cut, and altogether, around a million individuals will no longer have to lodge a tax return.
Friends, this is reform for the future.
Reform we need to make to keep our economy competitive, to protect our environment and to do the right thing for coming generations.
Reform that is here to stay.
It is appropriate that 2012 marks the start of our carbon price because it also marks 300 years since the age of carbon began with the invention of the first commercial steam engine.
Those 300 years have brought higher living standards for humanity than all the preceding centuries combined.
We would not trade those centuries for anything.
Except for this: the same carbon emissions which created our modern way of life are now threatening to undermine it.
So a second industrial revolution is needed.
And carbon pricing is the key that unlocks the door to that clean energy future.
Like tariff reform and floating the dollar, it is a gateway reform.
The one big decision by government that unlocks thousands of individual decisions by Australian firms and households.
Their ingenuity.
Their creativity.
And their ability to see solutions where only problemsnow exist.
Friends, you here in this room and your colleagues around the nation will be the leaders of that change:
The clean energy and low emissions technology firms.
The carbon market trading companies.
And the professional service firms who will support you.
Just as Apple and Microsoft drove the IT revolution in the 70s and 80s, you will drive this revolution.
So by the middle of this century, we will be a different nation.
Cleaner.
Smarter.
Richer.
A nation where the three-century-old link between emissions growth and economic growth has finally been broken.
The age of carbon pollution will end for the same reasonwe don't ride in horses and buggies anymore.
Or do our calculations on slide rules.
Or send our messages by carrier pigeon.
Because of the infinite capacity of human beings to imagine a different world and bring it into being.
That is why the legislation passed yesterday afternoon is not just a plan to deal with climate change.
It's not just a plan for new technology and low emissions.
It's an act of faith in the Australian people.
A confident, creative people.
Up for the big decisions.
Unafraid of the future.
Ready to build a clean energy future together.


Werribee Victoria
This video contains excerpts from the Community Cabinet meeting held in Werribee on Wednesday 9 November 2011. A complete transcript of the Public Forum detailing all questions and answers can be found via the Community Cabinet links on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet homepage http://www.dpmc.gov.au/community_cabinet
Footage of the school, students, Community Reception, members of the public mingling, music and entertainment.
Narrator: On the 9th of November a Community Cabinet meeting attended by a very large audience was held at the Werribee Primary School, in the Prime Minister's electorate of Lalor. Ministers answered questions and discussed issues on a broad range of topics.
Student: Julia Gillard is coming to our school to have a Cabinet meeting.
Community Member 1: It is a good opportunity and this one of the things the Australian family require. We all feel part of the family.
Lyn Tout, Principal: It is now my great pleasure to introduce the Honourable Julia Gillard, the local member, the member for Lalor and also our Prime Minister.
Prime Minister: I am very pleased to be here in Werribee tonight, at Werribee Primary. I know as the local member in this area and someone who has their home in the west, that for too long people have viewed the west as an area of disadvantage. That's not how we view it. We view the west as an area of opportunity, of great diversity, of community bonds and of strength.
We believe that our job as a Labor government is to ensure that Australia can offer opportunity for all. We are driven to do that. To make sure that opportunity is spread throughout our Nation and we are also driven to ensure that as we spread that opportunity we don't leave Australians behind.
Community Member 2: What directives have you given to your Communications Minister to prioritise broadband rollout on the basis of the greatest need?
Prime Minister: Thank you. It is not the government that makes the decisions about the priority of the rollout. It's actually the National Broadband Company, the NBN Co.
Community Member 3: I'd like to congratulate you all for the climate change and the carbon tax debate that you've had the backbone to stand up to the rest of the country on. I think it's incredible.
Applause
Community Member 4: Can the Federal Government influence the Victorian State Government to invest in the National economy by building the West Link project?
Anthony Albanese MP:  So, can we control everything? No. We can't have centralised planning from Canberra, for what are quite rightly state and local government responsibilities. But what we can do is, to link funding to getting those proper planning processes right and that certainly is what we are doing in practise and intend to do more of in the future.
Community Member 5: We can have our say and see what the issues are locally and nationally
School Students:  Because she (the Prime Minister) is our local member, it's nice to see her around and doing things for our community
Community Member 6: I think she (the Prime Minister) is doing a fantastic job and I just wish more people would hear the message and agree with that.
Footage of the Prime Minister mingling with members of the public, pans of the Public Forum and one-on-one meetings between ministers and members of the public.
Ends with musical interlude and applause
Footage concludes (3 minutes)



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today officially opened the new and already highly popular community learning centre in Wyndham Vale.
The new centre is providing a comprehensive range of much needed services for the people of Wyndham Vale, which is one of Wyndham's fastest growing areas.
The Prime Minister toured the Centre with Minister for Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government, Simon Crean today.
The Centre has maternal and child health consulting rooms, kindergarten rooms, consulting areas for agencies and Government departments, a community learning area with 16 computers, a youth lounge area and a library.
The library features state of the art technology which allows people to check-out electronically tagged books themselves.
The Centre has seen around 7,000 people use its facilities each week since July this year. The library alone now has 5,000 patrons and nearly 350 members.
The Gillard Labor Government provided more than $2.3 million to help build the Centre, working closely with the Victorian Government and Wyndham City Council. 
The funding came out of the Government's $1.1 billion Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program which supports local infrastructure projects, like the Centre, across Australia.
More than $83 million has been allocated to help build projects under this program in the western Melbourne region alone.
For example, the Gillard Government provided $9 million to help build a state of the art kitchen which prepares essential meals on wheels services for several local councils in the Hobson's Bay area.
The new Brimbank Gardens Community Hub and sporting complex at Derrimut received $3 million for construction from the Gillard Government.
The Government also provided nearly $3 million to help build the Milleara Family and Community Hub with the Moonee Valley City Council, incorporating a child care centre, a maternal and child health centre and kindergarten.
Wyndham is the fastest growing local government area in all of Victoria  -  and the third fastest in Australia.
Wyndham Vale is one of Wyndham's growth fronts with a population expected to increase from today's 18,000 residents to nearly 40,000 by 2026.
The Gillard Government is working hard to jointly establish the right facilities to meet the growing needs of communities like those in Wyndham.
Great community projects like these are providing thousands of jobs opportunities around the country.
Many local tradespeople and suppliers were engaged during the construction of the new centre at Wyndham Vale which now supports 20 permanent jobs. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the Government was prepared to provide over $2 billion to deliver an historic pay rise to 150,000 of Australia's lowest paid workers in the social and community services sector - the vast majority of them women.
This is an important step on the road to closing the long-standing pay gap between men and women and delivering fairness to the workplace.
Workers in this sector have been underpaid for too long because their work was viewed as women's work. They work in incredibly challenging jobs, including:
 * 	Working with people with disabilities
 * 	Counselling families in crisis
 * 	Running homeless shelters
 * 	Working with victims of domestic violence or sexual assault.
They deserve to be properly rewarded for their work.
The Government will put a joint submission on equal pay with the Australian Services Union to the independent umpire, Fair Work Australia. To back up its commitment the Government is prepared to provide over $2 billion to fund its share of any wage increases awarded.
The Government expects major providers and other unions will join us in the submission.
If the submission is accepted, these workers would for the first time be given a fair day's pay for a fair day's work.
Of the 150,000 workers in the sector, 120,000 are women. Fair Work Australia has already found that their work is undervalued because of gender considerations.
If FWA agrees to the Government's proposal on the extent of this undervaluation, this will deliver very significant pay rises. The Government also encourages state and territory governments to commit to funding their share of the cost of closing the gender pay gap. 
In 2011, it is unacceptable that women earn on average one fifth less than men full-time  -  the equivalent of working nearly seven weeks a year for free.
The historic case currently before Fair Work Australia was only made possible because Labor removed the barriers to pay equity claims in the federal jurisdiction. Previously, an applicant had to prove discrimination, and the legal test only allowed comparison between “equal work” rather than the new broader test of “equal or comparable work”.
As a result, no equal remuneration case has to date succeeded under federal workplace relations law.
With Fair Work Australia's approval, the increases would be phased-in over six years, starting on 1 December next year.
The phased introduction recognises the complex funding arrangements in the sector, which involve local, state and territory governments, not for profit organisations, commercial providers and the Commonwealth.
This will allow community sector organisations delivering Commonwealth-funded programs to pay the new rates, without reducing services to the community. The Government will also increase funding under Commonwealth-State agreements that cover social and community sector employees.
Every day the community sector delivers vital services to hundreds of thousands of vulnerable Australians. We want to make sure the community sector is strong and productive into the future.
Through the Community Sector Wages Group the Government has been working with all parties to examine the potential implications of a pay increase, taking into account the need to ensure a sustainable and effective social and community services sector.
The Government will now work with the sector to identify opportunities for reform, from both Government and service providers, to strengthen and improve service delivery, and reduce red tape for the sector. 
The Government is committed to the consultation process announced by the Minister for Workplace Relations and which will be undertaken by Mr Arch Bevis to resolve issues relating to certain employees and employers in Queensland covered by an order made by the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission in 2009. The Government expects this process to conclude by 30 November 2011.
Improving women's earning capacity and expanding their choice of jobs will not only aid women's own economic security, but will lift our country's productivity.
Consistent with the Government's record of strict fiscal discipline, any expenditure will be offset and will be reflected in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook (MYEFO).
The Government will continue to work with industry and union leaders to close the pay gap. 



It is wonderful to be here today with so many good leaders and hard workers, leaders in the union movement, social and community sector workers of course my friends and colleagues Tanya Plibersek and Senator Jacinta Collins.
Many old friends and new friends, hard working Aussies all.
You don't need to be an expert on the social and community sector workforce to know this:
You are among the hardest working Australians.
You are mostly women.
And it is time you got equal pay.
All across our nation, you work in women's refuges and in disability support centres.
You manage family support services, you lead teams of professionals who counsel victims of sexual assault.
You're in charge of homes for homeless men and the mentally ill.
You're counsellors, social workers and therapists. 
Community development workers and specialist care and support workers.
More than three quarters of you women.
Nearly two thirds of you have an industry qualification  -  compared to just over half in other industries.
But your average full-time wage is just over $46 000 per year  -  compared to around $58 000 for all working Australians.
A gender-driven pay gap which sees, for example, a Disability Support Worker with a tertiary qualification who supervises five staff get paid less than $38 000 a year.
You have above average qualifications, you get below average pay.
This is something Labor's fair work system can fix.
On 19 March 2009, more than two and a half years ago, your Parliament passed the Fair Work Act into law.
A law which put Work Choices in the grave, a law which brought balance to Australian workplaces.
A law only a Labor government would enact.
We established Fair Work Australia.
We delivered ten national employment standards in law.
We created a modern award system.
With a new way to set the minimum wage which is fair to low-paid workers.
And fair minimum conditions like penalty rates and overtime that cannot be stripped away.
We gave people the right to be represented by their union.
The right to bargain in a system where employers and employees would get a fair go.
We created a new bargaining stream for low-paid workers who had been locked out of the benefits of collective bargaining.
We gave 2.8 million more Australians protection from unfair dismissal.
We ended Australian Workplace Agreements, the individual statutory employment agreements that had ripped off so many hard working Australians.
And we broadened the definition of pay equity to allow real progress in closing the gender pay gap.
Friends, these are things only a Labor government would do.
And Labor's agenda for working people has gone further.
Delivering paid parental leave for new parents to stay at home.
Lifting the childcare rebate for families who need help.
Lifting family payments for parents of teenagers.
Cutting tax for middle- and low-income families.
Increasing the pension and legislating higher super for better living standards for Australians when they retire.
Above all keeping the economy growing, supporting and creating jobs.
Over seven hundred thousand jobs have been created since Labor came to office, over 120 000 in the last year.
We have exposed the conservative lie that you have to choose: That you can have penalty rates and overtime, protection from unfair dismissal and parental leave entitlements  -  or you can have growth and jobs  -  but not both.
And we have brought those real benefits to working Australians' lives.
Each of these achievements was delivered with these goals in mind:
To ensure every Australian shares in the benefits that a strong economy brings.  To spread opportunity to all, to ensure our changing economy leaves no one behind.
Fairness at work is vital to Australian families.
We can never have fairness at work if work is not fair for women.
Or for the men who work alongside them in sectors like yours.
So when Labor came to office I was determined to make real progress in closing the gender pay gap.
A gap which is now so great, with full-time working women earning on average one fifth less than men full-time, that it is as if women work nearly seven weeks every year for free.
A gap driven, in considerable part, by the way our society and economy have traditionally undervalued female-dominated occupations.
For too long society has undervalued the work women do.
Federal equal remuneration provisions were first introduced in Australia in 1994. 
But those equal remuneration provisions were strictly limited to considering work of equal value.
By the time of the Fair Work Act sixteen applications had been made in the federal system, sixteen applications had failed.
It had become clear that Federal law set a test which had proved impossible to meet. 
So in the Fair Work Act I was determined to change this.
By 2008, some state legislation, like that in Queensland, already employed a wider test.
And so in the Fair Work Act we consciously adopted a wider test, mirroring those like Queensland's.
To deliver a right to equal pay for work of comparable value, not just the rigid old equal value test.
In 2009, Queensland's legislation saw a landmark decision of the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission.
And encouraged by that decision, and by the Fair Work Act, you and your unions, led by the Australian Services Union, made this important gender pay equity application to Fair Work Australia.
Supported by the Heads of Agreement I signed with the ASU when I was Minister for Workplace Relations.
This year, our new laws and the case brought by your unions have allowed a sensible comparison between different kinds of work in different parts of the national economy.
In May, Fair Work Australia found that workers in your sector do not get equal pay with people who do comparable work.
And Fair Work Australia indicated it would seek further submissions to allow it to determine an appropriate remedy.
Understand: this equal pay test case is no “unintended consequence” of the new system.
This has given us exactly what we wanted, exactly what I hoped for.
The chance for a fair decision, based on fair evidence, by Fair Work Australia, that yes, the people who work in your female-dominated sector have long been underpaid.
And yes, you have been underpaid because you are mostly women.
This case creates an opportunity for governments and unions, employees and providers to put our heads together, to agree on a fair value and of course to agree on where the money will come from.
It's not an opportunity this Labor Government will miss.
This is the good news I have come here to tell you today.
Nearly twenty years since those first equal remunerations provisions were introduced.
Nearly three years since the Fair Work Act passed.
Two years since your unions brought your case.
Six months since Fair Work Australia found that you are not paid fairly.
And after hundreds of hours of detailed discussions between the various parties.
The Federal Government and the Australian Services Union now have agreement on a way forward.
A way forward to deliver fair pay for caring workers covered by this case.
Friends, today I can announce that the Australian Government will join with the Australian Services Union to make a joint submission to Fair Work Australia in the Social and Community Sector equal remuneration case.
That means together we will argue for rates of pay that fairly and properly value social and community sector work, for rates of pay which don't discriminate and which finally end decades of unequal pay.
Other unions will join us and we expect major providers will do the same, to support this before Fair Work Australia's Full Bench.
If, through its own rigorous and independent processes, the Full Bench now agrees to the remedy we propose, here's how it will work.
Social and community sector workers covered by this case will be paid new, fair pay rates, based on the convincing evidence of gender pay imbalance given in this case. 
When fully implemented, this should deliver pay rates comparable to those awarded by the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission in its landmark 2009 case.
And in the joint submission, the Federal Government will clearly state that we will fund our share of the pay rises which flow from the Full Bench's final decision.
More than 150 000 people  -  including 120 000 women  -  work in the sector.
Our decision will fund our share of very significant pay rises for these workers right across Australia.
We will make a regulation to ensure that eligible Queensland workers receive their share of these pay increases as well.
And we will propose that the fair pay increases start on 1 December next year  -  and be gradually phased-in over six years.
Our decision comes at a cost to the Federal Budget of over $2 billion over the full phase-in period.
The States and Territories should also do the right thing. 
To support properly valued rates of pay, to pay their share of the cost.
And providers can play a role in urging the States to pay their full share.
All Governments must meet their share of the funding responsibility  -  -  but our commitment is not conditional on the decisions other Governments now take.
Because we believe in equal pay - we know this is the right thing to do.
We will deliver our share of funding for caring workers covered by this case.
We will do our part for equal pay.
We will also fund these pay rises responsibly.
We will make the necessary decisions to find the financial room  -  under our strict fiscal discipline, the additional expenditure for the Commonwealth will be fully offset.
The States and Territories share funding responsibility as well.
As I have said, our decision does not depend on the States and Territories doing the right thing.
The Federal Government recognises the budget pressures the States and Territories face.
But we know you are working Australians who face budget pressures too.
You have waited long enough to get equal pay.
The evidence given to Fair Work Australia in this case is remarkable. The benefits if Fair Work Australia agrees are very great too.
One witness, I will call “Natalie”.  Natalie helps people who are mentally ill, children and young people needing out of home care and people living with a disability. 
She helps them learn to live independently when they move from long-term hospital-based care to community-based living.
Natalie is currently paid $41 648 per year.  When fully implemented, her fair pay will be around $55 000 in today's dollars.
Another witness, I will call “Michelle”.  Michelle has a law degree and a degree in youth affairs. 
She works full time at a community legal centre, managing the legal and financial counsellingprograms, supervising seven staff and numerous volunteers  -  as well as providing legal advice directly to clients.
Michelle is currently paid just $49,500.  When fully implemented, her fair pay will be around $66,000 in today's dollars.
We will deliver very significant pay rises to hard-working Australians.
Not just equal pay or fair pay, higher pay.
Higher take-home pay for tens of thousands of working people and their families.
At a time when in every family, every dollar counts.
This historic joint submission will now go before Fair Work Australia's Full Bench.
The Government and unions will ask the Full Bench to confirm that the agreement meets the legislative requirements.
We will ask Fair Work Australia to agree to fair pay for caring workers covered by this case and in turn to declare, that the days are coming to an end when the work of women is valued less because it is women's work.
Friends, the best way to keep our economy strong is to keep people in work.
The best way to keep our society fair is to keep work fair as well.
Labor showed in the global financial crisis that we can have a growing economy and support and create jobs, while protecting Australians' rights at work.
Labor's approach to fairness at work has been good for our country in the past.
And the plan I have announced today is an example of how it should be in the future as well.
Unions, employers and the Government working together.
Negotiating in good faith, based on the best evidence, working together to find the best way to reward hard work.
Accepting the decision of the independent umpire.
This is our fair work system functioning as it should.
As a guarantee of fairness for all.
As a driver of productivity growth and future prosperity.
So we sustain growth and so we keep creating jobs.
These new measures I announce today will be good for our country as well.
Because we are Labor, we will deliver fairness for Australian women.
Today is a great step forward on the path to equal pay.
And because we are Labor, we govern for all, we govern for working Australians. 
Today is a great step forward for tens of thousands of hard working people.
I know many working people struggle to make ends meet.
This is why Labor in Government has delivered real benefits to middle- and low-income families.
Tax cuts, pension increases, higher family payments, increased super.
And now, through this announcement today: fair and equal pay.
And I also know that nothing is more important to working Australians than work itself.
The dignity of work and the benefits of work.
Because the value of work is at the centre of every family budget and it is at the centre of Labor's decision-making and vision for the future too.
The future of our economy  -  of an economy of jobs and growth.
The future of our workplaces and families as well  -  of an economy that serves working people.
Where their Government is on their side  -  managing the economy in the interests of all.
In a country where working people share in the benefits that a strong economy brings.
Working Australians can only be sure of these good things when the Government is on their side.
Working Australians can only be sure the Government is on their side when the Government is Labor. 



PM: I'm here in Sydney with Jacinta Collins the Parliamentary Secretary for Workplace Relations and I've had the enormous privilege this morning of spending some time with people who work in our social and community services sector and I can see a number of them still in the room.
These are hard working Australians who support people with disabilities, who work with our homeless, who support women when they've been the victims of sexual assault, who support families in crisis; they do some of the most important work in our society. But because this work has been predominantly done by women it's been undervalued and underpaid.
To give you just one snapshot statistic there, in this sector, the social and community services sector, around two thirds of the workers have post-school qualifications compared with half in the Australian workforce generally and yet when we compare pay, these workers on average get $46,000 a year whereas the Australian average is $58,000 a year  -  showing you that they have been undervalued and underpaid.
When Labor came to government we got rid of the hated WorkChoices and replaced it with the Fair Work Act. Amongst a huge set of reforms to make a real difference for working Australians, I ensured that we put in the Fair Work Act a decent equal pay principle. A decent section of the Act which meant underpaid working women could go to Fair Work Australia and get equal pay.
The Australian Services Union has taken the first test case to do just that, to get wage justice for people who work in the social and community sector, predominantly women, but also the men who work alongside them.
Today I've come to meet with those workers and announce that the Government will join with the Australian Services Union in a submission to Fair Work Australia to get these workers equal pay and we expect that we will be joined by responsible providers and possibly state governments in that application.
We will be saying to the Industrial Relations Commission that they should give these workers comparable wages to what has been achieved in Queensland through its industrial system. That does mean that we'll see increases in the order of $7,000 a year for workers in the disability sector. That's an important recognition of the work that these workers do.
We need to fund this and the Commonwealth will fund its fair share and today I'm calling on state and territory governments to also fund their fair share of these increases for social and community services workers.
For the Commonwealth we anticipate the cost will be around $2 billion phased in over a six year period. That's a lot of money and we'll make the budget choices necessary through our strict budget discipline to find that money and to offset it in the Federal Budget.
But budgets are about choices and they're about what you value and as a Labor Government we value the work of working Australians, we value the work of working women and we believe that they should be treated with fairness and decency in their workplaces and that's what equal pay is all about.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how confident are you that Fair Work Australia will accept your joint submission?
PM: Well Fair Work Australia is an independent industrial umpire. We deliberately set it up as an independent commission after we'd seen the former government try and destroy the industrial umpire. But I do believe that the Federal Government, coming with the Australian Services Union and other unions and we will be looking to be joined by responsible providers, I do believe that that will be a very persuasive voice before Fair Work Australia.
Fair Work Australia's already taken the first really big step and that is to say that these workers are underpaid and undervalued and it asked the parties to come back with a view about what should happen next and we're going to raise our voice very strongly about what should happen next. These workers, these working women and the men who work alongside them deserve fairness and decency, that's the Labor way.
JOURNALIST: You call on the states and territories to contribute their fair share, how much is that?
PM: Well we as a Federal Government are not a major direct employer of workers in this sector but we fund a lot of work that community and social services sector workers do, so for the work that we fund we will step up the funding so that these pay rises can be paid.
We'd be asking state and territory governments to do the same where they fund work in this sector they should step up too and provide the right additional funding so that there can be equal pay and decency at work for these working people.
JOURNALIST: Can that 20 per cent rise be delivered though if state government don't contribute their fair share?
PM: We will do as a Federal Government what we need to to ensure that these rises are funded. We will pay our fair share.
So what we do is not conditional on what happens with state and territory governments, we will do the right thing anyway, but I'm calling on those state and territory governments to join us in doing the right thing.
JOURNALIST: Have you had any indications from the states and territories?
PM: We have kept in contact with states and territories throughout the Fair Work Australia process. We've advised states and territories that we are taking this step today, that we are committing as a Federal Labor Government that we will go to Fair Work Australia saying that these working people deserve equal pay, that these working women have been discriminated against for too long and it's time to fix it  -  we've certainly said that to state and territory governments and we are looking forward to their response and asking them to join us in getting fair pay for these working women and the men who work alongside them.
And having had the opportunity to talk to them today, these very hard working, dedicated professionals haven't just spoken to me about what it means for them personally, though of course it does mean more money for them personally, they've spoken about what it means for the service that they work in.
They see too much staff turnover because people simply can't afford to stay doing these jobs even when they love them. They can't get the recruits they need because people can earn more money doing less stressful work even though they'd prefer to be working in this sector.
It's in the interest of every Australian that we've got a healthy, vibrant social and community services sector supporting Australians who need help the most  -  so making sure that there's equal pay and fair pay is good for the individual working people involved, it's fair to them, but it's also right to strengthen our social and community services sector, which at the end of the day we all rely on as Australians.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what do you make of, just on another issues, the changes to the hierarchy of News Limited?
PM: Look I made a statement yesterday about John Hartigan's contribution as CEO of News Limited. I've described him as a giant in the industry, someone who's risen from the most junior ranks in newspapers right up to the top and I've wished him well for the future.
JOURNALIST: And his replacement?
PM: Well I'll certainly be interested to get to know his replacement. I think yesterday was a good time to say a few things about John and we'll certainly be looking forward to working with the new appointees at News Limited.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what do you make of the Glenn Sterle arguing that the TWU should challenge the Fair Work ruling on Qantas?
PM: Well no appeal's been lodged. The approach the Government's taken on Qantas is to say we certainly did not want to see the extreme industrial action that Qantas took and the grounding of planes and the disruption that meant for passengers, so we acted quickly to get the planes back in the sky.
Now is the time for parties to come together and to sort this dispute out, if they're not able to do so then Fair Work Australia, our industrial umpire, will do it for them. But I can certainly say to members of the travelling public, to passengers who are going on Qantas that we've taken the action necessary to make sure that there is no industrial action and no more disruption of passengers.
JOURNALIST: Are those comments unnecessary or unhelpful?
PM: Well as I've said there is no appeal which has been lodged.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in September the Australian Government circulated a brochure to letterboxes titled ‘What the carbon price means to you'. The brochure mentions the wish to reduce emissions by five per cent by the year 2000, but neglects to mention what those year 2000 levels were.
Just in order to allow Australians to quantify the size of the challenge can you explain that to them and how they were measured?
PM: Well we set the carbon pollution reduction targets for some time now so -5 per cent by the year 2020. So what that means in perhaps terms that people can find easiest to imagine, it means 160 million tonnes less of carbon pollution, that's the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road.
I think we've got around 12 million vehicles in Australia today, so if you try and get a mental picture of 45 million cars, that's a lot of difference, that reaching that -5 per cent target will mean.
JOURNALIST: What was the year 2000 figure that's been reduced by five per cent?
PM: The baseline is 2000, it's a reduction of five per cent, so it's just straight maths but the five per cent is 160 million tonnes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's been some violent scenes involving striking workers outside a chicken factory in Melbourne. What do you have to say about their actions?
PM: Well there's no cause for violence in any situation at all and certainly no cause for violence in an industrial situation. No one should be involved in violent acts in an industrial situation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the unemployment levels are falling for a second straight month, what do you put that down to?
PM: Well our economy is a strong and resilient economy, we're not immune from events overseas and I do want to say today as we've seen some of the news overnight from Europe and some of the volatility in markets as a result, that it is vital that Europe gets its house in order.
Some progress has been made, but I reiterate what I was saying at the G20, progress has been made through the agreement in late October by European leaders to act. Some progress was also made at the G20 but European leaders need to implement the decisions that they have taken and it is very important that the world continues to speak with one voice to Europe and to say to Europe and the eurozone  -  get your house in order.
Here in Australia we're not immune from the global economy but we have a strong and resilient economy, we're in the region of the world that continues to grow, in the Asian region.
We are still seeing strong prices for the resources that we sell. Now there are other sectors of the economy under pressure like manufacturing and as a government we want to make sure that we come through this resources boom with a strong diversified economy that offers people opportunity right throughout the country. It's certainly a Labor mantra to make sure we've got opportunity for all and that means that we've got to have a strong diversified economy, that's what we're seeking to achieve.
Today's job numbers show that we are creating full time jobs, unemployment by the standards of the world is low in Australia. I think that means we should be saying to each other  -  we came through the global financial crisis strong, we worked together to achieve that as Australians, government, employers, unions, working together.
Now we need to keep working together to manage our patchwork economy in the interests of working people.
JOURNALIST: Will you be signing a free trade agreement with Korea at APEC?
PM: We've continue to work with Korea on a free trade agreement and we'll continue to do so. Those discussions are in an advanced state but they are continuing.
Thank you. 



Our economy is not perfect  -  there's pressure on many sectors from the strong dollar and pressure arising because of cautious consumers and competition from overseas.
But believe me, the leaders who I sat with at the G20 table last weekend would dearly like to swap these challenges for their own.  And many would view an unemployment rate of 5.2 per cent as a distant dream.
This meeting of the G20 came at a very important time for the international economy, especially for Europe.
And the meeting itself was made more demanding, more crucial, by the breakout of domestic political uncertainty in Greece.
Precisely because the G20 matters  -  and because of the very serious state of the European financial system  -  the outcomes of the meeting have been heavily scrutinized.
As a participant, I can say the G20 made progress in addressing the current eurozone crisis.
It set the ground for important steps to be made in the medium term to restore balanced, sustainable world growth.
But I can also say, there is still more work to be done and that work will be critical to restoring confidence to the financial markets of the world.
Before I sketch out the progress that was made in France in tackling the immediate crisis, and developments since the summit concluded, I do want to reflect on the wider context  -  on the perspective I brought to the meeting.
Because I did join the table with some satisfaction.
Proud to represent a country whose economic fortunes are so different to almost all other countries whose leaders were there.
In the meeting, I reminded my counterparts that while some of our talk may appear esoteric  -  as we talk intently about financial transactions, institutions and markets, discuss leveraging, and distinguish the solvency and liquidity of nations  -  our task outside the summit meeting room is to explain.
So that our peoples know that the ultimate purpose of our work is creating jobs for the people of our nations.
Delivering this message to that audience was made easier for me than almost any other leader  -  for the simple reason that here in Australia we have created over seven hundred thousand new jobs over the last four years.
In a period when the world has shed around thirty million jobs.
And of course unlike most other G20 countries, which are subject to disturbing discussions about sovereign debt, Australia has extremely strong public finances.
But alongside some satisfaction in our own economic strength at home, I participated in the meeting with a real sense of active concern for the future economic course of the world.
As you well understand, Australia has a strong stake in Europe getting its house in order  -  and maintaining the stability of the eurozone.
Because the Australian economy  -  and public revenues  -  are most definitely touched by the developments in Europe.
We live in a world where movements in financial markets in the North Atlantic are felt through the markets of Asia and beyond  -  a fact we have seen reflected just today.
Our real economies, through direct trade and investment, and the trade and investment of our major trading partners, are deeply interdependent too.
So, from an Australian perspective, it was vital that the G20 meeting delivered important steps towards dealing with the current eurozone crisis.
Any threat to the stability of the eurozone, in turn a threat to European banks, could decimate  -  not just devalue  -  Europe's domestic currencies, and cause havoc throughout financial markets.
So the G20 simply had to make progress  -  and it did.
Leaders retraced the plan outlined by European leaders on 27 October  -  and urged that rapid steps are taken by European Finance Ministers over the coming days.
European Finance Ministers must now detail how a larger European Financial Stability Facility will be financed and how it will operate.
The lack of clarity over Greece's political future is certainly troubling.
But the G20 meeting brought Greece back from the brink of a referendum that threatened to derail the October plan.
A development which the G20 did not foresee leading into the summit, but which was vital once Greece moved itself so close to the edge. 
And the very real consequences of Italy having to govern with a watchman at its door each quarter have rapidly unfolded this week.
A political reflection of the economic reality that strong steps had to be taken to get Italy back on track  -  and that they were.
With markets now questioning whether Italy and Greece can deliver on their commitments, the consequences of any indiscipline and indecision in Europe could not be clearer  -  nor the need more urgent.
Markets are looking for reassurance that there is the political will to find solutions to these problems.
The message to European governments could not be clearer too.
As I told European leaders in Cannes, it is time to turn words into deeds.
The G20 also laid the basis for IMF resources to be increased so the Fund can play its role as the bulwark of global economy.
As it has in the past in our own region during East Asia's own financial crisis of the 1990s.
The barriers to protect contagion from weak countries spreading through other parts of the global economy were fortified at the G20  -  by the absolute commitment to ensure that the IMF has the resources it needs.
This stands even as the eurozone needs to detail and implement its plan.
Strengthening the IMF is a significant outcome, one clearly flagged and strongly advocated by Australia in the weeks leading up to the G20, and embraced by other leaders at the summit.
And given some political discussion in Australia, the BCA's support was well received this week.
Following the work of eurozone Finance Ministers, we can all expect G20 Finance Ministers to meet to flesh out the arrangements for strengthening the IMF.
The G20 took important steps towards restoring sustainable global growth.
The G20 agreed that Doha is not delivering what the world needs.
I argued in the lead up to the Summit that if we can't just press rewind and replay on Doha, we can't press pause either - we need to stick a new disc in the machine.
That is what the G20 has agreed to do.
It also agreed to an action plan for growth and jobs.
Countries with surplus savings committed to increase social protections, to drive domestic demand and counter high rates of household savings born of the need for self provision. 
There was also a clear recognition of the importance of market-based exchange rate systems, which augurs well for Australia's trade-exposed sectors.
Meanwhile, deficit countries agreed to continue to pursue structural reforms, consistent with a clear and definite path to fiscal consolidation, especially across the US and Japan.
Finally  -  in what has fuelled an outbreak of competitive federalism amongst Premiers and Chief Ministers  -  Australia secured the rights to host the G20 in 2014.
This outcome recognizes Australia's economic strength and leadership ... a great opportunity for the Australian business community as well.
At Cannes, I spoke at a meeting of what is called the B20.
A gathering of international business leaders which develops recommendations to the assembled G20 leaders each year.
The group had a rich exchange over two days leading up to the leader's summit  -  and was addressed by a range of leaders, including President Medvedev of Russia, Prime Minister Noda of Japan and President Lee of Korea.
So in 2014, leaders of the world's businesses and governments will meet here in Australia, overlooking the shores of - well we'll see which river, harbour or lake it is in due course.
Friends, sharing up close the worries of other leaders and reflections on their economies and the global economy, reinforces my resolve that the task for Government and business is to walk the reform road together.
Our prosperity will not shape itself  -  our productivity will not grow itself either.
We must be determined to make the whole economy productive, to make the whole economy strong.
And that's what this Government is doing.
Through investments and reforms in education and training.
Much-needed investments in quality  -  and fundamental reform, by building productive economic infrastructure.
Above all, high speed broadband, allowing every business in the country to do business more cheaply and more quickly.
Building our clean energy future.
Carbon pricing now moves to become part of the economic fabric of this nation  -  business can now get on with the job.
Of particular interest to your Council of course  -  pursuing smart deregulation for a seamless national economy.
There's generally been effective cooperation between all jurisdictions to deliver these reforms, but I share the frustration of business with the pace of change.
There's clearly a role for business to make your case clearly to the States as well.
The delays in implementing harmonised work health and safety laws in Victoria and Western Australia are quite unnecessary. 
It's important that parties in all States deliver on reform.
You've also made clear your keen interest in progress with the development of a National Trades Licensing System. 
Vital for increasing labour mobility - another important implementation priority for the Territories and the States.
And of course, we are working with you to reform the system of tax.
Not just using our resource wealth to fund company tax cuts, build our pool of national savings and build new infrastructure  -  though better tax of mineral resource rents is important.
But finding new ways to give you the flexibility to make change work for your firms, to reward imagination and invention, innovation and ideas.
That was our goal for the Tax Forum and by any measure it, like the Future Jobs Forum which followed, was a success.
Both considered as a process and considered by what it has delivered.
The BCA's own contribution at the Forum, and I well recall Jennifer Westacott's discussion of the risks of our narrowing tax base over time, was valuable.
And the business tax reform working group, chaired by Chris Jordan from the Board of Taxation, now has the job to carry the torch for reform.
I'm grateful to the Australians who've volunteered their time to serve on the working group  -  and I'm looking forward to their reports. 
It's said that the monthly instalments of Dickens' The Old Curiosity Shop arriving by ship drew crowds of New Yorkers to the quayside desperate to know if Little Nell had lived or died.
I'm sure Chris and his team are expecting that tax commentators and advisers will await the working group's discussion of loss carry back, uplifting losses, and the value of losses when business change composition or ownership with just such excitement, but speaking for myself, and I expect for some others, I'll also take great interest in the other side of the group's advice.
Identifying options from within the business tax system to fund any proposals.
In a period of fiscal consolidation, that's literally the bottom line on reform.
Have no doubt: the Government will hold our fiscal discipline.
It is vital at a time of heightened global instability and intense market scrutiny of high sovereign debt levels.
The recent turbulence in global markets is due in very large part to the failure of too many Governments around the world to develop and then deliver credible fiscal paths back to surplus.
We won't make that mistake.
A strong and credible fiscal strategy like ours underpins confidence in our economy and supports job creation.
And because the fastest fiscal consolidation on record also gives the Reserve Bank room to move on interest rates, as we've seen with the most recent rate cut.
For the people in this room, rate cuts mean more customers coming through the doors with more money in their purses and wallets.
Last week's cut has already provided some much-needed relief for businesses and households and boosted confidence too.
The Government's continued commitment to fiscal discipline should ensure room for appropriate monetary policy flexibility.
It also ensures that we will continue to make some difficult decisions to protect our strong public finances.
My Government will stay on the reform road. 
It'll be easier to do that when business walks with us.
On your best days, the BCA has understood that too.
Knowing our door's always open to good ideas .and knowing that we respect straight dealing as well. 
That's how you've approached the Tax Forum and the Future Jobs Forum and it's a good thing.
Making contributions to a real and responsible reform conversation.
Ranging across a broad agenda, supported by quality policy research and new ideas.
Through authoritative, non-partisan contributions, to a serious discussion grounded in the facts.
Based on an understanding of the direction of public policy in this country and an engagement with the Government's overall approach.
Taking your part in our processes which  -  like the business tax reform working group, like the Tax Forum, and like the White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century  -  reflect my preference for the methodical and respectful development of ideas.
I want business to play a key role in the intellectual work to shape Australia's future prosperity over the coming century.
That's the role you've played in making the case for tax reform this year.
That's the role you've often played in making the case for economic reform with a social purpose as well.
Understanding that a strong economy is an economy with jobs and growth, offering opportunity for all.
Understanding that a strong economy allows us to pay for the services and the safety net on which, as your Council put it recently, the “Australian social compact is predicated”.
And that this social compact is in turn the predicate for public support for continuing economic reform.
These are things we have done together well in the past and which I am sure we can do together well in the future.
Together, we should be optimistic. 
Not because change is always good  -  but because Australia is always good enough to make the best of change.
Together, we should be determined too.
Because in an Asian century, with a productive economy, working together for reform the prize for Australia is rich indeed.
A strong economy and opportunity for all, more jobs and better jobs.
Spreading the benefits and dignity of work to every corner of our country. 
Turning a mining investment boom into an opportunity boom.
Great opportunities are there for us when we work together well.
My Government will do its part to be sure we do that. I'm sure you will too. 



The Prime Minister today encouraged all Australians to mark Remembrance Day by observing a minute's silence at 11am.
The Prime Minister said whether Australians are in the office, on a building site, in the classroom or at home, we should all take a quiet moment to reflect on the sacrifices of our fellow Australians in uniform.
Remembrance Day is a day etched in the memories of many, which honours all servicemen and women who have died in wars, conflicts and on peacekeeping operations.  
It marks the anniversary of the armistice which ended the fighting in the First World War in November 1918.
On 11 November, at Remembrance Day services across the country and overseas, Australia pays tribute to more than 102,000 Australians who have lost their lives in the service of our nation.
We also pause to remember the Australians who have served with distinction in wars, conflicts and peacekeeping operations around the world. 
As we take the time on Remembrance Day to reflect on the contribution of past generations of servicemen and women, the Prime Minster also asked Australians to remember those currently serving Australia at home and abroad. 
This year we have sadly seen Australians in uniform lose their lives abroad and at home and it is important we recognise the service and sacrifice of these brave soldiers. The Minister for Veterans' Affairs said all Australians owe a debt of gratitude to all who have risked their lives fighting for this country. Lest we forget.
This year marks significant anniversaries of major battles in Australia's military history  -  Tobruk, Greece and Crete 70 years ago; Kapyong and Maryang San 60 years ago; and Long Tan 45 years ago - as well as the centenary of the formation of the Royal Australian Navy.  
The Prime Minister also encouraged Australians to mark Remembrance Day by buying a poppy from the Returned and Services League (RSL) of Australia. 
For more information on Remembrance Day please visit www.dva.gov.au 



PM:  Can I start by saying a big congratulations to Queensland, to Anna Bligh, to Gold Coast Mayor Ron Clarke on securing the Commonwealth Games for 2018.  This is a fantastic achievement  -  all Australians will be looking forward to hosting the Commonwealth Games but this is going to be a particular delight for the people of the Gold Coast and the people of Queensland.  Each time we've hosted the Commonwealth Games we've done a fantastic job.
  Australia is great at hosting major international sporting events.  We bring to it a sense of sportspersonship and fairness our sense of fun and engagement.  This is also a great opportunity economically for the Gold Coast, bringing as it will, people from around the world to participate in and to enjoy the Commonwealth Games.  So, congratulations Queensland.  Absolutely great news.
I'm here in Honolulu for the APEC meeting.  I've this morning had the opportunity to share in a Veterans Day event with representatives from the United States veterans community.  Here in Honolulu it is the 11th of the 11th and it was appropriate on the 60th anniversary year of our alliance of ANZUS for me to take some time to reflect with our friends from the United States on what shared sacrifices meant to us so I did very much, felt very honoured, to have the privilege of attending and addressing that Veterans Day event.  I was also delighted to see that there were some Australians in the audience who had travelled here to participate in that event and it was a moment to reflect on the costs of war and on the dedication and service of those who are in our defence forces. 
Here in Honolulu, over the next few days, I will be attending dialogues with business leaders.  I will be in the leaders discussions of the Trans Pacific Partnership and, of course, attending the APEC Meeting itself.  My objectives here at this meeting of APEC and the events surrounding it are five in number.
First, I will continue as I did at the G20 to push very strongly for a new and innovative approach on global trade.  We need to break the gridlock that we have hit with the DOHA Round.  I have spoken about this consistently.  Spoken about it at the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting, pushed it at the G20, our Trade Minister has been consistently pushing it in trade discussions around the world.  If we are to make progress on global trade then we need to find a new way forward which breaks up the DOHA Round, ends the gridlock and gets some important things done and I will be taking that message to APEC.
Secondly, I'm looking forward to sharing perspectives on the global economy.  APEC represents the members of APEC, account for 56 percent of global GDP and 46 percent of the world's exports.  So we will have leaders of economies who are in a position to reflect on the global economy and particularly to reflect on what the Euro zone crisis means for the global economy so I'm looking forward to sharing perspectives following the G20 and into APEC.
Third, I'll be attending a leaders meeting of the Trans Pacific Partnership and I'm hoping that here we will be able to embrace a framework for the TPP free trade agreement.  Now what this hopefully heralds is the start of something that will develop into a free trade zone over time and if it did so develop, it would create a regional market that is around 40 per cent bigger than the size of the European Union, effectively one and a half times the size of the European Union.  So that is an important long term goal.  I'm hoping here that we can take a step forward and endorse the framework and then negotiations under that framework can proceed as quickly as possible.  I also wanted to take this opportunity to welcome the fact that Japan has indicated that it wants to involve itself in discussions about joining the TPP.
Then fourthly, I welcome President Obama's focus at this APEC on green growth following our adoption of a carbon price and a clean energy future.  I'm looking forward to those discussions on green growth.
And fifth and finally, I'll be looking forward to working through, with my fellow leaders, on developing a seamless regional economy.  Back home in Australia we've been paying a lot of time and trouble to developing a seamless national economy within our own federation.  We've got work to continue within our region so that beyond straight trade liberalization questions there are also issues addressed which enable businesses to trade more freely to not encounter behind the board of barriers and constraints that prevent them trading freely.
So, this is a strong agenda here at APEC and in the associated TPP discussions and business discussions.  Australia has been a driving force in APEC, here in Honolulu I'm looking forward to participating in the APEC meeting.  What happens in our region, the growing region of the world, is pivotal to Australia's national interest and this is an important forum for discussion of economic liberalization questions and of greater freedom of trade between our nations.
I'm happy to take questions, yes, Matthew.
JOURNALIST:  Can you give us an idea of the kind of scale of benefit to Australian exporters for the TPP go ahead and what contribution to you think that increased trade could make to helping create jobs and kick-start in the wake of the last ten years' events.
PM: Well increased trade is always a shot in the arm for growth.  That's why we've been so focussed on trying to get over the gridlock in the DOHA Round and get the global economy the shot in the arm it needs as we're trying to get the global economy on a sustainable pattern of growth.  It's too early in the TPP discussions to scope it and say it's necessarily going to mean x or y or z numbers of jobs in Australia, but just working from first principles, we are a great trading nation.  The more we trade the more we prosper.  We live in the growing region of the world so anything that facilitates us getting our goods and services to market more easily in our growth region is good for Aussie jobs.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible).
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, why do we need to have US marines stationed in Darwin?
PM: Look I've seen media reports about these matters today.  Can I say first, I'm very much looking forward to President Obama's visit to Australia.  We will have a wide set of discussions when President Obama comes to Australia.  They will of course encompass things like the circumstances in the global economy.  They'll go across the full range of interconnections between our countries and of course, we will be reflecting on the fact that it's the 60th year of ANZUS, 60 years of being allies and what being allies means for the future.  On any specifics of what I may announce with President Obama when he's in Australia, we'll leave that to when we're in Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how significant is it that Japan says that it wants to be a part of the TPP talks. (Inaudible)?
PM:  This is a good sign.  Clearly we've said overtime that we would welcome Japan joining the TPP discussions.  We'd want all of that to be done in the framework of striving for a comprehensive and ambitious agreement and that would still be our perspective.  We want this to be a comprehensive ambitious trade agreement.  I think it's good that Japan has indicated its willingness to be involved in discussions.  Japan is a substantial economy.  A very, very large trading partner for Australia over a long period of time and, whilst of course the Japanese economy has had some troubles and the Japanese nation is still recovering from the devastating tsunami  and earthquake and the nuclear incident that followed it, Japan for a long period of time will be very important to Australia's prosperity.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister (inaudible) to the Japan Australia (inaudible) its willingness to engage in more open trade by the Japanese?
PM:  When I was in Japan we did touch on those free trade discussions, the direct discussions between Australian and Japan.  The advice then from the then Japanese Prime Minister and from the government of Japan more generally, was that there focus had to be on reconstruction and recovery from the earthquake and tsunami and I was, as you may recall, the first foreign leader invited by the Japanese government to go to Japan following those devastating events and I got to see the size and scale of the damage first hand and it was truly breathtaking.  So we understood that all government resources at that stage needed to be marshalled in the interests of the Japanese people.  I think what this now signals is that the Japanese government is still focussed on reconstruction and recovery but able to now work on a broader set of fronts so that's a good thing.  On anything that that might mean specifically for the Australia Japan free trade agreement, we'd have to have some dialogue with Japan about that.  Their posture has always been a willingness to talk but they just did have this capacity constraint as they faced this huge disaster for their country.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, President Obama's talking about the Pacific century, you've spoken about the Asian century, we have strong bilateral relationships with China and the US although America sees China as a security challenge, we see it as a trading opportunity.  How do you balance those two relationships, China and the US?
PM: Well I don't accept the characterization of your question.  The US is deeply engaged with China, deeply engaged with China and as China rises, the US, like Australia, wants to see China a part of the global based, rules based system; wants to see China deeply engaged in regional architecture and global architecture.  So, our perspectives on China's rise, I believe, are very comparable between Australia and the United States.  When I launched the Asian Century White Paper, I was very clear that the US is deeply engaged in our region, that that will continue and that it is possible for us to have an ally in Washington and friend in Beijing and that is what we're continuing to strive for.  The Asian Century White Paper is specifically focussed on that part of our broad region which is engaged in the most dynamic growth and change because I want us as a nation to fully understand all of the opportunities that come from that dynamic growth and change.  As well as address any risks from that dynamic growth and change.  That's why the White Paper is a comprehensive one.
Yes.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, does China have anything to worry about in terms of closer defence ties between Australia and the US and, (inaudible) the Greens with China but what's your reaction to the Greens criticism of the idea of a closer relationship with (inaudible)?
PM:  We've been an ally of the United States for 60 years.  We've been friends for a lot longer but we've had our ANZUS arrangement between our two countries, the obligations that that gives us to look after each other in this world.  We've been subject to those obligations freely and willingly for 60 years.  So it's not going to surprise anybody in China that Australia is an ally of the United States, they've had 60 years of experience seeing what that means for Australia and what it means for the United States. In terms of whether or not there will be any enhanced security cooperation and all of those questions the subject of media reporting today, as I said a little bit earlier, anything I've got to announce with President Obama on that matter will be done when President Obama is in Australia.  On some of the statements made by the Greens, let me make it absolutely clear, national security policy is the province of government.  The government will make the necessary decisions to keep our nation safe and secure.  That's what I will do, working with my team in government.
JOURNALIST:  What is your concern about Japan joining the TPP?  Is it maybe that discussion may get (inaudible) than expected or maybe the agricultural issue or the beef issue?  What is your concern?
PM:  Look I'm welcoming Japan's statement that it will now involve itself in discussions about joining the TPP.  I think that's a very good thing.  Discussions will continue as Japan goes through that process.  So there's no question of slowing down the discussions between the nations who have already indicated that they want to be in a Trans Pacific Partnership.  Our aim for the Trans Pacific Partnership is that it is as ambitious as possible and I am restating that aim but I am in no way concerned about discussions slowing down.  Discussions are going to proceed as Japan works through the process of its own discussions as to whether or not to join.
JOURNALIST:  They need to be a serious willing, they need to give something don't they?  I mean agricultural they've been (inaudible) for years.
PM:  Well what we know is that the Prime Minister of Japan has indicated that he wants to be in a discussion about joining the TPP.  I welcome that for the TPP.  That won't slow any discussions happening between the nations who have already said they want to be in it  -  those discussions will continue and our aims are ambitious ones for what is in the Trans Pacific Partnership.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, will there be any money for Queensland as a result of winning this bid?
PM:  Well this is for the Commonwealth Games in 2018 so there's going to be plenty of time to talk about arrangements between governments to facilitate the Games.  Thanks very much.
JOURNALIST:  (Inaudible) about the boy in Bali.  We know he's now going to spend at least another two weeks in jail there.  Do you have any plans to raise this when you go to Indonesia next week?
PM:  I'm not going to pre-empt any discussions that I'll have with President Yudhoyono but let me say this; Australia raises consistently consular cases with our friends in Indonesia and I do say specifically in reference to the Bali boy that the Indonesian authorities have been very helpful in terms of the circumstances in which he's been held and accommodated and we do thank them very much for that,for being helpful in that set of circumstances.  This is a difficult, matter, it's a sensitive matter.  I do want to convey my thanks to Indonesia for what it's done so far in relation to the treatment of the Bali boy but I'm certainly not going to pre-empt discussions with the President of Indonesia or be drawn on these questions about the Bali boy in any detail, they're too sensitive for that.
Thanks very much. 



Your Excellencies
Mr Acting Chief Justice
Ministerial and parliamentary colleagues
Member of the Australian Defence Force past and present
Custodians of the Australian War Memorial
Friends of peace all
On May 5 this year, a frail old man died in Perth.
The sort of death that happens in nursing homes every day.
But this was no ordinary loss.
With the passing of Claude Choules, the final link to World War One has been broken.
Around 70 million people fought in that dreadful conflict.
Mr Choules was the last.
A mighty bond, worn down to a single slender thread, itself now broken.
An age ended.
Its sole surviving voice forever mute.
Claude Choules was there on this day, 93 years ago.
The day the guns fell silent.
The day that peace began.
But if November 11 was the end of war, it was the end of innocence too.
Never again the ‘laughter of unclouded years'.
The armistice forged that autumn morning was a bitter, partial peace.
But then again, it always is.
Because human nature is weak and the summons to warlies never far away.
That is how this memorial to one war came to be opened in the midst of another.
And how hardly a day has passed since 1941 when Australians have not been abroad on active service, half of that time in combat operations.
The truth is we are a good nation in an imperfect world.
A people of peace so often called to war.
Fighting other nations, but really fighting deeper foes:
Tyranny, injustice, persecution and greed.
Never for national gain.
Never for purposes other than what we judged to be right.
Surveying these walls and the immense sadness of 102,000 names written on them, it is right to conclude that our nation  -  and especially the young people of our nation  -  have always accepted the cost and burden of war, as seen in Afghanistan this very day.
If we pay that price willingly, we never pay it lightly.
Because war is a profound responsibility for any nation to undertake.
Is it not surprising that men like Claude Choules and Charlie Mance who saw the worst of war became the most fervent sons of peace, and so often shunned observances such as this.
They knew what we only see ‘through a glass darkly'.
Privy to the joyless irony of conflict:
that the aim of war is peace  -  and the price of peace is all too often war.
An unbearable paradox witnessed by endless rows of pale, identical gravestones, and mud-soaked fields that even now still yield up their dead.
There are many tributes to war  -  memorials, wreaths, poems and songs.
All of them reaching for the unsayable.
All of them falling necessarily short.
Perhaps the only memorial that fully touches the enormity of war is silence.
It was in silence that so many of our veterans wrapped themselves when they came back.
Having seen and done things too awful to ever bring into the sanctity of their own homes.
Or to share with people who could never understand.
The things of which there is nothing left to be said.
Things for which words and symbols fail.
And contemplation remains our best and only gift.
In the wisdom and dignity of our silence, therefore, let us not forget.
It is little enough to ask of us who gained so much, from those who gave so much.
So in our still and grateful hearts, let there be only silence.
That on this day, and on every day, in every month and season, we will remember them.
Lest We Forget. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard has congratulated the winner of the Prime Minister's Water Wise Award, which showcases commercial and industry innovation in water savings and efficiency.
Queensland-based landscape supply company Nursery Traders won the award for its water harvesting and recycling projects, which have reduced reliance on potable water by 98.5 per cent per hectare.
After nearly two decades of innovative water saving initiatives, Nursery Traders have almost completed their goal of total water self-sufficiency.
The Gillard Government recognises the immense challenge we face as a nation in preparing for a future with less water and the role government, industry, and individuals play in response to these challenges.
Speaking at the savewater! Gala Awards Ceremony in Melbourne, Parliamentary Secretary for Sustainability and Urban Water Senator Don Farrell said he was impressed with the innovative projects put forward by the winner and four finalists.
Nursery Traders' implementation of a range of sustainability measures is outstanding. They saved nearly 60 million litres of water in the past year and have generated over 100,000 kilowatt-hours of green energy to date.
The winner and four finalists were selected on the basis of their significant water savings; innovation; excellence in project delivery, and high capacity for their approaches to be replicated at other facilities.
The four finalists for the Prime Minister's Water Wise Award were Plant Growers Australia, Geelong Racing Club, Encore Tissue (Aust) and Village Centre Batemans Bay, while Daisy Fresh Dry Cleaners were recognised for their commitment to overall sustainability throughout their operations.
The Prime Minister's Water Wise Award is a prestigious award for water efficiency excellence open to all commercial and industrial water users.  For more information visit: http://www.environment.gov.au/water/policy-programs/weo/pm-awards/index… 



Today the Australian people pay our respects to all the citizen-soldiers of your “city on a hill”.
Meeting, here as we do, on a “Hill of Sacrifice”.
For the Australian people and for the American people this is a year of anniversaries.
Seventy years since 1941.
Since the infamous attack on Pearl Harbour, since that day which first brought Australia and the United States together in a Pacific war.
Sixty years since 1951.
Since the signing of the ANZUS Treaty which joined Australia and the United States in a solemn commitment, since first we joined together formally as allies, not just as friends.
And ten years since September 11.
Since the attacks on America which changed the world we live in but could not change the values which together we share, since for the first time our ANZUS treaty was invoked.
In this year of anniversaries, it is a very great privilege for me, representing every Australian, to be together with you as you remember the veterans of America's wars.
In this beautiful and hallowed American place  -  where so many of America's own lie in graves which they found too soon  -  you would be well entitled to say:
They died for us. This is a day and a place for ourselves alone.
But we Australians know that this is not your way.
Because we know that so many of these buried here died for us too.
When we were under attack in the Pacific, so many of these buried here were among those who came to our aid.
They fought with us, together, side by side, step by bloody step.
So today, when Australians remember our own fallen, we remember yours.
And I remember this, too:
That when the fear of an invasion of my country was finally destroyed, it was destroyed by sailors from your country, destroyed at the Battle of the Coral Sea.
It is a battle which is immortal in Australia, a battle which is immortalised in the beautiful Map Galleries here as well.
Today, Australians honour your fallen.
Australia does not forget.
And we remember the origin of this day itself.
I believe something of the peace-loving character of your people is shown in the importance you place on this day, November 11.
It is not the anniversary of the onset of a great conflict.
Not the commemoration of a great victory or great feat of arms, it is the day and the hour of the end of the Great War.
You remember your veterans in the moment to which each one of them dedicated their dearest hopes - you remember them at the moment when peace began.
Our two nations have been allies these past sixty years.
Our two peoples have been friends for longer still.
Through many dangers, toils, and snares, we have already come.
Australia will never forget the sacrifices you made for peace in the past.
Australia will always share the hopes you have in the future for peace. 



PM: I'm here with Dr Emerson, the Minister for Trade and we've just attended a meeting convened by President Obama on the Trans- Pacific Partnership and I'm delighted to be able to announce that following that meeting we have reached broad agreement on the Trans-Pacific Partnership - on the broad outline of the Trans-Pacific Partnership. 
I've said consistently to Australians that trade equals jobs.  We are a great trading nation and anything we can do to increase our capacity to trade is good for Australian jobs.  To give you a sense of the scale of this, of working on the Trans-Pacific Partnership is part of ultimately leading to a free trade zone in the Asia Pacific.  It's an important development for our nation's trading future.  When we look at the number of economies involved in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, currently the countries involved account for around one quarter of global GDP.  As we were discussing yesterday, Japan has indicated an interest in becoming involved in the Trans-Pacific Partnership  -  if that occurred then this would cover more than one third of global GDP.  So, in scope, the Trans-Pacific Partnership encompasses a range of economies and a great scale of global GDP.  In ambition, and this is very important, in ambition the TPP has as a goal eliminating barriers to trade in our region.  That is, eliminating tariffs, a very important expression of the level of ambition of this new partnership.
So, we will now keep working as quickly as possible with the nations involved in the Trans-Pacific Partnership to bring this matter to a conclusion.  In particular, we are aiming for the Trans-Pacific Partnership to reach the stage of a legal text during the course of 2012.  I am delighted with this development.  There is a great deal of ambition and scope in the Trans-Pacific Partnership and this is good for Australia, because with our proud trade credentials that means jobs for Australians.
I'll turn now to Dr Emerson for some comments on the TPP and then come back for some broader comments on APEC.
MINISTER EMERSON: Thank you PM.  A defining feature of the Trans-Pacific Partnership is that it has political momentum.  There's an enormous amount of enthusiasm for the Trans-Pacific Partnership amongst the nine members and most particularly the United States is very keen on seeking to achieve agreement on legal text in 2012.  So we want to capitalize on the fact that there is so much political will here to create a free trade grouping that would be, with the addition of Japan, constituting more than one third of global GDP; would include, with the addition of Japan, the biggest and third biggest economies on earth.  We have long sought to position Australia in the Asian region in the Asian century.  The Prime Minister, through her White Paper exercise, has been doing this and the Trans-Pacific Partnership is an expression  -  an early indication - of our commitment to integrate our economy more closely into the fastest growing region on earth because that means more jobs and more prosperity.
So we're pretty excited about it.  We're excited about the fact that the partners, the nine partners have agreed that the goal is to eliminate all tariffs which helps move this from a concept to something that's very practical and very real because the elimination of tariff barriers means that we have access to other countries' markets.  Our own tariffs are very low or zero but having this goal expressed in the statements today means that other countries are fair dinkum about that.  Better access for our exporters, whether they're agricultural exporters, whether they're manufacturing exporters, and increasingly in the 21st century, the service economy where all the new opportunities present themselves for Australia.
So a very exciting development  -  we're thrilled that the President of the United States is so keen on this.  The other eight members are very keen on it and are also, in respect of the possible inclusion of Japan and other countries that have expressed an interest.  We've already said that we're positive about that.  But we need to maintain a high level of ambition, a high level of ambition for the Trans-Pacific Partnership and we need to maintain the pace.  Very hard to gain political momentum  -  once you've achieved you've got to keep rolling and that's what we'll do.
PM:  So, if I could thank the Minister for Trade for his hard work so far but as you can tell, from today's discussion, we are delighted with this result but that means that there is more hard work to come to bring this to a conclusion in 2012 and it will be good for our economy and good for jobs.  As we move towards the APEC meeting itself, the focus on trade will continue.  In particular, Australia will be taking the same message to APEC that we took to the G20 and a message that the Minister for Trade has been taking around the world, which is that we need to recognize that the DOHA discussions have reached gridlock and we need to take a fresh approach if we are going to see progress.  We achieved at the G20 a broad recognition that a fresh approach is required and that was reflected in the leaders' statement.  We'll be taking that perspective into APEC, once again looking for a fresh approach to those global trade talks. So instead of having to wait till everybody can agree everything, we can break the round into components and get things done amongst willing countries.
Second, on the question of trade as we move into the APEC discussion themselves, we will be discussing what I believe is a new frontier for trade and that is trade in environmental goods.  As our region and the world grapples with the challenge of climate change, then increasingly focus will turn to having ready access to the environmental goods that make a difference to carbon pollution and to reducing carbon pollution.  It's in all of our interests that trade in those goods is as free as possible so people can get access to the goods that they need so that they can cut back their carbon pollution.
Then, in addition, the APEC meeting will focus on matters associated with a seamless regional economy.  There are often barriers beyond just direct trade barriers  -  regulatory differences between nations that can make it hard for say an Australian business to go into our region and to trade everywhere and to find it easy to do that.  So the work of APEC on getting rid of those behind the border impediments will continue.
And, as I said yesterday, the APEC meeting comes at an important time in the global economy.  We had a key focus at the G20 on the Eurozone crisis.  This will give leaders another opportunity to share reflections on where we are with the global economy and next steps in ensuring that we can bring the global economy to a pattern of balance and sustained growth.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you talked about the ambition of the TPP and you set up a framework about how we move ahead but how likely is it that we will actually get to a position of eliminating tariffs?  Will some the participants want to have tariff cut-outs that they want exceptions to their rule  -  for example, Japan doesn't want to compete on rice, for example?  So how likely would you get to something that's real?
PM:  We're bringing a spirit of optimism to this and I think that optimism is justified because the amount of progress that has been made already - that we are standing here and able to see leaders endorse a leaders' statement, a broad outline of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, but also have leaders endorse the ministerial report to leaders from Trade Ministers.  And that ministerial report actually discusses the elimination of tariffs.  So I think we should take from that an optimistic message that people are aiming high with the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  So the coverage of the Trans-Pacific Partnership is broad  -  around a quarter of global GDP.  It could become broader with the inclusion of nations like Japan taking us to more than a third of global GDP.  And the aim is high.  On the aim I'll turn to Dr Emerson for some comments on your question, then we'll take some others.
MINISTER EMERSON: Well to reaffirm what the Prime Minister said.  It's a very significant development that the TPP parties agreed to include the elimination of tariffs.  Your question is really when or how likely.  There will be a phased reduction in tariffs  -  there always has been.  In our case we've been phasing down tariffs since about 1985 and we're pragmatic about the schedules, that is, we want the destination to be zero.  The journey: we're happy to discuss because that obviously involves structural assistance in some of these countries with higher tariffs.  And in respect of the entry of other countries, they'll need to sign up to similar level of ambition.  That's certainly the determination of the TPP parties, we want more countries in but we want those countries in on the basis of maintaining a high level of ambition and a good pace  -  keeping these negotiations going at a good click.
PM:  We'll go to Mark and then we'll come round. Yes Mark.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, sorry just to boil this down a little bit. What sectors of the economy stand to benefit most from this? What industries?
PM: I think certainly agriculture stands to benefit a great deal.  We are a great agricultural nation.  We have very efficient farmers, very efficient and productive farmers and when you talk to them they are very alive to the barriers that prevent them getting full access into other markets and if they had full access, then they would well and truly compete on price and quality.  So for our farmers this is a very important development.  Beyond our farmers we move from just growing food to actually producing food.  We've got increasingly a great reputation as a quality food producer.  We've got a historic reputation as a clean green producer.  We are a producer of fine foods; fine wines and once again, we can get barriers that prevent us competing fairly in markets where people would want to buy Australian products but can't do it now.
For our manufacturing sector, there are impediments to selling our manufactured goods into our region.  It frustrates many of our manufacturers that they can't get their products to market, once again at a fair price, so it's important for them.  And I would also replicate what Dr Emerson has said and this has been a focus within the government as we work towards Australia in the Asian Century White Paper.  Often when we think about the growth of Asia, people think about resources and of course that has been growing.  We say let's focus more broadly, there's great opportunities here in food, in elaborately transformed manufactured goods but there's also great opportunities here in services.  Whether it be accounting services, legal services, engineering services, the services that a mining industry consumes, you know, you name it, the things that we do through the knowledge and capacity and skills of the Australian people can be traded goods too.  So, Australians with expertise providing services into other markets and doing that on the basis of fair competition. 
Dr Emerson might want to add.
MINISTER EMERSON:  I would just give you the basic statistics there.  Service economy constitutes about three quarters of our domestic economy and about 23 percent of our exports.  Now there's no magic in getting that up to three quarters because we are a great resource-producing nation but you can sense from that the upside potential in converting our strong service economy into a strong service export economy.  And all of those businesses, large and small, the accounting firms, the financial advice, all of that is important.  In a dramatically, rapidly growing region, these are the sorts of services that the TPP parties will be looking for and what we need to do is harmonize the arrangements so that's what good in Australia is good in those TPP parties.  That their licences, that the regulations, are smooth and harmonized so that they can do business in any of those TPP parties.
PM:  We do just need, I'll take the next question, but as we have these discussion s of trade, people may have in their minds that this is big businesses doing business overseas.  In today's world and tomorrow's world with the national broadband network it will literally be increasingly possible to be a small business, indeed a micro business, where people are working from home and trade what you do internationally.
Yes.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, despite you optimism, is it true to say that with this broad outline of agreement , there is no agreement or schedule or timeframe at this stage to actually produce and eliminate tariffs?
PM: Leaders in the room expressed their ambition to bring the Trans-Pacific Partnership to the stage of legal text - so to work it all the way through during the course of 2012.  So that is an important statement of ambition about getting this done.
JOURNALIST:  Do you think it's a realistic ambition?
PM:  Well we wouldn't have said it if we didn't think that it was realistic.  Is it a stretch?  Is it going to be hard?  Absolutely, but what the trade ministers have achieved so far has been a stretch, it's been hard, and they've got it done.
JOURNALIST: It's very positive developments but  -  there's no doubt about that  - but China is Australia's biggest trading partner at the moment, and the second largest economy in the world.  Will you be working diplomatically to encourage China or towards China also joining the TPP?
PM:  Well of course our great trading relationship with China will continue as we also work on the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  The outlook from leaders when we met is that we are open to broadening this, to having other countries indicate their interests in being involved but we don't want that to slow down the pace of development of the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  So we have, for example, had an indication from Japan and that's a good thing.  But we'll be working on trade at every level as a government.  We've come up with this proposal about a fresh approach to DOHA and that is being taken up by the world.  That's a good thing.  We focussed on this Trans-Pacific Partnership and we are seeing progress.  We're also focussed on some key bilateral trade agreements and I am hoping that during the course of these APEC discussions, we can also put a focus on freer trade, easier trade in environmental goods.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, yesterday you mentioned at the CEO Summit that people had to adapt to more change and that it would be stressful on their lives. Given the TPP and the movement towards reducing all tariffs what about the Australian textile, clothing, footwear workers who are, effectively, the most protected in the country, what's your message to them under this deal?
PM:  Well we've been reducing tariffs in the textile, clothing and footwear industry for a long period of time now.  Indeed when that tariff reduction program started, I was a lawyer at Slater and Gordon and I had the opportunity to see up close what that meant for some of the working people in the textile, clothing and footwear industry.  And it hasn't been an easy journey of change but it's been a journey where, increasingly we have gone up the value-added chain so that we, you know, produce things that the world wants to buy.  They are not your mass production garments but they are high quality, high design, high fashion, customised  -  still very valuable commodities.  So, progress there continues in the TCF industry and they have been adaptable to that change  -  it's been difficult but they've been adaptable.  And the Labor government, when these tariff reductions started, so that's back in the era of the Hawke and Keating governments, did work to support that industry and those workers in a journey in change.  And we've learnt some things about how to work with people during periods of adjustment.
JOURNALIST: So they can expect to see some more assistance to help them adjust?
PM:  Well we are on a known and agreed path with TCF.  So that path is there, it's accepted by the textile, clothing and footwear industry.  More generally, can I say, I'm happy for anybody to look at the transcript of my remarks yesterday when I was at the business forum.  The point I was making yesterday very clearly is what are the kinds of characteristics we will see in the future workforce and what does that mean that we need to think about in terms of our education system.  The characteristics of that future workforce, I believe, will be a strong emphasis on the foundation skills.  If you can't read, write, do numbers then you don't get entry into anything else.  A strong focus on adaptability  -  we live in a world of change and that world of change will continue.  A strong focus on creativity  -  we will be great innovators and we will bring creative skills to bear in that innovation.  Great teamwork because modern work structures require people to collaborate and finally, I made the point I also think it will require citizenship skills so people can be very discriminating about the mass of information that's available to them today.  They're the comments I made yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're seeing a lot of Barack Obama at the moment, the G20, you've got this, you've got next week at the East Asian Summit.  Can you give us some insight into the working relationship with the US President?  How you get on?  Just some insights into that internal relationship?
PM:  Oh I think President Obama and I personally both got on very well.  I enjoy working with President Obama.  I've enjoyed working with him in a variety of formats. Obviously, G20 not that long ago, then of course here at APEC, and we'll have the opportunity to see President Obama in Australia.  So I think we work well together, personally get on so I'm really looking forward to welcoming him in Australia.  As I frequently joke with him we're both 1961 kids.  It was a good year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, tonight the dinner and tomorrow at APEC, green growth is obviously one of the themes  -  will you be talking about Australia's recent achievements and how easy it's been to do?
PM: I do strike a fair degree of interest, as I travel, from leaders about what's happening in Australia with carbon pricing and I've been explaining to people that carbon pricing will start on the 1st of July next year.  That we have a very emissions intensive economy and we're addressing that in the cheapest way possible so that we start cutting our carbon pollution.  They are sometimes interested in how fast and furious the political debate has been but at the end of the day that's a matter for Australian politics.  What's important for Australia is the outcome that we've struck so less carbon pollution, still working with our industries so they maintain their competitiveness, and a major tax reform which will see more money in people's pockets and see a million people out of the tax system.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what sort of impact would there be on growth in Australia? Is there any dollar value or anything from a TPP?  And if it was a legal text in 2012 how soon would the benefits start to flow?
PM: Well look I go to the Minister for Trade on how text and all that subsequent work rolls out.  We're not in a position now to model for you an agreement that is still being worked on but there's a very clear general proposition here and that very general clear proposition is trade equals jobs.  Trade's good for growth and it's good for jobs.  We are a great trading nation.  Ever since we've opened our doors to the world, we have made our way in world by being good at what we do.  I am incredibly optimistic about the capacity of Australians to keep being absolutely world class at what we do and that means we're a great trading nation, that means more Australian jobs.
MINISTER EMERSON:  In terms of modelling, I think realistically, you need to wait till the TPP takes shape.  Economists are wonderful people, but they can make things up too.  And you will be making it up.  If you did some economic modelling about a concept and whatever you plugged in you'll get a result on the other side and everyone will say, wow look at that, isn't it terrific.  So, being realistic, though, I think if we go back to those basic statistics that we're looking at an area that ultimately would be a free trade area  -  leading by the way to a free trade area for the whole Asia Pacific.  That's the ultimate goal here.  So we start with nine and keep expanding.  All of those nine are APEC economies.  And wouldn't it be fantastic to have a free trade area in the fasted growing region on earth.  And so when I get to quantify those benefits, it will be an extraordinarily large number but let's have the TPP take a bit more shape.  We get the text then we get their schedules about reductions in tariffs and other barriers overtime  -  that's when the modelling can occur. But anything that's up to almost one and a half times the size of the European Union but defined by rapid growth whereas the European Union is not defined by rapid growth  -  you'd rather be here.  Right here, in the right place, at the right time in the Asian region in the Asian century.
PM:  I don't think we can top that shameless plug for economists from the man with a PhD in economics so thank you very much.
MINISTER EMERSON: Thank you. 



PM: I'm very pleased with the outcomes of APEC and let me just go through them.
Leaders had a good discussion about the global economy. We had a presentation from IMF head Christine Lagarde. As has been noted at the G20 and was reflected in the discussions here amongst leaders, the leaders are concerned about circumstances in the Eurozone and continue to urge European leaders and particularly Eurozone leaders to get on with the job of turning into deeds the words of October 27 regarding the Eurozone crisis.
It's very important that Europe takes the lead in resolving the Eurozone crisis. This is important for the global economy.
But APEC brings together a growth region in the world. Australia is part of that growth region, and that is good for jobs and good for growth. Leaders recognise that in order to continue being the growth region in the world and to put a shot in the arm of global growth, we do need to seek progress in trade talks, so leaders at this meeting did two important things: they issued the same kind of call as the G20 about the future of the Doha round. Australia for a long period of time has been saying let's break this global trades talk gridlock, let's get on with the job.
Doha has reached a gridlock. We need to find a fresh approach. G20 leaders endorsed that fresh approach and APEC has endorsed it, too. What that fresh approach means is breaking up the Doha round so that participants can get real action done.
Doha has reached a gridlock because it requires all parties to agree to all things before movement can be made. We believe that by breaking the round up we can see movement and APEC leaders endorsed that call.
In addition, APEC leaders determined to keep their markets open and to not take any measures to close markets - that is, to keep protectionism at a standstill through to 2015. There had been an earlier agreement for a standstill. Now, that has been extended and that is very good news indeed.
What that means is that APEC leaders have recognised that if we try and turn the clock back, if we try and go back to the earlier days of closed markets, then that will disadvantage everyone and ultimately cost jobs. So, this standstill is good for jobs in our region. It's good for Australian jobs. It's good for facing the future rather than seeking a return to the past.
Then, today, APEC has broken into a new frontier and that is the frontier of green growth, and it's done that in two very important ways. Through President Obama's leadership, there's been an opportunity for APEC to set an example to the world on clean energy and green growth. I think that's important because in the past APEC has set an example to the world on the way in which you can liberalise trade and trade more freely. Now, APEC is setting an example to the world on clean energy and green growth.
Specifically, APEC has agreed to reduce the carbon intensity of the region's growth through a goal of reducing energy intensity by 45 per cent by 2035. That means the whole region will collaborate to reduce energy intensity.
This is an important development. In Australia, we have a number of measures to increase our energy efficiency. Obviously we have standards for products and Australian households would be very familiar with looking at the standards for products to see how energy efficient a refrigerator, for example, is going to be. That's one way of increasing energy efficiency, reducing energy usage - to see those sorts of standards throughout the region would be a good thing.
In Australia, too, we have an initiative where big energy users have been required to publicly report on their energy use. That simple transparency measure, being held up to account in the eyes of shareholders and the broader public, has seen a 10 per cent reduction in energy use per year by those companies. That's the equivalent of 2.5 per cent reduction in energy use by Australia and a 2 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
So, this focus on energy intensity and being more energy efficient across our region is an important one and the setting of this ambitious goal is an important outcome from this APEC meeting.
In addition, this APEC meeting agreed that countries and economies in APEC, that economies in APEC would have tariffs on environmental goods reduced to 5 per cent.
Now, this is unambiguously good news for Australia. We do not have tariffs of more than 5 per cent on any environmental good.
What that means is that we won't experience any of the pain that would come from those tariff reductions, but we will experience the benefit of being able to get environmental products which we produce into the economies of APEC with less of a tariff load.
And to give you an example of the kinds of products that this refers to, it refers to solar panels, to wind turbine gearboxes, to fuel cells, to more efficient fuels cell, to water-saving shower devices, which many Australians would be very familiar with given our water scarcity.
So it means we, as we produce these goods, can get them into APEC economies with less of a tariff load. That is unambiguously good news for Australia.
And then finally progress was made in our quest for a seamless regional economy, enabling businesses large and small to trade across our region and to get to market more easily. There was a particular focus in these reforms on small- and medium-sized enterprises, recognising that they are not of a size to have an office or a trade representative in economies around the region.
We've agreed to measures like having a regional database on regulations so the small and medium enterprises can improve their market knowledge and their ability to trade, and we've also agreed to promote regulatory convergence.
We've seen things like the Australian initiative, the Asian Region Funds Transport, which helps harmonise the way that investment regulations work so you can invest across borders more easily. We are going to build on that kind of work.
APEC has a good track record over many years, and I believe that today's meeting will stand as another highlight in that good track record of leaders in economies coming together and getting real work done, and the end result of that real work is it means jobs for people in the Asia Pacific and it means jobs for Australians.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
Yes, Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you any idea roughly what the current value of Australia green exports is and can you give us an idea of the potential for growth roughly in (inaudible)?
PM: Look, we have to do some modelling of the potential for growth, but we are a maker of things like these water-saving shower devices and they're very, very common in Australia. We are a maker of things such as wind turbine gear boxes. We do make some fuel-efficient fuel cells or energy-efficient fuel cells, so we can give you some figures about today's volume of trade. I can make them available to you.
Modelling the growth would require making some sophisticated assumptions about what this will spur, but just from common sense if we can get in with the things we make and they are going to face less of a tariff barrier, that's good news.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what was the real threat of an outbreak in protectionism in the Asia Pacific, given that the countries here have been moving in slightly different directions to, say, Europe?
PM: Well, I think the recognition here is that unity strength. The problem with turning your face back to the past and going back to the days of closed markets is once someone does it, then it makes it much, much harder for leaders in other economies to hold their nerve and to hold to where they are on free trade and indeed to keep improving free trade.
So, it is always important that there is unity and that there is, if you like, a locked-in approach where everyone says instead of going back and thinking that prosperity lies in beggaring my neighbour, we all look forward together and say prosperity lies in each of us doing all of the things we do best and trading between ourselves.
I've said before and I'm very happy to say again  -  we are a great trading nation. We can hold our head up in the world. We've got nothing to fear from free trade, we're good at it. We're good at the things that we do and having good access to market in our region helps us support Australia jobs, and if you think of all of the things we do across agriculture, across manufacturing, across services exports, freer and freer trade in the growth region of the world in which we live is good for Australian jobs.
Sorry, we'll go to Mark and then come across.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, reports today that the mid-year economic forecast will in fact be a mini budget. Is that what the Government's considering at the moment, looking at measures that go to this year's budget and budget years beyond that?
PM: The Government is of course working on the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook. You'd be expecting us to do that at this time of year.
What I would say about it is you will see a continuation of the Government's strong approach to fiscal consolidation. We are very determined to keep pursuing bringing the budget the budget to surplus in 2012-13.
The Treasurer has made some of the very obvious statements about how global economic circumstances have made that a harder task, but we are committed to our path of fiscal consolidation, to bringing the budget to surplus.
We have very low debt by the standards of the world, we have very strong public finances, but we have a very clear plan and strategy and budget rules and budget approaches to bring the budget to surplus, and you should expect in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook to see more of the budget discipline that we've shown in the past.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) how binding is the reduction in carbon intensity? It looks like the (inaudible)
PM: It's an aspiration for the region, but I still think that this is very important development. When leaders meet and effectively put their names to the communiqué that comes from the meeting, they do that because they think it's important to say this is our goal, and unless you set a goal, even if it's a stretch target, unless you set a goal you're never going to get anywhere.
So, a clear articulation of this goal, and it is a specific one - reducing energy intensity by 45 per cent by 2035 from 2005 levels - leaders have agreed to that knowingly, understanding that if we can reduce our energy intensity then we are doing the right thing by our environment and our world, it means less carbon pollution.
It also means more efficient production and more efficient products for people. If we look at the modern iteration of household products, they use less energy than the products of the past. That's a good thing all round - a good thing for the environment, cost-effective for the people who make them and cost-effective for the Aussie households that use them. We want to see that kind of approach more broadly.
I don't think too many Australians would say they don't want to see those stickers that tell them how energy efficient their dishwasher or fridge, they wouldn't want to see them go. Of course, spreading those kind of measures is a good thing.
Yes, Sabra?
JOURNALIST: I ask, is it, as the Government searches for significant cuts from MYEFO, is anything quarantined, and can we put today's APEC meeting in context? Just how significant are the things that you've achieved today  -  if you could say what you think about that?
PM: Well, the last thing I'm going to do with MYEFO is play a rule-in, rule-out game, but I would remind we're a Labor Government that has been driven by making sure that we work in the interests of working people and that the economy works in the interest of working people and that we see a spread of opportunity for all, and that we're making sure through services like our aspiration for a National Disability Insurance Scheme that we're not leaving people behind. So, they're the approaches we'll take to MYEFO. It's the approach we took to the last budget and it'll continue to drive us.
On the significance of this APEC meeting, I think it comes at a significant time in the global economy. We still see instability in Europe which is concerning and that means that there are risks in our global economy.
Australia's not immune from those risks, our region isn't immune from those risks, but we live in the growing part of the world, rapidly emerging economies, the benefits of economic growth and what this meeting has done is taken an important number of steps to better harness that growth and better add to that growth.
I think breaking this new frontier of clean energy and green growth for APEC is important. APEC has discussed these matters in the past - for example, in Sydney in 2000 - but this has really taken it forward as a new frontier for APEC. That's a very important development and I think at this period, given all of the risks in the global economy, for leaders to be so clear about their free trade desires and their refusal to closing markets is very, very significant, and whilst it is full of technical detail and unlikely to make front page headlines, with the exception of perhaps some of our newspapers, but unlikely to fill page after page of the newspapers, the work on the seamless regional economy is important to business and that means it's important to Australian jobs.
JOURNALIST: It's a bit like herding cats though, you (inaudible) the Australian states (inaudible).
PM: APEC's had a good tradition of getting things done in this area in the past and we're building on it, and with respect to my media friends, we're kind of use to herding cats.
Thanks very much.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed you didn't get a shirt Prime Minister?
PM: Very happy with my own jacket, thank you. 



HOST: The leaders of the 21 APEC member nations are in Hawaii, discussing among other things, regulatory reform and cutting tariffs on 'green' products like solar panels. 
Australia is again pushing for a re-think on trade talks, but it's trumpeting a deal done on the weekend for a Trans-Pacific Partnership aimed at eliminating trade barriers across the region.Nine countries want to be part of it, Australia is among them.The Prime Minister says it will mean more jobs. Julia Gillard is speaking here to our chief political correspondent, Sabra Lane.PM: To have the opportunity to meet with Trans-Pacific Partnership leaders and endorse the broad outline for the Trans-Pacific Partnership is good news for Australia and good news for our economy. We are a great trading nation and so freer trade with our growing region means Australian jobs.HOST: You've talked about that there is great political momentum for this to happen and that the ambition is strong. There are concerns that President Obama will be constrained by domestic politics as he heads to the presidential election. Will it really happen in 2012?PM: Well, President Obama is chairing here in APEC. Obviously we are in Hawaii and the USA is the host, President Obama chairing the APEC meeting and chairing the Trans-Pacific Partnership meeting.He brought the group together and he has certainly spoken in the language of ambition for getting this done in 2012 - an agreement that does have its sights set high as well as a very broad coverage.Already the number of countries that have agreed to go in the Trans-Pacific Partnership equal around a quarter of the world's GDP. If Japan comes in, that's more than a third. That is a regional economic structure one-and-a-half times the size of the European Union.HOST: Japan has indicated it wants to come on board. Will its pace match the pace set by the nations who are currently members of the TPP given that Japan will probably go slowly because politically at home for Japan, there are some very tricky agricultural issues to deal with.PM: There is a very clear understanding amongst Trans-Pacific Partnership leaders that we will be having the talks and the talks will be progressing so they will not wait, the talks, to see whether or not Japan moves to the stage of saying yes, absolutely, we want to be in the Trans-Pacific Partnership.So this is not a question of being held up or held back. Our trade ministers and trade negotiators will be hard at work whilst Japan goes through the process of discussion about joining.HOST: China says it hasn't been invited. Would you like to see China part of the TPP?PM: Well, the way the TPP has worked is nations have stepped forward and said yes, we want to be involved.HOST: Would you like to see them involved?PM: Just to be clear, this is not an invitation structure. No one is issuing invitations. Countries are saying yes, I want to be in and as the Trans-Pacific Partnership gathers pace and clearly has political will and momentum behind it, I expect more countries will look and see that something important is happening and will say to themselves yes, we want to get involved. Now China obviously will make its own decisions.HOST: What can Australians expect of President Obama's visit?PM: I think Australians will be delighted to see president Obama in our country. President Obama will be there in Canberra addressing a joint sitting of the Parliament and then going to Darwin. I think what people will see from President Obama's visit is a reaffirmation of the incredibly strong bonds between our two countries.HOST: It's been widely talked about that Australia and the United States will announce ongoing development of the Strategic and Defence Alliance. Why does Australia need to see more US troops and assets on Australian soil?PM: Sabra, I'm confident I'm now going to disappoint you and just simply say that anything that I've got to say with President Obama about that matter or indeed any other matter will be done by the two of us jointly when we are in Australia together. 



PM: I want to outline my approach to a number of issues at the forthcoming ALP National Conference. Firstly, I want to deal with the question of uranium and India. The Labor Party's current platform prevents us selling uranium to India, because it is not part of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. I believe the time has come for the Labor Party to change this position. I believe that for three reasons.
First and foremost selling uranium to India will be good for the Australian economy and good for Australian jobs. If I can give you just some quick statistics about that, Australia is the world's third largest supplier of uranium; uranium contributes over $750 million to the Australian economy, creating over 4,200 jobs. India is expected to increase its use of nuclear power from its current three percent of electricity generation to 40 percent by 2050. India is our fourth biggest export market, a market worth nearly $16 billion to Australia with enormous potential to grow as India becomes wealthier. I think those statistics give a sense of the size and scale of the economic opportunity here for Australia in the future, as India rises and brings hundreds of millions of people out of poverty, it will need more energy, it is looking to supply 40% of that energy need through nuclear energy, we are a very big supplier of uranium so having access to this new and growing market is good for Australian jobs.
Second I believe that this will be one way we can take another step forward in our relationship with India. We have a good relationship with India, it's the world's largest democracy, a stable democracy and we have worked on our links with India, but as I have described to the Australian people before, Australia faces a unique set of opportunities in this the Asian century, where we live in the right region of the world which will see strong economic growth and India as a rising giant will be part of that strong economic growth, so put simply our best possible partnership with India is also good for Australian jobs.
Third I believe this change should make sense and should take place because circumstances have developed in the international community. It made sense, the current platform, when there was a widely supported international strategy to bring India into the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, there was a period of time where that was a widely engaged in international strategy, but the US-India Civil Nuclear Agreement changed that strategy, it effectively lifted the de-facto international ban on cooperation with India in this area. Consequently given that change in diplomatic circumstances around the world, for us to refuse to budge is all pain with no gain and I believe that our national platform should recognise that reality.
So this is a significant issue for Australia that will be the subject of discussion and debate at our National Conference but I am making my position on this issue very clear.
Second on the issue of same-sex marriage, it's been clear for some time that there will be a major debate on this at ALP National Conference. It's also clear that within the Labor Party and indeed within the Australian community there are very deeply held and different views about same-sex marriage and the Marriage Act, this is the subject of community debate so it's no surprise that it is also the subject of debate within the Labor Party. I have made my position on this clear for a long period of time now, I do not support a change to the Marriage Act, the Marriage Act defining marriage as it does as a union between a man and a woman. I believe that marriage has come to have a particular cultural status and role within our society and I do not believe that should be changed. But I also understand that there are deeply held and differing views so it is appropriate that on a question like this that the Labor Party gives its members a conscience vote. However I do note that the Government will not be bringing forward any proposal for change to the Marriage Act.
Then thirdly, the other issue that I have spoken about and want to be heard on in relation to our National Conference is the question of party reform. I've set the Labor Party a challenge and I intend to take that challenge to National Conference and that is to grow our party membership by 8,000 members as a first step. The broader we can be the more representative of the Australian community we can be, the better. Labor will always seek to reach out to those people who deeply care about opportunity for all, about not leaving anyone behind, about making sure that we are doing the right things to assist working people, that's been our heritage, that will be our future and we are looking for Australians to join us in that task by becoming members of the Labor Party and I'll be asking the Labor Party to get out there and to recruit 8,000 new members.
I'm also asking the Labor Party at National Conference to embrace party reform. There are many things we can do to modernise our political party so that it has broader and deeper roots in the Australian community and it is using more of the mechanisms that people use to get their political information and to have their political debates today, so consequently I will be going to National Conference endorsing changes and reform which will see us modernise the Labor Party.
For some time now I've been saying I expect and want to see a noisy Conference. People join political parties, they join the Labor Party because they are passionate about ideas. The Labor Party is a party of ideas and I expect that to be on display in full measure at National Conference, I believe people will come ready for a debate, they'll come ready to make a bit of noise, they may even come prepared for some fireworks and that's a good thing, that's a great thing, that shows that we are a political party full of ideas and working our way through how Australia deals with the challenges of today and the challenges of tomorrow.
I'm very happy to take any questions, we'll go to Phil Coorey first given I misnamed him at my last press conference.
JOURNALIST: It's a double banger, on same sex marriage, are you opposed or do you have any particular view on the change to the platform, the ALP platform, changes to the wording as the Left is after as well, and on uranium now that the NPT consideration should no longer be a concern in regards to India, does this open the door for Australia to consider selling uranium other countries such as Israel?
PM: Right well if I can take the second question first, no it doesn't, because there's an important issue here with India which you need to understand to understand my perspective on this. India made an approach to the International Atomic Energy Agency and to the Nuclear Suppliers Group, that was in relation to its agreement with the US, that the US would sell uranium to India, and the board of governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Nuclear Suppliers Group agree that the US should be able to sell uranium to India. They got an exemption from the Nuclear Suppliers Group, indeed Australia supported that and we are represented on the board of governors of the IAEA, the International Atomic Energy Agency and at that level we also supported the arrangements between the US and India.
So that puts India in a class of its own, a group of its own. When you look at other nations, you know whether it be Pakistan or Israel they are not in that same class and I would note too with Israel as far as I am advised they are not seeking Australian uranium and they don't rely on a domestic civil nuclear industry for their power supplies.
On the question of same-sex marriage I've made my view clear, I'm expecting there to be a debate, I'm expecting there to be a debate, the platform currently backs marriage being between a man and a women, I'm expecting there to be a debate and I won't shirk playing a role in that debate when it comes to National Conference.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well I'm being very clear about what view I will take to National Conference and I expect there to be a debate and that's a good thing, there should be a debate on ideas that are the subject of interest, concern and differing views within the community and consequently within our political party.
David.
JOURNALIST: A two part question as well on uranium, what are we to read into the announcement on this on the eve of President Obama's visit, is it also being driven in part by wanting to fall into line with the United States on this? And secondly what are the arguments now if it's ok to sell uranium to a developing country that's not a signatory to the NPT, what are the arguments against using nuclear power here in Australia?
PM: Well firstly on your first question there's nothing to be read into it, coming as it does the day before President Obama's visit other than it suited me as the day to make the announcement. So it's my decision, my announcement and it was made because of my logistics as today is the appropriate day.
Secondly, on the question of nuclear power in Australia, we have abundant energy sources and so we are not in the position of a number of other nations around the world that are desperate for energy, that can see their energy needs growing and need to look to nuclear as a source of supply.
We live in a country where we have had and continue to have abundant reserves of coal, we've got new fuels like relatively recent developments in terms of gas, we are seeing amazing developments in terms of renewables, using solar, wind, tidal, geothermal. Our energy mix here will be an energy mix that moves so that we have a greater outreach to clean energy sources and renewable energy sources, we don't, to meet our energy needs need nuclear energy.
I'll go to Michelle. I'll go to Michelle and then come across.
JOURNALIST: Seeing two questions are in fashion-
PM: -Yes they seem to be today, don't they?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard could you give us a bit of the background of your coming to this decision, for example how many of your ministers have you consulted. I notice it's not a cabinet decision, it's your position at this point. And secondly, on party reform, do you support the position that's been advocated by some of 50 percent direct election to the conference?
PM: Firstly, internal government processes are just that  -  they're confidential and I don't intend to go to them, but I've certainly been aware for a long period of time that a number of my ministers had concerns about the party platform and I've determined that we will take this step.
On the question of party reform, my mind is open to reform proposals that engage more energy, more ideas, more activity in the Labor Party. I will obviously become more specific about those things when we are at National Conference and I'm in a position to put forward my views very directly in the party reform debate.
What I have certainly said is that I do support us trialling primaries, I believe this is an outreach mechanism to the community. There are thousands of people out there who support Labor, who support the deeply held values of our political party, who look with pride at the Labor history of big reforms, Medicare, superannuation, the pension and now look to reforms that this Government has done like carbon pricing with a sense of pride that Labor is the party that manages change for working people and it's those sorts of Australians that I think might step forward and involve themselves in a primaries discussion and candidate selection. So I do believe we should trial that.
Yes, Paul.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is your message to the conference that if a change is Labor Party policy to accept marriage equality, that your Government will not progress that in the Parliament?
PM: The Government will not bring a bill to the Parliament to change the Marriage Act.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Full stop, full stop. The Government will not bring a bill to the Parliament to change the Marriage Act.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, clearly in this Parliament private members have the ability  -  private members have always had the ability to bring bills to the Parliament and that continues in this Parliament, but the Government will not bring a legislative proposal to change the Marriage Act to this Parliament.
Dennis, and then we'll come across.
JOURNALIST: On that particular point, are you ensuring the Government does not bring forward any change to the Marriage Act as part of your undertaking before the election, that the Government would not introduce any legislative change and would you see a private members bill as a breach of that promise?
PM: Firstly, certainly I gave an undertaking at the time of the election that the Government would not bring forward a legislative proposal, so I will acquit that undertaking.
Second, it follows I think as a matter of kind of common sense logic that if you take the view that I do  -  that this is an area in which people should have a conscience vote, that really it's not appropriate for this to be the work of government, so much as if anybody is to bring forward a proposition for it to be the work of individuals in their capacity as parliamentarians.
Yes, Catherine.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the three rationales you mentioned for, as guiding your thinking on the India uranium issue have existed since John Howard made the decision that you are now making, in 2007. So why has it taken you so long to get a sharp end to Labor's thinking in relation to this issue?
PM: The events that I referred to, US and India, an agreement to sell and buy uranium, the Nuclear Suppliers Group giving India an exemption, the board of governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency dealing with the question, happened in 2008/2009. So it is true that just looking at the timeline these matters could have been discussed at the last ALP National Conference, but if we'd done that that would have been before the international community and Australia itself had had the opportunity to observe these new arrangements, bedding down and to make an assessment of them.
And so they have bedded down, we're in a position now to make an assessment of them and we will deal with the matter at the forthcoming National Conference.
I should also indicate, in terms of the timing of National Conference, I deliberately decided National Conference should be held this year, comparatively early in the life of the Government and that is because I do not want it to be an election style parade and pageant, I want it to be a genuine conference where people are debating ideas. I expect there to be some noise, I expect there to be the occasional sharp word spoken, that's what happens when you get hundreds and hundreds of people together who are absolutely passionate about ideas and the nation's future and that's a good thing. That's a great thing.
Phil Hudson.
JOURNALIST: My two questions-
PM: -I'm not sure if I'm going to be endorsing this as a new way forward for the-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible). We can be much worse than this (inaudible).
PM: That's true, that's true. You did (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: Just on the same-sex marriage, can I just clarify, you said that it won't be a Government bill. Could a Labor backbencher put forward a private members bill and my second question is on Barack Obama  -  what sort of welcome do you expect Australians will give the President when he arrives, and what do you say to some foreign policy experts who've been expressing concern that Australia's becoming a bit too close to the United States?
PM: Well, in order, it is consistent with a matter being a conscience vote that parliamentarians, including Labor parliamentarians can exercise their rights as parliamentarians, including if they so choose to bring a private members bill, but there will be no government bill.
On the second question, Barack Obama, I think President Obama will get a very warm welcome in Australia. I think Australians feel warmly and deeply about the United States, our links as nations, whether it's 60 years of our alliance in the military sphere, whether it's the incredible people-to-people links, the exchanges between us and the US, whether it's our cultural ties, Cate Blanchett, for example, going to Hollywood, Nicole Kidman, our cultural ties are deep. I think people feel a sense of connection and affection for Americans and I think that will be on display as people greet President Obama.
On the question about our relationship, our relationship is long lasting, it's a deep one, they are a great ally of this country. We have stood shoulder-to-shoulder with them in the most difficult circumstances this nation has ever faced, we've stood shoulder-to-shoulder with them in the days since 9/11, we're working shoulder-to-shoulder with them now in Afghanistan. I think all of that drives a depth in our relationship.
I do note some foreign policy commentary that we need to choose between the US and China. I dismiss that, I do not agree with it. I think it is well and truly possible for us, in this growing region of the world to have an ally in the United States and to have deep friendships in our region, including with China.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just one question-
PM: -Final question, yes.
JOURNALIST: Just in relation to some of the restrictions on uranium mining and exploration in the states. Given what you said about jobs, this being good for the Australian economy, should they be reconsidered and will they be obliged to, depending upon what happens at conference?
PM: Whether it's uranium, or whether it's any other resource in our ground, it's not my intention to uplift state planning laws to the Federal sphere, so there's a question there for states to address.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and President Barack Obama met on November 16 in Canberra and announced a series of initiatives to expand and deepen cooperation between Australia and the United States.
Partnering in Education 
Australia's Minister for School Education, Early Childhood, and Youth Peter Garrett and U.S. Secretary of Education Arne Duncan have issued a statement (attached) outlining new initiatives to: conduct experts-level policy dialogues on issues like teacher quality and school improvement; expand virtual exchanges between schools in both countries on sustainable communities; and establish a Global Connections and Exchange program, sponsored by the U.S. Department of State in consultation with Australia's Department of Education, Employment, and Workplace Relations, to enable collaboration on environmental issues between American and Australian secondary schools in remote areas of both countries.
Partnering on Clean Energy
Australia and the United States have detailed new cooperation on clean energy in a statement (attached) that covers: seven new solar research projects to be conducted under the U.S.-Australia Solar Energy Collaboration (USAEC) Initiative; enhanced collaboration on best practices for promoting energy efficiency; and the Sydney Theatre Company and the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts are exploring the adoption of clean energy and energy efficient technologies to reduce the carbon footprints of cultural institutions.
Partnering in Development 
Australia and the United States are to work together as outlined in the attached statement to address global development challenges, including: launching a new joint partnership called All Children Reading: A Grand Challenge for Development to improve reading outcomes for 100 million children in primary schools by 2015; launching the GSMA mWomen Global Development Alliance to empower women and girls through improved access to mobile phones; and cooperating on development challenges in Southeast Asia, the Pacific Islands, and Afghanistan. 
Partnering to Combat Serious Crime
Criminal activity increasingly spans international borders, necessitating close cooperation and information-sharing between law enforcement agencies around the world.  On November 16, Australia and the United States signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Enhancing Cooperation in Preventing and Combating Crime (attached).  The MOU augments the ability of the two countries to prevent, detect, and investigate serious crimes by providing for the sharing of biometric data, including fingerprints, on a case-by-case basis. The MOU reinforces cooperation on common challenges while respecting shared values regarding the privacy of each country's citizens.
Partnering for Justice in Afghanistan
As Afghan forces begin to take the lead in defending their country, Australia and the United States are committed to working together to promote transparency, accountability, and strong Afghan civil institutions such as the justice system.  Australia will assist efforts to strengthen the Afghan justice system by deploying three Australian Civilian Corps justice advisers to the Justice Center in Parwan (JCIP).   Established in partnership between the U.S. and Afghan Governments in 2010, the JCIP enables the transition of U.S. military detainees into the Afghan criminal justice system through fair and transparent trials conducted by the Government of Afghanistan under Afghan law.  The Australian Civilian Corps deployment is expected to occur in early 2012.  The Australian advisors will be the first non-U.S. advisors to Afghan justice officials at the JCIP.    
Partnering on the TPP
Australian Trade Minister Emerson and U.S. Trade Representative Kirk met on the margins of the November 11 APEC meeting, and reiterated their strong commitment to successfully concluding the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) negotiations as soon as possible.  The United States and Australia are the two largest economies of the nine countries negotiating the TPP agreement.  They also expressed satisfaction with the robust growth in two-way trade since the start of the Australia-U.S. Free Trade Agreement in 2005, noting that bilateral trade in goods and services grew 53% (based on official Australian statistics converted to US$) through the end of 2010, with total U.S. exports to Australia reaching US$35.2 (A$35.3) billion in 2010, and total Australian exports to the United States at US$14.6 (A$14.5) billion.  Investment has also increased significantly, with a 20% jump in bilateral investment flows over the past year alone (U.S. official figures).  The United States is the largest foreign direct investor (FDI) in Australia, with a cumulative FDI total of US$134 billion in 2010 (based on official U.S. data), while for Australia, the United States is the largest destination for outbound FDI, with a cumulative total of US$94.9 (A$93.4) billion (based on official Australian data).  Minister Emerson and Ambassador Kirk noted that the U.S.- Australian economic relationship is a strong example of the kind of open, transparent, and fair trade and investment ties that the two countries hope to expand throughout the Asia-Pacific region with other TPP partners.     
Partnering in Space 
The U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the Department of Industry, Innovation, Science and Research (DIISR) have announced their intent to extend two bilateral space agreements scheduled to expire in 2012.  Under the Space Vehicle Tracking and Communications Facilities Agreement, first agreed in 1980, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) operates the Canberra Deep Space Communications Complex, one of three global facilities that provide data to NASA to track and maintain contact with NASA and other spacecraft operating in deep space.  The Agreement on Scientific Ballooning, signed in 2006, assists NASA and its Australian partners, CSIRO and the University of New South Wales, in developing new technologies and payloads for NASA missions by using cost-effective balloons to place scientific payloads high in the atmosphere.
Partnering in Commemorating the Battle of the Coral Sea
In recognition of the exceptional bravery and sacrifice exemplified by our sailors and airmen who fought together in the May 1942 Battle of the Coral Sea, historically regarded as the start of U.S.-Australia military cooperation, Australia and the United States are to work together, in advance of the battle's 70th anniversary in May 2012, to locate the wrecks of three U.S. warships (the USS Lexington, USS Neosho, and USS Sims) sunk in Australian waters during this pivotal two-day clash.  The National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, a leader in archival research on historic naval battle records, is to provide expertise to identify these wrecks for formal designation as protected heritage resources under the laws of both nations.  Australia and the United States will also continue to advance collaboration on marine and climate science in the Coral Sea and other areas.
Partnering to Address Digital Issues
New digital technologies like cloud computing and smart phones offer further opportunities to enhance people's lives through digital technologies.  However, challenges such as cyber security and safety, privacy, or jurisdictional issues could prevent our societies from tapping the digital revolution's true potential.  In order to bring together U.S. and Australian public and private sector experts to discuss how best to address these issues, and compare domestic experiences and perspectives, the United States and Australia, together with the private sector, are to hold a dialogue on “Cloud Computing,” featuring former U.S. Chief Information Officer Vivek Kundra, in Canberra in February 2012.  The dialogue will address how to eliminate obstacles to trans-border flows of data or information, while maintaining data security and privacy as well as law enforcement and national security.  The two governments will explore the possibility of future dialogues on other digital topics of mutual concern. 
 * 	Statement on Education Cooperation [PDF 69KB]
 * 	Statement on Clean Energy Cooperation - [PDF 79KB]
 * 	Statement on Development Cooperation  [PDF 129KB]
 * 	Statement on Memorandum of Understanding on Combating Crime  [PDF 72KB]
 * 	Memorandum of Understanding on Combating Crime  PDF [3.3MB]



Today, Prime Minister Gillard and President Obama announced two new force posture initiatives that will significantly enhance defence cooperation between Australia and the United States.
Coming on the 60th anniversary of the ANZUS Alliance, these initiatives strengthen an already robust partnership that has been an anchor of stability and peace in the Asia-Pacific region. They reflect our enduring and visible commitment to strengthening regional security and will increase interoperability between Australian and U.S. forces.
Starting next year, Australia will welcome the deployment of U.S. Marines to Darwin and Northern Australia, for around six months at a time, where they will conduct exercises and training on a rotational basis with the Australian Defence Force. The initial deployment will consist of a small liaison element and a company of 250 U.S. Marines. The intent in the coming years is to establish a rotational presence of up to a 2,500 person Marine Air Ground Task Force (MAGTF). The U.S. Marines will exercise and train on a rotational basis with the Australian Defence Force in the Northern Territory.
The leaders also agreed to closer cooperation between the Royal Australian Air Force and the U.S. Air Force that will result in increased rotations of U.S. aircraft through northern Australia. This will enhance bilateral collaboration and offer greater opportunities for combined training and exercises. Select equipment and supplies in support of these initiatives will be prepositioned in these locations to facilitate exercises and training.
These joint initiatives, which will take place in Australian facilities, are part of an ongoing review of U.S. force posture in the Asia-Pacific region intended to pursue a more geographically distributed, operationally resilient and politically sustainable military presence in this region. They will further enhance the capabilities of both partners by increasing opportunities for combined training, deepening interoperability, and enabling both countries to work together even more effectively to pursue common interests. Moreover, these initiatives will better position both nations to join with other partners to respond in a timely and effective manner to a range of contingencies in the Asia-Pacific, including humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.
Both leaders reaffirmed that the ANZUS Alliance is one based on the strongest of friendships resulting from shared values. They agreed to continuously explore ways to deepen cooperation and to maintain the vitality of the Alliance in the face of an ever-changing global environment. 



President Obama
Mr Harry Jenkins, Speaker of the House of Representatives
Senator the Honourable John Hogg, President of the Senate
The Honourable Tony Abbott, Leader of the Opposition
Honourable Members of the Australian Parliament
Distinguished guests
Mr President.
It's good to see you again after so long, it's been what, two days?
Now I'm not saying our Air Force is faster than yours, our Air Marshal Brown did ask me not to lay down any challenges on his behalf but the Royal Australian Air Force did beat Air Force One to Canberra from Hawaii.
Prior to leaving Hawaii my partner Tim did get a small lecture from the First Lady. 
Michelle instructed Tim to make sure we fed you up in Australia because she's worried you work so hard you forget to eat. 
So we've responded to her request by making sure you eat a hearty dinner and that there are several hundred witnesses.
Mr President, you come to Australia with the honours of a Head of State.
You come as well, as an ally and a partner and a friend.
And you come as a person for whom many Australians feel great personal warmth.
Not just for the substance of your leadership abroad and at home.
But for the style of modern leadership you display as well.
Australians, not given to overstatement, see you leading a great nation amid all the passions of politics in a democracy and we see in you a combination of clear vision and a deep calm.
And we admire your own unique journey in life and law, community and politics.
Australians who know your memoir Dreams from My Father can't help but experience the “shock of the familiar” as we read your remembrances of times past, of a life lived with roots in many places.
From Hawaii and Indonesia to Kansas and Kenya, from Boston to Chicago to Washington.
We know that in this respect, you embody the American dream of opportunity.
But Australians also recognise, in your wider reflections on identity and place, the value of a world view that looks outwards rather than inwards.
Like ours, a state of mind that is inclusive, rather than exclusive, that sees diversity not as a weakness but as a great strength.
Like ours, an acceptance of responsibility in the world, of an obligation to all, that goes with maturity as a people and a nation.
That is your story, that is our story, that is part of what our two people hold in common.
Part of our common cause for the common good.
Mr President
We have been allies for sixty years.
Comrades in arms for decades before then.
And friends for longer still.
In what is a year of anniversaries, we share a long history but we know it is a history defined, more than anything else, by our shared, restless, forward questing.
Defined always, then and now, by the things we do together to honour our national pledges, to be young and free, to be home to the brave.
Mr President  -  welcome to Australia.



President Obama
Mr Harry Jenkins, Speaker of the House of Representatives
Senator the Honourable John Hogg, President of the Senate
The Honourable Tony Abbott, Leader of the Opposition
Honourable Members of the Australian Parliament
Distinguished guests
Mr President.
In March this year I was the fourth Australian Prime Minister to speak in your people's representative house.
Like Prime Ministers Menzies, Hawke and Howard, each of us received as an ally and a friend.
Today, you are the fourth American President to speak here.
Like each of your predecessors, you come here as a friend and ally as well.
Mr President, welcome to our Parliament.
You meet us as your predecessors did.
A people enlivened by a spirit of confidence and resolve.
As friends, we recognise that same spirit in the nation you lead.
One you would no doubt express in those famous words-
Yes we can.
As allies, in this year of anniversaries, we recall that spirit in so much we have done together in the years we have shared.
A spirit we showed in 1941.
When a terrible Pacific war began which tested us both deeply and cost us both so much, but in which our will ultimately prevailed.
A spirit we shared in 1951.
When leaders from both our nations imagined and then brought about a new future for us in the world, as allies not just as friends.
And a spirit we felt deeply on September 11.
When we began our fight together to deny terrorism a safe haven, and to bring justice for terrorism's victims.
Justice which was delayed but which, this year, could not be denied.
Mr President
As allies, we look forward always and this is a year in which we have made plans for a future just as great.
A year in which we have drawn on the confidence and resolve we share knowing that together, we can prevail.
Confident we can secure our own nations  -  and co-operate for peace.
In Afghanistan. 
Where, together, we are seeing the mission through to transition.
In our region. 
Where the expanded co-operation we have announced will see our alliance remain a stabilising influence in a new century of regional change.
A new step agreed on during your visit, but more than a new step for our two nations, it is a renewal of our alliance itself.
Confident we can create jobs and restore global growth.
At the G20 and APEC, in our decisions to forge an ambitious Trans Pacific Partnership, in our discussions here on the prospects for trade and at the East Asian Summit this weekend.
Where we will work together to keep the doors of trade open so the whole of the world's economy grows, creating jobs for all the world's people.
Confident we can secure clean energy and combat climate change too.
Working together, taking our part in global action.
Encouraging tariff cuts on environmental goods, promoting energy efficiency and sharing plans for low-emissions technologies.
And each of us driving change at home.
Mr President
The resolve and confidence of our two nations has always served a high purpose.
Since its founding in 1951, ours has been an Alliance for a secure future.
But it has always been more.
Our alliance was anticipated a decade earlier  -  in the judgements of an Australian Prime Minister and the resolve of an American President.
And the partnership between us is still deeply imprinted with the personal character and public ideals of those two great men.
For it has never been simply a treaty to defend our interests or protect our territory.
It was then, and is now, a friendship dedicated to the values we share in the life of the world.
Mr President
In Perth there is a Library dedicated to the memory of my great predecessor, John Curtin.
Our great wartime leader, the man who looked to America free of any pangs.
There you find a book given to him during his visit to the United States in 1944.
Prime Minister Curtin and President Roosevelt met as leaders of two great nations at war.
But as two great leaders, they looked ahead to the peace.                                                     
And Curtin returned to his country with much more than a plan for security.
He brought back  -  and kept as a treasure  -  an illustrated book edition dedicated to President Roosevelt's “four essential human freedoms” as well.
Freedom of speech, freedom to worship, freedom from want and freedom from fear.
Freedoms for which so many diggers and GIs died.
Freedoms for which Curtin and Roosevelt were each still working on their own final day.
And in our work together in the world now  -  we are true to that great charter still.
To peace and security. 
For jobs and growth. 
With a clean environment and clean energy.
Mr President.
We welcome you here as you come as an ally, a partner and friend.
Mr President welcome to our Parliament. 



Thank you very much.
I start by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and in the spirit of reconciliation pay my respects to elders past and present.
I'm here to introduce President Obama to you, and I know that you are going to give him a wonderfully warm Darwin, Northern Territory welcome.
We're here for three reasons.
First, President Obama said when he came to Australia that he wanted to get out beyond Canberra; he wanted to get out and about and meet some real Aussies and no better place to do it than here in Darwin, here in the Northern Territory.
President Obama, a few characteristics of these real Aussies, having spent some time last year in Afghanistan watching the AFL grand final replay with them, they love their sport even when Collingwood wins. It's always a controversial call.
They like having a drink with their mates, but when they're deployed overseas we feed them this toxic brew called Near Beer. I'm sorry about that. They love their country, they work hard - they work hard in a spirit of mateship and accepting responsibilities. So, President Obama here to some real Australians.
Second, President Obama is here to say to the serving military personnel, to the people from our Australian Defence Force and to some Americans friends as well, thank you for what you do, thank you from me as Prime Minister of Australia and from President Obama. Thank you for everything that you do in our own nation, in times of natural disaster. Thank you for the hard work and training you do in this place. Thank you for the way that you hold up the standards of our country and hold our flag high, whether it's in East Timor, or the Solomon Islands, or the hard fight in Afghanistan, you are there doing what we need you to do.
You are there because you want to serve and we are so tremendously proud of you, and particularly tremendously proud of those of you who have been to Afghanistan and who are looking to go back; those who know that that fight has given us days of sorrow, as well as days of reward, days of progress; those of you who have shown fortitude and bravery, no matter how tough it's got.
Thank you for your determination, and we share your determination to see the mission through.
And last, but by no means least, President Obama is here because he and I have been working to strengthen the great alliance between our two countries, working to make sure that the alliance lives anew in this place, in the Northern Territory, by bringing 250 Marines here initially, going to 2,500 Marines over a staged process, so that shoulder-to-shoulder with our American friends we can train with them, we can be with them to meet the contingencies in our region.
We are conscious that when we talk about the American-Australian alliance, when we talk about ANZUS, really we're talking about you, because you are the ones who do the heavy lifting, you are the ones that make this alliance live, day in day out, through the work that you do.
We admire your sense of duty, we admire your courage, we admire your experience, we admire the fact that you face down adversity.
And the President of the United States of America is here to tell you that himself  -  ladies and gentlemen, one and all, President Obama.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today proposed a new national day of observance on 19 February to commemorate the bombing attacks on Darwin and other northern Australian towns during the Second World War.
Next year marks the 70th anniversary of the surprise Japanese attack, when on 19 February 1942, the Second World War reached Australia's shores.
In two air raids, 242 attack aircraft and bombers carried out a pattern bombing of Darwin Harbour and surrounding areas.
It was the start of a sustained bombing campaign by the Japanese across Australia's north which lasted almost two years and killed hundreds of Australians and Allies.
More than 240 people alone died during the first attacks on Darwin including civilians, post office workers and service personnel from Australia and the United States.
The Prime Minister announced that the Government intends to recommend to the Governor-General that 19 February be proclaimed as ‘Bombing of Darwin Day' to ensure the attacks across Australia's north are appropriately remembered and commemorated every year.
The anniversary of the first attack on Darwin can then join Anzac Day and Remembrance Day as a date Australians pause to remember those who served and sacrificed their lives in defence of this country.
Darwinitself endured 64 bombing raids by the Japanese over 18 months destroying numerous civic and military buildings, boats and aircraft.
Many other towns across Australia's north were also bombed by the Japanese including Broome where as many as 100 people lost their lives, Wyndham, Katherine, Townsville and Cairns.
Despite the significance of the Second World War coming to our shores, the bombings were downplayed at the time.
A day of remembrance on 19 February will ensure the hundreds of lives lost in those dark months of the Second World War are never forgotten, whether in Darwin, or any of the other communities hit across Australia's north.
The proposal to formally recognise the impact of the bombing raids has been strongly supported by Northern Territory Senator Trish Crossin, the Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Labor Member for Lingiari Warren Snowdon, and the Northern Territory Government.
The proposal will complement other preparations being made to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the Bombing of Darwin next year.
The Gillard Labor Government has committed more than $330,000 to support the commemorations for the 70thanniversary of the bombing of Darwin.
The Federal Government funding will also work in partnership with the Northern Territory Government to establish the Defence of Darwin Museum to ensure those traumatic 18 months and the stories of those who served and died are never forgotten. 


It is my great pleasure to be here among the ASEAN family  - and indeed Australia was proud to become ASEAN's very first dialogue partner back in 1974.
It is my great pleasure to be here in Bali  -  this beautiful island where the very first ASEAN Summit was held 35 years ago.
It is my great pleasure to be here in Indonesia  -  a great strategic partner and friend of Australia over many decades.
The relationship between Australia and Indonesia has never been more important for our two countries.
And I want to thank and pay tribute to President Yudhoyono for his efforts in building the friendship that our two nations enjoy.
I am looking forward to participating on Sunday in what will be the first of annual summit meetings between Australia and Indonesia, reflecting our desire to work ever more closely and cooperatively together.
Friends, I recently turned 50 and I was thinking about the Asia I learned about as a young girl back in the 1960s.
It was a region of poverty, colonialism, ideology and war.
The reality, a few short decades later, couldn't be more different - for Asia, and for Australia's place in it.
The region is growing in prosperity, peaceful and strong.
And for my nation, these have been remarkable years of learning and engagement.
Years in which we came  -  not always easily  -  to see our place in Asia as a source of strength.
To celebrate the “advantage of adjacency” to our own neighbourhood rather than fear the “tyranny of distance” from our Northern Hemisphere origins.
It is true we come from many cultures; many different histories; many political traditions.
But our objective is the same: to strengthen and deepen our economic, political and security cooperation across the Asian region.
And to do so in what that very first ASEAN Summit calledthe spirit of “mutual respect and mutual benefit”.
Today we gather on the eve of another summit.
A defining moment for our region as the United States and Russia join the East Asia Summit for the first time in its short history.
President Obama has just visited Australia and I know he is looking forward to being the first US President to attend the East Asia Summit.
It is defining because it acknowledges the global significance of our region.
Because it acknowledges the shift in economic power to the East is not a temporary phase but a long-term development of lasting significance to the whole global community.
This is truly the ‘Asian Century'.
And by Asia, we don't just mean China and India  -  but the whole of Asia.
This is a favoured region at the best time in its history.
Economic growth the fastest in the world.
Economic growth lifting millions of people out of poverty.
For all who exercise leadership in the region, this is cause for the greatest satisfaction.
To see the living standards of your people improve and to see your nations rise in the esteem of the world.
This is the region where the economic history of the 21st century will be written.
By 2020, it is estimated that 1.2 billion people will join the middle classes of Asia.
We are witnessing enormous economic and human transformation and that creates enormous opportunity.
That shift is already well underway, as any visitor to the streets of Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur or Bangkok will attest.
We are witnessing the growth of financial and legal services.
Higher education.
Technology and innovation.
It is a story of dynamism and sophistication.
But we also know that our emerging success story is not immune from the events of the wider world.
I am sure that at the East Asia Summit, leaders will want to talk about the Eurozone crisis and how it is affecting the region's prospects.
The Global Financial Crisis is not over.
Instead it has presented as a crisis in two parts.
The first phase was largely a crisis of liquidity in the private sector, triggered by the collapse of the sub-prime mortgage market in the US.
The second and current phase is a crisis largely surrounding sovereign entities and their capacity to meet their debt obligations. 
We are seeing more turbulence on global markets.
The need to act has become more urgent, not less, since the G20 in France. 
So we look to Europe for a swift and decisive response to problems of high debt and low growth facing the Eurozone.
New political leadership in Italy and Greece offers the Eurozone a further opportunity for the response the world needs to see. 
We urge them to seize this opportunity and implement the October 27 package in full.
Beyond resolving the Eurozone crisis, the most immediate challenge to the health of the global economy is securing  continued global growth.
That will require economies committing to macroeconomic policies to support recovery and this includes action from both the developed economies and the major emerging economies of the world.
Developed economies need to take steps to bolster growth in the short-term, whilst putting their public finances on a sustainable footing over the longer-term.
Emerging surplus economies need to rebalance their economies away from external demand and towards domestically-driven consumption, and allow for a greater role of market forces in setting the value of their currencies.
And all economies need to undertake necessary structural reforms to boost productivity and growth.
One of the harsh lessons of the Global Financial Crisis has been that economic problems no longer begin and end at national borders.
This was a lesson Asia itself learned through the Asian Financial Crisis of the late 1990s.
At the G20, leaders acknowledged the International Monetary Fund's central role as a key line of defence in the global economy and leaders affirmed their strong commitment to supporting the Fund to carry out its systemic responsibilities.
Friends, as global economic and strategic weight shifts from west to east, global institutional frameworks reflect this in turn.
At the 24th ASEAN-Australia forum in September in Canberra, Australia reaffirmed its support of ASEAN's mission to champion regional integration.
Expanding markets.
Eliminating barriers to trade.
Australia recognises this through a growing body of cooperative work with ASEAN across a broad spectrum of areas including: business and people-to-people links; education and health; climate change; and transnational crime, including drug trafficking and people smuggling.
With Indonesia, China, Japan, Korea, India and Australia counted among its members, Asia takes its rightful place at the G20.
And now, with Russia and the United States onboard, nearly half of the G20 sits at the EAS table.
Just as ASEAN has grown in stature and purpose since 1967, new institutions have emerged to meet the needs and challenges of the 21st century.
The East Asia Summit is one such institution whose wide membership is a response to the new era that has redefined how we view our world.
Perhaps our single most important understanding is in the area of trade.
We know that closed markets are never the answer.
Nor is this a time for the faint-hearted.
As with the financial crisis which we so successfully negotiated in 1997, this is a time to be resolute and embrace the future.
A time to invest  -  as my Government is  -  in the drivers of growth: skills, infrastructure, high-speed broadband, clean energy, tax reform, better health care.
To strengthen our banking and regulatory regimes.
To optimise our exchange rate settings.
To boost transparency, enshrine the rule of law and uphold the rights of our people.
Above all, this is a time to keep breaking down barriers and opening the doors of trade.
There is a simple equation at work here: trade equals growth, equals jobs.
Benefits that accrue even through unilateral tariff reductions, as Australia's experience over the past 25 years so amply demonstrates.
Making us more competitive.
Making us more productive.
And forcing us to look beyond our own shores because nations that trade are nations at peace.
Friends, I'm very proud of the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement.
And I warmly commend Indonesia on finalising ratification this week.
This is the most comprehensive trade deal that ASEAN has negotiated.
A gold-standard regional trade agreement.
By opening up our markets to each other, we are creating a trading group with a combined population of 620 million people involving some of the fastest growing economies on earth.
Around this time last year, President Yudhoyono and I agreed our two countries should work towards a Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement.
Our Trade Ministers have used the time since to prepare the ground for detailed talks, consulting with our business communities and discussing economic cooperation designed to ensure the benefits of the agreement are widely spread.
Now we are both in a position to begin in earnest our work on the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement.
In doing so, we will emphasise the ‘P' in CEPA  -  partnership  -  ensuring our agreement delivers real benefits to everyday Indonesians and everyday Australians.
Both our governments are determined that it will not only be large corporations that benefit from this market opening  -  as important as you are.
We want to ensure the benefits of greater trade are spread throughout our communities and throughout our regions.
Indonesia's population of more than 240 million makes it the fourth most populous country on earth. 
Its economy is already one of the 20 largest in the world, having achieved impressive real average annual growth of five per cent during the last decade.
Private forecasters predict Indonesia will grow to around the fifth to eighth largest economy in the world over the next 20 years.
The strong commercial bonds we have built are set to produce large dividends for both our nations.
Friends, the same thinking informed our deliberations at APEC in Hawaii last week.
Regional leaders affirmed that Asia and the Pacific will not wait for the rest of the world to move the free trade agenda forward.
The Trans Pacific Partnership stands to become a free trade zone bigger than the European Union.
But only if we avoid becoming mired in the quibbling and controversy that has beset Doha.
Now it's time for TPP supporters to make this Agreement a reality, translating the consensus and goodwill of last week into a concrete deal next year.
And, of course, our job doesn't end there.
We need to push for further structural reform.
Reform that will promote confidence and allow business to create jobs and drive productivity throughout the region and across the globe.
As governments and as businesses we must not respond to uncertainty by closing markets or turning away from reform.
Governments need to focus on trade and give business the conditions that encourage growth, including through entrepreneurship and innovation.
The driving force behind government measures is the desire to build resilient economies because it is resilience that provides the stable environment which promotes open trade and investment.
But sustainable economic growth is only possible where there is certainty, and the EAS provides a collaborative framework for regional stability and growth.
The key to growth in the region and the resultant jobs is economic openness.
The member nations of the EAS will use our position in the G20 to deal with structural imbalances.
At APEC to open the region as a whole.
And through a comprehensive agenda of Free Trade Agreements to deepen country-to-country economic ties.
We need effective regionalism through institutions with the right membership and mandate to address the full range of security, political and economic issues facing the region.
The EAS has made a strong start to what I believe will be a great history of cooperation between nations who have not always been friends.
We have learned from our history and moved on from it.
We understand the need for cooperation and convergence.
And we are beginning to see just what a more united Asia can mean for our region and for the world.
This is moment of opportunity and a time of hope.
Let's master its challenges and seize its opportunities.
In the ASEAN spirit.
As partners  -  as neighbours  -  as friends.
Together.



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today announced that Australian Scientists will work with Indonesia and Vietnam to address challenges of air and water quality and respond to climate change, population growth and rising energy demands in some of the most densely populated cities in the world.
Australia will host two seminars exploring how the cities of East Asia can become more sustainable and adapt to climate change.
Australian scientists working on the ground in Vietnam and Indonesia with local partners will share their expertise with the fastest growing region in the world which is home to some of its biggest and most vulnerable cities.
Funded under the Australian aid program this is the first project led and funded by Australia in the East Asia Summit Environment stream.
The seminars will build on work already underway by CSIRO and AusAID's Research for Development Alliance and the Climate Adaptation through Sustainable Urban Development Project.  The seminars will take place in Makassar, Indonesia and Can Tho, Vietnam in 2012. They will be organised in conjunction with localresearch partners - the University of Can Tho, Vietnam and the University of Hasanuddin, Indonesia.
These collaborative urban case studies focus on how integrated urban water management systems put sustainable urban development principles into practice. The lessons being learnt in these two rapidly developing cities will be shared with other EAS member nations.
The seminars will also play an important role in advancing regional cooperation. Australia can share our experience as we develop and strengthen networks throughout East Asia. 



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, speaking in Bali at the East Asia Summit, today outlined the practical steps Australia will take to assist South-East Asian countries to address the challenges of climate change.
These will include helping some South East Asian countries phase out inefficient incandescent light bulbs, improve coastal ecosystems and build the capacity of communities to respond to climate change in the region.
As part of the package Australia will provide up to $15 million to help Vietnam adapt to unavoidable impacts of damaging climate change including rising sea levels and changing rainfall patterns.
Australia will work with the German Government to assist Vietnam to manage and protect its coastal ecosystems in the Mekong Delta including through improved dyke management and the restoration of mangroves. This work will also assist local communities to respond and recover from natural disasters and develop a better understanding of the likely impact to their community they might experience as a result of climate change. 
A further $15 millionwill support non-government organisations working with communities in South East Asia, focusing on Vietnam, to address climate change. The funding will help communities to manage the unavoidable impacts of climate change and help them reduce or avoid greenhouse gas emissions.
Countries in South East Asia will also benefit from a $3 million capacity building program to improve their ability to accurately report and measure their national greenhouse gas emissions. 
Australia will also promote phasing out inefficient incandescent lighting and adopting standards for efficient lighting across the region in a $500,000 package.
In addition countries in the region such as Indonesia and the Philippines will receive assistance to support their uptake of clean technology through Australia's contributions to the Clean Technology Fund. 
Australia also provides assistance for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) for several EAS countries  -  bilaterally to Indonesia and via multilateral contributions to Cambodia, Lao PDR and Vietnam. 
Since 2009, Australia has committed more than $5 million towards the Coral Triangle Initiative. This supports protection of livelihoods and food security for people dependent on coastal ecosystems which are susceptible to environmental degradation and climate change impacts. Countries include Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, East Timor, Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands.
Ms Gillard is in Bali, Indonesia to attend the East Asia Summit and to meet with Indonesian President Yudhoyono in the first annual leaders' summit.  



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today welcomed the support of East Asia Summit leaders for a joint Indonesia-Australia initiative to help improve regional responses to natural disasters.
The initiative will ensure EAS countries are ready to make a coordinated response to natural disasters.
Ms Gillard said it would help improve information sharing between countries, overcome bottlenecks in providing assistance and allow EAS countries to work more effectively together in disaster responses meaning assistance will get to people affected by natural disasters more quickly.
Australia will also prove $1 million to support a disaster coordination secretariat based in the ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance Centre in Jakarta which will a play key role in implementing the initiative.
The centre will be able to deploy rapid assessment teams to natural disasters to quickly determine what assistance is needed and coordinate the response across EAS countries.
Australia will also provide $8 million to the World Food Programme to help improve emergency preparedness in the region. The funding will increase the pre-positioning of emergency food supplies and help civilian organizations the military work together in emergency operations.
Natural disasters have exacted a heavy toll on EAS member countries, including the earthquake and tsunami in Japan and the earthquake in Christchurch, New Zealand this year. EAS members accounted for eight of the world's ten deadliest disasters in 2009 and five of the ten in 2010.
The initiative builds the Prime Minister's commitment at last year's EAS to provide $10 million for a package of practical activities to help strengthen East Asia regional disaster management.
Australian already does significant disaster coordination across the region including working with national broadcasters to develop disaster response plans and improving risk modeling for cyclones, tsunamis and earthquakes.  
In the last financial year, the Australian aid program has provided more than $63 million on emergency prevention and preparedness activities in 32 developing countries.  



The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, today announced a $24 million commitment to assist Australia's Asian neighbours combat infectious diseases in people and animals across our region with new laboratories, plans to prepare for pandemics and better veterinary services.
Australia will work with the World Health Organization and the World Organisation for Animal Health to combat emerging infectious diseases and pandemics, helping our neighbours in the Asia-Pacific region to better protect themselves and stop the spread of disease throughout the region.
Ms Gillard, speaking at the East Asia Summit in Bali, Indonesia, said while there have been significant improvements in our ability to detect and respond to emerging infectious diseases, more needs to be done.
The $24 million, four-year commitment includes:
 * 	$12 million to the World Health Organization to assist countries in the Asia Pacific to build better laboratories, develop national pandemic preparedness plans and implement innovative surveillance systems
 * 	$12.7 million to the World Organisation for Animal Healthto strengthen veterinary services and to better manage animal-borne diseases in our region.
These initiatives are helping to deliver on Australia's announcement at last year's summit to commit $32 million between 2010 and 2014 to combat emerging infectious diseases and pandemics in our region. 
Australia plays a leading role in addressing emerging disease threats in our region. We have provided more than $200 million since 2003 to strengthen prevention, detection and response capabilities to threats such as H5N1 avian influenza and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS).
Australia has assisted partners to develop national pandemic preparedness plan and strengthen detection, prevention and control systems, resulting in a significant improvement to countries' ability to respond to pandemics across the region.



PM: Thank you very much. This morning I had the opportunity to visit the memorial to the Bali bombings and to lay a wreath on behalf of Australians. It was a moving experience. Australians, I believe, will always remember where they were when they heard the news of the first Bali bombing and the second Bali bombing. The first Bali bombing cost us 88 Australian lives and so many others lost their life on that fateful night.
To see their names on the board in front of you as I laid the wreath was a moving experience. I want to thank the Indonesian people and Indonesian authorities who worked with us so closely at the time and the Governor of Bali was with me today and played a pivotal role as the police officer in charge of the investigation of the Bali bombing.
I also want to thank Indonesia for everything we've done since, collaborating and cooperating on counter-terrorism and much progress has been made, but it was a very moving moment.
On issues that do tug at your heart strings I do also want to take this opportunity to offer my condolences to the families who have lost loved ones in this dreadful fire in a nursing home. To imagine frail, elderly people caught up in a fire like that at risk of being engulfed by flames, it is truly horrifying. My condolences do go to the families who have lost loved ones and to those who's loved ones are now in hospital and who are with them, awaiting news of their condition.
I do want to issue some words of thanks too to the staff of the nursing home who played a role in the rescue efforts and to our remarkable fire fighters and police who always do the most amazing things in the most difficult of circumstances. But for many Aussie families this is very, very dark day.
I'm here in Bali for what is an appropriate end to a season of international summits; the G20, then APEC then the East Asia Summit here. The G20 is a pivotal forum for discussions of the global economy. APEC is a pivotal forum for discussions about deepening engagement in our region, regional integration of our economic agendas, freer trade, greater ability to work with each other and to see each other's goods and services work in what we hope will ultimately become a seamless regional market. And I'm here today for a meeting of the East Asia Summit.
This is an historic meeting, it will be the first time the United States and Russia are represented around this table. That means that the East Asia Summit is truly the summit for the Asian century; a meeting of the right members with the right mandate to discuss political, strategic, security questions and economic questions and I'm looking forward to the discussions at the East Asia Summit today.
Amongst those discussion which will be about deepening cooperation in our region, the purpose of the East Asia Summit being to ensure that we deepen cooperation and build norms across our region as our region grows and rises. There will be a number of topics discussed today and I particularly want to go to one and that is the question of disaster management.
Australians know what it's like to face natural disaster, so too do the people of Indonesia and we remember such devastating natural disasters in this place including the Boxing Day tsunami. For us as Australians reflecting back on the year that's been where we saw the Queensland floods and then wide scale flooding in other parts of the country, the tropical cyclone, then we watched the devastation in Christchurch and then we watched the true horrors of the earthquake and tsunami in Japan.
This has been a time of natural disasters and as Prime Minister during those natural disasters I well remember receiving the calls from leaders in our region full of offers of help. The Kiwis came to assist us with the Queensland floods. The Singaporeans were very quickly offering their helicopters which were stationed in Australia. Indonesia offered and sent engineers to assist us. We fielded search and rescue teams both into New Zealand and into Japan. We fielded Aussie police officers into New Zealand as well. This is the kind of cooperation and assistance which really helps nations when they are most in need.
Today I will take to the East Asia Summit, alongside President Yudhoyono, a plan for us to better work in our region on disaster management. The key features of that plan are transparency about what each of our nations can do. So we've got a full understanding of the capabilities available at our disposal across our region if our nations face the worst of circumstances.
Then working on the bottlenecks to rapid deployment, the things that at the moment might slow us responding to someone else's need or someone in our region responding to Australia's need. And also moving to the stage of having exercises and tests so we know if the call comes we can see regional assistance deployed rapidly to the countries most in need.
To give you some statistics about our region, we are a region that has faced devastating natural disasters in the past. Indeed if you look at the year 2010, five of the ten deadliest natural disasters in the world that year happened in our region. If you look at the world at the year  2009, eight of the world's ten deadliest disasters happened in our region. So we are a region that knows what it's like to suffer, we are a region that knows what it is like to pull together and respond. This disaster management plan is about ensuring we can better respond when our friends are in need or when we are in need across our region.
In addition, I anticipate that at the East Asia Summit today we will talk about circumstances in the global economy including the continuing concerns about the Eurozone crisis. I believe we will focus on trade and that the East Asia Summit will lend its voice to the message that has been consistent now across CHOGM, the G20 and APEC, and that is that we cannot turn our faces back to the past, move back to the days of closed markets, that this is a time to continue to work together to see freer and freer trade and this is a time too to take a fresh approach to getting movement in global trade talks. The DOHA round has become stuck. We have been talking as leaders across these summits about getting talks moving again and I believe the East Asia Summit will also lend its voice to an innovative new approach to move trade talks forward.
I believe we will also talk about the issue of climate change, it was a feature of the dinner last night in the cultural performance, a focus on climate change and the work that we can do together. I believe in these discussions today we will be looking at areas such as mitigation, adaption and clean energy. And given the rapid and growing urbanisation across Asia, we, Australia, will also be highlighting the importance of building environmentally sustainable cities and Australia will host seminars on sustainable cities and climate change adaptation in Indonesia and Vietnam in 2012. A real focus on doing what we need to to make sure that cities are sustainable including questions like integrated urban water management systems and sustainable urban design.
At this meeting we will also have the opportunity to talk about security questions including maritime security, non-proliferation in our region, important security questions for us all.
And then tomorrow I will look forward to the first Australia-Indonesia leader's meeting, the first of it's type to be held. This the first leaders level summit since these new bilateral arrangements were agreed when President Yudhoyono visited Australia in March 2010 and had the opportunity then to address our Parliament. And having this first leaders level summit is a sign of the growing strategic partnership between our two countries.
So I'm looking forward to the discussions today. Certainly Australia's voice will be heard on disaster management and the plan we've worked on with Indonesia, it's a step forward for our region as well as on the other questions I've raised with you.
I'm happy to take questions. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you expecting any leaders to raise concerns with you about America's increasing military presence in Australia? Can you understand why China might be upset and do you expect that decision will play into these discussions about maritime security focussing on the South China Sea?
PM: Well there are a million premises in those questions so let me unpack them. This is a leaders level summit where leaders can raise whatever they want to, that's it's beauty, that it's got the right membership and right mandate, the right people around the table able to raise any issue that they wish to, so leaders can raise whatever they want today.
On our arrangement with the United States that President Obama and I announced in Australia, we are long term allies with the United States. We have been marking our 60th anniversary of ANZUS. It is well known to everyone in our region that we are long time allies of the United States and President Obama and I announced the next step forward in cooperation in our alliance. This is regular deployments into the Northern Territory for training purposes starting with 250 marines moving in staged way to 2,500 marines who will be in Australia for around six months at a time, training and exercising in the Northern Territory. As I made very clear in Australia, this is in our national interest, it gives our ADF the ability to train with the American Marines.
As I also made clear in Australia, having America, the United States strongly engaged in our region is a force for stability and is supported by Australia. On the reaction of China, having seen the official comments from China, China recognises that we are a long term ally of the United States and that this is part of our bilateral relationship. China also recognises that engagement with the United States is good for China, good for the United States and good for this region and of course we've got our strong bilateral relationship with China; strong economic partnership but a bilateral relationship that comprehends more than that.
So it is possible and we will continue to have our alliance with the United States and our friendship with China. I believe that is what will be on display here and beyond, that we will be working with both the United States and China. As I said in Australia, it is possible for us to have an ally in Washington and a friend in Beijing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you believe our region is safer now from the sort of terrorist attack we saw nine years ago here?
PM: I believe we've taken some very big steps forward in counter-terrorism. Now in terms of defeating and addressing terrorism, you've got to be eternally vigilant, you can never rule the line and say the job is done, now counter-terrorism is where it needs to be. Every day, every week, every month, every year we keep reviewing and renewing and refreshing to make sure that our counter-terrorism is up to the mark. But the collaboration we've had particularly here in Indonesia has been tremendously strong and I believe great progress has been made.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, back on China, just bouncing off your initial response, it sounds like it's very different to Kevin Rudd who told the 7.30 Report that there was indeed some consternation in Beijing about this decision-
PM: I doubt if you display the words there's any difference at all. We've seen the official response from the Chinese Government. We've also seen some commentary in Chinese newspapers. I am making the common sense point and the Foreign Minister will make exactly the same common sense point and we would have made it several months ago and we'll be making it for the years ahead: this is a question for us, Australia, working alongside the United States but also continuing to deepen our partnership with China. We are strongly engaged with China, we have a strong economic partnership, we have growing links in other areas, strong people to people links, education links, we work on all of those links, we'll be shortly  -  in the next year celebrating the 40th anniversary of diplomatic relations with China and across that time we've seen our relationship strengthen and grow.
JOURNALIST: Will you be talking to Premier Wen about this issue either in a bilateral or at the leaders forum and what will you be telling him?
PM: I will be hoping to have a discussion with Premier Wen, a bilateral discussion, but of course arrangements are made as we go at these summits. I would say to Premier Wen what I've said to you now about Australia's alliance with the United States and how we have, in Australia, made an announcement with President Obama about the rotation of deployment of marines into the Northern Territory for the purpose of exercising, that having the US engaged in our region is a force for stability, that having those marines training alongside the ADF in Australia enables us to have a strengthened capacity to respond to regional contingencies including things like natural disasters when we often rely on our people in uniform to be the ones who are there first on the ground lending a helping hand.
JOURNALIST: So essentially that it's not a threat to China?
PM: Certainly not, absolutely not.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on the same topic, Barack Obama said yesterday that he and the Indonesian President have agreed to increase US support for Indonesian military. Do you think that China could see that as a threat, as being another military build up or support from the US in China's backyard?
PM: I think everybody needs to just take a breath and get a sense of perspective. We have direct relationships military to military with China. Across our region Australia does military to military links and military to military exercises. To give you one example I've referred to today, the reason that Singapore contacted me during the summer of natural disasters and said can we help you with helicopters is because they're in Australia. Singapore military helicopters are there in Australia and they're there for the purposes of exercising and training. So there is a huge network here of collaboration and joint exercising and work between our  military and other militaries in our region. It's therefore entirely unsurprising that the US would be here in Indonesia, talking to Indonesia about military to military cooperation as well. This is business as usual, this is what we do.
JOURNALIST: Tomorrow you'll talk to President Yudhoyono. There are a number of issues that have been difficult in that relationship over the past six months: juveniles in Australian detention, a juvenile in Indonesian detention, the cattle issue. How difficult would you expect that conversation to be and what do you expect potential sticking points will be?
PM: We have a very strong friendship and partnership with Indonesia and so when I meet with President Yudhoyono tomorrow in this first leader's level summit under our new agreement to have these summits annually, I believe we'll talk about the full range of our relationship and the strength of our relationship and building on it for the future.
Yes, there have been some issues that we've needed to work through during the past 12 months. On the live cattle question, the trade has resume, there's more than 120,000 head of cattle moved into Indonesia since the trade was resumed.
On the question of the Bali Boy, you know, clearly we are grateful to Indonesian authorities for the steps that they have taken to assist with the welfare of this boy including ensuring that he is held by himself, not with other people and that his parents have ongoing and ready access to him. That matter is due to return to court on 25 November so it's not in the interests of this young boy for me to make any commentary about the legal case itself and I won't.
So these issues, yes we've worked through them during the course of the last 12 months and clearly in relation to the Bali Boy and the number of other Australians here in Bali, we continue to provide consular support and from time to time to raise these matters with Indonesian authorities. But overall the relationship is a strong one and we are aiming to keep building on that strength for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister will you be raising the issue of Papua and ongoing concerns about human rights abuses in Papua with the President and on the subject of human rights, Burma has been given the green light to be the chair of ASEAN in 2014, do you have any reservations about that? Will you be reviewing the sanctions against the regime or the individuals in the regime that are currently facing sanctions?
PM: If I can go to the question of Burma first. I did in the margins of last night's leaders' dinner have the opportunity to speak to the representative of Burma who is here, the President, President Thein Sein, and I made the point to him that Australia welcomes the progress that has been made in Burma. The fact that Secretary of State Clinton is visiting Burma is a recognition that some progress has been made and indeed our Foreign Minister, Foreign Minister Rudd has already visited Burma in recognition of the progress that has been made but there is a lot more to do, a lot more to do in Burma in releasing political prisoners, in ensuring there is proper democratic structures and that there is proper responses for human rights and I made that point directly to the President. But the progress that has been made to date is welcome.
On Burma chairing ASEAN in 2014, that of course is a decision for ASEAN and it has been taken and as a result of it being taken that does mean that Burma will chair the East Asia Summit in 2014. What I would say about that is for the nations of the East Asia Summit, I believe it will be very important to see the continuing progress in the days between now and that hosting in 2014, very important for them to see continuing progress.
JOURNALIST: Will you review the sanctions that are currently in place?
PM: Look, we're welcoming the developments, the developments are happening rapidly. We will obviously calibrate issues about sanctions against change as it occurs but I do want to be very, very clear- there is a lot more to do in Burma. We are welcoming of the steps so far, I don't think it's an overstatement to say that this is the best progress we've seen in 20 years but they're at the start of this journey, welcome progress, but a lot more to do.
On the question of Papua, I've raised that with the President of Indonesia last time I met with him, we need to be very clear here, we recognise Indonesia's territorial sovereignty but we welcome the steps that Indonesia and particularly President Yudhoyono has taken to look towards greater self management in the area. There is a need to continue to address human rights questions in the area and President Yudhoyono has been very clear about his intentions that any questions about human rights abuses are investigated. So we very much welcome the progress that Indonesia is making in that area.
JOURNALIST: So returning to the issue of the 2014 summit, is there a possibility that Australia might boycott that summit if progress in human rights and political rights are seen to be not, is seen to be  -  I'm searching for the word-
PM: We've got a collaborative spirit amongst the journalists and that's nice to see. Any decision about attending a summit in 2014 will be taken in 2014, I think that's just a very common sense point and the bigger point that I'm making is that of course East Asia Summit nations would want to see continued progress between now and 2014.
We'll just take a question over here and then come back over.
JOURNALIST: Thank you. What will you say to President Yudhoyono in relation to Indonesia's concerns about Indonesian minors in Australian gaols?
PM: Well I think it's very important that we've got the facts on the table here. We do not have in Australian gaols Indonesians who have been found by courts to be minors. We don't. Since September 2008 we have returned to Indonesia 77 people found to be minors or believed to be minors and we always err on the side of caution here so our policy outlook is that we return Indonesia minors to Indonesia. They are not the subject of gaoling in Australia.
Having said that, I do have concerns that the amount of time that has been taken in some cases to establish people's ages has been too long. Now I absolutely accept the advice from the police that this can be a very difficult thing to establish in circumstances were age is disputed to determine someone's age in those circumstances, no papers, then with an incentive to make a claim they are a minor because they will be returned to Indonesia, that that can be a complex task for the police.
But having said that I am concerned that this has taken too long and we do want to, and we are in the process now of working through with Indonesia some arrangements which would enable us to work collaboratively with the Indonesian police so that they would assist in helping us have the information we need to make age determination and to speed the process.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on the question of uranium sales to India, will you be having any discussions with the Indian Prime Minister about this? Do you have a bilateral lined up?
PM: I spoke to the Prime Minister of India about this personally and directly when I was in Australia on the day that the decision was announced by me in Australia. I had conveyed the decision to me in writing before it was announced and I followed it up with a telephone call on the day that it was announced. In the margins of the dinner last night, the Prime Minister of India said to me in person what he had said to me on the phone during that telephone call which was that he thanked me for making this decision. He understand that we now have some Labor Party processes to come.
JOURNALIST: Why didn't you consult with Mr Rudd over that decision Prime Minister?
PM: It's a leader's decision and I made it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just back to Jo's question, what will you be saying though to President Yudhoyono because you do have Indonesians who claim to be minors who are behind bars in detention centres in Australia so that's not very different from being in gaol for a child and what are you going to say to him?
PM: Well my understanding is that there's 17 Indonesians where age is an issues in their court proceedings, my advice is 17, where age is an issues in their court proceedings. I'll certainly be saying to President Yudhoyono that we do want to work cooperatively with them. Processes are already underway so this has already been started, but I would be saying to President Yudhoyono that we do want to work cooperatively with Indonesian authorities including Indonesian police to do what we can to speed the determination of people's ages.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you know that the x-ray, sorry, the x-ray technology is hugely controversial, it was actually rejected by a Perth court as a way of determining age. Shouldn't we just drop it?
PM: Well you need a way of determining people's age. I obviously leave these operational questions to the Federal Police, they are not questions for the Prime Minister as to how police go about collecting evidence in that sense and whether or not they've got a view of the use of wrist x-rays, you'll have to direct those questions to the Commissioner of the Federal Police, that's probably for him, but I am indicating to you that I am concerned about the amount of time that has been taken and we have already started a process with Indonesian authorities to see if we can get access to the kind of information that Indonesia would have that we don't about it's nationals which may enable us to make determinations about age more easily.
Now I do think we've got to be just fair to Federal Police here, I just think intuitively we all know that this is a complicated task and if you've got a young person in front of you who claims to be a minor, making a determination about whether they are 17 or 19, you know, this is not an easy thing in the absence of  -  no papers, no documents, no identification. So that's what the police are dealing with and if we can collaborate with Indonesia to speed access to documents and evidence which may be available in Indonesia that is not available directly in Australia then that's a good thing because it will help us speed up the determination.
We'll go here and come here, we'll take two and then we'll call it a day. I do have some big things to do today. Yes.
JOURNALIST: It's a regional question. How important has Indonesia's leadership been in the past year in the region and is Australia committed to supporting it?
PM: President Yudhoyono is a great friend of Australia and under his leadership of Indonesia we have seen our friendship, our partnership, our bilateral relationship grow stronger and stronger. This is the Asian century, as I've said in Australia and we need to make sure as a nation that we are accessing all of the opportunities that lie before us in this, the Asian century, when we live in this growing, dynamic region of the world. That what has traditionally been thought about as the tyranny of distance now becomes the great advantage of being adjacent to the growth region of the world.
Now I'm well aware when I use that terminology  in Australia people's minds quickly run to China and India. Their minds should also run to the full region and to this place, to Indonesia, to this growing, vibrant democracy, growing in economic strength and weight, just to our north and a great partner and friend and President Yudhoyono's leadership has been pivotal to that.
Last question here.
JOURNALIST: Just speaking of minds running back to China, I just wanted to return to the question of maritime security and ask what sort of the message that you would be taking and you would expect to see the leaders taking in terms of preserving maritime access to the South China Sea?
PM: Well I'll speak on behalf of Australia, what leaders want to say at the East Asia Summit is a matter for them. Our position on the South China Sea is that we do not take a view or position on the competing claims here. We don't take a view on that, but we do have a very strong view that any competing claims should be resolved through appropriate processes in accordance with the international law of the sea and in accordance with the processes of adjudication that flow from that. We want to see across our region in all places the ability for there to be freedom of navigation for people to see these ships go through. We are a great trading nation, we get our goods to market by ship, it's in our interest to see freedom of navigation, it's in the interests of this incredible, dynamic growth region in the world to see that freedom of navigation.
Thank you very much. 



PM: I've just come from a bilateral meeting with President Yudhoyono. I took that opportunity to congratulate him on his leadership and chairing of the East Asia Summit yesterday. It was an important meeting, an historic meeting. Bringing to the table for the first time both the US and Russia. That means that the East Asia Summit is now the right place to talk about the issues of the Asian century. It has the right membership and the right mandate to be the body for the Asian century.
I congratulated President Yudhoyono on what we achieved yesterday. In particular yesterday at the East Asia Summit we saw leaders endorse the plan brought by Indonesia and Australia for better coordination of natural disaster management. Now that the plan has received the support of leaders we need to get on and ensure that it is made into a reality.
We hope that expanding the ASEAN Committee on disaster management that the expanded committee that now has all EAS members around the table will meet in the first quarter of next year. So that we can turn the plan that Australia and Indonesia took to the meeting into a reality.
And Australia will be providing $1 million to support a disaster coordination secretariat based in the ASEAN human assistance centre in Jakarta and that that is going to play a key role in implementing this initiative.
This is a very practical initiative so that we can better deal with natural disasters in our region. It's all about East Asia Summit members working together. It's all about developing confidence. It's all about the habits of cooperation as well as the very practical outcomes that can be achieved.
I was also pleased that at the East Asia Summit yesterday we had a good discussion on the security challenges in the region. It's critical if the East Asia Summit is to fulfil its full potential that members are able to canvass the broad range of security issues across the region. There was a particular focus on maritime security with many speakers highlighting the importance of resolving territorial claims in the South China Sea peacefully and in accordance with international law. Australia supported those calls. Non-proliferation and security on the Korean peninsula were also discussed.
On trade I was pleased that many leaders embraced a strong message that we cannot go back to the days of closed markets and that we need to keep moving forward to strengthen international trade and particularly to move forward global trade talks.
As I said yesterday given the growing urbanisation across Asia it is important that that development happens in environmentally sustainable cities. We want to see that urbanisation in a way which means we are better dealing with issues such as the generation of carbon pollution and the sustainability of the use of water. That was also before the meeting yesterday.
And I was pleased to announce that Australia will take additional steps to help South East Asian countries address the challenge of climate change including through protecting ecosystems on coasts in the Mekong delta.
Turning from what happened yesterday at the East Asia Summit to my bilateral discussion this morning with President Yudhoyono, Indonesia is of course one of our most important relationships.
Indonesia is a founding member of the G20, APEC and the EAS. It's the third largest democracy in the world after the United States and India, it's the fourth most populous country in the world, and the country with the largest Muslim population.
Indonesia is also our 12th largest trading partner with two-way trade, $12.9 billion in 2010 and our largest bilateral development partner. I can therefore think of no better way to finish this period of intense international engagement than here in Indonesia meeting with President Yudhoyono.
Our relationship with Indonesia has taken significant steps forward in recent years. We had this new leader level architecture, which we've seen on display today the commitment to bring leaders together as we have today.
My meeting this morning was the first such leader level summit under the agreement that was struck in March 2010.
We also have a new Australia Indonesia Dialogue Meeting. And that met in Jakarta for the first time only a few short months ago. And that is about strengthening relationships between our two people.
We agreed in our discussions today to make sure that what is called a 2 plus 2 meeting, a meeting of our defence and foreign ministers occurs during the course of next year.
And as I discussed with President Yudhoyono on my visit to Jakarta last year we agreed that we would now get on with pursuing our comprehensive economic partnership agreement. But we canvassed a full range of issues bilaterally and globally, we certainly noted that Indonesia's ratification of the Australia New Zealand ASEAN Free Trade Agreement is a great step forward and with that concluded, we can now use our time and energy on the comprehensive economic partnership agreement.
The President and I were then pleased to witness the signing of an arrangement between our federal police and the Indonesian national police to combat and prevent transnational crimes.
Building on the disaster management cooperation that was agreed at the East Asia Summit, I was also pleased to advise President Yudhoyono that Australia will gift up to four C-130 Hercules aircraft to the Indonesian air force for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.
These are aircraft that require work and repairs but Indonesia is very keen to have them to assist with disaster management. And I was able to convey to President Yudhoyono from my own personal experience during our summer of natural disasters that these aircraft are very important to the movement of people and equipment and food during times of difficulty.
Australia has also provided Indonesia with three high-speed intercept vessels to combat people smuggling activities in Indonesian waters. These vessels arrived in Indonesia on the 7th of November and will be delivered to the Maritime Police with the aim of helping them combat people smuggling.
I was also very pleased to speak to the President of Indonesia about the importance of food security and to announce the establishment of a $112 million Australia Indonesian Partnership for Rural Economic Development. The aim of this is to increase food productivity, the amount of food that is grown, improving farm management and that in turn will improve the incomes of 1 million poor farmers in Eastern Indonesia.
We had a good discussion today. I want to thank President Yudhoyono for his leadership, for the warm welcome we have received here in Bali, for the arrangements made for the East Asia Summit and his leadership at the Summit and also for our bilateral discussion today which was a very positive discussion about the strategic partnership between our two nations.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister what did you talk to President Yudhoyono about in regards to Indonesian minors in Australian detention?
PM: I indicated to President Yudhoyono what I said publicly yesterday which is I am concerned about the amount of time that it has taken to ascertain the age of some Indonesian minors. I do remind that when we establish people are minors they are returned to Indonesia. We do not seek to charge and detain minors. But there have been times when ascertaining age has taken longer than it should have and I want to step up our partnership and cooperation with Indonesia on how we can ascertain people's ages and if they are minors, get them back to Indonesia as quickly as possible.
I'll just take a follow up and then we'll move across.
JOURNALIST: What practical measures though you going to take to step up or speed up that process?
PM: We need to do some work between us and Indonesia on the best way of addressing this. Cleary if we can have the closest possible cooperation between us and Indonesia on accessing documents and the like it might help identify people's ages then that will assist. But I do have the concern that it's taken too long and I have certainly spoken to our relevant agencies, they're are aware of my view that we need to find ways of getting age determined more quickly.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: There was no mention of the live cattle ban at all during my discussions with President Yudhoyono. On the circumstances of the 14-year old boy here in Bali I did thank President Yudhoyono for the care that Indonesian authorities have shown to ensure that this young boy is kept separately, has ready access to his parents, they have shown that degree of care and concern and I thanked President Yudhoyono for that.
On the relationship with Indonesia, we have a strong, positive relationship with Indonesia. It is our nearest neighbour, it is so important to us this partnership with Indonesia. We take the view that it is a strategic partnership between our two countries. Yes, there have been issues in our relationship over the last 12 months. That happens in relationships between nations from time to time. The important thing is that we work through those questions.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: I had the opportunity to talk to President Yudhoyono about that yesterday in the margins of the East Asia Summit and I raised it in the context of the bilateral meeting today. President Yudhoyono certainly understands that this is a step forward in our defence cooperation with the United States. We are a long time ally of the United States. This step forward in our defence cooperation is not aimed at any nation in our region. And it does make available to us the ability to meet regional contingencies including natural disasters in our region.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister. The lawyers for the Bali boy were hoping that you'd ask President Yudhoyono to expedite his return to Australia. Would you consider that appropriate?
PM: This matter is returning to court as soon as the 25th of November and in those circumstances this is a very sensitive question that needs, Indonesian law clearly applies, this is a very sensitive question and I don't view it appropriate for me publicly or any other time to be speculating or talking about those legal proceedings and their potential outcomes.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: I did meet with Premier Wen of China yesterday. I raised with him the arrangements we have come to with the United States about Marines being deployed into the Northern Territory on a rotational basis and increased cooperation between our two Air Forces. So I raised it with him. Our meeting was a cordial one, a constructive one, we were be looking into the future. It was a forward-looking meeting. On the attitude of the Chinese government on these questions, I think it's best taken from the official statements of the Chinese Government through its Foreign Ministry, indicating that they want to focus on peace and stability in the region and so do we.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on other Australians incarcerated in Indonesia, did you raise the issue of clemency for the likes of the Bali Nine or Schapelle Corby? And also on the delivery of these intercept vessels is that now an acceptance that there's really nothing you can do to discourage asylum seekers from making the voyage to Australia by boat and you've moved more into an intercept phase and [inaudible]
PM: I'll take your second question first. And the answer to that is no, not at all. Not in any way. We have been engaged for a considerable period of time with Indonesia on detecting and disrupting people smuggling. They have been good partners working alongside us to combat this transnational crime. So making the boats available is part of that ongoing relationship. It should not be read as a response to the legislation before the Parliament relating to offshore processing. It's not a response to that. It should not be read in that context. It should be read in the context of our ongoing cooperation and collaboration with Indonesia on transnational crime including people smuggling.
On the first question you asked me, I did raise with President Yudhoyono Schapelle Corby's case. Schapelle Corby has a clemency appeal before the President. I indicated to the President that Australia strongly supports Ms Corby's appeal for clemency. I also raised with him the cases of Mr Chan and Mr Sukumaran who have been sentenced to the death penalty in Indonesia. I indicated to him that if they file clemency appeals, and they have not yet done so, but if they file clemency appeals, then Australia will strongly support those appeals for clemency as well.
JOURNALIST: There was talk of a prisoner transfer or swap arrangement being agreed to some years back. Is there any progress on that?
PM: Last time I met with President Yudhoyono we talked of an international prisoner transfer agreement which would enable the movement of each other's nationals back to jails in our nations. That agreement is still being worked on at officials' level.
We'll go here and then we'll come across.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: The President certainly listened to my words and gave me a hearing on those matters.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Look, I'll have plenty of time. Plenty of time to deal with matters associated with ALP National Conference when I'm back home. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you talk about enhancing people to people links in the communiqué but of course there's a travel advisory that urges Australians to reconsider their need for travel. Did the President mention the travel advisories [inaudible]?
PM: No he did not. Our travel advsories are looked at every three months as a matter of assessment. Obviously they are changed very quickly if something happens that requires immediate change. But as a matter of routine they are looked at every three months to see if they are providing the appropriate advice to Australian travellers so the travel advisory here would continue to be assessed through that process but it wasn't raised with me by President Yudhoyono.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say you raised the US troop deployments with the Chinese Premier. What exactly did you tell him and did he raise any concerns about it?
PM: A briefing had been provided to Chinese officials before the announcement was made. That was done by our Ambassador in China. So clearly the Premier and the Chinese Government in general, officials of the Chinese government were aware of the announcement. I certainly described the announcement to Premier Wen that Australia had made this decision and we would be taking these steps forward in our defence cooperation with the United States. I don't want to canvass in detail matters said in a bilateral meeting. But the attitude of the Chinese Government I think is best summarised by the statements that have come from its Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how confident are you of getting the mining tax through this week? And on that topic the Opposition says that they'll oppose it but might support some amendments that lessen the impact on mining companies. What do you think about that approach?
PM: Look, I've got plenty of time to deal with that when we're back home as well. But clearly the Minerals Resource Rent Tax will be a big topic of debate in our Parliament this week. But it's an incredibly simple proposition: in this, the Asian century, when we are seeing such strong demands for our resources, and we've really got that section of our economy absolutely turbo charged, that it is appropriate for that section of the economy to pay some more tax and for us to use that tax to spread and balance growth across our economy and to increase our pool of national savings. Now I do understand that the Opposition takes a different view and wants to take benefits off people and give them to big mining companies. That's not my way and that's not the Labor way.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the summit season is over. You're returning home. Do you think you'll scale the heights at the end of the year by pulling off this mining tax?
PM: Paul, that's an elegantly phrased way of re-asking that question behind you. I've got to give you full marks. Clearly, whilst I have been here attending the East Asia Summit and in the bilateral with President Yudhoyono, I have not been in dialogue with people back home on the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. But my view is very simply this: for any Parliamentarian who thinks that in this age of high resource prices where we are taking out the mineral wealth from our grounds and selling it for very high prices and seeing very high profitability in mining, for any Member of Parliament who thinks it's right to use some of that profit to support other businesses, including small businesses, and to put more money into people's superannuation, then that says vote yes.
Thank you very much. 



Leaders met for the inaugural Indonesia-Australia Annual Leaders' Meeting in Bali on 20 November 2011.  The meeting marked an historic new phase in the relationship, based on a common interest in each other's progress, prosperity and security.  We reaffirmed our commitment to a genuine comprehensive strategic partnership  -  working with shared purpose bilaterally, regionally and globally.  Our shared values of democracy, openness, mutual respect and tolerance underpin a new era of opportunity in the relationship.
The Annual Leaders' meeting is the key mechanism for strengthening the partnership at the leaders' level, as well as providing strategic direction to respond to contemporary regional and global challenges.  We underlined the importance of holding regular joint meetings of Foreign and Defence Ministers, committing to hold an inaugural 2 + 2 meeting in the first quarter of 2012.
Australia congratulated Indonesia for its strong leadership in advancing regional security, stability and prosperity as ASEAN chair and host of the East Asia Summit (EAS) and the ASEAN Regional Forum. We jointly welcomed the inaugural participation of the United States and Russia in the EAS, agreeing on the importance of EAS members having free and frank discussions on emerging security issues.  We also welcomed the adoption of the Declaration of the East Asia Summit on the Principles for Mutually Beneficial Relations in the 6th East Asia Summit in Bali, to guide interaction between EAS members.  The South Pacific region is an area of shared interest and we are committed to jointly working there, through existing mechanisms, including the Pacific Islands Forum, on the promotion of democracy, good governance, human rights, the rule of law and capacity building.
Being neighbouring countries and fellow democracies, Indonesia and Australia have a shared interest in the promotion of democracy that also recognizes and respects the different states of democracy in the region. Indonesia looks forward and welcomes Australia's continuing support for the promotion of democracy in the region and in this regard welcomes its participation at the ministerial level at the fourth Bali Democracy Forum in Bali in December 2011.
We noted with great concern the weakening global economic prospects. We welcomed the sense of urgency from the global community to address the renewed challenges facing the global economy.  We endorsed the important steps taken by G20 leaders earlier this month to address risks to the global economy, and the resolution by APEC leaders in Honolulu to support strong, sustained and balanced growth both regionally and globally.  We supported the Cannes Action Plan for Growth and Jobs, which outlines the role all countries can play in ensuring the stability of the global economy and financial system, and in particular the need for macroeconomic policies to support recovery and strengthen the foundations for growth and jobs. We committed to remain vigilant and ready to take bold actions in coordination with other countries and the IMF.
APEC remains the pre-eminent regional economic and trade forum. We welcomed the strong outcomes from the APEC Leaders' meeting in Honolulu.  Agreement to support G20 goals on global growth was a significant step, especially the call to resist protectionism and take fresh approaches to advance the Doha round of WTO negotiations.  APEC leaders' commitment to support green growth will also help wider regional efforts on energy, the environment, and climate change.
Our cooperation on traditional and non-traditional security issues has never been stronger, underpinned by the Lombok Treaty and its Plan of Action. We reaffirmed our commitments under the Treaty, including to one another's sovereignty and territorial integrity.  Australia was pleased to announce it would provide support to a new Indonesian Armed Forces Peacekeeping centre. 
Reinforcing our comprehensive security cooperation, both leaders directed senior officials of both countries under the Security Cooperation Consultation Group to review existing cooperation, and to coordinate and set priorities under the Plan of Action of the Lombok Treaty.  Both leaders also further encouraged the finalisation of the Defense Arrangement as a basis for an enhanced defense cooperation between the two countries.
Indonesian and Australian law enforcement agencies continue to work tirelessly and successfully to combat terrorism, dismantle terrorist networks and prevent transnational crime, including through intelligence sharing, information exchange and capacity building.  We welcomed the conclusion of the Arrangement on Cooperation in Preventing and Combating Transnational Crime and committed to continue our close collaboration on legal issues, including mutual legal assistance, transfer of prisoners' arrangements, extradition, capacity building and development of legislation. The strength of the relationship in the legal sector is also evidenced by the good outcomes achieved over the past few years including the establishment of the Senior Legal Officials Consultative Group.As Co-Chairs of the Bali Process, we will continue to pursue regional solutions to people smuggling.  Australia appreciated Indonesia's support at the fourth Bali Regional Ministerial Conference for a Regional Cooperation Framework in the Asia-Pacific region.  Both leaders welcomed the operationalisation of the Framework including to explore the possibility of establishing a regional support office to assist the co-chairs. Australia further welcomed Indonesia's criminalization of people smuggling and was pleased to announce that it would provide three high speed intercept vessels to the Indonesian National Police to counter transnational crime, including people smuggling, in Indonesian waters.We underlined the importance of ensuring appropriate treatment of Indonesian crew detained in Australia suspected of being involved in people smuggling activities, especially minors.  We agreed to strengthen collaboration between our police to verify the age of people smuggling crew, ensuring that minors are returned to Indonesia as soon as possible. In this regard, we welcomed the First Indonesia-Australia Bilateral Consular Consultation held in Perth on 30 June 2011  and recognized that the bilateral consular consultation is the appropriate mechanism to address issues of common concern on consular protection for nationals of both countries.We are committed to enhancing disaster management and mitigation capabilities through the Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction. Australia thanked Indonesia for its provision of US$1 million to assist efforts to rehabilitate flood affected areas in Queensland in February this year, noting the package of support highlighted the strong friendship between the two countries.  In keeping with our tradition of assisting one another when natural disasters strike, Australia announced it will provide up to four C-130 aircraft to boost Indonesia's capacity to deliver humanitarian assistance.
We are working side by side to contribute to global responses to climate change.  We reaffirmed this partnership, including our cooperation through the International Forest Carbon Initiative to help reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries (REDD), and agreed to collaborate closely in the lead up to COP17 in Durban.  We agreed on the importance of all major emitters pledging to significant mitigation targets at Durban.Great potential exists to promote trade and investment links between our two economies  -  the two largest in the region.  We welcomed the entry into force of the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement (AANZFTA) and committed to commence negotiations on an Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement at the earliest opportunity. We agreed to encourage an increase in bilateral trade to US$15 billion by 2015.The Australia-Indonesia Development Partnership continues to deliver strong results to meet Indonesia's development needs in education, infrastructure, health and poverty alleviation. Indonesia welcomed Australia's plans to increase substantially the size of its aid program over the next four years.Food security is a growing challenge, with recent widespread flooding throughout our region devastating food crops.  We recognised the role of our aid partnership in helping Indonesia to address food security concerns and agreed to implement a new $112 million agricultural initiative to improve the livelihoods of Indonesian farmers.  We agreed to work together to enhance animal welfare outcomes and contribute to ensuring a sustainable trade for the live cattle industry. On the issue of palm oil, Indonesia encourages Australian industries to purchase and use sustainable palm oil from Indonesia.Strong and diverse links between Indonesians and Australians at all levels bring vitality and strength to our friendship.  We committed to strengthen people-to-people links, welcoming the success of the recent inaugural Indonesia-Australia Dialogue that discussed and identified possible methods to promote and enhance people-to-people contacts. The leaders encouraged that such an event be conducted on a regular basis focusing on specific issues of common concern.
Education is a key to our partnership.   We agreed to seek to increase the number of students in each other's countries and noted the importance of scholarships and awards for doing this, including the Endeavour Student Exchange Awards, the Australian Consortium for In-Country Indonesia Studies, the Darmasiswa Scholarship and the Indonesian Arts and Culture Scholarship. The successful Australia-Indonesia Building Relations through Intercultural Dialogue and Growing Engagement (BRIDGE) Project was developed to strengthen cultural understanding between both countries.  Funding announced in 2011 of $3.6 million over five years will create more than 80 new school partnerships and involve more than 3500 Australian and Indonesian teachers.
Australia is the principal destination for Indonesian students. Indonesia welcomed Australia's recent allocation of some $1 million to three pilot projects to specifically develop the skills and language proficiency of Indonesian language teachers and improve non-Indonesian language teachers' understanding and knowledge of Indonesia.  Australia is a leading provider of scholarships for Indonesian students to undertake study, research and professional development in Australia.  Australia was pleased to announce the introduction of the Indonesia Australia Knowledge Sharing pilot project to build management capacity in Indonesian university executives.   
In this historic first meeting, we recommitted to enhance our comprehensive strategic partnership across all spheres of activity.  Our shared vision and challenge is to create two countries, deeply familiar with one another and working closely for our mutual good and that of our region.  We call on all Indonesians and Australians to reach out to each other as neighbours and friends; to celebrate the differences in our cultures; to embrace the political freedoms and values we hold in common; and to realise the full potential of our joint partnership and shared future. 



The Government today moved to ensure that all future decisions about coal seam gas projects and large coal mining developments are based on the most rigorous scientific evidence available.
Coal seam gas and coal can bring huge opportunities  -  but to do so must maintain community confidence, especially in regard to impact on water.
This can only be achieved by ensuring all environmental approvals and licensing decisions are made on the basis of transparent, objective scientific evidence.
The new science-based framework being introduced by the Government will provide certainty for regional communities around coal seam gas and large coal mining developments, jobs and investment, as well as protection of water resources.
The Government has listened to community concerns, and will:
 * 	Provide $150 million to establish a new Independent Expert Scientific Committee that will provide scientific advice to governments about relevant coal seam gas and large coal mining approvals where they have significant impacts on water; oversee research on impacts on water resources from coal seam gas and large coal mining projects; and commission and fund water resource assessments for priority regions.
 * 	Establish a new National Partnership Agreement with the states through COAG, agreeing that the Commonwealth and states have to take into account the advice of the Committee in their assessment and approval decisions.
 * 	Provide $50 million in incentive payments to the states to deliver this outcome.
 * 	Mandate that the Independent Expert Scientific Committee publicly disclose its advice to ensure local communities have all the best information available to them.
These arrangements will provide all Australians with greater confidence that projects will be subject to rigorous and objective scientific assessment.
Independent assessment will help build greater trust and help build community confidence in coal seam gas and coal mining development in sensitive areas. 
Under these arrangements, the states will remain the primary regulators. The framework will apply to future licenses.
Businesses will not be required to change the way they apply for a licence  -  the framework is not designed to add extra work or increase the regulatory burden for upcoming projects.
It does mean, however, that their applications will be subject to rigorous and independent scientific assessment by the Committee before states grant an approval for a relevant activity.
This is a good outcome as it will inform better environmental regulation of coal seam gas and large coal mine developments' impacts on ground water across Australia without imposing additional Commonwealth regulation.
It leaves the administration in the hands of the states, which have the local knowledge and local relationships, while avoiding duplicated regulatory systems, with the added costs and uncertainty that brings.
Independent expert scientific advice to provide quality recommendations for the protection of underground water has formed part of federal approvals when they have been given.
But to date, this quality independent advice has been limited to the extent of environmental powers set out under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999.  
With this new Independent Expert Scientific Committee, the level of scientific rigour will be applied to consider the impact on underground water more generally.
This is an important development with Australia set to benefit from a strong coal mining and coal seam gas industry for years to come. 



Mr Speaker, In my statement to the House last year on the war in Afghanistan, I set out to paint a very honest picture of the difficulties and challenges facing our mission in that country.
I did so, confident that Australians are a realistic people.
Our people of peace, so often called to war, have always known that human conflict brings days of sorrow as well as days of progress.
And Australians well know this war is no exception.
Australians well understand that days of progress and days of sorrow still lie ahead.
Of course, we wish it could somehow not be so.
It is right that in hard moments our hearts ache for all that is lost and all there is still to lose.
Of course, we know that in an imperfect world, there is no perfect way.
It is right that we do all that we can, with all that we have, to defend Australia and its national interests.
This is the world we live in. 
It has not become a perfect world in this last year.
Mr Speaker, the international strategy in which we take our part is sound.
Focussed on counter-insurgency and designed to deliver transition.
Led by President Obama since 2009.
Supported by the leaders of the 48 other countries who are members of the International Security Assistance Force.
Carried out under a United Nations mandate and with the support of the countries of the world.
A strategy which is consistent with Australia's aim in Afghanistan as well: that a functioning Afghan state is able to assume responsibility for preventing the country from again being a safe haven for terrorists.
Our mission in Uruzgan as part of the international strategy is clear.
Protecting the Afghan people.
Training the Afghan security forces.
And building the government's capacity.
Australia's national interests in Afghanistan are also unchanged.
They remain very real  -  very clear.
There must be no safe haven for terrorists in Afghanistan.
We must stand firmly by our ally, the United States.
Mr Speaker, yes, we are paying a high price for progress in Afghanistan.
But progress is being made.
Our national interests in Afghanistan have not changed in twelve months.
Our mission has not changed.
The timetable for transition to Afghan-led security by the end of 2014 has not changed either.
We will complete our mission of training and transition.
Mr Speaker, I believe that our Parliament and our people want to know more about the daily work of our troops  -  and our civilians  -  in Afghanistan.
Australians should have a practical and realistic picture of what our people in Afghanistan are doing on the ground.
The moving and now sadly familiar images of ramp ceremonies overseas and funerals at home are a very real part of the story of the war  -  but they are not the whole story.
We owe it to our troops, and to our nation, to understand the whole.
Defence has around 1550 personnel deployed in Afghanistan at any one time.
Over two thirds of them serve in Uruzgan.
Many of the Australians currently there arrived at the end of June and will be deployed until around March next year.
With rotations, nearly four and a half thousand Australian Defence Force personnel will spend time in Afghanistan this year.
Many will be on their second and third deployments ... some will have been to Afghanistan many times.
Combined Team Uruzgan is principally an Australia-US partnership, but it also includes some contributions from Singapore and Slovakia.
Most of our soldiers in the Team are part of the Mentoring Taskforce.
The Taskforce trains and mentors the Afghan National Army's 4th Brigade  -  to make it ready to take over lead responsibility for security in Uruzgan.
The Taskforce and the Brigade train and fight together.
Working hard to build the Brigade into an effective security force.
Removing Improvised Explosive Devices where they are found.
Searching out “caches” where insurgents hide explosives, Improvised Explosive Device components and weapons.
They have been involved in hundreds of incidents involving direct fire  -  hundreds of firefights  -  this year.
To support these operations, they maintain forward or patrol bases, across the province, in some cases as far as seventy five kilometres from our main base at Tarin Kot.
And they join operations outside the province too, cutting the so-called “rat runs”, the routes which provide support and supply to insurgents in Uruzgan.
This last year, the Afghan 4th Brigade has increasingly assumed the lead for the planning and preparation of operations.
And as that has happened, our Australians have increasingly concentrated on mentoring and partnering Afghan command and combat support functions.
Our Special Forces work alongside the Afghan National Police's Provincial Response Company. 
Together, they have been targeting insurgent leaders and bomb-makers.
Finding weapons.
Interdicting some of the movement of Taliban forces and supplies across Afghanistan.
Working alongside the Afghan National Interdiction Unit, our Special Forces disrupt the narcotics trade as well.
In September and again earlier this month, the Interdiction Unit captured hundreds of millions of dollars worth of narcotics and thousands of kilos of poppy seed stored in preparation for next year's growing season.
They cut vital money flows to the insurgency and Taliban when they did.
Another example of our work in building Afghan security capacity is our work at the Afghan National Army Artillery Training School.
The Afghan artillerymen we have helped train have now formed a new battery within the Afghan National Army.
And in early April they were deployed to Kandahar to commence counter-insurgency operations.
In Uruzgan Australians also work with the Afghan police to get them ready for transition. 
The Australian Federal Police currently has 20 officers at the Police Training Centre and our police have trained more than 1600 Afghan National Police officers in local policing work.
This is our people's daily work.
Protecting the Afghan people and training the Afghan security forces.
Every day, Australians are working to strengthen institutions and deliver basic services as well.
In Kabul, led by our Ambassador, our diplomats work with the Afghan Government and our international partners to prepare for transition in Uruzgan province.
We have 12 AusAID staff in the country at any one time, working in Kabul, Kandahar and Uruzgan.
In Uruzgan, Australia leads the Provincial Reconstruction Team.
Officials from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and AusAID work hard in what is a vital and perhaps under-recognised role.
These fine public servants serve our national interest well.
Australia is amongst the top ten bilateral aid donors to Afghanistan.
Our programs fund primary schooling. 
They train farmers to increase crop yields and improve their livestock.
They offer small loans to help rural households develop their own small businesses and economic independence. 
They help remove land mines and teach locals about the risk of mines.
They distribute saplings and plant trees.
Every day this work makes a difference in Afghan lives.
Our soldiers, police and aid workers do their work as part of a political and development strategy for the province as well.
Civilian administrators and aid officials  -  including Australians  -  are helping government work better in Uruzgan and in Afghanistan as a whole. 
They have a difficult task.
Helping to recruit and train effective public officials, including in key provincial positions.
Assisting the Provincial Government to deliver basic services like health, education and rural development.
Playing a constructive role to lift the power and prestige of elected government.
All difficult  -  all vital over time.
Because the international strategy is one which understands that no insurgency is ever defeated by military force alone.
To understand this daily work of our people, we must understand too that their work forms part of a nationwide strategy with international support.
And the international strategy supports the Afghan Government's efforts for reconciliation.
We support reconciliation and the reintegration of insurgents who are prepared to lay down their arms, renounce violence and terrorism and respect Afghanistan's constitution.
The international strategy also understands that Afghanistan exists in a regional security context where all its neighbours must do their part.
This year brought a great victory against terrorism.
The hiding place of Osama bin-Laden was found and Osama bin-Laden was killed.
Justice delayed, but not justice denied.
Yet this great success, revealing as it did bin Laden's presence in Pakistan, underscored the complexity of the war in which we are engaged.
Pakistan, its military and people, are on the frontline of terrorism and have been victims of its violence themselves.
In that country, perhaps as many as thirty thousand civilians and five thousand military personnel have died in terrorist attacks in the past ten years.
We do co-operate with Pakistan on counter-terrorism.
And the international community is there to assist as well.
All that is true. 
What is also true is this.
It is time for Pakistan to do more to counter terrorism and extremism.
Particularly on its border with Afghanistan.
That is in the interests of Afghanistan, Australia, our coalition partners, it is in the interests of Pakistan itself.
Mr Speaker, this was the daily work of the Australian military and civilians in Afghanistan this last year.
And it was not isolated work.
Across Afghanistan this last year, Coalition and Afghan troops put considerable pressure on the insurgency. 
Sustained operations through the year weakened the Taliban's leadership and disrupted its ability to recruit and resupply.
In 2010, the momentum of insurgents had already been halted and then reversed.
In 2011, the insurgents were unable to retake any ground from the control of the International Security Assistance Force.
These gains need to be consolidated. 
Despite our successes, the Taliban is not yet defeated.
But there is progress on the ground.
The 4th Brigade is becoming more capable and professional. 
So is the Afghan National Army as a whole.
Its ability to combat improvised explosive devices has significantly improved  -  more than 120 Afghan counter-IED operators are in the field with another 70 in training now.
Some of their training has been from Australians.
Afghan medics are about to deploy to patrol bases to train Afghan soldiers in skills that will enable them to stabilise combat injuries and prevent non-battle injuries.
They've been trained by Australians.
The Afghan National Police's crime scene and evidence collection procedures have improved.
Thanks to Australian training too.
And progress can be seen in the country as a whole.
Important tactical victories have been won fighting Al Qaeda and degrading jihadist networks.
Maintaining our momentum against the Taliban  -  cutting into their ability to control territory and provide sanctuary for terrorist groups.
And the process of transition has begun.
Several provinces and districts have now moved to Afghan-led security control and further provinces and districts are to be announced soon. 
We understand that security progress is not enough.  
Progress in human development and political reconciliation is vital too.
Afghanistan is a poor country today: a place where most people are extremely poor and where many lack access to clean water, health and education and basic services.
But this is not somehow inevitable or inescapable.
It is a product of war and dictatorship and peace and progress can allow Afghanistan to develop over time.
In the 1960s Afghanistan was a poor country but a growing one.
Its wealth was comparable to that of countries like Malaysia and Portugal  -  countries which have found a path to prosperity in the decades since.
By 2002, much had been lost.
But since 2002 much has been gained.
School enrolments are up from around one million then to over seven million today, including over two and a half million girls.
Basic health services once reached 10 per cent of the population ... they now reach around 85 per cent.
Almost 10,000 km of rural roads have been rehabilitated, employing hundreds of thousands of local workers and building critical infrastructure.
The economy has grown strongly ... averaging 11 per cent growth each year since 2002.
Uruzgan is still a poor province and Afghanistan is still a poor country.
These lost decades can never truly be regained  -  the Afghan people's goals for development, and our work with them, are very realistic.
But Afghanistan is unrecognisable from the place Australians first deployed to ten years ago.
This is what is happening on the ground.
In security, in training the Afghan 4th Brigade, in delivering basic services, progress has been made during 2011.
Mr Speaker, our caution is real. The progress is real too.
So now let me turn to the Government's plans to complete our mission of training and transition, our plans to ensure that progress continues during 2012.
Throughout the coming year, we will continue working closely with the Afghan government, our ally the United States and other international partners on the future of our Uruzgan mission and the course of transition there.
This ultimately depends upon a careful, realistic and professional assessment of the progress of the Afghan 4th Brigade.
Our best professional advice is this: the overall training task is on track.
The 4th Brigade is demonstrating progress towards operating independently.
One of the Brigade's Kandaks, or battalions, is now close to being able to conduct fully independent operations with advisers.
The others are making steady progress with more expected to be capable of conducting independent operations next year.
This is the big picture of the 4th Brigade.
But every member of the House understands the grave significance of the attacks on our soldiers by individual members of the Afghan National Army.
If I can echo the Chief of Defence Force's words, it is critical that we show restraint and reserve our judgements until the investigation of these incidents is complete.
We do not yet have grounds to conclude that these attacks represent a pattern or were directed with a purpose.
What we do know is this.
These attacks killed Afghan and Australian alike.
Our partners in the 4th Brigade, our Afghan partners, are shocked and horrified at what has occurred.
The Afghan National Army is a force of some 300,000 soldiers ... a force making steady progress like the nation it serves.
Whatever their purpose, we are determined not to allow these incidents to erode our trust.
We must not allow attacks like these to strike at the core of our training and mentoring mission in Afghanistan.
Mr Speaker, all our best advice leads us to conclude that the 4th Brigade is on track to assume the lead role on security in Uruzgan by 2014.
And we are making steady and careful preparations for transition now.
Australian forces have already handed over 11 patrol or forward operating bases to Afghan lead.
Mobile mentoring teams will continue to assist our Afghan partners at their operating bases for periods as required.
When our primary training and mentoring task in Uruzgan is complete  -  when the Afghan authorities have assumed lead security responsibility in the province  -  then Australia will adjust our contribution.
The timing to complete transition in Uruzgan is not yet decided. 
But given the progress we now see, it may well be complete before the end of 2014.
And once our mission to train and mentor the 4th Brigade is complete, we will draw down the number of ADF personnel in the country.
We are realistic about the 4th Brigade's progress.
And it's that realistic assessment, by the governments of Australia and Afghanistan and by ISAF, which will decide the timetable for transition in Uruzgan.
We will not allow a security vacuum in the province.
This reflects the international plan across Afghanistan.
In March this year President Karzai announced the first tranche of Afghan districts and provinces to start transition to Afghan-led security responsibility.
As security conditions improve, 2012 will see Afghan authorities take on lead security responsibility in more provinces and districts.
The Afghan government is expected to announce the second tranche of provinces and districts for transition soon.
Transition is a process  -  and in these areas it is expected to take around 12 to 18 months.
By the time transition in the second tranche is completed, Afghan national security forces will have lead security responsibility for around half of the country's people.
As subsequent tranches are announced through 2012 and 2013 the remaining parts of the country will enter transition.
And the Afghan National Security Forces should lead and conduct military operations in all provinces by the end of 2014.
Mr Speaker, over the next three years, Australia will complete our mission of training and transition.
Australia will not abandon Afghanistan.
With Afghan authorities in charge of their own security, the nature of the international effort in Afghanistan will change.
International military forces will reduce in number.
The forces that remain will focus on training and support for the Afghan National Security Forces and on counterterrorism.
Australia's contribution in Afghanistan will continue to be part of a wider international effort. 
We will be engaged through this decade at least.
Naturally much remains to be decided.
For now, the centre of our efforts is directed toward successful transition.
But now is also the time when we will begin to develop the right strategy and approach for beyond 2014  -  for post-transition.
2012 will be an important year.
Working closely with the Afghan government, international community and military planners, we will form our plans for transition and beyond.
What we can say already is this.
The international commitment, including that of our ally the United States, remains substantial.
A substantial commitment in human and in dollar terms.
Today, the US has around 100 000 troops in Afghanistan, reducing to around 90 000 at the end of this year.
Most of the “surge” troops, which lifted troop numbers to deliver the international strategy, will remain for lost of 2012.
This time next year, there will be around 68 000 US troops in Afghanistan  -  as part of an international force of over 100 000.
By the end of next year our contribution of around 1550 people will be part of a force of over 100 000 uniformed personnel.
The United States is in negotiations with Afghanistan on a long-term Strategic Partnership  -  intended to provide a transparent political framework for long-term cooperation  -  to continue targeting terrorists and support a sovereign Afghan government. 
While the shape of the US commitment in Afghanistan post-2014 is yet to be decided, this work being done by the US on its long-term strategic partnership  -  and work being done by NATO  -  informs our thinking. 
And the May 2012 summit in Chicago of member countries of the international force will be critical in developing this thinking further.
Mr Speaker, what this means is that we have reached an important stage in our national policy on Afghanistan.
I can advise the Parliament that the Government's post-transition planning has formally begun.
Building on the announcements made by the Minister for Defence and the Minister for Foreign Affairs during this year.
During my visit to Afghanistan last month, President Karzai and I discussed formalising a long-term framework agreement for the future of the Australia-Afghanistan partnership.
This kind of co-operative, country-to-country approach is an important framework for our long-term plans. 
We seek an enduring relationship with Afghanistan beyond 2014 as Afghanistan takes on responsibility for its own security and governance. 
Taking in a broad range of bilateral activities, including a sustained development assistance program and support for Afghanistan as a fledgling democracy. 
We have all worked hard to support democratic institutions and process.
The next Presidential elections in 2014 will be a test of those.
So continued electoral reform is important too.
Australia will work closely with the Afghan government and international partners to continue electoral reform and support successful and transparent presidential elections in 2014. 
Good government in the country may be the work of an Afghan generation.
That, of course, is the responsibility of the Afghan Government and people.
But we can help.
While in Afghanistan, I also officially opened Australia's new Embassy in Kabul.
A “bricks and mortar” symbol that our relationship with the people of Afghanistan will endure.
After 2014 we will continue to maintain links with Uruzgan, a province in which we have invested so much. 
But our role will also have a national focus.
Substantial development assistance and an AusAID presence, including Afghanistan-based official aid personnel.
We also expect to continue defence training to continue building the capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces  -  and for the Australian Federal Police to keep training the Afghan National Police.
We must remain vigilant against the threat posed by al Qaeda and the groups it has inspired.
Al Qaeda and its affiliates still hold ambitions to conduct acts of terrorism in Afghanistan, the region and around the world.
We will continue our efforts in Afghanistan to ensure that the country never again becomes a safe haven and training ground for international terrorism.
Whether there is still a counter-terrorism role for the Australian Defence Force, in concert with the US and other international partners, will depend both on the security situation and on our discussions with our international partners.
The Government will keep under consideration a continued Australian Special Forces presence in Afghanistan beyond 2014.
We will take a firm line on our national interest that terrorism find no safe haven in Afghanistan. 
Mr Speaker, I am deeply aware  -  the Government, the Parliament and the nation deeply feel  -  the burden which is being borne by the Army, by the Australian Defence Force and by the Defence community as a whole.
In the years since 1999 we've asked much of this generation of our Defence Force personnel.
We ask much of their families.
We ask much of the communities they come from and the communities where they live.
And for these good people, this has been a very hard year.
As a nation, we are determined.
We know we have done good things.
As a nation, we know their price.
We know the good things we have done have come at a high cost.
There have been days of sorrow and we do not forget.
Eleven Australians have died in Afghanistan this year.
The 1st Combat Engineer Regiment lost Corporal Richard Atkinson and Sapper Jamie Larcombe in February.
The 2nd Commando Regiment lost Sergeant Brett Wood in May and Sergeant Todd Langley in July.
In May, Lance Corporal Andrew Jones of 9th Force Support Battalion and Lieutenant Marcus Case of 6th Aviation Regiment both died of wounds.
The Incident Response Regiment lost Sapper Rowan Robinson in June. 
2nd Battalion, The Royal Australian Regiment, lost Private Matthew Lambert in August  -  and then last month the Battalion also lost Lance Corporal Luke Gavin.
On the same day Captain Bryce Duffy, 4th Regiment, Royal Australian Artillery, and Corporal Ashley Birt, 6th Engineer Support Regiment, were killed.
We do not forget.
Mr Speaker, I believe that the best tribute we can pay to them is to live by their example.
The example set by those who have died and by those they leave behind.
Of their service without fear.
Even in their mourning they are an example to us: these are people who stick together, these are people who see things through.
I am proud of the respect Australians show to our Defence Force  -  to those serving, to those who have died.
I see that on ANZAC Day and I see it on Remembrance Day, I feel it most when we hold our breath at the news that we most dread, news of new casualties from the field.
We have lost 32 Australians in our decade in Afghanistan.
They are not our only casualties. 
Our wounded  -  and their families  -  have suffered terribly as well.
More than two hundred Australians have been wounded in action in Afghanistan.
Forty eight this year.
They include eighteen soldiers who were involved in improvised explosive device attacks.
Five aircrew who were wounded in a helicopter incident.
And another ten soldiers wounded in the two recent incidents at patrol bases.
They suffer.
Amputations, fractures, gunshot and fragmentation wounds, hearing loss.
What is called “mild traumatic brain injury”  -  something we will see more and more often as we learn more about how to detect and understand percussion damage from explosions.
Lacerations and contusions, concussion and traumatic brain injury, penetrating fragments and multiple severe injuries.
Many will not serve again. 
Some will not walk again.
Not one will be forgotten.
Our country will recognise and respect our wounded as well as our dead.
Our country will take care of these Australians as they have taken care of us. 
We will see our mission through, we will see our people through as well.
Mr Speaker, this year, I flew from Jamie Larcombe's funeral at Kangaroo Island half way across the world to Washington DC. 
I spoke about him there.
Because I wanted to be sure that his service was honoured, and through him, that of all his mates.
Not just their service and their sacrifice, but their virtues as well.
Their confidence and their resolution.
Their professionalism and their courage.
Their determination to see their mission through. 
They are a sight to see.
Ours is a beautiful country  -  we share a continent of many great sights and last week I took President Obama to see one of our finest.
Fifteen hundred of our young people in uniform in an Air Force hangar on a steamy Darwin day.
And I never thought I'd say drinking a non-alcoholic beer was a highlight of my year.
But a good time depends on the company you keep.
And if it had to be “near-beer” last month, it was worth every drop for a chance to be near some great young Aussies in the canteen at Tarin Kot.
The job they are doing for us has not changed in twelve months.
They have made progress.  
They have hard days ahead.
So do we.
Ours is a realistic people. 
A people of peace, so often called to war.
We will do what is necessary.
We will defend our national interests.
We will deny terrorism a safe haven in Afghanistan.
We will stand by our ally, the United States.
We will complete our mission of training and transition.



Sydney in the year 2000 was an unlikely setting for a modern-day fairytale.
A beautiful young woman meets a handsome prince, and they live happily ever after.
Of course, there were no carriages or castles.
This was a distinctly 21st century romance:
Meeting amid the lights of a big city.
Exchanging thoughts by email.
And flying back and forth in jumbo jets.
In any case, fairy tales exist only in story books.
Because royalty in these democratic times means hard work.
The choice made by Mary Donaldson  -  like that of her contemporary Catherine Middleton  -  was bold and perceptive.
You knew that in marrying an heir to the throne, you had embarked on a journey of service.
A journey that would last your whole life.
As Australians, we know this from the life of our own Queen, as Danes do from yours.
It is a commitment to duty and leadership.
A commitment that has brought you here among us today.
And so I welcome Your Royal Highnesses as representatives of the Danish nation.
A nation known throughout the world for its values and humanitarian commitment.
A nation that leads the world in policies so crucial for our times like clean energy, urban development and food security.
Concerns you have come to explore with a receptive partner in dialogue this week.
Indeed, I welcome Denmark's commitment to reduce carbon emissions through a carbon price by 40 percent by 2020 and boost the share of renewable to 50 percent of energy consumption.
I know that as Australia undertakes its journey towards a low carbon future, we have a great partner in Denmark.
We are strengthened by your example and your expertise.
It is a partnership that extends beyond governments to the private sector.
And I am delighted that Crown Prince Frederick will journey on Friday to Macarthur in Western Victoria where Danish company Vestas and Australia's Leighton Holdings are building a wind farm, the biggest in the Southern Hemisphere, and another down-payment on our obligation to protect this planet for future generations and build the jobs and industries of tomorrow.
But friends, This could never simply be an official visit based on policy discussions, however worthy they may be.
It is a homecoming.
A return.
A return to the place that will always, with Denmark, be high in your loyalty and love.
For Crown Princess Mary, I know you want your own children to know something of the places that shaped your own upbringing and circumstances.
For Crown Prince Frederick, I know you seek to deepen your understanding of this land which has so unexpectedly become a part of your own life story.
For both of you, and for your children, Australia will always be your other home.
Where you will always feel that sense of warmth and comfort so aptly described in Danish culture as hygge.
Where family and friends await you.
Where formality is never required.
Where our door is always open and you never need to knock.
We are indeed delighted to have you as guests  -  so uniquely connected as you are to this land and its people.
You Royal Highnesses are welcome.
Honoured.
And very much at home.



The Government has secured support for its historic reforms to lock in the benefits of the mining boom and deliver a fair return from the development of the nation's resource wealth.
The Minerals Resource Rent Tax (MRRT) and the extension of the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax (PRRT), which were supported by the House of Representatives last night, will help create a sustainable economy beyond the mining boom and support investment in infrastructure and industries to grow jobs in the future.
The revenue from these reforms will assist businesses, particularly small businesses, that are outside the mining boom fast lane, and fund new infrastructure across the nation to drive productivity and growth.
The proceeds of the mining tax will enable increased superannuation for Australian workers  -  delivering investment back into Australian companies and Australian jobs.
There's no need for the success of one sector to come at the expense of another. The MRRT and PRRT will use the profits of the resources boom to strengthen our entire economy to the benefit of all Australians.
The Government's resource taxation reforms will support:
 * 	A major new tax break for Australia's 2.7 million small businesses as well as a cut to the company tax rate for all businesses, with small businesses getting a one year head-start.
 * 	A boost to the superannuation for 8.4 million workers, which will increase the nation's savings pool by $500 billion by 2035. This will provide a 30-year-old worker on average earnings with an extra $108,000 in retirement savings.
 * 	A much needed extra superannuation contribution for 3.6 million low-income-earners worth a total of $900 million each year.
 * 	Critical investment in roads, bridges and other infrastructure, particularly in our great mining regions.
Tony Abbott has opposed this important reform every step of the way, insisting that the benefits of the mining boom should not be shared by all Australians.
Mr Abbott and the Coalition have decided to turn their backs on small business and the broader Australian community who will benefit from these reforms to Australia's taxation system.
The vast majority of those who will be paying the MRRT understand the importance of this economic reformand support it.
We know Australia's resources boom won't last forever. The minerals can be dug up and sold only once.
That's why the Government is committed to ensuring the Australian community receives a fair return from the mining boom and that we lock in the gains for generations to come. 



PM: Thank you very much. I'm joined this morning by the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, by the Minister for Resources, Energy and Tourism and the by Assistant Treasurer.
As a Labor Government, when the global financial crisis hit we were determined to protect Australian jobs. We acted to protect Australian jobs and to keep Australians working. Now, during this phase of our economy's growth, we are determined to share the benefits of the resources boom.
Australians are well aware that there is a resources boom underway, with resources prices high; with some of our biggest miners making record profits; with hundreds of billions of dollars of investment in the pipeline, but many Australians have thought to themselves ‘well what does this mean for me?' These are the assets in our grounds that can only be dug up once, they can only be dug up and sold once.
Many Australians have thought ‘what does this mean for me?' as these assets are dug up and sold, ‘what does it mean for my future and for the nation's future?'
Well, they're very legitimate questions, and last night in this Parliament those questions were answered when the Government delivered its Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
What this means is a fairer share for Australians right around the nation. What this means is that our super profitable mining companies will pay more tax, and that tax will be used to cut company taxes, to give Australians more superannuation, and to build more infrastructure.
This is about a fair deal across the nation for Australians from the benefits of the mining boom. It's about ensuring Australians today see that fairness.
But it's also about ensuring Australians in the future see that fairness, too. Australians recognise that this is a deep and will be a long-lasting boom, but they still want to know what the Australian economy will look like in the days beyond the resources boom, and I want to make sure our nation emerges from this resources boom with a diversified economy that can offer opportunity to all.
That's why we are having our super profitable miners pay more tax: in order to cut company tax and provide benefits to small businesses to share opportunity around the country as we grow our pool of national savings and give Australians better retirement incomes.
This is about sharing the benefits of the boom in the interests of working Australians.
I'll turn now to the Treasurer for some remarks and then we'll take some questions.
TREASURER: Thanks very much Prime Minister. 
Look, this is a very big win for the Australian people. It's a very big win for 2.7 million small businesses.  A very significant tax cut for those small businesses. A $6500 instant asset write-off will really help with the cash flow of small businesses, particularly those that aren't in the fast lane of the mining boom and it's a very big win for the Australian workforce. A very big win for 8 million workers, a significant boost to their superannuation over time and a significant boost to the superannuation of some low-paid workers as well. And what all that does is boost our national savings, and in boosting our national savings we build the nation. 
We provide a critical platform to fund Australian industry. Boosting our superannuation savings was demonstrated as being very important as helping our country during the global financial crisis when those savings were deployed to fund Australian industry quite significantly. 
So this is a critical economic reform in our 25 year economic reform journey. A very significant reform that owes a great deal to the determination and guts about our Prime Minister, because this has been hard fought and we have fought against vested interests that have captured the Liberal Party in this debate but we've got it through because this is part and parcel of facing up to the challenges of Mining Boom Mark II and maximising the opportunities that flow from that to the whole country.
PM: Happy to take some questions. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Isn't it a fact that the mining tax is a risky proposition because a drop in commodity prices could wipe out the revenue that's raised from the measure?
PM: Well I'll turn to the Treasurer for some comments, but this is an efficient tax. It's a tax on profits, as opposed to the inefficient taxation that we see through royalties, and what that means is that during this resources boom our most highly profitable companies will pay more tax, and that will be used to share the benefits of the boom to all Australians.
And because it is a profits-based tax it doesn't discourage investment in new mining activity. It is an efficient tax structure.
I'll turn to the Treasurer for some comments, too.
TREASURER: The whole point of a profits-based tax and why it was recommended by the Tax Review is that when prices are really high we get a fair share of that gain. That is the whole point of having a resource rent tax. 
That is why it was recommended by the Tax Review. And what we know  -  and we said this 18 months ago  -  is that Australia's prices will be higher as we go forward. Our terms of trade are around 140-year highs. Now we don't expect that to last forever and of course there will be swings and roundabouts but what we know, given demand in the Asian region and given the Asian century, is that by putting in place a profits-based tax now, we will maximise the opportunities for Australians to get a fair share from our mineral wealth, which is going to be worth a lot more as we go forward. 
That is why this is such a critical economic reform because in the past our royalties system has not captured fair value of our resources and indeed it has punished so many of those businesses that aren't profitable. So when businesses are not profitable they are not impacted as much. So when prices go up, so does the return to the Australian taxpayer and of course when prices come down, well the returns come down as well. That's the whole point of having a profits-based tax.
PM: OK, OK  -  Andrew?
JOURNALIST: Maybe you could answer the question as well, Prime Minister - one of the arguments put by the smaller companies, smaller miners, is that it discriminates against them. If it is proved that they are discriminated against, or disadvantaged, do you pledge to change that legislation?
And secondly, I just want to ask Mr Swan about the penalties  -  if Colin Barnett, for example, lifts royalties, then he knows that the lag with the Commonwealth Grants Commission is such that it might be another government, or another leader, who actually pays for the reduction in GST revenue, or GST share. Would one of the mechanisms you're considering make the punishment more immediate by bringing it forward?
PM: Can I just say something and then go to Wayne on the question of the intersection with the States.
I am truly amazed that any State premier would be saying no to increased superannuation; no to company tax cuts; no to tax breaks for small businesses in their State - truly amazed any State premier would be doing that.
And in relation to Premier Barnett, he knows better than most that he has agitated to see a review of the Goods and Services Tax and that I have instigated such a review, because I do believe it's important that we look to make sure that states are conducting themselves in the most economically efficient way, and that is part of the GST review being overseen by former premiers Brumby and Greiner. They are therefore the right people to ask to look at this question  -  royalties being an inefficient State tax.
TREASURER: Well the Prime Minister has largely answered the question. The fact is he does get a temporary boost but he loses it all and by putting up his royalties he is in fact giving money to other states. So he's not doing the right thing by the people of Western Australia in the long-term.
Now, because of the way the formula works, the Prime Minister agreed with the Premiers that we would have a review of the principles that underpin the distribution of the GST, but it's a wider question than just the GST. It's a question of Commonwealth funding that also comes from a variety of other areas. 
So the point is that he hasn't won from doing what he is doing and what we do need to do is to sort out some of these issues and one of the ways we're sorting them out is through that review but I thought Martin might want to say something about the small miner question.
MINISTER FERGUSON: Look, the tax is specifically structured to actually in essence effectively mean small miners pay very little tax.
Take the magnetite industry, for example, and have a look at the taxing point. That's the key to this tax system.
In terms of the magnetite industry, at that taxing point the dirt is worth very, very little. The real value of the magnetite industry is the processing past the taxing point. We made a further concession lifting it from $50 million to $75 million, phased out at $125 million.
Can I also remind you this is a prospective tax. The real problem for small mining companies in Western Australia is the royalties system. Irrespective of profits, they'll be taxed on the amount of commodity they actually produce from day one: no write-off for investment in capital equipment or whatever, they are taxed from day one, and the real challenge of the magnetite industry in Western Australia is the increase in the royalties.
There's already a bit of whisper in Western Australia, the Western Australian Government is now going to have to give a holiday with respect to royalty payments to the magnetite industry to try and continue to make Western Australia attractive for investment in the magnetite industry compared to other States and Territories. That is what came out of the Argus-Ferguson process.
PM: Thank you, we'll just go one at a time. We'll go Matthew Franklin  -  yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on superannuation, I think the Treasurer said, correct me if I'm wrong, that this mining tax will help everybody's superannuation. Can I just get this straight? I might be wrong, but I thought that all you are doing with the proceeds of this tax is to augment the superannuation of low-income earners. Can you please explain how the increase from 9 to 12 per cent is funded by this because - unless I'm wrong, please explain to me the - I thought that that's to be met completely by employers and do you expect them to take that off their bottom line?
PM: OK, we'll go to Bill Shorten but can I give you the bad news? You are wrong.
Moving superannuation in the way that we have determined to do, from 9 to 12, has a tax consequence for the Federal Government because of the difference in tax treatment, so that has to be provided for, and then of course we have built into this superannuation benefits for low-income Australians because that is the right thing to do by low-income working Australians, so that they too can have some prospect of a decent retirement. I'll turn to the relevant minister.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
TREASURER: You're a beneficiary, too.
MINISTER SHORTEN: Well done, Matthew.
PM: Yep, that's right. Well, we don't know about your own personal tax arrangements, but for the movement from 9 to 12 in relation to all working people there are tax consequences that need to be dealt with in the Commonwealth budget.
MINISTER SHORTEN: There are three groups of beneficiaries for what happened last night. First of all, there's the people over 70; now they go to work and are employees, that's the first group. There's about 53,000 of those Australians who are working over 70. Up til last night, if they were over 70 and working they couldn't get superannuation. Now they can, from 1 July 2013. That has a cost.
The second group of beneficiaries, the group you identified initially in your question, there's 3.6 million Australians who earn less than $37,000 a year, and then the third group of beneficiaries is, figures based a couple of years ago, there's 8.5 million Australians who are getting 9 per cent super and that's it. So they're the three groups.
The tax cost to the Government is this: when you get paid, and I'll go through each group very quickly, and I'll go through that last group because that's the big number Matthew and that's the higher paid people, when you're earning above a certain amount of money your marginal tax rate is higher than 15 per cent. It can be, depending on what it is, 30, 45 per cent.
What happens is if some of your income, instead of being received in your fortnightly pay or your monthly pay taxed at the higher marginal rate, what happens is all of a sudden under what we've proposed over the next seven years, 3 per cent of income which was previously taxed at a higher rate will be taxed at the concessional rate of superannuation, which is 15 per cent. You know the deal with superannuation is if it's compulsory it's concession - if you can't have it now you get a concessional tax rate, and that's part of the deal.
So, what we're doing is we're seeing an amount of income in the forward estimates and beyond that which will move from the higher taxed pool to a concessionally taxed pool. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) employer's contribution.
MINISTER SHORTEN: You're right in part, but understand that if all of a sudden the Commonwealth is receiving less income revenue, in other words if the pool of money that was going into the higher taxed pool is in a lower taxed category, then there's money which is no longer available for the Commonwealth, so it's the funding of the tax concession rate which has to be replaced and that's where some of the money's going. 
What is interesting, I should say, is that our opponents have said - I mean, they've flip flopped all over the place - but what they have said is that they will keep the increase but they haven't explained how they fund the tax concession for it.
But what is significant is the Opposition hasn't said what they're going to do on that second group of people I mentioned. There's 3.6 million Aussies who earn less than $37,000 a year, what this Government's done is its finally dealt with an inequity in the system that's lasted ever since super was invented, it's this: when you earn less than $37,000 a year, you either pay 0 income tax or 15 per cent, and what's happened is we've been forcing people up to now to save into super and they've got to pay 0 per cent tax, so they're actually paying more when they go into their super that if they were getting in their pocket, or at least just the same. We're abolishing that. Now, that's $1.8 billion over the forwards.
The question is 1) do the Opposition, are they going to rescind the special deal for 3.6 million Australians who will no longer have to pay tax, and that for an Australian who earns $37,000, that's an extra $500 which they were paying in tax, they'll get to put into their superannuation. So they haven't explained a) will they rescind it, and if they decide, like the bigger super increase they're not going to rescind it, they' haven't explained how they'll fund it.
The other group is the people over 70, there's not a large number at this point but that has a small cost for the reasons I've explained.
PM: OK, we'll go to Mark Riley. We'll take them one at a time and we'll go to Mark Riley first.
JOURNALIST: Thanks, Prime Minister. The Opposition says you've done a secret deal with the Greens here. Where's the $20 million coming from and why weren't they or you prepared to release that information last night?
PM: Well, the Government has determined to put in place a modest savings measure that was in contemplation in the context of MYEFO. The details of it have been released by the relevant Minister - that is, the Assistant Treasurer.
Yes, Phil Coorey?
JOURNALIST: Back to royalties, the cut off you've put in with the letter with the independents is July 1 this year, but West Australia raised its royalties before July 1. Now, they say it's $2 billion based on a low dollar, Treasurer says it's about half that. Either way there's an impost there. Are you going to have to reimburse them, Western Australia, for that entire royalty increase, the miners sorry?
TREASURER:We will deal with all of these issues in two ways. One, we'll deal with the long-term issue about royalties and the relationship to the relativities in terms of GST distribution and other Commonwealth payments. But secondly, we have to deal with the here and now, and in terms of the states, we had to put a date in so we put it in 1July.
There has been a debate about who knew what, when, where and why.  We've decided to put a ruler under that, if you like, and make it 1 July because there will be consequences for those that continue to put up royalties in this environment. As Martin has said, it will have a dramatic impact on many companies, an adverse impact, but also we've said we can't necessarily continue to make the contributions that we need to make in terms of infrastructure. That's the date we've set.
JOURNALIST: So is the WA royalty increase, does that beat the deadline?
TREASURER: I said 1 July.
PM: We'll go to Michelle, and then we'll come across. Michelle?
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, can you just clarify, you were talking about the lost revenue with the 15 per cent concessional rate, can you clarify how much that would cost over the forward estimates?
TREASURER: I've got a figure in my head Michelle but I think we'll get it to you afterwards just in case. It's-
JOURNALIST: -Could you get it out of your head, perhaps?
TREASURER: We'll you know, it's only had three hours sleep Michelle, so-
PM: -We did have quite a late night. Yes, we'll go to Mark.
TREASURER: It's a substantial abount of money anyway, Michelle, I can tell you that, over the forward estimates.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why did you ask the Greens not to divulge the details? Doesn't that just give Tony Abbott a stick to whack you with about secret midnight deals, and secondly, you set this year up to be the year of decision and delivery, we're at the end of the parliamentary part of it - how do you think you've gone?
PM: Well, on the savings measure that we had in contemplation and we have decided to action, it's a 1-year pause in the phase down of withholding tax, and the Assistant Treasurer has released the details.
We wanted to release those details today because, just in accordance with normal prudent Government measures and approaches, we wanted to alert stakeholders to the fact that we were actioning that savings measure, so we've been through that process this morning and when we completed that process the Assistant Treasurer released the details.
On year of decision and delivery, I have been determined every day of this year to make sure that we deliver to working Australians in this time of change in our nation. This is the Asian Century. Our economy is being transformed. There's nothing more important to us as that transformation happens than making sure Australians have the jobs and opportunities of the future and that they have them with fairness. That's what the big reforms like seizing a clean energy future and this one have been all about.
Yes, we'll go to the very quiet Chris Uhlmann just because he is very quiet. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Yes, look, I just wanted to get some more clarity on what Matthew said. You've talked about how the mining tax pays for the tax issues that the Government has, but who pays for the move from 9 to 12 per cent? That 3 percent is paid for by employers, isn't it, or by employees forgoing wages and saving them?
PM: I'll turn to the Assistant Treasurer, but can we just take a little step back? There's an implication in this question somehow that this would have happened in any event. There are working Australians who never would have seen a cent of an increase in super over 9 per cent if this Government hadn't decided to make it happen for them, and we decided to make it happen for two reasons.
I believe Australians are entitled to a decent retirement, and they're not going to get that decent retirement of a 9 per cent superannuation contribution. So, it's about fairness to working Australians and we've put in additional measures to recognise that low-income Australians do it the hardest getting to a decent retirement, and also to recognise in the world we live in now there will be changing patterns of work and retirement, and so that's the measure in relation to people over 70.
So, Labor, the Party of superannuation, fought every step of the way, opposed by the Liberals when we first put it in place in this country, opposed now about decency for working Australians. It's also about having a pool of national savings for our national economy. We saw the benefits of that during the days of the global financial crisis. We'll see the benefits of that as our economy transforms and we seize this economy of the future.
I'll go to the Assistant Treasurer.
MINISTER SHORTEN: When the conservatives say that increasing superannuation from 9 to 12 over the next seven years is a cost on employers, they're lying. It's a matter of record. If you look at the increases when we increase superannuation in this nation from 3 percent to 9 per cent - that was between 1992 and 2002 - we saw what happened then: business profits as a share of GDP went up, unemployment fell, real wage growth still occurred, we saw a decrease in the unit labour costs and productivity increased.
Increasing superannuation is not a cost in terms of employers because what happens is it's offset against real wage increases. So, the fact of the matter is, over time, and these are seven instalments, it's a modest plan, quarter of a percent until 2013, quarter of a percent in 2014, then five lots of half a percent, so on a $100,000 payroll it's $250 extra.
The truth of the matter is for workers what it means is if they were getting that all in cash, that would have a great inflationary impact, so what it is is for employers, it's part of the inevitable real wage increases they'd have given and we've got all the evidence of a decade to show it, and for employees it's an anti-inflationary tool because money which is diverted into savings as opposed to immediate consumption, exerts a downward pressure on inflation.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
MINISTER SHORTEN: Pardon?
JOURNALIST: The money doesn't come from the mining tax, it comes the employers (inaudible).
PM: (Inaudible) for tax arrangements have been made from this tax, so there's a values question here and we've answered it. Do you think that money best lies in the hands of the most super-profitable mining companies in this country, or it's better off going to support a measure to give Australians a decent retirement? Well, we've answered that question and the answer is in favour of Australians and a decent retirement.
I well and truly understand Tony Abbott's answer is let super-profitable miners keep it.
David Speers?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given the spending that's associated with the mining tax and the extra concessions you've had to make, can you guarantee that the mining tax as a whole won't cost the budget?
PM: We'll go to the Treasurer.
TREASURER:Well, what I can certainly guarantee is that we will continue to put in place fiscal discipline. If you look at what we receive from the tax and if you look at what we're committed to, it is broadly equivalent through to 2013-14. We're doing the budget update through the mid-term review towards the end of the year. We will account for all of that then.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: We'll go here, yes.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, when you announced the interest rate withholding tax reduction in last year's budget, you said at the time that it would put downward pressure on interest rate margins. By deferring it, aren't you putting upward pressure on interest margins?
TREASURER:Well, this is a benefit that we've deferred for one year. It's a very important reform but we can not necessarily accommodate it at this time. We are still committed to it for all of the reasons that I announced one year ago but we are making savings. I've said in the Parliament yesterday and I have said repeatedly over the last couple of weeks that because of events in the global economy, and because of lower global growth, that has a flowthrough to revenues in our budget and in this mid-year review we will be making savings and we will be making further savings as we announce the mid-term review, that is one of them.
PM: OK, just in the interest of fairness we'll go to Karen, who probably hasn't been able to muscle her way to the front with her sore foot. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Greens still seem to be saying that they're reserving the right to vote against this in the Senate. How is this a done deal if they still say they might block it? What are they asking you for that they haven't got already?
PM: Well, you'll have direct those questions to the Greens, but the proposition that will be before the Senate now is the Minerals Resources Rent Tax - yes or no? I fully expect that the answer will be yes.
JOURNALIST: How can you say that you've delivered it if they're still saying they reserve the right to vote against it?
PM: Karen, I think you are aware that in terms of the stated positions of people in this Parliament, this is a Government determined to deliver this Minerals Resource Rent Tax. We've delivered it through the House of Representatives. I very much expect  -  indeed, have no doubts - it will go through the Senate.
Katharine?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I understand your rationale about wanting to inform stakeholders about what you agreed with the Greens last night, but in terms of proper process, shouldn't you have delayed the vote?
PM: This was a modest savings measure, a 1-year pause we had in contemplation in the context of MYEFO. As a Government, we determined to action it. The thing we wanted to do was to talk to stakeholders before it was publicly announced and we were in a position to do that this morning.
OK, we'll just take a last one here and then we'll go, thank you.
JOURNALIST: On another matter, the Bill O'Chee allegations that were raised today in the Fairfax Press, I obviously don't expect you to comment about it specifically, but more broadly, does it raise any issues in your mind about the role of the media in Australia?
PM: I've seen those reports and it's reported that there's an Australian Federal Police investigation, and on that basis I won't be drawn in the specific or the general.
Thanks very much. 



We would not be here but for the events of 28 April 1996  -  events that will remain in our nation's memory always.
On that day, we saw unmitigated evil from one man.
And extraordinary courage from another.
I refer, of course, to Walter Mikac, whose wisdom and generosity of spirit has brought us together today.
In some very dark days, Walter came to see that too many children grow up knowing fear in their lives, and that he could do something about it.
In response, the Alannah and Madeline Foundation has given new hope to thousands of children, and will give hope to thousands more in the time ahead.
In the past 15 years, the need for our children to be safe has not changed.
But technology has.
The digital world has changed the landscape of childhood dramatically and forever.
Gone are the days when bullying stopped at the school gate.
The spread of electronic devices means bullies can now follow their victims everywhere and in a sense, technology has run ahead of the systems, rules and ethics required to manage the situation.
That is where eSmart has such value.
Because we want children to be as safe in the cyber world as they are, or should be, in the physical world.
I'm delighted that the Australian Government invested $3 million in support of the pilot program, which is now available to public schools in Queensland and Victoria.
I congratulate the Foundation on this result, and I am deeply honoured to be your National Patron.
I'm also deeply honoured that Her Royal Highness has agreed to be International Patron.
I spoke at Parliament House earlier this week of the life of service that Mary and Frederick have embraced.
Their support of the Foundation shows that spirit of dedication in abundance.
The support of the Crown Prince Couple means that more children will be able to enjoy their childhood free from harm.
It was something Alannah and Madeline never got to do.
But it's a gift we can at least give the children of today and tomorrow.
I know it is a cause dear to the heart of Crown Princess Mary.
She is a gracious leader and an inspirational friend.
And it is my very great privilege to welcome her to speak with us today. 



Ten years ago last Tuesday, my friend Bob Carr opened the Visy plant at Tumut.
It was Visy's first big venture into clean energy based on the sustainable re-use of manufacturing by-products.
Today we welcome the second.
Across that decade, Visy's commitment has remained unchanged.
What has changed, however, is the absence of a great Australia, Richard Pratt, and today we remember him with affection and respect.
There is much of Richard's spirit in this plant.
His sense of the future.
His sense of uniting environmental imperatives with commercial opportunities.
His sense of his family and his company as good corporate citizens.
And all those things remain true today.
Friends, I often speak of a clean energy future and I know it can sound like an abstraction sometimes.
But I would simply say to the critics and the sceptics: Come to Coolaroo and see for yourselves.
This is what the clean energy future looks like.
The intelligent application of technology to the challenges facing our planet.
Achieved in a way that fosters investment, profits and jobs.
That's why I say I'm an optimist about our nation's ability to embrace a clean energy future.
Because the signs are here already.
At Coolaroo and Tumut.
At the geothermal facility I saw in the streets of suburban Brunswick.
The new solar energy facility in Newcastle.
The wind farm that Crown Prince Frederick inspected yesterday at Macarthur  -  the largest in the Southern Hemisphere.
The new gas-fired power stations set to go up in Queensland.
All of these projects are a down-payment on the clean energy future we can build together as a nation.
Yes today projects like Coolaroo are the exception.
In a clean energy future, they will become the norm.
They will be places of opportunity for Australians.
Our tradies and engineers will find work on such projects.
Our kids will learn about them at uni and TAFE.
Our whole economy will be re-tooled as we see $100 billion invested in clean energy over the next 40 years.
I'm hugely optimistic about that future.
It means innovation.
It means investment
It means jobs  -  high skill, high wage jobs for our regions as well as our cities.
Above all, it means keeping our planet safe and clean for our grandchildren and their grandchildren.
With the carbon price, we're embarking on a great journey together as a nation.
A transformational journey.
A reform as big as any we've seen in the postwar era.
Such decisions are never easy at the time.
But who would have it any other way?
Who want anything less than a government taking the big decisions for a nation's future ensuring we land on the right side of history.
That's what we've done.
Now that the work of legislation is complete, the work of our business sector begins.
Because it is your ingenuity that will make our carbon future a reality.
That's why we chose a market mechanism.
And indeed only yesterday the OECD released a new report which is the latest piece of expert advice calling for action to reduce carbon pollution to avoid dangerous climate change.
Importantly the OECD confirms that putting a price on carbon is the most effective policy because it creates dynamic incentives for investment in cleaner technologies and infrastructure.
The ‘hidden hand' of the market made us prosperous in the three centuries since the Industrial Revolution began.
The same ‘hidden hand' will help us overcome the unintended consequences of the Industrial Revolution that take the form of climate change.
Firms like Visy are already on the way.
Others will come to learn that acting on carbon is not a drawback but an opportunity.
I'm confident about this because we are a creative and adaptable nation.
Australians can do great things.
We've done them before  -  we can do them again.
This facility is proof.
I welcome it.
I look forward to seeing more of the same across our great nation.
And I take pride in declaring the Visy clean energy plant officially open. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today welcomed President Karzai's announcement of the second tranche of provinces, cities and districts set to transition to the responsibility of Afghan-lead security forces.
When the transition of this second tranche is completed, Afghan national security forces will have lead security responsibility for around half of Afghanistan's population.
President Karzai's announcement underlines the progress made this year and shows the Afghan Government's goal of assuming lead responsibility for security across Afghanistan by the end of 2014 is on track.  
The timing for transition in Uruzgan Province, where Australia's training and mentoring efforts are concentrated, has not yet been decided.
Australia will continue to train and mentor the Fourth Brigade of the Afghan National Army in Uruzgan to ensure the province is well positioned to commence transition. 



The Prime Minister's Taskforce on Manufacturing held its first meeting in Canberra today. 
Leaders from the manufacturing sector, unions and the research sector joined the Prime Minister, the Treasurer, the Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research and the Ministers for Finance and Deregulation; Tertiary Education, Skills, Jobs and Workplace Relations; Trade; and Defence Materiel to affirm the importance of the manufacturing sector to the economy, acknowledging that it employs nearly one million Australians and generates over 34 per cent of Australia's merchandise export income.  
The Taskforce agreed its primary purpose is to secure a strong future for Australian manufacturing and its workforce. 
Members agreed to develop a shared vision and to prepare advice to Government by June 2012.  To do this, members agreed a workplan that will focus on:
 * 	The short term and long-term competitiveness of the Australian manufacturing sector;
 * 	An analysis of the pressures and possible adjustments facing the sector resulting from the influence of the Australian dollar and the international economy;
 * 	Improved access to capital, markets, research and innovation, and skills to underpin a more competitive and successful manufacturing sector;
 * 	Maximising opportunities for Australian manufacturers resulting from the rise of Asia;
 * 	Addressing regulatory and other barriers to the growth of the manufacturing sector;
 * 	Building stronger partnerships between SMEs, larger companies, research partners and governments to underpin a more research and innovation focussed manufacturing sector; and
 * 	The development of a roadmap outlining a shared vision and direction for Australian manufacturing over the next decade.
Members received an update on local content and participation measures announced at the recent Future Jobs Forum and outcomes from the recent meeting of the Resources Sector Supplier Advisory Forum, chaired by Peter Beattie.
The next meeting, in early 2012, will consider the results of targeted consultations with the manufacturing sector, work on the draft roadmap for manufacturing and a paper on market opportunities in the Asian economy as part of the White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century process.
Members agreed on the need to better leverage and co-ordinate existing Commonwealth and state government policies and programs; and the importance of maximising opportunities from Commonwealth procurement, including in the defence sector.
The Taskforce acknowledged the key role of science and technology in successful Australian firms. Members agreed on the importance of building closer linkages and collaboration between industry and the research community, and developing better access for Australian business to global supply chain.
Members noted that current economic conditions are challenging for many manufacturers, particularly the effect of the high Australian dollar and competition for skills  -  although the impacts vary across the sector. The Taskforce agreed to develop further work on potential adjustments facing Australian manufacturing and pathways for displaced manufacturing workers.
The Taskforce stressed the importance of manufacturers and the sector being better able to move up the value chain and the importance of management and workforce skills, technology and innovation to the future of Australian manufacturing.
Innovation is a vital ingredient in adapting to a high Australian dollar and more intense global market competition. Shared knowledge, investment in skills, stronger industry research collaborations and networks are necessary to further underpin a vibrant manufacturing sector ready to take advantage of new opportunities that are emerging. Investments in clean energy, national broadband, skills and tertiary education are key pillars that will assist Australian manufacturers move up the value chain.
A website has been established containing public information about the Committee and its work which can be found at www.innovation.gov.au/manufacturingtaskforce



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that the Climate Change Authority, one of the key governance bodies established under the Government's clean energy legislation, will be based in Melbourne.
The CCA will be an independent body which will provide expert advice on the carbon pricing mechanism and the Government's climate change mitigation policies.
Locating the new Authority in Melbourne will enhance its ability to engage with business and other stakeholders.
It will also allow the CCA to work effectively with the Productivity Commission which also has important functions under the clean energy legislative package.
The Government has already announced that it will appoint the former Reserve Bank Governor and Treasury Secretary Bernie Fraser as the first Chairman of the CCA.
Up to another seven members with expertise in fields including climate science, economics, emissions trading, climate change mitigation and finance will be appointed to the CCA in coming months. The Chief Scientist will be an ex officio member.
The CCA's legislative functions include making recommendations to the Government on future pollution caps under the carbon pricing mechanism.
The CCA will also provide advice on the performance of the carbon price and other climate change initiatives and will track progress towards Australia's pollution reduction targets.
It will conduct regular public reviews and its reports will be made public.
The CCA will start operating from July 2012.
It will complete its first review of the carbon price mechanism, which will provide recommendations on the first five years of pollution caps, by February 2014. The CCA will also review the Renewable Energy Target legislation by the end of 2012. 



PM: Well can I welcome everybody to this first meeting of the Prime Minister's Manufacturing Taskforce, I know for some it hasn't been an easy journey to Canberra today, I understand that there was some flight delays so I thank people for getting here. Our job here today is to focus on the jobs of Australians, so we've got work to do focussing on Australian jobs.
We know our manufacturing sector is a diverse sector and there are some days of pressure on manufacturing as a result of our high Australian dollar, but I'm very determined as Prime Minister that we work with our manufacturing sector to ensure that we come through these days of pressure, that we have a diverse manufacturing sector that we take with us into the future of this nation.
So the work we're going to do around this table, focussing on manufacturing, focussing on Australian jobs, is very important to the nation's future. We come together at a time when the Government has been strongly focussed on manufacturing and engaged in working with each of you in various ways, but the purpose of bringing everybody together is to make sure we understand your up to the minute insights as to what was happening in manufacturing and to make sure that we are, throughout all of the instrumentalities and agencies of government, working as hard as we can together on manufacturing.
So this is a moment to roll the sleeves up  -  Government, business and unions working together for the future of Australian jobs in manufacturing.
I think whilst there are days of pressure at the moment, we also need to remind ourselves that these are days of opportunity and the future has great opportunities for Australian manufacturing. We as a Government are working hard on Australia's role in this the Asian Century, where our nation will get new opportunities as we see the growth in Asia and particularly the growth of the middle class in Asia. More than a billion people who will want the kind of things that we want and that will include elaborately transformed manufactured goods, it will include the best of Australian fashion, it will include a lot of things that people around this table make today and many things that we will innovate and make tomorrow.
So these are days of opportunity too. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Arts Minister Simon Crean today announced $100,000 in prize money for a new poetry award to be included in the 2012 Prime Minister's Literary Awards.
Australians can now submit their entries for the 2012 Prime Minister's Literary Awards, including submissions for the new poetry category.
A total of $600,000 will be awarded in six award categories making the Prime Minister's Literary Awards prize pool the richest literary awards in Australia.
The Awards celebrate the contribution of Australian literature and history to the nation's cultural and intellectual life.
The new poetry category has been introduced to reflect the significant contribution poetry makes to Australia's literary landscape.
Whether it is verse, the bush-ballad or the story-teller, poetry is ingrained in Australia's identity.
Australia's best poets will now be recognised alongside our best authors and historians through the Prime Minister's Literary Awards.
The Prize for Australian History will also become part of the Prime Minister's Literary Awards from 2012. 
Currently administered by the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, the Prize for Australian History will be transferred to the Office for the Arts next year.
It is the nation's pre-eminent award for an outstanding publication or body of work that contributes significantly to an understanding of Australia's history.
By including poetry and history in the Prime Minister's Literary Awards, the Australian Government is honouring the enormous contribution these two genres make to our cultural wealth.
The Prime Minister and Minister Crean are encouraging all Australian authors, poets and historians to enter the 2012 Awards.
Eleven people will sit on three judging panels for the Awards. The multi award winning journalist and author Chris Masters will chair the non - fiction and history panel.
Literary giant Joel Becker will chair the fiction and poetry panel and Judith White will chair the children's and young adult fiction panel.
The winner of each category  -  adult fiction, non-fiction, Australian history, poetry, young adult fiction and children's fiction  -  will receive $80,000 tax free and shortlisted entries will each be awarded $5,000.
To be eligible for a prize, entrants must be living Australian citizens or permanent residents.
Entries in the fiction, non-fiction, young adult fiction, children's fiction and poetry categories must have been first published in English between 1 January and 31 December 2011 and offered for general sale in Australia between these dates.
For the Prime Minister's Literary Award for Poetry, collections of poems published in book form written by one or two poets are eligible for entry.
Entries for the Prize for Australian History can be film or radio documentaries, websites, DVDs, or other forms of multimedia. Producers of works that document Australian history in any format are encouraged to enter the Awards. To be eligible, history works must be first published, produced or broadcast between 1 January 2011 and 31 December 2011.
Entries close on 1 February 2012 and the shortlist will be announced in May.
For more information visit www.arts.gov.au/pmliteraryawards



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today paid tribute to Australian rugby league legend Artie Beetson.
Mr Beetson broke new ground as the first Indigenous Australian to captain a national side in any sport.
His brilliance on the field remains seared into the memory of rugby league fans, and his lengthy contribution to Queensland and Australia as a player and coach were honoured with an Order of Australia in 1987.
Mr Beetson will be remembered as one of Australia's greatest ever players in an iconic period for his sport.
He was also a tireless worker for Indigenous Australians as a member of the Former Origin Greats, inspiring young Australians to finish school and move into jobs.
The Prime Minister extended her deep sympathies to Mr Beetson's family, friends, and the Australian rugby league community. 



Thank you Jenny, it's so good to be so warmly welcomed by our President, elected by our members.
Delegates, here we acknowledge Australia's first people, we acknowledge the traditional custodians of the land on which we meet.
And I look forward to the great day when we will acknowledge them in Australia's Constitution as well.
Delegates, it is good to be with you all again.
In the sixteen months since we stood together in that toughest of Federal election campaigns, our Party has governed and governed well.
We all shared the hard work of those campaigning days.
And we share the achievements and opportunities of these days of government.
As I have travelled our country since, I have seen our achievements reflected on so many Australian faces  -  and seenthe opportunities we want to spread to all Australians.
I saw them in the faces of the education-hungry young women I met at UnitingCare Ambarvale in May.
Young mums getting help with childcare, with skills, help finding a job, leaving a life of exclusion behind.
That's why this year our Labor Budget gave better help to Australians to get a job and to make sure it pays.
Achievements reflected in the face of a hard-working woman I met last month in Melbourne's west.
She suffers an acquired brain injury but she's never been a victim, started a business in her own home  -  marketing gourmet dog biscuits over the internet!
Now selling them to Harrod's of London for thirty five pounds each.
That's why this year, we took the decision to lay the foundations for national disability insurance, fairness at last for two million Australians, people with disabilities and their carers  -  it will be a defining Labor reform.
Opportunities reflected in the face of a woman I met in Darwin last year. 
A cancer survivor worried by a sore leg that won't heal, now getting the care she needs.
Because her dermatologist in Adelaide can examine her leg on a high speed video link on-line.
That's why we're rolling outhigh speed broadband.
Tasmania led the nation, beginning the replacement of the hundred-year old copper wire network, and now this year inBrunswick and Armidale, Townsville and Kiama, the National Broadband Network is an investment in the future which is operating now.
Achievements and opportunities reflected in the face of a resilient teenager I met in The Canberra Hospital.
A sixteen year old boy getting a hip joint operation faster because we're cutting waiting times. 
That's why this year we delivered for health  -  not just much-needed extra funds, but the long-lasting reforms to give our people better care.
And delegates, achievements and opportunities I have seen reflected in so many faces of our clean energy future.
I've met workers at a Brisbane tip generating power from methane, traditional apprentices with clean technology skills in Brunswick and wind farm technicians in Bungendore.
Workers at one of our cleanest baseload power stations at Dalby and staff who told me about pioneering technology at Kogan Creek.
The faces of the new jobs being created in our clean energy economy.
That's why this year.
After a debate lasting the best part of two, even three decades together, this year, we turned words into deeds and next year, Australia will have a price on carbon.
Great Labor achievements  -  great Australian opportunities.
And delegates, together we've done more.
Labor is the Party of jobs. 
And you know the value I put on the benefits and dignity of work.
A value I've never seen reflected so clearly as on the days when I have been lucky enough to visit Australia's gas fields and mines.
And all the places in our great resource states  -  Western Australia, Queensland, and now South Australia  -  where our young people are trained in the trades they need to make the most of the mining investment boom, to win their own jobs and to make the boom last.
As the Party of jobs, we govern for jobs.
So in the worst global recession in seventy years, over conservative opposition in the Parliament and beyond, we brought our economy through, stronger than any developed country and your Labor Government, created more than seven hundred thousand Australian jobs.
Labor is the Party of growth. 
And you know my passion for education  -  growth's long-term key.
It is a passion I've seen more than shared, I've seen it exceeded, by the kids, the parents, the teachers  -  and by a great principal, Margaret at Goodna State School, in Queensland's south east.
Where our national partnerships are lifting teacher quality, improving the children's reading and writing and rebuilding this local school as well.
That's why your Labor Government doubled education funding.
And delegates Labor is the Party of fairness. 
The fairness I believe we express above all through the respect we show each other as Australians.
Fairness and respect that your Labor Government works hard to extend to every Australian every day.
As we did when we decided to make a new, fortnightly payment to support surviving Australian prisoners of war  another victory in Labor politics for that great fighter for fairness Tom Uren.
As we did when we took the decision finally to give Australian women paid parental leave.
And when we took the decision to give caring workers equal pay.
We did it because we know that fairness begins in the workplace.
Delegates, we always have from our first days in office in Australia.
Watson's Labor worked so hard for conciliation and arbitration  -  to protect working people.
It took longer than that first, four-month term for Labor in national office  -  but Watson's Labor got it done.
And in doing so they set the test for every one of their successors.
That urgent, ultimate test they set for Labor in office is still the same: did you do the right thing for rights at work.
Friends, this Labor Government did.
Your Labor Government put Work Choices in the grave.
And only victory in 2013 will bury Work Choices forever.
Delegates, we meet today as Labor.
We all know the Labor way.
The way of jobs, of growth, of fairness.
The way of education, of hard work, of respect.
The way of the future.
And we meet as a Party which knows  -  that the Labor way is the Australian way. 
Our great movement's shared identity  -  and our grand Party's historic mission  -  combine as simply as this: we are Labor for Australia.
To govern for Australia is a great privilege for us  -  it is a great responsibility as well.
We love this movement  -  its traditions and ideals  -  but we have always seen it as a movement in service to the nation we love more.
We have always governed by putting the nation first.
The responsibilities of Government are the responsibilities of hard choice.
Curtin knew that when he raised conscripts for military service overseas.
Chifley knew that in the industrial winter of 1949.
Whitlam knew it when he ended the bitter debate over state aid.
Hawke and Keating knew it every day they governed.
And we know it now.
We showed it this week, as we made the hard decisions to bring the Budget back into the black.
We will show it again this weekend, as we make the hard decisions to prepare our nation for the future too.
Delegates, in these coming days, I want us to have a fair dinkum Labor Party conference.
We didn't join Labor in our youth because we had no opinions.
We didn't come here for a coronation or a campaign launch.
We came here for debates, we came here for surprises, we came here to have votes.
This is why I called the review of our Party last year.
And why I asked three fine Labor servants  -  John Faulkner, Steve Bracks and Bob Carr  -  to serve our Party once more.
To bring forward proposals to strengthen us  -  to be a Party of members because I knew we needed change.
That's why I also stated very clearly in September how I believe the next stage of Party reform should begin.
And at this Conference, I believe we can go further.
We can set a recruiting challenge.
Eight thousand new members next year and I want this Conference to sign up to the target this weekend.
We can adopt a community organising approach.
Backed with real resources, giving our Labor members and activists the tools they need “to organise and fight” for progress in their communities.
So as we grow, we grow in connection, including trialling community preselections, “primaries”, in some seats. 
And we must lead in the new world of campaigning on line.
We must have a serious digital presence through which Australians who share our values can engage with our ideas.
A base from which Labor campaigns can be organised.
The proposal to build a much stronger Labor on line presence is a vital proposal for the future.
We can move to modern structures.
Recognising that the old branches alone are not the future, embracing new forms of online membership and opportunities for supporters to become more involved.
Allowing members to organise around policy areas that reflect their interests and ideas.
And offering new opportunities to participate in policy development through genuine forums which include parliamentary, union and directly elected representatives.
And above all, we can create a richer experience for members of the Labor Party.
A genuine opportunity for all Labor people to take part in the Party's political life.
More opportunities to have a say and a direct vote in important decisions.
Starting with a National President, elected by members, to serve a full, three-year term.
I know change needs fresh thinking and strong leadership.
But you know it needs something else as well.
No parliamentary leader  -  no executive or committee  -  can dictate the moment at which we become again a Party of members.
As Leader, Ican create the opportunity  -  only you can take it.
Delegates, in the debate tomorrow I urge you to seize this moment for reform.
A Party of members will always be a Party of passions.
And I know we are more than able to express our passions in unity and with respect.
Because the respect we share  -  the trust we have in each other  -  join us in a bond that no debate, however passionate, can untie.
Because we meet as Australian Labor people.
Because we meet to debate the way ahead  -  for our country and for our common cause.
And because we know that our cause and our ideas our plans for jobs and growth and fairness, these things must be fought for. 
Argued here, yes, then fought for as well.
Fought for in politics against determined conservative opposition, fought for in every street, suburb and town.
Together, we must seek to govern, because only Labor can govern for all.
Delegates, I said 2011 would be a year of decision and delivery, Inever said it wouldn't be hard.
And I knew that in 2011 our Labor Government would have to persevere.
Showing the courage of your convictions does take courage.
But delegates, I knew something else.
I knew that in 2011 we would not be alone.
Because I always knew that the volunteers and the members, the activists and the organisers  -  all those who fight for Labor in our time  -  would prove more than worthy of the Labor generations who went before.
You were with us in the hard days of the last election campaign.
You were with us in the hard days of Government this year too.
Labor generations past have claimed great achievements as their own as 2011 ends, you can be proud of what you have done.
And together in 2012, we will do much more.
In 2012 we will cut taxes, lift family payments and lift the pension.
In 2012 we will cut company tax, lift super and build new infrastructure.
In 2012 we will create tens of thousands of jobs.
Delegates, I believe Australians are naturally confident.
We face the future and we see a chance to build, a chance to grow, but I also understand that Australians ask hard questions about their own future too.
Will the mining boom last?  
Will all our people get a fair share of our mineral wealth? 
What will sustain our economy in the days beyond the boom?
Will we build on the great advances that have helped our people live longer? 
Will our senior generations have the choices to work and to live a full life as they age  -  and will they have security of accommodation and care when they need it?
Will Australians with disabilities, children, adults, seniors and their carers, two million in all  -  be able to live a full life?
And perhaps the question that lies at the foundation of it all.
Will we remain economically strong in the Asian Century  -  growing our wealth and spreading fairness too?
What is the future of Australian jobs?
Delegates, I look forward certain that we will answer these questions.
Because we do know the future of Australian jobs.
That future is not jobs for their own sake, not hard work without reward.
But jobs with skills which will be in demand for years  -  jobs in industries which will grow for decades to come.
The farmers of tomorrow won't only farm the wheat to feed us, they'll farm carbon and trade the credits in the world.
The plumbers of tomorrow will have the skills we've always relied on and more and more they'll apply them to transform the energy and water efficiency of our factories and our homes.
Just as the panelbeaters who work our metals today will work in new supply chains tomorrow, for the global manufacturing that will flourish in the Asian Century.
And the caring abilities of our nurses and doctors will be applied in entirely new ways, offering diagnosis and advice on-line and from afar.
This is what working life will really be like in a high-tech, high-skill, clean energy economy.
And these are just some of the future jobs we can already see.
We will create new jobs in our whole economy, from tourism and hospitality, to retail and finance, construction and mining will change as well.
And there are jobs coming which we can hardly imagine today.
Entirely new occupations  -  created by tomorrow's entrepreneurs  -  using the new skills and new technologies we're investing in now.
These are the jobs of the future for which we govern.
And we govern for them now.
We are on track to create over three hundred thousand more during the next two years.
Today we would not swap places with any economy in the world.
It's often said, but rarely is it so true: we did this not by chance, but by choice.      
We govern for jobs  -  by governing for growth.
And we govern for growth by saying yes.
Yes to the skills, to the infrastructure.
Yes to keeping the doors of trade open, to walking the reform road in office every day.
And for that still to be true tomorrow, we still have work to do. 
This is the key to Labor's economic approach: Labor says yes to Australia's future.
To trade training in high schools, to extra university places.
To better roads and ports and to high speed broadband.
To a nation strong and respected in the Asian Century.
And while we govern for jobs through growth, we govern for jobs for fairness.
Fairness, when we extend opportunity to all  -  so everyone has the chance to get ahead.
Fairness too, when we ensure no Australian is left behind.
When we govern for jobs, for growth, for fairness, that is when Labor governs for all.
Delegates, Labor has always governed for all.
This is how we began. 
As men and women coming together in trade unions  -  giving the ordinary person power in the workplace he or she would never have alone.
Aiming to give working people security  -  to end want for all who work.
In the second half of our existence, we aimed higher.
Aiming for a fair distribution of opportunity in a modern economy.
Above all, through an education system that would give working-class kids a chance.
That historic work is not yet done  -  but we must lift our eyes again.
Because we know just how much has changed in these long years  -  we can sense already just how much will change in the future.
And it is because we have always looked with confidence to the future that we are confident to look to the future now.
Confident to show our people the future we see and seek.
Australia is a special country  -  and we can do something special here.
We can set a goal for which few peoples in the world can realistically hope.
Australia can be both prosperous and fair.
Sharing the wealth and the benefits of hard work with all.
Showing the world that a prosperous nation can be a fair nation still.
And silencing the many voices who say it cannot be done.
There are still those who say we must make a simple choice between growing jobs and being fair.
Friends, because we are Australians, because we are Labor people, we know that they are simply wrong.
We have proved the world wrong many times before today.
We are the people who share and stick together.
We are the people who hold on to mateship and the fair go.
We know that to have jobs, we must have growth.
We know that to have fairness, we must have jobs.
So we grow and as we do we spread the growth.
We create jobs  -  and we demand that every job be a job worth having.
We know ours is a people who work hard  -  and we deeply believe all deserve a share in the benefits of their hard work.
This is the Labor way.
This is the Australian way.
We follow it simply because we are us.
And this is Labor's historic task too: to be Australia's Party, to lead in the Australian way.
Our historic task, to carry forward a torch which first burned decades before we ever knew the words “the light on the hill”.
We always sought to govern and we always governed for all.
We still do.
Delegates, Australia can do this.
We can do this when we say yes.
Yes to jobs, to growth, to fairness.
Labor says yes to Australia's future. 



The Gillard Government today announced a new agency will be established to lead the Commonwealth's work to design the launch of a National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS).
The agency will also oversee new projects to that identify practical ways to prepare the disability sector and workforce, and people with disability, to move to a new ways of delivering disability services.
The Gillard Government will provide $10 million for projects that examine how to deliver individual, personalised care, ending the crisis-driven approach that is still sometimes applied.
Following in the footsteps of Medicare, an NDIS will make sure Australians with disability have access to the services they need to participate in society, no matter where they live or how they acquired the disability.
An NDIS will involve fundamental changes to the way disability care and support is provided in Australia.
It will operate on insurance principles and give people with disability greater control and choice over the services they receive, for example through individualised funding.
This will finally end the cruel lottery that means the services people with disability get depend on where they live, what disability they have and how they got that disability.
Throughout 2012, the Gillard Government will work closely with state and territory governments, people with disability, their families and carers, service providers and the disability care and support workforce on the critical design and development work that is needed for a launch.
The new agency's work will build on the foundation reforms agreed by the Commonwealth, states and territories at the meeting of the Select Council on Disability Reform in October. Work to deliver the foundation reforms is now underway.
The new projects will give the disability workforce, service providers and people with disability the opportunity to work with government on the development of a launch of an NDIS.
For example, a project could examine how service providers can adapt their business model for a move toward individually controlled funding.
The Australian Government wants to see improvements to disability care and support as quickly as possible.
That is why the Australian Government is committed to working in partnership with the states and territories, who have primary responsibility for disability services, in designing the launch of a scheme.
We will consult with state and territory governments and other experts to ensure we draw on their experience in running disability support services and long-term care and support schemes.
This design work will help inform the launch of an NDIS in select locations around the country.



Australia came into the 1970s with a new vision for our nation and its place in the world beyond the sterile polarities of the Cold War.
It was a vision that brought us closer to our own region.
Closer to an awareness of what we could achieve through active middle-power diplomacy.
Australia's intelligence capacity needed strengthening to operate effectively in the new climate.
And it was from a period of scrutiny that the Office of National Assessments came into being.
Of course, those developments reflected the deep concerns felt by my predecessors, Gough Whitlam and Malcolm Fraser.
But they also bore the unmistakable stamp of another great Australian, Robert Marsden Hope.
He was a brilliant judge and barrister  -  a man of learning and culture.
A civil libertarian; a friend of the Indigenous community.
Described by colleagues from the NSW Supreme Court as a man with an ‘acute mind', a ‘great depth of knowledge' and ‘a passion for justice'.
And remembered in one obituary as “one of the nation's more notable achievers.”
Robert Hope brought his exceptional gifts to the task of giving our nation an intelligence system equipped to meet the challenges of a complex and changing world.
An intelligence system which, he said, would be “entitled to the confidence and respect of the nation”.
I think it's fair to say that Justice Hope, and all who worked with him in the 70s and 80s, succeeded beyond all expectations.
Robert Hope's vision was of an intelligence system that is separate from policy making, that draws from many sources but centralises assessments.
A system that assures the Australian public it is working with integrity and propriety.
Indeed, Justice Hope didn't talk about a system.
He talked about an intelligence community; of agencies working collegially to deliver effective advice that best served the nation's interests.
The focus on modernisation positioned Australia for what was to come in the following decades:
The fall of the Berlin Wall.
The rise of Asia.
The growth of technology.
The spread of terrorism.
Over its 33 year history, this agency has advised six Prime Ministers.
From Fraser to Gillard, you have won our trust and our admiration.
In an increasingly complex world, ONA's rigorous analysis, and ability to cut through ‘the noise' has never been more crucial.
These assessments help the government to put our policy decisions in context and make sense of the world.
It is hard to imagine the prime ministership in the 21st century without the work of ONA.
Hard to imagine not having Allan's advice around the National Security Committee table.
Hard to imagine not having ONA's assessments to inform and illuminate our decision making.
Friends, none of this would have been possible without the foundations laid by Robert Hope.
The fact that the intelligence community remains much as he proposed it bears testament to that fact.
Justice Hope left us 12 years ago, but his place in our nation's story will not diminish.
He is honoured by the naming of a park here in Canberra, and a memorial prize at the University of Wollongong where he was founding Chancellor.
But today we pay him further respect with the naming of this building.
It is a place rich in history  -  once home to the Patent Office, the ACT Supreme Court, the Commonwealth Police and the Attorney-General's Department, to name just a few.
Perhaps most significantly, it is one of Canberra's most graceful old buildings, the very type of heritage that Justice Hope spent so of much of his career working to preserve as the founder of the Australian Heritage Commission and the Register of the National Estate and the inaugural chair of the NSW Heritage Council.
I think this is a tribute he would have appreciated most deeply.
A building once slated for demolition, now proudly restored, indeed inscribed in the Register of the National Estate that Justice Hope created.
And a delightful milestone as move towards Canberra's centenary in 2013.
Friends, in all of these things, we see the best of Australia.
Achievements that reflect our ability as Australians to get things right. And underscore the primacy of good public policy in charting the nation's future:
The development of this city as a worthy capital for our country.
The preservation of this building and the heritage legislation that made it possible.
The creation of ONA and the reform of our intelligence community.
And, of course, the life of opportunity and service led by Justice Hope, in whose name this building is now stands.
So I wish the staff of ONA every happiness in your new home.
I know not much makes you happy - reading your assessments but hopefully you take some delight in this. I was joking as I came down here, Allan, that I've never picked one of your reports up that says ‘It's sweet, don't worry about it'. My office joked back with me that one's being prepared for Christmas but I doubt that that's true.
So I wish you every happiness in this building, if not every happiness in everything else that you do.
I thank you for the very great work you do on behalf of our nation.
And I have the very great pleasure in being here to declare this building, the Robert Marsden Hope Building officially open. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Sport Mark Arbib today announced two new initiatives to encourage children to get active at school.
The Prime Minister's Olympic and Paralympic Challenges will tap into the spirit of the 2012 Olympic Games, encouraging our kids to compete for gold, silver and bronze awards while the competition is being played out over in London.
Every four years we are captured by the talent, determination and spirit of our Aussie athletes as they take the world stage.
These athletes provide the foundation for the dreams and aspirations of many young sports people as they strive to emulate their heroes.
We want to take this enthusiasm and use it to get kids out in the fresh air showing the sportsmanship that Australia is rightly renowned for.
In the Olympic Challenge, primary school kids will accumulate points every time they take part in an individual sport or as part of a group at school or through a community organisation.
The Paralympic Challenge will build on the existing Paralympic Education Program which is designed for children and teachers to learn more about Australian Paralympians, the Paralympic movement and people with disabilities in general.
The Challenges will run from 28 May 2012 until the close of the Olympics on 12August and the Paralympics on 9 September 2012.
Registrations will open in April 2012. Information will be sent to schools, out of school hours centres and other organisations who might want to take part in a Challenge. There is no cost for children, schools or other organisations to participate.
The Olympic and Paralympic Challenges are an Australian Government initiative working in partnership with the Australian Olympic Committee and the Australian Paralympic Committee.
They enhance the Gillard Government's commitment to boosting sport in communities across the country, which includes more than $117 million in the 2011-12 Federal Budget to support initiatives and programs including the $43.9 million Active After-school Communities program.
For more information please visit www.olympicchallenge.gov.auor www.paralympicchallenge.gov.au. 



PM: Thank you very much. I'm here with Senator Mark Arbib, the Minister for Sport.
we're having a very good day out at Red Hill Primary School, and if I can reinforce the message to kids, please get involved in 2012 in the Prime Minister's Olympic and Paralympic Challenge, please get out there, be active, earn those points and earn those rewards including gold, silver and bronze medals - and you've got plenty of amazing Australians to inspire you in that task.
We're very happy to take any questions.
We'll go here and then come across to Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you like Kevin Rudd?
PM: Look, Kevin Rudd and I are working together in the interests of the nation. Kevin has been attending for us the conference in Bonn on our further strategy in Afghanistan and is now pursuing the nation's interests in a number of places overseas.
Yes, Matthew?
JOURNALIST: At the weekend the Labor Party changed its platform to endorse gay marriage, a position that is the opposite of your personal position. Do you believe that your Party's position is in line with mainstream community views on this matter?
PM: I think that there's a range of views in our community and I think the fact that it was such a major debate within the Labor Party reflects that difference in community views.
What I thought was most important was that people at the conference and in the Parliament get the opportunity to vote in accordance with their conscience. For some people, this is about their most deeply held aspirations for their own lives. For some people it's about religious convictions they've always been motivated by. People will have a variety of views and I just think it's appropriate that at our conference, in the Parliament, in the community, people speak from their hearts on this matter.
JOURNALIST: But you need the support of the political mainstream to retain government. I'm asking you whether you believe that the position is in line with the views of the people that you need to vote for you for you to be re-elected?
PM: I'm not making judgments on the politics of this. I'm sure others, including commentators, will want to do so. My judgment was about the ability of Parliamentary representatives to speak from their heart and to vote in accordance with their conscience.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think Sky News should be compensated for taking part in the ultimately doomed tender for the Australia Network?
PM: Well, we haven't received any applications for compensation. If we do, then of course they'll be properly considered.
We'll go here and then come across  -  yes?
JOURNALIST: Just a couple of things, why did you snub Mr Rudd in your speech to the conference? Will you be encouraging the release of the full election review, and also was the release of snippets of it pay back for his behaviour over the weekend?
PM: Right, well, I'll take that three-part question.
First, I spoke to the conference about Labor ideals and Labor's vision. I'd ask people to have a look at the speech and judge it for themselves.
What I did in that speech was talk about the things that this Government has done, this Government, of course, being in office since 2007 with Kevin Rudd leading this Government for a period of time and now a very valued member of this Government. So, I talked about what we have been doing, but most importantly I also talked about our future and focussing on the needs of working Australians at this time of great economic transformation in the life of our nation.
Now, remind me of question two.
JOURNALIST: Will you be encouraging the release of the full review, and was the leaking of parts of it payback for Mr Rudd's behaviour?
PM: OK, the Faulkner-Bracks-Carr review was something that I ordered as Prime Minister. It's been dealt with by our National Executive. It's now been dealt with by our national conference.
My eyes aren't on what happened in the 2010 election. My eyes are always on what we need to do today to ensure that we're building opportunities for Australians in the future.
On the question of the leak, the first I knew about it was when I opened my Sydney Morning Herald yesterday.
JOURNALIST: But what about his question? He asked you if you though it was-
PM: -I just did answer his question, thank. Yes, here, thank you. I'll take a question from here.
JOURNALIST: Why was the tender established for the Australia Network in the first place if you were not prepared to see it through to the end? How can the business community have confidence that you won't cancel other tenders?
PM: I think we've got to be very focused on the circumstances here.
The Government did believe it was appropriate to have a tender round and we wanted to have a tender round that came to completion in good faith and acquitted all of the usual tender rules. What happened here was that there were several leaks that compromised the process, and having seen that happen it was appropriate to bring the process to an end.
Then, the Government determined that in order to give certainty and to deal with this matter, having seen that problem with the tender round, that the appropriate thing to do was to have these services provided by the ABC.
This is an important arm of soft diplomacy for Australia. Many other nations around the world that have comparable services have them associated with their public broadcaster.
We'll just take one at a time  -  yes?
JOURNALIST: Does it now look like the ABC is the second-best option, given that there were those leaks and you're now not allowing a competitive process to be followed through?
PM: Well what it looks like is what it is which is that the Government authorised a tender round. We would have liked that tender round to come to conclusion. We are in a position where that is not possible. It has been compromised by several leaks during the process.
As a result we needed to make a decision for the future which would give certainty. We've made that decision and we've taken public policy choice that this function should be with the ABC.
We'll go over to Paul Bongiorno.
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Did you wait until Mr Rudd had left the country before you made the decision?
PM: This was a decision made at Cabinet last night. There was a Cabinet submission circulated which Minister Rudd, like all Cabinet Ministers, received.
Can I just make the simple point about Cabinet processes - many Ministers need to be away from a Cabinet meeting for a variety of reasons. The usual process is they ensure that their views are represented within the Cabinet room by the Minister acting on their behalf, and that happened in this case. I'm not intending to go to Cabinet discussions, but the absolute usual protocols, that an acting Minister conveys the view of the Minister who is necessarily absent, happened in this case.
JOURNALIST: Why did you decide to make the decision, though, to award the contract to the ABC, before the AFP had concluded its investigation or the Auditor-General's had concluded their investigation?
PM: Well, we believe that it was appropriate, given how long-running this matter had been, and that we did need to bring the tender round to an end because it had been compromised, to make a decision that would be clear and certain and we made it.
Yes, Mark?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, leaving aside the outcome, do you concede the process has been messy, and secondly, would you like to see an interest rate cut this afternoon from the Reserve Bank?
PM: Look, the process was compromised by several leaks, so of course I would have preferred that that hadn't happened, but it has happened and being in Government is about taking the facts as you find them, not how you would wish them to be, and then dealing with those facts and making the best decision, and faced with these facts, that this tender has been profoundly compromised as a result of these leaks and needed to be brought to an end, a decision that has been public for some time now, we took the best decision we could to give certainty.
On the question of interest rates, the Reserve Bank acts independently of government, so its decision will be announced later today. Should there be any interest rate cut, then certainly I would want to see that passed on in full by the Australian banks. There is no reason for it not to be passed on in full.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Prime Minister-
PM: -We'll come to Michelle second. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say that it's been profoundly compromised by leaks. What do you mean? How have leaks compromised this process?
PM: Well, we received advice that given the leaks that had occurred that the process did need to be brought to an end.
JOURNALIST: What were the leaks, and  - 
PM: -Well, all of this is publicly known. That wasn't the decision from Cabinet last night. The bringing of the tender round to an end as a result of leaks was taken a while back, and taken a while back on the basis of very clear advice that that was what the Government should do given confidential tendering information had not remained confidential to the process but had gone into the public domain.
Michelle?
JOURNALIST: But then why didn't you take the decision then to go to the ABC, rather than it coming out of the blue now in the middle of these inquiries, and also could I just take you back to the previous question, would you favour the Faulkner Review be released?
PM: Well, with respect, Michelle, it's not out of the blue to us. We got advice that the tender round should be brought to an end, so it was brought to an end. We then had a proper Cabinet process, including the generation of a Cabinet submission which was circulated for coordination comments and all of the things that happen with a proper system of Cabinet Government. We then went through a proper Cabinet process to determine what should happen next. That submission came to Cabinet last night.
On the question of the review, the review has now been dealt with. It's been dealt with both by the National Executive and by our National Conference-
JOURNALIST: -But Faulkner and co want it out.
PM: Well, as I'm indicating to you, Michelle, it's being dealt with.
My focus isn't back to the 2010-11 election campaign. My focus is on what we need to do today and tomorrow to make sure that we're providing opportunities for working Australians during a period of profound economic change.
JOURNALIST: Firstly, do you think Tony Abbott should allow members of the Opposition to have a conscience vote on same-sex marriage, and secondly do you have an update on the Australian man who has been kidnapped in the Philippines?
PM: Well the answer to the first question is yes, I do. I think it's appropriate that all members of Parliament, irrespective of their political party, should be able to come to the Parliament and vote in accordance with their conscience on any bill that is moved by a private member to change the Marriage Act.
I do note, for example, in Labor's tradition, that bills in the past dealing with marriage have been the subject of a conscience vote. For example, the changes to the Family Law Act in the 1970s were the subject of a conscience vote.
So, I do think a conscience vote should be extended. I think it would be very tough to a Liberal Party member who had a very strong personal view to not be able to express that view in the Parliament and to vote in accordance with it.
Now, on the question you've asked me about the Australian in the Philippines, can I say this: we are certainly aware that an Australian in the Philippines, that he may have been kidnapped. There are media reports to that effect as well.
In these circumstances, a taskforce has been formed to deal with this issue. Our embassy in the Philippines is working with local authorities to try and establish the full facts here. We don't have the full facts now and we want to make sure that we establish the full facts, and we are providing consular support and assistance to family members of the man who may be involved in these kidnap circumstances.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: We'll go here and then come across.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you received a bad marks over the weekend for your series of speeches at the National Conference including the line ‘because we are us'. Are you going to sack your speech writer? And secondly, have you sent Kevin Rudd a Christmas card this year?
PM: I'm sending Christmas cards to all of my Parliamentary colleagues. Indeed, I'm sending them to some members of the Press Gallery as well, and we'll ascertain who after this press conference. No, that's not right. We'll be insuring that they're very widely distributed.
On my speech to conference, I spoke about the things I wanted to speak about.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister given the weekend's events, are you still able to work  -  have a functioning relationship with Kevin Rudd, and are you bracing for a challenge from him?
PM: The answer is, yes, of course we work together closely in the interests of the Government and the nation. Kevin is a very valued part of my team. He's doing a great job as Minister for Foreign Affairs. He's an incredibly active Minister for Foreign Affairs, pursuing our great Australian tradition of middle power diplomacy, what we like to style as punching above our weight. Kevin Rudd is doing that for our nation, so we'll keep working together with Kevin pursuing his work as the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the 60 best and brightest university students from Australia and Asia to receive a Prime Minister's Australia Asia Award.  
The Prime Minister's Australia Asia Awards provide 40 scholarships annually to Australian university students, 20 at undergraduate level and 20 at postgraduate level. 20 scholarships are also awarded to the top international Endeavour Postgraduate Award scholars from Asia each year.
Ms Gillard congratulated the recipients of the Awards, saying they are offered to the best scholars, researchers and emerging leaders from Australia and participating economies in the Asia region, and recognise that the Award holders are the leaders of the future.
Australian recipients in the 2012 round represent institutions from six states and territories, undertaking study or research in a diverse range of fields including creative arts, biomedical engineering, psychology and marketing.
These high-achieving students have the opportunity to immerse themselves in the academic and social cultures of other countries by undertaking international study and work experience.
In 2012 Award holders can study in any of the following countries and regions to broaden their professional and personal horizons:
 * 	India
 * 	Indonesia
 * 	Japan
 * 	Malaysia
 * 	The People's Republic of China (including Hong Kong and Macau SARs)
 * 	Singapore
 * 	Republic of Korea
 * 	Taiwan
 * 	Thailand
 * 	Vietnam
The Prime Minister's Awards build deep and enduring education and professional links between Australia and Asia. They also provide an opportunity for Australian universities and the Australian Government to work in partnership to identify and reward high calibre scholars.
Recipients of the Awards can combine their study or research with an internship or work placement, developing internationally-aware, skilled future leaders who can compete and collaborate in a globalised market.
International education is Australia's third largest export industry and these Awards strengthen Australia's international education sector and enhance Australia's reputation as a quality education provider.
Australian recipients of the 2012 Prime Minister's Australia Asia Awards will be recognised at a Presentation Dinner at Parliament House on 7 December 2011.
For further information including the list of Award holders, visit http://www.deewr.gov.au/International/EndeavourAwards/AusApp/Pages/PMAw…



Prime Minister Julia Gillard has named engineering firm Sedgman Limited as the 2011 Australian Exporter of the Year, praising its commitment to innovation and sustainability.
Sedgman designs, builds and operates coal and metal processing facilities in Asia, the Americas and Africa, as well as Australia.
It specialises in cleaning coal and has helped implement ecologically sustainable initiatives in many developing countries.
Last year, the Queensland company doubled its export earnings, undertaking projects in more than 20 countries including Mongolia, Mozambique, Botswana and Laos.
Sedgman's designs integrate various Australian-developed technologies, helping keep Australian expertise at the forefront of coal processing globally. 
The Prime Minister congratulated Sedgman on its achievements, which exemplify the skill and professionalism of Australian exporters and their importance to the national economy.
The Australian Export Awards is one of the country's longest-running and most prestigious business award programs.
It honours the achievements of Australian exporters and celebrates their contribution to national prosperity. 
The Prime Minister's Australian Exporter of the Year is selected from the winners of 12 national categories. Sedgman was also the winner of the Minerals and Energy Award. 
The 49th Australian Export Awards ceremony was hosted in Brisbane tonight by Trade Minister Craig Emerson, and co-presented by the Australian Trade Commission and Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Innovation Minister Senator Kim Carr today announced a new $249 million package designed to help Australian industries become more competitive and create new job opportunities.
The Industry Transformation Research program and cadetshippackage includes:
 * 	More than 1,000 engineering cadetships over the next four years so students can get the work experience they need to kick-start their careers in manufacturing and other Australian industries.
 * 	Newresearch training centres that will provide quality industrial doctoral and postdoctoral training for up to 600 PhD students each year.
 * 	Newresearchhubs bringing researchers and industry representatives together to design and engineer commercially and technically viable solutions to some of our most pressing industrial problems.
These new measures are part of the Labor Government's commitment to a more competitive and research focused manufacturing sector creating quality jobs and building the industries of the future.
Australiais endowed with top quality researchers and top quality industry  -  this new alliance bringing the two together just makes good sense.
As a result, Australia's research effort will be better aligned with the needs of Australian industry.
This Government has provided researchers with the best research infrastructure the country can afford  -  now we can give these cadets the best training experiences too.
Manufacturers will have the benefit of additional research expertise and knowledge to tackle difficult problems in key sectors such as metals, food, energy, textiles, building and automotive.
For more information on the Industrial Transformation Research Program, please see the attached summary, or visit www.arc.gov.au.
For more information on the engineering cadetships, visit www.innovation.gov.au. 



Australia has lost one of our greatest statesmen with the passing of Sir Zelman Cowen overnight.
Sir Zelman will be remembered for his service to this country in so many ways, no more so than as the 19th Governor General of Australia.
With great dignity and humility, Sir Zelman entered the role in 1977, determined to bring a ‘touch of healing' to our nation. And he did.
The modern prestige of the office can be greatly credited to his healing touch and for this alone I believe we owe him a debt of gratitude.
Sir Zelman's time as Governor General is just one highlight of a long, distinguished and extraordinary life.
Sir Zelman was a great scholar, teacher, author and advocate. He mentored many of his students who today are lawyers, politicians and leaders in industry and business.
He was a tireless servant of our nation, even delaying his Rhodes Scholarship so he could serve in the Royal Australian Navy during the Second World War, which saw him stationed in Darwin during the Japanese attacks.  
Sir Zelman was a proud member of the Australian community, a proud member of the Jewish community and a leader of both. He was a humanitarian whose ongoing dedication to justice and public welfare will remain one of his great legacies.
We will remember him for his warmth, his humility, his integrity, his compassion and the great dignity he brought to public life.
Above all, Sir Zelman was a loving husband and father who will be missed by his wife of 66 years Anna and his children Shimon, Yousef, Kate and Ben.
The thoughts of a nation are with them today.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today welcomed Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg to Australia.
This is the first official visit to Australia by Prime Minister Stoltenberg and the first by a Norwegian Prime Minister since 2005.
On behalf of the Australian Government and people, Prime Minister Gillard expressed Australia's profound sympathy for the victims of the tragedy in Norway in July. Prime Minister Gillard wanted the people of Norway to know the thoughts and prayers of all Australians were with them following the terrible attacks.
The Prime Ministers welcomed the growing economic ties between Australia and Norway and agreed to continue efforts to expand cooperation, particularly in the mining and oil and gas sectors. The leaders welcomed Prime Minister Stoltenberg's visit to Perth with a Norwegian business delegation focused on oil and gas and shipping.
Australia and Norway share a commitment to international security and are active contributors to a number of UN peacekeeping missions, including the UN Mission in Southern Sudan and the UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
On Afghanistan, the Prime Ministers discussed the transition to Afghan-led responsibility for security by 2014.  They agreed on the importance of a long-term commitment to Afghanistan following transition to support Afghanistan's economic development and stability.
The Prime Ministers discussed the significant action being taken by many countries to tackle climate change and committed to continue Australia and Norway's close collaboration on global negotiations.
Prime Minister Stoltenberg congratulated Prime Minister Gillard on the passage of the Clean Energy Future legislation, noting market-based approaches were the most efficient and cost effective ways of reducing emissions and would drive innovation and investment in renewables. Norway first set a price on carbon in 1991 and has had an emissions trading scheme since 2005.
The two leaders welcomed cooperation between Australia, Norway and the Indonesian government to preserve Indonesia's forests through REDD+ and the recent Declaration of Intent on REDD+ in the Congo Basin, supported by Australia and Norway at Durban.
As two major energy exporters, the Prime Ministers discussed how Australia and Norway could utilise their leadership in the mining and resources sectors to support efforts by developing countries to translate their resource endowments into sustainable growth and prosperity for their communities.
Norway has had an Oil for Development program since 2005 and Australia recently announced the creation of a Mining for Development program to promote sustainable economic development through mining. The leaders agreed that officials would meet to identify areas of cooperation and information exchange between the respective programs and reaffirmed both countries' support for the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
Prime Ministers Gillard and Stoltenberg expressed their concern that the current approach to the Doha Round had reached an impasse and agreed that efforts were needed to resist protectionism and strengthen the multilateral trading system. Australia and Norway will jointly host a meeting in the lead-up to the upcoming WTO Ministerial Conference to discuss new and innovative ways of advancing the Doha Round, including measures to ensure development in the world's poorest nations is not held back by deadlock in the WTO.
The Prime Ministers discussed cooperation in Antarctica, noting that both Australia and Norway are celebrating major centenary events in 2011-12 to mark the achievements of the ‘heroic era' in Antarctica.  Australia recently celebrated the centenary of Sir Douglas Mawson's expedition to Antarctica, which laid the foundation of the Australian Antarctic Territory. Prime Minister Stoltenberg outlined his upcoming trip to Antarctica to mark the centenary of Roald Amundsen's arrival at the South Pole.
The leaders agreed both countries are strongly committed to the Antarctic Treaty System and will work together closely to promote environmental conservation in Antarctica.  



Today Nick Sherry has tendered his resignation as Minister for Small Business, Minister Assisting on Deregulation and Public Sector Superannuation and Minister Assisting on Tourism.
Nick Sherry has made a notable contribution to the Gillard Labor Government in his role as Minister for Small Business ensuring that Australian small business, the backbone of our economy, was well supported during global economic uncertainty of the last year.
He has worked extensively on the Government's jobs and small business reforms as well as implementing initiatives and being an advocate for the growth of the Australian tourism sector.
Nick's personal interest and more than 20 years experience in the Australian superannuation system made him a valuable asset as an economic Minister during the Global Financial Crisis when he oversaw elements of the superannuation system.
He has served the Labor Party previously as Parliamentary Secretary for Primary Industry, Energy and Resources during the Keating Government and was Deputy Leader of the Opposition in the Senate as well as being member of Labor's tactics, strategy, economic and policy committees, and a member of the Labor Party National Executive and Tasmanian Administrative Committee.
As Senator for Tasmania, he has and will continue to proudly and tirelessly serve his constituents in the Federal Parliament.
I thank Nick for remarkable efforts in service to the Labor Ministry and I wish him and his family the very best in the future.  



Today I announce changes to the Ministry and the Cabinet.
These changes will better equip the Government to focus on its priorities for the coming year:
 * 	Keeping the economy strong and ensuring Australians have jobs as the economy goes through a period of profound transformation.
 * 	Using our prosperity to spread benefits to all Australians.
The Australian economy and Australian businesses will face both challenges and opportunities in coming years as our economy transforms.
The transition to a clean energy future, the emergence of new technologies and the changes to existing industries to take advantage of new conditions will bring enormous opportunities our nation must be ready to seize.
The changes to the Ministry will support a stronger focus on industry, innovation, productivity and participation, to ensure Australia is in the best possible position as we go through this transition.
At the same time, we must use our prosperity to spread benefits to all Australians, giving people the chance to get ahead while we make sure nobody is left behind.
The changes to the Ministry reflect the high priority the Government places on the important social policy reforms we will pursue over the next year.
A newly expanded Department of Industry, Innovation, Science, Research and Tertiary Education will be established and led by two Cabinet Ministers.
The Honourable Greg Combet MP will be appointed Minister for Industry and Innovation. 
Minister Combet will also retain his responsibilities for the Climate Change and Energy Efficiency portfolio. 
Senator the Honourable Chris Evans will be appointed Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research, along with his existing role as Leader of the Government in the Senate.
This new portfolio will mean better links between industry, innovation, science, research and tertiary education. 
This new portfolio will also be responsible for international education given the importance of higher education and vocational education and training to this sector.
The Education, Employment and Workplace Relations portfolio will be led by two Cabinet Ministers.
The Honourable Bill Shorten MP will be appointed Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations.  Minister Shorten will also retain his responsibilities as Minister for Financial Services and Superannuation. 
To support the strong focus in the new Ministry on Australian industry, particularly the manufacturing sector, Senator the Honourable Kim Carr will be appointed Minister for Manufacturing.  Minister Carr will also be appointed Minister for Defence Materiel.
The Government is also conscious of the challenge of housing affordability.  To ensure a stronger focus on this issue in the future, the Honourable Robert McClelland MP will be appointed as Minister for Housing and Homelessness, within Cabinet, responsible for all Commonwealth housing policies and programs. 
To support this new arrangement a number of machinery changes will be made to consolidate programs and Minister McClelland will be sworn to both FAHCSIA and the Treasury.
The Honourable Robert McClelland MP will also be appointed as the first ever Minister for Emergency Management, which will remain within the Attorney-General's portfolio. 
Senator the Honourable Mark Arbib will be appointed as Assistant Treasurer, Minister for Small Business, in addition to his existing role as Minister for Sport.  Minister Arbib will also be the Manager of Government Business in the Senate.
Disability reform and the creation of a National Disability Insurance Scheme will be a key priority for the Government, as will reforms in aged care and the implementation of the mental health package announced in the 2011 Budget.
Reflecting this, the Honourable Jenny Macklin MP will remain the Minister for Families, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs but will also be sworn as the Minister for Disability Reform, with a lead role in building the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The Honourable Julie Collins MP will be elevated to the Ministry and appointed Minister for Community Services, Minister for Indigenous Employment and Economic Development and Minister for the Status of Women.
The Government will also be focussed on continuing to deliver in health, through our new health reform agreement, as well as in aged care and the implementation of our mental health package announced in the 2011 Budget. 
Given the breadth of the Government's agenda two newly appointed Cabinet Ministers will be responsible for this work.
The Honourable Tanya Plibersek MP will be appointed as Minister for Health.
In addition, the Honourable Mark Butler MP will be appointed to Cabinet as the Minister for Mental Health and Ageing, with additional responsibility as Minister for Social Inclusion. 
The Honourable Brendan O'Connor MP will be appointed as Minister for Human Services and Minister Assisting for School Education.
This appointment of an additional Minister working on School Education also reflects the depth of the Government's reform agenda to improve the quality and equity of school education.
The Honourable Nicola Roxon MP will be appointed as the nation's first female Attorney-General. The Attorney-General will take on additional responsibility for Privacy and Freedom of Information.
The Honourable Jason Clare MP will be appointed as Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for Justice.
The Department of Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government will move from my portfolio to become a standalone Department. 
Responsibility for Arts and Sport will transfer to the new standalone portfolio, which will be named Regional Australia, Local Government, Arts and Sport. 
These new arrangements will ensure there is an appropriate focus on the arts in regional as well as non-regional Australia.
The Honourable Simon Crean MP will continue his important work as Minister for Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government and Minister for the Arts.
I am also announcing a number of changes to Parliamentary Secretary responsibilities.
Senator the Honourable David Feeney will retain his existing responsibilities as Parliamentary Secretary for Defence. 
In addition, the Honourable Mike Kelly MP will be appointed a Parliamentary Secretary in the Defence portfolio and will assist the Minister for Defence on the Afghanistan transition.
The Honourable Mark Dreyfus MP will be appointed Parliamentary Secretary for Industry and Innovation, supporting Minister Combet.  
Mr Dreyfus, will continue to serve as Cabinet Secretary and Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency.
Sid Sidebottom MP will be appointed Parliamentary Secretary for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
I want to thank all Ministers who have served the Government so well in their current portfolios.
As a result of these changes the number of women in the Cabinet and Ministry will increase.
I intend to make some further administrative changes to better align responsibilities within portfolios.
Responsibility for the National Archives will move from my portfolio to the new Department of Regional Australia, Local Government, Arts and Sport.
Responsibility for national security research and innovation will move from my portfolio to Defence.
Responsibility for cyber security policy will move from the Attorney-General's portfolio to my portfolio.
All departmental changes will occur within existing resources and existing Secretaries will remain in place.
I will recommend to her Excellency the Governor-General that the new Ministry be sworn on Wednesday 14 December 2011. 



PM: [audio break] Nick Sherry announced his intention to retire from the Ministry. Nick has been a tremendous contributor to the Labor team over a large number of years now. He is someone who (inaudible). Minister for Superannuation, a policy area very close to his heart. His political career also contains some tremendous personal lows and I think Nick is always going to be remembered as someone in this Parliament who showed a great deal of fortitude and determination even in the most difficult of circumstances. He's also been an innovative policy thinker, he certainly goes from the Ministry to the backbench as a Senator for Tasmania with my great personal thanks for the contribution that he has made.
In the circumstances where Nick indicated that he did want to take a step back from the Ministry, I have determined to appoint Julie Collins the Member for Franklin to the Ministry. Julie has been doing important work as a Parliamentary Secretary. As Minister she will now have the opportunity to build on this important work in the community services area. She will serve as the Minister for Community Services and she will add to this responsibility being Minister for Indigenous Employment and Economic Development and also Minister for the Status of Women.
Sid Sidebottom, the Member for Braddon, will become a Parliamentary Secretary and will serve in the areas of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
There will also be a number of other changes to Ministerial arrangements into the Cabinet. These changes are ones which reflect my central priorities as we go into 2012.
First of course, keeping our economy strong today and strengthening and modernising our economy for the future. We live in a period of tremendous economic change and in this period our focus will always be on jobs today for Australians and jobs tomorrow. That means that we need to keep our economy strong now and we need to be modernising it for the future.
Second, as we enter 2012 my priority is on insuring that Australians can share the benefits of our nation's wealth. I want to see Australians sharing the benefits of opportunity and I don't want to see Australians left behind.
With these priorities I have determined to make some changes to Ministerial arrangements and some new appointments to Cabinet. I believe that with this new Cabinet in place it will see an important mix of new energy and talent as well as wise heads and experienced heads in Cabinet. We will see this new mixture which will give us the focus and the fire power we need in 2012 to pursue the Government's priorities. I believe it's the right mix of experience and new blood.
As I said with our first priority being keeping the economy strong and ensuring that Australians have jobs, the ability to get a better job, the ability to start a small business if that's what they choose to do, the reassurance that when they go to work there will be fairness and decency there, that's my first priority and in this period of profound economic change I believe the Ministry must reflect that priority.
As we all know our economy is changing and that change does bring with it opportunities. Opportunities for new jobs, new industries as well as the chance for older industries to change. So in this period of change, to keep our whole economy strong, we must be shaping the economy of the future. And that means of course our focus on clean energy, it means the opportunities that come from new technologies like the NBN, it means a strong resources sector, high tech manufacturing, a diverse services sector, a growing food and wine industry that benefits our agricultural producers and an innovative and competitive tourism industry.
This is the economy that I want to see for the future. It is one that we have commenced to build in 2012 with important reforms like our Clean Energy Future reforms, putting a price on carbon; like the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, sharing the benefits that come from this period of high commodity prices and strong demands for minerals and of course with the rollout of the NBN.
Given the importance I am placing on jobs today and jobs tomorrow, on the shaping of this future economy I am appointing Greg Combet as Minister for Industry and Innovation. Greg will retain his own responsibilities as Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency given that our Clean Energy Future is such a key part of our nation's economic future and will be a key part of seeing the innovation that we need to create our future economy being unleashed.
Greg Combet will work alongside Chris Evans, Greg Combet working alongside Chris. Chris will serve as Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research and the two of them will work in a new department that brings together skills and higher education with the innovation, science and research portfolios, that is, it will bring together skills and higher education with the things that shape our future economy  -  innovation, science and research.
I want Australians to be able to get the skills and education that they need to have the best possible opportunities not only in today's economy but also in the future economy. Skills reform is going to be an important priority for the Government in the first half of 2012 and Chris Evans will be working on that.
Mark Arbib will step up to the new challenge of being Assistant Treasurer and Minister for Small Business. This is to sharpen a focus on one of my strong beliefs and that is that the highest aspiration for working Australians today is not necessarily getting a better job, it can be to start their own small business and I will be looking to Mark Arbib as Minister for Small Business to be in touch with the needs of our small business community and for being in touch with Australians who see their future being creating their own small business.
In delivering on our agenda for the economy of the future, Greg Combet will work with Kim Carr who will maintain his long held passion for Australian manufacturing by becoming the Minister for Manufacturing as well as the Minister for Defence Materiel.
This is a focus on our future economy and on jobs. Jobs are essential. But we're a Labor Government so we're never going to forget that the decency and fairness at work, equality of jobs matter to working Australians. It is critical that people are afforded fairness and dignity when they walk into their workplaces.
Bill Shorten will become Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations and I've asked Bill not only to focus on our Fair Work agenda as important as that agenda is, but to also broaden our description and thinking about workplace relations so that it deepens our national understanding about how workplaces are changing and the challenges for work and family life as that change occurs.
In the economy of today and certainly the economy of tomorrow we will work differently than we have in the past. That does bring benefits for working families including benefits like being able to work from home in a more meaningful way that has ever been possible before. But it also brings challenges and I will be asking Bill Shorten to not only focus on our incredibly important Fair Work agenda but to take this broader approach to workplace relations.
Bill Shorten will also be Minister for Financial Services and Superannuation as a recognition that working Australians today are not only concerned about their days at work but they are using that time at work to make proper and prudent preparation for their retirement through superannuation and other financial investments.
As I indicated the Government's other significant priority going into 2012 is about using our prosperity to give people the chance to get ahead, to share opportunity whilst also making sure that we aren't leaving Australians behind. Central to that is education, ensuring that today's kids get the best possible education is vital to our prosperity as a nation in the future, it's also vital to our equity as a nation. No one, I think, would doubt my passion when it comes this area  -  education transforms lives, it makes lives, it made my life. Education is the key to ensuring that our future prosperity is there and equity is there and education starts in the days before school through what we can do in early childhood.
I have therefore decided to strengthen our early childhood education team. That team currently consists of Peter Garrett, Kate Ellis and Jacinta Collins. I've decided to strengthen that team with the appointment of Brendan O'Connor who will assist Peter with our 2012 school reform agenda including the Government's response to the Gonski Review.
Brendan will also take over the important portfolio of Human Services.
Now there's nothing more important to the peace of mind of Australian families that knowing if they face illness or disability, mental illness, if they need an extra helping hand because of the impacts that come with ageing, or they need a hand in the circumstances of a natural disaster, that it will be there for them.
As a Labor government, as a Labor Party, we've always believed in the importance of helping Australians who are down on their luck through no fault of their own and that hasn't changed. I've therefore decided at Cabinet level to dedicate new resources to these areas that give assurance to working Australians and Australians generally, that a helping hand will be there if they were in times of need.
Tanya Plibersek will join Cabinet as the Minister for Heath and Mark Butler will join Cabinet as the Minister for Mental Health and Ageing and the Minister for Social Inclusion.
This team, this new team, will work on the delivery of Nicola Roxon's enormous suite of health reforms, including the implementation of the landmark health agreement that we reached at towards the start of this year and then delivered in its full form in the middle of the year and a wide ranging set of reforms so important for the future of health care.
This team will also work on the delivery of the nation's biggest ever mental health package, as funded in the May Budget and the team will work, particularly Mark Butler, on reforming aged care.
I believe it's important that this team works on this important agenda, I also believe that it's important Mark take the job as Minister for Social Inclusion, so that he is at the Cabinet table, able to ensure by looking across portfolios that disadvantaged Australians don't get left behind.
Jenny Macklin is going to continue her vital work on the development of a National Disability Insurance Scheme. This will be a key part of the Government's priorities in 2012 and given it is such a pivotal part of our agenda, Jenny's title has been changed to reflect that one of the key areas of work for her in 2012 will be disabilities reform.
Robert McClelland will be at the Cabinet table as the Minister for Emergency Management. Having lived through the days of last summer, both as individuals and as a nation, we all saw what can come when natural disasters strike, how they can impact the lives of so many thousands of Australians.
As we move into this summer, which I am hoping is a peaceful and quiet time, but having lived through the days of last summer, we know that natural disaster can strike and strike quickly. I am determined that at the highest level of government we have a Minister who is focussed on our response, the Commonwealth's response, to natural disasters.
Robert will take that job, he will also take on the important challenge of bringing to the Cabinet table new thinking in the area of housing, both public and private.
I am determined that we continue to drive against homelessness, that we continue to make a difference to the circumstances of Australians who are at risk of being homeless, or who have become homeless. And I also want us to strive to make a difference to housing affordability for young Australians and Robert McClelland will perform those roles.
I've asked Nicola Roxon to take on the portfolio Attorney-General, which lies at the heart of good government. Nicola's first love was the law, she is a Supreme Court prize winner, she is a former High Court judge's associate and she will return to her first love of the law as the Attorney-General.
She will be the first woman in the nation's history to serve in that role and I know that she will do it with distinction.
Amongst all of the things that Attorney-General brings, I've specifically asked Nicola to lead our efforts against the legal campaign by big tobacco to end the Government's reform of plain paper packaging.
These changes do mean an expansion of the Cabinet to 22 in order to ensure the Government's reform priorities in 2012 are directly represented at the Cabinet table.
In the outer Ministry, as I've indicated, Mark Arbib is becoming Assistant Treasurer and Minister for Small Business, in addition to his current responsibility as Minister for Sport. Mark will also take on the role as Manager of Government Business in the Senate.
Jason Clare will be appointed Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for Justice.
Amongst some minor changes to the existing responsibilities of Parliamentary Secretaries, Mike Kelly will return to the Defence portfolio, with particular responsibility for assisting Stephen Smith and the Government on the transition in Afghanistan, he is well placed to do that, given his own experience in his Defence days and his particular expertise in counter-insurgency.
Finally, I am determined, being the first woman to serve in this position, as the nation's Prime Minister, to see women take their full and equal place in our nation's decision making.
I'm very pleased as a result of this set of changes, the nation will see its first ever female Attorney-General and we will add another woman to our Cabinet and another woman to our Ministry.
These women, Nicola, Tanya and Julie, understand from personal experience many of the challenges Australian women face as they seek to build a career whilst having a family and I believe it's important that Australian women can look at the decision making of their nation and say that their life's experience is represented there and I believe Nicola, Julie, Tanya, will strengthen our capacity to do that.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
Yes, Phil.
JOURNALIST: Just to be clear because we haven't been given a list, exactly who has gone into the Cabinet, who has come out of the Cabinet, and why have you had to increase the size of the Cabinet, was it because you couldn't convince people to leave?
PM: The size of the Cabinet has been increased because of the breadth of the Government's reform priorities. What has driven me, as I've shaped this reshuffle, and it is my decision as Leader obviously, who serves in which portfolio and who serves in Cabinet. What has driven me in this reshuffle is making sure that the Government's big reform priorities for 2012 are represented around the Cabinet table.
That has meant that, in terms of going into Cabinet, Tanya Plibersek, Bill Shorten and Mark Butler have done into Cabinet. Kim Carr has gone to the outer Ministry. I've determined that I want to restructure Ministerial arrangements and our Departmental arrangements, which help us drive to create the economy of the future.
So I've done that with a new department, with Greg Combet and Chris Evans as Ministers in it. A combination that brings together Industry and Innovation, Science and Research, as well as Higher Education and Skills, with Greg also continuing to serve as Climate Change Minister, you can see coming together there the important future economy elements, including our clean energy future. The portfolios I have chosen for Kim Carr enable him to pursue his long standing passion for Australian manufacturing and Australian jobs in manufacturing.
The portfolio of Defence Materiel is central to our national security, it is also one which makes a difference to Australian jobs, skills and capabilities, which is why I thought Kim Carr would be a terrific person to do.
I'll go to Michelle Grattan.
JOURNALIST: Did you say Mark Arbib is retaining the Sport-
PM: -He's retaining Sport.
JOURNALIST: Isn't Assistant Treasurer a fairly big job? Why have you kept Sport with him?
PM: I thought it was important as we move into Olympic year to keep that continuity. Mark will have a very big workload, a sizable workload. Assistant Treasurer, Minister for Small Business, Minister for Sport and he will be the Manager of Government Business in the Senate. This is a new set of opportunities for him, but he is serving well as Minister for Sport and I thought that there was some reason to keep continuity as we move into Olympic year and with some of the issues the Government has been dealing with, including trying to use our love of sport and the fact we'll all be parked watching Olympic events this year, to actually make a difference to people's thinking about themselves going out and playing some sport and getting involved.
Laura.
JOURNALIST: Why hasn't Kim Carr been given the job you've now given to Greg Combet? Why has he been demoted and surely the two speed economy being such a big issue means it's actually something that should be at the Cabinet table and yet you've relegated it to the outer Ministry.
PM: Manufacturing will be represented at the Cabinet table by Greg Combet. I have restructured this Department to put a focus on the future economy we need to build. We are in the days of the patchwork economy, absolutely right and I said during this period of the patchwork economy I want to manage today's economy so we're offering opportunity for all, right around the country, that there aren't regions or individuals feeling left behind, but I also in these days want to be building the economy of the future. And I want to make sure that economy is a more diversified one, not a less diversified one, as a result of the resources boom and I know many Australians fear we'll come out of the resources boom with a narrower economy than we had going into it.
So I've asked Greg Combet to step up to that challenge. It is something I think lies at the heart of what we want to achieve as a government, so focussed on jobs today and jobs tomorrow. It enables him to bring together what he's been doing in clean energy, with this work to develop the economy of the future, so Greg's the right choice for that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) head up that Department, and what part of the Climate Change Department move into that new Department?
PM: Greg will be Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, with the Climate Change Department continuing.
JOURNALIST: Will there be a new Department?
PM: I presume Don Russell, the current Secretary of DIISR, will head the new Department. Greg will continue as Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency. We're now obviously in the days of implementation of the carbon pricing package, so it starts on 1 July next year, in those circumstances, whilst that implementation is painstaking work, I do believe that Greg has capacity to turn his mind to an additional challenge and that's why I've asked him to do so.
I have asked Kim Carr to continue to serve in the areas for which he has a life time passion and has done some tremendously good work.
Yes, Phil.
JOURNALIST: Are Brendan O'Connor and Peter Garrett sharing Education, what will  Brendan's exact title (inaudible) ?
PM: Minister Assisting on School Education.
JOURNALIST: That's an outer Ministry?
PM: Yes, it is. Yes, it is, so Brendan O'Connor will be the Minister Assisting on School Education, he will also be the Minister for Human Services. We've got a strong education team, with Peter Garrett leading it, but we are continuing our major drive in school reform and school education. So all of the reforms that we have been implementing so far and they're be biggest set of reforms ever made to Australian schooling, we are now looking to add to, with reform of school funding, in those circumstances I thought we should pump up the team and I've done that with Brendan O'Connor.
Yes, I'll go to the back, Steven.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why do you keep Robert McClelland in the Cabinet when you've substantially reduced his responsibilities?
PM: I thought it was important, given what we've learned through the things that we've lived through over the days of last summer, that there be a dedicated Cabinet level Minister doing Emergency Management and able to be there at the Cabinet table. Not only in days of the actual emergency, we have already made arrangements so we've got a Ministerial team which Robert will lead, ready to swing into action if we face the kind of emergencies that we did last summer. So I've already put that in place, Robert will lead that team.
In the days of the immediate response, that's obviously critical, it's 24/7 work and Robert will do it, but even in the days beyond the emergency response there are days of recovery and rebuilding, I think it's important that Robert is at the Cabinet table there. There are also important days of resilience building, we learn something from every natural disaster about how we could be better prepared for the future. I thought it was important for Robert McClelland to be at the Cabinet table.
As a Sydney Minister I've also asked Robert to take on the challenge of Housing. I think it's important that we do move to having a dedicated Housing Minister at this time. Housing isn't just an issue in Sydney, but I think Sydney is often the biggest flashpoint where people are thinking about housing affordability and the very simple question  -  will I ever be able to afford to own my own home. I want Robert, particularly as a Sydney based Minister, to work on that area and I want to make sure we continue in our drive against homelessness.
Yes, I'll go to Andrew.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how many of your demotees, if I can use that new word, threatened to quit  -  one or two? And secondly, why didn't you shift Ludwig out of Agriculture, given the internal heat he came under for his management of the live cattle exports?
PM: Well I'll take the second question first, but I'm happy to answer the first one as well. On Minister Ludwig, it's been a difficult year in the portfolio of Agriculture, as a result of the decision the Government took  -  the whole Government took  -  on live animal exports and the suspension to Indonesia. So I know it's been a difficult year and Joseph Ludwig has managed his way through those difficulties.
I want Joseph Ludwig to continue in that work, he's working even as we speak with stakeholders in Agriculture, working his way though, has been a difficult period, but we've got live exports resumed now, we've got better circumstances and a better understanding about how we deal with the animal welfare issues which were shockingly unveiled on Australian TV screens, so I think it's important for Joe Ludwig to be there consolidating. I think Sid Sidebottom will be a very good Parliamentary Secretary for him, bringing a perspective from Tasmania on all of these issues, including the forestry issues.
On who I've chosen to be in here, I've chosen the people I wanted, I've chosen the strongest possible team to take the Government's reform priorities forward. I'm not going into individual discussions with Ministers, but let me tell you  -  I read a few things in the media that bare no resemblance in any way, shape, or form to any discussion I've had with a Minister.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister was the Durban climate change conference, in fact-
PM: We'll go, Paul we'll definitely come to you, but we'll go here and them come  -  well why don't we just do reshuffle questions first and then we'll go to issues of the day and Paul I'll give you-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) reshuffle.
PM: Alright, OK, it's an interesting question. OK, we'll go (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott said this morning that this reshuffle's more about shoring up your leadership, what's your argument to counter that?
PM: Tony Abbott's negative about everything, so of course he's negative about the reshuffle. What else would you expect?
Paul.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Greg Combet have as much work do to now in the climate area, given that the Durban conference seems to have derailed a key plank of your economic strategy, with no effective, or significant rather, climate change action globally for ten years.
PM: Well, I think you've got on the wrong tram in relation to Durban and I think you've got on the wrong tram in relation to Greg Combet, so let me just explain why for both.
The result of Durban is that the big emitters, including the US and China, have agreed that there should be legally binding arrangements in 2020 and that negotiations will start for an agreement in 2015, so an agreement in 2015.
This is actually an important step forward, this is a remarkable step forward that means the world is showing that it is acting on climate change and I know in the lead up to these discussions at Durban there have been a lot of doomsayers around. I note, for example, that in accordance with usual negativity what we have seen is the Opposition predicting that nothing will happen at Durban. Let me just take you to the words, the relevant spokesperson, Greg Hunt said ‘there won't be a global agreement'  -  well, completely wrong. Senator Birmingham, who presumably got the same talking points from the Leader of the Opposition's office, say no to everything: ‘there doesn't appear to be any hope of a replacement to Kyoto, an extension to Kyoto being agreed upon and so this means we'll see the perverse situation where the world will enter a void where there is no agreement to act.'
Well the complete opposite happened. There is an agreement to act, including an agreement to act that extends to the US and China. This shows that the world is acting on climate change, that is what we have said to the Australian community all along, the world is acting on climate change. We have to act, we have acted and we will implement those measures so carbon pricing comes into place on 1 July next year.
On Greg Combet's workload, Greg Combet's workload in carbon pricing is moving to implementation. Yes, that is careful and painstaking work, but having been with Greg Combet as we worked though the best way put putting a price on carbon, with the complex policy design work, that was obviously an incredible onerous task. We've moved beyond those days of design and delivering legislation, to implementation, and whilst that will require Greg's efforts he does have capacity to turn his mind and his efforts to a further change.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Just given that negotiations on the international agreement continue for three years and we don't get concrete outcomes til 2020, is there an argument that maybe Australia's carbon price should start at a lower level, that we should scale back some of our ambition and then bring it up after 2015 when things become clearer?
PM: Well, I think you've got to remember the one point of bipartisan agreement in a world in which the opposition says no to everything, and that one point of bipartisan agreement is we have said, unconditionally, that we will cut our carbon pollution by five per cent by 2020, unconditionally.
So if you are going to acquit that unconditional obligation, then you need to find a way to do it and putting a price on carbon is the cheapest way to do it. Why would I subject this nation to doing it in a more expensive way? Tony Abbott might want to do that, I don't.
Karen.
JOURNALIST: Some people might look at this list of changes that you've made and note that you've promoted two, in particular, people who were involved in your elevation to the job of Prime Minister. What would you say to anyone (inaudible)?
PM: You mean Tanya?
JOURNALIST: I'm talking about  -  well, maybe there's three  -  I'm talking about Bill Shorten and Mark Arbib. What would you say to anyone who sees some kind of association with their elevation and you and your promotion?
PM: I'd say anybody making that assertion was incapable to logical thought. Have a look at  -  and that might be something that could be rectified through our ever improving education system for them  -  the key new appointments here are the appointments into Cabinet. Yes, of course important changes have been made, like Julie Collins coming into the Ministry, but I'll direct your attention to the people joining Cabinet  -  Tanya Plibersek, Bill Shorten, Mark Butler.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's been no mention of Kevin Rudd in this, of course he retains his position. Does this indicate that you're satisfied with his (inaudible) both as Foreign Minister, but also as a loyal member of your Cabinet?
PM: I haven't taken you to anybody whose job has remained the same. I've only taken you to the changes. Kevin Rudd is continuing as Foreign Minister, as I've said before and I'm very happy to say again, he's doing an exceptional job as Foreign Minister, so his role is not changed in the same way that Wayne's role isn't changing, Chris Bowen's role isn't changing, Craig Emerson's role isn't changing, Stephen Smith's role isn't changing and the list goes on.
So in this press conference today, I've just answered your question  -  I am obviously delighted with the work that Kevin Rudd is doing as Foreign Minister. He continues what is foreign policy work in our proudest tradition, which is punching above our weight in the councils of the world and in our bilateral relationships, that's what I want to see Kevin Rudd doing, it's what he's doing now as Foreign Minister and that's what I want him to continue to do as a member of my Cabinet.
Yeah, we'll go here and here and come back through. Yes, Mark.
JOURNALIST: Did you make all these decisions unilaterally, or did you consult the factions and just to clarify, is Brendan O'Connor having carriage of (inaudible) funding, or just assisting the Minister, Peter Garrett?
PM: So, Brendan O'Connor will assist Peter Garrett with it. There's a team here, there's currently Peter, Kate, there's Jacinta Collins, but I wanted to add to the team, given the volume of work and we've got this huge reform agenda and now we're doing school funding as well. So Brendan O'Connor will work with Peter Garrett on the breadth of our school reform agenda, but he will also work with his on Gonski. I made these decisions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Greg Combet and Chris Evan sharing a Department, who's the senior Minister and who takes the cab sub to Cabinet, (inaudible) have co-Ministers in a sense?
PM: No, it's exactly the same as the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations has been. It's exactly the same as the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has been for many a long year. We have two Cabinet Ministers and they bring submissions to Cabinet in their portfolio areas.
So, Kevin would bring one on foreign affairs, Craig would bring one on trade. Under the old arrangements Chris Evans would bring one on workplace relations, Peter Garrett would bring one on school education. It's no different than that.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect that this new team is the team that will go to the next election, or are you anticipating another reshuffle before then?
PM: I have put this team together as the strongest possible team to drive our reform priorities to ensure that our economy is strong today and strong tomorrow and to make sure we're offering Australians the benefits of opportunity and I don't want to see people left behind.
I want this team driving the economic transformation that this nation needs in the interests of working people and by that I mean working people getting opportunities, getting a helping hand when they need that helping hand. That's why I put this team together.
Now, I've selected it because it's the strongest possible team.
Now, I know Tony Abbott has said he'll take his current team to the election. Clearly I'm not going to be without common sense on this, change is possible. Until Nick Sherry came to me at National Conference a few weeks ago, not that long ago, and said to me that he wanted to stand down, I wasn't aware that Nick was contemplating that.
So, those things happen, Nick's made a set of decisions based on his own circumstances and his own life and I had already been in the throes of thinking about a reshuffle before Nick came to me with that conversation.
But this is the strongest possible team and I've put it together to reflect the priorities that I want 2012 particularly to be all about  -  building on what we've delivered in 2011.
Thanks very much. 



HOST: Ms Gillard, good morning and welcome.PM: Good morning Sabra.HOST: In announcing this reshuffle you said it would give the Government the fire power and focus it needed for 2012. Is that an admission that you didn't have focus this year and that you've been firing dummy rounds?
PM: 2011 has been a difficult year, that's obvious. In 2012 I want Australian families to see the benefits of the changes that we've delivered this year and I also want to see us focusing on jobs, the economy and fairness for the future. It's the job of government to deliver change and to publicly make the case for change.So of course in considering who should be in cabinet and who should be in the ministry, I have selected people who have got the skills to deliver the changes we need, to keep strengthening our economy, to keep increasing jobs, to have the jobs of the future with fairness as well. But I've also selected people who can publicly make that case for change.HOST: You've got 22 people in the Cabinet now, that's a fairly unwieldy size. That doesn't suggest decision, or is it that case - is that size now because you couldn't force Robert McClelland and Peter Garrett out?PM: Well it's that size because of the breadth of the Government's priorities. I wanted to make sure that the things that we are focusing on in 2012 are around the Cabinet table. I've done that in the structure that I've chosen.In terms of assertions that have been made publicly here about people threatening to resign and the like, they are completely untrue.HOST: Well Robert McClelland told me that he didn't want to go, he didn't want to leave being Attorney-General.PM: No, he didn't want to leave being Attorney-General. Being involved in these conversations about change obviously means you have a set of difficult conversations.Robert would have preferred to stay but he also identified to me a great passion for the emergency management role, and having lived through the last summer of natural disasters, I thought it was very appropriate for Robert to take that role and to represent it around the Cabinet table, also, dealing with the important role of housing and homelessness.What I was directing your attention to, Sabra, was some of the silly commentary that's been around about people threatening to resign. That is completely untrue.What I've done here is I have selected the best team, the strongest team, to deliver the Government's priorities in 2012, which are about jobs and the economy and fairness.HOST: They didn't need to threaten to resign, you know what the numbers are in parliament.PM: Oh crazy. What's the point of that question?HOST: Well the point of the question is your numbers are so tight, even you know that if one threatened to go that that could possibly lead to your government falling over?PM: So now you're building hypothetical on hypothetical about something that didn't happen.I have selected the best team to meet the circumstances of the nation now.2011 has been a difficult year. 2012 is an important year for our nation and an important year for the Government where we will move to the delivery of the things that we have created in 2011, including our clean energy future, including the Mineral Resource Rent Tax and we will continue to roll out the NBN.We will build on those things to create the economy of the future in this the Asian century, a century of transformation. And at the same time we will deliver our priorities which ensure we are not leaving Australians behind. That's about health, mental health, it's about ageing, it's about disability, it's about social inclusion generally. It's about all of those priorities that are now around the Cabinet table in the appropriate form.HOST: "Gillard rewards her henchmen" - that's one of the headlines in the papers today and it's a theme that runs through many of the newspapers today. There's no denying that you have rewarded the people who helped you into the job last year, Mark Arbib and Bill Shorten.PM: Well let's have a look at the actual facts.I have made selections which mean we have more women in cabinet than ever before. I think that's important. I've made selections like Nicola Roxon becoming the first ever woman to be Attorney-General of this country. I've put Tanya Plibersek into health because I think she will do a remarkable job delivering on and building on Nicola Roxon's reforms. I've asked Mark Butler to step into the Cabinet because of the importance of issues like mental health and ageing to our society today. I've asked Julie Collins to serve from Tasmania.What this means overall is that there's a diversified team. More women than ever before and women who bring a life experience about what it's like to juggle a family as you try and build a career.Yes, Bill Shorten has been promoted, and that's appropriate. Bill's done a remarkable job when he had disability as a responsibility. The reason a National Disability Insurance Scheme is on our nationa's agenda is because of Bill Shorten and his work. He's done a great job in superannuation and he will now have the opportunity to build on that with employment and workplace relations. Mark Arbib has capacity, the capacity to step up and do more and I've asked him to do more.HOST: Why did you demote Kim Carr? He's been universally praised inside and outside Labor. Some insiders from your party say that it's - he has been duded and it defies logic.PM: I wanted to create a new department and new portfolios to focus us on the future economy and that is what I've asked Greg Combet, in particular, to do. In 2011 we have done what we need to do to build a clean energy future - put a price on carbon. That will change our economy.At the same time the Asian century is changing our economy and we have to find Australia's place in that century. So we are maximising the opportunities. And the mining boom is changing our economy too, putting pressure on other industries, like manufacturing, like tourism, like international education. I've asked Greg to take a broad portfolio, which will put him in the position of designing and working with businesses and industry in the Australian community on that future economy.HOST: But it's not a good look for Kim Carr, a man who works very hard is demoted.PM: Well these are about difficult decisions.Clearly in these conversations and making selections, you do have to make decisions which effect individuals, which individuals may not welcome. As leader that's my job, to get the best possible team, the strongest possible team.What I've asked Kim Carr to do is to focus on his traditional passion for Australian manufacturing as well as take on the very important portfolio of defence materiel, which is about the equipment and capabilities of our defence force.He will work with Greg Combet because I want manufacturing to have a strong place in our future economy. Clean energy will have a strong place, the NBN will have a strong place, and we need in this time of transformation to make sure our economy grows in a way which offers opportunity for all. I don't want to see regions and industries left behind.HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for your time this morning.PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning John.
HOST: You're looking very, very healthy.
PM: Thank you very, very much.
HOST: I don't know how you can look very healthy with such a taxing job, it's a hell of a job.
PM: It is a big job, it's a great responsibility and also a great opportunity to make a difference to the nation's future. So I'm feeling fine and fighting fit, thanks John.
HOST: Good on you. Tell me, when you're not Prime Minister, what are you, what do you do when you're not being Prime Minister? Or is it a 24 hour job?
PM: Well it's pretty much a 24 hour job, but I will take a break over Christmas, I'll actually go on two weeks leave at the end of this week. I'm going to spend some time with family, of course with Tim and then with my family in South Australia. And we do very ordinary things, watch DVDs together, have family meals, read books, you know all of that kind of stuff. Just very normal, quiet, at home activities.
HOST: While Parliament is sitting are you able to have those quiet, normal activities, or are you really kind of at it all the time?
PM: Yeah, at it all the time and most days are big days, whether or not Parliament's sitting. If I do get the opportunity on a weekend to have a couple of hours, I do find it fairly easy to use those hours to relax. I'm not someone who carries the stress with me too much, but basically I do work very long hours and weekdays and weekends can be indistinguishable, they can be a lot the same in terms of working time.
HOST: Are you tough?
PM: I think I am tough, yes, a resilient person.
HOST: Do you need to be tough?
PM: I think you need to be tough too, I mean there's a lot of responsibility in this job, you make some very big decisions that affect people's lives, you're also responsible for setting our nation up for the future, for its long term prosperity and opportunity and that's really what drives me. And of course, politics is contested, it can get personal, so you do need to be pretty psychologically strong and I think I am.
HOST: Do you like Kevin Rudd?
PM: I've been asked that at a press conference very, very recently-
HOST: (inaudible)
PM: Of course. Look John, I can understand there's always intrigue with these kind of things, but Kevin and I are working well together and that's the important thing for the Government and for the country.
HOST: Prime Minister, do you like him?
PM: Look, Kevin and I are working well together John. I just  -  the reason I'm hesitating is because I don't like the, sort of, pop psychology of it all  -  we're doing something serious, we're running the government and we're running a nation.
HOST: I understand that-
PM: -And the important thing in all of that is that people are working as professionals in the nation's interest and Kevin Rudd most certainly is.
HOST: I agree with all of that, but as the question was asked on a very serious program, or a program that considers itself to be very serious, I thought it worth asking again.
PM: I was asked it at a press conference, is my recollection.
HOST: That's right, and I saw it played back on a very serious television program. What's the best thing about being Prime Minister?
PM: The best thing about being Prime Minister is designing the policies that will set this nation up, that will make a difference for us now and for opportunity in the future. Not only designing them, but delivering them and then seeing them work.
So I can already say that I can see policies I delivered as Education Minister making a difference in Australian schools. Next year we will see the Clean Energy Package making a difference, it will be real in people's lives, they'll see the tax cuts, the pension increases. They'll also see businesses starting to build our clean energy future. Minerals Resource Rent Tax, that will come into operation next year and we will see small businesses get tax breaks and then go on and grow and give people jobs.
These are the things that really get you passion up about it, because you know you're making a difference, not only today, but for tomorrow. I've got a very clear vision of the kind of country I want us to be, I want us to be a land of opportunity where people can get ahead, where they've got the benefit of jobs, where there aren't regions that feel like they're left behind, or industries stranded in the past. And I also want to use all of that shared prosperity to do good things, fair things for each other, which is why a big thing that we will work on in 2012 will be the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
HOST: It's been a very interesting year for us and obviously for you. Was Barack Obama as charming as he appeared to be?
PM: Yes, he is. The private person is very like the public person.
HOST: Really?
PM: Very calm, very measured person, very intelligent, casual in a way. I mean clearly being President of the United States comes with all of this machinery and prestige, but in the middle of that he is actually one-to-one, in his reactions with people, a very casual person and of course with that brilliant smile. I would think the way you can best judge people's attitudes is not necessarily how they treat me  -  the Prime Minister of Australia  -  but how you see them interact with others and as President Obama moved through Parliament House he said hello to every attendant and every security guard he walked past, he doesn't have to do that, nothing makes him do that, except being a good person.
HOST: Yeah, does he have a great deal to presence?
PM: I think he does have a presence, absolutely and that fabulous high-voltage smile.
HOST: Do you think that presence comes with power?
PM: I think there is a connection, but I suspect if you had met President Obama before the days of his presidency, and I didn't have an opportunity to, but I think if you had met him then, you probably would have still said ‘here is someone special', with the attributes I've just described now. And now of course he's taken those attributes into a job that has so much power, I suspect it's mutually reinforcing the sense of presence that he probably naturally had and the power that comes with the office of the presidency.
HOST: I suppose he would have to be considered the most powerful man in the world, wouldn't he?
PM: America, of course, the strongest nation on earth, the super power, so in every sense you would say President Obama's got a lot of responsibility on his shoulders and a lot of opportunity to make a difference, not only for his country, but for the world generally.
John, we live in a changing world-
HOST: -We certainly do.
PM: And the US is incredibly strong and will be a super power for as long as the eye can see, but we are also seeing tremendous growth in our own region, here in the Asian region of the world, the growth in China, the growth in India, so we will see those countries emerge to a more powerful status in every sense of the word  -  economically, in military terms, in cultural terms, in presence, if you want to use that word about nations. Which is why I've commissioned a white paper, a formal Government study of our role, Australia's role, in this the Asian Century, and how we can be strong in it, because I think this is an era of grand opportunity for us  -  some risks, but overwhelmingly opportunity and we've got to make sure that we harness them.
HOST: When you consider that we have, what, give or take 25 million people, as opposed to 303 or something in the United States, we are a very, very impressive small country, are we not?
PM: We're the best country on earth John. Just no contest in my humble opinion. We, I think, have a uniquely Australian approach to trying to combine prosperity, the generation of wealth, with a sense of fairness. I think Aussie mateship does live deep within us, as a very core Australian value and one of the things that as a Government I think we should do in leading this nation, is bring that value to the fore in how we treat each other. And that changes as our society modernises, but it's always about giving people a helping hand when they face tough times.
I've wanted to do that in health, by improving heath, I want to do it now for people who face disability, life circumstance, an accident at birth, I don't want that to mean poverty and disadvantage for people for the long term. I want to make sure we're strong and resilient in the face of natural disasters because we never know-
HOST: -You never can tell-
PM: - Whether it be you, or me, or any of the people listening to us today who could face that circumstance. So that sense of making sure we're not leaving anybody behind as we build prosperity and opportunity, I think is a very traditional Labor approach, it's a very traditional Australian approach and the two go together.
HOST: How do you get on with Bob Brown?
PM: Look, I have a working relationship with Bob Brown. The truth is, if we look across the modern sweep of Australian politics, Prime Ministers have needed two talk to others and work with others in order to get their legislation through, apart from a brief period between 2004 and 2007 Prime Minister Howard, for example, always had to talk to people in the Senate, whether it be Bob Brown or whether it was Meg Lees and the Australian Democrats, or Greens from Western Australia  -  you would recall there were two female Green Senators from Western Australia.
So there's nothing usual in sitting down with people in the Parliament and talking turkey about what needs to be done next.
HOST: Does Bob Brown have a great deal of say in decisions that you make?
PM: I make the decisions with my Cabinet team and with my Caucus colleagues for the Labor Government. When those decisions require legislation, just like Prime Minister Howard would have said to himself ‘How am I going to get this through the Senate?', I say to myself ‘How am I going to get this through the House of Representatives and the Senate?' and then have the conversations which enable me to do that.
HOST: It must be a fascinating life, because it would require a great deal of very sensitive thought about which route to take to get the objective, whether you talk to him, or whether you talk to her, or whether you don't talk to anybody and just do it yourself. It must be a very challenging job.
PM: The nature of modern democracy, I think though, is it's not a command and control system, where a leader barks out orders and everybody snaps to attention and scurries around. I think as a society we're quite different from that in the modern age. People want to have a say, people in their suburbs, their towns, their communities want to have a say, want to have a direct relationship with government and make sure their voice is heard and they'll do that a variety of ways, sometimes they'll come to our Community Cabinet meetings, sometimes they'll go and bash on the door of their Member of the House of Representatives, or a Senator who's got an office in their local region, sometimes they'll send a letter, send and email, tweet, all of these things.
HOST: Plenty of modes of communication available to people now.
PM: And I think in our modern world people want to have a say and so the nature of our democracy, I think, needs to be in many ways more consultative and listening to people and we do that through our Community Cabinets, which I think are a great way of keeping our ear to the ground.
When you come back into Parliament House, I don't think that there's any problem with actually sitting down and having a conversation with people, whether that's one of our Labor backbenchers who runs into my office and says ‘My community definitely wants this' and they do that all the time, they're feisty representatives of their community, or whether it's a conversation with Rob Oakeshott, or a Tony Windsor, or an Andrew Wilkie, or indeed with the Greens political party.
HOST: Can you tell me, do your people, not you individually, but do your people listen to this kind of program to get a feeling of what  -  I start the program by saying what's on your mind Australia and they ring and tell us and they say things, probably, on this program, normally your people wouldn't really get to hear. Do people monitor this sort of program?
PM: For individual Ministers we obviously have big work programs to do, we're in meetings, we're at events, we're doing things were you can't have the radio on-
HOST: -You couldn't listen, no.
PM: You've got to be very focused, but people are in and out of cars all the time and would be listening to the radio frequently while they're travelling around and then, of course, as a general sort of oversight thing, we do have streams of media monitoring to let us know what's happening around the place and what the news of the day is.
HOST: It's intriguing the way it all works and when I say what's on your mind Australia, they really do tell you. They certainly don't hold back.
PM: People come and tell us directly too, of course they ring you John, and have those special conversations with you, or give you the feedback through all the mechanisms that you now have with modern technology to reach out into the community. I mean, we have those mechanisms too, so you do get a good sense from, for example our Labor Caucus members who will come to Canberra, having had a couple of weeks back in their electorate while Parliament's not sitting and they will say ‘Well, at the local shops, at the local fete, when I had a street stall, when I had a mobile office, or direct into my office, people came in and this was the issue they were talking about'. So they do have their ear to the ground.
HOST: Do you think that we talk Australia up enough?
PM: I always want to see us do it more-
HOST: -Me too.
PM: I'm incredibly proud of our country and I do get the opportunity to go to international meetings where I can skite about what a great nation we are-
HOST: -And it is, yeah.
PM: What a resilient economy we've got. I like the fact that I can go to international meetings and have conversations with other leaders, where when I go through our economy and statistics you can almost see them drop their heads because they are so envious about how our economy is going. Now that doesn't mean that there isn't more to do to bring opportunity for all Australians, but we are a great country. We pulled together during the global financial crisis, we've kept our economy strong, we bring that special sense of fairness and we've never been afraid of the future, even when it's required taking tough decisions today to build that future and I think as Prime Minister I've seen elements of all of that on display. And I've also seen the great pride we can take in the work of our military people, in Afghanistan and beyond, they are the envy of the world too, they are amazing at what they do.
HOST: They certainly are, but we get constantly asked what are we doing in Afghanistan?
PM: I can understand that, we've been there a long time and we've suffered some very heavy losses and particularly the incidents where people have seen an Afghan National Army soldier hurt our soldiers, that really makes people look and think and makes them feel very anxious as well full of grief for the families that have been affected.
So we do have to keep explaining we're in Afghanistan pursuing the mission that originally took us there, which was to ensure that it is not a safe haven for the training of terrorists who can then come and take Australian lives.
HOST: And that was the motive originally, wasn't it? To go there and make sure it didn't become a safe haven for terrorists, but isn't that job completed, or you feel that it could revert?
PM: We are in a process now, country-wide in Afghanistan, the process is called transition, where area by area they are being marked to transition to Afghan control and security leadership. Where we are, in Oruzgan Province, has not yet been marked for that kind of transition, but it will be and President Karzai has made it clear that he wants to see the whole nation under control of Afghan Security Forces by the end of 2014. Now that doesn't mean that our engagement with Afghanistan would end, we will continue to have a partnership for aid and development, Afghanistan is a very poor country, there's a lot to do to just make sure kids survive into, babies don't die when women are having children, that infant mortality comes down, that kids actually live through their childhood years and don't fall victim to diseases like polio, which we saw the back of years and years ago and people can get education and what they need to help make a life for themselves.
So we will be there in that form, we may also be there in some military form, but we are yet to make the decisions about that, as we work through not only here in Australia, but with all of the partner countries in Afghanistan, as to how this transition process will work and what lies beyond transition.
HOST: What was our original motive in going to Afghanistan?
PM: Well, you would recall we went there following 9/11, to use the parlance following the attack on the United States with the World Trade Centre coming down and all of that dreadful footage, we can easily bring to our minds those pictures of distress and loss in New York and of course also in Washington. So, we went there because we saw those attacks on the United States, our alliance was invoked, and we went as part of our alliance, but also because we knew that this kind of terrorism was a problem for the whole world, including for Australia and we lost Australians on that dreadful day.
HOST: We did. Do you think we're greatly indebted to the United States?
PM: I think we're great friends, great allies, great partners. So we've got bonds that go both ways, I think we value them and they value us.
HOST: I think that's quite right and I think it's very important. I can't really think of anybody else wanting to come to our rescue in a time of trouble, but I'm sure the Americans would.
Tell me, plans for Christmas, quiet one? Going to be with the family, as you told us, but apart from that nothing and just a little holiday, just a little break?
PM: Just a little break. I'm looking at taking a couple of weeks off. I'll spend some time out in the country, just very quiet, me and Tim and just enjoying some peaceful time in the country.
HOST: So when you say out in the country, have you got a place to go? I don't want to know where it is, but have you-
PM: -We might be fairly, I might be a bit secretive about the location, but we'll be out in country Victoria and then we'll go over to South Australia and spend some time with family.
HOST: I don't blame you for being secretive, it must be a nuisance to be Prime Minister sometimes, people would want to burden you with their woes, I imagine.
PM: I like having a chat with people and I've always enjoyed that part of this position as Prime Minister and indeed since I first came to the Parliament in 1998, being out meeting people, talking to people. When I was first elected that was obviously about the community I represented in the Parliament, the community is Lalor in Victoria. Now it's about the nation as Prime Minister, but I like having the conversations I have with people as I move around.
But I am looking forward to just a little bit of quiet and private time.
HOST: Peace and quiet, yeah.
PM: Peace and quiet, read a few books. Those kind of things.
HOST: What kind of books do you read?
PM: All sorts. I've put together a little collection to take away, so I'm taking a Frank Moorhouse, I'm looking forward to reading that, I'm taking away a collection of short stories about Australian women that a friend gave me, so that should be a good read. I'm taking away a book called, I think it's called Insatiable, it's actually a story of an Australian chef, about the food industry. So, a wide range.
HOST: A very wide range. Do you read mysteries?
PM: I do read mysteries. Yes, when you travel as much as I do, it's nice to sometimes at the end of a long day have a page turning novel, a light read that just helps you do the break between working really hard and trying to get to sleep.
HOST: Tell me this, are you familiar with an authoress  -  because I'm old fashioned I say authoress (inaudible)  -  called Donna Leon?
PM: Donna Leon.
HOST: L-E-O-N-E.
PM: No, I don't think I am. You might have to name a book title, I'd be more likely to remember the titles than I would the author.
HOST: I can't remember, but I'll  -  I can't remember the titles of the books, but she writes about Venice. She has a detective who is resident in Venice and they're all written around Venice, but she's the best literary writer since Agatha Christie.
PM: I used to love Agatha Christie books when I was growing up, I would have read all of them and I still now when on the TV they show the Miss Marples (inaudible) I'll record that in the hope that I'll someday get enough time to watch them. But you might have picked a new author for me John, I'll have to follow that up.
HOST: Donna Leon.
PM: A murder mystery in Venice would be an intriguing thing.
HOST: Yeah, I'll get  -  they're available in paperback. I'll get a couple and send them to you, if you'd like.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: And I hope you have a happy Christmas and I hope that the new year is fulfilling for you and of course for the nation and I appreciate very much your very generous time that you've given us this morning. It is very, very kind of you.
PM: Thank you very much John.
HOST: Happy Christmas.
PM: To you too. 



Every year we work so hard getting ready for Christmas that the day can be over almost before we know it.
And then if you were up late at a church service, or up early opening presents, it can be one of the sleepiest afternoons of the year. 
So it's always worth stopping to take it all in  -  to enjoy that feeling that “it should always be like this”. 
For me, the most special thing about Christmas is the people I'm with.
Because it's a day we share with the people who are most important to us.
At Christmas, for at least one day, we can all live the life we'd most like to live: a life of loving kindness for those we care about most.
And this evening, we all know we are not alone, that we all have people to protect and trust, and we all have people who look to us to hope and persevere.
I know I speak for all Australians when I express a particular Christmas wish to all those who have to work today to take care of us.
Police and fire fighters, ambulance officers and nurses, emergency personnel, all the essential services which keep our cities and towns running.  And of course our troops abroad ... everyone who gives up their Christmas Day to make our Christmas Day possible. 
Thank you for such a generous gift.
To all Australians, wherever you are and whoever you are with, I hope today at your place has been everything you hoped for. 
Merry Christmas.



Can I say to the crowd assembled here  -  I love this time of year.
I love it because it means I get to come home to South Australia. I get to come home and spend some time with family and friends, a very precious thing to do.
But I've also made it part of my annual calendar, as I come home to South Australia, to attend here, for Proclamation Day.
Such an important time of reflection on the history of this great state.
A time when we look back and a time when we look forward.
And friends, when we do look back, when we remember the Proclamation of South Australia, I think we see it as a day of endings and a day of beginnings.
For the traditional owners, it was the end of a way of life that they had treasured for centuries.
For the settlers it was a final closing of the door on old skies and old friends.
For both, it was a new beginning.
Full of risk.
But full of promise too.
The Proclamation tells us that they set out to create nothing less than a “great and free colony."
As the Premier and Mayor have detailed in their speeches, the founders succeeded and they succeeded in abundance.
Those nine ships of our own “first fleet” didn't just bring settlers and cargo.
They brought the best of our human values:
Optimism.
Faith in the future.
And willingness to unite great ambition with relentless hard work.
As Australia's first female Prime Minister, I was delighted to be reminded that there were 78 women in that fleet.
A woman, one of them a historian, who told us that they believed themselves to be“a worthy sisterhood.”
We rightly celebrate our founding fathers like Hindmarsh and Gouger; Torrens and Light.
Let's celebrate too those unnamed founding mothers and sisters too  -  because there would have been no South Australia without them.
If we have achieved good things, and we have, it's only because they achieved even better things in circumstances unimaginably harder than our own.
Friends, there is perhaps another clue to this State's success in the cargo of those ships: the state's first printing press.
Yes, they brought a printing press because they intended us to be a people of reason and learning - a free people in a new land; liberated from the poverty and the ignorance of the old.
175 years later, their achievements stands  -  and it stands strong 
They created South Australia out of hardship and sacrifice.
And no community has ever been made of better materials.
And so on this day of gratitude and homecoming, we make our own proclamation:
That we will honour their great deeds with great deeds of our own.
Proud of the past and unafraid of our future.
Always ready to make those founding hopes our own.
Thank you for welcoming me on Proclamation Day.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Sport Mark Arbib and Member for Adelaide Kate Ellis today announced the Australian Government would provide $30 million towards the redevelopment of Adelaide Oval.
With support from the Federal and South Australian Governments, Adelaide Oval will be redeveloped into a 50,000 seat world-class multi-sport venue.
The Gillard Government funding will go towards the construction of two new underground car parks, creating more parking solutions in the precinct and freeing up space on residential streets.
The funds will also go towards the creation of new wetlands and other enhancements around the Riverbank precinct to make sure the Adelaide Oval continues to be one of our country's most beautiful sporting venues.The Prime Minister thanked the Member for Adelaide for her continued representations on behalf of the people of Adelaide.
We want to make sure the benefits of this once in a lifetime upgrade doesn't just benefit sports fans.  This redevelopment will benefit the whole city, from tourist operators to residents who live nearby.
The Gillard Government is proud to be working in partnership with the South Australian Government to transform Adelaide Oval into an international standard sporting facility in a truly beautiful setting.
As one of the most recognisable cricket grounds in the world, the Adelaide Oval has been the stage for some of the world's best cricket since 1871.
Following the redevelopment, AFL games will also be played at the oval for the first time in 40 years.
The South Australian Government committed $535 million to the Oval's upgrade. Construction is scheduled to begin in March 2012 after the current cricket season.  The redevelopment is scheduled to be completed in time for the AFL season in 2014.



PM: Can I start by wishing everyone a Merry Christmas. I hope everybody here had a great Christmas, I certainly did have a fantastic Christmas here in Adelaide with family and friends. I'm joined today by Acting Premier John Rau, by my parliamentary and ministerial colleague and the Member for Adelaide Kate Ellis and also by Ian McLachlan who is President of the South Australian Cricket Association and we are here at this wonderful Adelaide Oval and I'm very pleased to be able to announce today that the Federal Government will make a $30 million contribution towards the redevelopment of this place.
Our $30 million will go to construct some new car parking as part of the redevelopment. It will also go to create a wetland precinct on the river bank.
Now this is important because Kate Ellis as local member has made constant representations about ensuring that when this redevelopment happens, the needs of local residents are met as well.
Understandably they've had concerns about car parking and they will now be resolved through the use of this $30 million for new car parks. And they've wanted to ensure that people who aren't necessarily sports lovers can still get a benefit from this redevelopment and that benefit will be in the new wetlands alongside the river.
During the time I've been here in Adelaide I've been walking on the river. It looks fantastic now, it is enjoyed by so many South Australians and this will be an important new feature with this wetlands walk.
I'm very excited about what this redevelopment means for Adelaide. What it means in terms of the ability to continue to host cricket at the standard that Adelaide always has throughout its history but what it also means about the hosting of other events including AFL matches right here.
So this is an important part of redeveloping this great city, my home town and I'm very pleased to be here to make this announcement.
I'll hand over now to the Acting Premier for some comments.
RAU: Thank you very much Prime Minister and welcome back to Adelaide.
PM: Thank you.
RAU: And may you stay long. Can I just say on behalf of the State Government that we're absolutely delighted to have the support that we're now receiving from the Federal Government.
I'd like to obviously thank the Prime Minister and Kate Ellis the Member for Adelaide for their great efforts in supporting this project. Everybody in this room would appreciate that this project now has the overwhelming support of all of the people of South Australia. We're lucky enough to have cricket and football and the general public entirely supportive of this project. It's going to be part of the revitalisation of the city of Adelaide which is taking place and on behalf of the State Government I can only say that we are delighted and very thankful for the support the Commonwealth is giving us in relation to this project and Prime Minister I hope when the project opened you'll come back again and have a look at the actual development that is taking place in part due to your great support today, so thank you very much.
ELLIS: Well thank you very much to the Prime Minister, to the Acting Premier, to Ian McLachlan and can I thank you so much for your announcement here today.
We know that a developed Adelaide Oval is great news for sport, it is great news for our city and what we are working to ensure is that it's also great news for the local community.
I know that since day one I've known that this will be a fantastic investment in our state but that we also have to make sure that the needs of the local residents are taken into account. And in my street corner meetings, in my consultations in our local community I've heard time and time again that people support the development but they are concerned about car parking, they're concerned about access to their streets and their houses and they also want to make sure this is a development which is for more than just sports lovers.
Personally I am a sport lover and I am looking forward to watching the cricket, to watching the football, but also to be able to enjoy this redeveloped precinct. I thank the Prime Minister for listening to the concerns of Adelaide residents, for making sure that we can play a role for working in partnership with the South Australian Government and with the local sporting community to deliver the best results for Adelaide.
MCLACHLAN: Yes, Prime Minister thank you for the contribution from your Government and I'd also like to thank Kate because we've been at her for some time, I mean many years to support this project and others and I'm also pleased that we can do several major things with this. One is to get car parking and the indoor school together. There'll be a car park under that indoor school now  -  certainly. Because the kids come from the country during all of the holidays particularly in the summer and their mums and dads can sit underneath and wait for them so that will be a convenient thing rather than having to walk back for hundreds of yards in the heat.
Secondly the extension of what was called the Cathedral Project I think it was called which has been around for some seven or eight years, which was to take storm water and clean it up, I'm very pleased to see that happening too and so I hope that that will appease, if you like, some of those people who have been worried about this development.
As for the development itself and the other things this extra money brings, Prime Minister, it will just round out our list of essentials, I would say and I think when this is finished it will be the catalyst that will switch this town on and so I'm very pleased that a) the project's going ahead obviously as Chairman of the Stadium Management Authority but secondly that this contribution can round out a project which I think will make this the most beautiful and convenient first class cricket and football  ground in the country.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: This project was first announced in December 2009, why has it taken until December 2011 for the Federal Government to put up (inaudible)?
PM: The Federal Government has made investments in Adelaide Oval in the past. We've been working on this announcement today for some time. It flows out of the Member for Adelaide  -  Kate Ellis' consultations with the local community and making sure that their needs were met at the same time that we enhance this redevelopment. So I think as you've heard this morning, what we've announced today is going to meet needs for the local community so that they're reassured that there won't be cars across their driveways for example but also will enhance this redevelopment so people can come and park easily whether they're coming to attend a sporting match or whether they're bringing one of the kids for training.
JOURNALIST: Given the budget position and given the Federal Government's withdrawn funding from various other South Australian projects, such as the (inaudible), how can you justify this kind of expense on something which is probably not a fundamental project in terms of the infrastructure? Is it more a gift to the local member (inaudible)?
PM: I think your question is underestimating the significance of this redevelopment for Adelaide. This is about people coming into the city, attending a sporting event then going on- flowing from the river back into the city, maybe taking their family out to dinner, having a drink after they've been at the sporting event or perhaps going to the shops before they come to the sporting event so it really is about revitalising the city of Adelaide.
As someone who grew up in this place I can remember the days that we basically all had our backs turned to the River Torrens so you didn't really view it as a feature of the city, now it is properly valued and viewed as a feature of the city and the way in which this redevelopment is going to be done alongside other redevelopments that are happening in Adelaide will create an entirely different sense of how people use the city, move around the city and enjoy the city. So it's a very important piece of infrastructure.
I don't know whether anybody else wants to say something on that?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) suggest that this is basically a vote buying exercise.
PM: This is about an important enhancement for this redevelopment that certainly will make a difference to local residents but as we've heard from Ian McLachlan who's in a very good position to judge being president of the Cricket Association, it will also enhance directly this redevelopment for the people who will come and use it. His example  -  a country mum who's driven her son or daughter down for special training  -  get a park straight underneath rather than have to worry ‘where am I going to put the car', ‘how long is it going to take me to get from the car to where we need to go for the training', ‘how long is it going to take me to do the walk back'.
JOURNALIST: Do you think people are wary of the amount of spin and cynicism involved in the selling of this process right the way through including today where you get a good run by dropping the details to a sympathetic local paper  -  do you think that's symptomatic of how this process (inaudible)?
PM: I must admit I'm not going to agree with any part of that question and I think in the spirit of Christmas - this is no more complicated than what you see in front of you. It's a $30million investment to make difference for local residents but also to make a difference for the city of Adelaide and the state of South Australia that will very much value this place.
JOURNALIST: While we're on the topic of newspapers and News Limited papers have suggested that your Government has spent $65 for every Australian in a bid to keep the Greens and Independents happy and keep yourself in power. Do you agree with that figure?
PM: Thanks very much for that question. You are referring to a report in today's Daily Telegraph and I thought when I saw that report this morning  -  they don't call it the silly season for nothing. That report is wrong. To give you just some examples of how wrong that report is  -  it records for example the $10 billion investment into the Clean Energy Finance Corporation. I'd invite anybody to get the budget papers themselves and have a look and when they do have a look they'll find that that $10 billion doesn't hit the budget bottom line. It's an investment in solar and renewable technology, it's an investment in clean energy and it comes on top of investments that the Government has made in the past.
And then to give you some more examples of just how wrong that report is, it records things like Labor election commitments  -  Labor's election commitment to have an investigation of high speed rail; Labor's election commitment about connecting renewable energy sources to the electricity grid. So the report is wrong, wrong in all of the details that I've just described. And can I say again - they don't call it the silly season for nothing.
JOURNALIST: Presumably there was some lobbying for this $30 million, can you therefore quantify the flow on benefits to the state from that $30 million?
PM: Well I'll turn to Kate because she's been representing her local community on this.
ELLIS: I just want to make really clear that the Federal Government and myself as the local member has supported the redevelopment of Adelaide Oval since day one and we need to just be clear when we're talking about timing, when we're talking about support  -  that from day one we said we think that this will be a fantastic investment for our community but if you recall at the time we were also going through a World Cup bid process where we worked with the South Australian Government during that process and we came to agreements to invest in Adelaide Oval if we were successful in that bidding process. And we also said if it turns out that we're unsuccessful in that bidding process we will sit down and work with you to see how we can invest. That's the point that led us to today.
So this isn't something new, this is something we have supported from day one and we've committed to working with the South Australian Government, we've done and that and the results of that can be seen today.
JOURNALIST: And on that Kevin Foley initially suggested he'd be seeking $100 million from the Federal Government, is this (inaudible).
ELLIS: No, I think South Australians would expect their Treasurer to being asking for perhaps more money than they're going to get in the end. We think that this is a fair contribution. We also know that this is a contribution that will have a real difference. The South Australian Government are funding the overwhelming majority of this upgrade but we wanted to ensure that we could make a difference, that we could ensure that we'd get the best result and that we can play a role in this as well which is what the $30 million will achieve.
JOURNALIST: Was it disingenuous then to throw that figure around or had you given some kind of commitment or suggestion that he would get (inaudible)
ELLIS: We have gone through many discussions and negotiations with the state government. Obviously a large number of those were done in the context of the World Cup bid but since then we've sat down and I think that the South Australian Government would probably say that they are delighted to receive $30 million-
RAU: We are.
ELLIS: And that is definitely being viewed as a positive.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We'll just take one last question over here and then we'll go.
JOURNALIST: Just on asylum seekers, I understand the Government currently is looking at a proposal to take to the Liberal Party, when can we expect that to be delivered to the Liberal Party and when will there be an (inaudible) to the negotiations?
PM: I've been staying in constant contact with the Minister for Immigration Chris Bowen and my cabinet colleagues about this over the Christmas season. I am very pleased that the Opposition has now decided to actually sit and have serious discussions on this question - I'm very pleased to see that.
This isn't a matter for politics, this is a matter for getting something done and we will continue those negotiations. Because it's not a matter for politics it's not my intention to conduct those negotiations through the media but they will continue and I hope that they continue with good faith and good will towards an outcome.
Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: The people of Darwin have had a rough Christmas (inaudible).
PM: At Christmas time unfortunately we do see around our country all too regularly Australians who are caught up in natural disasters or Australians who are feeling in their own family the burdens of fire and we've seen that over this Christmas season and of course we see Australians too caught up in car accidents so whilst it's a time of joy and friendship and family for many Australians it can often be a time of hardship for some. So for Australians who have faced hardship over the last few days whilst we've been celebrating Christmas, I think all Australians have been thinking of them as we've seen what they've gone through, that's certainly been my view as I've seen people caught up in all sorts of circumstances and difficulties over the Christmas season.
I guess it strikes us particularly heavily at this time of year when we know somany people are celebrating and we see our fellow Australians doing it tough.
Thank you.
[ENDS]



PM: Happy New Year to everyone. It's great to be here in Smithfield and I'm joined today by my Parliamentary colleagues the Minister for Families and Community Services and Indigenous Affairs Jenny Macklin and by the two Chrises, I'm joined by Chris Bowen who is here in his capacity as the Member for McMahon and by Chris Hayes here as the Member for Fowler. And we're here today with an important announcement about a new benefit for families which starts today. This is good news for Australians families and good news for the Australian economy.
This is delivering on an election commitment that we made. Delivering on an election commitment to increase Family Tax Benefit for families with teenagers. Our current system of family payments basically assumes kids leave school at 16 and they go and get a job. Well that was the Australia of the past but we all know it's not the Australia of today and it's not going to be the Australia we want tomorrow. But currently families get a rude shock when their child turns 16. Their child is still at school, they still need feeding, they still need new clothes, they've still got all of the expenses of having a teenager in the household but their family benefit can drop by 67 percent.
From today we are fixing that. Families with teenagers that are 16, 17, 18, 19 that are eligible can look forward to increased family payments. For a family on the maximum rate of family payment this will make a difference of around $4,200 a year. To put that in context, it's around $160 per fortnight more than families have been receiving in the past.
So this is good news for families with teenagers. It's also good news for the Australian economy because this benefit is tied to kids staying at school. Making sure they get that all important Year 12 or equivalent. Now whether they're staying at school because they want to go to university, whether they're staying at school to get the best possible skills for their job that they're dreaming of, whether they're staying at school to get a flying start through a school based apprenticeship program or using a trade training centre into an apprenticeship  -  we want kids staying at school.
All of the evidence tells us if kids drift away from school early then that can mean a lifetime of disadvantage. And we are concerned that for some low income families the cost of keeping their teenagers at school is just too much for them. So this today is good news for families under cost of living pressure. It's also good news for the Australian economy because it will help keep kids at school.
I'll turn now to Jenny Macklin for some comments then we'll take questions.
Jenny.
MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister. Happy New Year everyone. I'd like to first of all thank the Huynh and Tran families very much for having us and having them in their home today and for especially having us here on New Year's Day and welcoming us in the way that they have.
As the Prime Minister has just said, today is very good news for families particularly families of older teenagers. I think all of us know especially those of us with teenage children know that they don't get cheaper as they get older and one of the major improvements that this Labor Government is delivering from today is an improvement to Family Tax Benefit for teenagers  -  for teenagers from 16 to 19. And if you're on Family Tax Benefit Part A it will mean that you can get an increase of up to $4,200 extra a year if your young person is staying on at school or staying in vocational education.
So this is very, very important for families and also a very important encouragement to young people to stay on at school.
The evidence shows us that young people from lower income families are less likely to finish Year 12 or less likely to get a vocational equivalent to Year 12. We want that to change.
All of us know that young people are better off, going to get a better job if they stay on at school and this is all about helping their families to make sure they can better make ends meet with extra help from our Labor Government.
PM: Thank you. Very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Will you be (inaudible) cut out levels for this benefit?
PM: I'll get Jenny to do all the stats for you.
MACKLIN: So they way that it works, the largest benefit goes to those people on maximum rate of Family Tax Benefit. It varies depending on the number of children you have, but it's around the high $40,000 family income mark but it really has a lot of things  -  the number of children, the age of the children, but it's around that level.
JOURNALIST: Minister, was this announced during the election campaign?
MACKLIN: It was, as the Prime Minister has just said this is an election commitment that she made that this Labor Government is now delivering on.
I'll just say one of the most disappointing comments that I've seen from the Leader of the Opposition in this regard, he said a few weeks ago that only the right children should stay on at school. Well that's not our view. Our view is that all children should have the chance to stay on at school and get the best education because all of us know that that means they've got the best chance to get a decent job.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) will some of these gains be swallowed up in areas like the Baby Bonus being scaled back and here in New South Wales concessions for first home buyers being (inaudible) back?
PM: Well the concession for first home buyer's scheme you refer to is a state government scheme, on the Baby Bonus Minister Macklin will answer.
MACKLIN: The Baby Bonus changes of course happen at a different stage of life so one of the things that we're fixing is a real anomaly, a real change that needed to be made to the Family Tax Benefit system.
Parents at the moment get a terrible shock when their children turn 16 and they find their Family Tax Benefit goes down dramatic even though the costs of raising children at that age generally goes up. So we're fixing a very significant problem that did exist for families and this has never been done before.
With the Baby Bonus we want to make sure that the Family Tax Benefit system is sustainable so from September next year the Baby Bonus will be at $5,000 but of course it is our Government that has also introduced Paid Parental Leave, the first national Paid Parental Leave scheme and today is the first birthday of our national Paid Parental Leave scheme.
We've got around 120,000 families who've so far benefitted from our paid parental leave scheme.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how will the Government respond to Victoria's rejection of the mandatory pre-commitment laws?
PM: Oh, sorry you're on a different topic altogether aren't you? Look we're continuing to work on poker machine reform. As I've said in the past I am concerned about the damage that pokies can do to families. I've seen it in my own electorate in Melbourne's west where we do in my electorate office get people in real distress come in because they or a family member have got an addiction problem and they've literally put that week's rent or that month's mortgage payment down into the pokies and made a big, big problem for their family as a result. So I am concerned about poker machines and the damage that they can do.
Minister Macklin is leading the Government's efforts and we're continuing to work on poker machine reform including continuing discussions with our state colleagues.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Bob Hawke and Paul Keating continue to argue today about who was really behind the floating of the Australian dollar. Who do you think is really telling the truth?
PM: Well, giving my age away, when we're looking back at Cabinet documents that are 30 years old, the Cabinet documents that have been released for public display today, I was 20 or 21 when those Cabinet documents were being generated. So I wasn't around that Cabinet table. Consequently it's Bob or Paul who'll have to answer those questions for you.
But it was an important reform to give birth to the modern Australian economy. And in that tradition today as a Labor Government we are continuing to deliver the reforms that will give us the economy we need for the future.
We built the foundation stones last year  -  rolling out the NBN, the Clean Energy Future package and the Minerals Resource Rent Tax and in 2012 we will be building on those foundations to generate Australia's future economy.
JOURNALIST: Will 2012 be a year free of leadership speculation?
PM: 2012 is going to be a year in which we are building the economy of the future as well as continuing to deliver fairness.
When I looked at the documents released in today's newspapers from all those years ago, one thing that struck me was a reminder of the Labor Government building Medicare against strident opposition from the Liberal Party.
Here, today we are committed to building a National Disability Insurance Scheme, another big engine room of fairness for the Australians who need that help the most.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) just a response to calls to redraw the boundaries of the Great Barrier Reef from the (inaudible)  -  what's your response to that?
PM: Look that's a question ultimately for Minister Burke in terms of any park boundaries so I'll leave that to him.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you support a return to Nauru as part of a compromised agreement (inaudible) and how close are you to another meeting with the Opposition?
PM: Well negotiations are continuing and it's not my intention to have a running commentary on those negotiations in the media. We want them to continue in good faith and good will.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how confident are you that you'll be Prime Minster by the end of 2012?
PM: I think you'll find I answered those questions in 2011, so have a look at the transcripts.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS]



From today, eligible families with teenagers aged 16 to 19 will get a boost to their family payments of to up to $4,208 per teenager, if their child stays in school or a vocational training equivalent.
This increase will bring the maximum rate of Family Tax Benefit Part A for eligible teenagers to $6,307 a year.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Families Jenny Macklin today met with the Huynh and Tran families in Smithfield, Sydney, to discuss what the increased Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A payments will mean for them.
We all know teenagers don't cost less once they turn 16.  If anything they cost more, which is why we're making this important change today.
There are about 630,000 families across Australia with a teenager turning 16 within the next five years who stand to benefit from this increase if their child stays in school or a vocational training equivalent.
Today's increase means these families could benefit from the increase in the maximum rate of FTB Part A of up to $160 extra per fortnight to help pay the bills, which translates to an increase of $4,208 annually.
In addition to this, more than 82,000 teenagers currently aged between 16 and 19 could also benefit from the changes. Families already receiving Family Tax Benefit Part A will have their entitlements automatically adjusted from today if they are entitled to the higher rate.
The Minister for Families Jenny Macklin said that evidence showed that those teenagers who finish their education or get a trade are better off in the long term.
We want all children to stay in school or get school-based apprenticeships to give them the best chance at getting a good job.
This change will provide parents with that extra financial support to ensure their older teenagers achieve a Year 12 Certificate or equivalent qualification.
The Government's $770 million investment over five years will be particularly valuable for families with lower incomes.
In 2006, Year 12 completion rates were at 59 per cent for students from low income homes, compared with 78 per cent for higher income students.
These findings indicate that the costs of educating teenage children are an important barrier for families on low incomes to support their child's education.
Most families with a teenager in full-time secondary study who is currently receiving Youth Allowance are likely to be better off on Family Tax Benefit and should check their eligibility.
For more information, go to:http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/sa/families/payments/Pages/supporting_familie…



The New Year is a time to look with gratitude on the good things of the last 12 months and look forward with confidence to the year that stretches before us.
It's a time for new hope and new beginnings.
Perhaps a personal resolution like spending more time with family or a big life decision like starting a university or TAFE course or opening a business.
Whatever the New Year holds for you, I trust it will be a safe and happy one.
Let's also remember that the 1st of January is the anniversary of Australian nationhood.
So let's also resolve to make this great country of ours even stronger.
Yes we've achieved remarkable things in our nation's journey.
But I firmly believe that even better days lie ahead.
Together let's make 2012 a year of which every Australian can be proud.



I congratulate former Prime Minister John Howard on his appointment as a member of the Order of Merit.
This high honour recognises Mr Howard's distinguished public service over many decades.
As our second longest serving Prime Minister and a parliamentarian of 33 years, Mr Howard devoted his life to Australia.
He led our nation through many difficult days including our grieving after the Port Arthur massacre, 9/11 and the Bali bombings. He led our nation through times of widespread and complex economic and social change.
While Australians will inevitably have a variety of views about the record of the Howard Government, Mr Howard rightly commands ongoing respect for his contribution to the nation.
Appointments to the Order of Merit are the gift of The Queen.
Mr Howard now joins a small number of distinguished Australians to receive this honour, including  Sir Macfarlane Burnett, Lord Florey, Sir Sidney Nolan,  Dame Joan Sutherland and Lord May of Oxford.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and NSW Premier Barry O'Farrell today celebrated the 100th test match at the Sydney Cricket Ground (SCG) by announcing a $186 million upgrade to the Bradman, Noble and Messenger Stands.
The NSW Government will contribute $86 million to the project, while the Australian Government and the Sydney Cricket and Sports Ground Trust will contribute $50 million each.
Work will start shortly after the Australia v India One Day International in February with the project scheduled to be completed before the 2014 Ashes test match between Australia and England.
The Prime Minister called the Sydney Cricket Ground an iconic sporting arena in NSW and Australia.
Today marks the beginning of the next stage of SCG's development to ensure it maintains its rightful place as a world-class sporting facility.
This is an exciting project, not only for Sydneysiders but for all Australians, who have grown up watching the New Year's Test and relishing in the history and tradition of the ground.
Mr O'Farrell said the upgrade to the ground was a fitting way to celebrate the SCG's 100thtest match.
“The world's finest cricketers have stepped onto the hallowed turf of the SCG and it's only fitting NSW has a ground to match their exploits,” he said.
“The new development will ensure spectators have fantastic facilities, while preserving the history of the Members and Ladies Stands.
“This is a win for cricket and AFL fans and the upgrade will create hundreds of jobs during its construction providing a great boost to the building industry,” Mr O'Farrell said.
Spectators have been made the priority with no columns in the new seating area ensuring sightlines are unaffected, and up to 85% of seating being under cover.
Replacement of the Noble, Bradman and Messenger stands is aimed at improving spectator enjoyment and also providing state-of-the-art facilities for corporate and media interests.
Plans also include the largest video screen at any Australian sports ground, 700 person dining room, three new bar areas and secure player facilities.
Once construction is complete the capacity of the SCG will increase from 45,000 to 48,000.



PM: I'm delighted to be here today with Premier O'Farrell. You can feel the excitement in the air already. People look forward to this day all year and already history is being made as we're here for the first day of the 100th test at the Sydney Cricket Ground and I know that the crowd is hoping to see some more history made than that.
So on this very exciting day I'm very pleased to be here to make an announcement with the Premier about the future of this ground.
This ground has wonderful history and we want to honour that history by making sure we preserve it but also making this ground ready for the future. That does mean that three stands need redevelopment so that they can have better facilities for those who love their cricket and those who love their football. Better lines of sight, better amenities, better facilities for corporate entertaining as well as, as Rodney mentioned, the biggest screen that there will be at a ground in Australia.
So I'm very pleased to be here and to commit the Commonwealth Government to investing $50 million in this redevelopment. It means that this great ground, the Sydney Cricket Ground will not only have a proud past but it will have a wonderful future.
I'll hand over to the Premier.
O'FARRELL: Look I'm delighted to be here with the Prime Minister. I want to thank the Prime Minister, I want to thank the Sports Minister Mark Arbib, for their contribution.
$186 million will buy a great future for what is already a fantastic cricket and sporting ground.
She is looking tired, the facilities aren't up to scratch and what this $186 million dollars will do is ensure this is a first class stadium again. It will set it well for the future and provide both spectators and those people who have the honour to play on the stadium with the world's best equipment and facilities.
So it's fantastic to be here with the Prime Minister, it's great to be here with Rodney Cavalier as Chairman of the Sydney Cricket Ground Trust to be investing in infrastructure in New South Wales.
You know running Government is not just about hospitals, not just about roads, not just about public transport, you have to do it all. You have to be able to walk and chew gum at the same time, that's what we're doing, we're getting on with the job and we're doing so today on the first day of the 100th test here at the SCG by committing ourselves to redevelopment that will be complete in time for the January 2014 Ashes Test.
PM: So this is a great partnership, Commonwealth Government, State Government as well as the Cricket Ground Trust so I'd like to thank everyone involved and on my part I'd like to thank Sports Minister Mark Arbib for his work on this proposal.
So we're very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
O'FARRELL: Well no one who knows me understands that I love this place, that I love the football here, I love the cricket here, I even love those concerts that used to occur here. And it doesn't take much arm twisting for me to ensure that this stadium is up to scratch with others around this country.
Now what I understand, and we've got Cricket Australia here today, is that there is no right to have test matches at any ground around this country, we operate in a competitive field, we've seen in Victoria, we've seen in South Australia, we've seen in Western Australia, we've seen in Queensland a stadia upgraded. Upgrading and this investment in the SCG is about ensuring that we remain competitive in the race to have some of the best sporting events in the world here.
PM: We're here today for the cricket, no wrestling, no wrestling today.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
O'FARRELL: Well I'm suggesting that frankly when you compare parts of this ground now to other stadium around the country it doesn't come up to scratch that's why the New South Wales Liberal Nationals Government is committing $186 million. $50 million of which is thankfully is coming from the Federal Government to ensure it is competitive and that the future of this ground, the future of events at this ground is secure.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
O'FARRELL: I'll leave that to the Cricket Ground Trust because I'm happy to run Government, I leave to the Chairman of the Cricket Ground Trust the events that occur here and I leave with him the factors to what name the new stand will have as well.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
O'FARRELL: I think demolition starts in March if I'm correct Jamie, is that right? So demolition will start in March and it's all due to be read for the second test, the New Year's Test 2014.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) do you wish there would have been bigger capacity with these renovations?
O'FARRELL: Look I think what the renovations also seek to do as we've seen with the Trumper Stand is not just give individual patrons and spectators better facilities but also to improve both the corporate and functions facilities because we can't operate stadia like this, they can't generate the income they do simply through sporting events. I would come out here probably at least once a fortnight to a dinner or an event in one of the rooms here that's run by a charity or some other organisation and that's what this new stand will do as well which is provide more revenue generating capacity for this ground.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
O'FARRELL: Well that's a question, that's a very good question Chris and I suggest that you ask that as a Channel Seven exclusive to the Chairman of the Trust after this.
[Questions to Mr O'Farrell omitted]
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well what we've seen from Commodore Bainimarama is the announcement of a first step but from the point of view of the Australian Government all steps need to be taken to restore democracy to Fiji, that has been our consistent call. Now getting rid of these emergency regulations is the first step, having a consultation period is a first step too but these steps need to be followed up by further action.
When I attended the Pacific Island Forum we called for a consultative period that was inclusive of all stakeholders with no preconditions so people could get round a table and build democracy in Fiji, that is what we want to see happen.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well as soon as possible democracy should be restored in Fiji. We have maintained this call consistently now for a long period of time. We've had representations in the past from the Commodore that he was going to act and then action didn't follow. We do want to see action, we do want to see democracy restored.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I've seen these reports today and there is no new system in our detention centres. There have always been administrative arrangements made so that asylum seekers are held in detention facilities that are most suitable for them.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well the investments we've made on Christmas Island are known already and they've been publicly announced but the sense in today's reports that there is a new system in operation is simply not right.
JOURNALIST: Bob Hawke says that the Labor Party's unions are strangling the party. Do you feel there is less influence (inaudible)?
PM: Bob Hawke's, of course, a living legend, an Australian living legend and certainly a Labor legend, I count him as a good friend.
Bob is right to say that the Labor Party needs to keep modernising and that's why at our recent National Conference we did respond to the review that I ordered and which was subsequently undertaken by Steve Bracks and Bob Carr and by John Faulkner.
And as we dealt with those reform issues at National Conference we did adopt a number to better include our party membership in the decision making of the ALP.
So the right forum for those debates was at National Conference and debates were held. We are now moving to implement the decisions made.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look I believe our great trade union movement is important to Australian society and to representing the needs of working people. It was the trade union movement shoulder to shoulder with the Labor Party that fought back and got rid of WorkChoices and we're going to keep the fight up because if we ever give that fight away then WorkChoices will be back. Clearly it remains the policy much loved by the Liberal Party in Canberra.
So the trade union movement's got an important role on behalf of working people. For our party structures we do need to keep modernising and we had those debates at National Conference.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: We'll go here and here and then across. Yes.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I've lost count of how many policies about broadband the Opposition's had. It may be on its 16th, its 17th, its 18th  -  something like that. The Opposition is basically opposed to Australians having broadband. The Leader of the Opposition is committed to ripping the National Broadband Network out of the ground. Now that means he is opposed to our economy being ready for the future because having this technology is important to us holding our heads up in the international competition that is the global economy today. Other nations have this infrastructure, we must have it too.
Now the roll out is proceeding. We did take the time necessary to negotiate with Telstra, an appropriate agreement to use its infrastructure because that meant that the National Broadband Network could be rolled out more easily using pre-existing infrastructure, so that was the right thing to do. The time was taken to negotiate that agreement, it was negotiated and now the NBN is rolling out.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well time was taken to negotiate the agreement with Telstra, there's nothing new in me acknowledging that. All of that was spoken about publicly and worked through during the course of last year.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I don't think it's a New Year's resolution. Premier O'Farrell and I have worked on some important reforms during our joint period in office including the National Health Reform Agreement which means more doctors, more nurses, more local control of hospitals, more resources. We'll go to COAG together in the first part of the year and talk about skills reform, so important for the future of our economy.
So we've been working together  -  if you want to say shoulder to shoulder I'm happy to, during the months that Premier O'Farrell‘s been in office and I've been Prime Minister.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: I did promise one over here so I do want to be fair  -  yes?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well we've moved to change the system to better benefit low income workers. I want Australians to have a decent retirement. Superannuation is a great Labor invention, it's here in this country because of the actions of the Hawke and Keating Government. And now we need to take the next step and increase superannuation from 9 to 12 per cent and we're on a journey to do that using in part the proceeds of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax to back in what Government needs to do to make that possible.
Now as people prepare for their retirement we've got particular concern for low income workers, many of them women, how have been in and out of work because they've been caring for their families, or perhaps have worked part time or on a casual basis for an extended period of time. So we've moved to have a better system to support the superannuation of low income workers.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We've settled our policy, I can of course understand that there are many who will argue for different policy conclusions. But our policy to make sure that we are assisting low income workers through better co contributions, contribution from Government to help them along is out there and a settled policy.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) do you think that we need to crack down on safety at holiday homes?
O'FARRELL: Look I think the spate of drownings, the spate of accidents is just a reminder to parents to be ever vigilant with children particularly in holiday periods when they're not in organised activities. So as a parent myself I know that young children need constant attention and regrettably these incidents demonstrate once again the importance of parents keeping a close eye on kids in the holiday season.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: We'll just have a last question  -  to be fair we had an indication over here and you haven't had one yet.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
O'FARRELL: Well our submission is in to Infrastructure Australia. Infrastructure Australia will make their consideration and of course I'm happy to stand shoulder to shoulder with the Prime Minister anytime she has a cheque to deliver to New South Wales.She is the Michael Clarke here, she's the captain of the team, I'm the Ed Cowan  -  I'm the new boy on the block.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
O'FARRELL: Well look, you know it's tragic whenever any emergency worker loses their life. Paramedics, emergency workers exercise their duties on behalf of the entire community. It's a sad day for what we see is the health sector, the community coming together to celebrate a life, a life given in the end in sacrifice for others.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
O'FARRELL: Well you know I'm concerned that the holiday period road toll has increased. There is constant effort by both the Office of Maritime and Road Safety but also the Police to keep the road toll down, but as long as you have idiots who get behind the wheel drunk you're going to have deaths and it's about time people exercised greater personal responsibility on this issues.
Understand - you drive drunk you lose your license, you can go to jail. Understand - you run people down you can end up in jail as well.
PM: And I think we're on our way out but just on our way out I think we should acknowledge there are a lot of emergency workers who are on high alert today due to the extreme weather conditions in parts of Australia and the extreme heat.
So to everybody who is suffering through those conditions I'm sure we'd all want to say  -  keep safe, listen to your local emergency announcements and make sure that you do what you are asked to do by emergency workers - they're trying to keep you safe too.
Thanks very much.
[ENDS]


I would like to express my deepest condolences - and those of all Australians - to the families and friends of the 11 New Zealanders who died in the tragic ballooning accident this morning.
Our thoughts and sympathies are with them at this sad time.



The Gillard and Weatherill Governments today reaffirmed their support for Australia's automotive sector following a meeting with General Motors to discuss the company's future investment plans.
Manufacturing Minister Senator Kim Carr and South Australian Premier Jay Weatherill met with senior executives in Detroit to ensure the interests of our automotive sector are properly represented.
The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, said the meeting was another tangible step in our commitment to secure and strengthen the future of our automotive sector.
We know our economy is transforming which is why we made manufacturing a key focus of the Tax Forum and Future Jobs Forum and why the PM's Manufacturing Taskforce was created.
Now, in 2012, we have our sleeves rolled up, ready to build on this work with industry to ensure manufacturing remains a staple of our economy.
Speaking from Detroit, Senator Carr said it was important to present and discuss this support with the senior executives at General Motors, along with Mike Devereux (GM Holden Chairman and Managing Director) and Premier Weatherill.
“GM is going through its product planning cycle for next generation models.  Today, we wanted to discuss their plans and make clear our support and commitment for ongoing automotive, design, engineering and manufacturing in Australia,” Senator Carr said.
“All parties are committed to GM Holden's Australian vehicle manufacturing operations. Supporting the investment plans of GM Holden and other Australian motor vehicle producers ensures we maintain our automotive manufacturing base and a more diversified national economy.
"As part of the discussion, GM has agreed to establish a working group to look at increasing opportunities for local component suppliers in global markets.
“The New Car Plan for A Greener Future has been effective in attracting investment to the Australian automotive industry and I have every confidence that GM Holden will continue to make a major contribution to the Australian economy, and to those seeking highly skilled and highly paid jobs.”
Mr Weatherill said he was in Detroit to put South Australia's case for being a strong part of GM's future global plans.
"Today, we received a clear message from Mr Akerson and Mr Devereux that they are committed to working with government to secure Holden's future in Australia and in particular at the Elizabeth plant.
"One possible scenario being considered by General Motors is the closure of its Australian operations. We are, of course, urging GM not to pursue this course.
"Important progress has been made on the terms of this agreement to secure the future of Holden in Australia and is expected to be concluded in the coming weeks," Mr Weatherill said.
Senator Carr said GM Holden directly employs more than 4,800 people across Australia, with major design and engineering facilities and an engine plant at Port Melbourne. About 2,500 people are employed at its assembly plant in Elizabeth, South Australia. 
The Victorian Government is also involved in the discussions on Holden's future, he said.
Senator Carr and Premier Weatherill met Dan Akerson, GM's Chairman and Chief Executive Officer and Tim Lee, GM's President of International Operations.



PM: It's an absolute privilege to be here today with Premier Anna Bligh and with local mayor Steve Jones.We're here for a day of remembrance but also a day of resolve where this local community is coming together to remember what happened 12 months ago, but also to show a spirit of unity as this community works its way into the future and into 2012.
I remember coming here and meeting with Anna and Steve within days of these devastating events. I remember seeing community members sheltered under Grantham State School, the shock still well and truly written on their faces. People just didn't know at that stage how many people had lived and how many had died, but even then I saw courage and determination to rebuild for the future.
I remember going to an evacuation centre in Helidon and listening to a small girl tell me her story of being winched off the roof, told to me just like a small child will tell you any other story about something that had happened - but she had lived through an amazing experience.
And I remember all too clearly the stories of the chopper pilots who did remarkable things in some of the worst weather they'd ever put their helicopters up into because their fellow Australians were in need.
There was plenty of sadness in those days and there's plenty of sadness still, but there was a lot of courage. As nature threw its worst at the people here, they showed their best. And that best has been on display everyday since as the people of Queensland have rebuilt after that devastating summer.
It's a real privilege to be here today to get to share in this local community's commemoration of things lost and also joint resolve for the future.
I'm glad we've been able to work with the local council, with the State Government, with the people of Queensland on rebuilding. There's much rebuilding still to do but there's a real strength and unity to do it.
I'll hand over to Premier Anna Bligh.
PREMIER BLIGH: Well thank you Prime Minister and I thank the Prime Minister of Australia for joining with myself, the Mayor of the Lockyer Valley, Steve Jones, and the people of the Lockyer Valley on this very, very important day.
12 months ago this community was devastated and today was a day when we look back and we look forward. We look back and relive some of the very painful memories and we look forward with a great sense of hope to what 2012 and the year's beyond hold for the people of the Lockyer Valley.
These devastating disasters, without doubt, were sent to test Queensland. Queensland was tested almost beyond endurance, and nowhere more than here in the Lockyer Valley with that devastating loss of life.
What we saw this morning was a community that wasn't pulled apart by these events: a community that was pulled together by them. A community that's held onto that strength and courage everyday of the last 12 months and as a result today they stand proud, they're recovering, they're rebuilding and they've got a very, very bright future and you could feel the sense of hope in people's hearts at today's event.
I congratulate the Lockyer Valley Regional Council. This was a very emotional time and very important to mark it with respect and with a dignified ceremony and they did that with great style this morning and I think it's a great credit to the Council but much more a credit to the local community.
These sorts of anniversaries are important to mark. We know that this is not over. We know the job is not yet finished, but every now and then you have to stop and look at how far you've come, and this community in the Lockyer Valley has made remarkable strides against all the odds. They fill my heart with pride and I think Australians everywhere feel a great sense of pride in what's been accomplished by the little towns in this beautiful, beautiful part of Australia.
So, congratulations to the Mayor.
We thank the Federal Government for all their financial assistance. It's been a great partnership. We simply wouldn't be standing here if we hadn't had all levels of government working together. But we wouldn't be standing here if we had hadn't had Australians from all parts of the country dig deep and donate and help us when we needed them.
What you see is a community recovering and that's happening because you helped us, so thank you, to every Australian that dug deep when we needed them.
Steve?
STEVE JONES: Thank you, Premier. Today is a very important day for the Prime Minister and Premier to be here with us in the Lockyer Valley. It's a very important day in our history and I think it's a day when it gives us an opportunity to not only stand still and think about what's happened but an opportunity to say to all Australians: ‘thank you for what you've done for us over the last 12 months.'
The level to which they've donated to us, comforted us and assisted us through all levels of support is fantastic and I think that was echoed well and truly this morning through the services we've been to so far.
The people of the Lockyer Valley are most thankful to all those people that have assisted us and at this point we see it as a great opportunity for us now, not to forget about what's happened, but to manage that and move ahead with some positives for our people and we ask the Australians to continue supporting us to move back to normality and we look forward to people living once again in the picturesque Lockyer Valley the way it was.
Thank you very much.
PM: Happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what have people been telling you - their stories?
PM: I have had the opportunity at the end of the service today to talk to some people in the crowd. There are still tears in eyes and there's a lot of emotion around but people are also talking about their home being back to what it was and some looking forward to a new school year and a new year in 2012, so we've got a lot of optimism too.
We also had today, you would have seen them, the SES workers, the emergency services workers, the police, were there and I know this will be a time where they're thinking deeply about everything that they had to do and everything that they saw during those very difficult days, so we can't say thank you enough to the people who got the community through in that really, really tough period.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look, these are emotional events. I mean, I view my role here today as the nation's Prime Minister representing the views of the nation and all Australians wanted to stand shoulder to shoulder with the people who were suffering last summer, and Steve's spoken about that, the sense of embrace that came from the rest of the country, I think that's really important and so I wanted to be here today to just hopefully, by my very presence, give that sense that the nation's still thinking about what happened here and we're still there as the rebuilding happens.
For me, I've seen some incredibly emotional things, some really hard things, some people whose emotion is just raw and at the surface and you've been there to comfort them, so it does leave a mark on you. It certainly does. And that mark will be there for the rest of my life and I'm sure Premier Bligh who was so directly leading this State during these difficult days, it'll be there for her too.
JOURNALIST: Were you tempted to keep the flag, Prime Minister?
PM: Well, when I first got it, when the helicopter pilots first gave it to me, and it was just sodden wet and muddy I remember thinking to myself then that this is something incredibly precious and special, and so I took it back to Canberra not quite knowing then what I would do with it, but knowing that it represented a spirit of bravery and a spirit of Australia and so we let it dry very carefully and then after we did the condolences in Parliament I knew the right thing was to give it to Steve so it could always be here in this community.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
STEVE JONES: Yes, it's in the Cultural Centre in a key position.
PM: Yes, I couldn't be here for when it was first raised here locally, but I remember giving it to Steve when he was there at a local government conference, but also very focused on talking directly to us about what needed to be done to rebuild here.
JOURNALIST: Has the help that you've been able to give come to an end yet?
PM: The help is still rolling out. In terms of rebuilding it's a more than $5 billion commitment. We've advanced more than $2 billion worth of funds to the State Government and we've been working directly with local councils.
A lot's been achieved and we shouldn't underestimate how much has been done. I mean, it's been remarkable how at every level of government right throughout the community people have worked together to rebuild, but some of the really big infrastructure takes a long time and this was a very costly set of natural disasters. In human terms we lost a lot of lives. It was also incredibly costly in economic terms, the most costly set of natural disaster the nation's ever faced in terms of infrastructure ruined, and we're still working together to rebuild that.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about the couple that have been detained by the Japanese?
PM: I'm happy to answer questions on that but we might just see if there's any more directly on Queensland flood recovery?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PREMIER BLIGH: I think we all get emotional at different points. I have to say when I heard the words to 'It's a wonderful world' that was a pretty emotional moment.
Like Steve, I've had an opportunity to get to know many of the people who've lost family members, and I know what it took for them to be there today and I know the journey that they've been on the last 12 months and the many people there who - some of them still not back in their houses, some rebuilding, some who have only just started to feel that they're getting back on their feet, and for them to be there today, it was very important for them but I was very conscious that it was not an easy day for many of the people in today's audience and I think everybody was touched by that emotion.
As we said, this is still very, very raw. This is devastating grief and we all knew that it was going to be a long, hard, slow journey of many steps and today we all, together, took another step.
But there are many, many more ahead and there are many emotion days ahead I think, so there are good emotions and there are sad emotions. I think we both felt pretty emotional when we saw the new house opened on 10 December and we saw people moving into a new home in the face of unimaginable devastation.
So there are good times as well as bad times to be reflecting on.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PREMIER BLIGH: Well I think one of the really significant things about today's ceremony is to reassure the people in this valley that it might be 12 months down the track but they have not been forgotten. Australia still remembers what happened to them and we remember it just like it was last week, just like they do. We're not going to walk away from the long-term challenge of recovering this community.
Rebuilding roads and rebuilding buildings is only part of the journey. Helping to rebuild lives means being there for the long term. We've got a counselling program that's there for the next two years. We've got support workers working with the council - they're funded and they're there for the next couple of years.
We know that this is not over. We know that for many people they feel like they are just starting to make the first baby steps, and we're going to stand there and hold their hand every step of the way.
People feel very, very strengthened when they come out to these sorts of events and see the Governor General, the Governor, the Prime Minister of the country - that tells them that Australians still remember and I think they feel very heartened by it.
JOURNALIST: Mayor, can I ask you a question? (Inaudible).
STEVE JONES: Very advanced - we've taken on a lot of work in that regard. We've installed all sorts of electronic rainfall recording equipment, we've installed further gauges with government, further gauges in the creeks, and I think we're probably in a great position. It's a position that probably a small rural council such as ours would never ever have considered but once you've been through this episode you know it's possible and we want to make every step to make sure it's safe in the future.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
STEVE JONES: There is, there is. We've done a lot of work in that regard and quite early in the piece we had the system using the mobile phone in place and that's now continually in use and we're developing that further. We're developing some siren type systems to put into some of the townships and things will be quite advanced.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Thank you for the question, and earlier today we did confirm that we are in a position to have the three Australians who are currently on the Shonan Maru released to us. Consequently we have dispatched a Customs vessel - the Ocean Protector - to go and rendezvous and pick them up. That does cause costs. Cost number one is in the extra fuel that is used because the vessel has to proceed at full speed so that it can get there in as timely a way as possible. That burns fuel.
And cost number two, of course our customs vessels have their own work to be getting on with including work protecting our fisheries. So let me make it clear the conduct of these three Australians in my view is unacceptable, engaging in illegal activity.
I feel very strongly about whaling, I know many Australians rightly do. But we are taking the most effective action we can against whaling through the International Court of Justice. People might want to make their views heard and they should but people need to make sure that they stay on the right side of the line and engage in legal activity and in terms of people who are going to the Southern Ocean, they need to keep themselves safe. This is a remote and dangerous stretch of water.
And I do also want to say this: people shouldn't assume because this matter has been successfully resolved that we are in a position to always resolve issues like this. If people engage in illegal activity then they are at risk of feeling the full force of the law and of course if you are on a Japanese vessel, then the law that applies when that vessel is beyond our waters, the law that applies is the law of Japan.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Bob Brown is seeking Tony Abbott's support for a bill that will require an Australian Customs vessel to escort all Japanese whaling vessels while they are in Australian territorial waters. Will you be supporting such a bill or will you be having talks about that bill?
PM: Well, let's just go through this in order.
First and foremost I think it's fairly easy for Mr Abbott to beat his chest when he's in Opposition. When Mr Abbott was in Government not one boat was ever dispatched and no legal action was taken to stop whaling.
We as a Government sent a vessel in order to record whaling activities to get the film footage we needed to support our legal action.
Number two, in terms of the seas, the Southern Ocean and the high seas generally, Australia does not have legal authority to just be charging around the ocean acting as an international police person. To do that can put our personnel at physical risk. This is a dangerous stretch of water, and it can put them at legal risk because they are not in our jurisdiction.
In terms of the entry of the Shonan Maru into our exclusive economic zone, we were advised about that by the Japanese Government. We made it clear that that coming into our waters was not welcome.
JOURNALIST: So are you saying what Bob Brown's proposing is impossible?
PM: In terms of a Australian vessel being out on the high seas acting as an independent police person, we do not have the legal authority to do that - we just don't.
Now, we did dispatch a vessel during one whaling season to record the evidence we needed to support the International Court of Justice case. That is the effective way for us to act to end whaling.
And once again I think it's pretty easy when you're in Opposition to demand that things should happen. I think the Opposition's got to answer for the fact over 11 long years of Government, not once, not ever, was a ship sent and no legal was ever taken against whaling.
JOURNALIST: How much is it going to cost?PM: Yep - we'll just do Holden. Yes, sure. Sorry?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well the Minister for Manufacturing and indeed the Premier of South Australia are over in Detroit. They've been having productive discussions with GMH because we do want to see a car industry here in this country and I do want to see Holden have a future here in Australia.
Now we've faced the sceptics before. We were told during the days of the global financial crisis that it was impossible that Australia would emerge with a car industry. We worked with Holden, we worked with Ford, we worked with Toyota and we came through and we are one of the limited countries now around the world where you can move from design to production - all the way across what makes a motor vehicle.
So we're taking that spirit that we used during the global financial crisis to these current talks because I want to see Holden have a future. I also want to see Ford have a future, which is why today I've announced with the Victorian Government that we will be providing some assistance to Ford so that it does continue to manufacture here Ford vehicles and that they are more emissions efficient than they have been in the past.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The Attorney General dealt with this today. We won't be in a position to give you every dollar and every cent until the operation is completed and the rendezvous has been made - the Australians picked up and then returned to Australia - but we are talking in the vicinity of hundreds of thousands of tax payer's dollars.
JOURNALIST: And that figure will be disclosed?
PM: Of course we're always happy to be completely transparent about figures.
I think anybody can just tell from common sense when you're talking about fuel used by a ship in part, how far it's got to travel and the ocean conditions that it strikes as it makes that travel, will have ramifications for the amount of fuel used, so that's why I'm not in a position to give you every dollar and every cent, but it will be in the order of hundreds of thousands of dollars and that does concern me.
I think that will concern Aussie taxpayers and I think it should weigh on the minds of people who are considering how they can best make their voices heard about whaling. Certainly, make your voice heard, but there's plenty of peaceful, legal ways to do just that.
Thank you.
[ENDS]



We, the leaders of the nation and the State, honour you in this place.
This region made sacred by courage and loss.
A place where one year ago, we were reminded that for all its blessings and rewards, this can be a harsh and unyielding land as well.
As Australians, we never fear nature's challenge.
That's not who we are.
We are a nation that endures.
A people who return and rebuild.
Even before the total number of lives lost was known, images were being inscribed deep in our nation's heart.
Images of horror and destruction.
And images of valour and sacrifice as well.
For me, those images will always be represented by the flag given to me by the Defence Force chopper pilots who saved so many lives on that dark and dangerous night.
The flag was still wet and muddy yet it couldn't be more precious because it spoke to them  -  and to the nation  -  about courage and endurance.
What it means to be Australian.
And how people across Queensland somehow found the inner strength to face the death and destruction that engulfed them.
That flag has returned home to the people of the Lockyer Valley; a permanent reminder as time passes.
Indeed it's hard to believe a year has passed.
Ten days ago the world welcomed in 2012.
But I know for many of you, January 1st was no festivity  -  the wounds are still too raw for that.
If there is any occasion for contemplating the past and the future, it is perhaps this day  -  January 10.
Your very own New Year.
A New Year without illusions as to how deep the hurt remains, and how far along the path of reconstruction we still have to go.
Marked not with champagne and celebration, but with remembrance and resolve.
Remembrance of those who have gone.
And resolve to somehow build new lives out of the wreckage of the old.
Much has been lost in this valley and in this State:
Precious loved ones.
Treasured possessions.
And a familiar way of life.
But in the face of tragedy, much also abides:
The grace of community.
The strength and generosity of each other.
And a determination to never forget what happened here.
Not after one year.
Not after ten years.
Together we remember.
Together we will rebuild. 



The Gillard and Baillieu Governments today announced new funding to boost the performance of the Ford Falcon and the Ford Territory produced here in Australia.
 The Commonwealth will provide $34 million towards a total investment of over $103 million to boost the fuel efficiency and emissions performance in both models.
This funding will also see the Falcon produced at Broadmeadows in Melbourne to at least the end of 2016.
The Prime Minister said today's announcement was great news for the future of the automotive industry in Australia.
With a rising dollar and fierce competition from other countries in our region, we need to be investing in manufacturing products that are innovative and competitive.
This is exactly the type of investment we identified at the Future Jobs Forum and the PM's Manufacturing taskforce to help shore up the future of our manufacturing sector.
It's smart, it's competitive and best of all it will secure jobs, not only in Victoria but also across the nation.
Making the announcement with Ford Asia Pacific and Africa President Joe Hinrichs and Ford Australia President and CEO Bob Graziano, the Federal Minister for Manufacturing, Senator Kim Carr, said it was an exciting new initiative for the Falcon and Territory.
“It will boost the fuel efficiency and emissions performance of the Falcon by more than 5 per cent with the use of new improved aerodynamics and transmission technology,” Senator Carr said.
"We are working with the company to ensure its future in Australia.  This announcement is an important step in our ongoing commitment to strengthen the sector." Victorian Acting Premier Peter Ryan said the Victorian Coalition Government was also providing financial support to Ford's 2014 upgrade project that will deliver a new and better Falcon and further strengthen Geelong's position as a major automotive centre. Victorian Minister for Manufacturing, Exports and Trade Richard Dalla-Riva said this investment will deliver a significant boost to Geelong's economy and flow-on benefits for businesses right across Victoria. “Ford is at the centre of Victoria's and Australia's automotive sector and a major provider of high value jobs, both directly and through supply chains. “The Victorian Coalition Government is committed to strengthening Victoria's position as a competitive and innovative manufacturing base for world-class vehicles. “Manufacturing is a major contributor to Victoria's economy and is the state's largest employer. The automotive industry is a vital driver of our overall manufacturing sector and the Ford 2014 upgrade represents a significant vote of confidence in Victoria's automotive manufacturing sector”, Mr Dalla-Riva said. Senator Carr made the announcement at the Detroit Motor Show, and Victorian Acting Premier Peter Ryan and Minister Dalla-Riva made the announcement at Ford's Geelong plant.



Many ceremonies are being held this week, with countless words written and said.
But there are times when symbols are needed to carry us beyond words.
To tell a story each hour of the day to assemblies as big and formal as this.
Or to a single, silent onlooker reflecting in the cool of a long summer evening.
As a community, you could have commissioned a great artist or sculptor to commemorate the floods, and they would have produced something beautiful.
But what symbol could be more eloquent than this ‘Pillar of Courage' we unveil today?
It is, of course, a flood marker.
A simple everyday object found near rivers and creeks in a thousand country towns.
But because of what happened a year ago, it is so much more.
It is a memorial and a tribute.
A sign of our gratitude.
And a story book to teach those yet to come.
Friends, this pillar dates from 1893 when this was a small town of  500 people and the railway had just come through.
Like the marks on a doorway that chart a child's growth, it records Goodna's endurance and resolve.
Indeed these are the very words that have been inscribed:
“Resilience, Community, Strength
Heroes, Caring and Unity”.
But this marker is not just a symbol or a metaphor.
It shows with mathematical precision how truly we live in a land of “droughts and flooding rains”.
And how despite all those challenges, we wouldn't want to live anywhere else on earth.
Of all the nations of the world, this is where we choose to stay.
This big, harsh continent is our home.
Our dreaming to share forever.
And we love this country all the more in times of crisis because natural disasters force us back to the very essence of who we are and the things we treasure the most:
Our lives.
Our families.
Our communities.
Our land.
Not that we welcome natural disasters; it would be a sheer blessing if we never faced another.
No-one wants to see their possessions carried away in a skip.
Live in a caravan for weeks that stretch into months.
Or wait endlessly for something as basic as gyprock to rebuild their home.
We do not welcome disaster.
We simply know that when disaster comes and nature hits us with its worst, we are challenged to be our best.
As Australians, we never fail to meet that challenge.
Whether in the leadership of an Anna Bligh, or civic representatives like Paul Pisasale and Paul Tully.
Dedicated local Members like Bernie Ripoll and Shayne Neumann who made a region's voice heard loud and strong at the Cabinet table.
Community helpers like Cathy Beauchamp who bring such humanity and hope.
SES workers who come cheerfully from as far afield as Tasmania.
Or the hundreds of unnamed volunteers who gave up their time or broke off their holidays to ensure a summer of loss didn't become a summer of despair.
Twelve months on, we stand in the balance between what has happened and what is yet to come.
On this we are clear:
Today's anniversary isn't the end of the story.
To think that would be a mistake  -  and one we are not prepared to make.
What is wrecked in a day can take months even years to restore.
And some things  -  like broken hearts and shattered memories  -  can never be repaired in full.
Perhaps there some comfort or sense for us today in the Queensland motto: “Bold but faithful.”
Yes, let us be bold in our plans for the future and the reconstruction we will deliver for this State.
But faithful to the memory of all we have lost and the hurts that won't so easily go away.
Which is precisely what this Pillar conveys and represents.
That when the waters rose high, our courage rose higher still.
We held on.
We rescued and cared for each other.
We rebuilt with pride.
And we never, ever forgot.



PM: I'm here today with local member Shayne Neumann. Bernie Ripoll has been with us but has had to leave to go to another engagement, and I'm spending time today with the community in Ipswich and Goodna and here with the SES that did so much amazing work during the days of the flooding here.
I remember what it was like here 12 months ago. I came in and met with people in evacuation centres. I saw the way the water was devastating this community, but I also saw a tremendous spirit of pulling together.
I remember, for example, with Shayne visiting a local church that had become very quickly an evacuation centre for frail aged people, and it was taking its toll to give that kind of intensive care to elderly Australians very quickly, was a huge effort. But the community was standing by and doing things like delivering bedding and towels to help out. That really spoke to me about how this community was going to pull together even in the toughest of times.
Today we've watched the Pillar of Courage unveiled. It tells us not only the history of the flooding of this region but the history of this region's resilience, including in the face of what happened here 12 months ago.
And then I did want to come and meet with the local SES and beyond. We've got people from the Gold Coast, from beyond the local area, but meet with people who just got out there and got the job done when the going was at its toughest.
We've just been inside sharing a sandwich and one of the local police officers said to me, and I'm going to borrow his words, these are the people who just don't flinch  -  who when it's really hard get out there and get the job done, and it's a very special privilege for me to have the opportunity to say a personal thanks to them here today.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
Did you want to say, Shayne, just some words about your local community first?
NEUMANN: Well, on behalf of myself and Bernie Ripoll we want to thank the SES, the police, the rural fire brigades and everyone who's done everything they could during the flood.
We thought we'd have a sandwich because we thought eating a meal together is a very human thing to do and it's what people during the flood actually did. Sandwiches and sausages  -  it wasn't just support and solace, sandwiches and sausages helped people get through.
So I want thank, Ari, you and the team and the four units and the group leaders as well for the wonderful work they did during the flood. They showed tremendous resilience, commitment and determination at this time, and since that time they've continued to work and so we honour you and we are privileged to represent you in Federal Parliament. On behalf of myself and Bernie Ripoll  -  thank you very much to the men and women, and you have my gratitude and applause, well done.
[APPLAUSE]
PM: Thank you. We're happy to take questions. Yes?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Sure.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I think it's very important that when we're developing coal seam gas we're guided by the best possible science, which is why the Federal Government has determined that we will use our scientific leadership to work with States including Queensland to answer all of the questions that people understandable ask about coal seam gas.
We've got to make sure we get the balance here between using a resource which is very valuable to us whilst getting the environmental standards right, so we're going to bring our scientific leadership to bear, we're going to ensure that there is good science that's transparently available to local communities to inform decision making about where coal seam gas will be gathered from and we're going to lead through a Council of Australian Governments process - best practice around the country, including here in Queensland.
Now, ultimately planning decisions are overwhelmingly in the province of state governments and we're not intending to step in and take that role over, but we are intending to do what the Commonwealth does and does well  -  scientific leadership and coordination of states.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when will your Government act on the recommendations from its insurance review?
PM: We've acted on a large number of recommendations from the insurance review. Particularly, we've acted on the recommendations about transparency and about making sure that there is a standard clause to define flooding.
What we learned after the events here, and across Queensland and indeed in other parts of the nation, is that floods were defined very differently in different insurance policies. Indeed, it was 10 times more flood claims subject of disputation than claims about cyclones or bushfires or hail stones, so it was a vexed area. Many people thought they were covered and they weren't covered.
We wanted to sort that out. I was very concerned about that and very concerned about the performance of insurance companies in response to floods here in Queensland. I remember, for example, the community meeting you had where not one representative of an insurance company turned up to face the music. So, we've worked to bring a standard definition of flood to insurance policies and that's before the parliament now.
We've worked to make sure that people get transparent, easy-to-understand information about what their policy provides so that when they're shopping for a policy they can do an apples-to-apples comparison.
Now, I know that there are some recommendations still under consideration. There is one, for example, by a gentleman who's been a good advisor to the Federal Government on floods. He's come up with what is a fairly novel proposal about how we could deal with insurance for the less than two percent of people who live in the most risky, flood-prone areas. Now, it is a novel suggestion. We are canvassing views on it. I am concerned that we've got to make sure we're getting value for taxpayers and I think people will want to express a view about whether it's the best use of taxpayer's money to use that money to give to insurance companies.
JOURNALIST: Will you issue a report card in much the same way that Anna Bligh did on the floods commission of inquiry on how your performance is going with bringing in the recommendations?
PM: On the commission of inquiry, we've taken exactly the same approach as Premier Bligh. On the recommendations that were either wholly directed at the Commonwealth or partially directed at the Commonwealth, we've responded to all of those recommendations and I'm very happy to be held to account for it.
On the recommendations from the insurance group, we're very happy to be completely transparent about that and indeed I think you'll find we have been.
JOURNALIST: Another Japanese whaling boat has entered Australian territorial waters. Do you think that's acceptable?
PM: Well I think we've just got to be clear about the facts here. As recently as yesterday we reiterated our view to the Japanese Government that whaling vessels are not welcome in Australian territorial waters. Now I'm aware that there has been on vessel which I'm advised has been in Australian territorial waters and I'm advised that it will leave Australian territorial waters.
Now, it's been a long standing view that whaling ships are not welcome in our waters, and we've said that to the Japanese Government before but we've reiterated it yesterday.
JOURNALIST: How do you plan to resolve it, I mean clearly legal action is worthy?
PM: We're in a circumstance now where on my advice to the ship in question is leaving Australian territorial waters.
JOURNALIST: What do you make of Senator Brown's decision to boycott a weekly meeting with you?
PM: As Prime Minister I'm available to meet with Members of Parliament and I meet with them very regularly from right across the Parliament. People value the opportunity for a meeting to raise their concerns directly with me.
For example, Shayne is no stranger to getting on the phone, getting on the text, and knocking on the door to make sure that he has his community's concerns heard by me. So, I make myself available. Whether Senator Brown wants to take up that opportunity is entirely a matter for him.
Senator Brown has taken a different view from me about the forestry questions in Tasmania. We have responded to a circumstance where market conditions have changed, where Gunns indicated it was leaving the market. That was going to leave workers out of jobs without any assistance, it was going to leave contractors bankrupt without any assistance, and it was unclear what the long-term future of the forests would be.
We've stepped in to support workers, to support contractors who are exiting the industry and to work towards the verification of more than 570,000 hectares of area so that we can get agreements about preservation of these important sections for the future, and what needs preservation will be determined by an independent expert, by Professor Jonathon West.
So that's the process we're going through. I understand Senator Brown's got a different view. That's a matter for him.
JOURNALIST: In regards to the underpaid retail workers in the retail sector, is this a mistake or are retailers (inaudible)?
PM: People need to abide by the law and pay their workers properly. I understand there was an issue with some Fair Work Australia information which has been corrected, and obviously someone who has been misled by that information and didn't intend to do anything wrong has go my complete sympathy. I understand they've probably done their best to do the right thing.
But I think we all know that there are industries in our nation where workers are at risk and we need to make sure that they are getting paid properly which is why we've got the systems that we've set up under Fair Work Australia.
When we got rid of Work Choices one of the reasons we did it was all of the evidence was telling us that it was young people, it was women in occupations like retail and hospitality, who were most likely to do it tough and more likely to lose their penalty rates for not a cent of compensation or lose their public holidays for not a cent of compensation.
We thought that was wrong. I still think it's wrong. That's why we support the Fair Work system and we will be doing everything in our power to resist the Abbott plan to bring Work Choices back.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think it's disappointing that Tony Abbott has chosen to go on holidays rather than come to flood commemoration services?
PM: Mr Abbott's holiday arrangements are a matter for him and I'm not intending to issue any comment on it.
JOURNALIST: Just something else - 
PM: -Sorry, Sally's trying to round us up. We'll go one here and one there and then we'll go.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) taxpayers of the financial benefits (inaudible)?
PM: I think we've got to be very clear here about what the Government's trying to achieve. The automotive industry is incredibly important to this country. Manufacturing is important to this country. It's the source of good jobs, high-quality jobs and it isn't just what happens in the car factory - it's all of the supply chains that lead to it and flow from it that keep people in good-quality jobs and work.
And so we have worked with our big car makers to keep the car industry here. We did that during the days of the global financial crisis and I'm determined to do it again because it is the right thing for our nation as we undergo this resources boom, to make sure that in the days beyond the boom we've still got a strong manufacturing sector.
Now we've been guided by work including the Steve Bracks review, and of course when we make agreements with car makers the car industry is required to put its money on the table too, and that is a feature of the agreement that we've struck with Ford and we are working in the same way with Holden.
What disturbs me is when we've got work to do to keep making sure that the car industry is in the country, that on the other side of politics Mr Abbott's plan is to rip half a billion dollars out of industry support, and today his spokesperson has been questioning the value of what the Government's trying to achieve.
Well, I'll tell you what we're trying to achieve - we're trying to achieve manufacturing jobs for Australian workers.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) says you're a reliable source of (inaudible).
PM: Unfortunately I'd be letting him down today. I'm not always a carrier of lollies but during the course of those long days when we were out and about talking to people in evacuation centres and all around the community, either I started the day with some in my bag or inevitably during the course of the day some kind soul would give me some jelly beans or some snakes or something to take with me, so I think that's also telling you about the spirit that was going on as we did all of the work in the aftermath of the floods here.
Thank you very much.
Oh look, now I feel sad for you  -  yes?
JOURNALIST: Is it case of you not having (inaudible)?
PM: I presume you're relating that to the question about Senator Brown and whether or not he wants to take the opportunities for meetings. My answer would have been the same if you'd asked me this time last year.
Thanks very much.
[ENDS]



The Gillard Labor Government today launched a new website to tackle cyberbullying and help more young people stay safe online.
The Easy Guide to Socialising Online website has been developed in partnership with industry and young people to help parents, children and educators combat cyberbullying and inappropriate content online.
The Easy Guide website is part of the Government's $125.8 million Cybersafety Plan and has been developed following advice from the Government's Youth Advisory Group on Cybersafety.
The new website provides cybersafety information for 26 social networking sites, search engines and online games, and gives step by step instructions on how to report cyberbullying, abuse and inappropriate content on these sites.
It also provides clear information for parents, educators and young people on how to adjust safety and privacy settings on websites as well as tips on how to stay safe when using any social media site.
Members of the Government's Consultative Working Group on Cybersafety (CWG), including Facebook, Google, Microsoft, NineMSN, Yahoo!7 and the Interactive Games and Entertainment Association worked closely with the Government to develop the Easy Guide website.
Cyberbullying is a serious matter which is why the Government has listened to young people and produced the new guide to staying safe online.
The Government's Cybersafety Plan involves a number of important initiatives including the Easy Guide to combat online risks to children.
The Cybersmart website www.cybersmart.gov.aulaunched two years ago, has received well over a million visits and provides access to KidsHelpline for confidential online counselling.
It also provides access to the Government's Cybersafety Help Button which is a ‘one stop shop' for practical information and tips on how to deal with cyberbullying, unwanted contact and offensive or illegal content.
Since its launch 12 months ago, the Help Button has been downloaded on more than 300,000 computers across Australia.
The Cybersafety Help Button can be downloaded at www.dbcde.gov.au/helpbutton.
The new Easy Guide website address is www.dbcde.gov.au/easyguideand it can also be accessed via the Cybersafety Help Button.
For further tips on cybersecurity and safety are available at www.staysmartonline.gov.au



PM: I am delighted to be here in Hobart. I'm joined by the acting Premier, Bryan Green. I'm also joined by my parliamentary colleagues, Julie Collins, who is here in her capacity as the Member for Franklin, and Senator Lisa Singh.
As we stand here, the 100-year memorial for Douglas Mawson's epic journey into the Antarctic is being commemorated. The service is underway as we gather here.
So, no better time to talk about our future, our future for marine studies and our future for Antarctic studies.
And here in Hobart today I'm very pleased to be on the site of where we will construct a $45 million Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies. This is going to be an important facility, housing 290 students and staff who are devoting their intellectual endeavours to furthering our understanding of our oceans and Antarctica, and they will be joined by the CSIRO scientists who work in the facility right alongside here, and for those scientists to do their best work they need to be able to research out there in the ocean, so I'm also very pleased to have been able to inspect today the vessel that has been doing that work for us, but will be replaced by a new vessel with greater capabilities.
The RV Investigator, the new vessel, is due to arrive in Hobart in June 2013, and we've been told by the people who work on the current vessel that the new vessel, the RV Investigator, will be able to take more scientists for longer journeys out into the ocean so that they can use the new technology to research what is happening in our oceans, and most particularly on the ocean floor.
We've been told today that since the advent of robotic technology for investigating what is happening in our oceans, which only happened comparatively recently, the amount of information available to humanity about our oceans is greater now than it has ever been in our history, indeed more information has been collected in this period than was available to human beings throughout human history before.
So, it's a wonderful time to be investing more in our research capacity, investing in our connection with Antarctica, a history 100 years old but with a great future in front of it.
My congratulations go to the University of Tasmania for the work it has done getting ready for this Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies. They made a very impressive bid to our Education Investment Fund, and that's why we were able to make the $45 million available.
And I'm also very pleased that through our Super Science initiative we have been able to make available the $120 million necessary for the new vessel.
Secondly, I will, during the course of my day in Tasmania today, go to Bellerive Oval, and I'm very pleased that we are able to make available $15 million for a much-needed upgrade.
Now, I'd have to say this has come about because of the persistent advocacy of Julie Collins as local member. She has been carrying not only the hopes of her electorate but the hopes of the people of Hobart who wanted to see Bellerive Oval upgraded, who wanted to see it as a facility that could not only be home to cricket but could also host AFL football, and as a result of our investment we will be able to see new facilities.
There will be a boost of capacity to about 20,000, which is an important extension of capacity for Bellerive Oval, so more fans will be able to get in and see more events.
This is about the local community, but it's also about boosting tourism in Tasmania, because we know that many people choose to come here to watch sporting events.
And then finally, I'd like to make some statements about circumstances in Europe. I know many Australians have been watching the news over the weekend with concern about the economic developments in Europe and what they mean for Australia.
Last Friday, Standard and Poor's announced that they had downgraded the sovereign debt ratings of 9 of the 17 countries of the Eurozone. That included the loss of the AAA ratings of France and Austria. It also included a downgrading by two notches of Italy, Spain and Portugal.
Now, these downgrades weren't unexpected, but they do indicate that there continues to be concern about the Eurozone crisis by market participants. Eurozone leaders last year reached an agreement to stick to stricter spending rules, and to establish a liquidity fund to help struggling members.
The European Central Bank has also been playing a role by lowering interest rates and providing assistance to the European banks.
While these are all steps in the right direction, more needs to be done to address the far-reaching problems in Europe. More has got to be done to convince markets that the right long-term steps are being taken to solve Europe's problem.
The truth is European countries now face some very hard choices about how to restrict their spending and reform their economies and pay off their debt. The downgrade engaged in by Standard and Poor's is likely to mean that paying off the debt is more expensive for those countries because it will be more expensive to borrow.
So, it is absolutely critical that European leaders lay out credible, medium-term plans to get their budgets on a sustainable footing. Taxpayers rightly expect governments to be prudent with their money and to have sustainability in their budgets.
In terms of what this means for Australia, well the Australian economy is in a very different place. The Australian economy has sound fundamentals  -  we have growth, we have low unemployment, we have low debt, and we have inflation in the RBA's target zone. That means the fundamentals of our economy are strong. Our circumstances could not be more different from those of Europe.
So, it's a very stark contrast, but clearly as a Government we continue to monitor developments in the Eurozone, and we will continue to urge European leaders to do everything they need to do to address the Eurozone problems that have now been rolling for some time.
I'll turn now to the Acting Premier for some comments, and then to some comments from Julie Collins, and then we'll be happy to take your questions.
ACTING PREMIER GREEN: Well, thank you very much, Prime Minister, and welcome to Hobart. It's fantastic to have you here, and of course today's update with respect to the IMAS construction is another step forward in terms of the relationship that Australia, and indeed Tasmania, has with the Antarctic.
Today's been a really interesting opportunity to have a look at the important work that's going on by the CSIRO, but importantly from the State Government's point of view, the partnership that we have with the University of Tasmania is in fact quite a unique one. Given that the University of Tasmania is the only university in Tasmania means that we can work very, very closely with them, and the construction of this IMAS building means that the work that we need to be done in ensuring that all of the science and management techniques associated with managing our fishery around Tasmanian waters is once again confirmed.
Obviously, the $45 million investment is very significant to the State's economy, but at the same time it builds on the strengths that we've been able to achieve, in terms of the partnerships that are being built.
Obviously, this site is a fantastic one, there's no doubt about it. Adjacent is CSIRO, and as you quite rightly pointed out, 290 students working here, together with a whole range of people taking it to about 1,000 students brings the economies of scale to a level that gives us a status internationally, well and truly.
So, an amazingly positive announcement for the State of Tasmania.
We want to build on the fact that we have such a close affinity with the Antarctic. The 100-year celebration of Mawson is amazingly significant, and from time to time we're reminded - when we get those cold southerlies, Prime Minister, you can just about smell the penguins  -  that we are right on the doorstep of the Southern Ocean and the Antarctic and really that allows us, through our economic development plan, to continue to build on the 890-odd people that are employed around the Antarctic spectrum, and of course as a State we are looking for every opportunity to continue to build that.
So, it is a great pleasure to have you here today, and I'm looking forward to the construction of this building, the new vessel coming here so that everybody gets the complete understanding that Tasmania, and indeed Australia, have got it right when it comes to the relationship with the Antarctic.
Thank you very much.
MINISTER COLLINS: Thank you and it is fabulous to have the Prime Minister here in Hobart.
I particularly want to thank the Prime Minister for her announcement about funding for Bellerive Oval. As many people here in southern Tasmania would be aware, there was a real threat that Hobartians and Tasmanians would not have access to World Cup cricket without this upgrade. I know that many sporting Tasmanians will be really thrilled that this development is going ahead and that we will indeed have World Cup cricket here in Hobart, access for Tasmanians.
It is also, though, a real demonstration of the Commonwealth Government continuing to invest in Tasmania as a whole. We've heard about the $43 million here with the IMAS development, the $120 million for the Southern Surveyor replacement. The Federal Government has continually invested in Tasmania, keeps investing in Tasmania, working with State and Federal Governments to ensure that we get the best value for the taxpayers' dollar here in Tasmania, and it's great to have the Prime Minister back down here again.
PM: Thanks very much. We're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on poker machines, Nick Xenophon has suggested that you're not serious about the reform, that you're putting it up to knock down and you're not particularly bothered if that happens. Can you respond to that suggestion?
PM: I came to Tasmania for a variety of purposes, including being here today with my colleagues and talking to people about what's going to happen here with the new Institute and the new vessel, and of course to make the announcement about Bellerive Oval, but I also came to Tasmania to meet with Mr Andrew Wilkie and to talk about poker machine reforms. Those discussions are ongoing and it's not going to be my intention to be commenting on them in the media, but we had a constructive discussion yesterday. Both Mr Wilkie and I said publically following it, that it was a constructive discussion.
In terms of Senator Xenophon's comments, of course Senator Xenophon was not in those discussions yesterday, so the people who best know how those discussions are going are the participants in them, and both participants  -  me and Mr Wilkie  -  described them as constructive, because they were.
JOURNALIST: You would remain on course, then Prime Minister  -  you remain on course for the legislation to be ready?
PM: Look, I've said all I'm going to say. It's not my intention to be commenting on these discussions as they're had.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) $1 bet option (inaudible).
PM: I'm not going to be making comments on the discussions I'm having, as I've just told you.
JOURNALIST: Could you though, Prime Minister, just clarify that you remain committed to mandatory pre-commitment?
PM: I'm not going to be engaging in comments on the discussions I'm having. When we've got something to say, we'll say it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We're in a course of discussions, and it's my intention to pursue those discussions to the end, and then when we've got something to say, we'll say it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We'll be continuing discussions over coming days.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) sanctions against Japan (inaudible) look like they remain determined. Every year they return to the Southern Ocean (inaudible).
PM: We are taking the most effective action that can be taken against whaling.
I am as anti-whaling as anybody else in this country. I do not want to see whales slaughtered, so we've got to take the most effective action, and the most effective action is the case that we have launched in the International Court of Justice to get whaling stopped. We will pursue that case to the end.
We dispatched a vessel in an earlier whaling season to get the footage, the proof of what's going on, and we are now pursuing that court case in the international court. That's the most effective way forward.
Now, I understand that people want to make their views heard about whaling, that Australians are anti-whaling and they want to lift their voices, and that's all to the good. I do believe when people do that they need to stay the right side of the law.
JOURNALIST: The three protestors that were rescued, should they contribute to the cost of the rescue?
PM: The truth is it has been a costly venture to go and retrieve these three men. As I've indicated, we'll be able to tabulate the full costs now that the voyage is completed, because the principle additional cost is in fuel, but my anticipation is that it will be in the order of hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Now, I believe the conduct of these three individuals was irresponsible. I do not understand them to be people who probably have that kind of money at their disposal, so unfortunately it is the Government, the Australian taxpayer, who to date has had to bear these costs, which is why, amongst a variety of other reasons, I think the conduct was irresponsible conduct: irresponsible because it was the wrong side of the law; irresponsible because these people could easily have been taken to Japan and charged  -  once you're on a Japanese vessel you're under the Japanese legal system; and irresponsible because of the cost that it's put Australian taxpayers to.
JOURNALIST: What happens when they put foot on land today?
PM: Well, they are not being charged by the Japanese Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in regards to the forest agreement, are you still confident it's on track to (inaudible).
PM: I think we've got to be very clear, here, about the forestry agreement and the work that we've been doing with the State Government and with stakeholders on all sides of this debate. The truth is that market conditions changed for forestry in Tasmania, and that meant that we knew, with Gunns exiting the industry, that workers were going to lose their jobs, that contractors were going to exit the industry and go out of business.
Now, as Prime Minister I could have sat in Canberra and watched that happen, or I could have got myself involved to make a difference for those workers and those contractors and the people those contractors employ, so I did get myself involved, and that means we've made money available to assist workers who are losing their jobs; money available for contractors exiting the industry; and we are working with the Tasmanian Government to diversify the Tasmanian economy, and that process is underway now.
We said, in the course of that, that we would have a verification process. There's 572,000 hectares. We said we would be looking to ensure that there was conservation, interim conservation for around 430,000 hectares.
You read the agreement. We always said that we would be guaranteeing wood supply for current contracts, and we've done that.
As a result of the interim conservation agreement Minister Tony Burke signed with the Tasmanian Government, 99.5% of the nominated area for interim protection is being protected  -  99.5% - and we will keep working through the rest of the process.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, that 99.5% (inaudible).
PM: And it always was going to be under the agreement.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
PM: As everybody who's been a participant in the process knows, the verification process is being undertaken by Professor Jonathan West. He was the expert that all stakeholders agreed had the experience and the know-how to get this job done, and so it's his verification process that we will rely on.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, let's just backtrack in the history here. This isn't the Federal Government, or indeed the State Government, saying to stakeholders that you must do this or must do that  -  it happened the other way around. The stakeholders realised market conditions had changed. They got together, people who had been at war for a long period of time, who'd never seen eye-to-eye over forestry questions, got together around a table to work through, to see if, in this changed set of circumstances, they could work out a way forward, and when they, together, had a statement of principles, we became involved.
So, this is a process that the stakeholders, including the environmental groups, have been involved in, indeed, were the first architects of. So, this is the process. The process has been agreed to. Jonathan West was the person agreed to. And so I do expect people who have been in the process every step of the way to hold to the process that they agreed to.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: No, I won't today. I will be having a discussion with the Acting Premier.
JOURNALIST: Back on whaling, (inaudible) Japan's got the message that (inaudible).
PM: Well, we have stated to the Government of Japan on more than one occasion that whaling vessels are not welcome in our territorial waters. There was a boat that did come into our territorial waters. We have reiterated to the Government of Japan that those ships are not welcome, and that vessel left our waters.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) why hasn't there been (inaudible) these meetings with the Coalition, and will you be (inaudible).
PM: Well, let's get all of these facts right, too. The facts of this are as Prime Minister I commenced a process before Christmas to have discussions with the Opposition to get a solution here, and I indicated to the Opposition that we were prepared as a Government to join with the Opposition and pass the Government's amendments to the Migration Act, and having secured those amendments through the parliament to action both the agreement with Malaysia and a processing facility on Nauru.
Now, the Opposition has always said that its policy was to have a processing facility on Nauru, so we've basically said that we would action that policy alongside Malaysia. That is in the written correspondence.
Following that written correspondence, it was agreed that there would be a set of meetings, the participants in those meetings have been the Minister for Immigration, Chris Bowen, his counterpart, Scott Morrison, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Kevin Rudd, and his counterpart, Shadow Minister Julie Bishop.
Those discussions are ongoing.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) state government put up some money as well
PM: Well, Commonwealth contribution of $15 million is there. On State Government contributions, I'll turn to the Acting Premier.
ACTING PREMIER GREEN: Well, obviously, the State Government is not in a position to make a contribution to the project now. The fact is, though, that this is upfront funding which will allow us to work closely with the Clarence Council and Cricket Australia to understand how we can bring this project to fruition.
So, our concentration is obviously on making sure we can provide core services. The budget strategy remains intact, and we will, as I've just indicated, work closely with those parties, and including the Commonwealth, to see this project through.
PM: Can I just conclude by thanking everybody who's made us so welcome here today, from the University of Tasmania and from CSIRO. We've got to meet staff, we've got to meet scientists, we've got to meet students, we've got to meet people who actually crew the vessel that currently does the ocean surveying, so thank you very much for making us so welcome, and this is a good day, I think, for Tasmanian jobs, with these new investments both in the Institute here and in Bellerive Oval.
It's a good day for science in Australia and our connection with our waters and with Antarctica and it's also a good day for sporting fans, so thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the Australian Government would provide $15 million towards the redevelopment of Bellerive Oval.
This Commonwealth funding will contribute to the extension of the Southern Stand boosting the capacity to about 20,000. 
The Members and Players Pavilion will also be extended and allow other sports including AFL to house their Tasmanian headquarters at the oval.
Bellerive Oval currently has a capacity of around 16,000 and over past summers has regularly sold out major sporting contests. 
Once the redevelopment is complete, more Tasmanians will get to see more sporting matches right here in Hobart.
In 2015, Bellerive Oval will be ready to host matches as part of the Cricket World Cup.  In addition the upgrade will lock in North Melbourne AFL matches at Bellerive.
The project will also boost tourism in and around Hobart.
The Prime Minister thanked the Member for Franklin, Julie Collins, for her continued representations on behalf of the people of Tasmania.
Bellerive Oval is a much-loved ground for Tasmanians and the Federal Government is proud to be working with the State Government in this redevelopment. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today visited the site of University of Tasmania's new state-of-the-art institute, which will provide a new research hub for marine scientists in Tasmania.
The construction of the institute is funded by a $45 million investment provided by the Gillard Government under the Education Investment fund.
Due for completion in early 2014, the new Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies will house 290 marine scientists, students and staff in 2014, providing opportunities for collaborative research of national and international significance.
The Institute will be located close to both the Australian Antarctic Division and the CSIRO's Marine and Atmospheric Research laboratories, on the iconic Hobart waterfront.
The Hobart wharf district is the ideal location for this leading research facility being the current and historical departure point for Australia's Antarctic research expeditions.
The 3-level building will have a 5-star green rating. It has also been designed to fit in with its historic surroundings. 
A ground floor exhibition space showcasing a range of marine and Antarctic displays will provide an additional point of interest for visitors to the waterfront precinct.
The Tasmanian-based science community already makes an important contribution to the world's understanding of the Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.
While in Hobart, the Prime Minister also toured CSIRO's Marine and Atmospheric Research laboratories and visited one of Australia's two deep water research vessels - the RV Southern Surveyor.
Under the Super Science initiative, the Federal Government has provided $387 million in marine, Antarctic and climate research infrastructure including $120 million for a new, state-of-the-art research vessel to replace the Southern Surveyor. 
The RV Investigator is due to arrive in Hobart in June 2013 and will be able to accommodate four times the number of scientists on voyages for almost twice as long. It is anticipated the new vessel will operate out at sea for up to 300 days a year - some 120 days more than the Southern Surveyor. 
Other funding to ensure Australia's continuing leadership in marine, Antarctic and climate science and research includes:
 * 	$102 million for the Australian Antarctic Division in 2011 - 12
 * 	$73 million for the Antarctic research through the Cooperative Research Centres program
 * 	$102 million for the Integrated Marine Observing System (including $52 million Super Science funding)
 * 	A total of $100 million from the Education Investment Fund to support three major marine research facilities: the Sydney Institute of Marine Science; the Indian Ocean Marine Research Centre in Perth - including $45 million for the Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies.
For further information on the Education Investment Fund, please visit www.deewr.gov.au/eif/



PM: I'm here at the Ford factory at Broadmeadows and I'm joined by the Minister for Manufacturing, Kim Carr, and by our local member, Maria Vamvakinou, and I've been very pleased to be able to walk though today and to talk to some of the hard-working people here at Ford.
The workers you can see behind me are just some ofthe 46,000 Australians who work in the car industry, and beyond those directly employed there are another 230,000 Australians whose jobs depend on there being a car industry in this country. We are proudly one of 13 countries around the world  -  only 13  -  that can say that they have a car industry which does everything from design through to the car rolling off the production line. That's a very special thing to be able to say.
And the skills and capabilities that come out of manufacturing automobiles then flow through to the rest of manufacturing, so a vibrant car industry is so important to the future of manufacturing generally.
Because of the importance of the car industry, during the global financial crisis we worked hard to make sure that we would still have a car industry in this country and we do. Now, we are in a time of economic transformation and change in Australia, we are going through a spectacular resources boom. That brings great benefits, but it also means our Australian dollar is very high and a high Australian dollar can put pressure on other industries, including manufacturing.
I'm very determined as Prime Minister, as we go through this period of economic change, that we emerge with a diversified economy with many sources of strength, including manufacturing. I don't want to see the resources boom hollow out other parts of the Australian economy, which is why we are working with the car industry to make sure we hold these jobs and these skills and capabilities in Australia.
As a result of recent discussions, we have entered an agreement with Ford which will see this manufacturing which happens here keep happening through to 2016. That's important news for the workers here.
And we continue to have discussions with Ford about the future of car manufacturing by Ford in Australia, and at the same time we are continuing to work with the rest of the car industry.
As a result of us making $34 million available to join with Ford in new investment to keep car manufacturing here, we'll actually see the number of jobs grow. There will be an additional 300 jobs as a result.
So, that's good news for people who are going to get that work, it's good news for people who rely on car manufacturing for their livelihoods, and it's good news for Australian manufacturing overall.
Premier Baillieu, a Liberal Premier, has joined with us in these endeavours and I thank him for that. In contrast, Tony Abbott is saying no to the jobs of these Australian workers - simply saying no to them having their jobs. Now, that is an irresponsible approach.
Unfortunately the irresponsibility doesn't end there. Mr Abbott's Finance Spokesperson, Mr Robb, has also been engaging in deeply irresponsible conduct.
We are at a time in the global economy where there is volatility out of the Eurozone. That means that markets are skittish. That means it's an incredibly dangerous time for people to be spruiking nonsense about the Australian economy, and that's what Mr Robb has been doing - talking our economy down.
The plain facts are these: Australia has succeeded in getting the coveted AAA rating from all three major ratings agencies - the first time in Australia's history we're ever had that, the AAA rating from all three ratings agencies, and we've succeeded in getting it now.
Under the former Howard Government we never achieved that benchmark. In 2007, there were 16 economies with a AAA rating from all three ratings agencies - and we weren't one of them. Now there are 12 economies with that coveted status, and we are one of them.
So, for Mr Robb to wander around trying to fool people and say the Australian economy is in the same state as some the European economies is simply wrong, and it's grossly irresponsible at a time where we are seeing market volatility and markets are understandably skittish about circumstances in Europe.
The Australian economy is in a very difference place: we have economic growth, we have low unemployment, we have low debt, and we are working hard to make sure we've got jobs today as we build our future economy so we've got jobs tomorrow.
I'll turn to the Minister for Manufacturing, Kim Carr, for some comments.
MINISTER CARR: Thank you, Prime Minister.
Today's visit allows us the opportunity to talk directly with workers here at Broadmeadows about their future, and about the Government's commitment to ensure that they have a prosperous future. We are talking to people right across the industry in this country because we value highly the importance of the automotive industry  -  not just because the capacity to make a motor car, but because of its importance to manufacturing generally.
A million Australians are employed in manufacturing and the foundation stone of manufacturing is the automotive industry. We have the capacity in this country to be able to be part of a great global industry and to remain part of it, but it requires investment, new investment. It needs constant attention. It's not a set-and-forget policy area. It's an area which we must work closely with everyone involved to maintain our international competitiveness.
And that's why I'm calling upon the Liberal Party to fulfil its obligations to blue-collar workers, to working people of this country, and actually stand shoulder-to-shoulder with them in what has been the most difficult year, probably, since 1957.
This is a direct result of the changes that are occurring in the Australian economy, the direct result of a two-speed economy, and we've got an obligation as governments and as oppositions to work with the industries to ensure that we have a sustainable future in manufacturing.
Now, Mr Abbott has spent most of last year trawling his coat across this country, factory after factory, seeking to claim that he is sympathetic to the struggles of working people. Well, now here's his chance - as I understand it a meeting tomorrow, a meeting of the Shadow Cabinet tomorrow, to demonstrate his commitment, to put his money where his mouth is and to stand up to the theorists that think that we can get on in this world by pretending the world is some sort of giant university seminar.
Well, of course the real world of economics is very different. We have to work with international companies to secure investment, to secure the future for jobs in this country. And Mr Abbott has a direct responsibility, a direct responsibility to you, all of the people who are here today, to face up to his obligations - not just talking the talk, but actually acting, and we need to have a bipartisan approach in this country to the future of investment, because the international community, the international investment community, is looking to us, who want to know whether or not we are genuinely committed to manufacturing into the future.
Well I can assure you this: the Australian Government is. What about the Opposition? Are they genuinely committed, or are the just running for political gamesmanship that we've seen so often in this country? What we need is the Parliament to stand together, stand together for the working people of this country and secure the jobs for the future.
Now the Liberals have a policy at the moment of reducing assistance - reducing assistance. They have been saying to us on one hand they support the industry, yet on the other hand they say they want to take money out of the industry. You can't do both and Mr Abbott has to come clean  -  he said last August that they were in the business of reviewing their policy. Well, it's time to release the report, release the report that the Shadow Cabinet is looking at, so we can see whether or not they're fair dinkum.
I know that Mr Loughnane, the Liberal Party national director, and others within the senior ranks of the Liberal Party have been promising the motor companies that they're going to change their policy. They've been promising that for some time.
Well, it's time to deliver. It's time for them to stand with this Government, join with this Government and defend manufacturing jobs in Australia, defend the automotive industry and ensure that we remain, as a country, committed to high-technology, high-wage, high-skilled jobs, right into the 21st century.
Thank you.
PM: And I'll call on Maria Vamvakinou, who's the local member here. As we've moved around and talked to people, quite a few people live nearby where they work, so I'll get Maria to say a few words.
VAMVAKINOU: Thank you, Prime Minister.
As the Prime Minister said, a lot of the people that work here and are here today in fact are my constituents. I've been associated with Ford since my becoming the Member for Calwell about a decade ago. However, the history of Ford as an employer in Broadmeadows spans well in excess of 50 years.
This is an important provider for a very important manufacturing of cars in Australia. Last year Tony Abbott stood up in the Parliament and challenged me as the Member for Calwell to stand up for my constituents, to stand up for manufacturing in my electorate. Well, I am standing up for my constituents, the Government is standing up for my constituents, the Government is standing up for the future of manufacturing in Australia.
My call now is to return the compliment to Tony Abbott and to challenge him to stand up for the future of manufacturing in Australia and to stand up for the jobs in my electorate. I just want to tell Mr Abbott and those who feel that this is bad money being spent, that people in this electorate and people right across Australia understand the importance of Australia being a manufacturing nation, they understand the importance of jobs, they want their Government to invest in this country's manufacturing capacity and in this country's future.
This is the message I convey to the Opposition Leader on behalf of my constituents and on behalf of the many people who have made their lives in Australia in post-war migration, who came here and who now, as late as last night, 78-year-,old Sophia said to me: this is one of the best things that an Australian government can do to preserve Australian manufacturing.
Thank you.
PM: Thanks Maria, thank you.
Thank you, we're happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, what is the (inaudible) at what point does the car industry have to stand on its own two feet?
PM: We are optimistic about the future of manufacturing. That does mean we've got to make the right decisions now, and the right decisions to support the industry during this phase of economic change in our country, where we've got the resources boom, we've got a high Aussie dollar, we've got competition for capital and for labour, and so we will be supporting Australian jobs during this period because I want us to come through this period of economic change with a diversified economy, with many sources of strength, including manufacturing.
Now, that does mean that we need to work with companies. We've got to work with companies to ensure that there is investment here and there is a future here and that is what we've been doing.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) is that right?
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: So at some point (inaudible) will cease, the taxpayer (inaudible)?
PM: As a Government, if you want to have jobs in your economy, then you've got to have the right policy settings every day. You never rule a line and say ‘it's done.' You've got to keep creating new jobs, keep working on your economy, keep building the economy of the future.
We are making the prudent decisions that we need to to keep Australian jobs here in car manufacturing. We are doing it within the New Car Plan, and the expenditure envelope for that New Car Plan.
The question here is whether or not that plan should be cut back  -  that's the difference  -  and as I have said and as Minister Carr has said and the local Member Maria Vamvakinou, there is a key issue here. I want to see these Australian workers keeping their jobs, I want to see jobs grow as a result of this investment.
Mr Abbott is saying no to these workers' jobs.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Yeah, sure.
MINISTER CARR: Perhaps I can help you with a few facts and figures on this matter.
PM: I suspect you could.
MINISTER CARR: The automotive industry around the world, we're one of 13 countries as the Prime Minister has indicated, that can make a motor car from the point of an idea through to the showroom floor. We're in very, very good company - very, very good company, - and it's a real measure of how a society has been able to evolve. Those countries that have lost their automotive industry, and there are many that have done that, deeply regret it because of how important the automotive industry is to the skills foundations of many, many other aspects of manufacturing, whether it be in aerospace, whether it be in instrument making, whether it be in aluminium, whether it be in plastics, whether it be in glass.
These are, of course, the foundation stones, as I say, these jobs you see here today are the things that we are able to develop which means that we can make jet fighters and we're in the process of that through the Joint Strike Fighter. The skills that are learnt here carry over to so many other places.
But nowhere in the world  -  nowhere  -  does the automotive industry survive without substantial co-investment by the governments. The governments of these countries around the world value the investment, value the jobs, value the huge benefits that come from research and development, from exports, value the services that are generated.
So in Australia though, our investment with the automotive industry is very small, very small by international standards, and the recent reports indicate that for Australia it's less than the price of a football ticket, $17.80 per taxpayer.
In Canada it's $96.39, in France it's $147.38, in Germany $90.37, in Sweden $334, in United Kingdom it is $27, but in the United States, the great home of free enterprise, is it $264 per taxpayer that goes towards support for the American automotive industry.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
I don't think you have heard those numbers before - $264 per taxpayer in the United States, and less than $18 in Australia.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) if it requires government subsidy (inaudible) around the world, how long will you keep it up?
PM: Well you've just heard Minister Carr explain, and what I said before is you've got to look at the benefits to the economy overall, and the spinoffs that come with having the kind of skills and capability and innovation and supply chains that manufacturing automobiles gives you, and what that means for manufacturing overall.
Now, we well understand that other people will make a different judgement call. There will be people who say that the jobs of these workers and having manufacturing is yesterday's economy. I don't agree with them. It seems that Tony Abbott does.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you about Australian companies being forced to use Chinese supplies in the mining sector (inaudible)
PM: Look, thank you for the question and I am very concerned about the anecdotal reports today that there is a requirement that Australian firms are not used in mining. Any clear evidence of this will be taken by us to the World Trade Organisation, because it's in breach of the rules and it's not giving Aussie manufacturers a fair go.
So my message would be to people who have got this anecdotal evidence, that we need to take it to the next stage, get the clear evidence, and if clear evidence is available then we will certainly do everything we can to press the case internationally, because it's not fair to Aussie manufacturing.
JOURNALIST: Just on pokies, Prime Minister, Clubs ACT is working on a trial of mandatory pre-commitment (inaudible)?
PM: As I said yesterday, I've had some discussions with Andrew Wilkie, we will have some more discussions in the future and it's not my intention to engage in running commentary in any way while those discussions are happening.
JOURNALIST: But do you support a $1 betting limit?
PM: I'll just refer you to my last answer. I'm not going to add commentary in any way while those discussions are happening.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, we are still in discussions with Holden and working hard on it. We obviously want to see auto jobs across the board here in Australia, and Minister Carr continues to work hard on it. So we will be working on that in the months to come.
JOURNALIST: Will that go to Cabinet?
PM: Oh, of course major decisions go to Cabinet, absolutely.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Minister won't be able to make the argument then?
PM: You misunderstand the Cabinet process and how it works.
JOURNALIST: Just on the Queen's Diamond Jubilee in about five months, is the Australian Government buying her a present?
PM: As I announced at the time of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, the Palace has let it be known that the Queen's preference is that there be resources made available for her Diamond Jubilee Trust, which will make investments across the Commonwealth, and so we are considering making a donation to her Trust.
JOURNALIST: Britons are talking about a (inaudible) or something, we wouldn't go that far (inaudible)?
PM: Well, I actually stood with Prime Minister Cameron when he indicated that the advice from the Palace was that the Queen's preference was for a Diamond Jubilee Trust. Beyond that, obviously, the UK Government will make its own decisions, but Prime Minister Cameron certainly indicated that the UK Government would be making a contribution to her Trust.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried that the nationalisation of OH&amp;S laws (inaudible)?
PM: Look I've seen these reports today and we've just got to take a commonsense approach to all of this, and we most certainly are. We are continuing arrangements where there are safety expectations for the treatment of volunteers, and volunteer organisations know that and go out of their way to make sure that they keep their volunteers safe. If you look at organisations like the SES, they train and train and train and train for safety. Now our approach has been endorsed by the peak body for volunteers, Volunteering Australia.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Government's always got to do the appropriate things to make sure that your economy is growing and that you are developing the economy of the future. If you look right across the board, we invest in skills - that's about the capacities of individuals in our future economy. We invest in infrastructure, no bigger infrastructure than the National Broadband Network, because that's about the future of our economy. We put together our Clean Energy Future package because lowering our carbon pollution is about the future of our economy. We invest in road, in rail, in ports, because that's about the future of our economy. And of course we work through industry policy settings to make sure our economy has jobs today and is ready for the jobs of tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a (inaudible) that Ford has contributed to its own problems to some extent by focussing on big cars that run on petrol, which is not what the market wants and wasn't heading in that direction. So, are you propping up that (inaudible)?
PM: Well, I'd invite you to have a good hard look at the motor vehicles that are on display here and you will see through the Government's work and our change agenda, we have helped support the development of vehicles that are lower emissions, which is what the people want today. The vehicles that are on display here have world-breaking design features that have been developed here in Australia, and then of course you can take that in Australia all the way through to making the vehicle, having it come off the production line, going into the showroom and then ending up being the vehicle that proudly sits in your driveway.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'll get Minister Carr to clarify timing.
MINISTER CARR: Look, that's just not true. The fact remains that in Australia we've improved the consumption levels by about 20 per cent in the space of the last four years - that is, the consumption of petrol. So, we're improving the emissions in terms of both the, in terms of the power train and the tail pipe.
Last year, we sold over a million cars in Australia. We sold 49 fully electric vehicles. The future will go to other technologies, it's a question of when. It's a question of whether or not we have got the maximum benefits out of the combustion engine, and we are seeing dramatic improvement still to be made with the combustion engine.
At the end of the day, it's about the business case, and while over time we will see new forms of technology brought to bear - full electrification, hydrogen, a range of other options - but in the immediate term we are seeing that the petrol engine is the way in which people want to go and we are seeing they want to see cars that are more fuel efficient, but they want them to be powerful, they want to see cars that are big enough for people to be able to pick up the kids, do the shopping, put a passenger in, all at the same time.
And so there are, of course, changes in consumer sentiment, but overall the fact is that in Australia today the top five car range, Australia produces I think three of the top five cars.
The Commodore, which has been a top selling car now for the better part of 15 years, was pipped by 400 vehicles. That's more to do with the changes in the price of the dollar than it is necessarily much else. We're seeing the Cruze, 33,000 vehicles sold last year. We're seeing the Territory here today, it is now best in class, a 57 per cent increase in its sales - 57 per cent.
And that's because of the new technologies we brought in, diesel engines. So the combustion engine's got a long way to go, and I'd say over the next generation you will see very substantial changes and the development of new technologies, but we're in the business of co-investment, so the Government puts in some money, but the companies have to put in much, much, much more.
We're in the business of working with State Governments, to ensure that they meet their responsibilities as well and overall what we've seen is that the New Car Plan has been very, very successful.
This is an issue that could have been resolved in 2008. It could have been resolved, not in our interests, could have seen the collapse of the industry. The Government's action has shown that the industry is vibrant and is able to sustain the shocks of the global economic crisis.
We're now going through another period of difficulty as a result of the dollar. The dollar has increased by nearly two-thirds its value since we introduced the New Car Plan, so there has to be adjustments, and that's what the Governments doing. The New Car Plan is flexible, is adaptable and is able to see new technologies employed, like EcoBoost in Ford, which has seen substantial improvements and real value for money for consumers.
PM: We need to complete the rest of our tour, but can I say a very big thank you to everybody who's made us so welcome here at Ford, and we're looking forward to the rest of it.
Thank you, thanks very much. 



I would like to thank Eric Ripper for his service to Western Australia and Australia.
He has served on the front bench of WA's parliamentary Labor Party for more than 20 years, including as a loyal and effective Deputy Premier in a two-term Labor Government.
During eight years as Treasurer from 2001 to 2008, Eric inherited an economy in recession and went on to deliver eight budget surpluses.
He served in a range of portfolios, including Energy, State Development and Public Sector management, and he was instrumental in reforming the State's energy market - attracting investment and creating jobs.
Eric's contribution as the Minister responsible for Native Title is unrivalled. He won and held the confidence of stakeholders, including miners and pastoralists, and led the reform and improvement of land access processes. His achievements included Native Title agreements that have underpinned the expansion of the Ord River agricultural area (Ord Stage 2). During his time as Minister, Native Title was determined over 800,000 square kilometres of Western Australia - an outcome unmatched anywhere in Australia.
Following the defeat of Labor in 2008, Eric accepted the role as Party Leader at his colleagues' request. For three years, he has led the WA Labor Party through turbulent times, fostering unity and purpose at a time when both could have been in short supply.
Eric is a proud West Australian and a true believer in the Labor cause. He has supported and assisted the development of WA's next generation of Labor politicians, and I know his commitment to the Party has never wavered.
I understand that the WA Party will meet next week to elect a new leader, and I look forward to working closely with them in the interests of Western Australia and the nation. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today congratulated 40 Australians who have been recognised for their outstanding work in building strong and cohesive local communities.
The 40 local champions have been independently selected as the new People of Australia Ambassadors following hundreds of nominations from the public.
Australians were encouraged to nominate inspirational people who have helped to build bridges, promote inclusion and strengthen ties in their communities.
The Prime Minister and Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Kate Lundy announced the new Ambassadors in Melbourne today.
They were joined by football champion and new Ambassador Harry O'Brien, who is actively involved in the AFL's own Multicultural Program and engaged in a variety of community projects.
The Ambassador program is a key initiative of the Gillard Labor Government's multicultural policy, The People of Australia, announced last year.
The 40 Ambassadors now have a new platform to promote their good work and share their ideas and initiatives that can help inspire others.
The Gillard Government recognises good work that is happening in our communities and that good work deserves to be championed at the national level.
The new Ambassadors will be able to provide advice to Government and the Australian Multicultural Council.
Their contributions will help assist and strengthen the Government's multicultural policy.
The Ambassadors have been recognised for the real impact they are having on the lives of many Australians - from bringing kids together through sport, to helping small business owners from diverse backgrounds get up and running.
The inaugural Ambassador program speaks to the strength of our Australian communities and our capacity as a nation to welcome people and make them feel part of our community.
The 2012 Ambassadors' term commences today and ends on 30 December 2012.
Further information on the Ambassadors is available at http://www.amc.gov.au/ambassadors/ambassadors-2012.htm



PM: I'm joined by Parliamentary Secretary Kate Lundy, who does our work in Immigration and Multicultural Affairs and I'll have something to say about this man in a moment.
But we are here today for a very important event, and that is to announce the 40 Australians who are going to be our People of Australia Ambassadors. This is a program where we've been our in the community looking for those Australians who go out of their way to make sure that our wonderful multicultural society is a cohesive and strong society - people who take those extra steps to make sure that migrants to our country end up integrating and participating in the Australian way of life.
The Australians that we've chosen come from all sorts of different backgrounds and they are involved in a wide range of activities  -  whether it's getting kids involved in sport, whether it's helping kids learn to read at school, whether it's helping elderly migrants who have their needs for particular forms of aged care and particular language needs, these are Australians who do that work in their community.
And so we wanted to recognise them. We wanted to say thanks and we wanted to say that they are People of Australia Ambassadors who should be recognised nationally and by their local communities as they go about this great work.
Now, there's not many occasions in my life that I'm called upon to talk up things associated with Collingwood, but I'm making a special exception today, a special exception because Harry O'Brien is one of our People of Australia Ambassadors and he is doing remarkable work through Australian Rules Football into our multicultural communities and involving kids
And I'd like to thank him for the work that he does, thank the Collingwood Football Club and Eddie for the support that they give and I'll ask Harry now to make some remarks about being a People of Australia Ambassador.
O'BRIEN: Thank you very much Prime Minister. I must say that just listening to the Prime Minister speak I got a little bit emotional because I was just reflecting a bit on my life and my upbringing. You know, coming to Australia at three years of age, moving here to Melbourne first and living in the Fitzroy Commission flats, then later on growing up in Perth from the age of seven.
I grew up in a family where no-one looked like me. I was the only child in my family of four children in my family, I was the only child of African descent and always remember feeling different and we all know how honest kids are at school, they'd always ask me, you know ‘Why are you black? Why is your family white? You must be adopted' and this would happen every day and I even remember the embarrassment of the roll call every day where the teacher would try their best to say my name  -  my real name isn't Harry, I was born Heritier  -  and I remember the teacher trying to say my name and, trying their best, but they'd always have difficulty and I remember the kids snickering and laughing and I would just feel this sense of detachment, sense of separation from the society that I was living in.
And I remember this used to be something that really upset me from a young age, but I got to a point of probably about 13 years of age and I remembered that I would do my best to make sure that people wouldn't feel this way and this filled me up with a lot of passion to work in this field of trying to show that we as a human race, and particularly in Australia as a population, have a lot more in common than we do that sets us apart
So, to be nominated by the Government and to be recognised by Julia, I just, I'm so humbled by the experience of it all. I didn't even know that the Prime Minister knew who I was, so, yeah, going back, just thinking back to all the pain that I went through, but now being able to have a platform to assist in, I suppose, the conscious evolution of our society and moving us closer to oneness, rather than the separation.
So I'm so grateful for this opportunity and I really do, I do have the desire to represent the people of our community as best as I can.
Thank you very much.
PM: Thank you very, very much.
Now, we'll happily take questions.
JOURNALIST: What sort of duties will Harry perform as an Ambassador? Will he have any sort of specific duties at all?
PM: Harry will be out there and our other Ambassadors will be out there continuing the work that they do and hopefully building on it, but building on it with the appointment of being a People of Australia Ambassador. And we are going to use them as the eyes and ears for the Government in communities right around the country, and we'll be asking them to forward to our Australian Multicultural Advisory Council what they learn so that we can better inform government work and government programs. 
Now, of course, government's got to do all of the things that it does to get our immigration program right, to offer settlement services, to make sure that in our communities right around the nation there's education and healthcare services when people need it. But we all know that the glue that brings us together is the thing that happens person to person, family to family, sporting group to sporting group, out there in the community that brings people together. And that's why we can learn so much from people who are doing that really practical work, as Harry has been doing and will continue to do.
And I think you can tell from that really moving rendition of his own life story what it can be like and how a helping hand and a word of comfort at the right time during the journey of your life can make a real difference.
JOURNALIST: What are the specific characteristics that Harry has that makes him a good Ambassador?
PM: Well, he's stepped forward already. Before we had this program he involved himself in this work of reaching out to our multicultural communities, informed by his own life experience. It can be an incredibly powerful combination to get sport and community, our sporting stars, all working together using kids' natural love of sport, natural idealising of sporting stars, to give them a helping hand and to bring them into the life of our community, so Harry's already been doing that. Obviously I'm wishing him all power as he does all of that work, not so much necessarily on the field, but certainly out there in our local communities.
JOURNALIST: Harry, how rewarding is it doing community work, or voluntary work throughout the community?
O'BRIEN: Yeah, I think anyone that does, I suppose, volunteer or is active in the community will know that they should do it because it gives the greatest satisfaction to be able to give back and for myself I know that I feel the best when I'm doing something for someone else and we even have it here at the Collingwood Football Club, especially on the field, having Mick Malthouse as our coach and now Nathan Buckley, the theme has always been make your team mate a better player and that's how teams are successful and it's not just limited to sport, this should be, I suppose, the creed for our nation, is make your neighbor a better person, make the person next to you better, make their life easier and I think that's what we're moving towards with great initiatives like this.
JOURNALIST: Harry, obviously you've been playing in the competition for a few years, have you seen cultural acceptance improve, or is there still some way to go?
O'BRIEN: Look, to be honest, I've always seen the AFL as being a leader in society with a lot of things, and in this particular instance, when I got into the AFL system in 2004, at the end of 2004, there was already a lot of education, you know the AFLPA and the AFL work together to educate players on cultural awareness and inclusion and I've always seen the AFL as leading the way, but never being complacent, always looking for different ways that we can reach out to the community. So, yeah, the AFL is the leader in this field.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the Government looking to change the pokie reform timeline?
PM: I see that today there's all sorts of speculation in the newspapers about this matter, but my answer to you is going to be the same as yesterday, which is I'm not intending to engage in a running commentary on discussions with Mr Wilkie whilst I'm in those discussions.
Here in Melbourne, I do want to say this: as everybody knows my electorate is here in Melbourne's west and I am concerned about problem gambling, because in my own local community I've seen the damage done.
JOURNALIST: Are you still confident of retaining Andrew Wilkie's support?
PM: Well, as I just said I'm not engaging in commentary on this matter.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We've said when we've got something to announce then we'll certainly announce it, but whilst I'm in discussions with Mr Wilkie I'm not going to engage in commentary on those discussions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, I'm not engaging in commentary on this matter, nor responding to people who are engaging in commentary on this matter.
JOURNALIST: But your commitment to reform is undiminished?
PM: I am concerned about problem gambling. In my own electorate in Melbourne's west we do have people who come to my office looking for help because they are in the most desperate of circumstances. So I am concerned about problem gambling, I've been involved in discussions with Mr Wilkie, I know that he also has a passionate concern about problem gambling. But I'm not going to engage in commentary on our discussions whilst we're having them.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) your ministers have publicly stated that mandatory precommitment is the best solution though. Do you still believe that?
PM: Well, look, as I said to you yesterday, and I think maybe the day before as well, I'm not going to engage in commentary whilst I'm in discussions with Mr Wilkie.
JOURNALIST: The Opposition says it's about trust. Can Australians trust you to (inaudible) pokie machine reform?
PM: Once again, I refer you to my last answer.
JOURNALIST: Have you had a chance to discuss this issue with Mr McGuire?
PM: No, I haven't. We've been, I said as soon as I got out of the car, it is inevitable that I will get a comment from Mr McGuire about having worn black and white today and that has been the nature of our discussions and it wasn't intentional.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) reforms still a priority for your Government?
PM: Look, not engaging in commentary, thanks. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Not engaging in commentary.
So, we can keep doing the questions a million ways, but you're going to get the same answers, so you'll be very frustrated.
JOURNALIST: The churches and some other community groups are worried about the OH&amp;S reforms. Do you think their concerns are valid?
PM: Look, I dealt with a couple of days ago and I do want to make this point: what we've been doing with Occupational Health and Safety reforms is effectively codifying what has existed for volunteers beforehand. We have the endorsement of Volunteering Australia.
Volunteer organisations go out of their way to make sure that the volunteers who do all of that great work are kept safe, so we're taking a very commonsense approach to this.
JOURNALIST: But there are a growing number of groups are actually saying the opposite, that they feel, for instance, Anglicare are concerned about whether or not they can continue to have carers operating in the foster system. Is that something that you-
PM: -Once again, we're happy to work through with people, but Volunteering Australia did endorse out approach.
I think there's a question of getting the right information to people, because I suspect some of the things people have read in the newspaper may have raised some concerns, but when people have the benefits of the right information they will see we're taking a very practical, very commonsense approach.
And I deal with a lot of volunteer organisations. I mean footy clubs have a lot of volunteers who come and help and of course organisations that rely on volunteers make sure that those volunteers are kept safe. They understand that that's part of what they want to do, because it's the right thing to do and people will come and volunteer and everybody wants to keep those precious volunteers safe, so it's a very commonsense approach.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you agree with Bill Shorten's assessment that banks are putting profits ahead of people's welfare?
PM: We've said about Australia's banks that they are strong and given the world we live in, the global financial crisis and how that affected our country, and now of course the volatility we're seeing coming out of Europe, we can take comfort in the fact that here in Australia our four major banks are strong and also that as a nation we have got, for the first time ever, the coveted AAA rating from all three major ratings agencies.
But we've also said that banks need to offer the best possible products to banking customers. We've made it easier for people to shop around, so if they don't like the deal that they're getting from their bank, they can go down the street, or get online and look for another deal.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, the comments were particularly about the jobs cuts, so they're cutting staff-
PM: -On job cuts, I never want to see any Australian look their job. Of course that's a big blow for that person and for their families. We do want to see Australia as a great financial services sector, and overall employment is growing in financial services.
JOURNALIST: Can you comment on the agreement with the Opposition on irregular boat arrivals before Parliament resumes?
PM: We are still in discussions with the opposition on that matter.
And if I can just conclude on another matter, there's been newspaper reports today about concerns regarding the Oakajee Port development in Western Australia. Now, I understand that people are concerned about this matter and whether or not Australians will get a fair share of the work that goes to constructing the Oakajee Port.
It is my intention to write to Premier Barnett today to seek his cooperation to make sure that we can get to the bottom of this matter.
When we look at Western Australia what we see is a huge resources boom and that's fantastic, but other Western Australians want to know that they are going to get a fair share of the prosperity that comes from that resources boom.
So, I will be writing to Premier Barnett today to seek his cooperation to get to the bottom of this matter.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
O'BRIEN: Yeah, sorry, before we get going I'd just like to say before I was speaking to the Prime Minister and it became apparent to me that she has, I don't know, there's something, she's starting to develop a soft spot for the Collingwood Football Club and I thought I'd just try and get her over the line a bit, now that Barry Hall's left I think maybe she could adopt me as one of her favourite players. So, here's a present from the Collingwood Football Club to you.
PM: Thank you very much for that.
MCGUIRE: You can try it on if you like Prime Minister.
PM: That's OK, thanks Eddie.
I can definitely confirm you're one of my favourite People of Australia Ambassadors.
Thank you.
O'BRIEN: No worries, thank you.
PM: Thank you very much. 



PM: Thank you very much to Mark and Patrick for presenting this report to me.
Can I start by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and in a spirit of reconciliation, paying my respects to elders past and present, Matilda thank you for the welcome to country. Ron, thank you for once again having us in this wonderful institution.
Can I also acknowledge my ministerial colleague Jenny Macklin and every member of the panel who has worked so hard on this report.
I'd like to say a few words to the panel firstly  -  I know we did not send you on an easy journey.
We drew people from all different walks of life, we added to you people from across the political spectrum and of course Rachel and Rob are here today, Ken couldn't be with us, and we asked you to work together to prepare this report.
We were very specific about what we wanted done. We wanted you to bring forward a proposal that could contribute to a more unified and reconciled nation, that could be of benefit to and accord with the wishes of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples, be capable of being supported by an overwhelming majority of Australians from across the political and social spectrums and be technically and legally sound.
It was a pretty big mission.
So thank you very much for your labours right around the country and having done it in such a consultative way and having found the unity to give this report to me today, I genuinely do thank you for that work.
Today this report goes from being the property of the panel, to the property of the nation and that is appropriate, because for constitutional change Australians have to understand and be persuaded of the case for change. It's our nation's Constitution, out people's Constitution, not our Constitution.
And we know that Australians have been slow to change their Constitution, that out of the 44 referendum proposals put, only eight have succeeded. But we should take hope from the fact that of the referendum most successful when presented to the Australian people, it was the 1967 referendum, when people decided that they wanted to say yes to change.
And I acknowledge the young Freedom Riders here today, who are out there once again living that journey and getting people to say yes to change. Thank you for what you're doing.
And of course we learned when Kevin Rudd delivered the apology on behalf of the Stolen Generations, that that moment had meaning; it had great meaning, because around the nation Australians said yes to that moment.
They wanted the apology said, they wanted it said for them and Kevin Rudd delivered those beautiful words.
So now we are looking to the Australian people again, to get involved and to find it in themselves to say yes to change.
So I'm here today to say to all Australians they should get on the You Me Unity website, they should familiarise themselves with the contents of this report, they should start discussing in their homes, with their neighbours, in their community meetings, in their workplaces, in their trade unions, in their churches, this case for change.
They should consider it deeply, because it's so important to the Australian nation. And as the Australian community considers it deeply, it falls to us, to the political leaders of the nation to make sure that we consider it and respond well too.
It is going to take the deepest and strongest sword of bipartisanship, it is going to require each and every one of us involved in politics, whether it be in the Federal Parliament just down the road, whether it be in State Parliaments, indeed whether it be as local government members or other sorts of community leaders, to find it in ourselves to be our best selves, to advocate this case for change, with the maximum degree of unity.
But I am an optimist. I'm taking it as a good open that as I walked in today I met a small girl and she told me her name was Hope. I think that's a good thing and having met that small girl called Hope I think we are joined here today in a hope for the future.
So, as Prime Minister, I am here to receive the report and I am here to say that as a nation we are big enough and it is the right time to say yes to an understanding of our past, to say yes to constitutional change and to say yes
to a future more united and more reconciled than we have ever been before.
Thank you very much.



The Australian Government today received the expert panel's report on the recognition of Indigenous people in the Australian Constitution.
Over the past year, the panel of Indigenous and community leaders, constitutional law experts and parliamentary members have led wide-ranging national public consultations to develop options to recognise the special place of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in the Constitution.
The panel talked to more than 4,600 people, in more than 250 meetings in 84 locations across the country and received more than 3,500 submissions.
They also sought extensive advice from Indigenous leaders and constitutional experts and gathered data through research and surveys.
The Government will now carefully consider the panel's recommendations before determining the best way forward.
The Australian Constitution is the foundation document for our laws and our government, but it is silent on the special place of our first Australians.
Constitutional recognition of Indigenous Australians is a significant step towards building a nation based on strong relations and mutual respect, which recognises the unique and special place of our first peoples.
The Government thanks the panel, including co-chairs Mark Leibler and Professor Patrick Dodson for their dedication and tireless work over the past year. They have helped build a strong foundation for change.
We also thank the Australian Human Rights Commission, the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples and Reconciliation Australia, and the many people who lodged submissions, participated in consultations or helped the panel with their research.
The Government does not underestimate the challenge of achieving nation-wide consensus. Change will not happen without support from across the political spectrum and the support of the majority of Australians.
The National Apology to Indigenous Australians helped build a bridge of respect between Indigenous and non-Indigenous people. It helped generate the trust so we could work together to tackle Indigenous disadvantage.
The recognition of Indigenous people in the Constitution is another step in that journey, a step that is critical in our efforts to close the gap.
The panel's report can be found at www.youmeunity.org.au. We encourage all Australians to visit the site to learn more and to register their support for Indigenous constitutional recognition.  



HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time, thanks for joining us on Sky News.
Will you still honour your deal with Andrew Wilkie to introduce pre-commitment technology for poker machines in Australia?
PM: Well Kieran, happy new year and I can say I am in discussions with Mr Wilkie about poker machine reform and about problem gambling, and what lies behind all of this is I am very concerned about the damage done by problem gambling and I think my experience is probably the same as many other members of parliament. We see the consequences of problem gambling in our electorate offices, we see the numbers coming in looking for the emergency relief because the dad's got a problem with poker machine addiction and they literally can't feed the kids.
We've had circumstances where people have scrambled around to find someone a bed because they're not homeless because they weren't able to pay the rent or pay the mortgage, so I am very personally concerned about the damage that gets done to individuals, to families, to kids, because people can't control this addition. So, I want to see real reform here.
Now, this parliament, the parliament the Australian people voted for, is capable of some remarkable things, but in order to get big legislation through we need to get everybody on the same page  -  they're not on the same page now and that's what we're working on and I'm continuing my discussions with Mr Wilkie in that context.
HOST: But Rob Oakeshott and Tony Crook have both said that they're open to reform, they want to see the legislation first. What makes you sure or thinking that the numbers aren't there when Mr Wilkie's optimistic himself?
PM: Well I'll let individual members of parliament speak for themselves, but obviously working in this parliament and having discussions with people, I formed the view that there is an appetite for reform, but we do have to work on getting people on the same page and so to get change, to make change real, we need a piece of legislation to go through the House of Representatives and then into the Senate and I'm discussing poker machine reform with Mr Wilkie against that backdrop of this parliament.
And Kieran, if I can point pack to some of the big things that happened last year, we got carbon pricing through the parliament, we got the Minerals Resource Rent Tax through the Parliament, we got hundreds of pieces of legislation though the parliament.
In this parliament that required some cooperation and some collaborative work and that's the approach I'm going to take this year, including to addressing problem gambling.
HOST: People are questioning your commitment to this issue, because up until the last week or so you have been willing to re-state that you are committed to the idea that the Productivity Commission came up with, and that is the pre-commitment technology and again this morning and over previous news conferences you have not done that.
PM: Well Kieran, let's just get the history in sequence. We only have the Productivity Commission report because the Government was sufficiently concerned about problem gambling to ask for it.
And there shouldn't be any mystery about why we were concerned, people see the damage, as I have seen it done in Melbourne's west, and we're a Labor Government, we're Labor people, so of course our thoughts run to those most at need and most at risk in our society. And so we showed our concern by saying let's get the experts, the Productivity Commission, to give us a good piece of work on addressing problem gambling. That's why we have the report.
In terms of the things I've said over the last week, I am putting the appropriate respect to the discussions with Mr Willkie. I don't think it's appropriate when I am in discussions with him to have a running commentary on those discussions.
Now, of course we are both concerned about problem gambling, about people who can't control their playing of poker machines, lots of people  -  fine recreation, have a good night out, that's fantastic  -  but there are some people that do have these addiction problems that do so much harm.
HOST: Tony Abbott is making this an issue about your character. He says you've dudded the Australian people on a carbon tax and now you're preparing to dud Mr Wilkie. If you don't honour this commitment through either pre-commitment technology or dollar maximum bets, doesn't this become another question of your credibility?
PM: Well Kieran, if you're asking me to be surprised about Tony Abbott being negative, I'm not going to be surprised at all. We expect Mr Abbott to be negative every day and he never surprises us. So, another day, another statement of negativity.
On getting something done about problem gambling, I do want to see us get something effective done to assist problem gamblers and to make it less likely in the future that people will get themselves in a circumstance where they can't pay the rent, can't pay the mortgage, can't feed the kids.
To do that we need to get people working together so legislation can go through the parliament. What makes a difference in communities around the nation, in people's homes, in people's lives, is an effective change in the law.
HOST: Mr Wilkie says he's happy to support a trial, but any trial should not determine the fate of the reform, simply the shape or design of the reform. Is that still the Government's position as well?
PM: Well, once again, I'm not going to be drawn on the detail and that's because I don't think it's appropriate to do so when I'm in discussions with Mr Wilkie.
HOST: OK, well he's withdrawn his support for the means testing of the private health insurance rebate. This has been described as revenge over the pokies discussion. Do you see it as retaliation?
PM: Well, I've seen some reports today. I mean, Mr Wilkie can address those matters. I think his comments actually went to the nature of evidence about private health insurance reform. We, of course, are seeking private health insurance reform-
HOST: -It's posturing though, isn't it, in this debate?
PM: Well, we're seeking private health insurance reform because the evidence is very clear that when we've reformed private health insurance in the past we've seen all of these claims that it would be end of private health insurance and then when the evidence all comes in, more people hold private health insurance than have before.
And behind the reform that we are putting forward is a basic fairness proposition, which is I don't think an apprentice who is learning to become a brickie should end up subsidising my private health insurance. I can pay my own.
So that is the fairness proposition that we are obviously taking to the parliament and seeking to persuade people of. I think it's a pretty self-evident fairness proposition.
HOST: A couple of other issues that we need to discuss - the economy of course, the job numbers out yesterday confirming the worst calendar year for the labour market since the recession in the early ‘90s. How much of a worry is that, given it's likely that the worst of Europe, fall out of Europe, hasn't been felt here?
PM: Well, we have seen jobs growth slow and that's because there are some headwinds in the global economy. I've had a lot of say about what's happening in the Eurozone and the need for European leaders to get together and get it done, not just talk about it, but resolve the ongoing problems in the Eurozone.
We also have pressure on some parts of our economy because of our high Australian dollar. What that has meant is many employers have chosen to give their continuing employees more hours rather than put a new person on, but when you come back to the foundation stones here, we have low unemployment, Australians have amongst the best job prospects in the world and we as a Government will be working with those industries under pressure, including manufacturing and if you want one thing that's going to cost Aussie jobs  -  Mr Abbott taking half a billion dollars out of supporting our car industry will cost Australian jobs.
HOST: So the Mid-Year Economic Outlook released by Treasurer Swan, that's still on track, those forecasts, do you think?
PM: Well, we update forecasts periodically. We do it mid-year and we do it at the budget. We've seen one month of unemployment data come in and that's the information that you're referring to.
We are an economy with strong fundamentals, we've got growth, we've got low unemployment. Look around the world. We're talking about employment just over five per cent. In the Eurozone they're talking about it at 10 per cent, the Americans more an 8 per cent. So job prospects here are still solid for Australians.
But we will work with those industries that are under pressure. We're engaged in a lot of work now with the car manufacturing industry. It's the source of good jobs, high-paying jobs, it's a backbone of manufacturing overall, which is why I'm so disappointed that Mr Abbott has taken the position of cutting half a billion of support for those Aussie jobs away.
HOST: If it's not the right thing for the economy, are you willing to shelve you commitment to return to surplus?
PM: Well, our economy is growing. We have room to move on monetary policy. Obviously, that is in the province of the Reserve Bank.
One thing I'd say, Kieran, you can see from around the world, is this is the right time for governments to be clear about their fiscal strategies and we're clear about ours and we are determined to return the budget to surplus.
What also disappoints me is some of the ridiculous claims, dangerous claims, we've seen made by the Opposition about our position as a Government and as a nation. Global markets are skittish. It's the wrong time to be saying silly things. We are a nation that has got the coveted AAA rating from all three ratings agencies for the first time in our history. That's because markets are saying Australia is taking the right approach on fiscal discipline.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you very much.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced reforms to Australia's peak science advisory body to make it more relevant and responsive to the immediate challenges and opportunities facing the nation.
The new Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council (PMSEIC) will have a more dynamic and contemporary focus following a recent review of its operations and membership.
The new smaller Council will meet three times a year to provide more timely independent scientific policy advice to Government on existing and emerging issues that a nation like Australia must confront.
The Council will also continue to provide essential advice to Government on issues facing Australia's long term future, looking five to 30 years ahead.
The changes reflect the Gillard Labor Government's confidence in science and innovation as key drivers to improve Australia's living standards, health, productivity and environment.
Our scientific community is highly regarded for its tremendous contribution to build a richer, fairer, cleaner and safer Australia.
The new Council, led by Chief Scientist, Professor Ian Chubb will be in a stronger position to utilise this scientific expertise.
The Council will be able to refer long-term issues, five to 30 years ahead, requiring a scientific response to the Australian Council of Learned Academies to undertake in depth, interdisciplinary research and report to Government through the Chief Scientist.
The Prime Minister today announced $1.95 million over four years to 2014-15 for in-depth and evidence based research to support the work of the Learned Academies.
The new Council will be in a stronger position to discuss topics such as technology, health and communications issues that have implications across Government.
Professor Chubb will consult with business, universities, state chief scientists and other stakeholders on Council projects and priorities.
More regular meetings will also help the Council provide more timely scientific policy advice to meet the needs of the economy as well as responses to regional developments and international relations.
High on the agenda of the new Council will also be the Chief Scientist's report on the Health of Australian Science - looking at strategies to ensure its sustainability.
The PMSEIC's revised membership will include:
 * 	Prime Minister (chair);
 * 	Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research (alternate chair);
 * 	Minister for Industry and Innovation
 * 	Other Ministers relevant to the meeting, at the invitation of the Prime Minister;
 * 	Australia's Chief Scientist;
 * 	CEO of the Australian Research Council;
 * 	CEO of the National Health and Medical Research Council and;
 * 	Six individual standing members, chosen for their contributions to science and research:
 * 	Dr Megan Clark;
 * 	Dr Cathy Foley;
 * 	Dr Ben Greene;
 * 	Professor Robert Saint;
 * 	Professor Fiona Stanley; and
 * 	Professor Graeme Turner.
The PMSEIC will convene early this year. For more information, visit http://www.innovation.gov.au/Science/PMSEIC/Pages/default.aspx  



PM: Good afternoon. I'm here today with Jenny Macklin, the Minister for Families and Community Services. We're here to announce the Government's policy on problem gambling. Many Australians enjoy gambling, which means they like to place a bet, it's harmless fun, it's part of a good night out and there's no damage done. But I know and we know as a Labor Government that there are too many Australians that struggle with problem gambling, and that that problem gambling can literally wreck lives and tear families apart. We're here in Melbourne today, I represent an electorate in Melbourne's west and I know firsthand that there are people who live in my electorate, who live in Melbourne's west who start the day with all good intentions they're not going to do any gambling that day, but they jump in the car, they drive past a gaming venue and it's just too hard to not drive in and to walk into the venue. And then they sit in front of the machine and they're full of good intentions about limiting their losses and then they find at the end of their session what they've actually done is put all of the money that would have paid for the mortgage or the rent into the machine, and they're in the circumstance where they have to go home and tell their husband or tell their wife or tell their children about the damage done. Problem gambling is a very big issue for too many Australians, putting a lot of pressure on them and their loved ones. And in those circumstances it's the right thing to do to act. As a Labor Government we understand that and that's why in 2008 we asked the productivity commission to look at this area and to make recommendations to Government.
Today I can confirm that the Government will be bringing to the Parliament legislation to address problem gambling, the key features of that legislation will be a trial of mandatory pre-commitment to see whether or not it can work. This is the approach that was recommended by the Productivity Commission, and that trial will start of the 1st of January next year. Whilst the trial is underway it will be compulsory for new gaming machines to be fitted with pre-commitment technology so that the technology will be rolling out while the trial is underway. From the 1st of January next year too there will limits on the amount of cash that people can get out from teller machines in gaming venues, clearly if people can keep getting more and more cash then they can be more and more at risk of putting that cash down the machine and losing it. So the amount of cash available from machines will be limited to $250 per day with appropriate exemptions for some country areas where ATMs are limited.
In addition this approach will mean machines are also fitted with dynamic warnings so that as you're playing the machine you can see warnings that advise you about the costs and consequences of what's happening as you play.
We will also be investing in new resources to support counselling for problem gambling so people can get a helping hand, and we are also working to address interactive gaming, the gaming that comes with new technology, including what I view to be a real problem for the community which is the increasing showing of live betting odds during sports coverage, during sports events.
We will bring this legislation to the Parliament and I believe we will get this legislation through the Parliament.
I'd like to make some reflections about the Parliament in which we work. The Parliament in which I'm Prime Minister is a parliament which has been able to get big reforms done. Last year we got very big reforms done, nation changing reforms like carbon pricing and like the introduction of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. In order to secure those big reforms we needed to work with others, we needed to get everybody on the same page to get page. The response is the same with problem gambling, we need people working together on the same page to get change and the package of reforms we are announcing today I believe will get that support in the Parliament.
What that means is you don't necessarily get everything that you would have envisaged at the start. That you do have to have discussions, that you do have to make compromises, that's the nature of politics. But it also means you can get some very big reform done, we've done it already in some very significant areas, and I want to get a big reform done in problem gambling. To not take this approach means that you don't get change, and not getting change is too big a risk for those Australians and their families that struggle day to day with the pressures that problem gambling puts on their shoulders.
I want to also, before handing to Jenny Macklin, just say a few words about Andrew Wilkie. I've spent a lot of time with Andrew Wilkie, I've spent a lot of time with him this week, but I've spent a lot of time with him since he was elected to the Parliament in 2010. He is a passionate advocate for change in this area, he has been absolutely tireless in his pursuit of change. He cares deeply about the circumstances of people who have got gambling addiction problems, he knows a number of them personally and his heart has been touched by their story. It is a real tribute to Andrew Wilkie that the nation will move to a full trial of mandatory pre-commitment on the 1st of January next year. I'll turn to Jenny Macklin for some comments and then we'll take you questions.
MINISTER MACKLIN: As the Prime Minister has indicated we have been working comprehensively over the last 18 months to bring about real reform for problem gamblers. That's really what this is all about. We do understand the pain and suffering and the devastation to families lives, to individual lives, that comes from problem gambling. And that concern is very widespread. It is the reason why we asked the Productivity Commission to do the major inquiry that the presented to the Government on problem gambling. It is the reason that we got an agreement from the states and territories in the middle of last year to introduce pre-commitment technology across Australia because all of us understand how important it is to act on problem gambling.
It's also the reason that we have widespread support for a major trial into mandatory pre-commitment. Many of you would be aware that the Productivity Commission recommended that we introduce mandatory pre-commitment and we do so after a major trial of this technology.
We now understand that the support for mandatory pre-commitment legislation in the House of Representatives does not exist. It does not exist to get that through the House of Representatives as it is currently configured.
The most important thing for us is to get real action on problem gambling. To get the reform that we can through the Parliament that we have. We have no intention of walking away from those people, those problem gamblers, who depend on us to act. So the legislation that the Prime Minister has outlined here today will be the first time that the Federal Parliament has acted on problem gambling. Never before have we seen problem gambling addressed in this way. We will put legislation into the Federal Parliament to make sure that pre-commitment technology is available for poker machine players right around Australia. We do recognise that this is a useful technology and we want to make sure that it is available. We want to see it on every machine around the country by 2016, with a longer time for smaller venues.
We also do recognise that cost of play display warnings are useful and that will also need to be done on machines around the country by 2016. As the Prime Minister indicated, we do want to see limits on the amount of money that people can take out of ATMS in pubs and clubs and that will be $250 per day per venue.
One of the other very important parts of our reform package is of course the trial of mandatory pre-commitment. Yesterday I made a substantive offer to the clubs industry in the ACT and I've spoken to the ACT Government about a trial in the ACT. That offer has been viewed as serious and substantive by the clubs industry in the ACT and by the ACT Government. If we get the agreement of the clubs industry in the ACT we hope to start this trial as soon as possible next year. There is of course a lot of technical work that will have to be done, machines will have to get ready and the whole system will have to be geared to have this trial. This is a major program of gathering the evidence to show the effectiveness of mandatory pre-commitment and I'd like to thank the clubs industry in the ACT and the ACT Government in anticipation of us working together on this very important reform.
PM: Thank you, we're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what (inaudible) have you offered Andrew Wilkie (inaudible)
PM: Well we'll let Mr Wilkie speak for himself, I think that's appropriate. Obviously Mr Wilkie has been very passionate about problem gaming reform and continues to be very passionate about reform.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister  what do you think about Tony Abbott saying that if the Coalition wins government that they'll use Navy ships (inaudible) asylum seekers?
PM: Well yesterday Tony Abbott was joking about lives being lost at sea and today he's outlining a plan to put Australian lives at risk, to put the lives of Australian Navy and Customs personnel at risk. It's been absolutely clear from the statements of senior officers in Navy that this is a dangerous and reckless approach that puts young Australians at risk and my view is a very clear one: turning a boat around is not worth losing an Australian life.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it's cruel turning them back in that way?
PM: I think it puts lives at risk, I mean you've used the world cruel, it's putting lives at risk, the lives of the Australian personnel involved and the lives of the asylum seekers both can be at risk through this kind of reckless approach and it's been made very clear by senior Defence officers that there are dangers associated with this approach.
JOURNALIST: What do you think of his quota system (inaudible)
PM: Look the Government's obviously, in the area of border protection and dealing with asylum seekers and refugees said that we want to have an approach of protecting our borders, an approach where we extend compassion to people who are genuine refugees. We've been in discussions with the Opposition about securing the legislation through the Parliament that would enable offshore processing, the Malaysia arrangement that the Government has entered into and what Tony Abbott has said is his policy which is a processing facility on Nauru. My understanding is that those discussions are ongoing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) is this another broken promise and if not why not?
PM: Well let's very clearly address that question. The circumstances in this Parliament are clear, I have spoken to every member of the cross bench and it is clear from my discussions with them that there is not the support in the House of Representatives for the Andrew Wilkie plan, for the full mandatory pre-commitment arrangements that Mr Wilkie and I discussed after the last election, very clear that there's not the Parliamentary support. That is also very clear from the public statements made by members of the cross bench. So the circumstance in which we find ourselves are as follows: we have to do something about problem gambling, not getting legislation through the Parliament is not good enough, it means nothing would change, we have to do something about problem gambling. We also have to recognise that to get legislation through this Parliament we need to get people on the same page, prepared to support change. With the changes that we've outlined today we will be taking to the Parliament for the first time ever a national approach to problem gambling in the laws of our country and I believe we can secure this through the Parliament.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: When I discussed matters with Mr Wilkie following the last election and indeed the other discussions I had with cross benchers, we obviously worked through issues of concern to them and of concern to the nation, but all of us understand that in this Parliament we need to get people to work together to achieve major change. Let's look at the huge example from last year, the example of putting a price on carbon, reducing carbon pollution and making sure that we see appropriate investments as a result in clean and renewable technologies. In order to do that we needed people to work together, what they meant is no one got everything that they wanted but we worked together for a reform that will change our nation and reduce our carbon pollution. It will mean that we've got clean energy jobs of the future.
The same approach applies here with problem gambling, I believe there is general concern across the Parliament about people who have got addiction issues with gaming, too many local members would have seen exactly what I have seen, seen people coming into electorate offices begging for emergency relief, where can they go and get a cash handout so that they can go and buy what the kids need, so that they can make sure that there's literally food in the house. Every local member would have seen that, and when you've seen that you do know that action needs to be taken. What we've outlined today is the action that should be taken that will make a real difference, and that can be secured through this Parliament. So we're not talking about ideas, we're getting things done.
JOURNALIST: But how does a trial, which may or may not be implemented further down the track actually affect right now those very people you're talking about who can't afford to feed kids or put a roof on their heads? How (inaudible)
PM: Well let's be very clear, we'll be trialling this technology, full mandatory pre-commitment, to see if it works. That was the approach recommended by the Productivity Commission, the experts we went to as a Labor Government and asked for their recommendations. What will people see change in gaming venues? Well as a result of this legislation they'll see things change including their ability to get cash out of the ATMs, so that in itself creates a circumstance where people can't just keep going back and back and back, more cash, more cash, more cash, more losses. They will see more machines with pre-commitment technology, those machines will ultimately be linked into a state-wide scheme, they will see dynamic warnings coming on display on machines so that they can understand the full cost and consequences of keeping gaming, what it will mean for them and the amount they're going to lose and what that can mean for their family. They'll also see more support, more counselling available for people with problem gambling so that they can get a helping hand.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister why do you wait until next year to implement that $250 limit for ATMs?
PM: Well we need to legislate of course, so the legislation will come to the Parliament during this Parliamentary session, and then there's the set up time about changing the way in which the machines work.
JOURNALIST: Just on an Afghanistan question, Nicolas Sarkozy's threatened to withdraw troops after four were killed. Has our position changed about our troops in Afghanistan at all?
PM: Look our hearts do go out to the people of France, we know what it's like to lose soldiers in Afghanistan and so our condolences go to them, they are grieving their losses today. President Sarkozy remains committed to the mission in Afghanistan, I am certainly committed to the mission in Afghanistan. It's in our national interest to be there, to make sure that we don't see Afghanistan again become a place where terrorists train and those terrorists then go and wreck violence around the world including the taking of Australian lives.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) happened to us and then happened to them?
PM: Look these are dreadful, dreadful incidents and when they have happened to our soldiers I've said that they are very corrosive of trust, I believe they're aimed to be corrosive of trust and that weighs heavily on people, but we need to see the mission through in Afghanistan. We've got a very clear mission and a very clear timeframe and we are going to see it through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister why didn't you start planning for a pre-commitment trial after you'd struck the deal with Andrew Wilkie, why did we wait 18 months (inaudible)
PM: Well that's not the chronology, I'll get Jenny Macklin to take you through it.
MACKLIN: In fact we've been working on the trial for some time. The trial was a recommendation of the Productivity Commission. There has been detailed work done by my department and questions of technology and other detail have been worked through with ACT clubs over the last period. We do understand how important it is to have this trial and I'm very pleased that we've now been able to make a substantive offer and I hope we'll be able to proceed as soon as possible.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I'll say something about that first and then go to Jenny Macklin for the details. I think it needs to be understood that in the agreement that Andrew Wilkie and I entered that moving to full mandatory pre-commitment would have been after the next election in any event, that is in Mr Wilkie's agreement with the Government. As I've made clear we're here today because we're concerned about problem gambling but we're also here because we recognise that in this Parliament to secure reform that we need to take a different approach and so the approach that we've outlined today is the one that can go through the Parliament and make a real difference in peoples' lives. I'll get Jenny also just to address those timeframe issues.
MACKLIN: Just in terms of the original time frame we have which is 2014, the technical advice we have is that would not be achievable. The Productivity Commission did recommend that the introduction of pre-commitment technology be done over the period to 2016 and that's what we will put in the legislation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) and secondly you've said that $1 are off the table, why exactly is that?
PM: Well I'll get Jenny Macklin to take you through some considerable detail about $1 bets, on the ATMs and casinos that's a recognition by us as there's been a recognition by states as they gone around dealing with problem gaming issues that casinos are in a different circumstance to other gaming venues. They are a major tourist attraction, they bring people into our country, into our cities, they're a destination place where people go for entertainment across all of the things that happen across those very large venues. In those circumstances they are in a different position from clubs and pubs in other parts of the country.
MACKLIN: Just on the $1 maximum bets issue, just to remind you that the Productivity Commission recommended that the best way to deal with problem gambling was to provide pre-commitment technology, that's what we intend to do and that's why we are conducting the trial of mandatory pre-commitment.
That said, we have done some technical work on the feasibility of low intensity machines and maximum $1 bets. The work that my department has done on this issue demonstrates to us that this is not the simple solution that some people are claiming. Simple solutions rarely are. The technical advice we have is that if we were to have $1 maximum bets that all the games that are played on poker machines would need to be changed. So all the software would need to be changed. Many of the machines would also need to be changed. And the estimate we've been provided with as to the cost of introducing $1 bets is $1.5 billion.
Our desire is to see whether or not we can try low intensity machines as part of our trial in the ACT, we're getting some technical advice about that. But as to the path we intend to pursue to help problem gambling, pre-commitment technology, the introduction of pre-commitment technology on all machines around the country and a mandatory pre-commitment trial we think is the way to deliver for those people who need our help. 
JOURNALIST: And who provided the details of that?
MACKLING: The department has got that information, I can get that for you.
JOURNALIST: In your discussions with the ACT, how confident are you that the industry will be accepting of this?
MACKLIN: They've certainly been positively received and I'm very pleased that both the clubs in the ACT and clubs elsewhere think that we should have a trial of mandatory pre-commitment, so I certainly hope we will be able to pursue this trial.
JOURNALIST: The Productivity Commission started its inquiry in 2008 and now we're looking to not see any comprehensive nationwide action until 2016. Is eight years a reasonable timeframe to deal with such a crucial issue as this?
MACKLIN: And of course that's exactly what the Productivity Commission recommended. It realised that to introduce the technical changes that are needed to make pre-commitment a reality would take time, they recommended that it would take until 2016, they have also recommended that we do this major trial and that too means we have to set up the trial, of course we need to conduct the trial and then we need to properly evaluate the trial. As the Prime Minister has indicated we want to make sure that the evaluation of the trial is done
PM: I just it should also be noted too that until the Labor Government asked the Productivity Commission for its advice and report no one had ever stepped up to the plate and said that this was the business of national government, attacking a big issue like problem gambling.
Ok thank you very much. 


The Gillard Government today announced its plan to tackle problem gambling, helping the five million Australians affected by problem gambling in this country.
This plan means the Gillard Government will do more to tackle problem gambling than any Commonwealth Government in Australia's history.
The Government will act to:
 * 	Undertake a large scale trial of mandatory pre-commitment;
 * 	Expand pre-commitment technology to every poker machine across the country, that could then be used for mandatory pre-commitment if it is supported by a trial.
Rolling the technology out to every machine now ensures that we will be ready to flick the switch to a best-practice mandatory pre-commitment system, if the trial results support it.
We believe this evidence-based pathway to help problem gamblers and their families will gain the necessary support to pass the current Parliament.
It is our intention to introduce legislation in the first Parliamentary session of this year which will require that:
 * 	All new poker machines manufactured from 2013 must be capable of supporting pre-commitment; and
 * 	By 31 December 2016 all poker machines must be part of a state linked pre-commitment system, except eligible small venues which will have longer.
We will also continue to work on pre-commitment technology through the COAG Select Council on Gaming Reform. At this forum in May last year, state and territory gaming ministers agreed to support the required infrastructure for pre-commitment technology in all jurisdictions.
The Gillard Government understands that many Australians enjoy gambling responsibly. But for others it can have devastating consequences.
Problem gambling ruins lives.
That's why in November 2008 we asked the Productivity Commission to inquire into problem gambling in Australia.
The Productivity Commission found that problem gambling affects up to five million Australians, including friends, family and employers of people with a gambling problem.
These far reaching impacts are why the Australian Government is delivering genuine, long-lasting reforms to help problem gamblers and their families.
The Government is also taking a range of other actions to support problem gamblers and their families including:
 * 	Introducing a $250 daily withdrawal limit from ATMs in gaming venues (excluding casinos) by 1 February 2013;
 * 	Electronic warnings and cost of play displays on poker machines by 2016;
 * 	Additional counselling support with 50 new financial counsellors to work with problem gamblers, and expanding the reach of Gambling Help Online;
 * 	Strengthening self-exclusion arrangements; and
 * 	Improving training for staff in pokies venues.
Further, the Government recognises that gambling online and sports betting are a growing concern, and we will:
 * 	Ban the promotion of live odds during sports coverage;
 * 	Extend pre-commitment to online betting services;
 * 	Crack down on online sports betting companies offering credit and introduce stricter limits on betting inducements; and
 * 	Increase the powers of the Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) to enforce these new rules.
The actions the Gillard Government is taking will be the most significant and far reaching national reforms to tackle problem gambling ever seen in this country.



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning, happy New Year.
PM: Good morning Fran and happy New Year to you too and welcome back.
HOST: Welcome to the year of the dragon. Prime Minister, you've torn up a written deal with Andrew Wilkie to introduce compulsory precommitment limits on poker machines. You welched on a deal?
PM: Well Fran, let's be very clear what's happened here  -  what has happened is it became apparent that there wasn't the support in the House of Representatives to deliver Andrew Wilkie's plan, to deliver his plan for full mandatory precommitment. So I have worked to make sure that we get far reaching poker machine reforms through the Parliament. Indeed it will be the first time ever that the national government has taken any steps in a major way to deal with problem gambling, any steps to legislate to address the real pressures that problem gambling puts on the shoulders of Australian families.
And so we've announced a comprehensive package of change, machines will be changing so that they will have precommitment technology on them, we will have a full trial of mandatory precommitment to see whether it can work to help problem gamblers. We will also be limiting the amount of cash people can get out of ATM machines in gaming venues, so they can't just keep going back and back and back for more and more and more and more and we'll also be ensuring machines have warnings on them and we'll be putting extra support behind counselling.
HOST: But Prime Minister, the fact is you signed a deal with Andrew Willkie, you promised to introduce this legislation into the Parliament by May and introduce the policy into operation by 2014, now you're not doing that. Why should anyone trust you, how can voters believe what you say?
PM: Fran, government's about getting things done and the circumstance here is legislation for full mandatory precommitment would fail in the Parliament. Now that would-
HOST: -But you never even put it to a vote. Why not test it on the floor of the Parliament and argue your case? I think voters find it hard to understand how you can make that assessment without even giving it a go.
PM: Well Fran, you are aware, as I am, of the statements made by the independents and crossbenchers on this matter and it is apparent that legislation would fail. In those circumstances we've got a choice  -  do you go to the Parliament and have something fail, get absolutely nothing done, make no difference to problem gambling, no difference to the usage of poker machines in Australia-
HOST: -Put the case to the Australian people, make it clear the strength of the Government's commitment on this. I mean it's not impossible, admittedly-
PM: Well, no one should doubt, Fran, the strength of the Government's commitment on this. We will make sure that there is the biggest package of change ever delivered by a national government on problem gambling in this nation's history. So no one should doubt the Government's commitment, but government is about getting things done, Fran. It's about acting, it's about delivering change and we will deliver change, rather than go to the Parliament, get a piece of legislation voted down and not one problem gambler in one gaming venue in Australia experiences any change in their lives as a result.
HOST: It just seems though, like perhaps the Government's prepared to forfeit without actually giving it a go. This is an unusual Parliament, everyone understands that, minority government is not easy, it's not impossible though, is it that unusual results could come in a Parliament like this, if a government argues convincingly on the floor of the parliament you might be able to persuade someone from the other side to your cause.
PM: Fran, I have worked on this patiently, alongside Jenny Macklin, I have had direct discussions with the crossbenches, they have said the same things to be privately that they have said publicly. Your question is basically premised on the assumption that we haven't sought hard testing of people's views. Well we have had discussions in private, we have seen the statements made by the independents in public and it is apparent that there is not the support in the House of Representatives for Andrew Wilkie's plan.
Now in those circumstances you can say ‘Well, let's get nothing done, let's just take a piece of legislation, watch it go down, nothing changes for problem gambling, nothing changes for Australian families that really have the mortgage and the rent and the food for the kids put down poker machines.' Or you can take the approach I'm taking, which is government is about delivering, it's about getting things done and we will deliver the most far reaching set of changes on problem gambling ever delivered by a national government.
HOST: You see that's your problem, isn't it? You say government's about delivering, but you have a perception problem here, because you've already been branded with a broken promise on the carbon tax, here's another broken promise. Doesn't this just entrench the public perception that you can't be trusted, that you don't deliver on what you promise?
PM: I think the Australian people look to government's to deliver, they want to see practical changes in their lives, they want to know when they go to the local hospital that it's improving and it's got more funds and more doctors. They want to know when the children go to school that they school is improving and there's a real focus on teacher quality and literacy and numeracy. They want to know across the board that the government is doing the right thing to keep people in work, to manage the economy in the interests of working people and on the issue of problem gambling I think Australians are concerned-
HOST: -They are concerned, we know that, 60 per cent of Australians support action on gambling reform.
PM: Exactly Fran. I'm agreeing with you. Most Australians are concerned, many Australians would personally know someone in their family, in their workplace, through a club that they're involved in, through a church or a trade union they're involved in, would know someone who's struggled with pokies addiction. And what Australians will see as a result of the Government's legislation is change and I'm very aware of the problems that families face when addiction to poker machines take over. I've seen it in my own electorate in Melbourne's west, where people do start off the day with good intentions, they're not going to do gaming at all, and then they find themselves in a gaming venue, then they're only going to limit their losses and by the time they walk away from the machines they've done all of their dough.
Well the approach we're taking will mean that there's precommitment technology on the machines, people will be able to take a decision to limit their losses, we will be trialling full mandatory precommitment, they won't be able to go and get endless supplies of cash out of the ATM machine and there will be more counsellors available to support people who have a problem and whose family is saying to them ‘please get some help.'
HOST: With respect, Prime Minister, the approach you're taking is a trial on precommitment technology, which you've said previously and consistently you're absolutely committed to, that doesn't start until next year. Why wait 13 months to begin a trial, where's the force of the commitment there?
PM: Well Fran, we've got to deal with the practical realities of the world in which we live. First and foremost, Andrew Wilkie has also supported a trial in the past-
HOST: I'm not arguing against a trial, I'm arguing why can't you have a trial now?
PM: And I'll answer your question Fran, but let's make sure we get all of the facts on the table  -  Andrew Wilkie has supported a trial, under Andrew Wilkie's plan, if it was implemented, the change to full mandatory precommitment would happen after the next election in any event.
On the time of the trial we will be trialling in the ACT, every machine needs to be changed, every machine needs to be in the right place for precommitment technology, some of them would probably have it now, but every machine that doesn't have it needs it put on, then the software to interlink all of the machines needs to be brought into force. We've taken very careful advice on how long that would take and it will take ‘til next year, that's just the practical reality.
HOST: Well, it seems though that it's pretty convenient timing for a government that was being absolutely hammered by this issue in many of its marginal seats, because this trial won't even be evaluated until June 2014, that's the trial, well after the next election. If a Coalition government's in place by then, well as Tim Costello says, this precommitment hangs on a wing and a prayer, doesn't it?
PM: Well, number one Fran, we can't wish away the facts and the facts are we have been advised that it is not possible to start this trial earlier than 2013 due to the large amount of set up work that needs to be done. Now you can pretend that that's not a reality, that's not a fact. I'm Prime Minister of the country, I deal in facts  -  that's the facts.
Number two, in terms of the role of the next Parliament, even under Andrew Wilkie's plan full mandatory precommitment would have come into effect in the next Parliament.
HOST: Yes, but it would have been legislated in this Parliament.
PM: And Fran, you know parliaments can make and unmake legislation and so the move to full mandatory precommitment would have been in the next Parliament in any event.
HOST: Prime Minister, talking about this trial, as I understand it the clubs involved will get $36 million of taxpayer's money to offset, amongst other things, offset losses that might arise from the trials. So, if I'm right, you're giving money to the clubs who make millions and millions and millions of dollars out of pokies and people's losses, to do this? A lot of people are very unhappy about that thought.
PM: Well Fran, once again, real world, let's have a look at the facts  -  we need the cooperation of the clubs in order to have the trial.
HOST: But do you really need to offset them for the losses, I mean fair enough-
PM: -Fran, real world, we need the cooperation of the clubs to have the trial. If you were a club owner you would be saying to government ‘Well, I'm prepared to help with the trial, but what about the costs, what about my losses, what circumstance am I going to be in?' So we've got to make an arrangement with them which means we've got their cooperation for the trial.
To go down the path you're suggesting where you don't give them full compensation would equal having no trial.
HOST: Labor backbencher Craig Thomson has written today this is a big win for the Labor Caucus. In reality isn't the big winner here the clubs and pubs of Australia, big business who spent millions of dollars lobbying against this?
PM: Well I believe the winners here, if you like, are people who want to see real change on problem gambling. There is community concern and we could have all sorts of political argy-bargy and end up with nothing, or we could get a piece of legislation though the parliament that will deliver real change. I've adopted a course which will see us deliver real change.
HOST: Talking of real change, the Greens have a proposal they want to bring in which is $1 bet limits. The Productivity Commission also recommended $1 bet limits and says it's something that should be part of the mix of reform. Why don't you support $1 bets?
PM: The Productivity Commission's foremost recommendation was about precommitment technology-
HOST: -But not the only recommendation.
PM: Let's be very clear about what the Productivity Commission recommended. Second, we are open during the course of this trial to the trialling of low intensity machines, but we also have very clear advice that in terms of the costs of changing machines over, that seeking to have $1 bet limits is the most costly way of bringing about change.
HOST: So it's all about the costs, that's your only concern about the $1 bets?
PM: Well, when you say, Fran, all about the costs, costs actually matter. We have very-
HOST: -Oh, sure. I'm not saying you don't-
PM: -We have very clear advice that that is the most costly path of change. The predominant recommendation of the Productivity Commission was about precommitment technology, so we are pursuing that advice from the Productivity Commission on precommitment technology. We are open to also trialling low intensity machines.
HOST: Prime Minister, you've had a lot of meetings with Andrew Wilkie lately. Andrew Wilkie is now withdrawn his support for your government overall. He's now talking about warmer relations with the Coalition and rethinking his support for government on a number of issues, for instance the means testing of the private health insurance rebate. In your talks with him did he make any specific threats there?
PM: Look, I'm not going to go into my discussions with Andrew Wilkie. The outcome of those discussions is clear. What I put to Andrew Wilkie was that there was not the support in the Parliament for the package of changes that he wanted, that his was a circumstance where you could get nothing or you could get real change and that we were moving towards real change. I do note that Mr Wilkie publicly has said he will support the Government's legislation, which will make a difference for problem gambling.
On issues like the private health insurance rebate, Fran this is a simple proposition about fairness. It's whether or not you believe at the end of the day, that someone who works in a shop should be subsidising the private health insurance of a millionaire, whether someone who works as an apprentice should be helping me pay for my private health insurance.
Well I don't need that help, the millionaire doesn't need that help and that apprentice or that person working in a shop shouldn't be facing the burden of paying a third of the cost of the private health insurance of upper income workers.
Now Mr Wilkie, in the past, has been very clear that he support this legislation.
HOST: Prime Minister, on another issue, asylum seekers. Tony Abbott has said now that in government his policy would be to turn back all boats from Indonesia. Are you tempted to follow, given that your policy, which was the Malaysia solution, now appears completely sunk?
PM: Tony Abbott's policy is to put Australian lives at risk. You should see and note the wise words of senior Navy personnel who say that this is risky for Australian Navy officers, for Australian Navy crew. Mr Abbott's policy is about risking Australian lives and indeed the lives of asylum seekers.
Everybody actually knows what happens, Fran. What happens is asylum seeker boats are disabled, they are sunk, people are in the water, our Navy personnel have to go and get them, that puts everybody at risk, including the lives of young Australians. That's where Mr Abbott wants to end up.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us.
PM: Thank you. 



Students with disabilities will get more support to help them finish school and find a job under a new National Partnership signed by Prime Minister Julia Gillard and NSW Premier Barry O'Farrell today.
The Gillard Labor Government is providing an extra $47.9 million to support children in NSW Government schools under the national $200 million More Support for Students with Disabilities initiative.
This important initiative is part of the Gillard Government's commitment to making sure all Australians have the best opportunities to learn and get a job  -  regardless of their personal circumstances.
The extra funding will be delivered through a new National Partnership that will allow schools to make the best choices for their students so they can learn more easily and engage with their classmates, teachers and support staff.
For example, schools could use these funds to purchase new assistive technology like computer software, audio and visual tools and low vision aids.
The funding could also help schools make decisions about additional teacher and support staff training, extra hours of in-class support and further teachers' aides.
Funding for non-government schools in NSW under the initiative will be provided through funding agreements that align with this National Partnership.
We know that having the right support at school makes a world of difference for the future of students with disabilities.
Without this type of support for schools, students with disabilities are less likely to complete Year 12, putting them at greater risk of unemployment and social exclusion.
The workforce participation rate for people with disabilities is currently only 53 per cent, meaning thousands of Australians do not have the benefits of a job.
We can make a difference by starting in the classroom and helping every child reach their full potential.
The Gillard Government is determined to make sure people with disabilities and their carers get the best support and the care they deserve.
Work is also underway to develop the first ever National Disability Insurance Scheme - an historic reform that will ensure Australians with disabilities have access to the services they need to participate in society.
The Government is also working with the states and territories to develop a nationally agreed model of collecting information about students with disabilities.
This will allow us to develop the first Australia-wide picture of how many students are in our schools, where they are located and the level of support they are already receiving.
Other measures introduced by the Gillard Government include the $220 million Helping Children With Autism initiative, the $147 million Better Start for Children with Disability program and the creation last year of a new Schools Disability Advisory Council.
We want every student in Australia to have access to the best possible education - the agreement signed today is an important step towards achieving that goal. 



PM: [AUDIO BREAK] visit a large number of schools and whenever I go to those schools I meet Australians who are truly inspiring, teachers who are making an incredible difference in the lives of young Australians and parents who are supporting their children through their learning, including when children have disabilities, parents who are really support their child even when the going can be very, very tough.
I've talked to those parents, I've seen those children, and as a Government we have acted to support their learning. We've almost doubled the amount of money going to Australian schools, so that money has made a difference for children in every school including children with a disability. We've invested in early intervention, firstly for children with autism and we have broadened that program so it can now provide a better start and early intervention for children with a range of other disabilities as they move into school.
But I'm also very convinced, from having visited schools, that there is unmet need out there, and there are times when a parent's choice about where they'd like their child to go to school is limited because the school they'd most like to go to can't cater for their child because of their child's disability. And we know that this can add up to difficulties for kids for the rest of their lives. Too few children with disability finish Year 12 and too few go on to be adults who have a job in the workforce.
So, today I am very pleased that I'm here with Premier O'Farrell, able to announce that we will be investing $200 million more in supporting children with disabilities in Australian schools. This money will be made available over the next two school years.
Premier O'Farrell has been the first Premier to sign up to the national partnership agreement to deliver these funds and I thank him for that. What it will mean in New South Wales is $48 million more for government schools, and we will be working with non-government schools including the Catholic sector and they will get additional funds of $15 million.
Now, these funds can be used flexibly by schools to make a difference to children with disability. They can be used to support things like new technical aids, because there's so much remarkable technology out there that can help a child with a disability more fully participate in learning. The money can also be used for additional staff support, and specialist support like speech therapy and occupational therapy that assists children.
I hope that this money will make a real difference and I am sure that it will, and I hope, too, that it will help relieve some of the pressure which is on the shoulders of parents who have children with disabilities because they do feel that pressure.
We do have a package of benefits to make a difference for families with school-aged children, including our investment in the Education Tax Refund to help with the costs of getting kids to school - so keep your receipts as you go about spending that money in the lead up to school going back, because you can use it to make a difference at tax time.
And this year we will be delivering extra family payments for families with teenagers to help with the costs of teenagers and help with keeping those kids in school to the end of Year 12 or an equivalent qualification.
All of this is about helping families through, but it's also part of a vision of Australia as a high-wage, high-skills society. I want us as a nation to win in this century, which will be characterised by rapid economic growth in Asia. This can be a century of real opportunities for us, we can win as a nation in this century, but in order to do that we've got to win the education race as well, we've got to make sure we're always improving quality in education, we've been very focused on doing that and we are making a difference to quality in education.
But at the same time our competitors are continuing to invest and improve the quality of their school systems, and four out of the five top-performing school systems in the world now are in countries in our region. So, we've got to keep running this race to improve education quality. It's about every child in every school, including every child that has a disability, and we want to better support them.
I'll turn now to the Premier for some remarks.
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Thank you, Prime Minister.
Look, can I say I'm delighted that New South Wales is the first State to be signing up to this new national partnership focussed on the needs of those students and families who live with disabilities.
90,000 students with disabilities will be enrolled in New South Wales public schools this year. 80 per cent of those students will be in mainstream schools, both country, regional and urban schools, and Prime Minister I can assure you that this funding, this $48 million, will make a difference to the education that they get.
This scheme I think is very cleverly designed to enable States to focus on their particular needs, there is flexibility, and certainly in New South Wales one of our key focus is on the teacher skills because as more and more students with disabilities have entered the education system, have in particular entered mainstream schooling, we need to ensure that teachers have those skills that are required to ensure that those students' abilities are developed, and that's what it is all about - every student has abilities and the task of education is to develop those abilities to the fullest.
Our schools are entrusted, but teachers are asked to ensure that a student, whether disabled or otherwise, is able to develop their full potential because that is the one way that in this century and in the next we can continue to succeed as a nation, and can continue to develop ourselves in this country. So Prime Minister, thank you for this new national partnership. Can I assure you that families of students with disabilities across this State will be grateful for the recognition of the Federal Government. We're determined to ensure that this funding is applied sensibly off the back of a trial that's been going on in the Illawarra for the past couple of years about how best to support the students with disabilities in classrooms, but at the end of the day it all costs money, this is another great example of cooperative federalism - cooperative federalism where the Federal Government and the State Government joins together to provide critical services to people across States like New South Wales, and across the nation in the case of the Prime Minister.
So, I'm pleased to be here, pleased that New South Wales is the first to sign up and pleased that we'll be getting this funding over the next two years.
PM: We're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does this in any way pre-empt the Gonski review? Does it somehow, does it indicate that Gonski may overlook public schools because public schools do carry the weight of kids with disabilities?
PM: Not at all. In fact, quite the reverse. The reason we've decided to make these resources available now is there is unmet need now. The reason we've decided to roll them out over two school years is that's the balance of the current funding period for school education.
When we release the Gonski review, of course it will be talking about the future of funding arrangements for school education beyond the current funding period. So, I'm not going to pre-empt what is in Gonski, but we have decided to make a real difference now, joining to other initiatives that have been rolled out for students with disabilities but making a difference in the two years that are in this school funding period.
JOURNALIST: And Premier will you be rolling out the Illawarra trial across the state?
O'FARRELL: The Minister for Education, Adrian Piccoli, will be detailing shortly how specifically this funding will be spent, but it will be spent off the back of what has been a very enlightening trial across the Illawarra and the south-east region of the Department of Education.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Christopher Pyne says (inaudible) Australian kids behind, he said you've done too much funding on bricks and mortar and not enough of numeracy and literacy (inaudible) what's your response?
PM: Well, this is the Federal Opposition all over - just relentless negativity.
Let's go through some of the facts. When we came to office in 2007, education reform had been neglected in this country for a decade. That is showing in the results that our children are turning in in international testing. When international testing happens, it happens when kids are 15 years old, so how well they're going to go in those tests is determined by all the years they've been in school up until that point, and unfortunately education reform was neglected for a decade.
Whilst education reform was being neglected here, countries in our region were investing to get ahead, countries like Korea, countries like Singapore investing to get ahead and they have got ahead of us in international testing.
When we came to Government in 2007, we started a major reform journey in education about every child in every school lifting standards. That has included new national curriculum which is being rolled out; it's included transparency through My School so everyone can see how their child's school is going; it's included investments in disadvantaged schools because unfortunately it's often the poor kids who get left behind and don't succeed in education; it's included investments in literacy and numeracy, because if you don't get those foundation skills then the rest of education is going to pass you by; it's included investments in teacher quality because we recognise there's nothing more important than the quality of the teacher standing in front of the classroom to a child's education, so we've been investing in teacher quality and giving teachers rewards, the best teachers, for going to schools that need them the most, we're bringing the best and brightest into teaching through initiatives like Teach for Australia.
We're also, of course, in the time of the global financial crisis invested in school buildings, and that investment made a difference to Australian jobs. The Opposition did want to turn its back on Australian jobs and see 200,000 Australians out of work. We invested to support Australian jobs, but when we made that decision we decided that there was nowhere more important in this country to invest than in Australian schools, and when you go to schools now school capital matters, teachers want to teach in a different way today. It means they need flexible spaces, modern spaces, different spaces and that's what the Building the Education Revolution program has provided.
In contrast, the only thing I ever hear from the Opposition about education is saying no to the Government's changes and talking about cutbacks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, regarding the talks on immigration, they've broken down again. What can you as the Prime Minister do to end the stalemate?
PM: Well, I want to be very clear about the course of discussions that we've had with the Opposition.
Firstly, they asked us to put a proposal - and we did. Then they asked us to put it in writing - and we did. Then they asked us to include Nauru - and we did. And to all of that the Opposition has just said no.
Well, as Prime Minister I want to be very, very clear: it's not good enough to just say no when people are drowning at sea. That's not a good enough response from the Opposition. The Opposition should reconsider its reckless negativity in this area.
And I also want to say this: I will not join with Tony Abbott in a plan that would put at risk the lives of Australian personnel. I won't agree to a plan to put young Navy officers at risk of losing their lives in waters to our north. What Mr Abbott has outlined is a plan to put Australian lives at risk and I'll never agree with that.
JOURNALIST: Do you that Tony Abbott (inaudible)
PM: That's a question you'd have to put to Mr Abbott.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've put education today in the long-term context of competitiveness, but there's a more pressing issue now as shown yesterday with Toyota, high dollar punished (inaudible) what's your response to that?
PM: Well, as I think is well-known, my home is actually in Altona in Melbourne's west, and you can pretty easily walk from my place to where the Toyota factory is, so I've been very saddened to hear about these announced redundancies today.
I know the Toyota factory well, obviously in my electorate and Melbourne's west, we're home to lots and lots of families that rely on Toyota for their living, that's where mum or dad work. So, for the 350 workers involved this is very, very difficult news and we will be doing everything we can to work with them and support them to get a new opportunity and new job.
For the car industry overall, the car industry in this country employs 46,000. It supports the jobs of more than 200,000 others. It's the backbone of manufacturing, and manufacturing employs a million Australians.
There's pressure on manufacturing now because of the high Australian dollar and also because there are confidence and volatility issues in the world economy. We understand that and that's why we are working with the car industry and with manufacturing overall to deal with these days of pressure.
But as a Labor Government we will always be focused on Australian jobs and manufacturing jobs. It's not good enough in this time of global change and in this time of change in our own economy, when we see this pressure from the high Australian dollar, to just say no to jobs in manufacturing. And I think it's incredibility disappointing that Mr Abbott is saying no to those jobs, he's threatening them with a cutback in assistance to the automotive industry, he's putting those jobs at risk. We are working with the car companies to hold those jobs in Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you happy that Australian taxpayers (inaudible) foot the bill (inaudible)
PM: This is the normal protocol and we abided by it.
[QUESTIONS TO PREMIER O'FARRELL ON OTHER MATTERS]
PM: Perhaps before we go we should just say, both Premier O'Farrell and I, weather predictions for the north coast of New South Wales are for very solid rain and for king tides, so we'll be working together and monitoring that very closely to see if assistance is required. But in the meantime, having seen what we saw over last summer, I did want to say to everybody listen to your warnings, stay in touch and please keep yourself safe.
Thank you. 



Tonight we celebrate Australia Day by celebrating those who reflect the very best of our great nation.
Because we are a great nation.
And we are a great nation because of our people.
That is our true wealth:
The 23 million people who love this country deeply, sometimes at the cost of their lives.
It says a lot that alongside fireworks and BBQs and all the things we will do tomorrow, we celebrate Australia Day day by choosing four individuals who reflect and inspire our nation.
They've been opera singers and artists.
Football players and scientists.
Our most recent recipient, Simon McKeon, is a businessman who has used his success to help others.
They are remarkable men and women, every one of them.
And they point the way to a creative, confident future for our nation.
If there is any quality common to all our Australians of the Year, it is courage.
Jessica Watson embarking on her dangerous voyage.
Fred Hollows restoring sight to those without hope.
John Farnham risking everything on a comeback.
Alan Stretton rebuilding a shattered city.
They had courage.
The courage to imagine a better nation and to face the future without fear.
We don't all have the gifts these extraordinary Australians possess.
But each of us in our own way  -  can share and emulate one thing: their courage.
Because it's not in our nature to be afraid  -  it never has been and I know it never will be.
So let's celebrate the great nation we are, and the even greater nation we can become together.
Happy Australia Day! 



Nominations open today for the Prime Minister's Prizes for Science - Australia's most prestigious science awards.
The Prizes honour Australians who have made significant contributions to building a more prosperous and progressive society through scientific achievements and science education.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research Chris Evans today encouraged the science community to nominate outstanding colleagues for the Prizes.
The Prizes are part of the Australian Government's Inspiring Australia strategy to foster greater scientific engagement.
Science and innovation are key drivers to improve Australia's living standards, health, productivity and environment.
The Gillard Labor Government highly regards our scientific community for the tremendous contribution it makes to build a richer, fairer, cleaner and safer nation.
In the past, the Prizes have been awarded for Australian discoveries such as wireless LAN technology and the bionic ear and for achievements in areas like immunology, quantum technology and astronomy.
Past Prime Minister's Prizes for Science recipients Elizabeth Blackburn AC and Brian Schmidt went on to be awarded Nobel Prizes in 2009 and 2011 respectively.
Other past recipients include Ezio Rizzardo and David Solomon, John Shine AO, John O'Sullivan, Ian Frazer, Graeme Clark AC and the late Frank Fenner AC.
The prizes are awarded in five categories:
 * 	Prime Minister's Prize for Science ($300,000);
 * 	Malcolm McIntosh Prize for Physical Scientist of the Year ($50,000);
 * 	Science Minister's Prize for Life Scientist of the Year ($50,000);
 * 	Prime Minister's Prize for Excellence in Science Teaching in Secondary Schools ($50,000); and
 * 	Prime Minister's Prize for Excellence in Science Teaching in Primary Schools ($50,000).
As well as the cash component, each of the five Prime Minister's Prizes for Science comprise a gold or silver medallion and a lapel pin similar to that presented to recipients of Australian Honours like the AO.
Nominations close on 27 April and the Prizes will be announced later in the year.
People can find further information on the Prizes and nominate online by visiting www.innovation.gov.au/scienceprizes



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today released an unclassified overview of the Report of the Independent Review of the Intelligence Community (IRIC).
This was the first comprehensive review of the Australian intelligence community since the 2004 inquiry conducted by Mr Philip Flood AO. The Flood inquiry recommended that Australia's intelligence agencies undergo external review every five to seven years.
The full, classified Report was considered by the Government in November and work is underway to implement recommendations from the review.
The review found that Australia's intelligence agencies are performing well following a period of significant growth to deal with the security challenges of the 9/11 decade.  
Other findings were that:
 * 	Australia and its citizens are safer than they would otherwise have been as a result of intelligence efforts
 * 	Our intelligence capabilities have contributed significantly to the global security effort
 * 	Australia has built intelligence capabilities broadly commensurate with our growing security challenges
 * 	The current basic structure of the Australian Intelligence Community (AIC) remains appropriate, including the operational mandate of agencies
The review covered challenges for the Australian intelligence community over the next five years stemming from geo-political and technological change and made recommendations to help maintain the performance of the community in a period of resource constraints.
These recommendations covered areas such as priority setting and mission integration, performance evaluation, support for innovation and strategies for managing intelligence collection in the age of abundant information.  
The Prime Minister thanked the joint leaders of the review, Mr Robert Cornall AO and Associate Professor Rufus Black.
She said the Australian intelligence community played a vital role in keeping Australians safe and protecting Australia's security interests. The review demonstrated that the investment in the intelligence community over the past decade had resulted in more capability and increased performance.
The Prime Minister said the findings of the review and its recommendations would help ensure the intelligence community maintained this level of performance and was well-positioned to meet the challenges of an evolving security environment.
The unclassified overview of the IRIC Report is available athttp://www.dpmc.gov.au/publications/index.cfm



PM: Thank you and welcome to one and all, I'd like to welcome my Parliamentary colleague Senator Kate Lundy who is here, who does so much great work for us in the area of multicultural affairs and citizenship. Adam who is here, of course the chair of the National Australia Day Council, and all of his Council colleagues. I've had the opportunity to say hello to each of them, and I really don't know how you make the decisions you make, a very, very tough with so many Australians who deserve acknowledgement.
To the 2011 Australians of the Year, to Simon, to Ron, to Jessica and to Don, and to Jessica in particular, thank you for ensuring I've eaten my first Fruit Tingle in I think, it would be 25 years. Some interesting bet between sister and brother and sister lost but there we have it.
To the 2012 Australian of the Year finalists, thank you for joining us today and thank you for everything you do for the nation. To the 1967 Australian of the Year, Judith Durham, who was awarded with her fellow Seekers, it's great to have her included in these events today and she will be singing a little bit later and I'm sure we're all looking forward to that.
Welcome to The Lodge. This is of course my home, it's been the home of Prime Ministers for 85 years, it stands on the traditional lands of the Ngunnawal people and I acknowledge the Ngunnawal people and pay my respects to their elders past and present in a spirit of reconciliation.
This is my home but it's so much more than that, it's a place for all of us to honour, visitors and residents alike, our own homes, my home in Altona, our own homes can be bought and sold and rented at will, but here the Australian people are the landlord and that makes this place a important expression of our democracy and by extension the freedoms that make our democracy possible.
And it is today and tomorrow that we will reflect on those freedoms and everything that they mean to all Australians.
Of course there are many other places to reflect, in Canberra and across the country, one of them is on the southern shore of Lake Burley Griffin, a memorial to the Australians of the Year. A series of simple concrete pillars with a photo and a name of each, and beyond the row of pillars already filled there are blank pillars, almost as far as the eye can see, for the Australians of the Year to come, including those to be announced tonight. And they point us I believe to the kind of nation we can be, that as a young country our best days still lie in front of us, and there's nothing in our nation's life, whether natural disasters or the challenges of an unknown future, that we can't handle together.
The Australian of the Year winners and nominees are amongst those who will navigate us to a future with your inventions and your ideas, the new ground that you break in the arts and literature, the social programs that heal and unite our nation, the care you show for children, and the honourable service you provide in the armed forces, the professions, the law and public administration. Indeed I am very touched by the depth and diversity of the group that is with us today.
To paraphrase JFK this may be the most talent ever gathered in The Lodge since Gough Whitlam dined here alone, we have artists and scientists, indigenous leaders, community advocates, academics and educators, philanthropists and volunteers and sportspeople just to name a few.
You are people of achievement who make us so proud, the sort of individuals of whom Australian parents can ‘I hope my child grows up to be just like that.'
I'm proud to lead a nation that encourages this kind of work in our society and that has amongst its number people like you. And I'm prouder still that in the 52 years of this award our nation can produce year after year a slate of extraordinary nominees, year after year, decade after decade, without fail. And that I think should give us a great reassurance for the future.
Now I know none of you embarked on your life journeys alone or secured your achievements alone, and you're joined today by some of the people that have helped you on the journey, partners, friends, family members, you are all very welcome here today too and thank you for everything you've done to support the finalists who are here with us.
When we do announce the winners and that will happen a little bit later, I know that we will have some worthy recipients for the nation, and I believe that everyone who is acknowledged in that way should accept that honour without any form of modesty - people have done such remarkable things - but everyone who is here this morning has done remarkable things.
So this is your day and your moment to savour, please enjoy this time at The Lodge, please ensure you wander through the grounds and get to see all of it and I am very much looking forward with a great sense of anticipation to the moment that we will honour each of you later tonight and we will announce our Australians of the Year, people who have led brilliant and selfless lives.
Thank you for joining me here at The Lodge this morning. Thank you very much. 



The Government is very concerned about developments today in Papua New Guinea and is monitoring developments closely.
PNG is a close friend and partner of Australia's.  We want a PNG which is politically stable and economically successful.
The military has no place in PNG politics.
It is critical therefore that this situation be resolved peacefully as soon as possible, with the PNG Defence Force chain of command restored
Our High Commissioner in Port Moresby is conveying those points to PNG's political leadership. 



I extend a very warm welcome to everyone gathered here today:
To those of you who are becoming Australian citizens and to those who have come to support you.
Not only your family and friends.
But complete strangers who have come to offer you their embrace, knowing that the gift of citizenship is a gift that grows with sharing.
Today is first time this ceremony has been held in this location, amidst some of our nation's greatest landmarks.
We look up ANZAC Parade to the shrine honouring those who served our country in the most profound way possible  -  with the sacrifice of their lives.
We look around the lake to great institutions of culture, learning and justice, beyond we see symbols of Australia's democracy in the old and new houses of parliament.
And just across the Commonwealth Avenue Bridge is Albert Hall where Prime Minister Chifley officiated at the very first Australian citizenship ceremony in 1949.
Today we live in very different times, but the meaning of this ceremony remains unchanged across six decades.
It is modern Australia's greatest story  -  the story of inclusion and belonging which is immigration; culminating in our free acceptance of the duties and benefits of citizenship.
Since that first citizenship ceremony in 1949, more than 4 million of us have chosen to officially call Australia home.
Those four million of us left behind the life we knew: loved ones, familiar places, language, culture.
A brave and often painful decision, but a good decision.
Because for whatever we left behind, we gained so much more.
Freedom and opportunity.
Reward for effort
And a land of wide open spaces, not just geographically but wide spaces of the mind and heart to dream big dreams and imagine different, better future free of fear.
Today you join a rich and enduring story, begun countless centuries ago by the First Australians and continued by we who came here to build a great nation ‘with heart and hand'.
With the pledge you are about to make, you confirm in law what you have already accepted in your heart:
That is this your home  -  for you and your descendents forever.
And from all our different journeys, the Australian story has become our own. 



It gives me immense pride to bring to realisation the commitment I made one year ago to institute a National Emergency Medal.
And there could be no better occasion to do so than on the day when we pause to reflect on what it means to be Australian  -  January 26; Australia Day.
In a diverse country, this day necessarily means different things to different people.
But if there is one common trait that we can unite in respecting above all others, it is courage and resilience in times of trouble; when everything we express in our poems and songs is put to the test and the Australian spirit shines most brightly.
Today we award these Medals to a group of Australians who inspired us with their courage and service during two of the most devastating summers of natural disaster Australia has ever witnessed: the Victorian bushfires of 2009 and the Queensland floods and cyclone of December 2010 and January 2011.
Some of our darkest days that were followed by some of our finest hours.
The long hours without rest or sleep.
The stories of men and women who went to work to help others not knowing whether their own homes would be standing when they returned.
Of those who risked injury or even death to help others.
Or brought comfort to those who had lost everything they owned.
I've been speaking a lot to survivors as we recover and rebuild.
Their talk is never of how much compensation they received or how much they appreciate their new house.
Without fail, they speak of the people who reached out to them in their time of need: family, friends, neighbours and so often strangers, whose assistance extended far beyond the bounds of convention or obligation.
In other words, they speak of you.
Ordinary Australians who in difficult times did extraordinary things.
Of course, those who are worthy of honour never seek it.
And medals are only ever tokens of inner values and qualities that can never fully be measured or even understood by those who were not there.
Alone, they are pieces of cloth and metal worth only a few dollars.
But what they symbolise is beyond price.
These medals obtain their value from you who receive them.
From who you are, what you have done and the things you represent.
Today's recipients were nominated by the heads of major non-government and government organisations which deployed staff and volunteers in response to the natural disasters.
I thank the National Emergency Medal Committee for crafting a set of eligibility criteria that are both appropriate and credible but also generous.
And to any Australian who feels a friend or a colleague merits this award, I strongly urge them to lodge a nomination because this is an award for the many, not the few.
An award that springs from a nation's gratitude.
But also from our very real sense that your actions displayed the depth of your love for this country and its people.
That is why the decoration of this medal is itself so eloquent  -  a green and gold ribbon, with the image of our national flower, the wattle, on its face.
Because heroism and community service are an expression of citizenship and what it means to be Australian.
This medal is therefore a message from your country that what you did was more than just a job well done.
You carried the hopes and goodwill of the nation with you.
You reminded us why we are proud to be Australian and how we are a people who never fear adversity whether from the vastness of our continent, the fury of our climate or the uncertainty of what the future may bring.
That story is written across every page of our history.
As long as our nation has men and women like this, it will never cease being written.
And your names now have an indelible place in those pages.
So please accept the National Emergency Medal as a symbol of our thanks.
We are a brave and resilient nation.
But we are grateful nation too. 



PM: It's a great privilege to be here today in Flowerdale, I'm joined by Rob Mitchell the local Member, the Member for McEwen, and we've had the opportunity today to present some of our National Emergency Medals to some people who did incredible things during the Victorian bushfires.
Yesterday I had the opportunity in Canberra to present these medals, yesterday and today is the first time in our nation's history they've ever been presented. This is a newly struck honour that I asked Her Majesty the Queen to include because I wanted there to be a medal that could recognise the extraordinary things that Australians do for each other during natural disasters.
This medal is there for those people who are fire-fighters and police and ambulance and emergency services workers who go that extra yard, but it's also there for all of the volunteers who do such tremendous work giving a helping hand during times of emergency.
So there's lots of ways of showing, during a natural disaster, that you really care about your fellow Australian. Yesterday and today I've had the very special opportunity of honouring the first Australians to receive this National Emergency Medal.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister yesterday's event was obviously interrupted, do you think your security detail or police overreacted at all?
PM: I think the police did an amazing job in difficult circumstances. I was angered that the event yesterday was disrupted because it was such a special event for people who were getting a medal placed on their chest because they had done extraordinary things and I wanted all of the focus to be on them, but I had the opportunity to have a chat with them at the Lodge last night and also to meet some terrific Australians today.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, they were always coming along to an Australia Day function that I have at the Lodge during the evening of Australia Day but to have them there took on a special significance after the events of yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Do you think your security guard overreacted though?
PM: I think the police did an extraordinary job, I think they did a great job in very difficult circumstances.
JOURNALIST: How confident are you about returning the budget to surplus next financial year given the downgrades in global growth by the IMF and the World Bank as a result of the Euro debt crisis?
PM: First when we put out our most recent forecast in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, we factored in the volatility in the global economy so we took that into account.
More broadly what I would say is there is volatility in the global economy, particularly out of the eurozone as countries in Europe continue to struggle with the sovereign debt problems, and of course the American economy while showing some positive signs is still struggling.
What that reinforces is that in Australia our economy is in a very different place, we have unemployment just over five per cent, whereas the Americans are struggling with unemployment of more than eight per cent and across the eurozone it's ten per cent.
We not only have relatively low unemployment, we've got low public debt, we've got growth, we've got a resources boom, we live in the region of the world that is going to continue to grow.
So my focus as Prime Minister is making sure we win in this century which will be characterised by economic growth in Asia, by having our economy in the right shape to seize all of those opportunities of the future.
I'll go here and then come back over, yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, how do you respond to allegations aired on Sydney radio today that a female member of staff in your office tipped off the tent embassy about Abbott's comments and the fact that he would be there yesterday and so essentially was partially responsible for creating the situation (inaudible)
PM: Sorry, where did those claims come from?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Sydney radio this morning.
PM: Right, look complete news to me, I haven't heard that so  - 
JOURNALIST: -So you're unaware of those allegations?
PM: Look, I'm asking you now so I can catch up to speed. So on what show were they made?
JOURNALIST: Ray Hadley.
PM: Right.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Ray Hadley that a female member of staff in your office tipped off the embassy about the comments that Abbott had made and told her he would be there yesterday?
PM: OK, well look this is complete news to me, obviously a lot of things get said on the radio, but complete news to me.
JOURNALIST: Did anybody from your office contact the tent embassy?
PM: Well, obviously this is complete news to me, so I haven't had time to look at the matter or anything like that. I would just make the comment a lot of things do get said on radio.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what is your view about whether or not it should say infinitum, there is a point at which it should be moved on (inaudible) a better way to express those concerns and feelings?
PM: Look I've got no troubles at all, I've got absolutely no troubles at all with peaceful protest, and generally the tent embassy has been a peaceful protest.
What I utterly condemn is when protests turn violent the way we saw the violence yesterday and particularly disrupting and event which was to honour some extraordinary Australians did leave me very angry.
For myself I was always very confident in the abilities of the police, I knew I'd be fine and I was fine but I was very angry about the disruption to an event for some very special people.
JOURNALIST: It also comes at a time when we've got a referendum that's being discussed (inaudible) about recognising indigenous people in the Constitution, are you concern that the sort of events we saw yesterday, the anger that that creates could actually set back that cause?
PM: Well, I do note this morning that leading indigenous Australians like Mick Gooda have condemned this protest, utterly condemned it.
For the relationships within Australia, our prospects of reconciliation, we are a country I believe on a journey to genuine reconciliation, Kevin Rudd's apology to the Stolen Generations was a very important moment, all of the practical things we're doing through the closing the gap strategy to try and make sure that indigenous kids get a great education, that indigenous Australians have the same life expectancy as non-indigenous Australians, that people get jobs, that work is very important to a sense of reconciliation, as is the report I received from the expert panel on Constitutional recognition.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) invited Tony Abbott to make sure he was OK yesterday; can you walk us through the process of that?
PM: Well,  I was advised by the police that with the number of people that had gathered and the battering on the glass, that there was some risk that that glass could break and so it was better that we moved rather than have that continue.
Remember of course we weren't the only people in the room, there were medal recipients and their family members and others who had come to watch the event as well as staff who make all this possible, who do a wonderful job, the people who actually organise the medals.
So we did receive that advice, as soon as I got that advice, which was given to me as Prime Minister, I said well we need to make sure Tony Abbott also makes a safe exit so I went and discussed that with Mr Abbott and the only way of doing it, the best way of doing it, was for us to get together and do it together so that's what we did.
JOURNALIST: What commitments is the Government seeking from car companies in return for its support?
PM: We always seek a range of commitments from motor vehicle manufacturers when we work with them on a co-investment strategy and I use the word ‘co-investment' deliberately because we work with car manufacturers to secure lines of production and to secure Australian jobs and we'll keep doing that.
We understand this is a difficult time for Australian manufacturing, in answer to an earlier question I believe from you, I talked about the circumstances in the Australian economy. We are undergoing an economic transformation, the resources sector is going ahead by leaps and bounds. That's a fantastic thing, but it also means that our dollar is very high, the strength of our economy means our dollar is high and that is putting pressure on other parts of the economy including manufacturing.
Now during this resources boom and after the days of this resources boom, which I believe will last a long time, I want us to be an economy with many sources of strength. I don't want us to end up in a situation where we're strong in minerals, but weak in everything else, which is why we've got to make sure we're investing in manufacturing and car manufacturing is a backbone to Australian manufacturing overall.
A million Australians work in manufacturing, 46,000 of them  in making cars, more than 200,000 peoples jobs rely indirectly on the making of cars, and that's why we're working hard with the industry and we're proud we're one of only 13 countries in the world that can go from designing a motor vehicle to seeing it roll off the production line and someone jumping in it and driving it away.
It is very disturbing to me that this isn't a bipartisan commitment and that unfortunately the opposition has committed itself to cutting back assistance to car manufacturing and therefore committed itself to a plan which would cause the loss of Australian jobs.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Rob Hulls' resignation this morning is a blow for Victorian Labor?
PM: Look, I was actually advised, I got a message from Rob Hulls directly that he was intending to announce his resignation this morning.
Rob Hulls has been a fantastic servant of the Labor Party here in Victoria, he's had a tremendous career in Victorian politics, he will be remembered as a very reformist Attorney-General who made a very big difference to this state. So my best wishes go with him as he goes to the next stage of his life.
JOURNALIST: Are you going to get your shoe back from yesterday Prime Minister?
PM: I'm not sure, but it really doesn't worry me. I'm in the fortunate situation where I'm a woman with a few pairs of shoes, so I'm all OK thanks very much.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Fair Work Australia does all of this independently so you'd have to direct that enquiry to them.
JOURNALIST: It's been reported that (inaudible) against officials including Craig Thomson, would you be willing to accept (inaudible)
PM: Well, Fair Work Australia works independently from Government, anything about the investigations that you've just referred to I only know from today's newspapers, they're independent of us. The investigation is in progress and it should conclude.
JOURNALIST: Have you had a chance to speak to Craig Thomson about the (inaudible)
PM: Look they're not available to me, Fair Work Australia acts independently.
JOURNALIST: What about the report today?
PM: Fair Work Australia acts independently; I don't have any more information than what I read in today's newspapers.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, the investigation's ongoing, there's no conclusion to this investigation yet, so we've got to see Fair Work Australia in its independent role do what it does.
JOURNALIST: Will yesterday's protest change the way you interact with the public, will you make any changes-
PM: -For how I interact with the public no, not at all.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) to back in Flowerdale?
PM: I hope so, I always like coming and visiting with Rob. I have a great time when I come out here, and when I'm not here, and obviously I can't be here every day, Rob keeps me in incredibly close touch with what's happening in the communities that he so proudly represents in the nation's Parliament.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) do you still feel safe getting out and about, getting to all the little towns after yesterday (inaudible)
PM: Look, I'm absolutely fine and really when it started yesterday I concentrated on the event and I wanted to concentrate on the very special people who were at that event.
When I received the advice that I would need to move, I just made sure that we looked after Mr Abbott too. I was always incredibly confident the police would do everything they needed to do, I knew I'd be fine, I was fine, I am fine so it's all OK.
Thanks very much. 
JOURNALIST: Do you think there's a need for you and Mr Abbott to sit down with the protesters (inaudible) sensitive issue?
PM: Look, I just don't think that there's any place for violence in protests and I don't think that that should get you anywhere.
OK, thank you. 



Mr Rob Mitchell MP, Federal Member for McEwen.
Mrs Sophie Mirabella MP, Federal Member for Indi.
Councillor John Walsh, Mayor of the Murrindindi Shire Council and your Council colleagues,
Other community leaders,
And above all, to our medal recipients, who enrich us with their presence here today
Three years on from Black Saturday:
The trees are growing back.
Buildings are going up.
And life, from the outside, seems to have returned to normal.
Except it hasn't.
After the loss and destruction experienced in this region, life will never be the same again.
Some have moved away and sought to forget.
Others have stayed and forged an uneasy truce with nature.
Most will carry the loss and scars for the rest of their days.
Whatever path each individual and family takes, the path for our nation is clear:
We must stand by them for however long it takes.
And we must remember.
One of the things I hear most often in communities hit by disaster is this: don't forget us.
Don't forget us when the cameras move on, or the focus shifts to more recent tragedies.
And I'm here as Prime Minister to say loud and clear  -  we haven't.
As the calendar turns over to the third anniversary, the bonds of support and solidarity are very much alive. 
Today we convey that message in a new and powerfully symbolic form: with the award of the new National Emergency Medal.
The government asked the Queen to institute this medal because there was nothing in the Australian Honours system to recognise much of the service that was performed in these fires or in last year's floods and cyclone in Queensland.
Awards do exist for the most conspicuous bravery and some have been awarded here in Victoria already.
But there was nothing in the system that recognised the other forms of courage and service that a disaster brings forth.
Not only acknowledging those who fight the fires or supervised evacuations on the frontline.
But also those present day after day to feed and support them.
To offer clothes and accommodation to families who have lost everything.
Or ensure they get the government payments they need.
There is more than one way to serve our community during a natural disaster.
Contributions differing in function  -  but all partaking of the same spirit:
Of giving your time and skill for those in need.
Being there when it counts.
This, too, is service worthy of a nation's recognition.
And it gives me great pleasure to convey that recognition today.
Along with the group I presented in Canberra yesterday, you are the first recipients of the National Emergency Medal in our nation's history.
And I know from the generous heart of the Australian people that you won't be last.
Because the spirit that impelled you to serve was not some passing fad or impulse.
It was the deep love that we as Australians hold for our land, its people and its future.
And so in the shadow of Australia Day here in the landscape where the deeds of your generosity were inscribed I proudly present these medals to a very deserving group of recipients, from a very proud and grateful nation.
Accept them with honour.
And wear them with pride. 



PM: Thank you all very much for coming out on what is a hot Melbourne afternoon.
I want to take this opportunity to make some statements about events at The Lobby Restaurant on Australia Day and the subsequent resignation of one of my press secretaries Mr Tony Hodges.
To take you through the events of Australia Day firstly, Mr Tony Hodges as one of my press secretaries was in attendance at The Lobby Restaurant prior to my arrival for the event where I presented National Emergency Medals. Three other members of staff were also in attendance prior to my arrival doing various duties associated with the event. 
Journalists were waiting there, as is to be expected for an event where I was to be in attendance, medals were to be presented and the Leader of the Opposition was to be in attendance as well.   
Mr Hodges spoke to the journalists there; Mr Hodges was advised by the journalists there that Mr Abbott that morning had made a statement in relation to the tent embassy in Canberra and that Mr Abbott in relation to the tent embassy had suggested that people should move on. 
Mr Hodges, having received this information from journalists waiting at The Lobby Restaurant, formed the view that these comments should be responded to.
Mr Hodges then contacted the office of Mr Chris Bourke. Mr Chris Bourke is the ACT Minister for Indigenous Affairs, Mr Bourke is himself an indigenous Australian. 
Mr Hodges was advised that Mr Bourke was unavailable for making media comment. Mr Hodges was then referred to Ms Kim Sattler of UnionsACT.
Mr Hodges spoke to Ms Sattler by telephone. Ms Sattler was in attendance at the 40th anniversary events for the tent embassy. Mr Hodges accurately conveyed to her the statement made by Mr Abbott.
At no point did Mr Hodges say to Ms Sattler that Mr Abbott had suggested that the tent embassy be torn down or removed in any way.  Mr Hodges suggested to Ms Sattler that it may be appropriate for Ms Sattler to arrange for a couple of indigenous Australians who were spokespeople to be in attendance at The Lobby Restaurant for the purpose of responding in the media to Mr Abbott's remarks, especially if Mr Abbott determined to hold a press conference associated with the event.
Mr Hodges, in taking these actions, acted alone and his actions were not authorised. Clearly they are viewed by me as unacceptable.
The events at The Lobby Restaurant then ensued, as everybody is aware from the extensive coverage to date.
Mr Hodges subsequently to these events on Australia Day informed his superiors, specifically my senior press secretary and my communications director about this telephone call.
During the course of Friday morning quite a number of allegations were being bandied around in the media and by journalists about the events of the day.
My office, including my senior press secretary and communications director, worked to establish all of the facts in relation to these allegations. I, at the time, was presenting more National Emergency Medals at Flowerdale.
When I returned to this office, the Melbourne office, from Flowerdale in country Victoria, I was then briefed by my senior staff in relation to the outcomes of their investigations. Having received that factual brief I then met with Mr Hodges.
Mr Hodges had already offered his resignation to my chief of staff. He offered his resignation to me and I accepted it, because Mr Hodges conduct was unauthorised and it was unacceptable. He made a grave error of judgement.
However I do want to say in relation to Mr Hodges, that he is a hardworking person, he is a decent person. He recognises that he has made an error of judgement and he has paid a very big price in relation to that error of judgement.
On the events in general, I want to say this: no one's angrier than me about what happened on Australia Day. I had fought to institute this National Emergency Medal. I'd done that because I had met around this country people who had done remarkable things during the course of natural disasters, who deserved our recognition.
And when the protest kicked off and people were starting to smash on the glass, things happened like the man I was pinning a medal on his chest at that time subsequently came to me after the formalities had concluded and basically asked if I could re-enact it because his wife wasn't able to get the shot because of all of the disturbances.
Well that said something to me; it said something to me about the disruption of this event and what should have been an incredible moment of pride for each of those people as the medals were pinned on their chest.
They shouldn't have been in a circumstance where instead of all eyes being on them, all eyes were on protesters and on people pounding on glass.
So, no one is angrier than me about what happened at The Lobby Restaurant on Australia Day. The people who initiated those violent acts, the people who were involved in those violent acts are responsible for the violence that was there.
Their conduct has made me very angry; it's understandably made people around the nation very angry indeed.
I'm very happy to take questions. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why did your office wait until after 6:30 to detail Mr Hodges involvement?
PM: Because it took some time to put the facts together here and in order to brief me.
Let's be very clear about this, there were a range of allegations flying around on Friday morning and each and every one of them was investigated by my senior staff and I was presented with all of the facts.
To take just one example  -  the allegation made on Sydney radio was that someone had directly contacted the tent embassy. That needed to be investigated, that was untrue. Journalists in Canberra were saying a woman from my office had contacted the tent embassy, obviously enquiries needed to be made of relevant female staff members.
So in those circumstances we were investigating a wide range of allegations and that took some time.
JOURNALIST: Was it a matter of trying to avoid the evening news?
PM: It was a matter of taking the time to get the investigations done so I was in command of the facts and once in command of the facts I could take the appropriate actions.
I obviously determined the appropriate action was to accept Mr Hodges resignation when he offered it. What he did was unauthorised, it was unacceptable and he's paid the price.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: What was the reason you denied any knowledge though yesterday?
PM: Well I didn't have any at the time. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you know Kim Sattler personally (inaudible)
PM: I don't know her personally, no.
Look I attend a wide range of events. I particularly attend a wide range of events in the ACT, so it's very, very likely she's been at events that I've been in attendance at, but I don't know her personally.
I'll answer everybody's questions, so there'll be plenty of time, so we can do them one at a time.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: You've described Mr Hodges actions as unauthorised and unacceptable, but is it your belief that those actions did incite that behaviour by that group that besieged you?
PM: Well the only people who can answer the question about what motivated them to engage in that violent conduct is the people who are involved in the violence.
Mr Hodges role is exactly as I have described it to you  -  he spoke to Ms Kim Sattler, he at no time misrepresented Mr Abbott's comments and he at no time suggested that there should be violence or demonstrations or protests about the comments.
What he suggested was that they should be responded to in the media and that a couple of spokespeople should be available for that purpose.
JOURNALIST: That in itself is not heinous is it?
PM: Well, I've obviously formed the view this was a grave error of judgement by Mr Hodges.
It was a grave error of judgement because Australia Day is a day on which we take, in my view particularly as Prime Minister, a bipartisan approach to celebrating our national day.
It was a grave error of judgement because Mr Hodges acted alone and took that approach at an event which should have been truly bipartisan and only ever focussed on one thing and that was the recognition of the very special Australians who were there to get a medal pinned on their chest.
And can I just put this in some context  -  I'm up and down on stages all the time, I speak publicly all the time, I get applause when I give speeches, that kind of thing, not always applause, but I'm in the public eye. For people who aren't in the public eye, for people who are getting a medal, that's a major lifetime event. It's something  you want to get the photo of, it's something you want in the album that you're going to hand down to your kids, it's something that will take pride of place along with the wedding photos and the christening photos and the birthdays and the Christmases.
To have that event disrupted really made me furious and obviously I was very angry and disappointed when I learned that Mr Hodges had engaged in this conduct, which was unauthorised and unacceptable, but I want people to understand the facts of it too. Mr Hodges did not misrepresent Mr Abbott's remarks; Mr Hodges did not incite violence or a demonstration.
Yes. I'll come to you at the back, because you're missed out so far, but I'll go here first. Yes.
JOURNALIST: How has he described his motivations to make those calls to you?
PM: Exactly as I've described it to you. He believed it was appropriate for someone to respond in the media to Mr Abbott's remarks.
Yes, at the back.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your response to the opposition's calls for a police (inaudible)
PM: Well I've already talked today about some things that have made me very angry, let me add one more to the list and that is the insinuations made today by Mr Abbott and Mr Pyne. They have made me very angry.
For it to be insinuated that I would play some role in disrupting an event to recognise Australians who had performed miracles during a natural disaster is deeply offensive. And it is absolutely typical of Mr Abbott's negativity and his tendency to go too far.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Do you categorically deny, Prime Minister, that anybody else from your office was involved.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible)
PM: That's a matter for the AFP.
JOURNALIST: Looking back at it, it seems that that was quite an undignified way for the Prime Minister to make an exit from this event, when (inaudible), but how do you feel about the image that that conveys?
PM: Well you weren't there, the police were and they formed their best judgement in the circumstances at the time. I thought they did an amazing job.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, what's your response also to the Australian flag being burned yesterday (inaudible)
PM: It's grossly unacceptable conduct.
JOURNALIST: I also wasn't there, but I  -  like almost every Australian  -  have seen the footage, the photographs and the news footage. Were you hurt physically?
PM: Look, I scraped my foot because I didn't have my shoe on any longer, but not anything worth reporting or writing home about.
I've had worse blisters on my feet from wearing high heels for an evening, so we've got to keep all of this in some form of context. I think-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh, look, clearly we were in a circumstance where we were in a glassed in restaurant, where I am pinning medals on people's chests, where there is a limited protest, some individuals to the left and the police moved to contain that.
I had no idea who they were or what they were there for or what an earth they would be protesting about at a National Emergency Medal presentation.
So there was a small sort of incident to my left as I went about putting the medals on people's chests.
I had spoken at the event, Mr Abbott had spoken at the event, it was a bipartisan event, the first time we'd ever presented these medals.
So small scuffle, no idea what it was about and then the formal event of putting the medals on finishes, we're having a cup of tea and talking and just more and more people are gathering around the glass, banging on glass and getting louder and louder and the police obviously formed the view that there was some risk that the glass wouldn't hold and I'd invite people to imagine what that would have looked like if there as glass everywhere in a room full of people and so they formed the view it was best to move me.
I ensured that Mr Abbott's safety was appropriately dealt with as well and we exited to the car in accordance with the directions of the police.
And I reiterate again, when you're not there and with 20/20 hindsight and lots of time to reflect, maybe people will form all sorts of views, but in the moment I think the police did an amazing job.
JOURNALIST: Just to clarify Prime Minister, when were you told of Mr Hodges involvement and by who?
PM: Yesterday, exactly as I have described to you.
I went to Flowerdale, I presented National Emergency Medals, I spoke to the media, there was a question about one of these allegations, I responded to that as you've seen. I then came back here from Flowerdale to my Melbourne office, during the afternoon I was fully briefed by my staff who had been involved in these investigations and then I spoke to Mr Hodges.
JOURNALIST: So late in the afternoon?
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you or anyone from your spoken to Ms Sattler about these events?
PM: Yes, there has been communication with Ms Sattler about these events. I have named her today. Given I have named here I anticipate that there will be media interest in her, might have that wrong, but I suspect you will probably show some interest in her and consequently I thought she had a right to know.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how did Mr Abbott react in the car (inaudible)
PM: Oh, look, I've got no comments about his reactions.
We were all fine, we were sitting in the backseat of the car  -  me, a Federal Police officer and Mr Abbott and we were reflecting on the events that had got us there. We were both very sure that the police had done a good job.
The car took me to the Lodge, I invited Mr Abbott into the Lodge if he wanted a drink of water or anything, he said he would prefer if the car took him to Parliament House so he could ascertain where his staff members were.
I then went into the Lodge and spent some time ascertaining where my staff members were, because we had been got out of the event, but our staff members were still in the middle of it and I also wanted to make sure that the people who were there for the event were all fine and Kate Lundy was there, Robert McClelland was there, the National Emergency Medal recipients were there, their families were there. So I spent some time just ascertaining everybody was OK.
Then I had the opportunity that evening at my regular Australia Day function at the Lodge to see the National Emergency Medal recipients and to hear from them, their stories of how they felt which is why, for example, I'm able to refer to the feelings of a number of them. They were very proud that they got the medal, but that wasn't the way, that wasn't the way.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, what's your view of Ms Sattler's involvement (inaudible)
PM: Oh well, look, it is exactly as I've described it to you. I'm not intending to express an attitude towards it.
OK. Thank you. 



Prime Ministers Julia Gillard and John Key met for the annual Australia-New Zealand Leaders' meeting in Melbourne on 29 January.  Their meeting was followed by the second Joint Meeting of Australian and New Zealand Cabinet Ministers.
The Prime Ministers re-affirmed their strong commitment to the closest possible relations between Australia and New Zealand, including through an annual Leaders' meeting.  They agreed to conduct further joint meetings of Cabinet Ministers on a regular basis and at least once in the term of each government.
Towards 30 Years of Closer Economic Relations
2013 marks the 30th anniversary of the Closer Economic Relations (CER) agreement.  CER and the Single Economic Market (SEM) agenda have brought down barriers to trade, reduced costs for business, encouraged investment and created jobs and economic growth for both Australia and New Zealand.
The Prime Ministers agreed the Productivity Commissions of each country would conduct a joint scoping study [details attached] to identify options for further reforms which might boost productivity, increase competitiveness and drive deeper economic integration.  The Commissions will report by 1 December 2012 for consideration by Leaders in 2013.
Stronger Defence and National Security Cooperation
The Prime Ministers welcomed the outcome of the Review of the Australia-New Zealand Defence Relationship, which has been launched today by Defence Ministers.  The review outlines a new defence relationship framework that will make it easier for Australia and New Zealand to work together in our region and cooperate on capability development and procurement.  
The Prime Ministers announced further steps to deepen cooperation on national security and emergency management cooperation.  They agreed:
 * 	to strengthen cooperation against the shared and growing challenge of cyber security through a regular Australia New Zealand Cyber Dialogue;
 * 	that New Zealand would move from observer status to membership of the National Counter-Terrorism Committee, to ensure the closest possible coordination on counter-terrorism policy;
 * 	that New Zealand would move from observer status to membership of the National Emergency Management Committee, in recognition of the strong collaboration between the two countries on disaster management.
The Prime Ministers agreed to continue to work closely together in the lead-up to the Centenary of the ANZAC landings in 2015, and other important WWI centennial commemorations.
Criminal History Sharing
The Prime Ministers agreed to enhancethe reciprocal sharing of criminal history information for employment vetting purposes and plan an initial six month trial with Queensland to test how consistent and systematic requests for criminal history checks for employment purposes can be facilitated between Australia and New Zealand.   They also directed officials to accelerate the work under way on reciprocal information sharing to support border control and law enforcement, consistent with free movement of people across the Tasman.
Continuing Trans-Tasman Cooperation
Following their agreement in June to establish a joint Australia New Zealand Therapeutic Products Agency (ANZTPA), the Prime Ministers were pleased with progress towards the phased introduction of ANZTPA, and welcomed the inaugural meeting of the ANZTPA Ministerial Council, which will oversee the implementation of ANZTPA.
The Prime Ministers also welcomed progress in streamlining trans-Tasman travel, especially through the SmartGate trial.  They welcomed lowering of age eligibility for Smartgate from 18 to 16.
The Prime Ministers underlined their commitment to strong tobacco control measures and undertook to cooperate closely in their efforts to reduce tobacco use domestically.  New Zealand will closely follow progress in implementation of Australia's plain packaging legislation and the countries will look to ensure that no branded tobacco is able to be re-exported from New Zealand to Australia.
In the run up to the site selection decision, the Prime Ministers agreed to continue to promote vigorously the merits of the joint Australia-New Zealand bid to host the Square Kilometre Array (SKA).  The SKA will be the most powerful radio telescope ever built and will revolutionise our understanding of the universe. 
Climate Change 
The Prime Ministers re-affirmed their commitment to pricing carbon as the most environmentally effective and economically efficient way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.  They welcomed work towards linking the Australian and New Zealand emissions trading schemes, including agreement by Climate Change Ministers in December to Terms ofReference which will guide the work of the Australia New Zealand Carbon Pricing Officials Group.
2015 Cricket World Cup 
Prime Minister Gillard congratulated New Zealand on its successful hosting of the 2011 Rugby World Cup.  Recognising both countries' passion for sport, the Prime Ministers looked forward to Australia and New Zealand co-hosting the ICC Cricket World Cup in 2015 and welcomed the opportunities this would present for both countries.
Regional and Global Issues 
The Prime Ministers confirmed their commitment to see an end to all whaling in the Southern Ocean, welcoming New Zealand's intervention in Australia's international legal case against whaling in the Southern Ocean.
Recalling the strong outcomes of the first meeting of the expanded East Asia Summit (EAS) in Bali in November, the Prime Ministers reiterated the importance of enhanced regional cooperation through the EAS, APEC and the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF). 
Prime Minister Gillard congratulated Prime Minister Key on New Zealand's successful hosting of the PIF and committed to support New Zealand in its year as Forum chair.  The two Prime Ministers reinforced their commitment to work closely together in the Pacific, particularly on progress towards the Millennium Development Goals, and welcomed agreement to a joint funding arrangement for education assistance to Nauru.  The Prime Ministers agreed to expand cooperation on their respective seasonal worker programs in the region. 
The Prime Ministers agreed on the importance of strengthening the region's response to the shared challenge of irregular migration.  Recognising the efforts of regional partners and international organisations to examine opportunities to better cooperate under the auspices of the Bali Process, Australia and New Zealand agreed to consult on targeted refugee resettlement, within respective quotas, to enhance the region's response to irregular migration.  Both countries will engage with the UNHCR to ensure that this approach complements global priorities.  
The Prime Ministers agreed to further strengthen maritime surveillance efforts in the Pacific, with a focus on fisheries surveillance, and to work closely together and in partnership with Pacific Island countries to coordinate efforts.
The Prime Ministers welcomed the close cooperation between Australia and New Zealand in supporting Pacific Island countries to respond to and recover from natural disasters, most recently in relation to the 2011 drought in Tuvalu and current flooding in Fiji.
The Prime Ministers welcomed the close cooperation between Australia and New Zealand, together with the Solomon Islands and regional partners, in the Regional Assistance Mission in the Solomon Islands (RAMSI).  Both leaders noted RAMSI's progress on transition, building on the strong leadership and commitment of the Solomon Islands Government to ensure lasting benefits for the people of the Solomon Islands.
Prime Ministers noted also their close ties with Papua New Guinea and PNG's importance as a neighbour and regional partner.  They looked forward to the smooth conduct of elections in PNG and Timor Leste in coming months.
Both countries remained concerned about the continuing deterioration in Fiji's political and economic situation and its impact on Fiji's people, and agreed to maintain close consultation on developments, including with other international partners.  They reaffirmed the need for Fiji to return to democracy and the rule of law as soon as possible.
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed both countries' commitment to free and open trade in the face of global economic uncertainty.  They called for protectionism to be resisted.  The Prime Ministers said all countries must work together to secure global recovery and restore job growth.  European Union countries must fully implement commitments to stabilise economies at risk, prevent contagion and, in the medium-term, reduce debt levels and implement necessary structural reforms.  The Prime Ministers remained strongly committed to the goal of eliminating tariffs and other barriers to regional trade and investment, including through negotiation of the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Strengthening economic relations between Australia and New Zealand
Impacts and Benefits of Further Economic Integration of the Australian and New Zealand Economies - Joint Scoping Study by the Productivity Commissions of Australia and New Zealand
Purpose of the study:
The Governments of Australia and New Zealand are firmly committed to strong economic relations between Australia and New Zealand, including boosting productivity through reducing the regulatory burden on business, increasing competition and encouraging closer economic cooperation, and to strengthening those relations further.  The two countries have a long history of working together through the Australia New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement which first came into effect on 1 January 1983 and has involved successive rounds of integration of the Australia and New Zealand economies.  This has been highly beneficial to both countries.
At their annual leaders meeting, the Prime Ministers of Australia and New Zealand agreed that, to promote further reform and economic integration, the Productivity Commissions of each country would conduct a joint study on the options for further reforms that would enhance increased economic integration and improve economic outcomes.  The Commissions' final report should be completed by 1 December 2012 in order to inform the next meeting of leaders, expected to take place in early 2013. 
With 2013 marking 30 years of the operation of the Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement, the Commissions' report will help advise the Australian and New Zealand Governments on next steps in economic integration. 
The report should identify specific areas for further potential reform, the ways in which they might be best achieved, the likely impacts of potential reforms, any significant transition and adjustment costs that could be incurred and the time scale over which impacts are likely to accrue. 
Scope of report
The Commissions' report to leaders should provide analysis on:
 * 	potential areas of further economic reform and integration, including identification of the areas of reform where benefits are likely to be most significant, with particular focus on critical issues for business like investment and productivity;
 * 	the economic impacts and benefits of reform;
 * 	any significant transition and adjustment costs that could be incurred;
 * 	identification of reform where joint net benefits are highest;
 * 	the means by which they might be best actioned; and
 * 	the likely time paths over which benefits are expected to accrue.
Methodology
The Commissions should provide an explanation of the methodology and assumptions used in its analysis.  The Commissions should also provide guidance concerning the sensitivity of results to the assumptions used and bring to leaders' attention any limitations or weaknesses in approaches to reform evaluation. 
Consultation and timing
In the course of preparing the report, the Commissions should consult and hold public hearings as appropriate.  While these consultations would inform the Commissions' assessment, responsibility for the final report would rest with the two Productivity Commissions.
The Commissions should produce both a draft and a final report.  The Commissions' final report should be submitted to leaders, through the Treasurer of Australia and the Minister of Finance of New Zealand, by 1 December 2012.  The reports will be published.   



PM: It's a delight to be able to welcome Prime Minister John Key again today. We have been having a set of discussions, not only between Prime Ministers but also between a number of members of our ministerial team and I'd like to welcome them to Australia as well.
As I said when the Prime Minister first arrived yesterday, our relationship is one of being family. We saw that on display last year when we were both in times of need and having seen that on display last year this is a great time to bring us together, to bring our ministers together, to have a meeting in a joint cabinet format to talk about our relationship for the future and that's what we've been able to do today.
We do have an amazing history and we will be commemorating 100 years of that history in 2015, our ANZAC legend that binds us together, but we're also nations very focussed on the future and it's the future of the relationship that we've been focussed on today.
Both of us had key economic ministers here, including Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan and his counterpart Minister Bill English and so we have had a comprehensive discussion about the global economic climate and the challenges that that poses for our respective economies.
We've talked about the strength of our region and the fact that we are both situated in the region of the world that continues to experience economic growth and will during the course of this century and that that gives us particular opportunities for the future.
I was pleased in that context to brief Prime Minister Key at his ministers on our Australia in the Asian Century whitepaper, that we are working through as a nation looking at how we can win in this Asian century of economic growth and so we can be prepared for that economic growth in the future.
On our bilateral relationship we were very much focussed on what will be a significant anniversary of our closer economic cooperation, that is next year in 2013 we celebrate 30 years of Closer Economic Relations.
Now this is one of the true partnerships around the world for economic integration, one of the standout partnerships that our two countries have been working on over 30 years. So we are world leaders in this, but we want to keep building for the future, so we've asked our two Productivity Commissions to work together on a joint study as to how we can build on our close economic ties now for the future.
We also have had a proud history of working together in defence cooperation. We have endorsed the recommendations of a 2011 review of our defence relationship, so that we can continue that relationship as strong as ever and so it can be fit for purpose in the modern age.
We're also pleased to announce the establishment of an Australia-New Zealand cyber dialogue. One of the key security challenges of our age is cyber security, so a relationship as old and as deep as this one needs to be taken into the future and deal with contemporary challenges, like cyber security.
We've agreed to develop a six month trial between New Zealand, Australia and the Queensland Government to see how we can enhance the reciprocal sharing of criminal history information for potential employees. We do have very much a shared employment market, New Zealanders come here, Australians go to New Zealand, so it makes sense to have this six month study to see how we can have a more automatic approach to sharing the kind of information that people want when they are vetting a new employee.
So our forward agenda is going to be as busy as ever, we've got work to do in our region, work to do in Afghanistan, work to do in formats like the East Asia Summit and APEC and work to do directly together.
We are, of course, together pricing carbon to tackle climate change. Together we're pursuing our joint bid for the Square Kilometre Array, a fantastic science project for the future. And perhaps most importantly to many of our people we're going to host the world cricket cup together.
So Prime Minister Key it's great to have you here, it's great to work with you and over to you.
PRIME MINISTER KEY: Thank you very much. Prime Minister, firstly thank you very much and on behalf of my ministers can I thank you for hosting us here in Melbourne, for your hospitality and for the great dialogue and engagement that we've had over the last 24 hours.
I have a number of new ministers in new portfolios with me, so it's been very useful for them to have an opportunity to exchange with their Australian counterpart.
Certainly from New Zealand's point of view we don't have another relationship which is more important than this, you're our largest source of tourists coming to New Zealand, largest source of foreign investment, you're our largest export market. Pretty much on every fact Australia is a dominant and significant part of the New Zealand economy and when Australia does well New Zealand does well.
And I think, in a way, it's such a tremendous relationship it would be easy to take it for granted. Such a comfortable relationship, we know that we can always pick up the phone and have an open, frank discussion that it would be easy just to say maybe these meetings aren't necessary, but we always get something out of them.
And I want to thank you for your personal commitment New Zealand, your willingness to give us every resource required when we had both the Pike River mine disaster and the Canterbury earthquakes has been incredible and I think it's one that New Zealanders personally (inaudible), your address to the New Zealand Parliament is still something that is remarked upon in New Zealand, so you're a great friend of New Zealand and your Government has worked very closely with ours and we're very grateful for that.
I suppose I'd just make a couple of other comments, I think in relation to 2015, 100 years of the ANZAC commemorations, is a really important time for us, not only just in hosting the Cricket World Cup, but I think it will be an opportunity for us to do other things which bind that ANZAC spirit together and have public displays of a very deep and historical relationship.
Again in 2013, you're quite right, CER reaches that 30 year milestone and again an opportunity for us to do some more work there.
The Prime Minister has laid out, I think, quite clearly the discussions we've had and will have more of those over lunch.
I suppose I'd only really raise two other issues  -  one would be we've had some discussions about the situation of New Zealanders who have come to Australia since 2001. They're New Zealanders that don't currently have citizenship here, but can work in Australia because of trans-Tasman travel and employment protocols.
That's a matter I know that the Australian Government is looking at, Australia has historically been generous to those New Zealanders when they've found themselves in a difficult position because of their current status here, both in relation to the Queensland floods and the Victorian bushfires.
So I know that's an area that you're doing some more work, but it's just a sign of the strength of the relationship and the amount of movement we have that there's now some people in that category.
Just in terms of what's happening with Queensland, again you'll be aware that in part the trial is being led because of a high profile case of a New Zealander that had a criminal record that wasn't made aware to the Queensland authorities.
Now that may have been possible through a rather clunky system, so in one sense the system arguably works, but only if you go to quite a number of steps. So the purpose of the trial is to see whether we can make the process easier, have better information sharing.
Obviously there are privacy and legal issues that need to be considered on both sides of the Tasman and we'll work our way through those, but in a sense we now have what I think is an Australasian employment market and we need to reflect that in the way that we share information that we possibly can.
And lastly, I think if you look at what's happening it's plain for everyone to see the strength that's emerging in the Asian region and that's not just China, that's a very powerful seismic shift which is not going to be reversed any time soon.
That presents a lot of opportunities, I think, to both Australia and New Zealand and the interesting issue for us is how we can work collaboratively together to maximise the benefit that comes from that and there are some real opportunities, I think, for us to market New Zealand and Australia together or to do some things together and we certainly have great examples of that.
And I think the defence review really talks to that, of how we can continue to be even more streamlined in what we do, have better processes and probably formalise things that historically built up because of the nature of our relationship.
So, thank you for the opportunity to be here.
PM: Thank you and I think we've agreed how we're taking questions, so it would be, I think, courteous to start with a question from the New Zealand media.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, Steve Marshall from Television New Zealand.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Could you please outline the plan the Australian Government might have to put New Zealanders who have moved to Australia on an equal footing with Australian citizens?
PM: Look, this has been an issue of some long standing and was discussed by one of my predecessors Prime Minister Howard with then Prime Minister Helen Clark. It has put some New Zealanders in a situation where, when for example we're trying to get people disaster relief payments very quickly, that they aren't automatically in the system.
Prime Minister Key actually raised that with me last year during our summer of natural disasters and we did make sure that we extended assistance to New Zealanders who were caught up in that situation and caught up in those disasters.
So, the Prime Minister has raised this issue with me again. We need to keep working on it, obviously it's got money implications and that's something that we've always got to be very careful about. So we'll keep working it through 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, I'm sorry to not ask you about trans-Tasman relations-
PM: -Alright, so this is our question from the Australian media. Yes.
JOURNALIST: I think there is limited questions so I'm going to ask you about this week's protest.
PM: Sure.
JOURNALIST: Can you 100 per cent guarantee that Tony Hodges acted in a completely unilateral fashion when he passed on information that precipitated that protest? In other words was anyone else in your office part of that decision?
PM: I answered this question yesterday and the answer's no; no one else was part of that decision.
We'll have a question from the New Zealand media. Yes.
JOURNALIST:  Just going back to (inaudible) there's around 100,000 New Zealanders affected at the moment who moved here in 2001. Any plan that you're working on, is it looking at trying to deal with the plight of those particular 100,000 people, or the plan will be going forward to deal with (inaudible)
PM: Prime Minister Key might just want to address that first. I think the immediate concern is for the people, the 100,000 caught up.
PRIME MINISTER KEY: So there's the historic position those that are in that position where they've been here round about eight years, they don't currently qualify for residency and in fact if they applied they probably wouldn't get that, or citizenship. And so the plan is to see how they can be put on a footing which would allow them to enjoy those rights and that's something that is solely the domain of the Australian Government, I mean they have sole rights to determine their own policies and as the Prime Minister has pointed out there are financial implications of that.
But I think both governments are conscious of the issue and the significant number of New Zealanders involved and we're hopeful that some progress can be made there.
PM: OK.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, at what time on what day did Mr Hodges tell your senior staff about the phone call in question and you said yesterday that you were told of Mr Hodges actions late on Friday, roughly what time was that and why was there such a long gap in time for you to get informed of this phone call?
PM: Well I answered all of these questions yesterday too. In relation to your first question, Mr Hodges informed his immediate superiors later during Australia Day, so obviously there was the event at The Lobby Restaurant, there was the need for people to get out safely and return to Parliament House.
So a fairly dramatic event had happened and some immediate things needed to be done because of that dramatic event, including making sure everybody was safe and well.
So later that day Mr Hodges informed his superiors, my senior press secretary and my communications director.
Once again I answered your second question yesterday as well and the answer's the same: I was in country Victoria on Friday morning awarding National Emergency Medals to people, as I had been the day before at The Lobby Restaurant, the first time we've ever given these medals out.
I returned to my Melbourne office, my staff had been working to make sure that they could give me a complete factual brief.
As you would be aware there were a number of allegations circulating around the media at the time, including for example that a female staff member had made a telephone call. So matters needed to be checked, all of those matters were checked.
My staff were then in a position to give me a comprehensive brief and following that I spoke to Mr Hodges.
JOURNALIST: The statement of Kim Sattler in this morning's newspapers-
PM: -Well I think that's sneaking in what will be the last Australian question, but on that issue of a statement by Ms Sattler, Ms Sattler put out a statement yesterday which is consistent with the events as I understand them to have occurred.
Ms Sattler has obviously formed the view that she has not been accurately reported in today's media and as I'm advised she's put out a second statement today, which once again accords with the views that I hold, having been fully briefed on the events.
Thank you very much. 



PM: I'm here in Sydney today and I've met with the Governor of the Reserve Bank, Glenn Stevens and received a briefing from him and I'm here at the Stock Exchange and I've been briefed by its chairman and CEO.
In each of these briefings we've discussed the global economy, the economy of our region, and of course Australia's economy.
We live in a world with a number of economic challenges and people would see the news from Europe very frequently and also the news about the US economy. We also live in a world of opportunity as we are in the part of the world that continues to experience strong economic growth and looks more to that growth as time continues, as the Asian region continues to grow.
Having received these briefings today I just wanted to say a couple of things about my approach to managing the economy. Managing an economy and keeping it strong isn't enough. You've got to make sure that you're managing that economy in the interests of working Australians so that they're getting their fair share.
Looking at the Australian economy today, we are a pillar of strength in the world. The envy of the world and looking directly at what is happening in our economy we see more jobs, lower taxes and lower interest rates than we saw under the Howard Government.
We do of course have challenges in our economy; we live in a time of economic transformation. We are seeing a major resources boom. And that is a good thing for our nation but it but it also means our Australian dollar is very high, putting pressure on other sections of the economy including manufacturing and tourism.  And so as a Government we are working right across the economy so that there are opportunities for all and that our economy continues to have a number of sources of strength, not just mining.
During the course of 2012, we'll be very focussed on what we need to do to keep strengthening our economy today and building our economy for the future, including by delivering our clean energy future. By making sure Australians get a fair share of the mining boom, by making sure that we are harnessing the skills and attributes of Australians right around the nation so that they can fill the skilled jobs that will increasingly become available.
These are all important economic challenges for us, I'm focussed on them as Prime Minister, and I thank both the Stock Exchange and the Reserve Bank for providing me with some briefings today.
I'm very happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, has any of your staffers been questioned by Federal Police over the Australia Day protest?
PM: No.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The Government is very determined to return to surplus in 2012-13 as promised because that is the right strategy for our economy. I've just referred to our economy as a pillar of strength. Or economy is in a very different position from the economies of the United States and from the nations in Europe. We are experiencing growth. We've got low unemployment. These are such important things important things for Australians, the opportunity to get a job, the opportunity to work in a growing economy and in our growing economy it's the right thing to have fiscal discipline and to bring the budget to surplus which is why we are determined to do it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Kevin's Rudd's challenge. The story in today's Daily Telegraph looks, if it's true, to be quite damaging to you, Prime Minister.
PM: Look, my focus today is on the Australian economy and making sure that the Australian economy is working in the interest of working people. That they can get a job, that they can get the skills they need to get an even better job, that they can make a life for them and their families. I understand that as people look at their TV screens and they see all of the uncertainty around the world, they wonder what it means for us.
The Australian economy is in a very different position than economies overseas, we came out of the global financial crisis strong, we live in the growing region of the world economically and we have huge opportunities for the future, if we make the right decisions now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what was the message from Governor Stevens on the current state of the economy?
PM: Well Governor Stevens and I obviously discussed the circumstances of the global economy and Australia's economy. So we did talk about the opportunities and challenges. It's not my intention to go into specifics about my discussion with the Reserve Bank Governor.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you asked your senior advisers why it took them three to four hours on Friday to tell you about Mr Hodges' behaviour even though they told him  -  well  Mr Hodges told them the night before?
PM: Look I've answered these questions I think twice before so let me answer them for the third time. The approach that my staff took was to make sure that every allegation that had been made by various journalists, and there were various stories running around, was fully investigated and that they were in a position to brief me comprehensively on the full facts and so I received that briefing and then dealt with the matter publicly.
JOURNALIST: But your senior adviser knew about these allegations the night before and then went on to tell certain radio programs, for example, that nothing was going on. Are you going to be asking for his resignation as well given Tony Hodges-
PM: The way in which you've put your question is factually incorrect, it assumes things happened which did not happen. My office received an inquiry about an allegation made by Mr Ray Hadley. Mr Hadley's people were advised that allegation was untrue and it was untrue.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, should the RBA (inaudible) try and ease pressure on the Australian dollar for example?
PM: The Reserve Bank sets interest rates independently of Government.
JOURNALIST: Do you have view of Newspoll at the moment that things haven't improved for you?
PM: The important thing I'm focussed on today is the Australian economy. And what matters to me is the numbers of people who have got jobs. Whether or not we're going to see growth in the Australian economy and how high that growth is going to be. The fact that interest rates are lower now, the fact that taxes are lower now. They're the kind of numbers that I'm focussed on.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Kevin Rudd is doing a great job as Minister for Foreign Affairs. It's very important for a nation our size that we do have our voice heard around the world. We've got a proud tradition of punching above our weight when it comes to making our voice heard around the world and Kevin Rudd as Foreign Affairs Minister is doing a good job in making sure that our voice is heard.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look I've dealt with that I think in answer to a question over here.
JOURNALIST: Do you agree with Mr Crean though that he's not a team player?
PM: I've just given you my answer.
PM: We'll just take a question here and then we'll come over. Yes?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look, we each and every time we come to do a budget or the midyear economic and fiscal outlook, take a prudent approach. And we do make sure we look at the dollars being spent and we make cutbacks. But budgets are about choices and in order to deliver a surplus, in order for us to make sure we are doing the right thing by our economy and delivering fiscal discipline, then we do have to make room for new spending by making cutbacks.
I'd refer you to last MYEFO, I'd refer you to last year's budget, I'd refer you to the budget before that and the budget before that and what you'll see is we've taken a very prudent approach to making room. Now sometimes that means that there are very hard choices, but we will keep taking that approach because it's not in Australia's interest to end up, for example, in the position that the Opposition is now where they need to make $70 billion of cutbacks before they even get to the starting line. $70 billion of cuts to even make the first starting approach to what they'd need to do to make a budget add up.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be travelling to Queensland to help out Anna Bligh in her election campaign?
PM: Look I've spoken to or been in contact with Anna Bligh, of course she's there fighting her election campaign. I said to Anna and she certainly said to me that, you know, we'll work in on the campaign, like all State campaigns it will be focussed on State issues and Anna Bligh is very determined to fight hard for her vision of Queensland. Of course I and a number of Federal colleagues will be playing some role in the campaign.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask a question about the vegetable growers raising concerns about Coles lowering their prices. Is there anything the Government can do? There's concerns that they're going to be undercut and go out of business because of that.
PM: Look, we've always said that our big retailing chains should treat our farmers, vegetable growers, all of our farmers, fairly and appropriately.
Sorry, last question  -  you were-
JOURNALIST: I was going to ask Prime Minister, are you concerned about the strength of the Australian dollar?
PM: The strength of the Australian dollar is a reflection of the strength of our economy. It is the world knowing that we are economy seeing incredible growth in resources. It's the world knowing that our economy is strong. But the strength of the dollar does mean that other sections of the economy, tourism, manufacturing, international education, face some pressures.
We understand that and that is why we're working with sections of the economy including manufacturing and tourism and we've made changes in international education.
On the working with these other sections of the economy, it's very important to me as Prime Minister that during this time of economic change as we see such a huge resources boom, that we don't allow that resources boom to hollow out other sections of the economy. So we are working with manufacturing, we are working with the car industry, which is why I find it so disappointing that the Opposition is publicly advocating basically the end of jobs making cars in this country. A million Australians work in manufacturing, car making is important to the skills across our manufacturing sector and it is the wrong thing to do to be saying that people who work making cars should be tossed out of work and our economy should lose those skills.
Thanks very much. 



150,000 of Australia's lowest paid workers will benefit from substantial pay rises of between 23 and 45 percent as a result of Fair Work Australia's historic pay equity decision today.
120,000 of these Social and Community Services sector workers are women - working in difficult jobs often described as “caring” jobs, includingworking with people with disabilities, counselling families in crisis, running homeless shelters and working with victims of domestic violence or sexual assault.
This Labor Government allowed the case to be brought to the independent umpire through our introduction of the Fair Work Act and the ability to seek gender equity in rates of pay, and supported the application that was brought.
This is a very significant pay rise that will make a real difference to these workers and their families.
It is also the first ever successful pay equity claim in the national system, and a significant advance for equal pay for women.
Noting that the increases will be phased in over 8 years from 1 December 2012, we are absolutely committed to providing the Commonwealth's share of the funding needed to pay the higher rates of pay Fair Work Australia has awarded.
An appropriate phasing in period is unquestionably needed to allow for an orderly and structured transition so that service providers are supported and properly funded to respond to this major structural change.
It is now essential that all State and Territory governments, as significant funders like the Commonwealth, also commit to funding their share to ensure the continued sustainability of the sector.  We will continue to work through the impact of this historic decision in consultation with all relevant parties.
Credit must go to the Australian Services Union and other unions involved on achieving this historic advancement for gender pay justice for workers in the social community services sector.
These are workers who make a difference every day for the most vulnerable in our community and deserve to be properly rewarded for their efforts.
Properly valuing caring work and providing decent wages in industries dominated by women will keep our economy strong and resilient.
Importantly, the decision will also help part of the social and community services sector attract and keep qualified, valuable employees.
Today's decision is good for the sector, good for caring workers, good for women, good for families and good for the economy. 



 PM: Before I get to the substance of my address today, I just want to advise you of something that happened as we were coming in for lunch. And that is a decision was released by the Full Bench of Fair Work Australia literally just a few minutes ago.
The decision awards more pay to people who work in the Social and Community Sector.
It's a historic decision because it means more money in the pockets for workers who care for those who most need our help. Many of them are women, and many of them are low paid, working hard to make ends meet.
This case, an equal pay case, finally gives them the recognition that they deserve.
This audience of course will also recognise that there's an economic dimension as well to this decision for the years that lie ahead  -  in those years we will need to attract and retain more workers in the services sectors of the economy and especially in ‘caring' work which has historically been dominated by women.
Properly valuing caring work and providing decent wages in these service sectors will also help make our economy and our society more resilient.
So it's a good day for some workers who very much deserve proper recognition and they've got it today. 



Thousands of vocational students would no longer have to pay expensive upfront fees, and others would be guaranteed a subsidised training place worth up to $7800, in sweeping reforms to the Australian vocational education system to be proposed by the Gillard Government to the States and Territories.
This would mean thousands of Australians would finally be able to afford to get the skills they need to get a job or a promotion and improve their job security.
As a result of reforms the Commonwealth will work to negotiate with the States:
 * 	Any student pursuing a VET Diploma or Advanced Diploma would no longer have to pay upfront fees, instead paying HECS-style fees only when they can afford to  -  saving them thousands of dollars at the time they need it most.
 * 	Students studying foundation and entry-level courses for technical and service sector careers in areas such as health, business, hospitality, communications, construction, transport and other areas would be guaranteed a government-subsidised training place.
These changes would help people get better jobs; help tackle Australia's skills shortage; take pressure off families struggling to make ends meet; and recognise the increasing importance of higher level skills in Australian vocational education.
Currently, Diploma and Advanced Diploma students need to pay upfront fees of up to $2500 to commence their studies, at a time when they can least afford it.
By removing this cost barrier, students would have more choice about what and where they study, and would be free from the added burden of having to pay their training fees upfront.
Victoria is currently the only State which offers income contingent loans to VET students on a widespread basis, and there has been strong growth in students doing higher level VET qualifications since 2009  -  with more than 22,000 students taking up loans.
The Gillard Government will also seek to introduce a guaranteed entitlement for students to gain skills and achieve a qualification by progressing up to Certificate III level.
This reform package would not only open up a significant number of training opportunities for more Australians, but also improve job security and lift national productivity.
So that students and industry can have increased confidence in training effort and outcomes, the Gillard Government will also insist on new quality measures and benchmarks for training providers.
The Government will also launch a national My Skills website mid-2012, an online database to inform students about their training options. It will provide information about training providers and courses, training outcomes, fees and other costs.
The Government's reforms are part of a multibillion dollar skills package, which includes an additional $1.75 billion over five years specifically set aside in the 2011 Budget to reform Australia's training system provided the States and Territories agree to the Gillard Government's ambitious reforms.



	It's good to address an audience and a forum which does such great work to promote friendship and co-operation between two great countries, Australia and Israel.
	Decades after the desert was first made to bloom, Israel is a place where ideas still bloom.
	And this Chamber is a place where ideas bloom too.
	Friends, in 2012 Australians will be watching the economic situation of Europe closely.
	It's only by understanding just how serious and complex the European problem is that Australians can truly understand our own position of strength in the world economy,	the important opportunities we have created for ourselves  -  and the part every Australian can play in the work of coming years.
	As Australians see the problems of Europe, we see the importance of fiscal discipline.
	And as Australians increasingly come to know that our own fundamentals are strong by comparison, we know that we would not change places with any economy in the world.
	Now our job is to help Australians understand that it is this strength which is driving the transformations in our economy.
	And in turn, to understand that our nation is strong enough to bend those transformations to our own purposes - from a strong base, we can build a new economy, one which is even stronger, one which is full of opportunity.
	A new economy which is prosperous and fair, creative and skilled; where mining and manufacturing flourish and services grow; where the government manages the economy for working people, for the future.
	And as Australians imagine this new economy we want to build together, we know that for everyone to have a share in the new economy, everyone must have the skills the new economy needs.
	I sift a lot of economic commentary and advice  -  and I can tell you that, for once, the economists almost all agree  -  Europe still faces very serious economic difficulties.
	And of course, this is no longer only a Greek problem, nor is it contained in a “periphery” or in the south.  The January decision by Standard and Poor's to downgrade the sovereign credit ratings of nine of the euro area's 17 members included some traditionally thought stable and strong, like Austria and France.
	The ultimate proof of economic policy failure, mass unemployment, is blighting millions of European lives.  More than 23 million men and women are unemployed in the EU, five and a half million people under the age of 25.  In Spain, the unemployment rate is over 20 per cent.
	I do recognise that the July, October and December agreements last year in the euro area, the G20 November summit bringing the international community on board, plus the fiscal and financial reforms of new governments in Greece, Italy and Spain, all represent important progress.
	Over the Christmas period, the European Central Bank assisted by lowering interest rates and providing cheap finance to European banks, enabling them to refinance.
	And the reaction to the Standard and Poor's downgrades was not as severe as may have been expected  -  suggesting markets had priced in this additional risk already.
	But we can expect daily choppiness and immediate reactions to overnight news to continue to colour the mood of market commentators and participants  -  there will be more ups and downs in global markets for as long as it takes for Europe to get its house in order.
	In recent days, Europe's leaders largely signed off on a new treaty on greater fiscal discipline and cooperation.  They also largely agreed on a permanent rescue fund to tackle the on going debt crisis, as negotiations on the restructuring of Greek debt continue.
	Economies like Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Italy are each in different degree subject to the same policy double-bind: a long term fiscal repair task which plainly cannot be delayed but which does run counter to the urgent growth challenge.
	This demands measures to deliver long-term fiscal sustainability while those countries with the capacity also provide short-term support for economic growth.
	We cannot afford these nations to continue a negative downward spiral: sharp fiscal contraction, economic recession, falling employment, shrinking revenue, rapid decline in living standards sustained over years.
	That's why Australia has been at the international table in 2011 and we'll be back there in 2012, arguing for sustainable long-term finances and policies which restart European growth, arguing against fiscal austerity alone and at any cost.
	Arguing for a balanced European policy response.
	And that means restructuring Greece's debt; ensuring sufficient funds to refinance governments and recapitalise banks; progress now on domestic micro-economic reforms which spur growth; long term fiscal discipline across the Union  -  and delivering on measures for long term fiscal co-operation.
	Along with co-ordinated global action, where countries outside Europe play their part in providing the International Monetary Fund with the additional resources it needs.
	Australians have a deep interest in seeing these steps carried out.
	Strong Asian growth  -  with China expected to grow over eight per cent and India over seven this year  -  means that the overall outlook for Australia's trade partners does remain solid.
	But this does not make us immune from the problems of the European economy.
	If anything of value can be retrieved from the wreck of failed economic approaches in Europe pre-2008, it is the lesson to the world: fiscal discipline matters.
	There is debate about the appropriate pace of European fiscal repair now and how that relates to the growth challenge  -  and I've made it clear where Australia stands in that debate.  Where there's no argument is that European fiscal policy has been unsustainable.
	Australia's position is fundamentally different.
	When the global financial crisis hit we funded the best designed stimulus package in the world.
	A sophisticated set of targeted and temporary measures which kept our country out of recession and which grew employment in the hardest global environment  -  with a commitment to restrict spending and return to surplus as revenues recovered.
	That strategy remains.
	My firm conclusion is that handing down a Budget surplus in May is the right call in the present economic circumstances.
	The current international instability stems in large part from real concerns about sovereign risk  -  and perceptions of risk in various national economies can change quickly, indeed they have on occasion in recent times.  So our fiscal policy must be disciplined and must be seen to be disciplined as well.  It's in our interest to keep ourselves well ahead of the pack.
	A strong sovereign credit rating also underpins strong bank credit ratings.  A very important boost to the availability of credit for Australian business and to economic activity in Australia flows from our fiscal discipline.
	Critically, the Australian economy is growing.  Putting the budget into surplus when domestic economic growth is around trend means that we are well positioned to deal with further global financial and economic uncertainty and crises if that should occur.
	And it increases the scope for our independent Reserve Bank to ease monetary policy when conditions require.
	Fiscal discipline is the right call for the long-term as well.
	Australia has always had a relatively high reliance on overseas capital.
	The best way to ensure the continued vital inward flow of investment is through sound economic institutions and policies.   And the one big, ongoing, discretionary decision that reinforces that best  -  the most powerful single signal a government can give to investors  -  is a strong and disciplined fiscal framework.
	While global conditions make it harder, we are strongly placed to deliver a surplus for 2012-13.
	Handing down a Budget surplus this May will be good for the Australian economy, good for growth and good for jobs.
	Achieving a budget surplus will reinforce the strength of the Australian economy.  A strength which has brought investors flocking to our dollar, turning a once-in-thirty-years currency peak into a year-long high plateau.
	It's a striking development in our economic history that in a period of global uncertainty, the Australian currency is holding its value.  This comes even as markets harbour expectations of future easing of our monetary policy settings, expectations which might normally be expected to see the currency trend lower.
	There's growing evidence that the best explanation for this is confidence.
	It's well known that Asia's demand for our mining output  -  together with the domestic investment to expand our mineral capacity  -  has lifted demand for our currency, with its value up almost sixty per cent against the US dollar since 2009.
	There's another driver: investors looking to the Australian dollar as a substitute for betting directly on growth in our region  -  especially in China.
	This reflects Australia's strong position in what I call the “Asian Century”.
	We are one of the economies best placed to capitalise on the global economy's shifting weight to our region.
	So we've seen a global drive to hold Australian-dollar denominated investments: huge overseas institutional investors, both public and private, loading up on Australian assets  -  and a record surge in investors buying our government bonds  -  the reward for our fiscal discipline in uncertain global times.
	Add the relative woes of European economies  -  touching even traditional currency strongholds like Switzerland  -  and for the first time in history Australia is being referred to as something of a global “safe haven”.
	What is certain from all of this is our dollar is likely to remain relatively high for years to come.
	Natural advantages of resources, people and location  -  decades of economic reform  -  building economic strength.
	Economic strength driving a strong dollar  -  and a strong dollar driving economic change.
	Lifting the value of what we earn and what we own, while yes, lifting the price of what we make and what we sell as well.
	There is a flipside to this story.  We know that some sectors are doing it tough.
	The level of the dollar  -  and the pace of its rise  -  has broken some business models and forced economic restructuring.  It's already been behind some closures, while employers will also keep a watching eye on Europe.
	These are powerful, economy-wide transformations, perhaps best thought of as “growing pains”.
	Our success is driving the dollar.  In turn, the dollar is driving change and in doing so it's making our economy leaner and stronger, forcing us to move more of our effort  -  more money, more equipment, more people  -  into the parts of our economy where we can create the greatest value.
	We've said for years, for decades, that given a choice between competing on quality or competing on price, we'd compete on quality; that we'd take the high road to high-value, high-wage, high-skill employment, that we want to create jobs based on making and selling the best products and services we can.
	And we've said too that we want our consumers to have the benefit of low-cost high-quality goods, wherever they're made.
	Well, the strong dollar is locking in that high-value, high-quality approach for us.  We never really wanted to compete on price alone  -  but now it's just as well, because at parity with the US, we just can't.
	It's as if the world is turning up the speed on the treadmill while we're exercising.    It's an adjustment, it takes work, it builds strength, it's an adjustment up, not an adjustment down.
	And we can make it work for us.
	While economic transformations are never easy, this time we have an advantage we have rarely had before.
	The tough changes in our economy in the 1980s and 1990s came off the back of deep recessions in 1982 and 1991.  Big reallocations of capital and labour  -  many workers forced to look for new ways to support their family  -  at times of double digit unemployment and real concentrated hardship in many regions and towns.
	By contrast, the growing pains we feel in parts of our economy today come when unemployment is just over five per cent, when our economy has created over seven hundred thousand jobs since late 2007, when there are shortages in many skills, when prospects for work for skilled workers are genuinely bright.
	Every year, three hundred thousand businesses close down  -  and three hundred thousand new ones start up  -  every year.
	And every year, around a million workers change jobs  -  a quarter of them changing industries too.
	That's the modern Australian economy, and I know no serious advocate for any sector or industry who wants to stop the world changing.
	The challenge is to include all our people in the opportunities change creates.
	We can see an opportunity to build a new Australian economy.
	And we can see more: an opportunity to build the new economy together, to include every Australian in its growth.
	Our people do not want to be forced to choose between mining and the rest; nor do they want to choose between a strong future for manufacturing and a strong economy as a whole.
	They know their hard work has given Government a strong hand and they are looking to us to play the right cards.
	Yes, to ensure the benefits of our strong economy are shared by all Australians.
	Yes, to make the mining investment boom last, yes, to keep the whole economy strong - but more than that.
	In this decade, Australia can build a rich, fair economy  -  where working people get their share of the benefits  -  where strength is sustained into the future.
	A high participation, high productivity economy.
	Where everyone shares in the benefits of our hard work.
	Where fly-in, fly-out work doesn't fly over jobless households and past communities left behind.
	A high skill, high tech, fast broadband, clean energy economy.
	Where our energy exports fuel clean growth in the world and our energy use at home is cleaner and more productive.
	Where we sell computer games to Korea and diagnose disease over distances of thousands of miles.
	An economy with advanced industrial production, wherefuel-efficient cars made here are sold around the world.
	Not just one which maintains employment at major vehicle producers, though those jobs matter greatly.
	But one where vehicle manufacture anchors employment in the whole chain of supply.
	The component makers. The toolers, the metal manufacturers, the suppliers of plastics, chemicals and glass.
	An economy with the technical and scientific capabilities required to make cars  -  which sustains those capabilities through the economic cycle.
	Andthat's why this Government is working with the Australian car industry to lift its capacity for innovation and design.
	Smart and sustainable co-operation between government and industry is the model which has been pursued by reformistLaborGovernments in Australia for decades.  With no better example than the Button car plans of the Hawke-Keating era.
	There is no case  -  no case  -  for a half billion dollar cut to automotive industry assistance in the current economic environment.
	Nothing could better illustrate the real stakes at play in Australian politics than this debate between the parties over Government support for jobs.
	My Government is putting jobs first.
	And this new economy will be more adaptive, flexible and able to seize new opportunities than ever before.
	In the new Australian economy firms will see the moment of change as a chance, a chance to move up the value chain, to expand their discovery and production of premium goods and services.
	More specialisation, more world-leading research and development, so the ingenuity of our enterprises generates jobs of every kind, from design and manufacture to assembly and sales.
	More innovations in traditional areas of comparative advantage like mining and agriculture, ideas which become leading technology used around the world.
	Australia's best are businesses more than able to compete and win in the world.
	Building a new Australian economy means making many more businesses as good as that.
	Australian workers and industries can aim for and achieve every degree of sophistication and success of the clusters of great manufacturing in places as diverse as northern Italy or Israel, California or parts of Germany.
	Just as our international educators can offer tertiary educations the equal of Oxbridge and the Ivy League to a half a billion strong Asian middle class who'll want nothing but the best for their kids.
	Just as our financial houses can become the investment brains of that same Asian middle class as they seek choice and security in retirement as well.
	The promise of this new economy is there for every business and every person in every sector who is prepared to make it work.
	Australian LaborGovernments promise not just to manage the economy or to build its strength  -  but to manage the economy in the interests of working people  -  to build its strength for the future.
	So we see not just an opportunity, but an obligation: to spread the opportunities of the new economy to everyone.
	It is an ambitious goal, and to deliver it, the Government will pursue an ambitious program of investments and reforms in 2012.
	We will roll out fibre for high speed broadband to over sixty sites across the country.
	Twenty thousand more students will start university this year than last, up by a fifth since we came to office.
	We will hand down a Budget surplus in May.
	Carbon pricing will start on 1 July  -  driving change in energy use, funding innovation in clean energy and help for households.
	The minerals resource rents tax will start on 1 July as well.
	Funding tax cuts for small businesses and over time funding cuts for all businesses, higher super for all workers and new infrastructure in the regions.
	New business tax arrangements to reward innovation will be the subject of extensive work by the Business Tax Working Groupleading toa final report on the future of the business tax system in December.
	And through 2012, a new approach to collaborating with industry will be taking shape: through the new portfolio of Industry and Innovation  -  allied to the structural transition funding in the Clean Energy Future package  -  and the work of my own Manufacturing taskforce.
	These are big milestones on the reform road this year  - policies which lift productivity and build the new economy.
	And a new economy, driven by change, needs workers every bit as innovative as its firms whose skills grow as quickly as the sophistication of the technology they use every day.
	That's not just for scientists and laboratories: it's for advanced manufacturing and mining, agriculture and logistics, and it's in the shops and workshops we visit every day.
	If you doubt that, next time you get your car serviced, have a look at the machine they use to check the suspension  -  for that matter, have a look at the computer they use to total up your bill.
	To keep up, everyone needs strong basic skills and the ability to learn throughout life  -  skills that not everyone needed last century  -  and soon enough, to get ahead, everyone will need advanced skills.
	There will be new jobs not done now  -  and there'll be jobs that exist today that are done in new ways and demand new skills.
	Farmers with the skills to trade carbon credits.  Plumbers with the skills to transform the energy and water efficiency of our factories and our homes.
	Panel beaters with the skills to work in the new supply chains for global manufacturing.  Medical professionals with the skills to diagnose and prescribe on-line.
	This is why I've asked the Minister for Skills, Senator Evans, to bring forward a major proposal for a sweeping overhaul of the vocational training system in Australia.
	In coming weeks, we will be releasing details of proposals for reforms including income contingent loans.
	At the next Council of Australian Governments meeting, these reforms will be put to the States and Territories, whose co-operation will be necessary to deliver this reform.
	Under the plans now being developed, thousands of vocational education and training students would no longer have to pay upfront fees, while others would be guaranteed a significant fee subsidy of up to $7,800.
	This means benefits for students studying foundation and entry-level courses for technical and service sector careers in areas such as health and hospitality, business and communications, construction, transport and other areas.
	They would be guaranteed a government-subsidised training place  -  meaning many more Australians who want a place will get one.
Our plans also mean benefits for students working on a Diploma or Advanced Diploma, for courses like Engineering, Computing and IT, Architecture and Building, Community Services and Social Sciences, Health and Medical Sciences, Business.
They would no longer have to pay upfront fees, but would have access to HECS-style loans to cover their fees instead.
Getting rid of up front, out of pocket costs  -  saving thousands of dollars at the time they need it most  -  paying the costs back only when they can afford to.
Something which has been available to university students for decades.
I want the kids who learn these vital skills to have the same right to a low-cost loan as kids who study economics or law.
And I want TAFEs offering those kids high-quality training to have the same right  -  to offer as many places as there are kids who will take them  -  as the universities do today.
Cutting the upfront costs of training and improving student choice.
Guaranteeing every Australian the skills they need.
Because millions of Australians will need new skills to make the most of the new Australian economy we are building.
And because to build the new Australian economy, we will need millions of Australians to have new skills.
The equation is simple. 
Skills bring jobs, and skills bring job security.
The more skills you have, the better placed you are to grow your firm, to keep your job, to earn more over time.
And the better placed you are to find good new work if your job changes too.
Good news on skills for working Australians:
This is Labor's skills guarantee  -  a training ticket for your economic future.
With an economy which has the adaptive capacity, the modern infrastructure, the innovative firms  -  with people who have the adaptive capacity, the modern skills, ability to learn  -  then we can make the transformation to the new economy work for us.
I was recently reminded, while reading about the cricket of all things, of the famous oath of the American Civil War General Ulysses S Grant, who said he would “fight it out along this line if it takes all summer”.
There's something of that determination and clarity in my Government's approach in 2012. 
Today, interest rates and taxes are lower than when we came to office and we have created hundreds of thousands of jobs.
We will govern for a strong economy  -  and our success will be the country's success.
We understand the big changes at work in Australia.
We understand the opportunities they create.
We know Australia can be the winner in the Asian Century.
We can choose to give working people a fair share of the resources boom and today's economic strength  -  or allow only some to feel the benefits.
We can choose to get ready for the future  -  or stand still.
We can choose to face up to the hard decisions now  -  or take the easy way out today and leave all the hard decisions to our children.
We can choose to stick together and win through  -  or squabble amongst ourselves and lose out.
My line is very clearly drawn.
This Labor Government will make the right choices.
We will build a new Australian economy.
We will get working people a fair share.
We will get the country ready for the future.
We will see our nation stick together.
We will see our nation win through.  



PM: Yesterday I was talking about the future of the Australian economy and I said then that the fundamentals of our economy are strong, that we have a very strong Australian dollar, and that that strength is driving transformations in our economy, including transformations in manufacturing.
I said yesterday in a formal speech about the economy that I am very confident that we can build a new Australian economy where manufacturing has its place. That it can be high-wage, high-skill, high-productivity, at the forefront of innovation and research.
I'm here today at Boeing and they are showing us how you get that done, making a component for the Dreamliner aircraft, manufacturing it right here in Australia so that it joins the global supply chain and creates this aircraft of the future.
They're doing that even though the Australian dollar is strong by being smart at what they do, by staying at the forefront of innovation and research, by making sure that they're bringing high skills to bear as they go about manufacturing.
So it's been good to be here today with the Minister for Manufacturing Kim Carr and the local member, the Member for Melbourne Ports, Michael Danby, to see what this great workforce is doing.
Manufacturing currently employs around a million Australians and I want our new Australian economy to have people employed in manufacturing for our new economy to have many sources of strength, including manufacturing.
Making cars is a vital part of the approach to manufacturing. Interestingly, a number of the workers we met today got their skills working in the car-making industry, and the robotics we've seen today is robotics technology that comes from the car industry. There's pressure on Australian car-making today because of the high Australian dollar, and we have seen some job loss announced by Holden.
Of course, for the people who are involved those job losses that makes it a very difficult period as they go about looking for a new opportunity for themselves and their families.
But I am determined and Labor is determined that whilst ever Labor is here, we will be making cars in Australia. It comes down to a very simple proposition - are you for jobs or not? We are for jobs, and I reiterate that I believe it is entirely wrong for Mr Abbott and the Opposition he leads to be anti-the jobs of car workers and to be determined to rip money out of industry, co-investment with the car industry.
We will continue to work with the car industry. We have a package available of the right size to work with the car industry through our new car plan, to make sure that we continue to manufacture cars in Australia.
The new Australian economy is going to be built on high skills. It's going to be built on a clean energy future, it's going to be built on new technology like the NBN. It's going to be built on making sure that we harness the strength of mining, but we are also working with other industries so that we continue to have a diverse economy with many sources of strength, including manufacturing.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) from Toyota says he has real problems with productivity due to the industrial relations situation in this country  -  he's got (inaudible) taking rampant sickies it seems. Care to respond to his comments (inaudible)?
PM: Well I want to be very clear about my economic strategy for this country. I am not going to take Australia in a race to the bottom, which is about cutting wages and cutting penalty rates and cutting benefits for workers. That's Mr Abbott's way, that's not my way.
On Toyota, they have had a long history of very cooperative relations between management and the workers there. Of course, there is no excuse for unnecessary absenteeism; people should be going to work. But our future, our new economy should be one where people can have high skills, high-wage jobs in a productive industrial culture. The Fair Work Act is about that productive industrial culture, rather than the days of WorkChoices which was about rip-offs of working people. We are committed to that productivity industrial culture. Of course on  the other side of politics, there is a very clear choice here - they're still committed to WorkChoices and the rip-offs.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I understand that there are reports around about job losses at Westpac. I don't believe a formal announcement has been made, so I won't deal specifically with Westpac until a formal announcement is made.
But I would say this: for anybody to lose their job or to be confronted with a redundancy is a very tough moment for them and for their family, and they have all of our thoughts and all of our support, and we work with people in circumstances of job losses, to make sure that we can assist them to find a new opportunity and a new way of supporting themselves and their family.
When we look at financial services, there pressures on now in part because of some of the things we've been talking about here today at this great manufacturing establishment, but when we look at the future, we can see a bright future for financial services. We live in a region which is growing. We live in a region where the middle class is growing. The middle class in China, the middle class in India, the middle class in countries in our region and that burgeoning new middle class will want sophisticated financial services that can be provided by us right here in Australia. So I believe our financial services sector has a very bright outlook.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Isn't that a problem? If you want a flourishing car industry that's something you can fix isn't it?
PM: Well let's be very clear about the industrial relations framework in Australia. Our framework is about treating working people decently. It is about cooperative industrial relations. It's about bargaining between working people and their unions and employers and their associations to get a productive outcome for that workplace.
Now, I understand an issue has been raised about absenteeism, and let's be very frank, I don't think anybody can suggest that taking a sickie is something that has only occurred since the creation of the Fair Work Act. I think anybody who knows anything about Australian history might know a little bit more about that. Now, of course, there is no excuse for taking a sick day without justification.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Have a look at this place behind me. Have a look at this place behind me, which is competing, despite the strength of the Australian dollar and the pressure that it puts on, is competing against the world to make a part of an aircraft here so that it can be exported around the world. High productivity, great work culture.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We are in discussions right now with Holden and I will get Minister Carr to comment as well, but we are in discussions right now with Holden about co-investment to keep Holden manufacturing cars here beyond 2015.
I'm very determined that we continue to see car manufacturing in Australia. Now it's not going to be the same as the past, it is going to be different from the past. For us to keep up with manufacturing, then you've always got to be doing what you do better, and that means that you will be doing it differently.
But we are in discussion with Holden about the future beyond 2015, and let's be very clear about the contrast here, too. We are working with the car industry to keep Australian jobs. I'm absolutely determined, as Prime Minister, as a Labor prime minister, that we keep car manufacturing here. What we see on the other side of politics is cutbacks which would destroy jobs.
MINISTER CARR: Can I just indicate that our discussions with General Motors are going very well. I am confident, absolutely confident of a future at General Motors in Australia and the strength of the automotive industry in Australia through the second half of this decade.
As a result of the Government working with the companies we have already seen very, very big changes in the automotive industry, and we will see more changes. We have to adjust to a much lower volume environment as a direct result of the changes that have occurred with the value of the Australian dollar.
The Australian dollar has increased in value in real terms by 40% above its historic levels, and so we have to work within that environment to produce a strong manufacturing sector which employs high-skilled people well into the future, and that's exactly what we're doing.
It's very disappointing that today we've had to see some reductions in the number of people employed. That comes in Holden's case as a direct result of the changes in the level of exports that's been able to be achieved. That in turn is a direct result of the changes in the value of the Australian dollar. We are simply not exporting as many cars to the United States as we would have hoped to.
I'm absolutely confident, however, that we will be able to maintain our abilities to not only manufacture cars here, but to design and engineering work that the global automotive industry needs can be done in Australia.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
MINISTER CARR: It's not about sacking people. No-one is being sacked. What we're seeing here is a situation where every company has to face the great difficulties of managing their plants to meet the economic situation as we currently face.
We cannot - we cannot say, as part of any part of any negotiations, that every single job will be secure forever. It's about ensuring, ensuring that we employ the overwhelming numbers of Australians that are employed in manufacturing which is nearly a million people.
Now, that's been the case now since 1960. The levels of productivity and manufacturing have been huge over that period, and they will continue, continue to see significant improvements in our productivity levels. What we want to see, however, is the new investment that allows us to bring in the new technologies, the new industrial processes, the new products, and that's what we're doing. We're securing the future of the automotive industry through new investment, and that's what we will likely be able to make some positive announcements on in the very near future.
JOURNALIST: Any new cash to Holden come with strings attached for job guarantees?
PM: Let me be very clear about the way that we work with the car industry. We co-invest with the car industry and we reach agreements about the future. We reach agreements about manufacturing in Australia and of course that means Australian jobs.
The choice here and there is a very clear choice, is whether you stand for jobs in this country or whether you don't. That's the choice. And there couldn't be an issue in Australian politics that is clearer today than this one. Labor is standing up for manufacturing jobs. Mr Abbott is determined to cut back government assistance to manufacturing. That means he is determined to cut back manufacturing jobs in Australia.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: No I'm not, but there is a clear process under the Fair Work Australia Act for resolving demarcations. So I'm not in a position to comment specifically on the case.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well let me address that because I understand there's discussion about that today.
Mr Chalmers who represents the chamber, the automotive chamber nationally has been very clear today, that the pressure on the shoulders of the car industry is the Australian dollar.
Now, there is a figure of $400 per car floating around, and that figure isn't right. But Mr Chalmers, who is in a position to assess what is really driving change and putting pressure on in the car industry has made it very clear that it's the high level of the Australian dollar, and I understand that.
Of course, Minister Carr understands that. The Labor Government understands that. Because the forces at work in our economy and in the global economy which means this is a time of strength in the Australian economy, it's a time of a strong dollar. We're going to see that strong dollar sustained and that's going to drive a change in manufacturing, which is why during this period of transformation, we've got to stand with manufacturing, stand with the car industry and stand with those Australian jobs, and that's what we're determined to do.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look this is old news which the then Minister dealt with last year. So I'd refer you to when it was first new, which was during the course of last year.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: It's old news which was dealt with by the Minister last year, the very thing you're referring to came out and was dealt with by the Minister last year.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Does something need to be done about the culture of the sickie in this country? You've referenced it  - 
PM: Look, I think we've just got to be a little bit sensible here and being a little bit sensible requires this: a recognition that, yes, there are times when people take sick days that they shouldn't have.
I could have made that statement in 1960, I could have made it in 1970, I could have made it in 1980, I could have made it in 1990. I could have made it in the year 2000 or I could have made it today.
For anybody to suggest that that is a result of our Fair Work Act, therefore as a matter of just basic logic is obviously wrong.
People should not take sick days without justification. But when it comes to looking at productivity in manufacturing, well I would like you to look behind you, I would invite you to actually think about the things you've seen here at Boeing today, and I would invite you to think about the productivity levels that enable Boeing to make a component, a vital component for a new aircraft right here in Australia and ship it out in crates that have got "Made in Australia" stamped all over it, the thing that enables them to do that whilst our dollar is strong is high productivity.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) is demanding the full email be released over the Craig Thomson saga. Is that going to happen?
PM: That was dealt with last year.
JOURNALIST: What about sick days on days after weekends? Public holidays?
PM: Well I've just dealt with that as well. If I can deal with another matter.
There has been a boat go down in PNG with, as we understand it, 350 people on board. So this is obviously a major tragedy, 350 people on board a ship that has gone down.
We have been asked to provide assistance to PNG and we are providing assistance to PNG. We are also working to urgently ascertain whether or not there were any Australians on board.
But given the likely very high loss of life here, I think when this news comes to the attention of Australians around the country, they will be thinking about the people of PNG as they respond to this tragedy.
Thank you very much.  



PM: It is always great to be at Manuka Oval even if it is a day when we're looking at a rain-swept oval rather than one that a game is being played on. It's a lovely place and I have come to enjoy it a great deal as a football ground but it actually makes an even better cricket ground.
And of course the Prime Minister's XI is an institution in cricket in Canberra and we have seen the fact that crowds were prepared to come out today not even knowing if it would played. It is a great tradition over summer.
It is no surprise that the grand stands here at Manuka are named after the two Prime Ministers most responsible for this tradition as Ian has explained, Menzies and then Bob Hawke. Of course my predecessor Bob Hawke has done a lot for Australian cricket in his time though I'd have to say, over this summer, I think he has probably put the cause of responsible alcohol drinking back 40 years.
You've got to love the way in which we Australians engage with our politicians and engage with our news. Hawkie got more press coverage for downing that beer in what looked to me to be pretty record time than I got in announcing $95 million in cricket infrastructure at Adelaide, Sydney and Hobart.
Next time I make an announcement, expect me to do it with a beer in my hand and to be trying to equal Bob's best. But that's cricket, isn't it. A game that brings us all together, that reaches out to people around the nation, wherever they are in the nation, whatever their social status. There is no political barriers to engaging in cricket. Everybody loves it. And you don't have to be an expert to enjoy the game. I'm absolutely living proof of that.
So whilst today we haven't had the opportunity to see any cricket, we have of course over the summer enjoyed a lot of cricket. Whether it has been in pubs and backyards or whether it has been at our great grounds around the nation, people have enjoyed their cricket over the weeks that have been.
I'd have to say there has even been a bit of cricket at The Lodge. Tim has been out there playing a bit of cricket. Rueben the dog is learning to field. Though he gets the getting of the ball, itt is bringing the ball back that we are struggling with but Rueben the dog is out there doing a bit of fielding. Though I'd have to say Tim possibly did push it a little bit too far last night with Brad when my team came around for a function.
I think Brad was just being polite when he finally agreed with Tim that the little thing mown in the front of The Lodge equals the Adelaide Oval. That's nowhere near true but Tim somehow managed to persuade Brad of it during the course of the evening.
So it has been good to be able to spend some time with the players even if we couldn't watch them play. Brad, of course, a great local boy, a great local player and I thank him for having stepped up to the role of captain, even if he didn't get to lead the team out on to the field.
Cricket in Canberra has perhaps never been healthier. The Cricket ACT board and staff have done a magnificent job in making sure that this great game continues to prosper here. They do that at the grass roots level all the way up to the Bradman oration and particularly the oration at the Australian War Memorial, I think, was something many will long remember. It was a unique event for Australian cricket and rightly was reported around the world.
So, a big thank you to everybody who has made everybody who has made today possible. To the two teams who waited so anxiously to see if they'd get out there and have a go, it wasn't to be. And as I said last night, two great teams from two great nations. The friendship between Australia and Sri Lanka is a strong one. I joked last night that amongst all of our other common bonds, we love beating the Indian team. I think that is shared between us. But the bonds between our countries are much, much, much more than that and, having the two teams ready to play today was part of those bonds between us.
So, let's look forward to a beautiful sunny day next time we gather here for the Prime Minister's XI, but in the meantime, I hope you enjoy lunch.
Thank you very much. 



The Australian Government will provide financial assistance to flood-struck communities in Queensland.
I have spoken to Queensland Premier Anna Bligh several times today and I have reassured her that the Federal Government stands ready to assist the people of Queensland to respond to and recover from these events.
Joint State and Federal Government disaster relief and recovery arrangements will provide emergent assistance grants for families and individuals in Balonne, Murweh and Maranoa Shires.
These grants will provide $180 per person and up to a maximum of $900 for a family of five or more.  They are available to people experiencing hardship due to a disaster, and who require assistance to meet their basic needs.
This assistance will be provided through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
Assistance will also be provided to help councils to repair roads, bridges and other local infrastructure.
The following Local Government Areas can now access joint State and Federal disaster assistance for restoring public assets, clean-up costs and counter disaster operations: Burke, Central Highlands, Cloncurry, Doomadgee, Flinders, Murweh, Richmond, Carpentaria, Quilpie, McKinlay and Mount Isa.  
The Federal Government is also making available Australian Defence Force helicopters and other assets to support evacuations and we will continue to work closely with Queensland authorities to provide assistance where required.
Both the Commonwealth and Queensland governments are staunchly committed to assisting individuals, families and communities affected by disaster events. 



The COAG Reform Council's 2010-11 Seamless National Economy Report on Performance, released today, has reported positively on the progress of COAG's 27 deregulation priorities, with 15 having been completed, including one ahead of schedule.
In 2008, the Commonwealth, States and Territories agreed to implement regulation and competition reforms, including 27 deregulation priorities.
The deregulation priorities that have been completed include reform of consumer law, product safety, the health workforce, rail safety and consumer credit.
The Productivity Commission recently examined 17 of the deregulation priorities and estimated that, with full implementation, they could lower business costs by about $4 billion per year and, through improvements to productivity, increase GDP by over $6 billion in the longer term.
The report did raise concerns about some priority reforms which have been delayed, by the States and the Commonwealth, and where the outcome may be at risk.  As a reflection of the economic importance of the regulation and competition agenda, the Commonwealth has set aside over $450 million of reward payments associated with these reforms, tied to the delivery of agreed outcomes.
Of most concern is the overhaul of Occupational Health and Safety regulations which provides Australians with a nationally harmonised workplace safety system based on model legislation. This reform was due to be finalised last December.
The Australian Government is committed to leading on the deregulation and reform agendas, in conjunction with all States and Territories, and will drive accountabilities to ensure they are delivered in a full and timely manner.
The 27 deregulation reform priorities will reduce red-tape for business, increase productivity and enable an efficient economy where resources can move to where they can make the greatest economic contribution.
It is the responsibility of both levels of government to ensure regulations are in place to lift national productivity and facilitate the mobility and efficient allocation of resources.
As we build a new economy in response to the structural changes afoot because of the relatively high dollar, these objectives are more important than ever.
COAG is considering the Council's Report and will release a response in the near future. 



HOST: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning and there is a bit of rain around, you're right. So a delayed start, I don't think we're anticipating any play before around about midday.
HOST: No, but look, I'm confident that the ground staff, and they're going through the motions of taking the covers off now, it looks as though there's going to be a break in the weather and I guess whatever happens, whatever happens the lunch will be on, Prime Minister. Yes?
PM: Well that's true and I did have a great function at the Lodge last night to welcome both teams and representatives of cricket from around Australia, from Cricket Australia, but also a number of people who do so much work to make sure that the local ACT competition continues to thrive.
HOST: Can I tell you Prime Minister, we're just looking around the ground here, because we've been here since 5:30, there is dead set a spectator already in place waiting.
PM: Heavens above. Is that someone who's been there all night?
HOST: Some very keen people here.
It's going to be a big week coming up for you and your government of course, Parliament back sitting next week, the polls are rubbish, they're not flash and I don't know what's going to turn it around unless there's radical action. But we just get the feeling based on the talk about this meeting on the weekend that there may be radical action. What can you tell us about what's happening on the weekend?
PM: Look, this is a planning session for the Labor caucus at the start of the Parliamentary year. So one of the things I've been very focussed on as Prime Minister is to make sure that all our internal processes work well. We want to run a very competent, stable, methodical government, so it just makes sense to bring the team together at the start of the Parliamentary year and talk about the year to come.
At the same time, of course, we're not just looking internally to make sure our processes are right, but we're out there in the Australian community talking about what is going to make a difference for the future.
So my focus has really been on building the new economy we need to deal with this time of major economic change in Australia's economy.
HOST: Based on the polls, unless there is some wholesale changes to Federal Labor policy between now and election I don't think you're going to be at the Lodge, and I'm not telling you anything you don't know. And when I was talking about this meeting this morning, I made the suggestion that it wouldn't surprise me if the carbon tax was delayed, if not scrapped. Is that at all a possibility, even a faint one?
PM: No, not at all, because putting a price on carbon is absolutely pivotal to building the new economy we need so people have got jobs and prosperity in the future. To do that, what you're suggesting would actually risk long term jobs and prosperity for this nation.
We're in a time of tremendous global economic change, people see all of the news from Europe and they know that the American economy has its problems too. Here we're strong and we need to stay strong, but you only stay strong by making sure you're working on the challenges of the future, not standing still. If we stand still and just continue to run a high carbon pollution economy, then ultimately we will get left behind as the world moves on to a low carbon future.
HOST: But in reality if you leave it in place, isn't it reality that it'll be Tony Abbott who's tinkering with it and administering with it and perhaps dismantling it completely?
PM: Oh look, number one: government's about doing the right thing for the nation's future, the hard decisions. I'm not in the camp that says you sit here with your eyes on the opinion polls and that's all that matters to you, I'm here to make the changes we need to ensure our nation is stronger for the future. I'm going to be here working to support working families today, because a lot of people are finding it hard to make ends meet, so we're increasing benefits for families, like being able to put your school uniforms as you buy them on your tax and get a rebate for them  -  that matters.
But what also matters is making sure we're building the economy we need for tomorrow, so kids right around the country, whether they come from the poorest of households or the richest of households, can know that they can have a good job and a good future.
So that's what drives me.
HOST: OK, we've got this ideas session coming up at the Lodge in Canberra on Sunday night. Are you expecting any bright ideas from the Foreign Minister?
PM: Well, let's be very clear about what this is. I'm already crystal clear on what the Government's agenda is for 2012 and I spoke very directly about our economic agenda during the course of this week and building the new Australian economy.
But I work with a team, I work with a caucus team and they're a good team and of course like many workplaces would have planning sessions at the start of a calendar year, we are going to have one.
HOST: Dennis Shanahan in The Australian is suggesting that a challenge from Kevin Rudd to your prime ministership is now possible within the next eight weeks. He talks of despair growing within government ranks. There is surely some truth in what he says?
PM: Look, I don't worry about chatter in the media, I get on with the job and I think we've got to be very focussed  -  what do people want government to do? Talk about themselves, or deliver results.
Well I want government to deliver results and that's what I'm doing as Prime Minister.
HOST: Prime Minister, last Friday's demonstration at Parliament House showed disrespect to the flag and one of our listeners has asked why is it not illegal to burn the flag. Does it take free speech too far?
PM: Of course if you burn things, including the flag, in the wrong circumstances you can be breaking laws and by that I mean people shouldn't be going round setting fire to anything. I find it completely disrespectful and completely wrong for people to be burning the Australian flag.
I don't think that that's what we want to see in our nation. Of course people will have different views about what we should do as a country, we're a wonderful democracy and that means people can engage in all sorts of peaceful protest to make sure their views are heard, but burning the flag in my view is way too far. It is wrong to do it and no one should do it.
HOST: A lot of chatter around this morning over the Westpac announcement to cut a number of hundred workers and it's not the only announcement of the last few days of banking, manufacturing and industrial jobs going offshore. How does your government ensure job security for Aussies when this is happening on a regular basis?
PM: Well, look, that's a really good question and that's what I've been talking about this week and what the policies we're delivering this year will be all about. We're at a really interesting time in the Australian economy and a challenging time.
We came out of the global financial crisis strong and that's a great thing. We've got a strong economy and low government debt and we've got low unemployment. Our strength is driving a strong dollar and that strong dollar is driving further economic change and particularly putting pressure on trade exposed areas of the economy, like manufacturing.
So in this time of change we've got to be working with those sectors to make sure that they come through and we continue to have a diversified economy with lots of areas of strength. I don't want to wake up in ten years time and the only strength in the Australian economy is mining.
So we've been really focussed on working with manufacturing and we're standing by the car industry and car workers' jobs and that's actually the central political debate at the moment: Are you for those jobs or against them? I'm for them, Tony Abbott's against them.
On financial services, this is an industry undergoing change too, but we know that the financial services sector will continue to grow over time. It's got a bright future, because we're in the growing region of the world, with hugely growing numbers in the middle classes of Asia and those people will want sophisticated financial services, amongst a lot of other things that we've got the capacity to make and sell.
HOST: Prime Minister, before I let you go, have you got a message of encouragement to Brad Haddin and the PM's XI players, because I'm sure they're listening as we speak? What is it in the lead up to this, perhaps shortened Prime Minister's XI game today?
PM: Well I got the opportunity to spend some time with the team last night. Brad, of course, is a local boy. I said I wanted a tough captain and I think I've got one, Brad will be that tough captain. So my message to the team would be  -  go for it, don't worry about the weather, however much play there is we want every ball to count, we want every bit of play to count.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you so much for being accessible to us this morning, we really do appreciate it.
PM: Thank you. 



Eight Australian Defence Force (ADF) helicopters will assist with search, evacuation and resupply of people affected by the flood in the area of Roma, St George and Dirranbandi in South East Queensland, at the request of the Queensland Government through Emergency Management Australia.
Recent heavy rainfall across South-East QLD and northern NSW has caused severe flooding that has resulted in evacuations, community isolation and inundation to some properties.
These helicopters have been made available to assist in these vital efforts as a result of regular discussions between myself and Premier Bligh.
A request for assistance with night search and rescue capability came as the situation in Roma deteriorated yesterday afternoon.
The ADF tasked two Black Hawk and two Kiowa helicopters, which arrived in Roma at 10:20pm and commenced operations to search for, evacuate and resupply people affected in the Roma area.
Overnight, the Black Hawk helicopters transported Red Cross personnel from Roma to Mitchell and other people who were isolated by the flood waters. The Kiowa helicopters have conducted a search east of Mitchell along the Warrego Highway looking for stranded vehicles and searching for reported missing persons in the Roma area.
The helicopters will be available to assist in rescue operations as required until the immediate crisis has passed. A further two Black Hawk and two Kiowa helicopters are planned to arrive today. Working with Queensland authorities, the Federal Government will closely monitor the need for additional assets to support these operations.
ADF helicopters played a crucial role in supporting humanitarian relief operations in Queensland in early 2011 - providing aero medical evacuation and air lift during those floods.
The Federal Government, through Defence, Emergency Management Australia, and other agencies such as Centrelink will continue to assist the people of Queensland in the response to these events.



HOST: Prime Minister thanks for coming in.
PM: Thanks Mike, it's good to be here.
HOST: I appreciate your time. I guess the most negative thing that you're facing constantly is what we might call ‘rats in the ranks'. You've got people in your team trying to destabilise your leadership. Does that churn your stomach?
PM: I wouldn't say churn my stomach, no, and I'm not sure I'd even agree with the characterisation of your question, though, of course, it's a very famous saying.
My view about the Government is we have faced and continue to face some tough times politically. That is because we've done some big hard things and yes that does mean that politically it's been tough.
HOST: That's good Prime Minister, but you've run away from the question. You've got a problem. You've got people in your party moving to oust you from the leadership. I mean, the fact is you've got the Kevin Rudd circus, if you like. It's very debilitating to your leadership and to the Government and I really want to ask you  -  why have you allowed it to go so long?
PM: I think Kevin's doing a good job as the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I understand that in the political situation the Government finds itself, that people are going to talk about these questions and I understand that for Kevin that means when he is doing something publicly, whether its involving himself in the Queensland election campaign or talking about his work as Foreign Affairs Minister, that he too is going to be subject to these questions.
But Mike, I don't get up in the morning thinking about all of this. I get up in the morning thinking about what I need to do leading this nation today to make a difference today and make a difference for tomorrow.
So I know it's endlessly fascinating to others but to me it's, kind of, dead set boring.
HOST: It doesn't have to be endlessly fascinating. You could stop it. He's after your job and you could stop it.
PM: Look, I'm not agreeing with your questions Mike and so no reformulation of them is going to get me to agree with them.
HOST: I'll be direct  -  in '68 Whitlam had a situation like this, in '91 Hawke  -  they went into the Caucus and said ‘I quit, the position of leadership is open' and it was resolved. Why don't you do that?
PM: Because I believe Kevin's doing a good job as the Minister for Foreign Affairs and I'm very confident in my leadership of the Labor Party.
HOST: Is he doing a good job of destabilising your leadership?
PM: Mike, once again, I'm not agreeing with the premises of your question.
HOST: Let me just push you for one direct answer. Why don't you just call a showdown in the Caucus?
PM: Because there's no need. I'm very confident in my leadership of the Labor Party.
HOST: The daily headlines are so debilitating and so bad for your Government.
PM: Look, I'm not going to determine what I do as Prime Minister because of headlines in newspapers. I'm going to determine what I do as Prime Minister for what's right for the nation.
HOST: I'm sure you're sick of hearing about the ‘Julia who' factor, they're really talking about you and who you really are behind that wall and you've referred yourself to your innate style of holding back a fair bit. Is that going to change?
PM: I'm not, with the greatest respect Mike, I'm not a talk show host, I'm not on breakfast TV, I'm not appearing in a drama on Australian television, I'm the Prime Minister.
HOST: But you're a Prime Minister facing a little defeat and one of the factors is you have a low approval rating.
PM: Well, I think it's a question of expectations of leadership and if we look across Australia'a political history when Bob Hawke was there or Paul Keating was there or John Howard was there, I don't actually recall there being constant demands for them to show more personality. I don't remember people -
HOST: -Well Bob Hawke didn't need that call.
PM: No, he probably didn't and he did the leadership in a different way than Paul Keating, who did it differently from John Howard. But I don't remember people looking at John Howard and saying ‘gee I wish he'd be warmer and cuddlier and more humorous and more engaging in his press conferences'.
They looked at him and said ‘well, he's the bloke running the country' and I think the same standard should apply to me. I'm a woman running the country, I don't ask people to come to the view that they want to have me round for dinner on Saturday night, that's not what I'm here to do. What I'm here to do is to do some tough things, some hard things that make a difference.
HOST: You say you're a woman  -  would it be easier if you were a man?
PM: Look, I think it's different and I'm not surprised about that. I mean I grew up watching the Prime Ministers of this country and if you'd asked me then ‘close your eyes and imagine a Prime Minister' I would have imagined a bloke in a suit.
Now I'm the first person to not be a bloke in that suit, exactly the same sort of suit as you're wearing.
It's a different image of leadership. So I'm not surprised that it's kind of taking a bit of time for that to settle with the Australian public. It is different, but it also speaks of how great a nation we are that we can have truly equal opportunity and one of things that is most joyful in my job is I get any number of young girls or dads in crowds pushing their young daughter forward to get a photo with me. I don't know whether they support me, I don't know whether they're going to vote for me, but me being here has given them the sense that it is possible for a woman to do anything in this country and that's a great thing.
HOST: You tough it out?
PM: Well, that's kind of who I am. I'm not someone who wilts under pressure. I'm not someone who obsesses or agonises, I'm someone who gets things done.
HOST: Someone who gets petty like Kevin Rudd saying you and Tim live in ‘Bogan-ville' meaning you're bogans.
PM: Well, one, that was reported so we need to just be a bit careful about assuming everything that is written is true.
Two, I am who I am, if you want someone with a crusty, upper class accent who went to the most elite private school, well that's not me.
HOST: Bob Hawke especially, like so many Prime Ministers, but especially, was forgiven for his mistakes. You seem to wear your mistakes; they don't go away  -  like broken promises.
PM: You're referring obviously to the words I said about a carbon tax during the election campaign and when I said those words, I meant every one of them. I talked about having an emissions trading scheme, I talked about putting a price on carbon and that decision by me, I can do nothing or do something  -  right I'm going to do something, that has been met by a relentlessly negative campaign, one of the most negative campaigns I can recall in Australian politics.
So yes I am wearing some damage from that but outcomes matter and the outcome here will be on 1 July we'll start our journey to a clean energy future and a lot of people will benefit by having more money in their pocket than they otherwise would have through their pensions and tax cuts.
HOST: Prime Minister, people talk about your lack of emotions and they're only talking about seeing you in public. Are you a very emotional person when you go home?
PM: Look, I'm someone who likes to have a laugh and crack a joke. I think I am warm with people when I meet them, I like meeting people, I like hearing their stories.
When I present for media interviews and press conferences and all the rest of it, I don't view it as my job to be there emoting. I'm a very calm person, I take life as it comes, I'm a very stable person  -  I don't easily get knocked off course.
But of course my personal life is full of all of the loves and joys and circumstances of family life that everybody else's is full of.
HOST: Do you cry much?
PM: I'm not someone who's a big person for  -  no I don't. I'm not someone who would spend a lot of time with tears in my eyes. Does that mean that I don't feel emotions and sadness? Of course it doesn't, everybody's different.
HOST: Australia Day. A horrible mess and you behaved very well. But it turned out badly. Why?
PM: Well we had a staff member who made a very bad decision, very bad judgement call. He made it himself, he didn't consult anybody else about it and of course he's paid a very big price for that now. He offered his resignation and I accepted it, so he's out of a job.
HOST: Just for the record Prime Minister, did you have anything to do with tipping off the demonstrators?
PM: No.
HOST: Prime Minister, something has to change, seriously, for your Government to stay in power. Can you see what that change could be?
PM: If you're asking me do I think we can win the 2013 election, yes I do.
HOST: Will you be leading the party? 
PM: Yes, I will.
HOST: Before you lead your party to the next election, the fact is you have to deal with Kevin Rudd.
PM: Well Mike, that's your analysis.
HOST: Come on, Prime Minister, come one. You've ducked it beautifully, very well, but he's the elephant in the room.
PM: Mike it's not a question of duck, I've got a different view from you. You've obviously got one, I've got another.
HOST: No, but you can answer the question?
PM: And I am answering the question Mike. I'm leading the Government that of course has been under a lot of political pressure and will continue to be under a lot of political pressure.
HOST: That's the Government; I'm talking about you  -  leadership.
PM: And I'm talking about my leadership of the Government. But I'm not going to define what I do as Prime Minister, about the politics around the Government, I'm going to define what I do around what really matters in the nation and ultimately - if I can channel Paul Keating from way back when, he'd be the first to say  -  good policies, good politics in the end, even if it doesn't feel like it at the time.
HOST: Prime Minister, what did you want to achieve out of this interview?
PM: Mike, I thought it would be good to celebrate your return to television and I thought it would be good to start the year talking about the Government, the nation and what the year's going to be about.
HOST: Prime Minister, I really appreciate your time. Thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



The Australian Government this morning boosted its assistance to flood-affected Australia, providing a RAAF Hercules C-130 to conduct an aero-medical evacuation of low-dependency patients from St George Hospital in Western Queensland to hospitals in Brisbane and the Gold Coast.
The C-130 Hercules joins the eight Australian Defence Force (ADF) helicopters already assisting in the flood relief efforts in South East Queensland.
The situation in the area of St George deteriorated yesterday and overnight resulting in the need to evacuate patients from the St George Base Hospital to the Gold Coast.
The Air Force C-130 Hercules aircraft was on stand-by for such an emergency and will assist with the transport of these patients quickly and effectively to the Gold Coast. The Queensland authorities requested this assistance for the welfare of these patients and the Commonwealth immediately responded.
The Commonwealth continues to cooperate closely with the Queensland and NSW Governments in this unfolding flood situation, standing ready to help wherever we are called.
Four Black Hawk and four Kiowa helicopters, based at Oakey, continue to assist with search, evacuation and the resupply of people affected by the flood in the area of Roma, St George and Dirranbandi, South East Queensland.
Overnight the focus of the helicopters has been St George and Charleville as the floodwaters continue. The helicopters have winched people to safety in the area of St George and provided much needed food, bedding and medical supplies, as well as other equipment such as generators, to those affected by the flooding.
Emergency Management Australia has liaison officers in flood-affected regions to ensure that requests for any further assistance can be actioned immediately.The Commonwealth continues to work with the Queensland and NSW Governments to provide financial assistance to local communities affected by recent heavy rains and flooding through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.More information on this financial assistance can be found at www.disasterassist.gov.au



The Australian Government today activated direct payments of additional disaster assistance for communities in Queensland and Northern NSW hit by flooding as a result of recent heavy rainfall.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) of $1000 per adult and $400 per child will be made available through Centrelink to people who have been impacted by flooding in disaster declared areas.
In Queensland, these areas include the shires of Balonne, Barcaldine, Blackall Tambo, Maranoa, Murweh and Paroo. This payment is also available to people in Moree, Narrabri and Gwydir in New South Wales.
The flooding in these communities has caused considerable disruption, including isolation and the evacuation of thousands of people from their homes.
The AGDRP is a one-off payment designed as a quick cash injection to help people with their immediate recovery needs.
Ex-gratia payments of the same amount will also be available to New Zealand Special Category Visa Holders residing in these areas.
The AGDRP will provide financial assistance to eligible people:
 * 	whose residence has been significantly damaged;
 * 	who were stranded within their home or unable to gain access to their residence for at least 24 hours; or
 * 	whose principal place of residence was without electricity, water, gas, sewerage or another essential service for at least 48 hours.
The assistance will be delivered by Centrelink.
Many people in affected areas have spent considerable time away from their homes. This payment will go some way to helping them get back on their feet in the immediate aftermath of these floods.
The Australian Government is continuing to closely monitor the flood situation throughout other areas of Queensland and Northern New South Wales.
The Government is already providing significant assistance to flood-affected areas of Queensland and Northern NSW and will respond with further assistance as required.
Today's announcement is over and above the support already being provided by the Australian Government in areas affected by flooding throughout Queensland and northern NSW. This includes the joint Commonwealth and State Government assistance being provided under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
In Queensland this includes:
 * 	Counter Disaster Operations for the local government areas of Balonne, Burke, Carpentaria, Central Highlands, Cloncurry, Doomadgee, Flinders, Longreach, Maranoa, McKinlay, Murweh and Richmond.
 * 	Restoration or Replacement of Essential Public Assets for the local government areas of Barcaldine, Barcoo, Blackall-Tambo, Burke, Carpentaria, Cloncurry, Isaac, Longreach, Maranoa, McKinlay, Mount Isa, Murweh, Quilpie and Winton.
 * 	Personal Hardship and Distress Assistance (PHD) for the local government areas of Balonne, Central Highlands, Maranoa and Murweh.
In NSW the assistance for all declared local government areas includes:
 * 	Personal Hardship and Distress Assistance
 * 	Primary Producers Loans
 * 	Primary Producers Transport Subsidies
 * 	Small Businesses loans
 * 	Assistance for Councils and Trustees of Parks and Reserves
 * 	Loans and grants to Churches, Voluntary Non-profit Organisations and Sporting Clubs.
The AGDRP and the NZ ex-gratia payment can be claimed:
 * 	on line at www.humanservices.gov.au;
 * 	by calling the Department of Humans Services on 180 22 66; or
 * 	complete, sign and take your claim form to your nearest Department of Human Services (Centrelink or Medicare) Service Centre or Agent; or post to:	Queensland / NSW Floods  -  January 2012 Processing Centre,	Reply Paid 7815, Canberra BC, ACT 2610.
For more information on disaster assistance see www.disasterassist.gov.au



PM: Thank you very much. I've got three matters to deal with today. First I would like to offer my congratulations to the Queen on her Diamond Jubilee. Today is the anniversary, the sixtieth anniversary of her accession to the throne. We will be saying some more about this in Parliament tomorrow and particularly the ways that Australians can get involved in celebrating the Diamond Jubilee this year.
For today it is enough to say that we are marking a remarkable event for our Monarch, she is the only person to reach  -  the second person to reach the Diamond Jubilee anniversary, a truly remarkable event. I believe Australians remember her visit to Australia last year with a feeling of warmth and many Australians will want to get involved in celebrating this milestone this year.
Then secondly, we have today triggers payments to assist those people in Queensland and in New South Wales who are again suffering with rising flood waters. Unfortunately these scenes are only too familiar to us after the events of last summer and now we're seeing Australians again in need and in trouble in Queensland and in parts of northern New South Wales.
The extra payment that's been triggered today is the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment. It's a payment of $1,000 per adult and $400 per child to assist people who have been forced to do things like evacuate their area. Now this has been triggered across a wide series of areas so the best thing for people to do if they want to check their eligibility is to ring the Department of Human Services on 180 22 66 or go to the website www.humanservices.gov.auin order to seek the assistance that will help them through this time.
And then thirdly, tomorrow marks the start of the Parliamentary year. We come to the start of the Parliamentary year with the Australian economy strong as a result of the decisions the Government has taken to protect jobs and to keep our economy strong. As the Parliamentary year starts tomorrow it will trigger the start of a year long debate on the Australian economy. It will be a debate a between the Labor Government's approach; between our approach of managing the economy in the interests of working people or the approach of our opponents who are determined to slash $70 billion out of services for working families.
It will be debate between our approach in supporting jobs, just as we did during the global financial crisis, or taking the approach now being recommended by the Opposition of not supporting jobs and particularly seeking to slash jobs in the car industry.
It will be an economic debate between our plans for a clean energy future or the Opposition's plans to rip tax cuts away from working Australians. It will be an economic debate about whether we build the new economy our nation needs while supporting jobs and families today or whether we stand still.
During the course of this year our nation will face up to some important choices  -  do we embrace the future or do we try and run and hide from that future. Do we make sure working Australians  get a fair share of the resources boom or do we just let that resources boom and the wealth it generates go to a few. Do we make sure that we support working families with the assistance that they need or do we succumb to the Liberal Party agenda of cut backs for working families. These are the issues that at the core of the economic debate which will happen in 2012.
I have made up my mind about all of the choices in this debate. We stand for managing the economy for working families. We stand for jobs today and building the new economy that we will need tomorrow. We stand for getting ready for the future and making sure that we take tough decisions today rather than leaving them for future generations.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you heartened by today's Nielson Poll?
PM: There's any amount of commentary on opinion polls and I'll let others do that commentary. What I would say about the Government is the election will be in 2013. We've got a lot of hard work to do. As a Government we've got a lot of hard work to do delivering the plans for the economy that I've outlined today and of course during recent speeches. We will be doing that hard work.
We do have a lot of hard work to do and if we do that hard work I believe we can win the election when it's held in 2013.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Bob Brown today is blaming a relentless sexism on some of your political difficulties. Do you accept Bob Brown's critic? Has your gender made your job as Prime Minister more difficult?
PM: Look, I've made statements about these questions in the past as recently as last night on Mike Willesee, I haven't got anything to add.
JOURNALIST: On the economy, a lot of forecasters are suggesting this year could be as bad as the global financial crisis. As part of your economic management, are you prepared to stand by with more economic stimulus as you did during the GFC and would that affect the budget surplus?
PM: Well Denis let's be clear on the Government's outlook for the Australian economy. Our outlook is that we will continue see growth in the Australian economy. We're not immune from the events in Europe and we're not immune from a sluggish US economy either. But we are in the growth region of the world and because we are in that growth region, that does mean that we've got an underlying strength in our economy.
We're already seeing washing through our economy the benefits that come from the huge demand for resources today and what we are doing as we build the new economy of the future is making sure we benefit from the huge demand that will come from our region for what will be a wide range of services  -  from tourism to international education to food to wine and beyond. So that's the Government's economic plans.
Now on the economic information available to me, I see no reason to move from describing the Australian economy and its prospects as I've just described it to you. But what people can be certain of at every stage is we are a Government that acts to support jobs. We've shown the ability to do that in past, we're doing that today as our economy is being transformed by changes in the global economy and in our region. We're doing it for example in the car industry and we will resist any attempts by the Liberal Party to stop us supporting jobs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are Australia's options in ending the bloodshed in Syria given that China and Russia vetoed the UN Security Council motion on the weekend?
PM: We are supporters of the plan outlined by the Arab League, we've made that very clear which is why we are very disappointed to see the exercise of these vetoes at the UN Security Council. We certainly think that was the wrong decision, the wrong path and an abdication of responsibility in the face of the violence that we are seeing in Syria. So we will continue to press internationally for support for the Arab League plan.
JOURNALIST: You have foreshadowed the referendum to recognise Indigenous people in the Constitution during this term or at the election. Do you still think that timetable will be possible in light of both the political situation and the fact that there's some controversy over the expert panel's recommendation or do you think you would need to push that into another term?
PM: Well when you say the political situation Michelle, I'm not sure I'm going to agree with your analysis, let's be clear about the process here. We asked an expert panel with Australians who are well known for their passion in this area to provide advice to Government, to Parliament, to the Australian community on recognition of Indigenous Australians in the Constitution.
That panel produced a unanimous report and I think that is an achievement. Now that report is the subject of consideration by Government and of course the subject of consideration by the Opposition and others.
In order for a referendum to be put and successfully carried we would need the most overwhelming bipartisanship, we would need everyone to make sure that they were there raising their voices and campaigning for change. To see anything other than bipartisanship, we know in Australia, means that a referendum will head for a no vote.
So at this stage we'll continue to work through our response to the report. We'll continue to say to others in this Parliament that we want to see bipartisanship. When we have been able to fully explore how that bipartisanship may come about, then we would look at the timing of the referendum.
JOURNALIST: With regard to car manufacturing, we've been told for many years now that taxpayer assistance is to help car manufacturers innovate and eventually, with the hope they can stand on their own two feet. Do you think that it's  -  do you think taxpayers can ever look forward to a day when they don't have to be propping up the car manufacturing industry in this country or is it the case that we can't have one without taxpayer subsidies?
PM: Well if you look at the car manufacturing industry in Australia it is innovating, it's particularly innovating, to provide the kind of motor vehicles that are cleaner and greener and that people want to drive today. But we've got to understand we're in an international competition as to whether car manufacturing happens in our nation and other governments around the world are prepared to provide actually a great deal more assistance than we provide to car manufacturing.
So we have been a co-investor with the car industry to keep car manufacturing here and we are working on future co-investments. Now the cost benefit analysis for tax payers out of that is not just about the car industry jobs that it holds in this country, it's about the importance of that skill system and that ability to innovate and that kind of equipment and machinery to the whole of manufacturing and manufacturing employs around one million Australians.
So we have been a co-investor with the car industry to keep car manufacturing here and we are working on future car investments.
Now the cost-benefit analysis for taxpayers out of that is not just about the car industry jobs that it holds in this country, it's about the importance of that skill system and that ability to innovate and that kind of equipment and machinery to the whole of manufacturing, and manufacturing employs around one million Australians.
So we've taken a very hard headed decision that, given the benefits for jobs, that we should be in the business to co-investment with car manufacturers in Australia. Clearly the Opposition has come to a different view and they are very content to see 46,000 Australians who work in the car industry no longer have jobs and the 200,000 Australians who rely in part on car manufacturing in this country to also face threats to their employment.
JOURNALIST: Is that indefinite assistance?
PM: Well I've made it clear how we make decisions about these things.
Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST: Just back on the economy, you've said recently that one of the things that could keep the economy strong is lower interest rates and you've said the Reserve has the capacity if they so choose. Are you concerned that the banks are signalling right from the get go this year that they're not going to pass on rates cuts in full?
PM: I want to be very clear about what I've said about interest rates. Of course the Reserve Bank acts independently, so it is not for me to either predict or ask for particular interest rate movements. But there are things that government can do to create the room to move in monetary policy should the Reserve Bank choose to do so and key to that is showing fiscal discipline, which is why we are determined to bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13 as promised. It's the right thing to do in this phase of our economy's growth.
On the passing on of interest rate reductions to bank customers, we've been very clear about that and will continue to be clear, that people who are the customers of banks are entitled to be very angry if they don't see interest rate reductions passed on and we've made it easier for them to shop around.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) trade.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: How confident are you of reaching an FTA with say Korea and Malaysia this year? How are will you be working on that?
PM: The Minister for Trade is working very hard, particularly on the agreement with South Korea, but beyond that and very hard in international trade talks too. We have led a new and innovative approach to trying to break the deadlock in the Doha Round and it's not easy, it ain't easy. But Dr Emerson has done a very good job in trying to bring like mindeds together, people who are prepared to engage in some change and push forward for change. So we will be continuing to work on free trade agreements.
We do that because it's in Australia's interests as a great trading nation to see our products, our services, get into more markets and to do that with freer and freer access. We don't have anything to be afraid of when it comes to holding our heads up in the world as a great trading nation.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) this year?
PM: Look, I'm not going to make predictions about singing dates. I think you would be well aware that there have been political circumstances in the Republic of Korea around the free trade agreement with the US and that has had to be worked through, those difficulties with that free trade agreement in the political system there and that has had consequences for the continued negotiations on the Australia agreement. But we are continuing to negotiate.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on private health insurance, with the pokies legislation you didn't put Andrew Wilkie's plans to Parliament because the numbers weren't there. Are the numbers there for the private health insurance rebate means test and are you willing to make any further changes?
PM: Look, we obviously want to see these changes pass the Parliament and will continue to necessary discussions to get these changes to pass the Parliament. This is an incredibly simple fairness proposition  -  do you believe that working people, people who are in casual jobs, people who are perhaps an apprentice, struggling their way through low wages to get that all important ticket for their future, whether their taxes should be used to subsidise private health insurance for people who are much, much better off than they are. A very simple fairness proposition, a Labor fairness proposition and we will continue to press others in the Parliament to support that fairness proposition and obviously we are dismayed that the view of the Liberal Party and National Party is that a trade apprentice should be paying his or her taxes in order to subsidise the private health insurance of a millionaire.
JOURNALIST: Just on the economy, Prime Minister, if you are presented with a choice between saving jobs and protecting your surplus, what would you do?
And secondly do you this it was unkind of Rupert Murdoch to call Kevin Rudd delusional?
PM: Well we're not confronted with that choice in our current economic circumstances.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, let's be clear about our current economic circumstances and we'll deal with the facts and the circumstances as the present to us.
Of course the Government during its life dealt with economic circumstances where our nation literally confronted the possibility that the world could be moving into something like the Great Depression, and what we did then was we stepped up and supported jobs and we supported 2000 of them and we did that against resistance in this Parliament from our conservative opponents, day in, day out.
So no one should be under any illusions about how central supporting jobs is to me and to this Government. And we supported jobs in smart and sensible ways, including renewing the school infrastructure of this country, something that will count for the future, enabling teachers to teach differently today and at higher quality levels because they've got a more flexible capital stock.
So whenever we need to step up and support jobs, we step up and support jobs and we're doing it now in the car industry. But the economic circumstances that we face today are our economy is in growth, notwithstanding the events in Europe and the weakness in the US economy, our economy is in growth, because we're in the growth region of the world.
So what's the right set of decisions in that circumstance? Well, it's to support a budget surplus and show fiscal discipline. It's actually the right choice for the strength of our economy and if it's the right choice for the strength of our economy then it's the right choice for jobs.
Yes, Heather.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) last night with Mark Willesee you pointed out in one of your answers that you are Prime Minister. Why did you feel the need to do that?
PM: Oh, Heather, I had a discussion with Mike Willesee, I can't recall the form of the question, but obviously I thought with the form of the question that was the appropriate reply. Don't over read it, don't psychoanalyse it, you'd be wasting your time.
JOURNALIST: Should Fair Work Australia make public the findings of its inquiry into Craig Thomson and the HSU?
PM: Fair Work Australia is an independent body and it should act independently.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you accept that part of the problem for your Government is that you haven't sold the message well enough, and if you do what will you do about that, what will you do better this year?
PM: Mark, I'm in the business of getting things done. I'm in the business of making the big changes, the tough changes that set this nation up for the future. And yes in the moment they can be unpopular and yes in the moment they can be the subject of protest vote campaigns and that happened with our clean energy future package last year.
But as we move into this year and to the delivery of that package then the question will become: Do you want to seize a clean energy future, or do you want to snatch back tax cuts from working Australians? Do you want to go with the cheapest plan for change  -  our plan, or do you want to impose a bill of $1300 per year on working families to pay for a scheme that won't work and can't work?
Now we will keep out there explaining what the Government is doing and how it will set us up for the future, but the measure here ultimately is the benefits that it brings to the Australian people, not only today as we support jobs and ensure that families have got a package of services which they need to help them on the way through, but how we are setting up our country for the future.
Yes Michelle.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) any faults in selling, a number of backbenchers have made this point and a number of ministers have acknowledged that the Government needs to do better in explaining things. Do you acknowledge any fault on your part, or the Government's part?
PM: Look Michelle, we've hard work to do, not only in the continued making of change and the building of our new economy, but in explaining to working people, to people around the country, why we're making that change.
We live in complex times where people are still, I think, feeling the aftermath of a global financial crisis, the likes of which people had never seen in their lifetimes unless they were old enough to remember the Great Depression. Of course that weighs on people's minds, they look at Europe, they look at the US, they see the weakness in those economies and that weighs on people's minds. They turn on their TV screens and they can see one business that is engaging in redundancies, whist our mining sector cries out for more skilled workers and they want to understand who all of this adds up for them today and for them and their kids tomorrow.
Now that is the central economic message of the Government and what centrally this year is going to be about  -  explaining where we are, in a position of strength, but in a position of change, with a unique ability to leverage today's strength into tomorrow's strength if we're brave enough to take the hard decisions and to manage that change, to bend that change to our purposes for the future.
We are being invited by the other side of politics to stand still, to rip benefits off working families and to stop supporting jobs  -  we won't be doing it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned the depression there, I'm just wondering for a lot of Indigenous Australians out of work, long term unemployed, what's your message to them? Does your Closing the Gap report that's forthcoming, will that include good news for Indigenous Australians looking for a job?
PM: Well the Closing the Gap report will be a factual stock take of the differences that our policies have made to close the gap for Indigenous Australians. We said when we embarked on this strategy that we thought it was appropriate that there be an annual statement to the Parliament so every Australian could benchmark and see where we were.
We also said that these are very complex problems and if you're going to do things like change gaps in life expectancy, gaps in educational outcomes, therefore gaps in employment outcomes of Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia it would take time and persistence. But I do believe as we look around the country we are seeing some really remarkable and very heart-warming changes. We've seen our big businesses, corporate Australia, step up like never before in my view to work with Indigenous Australians for employment prospects and for change.
That's all good signs, but I don't underestimate the complexity of the challenge here and neither should anyone else.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you once urged journalists not to write crap. An awful lot has been written about leadership tensions, are there any tensions or are people writing crap?
PM: I would have to check what everybody's New Year's resolution is after my wise words from last year.
Yes, anything else?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when was the last time you spoke with Kevin Rudd and have you got an assurance of his support?
PM: Look, I deal with Kevin Rudd frequently in this capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs. On everything else I'll leave you to your fevered speculation which doesn't need any facts or any commentary from me for it to continue.
Thanks very much. 



The Australian Government has today pledged up to $5 million to The Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Trust, as part of Australia's commemoration of the Diamond Jubilee.
The Prime Minister has written to the Premiers and Chief Ministers encouraging them collectively to match the Commonwealth's contribution.
The Prime Minister will also appoint an eminent Australian to spearhead private sector fundraising for the Trust.
The Trust, which was announced by UK Prime Minister Cameron at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Perth in October 2011, was launched officially in the UK on 6 February.
Through its grant-making activities, the Trust will create an enduring tribute to Her Majesty The Queen by supporting charitable projects and organisations across the Commonwealth.
The Trust is chaired by former UK Prime Minister Sir John Major. Sir John has said the Trust will place great emphasis on enriching the lives of individuals, by focusing on areas such as the tackling of curable disease the promotion of all forms of education and culture. 
Australia's contribution to the Trust will go to development-related projects that will create a lasting legacy in honour of Her Majesty The Queen's Diamond Jubilee.
The Trust will undertake fund-raising activities through 2012 and is not expected to begin disbursement of funds until 2013.
The Government will also recognise the Diamond Jubilee in other ways:
 * 	The Prime Minister will light a Jubilee Beacon on Parliament House on 4 June.
 * 	Australia Post will issue a Jubilee stamp.
 * 	The Royal Mint will issue a Jubilee coin.
 * 	An east-west road in the Parliamentary Zone will be renamed “Queen Elizabeth Terrace”.
 * 	A scholarship will be established focused on women's leadership.
 * 	A Jubilee essay competition will be staged.
Their Royal Highnesses The Prince of Wales and The Duchess of Cornwall will visit Australia later this year as part of the Diamond Jubilee celebrations.
The Governor-General will also visit London in June to coincide with the major celebrations in the United Kingdom. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that clean-up and recovery grants of up to $25,000 will be provided to communities in Queensland inundated by recent floods.
Primary producers, small businesses and not-for-profit organisations in the local government areas (LGAs) of Balonne, Barcaldine, Blackall-Tambo, Maranoa, Murweh and Paroo will be eligible for the grants of up to $25,000.
This is in addition to emergency assistance provided to families and individuals in Balonne, Barcaldine, Blackall-Tambo, Central Highlands, Murweh, Maranoa Shires, previously announced by the Prime Minister.
The grants and other emergency assistance will be jointly funded by the Australian and Queensland governments under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
In addition to this NDRRA assistance, the Prime Minister yesterday announced that the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) of $1000 per adult and $400 per child has been made available through Centrelink to eligible people who have been impacted by flooding in disaster declared areas.
In Queensland, these areas include the shires of Balonne, Barcaldine, Blackall Tambo, Maranoa, Murweh and Paroo.
The Prime Minister acknowledged that many flood affected regions have only partially recovered from the previous flood events of 2011 and 2010, and that prompt financial assistance is required to help communities get back on their feet.
The grants also recognise the important role that small businesses, primary producers and not-for-profits play in delivering services and supporting community recovery following a disaster.
The Prime Minister also announced that the Australian Government would provide $2 million to the Queensland Premier's Disaster Relief Appeal, matching the state government's contribution.
The Australian Government is committed to assisting the people of Queensland to get back on their feet.  The Government stood by Queenslanders in their efforts to respond to last summer's devastating events, and it will do so again.
The Australian Government continues to work closely with the Queensland Government to deliver assistance to flood affected communities.
More information about disaster grants and assistance, including advice on how to apply, is available from the Disaster Assist website at www.disasterassist.gov.au.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that clean-up and recovery grants of up to $15,000 will be provided to communities in New South Wales inundated by recent floods.
Eligible primary producers and small businesses in the local government areas (LGAs) of Moree, Narrabri and Gwydir will have access to grants of up to $15,000.
The grants will be jointly funded by the Australian and NSW governments under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
This is in addition to the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) of $1000 per adult and $400 per child that will be made available through Centrelink to people who have been impacted by flooding in those areas.
The grants recognise the important role that small businesses and primary producers play in delivering services and supporting community recovery following a disaster.
The Australian Government continues to work closely with the NSW Government to deliver assistance to flood affected communities.
More information about disaster grants and assistance, including advice on how to apply, is available from the Disaster Assist website at www.disasterassist.gov.au.  



Australians in rural and remote areas are a step closer to fast and affordable broadband services with the announcement today of a $620 million agreement to design and build two satellites to deliver high speed broadband.
The two satellites will deliver, along with the fixed wireless and fibre networks of the National Broadband Network (NBN), universal broadband coverage across the entire Australian continent, and its external territories for the first time.
This will ensure high speed broadband is delivered to Australia's remotest towns, such as Calvert in the Northern Territory and Bandya in Western Australia.
NBN Co has signed a contract with US company Space Systems/Loral for the delivery of the two, next-generation, Ka-band satellites and associated tracking, telemetry and control systems, worth approximately $620 million.
Using these satellites, people in remote communities will be able to consult with medical specialists anywhere in Australia by videolink. Students in the bush will be able to have a dramatically improved education experience by being able to draw upon the latest content-rich, high bandwidth digital resources from anywhere in the world.
This will help bridge the digital divide between urban and regional communities.
The two new satellites will be launched separately in 2015.
In conjunction with the fibre and fixed-wireless networks, the satellites mean that when completed, NBN Co will be able to offer peak speeds of 12 megabit per second download / 1 megabit per second upload, at uniform national wholesale prices, to every home and business in Australia.
This will deliver a step-change in performance for satellite users, both in terms of speed and reliability, compared with existing satellite services. 
The existing copper network will continue to be available in the areas outside NBN Co's fibre footprint. That means the Universal Service Obligation, including the availability of a fixed-line voice service, will continue to be provided.
The contract to build the satellites follows a comprehensive, two-year procurement process undertaken by NBN Co.
The contract is part of a total investment of approximately $2 billion over 15 years that is required to deliver the NBN Long Term Satellite Service. Other agreements will cover the ground segment, end-user equipment and the launch vehicles.
The Long-Term Satellite Service will build on the Interim Satellite Service, which was launched on 1 July, 2011, and is today providing access to enhanced broadband for Australians in rural and remote areas.
Further information is available on the NBN Co website at http://www.nbnco.com.au



PM: I'm here with Ministers Crean and Conroy and can I start by apologising for the delay in starting today's press conference, I was delayed and then we've been a bit chatting too about the announcement today.
We are working to build Australia's new economy. It's got to be an economy that is based on new skills, new innovation and diversity for the future.
Our economy is facing a number of challenges. It is very strong in the world, indeed our economy is the envy of a lot of the world, but times are changing. We're seeing global economic weight shift to our region, we're seeing the challenges of keeping up with new technology, we're seeing the challenges of keeping up with higher and higher skill levels. Of course we're getting ready for a clean energy future.
All of that means that we are seeing structural changes in our economy and we've got to be meeting those structural changes with a plan to have an economy for the future that will offer people the benefits of jobs and opportunity.
So this morning I'm here to talk about two things. First the role of manufacturing and the car industry in that future economy. Today I've met with car workers from around the country, they're understandably concerned about their jobs. They represent 46,000 Australians who work in car manufacturing, with another 200,000 Australians reliant on car manufacturing being an industry in Australia.
Can manufacturing needs to be part of our future and part of our new economy, because it does have, at its forefront, design and innovation skills which are important not only to car manufacturing, but to the rest of manufacturing.
I received today from those workers a petition signed by more than 5,000 who are concerned about the future of car manufacturing. We are going to be working with them to make sure that we are a nation that continues to be home to car manufacturing.
Now there will be continued change and the workers I've met with this morning have already lived through many rounds of change in the car industry. There will be changes in the future, not every job can be guaranteed, but we will be working hard to make sure that we are manufacturing cars in this country.
And, given the lead times on which investment decisions are made, given the need for certainty, it was understandable that the workers that visited here today are bitterly disappointed by the attitude of Mr Abbott and the Opposition who do not have a commitment to manufacturing cars in this country and are determined to slash half a billion dollars of industry assistance and to give the industry no certainty for the future.
Well unlike Mr Abbott we believe that the economy should be run in the interest of working people, that we should have a diverse economy for the future, that manufacturing should take its part and that the car industry needs to be part of that.
As we're building the new economy for the future we've got to make sure we've got the best of technology. There's no point asking our businesses and industries to compete if they're using yesterday's tools. Everybody, I think, would very intuitively understand that if we were a nation with no mobile phones, then that would be dragging our businesses behind, because the rest of the world has the benefits of that technology.
Well we need to make sure we're not behind the standards of the world and that's what rolling out the National Broadband Network is about  -  other nations will have this technology. We cannot ask the 100 year old copper wire network to keep our place in the future. It won't help us keep up with the standards of the world, we need the NBN.
Today we are making an announcement about how the NBN will benefit those who live in the remotest parts of our nation. Of course Australians are looking forward to fibre coming to their homes, but for those Australians who live in our remotest parts, we need another solution, which is why I'm pleased to be here today with my ministerial colleagues and with representatives of NBN to announce that NBN Co has reached agreement to have two satellites which will provide broadband services to those who live in the remotest parts of the country.
It will enable them to get information, get it at speeds that are faster now than many parts of our cities in Australia. It will give them access to technology in the way that other Australians are getting better access to technology. A different approach, but better access to the way that the world will work in the future.
That means that as we move to building the new economy of the future, creating the services that people need, we won't be leaving those Australians who live in the remotest parts of the nation behind.
I'll turn now to Minister Conroy for the details.
MINISTER CONROY: Thank you, Prime Minister. Today's announcement is a very significant one in the history of telecommunications in this country. I'm pleased to announce that Space Systems/Loral have been awarded this important contract by NBN Co.
The satellites will be built in California, in the United States, and will both be launched about six months apart in 2015.
These two KA band satellites, featuring the most advanced technology, satellite technology available anywhere in the world. They will provide a dedicated broadband service for the most remote three per cent of premises in Australia.
The satellites will have the capacity to serve 200,000 homes and businesses in rural and remote parts of the country and they will bring these premises an affordable world class broadband connection.
Now, let me be clear. It is a cross-subsidy built into the NBN that makes this affordable world class broadband connection possible. It ensures remote families and businesses pay the same entry level wholesale price for services as people in the cities.
Let me outline what we've already done as a government to bridge the digital divide in regional Australia.
We've launched, already, an interim satellite service last year to improve broadband services in underserved parts of the country.
There are now 2300 Australian homes and businesses connected to that service.
We've signed a $1.1 billion agreement with Ericsson to build a fixed wireless network in rural parts of the country and construction of this is underway and due to be completed by 2015 and the first customers should be in about the middle of this year.
We've delivered 6000 kilometres of fibre optic backhaul under the Regional Backbone Blackspots program and this will promote broadband competition in regional areas.
These satellites will allow remote communities to consult medical specialists anywhere in Australia, by videoconference. They will allow students in the bush to draw on content-rich, high-bandwidth digital resources from around the world.
And using these satellites rural businesses can more easily expand into markets nationally and internationally.
With the NBN's fixed and fibre wireless networks, these satellites will deliver a ubiquitous broadband service to the entire nation.
I just want to pass over to Simon Crean to say a few words also.
MINISTER CREAN: Thanks Stephen, thanks Prime Minister.
Obviously as Regional Development Minister this is a really important initiative from our perspective.
Everywhere I travel in the regions, they get the need to embrace the diversification of the Australian economy. One of the vital ingredients they need to help them in that diversification path is access to broadband.
And we made the commitment when we made the announcement that the seven per cent that wouldn't be connected from fibre to the home would be through alternate technology that gave much faster speed.
Four per cent of that, of the seven, is coming from connection, the other three per cent from this new satellite launch.
I've also seen when I've gone around the regions those who are already getting access to broadband  -  and the amazing opportunities they're taking from it.
Those who want to look at it, go to the Launceston General Hospital  -  which we built, where they are making health services available to their outlying regions.
If you want to see what they're doing at the University of Central Queensland go and see where the dual campus opportunities are delivering the skill needs creatively through that education precinct.
And if you want to see what the e-commerce opportunities are, go up to Armidale, where a digital photography company has been able to base its operations in regional Australia, because the speed it gets now enables it to upload and download  -  but the new speed it will get, they have huge expansion plans for their businesses.
This is why Governments have got to invest in the infrastructure, that's why this infrastructure is one of the most vital the country has made, it's why we're committed to it and this is just another brick in the foundation for the diversification of this economy.
PM: Thank you, we'll take questions. Yes, Phil.
JOURNALIST: With this announcement you've made today, when in 2015 will the satellites be launched and you say that they're going to be built in California, there's obviously a lot at the moment of focus on Australian jobs, is this something that we just are incapable of building in Australia, is the technology overseas? And thirdly I wonder if you could clear up this point, there's been a bit of speculation around what the satellites going to be called. I notice that some people are calling them B1 and B2 and others are suggesting they should be named after the two Prime Ministers that have seen the NBN, Kevin and Julia. Is that what you're going to do?
PM: We haven't named the satellites.
MINISTER CONROY: We haven't given any consideration to the names.
PM: We could run a competition maybe.
MINISTER CONROY: Yes, we might run a competition. But in terms - I did see a report suggesting that Australians companies had missed out. There are only five companies in the world that can build these satellites, I think three in the US and two in Europe. There are no Australian satellite manufacturers and the company that was discussing this in the papers today, they purchase their satellites from overseas because there is no Australian satellite manufacturer. So I want to be very clear about that.
In terms of the timing, it's the first quarter of 2015 for the first and six months later for the second satellite.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry, what was that?
JOURNALIST: How many bidders were there?
PM: How many bidders?
QUIGLEY: That's actually commercial in confidence. We don't talk about those. We had multiple bidders. There was more than one, of course, and we came to a shortlist of two bidders, in the end, out of a larger field and it was a very thorough process as the president of SSL can attest. We spent a lot of time, put a lot of work into this.
JOURNALIST: What's commercial in confidence about answering a question of how many bidders there were?
QUIGLEY: Because we simply don't talk about unsuccessful bidders. We just say there was-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
QUIGLEY: Yes, well, if you - what the Minister said, how many satellite manufacturers there are in the world, there's five.
PM: OK, Lenore.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you entered into a new co-investment bill with Holden or another one of the car makers, will the money come from existing programs or will it be new funding and if it's existing programs what programs will it come from?
PM: It will come from the $5.4 billion New Car Plan. We made allocations a long time back now as a Government to make sure that we could keep working with the car industry and co-investing and that's because we understood the importance of car manufacturing to skills and innovation in our country.
I was recently at Boeing, the robotics they use as robotics that is used in the car industry, workers I met there got their skill sets from working in the car industry, that just shows you how important it is to the whole of manufacturing that you can get that technology and those skills then used to make planes and to compete in the world for making components of the new Dreamliner aircraft.
So it will come out of the $5.4 billion New Car Plan. That's a very stark contrast to the approach we've got on the other side of politics, which is to take half a billion dollars away as a direct cut and then to give no commitment and no certainty beyond 2015.
So out attitude is and will remain that you've got to be running your economy for a purpose and the purpose is to serve the needs of working people, so they can have jobs, they can have opportunity, they can have prosperity. We're determined to do that today and we're determined to do it tomorrow as well.
And we've got to do that in the future, by making sure our economy is ready for that future. You can't stand still. You can't pretend that the new technology isn't being rolled out in the rest of the world. You can't pretend that the climate change challenge is going to go away and that you don't need to move to a clean energy future.
You can't pretend that we don't need higher and higher skill sets. You can't pretend that there's not a major structural change underway in our economy, which means we need to take specials steps to make sure it's a diverse economy, with many centres of strength as we go into the future.
I'll go to Phil Coorey and then come to the back. Yes.
JOURNALIST: The announcement by Alcoa this morning to review its future at Geelong, the high import costs and high dollar and other reasons they've given. The Coalition is saying the last thing these sorts of people need on top of those sorts of pressures is a carbon tax. Could I get a response to that?
PM: Certainly. We never want to see people put through the pain of losing their jobs. There'd be some working people who are very distressed today to hear this news and obviously we're thinking of them.
The CEO of the company has made it absolutely clear that this is not about carbon pricing but about other pressures on the business including the high Australian dollar. And so I would say to you and say it very loudly and clearly: I think it is disgusting that the Opposition takes the approach of using the potential job losses of hard working Australians as grist to its mill for its fear campaign. I think that is the wrong thing to do.
I did promise up the back. We'll go here.
Lenore?
JOURNALIST: Given all of those pressures on manufacturers and on companies like Alcoa, are you still confident you've got the carbon tax starting price right?
PM: Yes we are confident in the design of the carbon price and we're confident that it's going to be the cheapest way to take us to a clean energy future. So let's be very clear about what's happening with clean energy around the world. Nations are moving to a clean energy future.
We actually had a breakthrough at Durban where nations said that they would enter legally binding agreements. Now we are working through that globally but nations are on the move.
We've got a high carbon intensive economy. We've got a big journey of change to walk.
So either you can pretend none of that's happening, you can stand still and you can try and cater for the economic shock in the future when it comes or you can take the cheapest approach to getting change and that's what we've done with carbon pricing, we're very confident in the design of the scheme.
Yes, at the back.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, sporting codes are quite concerned about the state of copyright law at the moment because of the Optus TV case and I think you're aware of this. Do you see any argument for some Government action to increase the certainty around copyright law at the moment and Senator Conroy I'd be interested in your thoughts on that as well.
PM: OK, look I'll go to Stephen in a second but yes, I've had discussions directly and personally with representatives of the major sporting codes and the relevant Ministers including Stephen, the Attorney General and the Minister for Sport  -  met with them yesterday.
They are working out their own approach to the legal case that has created these circumstances. They do of course have the option of an appeal and using appeal rights. The running of the legal case is a matter for them. What's a matter for us is considering whether or not there needs to be changes to the copyright laws in view of these circumstances.
We have said to them, and I'm very happy to say publicly, that we will urgently consider options here. I think we're all concerned about what this can mean for our great sporting codes and it was an unexpected development.
I'll go to Stephen for some comments.
MINISTER CONROY: Look, we're getting full consultations with them at the moment. We're meeting with the legal teams from them, getting briefings from them. Obviously, Optus are keen to talk to us as well.
So we're in the process of getting all the information, all the legal advice. There are, as has been touted, possible solutions from the perspective of the sporting bodies. We've said we'll consider them but we'll be going through a process to ensure that if any change is to be made, that we would consider any adverse consequences.
But at this stage, we are just getting the legal advice fully explained to us, and we're happy to consider if a solution is available.
But digital technology is marching on. The whole purpose, as you know, of a Convergence Review is to try and consider the broader framework of what's happening.
I mean, you can go into JB Hi-Fi right now for between $150 and $200 and buy a television receiver - no screen, which with the download of an app onto your iPad broadcasts the free-to-air signal from this box straight onto the iPad screen. No recording involved. That's available in the marketplace today.
PM: We'll go to the back and then Dennis.
JOURNALIST: The community of Papunya which is home to the Great Western Desert movement has a classroom that only accesses the internet once a day for 20 minutes a day shared with 150 people in that centre. Now under the NBN roll out Casuarina and Darwin have been identified. What measures  -  how can you fast track this and what do you actually think  about that in terms of how will this announcement impact on that?
MINISTER CONROY: Well, I think the sort of satellite services that are available in remote Australia today are fairly average, and that would be a kind description.
The sort of service you're going to see here matches what many Australians in capital cities get today.
Our interim satellite solution, I would be interested in talking with that community about whether they've looked at accessing our interim satellite solution -
JOURNALIST: - They can't under your program because they already have one that's quite obsolete, but because of what -
PM: I don't think that's a correct description of the way our program works and we're happy to look at the specific circumstances of this individual school.
MINISTER CONROY: Happy to catch up and talk with the community about that. But the way the system works, if you've got an existing satellite system that's been put in place for the last three years, you're just at the back of the list.
But if - once that three years ticks over and if it's as obsolete as it sounds like, the three years will have ticked over, they are potentially eligible to apply for it, but happy to sit down. Where's Andrew from my office? Right behind you. If you - if that community wants to get in touch with Andrew, we can work out what the possibilities for them are.
But the satellite service that this announcement covers will see a quantum, a leap in improvement in services for the most remotest communities.
JOURNALIST: Just following on from Jeremy's question, can you give us an idea of the geographic footprint of this new satellite system. You've mentioned the extra external territories and the 200,000 premises. Where are most of those 200,000 premises  -  is there a (inaudible) in central Australia?
MINISTER CONROY: No, the remotest three per cent of Australian premises. If you were to do a map, we usually go the red dots on the map, and apologises for those who haven't seen the map I'm talking about - Dennis, I think you might have - the red dots are fibre covering, obviously, 93 per cent in total of Australian population. The grey areas around the red dots - and again, apologies for the description - cover the next four per cent. And the remaining three per cent. So, it's everyone outside those two footprints. You can look it up on the NBN website and you'll see that it's the - the footprint is everywhere other than those areas.
Now, if there's individual circumstances where people can't get fibre because there's some geological reason or they can't get their wireless because of line of sight, then, potentially, they can access but they ought be able to make that case.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
STEPHEN CONROY: No, if you're inside the fibre footprint and your home is going to be connected to fibre, you aren't able to take advantage.
The reason we can deliver - and this is really important, particularly for - not just for cross-subsidy issue, the reason we can deliver the quality of service, the download and upload speeds we are talking about here is because we're restricting the number of people who are using it.
If you were to announce - if you were the Coalition, who keep talking about this, to announce that you wanted, say, 25 per cent of Australia to be on a wireless and satellite footprint, you would collapse this satellite. This satellite could not deliver these services for these prices and speed. So, it's very, very important people understand this.
You cannot deliver the quality of service if you were to suddenly pile half a million Australians onto the wireless and satellite networks that they're not configured for.
PM: Right I think we may be in the territory where the old saying ‘a picture is worth more than a thousand words' is right on the money. So there's a map coming to you Dennis. We'll come to the front in a second. Paul Bongiorno?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your political opponents say the NBN is an extravagant use of taxpayers money.  These satellites come on line 2015, that's beyond the next election. Have you Abbott-proofed them and is this $620 million an extravagant use of taxpayers money? Wouldn't it have been better if maybe Telstra or someone else did this?
PM: Well there's nothing we can do to stop Mr Abbott destroying the Australian economy if he's Prime Minister. So if he is Prime Minister what we will see on his words today is no budget surplus delivered for five years. What we will see if he's Prime Minister is the end of the car industry. What we will see if he's Prime Minister is the ripping out of the fibre out of the ground and Australia falling behind the standards of the world on this technology. What we will see if he's Prime Minister is cutbacks to education and to skills which mean that we on the skills race fall behind the standards of the world. And of course we don't know where the $70 billion of cutbacks to the services working families need are going to fall. But there's only so many places in the budget you can get huge money like that  -  cutting pensions, cutting Medicare, to take just two examples.
So if Mr Abbott's Prime Minister there's nothing that stops that happening  -  that's his plan.
Yes, Michelle.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) out, surely?
PM: Well you know, contracts and honouring them don't figure very highly in the rhetoric of the Opposition so let's not make any assumptions about the degree of destruction that would come.
MINISTER CONROY: Why on earth would you want to deny the most remotest Australians access to world-class broadband?
Because if you were to cancel that contract, that's what you'd be doing. You'd be denying them the best possible broadband service that can be delivered in the foreseeable future. So, that's the stark choice. Cancel the contract and deny those people in the most remotest areas of Australia. And the quality of service, and you suggested the Telstra model - well, we've seen - we've had 25 years and recently 15 years of subsidised Telstra and it hasn't upgraded. The very reason the National Broadband Network has been put in place is to create the structural separation which has held back the Australian telecommunications sector and you get the capacity to have a wholesale only network where everyone can compete.
So, just the model of subsidising Telstra to go and provide services hasn't delivered for regional and rural Australians.
JOURNALIST: But what is the status of the contract? Can you get out of it at all? You haven't answered that question whether  - 
MINISTER CONROY: It's a legally binding contract, we won't cancel it.
JOURNALIST: Yes, but there are always get out clauses.
PM: Andrew the point we're obviously making here  -  this is a legally binding contract. Do we know whether Tony Abbott will take the reckless approach of tearing it up and seeing what the courts might decide following that? No, of course we don't.
We do know, of course, that Mr Abbott's plans for the economy are reckless. I mean, shovelling money at some of the most profitable mining companies in the world and ripping money off other businesses  -  part of his plan.
Shovelling money into the hands of some of the businesses that generate the most carbon pollution and ripping it out of the hands of taxpayers and pensioners  -  part of his plans. Would he take his risk in the courts? Well only he can answer that for you.
Michelle?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, you mentioned the Opposition and the budget surplus, if you were reelected would you guarantee that your government would run a budget surplus in or through the next term, I'm not talking about this budget-
PM: Our commitments here are obvious. They're commitments about running budget surpluses over the economic cycle and of course that would be our commitment. In terms of who's doing what on the surplus Michelle, let's be very clear about what's happening today, rather than think you need to war game into the future.
Today it's all crystal clear and right in front of your nose. Today I can say on behalf of the Government we are determined to deliver a budget surplus in 2012-13 and we will.
Mr Abbott, on his words today, has endorsed the words of his finance minister which mean that they will not commit to a budget surplus in the next five years.
Matthew Franklin.
JOURNALIST: A moment ago you just attacked Tony Abbott for hitting taxpayers and businesses so he can shovel money in some of the biggest companies in the world. Isn't that what you're doing with the car industry and during most of our adult lives here we've heard Governments  -  taxpayers being asked to fund the car industry for the reasons which are fair reasons that you put forward before. But to what evidence can you point that says that the car industry is doing anything more than just sitting there taking the dough? What are they doing to get to a point where we don't have to pay for them anymore?
PM: Well I think you're completely - that's a completely ridiculous comparison, to be frank. My comments about Mr Abbott's approach to the mining industry are that we are enacting the Minerals Resource Rent Tax to take a fairer share of taxation when mining companies are highly profitable and to use that money to help diversify our economy by giving small businesses a tax break, other businesses a tax break and of course by backing in what Government needs to do to see an increase in superannuation for working Australians, better retirement for them, better pool of national savings for the nation.
What Mr Abbott wants to do  -  get rid of all of that and give some of the most profitable mining companies in the world back more of their profits. That's what my statement went to.
On the car industry, the decision you make there is: is it in the nation's interest to have these skills and technologies available in our supply chain and in our manufacturing sector. That's the prism, you look at it and say ‘are we getting benefits for that  -  national benefits for that'? I say we are getting those national benefits. It's 46,000 direct jobs but the benefits are far more than that. There's 200,000 jobs that rely in part on the car industry being there but the manufacturing sector obviously works together and the skills and capacities and innovations here make a difference for the rest of it.
Mr Abbott is taking the approach of saying ‘well, cut that out  -  the car industry  -  chuck that overboard, 46,000 jobs', big consequences for 200,000 other jobs and whatever happens to the rest of it, the one million people who work in manufacturing, we'll just let that happen too. That's why it's an irresponsible approach. It's not in the interests of working people and it's not in the interests of the future of our economy for our economy to be hollowed out so that we've got strong resources but nothing else.
Mark Riley.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott apparently told the Coalition party room yesterday that you were in your political death throes and that the only thing that stands between the Coalition and Government now is themselves. Do you think he's getting a bit cocky?
PM: Look, I'll allow Mr Abbott to answer for his words. My focus is on plans for the economy now and the economy tomorrow. I think Mr Abbott should answer some questions about them.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what is your message to the banks considering jacking up their mortgage rates sometime towards the end of the week? Are they justified in doing that and what should bank customers do?
PM: First I'd note banks haven't announced any decisions at this stage.
Second, I'd say I understand that people get angry with their banks if they don't see proper treatment and fair treatment flowing through to them and we as a Government have made it easier than it has ever been before to take your business, walk down the road and get a different deal.
Yes, Karen?
JOURNALIST: Just back to Matthew's question. Are you saying that there's no obligation on the car industry to become efficient and to not require a subsidy in the future?
PM: Absolutely not, absolutely not.
JOURNALIST: Well what are they doing?
PM: Well Karen I'll answer your question by saying you completely misunderstand everything we've done in the car industry to date. At every step of the way, as we have co-invested with the car industry we have put requirements on them for continued investment by the car companies themselves, things like the manufacture of new lines of cars here in Australia with all of the jobs and all of the skills and all of the innovation that's come with that. That's been our track record, that will be our future.
JOURNALIST: Can you see a time when you won't need to co-invest, when they won't need Government money?
PM: Well you're, I think, got a wrong view of what the car industry's about and what subsidising it's about. There's a lot of lazy talk in the newspapers and beyond about the car industry somehow being an old industry that should sunset and it can't be part of the future. Well I'd say to anybody who's got that view, take yourself and go and walk around a car manufacturing plant and see the state of the art technology being used and state of the art skills being used. In terms of Government support, the Government support is there as a co-investment to keep car manufacturing here in a world where other Governments provide co-investment too.
The economic decision for Government is about whether that is worthwhile not only in terms of direct jobs but the supply chain and the skills and capacities and innovation that comes with it for the rest of manufacturing.
Chris?
JOURNALIST: Will the investment that you are making that those jobs will stay and that the industry will stay?
PM: I said at my outset of the remarks that I made today  -  we can't guarantee no change in car manufacturing. I said that to the workers that I've met with a little bit earlier. We can't guarantee every job.
What we can guarantee is that we are working hard to keep car making in this country. The lack of certainty about its future is coming from the Opposition benches.
Thanks very much. 



HOST: Julia Gillard welcome.
PM: Thank you Chris.
HOST: Prime Minister, if you're such a good economic manager, why don't you get more credit for it?
PM: It's about getting the big things done that we need for our country's future, that's my focus Chris.
Look, we have come out of the global financial crisis strong, we acted to save jobs and we have created more than 700,000 jobs, that's a good thing.
In fact I think that possibly is an achievement that we do need to keep speaking about, because work is so important for people.
We know what it's like for families to lose the breadwinner and have the family devastated.
And if we look in global terms, I mean if you look at the American economy  -  we've created 700,000 jobs, they've lost six million. If they'd been creating jobs at the rate we've been creating them, they'd have created 15 million jobs in this period.
So we've come out strong, but we've got a lot more to do to build the economy we need for tomorrow.
HOST: And all of those things were true at the 2010 election and yet the electorate gave you a bare pass for that. Why is that?
PM: I think that this is an anxious age, people have seen the global financial crisis, the biggest economic-
HOST:-But if you saved them why aren't they grateful?
PM: Well, the biggest economic downturn since the Great Depression, I'm not surprised that that has made people feel anxious. And then they look at Europe and they see doom and gloom night after night, coming out of European meetings and European markets and the mouths of European leaders.
And I think that that does in the community mean people are thinking ‘Well, what does this all mean for us?' It's my job, it's the Government's job, to be explaining what it all means.
HOST: And have you failed at that job?
PM: Well, we'll keep doing that job and there's a lot of hard work in front of us to keep doing it and I'm very prepared to keep doing that hard work.
But the explanation of this not only needs to be about where we are now  -  which is strong in the world  -  but it needs to be about where we're going to in the future. What's the new economy going to look like, what are people going to do for jobs tomorrow, what skills will they need, what technology will they use?
And that's what we're concentrating on now.
HOST: Yeah, well let's talk about the new economy, which is you've been talking about a lot lately. Let's take a couple of elements of that, starting with the NBN. And yesterday you announced a $2 billion plan to build satellites, aren't we wasting a lot of money on the NBN? Why can't you lease existing space on satellites?
PM: Let's just look at the dollars for the NBN. For every dollar we put in on behalf of taxpayers, a dollar and seven cents will come back out, so that's the equation for the NBN.
And our nation will have the technology it needs to be productive in the future.
It's one of the big transformative changes Chris, it's like the railways, like the telephone line, the old copper line was in its day, like internal air flights in our country  -  I mean in the old days, if I can use that terminology, to get from Perth to Sydney was a nightmare, now of course we're used to domestic air travel. That's transformed business as much as its transformed the way families reunite and the way people go on holidays.
HOST: I'm not arguing that we don't want broadband.
PM: These are huge productivity enhancing measures, real enablers, and the NBN's the next one.
HOST: I understand that Prime Minister, I'm not arguing against it, I'm arguing though, could we get better value for money and it's that a question that people constantly raise about your government?
One of the problems perhaps you have in being seen as good economic manager, is the sense that this government wastes money and lots of it.
Could the NBN be done cheaper, why couldn't space be leased on satellites? Have you asked that question?
PM: Oh look, of course we've asked all questions and we have had every level of due diligence and reports and experts and advice, but it all comes down to this very simple proposition  -  do we think that we can have a prosperous economy in the future using yesterday's tools? Do we reckon we would have a prosperous economy today if we didn't have electricity, to take an example? Of course we wouldn't.
We've got to have electricity to make sure that Australian businesses run. Well the NBN is the next big thing that will enable productivity.
Nations in our region will have it, they'll be pushing information around that quickly through a National Broadband Network.
HOST: But you'll be the only nation that builds it this way.
PM: Well we've got to be keeping pace and I don't agree with your proposition. There is public investment in broadband in other countries apart from ours.
HOST: Entirely public owned.
PM: And do the maths, do the maths.
HOST: Can you name another country that is doing it precisely the same way that Australia's doing it, which is an entire government-
PM:-Oh look, we've got our own solution, but let's just compare Australia to other countries around the world.
Would it surprise you Chris that we've got a unique solution? We're a continent; we're huge, relatively small in population. The challenges of getting NBN here are different to Singapore, I mean heavens above of course they are.
And so we've had to tailor make a solution for our nation. But the question as you tailor that solution is ‘do you want to be left behind, or do you want to be able to have the kinds of technologies that other nations will in the future?'
We can build this, getting a return for taxpayers, with all of the productivity benefits that will come from having it. That's part of the new economy.
HOST: And you want a modern car industry, obviously you've said that you're going to spend money to do that. Why then did you cut $230 million from the Green Car Innovation Fund?
PM: We've got a $5.4 billion plan and we judged that that was the right size. So every dollar's got to work and every dollar's got to do the maximum amount of work we can make it do and we judge the plan is of the right size as it is now.
The debate here is between our New Car Plan, where we will keep co-investing with car industries to keep making cars in Australia, versus the plans on the other side of politics for cuts and the loss of car making jobs.
HOST: They'll still spend lots of money; they'll just spend less than you. And you decided at one point in time on a Green Car Innovation Fund that less was OK and perhaps the Coalition, if they're going to get the same outcome, spend the money more wisely.
PM: Well I think Chris you're misunderstanding the position of the Coalition and you're misunderstanding the needs of the car industry today.
HOST: (inaudible) Howard plan?
PM: Well let me just explain that, the Howard plan, precisely. Thank you for saying those words.
The opposition's got the Howard plan, half a billion dollar cut now is what they're saying and the Howard plan was for no more assistance after 2015. If the Howard plan is enacted today after the days of the GFC, with the Australian Dollar where it is now, Mr Howard was not Prime Minister with an Australian Dollar where is now, that is the death of the car industry.
That is what the opposition stands for.
HOST: So you're promising industry assistance forever. What happens if we continue to lose jobs, because you can't guarantee that we won't lose jobs, I mean even manufacturers in this industry, can you?
PM: Oh Chris, absolutely and I have been very clear about this. Car making will change, manufacturing will change.
The last thing I am doing is saying that I can hold the tide back when it comes to change. I'm in fact saying the complete reverse. I'm saying things are going to change. We've got to be in front of that change. We've got to shape that change and we've got to bend it for the interests of working people and our nation overall.
The car industry is important because it's another one of those enablers. The NBN  -  helps you do things, you can move information more quickly than ever before in human history.
The car industry also is an enabler, the skills in it, the innovation in it, doesn't just matter for car making, it matters for all of manufacturing. That's why it's so important.
HOST: Prime Minister, do you think that one of the problems that you have in convincing the Australian people of these things and that you are a good economy manager is because you have broken your word before.
You said that you wouldn't challenge Kevin Rudd and you did. You said there wouldn't be a carbon tax and there was and you signed this agreement with Andrew Wilkie that said that there would be mandatory precommitment and there won't be.
PM: Well Chris, I'm happy to go through all of those examples if you like, but I've answered those question a million times on the public record in the past and so I think we'd be better spending our time talking about what the economy is going to look like in the future. That's been the debate this week.
HOST: But isn't that a matter of trust too. One of the things that's most important, Prime Minister, is that the people trust him or her. Is there a trust issue?
PM: People can look at the debate that has been in Parliament this week, but you watch how we as a government, and I as a Prime Minister, have been laying forward our economic plans, doing things that we need to do to get our economy in the right place for the future.
You and I have had a conversation about NBN  -  that's one thing, that kind of productivity enhancing change. Of course skills is important too, how are people going to work in the future, what are the skills that they're going to need.
We are going to keep talking about what we need to do make our economy strong, but more importantly than talking about it Chris, we're going to be delivering it step by step, plan by plan, and people can judge us on that.
HOST: Prime Minister, why don't you just tell Kevin Rudd to stop briefing the media against you?
PM: Chris, I've dealt with all of these questions on the public record too and I really haven't got anything to add.
HOST: Why don't you just ask him to stop briefing journalists, because clearly he is? I know that you believe there's a lot of smoke there and no doubt there is, there's also a fire and it's pretty easy to see where it's coming from.
PM: Look Chris, I've dealt with this very comprehensively in many media engagements over the last week. It's not where my focus is, my focus is on whether Australians are going to have jobs, the quality of those jobs, the income they'll get from those jobs, the sense of job security, not which comes from having a job for life, because people won't have that, but knowing that they've got the skills and attributes and capacities that mean they can get the next job.
And the things that matter for Australian businesses-
HOST: -As this question rises again with Kevin Rudd, as it will, because it's not gone, it's just sleeping at the moment. Why don't you ask him to have a press conference and say he won't challenge?
PM: Chris, you can be endlessly fascinated by all of this. I'm endlessly fascinated about the prospects for our nation, our economy and for working people.
HOST: Prime Minister, are you going to ask the Fair Work Australia inquiry to simply do this: release the outcome in March when it's finished?
PM: It would be highly improper Chris and no I'm not. And I'm not going to ring up the Chief Justice of the High Court and ask the High Court to come out with a particular decision in a particular time. I'm not going to ring up the Police Commissioner and say ‘can you make sure you investigate a particular matter within a particular time'. I'm not going to ring up the independent industrial umpire and do that either, that would be grossly improper and it's grossly improper of the opposition to call for it.
HOST: Prime Minister, you've had a very strong opinion on the High Court and on a decision they made and you made it quite plain, you made it quite plain and people at the time said that that was perhaps inappropriate-
PM: -Chris, now you're being absurd and I'm not going to allow you to draw that analogy, because that is ridiculous. The High Court made a decision; of course it made a decision properly, independently, as the High Court does and as the High Court should.
I had some things to say about that decision after it was brought down. What I am being asked to do by the opposition is to ring up the industrial umpire, the independent industrial umpire, whilst they are dealing with a matter - not after they've dealt with it  -  whilst they're dealing with a matter and tell them what to do next. That's wrong and I won't do it and it's wrong for the opposition to ask for it.
HOST: Prime Minister, with the incident on Australia Day, which I know you will say again has been canvassed over and over, doesn't it show a problem in your office is that there's too much concentration on Tony Abbott and not enough concentration on governing?
PM: Chris, I was happy to spend all of this interview talking about the new economy and talking about the things we're doing, but Chris there is a choice in Australian politics. I've made some choices, the Government's made some choices and I think it is the right thing to do to point out the alternative.
I think as we go into 2012, where our focus so centrally has to be on keeping our economy strong now, but doing what we need to do today to make sure it's strong for working people in the future.
I think in that context it is fair enough to say to the Australian people  -  you've got a choice here, build for the future or endorse Tony Abbott and stand still.
You've got a choice here, run the economy in the interests of working people, or do what Mr Abbott's inviting you to do, which is run it in the interests of the few who are already privileged. I think it's fair enough to point out those choices.
HOST: You've been demanding this week that they guarantee a budget surplus. Can you guarantee a budget surplus?
PM: We're determined to deliver a surplus in 2012-13 Chris, and we will.
HOST: That's not a guarantee.
PM: I've just said and we will.
HOST: You will?
PM: And we will.
HOST: And if you don't what-
PM: -Look Chris, I don't know why we're splitting hairs about the English language here. I don't think I've said anything confusing. We're determined to deliver it and we will.
HOST: And if you don't, will that be a measure that your government can't do the things that it said it's going to do?
PM: Well Chris, why don't you watch the surplus come down and then you can ask me that question afterwards. Actually there'll be no need to.
HOST: OK, I'm sure we will. Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thanks Chris. 



The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet's Canberra headquarters was today named in honour of the Prime Minister who established the agency, the Right Honourable Andrew Fisher (1862-1928).
The naming of the building forms part of the Prime Minister and Cabinet's centenary celebrations.
The Prime Minister's Department, as it was then called, was formed in July 1911 in Melbourne before moving to Canberra in 1927 where it occupied a variety of offices before moving to its current home at One National Circuit Barton in 2007.
Today the department plays a central policy development and coordination role across government, realising Andrew Fisher's vision of an agency that would support the Prime Minister of the day.
The Prime Minister said the naming of the building was a fitting tribute to an inspiring individual who started work aged 10 as a coal miner, migrated to Australia and rose through the labour movement to lead our nation three times as Prime Minister from 1908-09, 1910-13 and 1914-15.
Prime Minister Fisher left a powerful legacy including the foundation of the Royal Australian Navy, the Commonwealth Bank, the transcontinental railway and the national capital in Canberra, along with measures to promote fairness including maternity allowances and workers' compensation for Commonwealth employees.
Mr Fisher was Prime Minister at the outbreak of World War One and famously pledged that Australia would defend Britain 'to our last man and our last shilling'.
He oversaw Australia's defence preparations until his retirement in October 1915. 



PM: I'm delighted to be here today at FRANS with Minister Macklin and also with Parliamentary Secretary Jan McLucas. We've come here today to Sydney, to Marrickville, to the electorate of Anthony Albanese, who has been with us this morning to talk to families about what it's like to have a member of their family who has a disability.
What kind of services make a difference, how hard it is get those services, what the challenges are with the fragmentation of services. Needing to go to different places and prove and reprove your level of need.
We've been talking about these things today because we're working to build a National Disability Insurance Scheme. It's not going to be built overnight. It will be a change as big as Medicare and it will make a difference for Australians around the country who live with disability or have a family member or friend who lives with disability. At the moment what you get depends on how you got your disability  -  did you get it at work, did you get it in a transport accident, were you born with it, did you get it in some other circumstances, not work, not in a motor car? Or is it something that is the result of getting a debilitating illness?
Depending on the answers to those questions you can get a good package of care, or you can be left really struggling. It really is a pretty bad lottery and too many people come out losers in that lottery. We've been investing to improve disability services and we're going to keep doing that, but ultimately we need to change the system so that all Australians, no matter how they acquire their disability can look forward to getting appropriate care and support and that there's one door that they open to then access the service and service providers that they need in their local community.
It's been good to have these discussions today. Clearly there's a lot of pain around, some frustration and all of that's really understandable. Now the families who live and love and care for people with disability do remarkable work and it can come at considerable cost to them personally and to other family members. We want to try and lift some of that burden.
Investing in a National Disability Insurance Scheme is the kind of change we can make if we keep our economy strong. We've been in Parliament all week talking about how important it is to make sure our economy is strong today and that we build the strength our economy will need tomorrow, when times have changed and challenges are different.
We've been doing that because we want to make sure our economy's strong now and into the future, but we want to do that for a purpose. A strong economy is not an end in its own right; a strong economy is what we need so that we can meet the needs of Australian families, that we can get them the supports that help them in times of trouble and one of those new supports needs to be a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
I'll turn now to Minister Macklin for some comments and then we'll take questions.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister, it is so good to be here today to be at such a service that is plainly so loved by the people who come here and by the families that depend on it. So to everybody here, can I say a huge congratulations. Today your work has been given the huge tick by the people that you care for so much.
We are here today to make sure that we listen to people, that we do the work that's necessary to design a National Disability Insurance Scheme. Today we heard that families and people with disability don't want the confused and difficult and multiple places to get access to disability services. They want a clear entry point, they want national standards that make sure that wherever they live they're going to get a decent service. They want to know that there won't be multiple times that they'll be assessed when their needs for disability services change.
That's what we're about, we're about developing these tools, doing the work that's necessary to get ready to launch this National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We do appreciate the opportunity to listen to people today, but in the meantime we have a lot of work to do, we intend to keep getting on with it because people in Australia have waited far too long for this change and this Labor Government is determined to deliver what people need.
PM: Righto, we're happy to take some questions.
OK, well we'll go and have morning tea. Right.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) issue a directive to your Cabinet for them not to speak to the editors of some newspapers?
PM: I've seen that story and I'm very happy to answer it. I'm not going to talk about what happens in Cabinet, but I am going to say this: as a government we're out and about every day explaining what we do to the Australian community and that's important. I want Australians to understand what we're doing today to manage the economy. I want them to understand our view and perspectives on the global economy. I want them to understand what we think about Europe and how it might have implications for our economy, but how strong our economy is.
I want them to understand our big reform projects like the National Disability Insurance Scheme. So, of course every day we're out explaining what the Government is doing to the community, today and tomorrow, what we're doing to build a stronger economy for tomorrow.
And we coordinate the explanation of that message, we always have and we always will and there's nothing new in that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you sure you've got the numbers to pass the means testing of the private health insurance rebate and have you got an iron clad guarantee from Rob Oakeshott (inaudible)?
PM: Well Mr Oakeshott will speak for himself I'm sure. As a government we are working hard to secure support for the passage of the changes to private health insurance and we're doing that because this is about fairness. I mean if you can imagine someone who's say a businessman who supports his family, maybe earning $300,000 a year, works pretty hard to do it I'm sure. But if you can imagine that businessman and you can imagine a young apprentice who's earning a few hundred dollars a week.
At the moment basically we ask that young apprentice to subsidise the private health insurance of that businessman and his family. Well I actually think if you've got the two of them together, the young apprentice and the businessman, and the young apprentice was getting his wallet out to give some dollars to that businessman, I think that businessman would probably say ‘mate, keep your money, I don't need it.'
That's the Australian kind of ethos, that's the Australian fair go and we think that that should be in private health insurance as well.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think that your team is coordinating their messages around-
PM: As we always have.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) your Government (inaudible). Presumably this gag on speaking to newspaper editors is because members of your team aren't coordinating (inaudible)?
PM: You misunderstand the situation. We're coordinating, as we always have and always will.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Alcoa's asked this morning for a bailout package along the same lines as the automotive industry. Will you consider such a package or other measures such as payroll tax concessions or carbon tax concessions for the company?
PM: Well payroll, of course, is in the domain of state governments and I know that Premier Baillieu in Victoria has had some discussions with Alcoa.
From the point of view of the Federal Government, first and foremost the situation at Alcoa is not about carbon pricing, they've made that absolutely clear. It's about the structural changes that are going on in our economy because of the structural changes that are going on the global economy.
Our dollar is very high. That's because we're in the right region of the world that's growing and we're selling a lot of resources to the region of the world we live in. That's makes our dollar strong.
Our dollar's also strong because we're increasingly viewed as a safe haven currency. Now that strength brings changes and it brings pressure on manufacturing industries, including in aluminium. So of course we'll keep working with all of manufacturing, including Alcoa. I want us to be a nation where we've got manufacturing jobs, that's why we're working hard against the opposition of the Liberal Party to keep the car industry in this country.
But no one should confuse this with the Opposition's fear campaign and Alcoa has made it crystal clear this is not about carbon pricing.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are the major impediments to the National Disability Insurance Scheme? Is it the tough choices you've got to make in the upcoming budgets, is it the design of the scheme itself, or is it the states are dragging the chain on it?
PM: I'll turn to Minister Macklin for some comments too, but taking it in order: we need Commonwealth State cooperation, we have to do this together. We provide funding into disability now together, there are things the Commonwealth does, things states do and we've been stepping up our level of investment.
As a government we've got a proud track record of investing more and more in disability. Indeed I think the last time I was in this state for a media conference was when I was announcing with Premier O'Farrell our $200 million investment into better supporting kids at school who have disabilities. So Commonwealth State, we've got to work together.
Then we've got to get the design right. This is an incredibly big thing to do. I mean if we take a comparable example  -  Medicare. Well we all kind of take it for granted now that you can go to the doctor, you can be bulk billed, or if you pay you can go to the Medicare office, get the rebate. But the design of Medicare, to get it right, took a considerable period of time. It didn't happen overnight. It's a big complex system, but in the lived experience for Australians it makes so much about their lives simpler.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme, in the design is going to be a big complex system, in the lived experience for Australians we want it to make their lives easier. But we've got to get the design right.
The Productivity Commission talks about things like launch sites, like testing it in various parts of the country to get a sense about design and whether or not we've got it right, so all of that work has to be done.
And we've coming off a basis where we don't even have across the nation at the moment, we're one country, but we don't even have a common assessment approach to what a disability is.
So even the kind of measuring sticks you would use, the rulers that you would use in this area, no one's designed them yet.
So that's why it's going to take some time. I'll turn to Minister Macklin. I'm going the wrong way again, Minister Macklin for some comments.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Just one additional point that I'd make to those that the Prime Minister has outlined  -  we're also fundamentally rethinking the way in which we will finance such a National Disability Insurance Scheme. At the moment we have many different schemes running differently in different states. We also have a charity model  -  a model that is based on rationing of very limited resources.
What we want to build is an insurance system that says ‘If you are born with a disability we will make sure that you get the care and support that you need over your lifetime. We will make sure that what you need is assessed at regular intervals, so that you're able to be as independent as you possibly can be, that you get the supports to be able to participate in our society as much as you possibly can.'
But this change in approach is absolutely fundamental. It hasn't been done before in Australia, it really requires a major rethink, we don't have any of the technical work done that the Prime Minister has just outlined, the assessment tools, the quality standards. All of these things need to be developed. We do want to have launch sites, we are doing the work to prepare for them, because we also know that we are going to have to test how this works in practice.
JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister said that there was some hard headed budget decisions that were required on expenditure in this area. Is this core Labor business, as opposed to others who might see it as an aspiration (inaudible)?
PM: I'm very happy to answer that question and what we are working to do as a Labor Government is to bring the budget to surplus because that's the right economic call for jobs and growth in our economy today.
Whilst we do the big things, like work on the design of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, on the other side of politics they're in a mess on both, on both the surplus and the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
I think the Leader of the Opposition today came out with the thirteenth position the opposition's had on bringing the budget to surplus. They're in a complete muddle and that's not surprising because they've got to find $70 billion worth of cuts to services families need before they even get to the starting line about talking about how to do a surplus.
And Mr Abbott has said that a National Disability Insurance Scheme is now parked behind their big muddle in their eyes.
Well we're very clear about what we're doing, whilst they're in that muddle, we will bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13, exactly as promised and we will be working on a National Disability Insurance Scheme as you've heard us talk about today.
Thank you very much. 



The Prime Minister today announced updated figures for emergency payments provided to those affected by the floods in NSW and Queensland.
The Australian Government is working closely with the Queensland and NSW Governments in this unfolding flood situation to make sure affected communities get any necessary Commonwealth assistance immediately.
As at the end of Friday 10 February more than 10,900 claims for the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment have been granted, worth over $12.96 million.
Of this, more than 4,100 claims were from Queensland, totalling around $4.89 million and more than 6,800 claims have been from NSW, worth over $8.07 million.
Over 16,000 calls have been received to the Australian Government Information Line of 180 22 66 since the payment was announced on 6 February. 
More than 850 claims were granted on that day the payment was first announced, the fastest turnaround of disaster payments in Australian history. 
The Australian Government is providing Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payments of $1000 per adult and $400 per child to people who have been impacted by flooding in Balonne, Barcaldine, Blackall-Tambo, Maranoa, Murweh and Paroo shires in Queensland and those in Moree, Narrabri and Gwydir in New South Wales.
Residents can apply online at www.humanservices.gov.auor call 180 22 66.
The Australian Government is also providing significant financial assistance under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) for 21 local government areas in NSW and 21 in Queensland declared as natural disaster areas.
Details of assistance can be found at www.disasterassist.gov.au
Speaking in St George in Queensland, the Prime Minister also announced that the Australian Government had this week advanced $1.9 billion to Queensland to assist in recovery from last year's natural disasters. 
This is part of our commitment to help Queensland rebuild from the natural disasters that took place last summer.
This week's payment means that the Australian Government has advanced a total of $4.1 billion to Queensland to assist in recovery from events including last year's floods and Cyclone Yasi. 
These further advance payments are evidence of our ongoing commitment to helping Queensland recover and rebuild. 



Thank you very much. It is a great pleasure to be here this morning with my ministerial colleagues Simon and Peter.
But there are more of us here than that - I'd like to particularly acknowledge my parliamentary colleague Dick Adams, who is with us. Dick is someone who learned to read in adult life and I think he is a terrific ambassador for our nation on what it means to become a reader when you are an adult. Thank you for being here Dick.
We're also joined by local members for the ACTGai Brodtmann and Andrew Leigh, by Kate Lundy, my Parliamentary Secretary.
We're joined to by Graeme Innes, the Disability Discrimination Commissioner, by Margaret Allen, Chair of the National Year of Reading Founding Partners, by William McInnes, who has spoken to you, by National Year of Reading Ambassadors and many other distinguished guests and friends.
Anne Marie  -  it's lovely to be back here.
Since I was here for the Literary Awards, the National Library has opened the blockbuster exhibition of treasures from the State Library of Berlin and a permanent gallery of our own literary treasures.
But really the greatest treasure of all is this National Library's wonderful staff and I know we've got some in numbers here with us this morning.
This is the home of books and reading for our nation and so it's always a delight to be here.
And I'm also delighted to be back here sharing a stage with Boori Monty Pryor, one of the winners of the Prime Minister's Literary Awards from 2011.
Boori is a great children's author.
And as an Indigenous Australian, his presence is also a reminder that story-telling has been part of life on this continent for millennia, and so today I honour the First Peoples of this land on which we meet with great warmth and friendship.
I also acknowledge Jennifer Byrne, who I think has got possibly the best gig on television, though I'd say potentially the second best gig is being David or Margaret on the movie show. How good a job would that be?
Margaret, you know I'm very envious of it, but I'm also very envious of Jennifer's job.
Jennifer is bringing reading to Australians in a new way through the power of TV.
Friends, we are all here for one reason and that's because we love books and we want all our fellow Australians to do the same.
Over the holidays, I was delighted to able to be able to immerse myself in a wide range of books.
I particularly loved being transported to the 1920s in the pages of Frank Moorhouse's Grand Days, a modern masterpiece.
I know for many Australians, getting to read a book means reading a Tim Winton or Peter Carey and we all share that sense of anticipation when a new one comes out. We just want to grab it.
It also means reading or re-reading classics like Jane Austen or Charles Dickens, and if you want a tip, if you ever want a conversation on Austen, Tanya Plibersek is your woman.
For others it is contemporary writing, or maybe it's a great magazine like The Big Issue, and I've been able to pick up a copy today. The Big Issue doing so much for social justice and social inclusion.
Of course the way we read varies too, for some it means Braille or audio books.
It could be a tablet  -  but I'd have to say given I have my Cabinet documents on an iPad, I don't read for pleasure using one. I like the book, it enables you to read it in the bath, I'm always worried about taking the iPad anywhere near the water and you also have that delicious sense when you finished it that it's telling the story of your reading through the pages, particularly through splashed pieces of mango and the like over summer.
So I like to have a book as an artefact, but it doesn't really matter how you read, it just matters that we do.
I want Australia to be many things: a prosperous nation, an innovative nation, but I certainly want us to be a reading nation.
It's true we have a strong record of buying and borrowing books in this country, but there are many gaps, too many gaps in our efforts.
Around 4.5 million working-age Australian adults don't have the high level of core, literacy and numeracy skills they need to succeed at work or study.
Now illiteracy is a tragedy, it's as simple as that.
A tragedy compounded by the fact that it is so unnecessary.
In a rich country like ours with universal education, we can do better.
To be able to read is a form of enfranchisement just like having the vote.
It's a passport to full participation in the life of the community and I want every Australian to know the joy and pleasure that comes from books and reading.
I want them to get all of the practical benefits too.
So I welcome the National Year of Reading and I am delighted the Australian Government has been able to support it.
The National Year of Reading has identified three goals which will help us turn Australia into a nation of readers:
First goal, for all Australians to understand the benefits of reading as a life skill and a catalyst for well-being.
Second, to promote a reading culture in every home.
And third to aim for families, parents and caregivers to share books with their children every day.
We will see every library  -  large and small  -  open their doors to invite the public in.
We'll see media campaigns to help people become more confident in talking about and enjoying books.
There is funding for adult literacy, because it's never too late  -  never too late - to discover a love of reading and the productive skills it brings.
And we'll be working with Indigenous communities where we know literacy is so important for better life outcomes.
In short, we'll be reaching out to Australians wherever they live because the gift of words is too precious to be withheld from anyone.
I therefore welcome this year-long celebration of books and reading.
I thank all the librarians, teachers, booksellers and other supporters for your help in making it a reality.
And I proudly declare the National Year of Reading officially open.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today encouraged children and parents to read together for an hour a week as part of a new national campaign to improve literacy.
The Prime Minister today launched the 2012 National Year of Reading campaign at the National Library of Australia in Canberra, joined by Arts Minister Simon Crean and Minister for School Education Peter Garrett.
The campaign is designed to tackle taboos around illiteracy by promoting a culture of reading in every home, school and workplace.
The Gillard Labor Government has provided $1.3 million towards the campaign which is supported by Australian libraries and their associations, State Governments, community groups and commercial partners.
Children's brains develop rapidly in their early years and it is widely recognised that sharing books with them before they start school greatly improves their chances of developing good literacy skills.
Other research shows nearly half of all Australians do not have the literacy skills they need to cope with the demands of everyday life and work.
This means millions of adults find it difficult to do everyday tasks such as reading a timetable or following medical instructions.
The 2012 National Year of Reading campaign will highlight the benefits of reading as a life skill and a catalyst for well-being through thousands of local community events held in libraries, schools and workplaces.
Events include children's competitions, peer-to-peer book reviews,adult book clubs and workplace literacy programs.
The campaign includes a call to action for parents and caregivers to share a book with their children for an hour each week or 10 minutes a day.
It will also challenge Australians to read for one hour on Saturday 25 August 2012.
The Gillard Labor Government is committed to improving literacy for all Australians.
It is providing $540 million under the Smarter Schools National Partnership to deliver sustained improvements in literacy and numeracy.
As well as working to improve literacy for school students, the Government is also investing an additional $182.8 million over four years to improve the language, literacy and numeracy skills of Australian adults.
As part of the National Year of Reading, the Prime Minister and Arts Minister today announced the winners of the Our Story competition for the 8 books that best represented life in our states and territories.
The winners of the Our Story competition are:
 * 	ACT  -  Smoke and Mirrors by Kel Robertson
 * 	NSW  -  The Idea of Home by John Hughes
 * 	NT  -  Listening to Country by Ros Moriarty
 * 	QLD  -  The White Earth by Andrew McGahan
 * 	SA  -  Time's Long Ruin by Stephen Orr
 * 	TAS  -  Wanting by Richard Flanagan
 * 	VIC  -  Well Done, Those Men by Barry Heard
 * 	WA  -  Jasper Jones by Craig Silvey
For more information on the National Year of Reading or Our Story competition visit www.love2read.org.au
The National Year of Reading will complement Australia's first National Cultural Policy in almost 20 years which is currently being developed. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning, welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning, Sabra.
HOST: We'll get to the economy is just a moment. But first this morning a lot of people are asking the question: Why did you give Four Corners an interview for its program last night?
PM: I was approached by Four Corners for an interview on what was described as the Government's progress since 2007.
And so in those circumstances of course I said yes. My job is to answer questions and to explain what the Government is doing. I'm not someone who runs away from questions and so I did agree to the Four Corners interview.
HOST: Kevin Rudd didn't. He maintained a silence. Do you think that you were misled about the terms under which the interview was going to be done?
PM: Well I've explained to you, Sabra, the terms that were put to me - that it was going to be an interview about the Government's progress since 2007, and of course outlooks for the future. And that's what I'm particularly focused on - the outlooks of the Government for the nation's future.
We're in a time of challenge - economic challenge and economic change - and that's my focus.
HOST: We'll get to that in just a moment.
The episode last night revealed that staff in your office had been working on a prime ministerial acceptance speech two weeks before the leadership change happened. That's pretty damaging. Did you know that speech was being written?
PM: Sabra, I'm happy to answer that question and I will. But I do want to say this: This is all focused on the past and that is not where my focus is.
People are reading today about job losses. They're looking at change in our economy. They're thinking about what we need to do have strength and prosperity in the future. That's where my focus is as Prime Minister.
But in answer to your question let me make two very simple points - I did not direct staff in my office to prepare a speech for me as Prime Minister. I wouldn't have seen the need for it.
I decided to challenge Kevin Rudd and to ask him for a ballot in the Labor Party on the day I asked him for that ballot-
HOST: -But did you know-
PM: -And no question- no question, no television program, nothing will ever change the facts that I made up my mind to ask Kevin Rudd for a ballot within the Labor Party for the Labor Party leadership on the day I walked into his office.
HOST: But did you know about this speech being written? You may not have asked for it but did you know that it was being written?
PM: Well I didn't direct it. And this was a tense few days for me and the Government. So I can't specifically say to you when I came to know about the speech. It could have been on the Wednesday night, it could have been before.
But the point here is I didn't direct the speech and the decision I made about seeking the Labor leadership was made on the day that I walked into Kevin Rudd's office and discussed with him having a ballot for the leadership.
HOST: The US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton knew about a possible leadership change two weeks before it happened. Did she know more than you?
PM: Well that's asserted in the program and the program directors will need to put forward the evidence of that.
HOST: The leadership question though is pre-eminent given people are asking these questions. Tony Abbott is now three points ahead of you as preferred prime minister. He's turned that rating around. Aren't people right to be talking about the leadership?
PM: Sabra, the economy is pre-eminent and the opportunity for working people to have a job today or to start a small business today, to provide for their families and get help with cost of living pressures and to know that we are doing today what we need to do to build an economy where they will have opportunity in the future.
What's pre-eminent is managing the economy in the interests of working people.
HOST: But you don't seem to be getting any credit from voters or the public in managing the economy. They're not rewarding you in the opinion polls for doing a good job.
PM: The reward for building a new economy is in job numbers. The reward for managing the economy properly today is that we see low unemployment even as we see stresses and strains in areas like manufacturing and tourism.
The reward for running the economy right is that we can say to ourselves as a nation that we are giving working people opportunity.
And all people have to do to get a sense of what that means is to cast their eyes overseas. They see riots in Europe as Greece passes its austerity package. They see people unemployed in the United States and across Europe - millions of them.
Here of course Alcoa workers and a number of others face challenges. But overall our economy is strong, offering people the benefit of jobs.
HOST: Do you believe the banks now, that they have funding pressures? The ANZ has announced now that it's cutting a thousand jobs. The banks have- various banks have announced staff cuts. That seems to underline their message about rising costs.
PM: I think what the banks need to be focused on is the deal for their consumers.
We've created a competitive market where people can shop around for their mortgages and their banking products.
That's a world away from what the past used to be when people would put on a suit and go to the bank manager and hope that the bank manager would do something for them. Now banking customers have power in their hands and they can say to their bank manager or the person at the counter 'If I don't get the deal I want I'm going down the road'.
HOST: What about the workers though? A thousand workers are losing their jobs at the ANZ bank. Other banks are cutting staff as well. You don't believe them on their claims that their costs are too high and these are the sorts of things they have to do to cut costs?
PM: Well I would say that banks need to take responsibility for their own decisions and the ANZ Bank needs to take responsibility for its decisions. It's determined to put interest rates up and to cut staff, so in my view something that consumers have got a right to be pretty angry about.
And of course for those people who are now at risk of losing their jobs, they too will be very upset.
It's for the ANZ to explain why it is doing that.
HOST: Have you sought assurances from the banks that they're not offshoring these jobs?
PM: Well, to all of the banks we have been very clear that they have benefited from government support during some dark days during the global financial crisis.
Now that was appropriate. We needed to make sure that our banking system stayed strong during those days.
In these days I believe banks do have a responsibility to look to their customers, to look to their employees and to do the right thing by both.
HOST: So shareholders shouldn't be their first priority?
PM: Well shareholders have got a right to get a return on their investment. Our banks are very profitable, Sabra.
HOST You just mentioned the global financial crisis. If the banks came cap in hand to you now and said 'We need help again' would you be prepared to give them help?
PM: Well they're not going to Sabra so I'm not going to answer that hypothetical question. What we know is-
HOST: - You gave the banks a hand in 2008.
PM: Well let's deal with the facts in our economy and the facts in our economy are we've got a strong banking system; we've got low public debt; we've got low unemployment; we've got economic growth. Our economy is the envy of the world.
Now our economy is also in a time of change. And I know people hear us say that - the envy of the world - and then they see ANZ announcing job losses or Alcoa under pressure. What's driving that is a structural change in our economy - high Aussie dollar driving change.
But this is also an era of opportunities - opportunities for higher skilled jobs. What we know about the workforce of the future is we'll need two and a half times as many people in skilled jobs as unskilled jobs.
Or put another way, for every unskilled job that's created in the future, two and a half skilled jobs will be created. We're getting ready for that.
Our future will be one of better technology, we're getting ready for that with the NBN. Our future will be one of clean energy, we're getting ready for that with carbon pricing.
HOST: Sleep City has also announced that it's going into voluntary administration, putting 400 jobs at risk. Earlier this week Kell and Rigby, construction company, said 500 jobs are in danger. You've got trouble at Alcoa, a thousand jobs at the ANZ Bank.
This is not just jobs being lost in manufacturing. It's spread to retail, the financial services and construction. Is the economy really as healthy as you and Wayne Swan say it is?
PM: The economy's fundamentals are strong but many sectors of our economy are undergoing change. A lot of that change is driven by the strong Australian dollar. Some of that change is driven by industries getting ready themselves for the future and being under change.
So when we look at retail, we've got pressure there. Obviously when we look at retail, some dynamics in the retailing sector are changing - online retailing, different consumer expectations about how they're going to go and buy their goods. And so that is driving changes in retail.
There are changes in banking but we do know that the financial services sector overall will be strong in Australia and will employ more Australians.
Manufacturing is showing the stresses of the high Aussie dollar.
So this is a time of significant structural change in our economy.
Now you can take your hands off and say 'Well let all of that happen and who wins, wins and who loses, loses'.
My point of view is we look at that change and say 'Let's bend it to our purposes. Let's make sure that it serves the interests of working Australians so that they know that they can get a job and have a good job'.
It won't always be the same job. There's not going to be jobs for life in the new economy. But people will have the skills and capacities they need to get jobs in this time of change.
HOST: Prime Minister thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks Sabra.



PM: Great to see so many of you here to celebrate the launch of the National Year of Reading. I'm here today with ministerial colleagues Simon Crean and Peter Garrett.
This is the launch of this Year of Reading. It's a way that we want Australians around the country to get involved in reading books. So whether you're a parent reading to a child or a grandparent reading to a grandchild, whether you're reading for yourself, whether you're someone who wants to upgrade your literacy skills and unlock a love of reading, this is the year for you.
Right around the nation libraries will be throwing their doors open and there will be all sorts of celebrations and activity for the National Year of Reading. We will be investing resources into adult literacy because we're disturbed that too many adult Australians don't have the literacy skills that they need for work and for pleasure in modern Australia.
So it's important to get involved, to show your love of reading and I very much enjoyed the launch this morning.
I'm happy to take any questions. Yes, Matthew.
JOURNALIST: On the issue of the Four Corners program last night, you made clear on the program, although they didn't broadcast it all, and in your views this morning that the key issue, the germane issue for you, is that you didn't make up your mind to challenge until the 23 June.
Given that we are aware, and I don't think your disputing, there was polling (inaudible) and that there was someone writing a speech for you. Can I just ask you  -  when did either somebody in your office or the faction people who were behind the change of leadership first canvas with you the idea that you should be the leader?
PM: Can I say firstly, these events are in the past and my focus is on what we need to do today for our nation's future which is why my focus is on things like reading, because that's important not only to people's sense of independence and self, it's also important to our national economy because people need those skills and abilities in the modern age.
But I'm happy to answer your questions and I will. I made my decision to ask Kevin Rudd for a leadership ballot on the day that I spoke to him and asked him for that leadership ballot. I was canvassed in the short days before, very close in to me making that decision.
When people had sought to raise the matter with me earlier I had declined to have the conversation with them and no amount of speculation here or media interest will change that simple fact that I made up my mind on the day that I asked Kevin Rudd for a ballot.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well let's be very clear  -  we were asked by Four Corners to appear last night. I was told, my office was told, that this program would be about Labor in government since 2007 and the future of Labor. So I chose to appear and you've seen on TV some aspects of that interview and we've obviously released aspects of that interview as well.
Mark.
JOURNALIST: What's your message today to those members of your Caucus who fear your prime ministership is beyond repair?
PM: Well Mark, you'll have to put a more specific question than a broad suite like that.
Yes, over here.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
Well, we'll just take a question here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, who did canvas you? Just going on the back of Matthew's question and also who was writing the speech in the lead up to the (inaudible)?
PM: Look I'm not going to go into individual conversations. The important thing here in relation to what was on Four Corners last night is: number one  -  I didn't direct anybody to write a speech for me, and number two  -  I made up my mind on the day.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Closing the Gap report is due tomorrow.
PM: Yes it is.
JOURNALIST: Indigenous Australians are sort of quizzing why around Valentine's Day you continue to break their hearts by tabling the report always late, for the fourth year in a row. Is this a serious relationship you have with Indigenous Australia or a political fling?
PM: Well, with respect, it's in the right week and we had the anniversary of the Apology on Monday and we thought it was important that there be the set of events to mark the delivery by Kevin Rudd of the Apology to the Stolen Generations. I will deliver the Closing the Gap report in Parliament tomorrow.
Yes, Karen.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how could it be somebody in your office could be preparing a speech to mark the overthrow of the Prime Minister and you not be aware of it two weeks (inaudible)?
PM: Well Karen, first and foremost let me repeat: I didn't direct anybody to write a speech in my office. Let me also say this, and I'll answer your question but let me also say this before I do.
People would be aware that political staff prepare for contingencies, that they work on things that they are concerned about and believe might happen, political staff, particularly experienced political staff do that.
On my knowledge of the speech, that was a tense period of time and I don't have a clear recollection of when the speech was first brought to my attention, whether that was on the Wednesday night in question or whether it was shortly before.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
But the important thing here is I didn't direct the speech to be written. I made my decision on the day that I asked Kevin Rudd for a ballot.
Yes Kieran.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I've seen polling undertaken by the ALP over a long period of time, I particularly saw polling in my capacity as Deputy Opposition Leader and then Deputy Prime Minister. But the important point here is my decision was not motivated by the polling.
Thank you very much. 



Queensland has become the first state to sign up to strengthened regulation of coal seam gas and large coal mining developments.
In November, the Prime Minister wrote to the Premiers of NSW, Queensland, Victoria and South Australia and the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory seeking cooperation to strengthen the regulation of CSG and large coal mining developments that may have significant impacts on water resources.
This was in response to community concerns about the management of the impacts of these activities on important water resources and to fill the critical gaps in scientific understanding about these impacts.
The Australian Government welcomes the Queensland Government's support for the National Partnership Agreement on Coal Seam Gas and Large Coal Mining.
A strong coal mining and coal seam gas industry will generate significant economic benefits for Australia, through increased investment and the creation of jobs, and is important to energy supply and security.
The Agreement, which implements the Prime Minister's announcement on 21 November 2011, will help to build stronger community confidence in this industry, and help to underpin its safe and reliable expansion.
The NPA will ensure that future decisions are informed by substantially improved science and independent expert advice, by establishing an Independent Expert Scientific Committee (IESC) that will:
 * 	Provide governments with expert scientific advice on CSG and large coal mining development proposals that are likely to have a significant impact on water resources;
 * 	Commission public research and bioregional assessments in areas of high CSG and/or large coal mining developments in order to improve scientific knowledge and understanding of the impacts of these developments, both in specific locations and on water resources more broadly; and
 * 	Make public its advice and the findings of all research undertaken.
The Commonwealth will continue to work cooperatively with other states and territories to progress this reform.



Mr Speaker, in the long story of relations among the peoples of our nation  - the story of our struggles with each other and of our struggles to reconcile  -  there have been some good days which we will not forget.
Days when a glimpse of a better time came briefly into view.
We have cherished them.
We cherished 27 May 1967, when Australians voted Yes.
To empower the Commonwealth to bring the resources of the whole nation to bear to address Indigenous disadvantage.
Perhaps the greatest was here, four years ago.
13 February 2008, when Kevin Rudd said Sorry.
Sorry on behalf of all of us, for the “grief, suffering and loss”, for the “pain, suffering and hurt”, for the “indignity and degradation”.
A day we cherished, when we saw our nation as we wish it could always be.
Now we look forward to another such day  -  to the day when Australia's Indigenous peoples are recognised in the Act which constitutes the Australian Commonwealth.
And we look forward to the work that we will do together on all the days that lie between. 
Every day, our conscience demands we work to Close the Gap.
Mr Speaker, that work, every day, is what this Government has done.
By embracing the targets of the Closing the Gap campaign, this Government deliberately leaves itself nowhere to hide.
Closing the Gap is a practical and empirical project and it is a project that should move us deeply, work which will make such a difference in so many individual lives.
We aim to halve the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under five by 2018, so more Indigenous babies live.
To ensure access to early childhood education for all Indigenous four-year-olds in remote communities by 2013, so more Indigenous children are ready on their first day of school.
To halve the gap in literacy and numeracy achievements for children by 2018, so more Indigenous children know the love of books.
To halve the gap for Indigenous students in Year 12 or equivalent attainment rates by 2020,so more Indigenous young people are ready for life and a job.
To halve the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians by 2018, so more Indigenous adults know the dignity and benefits of work.
And we aim to close the life-expectancy gap within a generation  -  that is, by 2031, so every Indigenous Australian has the chance to grow old.
Measurement is central to this project of Closing the Gap.
Because the Closing the Gap targets are not meant just to challenge us to do more  -  they are designed to hold us accountable to our ambitions.
It is through the annual assessment of the independent COAG Reform Council that is published in June each year  -  and through the annual Closing the Gap Report which the Government releases today  -  that we are brought to book.
The targets we have set are specific and measurable tests of our improvement.
Last year I reported that measurement of progress towards these targets, including by the States and Territories, also needs to improve.
However we can already track progress in reducing under-five-year-old mortality each year.
We have effective measures of access to early childhood education and our measurement of achievements in reading, writing and numeracy is sound.
Direct measurement of life expectancy and year 12 attainment relies on the Australian Census data, which is only available every five years.
So we track overall mortality on an annual basis  -  and this forms a reliable proxy from which we can track improvement in life expectancy.
And we track trends in apparent school retention each year, which acts as a guide to year 12 attainment.
Our employment target is measured using the respected National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Survey and the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Survey, direct measures of progress which are available every three years  -  supplemented by the five-yearly census.
But when we began the work of closing the gap, we knew that we needed better information about Indigenous health, education and employment.
This is why the 2009-2010 Budget invested almost $50 million extra over four years, funding new work by national data agencies and the States and Territories, to give us data which is more detailed and reliable, more comprehensive and easier to compare  -  particularly between Census years.
This year I can report that measurement has improved.
Central to the effort to measure progress is the Census  -  and last year's was better than any before.
$20 million of that extra funding was allocated to improve Census data collection methods.
Local Engagement Managers and mobile teams built early rapport with Indigenous communities.
They organised the delivery and collection of census books differently and they developed new ways for people who aren't literate in English to answer census questions.
They worked especially hard in the most remote areas and among the most disadvantaged.
Indigenous communities themselves already tell us the 2011 Census was an important improvement on the past.
We have improved other measurement besides the Census.
To improve data on access to early childhood education, the Australian Bureau of Statistics has led the development of the new National Early Childhood Education and Care Data Collection. Importantly, this collection includes data on early childhood education in early childhood centres. 
We now have nationally consistent data on smoking during pregnancy and we have agreed data to track the timing of the first antenatal visit  -  so we will be able to say how many Indigenous women get advice from a health professional at the right times during their pregnancy.
New key performance indicators will help us better understand the contribution of Indigenous specific primary health care services.
All this is thankless, detailed, time-consuming work  -  performed by dedicated professionals in statistical collection and analysis. 
But because of it, Mr Speaker, I am confident we can say that we are better placed than ever before to measure effectively our progress to Close the Gap.
Today's Closing the Gap Report shows that the foundations for overcoming Indigenous disadvantage are in place.
The Report shows that we are seeing progress  -  we are making gradual gains. 
The Australian Government remains the most confident of meeting two of the six targets.
The target of halving the infant mortality rates for Indigenous children under five by 2018 is on track.
We are also confident we can ensure access to early childhood education for all Indigenous four year olds in remote communities by 2013.
For the third, we are also now generally on track to meet the target to halve the gap in reading, writing and numeracy achievement for Indigenous children by 2018.
This assessment is based on results from the annual National Assessment Program  -  Literacy and Numeracy, NAPLAN.
We can see measurable improvement in the 2011 NAPLAN results.
Significant gains occurred between 2010 and 2011 in the percentage of Indigenous students at or above the national minimum standards.
For example, for Year 3 Numeracy, up by 7.0 percentage points  -  and Year 9 Reading, up by 7.7 percentage points.
In fact in seven of the eight areas in which we can assess progress in reading and numeracy since 2008, the gap has narrowed.
And in six of these eight, the improvement over four years is fast enough that if it continues we will meet the target by 2018. 
In year seven and year nine numeracy progress still needs to accelerate.
We continue to see improvement in two more of the six targets, and with faster improvement over time, we believe these can be reached.
The Report shows that apparent retention rates to Year 12 are improving for Indigenous students  -  up from barely thirty per cent in 1995 to just over 47 per cent in 2010.
Faster improvement will be required to halve the gap in Year 12 or equivalent attainment rates by 2020. 
We will need to keep expanding places for post-school training and education.
We will need to keep working with Indigenous young people to ensure they find the opportunities which exist in the education and training system.
Faster improvement will also be required to halve the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians by 2018.
Indigenous employment has increased sharply in Australia in recent decades, reflecting a long period of almost uninterrupted economic growth  -  and an active and engaged approach from corporate Australia. 
Never in our nation's history has business been more prepared to play its part.
Just under 90,000 additional jobs were won by Indigenous Australians from 1994 to 2008.
The Indigenous unemployment rate fell from 31 per cent in 1994 to 23 per cent in 2002 and to 16.6 per cent in 2008.
In urban areas, the majority of Indigenous Australians of working age are employed  -  this was not the case 20 years ago.
Closing the Gap on life expectancy by 2031 remains the most challenging target of all.
Progress towards the other health, education and employment targets all provide strong foundations to help us lift life expectancy.
And the life expectancy target is the longest term of the six  -  it is a twenty-five-year target.
While the challenge is very large we do know that some progress is being made. 
In Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory the Indigenous mortality rate declined by 36 per cent from 1991 to 2010  -  and there was a significant narrowing of the gap in mortality rates with non-Indigenous Australians. 
And we know what the main causes of Indigenous mortality are  -  chronic disease and accident and injury.
So we are working to limit their incidence and reduce the harm they do.
Hundreds of extra Indigenous health workers are working to attack scourges of cancer, diabetes, heart disease and mental illness, as well as targeting risk factors for chronic disease such as smoking, poor nutrition and lack of exercise.
Mr Speaker, four years into a twenty-five-year project, this much is true: health outcomes, employment outcomes, education outcomes are improving, they need to keep improving and to improve more quickly.
This much is also true: foundations are in place, work is underway , we can measure encouraging improvement now.
This is our progress towards Closing the Gap.
Mr Speaker, one of the great myths of Indigenous disadvantage is that it persists despite decades of expensive public responses.
The reality is quite the reverse.
Report after report has shown that decades of under-investment in services and infrastructure are unquestionably a major cause of disadvantage, especially for the very young.
No Australian family, however hard-working, self-respecting or self-reliant, is expected to fix broken sewerage pipes at the end of their street or repair street lighting outside their house.
These are things Governments are responsible for  -  the basic, universal services all Australians are right to expect.
So the Australian Government has heard the call to change.
We have delivered billions of dollars of additional investment in the “building blocks” of better lives.
In early childhood and in schools  -  in health and healthy homes  -  in economic participation, in safe communities, in leadership and governance.
I have seen the difference this is making even in places where problems seem as intractable as they have been in the town camps of Alice Springs.
And so many Indigenous people have heard the call to change too.
They have taken on new responsibilities, not only to improve their own circumstances but to share the example with their young.
I have met the people who are making these changes in their own lives.
They know that no Australian Government, however active or ambitious, can get any child out of bed for school in the morning  -  or make any parent ask visitors to leave at a reasonable hour so the children in a small house can sleep.
These things are the responsibilities of every Australian family.
Another great myth of Indigenous disadvantage is that the nation must choose between “two reconciliations”  -  symbolic and practical.
That we must choose between a reconciliation which respects the rights and responsibilities of culture and land  -  and a reconciliation which respects the rights and responsibilities to education, health and jobs.
This is also quite false.
It runs against what we all know to be true in our own lives  -  that things of the spirit are inextricably linked with the things of day to day life.
A life of plenty without respect and acceptance is still a life half-lived  -  as is a life of poverty with respect and acceptance.
Human beings need to nourish and sustain body and soul.
The reconciliation we seek between us is not something which can be sorted or classified like a list of policy priorities.
We seek precisely the kind of harmony and concord  -  a national unity  -  which can never be whole or complete under conditions of poverty and unfairness.
And we seek precisely the kind of practical benefits in people's lives  -  better education, employment and health  -  which can never ultimately work without sharing responsibility and self-respect.
I think of my visit to the Northern Territory during the dry season last year.
There, in the spectacularly beautiful Alice Springs Desert Park, I handed back to traditional owners the title to their land under the Aboriginal Land Rights Act.
I saw people overwhelmed and emotional about the handover and what it represented  -  I remember Alice Ngalkin signing the deeds while her friends and family took photos to mark the event. 
A moment of great symbolic power which I shared with deep respect and which on that day brought me so much closer to the Indigenous people there.
And in the atmosphere of respect which we had built between us  -  the local Aboriginal elders and I then sat down to talk.
And they told me as frankly as anyone could, with both sentiment and deep conviction, what they believed I need to know about the practical problems they face.
They spoke about the need to listen and to trust.
And they said that the education system has failed Aboriginal people and it is critical to addressing disadvantage. 
They said that the way the emergency responsestarted in 2007 caused shame and hurt and they wanted to stay with us on the new journey. 
And they spoke about alcohol and its harms  -  the need to be tougher. 
They didn't pick sides in some dialectic or debate  -  but because of the trust we had shared that day, we could speak together in respect about what they knew was wrong and what they knew would work.
And that week, on the Gove Peninsula, I saw the traditional owners of the land and the representatives of a mining giant sign an agreement.
Signed before a gathering of thousands of people from all over Arnhem Land and from all around Australia.
We all met there for a striking ceremony performed on what was long contested country  -  where those most potent of all symbols of the struggle for land, the Yirrkala bark petitions, were inscribed in 1963.
And we met to celebrate an agreement which secures the future operations of the bauxite mine, alumina refinery and Nhulunbuy township. 
Which delivers Indigenous people real economic benefits fromthe mining investment boom, with economic development, jobs, better housing and community facilities.
Mr Speaker, in the Desert Park and on the Peninsula  -  among Australians who treasure progress and respect  -  I have seen and felt the presence of the reconciled nation we can become.
Where secure title to the big tracts of traditional land gives traditional owners a long-term economic future and a share in the jobs and opportunities the land can create.
And where secure title to a home in a town or community gives parents the security to raise and educate their children in a safe environment.
Where by saying sorry for the wrongs of the past and by recognising Indigenous people in our constitution, we build respect between all Australians.
And where that respect allows us to speak honestly with each other as we decide, together, what works where.
Not to the detriment of basic local service delivery  -  never accepting the “soft bigotry of low expectations” or attempting to “explain away” violence against women.
But yes, bound together as individuals and as a nation by shared symbols of respect and practical action  -  listening to each other properly, about what the best evidence tells us about what will make the greatest difference.
Whether the conversation is between a minister of my Cabinet and the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples, or between a departmental official and a parent who works part-time as a local teacher's aide, we listen to each other  -  and then we get on with the job.
This is the relationship between our people which I seek.
Mr Speaker, perhaps the ultimate manifestation of respect is constitutional recognition of Indigenous Australians. 
The proposal before the country now has been years in the making.
Over decades, many ways to recognise Indigenous Australians as our first peoples, to affirm their full and equal citizenship and to remove remaining traces of racial discrimination from our law have been proposed.
In August 1937, William Cooper sent a petition with 1,814 signatures to Prime Minister Joseph Lyons requesting that he forward it to King George VI, seeking direct representation in Parliament.
In June 1988, the chairs of the Northern and Central Land Councils presented the Barunga Statement to Prime Minister Bob Hawke. 
It called upon the Australian Government and people to recognise key Indigenous rights and “to negotiate a Treaty recognising our prior ownership, continued occupation and sovereignty and affirming our human rights and freedoms”.
And my party's national Platform has been pledged to support constitutional recognition since 1998.
Then in October 2007, then-Prime Minister John Howard raised the hopes of a nation, pledging that:
If re-elected, I will put to the Australian people within 18 months a referendum to formally recognise Indigenous Australians in our Constitution  -  their history as the first inhabitants of our country, their unique heritage of culture and languages, and their special (though not separate) place within a reconciled, indivisible nation.
It was a gracious and deliberate statement which effectively began the contemporary process that leads to today.
And four years on, the movement for constitutional recognition is strong and growing.
It grew through 2008, when the Cabinet met in east Arnhem Land and was solemnly petitioned to continue with this process.
And in 2010 I announced the appointment of an Expert Panel on Constitutional Recognition of Indigenous Australians to do the hands on work of developing options for constitutional change.
I didn't send the Panel on an easy journey  -  and they performed mightily. 
Last month, the co-chairs Patrick Dodson and Mark Leibler delivered the Panel's Report on Recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples in the Constitution to the Government.
I have thanked them publicly already and I do so again here today.
Mr Speaker, for constitutional change, Australians have to understand and be persuaded of the case for change.
This does require all-embracing political bipartisanship. 
But it requires more.
Political bipartisanship, while necessary, is not sufficient.
We need more than the consent of the governed to an agreement between parliamentarians  -  we need a genuine community desire for change.
Our Constitution is our nation's founding contract  -  our people rightly guard it with care.
Support for constitutional recognition must genuinely have the people's support.
That is what happened in 1967.  Yes, bipartisanship  -  but more.
A deep feeling in the Australian community leading to millions of Australian people deciding to say yes to change.
Earlier today, the Minister for Indigenous Affairs and I announced funding for a community conversation, to be sponsored by Reconciliation Australia.
To build support for what is already the subject of bipartisan agreement: the principle of constitutional recognition.
And to build understanding of the ways in which constitutional recognition might be achieved.
The Expert Panel's report provides a firm foundation for this discussion.
This is an opportunity for the Australian people to get involved.
To get on the You Me Unity website, to learn about what's in the Panel's report, and what happens next.
To find practical information and solid ideas and to discuss them  -  in their homes and with their neighbours, in their community meetings and in their workplaces, in their trade unions and in their churches.
The Government is committed to this change  -  we are committed to building public support for this change  -  and in the many conversations which follow in the Australian community, we will take a leading part.
It is through the sum of that myriad of conversations, of people listening and speaking with respect, that we will truly know that our people are ready to say yes to this change.
Mr Speaker, the day we said Sorry was a great day in this nation's history ... the day of constitutional recognition will be another.
Closing the Gap is an accumulation of all the small victories on all the many days that lie between.
The young man, first in his family to learn a trade, with skilled work on his traditional lands. 
The young woman, first in her family to earn a degree, holding a job in the city.
The basic public services that surround them, delivered at the standard every Australian expects.
The keys to a couple's first home  -  and the life of dignity and pride they live within it, raising children who are ready to take their place in a reconciled nation.
The respect shown to them by people in the community where they live. 
The detailed measurements which tell us this is so.
When more Indigenous children are ready to learn on their first day of school  -  we will know we are closing the gap.
When brilliant Indigenous school leavers are as sought after by the big firms as brilliant Indigenous footballers are sought after by the big clubs  -  we will know we are closing the gap.
When fewer Indigenous men between 35 and 45 die of disease  -  we will know we are closing the gap.
Today, we know we have a long way to go.
But we also know we are Closing the Gap. 



PM: We're here today for a special celebration of the Trade Training Centre that will not only serve this school, but three other schools. As I said when I addressed the assembly, this is about every child's education, making sure they get the opportunities and choices they want to live their dreams.
Not every child is the same, they'll want a different pathway, and they'll want schools today to be able to support them. Whether their dream is going to university  -  and I've met a young person today who said that she wanted to do that and be a journalist  -  or whether it's their dream to become a chef and I've met young people today who want to do just that. Or whether their dream is to work in construction and I've met a young man who said that to me today. We've got to make sure that our schools are equipped and able to support them as they choose all of those different pathways.
This is about lifting quality for every child in every school, it's about every child in every school leaving school ready for the next stage of their lives. Our economy is in days of change, and that's going to put new demands on the workforce of the future for higher and higher skill. We know that in the economy that these kids will live in, for every low-skilled job that is created there will be two and a half high-skilled jobs created. We've got to get children ready for those jobs, and we've got to make sure that they leave school with all of the attributes for living a successful life as an adult. And in this school you can feel not only the academic excellence, but also the sense of community and spirit that is building these kids for the rest of their lives. So it's been a wonderful pleasure to be here, I thank Michael the principal for so much facilitating the visit and I've really enjoyed talking to the kids.
I'm here with Peter Garrett, the Minister for School Education. We continue to deliver groundbreaking reforms in education. More money in school education, but importantly a major reform agenda to drive change.
On Monday we will release the report of the Gonski Panel; led by David Gonski a group of eminent Australian who have looked at school funding. Of course on Monday the Minister and I will be talking through all aspects of that report. But, we want to work through  -  step by step  -  the challenges for the nation for funding our schools for the future.
We know that we live in the region of the world that's growing economically. But other nations in our region are investing to improve their school system. Indeed, four of the five highest performing school systems in the world are in countries in our region. So we've got to make sure we not only keep up but we win that education race. We're very focussed on a reform agenda to do that, and we will, following the release of the Gonski report, be working through what are an enormously important set of questions that will require study and consideration and work with stakeholders. So we're looking forward to that on Monday.
I'm going to turn now to Peter Garrett for some comments, and then our local members will say a few words. We are in Gai's electorate and she has a very close connection with this school. She was very enthusiastic about me coming here, but what we have seen today will service not only students in her electorate, but also in Andrew's electorate so they'll both make a few comments. So I'll turn to Peter now.
MINISTER GARRETT: Thanks very much Prime Minister. Look, it has been a great event here at Mary Mackillop, and I think the fact is that we are providing unprecedented levels of investment and support for students in schools right around Australia. And the fact that young students here can get the opportunity to learn in first-class facilities and decide whether or not they want to take a job option on that skills pathway which really gets them going in employment once they leave school.
Coupled with the significant investments that we've made in school facilities, including in this school, and as well as that the national partnerships which we've been delivering through the states focusing on things like teacher quality, literacy and numeracy, and of course assisting low SES communities as well. All of these things add up to a substantial, far-reaching reform agenda on education that is absolutely essential for this country as we go into the 21st century  -  a century which is going to be very much charged by the activities in our region, and where students in our region will need to be able to have the best possible education that they can.
BRODTMANN: It's a great pleasure to be here today and I'd also like to thank Michael Lee for hosting such a wonderful reception and event. I'm a very strong advocate of vocational education, I was president of the RMIT in Melbourne, and so I've got a very strong tradition in my family as well. But what I love about what we've seen today is the fact that this investment is in the Catholic college system here in Canberra, but it's not just here on the south side in Tuggeranong. We've also got an investment in Griffith at St Claire's College and on the north side in Andrew's electorate and I'll let him speak about that.
In addition to the investment that we've made - $5.7 million  -  into Trade Training Centres in the Catholic education system, we've also just last year announced an $8 million investment in public Trade Training Centres in the Tuggeranong Valley. So it just underscores Labor's commitment to investing in Canberra and investing in education in Canberra and particularly investing in vocational education.
LEIGH: Thanks Prime Minister, I'll be brief. One of the things that's great for me about this centre is the fact that it brings together four ACT Catholic schools. Students at Merici, at St Francis Xavier's, at St Claire's and here at Mary Mackillop sharing facilities for trades training. Learning how to be the great carpenters of the future, the great chefs of the future.
When I speak to employers in Canberra, they're crying out for talented young tradespeople, and centres like this one are going to produce those students. The other thing I love about Trade Training Centres is that a lot of the stress in education is at points of transition, when children have to move from one system to another. But with a Trade Training Centre we've taken away one of those points of transition, so students can move from high schools straight into trades training without the emotional stress that often accompanies those sort of moves, and that helps us to bring down the dropout rate from education which is absolutely critical to building a first rate education system.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're talking about these students getting jobs. Just on the issue of jobs, 300 people today stood down from Air Australia. Obviously some sectors of the economy are doing it extremely tough, you know how many thousands of people have lost their jobs in the past few weeks and months and on the other hand thousands of people are finding themselves in work and that's been reflected in this month's jobs figures. How can you reconcile that so many people are losing their job at the moment and yet on the other hand so many people are finding work?
PM: For a long period of time now we've talked to people about what we've referred to as  the patchwork economy. And what that means is that our economic fundamentals are strong, we do have a strong economy. When you look around the world the strength of our economy is obvious. But we also have big changes in our economy. A very high Australian dollar in particular driving structural change in our economy. So that means that there are enormous opportunities, I mean if you look at the resources sector more than $400 billion of investment in the pipeline. That's not just going to create jobs in mining, it's going to create jobs in construction, it's going to create jobs in all of the services sectors that then work with the mining industry including top end services like legal services and managing money and all the rest of it.
So, we've got tremendous strength in sectors like resources. But the high Australian dollar is also putting pressure on other parts of the economy; manufacturing, tourism and a number of other sectors. At the same time we've got various industries undergoing structural change. Retail is in a world of change. Your own industry, the media industry is in a world of change, so we've got these different effects in different parts of the economy.
What that means is every time we see a worker lose a job, we're of course concerned for that working person and his or her family and we want to support them in that circumstance to get the next opportunity and the next job. And for major industries that are so important to our future like manufacturing, we're working hard to make sure that the strong resources boom doesn't hollow out those industries, that we've got them of the future.
On this particular company today, my immediate concern today is not only for the working people caught up in this circumstance but also the passengers who are caught up. I want to say to the administrators that they need to do everything they can to ensure that people who have been passengers with this airline get back home. I do understand that Qantas and Jetstar are stepping up with some additional seats to help get back home, but I do want to see maximum support for those Australians who have been stranded from the administrators of this company, and then of course we want to see them deal with their workforce properly, including supporting them, and we'll want to see them supported so that they can get another opportunity too.
JOURNALIST: Would you consider a charter flight perhaps to get some of those stranded Australians or would the Government step in at all?
PM: Look on my advice at the moment, both Qantas and Jetstar have indicated a preparedness to step in and step up and I very much welcome that. But the fact that they're stepping in and stepping up doesn't mean the administrators should down tools. The administrators of this business should also be doing everything they can to help passengers get back home.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you concerned at all by claims by workers (inaudible) this aircraft company (inaudible) they've been paid $90 a day including incentives?
PM: I am concerned by those claims and I know some have been made on Melbourne radio today too. As I understand it the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations has referred this to the Fair Work Ombudsman. That's the right place for it to go and if there has been any mistreatment or any breaching of industrial standards then of course that's against the law, it's against our Fair Work Act.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Clubs Australia agreed in principle last night to supporting a trial in the ACT but do have some concerns over compensation and the participation of Queanbeyan clubs as well. They of course want to meet with you. Given the February 2013 deadline, how quickly would you like a meeting with Clubs ACT?
PM: Minister Macklin has been meeting directly with Clubs ACT and I understand that those discussions have been going very, very productively, so I'm keeping in close touch with Minister Macklin. But all of the reports to me are that everybody's working well together to see this trial get underway.
JOURNALIST: The Treasury Secretary Martin Parkinson has basically warned against propping up industries saying it takes the economy backwards. Is (inaudible) Treasury Secretary at odds with Government policy?
PM: Martin Parkinson has been talking today about the strength of the Australian economy and he's been making what I think is a very important statement about how damaging it can be when people talk the economy down. And we've just seen two weeks in the Federal Parliament - the Opposition talking the economy down even though yesterday we saw a reduction in the number of Australians unemployed. More Australians are in work today than ever before. There are Australians facing change and challenging times, but more Australians in work today than ever before is a remarkable result when you look overseas and see literally millions and millions of adults and young people unemployed.
On industry support and assistance, we always analyse very closely how we are going to work with industry and why we're going to work with industry. When we're working with the car industry it's not a question of propping up an industry we think doesn't have a future, we think car-making's got a great future in this country. These are days of stresses and strain, days of change, but we are one of a precious few nations on earth that can do everything from designing a car to making it and see it roll off the production line. We need to keep skills in our economy like that because they support the rest of manufacturing. So that's the approach we take.
JOURNALIST: There's media reports today that Kevin Rudd thinks he has the numbers to challenge you (inaudible) back bench (inaudible). Wouldn't it be best if that just happens so you can clear the air (inaudible) better for Labor and yourself?
PM: Well I'm here as Prime Minister today doing what I always intended to do today which was spend some time at this remarkable school. So nothing is more important to me than just getting on with the job we need to do to give these kids the best possible future, but also to give our nation the strongest possible economy for the future. So when they graduate from here and whatever the rest of their education journey brings they will be young adults in a prosperous economy where they can get an opportunity and get a chance.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, was Martin Parkinson wrong when he said that strategic assistance can hamper structural change in the economy?
PM: Look Martin Parkinson obviously will speak for himself, but I think we've got to be very careful about what it is that we are doing as we work with industry. So I don't want my comments to be viewed as somehow counter to Martin's comments, because when you look at the full context I don't think that's going to prove to be right. We're not in the business of propping up industries that don't have a future in our economy. But that's not the car industry. That is not the car industry. It has a future in our economy. We are specifically saying to Australians these are days of economic change, and you know we've got a choice. Do we try and pretend we can stand still, or do we embrace the challenges of the future? Well I know the other side of politics is saying pretend you can stand still, I think common sense tells you change is going to happen. The choice you've got is do you shape change or let it shape you? Well I'm for shaping change so that the economy, both today and tomorrow, serves the interests of working Australians and serves the interests of these young people today who are going to be tomorrow's working Australians. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, two more boats intercepted overnight. You want to stop the boats, Tony Abbott wants to stop the boats. Why can't you come together and work out a solution to it?
PM: I don't think Tony Abbott wants to stop the boats at all. I think that's the last thing he wants to see happen. I think Tony Abbott wants to see more boats, and so at every stage when we have sought to work with the Opposition and we've been prepared to compromise, we've been prepared to talk about things in good faith, whenever we've done that the Opposition has repudiated those approaches because Mr Abbott has made a hard headed political calculation that it is in his interest to see more boats.
Now in terms of that political calculation, I think Mr Abbott is doing the wrong thing. We all know the consequences that can happen when people risk their lives at sea. I don't want to see more people getting on boats, but I'd also have to say this. I am absolutely opposed to Mr Abbott's pledge and plan to risk the lives of Australian Defence Force personnel through his policy of supposedly turning boats around.
JOURNALIST: Caltex is reviewing two of its refineries today. Does the Government  -  in terms of - is there a strategic consideration that the Government should step in to ensure Australia actually retains critical refining capacity?
PM: Well we'll obviously talk to Caltex and work with Caltex as it goes through this review process. They too are facing days of change, but I don't think we can run all the way to what the conclusion's going to be. Caltex is in a change journey too and as we talk to businesses every day we'll talk to Caltex as well.
Thank you very much. 



The Australian Government has successfully built 160 new Trade Training Centres around Australia in just four years - providing thousands of students with new skills and career opportunities.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for School Education Peter Garrett today opened one of the newest Trade Training Centres at St Mary Mackillop College in Canberra.
Trade Training Centres are a key Labor Government initiative to help address skill shortages, boost national productivity and give young people rewarding career pathways.
Over the last four years, the Government has approved $1.2 billion to fund more than 370 Trade Training Centres benefitting more than 1,060 schools around Australia.
The Government will provide $2.5 billion for Trade Training Centres over 10 years to ensure all secondary schools across Australia have access to the state-of-the-art training facilities.
The Centres encourage more students to complete Year 12 by providing clear training pathways at school that are needed for careers in trade and skilled occupations. 
The Gillard Labor Government strongly believes that every student, no matter where they live or what school they attend, deserves a great and rewarding education. 
Our future prosperity as a nation rests on having world class schools that provide the best learning opportunities for our children.
Through our education reforms, which include building new facilities to modernise our schools, implementing Australia's first ever national curriculum, and empowering local school principals, we are ensuring that no student or school is left behind. 
The Government has provided $5.7 million for the Canberra Region Pathways Trade Training Centre.
It will be used by secondary students at St Mary Mackillop College, Merici College, St Clare's College and St Francis Xavier College. 
Students at the Canberra schools will now be able to gain qualifications in construction, hospitality and manufacturing.
Further information about the Trade Training Centres in Schools program is available at www.tradetrainingcentres.deewr.gov.au



The Australian Government will provide East Timor with a collection of historically significant and rare films and photographs to help celebrate its 10th anniversary of independence.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today presented East Timor's Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão with a framed photograph and two historical films taken in East Timor during the 1920's and during World War II to mark the start of the unique project.
The National Film and Sound Archives (NFSA) holds a broad collection of audiovisual materials taken in East Timor which will be of great value to one of the world's youngest nations.
As East Timor has a limited collection of historical documents, the archival materials will help contribute to the country's sense of national identity and provide a deeper understanding of the their political and cultural history.
The Australian Government will provide funding to the NFSA to help it identify archival material of cultural and historical importance to East Timor.
The first short film presented to Prime Minister Gusmão today depicts rarely seen village life in Portuguese Timor in the 1920's taken by oil and gas explorers.
It is believed to be the oldest existing footage taken in East Timor.
The second film, shot by Australian war cinematographer Damien Parer, depicts the little known but tremendous support provided by East Timorese locals to Australian servicemen who were fighting the Japanese on the island during World War II.
The photograph presented today is an image of a young East Timorese boy taken from Parer's footage.
The 10th anniversary is an important milestone for the country's young democracy.
East Timor will conduct presidential and parliamentary elections this year  -  their third since independence.
The Australian people have a special affinity with East Timor stretching back many decades.
Australia was at the forefront of international support for East Timor's transition to independence and has since been a dedicated partner in helping the country become a stable, peaceful and more prosperous nation.
As a close neighbour, Australia remains strongly committed to East Timor's future and development priorities, providing an estimated $124 million in assistance in 2011-12.
The Australian Government has announced the ‘Roads for Development' program which will provide $30 million over four years for the rehabilitation and maintenance of the road system in Timor-Leste, providing short-term employment for an estimated 52,000 Timorese and increased access to schools and health services in rural areas.
The ‘Rural Water Supply and Sanitation' program also will supply $45 million over four years, andby the end of 2012will provide an additional 35,000 East Timorese with access to basic sanitation, as well as access for an additional 90,000 East Timorese to safe, reliable, and sustainable water supplies. 



In early 1942, our nation had been engaged in hostilities for two and a half years, but this was the moment the reality of war hit home.
February 19.
Our date of infamy.
Australia's Pearl Harbor.
Today we stand “safe on freedom's vantage ground” and look back on those events with gratitude and respect.
Gratitude and respect that the passing of seven decades has only served to increase.
The Japanese Imperial force that attacked Darwin was much the same force that attacked Hawaii nine weeks earlier.
It was a massive armada of 242 planes and Darwin didn't stand a chance.
It took just five bombs to destroy the USS Peary.
She went down as a brave ship does  -  with all guns blazing, even as the water began to cover her deck.
The historian Peter Grose called it a “doomed yet magnificent reply” to the Japanese assault.
A feat that deserves an honoured place in the military history of the United States and in the story of our two nations.
The USS Peary holds that place, securely and lastingly.
A place her crew earned with their courage and with their lives.
Therefore the placement of this gun is no accident.
It points directly to the spot where the USS Peary rests on the floor of Darwin Harbour.
Not a wreck but a war grave.
As precious in its own way as the lawns and granite tablets beneath which their comrades rest in Hawaii.
Friends, these Americans died alongside many Australians.
They were among the first of thousands who would serve and die together in the 40 months of bitter warfare to come, bonded in a brotherhood of shared sacrifice.
As our personnel fought side by side, so did our nations.
And thus from these disastrous events came some lasting benefit:
The distant pre-war friendship between Australia and the United States became a firm and lasting alliance.
The course of Japanese history was turned towards democracy and peace.
And together our countries helped build, through the United Nations, a world order more just and secure than what had gone before.
These were prizes dearly bought.
So today we gather to ensure that the value of the sacrifice made in this city is never surrendered.
We commit ourselves to always “see and hold the good”
To honourably inhabit the freedom for which these brave Americans offered the gift of their lives.
Speaking in Australia at the height of the war, Eleanor Roosevelt said that “victory comes as a result of the full and free gift of all that we have within us.”
These gallant men gave all that they had  -  in full and free measure, as Americans always do.
They were far from American soil.
But they were not strangers.
Here they rest in Australia's embrace  -  at home with us and in peace  -  forever. 



On the 70th Anniversary of the Bombing of Darwin, Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Veterans' Affairs Minister Warren Snowdon, encouraged all Australians to reflect on the dark day when our nation was first attacked on home soil  -  19 February 1942.
Today's anniversary will also be the first time it is recognised as a national day of observance, joining Anzac Day and Remembrance Day as a date when Australians can pause to remember those who lost their lives protecting our freedom.
Speaking from Darwin, the Prime Minister said the attacks on Darwin and northern Australia were a defining moment in our history that should not be forgotten.
We want to make sure the sacrifice of those who died in the attacks is remembered and our veterans honoured.
We also want Australians to learn more about what happened and why these events are so significant in the history of our nation. 
Seventy years ago to the day, 242 Japanese aircraft killed more than 240 people and injured hundreds more  -  both civilian and service personnel.
Many sites including the harbour, post office, Army hospital, RAAF base and administration building were completely destroyed.
The attack came just four days after the fall of Singapore, from the same battle group of Japanese fighters, bombers and dive bombers that destroyed Pearl Harbor, two months prior.
Minister Snowdon said it was important for Australians to understand how these attacks changed our nation forever.
It was the first time we had been attacked on home soil and “the gravest hour in our history”, as described by Prime Minister Curtin at the time.
The bombing of Darwin was the first of more than 90 air raids across Australia's north starting in February 1942 and lasting until November 1943, hitting Broome, Katherine, Wyndham, Townsville and Horn Island.
Images of the Bombing of Darwin are available for download from the Australian War Memorial, contact media@awm.gov.au
Audio files and films can also be requested from the Memorial's collection web page at www.awm.gov.au/search/collections/



HOST: Prime Minister, welcome to Weekend Sunrise.
PM: Thank you very much.
HOST: Now tell us, why should Australians care about today's anniversary?
PM: This is an important event in our nation's history. It was the first time we were ever attacked at home and I think for too many Australians, the history remains unknown. I was determined to change that by ensuring that we did mark this as a national day, that we told the story of what happened all of those years ago, 70 years ago, when Darwin was bombed. And then we told the story of what happened with bombings across the Top End in 1942 and 1943. This is really Australia's Pearl Harbor and we should understand it.
HOST: We spoke to one of the Darwin defenders this week and he said he would never again trust the Japanese, still after all these years - does not trust the Japanese. Does not want a bar of the Japanese. What would you say to him?
PM: I'd say to him that a lot has changed in 70 years. The bombing of Darwin, the day we are commemorating, gave us a sense that we needed to always be ready to protect ourselves at home. Over the long years since, we have prepared for that. Of course, we have done that that in alliance with the US.
At the same time, Japan has changed too. It's become a democracy, a very strong power in our region. One that we work with closely and indeed part of the future of Darwin is going to be shaped around a huge Japanese investment in the form of Inpex, so the relations between our countries are very different from what they were 70 years ago when we were at war.
HOST: However, could an attack like this ever happen again on Australian soil, to this northern coastline of Australia particularly I guess and if so, are we prepared for it?
PM: Our defence preparation learns all the lessons of the past. Of course we fight wars differently than we did during World War II. The technology has changed, many of the threats have changed. Now we focus on terrorism, we focus on cyber security but yes, we are focussed on how we would defend our nation if ever the worst should come. And we've learnt a lot about what forward defence means and what it means to have our defence forces stationed in the north of our country including here in Darwin. And we are working in cooperation with the United States, our great ally; we are going to see some Marines deployed here this year for some exercises in the Northern Territory.
HOST: We joined with some of the survivors from 1942 on Friday night to watch a documentary, a very in depth and a fantastic documentary on these bombings and afterwards we were surprised by how little we all knew about these attacks. None of us had ever learned about it this in school. Are you happy with the history curriculum in Australian schools at this point?
PM: I didn't learn about it at school and we've got to remember when this happens, 70 years ago, the government of the day, concerned about morale in Australia, deliberately released low numbers of how many people had lost their lives. They said 15 when of course the truth was more than 240.
So, right in the midst of the war, people down played it and I don't think we have learned about it enough since. We are shaping a new history curriculum through our national curriculum process. I want it to teach Australian children our history including the history of the bombing of Darwin but of course all of our engagements in war and what has shaped us and what has brought us that ANZAC spirit that we so much reflect upon on ANZAC Day in modern times.
HOST: When you consider the loss that a city like this had 70 years ago, does it reinforce to you the burden and the sense of responsibility that a leader has. Because at that time, there wasn't great leadership shown.
PM: The sense of responsibility you have for national security is always with you. Particularly as we shape our strategy in Afghanistan. I know what it is like to feel the weight of having to make decisions where our troops are involved and where people are in harm's way. And we have seen so many losses in Afghanistan. So, of course, I understand the weight of that responsibility.  And as we reflect on the history of 70 years ago, it's always a way of renewing your dedication to making sure we are prepared in the future.
HOST: What does it mean to you to be Prime Minister?
PM: What it means to me to be Prime Minister, is it's a great opportunity to shape our country's future. I am here in the business of bringing change. I am tremendously optimistic about our nation's future. I think we live at a time where our nation is on the doorstep of new rich possibilities for the future. We live in the growing region of the world, that's going to bring new ways of being economically prosperous. That means that we can bring new advantages to working people and a sense of more fairness in our society, for example by looking after disabled Australians better through a National Disability Insurance Scheme. So, I am driven each and every day by the sense of possibility, of bending and shaping change so that we are a better and better nation in the future.
HOST: Have there been times particularly recently when you have wondered if it was all worth it?
PM: Never. Never at all. I mean, this is an incredible privilege, an incredible privilege to live the life as Prime Minister, to have the opportunities for making decisions about the future that it brings. And the things that always sustain you as you live this life, is I can go out in the Australian community and I can see the benefits of changes that I decided upon and that we have brought to the Australian community.
So, when you can go out and meet a child who is getting a better education because of decisions you made, go to a hospital that's offering improved health care services because of decisions you made, go to work-places where people are being treated better because of decisions you made, then of course, that reinforces how important it is to do this job and keep making sure that this great nation of ours has an even greater future.
HOST: These past few weeks must have been difficult for you personally, I imagine. And I have to ask you about these Weekend Australian claims today that Kevin Rudd is planning to mount a challenge before the Queensland election. If he did that, is there any possibility he could win?
PM: I'm not going to engage in hypotheticals and I must admit, over the last few weeks I have been focussed on our economy and how we are going to build that for the future. When I've got the unemployment results on Thursday and saw our economy create 46,000 jobs in January, that's the kind of thing I'm focussed on. Understanding too that there are days of pressure in our economy for some people, in manufacturing and we have seen job losses. So, look, that's what drives me. As for the rest, I just don't spend too much time focussed on it.
HOST: But there is a lot of focus on this at the moment. How do you get on with business and move the spot light in a situation from all this talk of leadership back to the important issues that Australians are saying they want to hear about, like the economy, they don't want to hear about leadership any more. How do you bring it back?
PM: Well, for me, it's just about the determination to keep focussing on the things that really matter. I do understand that this kind of focus over the last few weeks means it's more difficult for me to be out there explaining to people what is happening in our economy and these days of incredible opportunities, but also, dramatic change and that dramatic change has painful moments for people.
For me to be out there explaining what is happening in schools and what we are trying to do with school funding and we have got a big review coming out on Monday; what we are doing in hospitals to improve standards. But I will keep doing that because that's the important thing about the job. Not the Canberra based gossip but actually delivering things that have got a real chance of making a difference in the lives of families around the nation.
HOST: Do you see it calming down in the next few weeks?
PM: Look, I'm focussing on what I'm doing as Prime Minister here in Darwin, in what is inevitably a humid but very beautiful place this time of year, to reflect on our history, but also to talk about our future in terms of national security and beyond.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you very much. 



PM: It's a great pleasure to be here with Northern Territorian and Minister Warren Snowdon. It's been a great honour today to attend the events here to commemorate the bombing of Darwin 70 years ago.
As a Government we deliberately sort to ensure that this day would be a national day where we pause to reflect about everything we've lost but also to admire everything we've built.
We've had the opportunity today to honour veterans who were here on that dreadful day when Darwin was bombed, when we saw the first attack on Australian soil. It was Australia's Pearl Harbour and it commenced the Battle of Australia.
It's been a wonderful pleasure to be here last night and today to be able to participate in the commemorative events and I want to ensure that right around the nation people stop and reflect on this day and of course that our school children learn this history which has be forgotten for far too long.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Kevin Rudd  -  some videos have come out of him swearing. What's your response to that, his behaviour?
PM: Can I be very clear about all of this. There have been some assertions today that somehow this is connected with my office. That is completely untrue. My office did not have access to the material people have seen on YouTube. I don't know who put that material on YouTube but whoever did it has acted inappropriately.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I have the strong confidence of my colleagues, their strong support and my focus is on getting on with my job as Prime Minister. We're doing that today marking a very special and important event in Australia's history, but we're doing it every day. Building the strong economy we need for the future while we make sure we deliver a package of policies to support working families today. So that's where my focus is and that's where it will remain.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look, I'm not going to be drawn into commentary on the contents of the video.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm getting on with the job with the strong confidence of my colleagues. We are delivering for this nation the change we need to have a prosperous economy for the future so that working Australians can be reassure they'll have a place in that economy and so will their children. And we're working today too to deliver the benefits of a strong economy to working families through policies that support them like Paid Parental Leave, like our expanded Education Tax Refund to help with the cost of getting the kids to school, like more money into childcare than ever before.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I understand that Darren is feeling pressure, he represents a constituency in the Federal Parliament that is feeling the pressure from economic change and so I understand he's feeling that pressure.
The best way of dealing with that is for us to keep getting on with the job of supporting people and their jobs today and supporting people as we build the new economy that will give them jobs for tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: If there was a leadership spill, do you think you've got the numbers?
PM: Look I'm not going to engage with hypotheticals, but I'm getting on with the job with the strong support of my colleagues to do so.
Okay, thank you very much. 



Nineteen forty-two was the darkest year in Australia's history.
And if that darkest year had a darkest day, it was February 19.
It was the unimaginable day.
Beginning a series of raids around Northern Australia that together marked the first time our land has been attacked in war.
In two waves, 242 Japanese planes appeared in the air over this small but strategic township.
A young sailor Harry Dale said: “They all glistened silver in the sun, like they were painted with silver frost.”
But those planes brought only destruction from the bright skies.
Our distance from the hatreds of old Europe was no longer a protection.
Our peacetime complacency had become a potent setback in war.
Admittedly there had been some preparations but they were not enough.
Darwin ended the complacency.
This was the Battle for Australia.
The battle of every citizen for our nation's survival.
This was a fight for home and country.
For all we loved and held dear.
That would touch every family and every home.
Yet even as the bombs fell, fate was ordaining our response in the jungles of New Guinea.
So within months, the Japanese advance had been halted and the certainty of their defeat assured.
Less certain was our future friendship with Japan. But today that too is assured.
As the Allies surged north, Darwin remained a military post busy with troops and supplies.
And when peace came, residents returned to a broken town that took years to rebuild, only to be struck by another foe from the north, Cyclone Tracy.
The strength and resilience of Territorians is foremost in our hearts today.
Their dignity in the face of adversity will never be forgotten.
The bombing of this city was a terrible day in a terrible war.
A disaster tinged with defiance.
Like Gallipoli, it was an early set-back that spurred the nation to ultimate victory.
Territorians have always known it.
And we have made this a national commemoration so that the whole country will know it too.
This day is inscribed in the story of our nation forever.
Reminding us how precious is the freedom we enjoy.
How high a price has been paid to preserve it.
And how we must never, ever forget. 



Funding arrangements in Australian schools are failing to get the best results for students, are complicated and lack transparency, the first comprehensive report into school funding since 1973 has found.
The Review of Funding for Schooling was undertaken by a panel of eminent Australians chaired by David Gonski AC.
It warns that new arrangements are needed to:
 * 	Make sure that Australian kids do not fall behind the rest of the world, and keep Australia competitive, after a decline in education standards in the past decade.
 * 	Stop the gap between advantaged and disadvantaged students growing wider.
To deal with these challenges, the report recommends introducing a Schooling Resource Standard, which would have two elements: a set investment per student, plus additional top-up funding to target disadvantage.
While the proposals in the report provide insight into the kind of system that might deliver the resources we need for schools and students, the report also acknowledges a lot more work is needed to develop and test the different elements of the model before we can be sure it would deliver on our goals.
The Gillard Government will implement a model of this kind if we are satisfied it will help Australia to achieve the following objectives:
 * 	Support higher achievement for all students;
 * 	Deliver equity in access to high quality education;
 * 	Deliver excellent teaching and learning outcomes;
 * 	Support school choice for a diverse range of schools, allowing parents to choose the school that is right for their child;
 * 	Provide fairness, transparency and accountability;
 * 	Support continuousimprovement and innovation in school performance;
 * 	Deliver financial sustainability, to ensure that schools can be financed properly into the future;
 * 	Stability and certainty for schools about their funding, ensuring that no school loses a dollar of funding per student as a result of any changes.
The Gillard Government will now begin work on the next stages in developing a new funding model for our schools.
The Government will:
 * 	Take a set of funding principles to the next meeting of COAG for agreement.
 * 	Seek the commitment of states and territories to work through the reform proposals and options for implementation. This will include detailed development and modeling of the elements of a new funding system, including costs, and how they could work in practice.
 * 	Establish a number of working groups under the COAG council system that will engage across sectors and with stakeholders in key areas to test specific elements of the recommended model, including additional funding to target disadvantage.
 * 	Establish a Ministerial Reference Group to ensure there is ongoing consultation and dialogue with key stakeholders and the public through this process.
The report also makes a number of other key recommendations, including a new approach to capital funding, strategies for promoting philanthropic partnerships with schools, and establishment of an independent National Schools Resourcing Body to set the level of investment needed to provide a high quality education. We will consider each of these in full as we work through the full set of recommendations contained in the report.
In working on these reforms, the Gillard Government will carry out a nation-wide consultation process with Australian families, teachers, principals and the wider community.
This will begin on Wednesday 22ndFebruary with a public forum in Canberra which will be streamed live around the country. Further events will be heldrightacross Australia in the coming months.
We want every Australian parent to be confident their child will get a world-class education no matter where they live or what school they attend.
That's why we've made investing in schools a national priority. We've introduced reforms that are having real benefits for students and families, including the national curriculum, modernising facilities in schools across the country, investing in teacher training, providing more power to principals and providing more information to parents than ever before through the My School site.
The Government has already almost doubled funding for schools to more than $65 billion over four years.
National reform of funding is the next step in this ongoing effortto raise education standards in schools. We will work through these proposals carefully, in collaboration with the community, to make sure we arrive at a new funding model that delivers the best results for Australian schools and families.
The Government thanked the members of the panel for the Review of Funding for Schooling for their leadership and service on this important issue.
The full report, the Government's initial response and details of the next steps can be found at the Your School Our Future website www.schoolfunding.gov.au    


PM: I'm joined by Minister Garrett, the Minister for School Education and by David Bradbury, our local member here in Lindsay.
Can I start by saying a very big thank you to everybody who's made us so welcome here today. To the principal, to our student leaders, to the students that we've met in the classrooms to the students who are probably still over there making pancakes and to the parents and teachers that we've had an opportunity to talk to  -  thank you very much for a big welcome.
And we're here today to talk about the future of education in Australia. We're here in a great school and it's always wonderful to walk around a great school and to see kids who are happy and enthusiastic and going about their learning.
But when we look at our education system overall, whilst we've still got a good education system by the standards of the world, there are worrying signs that our standards are slipping behind. We've watched some kids learning their maths today and enjoying learning their maths. But we know from international testing that the average 15 year old maths student in Australia is more than two years behind a 15 year old in Shanghai.
That is part of the evidence that tells us four of the top five school systems in the world are in our region and we, Australia, are starting to slip behind those standards. So in reading over the last decade we've slipped in international testing from equal second to equal seventh. In maths we've slipped from equal fifth to equal thirteenth. This means we do need to address how in our nation we can be lifting standards, lifting quality and making sure that every child gets a great education because the same set of data tells us that there is also a big gap between the education that a top performing child gets in Australian schools and those children who come from the poorest backgrounds.
So yesterday we announced the first major review of school funding in basically 40 years. That review comes on top of a big reform agenda in education that we have been driving to lift standards and we've had the opportunity to talk about some of those reforms here today and the difference that they've made to this school. The difference that new school capital has made through Building the Education Revolution, the focus on literacy and numeracy, the focus on teacher quality, the focus on giving more resources to disadvantaged schools, our additional $200 million of investment into the needs of students with disabilities.
But now, following the release of the Gonski review yesterday, we are asking schools like this one and school communities, parents, teachers, principals, to now get involved in the discussion our nation needs to have about the future of our education system and the future funding for Australian schools. We want every child to get a great education; working through a funding model for the future is a key part of that. 
It's been great to be here today, I'm going to hand over to Minister Garrett for some comments on the Gonski review and then to local member David Bradbury who is very familiar with this great school.
So Peter if you'd like to go first?
MINISTER GARRETT: Thanks Prime Minister.
Yesterday's release of the most important review on school education funding and our work today and from this day on to make sure that parents can be confident that their kids are getting the best education that they can is right at the centre of what we need to focus on as a nation and its right at the centre of our agenda as a Government and I was really pleased to see a wide range of groups bring forward positive comments about this important education review finding. Whether it's the Business Council of Australia, the Independent Principals Association, the parents' councils, the education unions  -  everybody recognises that this is an important and urgent task and everybody recognises that there is a lot important work to be done.
Nothing in this education review release says that we want to reduce support for schools in Australia. In fact, this is all about making sure that the resources that we apply to schooling give our kids the best education that they can get and we are literally rolling up our sleeves and getting stuck into that work not only by coming into great schools such as this one and spending time with the students and the parents and teachers, but also sitting down with our state colleagues, getting those working groups underway so that we can refine, develop and test the proposed model that Mr Gonski has recommended that we consider.
We have a strong track record of significant investment in education. We have existing programs where we're focusing on teacher effectiveness, on literacy and numeracy. We have a national curriculum for the first time which we agreed with the states and we're now looking forward very much to continuing to work with the states on these national education reforms that are so central to our future prospects as a nation.
BRADBURY: Well thanks very much Prime Minister and Minister Garrett, it's great to have you out here in St Mary's at Our Lady of the Rosary and can I take the opportunity to thank Mr Mark Geerligs, the principal here at OLR.
This is, I think, one of the finest Catholic schools in that great tradition of Catholic schools. This was a school that was actually established by Mary Mackillop, St Mary of the Cross and here we see so many years later those fine traditions being carried out in the work that's being done here.
I want to thank the staff, the students and the whole school community for the very warm welcome that they've given the Prime Minister out here today. It's wonderful to see.
On this particular site we've seen tremendous changes occur over the last few years and they have been supported by the Government but also through parental contribution through the Catholic Education Office and their funds. But I know that in the time that I've been representing this community, the opportunities that are on offer for young students coming to this school have increased immensely. That's something I'm very proud of and that's one of the reasons why I am so proud that as a Government we are tackling the question of education reform into the future because as a country if we are to succeed and to achieve the success that we can, we need to invest in each and every one of us so that we can all realise our potential and when you look at the potential that exists within the young students that we've seen today, well, if we can grasp the nettle then this country can only achieve that success.
So thank you very much to everyone's that's invited us along to be here today.
PM: Thank you. Thank you very much Mark and to Peter and Chloe, our student leaders who have looked after us, thank you too.
So, any questions?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: Yes?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) standards have dropped quite dramatically - you were point out some statistics there, who's responsible?
PM: Well I think we've seen a problem with underinvestment and not sufficient focus on reform in Australian schools in the past. I have said about the Howard era that it was a waste of a decade when it came to reform in Australian schools.
As soon as we were elected in 2007 we started on a major reform journey of change. Things that people had dismissed as not possible to achieve, like national school transparency through MySchool, a national curriculum, and we're making investments in teacher quality and the like. They take time to show rewards. We can track some rewards already but they're going to take more time to show their full reward. Now we want to join those reforms with this debate and approach to school funding, working through what we need to do with resourcing Australian schools because reform matters to drive change, but the money does matter too and now we have to have the national debate about the money.
JOURNALIST: What about the accountability going forward. Throwing money at a problem is one thing but at the end of the day who's going to be responsible?
PM: Well, we've always got to have resources associated with reforms and change which are about driving standards up. We announced yesterday that as we do all of this nuts and bolts work following Mr Gonski's review on school funding, that we will have a conversation with school communities, we will work it through, but when we make the ultimate decisions about what to do about school funding we will be driven by a number of principles and key to those principles is better results, continuous improvement, lifting quality  -  that's what we want the resources to do.
JOURNALIST: So will the government commit that extra $5 billion to education?
PM: Well I think we've got to be very clear where that figure came from, and why it's in Mr Gonski's report. Mr Gonski himself makes the point that he and his very eminent review panel was working with 2009 information. So they've worked with that information, and they've created for us some very big insights into how we can design school funding for the future. But on the actual dollars, they say more work needs to be done because they were working on 2009 information and they weren't able to get a complete picture and do all of the nuts and bolts work themselves. So that's understandable. We need to do that nuts and bolts work now.
JOURNALIST: How long will that take?
PM: Well we are getting straight into it and we will be driving it intensively over coming months. It will be work with education stakeholders, it will be work involving schools and school communities, and it will be work involving our state and territory colleagues because Mr Gonski's review is what we asked him to do in the sense that we asked him to look at funding for all children in all  schools. Not just look at one school system, the approach of our government has been not to look at school systems but to look at schools  -  all schools  -  and every child in every school.
JOURNALIST: So you're saying that because they've working with 2009 figures, it could be greater than the $5 billion [inaudible]?
PM: What I'm saying is I don't think it is productive for us to be speculating about figures before we do all of this nuts and bolts work. To give you just a very clear example and its one we discussed when we were at the table, the report talks about having a new loading to help meet the educational needs of students with disabilities, and the report then makes the point we don't even have a common definition around the country at the moment about students with disabilities or what extra they should receive, and that means that students with comparable needs in different parts of the country today can be getting different support packages. And so until you work through all of that, it stands to reason you can't generate the figures.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're obviously passionate about this policy, there are murmurings behind the scenes going on, [inaudible] how distracting is what's going on within the Labor Party ranks is it to you coming out to do this?
PM: For me, I get on with my job and there's nothing more important to me doing this job than focussing on education. I mean it's key to my vision of our nation's future; we can't have the new economy I want to build unless we have kids learning in schools and able to get those jobs of the future. And to give you just one statistic on that, we are creating jobs even today. We are creating jobs in a way that, for every unskilled job we create, we create two and a half skilled jobs. Now if you fast-forward that into the future it means there will be less work and less opportunities for people who don't have skills. So my focus is on that. Of course I would prefer if all of you had come to the press conference today solely for the purpose of talking about school funding, I understand that from your various bureaus and people you talk to in Canberra, many of you have come for other purposes. So of course I'd prefer that we were in a situation where the only focus was this important national debate.
JOURNALIST: Do you want a pledge of loyalty from the Foreign Minister?
PM:  Look there are many reports about this today. For me, it is what I've just said to you. It's about getting on with the job. I answered a lot of these questions yesterday and to be frank with you I really don't have much to add.
JOURNALIST: But Prime Minister, will you be holding talks with Kevin Rudd about the leadership [inaudible]?
PM: Well look I'd refer you to my last answer. My focus as I'm standing here today with you is on this important report into the future of school education.
JOURNALIST: Were you involved in those secret talks, the secret discussions?
PM: Well look I think you're referring to some newspaper reports today and I've seen those reports and you know, my approach here, I couldn't be clearer about my focus. It's about getting on with the job. I'm not going to be engaged in running commentary about multiple reports in different newspapers about different things.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Look, I did speak to Darren yesterday and that's a private conversation and I'll keep it private.
JOURNALIST: Do you believe you have the numbers [inaudible]?
PM: As I said yesterday I enjoy the strong support of my colleagues.
JOURNALIST: But Mr Rudd yesterday was accused of disloyalty to the Prime Minister. [inaudible]
GARRETT: The Prime Minister has my full support. She always has had and I think it's really important to recognise that people rightly are concerned about the way in which we can get the better education system happening in this country in the way in which we fund schools. That's why we've come out here today, and that's what I'm going to be focussed on and I know that that's something which the government is very focussed on as well. That's the most important piece of work for me to be doing today, and I have no more to say about that matter other than any other questions on education.
BRADBURY: Can I be very clear about this, and say what I have always said, publicly and privately, to anyone that has asked me. And that is that I support Prime Minister Julia Gillard, and in fact it would be fair to say that I am one of her strongest supporters. But I read in the paper today as I've read on a few occasions in the last couple of days, that I am somehow listed on a list of so-called undecided people. Can I make this point, that in relation to each of those articles not one journalist has asked me for my view. Now as I said both privately and publicly I have stated that I support the Prime Minister. She's doing a great job in difficult circumstances. As a government we need to do what Labor governments are here to do and that is to reform education to deliver the services that people in our communities want. Now I don't know what I have to do to go beyond that, if it means getting a tattoo, I'd consider it. But somehow I think my wife might object to that.  But frankly I think that I've said all that I can say. The Prime Minister has my absolute support.
JOURNALIST: How does it make you feel when you read these reports that you're undecided?
BRADBURY: It makes me frustrated with the journalism that underpins these stories. Frankly I am accountable for all that I do as a Member of Parliament and that is appropriate, that's right. But if people are going to write stories where they haven't even bothered to pick up the phone and to ask you a simple question... Any journalist, and I defy any journalist in this country that has spoken to me about this issue, that suggest that they had anything other than a definitive answer of my support for the Prime Minister to come forward. There won't be one person that will come forward and say that. Yet these things are printed in our newspapers for whatever purpose. But frankly I support the Prime Minister; I think it's about time that we just allowed her to get on with the job of tackling these challenges that are too important to the students that we saw here today, that have a great contribution to make to our country. And we want to get on with giving them the policy settings and the funding that they need so that they can achieve that.
JOURNALIST: Mr Bradbury, Lindsay is a marginal seat. Does this sort of instability make you nervous about your job, when the election comes around?
BRADBURY: Well, disunity is death. That is a principle in political life. And frankly, there is no reason why there shouldn't be complete unity behind the Prime Minister. I think she has the overwhelming support of her colleagues. In fact, I am certain that that is the case. I think it's important that as a government we have the opportunity to do what we can do and that is to build the better Australia that children such as those that we met here today expect us to get on with building.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, [inaudible] distraction though from these policies, so isn't it in your best interests to resolve it and bring it to a head?
PM: Well I'm very focussed on these policies and that's what we're here to talk about today.
JOURNALIST: David Bradbury just made the point that disunity is death, [inaudible] do you stand by what he's just said?
PM: My approach as I've outline to you is to be very determined about getting on with the job. We're here today to talk to people about the future of Australian schools. Last week in parliament we delivered a private health insurance rebate  -  changes long fought for. Over the course of last year we delivered nation-changing reforms, not all of them popular or easy, but reforms that will make a long-term difference for the prosperity of this country and for opportunity within this country. That's my approach and my determination. Thanks very much.


PM: It's great to be here today at BAE Systems. I'm joined by the Premier of South Australia Jay Weatherill and by our local member Nick Champion the Member for Wakefield.
We're here today looking at some very advanced manufacturing. Advanced manufacturing that is happening right here and is so important to our Defence.
Looking at this place you can see that it's a world away from many people's image of manufacturing. It's the latest of technology doing the most sophisticated things. This part of South Australia is well known for its manufacturing whether it's here at BAE Systems or whether it's at Holden, this is a great manufacturing region.
As Prime Minister I'm very passionate about ensuring that Australia has a strong manufacturing sector for the future. To get that right we need to be working with great companies like this one and I thank everybody for making us so welcome here today.
We've got to be working with them as we go about our Defence contracting and working through our capability requirements and needs for the future, but we need to be doing more. We need to be making sure we've got the high skill settings that get the workers to this place with the skills that they need.
We need to be making sure that we've got the best of technology available, including the National Broadband Network. We've got to keep investing in infrastructure to get these important goods to market. We've got to be getting ready for a clean energy future because that's what the world will require.
So when I talk about creating the new economy of the future I'm talking about businesses like this one; great businesses employing people in high-skill, high-wage jobs where manufacturing has a clear future, as well as talking about the future of other industries in our economy.
We've, over the last few days, been very focused on Australian schools and that is part of this picture too, because we're only going to get the skilled workers we need for tomorrow if we've got a world class schooling system which is why, following the receipt of the Gonski Review, we will be continuing to work with schools and school communities on the future of Australian education.
We've already brought a lot of reforms, but there is more to do to ensure Australian kids are winning the education race and if we can win the education race then we'll win the economic race in the future, as they take their skills and capacities into businesses like this one.
So it's been great to be here today, thank you to everyone, thank you very much.
I'll hand over to the Premier for some comments and then to Nick.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Thank you Prime Minister and Nick.
Just last week we unveiled our plan for the next two years and one of the key priorities we laid out for South Australia was the growth of our advanced manufacturing sector and we've always had an important manufacturing sector but the question for South Australia is how we can grow that, take those skills and capabilities and translate them into an advanced manufacturing sector.
Now a fantastic vehicle for that is the Defence industry and we're seeing here a fantastic example of what an advanced manufacturing industry looks like. Look at this factory, it's a very different factory from the sort of factory you might have imagined in the past. In the back room there are ICT technicians, there are a whole range of other professionals that perhaps are not traditionally associated with what we might understand to be the manufacturing process.
This is the manufacturing industry of the future and we believe we have to grow this if we are to sustain ourself as a state and indeed as a nation. We've invested very significantly here in this particular plant to give this business the capability of forming part of probably one of the largest and most important manufacturing projects in the world which is the Joint Strike Fighter.
They have the capacity to elaborately transform pieces of titanium into the struts that go into the Joint Strike Fighter. Recently I had the opportunity of inspecting the Lockheed Martin Plant in Dallas and see how this particular factory here fits into that global picture. And it's very exciting that this plant here is playing such a crucial role in what must be regarded as one of the most important manufacturing projects which is being undertaken in the world, certainly one of the largest.
So I want to acknowledge the skills and the capabilities of all the workers here and as the Prime Minister indicated, we need to lift the standards in our education sector if we're to provide the skills that are necessary to feed the factories of the future like this and that's why we in particular welcome the Gonski Review.
Can I just say something about the Gonski Review. I noted today that there's some criticism by some of the Liberal Premiers across Australia. I don't share those criticisms. I'm favourably disposed to the Gonski Review.
I think it is an incredibly important contribution to the future of education in our nation. It does a couple of very important things; the first thing it does is it shifts our education system to focus on the unique needs of every single child, making sure they have what they need to have the skills and capabilities to participate in both work and life.
The second thing it does and this is incredibly important and I can't understand any state Premier not wanting to be part of this: it for the first time, systematically calls for both the Commonwealth and the state government to be involved in the funding of public education.
Now of course the Commonwealth Government recently has been a massive contributor to public education through a series of national partnerships. What this review proposes is the Commonwealth will be involved in a systematic way and in an ongoing way.
Now if you care about public education, then it simply does not make sense to have state governments funding public education and the Commonwealth Governments fundamentally funding private education. The truth is the relative capacities of those two systems to fund will mean that one system will over time become a less well supported system.
What we need is both Commonwealth and state governments supporting the needs of every child in whatever system they happen to be in whether it's public or private. That's why we fundamentally support the principles underpinning the Gonski Review.
There's a lot of detailed work that needs to be done to land that review, there are a lot of discussions about the relative financial burden of how the system would work. I don't think it threatens the state's autonomy  -  their public education systems. I think you can have state autonomy over your public education and still accept the nature of the review proposed by Mr Gonski.
Thank you.
CHAMPION: Well, thanks. Well it's terrific to have the Prime Minister and the Premier out here to see the future of manufacturing in the north and I'm particularly inspired by the fact that when we talk to the workers here they tell a story of starting out doing apprenticeships in toolmaking, ending up working on highly computerised machinery and doing more on the technical side and then ending up doing more study in higher education.
That's a story I want to see replicated in the local area for kids coming out of Fremont High School or coming out of St Patrick's Technical College or coming out of the multitude of high schools that I've got in my electorate.
It's a very important story to tell. I hope you all focus on it because it's about the transformation of our manufacturing sector away from what people imagine in their minds of dark and dingy factories, towards highly technical, highly skilled, highly modern jobs for the future and when people think about jobs for the future they should think about the workers here at BAE.
Thank you.
PM: Thank you very much, we're happy to take your questions and at the conclusion I'll make some remarks about Christchurch and the anniversary today.
Yes?JOURNALIST: On the topic of manufacturing (inaudible).
PM: We're continuing to work hard with Holden on the future of Holden in this region. I understand how important Holden is here in South Australia, it's important to the nation overall and so we'll continue to work with them.
We have to do intensive work because we are looking to secure a future here. It won't be the same as the past has been, but we want it to be a strong future for Holden. So I'm not in a position to make an announcement today, but I can assure you that we are doing everything with Holden to secure them for the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) suspect within a couple of weeks they'll have a more certain future?
PM: Well we're working hard on bringing to conclusion what we're able to say about co-investment with Holden and about those jobs in the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Premier wants to talk to you later today about the River Murray, which is an important issue. Can you give a guarantee that under the Murray Darling Basin Plan you will ensure that South Australia's interests are protected?
PM: Well the Premier has already raised with me the question of the River Murray so he hasn't let a minute go by which is understandable.
As someone who grew up in this state I understand the importance of the River Murray to South Australians and I understand the frustration that has come over years and years, decades and decades, because of the inability of our nation to get a national plan and the sense here in South Australia that being at the end of the river you are hostage to what happens further up the river. I can understand that sense of frustration.
I certainly want to assure South Australians of this: I want to see for the future the River Murray being a healthy river, the river communities being vibrant communities and us seeing sustainable food production. I want to make sure that in the future South Australian families can take their kids to the mouth of the Murray and they can see water flowing.
Now there's always going to be droughts and there's always going to be times of stress, but we need to get this right for the long term and for the future. That's what we've been working on with our independent authority, the Murray Darling Basin Authority. It has put out a plan for consultation and that should be the subject of vigorous debate and it is being the subject of vigorous debate.
But as that debate happens, certainly as Prime Minister, I'm not going to forget what I learnt as a child here in South Australia about the importance of the River Murray. Our Federal members here are constant advocates on behalf of the South Australia about the future of the river, as is the Premier.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how do you respond to news that Simon Crean could be making a tilt at the leadership?
PM: Look I answered a wide range of these questions yesterday and I know I'm going to disappoint you but I really don't have much to add.
I'm here getting on with the job, and the job is about focussing on the future of our economy. Where are today's young people going to work? What are they going to do? What are their jobs going to look like? I want jobs to be in advanced manufacturing for our young people and I want them to go to the best schools possible so that's my focus.
JOURNALIST: The leadership issue isn't going away, Simon Crean (inaudible) the circuit breaker that's needed to make this dispute (inaudible)?
PM: Well, I've answered a wide variety of these questions and my focus is on getting on with the things that are vital for our nation's future - managing the economy today in the interests of working people as we build the new economy of tomorrow. And that's what we're talking about here.
JOURNALIST: You say you're just getting on with the job, wouldn't it be easier just to call for a spill and have it all out and then finished with?
PM: Well, once again I know I'm going to disappoint you, but I've answered these questions yesterday and the day before and I really don't have anything to add.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the comments from Doug Cameron last night on Sky News, where he was talking about ministers thrashing each other in public. What are your thoughts? What do you think of ministers criticising each other in public?
PM: I have answered these questions over the last few days. I really don't have anything to add. My focus is on getting on with the job that I need to do as Prime Minister for the nation.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about Colin Barnett's comments about Gonski?
PM: Look, I am concerned that Premier Barnett would somehow take a message from this major review on school funding  -  that it's about who controls schools  -  it's not about who controls schools.
States will continue to manage and run state schools. The independent schools will run themselves as they do now. The catholic education system will manage catholic schools, and overwhelmingly as we look around the nation, states, the catholic school system, independent schools are doing a great job. But we need to keep getting better. We need to keep getting better for the future.
And so it's not about taking over the management of schools. Premier Barnett in Western Australia would continue to be the leader of what happens in public education there, but it's about governments working together to get this right for the future.
JOURNALIST: Just on the River Murray, do you stand by your pledge to bring in legislation (inaudible) in this term of government?
PM: Look, we are determined to get a plan, and get it done, get it operational. That's certainly our determination.
We're at the stage now in the process where there is a plan out for consultation. That is working through until late April, and then we will be in the endgame of getting the final plan done.
So this is an important time in the development of the plan for people to have their voices heard. Certainly there are very strong South Australian voices. I'm surrounded by two of those very strong South Australian voices, and they will be continuing to put the message on behalf of South Australia, and I understand that message.
I grew up here, knowing what it was like when the River Murray was in drought; knowing what it meant for communities in the Riverland as well as for the community of Adelaide itself. I understand what it meant for all of South Australia.
JOURNALIST: Are you confident that the plan will be an environmental solution rather than a political solution?
PM: The plan  -  the aims here and they are threefold - we want a plan that will give us a healthy river, we want a plan that will ensure we've got vibrant river communities, and we want a plan that enables us to have sustainable food production.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the plan as it stands (inaudible) are in the best interests of getting agreement on the plan?
PM: I'll turn to the Premier who might want to make some comments, and I'll say something afterwards. Thank you.
WEATHERILL: What I've always said is that we're not ruling out any of the rights that we may have. I've also said at the same time we're participating in a process that is going to lead to the establishment of a plan, so we're not yet at the end of that process, we're participating in that process in good faith.
I was asked whether I ruled out taking a challenge to the High Court, and I said I don't and I said that we believe that we have rights in relation to the waters that come from the upstream states downstream. A pretty fundamental proposition is that if you're upstream you can't deplete the water such that people downstream can't enjoy the benefits of the waters and enjoy a healthy environment.
So that's been our position. It's consistently our position but we're working in good faith through the process and will continue to strongly advocate South Australia's position.
JOURNALIST: Premier, you've said you'd like to see the Federal Labor leadership  issue sorted out, and given you've got the Prime Minister here, what would your advice be to the Prime Minister?
WEATHERILL: I'm not going to be distracted by these questions; I've got many more important things to talk about than media speculation about the Federal Labor leadership.
We've been talking about advanced manufacturing, about the river, we have a whole range of very important decisions in relation to the Defence industry, in particular the new submarine project that is of vital importance to South Australia so they're the things that I'm interested in and they're the things I'll be speaking to the Prime Minister about.
JOURNALIST: But do you think the current Labor leadership crisis is distracting from those issues at the moment?
WEATHERILL: It's not distracting me.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how was the dinner last night?
PM: I enjoyed it.
JOURNALIST: There was no meat on the menu?
PM: No, well there was fish on the menu, so people ate fish. People ate vegetables, we obviously responded to requests about particular dietary needs as people put them in.
JOURNALIST: Has it impacted on your opposition at all to same-sex marriage.
PM: Look my position's clear, and we will in the Labor Party, have a conscience vote on this issue as we determined to do at National Conference.
JOURNALIST: So just on the issue of the legal challenge, do you think it is helpful for reaching an agreement on the Murray Darling Basin Plan?
PM: I think the Premier's just dealt with that issue. We are working to get a plan that will meet all of the objectives that we know we need to meet for the future of the Murray and for the best interest of our nation.
We've had the Murray Darling Basin Authority working independently of government and that's appropriate. Guided by science and that's appropriate. Now people can have their views heard because there is this period of consultation.
But we do want to get to an outcome here that sees us have a healthy river. That's what South Australians want to see, a healthy River Murray and what they want to see is a national plan so that there is an understanding about conduct up and down the river rather than South Australians just bearing the brunt of conduct that happens upstream over which they have no influence.
JOURNALIST: Do you support the possibility of legal action or not?
PM: Well I think the Premier's just made it clear that he's taken an approach of not ruling that out, but clearly still taking that approach of working to get an outcome  -  a plan that meets the needs of South Australia and the nation overall.
JOURNALIST: Do you promise that there will be a plan in this term of government?
PM: That's right, we are delivering as we said we would.
Yes there have been some times here that we've needed to get extra time in for consultation and so you're seeing that play out now, and then the next stages will come to fruition exactly as we've always said they would. There will be a final plan and then we will move to the stage of legislation.
JOURNALIST: Do you think as it stands the plan is unfair to South Australian interests?
PM: Look, I think the best thing is for people to have their voices heard. If I am seen to prejudge this debate I don't think that's fair to anyone. We will go through the process with the independent authority as we said we would.
JOURNALIST: On a daily basis there are calls from your colleagues to resolve this leadership problem. I know that you've said you've responded to this, but is it the case that you're sticking your head in the sand and not dealing with this?
PM: Look, the case is that I have responded to it and I'm here talking about the future of our economy and also the future of schools.
JOURNALIST: Peter Beattie says it's another day, another leadership challenge. What are the problems with the Labor caucus? That's what he's asking, what are the problems with the Labor caucus.
PM: Well I'll refer you to all of my other answers. So if that's the end of questions, I'll just make a statement about Christchurch.
It's a year since our New Zealand friends had to live through the shattering devastation that we saw in Christchurch.
185 people lost their lives. I think we all remember seeing those images come through our television screens and the scenes of devastation in Christchurch, particularly in its CBD.
I've had the opportunity to go to Christchurch since  -  I was there for a memorial service. I met with some of the Australian Emergency Services personnel and police who went to help. I met with some of the local community, and I toured a very eerie CBD. It had been cordoned off, it wasn't safe for people to go into, and buildings had been marked for demolition. Some of them already rubble, some of them so structurally unsound they were going to have to be demolished.
It's hard in words to convey what that picture was like, a CBD with no one working in it. A CBD with no one on the streets; a CBD full of damaged buildings with more marked for demolition.
It was a very, very tough time for our New Zealand family.
As is the Aussie way, in that tough time we extended to them all of our support, and I think today Australians will want to mark this one year by thinking about our New Zealand family and how far they've come during this twelve months, but how much more needs to happen.
The people of Christchurch have suffered ten thousand aftershocks since this major earthquake; it's pretty hard to imagine that too. Having lived through such a major earthquake, then day after day feeling the tremors again with all of the stresses and strain that comes with that.
So, our thoughts are with New Zealanders today, with the people of Christchurch, as they mark this very solemn anniversary and as they dedicate themselves to the rest of the rebuilding that needs to be done in that very beautiful city.
Thank you very much.



Today Kevin Rudd has tendered his resignation as Minister for Foreign Affairs. Mr Rudd was a strong and effective advocate for Australia's interests overseas.During his period of service as Foreign Minister there were many achievements. He strongly pursued Australia's interests in the world.
I am disappointed that the concerns Mr Rudd has publicly expressed this evening were never personally raised with me, nor did he contact me to discuss his resignation prior to his decision.I plan to hold a press conference tomorrow to make a further statement.


Today we pause to remember the people of Christchurch, who suffered so cruelly when their beautiful city was struck by a great earthquake one year ago today.
The devastating earthquake took the lives of 185 people and grievously wounded many more.
Much of the city was crushed, including historic landmarks like the ChristChurch Cathedral, and thousands of homes were lost to liquefaction.
In this past year more than 10,000 aftershocks have continued to shake the city and its surrounding districts and test its people.
Australians responded with generosity and compassion to this great tragedy, just as New Zealand did in response to our summer of disasters in 2011.
Today, Christchurch is again in our thoughts, our sorrow and grief undiminished, our respect never greater.


PM: I have decided that at 10am Monday morning a ballot for the Labor leadership will be conducted. Following Kevin Rudd's resignation yesterday, I have formed this view that we need a leadership ballot in order to settle this question once and for all. I believe it is in the interests of Labor Party that it be determined once and for all, but much more importantly, I believe it is in the interests of the Australian nation.
For far too long we have seen squabbling within the Labor Party which has obscured the Government's achievements and what we are doing to build a stronger and fairer Australia for the future.
In recent days, I believe that this has moved to a distraction from governing itself. That's not good enough. Australians are rightly sick of this and they want it brought to an end. Only Labor can provide the vision that this country needs for our future and Labor can only provide it if we resolve this issue once and for all and proceed with unity and determination.
When the ballot is called at 10am on Monday morning, I will re-nominate for the Labor leadership and I expect to receive the support of my colleagues when I do so.
But let me be very clear about this - if against my expectation I do not receive the support of my colleagues, then I will go to the backbench and I will renounce any further ambition for the Labor leadership. This would be in the best interests of the Government and the nation.
I anticipate that Mr Rudd will also be a candidate in this ballot. I ask him to give the same undertaking, that if he does not succeed in this ballot that he will go to the backbench and renounce any further claims to the leadership and act in the interests of the Australian Labor Party and of our nation.
In the past 18 months under my leadership, the Government has secured some major reforms which will make us a stronger and fairer nation in the future. It will make us ready for the future.
In these reforms, I'm thinking of the reform we have introduced to put a price on carbon and to seize a clean energy future for us, a reform that a have delivered in this minority government Parliament, a reform that was not possible prior to my leadership despite the support of the then Leader of the Opposition for a price on carbon and despite the same Leader of the Greens being in the Federal Parliament.
Under my leadership we have also enacted a Minerals Resource Rent Tax to better share the mineral wealth within our grounds and to back in important changes like more superannuation for Australian workers and better arrangements to support small business. When I became leader of the Labor Party, this reform was the subject of a vicious national debate and there was no prospect that it was going to be secured.
Thirdly, under my leadership we have secured an historic health agreement right around the nation that is meaning more doctors, more nurses and more local control of hospitals. It's meaning less emergency department waiting time, it's meaning better access to elective surgery.
When I became Prime Minister there was an agreement which did not extend to every corner of the nation and which was being picked apart by premiers and was not going to stand the test of time.
Under my leadership, too, we have secured the structural separation of Telstra, what we needed to do in order to back in the roll-out of the National Broadband Network. This was a reform not attempted before I came to the prime-ministership, but a vital reform for the nation's future.
In addition, under my leadership we have secured the means testing of the private health insurance rebate. A fairness measure  -  fairer to low and middle income earners who are no longer going to be asked to subsidise the private health insurance of those who earn so much more than they do.
Once again prior to me becoming Prime Minister this reform had been attempted but it had not been secured - in this minority Parliament I have secured it.
And of course as Prime Minister I have continued to roll out the education reforms that I designed and we are in the process of adding to them, because there is nothing more important that our nation's future than making sure that every child goes to a great school and gets a great education.
At the same time, as we have done all of this, under my leadership we have ensured that low income workers get a fairer tax deal. We have taken the steps necessary to get the budget on the track back to surplus and we will deliver that surplus in 2012-13 and we have continued to manage the Australian economy so that it is strong and offers Australians the benefit of jobs. Jobs today whilst we build the new economy we will need for the jobs of tomorrow.
Now no government is perfect and I have made mistakes over the past 18 months, I acknowledge that, but ultimately the measure of a government is what the government achieves for the Australian people, what meaningful change and meaningful reforms are delivered. The measure of a government is not by opinion polls or daily headlines in newspapers.
I believe that the driving purpose of a Labor Government is to make sure our nation is stronger and fairer in the future than it is today. Achieving that vision requires us to make all of the right choices today, to manage the economy in the interests of working people whilst we make the right choices to build for the future, so that in that future people will have the opportunity to get a job, get a better job, start their own small business if they choose to, families will have the security that they need to nurture their children and to know that they will have a great future. That is the driving purpose and ambition of a Labor Government to meet the needs of working people today and tomorrow.
Ultimately, under my leadership, I believe we have been securing the big reforms that will make us stronger and fairer. But we've got so much more work to do building on those reforms. So much more work to do to make sure that every child does go to that great school which is why we are now pursuing the work flowing from the major review of school funding and new proposals to empower school principals so that they can run their schools knowing that they can give every child a great education.
The reforms we still have to pursue to make sure that Australian adults have the skills they need to get the job they want, which is why I am taking a major skills reform package to COAG in April.
The reforms that we need as a nation to make sure that in this time of structural adjustment and change we continue to be a nation that has got the benefit of a diversified economy, that we don't just have one source of strength, the resources boom, but we have many sources of strength including the manufacturing sector, tourism, international education, and a services economy.
We've got more to do to make sure that Australians who live a life with a disability or the people who care for those Australians with that disability get a fair go and a fair chance.
We've got more to do to make sure, as our society ages, that we are supporting older Australians and giving them the choices and options they need and deserve.
It is my intention to seek the support of my Labor colleagues to make sure that I can continue to pursue this reform agenda as Prime Minister. Meaningful reforms that will have an impact on Australian families and better support them in their lives and better give them economic opportunities for the future.
Now I note that Kevin Rudd in his media statements yesterday and today has very consistently referred to the need to defeat Tony Abbott at the next election.
I want to be clear about this too. I believe that we can win the next election and defeat Tony Abbott. I believe I can lead Labor to that victory, provided that the Labor Party unites and we get on with the job.
But I also want to be very clear about this - government is about more than electioneering. Government is about having the courage to get the big reforms done. Government is about making sure that each and every day you have the discipline and the method necessary to get the huge volume of work done that government needs to do. Government is about having the personal strength in adversity to still ensure that you stay focused and you get your job done.
I believe I have demonstrated those attributes as Prime Minister. The courage on the big reforms, the discipline and method to make every day count, the personal sense of strength which means that I can always keep going no matter how adverse the circumstances.
In this Labor leadership ballot I will be saying to my colleagues that we need to come together and to keep working in the interests of the Australian people each and every day, delivering the big reforms that are always the hallmarks of Labor governments. I'm very happy to take your questions.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
PM: We'll do it one at a time, yes.
JOURNALIST: Your colleagues have been vociferous about the Kevin Rudd, including your deputy. Do you still maintain he led a good government that simply lost its way?
PM: Well on the question of 2010 and the past I would like to say something about that. My focus is on the future, not on the past, but let me just say some things about 2010.
I determined that I would contest the prime ministership in circumstances where the government that Kevin Rudd had led had entered a period of paralysis.
Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister always had very difficult and very chaotic work patterns. In my view, Kevin Rudd is an excellent campaigner and he was an excellent campaigner in 2007. Indeed, a remarkable campaigner in 2007.
But government requires different skills. Government requires consistency, purpose, method, discipline, inclusion, consultation; it requires you to lead a big team and to lead it well. Kevin Rudd, as Prime Minister, struggled to do that and by the days of 2010 that struggle had resulted in paralysis in the government.
In those circumstances I did ask Kevin Rudd for a leadership ballot and in that leadership ballot Kevin Rudd assessed he had so little support that did not choose to contest it.
That is the people who knew him best and knew the most about his prime ministership had determined that he no longer had their support. That's what motivated me in 2010, it was about the interests of the nation and providing good government.
Out of respect to Kevin Rudd at that time I didn't canvas every detail. I used the terminology that the government had lost its way. And clearly, with that level of paralysis the government had lost its way.
As Prime Minister I've worked very hard indeed to make sure that we govern with discipline and method and that is what I do as Prime Minister and that is what I will seek to have the support of my colleagues to continue to do.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Graham Richardson this morning has said this has now got vicious and the wounds are deep and will last for a long time. That must be concerning for you. Is it vicious?
PM: There is a challenge here for Labor to have the leadership ballot on Monday and to unite after Monday. And certainly, my message to my colleagues will be that we do need to unite after Monday and get on with the job that Australians expect us to do and that job is about governing for them, each and every day.
Yes, of course, political parties campaign and political parties electioneer and I've played my fair part and my fair share in electioneering and election campaigns. But the focus of government has to be on delivering each and every day and that will be my message to my colleagues.
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
PM: And I'll finish answering the question. In terms of the Labor Party coming together, I think it is very important that the leadership ballot that is on Monday ends this once and for all, which is why I am prepared to say that if I am not successful in that leadership ballot, then I will go to the backbench and renounce any further ambition to the Labor leadership.
I expect to win. But if against my expectations I lose that is my commitment. Kevin Rudd should give a comparable commitment.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: How long has Kevin Rudd been undermining your leadership? And do you agree with comments made by Wayne Swan last night that went all the way back to that election?
PM: Well let me say this  -  over many months now there have been rumours of destabilisation of my leadership by Kevin Rudd.
On each and every occasion I have preferred to think the best of Kevin Rudd and think the best of his conduct. However, it is now evident to me and I think it is evident to the Australian people that there has been a long-running destabilisation campaign here to get to this point, where Kevin Rudd is clearly going to announce that he wants to seek the Labor leadership.
Now I don't seek to dwell on that because our purpose, my purpose, the Labor Party purpose, is about serving the nation's interests.
And I of course called the leadership ballot because I believe it is in the interests of the nation to get this resolved. Australians are rightly sick of it and that is why I have determined that the matter will be resolved on Monday.
JOURNALIST: According to your colleagues this has been going on since 2010, why didn't you act earlier to try and get rid of this destabilisation?
PM: Look, I have preferred on every occasion to believe the best of people. Now I think as we see all of the evidence in our newspapers every day, there has been a concerted campaign here and it's time that it was brought to an end and the way of ending it is with a ballot.
JOURNALIST: Are you giving Kevin Rudd a fair go though by calling a ballot so early in the week?
PM: Well let's just go through the circumstances here. Kevin Rudd announced his resignation as Foreign Minister yesterday. That was a decision he took at a time of his choosing.
It is now absolutely evident that Kevin Rudd is intending to return to Australia to ask me for a leadership ballot. I am not prepared for the nation to go through many days of drift before there is a clear point where this is going to be resolved.
And if I can make one political comment - overwhelmingly my view is about the nation and the need for certainty, but if can I make one political comment, I don't believe it is fair to Anna Bligh and to our colleagues campaigning in Queensland for this to drift on day after day with no resolution in sight.
JOURNALIST: Hasn't the government lost its way now for this situation to have evolved and if you don't win with a big majority on Monday it's going to continue, isn't it? À la Bob Hawke, Paul Keating, John Howard and Andrew Peacock (inaudible)
PM: Well on continuing, that's a question you need to put to Mr Rudd.
I've made my attitude very clear. This is the final decision by the Labor Party as to who should lead it and I will accept that decision as the final decision and conduct myself in accordance with it.
I believe Mr Rudd should give a comparable undertaking.
On the question of what the Government is doing now, let me assure Australians in this period I will continue to do my work as Prime Minister. I'm intending to do that. I was doing that yesterday. I'll do it today and I'll do it in the days to come.
But it is very clear to me that this is a distraction that is obscuring the ability of the Government to explain its reform program to Australians and for some in Government, I believe it is becoming a distraction from their work.
JOURNALIST: What does this say about your leadership that 18 months into that leadership you're being forced to call a leadership ballot?
PM: Well I think you need to put that question to some others who have brought us to this point.
JOURNALIST: Has anyone suggested to you that it would be in the party's best interests for a compromise candidate other than yourself  to contest against Kevin Rudd?
PM: No, no one has suggested that to me.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe your partners in minority government could or would work with Kevin Rudd. Or have you had an indication from any of them that all bets are off?
PM: Look, all I've seen is their comments in the newspapers.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said earlier that you'd made some mistakes. What specifically were those mistakes that you made?
PM: Look I think that's a good question and I'd have to say having lived through the days of the Rudd Government and of course I was Deputy Prime Minister in the Rudd Government, so I take my fair share of the criticisms of that time.
But having lived through the days of the Rudd Government, it became absolutely clear to me that one of the overriding problems of the government that Kevin Rudd led is it was very, very focused on the next news cycle, on the next picture opportunity, rather than the long term reforms for the nation's interests.
I think, to be frank, as Prime Minister maybe I overreacted to that, maybe I went too much the other way, and I said to myself good policy will always speak for itself.
Well, good policy does speak for itself, but you've also got to be out there being a very strong advocate for it. So I've learned lessons about making sure that I'm not only in my office making sure we deliver the big reforms for the nation's future, but I'm also out explaining them in a way that helps Australians understand them and make sense of them and connect them to our big picture for the future.
So I think I've learned some lessons from that during these months.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, very quickly some are already saying that a drover's dog would lead the Liberals to an election victory next time around. I know that's an analogy from the past, but how do you (inaudible)
PM: I am confident that we can present at the next election in 2013 and that we can win that election, provided we use Monday's opportunity to end this for all time and then we get on with the job of delivering good government to the Australian people in the interests of a stronger and fairer Australia for the future.
 And certainly, my intention as Prime Minister, if I secure my colleague's support during that ballot, and I anticipate that I will, if I secure my colleague's support in that ballot, then I will be simply getting on with that job and I think the message will have well and truly gone to others that it is over and that these days of destabilisation are behind us and we are focused with 100 per cent unity on what we need to govern in the best interests of Australians every day. 
That takes courage, it takes method, it takes purpose, it takes discipline, it requires inner personal fortitude and strength and I will bring all of that to the table.
We'll take a couple more here and then we'll go.
JOURNALIST: Why are you better placed to beat Tony Abbott when the polls clearly show otherwise?
PM: I believe when people vote in this nation they vote on what is going to be in the best interests of their family. I don't believe you govern by looking at today's opinion polls and saying what do I believe in today? I don't believe you do that.
Opinion polls they'll go up, they'll go down. I'm under no illusions about the degree of political difficulty the Government confronts. I'm also under no illusions why we have those political difficulties.
We have worked to secure some big reforms. We have shown courage in adversity. I particularly said to myself when we formed this minority government that we were not going to leave reform opportunities by the wayside. I was not, because there was a minority Parliament, going to cower or have this nation cower from the big reforms.
So has it cost us, things like carbon pricing, yes it has. Is it absolutely the right thing for the nation's future, yes it is.
And I will be very prepared in the 2013 election to debate Tony Abbott and to say to him and to say to the Australian people you've got a choice here. You've got a choice about whether or not having seen that big reform secured and seeing more money in your pocket, as a result of that big reform, whether you want to keep that reform for the nation's future or descend into the chaotic policy that Tony Abbott has. I'll be very happy to that have that contest in 2013.
JOURNALIST: Kevin Rudd spoke about the support he has from his colleagues. What sort of support have you received from your colleagues, particularly the front bench?
PM: I've made it very clear over the days I've been questioned about this that I enjoy the strong support of my colleagues and I do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Labor Party has made the structural reform has been controlled by the faceless men?
PM: Well thank you very much for that question too. Firstly, I think this chatter about faceless men is profoundly insulting to my Labor colleagues and my caucus colleagues, profoundly insulting to them.
I can tell you about my Labor colleagues. I can tell you about the men and women who make up the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party. They are people who went into public life because they believe in something. They believe in a Labor vision of the future. They believe in making sure that we deliver that Labor vision for the future. They believe in helping working families each and every day.
They are people of their own mind and own resources and they make up their own mind. And any suggestion that somehow they get told to do by someone else I think is deeply and personally insulting to each and every one of them.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried or are you concerned at what will happen if Kevin Rudd loses the ballot and he quits Parliament causing a by-election?
PM: Well you'll have to put that question to Kevin Rudd.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you now blame Kevin Rudd for sabotaging the 2010 election as some of your colleagues have said this morning?
PM: The 2010 election was sabotaged. We went into that election in very difficult circumstances as a result of the months of paralysis and chaos under Mr Rudd's leadership; the need to sort that out, the fact that huge reform issues like carbon pricing were in a mess, in a very big mess.
So we went into that election in politically very, very difficult circumstances. Notwithstanding that, in the early part of that election campaign, the opinion polls - and I don't ordinarily refer to them  -  but as you know during the weeks of an election campaign we get a blizzard of them and if people look at the opinion polls from 2010 and this accords with the Labor Party's own internal research, we were in a winning position in that campaign until the sabotage that knocked that campaign very, very solidly.
Now I had to come out, actually it was here in Adelaide is my recollection, and deal with
that sabotage of the campaign and get the campaign back up and going, pull myself and pull the team through, so that we could create a government and I did do that.
I found it within myself to make sure that we continued to campaign for all of the Labor policies and programs we believe in and then when confronted with a minority Parliament, I got myself right in there and made sure that we delivered government and we did.
So it required some stoicism but I think people who know me, and many people standing in this press pack do, people who know me would know stoicism and personal fortitude and a sense of  calm under pressure is amongst my key attributes and one of the reasons can I do this job.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this has obviously been a very bitter struggle, you say that the ballot will hopefully provide a final decision, what guarantee can you give that there won't be more sabotage?
PM: You have to put that question to Kevin Rudd. I've made my view very clear. We'll take a last question here.
JOURNALIST: Can you rule out here and now that you ever leaked against Kevin Rudd when he was leader?
PM: Absolutely, I can rule that out one hundred per cent, one hundred per cent, and I can say this to you, feel free to ring any of your colleagues in the federal press gallery, and feel free to say to them “Julia Gillard absolves you of any obligation you might feel from off the record comments. Did she ever make a comment disloyal to Kevin Rudd during the time she was Deputy Prime Minister?” And to a person they will say no, because I never did.
Now I know this has been the subject of commentary in recent weeks, I want to be very clear about this  -  as the dysfunction in the government grew, I did everything I could. Everything humanly possible to try and salvage the situation and to try and make sure that Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister and the government that he led functioned. I went to extraordinary lengths.
Now I'm not going to sit here and stand here and detail all of that, but it's very well known inside Labor the extraordinary lengths I went to, as Deputy Prime Minister, holding the equivalent of two Cabinet portfolios, and then knocking myself out each and every day in things well beyond my own portfolio responsibilities and going to organisational matters in Mr Rudd's office to try and get the government functioning.
Increasingly, senior bureaucrats and senior advisers came to me in the course of all of that chaos as did my senior colleagues, because I became the touchstone, the person who had some prospect of going and getting things done during those days of dysfunction.
I did that as a loyal deputy, I did it to the best of my ability, and it became clear to me, very shortly before I asked Kevin Rudd for a leadership ballot that no matter what efforts I was prepared to put into it, it was not going to work and that is why I asked him for a leadership ballot.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) were you actually positioning (inaudible)
PM: I was doing everything I could as Deputy Prime Minister to get-
JOURNALIST: -To be Prime Minister.
PM: No, to get the government functioning, to get the government functioning and I'm not-
JOURNALIST: -How can people believe you-
PM: -Well I just told you the truth. Yes.
JOURNALIST: How can the people believe you when you were part of that dysfunction and you didn't speak up, because-
PM: -Well, that's because I believed that  -  well your question is internally inconsistent, let me answer it-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, I'll answer it thanks very much-
JOURNALIST: -And you denied it.
PM: If you stop talking then I'll give you an answer but I can't give you an answer if you keep talking.
Your question is internally inconsistent. You are suggesting to me that somehow I either wasn't doing this work or if I was doing this work, I should have been speaking about it. Well it stands to reason that the work I was doing to get the government functioning was only going to work if I did it internally to the best of my ability-
JOURNALIST: -And that helped you to become the Prime Minister.
PM: Ultimately it became manifest to me that it wasn't going to work. What made me Prime Minister was the people who knew the functioning of that government best formed the view that I was the best person to lead it and formed the view in large numbers that Kevin Rudd was not-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: -And consequently he did not present to the ballot.
JOURNALIST: Are you saying you had no ambition to be Prime Minister? That you just fell into (inaudible)
PM: I'll take a question here.
JOURNALISTS: That you just fell into the job, it just happened? The Australian -
PM: I'll answer your question but-
JOURNALIST: Because at that time the Australian -
PM: -I'm not listening to this rudeness, I'll answer your question and then I'll give a question to your colleague. Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the Australian people (inaudible)
PM: I'm not going to have you just speak to me like this. End of sentence. I'll answer your question and I'll take a question from your colleague.
And the answer to your question is exactly what I have just described to you. Now it is your colleague's turn, don't be rude to him.
JOURNALIST: Is it not that that is exactly the paradox, that Kevin Rudd, for the reasons that you outlined previously, is unpopular apparently so with most of your colleagues, yet people in the community view him very favourably. That's the problem for you, isn't it?
PM: Well I've just outlined to you my approach to government and how it's about getting things done.
Thanks very much, thank you.


PM: I'm on my way to a plane so I've only got time to make a short statement, and then I'll take questions at a media event later today.
The choice that my colleagues will make on Monday is about who should be Prime Minister of this nation. It is a choice about who's got the strength, the temperament, the character, the courage to lead this nation. Who's got the ability to get things done even in the face of] adversity. This is not an episode of Celebrity Big Brother, this is about who should be Prime Minister.
As Prime Minister, I have got big reforms done that languished under my predecessor. These big reforms include putting a price on carbon and seizing a clean energy future, health reform, the minerals resource rent tax, making sure that our telecommunications system was ready for the 21stcentury. As Prime Minister, I have got the hard things done, and as Prime Minister after Monday I would intend to do that.
I've been speaking to a large number of my colleagues over the last day, and when I've spoken to them they are going to come to Monday's caucus meeting exercising their best judgment about who should be Prime Minister and who should lead this nation for the future. Pre-selections should not come into this. This should be about people coming to Monday's caucus meeting making the determination as to who's got the strength and ability to do the job of leading this nation.
Thank you very much.


Australian parents and teachers can now track how children have improved over time in the key areas of literacy and numeracy with the launch of the newest version of the My School website.
The updated website measures the progress of students who have sat NAPLAN tests over the past four years, allowing parents to identify schools that have helped their students noticeably improve in comparison with other students who started at the same level.
This new version also includes the latest information on the funding available per student for every school in the country in 2010.
Speaking at Bethany Primary School in Werribee North, the Prime Minister said the My School website was now more powerful than ever before, shining a spotlight on Australia's schools to help lift the performance of every student.
We want every child in Australia to have access to a world class education.  Giving them the best start in life is at the heart of what we stand for as a party and as a nation.
Four out of five of the top performing school systems are in our region.  For Australia to succeed in the global economy, we must have a world-class school system.
My School is pivotal to this.  It helps us see what works and which schools need support to improve.
Minister for School Education Peter Garrett said the new version of My School includes new information about the vocational education and training options available to students.
This information will help young people wanting to pursue a vocation, plan their final years of school.
The information on the site also highlights the impact of extra Government funding for these schools when it is used to improve teacher quality and focus on better learning outcomes. For example:
·         17 schools participating in the Literacy and Numeracy National Partnership were initially identified as “red” schools (results substantially below statistically similar schools) when NAPLAN results became available on the My School website in 2010. None of these schools are now recorded as “red.”
·         In 2010 another 110 schools were identified as red schools. These schools were provided with a one-off payment by the Gillard Government to support better outcomes for their students. In 2012, only 17 of those schools still identify as red.
Minister Garrett said that the information provided on My School was essential for the development of the new national school funding model.
Without the information provided by My School and the NAPLAN tests introduced by the Gillard Government, we would have no clear national picture of student performance and improvement.
The Gonski Report showed that Australia's education performance is being overtaken by other nations and that we must overcome the effects of disadvantage on student achievement.  Greater transparency is a vital part of our agenda to improve Australian schools and fund them effectively.


This is an occasion to reflect on what we've achieved together.
We've got more to do but we achieved something huge together and that is getting equal pay for the 150,000 people who work in the social and community services sector, 120,000 of them women.
The work you do, I think every Australian is proud of and admiring of you  -  it is remarkable work in some of the toughest circumstances.
You see those things that many other Australians want to avert their eyes from; families in crisis, children who have been neglected, people with drug and alcohol problems, people with mental health issues, domestic violence.
There you are, providing all of your care and support, and as Prime Minister I wanted to see that properly paid and properly recognised, and I'm proud that we've achieved that together.
We have the opportunity today to tell the reform story  -  I know it's so known to you, but we do need to reflect on how we achieved this and the steps that made it possible.
Because this was no overnight sensation, this wasn't getting up in the morning and deciding that you wanted something done by the 6 o'clock news, this was years and years of patient work which we did together.
First we had to get rid of WorkChoices, because we knew that was destroying (inaudible).
So, we fought the 2007 election campaign and then we were in a position to get rid of WorkChoices.
And throughout 2008, as the Minister I worked with you, worked with people around the country to try and make sure that every part of the Fair Work Act was right.
And one big decision we had to make was what was going to be the equal pay principle in that Fair Work Act.
We knew all of the principles in the past had let women workers down, so we made a deliberate decision when we wrote the Fair Work Act to go to the best equal pay principle that there was in the country at that time, and we picked up the equal pay principle from Queensland because we knew that was the best way of getting women workers equal pay.
Then we got the Fair Work Act through in 2009, and that wasn't an easy struggle.
It took a lot of work, a lot of opposition from the Liberal and National parties, we didn't have control of the Senate, I had to negotiate and make sure the Act got through and I was very proud on the day that it did.
And then you brought your case, following the Fair Work Act.
In filing your case, starting all of those arguments before the Fair Work Commission, before Fair Work Australia to explain what you did and why it was underpaid.
That was a lot of work for you too.
Then, in March 2011 we brought together representatives  -  your representatives  -  representatives of employers and representatives of government to work as a reference group to see what else we needed to do to support the equal pay case.
Of course as Minister I'd already struck an agreement with you and we were going to work together but we needed to keep driving that work forward.
And then in May last year Fair Work Australia said yes there was a pay issue here, that it needed to be resolved in the interest of justice.
At the end of all of the work that we needed to do together, then we needed to come together and work out how we're going to bring this to finality.
What are the pay rates going to be?
And how's government going to find the money it needs to give you the wage justice you deserve?
And so late last year we entered into that agreement, where we said we'd support you, many employers said they'd support you, we'd get the final decision in the case and we would make $2 billion available to top up wages so you could have equal pay.
And wasn't it a fantastic day in February this year, when Fair Work Australia (inaudible).
This is a proud story of people working at their best.
Government doing what it needs to do.
You representing members right around the country, this great union.
Never giving up, never giving up on equal pay.
Fighting the struggle year after year.
And then of course it's also a story about employers who wanted to see their workers properly paid.
It's been a lot of work, it's taken a lot of time. We've made a lot of decisions, you know, there's been papers, submissions, court cases before Fair Work Australia, Cabinet decisions; a lot to do but we got there in the end.
And that is because we worked together in a patient and methodical way.
I want to thank you for that.
It's my vision of Australia's future that we no longer see unnecessary pay gaps, unfair pay gaps between men and women.
It's not good enough to say that something is women's work and therefore to be valued less. We've started on a very big journey of change; we've started with you, thank you for walking that journey in the determined way you did.
I'm very proud to be with you today and I'm looking forward to saying a big hello to everybody over morning tea.


PM: It is now certain that there will be a leadership ballot at the Labor caucus meeting on Monday. This leadership ballot will determine who leads the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party and who leads the nation as Prime Minister.
The choice that the nation faces and my Parliamentary colleagues face on Monday is a choice as to who has got the character, the temperament, the strength, to deliver on behalf of the Australian people.
This isn't Celebrity Big Brother. It is about working out who can lead the nation, who has got the ability to get things done. That is the main question and the main choice - who as Prime Minister has the personal attributes and personal strength to get things done that the nation needs to be done.
As Prime Minister I have delivered reforms for the Australian people, they haven't been easy reforms and I am asking my caucus colleagues for their support on Monday so we can spend 2012 delivering further much needed reform for our nation. So that we can continue to deliver our education reforms and build on them with a new approach to school funding and a new approach to skills, an approach that our nation needs so we can have a strong economy for the future.
So we can keep building on our proud record of job creation and keep creating jobs even as our economy transforms and changes and particularly that we can keep creating jobs in those sectors of the economy that are under most stress like manufacturing.
That we can keep delivering our health reforms, to make sure that they make a difference for people right around the country when they need to go to hospital or see a local doctor.
That we can keep delivering on our carbon pricing reforms, making sure that we are tackling climate change and we are giving Australian families much needed extra support in the form of tax cuts and family payment increases and pension increases.
And that we can continue to develop a National Disability Insurance Scheme, so whether you get a fair go in this country if you have a disability isn't determined by a cruel lottery as to how you got that disability, but that we are making sure that we are caring for every Australian who has a disability.
Today I have been talking in Melbourne about two reforms that I have overseen, first as Deputy Prime Minister and then as Prime Minister. They are good examples of the approach I take to getting things done, working with purpose, working with a method, working with discipline, working over the long term to deliver results.
It was only by working in that way we were able to give equal pay to people in the social and community services sector. It was only by working in that way that we were able to deliver My School and more information for Australian parents on their child's school than they have ever had before.
Talk is easy, getting things done is harder and I am the person who gets things done.
Of course politics is a contest and I am very confident that at the next election Labor can prevail over Tony Abbott and that I, as Prime Minister, can lead Labor to a victory at that election.
I am very confident of that because our agenda will stand as a stark contrast to Mr Abbott always saying no. Always saying no to any form of change whilst he has no ideas of his own.
So I am asking my Caucus colleagues for their support so that as Prime Minister I can continue to lead a team with discipline and determination, that I can continue to deliver a Labor agenda to make sure Australians each get their fair share today but we are also building the country that we want to be tomorrow.
That is what I am asking my caucus colleagues to support.
When Monday comes and goes there will still be a nation that needs to be governed. There will still be a party which needs to live out its historic mission for working people. Those things can only be done with purpose, with method, with character, with strength and that's what I will seek to continue to deliver as Prime Minister beyond Monday.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you lost the trust of the Australian public?
PM: Well I note that Mr Rudd did talk in his press conference today about questions of trust and questions of confidence and let me very directly address those.
On questions of confidence Australians can have confidence in me that no matter how hard it gets I've got the determination and personal fortitude to see things through.
Australians can have trust in me that I am the person who gets things done.
My track record shows that and that is the leadership that I will continue to deliver.
JOURNALIST: Kevin Rudd says you're headed to the rocks under your leadership?
PM: Well let me say again, I am confident I can lead Labor to a victory at the next election because at the end of the day people judge what political parties deliver on their own life experience, on what has changed, on what has been done, not what has been said but what has been done and I am the person who gets things done.
Just look at the record over the last few years.
Who has delivered carbon pricing? I did.
Who delivered a historic health reform agreement making changes in emergency departments for people seeking health care around the country? I did.
Who has delivered education reforms and is continuing to build on them?  I am doing that and will continue to do that.
Who delivered the modernisation our telecommunications sector needed with the changes to Telstra through structural separation? I delivered that.
And I have delivered those things in circumstances where politics has been strongly contested between the political parties and in minority government.
But on the question of trust, let me also say this: Kevin Rudd spoke about trust today but spoke did not deny when challenged - did not deny when challenged - that he has spent time whilst I have been Prime Minister and he has been Foreign Minister, behind closed doors in secret conversations with people undermining the Government.
Kevin Rudd asked people to consider questions of trust, well there's a question of trust right there.
When I was Deputy Prime Minister, and I said this yesterday, I challenged anybody in the media - anybody in the media - who had ever heard me utter a disloyal word about Kevin Rudd on or off the record to print that.
And today no one has. And no one has because it never happened.
In a very sharp contrast to that Kevin Rudd today, when asked whether he would reveal if he'd been in conversations undermining the Labor Party and undermining the Government, he refused to answer.
Well, what I've got to say about my role as Prime Minister and the future I intend for this country and for the Labor Party, I will say right out loud, not in meetings behind closed doors with an endeavour to keep it secret.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Kevin Rudd today, he said that you argued for the ETS to be delayed? What does that say about your credibility?
PM: Well I'm happy to be judged about my credibility on carbon pricing  -  I've got it done. Didn't talk about it, got it done.
Kevin Rudd, when the going got tough couldn't get carbon pricing done.
I, in the toughest of all possible political circumstances, got it done.
And it just seems to me that these claims actually point to some amazing contradictions in the position that Kevin Rudd is putting to people today.
He seems to be saying I lacked commitment on carbon pricing, whereas I am the person who got it done. He asked people to consider questions of trust while, of course, he won't reveal to the Australian people the conversations that he has had undermining the Government.
And he continues to talk about the so-called faceless men but he has announced a plan today to enable factional decision making about who should be a minister in Government.
These are essential contradictions at the heart of what Kevin Rudd has had to say today and I think he should answer to those.
JOURNALIST: It appears you're trying to rewrite history about what happened that night when you went into his office. Do you stand by your version of events?
PM: I certainly stand by my statements made as recently as last week, as recently as yesterday in fact, that I made my final decision to ask Kevin Rudd for a ballot in the Australian Labor Party on the day I asked him for that ballot. I certainly stand by that statement. And I worked damned hard as Kevin Rudd's deputy, worked very, very hard in days of chaos and paralysis to try and keep his government running. That's the truth, that's the history.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you retain the party members who have supported Kevin Rudd during this like Martin Ferguson in your cabinet if you win the ballot?
PM: I'll do what I've always done which is select my team on the basis of merit, and the ability to take up the fight to the Liberals.
JOURNALIST: Did you or Mr Swan tell Mr Rudd the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme should be dumped altogether (inaudible)?
PM: I've just dealt with that, but let me deal with it again. On carbon pricing, who can put their hand up and say they've got it done? I can. As Australian Prime Minister I have shown my dedication and determination to put a price on carbon. I mean anybody who was here for one day of last year cannot doubt how hard it was, how politically costly it was, to stump up to this parliament and to get a price on carbon. I had the courage in those circumstances to work on legislation and to get it through. That remained to be done because under Kevin Rudd's Prime Ministership, in a different parliament, when he had majority government, a leader of the opposition who agreed with him on carbon pricing, even in those circumstances he wasn't able to get a carbon price through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr Rudd says he'll challenge once and only once; he also said that people shouldn't make unbelievable promises. Do you believe that he'll only challenge once?
PM: Well only Mr Rudd can answer that question for you, but I do reiterate the concern that I have that Mr Rudd today refused to deal publicly with the conversations of destabilisation and undermining of the government that have clearly gone on. And we are, as a Labor government, and my approach to being in government is I am very determined to deliver a government and deliver government programs that make us a stronger and fairer nation. A Labor government, with a Labor vision, with Labor plans, with Labor programs. Now that's not always easy. It means you stump up to really hard reforms like getting carbon pricing done. And they can be politically costly and we have paid some cost. That cost is the cost of doing big things that matter to the nation's future. The cost that shouldn't be paid is the cost of destabilisation, hampering the work of the government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you got the numbers to win on Monday?
PM: I have been speaking to my caucus colleagues and as I have, I have been reassured that I have got strong support. I have said consistently I've got the strong support of my colleagues and my conversations with my caucus colleagues certainly verify that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you (inaudible) you are the person who gets things done, why do you think those reforms haven't really translated to electoral success in the polls?
PM: Look these are hard reforms, and when you've engaged in hard reforms that are about the future, that are big things, difficult things like carbon pricing, inevitably there's a political cost. And what leadership comes down to is are you prepared to pay those political prices? Are you prepared to show the courage and determination you need to, even in the most difficult of circumstances, to get things done? I have proven that I am able to do that.
During 2012 I've got a very clear agenda that I want to lead our government and our nation in. It's about jobs, it's about education, it's about skills, it's about the future of our economy, it's about getting working families the services they need. I will prosecute that agenda if I receive the support of my caucus colleagues on Monday, as I expect to do. But the political price that I shouldn't have to pay is a political price that comes form undermining and destabilising.
JOURNALIST: How are you personally handling this challenge? Running the country and fighting for your job?
PM: Just fine.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: If you lose on Monday, would you be prepared to serve again in a Rudd cabinet?
PM: No I would go to the backbench as I've announced and renounce any further claims to the leadership.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: I'll give a question over here  -  you haven't had one.
JOURNALIST: You've laid a lot of blame with Kevin Rudd for the position Labor's in now, (inaudible) accept yourself though about your situation in terms of polling and your standing?
PM: I think what I've just said to you actually gives a lie to your question. What I've just said to you is big reforms can be politically costly. You've got to work out whether you believe in those reforms, whether you've got the courage, the method, the discipline, the purpose to go out and get them done.
Well I'm someone with plenty of courage, I'm someone with plenty of discipline, I'm someone who gets up every day and does it all again no matter how hard the going is. That is who I am. I've brought all of those skills to bear in 2011 to get big reforms done like carbon pricing. And I understand the political cost of those reforms. I also understand the benefit. We will be a nation with a clean energy future, because I got that done last year. That will be Australia's future and it wouldn't have been our future if I hadn't got it done.
I'm happy to show the courage in the face of those political slings and arrows, I think that's politics as usual. What shouldn't happen in politics is you shouldn't be dragged down by someone who is on your own side, who today is unable to deny that they have been in conversations locked behind closed doors, talking to people and undermining the government.
There was a question  -  sorry you haven't had a question.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) say you lead a government struggling for traction, it's the middle of the parliamentary term, you're seeking some clear air to show your policy successes of the past and what you hope to achieve in the future, and now you're challenged for your job by a senior colleague. Do you consider it an act of political treachery, and I guess, if you'll take my supplementary, how does that differ from the events of June 2010?
PM: Well I've dealt with the events of June 2010 pretty comprehensively yesterday. The government in those final months particularly in 2010 was in a chaotic state and a paralysed state. That is why I stepped up to the plate. I asked Kevin Rudd for a ballot. He had so little support in caucus he did not present for that ballot. That is the history of 2010.
As for the history that will be written about this year, well we will look to Monday's ballot. What I am looking for from Monday's ballot is a decision from caucus that is in the nation's interest and that decision is to have a person continue in the job of Prime Minister who has got the character and temperament to get the job done.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you think that having Rudd popular with the people, a lot of commentators have said the past couple of days that Kevin Rudd's popular with the people, you're popular with the party, even though it's a party who gets to decide on Monday who do you think would rather be the Prime Minister?
PM: As I said, this is not an episode of Celebrity Big Brother. This is about who can be the Prime Minister of this nation. I've got the attributes to do the job, just as I have been doing it.
JOURNALIST: With a bloc of support already behind Kevin Rudd, and Ministers falling into line as well, isn't your leadership already damaged?
PM: I will seek the support of my caucus colleagues on Monday. I expect to receive their very strong support.
JOURNALIST: If Kevin Rudd was as (inaudible) as you've put it and as dysfunctional as Simon Crean has put it, how does the government justify having him in such a senior portfolio as Foreign Affairs?
PM: I formed the view that Kevin could acquit that task. His expertise is in foreign affairs, so I formed the view that he could do that job and should do that job for the government. Clearly he chose to resign that job this week. What Kevin obviously struggled to do when times were a little bit politically tough, particularly in 2010, was to run a government with any sort of method or purpose or discipline, internal processes, ability to get things done. That's what I have sought to rectify as Prime Minister.
Thank you very much.


Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Arts Minister Simon Crean and Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs Senator Kate Lundy today announced a $2 million investment towards an Antipodes Centre for Greek Culture, Heritage and Language in Melbourne.
The Prime Minister made the announcement today at the Antipodes Lonsdale Street Glendi - Melbourne's renowned Greek Festival.
The new cultural centre will be in the heart of Melbourne's Greek Community as part of a multipurpose building on the corner of Lonsdale and Russell Streets in the CBD.
The centre will recognise and celebrate the immeasurable contribution Australia's Greek community has made to our society and acknowledge the special cultural and historical connections between Greece and Australia.
The state of the art facility will showcase the Greek community's proud history, displaying valuable archives built up over decades and host special exhibitions and performances.
It will also provide support to new and existing Greek migrants through programs run by the Greek Orthodox Community of Melbourne and Victoria.
The Greek Orthodox Community has a long history in running successful cultural activities in Melbourne including the Greek Film Festival and the Antipodes Festival, which is the largest celebration of Greek culture outside of Greece.
Established in 1897, the Greek Orthodox Community has provided $6.2 million towards the project including $1.2 million from donations alone.
The $2 million investment from the Gillard Labor Government demonstrates our commitment to programs that build on the strength of the nation's renowned cultural diversity.
Australia has changed significantly over the past two decades and we now have greater diversity in our population than ever before.
As a Government we recognise the significant contribution made by the Greek community.
Our nation has been enriched by the contribution of generations of Greek families who have settled in Australia, raised their families and built strong communities here.
Greek Australians have played an important part in our national story and Greek culture has inspired great art, scholarship, academia and architecture.
As the Australian Government works towards the release of the first National Cultural Policy in almost 20 years, this new centre will help highlight and celebrate Australia's diverse cultural heritage.


PM: It's great to be here today in Cessnock for the Country Labor Conference. I have joined here today a mob of true believers in the Labor cause, people who love and are very passionate about the Labor Party.
In my address today I have explained to them my determination as Prime Minister to keep making the big decisions that make a difference for people who live in country Australia.
We are delivering the National Broadband Network because it will make such a difference for jobs and service delivery in country Australia. We are delivering the delivering the education reforms that mean it will no longer be true that a country kid is at risk of getting a second-class education and not getting the skills that they need for the rest of their life.
We will keep delivering the health reforms that will make a difference for country Australia, so that it will no longer be true that your likelihood of dying if you have a cancer is greater than the likelihood of an Australian in the city dying. We shouldn't have that kind of health care gap in modern Australia.
We'll keep getting the big calls right for the future of country Australia. Creating the economy we need so people have jobs right around the country, and creating that economy as one that is high wage, high skill and part of a clean energy future.
It's been great to join here today my friends here at Country Labor Conference in New South Wales. I also spoke to them about the decision that the Labor Party faces on Monday. And I said to those who love the Labor Party here today that after Monday's ballot we must come together and unite. Be a united Labor Party that is continuing to deliver the reforms and policies and plans which mean that we are running the economy in the interests of working people, supporting working families with the benefits that they need and creating the economy of tomorrow so people can live a stronger and fairer future. That is our Labor mission, and we must unite behind it after Monday's ballot. And I'm very confident that my Labor colleagues will do so.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: As I've said consistently delivering good government isn't about keeping your eyes on the opinion polls. It's about keeping your eyes on what's right and making sure when you are delivering your plans that you get them done.
I've been very clear over the last few days that I will say to my caucus colleagues on Monday as I have said to them during the last few days: I have the capacity to deliver the big reforms and changes that this nation needs. It's about doing the job that the nation needs done, sometimes that does cost you popularity, but we've got to embrace the future, get the big reforms done and that's precisely what I've been doing.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
PM: Well as I said to my country Labor colleagues today, I am absolutely confident that in 2013 we can defeat Tony Abbott. Absolutely confident because we will go to that election saying you have a choice. You have a choice about whether or not you get a fair share from the mining boom or you give money back to billionaires.
You've got a choice about whether you have a quality education for your kids and decent health care or you can embrace Tony Abbott's cuts. You have got a choice about whether we build the economy we need for tomorrow or you listen to Tony Abbott and say it's OK to stand still, to forget about a clean energy future to forget about the rollout of NBN. The choice will be very clear in 2013. And we have got a lot of governing to do between now and then, governing the way I have governed - getting the big things done.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I spoke to Anthony Albanese this morning. I have known Anthony Albanese, Albo, a very long time. In fact I have known him all of my adult life. He is a great Labor man with a great Labor heart. He is someone who always wants to put the best interests of the Labor Party first and get about fighting Tories to use his terminology from today.
I disagree with the decision that Anthony Albanese has made. But the one thing I know about Albo is following Monday's ballot he will be back doing what he does best, fighting Tories in the Parliament and beyond.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: He spoke to me this morning and offered his resignation and I refused to accept it. Anthony Albanese has been doing a remarkable job as Leader of Government Business and I can't imagine a government I lead without Anthony Albanese in there beside me fighting hard in Parliament as I am committed to doing each and every day.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
PM: He's explained to me as he explained publicly today, so I'm not going to canvass every word of our conversation. Anthony has put his reasons on the public record. They are the same reasons that he discussed with me. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Exactly what I have done today, which is remind my Labor colleagues that we've got two big decisions in front of us on Monday. Decision number one: who the Federal Parliamentary Leader and Prime Minister will be. Decision number two: that we unite after the ballot, unite as a government, continue to drive our reform program, continue to run the economy in the interests of working Australians, and continue to shape the future so that it is fair to working Australians.
There's a few ways of letting change happen in this country. You can pretend, like Tony Abbott does, that you can just stand still. That doesn't work. Change still happens. But it's not fair change. 
Look at the NBN. If we were just standing to one side, there would be people in wealthier parts of the country getting the benefits of super-fast broadband and there would be poorer suburbs and regions missing out. 
What you need to do as a Labor Government is bend change in accordance with your values and for your purpose. That's exactly what we've done with the NBN by ensuring it gets rolled out right around Australia, and that people in country Australia pay the same wholesale price, they're not disadvantaged in getting the benefits of superfast broadband.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Yes, I am. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well Kevin Rudd has given an undertaking that if he doesn't win in Monday's Ballot, that he will retire to the back bench and not mount any further challenge.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: You can direct any questions about Kevin Rudd's words to Kevin Rudd. What I know is this: the mission of Labor after Monday's ballot will be to unite, to get on with the job, to get on with the reform program that I have outlined and to make sure that we are governing each and every day in the interests of working Australians. I've said consistently over the last few days, and let me say it again, I bring to that task a lot of courage, a lot of strength, a lot of personal fortitude, and I will be getting on with the job.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: My approach is exactly as you have seen it today. You get on with the job. You outline your big policies and plans and then you get them done. Talk's one thing, delivery is another. I'm about delivery.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I absolutely believe it can and I'm determined that it is what we do after Monday's ballot.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look, I think any speculation of that sort is not in the Labor interest and not in the Labor cause and not in the national interest and not in the national cause. Monday is it, end of it. We vote, everybody accepts the result, and then it is over, it is done.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I spoke about Tony Abbott and tantrums.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
PM: I spoke about Tony Abbott and tantrums as I spoke about the political contest and the political difference between the Government and the Opposition. We're for getting things done today and shaping the future. Mr Abbott is kicking and screaming and just yelling "no", that is why I spoke about tantrums.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We vote on Monday and then we unite. And we get the job done of governing each and every day. Of delivering what we know will make a difference for working families today, for their jobs, for their health, for their education, for their communities, as we shape the future. That's what I'm determined to do.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look I'll let commentators commentate on opinion polls and those things. I will get on with doing what's right for the country's future. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
PM: I have just answered that question.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: It's important to make the right decisions, even when they're hard decisions. It's important to have the courage to see them through; even when they come at your political cost, because the ultimate measure of a government, the ultimate measure, isn't opinion polls in newspapers, the ultimate measure of a government is whether it led this nation to a stronger and fairer future. That is what I am seeking to do as Prime Minister. That's what I've been determined to do through big reforms, unpopular reforms, like putting a price on carbon. We will be a nation better prepared for the future, because we had the fortitude and courage last year to do that. That is what government is about.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well how long have you got? But in 2012, let me be very clear, we will be continuing to manage the economy for working people. It will be about jobs. It will be about jobs in all sectors of the economy. There are sectors like manufacturing under pressure, and we will be working with them and working on jobs. It will be about the skills we need for the nation's future. We know we are creating jobs with higher and higher skills at a rapid rate. Unskilled jobs are being created at a much lower rate. The end game of that is if we don't give people the skills they need they won't have a job. So we will deliver a fundamental skills reform package.
We will keep building the National Disability Insurance Scheme so that you're not involved in a cruel lottery about whether or not you get help if you have a disability. We will deliver the budget surplus as we promised. We will continue to create the economy of the future; implement carbon pricing, roll out the NBN, make sure we understand as a nation all of the opportunities that the spectacular economic growth in our region gives us. That's what 2012's about.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm not dealing with a question that's all in hypotheticals. The Labor Party will make a decision on Monday, then we will unite as I have described.
Thank you very much.


In September 2010, just a few days after I formed this Federal Government, I came to country New South Wales.
I went to Bathurst to a great institution of Labor in the regions, the dinner for the ‘Light on the Hill'. It was a good chance to thank you, to thank you, the people of country Labor, for everything that you did to secure government for our party in 2010.
I'll never forget it.
And delegates in the 18 months that have that have passed since, despite everything that's been thrown at us since that day, that's what my Labor team has done.
We've got on with the job, we've pursued that Light on the Hill.
We've not just talked about reform, we have delivered reform. We've made a real difference for millions of Australian lives.
Friends, your Labor Government, the Labor Government I lead, has secured great Labor reforms. Reforms which will make us stronger and fairer for the years to come.
We've put a price on carbon and we've seized a clean energy future.
This Labor Government.
We're putting in place a minerals resource rent tax to better share the mineral wealth, to make sure that regions like this one get infrastructure, that working Australians get higher superannuation, and that there are lower taxes for Australian small businesses.
Friends, achieved by this Labor Government.
We've secured an historic health agreement with every state and territory, up and running right now, delivering real benefits today.
This Labor Government.
We've secured the structural separation of Telstra, and we've begun the roll-out of the National Broadband Network to bring jobs and opportunities and better services to the regions where you live, no matter where Australians live.
Friends, that's a nation-changing reform from this Labor government. And we are rolling out reforms to education, reforms that I designed and we are adding to them.
Yesterday, I had the great delight of launching the most recent version of My School, part of our great suite of education reforms. More information than any of us have ever had before on the performance of Australian schools.
Information is good, but it's better when it's used, and we are using it to guide new investments, to uplift standards in schools right around the country, but most particularly, the kids that are in the disadvantaged schools are seeing the benefits of our reform, a great Labor approach, a great Labor reform.
And friends, we've ensured too that the lowest paid workers in this country see rising living standards and they will pay less tax.
And yesterday, too, I was very proud to join some of the 150,000 social and community services workers who will see more recognition and reward for their incredible hard work, because of this Labor Government.
And friends, we've achieved all of this whilst making the hard decisions, to get the budget back to surplus in 2012-13 and at a time when we have kept creating jobs so we can now proudly say to each other, there are more Australians in work today than ever before under this Labor Government.
Delegates, this is your Labor Government. And these things are the measure of our success.
Not polls or headlines but real achievements on behalf of working people.
These things we achieve for the Australian people, these meaningful and lasting reforms, these are the measure of a great Labor Government.
And delegates, there is so much more to do.
So many tasks still lie ahead of us.
Leadership is about delivering against the odds and in the face of adversity. It's about having a plan for change and then delivering on that plan.
That's how you change things, that's how you make a difference to people's lives and that's exactly what this Labor Government has and is doing.
We have the plans for the future, the plans for education, the plans for jobs, the plans we are delivering on.
And we are making sure that wherever you live in this vast nation of ours, you are getting your fair share.
Delegates, I am absolutely determined that we use every day of government and every ounce of our energy to deliver today to working people, to run the economy in their interests, to make sure that we support hard-working families, that we give them the benefits that they need, whether they've got a child just born, a child in kindergarten, a child at school, a child in an apprenticeship, a child going to university - that we are there with them.
Whether they are caring for an older relative, or someone with a disability, that we will be there with them.
And at the same time, we are a party of the future.
So whilst we deliver today, we will be building the economy we will need for tomorrow, an economy in which every Australian has a stake and every Australian has the best of opportunities and the ability to prosper.
This is the vision.
This is the mission of your Labor Government.
And this is what gets me out of bed every morning, delegates.
They're the things that I care about, and that's the kind of country I want to live in.
Delegates, we need to be very frank with each other.
Has it cost us politically doing some of these very hard things?
Absolutely, it has. You betcha.
But did we put the nation's future first when we made those decisions?
Absolutely we did. And because we showed that coverage, delegates, because we showed that ability to shape our nation's future I am incredibly confident about our prospects of success when we present at the next election in around 18 months' time.
Delegates, there is lazy talk around about defeat in that election campaign.
It is a shame.
I've come here to say to you today, it is not in our Labor culture, it is not in our Labor way to be defeatist.
I don't have a defeatist bone in my body and I am confident we will prevail in 2013.
And delegates, I can be so confident of that because I'm so confident in our policies and plans. In the differences that they will make in the lives of Australians. The real things that people will judge on in 2013.
I'm also confident of that delegates because I know, as you know, just how hollow at the core is Tony Abbott's campaign for the Prime Ministership. How hollow it is.
Friends, I have the opportunity, maybe opportunity isn't the right word, but day after day I sit in question time very close to Tony Abbott. I have the opportunity to see him up close.
And friends, most days he reminds me of a two-year-old who is tired and having a tantrum.
He's so enthralled by the tantrum he has forgotten why he is having it and he has no ability to explain what he wants to stop having it.
He apparently started having the tantrum because he was opposed to seizing a clean energy future. Even though, in the past, he has been in favour of putting a price on carbon.
And he apparently started having the tantrum because he thinks we shouldn't have the carbon price but he can't explain to you how he's going to take it away without also ripping out of the hands of millions and millions of Australians tax cuts, pension increases and family payments increases that make them better off.
And he apparently started having the tantrum because he was concerned about government debt, but here he is now with a $70 billion black hole, more debt or $70 billion of cuts to services that hard-working families need.
And he apparently started having the tantrum because he wanted to stop the boats. But every day he has been having the tantrum he has actually pursued in the part a political strategy to make sure that there are more boats and his only pledge about so-called stopping the boats is to put the lives of young Australians at risk in our Australian Defence Force.
That is the hollowness at the centre of Tony Abbott's claim to be Prime Minister.
And delegates, let's think about the choice that the nation will face in 2013. How stark and clear that choice will be.
We will be saying to Australians in this time of record prosperity, in our mining sector, that Australians around the country should be sharing the benefits of that wealth.
He will be saying to Australians standing alongside some of the richest Australians country, people who aren't millionaires, they are billionaires, he will be saying to working Australians can you give these benefits back?
Can a region like this one back its infrastructure dollars so I can give a tax cut to some of the wealthiest Australians who have ever lived?
The choice, delegates, will be so clear.
And the choice will be clear, too, as we take to that election campaign our proud track record of improving education and health and he will go there with plans for cuts.
Cuts to schools, cuts to hospitals, cuts to apprenticeships.
He is opposed to kids having computers in schools. He's even opposed to the money that is going into improving teacher quality and helping disadvantaged kids get a chance.
That will be the choice in 2013.
Delegates, the choice will be such a clear one.
Whether we help working people today or put Work Choices back around their necks; that will be the choice in 2013.
So I am absolutely confident, delegates, when we go to that election campaign, presenting our choice for working Australians, our choice for managing the economy in their interests, our choice for continuing to provide to them the benefits that they need to make a life and to have an opportunity, our choice for fairness at work, and our choice to embrace and shape the challenges of the future and not stand still, we will prevail at the end of that election campaign and it will be the end of Tony Abbott's tantrum.
I'm confident of that, delegates.
Delegates, you all know the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party has a big decision to make on Monday and I didn't come here today to canvass your support in that ballot.
But I did come here to say to you two things: the federal Labor Party doesn't face just one big decision on Monday, it faces two. First, we must choose a leader in the ballot I've called.
Second, we must choose unity after the ballot is declared.
Delegates, I've come to you today to say that is what your federal representatives will do.
They will choose unity.
Because I know my Labor colleagues, the men and women who make up the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party, I know them well.
They went into public life because they believe in something.
In a Labor vision of the future and in delivering on that vision in government.
Labor politics is about what is best for millions and millions of working people. Their jobs, their kids, their communities, their future. And my Labor colleagues know that.
And on Monday afternoon, I promise you this: the caucus will come together to keep working in the interests of the Australian people each and every day.
I know that they'll do it on Monday, because even in adversity the overwhelming majority of your representatives have been doing it every day.
Delegates, fairness for Labor has never just meant fairness no matter what you do for a living. It's also meant fairness no matter where you live.
That is how Labor governs this country, governs the country we love.
It's how we govern it now and it's how we will campaign in country Australia in 2013.
You know that too from our policies like the NBN, bringing the benefits of broadband everywhere.
You know that too from what we've done and continue to do in education.
It has always been an offence to me that a country kid had less of a chance of going to a university than a child growing up in a city, and delegates we're changing that.
Have no doubt and feel free to look at the most recent statistics as to who now gets to go to university under our Labor reforms.
More places than ever before, more kids from poorer backgrounds and more support for country students than there's ever been.
And friends it's always been an offence to me too that you are more likely to die of cancer if you live in country Australia than if you live in the city.
It's a great offence to us as a nation, and we are changing that.
Through the historic health reforms we have struck. Better care in country Australia, whether it's GP super-clinics or regional cancer centres.
We are not going to leave people who live outside our cities without the best of health care and the best of our efforts to get it to them.
Friends that's our vision.
And of course our vision is of more jobs for the future, jobs spread to every corner of the nation.
Friends, your Labor Government, the Labor Government I am so proud to lead, has secured great Labor reforms.
But we didn't do it alone.
We couldn't have done it without you.
Thank you for everything you did. All you did. The amazing efforts you went to.
When we had to raise the flag of Labor during that toughest of election campaigns in 2010.
Thank you for your faith then, keep that faith now, and I'll see you on the campaign trail in 2013, when we defeat Tony Abbott.
Friends, thank you very much.



PM: I'm here at Mambourin Enterprises, in my electorate in Melbourne's West, in the electorate of Lalor. I'm joined by Jenny Macklin, who's here in her capacity as the Minister overseeing disabilities reform.
We're here today meeting some of the people who benefit from the amazing work that happens here at Mambourin, supporting Australians with disabilities. And we're here to renew our commitment to building a National Disability Insurance Scheme, a great Labor reform. A great Labor reform in the tradition of Medicare to make a difference in the lives of Australians who have a disability and their families and their carers.
This is the kind of great Labor reform which speaks of the Labor vision and the Labor spirit. And after tomorrow's meeting, after tomorrow's ballot, we will unite in the great Labor cause behind the great Labor vision.  
My caucus colleagues, Labor members one and all, put themselves forward for public office because they believed in the Labor vision of the future. A stronger and fairer Australia, an economy that offers the benefits of opportunity, an economy that's ready for the future, but also a society that is prepared to extend support to the Australians who need it the most. Tomorrow, we will unite behind that Labor purpose and that Labor vision and we will be getting that Labor vision into a reality for Australians.
I'll turn now to Jenny Macklin and then we'll take questions.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister. If I could also first of all thank everyone here at Mambourin for all of the wonderful work that you do for people with disability. We've seen some of the people today, we've heard the choir. If you could see how much we loved listening to them, and what it demonstrates is their desire and capacity to do what they can with the abilities they have and in their case of course to sing with beautiful voices.
We also know that you've created wonderful opportunities for people to learn skills and get to jobs and to be independent to the extent that they can. And we thank you very, very much for that. We know that there are many people here today, like many around Australia, who are campaigning for a National Disability Insurance Scheme. And if I can just say, we have a Prime Minister in Julia Gillard who is going to make sure that Australia takes that next big step in social reform  -  to deliver a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
People with disabilities, their carers, their families have waited too long  -  too long, have suffered too much, carried too much of a load because of the poor level of funding for disability services. We know how critical it is to build a new system of disability care and support.
It was a Labor government in the past that built Medicare, and it will be a Labor government, under Julia Gillard, that will build a National Disability Insurance Scheme. She has the determination, but she also has  -  I think I can say  -  the negotiating skills and this will be a tough negotiation task to build this scheme. And I know, under her leadership, it will happen.
PM: Happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister ahead of tomorrow how are you feeling, are you feeling you still have the momentum?
PM: I'm feeling determined, and I'm feeling determined to deliver our Labor program after tomorrow. We're here today talking about one of the great Labor visions, one of the great visions about being stronger and fairer. In this country today, there are Australians with disabilities who get left behind. We're determined to change that. It's part of our Labor vision of a stronger and fairer country, and that's what we will unite behind following tomorrow's ballot.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible)?
PM: Look, I understand that there's been comments from a number of people about the events that you refer to. I haven't got anything to add to that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe Kevin Rudd's pledge that you have his unequivocal support if he loses the ballot tomorrow?
PM: I believe Labor, all us will, every one of us, will unite after Monday's ballot. We will unite tomorrow and we will get our shoulders to the wheel delivering Labor's program and plans.
At the end of the day and at the end of what has been a very difficult week, the things that unite us in the Labor Party are far, far stronger than anything else. We all went into public life with a passion for changing this country, for bringing Labor values into the life of this country, for getting the big things done and none of them bigger than a National Disability Insurance Scheme, I am absolutely confident that is what will motivate everyone of us following tomorrow's ballot.
JOURNALIST: Did you (inaudible) Kevin Rudd to dump the CPRS as Maxine McKew accused you of this morning in the paper?
PM: Look I've seen that commentary today and I've had a few things to say over recent days about the events of 2010 and I don't intend to add to them today.
But on climate change and putting a price on carbon, I don't think there could be any Australian who has doubted my determination to get that done in the face of the most ferocious campaign from the Opposition. I have achieved that, Labor has achieved it and because we've achieved it we'll have a stronger and fairer future that will be a clean energy future. The alternative was to see our economy languish behind other economies around the world as they seized the future and we got left behind.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I commented on that yesterday. Anthony Albanese is a great Labor person  -  I've known him all of my adult life. He made a very sincere and moving declaration about his love of the Labor party and his love of Labor program and ‘fighting Tories' to use his terminology.
That's the kind of spirit that we will see from Labor after tomorrow's ballot  -  that kind of spirit of coming together, getting the job done, fighting our opponents and winning through for Australians, winning through for them a stronger, fairer future  -  the jobs of the future, the economy we need in the future, but great reforms for our society too, like this National Disability Insurance Scheme.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you thought that his vote may in fact sway others privately to change their vote (inaudible) ballot?
PM: Look, on tomorrow's ballot I am going to say to you what I have said consistently: I am very confident of the strong support of my colleagues.
JOURNALIST: Given the need for unity, do you think the comments of Wayne Swan and Simon Crean about Kevin Rudd were over the top and will harm that unity in the future?
PM: A lot of claims and a lot of things have been said by all sides over recent days. The important thing is that tomorrow's ballot ends this, there is a result and following that result everyone accepts it and unites and gets on with the job and I am absolutely confident that will happen.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would another Rudd Government be preferable to electoral defeat?
PM: Look, I've dealt with these matters over recent days too. As I said yesterday to my Labor friends at NSW Country Conference, I am absolutely convinced we can defeat Tony Abbott at the 2013 election. I will be very, very enthusiastic about standing there in the 2013 election and being very clear about the choice, clear about the choice for Australia's future and no better example than the one we're talking about today  -  we're for a National Disability Insurance Scheme, I'm for getting it done  -  Mr Abbott describes it as a ‘hope', an ‘aspiration'  -  something at the bottom of the in-tray that he might find his way to sometime in the future. That's the kind of difference between the government I lead and Mr Abbott. We're for change and managing it for working Australians and their families, he's for pretending he can stand still and say no to everything and he's effectively saying no to a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
JOURNALIST: Kevin Rudd apparently says that he's afraid that the character assassinations will continue even if he does go to the back bench. Is that going to happen?
PM: As I've just said to you repeatedly, I believe we will unite following tomorrow's ballot. I've got great faith in my Labor colleagues  -  each and every one of them, that the things that drive us to be in Government and to deliver the changes Australia needs will continue to drive us solidly after tomorrow's ballot, I believe we will be united in that purpose absolutely.
That does mean that we will be working together. I do not want to see continued commentary on these kinds of matters after Monday. What people will be talking about after Monday's ballot is our program for reform, our vision for the future and why it is at risk under Tony Abbott.
JOURNALIST: After the spectacle that (inaudible) over the past few days (inaudible)?
PM: By our behaviour which will demonstrate it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've said that you're confident that you've got the support of your colleagues but do you have the support of the Australian people given the recent polls?
PM: Look, I dealt with these questions yesterday too and I said government's about doing what's right for the nation's future. You don't look at the opinion polls to work out what you believe in and what the nation needs, you look inside yourself, to your core beliefs, to your core Labor beliefs and then you go and get it done. That's what we will do following Monday's ballot.
JOURNALIST: What are you numbers looking like so far? 
PM: As I've answered over here, I've said consistently to you I've got the strong support of my colleagues.
Thank you very much. 



The Prime Minister today thanked Mark Arbib for his contribution to the Australian Labor Party and to the nation over the last 16 years, following news of his resignation as a Minister in the Gillard Government and Labor Senator for New South Wales.
During his time in the Federal Parliament, Mark has served in a number of key roles including Minister for Employment Participation, Minister for Social Housing and Homelessness, Minister for Indigenous Employment and Economic Development, Minister for Sport and most recently Assistant Treasurer, Minister for Small Business and Manager of Government Business in the Senate.
Mark worked with me during the days of the global financial crisis and was passionate about making sure young people didn't bear the brunt of this economic turbulence.  In response to this he created Apprenticeship Kickstart, which has seen over 46,000 Australians get an apprenticeship.
Mark is also passionate about ending Indigenous disadvantage, what he refers to as the stuff of the soul.
During his time as Minister for Indigenous Employment and Economic Development there were over 65,000 commencements in employment and training under the Indigenous Employment Program, an uptake three times higher than under the previous government.
Mark also set up the Learn. Earn. Legend! program which uses sport to inspire young Indigenous people to finish school and get a job.
Mark's reforms in homelessness have helped thousands of Australians find a safe roof over their heads and as Sports Minister he has led the global fight on match fixing, introducing a national policy on match fixing and securing agreement for nationally-consistent criminal laws. 
Mark has also served the party tirelessly as NSW Labor Assistant General Secretary and General Secretary for eight years.  His resignation today will be received with a heavy heart by the members of our party.
I wish him and his family all the very best in the future.
I will make an announcement about future Ministerial arrangements in due course. 



PM: Thank you. I have today received the overwhelming endorsement of my Labor colleagues to continue as Labor Leader and as Prime Minister. I thank them for their support and their faith in my capacity to lead the nation.
The last week has seen us, the women and men of the Labor Party focused inwards, focused on ourselves. At times it's been ugly. I understand that.
I also understand that as a result, Australians have had a gutful of seeing us focus on ourselves. I understand the frustration of Australians in seeing us do that.
So today I want to say to Australians one and all: this issue, the leadership question, is now determined. You, the Australian people, rightly expect government to focus you, for you to be at the centre of everything that government does.
I can assure you that this political drama is over and now you are back at centre stage where you should properly be and you will be the focus of all of our efforts.
In all of the things that have happened over the last few days, I have had the opportunity to explain the circumstances of 2010 and how I became Prime Minister. I accept that I should have explained that at the time.
I have now had the opportunity to do so, but having taken that opportunity, I believe the discussions about 2010 should now be at an end, our focus is on 2012 and all the years that lie beyond for the Australian nation.
I understand many people, many Australians, will have their doubts that after this fight Labor can come together and pull together in a united way. To any who have those doubts, I say this: we have come together before and we will do so now. We will move forward as a united team. I'm absolutely confident of that, because at the end of the day, as Labor people, we are driven by a common purpose.
A common purpose and a common set of values, a common belief in what we want for Australia's future as a stronger and fairer nation, we will unite and focus on that, our Labor vision.
I want to say three things about today and the days that lie beyond.
Firstly, to Kevin Rudd, this is a difficult and disappointing day for him and his family. A very tough day indeed. I want to say to Kevin Rudd for the days that lie beyond, as a nation, as a Labor Party, we must honour his many achievements as Prime Minister.
Kevin Rudd led this nation through the global financial crisis. He delivered the Apology to the Stolen Generations. He's been an amazing advocate of Australia's interest on the world stage, and he has made so many other remarkable achievements besides that.
We honour those achievements, as a nation, as a Labor Party, as a Labor movement, without reservation. In the days that lie ahead, you will see us do that.
As for now Dr Emerson will act as Minister for Foreign Affairs and at the appropriate time I will appoint a minister to fill that vacancy.
Second, about today and the future - many Australians will have read a lot of commentary about opinion polls during this period of time.
I actually believe deep down in their souls Australians don't look at politicians and think we can't read opinion polls. When they look at politicians actually the doubts that they have is that we are in it for a purpose. That we are in it with some courage to get behind a purpose that we believe is right.
I believe my Labor colleagues have demonstrated today that we have that courage, that we have that sense of purpose, and that we are prepared to drive behind that sense of purpose.
Now that doesn't mean that holding the community opinion with you and winning elections isn't important. Of course, holding community opinion and winning elections is important. It's important to the future of our country.
So through this process I can say I have learned some things. As I said last Thursday, I know I have made some mistakes about how I have been an advocate for our policies and programs, our Labor vision in the community.
I intend to be a stronger and more forceful advocate of what we are doing and what we are achieving for the Australian people.
Finally that brings me to the question of the next election. I absolutely believe that united we can win the next election and I am very determined that in the 2013 election we do so.
I will take Labor to that election and I am confident that we can win that election, which will be about competing visions for the future, our Labor vision of a stronger and fairer nation, a modern economy with opportunities, our vision of the nation as having great quality schools and good health care, our vision of the future of the nation, including things like a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We will put that case to the Australian people in 2013 and I am very confident we will win through.
On occasions like this, people often ask you how you feel. Well I can tell you how I feel today, I feel impatient. Impatient because I want to get on with the job of building this country's future. Impatient with getting on with the work that we need to do so that in the future Australians have the benefit of jobs, their kids have the benefit of great quality schools, they've got a health care system they can rely on.
We understand the opportunities coming our nation's way as our global economy changes, our regional economy changes, and our own economy changes.
And as we build great new vehicles of fairness, like a National Disability Insurance Scheme. I'm impatient to get on with that work. I will be getting on with that work today. We haven't got day to lose.
I'm happy to take questions. Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd in his appeal to colleagues made comments about a few policy areas. He talked about small business, he talked about carbon tax moving to a floating price quickly. He spoke about small business.
You won but do you take on board any of his concerns in that area and is it likely to cause any amendments, changes or discussions within your party about your policy?
PM: Carbon pricing, the legislation that's gone through the Parliament will be delivered in full as it's gone through the Parliament.
I am absolutely convinced that the legislation is right, that starting carbon pricing on 1 July this year at a $23 a price per tonne, with all of the money going to families that we have decided should go to families is the right way of our nation seizing a clean energy future.
On engaging with small business, I always believe that we can do more to engage with people who have taken the risk, started their own business, and with Australians who are working people now, but actually see that as a vision for see for their future and so focusing on small business is very important to what we will do in the future.
JOURNALIST: Is there any chance that you will offer Kevin Rudd his old job back as Foreign Minister and what of the other five ministers who backed Kevin Rudd? Will they be returned to their positions?
PM: I think Kevin Rudd today has made it very clear what his vision of his future is as the Member for Griffith. On the question of a reshuffle and filling the vacancy now arising in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, I will make the decisions to do that in coming days.
JOURNALIST: Just on that point are you able - you talked about unity, are you able to guarantee that no existing minister, regardless of who they voted for, if they want to stay in the ministry can stay in the ministry?
PM: As I said during the past few days, my focus will be on having a team based on merit and the ability to take the fight up on behalf of Labor to our conservative opponents.
That's how I will make the selections. Let me be very clear with you about this - I understand that today you will probably ask a million questions in a million different formats about how I will deal with the reshuffle. I'm not answering any of them.
I will announce the reshuffle when I choose to do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said that you should have explained your reasoning back in 2010. For the record, can you say why you didn't do that? Was there anything else that you did wrong back in 2010 (inaudible)?
PM: Back in 2010 I took the view that I didn't want to, in terms of respect for Kevin Rudd and the Government's achievements, canvass those matters publicly. I now realise that that was an error and it made it very difficult for the Australian public to understand what had happened.
Having canvassed it in recent days it's not my intention to continuously do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you've said that your (inaudible). It is clear Labor has not been united since late 2009, what is going to change in people's confidence that you can now deliver (inaudible)?
PM: Well, you've seen my determination today, you've seen Kevin Rudd's determination too, and I think you will see the determination of my Labor colleagues on display. We have had fights in the past as a political party, as have our conservative opponents had fights in the past. We have shown after them the ability to come together because at the end of the day the bonds between us in the Labor cause are stronger and more dominant than anything else.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).
PM: Impatience is what I feel, I'm restless to get on with it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) kindly about Kevin Rudd today, and about his legacy as Prime Minister, why has it been so difficult to say that in the past (inaudible)?
PM: I have said in the past about Kevin Rudd's considerable achievements as Prime Minister. I've talked in the past about his absolute focus on Australian jobs and getting Australia through the Global Financial Crisis. I certainly in the past have spoken about what a privilege it was to sit in the parliament the day he delivered the Apology to the Stolen Generations. Over the last few days of course there's been a fast and furious debate, and as I've said it has at some times been ugly. As we go from this day into the days that follow, as I said to my Labor colleagues in caucus today, we will do that honouring Kevin Rudd as a former Prime Minister and for us, Labor people, more importantly than anything else, as a former Labor Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, the estimates of the vote for Kevin Rudd a week ago was that he had about a third of the caucus in the meantime you had this image of the Labor party outwardly trashing each other publicly which will no doubt feed into the Liberal party's advertising campaign. Did the (inaudible) achieve, and was it worthwhile doing?
PM: Laura I'm surprised at your question, because I would have thought you read more newspapers than I do, you probably have a bit more time. But I've seen estimates in newspapers from Kevin Rudd was very likely to win, Kevin Rudd was going to be supported by half the cabinet, Kevin Rudd was going to get 45 votes and so on and so on and so on.
Estimates here, estimates there, lists here, lists there. What we now know is the truth. Obviously my caucus colleagues have overwhelmingly endorsed me to continue to be Labor leader and Prime Minister. I asked them to give me that endorsement because of my strength and capacity and ability to do this job. I asked them to give me that endorsement so that we stay the course we pursue the purpose that I have outlined for this government and this parliament when I became Prime Minister and certainly in the days after the formation of minority government. It's not easy for my caucus colleagues to give that endorsement in circumstances where everybody who likes to read the tea leaves of opinion polls is telling them to do something else. They've done that because of their sense of passion about the Labor purpose I have outlined for the future.
JOURNALIST: Kevin Rudd told the country you can't beat Tony Abbott, at least one of your frontbenchers has come out and said you can't beat Tony Abbott. The polls would suggest you can't beat Tony Abbott. You said you've learned a lesson, what are you going to do differently, what can you do to beat Tony Abbott?
PM: Well Fran, I can and I will. And the important thing  -  everybody votes in 2013 and let's remember the next election is some 18 months away, when everybody votes in 2013. They will be voting for what kind of nation they want Australia to be. What sort of future they want us to have, and the choice will be absolutely clear.
Do they want us to be a nation that share the proceeds of the mining boom, or to put that in the hands of a few? Do they want us to be a nation that gets up and seizes the opportunities  -  the amazing opportunities coming our way out of the changes in our region, or do they want us to stand still? Do they want us to be a nation that is building more ways of giving people fairness, and a fair go in life? We built Medicare, the next big challenge is to build the National Disability Insurance Scheme. Do they want to see that? Do they want to see us build the economy we will need for the future? To all of that, Tony Abbott will say no, no, no, no, no. (Inaudible) people can choose.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister a lot of Aboriginal people (inaudible) love Kevin Rudd because of the apology, do you fear that there will be some sort of backlash with the Aboriginal people in Queensland at the next election because of today's decision?
PM: No I don't. As a government we are very focused on our Closing the Gap strategy, certainly commenced by Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister. Commenced as he gave the Apology to the Stolen Generations, being a set of policies and plans to make a measurable difference for Indigenous Australians in their lives, and we are pursuing those policies and plans with absolute determination.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've talk about honouring Mr Rudd's record in government, but for the last five days your senior Ministers including the Deputy Prime Minister have been out there trashing the record. What role did you have (inaudible) quite deliberate strategy?
PM: I've spoken the truth about my perspective in 2010 and the circumstances of the government then. I think it was a truth that needed to be told. I do regret not telling it in 2010, I think it made it harder for Australians to understand why the prime ministership had changed. But it's not my intention to dwell on the circumstances of 2010 either, I'm about getting done today what we need to do for this country's future and that will be my focus.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, during this last week you constantly talked about disabilities. Are you going to therefore commit to the National Insurance Disability Scheme and how would you fund it?
PM: Well Latika, you will have to wait on that very pressing policy question. But of course, we are very committed to building a National Disability Insurance Scheme and we are not underestimating the complexity of doing that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given that in his speech he thanked the Australian public for their support for him and his family in their journey through public life so far. Are you worried he will spend the next couple of months chipping away at those 31 votes that he's got and there will be another challenge?
PM: I think anybody who's watched Kevin Rudd's statement to the media today could see the honestly, the candour, the way that he's approached that press conference, they could see what he said and I absolutely accept it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister have you spoken privately to Mr Rudd today or do you intend to?
PM: We shook hands in the caucus room and spoke very briefly then.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr Rudd hasn't renounced as you asked him to all future leadership ambitions, he's only said that he won't challenge you a second time. Doesn't that mean that his presence as the Member for Griffith into the future is still sitting on the back bench as a reminder he may come forth again?
PM: I don't think it's fair for to you to reinterpret Kevin Rudd's words. What he has just said is that I will have his strong support to take our party forward, take this government into an election in 2013 and to fight that election and win. That is what Kevin Rudd has said today.
JOURNALIST: It would be fair to say that the carbon tax has been one of the more difficult policies for your government to sell. This week Kevin Rudd revealed it was you and Wayne Swan that asked him to shelve the CPRS. When did you change your mind and not want to wait for a bipartisan solution, and aren't you a hypocrite moving forward with this now?
PM: I've answered this question many times in recent days, and I don't think having watched what I achieved in the Australian parliament in the most difficult of circumstances last year to put a price on carbon, when I did that against community opposition around the country, rallies around the country carrying some of the most pointed slogans that have ever been put on a sign against a Prime Minister. When I fronted all of that out, when I fronted in shopping centres where occasionally people would get in my face and get in my space to give me a free character assessment about it, when I've done all of that, how can anyone seriously doubt by commitment to this policy? I got it done.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, since the ballot what contact if any have you had with the independents or crossbenchers and what's been your message to them.
PM: None since the ballot.
JOURNALIST: Your behaviour over the last few days  -  you actually (inaudible) received a lot more direct, a lot more honest and even in some circumstances a little bit angry. Do you think you might change the way you approach political (inaudible) in the future?
PM: Well I intend to be a very forceful advocate of the government's policies, so settle in.
Any other questions? 



Final approval for the structural separation of Telstra has today been granted by the ACCC, in a major landmark for the nation's telecommunications industry.
This means for the first time in Australia's history, telecommunications providers will compete on a level playing field.
Consumers are set to benefit from this competition as retailers compete evenly and fiercely to give customers the best and most innovative services, at the best price.
By structurally separating Telstra, the Government has finally fixed the wrongs of past governments. Telstra was structured and sold in a way that was bad for consumers, bad for competition and bad for the economy. 
For consumers, this means the Government has secured the best outcome for their telecommunications services by locking in maximum competition  -  now and into the future.
The telecommunications industry has been seeking this outcome for nearly two decades, an outcome that only Labor has been able to deliver.
This announcement today is also an essential step in the development of the National Broadband Network.
Telstra have undertaken to close down their copper network as the NBN Co fibre network progressively rolls out to 2020. The undertaking also provides measures in the interim to ensure existing fixed line services are supplied to wholesale customers on the same terms as they are supplied to Telstra's retail arm.
The acceptance of the undertaking is one of the last hurdles in the finalisation of the Definitive Agreements between NBN Co and Telstra that will advance the roll-out of the NBN. 
Once finalised NBN Co will gain full access to detailed information about Telstra's network of pits and ducts. This data is essential for NBN Co confirming its three year rollout schedule which will be released before the end of March. 
NBN Co has already announced its 12 month fibre rollout schedule which will see construction underway or completed for 758,000 Australian households, businesses and public facilities by December this year.  



PM: I'm here with Minister Conroy on what is a landmark day for telecommunications in our country. Today the ACCC, our competition and consumer watchdog, has given the approvals necessary for the structural separation of Telstra.
Structurally separating Telstra is an achievement of this government. We got the landmark legislation through at the end of 2010.  What structural separation means put simply is that Telstra provides wholesale services and people can compete for the provision of those services to consumers. It means real competition in telecommunications for the first time in our nation's history.
The decision today means that there can be genuine competition in telecommunications from today on. But it particularly means that we are able to deliver the National Broadband Network with the wholesale price around the country that we have promised. That people in the country would get the same benefits, the same wholesale benefits, as people in other parts of the nation. This is an important development. We now have the funding, the legislation, and the regulatory approval we need for the rollout of the National Broadband Network.
By the end of this year around three quarters of a million Australians will see the National Broadband Network completed or underway - so actually in their own communities where they live. This is an important development for those Australians and the NBN is vital to our future competitive ability as a nation.
It makes clear the choice at the next election, it'll be a very simple choice, one between broadband or no broadband, we are delivering broadband, Mr Abbott is committed to demolishing the NBN.
I'll turn to Minister Conroy now for details and then we'll take your questions.
MINISTER CONROY: Thank you Prime Minister. I have previously described the structural separation of Telstra as the Holy Grail of microeconomic reform in this sector. And today's decision by the ACCC means that structural separation should now be locked in for the future.
The telecommunications industry has been seeking this outcome for two decades. The ACCC made this point in its report today when it said, and I quote, “together the SSU (structural separation undertaking) and the migration plan implement a form of structural reform of the telecommunications sector that responds to a long standing competition concerns that have arisen from Telstra's vertical integration.” And this echoes what Paul O'Sullivan, the CEO of Optus, said in 2009, “Telstra's vertically integrated structure has been the key impediment to competition in the fixed line market for many years.”
The structural separation of Telstra is, as the Prime Minister has said, an outcome that only the Gillard Labor government has been able to deliver. Let's be very clear about this, Telstra did not voluntarily agree to this separation, Telstra has made this undertaken in response to the policy and legislation of this government. 
The government always had structural reform of the industry as one of its goals in its development of broadband policy. We provided them with a clear choice - they could choose to remain a vertically integrated fixed line business or they could choose to separate and be able to participate in offering a full range of services.
They could choose to keep the vertically integrated dominance of the fixed line market and divest Foxtel, or they could choose to separate, keep Foxtel, and be able to participate in the auction for spectrum for mobile broadband later this year.
Telstra has chosen the route of separation; Telstra's shareholders have supported the decision with 99.45 percent voting in favour of it. The structural separation undertaking sets out how Telstra will decommission its copper network, as it progressively migrates customers to the NBN.
The migration plan that accompanies the undertaking sets out how Telstra will shut down its copper network. As NBN Co completes its fibre network in an area, an information campaign will commence advising customers that the copper line will be disconnected. Consumers will have the option to choose from any of the retail providers offering services over the NBN.
In every greenfield estate above 100 premises, new housing estates, each new premise is already served by structurally separated access - there is no copper - and as we progressively close down the copper network other providers still need to access Telstra's coppers to provide services.
The undertaking also includes measures to improve the terms under which they do this.  This delivers equivalence and transparency in the supply of regulated services to Telstra's wholesale customers. This ensures that these services are supplied to wholesale customers on the same terms as they are supplied to Telstra's retail arm.
Levelling the playing field in the telecommunications sector will result in better services to Australian consumers at lower prices. We have already seen the emergence of strong price competition and service innovation from a range of providers to the NBN.
The acceptance of the undertaking will also trigger the finalisation of the agreements between NBN Co and Telstra that will advance the rollout of the NBN. ACCC approval of the SSU is one of the final steps in completing the definitive agreements between Telstra and NBN Co.
Once finalised, NBN Co will gain full access to detailed information about Telstra's network of pits and ducts. This data is vital for NBN Co in confirming its three-year rollout schedule, which will be released before the end of March.
NBN Co has already announced its 12 month fibre rollout schedule, which will see construction underway or completed as the Prime Minister said in 758,000 Australian households - so completed or construction underway by December this year - that's households, businesses and public facilities by December this year.
Australians are already seeing the benefits of retail competition over the NBN, with retail service providers announcing some very competitive NBN plans. In fact many of the current broadband service offerings offered over the NBN compare favourably to prices for ADSL2+ in the marketplace today.
For example, many of you wouldn't have seen this, but a company called SkyMesh is offering NBN fibre services from $29.95 per month. That's it, one price, no line rental, $31 on top, $29.95 for NBN Co services. Optus plans start from $39.95 per month for a bundled plan, and a number of other retail service providers are offering plans starting from $34.95. So this is a very exciting time to be a broadband consumer.
The NBN will cater for Australia's future telecommunications needs and will connect our cities and our regional centres to make us a world-leading digital economy.
PM: Thank you Stephen, we'll take questions.
JOURNALIST: Australia is a big country in terms of geography but not that big in terms of population what are the prospects for vigorous competition in this sector in the long term, or will it settle down to be a few major players?
MINISTER CONROY: This is national pricing from these companies. I mean this was our commitment, this is our fundamental difference between us and Tony Abbott and Barnaby Joyce. We are delivering universal pricing across the country. We're not promising to deliver metro-equivalent, we are actually doing it. Across Australia everyone gets the same price.
Now there was a lot of debate earlier in this process about how many Points of Interconnect, or POIs, there should be. And arguments about whether we should have a smaller number of POIs. What that did that debate, that decision by the ACCC, was ensured that everyone gets access and that across the country everyone gets the same price offering from the NBN.
They've got to interconnect with other parts of the network but fundamentally, as you've already seen despite claims that it was going to be more expensive because of the ACCC's decision  -  national pricing, it's locked in, we are delivering it. We're not promising metro-equivalent, we delivering universal prices across the country.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
MINISTER CONROY: We've already seen that Vodafone have announced they are going to enter the fixed line market for the first time. Vodafone, the world's largest telecommunications company, is actually entering our market. It has its first customers in Armidale at the moment - never been in the fixed market before, so you've got a big new international entered.
SkyMesh, not a company that's done fibre before I believe, it's done satellite, entered the fixed line market. And there's a number of local providers as well as competition already coming from Optus, iiNet, which have merged with Internode, you've got TPG yet to announce their prices and you've got Dodo yet to announce their prices.
As well as Telstra's prices yesterday - which despite some of the ill-informed commentary, is actually just the top range of prices, they have more plans to come - they are guaranteeing in their press release that they will maintain their pricing for people who just want to use the telephone and who don't want broadband, that's in their press release.
But yesterday's announcement by Telstra was simply their top range prices as they begin to get NBN-ready. It's not their final prices and they've said publically and repeatedly that there are more packages to come.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister I guess you've just come from a caucus meeting this morning and I suppose you were able to share the good news about this policy advance. What was your general message to your colleagues about this policy and about the events of the past week and how you want your government to go forward from here?
PM: I think we're getting some head tossing in the rest of the group about whether that is a connected question or not to the subject of this press conference. I'm prepared to pay that one so we'll rule it in as question as a result. Anthony will do the normal caucus briefing.
My message to my colleagues in caucus was the same as my message publicly yesterday. The nation is now watching us, and we need to get on with the job and here we are today getting on with the job delivering our vision of the nation's future. We've talked a lot about the NBN today, and so we should because this is a landmark day. But let's talk about the purpose of the NBN.
The NBN is an instrument to make us a more prosperous nation in the future. We won't be able to compete with nations around the world and in our region without the NBN and it's an instrument to give us 21st century service delivery. So you can be in a country town and you can see an inner city specialist to meet your health care needs, and it will be like you are talking to him or her face to face, something people have never had before. It means our kids in our classrooms in our schools around the country can be connected with the best educational resources on earth, something we have never had before.
JOURNALIST: Minister back on Telstra, is the final step of the Government as the major shareholder of the NBN signing the agreements, is that the final step and when will that happen?
MINISTER CONROY: The Cabinet has to approve the final instruments in case there were any changes to the early one, I think there have been some changes along the way, some discussions with the ACCC, so there are two different things. There's the SSU and the SAU. The NBN one has to come back. This one doesn't have to come back to Cabinet. 
So this announcement today doesn't come back to Cabinet, but the NBN in its negotiations with the ACCC, if they make substantive changes, and they've already resubmitted their documents, they will come back to Cabinet. So this particular part of the process doesn't; the next part does.
PM: Just before we go to another question, you might want to just explain those two acronyms.
MINISTER CONROY: Yes, sorry, structural separation undertaking is what we've got today; the special access undertaking that NBN Co is negotiating with the ACCC does need to come back, if there's changes  -  and there's already been a change for instance to the marketing clause, if you remember there was a lot of controversy around whether or not they could misrepresent their products as equivalent, so that's already been changed, that needs to come back for approval, and any other as part of this final iteration  -  but that's separate from today.
JOURNALIST: Can I just clarify on the NBN and structural separation, for those of us non tech-heads, if for example the Coalition wins government, and says it's not going ahead with the NBN, would structural separation still work?
MINISTER CONROY: It depends on what their plan is. That's why I say this should be locked in. If they return back to their fibre to the node proposal, that they flag at the moment, and they've not fleshed out a price yet  -  I mean, Citibank priced it at $16 billion, I think Malcolm in a speech recently said his FTTN proposal would be about a third of the cost of the fibre to the home, that's still $10 billion, let's be clear, so $10 billion as opposed to $16 billion.
If they return back to that, then by definition there is no automatic structural separation, and if you see in the Fin Review today, in your paper, you'll see he's been challenged by Paul O'Sullivan, and others, to say how will you deliver structural separation under your policy, because he had no, he just said blithely, Telstra shareholders will understand this, they'll know that it's better for them.
So the question is, well Malcolm, 99.45 percent or whatever it was said that they disagree with you, and they've taken this package. So he's going to have to not only pay for a $10 billion to a $16 billion actual build cost, he then has to put on the table a whole heap of money to get them to agree to structurally separate. So, it's done. If we stick with this policy, it's done.
If you go back to Malcolm's policy and Tony's policy, then you end up having to renegotiate the whole thing, and there's no reason for Telstra to agree to this  -  as some people suggested, we gave them some pretty harsh alternatives, and Malcolm ruled out the issue of the wireless, the spectrum, the wireless spectrum auction. He said no, we won't do that  -  well, it won't matter, because the auction will have taken place before the next election. So he has no mechanism whatsoever to convince Telstra, other than an even bigger bucket of money on the table than he's prepared to admit to.
So there are billions and billions of dollars that will have to be on budget from Malcolm if he wants to go down the path of changing this policy. But the sector, even Telstra now, have accepted that this is the best place to be, and Malcolm's policy takes you backwards.
PM: And can we just say, for the non-aficionados in the room, can we just remind ourselves, that means in 2013 when communities vote, they'll be voting on a very simple choice: broadband or no broadband.  Andrew?
JOURNALIST: On a connected question, pardon, Minister, sorry, by the time of the next election  -  say it's October next year  -  how many houses will have been connected, and how many houses or premises will have been passed by, and how close is this to the 20 percent threshold, which is the point at which Telstra (inaudible).
MINISTER CONROY: Even on the original corporate plan, which was released just over a year ago, I think the calculation would have been about 14 per cent  -  one four  -  so
JOURNALIST  -  It was 14, but there have been delays  -  what's the latest estimate and (inaudible).
MINISTER CONROY: No, we'll be releasing the new corporate plan over the next few months, we've received the draft, we're having discussions, and we'll release the final plan in a few months, so you'll get an absolute, definitive indication. Now you mentioned delays  -  this is the single greatest delay, getting this signed.
The original plan based its calculations on this agreement which we're talking about today having been finished in June last year. So there's about eight months difference. What that's meant is that the start date for the rollout's moved forward by eight months, so those figures that existed in that original corporate plan were based on an assumption that they would have been starting from June last year.
So we'll be releasing the updated figures  -  we haven't finalised them all yet  -  there's still some issues around the corporate plan that we're in discussion with NBN Co about, but the corporate plan will be released and you'll all get to see those sorts of calculations. But in terms of the 20 percent, the original corporate plan only has us at 14, that wasn't reaching the 20 percent, because of the eight month delay in getting this agreed, it's not likely to threaten the 20 percent either.
PM: And can I just say, Ed, the statistic I referred to very broadly in my introduction more specifically is by the end of this year, 758,000 households, businesses and public facilities will have the NBN construction underway or completed.
JOURNALIST:  Minister, given that this was, the delay to this agreement has caused problems for the whole roll-out in terms of hitting the original targets, are you confident now that they're rolling out right now enough fibre to hit the target at the end of the year  -  do you think that now this is agreed there is any prospect that the March update could be better than you might originally have thought?
MINISTER CONROY: Look, the deal that was struck between Telstra and NBN Co allowed them to pass a small amount of information to us to begin the announced sites. So I'm confident that the sites that have been announced, we already have all of Telstra's information. What you'll see, probably in the very near future, is with the final signing of the DAs  -  definitive agreements.
So when we sign that very shortly, the rest of the information gets passed over, so we'll then have everything we need to be able to confidently say that the three-year plan will meet its projections. But the actual construction that's underway, we already have all of the information from Telstra.
I'm very confident that we'll have the construction underway for the 758,000 by the end of the year. We already have all that information and those announcements have been made, and the contracts have been let, and they're being built around the country. If you go around the country now you'll find that they're doing the early prep work, and they're at different stages in different places of the preparation work.
I mean it comes down to opening pits up, dragging a piece of fibre through, I mean it's very basic early construction work like that, as well as connecting things to the side of people's houses.
JOURNALIST: Can you say now how many would be passed by September 2013?
MINISTER CONROY: We'll be able to have a better guide from that when the corporate plan comes out in a few months.
JOURNALIST: Minister, you've said that this was the Holy Grail of microeconomic reform in this sector. Is that based on how difficult it is to get this approved, is it how difficult it is to get this negotiated, or is this directly related to the wider economic benefits that you've been told this will have on the economy?
PM: We'll go to Minister Conroy, but let's be very clear  -  we talk about this as such an important microeconomic reform because of the outcome for Australians, the difference it will make in their lives, in their own lives at home and in their businesses.
We've lived with this tyranny of distance for a long period of time in telecommunications, where everything has been so much more expensive for people who live outside the real centres of our cities  -  once you've got out to regional centres and beyond, things have been so much more expensive, which is why this separation, giving you wholesale and retail competition, makes such a difference.
It's about fair pricing for people, and with the NBN it's about uniform wholesale pricing for people, so it's no longer true  -  the way it has been for years  -  that if you picked up the phone and made a call then you're getting charged different rates than someone calling in the city, from one point in the city to another, if you call that point in the city it's different for you. With NBN, with the movement of the information, that won't be true for people who live in country Australia.
MINISTER CONROY: I mean let's be clear, this is a debate that goes back to the Hawke-Keating government, and I've said this to you many times, this is a mistake that goes back twenty years, that's stretched over two governments, and this is finally resolving what many people believe was unfinished business; that they should have gone for the interconnect policy, rather than the infrastructure competition policy that they ended up with, and we believe this sets this into the right mode.
We've separated it, you can now get the innovation. And as to the benefits, I mean I was in Blacktown last week, and I visited a home  -  and he runs his, it's a guy he runs this business from his home. And at the moment, it's a data-heavy business, he works for the AFL, his job is to go and record all the local Sydney grade matches  -  he was at the NAB Cup the other day and he does all the stats. He watches them, he does all the stats and then he sends them up to Melbourne, so they keep this all updated. At the moment, he does it on a  -  he records the matches, starts doing the data, and then he gets  -  because it's so much data  -  he gets a CD, and he sends it via the post. And they send it back to him. This is the 21st century!
So he literally does this  -  he's a small business owner saying I'm begging you to connect my home as fast as you can, because I'll just press a button and it'll be done in seconds, and it'll come back in seconds.
So those are just one small example of how a business in Blacktown  -  not in a regional centre, in Blacktown  -  will benefit because of the numerous blackspots across metropolitan as well as regional Australia.
JOURNALIST: If you want to reduce this absolutely to the retail level, to an audience level in a sense, are you saying this is cheaper, faster internet access wherever you are. Is that fundamentally what this is about  -  what it will mean to the end user?  And if I could ask you another question, on indulgence as they say, have there been any discussions with Bob Carr for the Senate vacancy; has the foreign ministry position been part of those discussions?
PM: Alright, why don't we go to Stephen on the faster and cheaper and then I'll deal with the second part.
MINISTER CONROY: There is no question that, despite the claims from Paul Fletcher, Tony Abbott, and Malcolm Turnbull that it would be more expensive that it would be more expensive broadband, the market  -  the plans in the marketplace  -  disprove this categorically. They disprove this.
And what you see now is better services, for the same prices in some cases, and cheaper prices. The $29.95 SkyMesh plan is the cheapest price I've seen. You've got to remember, the wholesale price is $24, so they're making basically $6, across the country an offering  -  that's an extraordinary price, and Exetel I thought was going to be about the cheapest price at around $35. And then SkyMesh have come in at $29.
So you're already seeing price pressure, if you remember Internode created a bit of a stir, they put in their first top price at $189 for the new 100 megabit plans; they've already reduced their prices twice.  They've increased their cap and reduced their prices twice, because everyone else came in below them. So you're already seeing price competition, cheaper prices being delivered, faster speeds and more consistent and purer service.
PM: Okay, and then on the second part of your question, obviously there is speculation today about a number of names for the Senate vacancy arising from Mark Arbib's resignation. Something tells me we will see more speculation over coming days about more names. I'm not going to be drawn into a continuous round of commentary about this speculation but before everyone here works themselves up into fever pitch I would remind that Bob Carr, over a long period of time, has said that he's not interested in coming to Canberra.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, notwithstanding that you're waiting for the review, are you still philosophically committed to the internet filter, and is that something you'll introduce this term or next term?
MINISTER CONROY: Well, two companies, in fact three companies have already introduced it. It may come as a great surprise to you that the internet hasn't slowed down or collapsed. Telstra and Optus and a small  -  apologies to the third company  -  have introduced the filter.
They're testing it against the Interpol list, and overwhelmingly Australians have not noticed any difference, any difference whatsoever. We've seen announcements by a whole range of other companies that they're going to introduce it themselves voluntarily. We welcome this, we think this is a fantastic step forward. I've been calling on the sector to stand up and move forward, I think I've only seen now one company that has indicated it may not introduce voluntarily the filter.
So we welcome  -  well, we're still going through the review at the moment, but I'm very, very excited that the industry has stepped forward. And at this stage I'm only aware of one company that said it won't, and there are discussions taking place with them. And if we were to achieve an outcome where everyone actually introduces it themselves, well then that is the best possible outcome.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, you say that Bob Carr himself has said he doesn't want to come to Canberra, but clearly as one of, or I think the longest-serving Labor New South Wales Premier, he would have the credentials to come here. Do you believe he would be an asset to your team, and would you entertain the thought of someone new to Federal Parliament taking on the Foreign Ministry straight away?
PM: Look, on reshuffle questions, as I said yesterday and said this morning when interviewed on the ABC, I'm not going to be answering questions about the reshuffle. I'll announce the reshuffle when I announce it, and I won't be engaging in commentary on the period in between. On Bob Carr's attributes and abilities, of course I am a huge fan of Bob Carr, remarkable Premier of New South Wales, a very intelligent man, I'm a huge fan of Steve Bracks too, and John Brumby and I could keep adding to the list, Mike Rann, and the list goes on.
MINISTER CONROY: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm getting helpful suggestions here now from Stephen Conroy, I think he just added Stephen Conroy to the list as someone who should be talked up, but I refer you to my earlier answer.
MINISTER CONROY: I'm a born diplomat.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what involvement would you expect to have in the selection of a candidate for the Senate  -  it's a choice for New South Wales but you're the Prime Minister, how much involvement will you have?
PM: Well as Prime Minister, I will be making sure that there is a candidate selected who is of high quality and can make a contribution to the Labor team as we get on with delivering all of the things that we have promised the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: But would you expect to have a veto or a vetting role in that?
PM: We, and by we I mean Labor and me as Prime Minister, will present a candidate who's got the attributes and capacities to add to the Labor team  -  we've got a lot of work to do, we've got a huge program of reform this year, whether it's skills, getting the budget into surplus, building the National Disability Insurance Scheme, supporting jobs, getting about the big, big task of building the economy of the future, including through making sure that the NBN is there and that people understand its capacities  -  we've got a lot of work to do and of course I want the next person who joins the Labor team to be able to make a great contribution to us getting that work done.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in recent days you've said that you've thought it was good that a more full and better explanation of the events of June 2010 had been given to the Australian people. Wouldn't it assist that even further if the Bracks/Carr/Faulkner review was released in full?
PM: Well the events of 2010 that I've spoken about, how I became Prime Minister, I did say publicly last Thursday that I'd thought the Australian people did need a fuller explanation of that, and I've provided it in recent days. It's not my intention though to dwell on events in 2010, I'm focused on the future.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, there's been some suggestion this morning that a Minister might have exercised a sort of effective veto over Mark Arbib continuing in the ministry. Can you tell us unequivocally that this was not so?
PM: I've got absolutely no idea what you're referring to, absolutely no idea.
JOURNALIST: Have you spoken to Bob Carr in the last 24 hours?
PM: Look, I'm not going to get into my private conversations, thanks Phil.
JOURNALIST: Minister Conroy, you just joked that you were a born diplomat.
MINISTER CONROY: Irony, joke, call it what you want.
PM: I'm not going to rule anything in or out on the reshuffle, but some things are towards the outer edge of possibilities.
MINISTER CONROY: That would be kamikaze.
PM: Have we got any other questions? Good, thank you.  



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning and welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning Sabra.
HOST: A lot of Australians would be scratching their heads this morning and thinking what was that all about yesterday.
PM: Sabra, I think Australians understand what it was about. Clearly Labor needed to resolve the leadership contest, it was resolved yesterday and as I said yesterday, we are now getting back on with the job.
We've got lot of important things to do in 2012. Our economy's changing, I think Australians know that. They're seeing job losses in some sectors and then spectacular growth in others. That requires us to focus on the economy, skills and we'll deliver a skills package through COAG, a budget surplus, we'll get that done in May, making sure that we're getting ready for the new economy with the National Broadband Network, with our clean energy future from 1 July, making sure we deliver the minerals resource rent tax. So Sabra, that's my focus and that's the work we're getting on with.
HOST: What was it designed to do? Was it designed to crush Kevin Rudd's leadership ambitions for good?
PM: What it was designed to do was resolve the Labor leadership contest and it's done that. Yesterday, what you saw was both me and Kevin Rudd come out of the Labor Party room and indicate that we would work as a united Labor team to deliver our agenda and our vision of the country's future and also to be very clear about the choice between the Labor Government and our conservative opponents and the choice couldn't be clearer.
A budget surplus on our side, $70 billion hole on theirs, just to take one example.
HOST: But a third of your caucus don't have belief in you to do the job and also Kevin Rudd said yesterday when he addressed caucus he didn't want to stand idly by while the next generation of Labor leaders is wiped out. They're both pretty damning for you.
PM: I'm pretty confident, Sabra, that we can win the 2013 election. We've got 18 months to go before that election and during those 18 months, we will be building the new economy Australia needs so people have jobs and opportunity.
We'll be continuing to provide a package of benefits to working families, paid parental leave, our new education tax refund, more money going into childcare than ever before and of course we'll be building a new platform for the future and fairness in the future and that is a better way of helping Australians with disabilities and their families so we've got to lot of work to do.
Australians will get to judge it in 2013, but in 2013 the choice will be very clear too, the choice between us, prepared to grapple with the challenges of the future and our conservative opponents, the Liberals, who keep saying that you can stand still in the face of change.
Australians are a very commonsense people and I think they know you can't stand still.
HOST: When did you decide enough was enough? It's been suggested that Simon Crean and Wayne Swan were as strident as they were in criticism against Mr Rudd to flush him out for a challenge, for you to call on a spill while he was overseas to extinguish his momentum, to crush his numbers.
PM: Sabra, what happened last week is plain and transparent from the events. I made a decision to hold a ballot and announced that decision. It followed Kevin Rudd's decision to resign as Minister for Foreign Affairs.
HOST: Your warm praise of him yesterday during your press conference, on his record as Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, your words, are they the words that  you should have uttered last year at the national conference when you tried to airbrush him from history?
If you had acknowledged that then maybe you would have avoided what happened over the past week?
PM: Well, look I don't accept much of this analysis about last year's national conference, but the past is the past Sabra and I'm looking to the future and getting on with the job we were sent here to do.
We've been doing that job for 18 months, doing some incredibly hard things, bringing a lot of strength and determination to getting big reforms done like carbon pricing, even against hysterical scare campaigns from the other side of politics.
We're now going to take that same strength and determination into making sure we've got the economy we need for the future and we're getting a fair go for working families, as we embrace that future.
HOST: But many people are still quite confused, a man that many believe was  treacherous during the 2010 campaign, if you felt so strongly he'd been two-faced against you and the party, why did you appoint him Foreign Minister?
PM: I believed Kevin Rudd had the capacities to be a good Minister for Foreign Affairs and indeed he's been a great Minister for Foreign Affairs and I talked about some of those achievements yesterday.
HOST: But you talked about the sabotage of last week. This is someone you then reward with being Australia's chief diplomat overseas. How does that marry?
PM: Sabra, yesterday and in the days in the lead up to yesterday, I have said some things about 2010 and the circumstances that led me to put myself forward for the leadership.
I thought the Australian public should have an explanation of that and I regret not providing that explanation at the time in 2010.
I've also yesterday said some things about the government that Kevin Rudd led and of course the government had remarkable achievements too, remarkable achievements delivering the Apology to the Stolen Generations, remarkable achievements in advocating Australia on the world stage and most amazing of all, the way Kevin Rudd guided the nation through the global financial crisis.
So I've told the plain, simple truth about some of the great things and some of the difficulties.
HOST: Can you ever see a time when you'd bring him back off the backbench?
PM: Kevin Rudd's made it clear he will be on the backbench servicing a local community he loves and he lives in as the Member for Griffiths.
HOST: And do you trust him when he says he won't challenge again, he's renounced his leadership ambitions?
PM: Sabra, I think anybody who watched Kevin Rudd speak yesterday could see the emotion, but they could also see the candour and what he said yesterday is he would be supporting me as I lead our political party and the nation through to the 2013 election, which I am confident we can win because the choice between us and our opponents is so stark.
It's a choice between whether you shape the future or whether you pretend you can stand still, whether you support jobs or whether you don't, whether you look after working families or ignore their needs, whether you deliver a budget surplus or  a $70 billion black hole.
HOST: Will the departure of Mark Arbib make it easier now for you to unite the party?
PM: Mark Arbib did a great job in his various portfolios. I worked with him when he was in the employment portfolio and Apprenticeship Kickstart was his idea, getting kids into apprenticeships during dark economic days where they could have missed out on that opportunity in life.
Mark will now go to the next stage of his life. He clearly thought that it was something that could add to healing within the party.
HOST: Do you think so, that's the question. Do you think so? And he said he was uniquely placed within the party, being a factional powerbroker to do this. Should more of them go?
PM: Well Mark came and spoke to me yesterday. I understood what was motivating him. I understood how he thought that as a gesture, if you like, making the move away from politics, that could help with healing in the party and of course I want to see us as a united team delivering the big program of work we've got in fronts of us and I'm very confident we'll be doing that.
HOST: Do you think more of them should go?
PM: Look Mark Arbib made his own decision, a personal decision, and I'm not going to generalise from his personal decision to anybody else.
HOST: His decision means now that your reshuffle is going to be more substantial than what it was going to be. What's going to happen to people like Chris Bowen, Robert McClelland, Martin Ferguson, Kim Carr, people who advocated against you being the leader?
PM: Well nice try Sabra, but I made it clear yesterday that I'll announce the reshuffle in my own time and I'm not going to be speculating on it before I announce it. So I'm not answering any of these questions. I'm sure that will disappoint you, but that's the way it is.
HOST: Kevin Rudd said there shouldn't be retribution, will you take those comments on board?
PM: You can ask the question a million ways. I will judge my team the way I've said that I'm going to judge it - on merit and the capacity to take the fight up to the other side of politics.
That's what will drive my decision but I'm not going to be speculating on individual aspects of it before I deliver that decision.
HOST: I'm not asking you to speculate on individual aspects, I'm asking whether retribution is going to be part of it.
PM: Well I've given you the answer about how I will judge my team. I'm not going to speculate in any way Sabra.
I'll deal with the reshuffle in my own time and I'll announce and I'm not speculating about it before I announce it.
HOST: You said that you were wrong to have not explained the events of 2010 more fully. Have you been badly briefed?
PM: Look my decisions are my own. I took a decision in 2010 that it wasn't appropriate at that stage to explain matters internal to the Government. I took that decision because I thought it wasn't the appropriate thing to do with Kevin Rudd having just left the position of Prime Minister. I was concerned about that and obviously I was concerned too, as I got there as Prime Minister and needed to do a lot of work to make sure we were ready to fight the 2010 election and since the 2010 election it's been lot of work since.
But I do think it left Australians mystified as to why the changes happened and I've dealt with that in recent days, but it's not my intention, Sabra, to keep dealing with that. My focus is on 2012, 2013 and Australia's long term future.
HOST: It may not be your focus but one press conference doesn't explain the whole of 2010 and people would like you to explain it.
Other names that are being put forward as possible replacements for Mark Arbib are Kristina Keneally, Warren Mundine, Michael Fullilove, are these the sorts of people you would like to see in the party?
PM: Look I'm not going to speculate about who might fill that Senate vacancy either.
HOST: OK, there speculation this morning that with the departure of an internationalist like Kevin Rudd, that that will harm Australia's bid for the UN Security Council seat. Is The bid over?
PM: We will keep pursuing the UN Security Council bid. As a Government we've been very committed to it.
Of course Kevin Rudd was very personally committed to it. Across Government ministers have been playing their part, I've been playing my part, pushing our case for the UN Security Council and it's a very simple proposition about Australia being able to have its voice heard at that level on the world stage.
It was never going to be easy. It's not easy to get your way on to the Security Council but we will be pushing full forward with that bid.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you. 



It is a pleasure to welcome you all to Parliament House, the home of Australia's very much alive-and-well democracy.
I'm here as Prime Minister to acknowledge this industry and its magnificent contribution to the health of our people and the productivity of our nation.
When we talk about the success of Australia's economy, and our contemporary success is simply remarkable, we celebrate the contribution made by sectors such as mining and manufacturing, and we are right to do so.
But there's one sector that deserves to be up in lights along-side those others, and that is the pharmaceutical industry.
You are a great Australian success story, and on behalf of the nation, I honour your success tonight.
Like manufacturing, this is an industry that has said to the rest of the world: We can do this. We can make it. We can compete with the best. And you have.
Friends, I often talk about the new economy growing from the opportunities of the Asian century and a future based on skills and innovation.
You industry encapsulates exactly what I'm talking about. These are skilled jobs held by skilled people. Innovating. Value-adding. Knowledge-rich. Employing 14,000 people and sending abroad exports worth $4 billion a year, half of them to Asia. Like my old friend, the late John Button, I want this industry to succeed and thrive.
That's why we've worked hard with you to make Australia an attractive destination for global investors through the R&amp;D tax incentive and changing the rules on intellectual property.  But, of course, it goes beyond financial incentives.
We are also working to deliver first-class infrastructure like the National Broadband Network. We've opened up university enrolments so that places in science and pharmacy are now uncapped. And we're cutting the red tape surrounding clinical trials so you can get on and do what you do best.
Above all, we're working with you to keep the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme strong and sustainable for the 21st century as we face a growing and ageing population.
I know this is bipartisan gathering but I want to say a word about the PBS and what it means for Australian society. The PBS is no accident.
It's part of more than a hundred years of building a social safety net to bring wellbeing and peace-of-mind to Australian families.
It started in the first decade of Federation with the age and disability pensions.
We added Medibank, now Medicare in the 1970s. Universal superannuation in the 1980s. The National Disability Insurance Scheme in this decade. And back in the middle of it all, we had Ben Chifley creating the PBS. The year was 1947.Our nation had just been through a terrible world war and Chifley wanted to build a nation worthy of its heroes.
He'd also lived through two Depressions and witnessed first-hand the devastating effects of poverty and inequality.
So Chifley envisioned a different Australia  -  a fairer Australia. A nation that would bring security and dignity to all its people, regardless of their wealth or means. In creating the PBS, Chifley was not only engaged in policy development but in a contest of ideas.
Because as with Medicare and superannuation, the PBS was not always universally welcomed.
But like Medicare and superannuation, the PBS has become an integral and trusted part of Australian life.
We cannot imagine this country without it. Affordable pharmaceuticals  -  backed by scientific rigour  -  so that illness does not lead families to financial destitution because of the cost of medicines as it did in Chifley's day.
Today we are custodians of the scheme. Charged with making it efficient and sustainable so it continues to bring comfort and certainty to Australian families for years and decades to come.
I know we've had some tough decisions and difficult conversations in that process. And I'm here tonight because I'm grateful that Medicines Australia made those conversations constructive and professional.
With goodwill and compromise on all sides, we've found way through and we will continue to work with you to ensure the sustainability of the Pharmaceuticals Benefits Scheme.
The Memorandum of Understanding between the Government and Medicines Australia on behalf of industry is but one way we can provide certainty for both parties.
That's not only good news for the millions of Australians who rely on the PBS. It's a template of effective and respectful engagement for those in industry who would seek to influence government.
So friends, I'm here tonight to pay tribute to Medicines Australia and to Will Delaat as he bids you farewell. As an organisation, you have been well served by officials like Will and Brendan Shaw who set a high standard for advocacy in public policy.
As a result, we are maintaining the integrity and sustainability of the PBS as one of the most respected and rigorous pharmaceutical schemes in the world.
Will Delaat has made a significant contribution to that outcome. He can be very proud of the mark he left on your industry and on public life in this nation. A person of quality and a person of substance.
Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in acknowledging Will de Laat as I present this certificate of appreciation on your behalf. 



JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you considering a new ban on live cattle exports to Indonesia following Lateline last night?
PM: Minister Ludwig is addressing this issue. We've obviously worked hard on standards for live animal exports and worked hard on the inspecting of them as well.
So Minister Ludwig will be dealing with the details.
JOURNALIST: Can you clarify the Bob Carr situation, was he offered a job?
PM: The story that's on the front page of The Australian newspaper today is completely untrue.
JOURNALIST: Were you overruled though?
PM: I've just said  -  completely untrue.
JOURNALIST: In any way?
PM: I've just said  -  completely untrue and let me make this very clear: of course my door is open to talk to people as I work my way through the reshuffle, but the decisions are mine and I'll make them.
JOURNALIST: What do you make about the sexist remarks about VC winner Ben Roberts-Smith?
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: Someone on The Circle has made some sexist, disrespectful remarks about the-
PM: -I don't know anything about that, I'm afraid. 



Well it's a great pleasure to be here to launch George's book.
You've got to come and help a man whose surname is shortened to ‘Mega', what a fantastic surname he has. He was just pointing out to me with one more vowel it would have been ‘genius' on the end too but that wasn't to be.
So it's great to be here to launch George's book. I think George passes the Gillard test of journalism, which is he doesn't write crap. And on a day like today let me say that with more passion and force than usual. Not every anecdote here is retold as those involved in it remember.
But you don't launch a book by Megalogenis because you agree with every word of it. You launch it because you are interested in every word of it. Because George is a born myth-buster, empirical and sceptical, without succumbing to contrarianism. Still, my assessment of George's new book is that he's only half-right. Sorry about that, George.
The two big myths about Australia were best articulated fifty years ago. One, about our national economy: that we're just a “lucky” country. Two, about our national leadership: that we're run by second-rate people. George busts one of them  -  but I'm afraid he's still in thrall to the other.
InThe Australian Moment he smashes up one of the greatest myths of our time  -  that we've lived on our luck. He calls that one out right and I couldn't be happier that he's done it.
You know, all those cartoonish lines you read elsewhere, about our future being “a quarry and a beach”, all that silly self-deprecation about having “dumb luck” with our resources. I've never been so impatient with that kind of lazy opinionising as I am in 2012.
In reality, so many countries manage their mineral wealth badly that in the developing world they call it “the resource curse” and in the advanced world they call it “the Dutch disease”. National success in managing resources isn't dumb luck. 
This truth, that Australia isn't lucky, that we're actually good at national economic policy, runs through the whole of George's story, until he comes to this terrific question at the end. In his words:
Are we in danger of becoming a great country?
Well my answer today is you bet we are.
Here's Australia, with a great people, with a good government, doing the hard things, and doing them well. Making the most of a boom in mining investment, sharing the long-term benefits, pursuing the long term reforms, with economic numbers anyone else in the world would do anything to grab, with more Australians in work than ever before. This is a country where we make change work for us.
We've built a strong economy in the past thirty years  -  and we're building a new economy for our future right now.
But here's the rub, and here's where George and I do part company as analysts. Having busted the “lucky” myth, he's still taken in by the “second-rate” myth. So George says himself that Australia is “the West's last best role model”. High praise  -  that's George's words.
And I agree with that  -  our unique synthesis of equality and prosperity makes Australia a nation where we prove that fair countries can be rich and rich countries can be fair.
But still, George says the “last serious election” was nearly twenty years ago, in 1993. Well I'm afraid George, I just don't buy that. In specifics, because I know there were some big issues at stake in 2007  -  like WorkChoices  -  and 2010  -  like the NBN  -  and that there'll be big issues at stake in 2013.
But it's really the general reflection on the state of Australian leadership that I want to rebut. If we're so good at managing the economy  -  maybe our politics and government isn't quite as intellectually arid as all that.
You see we're not run by some wise old owl playing the clarinet in the bath or some solo genius zipping back and forth from Bungendore in a sports car while the political class wastes its time on doorstops. I think we've got a smart, hard-working people, tough businesses, and yes, a class of economic officials that the world envies.
But we've got politicians who make decisions and get the job done. Taxing mineral rents  -  doesn't just happen, it takes decisions. Building high speed broadband  -  takes decisions. Pricing carbon  -  takes decisions. And big ones at that.
And while I know you are not a born nostalgic, George, there is just a touch of “lollies were sweeter when I was young” in that way of looking at the 1980s and 1990s. Now, the boomers have got Gough and their kids have got Bob and Paul and I don't begrudge anyone fond memories of the politics of their youth. 
And my government isn't perfect, any more than theirs were. But reading George's account of Australian politics, I am reminded of something I often draw from conversations with Hawke and with Keating.
We in Labor rightly look back to the 1980s and 1990s as a period of great government, great reform. But the rear vision mirror should never be rose-coloured.
The truth, as we read here funnily enough, when you see the facts laid out by George, and as the leaders of that period tell you themselves, at least in private, what they say is that it was a very human business back then too. Sometimes they made mistakes, missed soft landings, had big regrets; sometimes they had triumphs, did good things for all.
At times they overcame determined conservative opposition, like on super, at times the opposition supported reforms, like on tariffs; they sometimes brought people with them, sometimes they pressed ahead with unpopular plans.
Through it all they built two models, two enduring Labor models of a strong fair economy and of a forward-looking politics. A nostalgia for their period is a contradiction in itself. So yes our economy is strong, but no, it's no coincidence. Because we are well led. We've had leadership, not luck.
Take the Deputy Prime Minister. Wayne Swan's been Australia's Treasurer for nearly five years, Labor's Treasury spokesman for almost eight, saw us through the Global Financial Crisis, is seeing us through Mining Boom Mark II, was the Euromoney Finance Minister of the Year in 2011. If this is the Australian moment, and it may well be, Wayne got us here as much as anyone. Swanny should probably have more mentions in your book than Margaret Thatcher. But I might be biased.
Where I have no doubt is that we're doing exactly what our great predecessors did. Working with business, and we'll have more to say about our deregulation agenda with the BCA shortly. Making the big investments, delivering the big reforms, making the big changes work for us. Yes, we're working with industry, working with manufacturing, working with cars.
And for the heresy-hunters who want to say that this is anathema to the Hawke-Keating tradition, well, go to George's index, look up tariffs, see what actually happened. The Government I lead won't turn the clock back. What we will do is build a new Australian economy. So, George is half-right, but in fairness, that's better than being entirely wrong.
And it is a good book  -  a clever, funny and compelling read in George's typical style. First, there's new facts and new analysis galore. This is the person who told John Howard, to his face in an interview, that it was under his Prime Ministership that for the first time the majority of migrants to Australia came from Asia. Now that's not bad to claim in the book.
Second, he builds on the facts and analysis with great colour. When he climbs these little mountains of empiricism he always plants a flag of expectation on the top. So he doesn't just do the analysis that tells us, for instance, that the generation born after 1964 is and I quote-
The first group in which women are better educated than men, and the Australian-born children of immigrants are better educated than their local peers.
He calls this group-
            Generation W, for women and wogs.
That's nice. In fact George I regret that I didn't make the birth cut-off, having been born in 1961. George of course then does the high politics as well 
He has an argument to put about the “fifty or sixty politicians in conscious tension with one another,” and if it's a bit tough on the profession of politics overall, in its detail it's rarely conventional wisdom 
Finally, with George, you do get the economic big picture. In the end, what George does in The Australian Moment that I think hasn't been done as cleverly or successfully before is this: He connects our domestic reform experience  -  the decisions our leaders have made  -  to our experience of the global economy  -  the economic shocks of the last forty years.
That story of the interplay of politics and the economy, the successive shocks and what we did in them, from the OPEC oil prices of 1973 to the Global Financial Crisis of 2008, that's the prism through which George tells his story.
It's not complete. But it is a convincing way to understand a lot of what's been done in this country and why. And it's his most interesting and significant contribution yet.
It is good to be living the Australian moment in 2012. And I'm delighted to be here to launch The Australian Moment today.
Thank you very much. 



Today I announce changes to the Cabinet and Ministry that I will recommend to Her Excellency the Governor-General.
I have put together a team that will best equip my Government to pursue our priorities for the nation.
Cabinet changes
Bob Carr will join the Senate, and will take on the role of Minister for Foreign Affairs. Until he takes his place in the Senate, Craig Emerson will continue to act as Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Craig Emerson will also take on an expanded role of Minister for Trade and Competitiveness, paying particular attention to increasing Australia's international economic competitiveness, with a focus on the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper.
Brendan O'Connor moves into Cabinet to take the position of Minister for Small Business, as well as Minister for Housing and Homelessness. Small businesses are central to Australia's economy and deserve Cabinet-level representation.
Attorney-General Nicola Roxon will take on the additional portfolio of Emergency Management, which as I have made clear I believe must be a Cabinet-level appointment.
Tony Burke will take on the additional role of Vice-President of the Executive Council.
Ministry changes
Kate Lundy is promoted to Minister for Sport and Minister for Multicultural Affairs, as well as Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation.
David Bradbury is promoted to the Ministry as Assistant Treasurer, and in the newly-created position of Minister Assisting for Deregulation.
Jason Clare will take on the additional portfolio of Minister for Defence Materiel.
Kim Carr will move to the crucial services delivery portfolio of Human Services. Minister Greg Combet will continue to be responsible for manufacturing at a Cabinet level.
I wish to thank Robert McClelland for his many years of service in the Ministry.
I am also announcing a number of changes to Parliamentary Secretary responsibilities.
Parliamentary Secretary changes
Jan McLucas will become Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister in addition to her existing duties, and Richard Marles will assume wider responsibilities with the additional title of Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs.
Bernie Ripoll becomes Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasurer, while Sharon Bird becomes Parliamentary Secretary for Higher Education and Skills.
Jacinta Collins will become Manager of Government Business in the Senate following Mark Arbib's retirement.
I want to thank all Ministers who have served the Government so well in their current portfolios.
I will recommend to Her Excellency the Governor-General that the new Ministry be sworn in on Monday 5 March 2012. 



PM: Thank you very much, everybody. I'm joined today by Senator Penny Wong and by Assistant Treasurer David Bradbury, but I'm also joined by Tony Shepherd, the President of the Business Council of Australia, and by Peter Anderson, who is the CEO of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
The Australian economy is strong, but we know that some businesses are under intense pressure as a result of the high Australian dollar. One of the ways that we can address these challenges of change is by lifting productivity in our economy. As a government, we've been focused on lifting productivity. That's why we're focused on skills reform, making sure that working Australians have the skills they need and Australian businesses have the people they need. It's also why we're focused on rolling out the National Broadband Network and other productivity-enhancing infrastructure. It's why we're focused on delivering tax reform that can assist businesses, make investments and be ready for the challenges of change.
We've also focused on driving up productivity by creating a seamless national economy so that our nation can have one set of rules and regulations for Australian businesses. Now, regulation is important and good regulation matters. It matters so that business knows what the rules are. It matters so we can get the kind of social and environmental outcomes we want in our nation. But poor regulation, too much red tape, holds business back. As a government, we've been focused on working through COAG in creating a seamless national economy, and in that regard we've delivered 16 of 27 regulation reforms. In delivering those 16 reforms, we have delivered changes that make a real difference for Australian business.
The Productivity Commission recently looked at the 17 reform priorities that we are working on, and has estimated that those reforms alone could lower business costs by about $4 billion a year, and through improvements to productivity, increase GDP by over $6 billion in the longer term. Now we want to go to a further stage, and that is have business leaders working directly with the Council of Australian Governments on further regulation reform. That's why I'm pleased to be here with my parliamentary colleagues, but also with the BCA and ACCI to today announce that in the day before the next COAG meeting, we will have a COAG deregulation meeting involving Australian businesses.
We will bring together around 25 business representatives. We want them to be at the drawing board as we contemplate the next round of reform. We want leaders of the nation, as they meet at COAG, to hear directly from Australian businesses about what would make them more productive and what regulation challenges they face. To take an example, a practical example of the sort of changes we're working on now, and how they can make a difference, we're working on occupational licensing. It's never been more important than it is now in this time of economic change for labour to be able to go to where the work is and have their skills recognised. And yet, as a nation, we've been in a circumstance where an electrician couldn't go from Queanbeyan to Woden and ply his or her trade, let alone have someone from Tasmania fly in and fly out of a mining project in South Australia or someone in New South Wales fly into Queensland's Bowen Basin. We've clearly got to do better than that, and that's what this regulatory reform agenda is about. I will turn now to my colleague Senator Wong for some comments and then we'll hear from Tony and Peter.
MINISTER WONG: Thanks very much, Prime Minister, and thank you to Peter and to Tony for joining us for this announcement. When we talk about deregulation, what we're really talking about is another strand in the Government's productivity agenda and we understand that to achieve reforms in this process takes a lot of hard work. It's easy for politicians to talk about deregulation, much harder to deliver it. Now, if you're serious about ensuring you do approach this sensibly, you have to have a national focus, and that's why the COAG has been where this government has driven these improvements. As the Prime Minister said, the deregulation reforms, the 16 which have already been completed. But we also understand what we need is partnership. We need partnership with the states and we need partnership with the business community.
We need the business community to work with us to deliver not only the reforms which we already have yet to deliver through the seamless national economy reforms, but the next wave of reforms. And we know there is a benefit. The benefit is not only to the businesses that are the members of those people represented here today, but to the broader economy, to all Australians, as the Prime Minister has said. The Productivity Commission has said just 17 of the 27 seamless national economy reforms would yield a lessening of business cost of around 4 billion a year, even more in terms of the benefit, the increase to GDP, and that is not the entirety of our agenda, there is more to do. So we're very pleased that we're able to make the - the Prime Minister is able to make this announcement today. I certainly look forward to working with these gentlemen and their members on continuing the deregulation agenda and also with David Bradbury whom I'm very pleased has been appointed as minister assisting on this important area. Thank you.
PM: We will just turn now to Tony.
SHEPHERD: Thanks very much Prime Minister, and Minister. It's great to be here with you today. Today's announcement of the COAG business advisory forum is a great opportunity to reset the agenda, to get the federation working better. A successful federation will lift the living standards of all Australians. Business is very keen to work directly with Australia's first ministers about the Federal/State issues that are holding back our productivity and competitiveness. Businesses, big and small, deal daily with the dead hand of red tape and inefficiency in our federal system. The different rules and regulations in our nine federal, state and territory jurisdictions are a major drag on our economy and a huge cost to business and consumers. So we welcome the chance to help our governments drive better progress in the deregulation agenda. We also are really pleased the premiers will be supporting this initiative.
As the Prime Minister says, at a time when our economy is undergoing huge change and facing many pressures from a tough global environment, we must pull out all stops to reduce the unnecessary costs of doing business. COAG is an important forum for the reforming that will lift our productivity, but it needs to focus on delivering real benefits on the ground. Our view is there needs to be less things on COAG's agenda and a greater focus on the things that really matter. For example, we must complete trade licensing recognition - again as the Prime Minister has so eloquently outlined - which will make it easier for workers to move where the jobs are. The unfinished competition reforms on energy markets and transport infrastructure regulation are also vital productivity boosters.
But we must be conscious that in harmonising rules and regulations for the sake of it is just not the answer if all we get is worse regulation in every jurisdiction. The focus has to be on reducing costs, in making it easier to do business, and removing the barriers to the free flow of goods and services, jobs and investment around the country. Thank you very much.
PM: Thanks, Tony. Peter.
ANDERSON: Thank you very much, Prime Minister and Ministers and Tony Shepherd. Today's announcement is very welcomed. Excessive regulation or poor quality regulation and red tape is a drag on doing business for both businesses large and small, and so all of us who are leaders in the business community have a responsibility to work with our governments around Australia in our federation to try and minimise those negative outcomes created by excessive or poor quality regulation. The COAG agenda is an important part of the regulatory reform agenda.
It is a difficult agenda because it not just involves assessing regulatory issues, but also dealing with the perspectives of different levels of government in Australia. I'm very pleased that a COAG business forum can be established not just to try and improve our regulatory outcomes in Australia, but also to qualitatively improve the dialogue between the private sector and our public sector, our governments, on these important issues. If this forum operates as proposed, it holds the potential of adding significantly to the social infrastructure in Australia in the form of dialogue between our private and public sectors on matters of national economic regulation, and that is a good thing.
The Chamber of Commerce movement across the country, I have no doubt, will support this initiative, because those chambers not only are dealing with these regulatory issues at a state level, but they are involved in dialogue with their state governments. And so the announcement that's been made here today means that we're not only going to be talking at a national level with business representatives with the national government, but through the COAG process we're going to be using our mechanisms inside the business community to build bridges, improve dialogue and hopefully create better outcomes.
I thank the Australian Government, and the Prime Minister, for adopting this initiative and announcing it and pursuing it with this vigour. I also thank the Business Council for helping develop this initiative, and for my Chamber colleagues, particularly Stephen Cartwright from the New South Wales Business Chamber for developing the concept of a business forum associated with COAG. I encourage all state governments and state agencies to look very positively at this initiative because it does hold the prospect of building better outcomes, giving fresh life to the COAG agenda and creating a much stronger and competitive economy.
PM: Thanks very much. What we'll do is we will take questions on this announcement and initiative and then we'll let Tony and Peter to retire from the fray and take some other questions.
Louise and then Laura.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one of the main obstacles to the trade licensing harmonisation has been the WA government, who arguably needs the tradesmen the most for the mining boom. Is this a way of putting pressure on the WA Government to come to the party?
PM: If this works properly, I think it's going to put some pressure on all of us and that's a good thing. It's a welcome pressure, we deliberately want to be in that situation where, as a national government with our state and territory colleagues, we're in a room with the business community and we're all very focused on what we can do to lift productivity and particularly lift the burden of red tape off Australian businesses. So, if in that room there are some things said about the need to deliver on the trade licensing agenda, then that will be a welcome contribution, but I expect that there will be challenging things said in that room for all of us and that's a good thing.
Laura.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister and possibly Mr Shepherd as well, we've been talking about trade licensing, using that as an example, what would this forum deliver that we haven't got at the moment? Do you see the business community giving examples of issues that have to be resolved on trade licensing, for example, or is it just a forum where they can speak to all governments at the same time? What are they actually going to be bringing to the table using trade licensing as an example?
PM: I'll go to Tony in a second, but the way I'm thinking about this is we've been solidly engaged in the seamless national economy agenda, but we have taken, if you like, a top-down approach. We've looked at the things that have been in the nation's too-hard basket for many a long year - occupational health and safety is one of those, trade licensing has been another, some of the consumer reforms that we've made are a third example.
We've taken the things that government has known about, they've been in the too-hard basket, and we've been driving to get them done. Now through this process we can take a business-up approach so that through the business people who directly come, through the representative organisations like the BCA and ACCI, we can actually hear the stories from the small businesses and the large businesses around the nation who may well say to us, "That's good. OH &amp; S, trade licensing, consumer reforms, all fantastic, but from where I sit, running my business, my top three things are this, this and this, and have you thought and about them yet?"
So it's going to enable us to collect all of that up, think about it in the room and then work out how to action it, and it's very significant that leaders, me as Prime Minister, Premiers and Chief Ministers will sit at that table one day and then literally go and sit at the COAG decision-making table the next. I'll turn to Tony for a comment too.
SHEPHERD: Well thank you Prime Minister again and congratulations to the Prime Minister and the Minister for taking the lead on this because this is what we needed. But Laura, in answer to your question, what it will do is it will bring all the parties to the table and it will enable business to give case examples to Premiers of what we are seeking and the advantages to the economy and to each of the states for making these reforms. So if we take trade licensing, for example, we should be facilitating the transfer of an electrician from, say, New South Wales or Queensland to Western Australia and vice versa, and what are the costs and delays that occur as a result of this lack of harmonisation.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shepherd, if I could just ask you a question. The Business Council hasn't exactly been the best friend of this Government for some time. Does this initiative herald a new sense of engagement between business and the Government?
SHEPHERD: Well, I wouldn't agree that we haven't been the best friend of government for a long time. We've enjoyed a very robust, good working relationship.
This is an example of the sort of relationship that both parties would like. We see this as a great step forward and we will continue to - we trust to have a good working relationship with this Government and particularly the ministers that we engage with in business.
PM: OK, we'll got to Phil Coorey and then we'll come back across to Latika.
JOURNALIST: Mr Shepherd, or possibly Mr Anderson, what are the BCA's other concerns over (inaudible) levels of business taxation as well as red tape. Do you have a view on the Coalition policy to increase business taxation to fund a paid parental leave scheme? Do you think it's a good idea?
SHEPHERD: We're not here today to discuss the Opposition's policies. Again our advice to Government and to Opposition is always fearless, it's always unambiguous.
And we say to both the Government and the Opposition, the focus in Australia today has got to be on improving our productivity and our competitiveness, because in that way we generate the wealth that the whole nation can benefit from.
So we say that should be the first port of call in assessing government policies.
PM: Do you want to say anything on that, Peter.
ANDERSON: Phil, I'm on the record when this was announced by Mr Abbott as saying that this was a mistake. We still continue to hold that view.
The issue of regulation reform, though, that we're here today talking about, is an issue that the business community has had a lot of frustration with governments of all political colours with, at all tiers of government for many years.
That frustration is very real. However, we also have a responsibility to help, work with governments to do something about it, and that is the genesis of this idea, about a business forum accompanying COAG. Rather than just sit back as a business community and express our concerns and frustrations about lack of progress or the lack of ambition within an agenda, we need to take some responsibility ourselves to recognise that appropriate partnering with governments of all colours at all tiers is absolutely crucial to getting an outcome that we want.
So that's why we're here today and that's the focus of today's message.
PM: OK, Latika.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just directing this question to you, do you think that this is a sign that your relationship with business is healing?
PM: We've had a productive relationship with the business community across the days of being in government. Now that doesn't mean we've agreed about all things, of course we haven't. We've got different obligations and different perspectives, but right across all of the days of government since 2007. We worked strongly with Australian business during the days of the global financial crisis, to keep people in work, to get businesses through, to save businesses, to make sure that our banking system was continuing to provide the kind of services that business needed.
In my former portfolios of Education and Workplace Relations, we didn't always see eye to eye, but we worked solidly on reform agendas. I've received very solid backing from the business community about the need to improve the quality of Australian schools, to focus on skills, to drive increases in places and quality in Australian universities.
I couldn't have had a better friend for that reform agenda than Australian businesses, because they knew how important it was to the nation's future and continues to be.
In workplace relations we had to have some difficult discussions, no doubt about it.
In occupational health and safety, some very productive discussions that have got us to the stage where that is moving through to get a harmonised system.
Right across on things like the NBN and infrastructure, on trade agreements, we've worked very strongly with Australian business.
So we've always wanted to have a good relationship. I believe this is a demonstration of what you can achieve with a productive relationship.
We'll go to Kieran at the back and then come through. Kieran.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I'm interested to hear how the gentlemen and their organisations will pick the businesses that will have a direct say in this forum. Also I might have missed it, but is this a permanent forum that's been set up attached to COAG.
PM: OK, well on the picking I'll outline that and then I'll actually go to Senator Wong, given she's has been so pivotal to this initiative to talk about the role and how we see it rolling out.
We are consulting, I personally am consulting with Premiers and Chief Ministers about attendees. This is a COAG forum, so it's got to work for COAG.
So it's not the Commonwealth saying ‘We will have the following people.' It's us seeking suggestions from states and territories, too.
We're looking for around 25 people. We'd obviously want a representative group across industry sectors, and we'd want to involve the voice of organisations, BCA, ACCI, and of course the voice of small business through COSBOA, but I will go to Penny about the genesis of the idea and its future
MINISTER WONG: Obviously, fundamentally the genesis of the idea was from the business community. I think Peter outlined very well the logic behind it. I think I would like to see this continue, but obviously this will ultimately be a matter for the COAG, the extent to which this gets integrated into further work. We do have a set of work at this stage which is required to be done. We've got the ending and the completion of the rest of the seamless national economy reforms, but then we also have COAG's next wave of reforms. My way of thinking is the primary work for this forum is to input into the next wave of national reforms, that's really what we've got to get the input into.
PM: We'll got to Phil and then to Paul. Phil.
JOURNALIST: Senator Wong, is there a deadline at which you want say the trade licensing, for example, to be settled by? So is it by June 2013? Is there a deadline by which that it would be seamless and there would be no more restrictions?
And are you able to promise that these changes will actually lead to a reduction in red tape? I know it's always said, but can you guarantee there will be less red tape?
MINISTER WONG: The whole premise of this is to try and lessen the regulatory on businesses operating in a national economy. So that's the whole premise of the seamless national economy reforms. What was your first question again?
JOURNALIST: The deadline.
MINISTER WONG: The deadline  -  COAG has already brought forward the completion of the first wave of the seamless national economy reforms to the end of this year. So our expectation is that is what would happen. Having said that, I think we all know in here that we need to get a lot of focus on this across jurisdictions. And as the Prime Minister said, one of the benefits of this forum is it is elevated to first ministers where you get the leadership nationally and you get the leadership at state levels from first ministers and senior people in the business community. And that's how you get the reforms done.
PM: Paul.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've got relatively new state governments in the two big states and it looks like you might have another in the third. Not to necessarily comment on that, but the message seems to be that the new state governments aren't all that happy with COAG, they would prefer to see competition between the states, rather than cooperation.
Is this move going to be counterproductive or cut across what you're trying to achieve here (inaudible)?
PM: Look I'll make a comment and then turn to Tony and Peter.
There is always going to be a role for healthy competition between the states, whether that's on the sporting field or whether that's them pitching their wares to the business community and saying ‘We're the best place to do business.'
That will always happen. It's not a bad thing. It's not a bad thing for Australian states and territories to be in a race, to be more productive, more competitive and a better place to do business and to grow jobs.
But there are some things that can only be done if you take a collaborative approach nationally. Of the things we're talking about today: the seamless national economy reforms - just picture yourself as running a business that trades around the country, how much extra red tape and paperwork it would cause you if the safety laws are incredibly different in one state from the others.
So, you've got same business, same work processes, working people who are looking to you for their health and safety and to make sure they go home that evening, but the way you've got to acquit your obligations is different in different states.
Look at the occupational licensing. You've got a workforce and you're going to have a big expansion in one state and one of the things you want to do is perhaps offer an opportunity to people who work in another part of your business that isn't going so well, to move interstate and to take the benefit of the prosperity that's going to come from the expansion and you run into all these occupational licensing issues.
Those restraints hold us back as a nation, and so if we can get this vision of a seamless national economy, it can still be one in which states compete to be the best place on other areas, but there is this foundation stone of good regulation and seamless regulation for the business community.
I'll go to Tony and then Peter.
SHEPHERD: Look, it would be a tragedy if this failed because of regulation competition between the states.
There is plenty of areas in which the states can compete. I would start with state taxation. But we have been federated now for 112 years. It is time we started to operate as a national economy, and our competition is not internal, our competition is external, so the harmonisation of these laws is imperative for our productivity and our future prosperity.
PM: Peter.
ANDERSON: Paul, the business community doesn't want states to compete over increasing regulation. There is a role for competitive federalism in a nation like ours, and even nation like ours, and even on some economic issues they may not lend themselves to harmonisation or centralisation.
But there are a substantial body of matters that do lend themselves very directly to that, and part of the benefit of this forum is not just to be able to help governments complete the outstanding business, but also to identify where some of the unfinished business might come from, and steer clear of areas where there may be insurmountable or good reasons why not to embark on the path of breaking down competitive federalism.
JOURNALIST: You have obviously - have dealings with state governments and the premiers. Do they share your vision?
ANDERSON: I think every government wants competitiveness and efficiency from their economy, whether it is a domestic economy, regional economy or national economy. And so every state government we deal with has that objective and there is a direct link between delivering on the COAG regulatory reform agenda for both large and small businesses, and delivering an efficient, competitive and productive economy and that's the focus.
PM: OK, we'll go to Michelle first and then come across. Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Could I ask the two business leaders whether they agree with Wayne Swan that a small group or a small number among the super rich are threatening economic reform and Australia's fair society?
SHEPHERD: OK, Michelle. Good question. I didn't think we'd get through this press conference without it.
Look, I think all Australians want their leaders, political, business, or community leaders to work together, to work cooperatively, and they don't want a divided society, and I think that is - it's one of the defining features of Australia and one that I don't think is under threat.
The Treasurer's statement reflects on the US, but we are not America, we're definitely not America.
I mean, our distribution of wealth is - we've maintained the ratio. We've got great economic mobility. And the business community supports this.
And if I went through all of the BCA members, our members support the social safety net, they support universal health care and universal education, they support the fair go, they support good wages and good conditions for their workforce.
We are united in wanting a more prosperous and wealthy Australia. So we don't see that there is this issue in Australia and we don't see the economy as working in sectors. It's a unified, integrated economy and what's good for the nation and what's good for business is good for everybody.
PM: Peter.
ANDERSON: Michelle, I was first asked about this last Friday, so my response is going to be exactly the same.
I didn't think it was a helpful intervention and I made the point that some of the concerns that were expressed by major players in the mining industry were also concerns which has similar expressions of frustration from smaller and medium business interests, perhaps for different reasons.
However, the Treasurer has also made it clear that the Government is extremely open to, and he is very open to, a dialogue, and a difficult and robust dialogue even, with the business community, including through its business associations. And that is the experience we have had in dealing with Treasurer Swan, he has been extremely willing to hear our representations, even on issues which have created differences of opinion and continuing differences of opinion.
But we have also worked with Treasurer Swan to deliver some extremely strong outcomes, including during the global financial crisis. So there will always be ups and downs in a relationship between the business community and economic ministers in a government, that is the way it should be. But what we're seeing today is just how the business community can take its responsibilities and governments can take their responsibilities and we can make sure that whatever differences of view we have about process or policy, we still all have our eyes on the bigger picture and the need to work together to that end.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's going to be your  -  what are you going to say to Colin Barnett given that some of your colleagues believe that his reflexive response to any talk of reform harmonisation is that it's another federal takeover and that he's often hostile?
And secondly, can I ask if, given that you're having CEOs on this business forum, are you going to be inviting Andrew ‘Twiggy' Forrest to be (inaudible).
PM: Well I've just indicated the process for working out who will be the representatives from the business community, so we'll be consulting with states and territories. So I don't think it's appropriate today to be going to individuals names.
On what I would say to Premier Barnett, I'd say exactly the same thing to Premier Barnett that I would say to any of the other premiers of chief ministers, which is: it's in the nation's whole interest to be lifting productivity.
Productivity is good for each of us, it's good for all of us. Put at its most simple, productivity equals more jobs and more prosperity.
So for working Australians, they want to see the more jobs, as a nation we want to see the greater prosperity, so why wouldn't you involve yourself in a process which is about productivity and about lifting red tape and things that hold businesses back.
And then on the geography of the nation, we've got to rethink some of the geography and how we think that plays out in the world of work.
When I can go to Barrow Island, go to Gorgan and meet someone who lives two streets from me in Altona and that's where he works, flies in and out from Altona in Melbourne to Barrow Island, that's his job.
When that can happen to me  -  just one man, one experience, good conversation about the Western Bulldogs - that requires you to think again about the geography of the country. 
Western Australia's economy, of course, runs to rhythms around the resources boom, of course it does and that's why it's so go ahead at the moment. But Western Australia's economy is also interlinked with the rest of the nation  -  they need people with skills, they fly them in and fly them out, they invite them to move there.
They need good intersections with the rest of the economy, whether it's on environmental assessments so that the way in which they're dealing with projects is not out of step or more onerous for businesses than other parts of the country.
They need good quality skills, not only generated in WA, but generated in parts of the nation and able to be recognised in WA. That's what this agenda's about, so I'd put it like that to Premier Barnett but I'd also put it like that to Chief Minister Henderson in the Northern Territory. The Northern Territory's economy is more integrated with the national economy than it was 10 or 20 years ago as well and so the story goes on.
Right, now  -  just final questions on this?
OK, yes  -  the Financial Review, you can pick them.
JOURNALIST: Just to pick the technical question, ACCI's here, the Business Council's here, the Australian Industry Group isn't here. Are you anticipating that they'll be involved in this process?
PM: Yes we are and we'll also be involving COSBOA for the small business voice.
Was it on this or another issue?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Okay well we might let Tony and Peter go.
Thank you, thanks a lot.
OK, just before we go to other issues of the day I just want to say a couple of things about floods and then we'll take your questions.
Everybody knows that for many people across the nation this is a very challenging and stressful time. We've got flood waters across New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria.
There are evacuation orders in place for many communities and of course people have seen that and seen some of the distress that causes through the media today.
For the people of Wagga particularly, this is a very anxious time.
I spoke to Premier O'Farrell yesterday. I reiterated to him a comment I've made to him on more than one occasion in the past, which is if he needs assistance in managing any of this or managing the evacuation particularly, that we are standing by ready to assist.
Members of the Australian Defence Force have been deployed to Victoria and to Wagga to prepare for the water and to support the recovery from the flooding and we stand ready to provide further support.
But as Prime Minister I wanted to say to the people most directly affected today: we are focused on them and their needs. As a Government we do respond in these situations, we respond at the request of our state colleagues, they are the ones who are managing the situation on the spot, but the Australian Defence Force always plays a remarkable role in assisting communities through and that has already started in relation to the current set of problems.
Right, we'll take your question then go to Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Sure. Prime Minister, what is the Government doing to help the Perth man being held in Malaysia who may face the death penalty over drugs charges?
PM: Look, we now have two Australians involved in incidents where drug charges are in contemplation or have been laid, one in Indonesia and one in KL.
In relation to both we are providing consular services and that's the best support that we can as a nation at this stage. It's not in the interests of either of these men for me to be speculating about what will happen with their legal proceedings in either nation, the best thing that we can do is provide them with consular services and we are.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, some elements of the environmental movement are foreshadowing a plan to try and fight the development of the coal industry. Do you worry about that and what it means to the jobs of many Australians?
And secondly, in an allied question, what is your response to the suggestion that Wayne Swan's attacks on a couple of high wealth individuals are divisive and unhelpful?
PM: Well if I can take them in reverse order, firstly on The Monthly article  -  have you read it?
JOURNALIST: I have.
PM: Good. That's good. Well I'd commend it to anybody in the group who hasn't read it, to make sure that they read the whole thing and when you do read the whole thing obviously Wayne Swan is talking about how the overwhelming, vast majority  -  indeed he uses the term '99 per cent' of the business community work motivated by community interests and the national interest and we've just seen that on display today. And you've just seen on display today the partnership that there is between the Australian Government and the business community.
On the article overall, I think it is important for us as a nation to recognise that public policy has to be at the forefront of interventions in national debates. Interventions in national debates shouldn't be about how loud a voice is, it should be about the quality of the contribution.
JOURNALIST: Just on the coal industry, sorry?
PM: Oh on the coal industry, I'm sorry Matthew. Look, I've seen the reports today of this report, I haven't had an opportunity to read the report myself so I'm not in a position to deal with the details but I can certainly deal with the principles.
And first and foremost, the coal industry has got a great future in this country, we've made that clear all along that the coal industry's got a great future and you're seeing that future being built now as we see expansion in our coal exports particularly.
So the industry's got a great future. We've got to have appropriate environmental regulation and processes  -  of course we do, but they should always be based on the facts and nothing other than the facts.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the floods are obviously having a big effect on communities.
Do you expect that they will also have an effect on the economy and whether that will affect the budget and at this stage do you see any potential that you may have to extend the flood levy that has already been imposed?
And if I can I ask secondly, do you know how many Australian graves have been damaged in Libya in the attack and do you have any response to that attack? Have you spoken Libyan authorities?
PM: Once again, if I can take them in reverse order. I was disgusted by the attack on Australian war graves. The acting Minister for Foreign Affairs certainly conveyed it in strident terms, the view of the Australian Government, so that it got through to Libya and since you've seen the interim Government there issue an apology and that should have been issued, that was appropriate and it's been done.
Now there are a few other things that need to happen. There is a full investigation underway and we need to see that investigation come to conclusion, because wrongdoers here should be identified and should face appropriate punishments.
And we do need co-operation so that our War Graves Commission can return these very sacred places for Australians to how they should look rather than how they look now after this disgusting vandalism.
So that has been dealt with through the Minister for Foreign Affairs  -  acting Minister.
On the flood levy, we've got no intention and will not be extending the flood levy. On the economic cost of the current floods, the truth is it's too early to tell. It's impossible to quantify economic damage until flood waters subside, but we will make appropriate arrangements to support communities when we're in a better position to assess what the dimensions of the rebuilding task is.
Depending on what happens with flood waters and impacts on communities, it can trigger an immediate response through disaster relief payments. That trigger is actually in the hands of state governments who come to us and request that kind of assistance. If we receive a request of course we'll respond to it.
When we're in a position to provide more advice about economic damage of course we will, but it's way too early for that, we're in the direct response to the flood waters - you need the recovery to start, you need the waters to go down and then in relation to roads and rail you need to see what lies underneath those flood waters and the amount of damage done.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we were talking earlier about things that impact business, energy and electricity is something that impact on business.
Your latest cabinet minister Bob Carr is pro-nuclear. Why does the Government remain opposed to nuclear power, particularly with new technologies coming through such as thorium reactors and so on.
PM: Look, this is been a longstanding position of the Labor Party and Labor Government and it won't be changing. When we look at nuclear energy we are in a happy position in this country where we've got multiple sources of energy and unlike other nations around the world we don't need to turn to the nuclear option in order to have plentiful energy supplies.
Our future as a country, and we'll be driven there by our clean energy future package, is in making the best of our natural assets, as well as continuing to use traditional sources of energy.
We are country with abundant sunshine, we are country with a very, very, very long coast line which gives you access to tidal power, we've got the right geography in our to be able to access hot rocks and all the rest of it. That kind of energy that can be brought on stream and I've seen some of that energy at work already, not in outback Australia but in Australia's major cities.
So we're in a position where we've got alternatives and it's our vision as a government that through our clean energy future package we realise the full potential of those alternatives.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) research?
PM: Well I've answered your question on where we're going next and where we're going next is using our natural assets to their fullest capacity.
We'll take the last two and then we'll go  -  Michelle and then Kieran.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard your Defence Minister has had for some time the report dealing with the conduct of the head of ADFA in the Skype affair. Do you think, in terms of natural justice, that should be released as soon as possible and do you have any idea when it will be released?
PM: Look, Minister Smith is dealing with that matter so any questions are more appropriately put to him.
Yes, Kieran.
JOURNALIST: There are some tensions in the relationship with Jakarta on the anti-logging bill  -  we've seen reports of that today, but more broadly as well. Do you think that the appointment of Bob Carr gives a chance to reboot the relationship with Indonesia or at least give it more of a focus?
PM: Look, I don't accept the premise of  -  the multiple premises of your question  -  I just don't.
We have a strong relationship with Indonesia. Yes there are, from time to time, frictions in that relationship, but nothing that a strong and robust relationship can't handle and to the extent that we've seen in those frictions then we've worked our way through on them.
Personally I am very deeply committed to this relationship and as Prime Minister have worked with the President of Indonesia on a wide variety of fronts to strengthen the relationship between our two countries.
On the illegal logging issue that you raised, this is an election commitment; it has been the subject of consultation with Indonesia. It's been subject of consultation at the level of officials but it's also been the subject of consultation at ministerial level.
The relevant Minister, Minister Ludwig was, for example, in Indonesia, I think it was March 2011, working through issues associated with this bill.
Thanks very much. 



CEOs of the nation's biggest companies will join state and territory leaders on a new Business Advisory Forum being established to advise on deregulation.
Cutting red tape is a key priority for the Gillard Government, as excessive regulation lowers business costs and hinders productivity.
The Council of Australian Governments has identified 27 areas of priority when it comes to cutting red tape. Of these 27 priorities, 16 have been implemented.
Senior business figures on this Forum will have two main roles:
•           To advise Governments on how best to coordinate and progress the remaining areas of competition and regulatory reform; and
•           To nominate new areas of regulatory reform that will help lift productivity and drive investment, therefore growing businesses and creating new jobs.
Small business will also be directly represented on the Forum, given smaller firms often disproportionately feel the impact of regulatory burdens.
Business leaders are best placed to advise on these matters because excessive red tape is often experienced at an individual, business or industry level.
While COAG members often hold individual dialogues with business figures in their own state and territory, this Forum will allow business leaders to put their case on the national stage.
As a nation we have an interest in a flexible and efficient economy where resources are able to move to where they can make the greatest economic contribution.
COAG's reforms, which were agreed to by all States and Territories in 2008, aim to deliver a seamless national economy.
As we build a new economy in response to the structural changes being driven by our high dollar, these reforms are more important than ever.
The Prime Minister will chair the Forum and its inaugural meeting will be held on 12 April 2012 prior to the next meeting of the Council of Australian Governments.
The Prime Minister has written to all State and Territory Premiers and Chief Ministers and will shortly write to business figures, inviting them to participate.
The Forum is supported by the Business Council of Australia. The BCA will prepare submissions for the Forum based on consultations with the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and all state-based Chambers of Commerce.
The Forum will complement the existing work being undertaken by the Business Regulation and Competition Reform Working Group.
Through the Forum, the Commonwealth looks forward to working with business and the states to advance a new deregulation agenda over the coming year.
The Productivity Commission recently looked at 17 of the deregulation reform priorities and estimated that those reforms alone could lower business costs by about $4 billion a year and, through improvements to productivity, increase GDP by over $6 billion in the longer term.  



The Prime Minister today thanked Jeff Lawrence for his contribution to working Australians following his decision not to stand for re-election as the Secretary of the ACTU.
For more than 30 years, Jeff has been standing up for the rights of working people and in doing so he has made a valuable difference to workplace relations in Australia.
Jeff leaves a legacy that includes his work to secure real wage increases for our lowest paid workers, his support for the nation's first paid parental leave scheme and his campaign for national workplace safety laws.
But nothing surpasses his efforts in helping to abolish WorkChoices.
Jeff played a crucial role in the ‘Your Rights at Work' campaign alongside the then ACTU Secretary Greg Combet and President Sharan Burrow, that helped see the end of the Howard Government's industrial relations scheme.
He also worked closely with me as Deputy Prime Minister in the development of the Fair Work system, which protects workers from unfair dismissal, guarantees a safety net of rights and conditions including collective bargaining, saw the appointment of an independent umpire and put an end to Australian Workplace Agreements.
Jeff has been a respected, no-nonsense voice in national forums including at last year's tax and future jobs forums.
In his role at the ACTU, he also helped to broker new Government procurement guidelines that place greater emphasis on Australian jobs and workplace rights.
Most recently Jeff has worked with the Government to help secure a pay rise for low paid workers - mostly women in the social and community sector.
I wish Jeff and his family all the best in the future. His tireless advocacy will be missed by working Australians across our nation. 



Sydney will be home to the Gillard Government's $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
Sydney has been selected because it has a strong clean energy sector and a network of financial, legal and professional services that will ensure the smooth set up and operation of the Corporation. Sydney is considered to be an optimal location from which to service a national client base.
Locating the Clean Energy Finance Corporation in Sydney's financial sector hub will also help with the building of partnerships with lenders and investors.
While Australia has many leading researchers in the clean energy field, in Sydney the Corporation will also be able to draw on higher education and research and development facilities across the state, including the CSIRO Energy Centre and the University of NSW School of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering.
The Government announced the Corporation as part of the Clean Energy Future package to encourage private investment and help overcome barriers to commercialising and deploying clean energy technologies.
The Clean Energy Future package is a comprehensive plan to cut carbon pollution and drive investment in the clean energy technologies that will ensure our economy remains competitive in a low-carbon global economy.
The Clean Energy Finance Corporation will play an important role in this economic transformation.
It will make investments in businesses seeking funds to commercialise innovative clean energy proposals and technologies. The Corporation will also invest in the transformation of existing manufacturing businesses to re-focus on making the inputs for the clean energy sector.
Jillian Broadbent AO has previously been announced as chair of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation. She is also chairing an expert review to advise on the design of the Corporation. Ms Broadbent has been consulting industry and stakeholders and will report back to the Gillard Government later this month. 



PM: I'm here with the local member Michael MacCormack and with the local Mayor and I thank him very much for showing me around  -  thank you very much to Kerry Pascoe.
It's been a great opportunity to come along and say hello to the people of Wagga and the Wagga community as it deals with this flood. I've had the opportunity today to be briefed on the flood, to see it from the air and to meet with so many of the remarkable volunteers who are making such a difference.
So can I say very, very clearly to everyone, to the local Police, the Emergency Services workers, the local council personnel, the local SES, all of the people who have volunteered, to everyone who has filled a sandbag  -  thank you very much for what you've done.
To our Australian Defence Force personnel who have done great work filling sand bags and door knocking to help this local community out  -  thank you very much too, this has really been a great effort across the whole community.
What we know now is the CBD hasn't flooded. An evacuation order was made and it was the right thing to do to make it, but fortunately the CBD hasn't flooded but many people have been impacted by this flood particularly in north Wagga. And these flood waters are going to have an impact right across the region. Now other townships are on alert  -  Griffith, Forbes and the waters will make their way through to Victoria and townships there are bracing and obviously feeling the anxiety that comes with waiting for flood waters to hit.
As I said this morning in Sydney when I was with Premier Barry O'Farrell, we will be working with the state government and with the local council to keep supporting the local community here. Already in accordance with our natural disaster arrangements we've triggered assistance which helps people in hardship, helps them with repairs to their homes, helps primary producers and helps small businesses.
We'll keep working with the state government, they are the ones who make requests of us as a federal government and then we stand ready to respond to those requests.
When the flood waters subside, and that's a while yet, we've been talking about the need for pumping and the movement of so much of this water, but when the flood waters subsides then we'll be able to count the costs in infrastructure damage and we will be working with the state government and with the local government to assist with getting infrastructure back in order.
We've got longstanding natural disaster arrangements and will work through those arrangements with this community here.
In Australia we know that we face these kind of disasters only too often. We're a nation who over the last few years has seen so much hardship caused by flood waters, now we're seeing that hardship here, but whenever we see that hardship come we see some great Australian spirit too and I've seen that in spades today.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) able to offer us any additional funding or aid from the Federal Government?
PM: Well we're standing ready to work with the state government. They way our natural disaster arrangements work is the state government makes requests of us and we respond to those requests. We've given a big tick to every request we've received so far and we'll keep working with the state government. We can't count the cost in infrastructure until flood waters subside. It's just not possible to get a good account of the damage until you know what's under the flood waters  -  roads and bridges and other infrastructure.
JOURNALIST: How did you feel when you saw extent of the flooding?
PM: Unfortunately as Prime Minister I had opportunity to see too many homes that are flooded. Getting to see it from the air gives you a really good sense of the impact and when you see a house that's got floodwaters up to the eaves then you just know the damage that's been done inside that home is truly devastating.
So for people, when they're able to get back to those homes and start the clean up, it's going to be a very heart breaking time. And I know too from visiting communities months after floods have hit that it's often when the initial event is over and the TV cameras have gone away and the media's attention has understandably gone elsewhere in the nation to other issues that it's at that time that it really hits homes and hits hard to people.So this is the start of what is going to be many, many, many long months of recovery.
JOURNALIST: What kind of estimates are you hearing in terms of the damage bill?
PM: Anything I heard now I wouldn't really pay attention to because you cannot get a good account of the damage until flood waters subside, you simply can't know what's happened to a road until the water's off the road and then you can get the engineers in to have a look.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you concerned it might put a dent in the Government plans to return to surplus?
PM: The budget will be returned to surplus in 2012-13 as promised. As a Government we've always made the decisions necessary, some of them very tough ones but the decision's necessary to support communities in need and we'll keep taking that approach.
JOURNALIST: Have there been warnings about the (inaudible) have all been affected and what impact that will have?
PM: We've been talking about some of those issues as we moved around, the issues with stranded livestock for example which is being worked on right now. Once again, we don't have full accounting yet but flood water is very damaging and the economic costs of floods is higher than other forms of natural disasters because it does knock around our primary producers, it knocks around small businesses and it does a lot of damage to infrastructure. We won't know the full toll yet, even the farmers involved probably can't give you the full toll themselves yet, but that cost I imagine will be considerable and we'll get further details in the weeks and months ahead.
JOURNALIST: We are hearing estimates of at least a billion dollars in damage to the Riverina alone. Does that give you pause for thought?
PM: I know from my experience around the country  -  flood waters are incredibly damaging. They do a lot of damage to infrastructure, to roads, to other forms of infrastructure. We know that in economic terms floods do more damage than other natural disasters. Now other natural disasters  -  bushfires etc, can often be much more threatening in terms of loss of life, but floods do the most economic damage.
But we cannot know what the economic damage is yet, it's just not possible to know.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) when are you coming back to Wagga to talk about some of the issues  -  non-flood issues we want to talk about?
PM: Well I'd be happy to come back, I'll talk to your local member about that and see what we can do to come back in the future. I always think it's important to be able to get out on the ground when a community's facing this kind of stress and strain, just to be able to say thank you to people who have helped out but also so I've got a very clear picture in my mind of what it's meant for that community and seeing it from the air does give you a very clear picture of the damage done and the number of homes that are inundated with water.
JOURNALIST: Can you describe for us some of the sights you did see today. 
PM: The view from the air shows you the homes that have still got water up to the eaves. It shows you the pattern of it, so there are neighbours who will be in quite different positions  -  some have got flood waters right through their home, some on just that little bit of higher ground have got flood waters on their land but not in their home so neighbours who are going to be in very, very different positions.
From the air too you can get a sense of what it's been like to move the number of people that needed to be moved. Fortunately the CBD is getting back to normal now, it's a lot different than it would have been but it was the right thing to do to do the evacuation. If that levy had been breached, if the water had gone in it would have risen very, very quickly so it was the right thing to do to ask people to get out  -  in fact to tell people to get out so that they weren't in those circumstances.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) the thought might be of people flood mitigation (inaudible).
PM: We've got longstanding arrangements with the state governments and they work well and how we respond to this will be done in accordance with those arrangements. So we get involved when a state government asks us to. The Commonwealth is (inaudible) problem which is appropriate because obviously as an issue gets bigger then it's more important that the national government steps in and plays a bigger role. When we do have a role in getting infrastructure back in order it is possible to get that infrastructure rebuilt to a better standard. The guidelines we work under specifically talk about betterment so if there is a clever way, a different way of doing the engineering (inaudible) then that is of course a course we can go down and work on. But at this stage our focus has been on responding to what the state government has asked us to do. They've asked us to trigger what's called Category A and Category B under our natural disaster arrangements which is long way of saying they've asked us to trigger payments that help people in difficult circumstances, that help people in difficult circumstances with costs of repair and clean up, that help primary producers and help small businesses and that's been done.
JOURNALIST: What kind of money is that (inaudible) say an individual who has their house flooded right now?
PM: Well we can give you all of the details on that, I've got a very long list here but to give you some examples: Category A can provide grants of up to $16,600 for repair or replacement of essential furniture and personal effects; grants of up to $122,966 for essential repairs to housing. It can provide maintenance of tarpaulins and the list goes on  -  removal of damaged household contents, clean up of asbestos because that can be an issue and it provides loans and support for primary producers and small businesses.
Everybody's in a different position, everybody needs to have their own circumstances assessed so if they get on to our disaster assist information lines then they'll be able to have someone work through their own personal position for them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you spoke of the budget surplus a minute ago  -  pretty poor economic figures came out this morning. Is there a risk that by committing to the budget surplus you'll (inaudible)?
PM: No, there's not and I don't agree with your characterisation of today's figures. Today's National Accounts figures are solid given the international circumstances that they were delivered in.
We've seen a lot of uncertainty in the global economy arising out of anxiety about the position in Europe so these are solid figures in those circumstances. Overall the Australian economy (inaudible) resources boom because of the hundreds of billions of dollars of investment in the pipeline, because of the real opportunities we've got being in the growing region of the world.
When we deliver the budget in May this year we expect the outlook for the economy to be one of solid growth and in a solid growth economy the right thing to do is to return the budget to surplus and we remain determined to do that.
JOURNALIST: With the environment and the economy, Bob Brown said today that all the benefits of the carbon tax environmentally would be wiped out by all the coal mining growth in Queensland (inaudible).
PM: No I don't. We've always said and always will say that the coal industry's got a great future in Australia. We are a coal mining nation, we export a lot of coal, we use a lot of coal, we can continue to have a strong coal mining industry but we also need to do the right things to be seizing a Clean Energy Future.
So this morning I stood with Premier O'Farrell to announce Sydney would be home to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation. Our nation's going to have greater energy needs in the future, I want to see a greater proportion of those energy needs come from renewable and clean energy sources and that's what putting a price on carbon is about and it's what the Clean Energy Finance Corporation is about.
JOURNALIST: Was Jeff Lawrence pulled out of his position at the ACTU?
PM: What I'd say about Jeff Lawrence is he's made an incredible contribution to the lives of working people around Australia. He's been in the trade union movement for more than 30 years, he's a quietly spoken man but he's a very determined man and his lifetime determination has been to deliver fairness to working Australians  -  he's got a proud track record of that including being pivotal to the campaign to get rid of WorkChoices.
JOURNALIST: Was he pushed?
PM: These are all questions for Mr Lawrence, what I think is appropriate for me is to indicate what an amazing contribution he's made to the nation through his advocacy for working people.
JOURNALIST: Would Dave Oliver make a good replacement?
PM: These are matters for the ACTU.
JOURNALIST: Do you think there is a need to build more dams after all these floods in the last week?
PM: I think you'll find that the question of dams and flood mitigation is not a simple one. A lot of people like to talk in slogans about this, not about all of the details. I don't have any evidence available to me that suggests what we've seen here would have been made different in terms of a constructed dam.
There are dams in this region  -  I've flown over a dam today for example, so let's not whilst people are still working  -  volunteering, while people are still thinking what's happened to their home, pretend that there's an easy solution here  -  that's not the right thing to do. 



PM: I'm here today with Premier O'Farrell to announce what is a great win for Sydney. I'm here today to announce that Sydney will be home to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
The Clean Energy Finance Corporation will oversee a $10 billion fund and that fund will be used to unlock our Clean Energy Future. Our Treasury tells us that we will see $100 billion of new investment into renewable energy between now and 2050.
So the Clean Energy Finance Corporation is going to be a part of making sure that we realise a Clean Energy Future, that we use our abundant sunshine, our tidal power, our wind power and our other sources of clean energy.
This is a good win for Sydney and Sydney was the right place for the Clean Energy Finance Corporation for three reasons. First, this is a city that can offer the benefit of financial and professional networks to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation. Second, this is a city in which many investment businesses make their home and so the Clean Energy Finance Corporation can reach out to them. And this is a city too that is home to tertiary institutions, universities, higher education that can offer the benefits of their expertise to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
So I am delighted to be here today to make this announcement. Having the Clean Energy Finance Corporation here in Sydney means Sydney will be central to driving Australia's Clean Energy Future.
Before handing over to the Premier I just want to deal with two other matters.
I will be going from Sydney to Wagga to talk to local community members and SES workers on how that community is going as it faces the floods. We know that water levels are starting to slowly decrease in Wagga and many people will be commencing to return home. But we also know that getting back home is the first step on a long, hard journey of recovery. It's the first step of the long slog.
We are providing assistance alongside the state government to communities including Wagga and I want to meet with people first hand to see how the community is faring and what the journey of recovery is going to involve.
The flood waters are going to keep on the move so now we've got anxiety for other communities like Griffith and then communities in Victoria too. As a Federal Government we'll keep working with our state counterparts and local communities to support them during this difficult time. As a nation we've shown that we don't leave people behind, that we continue to show our generosity and support to our fellow Australians when they're in times of need.
And then finally I just want to say a few words about the desecration of Australian war graves in Libya. I said yesterday I was disgusted by this desecration of Australian war graves. We know how preliminary estimates, and I stress preliminary estimates, about how many graves have been affected. Distressingly, our preliminary advice is 50 out of 55 graves have been damaged by these actions so that's a very large number, 50 out of 55 graves.
Our Department of Veterans' Affairs will be in contact with the families of those whose loved ones lie in those graves and our War Graves Commission will be restoring those graves and as I said yesterday we will continue to ensure through our pressure on the interim government in Libya that there is a full investigation of this matter and that wrongdoers are brought to justice.
I'll turn now to Premier O'Farrell for some comments.
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Thank you Prime Minister.
Can I congratulate and thank the Prime Minister for choosing Sydney, Australia's financial and commercial capital, as the home of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation. This is good news for this city, this is good news because this city has the skills, we can make this Finance Corporation work not just in this city but for the whole of Australia.
Can I say that I'm delighted with the jobs it will also bring to Sydney at a time when other financial services areas are stretched. This is good news whichever way you look at it, I thank the Prime Minister. I think it's also an example of how state and federal governments of different political complexions can work together to deliver real results for their communities.
PM: Thank you. So if we can take questions on the Clean Energy Finance Corporation and on federal politics first and then I will leave the Premier to deal with a number of issues related to New South Wales and Sydney.
JOURNALIST: How many jobs will required (inaudible)?
PM: There will be 40 jobs in the Clean Energy Finance Corporation but it is pivotal to unlocking all of the jobs that are going to flow from a Clean Energy Future. That's the jobs that there are going to be in creating new renewable sources of energy but it's also the jobs that are going to be in manufacturing. We know that the global clean energy market is already $5-6 billion in size and it's only going to grow over the future.
So the Clean Energy Finance Corporation will be playing a role in unlocking investment in renewable and clean energy. It will be playing a role in knocking away barriers that stop that investment but it will also be playing a role in making sure our manufacturing sector gets the opportunities that will come from global demand for clean energy goods, for cleaner ways doing thing, cleaner ways of manufacturing.
JOURNALIST: So where's the funding coming from?
PM: The funding is part of our Clean Energy Future package announced last year so the $10 billion provision was made in our Clean Energy Future package and provision was also made for the costs of the Corporation.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: This is part of the carbon pricing package, yes, absolutely and the reason we are putting a price on carbon is to drive a clean energy future. We want to see the investment that means we will be using energy that comes from the sun, energy that comes from cleaner sources. Now the foundation stone is carbon pricing. You're not going to get the change unless you put a price on carbon, but with that foundation stone there is a role for a Finance Corporation that is catalysing change and catalysing investment and that's what the Clean Energy Finance Corporation is going to do.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The Clean Energy Finance Corporation is the subject of its own legislation. It was announced as part of our carbon pricing package. Legislation will be dealt with in the winter sittings of Parliament. We already have Jillian Broadbent who is a well known Australian businesswoman and a long term member of the Reserve Bank Board heading up the expert group that is going to lead to the establishment of the Corporation. So activity is underway now.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Jeff Lawrence's future is a matter for Mr Lawrence and any announcements about that are a matter for him, but what I would say about Jeff Lawrence is he is and has been over a long period of time a very strong advocate for the rights of working people. He played a great role in the campaign against WorkChoices and he's played a great role at the ACTU and is continuing to do that in making sure that working people get a fair go.
The spectre of WorkChoices isn't dead, I understand that Joe Hockey today will be speaking once again about workplace relations reform and that is of course code for the Liberals bringing back WorkChoices.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well clearly he feels okay or he wouldn't be here.
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well as a parliamentarian I respect parliament. The legislation has been passed, this is a decision by the federal government to allocate funds to this Corporation and I'm delighted that the Corporation and its jobs are coming to New South Wales.
JOURNALIST: The Federal Opposition's promised to abolish the Corporation should it win government at the next election though Premier  -  doesn't that put you at odds with your own party?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well no, what it has is a New South Wales Premier doing what a
New South Wales Premier should do which is applauding the attraction of jobs to this city and this state.
JOURNALIST: Do you support the Federal Opposition's position?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well I get one vote, I imagine there'll be lots more millions of votes come the next Federal election which I think is in 2013 or 2014. The Prime Minister might know about the timing better than me.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We've already worked with the state government on triggering some of our natural disaster relief arrangements and this is always a cooperative venture when we need to address natural disasters. I mean there's no politics to be played here, it's just sleeves rolled up, working together to help communities through.
We've got longstanding relief arrangements and we've already triggered under those arrangements, on the advice of the state government, support for individuals and businesses and primary producers. Further support can be triggered, we'd take the state government advice about that. But one reason for going to Wagga myself is to talk to local community members about their needs.
JOURNALIST: What's the size of today's investment in New South Wales, Prime Minister, you've mentioned the number of jobs, what's the size of the investment by relocating the Corporation?
PM: The main thing I think about having the Corporation here is, yes it's 40 jobs, but it's what it will mean as it drives change in renewable energy and clean energy. This is going to be home to the body that is making decisions for a $10 billion fund and is catalysing the kind of new investment we need to see in the energy sources of the future. So it's good news for Sydney and I'm pleased to be able to be here today to announce it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you and the Premier are locked in a stalemate over billions of dollars worth of funding for the Epping to Parramatta rail line while Sydneysiders wait for some decent transport infrastructure, surely the two of you standing here can unlock this money?
PM: Well we'll continue doing what we do as federal and state governments which is working through, even working through the most difficult problems. I understand you may have some questions for Premier O'Farrell today on transport issues of another nature.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm here today to talk about the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, I haven't got anything new to say to you about Epping to Parramatta.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: These are decisions for the ACTU. As a Labor Government we respect the role that trade unions play and the ACTU plays itself on behalf of working Australians and working people.
Thank you very much, I'll leave you with the Premier. 



All environmental approvals and licensing developments for coal seam gas and large coal mining developments in New South Wales will be based on rigorous scientific evidence.
New South Wales has signed up to the Gillard Government's National Partnership Agreement on Coal Seam Gas and Large Coal Mining.
The National Partnership Agreement specifies $150 million for a new Independent Expert Scientific Committee, to:
•           Provide governments with expert scientific advice on CSG and large coal mining development proposals that are likely to have a significant impact on water resources;
•           Commission public research and bioregional assessments in areas of high CSG and/or large coal mining developments in order to improve scientific knowledge and understanding of the impacts of these developments, both in specific locations and on water resources more broadly; and
•           Make public its advice and the findings of all research undertaken.
NSW will be entitled to a significant portion of this $150 million in funding as it is expected to have a considerable number of future coal seam gas developments.
The Agreement also includes $50 million in incentive payments to the states. By signing up to the Agreement, NSW will be entitled to $17.5 million.
The Agreement strengthens the regulation of CSG and large coal mining developments that may have an impact on water resources.
Coal seam gas and coal can bring huge opportunities  -  both in investment and job creation - but to do so community confidence must be maintained in these developments.
The new Committee will fill the gaps in scientific understanding about the impacts of these developments, and underpin the safe and reliable expansion of the industry.
The Prime Minister wrote to the Premiers of NSW, Qld, Vic, SA and the Chief Minister of the NT in November asking them to sign on to the Agreement. The Queensland Government signed up to the Agreement on February 14.
The Commonwealth will continue to work cooperatively with other states and territories. 



Today we pause to remember the thousands of people who lost their lives in the terrible earthquake and tsunami of 11 March 2011, the most powerful earthquake on record to hit Japan.
This is a day of painful memories for the Japanese people and on behalf of all Australians, I express my heartfelt condolences to those who lost loved ones in this terrible tragedy.
As the first foreign leader to visit the disaster zone, I saw the appalling scale of damage for myself in the coastal community of Minami-Sanriku, a whole town washed away with devastating loss of life.
I will never forget these scenes of unimaginable destruction and loss.
But neither will I forget the stoicism shown by the Japanese people as they sought to recover and rebuild. Their courage and resilience has resonated deeply in Australian hearts.
I am very proud of our nation's generous and compassionate response to the tragedy, including the exceptional work of our emergency workers such as the Urban Search and Rescue Team deployed to the Miyagi region of Japan.
Their efforts, and the generous donations made by millions of Australians, reflect and honour the spirit of friendship between our two countries.
Today our Ambassador to Japan Bruce Miller is representing Australia at the national Memorial Service in Tokyo, attended by Their Majesties the Emperor and Empress.The Vice Chief of the Defence Force Air Marshal Mark Binskin AO, together with Rob McNeil,Chief Superintendent, NSW Fire Brigade, who led the Australian Search and Rescue Team, are also representing Australia at the memorial service in Minami Sanriku, showing our solidarity with the Japanese people at this time of remembrance.As a close friend and partner of Japan, Australia will continue working closely with the Japanese government and people as they continue along the path of recovery and reconstruction. 



It's a great a delight to join you here today to be with Queensland Labor.
I see great advocates for Queensland in this audience, Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan, Kevin Rudd, Peter Beattie, Wayne Goss.
It's a genuine pleasure to be with representatives of the Queensland Labor movement, of federal, state and local government, of our trade unions, fellow activists, one and all.
And we're here today for an important purpose because this state faces a very big choice. You've heard Joshua talk about it and I'd like to specifically acknowledge Kate Jones with us today, the current and future Member for Ashgrove  -  I think she's going to change Queensland politics.
I always enjoy coming to Queensland  -  but I love coming and being with Queensland Labor when there's a fight on, because you are great fighters. Whether it's the original shearers gathering under a Queensland tree or whether it's the people in this room today  -  when there is a fight on you show the strength and determination to win that fight and if anybody can win the fight on election day then Queensland Labor can.
Around Australia when people look at Queensland they look with envious eyes. They look at what is being achieved in this state: the rising school standards, the growing numbers of apprenticeships, the new jobs in mining but beyond that as well, jobs in the science and research in this state are growing faster than in the advanced world.
People see a state investing in infrastructure but keeping its taxes low. A state that is improving its health care system and making sure that people have the benefits of new facilities. People see that being achieved today and they know in their bones around Australia that Queensland has the opportunity for a great future. That you are on the cusp of ensuring that your state can be stronger and more prosperous but at the same time can be fairer.
That your state can lead the way in making sure that new wealth and new work and new opportunity is shared by all. Australians around the country know that about Queensland.
But we also know this: you don't have today's achievements or shape the future by accident. It takes work, it takes vision, it takes a plan.
It took Queensland Labor to introduce Prep into this state so Queensland kids have 13 years of schooling.
It took Queensland Labor to do that because Queensland Labor knew that without the benefit of those years of schooling, without rising retention rates, Queensland kids were going to be left behind.
And it's taken Queensland Labor to oversee the current boom in this state, not only in mining, not only in LNG, but the boom you're experiencing in biotech, in aviation. It's taken Queensland Labor to manage your economy so that it gives your people those benefits.
It's taken Queensland Labor to ensure that there is the biggest health infrastructure program in this state of any part in the country. It's been Queensland Labor making those decisions and it will take Queensland Labor to shape this stronger and fairer future.
You are on the cusp of a remarkable opportunity but it will not be realised by accident.
And if the wrong choices are made, if the wrong choices are made for the future of this state, then in the blink of any eye you could slide back 20 years.
That's why election day in Queensland is so important. The choice your face on election day is so important.
It's a choice about who should lead this state, who should lead this state and make sure that it realises the promise the future holds for you now.
Anna Bligh is that leader. She has the vision, the courage and the plan to make sure that this state can be everything that can be realised for its future, that every opportunity is fully exploited.
When this state faced its most difficult hour it was Anna Bligh with her wisdom, her patience, her courage, her voice of reassurance that led this state through.
When this state needed rebuilding it was Anna Bligh who set about the rebuilding, not talking in slogans about can do  -  getting things done, that made a difference to this state.
And for your Premier, for Anna Bligh, rebuilding simply wasn't enough. At the same time she has been building Queensland's future. She leads a team who understands the future of this economy. She leads a team that understands the opportunities from the mining boom in this state. She leads a team with a plan for the future, a plan like using the benefits of your mineral wealth to invest in the minds of young Queenslanders so they can take their place in the future.
Friends, come election day, the choice is absolutely clear. It's a choice as to whether or not this state is going to leap ahead or languish. It's a choice as to whether or not Queensland is going to seize the future or slide back to the past. It's a choice as to whether or not Queensland will be the place that the rest of the nation looks at with envious eyes or the place that's got the reputation of having squandered a great opportunity.
Friends, the choice is clear and the fight is on.
And I ask you to welcome with me today the leader in that fight, the Labor leader, your Queensland Premier, the person who's going to lead this state to a great future - Anna Bligh. 



The Prime Minister today welcomed events around the world to mark Commonwealth Day, the annual celebration of the Commonwealth of Nations held each second Monday in March.
The theme for this year's Commonwealth Day is Connecting Cultures, a theme that reflects the unique character of the Commonwealth, as an association not just of nations but of peoples.
The Commonwealth represents around one quarter of the world's countries and one third of the world's population, and accounts for all of the world's major faiths. Its membership is diverse but is brought together by a commitment to shared values of democratic freedom, open government, and economic and social development.
The Prime Minister announced that Senator Jan McLucas, Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister, will attend the traditional Commonwealth Day observance in London's Westminster Abbey early tomorrow (Canberra time).
Senator McLucas will join Her Majesty The Queen, Prime Minister David Cameron, heads of government and Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma at the multi-faith service.
The Prime Minister welcomed similar celebrations in cities around Australia today, noting that this year's Commonwealth Day held special significance for Australia following its successful hosting of the 2011 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Perth in October.
As current chair-in-office of the Commonwealth, the Prime Minister said that CHOGM 2011 had reaffirmed the enduring value of the Commonwealth and that leaders were working to make the association even stronger into the future. 
The Queen will also deliver her annual message to Commonwealth countries today.
2012 marks The Queen's diamond jubilee, representing the 60th anniversary of The Queen's accession to the throne and as head of the Commonwealth. 



I begin by honouring the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and pay my respects in the spirit of reconciliation to Elders past and present.
We meet in a spirit of friendship on country made sacred by unbroken centuries of custodianship and care.
One hundred and eight words; that's how Canberra came about.
Just 108 words, which together comprise Section 125 of our Constitution.
From those modest words, a mature, confident city has grown up.
A city Walter Burley Griffin created as the capital for a country of “bold democrats”.
Just as we made a new nation, so we made a new capital.
Canberra wasn't just a clever solution to a vexing political problem.
It gave expression in urban shape and form to the values that define us as a people.
This is a democratic city.
A city close to nature.
A city that didn't seek to emulate the grandeur of its Old World peers.
And, of course, it is a city wisely named from among the ancient languages of its First Peoples  -  a stunning act of Reconciliation before the term Reconciliation was even known.
In a special way, Canberra belongs to every Australian.
Many children come here in Year 6.
Many Australians endeavour to visit it at least once in their lives.
And many new migrants come here soon after settlement because of the kind of civic pilgrimage it represents.
No citizen who comes to the city is a stranger.
So the Canberra Centenary is a celebration for every Australian, and I am delighted by the leadership being shown originally by Jon Stanhope and now by Katy Gallagher in preparing for it.
As the modern custodians of our capital, you know how much this anniversary means, and I'm very proud of the team you've drawn together led by two living national treasures, Sir William Deane as Patron and Robyn Archer as Creative Director.
I know you are preparing a strong program of events and commemorative projects, and I wish Robyn and her team every success.
I'm also delighted the Commonwealth has been able to make a contribution through the redevelopment of Constitution Avenue and the National Arboretum.
And today I want to go further by making a formal and public commitment on behalf of the Commonwealth of Australia to the role and significance of Canberra in the life of our nation.
Today I commit the Commonwealth to continuing to build and grow the nation's capital, its cultural institutions and its role as the focus of ceremonial, parliamentary and national leadership.
I commit to Canberra remaining the heart of the Australian Public Service and the primary location of government departments and agencies.
I pledge a deep and enduring partnership between the Commonwealth and the ACT legislatures and between the governments of the Commonwealth and the ACT to foster and develop a strong and flourishing city.A city which reflects the national pride we take in this, our bush capital; the respect we pay to our war dead and the vision of our founding leaders so elegantly realised in the plans of Walter Burley Griffin.
We make these commitments with a spirit of pride in Canberra's past and absolute confidence in its future.
As this city begins the count-down to its centenary, I say to all Australians:
Canberra is a success; our collective success over ten decades.
And it deserves to be celebrated.
What we are really celebrating, in a sense, is our ability as a nation and a people to get things right.
Whether in designing a constitution, introducing the basic wage and the old age pension or founding Canberra in that first decade after Federation through to multiculturalism and charting a way through the Asian Century in our own times, we are a people that gets the big calls right.
So I want this to be a celebration of Canberra as our capital.
But also a celebration of our characteristic ability to get things right and the confidence and astuteness that we've brought to the task of building the institutions of our nation.
In that spirit, I proudly launch the program to celebrate this, Canberra's centennial year. 99 going on 100.
I affirm the Statement of Commitment made on behalf of the nation today.
And I look forward to joining Canberrans and all Australians in celebrating the contribution this city has made to all the success and identity of the country we love so much. 



PM: It is great to be here today with Peter Strong, who leads COSBOA, the Council of Small Business Organisations of Australia. That means as well as running this great bookshop, he's an advocate for 2.7 million small businesses around the nation.
I was going to be joined here today by Brendan O'Connor too, the Minister For Small Business, a strong voice for small business right at the Cabinet table, but unfortunately the Opposition prevented him being able to leave the Parliament today, so Peter my apologies from Brendan O'Connor for not being able to be here today.
Small business is vital to the Australian economy. It employs half of Australians and it makes up a third of our economy. Small business is such a life blood of our national prosperity and I have been talking to Peter today about how that works and the family sense that you can get from a small business and working within a small business.
What that means is that small business is big today as an employer and for tomorrow running a small business is the aspiration of many working Australians.
As a Government, we understand that and we want to work in a partnership with small business to support them, to support them as they go about the very hard work of making their businesses successful and employing other Australians.
So I'm here today to announce that we will create a Small Business Commissioner. This is another step forward in our partnership with small business. This Commissioner will be charged with a number of responsibilities to work with small businesses.
Inevitably, because people are so busy in their own business, they don't have the time and the resources to engage with government policy and programs the way many bigger businesses do, where they can afford to have specialists who can advise them on government policies and programs.
So the Small Business Commissioner will act as a one-stop shop, a place that small businesses can go when they need advice about the whole range of government programs, rather than having to puzzle their way through as to who to talk to.
The Office of Small Business Commissioner will also act as a great advocate for small business within government, making sure that government departments understand the importance of thinking about small business as they go about their work.
Once again, it can be so much harder for small businesses to have their voice heard.
So this is an important step forward for small businesses. It has been a long sought after policy from the Council of Small Business Organisations, from COSBOA. I've spoken to Peter about it personally and I'm delighted to be able to announce it today.
It builds on top of a number of policies of the Government to support small businesses. We want to provide small businesses with a tax cut, a company tax cut starting on 1 July.
We want to provide small businesses with an instant asset write off at $6,500. So if they're investing in new capital in their business, they get a tax benefit for doing so every year that they invest in that new capital.
We want to provide a $5,000 tax benefit if they purchase a new motor vehicle that they need to use in their business. So many small businesses need to be mobile and that is a great benefit for small businesses too.
We're in a position to provide those benefits to small businesses because of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. This is a way of ensuring that the proceeds of the mining boom are shared around the country and across the economy to small businesses and to the people who work within them.
Can I take this opportunity to say that today Tony Abbott has confirmed that the Opposition will vote against tax cuts for small businesses and tax benefits for small businesses.
They will vote against the tax cut to 29 cents in the dollar for small businesses from 1 July.
They will vote against the instant asset write off going to $6,500.
They will vote against the $5,000 benefit if you buy a new car.
Indeed, they will vote against tax cuts for all businesses. That is what Tony Abbott has confirmed today.
This is proof that Mr Abbott has become so negative that he's now planning to vote against tax cuts for small businesses, vote against jobs and vote against the Australian economy.
Only last year Tony Abbott was talking up the importance of tax cuts for small businesses. He said this, his words, "If there are lower taxes on companies we will have more successful companies. We will have a more prosperous economy and that is good for every single Australian."
By his own words, Tony Abbott has confirmed today that he's going to vote against successful companies.
He's going to vote against a prosperous economy.
He's going to vote against something that is good for every single Australian.
This is the negativity of the Opposition at its worst.
I will now turn to Peter for some comments and then we'll be a happy to take questions.
STRONG: Ladies and gentlemen, for over a decade now the Council of Small Business has been asking for a lot of things from government and what we've really wanted is some architecture, some infrastructure within government to look after small business.
In the past a government will say ‘Here's a good thing for small business.' and give it to us and a year later it will disappear. It will disappear because of the bureaucracy; it will disappear because we're not in anybody's mind. And now we have infrastructure.
A couple of weeks ago we found a Small Business Minister in Cabinet and that's as good as you're going to get when it comes to that level of decision making. And now we have a Small Business Commissioner at the national level to make sure that the public sector considers small business, to make sure that we are never forgotten again.
For two decades we have been forgotten, when you look at the red tape that's been added on what we do, when you look at the taxes that have been put on us, when you look at the system that is have been put upon us, we've disappeared as human beings and now we're back again and that's a fantastic thing.
I've got to say it is a very exciting day for us to have that architecture, that infrastructure in place at the national level, a person in Cabinet and a Small Business Commissioner.
Thank you Prime Minister, it is something we have wanted for a long time. And the other thing I've got to say is we are in deep dialogue on a range of other issues.
And we haven't agreed or disagreed on these other issues but we know the Government is listening to everything we say and any time I want a meeting I get it, which means I've got to stop asking for them.
It's a very good place to be for small business and we expect a lot more to come over the next few months.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when will the Commissioner be appointed, when will it be up and running?
PM: We will be appointing the Commissioner in the second half of this year.
He or she will then commence work, working with the advisory committee that Peter is actually the deputy chair of. The Office of Small Business Commissioner will be formally established on 1 January next year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you spoke a lot before about Tony Abbott's refusal to support tax cuts for business. Are you equally concerned about the Greens' opposing the tax cuts for bigger business as they have announced, and doesn't that cut, if that goes ahead, cut to the very heart of the design of your mining tax which Labor has been telling us for three years is about - two years  -  is about addressing the two-speed economy of which there are, I'm sure you'll agree, big businesses that are also not mining companies.
PM: Absolutely. I focused on Tony Abbott today because it is Mr Abbott's decision I'm surprised by, truly surprised by. There were words from Mr Abbott last year which would lead any reasonable person to believe that he was going to back in these company tax cuts. I think many business people would have relied on those representations from Mr Abbott, many business organisations certainly came to the conclusion that he was going to back in the tax cuts.
So I've focused on that today because that's the decision I'm surprised by. And, look, I'd have to say I never thought I would see the day that the Liberal Party would join with the Greens to vote against a tax cut for business. That's what Mr Abbott has announced today.
JOURNALIST: What about the design of the MRRT and the importance of big business (inaudible)?
PM: We will keep pushing for the benefits for businesses that we want to flow from the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. We are in a position now where the Minerals Resource Rent Tax will pass the Senate during this sitting fortnight. It will be the law of Australia.
Then we will bring a piece of legislation to the Parliament in the budget session to cut taxes for businesses, to provide the sorts of benefits that I've talked about.
It is important to addressing our patchwork economy. Many bigger businesses that aren't in the fast lane of the economy are doing it tough. Businesses like manufacturing, we want to provide them with a tax cut.
Good for the businesses, another way of supporting the jobs in those businesses. We'll bring that legislation to the Parliament, but on what Mr Abbott has said today, he will sit down with the Greens to deny tax cuts to businesses. That's what he says.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why did you break up the two tax cuts then? Why did you give the Greens the chance to say, ok, we'll back small business tax cuts but we won't backs the tax cut for the big end of town?
PM: Look, we've said for a long period of time we were going to bring the tax cut legislation to the Parliament after we had received the work of the Business Tax Working Group.
We had a Tax Forum last year which went very, very well. We had representatives from the business community, from trade unions, from civil society, all talking about the kind of state our economy is in now, which is that its fundamentals are strong, but its undergoing very deep structural change. It needs to be agile as we go about that change. There's this patchwork effect. What can we do in business tax that makes a difference?
So we've timed this legislation to give us the option that if the Business Tax Working Group gives us a smart, revenue neutral proposal, then we would be in a position to add it to the legislation.
So we'll receive that work and assess it once we've received it, but that explains the timing for you.
I'd also say - we were entitled to believe Mr Abbott's statements from last year that he was going to back these company tax cuts in.
Last year he was out talking about the importance of company tax cuts. It is only yesterday from Mr Hockey, and now today from Mr Abbott, that it's become absolutely transparent that they are going to vote against tax cuts. That means they're going to vote against jobs. That means they're going to vote against the strength of our economy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if Tony Abbott remains entrenched in this view but you still want to get it through the Senate, what sort of positioning will you countenance with regards to how you'll deal with the Greens, if it takes reducing the company tax cut for big business and putting more money into disability, health or education?
PM: Look I'm not going to war game all of that through for you today. The Government's position today is crystal clear. We're for taking a fair share of tax from the turbo charged section of the economy, the resources sector, and using that to benefit businesses around the nation big and small. Mr Abbott is opposed to that.
What he is saying is he wants to benefit billionaires and he wants to betray other businesses. That's Mr Abbott's position. That is the backdrop to the parliamentary debate we will have in May about cutting tax for businesses and supporting Aussie jobs.
JOURNALIST: The CSIRO report today has some fairly alarming findings about the rise in greenhouse gases. Is a carbon tax enough to really combat this worrying rise in greenhouse gases and global warming?
PM: Putting a price on carbon is the best way, the cheapest way, indeed the only effective way, of cutting emissions. We've always said that. What the work of the CSIRO today should reinforce in people is the need for effective action.
They're saying to us that carbon pollution has never been higher than it is now with all of the impacts we know that has on the warming of our atmosphere.
The scientists are telling us that. The scientists, as a result, are saying to policy makers ‘you need to do something.' Well we are doing the most effective thing you can possibly do to cut carbon pollution.
We've done that against the worst Opposition and reckless negativity that we've seen in Australian politics, in my view, from an Opposition Leader who used to be in favour of putting a price on carbon.
We've stared down a cheap populist campaign to get right thing done for the nation and it will come on stream on 1 July.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, back to small business if I may - the Greens idea that you should perhaps increase the turnover threshold at which the company tax benefits will cut in, will you entertain that at all?
PM: Look, our policy is clear. We're for giving small business a tax cut on 1 July and giving all businesses a tax cut a year later. That is what we stand for. That is the policy we are pursuing.
The position we're in today is, as I said over here, one where Tony Abbott says no, don't do any of this, don't have the mining tax, make sure the billionaires benefit and make sure everybody else misses out.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried about the uncertainty that it will create in the business sector if you don't have that one per cent company tax cut through by 1 July.
PM: I am very worried about the uncertainty that Tony Abbott's created today. Businesses are entitled to say for many, many, many long months they believed Mr Abbott's words that he supported company tax cuts. Why should they have disbelieved those words?
If anything, you would have said it is one of the core brands of the Liberal Party, to stand for reduced taxation on business when there's an opportunity to do so.
So against all those years of Liberal Party history, against all of those statements from Mr Abbott, everybody was entitled to conclude he was going to support company tax reductions.
It's today that he said to Australian businesses ‘I'm selling you out'.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott said he's going to have separate company tax cuts outside of this equation.
PM: And where's the money coming from?
JOURNALIST: But if you did it the way you said you would to start with, which means it was supposed to go through with the MRRT-
PM: -That's not what we said. We said - I'll refer you to the statements of the Treasurer. We said that we would bring this legislation to the Parliament after we were in receipt of the Business Tax Review Working Group.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Craig Thomson has admitted himself to hospital this morning. Do you have any update on his condition?
PM: I understand that Mr Thomson has been experiencing severe stomach pain, so he thought the best thing to do was to go and get himself checked out.
I understand he's anticipating he'll be right to return to work in a day or two. In those circumstances, whilst the Opposition didn't help us today by letting Brendan O'Connor have a pair, they have honoured the longstanding convention that if a member of Parliament needs medical attention and he's suffering an illness, that we all make the appropriate arrangements to let them go and get the care they need.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the Greens blocking the big business cuts, it actually gives you a bit of breathing space, doesn't it, when it comes to the return to surplus? So it actually could be a blessing in disguise in some sense?
PM: I want to do what we said we would do. I want to make sure Aussies get a fair share of the mineral wealth in our grounds as we go through the resources boom and we use that as a way of funding tax cuts for businesses across the economy, as well as backing in superannuation for working people, as well as providing infrastructure to the regions that are experiencing both the blessings and burdens that come with spectacular growth.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I want to deliver tax cuts to businesses. The situation today is Mr Abbott has said he's going to betray businesses around the nation.
JOURNALIST: Before you arrived we were hearing from Peter and another person about one of the major bug bears experienced by small business and that is the administration of superannuation, the argument being that it takes a lot of time and money and effort to administer something that might be better done by the ATO.
If that's the view that is reached by the Commissioner, and indeed by the Minister, are you amenable to that idea?
PM: Look, Peter and I have had a conversation about this and I suspect because Peter is such a feisty advocate for small business we're going to hear some more.
Clearly, having created superannuation in this country for working people, and now wanting to add to that superannuation, we are very focused on the attachment of superannuation to the world of work and to employers.
Now I do understand that that puts a burden on small businesses when it comes to doing their accounting and we'll keep talking to Peter about ways that we may be able to alleviate some of that burden.
I would remind that Peter has got a ring side seat when it comes to the COAG discussion between business and leaders from around the nation. By ring side seat I don't seek to imply that COAG is a boxing match, but he'll be there able to put his views straight to leaders about lifting red tape burdens.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you still proposing to abolish the entrepreneur's tax offset?
PM: We have abolished the entrepreneur's tax offset.
JOURNALIST: How does that fit in with the overall scheme of supporting small business?
PM: It was an ineffective policy with very, very limited benefits for small businesses, so we decided to get something more effective done.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott says Bob Carr is your latest attack dog. Do you agree with that assertion?
PM: Bob Carr, like all of the members of the Government, puts the Government's policies and programs and where necessary, points out what Mr Abbott's negativity is costing the nation.
Thank you very much. 



Australia's 2.7 million small businesses will be given a direct voice to the Gillard Government, through the appointment today of the nation's first Small Business Commissioner.
Labor understands how vital the small business sector is to the Australian economy, employing almost 5 million Australians and making up over a third of the economy.
The small business sector has been calling for better advocacy, advice and information at the federal level and the Government has listened.
This new Commissioner will:
 * 	Provide small businesses with a new voice to highlight their issues to the Australian Government;
 * 	Provide a one stop shop for small business services and information;
 * 	And ensure the interests of small business remain at the forefront of Government policy making.
Australia's more than two million small businesses are made up of hard-working men and women who are putting in long hours to build better futures for their families.
The Commissioner will also act as a one stop shop for small business people, representing their concerns and interests directly to the Government.
Small business owners will be able to access information and advice, and referral to external services such as dispute resolution services.
The Commissioner will also work with the Minister for Small Business, Brendan O'Connor, to ensure Government agencies take into account the needs of small businesses, including ways in which we can manage the regulatory burden on small business.
The Commissioner will report directly to the Minister, who will liaise directly with his Cabinet colleagues about issues important to small businesses.
The Commissioner will also be able to take up individual cases with relevant Government agencies.
The Commissioner's office will work with state and territory small business commissioners to ensure services for small business are simple and easy to access, minimising duplication across jurisdictions.
They will also work to simplify advice for small business, including in dispute resolution, making it more readily available online and via hotline.
Labor has always taken the needs of small business seriously. We appointed the first ever Small Business Minister, and made this portfolio a Cabinet appointment earlier this month.
This announcement responds to the Australian Government's review of small business dispute resolution programs and options which reported in 2011.
Labor understands and supports the aspirations of working people who want to run a decent small business. That is why we are also cutting the company tax rate for small business from 30 per cent to 29 per cent, increasing the small business instant tax write-off from $1,000 to $6,500 and introducing a $5,000 tax break for motor vehicles  -  all of which are opposed by the Liberals.
The Commissioner will be appointed in the second half of this year. 



Schools in the Australian Capital Territory will be given greater control over managing budgets and the recruitment of teachers under a joint initiative between the Australian and ACT Governments signed today.
The Gillard Government will provide more than $1.3 million to the ACT Government to roll out our Empowering Local Schools initiative over the next two years.
As part of the initiative, eight schools in the ACT, to be announced in May, will receive a start-up grant of up to $50,000 to help implement initiatives that provide them with more autonomy.
Under the program:
 * 	Each school will be given a direct budget, giving principals greater flexibility to allocate teaching and staff resources where they are needed most.
 * 	Principals will be able to recruit and manage their own staff in most cases, rather than staff being centrally allocated to schools.
 * 	Schools will be able to offer financial management training to principals, teachers and board members, allowing schools to improve their leadership skills.
The Gillard Government will also provide $712,000 to non-government schools in the ACT to help them develop new governance arrangements and provide extra training opportunities for staff.
Speaking at Gungahlin College, the Prime Minister said the Empowering Local Schools initiative was an important part of the Government's move to give schools the flexibility to direct resources where they are needed the most.
We want every child in Australia to have access to a world class education, because giving our kids the best start in life is at the heart of what we stand for as a party and as a nation.
This initiative allows principals to make decisions around managing staff and funding, because we know they are in the best position to make decisions about their own school.
Evidence both here and internationally has also found that greater school autonomy is strongly linked with improved student results, behaviour and attendance.
ACT Education Minister Chris Bourke said the ACT Government was already supporting Federal reform in this area through their $600,000 Empowering ACT Public Schools program.
Eight local schools have already taken part in the first phase of theACT program, with another fifteen ready to join for 2012.
“ACT public schools have taken to this new model of teaching and learning with gusto and it is already revealing the benefits,” said Minister Bourke
“At Gungahlin College empowerment has meant the school now has the opportunity to have a teaching focus on high level sciences, bringing in experts to teach special curriculum areas and sharing staff with the local university.
“Our schools provide a great showcase for these reforms, with policy makers from across Australia visiting to see the success of this new method of school governance.”
The Prime Minister said her Government was committed to rolling out similar reforms in 1,000 schools across the country over the next two years.
More than $480 million will be provided to state and territory governments, and the non-government school sectors, between now and 2017.
So far, Governments in NSW, South Australia, Queensland and Tasmania have signed National Partnerships with the Australian Government, with detailed implementation plans currently being developed.
Funding agreements have also been signed with the Catholic and independent sectors in the majority of states and territories. 



PM: I'm here today at Gungahlin College and thank you very much to Gai for showing us around.
This is a great school, that has been set up on the basis of empowering the school principal Gai to select her staff, to marshal her team and to manage her school budget.
I'm here today with Chris Bourke, the ACT Education Minister to announce that the Federal Government and the ACT has entered into an agreement to roll out Empowering Local Schools to eight schools in the ACT.
This is part of a national initiative, a Federal Government initiative, to empower 1000 schools around the country. We're investing $480 million until 2017 to achieve that result and we have already achieved agreement, not only with the ACT, but with New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania to roll out Empowering Local Schools.
Now we're so passionate about this because simply put it means better results for students and Gai couldn't have been clearer than she was today about the better results that you see for students when the principal has more ability to select their team and to drive their school in the direction that works for the kids in that school.
Every school is different and Empowering Local Schools recognises that.
Because I am required back in the Federal Parliament and because Minister Garrett was unable to come today because a pair wasn't made available to him, I will now take questions and then I will leave the ACT Minister talking to you specifically about what it will mean for local schools.
Happy to take your questions now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you concerned about Clive Palmer's legal challenge?
PM: The interesting thing here is Clive Palmer says something one day and Tony Abbott parrots it the next. Clive Palmer tells Tony Abbott what to do.
So Clive Palmer has told Tony Abbott to carry on about the constitutionality of putting a price on carbon. Of course we took very careful advice on the carbon pricing legislation.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) billionaire's revenge after Wayne Swan's scathing attack?
PM: You'd have to ask Mr Palmer that. But really the important thing is we've learned over the last 24 hours, Clive Palmer tells Tony Abbott what to do. That's because Tony Abbott's in politics to look after the billionaires.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We have taken careful constitutional advice and legal advice at every stage.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Senator Conroy this morning undermined Peter Costello's position on Future Fund, he said he wouldn't trust him as much as David Gonski to be the chair.
Now your government appointed him, is it actually the official government position that Peter Costello is not up to the position and if not what was Stephen Conroy talking about?
PM: David Gonski is the best person for the job, that's why he was selected and I am sure Senator Conroy was putting that view too. The Government obviously came to the conclusion that Peter Costello should to play a role in the Future Fund, that's why we appointed him and he'll continue to play that role.
JOURNALIST: But Senator Wong said this morning he lacks the competencies required to be the chair of the Future Fund. What competencies are those, I mean as I say-
PM: Well being the chair is a different position, so it requires different competencies. The Government selected the best person for the job and the best person for the job is David Gonski.
JOURNALIST: It's not because politically it would have been harder to work with Peter Costello?
PM: It's pretty hard to make that case when we appointed him to the Future Fund at all.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you agree with the Treasurer's assessment that billionaires like Clive Palmer have too much influence over the political debate?
PM: Look I agree with Treasurer Wayne Swan that our political debate should be about the national interest, it should be a debate that extends to the full range of Australian society, it shouldn't be a debate that's dominated by a privileged few.
We will always make decisions in the national interest. The billionaires don't tell us what to do. I respect people who've made a lot of money, good on them. If they've made that money and strived for it that's achievement and that's a good thing.
But when we make national policy, we make national policy for everyone, listening to the aged pensioner, listening to the working person who's striving hard, listening to the small business operator who's knocking themselves out day after day to provide for themselves and their families and to give their fellow Australians a job, listening to business as well.
My criticism here is of Tony Abbott - the only people he listens to are the billionaires. They're setting his policies for him, which is why, faced with the choice of better taxing mining and benefitting other businesses around Australia, he says ‘Give the money to the billionaires, knock tax cuts away from small business and other businesses around the nation.'
We'll go here because you haven't had one. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Yesterday you announced the Business Commissioner and today a report has found that Westfield has built into its lease agreement the carbon tax.
What reassurances have you got for small businesses who are worried about the carbon tax and their rental agreements?
PM: Well I'm glad you have asked me that question and I would refer you to Shop Talk, the journal of the Shopping Centre Council of Australia who have put out today a stop press.
‘Some newspapers' - this is their quote not mine  -  ‘Some newspapers are today carrying an exclusive report quoting a retailer claiming that some shopping centre landlords are including a new lease provision passing on the effects of the new carbon tax to retailers.'
Then they go on to explain: ‘This clause is actually several years old, which is why it does not directly refer to a carbon tax and was included in leases once debate began about the need for legislative action to combat greenhouse emissions.'
I'd also refer you to the fact that discussion about combating greenhouse gas emissions has been round for a while, it's been around right back to the days that Tony Abbott was standing alongside John Howard backing in a carbon price.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just back on Peter Costello, I have to ask again, he ran a $300 billion annual budget. The Future Fund - what specific competencies does he not have to not be able to manage a $73 billion Future Fund when the view of the board of the Future Fund was he should be the chairman?
PM: Look Senator Wong has dealt with these questions today. The obligation of government is to pick the best person for the job and we did.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the last time that the Government took legal advice was in regards to the Malaysia solution and that didn't go particularly well. Are you concerned with the Clive Palmer situation, that you may receive different legal advice or perhaps better legal advice?
PM: Look, we have taken careful legal advice throughout. If Clive Palmer is going to take a court case and Tony Abbott is going to back him in, well so be it. It will be part of their hysterical campaign against putting a price on carbon, even though as is perfectly clear from the historical record, Tony Abbott in the past has been a supporter of putting a price on carbon.
But, if he has been told by Clive Palmer to knock off supporting carbon for a while and to do what Clive tells him, that's a matter for Tony to explain.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have an update on Craig Thomson's health?
PM: No, I don't. I understand he continues to be unwell. I received that advice yesterday. I don't have a specific update about his state of health other than he continues to be unwell and won't be in Parliament today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, business said today that a one cent in the dollar tax cut is not really tax reform, it's just skirting around the edges, what's your response to that?
PM: Look, I understand the case of business to have a lower company tax rate, but I'd make this very simple point: you can't get to 25 cents in the dollar by not starting to bring the company tax down. The only way of hitting 25 cents, if that's what businesses want, is to be on a journey down in company tax.
I want to start taking company tax down and it is Tony Abbott and the Liberal Party of Australia, of all people, who want to stop this happening. They are saying to businesses around the nation ‘We want you to pay more tax, even though the Labor Government wants to take a bit of a tax burden off you, we want you to pay more tax.'
And yesterday, Tony Abbott not only said he is opposed to our tax cuts for big and small businesses, he actually walked away from his earlier commitments to provide to businesses a 1.5 per cent piece of tax relief in company tax.
So, he's betraying them in terms of the tax cuts I want to provide now and he has walked away from any commitments he had in the past to provide the sort of tax relief that he's talked about in the past. Once again betraying businesses and large and small.
Thank you. 



Thank you Peter, for that introduction. He's always a hard act to follow, showing that you can get away with anything in an Irish accent.
It's grand to be here again.
Ambassador White - welcome to an Australian St Patrick's Day event.
Can I acknowledge too my Federal colleagues, Tony Burke and Deb O'Neill, who are here with us enjoying the day.
I know that Joe Hockey is here too, travelling as Joe O'Hockey today, and wearing a borrowed green tie.
I'd like to acknowledge the friends and colleagues from state and local government.
Many friendly Irish faces and names  -  there are Keatings, there are Kellys, Johnno Johnson is here, and so many other friends.
Welcome too, to my fellow speakers today. Barry O'Farrell, for one.
A long standing friend of this Club and of course, a man who's got a considerable promotion since St Patrick's Day last.
Barry, I don't think you view it as your role to make my life easier, but you've made it easier in one respect. I didn't have to text you this morning to make sure that you and I weren't wearing the same outfit.
To Kristina, who's here, it was always a risk and the problem was she was always going to look better in it. Kristina it's great that you're here today.
I'd also like to acknowledge Mr. Alan Shatter, the Irish Minister for Justice, Equality and Defence. Welcome.
We know Ireland has been doing it tough  -  really tough. And it must sometimes feel for our Irish friends that history is a nightmare you're still trying to escape.
We admired the days of the Tiger and through those last decades felt your growing pride and your new prosperity and now we feel how bitter it must be to face tough times again.
But even in these tough times Ireland is proving to itself and the world it's a great nation, a great people with great strengths to draw on. And one of those biggest strengths is your Irishness itself.
In international politics they talk about ‘hard power' and 'soft power'.
Hard power  -  the power of coercion and payment, fleets and armies, silver and gold.
And soft power  -  the power of co-option and attraction, influence and ideas  -  story and song.
Well surely, Ireland is a soft power superpower.
Proved by the fact that we can never say no to you and we can never stay mad with you.
And we know that Ireland is going to be back where it wants to be.
Now today, here, it's serious business here at the Lansdowne Club marking St Patrick's Day. And it has been serious business in this city for a very long time.
Did you know at Sydney's St Patrick's Day dinner in the 1830s they would toast ‘The commercial interests of the colony'?
Even back then, they were telling their families accountants and financial managers that this was a business lunch. And so the story goes on.
It's a day to honour the Irish,and the honorary Irish as well. So it's no surprise either that at those very same dinners here in the 1830s they would toast ‘the sons of St George, St Andrew and St David who have honoured us with their company this day'.
So I'm glad all these years later you can make me, a daughter of St David, so welcome amongst you.
It's a big day for the Irish, and it's a big day for Australians too, because we know without the Irish we would be a very different place.
Our society is this wonderful and complex multicultural tapestry. 
But at the start of European settlement, Englishness and Irishness were the original warp and weft of the people, the weave and the cross-weave of our national personality.
We do love the larrikin. There's one or two of them here today I'm sure.
It was Manning Clark who said the larrikin is like this: ‘Almost archly self-conscious -- too smart for his own good, witty rather than humorous, exceeding limits, bending rules and sailing close to the wind, avoiding rather than evading responsibility, playing to an audience, mocking pomposity and smugness, larger than life, sceptical, iconoclastic, egalitarian yet suffering fools badly and, above all, defiant.'
Could you have a larrikin without Irish emigration? The answer is no.
And if we're more English than we like to admit  -  well, we're not nearly as Irish as we would like to be.
This year I took the opportunity to make the Federal Cabinet just that little bit more Irish. 
I already had that fine Sydney Irishman Tony Burke, a grand representative for all the Irishmen who've been in the great south land for a century or more.
But this time, I thought two was better than one, and if I could get one who came out here on a boat himself, all the better.
So, it was great fun to read out the names of each of the new Ministers last week, but none more so than that fine Melbourne Irishman, Brendan Patrick O'Connor, proudly a member of my Cabinet.
And I know that his brothers Michael and Brian, his sister Siobhan, and his parents, Philomena from Tipperary and Michael Sr, a grand Kerry man, we're very pleased too.
It's good to have another larrikin joining Tony Burke in the Cabinet.
Even if it means we won't get not going to get that much business done in their portfolios this afternoon.
As you all know, we wouldn't be without the Irish for a moment. It's as if Ireland were Australia's marvellous, admired, absent uncle. 
Sending wonderful gifts in the post and ringing us up at odd hours with mad anecdotes, just when we'd almost forgotten him. 
But for all that, he's our favourite uncle, given we know what Australia would be like without the Irish - just like New Zealand. 
Think about it!
I'm going to pay for that in my next bilateral discussion with John Key!
I'm sure it's a good thing, a very good thing, that you all have the weekend to recover from this lunch.
So we can be very confident in the pursuit of national productivity that you will be at work on Monday.
And I do want to say this too. That hasn't changed either. Patrick O'Farrell reminds us of the United Irishman Joseph Holt  -  a true political prisoner - sent here after 1798 and who found himself farming near Sydney, and he said in 1803: ‘My usual time to commence to sow cropswas the first Monday after St Patrick's Day. it requiring a few days to get the men sober.'
Enjoy the lunch! 


The Prime Minister today paid tribute to Margaret Whitlam AO, who has died in Sydney aged 92.
Margaret Whitlam was a remarkable woman, rightly loved and revered as a national treasure.
The Whitlams married in 1942 and were on the threshold of celebrating seven decades together on April 22. Gough impishly described their union as “my best appointment”, and with Margaret's loss, this extraordinary and enduring partnership has been broken.
It was a partnership of equals, with Margaret's intellect and wit superbly matched to Gough's own.
She accompanied Gough through the entire span of his journey in public life and the years after, including those painful days in and after 1975.
Margaret was an accomplished woman in her own right, with an abiding commitment to social issues, reflecting her own professional training, as well as a tireless advocate for the arts, the environment and women's rights.
Indeed Margaret's own self-confident and forthright example inspired many women that they too could lead lives of greater ambition and purpose.
Through her own independent activism and advocacy, she also helped redefine the role of ‘first lady', giving it a new and deeper significance in the life of our nation.
Today our thoughts are with Gough as he faces the prospect of life without his loving consort and companion.
Our thoughts are also with Gough and Margaret's children Antony, Nicholas, Stephen and Catherine and partners, their grandchildren and great grandchildren.
I look forward to paying a more formal tribute to Mrs Whitlam on the floor of the House of Representatives, the chamber which Gough dominated and served for so long.



This morning Australians woke to the sad news that Pope Shenouda III, Patriarch of Coptic Orthodox Church, has died in Egypt overnight.
Pope Shenouda had served in religious life for sixty years. He was spiritual leader of his people for four decades.
On behalf of all Australians, I offer my condolences to the Coptic community in this very sad hour. We know the eight million Coptic Christians in Egypt - and millions more worldwide - have lost their patriarch in a most difficult time in their history. 
I also know the Australian Coptic community looks to events in Egypt with great anxiety for their fellow faithful and the holy places.
I want them to know today that the Copts of Egypt are not without friends in the world, or in Australia. 



PM: [audio break] which is what I've just spoken about here at AIG.
Today we are announcing a major new skills package. Tonight, the Minerals Resource Rent Tax will go through the Senate.
These things are about Australia's future and making sure that it's a future in which people can get jobs, higher incomes and enjoy fairness.
The skills package that I've announced today is about making sure Australian workers have the opportunity to get new skills, a better job and higher incomes.
It's about Labor's vision of the future. It is a package which will enable us to see 375,000 extra completions over the next five years, making sure that we are addressing the prospect of skill shortages in our economy.
It's a package which means Australians will enjoy the benefit of a national training entitlement, that they will be able to get a Certificate III qualification, the first level of qualification that makes a noticeable difference to earnings.
It's a package which ensures those studying upper level VET qualifications will have the benefits of income contingent loans. 60,000 Australians will get those benefits, leveraging in to our vocational education and training system an extra $155 million.
This is a substantial package being taken by package being taken by the Federal Government to the next meeting of the Council of Australian Governments.
It's a package that includes more than $7 billion of support for skills and training, plus the offer of an extra $1.75 billion in order to get the training scheme that our nation needs for the future.
We live in times of economic change. It is full of opportunities and full of challenges. But one thing about this era in which we live is absolutely certain - the jobs of tomorrow will be jobs that require higher and higher levels of skill.
So for Australians to have the opportunities that they seek for themselves and their families, they will need to secure those higher levels of skills.
That's why it's the Labor way to make sure we address this challenge and give Australians the opportunities to grab those new skills and to grab the chance of a better life for themselves and their family that having those new skills gives them.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I can't remember the number of press conferences, speeches or announcement I've been to of governments announcing x thousand number of training places. Is this, though - I've never been to one where they announced we're actually going to give you financial support to actually take one of these places. Is that sort of filling in the missing link?
PM: Look, this is the booklet that outlines in full detail the plan that we are announcing today. But I think the things - the features, that really make this plan very different from anything that you've heard in the past, it comes with a national training entitlement so that Australians, who need a Certificate III have the benefit of a publicly subsidised place to go and get that all important qualification, which is the first level of qualification that makes a real difference to earnings.
It's a package which comes with better support for those who want higher level qualifications, the same support that university students have enjoyed for years.
It's a package which comes with 375,000 extra completions over the next five years and there's more transparency, so that there is more power in the hands of students and indeed in hands of employers who need to know all about training.
So it's a significant package of changes in order for it to live and breathe right out in our Australian community, we need to get agreement Australian right across our Federation and that is what I will be striving to do when first ministers meet in April.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how much advertising and printing is involved in selling this package, just on that booklet you mentioned, it's 84 pages and on my assessment of it about 36 per cent of it is either blank pages, coloured pages, or full page photographs. So is that really a good use of money?
PM: Look I think people are entitled to know what we are aiming for the skills for the nation.
We are talking about what will give people access to better jobs, higher incomes, and indeed, more security during their working life. You will see in this booklet the statistic that we are now creating two and a half skilled jobs for every unskilled job that's been created.
Now that means if we don't lift the skill levels of the Australian community, more and more Australians will be competing for fewer and fewer unskilled jobs. A very poor vision for the future. I think Australians are entitled to the full details of Labor's vision for the future and how we want to ensure they've got the skills they need so they can get those new skilled jobs that are coming on stream.
JOURNALIST: Much of this still needs to go past COAG though, how confident are you that it will be and just coming back to that question before, how much is being spent on selling this package?
PM: Look, we'll get you all of the figures about the booklet if would you like them, but really, the significant point today is about our nation's economy for the future. Whether you want an economy that has the capacity to seize the opportunities of the growth in our region, which will mean growth in higher and higher skilled jobs.
The vision of the future about making sure people can get access to those jobs. That's the important thing we are outlining today.
We are taking this opportunity to clearly outline it because as we move towards the COAG meeting, I do want Australians, individuals and businesses, as well State Premiers and Territory Chief Ministers, to understand what is on offer here.
This is a package of significance to the whole Australian community.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've said many times that you want manufacturers to move up the value chain and you've mentioned, I think again today, the opportunities that lie to our north. How can we be sure though that the actual skills that we're training people under these packages will actually deliver on the needs of the economy not now or two years ago, but 10 years from now?
PM: Well we are able to chart, and Skills Australia has been specifically doing this work, we are able to chart where the growth is in the Australian economy and what we anticipate to be the new opportunities of the future.
To mention just a few obvious ones - we know that mining is offering people new opportunities, we know construction has got demands for people with skills, we know that our aged care sector, our healthcare sector is growing and needs skilled workers.
And so we are able to identify those skills and respond to making sure that there are more places. This is a system, too, where students make demands, what place they want, and they'll have more information than they've ever had before about the employability of doing that training.
And where employees have direct influence in the system too, Minister Evans, who I'll turn to now, has done a lot of work to make sure that employers and their preferences of training matter to our system and I'll turn to him.
MINISTER EVANS: I'll just make three points in response to that question. The first is we set up the Workforce Development Agency Fund in the last budget, $550 million, to partner with industry to train for skills shortages. That money has been rolled out often on a one-for-one basis with industry and they are putting in support for training in the skills that they know they need.
So companies large and small are partnering with the Government, in addition to the training system, to fund to meet specific skills in short supply.
The second aspect is that we have worked closely with industry in developing these propositions, for the first time this Government's involved industry in the development towards the COAG process.
So there's been a series of roundtables that involve industry. There's another one tomorrow which has shaped the Commonwealth's approach, so very much driven from industry.
And the third quick point I would make is Skills Australia is not just some sort of academic body. It is a body chaired by someone from industry, Phil Bullock, with a great reputation, but also we've had the leader of the AIG and ACCI on Skills Australia, together with economists and other industry leaders.
They're driving Skills Australia's work so that industry has a clear appreciation of what the skills needs are. We're not training for training, we're training for jobs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think the Opposition should have given Craig Thomson a pair for the entire week, or is it fair enough they want more information on his medical condition?
PM: It's normal practice to extend pairs to people who are unwell. As for the details of this matter, that's worked out between the Chief Government Whip and his opposition counterpart.
JOURNALIST: Do you agree with Bob Carr's comments about Papua New Guinea or are you embarrassed by them? Surely the situation could have been better handled?
PM: Look, Senator Carr has made it clear that some of his remarks were taken out of context.
We have a partnership with Papua New Guinea. We are supportive of its move towards elections in the normal time cycle and, indeed, we have agreed to provide both election expert support, people who are trained in how to run elections, as well as some Defence assets to assist with getting ballot papers to where they need to go, given the nature of the terrain, so the ability to fly around.
JOURNALIST: So you're not embarrassed by the comments? You don't (inaudible).
PM: I've responded to your question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Penny Wong and many other Government ministers are frequently, I think and yourself, frequently demanding that the Opposition tell us where the money is coming from, that is, where are their savings. They refuse to do so. If that's a reasonable question to ask, and you think that they should answer that, can I ask you what savings are in your budget?
PM: You'll see the budget on budget night and if Mr Abbott wants to say he thinks the right time to publish his savings is in his budget reply speech then that's fine by me.
But he has got $70 billion to account for and I think it is important that the Australian community gets to understand what services to Australian families are going to be slashed to fill this $70 billion this gap.
JOURNALIST: More generally, are we likely to expect  -  I realise that was a partly facetious question  -  but are we, without detailing the actual cuts, given the savings task in front of you to meet the surplus, should we expect that there are going to be significant cuts in services in your budget?
PM: What you should expect is for the Government to continue to take the prudent approach it has to government spending.
We have been matching government spending with savings now since mid 2009.
We continue to focus on what is the right thing to do for the nation's economic needs. And I do want to make this point  -  it's in the interests of Australian economy and the Australian people that we return the budget to surplus in 2012-13.
That's in the interests of the Australian nation. And so because it is in the interests of the Australian nation, and the interests of Aussies and their economy, the economy they participate in by having jobs, we will get it done and it will be completely transparent to people on budget night how we have done it.
But we are saying to Mr Abbott, with his plan, which he is clearly seeking to keep obscured from public view, to cut $70 billion from services, that he needs to detail where those cuts are coming from.
Australians are entitled to know. Is it coming out of pensions? Is it coming out of health? Is it coming out of education? Is it comes out of all of them? How much? What will they lose?
They're entitled to have those questions answered.
JOURNALIST: On the mining tax - you mentioned that today. Are you closer with a compromise with the Greens or Coalition on the tax cuts related to the mining tax and on a separate issue, what do you make of the HSU report and do you agree that perhaps the members of the HSU now have a case to want further attention taken to the financial management of the union?
PM: I'm not going to comment on matters where there are further processes involved. On the company tax agenda, we continue to be determined to provide Australian businesses, large and small with a tax cut.
Mr Abbott appears to be determined to deny those businesses a tax cut and he wants to impose on 3,200 businesses extra tax.
So we will bring that legislation to the Parliament, and as I said last week, I think it is a truly remarkable thing that the Liberal Party - that the Liberal Party - will sit in the Parliament and will vote against a tax cut for Australian businesses, but under Mr Abbott, with his negativity, that is what they are intending to do.
JOURNALIST: No closer to a deal then?
PM: We will bring the legislation to the Parliament exactly as we outlined and the position of the Government is clear.
On parliamentary proceedings, the real question is Mr Abbott not supporting a tax cut, despite everything he's ever said about how desirable tax cuts are for businesses.
Thanks very much. 



Australia stands at the cross roads.
We've witnessed a shift in our economic interests from America and Europe to Asia in a single generation.
We're seeing shares of employment and activity move towards services and high tech production
We're seeing our dollar rise to sustained high levels due to our commodity exports and confidence in our currency and bonds.
It is a major structural realignment of our economy; an externally-led change as big as any we have seen in 200 years.
Like the 1980s, it is a time to choose.
To chart a conscious and deliberate pathway to sustained prosperity, or face the alternative of mediocre growth or even decline.
In the early 2000s, the mining boom gave us a moment of complacency.
But the post-GFC world has made it clear we cannot cruise along any more.
The world of easy money and easy choices that prevailed until 2008 is gone and won't be coming back.
We are in an era of deleveraging.
An era of savings, surpluses and balance-sheet repair.
An era of falling tax revenues and tough fiscal choices.
An era when the baby boomers have begun to retire.
This is a more austere and demanding world where only the resilient and the nimble will prosper.
Growth will not come easily.
Every percentage point of GDP will be hard-won.
Yes there is opportunity in the mining boom and in the relentless rise of Asia's middle class.
But we can only take advantage of those opportunities if we renew the productivity drive that made us so successful in the 80s and 90s.
The high road.
So that people buying our products and services don't ask how much they are but how good they are.
Taking us into the league of countries like Germany, Sweden, Singapore and Israel where high value, high quality is a way of life.
Let's be clear, though, on what productivity means.
It doesn't mean taking a few dollars out of workers' pockets or eroding protections that bring them dignity and security.
And it doesn't mean hard-working employees working even harder.
In a mature, sophisticated economy like ours, the biggest single source of productivity will come from only one place: capital deepening.
Physical capital  -  the infrastructure and equipment that enables us to achieve more.
Like unleashing the power of broadband through the NBN.
Completing the duplication of the Pacific Highway.
Upgrading our national freight rail network.
Unclogging our cities through massive new transport infrastructure like the Regional Rail line in Melbourne.
And we're working towards linking the rapidly expanding resources sector in New South Wales to Port Kembla via the long-deferred Maldon to Dumbarton freight line.
It's a huge agenda, and no government has done more in these areas since Federation than ours.
The other part of the picture is human capital  -  in other words, people and skills.
Nothing is more important to Australia's future economic success than skills development.
Nothing.
Skills are the lifeblood of a modern economy and the key to a more prosperous future.
Skills are central to ensuring that we have the workforce needed to deliver the innovative, high quality products and services that will power our economy this century.
Economic modelling by KPMG Econotech shows that the Government's skills targets could lift Australia's GDP by up to 2.6 per cent each year between 2025 and 2040.
It would boost employment by 1.2 per cent over the same period.
For individuals, achieving recognised qualifications is one of the best ways to secure a job and earn a decent wage.
In a changing economy, skills also build resilience.
They provide workers with the flexibility to change jobs, apply skills in different contexts and go on learning.
They enable employees to manage the demands of new systems and new technologies.
As our economy continues to change, having the right skills, and the ability to apply those skills in the right settings,will be critical.
A few moments ago I used the phrase “human capital”.
It's a dry economic term but what we are really talking about is liberating the creative capacity of individuals.
Giving them the opportunity to change their lives for the better.
Whether it's a kid in the suburbs who has no other social or economic advantages.
An older worker looking to change fields or overcome the challenge of redundancy.
Or perhaps a single mum wanting to return to the workforce.
In the past it was easy for students to leave Year 9 and 10 without further qualifications due to the abundance of unskilled jobs or career pathways that didn't require formal skills.
But now, and increasingly in the future, individuals without qualifications will simply be forced to compete for a diminishing pool of low-skill, low wage jobs, or else face the demoralising prospect of unemployment.
That's not the future I want for any Australian.
I want a future where Australians have the opportunity to get new skills and a new opportunity to create a better life for themselves and their families.
That's why I refer to the power of education as being transformative.
Transformative for individuals and transformative for society.
To date, this government has covered a huge amount of ground in early childhood, schools and university education.
In universities, we've moved to a demand-driven system that has already resulted in 150,000 extra university places.
More than 40 per cent of young women now have a bachelors degree or higher, achieving a large part of our target more than a decade ahead of schedule.
We are well on track to achieve our target of 40 per cent of people aged 25 to 34 holding a bachelors degree or higher by 2025, with more children from poorer families getting a chance.
We're making sure that all Australian children have the opportunity to reap the rewards of a quality early childhood education through universal access to preschool.
In schools, we've put in place My School, we're devolving power to local school principals and communities, and boosting teacher quality.
We're introducing the National Curriculum and charting a pathway to a better way of funding schools through the Gonski review.
The next wave of reform must be in the area of skills.
This is the missing piece of the puzzle.
Since 2008, our nation has been committed to ambitious targets for skilling Australians:
 * 	Doubling the number of qualification completions at diploma and advanced diploma levels
 * 	Halving the proportion of Australians of working age  without a Certificate III qualification or higher by 2020, and
 * 	Increasing the proportion of young Australians aged 20 to 24 attaining Year 12 or Certificate II to 90 per cent by 2015.
Already we have 460,000 doing a trade apprenticeship or a traineeship  -  with more people studying a trade than ever before in Australia's history.
But we need to go further to make our training goals a reality.
So today I am pleased to announce a new major package of reforms.
A skills blueprint to meet the demands of the Asian Century.
A plan to help Australians gets jobs, learn new skills to get better jobs and to build a more competitive business environment.
Friends, the package I launch today is a plan for better, more timely access to training places.
But also better quality training.
Fairer funding of training.
More flexible and innovative delivery of training.
It is a plan that is mindful of the central place that TAFE plays in our training system and indeed in our national imagination.
Our TAFEs are essential public institutions that have a presence in every region and collectively deliver 80 per cent of VET training.
TAFE is known for its sophisticated technical educationand its ability to reach those in our community who are marginalised.
Our plan encompasses TAFE and all of vocational education, and it starts with this simple proposition: skills are no longer an optional extra but a necessity.
In the new economy we are creating, few Australians can or should be left to embark on their working lives without skills and qualifications.
The economy needs it; our vision for a fairer nation demands it.
Today 4.1 million working Australians do not have the skills necessary for entry to the key growth sectors of our economy.
These workers earn up to $10,000 a year less than their more skilled peers.
They have an employment rate of less than 60 per cent.
And they get locked out of new opportunities because demand for jobs with high-level skills is running at 2.5 times the rate of unskilled jobs.
Put simply, they are less likely to have a job.
Think of it this way.
The jobs of the future are jobs that require skills:
Advanced manufacturing, taking us up the value-chain.
Clean energy.
Mining, building and construction.
Financial and property services.
Child care, aged and disability care.
Nursing and allied health.
New media, culture and design.
These are the growth areas of today and tomorrow, and every single one of them requires skills.
So our plan begins with measures to increase the accessibility of training places in the community.
As a result of our reform plan, every working age Australian will be entitled to a taxpayer-funded training place to obtain a qualification up to and including Certificate III, including language and literacy courses.
Any one from Year 10 to retirement age will be able to obtain one of these places.
This is our National Training Entitlement for every Australian.
Why Certificate III?
Because research tells us this is the threshold qualification that really makes a difference.
It's the qualification that provides a noticeable boost to income.
The first qualification that begins admitting holders into the professions like child care or aged care.
But friends, we know this development on its own is not enough.
Many more Australians will aspire to higher qualifications and they deserve every encouragement to do so.
But the upfront costs can deter many in our community, especially those from modest circumstances.
So today I can announce a new plan to bring to our vocational sector the benefits that interest-free deferred loans have long brought to university participation.
Think of it as being like HECS for Skills.
At last, VET diploma students will get the same rights that university students have had for years:
 * 	No upfront fees
 * 	Access to an interest-free loan to pay for their study
 * 	Only having to pay that loan back once their income reaches a certain level.
Remember university students have enjoyed the benefits of HECS for 23 years.
With these reforms, VET will no longer be the poor relation.
More opportunities to train, funded more fairly.
That's what is on offer today.
But we know these measures on their own are not enough.
We can't pour extra money and extra places into a patchy and inflexible system.
So we also need a focus on quality and a focus on transparency.
Already we've established the Australian Skills Quality Authority to promote higher standards amongst the nation's 5000 training organisations.
The Commonwealth is also moving to review and improve these standards through the National Skills Standards Council.
But we need to go further.
To this end, our reform package includes a number of measures designed to support the delivery of high quality VET training.
We will work with the States and Territories to ensure the qualifications delivered by the VET sector are independently assessed over the next two years.
The Commonwealth will require all jurisdictions to ensure only quality providers with an established record can access public funding.
And we will require the States and Territories to set out a plan for navigating their TAFE systems through these reforms so that the important role of public providers is maintained.
It is in everyone's interests that TAFE remains at the centre of our VET system.
Friends,
There's one final piece of the picture and that is the role of students, especially the information and support they receive.
We've seen how My School and My Hospital are helping to bring choice and transparency to school education and hospital care.
The VET sector trains 1.8 million students a year, so it merits the same open and accountable approach.
Under the government's reforms, we will establish a single website, My Skills, so people can have vital information on training courses and training providers.
Over time, the My Skills website will provide individuals and employers with real time information on things like course options, employment outcomes, audit reports and fees.
We want business and individuals to have ready access to information that will allow them to choose the training organisation that best suits their needs.
We also recognise that such a big and diverse sector can be hard for students to navigate.
So we will introduce a Unique Student Identifier, a single ID number that will enable students to track the skills and qualifications they have achieved.
It will bring all their training history together in a single, portable record making moving courses or providers easier.
It was also make it simpler for them to obtain recognition of prior training and skills when they enrol in a new course.
Lastly, we will be asking the States and Territories to do more when it comes to student retention and learning outcomes.
We want to re-set the benchmark of achievement in training.
A test of this reform will be not just how many students sign up for training  -  but how many complete.
At the moment only 30 per cent of students, on average, complete a VET course.
That is an enormous waste of public funds, a big loss of potential skills, and a human tragedy as well.
With better approaches to training content and delivery, teaching quality and student support, I believe we can vastly increase the completion of VET qualifications.
Indeed we are negotiating measures with the States and Territories to ensure that around 375,000 additional students will complete their qualification over the next five years.
Friends, these are Australian Government proposals that come with the endorsement of my Cabinet and my own lifelong commitment to the importance of education.
But the truth is the States and Territories remain the majority funder for VET training and share a profound interest in delivering quality outcomes.
So these are reforms requiring the support and endorsement of the whole Federation.
Accordingly, I will be presenting these proposals to my fellow First Ministers at the COAG meeting on April 13.
I present them in a spirit of bipartisanship and goodwill.
They are proposals designed in the national interest and I look forward to having a fruitful conversation with my State and Territory colleagues.
In approaching the COAG table, I won't come empty handed.
On behalf of the Commonwealth, I will offer the States and Territories $7.2 billion over five years to underpin Australia's training system.
In addition, we have another $1.75 billion to support and drive these new reforms.
To which will be added funds unlocked by VET FEE-HELP, potentially amounting to $155 million each year, which will help underwrite the National Training Entitlement.
Together these measures almost double the level of funding the Government inherited in 2007.
So it can be fairly said that our nation's long neglect of vocational education is at an end.
A huge new piece of the Government's plans for the nation's future falls into place today.
We have ambitious goals and they are necessarily bold:
To make every school a great school.
To make every university a great university.
To skill every Australian who can and wants to be skilled.
To ensure no employer creates a job without someone qualified and equipped to fill it.
No longer will personal means or a lack of training opportunities be a barrier or an excuse.
We will have a supply of training places sufficient to meet the needs and opportunities of the future.
Training underpinned by quality, flexibility and transparency.
This skills package is a huge breakthrough for business and employees as we shape the new economy.
It sits alongside our reforms in clean energy, broadband and tax redesign as the building blocks to equip our nation for the challenges ahead.
It's also a satisfying moment on my own journey in public life, so let me conclude with this reflection.
I am honoured to lead a movement that was founded in 1891  -  Australia's oldest political tradition.
It was begun by a group of workers and small businessmen who laid out a simple 16-point plan as their first platform.
One of those items was a commitment to “Free, compulsory, and technical education, higher as well as elementary, to be extended to all alike.”
Universal schooling was achieved quickly in the final decades of the 19th century.
But in university and VET, it's taken more than a century to achieve this promise.
Only now, under this government since 2007, is broad access to university and high-level vocational education  -  free at the point of use and driven by demand  -  being delivered and assured
They are reforms that will shape and sustain our nation for decades to come.
Reforms that position us to be winners in the Asian Century.
A race our nation cannot afford to lose. 



Up to 60,000 students per year will no longer have to pay upfront fees to undertake vocational education and training.
Finally, VET diploma students will get the same rights that university students have had for years:
 * 	No upfront fees
 * 	Access to an interest-free loan to pay for their study.
 * 	Only having to pay that loan back once their income reaches a certain level.
For too long, potential students have been deterred from higher level vocational education because of upfront fees. These fees can exceed $3000 per year. Many workers have given up the chance of retraining for the same reason.
These reforms will break down the cost barrier to higher level vocational education.
The Government will pay the upfront costs of a course as a loan and students will not have to repay the loan until they have secured a good job with enough income to allow them to make gradual repayments (currently an income of $47,196 per year).
If all states and territories agree to the offer of expanded access to VET FEE-HELP, and the maximum take-up is achieved, up to $155 million could be loaned each year to subsidised higher level VET students. This could support as many as 60,000 higher level VET students with student loans each year.
Under the Government's offer to the states and territories, interest-free, deferred loans will be available to all students studying publicly subsided diplomas and advanced diplomas. Students seeking to undertake higher level VET qualifications will the choice of an income contingent loan to pay those fees if they are unable or don't want to pay for tuition fees upfront.
This means the number of workers with a diploma of advanced diploma qualification in the labour market will increase and businesses will have more highly qualified graduates.
The increased private investment in training also means states and territories will have more financial resources to increase publicly subsidised training places. 



The Gillard Government today released new proposals to raise the quality of vocational education and training across the country.
The Government has put $1.75 billion on the table to work with the states and territories to deliver on reforms to the VET system over the next 5 years.
Key measures in the offer to the states and territories include:
 * 	Working with the states and territories to ensure courses delivered by the VET sector are subject to independent quality assessment.
 * 	States and territories will be required to implement these independent checks over the next two years.
 * 	States and territories will have to set strict criteria to ensure only quality providers with an established record can access public funding.
 * 	States and territories will be required to provide strategies that will continue to support and strengthen the public providers of vocational education and training (TAFE) over the next five years.
 * 	Each state and territory will be required to implement strategies to improve the quality of VET teaching.
Students training for a job deserve the best possible education.
With high skilled jobs increasing at 2.5 times the rate of other jobs and some 4.1 million Australians not having post-school qualifications, the nation may face a significant shortfall of suitably skilled workers in coming years.
The Government is determined to remove the barriers preventing Australians from accessing further training, but we will not let this come at the cost of quality.
These reforms that will make it possible for more Australians to obtain the high quality skills they need.
The offer of $1.75 billion is in addition to the $7.2 billion the Government will made available to the states and territories over the next five years for the VET system.  



The Government tabled the first annual report of the Independent National Security Legislation Monitor, Mr Bret Walker SC, into the operation of Australia's counter-terrorism and national security legislation in Parliament today.
The Government established the position of an independent Monitor in response to recommendations from the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security, the independent Security Legislation Review Committee (the Sheller Committee) and the Clarke Inquiry into the case of Dr Mohamed Haneef.
The Monitor plays an important role in making sure our enforcement and intelligence agencies have the powers they need to prevent terrorist acts from occurring.  The Monitor also makes sure that these laws remain necessary, consistent with our international obligations and protect the rights of individuals.
The role of the Monitor underlines the Government's commitment to transparent oversight and regular review of Australia's counter-terrorism and national security legislation.
Although the report does not contain any recommendations, the Government will give careful consideration to the issues raised in this report.  There will be no formal response.
The report outlines the Monitor's extensive agenda for the  next year and we look forward to considering any recommendations from this work in due course.
The report can be found at: http://www.dpmc.gov.au/publications/INSLM/index.cfm



The Gillard Government today unveiled its formal offer to the states and territories to turbo-charge skills training and help more Australians get the jobs they want.
The offer, which will be taken to next month's COAG meeting, will aim to make sure around an additional 375,000 students complete qualifications over the next five years.
Under the offer:
 * 	All Australians  -  from post school to the age pension - will have access to a government subsidised training place up to their first Certificate III, through a National Training Entitlement; and
 * 	Interest-free loans will be expanded in the vocational education and training system, enabling up to 60,000 students per year to defer the upfront cost of tuition. Loans will be available to all students studying publicly-subsidised diplomas and advanced diplomas at approved VET providers. 
This is the first time working age Australians have been guaranteed access to a government subsidised training place, through the National Training Entitlement.
Certificate III is the first level of post-school qualification shown to have a significant positive impact on a person's employment and earnings.
Students will be able to access the Entitlement through training providers approved by the state or territory to deliver publicly subsidised training. Depending on where the training is carried out, the subsidised place could be worth up to $7800 for some courses.
These reforms will help Australians get the training they need to get a job, change careers or boost their chance of getting a better-paying job.
For example:
 * 	For the 4.1 million Australians without a Certificate III, they could be earning an additional $400,000 on average over the course of a typical working life if they improved their skills to a Certificate III qualification or higher.
 * 	Workersholding a Diploma or Advanced Diploma earn on average around $200 a week more than those with no post-school qualification.
The blueprint released today - Skills for All Australians - outlines the skills challenge facing the nation and the Gillard Government's offer to the states and territories. 
In an economy changing because of the high dollar, skills build job resilience. They provide workers with the capacity and flexibility to switch careers - seizing new opportunities - and apply skills in different contexts. 
This skills package is a significant breakthrough for business and employees as we shape the new economy. It sits alongside our reforms in clean energy, broadband and tax redesign as the building blocks to equip our nation for the challenges ahead.
We are committed to building a highly skilled workforce and a more productive economy.
We believe all eligible Australians should be able to access training, no matter where they are from or what their background is. Too many Australians are sidelined because they do not have the skills they need to join the workforce.
Skills Australia estimates that in the five years to 2015, Australia will need an additional 2.1 million people in the workforce with VET qualifications.
While jobs for more highly skilled workers are growing at 2.5 times the rate of other jobs, the pool of workers with skills to fill them is not keeping pace.
The Government has put $1.75 billion on the table to work with the states and territories to deliver these reforms over the next five years.
The offer is in addition to the $7.2 billion the Government will make available to the states and territories over the next five years for the VET system. In total, that is close to $9 billion dollars over the next five years.
These reforms promise to deliver far-reaching changes that will make a difference to the lives of millions of Australian working families. 



Workers thinking about changing their career or updating their skills will be able to compare courses, fees, providers and the quality of training on offer through a new My Skills website.
My Skills  -  to be launched later this year  -  will ensure students and businesses can find the training that is right for them.
Right now, there is no consistent or authoritative source of information on training providers. Different providers have different fees, varying level of student satisfaction and varying success in providing a pathway to employment or further training.
This lack of available data means it can be difficult for an employer or an individual to make an informed choice about which training course is most appropriate for them.
Through My Skills, Australians will be able to research the courses on offer in the VET system by the approximately 5000 registered providers. It will bring greater transparency and choice to the sector by allowing for comparisons to be made. 
Over time, the service will cover student fees, the outcomes of satisfaction surveys and greater information at the individual campus or training location level. It will also include information about the availability of student services such as childcare arrangements, as well as links to local employment opportunities.
My Skillswill be a key measure to boost transparency in the vocational education and training system.
A new Unique Student Identifier will also be introduced so students will be able to access information about their training record from a single authoritative source.
This will help students keep track of their qualification and training, as they upskill and reskill throughout their career.
It will also give the Government better access to data on where training funds are being spent, boosting accountability and transparency.
Together, these changes will lead to improved efficiency and better outcomes in the training system.  



On behalf of the Australian Government and people of Australia, I extend my deepest condolences to the Tongan Government following the death of His Majesty King George Tupou V.
Our thoughts today are with the people of Tonga, including the large Tongan community living in Australia.
During his reign, King George guided his country through a critical process of constitutional change towards the establishment of a Constitutional monarchy, founded on democratic principles. 
Tonga's first truly democratic elections, held in November 2010, set the country on a new course.
King George was a great friend of Australia, having last visited Australia in October 2010.
We enjoy a warm and close friendship with Tonga, supported by our aid, defence cooperation, regional cooperation through bodies such as the Pacific Island Forum. 



The Government last night delivered an historic reform to share the benefits of the mining boom and deliver a fair return to Australians from the development of the nation's resource wealth.
The Minerals Resource Rent Tax (MRRT), which was passed last night by the Senate, will help spread the benefits of the mining boom to all Australians and strengthen our whole economy.
Australians know how important the mining industry is, but they also know that we can only dig up and sell the resources once.
The MRRT will deliver Australians with a fair return on the resources they own 100 per cent.
Only super-profitable mining companies will pay the MRRT and the proceeds will go to where they can make the greatest contribution to jobs and economic growth - to cutting taxes for all companies, to infrastructure, and increased superannuation which will boost our national savings.
The MRRT will deliver:
 * 	- A major new tax break for Australia's 2.7 million small businesses as well as a cut to the company tax rate for all businesses, with small businesses getting a one year head-start;
 * 	- A boost to the superannuation for 8.4 million workers, which will increase the nation's savings pool by $500 billion by 2035;
 * 	- A much needed extra superannuation contribution for 3.6 million low-income-earners; and
 * 	Critical investment in roads, bridges and other infrastructure, particularly in our great mining regions.
Tony Abbott has opposed this important reform every step of the way, insisting that the benefits of the mining boom should not be shared by all Australians.
Mr Abbott and the Coalition have decided to turn their backs on small business, Australians workers and the broader community, and instead want to give a tax cut to super-profitable mining companies.
Most of those who will be paying the MRRT understand the importance of reforming the taxation of resources and support this critical economic reform.
Mining is a great Australian industry that is going from strength to strength in full knowledge of the introduction of the MRRT. New investment in the resources sector has risen from $47 billion in 2010-11 to $95 billion this year, to an expected $120 billion in 2012-13.
The MRRT is central to the Government's plan to spread the benefits of the mining boom to more Australians for generations to come.
The Gillard Government believes all Australians should share in the benefits of the mining boom, not just a fortunate few. 



HOST: Has the fight been worth it? You and Labor lost a lot of skin. It also contributed to Mr Rudd losing the prime ministership.PM: Well I'm not accepting the premise of your question about past events in Labor, but of course it's been worth it. Having the mining tax go through and become reality is exactly the right thing for our economy now and for fairness for Australians.
We're going through a spectacular resources boom. That's good for our economy but it also means we need to share the benefits of that boom right around the country. The mining tax will do that with new tax benefits for 2.7 millions small businesses, better super for more than 8 million Australian workers, and we will have a stream of funds to build the infrastructure we need for the resources boom - the ports, the road, the rail.HOST: This was a relatively simple proposal to redistribute some of the huge profits made by some of these mining companies. Why on earth did it take so long and why did it claim your predecessor Kevin Rudd?PM: Well once again I'm not accepting the premise of your question but clearly mining companies don't want to volunteer to pay more tax, I understand that, and we've had to work hard to strike an agreement with the biggest mining companies to get all of the policy details right and then to battle it through a Parliament where the Leader of the Opposition and the Liberal and National Party saying no to absolutely everything.HOST: Is it a good policy idea badly executed?PM: It's a good policy idea which was always going to be controversial, always the subject of push back and opposition and against all of that, we've won through. 
HOST: The mining industry ran a fairly devastating campaign against the tax. Would you acknowledge that your government didn't mount an effective defence against that?PM: Well we're sitting here today and the mining tax is law so I think at the end of what has been a difficult period - we've had to battle hard - but at the end of that difficult period, we've won through for the Australian nation.HOST: Are you confident that this tax will deliver the kind of windfall that you hope it will deliver for the budget? There are warnings this morning that the impact of this tax will be eroded by the falling commodity prices, the high Australian dollar, the slow growth that's happening in China and the tax breaks that you've agreed to.PM: Well I think we've got to be a bit practical about all of this. I'm very confident in the Treasury forecasting and the Treasury forecasting shows the amount of money that we will gather from this tax.I want to say too though, we've been listening for a few years now to people who are saying well you know, a spectacular fall in commodity prices is just around the corner and what have we seen over all of that time? Very, very strong terms of trade and very high commodity prices.You just used the terminology 'the slow-down in China'. We're talking about a slow-down to a more than 7 per cent growth rate. China is still going to be buying in absolutely record quantities the things that we have to sell out of our resources sector.So we know the outlook for resources is strong. More than $400 billion of investment in the pipeline. I as Prime Minister routinely go to projects that are worth $20, $30, $40 billion, and when you're standing at one of them, then you're standing at one of them because there are dozens of others either being built now or on the drawing board.So we know as a nation we're going to be earning a lot out of our mineral wealth. The question is should we share it or should we give it to a privileged few?I'm for sharing it. Obviously the Opposition is for keeping it in the hands of a privileged few.HOST: How worried are you by a High Court challenge from Clive Palmer to this?PM: Look I'm not worried at all. Clive Palmer is a very, very wealthy man. He's a mining billionaire. Well that's good for him but the question is not what is better for Clive Palmer, it's what's better for the Australian nation.Now he might want to fight the Government's plans to share our minerals wealth with all Australians and to keep more for himself but it's my job as Prime Minister to make sure that in this time of resources prosperity and economic change, we are fairly sharing the mineral wealth in our grounds that belongs to all of us and we're using that mineral wealth to create the economy we will need for the long term, which is a diverse economy.I do not want the resources boom to hollow out other sections of the Australian economy so we emerge from this one trick ponies - we're only good at resources and we're not good at anything else. That's why we're sharing the benefits through company tax reductions to help other businesses be stronger.HOST: You've said that this will deliver a tax cut but none of that is guaranteed, especially for big business.Why aren't you pressuring the Greens on this to deliver something that you've promised because the tax cuts aren't through Parliament yet?PM: Well we will bring the tax cuts to the Parliament in the budget session. That is the timing that we always promised and I'm intending to be a vocal advocate for these tax cuts.First and foremost I face opposition from Tony Abbott, who is now so negative that he will say no to things that are part of the Liberal Party's brand.HOST: But you're the Prime Minister, you made the specific promise, you are in government, the Greens have helped you form that government. Why aren't you pressuring the Greens to deliver on this promise?PM: Look we will continue the campaign for these tax cuts but I think I am entitled, Sabra, to say today and to continue to say that the remarkable decision here is the decision by Tony Abbott to oppose these tax cuts.If you ask people, you know, 'What do you think a Liberal Party would do about tax cuts, what do you think the Greens political party would do about tax cuts?' I think most people would say 'Well I think the Liberal Party would vote for them and maybe the Greens would vote against'. That's the kind of brands that those political parties have out in the Australian community and there is Tony Abbott repudiating every bit of Liberal history - and words out of his own mouth - and saying he stands in the way of small businesses and then bigger businesses getting a tax cut.HOST: AM is broadcasting from the port this morning which services central Queensland's huge coal fields and one of the main complains that you'll hear is that basic non-mining infrastructure has been poor for such a long time.We all know that Australian State governments don't like raising taxes so they've largely failed in their duty to their citizens to force mining companies to help provide some of this infrastructure.Do you get frustrated that it's always the Federal Government having to step in here to fix and deliver the infrastructure that regional areas need to deliver on the mining boom?PM: Look around the country I think state governments have been working with mining communities to meet their infrastructure needs. It's not easy, you know. For mining communities that are seeing spectacular growth, there are stresses and strains from that growth - house prices skyrocket, rents skyrocket.If you're in the mining sector and earning a big income then you can cope with that. If you're someone who's lived in that township for a long period of time, you're on a fixed income, you're the person who waits on tables at the local café, then all of that is a very big burden for you.And then you've got the staffing questions. How do you keep the police officers and the childcare workers when they can all go and earn more money in the mines? So state governments, national government, we're all grappling with these questions.For the national government, part of what we are doing with the mining tax - not only the tax benefits for businesses, the superannuation, but it is backing in infrastructure. Now the hard infrastructure that mining needs, the roads, the rail, the ports, but in stepping up to do more of that obviously we are enabling our state colleagues to then work on some of the things that most concern them like the construction of local schools and police stations.HOST: The Fair Work Australia report into Craig Thomson's time at the national branch of the Health Services Union is still yet to be released, but we've seen a Fair Work Australia report into the Victorian branch last week.Would you concede there is evidence of a culture at the HSU which has seen a lack of accountability and the possible misuse of union funds here, members' money?PM: Look I'm not commenting on something that is going from Fair Work Australia into the Federal Court. That's the report you refer to, it's being referred to the Federal Court as I understand it so it's not appropriate for me to comment on that.HOST: Have you looked at it? Have you read it?PM: Look I'm not going to be drawn on commentary about something that's still the subject of legal proceedings.HOST: So you're not going to say whether you've even glanced it or been briefed...PM: I'm not going to engage in commentary on something that's before a court.  



We gather in a spirit of commemoration and of celebration.
Commemoration because the vivid light which was the life of Nancy Wake has been extinguished.
But celebration because that life has such lasting significance for the people of the nations represented here today and, indeed, for the wider cause of freedom.
We remember a moment, decisive in history, when the world stood in dire peril, and exceptional men and women rose up to meet that challenge.
Nancy Wake holds a foremost place in their ranks.
It is commonplace now to call them “the greatest generation”.
But Tom Brokaw's characterisation is so favoured and repeated because it is so true.
They were the children of one world war, raised in the midst of privation and unease, who were forced to face another war that became the most dreadful conflict in human history.
These were dark days for Europe; the very darkest.
In 1940, France and the Low Countries were smashed as the German forces swept all before them.
In his historic radio address, General De Gaulle asked three defiant questions:
"Has the last word been said?
“Must hope disappear?
“Is defeat final?”
The response in many freedom-loving hearts was a resounding no. No to each of these questions, no to them all.
Nancy Wake was one who gave the same courageous answer and kept the “flame of resistance” alive.
But in her case, it didn't need to be that way.
Nancy was young, she was wealthy, she was beautiful.
She could have escaped or melted into the civilian population, living out the war in quiet obscurity without reproach.
But from the first days of the Occupation, Nancy knew this was not a time for reticence or self-regard.
She gave all and she risked all.
Never was a cause better or more faithfully served.
Nancy Wake's remarkable career as a spy and saboteur has been well documented in Peter's book and many other sources.
Her deeds and character were showered with honours richly deserved.
And Nancy's own long life allowed her to receive in full measure the affection and respect that was so completely her due.
Now, months after her passing, when so many wise and insightful words have been written and spoken, what is still left to be said?
For me, speaking on behalf of the nation and also expressing the feelings of my own heart, it can be summed-up in one word:
Gratitude.
Gratitude that when history's greatest summons came, Nancy and millions like her were ready to answer the call.
Gratitude for Nancy's life and her achievements.
And so we gather here, in this People's House, and in this distinguished company to say goodbye to Nancy Wake one last time.
She risked her life for months and years, and yet was spared.
Now old age has done what Nazi bullets could do, and Nancy Wake has gone from our midst.
But like all of her comrades, who fill honour rolls and cemeteries in five continents, her deeds will endure.
Her memory will not perish.
And her name will live among the valiant forever. 



HOST: Good morning to you, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Lisa.
HOST: Now, the mining tax, this is the one that was part of Kevin Rudd's downfall as Prime Minister. It must make it a particularly sweet victory for you?
PM: It's certainly been a long battle Lisa and I'm glad we've been able to deliver what really is a fairness measure for Australians around the country. We're going through a remarkable resources boom. Those minerals belong to everyone. They belong to our nation. They belong to each of us and we want to make sure Aussies around the country get their fair share, so the mining companies will pay more tax when they're profitable and that will be used to back in tax breaks for small businesses - 2.7 million of them around the nation, and to back in more superannuation for more than 8 million workers, which means better retirement incomes, but it also adds to our pool of national savings and that's good for our economy. And it will help us build some vitally needed infrastructure. Resources booms are hungry for roads and rail and port and we need to do the building of those things in mining communities.
HOST: The Opposition has pointed out that only 30% of small businesses are incorporated and that only half of those actually pay company tax, but all small businesses also be hit by the coming carbon tax. So there's a bit of an anomaly there.
PM: Well I'm not surprised the Opposition is misrepresenting the benefits of the mining tax. They are standing up for the interests of a privileged few, whereas we are working to share the benefits of the boom right around the country.
We were well aware when we designed this, Lisa, that many small businesses are not incorporated, so there's two ways small businesses can benefit. If they are a company, they can get a company tax cut. Whether or not they are a company, they can have the benefit of an instant asset write-off. So if you go and buy a new thing your business needs, you can write-off the first $6,500 of it and you can do that every year. We're also providing some special benefits when you need a new motor vehicle in your small business and we know many people's small businesses actually consist of the ute, the tools and their skills as they go around the suburbs and towns of our nation plying their trades.
HOST: With the mining tax, you are not at all concerned about killing off the goose that lays the golden eggs, particularly with the slowing down of China?
PM: Not at all concerned. We know that we have more than $400 billion of investment in the pipeline. That's record-breaking any way you want to measure it. It is an incredible development in our nation's history. This, too, is a profits-based tax, so it's a better way of taxing mining companies. The average life for a mining company is that there is a long period of time where they are putting in big capital investments and they're not making any money. Then of course they start getting those vital ores out of the ground and they earn good money, good profits, and it is when they are at their most profitable that they will be paying this tax. It is actually a better way of doing it to ensure that people still want to go mining.
HOST: Small mining companies are unhappy, as you know, and Clive Palmer is threatening to challenge the tax in the High Court. Any concerns?
PM: Well Clive Palmer is a very, very, very rich man. He is a billionaire and good luck to him. But I believe as Prime Minister when I am making policy decisions in Canberra, my job isn't to make Clive Palmer better off, my job is to make sure that Australians around the nation are better off. And sharing the proceeds of the mining boom by providing tax breaks, firstly to small businesses, and then to businesses generally, and building up our stock of superannuation, is good for everyone in our country, good for our economy and good for fairness.
HOST: Has the Gina Rinehart family soap opera over the divvying up of their billions been a bit of a God-send in helping to paint mining tycoons as rich and out of touch?
PM: I'm not interested in any family matters involving Ms Rinehart. That's her business. What I am interested in is making sure at this time in our nation's history when our economy is undergoing very profound change that we get all of the policies right so everyone benefits and we are building the economy we need for the future. We've got a spectacular resources boom. We know businesses in other sectors of the economy are doing it tough. It makes sense to take some money from the turbo-charged section of the economy and share it more broadly around the nation, and that is what the mining tax does.
HOST: Prime Minister, we will have to leave it there. Thank you very much for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you Lisa. 



The Australian Government condemns in the strongest terms the murders earlier today of four people  -  a Rabbi, two of his children, and a student  -  at a Jewish school in Toulouse, France.  Another student was seriously wounded. 
Under French law, this is an act of terrorism, and under the law of humanity, this is an act of irredeemable evil. 
Our sympathies go out to the families of those who were murdered; to the Jewish community of France, which has unfortunately suffered previous acts of terrorism in France; and to the French people, who are all searching for answers in the face of such a tragedy.
We share their resolve that those responsible for this crime, and other hate crimes that have occurred recently in France, will be brought to swift and certain justice. 



PM: I'm here with Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan and with the Minister for Resources, Energy and Tourism Martin Ferguson.
Last night the Parliament finished and passed the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. The Senate passed the mining tax. That means the mining tax will come into operation on the first of July this year.
The mining tax is about ensuring that Australians get a fair share of the benefits of the resources wealth within their grounds.
It means that we will be able to provide new tax benefits to small businesses and businesses around the nation, new superannuation benefits for Australian workers increasing our pool of national savings, and it means we will be able to fund new infrastructure for mining regions.
Ultimately the big public policy decisions in national life come down to who you stand for. In determining that at this time of our nation's history we needed a mining tax, the Government determined that at this time, particularly as we see all of the changes in our economy that the resources boom is bringing, that we needed to take special measures to share the benefits of that boom.
Put simply, it meant we determined to stand for the benefits to the many, rather than to the privileged few. To shape the future, rather than to pretend that we could stand still. To make sure that we were supporting jobs, rather than doing what we have been urged by the Opposition, which is effectively to stand in the way of Australian jobs.
I'll turn to the Treasurer now for a description of the benefits that will flow from the mining tax and then we'll take questions.
TREASURER: Thanks very much, Prime Minister. 
This is a critical step in Australia's 30 year economic reform history. It ensures that all Australians will share more fairly in the resources that we own 100 per cent and it certainly gives us the opportunity to spread the benefits of a mining boom more fairly right around our country.
Tax breaks, for example, to 2.7 million small businesses right around the country.
A big boost to super for something like 8 million Australian workers. If you're a 30-year-old on average earnings, it's a boost to your super in retirement of an additional $100,000.
And, of course, a significant increase in infrastructure investment in mining communities.
Now I did want to pay tribute to the role of both the Prime Minister and also the Resources Minister, in what has been a very difficult and very strong political debate and economic debate in Australia.
Now the Prime Minister went in to bat for millions of small businesses and millions of workers. She won.
Tony Abbott went into bat for the likes of Clive Palmer and Gina Rinehart and he lost.
That's a very good thing for Australia, because what we have put in place is a policy framework that's going to enable us to spread the benefits of the mining boom right around our country.
We talk a lot about the Asian century and the Asian century is very important to Australia because it will provide opportunities, not just in resources, but right across our economy.
But at the moment, we are experiencing a mining boom because of the very strong growth in Asia. We can make this the Australian century in Asia if we maximise the opportunities that flow particularly from resources and spread them right around our country.
Because the fact is that there are great opportunities and there are great challenges and one of the challenges that comes with a mining boom is a higher dollar and of course a patchwork economy, because not every business or every worker is in the fast lane of the mining boom and that's why we must put in place the policies that the revenue stream from the MRRT is funding.
Now there's a rolled-gold case in terms of equity to do what we're doing but there's an even stronger case in terms of cutting taxation for business.
The economic stupidity of the Opposition in opposing our cuts to company taxation is simply breathtaking given the outlook that I've just gone through.
The fact is there are patchwork pressures in our economy, not all businesses are in the fast lane and that is why we do need to put in place, not just the measures that passed through the Senate last night, but the measures which will go to the House of Representatives and to the Senate in the budget session to give a tax cut to businesses right across the board.
So in the budget session there will be another opportunity to discuss what we have to do to make our economy stronger and more prosperous through further company tax reform. The fact is the Liberals have turned their back on Australian business and Australian workers and what we are doing is putting in place a range of measures, including cuts to company taxation which will strengthen our economy and strengthen employment.
JOURNALIST: Would you consider declaring the tax cuts a matter of confidence to force the Greens to support it?
PM: I think you've forgotten one big thing here, it's called the Opposition. It's called the people with the most votes in this Parliament, other than obviously the Government working with the Independents.
I mean before you give Tony Abbott a get out of jail free card on this, let's just focus on what the Liberal Party has stood for and what Tony Abbott has said it stands for across the ages and in contemporary politics. Tony Abbott has said repeatedly that he thinks company tax cuts are a good thing, but he's going to come into this parliament and vote against them. He's going to vote against the Liberal tradition of supporting business tax cuts.
We will bring these tax cuts to the Parliament, Tony Abbott can answer to the Australian people for voting to deny those tax cuts.
That means he can answer to the 2.7 million small businesses around the country. He can answer to all of the businesses around the country he seeks to deny a tax cut to.
He can answer to all of the working people around the country, because business tax cuts aren't just good for business, they're good for economic activity which means they're good for jobs and they're good for growth.
Phil.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, two questions, just separate things about the mining tax. One, are you confident of the revenue projections in the forward estimates from the mining tax and B) is a two tiered company tax system workable?
PM: Well the company tax reductions that we will bring to the Parliament will give small business an advance down payment on tax cuts. They'll get the tax cuts first, the company tax reduction. Then the tax cuts for bigger businesses will flow.
We deliberately structured it that way because we don't think it's a good thing to have a permanent difference in company tax rates, but we did believe that it was appropriate to give small businesses a head start and we continue to believe that.
We understand that not all small businesses are companies and so we've deliberately structured benefits that flow to small businesses, whether or not they're companies, including the instant asset write-off, which helps them buy new capital for their business and get a $6,500 tax break every year that they decide to buy a new capital item.
On the revenue projections I will turn to the Treasurer.
TREASURER: Yes, we certainly are confident in our revenue projections and they are revised, they were revised again in the budget update at the end of last year.
So those forecasts come from the Treasury, they have worked with the industry in terms of the industry's appreciation of the starting base, volumes and price and they're the forecasts they make.
And the forecasts are always revised, depending on what's going on with the exchange rate, volumes and price. That is just common sense.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you keep targeting the Coalition on these tax cuts. They have said they're not going to pass them, they're not going to negotiate. The Greens however say they will negotiate in the next couple of months. Will you ultimately accept a two tier tax system if, after negotiations with Bob Brown, that is the best deal you can get?
PM: Well, first and foremost, I am not going to share your analytical point.
Everybody in this Parliament bears a responsibility  -  everybody. Tony Abbott bears a responsibility. He wants to be Prime Minister of this nation, he bears a responsibility.
And in this Parliament he is going to discharge that responsibility by walking into the Parliament and voting against company tax cuts.
And so that is the central point that should be made and should be understood around the country - Tony Abbott, from the Liberal Party, voting into the Parliament to deny businesses around the country a tax cut, despite everything that has been said over decades and decades by Liberal politicians, including Mr Abbott, on the benefit of company tax reductions.
Of course, the Government will bring its legislation to the Parliament and we will work to get our legislation through.
I've taken a question about why we structured the arrangements the way we did.
We think that that is the right structure and we will be fighting for those company tax cuts.
But I think I am entitled to say, before we get into questioning about what may or may not happen when that legislation comes in May, the only reason any of those questions are being asked is because of Tony Abbott's recklessness and negativity.
He is now so negative about this nation's future, so bitterly negative about this nation's future, that he is going to walk into the Parliament and vote against a proposition you would have said was absolutely core to Liberal beliefs.
Yes, Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're absolutely entitled to say that-
PM: Yes and I just have. Love to read it in my Australian too, I'll look forward to it tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Great. I think I wrote it today.
PM: Right, well tomorrow's another day Matthew, I'll read it again.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you  -  I believe you've been asked three times now, can you though, tolerate the idea, even if  - 
PM: I've answered that question to our - the system we want is a system that gives small business a head start on the company tax reductions. We do not think it is a good system in the long term to have differential company tax rates.
JOURNALIST: The question is if the Liberals - you can't control what the Liberals do. If ultimately your legislation is not passed in such a way that gives the cuts to big business, will you - what would you do then? Are you just going to have to cop that or are you simply not prepared to contemplate the idea that you can get to that point?
PM: First and foremost, I come to these press conferences a lot and I get told at every one of them ‘gee, you won't get X or Y through'. I have put up with months and months of scoffing about the carbon price  -  guess what? It's the law of Australia today. I have put up with months and months of scoffing about the mineral resource rent tax. Guess what - it went through the Senate last night. Before we start on a process of months and months of scoffing about whether or not we will get through the company tax cuts, I think I'm entitled to go scoreboard and at the moment it's running more in my favour than yours.
Yes, at the back.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask the Prime Minister and the Treasurer, you've talked about potentially imposing effectively penalties on states if they increase their royalties further. At what point do you say ‘okay, if royalties go up from here we will cut your infrastructure payments, we will cut your GST payments' and will it be dollar for dollar? Will states have a real stick if they choose to increase royalties?
PM: I might go to the Minister for Resources on that.
MINISTER FERGUSON: The MRRT produces a revenue stream. It also provides that we will offset as a result of our agreement with the mining industry, any increase in state royalties. That offset effectively reduces the revenue stream to the Commonwealth. The state responsible for an increase in royalties can't then expect that the Commonwealth would turn around and eat into consolidated revenue to maintain the same infrastructure spend in that state or territory. It speaks for itself.
As a result of the MRRT we are absolutely committed to assisting Australian industry by reducing company taxation, the purchase of new capital equipment, increasing superannuation and investing in the future of the resources sector through investment infrastructure. The choice is for the states, because there's one thing guaranteed. Every time they increase royalties they don't invest it in resource regions. We will.
JOURNALIST: But at what point do you start doing that and how much are you willing to cut payments or cut infrastructure  -  cut GST payments or cut infrastructure payments?
PM: Well the direct question about royalties and GST has been referred to the GST review. The Minister's made the very common sense point though that state governments can't seek to have this all ways, and another very common sense point here is the minerals resource rent tax is a profits based tax. It is a more efficient way of getting and sharing the benefits of the resources wealth within our grounds than state based royalties which hit companies whether or not they're profitable.
And of course the ordinary time cycle of a resources company is they do the exploration, that's not easy. They then do the intensive capital investment that brings the resources on stream. That's a period of large expenditure and no income. Then of course they hit the period when they are profitable, they're getting the ore out of the ground, they're getting good prices for it. The minerals resource rent tax is structured understanding that is the life cycle of a resources business and so the tax is there when the business is profitable not hitting it across the board the way state based royalties do.
Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST: On infrastructure  -  withholding infrastructure money. There's a  -  correct me if I'm wrong, there's a $6 billion infrastructure fund to be funded by the tax to be paid to the states between now and 2020. Is it from that fund only that you'll withhold infrastructure money or are you prepared to go further into general purpose payments if necessary if the states test you on this?
PM: I'll turn to the Treasurer. Our ultimate aim is to work with the states to ensure that Australians get a fair share of what's in their grounds and we get a system that works well. We have also been clear with the states though that we are not going to be in a position to just see them gouge away here and to be of the view that it doesn't have consequences.
We've referred the matter to the GST review, that's important, and we'll get some advice from that review.
I'll turn to the Treasurer for some comments too.
TREASURER: Well we have referred the matter to the GST review, that is some time off. In the interim we've said that we will take it away from infrastructure payments from that fund. Okay? Thanks.
PM: Well just go Latika, Michelle and then we'll go.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, IPART has had some pretty scathing views on renewable energy targets and has called for them to be reviewed with the introduction of the carbon price. Are you willing to respond to that urgency and look at that before the white paper report's back?
PM: I'll go to the Minister.
MINISTER FERGUSON: There's already a review of the renewable energy target locked into our legislative framework model, so I'd also say in terms of the variety of clean energy programs that have existed at a state and territory level, the objective over the ensuing future is to actually rationalise them to end up with a common approach which is based on a national carbon price side by side with a renewable energy target plus a major investment in clean energy technology. That's the outcome that we have put in place, that is the appropriate outcome for the future of Australia from a clean energy perspective.
JOURNALIST: Minister, do accept that they are distorting electricity prices as IPART says?
MINISTER FERGUSON: They are very clear that there have been a variety of state and territory schemes put in place over the last decade because of a failure of the previous Howard Government to actually resolve this clean energy debate, to resolve the debate about a price on carbon.
Having now done that it is appropriate that we rationalise that set of state and territory initiatives which are like a dog's breakfast, of no benefit to industry and of no benefit to the overall economy.
PM: Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Just going back to the company tax cuts, there's been some discussion that the threshold for a small business has been set very low  -  turnover of $2 million. Are you at all open to the proposition of looking again at that threshold to raise it to, say, $5 million or something like that?
PM: Well I'm not going to answer a series of hypothetical questions. I'll restate my determination to deliver on the company tax cuts and that legislation will come to Parliament in May.
What we have achieved through our determination is the minerals resource rent tax against, yet again, a hysterical scare campaign from the Opposition acting as they do in the interests of a privileged few  -  on this occasion, taking their mining instructions from mining billionaires. So we're stared that hysterical scare campaign down. Now we've got the Opposition threatening to trash the Liberal Party brand, presumably to all cash in their Liberal Party tickets and get some other form of political party ticket and vote against company tax cuts.
Michelle, we'll do what we do in a determined fashion to deliver the right things for the nation's economic future. That includes sharing the benefits of the resources boom through these company tax cuts.
Thanks very much. 



Australia has lost one of our sporting greats with the passing of Jim Stynes this morning, following his courageous battle with cancer.
As a sporting legend Jim inspired millions with his sportsmanship, making a lasting contribution to Australia's game.
But he will always be remembered for the heroic and brave way in which he handled adversity  -  for this he will remain a legend.
Born and raised in Dublin, Jim moved to Australia in 1984 to play a foreign code, only to quickly master it.
Jim represented Melbourne Football Club for 264 AFL matches, winning his club's best and fairest award four times and the Brownlow Medal once in 1991.
But these achievements are just one segment of his extraordinary life. Jim used the opportunity AFL gave him, to become someone who changed lives.
Through his youth organisation Reach, he touched the lives of thousands of young Australians, helping them to realise their full potential.  
It was work close to his heart and work that he continued even in the face of his battle with cancer.
Jim was also a faithful servant of his beloved Melbourne Football Club.
He took on the Presidency when the club was at its lowest ebb and managed to shape a bright future and new direction for the organisation - for this they owe him a tremendous debt.
Above all, Jim was a loving husband and father who will be sorely missed by his wife, Sam, and their two children.
The thoughts of the nation are with them today as they grieve the loss of a wonderful man.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard will today announce that the Government intends to open a Consulate-General in Chengdu, the capital of China's Sichuan Province.
The announcement comes as Australia and the People's Republic of China celebrate this year their 40th anniversary of diplomatic relations.
Australia has had a diplomatic presence in China for almost 40 years. Our Embassy in Beijing was established in 1973 and our Consulates-General in Shanghai, Guangzhou and Hong Kong in 1984, 1992 and 1986 respectively.
The Prime Minister said broadening Australia's diplomatic presence in China was a priority for the Government as the Asian Century unfolded.  The new mission is a down-payment on the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper.
Today's announcement comes after careful Government consideration of an expanded diplomatic presence in Western China, led by the former Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd. 
The new Consulate-General will increase our diplomatic footprint and will help build on our ever-growing relationship with China.
The creation of the new post will also help identify and build on these opportunities for Australian businesses.
Foreign Affairs Minister Bob Carr said the Consulate-General in Chengdu will provide a direct link to a diverse province which is home to over 80 million people.
Chengdu is a major gateway to the vibrant inland regions, which account for a growing share of China's trade, foreign investment and economic growth.
Cities like Chengdu will be central to the innovative, high-skill, high-tech, higher-income growth which will drive the next stage of China's remarkable economic transformation.
Minister for Trade and Competitiveness Craig Emerson, who last year visited Chengdu while leading a 100-strong business delegation through China's inland growth centres, said the move would help strengthen and expand trade partnerships.
China is already Australia's largest two-way trade partner, with total trade valued at over $113 billion in 2010-11. 
Many Australian companies, including Bluescope Steel, Rheem, ANZ and Cochlear, are already active in western China. 
Dr Emerson said a dedicated Consulate-General in this rapidly growing region would help develop demand for the sophisticated goods and services which Australia was well placed to provide. 
Funding for the new Consulate-General will be provided for in the forthcoming budget.  The Consulate-General will be operational as soon as possible following completion of formal establishment processes with China. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard will join leaders and representatives from 52 other countries and four international organisations to participate in the Nuclear Security Summit hosted by the President of the Republic of Korea, Lee Myung-Bak, on 26 and 27 March.
The Seoul Summit will continue international efforts  to address the potential threat of nuclear terrorism, one of the gravest challenges to international security.
This Summit follows the 2010 Summit in Washington, which was the largest gathering of world leaders in the US since the 1945 founding of the United Nations.
The Washington Summit initiated international action in support of President Obama's goal to secure all vulnerable nuclear materials worldwide within four years.
The Seoul Summit will continue the momentum of international cooperation on this important objective and take stock of progress made since 2010.
Australia also has a strong record of achievement on nuclear security, non-proliferation and disarmament, including supporting the introduction of international legally-binding obligations to secure nuclear material and facilities.
In 2008, Australia partnered with Japan to establish and support the independent International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament and then again, in 2010, to establish the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative.
In keeping with the Government's proud record, the Prime Minister will take to the Seoul Summit an assurance that Australia will continue to support the strongest possible measures against the threat of nuclear terrorism.



Mr Speaker, I move that this House:
 * 	1) Affirms:			 * 			a. its support for the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons; and
		 * 			b. its support for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) as the essential foundation for the achievement of nuclear disarmament and the cornerstone of the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
 * 	2) Notes:			 * 			a. ratification by the United States and Russia of the Treaty on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (New START)  on 5 February 2011;
		 * 			b. unilateral nuclear arsenal reductions announced by France and the United Kingdom;
		 * 			c. the strong working relationship between Australia and Japan on issues of non-proliferation and disarmament, including more recently by establishing the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative to take forward the 2010 NPT Review Conference outcomes;
		 * 			d. the unanimous views presented by the Joint Standing Committee on Treaties in Report 106 on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament.
 * 	3) Calls for:			 * 			a. further cuts in all categories of nuclear weapons and a continuing reduction of their roles in national security policies;
		 * 			b. states outside the NPT to join the Treaty as non-nuclear weapon states;
		 * 			c. ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty by all states yet to do so;
		 * 			d. the immediate commencement and early conclusion of negotiations for a verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for weapons purposes;
		 * 			e. stronger international measures to address serious NPT non-compliance issues;
		 * 			f. Iran, Syria and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to cooperate fully with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and to comply with United Nations Security Council resolutions;
		 * 			g. political and financial support for a strengthened IAEA safeguards regime, including universalisation of the Additional Protocol;
		 * 			h. further investigation of the merits and risks of nuclear fuel cycle multilateralisation;
		 * 			i. exploration of legal frameworks for the abolition of nuclear weapons, including the possibility of a nuclear weapons convention, as prospects for multilateral disarmament improve;
		 * 			j. efforts to establish a Middle East zone free from weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems, freely arrived at by all regional states.
		 * 			k. efforts to reduce the threat of nuclear terrorism within the framework of the IAEA and the Nuclear Security Summits.
		 * 			 
Mr Speaker, nuclear weapons are a reality in our world ... a real challenge to our resolve to build a better world.
A challenge which needs to be faced by all nations ... one not to be ignored ... and one Australia cannot and will not ignore.
We are realistic about eliminating nuclear weapons.
It will be difficult, it will take time and ultimately, it will require a stable international security environment. 
But it can be done. 
Indeed, progress has been made: there are many fewer nuclear warheads in the world today than there were in 1989.
This is why Australia supports the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the International Atomic Energy Agency and the disarmament initiatives of the United Nations and the Nuclear Weapon States themselves.
Why Australia supports the United Nations Security Council's measures against the nuclear programs of Iran and North Korea.
Why Australia has our own sanctions targeting the programs of proliferation in these countries.
Why we are introducing additional sanctions measures against Iran, comparable to those of the EU.
And why we urge Iran to comply with its United Nations Security Council and IAEA obligations.
Why Australia also actively supports the Financial Action Task Force and other international measures to combat the financing of WMD proliferation.
And why Australia supports President Obama's call to secure all vulnerable nuclear materials by 2014  -  and the commitments made at the 2010 Nuclear Security Summit in Washington.
Because these measures have made a difference and because they continue to do so.
Australia has made a difference in past years.
Including through our leading role in the negotiation of major international arms control instruments such as the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty and the IAEA's Additional Protocol.
We have a strong and longstanding record of activism and achievement on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
In 1972, when we joined with New Zealand at the International Court of Justice in actions against nuclear testing in the Pacific.
In 1995, when we established the Canberra Commission on the elimination of nuclear weapons.
In 2008, when with Japan we established and supported the independent International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament (ICNND).
In 2010 when we again partnered with Japan to establish the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative.
We take our nuclear obligations seriously.
That is why Australia exports uranium only for peaceful purposes, under the strictest safeguards  -  now and into the future.
And why we will make a difference again next week, combating the threat of nuclear terrorism, when I participate with other world leaders at the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit.
I commend the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Treaties, including its Chair, the Member for Wills, for their tireless advocacy of non-proliferation and disarmament that led to this motion.
Now, today, this Parliament, with this motion, can state our ambition to make a difference in future years too.
That is why I move this motion.
And that is why I welcome the fact the Leader of the Opposition will second it as well.
A world without nuclear weapons is a long-term commitment ... we may not see it in the time of any of us in this House.
But one day, our successors should say of nuclear fear: the threat has passed; the game is over; never again.  
I commend this motion to the House.



Two young Australians will be given the ability to study at the top universities in the world each year, through scholarships announced in honour of Sir Zelman Cowen.
Sir Zelman understood the power of education to change people's lives for the better.
His own academic achievements were substantial: he completed two Honours degrees in arts and law at Melbourne University, and enjoyed a life-changing experience as a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford in the 1940s.
Returning to Australia, he became a Professor and Dean of Law and Vice-Chancellor of two universities, New England and Queensland, before becoming Governor-General in 1977.
The Government will honour those achievements and pay tribute to the memory of Sir Zelman, by helping young Australians to progress their own education.
The Sir Zelman Cowen John Monash scholarship program will help two young Australians each year to study at the highest level overseas at the world's top universities.
Lady Cowen and the Cowen family joined the Prime Minister and Her Excellency, The Governor-General, to launch the scholarships in Parliament House today.
The Government has worked with the General Sir John Monash Foundation to create the scholarships, following the death of Sir Zelman in December. The Foundation currently runs the Monash Awards for postgraduate study at non-Australian universities.
The Government has made a special one-off grant of $6 million to the Foundation Endowment Fund to provide for the two Zelman Cowen scholarships in perpetuity.
These scholarships will allow the nation to lastingly remember the work and life of this great Australian. 



Holden has been a proud part of our nation's story for more than a century. It's an Australian icon. But the truth is in January this year we were at real risk that there would be no more Holden in Australia, that we wouldn't have Holden here producing motor vehicles. Now that wasn't acceptable to me as Prime Minister and it wasn't the right thing for the nation's future. It would have been a knock-out blow for manufacturing in this country given the importance of the auto industry to all of manufacturing.
So, I'm pleased to be here today with the Premier, with Minister Combet, with Holden and Mike, to announce some good news. And the good news is that the future of General Motors is now secure in this country for the next decade.
Holden will be here in Australia producing cars for at least the next 10 years. That's great news. And it's as a result of a more than $1 billion co-investment between the Federal Government, the South Australian Government, the Victorian Government and of course Holden, which is investing strongly in the future of manufacturing Holden cars here in Australia.
So this is a great day for Australian car-making, to be able to announce that Holden will be here for the next decade and we've been able to secure that by working together. But I also want to say it's a good day for smart policy, because it is smart policy to ensure that we shape the future, that it's not shaped around us. And the high Australian dollar, the aftermath of the global financial crisis, current global economic circumstances could have shaped the future for us and that future would have been one without Holden in this country.
Instead of letting the future be shaped, we've taken the active decisions to make sure we determine what the future is. And that future will be one in which Holden continues to make cars here. It will be a future of more innovation. It will be a future of high-skill, high-value manufacturing and as a result of this co-investment, we'll see two new Holden vehicles generated here. Next-generation vehicles which are cleaner and greener than the Holdens of the past. They'll be smart, clean cars but the most important thing here today is they will have on them "Made in Australia." They will have been made right here.
This is a co-investment in every sense of the word. Between the Federal, South Australian and Victorian Governments, we are making an investment of $275 million. That joins with a more than billion-dollar investment from Holden to secure the future and because of the multiplier effect of making cars in this country, Holden's estimate is that that will generate more than $4 billion of value to the Australian economy.
This is truly a strategic co-investment not a handout. And if anybody has any doubt about the importance of the car industry to our country and to manufacturing, I suggest that they talk to the people from Holden who are here today. The people who represent the highly skilled workforce at Holden, the people who make these great cars. And they'll be able to tell you about the high skills that are generated in the car industry, they will be able to tell you about the importance of car making to thousands of jobs in car component companies all across the supply chain and they'll be able to tell you too about the importance of those skills to other manufacturing enterprises.
This is an industry that employs more than 50,000 people. It's central to the jobs of 200,000 others. That means that it's a vital component of our economy and it's a crucible of new skills and new technologies.
Now we live in what is a tough global environment with a strong Australian dollar ,and that means we're in a time of change and a time of transformation. What this announcement proves today is during that time of transformation we can be a country that successfully manufactures right here. We can be a country that seizes the opportunity that is going to flow from what I have called the Asian Century, a century in which we will see spectacular growth in our region and new opportunities for the Australian economy.
So I'd like to thank Mike for the work that we've been able to do with Holden to secure today's announcement. I'd like to thank Ministers Combet and Carr for their work on today's announcement. I'd like to thank Ian Jones too and the union representatives who are here, people who represent a highly skilled workforce who have wanted to work with us to secure the future, and Premier Weatherill, thank you for playing your part and I'd like to acknowledge too the contribution of the Victorian Government.
Thank you very much.  



The Gillard, Weatherill and Baillieu Governments today announced a $275 million co-investment in the future of GM Holden's car making operations in Australia.
In return for this investment, Holden has agreed to inject over $1 billion into car manufacturing in Australia, and to make two next generation vehicles here that will be cheaper to run and better for the environment.
This partnership will see GM Holden continue making cars in Australia until at least 2022.
The high Australian dollar and strong competition from other countries in our region are putting strain on our automotive industry, and GM Holden had considered closing its entire design and manufacturing operations in Australia.
Through hard work and extensive negotiations we have struck an agreement that will see the company maintain a strong manufacturing presence in Australia for at least 10 more years.
The Prime Minister said the Federal Government's contribution would be $215 million, funded under the existing $5.4 billion New Car Plan for a Greener Future.
This funding is not a hand-out  -  it is a strategic investment that will boost our economy, foster innovation, build new business opportunities and promote adoption of new fuel-saving and safety technologies.
Holden has estimated that the new investment package will return around $4 billion to the Australian economy.
Most importantly, this co-investment will support thousands of jobs at Holden that would have been lost if the company had stopped making cars in Australia. 
It will also support thousands of secondary jobs in key automotive component manufacturers who supply parts to GM Holden, many of which are in regional Australia.
The automotive industry employs 55,500 people across every State and the ACT and supports around 200,000 additional jobs nationally.
With a shift to global car platforms there will be increased pressure on Australian component manufacturers  -  but there will also be opportunities for these firms to win new business in global supply chains if they are competitive.
As part of the agreement, Holden will create a new Suppliers' Working Group to help Australian suppliers sell into its world-wide supply chains.
Additionally, the Gillard and Baillieu Governments will provide an extra $35 million for the Automotive New Markets Initiative, a new program to help firms in the automotive supply chain move into export markets and supply their products to other industries, with a Federal contribution of $25 million.
The pressures on the automotive sector are likely to see restructuring in the coming period which is why the Government will also provide $15.6 million to extend the labour market element of the Automotive Industry Structural Adjustment Program to provide training and employment services for workers leaving the auto sector. 



PM: A great day, a great announcement. I'm sure you've got some questions, so we'll take questions on Holden.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, where is this money coming from?
PM: It's coming from the $5.4 billion New Car Plan, it's a very important investment for the future. As I said just a few moments ago, the choice we faced earlier this year was whether or not Holden would continue to be here in Australia. Whether we'd have the jobs, whether we'd have the skills, whether we'd have the innovation that comes with having Holden right here in Australia through the announcement that we've made together today we know Holden will be here through to 2022, a decade of transformation and change.
We're dealing with different global economic conditions than the past. A high Australian dollar, an Australian dollar that's going to be around parity with the US, that puts pressure on but we've responded to that. We're going to see manufacturing here with two new generation motor vehicles produced right here in Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, was that put directly to the Government, that Holden could pull out of Australia if this investment wasn't made?
PM: It's the no secret that at the time, when Premier Weatherill and then Minister Kim Carr, then being the Minister for this portfolio, were over in the United States speaking to Holden, that it was a very real possibility that there would be no more Holden manufacturing in this country.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, these two new models, are they going to be designed and built in Australia, or are they just part of the global platform of GM?
PM: I'll get Mr Holden to talk about the models, Mike.
MIKE DEVEREUX: Absolutely. So these are two new global architectures that we'll be putting into the Adelaide assembly plant. In terms of the engineering of those products, one of the things that we're going to transition over time is what we have our engineers globally doing.
And gone are the days when you can engineer a car for one country and hope for that to be economically feasible, so we'll putting our engineering and design talent to work, as they already are in terms of the Camaro.
You've seen some of the product of our engineering organisation that never even gets sold in this country. We'll continue to work on global products in Port Melbourne and frankly, as Prime Minister Gillard said, be part of that new reality in the global auto industry.
JOURNALIST: Will all of the current models continue to be made at Port Elizabeth?
DEVEREUX: Pardon me?
JOURNALIST: Will all of the current models being made at Port Elizabeth continue to be made?
DEVEREUX: Yeah, one of the tough things - and we talk about this quite a bit, as we have been negotiating this package, is you're looking out into the second half of this decade.
So from a commercial sensitivity standpoint, the last thing I want to do is tell Ford, Toyota, Nissan, Honda, what my plans are.
So I'm not trying to be evasive, but really commercial in confidence.
JOURNALIST: Commodore is an iconic brand in this country, as you know, what about the prospect for Commodore? Will it survive?
DEVEREUX: Well the next-gen Commodore actually is launching next year, so we're going to focus on getting our VF Commodore into the Adelaide plant.
It's a fantastic new upgrade for that model and we'll talk about five years from now, maybe a little bit closer to five years from now.
JOURNALIST: You haven't given up on Commodore?
DEVEREUX: Absolutely not.
PM: I think what Mike is saying is with some enthusiasm you'll be able to go to one of those car shows where they whip the sheet off the new model and that's the first time you see it.
Yes. Phil.
JOURNALIST: Would you like to see, Prime Minister, Commodores continue to be made and their (inaudible) guaranteed?
PM: Look, Mike is the person to talk to you about future models. What's vital for me, as Prime Minister of this country, is that we have a strong manufacturing sector, with all of the jobs and skills and innovation that comes with that.
And car making is so vital to the continuation of manufacturing employing more than a million Australians, so why we have been involved in this is we understand how important auto is to the whole of manufacturing.
We understand how important it is to jobs and we wanted to hold those skills and that capacity for innovation in our nation and we have.
Phil.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this funding - are future governments, Labor or Liberal, contractually bound to deliver this co-investment?
PM: We'll certainly be entering into agreements with Holden with all of the details of what we've worked through, but you're raising with me the opposite view and the opposite view is that you would have slashed half a billion dollars out of the fund that has made this possible.
If you cut half a billion dollars then you can't fund today's announcement. Today's announcement a total package of $275 million, could not be funded if you were hacking away at the support to the Australian car making industry and that's exactly Tony Abbott's plan, to hack away at that support, though this industry employs more than 50,000 Australians and supports the job of 200,000 Australians across the supply chains.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the co-investment model now a permanent model or will this be the last time you could (inaudible)?
PM: We as, a Government, consider co-investment depending on the outcome for Australians and when we see a co-investment that means jobs, means the continuation of manufacturing here, means that what is an icon manufacturer in Australia, like Holden, continues with all of the feed in to the economy, the supply chain, skills and innovation that that makes possible then we are prepared to be involved.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Treasury Secretary said in February, Martin Parkinson, said if you replace quotas and tariffs with other interventions, no matter whether to create national champions or support so-called strategic industries, you're replacing producer interests (inaudible) consumers, it's still akin to protection. How does this fit with what Mr Parkinson says?
PM: Well, we see these kind of investments made around the world and they're made around the world for good reason, because of the benefits that flow from having car making in your nation.
Now, I want to see us be a world in which, as a great trading nation, we can continue to exploit all of our skills and all of our capacities and end up being a huge winner in this Asian century, that's the future for Australia that I see - high skills, high wage, great opportunities for export in the growing region of the world in which we live.
In order to do that we've got to make sure we've got a strong manufacturing sector as well as services booming and resources booming. We want to be an economy with many sources of strength and that's what today's announcement is about.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, and Premier Weatherilll as well, you talk about the value of this package for jobs. What sort of numbers are you talking about? Do you have increased jobs or are you talking about protecting jobs that are already in the sector?
PM: The basic rule here for people to think about is we are in a circumstance where Holden could have gone, all of those jobs could have gone, or we could have worked together to secure Holden for the future. That's what we've done.
Holden will be here for the next decade at least.
JOURNALIST: Minister Combet mentioned steps will be taken to help Holden compete with a parity dollar. Can you outline what steps are going to be taken to allow Holden to compete?
PM: The basis of these discussions is that Holden will be here for the next decade at least and it will be making cars and competing in economic circumstances where we expect the Australian Dollar to be round about parity with the US dollar.
That means the business model they are working with now has to take that into account.
Now that's different from any other period in our nation's history. I mean, we're all - well, Joe's a bit younger than me - but we're all old enough to remember when the Aussie dollar routinely traded just over 60 cents against the US dollar. We're all old enough to remember that.
We've seen a sharp appreciation in our currency against the US dollar. Now that's as a result of our economy being strong and it's got its tremendous up sides. It literally means everything we earn and everything we own is worth more in the eyes of the world than it was before and many Australians are directly experiencing that as they choose to take overseas holidays which are comparatively cheaper for them to do.
But it's got tremendous pressures which flow too. Pressures which flow on manufacturing and which are at risk of breaking business models that have been factored with the Australian dollar at 80 or 85 cents against the US dollar.
That's meant great manufacturers have had to rethink their business model. It's a time of transformation and change. Holden's up for that transformation and change and continuing to manufacture here and employ people here and we're working with them to do it.
JOURNALIST: A question for Mike. How is Holden (inaudible) from July 1 and how much (inaudible) average price of a Commodore?
DEVEREUX: The whole notion around efficiency, and that's really what Prime Minister Gillard was just talking about, as a business person - and I'm sure lot of people listening to this event and listening to us talk right now say, well what is it all about in term of being able to compete in a new reality of a parity dollar.
Well what it means is that John Camillo, John Gee, Ian Jones, all of our union partners, along with Holden, have to be able to have a profitable business model for the long-term with the set of economic conditions that we've got right now.
Now our earnings will be announced in about a month or so's time and at that point in time I'd be happy to even talk a little more about how it is that we can actually be able to transform our business model to be viable for the long-term, because that's exactly what we're doing here.
JOURNALIST: Mr Devereux, there was some concern a couple of months ago about design jobs in Melbourne. Will any of those jobs be lost or will this package save those jobs?
DEVEREUX: The notion of what we're going to do with both our engineering and our design organisation is that there's a bright future for both of those groups.
Not only will we work on things that we happen to manufacture in this country, but we're also going to be working on things not just for North America, but as Prime Minister Gillard says, this is the Asian century. There's no debating it, there's no doubt about it and we need to connect ourselves much more directly to some of the massive growth markets that we've got not only in China, but in places like India and the ASEAN region, so without disclosing the types of products that we're actually going to be designing and engineering, we will be much more tightly connected to GM's international operations for design and engineering going forward.
JOURNALIST: So will there be any jobs lost beyond what you've already announced in past months?
DEVEREUX: Well, Premier Weatherill and I have just been talking about this this morning and the funny thing about it is if you can tell me what the Australian Dollar is going to be seven, eight, nine years from now, what my all competitors are going to do in terms of launching cars, how many cars might be sold in Australia, what interest rates are going to be, I might be able to tell you how many vehicles I'd be able to produce, and therefore how many employees that I might have.
If I knew that I certainly wouldn't be running a car company. I don't think any of us would be doing what we're doing today.
JOURNALIST: In the short term though, will any jobs be lost?
DEVEREUX: Again, it's going to be a decision at the time. Right now we think we have a pretty strong business model. We're proud of our workforce in Adelaide and the entire Holden team and we're going to run a smart business to make money for the long-term.
PM: Just before we take any further questions, can I just, building on what Mike said, as a Government we've spoken a lot to the Australian people about this Asian century, about the pressures in our economy now that are being brought by a high Aussie dollar, but about the opportunities for the long term.
Here today I think you can touch and feel a bit more what that means. This a business that has experienced pressure.
They've never had a business model before for car making in this country, where you foresee that the Australian Dollar is going to be around about parity the US dollar, but even in those circumstances, we can continue to do great things in manufacturing and even in the days when that pressure is on you can see remarkable opportunities in the future as our region grows and we are right here with the opportunities and capacities to exploit that growth.
Now to get there means you've got to get a set of major economic decisions right, everything from bringing the budget to surplus, to making sure we've got the benefits of new technology like the NBN, to getting your skill settings right, to seizing a clean energy future.
And that's precisely what the Government's been doing.
Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST: In a budgetary sense, the Commonwealth's contribution, which years is that going to be paid to Holden (inaudible)?
PM: Look, I'll go to Minister Combet, but the allocation is from the $5.4 billion New Car Plan and obviously we have partnered with the South Australian Government and Victorian Government.
MINISTER COMBET: The straight forward answer to that, Phil, is that from the announcement today, negotiations now pick up, if you like, with General Motors Holden for the terms of the contract that will be entered into and obviously in partnership with the South Australian Government and Victorian Governments as well.
And that will establish the milestones, the conditions, if you like, against which the contract payments will be made by Government.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PREMIER WEATHERILL: I think the better example is the Cruze, where there was a co-investment program, which has secured the future of Holdens. And so we're here today talking about the future of Holdens because it still exists.
I think that's the critical issue here. What we were faced with was a base case proposition of the closure of Holden. We did some modelling on that and the estimates were up to 16,000 jobs would be lost in South Australia.
So not only the jobs within Holden, but all of those associated component manufacturers, and of course the multiplier effects throughout South Australian economy, having a dramatic effect on South Australian revenues and of course our economic growth.
And perhaps more critically, stripping out a manufacturing base, which would mean it would be very difficult to achieve our ambition of an advanced manufacturing sector.
One of the things that we firmly believe is that without a manufacturing sector it's almost impossible to build one. So it's absolutely crucial that we secure a future for Holdens and obviously a lot of this program is about changing the way in which our car manufacturing industry operates, so that it has a secure future not just for the next 10 years, but beyond that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is that it for industry assistance for the car industry? Do you rule out Ford and Toyota coming back to you looking for more money as well?
PM: Look, we've worked with Ford and you would have seen a package we announced earlier this year. We've work would Toyota too. But we've got an ongoing program to engage with the car industry. That's why we created it New Car Plan.
JOURNALIST: Longer term, do you think that your car package will mean that in 10 years time Holden won't need further assistance or is it simply that Australia is not good at making cars without Government assistance-
PM: I think that's a completely ridiculous proposition. We are incredibly good at making cars.
We have in incredibly highly skilled workers, we have good productivity in our vehicle manufacturing industry and a business like Holden, that could put its manufacturing anywhere in the world, can make choices, global company, can put its manufacturing anywhere in the world, has chosen to keep manufacturing here because we're good at making cars and because we've taken the co-investment approach.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I'm not sure if you've been asked about it, but Clive Palmer's comments on the CIA and the Greens campaign, any thoughts on that?
PM: Well I think the attitude of the Government to that was made clear in question time yesterday.
I'd have to say what concerns me more about Mr Palmer is when he speaks as the ventriloquist the words come out of Tony Abbott's mouth.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Bob Carr, his comments on the Brazilian student's death, was he merely just not across his brief or was it just an unfortunate- he didn't know what was happening? 
PM: Look, I've seen reports of this today and I've seen Ms Bishop's comments and I just want to say I think it is really very inappropriate to be playing some politics around the death of a very young man.
Thanks very much. 



South Australia has become the third state to sign up to tougher regulations for future coal seam gas and large coal mining projects.
SA has signed up to the Gillard Government's National Partnership Agreement on Coal Seam Gas and Large Coal Mining.
This means all environmental approvals and licensing developments for coal seam gas and large coal mining developments in South Australia will be based on rigorous scientific evidence.
The National Partnership Agreement specifies $150 million for a new Independent Expert Scientific Committee, to:
 * 	Provide governments with expert scientific advice on CSG and large coal mining development proposals that are likely to have a significant impact on water resources;
 * 	Commission public research and bioregional assessments in areas of high CSG and/or large coal mining developments in order to improve scientific knowledge and understanding of the impacts of these developments, both in specific locations and on water resources more broadly; and
 * 	Make public its advice and the findings of all research undertaken.
The Agreement strengthens the regulation of CSG and large coal mining developments that may have an impact on water resources.
Coal seam gas and coal can bring huge opportunities  -  both in investment and job creation - but it is important to maintain community confidence in these developments.
The new Committee will fill the gaps in scientific understanding about the impacts of these developments, and underpin the safe and reliable expansion of the industry.
The Prime Minister wrote to the Premiers of NSW, Qld, Vic, SA and the Chief Minister of the NT in November asking them to sign on to the Agreement.
The Queensland Government signed up to the Agreement on February 14, followed by the NSW Government on March 7.
The Government will continue to work cooperatively with other states and territories. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today marked another step toward the establishment of a comprehensive cancer centre in the Central Coast of NSW with the pouring of concrete for one of three radiation oncology bunkers at the new Central Coast Regional Cancer Service.
The Gillard Government has committed $28.59 million to the project along with a $10 million contribution from the NSW Government.
The regional cancer centre will include a comprehensive radiation therapy and associated cancer service facility at Gosford, and a satellite multidisciplinary clinic and day oncology unit at Wyong Hospital to provide the full spectrum of cancer services including prevention and screening, treatment palliative and support care for local people.
Construction began on the Cancer Centre in July 2011 and the project is expected to be complete by March 2013.
The Government has allocated $670 million to projects to help close the gap in outcomes for patients in regional areas and are in the process of constructing 24 Regional Cancer Centres.
Eighteen of the projects are now under construction have early works underway or are in the design phase.
Labor's health reforms are also providing more health services closer to home, with more than 60 GP Super Clinics, including the Southern Central Coast GP Super Clinic in Robertson, more than 400 primary health care infrastructure grants, 4,600 practice nurses, and telehealth consultations.
The Gillard Government is delivering better health outcomes for Australians who live in rural and regional Australia  -  better access to services, infrastructure and more health professionals on the ground. 



PM: [audio break] watching the concrete being poured for the Cancer Centre here at this hospital, so it's a day of achievement, another milestone in bringing a cancer centre here to Gosford.
And that's going to make a big difference to this community, because at the moment people have to travel to get cancer treatment, go to Newcastle or go to Sydney, with all of the additional stress and strain that means for them, at what is already a difficult time of their lives.
So, having seen the concrete poured today, we're going to see a centre up and operating next year, something that's been achieved with almost $30 million of Federal Government money and a contribution from the State Government.
This is part of the new health infrastructure that we're bringing to the Central Coast. It includes a rehabilitation centre at Woy Woy, as well as a GP Super Clinic here in Gosford. And it's a real pleasure to work alongside Deb as she advocates for this community and we're able to make a difference to health infrastructure here in this community.
All week in Parliament we've been talking about our Labor vision of the future, our plan to make sure that our national prosperity is used to benefit the many, not the few. To make sure that the vast mass of Australians  -  working people, retirees - get to see the benefits of national prosperity.
And that's one of the things that we can say here today is being achieved with this new health infrastructure.
And of course across the parliamentary week too, we've been debating economic matters like our plan to ensure that small businesses get new tax benefits.
We're very determined that in this age of mining prosperity, a resources boom, that that money is shared around the country and shared by small businesses who struggle, who work hard, who give their fellow Australians a job and who deserve a tax break to help them do that.
I'll hand over now to Deb and then we'll be happy to take your questions.
O'NEILL: Well I'm delighted to have the Prime Minister here in, what I always say in Parliament, is the best seat in the nation. It's such a beautiful place to live but sadly people figured that out some time before a lot of the infrastructure came into being, and that's why it's so important that this Federal Labor Government understands the needs of regions such as ours and is investing in the essential health infrastructure that we need.
To have seen the bunkers poured today and to know the community support that's been behind persuading the Federal Government, the Labor Government, to commit $28 million to getting that off the ground is a great achievement.
I'm absolutely delighted that that has happened today, the sun's shining and it's quite symbolic of, I think, the bright future for health here on the coast.
Also, I'll be taking the Prime Minister very shortly with me down to the seniors' concert down in Woy Woy and I know that entire community is delighted that it's $22 million of Federal funding along with $5 million from the State that's going to bring life back into our Woy Woy rehabilitation centre, and of course the investment of $7 million in a GP Super Clinic.
This is a practical action, our Prime Minister getting the job done for ordinary Australians, making sure that there is benefit for the very many people in the community who need access to public health services.  Thank you.
PM: And I want to reassure I am not singing at the event we're going to next. I will say a few words but no singing for me. So, who's got a question?
JOURNALIST: Craig Thomson's been embroiled in another scandal this morning, trying to interfere with a local government plan for a job centre. Are you confident that, in his position?
PM: Look, there's been a long-running issue here on the Central Coast about youth unemployment and about access to training, so as a Labor Government for a long period of time we've wanted to see better access to training for young people and indeed for adults who missed out on education earlier in their lives.
So there's been a proposal considered over some time about a Central Coast training facility. It has had some difficulties and the relevant government department is continuing to work through those.
So, as for Mr Thomson, he has been involved, of course, as a local member in advocating for this facility which we allocated some money towards at the 2010 election.
But we do need to resolve some present issues between the proponents of the facility to get it done for the people of the Central Coast.
JOURNALIST: Joe Hockey has expressed reservations a Federal Government's plan to inject a quarter of a billion dollars into Holden (inaudible) small businesses are being left out (inaudible)
PM: The only political party in Federal politics leaving small businesses out is the political party that Joe Hockey's a member of.
The Coalition, the Liberal and the National Party, have determined to vote against tax breaks for small businesses. They're asked to consider a really simple proposition  -  do you think big mining companies that are making huge profits should keep all of that money, or should a share of that be used to help small business? We say yes, Joe Hockey says no.
On support for Holden, I'm not surprised that Mr Hockey's indicating he doesn't support car worker jobs. The Opposition saying no to everything, is saying no to supporting car worker jobs and they've cut by half a billion dollars, or have a plan to cut by half a billion dollars, the very pool of funds we've used to support Holden.
So our vision of the economy here is that we need manufacturing, we need our great manufacturing companies like Holden doing everything they do, training up workers, bringing the innovation.
But we also need vibrant small businesses and that's why we've got a plan for both.
Working with Holden, to hold it in Australia for the next generation; working with small businesses to make sure that they get a tax break and a helping hand.
JOURNALIST: Bob Carr last night said that we should restrict immigration to preserve the environment. Do you agree with that?
PM: On immigration, the government makes decisions a piece at a time, so what we do is we look at the economic circumstances in our nation and set our immigration targets so that they best work with the nation's need for skilled labour.
Now none of that should ever be an excuse for not investing in the skills and capacities of Australians, which is why as a Government we've been so focussed, so incredibly focussed on investing in early childhood education, school education, universities and now we have a big new package for skills, including new HECS arrangements for skills to help people get those more expensive qualifications without being immediately out of pocket.
So our focus on immigration is on what the nation needs.
JOURNALIST: Are you backing negotiations with the Malaysian Government on offshore processing?
PM: Look, we want to secure arrangements to process asylum seekers offshore.
There's one person stopping us doing that and it's no surprise who it is. It's Tony Abbott because he says no to everything, including no to offshore processing of asylum seekers.
JOURNALIST: So you're not currently in-
PM: -We have a concluded agreement with Malaysia. We can't enact it because Tony Abbott is saying no.
JOURNALIST: What about (inaudible) in the Queensland election? The latest polls look like a swing towards Campbell Newman.
PM: Look, I certainly wish Premier Anna Bligh well as she goes into Election Day in Queensland tomorrow.
I've worked with Anna Bligh and she has achieved a remarkable amount for the people of Queensland.
Education's very close to my heart, and one thing that Anna Bligh's achieved in the recent period is creating a prep year in schooling for Queensland kids.
Queensland kids were getting a year less schooling than kids around the nation, which was only ever going to leave them behind.
Anna Bligh's stepped up and fixed that as well as stepping up when Queensland faced its darkest days during the summer of natural disasters.
So I've got all good wishes for Anna Bligh as she goes into Election Day tomorrow, and we'll see what the people of Queensland decide.
JOURNALIST: Do you feel Mr Abbott overstepped the mark when he said you have a target on your head? Do you accept his apology?
PM: Look, Mr Abbott's words are a matter for Mr Abbott.
Thanks very much. 



Young Australians will be given help to achieve their education, community and sporting goals, through the creation of new scholarships in honour of Jim Stynes.
Jim Stynes was a man who inspired AFL fans across the nation. But off the football field, Jim was also a man who fought for a better life for thousands of Australian kids.
Today we honour that legacy, with the creation of the Jim Stynes Achievement Scholarships.
In partnership with the AFL, these scholarships will help young Australians to realise their potential.
Jim courageously held up his number 37 guernsey at the start of his battle with cancer.  Today, we're holding up 37 scholarships a year for young kids who come from indigenous or multicultural backgrounds, or suffer from disadvantage and need a leg up in life.
These scholarships will build on the remarkable work that is done at Reach, by helping each recipient achieve their education, community or sporting goals.
We want to see kids reach for their dreams.
The Gillard Government will provide $3 million to establish the Jim Stynes Achievement Scholarships. As a partner in the program, the AFL will provide an annual contribution of $150,000 a year for the next five years. The scholarships will be administered by Reach and the AFL in partnership with the Government.
Through these scholarships, Jim will continue to inspire some of our most disadvantaged children to gain confidence and find their place in the world.   



The Government has today released the unclassified version of the report from the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security's Inquiry into the actions of Australian Government agencies in relation to the arrest and detention overseas of Mr Mamdouh Habib from 2001 to 2005.
The Inspector-General, Dr Vivienne Thom, conducted the inquiry following a request from the Prime Minister in December 2010. Dr Thom provided her report to the Prime Minister on 19 December 2011.
The report indicates that no Australian official was found to be involved or complicit in any alleged mistreatment or relocation of Mr Habib while he was detained overseas. However, the report also makes clear that some whole-of-government mechanisms and processes could have worked better. 
The Government has carefully considered the report's findings, and accepted five of the report's six recommendations, which strengthen policies and procedures to ensure proper treatment of Australians detained overseas.
New policies will enhance monitoring and reporting processes regarding an individual's ability to communicate with Australian officials or legal representatives, provide guidelines to mitigate the risk of inhumane or cruel treatment, and formalise reporting processes where officials become aware or suspect that an Australian detained overseas is being mistreated. Those processes will also enhance decision-making procedures surrounding the passing of material to foreign governments where it may subsequently be used in improper questioning of any individual, irrespective of their nationality.
Many of these changes are already being implemented by the relevant agencies. 
The Government has not accepted a recommendation proposing that government agencies prepare an apology to Mrs Maha Habib for failing to keep her properly informed of Mr Habib's welfare and circumstances.  We are satisfied that Australian agencies and officials performed their duties faithfully in the difficult and unprecedented environment in the aftermath of the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks. We note also that there were considerable constraints on access to detainees, including Mr Habib, in Guantanamo Bay.
Since 2007, the Government has enhanced oversight mechanisms by establishing an Independent National Security Legislation Monitor and extending the powers of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security to conduct inquiries into agencies outside the Australian intelligence community.
The commissioning of this Inquiry and the release of the report underlines the Government's commitment to transparency and oversight of the activities of our national security agencies.
Separately, the Government has already enhanced coordination across government to respond to any similar incidents in future through the establishment of a protocol to ensure a better coordinated response.
A copy of the report, with details of all recommendations, can be found at www.igis.gov.au/inquiries/index.cfm



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today congratulated Campbell Newman and the LNP on their comprehensive win in the Queensland election.
The Prime Minister also congratulated Anna Bligh, who led a hard fought campaign and has served the people of Queensland as Premier for over four and a half years.
Anna Bligh is a hugely talented leader who has worked hard each and every day to deliver Labor reforms for her state.
Anna created a prep year in the school system to make sure Queensland kids didn't fall behind the rest of the nation from the very start of their schooling life.
As Premier, Anna also helped secure record mining investments and generate almost 100,000 jobs for the people of Queensland since the last election.
Just over 12 months ago, Anna showed her true strengths as a leader when she led Queenslanders though the worst floods and cyclone the state has ever seen, and since then, she has committed herself to the reconstruction task to make sure Queensland got back on its feet again.
A special mention must also go to former QLD Premier Peter Beattie who also played a vital role in transforming Queensland into the "smart state" it is today- a place where people want to live and businesses want to invest.
The Gillard Government has a big reform agenda and we will deliver for Queenslanders working with the new LNP Government in areas such as health, education, skills, infrastructure and the rollout of the NBN as we build a strong economy for the future. 



Prof Jeong Kap-young,President of Yonsei University.
Mr Kim Woo-sang, President of the Korea Foundation.
Distinguished guests and friends.
It is an honour to be here for my third visit to your beautiful country as Australia's Prime Minister.
And it is inspiring to gather with you here at Yonsei, one of Asia's most prestigious universities.
So much of Korea's destiny has been shaped by the young people whose education was found within these walls.
Of course, this is also home to a Centre for Australian Studies, so generously hosted by your university since 2008.
I cannot think of a better place to speak on the economic opportunities and security responsibilities that lie ahead for our nations  -  and I could not have chosen a better time for such reflections, following our Friendship Year celebrating 50 years of diplomatic relations between us
Australians and Koreans are indeed friends.
Australian missionaries and Korean people shared their faith in Busan a hundred and thirty years ago.
Korean and Australian soldiers shared their sacrifice defending this very city against aggression sixty years ago.
I will never forget being in Korea last year to mark the anniversary of the Battle of Kapyong  -  and to pay tribute to the courage that Koreans and Australians shared under fire in those dark days.
And today, in better times, Australians and Koreans share so many human connections: as migrants, as business partners, as students, and as tourists.
At any one point, we estimate there are 150,000 Koreans in Australia  -  residents, students and tourists.
Australia and Korea are friends  -  and we are partners.
We are two dynamic peoples, each seeking prosperity based on economic reform and productivity growth.
Two competitive
Two absolutely authentic democracies, each with transparent and accountable governments.
Two middle powers, sharing a strategic outlook, multilaterally engaged, constructive citizens in international society.
And two US allies, each committed to a stable and prosperous Asia-Pacific, free from conflict between states.
That is how I come to address you today  -  as a friend and a partner.
But more, I come to address you as respected neighbours.
Australians in Asia are not strangers.
This is our neighbourhood.
We have brought a spirit of engagement, of openness, of adaptation and learning to our relations in Asia over many decades now.
And the hard numbers measure how much we've changed.
In trade alone, between around 1950 and 1990, Australia's exports into Asia grew to about half of our total exports.
And this grew even further in the past twenty years, with exports to Asia making up almost three quarters of Australia's total exports today.
In 2012, our decades-long project of engagement has reached a new phase.
I have commissioned what we know as a “white paper”  -  the most elevated policy document in the Australian tradition of government  -  a White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
It will be a national blueprint for a time of global, regional and national change.
And this project unfolds in a century defined not only by the Asian strength that we see coming into being  -  but by changes in the global economy outside Asia  -  by the things the global economy is leaving behind.
The world of easy money and easy choices that prevailed in parts of the global economy until 2008 is gone and won't be coming back.
We are in an era of deleveraging, of savings, of surpluses and balance-sheet repair.
Growth will not come easily  -  every percentage point of GDP will be hard-won.
Ours is a time, austere and demanding, when only the resilient and the nimble will prosper.
But in so many ways, that is exactly what makes this Australia's time, Korea's time, what makes this Asia's time.
Because this is a time when the virtues we share will never be needed more.
A time which suits thrift and industry, education and hard work.
A time which suits societies which stick together, which join in shared work and in mutual care.
A time which suits families, communities and nations who willingly shoulder their responsibility to shape the future and to prosper in it.
A time in which the demands of leadership are to make the big decisions for the long term.
Many of the big decisions confronting Australia are shared with Korea.
In our nation building investment in infrastructure at home  -  in broadening and deepening the trade links between us  -  and in working together for peace and security in the world.
Both our nations understand that high-speed broadband services are critical to future prosperity.
Increases in broadband coverage spur economic growth.
It's estimated that every 10 percentage point increase in broadband penetration delivers in the order of a 1.3 per cent one off growth boost to the economy.
And there is a clear link between technology innovation and economic success.
Studies suggest that 70 per cent of product innovation and 73 per cent of process innovation in manufacturing is linked to information and communications technology.
High speed broadband matters.
But I don't need to tell you that: Korea's digital economy leads the world.
Ranked first in the world for the availability of government information online, sophisticated delivery of government services electronically and online citizen participation.
Leading in eCommerce  -  measured at over 30 per cent of all commercial transactions here  -  probably six times the level in Australia.
An information and communication technologies market estimated to be worth 16 billion Australian dollars a year.
Made possible by the highest broadband connection rate in the world  -  reaching over 90 per cent of homes.
We in Australia admire that greatly  -  and we are learning fast.
Because the Korean experience of high-speed broadband  shows how much Australia can look forward to as we build our own National Broadband Network at home.
Of course our two national contexts differ in certain respects. 
Notably, Australia's vast landmass and the need to serve every Australian community means our business model is different.
But we share ambitious goals for internet speeds  -  and for digital productivity.
And with the rollout of the national broadband network, the direct contribution of the internet to Australia's economy is estimated to increase by 40 per cent  -  to reach $70 billion by 2016.
This creates opportunities in Korea as well as in Australia.
Your business and research communities have great experience in the innovative application of broadband.
We're already collaborating in research on developing digital visual content technology for animation and digital media.
Our animation and multimedia companies are establishing alliances.
And the opportunities for Australian and Korean firms and universities to co-operate in this and many other fields will only grow.
Today I can tell you that Australia's NBN Co will be announcing soon the details of its ambitious roll out over the next three years.
Soon, Australian families and firms in communities around the nation will know exactly when their suburb or town will switch on to the NBN.
Switching on to technologies which will revolutionise the way Australians teach and learn, the way we diagnose and cure, the way we buy and sell, the way we live in the world as friends.
Our hundred year old copper network telephone lines have served us well.
But unless we switch on the future, our old system will choke economic growth, competitiveness and the possibility of better health and education services.
Today, I saw with my own eyes the future of education. 
I visited Gyeseong Catholic Girls High School here in Seoul and joined in a broadband video link with Australian students from Armidale in New South Wales.
The Australian and Korean students practiced their language skills  -  introduced each other to the achievements of famous Australians and Koreans,they learned together.
But this was more than a vision of the classroom of the future using Australia's NBN technology  -  itwas a living example of the future I seek for my country.
Of the opportunities for us in the Asian Century. 
Of the transformative power of education in individual lives and in the society and the economy as a whole.
Of how Australia can build the “Asia literacy” that will help us seize the opportunities which will come as our region grows and prospers.
And seize the vast possibilities of building a new economy -  an economy founded on high skills, high wages, high value manufacturing and clean energy made possible by high technology.
And in this time of opportunity, we in Australia and Korea can prosper together.
Australia's modern and strong economy and our strengths in raw materials, energy and services already complement Korea's strengths in hi-tech manufacturing and heavy industry.
Broadband will increasingly connect our people and our firms.
And it will bring us increasing opportunities to take advantage of our strongly complementary economies.
You are no doubt familiar with the phenomenon known as ‘Factory Asia' which has emerged as costs have risen and currencies appreciated since the 1980s.
First Japan, then the so-called ‘Tiger' countries, like Korea, then the ‘Dragons' of South East Asia, and over time, China and Vietnam, have each in turn moved parts of labour intensive assembly to lower cost regions and countries, while retaining higher end, higher value parts of the production chain at home.
This rapid integration and expansion of Asian supply chains holds important lessons for Australia, with our strong currency and our need to compete on the highest value rather than the lowest cost.
I'm struck, for instance, by the example of the Macquarie Group of companies.
Active in Korea for more than a decade, managing over 20 billion Australian dollars worth of assets here, a leading player in infrastructure funds, corporate finance and merger and acquisition advisory work. 
Now, many Asian bridges have been built with the natural resources Australia's best mining enterprises extract.
But when the Macquarie Group arranged the finance for the recently completed Grand Incheon Bridge, we saw a bridge built with the sophisticated financial products that Australia's best service firms develop.
This kind of sophisticated economic co-operation, seeking out and making the most of new complementarities between our firms, promises considerable opportunities for both our countries in coming years.
A successful conclusion to our negotiations for a comprehensive, high-qualityFree Trade Agreement between Australia and Korea is important to make the most of these.
Giving Australia an opportunity to compete evenly with other countries for access to your market  -  and further opening up our markets for your goods, services and investment.
Bringing new benefits to both our peoples  -  and expanding the existing benefits of our substantial and complementary economic links.
Friends,We do see much that is new in this Asian Century  -  great opportunities for prosperity and growth  -  but only if we can keep the peace.
For among so much that is new, many old tensions remain  -  and many old threats never went away.
No country knows that more than yours.
But you should also know that in Australia, you have an understanding friend.
Your security threatened by a conflict unresolved for 60 years.
Your capital, so close to perhaps the world's most dangerous border.
A border I visited on my last visit to Korea and where I stood face-to-face with a North Korean guard.
A visit not just to see for myself the frontier on which you must maintain such vigilance  -  but to show you as well that you have friends in Australia as you keep the watch.
So we strongly support your efforts to maintain peace on the Peninsula.
We have consistently called on North Korea to abandon its nuclear programs.
And we remain deeply concerned by North Korea's aggressive and unpredictable behaviour.
Just weeks after what had been constructive US-DPRK talks and apparent agreement to a moratorium on long-range missile launches, we learn that North Korea plans a satellite launch using ballistic missile technology.
This clear breach of UN Security Council resolutions would be a very provocative action.
Australia continues to urge North Korea to act in the interests of its own people, abandon this launch plan and follow through on its recent assurances and commitments.
Those Asian countries with the most influence on North Korea can  -  and should  -  act too, and should demand that North Korea not proceed with its planned so-called satellite launch.
North Korea's continued refusal to de-nuclearise is one of the gravest security challenges Asia faces.
I'm here in Korea this week with many other leaders to attend a meeting hosted by President Lee on another grave challenge: the security of nuclear materials.
We are continuing work begun by President Obama two years ago, to secure all vulnerable nuclear materials within four years.
There is progress to report.
Toward legally binding commitments to the highest standards of protection. 
Special precautions for the most sensitive nuclear materials, such as highly enriched uranium and separated plutonium. 
Securing radioactive sources and guarding against the possibility that terrorists could develop a radiological dispersal device  -  a so called “dirty bomb”. 
And ensuring the secure transit of nuclear materials.
This week will see practical new steps and commitments.
Australia is doing its part.
We have met all our commitments from the first Nuclear Security Summit held in Washington two years ago.
And this year we will host an International Atomic Energy Agency seminar for our Southeast Asian neighbours on best practice in nuclear security standards.
We must do everything in our power to prevent terrorist groups from acquiring a nuclear weapon  -  or the materials to build one. 
We must never permit any terrorist group to threaten any nation with nuclear catastrophe.
And this means we must act together.
Friends, I believe that in this Asian Century the secure and prosperous peoples will be those who never fear change but always make it work for them.
Few nations have done that with greater purpose than your great Republic. Korea shows the way. 
Your long rise is testament to the astute vision and statecraft of your leaders,it is testament, too, to the patient effort and sacrifice of your peoples.
Millions of people, perhaps like the parents and grandparents of so many in this room, who worked so hard for so long.
Who saved and scrimped and went without, who pushed their children through relentless hours of study and homework.
If there is any Asian miracle, it was they  -  and now it is you  -  their children and grandchildren, who have so abundantly matched the high hopes they held. 
We admire you greatly.
In Australia, Korean brand names like Samsung, LG and Hyundai are a byword for quality, innovation and global reach.
Our students are welcome faces in each other's universities and colleges.
Australia's successful Korean community is an integral and respected part of our multicultural society. 
Two million people born in Asian countries live in Australia  -  over 100,000 of these people were born in Korea.
Australia has even caught the “Korean wave”, the renaissance of your popular culture reaching all the way to our shores.
We welcomed some of Korea's biggest reality television programs to our country last year  -  and tens of thousands of young Koreans and Australians watched your best known singing stars perform at a K-Pop concert in Sydney last year.
Our friendship is strong and growing and when I return to Australia, I will do so enlivened and inspired by your Korean example.
Because in education, in high speed broadband, in economic growth, in securing jobs, my country, like yours, sees great opportunities for each of us and both of us in the Asian Century that lies ahead. 



PM: I'm here in Korea for the Nuclear Security Summit. I have had the opportunity this morning to meet with some Korean students, online using broadband talking to students in Australia so that's been a special pleasure but my purpose for being here in Korea is to attend the Nuclear Security Summit.
This is an important meeting bringing together more than 50 countries. It follows on the first Nuclear Security Summit in Washington.  The purpose of this summit is to bring leaders together to discuss how we can better secure nuclear material. Nuclear security is a major challenge for our world. We want to make sure that nuclear material never falls into the wrong hands. We know that there are terrorist groups who have said that they want to acquire nuclear material for a so called dirty bomb. 
Indeed we know that Bin Laden, when he was alive, described the getting of nuclear material as a religious duty.  As a result of the work that's already been done through this Nuclear Security Summit process, it would be difficult for terrorists to access nuclear material. But it's not impossible and we cannot be complacent given how extreme the consequences would be of a terrorist dirty bomb.
So, over today and tomorrow I will be working with representatives of other countries to further deliver on the nuclear security agenda. Australia has a good track record on nuclear security; indeed the non government organisation, the Nuclear Threat Initiative assessed us as being right up there in the world in terms of our security protocols. We are also as a nation working on things like the use of lower grade uranium for medical purposes and we are a world leader in the forensic technology that helps you detect illicit nuclear material. 
I will be dealing with these questions over the coming meeting today and tomorrow but the importance of Australia being here I think is obvious, given the challenge that securing nuclear material presents for the world. If I can address one other matter and then I'll take questions on my visit to Korea and when we have finished those questions I'll be happy to take questions about the Queensland election. 
I just wanted to say too that the purpose of the summit is not to address issues associated with North Korea but of course it's inevitable as countries gather in Seoul that in the margins of this Nuclear Security Summit there will be discussions about North Korea, indeed President Obama and President Lee of Korea addressed these questions yesterday.
North Korea has announced its intention to launch a so called satellite using missile technology. This is in breach of UN Security Council resolutions; it's in breach of an agreement struck very recently with the United States. My message and the message of many leaders here will no doubt be that North Korea needs to take a step back from this proposed launch, it needs to abide by UN Security Council resolutions and it needs to abide by its agreement with the US struck as recently as the 29th of February this year.
I'll take questions on the trip first and then when we've done that we'll move to questions on the Queensland election. We'll go one, two and then three, yes you.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Should Australians be concerned and if North Korea doesn't desist from this presumably some consequences have to apply what do you think should be the consequences?
PM:  The missile is being launched south. The advice to me is that for there to be any issues to Australia, the missile would have to break up very late in its flight and if it did break up very late in its flight then the junk that came from the break up would burn off as it entered the atmosphere so the advice to me is that there is only the lowest potential risk that any debris would reach Australia.
On consequences, as President Obama made clear with President Lee yesterday we would be talking about the further isolation of a regime which is already very isolated.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, at this meeting you said it will be discussed on the sidelines, do you plan to talk to other world leaders, particularly China, and ask them to try and as you say rein in North Korea?
PM: Well certainly in my many meetings across the international events that I have attended when I have talked to other leaders, North Korea - security on the Korean peninsula - has been one of the issues I have very regularly raised and in my bilateral discussions here in Seoul, I would be raising it too. I do not have a formal bilateral discussion scheduled with China at this meeting.
JOURNALIST: Should China though call for them to stop the launch?
PM: Look, I believe countries around the world - all countries - should be using their mechanisms and endeavours to put the message very strongly to North Korea that it needs to step back from this proposed launch of a so called satellite using missile technology.
JOURNALIST: PM, will you be raising the issue with Ban Ki-moon this afternoon and will you also be raising the issue of East Timor with Ban Ki-moon, withdrawing troops from East Timor?
PM: I will be speaking to the United Nations Secretary General and I will intend to raise issues associated with security on the Korean peninsula and the UN mission in East Timor both are certainly on the list.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does the North Koreans' launch plans dash hopes that there might have been a change direction under the new leader?
PM:  Well, certainly following the leadership transition I suppose, the best analysis that we can come to is that the question is unsettled. I mean there was one sign in a positive direction with the entry into the agreement with the United States obviously with food aid on the table which is very much needed.
As we understand it by people in Korea and commitments given, only then having seen that positive sign, to then see this very negative and contradictory sign announcing this so called satellite launch with the use of missile technology. So I think the position so far in terms of analysing the direction of the regime following the leadership transition, the best we can say is that the signs are very contradictory and the position looks unsettled.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, these groups like al-Qaida presumably they have to get these weapons from somewhere and that could be states. How can we be sure that exported Australian uranium isn't freeing up other stocks of uranium to go into nuclear weapons?
PM: If I can just deal with the premise of your question. I mean on nuclear security, what is being guarded against is theft of nuclear material, whether it's in transit or whether it's being used associated with peaceful purposes, but the theft of material or technologies that would assist with putting together a dirty bomb. So the frame here is not just willing sales which seems to be what's behind your question. The frame here is obviously the full gamut of security how you keep nuclear material, nuclear know- how, nuclear technology secured.
For Australian uranium we enter into very rigorous safeguards agreements on Australian uranium as we export it and we will continue to do so and I do remind, understanding that we are a uranium exporting nation, that we are viewed as having a very good track record on nuclear security questions.  
JOURNALIST:  (Inaudible)
PM:  Look the issue of North Korea is a difficult one. I'm not going to stand here and pretend to any of you that there is some simple remedy to this, if there were some simple remedy then the world would have struck it  a long time ago.
We have a very isolated regime. We have a regime that maintains itself through the use of rigorous suppression of its people. We have a regime that can be full of contradictory signs and those contradictory signs have continued  even past the leadership transition but we do need now at this point to be saying that North Korea needs to step back from its announced intention and that it does risk even being  further isolated.
Clearly as recently as the 29th of February  when its struck the agreement  with the United States it saw some merits in coming forward a little, striking an agreement and receiving some food aid in response.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Our understanding of the state of play in Korea is that they are not at the stage where technology-wise they could create a device, miniaturise a device, have a delivery system that would get a device to a target around the world. So I don't think we want to be raising more fear and more apprehension than is necessary. Clearly any conduct by North Korea that is about using missile technology and this launch of a so called satellite that uses missile technology - that is a development we don't want to see which is why I have made it clear what Australia's position is, but you shouldn't leap from that to the next stage because that's not right.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that the announcement of the satellite launch has anything to do with the fact that this conference is happening in Seoul this week?
PM: Oh look, I couldn't possibly answer that for you, I couldn't diagnose cause and effect for you like that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM:  Look I don't want to pretend that I can understand the motivations of the North Korean regime.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what messages are there for you and for federal Labor (Inaudible)?
PM: Look I'm happy to take that question but just make sure we have done all questions about being in Korea first okay. Karen.
JOURNALIST: What message is there for you and Labor in the election results?
PM: If I could say a few things about the Queensland election result. First, I rang Campbell Newman on Saturday night to congratulate him on his election win and I look forward to working with him as Premier of Queensland. We've a lot of great things that we can work together on for the benefit of the people of Queensland.
For Anna Bligh I do also want to say that clearly I have spoken to her privately and I spoke to her on Saturday night.  Anna Bligh is a woman of real capacity.  She is a woman with a great heart. She is a very proud Queenslander, she loves Queensland and I think we saw that love of Queensland very much on display when she lead Queensland during the dark days of the floods and cyclone. 
She is also a woman who very much loves her family and her engagement in public life has taken her away from her family for a long period of time and I know that she will look forward to spending time with them.
On the future and message from all of this, I'm a Labor person so obviously to see an election loss like that for Labor is a deep, deep disappointment to me. We have seen Queensland Labor govern Queensland for 20 of the last 22 years. Queensland Labor has got many achievements to be proud of across those two decades but the people of Queensland have not only spoken a message to Queensland Labor, indeed they've shouted it, and that message needs to be respected.
And so for Queensland Labor it will be about listening to that message and getting out and about in the community forging the community bonds and links and renewing Labor in Queensland.   
For the federal government, inevitably whilst elections turn on their own issues and own questions, inevitably there will be discussions about what are the implications for federal Labor, I understand that.
Since I first became Prime Minister during the days of the 2010 election and beyond, I've never underestimated the degree of challenge for federal Labor, I don't underestimate it now.   We've got a lot of hard work to do, a lot of hard to for the people of Queensland and with the people of Queensland.
Ultimately, the 2013 will be decided on its own issues. We will go into that election having governed standing up for working people not for the interest of a privileged few, having governed to deliver on a plan for this nation's future and seeking a renewed mandate to continue delivering on that plan. Having governed to create prosperity today in the economy, we will need so that people can have prosperity tomorrow and we will go to that 2013 election talking about else we need do to construct that future economy.
So people will make their decisions then. For us, it's about doing what I believe I have done as Prime Minister  and I am certainly going to continue doing so which is knuckling down, getting on with the job on the behalf of working people, managing  the economy in their interest and to the benefits of their families.  
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Were you taking the advice of your own MPs who were saying that you must now spend more time in Queensland? I think they said you should know the names of every footballer in Queensland, not just the Bulldogs. And that there was even a suggestion that you should buy a house and live in Queensland. I mean, this is coming from your own side about your future.
PM: There, there will be any amount of discussion on all of this and that's understandable. For me, it's about governing in the interests of the people of Queensland and the interests of all Australians.
What I believe Australians want to see from their Government and what I seek to provide as Prime Minister is the leadership necessary to manage the economy in their interest today. People want to have jobs, they want to have the prospect of getting a better job, they want to be able to open a small business if that's their desire they want know that the government is standing alongside managing the economy in their interest so they can have those opportunities.
At this time in our history, people want to see the benefits of the resources boom shared, they want to see those benefits delivered so that you create more jobs and prosperity in the future. They want to see us working alongside working families whether its tax cuts, pension increases, which obviously will be delivered by the government. Whether it's better schools, better hospitals they want to see us getting that done and we will continue to work on those things.
JOURNALIST: Will you address the question of broken promises? Some of Queensland, a lot of Queensland thinks this is about asset sales, being a broken promise and you obviously have an issue with a broken promise on a carbon tax. Is there anything you can say to the Australian people about broken promises (Inaudible)?
PM:  Look, I've said this before but I am happy to say it again, when I said those words during the 2010 election campaign I meant every one of them. Then in the circumstances of this Parliament I needed to make a choice as to whether our nation would seize a clean energy future or let the opportunity go by. And there is no place in the country that stands to better prosper in a clean energy future than Queensland because of its natural assets and natural advantages.
So, I have acted in the national interest to get a benefit for the nation through a clean energy future, and also to deliver practical benefits for families today in the form of tax cuts and family payment increases and increases in the pension.
JOURNALIST: So Prime Minister will you rule out any changes to the structure of the carbon tax between now and the next election?
PM: No, the carbon tax will be implemented exactly as legislated.
JOURNALIST: Will you accept that both you and Anna Bligh, there is a perception that voters don't trust you and that is something that you have to turn around if you don't want to have the same result in the 2013 election?
PM:  Well I am happy now and in the 2013 election to say ‘who do you trust to manage the economy in the interest of working people, who do you trust to understand the needs of the future and the building of that future economy, who do you trust to spread the benefits of the mining boom to make sure that they are shared by all Australians, who do you trust to improve your local schools and local hospitals?'
 I'll be very happy to continue governing on the basis that we are doing those things because they matter to Australians today and to Australians of tomorrow.
On the other side of politics, people are being invited number one to believe the next election doesn't matter at all. Tony Abbott has basically been conducting himself as if he's got the next election in the bag, doesn't matter, you know, letting Australians have a vote, Tony Abbott's response to that is ‘who cares he's going to win, he's got the it in the bag, he doesn't have to think about Australians, you know he doesn't worry about them, he's just, you know, is already announcing to the world he's going to be the next elected prime minister.'
So his attitude is he's got it in the bag, his attitude is he doesn't have to say anything except no to everything to get there.
On our side of politics, as a government, we are driven by managing the economy today so that it benefits working people not a privileged few and that is a struggle in the Parliament because of the advocacy by Tony Abbott and his friends of the interests of a privileged few.  We are about creating the future economy which means people have got an even better opportunity to get ahead tomorrow in tomorrow's economy and of course we are about delivering the benefits working families need. We've done that, we've done it consistently and we've got more to do.
Big reforms like the national disability insurance scheme, and I am never going to be someone who says to the Australian people ‘pretend change isn't happening, pretend you don't have to do anything to shape the future.' That is Tony Abbott's game. My message to the Australian people is sometimes we have to do really hard things to shape the future and carbon pricing, clean energy future was part of that, a really hard thing, but is going to give our nation a better future.
JOURNALIST:  Were federal issues a factor in the Queensland election?
PM: Look the Queensland election, I mean Queenslanders will answer this question for themselves, but I think when you look at the material in the Queensland election, the days of campaigning during the Queensland election, what was said by the political leaders, Anna and Campbell as they contested that election, the fight was overwhelmingly on state issues. There was clearly a major “it's time” factor after Labor having been in government for so long.
JOURNALIST: What about the leadership challenge between you and Mr Rudd?
PM: Sorry, I'll go here and then come back.
JOURNALIST: Where you surprised by the extent of the wipe out of Labor in Queensland? Did you expect something like this?
PM:  I think the expectations were that Labor was going to be defeated and soundly defeated. I think, you know, the dimensions of the defeat don't really settle on you until you can see the numbers come up on the TV screen. Sky's coverage, ABC 24's coverage. So yes, you know, the dimensions of this defeat took me by a bit of surprise on Saturday night. And Labor in Queensland, State Labor, we've got a lot of rebuilding to do. We've got a lot of hard work to do and I'll get on and do it.
JOURNALIST: Graham Richardson says that Queensland voters feel something akin to, or are verging towards hatred for you, suggesting this state result will flow over into a federal context. What do you think of that comment and his contribution?
PM: Look, I'm not going to go commentator by commentator. I'll put my own views that I have.
JOURNALIST: I just wanted to ask how you feel about Labor losing its party status in Queensland as a result of the poll and that Campbell Newman may not now have an effective opposition.
PM: Look, these are things for the Queensland Parliament and for its arrangements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just one other issue, you mentioned inside how moved you were when you brought veterans here to Korea. There is a report by the Department of Veterans Affairs out today that's based on a survey of Australians about their feelings about Anzac Day. And it finds that people are saying increasingly that it's a day for partying, for drunkenness, it's lost its meaning, it's got no meaning for newer Australians. Do you think we need to reclaim Anzac Day or what do you think about the way we mark Anzac Day?
PM: I completely disagree with all of the conclusions of that report. As a local Member of Parliament, as Prime Minister, I've had the opportunity to see what Anzac Day means to Australians. I've had the opportunity in the electorate which returns me to the Federal Parliament, in Melbourne's west, I've had the opportunity to see the crowds grow for our local commemorations of Anzac Day.
I've had the conversations with people who were there waiting to have the Dawn Service often, in Melbourne, huddled in extreme cold waiting for the dawn service and to talk to them. And I've had people say to me things like, I'll say, ‘You are here with your young daughter, what brought you here today? And the father will say to me, “Well she did. She was the one who was absolutely insistent that we come. You know, I wasn't intending to come but she basically begged and said, ‘Dad, we've got to go to the Dawn Service.”
And so, when you see that kind of enthusiasm and embrace, by our youngest Australians, for commemorating Anzac Day, and for what it means to them, then I think we can say as a nation it's an important part of our national identity.
I actually think our degree of attachment to it is growing over time, not lessening over time, and I think as we move to the 100 year commemoration there will certainly be a greater sense of attachment and marking and interest in the history, than there has been for a long period of time. The degree of attachment to Anzac Day I believe is greater now by young people than when I was a small child and I think that's a fantastic thing to see.
PM: Sally is trying to whisk us off so we can stay on time, but, alright, we'll do one on broadband and one here.
JOURNALIST: I think it might be the same question.
PM: Okay.
JOURNALIST: The Chinese tech company Huawei has been told it can't invest in the NBN. Can you explain why and why it doesn't damage our reputation as a good place to invest?
PM:  The National Broadband Network is a huge infrastructure project. I mean it's bigger than the Snowy Mountains Scheme. It's the infrastructure project that our nation needs today. You would expect as a Government that we'd make all of the prudent decisions to make sure that that infrastructure project does what we want it to do and we've taken one of those decisions.
Thanks very much. 



I wanted to make three observations about what we've achieved since the last the last summit and three observations about what I think we need to achieve for the future.
Since the last summit I am able to report that Australia has honoured the three commitments we made.
We have ratified the Nuclear Terrorism Convention and as we've taken that action in our own country we've also furthered work to assist with nuclear security and research that enables medical isotopes to be obtained using low enriched uranium, rather than highly enriched uranium and as a result, not have a need for highly enriched uranium for our own purposes for medicine.
We've also been at the forefront of developing forensic science to enable the detection of illicit nuclear materials.
The second commitment that we made was to work within our region on nuclear security and I am able to advise that we are bringing together a meeting in Australia for the countries of our region to discuss nuclear security questions.
And third, in keeping with the commitments we made in Washington, we are having an independent IAEA review of our own nuclear facility, which is at Lucas Heights in Australia.
Mr President, as we move towards the next summit I wanted to offer three reflections on things that I believe we need to consider.
We will attend the next summit in the Netherlands in 2014, but at that summit I think we need to agree what will sustain these efforts beyond 2014, what will make a focus on nuclear security a permanent feature of what we do.
In that regard, I would suggest that in 2014, and as we move towards that meeting, we need to consider the following three things: We need to determine how we can further empower the International Atomic Energy Agency to continue its important work beyond 2014.
Secondly, I think we need to establish an accountability framework on nuclear security that builds confidence beyond 2014.
In that regard, one thing that we might consider would be regular peer reviews of our domestic nuclear security arrangements that would ensure ongoing transparency and keep each of us, and all of us, on our toes, which is where we should be as we deal with this challenge.
And third, I think we should find mechanisms to foster co-operation between governments and the private sector.
There are major corporations who play a role in the nuclear industry and to the extent that we can further collaboration with them, then I think we would further our ambitions for nuclear security.
Thank you very much Mr President for this opportunity and for once again being in Korea. Thank you. 



PM: Good evening. Today I was pleased to participate in the Nuclear Security Summit here in Seoul. This summit has been dealing with a pivotal question for our world, which is nuclear terrorism. Of course, the consequences of a terrorist act, a nuclear terrorist act,are almost unimaginable. When we remember how much 9/11 changed our world, if you imagine how the world would react if a nuclear device went off in a major city, it leads you, takes you to conclusions that you don't want to think about. It wouldn't only be the immediate loss of life, thoughthat would be grave, but also the consequences for the whole world's perceptions of its security. So consequently, this summit has been dealing with issues that are of importance to Australians, of importance to humankind.
As President Lee has said, the host of our summit, during the course of it, if a terrorist organisation were to acquire or build a nuclear weapon, they would show - his words - neither mercy,nor compromise. And we would all be victims in those circumstances. So it's been important to be here in Seoul as leaders met, and renewed our political commitment to addressing nuclear security issues -  political commitments first made in Washington two years ago. And of course, that commitment add up to saying we will do what is necessary to safeguard nuclear material so that it does not end up in the wrong hands.
Firstly, this summit has taken stock on progress over the last two years,since the first summit in Washington. And collectively, nations working together in the two years in between, have achieved a great deal.
Countries have been ratifying the relevant conventions on nuclear security and nuclear terrorism. They've been removing excess plutonium and highly enriched uranium. They've been securing radioactive sources to guard against the possibility that terrorists could build a so called ‘dirty bomb'. And they've been securing nuclear materials in transit.
To give you just some examples of what that all adds up to and what was reported on by nations today: the Ukraine,for example,has just completed the return of all of its highly enriched uranium to Russia. Sweden has returned all of its separated plutonium to the United States, the first operation of its kind. Mexico has converted its research reactor from highly enriched uranium to low enriched uranium,in a joint project with the United Statesand Canada. And Finland,the UK and France have completed rigorous IAEA reviews of their domestic nuclear security arrangements.
As I indicated this morning, we have made progress in Australia too, since the Washington meeting; we have recently completed our ratification of the Nuclear Terrorism Convention. We are continuing to outreach to the countries of our region on nuclear security,and we will be hosting a regional seminar and we have agreed with the IAEA that it will conducta review of the security arrangements of our nuclear science facility and research reactor at Lucas Heights and that will take place in 2013. One of the strengths of this process though, isn't just that you reflect on what has been achieved, but you look forward. And you say, on the basis of what has now been achieved, what more can we do to further nuclear security.
So during the course of the meetings today I have made three suggestions for further work, between now and the next security summit in 2014. Those suggestions are, further empowering the International Atomic Energy Agency to continue this important work beyond 2014. We don't want to have a process of summits with energy around them only to see the work not endure for the long term. We want to make a long term difference. Secondly, I suggested establishing an accountability framework on nuclear security that builds confidence. For example, we could consider regular peer reviews of domestic nuclear security arrangements. And third,I suggested fostering the strongest possible cooperation between government and industry. At the end of the day, many nuclear facilities are run by private companies, by private enterprise, and it is one thing for governments to come to meetings, and think and discuss. It is another thing to make sure that those with hands on control are actually doing what is necessary for nuclear security, and that takes partnership.
It's my hope that when we go to the next summit, in the Netherlands in two years'time, that we will see that there has been further national action on nuclear security. And we'll be able to agree on a range of measures that will take us to our ultimate goal, which is to entrench nuclear security practices that endure and keep us safe forthe long term.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, was it disappointing that this summit didn't resolve a firm timeframe of when countries should move away from highly enriched uranium? It's a voluntary aspect of the communiqué, but there's no set deadline. How can this summit make progress if action is (inaudible)?
PM: Well, progress has been made from Washington til now, and that was on the basis that people were voluntary stepping up and agreeing to do things. The whole process of having these summits catalyses change. You bring leaders together to get the political focus and drive and direction that brings change. And then that change is obviously implemented by officials in a range of governments. So we've already seen change, I mean, we've changed. We've moved to not have highly enriched uranium for purposes that we can have low enriched uranium. The technology is changing around the world to mean that there's less need for highly enriched uranium and that's why you can see countries who are voluntarily retiring their stocks to places that they can be safely stored.
So I think from Washington to here,we have seen progress so there'sno reason to assume that there won't be further progress out of today's summit and based on the actions in the communiqué.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what of the countries that are looking to embark on this journey in terms of the nuclear industry,how much is being done to try and discourage some of those countries from doing that, and is that what your objective is?
PM: I don't think it's the role of this summit to discourage nations that may chose to get their energy supplies from the nuclear industry. The question here is about the security of nuclear material. We have a well established nuclear safety regime-International Atomic Energy Agency for-the peak body, deals with these questions, and it's very clear internationally how nuclear safety questions are dealt with. What I'm pointing to in the three things that I've talked about particularly the first two, is actually having the same type of rigourin the nuclear security side that we see in the nuclear safety side, that is, it being very clear who is responsible for what and what needs to be done. To give you a practical example of that, it is routine,indeed mandatory,for people to have peer nuclear safety reviews. I'd like to see the same degree of rigourtaken to peer nuclear security reviews.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on that, those ideas, the peer reviews and the clearer and more permanent role for the IAEA. What response feedback did you get from other leaders? Did you feel that those ideas were embraced, and it's going to happen at the next summit, or was there some resistance?
PM: I felt the ideas were listened to and well received, and what will happen from here is that the experts whowork between the summits, so sort ofcatalysedby the discussion between leaders and with a mandate that is resolved as leaders meet, so the topics that leaders have raised are the ones that will be pursued, that the experts that meet between now and 2014 will work on those ideas.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, after listening to the last two days what these countries are doing, who are you most concerned about, who needs to be doing more to secure these nuclear materials?
PM: Look, I don't think it is for me to start naming countries, but I do think across the world, we need to see the best possible rigour and the best possible cooperation to prevent nuclear material falling into the wrong hands. So I, you know, progress has been made. I think you genuinely can say that as a result of President Obama calling for a process of change, then there being the Washington summit leading to this summit, I think you genuinely can say out of that the world is a safer place than it otherwise would have been when it comes to nuclear material. But that doesn't mean that there's room for complacency, or that there's nothing more that can be done which is why this summit is there, getting the next bout of energy together for the further progress that we need to make.
JOURNALIST: Was there a push though for a tougher deadline to stop using highly enriched uranium in reactors? Was that something that you supported?
PM: The communiqué was adopted unanimously around the room. There was not a debate within the room about the timing ofmoves from highly enriched uranium. But clearly, the contributions around the room were about what more needs to be done. So there was a genuine spirit of engagement,a genuine understanding that this is a problem for the world. Many people made statements comparable to President Lee's or made the observation that radiation doesn't respect national borders or boundaries, that a problem for one is a problem for all, which is why this kind of collaboration is so important.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there is a move obviously internationally to produce lower carbon emission sources of power, which means that more countries are looking towards nuclear energy, is there a danger of kind of chasing the tail, thatthere's going to be more and more materialthat is out there, either used as nuclear weapons or just simply (inaudible) making this difficult over time.
PM: I think you could have said chasing the tail if we had never embarked on this process, if the world had never embarked on this process, so if we were if you like, seeing more countries worried about energy security and energy supply determining that part of their energy that would come from nuclear energy, and the world wasn't working on nuclear security at the same time. But the world is working on nuclear security, working on it through this summit, having worked on it at Washington, responding to President Obama's call, so I think you can see this process to drive nuclear security forward as some countries determine that their future energy mix will have nuclear in it; of course,that's not happening everywhere  -  you know we for example, have an abundance sources of energy and access to clean and renewable energy, so we are in a different situation. Some nations have actually determined to turn away from nuclear energy generation having become concerned particularly following the incident of Fukushima, but you know, countries will make their own decisions on their energy sources what we can do, is be pushing nuclear safety  -  and there is a clear nuclear safety system and through this summit,pushing nuclear security which means that as a by-product of people engaging in energy generation or whatever that you don't see a risk of more material falling into the hands of people who shouldn't have it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) is this right, somehow have more of a policing role of the nuclear security problem. How would that work, would it be mandatory? I mean, in an ideal world, how would it work?
PM: Well the idea I'm putting forward which is looking at the empowerment of the IAEA, it is well established what the IAEA's mandate is in relation to nuclear safety, I would like it to be equally clear what is the mandate in relation to nuclear security, so it wouldn't be the subject of potential disputation, whether they've got to mandate, how much they have to mandate, what they're empowered to do, what they're not empowered to do, but it would be understood and known. Now that's something that's going to take a lot of work and a lot of discussion and so, you know, we've sent that idea, I raised it and that idea will now go from this summit into the expert processes that work to bring finished proposals back to the next summit.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you and other leaders have issued warnings to North Korea at this summit about its plans for next month, (inaudible)responded today saying (inaudible) won't be told what to do (inaudible) can you tell me what your response would be?
PM: I was saying yesterday and I'm just going to recap I suppose, we've seen a pattern of behaviour before with North Korea,where you see something that looks like a positive sign happen, only to see a completely contradictory negative sign and we've lived through that again over the last few months, a positive sign at the end of February  -  with entering an agreement with the US, now a very negative sign with the sort of belligerence around the plans for the so-called satellite launch and the use of missile technology. What I think has been made clear through the statements of leaders in and around this summit, so it wasn't squarely before the summit, but people have been talking about it as they have been here, is that that kind of pattern of behaviour,wanting to do something positive, then do something negative, then seek to be rewarded because you take the something negative off the table  -  but the game on that is up, that there won't be further rewards for that kind of conduct. President Obama has made that very clear and I think, leaders here have made itclear, that the consequences for North Korea is even further isolation for a regime that is already isolated and for whom basic obligations to its people,including supplying them with food,are not met.
JOURNALIST: Well why wait for next month, why not take steps to isolate it further now in advance of this?
PM: Well, I think the pressure has to be kept on North Korea at this time to take a step back from what they have announced. I think the statements that have been made here by leaders are part of putting that pressure on.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there's a pattern here of North Korea launching ballistic missiles and calling them actual nuclear tests,  is that likely to happen this time round, and if so (inaudible).
PM: Oh look, I'm not in the business of trying to predict the conduct of the regime in North Korea. You know, I don't know how you would anticipate that I would be able to do that, this is an unpredictable regime and as we've seen in the past, capable of pursuing quite contradictory directions. Trying to pretend there's some consistency in them publicly but they are clearly contradictory directions as they have done in the last few months  -  so I'm not going to pretend I have a crystal ball which enables me to read the minds of the regime in North Korea, but, you know the pressure does have to stay on, to take a step back from this missile launch.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there's a story in today's Washington Post which suggests that Australia and the US may extend their military agreement and offer the US some bases (inaudible) Cocos Islands. Can you comment on that?
PM: I can draw your attention to comments made my Defence Minister Smith last November on these questions. Clearly the alliance we have with the United States is pivotal to our security, it's of long, long standing, and we took the next natural step; in my view, in the evolution of that alliance last year, when I agreed with President Obama that we would host marines on a rotational basis in the Northern Territory for exercising. So the next step.
Our focus since President Obama and I made that announcement in Australia, when President Obama visited, has been the implementation of that new arrangement with marines and we will work our way up to it being a rotational deployment of 2,500 marines. Around that time, Minister Smith on television was asked about other aspects of the global force posture review and our discussions with America and I'll draw your attention to this, it's from the 20th November last year,and he talked then,having talked about the marines, he talked then about the prospects in the longer term - the prospects in the longer term, of enhanced ship visits and submarine visits through the Indian Ocean rim; and he talked then too, about the prospect of greater utilisation of Cocos lsland. So, you know, that was outlined by Minister Smith last November. In terms of, you know, progress on any of those matters since Minister Smith outlined them last November  -  there has not been any substantial progress, they continue to be the subject of discussions at officials' levels, but our focus has been on implementing the arrangement that we struck about the deployment of marines.
JOURNALIST: We understand you had quite a lengthy, long chat with Barack Obama. Is that something you can talk to us about?
PM: Look I did have a chat with Barack Obama, it certainly didn't go to any global force posture review matters. We talked about what had happened in the summit. We talked about prospects for further action on nuclear security and just had a personal chat as well.
JOURNALIST: We had a report from the US which talked about flying drones from the Cocos Islands. Is that something you would be comfortable with?
PM: Look, just to be clear about all of this, the status of all of this is, as Minister Smith indicated last November there are a range of matters that are being discussed at officials' levels as a result of the global force posture review by the United States. The thing for implementation has been the Marines. No further advances have really been made since Minister Smith indicated that there were these ideas last November.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) you are not opposed to that?
PM: Look I'm not going to play a rule in, rule out game about something that is being discussed at officials' level.
JOURNALIST: Could you just give us an update if you can on the condition of the Australian aid worker who was injured in Afghanistan and the circumstances of that injury?
PM: I have been further briefed on the circumstances of this dreadful incident involving an AusAID worker. It is the first time we've seen an injury to an AusAID worker in Afghanistan. So this is very sad, very concerning, and for the man involved and for his family, incredibly distressing news and a very difficult time for them. We are working to support the family. The man involved is receiving medical attention in Kandahar and should it be necessary to get him forms of medical attention that aren't available there then of course he will be medically evacuated. We take people from Afghanistan to Germany, so should that be necessary, that will be done.
My understanding of the incident was that he was outside the wire, he was outside the base at Tarin Kowt. He had been in the Chora valley to attend a community meeting. He was returning from the Chora valley and there was a suicide attack. And it was that that caused the injury. When our AusAID workers go outside the wire they are protected by our Defence personnel, they do not go alone. They go with Defence protection and there was Defence protection with this man for the purpose of attending the community meeting and then the return to Tarin Kowt.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look I can't give you all of those details I'm afraid. This is the briefing I have just received with the details that I can confirm for you now. Inevitably in these circumstances the first focus of the people on the ground is making the necessary arrangements to look after the person who is hurt so as some more time goes by we'll get some more details through.
JOURNALIST: Is he the only one who was hurt?
PM: He is the only one who has been hurt according to my information.
JOURNALIST: A question about China policy?
PM: Yes you can and then we'll go to David Speers.
JOURNALIST: There was a head of one of the main think tanks in Beijing said, a few weeks ago, said that there was a disconnect between Australian security policy on China and its economic policies on China and that this was no longer sustainable, or words to that effect. Is that true and also what do you think of (inaudible) view at the Lowy Institute that Australian analysts on China tend to bureaucratic analysis (inaudible) to their Washington counterpart.
PM: On your first question, no I don't agree with that view. And there is a public policy debate in our nation on questions concerning China and there would be Australian experts who would put the same view that you have quoted from the Chinese think tank. But I don't share that view. I think our security arrangements are well understood by China. We didn't just invent the alliance with America, it's six decades old. China knows we are in a long term defence arrangement with America and I think we can, whilst continuing to be a staunch ally of America, also have a good, constructive, robust relationship with China, including an economic relationship of considerable breadth and depth. Now I know that there are some analysts who come to a difference strategic conclusion than that, but that is my conclusion. And the evidence available to me, as Prime Minister, as I work on these questions, is that it is possible for us to have that kind of strong robust relationship with China, including a strong economic relationship, whilst we maintain our traditional closeness to the United States on security questions. The second - just remind me the second part?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Once again, people who study these questions and write for the various journals will come up with different views and perspectives. It is obvious that we get all sorts of advice, different sources of advice, different perspectives. Our job is to sort and sift that advice and to come to the best possible conclusion. So I think that calibration we have about our relationship with China is the right calibration.
JOURNALIST: Just on the nature of this summit where President Obama managed to get more than 40 world leaders together. This is the second summit, there will be another one you said in a couple of years, to deal with an issue of global security. Do you think it would be also a good idea on another issue of global security, climate change, to get the ball rolling on international agreements among world leaders?
PM: Well there's - the purpose-specific process on climate change which is the periodic meetings to talk about climate change questions. So obviously, in Copenhagen, a very celebrated meeting, but there have been meetings since, and meetings that have made achievements.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Depending, I mean, certainly at Copenhagen there were many leaders there. At the most recent meeting in Durban, people were represented in different ways, certainly some nations at leader level. But that is the long-term process for dealing with - when I say long term, it's been established over a long period of time - the process for dealing with climate change questions.
Of course, climate change also gets discussed when we meet in other meetings and summits. So for example, there's been climate change discussions in the meetings in our own region. APEC focused on green growth to give you one recent example. So, climate change gets a lot of focus from leaders of nations in different formats. But I don't think it would be wise to upend the current arrangements for negotiations and discussions on carbon pollution reduction between nations.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: No he did not.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today addressed leaders and representatives from over 50 countries at the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit to confirm Australia's ongoing commitment to combat the threat of nuclear terrorism.
Speaking at the summit, the Prime Minister said the ultimate goal was to set up nuclear security practices that keep the world safe for the decades to come.
That is why we are today announcing further action in the following areas:
 * 	Australia's ratification of the Nuclear Terrorism Convention.  Under this convention, any person who conducts an act of nuclear terrorism can be brought to justice irrespective of the territory in which they are found.
 * 	The hosting of a regional nuclear security workshop to build further capacity and collaboration on nuclear security in South East Asia.
 * 	A review of security arrangements at our nuclear science facility at Lucas Heights by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in 2013.
Australia has a proud history of action in these areas. We have the strongest possible commitment to stopping the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and to nuclear disarmament.
Today, we have worked to strengthen the global nuclear security architecture and ensure that countries make legally binding and other commitments to the highest standards of protection.
The world has become a safer place since the Washington Summit, thanks to the renewed focus on nuclear security driven by President Obama's vision and the work of many countries. 
Australia looks forward to the final stage of the summit in 2014 and the long term future of nuclear security across the globe.



Prime Minister Gillard today warmly welcomed President Bongo and his delegation to Australia.
Leaders agreed that the visit, the first by a President of Gabon, was a clear sign of the growing friendship between the two countries and reflected the growth of opportunities, political and commercial, in the bilateral relationship.
They welcomed growing bilateral contact, including recent visits to Gabon by the Prime Minister's Special Envoy and to Australia by Gabon's Permanent Representative to the United Nations.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Bongo welcomed the strong growth in trade in recent years, amounting to $910 million in 2011.
Gabon is now Australia's third-largest two-way trading partner in sub-Saharan Africa.
Leaders noted that Australia and Gabon faced similar policy challenges in managing growing natural resources sector.
President Bongo welcomed the assistance Australia was providing to Gabon in strengthening natural resources governance through the Mining for Development Initiative.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Bongo welcomed growing commercial interest by Australian mining companies in Gabon, noting this was an important plank of the bilateral relationship.
President Bongo welcomed Australian companies' interest in developing iron ore and manganese deposits in Gabon.
Prime Minister Gillard noted that the skills and capabilities of Australia's mining industry were world class and welcomed interest by Australian companies in helping to accelerate the development of Gabon's mining sector.
Leaders identified food security as an increasingly important issue to both countries. President Bongo welcomed the contribution that the Australian International Food Security Centre would make to this effort and registered Gabon's interest in working closely with the Centre to improve food security.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Bongo agreed on the importance of sustained efforts by the international community to address climate change and deforestation, noting the vulnerability of both countries to these threats.
They agreed to work closely together in multilateral and other contexts to advance work on a new global climate change agreement, following on from the commitments made at Durban. President Bongo welcomed Australia's measures to reduce carbon emissions.
Leaders discussed a range of common security challenges, including piracy in the Indian Ocean and Gulf of Guinea and the situation in Somalia.
President Bongo acknowledged the valuable contribution Australia was making to address peace and security issues in Africa and welcomed Australia's increased engagement in Africa more broadly.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Bongo agreed to take further steps to strengthen the bilateral relationship, including increased consultations and contact between Ministers and officials on bilateral issues and issues of international interest. 



PM: I'm obviously joined by Minister Conroy, Minister Albanese and Mike Quigley the CEO of NBN Co. We're in Tanya Plibersek's electorate and she is here with us as well.
As we have just announced, today we are making available the three year rollout plan for the National Broadband Network which means that the National Broadband Network will go to more than 3.5 million homes and other premises; businesses, schools, hospitals.
In three years time, over 3.5 million premises will be connected to or in the process of being connected to the National Broadband Network. This is part of our plan to take make sure that there is broadband around the nation and we need to do that because whilst our copper telephone network has served us well, if we don't embrace the future, our old network will choke off economic possibilities for the future and it will choke off the future for education and health services.
You have seen a very comprehensive presentation so we would be very pleased to take your questions.
Just to be clear we'll take NBN questions first and when we have exhausted NBN questions then we'll move to other issues of the day and I'll try and field them and get them to the right person.
My experience of these press conferences is there are people who are very much interested in the technical questions and people with a broader view, so I will try and shepherd the questions on that basis. Yes.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) just wondering if you can provide any guarantee that we'll see 3.5 million covered if there's a change of government?
PM: Well there won't be. If there is a change of government, then the NBN will stopped.
So for anybody who gets on the web site and checks out the status of their suburb, if you are expecting to get the National Broadband Network and the government changes at the next election, you can forget it.
There will be no broadband under Tony Abbott.
JOURNALIST: So can you give us an idea of how many premises will be covered by the end of next year?
PM: Well on that, Mike might have to do that for us.
QUIGLEY: We expect  -  we are under way now, by the end of this - under way building some quarter of a million premises, so that's work under way.
By the end of this financial year, we will be adding another 500,000 to that, which comes up to about three quarters of a million will be under way by the end of this financial year - under way or built.
What happens then is we obviously continue to ramp to achieve by June 2015 that total of 3.547 million premises.
JOURNALIST: So you can't give us a figure for-
PM: -They're the best figures we can give you. But if I can - I will go Minister Conroy on this but before I do, I just want to be very clear about this.
Wherever you are scheduled in the rollout of the NBN, your access to broadband is not safe if the government changes.
Tony Abbott's been very clear that he wants to demolish the National Broadband Network, so whether or not you've been connected or you're hoping to be connected, the only way of ensuring that broadband is there and continuing to roll out around the nation is for our government to continue that mission.
Tony Abbott simply doesn't believe in people having the benefits of the National Broadband Network.
I will go Minister Conroy too.
MINISTER CONROY: Let's not muck around. Tony Abbott and Malcolm Turnbull talk about fibreto the node, which means you're using the copper tail.
You're going to have to compensate Telstra for using their existing copper network.
How did Malcolm Turnbull answer this? He just said ‘Yeah that's alright, Telstra will agree to vend it in or we'll buy the copper'.
I mean seriously, buying the copper? Buying the copper - he wants to buy an asset that has been in the ground for 100 years in some cases, that is degrading, that has over a billion dollars of maintenance every year, and he wants to buy the copper.
This is a plan that is rooted in the last century; it's a plan that ignores that the band width demands across the world and here in Australia continue to be exponential.
And you've just got to look at those Cisco figures I talked about at the Press Club in December, you've just got to look at some of the examples of evidence recently.
Malcolm used to talk about the New Zealand fibre to the node rollout, except they dumped it and said we've got to build fibre to the home.
Malcolm has been recently talking about the UK. Well I would draw your attention to, I think, the former chief technology officer for BT who are doing that rollout, who appeared before, I think it was a House of Lords committee just in the last few days and he said what the UK are planning will miss the next industrial revolution, we'll still be using a candle while everybody else is using a light globe.
That was BT's former chief technology officer talking about what Malcolm Turnbull is trying to sell to this country.
PM: Thank you. Yes, we'll go along  -  so yes, you next.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) from the Fin Review, are you concerned in light of the (inaudible) that they're investigating News in Australia, are you concerned-
PM: -Look, we'll take other questions after we have done NBN.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you decision to block Huawei from tendering into the NBN, are you concerned that that will damage our relations with China?
PM: Well, let's be very clear about the decision we have made here. I have stood up for Australia's national interests. I note that the Opposition is standing up for the interests of a Chinese company.
We have made decisions in the national interest. We have made decisions that we have the ability to make. Any suggestion that this is somehow in breach of our trade obligations is simply untrue.
And I note that China itself takes a view about its own telecommunications system and rollout that it's got a special approach to whether or not there should be foreign investment in that.
So we've taken a decision in the national interest and of course we stand by it.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, David Ramage from the Australian Financial Review. Isn't it a bit of a misleading thing to say that there will be no broadband under the Abbott government, given that you can get broadband on copper, wireless, everything else?
PM: Well there'll be no National Broadband Network. He has been clear that the mission he is on is to demolish the NBN.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how do you respond to a report today it is the most expensive rollout of NBN?
PM: I may let Minister Conroy, who is champing at the bit to get into that.
MINISTER CONROY: Look, I have done a couple of press conferences on the economic intelligence unit analysis which says in its assessment process that any investment by the public or government in this gets a zero out of 10 or 20 rating. We reject this utterly. Utterly reject this.
This is right wing economic dogma. They then have serious factual errors which I pointed out 12 months ago, that they continue to have in their economic analysis they've just released - continue to talk about it's only a 100 meg plan and continue to misquote the number of homes to be connected.
They just get it wrong. I can only point it out publicly so many times, but I'm happy to do it again.
JOURNALIST: Where does your analysis place the cost of this network in terms of - 
MINISTER CONROY: -In terms of is anyone else doing as an ambitious project in terms of government support, I don't think so.
There are many countries involved in national broadband network rollouts, despite Mr Turnbull saying we're the only country.
We're certainly the only country who is committing as much and we are proud of the fact, we are absolutely proud of the fact that we are contributing as much money as we are, the $27 billion commitment from the Government before it then moves into equity funding by NBN Co itself. 
So we do not resile from this at all. We are proud of the fact that we are taking the step.
The market failed. What the economic intelligence unit doesn't want to accept is this has been a clear market failure.
This is a natural monopoly. Economics textbook 101 - natural monopoly, you can look it up, they apparently missed it, but this is a natural monopoly where we have seen consistent market failure.
The infrastructure competition model has failed miserably in this country. 150 disputes in the one sector compared over the eight or nine years, compared with four in all the other infrastructure sectors. This is a market failure.
PM: Can I just say too, from a common sense perspective in terms of rollout in Australia  -  we're a very big country. And so you would expect that needs here for rollout are different than some places in the world which are much higher population density and much more geographically compact.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Steve Marshall from Television New Zealand. Back to Huawei, your decision to block Huawei, its involvement in the NBN, where does that leave the planned New Zealand Australia submarine cable, which Huawei has been contracted to build?
PM: We took a specific decision about the National Broadband Network. On other decisions, including decisions involving New Zealand we will continue to take a prudent approach and if we've got anything to say to our friends in New Zealand about that, then at the appropriate time we will.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Nick Ross, APBC, given Labor's position in the polls and given the vast difference with the Coalition policy on this, and the given there's a big public kind of cynicism about the NBN, why don't you push it more?
Because the only time you kind of see Labor championing the benefits of this is at (inaudible) conferences like this.
There's no kind of like marketing or anything like that. People just don't know this and this is probably going to be the only opportunity to find out these figures and then it will go all cynical again.
PM: I actually don't accept your analysis of community opinion about the National Broadband Network.
I think people do want to see us embrace the future and they do understand the possibilities of the future.
Now, inevitably with a new technology like this, levels of understanding will vary across the community. But when I talk to business people, they're very aware of the economic possibilities of the National Broadband Network.
When I talk to people in health care, they're very aware of the ability it's going to give them to diagnose and cure across great distances.
Certainly when I talk to people in education, they're very aware of how it's going to open for them a window on the best of education and the best of learning around the world.
When you go to regional Australia, there are many regional communities absolutely champing at the bit to see the NBN come to their community because they understand it's going to end a tyranny of distance for them that they've lived under.
We will be out there explaining the benefits of the National Broadband Network, the way we are today - explaining it to communities.
But I think you will increasingly see businesses and education institutions and people involved in health care and people involved in looking after older Australians who rightly want to stay in their own home for as long as possible, starting to increasingly talk to their own communities and the people that they deal with about the difference the National Broadband Network is going to make.
MINISTER CONROY: Sorry, could I add just, Nick, I've seen your commentary on this. And I think you make a compelling case. You make a compelling case that there is a need for greater community education.
I think you probably don't listen to 2GB or some of the other stations in Sydney but I think you would even discover in the last few days NBN Co has actually just started an advertising campaign on radio.
And I think if you wait to the weekend's papers you may discover there's some more advertising about to take place.
But I think you've made a very compelling case, I agree with you and I'd probably just say be patient for a little while longer.
PM: So we will definitely be out there. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Chris Evans from (inaudible), just back to Huawei, this is a company that's been in Australia for a few years now, it's worked in 150 other countries including our allies, are you concerned that the corporate work that's already done in Australia and with other allies in terms of rolling out NBN has compromised these allies and compromised corporate Australia already?
PM: No of course I'm not. We've made a decision about critical infrastructure for Australia's future and that is the National Broadband Network.
And I stand by that decision, it's in Australia's national interest. I note that Opposition spokespeople are out criticising the Government for that decision and effectively advocating on behalf of a Chinese company.
Well we have taken the appropriate decision in Australia's national interest about this critical piece of infrastructure.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Josh (inaudible) we saw that during the period between the last election, before you formed a minority government that NBN Co actually had to stop rolling out that work. Will that happen again in this election period?
MINISTER CONROY: No, that is not right. In fact, I think by accident some described as political genius on my part, I would love to tell you that was true.
While that 17 day period was going on, NBN Co in fact were about to start digging and began digging the weekend after the election.
You understand, the NBN had that plan in Armidale that we had announced six or eight months before the election was called. So we had no idea that Armidale and New England would become such a vital national seat that everyone wanted to talk about.
We'd started the process, NBN Co in actual fact started constructing in the streets, digging trenches in the streets in that period while the rest of us were all acting or not even acting ministers we were all technically without portfolios, that issue was being decided.
So NBN Co kept going through that period so there was no cessation of construction.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) this time.
MINISTER CONROY: Absolutely
PM: The risk factor here isn't some risk factor which comes from the mechanics of having an election.
The risk factor here is that if Tony Abbott is ever Prime Minister he has promised to end the National Broadband Network, to stop it, to prevent communities getting it and he's threatened to demolish it. That is the risk factor.
JOURNALIST: James Hutchinson iTnews. With the three year rollout plan, now when do you now expect to (inaudible) the fibre rollout?
PM: I will go to Mike on that. He can talk you through each of the stages.
QUIGLEY: As you know this is a long - close a decade-long rollout. We've had some delays obviously with the negotiation of the Telstra deal and having the Telstra deal approved by the ACCC, which has happened just recently.
They got their SSU through. That's really now allowed us to get the information we needed to complete the work we've been doing and then really get going.
So we have to submit a new corporate plan to the Government by the end of this May.
We will be updating that plan and we'll be trying to do everything we can to recover that start delay and keep right on track to where we were. Now we can't commit to that, but we are working pretty hard. But it's about, overall it's about a decade long rollout.
JOURNALIST: So you expect it by 2021 now?
QUIGLEY: I wouldn't comment at this point, as I say we are still a work in progress.
While there was been a delay in the start due to that and what we did on the construction contracts, as you know, and integrating in the 14 points of interconnect moving to 121 points of interconnect, we are taking all of that into account, working that through and we'll be submitting at the end of May a new plan to the Government.
PM: Okay, so who haven't we taken a question from, I'm trying to be fair. Yes.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible). A question for Mr Quigley. Mike, what was the reaction from the NBN Co's engineers that you wouldn't be able to consider Huawei as part of the rollout?
QUIGLEY: Frankly, I really don't want to comment, either one on tender processes, or also on issues that as the Prime Minister has said, are issues of national security.
We as a government business enterprise execute on the instructions given by our shareholder.
JOURNALIST: Have your engineers examined Huawei's equipment to see whether there could be a backdoor or some sort of technical-
QUIGLEY: -I really won't comment on those kind of issues.
JOURNALIST: Just a question on the people who are - (inaudible) from Channel Nine, sorry  -  the question of people who are missing out. Everyone's going to be racing to this list.
How are you choosing which suburbs miss out? Like for instance just from looking at this, there's a cluster of suburbs of say Crowsnest, Naremburn, Chatswood but Willoughby is missed out in between. So would that mean you're going to roll the trenches through there-
PM: -Mike can explain, this has been about the engineering. So Mike can explain exactly how sites have been selected.
QUIGLEY: We do sites in modules, so modules are about between 2,500 to 3,000 premises and we plan to do those and when you see locations, they're the modules that go to build up a whole area.
So what we do is you may find that there are constraints in particular areas, depending on whether we have the links available back to a certain place, or it could be just straight engineering.
Often we don't want to do too many places in the same area concurrently because otherwise we congest the streets. Because there is as you know, we've got to haul fibre through the Telstra ducts, that means there's trucks in the street. We just can't afford to have that going on everywhere at once in a given area.
So we've tried to make sure we've sequenced this effectively but haven't congested area.
JOURNALIST: How would you feel if every suburb around you had it, but you were in the middle and didn't have it? It wouldn't seem to make a lot of-
QUIGLEY: -That is just a function of us trying to as I said, those principles that I outlined before. We've sequenced it that way. We know we're going to have some people who are disappointed.
But if I can keep reiterating we will have in another three months some more announcements and we will be announcing that next year, in a year's time, so people will be picked up eventually.
MINISTER CONROY: Let's be clear, no one is missing out. OK, in 12 months time, as Mike has just said, we will be giving you a 12 month update for the following 12 months.
And what you are likely to see is those areas that are possibly in those holes you're describing, it grows out sort of organically. So no one is missing out.
We can't do every street in Australia in the first three years. It is a massive national infrastructure build. You mentioned rolling out the trenches.
Part of what Mike has talked about is we're now using the Telstra existing ducts. So we're pulling through rather than necessarily digging trenches in our own right.
That's what Mike was talking about in terms of cost savings to the build. So no one is missing out.
Those people, there's going to be disappointed people  - we can't fit 12 million homes into the three year plan. So the engineers have used all the algorithms and things that Mike's talked about.
But everyone ultimately in Australia gets the National Broadband Network.
PM: OK, yes, over here.
JOURNALIST: This might be a question for Mike actually, (inaudible) what percentage of premises already connected to the NBN have actually taken up and using it?
QUIGLEY: OK, that varies across the - we have eight sites now, as well as the greenfields sites, we have eight brownfields sites, the five in mainland Australia and the three in Tasmania.
And the take up rates do vary. If I can just reiterate, we built those sites, the three sites in Tasmania and five in mainland as trials to test operations, construction and general products. The take up rate in fact we are very pleased with.
In some of those sites particularly Kiama and Willunga in South Australia, Kiama just south of us here, those take-up rates are now above 25 per cent.
If you compare that with fibre to the premise rollouts overseas they don't get those sorts of take up rates until three or four years after they started.
So these are very high take-up rates and one last point, remember, the copper network is being retired. Which means when the fibre rolls out, 18 months after that the copper network's retired, so take up rate isn't really an issue for this project.
PM: And one of the things - we've taken these questions before - I think one of the things that's always has to be remembered here is how people adapt to the use of new technology.
Even as we've been having this discussion today I've seen a number of heads bent over their Blackberries or iPhones. And when that technology first became available there were a lot of people, I'd have to say including myself, when mobile phones first came out, those big bricks, I said to people I was working with then, I don't see a use for them quote unquote.
Now how wrong was I? Well very, very wrong because I'm as an intensive a user as the people who are bent over their phones now.
That is how quickly the introduction and adaptation and use of that technology has taken hold in our community.
With the National Broadband Network we're going to see the same sort of expansion.
So people will understand its use, want it, get using it, once they get using it then they'll understand even more applications for it and on and on it would go.
I can't think that there were too many people here who when they first heard about mobile phones understood the world of applications that we would be in today.
We will go across, yes.
JOURNALIST: On what evidence did the Government base its decision to ban Huawei?
PM: We took appropriate advice and used that advice to make our decisions.
JOURNALIST: Who was the advice from?
PM: Look, I'm not commenting in detail on what ultimately are national security matters.
JOURNALIST: Huawei have said that they expect, or they were hoping to pick up some work in the NBN down the track. Is that a possibility, or what-
PM: - Look, I'm not speculating about hypotheticals for the future. We made a decision in Australia's national interest based on appropriate advice.
The Government's made the right decision. We made it carefully. We made it well informed and it was the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: A huestion for Senator Conroy. Has the Government made a policy decision on the battery backup issue or will NBN Co be rolling out 3.5 million backup batteries?
MINISTER CONROY: That is one of the issues we're still talking with Mike and the team about in terms of the update of the corporate plan.
So no final decision has been made on that yet.
JOURNALIST: So a decision by the end of, by the time the corporate plan is-
MINISTER CONROY: -Obviously they have got to incorporate a cost one way or the other. So we will be having, finalising that discussion over the next month or two.
PM: OK, we'll take a question here?
JOURNALIST: Phil Jacob from the Telegraph. Just going back to what you were saying (inaudible) so there won't be any new suburbs added (inaudible)
PM: Yes, there will be. So, I will go to Mike for the more technical description but the best way of saying is, we're rolling out, which means we're on a roll.
So you will see continuous updating as NBN goes through, so there will be more information each three months.
There will be another plan in 12 months time, which shows you as the rollout keeps going where it's going to next.
For the technical reasons Mike understands and can describe to you in detail, as you start then you build there, then you can roll out the next bit beyond and the next bit beyond and the next bit beyond and people will be kept continuously updated as that rollout happens and grows on what we have announced today.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: This is probably more a question for Mike. When are we going to see the first copper being switched off in whatever area?
QUIGLEY: Well the deal with Telstra just became unconditional, as you know, in the last month or so as the ACCC approved the deal.
Once we have declared an ESAM, that's these modules I've talked about of 2,500 to 3,000 people, once we declare that done, we then are in a process with Telstra where we begin that migration and it will take, overall we've allowed 18 months.
Although the CEO of Telstra has said he really wants to do that faster. So both companies will be working on accelerating that switching off of the copper module by module.
JOURNALIST: So you don't have a time or a place where  - 
QUIGLEY: -That will happen as we build the modules, we will do them one at a time. It won't take place all at once. It will happen module by module.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask one last question on NBN stuff, China's comments, from the Foreign Ministry, have lashed out at Australia's security decisions. Doesn't this put down Mr Swan's comments that it won't harm trade relations, and just a technical point, does this mean we rate the invasion of China as a more likely scenario than an invasion by France?
MINISTER CONROY: Alcatel are a French company.
PM: That's not what has motivated the Government here, so I know you've asked a rhetorical question and so I don't want my response to be seen as in any way embracing the premise of your rhetorical and, with respect, very silly question.
On the decision we've taken here and relationships with China, we've got a strong, robust relationship with China. We are deeply engaged at every level. We have a strong economic relationship. We have increasing ties at every level. Diplomatic ties, multilateral ties, people to people links and you will continue to see our relationship with China strengthen and grow.
Now, does that mean that there will never be a moment where we see things differently?
Of course not.
There will be moments when we see things differently, and I am not surprised that this is a moment where we are seeing one thing differently.
But it would be a great error indeed to move from a moment where we are seeing one thing differently and then extrapolate that to the full dimensions of the relationship - a very grave error indeed.
And once again, I do reiterate the decision we have taken is not in breach of any trade rules or trade arrangements with China, that is simply not true.
It is a decision open to the Australian Government. We've taken it for the right reasons through the right process, based on the right advice about a piece of critical infrastructure for our nation's future.
I do note that in China people also make decisions about their nation's future and who should be involved in the rollout of their own telecommunications.
They want to make those decisions for themselves, completely understandably so do we.
Yes, we'll go here.
JOURNALIST: Tim Christian from AAP, are there any plans to assist businesses who missed out on this rollout over the next three years?
PM: The rollout is going to keep happening as we have described it. It simply can't happen everywhere at once.
So I understand businesses will be anxious for the rollout. Put as simply as possible we're determined to get the National Broadband Network around the country.
We're working on it hard. We're working through the National Broadband Network Company.
We'll certainly be saying to the Australian people this is a project of significance to our nation's future and our economic future. Under us, you can be assured that it's going to continue, if the government changes then it will be dead.
JOURNALIST: Could it not create some sort of two speed economy though, between businesses who have it and those who don't?
PM: Look, you can only do what in the real world you can do. If I could snap my fingers and have every premise in Australia connected in the next second , would I do it? Of course I would.
But we don't live in that world. We live in a world where you've got to have trucks in streets, trenches dug, fibre rolled out, connections worked through. You've got to work on the basis of the infrastructure from Telstra that's there and the right way of rolling this out.
That's what we're doing now. That's the only way it can be done.
Yes?
JOURNALIST:  Can we move on to-
PM: OK, so are there any other NBN questions? Last one.
JOURNALIST: One more sorry, you said that the Huawei decision was based on advice. Was it based on evidence?
PM: The people who give us advice, base their advice on sound analysis and their understanding of the facts.
OK, right we will move to other questions.
 Thanks, Mike. We will let you retire from the fray. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask are you concerned about fresh allegations of misconduct at News in Australia?
PM: Look, I might have the relevant Minister address that.
MINISTER CONROY: Yeah look, thanks.
The claims that there is criminal conduct - if there is any and if the AFR aware of any - 14,000 emails is a lot as you know. I haven't read them all. You perhaps have.
I certainly think Neil has. But if there's anything in there that he thinks constitutes criminal conduct he should refer to it the Federal Police.
JOURNALIST: You've referred-
MINISTER CONROY: -We've not referred anything to the Federal Police. The Federal Police have already said publicly they haven't received a referral.
If there's any evidence of that, then the AFR should put to it the Federal Police, but we have not made a reference, the police have not received a reference, as obviously as they have indicated an ongoing support that they're giving the UK. But the Government has not referred anything to the Federal Police.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Does the Government plan to make any referrals on those allegations to the AFP?
PM: No, the Minister has just dealt with that. If there is anyone who has in their possession material that they think raises a concern about a criminal offence then they should refer to it the police.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Alexandra Ristway from Channel Seven News, on another issue, the Treasurer said this morning that the upcoming budget is probably one of the toughest he's ever had to deliver.
What assurances can you give that families won't be worse off under the upcoming budget?
PM: Well, the assurance I can give is we will take to the forthcoming budget our Labor values about managing the economy in the interests of working people and our Labor approach about supporting families.
When the world was threatened by the global financial crisis, we stepped up; we managed the economy in the interests of working people, we supported jobs and we also worked to provide new benefits to working families to help them with cost of living pressures.
Now, in the days beyond the global financial crisis, we can look at our economy, our region, our world and say to ourselves that the pre-GFC world is never coming back. It's never going to be the same again.
We live in a different world now. We live in a world full of opportunities because of the growth in our region, but we also live in a world that does confront us with some challenging choices.
We've got a strong Australian dollar that's putting pressure on some parts of our economy. We've got companies that are coming into this period with losses that they can bring to book against the tax system - that's affecting revenues.
We've got continued instability in parts of the global economy, particularly out of Europe.
So what is the right thing to do in all of those circumstances? Well, the economic imperative is to bring the budget to surplus. That will lock in the confidence we need for the future and we will do that.
As we make the choices to bring the budget to surplus, we will take our Labor values about supporting working people and working families with us as we make those decisions.
 Yes?
JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee the childcare rebate won't be means tested?
PM: I have seen budget processes before and I've participated in them as Prime Minister and I am not here at this stage of the budget preparation cycle, going to get into a rule in, rule out game about specific benefits or parts of the Government's agenda.
I know where this leads. And two or three days out from the budget it leads to a game of ‘will you rule out selling the Sydney Harbour Bridge, will you rule out exporting the Opera House' and so it goes.
So I am not going to start playing the game. But on child care, can I say look at what this Government has achieved to get an indication of what we think about child care.
There has never been a time in our nation's history where there has been more government support available for families who need childcare than there is under this Government today.
JOURNALIST: Is means testing being considered?
PM: Well I've just said to you I am not playing your rule in, rule out game.
So make of that you will. Because the next question you will ask me will be about another government program and another government program. I'm not going to get into the game, but you can judge the Government on what we have done.
So what does this Government think about childcare? Well we obviously think it's a veru high priority, otherwise we wouldn't be investing more money than the nation has at any other time in our nation's history.
When we came to government we deliberately said support for families wasn't enough and we worked with families to increase the support available to them.
So I think our track record counts for something when people are assessing the Government's priorities and plans for the future.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Just another one for Senator Conroy on the NDS allegation. Are there any ongoing investigations of any News Corp companies by AFP?
MINISTER CONROY: Well look, I couldn't comment on any ongoing investigations.
They don't keep me informed and it's not appropriate for me to ask questions about are you investigating this company or this company.
So, you would address that question to them. But they don't give me a running daily update about who they're investigating.
JOURNALIST: Has the Government made any referrals?
MINISTER CONROY: No, not that I'm aware of.
PM: OK, we've got a question right at the back.
JOURNALIST:A question for Senator Conroy, if the Federal Police aren't investigating at this stage, the News Corporation allegations, should ACMA be looking at it, especially given the analysis (inaudible) appropriate that Foxtel (inaudible)
MINISTER CONROY: The ACCC are considering that particular matter and there's a whole range of rules that they have to test against and they are conducting that.
On the issue around the ACMA, it's again, another independent statutory authority. And you would need to ask them whether or not they believe there's a need, following these allegations, for there to be any action but they are an independent statutory authority.
They're fully funded by the government, as you would know and they do administer broadcast law, which includes journalists. No-one is objecting to that recently.
But you would have to put that to the independent statutory authority.
PM: OK, we'll take a question here and one here. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Saturday saw the fall of the Labor Government in Queensland, are you worried that from now on in COAG meetings will be a lot more difficult?
PM: I've worked as Prime Minister with state and territory colleagues irrespective of their political persuasion to get things done in the national interest.
So for example, we got ground-breaking health reform done and the Minister is here now and she'd be able to give you chapter and verse, the differences that those reforms are making on the ground today for people who need health care.
Now I did that in circumstances where there was plenty of media speculation, saying that with the political complexion of parts of the country changing that COAG wouldn't work and there we had it, walked into a room and came out with a national health reform agreement to improve health care around the country.
So my perspective in COAG will be I'm not looking at what political party card people have got in their pockets, I'm looking at the best things we can do for the nation collaboratively and my experience generally is that Premiers and Chief Ministers walk into that room, not focussing on the political party card in their pocket, but focussing on what's in the best interests for their State.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Perhaps anotherquestion for Minister Conroy. Now that the classification review has been handed down, can you give us an update on the state of the internet filter project?
MINISTER CONROY: Look, as you know, we've been waiting to see that come down. I'm very interested in it. We're having discussions about it, as I think I've said, and there's been a little bit of misreporting that there are a number of companies already introduced a voluntary filter against the Interpol list.
We welcome that and think it's a very, very positive step. I would hope all companies would introduce that voluntarily.
We're in a situation where we're still having some discussions with the industry association and I think we may come to a very positive outcome.
JOURNALIST: So what does that really mean-
MINISTER CONROY: -I wouldn't want to spoil the surprise.
PM: That's a new line at press conferences.
Yes?
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, back to the upcoming budget, why not simply give families a break and delay the surplus?
PM: Because it's in the interests of families right around the nation that we bring the budget to surplus. There couldn't be anything more in their interests.
If we look at the world that we live in now, this post-global financial crisis world, there has never been more punishment meted out to countries that don't meet their fiscal targets than there is today.
You've got to stay the course and you've got to do what you've said you will do and that is bringing the budget to surplus. This is also the right economic choice for our nation now.
We are an economy that is returning to trend growth. The right economic choice, when you've got a growing economy, is to bring the budget to surplus and that is what we are going to do.
So if you care about jobs, if you care about the prospects for families in the future, if you genuinely care about the economy that people are going to work in tomorrow, where they're going to have jobs, where they're going to make their livelihoods, then you must endorse the economic imperative of bringing the budget to surplus in 2012-13.
Right we'll break from our last question and make this the last, last question and then we'll go.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, is it really a coincidence that all six crossbenchers get NBN in the next three years?
PM:Well that question should have been put when Mike was here, but Mike has described to you the way in which the decisions for this roll-out have been made.
Thanks very much. 



More than 3.5 million homes, businesses, schools and hospitals will have construction of the National Broadband Network either commenced or completed within the next three years, under a new fibre rollout plan announced today.
Across Australia, the numbers of homes, businesses, schools and hospitals that will see construction begin or be completed by mid 2015 are:
 * 	1,010,700 in New South Wales
 * 	691,600 in Victoria
 * 	678,600 in Queensland
 * 	429,200 in Western Australia.
 * 	327,300 in South Australia
 * 	135,300 in the ACT
 * 	65,200 in the Northern Territory
 * 	209,100 in Tasmania
Construction of the national fibre network rollout will begin between 1 April 2012 and 30 June 2015 in these locations, under NBN Co's indicative three year rollout plan.
Today's announcement provides certainty to Australians who have been waiting to hear when they will get access to this critical infrastructure. It also shows the NBN rollout is about to go into high gear.
In the 21st century, the internet is basic infrastructure - Australian families rely on it, and Australian businesses need it. It's become an essential utility - like electricity or water.
Unfortunately Australia's 100-year-old copper network is out of date and can't deliver the modern high speed broadband our economy needs.
We know that unless we upgrade to the NBN, our outdated system will choke Australia's economy in the future, slowing our growth and putting Australia behind the rest of the world.
We need the NBN to secure our economic future, which is why the Gillard Government is delivering high-speed, reliable broadband to every home and business in Australia.
The NBN will also transform service delivery and drive economic diversification for people living in regional Australia.
The NBN is one of the great enablers of the regions, for economic growth and diversification and service delivery.
It will ensure that every community around Australia gets fair and equal access to affordable high-speed broadband, including prices and services that are the same in the regions as they are in the city.
NBN Co released its first 12 month rollout schedule in October 2011. That schedule, updated for the first time in February 2012, continues to be updated quarterly.
The three year rollout plan will be updated each year.
A summary of NBN Co's three year indicative rollout schedule is available at Attachment A.
NBN Co has established an interactive searchable map on its website detailing the rollout, available at: www.nbnco.com.au/rollout/rollout-map.html.  



Thank you very much to NICTA for showing me and Minister Conroy and Minister Albanese the applications of the National Broadband Network.
It really has been an insight into the full power of this technology, whether you're at home, whether you're at work, whether you're managing a supply chain globally or whether you are trying to get goods to market in Australia, so thank you very much for that.
And both Stephen Conroy and Anthony Albanese are very pleased to be here too.
As many of you would be aware, I have recently been in Korea and I had the opportunity when I was there to visit Gyeseong Catholic Girls' School and to be on a link up with students who were in Armidale.
And watching those two groups of students talk to each other and explain things about each other's nations, but watching the power of that education experience reinforced in me that I do not want to see our nation left behind.
I do not want to see nations around the world like Korea have the benefit of a broadband network and to see Australia fall behind the standards of the world.
And so, I am here today to say very clearly that whilst our 100 year old copper telephone network has served us well, it cannot deliver the broadband we need for the future.
And if we don't move as a nation to the National Broadband Network, then we will see choked off the economic possibilities of the future and we will see choked off the service delivery possibilities of the future.
We have to move on and we have to move to the National Broadband Network.
This is going to bring a different way of working and living to Australian households, Australian small businesses, to hospitals, to schools, to technical and further education institutions, to universities, to regional centres, to our capital cities.
It is going to be make a difference for everyone around the nation. And in terms of our economy, we know that every 10 percentage point increase in broadband penetration delivers in the order of a 1.3 per cent one-off growth boost to the economy.
So, because we recognise the need to switch on to the future and the power of the National Broadband Network, I am very pleased to be here today with Mike Quigley, the head of the National Broadband Network Company, to release the three year roll-out plan for Australia's National Broadband Network.
Now this is a plan that sets out the communities across Australia which will either be connected to, or are in the process of being connected to, high speed broadband fibre by mid 2015.
We are announcing today that more than 3.5 million homes, businesses, schools and hospitals will be getting access to the NBN in the next three years. And where are these?
Well, over one million premises will be covered right here in New South Wales - from Campbelltown in Sydney's west, to Gosford and Coffs Harbour up north. Here in New South Wales, it's full steam ahead with the NBN.
Around 700,000 premises in Victoria will be covered, around 680,000 premises in Queensland, 430,000 premises in Western Australia, 330,000 premises in South Australia, 65,000 premises in the Northern Territory and over 200,000 premises in Tasmania.
This three year plan covers about one third of all the homes and businesses across our nation. It's going to be a fundamental change to regional and suburban economies.
And there will be direct jobs as the construction reaches its peak around 400 work teams, employing more than 16,000 workers, will be installing fibre optic cable to an average of 6,000 premises per week.
Now that direct jobs benefit is very important, as well as the economic potential being unleashed by the NBN.
So for example, to take a great state like Tasmania, which got the NBN first, which is where the National Broadband Network went first.
We know in Tasmania its economy is in transition, so Tasmania will see the benefit of more jobs today and it will also see more quickly than anywhere else, the ability of the NBN to transform Tasmania's economy for the future, an economy in which traditional industries like sustainable forestry will still employ people, but where we will see people employed in new industries as well.
High speed broadband is simply going to revolutionise the way Australians teach and learn, the way we diagnose and cure and the way we do business.
In this new world, you have to make the big decisions that shape the future.
And the Government is doing this through our roll-out of the National Broadband Network.
The choice for Australia is very stark. It's a choice between embracing the future or standing still.
It's a choice between broadband or no broadband.
We have made that choice and I am very pleased to be here to announce the three-year roll-out of the NBN.
Thank you very much. 



PM: I'm joined by Graham Perrett the Member for Moreton and I do want to thank everybody here at Senor touch screen solutions for showing us around today.
I'm here in Queensland today, one week after what was a very bad defeat for Labor in the State election. Now whilst the State election turned on state issues of course there are federal consequences and one of those consequences is that there is a new Premier in this State. So I've travelled to Queensland today to have my first meeting as Prime Minister with incoming Premier, Premier Newman.
I think people rightly want to see their leaders get on with the job, not let politics get in the way but actually work together to get things done. I've had a good meeting this morning with Premier Campbell Newman talking about our forthcoming work together including at the Council of Australian Governments meeting.
We've got a big agenda, a big agenda for the nation, a big agenda for Queensland and I want to thank Premier Newman for a constructive discussion today and I intend to work with the Premier in the best interests of Queensland, in the best interests of the people of this State.
Another consequence I believe of the election last weekend is we can see a real hunger amongst the people of Queensland and around the nation for a real plan for the future. People rightly want to understand what the future is going to bring and how the future can make our nation and this great state of Queensland a stronger and fairer place. And it's up to us to be out talking about our plans for the future and our plans for Queensland. This is a great resources state and I want to make sure that all Queenslanders get their fair share of that mineral wealth and we have a plan to ensure that the mineral wealth of this state is shared by the people of this state.
In this great state of Queensland where we see such magnificent natural assets as the Great Barrier Reef, we need to get on with tackling climate change, seizing a clean energy future and there are a few places in the world that stand to have a better opportunity in a cleaner energy future than the great state of Queensland. 
And of course, too, in Queensland we need to be delivering infrastructure. This is a fast-growing state and we are intending to deliver $8.6 billion of infrastructure investment and in addition to that to develop the technology here that people will need for future prosperity, future education and future health care services and that's the National Broadband Network.
So I've been very pleased to announce this week a three year rollout plan for the NBN which means around 680,000 premises in Queensland, homes, businesses, schools, hospitals, shops, will see the NBN connected to them or in the process of being connected over the next three years. That rollout will enable more people in Queensland to seize the benefits of this new technology: greater productivity, greater connectivity to where their businesses can grow and prosper, being able to take their products to the world. For households greater connectivity too which means that you can engage in new ways of learning and new ways of getting health care services. This is a great benefit to a growing state like Queensland.
It's a great benefit too to the small business economy of Queensland because the National Broadband Network enables those businesses to get online, to move information very, very quickly and to get the productivity benefits that come from that.
It's also great news for this highly regionalised state of Queensland. So for many regional centres it ends for all time that sense of the tyranny of distance and not being able to connect to do business, get health care services or get the education services that they need.
So it's a pleasure to be here and once again thank you to everybody here at Senor for making us so welcome today.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, those of us in the great state of Queensland are paying more for our electricity because of your carbon tax, what would you say to those (inaudible)?
PM: We've always been absolutely up front that putting a price on carbon would increase electricity bills. We've said that, very upfront, very transparent with people. What we've said is people should anticipate seeing their electricity bills rise by around 10%. Now, for an average household that means that they will see their electricity bill go up less than $4 a week. On average what they will see coming in is more than $10 a week as a result of tax cuts, family payment increases and pension increases.
I've always understood that there are many, many families out there in Queensland who find it hard to make ends meet and when a big bill comes in like the electricity bill it puts pressure on. That's why we've always been very clear with people that yes, the electricity bill will go up but people will get assistance and the increase in the electricity bill on average they can expect is less than $4 where the assistance on average is more than $10.
There are lots of other pressures on electricity prices, electricity prices in this state have gone up by around 40% over the last few years and that's nothing to do with carbon pricing. And into the future there will be price pressures from things like the need to invest in the poles and wires that take electricity around a big state like Queensland and a big nation like Australia.
For the Federal Government with carbon pricing we're providing assistance to families. For State Governments around the nation as price pressures come from the investments in electricity like new poles and wires, it's a question for those State Governments as to how they will assist families to meet those costs.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) itemised cost (inaudible) on bills?
PM: I think the more information people can get the better and I'd be very, very happy to see itemised on people's power bills or in associated information, information about the impact of carbon pricing but also information about the tax cuts, family payment increases and pension increases people can expect to assist them with the flow through of carbon pricing.
So I think it would be fair that people could see very easily and have all of the facts at their finger tips about the impact we're expecting on electricity prices of around about 10%, less than $4 a week for an average household, and they get all of the information about the more than $10 a week extra they will see flowing into their household budget.
JOURNALIST: If not for the carbon tax though our bills would have gone down?
PM: When you look at a bill in Queensland, and I'm very happy to do those calculations for you. If you look at a bill in Queensland, just look at $100 of electricity pricing to make the maths easy. If you look at $100 on an electricity bill, more than $50 is actually there because of the need for investment in the poles and the wires. Queensland's got more than 200,000 kilometres of poles and wires, new investments are needed, they've been neglected in the past, that has a cost and the cost for in $100 on your electricity bill of that is more than $50, absolutely nothing to do with carbon pricing but everything to do with the need to renew infrastructure at the state level.
JOURNALIST: How do you rebuild the tarnished Labor brand here in Queensland (inaudible)?
PM: I think it is incumbent on us to be here in Queensland, out there putting our case for our plan for Queensland's future, for a stronger and fairer future, for one where we share the benefits of the mining boom in this great state, for one where we tackle climate change and seize a clean energy future, for one where people see real benefits from new infrastructure including the National Broadband Network as well as the improvements that we're making in schools and hospitals and one in which people will see us continuing to provide assistance for cost of living pressures, whether that's in the form of this year's tax cuts, family payment increases and pension increases, or whether it's in the form of the new benefits of families we've already put in place like, for example, paid parental leave, more money going into child care than ever before and assistance for the first time with the cost of getting the kids to school.
JOURNALIST: Why didn't you bring your case during the actual election campaign? Why weren't you here more?
PM: I was here for the campaign launch. Obviously during an election campaign the single biggest event is the campaign launch and I was here to introduce Anna Bligh.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott has said that he will increase the child care rebate to cover nannies and that it will be coming out of existing funding. Would you consider replicating that or is there a reason why this can't be done?
PM: I've seen in today's newspapers reports of Federal Liberal sources that are saying very frankly they've got absolutely no intention of making any of these changes that Tony Abbott's talking about and really it's just a way of suckering in women to make it look like they care about child care costs. Very frank admission from the Liberal Party today that this is all about politics and not about real benefits for working women.
I would say too Tony Abbott himself has said that this would cost a lot of money, the estimates out there are around $2 billion and he doesn't have it. He's already in a position where he's going to have to slash and burn $70 billion of services that working families rely on. His answer to that has been to say well he'll somehow find that in the current child care expenditure. I'll tell you what that equals. It equals cutbacks for some families in child care. He'd have to be ripping money out of their hands in order to try and pay for what he's talking about.
So Liberals being very frank, they're not serious, it's all just a game, political game, and the fact that it's a political game is really shown by the way the sums just don't add up. He can't possibly make this work without huge cuts in child care benefits currently being received by families.
We've just had a discussion about cost of living pressures, imagine ripping child care support dollars out of the hands of hard-working families.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I think people should look to the cynicism that drips from this, very frankly acknowledged in today's newspapers that it's - they've got no intention of doing it, it's all about just looking like they care. 
JOURNALIST: What about the mining tax, Campbell Newman has indicated he would like to join a class action by New South Wales. How popular is the mining tax among Queenslanders?
PM: Premier Newman's legal actions or intentions are a matter for him. The Minerals Resource Rent Tax is about a very simple proposition. It's about fairness to the Australian people. We all own the mineral wealth that's in our grounds, it can only be dug up and sold once and whilst that happens during this huge resources boom I want to make sure Australians get their fair share, that the benefits of that huge resources boom in a state like Queensland is shared amongst the people of Queensland, not left in the hands of a privileged few.
JOURNALIST: Have you got something to tell us about disability allowances, Prime Minister?
PM: I think you're probably referring to reports in today's newspapers about a National Disability Insurance Scheme and some budget speculation. Of course I'm not going to speculate about matters in the budget. This time of year we get into budget speculation season and I'm not going to be speculating about what's in the budget. But I do want to say this about a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
This is a great Labor reform that we are working on just like Labor created Medicare and that made going to the doctor affordable for Australian families, we now want to build another great Labor reform which is ensuring that people who have disabilities and their families are treated carefully and treated in a caring way and carefully.
At the moment, depending on how you get your disability, you will be in very different circumstances. It really is quite a cruel lottery. So in some states if you heard in a transport accident you will get a package of care but if you were born with the same disability you wouldn't get the same assistance. We want to end that to make sure however people acquired their disability that they get the care they need. This is a Labor plan infused with Labor values and I want to see it for our nation's future.
JOURNALIST: How often do you plan to visit Queensland from now on?
PM: Look, I've been here in Queensland, I think this is my 21st visit in the last 15 months. You should anticipate seeing me and the Labor team out and about in Queensland talking about our plan for Queensland's future. I think people in this time of change both within our own nation, the region in which we live and the world in which we live want to know that there's a clear plan and clear direction for the future.
We have that clear plan, it's about sharing the benefits of the mining boom, it's about making sure our future economy can offer people jobs and prosperity, it's about managing the economy today in the interests of working families and helping them with the pressures that they face, the cost of living pressures they face as they raise their families.
GRAHAM PERRETT: And we're going to look for a flat in Moreton straight after this.
JOURNALIST: Will Queensland enjoy a disproportionate benefits compared to the rest of Australia do you think?
PM: When you look at things like Mineral Resources Rent Tax, this is a great mining state. Mining has incredible advantages, it also brings the stresses and strains of growth so we have said very clearly that money from the Mineral Resources Rent Tax will be used to bring infrastructure to mining regions here in Queensland.
Second, this is a state that has its huge mining giants but it also has a vibrant small business economy. We want to give those small businesses a tax break funded out of the Mineral Resources Rent Tax. We want to bring to them the power of new technology, the National Broadband Network, great for the small business economy that thrives in so much of Queensland.
And there's no place in the world really that can seize more of the opportunities from a clean energy future than right here in Queensland given the abundant sunshine, the long coastline, the ability to use the clean and renewable energy sources for the future.
JOURNALIST: What's your opinion of what happened in the last weekend? (Inaudible)
PM: I've spoken about that publicly. I mean this was a state campaign turning on state issues but of course there are consequences for Federal Labor. Amongst those consequences I'm meeting and dealing with a new Premier and I'm intending to continue to meet with and work with Premier Newman. I think people want to see politicians get on with it, not get bogged down in the politics.
And second, I think people do want to be very clear about what is the plan for the future of Queensland and I'm here talking about that today including the National Broadband Network.
JOURNALIST: If this trend is repeated though, Kevin Rudd and Wayne Swan would lose their seats in Queensland.
PM: We'll be working hard on a plan for Queensland's future and when it comes to the federal election that's due in 2013 the people of Queensland will have a very clear choice in that 2013 election, a very clear choice about whether they want a fair share of the mining boom or they want to see all of that money in the hands of a privileged few.
A very clear choice about whether they want to embrace and shape the future or stand still. A very clear choice about whether they want to see our further investments in the services and supports families need or they want to see Mr Abbott cut by $70 billion the services and supports families need.
JOURNALIST: The concerns from the manufacturing industry of the impact of carbon tax, are you seeing that as relevant?
PM: We're working through our carbon pricing scheme to support manufacturing and when it comes to manufacturing the million Australians employed in manufacturing we're working with them every step of the way, whether it's the car industry or manufacturing more generally, we are working with Australian manufacturing because we understand at this time of change with our high Australian dollar that there is a lot of pressure on the shoulders of manufacturing which is why I have highlighted publicly and let me do it again, how irresponsible it is, how grossly irresponsible it is at this time of change in particular for the Opposition to be talking about cutting half a billion dollars worth of assistance to the car industry given its pivotal role in supporting the millions of jobs in manufacturing.
JOURNALIST: What was the vibe you got from Mr Newman this morning? How would you rate him as a politician?
PM: We had a good and constructive discussion and I don't think it was particularly a time for politics, it was a time for leadership and getting things done in the interests of Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Can you be specific about the issues you talked about with him?
PM: Certainly we talked about the major issues on the forthcoming COAG agenda. We've got a big skills reform package, in this state people are looking for opportunities and there are opportunities for people with the right skills. We want to make sure people can get those skills, that they've got an entitlement to getting a Certificate III, the first qualification that makes a real difference to how much you earn and how employable you are, how secure a work future you can look towards and we've got a skills reform proposal to enable people who are studying high level skills to get the same deal that university students do  -  that you don't have to put all your money in upfront but you can pay it off as you earn more income because you did that qualification.
So we talked about that, we talked about a business meeting that we're having associated with COAG, to work together to improve our national economy and the way it works. We talked about proposals like: at the moment there is consideration about where the G20 meeting will go when it comes to Australia, we talked about that.
Of course the Premier used the opportunity to raise some things with me that he doesn't agree with. There will be times when we don't agree. I think people are looking to us to get on with the job and that's exactly what I'm intending to do.
JOURNALIST: Do you think you'll be able to work with him?
PM: Well we've started today.
JOURNALIST: Have you spoken to Anna Bligh lately? How's she going? 
PM: I spoke to Anna Bligh last weekend and I've been in touch over the course of this week. So - she's in a life beyond politics now.
Thank you very much. 



The Prime Minister today expressed her condolences at the passing of Senator Judith Adams.
Senator Adams, Coalition Deputy Whip, was a representative who brought a depth and breadth of life experience to the Parliament. She had friends across traditional party lines, and her absence will be keenly felt by her colleagues of all political persuasions.
Our thoughts are with her family and friends at this difficult time.
On behalf of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party, I pay tribute to Senator Adams for her contribution to public life, and offer our condolences to those she loved.  



Thank you very much, it's great to be here today and I'm joined by my Labor colleagues Andrew Leigh and Gai Brodtmann, Labor Members for the people who are working and shopping in this Woolworths as we meet this morning and Andrew had the opportunity of actually launching this store on Thursday.
I'm here because there's nothing more important to us as a Labor Government than making sure that people have got the benefits that come with having a job. The simple dignity that comes with making your own way in the world and the benefits that come with having employment and having that pay packet.
As a Government we've worked hard to make sure that Australians do have the benefit of work and when we faced very tough economic times during the global finance crisis we wanted to protect Australian jobs.
We want to see jobs grow now as our economy keeps changing and the way we live and work changes. So this store doesn't look like the Woolworths stores of the past, indeed there are new innovations in this store which are really at the cutting edge of retailing. But we all know that from the Woolworths that we used to go into five years ago or ten years ago or fifteen years ago, we live in a world of change, retailing is changing, our economy is changing and as a Government we have got to work with businesses and work with communities right around the country to maximise the benefits that can come with that growth and to maximise the benefits of jobs.
So that's why I'm very pleased to be here today, it is good news that Woolworth is looking to employ 10,000 more people, to put on 10,000 new starters to get them the benefit of a job. But it's even better news that Woolworths wants to do this in partnership with Government, so we not only find the quickest and most efficient way of filling those jobs, but we also ensure that we are embracing the full diversity of the Australian community and giving people a start and a hope.
So it's been great today to meet people who work right here at Woolworths today for whom this retail job was their first start and their first hope. I had for example the opportunity to talk to Chloe who's in the audience now, who had the benefit of this start and this hope through Woolworths.
And I've also had the benefit of meeting people for whom this was the first run on what ended up being a career. I know for many their image of retailing is that it's something people maybe do when they're young as their first job or it might provide them with flexible employment whilst their raising their family, but here at Woolworths today I've met people for whom this has become a career, who have worked here for 15, 20, 25 years, who started in that first job and who have got that all important apprenticeship through being involved with Woolworths. And I can see Skye in the audience, she's one of those.
So this agreement today is about making sure we can get for these jobs, it's about reaching out into the community to those who maybe find it that bit harder to get into the employment market and to get work and to make sure that because, perhaps they didn't do so well at school or they have a disability they don't get locked out of the benefits of employment. And it's also about putting people on the first rung of what can be a lifetime career, an apprenticeship opportunity, a management opportunity, the opportunity to really get ahead in life.
As we are working on the work that Government needs to do, I'm here in a store where a lot of people would be wandering around making their decisions today based on their family budget, so we're probably here with a lot of people working hard on their family budget. Just like they're working hard balancing their family budget, we're working hard down the road in Parliament House on balancing the Government's budget. But as we go about that task nothing is going to be more important to us than ensuring that we continue to protect jobs and we make sure that the families shopping here and the people who work in this store get the frontline services that they need.
So this is a great partnership, I'm really pleased to be able to be here to put my name on the dotted line for this fresh start partnership and I do also want to say particularly with Jennifer Westacott here from the Business Council of Australia and Margy Osmond from the retailers organisation, that this is the start of what I hope will become far more widespread as more business enter this kinds of partnership with Government to create jobs, fill jobs, reach out into the community and ensure that the benefits of jobs extend to all.
Thank you very much.



PM: Well I'm happy to take questions, given we've already made the announcement, but you may have to get your voices up, you seem quite a long way back.
JOURNALIST: How hard will this budget be for families (inaudible)?
PM: We are determined  -  you're quiet and I'm loud, okay we've still got the mic on.
We're determined to balance the budget, to return it to surplus because that's the right thing to do to lock in confidence at this time. But I do want to say something about how we're going to do that.
When you're making decisions about creating a budget surplus there are two ways to do it. We're intending to make those decisions on the basis of providing support to jobs as we've always done, protecting frontline services for families like doctors and nurses and making sure we're continuing to extend a helping hand to those in need.
The Opposition has got itself in a position that even after it endorses all of our budget savings it will need to provide $70 billion more of cuts into things that working families rely on and Tony Abbott's always telling us to judge him on his track record. Well his track record was even at a time of easy revenue growth that he took $1 billion out of public hospitals. So there's a very sharp contrast here between the approach we're intending to take to balance the budget, to lock in confidence for the future, to create a surplus whilst we protect jobs and frontline services for families and look after those in need compared with the $70 billion of cuts into areas families most rely on like the public hospital system which Tony Abbott has savaged in the past.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: We'll go here and then come over.
JOURNALIST: Are you planning on cuts to the Medicare Safety Net though?
PM: Look I've seen budget speculation today in the newspapers and I'm not going to comment on individual items of Budget speculation but what I can say is you can judge us on our approach and Labor values that we take to this task. We've invested billions and billions of dollars into health care into public hospitals to make sure that there are more frontline services, more doctors, more nurses, less waiting time in emergency departments, less waiting time for elective surgery. We will always act to preserve and protect the frontline service that families rely on.
JOURNALIST: I'm not asking specifically about what's in the budget or not but does the Government have any concerns with the current structure of the Medicare Safety Net?
PM: The Medicare Safety Net was designed by the former government, it was designed by Tony Abbott when he was Minister for Health and having given Australians a rock solid, iron-clad guarantee that he wasn't going to cut it in the 2004 election he then immediately cut it afterwards because in part it was badly designed. Badly designed because it was possible for some people to make a lot of money out of the Medicare Safety Net. We've acted to address a number of those problems with the Medicare Safety Net and we're always going to act to make sure taxpayers get value for money.
But I would remind - Tony Abbott, who was responsible for the initial setting up of this, immediately after an election, having said he wouldn't, took an axe to it himself.
JOURNALIST: Is it true that a razor is going to be applied to the rebates on special treatments?
PM: Well, I mean I'm not going to comment on individual Budget speculation but if you want to see the kind of approach that Labor takes to our decision making, have a look at today's newspapers and the fact that we are in a position to provide medicines that families need to them more cheaply.
The newspapers today are rightly reporting that for 1,000 medicines people will see price reductions up to a $15 price reductions, a cost of living benefit for families who are looking at their own budgets and finding it tough to make ends meet.
So we take our Labor approach to how we put the budget together. It's the right thing, it's the economically right thing to bring the budget back into the black, to make sure that we have a budget surplus that will lock in confidence for the future. But as we go about these savings we'll take our Labor approach of supporting jobs and frontline services and people in need.
JOURNALISTS: (Inaudible)
PM: I'll go here and here and then back again.
JOURNALIST: The Opposition wants to claim credit for those discounts on pharmaceuticals saying this is something that Tony Abbott introduced, and it happens annually anyway, so you're claiming for something he did.
PM: As long as he's claiming responsibility for the billion dollars that he took out of public hospitals, so long as he's claiming responsibility for having cut doctor numbers leading to a doctor shortage, the reduction in GP training places, it seems to me a little bit curious that Mr Abbott's out there trying to cherry pick his record when his record as Health Minister was huge cuts to public hospitals and let's remember Tony Abbott was ripping a billion dollars out of public hospitals when revenue was rolling into the Federal Government.
We are now putting together a budget after the effect of the global financial crisis where the world has changed, where the days of easy money are gone and even in those circumstances I can say to you we will act to protect services for families whereas Mr Abbott's track record in much easier days was huge cuts.
JOURNALIST: Will guarantee that families will not pay more to go to the doctor (inaudible)?
PM: I can just repeat what I've said to you, which is we're a Government that has ensured we're training more doctors, that there's billions of dollars more in the public hospital system, that we're out there creating new services like GP super clinics and cancer clinics to get people the care they need. They're the values we've taken to rebuilding the health system after Tony Abbott's cuts when he was in government in days of easy revenue. He still ripped a billion dollars out of the public hospital system.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you didn't answer the question though, can you give a guarantee that families won't pay more?
PM: I know going to play  -  and I know what the next question will be and what the next question will be and we're not playing the budget speculation game so you will just have to live with that until the budget comes out in May. But I can direct your attention very specifically to our track record and our values as we go about this task.
JOURNALIST: On a different topic then, given your Labor MPs on the detention centre inquiry joint parliamentary committee agree that there should be a 90-day limit on keeping people in detention, why won't your Government commit to that?
PM: We'll respond to this parliamentary inquiry at the appropriate time. We've worked hard to speed up processing times and to change the way in which the detention centre system works with new detention values. Of course what we ultimately want to do is we want to have an arrangement with Malaysia which would deter people from risking their lives at sea on boats where they can all too easily lose their lives as we've very tragically seen. The reason we are prevented from doing that is because Mr Abbott would prefer to see more boats.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Tony Abbott chiming in and giving you some fashion advice on the jackets you wear.
PM: Mr Abbott's words are a matter for Mr Abbott. Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: Sorry Prime Minister, could Medicare savings be used to fund the National Disability Insurance Scheme?
PM: The approach we're taking about the budget is the one I've outlined to you. On the National Disability Insurance Scheme, this is a great Labor reform which we do want to deliver. We've never underestimated the complexity of doing it but I do want to see us as a nation not treat people with disability as if they were participants in a lottery where some of them can come up with a package of services and some of them just miss out.
We'll take a last question from Sue.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one of the front line services families rely on is child care-
PM: Correct.
JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee that will be protected (inaudible)?
PM: Once again you can judge us by what we have done in child care. When we came to office people were struggling with the cost of child care, the rebate was only at 30%, the system meant families would wait to up to 18 months to get government support for their child care bills, be absolutely out of pocket for all of that time.
We have increased the rebate to 50%, there's more money going to support families with child care bills today than there has ever been before in our nation's history. 780,000 families are benefiting from that work and we've moved the system so people can get their money fortnightly.
If you want to judge people on their bona fides about child care, that's our track record whereas Mr Abbott, when he was in government and in a position in days of easy revenue to make a difference, didn't make any of those differences, and now he's involved in what has been unmasked in yesterday's newspapers as just a cynical political con job to get people talking about child care when even Liberal insiders are saying they've got absolutely no intention of changing the system or moving to supporting nannies. This is all just political spin and hot air from Mr Abbott.
Thank you. 



HOST: Welcome back to the program, Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Good morning.
PM: Good morning Hugh.
HOST: Now in Korea, as the news was coming in from Queensland and the latest Newspoll was also coming in, you said your job was “to listen and to lead.” As you listen, what now are you hearing across Australia?
PM: Well, right across our nation I think people are anxious about the changes in the world we are living through. We came through the global financial crisis and whilst we protected Australians from the worst, people knew that something big in the world had changed. And then they look at the news, particularly from Europe and they see more doom and gloom and then they look in our own economy and whilst they see huge opportunities with mining regions jumping ahead and people going there for work, they also see manufacturing under pressure and job losses.
So I think that all means that people are anxious and they want to know what the future is going to hold. They're right to be asking that question and it's my job to be leading the nation during this time and to be saying to the nation that despite current pressures, I am incredibly optimistic that the best days of our nation are in front of it. We've got to make the right decisions now to seize the opportunities of the future but if we do that, then we will be more prosperous and we can be fairer in the future we will live through together.
HOST: So are you suggesting that the hostility towards Labor at the moment is really just a function of a general anxiety  -  that it is nothing to do with Labor itself?
PM: You have invited me to reflect on how people are feeling and I do think that people know something big has changed in the world and they want a clear path for the future and it is my job to be explaining that path for the future. Of course, as people feel that anxiety we are challenging them to say, "You don't shape that future by simply sitting and standing still, you do not shape that future by not engaging in change yourself, you have to get out and engage in change" and we are asking the nation to make some big changes, like getting our economy ready for a clean energy future which is what carbon pricing is about.
But anybody who is pretending to people in our nation or indeed around the world, that the answer to today's anxiety is to pretend that we can stand still, isn't telling you the truth. We have got to overcome today's anxiety by moving forward confidently to shape that future together and to make sure that that future is a time when we realise all the opportunities of the spectacular growth in our region, all of the jobs and prosperity that will flow with it  -  all of the potential of the new technology that is coming like the National Broadband Network and all of the Australian potential to shape that future as a future of fairness as we take our great Aussie values of a fair go with us.
HOST: So if you are reading a sense of anxiety across the land, how much is the Carbon Tax, which is due to come in from 1 July, exacerbating that anxiety?
PM: Look, I think the kind of hyper-partisanship we are seeing in the modern political debate does feed the anxiety. People have been force-fed a diet now from the Opposition, force-fed for many months a diet of completely outlandish scare campaigns about what carbon pricing is going to mean. So people have been told it's going to mean huge job losses where of course, employment is going to grow. They have been told it is going to mean huge price increases where of course, we know that price increases will be less than 1% and all of that has obscured the fact that people are getting money to assist them, tax cuts, family payment increases, pension increases.
I mean, I know what it's like to grow up in a family  -  my parents are migrants, they worked incredibly hard. I know what it's like to be in a family where people puzzle over the bills and worry about how you are going to get those bills paid and as we engage in this time of change for a clean energy future, I am not going to leave working families behind, which is why we are providing them with money through tax cuts, pension increase and family payment increases to help them through.
HOST: You mentioned the Opposition but it's not just the Opposition is it? We are now pretty familiar with the view of the former head of the Future Fund, retiring head of the Future Fund David Murray. Here is what he said on Friday.
DAVID MURRAY: It is the worst piece of economic reform I have ever seen in my life in this country. 
HOST: That's pretty damning. Now the point has been made that he has been somewhat sceptical about the link between carbon dioxide and global warming but he is arguing that as an economist, that it is economically a poor piece of policy  -  and he is not alone. There are others who support the science in the business world who have been enthusiastic and also very negative about the economic impacts and efficacy of this piece of legislation. Is there nothing in this that rings any warning bells to you, this late in the day?
PM: The most efficient thing we can do to tackle carbon pollution  -  and I do believe climate change is real, I accept the science  -  we have to live and work in a way that generates less carbon pollution. The most efficient way of doing that is by putting a price on carbon pollution.
Now I'm saying that to you  -  when John Howard was Prime Minister he could have come on this show and said exactly the same words to you, that a price on carbon, a market-based mechanism to get carbon pollution reduced is the best way that our nation can tackle this problem and that is what is going to happen from 1 July.
HOST: The only way this legislation can stick is for you to win the next election because Tony Abbott has made plain that he will get rid of it. Do you believe you can win the next election with this piece of legislation or is this the millstone that is going to end Labor?
PM: I certainly believe every election is there to be won and we will go to 2013, saying the nation faces an incredibly clear choice, a very stark choice. Hugh, there has been a lot of fashionable commentary in modern politics that the choice between the two political parties is a bit of a Tweedledum, Tweedledee choice. Well at this time in our nation's history, nothing could be further from the truth.
I will go to the 2013 election saying we can shape the future together to make sure that it is a prosperous future where we all get to share its benefits. Mr Abbott will go to that election inviting people to stand still, pretend that the future is just not going to happen and he is going to go to that election effectively saying, the benefits Labor wants to provide to you I want to take away and give to a few, to a few billionaires.
He will go to that election carrying a candle for a privileged few rather than the vast majority of the Australian people. And when it specifically comes to carbon pricing, Hugh, no-one is really going to believe Mr Abbott at the 2013 election in my view. By that time carbon pricing would have started, our economy would have started the adjustment. People would have got the money in their hands and Mr Abbott I think, will find it very difficult indeed to pretend to the Australian people that he is seriously going to dismantle all that. I think this chest-beating right now is going to prove to be incredibly hollow.
PANEL  -  SEGMENT 1
HOST: Welcome back, this is Meet the Press. Our guest is the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard. Let's introduce now our journos, Michelle Grattan from The Age, Greg Sheridan from The Australian.  Good morning to both of you.
JOURNALISTS: Good morning.
GRATTAN: Prime Minister, can you - just turning to the budget, can you tell us if there are any areas which are quarantined from what the Treasurer has said will be pretty swingeing cuts?
PM: Michelle, I know it's budget speculation season, it's kind of started early this year and I'm not going to engage in speculation about individual items, but I can certainly say to you Michelle, that as we return the budget to surplus which is the right economic decision now to lock in confidence for the future, we'll be taking our Labor values with us so as we do what we need to, to get the budget into surplus, we will be keeping frontline services, doctors, nurses, the kind of things that people want to see in the hospital system. We'll be continuing to support jobs and we'll be making sure too that those who need our support the most continue to get that support.
GRATTAN: Well if I can just tempt you a tiny bit  -  clearly the Government has been talking up the whole disability area and your Disability Insurance Scheme. Could we expect that maybe you will be doing more in the first years about that than we have previously been given to believe?
PM:  Well, thank you for trying to tempt me, Michelle, but I'm going to give the same answer on budget speculation. But I am going to say to you too, I am passionately committed to seeing us as a nation doing better by people with a disability. I think it should dishearten all of us that right now in our country whether or not you get a decent package of care or not enough support depends on this cruel lottery about how you acquired your disability  -  whether you got it for example in a transport accident or at work or you were born with it or had a accident at home.
We can do better than that. We should do better than that, but I'm also going to be very clear  -  a National Disability Insurance Scheme is a very complicated thing to build. We are talking about a social reform at least as big as Medicare. As Prime Minister I believe using all of my Labor heritage and Labor values, that it's Labor that can get these big things done and we're continuing to work on a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
SHERIDAN: Prime Minister, your Government committed to a Defence Force structure in the 2009 White Paper  - 12 submarines, 100 joint strike fighters, three air warfare destroyers, an army of 30,000. It also made some funding commitments, which it said, and this was after the GFC, and it said these were essential to achieve that.
In the last budget money was ripped away from Defence and all the indications are the same will happen with this budget. Have you in effect, abandoned the White Paper force structure and if that is the case, shouldn't you tell the Australian people what our Defence Force structure will be?
PM: Greg, thank you for that question. Once again, like I responded to Michelle, I'm not going to get swept up in budget speculation on any item in the budget. What I can say to you about defence is we remain committed to the core capabilities that were identified in the White Paper and indeed, we've been working on the acquisition of those core capabilities. Around $6 billion of acquisition decisions have been made and are in progress.
You would be aware, too, that there are some issues with capabilities like the Joint Strike Fighter which aren't anything to do with Australian Government decisions, but are to do with the US approach to Defence during its budget difficulties and the fact that that project has been slowed and of course, our ability to access joint strike fighters depends on when the Americans are making them and how they are going about that major procurement project.
GRATTAN: Could I just ask you about childcare  -  I think the indications have been the Government is going to protect childcare in its decisions. But the Government has also been very critical of Tony Abbott's idea about the possibility of including nannies in the childcare scheme  -  what is wrong with having a Productivity Commission inquiry about this? Because after all they are a very hard-headed group and if it is not going to fly they will say so.
PM: Michelle, I'm very soft-hearted if you like, when it comes to childcare. I'm hard-headed in the sense I know it is a participation measure, it helps women in particular get to work. But we have also wanted to benefit families because we know what a cost of living pressure childcare fees have been, so we have instituted a scheme that has benefited 780,000 families around the nation. We have instituted a scheme that has increased the childcare rebate from 30% to 50% and we're getting the money to people fortnightly-
HOST: But Prime Minister, the question is about the suggestion of a Productivity Commission inquiry into the nannies.
JULIA GILLARD: And I'm happy to come to that right now, Hugh. I do want to just make the point that we are getting money into the hands of people quickly, fortnightly. They used to wait for up to 18 months.
Now, my criticism of the Opposition on all of this is first and foremost, it's quite clear from yesterday's newspapers they are nowhere near serious. This is all a bit of a fig leaf to start a debate about childcare, to pretend that they are interested in it  -  presumably to try to detract from their track record in Government. But you can see Liberal sources in the newspaper saying we are not serious, we are never going to do it, and then when Tony Abbott has been pressed on the figures he says, well, we will have to rip childcare money off someone to make this $2 billion available. Well, who is going to bear that cut? So really, this is all a political game from the Opposition while we are getting on the job of making childcare more accessible and more affordable for Australian families.
SHERIDAN: Prime Minister, another big money commitment in the foreign field was aid. Kevin Rudd was very committed to raising the foreign aid budget to 5% of gross national product by 2015. It is already $5 billion and is going out quicker than we know how to spend it properly. Are you committed to keeping this aid increase going so that by 2015, it will be in excess of $8 billion a year?
PM: The Government is committed to the millennium development goals. Once again, Greg, you are inviting me to engage in individual items of speculation about expenditure and I'm not going to do it  -  even at the risk of seeing another stinging Greg Sheridan column at some point, so I won't be doing that. On how important aid expenditure is, I think we are making a difference in many parts of the world  -  whether it is alleviating poverty experienced by children, whether it's building capability for better education, whether it's addressing challenges like getting vaccines in the arms of kids so that they don't die of preventable diseases. So there is a lot to be proud of in our current aid program.
PANEL  -  SEGMENT 2
HOST: Welcome back. The Prime Minister is our guest. Prime Minister, we just heard that play-off of Germaine Greer, the Tony Abbott. I fervently would hope that gender is not an issue in national politics but it seems that it is. Tony Abbott has expressed his regrets about his comments. Is that good enough for you?
PM: Tony Abbott's words are matter for Mr Abbott.
HOST: You do not think he should say sorry, I mean - climbing in as he did on that point?
PM: Hugh, I'm not going to add to what I have just said.
SHERIDAN: Prime Minister, could I ask you about the budget surplus. The deficit looks as though it's going to be $37 billion now. To get into your surplus you are going to have to take $40 billion out of the economy. Isn't there a risk that to fulfil the surplus commitment, you might actually tip this economy back into recession?
PM: Well, Greg, our economy didn't go into recession as a result of what the Government did to protect Australian jobs during the global financial crisis. And we'll keep protecting Australian jobs as we work our way through the big structural adjustments in our economy and we build the economy we will need for the future.
For this budget, we have got an economic goal of bringing the budget to surplus because our economy will be returning to around trend growth and so having a surplus is the right thing to do when you have got that kind of growth. But importantly in this changed world in which we live, this post-GFC world, the best way we can lock in confidence about the future and send a message to the world about the Australian economy is to deliver a budget surplus.
HOST: But you spent us out of the GFC. You went into debt to get us out of the GFC. The task now is to not spend  -  to actually save money. Is there not, as Greg asked, the risk of a recession being brought down upon Australia because of what you say, is an economic imperative?
PM: No, there's not, Hugh and to be talking in that language is to completely misunderstand what is happening in the Australian economy today. We've got an economy that has got turbo-charged parts of it. More than $400 billion of investment in the resources pipeline. We have also got an economy that is showing signs of strain from the high Australian dollar putting pressure on manufacturing and tourism and industries like that, that are, you know, very exposed to fluctuation movements in our currency. But at this time, we are seeing our economy in a period of change  -  structurally adjusting, getting used to a higher currency, getting itself ready to seize the benefits that will come down the track during this century of Asian growth and we are working today to make the right decisions to seize the benefits of this century of Asian growth. So as your economy grows in this way, locking in a budget surplus and all the confidence that comes with it is the right thing to do.
GRATTAN: Ms Gillard, could I ask you about a quite critical report that came down on Friday from a parliamentary inquiry on detention policy which said no-one should be in detention for more than 90 days, except on security grounds and did recommend an independent system for assessing adverse security findings. What do you take from that report and also, do you have any more ideas on how you can deal with the whole border security issue, now that the Malaysian solution is not possible?
PM: We will respond to the parliamentary inquiry as we usually do. We have worked hard to make sure that when we do detain people  -  and I do support mandatory detention of people who arrive unauthorised by boat  -  so when we do detain people, that we get about processing claims as quickly as possible and that we have detention conditions which are acceptable. We have worked hard on that.
GRATTAN: Are you satisfied with the results though? Do you think you have done enough?
PM: We have done a lot. Of course, I will look at the parliamentary report and we will respond to it in due course. But we have done a lot and the situation is not the same as when we came to Government, where you could see children in high-security detention for endless amounts of time. That isn't happening as a result of the changes that we have brought.
On the future for asylum seeker policy, Michelle  -  I little before I talked to Hugh a little bit about, hyper-partisanship about the way in which the Opposition just says “no” to everything. Well we are in a position where Tony Abbott has said “no” to offshore processing, which means he has effectively said “yes” to there being more boats. So really, for Mr Abbott, it is for him to explain how he can possibly pretend to the Australian people he is opposed to boats arriving on our shore when he has taken this position.
SHERIDAN: Prime Minister, one question on foreign policy  -  we have seen a colossal drop in public support for the US commitment in Afghanistan. We are the second-largest provider of military training to Pakistan in the world after the United States. It's very clear that Pakistani intelligence services are helping the Taliban and the Haqqani network kill Australian soldiers. Are you happy with that?
PM: We certainly know that as we work towards a solution in Afghanistan and we continue our training mission and acquit our mission and transition in Uruzgan province that there are issues about Pakistan and its involvement. Of course we know that, Greg. At the highest levels we are working to make our position clear. We do think the training that we provide of military offices is an important contribution  - 
HOST: Prime Minister, I do apologise  -  we are going to have to wrap it up. We are hard out of time. Thank you very much for joining us today, also to our panel.  



Australians looking for work will be given assistance through a landmark jobs compact between the Gillard Government and Woolworths.
We know many Australians want to find work, but need a hand with securing a job.
Woolworths is creating 10,000 new retail jobs this financial year (2011-12).
Under the Fresh Start Agreement signed today, the Government will set up a one stop shop to ensure that Woolworths has streamlined access to the full range of jobs, skills and training services the Government has to offer.
This includes access to a range of government programs such as:
 * 	Skills Connect;
 * 	Employment programs such as indigenous employment programs, pre-apprenticeship programs and access to apprenticeship incentives; and
 * 	Wage Connect.
This will ensure that Woolworths is able to employ a diverse range of people in these 10,000 positions, and in any future positions. This will include the long term unemployed, Indigenous Australians, older workers and workers with a disability.
By having a clear understanding of the needs of Woolworths as a major employer, we will cut through the red tape and tailor our services to be more effective.
These one stop shops will be set up at a state level  -  so state Woolworths managers can liaise directly with federal departments about incentives, skills, training, and support services.
In addition to establishing a one stop shop, the Government will also work to increase the skills and job readiness of jobseekers and existing employees.
Around 700,000 Australians have gained a job since Labor came to office.
We want to ensure all Australians who want a job can find one.
By partnering with a major employer such as Woolworths, the Gillard Government is directly helping Australians to secure a job.
We believe the best way to ensure workplace training meets the needs of employers is to work with them to deliver that training, and we want this agreement to be the first of many.
The Government believes industry must be at the heart of the training system. Our priority is to work with industry and employers, like we are doing with Woolworths, and assist in developing a training solution that has real results for Australians.
We know that a person's first retail job can turn into a career. There are hundreds of examples at Woolworths alone where people have started in low-skilled jobs, received training and experience and worked their way into skilled trades, such as butchers and bakers, and into management.
Through partnerships such as these, we can work with industry to give Australians the opportunity to up-skill and get a better job. 



The Prime Minister today paid tribute to the late Lionel Bowen, whose long and remarkable life came to an end in Sydney this morning at the age of 89.
Mr Bowen was a legend of Australian politics, who served with distinction in public life for 42 years across all three levels of government.
Lionel Bowen was a good Labor man, who was passionate for the cause of social justice, and who was renowned for his integrity, honesty and fairness.
Bob Hawke once referred to Lionel Bowen as “a great Minister, a great mate and a great Australian”, a sentiment the whole nation can endorse today.
Born into modest circumstances, Lionel Bowen started his working life as a messenger boy at age 14 and worked his way up to becoming a respected lawyer before entering the NSW Parliament in 1962, moving to federal politics in the electorate of Kingsford-Smith in 1969.
He also served as an Alderman and Mayor on Randwick Municipal Council between 1948 and 1962.
Mr Bowen was a highly-regarded and capable Minister in the Whitlam and Hawke governments 1972-75 and 1983-1990, playing a key role as a reforming Attorney General in the Hawke era.
Most important was Mr Bowen's role as Deputy Prime Minister alongside Bob Hawke, which he held from 1983 until his retirement in 1990. His loyalty, steadfastness and wise counsel were among the key ingredients for the success and stability of the Hawke era.
The Australian community has lost an outstanding leader, and the Labor Party has lost one of its finest sons.
On behalf of the nation, I extend my sincerest condolences to Mr Bowen's widow Claire, their eight children and his extended family. 



The first rotation of around 200 United States Marine Corps personnel arrived in Darwin on Tuesday night.
This initial rotation is an integral part of the enhanced practical cooperation measures pursuant to the Australia-United States Alliance relationship announced by Prime Minister Julia Gillard and United States President Barack Obama on 16 November 2011. 
It represents an evolution of existing exercises and activities that the United States (US) already conducts with the Australian Defence Force (ADF) in Australia.
Existing exercises include the biennial Exercise Talisman Sabre in the Northern Territory and Queensland, the most recent of which in 2011 involved close to 22,500 Australian and US troops working together.
As part of the ongoing US consideration of its global force posture, this initiative will see US Marine Corps personnel deploying to Northern Australia on a rotational basis for around six months per year. 
Over the six month period, this initial US Marine Corps rotation will undertake bilateral training in Australia with the ADF and conduct unilateral training in Australia.  
The US Marines will spend the majority of that time in ADF Northern Territory training areas and ranges including the Mount Bundey and Kangaroo Flats Training Areas.
Chief Minister Paul Henderson said Territorians are keen to welcome the US Marines following a visit from President Barack Obama last year and the Marines would be a welcome addition to Darwin's culturally vibrant community.
The initial rotation will be a US Marine Corps infantry company, which will not include heavy equipment, vehicles or aircraft.  Air and sea movements in support of this rotation are minimal. 
The intent in the coming years is to establish a rotational presence of up to a 2,500 personnel Marine Air Ground Task Force (MAGTF), rotating into Northern Australia in the northern dry season.  A full MAGTF includes a Command Element, Ground Element, Aviation Element and Logistics Element.  Major equipment to support the elements of the MAGTF includes wheeled vehicles, artillery pieces, light armoured vehicles and aircraft, in addition to personnel. 
There are no US military bases in Australia, and this will not change.
The US Marine Corps rotations of personnel will use existing Defence facilities in Northern Australia for accommodation and training. Defence will provide a range of support to this initial rotation and costs for this rotation will be shared under existing legal, financial and logistical arrangements.
Australia and the US continue to work together to establish specific activities that will occur during this initial rotation, and will continue to work closely with the Northern Territory Government. 
This initiative will provide tangible benefits for Australia by increasing the number, variety and complexity of training opportunities for the ADF, and further developing our interoperability with US forces. 
It also supports Australia's long-held strategic interests in supporting US engagement in our region in a manner that promotes peace and stability. The initiative could also provide new opportunities for Australiana and US engagement with our partners in the region.
The Government welcomes this latest chapter in the more than sixty year Alliance relationship with the United States.
Australia's own Force Posture Review is currently being considered by Government. 



Twenty-one organisations across Australia will share $60 million to help build community-based accommodation for adults with severe or profound disability.
People with disability need access to a range of supported accommodation models that will allow them, and their carers, to participate as valued members of their communities.
The Supported Accommodation Innovation Fund will help address a shortfall in supported accommodation and respite for people with disability.
It will encourage innovation and drive change in the way supported accommodation services are provided.
Negotiations for funding agreements are in progress with the successful 21 organisations, which will be responsible for 27 projects, providing 169 new supported accommodation and respite places across the country.
This is 19 more places than we originally committed to delivering.   
The new places will be available to people with severe or profound disability.
Some of the places will be provided for people with ageing carers or people in rural and remote communities, and there are specific projects that will be provided for Indigenous communities.
The new innovative accommodation includes a vertical village with an accessible gym, and homes designed with leading edge technologies based on world's best practice in sustainable housing, including home automation with motion detected lighting, and electronic devices to enhance hearing and speech difficulties.
This initiative will also help reduce the number of young people with disability who are cared for in nursing homes, or those at risk of placement in residential aged care.
These projects, which are to be completed by June 2014, build on the Australian Government's $100 million capital injection in 2008 to build more than 300 supported accommodation places, which are on track to be delivered this year.
For more information on the Supported Accommodation Innovation Fund go to www.saif.govspace.gov.au. 
										Organisation
											State
											Project Title
											Funding (GST excl.)
									CatholicCare Canberra and Goulburn					ACT					Gungahlin Living In Networked Communities (LINC) Program					$1,200,000							Affordable Community Housing Ltd					NSW					Ryde Area Supported Accommodation for Intellectually Disabled					$3,733,598							Affordable Community Housing Ltd					NSW					Grandview Project					$2,080,327							Compass Housing Services Co Ltd					NSW					Hunter Villages					$7,371,200							Endeavour Industries Ltd					NSW					Edgeworth Gardens Residential Development					$2,937,000							Housing Plus					NSW					Dubbo Supported Accommodation Project					$1,815,909							North Coast Community Housing Company					NSW					House to Home					$637,500							North Coast Community Housing Company					NSW					House to Home					$600,000							North Coast Community Housing Company					NSW					House to Home					$600,000							The Disability Trust					NSW					The WorkAble Living Project					$800,000							Life Without Barriers					NT					Alice Springs Respite Centre					$1,302,728							Cootharinga North Queensland					Qld					My Home is Smarter, Greener and Accessible! (Cootharinga Housing Innovations)					$840,450							Kyabra Community Association					Qld					Three Resident DMD Home Fitzgibbon					$729,119							Kyabra Community Association					Qld					Three Resident Home, Wynnum					$764,011							Synapse (Brain Injury Association of Qld Inc.)					Qld					Wabu Gadun Bulmba Gurriny Mukanji					$4,592,720							Community Accommodation and Respite Agency (Cara) Inc.					SA					Addressing unmet need and personal development through Regional Farm Stay Respite					$740,908							Centacare Tasmania					Tas					Supported Accommodation Drake Street					$577,000							Kingston Uniting Church in Australia					Tas					Kingston Uniting Church Residential Community, Rowallan Park					$2,801,650							Active Property Services Management Ltd					Vic					Active Whittlesea, New Beginnings					$1,041,060							Community Housing (Vic) Ltd					Vic					Heidelberg Key Ring					$1,612,220							each Housing Limited					Vic					Building an Independent Future					$2,465,800							each Housing Limited					Vic					Independent Living Venus Bay					$710,690							Haven					Vic					Cairo					$4,100,000							Housing Choices Australia					Vic					Gateways and HCA Innovative Housing Model,  Greater Geelong					$2,064,971							Housing Choices Australia					Vic					Supporting Pathways for Disability Accommodation in Bairnsdale					$1,556,740							Mission Australia Housing					Vic					Lardner Road Mixed Purpose Unit Development					$1,939,000							Yarra Community Housing Ltd					Vic					Dual Disability, Housing and Support					$1,930,631							 					 					 					 					 	



PM: Thank you very much and thank you for making me and Julie Owens, the Member for Parramatta and Jan McLucas, our Parliamentary Secretary for Disabilities, so very welcome today.
We've had the opportunity to watch some cooking in progress, we've had the opportunity to see some music played and a song being written, and we've also had the opportunity to hear from Shirley, who talked about the importance to her of being able, ultimately, to live independently. And that's what today's announcement is all about.
People with disabilities want choices, the same kind of choices that we all aspire to exercise in our own lives.
And one of those choices is making the choice about where you live, and in what circumstances you live and we understand that when people are striving for that choice that government needs to respond.
So I am really delighted to be here with Julie Owens today to announce the successful grants that will come from the Supported Accommodation Innovation Fund.
These grants will give $60 million to 21 organisations to build 27 supported accommodation and respite projects for adults with severe or profound disability.
Now these bricks and mortar investments are absolutely critical, but we actually know to create suitable accommodation for people with disabilities, you need more than the bricks and mortar. You need the care that comes with it and the support that comes with it and that's what we're striving for through these new accommodation opportunities.
The Supported Accommodation Innovation Fund is all about developing new ways of partnering and working together so that we not only have the bricks and mortar, but we have the care required and we have to opportunity for people with a disability to have their voices, their preferences, their options listened to. 
So the projects that have been successful have been genuine collaborations that have worked with communities, worked with families, worked with people with disabilities, to respond to their needs.
The Affordable Community Housing Limited has succeeded for two innovative projects, and we've heard them spoken about today. In total they will receive $5.8 million and I'm very pleased that one of these innovative new projects will be right here in Grandview Street, which is great news for the local community.
Now this announcement today shows how, as a Government, we are seeking to better meet the needs of people with disabilities today. We want to be responding and we want to be working with communities around the country for better options, better support and better care.
We also want to be working towards a National Disability Insurance Scheme, which will in all aspects of the lives of people with disabilities, give them the opportunity for better support and better care.
It will end for all time the spectre of what now is a very cruel lottery where the level of support you're entitled to depends entirely on the circumstances in which you acquired your disability.
So it can be a very different life experience for someone injured at work or in a transport accident, as opposed to someone who acquired the same disability at home or was born with that disability.
We want to end that cruel lottery through a National Disability Insurance Scheme. We are looking at this as another great Labor reform, just like Medicare for all time changed how we think about how health care and how Australians get to access health care. A National Disability Insurance Scheme will change for all time the way in which people with disabilities get care and support.
It's a big thing to do, and it's going to take some time to build. Just like Medicare is a complex system and you need to get every aspect of it right, a National Disability Insurance Scheme is a complex system and we need to get every aspect of that right too.
Now that means that the system in full is some time away, but I am hoping in coming weeks to be able to have something more to say about the way in which we will build a National Disability Insurance Scheme, how we will take the next step on what is a journey over time and which will take some time towards a full National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Now over recent days, I've been talking about the forthcoming Federal budget, and it will be a tough budget. But even against the backdrop of a tough budget, it is our way, the Labor way, to make sure that we are always supporting those and prioritising the needs of those who need our care the most. And so I'm very pleased to be here for today's announcement.
Congratulations, and I know that the money is going to go to make some real differences in people's lives.
Thank you.
So we're happy to take media questions, I'm not sure if that means our media friends need to group in closer than they are at the moment, or whether they're going to stay where they are.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You'll group in, OK. That's not meant to imply groupie, that's just grouping in.'
JOURNALIST: You have lots of fans out there I'm sure. Prime Minister, Bob Carr's views on drugs, he says he's pro-decriminalisation. What's your personal view on drug decriminalisation?
PM: Look my view about drugs is clearly, I mean drugs kill people, they rip families apart, they destroy lives and we want to see less harm done through drug usage.
So we want to make sure that we're supporting people to get treatment options and that we are getting our police to do what they rightly should be doing which is policing our laws on drugs.
I'm not in favour of decriminalisation of any of our drug laws. We want to keep supporting people who need our help to break out of a cycle of addiction, and we need to keep policing so that we are tackling those that are seeking to make a profit out of what really is a trade in incredible misery.
JOURNALIST: So are Bob Carr's outspoken comments causing problems for you?
PM: Look, I've just put my view about the issue that you've raised.
JOURNALIST: If adverse findings are made against Craig Thomson from Fair Work, what will that mean for the ALP?
PM: Well Fair Work Australia is an independent body. I know that there is speculation about its report. It's a matter for Fair Work Australia when it's released and I'm not going to speculate about what its contents may be.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday Robert McClelland said some comments, he said that the carbon tax is a burning issue that needs to be resolved by dialogue with the public. Can you do that?
PM: Look, on those comments and on putting a price on carbon, let me say this very clearly - I understand that there is some anger about the decision I made to put a price on carbon. I do understand that and I've acknowledged that before. But I made the right decision in the nation's interests and in the interests of seizing a clean energy future.
That's what people expect the nation's leaders to do, to make the right decisions in the national interest and we have. Putting a price on carbon will enable us to seize a clean energy future; it will enable us to better support families with tax cuts, family payment increases and pension increases, and it means we will see new sources of energy, clean and renewable energy for the future.
So it's the right decision for our economy, the right decision by our environment. Of course we'll be out there explaining that decision to the Australian community. We continue to have a lot of hard work to do to explain carbon pricing, but people will have the opportunity to judge carbon pricing for themselves from 1July this year.
JOURNALIST: And (inaudible) Robert McClelland, he said that the public is repulsed and fed up with spin. Has he talked to you about that?
PM: Look, on Robert's analysis, we are not a government of pretty words, I'm about getting things done. This Government has got things done in circumstances where there were many who proffered the analysis that they weren't do-able.
We are a Government that has been working to support families during a time when many families are feeling cost of living pressures.
We are a Government that's made the big decisions to build our future economy - the National Broadband Network, a clean energy future, the Minerals Resource Rent Tax to make sure we all get a fair share of the resources boom.
The big decisions we've made to improve education, and we're a Government that will keep delivering on those big decisions.
So it's not about words, it's about action. It's not about spin, it's about substance. That's the way in which I work and that's the way in which the Government works.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned at all that he's acting as a spokesman for the people that backed Kevin Rudd?
PM: Sorry, I didn't-
JOURNALIST: -Are you concerned at all that he's acting as a spokesman for the people that-
PM: -Not in the least. That issue's been dealt with, resolved, and it's over.
JOURNALIST: But the polls show, Prime Minister, that Julie Owens behind you would be one of thirty MPs who will lose their seats at the next election.
What do you say to backbenchers like Julie who fear they will lose their jobs next year?
PM: What people like Julie talk to me about is the very hard work that they're doing in their local communities. We do have a lot of hard work to do over coming months. But let me be very clear about this - I have been constantly told that there are things that can't be achieved and that I can't get done.
I was told during the days of the election campaign that with the degree of leaking that we saw during the election that we couldn't possibly succeed through the election campaign. Well we proved that wrong.
I was told during the 17 days in which we worked to form a government that we'd never get the support of two country independents. Well we proved that wrong.
I've been told that you can't get big reforms done in a minority government, and let's just go through the scoreboard: NBN - biggest change in telecommunications in our nation's history, being rolled out. Carbon pricing - seizing a clean energy future. The MRRT - making sure we all get a fair share of our mineral wealth. Huge reforms in education. Groundbreaking reforms in health.
All of these things I was told day after day, month after month, we couldn't get done and we have done them.
So anybody who's writing this Government off is coming to the wrong conclusion. We have worked hard, we will continue to work hard, we've got a lot to do out in the Australian community, and we will be doing that over the many months between now and the next election.
JOURNALIST: What about the Auditor-General, the Auditor-General said this morning that the Australia Network process, said that it presented the Government in a poor light and that it cast doubt over the Government's ability to deliver such a process fairly and effectively.
PM: Look we'll respond to the Auditor-General's report as we do. We respond to audit reports.
On the Australia Network tender, the Government determined that it was best that the ABC do that work and that was the right decision.
JOURNALIST: With all these polls that are coming out, Labor's not getting any ground, on a personal note how do you front up every day to that, and what are you going to do to change it?
PM: Well I'm a very determined person and you will see me continuing to be out there delivering the big things that matter to Australian families and to the nation's future.
For the families of Parramatta today, we can say whilst they battle with their cost of living pressures that we have delivered tax cuts, we have delivered the education tax refund to help with the costs of getting the kids to school, we've delivered child care changes so that there's more money going into child care now than ever before, we've delivered an historic pension increase.
This year we will deliver more tax cuts, family payment increases, increase to the pension.
We understand that we need to be supporting families. We'll also be delivering to those families better health services as a result of the health agreement this Government struck.
And we'll be ensuring - because what matters to those families is the opportunity to have a job - that we're not only protecting jobs today, but we're building the future economy which will ensure those families and their sons and daughters have a really good chance of a prosperous future.
It's what the National Broadband Network's about, it's what the clean energy future's about, it's what the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is all about.
I'll be out there making that case to the Australian community, with all of the spirit of determination I think people know that I hold.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Campbell Newman's Cabinet is being sworn in today. How will you deal with another obstructive conservative government at COAG when it comes up next month?
PM: Well once again, I was told after Barry O'Farrell's election by many in the media that it would be impossible that COAG ever worked again. It would be impossible that a major agreement was ever struck again. That that was it, no more big reforms at COAG, and what did we get done?
Well we went to COAG and we secured a groundbreaking health reform agreement, which means for communities right around the nation, they can see more doctors, more nurses, less waiting time in emergency departments, less waiting time on elective surgery lists and more local control of their hospitals.
So before you venture the analysis again, it might be best to look at how that analysis has proved to be flawed in the past.
JOURNALIST: Now Prime Minister, one more question on yesterday's announcement on the special visas, fast-tracking of visas for the American workers. The electrical industry says they're concerned that the Federal Government mismanaged the pink batts scheme. How will you manage this scheme  -  workers coming in, guaranteeing that there will be the right qualifications and the right services?
PM: Well we do that every day. These aren't the first skilled workers to ever come to Australia. Indeed, I wouldn't be here if we hadn't had a long, long, long history in this country of skilled migration. So of course we will use all of the normal processes to manage this skilled migration intake.
But the reason it's happening, and I think we've got to be very clear about this, unlike the American economy, our economy came out of the global financial crisis strong. So those workers in America are looking at an economy with unemployment rates of more than 8 per cent.
Here in Australia we're in a very different position, because as a Labor Government we stepped up during those difficult times to support jobs here in our country. Now we'll continue to support jobs for Australians in our country, and we'll always look to train Australians first and to give them an opportunity at those skilled jobs.
But we know, with the hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of billions of dollars of investment in the resources pipeline, more than $400 billion of investment coming through, that we will have a spike in the number of construction workers we need, and we are seeking to meet that so that our community can see those resources projects built and then see the prosperity that comes from those resources projects shared right around the nation through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
And this is one of the great divides in Australian politics today - whether you believe at this time of the resources boom we should be sharing that prosperity around the country or enabling it to remain in the hands of a privileged few.
Thank you very much. 



PM: I'm here with the Member for Parramatta, Julie Owens, with the Member for Chifley, Ed Husic, and with my ministerial colleague Senator Evans, who does very important work for us on skills.
And we're here today as you can see at Toll, and we're here because Toll has made an offer to engage 700 more staff over the coming few months to do that extra work in a way that means they are putting on 30 more apprentices.
So this is great news here in Sydney's West. But it's part of a bigger picture about jobs and apprenticeships that is happening right around the nation. We've got more Australians in work that ever before. We've got more Australians in apprenticeships and training places than ever before. Indeed, approximately 60,000 more under the life of this Government.
That's good news, but we do know the Australian economy is changing, and we know lots of people still need the opportunity to get a job or to get the skills to get a job through an apprenticeship.
So, I'm very pleased to be here today as part of the campaign by News Ltd Community Newspapers to create 1001 new jobs.
Now the great news about this campaign, which was kicked off a while back, is that it is already exceeding its target.
The original aim was to create 1001 new jobs in 101 days. We're a third of the way in and already the target is being exceeded. More jobs being created. And the contribution of Toll to that target is a remarkable one, with 700 jobs, 30 of them apprenticeships.
This hasn't just been achieved by big employers like Toll.
The result is being achieved by small businesses stepping forward and saying that they're prepared to put on an additional one person or two people, or one additional apprentice in their business.
So this is a community effort, it involves local newspapers, it involves local members, local employment services, local training providers, all working together to maximise opportunities in their local communities for work.
So it's great to be here today to be able to see more jobs being created in the West of Sydney, and congratulations to News Ltd local papers on the work that they are doing in this campaign. I'm very happy to take questions. Did you have a question? No, I'm getting waved at.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well to take your questions in reverse order, I don't have a copy of this Fair Work Australia report. Mr Abbott doesn't have a copy of this Fair Work Australia report. I can understand the strong degree of interest in it, but its release is a question for Fair Work Australia. So you need to direct those questions towards Fair Work Australia.
In relation to your first question, I don't have anything before me which would cause me to alter from my previous statements of confidence in Mr Thomson.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the ACTU is considering tomorrow whether to kick out the HSU. Jeff Lawrence says that he had a zero-tolerance towards corruption so why can't you have a zero-tolerance towards corruption for Craig Thomson?
PM: Well the ACTU is making a decision about one of its affiliates and it will take that decision tomorrow. That's a matter for the ACTU.
On the question of Members of Parliament, in the past when Members of Parliament have been the subject of referrals to the Director of Public Prosecutions, they've continued to participate in the life of the Parliament and in the life of their political party.
Indeed, one of Mr Abbott's Parliamentary Secretaries was in precisely that position, and at the time Prime Minister Howard said proper processes should take their course. That is true here in relation to Mr Thomson.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) seek a copy of that report to perhaps change your view about what's (inaudible) make an assessment of Mr Thomson?
PM: I understand the strong interest in this report, but the question of its release is a matter for Fair Work Australia, which is independent of Government.
JOURNALIST: Have you, as Prime Minister, asked to see the report?
PM: Fair Work Australia is independent and it needs to make its decisions independently of Government.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, Mr Thomson's public statements, as you would be aware, he has said publicly that he is innocent of these allegations.
JOURNALIST: Have you asked him...
PM: ...I don't believe any different answers would be supplied in any circumstances. Mr Thomson publicly and privately has said exactly the same thing, and you have access to those statements as well as I do.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if Mr Thomson is charged with criminal offences will you still want him to sit with the Government in Parliament? The Opposition has suggested you should (inaudible).
PM: I'm not going to engage in hypothetical speculation about what might happen, but I do note a member of Mr Abbott's team was the subject of criminal charges and continued to participate as a Liberal Party member.
JOURNALIST: Should the (inaudible) three or four months Prime Minister, hasn't this dragged on much too long (inaudible)?
PM: Well once again, you'll have to put that to Fair Work Australia.
JOURNALIST: What's your view, though? You're Prime Minister.
PM: Well look, I see that the Opposition walks both sides of the street on this question. Some days they chide and try and suggest that the Government has politically interfered in the investigation, on other days they call on the Government to politically interfere and speed the investigation up.
Well the Opposition might walk both sides of the street, I only say the one thing, the same thing. Fair Work Australia is independent and it makes its decisions independently of Government.
JOURNALIST: Now this report is not readily available, it's a bad look for your Government surely?
PM:  Well, this is a matter for Fair Work Australia. Fair Work Australia has made the decision about this matter and will make all future decisions independently of Government.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look, this is a matter for Fair Work Australia. Of course I became aware yesterday that Fair Work Australia had said publicly that it had a report and that it was forwarding the report to the DPP. It's all Fair Work Australia's processes. My reaction was no more than to note the facts.
JOURNALIST: Don't you agree with the public perception that this looks pretty bad for your Government, wouldn't you agree, this whole saga?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: That's not true. How do you put that allegation?
JOURNALIST: Well I mean, if there is the potential -
PM: You just used the word Minister, how do you put that allegation?
JOURNALIST: I said potentially.
PM: Yeah. But you said Minister. How do you put that allegation? So let's just be a bit clear about the facts here. Yes.
JOURNALIST: The public perception is that this whole saga doesn't look very good for your Government having Thomson even remotely associated with this. Would you agree?
PM: Well let's go back to precedents in the Parliament. Mr Abbott has a member of his team who he has asked to serve as a Parliamentary Secretary, who if Mr Abbott was Prime Minister would presumably serve as a Parliamentary Secretary in Government, a member of the Executive, who under the former Howard Government was the subject of referral to the DPP.
Back then Prime Minister John Howard said proper processes should take their course. He continued to participate in the Parliament and in the life of his political party.
So Mr Abbott's track record, as opposed to the things that he might be saying now, his track record is one where, in the past, when a member of his own party has been the subject of a referral to the DPP he's viewed it as appropriate for them to continue to participate in the Liberal Party and in the Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I've got a Western Sydney question for you.
PM: Right, okay well we'll come to that, yes, so is there any more on this issue and then we'll move to other issues.
JOURNALIST: There's been calls from Kathy Jackson, given how long this investigation has taken, for a judicial inquiry into Fair Work Australia. Is that something that you would support considering the length of this?
PM: Look, this is all a matter for Fair Work Australia.
JOURNALIST: My Western Sydney question. During, before the last election you intervened to save Laurie Ferguson in a Western Sydney seat. Would you be intervening to save Craig Thomson in Dobell on the Central Coast?
PM: Look, I'm not dealing with hypothetical questions thank you.
JOURNALIST: How many jobs are going to go (inaudible) Regional Australia (inaudible)?
PM: There's speculation about jobs in the Department of Regional Australia today. That is speculation, no decisions have been taken.
There's also material in today's newspapers about voluntary redundancies in the Climate Change Department. There will be voluntary redundancies in the Climate Change Department.
The big complex policy work about carbon pricing is done, it's finished. And because carbon pricing is coming into effect, a number of other programs that that Department used to run are being brought to an end.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday we saw some critical remarks from the Auditor-General about the way the Cabinet functions. Do you take any of those criticisms on board and will you be changing the way things operate in terms of tenders like the Australia Network?
PM: I commented on the Auditor-General report yesterday, and let me say of course this wasn't a smooth process at every step of the way, but the right decision was made and the right decision was for the ABC to do this work.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Governing Act which makes it independent.
JOURNALIST: Is there a case to be made for that Act to be reformed? Surely Fair Work Australia operates entirely (inaudible) in the public interest.
PM: I believe it's appropriate for the industrial umpire not to be the subject of dictates from a Government.
I do believe it's appropriate for the industrial umpire to be independent. I mean would you really want a circumstance where Mr Abbott, if he was ever elected Prime Minister, could issue an edict and tell the industrial umpire to strip penalty rates out of every award in the nation.
I mean we know they've done it in the past through Work Choices. Would you really want a position where, if Mr Abbott was ever Prime Minister he could just stand over the industrial umpire and tell them what to do?
Would you really want a situation in a big dispute like for example the Qantas dispute, where the Prime Minister of the day could stand over Fair Work Australia and tell them what to do?
Fair Work Australia is independent, it's independent under its legislation in the Parliament and that's appropriate.
On this report, I understand the strong interest in this report. But the independent umpire is the independent umpire, and it will make its own decisions.
JOURNALIST: The man in the hot seat Craig Thomson (inaudible)
PM: Look, you know my reaction is as I've put it here. I understand the strong degree of interest in this report. I don't have it, Mr Abbott doesn't have it, and how it is released, if it is released, is a question for Fair Work Australia.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: No I said, my words Mark, and I ask you to check them because I did not say that. I said matters in relation to Mr Laming were subject to consideration by the DPP. That is 100% accurate.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well we're about to go to that event, and soccer is a great participation sport out here in the West. I've got local members with me, Ed and Julie who can tell you all about it.
So this is a mass participation sport, we want to see more kids out there being active on the sporting field. You don't have to be a budding star, but you have to, you know, we want kids out there playing sport, having a go.
We know as a nation that we face some big health issues with obesity, with inactivity. We know for many kids and young people how seductive it is to sit inside on the computer, Facebook, playing the games, but not get outside, kick a ball, get out with your mates, get some sunshine, get some fresh air.
So I'm all for, across the many great sporting codes in our country, encouraging participation, and encouraging people to strive to be better and better. Soccer's doing a great job at that here in Sydney's West.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Ros Kelly as the Sports Minister, she put money into marginal Labor seats, so surely this is another funding project for a marginal Labor seat?
PM: Well I invite you to look across how we fund sport, and then see if your question stands up to any form of analysis.
JOURNALIST: Can you please comment on why it's important to get more apprentices involved, especially in transport and logistics?
PM: Thank you for that question, and I certainly can. This is a growing industry. A growing industry in our nation and one in which we've got a comparative advantage, as we take our skills to the region in which we live.
I've been talking to the Australian community about the spectacular growth in the region in which we live. That is full of possibilities for us. Economic opportunities for us.
We will not only see additional demand for transport and logistics in our own country, as we export the goods that we know that Asia wants to buy from us, we'll actually see demand for our expertise in transport and logistics directly in the countries in our region.
And so, this is a great opportunity for Australian jobs and Australian people to get the skills they need for jobs that are going to be there for the long term.
So it's fantastic to be here and to see this announcement of more jobs and more apprenticeships.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, you've put a million things together and unfortunately none of them's giving  -  let's just do some of the facts, because I think they might help you.
There are more Australians employed today than ever before in our nation's history. Fact. More Australians employed today than ever before.
Our unemployment is slightly over 5%. Look to America, it's more than 8%. Look to countries in Europe and you will find places where it's more than 20%. We're in that position with more Australians in jobs today than ever before.
We're in that position with that comparatively low unemployment rate, because we came out of the Global Financial Crisis strong. Because this Government, this Labor Government worked to support jobs.
Now we're in a situation where our economy is continuing to undergo change. Great opportunities in our region, they're showing now though the huge resources boom and that's a fantastic thing. People getting jobs.
But the structural change in our economy is also showing, with the high Australian dollar and some pressure on the shoulders of manufacturing and tourism and other trade-exposed industries.
So during these days of change we'll keep supporting jobs, and we will be building the future economy that gives people the best chance of prosperity and jobs.
That's what the NBN's about, the Clean Energy Future is about, the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is about, sharing the benefits of the boom, and it's also what the skills package that Minister Evans and I are working on for the forthcoming Council of Australian Governments meeting is all about.
Shaping that future economy, so people here in Sydney's West and people right around the nation can get the benefits of those future opportunities.
JOURNALIST: Just with jobs and a quick one, in terms of the job cuts in the ACT how will it impact on the economy there? Can they afford to bear much more job cuts (inaudible)?
PM: The Australian Public Service does remarkable things, and the workers in that public service are to be valued and respected. Often they get to be the subject of some fairly lazy criticism in my view, in the court of public opinion. I am a big respecter of the public service. But as a Government, we've also got to take some tough choices to generate a Budget surplus for 2012-13.
That's the right thing to do by our economy now in these days of structural change. It'll lock in confidence for the future of our economy. It'll also mean, because you know, the Government's doing the right thing, we're taking some of the pressure off and giving room for the Reserve Bank to move on interest rates should it choose to do so. Something very important to families around the nation.
So that means you face some tough choices and how we're dealing with some matters involving public service employment are one of those tough choices, but it's all about doing the right thing by the economy, the right thing by managing it in the interests of working families and that's bringing the Budget to surplus exactly as we promised.
Okay, thank you very much.



Football in Western Sydney will receive an $8 million funding boost to help grow the game in partnership with a new A-League football team for Western Sydney.
Football has the highest participation rates of all sports in western Sydney, with more than 137,000 players involved in the game.
The Gillard Government will provide $5 million to help develop local players and teams from the grassroots to the elite level as well as funding local football infrastructure and community engagement programs.
As part of the funding announcement, $1 million of this funding will be allocated to support the W-League and leverage the success of women's football in Australia.
Football's home in NSW will also be re-developed, with $3 million going towards the revitalisation of Football NSW's main facility at Parklea.
Under the funding arrangement the Government will join with the Football Federation Australia (FFA) to design successful grassroots programs that will promote participation and support pathways to elite football in Sydney.
Local clubs and communities will also be eligible for funding to deliver projects in partnership to build local infrastructure and support community programs.
These programs will encourage community involvement in soccer and facilitate player development pathways from community sport to the elite level.
The Gillard Government is committed to helping develop sport in Western Sydney, including involved more than 150 schools across the region in the Active After Schools Communities Program to get them more involved in sport and physical activity and join up with a local sporting club.
Football Federation Australia will make further statements about the new A-League football team for Western Sydney, and we hope to see this new team ready to compete next year. 


Macarthur Girls High School, Parramatta, New South Wales
On 4 April, 2012, the Prime Minister and numerous ministers held a Community Cabinet meeting at Macarthur Girls High School in Parramatta. This video contains some highlights of that meeting. A complete transcript of the public forum held at the meeting can be found on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet website.
Student 1: Well, today Macarthur Girls' has been invited to host the Community Cabinet, which involves some ministers and the Prime Minister coming in, and answering questions from the public.
Student 2: By coming out and addressing the community's concerns they make sure that whatever they're doing up there in Canberra is still relevant to what we need down here.
Man 1: I'm here today to enjoy the beauty of the fruit of democracy and to bring my community's concerns to policy makers and decision makers.
PM: I always love coming to schools and when I do I always say to the students within them that the most important thing that's happening in our nation today isn't happening in the boardrooms; it's not happening in the factories; it's not happening on the farms; it's happening in the classrooms of our schools around the country.
I think we can see a great girls' school that's going to be generating a future crop of female prime ministers for this country, so thank you very much for having us here.
Questioner 1: [VOICE OF AUSLAN INTERPRETER] I am particularly proud that you are implementing a National Disability Insurance Scheme, but I'd just like to come back to our language, which is Australian sign language. And that hasn't particularly been recognised by the Federal Government, in ensuring that information is available and accessible to deaf people.
PM: One of the things that Peter and I have been able to do in recent months is announce a $200 million dollar additional investment into supporting students with disabilities to be spent over two school years, whilst we work on the long-term funding model for education.
Questioner 2: I want to know how you'll convince business and the voting public  -  and probably most importantly the media  -  that some harsh measures might need to be taken in the budget to prevent Australia heading towards a recession itself.
Minister Swan: We are in a period of very, very great structural change. We came through a global recession with flying colours compared to other developed economies. But we are located in a region where there are big changes happening. And all of those big changes that are happening in our region are all good for Australia.
PM: So thank you very much for coming along tonight and participating in such good spirit. I'm sure we've both learned a lot from the exchange. Certainly we've learned things from you. So thank you very much.
Man 2: I think it's important for occasions such as this, because it gives that transparency to the democratic process.
Man 3: This community thing brings everyone together, so we can talk and let the Prime Minister see how the community's feeling.
Woman 1: We're hoping to put a bit more attention to Western Sydney, because  -  you know what  -  our future's here, our kid's futures will be here, so we want to have a say in that.
Woman 2: And if they don't come out to the community, they're reliant on their advisers. And whilst lots of people get an opportunity, perhaps, to lobby their advisers, they don't get such a broad spectrum of opinion, unless they actually come out to the community.



The community around Parramatta will soon have access to a healthier, more sustainable commute along the northern foreshore of the Parramatta River.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that a separate cycling and walking link will be built between the University of Western Sydney, housing developments in the area and key employment precincts of the Parramatta city centre.
This will link areas of the northern Parramatta River foreshore to each other, and will ensure residents have access to a safe, healthy and sustainable way to get to work or university.
This joint project - the Parramatta River City Renewal project  -  is the first successful project to be announced under the Government's Liveable Cities program.
Projects like the Parramatta River City Renewal Project are vital for the future sustainability of Australia's large cities.
Beyond just building better infrastructure to support communities, the Liveable Cities Program will provide lessons in achieving good outcomes that can be shared across capital and larger regional cities.
By improving the capacity of our cities to undertake strategic planning, we are working to improve the quality of life in our major cities, where the majority of our population lives.
The Gillard Government has committed up to $3.75 million, Parramatta City Council has committed $4.4 million and the NSW Government has committed $7.9 million to the Parramatta River City Renewal project.
The project is expected to be completed by mid 2015.
The other successful applicants under the Liveable Cities Program will be announced in the very near future. 



This ground, Adelaide Oval, is universally admired and it's one of the grand old venues of Australian sport and Ian has spoken to you this morning about some of those moments in sport, some of the history of this place.
It's been home to football and cricket in Adelaide for 140 years, a sports ground with a river end and a cathedral end, and with a marvellous traditional scoreboard - the best in the world just as described by Ian.
For so many South Australians, it's a place of very fond memories. Bert Oldfield's courage in 1932, and Mike Hussey's run chase in 2006, and the Victor Richardson gates and the old scoreboard are known and loved by so many.
Tens of thousands of South Australians have jammed in here to watch football games in the past.
We, of course, we were participating in our own football league before the days of the AFL, and when people came here to feel very close to their fellow South Australians and to watch a great game.
And there was that wonderful preview when Port played Melbourne at the end of last year, of what AFL footy will be like here from 2014.
So this is a very big project, it's taken long term decisions, substantial investments, sacrifices from everyone involved and above all faith in the future.
And that's happened because leaders in the community of the wider South Australian public all came to recognise that we have a chance to give Adelaide Oval a future every bit as grand as its past.
Securing the future of top-line cricket here, ensuring the long-term viability of AFL football in South Australia, and bringing to life the River Precinct and the centre of Adelaide all week and all year round. 
It's why, when I was asked by Kate Ellis in her capacity as local member, to provide funding to help deliver this project, we were pleased to provide the funding.
I know that our contribution, $30 million, is only part of this much larger $535 million project.
But I also know that this funding will make a difference in securing the development of the surrounding wetlands and making sure there is suitable car parking in and around the Oval for people who come here for all sorts of events.
We didn't want such a grand redevelopment to be diminished by not helping to get some of these very important details right.
And I know, growing up here in South Australia, just how much of a change this redeveloped oval will bring.
You're in days of change for South Australia, very, very optimistic days lie ahead.
There's a real focus on this city now, on Adelaide and its future, and I know through this redevelopment, the other work that is happening at State Government level and at local council level, the city can look forward to its future with pride.
And part of that sense of pride will be what happens here and seeing in just two years from now one of the great sporting grounds of this country rise up around us.
I want to congratulate everyone who's worked so hard, congratulations for being on time and on budget one week in, here's hoping every week's like the first week, and for all of you who are doing all of the hard work, on you rests the dreams and hopes of the young cricketers and footballers who are sharing with us the unveiling of the time capsule today commemorating the start of major construction work.
So it's great they're here to witness it. I'm going to look forward to coming here in the years ahead, to see what's achieved here, to watching some footy here, to spending some time at the new redeveloped Adelaide Oval.
Thank you very much for all being here this morning to celebrate this special event. 



The Australian Government is disappointed and concerned by the Papua New Guinea Parliament's vote to delay national elections for six months. Questions have been raised in Papua New Guinea about the constitutionality of this decision.
While we respect Papua New Guinea's sovereignty, as a strong supporter and long-time friend of Papua New Guinea, Australia believes that the elections should be held on time, in accordance with the Constitution.
Papua New Guinea's democracy has to date had a good record of holding elections on time.
Australia has provided substantial practical support to enable elections to proceed as scheduled.  We recently agreed to additional assistance of up to 30 Australian Civilian Corps personnel for the Papua New Guinea Electoral Commission and an air support mission. This support is more significant than for any previous election. 
We note the previous assurances of the Papua New Guinea Government that the election would be held on time and hope the Government will give this decision further consideration. 



PM: It's great to be here with the Premier, with Kate Ellis here in her capacity as local Member, and also with Senator Don Farrell, here in South Australia at the great Adelaide Oval, celebrating what is the first week of this redevelopment, but also putting in the ground in a time capsule some of the dreams and hopes and aspirations of young people in South Australia who play cricket, play football and may end up playing on this great oval. So it's a pleasure to be here. I'll hand over to the Premier and then we'll be happy to take questions.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Of course this site also is a massive opportunity for a lot of workers to participate in this project. At its peak 700 workers will be working on this site, in 2013. 15% of the total hours will be about assisting some people into apprenticeships and traineeships to give them a start  -  people that might have otherwise have had some difficulties in getting access to employment. So this is, as well as being a magnificent project, is a great employment generator for our wonderful city, and of course it's going to make a massive contribution to revitalising our beautiful city.
PM: Thank you very much, I'm sure we've got some questions.
JOURNALIST: How do you respond to allegations that the Labor Government is pork-barrelling Brisbane by shoring up its seats with the NBN rollout?
PM: The NBN rollout was determined by NBN Co  -  the company that is building the network, and they did it on engineering design. As the CEO Mike Quigley said as we announced the three-year rollout, they had a team of engineers working on the best way to do it, and those engineers wouldn't have even known where the electoral boundaries were between seats.
The building of the NBN is going to be right round the country, but it's got to build out rationally from, you know, Telstra exchanges and connection points, and that's what explains the three-year rollout plan.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the last time you visited Adelaide was a fairly eventful occasion. Was there some trepidation in returning again? It seems every time you turn up something fairly major and bad for yourself happens.
PM: I don't really know what you're referring to. I'm always very happy to be in Adelaide.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Fair Work Australia report, is it just a waste of time and money if it's in a format that (inaudible) unusable for the Commonwealth DPP?
PM: Fair Work Australia, the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions, these are both independent agencies. They work independently of government, that's the right thing for them to be independent so any questions and comments about the way in which they work are really matters for them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on Schapelle Corby, there appears to be renewed hope she could be released (inaudible), what are your thoughts on that and is there anything the Federal Government can do?
PM: Schapelle Corby has made a clemency bid. As a Government we have supported her bid for clemency. We've constantly made representations in support of her clemency bid. This matter is determined by the President of Indonesia. It's not in the interests of Ms Corby for it to be the subject of a lot of media commentary and speculation at this time. The matter will be determined by the President of Indonesia, but we have supported her clemency bid and we have made representations on a continuing basis on Ms Corby's behalf.
JOURNALIST: Fair Work Australia, this was a body that was set up by a Labor Government, that was influenced by the unions. It's a body staffed by union officials investigating unions. It's found 181 potential breaches and its given its report to the one body that can't seem to do anything about it. Is that a problem with the system?
PM: Well every assumption you've made in that question isn't right, so let's go right back to the start. We enacted fair work laws, we created the Fair Work Act to get rid of the hated Work Choices.
I think most people believe from a common sense perspective that in workplaces we've got to get the balance right between the interests of employers and employees. What Work Choices had done was taken the pendulum right up to one side, employers could do basically anything they wanted and employees were losing penalty rates, getting unfairly dismissed. So we fixed that, we got the balance right for a system that would work for working people and for businesses.
Fair Work Australia's the independent umpire, it has amongst its ranks people who've served in trade unions, people who've worked in employer organisations, people who've been employers in businesses, people who've worked in education institutions and who are expert in the study of labour law. So it makes decisions independently of Government.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look all of these are questions for Fair Work Australia, it's independent of Government.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look, what the Senate Committee wants to request is a question for the Senate Committee, and how Fair Work Australia responds is a question for it. This is an independent body, and it is not appropriate for me and it's not appropriate for Tony Abbott to be trying to give directions to an independent body.
If we looked at this in a different context, would you think that it was satisfactory in a major industrial dispute for the Prime Minister of the day to get involved and direct an outcome?
Would you think it was satisfactory for a future Prime Minister, say if Tony Abbott was ever Prime Minister, to get in and direct that your pay should be cut in half and that you should lose your penalty rates? This is an independent body for good reason.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) CEO of Energy Watch, a major sponsor of the Melbourne Football Club, is in some hot water over some racist comments on his Facebook page. He's also made derogatory comments about yourself. Do you have any response to those comments?
PM: Look, I'm not at all, you know, worried or concerned about the comments involving me, but there are amongst the things reported today to be on this site comments that are deeply offensive, very deeply offensive, and on what I've seen in the reports some that would particularly concern me are the comments about indigenous Australians and indigenous players. I mean the AFL has done remarkable work to profile and showcase indigenous Australians, to pursue the cause of reconciliation between indigenous and non-indigenous Australia.
So to see someone associated with one of the great football clubs making comments like that is really deeply disappointing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you concerned about the COAG next, next week's COAG meeting given the pact that's been made between the eastern states being Liberal premiers?
PM: No I'm not. I've worked with COAG whilst it's had a number of Liberal premiers amongst its number. We struck the health reform agreement that is getting billions of dollars extra into health care with Liberal premiers around the table.
We did that shortly after the election of Premier Barry O'Farrell. And what that has meant for people right around the nation is more doctors, it's more money into the public hospital system, it's going to mean less waiting times in emergency departments when someone in your family's sick, less waiting time on elective surgery waiting lists. So, we've been able to work with premiers of all political persuasions in the interests of the nation.
The only thing I've ever asked around the COAG table is people come in not, you know, clutching their party ticket in their hand, but come into the room clutching their plans for our nation's future.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) controversy surrounding Mitcham Girls' High School, the girls who were involved in the sexually explicit video and put in online, do you have any views on that, and you've had a bit to do with the (inaudible) system in other states, do you think South Australia should  sign up to that?
PM: I mean, for the individual girls involved, I mean this was a very, very silly thing to do and they're now caught up in the consequences of it. The internet  -  online  -  is changing our world in all sorts of positive ways, we work more efficiently, we can share information more efficiently, people can engage in social media, they can keep in touch with their friends in a way we never have been able to before.
But it's also got its dangers, and that's why this conduct was very silly by the girls involved. But it's something that needs to be now worked through, not by me or the Premier, it needs to be worked through by them, their families and their school. On, you know, cyber security, cyber safety arrangements, we are working around the country to put a highlight on the dangers that can be there in the cyber world. Dangers like cyber bullying, and to try and keep kids safe, and round the country premiers in their own schooling systems are making some choices about how to do that too.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you relieved that (inaudible) Craig Thomson won't be charged?
PM: All of this, Fair Work Australia, DPP, independent and the decisions made are a matter for them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it was a body set up by your Government. Do you think this is an example of the process working well, or does there need to be a re-think of the way this body is (inaudible)?
PM: Well, decisions about this matter are for Fair Work Australia. We generally, on how workplace relations is working now, believe the Fair Work Act is working well. Let's remember what we replaced. We replaced Work Choices, where you could get the sack for no reason at all and have no remedy. We replaced Work Choices, where people were getting their penalty rates ripped off without a cent of compensation. We replaced Work Choices, because the evidence was that people, particularly young people, particularly women were at risk of just having their pay cut.
Really basic things like what time of day you're going to get called in to work, whether you can make appropriate arrangements for the care of your children, whether you're given enough notice to do that before you're required on shift at the risk of being sacked with no remedy if you don't get there. I mean these things were, you know, dreadful, they were un-Australian, they weren't the Australian way, they weren't the culture of a fair go and we got rid of all of that and replaced it with Fair Work.
So the system's working to do what we wanted it to which is to get rid of that dreadful unfairness of Work Choices. There is a review of the Fair Work system underway, we always said there would be a review at this point, so if people have got ideas about improving the system that's how they can put them forward.
JOURNALIST: How can you say that it is actually working, Prime Minister, when you've got the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions saying that he's been given a report that's essentially useless by Fair Work Australia that cost millions of dollars of taxpayers'-
PM: Well I just took you through the industrial relations system and the working of it, and if you were someone who walked into work and had their penalty rates ripped off under Work Choices I think you'd be giving a tick to the Fair Work system. If you were someone who got unfairly dismissed without a cent of compensation, no notice, no reason, just tossed out the door, not able to pay your rent or your mortgage anymore because that had happened to you, I think you'd be giving a big tick to the Fair Work system.
If you're someone who's concerned about the balance being right between employers and employees, not employers having all of the say, and workers having none of the say, I think you'd be giving a big tick to the Fair Work system. On the specifics of this matter, Fair Work Australia is an independent body and it's dealt with it independently.
JOURNALIST: Just on Adelaide Oval, you announced the Commonwealth's (inaudible) late last year and subsequently the SCG. Given some of the budget constraints you've been facing since and some of them you've announced even this week, is it justifiable to be spending that kind of money on football?
PM: Of course it is, because as I believe the Premier described inside, the change here at Adelaide Oval, of course it's about football, it's about sport, but it's also about redesigning the way that this precinct works and its flow into the city.
This is an important setting for South Australia, whether it's coming to watch a match, whether it's kids getting access to the site with all of the sporting work that happens from here, whether it's the economic benefits of having a world-class ground that can attract and hold world-class events, or whether it's the flow-on economic benefits of people coming here, watching a match, wandering through to the city, going to a show, having a night out, having a meal out, spending some money, supporting some jobs, that economic benefit's important.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Absolutely. We want the River Murray to be healthy and we particularly want that for the people of South Australia. I know how important the River Murray is to this state, and I know what it's like to live here and to worry about the river and to worry about what's happening to the river because of the actions of people upstream. So we want to get this right, we want to get it right so we've got a healthy river, we've got sustainable agriculture, we've got vibrant river communities and we want to be guided by the best science available.
So we've got more work to do, but the voice of South Australians is being raised about this matter and that's a, you know, completely understandable, completely appropriate given the importance of the River Murray to this state and it's being listened to.
JOURNALIST: There was a Newspoll this week in South Australia that has Labor only four points behind  -  state Labor, compared to Queensland a very healthy position. Is the, South Australia pretty much Labor's last bastion, and why do you think the party and presumably the Federal Labor's holding up here better than other states?
PM: Well look, I'm not a commentator on opinion polls, because we have so many of them. If I took up commentary on opinion polls I'd do very little else with my time.
My preference with my time is to get about realising our vision for the nation's future, and for South Australia, of course that vision means a prosperous state, you've got an economy in change, huge potentials for the future, Olympic Dam, the ability to keep strengthening manufacturing here, even during difficult days with a high Australian dollar, your comparative advantage in defence projects.
There's a great future around the corner for South Australia and that great prosperous future means we can have benefits that we can all share. Things that we'll be working on together around the COAG table, like a new system to give people the skills they'll need for the future, and ultimately new benefits like a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the elevation of Mr Weatherill has helped the party's fortunes?
PM: Look I think Premier Weatherill's doing a great job, but I'm not a poll commentator, you need to go to someone else for that.
Thank you very much. 



In order to make sure the breakfast does go to 11 o'clock this morning, I'm intending to give you a two-hour speech, the first hour will be on the Salvation Army's Red Shield Appeal, the second hour will be on the Western Bulldogs. So please settle in.
I am simply delighted to be here in Adelaide to launch The Salvation Army's 2012 Red Shield Appeal.
I'm here to celebrate a very worthy cause and a very worthy organisation,  in a city which holds such a special place in my heart.
Adelaide is, of course, where I grew up. Where my family made its home following our migration from Wales. And part of that was involving the Salvation Army.
My mother worked at a Salvation Army home as a cook, Sunset Lodge. Many of you might know it, it's on Unley Road.
And I spent a lot of time at Sunset Lodge growing up, as mum worked there in what was then, I think, a first for family-friendly workplaces, my mother who worked from early afternoon til 6:30 in the evening so that she could prepare and serve a meal to around 70-80 elderly women who lived in what in modern parlance we would refer to as residential aged care.
In order to do that, she needed to make arrangements for my sister and I, and so particularly for me, who was the younger child she was able to go in the mid-afternoon, given a little bit of time off to either run across Unley Road to the infants' school I went to, Mitcham Infants, or run down the road to Mitcham Primary School so that she could get me from school in the mid-afternoon and I could sit on a stool in the kitchen where she worked til she finished at 6:30 at night.
And when I tell people that story, it all sounds a bit, you know, Oliver Twist, Charles Dickens, doesn't it.
A small girl sitting on a stool in a kitchen for a number of hours every day, but it wasn't like that at all because it really was a very special place, full of a lot of love and friendship.
And particularly for a small girl who migrated to this country, who didn't have any extended family and certainly didn't have any grandparents in this country.
To be able to spend time with the women who lived in that aged care facility, to stay with them as they gathered in the tea room for afternoon tea and then spend time with them afterwards being taught how to knit, playing cat's cradle, you know playing games and puzzles with women who had a lot of time and had a lot of love to give was a really special experience.
So a big part of my life, and I'm never going to forget it, and it's certainly taught me a lot about the values of the Salvation Army. So it's great to be here today, able to repay what was a very big favour for me, that love and affection in that home at Sunset Lodge.
And we're here, really, remarking on the work of Australians who are there on the frontline in times of crisis. In times of crisis you'll always find the Salvos there, and they're not there expecting fanfare, they're not there expecting recognition, they're just there getting the job done.
The Salvos were amongst the first to fly into Darwin on Boxing Day 1974.
They arrived at Granville before the emergency services.
The Port Arthur shooting, the Thredbo landslide, the Bali bombing and the Asian Tsunami all saw a rapid response from The Salvation Army.
More recently I've witnessed with my own eyes the work of the Salvos first-hand during the Victorian bushfires and in the aftermath of the Queensland floods and cyclone.
Even this day as we meet for breakfast, the Salvos are in communities where floodwaters are still affecting lives.
It was a very great pleasure to award the very first National Emergency Medal in January this year to some very deserving Australians and it was no surprise to me at all that amongst the recipients were people wearing that very familiar Salvation Army uniform.
One of the medal presentations was in Flowerdale, a town almost wiped off the map by the Black Saturday bushfires.
I was reminded that in that region, the Salvos, over a period of nine days, produced more than 29,000 meals and provided clothes and chaplaincy support for a community that desperately needed to know at that time that it wasn't alone.
But care and compassion has been the calling card of The Salvation Army since John Gore and Edward Saunders began its work in Australia, right here in Adelaide, more than 130 years ago.
The style of evangelism of The Salvation Army attracted some robust and at times even violent opposition in those early days.
We are reminded just how courageous those first Salvationists were when you realise that two officers died for the cause and more than 100 were fined or imprisoned for singing or preaching in the streets.
Of course, The Salvation Army's founder, William Booth, experienced heated opposition himself as he set about establishing the mission. 
His wife Catherine wrote that he would return from preaching and ‘often his clothes were torn and bloody bandages swathed his head where a stone had struck'.
Courage has been the cornerstone of The Salvation Army's history, as its ministry has taken its officers into prisons, to work with those in our society that too often had been shunned by our society, and the Salvation Army has shown great courage going into theatres of war.
And whilst the Salvos' core mission has not changed over the years, the Army has shown its ability to change and grow as our society changes and its needs change.
The Army's services have ranged far beyond crisis support and soup kitchens, or even the op shops that are our first port of call when we're going to go to a fancy dress event.
The Salvos have offered prison ministries since 1883, rural chaplaincy, and the uniquely Australian outback flying padre service, children's holiday camps, and even Australia's first film production company which not only captured the birth of the nation at Federation in 1901 but also made the world's first feature film.
But the modern Army has become an integral part of Australia's not-for-profit sector which in turn has become part of our vision for a more socially inclusive nation.
And what does that commitment to social inclusion mean?
It means every week, the Salvos locate 40 missing family members.
They help 500 people with drug, alcohol and gambling addictions.
They provide 2,000 homeless people with shelter so they don't have to sleep rough, and they give counselling to thousands more who just can't cope with things anymore.
And all of that is in just one week.
And members of the Salvation Army need to know that we, the Government, and those across our nation want to work with them to support them as they bring their special sort of compassion and care.
In last year's Budget, I was very proud that we were able to restate our commitment to welfare reform, especially for women and children.
And the Salvation Army is helping us get that support to the people who need it the most.
From financial counselling for women in crisis to delivering early intervention services for children and families in disadvantaged communities.
And in the first 12 months of the Government-funded Emergency Relief Housing Service, the Salvation Army has helped prevent almost 1000 families from becoming homeless.
Above all, we all know the thing that shapes a life, that makes a life, is the benefits and dignity of work, getting a job. All of the satisfaction that comes with it, the social connections that come with it, and that all-important pay cheque which is the difference between life on the margins of our society and life in the mainstream.
Employment Plus, by the Salvation Army, is the largest jobs network in our nation.
Getting people those opportunities for work, and the skills and support they need to make it possible.
I'm proud that the founding CEO of Employment Plus, Wilma Gallet, is joining the Australian National Council on Drugs because there is such a powerful link between overcoming substance abuse and breaking down the barriers to work.
This goes to the heart of Salvation Army's beliefs.
Yes, belief in God.
But also a profound faith in the resilience of the human spirit and its capacity for rehabilitation and self-reliance.
In other words, lifting people up, and honouring the human dignity that lies in all of us.
So the Salvation Army is there for those in need, a welcome constant in a rapidly changing world.
The Salvos uniform has and will always stand for hard work, integrity, help, compassion and caring.
It is a welcome sight for emergency workers and disaster victims alike.
It embraces society's outcasts but it passes no judgement.
It is a beacon of hope in many people's darkest hours.
It truly is ‘Christianity with it sleeves rolled up'.
And while not all Australians will be a member of the Salvation Army, each and every Australian can be part of the work of the Salvos' through the Red Shield Appeal, no matter what their faith or their background.
So I encourage every firm and individual in this nation to give as much as they can.
Every cent helps.
Even a dollar scrimped from a fortnightly pension is gold because it speaks of personal sacrifice and also care for the work of the Salvos.
So I say to all Australians  -  give generously.
And the Federal Government will be alongside you donating $350,000.
It's a worthy cause.
An honourable cause.
And so I proudly launch today the 2012 Red Shield Appeal, and I wish it every success.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that His Excellency General Michel Sleiman, President of the Republic of Lebanon, will undertake a state visit to Australia from 15 to 20 April.
Ms Gillard said she looks forward to warmly welcoming President Sleiman to Australia and that the Australian-Lebanese relationship is one that is built firmly on the friendship between its people.
Prime Minister Gillard will hold discussions with President Sleiman in Canberra on a range of bilateral and international issues, reaffirming the two countries' shared commitment to cooperation and strengthened ties.
President Sleiman will also call on the Governor-General and the governors of New South Wales and Victoriaduring his visit, which will include stops in Sydney and Melbourne. 



HOST: The Prime Minister, fresh from an Easter break, is in our Parliament House studios.
Prime Minister, welcome back to Breakfast.
PM: Good morning Fran.
HOST: Prime Minister, Alzheimer's Australia wants $500 million in this budget for dementia awareness and specialised care. Will you sacrifice your budget surplus to give older Australians the care they need?
PM: We will deliver a budget surplus Fran, because it's necessary for our economy at this time.
As I move round the country, businesses in particular talk to me about how much they'd like to see a rate cut, an interest rate cut. Now of course interest rates are cut by the Reserve Bank independently of government, but what we know is that returning the budget to surplus will help give the Reserve Bank the room it needs to move, should it choose to do so. So, we're going to bring the budget to surplus, it's an economic imperative.
We do have important things to do for the Australian community too, including making sure that our aged care system is sustainable and offers people the quality and the choices that they seek, and that it's going to be sustainable in the future as more and more Australians enter old age. Minister Butler has been working hard on that.
Fran, I'm not going to speculate as to what's going to be in the budget, but I deliberately said during the last election campaign that we would work on aged care during this period of government because we understood that the current system, which has served the nation well, but that the current system was starting to show stresses and strains and was going to show more of that in the future, as more Australians aged.
HOST: Well we're nearly halfway through this period of government and your Minister, as you say, concedes the aged care sector is, quote, ‘an industry in crisis'. That's what he said over the weekend.
Aged care organisations want your Government to respond in the budget. If you don't do it in this budget, you're not going to be able to fulfil that promise are you?
PM: Well Fran, I'm not going to speculate about what's going to be in the budget, and you shouldn't be drawing any conclusions about what's going to be in the budget. You should wait for budget night.
But we have worked through a process here, asking the Productivity Commission to provide advice.
Minister Butler has been out talking to older Australians. He's talked personally in meetings to around 4000. We've received expert advice and submissions from organisations including Alzheimer's Australia, and Fran I'm the first to acknowledge that our aged care system has problems.
It's not offering the choice, the quality that older Australians want. It's not offering them the ability to stay in their own home for as long as they'd like to with packages of community care, a home they've worked hard to pay off and that they rightly want to stay in for as long as possible as older Australians.
I recognise all of these problems in the aged care system, which is why I said during the election campaign we'd work on reform and why we are continuing to go through the process led by Minister Butler.
HOST: We already know that programs will be cut; the Treasurer's told us that, to achieve the surplus, back to the surplus, a $1.5 billion surplus is the promise.
It's a wafer-thin margin. Does it really matter? It makes no difference in economic terms does it, whether the budget is $1.5 billion in the black or $1.5 billion in the red?
PM: I couldn't disagree with you more strongly Fran, couldn't disagree with you more strongly.
Number one, I don't know when we got to a stage where people bandied around figures like billions and decided that they were next to nothing, that's not the approach that I take.
Number two-
HOST: -No but in a $400 billion budget-
PM: -Well Fran, returning the budget to surplus is an economic imperative. An economic imperative because we want to make sure that the Reserve Bank has the room to move should it choose to do so.
If you go round the country and talk to businesses, it's in the interests of Australian businesses to be supporting a budget surplus because Australian businesses, many of them doing it tough, because of the strong Australian dollar, have said to me that they would like to see an interest rate cut. So that's one reason for returning the budget to surplus Fran.
Another reason-
HOST: -Prime Minister, could I interrupt there just to talk about the interest rates, and I'm sorry to interrupt but the Reserve Bank signalled last week it's looking at a rate cut anyway. There's already scope with the low inflation, low unemployment-
PM: -Well Fran that's the wrong assumption. Fran, the Reserve Bank did that against a backdrop of understanding the government's determination to return the budget to surplus.
So you shouldn't be trying to give the impression to people that somehow what the government does doesn't matter.
The Reserve Bank understands what the government's fiscal strategy is. We've been crystal clear about it. Our determination to return the budget to surplus in 2012-13, and we will do so.
We'll do so because that means that fiscal policy is in the right zone to take the pressure off monetary policy, to give the Reserve Bank room to move should it determine to do so. It will also lock in confidence for the future.
We live in uncertain economic times globally, a great way of sending a signal of confidence about our economy to the world is returning the budget to surplus and we will. It's an economic imperative and that's why we're driven to do it.
HOST: It's an economic imperative, but some are asking at what cost. We don't know exactly the numbers of course until budget night, but at this stage the deficit for the current financial year will be at least $40 billion. One year later, your scheduled surplus.
It's already been pointed out no Australian government has ever attempted such a huge withdrawal of spending in just one year, and that's been described by some as seriously reckless. Could cost thousands of jobs and push the economy into recession. What do you say to those people who are worried about that kind of withdrawal?
PM: Well I'd say don't worry, because we'll be returning the budget to surplus in circumstances where we are forecasting around trend growth. Fran, we've got to be very clear about the state of the Australian economy today, so that any of these issues in people's minds about what's around the corner can be properly dealt with.
The Australian economy today is one where its fundamentals are strong. We've got unemployment at 5.2 per cent. We've got an economy returning to around trend growth. We've got more than $400 billion of investment in the pipeline, in the resources sector alone. We've got a high Australian dollar and that's putting strain on some areas, for example on manufacturing.
Now when you look at all of that, you've got to work out what is in the interests of the Australian economy today. Well with an economy returning to trend growth, with us wanting to make as much room as we can for the Reserve Bank to move, should it choose to do so on interest rates, with us wanting to lock in confidence and send a signal to the world, the right economic zone to be in is with a budget surplus. Now let's remember the return to-
HOST: -Yes, but is it a threat to the return to trend growth if you take out this amount of government spending?
PM: A return to trend growth, Fran, will be in a budget that has a surplus. So these things aren't done independently of each other. Our Treasury doesn't sit around forecasting what it thinks growth is going to be, not understanding what the government's fiscal strategy is. These things are done as a seamless whole.
So with the government determined to bring the budget to surplus in 2012-13, our economic forecasters, the ones who have served the nation well under Labor governments and under Coalition governments, are forecasting a return to basically trend growth.
HOST: Prime Minister, the Treasurer Wayne Swan has already said the budget won't be, quote, ‘a choice between surplus or social policy', and there is already some talk the budget will include start-up funding for the National Disability Insurance Scheme. Is that a commitment you can make today?
PM: Fran, I'm not going to speculate about what's in the budget, you'll have to wait til budget night.
But if I can address what underlies your question, the quote by Wayne Swan and the attitude that we are bringing to this budget, Fran you should expect, as a Labor Government we will deliver a Labor budget.
That means we'll bring our Labor values to the table, the values that always dictate that we run the economy in the interests of working people and always dictate that we do everything we can to help those most in need.
Now, in a budget circumstance where you are returning the budget to surplus, you've got to make choices, and they're not always easy choices.
Some of them, Fran, can be very tough choices, but when we are called on to make choices we do it in a Labor way. We protect frontline services, like nurses and doctors who help people out in public hospitals, and we are always determined to make sure as a nation we're doing better and better for those who need our care and concern the most.
HOST: Will you be able to bring the non-Labor premiers with you, because you sit down with the premiers on Friday at COAG. They've agreed in principle to the idea, the Productivity Commission notion of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, and putting back into that fund the $4 billion the states currently receive in Federal funding for disability.
Will the states be expected to stump up any of their own money extra for the scheme?
PM: Look, what I want to do with the National Disability Insurance Scheme is be honest with everyone, particularly state premiers, about how much work we've got in front of us. This is a huge reform, easily the size of Medicare, and you don't build a new system like that overnight, and you need to build it with full cooperation between Federal and State governments.
So, I will be saying to my colleagues at COAG, as I've said to them one to one, that this is a great reform for our nation, it's going to take work, it's going to take work in partnership, it's going to take some time to do, but we should aim to get it done for the Australian people because there are too many people now, Fran, who have got a disability, who are in a zone where they cannot get all of the services they need.
This really does depend so much on how you got your disability. You will be in a very different position if you were born with a disability as opposed to getting it in a transport accident. Now that's not fair, that two Australians with equal needs should get such unequal treatment, and that's what we're determined to fix.
HOST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about the HSU report, sorry the FWA  -  Fair Work Australia  -  report into the HSU, but more generally the ACTU and the Labor Party have now disaffiliated the Health Services Union.
The HSU has suspended its President, Michael Williamson, yet the person at the centre of the allegations, Craig Thomson, enjoys your full support. Surely the only logical explanation is that they're either all too harsh, or you're too lenient.
PM: I'm taking the same approach as Prime Minister Howard took in comparable circumstances Fran, which is that proper processes should be worked through.
I would remind you Fran, and you probably remember it, you would have been broadcasting then as well, that during the Howard Government there were members who were subject of referral to the DPP, indeed one of those Members of Parliament is currently a Parliamentary Secretary on Tony Abbott's front bench.
Prime Minister Howard then said proper processes should be worked through. Tony Abbott supported him in that. I'm saying what was good enough then should apply now. Proper processes should be worked through.
HOST: But was the ALP then improper  -  the ACTU rather, improper to disaffiliate the HSU?
PM: It's dealing with different things Fran, and you know that. The ACTU is making a decision about one of its affiliates, you are referring to an individual in the Federal Parliament, and proper processes should work through for that individual.
HOST: With the Fair Work Australia report of no use to the Commonwealth DPP, in terms of proper processes what happens now?
PM: Well this is a question for Fair Work Australia and a question for the DPP. Fair Work Australia is rightly independent of government, I'm not going to, Fran, try and step into the shoes of the industrial umpire, that wouldn't be right. The industrial umpire has to do its work independently of government.
HOST: But even if the industrial umpire seems to be incompetent? How is it possible for Fair Work Australia to have taken three years to deliver a report to the DPP that is of no use? I mean, really is independence to the point of incompetence, is that standard for a Government?
PM: Fair Work Australia is independent, and you should direct those questions to Fair Work Australia.
On the setting up of the system, I do believe in an independent industrial umpire. I don't believe that politicians should be able to dictate things like the result of a minimum wage case, whether or not penalty rates get stripped out of an award.
HOST: Of course.
PM: Now, politicians on the other side of Parliament might hanker for those powers because of course that's what they've done in the past  -  got penalty rates ripped off people through Work Choices. The approach we have is one of having an independent industrial umpire.
HOST: Yes, but if that industrial umpire, to all accounts, appears to not be able to manage some duties, and that seems to be what we've had, witnessed here, three-year investigation into a union. Is it time to review the powers and capacity of that industrial umpire? You are the government of the day.
PM: Fair Work Australia is independent, and Fran I'm not going to be drawn on commentary about the way it does its work.
More generally, and separately to the matter that you have been raising with me, when we set up the Fair Work system, when I, as the then Minister, put the Fair Work legislation to the Parliament and got it through, despite very trenchant opposition from the Liberal and National Parties, when we succeeded in getting that legislation through, we said at the time that there would be a review at this period, two years in, and that review is in train.
HOST: Just finally Prime Minister, on the issue of asylum seekers, there's a boatload of Chinese people currently in and around Darwin on their way to New Zealand to seek asylum, and they're going to be able to leave Australia as I understand it to make that boast journey.
Why, given that Australia asks so many other countries to stop people leaving their shores on boats headed for Australia?
PM: My understanding of that matter is that we're not in a position where we could detain these people. They have not asked for asylum in Australia and they are on a seaworthy vessel. So we are not in a position where we could detain them against their will.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us on Breakfast.
PM: Thank you. 



Environmental approvals and assessments will be fast-tracked and red tape cut for major development approvals, under reforms discussed at today's inaugural meeting of the Business Advisory Forum.
We know that red tape is a huge issue for business. For the small business owner who has to spend hours on paperwork or filling out forms, to the big business that has to wait months or even years for project approvals.
Today we started a very productive, direct discussion with business about how best to reduce red tape and reduce the impost on business.
Business leaders, the Gillard Government and state and territory leaders today focused on six reform priorities:
 * 	Environmental approvals and assessments;
		 * 			The Government has agreed to develop bilateral arrangements with the states to fast-track state assessments and approvals. This means states will be accredited to do certain Commonwealth assessments.
 * 	Major projects;
		 * 			All levels of government agreed to work towards the creation of taskforces for major projects, so approvals are administered by a single state agency and unnecessary duplication is removed.
 * 	Ending duplication in carbon and energy schemes;
		 * 			Governments have undertaken to prioritise the completion of a review of policies and programs that are not complementary to the national carbon price and may be ineffective or inefficient.
 * 	Energy pricing;
		 * 			Forum acknowledged the need to increase competition in energy markets. COAG will discuss bringing forward reviews of state and territory competition in retail electricity and natural gas markets and to ensure that energy regulation places greater weight on the outcomes for consumer.
 * 	Improving development assessments processes;
 * 	Best practice approach to risk based regulation.
Participants at the Forum also committed to participate in a ‘Red Tape Challenge'.
Business  -  particularly small and medium sized enterprises  -  will identify burdensome, inefficient or duplicative regulations that are impeding productivity and economic growth. COAG would twice yearly examine the suggestions made by business to ensure that initiatives with merit are addressed promptly.
Participants recognised that significant progress on regulatory and competition reform has been made under COAG's Seamless National Economy agenda.
However the Forum recognised that a stronger, more coherent compact with business was needed to drive national reform, and agreed on a National Productivity Compact between the Commonwealth, states and territories and business.
Today's Business Advisory Forum was an important change in the way we address deregulation.
The Forum outcomes will be incorporated into tomorrow's COAG meeting, where participants will be asked to commit to a new national agenda on deregulation. 



Leading business figures will head to Canberra tomorrow to attend the inaugural Business Advisory Forum.
Today the Government has released the list of 26 representatives who will join the Prime Minister and state and territory leaders at the Forum. The Minister for Finance and Deregulation and the Minister Assisting for Deregulation will also attend.
Business figures attending the Business Advisory Forum will:
 * 	Nominate new areas of reform to help lift productivity and drive investment;
 * 	Advise Governments on how best to progress the remaining areas of competition and regulatory reform; and
 * 	Discuss ways in which to lift regulatory performance and ensure the economic benefits from key reforms are sustained over time.
Business leaders will be able to directly tell the PM, Premiers and Chief Ministers, from their own perspective, their priorities for cutting red tape.
As we build a new economy in response to the structural changes being driven by our high dollar, deregulation reforms are more important than ever as they have the potential to lower business costs and improve productivity.
We believe business leaders are best placed to advise on these matters because excessive red tape is often experienced at an individual, business or industry level.
The Prime Minister will chair the Forum, which is being supported by the Business Council of Australia, Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Australian Industry Group and the Council of Small Business of Australia.
Through the Forum, the Gillard Government looks forward to working with business and the states to advance a new deregulation agenda over the coming year.
The outcomes of tomorrow's Forum will be incorporated into the discussion at the Council of Australian Governments meeting on Friday. 



PM: Thank you very much. It's good to be with you to talk about the results of a very important forum, the first time that business has ever had the opportunity to sit down with the nation's leaders, with the Council of Australian Governments, and talk about productivity.
We have an economy, the fundamentals of which is strong, and that's been reaffirmed today by our unemployment figures.
We see unemployment figures where unemployment has stayed low and, as remarked upon in the room, our economy has created more than 40,000 jobs. That means the Australian economy, in the last month, has created a third of the jobs created in the total US economy.
So the fundamentals of our economy are strong, but it is always a good day to try and increase productivity, it's always a good day to sit down and try and address red tape that stops getting business done.
And that has been the focus of today's forum. The first time in 112 years of federation, business representatives have been able to come face-to-face with leaders and talk about cutting red tape.
Now cutting red tape matters, it matters to small business owners who stay up late at night, or lose the very precious hours of their weekends, in working out their compliance burden.
It matters to bigger businesses, because they can be bound by lots of red tape in many different areas and that holds productivity back.
Today's Forum has actually identified some areas where we can put a spotlight on reducing red tape and increasing productivity. It's something that we are determined to do together, the Commonwealth working with States and Territories, working with business organisations.
We are determined to get this done.
The six priority areas identified by today's Forum were national environmental reform, the treatment of major development proposals, the rationalisation of climate change mitigation programs, further energy market reform, development assessments, and best practice approaches to risk-based regulation.
In addition to these the forum also determined to have a red tape challenge, to ask Australian businesses, large and small, to identify those nuisance regulations, the ones that no longer have a purpose, the ones that are duplicating regulations in other areas that can be done away with, so that governments can act and clear out this undergrowth of regulation that doesn't need to be there.
So today governments have heard the voice of Australian businesses, tomorrow in COAG we will take action, having heard that voice.
So I want to thank the business representatives for having made themselves available.
I'll now turn to Premier Jay Weatherill of South Australia to say a few things, in his capacity as chair of the Council of the Australian Federation.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Thank you Prime Minister. This has been a very valuable forum for us. The business leaders made a number of very powerful points about the need for reform in this area of regulation.
The important point was made that we live in a fast changing world and so investment decisions are taken and corporations need to respond very quickly, so a speedy regulatory system is a particular imperative in the world that we live in.
The second proposition that they raised, is a pretty self evident one, that investment depends on speed and certainty. So a regulatory system that delivers speed and certainty is one that's going to encourage investment. So this forum has been very advantageous for us.
The other advantage, I think, of this forum us that when we do go back to our states and we seek to implement a number of these national agreements, it's important that they're not disconnected from the views and concerns of the business community.
So bringing this forum together, having it so closely connected with COAG, will assist us when we go back to our states to ensure the passage of this legislation through our state parliaments, because it can be a difficult matter, sometimes getting these reforms through our state parliaments.
One of the measures that emerged today, which we think is a particularly valuable one, is in this area of duplication. The Commonwealth and the States both have environmental legislation, sometimes certain development proposals trigger both of those assessment and approval processes.
The time and delay and uncertainty associated with two development assessment processes is a major concern of business in country, so we've resolved today to work to eliminate that duplication and we think that is a very important step forward, it's one of the concrete outcomes of the discussions today and that will be further advanced in the COAG meeting tomorrow.
PM: If we go now to Tony from the Business Council of Australia, Tony Shepherd.
SHEPHERD: Thank you very much Prime Minister, Minister Wong and Premier Weatherill.
Can I start by congratulating the Prime Minister for this excellent initiative; we hope this will continue to be a fixture ahead of future COAG meetings.
I also thank the State and Territory First Minsters for agreeing to take part in what was a very constructive meeting.
This is an important and historic day for our Federation. We had our nation's political and business leaders seated at the same table, with one common purpose - to make Australia more competitive and productive.
This Forum's an acknowledgement that business has an important role to play in making the Federation work better for all Australians. And business, large and small, is very much on the same page with the reform priorities which we have bought to the table.
We've taken this meeting very seriously; we've put forward a set of six reform priorities that are squarely focussed on supporting business to lift productivity and competitiveness and to ameliorate the impacts of the high dollar.
We've made great progress today on a couple of issues, the commitment by First Ministers to remove the double handling between the Commonwealth, the States, on environmental approvals is a big leap forward.
It shows our governments understand how our future productivity and our future prospects are tied to a capacity to deliver on this huge pipeline of projects.
As I said in today's meeting, the major challenge for the Federation right now is working out how to deal with the uneven growth in the economy  -  how to make the economy stronger across the whole country.
So we wish COAG well in its deliberations tonight and tomorrow.
We recognise that COAG has many other things, apart from regulation and competition reform on its agenda, and all of these areas are hugely important  -  these include taxation and the distribution of GST, infrastructure funding, skills development and regulations governing our workplaces.
We don't expect COAG to be able to do everything at once, but coming out of today we are keen to see the beginnings of an action plan for delivering on these priorities.
And of course it's up to business to support the States and Territories in the reforms that follow from the COAG process.
We appreciate the complexity of the challenges facing COAG and also recognise that a number of our concerns are reflected in the current agenda.
We see this forum as an opportunity to sharpen the agenda and meet the challenges with renewed energy and direction. Most importantly it underlies just what can be achieved when government and business come together with common goals and a spirit of cooperation. Thank you
PM: Thanks Tony. Peter, if I could go to you.
ANDERSON: Thank you Prime Minister and ministers and colleagues. Today's Forum was very good for our Federation, it was also very good for our business community.
At the heart of today's meeting was an attempt to make our Federation work better for the economy and if it does, in turn the economy will be stronger in our Federation.
There were a number of areas today which are important next steps in delivering, not just the seamless national economy, but a more robust understanding amongst our governments of the impact of business regulation and red tape.
I'm particularly pleased that our governments  -  plural  -  our national Government and our State and Territory Governments have agreed to take on to themself some greater responsibilities and disciplines in the process of making regulation.
We know that there needs to be a robust process when regulation is proposed and we also know that too often good intentions have been lost in implementation.
What the governments have said to us today is that they understand that it's not just a question of harmonisation of some regulation amongst the Federation, or within the Federation, but it's also about improving regulatory quality and looking at best practice regulation in a range of areas.
And robust regulatory impact assessments, appropriate mechanisms for consultation with industry are crucial to that, both at a national and local level.
That's particularly important for small and medium business issues. I think it's important that the community know that today it wasn't just a discussion between governments and major corporations in the country  -  there were also important small and medium business perspectives put on the table, because a large component of our economy is comprised of SMEs who only operate inside one state, but for whom regulatory quality is crucial.
And the fact that governments have been prepared to take up some of the challenges we presented on that score today is very encouraging.
Finally, also if I can add that we were particularly encouraged that governments are prepared to review some of their own programs associated with carbon mitigation and carbon efficiency. Whatever one's view about the introduction of a carbon tax at a national level is, and as you would all know it's a view that I have that is not supported by my organisation.
But we certainly don't want multiple carbon prices adding dead weight to the economy, if we are going to face a nationally implemented carbon tax, and the willingness of governments to review the multiple programs that exist, which add cost and in some cases considerable cost with very little gain is, I think, a promising sign that we don't want to just load up the cumulative impact of cost on Australian business.
So it's been a good day for our Federation. I think rightly the business community will look at these discussions and look to specific outcomes that benefit the doing of business. That is the challenge that will be presented to us by our own constituents as business leaders, but this has been very important first steps.
PM: Thank you Peter. Innes.
WILCOX: Thank you Prime Minister and Premier Weatherill and my colleagues. Today was a very important day, because it allowed the business community to put forward some perspectives directly on how regulation was impacting on the way that they do business within Australia.
There were a couple of very key themes that emerged from today's discussion, they centred around duplication of regulation between State and Federal Governments and also at local government level, the redundant regulations that we still have on our statute books after a 112 years of history and the need for us to be more globally competitive, that was a theme that emerged right throughout the day, that we need to strip back our regulatory burden to be more nimble and more competitive as a nation.
One of the themes that emerged today was that with our main global competitors, many of them roll out the red carpet for business, but in many cases in Australia we roll out the red tape, and that's of great concern for industry more generally and today's measures are a very clear first step to wind back that accumulated regulation that has built up over those 112 years.
It's a great opportunity for business to put forward perspectives, government at all levels recognised the needs of business and of the business community, large and small, to be able to adapt to the global environment that they face every day and governments have agreed to take steps to wind back the regulatory burden on business.
There is no silver bullet, there's no easy solution, but today was a very positive first step and we thank the Government for initiating today's discussion.
PM: Thank you, and Amanda.
LYNCH: Small business is drowning in a sea of regulation. We need to remove the roadblocks that are actually hampering small business in their efforts to increase productivity and also to improve growth.
This is a start, it's actually a very difficult process that States and the Federal Government have agreed to. In the Communiqué there is an agreement actually look at the red tape, to collect examples of it, to measure progress and to benchmark progress with clear reporting timeframes.
This is what is needed and we are going to insist that these are met. Small business has a very urgent need to have these issues addressed. There's an increase of 30 per cent in small business failures over the last three years, 50 per cent increase last year, it's urgent, we need action now and it's imperative that these issues be addressed.
PM: Thank you very much. So we'll take questions on this directly, if there are other issues of the day we'll take them later.
Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I just, I'm just trying to translate the Communiqué and item number one on the environmental approvals and assessments.
PM: Have you got a version not in English?
JOURNALIST: Sorry, interpret. Sorry. What is it you're actually working towards, or will it be a joint State-Federal approval body, or will it be a State body with some Federal oversight, and I'm not talking about the world heritage and high risk projects, but your run of the mill stuff?
PM: Look, what we want to work towards here is a streamlined system, so that projects don't go through two layers of assessment for no real gain.
And so the classic examples that are brought by business is where people have gone through sequential assessments, so it's double the time, things that have been required for the first assessment are required in a slightly modified form for the second assessment, so they don't even get the benefits of just uplifting the work and re-presenting it, it's got to be redone.
So clearly that is an inefficient system. Having said that, Australians do want to see good environmental protection and good environmental outcomes and so when it comes to things like world heritage areas, of course as a Federal Government we're going to want to see particular care and concern.
So taking those two things  -  how can we best design a system that works, works in a streamlined fashion, works quickly, so people don't have these sequential assessments, but is still rigorous enough to ensure that we meet environmental standards.
Now that's the aim here and that's what we'll be working with our State colleagues to do, to get a framework as to how to Commonwealth engages and what it engages on and then to work with the States on how their processes roll out, so that we're not doing things twice.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'll just take this question, the timeframe for that will be dealt with at COAG tomorrow.
I'll just go to Paul Bongiorno.
JOURNALIST:Senator Wong, a question in regard to cutting red tape. The Queensland Premier has suggested that he has a more ambitious program and if he stuck to COAG's it would hold him back. I suppose, is that true? And I guess the second question would be is there anything stopping the states rushing ahead if that's their will?
MINISTER WONG:If States wish to proceed with red tape reduction faster than the COAG process is delivering, well good luck. And I'm sure businesses would be very happy to see less red tape in state jurisdictions. But what we're trying to focus on here are certain priorities.
And we really listened to the proposition that the business leaders at the table today put to us which was this: we needed to streamline and prioritise the COAG work program; we needed to really focus on certain key reforms when it came to deregulation; and remember this is about reducing compliance load.
There is regulation such as the environmental regulation, to which the Prime Minister has referred, which has a very sound public policy basis. But the question is: can we reduce the compliance load for businesses around that regulation?
So we have picked up in the Communiqué that you have received, the priorities that business organisations, led by the BCA, but all others at the table, have endorsed, and it will inform the COAG work program and I think it has the capacity to be of great benefit to the Australian economy.
PM: We'll just go Katherine and then to Matthew and then come back across. Katherine.
JOURNALIST: Still a little bit confused in terms of EPBC. Prime Minister do you think you have got in principle agreement from the states to go along the model as outlined in this communiqué, because Campbell Newman a moment ago seemed to be suggesting that EPBC approval should be entirely a state matter and that's not what you're proposing here. So just in tangible terms, what do you think has been agreed?
PM: What Premier Newman did in the room, and obviously in speaking to the media as well, did make it clear that it is his view that all approvals should be dealt with at a state level.
Now that is not my view, because we do as a Commonwealth have particular responsibilities, for example in world heritage areas. That's not the only example, Commonwealth waters would be another good example, nuclear issues would be another good example, indeed in the room I said if someone was to propose that they wanted to construct a new Lucas Heights, you would expect the Commonwealth to be engaging in oversight on those kinds of things. I've just been to a Nuclear Security Summit where these matters were canvassed.
So there is a proper role for the Commonwealth too. Now I understand Premier Newman has a different view, but what is encapsulated in the Communiqué in front of you, which will then go to COAG proper tomorrow, is a significant step forward from where we are today.
So this is about making big strides, big progress, in the interests of Australian business, making sure that we don't have unnecessary delays and unnecessary levels of regulation.
So is it everything that everyone one wants? Well it's not everything that Premier Newman would want, but this is a very, very substantial step forward from where we are right now, where business people can point to examples where one year, two years, three years, have gone by when they've been caught up in sequential regulatory approvals processes.
Matthew.
JOURNALIST: COAG, well before Labor took power, has been discussing seamless economy reforms and trying to remove red tape. Can you just give us come context on  -  is this a new kind of direction altogether, has the formation of your business advisory group happened because the process previously was in some way not working, or wrongheaded, or is this a sort of expanded thing that takes on new areas that weren't envisioned in that earlier process?
PM: I'll get Senator Wong to comment as well, but we have made progress on deregulation and Senator Wong will talk to you about the progress that has been made in a number of priority areas, so we have made progress and that's been done through a particular structure.
The purpose of getting everybody together today is to say: we now want to go to a new stage where business actually gets a direct seat at the table, so rather that it being a process between governments exclusively, business actually gets a seat at the table to identify their priorities and having seen those priorities identified that then creates the next tranche of reform that we are all going to push to get done.
So we've made a lot of progress, we now want to go further, business sitting alongside with us, their ability to bring directly to us the view from the ground, whether it's the view of small business or bigger business, on what needs to be done.
MINISTER WONG:Just a few comments if I can. First, it is the case COAG, certainly since the 2008 agreement on the Seamless National Economy, has been working very hard on a range of reforms  -  some 27 Seamless National Economy reforms, and we've completed about sixteen, and work continues on the remainder. So those are good steps.
I think the way to look at the Business Advisory Forum is it is a way in which we can bring greater impetus not only to the existing reform agenda but to the next reform agenda, and a sharper focus on what should be the priorities in the next reform agenda. I think that is good for the Federation, it's good for the economy.
I'd make the point also - I think the focus if you look at the Communiqué and the discussion is people around the room understand that deregulation is an important aspect, a key aspect, of meeting the productivity challenge.
Now there are a whole range of other things the Prime Minister will be speaking to First Ministers about tomorrow in terms of productivity, but deregulation is one of the ways in which we can make a contribution to increasing Australia's productivity.
Can I just make one comment on EPBC: I understand people might have views about a different system. There is no Federal Government until this one who has put this amount of cooperation and this amount of streamlining into the environmental approvements process. This is a greater amount of streamlining and a greater amount of cooperation than has ever been proposed before under previous Federal Governments.
PM: OK, yes and then we'll go to Latika. Yes.
JOURNALIST: On the agenda, with energy pricing, can you name a couple of things which would make a significant difference in terms of energy pricing, which is a major cost for business?
PM: If someone wants to take that, Tony might like to speak to the work in the BCA paper.
SHEPHERD: Yes, thank you Prime Minister. Look, one of the things that we raised today was the cost, for example, of the RET system, which one of our members estimated to cost electricity consumers an extra $1.8 billion a year.
So we're not saying that the RET system should be abandoned overnight, but it certainly should be looked at very seriously in the context of carbon pricing and there could be significant savings because if you're running two policies in parallel you might only need one policy and so that's an example of where you could get some efficiency.
Full contestability in the market for electricity supply, generation, transmission and distribution and retail, our market based approach has in the past resulted in lowers costs, certainly in Victoria it has, but they have got full competition from generation through to the retail level.
So that's another example of where contestability could improve the outcome for consumers.
PM: Latika.
JOURNALIST: Probably Tony again, or any of the business leaders really, when Tony Abbott repeals the carbon price, should he get elected, are you worried that prices that have been raised because of the carbon price won't necessarily be dropped once that carbon price is repealed?
And are you worried about how one: you might cope with that given that compensation would be wound back and two: how you could police that at all?
And Prime Minister, if you want to add anything.
PM: I think that's a very, very big stretch from matters discussed in today's Forum.
SHEPHERD: Look, simply put, I mean we haven't seen the Opposition's policy yet on what they're going to do and they haven't been elected, so this double hypothesis is a very dangerous things to deal with.
But I can say, as a general principle, if you have market reform and contestability in electricity supply, you will always end up, in my view, with a more productive and cheaper outcome.
PM: OK, we'll go, yes at the end and then come back.
JOURNALIST: On occupational health and safety, this is a question for the Prime Minister and business, what if any progress was made around that, because Victoria, as you know has been the standout state here. Was there any sense in which this got inched forward and will be discussed tomorrow?
PM: There was a reference to a stock take of the current agenda in the Forum, but the purpose of the Forum was to define the new agenda. On occupational health and safety, and another priority matter from the Seamless National Economy agenda we've already been working on, and that is the National Occupational Licensing System, that will be the subject of discussion at COAG tomorrow.
Phil.
JOURNALIST: Premier Weatherill, back on the EPBC stuff, as the CAF chairman at this event, are any of your other counterparts, apart from Campbell Newman, sort of hostile to this concept that's being negotiated, are any of the other States or Territories saying today that they want sole discretion over environmental assessments.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: No, I think the better way to think of it is that all of them support the proposition that's contained in the Communiqué - that is reducing the duplication between two systems of environmental assessment - it's just that Mr Newman he's on his own in suggesting it should go a whole lot further.
So I think even he would concede that this is a step forward, it's just that it's not as far as he would like to take it. So this was something that was I think, when I, in preparation for today's meeting, when I spoke to each of the Premiers and First Ministers, this was something around which there was a strong consensus.
JOURNALIST: On the issue of the environmental regulation, you could argue that one person's red tape is another person's environmental safeguard. When it comes to state level, we've certainly already seen differences of view about where the line should be drawn. How much risk is there that this in the end is going to be stymied on political definitions of environmental protection vs regulation?
It's one thing to remove duplication, but the next step obviously is where should the environmental assessment line be drawn? How much risk are you at of getting stuck in politics?
PM: Well, I think the fact that we could sit around a table today, with representatives of business who identified this as, and I'd think the representatives of business with us would be prepared to tick this, out of the six priorities raised they identified this as the single biggest one, that they wanted top of the agenda. Other things are important, but this had a particular priority for them.
So if we can be in a room, discuss with business representatives across governments, that this is an area for action, that's a good start.
And I would echo what Senator Wong has said, this is showing more preparedness by the national Government to streamline approvals than has ever happened in the nation's history, whilst we've had Federal environmental legislation.
That doesn't mean that there won't be some hard conversations from here  -  there will be, this is not simple. We do want to make sure that it works for business whilst protecting our environment, and that's about getting all of the details right.
I'll go to Senator Wong for some comments too. Oh, OK.
JOURNALIST: Tony, do you feel like you're at risk of getting stuck in the middle here, when you get to the next stage?
SHEPHERD: The god is in the detail and tomorrow COAG is going to deal with this in a lot more detail, so let's see what comes out of that.
But the move that the Commonwealth's made and indicated it's prepared to make, may not go as far as some people would like. Obviously I think the States would love to have the sole right to sign off on environmental basis, but if we could just eliminate double assessments and a step approach whereby you have to go through one, and then go through another one almost identical, that would be a significant saving in time and risk.
So if the Commonwealth could rely on the assessments done by the States  -  and can I say the State assessments, in the experience of our members, are very extensive and would  cover anything any reasonable person would want to consider. It's not like we're dealing with States with shoddy environmental standards, far be it.
So, just the reduction of the double assessment would be a great step in the right direction.
WILCOX: I don't think you can underestimate the steps the Commonwealth has taken to date to strip back regulation in this area. This is going to be vitally important to business; there are a lot of protections already in place at the State level, which will remain in place.
We're now at an argument about how far it goes, but the Commonwealth has already put forward a proposition where, apart from quite significant areas where the Commonwealth probably quite rightly does have a role, they'll cede a lot of responsibility here to the States and that will just make doing business much easier and that's what this whole Forum is about. It's quite a significant step.
PM: I think Premier Weatherill wanted to add a comment there and we're going to have to start moving very soon.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Just to clarify, what's not being put here is that they want a different result out of the State, as opposed to the Commonwealth assessment. What's happening is they're getting approvals under both systems, it's just doubling the amount of time and the costs associated with that, so it shouldn't affect the rigour or the quality of the environmental assessment.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) that the carbon tax will knock $3 billion off the value of two generating assets it wants to flog, are you disposed to compensate them in any way? They say that the Commonwealth has been disposed to compensate Victoria for dealing with its power stations.
PM: Look, all of our policy settings about electricity generation and carbon pricing are clear. They've all been announced.
JOURNALIST: Just two quick things-
PM: Sorry, we're going to have to go soon and I just want to be clear here  -  do people have further questions about the Business Advisory Forum?
OK, let's take a COAG question there.
JOURNALIST: Just two things, what do you imagine emerging from tomorrow with, in terms of positive outcomes?
And also you had a lot of high powered CEOs around the table today, can you give us a flavour of the tenor of their discussions, where they upset about the carbon tax and the mining tax, as many of them have been publicly, or was there a different flavour and subject matter to today's discussions?
PM: Taking the questions in reverse order: today was about getting something very important done. The focus of the discussion was exactly as we've represented it to you, the focus was on enhancing productivity by reducing red tape.
People have other opportunities to make their views clear about other government policies, but what we where there sitting around the table to do today, was to focus on enhancing our productivity performance and consequently the amount of wealth in the economy and the number of jobs it generates and doing that by reducing red tape. That's what people talked about.
On COAG tomorrow, two big outcomes, or two big matters for the COAG table, we are bringing an important skills reform package to the COAG table.
In our economy now we have got a thirst in many parts of our economy for skilled workers, we know that our economy is generating jobs at 2.5 times the rate for skilled people than unskilled people, which is a long way of saying that if you are an unskilled worker in today's economy and tomorrow's economy, you are going to struggle to get a job, keep a job.
So in those circumstances we want to be reforming our skills system, so people can get that first qualification that makes a difference to their employability and earnings, Certificate III, and then they can go on and get broader and deeper qualifications as well.
So, skills  -  important to individuals, important to our national economy, as well as taking into tomorrow's meeting what we have worked through today, to decide things like timeframes for enacting the good ideas that have been generated today, discussed today and agreed today.
Is that the last question on COAG? I might get my friends apart from Minister Wong who can stay with me, to retire from the fray and thank you. Thanks, thanks a lot.
PM: I did want to say something very briefly about the tsunami warning last night. As a region in the world we've seen the devastating power of tsunamis. We saw it in Indonesia, Boxing Day 2004.
We saw it in Japan the devastation there. For tens of thousands of people around our region, last night was a terrifying night. I'm very pleased that damage was minimal, that we did not see a major tsunami, but this has been one of those times when the region, as one, has waited, has been ready to react if that was necessary.
Certainly, the Australian Government was receiving continued briefings last night so if we had needed to respond in a humanitarian way we would have been able to do so but fortunately, the worst didn't happen.
Now I'll briefly take questions of the day then I do have to go.
Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Thanks Prime Minister, you are aware that Campbell Newman held a press conference earlier. There's two issues I want to get your response to  - 
PM: -Sure.
JOURNALIST: He said that if you're worried about red tape, it is the carbon tax that's going to slam huge amounts of red tape on people and he had the legislation to show us how big it was.
I know you're determined to proceed with the tax, but do you accept that it  -  what's your comment on his claim that is adds red tape to business and secondly, he said that with regard to the closure of the, I think it's the Norwich Park Mine, he says that's the Commonwealth's responsibility and that he blames, to a large extent, your industrial relations laws and that they need to be fixed. I was wondering if I could get a response to that, please.
PM: Well firstly, carbon pricing is going ahead on 1 July, exactly as legislated. That is the most efficient way of cutting carbon pollution in our economy. So, for people who are concerned about productivity, about red tape, about cost, the best way of cutting carbon pollution is by putting a price on carbon, which is what we have done and indeed today's discussion was about how with a price on carbon, less efficient, more costly schemes can now give way because there is a price on carbon.
On the mine closure, it's been made clear by the operators of that mine that there were a variety of factors, including production loss during the Queensland floods and so closure of that mine has been talked about for a long period of time. 
Of course, I never want to see anybody lose their jobs and go through that sort of distress, so I am thinking about the workers who have lost their jobs here. It's a difficult day for them and consequently, not time for the playing of politics with these jobs losses. 
Broadly, in our economy though, we should note that we are continuing to create jobs. It's important for working Australians that we continue to see strong job creation and we have seen more than 40, 000 jobs created in the last month and to use the words of one of the business leaders, that is a third of the number created in the whole U.S. economy being created here in Australia. That's telling you about the strong fundamentals of the Australian economy.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) HSU affair, do you support strengthening the penalties against corruption and making things more transparent under the Registered Organisations legislation?
PM: Specifically on the HSU, as I've said publically before, proper processes here need to take their course. Generally, of course I want to see working people having the benefit of strong, good trade unions that act in their interests, in the same way that I want our nation to have businesses that play by the rules, in the same way that I want to see charities always upholding the rules as well. 
I want to see the best for our nation, for working people in our nation, whether that's good governance in trade unions, businesses or charities.
JOURNALIST: So would you support strengthening the Act?
PM: Proper processes need to be worked through first.
JOURNALIST: On the National Disability Insurance Scheme, what are you looking for from the States in setting this up? Campbell Newman said it should be entirely Federally funded, is that something you agree with?
PM: Disability services are a shared funding system now with State Governments playing their part so I can't imagine really that a State Government would withdraw all of its funding from disability services. 
I just don't see how that would be possible or how that would ever be justified to people with disabilities or their families or the community generally - that you would down tools on looking after people with disabilities. 
For the future, what we want to see is a better system. It will require Federal State cooperation to deliver it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) additional money from the states?
PM: Look we have said consistently that in building a National Disability Insurance Scheme, this is a big thing to do, it's a huge thing to do. It's easily a reform the size of the creation of Medicare. 
We need to work through it properly, a bit at a time, including having conversations with our State and Territory colleagues about how it would work and how it would be funded. Those conversations are still to come.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have a report or research or anything to go to COAG tomorrow on the NDIS to kick-start this discussion?
PM: Look the principal work for COAG tomorrow is as I have outlined it. It is the focus on the skills package and we will be certainly following up what happened in today's Forum. 
The discussion about the National Disability Insurance Scheme will be ongoing and the big matter for resolution at COAG tomorrow is, as has been signalled to you for a very long period of time now, the skills package.
The discussions on the National Disability Insurance Scheme will take some time and they are ongoing.
JOURNALIST: On the skills front, you've put out a very detailed package, that you've announced. Is that what you will be discussing or do you have something new to add to the mix?
PM: That is what we will be discussing.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) positive result on that?
PM: Well we will see form the meeting tomorrow, Michelle, but in our economy today, it is in the interests of everyone, every level of government, every business in the country and every working person in our nation that we get a better skills system.



The inaugural meeting of the Business Advisory Forum to the Council of Australian Governments (COAG), convened by the Prime Minister, was held in Canberra today. The Forum was chaired by the Prime Minister and attended by Premiers and Chief Ministers, business CEOs, and representatives of Australia's peak business organisations.
All participants agreed they share a common goal  -  to improve national productivity growth to boost the prosperity of all Australians  -  and are committed to working together to secure gains in productivity.  Noting the speed of economic change, increasing globalisation and structural shifts in the economy, participants expressed their confidence in the capacity of Australia to address change and secure prosperity.
Members of the Forum reiterated that continual improvements to regulation and competition frameworks are critical contributors to productivity growth.  Substantive and effective reforms reduce the costs incurred by business in complying with unnecessary regulation, improve workforce participation and labour mobility and expand Australia's productive capacity.  This will help enhance Australia's global competitiveness.
While significant progress on regulatory and competition reform has already been made under COAG's Seamless National Economy agenda, the COAG Business Advisory Forum recognised that a stronger, more coherent compact with business is needed to drive and sustain a national commitment to new reform measures to lift productivity growth. 
Business leaders presented detailed analysis and assessment of elements of a competition and regulatory reform agenda, including a discussion paper prepared by the Business Council of Australia, on strategies and initiatives to lower costs to business, improve competition and lift productivity. Business leaders urged COAG to adopt an approach to competition and regulatory reform that: focuses on good policy; declutters the agenda; prioritises the most valuable reforms to improve competitiveness and productivity; and achieve outcomes. COAG members committed to providing a response to the suggestions raised by business before the next Forum meeting.
To meet this challenge, First Ministers and business leaders have endorsed a series of major reform priorities and agreed that COAG tomorrow will be asked to commit formally to a new national productivity-enhancing regulatory and competition reform agenda. 
Major Reform Priorities
Participants at the Forum discussed six priority areas for major reform to contribute to national productivity growth. These reform priorities are: national environmental reform; major development approvals; rationalisation of climate change mitigation programs; further energy market reform; development assessments; and best practice approaches to risk based regulation.
Environmental Approvals and Assessments  
Environmental protection is an ongoing priority for all governments. However, environmental regulation is often duplicative and cumbersome, resulting in unnecessary delays and uncertainty, slowing broad economic growth.
The Prime Minister, Premiers and Chief Ministers reaffirmed COAG's commitment to address these issues. The Commonwealth and States and Territories will work together to:
 * 	develop bilateral  arrangements for accreditation of state assessment and approval processes;
 * 	deliver improved bilateral arrangements with states and territories to fast-track accreditation including through the development of standards; and
 * 	work with jurisdictions to establish inter-jurisdictional taskforces to examine and facilitate removal of unnecessary duplication and reduce business costs for significant projects.
From discussions today, our ambitions are clear: streamlined environmental regulation that delivers strong environmental outcomes and better conditions for business.  In delivering these ambitions, the Commonwealth will maintain its capacity for a final approvals responsibility for World Heritage and high risk projects, with a framework to assess risk to be agreed between the Commonwealth and States, including on a bilateral basis. The Prime Minister, Premiers and Chief Ministers will tomorrow discuss at COAG ways to meet and implement the commitment, including timeframes for this work.
Major projects
The Forum acknowledged the steps that States and Territories have already taken to improve the process for approving major projects.
Participants at the Forum discussed the need for all levels of government to streamline the process for approvals of major projects.  As a first step, the Prime Minister, Premiers and Chief Ministers tasked the Commonwealth Treasury, in consultation with State and Territory Treasuries, to urgently scope the BCA's proposal to benchmark Australia's major development assessment processes against international best practice in terms of timelines for approvals, cost of administration and compliance and the additional costs arising from conditions imposed on projects, and report back to them within a month.
Premiers and Chief Ministers agreed to examine reforms that could be undertaken at the state level to improve the approval process for major development projects. This will be the focus of discussion at the next Forum, starting with the principles outlined by business.
All levels of Government will work towards a range of additional approaches, including the creation of taskforces for major projects, so that approvals are administered by a single State agency and unnecessary duplication in Commonwealth/State processes is removed.
Ending Duplication in Carbon and Energy Schemes 
The Forum also noted that governments have undertaken to prioritise the completion of a review of unnecessary carbon reduction and energy efficiency schemes. In response to business' views, it was recognised that this is a high priority for COAG focus and there is a need to place this work on a faster track and to remove policies and programs that are not complementary to the national carbon price and may be ineffective, inefficient or impose duplicative reporting requirements on business.   If any of these policies or programs is retained, jurisdictions committed to reviewing each of these policies or programs to identify if modifications are required.
Energy Pricing  
The Forum further acknowledged the need to increase competition in energy markets, including the need to increase the momentum of existing reviews of competition in State and Territory electricity and natural gas markets and to ensure that energy regulation places greater weight on the outcomes for consumers.  Commonwealth and State leaders reaffirmed their commitment to this reform process.  COAG will discuss bringing forward reviews of state and territory competition in retail electricity and natural gas markets as a key step towards removing retail price regulation.
Development Assessments
The Forum also discussed progress by State and Territory governments on development assessment reforms, and acknowledged the need to ensure these processes operate efficiently and do not create unnecessary delays for development proposals.
Development assessment is a state and territory responsibility, accordingly Premiers and Chief Ministers agreed to take the lead in improving the efficiency of development assessment processes.
Business leaders asked States and Territory governments to adopt ambitious targets to improve the development assessment process noting the strong link to national productivity.  Premiers and Chief Ministers agreed to consider this and to report back to the next meeting of the Forum.
Best practice approach to regulation
The Forum emphasised the importance of governments continuing to adopt a proactive approach to improve regulation in order to lower costs to the community and business  -  including adopting a risk-based approach to regulatory design, implementation, enforcement and review.  COAG will discuss concrete measures to lift regulatory performance, including reducing complexity and duplication and increasing transparency and accountability.  This would be informed by the current work of the Productivity Commission on the efficiency and quality of Commonwealth, state and territory and COAG Regulation Impact Assessment arrangements, due to be completed in late 2012.
Meeting the red tape challenge
Participants at the Forum agreed to commit to lowering costs for business  -  particularly small and medium sized enterprises  -  by identifying unnecessarily burdensome, inefficient or duplicative rules and regulations that impede productivity and economic growth.  Accordingly, all Government leaders committed to work individually and collectively, to identify and reduce “nuisance” regulations that may impose unnecessary costs on business, hindering competitiveness and stifling innovation.
The Forum committed to reduce reporting burdens on business and identify ways to remove overlaps in Commonwealth and State reporting obligations and to further expand the use of online business reporting.
In recognition that small to medium enterprises are particularly vulnerable to inappropriate or unnecessary regulations, the Prime Minister will ask the Commonwealth Minister for Small Business to work with the relevant State and Territory Ministers to engage the Small Business Advisory Committee and COSBOA to identify examples of burdensome or unnecessary regulations that frustrate businesses on a day to day basis, and report back to First Ministers.  The Prime Minister, Premiers and Chief Ministers also asked business leaders and State chambers of commerce to provide their own examples of inefficient regulation.
The Forum also agreed that COAG would twice yearly examine the suggestions made by business to ensure that initiatives with merit raised under the banner of the “Red Tape Challenge” are addressed promptly.
Delivering on existing reform commitments 
The Forum agreed to reconvene in the second half of 2012 to review and assess progress on the new agenda, and ensure that reforms at risk under the current Seamless National Economy agenda are being delivered, in line with the Forum's role as a source of continuing advice to COAG.  The Forum emphasised the importance of all governments continuing to deliver the outcomes committed to under the Seamless National Economy agenda.
In addition, the Forum agreed on the particular importance of securing best-practice harmonised occupational health and safety reforms.  Reforms under the COAG process commenced in five jurisdictions on 1 January 2012.   The Forum also agreed on the need to complete work to enable the creation of national trade licences, to improve the mobility of skilled workers.  These two reforms alone would make major inroads into business costs and deliver significant improvements to productivity.  The Prime Minister, Premiers and Chief Ministers provided business with an assurance that they would work constructively at the COAG meeting on 13 April and with business, to deliver the reform outcomes which business have strongly endorsed.
A new National Productivity Compact on Regulatory and Competition Reform
The new national productivity-enhancing regulatory and competition reform agenda will be supported by a new National Compact between the Commonwealth and states and territories and business  -  A National Productivity Compact: Regulatory and Competition Reform for a more Competitive Australia.  The new National Productivity Compact will include commitments to:
 * 	continued consultation with business as part of development of the new agenda;
 * 	include in the new agenda measures to ensure the hard won benefits of new national frameworks are sustained over time;
 * 	the regulatory disciplines that business strongly supports, including cost-benefit analysis, to ensure high-value reforms are identified and greater attention is given to reform implementation and enforcement;
 * 	improved governance arrangements to ensure future competition and regulatory reform focus on the delivery of outcomes; and
 * 	improved regulatory processes at all levels of government to stem the emergence of new inter-jurisdictional regulatory burdens.
The Prime Minister, Premiers and Chief Ministers will discuss at COAG a new approach to progress commitments on competition and regulatory reform, involving the establishment of a new inter-jurisdictional Taskforce. This Taskforce will report back on progress to the next meeting of the Forum. 



The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) held its 32nd meeting in Canberra today.  2012 marks 20 years since COAG first met in December 1992.  The Prime Minister, Premiers, Chief Ministers and the President of the Australian Local Government Association attended the meeting.
Skills Reform
COAG signed up to an ambitious set of reforms to the national training system; agreeing to a revised National Agreement for Skills and Workforce Development and a new National Partnership Agreement on Skills Reform.  Implementation Plans will be negotiated between governments by 30 June 2012.
Reforms under the National Agreement and National Partnership will provide the skills that Australian businesses and individuals need to prosper in a rapidly changing economy.
Key reforms include:
 * 	ensuring working age Australians without qualifications can get the skills they need to get higher skilled jobs in today's economy, by introducing a national training entitlement for a government-subsidised training place to at least the first Certificate III qualification;
 * 	reducing upfront costs for students undertaking higher level qualifications, by offering income-contingent loans for government-subsidised Diploma and Advanced Diploma students;
 * 	improving the confidence of employers and students in the quality of training courses, by developing and piloting independent validation of training provider assessments and implementing strategies which enable TAFEs to operate effectively in an environment of greater competition;
 * 	improving access to information about training options, training providers and provider quality on a new My Skills website, so students and employers can make better choices about the training they need; and
 * 	supporting around 375,000 additional studentsover five years to complete their qualifications, and improving training enrolments and completions in high-level skills and among key groups of disadvantaged students, including Indigenous Australians.
These reforms will support Australian businesses and drive improvements in productivity by growing the pool of skilled workers, encouraging existing workers to up-skill and supporting higher levels of workforce participation.
Business Advisory Forum
Noting the speed of economic change, increasing globalisation and structural shifts in the economy, participants in the Business Advisory Forum expressed their confidence in the capacity of Australia to address change and secure prosperity.  The Prime Minister, Premiers and Chief Ministers thanked the leaders of businesses and business groups for their constructive engagement on regulatory and competition reform at the Forum, and particularly welcomed the paper prepared by the Business Council of Australia (BCA).
Following discussions at the Business Advisory Forum, COAG agreed to progress six priority areas for major reform to lower costs for business and improve competition and productivity.  The reform priorities are:
 * 	addressing duplicative and cumbersome environment regulation;
 * 	streamlining the process for approvals of major projects;
 * 	rationalising carbon reduction and energy efficiency schemes;
 * 	delivering energy market reforms to reduce costs;
 * 	improving assessment processes for low risk, low impact developments; and
 * 	best practice approaches to regulation.
First Ministers reaffirmed COAG's commitment to high environmental standards, while reducing duplication and double-handling of assessment and approval processes.  To achieve these commitments, our governments will work together to:
 * 	fast-track the development of bilateral arrangements for accreditation of state assessment and approval processes, with the frameworks to be agreed by December 2012 and agreements finalised by March 2013;
 * 	develop environmental risk- and outcomes-based standards with States and Territories by December 2012; and
 * 	examine and facilitate removal of unnecessary duplication and reduce business costs for significant projects.
COAG acknowledged the Commonwealth's existing final approval responsibilities for projects within its current jurisdiction affecting world heritage sites and specific areas of action, including nuclear actions, defence development and developments affecting Commonwealth waters. The Commonwealth will work with the States and Territories to improve the process for approvals of these categories, agreed bilaterally or collectively, for consideration by COAG at its next meeting.
The Prime Minister, Premiers and Chief Ministers tasked Heads of Treasuries to scope urgently the BCA's proposal to benchmark Australia's major project development assessment processes against international best practice, and to report to COAG through Senior Officials.  COAG agreed that the construction industry is a significant contributor to Australia's economic and social wellbeing.  COAG noted that Heads of Treasuries have been asked to undertake analysis of construction industry costs and productivity, and agreed to consider the outcomes of this work through Senior Officials.  Both should occur within a month, including the possibility of referral of one or a combination to the Productivity Commission.
Premiers and Chief Ministers agreed to examine reforms that could be undertaken at the State and Territory level to improve the approval process for major projects, for discussion at the next Business Advisory Forum.  All levels of government will work toward a range of additional approaches, including the creation of taskforces for major projects, so that approvals are administered by a single State agency and unnecessary duplication in Commonwealth and State processes is removed.
COAG recognised the need to prioritise the completion of a review of unnecessary carbon reduction and energy efficiency schemes and asked its new Taskforce (see below) to provide urgent advice in advance of the next COAG on how to fast track and rationalise policies and programs that are not complementary to a carbon price, or are ineffective, inefficient or impose duplicative reporting requirements on business.
COAG reaffirmed its commitment to reforms to increase competition in interconnected energy markets.  COAG will consider at its next meeting proposals to bring forward existing reviews in electricity and natural gas markets as key steps towards improving competition and the efficiency of electricity networks to ensure that energy regulation places greater weight on the outcomes for consumers.
COAG discussed progress by State and Territory governments on development assessment reforms, and acknowledged the need to ensure these processes operate efficiently and do not create unnecessary delays for development proposals.  Premiers and Chief Ministers agreed to consider adopting ambitious targets to improve development assessment processes for discussion at the next Business Advisory Forum.
COAG agreed to consider concrete measures to lift regulatory performance, including reducing complexity and duplication and increasing transparency and accountability.  This will be informed by the current work of the Productivity Commission on the efficiency and quality of Commonwealth, State and Territory and COAG Regulation Impact Assessment arrangements, due to be completed in late 2012.
COAG further recognised that small to medium enterprises are particularly vulnerable to unnecessary regulation and the accumulation of regulation.  COAG agreed that the new Commonwealth Minister for Small Business, and the relevant State and Territory Ministers, would engage the Small Business Advisory Committee, the Council of Small Business of Australia and State and Territory Chambers of Commerce to identify examples of burdensome or unnecessary regulations that frustrate businesses on a day to day basis, and to report back to First Ministers.  COAG directed the Taskforce (see below) to prepare a comprehensive report on the red-tape challenge for its next meeting.
COAG committed to reduce reporting burdens on business.  COAG asked the Taskforce to report on specific ways to remove overlaps in Commonwealth and State and Territory reporting obligations, including the expanded use of online business reporting, for consideration at its next meeting.
COAG agreed the new productivity-enhancing regulatory and competition reform agenda will be supported by a National Productivity Compact: Regulatory and Competition Reform for a more Competitive Australia.  The Compact between the Commonwealth, States and Territories and business will set out a high-level statement on principles for effective regulation and reform.  The Compact will be developed by COAG Senior Officials, in consultation with business, and finalised at the next Business Advisory Forum.
To develop the policy and timetable for this ambitious new reform agenda, COAG agreed to establish across-jurisdictional Taskforce, chaired by the Secretary of the Commonwealth Department of Finance and Deregulation, comprising a senior Commonwealth Treasury official and Deputy Secretary representatives from both First Ministers and Treasury departments in the States and Territories, reporting to COAG through First Ministers' Senior Officials.
The Taskforce will provide advice to COAG for its next meeting on:
 * 	the detail of the specific reforms discussed at the Business Advisory Forum, outlined above;
 * 	the likely costs and benefits of the reforms, drawing on high-level advice from the Productivity Commission and an assessment against COAG's reform principles; and
 * 	sensitivities, stakeholder views and implementation pathways and challenges.
COAG noted the existing work on future regulation and competition reform, undertaken by the Business Regulation and Competition Working Group and the Standing Council on Federal Financial Relations, and asked the Taskforce to provide advice on the merit of these proposals in the context of a focused productivity-enhancing reform agenda.  COAG agreed that the Business Regulation and Competition Working Group would see the completion of the existing Seamless National Economy reforms by the end of 2012 but would not continue beyond this, being replaced by the Taskforce.
COAG noted that the Forum will reconvene in the second half of 2012 to review and assess progress.
Progress on Seamless National Economy Reforms
COAG released its response to the recent COAG Reform Council 2010-11 Report on the National Partnership Agreement to Deliver a Seamless National Economy.  COAG agreed to amend the Implementation Plan with respect to consumer credit and the national mine safety framework.  COAG noted the importance of completing the current Seamless National Economy agenda.  It released two report cards on the implementation of its deregulation priorities and competition reforms, demonstrating progress with 16 of the 27 deregulation priorities and two of the eight competition reforms now completed.
Given the priority placed on completing the Seamless National Economy reforms by a wide range of Australian businesses at the Business Advisory Forum, Leaders focused on two of the most important deregulation priorities.
COAG noted progress on establishing a national occupational licensing system.  The system aims to deliver considerable benefits to business, consumers and the wider community through enhanced mobility of licensed trades between jurisdictions.  Progress includes:
 * 	passage of the Occupational Licensing National Law in most jurisdictions;
 * 	appointment of the Board of the National Occupational Licensing Authority (NOLA); and
 * 	agreement between NOLA and the New South Wales Government Licensing Service to provide a national licensing register. 
There has been significant industry input in licensing policy development over the past 18 months, and continuing cooperation between jurisdictions on implementation issues and drafting the legislation and regulation.
COAG agreed the need for a best practice approach to regulation and committed to release the Consultation Regulation Impact Statements (RIS) that reflect this approach for electrical; plumbing and gasfitting; refrigeration and air-conditioning; and property occupations in the first half of 2012.  This will enable stakeholders to comment on the options for the detailed licensing schemes for each occupation, which include the status quo, national licensing and automatic mutual recognition.  COAG further committed to work toward agreement to the framing legislation and regulation by the end of 2012.  Given the complexity of the reform, it will now commence from 2013.  In the lead-up to the commencement of the reform, COAG will consult stakeholders on the options contained in the RIS and raise awareness of the reform.
On occupational health and safety reform, of the nine jurisdictions, six have legislated the new workplace safety arrangements and one other is in the process of legislating the reform.  COAG agreed that the current occupational health and safety laws will be reviewed by the end of 2014.  The Commonwealth noted that the National Partnership Agreement to Deliver a Seamless National Economy contains reward payments for successful implementation of these measures.
National Disability Insurance Scheme
The Commonwealth and all States and Territories reaffirmed their commitment to a National Disability Insurance Scheme.  They recognised a growing need to support the most needy and vulnerable people in the community, and that for many, lifetime support for income, accommodation and services is a necessity.
COAG also acknowledged that change can only be achieved, step by step, over a number of years.  In particular, current services and support must be maintained through any transition period.  Also, it is essential that the support of family members, friends and volunteers is maintained. 
Approximately 70 per cent of disability care and support services are funded by State and Territory Governments.  To develop a national scheme, it was recognised that the level and share of Commonwealth funding will need to increase.
The national scheme will be cognisant of, and build upon, existing services, recognising that services are best managed and delivered as close as possible to those requiring them. 
The Commonwealth and the States and Territories will collaborate on its development and implementation.
The diversity within and between States and Territories will need to be taken into account with each State offering a mix of services as either government-provided services, funded services from the not-for-profit sector or self-managed funding.
Broad principles have been agreed and now require more detail and tangible progress.  A careful and cautious approach will be taken to ensure that expectations remain realistic.  All governments recognise the importance of identifying who will and will not be covered by the proposed reforms and what level of service will be provided.  The early work will concentrate on achieving clarity and consistency in eligibility criteria, portability of benefit entitlements and funding of an NDIS.
COAG released high-level principles that will guide governments' consideration of the Productivity Commission's recommendations on an NDIS (Attachment A).
COAG asked its Select Council on Disability Reform to undertake further work on funding, governance and the scope of eligibility and support as a matter of priority, to enable COAG's consideration at its next meeting in 2012.
COAG also released a progress report which identifies some of the challenges associated with these complex reforms and the issues that need to be balanced in the design of an NDIS (Attachment B).  The progress report will inform engagement with the community on an NDIS design over the coming months.
School Funding Reform
COAG noted the Commonwealth is pursuing school funding reform with the objectives of reinforcing reforms to improve school performance and ensuring equity in resourcing.  The Commonwealth acknowledged the reform efforts underway across jurisdictions.  It invited the participation of the States and Territories in developing advice for COAG on options for funding reform, in the light of the recent Review of Funding for Schooling (the Gonski Review).  The Commonwealth shared with the States and Territories the high-level objective and principles that will guide its work on school funding reform.
Mental Health Reform
COAG signed a new National Partnership Agreement Supporting National Mental Health Reform.  This agreement provides $200 million in Commonwealth funding, alongside investments by the States and Territories, to improve outcomes for people with severe and persistent mental illness.  Through the delivery of 16 projects across the States and Territories, more people with severe and persistent mental illness and complex care needs will be able to access supported accommodation and avoid emergency department presentations and associated hospital admissions, through better supports to maintain their recovery in the community (see Attachment C for details of the 16 projects).
Work on the draft Ten Year Roadmap for National Mental Health Reform is continuing and COAG will consider the Roadmap later in 2012.  COAG acknowledged the strong interest expressed by the mental health sector and the wider community during national consultations on the draft Roadmap in January 2012.
Presentations on Issues Relevant to Sustainability and Urban Liveability
COAG noted the presentations from the States and Territories on issues relevant to sustainability and urban liveability, including: achieving better value from infrastructure funding, planning controls on non-aviation development on airport land, engaging the private sector to create better public spaces, improving regional resettlement, working across borders and sustainable development in northern Australia.  COAG also noted the continuing commitment of each government to improve the administration and planning for sustainable cities.  The effective organisation and planning of cities is vital for sustainable growth, increased productivity and wellbeing.
All governments actively participated in the review of capital city strategic planning systems undertaken by the COAG Reform Council.  The Council's recent report provides useful information for all governments to consider.  COAG agreed to continued intergovernmental collaboration and that further work on cities would be taken forward by the COAG Standing Council on Transport and Infrastructure.
Not-For-Profit Reform
COAG today agreed to take the first steps towards developing an effective approach to the regulation of Australia's not-for-profit (NFP) sector.
COAG tasked the NFP Reform Working Group with reviewing, developing and recommending NFP regulatory reform options to COAG including:
 * 	considering the adoption or application of a Commonwealth statutory definition of charity;
 * 	a nationally consistent approach to fundraising regulation;
 * 	reviewing legal, governance and reporting regulation for the NFP sector; and
 * 	considering approaches to harmonise the test for determining non-charitable activities of charities.
The work of the NFP Reform Working Group will build on the cooperation already achieved to successfully implement a national standard chart of accounts and recognises the critical role that not-for-profits play in enriching our communities and delivering effective services.
COAG agreed that the NFP Reform Working Group be asked to report to COAG at or before its next meeting, and ahead of the Commonwealth introducing the Australian Charities and NFP Commission legislation, on the process to avoid or minimise any regulatory duplication between jurisdictions, particularly around statutory reporting and governance requirements.
Expiring National Partnership Agreements
COAG noted the work underway through the Standing Council on Federal Financial Relations on expiring National Partnership Agreements, and agreed to consider the outcome of that work at its next meeting.
International Education
COAG noted progress in implementing the strategic review of the student visa program.  In relation to the review of the student visa Assessment Level framework, COAG agreed to expedite the implementation of the revised framework for low immigration risk providers so that they are able to have access to streamlined student visa assessments in the second half of 2012.
GST Distribution Review
COAG noted that the interim report of the GST Distribution Review will be released by the Commonwealth, prior to the Commonwealth Budget.
Attachments
 * 	Attachment A: High-level Principles for a National Disability Insurance Scheme  -  DOC 144KB | PDF 66KB
 * 	Attachment B: Progress Report: Building a National Disability Insurance Scheme  -  DOC 82KB | PDF 95KB
 * 	Attachment C: Projects under the National Partnership Agreement Supporting National Mental Health Reform  -  DOC 50KB | PDF 79KB



The nation's training system will be transformed after the states and territories signed up to a $1.75 billion package to accelerate skills reform at COAG today.
This skills package will ensure our national training system is able to respond to the needs of our economy, and will help to lift productivity and competitiveness.
Around an additional 375,000 students will be able to complete qualifications over the next five years under the package signed up to at COAG.
This will help more Australians get the training they need to get a job, to change careers or to up-skill and get a better-paying job.
The key elements of the $1.75 billion package signed up to today are:
 * 	The creation of a National Training Entitlement, giving working age Australians guaranteed access to a government subsidised training place;
 * 	The expansion of income-contingent loans to subsidised higher level qualifications in the vocational education and training (VET) system;
 * 	Launch of the MySkills website, to ensure students and industry can make an informed choice about the training that suits them, and a student identifier for the VET system; and
 * 	Measures to raise the quality of skills training and outcomes.
This $1.75 billion package is in addition to the $7.2 billion the Government will provide to states and territories through the National Agreement for Skills and Workforce Development over the next five years (see separate release).
In total, that means the Government isproviding almost $9 billion of funding to the states and territories over the next five years. This is a $1 billion increase over the previous 5 years under the National Agreement and Productivity Places Program National Partnership.
Today's reforms will provide industry with a better qualified and flexible workforce over time and will assist in meeting skills shortages in key areas of the economy.
The creation of a National Training Entitlement will see all working age Australians guaranteed access to a government subsidised training place, up to their first Certificate III.
Students who have literacy and numeracy difficulties, who left school early, have a disability or workers who have are long term unemployed will have improved access to training at a level that will have a significant impact on their employment and wage earning prospects.
Students will be able to access the Entitlement through training providers approved by states or territories to deliver publicly subsided training. Depending on where the training is carried out, the subsidised place could be worth up to $7800 for some courses.
In a second key reform, VET students studying subsidised diploma and advanced diplomas will have access to income contingent loans like those offered to university students through FEE HELP.
This will enable up to 60,000 students per year to defer the upfront cost of tuition, so that cost will no longer be a barrier to training. Students will be able to defer payment for their study until they are earning in excess of $47,000 per annum.
The My Skills website, due to be launched later this year, will give students the information they need to make the right choice about the training that suits them.
A new Unique Student Identifier will also be introduced so students will be able to access information about their training record from a single authoritative source.
The Gillard Government will work with the states and territories to ensure courses delivered by the VET sector are subject to independent quality assessment. 
We will ensure students receive high quality training that meets the needs of industry and students.
This includes strategies to improve the quality of VET teaching and training through the implementation of criteria specific to each state including monitoring, performance evaluation and quality indicators for providers.
States and territories will trial independent checks on the quality of training provider assessment practices over the next two years in order to underpin the introduction of  a national system of independently assessed and validated VET qualifications.
States and territories will have to set strict criteria to ensure only quality providers with an established record can access public funding.
Skills Australia estimates that in the five years to 2015, Australia will need an additional 2.1 million people in the workforce with VET qualifications.
This skills package is a significant breakthrough for business and employees as we shape the new economy. It sits alongside our reforms in clean energy, broadband and tax redesign as the building blocks to equip our nation for the challenges ahead. 



The Council of Australian Governments today agreed help improve the care and support provided to people living with severe and persistent mental illness and complex care needs through a new National Partnership Agreement.
The Gillard Government will provide $200 million to help address gaps in state and territory mental health systems.
This Labor Government is committed to delivering major reform in mental health.
Today's announcement builds on our $2.2 billion mental health package announced in this year's Federal Budget, delivering on a key election commitment to make mental health a key second term priority for the Government.
States and territories play an integral role in providing acute care, housing, education and social supports for people with a mental illness.
The signing of the National Partnership will mean more services and better support for people with a mental illness who frequently present at emergency departments.
Today's agreement will also help more Australians living with mental illness to secure and maintain stable accommodation and support to keep well and break the hospital cycle.
Under the NP, Commonwealth funding is being provided for the following projects:
 * 	Australian Capital Territorywill be provided with $2.8 million for the adult mental health step-up step-down early intervention support program and the supported accommodation outreach project targeting men with serious mental illness and recent experience of involuntary institutional care.
 * 	New South Waleswill be provided with $57.6 million for three projects: the housing and accommodation support initiative plus; in-reach support boarding house residents with mental health issues; and, the mothers with mental illness and their children: mental health community support program which includes intensive, family focussed support to mothers with mental illness and their children.
 * 	Northern Territorywill be provided with $3.6 million to increase accommodation and support for people with severe and persistent mental illness in Alice Springs and Darwin.
 * 	Queenslandwill be provided with $51.5 million for the supported recovery  -  coordinated accommodation and support project which includes long-term social housing and support services
 * 	South Australiawill be provided with $14.2 million to expand the assessment and crisis intervention service teams and develop a community walk in centre, which will enable people to present to a mental health clinician in a community location, rather than a GP or emergency department.
 * 	Tasmania will be provided with $6.6 million to provide packages of care for people with severe and persistent mental illness, including individualised and intensive support to access and maintain accommodation, education and employment support.
 * 	Victoria will be provided with $37.3 million for four projects: mental health outreach support and care coordination to people experiencing homelessness as a result of enduring mental illness; mental health support for secure tenancies enabling people with severe mental illness to maintain accommodation; psychiatric assessment and planning units; and a mental health hospital admission risk program pilot which will focus on providing short term coordination of mental health services.
 * 	Western Australiawill be provided with $26.1 million for individualised community living packages and the expansion of community intervention services that respond to the needs of children and their families.
While there have been significant improvements to state and territory programs, there is still considerable variation in the type of services available across the country.
Improving links between the state and territory and Commonwealth mental health systems will deliver better treatment for people living with severe and persistent mental illness and help them to stay well and lead functional lives. 



The nation's vocational education and training system will be centred on quality teaching and learning, under a revised National Agreement on skills signed up to at COAG today.
The revised National Agreement for Skills and Workforce Development aims to deliver a productive and highly skilled workforce.
Under the National Agreement, Governments will have to implement a National Training Entitlement, improve participation and qualification completions and assure the quality of training delivery and outcomes.
States and territories will have to set strict criteria to ensure only quality providers with an established record can access public funding.
States and territories will be required to provide strategies that will continue to support and strengthen the public providers of vocational education and training (TAFE) over the next five years.
The revised National Agreement includes the performance framework that will be used to assess progress against the COAG targets to:
 * 	Halve the proportion of Australians nationally aged 20-64 without qualifications at certificate level III and above between 2009 and 2020; and
 * 	Double the number of higher level qualification completions (diploma and advanced diploma) nationally between 2009 and 2020.
The National Agreement is the basis on which the Commonwealth Government will provide $7.2 billion in skills funding to states and territories over the next five years.
In addition the Commonwealth Government will provide $1.75 billion in funding to a Skills Reform National Partnership Agreement, as agreed at COAG today.
In total, that means the Government isproviding almost $9 billion of funding to the states and territories over the next five years to provide the skills that Australian businesses and individuals need to prosper in a rapidly changing economy.
These reforms promise to deliver far-reaching changes that will make a difference to the lives of millions of Australian working families. 



The Prime Minister today thanked Bob Brown on his remarkable contribution to state and federal politics over the last three decades.
Throughout his time in elected office, Bob Brown has been a figure of integrity with a deep love for this country and its environment.
Bob has served in a number of roles throughout his political career including as the Member for Denison in the Tasmanian Parliament from 1983, as Federal Senator since 1996 and as parliamentary leader of the Australian Greens since 2005.
As a former director of the Tasmanian Wilderness Society, Bob's career has been driven by a passion for our environment, having famously led a protest against the construction of the Franklin Dam.
It was this passion that saw him lead his party through historic negotiations with the Government and Independents Tony Windsor, Rob Oakeshott and Andrew Wilkie, to ensure the passage of our Clean Energy Future Package.
Bob has also been an active voice on the rights of same sex couples, having bravely used his own experiences to campaign for change.
I wish him well for his life beyond politics.
I congratulate Christine Milne on her election as the Leader of the Australian Greens Party. 



PM: Thank you very much. The Council of Australian Governments meeting has just concluded.
I know in the run up to this meeting there was a fair degree of scepticism about whether or not COAG could still get things done. Well I think we've proved today that we can still get things done and I want to thank my colleagues, the Premiers and Chief Ministers, for the cooperative spirit that they brought to the COAG table today.
Today you will witness us sign a new National Agreement for reform of skills. Now this mightn't have been the subject of much squabbling in the media, but the lack of squabbling shouldn't disguise from people the true significance of this reform to our nation's future.
If we want a strong economy in the future then we have to have a higher skilled workforce. If individuals want the best out of life, the best salaries, the best job security, then they will need higher and higher levels of skill in today's economy, and certainly in tomorrow's economy.
The agreement we are signing will reform our skills system, so that over the next five years we will see 375,000 additional training places, we will move to a system based on entitlement, so that an adult Australian who lacks a Certificate III qualification can get a training place to get one and that is the first qualification that makes a real difference to people's employability and their earnings.
This new system will deliver too the benefit of income contingent loans for upper level VET qualifications. That means that people who are getting higher level vocational skills will get the same deal that university students do. Instead of having to pay upfront, at a time when they mightn't be earning much, they will be able to pay later, when they are earning more as a result of their qualification.
So I am very pleased that we are able to say today that this agreement is being signed by all States, all Territories and the Federal Government. It's a major reform.
I'd also like to thank the Premiers and Chief Ministers for working together with the Commonwealth and with business leaders on strengthening our economy though lessening red tape.
As a nation we need to focus on productivity, on getting more productive and consequently becoming wealthier in the future. Red tape can strangle that productivity.
We listened to business leaders yesterday and today we have responded with decisions to take forward the key priorities of business leaders.
I'd particularly like to thank Premiers and Chief Ministers for working with me to ensure that we can get to a new system, which will still give us the best possible environmental protection, but cut out the double handling and time delays that can prevent important projects getting off the ground.
Today too we've talked about the National Disability Insurance Scheme. We've had a good discussion about the next steps in what is a truly nation changing reform. We've all acknowledged our commitment to it, we've also acknowledged that this is a big reform and a big change and we need to work on it together.
We will be working on it together in coming months, including addressing things that could deliver real benefits even as the National Disability Insurance Scheme is built.
I'd also like to draw people's attention to the fact that today we have signed an agreement on mental health, which will support Australians with mental illnesses and make available to them new packages of care.
This flows from decisions taken by the Federal Government during the budget last year and I think captures the spirit across all States and Territories that we are seeking to do better for Australians who battle with mental illness.
I'll hand over now to Premier Weatherill, in his capacity as the head of CAF, leading the States and Territories. We'll then execute the Agreement and then we'll be happy to take questions.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Thank you Prime Minister and if I could begin by thanking the Prime Minister and my Territory and State colleagues for the constructive way in which they've dealt with the Council of Australian Governments agenda.
I want to just mention two of the initiatives that we've dealt with today, the first skills and the second, the decisions that flowed from the Business Advisory Forum.
In relation to the skills agenda, we know that we have an economy in transition in this country. We know that for many Australians participating in the benefits of this economy is a challenge and this is an important issue for the strength of our economy, but it's also an important issue to ensure that we share the benefits of the prosperity that many parts of our country enjoy.
So linking up people with the jobs that exist is a real challenge. Of course we have courses, we've had courses in the past that have these training exercises, but what we are now doing is providing the means to connect those people with the skills that are necessary, making it easier for them to get into these courses, by expanding the number of courses that are available, making it easier for them to get in by getting rid of upfront fees, making it easier for them to stay in the courses when they might have difficulty in actually being successful in those courses.
So it's about ensuring that many more Australians get to share in the prosperity that we know exists in our country. This is very important for South Australia, we are on the verge of a mining boom, it's already begun, and there are anxieties that some of our citizens won't get to share in the mining boom.
This is the means by which more South Australians get to share in the benefits of the mining boom.
The second set of initiatives really goes to our response to the Business Advisory Forum and I want to just select one of those for discussion, and that's the decisions that we made about getting rid of the double handling and the duplication in relation to environmental assessments.
Both tiers of government, State Governments, Territory Governments, Commonwealth Governments, have environmental assessments, but for some of our projects both of those assessments take place and they take place one after the other, adding to a lot of time and cost and complexity, which is the enemy of investment.
From South Australia's perspective, just to give you two examples of what this means, on the Sturt Highway duplication, an important project for South Australia, because we had to have sequential State and then Commonwealth assessments, it added nine months to the project and many millions of dollars of expense to the project.
Now that's something that was unnecessary, because approvals were actually gained in both systems, there's absolutely no reason why those assessments couldn't be carried out by the State Government on referral from the Commonwealth. We're going to explore ways in which we can do that.
Another example was when we were attempting to take measures to protect our lower lakes in the most recent drought. We had this awful spectre of acidification of our lower lakes, which meant that we had to take urgent works.
We went through all of the State assessments and then we found we had to go through Commonwealth assessments and yet we were very urgently needing to take those works and it was a real race against time.
It was completely unnecessary for there to be two separate systems of assessment. This isn't about watering down the quality or the rigour of these environmental assessments, in both of those cases both State and Commonwealth environmental approvals were given, it's just they could have been done as part of the one process.
We're now going to explore the way in which we can achieve that and we're very confident we will get that result and there are timelines set down in the Agreement.
I think they're two very substantial achievements that without diminishing all the other work that's gone on in the COAG process.
PM: Thank you very much. So I will sign the Skills Agreement, the new Skills and Training Agreement and then pass it to Barry.
Get the signing happening that way and whilst that's happening, because Premiers and Chief Ministers can do well more than one thing at a time, we'll start taking questions.
Yes, Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I just wanted to ask, your skills package is detailed and you've rolled it out yourself over a series of announcements over about a year, I think.
Can you confirm that all aspects as you have envisaged them have been accepted by the States, there's been no tinkering, or if there has can you explain what that is, particularly with regard to the financial arrangements?
PM: The total amount of money that we were prepared to devote to this National Partnership Agreement remains the same. The key reform elements that we sought are the same too, the entitlements system, the additional places and the income contingent loans.
I think we've been able to work on this in a spirit of cooperation because across our great nation everybody understand we need a difference training system for the future and everybody understands we need more places, more agility and higher level qualifications.
So many jurisdictions have been reforming their own systems, or aspiring to reform their own systems in this direction and that's why we've been able to partner on it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Communiqué talks about a progress report on the NDIS. What progress has been made on the NDIS?
PM: Well the progress report will be released to you; it is work that has been undertaken particularly by Ministers for Disability Reform and Disability Services. It does pose very directly a set of questions that we will need to work through and answer to build a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
As leaders we've had a good discussion about the NDIS, we had most of that discussion in fact last night and we, I think, are understanding about how important this reform is, but also how complex it is, how we want to be realistic with people about the time taken to build the new system, but we also want to get on and work on some of those things that might be able to be done quickly and can make a difference for people now.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) comment from State Premiers on the NDIS?
PM: Pick a Premier, who would you like?
JOURNALIST: Mr Baillieu.
PREMIER BAILLIEU: Well we've been very supportive of the NDIS. We are pleased that progress continues. There are obviously a lot of issues associated with this, there are some principles that have been agreed, there's some more work to be done and this is not something that's going to be done overnight, it's going to be step by step over a considerable period, but I think there's a much greater understanding of what's now required and indeed I think more confidence that we all understand how we have to contribute in the longer run.
JOURNALIST: The Communiqué on the NDIS acknowledges that the Commonwealth share and level of funding will need to increase, is it fair to say that also given the overall funding that's required, the States' level of funding will also need to increase?
PM: Well we are going to work together on funding arrangements and we're not going to prejudge now how all of that will work, but the Communiqué makes, what I think is an obvious and common sense point, that at the moment the money burden of providing services for people with disabilities largely rests on the shoulders of the States.
We as a Commonwealth Government, we have increased the amount of money we're making available for disability services, but to build a National Disability Insurance Scheme we will need to step up to a bigger share of funding.
Now the details of that are all things that need to be worked through as we work through the details of a very profound, but also very complicated, piece of public policy reform.
Yes, Karen.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you sound like you have in principle agreement on disability insurance and the Opposition Leader has today proposed a joint taskforce. Can you tell us what your response is to that suggestion and how that would fit in with this process?
PM: Well, we're here getting it done.
JOURNALIST: What's your response to the suggestion, is it a reasonable suggestion?
PM: This is work that has to be done by the Federal Government, with State Governments, with Territory Governments, working together to get it done.
We're here today getting it done.
Latika. You didn't indicate, sorry. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've put a lot of effort into occupational health and safety, by the look of the Communiqué I think you've got six of nine jurisdictions.
Are you disappointed that you can't get all of it done? And also I'd be interested in the views of State Premiers on that as well.
PM: Well, we have worked hard on occupational health and safety reform and I continue to believe that completing the current harmonisation is in the interests of the Australian nation and in the interests of Australian businesses.
Jurisdictions, some of them have taken a different view from that. You will see in the Communiqué that there will be further work looking at occupational health and safety laws, but I would hope over time we can find our way through here to end up with a truly national system.
Yes, Andrew.
JOURNALIST: The first steps for the NDIS will be the introduction of no-fault motor vehicle insurance.
Now it would involve WA, South Australia and Queensland changing its rego rules. What's your message to them; given that the views of Premiers Barnett and Newman is that they don't want to increase the cost living and it would involve some increase in the cost of the rego?
PM: Look, I think in the question you're making a series of assumptions about how the system might be built and how jurisdictions in particular might want to build towards it.
We are not underestimating  -  none of us are underestimating the amount of work that needs to be done, how challenging this is, the need to look in a very hard-headed way at all of the details, including how it would be funded, but also the need too, to keep your values and principles and perhaps your soft heart there too, knowing as we do today that there are too many Australians with disabilities who don't get to live as fuller life as they could, because we haven't as a nation found a way to provide them with all of the services and supports they need.
So I think that's what's driving us. It's not in anybody's interest sitting here to pretend that they've got the crystal ball that can prejudge all of the operational details of this scheme. No one has that crystal ball. We've got a lot of hard work in front of us.
Phil.
JOURNALIST: A question of Premiers O'Farrell and Newman, a bit of a double banger.
Are both of you gentlemen still of the view you were yesterday on the EPBC that environmental assessments should be at the discretion of the States?
And if I could just sneak in a domestic question, Premier O'Farrell, Kathy Jackson from the HSU has today requested a meeting with you to discuss solutions to cleaning up that union, including possibility bringing in administrators to force fresh elections. Could I have your views on that as well please sir?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well on the EPBC, can I say it's our view, as reflected in the Communiqué that there should only be a single approval process, we should seek to remove duplication. We recognise the Federal Government has responsibilities, but ultimately what we were told yesterday, what we know as State Governments is that having a dual approval process slows things down, adds to cost and fails to deliver, in many cases, the necessary infrastructure.
In relation to the HSU, I'm happy to pursue what options are available in New South Wales to give the members of that union in New South Wales, if possible, the relief they're seeking, which is a chance to actually have an election. That's the sort of relief that others around the nation would like as well.
PREMIER NEWMAN: Look, from our perspective what you read in the Communiqué at the end of the second page, is progress and I'm very happy with that.
It's not everything that we'd ultimately like to see, but I think I've been very happy that the Prime Minister's been prepared to listen to the issue, to listen to business as well, not just the First Ministers who are up here, and if we can streamline this so we only have one approval process ultimately, I think that'll be a great outcome.
Now Queensland's more than happy to have the Commonwealth audit our approval processes, to make sure that we're doing it the right way, but ultimately we would hope that even on these world heritage issues, that we could be the ones that are doing that assessment process.
Now that's further down the track, but at least we've come a fair distance in the last 24 hours, so I'm happy about that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, the Communiqué says that the GST distribution review will be released prior to the budget. Maybe, can I ask you why you've nominated the budget and not before that and can I ask the First Ministers and maybe I'll direct this to Mr Barnett first, what they think of that, have they now got all the information from that review that they seek, or are they still waiting for more?
PM: Look, I'll go to Premier Barnett first.
PREMIER BARNETT: Look, I actually asked the Prime Minister if that would be released and I appreciate the fact that that will now happen.
My view is that the Commonwealth State financial relations at present are dysfunctional and obviously I have a West Australian perspective.
I can give you one example, with due respect to Paul down the other end of the table, Western Australia has 2.4 million people, the Northern Territory, I think, has 280,000, we both receive $2.9 billion in GST  -  ten to one.
I think a West Australian is at least equal of a Northern Territorian. So there needs to be some fundamental reform, and even a Queenslander's worth four to one, I think.
So, look, if the system's broken hopefully this review will put all the figures out there clearly and I would hope that we get a simple reform of GST.
I'm not asking for an equal share, I'm simply asking for a fair share for Western Australia and if we have a system as it is today, we will hold back the development of a State like Western Australia, which will inevitably hold back the Australian growth, because Australian growth is dominated by export income and investment income and most of that is in Western Australia.
JOURNALIST: Have you now got all the information that you and your Treasurers were seeking?
PREMIER BARNETT: We'll wait for the review of that, I think we know the situation, but obviously having Nick Greiner and John Brumby do that review, it's a step back. So we'll wait for that and I'm very appreciative that it will now be released.
PM: I think you meant a step back, in the sense of stepping back and looking at it, not-
PREMIER BARNETT: -We won't step back on our opinion.
PM: No, no, I didn't expect that.
Louise.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask the Victorian Premier-
PM: -Sorry, just on that question from Lara, Tasmania.
PREMIER GIDDINGS: I cannot let the West Australian Premier get away with all of that, because Tasmania disagrees that the system is not broken and we are also very pleased that the interim report will be released, that will help inform the entire discussion.
Because what you have with the Grant Commission process is a very complex formula, which takes into account a number of issues to try to ensure that there is fairness and equity in the way that we are able to access funding that helps support hospitals and schools and roads across the nation, in a way that ensures that no matter where you live in this nation, you have a similar access to a similar level of service.
Now for Tasmania we have just seen a further drop in our GST because of that formula.
I'm not complaining, because it was the right thing to do, it took into account significant Commonwealth funding to our State to help fund a new Royal Hobart Hospital.
We will see our relativities to back up when that money is flushed through the system, but it is an absolutely critical issue, which is not as simplistic as Colin Barnett, the Premier from Western Australia, would make you believe it is and we look forward to some vigorous debate around this issue over the coming months.
HENDERSON: I'd also point out Colin, that your probably have ten times the revenue raising capacity than we have in the Northern Territory and we have a whole scale of greater disadvantage, so let the discussions continue.
PM: OK, let's move right along, I think.
Louise.
JOURNALIST: I just want to ask the Victorian Premier, Mr Baillieu, you had objections before the meeting to the move on occupational health and safety regulation. Have you still got those objections and also I think you had objections to the quality regulator in the vocational education system?
PREMIER BAILLIEU: Well let's just deal with the occupational health and safety. I think everybody at this table and everybody at the business forum yesterday wants to see nationally based occupational health and safety laws and they want to see them based on best practice and that's certainly our view.
The Victorian system is widely regarded as best practice, the safest, the most efficient and the lowest premiums and indeed when the decisions were made to move to a national system, the Victorian system was the model which it was hoped other jurisdictions would move to.
So that's the starting point from as far as we're concerned. The Commonwealth did an impact assessment of the new laws that was fuzzy at best about the application to jurisdictions.
We, in turn, have done a very detailed assessment and that assessments suggests very clearly that the costs for Victorian businesses over the first five years will be more than $3 billion.
And as far as we're concerned that is the application of the model laws which now have been applied in some jurisdictions.
So, as far as we're concerned, we're doing to stick up for Victorian businesses, stick up for Victorian jobs and we're not going to sign up to the model laws and we will continue to prosecute the case for the application of the Victorian based laws on other jurisdictions and I'm conscious that other jurisdictions that have implemented the model laws, they are already experiencing some pushback and of course Western Australia have not yet implemented it either and we look forward to working with jurisdictions to introduce best practice, not average practice.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned at the start of your address today the lack of - my words  -  argy bargy in the issue relating to skills.
Just wondering with, we've come here frequently; see the parade of passing people in and out, different political stripes and much is made of how easy it must be if they were all the same stripe.
I just wonder what's your view now that it's quite a split, about the ongoing utility of COAG as a driver of reform in the areas that you're interested in and if you could nominate a few of the go forward issues?
And if I could direct the same question to Premier Barnett, who in a short time has become a veteran here, about your reflection on the same issue, going from being just one conservative Premier to it being quite an even split?
PM: My view about what's achieved at this table, or indeed at any other table that I sit at, including the Cabinet table, is you don't weigh the measure of what's achieved in column inches in the newspapers, you weigh it in what's achieved for the nation and for the lives of individuals within our nation.
So, skills reform mightn't have been front page of the newspapers for days and days and days, but in terms of what will make a difference for how our economy performs in five, ten years time, how people live and the opportunities that they get in five, ten years time, what we've achieved today is profound.
Put yourself in the shoes of that individual who hasn't even got the starting qualification to get themselves a decent job and a decent life  -  well this is going to make a difference to that.
Put yourselves in the shoes of a business person who can't get the skilled workers that they need, breaks their heart that they need to go the skilled migration route instead of giving a kid, or an adult they know, a chance in their business.
Well this will help change that. So these reforms are the big reforms, whether they're the most talked about reforms is a whole other criteria.
These are big reform for the nation's future. So that's how I weigh the measure of what's achieved.
We've got big things in front of us to do, which are going to be difficult to achieve and in an environment where, for every level of government, revenue is very strictly constrained.
We're all living with the aftermath of the global financial crisis. We're all living with the structural changes in the Australian economy.
It's taken a lot out of our revenue, it's taken a lot out of the revenue of States and Territories, but even as we deal with those challenges, I think we can sit round this table and be clear about our reform ambitions for the nation, including a National Disability Insurance Scheme, including work like less red tape choking Australian businesses, including ultimately further work on schools funding and school reform.
But it requires patience, you don't get these big things done overnight, skills hasn't been done overnight. It's taken a lot of work, a lot of discussion and exchange between jurisdictions, but it shows what you can achieve when people come here with the best interests of the nation driving them, rather than anything else.
Whilst the political composition of COAG is always the subject of much interest in the media agenda, and I understand that - it's to colour of the passing parade of politics, to pick up your terminology.
My experience as Prime Minister has been that it isn't that much about which political party people come from, it's rather about whether or not they're coming to this task with a degree of goodwill and a preparedness to get things done.
So even in an environment where people have been sceptical about whether or not COAG could continue to work, because of the election of Premier Newman in Queensland and consequently a change in the dynamics between representatives of political parties within COAG, this meeting today proves that as leaders we can come together and get things done.
We have.
PREMIER BARNETT: If I can add to that, there will always be machinery issues that need to be dealt with at a meeting like this. The critical comments I make from time to time, is I think COAG should have a serious agenda about issues that affect all of Australia and all of the States.
This time we did, with the National Disability Insurance Scheme and in my view the discussion that we had in private last night played an important role in getting the States and the Commonwealth aligned on how this will go forward.
Had that meeting not happened last night, I think we would be at disparate points of view at this press conference, so that's important.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, before you go can we just hear from you on the retirement of Senator Bob Brown from politics today?
PM: Yes, firstly I'd want to say I think Bob Brown has made a remarkable contribution to Australian politics. Clearly I don't see eye to eye with Senator Brown on a range of issues, but you'd have to say he's lived a life in Australian politics, an interesting life, a life starting with his environmental activism around the Franklin Dam and leading him all the way to the Senate and to leadership of a political party that he created, the Australian Greens.
So it has been an interesting and, I think, remarkable political life. I do with him well in his retirement, he and his partner. I don't know what they have planned for the future, but whatever they do have planned for the future; personally I wish him and his partner the best in that future.
JOURNALIST: Does this change anything with your professional relationship with the Greens, the arrangement you have?
PM: Well, firstly the agreement we have is with the Australian Greens political party.
On the outlook for the Australian Greens now with the new leader Christine Milne, and I do take the opportunity to congratulate her.
I would say to Christine Milne and the political party she now leads, that we would expect them to conduct themselves responsibly and reasonably, working with the Government to achieve big changes for the Australian people, including bringing the budget to surplus and continuing to deliver services to Australian families.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just briefly can I get your response to events out of North Korea this morning?
PM: Yes, we actually talked very briefly about this in the COAG meeting, because the news was coming through as we were meeting. This missile launch has clearly failed, but despite the fact it's failed, it was a dangerous and provocative act.
We are calling on the UN Security Council to come together quickly to deal with this matter. I had the opportunity when I was in South Korea for the Nuclear Security Summit to make very clear Australia's view of this conduct by North Korea.
It is in breach of UN Security Council resolutions, it is in breach of the agreement that North Korea entered in to with the United States of America in February this year.
This is an isolated regime that can take steps back from that isolation, if it engages in better conduct and conduct that it has agreed to engage in, in February this year, when it entered the arrangement with the US, steps towards further and further isolation are not in the interest of the people of North Korea.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you agree with Bill Shorten that Fair Work Australia's delays in investigating the HSU are unacceptable?
PM: Look, I've dealt with these matters before and what I've said is I understand the keen public interest in seeing these matters dealt with and the various reports made accessible to the public.
I do understand the public's interest in that, but the actual timing and mechanics of those releases are for Fair Work Australia.
Thank you very much.  



COAG has today agreed to fast track the removal of red tape for environmental assessments and approvals, after listening to the requests of business.
At the inaugural meeting of the Business Advisory Forum yesterday, business leaders raised delays in environmental approvals and assessments as a major cost. These delays, due to duplicative processes across federal and state systems, can take businesses months or even years to resolve.
Today COAG acted on that concern and the Gillard Government and states and territories agreed to fast track arrangements to use state assessment and approval processes by March 2013.
The removal of these regulations will protect the environment whilst ending the costly delays that result from double-handling and duplication.
COAG today established across-jurisdictional Taskforce to develop the policy and timetable for this new deregulation agenda, to be chaired by the Secretary of the Commonwealth Department of Finance and Deregulation.
COAG also agreed to progress key issues raised at the Business Advisory Forum and asked the Taskforce to provide advice to the next COAG meeting on the specific reforms.
In particular, the Taskforce will provide urgent advice in advance of the next COAG meeting on how to fast track and rationalise carbon reduction and energy efficiency schemes.
COAG also directed the Taskforce to prepare a comprehensive report on the red-tape challenge to identify examples of burdensome or unnecessary regulations that frustrate businesses on a day to day basis.
To ensure that the benefits of these important regulatory reforms are sustained, a National Productivity Compact has also been agreed between the Commonwealth, states and territories and business.
This Compact will set out a high-level statement on principles for effective regulation and reform, with the plan to finalise this by the next Business Advisory Forum to be held in the second half of 2012. 



The Prime Minister and First Ministers today committed to working together towards reducing the regulatory burden on the not-for-profit sector.
The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) agreed to the terms of reference, work plan and initial milestones for a new Not-for-profit Reform Working Group.
The working group will develop and recommend options for reform of the sector and help progress our not-for-profit reform agenda.
The Gillard Government has committed to working together with the States and Territories on an effective national approach to not-for-profit regulation.
Streamlining and consolidating regulations will reduce red tape and compliance costs and enhance transparency and accountability.
This will help not-for-profit organisations focus on the important work they do in delivering services and supporting vulnerable members of the Australian community.
The Gillard Government has already taken important steps to strengthen the sector. 
As part of the 2011-12 Budget, we announced a number of regulatory reforms at the Commonwealth level, including the establishment of the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission (ACNC) and the development of a statutory definition of charity.
Further information about the Commonwealth Government's not-for-profit reform agenda and copies of the Working Group's terms of reference and work plan are available at www.treasury.gov.au. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today welcomed the commitment of First Ministers to the principles that will guide the design of a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We want to end the cruel lottery that currently exists where the services and support people with disabilities and their carers receive depend on where they live, what disability they have and how they got that disability.
That is why the Gillard Government has committed to laying the foundations for the launch of a National Disability Insurance Scheme which would give people with disabilities and their carers greater control and choice over services and supports.
The principles, released today by the Council of Australian Governments (COAG), recognise the shared responsibility to building a National Disability Insurance Scheme by all Governments.
The First Ministers agreed that a National Disability Insurance Scheme must fundamentally change the way disability care and support is delivered in Australia using an insurance approach.
A National Disability Insurance Scheme will take into account the cost of care over the lifetime of an individual and focus on increasing opportunities for people with disability and their carers.
First Ministers also considered a progress report from the Select Council of Disability Ministers and Treasurers, which is leading work to design a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
This report sets out a work plan to progress work on the design of the launch of a scheme; and to consider critical questions of funding, governance and eligibility for a full scheme as a priority.
It reflects the existing agreement of the Commonwealth and states and territories to lay the foundations for a National Disability Insurance Scheme by 2013, a year ahead of the timetable set out by the Productivity Commission. 



PM: Thank you very much. The Council of Australian Governments meeting has just concluded.
I know in the run up to this meeting there was a fair degree of scepticism about whether or not COAG could still get things done. Well I think we've proved today that we can still get things done and I want to thank my colleagues, the Premiers and Chief Ministers, for the cooperative spirit that they brought to the COAG table today.
Today you will witness us sign a new National Agreement for reform of skills. Now this mightn't have been the subject of much squabbling in the media, but the lack of squabbling shouldn't disguise from people the true significance of this reform to our nation's future.
If we want a strong economy in the future then we have to have a higher skilled workforce. If individuals want the best out of life, the best salaries, the best job security, then they will need higher and higher levels of skill in today's economy, and certainly in tomorrow's economy.
The agreement we are signing will reform our skills system, so that over the next five years we will see 375,000 additional training places, we will move to a system based on entitlement, so that an adult Australian who lacks a Certificate III qualification can get a training place to get one and that is the first qualification that makes a real difference to people's employability and their earnings.
This new system will deliver too the benefit of income contingent loans for upper level VET qualifications. That means that people who are getting higher level vocational skills will get the same deal that university students do. Instead of having to pay upfront, at a time when they mightn't be earning much, they will be able to pay later, when they are earning more as a result of their qualification.
So I am very pleased that we are able to say today that this agreement is being signed by all States, all Territories and the Federal Government. It's a major reform.
I'd also like to thank the Premiers and Chief Ministers for working together with the Commonwealth and with business leaders on strengthening our economy though lessening red tape.
As a nation we need to focus on productivity, on getting more productive and consequently becoming wealthier in the future. Red tape can strangle that productivity.
We listened to business leaders yesterday and today we have responded with decisions to take forward the key priorities of business leaders.
I'd particularly like to thank Premiers and Chief Ministers for working with me to ensure that we can get to a new system, which will still give us the best possible environmental protection, but cut out the double handling and time delays that can prevent important projects getting off the ground.
Today too we've talked about the National Disability Insurance Scheme. We've had a good discussion about the next steps in what is a truly nation changing reform. We've all acknowledged our commitment to it, we've also acknowledged that this is a big reform and a big change and we need to work on it together.
We will be working on it together in coming months, including addressing things that could deliver real benefits even as the National Disability Insurance Scheme is built.
I'd also like to draw people's attention to the fact that today we have signed an agreement on mental health, which will support Australians with mental illnesses and make available to them new packages of care.
This flows from decisions taken by the Federal Government during the budget last year and I think captures the spirit across all States and Territories that we are seeking to do better for Australians who battle with mental illness.
I'll hand over now to Premier Weatherill, in his capacity as the head of CAF, leading the States and Territories. We'll then execute the Agreement and then we'll be happy to take questions.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Thank you Prime Minister and if I could begin by thanking the Prime Minister and my Territory and State colleagues for the constructive way in which they've dealt with the Council of Australian Governments agenda.
I want to just mention two of the initiatives that we've dealt with today, the first skills and the second, the decisions that flowed from the Business Advisory Forum.
In relation to the skills agenda, we know that we have an economy in transition in this country. We know that for many Australians participating in the benefits of this economy is a challenge and this is an important issue for the strength of our economy, but it's also an important issue to ensure that we share the benefits of the prosperity that many parts of our country enjoy.
So linking up people with the jobs that exist is a real challenge. Of course we have courses, we've had courses in the past that have these training exercises, but what we are now doing is providing the means to connect those people with the skills that are necessary, making it easier for them to get into these courses, by expanding the number of courses that are available, making it easier for them to get in by getting rid of upfront fees, making it easier for them to stay in the courses when they might have difficulty in actually being successful in those courses.
So it's about ensuring that many more Australians get to share in the prosperity that we know exists in our country. This is very important for South Australia, we are on the verge of a mining boom, it's already begun, and there are anxieties that some of our citizens won't get to share in the mining boom.
This is the means by which more South Australians get to share in the benefits of the mining boom.
The second set of initiatives really goes to our response to the Business Advisory Forum and I want to just select one of those for discussion, and that's the decisions that we made about getting rid of the double handling and the duplication in relation to environmental assessments.
Both tiers of government, State Governments, Territory Governments, Commonwealth Governments, have environmental assessments, but for some of our projects both of those assessments take place and they take place one after the other, adding to a lot of time and cost and complexity, which is the enemy of investment.
From South Australia's perspective, just to give you two examples of what this means, on the Sturt Highway duplication, an important project for South Australia, because we had to have sequential State and then Commonwealth assessments, it added nine months to the project and many millions of dollars of expense to the project.
Now that's something that was unnecessary, because approvals were actually gained in both systems, there's absolutely no reason why those assessments couldn't be carried out by the State Government on referral from the Commonwealth. We're going to explore ways in which we can do that.
Another example was when we were attempting to take measures to protect our lower lakes in the most recent drought. We had this awful spectre of acidification of our lower lakes, which meant that we had to take urgent works.
We went through all of the State assessments and then we found we had to go through Commonwealth assessments and yet we were very urgently needing to take those works and it was a real race against time.
It was completely unnecessary for there to be two separate systems of assessment. This isn't about watering down the quality or the rigour of these environmental assessments, in both of those cases both State and Commonwealth environmental approvals were given, it's just they could have been done as part of the one process.
We're now going to explore the way in which we can achieve that and we're very confident we will get that result and there are timelines set down in the Agreement.
I think they're two very substantial achievements that without diminishing all the other work that's gone on in the COAG process.



Australia condemns North Korea's decision today to launch a satellite on a long-range missile.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard said she understood the launch failed.
Regardless of its outcome, this launch was provocative and dangerous.
It directly contradicted the most recent assurances received from North Korea and was in open defiance of unanimously adopted United Nations Security Council resolutions.
We urge the Security Council to meet urgently to consider a robust response.
North Korea's nuclear and long-range missile programs and its proliferation of sensitive technologies present a real and credible threat to the security of Australia and our region.
Senator Carr said Australia was disappointed by North Korea's provocative gesture in launching the missile after recent positive discussions with the United States and South Korea.
As recently as February, North Korea had agreed to implement a moratorium on long-range missile launches.
“Since July last year, South Korean and United States discussions with North Korea have raised hopes for progress on denuclearisation,” Senator Carr said.
“But today's launch, in contravention of North Korea's own assurance, is a provocative act that will set back negotiations.”
Australia will be expressing its concerns to the North Koreans directly and working constructively with our allies and partners in the region to support the stability of the Korean peninsula and the security of the Republic of Korea and the broader region. 



Australia has lost one of our greatest Olympians today with the passing of Murray Rose, following his courageous battle with cancer.
Murray was a true pioneer of Australian swimming and his impressive feats in the pool helped to shape Australia's destiny as a successful sporting nation. 
At his Olympic debut at the Melbourne Games in 1956, Murray emerged as a national hero winning three gold medals. His success on the Olympic stage helped forge Australia's reputation as a country with dynamic sporting talent and great potential. 
Murray won a total of six medals from the 1956 and 1960 Olympic Games, and set an impressive 15 world records during the course of his career. 
Born in Scotland in 1939, Murray and his family migrated to Australia following World War II. Australian swimming was indelibly changed by the sporting achievements of an extraordinary Scotsman who paved the way for the next generation of swimmers to achieve on the international stage. 
Murray will be remembered fondly as a sporting legend who inspired the next generations of elite athletes and helped to propel Australia's sporting success in future Olympics. 
There is no disputing that the Olympian was a champion in the pool, but Murray also made an immense contribution to the community through charity work and as patron of the 'The Rainbow Club' which teaches children with a disability to swim. 
As an Olympic legend Murray inspired Australians with his gallant feats in the pool. He was a great athlete, a great role model and a great champion. But above all he was a lovely husband and father who will be missed by his wife, Jodie, and his son Trevor. 
The thoughts of the nation are with them as they grieve his passing.   



Prime Minister Julia Gillard will travel to Singapore and Turkey from 22 to 28 April.
Singapore is one of Australia's closest regional partners.  It is Australia's fifth largest trading partner and a key strategic and economic friend in the Asia Pacific region.
In Singapore, the Prime Minister will meet Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong to discuss ways in which we can strengthen bilateral and regional cooperation, boost bilateral trade and investment and reaffirm our already solid defence ties.
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the Battle for Singapore, in which more than 1,000 Australians were killed or missing in action and over 15,000 Australians became prisoners of war.
The Prime Minister will pay her respects at the Kranji War Memorial, which honours the sacrifice of allied service men and women in the Second World War.
In Turkey, the Prime Minister will join Australians who have travelled to Gallipoli to commemorate the landing of our troops at Anzac Cove. This is the 97th anniversary of the historic landings and will be a memorable event for all Australians.
On this day the Prime Minister will attend services at the Anzac Day Dawn Service, the Australian Memorial at Lone Pine and the New Zealand Memorial at Chunuk Bair.
The following day, the Prime Minister will hold talks with Turkey's Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
Australia and Turkey have longstanding historical ties that are close to the heart of Australians and Turks alike. These ties are reinforced by our strong community links and a vibrant Turkish community in Australia.
Australia and Turkey are strengthening our cooperation on a range of significant international issues. 
We are partners in the transition in Afghanistan and work very closely together in the G20, which Australia will host in 2014 and Turkey will host in 2015.
This will be Ms Gillard's first visit to Turkey as Prime Minister and the first visit to Gallipoli by an Australian Prime Minister since 2005. 



PM: I am very pleased to be here at the War Memorial this morning. I'm joined by Warren Snowdon, our Minister for Veterans' Affairs, by Rear Admiral Ken Doolan, Chairman of the Council of the Australian War Memorial, Ms Nola Anderson, the Acting Director of the Australian War Memorial, Mr Shane Carmody, Acting Secretary of the Department of Veterans' Affairs, Brigadier Bill Rolfe representing the Chair of the Anzac Centenary Advisory Board and of course I'm also joined by the local Member Andrew Leigh.
Ninety-seven years ago, the men of the 1st AIF were diverted from their training in Egypt to go to an unknown place called Gallipoli. Gallipoli is now a site of pilgrimage for every Australian. Most go there in spirit. Others who can travel go there in person to be present at the place and at the time when the story of courage and character which is Gallipoli began.
It's a journey I've wanted to make all of my life and I'm very honoured and grateful that I will be in Gallipoli for this Anzac Day. I will be there as Prime Minister representing the nation, but I will also be there as a grateful citizen, a citizen grateful for all of the things that have been achieved by the men and women who fought for this country across the ages.                        
We go to Gallipoli as Australians to see and to understand but mostly we go to bear witness now that the original Anzacs are all gone. So it is with this place that we stand in today, the Australian War Memorial. This building was meant to honour one conflict, the ‘war to end all wars'. But by the time it was finished we were enmeshed in another great war and yet more followed across the decades including this very day the fighting in Afghanistan.
But the First World War is the heart of this memorial and because all of the Anzacs are now gone, it is a story that needs to be told with renewed clarity and conviction.
Much has been contributed to the upgrading and expansion of this building over the past two decades, investments that do credit to all those who were involved in making them. But one great task remains: the refurbishment of the First World War galleries which have changed little over many years.
So I'm very proud today to be able to announce that the Government will provide $27 million to ensure this project will be undertaken and completed in time for the Centenary of Anzac.
These galleries themselves are a rich part of our tradition of memory, especially the dioramas we've just been looking at which so vividly and so faithfully capture the horror the Anzacs faced. So this will be a sensitive refurbishment, preserving all that is best loved of these galleries while bringing to bear the latest insights of museum design and multimedia technology. And it will allow more of the Memorial's very extensive collection to actually be on display, so you will be able to see what now is unfortunately hidden because there simply isn't the space or technology to display it.
We want to present these stories and experiences of our involvement in the First World War to a modern audience and particularly to the tens of thousands of school children who visit this place.
At the inauguration of this Memorial on Anzac Day 1929 the Governor-General Lord Stonehaven said that:
“No building can ever hold the same place in the hearts of Australians as the War Memorial will hold, even though Canberra is enriched and will be enriched with many noble and beautiful buildings.”
Eight decades have passed and places like the National Library and the new Parliament House have been built, but Lord Stonehaven's assessment surely remains correct. If we ever needed to explain or understand our nation and its character in a single place, this is it. This is the place.
No Australian needs to be told to respect it, Australians just do. And so we will ensure as the Centenary of Anzac approaches, that the building is given the care and resourcing it needs to repay that respect.
In the same way, we will deliver a program of commemoration that gives all Australians the opportunity to commemorate the Centenary of Anzac in the most appropriate way possible.
The work of the Centenary Advisory Board led by Angus Houston and building on the work of the Hawke Fraser Commission is moving swiftly ahead. I will be making further announcements in the coming weeks about the Government's support for the Centenary program but the work of commemoration begins here in this very sacred place today.
I'll now ask Minister Snowdon to make a few comments.
MINISTER SNOWDON: Thank you Prime Minister. You have emphasised the importance of the War Memorial on Australia's cultural landscape. I think we all need to appreciate that importance and know that over 850,000 Australians visit the War Memorial each year. 125,000 are schoolchildren. So it's a very central part of our cultural heritage and as such the investments been made by the Government to refurbish the World War One galleries are crucial to us providing appropriate commemorations around the Centenary of Anzac.
The Prime Minister has indicated she'll be going to Gallipoli for this Anzac Day. I'll be at Villers-Bretonneux, where on the 24th and 25th of April 1918 there was this tremendous battle. So it's important that we understand that when we talk about the First World War we appreciate the sacrifices made across the whole of the battlefront. To know that over 400,000 Australians served during the First World War, 60,000 of them died. And on the Western Front in France and Belgium 295,000 served, 46,000 died. The sacrifice is extreme and touched so many Australian families including my own.
So when we work towards the commemorations of Anzac, the Centenary around the start, the commencement of the First World War in 1914 and then beyond until Armistice Day in 1918, we will be relying very, very heavily on the work of the Anzac Advisory Board being led so ably by Angus Houston.
I'm looking forward to working with them. As the Prime Minister has said further announcements will be made in coming days around other things we are doing, but it is very important for all Australians to understand that we are intent on providing the most appropriate way, the best we can do to commemorate Australia's sacrifice during those great battles of the First World War. But understand also we're talking about a centenary of service up until the present day and understand we're also thinking about while we do that our men and women who are serving in Afghanistan.
REAR ADMIRAL KEN DOOLAN: Prime Minister, the announcement that you have made this morning about the funding of the refurbishment of the First World War galleries will be very welcome news to the Council of the Australian War Memorial, but also of course to the Director and our dedicated and expert staff here, but more particularly I guess to the broader sweep of Australians including those who spend their time here as volunteers showing our visitors around this iconic building, talking to the schoolchildren, and also those very important people who sign on as Friends of the War Memorial to help support this particular institution which has a unique place for many Australians who visit here from right across this vast land of ours.
And as the Minister has already said, included in that are the schoolchildren from every state and territory. And so the story continues to be told to those school children by and through this Memorial because it is unique. It is two things, it is both a memorial and of course it's a museum. Those who go and visit, as did briefly this morning, the memorial part and see the poppies placed alongside the names and watch people as they go and find the names of those who paid the supreme sacrifice in yesteryear then come down to this area here, and to the great part of the Memorial and are told the story and learn about what happened at places like Gallipoli, at places like Pozieres.
And of course it not only includes the First World War, but it includes those wars that have occurred since that time. So we thank you and the Government for the investment that you have placed in the refurbishment of these galleries and we look forward to seeing those opened in time for the Centenary of Anzac.
Lest we forget.
PM: So in line with the protocols of the War Memorial we'll only take questions relating to this announcement. Are there any questions? Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you give an indication of what the money will be spent on (inaudible).
PM: Sure, look I think the best person to do that is probably Nola so we'll call on her expertise to give you the full run down.
NOLA ANDERSON: Thank you Prime Minister and it will be a lot of work but a huge pleasure to undertake that work. There will be changes that you won't see because we will be keeping the dioramas which Australians know and love but there will be some major changes in the way that we arrange those dioramas. For example, we will be putting them into chronological order so that visitors can actually walk through the history of the First World War and see the dioramas, the stories that they tell, in the correct story line.
We will also be using a lot more new technology so that our visitors who are very technologically savvy these days will be able to use Wi-Fi, iPads, iPhones to interrogate more of the collection that we have there.
We will also be able to do some work on the heritage nature of the galleries, some of those parts of the galleries haven't been changed since the 1940s and we'll be able to make sure that they will be treated in the correct way that a heritage building should be.
PM: Thank you. Are there other questions? No?
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Gillard today warmly welcomed President Sleiman and his accompanying delegation to Australia, the first visit to Australia by a President of Lebanon.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Sleiman acknowledged the strength of people to people links between Australia and Lebanon and the foundation for a strong, productive and long-standing bilateral relationship.
They discussed the significant contribution to all aspects of Australian society by Australians of Lebanese descent.
President Sleiman told Prime Minister Gillard that he looked forward to conferring on NSW Governor, Professor Marie Bashir the National Order of the Cedar in recognition of her contribution to enhancing friendship and cooperation between Lebanon and Australia.
The two Leaders welcomed the recent establishment of the Australia Lebanon Chamber of Commerce and Industry in Melbourne, which they believed would complement the Australian Lebanese Chamber of Commerce in Sydney and serve to stimulate increased bilateral trade and investment.
The leaders discussed a number of significant regional issues including events in Syria, the need for constructive talks between P5+1 and the Middle East peace process.
They urged the immediate and full implementation of UN-Arab League Joint Special Envoy Annan's six-point peace plan.
Leaders welcomed enhanced cooperation in defence matters, including through the offering of places to members of the Lebanese Armed Forces in joint training courses in Australia.
Prime Minister Gillard reiterated Australia's support for de-mining activities in Lebanon and announced an additional $1 million contribution to accelerate the return of land free of mines to the people of South Lebanon.
President Sleiman and Prime Minister Gillard discussed the important work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees (UNRWA).  Australia's financial assistance to UNRWA includes support for the valuable help UNRWA provides to Palestinian refugees in Lebanon.
President Sleiman welcomed the Prime Minister's announcement that Australia would provide funding to support a Visiting National Professionals Program at the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the Centenary of Anzac, Warren Snowdon, today announced $27 million for the refurbishment of the First World War galleries at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra.
Speaking at the Australian War Memorial, the Prime Minister said the site was a very special place for Australians to come and remember the many thousands of soldiers who paid the ultimate sacrifice for our country.
We want to upgrade this gallery, so visiting Australians can say, with full appreciation and gratitude  -  we will remember them.
Today not a single Gallipoli veteran remains. Those who survived the Turkish guns have been claimed by time, and this epic wartime story now belongs to the ages.
But Anzac is no myth, and we want to make sure our record of this battle stands the test of time for generations of Australians to come.
Minister for Veterans' Affairs Warren Snowdon said the refurbished exhibition would be visited by around 850,000 people from around Australia and the world each year. 
The refurbishment of the First World War galleries will help generations of Australians learn about our nation's involvement in the First World War, the significant battles and to see first hand the equipment, aircraft and weaponry they used.
The upgrade will also introduce new technologies to the galleries providing new ways to illustrate the courageous battles our soldiers fought.
The refurbishment of the First World War galleries will be a fitting tribute to the 400,000 Australians who served in the First World War and the more than 60,000 who paid the ultimate sacrifice.
The upgrade will be completed in time for the Anzac Centenary in 2015. 



COMPERE: Prime Minister, thank you very much. Ladies and gentlemen the floor is now open for questions. We've got about quarter of an hour available for that and could I stress that we invite questions from everybody in the room, invited guests as well as the media, who will probably have a few that they wish to raise.
But as I said if you can indicate by raising your hand if you have a question, we'll get a microphone to you as soon as we can.
PM: Thank you.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, congratulations on a courageous speech, thank you. John Blaxland from the Australian National University. It strikes me that there is a remarkable parallel with Australia's history in the Vietnam War and Ashley Ekins wrote about it just recently in his book Fighting to the Finish and he made the observation in that book, that as we drew down in Vietnam the casualties of Australian soldiers who are left to continue the fighting rose disproportionately.
I'm wondering, therefore, as we look at the parallels for today, how we stand and how confident you are that Australian soldiers left remaining as forces are drawn down are left with the best support possible.
PM: Thank you. Thank you for that question and I want to be very clear in the answer.
President Karzai will announce in the coming period the next tranche of transition. It is our expectation that parts of Uruzgan will be nominated in that next tranche of transition.
That means the transition process will start. But people will not see Australian soldiers come home on the first day of transition. Transition is a process, a process we believe will take 12 to 18 months.
It's a process in which we will seek to achieve three things. We will seek to work our way through transition, we will seek to keep our people safe and at the end of transition we will bring the bulk of our people back home.
In the planning of that transition, because you are right, planning transition strategy is as complicated as any other part of the engagement. In planning that transition we will of course work with the best of military advice to plan it, so that it works the way that all of us would aspire to see it work.
But let me emphasise again, because I think this is important to the understanding of the concept of transition, it is not a moment in time, people will not see our ADF personnel or any of them come home on the first day of transition.
Transition will be a process, and people will see the bulk of our forces return at the end of that process.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, the announcement you have made today basically accelerates the anticipated return of our troops, probably by up to about 12 months, on what had been speculated on in the past.
Clearly, the agenda  -  or is the agenda being driven by the American election timetable and the need for President Obama to have a withdrawal strategy in place, and are you satisfied that the development of the Afghan forces will be advanced enough to ensure that they can maintain security to allow us to continue with the civil aid that you are promising?
PM: Thank you for the question, Brendan. I don't like to argue with members of the media, though the truth is I've been known to do so, but I don't like to argue with members of the media. But I would seek to remind you that in November, in my address to the Parliament about Afghanistan, my most recent update to the Australian Parliament, I did say in that speech that timing to complete transition in Uruzgan was not yet decided, but that it could well be completed before the end of 2014.
What drives the timetable is the assessment by ISAF and then by the Afghan Government of transition, the right moment to enter transition, and that is based on an assessment of the growing capability of the Afghan National Security Forces.
In saying to you that I expect that when President Karzai announces the next tranche, that parts of Uruzgan will be in that, what I am saying to you is that it is my expectation that parts of it will be assessed as having the right characteristics to be parts of the country where the Afghan National Security Forces can step up to responsibility for security in those areas over a 12 to 18 month timeframe. That is all that guides the strategy in terms of assessing transition, the conditions on the ground.
On the milestone that I anticipate being agreed in Chicago, that around Afghanistan, you will see Afghan-led security by mid-2013. Once again, clearly, there needs to be an assessment, and these assessments are being made, about the security conditions on the ground. Fifty per cent of the Afghan population are already covered by areas in transition.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, Neil James from the Australian Defence Association. The advance publicity for your speech this morning already saw some public debate start to plumb the normal depths it does in these topics.
What steps do you think can be taken, in particular, to combat the grossly insensitive and strategically simplistic view that the 32 Diggers we have lost in Afghanistan have died in vain, because this is particularly troubling to the families that have lost them and I urge you to take whatever steps you can to make sure that public debate doesn't make the grief for the families any worse than it is already.
PM: Thanks Neil for that question. And clearly, as I have said to you today, I most certainly do not share those perspectives, though they are being aired in the public debate.
I believe in engaging in Afghanistan our mission has been clear, our purpose has been clear, our sacrifice has been great. But the families of the men we have lost are able to say to themselves in a time of shocking grief and despair, that their loved ones were out there doing something clearly in Australia's national interest.
Now I think as human beings and as a nation overall, each of us, all of us, is capable of saying to ourselves that, when we lose a soldier, it breaks our heart. It breaks my heart when we get that news through.
I know too clearly what it feels like to get that call. It breaks all of our hearts. But that, the emotion we feel, that your heart is breaking at that point, shouldn't drive your strategic assessment about what our mission is there or for.
We need to be very clear about what our mission is and therefore very clear to ourselves and particularly to the loved ones of the men we have lost, what they were there for.
So I can assure you, like I am today, I will be out there in the public debate explaining the purpose for why we are in Afghanistan, how it is in the national interests of Australians for us to be there, how we went there, motivated by the terrorist attacks we saw on 9/11, but understanding that these attacks, attacks which took Australian lives and the attacks that subsequently flowed, found their training in Afghanistan, their support in Afghanistan. That's why we went, as well as, of course, standing by our ally the United States of America.
So we are there to make sure that Afghanistan is not again a safe haven for people who would train and come and kill Australians.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, do you have a vision for when the last Australian soldier will leave Afghanistan?
PM: Well I've outlined that to you today. So, well, I've outlined to you the transition process, what my expectations are of President Karzai's announcement, when the next tranche of transition is announced, and I have also explained to you what I believe our engagement in Afghanistan will look like at the end of that transition process.
So we will continue to be engaged in training work. I have talked to you today, for example, about the artillery school and, as you have seen from what I have said today, we have left the door open to contemplating a continuing role for special operations, subject of course to there being the right mission and mandate to do that.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, Jim Molan. Prime Minister, success in Uruzgan will only have meaning if we have success across all of Afghanistan. The aim for the size of the Afghan Armed Forces was, as you said, was 352,000 people, but ultimately to reduce to something like 230,000.
Should we expect that it will stay at the higher figure for a couple of years after 2014? That seems to me to be the time that the Afghan National Security Forces will be most tested.
PM: That's an important question, and I indicated to you that the force structure that is being contemplated is a surge force of around 350,000, but that over time would not be the ongoing force structure of the Afghan national security forces.
I'm not in a position to give you a number today about what the ongoing force structure would be, nor a date or even a window as to how it would move from the surge number to the ongoing number.
These matters are clearly under discussion now, they are under discussion in Kabul and beyond, but final decisions have not been taken. So I'm not going to, before final decisions are taken, speculate about numbers.
But I think you do raise an important point about clarity, about how the Afghan National Security Forces will be configured at this surge level and how the step-down will be done to the ongoing force posture.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, Karen Middleton from SBS Television. You said in your speech that reconciliation isn't a precondition for successful transition.
I am wondering, if it's not, aren't you effectively acknowledging that after we leave, the war will go on and it just won't be us fighting it any more?
And secondly, when I was in Afghanistan in August, I visited the Malalai Girls School in Uruzgan, that Australia helped to establish. How confident are you that that school and schools like it school will continue to operate without a security threat, once Australian forces and other forces in Uruzgan have gone?
PM: Karen, we are involved in a training mission and we are training an Afghan National Security Force that is capable of counterinsurgency. So we expect that there will be fighting against counterinsurgency after 2014.
We are expecting that the force we are assisting in training will have the capabilities to deal with that counterinsurgency at that time, though as I've indicated in my speech, we do expect for Australia and for the United States and others, there will still be some training work going on and there may still be some need for Special Forces to assist in the counterinsurgency task.
So we are training the right forces to be able to deal with counterinsurgency, and I have pointed, both locally in the province in which we work and in Kabul in recent days, to examples of the growing effectiveness of the Afghan National Security Forces in leading and acquitting operations in a counterinsurgency environment.
On, therefore, protection of places in Afghanistan from counterinsurgency threats, we are obviously training to ensure that the Afghan National Security Forces has had training and capability development in meeting that counterinsurgency. This is our mission; this is what is driving us in Afghanistan now.
As for the aid and development work and the perspectives about further improvements in health care and education and all of those things. I am always astonished when I talk about the gains that have been made in life expectancy in Afghanistan, that the gains have been made to a life expectancy of 48.
When you are a 50-year-old person, that sharpens your focus a bit, and I don't want to invite the audience to disclose their ages to each other, but when you hear a life expectancy like that, it does really focus your mind.
This is a poor country with a lot of development work to do. We can continue to assist in that development work and we will, but ultimately continuing Afghanistan's development will be the work of the Afghan Government and the Afghan people.
Thank you. 



Some of you here will remember that the Council of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute met for the first time in late winter 2001  -  less than a fortnight before the September 11 attacks on the United States.
One thing that did not change after September 11 was Australia's need for the work of an Institute such as this.
Independent and non-partisan, of course.
But more: informed and informative.
Giving us the possibility, at least, of a public conversation which is more empirical than opinionated  -  and in strategic policy, this is what we must have.
Here, the facts are a matter of life and death.
This is why, on several occasions in the past two years, I have spoken directly to the Australian people about our mission in Afghanistan.
My annual statement to the Parliament has been an important formal mechanism to engage the nation as a whole.
So have the Defence Minister's regular statements to the House.
And sadly, the deaths of Australians serving in Afghanistan have also been occasions for me to express the nation's grief and to restate the nation's resolve.
To reassure Australians not only about what we are doing there and why  -  but for how long.
For two reasons, this is another important time for an extended statement on our commitment to Afghanistan.
First, ever since 1915, April in Australia has been memory's season.
It is our most solemn national promise that in the morning of the 25th of this month, we remember the service of Australians in all the wars of our history.
And that remembrance amply includes the men and women of the Australian Defence Force who  -  alongside their civilian counterparts  -  are serving us now, in Afghanistan and around the world.
They more than meet the grave demands the ANZAC tradition makes of them.
And I am sure that in the period leading up to ANZAC Day, there will be renewed discussion of the strategy and policies which see our Defence Force committed overseas. 
So this is a symbolically significant period for Australians  -  and it is a strategically significant period.
In the next four weeks, the nations that make up the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan  -  ISAF  - will make critical decisions about the future of the mission.
On Thursday, the Foreign Minister Senator Carr and Defence Minister Smith will participate in ISAF Ministerial discussions in Brussels.
And on 21 May, I will attend the NATO/ISAF Leaders Summit in Chicago.
There, I will put Australia's view on the key questions before the international coalition.
I believe it is important I explain to Australians the decisions the Government is making and the position we will take to the table this month and next.
This audience is more than familiar with the origin of our commitment to Afghanistan.
You know that successive Australian Governments have seen our national interest in making sure that Afghanistan does not again become a safe haven for terrorists.
That the September 11 attacks  -  and most of the terrorist attacks since which have targeted Australian interests directly or in which Australians have been killed  -  had links to Afghanistan.
You know too, that successive Australian Governments have stood firmly by our alliance with the United States, invoked after September 11, against a shared threat.  
And you know that Australia's commitment  -  in our national interest, with our ally  -  is part of a strategy which enjoys wide international support.
In coalition with 49 international partners  -  under a United Nations mandate  -  at the invitation of and in co-operation with the Afghan government.
These facts of the origin of our commitment to Afghanistan are widely known and the fact that they have endured since 2001 is widely known too.
This consistency of purpose must not be mistaken for persistence in a strategy which is not working.
Quite the contrary. 
In reality the current international strategy for Afghanistan has only taken shape since 2009.
Two and a half years ago, in December that year, President Obama announced a new international strategy.
Based on counter-insurgency.
Backed by a surge of 30 000 US troops and increased contributions from NATO/ISAF nations.
And designed to facilitate transition: to prepare the Government of Afghanistan to take responsibility for its own security.
It was the right approach.
To quote ISAF's military commander, General Allen:
Throughout history, insurgencies have seldom been defeated by foreign forces.  Instead, they have been ultimately beaten by indigenous forces.
So in the long run our goals can only be achieved and then secured by Afghan forces.  Transition, then, is the linchpin of our strategy, not merely the way out.
This is why eighteen months ago, at Lisbon in November 2010, Australia, our international partners and the Afghan government laid out a clear process and a clear timeframe for transition of full security responsibility to the Afghan National Security Forces.
And why we committed to supporting Afghanistan's security and stability over the longer term.
This should be clear.
The requirements of the new international strategy led to the adoption of the timeline.
Not the other way around.
While the challenges in Afghanistan are significant and there will inevitably be setbacks, the new international strategy has been accompanied by security gains over the past year and a half.
Bin Laden is dead.
Most of al Qaeda's senior leaders have been killed or captured.
We have pushed al Qaeda's remaining leaders to the Afghanistan-Pakistan border area.
Their freedom of movement, and capacity to plan and execute terrorist operations from Afghan soil, have been significantly degraded.
We continue to see steady gains in the fight against the Afghan insurgency.
In some areas these are fragile and are not beyond reverse.
But in each month since May 2011, there have been fewer attacks by insurgents than in the same month the previous year.
Afghan forces are now leading more than a quarter of special operations and just under half of conventional operations.
We are also seeing progress in Uruzgan province  -  the main focus of Australia's contribution. 
The Afghan National Army's 4th Brigade is increasingly capable of planning and conducting operations on its own and the Afghan security presence across the province is expanding. 
The Brigade is conducting combined operations with the Afghan National Police.  And it is leading on many operations, with our Mentoring Taskforce in a tactical support role. 
For example, Commander 4th Brigade oversaw a two-week operation to clear a contested valley last month.
Led by the 6th Kandak, this operation demonstrated the 4th Brigade's ability to plan, execute and sustain an operation over an extended period.  It was marked as a keen success. 
The Brigade was able to disrupt insurgent resupply, to manoeuvre through an insurgent stronghold without taking major casualties  -  and to make contact with the enemy in an area the insurgency previously considered to be a safe haven.
Although we still face a dangerous enemy, this is the kind of progress we see  -  in Uruzgan and across the country.
And this view is increasingly shared by our Afghan partners.
With all this in mind, Australia, the international community and Afghan authorities have now reached another point where key decisions need to be made.
This is the vital business of the Chicago summit in May.
To review our progress in transition  -  to map out how we intend to complete the handover of security responsibility to the Afghan Government.
To ensure sustainment  -  to build the international commitment necessary to fund, train and support the Afghan National Security Forces after transition is complete.
And to highlight our long-term support  -  to recommit to and define our continued contribution in the years after 2014.
In Afghanistan, transition is already happening. 
Today, around half of the population lives in areas where the Afghan National Security Forces have begun taking lead security responsibility.
The next stage of transition  -  tranche three  -  will be announced soon.
And it's likely that by the middle of next year, mid-2013, the fifth and final tranche of districts and provinces will have commenced transition.
ISAF has made clear that this will not mean the end of combat, combat support or training.
But I'm now confident Chicago will recognise mid-2013 as a key milestone in the international strategy.
A crucial point: when the international forces will be able to move to a supporting role across all of Afghanistan.
I also expect President Karzai to make an announcement on transition in Uruzgan and other provinces in the coming months, including which areas of Uruzgan will begin the process first.
Once started, this should take twelve to eighteen months.
And when this is complete, Australia's commitment in Afghanistan will look very different to that we have today.
We will have completed our training and mentoring mission with the 4th Brigade.
We will no longer be conducting routine frontline operations with the Afghan National Security Forces.
The Australian-led Provincial Reconstruction Team will have completed its work
And the majority of our troops will have returned home.
When transition is complete, the international community will need to continue to support the Afghan National Security Forces. 
This is what we mean by ensuring sustainment.
The ANSF  -  which includes the police, the Afghan National Army and Afghan Air Force  -  is building up to a surge force of some 352,000.  
We expect the final size of the ANSF to be smaller than this.  
Indeed, the Government of Afghanistan, in consultation with ISAF, has made some initial decisions about likely future size and force structure.
Importantly, the ISAF Summit will discuss a funding arrangement for the costs of ensuring sustainment.
To maintain full responsibility for security in Afghanistan after 2014, the Afghan National Security Forces will need the right support  -  including funding and training  -  from the international community.   
In Chicago, I will be arguing strongly for broad and substantial international support. 
And I will go to Chicago prepared for Australia to pay our fair share.
Australia will also be prepared to provide niche training to the Afghan National Security Forces after 2014.
We are already involved in institutional training, through the Afghan National Army Artillery Training School. 
In future, we will support the proposed UK-led Afghan National Army Officer Academy.
We will maintain a role providing training and support to policing in Afghanistan.
The AFP will progressively refocus its police development efforts from training in Southern Afghanistan to institutional capability development of the Afghan National Police in Kabul.
And, finally, as I have stated previously, we are prepared to consider a limited Special Forces contribution  -  in the right circumstances and under the right mandate.
There may be a continuing role to train the ANSF to conduct  -  and to work alongside them in carrying out  -  counter-terrorism operations in Afghanistan.
Australia has an enduring national interest in ensuring that Afghanistan does not again become a safe haven for terrorists.
Reviewing progress in transition  -  and ensuring sustainment  -  are vital work for Chicago.
Stating our commitment to Afghanistan's human and economic development is vital too.
Strengthening the capacity of the Afghan government, economy and institutions will be essential to ensuring that the gains made to date are not reversed. 
Sustaining development and growing the economy will be enormous challenges in the years ahead.
The people of Afghanistan enjoy greater freedoms and a better quality of life now than in 2001. 
In that time life expectancy has increased by five years to 48 today.
85 per cent have access to basic health care services, compared to 10 per cent under the Taliban.
Over 7 million children, including 2.5 million girls, are now enrolled in school.
But clearly, development and capacity-building programs will need to continue well beyond 2014.
Above all, Afghanistan must grow economically, including by developing its mineral resources.
Mining, education and agriculture will be crucial sectors  -  all areas in which Australia can offer some technical expertise.
Like many in Afghanistan, I believe that a successful democratic transition at the end of President Karzai's second term will be a critical point in the development of Afghanistan's democratic norms.
Previous elections in Afghanistan have been criticised and many in Afghanistan and the international community have urged electoral reform. 
Electoral assistance will continue to be an important focus of the Australian aid program. 
We will maintain our support to Afghanistan's Independent Electoral Commission. 
During my visit to Afghanistan in October last year, President Karzai and I discussed formalising a comprehensive, long-term framework for the future of the Australia-Afghanistan partnership.
Indeed we hope to be in a position to sign the agreement when we meet at the Chicago summit in May.
This will set out Australia's enduring partnership with Afghanistan in development  -  along with security, trade and investment, as well as cultural and people-to-people links.
The Government of Japan will host an important ministerial conference in Tokyo in July.
At Tokyo, the focus will be on the coordination of international assistance through to 2014 and beyond  -  and on the Afghan Government's strategy for sustainable development.
At Chicago, it is vital that the nations of the Coalition restate our commitment to this cause.
I will use the opportunity that the Chicago summit creates to announce the details of increased Australian development assistance to Afghanistan through to 2015-16  -  and of our commitment to maintain that contribution in subsequent years.
At Chicago and at Tokyo, the international community will meet in a spirit of mutual commitment  -  so these are also opportunities for the Government of Afghanistan.
Opportunities to demonstrate its determination that our mutual gains over the last decade in democracy, development, tackling corruption and protecting human rights are maintained.
Australia and the international community also have a key role to play in supporting political reconciliation within Afghanistan.
Reconciliation is not a precondition for successful transition  -  our strategy is designed to ensure Afghanistan can wage counter-insurgency beyond 2014.
To be part of a settlement, those looking to reconcile need to lay down their weapons, renounce violence, cut links with al Qaeda and accept Afghanistan's democratic constitution.
And by taking the fight to the insurgents, and strengthening the Afghan forces in that fight, we help create the conditions for a successful Afghan-owned and led process.
It is clear talks are in their very early stages.  They are likely to be long and complex and will inevitably involve setbacks.
We will continue to support these efforts to pursue reconciliation.
We will also continue to work for a secure external environment for Afghanistan.
Australia welcomes regional initiatives  -  such as the Istanbul Process  -  which bring together Afghanistan's neighbours to identify ways to improve regional cooperation, including on economic linkages.
And Pakistan is critical to Afghanistan's stability.
We well know that Pakistan has been at the frontline of the threat of violent extremism in its region. 
Terrorist groups have attacked its people and Government.
Pakistan has launched numerous operations against these groups including in areas near the border with Afghanistan.
And in this fight the people and the military of Pakistan have suffered losses in the thousands, indeed the tens of thousands, over the last decade. 
Nevertheless, there is also no doubt that parts of Pakistan are being used by terrorist groups.
Particularly in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border areas.  
I am realistic about the threat that poses  -  realistic too about what can be done to limit that threat.
And our strategy, to build Afghanistan's own security forces, is founded in that realistic assessment of the country's future strategic environment.
The Government of Pakistan is in no doubt about Australia's determination  -  or our concerns.
We will work with Afghanistan  -  and with Pakistan  -  in those areas where our best judgement is that co-operation against terrorism which threatens both states is effective and real.
So for instance, there is scope to improve the tracking and control of items that assist terrorist groups in their attacks  -  as we see in the problem of Pakistani fertilisers being used to produce IEDs in Afghanistan.  
And we will do whatever else we judge best makes a difference in this difficult and sensitive task.
The people of Afghanistan face immense challenges for their national future.
Harsh natural terrain and turbulent history, tribal politics and the impact of thirty years of war, contemporary problems of corruption and narcotics.
National progress is the ultimate responsibility of the Afghan Government and people. 
But the world can help  -  and Australia can do its part.
I welcome a genuine public debate on our commitment to Afghanistan.
I say this because I am confident that the Government's approach is one which is soundly in Australia's national interest.
As well, because our people are entitled to a genuine questioning of national policies in a matter so serious  -  and difficult  -  as this.
In 2011, eleven Australian soldiers were killed in action in Afghanistan and fifty were wounded.
Four died and ten were wounded as a result of attacks by rogue members of the Afghan National Army
Several other nations have also suffered such attacks. 
These raised legitimate questions about the success of our mission to train the Afghan National Security Forces.
I also know that for many of our Defence Force families, the impact of these attacks was especially deep.
We are working with our Afghan partners to tighten vetting and screening and to implement a counter-infiltration plan.
I can assure Australians  -  through you  -  that we will do our very best to protect our soldiers from this threat.
Events of recent months have underscored the challenges for Australia and our ISAF and Afghan partners.
February's deeply unfortunate incident in which Islamic holy books were burned at Bagram Air Base caused offence to many in Afghanistan and around the world.
While in March, we were all appalled by the killing of Afghan civilians by a US soldier.  A shocking crime condemned by US and ISAF leaders alike  -  and by public demonstrations across Afghanistan.
These actions of an individual are no mark against the tens of thousands of courageous professionals deployed by Australia, the United States and other coalition countries.
Any more than attacks by rogue ANA members are a mark against the hundreds of thousands of patriotic Afghans training in uniform to build a capable national security force.
In March, an Australian Civilian Corps Adviser working with local communities on development activities in Uruzgan was injured in a suicide attack.
A reminder that our civilian staff in Afghanistan  -  our diplomats, aid workers, police and civilian corps workers  -  are also doing a magnificent job in dangerous circumstances.
And the weekend's renewed insurgent attacks in Kabul remind us that as the insurgency comes under greater sustained pressure in the field, the prospect of high-profile attacks aimed at disproportionate global public impact remains.
What remains too is the fact that these attacks were successfully countered by the Afghan National Security forces without substantial direct support from ISAF forces in Kabul.
An encouraging sign for the future of the counter-insurgency and for the success of transition to Afghan security lead.
And the shared endeavour between ISAF and Afghan forces across the country goes on.
None of this is easy.
There will be hard days ahead  -  there will be new days of grief. 
We did not enter this conflict lightly and we do not persist in it without great care.
I know that the peoples of the world's democracies want to see their sons and daughters return from war. 
This is as it should be.
I recognise that the global economic climate leads many, especially in Europe, to think of the pressing needs at home.
And I see that the people and leaders of Afghanistan rightly look forward to the day when they can truly lead in their own country. 
These are considerations I weigh heavily, as do the leaders of all the ISAF nations.
They are why I argue strongly for the integrity of the transition strategy.
Because the international strategy for transition in Afghanistan is the responsible, orderly, sustainable approach to full and permanent Afghan responsibility for security.
The judgement of the Australian Government, which I will take with me to Chicago, is this.
We can proceed with the transition we agreed to in Lisbon: understanding that it is a difficult mission, but confident it is on track.
We will see our mission of training and transition through.
When transition in Uruzgan is complete, Australia's commitment in Afghanistan will look very different to that we have today.
We will have completed our training and mentoring mission.
We will no longer be conducting routine frontline operations.
The Provincial Reconstruction Team will have done its job.
The majority of our troops will have returned home.
And there will still be some work to do.
We will ensure sustainment of the Afghan National Security Forces after 2014.
And we will support the long-term development of the Afghan government, economy and institutions. 
We will not abandon this mission for which so many have worked so hard  -  and for which some have lost so much.
So I can say today: to our people, whatever their view of the war.
To this audience, which consider these issues so carefully.
To the Australian civilians working in Afghanistan.
To our troops and their families.
This is a war with a purpose. This is a war with an end.
We have a strategy, a mission, and a timeframe for achieving it.
We are serving our national interest in Afghanistan.



PM: I'm here in Perth today with Senator Chris Evans - with our Minister who has been responsible for the development of the skills agreement that I was able to reach at COAG last week.
Can I thank the people from L &amp; M Radiators for having us here today. This a great business and it's a really interesting business to talk about what's happening in our economy now and what's happening with skills. 
This is a business that services the mining industry, making these huge radiators that you can see behind me but not just that.
This is a manufacturing business that is exporting its products around the world.  It's showing what can be achieved in today's Australian economy and part of the secret for this business is that they've got a focus on skills and training and we've been able to partner with this business to ensure that throughout the workforce people have got the benefit of the opportunities to get a Certificate III qualification or above and always focusing on skills, always focusing on quality has brought great results to this company.
Now people might think, well from the point of view of a business, that makes some sense but what's a Certificate III for an individual? 
Well, put at its most simple, it's about earning $400,000 more over your working life.  A Certificate III qualification is the first level of qualification that makes a real difference to what you earn and how employable you are.
Here in Western Australia there are around 400,000 WA people who don't have a qualification at Certificate III level or above. And yet we know that in the years to come to 2015 there'll be 76,000 new jobs for people with those qualifications and we know that this economy too is hungry for people with the upper level skills, with skills like diplomas.
Now all of this is why we took the approach last week of announcing a new skills package signed onto by Western Australia and all the States and Territories of the nation.  It will offer to people, as an entitlement, the ability to get a Certificate III qualification if they lack one and if they want one of those upper level qualifications than rather than worrying about how am I going to pay the fees, they can study now and pay later.
That is, they can get the same deal at university students do. So, this is about opportunities for the future of Australians, it's about a more productive workforce and economy for the future.  It's about what's happening in this business today but we want to see happening right around the nation.
I'm also very pleased to be here in Western Australia on the day on which we have announced a new package for workers above 50 years of age. 
Unfortunately, in some workplaces there is discrimination against older workers.  We've sought expert advice about this and having received those recommendations, we've announced today a new plan to create a special $1000 bonus for employers who give one of these workers a chance, give them a job and keep then in a job. 
This is all about extending opportunity too and making sure that there aren't unfortunate barriers that stop people getting the opportunities they need.
Today too we've seen the results of the most recent work of the International Monetary Fund - the global expert agency that looks at economies around the world and says to the world what is happening in each of them.
The IMF has said today that our economy, this year and next year, will out perform all of the major advanced economies in the world.  The IMF has said that the Australian economy is a world-beater.  
This is great news. What it's reconfirming that we came out of the global financial crisis strong.  We protected jobs.  We didn't go into recession and so we have the economy that we have today and it's the right thing in this economy to bring our budget to surplus to give us a buffer for the future in case the uncertain global economy takes a downward turn as well as to give the Reserve Bank the maximum room to move on interest rates, should it chose to do so.
Now on the say on which the IMF has said our economy is beating the world, Tony Abbott has been out today talking our economy down. 
Now, that negativity from Mr Abbott costs. That negativity, scaring people about our economy when it is a world-beater costs. That negativity can cost in scaring employers not into offering the next job or taking the next apprentice. It's more of the same from Mr Abbott  -  talking our economy down and being negative about it even as the IMF has said our economy is a world-beater.
I'm happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, were you aware of those Kevin Rudd's deal with Andrew Forrest just before you took over the prime ministership?
PM: Look, I've seen those reports today. Mr Forrest, in the past has said that the minerals resource rent tax was going to break his business and be the end of Fortescue Metals. And then of course he said that he wasn't going to pay any tax at all and didn't pay any tax now. In today's newspapers we've seen rehashed old claims about all of this, just old nonsense re-presented.
What happened here is, after I became Prime Minister, I sat down with the biggest miners in the country and worked through an arrangement to make sure that around the nation we see mining pay more tax because it can when it is super-profitable, and that we use that to benefit other Australians. 
Here in WA, better than most parts of the country people know about the resources boom, but they also know it's not everybody's boom. And for those Australians who aren't feeling the direct result of the resources boom, I want to make sure they get their fair share, and that's what I did as Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: But did you know about the deal that he'd done?
PM: Well, I've just described it as old nonsense for a reason.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your comments that Premier Barnett has not spread the mineral wealth fairly, has said that's naivety that can only come from Canberra and the rest of Australia should work a lot harder. Now this is set in the context where WA's GST receipts are set to drop to 55 cents in the dollar.
Now firstly can you elaborate on what you meant by Premier Barnett not fairly sharing the mineral wealth and two would this animosity between the Barnett Government and your government be over if GST receipts in this state were rectified?
PM: Well, I'm going to take that in the reverse order if I can.  First and foremost, I am very happy to work Premier Barnett on good results for Western Australia and I'm standing here in this business today talking about a good result for WA that the Federal Government worked on and that Premier Barnett agreed to.
In just the same way Premier Barnett and I were able to agree major health reform for this state which means there more money in the hospitals than there otherwise would have been.  It means people will face less waiting time in the emergency department or if they need elective surgery.  So I'm always happy to work with Premier Barnett and get things done for the people of WA. 
What I said in those comments and what I mean is simply this: many Australians would know about the strength of the resources boom in Western Australia. It's known all around the nation, it's known in many parts of the world. What may be less apparent to others outside Western Australia is that there are many Australian families who sit at their kitchen table, look at their pay packets and their bills and say gee, I'm not taking part in this boom.  This doesn't seem to be a boom for me. 
They are feeling under pressure, and as a Federal Government we want to be getting the needs of those families. As Prime Minister, I get it that those families are looming to us to work with them as they feel this pressure which is why we've done things like record investments in health and education.  That's why we want to build new services like the National Disability Insurance Scheme.  It's why we've invested so heavily in infrastructure in this state.
JOURNALIST: The State Government yesterday announced cuts over four years worth over a billion dollars, blaming the GST and the fact that our GST is dropping so much.  Do you think that's just an excuse and that's starting to wear a bit thin? 
PM: Government revenues, Federal Government and State Government, have been hit by the Global Financial Crisis and by the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis.  For the Federal Government, our revenues have been hit by $140 billion. Let me say that again: $140 billion. It's an extraordinary amount of money. 
Now what you have to do as a Federal Government when your revenues have been hit like that, but the economy requires you to return your budget to surplus, is to get the work done to make the hard choices to recognise you've lost revenues, to look to make savings and we've done that. 
We have matched all of our expenditure with savings since mid-2009.  That's the hard work of government and if the Western Australian Treasurer who made these comments isn't capable of doing that hard work of government here in WA, well he should hand the job over to someone who can.
JOURNALIST: Colin Barnett was part of the Liberal Government which struck the GST deal with John Howard's Liberals back in the day. They don't seem to like the figures that have been generated by that complex formula today, yet that's somehow your fault. Is that fair?
PM: Look, if we go across the sweep of Australian history we've looked to ensure that Australians around the nation can have state governments provide basically comparable services to them, that we haven't wanted Australians who live in parts of the country that are less prosperous to really, really miss out.
That's the way it's worked. Now there was a long period of time when WA was a beneficiary from that system. Now of course with this extraordinary resources boom WA is seeing its GST share drop.
Now I understand that Western Australians are concerned about that. I have had people just come up and have a chat with me about it and I did make the comment to the newspaper this morning, there's nowhere else I travel in Australia where people will wander up and start a conversation about the GST.
They'll wander up and start a conversation about a lot of things - jobs and health and education and carbon pricing and what have you. But this is the only place in Australia where people wander up and want to talk about the GST
So it's clearly on people's minds and because it's clearly on people's minds, I decided that we ought to have a thorough review to look at it. I wasn't underestimating the complexity of it, but we got three eminent Australians to do it, two who have been Premiers themselves and Premier Barnett at the time welcomed that process of us having that GST review.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) changes resulting from the review though. What's the point in reviewing it?
PM: Well, you're really asking me to put a very big cart before a horse. You have a review to see what's happening, to make sure you've got all of the information and to get some people with expertise to recommend changes to you. We are still in that process, indeed we've very shortly we'll be in a position to release the first interim report of this body.
And then it will work through and give us final recommendations in due course, but the fact that I was prepared to have a review indicates that I listened to the voices of the people of Western Australia and thought that was the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: On the IMF, the IMF's downgraded forecast for WA, for Australia, from 3.3 to 3 per cent. Isn't Tony Abbott right then when he says that the economy's underperforming?
PM: Can I invite you to look at the IMF's conclusions, that our economy now and next year is outperforming the major advanced economies of the world.
I go to a lot of international meetings and let me tell you, the leaders I sit down with would cheerfully chew their right arms off to have the macroeconomic signs that we have in this country.
If I said to President Obama ‘Do you want Australia's unemployment rate?' he would start chewing his right arm off to have it and he is in a better position than many of the countries in Europe where people are looking at unemployment of more than 10 per cent.
Around the world we are talking about millions and millions of people who are unemployed. We are talking about economies that today are smaller than they were before the GFC started.
Our economy is bigger than it was and it's growing and we've got an unemployment rate at 5.2 per cent and we didn't have a recession. That's what's happening in the Australian economy and against that Tony Abbott's negative.
What would he want? He'd want us to be the US, with unemployment more than eight per cent? He'd want us to be the Eurozone, with unemployment with more than 10 per cent? He'd want us to be Greece, would he?
I mean this is nonsense stuff and it's the sort of stuff you would only hear from someone who's addicted to negativity.
Now if that's all it was, well maybe people would just say that's political argy bargy, but what I feel and what really concerns me, is that out there in the Australian economy there's an employer listening to Tony Abbott who thinks ‘Well I won't put that next worker on'. Or an employer listening to Tony Abbott who says ‘Well I won't give that next apprentice a go'.
That's the cost of this kind of negativity.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister last year you intervened in a case of a 14 year-old boy arrested for drugs in Bali. Why is it that your government won't assist in the case of a 16 year-old Indonesian boy being held in an adult prison here in WA?
PM: Look, I'm aware of this case. First, let me say this  -  I don't want to see children in Australian jails, of course I don't, and I was very concerned during the course of last year, when evidence came to light that potentially some errors had been made about identifying people's ages, that we had to do better than that.
And so I said to the government departments that work in this area, particularly the Department of Immigration that we had to find a way to do better than that because I don't want to see kids in jails.
On the individual case that you raise, my understanding is that claims have been made about a birth certificate, that birth certificate was available to both the prosecution and the defence when this matter went to court. The court specifically determined the question of this person's age and determined that this person was not a minor, they were not a child.
JOURNALIST: There are claims that this is new evidence.
PM: I'm saying to you, my clear advice is that the birth certificate that is the subject of new evidence claims was available to the prosecution and the defence at the time the matter went to court.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The person in question can appeal the decision if they choose to do so. These are legal processes, a court has made a determination and so consequently if the person involved wants to make a further legal process, that's a matter for them.
But, you know, there's the specific incident you raise and there's the general case. I don't want to see kids in jail. I want our systems to be right so that we do not have kids in jail, but also we've got courts making determinations and people have got the evidence, both the prosecution and the defence, I think we have to recognise that about the individual example.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you understand about the mining boom and Colin Barnett?
PM: Well I think, what I'm saying about the economy of this state and really the economy of the Australian nation, is the fundamentals of our economy. We've just been through that and how they compare with the rest of the world.
That means at this time in our economy's history it's the right thing to do to be bringing the budget back to surplus and we will. But we also know that our economy is a patchwork, that some places and some industries are doing much, much better than others.
That is true in Western Australia, as it's true of the nation overall and so it's a mistake to think that every Western Australian is getting showered in benefits from the resources boom. I understand that, we understand that as we make federal policy to improve health, education, give people new opportunities for skills to better invest in infrastructure in this state, compared with the old Howard Government and to make sure we're building the things people will need for the future, like a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
JOURNALIST: On that note, is fifty-five cents on the dollar fair?
PM: Well I've just answered how I was concerned about it and therefore started the GST review.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the Centenary of Anzac Warren Snowdon today announced an additional $5 million for the establishment of an Anzac Interpretive Centre on Mount Clarence in Albany, Western Australia.
This Gillard Government funding will ensure the new centre is up and running by November 2014  -  the centenary of the first convoy.
Speaking in Albany, the Prime Minister said it was important Australians understood the role Albany played in our First World War history.
Albany was the gathering point for the first convoys carrying the Australian Imperial Force and New Zealand Expeditionary Force which departed from Albany in November and December 1914.
These troops  -  later collectively to be known as the Anzacs  -  were initially destined for Egypt for training before sailing on to Turkey, landing on the shores of Gallipoli from 25 April 1915.
Sadly, many never returned home.
As we approach the Anzac Centenary, it's fitting we remember the journey they began here on the shores of Albany.
Minister Snowdon said the Gillard Government's support for the construction of the Anzac Interpretive Centre was one of the recommendations of the National Commission on the Commemoration of the Anzac Centenary.
The new centre will offer panoramic views of King George Sound where the convoys gathered.
The centre will house interactive displays to follow the journey of ships that set sail and trace an individual soldier's or nurse's journey.
A number of these displays will also be available on the internet so Australians can access the history of Albany from anywhere in the world.
Minister Snowdon said the funding announced today was additional to the $250,000 for a scoping study and $1.3 million towards the establishment of the Centre, bringing the total Federal contribution to over $6.5 million.
The Government has also committed $300,000 to assist with a scoping study for a restaging of the convoy that left from Albany in November 1914. 
The Government will work closely with the Western Australian Government and the people of Albany on both of these initiatives. 



PM: I'm here today in Albany and I'm joined by Tony Crook, the federal member, the Member for O'Connor, and I'm also joined by Peter Watson, the local state Member for Albany. I'm having a great day here and I'm here for a very important announcement too.
Today Ihave announced that we will make available $5 million to invest in the Albany Interpretive Centre. This will join the $1.5 million investment we've already made. Now the purpose of that centre is to remind Australians of the incredible history of this place. This was the place from which, in 1914, the Anzacs set sail to go on the journey which led them to Gallipoli.
So as we move to the Centenary of Anzac, commemorations here and the reminding of the history of this place, will be the start of the commemoration of World War I, but particularly of the commemoration of the Centenary of Anzac.
We've had the opportunity to look out across the water, to see the sights, I invite everyone to imagine what that would have looked like in 1914, with 36 ships out there ready to convey, across the world, the soldiers from Australia and New Zealand, who would become known throughout history and throughout the ages as the Anzacs. For those soldiers, this was their last sight of Australia. The last goodbye, the last opportunity to see a fellow Australian face, a civilian who was left behind.
And for too many of those soldiers, those troops who set sail from this place, it was the last time they ever saw Australia, because as we know 8,700 did not return home. So, significant history and a story to be shared. Shared with the people who come and visit Albany in the future, but shared too through an interactive centre with people around the country.
I want to see this history able to be studied by Australians right around the nation, whether it's schoolchildren in the Northern Territory or whether it's someone who's interested in Tasmania, as well as people who choose to travel here to learn about the history. Even just a moment before I met a couple from Newcastle who are on holidays so already people come to study the history of this place and I can imagine them coming in greater numbers.
In addition to the announcement of that $5 million, I have today announced a $300,000 investment so that we can scope what would be necessary to stage a full re-enactment, a full re-enactment of the 36 ships, and maybe that might invite ships from other nations who participated in World War I. I'd like to say thank you very much to Tony Crook for being a very consistent advocate of this project, for bringing it very personally to my attention, and I know the local state member here too, Peter, has been a very strong advocate of this project as well.
Earlier this week in Canberra at the War Memorial, I announced a refurbishment of the World War I galleries of the War Memorial. Today I am here making some announcements about what else will happen to commemorate the Centenary of Anzac. This is the start of a number of announcements to assist our nation to commemorate that remarkable event. In making decisions about this we are being very assisted by the Centenary of Anzac Board, led by Angus Houston.
When we reach that centenary in 2015, I know right around the nation, whether it's in the smallest, smallest town or our largest cities, Australians will want to participate very meaningfully and very respectfully in that centenary. And being able to visit the Interpretive Centre here, or to learn about it and the history of the Anzacs online, will be part of paying our respects for the Centenary of Anzac.
I'll go now to Tony, who might want to say a few things.
TONY CROOK: Thanks Prime Minister. Thanks everybody for turning out today.  In particular I'd like to formally thank the Prime Minister for attending today and on making the announcement that she's made. This is a great start to what will be a fantastic interpretive centre, and great recognition for Albany and the significant role that it plays in the Anzac story.
As you've outlined today, Albany has a very significant role in the Anzac story, and I'm very proud to be the Member for O'Connor and to be welcoming the Prime Minister here and Warren Snowdon on a couple of occasions as well, who actually promoted this project.
I sincerely hope that I haven't been a pest to the Prime Minister but I hope that's my job, and I'm very happy to have advocated for the Albany community for this project, but not so much for the Albany community but for the whole Anzac story.
More and more people are coming together to celebrate Anzac Day, and I'm very pleased to see that Albany will be a very, very significant part of that, so thank you very much.
PM: Okay, I'm happy to take local questions. I will be going to Perth and conducting a full media event on the issues of the day when I get there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I may have misunderstood, but I thought I heard (inaudible) say the (inaudible) project was about $8.9 million. Does it mean (inaudible)?
PM: Well I would hope that the Government of Western Australia also considers very seriously making a contribution towards this project, and right throughout the Centenary of Anzac we know that there are many Australian businesses who are also prepared to make funds available because they recognise how important an event this is in the life of our nation. So I would be urging that others also make a contribution - $6.5 million from the Federal Government I think is a very important contribution  -  and we'd like to see it built on.
JOURNALIST: A lot of the (inaudible) who have been advocating for this talk about it being a world-class facility. Is that how you envision that this centre will be?
PM: Certainly as a world-class facility. I think when you see the plans and the dream about what this could look like, you can get a real sense of the time and trouble and study and research that local people have engaged in to put it together. They've got very keenly in their mind's eye about what it could look like and I think it's fantastic that all that local work has been done, and I really do look forward to seeing it come to fruition.
For many Australians they wouldn't be familiar with the story of this place, and they wouldn't really know about what happened here and how the troops gathered here and how they left from here, what the site looked like. They wouldn't know about the individual stories than can be told through the interpretive centre so it wouldn't just be the full picture of the ships, but it would be right down to the individual stories of what happened to that one soldier, what happened to that one nurse. So I think it'll just be a remarkable way of everybody learning in greater depth about the Anzac story.
JOURNALIST: As far as the interpretive centre  -  as you've mentioned not a lot of people know about (inaudible) do you even think that you could consider including it into the curriculum for schools as well?
PM: Certainly the history of our nation and of our Anzac story is included in school curriculum. We've moved to a national curriculum, so kids around the nation are studying high-quality curriculum and one of the things that we wanted to achieve through that was a proper and comprehensive study of history, of our national story, of who we are, of what brought us to this time and this moment, and of course there's no way of recounting our nation's history without telling the Anzac story.
One of the things I'd have to say I'm impressed about when you meet with school kids, and I meet a lot of kids as I move around the nation and I go to a lot of schools, I actually think that they are learning more in many ways about the Anzac story than we did when we were at school. I actually think there's a greater focus on Australian history now than when I was at school.
And I think that's a tremendous thing, that we're seeing that focus and that degree of attachment by young people to the Anzac story. And I think you see that every Anzac Day when young people turn out in such remarkable numbers, whether it's here in Albany, or in Melbourne's west where my electorate is, or at Gallipoli itself to mark the day.
JOURNALIST: Will more funding be available for the re-enactment of the convoy (inaudible)?
PM: Well the $300,000 is for a scoping study to work out how this could work and what could be done. I mean this is an incredibly big thing to do. I'm not a production events manager, but I'm sure if you spoke to one they would describe to you the difficulties and the need for very comprehensive planning.
To contemplate having 36 ships out there, to contemplate how many people would come, how they'd be catered for, where they'd stand, how they'd get a view, you know, how they would be fed and watered and looked after and all the safety stuff all the rest of it that goes with it. So the $300,000 is to enable that work to be done, and then further consideration will be given.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect that to have a really national focus, have national significance?
PM: I think absolutely. The re-enactment here, I think, would mark the first big event in what would be a commemoration that would last from 2014 all the way through to 2018, but of course with the Centenary of Anzac in 2015 as the most remarked-upon and most focussed-upon event. But I can imagine people wanting to participate in commemorations of all the big events that tell us the story of World War I, the ‘war to end all wars' as people thought it would be, and to make sure they understood Gallipoli in the context of what came before and what came after.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a lot of people know Albany's the last whaling town, does it surprise you that this Anzac story's not a bigger part of Albany's identity and also do you think it could form part of the town's economy?
PM: I guess it doesn't surprise me, but I would be hoping that through having the interpretive centre here and by having the very real focus that there will be on the 100 years since World War I, and the 100 years since the Anzac legend was born, that there will be a proper focus on Albany and its history and how it played such a big part, so I think that story is going to be much more known by Australians by the end than it is now.
Of course, for the local economy to have visitors come, as you do now to come and see what is already a remarkable part of Australia, but in increased numbers because the interpretive centre is here will be good for the local economy.
JOURNALIST: Do you envisage Albany being the most significant place for the centenary commemorations in 2015?
PM: Look, I think there will be  -  it's hard to say the most significant, because depending on your window on these events, different places will be significant to you. I mean there are very, very tiny country towns that you can look at the Honour Board and see how many people died, indeed how many people died from the same family because you see the same surname coming up on the Honour Board and you think about how many sons died from the same family.
So for people who are connected to that history, what happens in that place will be the most significant for them. For the nation overall, of course all eyes will be on Gallipoli in 2015, but I think, you know, to tell the story, to understand it, to understand the start people need to understand what happened here and so this is a very significant part of telling the story.
Okay, thank you very much. Thanks a lot. 



PM: I'm here today with Minister Butler to announce the Government's new policy on the future of aged care. We need a new aged care system for four reasons.
First, Australians are living longer, compared with the days when the old age pension first started, Australians live 25 years longer. Now that's a great thing, it's a fantastic thing, it means Australians get the opportunity to enjoy longer lives, something that should always be viewed as an asset for our nation, but it does have implications for how we run aged care.
Second, we know the proportion of Australians who will be older, is changing too, we are an ageing society, so our aged care system has to recognise that.
Third, we now have a new generation moving into retirement, the baby boomers, who will clearly want more options and choices than older Australians have sought in the past. The baby boomers changed what it meant to be a teenager, they've shaped our life, changed what it's meant to be an adult Australian, and they will change our conception of ageing as well.
And fourth, the current system has problems that need to be addressed. Now some people talk about a crisis in aged care. There are great people working in aged care, but there are huge problems too, and those problems include that there are not enough funded care packages for those who want to live independently in their own home. To give you just one statistic on that, last year, 24,000 applications were received for community care packages, less than 2000 were provided.
Second, the system currently of payments is unfair. Average pensioners are subsidising the accommodation and care costs of people earning many times what they do.
Third, families can't get the information they need to make difficult choices.
And fourth, and perhaps most disturbingly of all, 40 per cent of older Australians, are forced into emergency fire sales of their homes, in order to raise the money to pay for care, with bonds that can cost as much as $2.5 million, and bear no resemblance to the cost of accommodation.
So we need to change the system. And the policy that I am announcing with Minister Butler today, is one that honours the rights and dignities of older Australians, it is built on the work of the Productivity Commission that we requested, and of course it's informed by the conversations Minister Butler has had intensively with stakeholders and with 4000 Australians around the country, older Australians and their loved ones.
The system that we announce today is fairer and simpler. It will give older Australians and their families greater choice and greater control than they've had in the past. It will mean that if you want a nursing home place, we will make it easier for you to get one. If you want care in the home, we will make it easier for you to get that care.
More people will get to keep their home, and more people will get to stay in their home. And it will put our aged care system on a sustainable footing so that it can provide the kind of care that Australians expect and deserve, as our population changes.
So what's at the centre of this package? Well, two things. Making sure older Australians can stay longer in the home, like so many of them want to, and second, making sure older Australians and their families, aren't forced into emergency fire sales of their family home, at a time of life that's already difficult, and that can be made heartbreaking if you need to face an emergency fire sale of your home.
So the measures we are announcing today are as follows. To make it easier for older Australians to stay in their home and receive the care they need, we will double home care packages from 59,876 to almost 100,000.
We will provide new tailored care packages to people receiving home care, and new funding for dementia care. And we will cap costs, so that full pensioners pay no more than a basic fee, and others have caps as well, depending on their ability to pay.
We will also make sure that more people get to keep their family home, and prevent the fire sales that I've referred to. We'll do that by providing more choice about how to pay for care, instead of a bond up to $2.6 million, and bearing no resemblance to the actual cost of accommodation, you will be able to pay through a lump sum or a periodic payment, or a combination of both, whatever you choose.
People will also have longer to make that choice, with a cooling off period introduced, so that they can take up their aged care place, and then think about the best way to pay. And you'll have longer to pay if you need it, and longer to think about how to do it. There will also be a cap on care costs, with no-one paying more than $25,000 a year, and no-one paying more than $60,000 over a lifetime.
And because these changes will increase the number of places, people won't be forced to make sudden decisions under pressure because they're scared they'll lose the only place on offer. This means that people won't be forced into those emergency fire sales.
For the first time in aged care, fairness will also get a look in. For too long, pensioners have had to subsidise those who are much better off than themselves. Under these changes, which I emphasise will only apply to new people entering care from 1 July, 2014, ability to pay will be taken into account.
Now this recognises a simple reality that those who can support themselves, and contribute a bit more should, and that we must look after the needs of those who can't.
We're making these changes now so that we can start improving the system from 2012, but it's important that those older Australians who are receiving care in the community now, or who are in a nursing home, understand that these changes do not apply to them, those in care will be grandfathered, they will not pay more.
Now these are all big changes, and there's a lot of detail to be absorbed, and that's one reason too why we've got the start date of 1 July, 2014.
Now I do want to say a word about funding. We are deliberately taking the opportunity today to make this announcement well in advance of the Federal Budget, because whilst this policy has some fiscal impacts, it's not a budget measure per se, there's some new funding here, but for the most part, the funding for the package comes from a combination of redirected funding and means testing.
There are two reasons for that, aged care funding must be sustainable into the future and it must give providers an incentive to build places. We've got to have it viable, and we've got to have it sustainable for the long term.
In conclusion, can I say that when we've had policy debates about ageing in the past, losing the family home was the great fear of older Australians when those policy debates were had.
Now, with this policy, the family home will be at the centre of how we will deliver aged care in the 21st century.
I'll turn to Minister Butler for comments, and then we'll take questions.
MINISTER BUTLER: Thank you, Prime Minister.
Today we announce the most sweeping reforms to our aged care system in almost 30 years, transforming a system that was built in the 1980's around nursing homes, to one whose primary objective is to support older Australians staying in their own home for as long as possible, and if at all possible, for the whole of their lives.
In designing these reforms, as the Prime Minister indicated, we've listened very closely to the Productivity Commission, and to stakeholders in the sector, who have worked with us very closely in going over those recommendations one by one.
But most importantly we've listened intently to the views of older Australians themselves, views that have been put very forthrightly and very frankly, in the conversations I've had with them over recent months, that the Prime Minister referred to.
Living Longer, Living Better is a package of major reform, and $3.7 billion in new initiatives. We will create a new home support program that will consolidate the existing home and community care program, the respite program, and a number of others, and give it six per cent real growth in funding every year.
We will create two new types of homecare packages, and add, as the Prime Minister said, 40,000 new places over the coming five years, taking the expansion of homecare packages under this Government to 110 per cent.
All new homecare packages, and eventually all existing packages, must be consumer-directed, that is, built around the needs of the individual themselves, rather than around the convenience of the provider. And we're committed to providing more support to carers, those family members who care for their loved ones in their own home, day in and day out.
In addition to a very significant expansion of respite entitlements to those carers, we're increasing funding to Carer's Australia for counselling services by 50 per cent over the coming five years. In spite of those reforms though, designed to allow people to stay in their own home, many will still have to enter residential care for some period of their life.
This package builds a fairer and a better residential care system. We will increase the benchmark accommodation charge to $52.80 per day from July 2014 for facilities that are built or significantly refurbished after today's date, clearing the bottleneck that exists on building new facilities in a number of states around the country, and also taking the increase in that charge to 130 per cent under this Government.
We will also finally introduce a single system of accommodation charging reflecting the principle of ageing in place, which for some years now has meant that older Australians no longer have to move between a hostel system on the one hand and a nursing home system as they become more frail.
In doing this, we will deal with two significant causes of distress for many families in the current system.
Firstly, the Prime Minister and I have spoken before about the excessive bonds being charged in parts of the sector, up to $2.6 million as the Prime Minister said; amounts that bare no relationship to the cost of the accommodation being provided.
The Government is establishing an Aged Care Financing Authority modelled on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Authority, which among other things will approve accommodation charges and ensure that they reflect the value of the product being offered.
Secondly, the Prime Minister and I have spoken about the fire sale of the family home, faced by so many families who are expected to pay these bonds at a time of significant family crisis. The Government will entrench real choice, so that the consumer decides whether it suits them to pay their accommodation charge in lump sum or on a rental style, periodic basis.
This will be done through a statutory cooling off period that allows the consumer and the family to make that decision after they have gained security of tenure over their place under the Aged Care Act.
As a Labor Government, it goes without saying that we will maintain a robust safety net so that places are available in all regions for older Australians without income or assets sufficient to pay for their own accommodation or their own care.
At least a couple of times in the forums I held late last year, I had people come up to me and say something along the lines that - one lady said: I worked in aged care for 20 years, and I thought I knew it back to front until I had to find a place for my mum. And for the life of me, I couldn't find the information that we needed as a family to make the best possible choice.
The Government will introduce a single gateway into the system in line with recommendations of the Productivity Commission and the National Aged Care Alliance. At its heart will be a new My Aged Care website which will include information on aged care providers in your community, their services, their amenities, their staffing levels, their fees and charges, their history of complaints - if they have any, and for the first time, a rating system.
To better support older Australians in a system with much more choice, we're significantly expanding the National Aged Care Advocacy Program by 20 per cent. We're extending quality accreditation from residential care into home care as well, and giving greater powers over complaints to the independent Aged Care Commissioner so that older Australians and their families can have the greatest possible confidence that they're receiving good quality care.
The most important factor in the quality of care, however, is the number and the quality of staff; and this is undoubtedly the largest supply bottleneck in the system as well.
Aged care workers are notoriously underpaid. A few weeks ago, both Gary Gray and I met with a number of union delegates in a facility in Western Australia. One woman there had worked at the facility for 19 years. She'd got her Certificate III, then she'd got her Certificate IV. She'd done her first aid training, and she was required to do continuing professional development, but she was still earning well shy of $20 an hour.
To start the process of getting fair and competitive wages into this system, we've adopted the model that was proposed by the National Aged Care Alliance. The Government will contribute $1.2 billion to the implementation of a workforce compact to be agreed between providers, unions and consumer groups, and facilitated by an eminent person to be the subject of consultation between Minister Shorten and the president of Fair Work Australia.
As described by NACA -the National Aged Care Alliance - this is a bridging arrangement to longer-term work that must be done on a wages structure that will allow a quality workforce to grow from 300,000 today, to almost one million aged care workers in coming decades.
Dementia is the largest cause of disability among older Australians by a long way, but it will become the largest cause of disability across Australia generally in the next few years. For that reason, Minister Plibersek and I will take a recommendation to the next meeting of state and territory health ministers, that dementia be added to the list of six national health priorities, including at the moment diseases such as cancer, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes.
As has already been reported I think in the media, our package includes a substantial investment of around $270 million in dementia investments to fight dementia in areas like extra care resources for people with dementia receiving aged care; better hospital systems, quicker diagnosis by GPs; better support for the 15,000 younger Australians under 65 who live with dementia; and expanded support services for particular groups like people with dementia from a culturally and linguistically diverse background.
The package also delivers better support to other groups with diverse needs, and responds to a loud and clear message that I receive from older Australians, that they want better guarantees around their control over the circumstances of their death.
This package makes funding arrangements much fairer, but they also make them more sustainable in the face of soaring demand now and into the future.
Feedback from older Australians through the Productivity Commission inquiry and my forums told us that they recognise the need to contribute to the cost of the care, provided they have the financial capacity to do so, and provided that they're guaranteed that we're building a better system.
The Government has decided not to alter the treatment of the family home. We will however, introduce more sustainable income testing arrangements, and in residential care, means testing of non-housing assets for people who enter care after 1 July 2014.
Income testing will only apply to income above the maximum pension limit which is currently around $23,500 for a single person. And as the Prime Minister said, we will put in place annual, and for the first time, lifetime caps that limit any person's contribution to a reasonable amount over one year or their lifetime.
I'm happy to take any questions or throw to the Prime Minister first.
PM: Okay, Phil.
JOURNALIST: Just - Minister Butler said that this is the biggest reform since 30 years. I know it may be a little premature, but how long can we envisage these changes keeping industry sustainable before we, you know, maybe have to go through an exercise like this again?
PM: Well we are envisaging this as the long-term system for the future. We've designed it understanding that we're going to see increased demand as our society ages. And we are viewing this as being implemented over a 10 year period. I'll go to Minister Butler for some more details.
MINISTER BUTLER: There will be a substantial review written into the Aged Care Act of progress halfway through that 10 year period. And I imagine, and I know the sector imagines, that we will then want to have a look at things like the degree to which we've increased workforce supply, whether there is the capacity to accelerate an expansion of homecare packages at that time, or even introduce the entitlement idea that the Productivity Commission talked about.
I think people in the sector generally agree that we're going to have to take this slowly; there are supply constraints, particularly around workforce that limit the speed with which we can expand things like home care. But in five years time, having freed-up the bottleneck on construction, having got better workforce arrangements and better maturity in the sector around how you deliver truly consumer-centred care in the home, we may hopefully be in a position in five years to accelerate this.
PM: Yes David.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, with the caps that you're introducing, you've referred a few times to the bond at the moment which (inaudible) $2.6 million. But with these caps, can you give any sort of assurance this won't see any providers capped close their doors?
PM: This is about better viability for providers so that they know what the system is going to be and how they can work within that system, including to see an expansion of the number of places.
So from the point of view of providers, one of the big motivators of a need for change is the system was not going to be viable. I mean, it's got viability problems now - so creaking now, and that going to get worse in the future. I'll get Minister Butler to comment on that too.
MINISTER BUTLER: Let's be clear, some providers have been earning bonds that give them way over the odds compared against the cost of the accommodation they're providing.
What we are establishing is a system that will ensure that what they charge reflects the cost of the accommodation they're providing. They will be able to provide evidence to the financing authority that says it costs us to provide this particular accommodation a certain amount on a lump sum basis or a periodic basis.
We're moving, I guess, the benchmark rate to $52.80 from July 2014, that would give a return on investment of about 10 percent to the median cost of construction around the country. We think a 10 percent return on investment in this sector, which is a low-risk sector - aged care is not going anywhere fast, it's going to be with us and continue to grow.
It's very dependent on Commonwealth funding - so it's a low risk sector, a 10 percent ROI is very reasonable, and there's going to be a system where if it costs more they're going to be able to show that to financing authorities.
JOURNALIST: You talk about supply constraints from the workforce. What are the first workforce issues to be addressed and why wasn't that a real focus of this announcement today given that it is possibly the key constraint?
PM: Well I think it's a huge focus of the announcement today with the compact process that Minister Butler's outlined, and that's because the workforce strains in terms of getting people into the workforce, retaining them in the workforce are really showing all around the nation, but particularly showing in those parts of the nation where there is a draw into other industries and other sectors. For example Western Australia is seeing huge turnovers of staff and real difficulties in getting staff into the aged care sector.
Minister Butler will go to the details of the workforce components here.
MINISTER BUTLER: Thank you, Prime Minister.
The single largest element in dollar terms of this package is the workforce element; $1.2 billion out of the $3.7 billion. In addition to that we are providing - there are more than $400 million in the forward estimates already for training in the aged care sector. We are giving that money to the compact parties to give us some advice about whether some of that should be re-prioritised into areas of particular needs.
So in dollar terms this is a very substantial investment by the Government, and in structural terms we have adopted entirely the recommendation from the National Aged Care Alliance comprising providers, unions and consumer groups.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) about the fees getting as high as $2.5 million. I understand the average is around $200,000 in accommodation.
MINISTER BUTLER: Two hundred and sixty-four thousand.
JOURNALIST: So how much of this or is this really giving the most help to people who are already the best - the most well heeled, the best off? People who are best off, are they getting the most help from your changes because they're paying higher fees now?
MINISTER BUTLER: Well, if I can have a go at that. Look what we're finding, certainly not many Australians have $2.6 million lying around once they're into their 80s, which is the average age of entry into residential care, but we are not finding that large bonds in the hundreds of thousands are just being paid by people of relatively high asset and income.
We are finding people who might be on the pension but have a substantial asset, that they are being asked by the provider to liquidate that asset and to pay the money over to the provider. This is the sort of conversation we see in aged care facilities now.
So this is something that applies across the board whether you are a pensioner with a substantial asset now because you bought into the housing market in a capital city some decades ago, or whether you are a self-funded retiree with reasonably high levels of asset and income, either way it is not a fair system and it's a system we're going to deal with.
JOURNALIST: Just on means testing. You say that from 2014 some people, some pensioners and non-pensioners might pay more. Do you have any numbers on how many people might pay more? And are the changes to the bond arrangements designed to offset those costs in a sense?
MINISTER BUTLER: The major changes are in home care, and currently people who earn above pension income can be asked to pay 50 percent of that above pension income, but it's not a mandatory arrangement.
From 1 July 2014 for people entering care after that date we will make that 50 percent income contribution mandatory for people who earn above pension income. So pensioners will not pay any more in home care, part pensioners will pay 50 percent of their income above $23,500 for a single person up to a cap of $5,000. Now a home care package might cost as much as $50,000 to the Commonwealth, so that is up to a cap of 10 percent of the home care package they might be on.
Self-funded retirees on incomes of more than $43,000 per year for a single will pay again 50 percent of above pension income but up to a cap of $10,000, which might be as high as 20 percent of the cost, with the Commonwealth Government meeting the other 80 percent.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'll go to that in a second, but can I just say in relation to Mark's last answer, if you look at the system overall that we are laying out today we've got to ensure it's viable, we've got to ensure it's sustainable, we've got to ensure it's fair. And a big thing in the fairness that I would direct your attention to is the lifetime cap. So people can go through the process of requiring care at home, then go into residential aged care at the appropriate point and understand, you know, the maximum amount over their lifetime that they might be required to contribute.
MINISTER BUTLER: So to take an example, someone under the current system might spend a year in home care and then two years in residential care. Under the current system a self-funded retiree can pay up to $24,000 towards the cost of their care costs. Now if they happen to be in residential care for three, four or five years, which happens regularly, they might end up paying more than $100,000 to their care costs. Under our new system with a lifetime cap of $60,000 they will be capped at that rate.
So a self-funded retiree on high income might pay one year of home care at $10,000 and then two years, which is an average stay in residential care, at $25,000 a year and reach the lifetime cap. Anyone who stays longer would be protected, and the Commonwealth would pay the whole of the care costs.
If I can just finish - I think Karen asked the follow up. The proportion of the older population between those three categories is around 51 percent are full pensioners, around 37 percent of the population are part pensioners, covered by the $5,000 cap, and around 12 or 13 percent - is that up to 100? - 12 or 13 percent are self-funded retirees.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott says this morning that you're announcing big - paying these big additional charges, making everyone using the aged care pay more. You're saying he's wrong.
PM: Well on the extravagant claims I would expect that Tony Abbott's got things wrong. But can I say this about the attitude of the Opposition; first I would expect Tony Abbott to be negative today, I mean what else would one expect except Tony Abbott to be negative? It's as certain as the coming up.
But when this comes to the Parliament Mr Abbott has met with stakeholders and has said to them - and this has been publicly reported - that if the Government's package drew on and built on what the Productivity Commission recommended then he would be prepared to offer bipartisan support.
So let's expect all of the shrill negativity today, because Mr Abbott's got no other speed when he's in front of the media, but when it's in the Parliament we would expect Mr Abbott to honour his words to the key stakeholder groups he's spoken to.
JOURNALIST: How does this package affect the families of young people who currently use nursing home care because they've become injured or they've become ill and acquired a disability and there's no other care for them? Are they caught up in this?
MINISTER BUTLER: There is a process being led by Minister Macklin, particularly with the State and Territory Governments to move younger people from having to avail themselves of residential aged care, largely because there aren't alternative disability-specific facilities available to them.
What we've seen through that process is a substantial reduction in the number of new entrants to residential aged care who are younger people with a disability. And this is obviously at the heart of the ambitions that this Government has for a National Disability Insurance Scheme so that there are disability-specific supports for people, so that younger people with a disability, to the extent that they require residential care, are being accommodated with people of their own age.
JOURNALIST: Mr Butler can you outline for us the $1.6 billion claw back you're going to make to help pay for this? And would you describe what some of the homes have been doing with rorting the system?
MINISTER BUTLER: Well this has been a period of unusual claiming, if I can put it that way, under the new aged care financing and funding instrument that we introduced in 2008. This is an instrument that much better reflects the different levels of frailty that residents in residential care have. But what we found last year is that the growth of claiming among some providers was deeply unusual.
Having audited a number of these and set up a monitoring group that includes providers and consumers and clinicians, doctors to provide us with clinical evidence, we found that there are certain questions in the assessment process that have shown dramatic increases in movements between low needs to medium needs to high needs.
So taking an example is how long it takes residents to chew their tablets. This is a question in the ACFI assessment process that doesn't require any evidence. And it has seen amongst some providers a huge shift to high needs with a resulting lift in the income they receive from the Commonwealth Government.
Those questions that require clinical evidence haven't shifted, they haven't shifted, and the extra income we know is not going into additional care staff.
So we're very confident after the work we've done with the monitoring group that this is inappropriate claiming, and we're able to take steps to bolster the evidence requirements among those questions, and also bolster some audit processes to pull back half of that upward revision, so $1.6 billion out of the $3.2 billion over five years, and direct it into new areas of need.
PM: We'll go to Phil and then come back to Karen. Phil.
JOURNALIST: More broadly, this policy is part of a trend of reforms by your Government to keep public spending sustainable as the population ages. In that context, would increasing the tax on superannuation contributions go against that trend?
PM: Nice try and no doubt drawn off the pages of today's newspapers and in the category of Budget speculation - and you'll just have to wait to Budget night. I know it's frustrating, but you'll live.
Karen.
MINISTER BUTLER: A waste of a question.
JOURNALIST: I know. Given the crackdown on what you're effectively saying is rorting in some corners, and increased regulation on fees, how much blow back are you expecting from providers for the, what you've just announced today?
MINISTER BUTLER: Look, there are some providers who have been unusually claiming levels of money that we don't think they're entitled to. And they may be unhappy that the jig is up - we also know that there are consultants that are being used widely in states like South Australia and Queensland, one of whom had a cartoon on their website with a nurse holding a Parliament House shaped money box and shaking it vigorously until money came out.
So look this is a process that needs to stop. It was an unfortunate phase by some providers. We intend, in a measured way, to start to claw back that money and redirect it into areas of need, and if some providers don't like that I think bad luck.
JOURNALIST: Nursing proprietors - nursing home proprietors might say though that looked at the other way, that cartoon could have shown how hard it has been to get money out of the Government for much-needed improvements in services here.
PM: Well Mark I'll go to the other Mark, but a man of your expertise in this area would of course recognise the substantial increases in investment, in aged-care that this Government's already made.
What we are announcing today of course goes to the long-term structures of the system - and it's long-term viability, sustainability, and fairness, and puts, you know, the family home at the centre of how care's going to be delivered.
But you'd have all those figures in your mind about our in... additional investments, I'm very confident.
MINISTER BUTLER: And in case you don't, Mark, I'm happy to remind you of them: aged care funding under this government this year is more than two thirds higher than it was five years ago. And one of the substantial sources of extra funding for providers is the new funding instrument we've put in place so that per resident funding to providers has grown by more than four per cent per year.
So there are certainly providers doing better than others. But the providers I've talked about - that we've been able to look at that have been claiming in unusual ways extra funding, we know that the extra funding is moving into earnings rather than outgoings in extra staff, which is what you would expect if their frailty levels were increased.
JOURNALIST: They haven't been penalised or prosecuted over these claims though have they?
MINISTER BUTLER: No, no, we're making reassessments and we'll look at the way in which the assessment process and compliance mechanisms work in the future. Our priority at the moment though is to redirect the money into important new initiatives - and we're doing that.
JOURNALIST: As far as the workforce compact goes, will the Health Services Union be involved in that?
MINISTER BUTLER: Well look, that is a matter for the National Aged Care Alliance, and at the moment the Health Services Union, United Voice, and the Australian Nursing Federation who represent nurses in the area are the three unions represented in the alliance.
That is a matter for the industrial parties to work through, as overseen by the person as I said that Minister Shorten, Fair Work Australia will nominate to chair that process.
JOURNALIST: And are you happy with their representation of aged care workers in recent years?
MINISTER BUTLER: Well our priority is to make sure that aged care workers, no matter what their industrial representation, are given more support by this Government, and have the incredibly important work that they perform day in and day out, recognised and reflected in wages and other conditions of employment.
So that is our focus. And our focus isn't on the particular industrial representation from state to state.
JOURNALIST: On the rorting that's been going on, have officials been warning these nursing homes? Has there been action to try and crack down before this crack down?
MINISTER BUTLER: Well as part of the process that I talked about, Michelle, with a monitoring group of providers and consumers and clinicians, we've also been undertaking reassessments, which we're able to do under the Aged Care Act. And a number of those providers have seen their assessments reduced very significantly - and in significant numbers.
So there have been some robust and frank discussions, it's fair to say, between the Department and those providers.
JOURNALIST: But there's not been an opportunity to get back money that's already been misappropriated as it were?
MINISTER BUTLER: No. And you know, we need to recognise that that money is attached to an assessment of a particular resident in aged care. And we're not intending to have the assessment of individuals downgraded.
So this is something that will apply to new assessments. We don't want to see in any way individual residents of aged care facilities can end up worse off. We're going to do this as I said in a measured way with new assessments.
PM: Michelle, to put it at its most simple, you would expect us to be very forensic about the evidence, and you would expect us to make the best decisions in this package for the future about the use of Government dollars, and we have. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) access to GPs and specialists. How will the reform package improve that? That's a problem currently.
MINISTER BUTLER: Absolutely. Well there is around $60 million in the package where we'll be asking the health sector and the aged care sector to devise innovative ways in which we can get better health linkages. What we know is that around 30,000 people every year are admitted from a residential care facility to hospital when they could have been quite adequately treated at the aged care facility if a GP were available - or some other health professional.
They're just not available in those cases. So we need to find innovative ways of being able to connect GPs that will be open in '12, '13. We want to-
JOURNALIST: Is that open for discussion and debate?
MINISTER BUTLER: Yeah, so we want to talk with the sector, and obviously the AMA and other representatives of the health sector about the best way to target that money. And we also want to look at ways in which we can leverage off technical innovations like telehealth and such like.
PM: And we should of course say just for completeness, that is also being worked from the other end if you like with the kind of, the health reforms and the work that we're asking Medicare locals to do for example, to you know map patterns of need and primary care responses.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on another issue, the Opposition Leader's given a speech this morning in which he's described himself as a conservative, and a conservationist, and he says that those two things come from the same route; and to be one you are the other. Can you give us a response to that?
PM: Look, I won't lose too much time worrying about the alliteration in Mr Abbott's speeches. But as I understand it what Mr Abbott's out and about today is something that the Government dealt with last Friday at the Council of Australian Governments. I think we're just seeing an unseemly bit of catch up because Mr Abbott likes to pretend occasionally he's got something positive to say.
Thanks very much.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just quickly, your trip to Singapore, what do you hope to achieve?
PM: I'll be leaving on Sunday. Singapore's a good partner, a good friend, we have extensive links across all of the way in which government works with other nations - extensive links, economically extensive ties in defence, we work together in multilateral forums in the region and beyond. For example, Singapore has been invited on a number of occasions to attend the G20.
So I'm looking forward to having the opportunity for full discussions whilst I'm there.
The Government of Singapore and its officials rightly watch people come and go and fly through Singapore on their way to other places, and certainly like it if we can take the time and opportunity, periodically, to directly engage with the Government of Singapore. And that's what I'll be doing.
Thanks very much.


The Prime Minister spoke today to Papua New Guinea's Prime Minister, Peter O'Neill.
They discussed the importance of holding national elections on time, in accordance with PNG's Constitution. The Prime Minister welcomed Prime Minister O'Neill's statements that he supports the election proceeding on time.
The Prime Minister also underlined the importance of PNG's independent judiciary.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Arts Minister Simon Crean today announced that one of the biggest movie productions of the year, The Wolverine, will be filmed in Sydney, creating jobs for thousands of Australians.
To attract The Wolverine to Australia, the Gillard Government granted the producers a one-off payment of $12.8 million which will result in over $80 million of investment in Australia and create more than 2000 jobs.
The payment effectively provided The Wolverine a one-off investment package equivalent to an increase in the existing Location Offset to 30 per cent.
Without this effective tax offset incentive, the producers of The Wolverine would not have chosen Australia as the location.
The Wolverine will star one of Australia's best actors, Hugh Jackman, and reaffirm Australia's status as one of the world's best filming destinations.
The production will create more than 2000 jobs for Australians in all parts of the production sector from performers to the people behind the cameras and in studios  -  the set builders, lighting technicians, editors and special effects artists.
Up to 1500 indirect jobs will also be created in industries that provide services to large budget productions such as transport, catering and hospitality.
The Wolverine joins a long list of blockbuster productions filmed in Australia including The Matrix Trilogy and the highest budget television series of its time, The Pacific.
The Wolverine's predecessor X-Men Origins: Wolverine was also filmed in Australia, created 1000 Australian jobs and was seen by millions of moviegoers around the world.
This new chapter in the Wolverine series will help develop the skills and experience of our film sector  -  jobs that we want to keep here in Australia, not overseas.
A healthy Australian film sector is essential if we are to produce and see Australian content at the cinema, on our TV screens and online into the future.
The issues facing the screen industry are a focus of the National Cultural Policy and as such, will remain on the Government's agenda in the coming years.
Large budget international films make a vital contribution to the development of the local Australian screen industry and attracting them to Australia's shores remains a priority for the Australian Government.
Bringing The Wolverine to Australia reflects the strong and ongoing support of screen industry by Gillard Government.



Under landmark changes to the aged care system, more people will get to keep their home, and more people will get to stay in their home as they receive aged care.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Ageing, Mark Butler, today announced a 10 year plan to reshape aged care, beginning 1 July 2012.
The Gillard Labor Government will deliver the $3.7 billion Living Longer Living Better plan to deliver more choice, easier access and better care for older Australians and their families.
To make it easier for older Australians to stay in their home while they receive care, we will:
 * 	Increase the number of Home Care Packages- from 59,876 to almost 100,000 (99,669).
 * 	Provide tailored care packages to people receiving home care, and new funding for dementia care.
 * 	Cap costs, so that full pensioners pay no more than the basic fee.
To make sure more people get to keep their family home, and to prevent anyone being forced to sell their home in an emergency fire sale, we will:
 * 	Provide more choice about how to pay for care. Instead of a bond which can cost up to $2.6 million and bears no resemblance to the actual cost of accommodation, you will be able to pay through a lump sum or a periodic payment, or a combination of both.
 * 	Give families time to make a decision about how to pay, by introducing a cooling-off period.
 * 	Cap care costs, with nobody paying more than $25,000 a year and no more than $60,000 over a lifetime.
For the first time, we will also introduce fairness into the payment system. Right now, pensioners often pay more than people with hundreds of thousands of dollars in assets and a private income. As a result, pensioners are subsidising the accommodation and care costs of millionaires.
From now on the system will be fairer, based on capacity to pay. The amount you pay for aged care services will be capped and underpinned by tightened means testing, meaning older Australians will not be forced into a fire sale of the family home in order to get access to aged care.
This will not affect the million people already in the system, who will not pay a cent more than they would have under the current arrangements.
To ensure there are immediate improvements as well, the government will also:
·         Increase residential aged care places from 191,522 to 221,103
·         Fund $1.2 billion to improve the aged care workforce through a Workforce Compact.
 * 	Provide more funding for dementia care in aged care, and more support for services.
 * 	Establish a single gateway to all aged care services, to make them easier to access and navigate.
 * 	Set stricter standards, with greater oversight of aged care.
This package reflects in large part what older Australians, their families and carers, and aged care providers have told us is wrong with the system, along with the valuable input of the Productivity Commission report, Caring for Older Australians.
These reforms will enable older Australians to get the help they both need and deserve so they can remain living in their own homes for as long as possible. Labor's plan will help older Australians keep their own home for as long as they want.
They replace an aged care system designed a quarter of a century ago and which is now ill-equipped to meet the needs of retiring baby boomers and their parents who are living longer and healthier lives.
Implementation of the reforms will be overseen by a new Aged Care Reform Implementation Council. The new reform package will be implemented in stages to enable providers and consumers to gain early benefits of key changes and have time to adapt and plan for further reform over the 10 years.
Further details:
Under Living Longer Living Better the Gillard Government will invest:
 * 	$1.9 billion to deliver better access to aged care services;
 * 	$1.2 billion over five years to tackle critical shortages in the aged care workforce;
 * 	$80.2 million to improve aged care linkages with the health system;
 * 	$54.8 million to support carers;
 * 	$268.4 million to tackle the nation's dementia epidemic;
 * 	$192 million to support the diverse care of Australia's ageing population.
Home care
Older Australians want to receive care in their own home. Over the next five years, the number of operational Home Care packages will increase from 59,876 to 99,669. This will mean less waiting time for people who need care.
Under new means-testing arrangements for Home Care packages, which will start from 1 July 2014, a consistent income test will be introduced. This will ensure that people of similar means pay similar fees  -  regardless of where they live  -  with safeguards for those who can least afford to pay.
The means test will not include the family home, which remains exempt.
People currently receiving a Home Care package will not be subject to the new arrangements while their current care continues.
In addition, to protect care recipients with higher than average care needs, an indexed annual cap of $5,000 for single people on income less than $43,000, and on a sliding scale of up to $10,000 for self funded retirees, will apply to care fees. A lifetime care fee cap of $60,000 will be introduced.
Residential care
From 1 July 2014, the maximum accommodation supplement that the Government pays to aged care providers when people are unable to meet the cost of their accommodation will be increased from $32.58 to around $52.84 per day. This will help more aged care homes to be built or refurbished. 
As a result, we expect aged care places to increase from 191,522 to 221,103.
At the same time, we will give older Australians more choice about how to pay for their care, ensuring no-one is forced into an emergency fire sale.
Residents can pay for their accommodation in a lump sum, periodically, or a combination of both. A new cooling off period will mean that residents will not need to decide how they are going to pay until they have actually entered care.
From 1 July 2014, residential care means testing will be strengthened and improved. The current income and assets tests will be combined. This will address the unfair situation that results in asset-rich, income-poor residents paying for all of their accommodation and nothing for care, and income-rich, asset-poor residents who pay for their care but not for accommodation.
As with Home Care, the treatment of the family home will not change from current arrangements.
An annual cap of $25,000 and a lifetime cap of $60,000 will apply to care fees.
Support will continue to be provided to ensure homes in regional, rural and remote Australia are viable, and that people with greatest need, such as Indigenous Australians and homeless people, are looked after.
Building the workforce
The Government is tackling critical shortages in the aged care workforce by allocating $1.2 billion over five years to attract, retain and train aged care workers  -  and to ensure that they receive competitive wages through a Workforce Compact between government, unions and aged care providers.
Building a gateway to aged care services
A new My Aged Care website and national call centre will be established from 2013  -  the first step in building the Aged Care Gateway, an online integrated information and assessment entry point. The website will include an innovative ratings system of aged care homes.
Tackling dementia
Nearly a million Australians are estimated to have dementia by 2050.
The Government is making significant investments to better support people, families and carers living with dementia. A new Dementia Supplement will provide financial assistance of $164.3 million to people receiving Home Care packages and in residential care.
There will be increased support for primary health care providers to undertake more timely dementia diagnosis, and a stronger focus on people with younger onset dementia.


On behalf of the Government and people of Australia we warmly congratulate Taur Matan Ruak on his election as East Timor's new President, following the announcement of the final results by the Timorese National Electoral Commission. 
The candidates, electoral authorities, security agencies and people of East Timor also deserve great credit for a calm and orderly Presidential election. 
The peaceful conduct of the election and well-run electoral process demonstrates the increasing maturity of democracy in East Timor, and inspires confidence ahead of Parliamentary elections on 7 July.
Australia worked closely with Taur Matan Ruak during the 10 years he was the Chief of East Timor's Defence Force (F-FDTL). 
His leadership and vision for the development of the F-FDTL and his strengthened relationship with the leadership of the national police (PNTL) have had a profoundly beneficial impact on stability in East Timor. 
Many members of the Australia Defence Force have enjoyed a strong and productive personal relationship with Taur Matan Ruak.
The Australian Government looks forward to working with Taur Matan Ruak as he continues his contribution to East Timor's peace and development in his new role as President.



It is appropriate that Mr Slipper has stood aside as Speaker whilst alleged criminal conduct is investigated.
It is also appropriate for all parties to note the processes under way and treat them with respect. 



I am delighted to be in Singapore on my first official visit as Australia's Prime Minister.
I thank Your Excellency for your very warm welcome.
This is indeed a place where Australians have for so long been welcomed and where so many of our interests converge.
In Singapore, my country sees a partner and friend with a capacity to bring pragmatic and far-sighted thinking to regional and global challenges.
With you, we share defence and strategic interests, underpinned by a commitment to multilateralism and regional cooperation.
And, of course, we value our economic links and seek to learn from your example of adaptation and innovation as Australia remakes its economy for the demands of the ‘Asian Century'.
Few capacities are more important for my nation's success than education and training, as they have been for yours.
This year marks the 60th anniversary of the arrival of the first Colombo Plan scholars to Australia.
It brought some of Asia's brightest and best to my country in order to better serve their own, including around 1000 gifted young Singaporean students...a number of whom are with us here tonight.
Such exchanges have been a profound anchor in the ties between our nations, reflecting a high-quality relationship which is immensely valued by my country.
Tonight, I celebrate our shared past and I look to the future.
I look forward to working with you, Mr Prime Minister, on further ways in which Singapore and Australia can work together in the future.
I especially look forward to your official visit to Australia in October, where you are, of course, a familiar and honoured visitor.
Meanwhile, I deeply appreciate the warmth and generosity of your welcome.
I know our relations will be strengthened by the fellowship we share here tonight because our nations have long been friends,in good times and in bad.
It was here in Singapore that Australia established one of its very earliest foreign posts in 1941, a fateful time in the life of our people.
The years since the war have been years of opportunity for both our nations.
And just this morning, I reflected at Kranji on how a great price was paid for that freedom.
In those post-war years, Australia came to value anew the friendship of our neighbours and learnt to open our economyto the world.
Singapore used these decades with exceptional wisdom to build a city-state that is the envy of the world.
And I know you spoke movingly last year of the “ordinary people who struggled to improve their lives and lived through war or hardship or the turbulent early years of independence, and [who] achieved extraordinary results with good leadership.”
To this great nation, and those who lead them, I offer this heartfelt toast:
‘To the President and the people of Singapore.' 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Defence Science and Personnel Minister Warren Snowdon announced today a new pin of recognition for defence families.
Speaking at Kranji War Memorial in Singapore the Prime Minister said the new pin would recognise the special role family members take on when our military personnel serve abroad.
Our Diggers make a brave and honourable contribution to the nation when they serve overseas. 
But their sons, daughters, partners and parents also make a significant sacrifice too.
This new pin will be for these family members across Navy, Army and the Air Force who go for stretches without their loved ones, often under anxious circumstance knowing their loved one is deployed in dangerous conflict zone.
Mr Snowdon said the Department of Defence would work with family support organisations, including Defence Families Australia on the design of the pin.
It's important the design and look of the pin appropriately reflect its purpose and we will be making sure families have the opportunity to provide input into its design.
While some community and ADF organisations have individual badges or medals, no universal pin of recognition across the forces has previously existed.
The Prime Minister also thanked the Member for Robertson, Deb O'Neill who raised the idea with the Prime Minister after receiving the suggestion from one of her constituents, Milan Nikolic.
Milan served as a UN peacekeeper in Rwanda during the genocide and was severely injured while on active duty. His wife and two children back home battled their own health problems without the support of their husband and father.
It is expected the new pin will be released later this year. 



PM: I'm very pleased to be making my first visit to Singapore as Prime Minister, and I've started the day here at the Kranji War Memorial and I do want to say a few words about that as we are in the days in the lead up to ANZAC Day.
April is memory season; the time on which we reflect about all we have lost as a nation (inaudible). And this year is the year in which we commemorate the 70th anniversary of the Fall of Singapore. Now that was an event that rightly shocked and frightened Australians, bringing home to them the reality of war, and that reality was then brought even closer to home with the bombing of Darwin and Northern Australia in the period of time that followed.
On Wednesday, we will commemorate ANZAC Day and I will be very honoured to attend the Dawn Service and other commemorations at Gallipoli. But, today is an important time to reflect on the sacrifice of Australians here in Singapore. Around a thousand Australians died defending Singapore and Malaya against advancing Japanese forces, and of course there were other nationalities who fought here and died as well, the English, New Zealanders and Indians to name just a few, and then there was the tremendous suffering and loss of the people of Singapore and Malaya.
It's been a tremendous opportunity to come here today to reflect on that loss, and I've also very much enjoyed meeting former prisoner of war George Robert Smith. You might have seen us talking and laughing together. It says everything about the larrikin Australian spirit that when he reflects on his days as a prisoner of war he brings forth humour and jokes as his way of remembering.
To help us remember and to pay respect to those in our defence force and their families it's also fitting that as ANZAC Day approaches we take another step in recognising the sacrifice and the service.
I am well aware, in talking to Australian Defence Force families, about the sacrifice of the families - the long absences, the anxiety, the worry, the stress, the strain. And so today I can announce that the Government will be issuing a special pin to the families of those whose loved ones who are serving overseas in the Australian Defence Force  -  those who are on deployment.
Now this is a small way of recognising the burdens of these families, and a small way of saying we thank them too, for what it means to be a family of an ADF member, we thank them for what they do for our nation.
I am indebted to Deb O‘Neill, the Member for Robertson, for first raising this idea with me, and she, in turn, is indebted to one of her local constituents who brought the idea to her, Milan Nikolic. And, I would like to particularly thank him and thank Deb O'Neill for bringing this idea to me. I think it is a good one.
We already have some pins and badges that recognise families who have loved ones serving overseas, but this will take a more comprehensive approach and I am very pleased to be able to announce it today.
And, then for the rest of the day here in Singapore, I will be involved in a series of discussions and meetings. I am looking forward, later today, to a formal meeting with the Prime Minister of Singapore, Prime Minister Lee. We have had the opportunity to meet on a number of other occasions and I am looking forward to meeting him here in Singapore. I will also be meeting a number of leading Singaporean business leaders.
I have come to Singapore with four objectives in mind: to reaffirm Australia's commitment to this bilateral relationship and to deepening it; to promote Australia as a secure and open place to do business and to invest, a great place to come and work in our economy; to underline the value we attach to our defence relationship with Singapore; and to discuss economic and strategic change in our region and in the regional forums in which we work together.
Singapore is one of our closest and most important partners in South East Asia. We work together closely on regional issues and in regional forums, such as the East Asia Summit, APEC and the Asia Europe Summit. Our economic relationship is a strong one and it is growing. Singapore is our largest trading partner in ASEAN and out fifth largest trading partner globally. Our bilateral free trade agreement with Singapore is our second oldest. The only one that is older is our one with New Zealand. And many Australians work here and live here and many Australian businesses have their regional headquarters here.
So, in this century of Asian growth, we can learn a lot from Singapore's record of innovation and adaptation as well as its tremendous economic success in exploiting its competitive advantages.
I will also be very pleased, later today, to present an honorary AO to C K Ow, who is a legendary Singaporean business leader, who has been one of the mainstays of the Australia-Singapore business relationship for many years.
So, all of that will be a focus of the visit. But we shouldn't forget the importance of our defence ties too. Singapore values the opportunity to train and come and do exercises in Australia, including at the Army Aviation Centre at Oakey, where Singapore does helicopter training, and that is under an agreement that we are about to renew. That would have come to the attention of many Australians during the worst of the days of the Queensland floods when Singapore was very, very quick to offer the services of those helicopters for flood relief should they be required.
So, the relationship between our two countries is a busy one, it is a mature one, but there is always more that you can do together. So in this visit I will be proposing to Prime Minister Lee that we formalise an annual meeting between leaders, either in each other's countries or in the margins of international meetings, to make sure there is always the high level guidance necessary to further develop the relationship. And I will also suggest that we task the next meeting of the Singapore Australia Joint Ministerial Committee to report back to Prime Minister Lee and me on ways to deepen our cooperation and our trade and investment cooperation. So I am looking forward that series of events today. I am very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why is it appropriate for Mr Slipper to step aside and not Mr Thomson?
PM: Well, obviously I realised that you would be asking me questions about this matter, and I am very happy to answer them. When Australians look at their Parliament, Australians rightly expect parliamentarians to play by the rules and to uphold the respect and integrity of the Australian Parliament. They rightly expect that and they should do so. I believe the decision that Mr Slipper made yesterday to step aside while allegations relating to potentially criminal matters are investigated, I believe the decision he made to step aside was the appropriate decision.
On Mr Thomson, I dealt with that matter extensively back in Australia. Mr Thomson is a backbench member. He is not a parliamentary office holder.
JOURNALIST: Did you suggest to Mr Slipper in any way that it would be appropriate for him to step aside, and have you had any indication as to how long the investigation into the fraud allegations may take?
PM: On your second question first, I think the appropriate thing now is for everyone to respect the processes that are under way. Those processes are independent of me and so I can't help you with a ‘guesstimate' about how long they would take. That question would need to be directed at those people who are engaged in these processes. As for Mr Slipper's decision, it was a decision for Mr Slipper and taken by him
JOURNALIST: Was the decision taken with consultation with anyone from your office?
PM: I did not speak to Mr Slipper directly. As I believe is already a matter of public record, the Leader of Government Business in the House of Representatives, Mr Albanese, spoke to Mr Slipper.
JOURNALIST: When did Mr Albanese speak to Mr Slipper?
PM: Oh, look you'd have to go through details with Mr Albanese.
JOURNALIST: Just to clarify, are you saying that if Mr Thomson did actually hold a higher position it would be appropriate for him to step aside?
PM: Well, Mr Thomson, at an earlier point in time stepped aside from the (inaudible) position. You would probably recall that.
JOURNALIST: What do you know about the new allegations about the Tasmanian use of allowances by Mr Slipper and his staff?
PM: Nothing other than what has been reported in today's newspapers.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you willing to head back to the negotiating table with Andrew Wilkie to shore up his support, and have you or anyone in the Government spoken to any of the crossbenchers?
PM: Well, I have not. We are continuing to work with Mr Wilkie and work with him constructively on poker machine reform and on issues of importance to the Australian nation. So we will continue to do that and our attitude will be the same as it has been before this weekend and recent events.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott has said again this morning that he questions your judgement and your integrity for supporting Mr Slipper's speakership (inaudible).
PM: I expect Mr Abbott to be negative about everything. That is what Mr Abbott is and that is what he does. So if he's going to be negative about everything then he is going to be negative about this. But Mr Abbott, as he spews forth with that negativity, would need to recognise that Mr Slipper was pre-selected by the Coalition on nine occasions. That is my understanding.
There is, you know, a relationship with these pre-selection matters and Mr Abbott's leadership. That is, Mr Slipper was pre-selected as recently as the last Federal Election and was a candidate in that election under Mr Abbott's leadership. I do note that allegations that have been made on the weekend  -  and we should, for the record, say that they are strenuously denied by Mr Slipper  -  but I do note that allegations made on the weekend involved not only Mr Slipper but the conduct of senior Liberal adviser Mr Tony Nutt, who worked in Prime Minister John Howard's office when Tony Abbott was a senior member of John Howard's front bench.
So in all of his negativity, before he gets too carried away, I think Mr Abbott might want to reflect on those facts.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, are you confident that you will be able to continue to operate in Parliament while Mr Slipper is absent?
PM: Yes, I am.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr Albanese said on Radio National this morning that it would be inappropriate for any Member of Parliament to try to direct the Speaker to take any action. Are you saying Mr Albanese spoke with Mr Slipper-
PM: Yes, but you should not assume anything other than what I have said, thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: He didn't direct him to take any action?
PM: Well clearly, look at Mr Albanese words and draw your own conclusions. That is the only rational conclusion you can draw.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
Prime Minister: Well, can I say two things about that. First, I formed a professional judgement about Mr Slipper's ability to act as Speaker in the parliamentary chamber and to control the Parliament in Question Time, for example, having watched how he performed as Deputy Speaker. And, Mr Slipper, as he has done his work as Speaker has kept firm control of the Parliament, particularly during what can be a quite raucous period, Question Time. I don't claim to know Mr Slipper personally or well, but I formed a professional judgement about his ability to do the job.
Then, number two, having Mr Slipper be Speaker has enabled the Government to do some important things on behalf of Australian families. And, our focus is always running the economy, running the Parliament, running the nation in the interests of working people. So, to take just one example, it has enabled us to end the spectre of hardworking taxpayers' money going to support the private health insurance of millionaires. So that money can be available for front-line services that families need. Now that is important to working families.
They are the sorts of goals that I have as Prime Minister: looking after working families and making sure that we best meet their needs, for the services they rely on, great schools, good hospitals, family payments support which assist them, like paid parental leave and the like.
JOURNALIST: Has that professional judgement (inaudible)?
PM: Well, there are proper processes in train now and, as I said before, I think people should respect those processes.
JOURNALIST: You said that it enabled you to make some important reforms. One of those was to renege on Andrew Wilkie's gambling reform proposition. Do you regret that at all? How did that help working families struggling under debt?
PM: Well, in a statement I have become famous for and I will say it again: I reject the premise of your questions and I reject it absolutely.
The issue with the poker machine reforms that Mr Wilkie would have liked to have seen become the law of Australia is that they did not have the support necessary in the House of Representatives. That was the problem  -  that even with the Government voting for those reforms that they would not have succeeded to become the law of Australia.
Now I know Mr Wilkie has a different assessment from me on that fact, but I am very familiar with this issue and I am very familiar with people's views of it, and I formed that view that the legislation would not get through the Parliament. And, in those circumstances we commenced discussions with Mr Wilkie about the biggest package of reforms on problem gambling that the nation has even seen.
And, to fully answer your question, yes that is in the interests of working families because I have met too many people, from the kind of families you live next door to, the kind of families you feel you know really, really well, but what you don't know is happening behind those closed doors is that they can't meet the mortgage, they can't put food on the table, they can't get the kids to school with everything paid for that the kids need, because too much money is going down the poker machines.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott said the issue with Peter Slipper calls into question your integrity.
PM: Well you'd expect Mr Abbott to make wild and negative claims, that's who Mr Abbott is. He, I think, would need to reflect on the facts of this matter. He would need to reflect on the decisions taken by the Coalition, including under his leadership, before he starts making statements like that. There are things here for Mr Abbott to reflect upon.
JOURNALIST: Just on ANZAC Day, Prime Minister, how important is it for you personally to be attending the Gallipoli service?
PM: Look, I am very much looking forward to it. I have never had the opportunity before to travel to Gallipoli. I have never had the opportunity to mark ANZAC Day on that sacred soil, and so I am very much looking forward to the opportunity to be there, to be there in person, to meet Australians who are travelling there and to reflect on the sacrifice that our nation has made across all wars and, of course, today we continue to have very brave ADF members serving for us overseas. That's why we do want to better recognise their families.
I don't have a direct, personal connection with the people who served at Gallipoli. I am a Welsh migrant. My grandfather did fight in World War I, but obviously he fought with the British Forces and he did not fight at Gallipoli. But, I think for all of us, as Australians there is that deep sense of connection to what it is to be Australian and that means that there's a deep sense of connection to the Anzac story that forged so much of our national identity.
JOURNALIST: Were you emotional here, walking through the cemetery?
PM: Whenever you see displayed before you grave stones like these ones, that you can walk down and not only feel the power of how many of them are there, but read the details of the people and the ages, of course it's an incredibly powerful thing and I felt that very deeply today. As you can walk past grave stones where, you know, a person is 19, I would say a kid is 19, and they're there and they sacrificed for Australia. It is a deeply affecting place to be.
Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the Centenary of Anzac Warren Snowdon today announced a package of commemorative events and initiatives to mark the Centenary of Anzac.
The Anzac Centenary is one of the most significant commemorations in our nation's history.
We want to make sure every Australian can take part in events right across our country and at historic battlegrounds around the world.
The Anzac Centenary will run from 2014 to 2018.
It will mark 100 years since the Gallipoli landings and major Western Front battles.  It will also recognise other significant military anniversaries throughout the last century.
Just as the first Anzacs helped define our national character, the Anzac Centenary will be an important time to honour and reflect upon the service and sacrifice made by members of our Defence Force, past and present.
The Gillard Government will provide $83.5 million over seven years to implement the program. Key elements of the program include:
 * 	the refurbishment of the First World War galleries at the Australian War Memorial;
 * 	the refurbishment of war graves to ensure individual and collective memorials to our war dead, in Australia and overseas, are properly maintained;
 * 	funding for the running of commemorative services overseas during the Centenary;
 * 	a local grants program to help communities carry out their own Anzac Centenary commemoration projects, with funding available from January 2013;
 * 	an Arts and Culture Fund to support individuals, artists and cultural institutions to develop commemorative displays and artistic creations that showcase our military history;
 * 	a multimedia education program that has broad community reach to help Australians learn more about our military history;
 * 	a scoping study for a travelling exhibition or similar, that will take important memorabilia from the First World War and subsequent conflicts out to communities across Australia.
 * 	funding for the establishment of the Anzac Interpretive Centre at Albany;
 * 	a scoping study for a restaging of the first convoys that left from Albany in November 1914 and carried Australian and New Zealand soldiers to Egypt and Gallipoli; and
 * 	support to continue the work of the Anzac Centenary Advisory Board, which will play a key role in shaping planning for the Anzac Centenary commemorations.
This suite of initiatives is based on the recommendations of the National Commission on the Commemoration of the Anzac Centenary and have been developed in consultation with the Anzac Centenary Advisory Board.
Speaking from Villers-Bretonneux in France, Minister Snowdon thanked both the National Commission and the Advisory Board for their contribution.
There is plenty of hard work ahead as we develop and review the program, so we will continue to draw on the Board's valuable strategic advice as the Centenary draws near.
The Anzac Centenary Program will also be developed and implemented in partnership with local governments, communities and ex-service organisations as well as with state and territory Governments and international partners.
The Chair of the Anzac Centenary Advisory Board, Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, AC, AFC (Ret'd), welcomed the funding package.
“The Board will play an important role in advising the Government on the detailed planning, development, prioritisation and scheduling of the Centenary Program and liaising with the community,” Air Chief Marshal Houston said.
“The Board and its Business Group will also have an essential role in encouraging appropriate private sector sponsorship in relevant Centenary activities and projects," he said. 



PM: Tomorrow, around Australia and around the world, Australians will gather to commemorate Anzac Day.
I will have the opportunity to be with the thousands of Australians who make the pilgrimage to Gallipoli to commemorate Anzac Day on that very sacred soil. Anzac Day, every year, is a significant event for our nation  -  a time we pause and a time we reflect.
As we move to the centenary in 2015, we are moving towards an event which will be a very significant commemoration for our nation.
Anzac Day in 2015, I believe, will be like the bicentenary. It will be one of the commemorations that shape our nation and our understanding of who we are today.
So, I'm very pleased to be able to announce that the Government will make available $83.5 million to assist with the commemoration of the centenary of Anzac.
This money will be used for a variety of purposes, including refurbishing the World War I galleries at the War Memorial, creating an Anzac Interpretive Centre at Albany in Western Australia, the last sight of land for many of our troops who ended up fighting in Gallipoli.
It will be used for grants around the country, to help local communities, in their own way, mark the significance of this centenary. It will be used for educational purposes and for refurbishment of our war graves around the world.
So, tomorrow is a significant day for our nation; the centenary of Anzac will be an incredibly significant commemoration for Australia, for all of us.
I am very happy to take a couple of questions and then our long journey awaits.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, overnight Rob Oakeshott has said that he's open minded about a no confidence motion. He's saying that if civil matters of substance against Mr Slipper are found, then he should stay suspended and that the Government assured him during talks on the speakership that all was OK with Mr Slipper. How do you respond to this?
PM: Look, Mr Oakeshott's views are a matter for Mr Oakeshott. As I said yesterday, I believe it's appropriate that the Speaker has stood aside for this period as he announced.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott has accused you of making light of sexual harassment. What do you say about that?
PM: Well that's a disgraceful allegation and it's exactly what we expect from Mr Abbott  -  continued negativity. He's prepared to say anything to be negative.
Of course, every Australian should be able to go to their workplace and feel safe at work; safe in every way. And every Australian should be treated decently in their workplace.
I've devoted much of my adult life to making sure Australians are treated decently in their workplaces, including getting rid of the obscenity of Work Choices that Mr Abbott supported.
So when it comes to understanding the needs of Australians, Mr Abbott just doesn't get what working families need. He's there with the blood of Work Choices all over his hands, and now of course he's got plans for pain for Australian families, in the form of cutbacks of all of the services and support that families need.
JOURNALIST: In hindsight  -  they're calling your judgement into question in relation to installing Slipper as Speaker. Do you regret in hindsight, that decision?
PM: As I said yesterday, we have been able, in this Parliament, this year, to do some important things for working families. Because the Liberal Party views its political purpose as being to look after the millionaires and billionaires, we couldn't get through the Parliament, with their support, a change to stop apprentices for paying for the health insurance of millionaires.
We've been able to do that. We've been able to do that because of the arrangements that I made in the Parliament, and that's important for working people, that their taxpayers dollars aren't going out of their pay packet, into the private health insurance of people who can look after themselves.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it's been reported overnight that Mr Slipper has written to the Department of Finance requesting copies of the Cabcharge vouchers in question. Is it appropriate for him to be intervening in that way?
PM: Well, Mr Slipper would be now making arrangements in relation to answering these allegations. The Department of Finance deals with this at arm's length from government.
JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee that taxpayer funds won't be used to fund Peter Slipper's legal defence.
PM: The Attorney-General's dealt with that overnight and in some detail.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) inflation data out today, how good a shape of the economy and what are the chances of getting an interest rate cut?
PM: Well you'd expect me to say that the Reserve Bank sets interest rates independently.
You'd also expect me to say what is the very clear truth, and something I had the opportunity to talk to business people about here yesterday in Singapore, which is the fundamentals of our economy are strong.
Nations around the world are battling double digit unemployment figures and huge debt burdens. In Australia, we managed through the global financial crisis, we kept people in work, and we're managing the economy today in the interest of working people, and that does mean bringing the budget to surplus when we bring it down next month.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, Andrew Wilkie met with Anthony Albanese yesterday, what was the nature of that discussion?
PM: Look, you'll need to speak with Mr Albanese about that.
Thank you. 



PM: I have been very moved and very honoured this morning to attend the Dawn Service here at Gallipoli.  It's given me an incredible impression about what our Anzacs went through, landing here in the darkness experiencing that start of the light and that start of the warfare which was to come. 
This is a place of sorrow and sacrifice for Australians and New Zealanders and for people from so many other countries, particularly our friends in Turkey. Of course in those days we were foes but even in days when we were foes there was a respect between our fighting men and the fighting men of the Turkish nation. 
Here I have had the opportunity to feel a little bit what the sense must have been like of that landing. The significance of this place to us as Australians is beyond the military history here, as important as that military history is. 
This really marks the time that a fledgling nation got a real sense of itself - when the boys of federation became the men of Gallipoli. When we forged those values and bonds that we prize as Australians: mateship, good humour, endurance, bravery.  And the fact that this was a defeat probably means that we forged those values even more strongly, as our diggers endured those values came to the fore.
It's been a remarkable opportunity to be here, to experience it personally, to feel so moved by it. It has also given me the opportunity to see how we have people from nations around the world, but particularly Australians and New Zealanders come here for this Dawn Service.
And to think about the arrangements that we must make in 2015 for that incredibly important 100 year commemoration of the original Anzac Day.
I am very happy to take questions on Anzac Day matters.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you have mentioned the fact that this is more than a military day. The Centenary is coming up, would you like to see Anzac Day as a wider national recognition for all Australians?
PM:  I think the very important thing with Anzac Day is it has organically grown into what it is. It wasn't forced at the start. We didn't have Anzac Day created by an Act of Parliament or because a Prime Minister or a Premier had a bright idea.
Anzac Day actually started organically. Organically in Albany and in many, many other places as people came together to commemorate what had happened here. And I think that organic sense of growth has taken us to a new place with Anzac Day.   
Where now we see sons and daughters drag mums and dads, and grandmum and grandad, to Dawn Services. 
We've seen a revival of interest in Anzac Day. We've seen that revival of interest from Australians of all heritages and walks of life - migrant Australians, indigenous Australians.
So I think it is already organically growing beyond the original military significance into something even more.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you like to see (inaudible)?
PM: Well, many Australians do make the trip and of course, for people there's all of the logistics and expense of it and the ability to stay out all night and wait for the Dawn Service.
So I don't think there is any need to really encourage Australians to come. I think so many aspire to get here so many of our young people particularly do get here as part of the rite of passage of taking a gap year or an extended working holiday around the world. 
They come to pay their respects and that's a terrific thing to see.
JOURNALIST: Just back on this stuff in response to Dennis' question, would you regard Anzac Day now as our most important national day?
PM: I think in terms of the emotional chord it the deepest emotional chord for us. Australia Day is an important day too but I think as an event that stirs the emotion, that means that we get lumps in our throat and tears in our eyes, it's Anzac Day that has that significance for each of us and for all of us.
JOURNALIST: What do you want to do at Lone Pine?
PM: Well at Lone Pine, once again, we will commemorate what happened. Some of the most intense fighting and some of the greatest loss and some of the most amazing acts of bravery, when you see how many VCs were awarded at Lone Pine.
So I'll want to get a sense once again of what the landscape is like. That has been a powerful part of this morning for me. Being able to physically be there and see the landscape enables you to feel more of what it must have been like. And I think Lone Pine will have that sense for me too.
JOURNALIST: You're holding talks tomorrow with the President and Prime Minister of Turkey. Will you be raising any concerns at all about the situation in Turkey?
PM: Look I'll be having the opportunity tomorrow when I'll have a press conference before those discussions to address any of those questions, so we'll just stick to Anzac Day matters today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think there needs to be any further formal recognition of Anzac Day, as a day, as the Centenary approaches?
PM: I don't think there is a need for further formal recognition. I think it is, you know, written into all of us and written into the national calendar.  What is important is how individuals mark it. And I very much had the sense as a local Member of Parliament, well before I was in government or Prime Minister, that the interest and connection is growing.
I've gone over the years to many local events that have grown in numbers but they've particularly dropped in age.
So we've seen the original Anzacs leave us. Of course last year we lost our final Anzac, Mr Choules, and named a ship after him in his honour. 
But we've seen the age drop because so many young people now come. You know, and by young I mean very young. We see 12 year old, 14 year old kids who have insisted to their parents that they go to the Dawn Service in their locality.
So I think that shows that whatever is done formally, actually for individuals it's meaning more and more.
JOURNALIST: So you would reject, there were some suggestions beforehand that perhaps Anzac Day didn't represent all Australians, or couldn't represent all Australians? 
PM: I completely reject those suggestions.  I think Anzac Day has come to represent the deepest of Australian values for all Australians - for migrant Australians, for indigenous Australians, for Australians from all walks of life.
Thank you very much.  



They landed on this day in a land “ancient and implacable”.
They were young and raw.
Few were professionals, most new to battle.
They were called the Australian Imperial Force.
But before these 240 days of hell were over, they owned a name among the immortals  -  the Anzacs.
Unlike their French and British comrades, who held aloft battle honours like Austerlitz and Waterloo, the Anzacs had no tradition to rely on or defend.
They did something greater  -  they created one.
A new story for a new nation.
It is the story of us all and it belongs to us all because they were men of every background and belief.
But in this they were united  -  they were volunteers, every single one.
And so their presence here in Turkey was not only a manifestation of duty but an expression of citizenship.
Free citizens from a free land.
That is why Charles Bean was moved to say that “it was on the 25th of April, 1915, that the consciousness of Australian nationhood was born.”
Here, on these shores.
So rocky, so harsh  -  and so very far from home.
Our federal bond was young when the Anzacs came to this place.
The laws and institutions of our nation were laid down in 1901.
But here, in 1915, its spirit and ethos were sealed.
This was our first act of nationhood in the eyes of a watching world, an act authored not by statesmen or diplomats, but by simple soldiers.
The Anzacs.
The boys of Federation who became the men of Gallipoli.
This campaign claimed 8700 Australian lives.
From the most senior  -  Sir William Bridges  -  our first general to be killed in war to the youngest, James Martin who died at just 14, waiting to receive a letter from his mother that never came.
Almost one in ten of all Australia's losses in wartime occurred in the narrow confines of this peninsula.
And no portion of this landscape was fought more fiercely than Lone Pine.
Three days of vicious fighting soaked this ground in blood.
Of the nine VCs awarded at Gallipoli, seven were won here.
Like the campaign as a whole, it was a story of occasional success but ultimate frustration.
So today we come here not in triumph.
We come here in honour of qualities that defined the Anzacs and, we hope however faintly, might also define ourselves:
Reckless daring under fire.
Larrikin good humour.
A genius for improvisation.
And the unbroken bond of mateship.
Qualities that a swift victory might not have so easily revealed.
But qualities tempered and disclosed over nine months spent in the mud and filth of these treacherous gullies and unyielding cliffs.
Victory was not gained here, but meaning was won in this place and a harsh learning.
From here, the Anzacs went to the Western Front and Palestine where they found triumph.
And it is over this entire continuum from Anzac Day 1915 to Armistice Day 1918 upon which, in the final analysis, our judgement must be made.
That is the tradition of arms that gave us Tobruk and Kokoda, Kapyong and Long Tan.
And that is the tradition of arms passed down unbroken over a century to more recent conflicts, as the presence of Ben Roberts-Smith so powerfully attests today.
Victory was unlikely on these shores; a test the Anzacs were never going to pass.
They passed a greater and more enduring test.
So when Lieutenant Noel McShane of the AIF's 1stBattalion, asked of posterity:
“I hope you in Australia are not ashamed of us; we have done our bit and no blame can fall on us”, our answer rings unanimous down the decades.
No.
No, we are not ashamed of you.
Because no shame can exist in this place.
We are proud.
We are thankful.
And we will never, ever forget. 



They were strangers in a strange land.
Men who came from “the ends of the earth” in an enterprise of hope to end a far-off, dreadful war.
But it was not to be.
Even at dawn, the shadows were already falling over this fate-filled day.
Here on these beaches and hills, so foreign and yet so familiar, a skilled enemy lay in wait, led by a man destined to become a great leader.
A world of war was described in the mortal struggles of a million men on the narrow confines of this peninsula.
For the allies, this was a battle of nations fought by great powers and the might of their empires for a wider strategic goal.
For the Turks, this was a defence of the soil and sanctity of home, for which Ataturk ordered his men not only to attack but to die.
And the men who fought here from our nation, our allies and from Turkey did die  -  terrible deaths that spared no age or rank or display of courage.
Over 130,000 men gave their lives in this place, two-thirds of them on the Turkish side and 8700 from Australia.
So this is a place hallowed by sacrifice and loss.
It is, too, a place shining with honour  -  and honour of the most vivid kind.
A place where foes met in equality and respect, and attained a certain nobility through their character and conduct.
Eight months later, this campaign ended as it had begun  -  at dawn.
At 3.57 on December 20, 1915, the last Diggers quietly slipped away.
They did not begrudge the victory of their enemy, which was hard-fought and deserved.
They did share a regret greater than any defeat  -  having to leave their mates behind.
So the Australian and New Zealand commander, General Godley, left a message asking the Ottoman forces to respect the Anzac graves.
But no such invitation was required.
The Turkish honoured our fallen and embraced them as their own sons.
And later they did something rare in the pages of history  -  they named this place in honour of the vanquished as Anzac Cove.
We therefore owe the Republic of Turkey a profound debt.
No nation could have better guarded our shrines or more generously welcomed our pilgrims.
A worthy foe has proved to be an even greater friend.
Through Turkey's hospitality, we do today what those who left these shores most dearly hoped:
We come back.
As we will always come back.
To give the best and only gift that can matter anymore  -  our remembrance.
We remember what the Anzacs did in war.
And for what they did to shape our nation in peace.
In this place, they taught us to regard Australia and nowhere else as home.
Here where they longed for the shape and scent of the gum leaf and the wattle, not the rose or the elm.
Where they remembered places called Weipa and Woolloomooloo, Toowoomba and Swan Hill.
Or the sight of Mt Clarence as their ships pulled away from Albany, for so many the last piece of Australian soil they would ever live to see.
This is the legend of Anzac, and it belongs to every Australian.
Not just those who trace their origins to the early settlers but those like me who are migrants and who freely embrace the whole of the Australian story as their own.
For Indigenous Australians, whose own wartime valour was a profound expression of the love they felt for the ancient land.
And for Turkish-Australians who have not one but two heroic stories to tell their children.
All of us remember, because all of us inhabit the freedom the Anzacs won for us.
These citizen-soldiers, who came here untested and unknown, and who “founded a deathless monument of valour” through the immensity of their sacrifice.
This dawn will turn to darkness at the ending of today.
But the sun will never set on the story of their deeds.
Now and for all time, we will remember them.
Lest We Forget. 



PM: Yesterday I had the wonderful honour of attending Anzac Day commemorations at Gallipoli. 
Today I'm focusing on the broader aspects of our bilateral relationship with Turkey, which is far broader than the cooperation that they give us to facilitate so many Australians and New Zealanders who want to come here and to see Gallipoli for themselves.
Today I will be here in Istanbul and then in Ankara. Here, of course, in Istanbul I will be undertaking two events before I go across to Ankara. 
Those events will be as follows: this morning I will be meeting with His Holiness the Greek Orthodox Patriarch. He is a significant religious figure and particularly a significant religious figure for so many Australians. 
I will be talking to him about inter-faith dialogue. He is also a man with a keen interest in environmental questions and the future of our planet and I will be speaking to him about those environmental issues.
I will then be inspecting an Austal Ferry here in Istanbul. This is a great Australian manufacturing success story.
And as I travel, I want to make sure we are bringing Australian manufacturing stories to the attention of our own nation and to the world. 
There is a fashionable view that with manufacturing under pressure because of the high Australian dollar that we aren't seeing success in manufacturing. 
Here in Turkey, through the Austal Ferry, we can be very much making the point that there are success stories. 
This is a company, high-end manufacturing, that has sold ten vessels to Turkey in recent years and has also had export success in Europe, the US and the Middle East. 
I will then be flying to Ankara for a meeting with Prime Minister Erdogan and President Gül. This is part of strengthening our bilateral relationship with Turkey. 
We have a direct bilateral relationship and we are fellow members of the G20 and will host the G20 in sequence in 2014 and 2015. 
So I will be sharing perspectives with Prime Minister Erdogan about circumstances in the global economy and the outlook for the forthcoming G20. 
I will also be thanking him for his strong and principled leadership on Syria where we remain deeply concerned by the ongoing violent and humanitarian crisis. 
The Annan plan is the best hope for peace but the truth is it is hanging by a thread and it is being seriously undermined by ongoing violence in Syria. Syria must comply with its commitments under the plan. 
Without a credible ceasefire UN peace monitors cannot do their work. 
And so, if the Syrian Government continues to breach its obligations, Australia will support UN sanctions and an arms embargo. We have autonomous sanctions now and we will consider further autonomous sanctions in the future. 
I'll also be discussing with the Prime Minister, our shared concern about Iran's nuclear program. We want to see a peaceful resolution of this. 
We welcome the resumption of the P5+1 Talks. The ball is in Iran's court and it must make meaningful and genuine commitments to meet international concerns about its nuclear program. 
Finally of course, I will also be thanking both the Prime Minister and the President for Turkey's strong commitment to Afghanistan, where like Australia, they have seen loss of life and I will be offering Australia's condolences on that loss of life.
I'm happy to take some quick questions. 
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, on domestic matters, given Tony Windsor's position on Peter Slipper do you now accept that it's inevitable that Peter Slipper must stay stood aside pending the outcome of the investigation into the sexual harassment allegations as well and if he does are you confident you can maintain and deliver effective government with that setup?
PM: The best thing you can do in circumstances like this is to look to do what is right and based on the precedent of the Parliament. Not to try and invent rules as you go along but look to the history of the Parliament and what has been done in the past. 
And when we look to the history of the Parliament, we can see a clear set of precedents where people have continued to function in their office while the subject of civil matters. 
I believe Peter Slipper made the right decision in standing aside in relation to matters which potentially could result in criminal charges but let's remember they are very categorically denied by Mr Slipper.
So this distinction has been made in the past, was made by the Howard Government, with circumstances like then Minister Malcolm Turnbull, being embroiled in the HIH litigation.
Indeed this distinction is being made by the Opposition even today with the position it's taking in relation to one of its own South Australian Senators who is involved in civil proceedings. 
So I think the best thing you can do in these circumstances is to look to the appropriate precedent and that's what the appropriate precedent tells you. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten has seemed not to set that distinction and has suggested that Mr Slipper is looking at his future. Is that a different position to yours, Prime Minister? 
PM: I've been advised of Mr Shorten's remarks, obviously he's dealing with other matters today, and I think when you look at those remarks he does make the same distinction I'm making between criminal and civil matters.         
JOURNALIST: What's he alluding to when he says Mr Slipper may be making a decision in a couple of days? 
PM: Well he indicated in his press statement that he hasn't spoken directly to Mr Slipper.
JOURNALIST: Has Mr Slipper brought the office of the Speaker into disrepute? 
PM: Mr Slipper, I believe, has made the right decision to step aside in relation to the matters that he has stepped aside for. He does contest these allegations and vigorously denied them.
Of course, I understand that there would be community concern as they watch this matter reported in the media and in the press, of course I understand that.
But I think people would also see that when allegations have been made, people need the opportunity to have both sides worked through, including Mr Slipper's very direct denials of these allegations. 
JOURNALIST: So the Government would oppose any motion to declare the Speakership vacant in relation to Mr Slipper?
PM: Look, I mean our position will be as I've outlined to you, that we think Mr Slipper has taken the right decision to stand aside in relation to the matters that he has identified as the ones he's standing aside for and as to anything else, well I don't understand how it is possible for the Opposition really, I mean you know they can be negative publicly, but I don't understand how the Opposition can be consistent with its own actions in government and in Opposition to put a different view to the one that I'm putting.
And I would very directly refer you to the circumstances of their own South Australian Liberal Senator today where the Opposition has not at anytime suggested that he stand aside from the parliamentary positions he holds whilst he's the subject of civil proceedings. 
JOURNALIST: And what about Mr Windsor's position that Mr Slipper has damaged the position as Speaker?
PM: Well, you know Mr Windsor's comments are a matter for him. 
JOURNALIST: Will you be seeking to talk to Mr Windsor and Mr Wilkie in the event they're going to support any Opposition motion, (inaudible) like if Mr Slipper stands aside?   
PM: I'm not going to deal with hypotheticals. I've got an important program here today for Australia's relationship with Turkey and I'll get about that program and then return to Australia. 
JOURNALIST: Have you contacted any of the independents? 
PM: No I have not. 
JOURNALIST: What do you think of Bill Shorten's decision to put HSU - Health Services Union - into administration? 
PM: Well Mr Shorten has made a, has indicated today that the Government will seek to intervene in proceedings that are on foot before Fair Work Australia about the HSU.
I want Australian workers to have great trade unions; trade unions that serve their interests and that pursue those interests for people, you know, clearly and each and every day. 
There are a series of proceedings on foot in relation to the HSU and I'm not going to comment on those but it is clear that there is continuing dysfunction within this union and because of that continuing dysfunction and its apparent inability therefore to properly service its members, the Government has taken the decision to intervene in these proceedings. 
JOURNALIST: What's changed Prime Minister, why are you acting now?
PM: Well we, these proceedings are on foot, they weren't brought by the Government, the legal advice to us is that we can seek to have standing and intervene in these proceedings.  So if you like there was a vehicle that we could use before Fair Work Australia. 
JOURNALIST: Were you involved in the decision? 
PM: Yes of course I was. 
JOURNALIST: The HSU (inaudible)? 
PM: Well you would expect a union that is dysfunctional to not like it when a government decides that they are going to intervene in proceedings and put that case. 
I would remind that we are talking about parts of this union that are clearly dysfunctional and we'll be making that point in the proceedings. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister would you be concerned that any of the current leadership of the HSU East Branch attempt to make a comeback?
PM:  I'm not sure what you mean by that. 
JOURNALIST: Like aren't they (inaudible)?
PM: Well there's a set of proceedings here on foot, there's, you know, people who are bringing charges against each other within the union's proceedings.
Nothing the Government has done today stops those matters coming to fruition. What the Government is seeking is the appointment of an administrator so we can be certain that this union is being conducted properly and in the interests of its members. 
Okay I do have to go, thank you very much.    



The governments of the Republic of Turkey and of Australia reaffirmed the strong and friendly bonds that have been generated between their two nations out of the shared tragedy of the First World War. 
They reconfirmed the land battles of Çanakkale/Gallipoli during the First World War as a unique example of understanding and respect being forged among their warring soldiers that later contributed considerably to the healing of wounds between the Turkish and Australian nations.
They acknowledged these historical ties are reinforced by continuing community and political links and growing trade between their nations, providing the foundation for a strong and productive bilateral relationship.
In this, the 97th anniversary year of the Çanakkale/Gallipoli land battles, they welcomed the upcoming commemorations for the centenary of these events in 2015 as a significant opportunity to reflect on shared histories and to look to the future of the relationship.
They reiterated their desire to give a new impetus to the existing relationship in view of the centenary commemorations of 2015. 
They aimed to expand further the political, economic, and cultural ties between their nations, as well as to encourage increased contacts between their peoples. 
Referring to the Action Plan for Cooperation signed by their respective Ministries of Foreign Affairs on 1 February 2011, and determined to exert every effort, in good will, to make the centennial commemorations a success, they decided that:
1. 2015 will be proclaimed as the “Year of Turkey in Australia” and the “Year of Australia in Turkey” and celebrated as Cultural Years, during which a series of activities will be carried out to enhance historical, social and cultural understanding and consciousness between the two nations, with the relevant ministries to coordinate their efforts to this end.
2. Cooperation to identify, develop, approve and carry out schemes to mark the centenary commemoration of the Çanakkale/Gallipoli land battles of 1915 will be encouraged. Proposals submitted by Australian individuals or entities for consideration for the centenary commemorations to be carried out in Turkey will be discussed, assessed and determined primarily by the competent authorities of Australia, and selected eligible proposals will be discussed with the relevant Turkish authorities through diplomatic channels. The same procedure will apply for Turkey's proposed activities to be carried out in Australia.
3. Following the exchange of information on proposed activities, the relevant Turkish and Australian authorities will select and approve the eligible proposals for implementation in their own countries.
4. A joint coordination body may be established, to include the relevant ministries and cultural agencies.
5. Promotional activities as well as protocol and security arrangements on site, including programmes for public and media activities with a view to a successful completion of the centenary commemorations and the activities for the cultural years in 2015 referred above, will be the responsibility of the respective governments.
6. Unless decided otherwise on a case-by-case basis, each government will secure the funding for the activities organised by themselves for the centenary commemorations of 2015 in Turkey or in Australia, as well as the funding for their respective cultural years to be organised in the same year.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Foreign Minister Bob Carr today announced that John McCarthy QC will be Australia's next Ambassador to the Holy See. 
Mr McCarthy is expected to take up his appointment in September 2012. 
He will replace the Hon Tim Fischer AC, who served as Australia's first resident Ambassador to the Holy See from February 2009 until January 2012.
Australia and the Holy See established diplomatic relations in 1973. 
The bilateral relationship has benefitted from the appointment of a resident Ambassador. 
This has allowed closer dialogue, advocacy and cooperation with the Vatican on a broad range of issues of importance to Australia. 
These include food security, inter-faith dialogue, religious freedom, international humanitarian relief, and the promotion of peaceful and sustainable development.
An event of significance for the relationship in recent times was the canonisation of Mary MacKillop as St Mary of the Cross on 17th October 2010.
Mr McCarthy is a senior lawyer who has been actively involved in public and church affairs for many years as well as being a member of the Australian Bar. 
He has had extensive engagement in university education and governance, sports administration, arts administration, legal aid and professional committees and international charitable and disaster relief activities.
Mr McCarthy was Senior Counsel for the Dunghutti people, appearing as Senior Counsel in their successful native title case in the Federal Court in 1997.
In 2006, Mr McCarthy was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of St Gregory the Great (KCSG) by the Holy See for services to the Catholic Church in Australia and to the wider Australian community. 
In 2012, Mr McCarthy was appointed an Honorary Fellow of the University of Sydney.
Mr McCarthy was born in 1947 in Parkes, NSW and educated at the University of Sydney (Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Laws) and University of Virginia (Master of Laws).  He is married with six children.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Sports Minister Kate Lundy today announced funding of $2.5 million to the ACT Government for the installation of broadcast quality lighting at Manuka Oval in Canberra.
The announcement was made in the grounds of Manuka Stadium prior to the kick off of the inaugural Prime Minister's Cup AFL Match between the Greater Western Sydney Giants and the Western Bulldogs.
Manuka Oval has been a part of Canberra since 1929 and the upgrade will ensure the oval meets the high definition broadcast standards required to host elite sporting matches.
It will provide opportunities to attract new competitions, such as Twenty20, international cricket matches and pre season AFL games.
As a Senator for the ACT Minister Lundy, along with her ACT Labor colleagues, has been a constant campaigner for the necessary upgrades to Manuka Oval to encourage more elite sport to the nation's capital.
The upgrade will enhance Canberra's community infrastructure with the new lights designed to minimise light spill into surrounding residential and commercial areas.
The total cost of the lights is approximately $5 million with the remaining $2.5 million to be contributed by the ACT Government.
The Gillard Government is committed to local infrastructure projects and ensuring that communities have access to high quality facilities.  


PM: Good morning. Australians are entitled to expect that people in public life uphold the highest standards.
They're entitled to look at this Parliament, the building where I'm standing today, and see an institution that they can respect.
I understand that the matters involving Mr Slipper and Mr Thomson have caused Australians to become concerned about standards in public life today.
I also understand that both Mr Slipper and Mr Thomson are entitled to the presumption of innocence. Both men strenuously deny the allegations made against them.
I returned to Australia yesterday and since my return I have worked to make decisions about what is right in these circumstances.
I feel keenly that Australians are looking at this Parliament and at the moment they see a dark cloud over it. I want to ensure that Australians can look at this building, look at this institution, and feel respect for this institution.
Consequently, since my return from overseas I have done two things. I have spoken to Mr Slipper this morning. I have indicated to Mr Slipper my concerns about respect for the Parliament in these circumstances.
I have indicated to him that I believe it is best that he stand aside from the position of Speaker for a further period of time.
Mr Slipper has indicated to me that he is also of that view, and I anticipate that during the course of the day he will put out a statement to that effect.
I have also spoken to Mr Thomson. I had a conversation with him last night.
I indicated to Mr Thomson that I had decided it was appropriate for him to no longer participate in Labor caucus, to be suspended from the Labor Party.
Mr Thomson indicated to me that over recent weeks he has been thinking very deeply about these questions.
He is very frustrated by the amount of time that has been taken by Fair Work Australia dealing with the matters in respect of him. He had anticipated that those matters might be resolved more quickly.
He has been thinking deeply about his own circumstances and he had also reached the view that it was in the interests of the Labor Party for him no longer to participate in Labor Party meetings or the life of the Labor Party.
Now I stress in relation to both men, my decisions in relation to both of them, should not be seen to relate to a pre-judgement of the matters of which they  -  the allegations that they are dealing with.
Each of them is entitled to a presumption of innocence, and in making the decisions that I have, I am not pre-judging the issues that either of them face.
But I have made a judgement about the Parliament and about respect for the Parliament. I have made a judgement about the best thing to do in these circumstances.
Now I understand that many will question why I haven't reached these decisions earlier, why I have reached these decisions today.
To put it at its most simple, I think that there is a line which has been crossed here.
This is something that you need to judge in all good conscience and with your best endeavours.
And I believe a line has been crossed about respect for the Parliament, and that has given me sufficient concern that I believe it was the right thing to act and to take the decisions that I have taken yesterday and today in relation to Mr Thomson and Mr Slipper.
I'm happy to take any questions. Yes, Phil.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you say there's a dark cloud over the Parliament, what do you say to people who will say that the only way to clear that is to just clear the decks completely and call an election? What would be your response to that?
PM: My response to that would be it's in the interests of the Australian people that Parliament keeps functioning and that the Government keeps working.
I've just returned from overseas, where amongst other things I have spoken to leaders in Singapore and in Turkey about the economic times in which we find ourselves.
We live in a world of global economic uncertainty.
You might well have noted over the last few days that the UK has entered a double-dip recession.
It is consequently in the interests of Australians that the Government continue its careful management of the economy, keeping the economy strong, making sure that it operates in the interests of working people, and for which we deliver a Budget which will continue to keep our economy strong and benefit working Australians.
Yes, Phil.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, last week you were standing by the precedents of process and so forth in relation to Mr Slipper, and you cited similar precedents in regard to Mr Thomson, have you until this point underestimated the depth of feeling about these two issues, and has that only dawned on you since you've got home?
PM: Well certainly since I've returned to Australia I've been increasingly aware of the depth of feeling. I was not unaware of it when I was travelling overseas.
These matters have been building for some time. I do feel deeply about the presumption of innocence and I do feel deeply about parliamentary precedents too.
And I do not think it would be in the long term interests of the nation for us to say that whenever an allegation is raised about a parliamentarian that the automatic expectation is that they stand aside from the office they hold.
I think that could be an invitation to people over time to make frivolous allegations. I would be worried about that.
So, in all the circumstances here, what I've endeavoured to do is make a judgement about what is right. We've got to uphold respect for the Parliament. We've also got to understand the presumption of innocence.
My job, as Prime Minister of the nation, is to make the best possible judgement call about what enables respect for the Parliament.
I do believe a line has been crossed here, and because a line has been crossed, I've acted.
Yes, Latika.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you identify exactly where the line was crossed, what particular incident or development (inaudible)?
PM: I don't think this is a chemical formula about one molecule plus another molecule gives you an answer.
I actually think it's a judgement call about what is the right thing to do in a complicated set of circumstances, where there is a competition between principles I think we would all say we believe in.
A principle of respect for the Parliament, and the presumption of innocence, which is part of our Australian way of life.
But given the circumstances here, I've needed to make a judgement on behalf o the Australian people, about what best marks respect for the Parliament in these circumstances and I've made it.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) pick you up on two points. One is that you've come back and you've realised that the sentiment and depth of feeling has made you make this decision, and secondly you also say that frivolous allegations shouldn't force someone to step aside. Those two things indicate that you either think these matters aren't frivolous-
PM: No, I don't.
JOURNALIST: -or you're doing this for the voters.
PM: No, no, no, you should, both of those conclusions are completely untrue, and not in accord with what I said.
I answered Phil Coorey's question over here and I indicated to him I was not unaware of the depth of sentiment whilst I was travelling overseas, but of course coming back to Australia, being right here now, I have felt very sharply the judgements and concerns of the Australian people.
You would expect that, for me to feel that more when I am here, in my home, in my nation, on home terrain, than whilst I was travelling overseas, but I wasn't unaware of these matters when I was overseas.
I am making no judgement about the merits of the allegations against these two men. I am not in a position to do so, and it would be totally contradictory to the presumption of innocence for me to pretend that I am in a position to do so.
My reference to frivolous allegations was about my concern over the long term  -  it should not be construed in relation to today's events  -  it was my concern over the long term about where we might get to if it became the accepted automatic standard that someone the subject of any allegation immediately stands aside from their position.
That has not been the standard of Australian politics or the Parliament in the past.
Yes, Mark.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I just be clear about this, when you say a line had been crossed, is that in relation to the public sentiment, and secondly what agreement do you have or what arrangement have you made with Mr Thomson regarding his vote, will it be a formal agreement in respect to how he votes when he's on the crossbenches?
PM: Well Mr Thomson no doubt will address some of these matters himself, but Mr Thomson across his life has been a believer in Labor things and I believe he will support Labor proposals in this Parliament.
But I have made the decision that it is not appropriate at this time for Mr Thomson to participate in the workings of the Labor Party itself.
When I spoke to him last night he had been reflecting deeply on these questions too, and had also formed the view that that was the appropriate course at this time.
Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you accept that you have made a serious error of judgement in both these matters. Did you consult widely with your Cabinet in coming to these decisions, and haven't you left Anthony Albanese out to dry after defending Mr Slipper up hill and down dale over the last few days?
PM: Well I suspect the answer to all of those questions is no, but let me go through them a step at a time.
I've taken the decisions that I've announced today so they have not been the subject of broad consultation with my Cabinet colleagues.
They are my decisions as Prime Minister.
On the work of Mr Albanese, Mr Albanese does a remarkable job on behalf of the Government and the Parliament as Leader of Government Business.
Mr Albanese, over recent days, has been dealing very clearly with one of the principles that I've outlined to you standing here today, which is the presumption of innocence.
And I do think, when we look at all of the circumstances here, it does cause you to look at two things  -  respect for the Parliament and respect for the presumption of innocence.
Both are very fundamental to our Australian system and our Australian way of life. I've had to make a judgement call as Prime Minister about what in these circumstances best enables Australians to look towards this Parliament with a sense of respect.
It's a difficult judgement call but I've made it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe you will have the numbers in the House to pass your Budget and all of its associated measures?
PM: Well we, last Budget, passed the Budget bills in record time, and delivered the Government's program.
We will bring to the Parliament a Budget which is unambiguously in the interests of our nation today; it is in the interests of our nation to return our Budget to surplus.
Having just travelled and talked about circumstances in the global economy and circumstances in other nations where people are facing, you know, the sort of things we see across Europe, the UK going into a double-dip recession, millions of people unemployed, nations looking at dragging themselves out of the depths of economic crisis over years and years and years, and here we are in Australia due to the careful management of the Government, we have a strong economy, strong fundamentals, low unemployment.
What that means is it's unambiguously in our nation's interest to deliver a Budget surplus, and we will.
That will give us a buffer for the future, it will give the maximum room to the Reserve Bank to move in its independent judgement, and even as we bring the Budget to surplus we will deliver a Budget that is in the interests of working Australians.
Yes we'll go here and then come across.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you clarify what you mean by Peter Slipper standing aside for a further period, is that until all of the allegations against him are cleared up, but also had you done this sooner, do you accept then that public sentiment, distrust in Parliament, wouldn't be at the level it's at?
PM: Look I think it was, I think the timing here is the appropriate timing.
I've worked through these questions since my return and I've made some judgement calls since my return, and I've announced those judgement calls to you today.
It flows from what I've said to you about respect for the Parliament that I think these circumstances in relation to Mr Slipper and Mr Thomson need to reflect that view about respect for the Parliament and that's how long they need to last.
I think I promised Louise one and then we'll go over here and come back over.
Louise.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I guess the arrangement does give the Independents, bring them back into the game with the ball, especially Andrew Wilkie. Will you reconsider the, Andrew Wilkie's mandated (inaudible) pokie reforms?
PM: The circumstances with the poker machine reforms is that the proposition that Mr Wilkie passionately believes in, and I understand the depth of his passion about it, but the proposition that Mr Wilkie passionately believes in would not command support, majority support in the House of Representatives.
There is nothing that has changed about that. That is the circumstance. That is the fact.
What the Government is proposing to do is to bring to the Parliament the most comprehensive set of measures to address problem gambling that has ever been dealt with by a national government in this nation's history.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say that this decision has been influenced by your understanding of the depth of sentiment. You also say that you understand there will be questions about how long it's taken to come to this decision. Are you concerned about the depth of sentiment about how long it's taken you to come to this decision?
PM: I'd want you to understand what's motivated me here. What's motivated me here is what is right in these circumstances.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The views of Australians as they look at the Parliament matter. They matter to the functioning of our democracy; they matter to the life of our nation.
I have made a judgement call which I believe is right because I want Australians to be able to look at the Parliament and respect the Parliament, and I believe a line had been crossed about the ability of Australians to confidently say that they had respect in our Parliament.
I have, of course too, keenly felt the obligations about the presumption of innocence and I continue to keenly feel those obligations in relation to the presumption of innocence, but I have made a judgement call in the circumstances that we find ourselves.
JOURNALIST: With respect Prime Minister, I was asking about the depth of sentiment about the length of time that you have conceded. People will raise questions about your judgement in taking this long to make this decision.
PM: Look, and people can draw their conclusions. I've acted as I believe is right.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could you just clarify, I'm not understanding. When you said that the Speaker should stay stood aside for a further period of time, is that until all allegations against him are resolved? Could you give us some more information about that (inaudible)?
PM: As I've indicated to you I believe Mr Slipper will make his own statement today so you should look at Mr Slipper's statement.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, I'm just about to tell you that Michelle, thank you.
As for me, my view about this is it is all about respect for the Parliament and in these circumstances I have formed the view that it's appropriate for Mr Slipper to stand aside for a further period.
For me, coming at it as I do through the view about what is, what matters in terms of respect for the Parliament, I believe it is unlikely in my view that it will be appropriate for Mr Slipper to resume the chair before the matters that are the subject of contention are dealt with fully.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on Mr Slipper, will he be able to vote during the period that he's stood aside and will he stay on full pay?
PM: He is standing aside from chairing the Parliament, he will continue to, you know, formally hold the office of Speaker, he has stood aside from  -  my understanding is Mr Slipper will say he will stand aside from chairing the Parliament, acting as Speaker in that sense, and I've indicated to you what I believe, and what I indicated to Mr Slipper was my view.
My understanding of the constitutional circumstances here is that means that he does not vote in the House of Representatives.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition has repeatedly asked you to express confidence in Mr Thomson, which you've done repeatedly, does this now mean you don't have confidence in Mr Thomson?
PM: Well, what it means is I've formed a view about what's in the best interests of the Parliament and the nation at this time.
I make no pre-judgement whatsoever of the matters in relation to Mr Thomson. To do so would be inappropriate.
I've obviously formed the view, matters are at a stage that Mr Thomson should not continue to participate in the Labor Party, that's my view.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what has changed in the last week or however long it has taken you to make this decision, compared to when you've previously said that you had full confidence in Craig Thomson and (inaudible)?
PM: Well I think there's a combination of circumstances here that I'm dealing with and my view about integrity and respect in the Australian Parliament.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Sorry, I'll go to Phil.
JOURNALIST: Go to Sid first.
PM: Alright, I'll go to Sid, very generous.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your view, has it been informed at all by the Fair Work Australia report into Mr Thomson or the pending report by Mr Temby QC?
PM: No, and I don't have those reports available to me.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Right, okay, they're channelling each other. Originality in the press pack. Yes Louise, for what will be an original question I'm sure.
JOURNALIST: I hope so.
PM: You wouldn't want anybody to accuse you of groupthink. Surely not.
JOURNALIST: Are you confident that Craig Thomson won't quit the Parliament?
PM: Look, there's nothing that would indicate to me that Mr Thomson is considering that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say that this is a series of circumstances you're dealing with now, Mr Slipper, Mr Thomson has formed this view. It still doesn't take away from the fact that you've repeatedly said that you have confidence in Craig Thomson, that he deserves the presumption of innocence and should stay in his position. Is this motivated by voters and perception that voters will see?
PM: It's motivated by my view about what best harnesses respect for the Australian Parliament.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) why, what is it about what you're telling us today, don't you think the public will just conclude that this is another (inaudible)?
PM: Let's deal with your question in some detail.
First and foremost, in relation to Mr Slipper, I would remind that Mr Slipper did not arrive in the Parliament on the day that he took the Speaker's chair.
Mr Slipper was preselected by his political party on nine occasions, was viewed as an appropriate representative for them in the federal Parliament, as recently as last September Mr Abbott, the Leader of the Opposition, expressed full confidence in Mr Slipper.
Mr Slipper has served as Deputy Speaker of this Parliament before moving into the Speaker's chair.
So in those circumstances, I think in Mr Slipper the decision being made for Mr Slipper to become Speaker of the Parliament, it was against a backdrop of him being a long-term parliamentarian, continued confidence in him by his own political party and having served as a Deputy Speaker of the Parliament and in serving as a Deputy Speaker of the Parliament, having been perceived by the Parliament generally to have done a good job.
So that's the backdrop in relation to Mr Slipper.
The backdrop in relation to Mr Thomson is that allegations have been made about Mr Thomson, which he strongly denies and continues to strongly deny.
He is entitled to a presumption of innocence, and I have made that point on more than one occasion.
But I am now dealing with a set of circumstances where I believe in, you know, for Australians generally, and for me making a decision about these circumstances, a line has been crossed about respect for the Parliament and I have acted so that Australians can respect the Parliament which of course I want them to do.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you eager for the Labor Party to (inaudible) the preselection for Dobell with a candidate locked in place, and if that's your own view (inaudible) two months after being strongly endorsed by your party (inaudible)?
PM: The answer to the second question is yes, absolutely. The answer to the first question is I've made no decisions about any of those matters and haven't considered them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you say that (inaudible) Mr Thomson strenuously denies the allegations. Have you received an explanation yourself from Mr Thomson in response to the allegations, an explanation that convinces you that that's a viable position?
PM: I do not believe it's appropriate, and I am not going to put myself into the position of adjudicating these matters. They need to be dealt with through proper processes. It would not be-
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: And if I did it would be based on incomplete information, and so wouldn't that be a very silly thing to do. Let's be very clear here.
There is not one person standing here today, not me or any of you who is in the possession of the full facts in relation to either of these matters.
No-one is in that position and if no-one is in that position, then no-one should be pretending that they are in the position of being judge and jury here.
That would be very inappropriate, and I'd ask each of you if you were the subject of allegations that you strongly denied, how you would feel if someone without complete information determined that they knew exactly all about it and that they had a view about you.
You wouldn't be very happy with that, that's why our system has a presumption of innocence.
I don't believe as a nation we want to get to the stage where people are pre-judged before they get the opportunity of dealing with matters properly.
JOURNALIST: So should the Fair Work report be out?
PM: Look, as I've said consistently, the handling of the Fair Work matter is a matter for Fair Work Australia. I do note in my discussion with Mr Thomson, he did express frustration about how long this matter has taken.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you have adjudicated on this matter. You say no-one should but you just have in your-
PM: I've adjudicated on the, I've specifically said to you and I invite you when the transcript of this press conference is available, to check my words and you will see that at each and every time I have said to you I am not making any pre-judgement about the allegations that either Mr Slipper or Mr Thomson face.
What I've indicated to you is I have made a very definite judgement about the question of respect for the Australian Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think you've made that decision in time for respect to be restored for Parliament, the Speaker's position and perhaps (inaudible)?
PM: Yes, I do.
JOURNALIST: On another matter, you (inaudible) that you shouldn't tell Fair Work Australia as an independent body what to do, but you've indicated what the Reserve Bank should do-
PM: That's not true either.
JOURNALIST: You also criticised High Court judges for not supporting Malaysia deal, so why won't you tell Fair Work Australia which you (inaudible)?
PM: Nice try, but sooner or later you've got to hit the facts of things rather than just come and make things up, I didn't realise we were operating a pack of fiction writers in the press gallery, I thought we had journalists interested in the facts, so let's go through the facts.
I have never, at any time, instructed the Reserve Bank what to do. That is completely untrue. I would never do so, it would be wrong for me to do so.
When I speak about the Reserve Bank I consistently make the point that the Reserve Bank is independent of government, and it exercises an independent judgement about interest rates.
Of course governments can take decisions about fiscal policy and this Government has taken a decision about fiscal policy and returning the Budget to surplus.
Number two, on the High Court case, I engaged in commentary about the High Court case after the case was determined. That is a very different set of circumstances than trying to instruct an independent agency when a matter is still being dealt with.
I can only imagine the headlines and the commentary if in the middle of a High Court case I started issuing instructions to High Court judges about what to do.
Any other questions?
Thank you very much.



It's a great day to join everybody here. And everybody here is someone with a powerful story.
A powerful story about what it's like to live a life with a disability.
A powerful story about the lives of their family and their friends.
The lives of disability care workers and service providers.
And we know disability can be for a lifetime.
Which is why a lifetime of care and support for people with disability makes sense.
But we're all here today because we know that's the aspiration but we also know today it isn't like that.
You know this already from the stories of your own life.
The system is unfair, it's under funded, it's fragmented and it's inefficient and we can do better.
We're all here as Australians and we all know that this is a great country. Australia is a country where we can be good at solving problems like the ones we've been hearing about today. 
We're a country when we all see that something needs to be done, when we see that there are people who are missing out, when we understand that there's something that we can do, we're a country that's really good at getting it done.
Once, old age used to mean disadvantage.
So this country said, our country said - Australians are missing out, there's something we can do.
And a hundred years ago through the pension, and then more recently through superannuation, we've made sure that old age doesn't have to mean being left behind.
Once, sickness used to mean disadvantage.
So again this country, this country, our country said - Australians are missing out, there's something we can do.
And thirty years ago, through Medicare, we made sure that being sick doesn't mean that you get left behind.
I'm tremendously proud of these great Labor reforms, which responded to real community needs and shaped a better future.
Now we're here today because it's time to respond to another group of Australians who are missing out.
You're here today.
People with disability, your family, your carers, people who aren't getting a fair go in today's Australia.
In today's Australia, disability does mean disadvantage.
Over 400,000 Australians have significant and permanent disabilities that require ongoing care and support.
Today, more than 100,000 of you get no help through the current arrangements.
A hundred thousand Australians with disability are left behind altogether by government disability care, left to rely entirely on family, friends and other informal support.
The nearly 300,000 Australians with a disability who do get care, can't be sure that you get the care you need.
Instead, you basically get a ticket in what can be a very cruel lottery.
A lottery where access to services and support depends on your postcode or on the cause of your disability rather than on your need.
Disability doesn't discriminate  -  it could happen to any of us.
Any one of us could fall off a ladder, or have a stroke.
Any one of us could have a child or a grandchild born with cerebral palsy or Down syndrome.
We know Australians are missing out.
All of you here, and around the country, have raised your voice, you've campaigned magnificently.
And no one can say today, that the current system is good enough or it's fair enough. 
The system is broken.
And now  -  we also know that there's something we can do.
Because of your campaign, because of the work we asked the Productivity Commission to do, because of the work of Jenny Macklin, we know there is a practical, affordable, long-lasting solution.
That's why we're all here today.
For just one reason.
Because we know Australia is ready for a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
So friends, I've come today to join you for one purpose.
Today I can announce that in the May Budget, my Government, your Labor Government will fund our share for the launch of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We will do our part.
And of course we will be working with the States and Territories who are willing to do theirs.
We will launch a full year sooner than the Productivity Commission suggested.
That means from the middle of next year, select launch sites around the country will begin serving around 10,000 people with disability.
Growing to 20,000 people from the middle of 2014.
Places where people with significant and permanent disability, their families and carers will have their needs assessed, and will start to receive personalised care and support.
And the work of these launch sites will give us the vital lessons we need to go ahead with national roll-out when our discussions with the States and Territories are done.
Friends, this is good news today - good news for Australia and it's happening for two reasons.
First, because of the unity, the courage of the disability community.
And second because we've listened to you, Labor has listened to you. I've listened to you and I've heard your message of change and it's time to make it real now.
So I want you to promise me one thing: promise me you won't stop campaigning, and I promise you, we won't stop working.
You are saying  -  something has to change.
Today, I'm saying  -  you've waited long enough.
Because people with disability are missing out  -  because we have a plan which will work  -  Australia is ready for a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Thank you. 



A National Disability Insurance Scheme will start in Australia from July 2013 in up to four locations across the country.
From mid 2013, about 10,000 people with significant and permanent disabilities will start to receive support.
By July 2014, that figure will rise to 20,000 people.
The timeframe announced today means the first stage of an NDIS will be delivered a full year ahead of the timetable set out by the Productivity Commission.
For the first time in Australia's history people with significant and permanent disability will receive lifetime care and support, regardless of how they acquired their disability.
The Gillard Government will fund our share of the cost of the initial stage of the NDIS in the May Budget.
A new National Disability Transition Agency, funded by the Australian Government, will be established to run the delivery of care and support to people with disability, their families and carers in the select locations.
We want Australians with disability to start benefiting from this fundamental reform as quickly as possible.
The initial launch locations will be determined in consultation with the states and territories - who have all agreed their shared responsibility for the fundamental reform of disability care and support.
The work done at these launch locations will give the Government vital information on how best to progress the national roll-out.
An NDIS will give all Australians with a significant disability the peace of mind to know that their care and support needs will be addressed, no matter where they live or how they acquired their disability.  



PM: I'm joined today by Jenny Macklin, the Minister for Disability Reform and I thank Danni very much for joining us too, who is going to sign our press conference.
We've just had the opportunity to participate in the most wonderful event here in Sydney and it is joined by events right around the country, where people with disabilities, their families, their friends, their carers, are all coming together to make the point that every Australian counts and that we can do better by Australians with disabilities.
The current system we know is underfunded and it's fragmented. Too many people don't get the care they need and whether or not you get care depends on this really cruel lottery about how you acquired your disability.
We can, as a nation, do better than that and we will do better than that. In the tradition of great Labor reforms, like the old age pension and like Medicare, we are determined to build a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We've got a great Productivity Commission report to help guide the way and today I announced that we will launch sites for the National Disability Insurance Scheme a year earlier than the Productivity Commission recommended.
That is, we will make a start from the middle of next year on building a National Disability Insurance Scheme. There will be sites around the country where people will be able to see the difference and having learnt the lessons of those launch sites, we will then be moving to develop the scheme right around the country.
So we're getting on with this profound Labor reform more quickly than the Productivity Commission recommended, because people with disabilities have waited long enough and we will make appropriate provision for these launch sites, which will start operation from 1 July next year, we will make that provision in next week's budget.
I'll turn to Jenny Macklin for some comments and then we'll be happy to take your questions.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much PM. Well, every Australian does count. If you've got a disability, if you're a carer, if you're a family with a person who has a disability, today's the day when it became clear that our Government is going to deliver a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
And I'd just like to say here today, a very, very big thank you to each and every person right around Australia who has been campaigning for this day for so long. Whether you're a person with a disability, a carer, a member of a family, the way in which everybody has come together with one clear goal has led us to this day.
And I'd also like to say on behalf of all of those people, a very big thank you to our Prime Minister, who has made sure that this day became a reality. We know how important it is to deliver the additional care and support, but we also know that it's critical that we build an insurance scheme, a lifetime insurance scheme, so that if you are born with a disability, or if you get a disability as a result of an accident or an illness, you know that you will be cared for, and that's what we're determined to build.
We're going to start right away, start next July, with the first launch sites and build those launch sites over the next few years, so that we can make sure that we deliver to those people who need it most, people with disability, their carers and their families.
Thank you.
PM: Thank you very much, we're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: PM, can you tell us how much money will the Federal Government contribute to the scheme, and what are you going to do about the states if they decide not to contribute at this stage?
PM: Well, you'll see the provision we're making for the launch sites in the Budget next week. On working with the States and Territories, at the last Council of Australian Governments meeting we actually took some positive steps on working together. Here today people have had the opportunity to hear from Premier O'Farrell and at other meetings around the country people will hear from other State and Territory leaders.
So we will need cooperation with States and Territories to get this done. So far leaders have been working together and we demonstrated that at the last COAG meeting and we will be inviting States and Territories to be involved in these launch sites.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) make the announcement today though, can't you tell us how much and does it mean that if States don't come on board you won't give the funding?
PM: Well, we are stepping up to our responsibilities here. I'm afraid I can't tell you the figure, it will be in next week's Budget and we will be working with States and Territories to get this done. And I do want to say so far this has been characterised by good cooperation.
JOURNALIST: PM, when this was flagged a couple of weeks ago that these trial sites may be happening, Tony Abbott said that he doesn't believe that the scheme should be rushed and potentially that you're using this simply ahead of the next election, something as a scheme to go to the next election with. What do you say to that?
PM: Firstly, if I can just, on the terminology. These are launch sites and we're calling them launch sites deliberately. People are, I think, sceptical sometimes when they hear the word trial, because it means something is being looked at as to whether or not to do it. We are calling these launch sites because we are determined to create a National Disability Insurance Scheme. So this is the launch and these launch sites will help us learn how to get the big scheme done for right around the nation.
On Mr Abbott's attitude I simply say this: people with disabilities have waited long enough. Under the government of which Mr Abbott was a leading member people with disabilities waited and waited and waited for change and it didn't happen. Under this Government we've already engaged in substantial new investment, but we're the first ones to say it's not enough and now we've got to get on with the job of building a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
So I am not prepared to have people with disabilities wait.
JOURNALIST: But you are launching them ahead of schedule though, it's a year ahead of schedule?
PM: We're deliberately launching it a year ahead of schedule because people with disabilities have waited long enough to see real change.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Barry O'Farrell was saying that, he was talking about bipartisanship earlier. You've had no undertaking of bipartisanship from Tony Abbott on this issue?
PM: Well, Tony Abbott is effectively saying to people with disabilities ‘you should wait some more'. Initially he said they should wait into the future, he described the whole scheme as an aspiration and it seemed to be somewhere off into the long, long distance.
Now he said that they should wait for longer than Labor is prepared to and we want to get on with this job. People with disabilities have waited a long time for change, we can get on with this and we should get on with it. It is a great reform, a big reform in the order of Medicare, universal superannuation. A big thing that will change our nation for the better and make us a fairer country, make sure we aren't leaving people behind.
In that sense it's a great reform in the Labor tradition, so as Labor people we're very anxious to get on with the job.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the reactions to your announcement on Craig Thomson seems to be almost completely negative. Has your credibility taken yet another hit on this issue?
PM: I announced yesterday what I determined to be right for the Australian Parliament and for the Australian nation. I spoke yesterday about a combination of circumstances that had led me to the view that there should be change in relation to Mr Slipper and Mr Thomson and I announced my judgement calls about them yesterday.
I did, through the, you know, the combination of these things, through the combined weight of facts, the combined weight of the two incidents, decide that Australians were looking at Parliament and they were questioning the respect that they should have for Parliament. I wanted to put that right and I acted to do so yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Does change of judgement imply incorrect judgements initially though?
PM: What I described yesterday is exactly what motivated me in this matter  -  that it was a combination of circumstances, you know, an accumulation here, which I thought was posing a real challenge for the views that Australians had of the Federal Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Do you concede that there is again leadership chatter in your caucus?
PM: Look, you know, people will engage in the talk of politics in the newspapers. I expect the newspaper commentators to do that and the like.
For us, we are here today dealing with a major reform for the nation  -  the National Disability Insurance Scheme and on questions of respect for the Parliament about which I was very concerned, I acted to address those yesterday.
JOURNALIST: The phrase ‘a line had been crossed' seems to have created a bit of confusion. Can you explain what it was, how and when it was crossed, because the Craig Thomson issue has been going on for years?
PM: And I've just referred to my words yesterday, where I talked about a combination of circumstances. Clearly these two matters, whilst they are separate matters, viewed together I think created a weight of facts here, they created a, you know, cloud, is the terminology I used yesterday and I'm happy to use it again. They created a circumstance where I was concerned that the combination of the two was challenging people's ability to look at the Parliament with respect and so I acted to address those issues.
JOURNALIST: Did anything change, or did you just change your mind?
PM: Look, something changed, obviously with both matters being on foot.
JOURNALIST: But what changed?
PM: I just described to you, something changed with both matters being on foot. That's the combination that I refer to.
JOURNALIST: So, why can't you tell us more about that, I mean for example-
PM: Well, I've just describe it to you.
JOURNALIST: As a cloud, that's hardly specific Prime Minister.
PM: Well, I've talked about respect for the Parliament and that's what the reference I made yesterday to a cloud being over the Parliament was about.
And, as I said very clearly yesterday, this isn't a mathematical or chemical formula, it's a judgement call and I made it.
JOURNALIST: Do you regret saying so many times that Craig Thomson has your full confidence?
PM: Look, I'm not going to canvass issues in the past. I made a decision yesterday, it's the right decision. I made that decision because of my view about the, you know, weight here that was pressing on people's respect for the Federal Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your reaction to Clive Palmer's announcement today that he intends to run (inaudible)?
PM: Well, I guess in many ways I'm not entirely surprised. What it says to me very clearly is that the Liberal Party is the party of billionaires and the Labor Party is the party of working people.
JOURNALIST: If Labor can't improve its polling position, would you consider stepping aside from the party and allowing someone else to take on the role to the next election?
PM: I will be leading the Labor Party to the next election and I can tell you very clearly now what that election will be about. It will be about who you stand for; whether you stand for the privileged few, or whether you stand for working Australians and their families.
Thank you very much.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thank you. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Defence Stephen Smith and Minister for Defence Materiel Jason Clare today announced the Government would provide $214 million for the next stage of the Future Submarine Project.
This funding will go towards further detailed studies and analysis to inform the Government's decision on the design of Australia's next submarine.
The 2009 White Paper outlined the Government's commitment to acquire 12 new Future Submarines to be assembled in South Australia over the next three decades.
The Future Submarine project will be the largest and most complex Defence project ever undertaken by Australia.
With this complexity comes risk.
That is why it is essential to continue to take a measured and careful approach to the early stages of planning and design. 
It is also essential to learn from experience with the Collins Class to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past and minimise risks. This includes the maintenance and sustainment of the Future Submarines.
This is why the Government is conducting a Review into the Sustainment of Australia's Collins Class submarines, led by Mr John Coles.
The Coles Review involves a detailed examination of complex engineering issues associated with submarine sustainment and support from international experts and companies in this field.
The Government is considering four broad options for the Future Submarines:
 * 	An existing submarine design available off-the-shelf, modified only to meet Australia's regulatory requirements;
 * 	An existing off-the-shelf design modified to incorporate Australia's specific requirements, including in relation to combat systems and weapons;
 * 	An evolved design that enhances the capabilities of existing off-the-shelf designs, including the Collins Class; and
 * 	An entirely new developmental submarine.
The Government has ruled out the option of a nuclear submarine.
Indicative Timeline for the Future Submarines
 * 	2012: The Government will make a decision on design and test facilities including the Land Based Test Site and will receive the Future Submarine Industry Skills Plan.
 * 	2013: The Government will receive the results of the work announced today and will make a decision on the combat systems, torpedos, sensors and other weapons systems.
 * 	2013/2014: On current planning First Pass approval is scheduled for late 2013/early 2014.
 * 	2017: On current planning Second Pass approval is scheduled for around 2017 with construction expected to begin following Second Pass. 
The funding announced today will inform the Government's final decision on the design and workforce requirements for the Future Submarine, and identify and address risks in this complex project.
These studies are in addition to the Government's announcement in December that it had approved the release of Requests for Information to three overseas submarine designers (DCNS, HDW and Navantia), and that Defence had entered into a contract with Babcock for a study into a land-based propulsion site.
The studies announced today will be conducted across three broad areas:
 * 	Design studies;
 * 	Scientific and technological studies; and
 * 	Future Submarine Industry Skills Plan.
These are important steps in ensuring that the Future Submarines are delivered.
Design studies
Options for the Future Submarine range from a proven fully Military Off The Shelf design through to a completely new submarine. 
All options are being considered, other than nuclear propulsion, which the Government has ruled out.
These studies will be undertaken across four areas:
1. Military off the shelf design studies
These studies will be undertaken with three European ship building companies:
 * 	DCNS (France), designer of the Scorpene
 * 	HDW (Germany), designer of the Type 212 and Type 214 submarines
 * 	Navantia (Spain), designer of the S-80 submarine
These studies will help inform the Government on the viability of a military off the shelf design and what modifications would be required to meet specific Australian conditions.
2. Initial design studies for an updated Collins Class submarine
The Government will engage Swedish ship designer and builder Kockums to undertake initial design studies for an updated Collins Class submarine. 
The updated design will build on the high level of capabilities of the existing Collins Class submarine design, address challenges and obsolescence issues and provide capability enhancements.
Kockums is the original designer of the Collins Class submarine.
3. Analysis of options
An expert submarine design firm will be engaged to conduct cost and capability trade-off analysis of all options.
These studies will model the technical and performance characteristics of different submarine designs against capability and cost considerations.
4. Capability modelling by the United States
At the Australia-United States Ministerial (AUSMIN) consultations in Melbourne in November 2010, Australia and the United States agreed that Australian-United States cooperation on submarine systems was strategically important for both countries. 
The high level of submarine interoperability between Australia and the United States and our technical cooperation will extend into Future Submarine acquisition program.
United Statessubmarine companies Systems Performance and Analysis and Electric Boat will undertake capability modelling under a Foreign Military Sales case.
These companies will investigate the capability of an off the shelf option as well as an evolved Collins option.
Scientific and technological studies
In addition to these deign studies, scientific and technological studies will be conducted primarily by the Defence Science and Technology Organisation.
They will assist the development of requirements and provide technical advice to Government aimed at reducing risk in critical areas for the project.
These studies will cover areas including:
 * 	Propulsion and Energy Storage;
 * 	Signatures and stealth performance;
 * 	Combat systems; and
 * 	Hydrodynamics, propellers and pumpjets.
The scientific studies undertaken will deliver a range of reports and recommendations on the development of Future Submarine helping to provide better options to the Government for decision.
Future Submarine Industry Skills Plan
In December the Minister for Defence and the Minister for Defence Materiel announced that the Defence Materiel Organisation would develop a Future Submarine Industry Skills Plan.
Today, we are releasing details of how that work will be undertaken.
The Future Submarine Industry Skills Plan will identify what is required to build and sustain the skills required to successfully deliver Australia's Future Submarine capability.
The plan will be developed by a team be led by the Chief Executive Officer of the Defence Materiel Organisation Mr Warren King.
It will be supported by an Expert Industry Panel headed by Mr David Mortimer, AO.
The Expert Industry Panel will include representatives of DMO, Navy, the Department of Industry, Innovation, Science, Research and Tertiary Education, Skills Australia, unions, the CEOs of the four principal Australian naval shipbuilding companies; ASC, Austal, BAE Systems and Forgacs Engineering and the CEOs of the principal naval systems integration companies: Lockheed Martin, Raytheon, Boeing, Thales, Saab Systems and BAE Systems.
This group will consult widely with State Governments, Australian industry, industry associations, universities and other academic organisations to develop this plan.
Submarine Project Management
Given the central role of submarines in Australia's national security, the Secretary of the Department of Defence, Duncan Lewis, has recommended that a senior Defence position be dedicated to focusing exclusively on the oversight of all existing and future materiel-related submarine activities in the Department of Defence.
The Government has agreed to this course of action and is announcing today the appointment by the Secretary of Mr David Gould as the General Manager of Submarines in the Department of Defence.
Mr Gould will work in the Defence Materiel Organisation and will take responsibility for all materiel-related aspects of submarine support across Defence. Mr Gould will report to Mr Warren King, Chief Executive Officer.
In addition to working closely with the Chief of Navy, Mr Gould will work across Government and industry as a project integrator to pull together the remediation and support of our existing submarine fleet and the project to replace our existing Collins Class submarines. 
As a result of Mr Gould's appointment, and on advice from the Secretary, the previously announced position of Associate Secretary Capability will not be progressed. 



Ten days ago I was making my sixth visit to Asia as Australia's Prime Minister.
I visited Kranji War Cemetery and there reflected on the Singapore of 1942 and the Singapore of 2012.
How a nation could so radically transform itself in the space of just one lifetime.
Singapore is now a powerhouse of Asian growth - a hub for investment, education, transport and regional diplomacy.  Since 1942 its population has grown from 1 million to 5 million. 
Their living standards today are, on average, more than ten times higher and average life expectancy has increased by almost thirty years.
Today's Singapore would have been unimaginable in 1942.
Singapore's rise is richly symbolic of Asia's extraordinary rise, a story that could be told in a thousand ways but for which I will just give you one compelling statistic. 
In 1992, China and India, accounted for less than a tenth of world gross domestic product. In the two decades since, in a growing global economy, that has doubled.
Of course, Australia has also been transformed since World War II to become a dynamic, prosperous and diverse nation in which we pride ourselves on maintaining our unique blend of prosperity and fairness. 
At the time of the fall of Singapore, Asia represented a threat to the Australian identity.
Over the decades since our engagement with Asia has become essential to our identity. Our relationships with the diverse nations of the region are positive and successful.  
In 1950, Australia's goods exports to Japan, ASEAN and other major Asian countries were around 13 per cent of all of Australia's goods exports. 
Today, China, Japan, Korea, India and our ASEAN neighboursabsorb around three quarters of our merchandise exports. 
For all of us, the speed and reach of these changes are unprecedented.
But if you think the change we have lived through already in our region and in our nation is amazing, then, hang onto your hats, because so much more change is still to come.
Today, for example, 30 per cent of global output is created within 10,000 kilometres of Australia's shores.
That may double by 2050.
The number of “middle-class” people in the region is projected to rise from around 500 million today to 3.2 billion by 2030.
By 2030, China and India alone are forecast to account for 35 per cent of global energy demand.
The number of internet users in Asia and the Pacific tripled between 2005 and 2011, from 344 million to more than 1 billion.  
Every day, the number of people living in Asian cities grows by more than 120,000.
I want Australians to understand what all this change will mean for our nation and for them.
Adapting to the Asian Century requires a response from every level of Australian society.
That is why I decided to commission a White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
Australia needs to plan for that future and seize its opportunities.
I wanted to see a growing national debate and dialogue about the impact of what is happening across our region and about how we, as a nation, should respond.
So I welcome this summit and the work of the Global Foundation.
And for your summit and for our nation, it is important to understand how we are already preparing for success in this century.
Our program of national reforms is designed to improve our readiness to sustain and share prosperity.
They begin with skills and education: developing the human capital of all Australians.
150,000 extra Australian students are now studying in Australian universities as a result of our new plan for higher education.
We are introducing a world-class national school curriculum, empowering local school principals, rewarding teachers who increase their effectiveness in the classroom.
Last month we delivered a national skills reform to help more Australians to gain qualifications and provide up-front loans to help them with the cost. 
We are delivering a clean energy future for Australia, with the carbon price commencing on 1st July this year and major investments in renewable energy.
We are investing in infrastructure around the nation for roads, rail, ports and public transport.
Through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax we are spreading the benefits of the mining boom, investing in infrastructure that will help mining regions to grow.
We are rolling out the National Broadband Network, delivering high speed broadband to the whole of Australia and creating the means to connect and innovate.
We are delivering other policies to support innovation across our economy, like the reshaped R&amp;D Tax Credit, the instant asset write off for small businesses and long term investment in research .
And we are maintaining the right fiscal policy by working to return the Budget to surplus in 2012-13.
There is no clearer sign of a strong economy than a surplus.
Yes, it requires hard decisions.
But a surplus provides an essential buffer in case the global economy deteriorates.
And it gives the Reserve Bank room to cut interest rates when it judges appropriate  -  as we have seen this week.  That is good news for Australians.
Throughout this period, we have pursued a relentless focus on jobs with 700,000 jobs created in Australia in the last four years.  In last year's Budget we delivered reforms to help more Australians into work, through better support and clearer responsibilities. 
And we have pursued improved front line services for Australians including better hospitals and now a new National Disability Insurance scheme.
I will never endorse the perspective that Australians are too greedy, or view themselves as entitled to too much and that we should be content to see front line services slashed to the worst levels available in other countries in our region.
Our vision for our nation is not about this race to the bottom.  Rather, it is all about improving the lives of Australians today and Australia's readiness to succeed through this century. 
There are good reasons for optimism about our ability to do this.
In part that optimism comes from Australia's endowment as we grapple with the challenge.
This endowment is much more than our natural endowment.
It includes what we built together in the Hawke and Keating era, our open economy and strong economic institutions.
The White Paper process is about guiding us to seize the opportunities that are now opening up.
But we need to be aware that other countries are competing for those same opportunities.
And Asian economies themselves continue to move up the value chain, developing new capabilities of their own.
Asia has recently overtaken Europe in the share of world R&amp;D it performs.
In 1998 China performed twice as much R&amp;D as Australia; in 2008 it performed six times as much.
Four of the five top performing school systems are located in our region, not in America or Europe.
And we know all too well that painful structural change is occurring in the Australian economy and creating strain in some parts of our nation.
Australian businesses must find opportunities in conditions where the dollar and terms of trade will remain high for the foreseeable future.
They will not do that by simply doing more of the same, or by slashing costs and quality.
They will need to offer products and services with distinctive value, based on real areas of comparative advantage.
Indeed, the 21st century business model is likely to be very different from the successful business models of the last quarter of the 20th century.
In some cases, Australian businesses will be able to access large Asian markets through export, including through regional supply chains.
In others, the business opportunities will be secured by establishing enterprises, including business partnerships, in Asian countries.
Already some Australian firms are showing how these things might be done.
Just weeks ago, we saw the venerable Australian law firm Mallesons merge with a Chinese peer, King &amp; Wood, to create a new legal powerhouse centred in Asia.
It is the first alliance of its type in the world, combining a Chinese and Western law firm that will cooperate across mainland China, Hong Kong and Australia.
A few weeks later, GM Holden here in Australia (struck an agreement to design and engineer two new car models for manufacture in China by Shanghai GM, a joint venture with government-owned Shanghai Automotive Industry Group.
These are developments that were rare ten years ago and are still unusual today.
But in the decade to come, they need to become absolutely routine.
How we achieve that is what the White Paper is about.
So let me refer to a two areas that I hope will be part of your discussions tomorrow and beyond. 
First, Australia's potential to become a regional food superpower.
Just as we have become a minerals and energy giant, Australia can be a great provider of reliable, high quality food to meet Asia's growing needs. 
In doing this, we are not just an exporter of commodities, but a partner in growing international markets and a provider of higher value products and services for the global food industry.    
Joe Ludwig, our Minister for Agriculture, is developing a national food plan.
I know the Global Foundation has been working to support this process and I welcome further dialogue on how Australia can best take these opportunities.
At the same time, Craig Emerson is working from his trade portfolio to develop new agricultural partnerships between Australia and China.
As I said, it's not just about more exports. It is about developing the systems and services that add extra value to them and participating in the development of a market-based solution to food security across the region.  It would involve
Building our food processing industry so that it can supply Asia's growing consumer markets and developing the research, technologies and logistics that strengthen irrigation, grow higher yield crops and improve safety.
Second, White Paper consultation has demonstrated that cultural literacy and understanding, or Ken Henry describes as ‘Asia-relevant capabilities' are vital to Australia's prospects in this century. 
When I last visited South Korea in March, I met a young Australian woman who is studying at Yonsei University in Seoul.  She had decided that it was a great way to prepare for the career she hoped to have in Australian diplomacy. 
I agree.  We need to encourage even more Australians to study and work in the region and maintain their connections over their lifetimes.
Australia already possesses great specialist expertise in Asian culture, history and geography through our universities, and leading firms. 
And we have a dazzling array of Asian-Australian communities living here, with many different linkages across the region.
We need must broaden and deepen these ' Asia relevant capabilities' across the whole of Australian society.
We also have an incredible network of Australians living and working in countries of the region.  As the internet and new digital technologies accelerate, we should be using them to gain even more value from this diaspora.
Finally, in all of this, we do not forget that every nation approaches this century from the perspective of their own interests and values.
Australia is no different.
Our commitments to peace and prosperity, and our alliance with the US is a bedrock of our security and our region's.
And as we progress our agenda for engagement and collaboration, we remain clear about the essential importance Australia's military capability and alliances in this century.
Just as important is our continued commitment to building strong partnerships and friendships with the other nations of this region.
We will maintain an Australian Defence Force able to protect our interests and help maintain the peace and stability of our region.
We will also continue to review and update our own capabilities.
That is why I announced earlier today that we are bringing forward the next Defence White Paper to early 2013 and that we are taking the next steps in the submarine program.
Friends, we can and should face the Asian Century with confidence, optimism and strength.
We are plotting our path to success. But success never flows easily. It depends on making the right decisions now.
As Prime Minister, I remain determined to make us a nation that works together to put ourselves in that position to succeed.
A nation able to realise the opportunities in front of us.
I thank you for your preparedness to join me in designing and detailing how we can achieve that strength and prosperity in this Asian Century.
Thank you very much.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Defence Stephen Smith today released the final report of the Defence Force Posture Review. 
The report finds that our changing strategic environment does not require widespread changes in the location of our Defence Force bases, but that some adjustments should be made to meet future needs.
It finds that there are some weaknesses and risks associated with the capacity of Australian Defence Force (ADF) bases and training areas as well as our ability to sustain high-tempo operations in Northern Australia and our neighbourhood and region.
Release of the final report follows the Government's release of the interim report of the Review on 30 January.
The Force Posture Review addresses the range of present and emerging global, regional and national strategic and security factors which require careful consideration for the future.  
These strategic and security factors include:
 * 	the rise of the Asia-Pacific as a region of global strategic significance;
 * 	the rise of the Indian Ocean rim as a region of global strategic significance;
 * 	the growth of military power projection capabilities of countries in the Asia Pacific;
 * 	the growing need for the provision of humanitarian assistance and disaster relief following extreme events in the Asia Pacific region; and
 * 	energy security and security issues associated with expanding offshore resource exploitation in our North West and Northern approaches.
The Review also examined logistics support requirements, training areas for large-scale and joint training exercises, demographic and economic factors, public communications strategies, and engagement with industry, particularly the minerals and petroleum resources industries in Australia's North and West.
The Review concluded that the Australian Defence Force needs a force posture that can support operations in Australia's Northern and Western approaches, as well as operations with our partners in the wider Asia Pacific region and the Indian Ocean Rim. 
This will be particularly important as the Australian Defence Force approaches a period of transition and subsequent drawdown in Afghanistan, as well as in East Timor and Solomon Islands.
The Review identifies expanding maritime capabilities as significantly influencing Australia's future force posture. Joint amphibious capability is identified as having a transformational effect on Navy, Army and the ADF generally, driving force posture considerations.
The Review examined possible basing options in the North and North West of Australia and the possibility of arrangements that enhance access to commercial ports.
While permanent Navy bases in the North West are not operationally necessary, the Review recommended that Defence examine options involving investment to enhance Broome, Darwin and Cairns as naval bases.
The Review highlights the potential for greater wharf capacity and support facilities at HMAS Stirling (Fleet Base West) to support major surface combatant capability and operations.
The Review finds that Defence should proceed with its plans to homeport the Air Warfare Destroyers and Landing Helicopter Docks at Fleet Base East in the short term but also develop additional options involving Brisbane and Fleet Base West.
The Review also found that while Air Force bases are well-located, many currently lack the capacity to fully support new platforms, and some air bases in Northern Australia face significant logistics constraints.
The Review found that Defence should upgrade bases at Edinburgh, Learmonth, Pearce, Tindal and Townsville to enable unrestricted operations by KC-30 and P-8 aircraft and that Defence should upgrade Curtin, Learmonth, Tindal and Townsville, with Scherger as a lower priority, to support future combat aircraft operations.
The Review also identifies Defence's international engagement as a significant strategic asset.
Planning for the future security of Australia and its national interest is one of the highest priorities for Government.
The force posture of the ADF is an essential element of Defence planning.
The conclusions and recommendations of the final report are in the main longer term options for consideration. No decisions have been made about individual proposals. Many of these options, including development of new facilities involve substantial additional investment.
The Force Posture Review report will now form part of the security and strategic considerations feeding into the 2013 Defence White Paper, and decisions on Force Posture Review options will be made as part of the 2013 White Paper process.
The Review was undertaken by the Department of Defence and overseen by an expert panel comprising two of Australia's leading national security experts, Dr Allan Hawke and Mr Ric Smith, both former Secretaries of the Department of Defence.
The final report is available at: http://www.defence.gov.au/oscdf/adf-posture-review/
A copy of the Executive Summary and Recommendations is attached.
(The publicly available report is unclassified but has some redactions related to sensitive and classified national security material). 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Defence Minister Stephen Smith today announced that the Government will start work on a new Defence White Paper, to be delivered in the first half of 2013.
There have been a number of significant developments internationally and domestically since the 2009 White Paper which are influencing Australia's defence posture, future force structure and defence budget.
These are most appropriately addressed through a new White Paper. 
The Gillard Government remains committed to delivering the core capabilities identified in the 2009 White Paper and to delivering one of the most capable defence forces in our region, with the people and equipment needed for the task.
The Government is also committed to making strategic, risk-based decisions about Australia's long-term national security and defence needs.
This means the Government needs to periodically and methodically review the future capability requirements of the Australian Defence Force to ensure that they are appropriate to changing circumstances.
As outlined in the 2009 Defence White Paper, this process involves a new White Paper at intervals no greater than five years.
On a five year timetable, the next paper is not due until this time in 2014.
However, because of the significant developments internationally and domestically since the 2009 White Paper, the Government is bringing forward this schedule.  
These developments include:
The Australian Defence Force's (ADF) operational drawdown
Australia has committed to long-term support for Afghanistan. But as recently outlined by the Prime Minister, our training and mentoring forces in Afghanistan will drawn down and return to Australia in line with the ISAF transition strategy. 
In addition, it is likely the ADF's deployments in East Timor and Solomon Islands will potentially start to draw down during 2013.
These transitions will involve a major readjustment to ADF posture and Australia's defence priorities. The Government needs to carefully work through what impact this will have on the ADF.
The Australian Defence Force Posture Review (FPR)
The FPR assessed whether the Australian Defence Force is correctly positioned, geographically, to meet Australia's current and future strategic challenges. 
It was the first review since work done in the mid 1980s by Professor Dibb for then Defence Minister Beazley.
The FPR also addressed the range of present and emerging global, regional and national strategic and security factors which require careful consideration for the future.
It is important that Defence and the Government consider the judgments outlined in the FPR report in an orderly way, through a White Paper process.
The ongoing effects of the Global Financial Crisis
The 2009 Defence White Paper noted that the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) was the most serious global economic and financial crisis in decades, and that its strategic impacts were still unfolding.
Since then, the GFC has continued to have a significant impact on the global economy.
Following the GFC, the defence forces of major developed countries have increased efficiencies and reduced their budgets, including the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada.
Australia's 2009 Defence White Paper was completed before the unfolding of these events. Financial circumstances clearly present a real challenge to the 2013 White Paper.
Strategic change in our region
The Strategic change described in the 2009 White Paper has continued, particularly the shift of economic weight to our region.
Defence reform
In 2011, Defence commenced implementation of a wide ranging reform program, including in the areas of capability development, procurement and acquisition, the Defence Budget and the strengthening of personal and institutional accountability.
Australian defence industry skills
Australia needs to have the necessary skills and capacity in the Australian defence industry to support the future requirements of the Australian Defence Force, including building and sustaining new capabilities.
The 2013 White Paper will build on work already completed or underway since 2009, including:
The Defence Planning Guidance
The classified Defence Planning Guidance (DPG) is Defence's lead strategy document. It articulates the strategic priorities that guide Defence to produce the military outcomes sought by Government.
The DPG includes analysis of the future strategic environment, identifying the contingencies Australia might face in the bracketed timeframes of 0 to 5, 5 to 15 and 20 or more years.
The DPG is updated annually to set strategic guidance for force structure and capability development, corporate planning, resource planning, preparedness management and critical enabling functions.
The update to the 2011 DPG has been completed and will be considered by Government in the near future.
The Australian Force Structure Review
In the Defence White Paper 2009, the Government determined a development process for future White Papers, with Defence to prepare, prior to a White Paper, a Force Structure Review (FSR).
The FSR will provide costed force structure options for use in developing the White Paper  -  assessing the equipment and capabilities the ADF needs to deliver national security and defence priorities.
Defence commenced its FSR in November 2011.
The Defence Capability Plan Review
Defence has completed a full review of the Defence Capability Plan (DCP) including an audit of the plan and the development of new frameworks and methodologies for its management.
The DCP Review was considered in the 2012-13 Budget process.
The Australian Force Posture Review
The range of strategic and security factors addressed by the Australian Force Posture Review include:
 * 	the rise of the Asia-Pacific as a region of global strategic significance;
 * 	the rise of the Indian Ocean rim as a region of global strategic significance;
 * 	the growth of military power projection capabilities of countries in the Asia Pacific;
 * 	the growing need for the provision of humanitarian assistance and disaster relief following extreme events in the Asia Pacific region; and
 * 	energy security and security issues associated with expanding offshore resource exploitation in our North West and Northern approaches.
The Defence Budget
The Government needs to ensure that Defence spending is calibrated against an up to date assessment of short and longer term priorities.
At the time of the 2011-12 Budget it was determined that there would be a $1.6 billion underspend for the 2010-11 financial year.
In this context, Defence has conducted a comprehensive stock take of the Defence budgeting system, taking into account all budget processes, estimation methods and underlying budget assumptions. 
This includes the way in which Defence's Capital equipment budgets are formulated and managed, including the ongoing utility of contingency, slippage and over-programming. 
The Minister for Defence has asked Dr Allan Hawke, Mr Ric Smith and Mr Paul Rizzo to form a Ministerial Advisory Group to assist in the development of the 2013 Defence White paper.
Dr Hawke and Mr Smith are both former Secretaries of the Department of Defence. 
Mr Rizzo,a Director of a number of major Australian corporations including the National Australia Bank and Mallesons Stephen Jacques and is the Independent Chair of the Defence Audit and Risk Committee, led the development of the plan to address problems in the repair and management of the amphibious and support ship fleet. 



PM: I'm very pleased to be here today with the Minister for Defence, Stephen Smith, and with the Minister for Defence Materiel, Jason Clare, to make some important announcements about defence policy and defence capability.
First today we do want to announce that the Government will shortly begin work on a new White Paper and that White Paper will be delivered in the first half of 2013. Now that is around a year earlier than expected. The last defence White Paper was published in 2009 and at that time the Government committed to publishing defence White Papers around about each five years or at intervals no greater than that.
As the 2009 White Paper underlined, defence planning, by its very nature, is a complex business. You've got to make careful judgements about Australia's long term defence needs but at the same time you need to weigh those judgements against shifting circumstances and changing demands and that's why it is right, periodically, to redo the White Paper.
In 2009, when we did the White Paper we recognised that we would need to periodically and rigorously review the mix and scale of our capabilities to make sure that they're always appropriate to changing strategic circumstances. Reviews of this nature are essential to our defence planning. 
The Government is committed to delivering one of the most capable Defence Forces in our region with the people and equipment we need to do the job. We will deliver the core capabilities identified in the 2009 White Paper, including the Joint Strike Fighters, the new amphibious ships, the new submarines and our air warfare destroyers. 
These are enduring threads in our defence policy but equally there have been a number of significant developments domestically and internationally since the last White Paper was published which makes it right to start work on a new White Paper now. 
First, the strategic shift in our region described in the 2009 White Paper has continued as global weight has moved to our region of the world. Second, we now know far more clearly the transition time frames for our mission in Afghanistan and our drawdown in East Timor and the Solomon Islands. Third, we now have the Defence Force Posture Review which the Government is releasing today. Fourth, at the time of the 2009 White Paper the global financial crisis was still unfolding, as were its strategic impacts. We need to take stock of those impacts for our defence arrangements and for the Defence budgets of our key defence partners, our allies.
We also need to keep driving the defence reform program and to take stock of what it has achieved and we need to focus on ensuring that we retain the skills in Defence that we need in this stage of our Australian economic growth.
So, for all of these reasons, these six reasons, we think it's important that we take an opportunity to review our strategic settings and our force structure planning earlier than the first half of 2014.
Now, I recognise that making this announcement today and in recent days there's been a lot of speculation about Defence matters in the run-up to Tuesday's budget, and that's understandable.
The Defence Minister will be making some remarks about capability. We are not dealing with specific announcements about Defence funding in the budget today but I do want to make clear, as Minister Smith has said on more than one occasion, that Defence will be making an important contribution to the Government's fiscal objectives.
I also want to be very clear today that this contribution has been carefully designed to protect our servicemen and women and our Defence operations and to minimise the impact on core project capabilities. In particular, the budget will protect our men and women on the frontline. They will get all of the kit and support that they need. 
Second, there will be no impact on any of our overseas operations including Afghanistan, East Timor and the Solomon Islands. Third, there will be no impact on the equipment provided to ADF personnel on deployment overseas. Fourth, there will be no impact on ADF numbers. Fifth, there will be no impact on entitlements except where changes might already have been recommended under the strategic reform program and in relation to capability, as I've said, the core White Paper projects will continue to be delivered, with some savings coming from delays in capability projects that have occurred for reasons other than the budget and Mr Smith will outline those.
I want to briefly mention two matters and then I'll turn to Minister Smith. 
First, the Government is releasing today the final report of the Defence Force Posture Review. This is an important review assessing how our forces should be postured and what might best support operations in our northern and western approaches. The recommendations from the report will form part of the input to the new White Paper.
And finally, the Government is committed and remains committed to acquiring 12 new Future Submarines to be assembled in South Australia. In our strategic environment we need strong maritime capabilities and that's why we need a potent submarine force. This is a project which will unfold over decades but the early decisions on design questions particularly are the most critical. Today we are announcing that the Government has committed $214 million for the next stage of the Future Submarine Project. 
That funding will go to essential studies which will inform the Government's final decision on submarine design and workforce requirements for this very complex national endeavour which would be the largest procurement project the nation has ever undertaken.
I'll turn now to Minister Smith for some comments and then to Minister Clare and we'll be happy to take questions.
MINISTER SMITH: Thanks very much, Prime Minister. As the Prime Minister has said, three significant announcements today, firstly, the bringing forward of the White Paper to the first half of 2013, secondly, the start of the most significant Defence and capital works project that Defence and the Commonwealth has seen and, thirdly, the release of the Force Posture Review.
So far as the White Paper is concerned, as the Prime Minister has said, there are a range of important strategic reasons why it makes sense to bring forward the White Paper to the first half of 2013. There's a continued strategic shift to our part of the world and, in part, that's reflected by the United States' decision to not just continue but to enhance its presence in the Asia-Pacific, reflected in part by the Global Force Posture Review arrangements that we have with the United States but they're also working with Singapore, the Philippines, Japan and other countries.
Secondly, there's the drawdown from Afghanistan in an orderly way, in accordance with the International Security Assistance Force transition process but there's also an expectation and a likelihood of a drawdown from East Timor and the Solomon Islands - our stabilisation forces. So how do we address the aftermath of the drawdown from these operations, in particular a land-based expeditionary force in the Middle East for a decade?
Thirdly, the Force Posture Review which draws attention to possible perception that the first priority of the 2009 White Paper, Defend Australia, a perception that that has not necessarily had the prominence that it needs to and whilst there's no recommendations for wholesale additions of bases there are very strong recommendations about better capability, better logistics, better resources to our north and to our west, to our northern approaches and our western approaches, Fleet Base West, or HMAS Stirling and our Army, Air Force and Navy resources in the north-east, the north, and the north-west.
And finally, there are of course the implications from the global financial crisis which the 2009 White Paper described as unfolding and we've seen that occur. 
We are very well-placed to do a White Paper over the next 12 months. The 2009 White Paper was the first White Paper since 2000 so that took a considerable effort and that nearly decade-long gap was the reason why we committed ourselves to White Papers over a period not greater than five years.
There are a range of inputs into a White Paper. The Defence Planning Guidance, which is an essential part, has been completed by Defence and is awaiting government consideration. The Force Posture Review has been complete and is released today. The Defence Capability Plan has been reviewed exhaustively including in the context of the current budget. 
The budget review which we instituted after Defence's $1.6 billion underspend has also been completed. The Force Structure Review has commenced. It commenced in November-December of 2011. That is always the last piece of work into the White Paper process so we are very well advanced in terms of completing the White Paper on a 12-month basis.
If I can just indicate by way of aside that, as was the case with the 2009 White Paper, there'll be a ministerial advisory group to assist on the White Paper. I've asked Allan Hawke and Ric Smith, two former secretaries of the Department of Defence who were engaged in the Force Posture Review to help. I've also asked Paul Rizzo, well known contributor to corporate Australia but who also has played a leading role in Defence in the Strategic Reform Program and effectively wrote the Rizzo Report on our heavy amphibious lift difficulties, will also form part of that advisory group.
I've indicated to all three that if they believe they need any assistance then I'd have an open mind about adding to the ministerial advisory group.
The Prime Minister invited me to make some comments about capability and let me put the capability of the 2009 White Paper in its proper context.
The 2009 White Paper had with it a 2009 defence capability plan. That included some 180 projects. Of those 180 projects a small number, about 10, are no longer being carried out. They have either been cancelled or they have been stopped. The main reason for cancellation or stoppage of those 10 projects is that their capability has been overtaken by the scope of another project so there is a very small number of capability projects in the Defence White Paper 2009 that are not currently progressing and so the vast bulk of capability from the White Paper continues through the system.
As the Prime Minister has indicated, all of the headline capability, the core capability in the White Paper, whether it's Joint Strike Fighters, whether it's submarines, whether it's landing helicopter docks, whether it's air warfare destroyers, whether it's Caribou replacement, all of these continue in the system.
Last year we approved 49 projects, 49 projects, a record number of projects, beating the previous record, 36, in 2006. Since the 2009 White Paper was published we have approached $13.5 billion worth of projects and that includes projects and capability that we have added to the 2009 White Paper - two C-17s, HMAS Choules and the Skandi Bergen, our two offshore vessels to assist with humanitarian assistance and disaster relief and over 100 Bushmasters with the potential for more.
And so suggestions that somehow the capability planning in the 2009 Defence White Paper has not been met or is not on track, in my view are wrong.
Let me make some remarks. The Prime Minister has said that we won't be talking about the budget but she's invited me to talk about some capability, to inform you of some capability implications that arise as a result of our budget processes.
Firstly, so far as the Joint Strike Fighter project is concerned, you'll recall that I've been saying for some time that we'll do a number of things. Firstly, we won't allow a gap in our air combat capability to occur. Secondly, we would make a judgment in the course of this year about any risk to the capability gap. And, thirdly, we'd make a judgment in the course of this year about the timing of the placing of orders for our first 14 Joint Strike Fighters. 
We are contractually committed to two and they will be delivered in 2014-2015 in the United States for testing and training purposes. We have previously announced a commitment to purchase another 12 and that commitment will occur but it will occur two years after the previously anticipated timetable. That effectively mirrors the decision which Secretary of Defence Panetta made with respect to over 150 Joint Strike Fighters proposed to be ordered by the United States.
So we are now essentially on the same timetable for delivery of our first batch of Joint Strike Fighters as the United States is. 
The budget effect of that is that it takes out of the forward estimates for this year's budget between $1.5 billion and $2 billion. In round terms it's about $1.6 billion. So that is an example of where a move, a delay, a deferral of a capability has a significant budget impact. 
We remain committed to the Joint Strike Fighter project but we will see the delivery of our first 12 Joint Strike Fighters two years after the previous estimates at a net benefit to the budget of $1.6 billion, putting us on the same timetable, effectively, as the United States.
There is one other project which in the budget context the Government has decided in part not to pursue. We have a project in the White Paper, the 2009 White Paper, with respect to artillery. Part of the White Paper commitment was to have some self-propelled artillery. The Government is not proposing to proceed with the self-propelled aspect of our artillery project. We will of course continue with towed artillery which is also able to be carried by our Chinook helicopters.
That will be at a saving to the budget of some $225 million, a quarter of a billion. That project has had some difficulties and we've made the decision advisedly that we will not proceed with self-propelled artillery.
Two other important aspects of the budget in terms of capability. The budget will still allow the Government to make an advised decision in the course of this year with respect to the electronic warfare capability, the Growler. And so the budget allows in the course of this calendar year the Government to make such a decision, as it does the replacement to the Caribou, the tactical military airlift and you would have seen, those of you who follow these matters, interest expressed in the past by the proponents of the C-27 and the proponents of the C-295.
The Government is in a position in the very near future to make a judgment about these matters but the budget will not prevent the Caribou replacement from going ahead.
On White Paper matters, can I just mention in passing that this morning I had a telephone conversation with Secretary for Defence of the United States, Leon Panetta. We spoke about Afghanistan in the run-up to Chicago. I took the opportunity of indicating to him that we will be bringing forward our White Paper and explained to him the strategic reasons for that. I also indicated to him the tight financial and fiscal situation that we face and indicated to him so far as the budget was concerned there would be no adverse impacts which the Prime Minister has outlined. 
I also indicated to him there will be no adverse impact for the work that we're doing with the United States on their Global Force Posture Review, namely the marines in Darwin, greater, in due course, air traffic access, so far as our northern airfields are concerned and, third and ultimately, greater navy traffic through HMAS Stirling.
Can I move to submarines. We're announcing today the next stage of the Future Submarine Project. As a general proposition, as the Prime Minister has said, this will be the largest defence capability project the Commonwealth has embarked upon and, indeed, the largest single capital works project that we have embarked upon.
Given the difficulties that we have experienced over a long period of time with the Collins Class submarine we are being absolutely methodical and exhaustive about our planning for this project. All of our experience is that 80 per cent of the problems in capability are caused in the first 20 per cent of the life of the project so we are being absolutely methodical about that and make no apology for it.
There are four options that we are now exhaustively considering: a military off-the-shelf option, which could be adopted to Australian regulatory standards; a military off-the-shelf option which might be complemented by Australian combat, communications and weapons systems; a derivative of the Collins Class submarine, what has been sometimes colloquially described as a son or daughter of Collins; and fourthly a brand new design. The detail of all of that work is in the materials presented to you and Jason may add to it.
Secondly, there is an indicative timeline which takes you through our current timetable for first pass and second pass which indicates that we expect at this stage by about 2017 to complete the second pass process which would enable construction to occur.
Finally on the submarines, as the Prime Minister has said, we remain absolutely committed to the 12 new Future Submarine Project to be assembled in Adelaide. We've also, over the course of the last 12 months or so, had exhaustive conversations with the United States about complementary and inter-operative submarines for security and strategic reasons and, secondly, we've had exhaustive conversations with the United Kingdom about assistance on improving our Collins Class maintenance and sustainment. 
That's seen the appointment of the Coles Review and we're also announcing today that our general manager of submarines in the Department of Defence will be Mr David Gould from the United Kingdom. He will have responsibility both for Collins Class submarine maintenance and sustainment and the materiel aspects of the Future Submarine Project. As a consequence of that, we will use him in the submarine management area and the Secretary of Defence has decided - and I agree with his recommendation - to not proceed with the associate secretary capability position which we announced some time ago. 
Finally on the Force Posture Review - and then I'll hand to Jason for aspects of industry and training so far as the submarines are concerned. Finally so far as the Force Posture Review is concerned, what it does do is shine a light on the need for us to make sure that we are appropriately geographically dispositioned for the challenges of our future. That includes what we have in the north-east, what we have in the north, what we have in the north-west and also importantly what we have in the west at HMAS Stirling so far as our Indian Ocean fleet is concerned. 
Those recommendations will now feed directly into the White Paper process and it has been the production of the Force Posture Review which has been one of those factors which in my mind has helped me come to the conclusion to recommend to the Prime Minister that we bring forward the White Paper. I'm sorry that's taken a bit of time. 
I'll hand over to Jason who will deal with submarine matters, training and skills. 
MINISTER CLARE: Thanks Stephen. 
To build the new submarines we need to build a new industry and that will require hundreds of Australian companies and thousands of workers. It will require boiler makers and welders, electricians, naval architects, as well as system integrators. It's a lot of work. It will require workers and the assistance of companies from overseas but a lot of it will be home grown. A lot of those skills need to be developed here in Australia. 
In December last year, Stephen and I announced that we would develop a Future Submarine Industry Skills Plan and today I am releasing, with Stephen, the terms of reference for that work as well as announcing the team that will lead that work. It will be lead by Warren King, the Chief Executive of the DMO, with the support and the assistance of an expert industry panel. And that panel will be led by Mr David Mortimer AO. 
You will know him as the former chief executive of TNT and the former chair of Leighton Holdings. You'll also know - many people in the room will know that he is the chair of the Defence Industry Innovation Board that reports to me, and he is the author of the review into Defence Procurement and Sustainment in 2008 known to many in this room as the Mortimer Report. 
I've asked him to lead this team and he'll be assisted by a team of people including representatives from Australia's major naval ship building companies as well as from Australia's major military systems integrating companies. And their work is to work with the rest of the Defence industry with State Governments and Territory Governments around the country, with universities, academic organisations and think tanks to help us build a plan to build the skills to build for the next generation submarine. 
It's critical work. This is essential work to make sure that the Future Submarine Project is a success and I've asked them to deliver this report to me and to the Government by the end of the year and their work - their recommendations will feed into the work that's being done on the 2013 White Paper. 
PM: Thank you. We're happy to take questions. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I just wanted to ask a quite broad overview -
PM: Sure. 
JOURNALIST: The Government always talks about the structural change going on in the Australian economy and we're seeing (inaudible) particularly of workers and labour to Western Australia. There's a talk of the shift globally in the economy. You're putting together an Asian Century paper. 
Is there a case at some point to bring all of this work together to look at both the economic and strategic shifts happening in the world - particularly in our region and what it means for Australia? 
PM: Look, that's a good question. And when we did the specifications for what we wanted in the Asian Century White Paper we were mindful that we didn't want it to do the work that properly should be done in a Defence White Paper. That is, we didn't want it to go through hard power capabilities that is the work of a Defence White Paper. But it will make some reflections on the strategic context in which we work and then this new White Paper coming out as it will in the first half of 2013 will then fill in that security picture. 
So internally the two are being progressed knowing that, you know, there will be a landing point where the Asian Century White Paper comes out in the middle of this year in the same time frame that we are working towards the new Defence White Paper. 
We'll go - yes, and then to Phil. Yes Andrew. 
JOURNALIST: Given the problems in the manufacturing sector and the fact that we are constantly talking about trying to push ourselves into smarter technology, is there a national interest case in ensuring that the - for example, the build of the submarines - the design phase and builders all Australian done so that it might actually inspire a new manufacturing base in Australia? 
PM: Look, there's a national interest case in getting this right, in making sure that the 12 future submarines are right for purpose, that we learn the lessons of the past in relation to the Collins on sustainment and maintenance questions as we go into what will be the biggest ever procurement project that the nation has undertaken. 
So we've got to get it right. In getting it right, on any of the options that we choose for how the submarine will be designed, whether it's military off the shelf all the way through to uniquely Australian designed, whatever option we take on that continuum work will be done in South Australia assembling these submarines and then of course there is the continued maintenance over their life. 
So, this will be a big injection into manufacturing and into the development of our skills base and that's good for manufacturing generally. Anything that is lifting skills in one part of manufacturing has the ability to flow through to other areas of manufacturing. That's one of the reasons the car industry is so important to us. It uplifts skills which then flow through across manufacturing. 
So, good for jobs, good for skills, good for the rest of manufacturing and good over time for Australia having some comparative advantage in this Defence work. 
Bill. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) the time frame for the sub. When do we envisage and actually look to construct, you know, the final one to be selected, the first one to roll off the dock? 
And also, those budget cuts you just outlined about pushing the Joint Strike Fighter back and the self-propelled guns is that all of it or is there going to be more in the budget (inaudible)?
PM: Alright. I'll go to Minister Smith on that. But can - on the question of when the new subs will be available and what does that mean for capability and for potential capability gaps, we've got a number of moving parts here and we've got to get all of them right. Moving part number one is the life of the Collins Class submarine. The last of those rolled off the production line - to use your terminology. It was commissioned in 2003 with a 28 year life taking you to 2031. 
What we do know from overseas is that it is possible to extend the programmed life of submarines through appropriate sustainment and maintenance. The Americans have had some experience with that with their Ohio class submarines for example. 
So, one moving part here is the life - the full life of the Collins. The other moving part is what option we go to for, you know, military off the shelf, modified military off the shelf, and evolved Collins - what Stephen referred to as son or daughter of Collins - or a new uniquely designed Australian submarine. Depending on what decision you make there your production times are different. So, we've got to get both right to ensure that we aren't at risk of a capability gap. 
I'll go to Stephen on these questions and also on the budget question you asked. 
MINISTER SMITH: Well thanks Prime Minister. The Prime Minister is absolutely right. The Collins fleet went into the water variously from 1996 through to 2003 and so the design life of type of the Collins was 28 years. And so the on paper life and type of the Collins takes you to 2031. Now, that's the design life of type. 
What we are currently in the midst of doing is to do an exhaustive assessment of whether the life of type of the Collins can be extended. The Prime Minister has said, for example, the Ohio class and I was on the USS Michigan in Stirling last week - has effectively been extended from 30 years to 40 years. 
There's also the factor which I have said before that regrettably the Collins has not been in the water as much as we would have preferred. So, there is that potential for firstly getting the operation days of the Collins better and extending its life. Then there is the choice that we make in terms of the four options we've put out there. 
So those people who assert that automatically there will be a capability gap are in error. Yes, there was regrettably a capability gap between the Oberon and the Collins Class and we are working assiduously to do everything we can to make sure that there is no capability gap between the Collins and the future submarines. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
MINSITER SMITH: Still got a second part. The second part, Phil to your question was will there be other things in the budget? As the Prime Minister said Defence will make a contribution to the budget bottom line, to returning the budget to surplus. So yes there will be more in the budget. 
There is a general proposition, there's a general rule of thumb. In any budget with Defence if there are movements, if there are savings, if there is an underspend invariably 50 to 60 percent of that comes from capability. And so when you see the budget you will see that there are a range of programs in the Capability Plan which have been delayed or deferred, not as a result of any financial or fiscal imperative but just because projects get delayed as a result of difficulties, as a result of industry difficulties, as a result of technological challenges. 
There will be projects in the budget where our financial circumstances have said we have a higher priority. But I won't go any further into that. I've given you a couple of very important ones. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Smith-
MINISTER SMITH: What we have done with the budget is to make sure that our overseas operations are protected, no adverse implications, that our kit that we give to people about the deploy or deployed is protected, as a general proposition no adverse impact on conditions other than things which are in the strategic reform program, and no adverse impact on the number of ADF members on the military side. 
You may have seen some analysis recently which said after Vietnam we made the mistake of reducing military numbers and didn't think strategically. We're not reducing military numbers, and the White Paper has as one of its strategic analysis the drawdown of our effort in Afghanistan, the Solomon's and East Timor. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the-
PM: Okay. So, we'll go to - I think Laura had her hand up, then we'll go to Mark then we'll come back to the front. Laura. Sorry, and then we'll go to Brendan.
JOURNALIST: Just on the involvement of the US in the region, when will we know whether the Americans are actually going to be making some contribution to the cost of some of these changes including the Cocos Islands, and is that something that you've had to think about with the White Paper and also (inaudible)?
PM: Well as we indicated at the time that that story was in the media, this is a conversation that has a long way to go with the US. So, there's not, you know, an immediate set of decisions there. I'll turn to Minister Smith for a specific comment on it. 
MINISTER SMITH: Well, on Cocos the Prime Minister's quite right, that's very much long term. So far as the three priority areas that we have; marine rotation in the Northern Territory, greater access to our air fields in northern Australia and subsequently greater access to HMAS Stirling. 
In particular some of our northern fields, for example RAAF Tindall and some of our infrastructure at HMAS Stirling would require enhancement, expansion or improvement to cater for the greater access. In accordance with the finest traditions that is something which we have been and will continue to be in discussions with the United States about what the share of the infrastructure investment should be. 
We've come to no conclusions in that respect. Those two aspects of the greater operational and practical cooperation are the second and third cabs off the rank. In the first instance there has been no great need or any need to add to our infrastructure in the Northern Territory to satisfy the arrival of the first 250 marines. 
PM: Mark. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Smith, there are reports recently that the sort of delays you're talking about in the Joint Strike Fighter program will blow out the costs by between $3 to $6 billion. So are you saving $2 billion in this budget period so a future Government can pay double or triple that amount later on?
MINISTER SMITH: What we've done is exactly what the United States have done. We have essentially moved to the right or moved to two years the time in which we will order and receive effectively our first 12 Joint Strike Fighters. Leon Panetta did the same thing a few months ago when he moved over 150 joint strike fighters in a comparable manner. We'll receive two in 2014/15 in the US for testing and training purposes, and then in two years' time we'll make a decision about the arrival of the first 12 which will essentially form part of our first squadron. 
Given the problems that the Joint Strike Fighter project has seen we've had two problems, two issues. Firstly is the delay of the project, so moving the schedule to the right, which we've seen the United States take steps about in the last six months, and secondly increase in the unit cost. 
When we embarked upon the project we did a couple of very sensible things; firstly we chose the conventional Joint Strike Fighter, and secondly we put a fair amount of padding in our cost and in our timetable. On the timetable we have been making sure that we don't end up with a capability gap. We'll make that decision formally by the end of this year in terms of the capability gap, but my current advice is that the life of type of our 71 Classic Hornets and our 24 Super Hornets is sufficient for our air combat capability, but we'll make an advised judgement before the end of this year. 
So far as cost is concerned the Defence White Paper, the capability plan talks in terms of up to 100 Joint Strike Fighters. I've been making the point for some time we've ordered 14, any decisions that we make about further orders will be an advised deliberative decision by the Government of the day. 
PM: Matthew. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister if I can just take you off the Defence track just for a minute, with apologies to the Defence writers, just on the budget generally. 
PM: Sure. 
JOURNALIST: You've already - you're starting to outline the cuts that are going to be made in the budget, there will be more, clearly. You've often - you often attack Tony Abbott as being too negative. I'm just wondering following on from what Penny Wong was saying yesterday, given that the Coalition is committed to, as you are, a surplus in this year, do you believe it is possible for Tony Abbott to be knocking back your budget measures without providing clear examples of what his alternative would do to get to a budget surplus?
PM: I think Mr Abbott has put himself in a position that even if he endorses all of our budget measures to bring the budget back to surplus he's still in a $70 billion black hole. So the Government will be creating a budget surplus, Mr Abbott already has such a big financial mess that he's basically got to take $70 billion out of services to working families. 
Every budget saving we put forward that he doesn't take adds to that total and adds to the incredible cut backs he would need to make to pensions, health, education, Medicare, right across the board were he ever to become Prime Minister. 
Brendan. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned that the Defence White Paper is coming a year early, that the submarines - the number of submarines would not be an issue, that that would remain at 12 and they'd be built in Adelaide. The air warfare destroyers are being built at the moment, they're a fait accomplit, the landing ships are a fait accomplit, the only area there seems to be any flexibility is in the numbers of Joint Strike Fighters you might buy. 
Is this in fact going to be a very significant White Paper? It doesn't appear that there's very much room left for the writers of the White Paper to actually manoeuvre on this seven [indistinct] you've set out for it. 
PM: Look this will be an evolution of the 2009 White Paper, so we will be relying on work done for the 2009 White Paper and evolving a new White Paper in view of the changes in our circumstances, which I've outlined and Minister Smith's outlined, you know, the increasing evidence of the shift of strategic and political weight to our region, the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis, what it's meant for us domestically, but what it's also meant for the Defence budgets of our allies. 
The Force Posture Review that we're releasing today and the very significant clearer information we now have because we've made all of the relevant decisions, in relation to Afghanistan for example, about when draw downs will be happening. Clearly all of that wasn't available 2009 when the White Paper was being put together. 
So, you should expect it to be an evolution. One of the reasons we are very confident that it can be done in this timeframe is that it is evolving from the 2009 White Paper and a number of the key strategic inputs to it are already available including the Force Posture Review we're releasing today. I'll go to Hugh. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister this might seem an overly simple question, but given the capital scale of the submarine project can you explain briefly, in terms that people in suburbs can understand, why we need this massive spend, why we need to double the submarine capability?
PM: Well, I'm happy to answer that and then I'll turn to Minister Smith for some comments too.
When you think of Australia and our defence needs, obviously we need sophisticated maritime capability. And then in terms of sophisticated maritime capability, what submarines do and what they require an adversary to do to defeat you, is of disproportionate use. That is, the submarine capability is hard for someone we were engaged with to oppose. They're hard to locate; hard to destroy, and consequently take a disproportionate use of the efforts of your enemy if you were in circumstances where you were actively engaged in combat.
So for a nation like ours, an island continent, maritime capability is pivotal. And in the modern world, maritime capability that makes a real difference, submarines do.
MINSTER SMITH:    Well, that's the perfect answer, Prime Minister. I'll just add a couple of other things. So far as Australia is concerned, the thrust of the 2009 White Paper was an expanded maritime capability, as I think Brendan or - Brendan I think - the air warfare destroyers, the landing helicopter docks, the submarines.
The landing helicopter docks will transform, for example, our ship to shore capability. And all of this is in the context of a draw down from a decade-long land-based, army-based expeditionary force to the Middle East. So submarines, and an expanded submarine fleet is an essential part of our maritime capability.
And because we've seen, as reflected by the 2009 White Paper and of the work we're doing, a strategic shift to our part of the world - an economic shift, a political shift, a strategic shift, but also a military shift. As countries' economies grow, they are entitled to modernise their military, and we've seen the rise of China, the rise of India, the rise of the ASEAN economies combined, so we're not the only one in the Asia Pacific who is looking at our modern military capability. For an island country, an island continent, that involves a maritime capability.
So far as the White Paper 2013 is concerned, as the Prime Minister said, we're envisaging it as evolutionary rather than taking us in a fundamentally different direction. We do have to, in addition, grapple with what the 2009 White Paper described as the unfolding of the Global Financial Crisis. We've seen since then very sharp and deep budget cuts so far as the United States is concerned, very sharp and deep budget cut in defence - in Defence so far as United Kingdom is concerned, and in Canada.
So we're not the only country that has to - has had to grapple with the fiscal and budget demands so far as Defence capability is concerned. What we're trying to do is to make sure that we continue to have our core capability and that we're looking for the future. And the Force Posture Review very much has an eye to the future in terms of the ongoing political, military, economic, strategic shift to our part of the world.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, what are the lessons of the Collins Class in a nutshell? And is it realistic to be talking about extending their life when at the moment, you know, it's only possible to get one, maybe two in the water at any one time?
PM: Well, I think the lessons are number one, the greatest - you need the greatest possible clarity about design questions right up front. So as Stephen said to you a little bit earlier, I mean, 80 per cent of capability problems in putting something together tend to happen in the first 20 per cent of the work. So if you can be crystal clear going in on design and capability questions then that makes a real difference to the delivery of the project. So at first and foremost, that's been a lesson.
Second, we've learned some things about, as a nation, and of course, this question of the Collins Class has gone on under two decades now, so certainly under governance of all political persuasions. Another lesson has been about sustainment and maintenance, and what you need to do to keep submarines in the water doing what you want them to do, and what that implies for workforce and skill levels as you go through their full life cycle.
So I'd say they've been the key lessons. I'll turn to Stephen too.
MINISTER SMITH Again the perfect answer. The only thing I'd add is two things: firstly, the big mistake of Collins in addition to some design deficiencies was we did not take into account at the time - and I say - by we, I mean the Commonwealth, did not take into account at the time what the burden of maintenance and sustainment would be. So we're not making that mistake with the Future Submarine.
And so those people who say there's no relationship between Collins Class submarine and a Future Submarine Project are wrong because one of the fundamental mistakes made with Collins Class was not taking into account the burden of maintenance and sustainment - we will not make that mistake again.
Secondly, so far as our submarines are concerned, my most recent advice from the Chief of Navy, which was yesterday - so we've got two in deep maintenance to Adelaide, we've got two in regular maintenance in Western Australia which adds to the Prime Minster's answer on your question about manufacturing and skills. We envisage that the Future Submarines would be based wholly, if not substantially at Fleet Base West which would see the regular maintenance occurring at HMAS Stirling and Henderson.
And thirdly, we have two submarines, one is already on an operation - an exercise operation. The second is about be deployed to that effect.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I ask about Julie Bishop? She's been in Indonesia and got a rather hostile reception. I just wanted to ask what your impression of her ventures overseas have been. And secondly, what do you say to backbenchers who are rather anxious at the moment? Are they being simply ‘Nervous Nellie's' or do they have legitimate concerns about the polls?
PM: Well I've conveniently brought with me the Acting Minister for Immigration, so I'll get him to deal with your first question.
MINISTER CLARE: Well this is another criticism made of the Opposition's policy to turn back the boats. It's been criticised by the former Chief of the Defence Force, by the Chief of Navy. It's been criticised by Indonesian police. It's been criticised by the UNHCR. Most importantly, it's been criticised by the men and women of the Australian Navy. It was published in The Australian a couple of months ago where a senior naval officer said that doing this sort of work puts the lives of Australian military personal at risk as well as asylum seekers.
I remember only a couple of days into this job, when I was first appointed Minister for Defence Materiel in 2010, I went to Darwin and met with the men and women of that patrol in the Adelaide - sorry, in the Armadale Class vessels. And I asked one of the Commanders of the vessels about the work they do. And he said look, I'm glad that you guys won because I was worried about what this would mean for the men and women under my command, about the dangers that it would put them in. This is advice given to me unprompted.
And that's the real reason why we are worried about a policy to turn back the boat because of it putting the lives of Australian sailors at risk, and putting the lives of asylum seekers at risk. 
And remember what this is all about: four days into my appointment as the Minister for Home Affairs, I had to report to the nation that 200 people had died off the coast of Indonesia. A hundred washed up onto the shores, 100 still at the bottom of the Java Sea. In February we had 11 more people die off the coast of Malaysia. Now we can stop this happening, but it requires legislation and that means it requires us to work together. Both parties support offshore processing - we've proposed Malaysia. The Opposition has proposed Nauru. We have offered to do both.
Now what you've seen in Indonesia today is another criticism of the Opposition's policy; they've described it as arrogant. I guess my message here would be it is time to pass this legislation. It is time to reduce the risk of people dying at sea. We need to put our swords down and pass this legislation before more people die.
JOURNALIST: And on the second question?
PM: And on the second question, of course this is a time of political pressure as we continue to deliver very big changes for the nation's future, including carbon pricing coming on stream on 1 July. So I understand people feeling a sense of political pressure. Our job though is to get on with doing what's right for the nation, and that's what I intend to do. And actually, that's what we have been doing throughout this whole period.
We have in even recent weeks announced an aged care policy which means more older Australians will get to stay in their home, and which meets the challenges of an ageing population. We've clarified for the Australian people what is the most recent view we have about our mission in Afghanistan and the likely timeframe for that mission to be brought to an end.
We're here today speaking about our defence needs into the long-term future and how we will shine a spotlight on them through a forthcoming White Paper. And during all of this time we've been rolling out the NBN, building infrastructure, improving schools, improving hospitals for the Australian people and working to support their families. So that's our job in the national interest and we'll keep doing it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister nonetheless there've been a number of diversions including most recently the issue of Peter Slipper and his troubles. Do you regret having moved to put Peter Slipper in the Speaker's chair?
PM: Look, I've dealt with these questions when I made the announcement that I did on Sunday. Clearly you know, clearly I have become concerned - I was concerned about the implications for the Australian Parliament and community views of it of the combined weight of matters involving Mr Slipper, and matters involving Mr Thomson, and so I acted. 
So dealt with that on Sunday, and I have acted. My answer to the question before was of course about all of the other things that the Government is doing and the job that we're getting on with.  
And to be, you know, frank with the people who generate many of these stories, you know, clearly over the past few days there are stories about deadlines and all of that kind of thing. If I was someone given to keeping newspaper clippings, I'd have filing cabinets overstuffed and toppling over with stories written about deadlines. So you'll have to excuse me if that's not my focus. My focus is getting on with the job in the nation's interests. 
JOURNALIST: But you'd also have, wouldn't you, your filing cabinets toppling over with promises made by people in the Government of when things would get better when the carbon tax legislation passed, you know, when you brought the budget to surplus, when you dealt with Kevin Rudd. 
Haven't the points at which people in your government have said things would get better passed without things getting better? 
PM: Well, you know, my view has always been - and I've said this to you consistently - we govern in the nation's interests. We're Labor people. We're Labor people driven by Labor values and driven by a vision of this nation's future. And it's not always easy. You don't in accord with those great Labor values just get to do the easy, popular things. Sometimes you have to do the outright, very very hard things, the downright hard things.  
The Hawke Government showed that, the Keating Government showed that, under the Rudd Government we did some difficult things, and this Government has been called on to do some very difficult things, most particularly the big big change of carbon pricing. 
So you know you recognise that those things aren't easy and they aren't popular, but they are right, and they're in the great Labor tradition. We're not a political party that tells people to be afraid of the future. We're a political party that says we can manage this future together and we can do it in the interests of working people whilst being fair to working people even in days of great change. 
And I do note that for working people, as soon as the next few weeks, people will start to see additional money flow to them to help them through. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe the Coalition is involved in a cover-up in the Peter Slipper James Ashby allegations as suggested by Craig Emerson yesterday? And secondly, have you spoken to Joel Fitzgibbon about his support or lack thereof to your Prime Ministership. 
PM: Well you're referring to a story which generated a tweet from Joel Fitzgibbon where he denied its contents, and for the record I wasn't contacted about that story at all before it went to air. 
Number two, on the, you know, questions involving the Liberal Party, look, I've just been a bit surprised that Opposition people haven't been prepared to answer the questions put to them. 
PM: We'll just take the last three questions then we'll go. Michelle. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Smith, going back to the Defence cuts. Sometime ago, the Defence Department was asked to find very big cuts in terms of being more efficient and so on. Are these cuts that we will see in the budget out of that process, or have you had a new separate process to look at today the Defence Department and its spending?
MINISTER SMITH:   Well in last year's budget Defence made a contribution to the budget bottom line of some $4.3 billion, 1.6 of that was an underspend - $1.6 billion of that was money that Defence was not able to spend. And so for example in the current budget arrangements you might find the capacity for us to spend $1.6 billion on the Joint Strike Fighter project, but that's been pushed to one side and therefore there's no need or reason or utility having that in the budget for that purpose. 
The rest of the $4.3 million was essentially reprioritisation of the Defence Capability Plan. Now that was last year. This year in response to the underspend we effected a review of our budget arrangements to get better the budget, the Defence budget estimation processes. And that's detailed in some of the papers that you have. 
And so we're not anticipating or expecting an underspend of that nature, but we have to get our estimation processes right. Secondly, we have done an exhaustive review of our Defence Capability Plan and that's been done in a normal - in the normal course of events, but it's also been done in the budget context. 
As I think I said to Phil when the budget papers - when the budget is unveiled by the Treasurer, associated with the budget papers from Defence will be an indication as to where projects in the Defence Capability Plan have moved. Have moved to the right, to use the jargon, or have been delayed. And that brings a saving to the forward estimates. 
Some of that will be projects which have just been delayed in the normal course of events because of difficulties, some will be as the result of our judgment that that is coming from non-priority projects which can be deferred which can make the contribution to the budget bottom line. 
There are savings in other areas. I'm not proposing to detail those today. That would be inappropriate. But in terms of how we have tried to manage defence in a time of fiscal constraints - the Prime Minister has very importantly underlined the key areas that will not be adversely affected.  
Our operations overseas, whether it is Afghanistan, East Timor, or the Solomon's. The kit and the provisions provided to people deploying, or about to, people deployed or about to deploy. No adverse implications as I said to Secretary Panetta for the United States global Force Posture Review arrangements. No adverse implications in the main for conditions in entitlements of our men and women in the field other than things that might have been in the Strategic Reform Program. 
What we've tried to do is to reflect a tight fiscal period by doing things which when fiscal - a better fiscal environment returns we can bring back to the same level things that we have been doing. For the detail of that you need to wait until Tuesday. I've given you a goodly snapshot of capability, other areas you'll have to be patient on.  
PM: Okay, we'll take the last two questions.  
Now hang on we... okay. Well we've got to be fair to people who haven't had a question yet. It's a Labor tradition too, yes. 
Kathryn. 
JOURNALIST: Back to the carbon price for a minute. The legislation is in place. You've got all kinds of (inaudible) and other advice about (inaudible) scheme or whatever else, but the scheme is in place. I can't see how you could undo under it even if you wanted to, and you're not giving any indication that you want to.  
But are voters likely to see any enhancement or sweetener or addition to perhaps the compensation or are sectoral groups affected by the carbon price, likely to see any enhancement of the compensation to them between now and the election?  
PM: Well first and foremost the scheme has been designed with assistance to families as part of it, and people will see that assistance flow as soon as in the next few weeks. They'll see you know payments of money for families flow, they'll see payments for pensioners flow, and then people will see tax cuts from 1 July. So supporting working people every step of the way is already in the scheme, already designed, and people will see the cold hard cash very very soon.  
On carbon pricing in general can I say this: I mean, we are a nation that does need to tackle this challenge of climate change. And the only policy that's on the table, the only policy that's on the table to make any difference to our carbon pollution and tackling climate change is the Government's plan and the Government's legislation.            
Everybody who has been called upon to analyse the Opposition's policy - reputable economists and reputable climate change scientists know that it is rubbish. The only plan that's on the table that can lead this nation through to a clean energy future is the plan starting on 1 July, and it comes with assistance for families.            
Yes. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you say to Rio Tinto this morning suggesting it's reviewing its investment, and Australia's too high a cost country. Do you believe some of that criticism of the mining tax? 
PM: Well look I had a direct conversation with Mr Tom Albanese - need to keep your Albaneses straight here - with Mr Tom Albanese during the course of the week where he described as an around the world phenomenon increases in the capital costs associated with mining. So I think we've got to bear that context in mind. Rio is experiencing capital cost increases around the world, and it's a global company and mines in many nations. So he said that to me. 
We did not have a discussion about the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. I'm sure Mr Albanese has views about it. And I don't mean to suggest that he shouldn't put those views forward publicly. But he would also I'm sure be very well aware that it's legislated and it's starting and it's starting on 1 July, and it's about getting Australians a fair share of this resources boom. 
And to link your question to Kathryn's question - there are lots of Australian families out there who know that our economy is strong by the standards of the world, who hear about the resources boom, but then say to themselves gee, I don't reckon I'm seeing anything from this boom, where's my share, what's happening to me? You know, all this boom talk, strong economy, when's it going to make a difference to me? Well we obviously believe in supporting families, and they'll see money flowing through very soon - as I indicated before. And we have consistently said we believe the benefits of the mining boom should be shared. 
I'll take the last question. 
JOURNALIST: There's an outfit in New South Wales called Australian Power and Gas which this week has warned that they expect to raise their charges for power by 25 per cent - the strong suggestion in their argument is that they've blamed the carbon price for that. What is your reaction to a statement like that, and what protections will consumers have against any companies that seek to gouge out extra money as the carbon price looks at that. 
PM: Well firstly people should only make statements that are accurate. Australians are entitled when claims are made about carbon pricing to know what actually the truth is and the likely implications for them. So number one. 
Number two, in many parts of the country electricity pricing is regulated, and you have seen the statements of the regulators in New South Wales and Queensland, for example, where the statements they have made about the impact of carbon pricing are bang square with what the Treasury modelling showed which means that the money that will flow into people's hands in coming weeks and months has been designed right to help people with the impact of carbon pricing. 
And we deliberately designed that money so millions and millions of low and middle-income Australians will end up better off. 
Thank you very much.  


The Gillard Government today announced that 1.3 million Australian families with children at school will get a new cash payment to help make ends meet.
Each year, families will receive a new Schoolkids Bonus worth:
 * 	$410 for each child in primary school
 * 	$820 for each child in high school
This new guaranteed payment will help the families of 2.2 million school kids pay for uniforms, books, school excursions, stationery, and other costs like music lessons and sports registration fees.
Because the payment is automatic and upfront, it means:
	Parents don't need to keep receipts for months and months  -  it's a guaranteed payment.
	Parents will receive the full amount every time, so families won't miss out if they lose receipts.
	 Parents don't have to pay out of their own pocket, then wait months to get paid back - the payment will be paid upfront, twice a year, before the start of Term 1 and Term 3.
	No paperwork is required.
The payment will replace the Education Tax Refund from 1 January 2013. Under the existing system, 1 million families aren't claiming what they're entitled to  -  either claiming less than the full amount, or claiming nothing at all. That's 80% of eligible families.
Replacing the old system with this new payment means one million families will receive more cash  -  a typical family will get more than $720 extra each year.[1]
We understand that low and middle income families are finding it tough to make ends meet. This new payment will give parents help to balance the family budget. It provides financial support upfront, which means they'll have money when they need it most.
Just like the Education Tax Refund, the Schoolkids Bonus will be available to families receiving Family Tax Benefit Part A plus young people in school receiving Youth Allowance and some other income support and veterans' payments.
As part of the transition to the new Schoolkids Bonus, the Education Tax Refund for 2011-12 will be paid out in full to all eligible families as a lump sum payment in June.
This means families will receive their full Education Tax Refund entitlement ahead of tax time  -  so parents won't have to worry about keeping receipts or making claims when they do their tax this year.
The Gillard Government is delivering a surplus with targeted and responsible savings while staying true to the things we have always stood for like helping low and middle income families to make ends meet.
The new School-kids Bonus will cost around $400 million extra each year on top of the $830 million already allocated annually for the Education Tax Refund.
Legislation to enable these changes will be introduced into Parliament this week.


PM: It's great to be here today with Jenny Macklin and with our local members Andrew Leigh and Gai Brodtmann.
On Tuesday night when the Budget is delivered people will see a budget surplus. A budget surplus is the clearest sign we can send of the strength of the Australian economy.
It's the right thing to deliver a budget surplus, so we create a buffer if the global economy worsens at some time in the future, and it's the right thing to deliver a budget surplus, so we leave the Reserve Bank of Australia the maximum room to move on interest rates, if it chooses to do so, and we've already seen the RBA move last week to cut interest rates.
But at the same time we understand that many families look at the Australian economy, understand that our economy is strong, but for them they do wonder ‘Where's this resources boom? Where's my share of it? I'm under pressure making ends meet.'
We do understand that so many families struggle with the costs of raising children, which is why as a Labor Government we've delivered benefits like the Paid Parental Leave Scheme - a first in Australia - like more money invested in childcare than ever before to help families with the costs of care.
And today I'm able to announce a new measure to help families with the costs of raising kids.
Today I announce a Schoolkids Bonus, which will be about helping families meet the costs of all the things that the kids need for school.
The Schoolkids Bonus will be $410 for primary school students and $820 for high school students, that's the annual amount. The money will be paid as an entitlement twice a year, in January and July. It will be paid at the time that families are preparing to get the kids back to school after the summer break and it will be paid at the time that families are preparing for the last two semesters of school, particularly around the time that the kids need all the things for winter.
The Schoolkids Bonus will help families with the costs of all of the things that kids need for school, including the school uniforms, books, computers, pens, paper, all of the costs that kids have getting to school and making sure that they've got the things they need during their school days.
This new entitlement, the Schoolkids Bonus, is replacing the Education Tax Refund and so we will introduce legislation in the Parliament next week and we will seek passage of that legislation by the end of the week, so we can start paying the Schoolkids Bonus this financial year.
Now we want to replace the Education Tax Refund because the evidence is telling us that families are not fully accessing this entitlement. Around a million families haven't got the entitlement that they are due because they haven't kept their receipts, or they found it difficult to spend the money upfront, and then wait ‘til tax time to get their relief from the Education Tax Refund.
And so we are intending to move to this entitlement system, with the first Schoolkids Bonus paid before 30 June this year. 1.3 million families will benefit from this measure, those 1.3 million families are raising 2.3 million children. This is a helping hand for those families, because we understand that so many families are under pressure and this will provide some relief for helping with all of the costs that kids have at school.
I'll turn now to Jenny Macklin for some comments and then we'll be happy to take your questions.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister and first of all I'd like to thank Woolworths for having us here today. We really appreciate it and also it's great to see all the things that you can get here, that children need and I think for me personally it brings back memories from not very long ago, when I was trying to keep up with the cost of clothes and shoes for three growing kids.
PM: Growing feet.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Very true, Prime Minister.
So, I just think this new Schoolkids Bonus is going to be fantastic for families. It is going to mean that parents get money in their bank account when they need it, in January and in July, not have to do the paperwork, keep their receipts, put in their tax returns.
We know that it's important to deliver money straight into people's bank accounts when they need it most and that's what's so good about this Schoolkids Bonus.
So we'll have the first payment by the end of June this year and then the new payment will start in full from January next year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what guarantee, or how do you ensure that the families are spending it on those education (inaudible)
PM: Well, we've got a system at the moment where we know a million families have missed out on their full entitlement under the Education Tax Refund. Now, that's a million families who would have spent a lot of money on getting the kids to school and getting the kids everything they need for school, but who haven't been able to keep their receipts, or haven't been able to spend upfront and get the money all that time later at tax time.
Now, a million families have got costs getting the kids to school, we want to help them with those costs.
JOURNALIST: This could be a plasma bonus again though, couldn't it?
PM: Well, the costs for getting the kids to school are there. You've got to get the school uniform, you've got to buy the books, you've got to have the pens and pencils, you want your child to be able to go on the school excursions and not miss out.
All of the costs are there regularly for families, particularly when it's back to school time and particularly when you're preparing for the second half of the school year and you might need new winter uniforms, or the second set of shoes for the year because the kids feet have grown. So that's what the money is going to enable families to afford.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why didn't you do it this way in the first place?
PM: Well, we decided that we wanted to help families with the costs of getting the kids to school and we thought that through the tax system was the best way to do it at that stage, but we've had a few years of that experience now.
We've reminded families of this entitlement, but of the 1.3 million families eligible, a million of them haven't got their entitlement at all, or in full.
So when you see that, it prompts you to say ‘What's a better way of getting this money into the hands of families, so it makes a difference for people who are struggling to make ends meet?'
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) to guarantee and ensure that this is spent on education costs and there are no safeguards, you must admit, with this cash handout?
PM: I don't think anybody who's got school aged children would say that the costs of having your kids in school all year are somehow less than $410 for a primary school student and $820 for a high school student. The cost of having the kids at school are more than that, this is a helping hand along the way.
JOURNALIST: The Coalition will argue that because you're rushing it through this week and bringing those costs forward to this financial year, that it's fiddling the books to ensure the surplus.
PM: Under Labor the Schoolkids Bonus will be paid this year, next year, the year after, the year after that, the year after that and so on into the future. Under Labor this is an ongoing entitlement, the Schoolkids Bonus, paid twice every year.
Now I would be incredibly disappointed if the Opposition let its usual negative tactics get in the way of getting money into the hands of struggling families.
JOURNALIST: Does the fact that you are seeking to put this before the Parliament next week though give you  -  and I'm not questioning the motive of the policy  -  but doesn't it also give you an opportunity to pressure the Opposition politically to get them to support at least this aspect of the budget and presumably others?
PM: Well, having the legislation in the Parliament next week is just the practical consequence of wanting to get the money into families' hands as soon as possible. So that's why the legislation's coming to the Parliament  -  to make it possible to get money into the hands of families who need it.
JOURNALIST: How much is new money and how much is existing money that's been rolled into this new scheme?
PM: Because of the difference between the claimant rates under the Education Tax Refund and this system, this is a system that requires more resources, so we provisioned around $2 billion over the forward estimates.
It is going to cost more, because it's an automatic entitlement to families, to make a difference for those families, the one million families that are either missing out entirely, or in part, from the Education Tax Refund at the moment.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The Schoolkids Bonus will be paid this year, so it will be paid out of the budget monies this year. The budget will return to surplus on Tuesday night, because that's the right thing to do for the economy, but we've made the decisions necessary to also support working families and we've done that deliberately because, whilst our economy is strong, we understand this isn't everybody's boom.
We understand that there are families that aren't in the fast lane of the economy, that get the costs for the kids in school and worry about how they're going to meet then and wonder whether or not going to the movies on the weekend is ever going to be something that they can do, or always a luxury that they dream of.
We understand that people are struggling to make ends meet, so it's the right thing to do, to get money to families, into their pockets to help with the costs of getting the kids to school and everything the kids need.
JOURNALIST: Is this a Robin Hood budget?
PM: Look, this is a budget in a traditional Labor fashion. A Labor budget where we are doing the right thing to keep the economy strong for the future, so people have got the benefits of opportunity and jobs, whilst we support working families.
And it builds on the way in which we've stepped forward to support working families as a government, over the life of the government.
It's why we created Paid Parental Leave  -  first time ever in this country, to do something to help working families at the time you have a baby and with the costs of the baby and needing to leave work to look after your newborn.
That's why we stepped forward with more money into childcare than ever before and why we've moved to paying it fortnightly, because we understood that it was rough for families to pay all of that upfront and wait a long time to get government support back.
And it's why we're doing what we're doing today, building a new system which will better meet the needs of families for the times at which they've got to spend money buying the sorts of things we've looked at today, the school uniforms, the books, the pencils, the pencil cases. For the older kids the computer that they might work on when they're at home, or they might carry back and forth to school.
All of those things are costs for families and we want to help with those costs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on another matter Mal Brough has been, it's clear that he's had contact with Mr Ashby on the Slipper matter. Do you believe that that casts any doubt over his appropriateness as a candidate, or that if he runs it would cast a pall over his candidacy?
PM: Look, these are all questions for Mr Brough and for the Opposition. What I would note is that both Mr Brough and Mr Pyne have changed their stories about this matter and so I do think that the Opposition should be fully answering each and every question put to them on this matter.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) expect Mr Brough and Mr Pyne will be called by the Commonwealth lawyers to give evidence if they are not full and frank about what-
PM: -Oh, look, I'm not in the business, as Prime Minister, of dispensing legal advice. So, I can't help you with that question.
JOURNALIST: You talked about the money flowing through on the carbon tax and now you're putting money into people's pockets through this education Schoolkids Bonus. Are you trying to buy back support?
PM: The only thing this is about is getting money into the hands of families who need it.
We've got a system at the moment - we created it, never existed before Labor - to help people with the costs of getting the kids into school and during the school year.
We've found a better way to make sure people get money when they need it, that's what has motivated this Schoolkids Bonus today - that we're looking at actually on some families who have stopped to watch what's happening with this media conference  -  many of these families would find it pretty tough to buy all of the things out of these aisles to get the kids to school, that's what the money's for.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the state treasurers from New South Wales and WA have said the funding just isn't there for their states and they're saying, accusing you of providing false hope by bringing it forward to (inaudible)
PM: As Jenny Macklin and I announced last week, we will be funding launch sites in the budget a full year earlier than the Productivity Commission recommended. That's because we want to get on with the job of building a better system for people with disabilities and I'm looking forward to States and Territories joining us in that endeavour. We'll be asking them to step forward to host one of the launch sites.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Paul Howes said in his column this morning - and I know this will be a difficult question for you, but I'll ask anyway  -  he wrote-
PM: -Very, very last question.
JOURNALIST: He wrote in his column today that he believed that it had been the wrong things to do for the Labor Party to remove a leader and that that was why he would not be, he was very supportive of you because he thought I'm not going to make the same mistake twice. Do you think that it was a mistake in the first place?
PM: I've dealt with all of these questions a million times in the past. I'm not intending to today.
Thanks very much.



Former Australian Governor-General Major General Michael Jeffery AC CVO MC (Retd) has been appointed to lead the nation's fundraising efforts for The Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Trust.
The Trust aims to provide an enduring tribute to Her Majesty's dedication to public life through investing in charitable projects that will make a real and lasting impact on the lives of people throughout the Commonwealth.
The appointment of General Jeffery to spearhead national fundraising activities will help lift the profile of the trust.
General Jeffery will promote the work of the trust and encourage donations from businesses, communities, and individuals all around Australia.
General Jeffery's standing in the community and past service to the Queen make him well-suited to the role.
The trust, which was announced by Prime Minister David Cameron of the United Kingdom at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Perth in October, was launched officially on 6 February.
The Australian Government pledged up to $5 million to the trust in February as part of Australia's commemoration of the Queen's diamond jubilee in 2012. The Prime Minister has also written to the premiers and chief ministers of states and territories encouraging them to match collectively the Commonwealth's contribution.
Australians will be able to donate to the trust for the duration of the jubilee year, with disbursements from the trust to begin in 2013.
General Jeffery served as the 27th governor of Western Australia from 1993 until 2000 and the 24th governor-general of Australia from 2003 until 2008. His appointments as governor and governor-general followed a long and decorated career in the Australian army.
The Queen's diamond jubilee in 2012 represents the 60th anniversary of the Queen's accession to the throne and her time as head of the Commonwealth.
For further information about the Trust, visit: http://www.jubileetribute.org/. 



Can I start by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and in a spirit of reconciliation pay my respects to elders past and present, and we've listened again to a wonderful Welcome to Country.
Can I acknowledge that today is truly a bipartisan event. I'm here with the Leader of the Opposition  -  I'm red, he's always cross, so we're here together.
Had to do it  -  sorry.
Christine Milne, the Leader of the Greens is with us and, of course, Warren Truss, the Leader of the National Party.
I'd like to acknowledge the work done by the leaders of the Parliamentary Friends of Red Cross, Graham Perrett, of course from the Labor Party, Jane Prentice from the Liberal Party and Bruce Scott from the National Party. And Christine, herself from the Australian Greens  -  thank you for bringing parliamentarians in very great numbers together, not only to raise your voices about humanitarian concerns in this Parliament, but also to use your voices to amplify the voice of Red Cross to the Australian people.
And can I take this opportunity, through Michael and Robert and Joan, to say a very big congratulations to Red Cross for everything you do, for the communities across our nation and indeed the work of Red Cross around the world.
This was all very powerfully brought home to me during the days of natural disaster, whether you were in Queensland, you saw the Red Cross there helping people. When I went to Christchurch, you saw the Red Cross there helping people. When I went to Japan and saw the devastation following the tsunami, Red Cross was there helping people.
So right around our nation and around the world, we know that in times of the greatest stress and the greatest need, there are the people of Red Cross, so many of them volunteers out helping their fellow human being, out helping their fellow Australian.
And it makes you feel very proud as an Australian that there is that spirit of volunteerism and community care and concern in our country.
We see all of that during times of disaster and considerable stress, but we should never forget that on each and every day Red Cross is making a difference to someone's life in our nation.
During the course of 12 months Red Cross will, for example, provide around 800,000 breakfasts to kids going to school, kids who otherwise would start the school day without anything in their tummy, kids from the poorest of backgrounds, being helped each and every day through the marvellous work of Red Cross.
So thank you for everything you do, it's a great delight to join my fellow leaders and parliamentary colleagues here today to celebrate the work of the Parliamentary Friendship Group and Red Cross itself. 



The Gillard Government will deliver a$1.8 billion boost to family payments, new tax relief for business and lump sum allowances for struggling Australians as part of a new Benefits of the Boom package that will spread the benefits of the resources boom to all corners of our country.
The $3.6 billion package will deliver much-needed financial relief to families and businesses under pressure in our patchwork economy, through the following measures:
 * 	A boost in family payments for over 1.5 million families:
 * 	Families receiving maximum rate of FTB Part A with two or more children will receive an extra $600 a year, or an extra $300 a year if they have one child.
 * 	Families receiving the base rate of FTB Part A with two or more children will receive an extra $200 a year, or an extra $100 a year if they have one child.
 * 	More than a million Australians will benefit from a new lump sum Supplementary Allowance to help recipients of payments such as Parenting Payment and allowances, who will receive $210 a year for singles or $350 a year for couples.
 * 	Businesses will benefit from the introduction of a loss carry-back scheme, which will benefit up to 110,000 companies by up to $300,000.
The Benefits of the Boom package will be funded by re-directing Minerals Resource Rent Tax revenue intended for the company tax cut.
The proposed company tax cut has repeatedly been rejected by the Liberals and Greens.
The Government is not prepared to allow the opposition of the Liberals and the Greens to prevent Australian families and businesses from sharing in the benefits of the boom
The Government will therefore redirect the funds to families and company tax relief in a way that helps the economy and especially small businesses.
By providing families with extra money we are also providing a boost to the rest of the economy, especially the retail sector.
At the heart of this package is $1.8 billion in extra support for families through more generous family payments.
The Benefits of the Boom package also delivers tax relief to businesses facing challenges from our economy in transition through a newloss carry-back initiative.
Our economy is strong, we are bringing the Budget back into surplus and there is a mining boom - but it's not everyone's boom.
Many working Australians are struggling and feel it is harder for them to make ends meet.
This Budget will ensure the benefits of our strong economy and the mining boom are shared with all Australians  -  not just a fortunate few - to help with cost of living pressures.
It will do this while also returning the budget to surplus to build a buffer against global uncertainty and provide the Reserve Bank with maximum flexibility to cut interest rates if necessary like it did just last week.
The Benefits of the Boompackage will strengthen our economy by helping businesses struggling in the retail, manufacturing and other sectors due to the high dollar.
Tax Relief for Businesses
From 1 July, the Government will provide further tax relief for companies that report a loss through the introduction of a loss carry-back.
Currently businesses can carry forward losses to future tax years to offset their profits and therefore reduce their tax bills.
Companies that incur losses from 2012-13 will also be able to carry back those losses to offset previous profits so that they get a refund from tax previously paid.
This new initiative will support businesses facing challenges in our patchwork economy.  It will encourage businesses to invest and adapt, boosting productivity and strengthening our economy as it goes through a period of major transition.
The Government is also helping to improve incentives for Australia's 2.7 million small businesses to invest, helping to improve their cash flows
From 1 July 2012, small businesses will be able to instantly write-off each and every asset they purchase costing less than $6,500  -  a full deduction straight away, rather than waiting.
The first $5,000 of the cost of motor vehicles will also be able to be deducted immediately.
The Gillard Government is committed to further reforms of the business tax system, beyond the important new budget measure on loss carry-back and small business initiatives.The Government stands ready to deliver a cut to company taxes - fully funded by savings identified by the independent Business Tax Working Group on behalf of Australian business - if that's what the independent BTWG recommends and the Parliament agrees to support.
The final Business Tax Working Group report will be delivered to Government before the end of the year.
Boost to Family Payments
More than 1.5 million families will receive a boost to their Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A from 1 July next year.
All families that are eligible for FTB Part A will receive an increase:
 * 	Families receiving the maximum rate of FTB Part A with two or more children will receive an extra $600 a year, or an extra $300 a year if they have one child.
 * 	Families receiving the base rate of FTB Part A with two or more children will receive an extra $200 a year, or an extra $100 a year if they have one child. 
This assistance builds on the tripling of the tax free threshold, from 1 July this year, delivering tax cuts to all taxpayers earning up to $80,000
This is the largest increase in the history of the tax free threshold which will mean up to one million people will no longer need to fill in tax returns from 1 July 2012.
Supplementary Allowance
More than a million Australians will benefit from a new lump sum Supplementary Allowance to help recipients of payments such as Parenting Payment and allowances manage unexpected living expenses.
The payments of a total of $210 a year for singles or $350 a year for couples will be indexed by the Consumer Price Index to keep pace with inflation, will not be means tested and will be tax-free.
The lump sum payments will be paid twice yearly, starting in March next year - $105 per instalment for singles and $87.50 per instalment for each person who is a member of a couple.
This supplement will help people doing it the toughest who often don't have money at their disposal to help manage unexpected costs, like unforeseen car repairs or medical expenses.
The Government has always been committed to sharing fairly the benefits of the resources boom  -  every step of the way we have been opposed by the Coalition, who have voted to give tax cuts to mining billionaires, rather than Australian small businesses. 



The Gillard Government will deliver much-needed cost of living relief to millions of Australian households in the 2012-13 Budget, including a new Benefits of the Boom package.
Despite our strong economic fundamentals, many working Australians are struggling with cost pressures and find it difficult to make ends meet.
For some Australians electricity, rents and mortgages, the cost of groceries and petrol are putting serious pressure on family budgets.
This Budget will ensure the benefits of our strong economy and the mining boom are shared with all Australians to help with cost of living pressures.
The 2012-13 Budget puts in place a raft of measures to help people make ends meet, including:
 * 	increases to family payments;
 * 	a new Schoolkids Bonus to help families with the costs of a child's education;
 * 	cost of living support for people on allowances and payments such as Parenting Payment through a new Supplementary Allowance; and
 * 	in addition, from 2012-13 there will be tax cuts for all taxpayers earning up to $80,000, including a tripling of the tax-free threshold and increases in the pension for more than 3.4 million pensioners.
Some of these measures will be funded by the Benefits of the Boom package which will ensure the profits from the mining boom are spread to all corners of Australia.
These measures to help deal with the cost of living are good for families, pensioners and Australians on low incomes and will help make ends meet.
As well as this extra help for households, the Government will deliver a surplus that provides a buffer in uncertain global times and continues to give the Reserve Bank room to cut interest rates further if it needs to.
The Reserve Bank's cash rate is a full 300 basis points lower than when the Government came to office, in contrast to the ten rate rises in a row families experienced under the previous Liberal Government.
The current cash rate of 3.75 per cent is lower than at any time under the previous Liberal Government.
A family with a mortgage of $300,000 is now paying more than $3,000 a year less in repayments now than when the previous government left office. 
More help for families 
As part of the Benefits of the Boom package, more than 1.5 million families who receive Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A will receive a boost from 1 July next year.
All families that are eligible for FTB Part A will receive an increase:
 * 	Families receiving the maximum rate or part of the maximum rate of FTB Part A with two or more children will receive an extra $600 a year, or an extra $300 a year if they have one child.
 * 	Families receiving the base rate of FTB Part A with two or more children will receive an extra $200 a year, or an extra $100 a year if they have one child.
A new Schoolkids Bonus for Australian families
The Government is providing 1.3 million Australian families with children at school with a new cash payment to help make ends meet.
From next year, families will receive a new Schoolkids Bonus worth:
 * 	$410 for each child in primary school; and
 * 	$820 for each child in high school.
This new guaranteed payment will help the families of 2.2 million school kids pay for uniforms, books, school excursions, stationery, and other costs like music lessons and sports registration fees.
Because the payment is automatic and upfront, it means:
 * 	Parents don't need to keep receipts and wait until tax time to receive the payment  -  it's a guaranteed payment.
 * 	Parents will receive the full amount every time, so families won't miss out if they lose receipts.
 * 	The new Schoolkids Bonus will be paid to coincide with the start of Term 1 and Term 3.
The payment will replace the Education Tax Refund from 1 January 2013.
Under the existing system, 1 million families aren't claiming what they're entitled to  -  either claiming less than the full amount, or not claiming at all. That's 80 per cent of eligible families.
Replacing the old system with this new Schoolkids Bonus means one million families will receive more cash  -  a typical family will get more than $720 extra each year[1].
As part of the transition to the new Schoolkids Bonus, the Education Tax Refund for 2011-12 will be paid out in full to all eligible families as a lump sum payment in June.
Extra assistance for some of the most vulnerable Australians 
More than a million Australians will benefit from the introduction of a new lump sum Supplementary Allowance to help recipients of Parenting Payment and allowances manage unexpected living expenses.
The payments will be $210 a year for singles or $350 a year for couples, will be indexed by the Consumer Price Index and will be tax-free.
The lump sum payments will be paid twice yearly in March and September - $105 per instalment for singles and $87.50 per instalment for each person who is a member of a couple.
This supplement will help people doing it the toughest who often don't have money set aside to help manage unexpected costs.
Building on a strong record of tax cuts
From July 1 this year the Government is delivering a major tax reform that will more than triple the tax-free threshold and free over 1 million Australians from having to lodge a tax return from 2015-16.
This will mean that regular wage earners with incomes below the new tax free thresholds will get to keep all of their wages in their regular pay packets and won't have to lodge a tax return.
As a result of these reforms, from 1 July 2012, all taxpayers with income up to $80,000 will receive a tax cut, with most getting at least $300.
Further tax cuts will be delivered in 2015-16 for all taxpayers with incomes up to $80,000, with most receiving up to $85, on top of this year's tax cut. 
Increases in family payments and pensions
In addition to increases to Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and the new Schoolkids Bonus in this Budget, the Government will also deliver a $6.3 billion package over four years from 2011-12 of increases to payments to households as part of the Clean Energy Future Household Assistance Package of reforms. The maximum rates of pensions, allowances and FTB Part A will be increased by 1.7 per cent.
For example, full and part-rate pensioners and Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders will receive annual increases of $338 for singles and $255 each for couples, and families will receive further increases of up to $110 per child per year in FTB Part A and $69 per family per year in FTB Part B.
The Government's record boost to pensions  -  increased again this year's Budget  -  recognises that senior Australians have worked hard over many decades to make our country strong and deserve all the support we can provide.
The Government's historic pension reforms mean that since September 2009, pensions have increased by $154 per fortnight for singles on the maximum rate and $156 for maximum rate couples combined.
Single income families where the earner's income is between $68,000 and $150,000 will also receive a new Single Income Family Supplement of up to $300 per annum, to recognise that they will get less tax assistance than a dual income family on a similar income.
People holding an Australian Government concession card, or a Department of Veterans' Affairs Gold or White Card who have high home energy costs because they rely on medical equipment will also be able to claim the Essential Medical Equipment Payment of $140 per annum, in addition to any other assistance they receive.
Any low income households that do not receive enough assistance through tax cuts and increases to payments to cover their average expected price impact will be able to claim a new Low Income Supplement of $300 per annum.
From 1 January this year, the Government increased FTB Part A payments for families with teenagers aged 16 to 19 years in full time secondary school by up to $4,208 per year.
The Government also introduced Australia's first national Paid Parental Leave scheme, increased the Child Care Rebate from 30 to 50 per cent, and introduced the Schoolkids Bonus. 
		[1]This is based on a family with one child in primary school and one in high school, who did not claim the maximum Education Tax Refund in 2010-11.   



HOST: The Prime Minister is in Canberra and has been out selling the budget since dawn. Prime Minister you've had a massive day today, are you as sick of the word "surplus" as we are?
PM: No I'm not. I'm never going to get sick of the word "surplus".
HOST: Now Prime Minister it's not all about surplus though is it. You have spent some money. The average family is going to get some cash handouts. Some people are saying that's a bribe, but it's only a bribe if it works. Do you think people will change their vote over this?
PM: Hughesy, there is good news in the budget for people with families, people with kids. Particularly the Schoolkids Bonus, which we've been dealing with in Parliament today and believe it or not, the Opposition voted against it. So we want to get through to people before 30 June the first of their Schoolkids Bonus.
So around $410 if you have a child in primary school, $820 if you have got a child in high school and then it's going to become a regular feature of the system and you will get some in January and some in July each year to help you with those school costs, you know, the uniforms, the excursions, the school shoes, on and on the list goes. So we think that is some good news for families.
HOST: Could you put a clause in there that they only get the money if they vote for you?
PM: No Hughesy, we couldn't. That wouldn't be the right thing to do but I reckon it's the right thing to do to help look after some kids. You should try politics one of these days, Hughesy, you're wasted.
HOST: That's scary for all of us. Prime Minister, you have made some major cuts to foreign aid and to defence. Did you do that because you thought that would have the least impact on voters?
PM: Well I'm going to disagree with you about the word "cut", Todd. Foreign aid each and every year of this budget is going to go up. So have a look at the budget figures and you will see more and more and more money spent each year on foreign aid.
We are currently the 10th most generous nation in the OECD and we are going to end up the 6th most generous nation. So Australia I think can hold its head high.
We're doing great work around the world in, you know, child nutrition, in disaster relief. Right around the world we're making a difference.
We delayed by one year reaching our Millennium Development Goals. But more and more money is going into foreign aid under this budget and in Defence we made clear that there has been a whole range of changes in capability acquisition  -  when Joint Strike Fighters, for example, are going to become available and so that has led to some movement in our defence budget.
Yes, Defence had to make some contributions to savings in the budget too. But more is going on in Defence with capability acquisition than simply a budget question. There is a whole set of issues there we're working through.
HOST: So Prime Minister, why make savings in those two specific areas?
PM: Well we've made savings in those two areas but we've made savings right around the budget. So, there have been some additional imposts for higher income earners. We thought that's the right thing to do to be able to direct more money to people on low and middle incomes. And we have decided to not proceed with a company tax cut we wanted to give.
We're simply not going to get it through the Parliament because Mr Abbott is going to say no, you know, as usual. And the Greens were opposed to it in part as well. So some of that money has been redirected to spread the benefits of the boom to families through additional family payments.
And that's really to respond to the fact, you know, that our economy is strong, we're the envy of the world. You know, a lot of nations are in very difficult economic circumstances whereas here we have got a strong economy, we've got relatively low unemployment.
But many families, even in those circumstances are saying it's still pretty hard for me and I'm not seeing much benefit out of this resources boom. And so we want to make sure the benefits get spread fairly.
HOST: Now Prime Minister the budget is not the only thing that's been taking up your time over the last few weeks. After the Craig Thomson and Peter Slipper affairs have you just called everyone into your office and gone, "Ok guys, now's the time. Is there anything else I need to know about? Any more skeletons in the closet? I won't be angry but I want to know."
PM: No, I haven't used those words. I'm not sure I would have added the words, "I won't be angry" at the end of that sentence either.
HOST: Prime Minister obviously Mr Thomson and Mr Slipper have a right to the presumption of innocence but I will ask you a slightly different question about them. Your dog Reuben, if you were going away and you had to give your dog to one of them to look after for the weekend, which one would you trust?
PM: Well thank you for that question. Maybe I better go home and vox pop Reuben the dog and I'll come back to you with the answer next time I'm on the show. It's a bit like that, the octopus they use during the election campaigns, I could get two pictures and see which one walks towards.
HOST: That octopus is dead right now.
HOST: That's a cheerful note to end on I think Dave, well done, that's great.
HOST: Well Prime Minister, we still know you've got lots more to do tonight. So we'll let you go and try to fit some sleep in there somewhere. But thank you so much for your time tonight.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister good morning, thank you for joining us.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Okay, let's start with the $5 billion in cash handouts. Is this just a big bribe to win back voters?
PM: This is support for families, because around the nation so many people are thinking to themselves ‘I understand the economy is strong but gee I'm not feeling the benefits of all of that strength in my own life. Where's the mining boom when it comes to what's happening to me and my family?'
We do understand families are finding it difficult to make ends meet; electricity bills, costs of housing, getting the kids to school, and that's why we've moved to a Schoolkids Bonus to help people with the costs of getting the kids to primary and secondary school, and why we're also increasing family payments.
HOST: It sounds good for families, but some charity groups  -  St Vinnies, the Salvos  -  they say there's not enough in this budget for the most disadvantaged such as single families and those on the Newstart Allowance. What would you say to them?
PM: Well we've moved to add an allowance for people on Newstart, so they'll see and extra $210 per year as a bonus each year.
For people with kids, families, including single parents, they will see before 30 June money coming into their bank accounts, around $410 if you've got a primary school aged student, around $820 if your child is in high school, and that's to help families with all of the costs of getting the kids to school. And then we will also be increasing family payments, so if you've got two kids you'll see $600 extra.
HOST: Prime Minister, there are some broken promises in this budget. You've backed down on your company tax cuts, how can you blame Tony Abbott when you didn't even try to get it through the Parliament? Surely if you really believed in it you would have at least tried.
PM: Well I knew it wasn't going to get through so why go through the process when you absolutely know what the outcome's going to be. Mr Abbott always says no, and he had said no to a company tax cut.
He and his Coalition colleagues simply weren't going to vote for it, and of course they weren't going to change their mind. They were determined to say no. The Greens had indicated that they were opposed to this measure in part, so they weren't going to support it either. So, I could let that negativity win the day and stop us sharing the proceeds of the resources boom around the country, or I could act. I've determined to act, and we will share the benefits of the boom to families through extra family payments.
I'm also very determined to still deliver a company tax cut, and I have a process working with Australian businesses to help me do that through a tax working group we set up out of a big meeting on tax and tax reform we had in Canberra last year.
HOST: Prime Minister, with respect, you and your Government have lost credibility with voters after your backflip on the carbon tax. Add to that the recent scandals plaguing your Government. Is this budget enough to save you as leader and your Government?
PM: This budget is about what's right for our economy and how we can help families, pure and simple. We are bringing the budget back to surplus because that's the right thing for our economy now.
We are bringing the economy back to trend growth, the economy's going to be growing, and bringing the budget to surplus means we've got a buffer in case things get worse in the future.
We can protect jobs and it also means we're giving the Reserve Bank the maximum room to move on interest rates and people saw a very welcome interest rate reduction just last week. And I also, as we bring the budget to surplus, want to look after people who are doing the right thing, working hard, often finding it tough to make ends meet, and that's why there's new benefits for families in this budget.
HOST: Okay, just finally Prime Minister, the Independents Tony Windsor and Rob Oakeshott, they've indicated that they may vote with the Opposition to suspend Craig Thomson from the House of Representatives, a move that could really bring down your Government. How concerned are you about this and indeed, how concerned were you by that extremely damning Fair Work Australia report?
PM: Well first I'm very confident that the Government will go to the election at the ordinary time, in the second half of next year, and we'll get on with the job of delivering this budget, its surplus, its benefits for families, spreading the benefits of the boom and some important new things in the budget too, like launching the first sites for the National Disability Insurance Scheme, changing the aged care system so people get to stay in their own homes for longer, and also a public dental waiting list blitz because too many people have waited too long to get their teeth fixed.
So that's what's on my forward agenda. On the question of trade unions and the Fair Work Australia report, I want to say this very clearly. Overwhelmingly, trade unions in our country are professional, hardworking organisations doing the right thing by their members. But to the extent that a dollar of members' money is ever misused that's completely the wrong thing to happen, members' money should be used for proper purposes.
HOST: Alright Prime Minister Gillard you've got a big day ahead, we'll leave it there, thank you so much for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks Amelia. 



HOST: Let's see if we can find out some more answers to those questions, as I welcome to the program the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard. Good morning.
PM: Good morning Leon.
HOST: How very nice to have you on the program again.
PM: Good to be with you.
HOST: On time, as promised, is the bigger challenge actually writing a budget that delivers the surplus, or convincing Australians that it's for real?
PM: We're determined to deliver this surplus, we've been determined to make this a surplus budget and we have. And just to give you a feel of how determined we've been, in the forthcoming financial year 2012-13, since the last budget revenues into the Government have gone backwards by almost $10 billion.
So we could have said revenues have gone down by $10 billion, it's all too hard. But what we did instead was found savings so that we could still deliver a surplus. And across the four years of the budget, because you know, we publish the budget for next year and then the three years afterwards, across those four years we are saving $34 billion and that comes on top of $100 billion of savings that the Government's already delivered.
HOST: With that low tax revenue that you've just identified, which is of course a result of the Global Financial Crisis more than any other single factor, but with that low revenue along with the promised tax cuts for families, the cash payments for low income earners and a budget surplus at the same time, it seems to be something of a magic pudding. Where's the catch? Who's actually paying for the surplus?
PM: Well, it's the result of just working it through, doing the savings, $34 billion of them, and then making the choices we need to, to help families who are under a lot of pressure. I think one of the things in our economy now, you've just pointed to the global uncertainty and the Global Financial Crisis, that's certainly still having an impact and certainly still having an impact on revenues.
Another thing that's having an impact on revenues is we've got this big resources boom under way, that's fantastic, it means that there's a lot, indeed $450 billion of investment coming into the resources sector. But when mining's in the investment stage, then it's not paying a lot of company tax. So money's going in to building the new mines, but they're not actually mining and making profits yet.
So that's another thing that sort of has an impact on revenues. And then, you know, overall the economy's strong but there's this patchwork effect. Some sections of the economy are really feeling the pressure of a high Aussie dollar. So that all adds up to an economy where we do need the surplus, that's the right economic judgement, but around the nation many families are finding it pretty tough to make ends meet, and that's why we've got the package to spread the benefits of the boom and to help people with the costs of getting kids to school, the Schoolkids' Bonus.
Leon, there's one saving in here that people would have seen last night, and I want to be clear about. We were going to provide a company tax cut using the proceeds of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, it's clear that that was not going to get through the Parliament, the Coalition led by Mr Abbott is opposed to it, the Greens are opposed to it, so we're using that money to spread to families so that they've got some relief, and we'll keep working on a company tax cut with the business community through a working group process that we've set up.
HOST: Alright. When you say you're going to keep working on a company tax cut, it's been reported as having been dropped altogether but is it really more as if it's been postponed?
PM: I'm very determined to cut company tax. I wanted to do it by giving people the benefits flowing from the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, and I haven't been able to do that because of the negativity in this Parliament. So I'm looking to work on it another way, which is through a process we've already got in train from the tax forum we set up last year.
HOST: Is there a distinction to be made between breaking a promise and being prevented from keeping a promise by a hostile Parliament?
PM: If I can't get the legislation through I can't do it, and I wasn't going to let the negativity of Mr Abbott and the Coalition get in the way of me being able to spread to the Australian community the benefits of the resources boom. I think we should all share in those benefits so we found a different way to do it.
HOST: The idea of spreading the benefits of the boom, the recurring theme during the Treasurer's speech last night, certainly sounds appealing but I guess the detail is a little bit complicated. Just exactly who will be better off and by how much?
PM: Okay, I can certainly talk you through that. First, before 30 June this year, families with school children, so primary school, secondary school, who get Family Tax Benefit A, will see a Schoolkids' Bonus. So they'll get an amount of money, around $410 for a primary school student, $820 for a secondary school student, and that will become an ongoing feature of the system.
It'll be paid half in January and half in July each year, so back to school and then all the stuff you need for the second half of the school year. So families will benefit from that money. Then families will also see additional family payments from 1 July 2013. If you've got two children, that's worth $600. So they're the benefits that people should expect to flow. In addition, we already had coming through the pipeline some increases in family payments and pensions, and a tax reduction from 1 July for people who earn less than $80,000 a year.
HOST: Yes, I had a phone caller already call up and ask what do we get as old-age pensioners. I haven't been able to see anything in the budget for old-age pensioners, what do old-age pensioners get out of this budget?
PM: Old-age pensioners had the benefits, and continue to have the benefits of the historic rise we put into the rate of the pension. So the biggest adjustment to the pension that the nation's seen.
We've already delivered and then that gets indexed and continues to build, and then between now and 30 June people will see some money upfront to help them with carbon pricing. But for old-age pensioners the amount of money they will receive will be more than what they need to deal with the average impact of carbon pricing, which is kind of a long way of saying Leon, that they'll come out in front.
HOST: Are you and your government playing politics with Barry O'Farrell over funding for the Pacific Highway?
PM: Well I don't want to, I just want to get it done.
HOST: Because the budget has provided for around about $3.5 billion as a co-contribution amounting to 50 percent of the total funding, but the NSW Government is insisting the Commonwealth should pay more. If you can't come to an agreement what happens to the money?
PM: Well a deal on these roads is always a 50/50 deal. That's what the Minister for Transport has made clear and that's what the NSW Government should step up to.
HOST: You've been criticised for a lack of funding for other roads generally across NSW, is this one of the prices we have to pay in order to balance the budget?
PM: No, we are huge investors in infrastructure. We are continuing to deliver a $36 billion nation-building plan, and as a Government we've provided more into Sydney and more into New South Wales than was provided over the whole life of the Howard Government. So we're going to continue to be supporting infrastructure, supporting infrastructure in New South Wales. And I know how many problems there are there.
HOST: Absolutely. And of course one of the, or two of the items that might easily get overlooked in all of the discussion about a surplus and other features of the budget are two significant initiatives  -  the National Disability Insurance Scheme and also aged care reform. These are actually very large initiatives aren't they?
PM: Yes they are, and I thank you for asking me about them because I think, you know, snapshot out of last night, people see the surplus and they want to know what that's about, and of course that's about giving us a buffer for the future and making sure that the Reserve Bank has got the maximum room to move on interest rates should it choose to do so, and then people have looked about what's in it for families, so that's understandable.
But there's another big bit of the budget and you've just gone to it, which are big reforms that will make a difference for our nation's long-term future, a National Disability Insurance Scheme because we don't do as well as we should now for Australians with profound disabilities, people who need a lifetime of care, and we've put $1 billion into the budget to launch sites for the National Disability Insurance Scheme on 1 July next year. Now that's going to be sites where we launch, where we learn from, so that we can inform the rollout of what is a big, big reform and you need to get it right.
And then also in this budget is an aged care package which is all aimed at helping people stay in their homes for longer. And thirdly, there's a dental package too. We've got around 400,000 Australians on dental waiting lists and we're going to have a blitz to try and get through those waiting lists and to help people out.
HOST: As I understand it, that works through the existing state public dental systems, is that the way it works?
PM: That's right. That's right we'll be working with states to get that done, to get a blitz in place and we'll - there's also some measures in what is a package of a bit more than half a billion dollars to expand dental workforce because part of the problem, why are there waiting lists, well partly it's money and so we're going to put some more money in. Partly it's, you know, people who can do the work, who've got the skills to do the work.
HOST: And of course dental health could really be another area that should be considered for vast structural reform, shouldn't it, along the lines of disability and aged care. Dental health is something that's been under-resourced for far too long.
PM: I agree with that, and we want to keep working on it. We currently have a scheme called the Chronic Disease Dental Scheme, which this Government inherited, which is costing a lot of money, a lot more money than was originally thought when it was first created by the former government and isn't really meeting peoples' needs. We are trying to work on abolishing that scheme and using what is a large amount of money for a better provision of dental care. So we'll keep working on that, but as we do that work we're going to get stuck into the blitz.
HOST: You know, I know we're really pressed for time today but finally, this Government has really staked its reputation on achieving a surplus in this budget, but is it possible that we've rushed to a surplus too quickly, and the budget could exert a contractionary force on the economy as a result?
PM: No, no, I know some people think, you know, some people have raised that and maybe some people are worried about it, but with the budget coming to surplus we will still have an economy that is returning to trend growth, we'll have an economy that is growing, and that's why it is the right thing to return the budget to surplus. So we've got an economy that will be growing at more than 3 percent, now that means that we're in a very different position from nations around the world. You know, look at the US, look at Europe, we've got an economy that will be growing and so getting a surplus budget in a growing economy is the right thing to do.
HOST: Yes I'm fond of reminding people sometimes we forget how well off we are.
PM: I think, you know, when you do look around the world and you see some of the things in Europe, you know unemployment rates of more than 10 percent, more than 15 percent, young people who are never going to get that first job and never get a start in life, when you look over at our friends in the US struggling with an unemployment of more than 8 percent, it is pretty sobering, and we've all worked together hard to come out of the Global Financial Crisis as strong as we have.
Everybody's played their part. We did what we needed to do, through providing economic stimulus and supporting jobs, but so did lots of employers around the country and lots of trade unions worked well and worked cooperatively to save jobs. So I really think we should be very proud of what we've achieved together, and now's the time to build on it, and that's what the surplus budget's about.
HOST: And of course today must be the busiest day in your diary, so I'd better let you go. Thank you very much for your time today.
PM: Thanks Leon. 



HOST: It is budget wash-up day and on Triple J this morning we're very glad to have a special guest in the studio, who better to talk about Australia's finances than the person in the top job. Please welcome a good friend to the show now, been on a couple of times, Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
HOST: Good morning Prime Minister, thanks for being on the show.
PM: Good morning, a great pleasure.
HOST: Joining us from our Canberra studios, the ABC Canberra studios at Parliament House at the moment. Thanks for joining us.
OK, well first of all I think we have a question right off the back, the big story that came out of the budget  -  Alex Dyson.
HOST: The pig slaughter levy, Prime Minister. Jumping from $1.35 per head of pig to $2.25, a 60 per cent jump. Are you trying to get the swine vote?
PM: Let me explain this to you, I know it was the subject of grand fascination on Twitter last night. It is a levy that the industry asked for and it is not going to be passed through to consumers, so don't worry that the price of bacon, or your favourite pork chop is going up, because it's not.
HOST: OK, alright, well, we'll see. We'll just see Prime Minister.
HOST: Sam Kekovich could have something to say about it, I don't know.
HOST: We'll see what happens. OK, obviously we're a youth station so we're really interested in how this new budget, the 2012 budget affects young people, particularly students. This Newstart Allowance has just been announced, a lot of people hoping for major increases for students and young people who are going to uni and some reportedly living below the poverty line. Do you really think 60 cents a day, or the $210 a year Newstart Allowance is going to help students and unemployed people?
PM: Well, I think it will make a difference and let's look at the full sweep of what the budget is doing for students and for young people. First and foremost, we are continuing to lift our investments in education, universities, more than $5 billion more than they would have received if we hadn't moved to the new system of demand driven funding, so that they can expand places. That means around 150,000 more people are getting to go to university, many of them young people and many of them from poorer homes.
And we've changed the system of student income support, so that it better supports students, particularly regional and rural students and meets their needs.
At the same time, from 1 July we are tripling the tax-free threshold. That means that for a lot of young people who are in part time work, low paid work, they will no longer be in the tax system. They will be able to earn $18,200 and not pay any tax.
And in addition to that we've made a modest move to make a difference for people who are on Newstart.
HOST: A few of those students though, say maths and science students will be paying more to go to university, about double.
PM: We have made a change in an incentive scheme we had to studying maths and science. We found on the evidence that it's only made the most marginal difference to the number of people who are studying maths and science. Students who have been in that system will face a change for the forthcoming academic year, but they've had the benefits of that system for their earlier years of study.
And we are putting some resources in this budget to what we think will be better ways to encourage more people into studying maths and science, because we need all of those maths and science skills in so many jobs in our nation's future, but we also need people to get those skills at uni so that they can go maths and science teaching into our primary schools and high schools.
HOST: What about education at the primary and high school level, you've announced the Schoolkids Bonus, which is $120 per child at a high school and $410. That money goes directly to parents, not to schools, isn't that sort of initiative just to sort of buy votes from families and that kind of thing, isn't it?
PM: Well we've almost doubled the amount of money going into school education. So, whichever way you want to look school education, whether you want to look at school buildings, whether you want to look at school computers, whether you want to look at money to improve teacher quality, whether you want to look at more money going into-
HOST: -That's not what the Schoolkids Bonus does, that goes directly to parents-
PM:-No, but your point was shouldn't this be going to education and I'm explaining that in relation to that point we've almost doubled the amount of money going into education and, as we continue to invest so strongly in education right around the country, including into some of the most disadvantaged schools in our nation. Whilst we do all of that, we are also going to provide this Schoolkids Bonus. It's $410 for primary school students, $820 for secondary school students and it's to help with the costs of getting the kids to school, school uniforms, school shoes, school bags, pens, paper, excursions, all the rest of it. People with kids in schools-
HOST: -How do you know the money's going to be spent on those things though?
PM: Well, look, we've got Australian families who are out there every day paying the amount of money to get their kids to school and we want to give them a helping hand with it. This is replacing an Education Tax Refund system, which meant people had to keep their receipts and what we learned from that system is out of the 1.3 million families eligible for it, one million of them either weren't getting their entitlement at all, or they weren't getting it in full.
So it wasn't getting the money through to where it was needed, that's why we're moving to the new system.
HOST: Right, well a few people on our text line, Prime Minister, are worried about foreign aid, Wayne Swan referred to this as the battler's budget, but surely there are no bigger battlers than the recipients of Australia's foreign aid, which has been pushed back, despite election promises to the contrary.
Why do you think achieving a $1.5 billion surplus is worth, not only depriving these battlers, but also breaking that promise?
PM: Well we have made a change on foreign aid and I want to see us be a generous country around the world and we are. The change we've made is to do-
HOST: -We're one of the lowest contributors in the OECD.
PM: That is not the case. We are number ten in the OECD, on our way to number six in the OECD. That's the actual figures and we have already doubled the foreign aid budget and we are in the process of doubling it again, to more than $8 billion a year.
In these economic times, where our economy is strong in its fundamentals, but there are certainly pressures on and the government is not getting the same amount of revenue as it has in the past. We have made an adjustment of one year, so it will be one year longer before we reach our Millennium Development Goals.
But if you get out the Budget papers, each and every year you will see foreign aid increasing.
HOST: Britain is in recession at the moment and they're pushing bipartisanly for 0.7 per cent of GDP, our target of 0.5 has been pushed back that year. Do you think that that's enough?
PM: Well, we've made a decision in this budget to do the push back by one year, but of course I want to see foreign aid increasing and in this budget each and every year it increases compared with the last year.
So foreign aid is still continuing to increase.
HOST: On Triple J this morning, we're chatting to Prime Minister Julia Gillard about the budget at the moment. Finally Prime Minister, we've got Leader of the Opposition Tony Abbott calling in really soon, what about Indigenous Australians, if the Labor Government is so keen to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians in terms of life expectancy and education standards, why is Abstudy been cut down a bit in this budget and the Indigenous literacy and numeracy program worth $56 million been scrapped?
PM: What has happened there is that we've made some changes of program. Overall our investment into assisting Indigenous Australians, meeting our Closing the Gap targets, life expectancy, health, education, this Government has continued to invest in record amounts into assisting Indigenous Australians.
So, a program change, you don't want to let disguise from you the overall in the budget. We are investing in our Stronger Futures legislation; we are investing across the board in our Closing the Gap targets.
And we are doing more of that than any government in Australia's history.
HOST: Well Prime Minister Gillard, it's a very busy morning for you, so we appreciate you coming on Triple J very much. Thank you very much for dropping by.
Sorry we didn't get you to give away any prizes this morning, but you'd better get on to talk about the budget with many other people, so thanks so much for chatting to Tripe J, I know our listeners really appreciate it.
PM: Thank you very much and another time I'll come on and do the prizes.
HOST: OK, we'll get that next time. We'll lock it in.
HOST: Thanks Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Julia Gillard joins us, good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Eddie.
HOST: How are you?
PM: I'm very well indeed.
HOST: Prime Minister, I know you're doing 300 of these interviews so we won't muck around with you. On the Budget last night, can I just take you through as you've looked no doubt, for some reason when it gets to budget time it's carte-blanche for cartoonists, who take over the paper. And if I could just run you through in the Herald Sun today has you and Wayne Swan on the front, and their tone is that this is a budget to gamble to win votes back, The Age has got Wayne Swan in the Masterchef setup as if he's blown up the kitchen just to get a surplus regardless of anything else. I can't quite figure out theAustralian Financial Review, but The Australian has gone, they've got you with the hammer and sickle and the headline ‘Smash the rich, save the base.'
HOST: It's not like them at all.
HOST: No. Prime Minister, could I ask you what was the intention of this budget, when you go in obviously you've got all the different figures and things, what was the intention when you sat down to frame this budget six months ago with the Treasurer. What was it that you wanted to achieve?
PM: We wanted to achieve two things Eddie. We wanted to bring the budget to surplus because that's the right thing for our economy now. I think most people know we've come out of the Global Financial Crisis so much better than countries overseas.
We protected jobs, we didn't go into recession, and so we've got our economy returning to trend growth, and so you've got to get the budget into surplus. That gives us a buffer for the future, and it also means the Reserve Bank's got the maximum room to move on interest rates, and they moved last week and that's good news for Australian families.
So, surplus number one, then number two, spreading the benefits of the boom right throughout Australia. And this package, the budget, has been aimed to help families who are on low- to middle-incomes, who have got all of the costs of getting the kids to school, so that's why there's a new Schoolkids' Bonus - $410 for primary school students, $820 for secondary school students because the uniforms, the shoes, the pens, the paper, everything else costs so much money to get the kids to school. And there will be relief too in the form of increased family payments, so if you've got two children you'll get an extra $600 in those payments.
HOST: Prime Minister, we've had some callers this morning saying ‘yeah, that's great, we accept that and we're not going to hand that back, good on you, thank you for giving that', but was there a thought that maybe we need to, instead of giving $600 to every family, put that money collectively into schools as we had with the Education Revolution which despite all the criticism, when you drive around town and you see gyms up, and fantastic infrastructure put into schools, that this is maybe a better way of doing it. To push the economy going through and leave a tangible result, rather than $600 that will probably get paid on the gas bill?
PM: Well we're doing both, Eddie. I mean we've almost doubled the amount of money going into schools, and we're continuing to invest heavily in schools in this budget. So if you look across the life of the Government and into this budget, we've been huge investors in school education, early childhood education, big new skills package in this budget flowing from the last budget, you know, more apprenticeships, more opportunities for young people, and certainly more university places. We're growing our universities because we know that in the future economy people will need higher and higher levels of skill.
So we're big investors in skills, big investors in infrastructure, they're important to the long-term productivity and prosperity of our country, but right now too, we get it that around the nation people go ‘I understand the Australian economy is strong, I reckon it's a lot better than overseas, but as I sit in my home talking to my family, I don't feel like I'm a beneficiary of this resources boom. Where's this resources boom, it doesn't seem to be my boom.' So we want to share the proceeds of the boom with families who are struggling to make ends meet. So, if you've got a couple of kids, one in primary school, one in high school, between the school kids' bonus and the new family payments you can expect to see $1830.
HOST: Prime Minister, we've had a lot of calls this morning, it's a tough job the budget to try and please everyone. I think the most outraged that we've had on Triple M though has been over the increase in price in bacon. What have you done to bacon?
PM: Look my understanding here is-
HOST: It's a disgrace by the way. Absolute disgrace.
PM: I did understand that last night on Twitter this was a very interesting thing, out of all of the budget measures. My understanding is that there's a small increase in a levy associated with our pork industry, because they want to put some more money into research. So I don't think people need to get too anxious about the price of bacon.
HOST: Prime Minister, I think it's a lukewarm budget, personally I like the old days when the front of the paper the next day just simply said ‘Beers up, cigs up.' They were the best budgets in the history of the world. Can you deliver?
PM: I'm sorry I've disappointed you Mick by not putting the price of beer up, but no you can't write a ‘beer up' headline for this budget.
HOST: Prime Minister, we have to ask you as well, the budget comes out, these are the things that we want politicians to do and work and regardless of which side of politics you're on it could be one for business one for the families, that comes in ebbs and flows with the electoral cycle. But does it, do you just shake your head sometimes when you've got these other galahs in the Parliament that keep blowing things up around you and it just makes getting the job done that much harder when every day is hijacked by Peter Slipper or Campbell and these other clowns?
PM: I'm not much given to shaking my head, Eddie, I'm just someone who gets on with the job, and I've been very determined to work with Wayne Swan to deliver this budget. It's so important to our economy now and so important to families now, so I haven't let anything distract me from that, just getting on with the job.
It does frustrate me in the Parliament when we see negativity, and you know, more likely than not we see that coming from the Opposition where they just say no to everything. And I do note the Opposition's already out and about - just can't accept that our nation has achieved this remarkable thing, the surplus in these circumstances, so soon after the Global Financial Crisis, and despite continued turbulence in the global economy.
HOST: The big sell for you now is the carbon tax, Prime Minister. Every Herald Sun little caption today, alongside the families that have been picked out regarding their thoughts on the budget, everyone's carbon tax, carbon tax, carbon tax as we go into winter. How's the sell going to be on that to get people across the line? It's obviously a big thing the greening of Australia at the last election, and the election before that, but when it comes to actually forking out the dough people aren't that keen. How are you going to sell the carbon tax in the next little bit?
PM: I think a lot of fear has been generated and when people actually see what carbon pricing means, they'll see that the scare campaign was just that, a way of making them afraid, but not something informed by the facts.
In the coming weeks people will see increase in their family payments, people will see that turn up into their bank accounts, that's to support them as we move to carbon pricing on 1 July, and then if you earn less than $80,000 a year you'll see a tax cut from 1 July, and what that all adds up to is millions of families will actually come out in front because they've received more through increased family payments or tax cuts, or for older people pension increases, than the impact of carbon pricing on them.
HOST: Prime Minister, I like the significance of a surplus at a time in Europe where there isn't any austerity measures getting through, but the Opposition will say that that only exists in some Treasury computer and the likelihood of it actually coming to fruition is zero. How accurate can you be with the numbers?
PM: When you look at the budget, I mean I'd expect the Opposition to be negative so let's just, you know, accept that and put that to one side, that's definitely going to happen, but our determination to return the budget to surplus I think should be measured against this. We're returning the budget to surplus in the coming financial year in 2012-13.
Since last budget, the amount of revenue we're getting in that financial year has gone down by almost $10 billion, and instead of just saying ‘well let's give it all away, you can't get a surplus in a circumstance where revenues are going down by almost $10 billion', we said no, we're still going to get the budget to surplus, we've made $34 billion of savings across the full budget period  -  four years  -  and that builds on top of $100 billion we've done in the past, and $11.5 billion of savings we did late last year in the mid-year outlook.
So we have been incredibly determined, incredibly focussed, to make the tough decisions necessary to get the budget to surplus.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for joining us this morning.
PM: Thank you very much Eddie.
HOST: We'll let you go and talk to all the other nice, quiet interviewers who'll wrestle you over every decimal point and all the rest of it, we can read all this. All our listeners understand where it is because they are the ones who feel it every day with their families. Is there one line you can leave on the way out to the next interview that you'll be doing right around the country for the people on Triple M, 25-54 demographic, number one in the ratings in Melbourne, but the point I'm making there is that they're driving to work this morning and they want to know what this Government's doing for them. Can you just leave them with one last statement for them?
PM: One last statement, for the people listening to you Eddie, that we're bringing the budget to surplus, that's good for the economy, good for jobs and growth, and we're putting more money into their family budgets because we understand so many of them are doing it tough.
HOST: Thank you Prime Minister.
PM: Thanks very much. 



HOST: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: A busy day, obviously, talking about the budget, and it's been described by the Treasurer Wayne Swan as ‘Labor to its bootstraps.' Let's have a look at where the cuts will be. There will be cuts to AusAID, there will be cuts to police recruitment, jobs in defence going, scrapping Indigenous literacy and numeracy programs, and of course 4000 public services jobs to go.
That doesn't sound like Labor to the bootstraps to me, Prime Minister.
PM: Well it is Labor to the bootstraps, I don't think some of those savings have been properly described but rather than get into those details let me explain to you why it's Labor to the bootstraps.
It's a budget that delivers what our economy needs now, which is a surplus, that's a remarkable achievement given we so recently were in the days of the Global Financial Crisis and there's still turbulence in the global economy, and it's the right thing to do to give us a buffer for the future and also to make sure the Reserve Bank's got the maximum room to move on interest rates, because I think we all know what a difference interest rate reduction like the one last week makes for families.
HOST: Yes.
PM: So it's Labor to the bootstraps because we're taking the proceeds of the mining boom and delivering it to families who need that money through a Schoolkids' Bonus and through increased family payments.
HOST: 4000 public service jobs though, more unemployment?
PM: Well this will be achieved largely through natural attrition, and given the size of the public  service it's a relatively modest change. I'm not suggesting that won't make it difficult for some public service departments to make the decisions they need to, but given the imperative for our economy and our nation of returning the budget to surplus, we did need to make some tough choices. But as we've made those choices we've protected frontline services for Australian families.
HOST: Prime Minister, the Opposition Treasury spokesman Joe Hockey has accused you of not really delivering a surplus. It's a surplus in name only. Things like the National Broadband Network are off the budget in the books to create the appearance of a surplus. What do you have to say?
PM: Well that's a ridiculous claim by Joe Hockey. Look, I expect Mr Abbott and Joe Hockey to be relentlessly negative about this surplus. I expect them to try and, you know, distract from the remarkable achievement it is for our nation to get into surplus so quickly after the Global Financial Crisis. On the specifics of the National Broadband Network, there's been no change in this budget on the way the National Broadband Network is treated in the budget papers, and to try and claim so is simply wrong.
HOST: Prime Minister, the Government in itself, the running of the Parliament and your Government over the last couple of months, it's become a shambles. We've had the Speaker stand aside, we've had Craig Thomson, you've essentially expelled him as a member of the ALP, he's sitting on the crossbenches.
Isn't it time you gave the people of Australia the opportunity to judge this Government and call an election?
PM: Well we'll have an election in the second half of next year, on the right time for an election, three years after the last election. In the meantime this Parliament is getting on with the job.
What's perhaps less remarked upon publicly is that we've passed 300 pieces of legislation, many of them nation-changing pieces of legislation, which will set us up to be a stronger and more prosperous nation in the future. And then we're delivering a budget that's right for the economy now with a surplus, but also right for families now, and don't forget we're building for the future in this budget too.
HOST: Don't you think you have a responsibility to the Australian public, and overwhelmingly they are asking for another election. We've had text messages by the dozens this morning and I'm sorry to say none are positive about the current setup. They want another chance to vote, because they think the way it's operating at the moment is a shambles.
PM: Well I do have a responsibility to the Australian people, a responsibility to keep the economy strong and bringing the budget to surplus is the clearest sign of a strong economy. A responsibility to those families who sit in a great state like yours, and they know that there's a mining boom and they know that there are people making a lot of money, but they say to themselves, ‘gee where's my share?'
Well, through our family payment increases we're directly giving them a share of the mining boom, funded by the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. And it's my responsibility to keep building for the future, and in this budget we've got an aged care package to make a difference for people who are older and want to stay in their own homes. We've got a down-payment on the National Disability Insurance Scheme which will make a difference for Australians with disabilities and their carers who love them so much.
HOST: Alright, we'll see what the fallout is from the budget this morning. Thanks for talking to us this morning.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins me now. Good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Kochie.
HOST: It is a remarkable effort to turn a $44 billion deficit into a $1.5 billion surplus. Tony Abbott says you're cooking the books, where's the money coming from?
PM: Well I'm not surprised by Mr Abbott's relentless negativity, because he doesn't want to acknowledge what is a remarkable achievement for our nation. We have been through the global financial crisis, we protected jobs, and now we have done this turnaround in the budget.
We built this on savings, we've done $100 billion of savings in the past, $11.5 billion at the mid-year update, and then of course in this budget $34 billion of savings to bring the Budget to surplus, but we've done that by protecting frontline services and actually making choices to give families more money in their hands.
HOST: On this day last year you were telling us we could expect a $22 billion deficit, it came in at 44  -  double. Why should we believe you can deliver a surplus? Your track record hasn't been good in the last 12 months?
PM: Well the figures in this budget show how determined we are to deliver a surplus. Since we delivered last year's Budget, the revenues for the year in which we're delivering a surplus, the next financial year, have gone backwards by almost $10 billion.
So to keep delivering a surplus in that year, we've been swimming strongly against the tide, finding savings, that's how determined we've been. And this financial year, Kochie, has had some very unusual factors in it.
HOST: But they could still occur in the next 12 months and those revenues could continue coming down.
PM: No, but the unusual factors this year, Kochie. It's not every year you're dealing with the aftermath of the most expensive natural disasters the nation's ever seen.
Yes, continued volatility in the global economy made a difference too, but the impact of natural disasters was still showing.
HOST: Alright, the benefits of the mining tax, you're switching away from business to families. Is that an attempt to buy back your traditional Labor voter, who has been spooked by the carbon tax? This carbon tax bogey is hanging over every Australian family.
PM: This is about one thing and spreading the benefits of the mining boom to the Australian community. Out there there are many families who understand our economy's strong in its fundamentals, who know we came out of the global financial crisis better than the US and better than nations in Europe, but they sit at home and they say ‘It doesn't feel like my boom. I'm still struggling to make ends meet. I'm still worrying about the bills.'
So here is some help for families, through the Schoolkids Bonus, because having the kids at school is an expensive thing, all of the things that they need and then through extra payments for families through our family payment system.
HOST: Business is a bit narky, not getting the tax cut, because that tax cut was meant to compensate them for the increase in compulsory superannuation. So they're saying alright, we're not getting the cut, so will you delay the compulsory superannuation until we get some cut in the future?
PM: I want to deliver a company tax cut, what's stopped me doing that is I knew I wouldn't be able to get the legislation through the Parliament behind us.
HOST: So you're blaming Tony Abbott and the Greens for that?
PM: Well the numbers in the Parliament, Mr Abbott was going to vote against the company tax cut, the Greens were going to vote against the company tax cut. It was doomed to fail. So I wasn't going to let Mr Abbott's negativity stop our nation sharing the benefits of the mining boom, so we're flowing that to families.
But for businesses we're going to keep working with them on a company tax cut, we've got a business tax working group, we've got identified savings there to work on, we haven't taken any of those savings and they can help back in a company tax cut.
HOST: Can you guarantee them they will not have to increase superannuation payments to their staff until they get a company tax cut? Like your promise this time last year.
PM: I can guarantee them that we will work this year with them, through the Business Tax Working Group to try to get a better system of business taxation, which means we can reduce the company tax rate.
What I can also say about superannuation is it's being phased in very, very slowly, to the end of the decade.
HOST: A lot of singles are saying ‘There's nothing in it for me. Why should I keep working, paying my tax to support families with kids?'
PM: Well there's things in it for young people and singles. We've got a new allowance for the young and the needy, particularly unemployed people, students and young people who tend to work part time are going to benefit from the tripling of the tax free threshold, which means you can earn $18,200 and not pay any tax. And many kids who are balancing up uni, or a bit of work, bit of study, apprentices, are in that kind of bracket of income.
HOST: It has the smell of an election budget. It could be, it could come quicker than you expect. Rob Oakeshott, Tony Windsor, wavering with their support, given Craig Thomson affair, are you concerned about that? Have you talked to Windsor and Oakeshott?
PM: Look, we saw all of this stuff dealt with in Parliament yesterday, but our focus has been on the Budget and on making sure we deliver the surplus because it's the right thing for our economy-
HOST: -But if they push for Mr Thomson to leave, an election comes on.
PM: Well, I'm not anticipating that happening, Kochie. I don't think that is going to happen, but what's driven us in the budget is the economic need to have a surplus, to have a buffer, in case the global economy turns down, to take pressure off the Reserve Bank to give them the maximum room to move on interest rates, whilst spreading the benefits of the mining boom to families. That's what it's all about.
HOST: OK, thank you for joining us Prime Minister.
PM: Thanks Kochie. 



HOST: Prime Minister, welcome. The centrepiece of this Budget is a $5 billion boost for families. Is this really about winning back the Labor heartland worried about the carbon tax?
PM: It's about getting money to families, because they're under pressure and we want to assist them. The money that's going to families is going in two ways, through the Schoolkids Bonus, so that's a better way of helping people with the cost of getting the kids to school than the Education Tax Refund and it will mean that people will see some money before 30 June,  and then in January and June each year after afterwards.
HOST: That's the point  -  before the carbon tax comes in, they're getting a hit of cash. How much of this is about easing those concerns?
PM: It is about getting families money in a better way. I'd remind you that the Ken Henry tax review recommended changing the Education Tax Refund. We created the Education Tax Refund to help families with the costs of getting the kids to school and what we now know, because the system's operated for a few years, is of the 1.3 million families eligible, a million of them aren't getting their entitlement at all, or aren't getting it in full, because it's just proving too hard for people get the receipts, or maybe they don't know about it, or maybe if you get an accountant to do your tax return you make the claim, but if you struggle through the tax pack yourself you don't.
So we want to do it in a fairer way, to make sure people get the money and that is what is prompting-
HOST: But I also remember at the last election Tony Abbott wanted to extend that Education Tax Rebate to cover private school fees and you were critical of that at the time. Now there's no strings attached, parents can spend it on whatever they like.
PM: Well, we wanted to be clear about the purposes of the funds and Mr Abbott was talking about that at the last election. Though isn't it a little bit odd, David, that at the last election a Labor idea  -  helping people with the cost of getting the kids to school, was one Mr Abbott wanted to build on. But now he wants to take his reckless negativity and stop families getting money that they need before the end of this financial year, I mean that's his approach.
How can he wreck something as needed as getting more money into a family's budget?
HOST: His criticism is that it's just a cash splash, he may have alternative ideas on this.
PM: Mr Abbott's got to get off Sydney's north shore and go and talk to some real families and get himself in the real world.
David, have you ever met anyone  -  you're a man who knows a lot of people with young kids  -  have you ever met anyone who said to you ‘I've sent my kid to primary school all of this year and I've spent less than $410 doing it.' Have you ever met anybody who's said that to you?
No, you've met lots of people here in Canberra and around the nation, who have talked to you about the thousands that it costs them to get the kids to school and how they worry about paying for the excursions.
HOST: Sure.
So let's not have any of this nonsense that somehow the money isn't going to support families who are paying for their kid's education. People do spend more than that.
HOST: But I've also met a lot of people who are concerned about the plight of the school system, public schools in particular, and you've talked a lot about this over the years. This year the Gonski Review, which you launched, the call for a $5 billion increase in school funding, why couldn't you put this $2 billion, instead of just into the hands or the pockets of parents, target it to the school system?
PM: Because we're capable of doing more than one thing at a time. We've almost doubled the amount of money going to school education  -  almost doubled.
There are things happening in our schools today, as a result of our reform programs that never happened in the past. No one in the former Howard Government, of which Mr Abbott was a part, ever bothered themselves to think about disadvantaged kids and their education.
We have made a huge difference  -  national curriculum, quality teaching, more money into disadvantaged schools, the transparency of MySchool, the capital of Building the Education Revolution, the computers, the trade training centres, and that work will go on.
But at the same time as that work goes on we can help families in a practical way as they puzzle over whether or not they can afford to pay for the school excursion for their child.
That's why we want to get this money to them and Mr Abbott is so negative, so negative and so destructive. He wants parents who would need that money in their family budget, from having it, and he's got this ridiculous argument about cash splash.
Well, you know, $410 for a primary school student, $820 for a secondary school student, everybody who knows anything about families knows that getting the kids to school costs more than that. What we're trying to do it give a bit of help along the way.
HOST: Prime Minister, business are doing it tough at the moment. Now these are the wealth generators, the job generators in our economy, they're struggling many of them with the high dollar, the carbon tax is coming in as well. Now they're not they're not going to get the company tax cut you promised either. There's not a lot of them in this Budget, is there?
PM: Well there are things for them in this Budget, but on the company tax cuts specifically, I do want to deliver a company tax cut. I wanted to use the proceeds of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax to deliver it and it became abundantly clear that the legislation wasn't going to get through the Parliament, once again a cost of Mr Abbott's negativity, he always wants to say no, so something that you would have though the Liberal Party always believed in  -  reducing company tax  -  he said no.
HOST: Just on that. If it was part  -  really part  -  of the mining tax package, why didn't you attach it to the legislation, like you did with some of the other mining tax goodies, the superannuation increase. Why wasn't this demanded as part of the overall legislation, deliver a company tax cut?
PM: I don't know what difference you would have thought that was going to make, David, if we're in a Parliament-
HOST: It would have meant the Greens and independents have to vote either for, or against, the whole thing, the mining tax and the company tax cut.
PM: I think you're wishing away some practical things like the ability of people in the Parliament to move amendments to legislation to delete sections. So I don't think you can really say that would have made any difference.
The process isn't what's mattered here. It's not the process, it's the outcome and the outcome is Mr Abbott is so negative that even though the Liberal Party's always believed in reduced company tax, he's said no.
Well, I've accepted we won't be able to get the company tax legislation through the Parliament, but I still want to reduce company tax, which is why we will keep working with the Business Tax Working Group.
You would have noticed that in this Budget some of the savings that have been talked about in that group haven't been taken. They are available for the business community to work with us, to get a consensus package, a revenue neutral package, which means we do business tax in a better way and we cut the company tax rate.
HOST: So it has to be revenue neutral?
PM: Yes, it does.
HOST: Okay, so it'll have to be-
PM: And that's always been clear in the Business Tax Working Group work.
HOST: Alright, so if they're going to take a company tax cut, they'll have to give something as well, whether it's-
PM: And that's always been clear, revenue neutral, that that is a productive way forward for businesses who want to see us achieve a company tax cut and I want to see us achieve a company tax cut.
So I couldn't do it this way, I'm going to look and try and find another way to do it, and in the mean time I'm not going to let Mr Abbott's negativity stop me spreading the benefits of the mining boom around the nation, so families are going to benefit.
But you did say in your question there's not much for business in this Budget can I just very quickly pick you up on that. Businesses from 1 July, small businesses will see the benefit of the $6,500 instant asset write off. That's in part been funded from the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. You buy new equipment in your business and reduce your taxable income as you do so.
And they're going to see the benefits the loss carry-back arrangements-
HOST: Only 110,000 businesses will, according to your figures, will access that. 770,000 would have got the company tax cut.
PM: Well, we've looked at the eligible population and we think 110,000 will access it, but they will be businesses that are trying to change as our economy changes, because of the high Australian Dollar.
And can I just say too, retail's had problems because of the cautious consumer, so what we do to support families flows through into, you know, exchanges at the checkout in businesses, so that's good for business too.
HOST: Can I turn to the budget bottom line. For this current year that we're in, the forecast originally was a $22-$23 billion deficit; it's now blown out to $44 billion. For the coming financial year you've forecast a narrow surplus at $1.5 billion. How confident can we be that that's really going to be achieved? Will you do whatever it takes to protect that surplus, even if conditions worsen?
PM: Well we certainly will protect the surplus and to give you an idea of how much we're prepared to protect the surplus, in the forthcoming financial year 12-13, where we've budgeted a $1.5 billion surplus. In the last Budget til now, revenues for that financial year have gone down by almost $10 billion.
So even with revenues going down, we've worked to find the savings to protect the surplus, that's how determined we are.
That's part of a savings package across this Budget of $34 billion. That builds on top of $100 billion of savings in the past, $11.5 billion at the mid-year update.
HOST: And you'll go further if you have to, with more spending cuts, tax increases if you have to?
PM: We are determined to deliver a surplus now. I don't want you to set hares running, the Budget is there and it's there for all to see-
HOST: That you're committed to this.
PM: We're committed  -  well, proof of the pudding, we had people  -  including Mr Abbott and others, chanting at us for months  and months and months ‘It'll never happen, never happen, won't be in the Budget, won't be in the Budget.'
There it is, in the Budget. And now, of course, they turn their negativity in a different direction.
What really should be said, is that this is a remarkable achievement for the Australian nation, so quickly after the global financial crisis and in days where there's still some global economic uncertainty.
As a nation we should be proud of this, just the same way we should be proud of our track record of working together during the global financial crisis to keep people in jobs.
HOST: A couple of others just quickly. On foreign aid, we've apparently got a world leading economy that we're not going ahead with the promised increase in foreign aid as scheduled. Does that mean our bid for the UN Security Council seat is dead in the water?
PM: Well keep pursuing our bid for the UN Security Council, but I think we need to be a bit clear about, people are wandering around saying cuts to foreign aid. Well I'd invite you to get out the Budget papers and you'll see foreign aid going like that, across the Budget papers-
HOST: It would have gone a lot more, it would have gone $3 billion more.
PM: Every year, every year, more money spent on foreign aid than the year before. Every year. So foreign aid expenditure is going to continue to go up.
HOST: Just not as much as you promised.
PM: We've moved the end goal of the Millennium Development Goals by one year. But let's be clear, I mean compared with when we came to office, foreign aid is already $2 billion more. It'll be $2.6 billion more, it's going to keep going up.
So we are a nation generous be the standards of the world, we can hold out heads up high. We're already number ten for generosity in the OECD and we're moving to number six.
HOST: And just finally Prime Minister, away from the Budget, the ongoing saga around Craig Thomson. Tony Windsor and Rob Oakeshott, the independent MPs, are now saying they're really concerned about this and considering their options when it comes to Craig Thomson's presence in Parliament. Does that worry you. 
PM: Well look, we're getting on with the job of delivering the budget and I'm very confident that we will deliver the budget legislation.
On Mr Thomson, I made a decision that Mr Thomson should sit on the crossbench and he is now doing that, he is no longer participating in the Labor Party.
HOST: But his vote is still propping up the Government, it's crucial to keeping you in power. Should he be in Parliament?
PM: Well we've, I'll just remind of the following things. We've never in the nation's history, in a Parliament, excluded someone from voting because they are the subject of allegations that they deny. Mr Abbott has never applied that standard to himself, indeed in this Parliament, the one we're sitting in right now, since the 2010 election he has accepted a vote from someone who was charged with, and subsequently found guilty of, theft and assault.
So you know, let's be clear, this is a standard Mr Abbott has never believed in in the past and he's on the track record of quotes, of statements in the past, how much he doesn't believe in this and how much people should be given the benefit of the presumption of innocence. And this is political convenience-
HOST: But Craig Thomson has been found by the independent umpire. You kept telling us just wait for the independent umpire, Fair Work Australia, to make a ruling. It's now found he did spend union members money inappropriately, including on escort services. What more do you need?
PM: Well there's a few issues here. For me the appropriate decision was for Mr Thomson to no longer participate in the Labor Party and that-
HOST: Well he says that was his decision.
PM: Well, certainly I made that decision and spoke to Mr Thomson. So that decision's been done, Mr Thomson no longer sits with the Party in the Parliament and that is appropriate.
Then, of course, you're asking me about Fair Work Australia and its inquiry. As a Labor person, as someone who's worked all of their adult life in promoting fairness and decency in workplaces, I don't want to see $1 from a working person misused by a trade union, not $1.
HOST: Were you appalled by what you read in that report?
PM: Of course I'm deeply, deeply disturbed by it. I don't want to see workers money misused. We've got a trade union movement that is overwhelmingly decent, hardworking, professional, doing the right thing by their members.
But to the extent that $1 has ever been misused, then that is a great wrong and should not have happened. For Mr Thomson he continues to deny these allegations, the process will now move to giving him a day in court, he is entitled to that day in court.
For the Parliament, David, are we really going to move to a system where someone who can get a majority on the floor can kick out another member and stop them voting, because they are the subject of allegations that they deny?
I mean, can you imagine, in this Parliament in the past, when we had majority government, sometimes with very big majorities, for example the Howard Government after the 1996 election, are you really saying we should have a system that the then Howard Government with its big majority should have been able to suspend or expel 20 or 30 Labor Members? Is that where we're going?
Well, it doesn't work, it's not right. It can't possibly happen like that. Members are elected to the Parliament, there are proper processes for dealing with allegations and those processes should go through to their end.
And Mr Abbott should knock off the hypocrisy of trying to apply to us a standard that he has never applied to himself.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins me now. Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Paul.
HOST: Prime Minister, you've been selling the budget on the east coast for a few hours now, what's been the reaction?
PM: I have been speaking to people about the budget and explaining that we're bringing the budget to surplus this year, and why that's the right thing for our economy. And that we're spreading the benefits of the resources boom. So far I think people have just been pretty interested to try and get to grips with the details of it. It's a lot of information that comes out in Budget Night so I'm not surprised that we'll spend today and a number of days to come just taking people through the details.
HOST: Given that the deficit estimate in the last estimate was wrong by $22 billion, why should the public have any confidence that you're predicting this year to squeak into surplus by  -  this next financial year  -  by just $1.5 billion?
PM: Paul if I could just give you one measure of how determined we are to achieve this budget surplus. In the financial year to come, 2012-12, where we've budgeted the surplus, since the last budget revenues have gone backwards by almost $10 billion. So in the face of that we could have said it's all too hard, but what we've done instead is we've found savings so we still deliver a surplus, indeed we've found savings of $34 billion across the full budget and that builds on $100 billion of savings we've already delivered.
In the financial year we're in now there were some special factors that made a big difference to the budget. It's not every year that you need to cater for the aftermath of the most costly natural disasters in economic terms the nation's ever seen, and of course we saw continued turbulence in the global economy as well.
HOST: That, those cuts, I must say, are one of the things in the budget that puzzles me a bit, because they are very big cuts. Almost unprecedented in recent times. It's about the same amount of money that stimulus you put into the budget to get us over the GFC time. Don't you run the risk when you pull that much out of the economy that you're likely to limit or even stall growth?
PM: No you don't, because if you go to the budget papers and you say well what is Treasury forecasting is going to happen in our economy, and these forecasts are broadly the same as what the Reserve Bank says and what the International Monetary Fund says, they tell us that our economy will be returning to trend growth  -  3.25% growth  -  and that is with us implementing this strategy of having a budget surplus. And the budget surplus is important because it does give us a buffer for the future and it's also important because it enables the Reserve Bank to have the room to move if it decides to reduce interest rates.
Now it does that independently of Government, but we all know when the Reserve Bank chooses to reduce interest rates it does make a big difference for families. So, you know, someone on a $300,000 mortgage is paying around $3000 less a year on that mortgage than when we came to government.
HOST: There are certainly lots of handouts and tax redistributions to the less well-off in this budget. When the Howard Government made a practice of handing out inducements to people like that it was on the proceeds of established big surpluses. You're actually throwing the cash around when you haven't even succeeded in bringing in a surplus yet. Is that responsible?
PM: Well we've taken a very responsible approach to supporting the needy, and low- and middle-income families even as we bring the budget to surplus. And Paul, I'm a Labor Prime Minister, I'm never going to utter a word of apology for putting the needs of low- and middle-income earners first, that's what we do, we're a Labor Party.
And so in doing that we've brought the budget to surplus, but we are going to deliver to people who have got kids in school and who are entitled to family payments, we're going to deliver to them a Schoolkids Bonus to help with the costs of the school uniforms and the shoes and the excursions and the list goes on and on and on.
So people will see the first of those payments - $410 for a primary school student, $820 for a secondary school student  -  before 30 June this year. And then we have moved, Paul, into a different way of spreading the benefits of the resources boom, the benefits that come through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
We were hoping to be able to deliver some of that revenue to companies in the form of a company tax cut, because of the negativity in the Parliament House I'm sitting in we can't get that through the Parliament, so what we'll do is we will use that revenue to increase family payments and to give some support to the most needy in our community and I'll keep working to deliver a company tax cut in a different way.
HOST: There's no doubt a lot of people get quite a lot of money, a lot of less well-off people get quite a lot of money out of this budget without having to do anything extra to get it. Is that a Labor value?
PM: Well I think working with families who, you know, people work hard, they do the right thing, they, you know, go to their place of employment every day and knock themselves out to do their job as best as they can. They're there taking the kids to school every morning trying to bring them up the best possible way they can. They're under a lot of pressure in terms of costs. I think it's the right thing to do to say to those families on low- and middle-incomes we're going to give a helping hand too.
HOST: Yeah sure, but does it make our economy more productive by giving people money for doing nothing?
PM: Well when you look at the budget overall, we have been big investors in the drivers of productivity so this is not an either/or choice. We are big investors in skills and you see that in these budget papers. The new skills package I negotiated with all of the premiers and chief ministers, including Premier Barnett. We are huge investors in universities and growing university places. We've almost doubled the amount of funding in school education, we're investing in early childhood education so kids come to school ready to learn and get the most out of primary school. So all of that is in the budget too as we help families.
HOST: Prime Minister, the Liberals have said that they will oppose the Schoolkids Bonus, Joe Hockey said that explicitly last night. Would you be happy for that to go through the House of Reps on the vote of Craig Thomson?
PM: Well I want to deliver this money to families and so I'm determined to get it through the Parliament and I just have to say, you know, I'm dismayed that the Opposition would be so negative as to stand in the way of giving families a bit of relief.
HOST: On the Schoolkids Bonus, why shouldn't families claiming the tax deduction for their children's education expenses be required to provide evidence that they've spent the money in that fashion? Don't other taxpayers deserve to have that level of accountability?
PM: Well two things to that Paul, we are creating this Schoolkids Bonus to replace what has been the Education Tax Refund system, that's been a system where you keep your receipts, you hold them all the way til tax time, you do your tax return and put your receipts in and then you get the money back. Running that system, what we've learned from running it is of the 1.3 million families eligible for the benefit, 1 million were either not getting it at all or not getting it in full, so it wasn't working for people.
The Henry Tax Review actually recommended that we should move to an entitlement system rather than a receipts-based system and so, you know, an independent, Ken Henry, looking at this work said this isn't the best system. So we're moving to an entitlement system.
And then in terms of the amount, I mean, I've never met anybody who said to me, ‘here's my young son or daughter, they go to primary school and guess what? Across the school year getting them to school I spend less than $410 doing it.' No one has ever said that to me.
So people are meeting the cost of getting their kids to school and $410 for primary school students, $820 for secondary school students is going to be a help.
HOST: Why are most of these welfare payments pushed over into next year? Is it just the simple fact that it's an election year?
PM: We've timed them to come out to support families and just the best way of moving to new systems. So we want to move from the Education Tax Refund system where people collect their receipts to this new Schoolkids Bonus so it makes sense to start that this financial year so we don't have people on the old system if you like, trying to put their receipts in at tax time, so we've moved to that system.
Family payments  -  the new benefits of the boom package coming out of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax will start on the 1 July 2013, so these are benefits that have fitted into the budget and which are providing people with relief over time.
HOST: If we can just finish on that note, you say this budget is spreading the benefits of the mining boom, the Barnett Government is saying you didn't spread very much of it into WA in terms of infrastructure spending. They say that you're punishing WA for its own economic success.
PM: Well look that's just a ridiculous claim. We are big investors in infrastructure in Western Australia, we've got a proud track record of investing there and I'm prepared to compare our track record investing in Western Australia against previous governments.
I mean things like the Gateway project for the airport being funded by us, things like the work with Northbridge in the city being funded by us, we're also putting money into Oakajee and so the list goes on. So we are big investors in Western Australian infrastructure.
Now I know Premier Barnett likes to play the politics of it and he thinks, you know, it's kind of smart to do the Canberra bad  -  Perth good. Well you know, so the world goes and Premier Barnett can play that politics, but I think he at least owes the people of Western Australia the facts about how much, as a Federal Government, we are investing in the infrastructure of Western Australia and proud and pleased to do so because it's a growing state undergoing a huge resources boom and that means it's hungry for infrastructure.
HOST: Appreciate your time this morning Prime Minister. Thanks a lot.
PM: Thanks very much Paul. 



HOST: Prime Minister, thank you so much for your time.
PM: You're very welcome Adam.
HOST: The Schoolkids Bonus is expected to pass into law today. Budget 2012 is up and running in practice now.
PM: It certainly is and I was dismayed yesterday that the Opposition came into the Parliament and voted against families getting money that they need to help with the cost of getting the kids to school.
HOST: One of the aspects of this debate is that you are quoted as saying Tony Abbott should get off Sydney's North Shore and go talk to some real families. People are saying you are invoking class warfare, a division of the us and the them, the haves and the have-nots, the people on the North Shore and other real Australians. Why are you adopting that tactic?
PM: I was making a very simple point, which is Mr Abbott, who represents one of the wealthiest electorates in the country, came into the Parliament yesterday with his Liberal Party membership ticked in one pocket and used his vote to stop working families getting money they need.
And his explanations for doing that were just laughable, as I think people would have seen when he was challenged, you know, why did you support a Baby Bonus under the Howard Government, but you're not supporting this, how are they different? He volunteered the explanation ‘Well they just are.'
I mean he just could not explain why he was denying families money to help them with getting the kids to school.
HOST: Do you believe that carrying a Liberal Party membership card, or relating to the values of the Liberal Party means you're less likely to be an ordinary Australian?
PM: I believe Mr Abbott is out of touch with working families, because only someone out of touch could have decided to vote against giving people a helping hand of around $400 for a primary school student and $800 for a secondary school student and I really objected to the tone taken by Mr Abbott and the Liberal Party yesterday, where they were basically saying working people couldn't be trusted with $400 and $800, couldn't be trusted to look after their kids. I thought it was insulting.
HOST: At the same time people are saying one of the criticisms of your keeping the cap at $25,000 instead of pushing to $50,000 on what people can put at late working life into their super will stop people who've worked hard all of their lives from having sufficient money to enjoy their retirement.
PM: I am worried about the circumstances of people, particularly women, not only women, but they tend to be women who have been in and out of work, part-time work, they're coming to retirement age now and they find they don't have much super. I'm certainly concerned about that.
That's why we introduced a $500 co-contribution scheme, where as a Government we give a helping hand to low income Australians to boost their superannuation. We did, in this Budget, which is full of tough choices, have to defer by a couple of years moving to the different superannuation arrangements that you refer to, allowing people to tip in more money late in life and still get concessional tax treatment.
So we haven't called that off, we've deferred it for two years.
HOST: Have you deferred the Gonski Report's recommendations into public education, or have they been put - there's lots of concern this morning that it's such momentous report and a real chance to move on funding education, public and private, around Australia, seems to have been brushed over in the budget?
PM: No one should be concerned about that, we are continuing to work on the Gonski School Funding Review. That is actually out now, in a series of working groups between the Federal and the State Government and I know when politicians say things like that people can say ‘Well, that sounds like gobbledygook,' but if I can just explain to you  -  Mr Gonski and his review team said things like ‘Let's have a difference system of funding students with disabilities,' but at the moment we don't even have a way of nationally knowing where students with disabilities are. So no national system of identifying and categorising students with disabilities and working out how much money's necessary to meet their needs.
So Mr Gonski said to government you've got to get on, firstly, with building the tools you need to then help you build the new funding system. We're doing that now and so, of course, it's too early to have budget treatment of these matters, because we're still working it through.
HOST: When it comes to Federal-State relations there's a real stoush over the funding for the Pacific Highway. The Federal Government currently saying it's going to be a 50/50 split, the State Government saying they were expecting 80/20 and they just won't be able to find that extra money. Is there a chance through negotiations the Federal Government could give a bit on this?
PM: There should be no stoush. All this requires is for Premier O'Farrell to step up and honour his election commitment to the people of New South Wales and to accept the system of road funding that's been in place since the Howard Government.
So he can't say that this is about me, or this is about Minister Albanese, or this is about Labor. This is about a longstanding system of how federal governments work with state governments to do major road infrastructure projects and Premier O'Farrell's got to step up to his responsibilities.
We've already invested $4 billion and we are standing ready to invest the best part of another $4 billion, if Mr O'Farrell's prepared to do his job.
HOST: Prime Minister, it's been a very busy week for you, but you said, I read earlier in the week, that you were deeply shocked by what you'd read from the Safe Work Australia - Fair Work Australia report into the HSU scandal. What shocked you so deeply?
PM: Any suggestion that union money has been used for improper purposes, that it hasn't gone for representing working people, is obviously a distressing thing. I mean the trade union movement in this country is overwhelmingly professional, dedicated; the officials I meet are hardworking, they got into it for the right motivations, to make a difference for the members of their union.
So I respect people who do that, and it distresses me that there's any place in the trade union movement where money hasn't been used properly.
HOST: Is the Labor Party paying Craig Thomson's legal bills at the moment?
PM: Look, this is a matter for Mr Thomson and for New South Wales Labor. There is a question of making the appropriate declarations to Parliament. I understand Mr Thomson says he has now made the appropriate declarations, but of course declarations should be made on time.
HOST: Can I ask why is it a matter between Mr Thomson and the New South Wales Labor Party? Why can't you answer the question, if a man who until a matter of days ago was a member of the Federal Labor Party, sitting in the Federal Parliament, was having his legal bills paid by the Labor Party, over an issue that if it had found against him could have seen him no longer sitting in that Parliament? Do you know the answer to the question?
PM: Well, I've seen the reports today in the newspaper. I haven't played any role in relation to these matters and that's why it's a matter for Mr Thomson and the New South Wales Labor Party.
HOST: But you would know, Prime Minister, that some people hearing that and you saying I haven't played any role in this, you sound, some people would interpret you there as being wilfully blind to what's going on. Surely you know if Mr Thomson is receiving legal bills paid by the Labor Party?
PM: Well like you, I've seen today's reports and I've given you the comments on them that I can. I do also see in today's report there's some question of a late declaration to the Parliament and declarations to the Parliament of Members' interests should be made on time.
HOST: If Mr Thomson is now sitting on the crossbenches and not a member of the Labor Party, do you agree that it would be inappropriate for the Labor Party to be paying his legal bills now.
PM: And my understanding of today's reports is that that is not occurring as Mr Thomson sits on the crossbenches.
HOST: And can I ask you just quickly, President Barack Obama has come out and said that having thought about it for a long time, his position has evolved and in conscience now he must support gay marriage. In the context of the political American elections coming up this year, that's a massive statement for the President to make. What did you first hear when you'd heard he'd said that?
PM: Look, this is a big thing too in American politics. I'm not a day-to-day commentator on American politics for all of the reasons you would imagine. As Prime Minister of the country we've got a great relationship with the US and we work with presidents of all political persuasions and so we don't run commentary on their elections.
You might recall Prime Minister Howard got himself into a inordinate amount of trouble when he suggested that then-presidential candidate Obama would effectively be soft on Osama bin Laden and of course, as history has revealed to all of us-
HOST: He wasn't particularly soft on-
PM: No, no, he was not. I don't think anybody could sustain that argument now and I don't think John Howard tries to. So I'm not going to become a commentator on American politics.
HOST: Two quick questions in wrapping up, could you see your own position, you're opposed at the moment to gay marriage, could you see your own position evolving?
PM: Look, I've made my position clear and that's the position I'll take into the Parliament when ultimately the bill that has been moved by Stephen Jones, one of the Labor members of our team, when that becomes before the Parliament.
HOST: At the moment you are slated to fight the next Federal election against Tony Abbott, any chance it could be Peter Costello?
PM: Well, you tell me. I think it's quite intriguing that there are reports that Peter Costello is calculating a comeback. I'm not surprised in this sense, it is well known that many members of the Liberal Party are very concerned about Mr Abbott's lack of grip on economics, very concerned that the Liberal Party team, with Mr Abbott at the head, is trashing the Liberal Party's credentials on economic management, so there apparently is some yearning for Peter Costello because of that.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you so much for your time.
PM: Thank you. 



Today Nick Sherry has announced he will retire from Parliament, after almost 22 years as a Senator for Tasmania.
Nick has made a tremendous contribution to the Labor team.
He served as a Parliamentary Secretary in the Keating Government and subsequently spent many years working tirelessly on the Opposition frontbench. He then served as a Minister from 2007 until his retirement from the Ministry in December last year.
During his time in the Ministry, Nick worked hard to protect jobs and to strengthen Australia's small business sector. He was also a strong advocate for the growth of the Australian tourism sector and his name will always be synonymous with Labor's superannuation reforms.
Nick has made considerable achievements in his areas of portfolio responsibility, and in the ALP caucus and the Senate more broadly.
He has also served his constituents, the people of Tasmania, loyally and thoroughly for two decades.
I thank Nick for his remarkable service to the ALP and I wish him and his family well in the future.
Nick overcame some personal tough times and is much admired for his determination.
I'm sure he's looking forward to spending more time with his three young children in his post-Parliament days, and that they will be equally thrilled to have him home.
Nick will spend his final day in the Senate on June 1. 



HOST: Good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Jon.
HOST: Yesterday was nearly catastrophic, you don't know day-to-day what's going to happen in the Parliament do you?
PM: Day-to-day we get on with the job and this Parliament's passed around 300 pieces of legislation, so yes a minority government is a different situation than the nation's been in for a long, long time, but what's less-reported is the fact that the Parliament works, it gets things done. It passes new bills, it creates new laws, and they're not just garden-variety things if I can use that terminology. They're blockbuster pieces of legislation that are changing the nation and setting us up for the future.
HOST: If we need stability, and confidence is a big part of any economy, well we haven't got it at the moment have we?
PM: Well certainly, Jon, we've got stability, we'll pass the budget, we passed last year's budget in record time, so for all of the political drama that people understandably report and are interested in, actually the Parliament day-to-day works to get things done and the budget legislation last year was delivered in basically record time.
HOST: But you can't get clear air is my point. With the Independents, the drama over Peter Slipper, the drama over Craig Thomson, you never get clear air. The population, the business community, people are talking about anything except what you want us to talk about and what the Government wants to get on with is almost lost.
PM: I'm sure a lot of people yesterday were talking about the budget and what it meant for them and their families, and when people have those conversations, particularly people with school-aged children, they were looking at the Schoolkids Bonus and thinking that money will be a bit of a help.
So the real thing in Parliament yesterday which I think was the one to note was the vote on the Schoolkids Bonus in the House of Representatives, where of course we supported the legislation to get that money to families who need it, and in an astonishing move in my view, the Liberal Party led by Tony Abbott voted against families getting that assistance.
HOST: Well they've got a different vision for the nation. They've got a whole different focus on everything from the mining boom through to climate change. I mean, that's hardly surprising is it, they've got a different view of the country to you?
PM: They do have a different view and it's a view that low- and middle-income families can just fend for themselves, that they don't deserve Government support-
HOST: Well that not-
PM: -And if they get it they can't be trusted with it. That is exactly what Mr Abbott was saying yesterday, when he was challenged how is the Schoolkids Bonus different from the Baby Bonus delivered by the Howard Government, he offered the analysis ‘well, they just are.'
I mean, doesn't make any sense Jon. And then when pushed, he basically said, in an insulting fashion to families around the country, that they couldn't be trusted if they got this money.
HOST: Prime Minister if you did a snap-poll, I'm sure if we asked our listeners right now what's the one thing you would like to change, it would be the carbon tax. It's profoundly unpopular, even before it's come into effect.
PM: There is a lot of community anxiety about putting a price on carbon Jon, I agree with you. I understand people are worried about it, I understand many of them think that it's going to have this huge impact, that is they've heard the messages of Mr Abbott's scare campaign and they're worried about what carbon pricing will mean.
HOST: Well his scare campaign has been more effective than your attempt to sell it.
PM: People will get to judge. They won't, you know, they'll have the information to judge, not on what is said but what actually happens, the real facts.
HOST: But isn't-
PM: So from 1 July carbon pricing will start, our big polluters  -  the people who generate the most carbon pollution  -  will start paying the price. Families will see the family payments money, the increases there. Pensioners will see the pension increase, people earning less than $80,000 will see the tax cut from 1 July, and people will be able to judge for themselves.
HOST: He's a better salesman than you, is the point I was trying to drive towards though.
PM: What matters in our nation at the end of the day Jon is what happens. What happens-
HOST: You've got to take people with you don't you, on a journey, and he's taking people with him on his story, you're failing to take people with you on yours.
PM: Well I actually think it's about the facts, it's about the reality, it's not about stories, it's about outcomes. So people will be able to see what carbon pricing means for them, on 1 July.
People will be able to see what this budget means for them, as the 1.3 million families see the Schoolkids Bonus flow through to them for the first time, before 30 June. Then they'll be able to see for example, the increase in family payments, they'll see us start to build the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
They'll see the changes in aged care, than mean people can stay in their own homes for longer. They'll see the public dental waiting list blitz so more people, the lowest income Australians with, you know, really difficult problems. I mean we all know what it's like to have something wrong with your teeth, actually getting those basic health issues addressed.
People will see those changes, and they're the things that matter, not only today but for the future of the country.
HOST: And in fact I think, instinctively, you know that it's not about just the policies and you're right it's not just about the storytelling. It's in fact about both, you have to be able to come up with the policies but you also have to be able to sell them.
PM: Look, I'm accepting, Jon, we're not, we haven't got a different view so there's nothing to argue about here.
HOST: No, I'm not looking for an argument. I'm looking for an insight into the, whether or not- I know there is-
PM: I'm absolutely agreeing with you, 100% agreeing with you-
HOST: And there's (inaudible) within the Labor Party about your abilities to sell the message.
PM: Well Jon, if I can answer your question and I'm very happy to do so.
Being Prime Minister means you've got to do the things that matter to make our economy strong, to get people jobs and opportunity, to help people with the pressures on them day-to-day now, but also to build for the future. Getting those things done is my job.
Certainly explaining them to the community, taking the community with me is also my job, and Jon I'm the first to say I've got a lot of hard work in front of me, I understand that. But, that's both sides of the story.
You know, Mr Abbott is out there talking but ultimately Mr Abbott has to put out some policies that make some sense. And so, you know, as recently as yesterday, he's got himself in this big mess, doesn't believe in supporting low- and middle-income Australians with the costs of getting the kids to school, just doesn't believe in doing that, has said that he's going to support our family payments increases, but they're funded out of the mining tax.
And if he comes to government he's going to give the mining tax back to the mining companies, so you know, Clive Palmer and people like that will be happy, but that means he'll have to take those family payments away from people. He needs to explain why he thinks that's the right thing to do, so this works on both sides Jon.
It's not only what you say, it's what you do, and what Mr Abbott did yesterday was he walked into the Parliament and he voted against low- and middle-income families, families struggling to make ends meet, getting a bit of assistance with the cost of the kids going to school.
HOST: From Abbott to Costello, Peter Costello in The Age today, in his commentary piece says that the gap between promise and delivery is what counts and you never deliver on what you promise.
PM: Well I'm expecting Mr Costello to be lurking around somewhere in Parliament if the papers are - as the papers record today. He's apparently interested in a bit of a comeback, and I think that's probably because he's reflecting the concerns of many in the Liberal Party that Mr Abbott and his economic team don't really have a grip on the economy and aren't keeping the Liberal Party's credentials in economic management.
I mean, whether or not I like it the Liberal Party would say that they have credentials in economic management, and people like Mr Costello are obviously concerned that the current leadership is trashing those credentials.
On delivery, I'm happy Jon to be judged on delivery. So you know, let's go through it, any aspect of it you want to go through I'm happy to go through. I'm happy to go through the things we've delivered in schools, that have made a difference for kids-
HOST: Sure, I don't want to go through the whole-
PM: I'm happy to go through the things we've delivered in hospitals including the more doctors. I'm happy to go through the things we've delivered in the National Broadband Network, the things we've delivered on infrastructure, the things we've delivered like Paid Parental Leave, more money going into childcare than ever before.
I mean these things are real benefits that are out there, people are experiencing them now, whatever rhetorical flourishes Mr Costello might be using.
HOST: Do you ever think of giving up? This relentless assault on your credibility, your integrity, you judgement.
PM: Never.
HOST: Never?
PM: Never.
HOST: Okay. Interestingly, Barack Obama - President Obama  -  overnight in the United States has publicly stated his support for same-sex marriage. I don't know if you've heard much of what he had to say:
PRESIDENT OBAMA: It is important for me to go ahead and affirm that I think same-sex couples should be able to get married.
HOST: I've asked you about this before, is your view changing too?
PM: No, Jon, my view's not changing. I know President Obama has made that statement. I haven't had the opportunity to view it myself, I've seen the reports of it, but no, my view hasn't changed and when a bill comes to the Parliament later this year, moved by Private Members, Stephen Jones, one of our Labor Members is bringing the bill. When that bill comes to the Parliament this year I won't vote for it.
HOST: Your progressive credentials yet again then are not measuring up.
PM: Well, you know, I believe what I believe Jon, you can judge it.
HOST: Well, people will. And they judge you all the time, of course. Just one more thing, and I know my time is running out. There's a fair bit of concern after the Craig Thomson scandal that Fair Work Australia is irreparably damaged and I notice that the boss itself of the organisation says it might need a re-branding exercise, a new name, and it might need to split its judicial functions from its regulatory functions. Have you got a view on that?
PM: Well, I am concerned about the amount of time that the Fair Work report took, when the investigation was underway by Fair Work Australia I didn't view it as appropriate for me to hector or lecture.
I mean this is the independent umpire and for me as Prime Minister to be seen to be barking instructions at them I thought was wrong. But now the inquiry is out I do feel free to say that I think it has taken too long. I think a few things need to happen from here. Number one the general manager, when she released the report on Friday made some recommendations about legislative changes so Fair Work Australia can more easily cooperate with police, so those changes should be made.
There's a review by KPMG of the handling of this matter, and when its recommendations are available if they require changes in legislation then of course we'll do them. And we want to see some changes that make the system of, you know, for everyone, unions and employer organisations, more transparent, and that there are stiffer penalties if people do the wrong thing.
And we're working on that now and we'll do that in a consultative way with the ACTU and also with employer organisations. I mean, overwhelmingly, Australia's trade unions are run by decent people who work hard, they're democratic, they're well-run and get on with the job of representing their members.
But we do need to learn some lessons from this, and I think that there are some changes we need to make to the legislation that covers registered organisations.
HOST: Alright, well there's a lot on your plate, and I'm indebted to you for making some time for us this morning as you're out and about selling the budget, and I look forward to seeing you here taking some talkback in the studio when you get a chance in Melbourne one day soon.
PM: Thanks Jon, look forward to it.



PM: I'm here today at the Calwell shops with the Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan. We've had the opportunity this morning to meet some working families, some people invited by the local Member Gai Brodtmann to come and meet with us this morning. Unfortunately Gai wasn't able to get a pair from the Parliament, so she didn't get to come too.
But it's been great to meet some people who are looking forward to receiving their Schoolkids Bonus and who have been talking to us about the real world pressures that are on them.
I just had a conversation then about replacing a school jumper, a young girl lost her school jumper, $40 for a new one. These are the real costs of getting kids to school and that's what the Schoolkids Bonus is for.
We're here two days after Treasurer Wayne Swan delivered the Budget. A budget that comes to surplus exactly on time as promised, a surplus that's necessary to give us a buffer and a surplus that's necessary to give the Reserve Bank the maximum room to move on interest rates if it chooses to do so.
And we know from last week's interest reduction how important an interest rate reduction can be for families relieving the costs of the mortgage.
It's a Labor Budget to its bootstraps, as the Deputy Prime Minister has said. A Labor Budget that delivers the first instalment on the National Disability Insurance Scheme, funding the launch sites. A Labor Budget that delivers a better aged care system for the future, enabling people to spend longer in their own homes. And a Labor Budget that delivers a public dental waiting list blitz to help those people who have been waiting far too long for dental care, often some of the poorest people in our nation.
And it's a Labor Budget that delivers for working families, that delivers the Schoolkids Bonus to help with all of the costs of getting the kids to school; $410 for primary school students, $820 for high school students and the parents this morning have been explaining to us just how bigger help that kind of money is and how difficult they were finding it to collect their receipts under the old system.
And it's a Labor Budget that is going to spread the benefits of the mining boom, increasing family payments through money coming from the mining tax, making sure that Australians around the nation feel their share of the mining boom.
The fundamentals of our economy are strong. We know, though, many families are finding it hard to make ends meet. They look at the mining boom and they think to themselves ‘I'm not really feeling any benefit from this.'
Well, this is their benefit from the mining boom, spreading to them the wealth of our nation through new family payments.
I'll turn now to the Treasurer and then we'll be happy to take your questions.
TREASURER: Thanks very much Prime Minister. I'll just make a couple of brief points. I think before the words "cost of living" pass Mr Abbott's lips tonight he must explain why he is opposed to the Schoolkids Bonus.
He has got to explain why he is opposed to the Schoolkids Bonus. I was talking to Callum, having a cup of coffee there before, 16 years old, had to replace his calculator, $80.
Parents sitting around the kitchen table are having that experience all the time with their school-age kids and particularly when they get a bit older, they get much more expensive, particularly if you have got a couple of 16-year-olds, and 15-year-olds, or 14-year-olds in your house. So this money will be delivered when parents need it most and that's pretty important.
Also, Mr Abbott has said that he is going to abolish the Minerals Resource Rent Tax and give a huge tax cut to the mining billionaires. Well, he will need to explain tonight how he intends to fund any commitments he gives, given that he is going to give such a big tax cut to the mining billionaires.
And given that there is a $70 billion crater in the Liberal Party's budget bottom line, he needs to explain tonight what he is going to do to deliver a surplus in the future. 
I guess, given the $70 billion crater in the Liberal Party's budget bottom line, people like Mr Costello now are simply wringing their hands at the wreckage of the Liberal Party's economic credentials in the hands of the three stooges who currently run Liberal Party economic policy.
PM: Thank you very much, we're happy to take questions. We will go down this side and then, yes, so we'll start with you.
JOURNALIST: Was it appropriate for the ALP to be paying for Craig Thomson's legal costs?
PM: Look, this is a matter for Mr Thompson and for the New South Wales Branch of the ALP.
I see in today's news reports, there is a suggestion that Mr Thomson made a late declaration on this matter. Members of Parliament should be declaring, appropriately, things on time, not waiting and declaring late.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer or Prime Minister, you mentioned before the tax cuts. Business groups are increasingly angry with this budget, particularly the decision to drop the company tax rate. One of them yesterday said that 110,000 businesses will benefit from the loss carry-back arrangements, whereas 770,000 would have benefited from the tax cut.
What is your message to the 660,000 businesses that have missed out in this Budget?
PM: Well I will say something first and turn to the Treasurer. And the very simple message here is Mr Abbott's negativity has a price. People actually pay the price when Tony Abbott constantly says no.
So he decided he was going to say no to company tax cuts. And as the Deputy Prime Minister has said, maybe it's that kind of reckless approach to economics that is causing Liberals to yearn for a return of Peter Costello.
So he trashed the Liberal Party's brand. Over the course of history they have stood for things like lower company taxation but Mr Abbott is so reckless and so negative, he just said no.
That's got a cost. It meant we couldn't get the legislation through the Parliament. So what we've decided to do in this budget is spread the benefits of the mining boom directly to families through increased family payments and to some of the poorest people in the country through new allowances for people on Newstart, for example.
Now, in terms of Mr Abbott's negativity, he said no to the mining tax which means really, before he says anything about cost of living tonight, he's going to need to explain to Australian families that if he ever becomes Prime Minister, he'll be knocking on the door to grab that family payments money back, to give it to Clive and to give it to Gina, to give to some of the biggest mining companies in our nation.
Wayne might want to say a few things too.
TREASURER: I'll just make a couple of points. I think business should be expressing their frustration to Mr Abbott, because Mr Abbott was opposed to the company tax cut and so too were the Greens. 
So the Liberal Party has a policy of increasing company tax.  I think business ought to be expressing their frustration at that matter to the Liberal Party as well. 
I made it very clear yesterday that we are committed to tax reform. We're in the cart for corporate tax reform, that we will sit down with the business community and look at the report from the Business Tax Working Group and see what we can do to get some good reform in the system. 
But for the here and now, they should be expressing their frustration directly to the wrecking ball tactics of Mr Abbott.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott says this is a class warfare budget. What's your response to that?
PM: We're the Labor Party and we make absolutely apology for saying we're here to serve low and middle income Australians, and Mr Abbott is here to serve the rich, that's right.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you support a code of conduct for MPs and if not, why not?
PM: I believe MPs should behave properly in accordance with the highest standards. We have all manner of standards now, like declarations and people should abide by those rules.
If there is an aspiration for a further code of conduct, then I'm very happy to look at it. We should have high standards in Parliament and we should have MPs abiding by them and we should have people behaving consistently, too. 
There are others in the Parliament, Mr Abbott and Mr Hockey in particular, who have been late with declarations in the past.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this morning in an interview Rob Oakeshott said bugger the numbers, the Parliament needs to take action if Craig Thomson doesn't make an adequate explanation to Parliament. That's some fairly strong language from one of the key independents.
PM: Mr Thomson is going to make a statement to the Parliament, as he indicated yesterday. I would just say we have would have to be a bit careful here. It is not the role of the Parliament to prejudge things that are going before the courts.
JOURNALIST: Is it right for the Labor Party, if they did, to continue to pay the legal fees once he stood down or was suspended from caucus?
PM: Look, this is a matter for Mr Thomson and the New South Wales Branch of the Labor Party, but as I understand today's reports, they relate to a period before Mr Thomson was suspended from Labor Caucus.
I announced my decision about that a couple of weeks ago.
JOURNALIST: Just following up on Matthew's question, do you think the Parliament does need to take some form of action against Craig Thomson?
PM: I think we've just got to be a bit careful here. It is not the role of the Parliament to pre-judge matters that are going to be dealt with in the court.
And if I can put that proposition in the general for you, rather than the specific matter about Mr Thomson - if, for example, a parliamentarian was charged with theft, is anybody suggesting it would really be appropriate for the Parliament to pass a resolution as to whether or not they'd done it before the matter was properly adjudicated in the courts?
We have had a parliamentarian charged with theft and assault in this Parliament, a Liberal Senator. Now is anybody suggesting it would have been appropriate for the House of Representatives or the Senate to pass a resolution, either saying she was guilty or innocent, before the courts had the ability to properly work through the matter?
I think people just from a really commonsense perspective would say ‘No, that wouldn't be the right thing to do.'
JOURNALIST: As the Leader of Federal Labor, do you have no advice or no guidance at all for the New South Wales Branch on Craig Thomson?
PM: Look, this is a matter for Mr Thomson and the New South Wales Branch.
JOURNALIST: But it is a concern, obviously, from the independents if Rob Oakeshott's coming out saying bugger the numbers on the floor of the Parliament.
He is someone who is obviously very concerned about the issue and you rely on his support.
PM: I am very concerned that any money that is raised by trade unions from their members is used for proper purposes. I've made the point over the last few days and I'm happy to make it again.
Trade unions in this country are overwhelmingly professionally run, financially sound, doing a decent and proper job for their members, bargaining for them in workplaces, engaging in campaigns like the campaign to get rid of WorkChoices because of the harm it was doing to working people. 
So trade unions in this country doing their job. To the extent that any union member's money has been used for a purpose other than a trade union doing its proper job, then it's wrong. Just wrong, full stop, and appropriate action should then flow.
Fair Work Australia, whatever, under the law, needs to happen, Federal Court should then happen. But it is not for the Parliament to dictate to the courts what should happen next. That's not our system of Government, that's not our system of the separation of powers.
JOURNALIST: President Obama is saying that he supports same-sex marriage. Are you looking at changing your mind (inaudible)
PM: No, I've made my mind up and my position on this is well known.
JOURNALIST: You're not going to evolve on this issue?
PM: I've made my mind up.
JOURNALIST: Do you think though it makes Australia look behind when you have got countries like the United States looking at (inaudible)
PM: I think it just reinforces this is matter that people form their own views on, deeply personal question, people will think about it, work their way through it. Obviously President Obama has and he's announced a decision in recent hours.
Thank you very much. 


PM: I'm delighted to be back in Adelaide. I'm here with Senator Don Farrell and with Amanda Rishworth the Member for Kingston and she's done some work with Bedford.
I do want to say a very big thank you to the people from Bedford who have made us so welcome today. I've had the opportunity to look through this very great place, so to each of you thank you for what you're achieving here.
This is a very important place for people with disabilities in South Australia. What it shows is that with the right care and support, people can certainly make a life for themselves and can enjoy the benefits of work. And I have toured through here and watched flat packs - furniture being made which will be sold at very well-known outlets like Bunnings. So a commercial contract, the right quality being made by a work force that is diverse, giving people the opportunity of a job. And people doing are all the training their Certificate 1, Certificate 2 and Certificate 3. So it really is a fantastic outcome, it's really heart warming to be here.
And I wanted to come here at the end of budget week because the budget does make provision for the launch sites of the National Disability Insurance Scheme. We want to make sure that right around the country we are doing better for people with a disability. At the moment, what care you get can depend on how you got your disability, whether it was in a transport accident or at work, or whether you were born with it, got it through a disease or got it through an accident outside work and outside a motor vehicle. It's a really cruel lottery. And we want to end that through a National Disability Insurance Scheme. And that's why we've budgeted a billion dollars to start launching the scheme a year earlier than the expert group the Productivity Commission advised. We're doing it a year earlier because we want to make a start.
On Tuesday night, we announced a budget that brings the budget to surplus. Exactly as promised. That's the right thing for our economy now and it's a remarkable result for Australia, so soon after the global financial crisis. It's something we should all be proud of. That we've been able to bring the budget to surplus so quickly. It gives us a buffer for the future if we need it, it also gives the Reserve Bank room to move on interest rates should they choose to do so and we know from last week's interest rate reduction how important interest rate cuts are for families around the country. It's also a budget where we've deliberately tried to work to provide benefits to low- and middle-incomes.
We know many families around the nation are struggling to make ends meet. And so in the budget we wanted to provide assistance through the Schoolkids Bonus and we've already got that through the Parliament, the first budget bill through and for families around the nation, including 100,000 families here in South Australia, it will mean before 30 June they will see around $410 for each primary school student in their family, and $820 for each high school student in their family and that will be a bonus that happens every year for all of the costs of getting the kids to school.
We've also decided to use some of the money from the mining tax to support families through the family payment system. That's an extra bit of relief, too, for families with two children, it will mean $600 extra; for families with one child, $300 extra. These are important measures to make a difference for families under a lot of cost of living pressure.
Yesterday, Tony Abbott's party in the Parliament, the Coalition, voted against the Schoolkids Bonus and today, on national TV he has indicated that families shouldn't rely on the family payments we are providing, having voted against the Schoolkids Bonus, Tony Abbott is warning families that he's going to take the extra family payments away. This (inaudible) just doesn't understand the kind of cost of living pressures that families are under.
So I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the state governments have indicated that they're not necessarily willing to provide the (inaudible) in funding to go with the NDIS. How contingent are those trial sites on securing that money from state governments?
PM: We are going to bring a spirit of goodwill to negotiating with the states to get this done and I'm very confident that we will.
JOURNALIST: But Treasurer Jack Snelling has said the South Australian Government does not have the capacity to contribute. This, the only Labor mainland state government, what chance have you got of getting cooperation when even-
PM: Well we'll be working hard to get this done and I sat around the Council of Australian Governments table with premiers and chief ministers where we all talked about importance of the National Disability Insurance Scheme for the future so I'm very confident you will see the launch sites on time as promised.
JOURNALIST: The Costello-Kroger (inaudible) this morning, is it a relief to have the pressure off you?
PM: Look there's not much that I would agree with Peter Costello about, I'd have to say. I've been in Parliament when Peter Costello has been there and I didn't agree with him much then. So there's not much I would agree with Peter Costello about but I do agree when he says that Tony Abbott is not economically literate. And I'm really not surprised that the Liberal Party's casting around for someone who understands economics.
JOURNALIST: Do you think one of them is not telling the complete truth and their so-called conversation?
PM: Well they've got completely different versions. So they will have to work that out but Mr Costello has been talking about how economically illiterate Tony Abbott is. He has been on the record about that for years and years and years, that Tony Abbott doesn't understand economics and on that I find myself in agreement with Peter Costello.
JOURNALIST: But Mr Costello picks a fight with just about Liberal (inaudible).
PM: Look I'll leave all of them to work through that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on Federal politics, have you spoken to Mr Oakeshott (inaudible) about his comments about what appears to be his nervousness now?
PM: Look I'm very confident the Government will be continuing to deliver its budget bills just like we delivered the Schoolkids Bonus.
JOURNALIST: So you haven't spoken to him?
PM: Look, I'm very confident we'll deliver our budget bills the way we delivered the Schoolkids Bonus this week. I'm very confident the Government will deliver its budget bills.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the South Australian Treasurer has also said that the minority government and the proposed carbon tax are behind with consumer sentiment at the moment which is in turn damaging the state government's finances. Do you accept that that uncertainty is damaging the sentiment of Australian consumers?
PM: There has been a huge fear campaign from the Opposition on carbon pricing and it has caused many Australians to be worried about what carbon pricing is going to mean for them and their families. What they'll see in the run-up to 30 June and beyond is money to assist families flowing through, increased family payments, increased pensions and for anyone who earns less than $80,000 a year they will see a tax cut on 1 July. One of the reasons we thought it was the right thing to do to use some of the money from the mining tax to assist families with increased family payments is we understand people are under cost of living pressures and we understand that by supporting family budgets they will be out there buying the things their family needs and that's good for business.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just getting back to Mr Oakeshott for a moment. Has he got a fairly solid case in his so-called apparent nervousness about Craig Thomson (inaudible). Don't you think that what he's saying makes sense?
PM: Mr Thomson will make a statement to the Parliament next week, the next time the Parliament sits. He indicated that in Parliament this week and I think that's the next step that will be taken.
JOURNALIST: With respect that wasn't the question. (Inaudible).
PM: The logical thing here is for Mr Thomson to give his statement as he's indicated that he would. As I said during the course of the week while we were in Parliament, I think we have to be very, very cautious about the Parliament setting itself up as doing the job that the courts are there to do.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The Parliament is not there to be judge and jury. That's my view.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, with regards to the carbon tax, isn't Mr Abbott correct in saying if there was no carbon tax there (inaudible) compensation (inaudible)?
PM: Mr Abbott just doesn't get it that families are under cost of living pressure. And that's not about the pricing of carbon which will come into effect on 1 July, it's happening right now. Right now people have to do things like go and buy a new school jumper when their son or daughter has lost theirs. I was talking to a family about that yesterday. Or go and buy a new school calculator when one has been damaged or buy another pair of shoes because their child is growing and growing and growing. These are the pressures in the real world. And we've always wanted to help with those pressures, that's why we provided the Education Tax Refund. And now we want to provide that money in a better way because we realise that around a million families have been missing out on some or all of their entitlement. And to that, a bit of cost of living pressure relief so you can get the things you need for the kids going to school, Mr Abbott has just said no. He came into the Parliament and voted no against the Schoolkids Bonus. Now he is warning families he's intending to take away their family payment increases and give them back to Clive Palmer and Gina Rinehart.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on a very parochial issue.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Are you going to see Black Caviar tomorrow in Adelaide and secondly-
PM: No, I'm not.
JOURNALIST: You're not?
PM: No, I'm not.
JOURNALIST: You wouldn't consider taking your mum along?
PM: No we  -  won't be there.
JOURNALIST: But it's the biggest thing to hit Adelaide in the last two weeks-
PM: Well I hope you enjoy it but I won't be there.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I have some other commitments tomorrow which mean that I won't be there, but I hope you enjoy the day.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well that's Mr Abbott's warning to Australian families. Mr Abbott's warning today is that if he is ever Prime Minister, the family payments money will be taken away and this week he voted against the Schoolkids Bonus.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I've never believed any of the commentary about the two political parties in Australian politics coming together. The Liberal Party's the party of fair work - sorry the Liberal Party is party of WorkChoices. We're the party of fair work. Huge divide in Australian politics whether you think working people are entitled to decency and respect in their workplaces, we're the political party that always builds the big things Australians need, like Medicare and universal superannuation, the National Disability Insurance Scheme. And we're the party that unashamedly stands for helping low- and middle-income earners whereas the Liberal Party stands for the benefits of a few.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on an early question on the states' commitment to the NDIS. (Inaudible) fail you and states cannot contribute that extra funding, does that mean the trial sites are dead in the water and you then have a scapegoat?
PM: We'll get the trial sites up and operating as promised and they will start on 1 July.
JOURNALIST: Even without the state governments' funding?
PM: We'll work with state governments. We've provided a billion dollars. So we are obviously in a position to works on costs and working with state governments on the trial sites. We're going to work with state governments in good faith to get this done. I've sat around a Council of Australian Governments table where every premier and chief minister indicated how important this is for the nation's future. And so we'll work to get states to work with us on up to four launch sites.
JOURNALIST: Is it possible without state government funding?
PM: It's possible for us to work with states to get this done and we will get it done. We've provided the funding in the budget, we've done that deliberately to put ourselves in a position to now work with states to get the launch sites up and running so I'm not at all concerned about this issue. We will be able to work with state governments to get this done and if I can, I hear a lot of commentary about whether we'll get things done with the states. I heard it in the run-up to the health agreement. Then we got a health agreement with every State and Territory. Heard it in the run-up to the last meeting of the Council of Australian Governments and then we delivered a blockbuster skills reform with the agreement of every State and Territory. We'll work and we'll get this done too.
Thank you very much.


HOST: Good morning Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, you're flying to Adelaide this afternoon?
PM: Yes I am.
HOST: You're on the budget sell trail and we'll be talking to you about budget matters in a moment, but also catching up with your mum?
PM: Well it is Mother's Day on Sunday, so I am going to take the opportunity to catch up with my family whilst I'm in South Australia. So I'm really looking forward to that.
HOST: Are you staying over the weekend?
PM: I'll be staying until Sunday.
HOST: That's nice.
PM: Yes, I'm very much looking forward to it. I don't get as much time with them as I would like.
HOST: We were discussing, as a team, as you do, when weighty matters are upon you, whether a Prime Minister gets time to do their own Mother's Day shopping?
PM: My mum's not that big into Mother's Day, she's big into Mother's Day attention, so I'll be lavishing a bit of that.
HOST: So when the Prime Minister comes, that's enough attention.
PM: I hope she comes to that conclusion. I'll let you know if I've completely misjudged it and she's sitting there tapping her foot saying ‘where's the glossy present?'
HOST: And, Prime Minister, I'm going to try that line on my mother on Sunday to see if it works. I'll let you know.
PM: And if you get into dreadful trouble I'll speak to your mum for you.
HOST: Excellent.
HOST: It's a nice way, it's a nice thing and a bit of a break too. Prime Minister, you have had a crack at Tony Abbott for not being in touch with the values of real Australians because he lives on the North Shore and it raises the question of whether you govern for all Australians, or just those who hold traditional Labor values.
PM: I don't resile from those comments at all. Mr Abbott came into the Parliament this week and voted to stop working people, hardworking families, getting the benefits of the Schoolkids Bonus and voted against it not once, but time after time after time. They were playing all of these procedural tricks to stop the legislation going through and that means they were voting to stop families getting some money before the end of this financial year and then into the future getting $410 to help you with the costs of the primary school kids and $820 to help you with the costs of your high school children.
That's to the disadvantage of 100,000 Australian families, so I think I was right to say Mr Abbott needs to explain the values that would drive you to say families that work hard and find it hard to make ends meet don't deserve that money.
HOST: But would you agree he has a pretty good understanding of what it is to raise a family? He's got three girls, he's got a mortgage. On what do you base that criticism that he would be out of touch with family values?
PM: Well I think the way he's exercised his vote in Parliament this week, demonstrates he's out of touch. He's basically said this week that families can't be trusted with that money and shouldn't have it.
And so when he was called upon to explain taking this amazing stance, that the Schoolkids Bonus should not be paid to people, he said well families can't be trusted to spend it on the right things.
And then when he was challenged on, well, how does this compare to past Howard Government initiatives where money was paid to families, he just said oh, well, it's just different, it just is.
No real explanation at all, so that is incredibly out of touch.
HOST: So you don't consider yourself a Prime Minister for all of Australia, to come back to the original question, you don't really consider yourself a Prime Minister for people who may live in Sydney's North Shore, or northern beaches, or Adelaide's leafier suburbs, that you're not really there for them?
PM: I'm certainly a Prime Minister for all Australians, but when we're putting the Government's Budget together you've got to make some decisions and when you make those decisions you're driven by your values as to who you're seeking to benefit and how you think the Government should use the money it has at its disposal.
I made a deliberate choice that in this Budget we should be benefiting families who need our assistance with the costs of getting the kids to school. I made a decision we should be using some of the proceeds of the mining tax to pay through to families in the form of increased family payments.
Mr Abbott's made the decision that people shouldn't get the Schoolkids Bonus, because they can't be trusted with the money and today on television he's talking about taking the family payment increases away. Now, I think I'm entitled to say that someone who makes those decisions can't understand how difficult it is for so many families to make ends meet.
HOST: The cheques that go out next financial year for the Schoolkids Bonus, will people who have been keeping receipts for this financial year still be able to use them and get a tax refund?
PM: Look, that's a good question and it gives me the opportunity to just explain it. People, for this financial year, people will see the Schoolkids Bonus turn up in their bank accounts before 30 June.
HOST: So you can throw away the receipts you've been keeping? That promise, look, keep your receipts, you'll be able to claim it on your tax, that's  -  forget about all that. We've changed our mind; we're going to do something different.
PM: That's right and so people don't have to worry about those receipts.
HOST: But they weren't means tested, were they? So those families will miss out, who thought they were going to get that tax refund and they've kept their receipts in the shoe box, the classic shoe box, because-
HOST: But they might miss out on the bonus-
HOST: The bonus is means tested.
PM: The bonus is for people who are on family payments, that's right, what's called Family Tax Benefit A. The Education Refund also worked to benefit families in the same range. The difference with the system now and the reason it's important to explain why we changed the system  -  1.3 million families who could benefit from the Education Tax Refund, it's 1.3 million families who will benefit from the Schoolkids Bonus.
HOST: Different families?
HOST: Should you at least honour the promise that-
PM: No, no, no, no, no, they're the same families. The difference in the system is under the old system you needed to collect your receipts and put it in at tax time and what we saw, even though we tried to get the message through to people, keep your receipts, put it in with your tax return, when we looked at all of the evidence we found that a million of the 1.3 million eligible families weren't getting the refund in whole, or in part, some of them weren't getting any of it.
So for the same families, we've changed the system.
HOST: Alright, but don't bother turning up to your tax agent with receipts, you just get it paid directly into your account for this financial year?
PM: For this financial year it will be directly into your account before 30 June and it will be one annual lump sum for this financial year.
For the future it will turn up in two instalments, one in January for the (inaudible) obviously helps when you're preparing for back to school and one in July, which helps you with the cost of the second half of the school year.
HOST: Prime Minister, the National Disability Insurance Scheme, is also featured in the budget. Is that plan more press release than promise though? You don't have an agreement from the states, much of the money sets up a bureaucracy and it's only being trialled in four pilot programs.
PM: Absolutely not. This is us getting on with building the National Disability Insurance Scheme more quickly than the expert group, the Productivity Commission recommended. They recommended that this is such a big change, it really is as big as Medicare, in a system-wide change, a huge Labor reform, that it's such a big change that we needed to launch it in some sites first, learn all of the lessons from the launch before we rolled the system out nationwide.
HOST: Is it correct that the amount though over four years that will actually go at the pointy end on services, is $320 million, not $1 billion?
PM: The billion has been allocated for launch sites. Yes there are some administrative costs, absolutely.
HOST: But how much of that billion goes on administrative costs?
PM: Look, I don't have that figure in front of me, but the purpose of the billion is to do the launch in a number of sites. We can't do this reform nationwide without learning the lessons of a launch in a limited number of places.
HOST: Why not, why couldn't you have just tweaked the Medicare system so that you bring it in gradually? It is a huge thing, the Productivity Commission says $8 billion a year needs to be spent on this, about $80 million is expected to be spent per year under what you've announced. So a tiny, tiny fraction of what the Productivity Commission was recommending.
Why couldn't you have just tweaked the Medicare system, so maybe put up the levy by a tiny fraction and then increased what people can claim in terms of disability services on Medicare?
PM: It's different to Medicare. I've used the comparison with Medicare to give you a sense of the size and scale of it, but in operation it's a very different system. So it wouldn't be possible to tweak Medicare to get this job done.
What a National Disability Insurance Scheme will do is it will mean that for people with profound disabilities, however you got your disability, you will be able to get a package of care to meet your needs. At the moment people are in very different positions, depending on whether they were injured at work, in which case they're in the workers' compensation system. Injured in a transport accident, in which case in many states people get benefits through a compulsory insurance scheme.
HOST: And you haven't got the states signed up to this, have you?
PM: If I could just explain  -  so who misses out, if you're workers comp, transport accident. Who misses out, it's the people who get born with a profound disability, acquire it through an illness, one of those very grim illnesses like Parkinson's, or people who have an accident that's not a transport or a work accident. So for example I met a man the other day in Melbourne, he'd been camping and a tree had fallen over during the night, struck him on the head, now has a very profound brain injury. He's the sort of person who ends up trying to just cadge bits of care from here, there and everywhere and it's for that kind of person that a National Disability Insurance Scheme will make a big difference for.
HOST: Just quickly, we know you're going to run out of time and we do have to go to our spin cycle in a second, but Kelly Vincent, Dignity for Disability Member of South Australia's Upper House has called and wants to put an issue directly to you.
Good morning, Kelly Vincent.
VINCENT: Good morning, (inaudible) my question to the Prime Minister this morning is why do we need a trial scheme? I wasn't born when Medicare was rolled out, but I'm pretty sure we didn't have a trial then and what exactly are the lessons that the Prime Minister is hoping to learn here. We already know that the situation is different from state to state, we already know that we have a postcode lottery and that we need a equitable scheme to fix this. So why do we need to again make it inequitable by having differences in the trial scheme from state to state?
HOST: Prime Minister?
PM: I absolutely agree with Kelly that we know the current system is nowhere near good enough and so many people are missing out the care they need. We're taking the approach that the expert group, the Productivity Commission recommended, they said do launch sites, this is too big to try and do in one big bang right around the nation, you need to do launch sites to work out exactly how to do it.
That's the approach we've taking, but we're actually doing it a year earlier. So if we were following the recommendations of the expert group we wouldn't see the sites launch on 1 July next year.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for talking to us.
PM: Thank you very much.


National Disability Insurance Scheme; Schoolkids Bonus; Budget 2012-13; Carbon pricing; Craig Thomson; Global Financial Crisis; South Australian economy
HOST: Now you're coming to Adelaide later today, aren't you?
PM: Yes, I am Leon. I'm looking forward to it and I'm going to get the opportunity to talk to people about the National Disability Insurance Scheme and also talk about skills and job opportunities for people in South Australia.
HOST: Yeah, well on that, we've got the lowest fulltime job number right now and we'll get to that in a moment, but before we do, I think, I've got to ask you about this, are you concerned that someone like Rob Oakeshott is seriously considering pulling his support from the Government?
PM: Look, I believe the Government will deliver its budget in record time, just like we delivered last year's budget in record time and already this week we've delivered this first of our important budget measures, the Schoolkids Bonus, to get some money into the hands of families before the end of this financial year, to help them with the cost of the uniforms and the shoes and then that will be an ongoing part of the system. $410 for primary school students and $820 for secondary school students and we did that despite the fact that the Opposition voted against it and Mr Abbott didn't want families to have that money.
HOST: Okay, but of Rob Oakeshott threatening to withdraw his support from your Government because of Craig Thomson?
PM: Look, Leon, I am very confident the Government will be there, delivering this budget. We've got some big things to deliver, on top of the Schoolkids Bonus and one of those is increased family payments, which will be funded from the mining tax revenue.
So, $300 for families with one child, $600 for families with two or more children and what's remarkable is the day after voting against the Schoolkids Bonus, Mr Abbott is out today warning families that he wants to take that money away.
HOST: Well Prime Minister, the question still is, Rob Oakeshott has gone public questioning the due diligence of Craig Thomson's preselection, the fact that the New South Wales Labor Party has admitted paying his legal bills. Now you've sought in a sense to distance yourself from him, how distant can you be under those circumstances?
PM: Mr Thomson is no longer sitting with the Labor Party, he is suspended from the Labor Party, he is in the Parliament sitting on the crossbenches, and he will make a statement to the Parliament as he's announced in the next sitting fortnight.
Your question to me, Leon, was about the Government and getting on with the job and that's exactly what we're doing, having delivered this week a budget that brings the budget to surplus, which is good for the economy, gives us a buffer that we need and also gives the Reserve Bank the maximum room to move on interest rates. And then we've been very determined too, to deliver some money into the hands of families who are finding it hard to make ends meet and we've done that against the Opposition, Mr Abbott, who today is warning families that he wants to take family payment increases away.
HOST: SO you won't comment on Rob Oakeshott's comments?
PM: I've given you my answer Leon, you're asking me for my-
HOST: You've talked about the Government-
PM: Well, you asked me what's going to happen with the Government and I've given you my answer, which is the Government will be there.
HOST: Okay, so you're confident you'll stay in until the next election, which is late next year?
PM: Absolutely, the election's due in the second half of 2013 and it'll be held on the normal time.
HOST: There's something, I think, would be very handy to clarify Prime Minister, and that is that Labor has taken the class struggle concept to the electorate, where it talks about the rich have got to pay and you redistribute that to the poor, can you clarify your opinion as what level of income do you deem somebody rich?
PM: Look, there are clearly rich people in Australia, when people use the word rich, I think of people like Gina Rinehart, they're obviously rich, they're billionaires. For people who are doing jobs and trying to raise families, there are families in all different sorts of income positions and many of them find it very difficult to make ends meet and pay the bills and they worry about it, but as a government we've got to make choices about who we are going to give government money to to assist them. We've got to work out, out of limited resources, how we can best use those resources for the Australian people and as a Labor Government we unashamedly say our focus is on low- to middle-income earners.
HOST: Okay, so if you're a family earning a combined income of $150,000 you're deemed as rich or well-off. You're comfortable with that proposition being realistic?
PM: Look, I didn't use that word, Leon, and I didn't use it deliberately. People who are earning $150,000, $200,000, can find themselves under cost of living pressures, but they are in a different position from a family earning $40,000 or $50,000.
So when we make choices we've got to work out how to use government dollars to make the biggest difference for people who need our assistance the most, that's why the Schoolkids Bonus has gone to people on the family payment system, and why we also want to increase family payments and increasing family payments we've made a choice. We've said well, mining companies are really profitable at the moment, people like Gina Rinehart are doing pretty well, so we want to take some of the money from there and give it to low- and middle-income struggling families.
Mr Abbott is warning those families today he wants to take the family payments money off them and give it back to the mining companies and Gina Rinehart.
HOST: On that matter, what do you say to those who criticise your education payment, that they'll go out and spend it on something that's got nothing to do with education, like the pokies? What do you say to that?
PM: I just think this is an insult to a million families around the country. It's an insult to 100,000 families in South Australia. We've been paying an education tax refund to 1.3 million families, so it's been there, collect your receipts, put it in at tax time and what we found from that system is a million of those families aren't getting the refund at all, or aren't getting the full amount. And I've talked to people about that, I talked to a young mum yesterday who said ‘Look, we try and keep the receipts and then we mislay the receipts and then we find some of the receipts, but not all of receipts. It's just been very difficult for us.'
And then I talked to her and said ‘Well, using the money, what do the kids cost to send to school?' and she's talking about hundreds of hundreds and hundreds of dollars, that people pay every year to get the kids to school.
HOST: Prime Minister-
PM: This is $410 for a primary school student, $820 for a secondary school student. Leon, have you ever met a family who's paid less than that across a year to get their kids to school?
HOST: It's been more than that. Much more than that.
Now, look, our State Treasurer, Jack Snelling, has publicly stated that because receipts from the Federal Government are down, he's going to be forced into some very unpleasant decisions. Are you concerned that your payments about to flow through to a million battlers at least, will be evaporated by state charges?
PM: We don't, the Federal Government, we don't work out GST shares for states. We just don't. That is done independently of the Federal Government, under a system that dates from when Mr Howard was in office.
Now I'm not trying to criticise Mr Howard saying that, I'm just wanting to factually give you a picture of how the system works. So it's done independently from government.
GST revenues have taken some knocks, as have the Federal Government's revenues. We've taken huge knocks as a result of the global financial crisis, billions and billions of dollars no longer flowing through to us in revenue.
What do you have to do in those circumstances? Well, you need to make tough choices as Wayne Swan and I did for the Budget on Tuesday night, and Treasurers around the nation for state governments, including Mr Snelling, have to step up and do the same thing we've had to face.
But to give you a sense of the scale of this Leon, for next financial year, where we will bring the budget to surplus, revenues that we expected at budget time last year have gone backwards by almost $10 billion.
So we're going to get $10 billion less than we expected to and we've still made all of the tough choices to get the budget to surplus, to pay to families in South Australia, 100,000 of them, 170,000 kids, the new Schoolkids Bonus and to give families the benefits of new family payments, you do that by making hard decisions. We found in this budget, across the four years, $34 billion worth of savings and state treasurers need to get about the same kind of task.
HOST: How can the Treasurer's description of Australia as a prosperous nation be successful, in realistic now, when we've just talked about plummeting, you've just mentioned $10 billion of GST revenues that have come down and of course we've got these massive increases in utility charges?
PM: Well, Leon, I think we've got a really just understand what's going on in our economy. If you look at our economy compared with, you know, pick anywhere you want to in the world  -  the United States, the UK, France, Germany, you name it Leon - and compare with where our economy is. In the forthcoming financial year our economy will be growing at 3.25 per cent, unemployment will be comparatively low, our economy by the standards of the world has come out of the Global Financial Crisis strong and we should all be proud of that because we did it together. The Government did the right thing stimulating the economy, but working people did the right thing, trade unions, employers, many of them in South Australia, like the big car companies, worked to keep people on when it was really, really tough.
So, we've got a strong economy, but there are some flow throughs from the Global Financial Crisis and one of those flow throughs in that company tax is still down. Companies have been coming out of a loss making period and they're still taking the time to get their businesses right and return to a more profitable period and we're in a big resources boom, but that boom means that new mines are getting exploited and for a period of time they don't pay much tax, because they're building the mine.
So we don't have strong revenues yet, but we will see, over time, out of the strength of our economy. So that does mean that you need to make tough choices at this time. Economy's strong, but lots of families are sitting there saying ‘Well I'm not in the economic fast lane. Where's my share of this mining boom?' and that's why we've responded with the Schoolkids Bonus and increased family payment.
HOST: Okay, is there any room to move for the huge cost in utility charges  -  water, gas, electricity? Is there any room to move at all?
PM: Well these charges are not set by the Federal Government, Leon. So depending on what state you're in, sometimes they're set by state governments or state regulators, sometimes they're set by the private market, depending on which state you're in and who owns what.
For the Federal Government, what's our role? Well, our role is to support working families with cost of living pressures and we've added in this budget with the Schoolkids Bonus and the family payments for things that are at risk under Mr Abbott, and we've provided cost of living relief through a wide range of policies that are helping people.
Of course carbon pricing, is going to have an impact on electricity prices, around 10 per cent, we've always been completely upfront about that and people will get compensation to assist them through.
HOST: Well Prime Minister, now is the problem where there's more jitters in Europe, we've just talked about how we are interconnected with the rest of the world, whether we like it or not. Do you have any room to move at all financially if we have another Global Financial Crisis, or you've got a very modest surplus of a $1 billion, but that's not going to cut it if you need to put more money in the economy, is it?
PM: Well, our experts at Treasury, the same people who have advised governments in the past, have done the projections about what they think will happen in our economy, knowing what's happening in Europe, and they've said our economy will grow at 3.25 per cent in the coming year.
They're broadly the same estimates and outlooks and the Reserve Bank has and as the ones at the International Monetary Fund has. So, taking into account the circumstances in the world, the best expert advice the nation has is that our economy will be growing at 3.25 per cent.
HOST: Okay, one of the problems for South Australia, and no doubt this will come to you this afternoon when you visit here, Prime Minister, is the fact that we've got a big problem with full-time jobs, a lot of casual work out there and of course the definition of unemployment is that you have an hour's worth of work a week. Very few could ever survive on that, I'm sure you'd know and you would agree.
So what is your response to the fact that we desperately need more full-time jobs?
PM: I think we should  -  Leon, I'm acknowledging the problem that you're raising, about work. We always want people to have the opportunity for work, the opportunity to get a full-time job, a part-time job, what suits their family and the opportunity ultimately to go and get a better job too, to get new skills and know that over your working life you'll move from one job to another and you'll be going into better and better jobs.
We have, as a nation done well at that, given what's happened in the world, with the biggest meltdown since the Great Depression. For South Australia, the future, I believe is one that will build on your manufacturing base, which is one of the reasons why I'm so determined that we will see the submarine program benefit South Australia and I was very disturbed when Mr Hockey said ‘oh, forget all of that, forget about South Australian jobs, just go and buy them wholly assembled and done overseas.'
We want to build on your manufacturing base with the submarines. We've worked hard to support the car industry, because it's so important to South Australia.
HOST: What's your reaction about Ford? Now we've supported GMH, but Ford have taken a huge loss. If they come to you with cap in hand, what might you be prepared to do?
PM: Look, we've already worked to support Ford as well, so across our car industry  -  Holden, Ford, Toyota  -  as a Government we've worked with each of them.
And just future of South Australian jobs, Leon, you'll also see flow throughs from the mining industry, with Olympic Dam.
HOST: That's going to take a while to flow through though.
PM: It's going to take a while to flow through, but gee it's a big, big program for the future for South Australia. A huge generator of wealth and prosperity over time. And then South Australia's got all of the other great parts of its economy, whether it's food, whether it's wine, whether it's tourism.
HOST: Are you going to be making an announcement today on your visit here?
PM: I'm going to be talking about the budget to people and talking about the things we've spoken about in this interview, the Schoolkids Bonus, I want people to understand that they'll see some money in their bank accounts before 30 June and when it comes through that they know what it's for, how it's got there, that it's the Schoolkids Bonus coming through.
I want them to understand that the Schoolkids Bonus will be there over the years to support them under Labor and that they'll enjoy increased family payments under Labor.
I also want to talk to people about the big reforms in the Budget, like the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
HOST: I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you this final question Prime Minister and I'm not going to ask you to be a commentator, because you let people who are paid to do that do that, but does it occur to you that the carbon tax and the mining tax have got anything to do with the Government's poll stocks, or do you think there are other issues?
PM: Look, I think people are very anxious about carbon pricing, Leon, and I understand that. I mean we've seen the mother of all scare campaigns roll out over more than a year now, the mother of all scare campaigns. And many people have heard just horrifying stories about what's going to happen to jobs and what's going to happen to cost of living.
None of those horrifying stories are true, they're all monster stories made up by Mr Abbott to try and scare people. When people see carbon pricing come into effect on 1 July people will see increases in family payments, increases in pensions. If you earn less than $80,000 a year you will see a tax cut, that will be the way in which people, actually experience carbon pricing.
HOST: And just for the record, again I did as you about Rob Oakeshott in the beginning, who is having second thoughts. You're still confident that you'll be in government until the next election cycle which is the latter part of next year?
PM: Absolutely.
HOST: Alright, Prime Minister thank you for joining us.
PM: Thanks Leon.



PM: It's fantastic to be in Brisbane on what is such a beautiful day. I'm joined by the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan and we're here in the Federal electorate of Petrie with the local member Yvette D'Ath.
Happy Mother's Day to all the mums around Australia. Happy Mother's Day to my mum Moira, I got to see her in Adelaide yesterday and I hope she's having a terrific day with the rest of the family.
We're here today talking to some local mums about what Mother's Day has been like for them but also about how we want to help them with the costs of getting the kids to school.
We've just talked to Katie who has three high school aged students in her family, three high school aged kids and one primary school kid, about the extra help that the Schoolkids Bonus will mean for her. She said it's a recognition of all of the hard work that goes on in families and that's a pretty good way of putting it. We want to ensure that mums and dads around the country who need our help the most feel that help through the Schoolkids Bonus before 30 June this year and then it can become an (inaudible) part of how they meet the costs of getting the kids to school.
It's part of what we did in the Federal budget to make sure we're spreading the benefits of the boom, spreading opportunity to every part of the country. It's going to make a difference for families right around the nation and here locally in Petrie and in Queensland it's going to make a difference too.
So in Yvette's local electorate we'll see 9,700 families benefit from the Schoolkids Bonus, 12,000 families benefit from our increase to family payments and here in Queensland we'll see over 280,000 families benefit from the Schoolkids Bonus and 335,000 families benefit from new family payments.
I hope everybody's enjoying Mother's Day and we're certainly very pleased to be here and very proud of working with Australian families who are doing the hardest work of all, raising the next generation.
I'll turn now to Wayne Swan for some comments and we'll take your questions. Swanny.
TREASURER: Thanks very much Julia. It was good to talk to Katie and the other parents here today about the costs of bringing up school kids and if you've got three kids in high school it costs a bomb. So they understand how important it is to have a Schoolkids Bonus which is why I was just so appalled this morning on television when Mr Hockey said it was bad policy. This is good policy. It's good for parents. It's certainly good for mums who do a lot of the work around the kitchen table trying to pay the bills who understand how much it costs to clothe a student, to buy all the essential equipment. 
So a lot of families are going to get a very big benefit from the Schoolkids Bonus but also they'll get a very big benefit from the increase in family payments that we also announced in the budget which will start from 1 July next year and the Opposition has not yet committed to supporting those payments. Mr Hockey has refused to guarantee them. Mr Abbott has refused to guarantee them. We certainly guarantee them because, along with the Schoolkids Bonus, what this does is provide support to parents who are doing the most important job in the country. Here on Mother's Day it's important to reaffirm the role of parents, what they do for our country by bringing up the next generation and making it a better place.
Thank you.
PM: Thanks, we're happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Was it important to do that reaffirming here in Queensland for any reason?
PM: We'll be talking to families around the country. I've had the opportunity to talk to families in other parts of the nation. I want to make sure that everybody understands the Schoolkids Bonus is coming and that they can look forward to further assistance through family payments.
JOURNALIST: You must be concerned though about what looks like a collapse of support for Labor in Queensland re: the state election?
PM: Well the budget is about helping families and that's why we're here talking about it, talking to families like the ones here in the park today. One of the families we've spoken to will see around $2,800 before 30 June from the Schoolkids Bonus alone. A family, raising four kids, all of the costs  -  the shoes, the calculators, the school uniforms, the books, the bags, all of the costs that come with getting the kids with school and the budget's providing that bit of a helping hand.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) a chapter from Mr Abbott's personal history last week in relation to previous accusations against him. How dirty is the ALP willing to get to stem the Craig Thomson crisis?
PM: The point was simply being made that people are entitled to a presumption of innocence, that point was being made by Minister Albanese in the Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Craig Thomson was set up?
PM: I think it's not for me to come to conclusions here or announce conclusions. It's for the proper authorities and ultimately for the courts.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I am not going to judge. The appropriate place for this to be judged is the courts. I understand many Australians will have seen Mr Thomson's interview yesterday and they will have drawn their own conclusions but ultimately the only way this matter can be resolved is properly before the courts.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I don't have the time or the inclination to listen to gossip in Parliament House, like many other workplaces there's gossip in Parliament House, it can be hurtful to people and I think Mr Shorten and his wife were making that point today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Queensland Premier has said he doesn't have the money to support the National Disability Insurance Scheme. Do you have any comment on that?
PM: I'll be happy to talk to Premier Newman about how we can work together on having a launch site in Queensland. Here in this great state people who have a disability, whether they're born with it, whether they get one of the really cruel diseases  -  Parkinson's or MS or one of those very cruel diseases or whether they are acquired as a result of an accident, we know that too many of these Queenslanders aren't getting the care and concern they need from the current system. We want to improve that and I'm sure Premier Newman will want to be involved in discussions about how we can work together to do just that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) any other of the states?
PM: Well we announced the budget last Tuesday with the billion dollars to support launch sites four years earlier than the Productivity Commission recommended. When I sat round the table with all the premiers and chief ministers a little bit earlier this year there was a real sense of enthusiasm for the National Disability Insurance Scheme. People just simply recognise things have got to change. So if a premier or chief minister recognises as I do that things have to change then it's only a small step to working together when we've budgeted a billion dollars to get this done.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: No, we're doing it in this order deliberately, so deliberately we announced on Tuesday night that a billion dollars would be available, we want to put that on the table first and then go and have the discussions about the location of the launch sites.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Parliament becoming unworkable from your perspective, should you be cutting ties with the Greens (inaudible)?
PM: No, I'm not at all worried. We delivered the last budget in record time and we'll deliver this one too. We've delivered around 300 pieces of legislation, many of them huge nation changing reforms that will set us up to be a stronger and a fairer place in the future.
JOURNALIST: Are you confident of the support from the Independents, given Mr Oakeshott's comments.
PM: Yes I am.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'd certainly welcome discussions in the Parliament on a code of conduct for MPs. I do want to see Members of Parliament always doing the right thing, there are various rules now for Members of Parliament, but I'm obviously open to suggestions that we have a code of conduct and a clearer set of rules  -  be very happy to engage in discussions about that.
JOURNALIST: Last week the New South Wales Government expressed it's unlikely to challenge the carbon tax. Was that ever a concern?
PM: No. I always thought it was posturing and it was.
JOURNALIST: Just going back to Craig Thomson, (inaudible)?
TREASURER: Sorry, who said that?
JOURNALIST: Union leader Paul Howes.
PM: At the end of the day, it isn't a question of what conclusion an individual comes to whether that's you or whether that's anybody else. It's about what the courts find that matters.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Do you want to give me an example?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well if you haven't got one it's a fairly silly question.
JOURNALIST: A question for the Treasurer?
PM: Sure.
JOURNALIST: How would you gauge the public reaction to the Federal budget a week out?
TREASURER: I think a lot of parents out there are really keen to see all of the payments flow through. I mean, those people that have cost of living pressures understand how important the Schoolkids Bonus is, for example, how important the family payment increases are, but most importantly this budget comes back to surplus and that delivers something really important to people sitting around the kitchen table. It gives a lot more flexibility to the Reserve Bank to change their interest rate settings, should they decide to do so. 
So for example, at the moment if you've got a $300,000 mortgage you're paying $3,000 a year less than you were paying when the Liberals were last in power. So it's very important to have good fiscal policy in place. It' gives flexibility to the Reserve Bank but also to spread the opportunities of the mining boom around the whole of our community through things like the Schoolkids Bonus. There's a very good response to that.
PM: Okay  -  all in, all done? Thank you very much. 



PM: I'm delighted to be here this morning with Graham Perrett in his federal electorate of Moreton, continuing to talk to families here in Queensland about last week's budget.
Last week we returned the budget to surplus, which was the right thing to do for our economy, to make sure we've got a buffer for the future, and also because we want to give the Reserve Bank the maximum room to move on interest rates if it chooses to do so.
And for families in Graham's electorate, right around Queensland, right around the nation, when interest rate reductions happen they're very welcome, reducing the cost of the mortgage.
Last week's budget, as we returned it to surplus, was also one for hardworking Australian families. We know that there are families her in Queensland and right around the nation who work tremendously hard, who get about the hard work too of raising the next generation of Australians, but find it quite difficult to make ends meet, who feel themselves to be under cost-of-living pressure.
And so for those families, we've wanted to make a difference, through the Schoolkids Bonus, and also through family payment increases.
As we were talking about with families here, the Schoolkids Bonus provides $410 for primary school students and $820 for high school students. It helps with all of the costs of getting the kids to school.
And we're also increasing family payments, so for a family with two children on the maximum rate, they will see $600 extra.
And we've made special provisions in the budget to help some of the poorest and neediest Australians including those on Newstart allowance.
To give you a sense of how many families will benefit from us making sure that we're working with Australian families to help them get by, here in Moreton 9000 families will see an increase in family payments. 6800 families will benefit from the Schoolkids Bonus, and 9000 families will benefit from the new allowance for some of our poorest Australians.
Across Queensland, 335,000 families will see the benefits of increased family payments, 280,000 families will see the Schoolkids Bonus, that's for around half a million schoolkids in Queensland, and 295,000 families will see the allowance for some of the poorest and neediest.
I'm aware that Mr Abbott is in Queensland today. When he speaks in Queensland today, I think he's got to be very frank with the people of Queensland.
First, that he doesn't want half a million school kids in Queensland to benefit from the Schoolkids Bonus. And he's also got to be very clear about what he's going to do with our new family payments.
These new family payments are us sharing the benefits of the mining boom. They're funded through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. They're our way of saying to Australian families; we understand many of them are not seeing the benefits of the mining boom and here's a bit of a share for them.
Mr Abbott hasn't been clear about the future of these family payments, if he's ever Prime Minister. And I would call on him today to say very clearly that those family payments will stay.
Mr Abbott can't fudge this. If he's going to rip money off Australian families, then they've got a right to know.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said yesterday that you supported a code of conduct for politicians. Why has it taken so long?
PM: We talked about a code of conduct when this Parliament started after the last election.
It's been looked at by a Parliamentary Committee in the House of Representatives, and now a Senate Committee is also looking at it. I'm very open to a code of conduct, and to working with others in the Parliament to get this done.
JOURNALIST: If it was introduced at the moment though it would wipe MPs out (inaudible).
PM: Well, how do you put that? Explain to me how you've reasoned your way to that.
JOURNALIST: There'd be quite a few that might qualify.
PM: In  -  well, I don't think you can just go as broad-brush as that without saying specific things about specific people.
Parliamentarians are there doing the job to represent their electorates. Of course I want to see parliamentarians doing the right thing. There are many rules that govern Members of Parliament now but I'm very open to looking at a code of conduct for the future.
JOURNALIST: Do you support what the independents are saying, the broadening the rules, and if so do you need a referendum on it?
PM: Look, I'm very open to these discussions, that's what I indicated yesterday.
JOURNALIST: What sort of (inaudible) are you looking at for (inaudible)
PM: Well, look, the discussions are still to come. There's been a House of Representatives Committee that's had a look; a Senate Committee's having a look. As I indicated yesterday I'm very open to working with others in the Parliament on a code of conduct.
JOURNALIST: Yes or no on the referendum?
PM: Well, it's not as simple as that. The discussions about this are yet to come.
JOURNALIST: On the NDIS, can you rule out (inaudible)
PM: Well, we've got to be very clear about the process here, with the National Disability Insurance Scheme. We want to do better by Australians with disabilities and I'm particularly concerned that there are so many Australians who miss out on decent care.
Whether or not you get a good package of care can often depend how you got your disability, so someone injured at work will be in a different position than someone who gets Parkinson's Disease, to take just one example, or a child who's born with cerebral palsy.
I want to have a situation in our nation where however you get your disability; you get decent care and support. We asked the Productivity Commission to recommend how we could best do that, it's a really big thing to do.
They said first thing, have launch sites, get out there, work with launch sites to see how you can make this system work. And we've made provision in the budget to do that, $1 billion, and we're determined to do that a year early.
We'll take the lessons from the launch sites to roll out a national scheme. Of course it's got to be appropriately funded, and we'll make the budget decisions necessary as we work our way through. But we've got to do this in a sensible, methodical way, the first thing is to get the launch sites agreed with States and Territories, and get them started on 1 July next year.
JOURNALIST: So if the States want to come on board (inaudible) you'll allow an additional (inaudible)
PM: Well it's not a question of that. No, we've got a billion dollars on the table.
For the launch sites we are prepared to pay the lion's share. Of course we are asking States and Territories to show their concern about people with disabilities too.
Here in Queensland, there is the lowest expenditure per head on people with disabilities. So if you've got a disability here in Queensland, you'll get less than if you had that disability in New South Wales, or Victoria, or Tasmania, or South Australia or Western Australia, and the list goes on.
Well, I think that's pretty concerning for the people of Queensland. Someone with a disability here doesn't deserve less than someone in another part of the nation.
Very open to working with Premier Newman about a launch site here in Queensland to show how we can do better for people with disabilities. On how we'll make provision for all of this, well I think people should judge us on our track record.
We've doubled funding for people with disabilities, we've doubled disability support as a government since we were first elected, and we've made a provision of a billion dollars for the launch sites all at the time of returning the budget to surplus and taking, as a share of our total economy, less of a share in tax than the Howard Government used to.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Afghanistan, is that likely to bring forward the time that we will get out of (inaudible)
PM: Well thanks for that question because it's an important one.
Overnight, President Karzai has announced the next tranche of places in Afghanistan that will move into transition. Transition means that security leadership moves from forces from NATO and ISAF to Afghan local forces.
The province in which we work, Uruzgan Province, has been named in this tranche for transition. We anticipated that, and when I last gave a major address on Afghanistan to the Australian people, I explained that it was quite likely that Uruzgan Province would be in this tranche for transition.
What that means is the transition strategy is on track in the province in which we work. We will move into transition in the coming few months, and Afghan security forces will start to take the lead.
I, at the end of this week, will go to Chicago for the next summit of NATO and ISAF countries  -  the countries working in Afghanistan  -  for further definition of the strategy in Afghanistan.
But the message people should get from the announcement by President Karzai overnight, is that the transition strategy agreed at the last summit in Lisbon is on track.
JOURNALIST: Does that mean (inaudible)
PM: As I explained when I gave this major speech on Afghanistan, transition is a process, it can take 12-18 months, and it is at the end of transition in our province  -  Uruzgan Province  -  that we would see the bulk of Australian forces come home.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) how will you decide which States and Territories will get those launch sites and does it mean that if a State like Queensland agrees to the NDIS (inaudible) New South Wales and Victoria, that we will get one of the launch sites? Or is this like a giving the States a (inaudible)
PM: It's opening the door, and we want to have discussions with States to then get them to work with us on hosting a launch site. So for Queensland, Queensland would need to, through discussions with us, put the hand up and say we want to have a launch site.
JOURNALIST: First in, first served?
PM: Well, it's a mixture. We want to work with States and Territories around the country. So of course first in is always a good place to be. First in is always a good place to be, and willing to work cooperatively is the main thing.
JOURNALIST: And could there be a situation where States are having to put in money to help these launch sites and not actually host it? Or the $1 billion is fully federally funded?
PM: No, that's right. We put a billion dollars in the budget for the launch sites for the NDIS, for States that host a launch site we would also be looking at them to work with us and to make a contribution, but I stress we are putting in the lion's share.
JOURNALIST: Do you believe Craig Thomson's version of events?
PM: Look, it's not for me to be judge and jury on this. These matters are very likely to end up before a court and it's the court that should decide.
JOURNALIST: Is there a timeline for when those trial sites will be announced?
PM: We made the provision in the budget; we are commencing discussions with States and Territories. This comes against a backdrop where at the last Council of Australian Governments meeting we agreed principles for the National Disability Insurance Scheme, so States and Territories have already had an opportunity to get in and have a say and to indicate that they want to work with us.
Now we've allocated the billion dollars in the budget, the in-detail discussions will start about which State or Territory will host a launch site. So those discussions will happen over the coming few months.
JOURNALIST: So would you say Queensland should be a prime target for this launch site because we're so underfunded when it comes to disabilities, that we should be guaranteed it?
PERRETT: I'd say that.
PM: Well, that's really a question for Premier Newman. But, given in Queensland today there's less money spent per head on people with disabilities than other parts of the country, I would have thought that it would come up in Premier Newman's to-do list as an important area for work and reform.
JOURNALIST: You've been here over the weekend and Mr Abbott's here as well, (inaudible) is this an indication that Queensland is battleground state (inaudible)
PM: Well I always love coming to Queensland and I particularly love it when I ring back to Canberra this morning to find out that it was -5 in Canberra overnight, we've been joking about that this morning.
We've got a lot of hard work to do here in Queensland, and I'll be here to do it.
JOURNALIST: So will you be buying that proverbial house?
PM: Look, I have a house in Altona in Melbourne's west, so that's enough for me. The house in Altona and obviously I end up spending a lot of time in Canberra too, so I'm intending to be out and about in Queensland talking about the real benefits for Queensland from the Government's policies.
And we've talked this morning about how important it is for the families in Queensland that we got our Schoolkids Bonus through the Parliament last week, even though Mr Abbott voted against it, and that we deliver these family payments.
And once again I'd ask Mr Abbott to take this opportunity today in Queensland to guarantee he won't be ripping those family payments away from hardworking Queensland families.
JOURNALIST: Have you got any words of advice for Queensland's new Opposition Leader?
PM: No, look, I've spoken to her by telephone, I regret that I'm not able to spend some time with her during this visit but other commitments don't make that possible, but I look forward to sitting down and catching up in the near future.
JOURNALIST: Can you pronounce her name?
PM: I'm not going to play any games with you.
PERRETT: I can't spell Palaszczuk.
JOURNALIST: Sam Dastyari, says that he's looking at the possibility of an election this year or-
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: Sam Dastyari, from New South Wales Labor, says that he's looking at the possibility of an election this year or next, what does that say about Federal Labor?
PM: Well, the election will be next year on the ordinary timeframe.
Thank you very much. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I haven't studied the specific report that's in today's papers. Generally on climate change I say we do have to listen to the scientists. 
I mean we do that in other areas of life when it comes to, you know, medical advances, medical health, we listen to the scientists. Scientists tell us that smoking causes lung cancer, we listen to them, scientists tell us that you can get skin cancer from too much sun exposure, we listen them. When they tell us our climate is changing we should listen to them too.
Thanks very much.


The Gillard Government today welcomed the announcement by Afghanistan's President, Hamid Karzai, that a third tranche of provinces and districts would begin transition to Afghan-led security responsibility from the middle of the year.
The third tranche includes Uruzgan Province, where Australia's Mentoring Task Force, Special Forces and Provincial Reconstruction Team work with their Afghan and International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) counterparts. 
With the third tranche of transition, more than 75 percent of Afghanistan's population will live in areas under Afghan security lead.
At the Lisbon NATO-ISAF Summit in November 2010, Afghanistan and ISAF countries agreed that Afghan security forces would take responsibility for security by the end of 2014.
President Karzai's announcement is a strong signal that the transition process is on track. 
Australia is firmly committed to Afghanistan and to the agreed transition strategy and its implementation. 
Transition is a gradual process, not an event, achieved when the conditions are right on a province-by-province and district-by-district basis.
The inclusion of Uruzgan province in Tranche 3 reflects the progress made by Afghan, Australian and ISAF military and civilian teams in improving security and in the training and mentoring of the Afghan National Security Forces.
As transition gets underway in Uruzgan, Australia's Mentoring Task Force and Special Operations forces will support Afghan National Security Forces as they progressively take the lead for security.
As ISAF has said, the complete process of transition in an area can take 12-18 months, meaning that Australia's target of completing transition in Uruzgan by the end of 2014, and possibly earlier, is on track.
Australia will continue its strong support for Afghanistan after transition, including through a training and advisory role and through a possible special forces contribution.  This ongoing commitment to Afghanistan will be a feature of Australia's contribution to the Chicago NATO-ISAF Summit next week, which we will attend.



HOST: Prime Minister, welcome. It's my first ever interview with you, so it's lovely to meet you.
PM: Good morning Steve and good to be here.
HOST: I want to ask you about the National Disability Insurance Scheme in just a moment and meeting with Campbell Newman, but something's happened overnight. Apparently the third tranche of provinces in Afghanistan have said they will begin transitioning to taking responsibility for their own security in that country. What does that decision mean for Australia?
PM: This is a very important decision for us and it's evidence that the transition strategy in Afghanistan is on track. In the third tranche that President Karzai's announced overnight is Uruzgan province, the province in which our defence personnel work. So what this means is that from the middle of this year where we are in Afghanistan will commence transition. Now transition is a process where we move from our security leadership in the province to the security leadership of local forces and we have been training those local forces.
This is in line with the Lisbon strategy and I'll go at the end of this week to Chicago where NATO and ISAF, the countries in Afghanistan, will meet together to determine the next part of the strategy. But Steve we've been expecting this announcement, we've been expecting trance three to deal with the province in which we work and I'm very pleased to see this affirmation that transition is on track.
HOST: So this is not a changing of the timetable or of leaving early in any way?PM: No it's not, it's exactly what I said to the Australian people when I last spoke on Afghanistan and delivered a major address about it. I indicated then that I expected Uruzgan province to be in tranche three and to commence transition and that's exactly what's happened.
HOST: There are a lot of families who have defence personnel in Afghanistan, here in Brisbane. Do you know a date, can you give a date when they will be back home? Do you know?
PM: Transition is a process that will take between 12 and 18 months. That is what President Karzai has said overnight, that's what I said in my recent speech to Australia about the strategy in Afghanistan. And it's at the end of the transition process that we would see the bulk of our forces come home.
HOST: So here in Brisbane, the families that are waiting for their members to come home, can we say that they have done their job, as has been asked of them?
PM: We can say that they have been magnificent and they continue every day to be incredibly brave in difficult circumstances. The job isn't finished, Steve. The job is still underway of training local Afghan security forces. But now we are clearer and clearer on the timeframe because we are entering transition as planned.
HOST: When you go to Chicago, sorry, when you come home from Chicago, what do you
hope to bring back from that meeting?
PM: What I hope to bring back is a clearer picture of what next in Afghanistan. I've been very clear with the Australian people that post transition we don't just say ‘that's it', we will be in an enduring partnership with Afghanistan.
I will meet with President Karzai in Chicago and I'm hoping to work through with him how we will continue to support the Afghan people through aid and development. And I've also been very clear that even post transition, we are open to continuing some support for training local Afghan forces and potentially a role for special forces.
HOST: Hanging over this is, sort of, Iraq. We know that when we pulled out of Iraq, the place descended into somewhat of chaos. Are you at all concerned that that may happen in Afghanistan, even though we have done our job?
PM: Well the strategy here is clear. The work of building a robust democracy in Afghanistan is the work of the Afghan people, but the world needs to help. We need to help through a continuing engagement. We need to help through aid and development and certainly Australia is standing ready to do that.
HOST: I appreciate that. Thank you. Prime Minister Julia Gillard is my guest. This is 612  ABC Brisbane and ABC Digital Radio. My name is Steve Austin.
When you first met Campbell Newman, our Premier, how did you find him?
PM: I met Campbell Newman shortly after the election. I had met him before in other contexts when he was Lord Mayor of Brisbane. I'm intending to work with Premier Newman. I don't think anybody likes it when Federal and State Governments just play a never-ending blame game. So we are going to get on with the job. And I think at COAG, when Premier Newman attended his first Council of Australian Governments meeting, he showed a spirit of wanting to get on with the job and that's what I want to do too.
HOST: When I pitched the National Disability Insurance Scheme, how did you pitch it to him? How did you make your argument to him?
PM: To everyone, whether it's a premier or chief minister sitting around the COAG table or talking to someone in their local community, the argument for the National Disability Insurance Scheme is a pretty simple one. At the moment, whether you get good care and assistance with a disability depends on the circumstances in which you got it.
So if you are injured at work, you will get a different deal from someone who was born with a disability. Now I don't think that our care and concern for Australians with a disability should depend on some bizarre lottery about how their disability came about. And I am particularly concerned for Queenslanders because per head of population, less is spent on disability services in this state than any other part of the nation. I think we can do better than that.
HOST: Right across social services. But it's been that way with previous Labor Government and the Bjelke-Petersen Government before that 20 years ago. It's been historically low on a whole range of issues. He apparently told you that Queensland doesn't have the money for it at the moment. What did he say?
PM: We've budgeted $1 billion to move to having launch sites around the country. Now just to backtrack and then I will answer your question, when we decided we wanted our nation to have a National Disability Insurance Scheme, we asked the experts at the Productivity Commission to have a look and give us advice. They said the best way to do it is to launch it in a limited number of areas to learn the lessons of the launch before you roll it out nationally.
We have decided to do that but we want to do it more quickly than the Productivity Commission recommended, because Australians with disabilities have just waited long enough. So we want to launch in a number of sites around the country from 1 July next year. We put $1 billion on the table in the budget. We do want states and territories to make a contribution if they are going to host a launch site, but we are there with the lion's share already budgeted. And if all of us-
HOST: What about 75 percent or something, is that right?
PM: Well, we will work out the contributions in direct negotiations with the states. But we are sitting there with the lion's share on the table.
HOST: Did he tell you that they, that Queensland didn't have the money to get on board immediately?
PM: Premier Newman has been very, very rigorous in saying to me and I believe also to the people of Queensland that he is concerned about the finances of the State Government and he is intending to take a pretty tough-minded approach to expenditure. Now I appreciate that and understand why he's doing it.
But I also understand, as someone who has had to make some really tough budget choices in our own Federal Budget, that at the end of the day budgets are about choices, what you are prepared to cut in order to free up money to invest in things. I believe that there's few better investments than doing something that offers people with disability more of a life of hope and inclusion than we do now and particularly in a state where you're at the lowest spend per head, I think we need to do better than that. And I'm not trying it make a political point about that, Steve, I'm not trying to say that's Premier Newman's Government as opposed to past Labor Governments. I'm not trying to do that, just pointing out a simple fact, if you have a disability in Queensland today then less is being spent on you than if you had the same disability in another part of Australia. I think that's a bit unfair and we should get about the job of fixing it.
HOST: Tim Nicholls the Treasurer has told me that the Government is broadly supportive of the scheme but they told you that they don't have the money. Now Tim Nicholls has said there is an unexpected $450 million shortfall in GST revenue from the Commonwealth. Will you make up that shortfall in order to help Queenslanders take hold of the NDIS or become one of the launch sites?
PM: Let's be clear about what happens with the Goods and Services Tax. We - the Federal Government - does not determine its distribution between states. That's done independently by the Commonwealth Grants Commission. Yes, GST revenues are under pressure but so are the revenues that come to the Federal Government. Company tax, capital gains tax, the sort of revenues we rely on have taken incredible hits as a result of the Global Financial Crisis.
To give you one figure, company tax is $110 billion down from normal times, that is non-GFC times. Now in a revenue-constrained budget, we have still made the right choices to put money into the National Disability Insurance Scheme. All I would be asking is that Queensland and other parts of the country, in a revenue-constrained environment too, make similar choices because of the importance of people with disabilities getting a fair go.
HOST: So the answer is no, you won't make up the GST shortfall (inaudible)?
PM: A Federal Government has never made up a GST shortfall. That's not how the system works, it's never worked like that from the day that Prime Minister Howard conceived of the GST.
HOST: My guest is Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
So today, it looks like quite likely that because of the reasons of keeping his pre-election commissions, Queensland will not be a launch site for the National Disability Insurance Scheme?
PM: I wouldn't be coming to that conclusion yet, Steve. The process here is we ask the
Productivity Commission for a report, we absorb the report, we had a discussion about National Disability Insurance Scheme at the last COAG meeting. It was an amicable and a good discussion. We agreed some principles to guide us. Now, as a Federal Government we've put $1 billion on the table for launch sites and we'll get about the job of talking to our state and territory counterparts. Now let's have those discussions before jumping to a conclusion about what may or may not come out of them.
HOST: Have you spoken with Anna Bligh since she lost the state election?
PM: Yes I have-
HOST: What did you say?
PM: I obviously commiserated with Anna personally on the loss and I've spoken to her since just to catch up, sort of person to person. I haven't been able to see her in person but caught up on the phone.
HOST: What do you intend to do about the state of the Queensland Labor Party here in Queensland, they're not in a good way.
PM: Well my job is to be here in Queensland representing the people of Queensland and all of their cares and concerns. I'm not out there doing the organisational work of the Labor Party. Clearly here in Queensland we have a lot of hard work to do but I believe we are also here in Queensland offering benefits that will matter to the Queensland community.
If you look at the last budget just last week, we've made provision to help families in Queensland  who are struggling with cost of living pressures to have some more money in their hands to deal with that, particularly the Schoolkids Bonus. I was talking to families about that yesterday here in Queensland  -  you know, money that people will see before 30 June to help them with the costs of getting the kids to in primary school, high school and then that benefit will be ongoing and this is a considerable benefit for Queensland. We've benefitting around half a million Queensland school students through the Schoolkids Bonus.
HOST: I take your point but why do you think Labor did so badly in Queensland?
PM: Look, I'm not a commentator on state elections. I've got other things to do and big, big, big work to focus on including the National Disability Insurance Scheme and including working with families here in Queensland and in other parts of the nation who know our economy is strong but also say to themselves ‘Gee, I haven't been experiencing much of this mining boom'. I've got to keep working to make sure they get their fair share.
HOST: Have you met Annastacia Palaszczuk, the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the Labor Party in Parliament?
PM: I've spoken to her over the phone. I haven't had the opportunity yet for a sit down meeting.
HOST: Will you be meeting her while you're in town?
PM: I won't get that opportunity today because of other commitments but I'm certainly looking forward to having a chat with her.
HOST: It's fourteen minutes to nine, the Prime Minister is my guest, Julia Gillard.
Where's Kevin Rudd?
PM: Well he's representing the electorate of Griffith as you would expect him to be.
HOST: He's not in China or something?
PM: Not to my knowledge, no I'm sure he's out and about representing his electorate.
HOST: Do you have an agreement that says he is not allowed to speak with the media here in his home town?
PM: No, certainly not.
HOST: So when we ring him and ask for an interview and he says he's not allowed to talk, that's misleading?
PM: Kevin Rudd will make his own decisions about what media engagements he has.
HOST: Is he  -  I guess, do you know if he's going to stand at the next federal election?
PM: He's indicated publicly that he will.
HOST: So when he tells us he's not allowed to talk, it's not your office that's preventing him?
PM: Look, Mr Rudd is able to speak to the media should he choose to do so. If he doesn't chose to do so then Steve, that's a matter for him.
HOST: I'm delighted to hear that, helps clarify from your end at least.
Now Peter Beattie, former Premier of Queensland, a populist premier, very effective at winning elections, is talking quite publicly about many matters federal. Tell me, have you interest at all in Peter Beattie joining a federal arena, joining the Labor Party federally?
PM: As I understand Mr Beattie's current life, he's enjoying it a great deal. I know that his wife Heather had a tilt at the recent local council elections and Peter will always be a strong Labor supporter. It's in his bones, it's in his heart, it's in every fibre of his being, but I think he's enjoying what he's currently doing.
HOST: Would you like him in your team?
PM: I'm not going to be drawn on a million hypotheticals about someone else's life, I don't think that's really fair.
HOST: Well you brought in Bob Carr?
PM: But if you want to ask Peter Beattie about his life really you should ask Mr Beattie. It's not fair to ask me to talk about what Peter Beattie should do with his life.
HOST: If you give him the tick he say - well actually, he might pick up the phone and say ‘Julia, I heard what you said'.
PM: I think you're engaging in all sorts of hypotheticals and speculation and I'm not here to be issuing instructions to other people about how to live their lives and what they should do next.
HOST: This is 612 ABC Brisbane, ABC Digital Radio. Twelve to nine, the Prime Minister of Australia is my guest  -  Julia Gillard. My name is Steve Austin.
In Malaysia, apparently there's just been a trial held, a war crimes trial where George W. Bush, Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld and a range of other in the American administration were tried in absentia for war crimes and they were found guilty. Does this have any implications for Australia at all?
PM: No, I don't see how.
HOST: Okay, it was a bizarre trial but it's been reported in Malaysia, this trial has taken place in absentia, they were found guilty. I just wonder if there's any concern about Australian flow on at all?
PM: No. None whatsoever.
HOST: Nothing's been raised by the Malaysian Government at all in relation to that court matter?
PM: No. Nothing.
HOST: This is 612 ABC Brisbane and ABC Digital.
Julia Gillard, what are you doing while you're in Brisbane for the rest of the day today?
PM: I'll be having a chat with local families. I'll be out in the Federal electorate of Moreton with Graham Perrett where we'll be talking to people about what flows from the federal budget. Of course it's the Schoolkid's Bonus that we've just talked about. $410 for primary school students and $820 for high school students, but it's more than that. People will also see increases in family payments and some of the poorest and neediest in our community will also see a new allowance.
So I'll be out talking to people about how they're dealing with cost of living pressures, how people feel about meeting some of the bills, some of the costs. I've had chats with families about really basic things like your young child loses the school jumper or their calculator, manages to put it through the wash  -  all of those really human things that happen and then there's extra expense for families. We want to be working with families to help relieve some of that pressure.
HOST: Are you well aware that in his budget reply speech the Leader of the Opposition Tony Abbott accused you of firing up the class war. Do you hate millionaires? Like Gina Rinehart and our own Clive Palmer and Twiggy Forest. Do you dislike wealthy people?
PM: Mr Abbott has effectively declared war on low- and middle-income Australian families by refusing to support the Schoolkids Bonus and he did that by saying insulting things about them, like they effectively couldn't be trusted with the money, that hardworking families here in Queensland  -  if you gave them $410 to help with the costs of getting their son or daughter to school - couldn't be trusted with that $410. Now Mr Abbott started that war on Australian families.
For me, I wish people every success in life but I do, as Prime Minister, also have to make choices and when it comes to something like the mining tax, I think Clive and Gina can possibly do with a little bit less so hardworking families struggling to pay bills here in Queensland can have a little bit more.
HOST: They're home grown millionaires, in other words they're Australians. Many of your tax regimes look like you favour overseas controlled mining companies, the big ones  -  Rio, BHP and more. It was Wayne Swan that seemingly declared war on Gina Rinehart and Clive Palmer. Aren't you being unfair to Australian self-made people  -  self-made millionaires?
PM: Certainly not and mining companies are taxed as mining companies, so there's no discrimination against the mining interests that Mr Palmer or Ms Rinehart have, no discrimination whatsoever. The Minerals Resource Rent Tax applies to Rio and all of those companies. We're not particularly looking at local people, we're just looking at the resources wealth in our grounds which is owned by all of us, saying this is a particular time with a major resources boom in train, yet many families are saying ‘I don't really feel like anything is flowing through to me and my family from this resources boom', and we're simply saying for a resource that we all own, let's share the benefits of it.
HOST: Have you ever met Clive Palmer?
PM: No, I've never met Mr Palmer.
HOST: Would you like to?
PM: I'm sort of agnostic on the proposition.
HOST: Okay.
PM: I understand Mr Palmer has got a very different world view than me. He's entitled to that in our wonderful democracy. He doesn't want to pay the Minerals Resource Rent Tax for example-
HOST: He looks after his workers.
PM: Well I think people who are out their working for a living, the kind of people who got up early this morning to do all of the things they need to during this working day to earn some money for their families, to look after their kids, I think that they deserve some benefits to help them along the way and that's what the federal budget was about.
HOST: I have to let you go shortly but I want to squeeze in one more question.
PM: Sure.
HOST: You would have seen like the rest of us did, Craig Thomson's explanation on the weekend with Laurie Oakes. Do you accept his explanation of events after hearing what he had to say on the weekend?
PM: Look, I'm not playing judge and jury here because that's not appropriate. These are matters which sound from the Fair Work Australia report like they are very likely to go before a court and it's the court that should decide.
HOST: It's lovely to meet you. I hope you'll come again to the studio and to Brisbane. Thanks for coming in.
PM: Thanks Steve.



Thank you so very much, and thank you to Ged for that kind introduction.
I'm so proud to be here today as a Labor Prime Minister, so proud to stand before you, and for me this has a real sense of homecoming.
Not to this place, but to the people who are gathered in it, a real sense of homecoming to the great Australian trade union movement, the trade union movement that gave birth to our political party. It's good to be home with you.
A sense of homecoming too, because I learnt my trade union values in my family home.
My parents, John and Moira, taught me many things, but of all of them, first and foremost, they taught me to cherish family, they taught me to study and to work hard, they taught me to respect other people and they taught me to always, always, always carry your union membership card.
They taught me the value of trade unionism.
My parents always valued trade unions because, as working people, they didn't view themselves as being particularly at risk in the workplace.
They knew that with hard work and with thrift, with effort, that they would get ahead. They didn't overestimate or underestimate their position in Australian society, but they did know that whilst workplaces are overwhelmingly full of decent bosses and decent working people, that sometimes things can go wrong, and that's when you need your trade union.
And my parents understood, too, that even if nothing ever went wrong for them, it was a question of respect for their fellow workers that they were members of the union, and that they were there able to lend their strength to others should it be needed.
My parents always understood the value of joining with others in their workplace, bringing their strength together in the trade union, and they were proud union members all of their lives.
I've taken those values with me. And just like my parents taught me about Labor's vision of workplaces, they taught me about the broader Labor vision for society.
They taught me about the benefits of opportunity for all, that everyone, everyone should have the opportunity to get ahead.
They taught me about the great enabler which is education, the thing that enables people to realise their dreams. They taught me that a decent society doesn't ask people to beg, a decent society makes sure that people do not miss out on the things that go to help make a reasonable life for them and their families.
They taught me that Labor vision, and they also taught me that this great country, their adopted home, never ever needed to be afraid of the future.
All of my life I've taken those values with me and their values with me and there has never been a moment in my adult life where I've doubted their wisdom or their morality.
Those Labor values, my values, your values, they are the values that have guided the Labor Government I lead.
And I'm proud to be able to report to you today that driven by those Labor values, we have protected and enhanced the rights of people at work. I'm proud to be able to report to you today that we've dumped WorkChoices because it was dumping on working people.
That we have acted to recognise the valuable work of social and community services workers, undervalued for too long, mainly because they were women. We've acted to correct that.
And we're acting now to recognise the valuable work of people in aged care, of those who care for the elderly in our society, once again under-recognised for far too long.
And we've moved to protect the rights of cleaners. We've moved to improve the laws for outworkers. We've moved so that a truck-driving cabin being a workplace can be a workplace can be a safer workplace, so that truck driver gets back home that evening.
We've worked, too, to ensure that our building workers get a fairer go. And for every worker, we've moved to increase superannuation from 9% to 12% so people can see a decent retirement. The actions of your Labor Government driven by Labor values.
Friends, you understand, as I understand, that having fairness and decency at work is the foundation stone for fairness and decency throughout our society. It is what the Liberals never understood when they introduced WorkChoices, that if you take away rights at work, then you are taking away so much from working people.
That the values that make you take away rights from work are the values which show in everything else that you do.
Friends, I'm proud to be able to report to you today as your Labor Prime Minister that we have protected your rights at work and in doing so, we have eradicated the days of fear in Australian workplaces that Mr Abbott and his friends brought.
The days of fear when people would go to work not knowing if that was the day that they would be unfairly dismissed, not knowing if that was the day that they would lose their job unfairly and not be able to even complain about it. We have ended those days of fear.
I'm proud that we have been able to do that. We have moved from Mr Abbott's days of fear at work to days of decency and respect by protecting rights at work.
And we've done that as a foundation stone of a broader Labor vision for our society.
I am proud of the achievements of our government, whether it's the National Broadband Network or our health reforms, whether it's putting a price on carbon or an historic increase in the pension.
I am proud of those great Labor reforms. But the two that are closest to my heart, the work we have done to protect and save jobs and the work we have done to give Australia's children a better education.
When the worst economic catastrophe the world has faced since the Great Depression threatened, we acted to save jobs.
And because we acted, hundreds of thousands of Australians , your members, are in work today, still in their own homes, their kids able to get an apprenticeship because the party of work acted to save jobs.
And as the party of work acted to save jobs, your Labor Party, your Labor Government has also been working to transform opportunity by ensuring that Australian kids get a better education.
We've moved to improve schools, we've increased apprenticeships and we are expanding university places.
I only stand here before you today because I was a beneficiary of Gough Whitlam's dream that university gates should be opened to the many, not the few.
And that dream of education, that dream of education as the great agent of change, it has been there since been there since Chifley's light on the hill, it's been there since Gough Whitlam's lamp on a child's desk.
And that dream is being built on by this Labor Government today, making it a reality for young Australians.
I am so proud to be able to report to you that today more Australians from poorer homes are going to university than ever before, and I am absolutely convinced that in the decades to come, there will be people who stand on this stage and who are able to say that they are only standing here because of our education revolution, your education revolution, what your Labor Government is achieving today.
Friends, we're rightly proud of these achievements, these Labor achievements. We're rightly proud of what we have done as the party of work, as the party of a fair go, as the party of opportunity.
But, friends, we are also the party of realism and we gather today in what are not easy days for the Labor Movement or for the Labor Party itself.
I know you realise that and I realise it, too. Australia's trade union movement is a proud, free, democratic, accountable trade union movement.
Your reputation of being professional and hard-working on behalf of your members has been hard-fought for and hard-won, and so I know it distresses you the way that it distresses me, that the conduct, the very poor conduct of some parts of one union risk tarnishing that great reputation.
I know that that dismays you and it dismays me as well, and whatever the ultimate findings of the courts and tribunals are about all of this, we know that in some parts of a union, members have been let down very badly.
Instead of the sole focus of those union officials being on benefiting those members, those members have been let down.
That disgusts me and I know that it disgusts you, too, and we will work together for change to right this wrong because we all believe that a dollar taken from a worker is a precious thing, and a dollar taken from a worker as part of their union dues should always be used for their benefit.
So we will work together, for new reforms on transparency and new stiffer penalties.
That will be our way of saying loudly and proudly that what has happened here is not good enough and we, the Labor Party and the Labor movement, will be saying to union members around the country that we're getting on with the job in their interests, having drawn a line under this and acted for change, and we will work together to do that.
Friends, this too is not an easy set of days for the Labor Party itself.
I'm not ever going to succumb to government by opinion poll. We don't do the things we do because we're looking for a headline or looking for a poll bounce.
We didn't step up and save jobs because we were looking for a headline or a poll bounce.
We don't transform education for those political ends either. We don't do the things we do because of those political motives.
We do them because they're right.
We do them because they're in the Labor cause.
We do them in the interests of working people.
We do them because we're the party of hard work and the party of a fair go.
But, friends, whilst I will never succumb to government by opinion polls, I can read the opinion polls and I'm under no illusions about the depths of the political challenges that confront our Government. I understand that, I get that.
I understand that Australians have been screamed at now by the Opposition for more than a year.
They've been told that they need to be very afraid, they've been screamed at relentlessly and we all know a good fear campaign when we see one.
We also know that so many Australians have looked at this minority Parliament, the Parliament that they elected, and they have wondered to themselves whether something that is so unusual at the national level in Australia's political history, something the subject of so much dramatic reporting, is working in their interests.
And Australians, too, are still feeling anxious from the days of the Global Financial Crisis.
Australians recognised that something very big happened in the world and to our economy, and many Australians are worried what that means for themselves and their families and their future.
You know so many of your members are feeling like that, that sense of anxiety.
Well, here today I want to say to you, so you can say to your members, that there is nothing to fear when we look at each of these events, nothing to fear at all.
Your members have been told that their cost of living is going to skyrocket and their jobs are going to be at risk on 1 July when carbon pricing comes in.
And today I want to say through you, to your members, to the Australian people, that there is nothing to fear when carbon pricing starts.
I understand that so many Australian people are feeling under cost-of-living pressure; that they would come to you in their workplaces and say to you that they're wondering whether the Government understands the pressure that they're under.
Well, I'm here to say to you today we do understand that pressure and we will be working with Australian families on the cost-of-living pressures that they feel.
That's why we delivered a Labor budget, a battlers' budget, a fair-go budget to make a difference to working Australians around the country.
And so please, tell your members who are worried about cost-of-living pressure, that from next week people will start to see the money that is for compensating for carbon pricing start to flow.
Before 30 June, they will see a Schoolkids Bonus. $410 for primary school students, $820 for secondary school students.
On 1 July, people earning less than $80,000 a year will see a tax cut. Next January people will see the first instalment of that year's Schoolkids Bonus.
In March, some of the poorest and neediest, like people on Newstart, will see a new allowance to help them through. In July, people will see the second instalment of that year's Schoolkids Bonus.
They will see an increase in will see an increase in family payments and they will see further increases in family payments and in pensions as a result of carbon pricing.
Please tell your members that there is nothing to fear, that we will keep working with them, as a Labor government, focused on them and their families' needs to help them make ends meet.
Now, what's the Liberal answer to all of this?
Well, it was no surprise to me that a Labor budget, a budget for working people, a budget for battlers, was so attacked by the Liberal Party last week.
Let me just use some of the words that Mr Abbott spoke about our cost-of-living support for Australian families. About family payments he said and I quote,
            I'm not saying this particular measure is there forever.
It's Mr Abbott's way of saying under him family payments and their increases would be taken away.
Or when Mr Abbott said,
This Schoolkids Bonus doesn't have to be spent on school. I mean, you can go and blow it on the pokies.
That Mr Abbott's way of saying he doesn't trust working Australian families to look after their kids. What an insult.
Or when Mr Abbott said,
            This is just $400 or $800 emerging in people's bank accounts.
That's Mr Abbott's way of saying he is so out of touch that he doesn't understand that for so many families around the country, $400 or $800 makes a real difference.
Friends, you know differently from your members in your workplaces how families are experiencing cost-of-living pressures, and you know that they need our assistance, they deserve our assistance, they don't deserve Mr Abbott's cheap politics or even cheaper insults.
Friends, when it comes to the minority Parliament, I know that so many Australians, through the dramatic reporting have been concerned about what a minority Parliament means for this country.
Today I want to say to you and through you to your members that this minority Parliament, so unusual in Australia's history, is working.
As Bismarck said, politics is not a pretty business, and that's always been true. And making a minority Parliament work was never going to be easy, whether it was me or whether it was Mr Abbott. But in the days that followed the last election, when Australians had determined that they would vote for this minority Parliament, Mr Abbott and I took a very different approach to the future.
Mr Abbott did try to woo the Independents that he now scorns and insults. He did that by offering things like a billion dollars for the Royal Hobart Hospital. He thought that bribes would make the difference.
Well I took a different approach, a more purposeful approach, and I said to myself that in government you can make a difference to this nation's future, and there is no excuse for not ensuring that even with a minority Parliament, we work to secure our nation's future.
And this minority Parliament has.
300 pieces of legislation passed, not one defeat for the Government in a vote in the House of Representatives. This minority Parliament has been working through the too-hard basket for the nation.
Difficult reforms like putting a price on carbon, the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, the structural separation of Telstra, making sure that people are being encouraged to move from welfare to work. This minority Parliament is working to make a difference for the future of all Australians.
And friends, that is the measure for the Parliament, for the Labor Government. What you do that makes a difference for working people and their families, this Parliament is working to make that difference. That's the measure of what we have been seeking to achieve.
But I do understand, as I'm sure you understand as well, the frustration that can come from the headlines in the daily newspapers where, when you look at those headlines, with all of their horror, the schlock and horror that modern media reporting runs to, that the achievements of this minority Parliament aren't seen for what they are.
I understand that frustration as you understand it, too.
Yes, there are some days of frustration around, but for us, as we respond to that frustration, I want to say this to you: We are working and we are achieving for Australians around the nation.
We are working as a Labor government to deliver Labor reforms. This minority Parliament is working. Your Labor Government is working, and our economy, the economy that your Labor Government has worked with you to achieve, is the envy of the world, providing jobs to Australians around the country, even in these days of structural change.
So friends, let me say this to you about the achievements of your Labor Government and the work that we have to do together.
We could, in these days of political pressure, we could succumb to that political pressure, or we could do what I am urging you to do today. When you focus on what more needs to be achieved, when you focus on what we can achieve in the days to come as a Labor Government, I ask you to think of this:
We have a plan for the country.
We are getting on with the job.
I am determined that we deliver that plan because it will make a difference for all Australians.
We should not allow days of political pressure to become a counsel of despair. Rather than that, we should ensure that we stiffen our spine and we get on with the work that working Australians want us to do, the work that means such a difference to them and their families, the work that Labor people around the country rely on us to achieve.
I am absolutely determined to do that and prepared to take all of my energy and all of my vigour into the next 500 days as we move towards the election campaign and beyond, to keep striving for the Labor cause, and I know that you will be doing that with me.
Friends, to give you just one story about how I feel about all of this. Recently, a colleague gave me a postcard. It was from a friend of his who is serving in Afghanistan. It was actually a postcard that had been distributed to German army officers, to those from Germany who fight in Afghanistan.
And the postcard said on the back “I fight for Merkel”. And the Australian soldier who had given it to my colleague had crossed out Merkel and put Gillard: “I fight for Gillard”.
Friends, that's very flattering, very flattering indeed, but it's not right. I don't ask anybody to fight for me. I fight for Australia.
I fight for the Australian values we hold dear, I fight for the Australian way.
No matter how tough, I fight for Australia because of my belief in this great country. I've loved this country all of my life. I came here as a small child, the daughter of migrants who came to this place to seek a better opportunity. And they found it.
They found a beautiful nation, a sunny place, a welcoming nation which has given them and their children opportunities they could not have dreamed of when they first stepped off that boat in 1966.
This is a fantastic country. A fantastic country of hope, a fantastic country of opportunity. And as Prime Minister in these days where Australians are so frequently invited to be afraid, to be afraid of carbon pricing, to be afraid about managing their cost-of-living, to be afraid about their jobs, to be afraid about the future. As your Prime Minister, I will move the Australian people from these days of fear to days of hope.
This is a great country, and in this great country I will be guided by what I learned in my family home. My parents, with their great Labor values, taught me you've always got to give something back, you've got to give it a go, you've got to do everything you can to help others. That's what's driving me. I know that's what's driving you. And I know we're going to keep having that fight together.
Thank you very much. 



We today congratulate Dave Oliver on his election as Secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) and pay tribute to outgoing Secretary Jeff Lawrence.
They are both tremendously committed Labor men.
Mr Oliver was elected to the position unopposed at the ACTU Congress in Sydney today and we applaud the choice of the delegates.
He has been advocating on behalf of Australian workers for over 25 years and has put his shoulder to the wheel on improving workplace safety, particularly in relation to asbestos, and protecting workers' rights in the event of corporate collapse.
Mr Oliver's five years as National Secretary of the Australian Manufacturing Workers Union gives him a deep understanding of the pressures facing many sectors of the Australian economy, particularly those sectors under pressure by the high Australian dollar such as manufacturing, primary industries, tertiary education and tourism.
The Government will work with Mr Oliver to progress reforms to strengthen the rules governing the transparency and accountability of registered organisations, including trade unions.
We look forward to continuing to work with the ACTU to protect the rights and conditions of working Australians and to spread the benefits of the mining boom across the entire Australian economy.
The entire Government also pays tribute to outgoing ACTU Secretary Jeff Lawrence and warmly thanks him for his years of dedicated service to Australian workers and the labour movement.
Jeff Lawrence has been a giant of the trade union movement and has spent 30 years tirelessly advocating for improved rights and conditions in Australian workplaces.
He leaves a lasting legacy for Australian workers.  We wish him and his family all the best. 


Timbarra College, Berwick
Jan Adamson, Principal of Timbarra College: Today we're hosting the Community Cabinet, here at Timbarra College.
Timbarra College Student: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard and other Ministers, they're coming tonight to do a public forum.  
Jan Adamson: It's fantastic for our students who have been quite heavily involved in the preparation for today. They were all hanging out the windows waving to the Prime Minister when she arrived.
Community Member 1: And I thought, its good chance to be seen and put my point of view across.
Community Member 2: That's one of the best reasons why I'm here, is to actually see them out in the field meeting the real people and hear what they've got to say.
Community Member 3: It's very good for the government to actually mingle with the public, you know, associating with the government. And the government's not too distant; the government's actually working hand-in-hand at a local level with the local community.
Georgina Nicholson, Wurundjeri Elder:Wominjeka Wurundjeri Ballak Yearmenn Koondibeek. Meaning: welcome to the traditional land of the Wurundjeri people.
The Hon Julia Gillard MP, Prime Minister: I'm not going to speak very long, because this is your opportunity to pose a question or give us a reflection on the future.
Question: At the moment there's a significant issue with teenage suicide and I just feel there's just not enough support or programs available.
The Hon Tanya Plibersek MP: We've put a significant investment into mental health of around $200 million dollars nationally, which translated to about $40 million dollars for Victoria.
Question: In February 2011, Casey was flooded, which affected 18 hundred homes. Is the government working on responses to emergency situations to be the same response Australia-wide?
The Hon Bill Shorten MP: In insurance they have product disclosure statements that you need a PhD to read. So, this government's the first one to have changed the Insurance Contracts Act. We've now got one definition of what a flood is.
The last thing you need to worry about when your house has been flooded is whether your insurance company will pay up after you've been paying their premiums for years. And I think we have gone a long way to fixing most of those issues.
Question: What is the federal government's vision for education in the long term?
Prime Minister: Our vision for school education is that we are offering the best quality so our kids are getting a world class education, but we are offering that best quality to all children. That's what our investments in teacher quality have been about, in disadvantaged schools, our investments in literacy and numeracy, it's why we are putting computers into classroom, it's why we want a national curriculum that lifts quality around the nation and we make sure that poorer kids get a great education too.
Community Member 4: I'm happy to know that they are here and that they are doing a real sort of consultation with the community; it's not a window dressing.
Community Member 5: I was actually quite surprised by the amount of people that were my age. It's really good to see young people getting involved, which is what we need, because youth are the future.


PM: I'm delighted to be here at The Basin at this community house, and thank you to Heather and everyone who has made us feel so welcome here today.
I'm here with Laura Smyth, the Member for La Trobe, and a little bit later today we will have a Community Cabinet so that local community members in this area can come and talk to me and Cabinet colleagues about the work of the Government and what's on their minds. 
Laura is very shortly to go and open a new school building so if she has to duck out, please excuse her. I'm also here with Greg Combet, the Minister for Climate Change and Jenny Macklin, the Minister for Families.
Today is the day that money will first start to flow through to families resulting from carbon pricing. Everybody knows that the price on carbon will start on 1 July. The price is paid by big businesses that generate carbon pollution.
There will be some flow-through impacts for households of less than a cent in a dollar, but we are making sure that family payment increases, pension increases and a tax cut flows, so that people can see money to help them with the household bills.
Six million households will come out square or even in front as a result of these payments. And today is the first day that these new payments start to flow.
1.6 million families will see coming into their bank accounts from today a lump sum which is for their family payments. Up to $110 for families on Family Tax Benefit A, that's per child, and up to $69 for families on Family Tax Benefit B, per child.
After these payments have flowed over the next couple of weeks, then pensioners will start to see money flow into their bank accounts, and on 1 July people earning less than $80,000 a year will see a tax cut. Most of them will see a tax cut of $300. So families will see these payments start to flow.
In addition, as a result of the budget from last week, whilst we brought the budget to surplus we've deliberately made available new payments to families because we know many low- and middle-income families around the country are finding it hard to make ends meet.
So before 30 June people will see a Schoolkids Bonus. Over $400 for primary school students, over $800 for secondary school students. And there are further family payment increases to flow as well.
This is our way of ensuring that with our strong economy, with the budget coming to surplus, that we are sharing the benefits of the resources boom right around the nation with Australian families who are doing the hard work of raising the next generation of Australians.
To give people a family example about the kind of money that will flow through as a result of putting a price on carbon, if we take an example of a family with two school-aged children and an income of $85,000 a year, they will see an extra $1,000 in tax cuts and payment increases. So money will start to flow from today.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how will your Government get over the perception that Afghanistan is a money pit, given your announcement today of another $300 million post-combat dollars?
PM: Look thanks for that question, which is an important one. As a nation, we have invested a lot in Afghanistan. We have been there to make sure that it is never again a safe haven for terrorists.
That means very brave men and women have gone from Australia to fight in Afghanistan. And some of them have paid the ultimate price. We have lost Australian lives in Afghanistan.
Having spent so much time and lost so much, we want to see Afghanistan in the days beyond this period of Australian soldiers being there being a country which can provide for its own security.
The province we're working in, Uruzgan province, is now going to go into transition. What that means is that local Afghan forces will increasingly take security leadership of that province as they are taking security leadership around the country.
From 2015, Afghan forces will be leading security across the nation of Afghanistan. That's going to cost some money to sustain those forces, just over $4 billion. Australia is prepared to play its part in meeting those costs for Afghan forces.
So yesterday when I spoke to President Obama he and I discussed Australia's contribution of $100 million a year for three years starting in 2015. So that money will go to assist with making sure that Afghan forces are there providing for security in Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what can you tell us about Andrew Wilkie's latest proposal on pokies and what's the Government's view?
PM: As it happens I've brought the world's greatest expert with me, so I'll hand over to Jenny. 
MINISTER MACKLIN: Well we're still in discussions with Mr Wilkie about the legislation that we have drafted. This will be the first time a national government has proposed legislation to deal with problem gambling in the Federal Parliament.
I'm still waiting for Mr Wilkie to indicate whether or not he will support that legislation. When I spoke to him last week he indicated to me that he was still giving it consideration.
JOURNALIST: Minister, what are your comments on today's tent embassy protest in Brisbane? 
MINISTER MACKLIN: I understand from the media that there have been some issues in Queensland, obviously people do have the right to peaceful protest, we do need to make sure that people are able to put their point of view in a peaceful way, but otherwise I'd really have to get further information both from the Queensland Government and the Aboriginal people.
I don't have any further information other than that provided by the media.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you give an assurance that the leaked Kevin Rudd YouTube (inaudible)?
PM: Yes, I can.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott earlier today described the carbon tax in his words as a ‘gratuitous assault on Australian businesses.' How do you respond to this?
PM: Well Mr Abbott is always full of colourful praises, what he's never full of is solutions. All Mr Abbott ever is is negative about our nation's future. And having a clean energy future is important for our country. We have an economy that generates a lot of carbon pollution.
To seize all of the opportunities of the future, we need to move to cleaner energy sources. Like sunshine, like wind, other forms of renewable and clean energy and that's what carbon pricing will do.
JOURNALIST: What about the manufacturing sector? We've had local politicians saying it's going to cost at least 500 jobs in the local area. 
PM: Well I'd be very careful of claims that are made and I'll turn to Minister Combet for a comment as well. Be very careful of claims that are made about carbon pricing, because we have seen the Opposition out there with all manner of false claims to try and scare people.
I mean they have claimed that, you know, the world will come to an end on 1 July and I can guarantee this for you, 1 July will come and go as a very ordinary day in Australia, so don't believe all of the false claims.
For manufacturing, this is a pretty tough time and it's a tough time because of the strength of the Australian dollar. We've seen an Australian dollar trading at $1.05, $1.10 against the US dollar.
Now that's got its upside for Australia but it certainly puts pressure on manufacturing, and many businesses are still re-gearing to make sure that their business model can work with a very strong Australian dollar.
Here in this community, where we are now, there are some businesses that have suffered from that pressure, but there are a number of other businesses that are expanding jobs in manufacturing even with the Australian dollar at the strength that it is now.
Minister Combet's job is to be working with industries around the nation, but particularly manufacturing, so that we can support manufacturing and ensure we've got a diverse strong economy for the long-term.
And I'll just get Greg to make a comment on that.
MINISTER COMBET: Thanks Prime Minister. Well the first thing to bear in mind when you hear these claims of course, is that it's going to be a bit under 500 companies around the country who are the only ones that will have a liability under the carbon price mechanism.
The overwhelming majority of manufacturing firms will not have a liability under the carbon price mechanism. So that when you hear these claims, they're sometimes made by people wishing to engage in political debate about the issues.
I spent yesterday afternoon with quite a large group of people representing manufacturers in the south-eastern part of Melbourne and we had a good lengthy discussion about the pressures that they're confronting, but also the opportunities that they have with changes that are taking place in the economy and the growth in our region.
And there's a great future for manufacturing in this country, but we've got to become more efficient, more productive, more competitive, and take advantages of economic growth in the Asia-Pacific region. And the Government has a lot of policy mechanisms in place to help manufacturers achieve that.
JOURNALIST: Minister Combet, just in regard to the arrest of Rebekah Brooks, does this mean anything for News Corp in Australia, and do you think (inaudible). I'm from Fairfax!
PM: It's broadly under-industry.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that it's testament that there needs to be public interest tests in Australia? Feel free to answer, any of you!
MINISTER COMBET: I think it's possibly one that my boss should answer.
PM: I'm not going to make comments about legal matters at home or overseas. We've, through Minister Conroy, released the Convergence Review which makes a set of recommendations about media including questions of fit and proper person tests as I understand it.
We've said that we will take the appropriate time to consider the Convergence Review and respond to it.
JOURNALIST: Is Craig Thomson out of the woods yet? (Inaudible)
PM: I understand the AEC  -  the Australian Electoral Commission  -  has made a statement today. Minister Gray will issue a response to that from the Government.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look, I'm advised Minister Gray either has or shortly will put out a statement. As I understand it this is twenty-something page report. I haven't had the opportunity to read it myself.
In the broad I think it makes some recommendations about generally how disclosure matters should be dealt with and that they will go to the relevant parliamentary committee for further study and inquiry, and as I understand it they also find that Mr Thomson has not breached the Electoral Act. But I'll have Minister Gray deal with the specifics of it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Mr Thomson is not a member of the Labor Party, his membership is suspended, and it is a member of the Labor Party who will represent Labor in Dobell at the next election. 
JOURNALIST: Will that election definitely be in 500 days?
PM: I understand some grand excitement has been caused by me using the terminology ‘500 days' during my speech yesterday. Can I assure the people of Australia that the election will not be on Grand Final Day in 2013, and that's because I will definitely be at the MCG cheering the Bulldogs on to a very notable victory. 
I'm sure that's exactly what will happen on Grand Final Day next year!
Thanks very much.



Australia will contribute US$100 million annually for three years from 2015 as part of international efforts to help sustain and support Afghan National Security Forces beyond the transition process. 
The Prime Minister and Defence Minister Stephen Smith will take this commitment to the NATO and International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) summit in Chicago on 20-21 May.
This follows Australia's commitment to the Afghan National Army Trust Fund of US$200 million over 5 years beginning in 2009-10.
Afghanistan will have responsibility for its own security by the end of 2014.
To consolidate and build on the security gains of the transition strategy, the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) will need ongoing funding and training and mentoring support.
Australia has a vital national interest in supporting Afghanistan's stability and security after transition. Our commitment to ANSF funding reflects these enduring national interests.
Australia is a significant contributor to ISAF.  We are committed to the transition strategy and to supporting Afghan National Security Forces through transition in Uruzgan.
In Chicago, we will also re-affirm our commitment to supporting Afghanistan after transition.  In addition to ANSF funding, we will help train and mentor the Afghan National Army and police.  We will consider an ongoing Special Forces presence.
Australia will maintain a substantial development assistance program beyond 2014.  This will help sustain progress made in the delivery of basic services such as education and health to the people of Afghanistan.
Australia's enduring commitment to Afghanistan will be formalised through a Long-Term Partnership which the Prime Minister will sign with President Karzai.
This Partnership will frame cooperation beyond 2014 in a range of areas, including security, trade, investment, development and cultural and people-to-people links.  


PM: I'm delighted to be at Wagaman Primary School, and thank you to, there she is, Michelle over there, thank you very much for having us here today, and to everybody who's made us so welcome including some of the kids who, amazingly, said they'd like their NAPLAN to be a little bit harder. I haven't had that reaction before.
And I'm joined today by Chris Burns, the Minister for Education, and also Trish Crossin, Senator for the Northern Territory.
Apart from talking to the kids about how they found NAPLAN today, I've been able to talk to some of the parents about all of the costs of getting the kids to school, and I'm pleased to be here in the Northern Territory, in Darwin, talking about how we're going to work with families to help them make ends meet.
We want to make sure that there's more money in family bank accounts for them to use on the costs of getting the kids to school. That's why, by 30 June, we will be paying the Schoolkids Bonus, for the first time. $410 for primary school students, $820 for high school students, and then that's going to become a permanent part of family budgets, with instalments each January and each July to help you with the costs of getting the kids to school at the start of the school year, and then the costs for the second half of the school year.
Families can also look forward to more money in their bank accounts through our new family payments. We will be increasing family payments by up to $600 for families with two or more children.
And from yesterday on, people will have seen some money start to come into their bank accounts. That's an increase in family payments too, as part of our clean energy payments. Up to $110 per child for people who qualify for Family Tax Benefit  A, and up to $69 per child for people who qualify for Family Tax Benefit B.
And on 1 July, people will see a tax cut if they earn less than $80,000 a year, and pensioners too will see a pension payment coming through in coming weeks as part of the clean energy payments.
 All of this is about our understanding that so many families are finding it tough to make ends meet. And certainly, the cost of kids and getting them to school weighs heavily on families, and that's why we want to be there with a helping hand with some more money into people's bank accounts.
I'm also pleased to be here in the Territory for a few other purposes. I came here during the election campaign in 2010, and talked to some Territorians who were absolutely passionate about their hockey, and they talked to me about how, at Marrara where they train for hockey and play hockey, they needed a new surface. We partnered with the Northern Territory Government, $500,000 each, and hockey in the Northern Territory put in some money too, and it's going to be a great delight to open that new playing surface today.
And of course you've got a proud track record in the Northern Territory of training people who end up in our Olympic team playing hockey.
And tomorrow I'll be also very pleased to be able to turn the first sod on the INPEX Project. This is a huge project, part of our resources boom around the nation, a $34 billion project which will employ 3000 people in construction and then provide 700 ongoing jobs.
It's going to last for 40 years, and make a real difference to the prosperity of the Northern Territory. So, we've got that new investment in the resources sector, we know overwhelmingly the Australian economy is strong, but we know there are some families doing it pretty tough and needing some help to make ends meet, and that's why in the recent budget we've taken the opportunity to share the benefits of the mining boom around the country through new benefits for families.
I'm very happy to take questions, and I've joked that Trish will do all the hard ones, so any hard ones you've got they're over to Trish. Or Paul you could do a few hard ones for me.
BURNS: I hope so.
JOURNALIST: Bill Kelty overnight was talking about Labor losing public trust and needing to start telling the truth. Is he right?
PM: We've got a lot of hard work to do, and we'll be out there doing it, painting our Labor vision for the nation's future. And it's a vision of a prosperous, strong economy that seizes all of the opportunities that will flow through in our region of the world, in this century, when we will see spectacular growth, in China, in India, in Indonesia, right throughout our region.
And to be best positioned to seize all of that prosperity, we've got to be embracing the future  -  a clean energy future, a National Broadband Network future, a future where we're spreading the benefits of the mining boom, and of course as a Labor Government we're going to be using some of that prosperity to share benefits with people around the country including building new important ways of sharing benefits, like a National Disability Insurance Scheme, to do a better job for people with disabilities around the nation.
JOURNALIST: So those sorts of comments are helpful to Labor for you?
PM: Oh look, I'm always happy to hear people in the public debate and public space. I'm a great admirer of Bill Kelty, and what he achieved working alongside the Hawke and Keating Labor Governments, and we continue to work still as a Labor Government alongside working people and their trade unions, so that people are feeling the benefits of today's resources boom.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on Bill Kelty's comments, he's a legend of the Labor movement and he says that (inaudible) should stop blaming the media and the Opposition (inaudible). What have you got to comment on that?
PM: We've got a lot of hard work to do and we're going to be out there doing it, and when I spoke to the ACTU Congress myself, I indicated we'd be engaging in 500 days of fight between now and the next election, taking our visions to the Australian people and continuing to provide the real benefits that Australian families need, including the Schoolkids Bonus and including increased family payments.
JOURNALIST: Should the NSW Labor Party be completely transparent about how much money it gave to Craig Thomson to pay his legal bills?
PM: Look this is a matter for the NSW branch of the Labor Party, and as I understand it a spokesperson for the branch has already dealt with it today.
JOURNALIST: There's a suggestion that Craig Thomson may claim his phone was hacked. Is that a credible defence, do you think?
PM: Look, Mr Thomson's going to make a statement to the Parliament next week, so I'm not going to try and guess what's going to be in that statement, people will hear it next week.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott says that you've shrunk as the Prime Minister, what do you make of this?
PM: I'm used to Mr Abbott's negativity and personal abuse, he engages in it because he doesn't have any plans for the future of our country and I think this week, of all weeks, he's pretty embarrassed to be talking about himself because he voted against money for families last week and he won't guarantee even today that if he was elected Prime Minister, these family payment increases would continue, and at the same time his Shadow Treasurer's talking about putting gup tax on Australian families.
JOURNALIST: The NT Government announced the impact of the carbon price on power and water prices in the Territory today. Now they're facing an election in August and they won't comment on what they think about the carbon price, possibly because they know it's electoral poison. Have you condemned another Labor Government to electoral annihilation?
PM: Well thanks for asking me about that announcement today.
I've had an opportunity to have a look at it, and what it's telling people in the NT is that the average weekly impact of the carbon price on their electricity bill will be $2.61. The average weekly increase all of our modelling has been done on was $3.30 a week, with the average assistance flowing to families being $10.10 a week.
So, $2.61, less than the $3.30 we were figuring on, less than the $3.30 a week, and the average assistance people will see is $10.10 a week. So, for the impact of carbon pricing on power bills here in the Northern Territory it is less than our Treasury modelling expected and the assistance money that will flow through is in excess of this $2.61. On average it's $10.10 a week.
JOURNALIST: The Territory Labor Party has removed all mention of Labor from its electoral material, how does that make you feel?
PM: Well I don't think it's any secret that Paul Henderson's a member of the Labor Party and that he leads a Labor team. I think people in the Territory know that, and Hendo and his Government have been doing a great job here in the Northern Territory and I've been very proud to work in partnership with them on some of the very major reforms that we've engaged in that make a big difference to the Northern Territory.
I mean we're standing here in a Building the Education Revolution building, $1.9 million,  the transformation of Territory schools that we've worked on, both in terms of new school  capital and more money into schools, made a big difference for the Territory.
Our new money in resources into health, our more doctors, our more doctor-training here in the Northern Territory is making a difference for people around the Territory. Our Closing the Gap targets and our Stronger Futures package making a big difference for indigenous Australians here, and of course we've worked together on harnessing the benefits of the resources boom, including investing into skills to people can get those jobs, and there won't be anywhere in the country that gets a bigger benefit out of the National Broadband Network than here in the NT.
BURNS: So Prime Minister, if I could just comment, I was out with a candidate this morning who on their material was proudly proclaiming that they're a member of the Labor team, so, that was really a generalisation that isn't so.
JOURNALIST: Just to take you back to the carbon pricing, are you saying that Territorians should be happy with it because they're not going to be as badly affected as people elsewhere?
PM: My simple point is this.We have seen a hysterical fear campaign for well over 12 months now. Mr Abbott has said to Australians that the impact on their cost of living would be astronomical. He said to Australians that everyone would lose their jobs. He said to Australians that come 1 July, life as we know it would cease to exist. Sun wouldn't come up, the birds wouldn't fly, and on and on and on, this fear campaign has gone.
Now people have got some fact at their disposal, and they can see the increase from carbon pricing on their electricity bill is going to be $2.61, they can see that the average assistance for families, for households is $10.10.
Many families in yesterday and in coming days will see new  money in their bank accounts. They'll get the tax cut on 1 July, and they'll be able to judge this for themselves.
JOURNALIST: Will you support the Greens' call for an Integrity Commissioner for Federal politicians?
PM: Look, if a parliamentarian wants to put forward a piece of legislation for consideration then of course it will be properly considered.
JOURNALIST: Will you support it though?
PM: Look, we'll have a proper process, that's what we do, to look at pieces of legislation so that one will go through the proper process too. Thanks very much.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have a message for Michael Clarke?
PM: Well I saw those very glamorous photos today, and apart from looking very glamorous they looked a very joyful couple, so to Michael and his new wife, I'd say they've obviously had an incredibly day and best wishes for what is going to be, I hope, a very long and very happy life together.
Thank you.



The Northern Territory will continue to produce some of the nation's best hockey players with the help of new turf at Marrara Hockey Stadium in Darwin.
The upgrade brings the facilities up to the standard required to host national and international championship games in Darwin.
The Territory has a proud history in the sport of hockey, with home-grown Olympic medal winning athletes such as Nova Peris, Stephen Holt and Mark Hickman.
This new upgrade, which was an election promise in 2010, means Marrara Stadium can continue to foster Australian hockey players including current stars of the Australian men's team - Des Abbott and Joel Carroll.
The Gillard Government provided $500,000 for this project as part of a 2010 election commitment in partnership with the Northern Territory Government and the Northern Territory Hockey Association.
Senator Trish Crossin said the new upgrade would help the next generation of hockey players develop their skills on an international playing surface from day one.
It is also important for the 2,000 people or more who come to Marrara to play and watch sport every weekend.
Marrara Hockey Stadium Turf Replacement is one of 87 projects funded through the Community Infrastructure Grants Program, which is part of the $250 million regional community package committed by the Gillard Labor Government.
These projects are building and improving community centres, major sports grounds, heritage sites and other community infrastructure around Australia.
The project is an example of the Australian Government working together with state and local governments to boost social and economic development and support sustainable communities.


Families in the Northern Territory are among the big winners from this year's Federal Budget, with more than 15,700 local families set to receive the Gillard Government's new Schoolkids Bonus and about 18,000 local families to get a boost in their family payments from next year.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today visited Wagaman Primary School in Darwin to talk with local families about the extra support. 
The Schoolkids Bonus will provide $410 a year for each child in primary school and $820 a year for each child in secondary school and will replace the Education Tax Refund.
Parents will get their first payment in June this year and from next year the Schoolkids Bonus will be paid in two separate instalments  -  before the start of Term One and Term Three.
The Gillard Government knows that with kids in school, balancing the family budget can be tough.
We want to make sure that the extra money for school costs is paid upfront when parents need it most, with no more extra paperwork at tax time.
The budget also included increases to family payments for Northern Territory families to help with the cost of living.
From July next year, about 18,000 local families who receive Family Tax Benefit Part A will receive a boost of up to $600 extra a year to help them make ends meet.
We know that not everyone is experiencing the benefits of the mining boom and many are struggling to keep up with living costs.
The extra assistance for families announced in the Budget is on top of the money the Government is already providing through the Household Assistance Package.
More than 19,300 Northern Territory families started receiving extra money in their bank accounts from yesterday, as part of the Household Assistance Package.
Families receiving Family Tax Benefit Part A will receive up to $110 per child, and families on Family Tax Benefit Part B will get up to an extra $69.
This extra money will help families keep up with the cost of living now and over the coming months.
And next year, the regular payments that local families receive will go up for good.
MORE SUPPORT FOR FAMILIES IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
-       Schoolkids Bonus: 15,700 local families will receive $410 a year per primary school child, and $820 a year per secondary school child from next month. 
-       Boost to family payments: About 18,000 families will receive a boost to their FTB Part A payment from July 2013. Families with two or more children will receive up to $600 extra a year, and families with one child will receive up to $300 extra a year.
-       Household Assistance Package: More than 19,300 local families will get a lump sum payment in their bank account. FTB Part A recipients will get up to $110 per child, and FTB Part B recipients will get up to an extra $69.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that Her Excellency Ms Yingluck Shinawatra, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Thailand, will visit Australia from 26 to 29 May as a Guest of Government.
This year marks the 60th anniversary of diplomatic relations between Australia and Thailand.
In this time, Australia and Thailand have developed an enduring bond of friendship, built on strong trade, education, security and community links.
Thailand is an important regional partner for Australia. It is Australia's ninth largest trading partner overall, and second largest in ASEAN, with two-way trade totaling nearly $20 billion in 2010-11.
Prime Minister Yingluck's visit provides an opportunity to strengthen the relationship across the full range of our bilateral and regional engagement.
Her visit will include meetings in both the ACT and NSW, with a focus on trade, investment and tourism. Prime Minister Yingluck will be accompanied by senior ministers and will also call on the Governor General during her visit. 



PM: It's great to be here today in the Northern Territory. I'm joined by Chief Minister Paul Henderson. And we're here for an incredibly important event, for the Northern Territory and for our nation.
Today we have turned the first sod, broken the ground for the Inpex Project. $34 billion of project right here in the Northern Territory, making sure that the LNG here can be mined for the next 40 years.
This is fantastic news for the Northern Territory. It's about jobs, not only in construction but jobs over the next 40 years, and it's fantastic news for our nation. It's part of the resources boom which is changing the Australian economy.
These are remarkable days of opportunity for our economy. We have low unemployment, low inflation, a budget coming to surplus and more than $450 billion of investment in the pipeline and here today celebrating a $34 billion project.
Our economy is strong, but we know there are some families who are still struggling to make ends meet, and that's why in the recent budget, as well as returning the budget to surplus, we've provided families with a little bit of extra to help them get by, particularly the new Schoolkids Bonus and increased family payments.
But it's good to be here today, celebrating some new jobs in the Northern Territory. I will turn over to Paul Henderson, the Chief Minister, who has done so much to make this project a reality.
CHIEF MINISTER HENDERSON: Thank you Prime Minister, and it's great to have you here in Darwin to celebrate this day with us because this is a fantastic day for the Northern Territory.
This project will underpin our economy here for decades to come. And turning the sod today is a great day for Territory tradies.
If you want a job, there are thousands of jobs here in the Northern Territory. Since opening their office just 10 days or so ago, hundreds of people have been knocking the door down, putting their CVs across the table, wanting to have an opportunity to work on a world-class project right here in Darwin.
And certainly as the Chief Minister I will be doing everything I can to ensure that Territory business, Territory tradies, Territory apprentices get opportunities on this magnificent project because for me, this is about seeing Darwin emerge, right across Northern Australia, as the centre for oil and gas in Northern Australia.
As well as this project here today, we've got our marine supply base under construction.
The marine supply base will provide the base and the focus to service all of the offshore platforms off the Northwest Shelf all the way around here to Darwin in terms of service, supplying, maintaining all of those platforms for decades to come, and with that marine supply base will come companies large and small, that will come and invest in the Territory, set up businesses here in the Territory, and support Territory jobs.
I would also like to acknowledge today Charles Darwin University and thank INPEX for their great support of $3 million to help establish the Centre for Oil and Gas Research here at Charles Darwin University, to ensure that not only are we at the heart of delivering a world-class LNG plant here in Darwin, but we've got world-class research and development occurring in terms of developing oil and gas reserves in tropical waters, and the sign of the commitment by INPEX and Total to the Territory with that investment is significant.
I would just like to finish on also thanking the joint venture partners for their commitment to 200 apprenticeships over the life of this construction project.
That's 200 young people here in the Territory who will get an opportunity to do their entire apprenticeship on a world-class project, and those kids have yet to be selected, but if you are looking for a trade apprenticeship here in the Northern Territory, certainly this project offers plenty of opportunity.
So congratulations to everybody involved, Prime Minister, we turned the first sod, but there's a heck of a lot more work to go.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this is a huge project for the Northern Territory, what does it do for confidence in the Australian economy?
PM: We can be confident about the Australian economy because there are so many investments like this one in the pipeline. More than $450 billion of investment, in an economy which came out of the global financial crisis strong, where we see growth, low inflation, low unemployment.
Many Australians would be seeing the news from Greece, they would be seeing the unemployment rates in places like Spain, 25 percent of people unemployed. They'd even be worried about the unemployment rate in the US, more than 8%.
Here we've worked together with a spirit of optimism. We came out of the global financial crisis strong, and its investments like this one that are going to get us to the next stage. Now, that doesn't mean that there aren't some stresses and strains around.
The high Aussie dollar is having an impact on manufacturing and tourism, but even in manufacturing and tourism, we are seeing companies compete and hold their heads up in the world, make their way and continue to make good profits and keep people in jobs.
JOURNALIST: In terms of jobs locally, the Territory already struggles to fill skilled tradesmen positions. I know we're in discussions with the Federal Government about getting more migration visas. How are those talks going?
PM: I think firstly Chief Minister Paul Henderson will be sending out a message to many people around the country to look north for their future, given the scale of this investment, and there will be opportunities for skilled Australians to come here and get work, as well as the great training opportunities for young people in the Northern Territory and local Indigenous Australians.
We always look to train Aussies first, to make sure people get the benefits of this kind of prosperity in our economy. If we cannot fill skills shortages by training Australians, then we do look overseas and we'll continue to work on that as necessary.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, don't you think it is bit strange that people would be out of work, sitting there in cold, damp old Melbourne when there's jobs going begging up here?
PM: Spoken like a true Territorian. One of the issues we do have around the country, you're right is that there are some parts of the country like the Northern Territory growing rapidly, hungry for people, hungry for skills.
We've got other parts of the country that aren't seeing that kind of growth, and we have introduced some policies to encourage people who need a job to move to where the jobs are.
And people will see, this news on their TV screens tonight, and many of them might think ‘well there's a great opportunity for me to build my future in the Northern Territory with this prosperity flowing through.'
JOURNALIST: It's understood that this project is going to increase greenhouse gas emissions in the Territory by 30% in the Territory alone. Do you want see something locked in to offset those emissions, by INPEX or government?
PM: We've got an economy-wide carbon pricing scheme in the sense that it's not focused on the Northern Territory or focused on one project.
It's a system of carbon pricing starting on 1 July that will catch the biggest businesses that generate the most carbon pollution and require them to pay a price, and if they pay a price, then they will look for ways to reduce the amount of carbon pollution.
So that's our approach to reducing our greenhouse gases and it is the cheapest and most efficient way of doing it. At the same time there is money to assist households as we move to carbon pricing.
Already some families will have seen their increased family payments flow through. Pensioners will see money flow through. Tax cuts start on 1 July for people earning less than $80,000 and that assistance continues into the future.
JOURNALIST: So would you like to see INPEX actually invest in a carbon offset, to lock it in, to show what they're doing the right thing?
PM: What we've done is exactly what I've described to you. It's not based on individual projects, it's based on a system for those businesses that generate the most carbon pollution.
JOURNALIST: Do you worry that the Territory relies too much on big resources-intensive projects, where we're pinning too much of our future hopes on projects like INPEX and not diversifying?
PM: I'll go to the Chief Minister who'll want to talk about your economic strategy here specifically, but as Prime Minister, let me say this very clearly, we want to make sure that we emerge from this phase of economic growth, this resources boom, with a strong, diversified economy.
The resources boom is going to last a long time, but we are working so that the resources boom does not hollow out other parts of the Australian economy. We're working with manufacturing and with other industries so we come out of this phase of remarkable growth with a strong, highly diverse economy.
I want our economy to have many sources of strength, not be reliant on one source of strength, and the Chief Minister will talk about the Territory specifically.
CHIEF MINISTER HENDERSON: Thank you, Prime Minister. This is certainly not a one-shot-in-the-locker approach in terms of the growth of the Northern Territory economy.
We're seeing strong commodities growth right across the Northern Territory in terms of resources up into Asia. This project is the catalyst for bringing many companies, large and small, to the Northern Territory.
The fact that we are building our marine supply base, the long-term future for underpinning economic growth is to see Darwin be established as the oil and gas capital for Northern Australia, not only producing millions of tonnes of LNG for our neighbours in Asia, but also small and medium businesses emerging to support, supply, maintain all of the engineering work on those offshore platforms and our university developer's a world-class university with many opportunities for research and development.
So in growing an economy you've got to understand what your key competitive advantage is, and our key competitive advantage is our resources, as well as our fantastic tourism assets, the value of the Defence presence here in Northern Australia.
There are many facets to the Territory economy, but we had to broaden this economy, we had to deepen this economy, and that's what this project and all of the associated investment that's going to come to the Territory is going to do.
JOURNALIST: Chief Minister, you mentioned in your speech 4,000 jobs would be created. I was under the impression it was 3,000. Have we gained an extra thousand somewhere?
CHIEF MINISTER HENDERSON: Well this is right across this project, so the number 3,000 is specific to the construction of the plant, but the flow-on effects right across, in terms of other businesses servicing and supplying this particular contract will be significant.
So the multipliers keep on encouragingly expanding. Already $840 million worth of contracts have gone to Territory businesses. Companies like McMahon's who are having to put on hundreds of extra people and really encouragingly are taking on taking on Indigenous apprentices and giving them opportunities as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it has been revealed that two live cattle exporters have been penalised for breaching the new rules put in place by your Government, but these cases wouldn't have come to light if Animals Australia didn't film the evidence. Your system can't end cruelty, can it?
PM: Thank you for that question, and here in the Northern Territory live animal exports is an important industry and indeed right across Australia's north this is an important industry.
We've worked with the industry to get a better system so that we can track animals, we know where they go, and we know the conditions in which animals are being slaughtered overseas. Now, there are a number of ways that any abuses of the system can come to light.
The abuses that you refer to did come to light as a result of the work of animal welfare activists, but there is a number of ways they can come to light because the system is monitored and there are auditors.
What this news shows today is that the system is working. When abuses are identified, then people pay the price for those abuses, because we now know, because of the tracking system, where animals come from, who has been responsible for exporting them, where they are being slaughtered and we are able to see the conditions under which they are being slaughtered.
So this is evidence the system is working.
JOURNALIST: But it's not very effective if you're relying on a charity to do the hard yards?
PM: Well, there's a number of ways that abuses can come to light. Overwhelmingly, this is an industry that does the right thing. I've met with the cattle industry here before.
I will meet with them during the course of today again, and whenever I meet with them, they make the point to me very, very passionately that people in the industry do not want to see their animals abused and that there is no-one more heartbroken when there is evidence of animal cruelty than the people who work in this industry.
But like all areas of life, common sense tells you overwhelmingly people do the right thing, but there is occasionally the odd person who does the wrong thing and so the system is there to catch and identify those few people who do the wrong thing.
JOURNALIST: You're heading to the NATO summit. Are you worried about other nations raising Australia's Defence budget cuts?
PM: Certainly not, no. Whenever I meet with leaders at NATO and ISAF, so whenever I meet with leaders who also have their troops deployed in Afghanistan, what they say to me is words of congratulations about the professionalism and contribution of Australian troops in Afghanistan.
Our troops have an incredible reputation around the world, and it's hard-won, but when people see Aussie personnel, they know that they're looking at true professionals. 
JOURNALIST: What impact did your argument with Kevin Rudd or your feud with Kevin Rudd have on the creation of the annual summit in China?
PM: I've seen these reports today. Can I say generally we are deeply engaged with China in every way, in every respect. Our engagements are very, very deep.
To give you just one example of that, I think around 15 members of my executive team have been to China in the last two years to pursue discussions. I know that there are reports in today's newspapers that suggest when I went to China I reached a broad agreement about regular leaders' meetings and ministerial meetings.
That's simply not correct.
JOURNALIST: Just quickly, should Bob Carr have refrained from making comments about James Ashby. 
PM: The matter is actually before the Federal Court today so I'm not making any comments on it.
Thank you.



HOST: Great to have the Prime Minister Julia Gillard with us in our studios. Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Welcome to Darwin.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: I believe you had a night out last night, the red carpet was rolled out at a certain private apartment block around town. They must have been very excited that you were coming.
PM: Well I don't think that was really all about me, it's all about the Inpex Project and the people from the project got together last night. I had the opportunity to join them briefly-
HOST: The red carpet was for the Japanese executives and not for the Prime Minister? I don't believe that.
PM: You'll need to ask whoever was responsible for rolling the carpet out what was on their mind as they did it, but it was a gathering of the INPEX crowd to celebrate the ground breaking ceremony today, and I'm very much looking forward to that.
I did get the opportunity to go and visit a school and see some very gorgeous kids too, and also to look at the new surface for playing hockey on. You've got a proud track record of training some Olympians in hockey, so a new surface to do it on.
HOST: One of our listeners, who lives in that apartment block, said ‘I don't know what's going on up there but if they drop any more bottles down the garbage chute I'm going up to sort them out.' Was it a big night?
PM: Well I can't tell you about others, I was there about half an hour, 40 minutes in total.
HOST: And you were meeting with those INPEX executives, you're turning the first sod today. What do they want from you, other than to get on the shovel?
PM: Well I've got to get on the shovel, I'm not building the whole project, just a little bit of turning of some of the dirt.
We've worked with the proponents of the INPEX project and so has Paul Henderson and his Government , worked very solidly to realise this project for the Northern Territory. Because it's going to mean a lot of jobs and it's going to mean a lot of prosperity for the Northern Territory.
It's part of the transformation that the resources boom is bringing to our nation, a great set of opportunities in front of our country. This period of change does bring some stresses and strains too, a high Australian dollar and that's got implications for manufacturing and tourism.
But if we make the right decisions now, to build our future economy, then this can be a truly remarkable period in Australia's history.
HOST: INPEX only needs to offset half of their emissions because, you know, it's an LNG gas producer, and less carbon-intensive than coal. If the Australian Government's so confident of that why haven't we seen the numbers? Why haven't INPEX demonstrated in their EIS how their LNG will offset the need for coal-fired power?
PM: Well it's a huge new energy source, so it stands to reason that that new energy source being a cleaner energy source is a good thing. We are looking to be a continuing reliable energy supplier to our region.
That means we will be supplying energy in all sorts of forms, including continuing to export a lot of coal.
For us to reduce our carbon emissions, and we do need to do that, to seize all of the possibilities of a clean energy economy for the future, that's about us finding ways of reducing carbon pollution and working cleaner. And that will be driven by the carbon pricing which starts on 1 July.
HOST: But the carbon emission benefits from this project will be felt by Japan, not by us, won't they?
PM: Look, of course, we are an exporter of energy. And so as we export energy our energy gets used by other nations and INPEX will be exporting to Japan.
But for our own domestic economy, we know that per head of population, we are the biggest generators of carbon pollution in the developed world. Now when you're in that position, and the world is increasingly moving to a clean energy future, then you can't just stay still.
You've got to act, or you're going to get behind the standards of the rest of the world, and that's what carbon pricing is about.
HOST: Interesting to hear Barack Obama come out in support of gay marriage the other day. One of our listeners, Jake, wants to know are you, Julia Gillard, really opposed to gay marriage or will we read about how some anti-gay marriage heavyweight pulled your strings in a memoir ten years from now?
PM: I've got no idea what any of that means, or what it's a reference to. Of course I make my own decisions.
HOST: Have you been influenced, though, by Barack Obama's announcement?
PM: He makes his own decisions too.
HOST: Let's talk about the high cost of living in Darwin. Matt wants to know if you really have a hold on how expensive it is to live up here, where you pay 9 cents a litre or more extra for fuel, $1.10 more for a cup of coffee, and $140 a week more for average rent. Matt suggesting you might like to live up here for a while to see how the carbon tax really hits people in Darwin.
PM: Well let's talk about how it's going to affect people in Darwin.
You actually now have a piece of information today that you didn't have before yesterday, it came out yesterday.
The impact on electricity prices for people in Darwin will be, on average, $2.61 a week. On average the assistance we're providing to households is $10.10 a week.
$2.61; $10.10; I think those figures speak for themselves.
HOST: So what's the point of giving rebates for a carbon tax. Doesn't it defeat the purpose of encouraging carbon reduction if we're actually going to be better off as a result of the-
PM: That's a complete misunderstanding of what carbon pricing is about.
Carbon pricing is about the big businesses in our country which generate the most carbon pollution paying the price. The price signal is to them. They are the ones we want to change their behaviour so that they work their businesses and they generate less carbon pollution.
And there is all sorts of ways, whether it's, you know, mining or manufacturing, that people can reduce their carbon pollution.
So if you just put yourself in the shoes of a big businessperson for a while, at the moment they're putting carbon pollution in the atmosphere for free. After 1 July they'll be paying a price.
They're smart businesspeople, they'll say to themselves ‘I want to reduce that cost on my business, how can I do that? Well I'll find a smart way of reducing the carbon pollution I generate.'
There is a flow-through impact to Australian households, it's less than a cent in a dollar, 0.7 per cent of CPI, and we are providing tax cuts and pension increases and family payment increases to help people through.
And because I understand that cost of living pressures are there generally, carbon pricing doesn't start until 1 July, and your listener is already talking about cost of living pressures.
Because I understand those cost of living pressures, in the recent budget we determined to give families a Schoolkids Bonus and also increased family payments to help them with some of the cost of living pressures that they're feeling.
HOST: Part of the high cost of living here though is freight. The Territory Government wants you to exempt the Territory from any changes to the diesel fuel rebate, to take into account our huge trucking and transport costs. Will you consider an exemption for Territory transport businesses from 2014?
PM: Well we  -  you're using the right date. Diesel fuel, heavy road vehicles are not in any way affected by carbon pricing over the next two years, so they will come into the system in 2014.
I do understand that Chief Minister Paul Henderson is worried about the Northern Territory and of course he's always a very feisty advocate for everything to do with the Territory, so we'll keep talking to Paul Henderson about that.
But in terms of, you know, I understand, I get it that a lot of fear has been raised about carbon pricing. You know, your listener worried about cost of living, she may well have heard some of the more ridiculous claims about what this is going to mean for people's cost of living, and I just want people to have the facts.
You got a new, important fact yesterday. $2.61 on your power bill, average assistance $10.10 per week.
HOST: What about self-funded retirees? One of our listeners, Jem, is a self-funded retiree under the age of 65. Can he get a rebate for carbon tax?
PM: Look, for individual circumstances I've obviously got to, you know, take them back and analyse them, but the way the system works generally is for people who receive family payments, people raising kids, they'll get up to $110 extra per child if they're on the Family Tax Benefit A system, up to $69 for Family Tax Benefit B. That money's started to flow.
Pensioners will see an increase  -  a single pensioner of $338  -  and there are tax cuts too for people earning less than $80,000. Many self-funded retirees who end up with a Commonwealth Seniors' Card will also get the same kind of benefits as pensioners.
HOST: Twelve minutes to nine, 105.7 ABC Darwin. Julia Gillard, your Foreign Minister Senator Bob Carr has called James Ashby, in his civil case against Peter Slipper, ‘more rehearsed than a kabuki actor', I think is what he said. Do you endorse those comments?
PM: The matter involving Mr Ashby is directly before the Federal Court today so I'm not going to be speaking about it at all.
HOST: Mr Ashby, though, has complained to the Human Rights Commission, do you believe he's been demeaned?
PM: This is something that I'm not talking about particularly given there is a Federal Court proceeding on foot today.
HOST: Alright, we'd better let you go and get onto that shovel. Thanks for joining us this morning.
PM: Thank you. Thanks very much.


PM: I'm here in Townsville with Minister Smith. We've had a very special opportunity to talk to troops who are deploying to Afghanistan.
They will be going over the coming few weeks, and we've had the opportunity to say to them thank you very much for everything they've already done for the nation, and thank you in advance for the things that they will do in Afghanistan.
We've met some very brave men and women, and they're going to Afghanistan at a critical time as we move into transition in Uruzgan province, the province in which we work.
Transition isn't a moment in time, it's a process, and through that process local Afghan forces end up with security leadership in Uruzgan province and with security leadership for their nation.
From here, Minister Smith and I will go to Chicago for the NATO-ISAF summit on Afghanistan. This is an important meeting to define the strategy for Afghanistan beyond the days of transition; to consider issues like the sustainment of the Afghan National Security Forces.
So we will be meeting with leaders from nations that have troops in Afghanistan, working alongside our own, to talk about the next part of what will happen in Afghanistan.
But to go there from here, to be able to leave, having talked to some of our very brave troops, is a very special privilege and it's been great to be here. So we're happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: France says it will have all troops out of Afghanistan within a year. Does that change your stance?
PM: No it does not, and the incoming President of France will be attending this summit meeting.
For Australia we have said consistently that we are working through the strategy that was defined at the last NATO-ISAF summit in Lisbon, which both Minister Smith and I attended.
At that summit we agreed that we would move through transition to Afghan security leadership by the end of 2014.
Our province, Uruzgan province where we work, is now marked for transition in Tranche 3, so it will go into transition in the coming months. And we will work through that transition process.
As we've said consistently, the bulk of our forces will be able to come home at the end of transition in Uruzgan province, but we've also made it clear that we will continue to be engaged in training support in Afghanistan and we've made it clear too we will (inaudible) continuing role with special forces with the right mission under the right mandate.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are your commitments for Afghanistan that Australia's going to be putting forward once the NATO and ISAF troops do draw down?
PM: We have pledged that Australia would provide $100 million each year for three years to sustain Afghan local forces. We've been in Afghanistan a long time; it's cost us a lot as a nation. There have been some days of incredible sorrow.
So having worked through all of that to see the progress that has been made, we don't want that progress lost, which is why it's vital that the world community appropriately sustains the Afghan forces beyond the days of transition and we've certainly pledged to do our part.
JOURNALIST: What do you make of the  -  just on another subject  -  the Courier Mail has published a poll today which is quite damning for Labor. What do you make of that poll?
PM: We've got a lot of hard work to do, including a lot of hard work here in Queensland.
This is the second time I've been here in just over a week, and I will be here in Queensland frequently talking to the people of Queensland about some of the difficult major reforms we're engaged in, but ones which are right for our nation's future, including putting a price on carbon.
And I know that many families are very worried about what carbon pricing will mean for them, but assistance for families is there including increased family payments, increased pension payments, and for people earning less than $80,000 a year, they'll see a tax cut on 1 July.
And we understand that people are generally under cost of living pressure, which is why in the recent budget, as well as bringing the budget to surplus, we've brought new relief for families through the Schoolkids Bonus and increased family payments.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just on another issue, do you think a $7 million petrol bill for MPs is too (inaudible)?
PM: This is a - the standard entitlements for MPs have been there for years and years and years, absolutely nothing's changed on that, so MPs are able to use cars to move around, get about their work and there's been no change to the system.
JOURNALIST: Are you wearing a Maroons jersey this Wednesday to try and win back some support in Queensland?
PM: Well I will be back. We arrive back very early on Wednesday morning, so we'll hopefully be able to be here and watching all of the action.
I won't be disclosing at this point what I'll be wearing at the time; you might have to wait until Wednesday night to see that. Thanks very much.
JOURNALIST: Are you going to the Melbourne game at all?
PM: We're, this week we're in Parliament and unfortunately my itinerary does not enable me to go to as many sporting events as I would like, but-
JOURNALIST: I just asked because obviously there's a lot of controversy about the game being played in Victoria.
PM: I understand that. I do understand the view of people up here about the game being played in Victoria, but obviously part of the approach of taking the game round the country, trying to build fans right around the nation.
Thanks very much.



PM: I'm here in Chicago with Minister Smith and we will be attending a major international summit on the future of Afghanistan.
We came to Chicago from Townsville, where we had the opportunity to speak to some of our soldiers who will soon be deployed in Afghanistan. We were able to give them the thanks of the nation for everything that they do.
And they represent the first deployment that, building on the work of earlier deployments, will see the province we work in, Uruzgan province, go into transition.
Here at this summit we will be in a meeting of NATO and ISAF countries  -  countries that have troops in Afghanistan. We're here following the Lisbon summit two years ago, and we will have the opportunity to review progress since Lisbon.
In Lisbon the decision was made about transition in Afghanistan, and we will have the opportunity to review how the strategy of transition is playing out.
Progress is being made in Afghanistan. Already, two tranches have gone into transition, and the third tranche, including Uruzgan province, will go into transition in coming weeks.
The security situation is changing on the ground. Al-Qaeda has been dealt a hard blow, and the insurgency is on the back foot. And aid and development is being done and making a difference, and tomorrow I will have the opportunity to meet with President Karzai, and to discuss that aid and development work.
Now these gains are real, but they are also fragile. There remains a lot of work to do, and we will be focussed on that work at this summit.
Australia comes here with three objectives. First, we want to see at this summit a review of transition and a mapping out of transition until the end of 2014. And in particular we want to see a milestone adopted where all of Afghanistan goes to Afghan security leadership by mid-2013.
Second, we want the summit to focus on what will happen after 2014. After 2014 the nature of the mission and engagement with Afghanistan will change. The Afghan National Security Forces will be providing security for the people of Afghanistan across their country.
But support will still be needed. We have already indicated that we will stay engaged in training support, including supporting the artillery school and supporting army officer training in a UK-led initiative.
We will also stay engaged in aid and development work, and with President Karzai tomorrow I will be signing a partnership agreement which deals with our aid and development, our trade and investment links, and our people-to-people links for the future. And we have left open the possibility of a role for special forces, subject to there being the right mission and the right mandate for them in Afghanistan.
Third and finally, our objective for this summit is that we see appropriate decisions made to sustain the Afghan National Security Forces beyond 2014. In order to secure everything that has been gained, the Afghan National Security Forces need to be able to do their job.
Australia has already pledged support  -  $100 million a year from 2015  -  to support the Afghan National Security Forces, and we will be urging other nations to play their part in providing that support.
As well as directly attending the NATO-ISAF meeting on Afghanistan, we will have the opportunity to attend a NATO core partners meeting. Australia's engagement with NATO is broadening. Of course Afghanistan is central to our focus, but our engagement is broadening across a series of fronts, including cyber-security, terrorism, piracy, and we will have the opportunity to talk with NATO representatives about that at the NATO core partners meeting.
And then I will have the opportunity too to meet with a number of other leaders who are here. I'll be able to catch up with President Obama, and I will have formal bilateral meetings with Prime Minister Cameron of the United Kingdom; Chancellor Merkel of Germany; I will have the opportunity to meet the newly elected President of France; I will also have the opportunity to meet with the President of Pakistan, amongst others.
So we've got a big few days of work in front of us, but it's good to be here in Chicago for what will be a vital international summit on Afghanistan.
We're happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when you meet with Francois Hollande, what will your message be to him about his plan to take out his troops early?
PM: Well I'll have that meeting tomorrow, so I'll speak more about that meeting afterwards than before.
Clearly President Hollande has given the French people a commitment about what he will do with combat troops, but there are more ways of supporting the work in Afghanistan and I will be speaking to him about that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in respect of your meeting with President Karzai, you mentioned that there are other things that Australia can do beyond 2014 as well as the money that's going to go to aid and security. Presumably you're talking there about what special forces or other military advisers we might put there. That would require an invitation, would it not, from him. Is that something you'll be talking to him about tomorrow?
PM: My main purpose with President Karzai will be to talk about progress and the outlook for transition in Uruzgan province. We will enter a partnership agreement. We have been a considerable provider of aid and development monies to Afghanistan. Afghanistan is one of the poorest nations on earth.
And so aid and development matters to lift people out of poverty, but of course it also matters in the security context, which is, it is easy for the Taliban, for insurgents, to make a pitch to local people if local people are not seeing any progress on the basics of life, on having employment, on having access to healthcare, being able to see their kids going to school.
So we will be signing a partnership on aid and development. We will also deal with people-to-people links, and the prospect of trade and investment. Afghanistan needs to build an economy which will sustain the Afghan people, and I will be speaking to President Karzai about that, and it's in the agreement.
President Karzai is well aware from my earlier discussions with him that Australia will continue to play a training role beyond 2014. He's aware of our engagement in the artillery school, and the commitments we've made to the UK-led army officer training.
You're right, a question for this summit broadly is under what mandate people continue to be engaged after 2014, and that will be the subject of discussion at the summit.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just back on the French decision, are you saying it won't make a difference or will it, on the ground in Afghanistan?
PM: Look, I will have the discussion with the new President tomorrow so I don't want to pre-empt that discussion.
JOURNALIST: What's your advice on that?
PM: I'm just making the simple point that there's a number of ways of being engaged in Afghanistan, and supporting Afghanistan at this time as we move to Afghan security leadership and in the days beyond 2014.
JOURNALIST: Could I turn to a domestic matter if I can, the reports back home about childcare, that you're about the announce a way of keeping childcare fees down, is that something you're looking at?
PM: Look, I'll let my friends back home deal with all of those questions. As you'd be aware we've been in transit for the best part of 24 hours, so I think others back in Australia are better positioned to talk to you about that.
JOURNALIST: But can you tell us, will you be watching and listening to Craig Thomson's statement in Parliament while you're here?
PM: Look, I'll be focussed on the work here at the summit.
JOURNALIST: Has the dark cloud over the Parliament gotten darker with allegations against Senator Heffernan?
PM: Look, I'm not intending, given particularly we've been in transit for the best part of 24 hours, to be talking to you today about matters involving Senator Heffernan and obviously for issues involving Craig Thomson.
I've dealt with those questions in Australia before I left.
JOURNALIST: Just going back finally to the French question. Are you saying that where countries, for example, may be scaling down their military engagement, there are a number of other ways they can do it? Would you imagine that therefore there's a potential quid pro quo there, that countries that are disengaging militarily may be able to stump up some more money for this fund that we're kicking money into as well?
PM: There's a variety of ways of supporting Afghanistan, a variety of ways of supporting training in Afghanistan. We're there, engaged in a mission of training to increase the capability of the Afghan local forces as they move into security leadership and ultimately full responsibility for the security of Afghanistan.
So ways of being involved in training, ways of being involved in aid and development work, ways of engaging with Afghanistan which will support it at this time. I'm not going to pre-empt a conversation with the incoming President of France.
Thank you very much. 



PRESIDENT KARZAI: Madam Prime Minister, it's a happy day for us in Afghanistan to consider ourselves partners with Australia, a country that has been generous and kind to us, that has contributed to our stability and progress, that has spared no effort with risking the lives of its men and women in uniform, with relief Afghanistan, the taxpayers money of Australia to help our country and then today the signing of a document towards a strategic partnership for the future and for the announcement from Australia, by you Madam Prime Minister, of contribution to the Afghan Security Forces of $300 million for the next three years, all go very well with a lot of gratitude from the people of Afghanistan, Madam Prime Minister.
We will remember this and take it into history and I hope the day can come that Afghanistan can do its very small part as well in this regard.
PM: Can I say, in front of the friends gathered here and with you, President Karzai, that it is a great pleasure to be able to execute this agreement today.
I have said consistently to the Australian people that we would not abandon Afghanistan and we will continue to be working with you and this document today is our way of saying this is how we will continue working together.
We want to see, for the people of Afghanistan, an end of conflict, a growing economy and the ability to enjoy health, education, opportunity in life and if we can make a contribution to that we will be pleased to do so.
So thank you very much. 



President Karzai and I signed a long-term partnership between Australia and Afghanistan. As I've said to the Australian people on more than one occasion, Australia will stay engaged with Afghanistan to the end of this decade at least, but the nature of our engagement will change after 2014.
At the end of 2014, the Afghan people will take responsibility for security in their nation, but we will continue to be engaged in Afghanistan, and the comprehensive partnership that I have signed today specifies the way in which we will work together.
It commits us to working together to combat transnational threats such as terrorism, narcotics and people smuggling. It commits Australia to supporting Afghanistan's security after 2014, to supporting Afghanistan's development through an increased aid program, encouraging business and investment links, cooperating on migration issues and fostering people-to-people links and helping preserve Afghanistan's cultural heritage.
In line with that agreement, I can today announce that we will be increasing our aid and development assistance to Afghanistan. Whilst some gains have been made in aid and development in Afghanistan, it continues to be one of the poorest countries on earth. Life expectancy is 48 years old.
So there is much to do to assist the people of Afghanistan with services that Australians would take for granted, basic health and education services. Our aid commitment will rise from $165 million a year to $250 million per year by 2015/16.
That aid money is already doing good work in infrastructure, in the education of children, including girls, and in the provision of health services.
I've also had the opportunity today to engage in a range of bilateral discussions. I've met with the Prime Minister of the Netherlands, the President of France, the Prime Minister of Slovenia, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, the Commander of ISAF, General Allen, President Karzai of course, and later today I will meet with the President of Pakistan and the Chancellor of Germany.
I'm looking forward to the NATO Summit tomorrow and during the course of today's bilateral meeting I've had the opportunity to share perspectives on Afghanistan as we move towards the summit meeting tomorrow and I've had the opportunity to talk to my counterparts about questions in the global economy, particularly as we prepare for the forthcoming G20 meeting.
So I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when you meet with President Zardari later today will you be urging him to re-open supply lines?
PM: I will certainly be indicating to the President that those supply lines are necessary for Australia and our work, that we've got an interest in seeing those supply lines opened.
JOURNALIST: Do you believe there's grounds for an apology to Pakistan for the deaths of those Pakistani soldiers in November?
PM: Look I'm not going to involve myself in these issues between the United States and Pakistan, but it is in our interests, I believe, in everybody's interests, to see those supply lines open.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you discuss the possibility of ongoing role of Special Forces, our Special Forces in Afghanistan?
PM: As I've made clear consistently, we're starting transition in Uruzgan province and that will take between 12 and 18 months. By the end of 2014, the ISAF mission as we know it now is at an end and Afghan people will be leading security and providing security for their own nation.
But I've said beyond 2014 we'll continue to be engaged with Afghanistan, we'll continue to be engaged in training, particularly in the artillery school and in a UK-led venture to train Afghan army officers.
I have said we are leaving the door open for a potential role for Special Forces under the right mandate, but in my discussions today, whilst I've restated in those discussions the same position I've put publicly, there is still some time to work through what all of those arrangements post-2014 will look like.
JOURNALIST: What is the right mandate? (inaudible)
PM: In respect of the engagement post-2014, this is still early days. There is discussions to be had and work to be done, but it may be that there is a role for Special Forces to assist with continuing counter-terrorism after 2014.
There will be, I believe, and certainly we support and this will be a topic of discussion at tomorrow's Summit, a continued NATO engagement for training and advice and assistance beyond 2014.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister in respect of the partnership agreement you've signed today, how certain are you that Afghanistan can maintain the sorts of standards that Australia want (inaudible)?
PM: Well I think we've just got to take a fairly common sense approach here, which is Afghanistan is an incredibly poor country and so, whether it's infant mortality or health care for women and girls, circumstances in Afghanistan are very, very different from circumstances in Australia. It's a very poor nation.
We have seen improvements though. We've seen improvements in the provision of health care and the reach of basic health care to the population. We've seen improvements in child mortality, we've seen improvements in access to education including for women and girls.
The agreement that I've signed today does talk about the importance of appropriate governance, it does talk about the importance of equality of women and making sure that women can take an appropriate role in the society in Afghanistan.
So we want to see continued development work to build on what has already been achieved, but I do want to be very clear, we are coming off an incredibly low base. This is a very, very poor country.
JOURNALIST: Does that mean that if some of the gains that have been made for women and girls in particular are wound back under any political settlement with the Taliban or whatever, that Australia's support, financial, aid and the rest of it may be reviewed?
PM: I don't think we can engage in those kind of hypotheticals. We want to see for Afghanistan - it's in our national interest and what took us to Afghanistan in the first place is that it is no longer, never again becomes, a safe haven for the training of terrorists.
For the future of the Afghan nation, for building a democracy and a stable nation, this is the work of the Afghan people. But we can help and we will be helping through aid and development monies. We've seen some changes to date and of course we'd want to see further improvements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on a matter back home, Craig Thomson's speech to Parliament today, do you think he's going to convince (inaudible) will you invite Craig Thomson back to the Labor Party (inaudible)
PM: Look, I've dealt with all of these questions in almost every iteration imaginable before I left Australia and so I'll leave it at that. My focus here is on the Summit and associated meetings.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, I dealt with that question very directly when I was back in Australia so my focus here is on the work associated with the Summit.
JOURNALIST: What about once he's spoken, will you be speaking to us them about your response?
PM: Look, my focus is on the work I need to do here. Obviously I'll be returning to Australia for the second half of the parliamentary week.
JOURNALIST: Do you urge him not to name names in this statement, because that could open the prospect of giving people the right of reply?
PM: Look, I'm not engaging with these matters half a world away and Mr Thomson's statement is a matter for Mr Thomson.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, my focus is on the very important work I've got to do here on Afghanistan, the work of the summit.
JOURNALIST: Just on Afghanistan, the statement, the long-term partnership statement, does talk about the need for a political settlement. How does that fit, having a political settlement with the Taliban with the fact that the fighting is going to continue by the very nature you're considering keeping Special Forces there?
PM: I think we've got to be fairly clear in our minds about what we mean by political settlement. We've said for some time now that if there are elements of the Taliban who are prepared to renounce violence, cut any links with international terrorism and accept the Afghan constitution, then they should be involved in reconciliation discussions.
This needs to be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. That's nothing new in that. We've said that for long period of time.
We also have said for a long period of time that it is possible for individuals to reintegrate. So people who have perhaps been involved in fighting, not necessarily highly motivated combatants, but people who have become involved in fighting, this is a poor country, there would be people who have been involved in fighting because they're seeking to find a way for themselves and a way for their family in a very difficult country and difficult place who, at a local level, can become reintegrated into local community activities.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) happen in the middle of the congress on the peace settlement with the Taliban?
PM: It's difficult. It's a very difficult process and it does need to be Afghan-owned. We are ultimately talking about the political composition of the leadership of the Afghan nation. So, yes, this is a difficult issue but we do believe that endeavours need to continue to be made to seek political reconciliation.
JOURNALIST: What you said to the French President and what you'd say to Australian people who'd look at the French withdrawal of combat troops and think, ""Why can't we get out at the same time?"
PM: The President of France will speak for himself in his own words. I had a good discussion with him, it was of course the first time that I've met him. I had a good discussion with him both on Afghanistan and we had a discussion on circumstances in the European economy.
What I believe he is saying is that he will keep the commitment that he gave the French people about withdrawing combat forces, but there are other ways of supporting the ISAF mission in Afghanistan, including through training, so it is possible to play a role supporting the work of ISAF in Afghanistan other than through the provision of combat troops.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the Australian people, if the French can leave, why can't we?
PM: Well, to the Australian people, my argument continues to be the same as to why we're in Afghanistan. It is in our national interest to be there.
We went there because of our national interest, of course to stand by our ally the United States, but also because it was in Australia's national interest to go to the country where training had happened of terrorists who came and took Australian lives.
In 9/11, in Bali, we can actually trace the connections and trace the taking of Australian lives by terrorists to training that happened in Afghanistan, so it's unambiguously in our national interest to no longer see Afghanistan be a safe haven for terrorists.
And given all that we've done and all that we've lost, it makes sense for Australia, in our national interest, to see the rest of the job through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I understand that when you were speaking to British Prime Minister David Cameron you delivered something of a rebuke to him about an impersonation of you once?
PM: I did chide him very gently on impersonating my very Australian accent. He was doing it, I think, for comedy and enjoyment of the British people. I joked with him when I was in Perth at CHOGM about supporting a sheila, being the monarch of Great Britain, should a girl be the first born, if Will and Kate have a child and a girl be the first born.
He took it in very good spirits. I certainly indicated to him I will not be endeavouring to mimic his accent wherever I go.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Gillard today announced an increase in Australian aid to Afghanistan, to support the country's development and stability.
Australia's aid program will rise from $165 million to $250 million per year by 2015-16.
The Prime Minister advised President Karzai of the increase during their bilateral meeting at the Chicago NATO-ISAF Summit.
Despite recent gains in development, Afghanistan remains one of the world's poorest countries.
Over one third of the population still lives in extreme poverty and the average life expectancy is just 48 years.
Australia's aid will help Afghanistan expand basic service delivery in health and education, including for women and girls.
Our assistance will also help improve livelihoods in agriculture, promote rural development and help improve governance and public financial management.
The Prime Minister said it was important for the international community to provide sustained, reliable support to help Afghanistan meet its development challenges and to protect recent gains in areas like health and education.
International development assistance, together with support for security, will help underpin Afghanistan's stability.
Foreign Minister Carr said Australia would work with Afghanistan to make further progress on areas like tackling corruption, conditions for women and girls, and electoral and economic reforms.
These are important not only for Afghanistan's future but to sustain high levels of international community support through the transformation decade.
Australia has contributed to some important development gains in Afghanistan in recent years, including:
 * 	an increase in school enrolments from around one million in 2001 to nearly eight million today, including more than 2.5 million girls;
 * 	an increase in access to basic health services from 10 percent of the population in 2001, to 85 percent today; and
 * 	rehabilitation of more than 10,000 kilometres of rural roads, providing thousands of local jobs.
In Uruzgan Province alone there are now 29 girls schools and more than 200 schools in total (a sixfold increase since 2006). 
Eighty percent of pregnant women now receive at least one antenatal health care visit.
From 2012 Australia will directly support reform in the mining sector to encourage long term economic growth. 
This will include support for good sector regulation; advancing geoscience knowledge; and mining education focused on technical and vocational training.
Our increased assistance will contribute to Afghan-led multi-donor efforts to:
 * 	increase school enrolments to approximately 10 million students;
 * 	60% increase in coverage for Diphtheria, Pertussis, Tetanus vaccinations;
 * 	constructing approximately 3000kms of rural roads which will also help to provide jobs in the immediate post transition period.
We will also support election institution strengthening and civic awareness through a package of assistance worth around $30 million over four years. 



1. The Government of Australia and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, hereinafter known as Australia and Afghanistan respectively and collectively as “Governments”, share a commitment to peace, democracy and development, and reaffirm their common respect for sovereignty, human rights and the rule of law.
2. The Governments recognise their shared interests in a secure, stable and democratic Afghanistan, able to defend itself against international terrorism, a partner in peace with its surrounding region, and a valued contributor to the broader community of nations.
3. The Governments reaffirm their commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes between states and to the principle of territorial integrity.
4. The Governments recall the various undertakings made at the London, Kabul, Lisbon and Bonn conferences, as well as existing bilateral undertakings, and, building on their existing strong friendship and the historical ties between the two countries, commit to a long-term partnership for cooperation, based on shared strategic interests, in the following areas.
Political  
5. The Governments reaffirm their respect for the principles of national sovereignty, independence and non-interference in internal affairs, in accordance with international law.  They note Afghanistan's position in the heart of Asia and their shared support for regional stability and peaceful regional relations.
6. The Governments will cooperate to support shared interests in international, regional and multilateral fora and respect for obligations under applicable international treaties and conventions, including through regular political consultations on bilateral, regional and international issues.
7. Australia welcomes the continued efforts of the Afghan people to build a stable, democratic society, based on the rule of law, where human rights, including the equality of all men and women, are guaranteed under the Afghan Constitution.  In particular, the governments reaffirm their commitment to promoting and protecting the rights of women and girls in Afghanistan.  In support of these efforts, Australia will work with the Government of Afghanistan to build the  capacity of government and national institutions to promote and protect human rights.
8. The Governments recognise the importance of a political solution to achieving peace and security in Afghanistan and the region.  The Governments recognise that the reconciliation process must be Afghan led and Afghan-owned and be based on the renunciation of violence, severing ties to international terrorism and respect for the Afghan Constitution.  The Governments reaffirm the importance of regional support for reconciliation. The Government of Australia will continue to provide support to Afghan institutions and processes, including the Afghan Peace and Reintegration Programme, in pursuit of peace and reconciliation.
Security
9. The Governments reaffirm their commitment to addressing long-term transnational threats, including terrorism, narcotics, people smuggling and organised crime.
10. The Governments will work together and with other members of the international communityto assist the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) in countering the threat of international terrorist groups, and to promote the national security of Afghanistan during the transition of lead responsibility for security to the Government of Afghanistan as well as after 2014 as mutually determined.
11. To this end, the Governments will develop long-term cooperation on shared national security challenges and continue to work together to build the capacity of the ANSF and to promote international support for the ANSF.  Specific defence cooperation arrangements will be reviewed on a regular basis and could encompass such areas as counter-terrorism support and providing trainers and advisors to assist building the capacity of ANSF institutions.  Beyond transition, the range of support options may expand to include a program of defence cooperation with opportunities for professional training in Australia.
12. Furthermore, the Governments reaffirm their commitment to ongoing cooperation in conducting capacity development activities and other traditional areas of law enforcement cooperation, which could include countering narcotics, terrorism, people smuggling and transnational organised crime.  The specific areas of police cooperation will be decided by the governments from time to time.
Development
13. Building on their existing record of cooperation, the Governments reaffirm their shared vision to work together and with other members of the international community to achieve improved development outcomes for the people of Afghanistan.
14. The Governments underline their commitment to building the Government of Afghanistan's capacity to deliver basic services and provide economic opportunities to the Afghan people.  Australia reaffirms that its support to Afghanistan will be guided by the five strategic goals of the Australian Government's aid policy, An Effective Aid Program for Australia: saving lives; promoting opportunities for all; sustainable economic development; effective governance; and humanitarian and disaster response.
15. Australian assistance to Afghanistan will support the development priorities and planning of the Government of Afghanistan, as set out in the proposed 2012 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on Development Cooperation between the governments and consistent with commitments made by both Governments at the 2010 London and Kabul conferences.
16. Noting the unique challenges Afghanistan will face through the transition and during the Transformation Decade, the Governments note Australia's intention to make long-term, substantial and predictable commitments of development assistance to Afghanistan, in accordance with the shared responsibilities and commitments set out in the Kabul Process and the Bonn Conference.  Commitments will be affirmed on an annual basis, taking into account progress against the commitments made by the Governments in the MoU on Development Cooperation.
17. Recognising that Afghanistan's long-term economic growth and fiscal sustainability will depend on the development of its productive sectors, the Governments will cooperate to build Afghanistan's capacity to develop and sustainably manage its natural resources and agriculture sectors in a transparent and effective manner.
18. Australia will support Afghanistan's efforts in achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), reducing poverty, ensuring sustainable development through a private-sector-led market economy, and building human capacity through improved access to and enhanced quality of education and better access to health services.
19. As part of its capacity development support for the Afghan government, Australia will continue to provide training and expertise to Afghan public officials, including junior diplomats, in relevant Australian institutions. 
Trade and investment
20. The Governments affirm the importance of an open and predictable trading environment for economic growth and development.  Australia underlines its support for Afghanistan's process of accession to the World Trade Organisation as a Least Developed Country (LDC).
21. Subject to the laws and regulations and investment policies in force in their respective countries, the Governments will take such measures as may be appropriate to strengthen and diversify bilateral trade and economic relations.  In this regard, as Afghanistan is an LDC, Australia, subject to its customs laws, will continue to accord duty-free, quota-free treatment to all goods originating in Afghanistan for so long as Australia applies such treatment for least developed countries.  Australia will also consider, as part of Australia's broader development assistance commitment to Afghanistan, the provision of technical assistance to Afghanistan to support goods originating in Afghanistan to meet Australian requirements.
22. The Governments will work to enhance bilateral business relations and investment including through promotion and facilitation of  business exchanges. Both Governments will continue to cooperate in creating a conducive environment for Australian investment in Afghanistan. 
Migration and humanitarian affairs
23. The Governments will cooperate on migration and humanitarian issues, including as provided for in the MoU on Migration and Humanitarian Cooperation, signed on 17 January 2011 by the Governments and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
24. The Governments will continue efforts to address the humanitarian and livelihood needs of internally and externally displaced Afghan nationals, including those in neighbouring countries and on their return to Afghanistan.
Cultural and people-to-people links
25. The Governments recognise and commit to fostering the cultural and people-to-people links between Australia and Afghanistan.  The Governments will seek to cooperate in preserving and promoting Afghanistan's cultural heritage and to promote direct ties between the people of Australia and Afghanistan, including through sporting activities and cultural exhibitions.
26. The Governments recognise the importance of higher education for Afghanistan and cooperation between their universities and institutions of higher education. Australia will continue to promote educational links including through Australian scholarships.
Implementation
27. The Governments recognise the benefits of regular bilateral meetings in building a stronger bilateral partnership, including through Ministerial visits and meetings at international fora, and will work together cooperatively to facilitate such meetings.
28. The Governments will promote high-level visits and dialogue between the two countries for the purpose of developing and enhancing bilateral cooperation on issues of mutual interest.
29. Each Government will, pursuant to its national laws, regulations and policies, ensure appropriate access to its territory for the employees, representatives or contractors of the other government required to facilitate cooperation under this Partnership.
Institutional arrangements
30. The Governments will establish a Joint Commission on Bilateral Cooperation to review progress in implementing this Partnership and to provide a mechanism for regular dialogue on issues of shared strategic interest.  The Joint Commission will report to the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of both countries.
31. The Joint Commission will be composed of representatives of both countries and will be chaired jointly by appropriate senior level officials.  The Joint Commission will organise consultations on specific issues of bilateral cooperation as necessary and may establish working groups or committees.
32. Commitments made under existing arrangements that are not contrary to the content and spirit of this Partnership will be respected and may be reviewed by both Governments as necessary.  Further specific subsidiary arrangements may be concluded by the Governments to give effect to this Partnership.
33. Any dispute between the governments in the interpretation or implementation of this Partnership will be resolved amicably through consultation, negotiation, or such other means as may be mutually decided.
Final provisions
34. The Governments commit to a full strategic review of this Partnership in ten years from the date of its signature.
35. This Partnership will take effect on the date of the later notification by the Governments of completion of their respective domestic procedures, and will remain in effect until terminated by either Government on six months' notice in writing to the other Government.  This Partnership may be amended at any time by mutual consent of the Governments in writing.
This Partnership represents the understandings reached between the Governments of Australia and Afghanistan upon the matters referred to herein.  Signed in duplicate at Chicago on 20 May 2012 in the English, Dari and Pashto languages.  In case of any discrepancy in the text or difference in interpretation, the English text will prevail.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai have today signed a long-term partnership between Australia and Afghanistan.
This Comprehensive Long-Term Partnership is a clear demonstration of Australia's long-term commitment to supporting Afghanistan's security, development and governance following transition.  
The Partnership was signed by Prime Minister Gillard and President Karzai at a bilateral meeting in Chicago today.
Under the Partnership, Australia will
 * 	Work with Afghanistan to combat transnational threats such as terrorism, narcotics and people smuggling;
 * 	Support Afghanistan's security after 2014;
 * 	Support Afghanistan's development, including through an increased aid program;
 * 	Encourage business and investment links;
 * 	Cooperate on migration issues; and
 * 	Foster people-to-people links and help preserve Afghanistan's cultural heritage.
Through the Partnership, Australia will also work with the Government of Afghanistan to build the capacity of government and national institutions to promote and protect human rights.
A Joint Commission will be established to review implementation of the Partnership and to provide a forum for regular dialogue on issues of shared strategic interest.
The Partnership will give confidence to the people of Afghanistan that Australia will stand side by side with Afghanistan beyond the end of transition in 2014.
The nature of Australia's engagement in Afghanistan will change after transition, but Australia's commitment to Afghanistan's stability and development will endure.  



PM: I'm here today with Minister Smith, and today I've attended the NATO-ISAF summit. This has been an important meeting and a good discussion between partners.
Primarily, we spent the time agreeing important outcomes for the future of our mission in Afghanistan.
First we reviewed transition. We've agreed that we are on track and we will complete transition by the end of 2014.
We've increased the capabilities of the Afghan National Security Forces, we've weakened the insurgency, we've hit Al-Qaeda hard and we've seen development gains in Afghanistan.
No-one is underestimating the challenges that lie ahead. But our goal of an Afghanistan that is never again a safe haven for terrorism is within reach.
We agreed that by mid-2013 we will reach an important milestone in the transition process, and that milestone is that all parts of Afghanistan will have begun transition and Afghan forces will be in the lead for security nationwide.
In Uruzgan Province, in which we work, transition begins in coming months and, as you know, we expect this process to take 12 to 18 months, and at its conclusion the majority of Australian troops will be able to return home.
Second, at today's meeting we looked beyond 2014 to the support that Afghanistan will need to safeguard and build on the progress that's been made.
Our mission after transition will change and it will evolve. Afghanistan will have responsibility for its own security. ISAF will have made a shift from its combat mission, but there will still be a continuing need for support.
Importantly, this summit has agreed to work towards a new post-2014 NATO-led mission to train, advise and assist the Afghan National Security Forces.
As I've said in the past, Australia will contribute trainers to this mission with a focus on the Afghan artillery school and the officer training academy.
The new NATO-led mission will focus on training after 2014. Over and above this, however, there may be some ongoing need for a Special Forces contribution for counterterrorism, and I advised today's summit of Australia's willingness to consider such a contribution under the right mandate.
I was also able to advise the meeting of Australia's new long-term partnership with Afghanistan and our increased development assistance. I announced that assistance yesterday and counter-signed the partnership agreement with President Karzai.
Third, we agreed on the importance of funding the Afghan National Security Forces beyond 2014. We called on the international community to commit to this long-term sustainment.
In recent days, the number of international funding commitments has grown and more are expected shortly.
There is confidence that the target of $1.3 billion will be reached and, of course, Australia has announced that its contribution will be $100 million per year starting in 2015.
Finally, we agreed that a political process involving reconciliation and re-integration is an important component of our path towards a stable Afghanistan.
We agreed that these processes must be Afghan-led and must be underpinned by the renunciation of violence, the breaking of ties to international terrorism, and acceptance of the Afghan constitution.
As I said when I spoke about Afghanistan back in Australia, we did not enter this conflict lightly and we do not persist in it without great care. But today's summit demonstrates that we can proceed with the transition we agreed to in Lisbon, understanding it's a difficult mission, but it is on track.
I was also pleased to attend the meeting of NATO and its core partners. It's very much in Australia's interests for NATO to contribute to global security, and for it to have strong partnerships.
For our part, Australia wants a long-term partnership with NATO. We share a common vision for global security, and a common belief in the value of international cooperation to achieve security.
Our relationship with NATO has strengthened in recent years, including through the appointment of our first ambassador to NATO, and I'm looking forward in coming weeks to welcoming the Secretary-General of NATO to Australia.
I'll turn now to Minister Smith for some comments, then we'll be happy to take questions.
MINISTER SMITH: Thank you, Prime Minister.
The Prime Minister has given a comprehensive summary of the last couple of days in Chicago, so I don't need to add to that other than to say the Prime Minister and I attended the Lisbon summit in November of 2010.
The first job of this summit was to review the transition process. We've done that and there's no doubt that transition is on track.
Secondly, we have started the process of the detailed work required for the post-2014 transition presence in Afghanistan and also the post-2014 resourcing of the Afghan National Security Forces.
In the course of my time here, in addition to attending the bilaterals that the Prime Minister has had, I've also had the opportunity of catching up with a range of my defence ministerial colleagues, including Secretary Panetta, my Canadian counterpart, Peter MacKay, our New Zealand colleagues, both the Foreign Minister and the Defence Minister who are here and, also, my UK counterpart Philip Hammond, and, as well, Defence Minister Wardak of Afghanistan.
The general view of defence ministers is as reflected by the Prime Minister's assessment of today's events.
We are on track to transition. We are starting the planning at the correct point in the cycle for the post-2014 presence.
The Prime Minister, in the course of her remarks, used the phrase ‘difficult', and to steal a phrase the Prime Minister has used in the past, whilst this conference has been successful, while transition is on track, there will be difficult days ahead and we should not pretend otherwise.
Thank you, Prime Minister.
PM: Okay, we're happy to take questions. We are peering out into a bit of darkness, so we'll do our best to recognise people.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned this new relationship you've got with NATO. Looking down the track a few years in the future, how do you see this new - I suppose, this new form of alliance working and in what areas?
PM: Well, security threats are increasingly global and so it makes sense to have global partnerships as we look to combat those security threats.
In the modern age, of course, we're talking about terrorism, about cyber-security, about piracy. These are all international security threats, and one in which us, having partnerships with organisations like NATO, can strengthen us and strengthen them.
JOURNALIST: Could you explain a bit more about the 2013 midway transition agreement that's been made going from a combat to a supporting role. What will that mean for Australians in Uruzgan?
PM: The mid-2013 milestone is the point at which all of Afghanistan will be in transition and will have moved to Afghan security leadership.
With tranche three going into transition where Uruzgan Province is, around 75 per cent of the country will go to Afghan security leadership. In mid-2013, 100 per cent will go to Afghan security leadership.
At the end of 2014, what you see is the end of the current mission, the current combat mission, and a move to a different set of circumstances where the Afghan people are providing for their own security. But that doesn't mean that there will be no role for outside help and assistance.
We'll still be there providing training assistance. There will be a NATO-led mission to train and advise and assist. And as I've indicated consistently, we are leaving open the prospect that there may be some continuing role for Special Forces.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you have time to catch up with US President Barack Obama today? If so, what did you talk about, and did you discuss the Pakistan supply line issue?
PM: I did have a brief discussion with President Obama. I'd have to say it was more a catch-up between mates than anything else. We did have a very brief discussion about circumstances in the global economy.
JOURNALIST: But are you confident, after your talks with President Zardari, and we also hear President Obama has now had a brief meeting with him as well, are you confident - did you take away from that that supply lines will be re-opened?
PM: Well, President Zardari said to me yesterday and, indeed, said at today's meeting - so effectively said it publicly - that he had directed officials to work on this issue, what's referred to as the GLOC issue, which is the blocking of supply lines out of Afghanistan into Pakistan.
So given he's indicated that publicly, one would hope that there will be progress made.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we hear ongoing reports of corruption with the Afghan army. Are you confident that it can maintain control (inaudible) after 2014, provide security?
PM: Look, this is not without severe difficulties and challenges, you're absolutely right. But all of the reports to me from our people working in Uruzgan province, is that the Afghan National Army is increasing in numbers and increasing in capability.
General Allen reported to the NATO-ISAF summit today for all of Afghanistan what his perspectives are as the ultimate commander, and his perspective is that the security forces are growing in number and capability.
He pointed, for example, to their response when there were security challenges in Kabul in relatively recent times.
So, in those circumstances, are there difficulties? Yes there are, but the professionals who are there on the ground day-to-day are telling us that the forces are growing both in number and capability.
MINISTER SMITH: Sorry just - Prime Minister, perhaps I could just add to that answer.
PM: Sure.
MINISTER SMITH: The Afghan National Army is currently of a size of just under 340,000. It'll grow to a surge force of just over 350,000 and General Allen's advice, and this is consistent with the advice I get from the Chief of the Defence Force and our officers in the field so far as Uruzgan is concerned, that that growth is not just a numerical growth, it's also a steady growth in capability.
In our case in Uruzgan, that's reflected by the fact that all of the provinces transitioned in the third tranche.
Over a period of time after 2014, that surge Afghan National Army force, or numbers or numerical strength will decline, it'll be a gradual drawdown, ending up, at this stage, with an Afghan National Army force of in the order of 220-230,000.
So our analysis, our advice and the view from General Allen and others is that there is a ongoing growth in capability and the numerical strength getting to the surge force of just over 350,000 is occurring more quickly than was previously anticipated. We expect that to arrive at that point at about October this year, which is a few months earlier than otherwise expected.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: Yes, Mark.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, I've seen a summary of Mr Thomson's remarks to the Parliament. I haven't had the opportunity, as you would imagine, to do more than that. I've been focused on the NATO-ISAF summit.
As I've said many times in Australia before I left, it's not for the Parliament to be judge and jury here.
JOURNALIST: From what you've seen though, (inaudible)?
PM: Look, it's exactly the same as I would have said to you last week in Australia, it's not for the Parliament to be judge and jury.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say that Parliament shouldn't be the judge and jury. You've already decided that he shouldn't be sitting in the Labor caucus. Now Craig Thomson's mounted his defence in Parliament, what's it going to take for you to welcome him back?
PM: Look, I made a decision. I explained at the time I made it about respect for the Parliament and there was an accumulation of issues here involving Mr Thomson and Mr Slipper, and so I made a decision about Mr Thomson's further participation in the Labor Party and Labor caucus, so I continue to believe that that's the right decision.
As for the specifics involving Mr Thomson, I've said consistently these will be dealt with by an appropriate court at the proper time. Mr Thomson denies these allegations. He's entitled to his day in court and ultimately he'll have it.
JOURNALIST: So there's no certainty that returning him to the Labor caucus would bring the Parliament into disrespect?
PM: Well, there's no possibility of me changing my mind, so the question doesn't arise.
JOURNALIST: But there's no certainty either of these matters actually going to a court. So, in the circumstances where they didn't, the judgment would have to be made by you as to whether he was able to come back or not.
PM: Look, it's my understanding and I'm happy to be corrected by you, but it's my understanding of the Fair Work inquiry report that it was Fair Work's intention for a number of matters related to the Fair Work Act to be the subject of Federal Court proceedings.
As to any other form of proceedings, of course, I'm not aware. Those matters are still in investigation, as I understand it, but the likely court proceedings I refer to are the ones coming from the Fair Work inquiry.
JOURNALIST: And you want to see those all played out before you'll make any call on bringing him back to the Labor caucus?
PM: Look, I've made a call and I'm not intending to revisit it, but I also put the view to you today exactly as I would have if we were in Australia last week or the week before, it's not appropriate for Parliament to set itself up as judge and jury.
JOURNALIST: Do you have confidence in Fair Work Australia, or do you share Mr Thomson's view, as stated in Parliament yesterday, that the Fair Work Australia report (inaudible) was, quote, “selective” and “biased”?
PM: Look, I'm not going to engage in commentary about Mr Thomson's statement. Fair Work Australia is an independent agency doing its job.
JOURNALIST: Did Mr Thomson wait too long to make his statement? Did you wish he'd made it-
PM: It's a matter for Mr Thomson.
JOURNALIST: But do you have confidence in Fair Work Australia?
PM: Look, it's an independent agency doing its job
JOURNALIST: So you're happy with them?
PM: Well, all I can say to you is it's an independent agency, it's doing its job.
Clearly, Mr Thomson is intending when these matters come before a court and I think, from the Fair Work inquiry report they're likely to, to contest matters relating to the investigation. That's a matter for Mr Thomson.
JOURNALIST: Do you share his criticism at the way the media has dealt with this whole issue? He was quite brutal about sections of the media.
PM: Look, I've seen a summary of his statement to the Parliament and I'm not going to engage in a critique of individual bits of it.
Mr Thomson put his, you know, statement to the Parliament, he chose to do that, it was a decision for him. At the end of the day, it's not for the Parliament to set itself up as the court here or as jury here. There are proper processes and those proper processes should be gone through.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look I'm, you know, Mr Thomson's had his say and now the proper processes have to be worked through.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, I'll...
JOURNALIST: Do you feel for him?
PM: I haven't seen the statement being given, I've seen a summary of it, and, you know my comments are as I've just given them to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just back on Afghanistan for a moment.
PM: Alright, we'll make this the last question.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We certainly made our decision and publicly announced it because we thought the very fact that, you know, our nation was making so clear what we were prepared to do, that that in and of itself would have a demonstration effect, if you like, for other nations that were considering making a contribution, and I have, during the course of my various discussions with leaders at this summit indicated that Australia's made its decision, made its contribution, announced it publicly and it is important for all to make appropriate contributions to sustain the Afghan National Security Forces.
As I said in my intervention during the summit, we haven't invested this much and lost as much as we've lost to not now do the appropriate thing to sustain Afghan National Security Forces beyond 2014.
Thank you very much. 



Australia and Malaysia today signed a comprehensive free trade agreement (FTA) that will open avenues for Australian goods and services into the Malaysian market. 
The agreement will further integrate the Australian economy with the fast-growing Asian region, benefiting Australian exporters, importers and consumers.
It was signed in Kuala Lumpur by Australia's Trade and Competiveness Minister Craig Emerson and his Malaysian counterpart Mustapa Mohamed.
Today's signing follows an undertaking in March last year by Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Najib Tun Razak, the Malaysian Prime Minister, to complete negotiations within a year.
Under the accord, Australia will be as well-positioned in the Malaysian market as Malaysia's closest trading partners in ASEAN, and in some cases better.
For Malaysia, the accord allows the same tariff-free entry to Australia currently enjoyed by Singapore.
The FTA will guarantee tariff-free entry for 97.6 per cent of current goods exports from Australia once it enters into force. This will rise to 99 per cent by 2017.
Malaysian exporters, meanwhile, will enjoy duty-free entry to the Australian market.
Australia has also agreed to provide a three-year package of up to 21 short and long-term scholarships, fellowships, awards and exchanges to support Malaysia's economic reform efforts.
This complements existing exchanges between Australia and Malaysia on public sector and economic governance, including through the Endeavour Scholarships.
Malaysia is Australia's 10thlargest trading partner, with two-way trade worth almost $16 billion in the 2010-11 financial year.
Australian exporters of automotive parts, iron, steel and dairy products will benefit from improved market access under the agreement.
The FTA will also help diversify the trading relationship by opening Malaysia's services sector to Australian companies.
Malaysia has committed to allowing majority Australian ownership of service providers in a range of industries, including telecommunications, insurance, education, tourism, research and development, accountancy and mining-related services.
The signing of this FTA is an early outcome of the white paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
The agreement goes well beyond the lowering or elimination of import tariffs.
It is a vote of confidence in the Malaysian people, in their economic reform process and in the importance of the Asian region to Australia.
The FTA will also complement benefits already flowing from the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand FTA.


PM: I am here today with Minister Bill Shorten and with Damian and Rae Panlock and we're here today to talk about bullying in our workplaces.
I feel very concerned that in workplaces around the country there are people, particularly young people, who are being bullied at work. When the Productivity Commission is telling you that this might be costing our nation between $6 billion and $36 billion, then that makes you really worry that there's a silent epidemic out there. That there are people who are being bullied who aren't feeling that they can raise their voices and report their experiences.
Talking to Damian and Rae today they know-
JOURNALIST: My apologies.
PM: I was worried about you for a second; I thought that was going to hit you. And someone's recorder is on the floor. OK, that's alright, no damage done, no sound guys were injured.
That's the main thing.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: That's right; we can put a disclaimer up at the end - no sound recorders were injured during the course of this press conference.
I've have had the opportunity to have a conversation with Damian and with Rae about their family experience and they will talk about that family experience themselves, but it led to the loss of their daughter Brodie. And they fought hard here in Victoria for Brodie's law, to have a law that deals with serious bullying at work.
We, today, are here to announce a parliamentary inquiry into bullying around the nation. We are already taking some action, particularly through our new workplace health and safety laws and the development of a code of conduct by Safe Work Australia.
But I am concerned more needs to be done and if we have a national parliamentary inquiry, it will enable people to come forward, tell their stories, help us work out the prevalence of bullying in work places and also help us add to what we are doing now.
And one way we could add to what we are doing now is to take Brodie's law nationally and to have common national laws to deal with bullying at work.
So I'll turn now to Minister Shorten, who might want to say a few words, and then hand over to Damian and Rae.
MINISTER SHORTEN: Good afternoon everyone. It's great to be here with the Prime Minister and also very importantly, Damian and Ray Panlock.
Parents worry about their children growing up and being safe, but no family should go through what the Panlocks have been through. Their daughter was going to work, she was doing well and yet what was happening to her at work meant that one day she didn't come home.
This is a dreadful experience for any family. Bullying is a secret scourge; it is far too common in all Australian work places. There is no excuse for bullying. Having a parliamentary inquiry, where the voices of people who have been bullied can be heard, where families can explain what they've been through, I think puts a very human touch on what is a national problem.
The experts say it costs between $6 billion in the work place, to up to $36 billion, according to some experts. The Commonwealth Government is moving to have national safety laws, but we believe that workplace bullying, even if it can't always be seen, is as big a scourge as anything else which is hurting our people at work, in particular our young people.
So we want to do this because we don't want any other family to have to go through what the Panlocks and their family have been through.
DAMIAN PANLOCK: Thanks Bill
RAE PANLOCK: I'd just like to thank Ms Gillard and Bill, Bill's been with us for quite a long time and it has been a long, hard road and it's just wonderful so many people are united in this particular cause.
It is a really toxic environment, that bullying creates, and it does have a serious effect on people's state of mental health and it would be nice to know we can all go to work, young or old, and feel safe and that it will be taken seriously.
I just don't want to see young people, or of any age, go through what we have had to go through with the loss of Brodie. I'd just like to thank everyone.
JOURNALIST: How important is this (inaudible)
RAE PANLOCK: Very important. We have got the one in Victoria and it's just wonderful that it will be a national thing because it happens in every state, everywhere and it's just wonderful.
Thank you Ms Gillard, thank you Bill.
DAMIAN PANLOCK: I think uniformity, I think throughout all the States, and that's where Julia Gillard comes into it and Bill Shorten, that they will change the attitude and what the laws are going to be and looking at bullying, particularly in the workplace with young adults that are trying to get on with what they are trying to do, trainees, apprentices, whatever.
It's our children. It's really is, it's our village; we've got to look after them. And it takes the community to look after them, not just their parents, or their teachers, in the workplace, bosses or whatever.
And this is what's got to change, attitude, training, and with the good help of Julia and Bill and their team, I reckon we'll do it.
Across Australia, it's got to be done. All the same. Each State. Not just one or two States.
JOURNALIST: Mr Panlock, do you hope that a new national law would be named in your daughter's honour?
DAMIAN PANLOCK: It'd be nice, but I think any law is a good law that changes these things.
RAE PANLOCK: Definitely.
MINISTER SHORTEN: The question you asked about a parliamentary inquiry, how does that assist - the Commonwealth is working on a code of practice, but it is no secret that, unfortunately, sometimes there is friction between Commonwealth and States about who should do what laws.
Let's just park that issue for this issue of workplace bullying. I believe that there is enough bipartisan good will to take the initiative of using a parliamentary inquiry to look at having a common national law, wherever you are in Australia, you cannot bully people at work.
PM: Are there other questions on today's announcement?
If there is not, we'll just take some other questions of the day. Thanks.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, would you tell us about the special visas policy, are you supportive of the policy?
PM: Look, my concern here, and the concern of the Labor Government, is always to put Australian jobs first.
As a Labor Government during the global financial crisis, we put Australian jobs first and now we are putting Aussie jobs first too.
We've  got an economy where we've got an economy where we have got half a billion dollars - sorry $500 billion, I should be saying half a trillion - $500 billion of investment projects in the pipeline and that means that there will be tens of thousands of job opportunities for Australians.
I want to make sure, as those jobs come on stream, that Australians get the benefit of having those jobs. Now the sheer size and scale of what's happening means that we will need some foreign labour. We're working to make sure Aussies get jobs first.
Yesterday Minister Bowen announced a particular arrangement for one project in the Pilbara, at least 80 per cent of the jobs on that project will go to Australians.
But yesterday I decided that we would add to what we are doing to make sure that Aussies are getting the jobs first. We will have a Jobs Board, which will be a way for Aussies to know what's happening in the resources sector and what the jobs are, and companies won't be able to bring in foreign workers if there is an Australian ready, able and willing to do the work on the Jobs Board.
And second, I'm strengthening oversight of Enterprise Migration Agreements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it's been reported that you didn't know about the deal until it was done. Is that true, or were you involved in the negotiations?
PM: Look, I don't, on any day, comment on internal government processes, but the important thing for Australians is that people get access to job opportunities, that we are looking to Australians first, skilling Australians, getting them to fill these jobs.
These are jobs in our resources sector. It's our mineral wealth and we want to share the opportunities that comes from getting that mineral wealth out of the ground. That's why we're focused on Australian jobs first and foremost.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you just said you were putting some checks and balances, but unions today though are fearful that this may open the floodgates for foreign workers in other industries.
PM: I can assure everyone that we will be putting the interests of Australians at the front of the queue and we will be putting Australians looking for work at the front of the queue.
There will be tens of thousands of job opportunities in the resources sector and I want to make sure that Australians get the benefits of those opportunities, that we are skilling Australians first and getting them the jobs first.
Now there will be some need for foreign labour, the amazing size of what's happening in our resources sector means that there won't be enough Australians available to fill all of the jobs that are necessary, but Australians will always come first in getting these job opportunities.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about the divisions it's causing within the party? I understand Doug Cameron this morning said he'd been gobsmacked (inaudible)
PM: Look, I am sure Doug Cameron, along with all Labor members understands the importance of jobs. We worked very hard, as a Government to support Australian jobs during the global financial crisis and we'll be doing exactly the same now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the issue of bullying, many people would say that we should be leading by example; there's been some pretty unsavoury scenes in Canberra in recent times. Should we start there?
PM: Look, I'm not here today to talk about what's happening in Canberra, or matters associated with the Leader of the Opposition.
We are here today with Damian and Rae, a couple who know what this is like from losing their young daughter Brodie, and we want to respond to that very serious issue of bullying right around the nation at work
It does really disturb me. We don't even know the size of this; we don't know how many people are feeling under pressure in their workplaces. We have taken some steps to respond, but now this parliamentary inquiry is the next step, so that we can get national arrangements that make a difference for people who might be feeling fearful at work.
JOURNALIST: Back to that visa issue, given that you have said that you're going to be introducing new measures, does that mean that this (inaudible)
PM: It means that each and every day, we keep monitoring and improving policy. As a Government that's what we do.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you going be leading the Government to the next election?
PM: Yes, I will.
OK, thanks very much.



The Prime Minister and the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations today announced a review into bullying in the workplace.
The aim of the review is to look at the nature, causes and extent of workplace bullying and consider proposals to prevent bullying cultures developing in the workplace and help individuals who have been affected by bullying to return to work.
Workplace bullying can cause serious psychological injury and great distress to victims and their families. It also affects the broader community, causing lost work time, reducing productivity and contributing to increased workers' compensation claims and associated costs.
The Productivity Commission estimates the total cost of workplace bullying in Australia at between $6 billion and $36 billion annually.
The terms of reference of the review will focus on:
 * 	the prevalence of workplace bullying in Australia and the experience of victims of workplace bullying;
 * 	the role of workplace cultures in preventing and responding to bullying and the capacity for workplace-based policies and procedures to influence the incidence and seriousness of workplace bullying;
 * 	the adequacy of existing education and support services to prevent and respond to workplace bullying and whether there are further opportunities to raise awareness of workplace bullying such as community forums;
 * 	whether the scope to improve coordination between governments, regulators, health service providers and other stakeholders to address and prevent workplace bullying;
 * 	whether there are regulatory, administrative or cross-jurisdictional and international legal and policy gaps that should be addressed in the interests of enhancing protection against and providing an early response to workplace bullying, including through appropriate complaint mechanisms;
 * 	whether the existing regulatory frameworks provide a sufficient deterrent against workplace bullying;
 * 	the most appropriate ways of ensuring bullying culture or behaviours are not transferred from one workplace to another; and
 * 	possible improvements to the national evidence base on workplace bullying.
The Review will be undertaken by the House Standing Committee on Education and Employment, comprising members from both major parties. It will consult extensively with the community and will report by 30 November 2012.
The Australian Government is already working with state and territory governments, as well as employer and employee representatives, to harmonise work health and safety laws in Australia. Safe Work Australia is working on a Code of Practice to provide guidance to workplaces on how to prevent bullying becoming a health and safety risk in the workplace.
In addition, some states have passed legislation to deal with bullying  -  such as Brodie's law.
The review will complement the work being undertaken by Safe Work Australia and State and Territory governments.


Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Arts Minister Simon Crean today announced the shortlists for the 2012 Prime Minister's Literary Awards and congratulated the shortlisted authors and producers.
The 2012 shortlists recognise some of the strongest literary talent and history expertise in Australia and feature a range of authors and producers from award-winners to first-time novelists.
This year's Awards are the largest ever, including an inaugural poetry award and the newly incorporated Prize for Australian History, with over five hundred entries across all categories.
This was a very competitive year for the Awards and all the judges were extremely impressed with the high calibre of work entered.
The shortlists include a diverse range of entries from richly illustrated children's books to powerful documentaries with a broad range of themes including Indigenous history, family conflict, alienation, memoirs and fantasy.
In particular, the shortlist for the inaugural poetry award  -  a welcome and important introduction to the Awards  -  includes strong and innovative works, continuing Australia's rich tradition of the poetic voice.
It is also encouraging to see publishers of all sizes represented in this year's Awards, including small ‘micro'-publishers, independent Australian-owned publishers, university presses and multinational publishers.
A total of $600,000 will be awarded in six award categories making the Prime Minister's Literary Awards the nation's richest literary awards in Australia. A prize of $80,000 tax-free will be awarded to the final winner in each of the award categories: fiction, non-fiction, Australian history, poetry, young adult fiction and children's fiction. Shortlisted entries also receive $5,000 tax-free.
The Gillard Government has also provided support to Australian authors, publishers, booksellers and libraries through investing $1.3 million in the National Year of Reading 2012.
All Australians are encouraged to reignite their passion for reading with these imaginative and compelling Australian stories during the National Year of Reading.
The 2012 Prime Minister's Literary Awards shortlists are:            
Fiction shortlist
All That I Am by Anna Funder
Sarah Thornhill by Kate Grenville
Foal's Bread by Gillian Mears
Autumn Laing by Alex Miller
Forecast: Turbulence by Janette Turner Hospital
Poetry shortlist
Ashes in the Air by Ali Alizadeh
Interferon Psalms by Luke Davies
Armour by John Kinsella
Southern Barbarians by John Mateer
New and Selected Poems by Gig Ryan
Non-fiction shortlist
A Short History of Christianity by Geoffrey Blainey
Michael Kirby Paradoxes and Principles by A J Brown
When Horse Became Saw: A Family's Journey Through Autism by Anthony Macris
Kinglake-350 by Adrian Hyland
An Eye for Eternity: The Life of Manning Clark by Mark McKenna
Prize for Australian History shortlist
1835: The Founding of Melbourne and the Conquest of Australia by James Boyce
The Biggest Estate on Earth: How Aborigines Made Australia by Bill Gammage
Breaking the Sheep's Back by Charles Massy
Indifferent Inclusion: Aboriginal people and the Australian Nation by Russell McGregor
Immigration Nation: The Secret History of Us by Renegade Films Australia Pty Ltd
Young adult fiction shortlist
A Straight Line to My Heart by Bill Condon
Being Here by Barry Jonsberg
Pan's Whisper by Sue Lawson
When We Were Two by Robert Newton
Alaska by Sue Saliba
Children's fiction shortlist
Evangeline, The Wish Keeper's Helper by Maggie Alderson
The Jewel Fish of Karnak by Graeme Base
Father's Day by Anne Brooksbank
Come Down, Cat! by Sonya Hartnett, illustrated by Lucia Masciullo
Goodnight, Mice! by Frances Watts, illustrated by Judy Watson
For more information on the shortlists including judges' comments and author biographies visitwww.arts.gov.au/pmliteraryawards



PM: I big, big thank you to Gesima for having us here today. I'm joined by Jenny Macklin and also by Andrew Leigh, the Member for Fraser, and we have been able to talk this morning over a cup of tea about how difficult it can be for pensioners to make ends meet.
We are here today talking to people about how they can make ends meet and some new assistance that's coming to help Australian pensioners. From tomorrow, pensioners will see more money in their bank accounts. 3.2 million pensioners will see more money arrive in their bank accounts over coming weeks.
This is part of our clean energy assistance. What it means for a single pensioner, is that they will see $250 extra turn up in their bank account. For a pensioner couple, they will see $380 extra turn up in their bank account.
And this assistance will be ongoing, they'll see more assistance next March and it will start to be paid fortnightly. This assistance is there to help people with the flow through impact of putting a price on carbon.
Of course, the carbon price isn't paid by individuals; it isn't paid by pensioners or by any other individuals, it's paid by big companies that generate a lot of carbon pollution. But it does mean that there will be some cost impacts that flow through and the money is there to give people a helping hand.
And because we know that pensioners find it hard to make ends meet and we know that limited budgets can be really tight, we have calculated this assistance so millions of pensioners will come out better off.
We want to make sure that pensioners aren't only assisted for the impact of carbon pricing, but that millions of pensioners will come out better off. So to Australia's 3.2 million pensioners, when you see some more money arrive in your bank account in the next few weeks, it's there to provide you with a helping hand and millions of pensioners will be better off.
I will hand over to Jenny Macklin for a few comments and then we'll be happy to take questions.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister. I'm very pleased to be here with the PM and with Andrew Leigh, the Member for Fraser, and with some local pensioners who are going to be receiving additional money in their bank accounts over the next fortnight.
So starting tomorrow, over the next fortnight, all Australian pensioners, aged pensioners, disability support pensioners, those on the carer payment, will receive extra money straight into their bank accounts.
You won't have to apply; the money will go straight into your account. It will go into your account whether you are a maximum rate pensioner or a part pensioner and it will make sure that you get this extra help before the carbon price starts on 1 July this year.
It has been estimated by the Treasury that the expected price impact of the carbon price, on average, for a single maximum rate pensioner is $3.90 a week and we will be providing $6.50 a week in assistance to those single pensioners.
This does demonstrate our determination to make sure that all pensioners are adequately compensated, adequately helped for the increases in prices that will come as a result of the carbon price.
We are providing extra to pensioners. We do understand that for people who live on a fixed income it is more difficult and that's why we are providing this additional assistance to pensioners at this time.
PM: Thanks Jenny. Thank you, we are happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you spoken to Joel Fitzgibbon this morning? Are you confident of his loyalty and will he remain as the Government's Whip in the House of Representatives?
PM: Joel Fitzgibbon's had something to say about this matter this morning and I think his words speak for themselves.
JOURNALIST: Do you feel comfortable in your position, Prime Minister? Do you think you'll remain Prime Minister for long, you're not living on borrowed time like Tony Abbott suggests?
PM: Just settle down and I'll be happily leading Labor to the next election.
JOURNALIST: But have you spoken to Mr Fitzgibbon?
PM: Look, Mr Fitzgibbon's made a statement this morning and I think his words speak for themselves.
JOURNALIST: Will you be discussing discipline in the next caucus meeting?
PM: Look, in caucus we'll be talking about issues important to the Australian nation, that's what caucus is for.
JOURNALIST: When did you first find out about the decision to approve that Enterprise Migration Agreement with (inaudible)
PM: Look, I'm not going to talk about internal Government processes. As a rule, I don't.
On these issues, we'll always put Australian jobs first and giving Australians opportunities. We are going to see amazing growth in our resources sector - $500 billion of investments are in the pipeline.
That means that there will be tens and tens of thousands of job opportunities for Australians and I want to make sure Australians get the skills and get the jobs. There will be some need for some foreign labour because of the sheer size and scale but we will always put Australian jobs first.
JOURNALIST: Was your office consulted in the usual way?
PM: Look, I'm not going to talk about internal Government processes no matter how the question is phrased.
JOURNALIST: Does it annoy you when you constantly see these stories about your leadership in the newspapers?
PM: I've answered your question.
JOURNALIST: Will you be seeking to speak to Joel Fitzgibbon later today?
PM: Look, Joel's made a statement on this, his words speak for themselves.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you lead a divided and dysfunctional Government?
PM: We lead a Government that is getting on with the job, most importantly, keeping the economy strong.
When we were talking over there with some of the pensioners who are here this morning, a few of them, like my parents, came from the United Kingdom.
In the United Kingdom, we see an economy that's just gone back in recession. Across Europe we see literally millions of people unemployed.
So the focus of our Government is on keeping the economy strong, giving people the benefits of work and opportunity, helping people with their cost of living pressures, while getting the really big reforms done and no bigger reform than making sure we seize a clean energy future, which is what we have been talking about today and we can seize that clean energy future whilst ensuring that millions of pensioners are better off.
JOURNALIST:  Were you, as it was reported on Saturday, furious about Chris Bowen's decision to approve that Enterprise Migration Agreement?
PM: Look, I dealt with this extensively yesterday. I am very passionate about Australian jobs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, going forward, how many EMAs are in the pipeline and when can we expect announcements on new ones?
PM: Look, Enterprise Migration Agreements can be applied for by big project proponents. They'll be worked through extensively. There will be increased scrutiny and I will be making sure, too, that there is connection to a Jobs Board we are developing.
So a Jobs Board that can give people an idea of all of the opportunities in resources. But we will be making it contingent that companies look to the Jobs Board and if there is an Australian able and willing to do the work, then that Australian gets the work.
JOURNALIST: What sort of scrutiny? Will you be sending officials out to visit projects and finding out how many jobs are there and how many are being filled by overseas workers?
PM: There are monitoring processes in Enterprise Migration Agreements, absolutely.
JOURNALIST: Will you be asking Joel Fitzgibbon to explain himself, or are you satisfied with a tweet?
PM: He has dealt with this issue and I think his words are clear.
JOURNALIST: A tweet is sufficient and there's no further questions he needs to answer? A tweet is sufficient?
PM: Look, I think his words are clear, so it's not the vehicle as to how they have been disseminated but what they say.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the best thing for the Labor Party for you to remain as Prime Minister, or would it be best if you were to resign?
PM: No, it's certainly best that I'm here leading the team to the 2013 election.
I'm looking forward to leading the team into the 2013 election, talking about this Government's achievements, but also all the things we have got to do for the future of this nation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you expect Mr Thomson to be in Parliament next week?
PM: Look, I'm not aware of any arrangements about Mr Thomson and leave. I don't deal with that, that's dealt with at the level of the Whips.
Thank you very much.


From tomorrow and over the coming weeks 3.2 million Australian pensioners will receive more money in their bank accounts to help them make ends meet.
Across Australia a total of about $707 million in household assistance will be going out to pensioners before the carbon price starts on 1 July.
Full and part pensioners will receive upfront household assistance payments of $250 for singles or $380 for couples combined. These payments will be paid straight into pensioners' bank accounts over the coming few weeks.
From March next year pensioners will receive ongoing annual household assistance that will increase to keep up with the cost of living.
We know that pensioners have the least room to move in their budgets, which is why they will get the most help, with many pensioners coming out ahead.
About 2.1 million pensioners who are on the maximum rate of the pension will be better off by $134 a year for singles and $201 a year for couples on average - a buffer of more than 65 per cent against the expected impact of the carbon price.
And 93 per cent of pensioner households will be at least 20 per cent better off thanks to these new payments.
The Gillard Government is providing household assistance payments to millions of Australians. More than 1.6 million families have already received or will soon receive household assistance of up to $110 for each child in families receiving Family Tax Benefit Part A and up to $69 for families receiving Family Tax Benefit Part B.
Self-funded retirees, veterans, students and other eligible payment recipients are set to receive increases in their payments before the end of June.
And in July Australian workers will benefit from new tax cuts.
This new pension payment is on top of the historic pension rise and improved indexation arrangements this Labor Government delivered in September 2009. Since then the pension has increased by $154 per fortnight for singles and $156 per fortnight for couples combined.
Only Labor will deliver for pensioners because we understand how tough it can be to make ends meet.
In contrast, Tony Abbott and the Liberals will hit you in the hip pocket by clawing back all of this new financial support.
Pensioners can find out more by visiting australia.gov.au/householdassistance or calling 132 300.



Prime Minister Gillard warmly welcomed Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra to Australia on 28 May 2012. Prime Minister Yingluck's visit was especially significant as it marked the 60th anniversary of bilateral relations. Their meeting was followed by a joint meeting of Australian and Thai Cabinet Ministers.
The foundations of the partnership were established decades ago and have been strengthened by the growth of people-to-people links, security cooperation, trade and investment ties, and shared interests in a prosperous and stable region. Prime Minister Yingluck informed Prime Minister Gillard about the political situation in Thailand following the general election in July 2011. The two Prime Ministers agreed to work together as partners and to intensify bilateral and regional cooperation in all dimensions to meet the challenges and opportunities arising from the profound shifts occurring in the region. 
Strong people to people links
The two Prime Ministers welcomed efforts to increase the numbers of Australians and Thais visiting each other's country. Leaders looked forward to the forthcoming visit to Australia by Thailand's Australia-Thailand Parliamentary Friendship Group and welcomed the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Australian Political Exchange Council and King Prajadhipok's Institute to establish an exchange program between young political leaders. The Prime Ministers also looked forward to a separate visit to Australia by three young Thai female MPs under a program funded by the Australia Thailand Institute, and the visit of Australia's Global Ambassador for Women and Girls to Thailand in the coming year.  
Enhanced trade and investment ties
Since the Thailand-Australia Free Trade Agreement (TAFTA) entered into force in 2005, bilateral trade has doubled, amounting to nearly A$20 billion. Australia is Thailand's 6th largest trading partner, and Thailand is Australia's 9th largest. The Prime Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to expand trade and investment ties by working together in 2012 to complete a general review of TAFTA and a review of its provisions on special agricultural safeguards. Leaders looked forward to strong progress on this agenda leading to a ministerial TAFTA Joint Commission meeting. Both leaders stressed the importance, in the meantime, of efforts to address specific issues posing impediments to trade. They also undertook to identify ways for the two countries to cooperate on maximising the benefits of the growing regional free trade agenda.  Prime Ministers looked forward to the commencement of negotiations on a new Air Services Agreement and to a review of the Agreement for the Avoidance of Double Taxation to enhance investment between the two countries.  
Education
Education is a pillar of the bilateral relationship.  Prime Minister Yingluck noted that 2012 is Thailand's “Year of Speaking English” and welcomed bilateral cooperation on English language education.  Prime Minister Gillard reaffirmed the Government's commitment to boosting Asian literacy and encouraged Australian education providers to offer programs in Thailand. The two Prime Ministers welcomed the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding on Bilateral Education Co-operation to encourage collaboration between Australian and Thai educational and training institutions. Prime Minister Gillard was pleased to announce the new Discover Thailand scholarship program which will provide assistance to Australians studying in Thailand, as well as partnerships between Australian and Thai schools to boost Asian literacy. Prime Minister Yingluck underlined the importance of vocational training where Australia has expertise and best practice. Both sides looked forward to stronger cooperation in industries such as energy, mining, agriculture, hospitality and tourism.
Disaster management cooperation
Prime Minister Gillard expressed Australia's deep regret at Thailand's losses during the devastating floods in 2011. Leaders agreed to strengthen bilateral and regional cooperation on disaster preparedness and response, particularly by improving water management capabilities. They looked forward to the visit to Australia by a high-level Thai delegation to examine Australian disaster response and emergency communications capabilities. 
Energy cooperation
Prime Ministers recognised the potential for enhanced work on energy cooperation. They emphasised the importance of promoting the development and use of clean and renewable energy, including through research and development into advanced coal technologies. Leaders looked forward to a visit to Australia by a high-level Thai delegation to explore investment opportunities and share experiences on energy policies.
Food safety
Australia and Thailand are both major agricultural producing and exporting countries. The Prime Ministers committed to work together on food safety and food security, including as members of the Cairns Group. They looked forward to Australia and Thailand co-hosting the 20th meeting of the Codex Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems in Thailand in 2013.
Security cooperation
Thailand and Australia enjoy a strong and mature security partnership, including deep defence, counter-terrorism and people smuggling ties. They agreed to continue to pursue regional solutions to people smuggling through the Bali Process. Prime Minister Gillard welcomed Thailand's support for establishing the Bali Process Regional Support Office in Bangkok to assist in the operation of the Regional Cooperation Framework. The two Prime Ministers looked forward to finalising a bilateral Extradition Treaty.
Regional and global cooperation
The two Prime Ministers committed to enhanced collaboration in regional and global fora, strengthening partnerships in the East Asia Summit, ASEAN Regional Forum and Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation. The two Prime Ministers expressed support for each other's bid for a seat on the UN Security Council - for Australia in 2013-2014 and Thailand in 2017-2018. Prime Minister Gillard expressed her appreciation for Thailand's work at the UN Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice. 



Three young Indigenous Australians have been given the opportunity to study at Oxford and Cambridge, after being named as recipients of Charlie Perkins Scholarships.
As of two years ago, there had never been an Indigenous Australian studying for an undergraduate or postgraduate degree at either of these British universities.
In 2010, Paul Gray and Christian Thompson were the inaugural scholarship recipients and the first Indigenous students to study at Oxford.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister Evans and Minister Macklin congratulated the three students and their families at a morning tea held in Parliament House today.
The three Charlie Perkins Scholarships recipients for 2012 are:
•           Lilly Brown, 26, finishing Honours in Indigenous Studies at the University of Melbourne. She has been accepted to a Masters degree in Politics, Development and Democratic Education at Trinity College, Cambridge. She will be the first indigenous Australian to study an undergraduate or postgraduate degree at Cambridge.
•           Krystal Lockwood, 25, has completed her Criminology and Criminal Justice degree with first class honours at Griffith University. She will study a Masters of Evidenced Based Social Intervention at Green Templeton College, Oxford.
•           Kyle Turner, 27, received first class honours in his Bachelor's degree in Archaeology Practice and a Masters of Applied Epidemiology from the Australian National University. He has been accepted to the Doctor of Philosophy in Public Health at Jesus College, Oxford.
These three outstanding Indigenous students have already achieved so much in their chosen fields of study, and will now have the opportunity to continue their studies overseas.
The Charlie Perkins Scholarships give students the opportunity to become leaders, not only in their field but in the broader community.
The scholarships were launched in 2009 in memory of Aboriginal leader and activist Dr Charlie Perkins - the first Indigenous Australian man to graduate from university.
The Gillard Government today announced $200,000 for the Charlie Perkins Scholarships, to support this year's scholars overseas and to provide funding for three Roberta Sykes scholarships which will be announced later this year.
The British Government, Rio Tinto, the Pratt Foundation, the Cambridge Commonwealth Trust, the Cambridge Australia Trust and The McCusker Foundation are also generous supporters of the Charlie Perkins Scholarships. 



Friends, it's a tribute to your industry's importance to this country that Minerals Week has become an institution on our political calendar, now into its fourth decade.
Mining is our economy's “strong right arm”.
When Australians see those great images of the industry, big yellow trucks the size of apartment blocks and open cuts as deep as Sydney Harbour and trains as long as the Story Bridge, we all feel a real pride in the vast continent we share and the endeavour we've made to develop it.
When almost six million Australians travelled overseas last year  -  nearly tripled from seven years ago  -  every one of them had a purchasing power based on the strong dollar mining has built.
And mining is woven through our culture and history as well.
The first “diggers” were miners  -  it was miners who raised the first truly Australian flag and who beneath it swore to stand by each other and their rights.
And it's my view that the modern story of mining is also one from which all Australians have much to learn  -  because the mining industry is now one of the finest examples of what I think of as the Australian “endowment”.
This country derives a historic advantage from our national talents and our natural gifts.
The gifts inherent in our natural resources, environment and location.
The talents embodied in the skills and knowledge of our people.
Now, no question, one of those talents is self-deprecation.
Outside the sporting arena, when we do undeniably achieve, we too often put it down to luck.
But it's not luck that makes this a top-ten country on low trade barriers, openness to international ideas, sophisticated and independent economic institutions, a list that goes on.
Luck didn't give us the three triple-A ratings which only seven other economies can claim  -  which no previous Australian government can claim either.
Luck didn't make us a top-two country on the measures that are most important to us: political stability, social mobility, ease of starting a business.
Luck didn't keep us out of the worst global recession in eighty years.
Any more than luck built a mining industry that supports the jobs of hundreds of thousands of Australians, that develops and exports advanced mining services and leads the world in production of so many commodities.
No, it took hard work, good ideas, tough business leadership, a skilled and creative workforce, generations of private endeavour.
And Governments playing their part.
You had to fight for it, we had to fight for it, and that suits us, because Australians know that things worth having are worth fighting for as well.
Many places on earth are resource-rich.
Few nations turn natural resources into national wealth as well as Australia does.
In reality, so many countries manage their mineral wealth badly that in the developing world they call it “the resource curse” and in the advanced world they call it “the Dutch disease”.
Australia's success in managing our resources has been built on much more than chance.
This is one of the keys to understanding your industry's success  -  and it is one of the keys to understanding our future success as a nation.
You see, our national endowment is not just the value of our natural gifts or the value of our national talents.
It's the way we use those talents to make something out of those gifts.
The way we take our skills and knowledge, and use them to transform our natural resources, environment, location: the way we turn these things to our purposes.
This endowment was not just given to us  -  it was made.
We made our location an advantage when we all worked hard to open this nation to Asia.
We made our environment an advantage when we all worked hard to protect it and to show it to the world.
Just as our natural resources only become an advantage because you make the most of mining.
Because of the work you do, and the work your people do, to extract its value, to find markets for it.
Making mining succeed is the work you do every day  -  and in modern Australia, it's a big part of the work of Government too.
And mining will benefit from much that this Government does in coming years, what we do for growth in the world  -  and for growth at home. 
And yes, what we do to deliver a share of the benefits of growth to all. 
When I recently said “I fight for Australia” I meant it.
In a tough global environment, Australia needs tough leadership, and I think you know by now, I'm prepared to fight.
Right now, there are important challenges to global growth.
At the centre of these challenges is the struggle of many European economies to deal with their sovereign debt crisis and restore growth on their whole continent.
The political developments that flow from this struggle have captured public attention in recent weeks, but in truth they have only dramatized the real economic debates which we have been engaged in through this year and last.
In Chicago last week, while of course the principal business was security, I did take the opportunity to express to my counterparts Australia's support for the G8's renewed resolve to promote European growth alongside fiscal sustainability.
And the European leaders weren't surprised at the view I expressed or that I flagged Australia will keep up the fight for strong and effective pro-growth policies at the G20 next month.
It's an argument we've pressed for some time now, and in doing so we have pointed to our own example and achievements.
Australia is a case study of policies to hold growth up in the face of a downturn, combined with charting  -  and following  -  a disciplined path of fiscal repair.
Growth and consolidation.
Of course, Europe is in a fundamentally different position from Australia, facing deeply entrenched problems with no easy fixes.
While Australia also has the advantage that we are in the right region at the right time, entering an Asian Century.
Asia's transforming growth won't end in a year or five years  -  it's an historic change with historic consequences and it's driving a long term shift in demand for what you produce.
But ultimately what's best for our peoples' jobs is balanced global growth and what's best for our firms' prosperity is balanced global demand and your industry is no exception to that.
So we'll keep up the fight for growth in the global economy.
And we'll continue that fight at home as well.
I'm very proud of the surplus Budget the Treasurer brought down this month.
In a very tough world environment, there's no clearer symbol of Australian strength.
And the surplus is right for the domestic economy as well.
The fiscal consolidation we've delivered has been designed to maintain sustainable, low-inflation growth, and you can see the effects already.
And you can also see that the extraordinary investment pipeline in this country keeps growing and now sits at over $500 billion.
So it's vital Government create room for the private sector and that's exactly what we've done.
Of course, it's not easy.  I look out at the room and there's a few veteran industry cost-cutters here who know that.
People who know what it's like to look at the revenue forecasts going down, quarter after quarter, who know what it's like to open up the lid on a few big cost-centres and to make the tough changes to get costs coming down.
That was the kind of picture we faced in framing this Budget:
Our predecessors saw revenues increased by almost two percentage points of GDP during their term.
In five Labor Budgets revenues have fallen by more than one and a half percentage points of GDP.
So what's our response been?  We've cut spending.
Down to 23.5 per cent of GDP next financial year and staying below 24 per cent over the forward estimates. 
The longest sustained period at these levels since the early 1980s.
We don't cut spending, or shrink the real size of Government, in a lunchtime libertarian seminar.
We do it in long days of expenditure review.
And because we make difficult decisions and pursue tough savings, we are able to keep room for important investments in the long-term drivers of productivity.
In infrastructure.
Projects vital to your industry, like the long-deferred Maldon to Dumbarton freight line linking resource fields in New South Wales to Port Kembla. 
And new economic infrastructure, delivered through the Regional Infrastructure Fund, drawing on the proceeds of the MRRT, like the hundreds of millions we've contributed to the major upgrade of the roads around Perth Airport.
In skills.
The Budget funded our new “HECS for Skills” scheme.
Part of our almost doubling of the level of skills funding we inherited in 2007.
So while for projects where there's a real need for some temporary overseas workers we will support that, our first priority is to secure jobs and training for Australian workers.
So our surplus Budget is a Budget for growth  -  it's the right Budget for the times.
I know many of you have serious differences of opinion with us on some of the elements of our policy approach.
You've told us that straight, and we expect nothing less, straight talking is the Australian way.
But I think we also both know that there there's a whole productivity agenda that we do share and where we can make a huge difference: in skills, innovation, infrastructure, business regulation, trade.
And you know that when industry and government work together on the world stage we get results together too.
Australian officials overseas, my ministers too, spend plenty of time working in the interests of our mining industry.
It's the same in my own meetings with visiting heads of Government, in my own work overseas.
Many of you know from your own experience that when it's in the industry's interest, the country's interest, for something to get said at the highest level, it gets said.
These are the opportunities for progress we share.
So we've got a plan to keep up the fight for growth, in the world and at home.
And yes, we've got a plan to spread the benefits too.
We are going to cut taxes, lift pensions and lift family payments.
Now, I know you're not all in love with the language of “spreading the benefits of the boom”.
I know everyone here works hard, competes in a tough global environment; you take big risks and you earn the big rewards.
You build something. 
Australians don't begrudge hard work and we admire your success.
But I know this too: they work pretty hard in car factories and at panel beaters' and in police stations and hospitals too.
And here's the rub. 
You don't own the minerals.  I don't own the minerals.
Governments only sell you the right to mine the resource.
A resource we hold in trust for a sovereign people. 
They own it and they deserve their share.
I think we've been crystal clear since the Budget.
We want growth and then we want the benefits of growth to spread to all.
There's been a fair bit of talk recently about whether Labor wants to make the pie bigger or slice the pie up differently.
Well, here's the answer.  Since we came to office:
Euro area: economy shrank, one point six per cent.
Japan: economy shrank, one point seven per cent.
United States: economy grew, one point three per cent.
Australia: economy grew, eight point eight per cent.
At the end of it all, the short-term arguments come and go  -  the facts endure.
Our economy is the envy of the world.
Our mining industry is the envy of the world.
There's nowhere in the world you'd be better off investing.
And there's nowhere in the world where mining has a stronger future.
And this is Australia, and it has a Labor Government. 



Friends, this year we celebrate the 60thanniversary of Gough's election to Parliament, which brought into public life one of the finest minds of a great generation.
Gough, who is so well-known for his deep love of literature, was very fond of quoting the last lines of the Inferno, when Dante and Virgil returned from the deep and “came forth to see the stars once again.”
Gough Whitlam is one of those stars, one of those stars for the Australian nation, for the Labor movement and the Labor Party.
Gough Whitlam would surely have become pre-eminent in whatever profession he chose.
If he'd gone into academia, he would have been a vice chancellor; if he'd gone into the law, he would have been a chief justice.
But he chose politics, because he understood its dignity and he saw its possibilities.
He brought a depth of analysis to public affairs grounded, as he expressed it, in “the tradition of optimism about the possibility of human improvement and human progress through the means of human reason.”
They were wise words then, just as they are wise words now.
Friends, in 2012 the “certain grandeur” of our friend Gough Whitlam endures as we celebratethe 40thanniversary of the government that bears his name, while the rancour and pettiness of his opponents pale into merited insignificance.
The thousand days of the Whitlam government were a brilliant, transforming moment  -  our own touch of Camelot.
Graham Freudenberg once wrote that “Those of us who were there have a duty to educate those who were not.”
Graham and Gough have laid down that record in their writings, their interviews and their lectures.
But it is a story that must speak to future years and future generations as well.
Not only as an artefact of history or literature, but as the inspiration of a living tradition of social action to shape the Australia of tomorrow as Gough has shaped the Australia of today.
So it's fitting that the Whitlam Institute has found a home here in the region where Gough became the first leader to elevate the needs and aspirations of suburban Australians to the level of national concerns.
Here in the university of which Gough can rightly claim to be the father.
Here, in one of our most important heritage buildings, founded by Governor and Mrs Macquarie to provide care and opportunity for the girls of the new colony.
Indeed, surely there is an appropriate symmetry for me as the first female prime minister of our nation, to be here today to celebrate the fact that more than half the enrolments of this university are now made up of women, many of them migrants and many of them refugees; many more the first in their family to receive the benefits of higher education.
So, it was a wise choice of this venue to host the Whitlam Institute, and my colleagues are here today to celebrate it.
And today we enable the job to be completed with a grant of $7 million to achieve full restoration and functionality of its eastern wing.
That work will include a public library displaying a collection of Gough's personal books and papers, plus accommodation for the Institute itself.
Perhaps for all of us most poignantly, it will include a public gallery on the top floor named in the honour of Margaret, remembering her lifelong connection with the arts.
And, more broadly, honouring what Gough Whitlam himself called "the longest prime ministerial marriage in Australian history”; a partnership without which the Whitlam legacy cannot even be imagined.
So friends, here today with a contribution from the Federal Government and joined by a contribution from the University itself, we can complete the task began 12 years ago when the University kindly agreed to give the Whitlam Institute a home.
So friends, in these historic walls, one of the nation's greatest stories can be told and retold, and one of nation's greatest sons can be esteemed.
Gough, you are in our thoughts today, and we thank you for giving us so much; the men and women of Australia, so much to remember and so much to preserve.
Thank you. 



Australia's oldest public building will be restored with a $7 million grant from the Gillard Government to permanently house the Whitlam Institute and Margaret Whitlam art galleries.
The restoration of the historic Female Orphan School building at the University of Western Sydney's Parramatta campus announced today means the resources of the Whitlam Institute can be used to their full potential.
The Whitlam Institute was established by the University of Western Sydney in 2000 to honour Gough Whitlam's vision for a democratic and progressive Australia and to foster cutting-edge research and public debate.
It was the Whitlam Government that opened up access to education for all Australians, abolishing university fees, established a national vocational education system, reformed school funding, created Austudy and invested in national pre-school education.
The Whitlam Prime Ministerial Collection, including the Whitlam Prime Ministerial Library and contemporary galleries and exhibitions, is currently housed in small premises on the campus, originally built in 1868.
The limited space and lack of audio visual facilities means school visits and international visiting scholars cannot be catered for.
This funding opens a whole new world of possibilities.
This restoration will see the full collection brought together in one location, providing a central point of access available to scholars and researchers.
It will also house a rich collection of art displayed in galleries named in honour of the late Margaret Whitlam.
The new facility will feature a dedicated space for use by schools and community groups and capacity for the institute to host important public cultural, educational and policy events.
This funding will ensure that the Female Orphan School building remains a public place for educational, cultural and public policy pursuits and becomes a pre-eminent resource for western Sydney. 



On behalf of the people of Australia, tonight we will have the honour of lighting this beacon.
This beacon will be one of those shining around the world, and in lighting the beacon tonight we are joining our celebrations for The Queen's Diamond Jubilee with celebrations being held right around the world.
These beacons glowing around the world symbolise one family across a wide world, the family of the Commonwealth nations. Rich in their diversity but united now in admiration for the unstinting service of The Queen.
Tonight we are reflecting not just on the passing of six decades;we are reflecting on a life well lived, a life of sacrifice, a life of service. And to the young people who are here with us this evening, I hope one thing you always remember about tonight is that example of The Queen spending her life in the service of others.
We are also reflecting on six decades that have passed and how much our nation has changed in that time.
We have become a confident nation, understanding our place in our region and in the world, with every reason to be optimistic about the future.
Across all of that change in our nation, 60 years of change, The Queen has been a symbol of continuity and a very wise and patient friend.
So tonight we honour her by lighting the beacon in front of us and we hope that, as she sees these beacons lit around the world, she accepts them for what they are  -  lights in admiration of her service.
Thank you very much 



The Australian Rugby League community owes David Gallop a debt of gratitude for his stewardship of the game following the announcement that he will step down from the role of Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Australian Rugby League Commission (ARLC).
During his tenure as CEO he had successfully grown the game and promoted Rugby League in Australia.
The popularity Rugby League enjoys today is testament to David's leadership and administration of the game over the last decade.  He effectively steered the NRL through a period of growth and was instrumental in establishing the new independent commission earlier this year.
Fans of Rugby League will remember David for his dedication to the game and the Australian Rugby League community. As CEO he demonstrated great integrity, leadership and professionalism.
David appreciated the power of sport to build strong communities, inspire our kids and bring people together through a shared love of the game. He understood that for supporters of Rugby League, the game was all about the teams they follow and forging strong connections to the grassroots.
He acutely understood where the game had come from and the future direction the League needed to take in order to grow. He leaves the game in a better position than when he took the reins and for this he should be acknowledged. 
David's passion for Rugby League and his strong commitment to building the game will be a lasting legacy that will be built on by the new commission. 



PM: I'm here today with Daryl Melham, the Member for Banks, and I'd like to say a big thank you to all the parents and workers at this childcare centre, a Good Start centre, that we've had the opportunity to talk to today and we've also had the opportunity to play some games with some of the children here and that's been good fun as well.
I very clearly remember, as I was saying the parents over morning coffee, when ABC Learning collapsed and we faced the prospect that hundreds of childcare centres around the nation would close and thousands of parents and families would be disrupted.
It was a pretty trying time, but we worked to make sure that families could get childcare and a great thing came out of that period and that great thing is Good Start; a not-for-profit organisation now operating 600 centres around the country including this one; so a remarkable result out of the collapse of ABC Learning.
So here at this Good Start centre today I've had the opportunity to talk to parents about childcare, about its quality but also about its affordability. I'm very proud that we are investing more money in childcare support than has ever been invested before.
We've tripled the investment to help parents with the cost of childcare. We've increased the childcare tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. That means that we are working with parents to meet half of their out of pocket costs.
It means we are investing more than $22 billion in childcare supporting parents to get the care they need for their child.
And to give you a sense about what this means for an individual family; for a family that's earning $75,000 a year that's got one child in long day care, for that family currently meeting childcare costs takes 7.5 per cent of their income, it used to take 13 per cent.
So our new investments in childcare have made a real difference for families.
But I am keen to do more. I understand that for many families they worry we they see childcare fees go up and they worry about the long term affordability of childcare.
I want to make sure that working with providers we are seeing what else we can do to build on our current reform to assist families with childcare. I do understand that for many families worrying about childcare costs is front and centre of their concerns about cost of living.
So I want to make sure that as we're giving families extra support that they don't see they cash gobbled up in increased childcare fees.
I want to make sure for families that work really hard during the week, that they don't at the end of the week see too much money gone because it's gone on childcare.
And I want to make sure too for many women who are returning to work that they're not dismayed about how big a bite childcare fees are taking out of their earnings from returning to work.
So tomorrow in Sydney I will be bringing together childcare providers and the relevant trade unions to discuss what more we can do to assist families with the costs of childcare.
Now government needs to play its part but so do providers need to play their part, which is why I want to have that conversation directly with providers and with relevant unions.
I believe by working together we can work our way to building on our current childcare reforms and making a long term difference for Australian families.
So the bottom line really comes down to this, I want to make sure that when we're giving families extra support, that that is making a difference to childcare affordability for them, not only today but over the time to come.
Now I understand that it's not just childcare fees people worry about when they're concerned about cost of living. As we've been talking with the parents today, kids grow up and they leave childcare and they go to school.
And in coming weeks families will see some assistance with the cost of getting the kids to school with our Schoolkids Bonus; $410 for primary school students, $820 for secondary school students. So we want to be working with families with school aged kids as well.
So I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: When you talk about the money being gobbled up by increasing fees, do you think that some childcare centres have been using these rebates as an excuse to raise fees?
PM: Look, I don't want to reflect on the behaviour of childcare centres or any individual centre.
My concern here is we've really increased our investment in childcare, so that we are working with families to meet 50 per cent of their out of pocket cost.
But I know families still get concerned when they see childcare fees go up.
So that's the conversation that I think we need to have now and I'm intending to do that personally with providers and with the relevant trade unions to see what else can be done on childcare affordability.
JOURNALIST: But so do you think that the increases that have come over the last few years  -  is there a reason for them? Are they justified?
PM: Look, I mean people I think would understand from a common sense point of view that costs go up for a variety of reasons.
When you're running a childcare centre you've got to pay the bill for the premises, you've obviously got to pay the bill for the staff, for all of the kids and equipment that the kids need, all of the food, all of those things have to be paid for and provided and people know that costs go up.
And yes there's been some modest effects too from our quality standards, but we've talked to parents today about just how important knowing that their childcare is at a good quality is to them.
So it's not me saying to childcare centres that I'm worried about unnecessary fee increases - maybe there are some individual examples of that, but my concern is a much more general one about childcare affordability.
We've made a big difference. I think those statistics for a family earning $75,000 tell you that. We've made a big difference, you know 13 per cent of your income versus 7.5 per cent, but I want to see what next we can do.
JOURNALIST: On interest rates, do you think today's expected cut will be enough to boost confidence in households and business?
PM: Australians have got every reason to be optimistic about our economy and that's been reinforced today by the National Accounts and by our growth figures.
And this a result that all Australians should be proud of, because we've worked together to make sure our nation came through the Global Financial Crisis and that it's continued to grow.
I mean it is truly remarkable that at a time when European nations are going backwards and many nations are really, you know, staggering to even try and put one foot in front of each other when it comes to growth that we are surging ahead.
So Australians today can be very proud of the growth in our economy and that should give people every reason for optimism in the future.
Our economy's fundamentals are strong, we are seeing our economy grow and I think these growth numbers today are proving some of the doomsayers and sceptics wrong.
JOURNALIST: Is a cap on childcare fees something you would consider?
PM: We've got a range of options that we need to work through and there's no, you know, you can't just say a cap on childcare fee because what do you then do when costs go up for legitimate reasons?
So we've got to talk about these options and work them through with the childcare providers and relevant unions.
So we've got options on the table, I want to test them in the discussion tomorrow. We won't get to the end of the discussion tomorrow. That will take place over the months to come, but I want to build on what already has been a big set of new investments to make childcare more affordable for families.
JOURNALIST: When can parents expect to see the difference?
PM: Well they're seeing a difference already as a result of the Labor Government, seeing a difference in their childcare tax rebate-
JOURNALIST: But they still think it's too expensive, when will are they going to see that change?
PM: I understand people are concerned about affordability, which is why I'm here today and why I will call the meeting together tomorrow to see what else we can do.
It's a discussion that will take a few months; I'm not going to pretend that there's an overnight extra step that we can take here.
We've invested a lot, we've made a difference but I am looking to do more and to lead a discussion over the next few months to see what else we can do to help Australian families with children in childcare.
And when we say childcare, we're obviously standing in a centre today and this would be many people's image of childcare, but we do need to remember we're also talking about things like after school hours care for kids.
JOURNALIST: Do you know what parents in Sydney are paying for childcare?
PM: Oh look, there are many numbers reported and, you know, it depends which centre you're at, but certainly I've heard families say they're concerned about their childcare costs rising and, you know, even taking into account the new assistance the Government is providing for them that they're concerned about childcare costs rising.
So am I, and that's why I'm here today and that's why we'll have the meeting tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Just back to interest rates. Is the cut a sign of economic weakness in terms of basic (inaudible) economics?
PM: I think the Reserve Bank has talked about its reasons yesterday, for the interest rate decision which it makes independently of government. But what government can do, and what we have done, is give the Reserve Bank room to move by bringing the budget to surplus.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask if the Coalition's partly to blame for talking the economy down lately, with what's been going on?
PM: Look, I know there are some reports today about what's motivated the Reserve Bank on interest rates and I'm not going to comment on those reports.
But if your general case to me is ‘Does the Opposition talk the economy down?,' yes they talk it down every day, and that negativity does have a cost.
JOURNALIST: What do you say to banks about passing the rate on in full?
PM: We believe that the banks should be passing this interest rate cut on in full to mortgage holders. I don't believe there's any excuse for the banks to do anything other than pass it on in full.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask your reaction to the Victorian teachers' strike tomorrow?
PM: Look, this is a question for Premier Baillieu and his government.
I'm certainly worried for parents who are going to have all of their, you know, family disrupted with the industrial action. I would be urging everyone to get around a table and work it through and work it out. Thanks very much.
JOURNALIST: Just on Mark Arbib's new position at Crown Casino. Are you worried about a conflict between the code of conduct for retired ministers and the duties that he might have to perform?
PM: No I'm not.
Thank you. 


PM: I've called this meeting to get to the bottom of the childcare affordability issue. To get feedback as to what was happening in childcare today, and to make sure that we can be working to get the best possible deal for families for the future.
I've been asking the people in the room what some of their answers are to the questions that families are asking themselves about childcare.
It was a constructive meeting and there was very good recognition of the huge levels of support that the Government is giving to childcare, and of the major reform agenda we've been rolling out.
Minister Ellis will say something on the feedback about the National Quality Framework, but certainly there was a key focus on quality in the room.
And there was also strong recognition that the Government is investing over $22 billion in early childhood education and care.
That over the next four years around $20 billion will go direct to families to support their childcare costs.
That we have made a difference to affordability, so a family that's earning $75,000 a year used to see 13 per cent of their income go on childcare fees, now that's been reduced to 7.5 per cent.
There was a recognition of our reform agenda, and those moves to increase support for families.
That's including the move from 30 per cent to 50 per cent for the childcare rebate, so working with families to support their out of pocket costs with a 50 per cent subsidy, and also increasing the maximum amount families can receive by more than $3000 to more than $7500.
So good recognition within the room of the steps that we've taken. But that still left us confronting a question that we need to answer.
The Government is providing record levels of support, and yet many families are still finding themselves with significant fees to pay and are feeling that burden.
And at the same time childcare wages remain relatively low.
So we've got three factors; government providing record support, many families still feeling the burden of childcare fees and worried about increases, and we do confront issues with turnover because childcare wages do remain relatively low.
So in the discussions today we focussed on each of those questions.
We all want to make childcare more affordable for the future, we want to keep our focus on quality, and we want to see kids retaining good relationships with staff and that there isn't an unacceptable level of staff turnover.
In the room we discussed a number of potential ideas for the future.
We talked about how we could get the best out of existing government assistance, and make sure that parents are getting everything that they're entitled to.
We talked about transparency and making it easier for parents to understand what government funds are throwing, and what differences those funds are making; smarter ways of doing that, clearer ways of doing that.
We talked about what work could be done on fee increases and trying to, for the future, looking at how we could deal with a better way of managing potential fee increases.
We had some discussion of flexibility of services, and some discussion about the rewards for childcare workers and their career paths.
Now today's meeting was always going to be the start of a discussion, not the end of a discussion.
But what's clear from today's meeting is if we are going to make more headway on childcare and early education that we all need to be working together.
Government's got to play its part, but so do providers and all of those who are so passionate about childcare. But I do want to see us get to some new answers in the next few months.
I don't want a situation where parents are concerned that the assistance that government is providing will ultimately be gobbled up in fee increases.
I don't want people to feel those kinds of pressures. So I am determined to act on this, and I'm determined to keep working with people so that we can address these issues over coming months.
I want to thank everybody who made themselves available for today's discussion, and I'll turn now to Minister Ellis for some comments and then we'll be happy take questions.
MINISTER ELLIS: Well thank you very much Prime Minister.
Today was a very positive discussion with a broad cross-section of the early childhood sector, and we received very positive feedback about the Government's initiatives to date.
I think what's noteworthy is that there was overwhelming support for the National Quality Changes which have been made, and this was people recognising that there have been big steps taken from the days when this sector was viewed as a babysitting sector.
We're now recognising how critical the early years of a child's life are. We know that their experiences in those first five years of their life will in fact shape their future outcomes when it comes to their education, their development, their social outcomes.
So we believe that Australian children absolutely deserve the best start in life, but of course we also want to ensure that it is both affordable and accessible. We had some positive discussions today about how we get to that point.
We're a government that has taken big steps already.
We've introduced reforms, we've also massively increased our investment in this area, but we're also saying that we know that parents are continuing to have to juggle their work and their caring commitments.
We know that parents are still being burdened with another strain on their family budget, and we want to continue to work to see what further steps this Government can take.
Now in contrast to this, Tony Abbott has made clear that he thinks that there's more to be done in childcare, but that he's put it in the too-hard basket.
Instead of coming up with solutions like we're working on here today, he's palmed it off to the Productivity Commission to say ‘Have a lengthy inquiry, see if you can come up the answers which we can't come up with ourselves.'
Well in contrast this Government has said that we're willing to sit down with the sector, we want to continue to work with them, we want to come up with further reforms, because we recognise and we have shown our recognition for just how important this sector really is.
Thank you.
PM: Right, we're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: PM, in your discussions today, the not-for-profit sector are calling for a change to the rebates, maybe more rebates going to childcare providers rather than parents. Was that discussed?
PM: Look, that was raised in the room and I have to say I don't think that was just raised by the not-for-profit sector.
Around the room whilst there wasn't, you know, unanimity about exactly what to do, I think there was broad agreement that it would be good if it was easier for parents to understand what fees were and what the level of government subsidy is.
So, you know, a remark in the room to give you a flavour of it, is you wouldn't want someone dissuaded from returning to work and accessing some childcare because they'd seen a headline fee from a centre and not realised that they were going to get government support.
So they've got a figure in their mind thinking ‘it's going to cost me this much.' Actually that figure's not right because it's not taking into account childcare benefit and the childcare rebate.
So there was  -  whether it was not-for profit or the private provision sector, there was a lot of consensus in the room that simplicity and transparency is very important.
JOURNALIST: So would you be looking at something similar to what you've done with banking reforms in terms of telling parents, giving them a sheet or something like that, outlining what they're paying, where they're getting government rebates and so forth? Would you looking at some sort of similar scheme?
PM: Well we've got some work to do and some thinking to do. I've been talking to parents, I did that yesterday.
I had the opportunity to exchange some views with people on Mamamia, and I've had this feedback today.
So working with Minister Ellis over the next few months, we will be considering what's been put to us today; we will be continuing the conversation.
But I am determined that we will act to build on the reforms that we have already brought in childcare.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, so you are considering directly funding childcare centres?
PM: Look, I'm not going to at this stage of the discussion or the conversation, get into a, you know, rule in rule out game about, you know, what we're considering or what we're not considering.
Our aim here is to make sure that every dollar that government invests in childcare makes a real difference to affordability.
And of course I want parents to understand what support is available to them.
I saw it reflected in the discussion on Mamamia today, the, you know, real wrestling that women do with the decision to return to work having had their first child or their second child, and the real wrestling with ‘how will I make it all work,' ‘what will it all add up to,' ‘what will it mean that I get to keep from my pay packet at the end of the week?'
Of course with people working their way through those complex decisions about what's right for their family, I want them to understand the system and understand that the Government is there supporting them with a 50 per cent childcare rebate, effectively going halves in your out-of-pocket costs, as well as the Child Care Benefit.
JOURNALIST: What about the private sector? Have you looked at inviting employers into these conversations?
PM: They were there today.
JOURNALIST: What sort of things did employers  -  the government seems to be, the Federal Government, to take care of the childcare centres and childcare when it's the employers perhaps, what sort of-
PM: Oh I see what you mean, the employers of-
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: No I understand. We'll certainly be involving in the conversation people from all perspectives, and many, you know, employers in our nation have involved themselves really actively in supporting returns to work of their highly valued staff, including supporting them through making available care associated with their workplace, so that's another model.
There's never going to be a one size fits all solution here, family life and working life comes in too many shapes and sizes for government to say, you know, one model is going to fit.
Families need to work through centre-based care, family day care, care by relatives, care near work, care near home.
All of these things come into people's consideration about what's good for their families. But certainly we're very happy to talk to employers directly.
JOURNALIST: How are you planning to tackle the challenge of low pay for childcare workers, and how will you balance that with fee rises, or the potential for fee rises in centres?
PM: We did in the room today talk about childcare workers and early educators.
We have, through the National Quality Framework that Kate referred to ensured that we're not only seeing quality care but we're seeing an early learning framework happen through childcare, and you know, kids obviously get to attend pre-school and kindy and all of that as well.
But we are giving kids a flying start to school by investing in early learning and we've absolutely accepted the compelling research from our own nation and right around the world.
If you're going to make the biggest possible difference to a child's life, then the early years are the pivotal time for making that difference.
You've pointed to a (inaudible) of tension and the tension was remarked on in the room, that we do want childcare workers to be valued, we do want this to be a sector where people can imagine working for a long period of time and making a career out of it.
It's obviously good for kids to have continuity of care, to recognise the faces in their childcare centre or where they go for family day care, and yet of course when you look at the other side of the coin, wages matter to fees and costs.
So that was one point that was squarely on the table today. Once again, we've got work to do in the coming months.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on maintenance, (inaudible) was the director of a childcare centre. She's been in the industry 15 years, and she's earning about $43,000 a year before tax. She's just been offered a cleaning job for almost twice as much, what's being done to keep these highly experienced people in the industry?
PM: Well you've named an issue that was within the room today, and certainly has been the subject of discussion between me and parents.
You know, people are concerned that, about childcare workers, I think people have increasingly come to value their work, and I think part of what the Government's done, and Kate's referred to it, is we, you know, dispensed with the notion that this is, you know, babysitting women's work and that there's no skill in it or no passion or enthusiasm for it, or no career path in it.
Our reforms have been there to speak very loudly and clearly that this is valuable work making an incredible difference to the next generation of Australians.
It's valuable work enabling current Australians to go and work and to pursue their vocations and what they want to do with their lives, so it's valuable, and it's skilled.
And you know, childcare workers have skills, they have qualifications, there's a career path there, university-educated early childhood educator, teacher.
So we recognise all that, and recognise that there are pressures in the system today. That was squarely on the table today and squarely before us as we work our way through this process.
JOURNALIST: When did you talk about rewarding them? Of course the greatest reward for any worker is wages, are you actually going to consider lifting the basic minimum wage for childcare workers, are you considering that?
PM: Well we don't, as a government, mandate wages. We've dispensed with the gross unfairness of WorkChoices and replaced it with the Fair Work system, and we've got an independent umpire that manages that system for us in approving award wages.
So we don't, you know, just pick a figure. The feedback that I've had from providers, both public and not-for-profit is many of them strive to pay above the award rate and a number of them have actually, with current strategies, got turnover down to very, very low levels.
I think a figure used in the room today was less than 3 per cent turnover in one not-for-profit chain or set of centres.
So look you know, there's different theories out there about recruitment and retention but clearly there's a question of how this work is going to be done.
JOUNALIST: That's not the case though with not-for-profit childcare centres - they are willing to pay above the award wages. So they've got the two-fold, they've got above award wages and their fees are a lot lower than the private sector. But in the private sector it seems that the fees are double or triple what they are in the not-for-profit and the wages are dead on award. Is the Government going to look at doing anything about that?
PM: I don't think we can generalise too much. You know, you're trying to generalise across the not-for-profit versus the private sector and I actually think it's more finely calibrated than that.
You've got to look at individual areas and individual circumstances.
We had a discussion today about some parts of the country that have far more places available in centres than people want and there are centres that are struggling for viability because there isn't enough uptake and yet we also know that there are other parts of the country where people find it incredibly difficult to get a childcare place.
So, you know, there's not one experience here but, you know, we do want to see quality care in centres where it is possible for staff to be there and to stay working in the centres, stay providing continuity of care that's part of quality.
Of course we understand that private centres need to make a profit, they're in a business and the numbers have to add up.
JOUNALIST: What are the nuts and bolts of how we are going to change it?
PM: As I said both going into this meeting and coming out of it this is something that we will be working on over the coming months, but I'm determined that through the process that we will engage in together, Kate and I working broadly with parents and childcare providers, trade unions and representatives right across the sector, these are the type of questions we want to work through.
We've got a proud track record of reform and I think that was very, very strongly acknowledged in the room today. We're looking to build on those reforms.
JOURNALIST: PM, can I just your reaction to today's unemployment figures? There was a slight increase by 0.1 percent.
PM: We've seen in today's unemployment numbers the creation of 46,000 new full time jobs so that is a very strong result to see that many new full time jobs created and it's a reflection of the strength of our economy generally.
So yesterday with the economic growth numbers there's a lot for Australians to be proud of about how we've worked together and pulled together to come through the Global Financial Crisis and to see our national economy so strong compared with so many nations around the world and to see that number of full time jobs being created is a good thing.
These figures do have a slight up-tick from the 5.0 percent to 5.1 percent because the last figure has been revised. A slight up-tick and an increase in the participation rate - that is more Australians wanting to go an access a work opportunity.
So I think overall they do speak very strongly of the strength of our economy and I'm particularly pleased to see the number of full time jobs that have been created.
JOURNALIST: And what do you say to Marius Kloppers and the Business Council who say that the cost of doing business in Australia has increased and that they are blaming too much Government regulation and so forth. The Business Council's saying the cost of doing business in Australia is 40 percent higher in Australia than it is in the US. What do you say to them?
PM: We'll make this the last question but I have a continuing strong dialogue with the business community.
I'll have the opportunity to speak directly to them when we have a major economic forum next week but one of the things we have agreed with the business community and we're working on very strongly is deregulation, better regulation and particularly not having national regulation and state regulation pulling at each other in all sorts of odd directions.
To try and give even more impetus to those reforms at the last COAG meeting we had a special Business Advisory Forum where major business leaders like Marius Kloppers had the opportunity to directly say to, you know, to premiers, to chief ministers and to me what business would like to achieve in deregulation.
Thanks very much.


HOST: Prime Minister, lovely to see you, thanks for your company.
PM: Good morning Linda.
HOST: You've moved quickly after that weekend red flag from the childcare sector about what's happening with costs and people leaving the sector. Now we've heard repeatedly you've put more than $22 billion into the sector. You've increased the childcare tax rebate from 30 to 50 percent. In light of that is there really a problem with fees going up in the childcare sector?
PM: We have done a lot but I know people are worried about fee increases and long term affordability.
You're right there's around $20 billion going direct to parents to subsidise the cost of childcare over the next four years. So that's tripled from what it used to be.
That means that the childcare rebate is at 50 percent and the easiest way of thinking about that is effectively the Government is going halves with parents on costs and we've moved to increase quality standards too because you want to know that your child is being cared for in a good place with great quality standards.
But I do understand that people are worried about fee increases and long term affordability. So whilst we've done a lot I want to see what else we can do, which is why I'm meeting today with Minister Ellis, with childcare providers, both from the not-for-profit sector and those that are run for profit and the relevant trade unions.
HOST: Okay, Minister Ellis actually in May said that the facts are that childcare has never been more affordable.
PM: Well that's true if we look at the percentage of people's income that they're spending on childcare.
So if you imagine that a family earns $75,000 a year, they've got one child in long day care. That used to take 13 per cent of their income now it takes 7.5 per cent.
So that has become a lesser percentage of income and more affordable in that sense. But I know people do worry, ‘well what's going to happen next year and the year after and the year after?'
What's going to be there in terms of quality? What's going to be there in fee increases? And it's because of those concerns that I want to see what more we can do to build on what we're already putting into the system.
HOST: It just does seem though that Kate Ellis was trying to play down the concerns there and now you've just jumped in on it. Are you concerned that your Minister hasn't handled this well?
PM: Kate's doing a fantastic job but we need to be doing two things at once.
We need to be putting in our record investments and we need to be keeping a good eye on what else we can do for the future. That's why I'm having the meeting today.
HOST: Okay let's go to some of the details because you've already signalled that you don't favour capping fees because you don't want to prevent childcare centres from being able to raise fees for legitimate reasons.
PM: I got a question yesterday about you know, and I interpreted the question as a very, you know, hard cap, you know, just put a cap on and no fee ever increases for the rest of time.
Well of course that's not possible because we all know that over time costs are going to go up. But I want to work through a broad range of options with providers and unions with Minister Ellis there.
This is a meeting today but it's not going to be the last meeting. I don't want people to have the expectation that we'll walk out with a whole new range of solutions.
HOST: So you don't have a proposal in your head? Sort of an outline you're going to start with? Some response that you think might work at this point?
PM: We've got some options that we'll want to talk through and we'll want to see what people bring to the table as well. But this is a process that will take a few months.
HOST: Okay, as well as that suggestion of a cap and obviously that could be discussed in all sorts of ways and I might just get you to pop headphones on for a moment.
Sue Lions from the childcare union United Voice said this to Adam Spencer on our breakfast show this morning.
SUE LIONS: As long as Governments put money into parents and not into centres, they have no way of controlling the fees. The Government needs a lever. I mean billions of dollars of taxpayers' money going into childcare centres and so really what Government needs is a lever to help keep costs down and so what we are now saying to Government around that benefit is that benefit, non-means tested benefit should be paid directly to centres.
HOST: Okay so that was Sue Lions this morning and she's talking about the non-means tested aspect of benefits that parents get. Are you willing to take that from parents and give it to childcare centres as an option?
PM: Looks that's one of the options that I'm sure will be on the table at the meeting today.
Sue and her union, whether it's Sue personally, but certainly her union will be at today's meeting and they are doing a fantastic job for childcare workers around the country  -  very focused on quality and training and support for those workers.
So that'll be one of the options on the table but I want to work through a range of options and it will take us some time.
But the aim here is to respond to parents' concerns about fee increases and affordability.
We're supporting them, we're supporting them strongly but of course I'm always open to ideas, good ideas about the future.
HOST: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard is our guest this morning in the studio and we'd love to hear your experiences in the childcare sector. Is childcare stretching your budget or are your children, or maybe you're a worker thinking about leaving the industry. We know that the cost, the earnings of workers is often very low; Prime Minister, as low as $18 an hour. What's a fair rate of return, do you think, for those people who look after our children at the most important part of their lives?
PM: It's not for me to strike an hourly rate for childcare workers. We've created a fair system of workplace relations.
HOST: $18 an hour isn't it though is it?
PM: Well we've created a fair system of workplace relations to help people, particularly those workers who don't tend to have much industrial power in our society to be able to go to an umpire and work things through.
And we've particularly got a stream for collective bargaining for workers who have been historically low paid and we've seen you know big moves on equal pay in the social and community services sector because we do know that occupations that are historically women's work have tended to be underpaid.
I know that United Voice and the Australian Services Union are pursuing pay issues for childcare workers and I will want to understand from providers and the unions what they think this all means for turnover and ability to hold people into the sector, because people obviously do want to see some continuity of care for their children, their children getting to know someone and that person, that very special carer, getting to know their child.
HOST: It's terrible when someone like that just disappears from your child's life so you'd be wanting to try to secure those workers. Certainly the losses seem huge, were you surprised? 180 a week is the rate of departures by staff.
PM: Look I'm not surprised that there are large departure numbers.
I was at a Good Start centre yesterday in Bankstown. Good Start is a big not-for-profit provider that came out of the ashes of ABC Learning and I was the Minister at the time and it was a very stressed period when we faced the prospect of hundreds of centres closing overnight and thousands of people being disrupted having nowhere to have their child cared for.
But out of all of that came this great thing, Good Start, not-for-profit, you know, running centres around the country.
They've certainly management to reduce their turnover rate so I think it's high on the-
HOST: We're they offering higher salaries?
PM: Well I think also training and a career path so people can see that, you know, they can start as a childcare worker but work their way through to being an early childhood educator, a teacher in a childcare centre. So I think that there are some things that we can explore today that, you know, centres can bring to the table about what they've done to reduce turnover rates.
HOST: Let's take a couple of calls. Jodie's on the line from Mosman, hello Jodie.
CALLER: I just wanted to make a comment on childcare. I've recently, we've recently had a baby, we've got a 1 year old little girl and I've had to return to the workforce, my husband and I. And we put her in long term day centre for two days and family day care for three days which is run through the council.
We've looked at this option for affordability because $145 a day for long term day care and with the family day care works out to be just over $1000 out of our pocket a month, which is quite substantial and we do appreciate the 50 per cent rebate but still with that it's out of pocket $1000.
Now recently the council put the fee up from $2, the carers pay $2 a day per child back to the council; this is for the family day care. This week they've put the fee up from $2 to $20.
Now for me that doesn't encourage the carers to keep running their business and it helps us as families in the community to send our children to a place where these families, where this carer really cares for the children.
HOST: Jodie, thank you very much. Prime Minister that's a pretty steep charge for the carers to be paying isn't it? It also demonstrates this is a multilayered problem. I mean how would you build that scenario into what your solution might be?
PM: Jodie I think has raised an important issue with us and it is multilayered. We've got around 960,000 children that get cared for in various forms of approved childcares so almost a million children. Around half a million of them are in long day care so when you say childcare people imagine those childcare centres that they drive past and they see the signage.
About half a million children in long day care but the rest of them, the almost a million children, are being cared for in family day care. So carers, predominantly women who are looking after children in their own home or they're being cared for in out of school hours care.
So a cocktail of going to school and then being cared for for a period while mum and dad are at work.
Now our childcare support runs to all of these various forms of care but we do, when we're trying to think about affordability and quality, have to be working in every area.
What Jodie's obviously pointing to is something very particular to her local council area and I'll be happy to have a look at that. Local council does play a role in family day care.
HOST: I'm interested in whether you think that you're quality reforms on minimum staff and training have contributed to this problem this problem which is not necessarily to be unexpected I suppose, but it seems that that is part of the issue here.
PM: Look they were always expected to have a modest impact on costs and so yes, there is that modest impact. We have for example started the new quality standard for the ratio of carers to babies, to the smallest children and that ratio is 1 to 4.
Here in New South Wales it was already at 1 to 4. In various other parts of the country you could have a childcare worker looking after more babies and they've now had to conform with the 1 to 4 standard.
So, you know, there is a balance here but people do want to be assured that their child is getting good quality care and they want to be assured too I think that early learning is happening in childcare, helping the kids get ready for school making a flying start into school.
So not, you know, kids in lessons, but kids learning through play, colours and shapes and counting and all of those kinds of things.
HOST: All the research tells us this is the most important time in a human being's life doesn't it? So you will presumably be wanting a solution that emphasises that educational content, but are we expecting to get it for a babysitter price if you like?
PM: Well I think we've got to recognise that there are some costs that come with quality and we recognised that with our quality reforms but those costs are quite modest. We are introducing and we've been very focused on getting early learning into childcare centres.
So whether your child is, well, however your child is cared for and whether they go to a standalone kindergarten or whether they go to a childcare centre, they get the benefits of early learning.
Because you're absolutely right the research is in, it's clear, it's crystal clear that if you're going to make a long term difference to someone's life, early childhood is the time to do it and if we're going to make a long term difference to disadvantage, to the prospect of kids who come from the poorer homes where there aren't the books and the learning experiences, you know, happening at home then early childhood education and care makes a profound difference to that child's life.
HOST: How long do think it will take you to work through these issues? You say it's not a solution in one day's summit, it'll take some months. When can we expect to see something?
PM: Well I am saying some months and I'm using that terminology deliberately.
I understand that people want to see us getting on with this job and we will be and as we're getting on with the job we'll continue, you know, the record investments that we've already agreed to because we understand how important it is not support families when their kids are at this stage of life and then the kids get bigger and the kids go to school and the cost of living issues don't end when the kids go to school which is why we've got the Schoolkids Bonus in place and people will see the first payment before 30 June in this year.
HOST: One text in from Donna, she asks you Prime Minister what about after school care for over twelves? Now that's a whole can of worms. There's not a lot out there for over twelves, is that something you're thinking about?
PM: Look that is a big issue and something that we do have to think about. People's needs for care don't end at a hard date.
People obviously don't want to see 12 year olds rattling around unsupervised with all of the problems that that can cause.
HOST: Just on a couple of other issues Prime Minister the economy, great figures yesterday we should all have a spring in our step your Treasurer said but here in New South Wales perhaps not so. It is still a very uneven scenario across the country isn't it the two-speed economy as we keep hearing and now with still more global turmoil on the markets. China slowing, Marius Kloppers from BHP yesterday warning that some of those pipeline projects that your Treasurer often talks about, might get put on hold. Things might not look so good in the near future?
PM: Well Linda, I think firstly let's just take a moment to digest this news because I think it's something that we all should be proud of.
I mean we have lived through the biggest global economic turmoil since the Great Depression.
So, you know, the biggest event in our lifetimes, the biggest event in our parents' lifetimes, and we have just lived through it. And Australia has come through that strong.
These growth figures are the strongest in four years and what they are telling us is that as a nation we pulled together and we got this job done.
We kept the economy growing, it's the envy of the world, we kept people in work.
Now that doesn't mean that for every individual, for every family, for every part of the country that people are feeling all of the benefits of our current economic strength.
Though we do need to remind ourselves yesterday's numbers are telling us that we're growing not just in mining. So it's, you know, economic growth broader than that.
HOST: Well it is a bit confusing, for some of use a bit confusing though. We're often doing stories here about how the retail sector is struggling, shops closing, you know, well-known streets in Sydney looking all boarded up, it seems counterintuitive.
PM: Well when you're looking at household consumption you're looking at traditional retail you know going to the shop and coming out with a new jacket or a pair of pants or whatever and you're talking about the services that households consume and there certainly is an adjusting consumer preference between retail in the traditional form and the consumption of services so that's reflected in the figures.
But consumption in these figures is strong so the economy's got more strength than just in mining but there is still a patchwork effect here which is why we're very keen to share the benefits of the mining boom and that's what the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is about.
These figures I think are an answer to those who over a long period of time including leading figures in the Opposition who have been preaching doom and gloom and they're a tribute to Australians and our determination to work together even in the toughest of times.
HOST: You don't worry that China is looking a little gloomier than we might have hoped? We are still very tied to China aren't we?
PM: China is very important to us but once again let's just get a sense of perspective here.
We're seeing some moderation in China's growth rates but China will continue to grow strongly and it is continuing to lift people out of poverty. It is continuing to see its population urbanise.
Hundreds and hundreds of millions of people becoming city dwellers; they need somewhere to live and it's Australian commodities that are helping them build what they are going to live in and that phenomenon, the urbanisation of China, is going to continue for a long time yet.
HOST: It is a fantastic thing to watch actually even when it does slow down it's still going at an extraordinary pace. Just the tabloid TV battle over the prostitute who first claimed and then recanted about Craig Thomson. You must be delighted to see the focus shift off, specifically off your government on that question for a while?
PM: Oh look, I'm not going become a commentator on what TV show decides to do what.
HOST: Another one from this week, the Native Title changes that your Attorney-General announced yesterday. A lot of Aboriginal people saying of course they're sick of seeing their old people die while they wait for Native Title determinations but nonetheless it has been quite a successful process and the Opposition is saying it does want to mess with that. Should you leave well enough alone?
PM: There are some modest improvements we want to make and the Attorney-General spoke of them yesterday.
I mean we view the Native Title system in this country as a great national achievement, obviously driven by a Labor Government and something that Prime Minister Paul Keating is rightly proud of. And just when you know we reflect on the cycle of politics, remember that scare campaign? Remember how we're all going to lose our backyards?
No one's freehold title for their home was going to be safe. Conservative politicians were on TV screens producing maps to whip up fear.
People might want to just reflect what those fear campaigns look like in the judgement of history and think about some current fear campaigns and what they're going to look like in the judgement of history.
But the improvements Nicola's aiming for include things like requiring people to bargain in good faith rather than timing out people's ability to pursue their claims, and I think they're modest but sensible improvements.
HOST: On the other hand there are those like Warren Mundine who say look, you know, take the initiative. We know that if we reverse the onus of proof for example that there would be a real boost to Aboriginal enterprises that's good for the economy. Why not take that step?
PM: I understand that there will be a number of people who continue to advocate for reversing the onus of proof, but we've taken a decision about what we think can and should be achieved at this stage.
They are improvements that will make a difference but it's a building on, not a huge redoing and that's what Nicola Roxon announced yesterday.
HOST: Prime Minister very good to have you in the studio. Thanks for your time today.
PM: Terrific to be here, thank you very much.


Australia has joined international condemnation of the massacre on June 6 of more than 70 people in Qubayr in Syria and of the Assad regime's refusal to permit UN observers into the area.
The killing of more than 70 people in Qubayr was a barbaric act that targeted civilians in a village reportedly surrounded by Syrian Government forces.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has also indicated that UN observers came under fire from pro-regime forces when seeking to reach the village.
The Syrian Government has denied responsibility for the massacre. But we know this is a regime that has no credibility, having shown blatant disregard for the safety of its people and for the will of the international community.
Australia remains committed to a unified international response on Syria, and continues to work towards the prospect of action by the UN Security Council.
Australia's Permanent Representative to the United Nations in New York, Gary Quinlan made an intervention in the General Assembly session on Syria condemning the Qubayr incident and the Assad regime's repeated failures.
The Foreign Minister will raise developments in Syria in talks next Tuesday (June 12) with Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Saud al Faisal in the Saudi city of Jeddah.
Saudi Arabia is a key member of the Arab League which has been a leader in the international community's response to the crisis in Syria.
The Australian Government is also working on plans to expand Australia's humanitarian contribution in the region, with an estimated 80,000 Syrian refugees now in camps and other locations in neighbouring states.
Australia implements robust autonomous Syria sanctions and is considering further measures against the Assad regime.



Brisbane will host 130 leaders of Australian business, unions and the community at a major economic forum next week.
The Gillard Government has today released the agenda for discussion and the list of participants at the Prime Minister's Economic Forum on 12 and 13 June.
The Prime Minister will commence proceedings with a keynote address to a dinner on Tuesday night. This dinner will focus on Australia's role in the global economy, and in particular in the Asian Century.
The nation's patchwork economy and high Australian dollar will be the key opening sessions for Wednesday's Forum, with Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan and Reserve Bank of Australia Governor Glenn Stevens presenting to the Forum.
The Economic Forum on 13 June will be divided into five sessions:
 * 	Australia's Patchwork Economy and the High Dollar: opened by Reserve Bank of Australia Governor Glenn Stevens and the Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan.
 * 	Economic Transformation: Innovation and Collaboration: Opened by the Minister for Industry and Innovation Greg Combet.
 * 	Investment in Productive Infrastructure: opened by the Minister for Infrastructure and Transport Anthony Albanese.
 * 	Building the Workforce: Skills and Education: opened by the Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research Chris Evans.
 * 	Competition and Deregulation Reform Agenda: opened by the Minister for Finance and Deregulation Penny Wong.
Our economy is among the strongest in the world  -  we have impressive growth, low unemployment, contained inflation, very low debt and a record investment pipeline. These strengths are only further confirmed by the release of economic data this week, such as the National Accounts and jobs figures.
At the same time, the sustained high level of the dollar and the patchwork nature of our economy means not all Australians are feeling these economic benefits, making this a key point of discussion at next week's Forum.
The Forum will also discuss the need to maintain a focus on productivity and growth.
Participants will discuss opportunities presented by major public policy reforms, such as the clean energy package, NBN, infrastructure, skills, tax reform and deregulation, and how these measures can improve Australia's competitiveness and productivity.
The Forum will also be an opportunity to discuss progress on a range of key economic policy priorities, such as the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper, the Prime Minister's Manufacturing Taskforce, the Business Tax Working Group and the COAG Business Advisory Forum on deregulation.



More than $1 billion in household assistance payments has been delivered to about 5 million Australian families and pensioners since the roll out began almost a month ago.
The Gillard Government is delivering household assistance to help people on low and middle incomes make ends meet.
The latest round of household assistance payments  -  advances of up to $190 for eligible students  -  will be rolled out from today, ahead of the carbon price introduction on 1 July.
Many students who rely on Youth Allowance can expect to be well ahead, given that the carbon price is expected to have an impact of $117 per year on their living costs.
More than 315,000 students on Youth Allowance, Austudy or ABSTUDY will share in $52 million in payments over the coming fortnight, with the payments to be paid straight into their bank accounts.
Students are also set to benefit from tax cuts starting on 1 July.
 * 	All workers earning less than $80,000 a year will get a tax cut.
 * 	A young person in part-time work earning $20,000 will get a tax cut of up to $600; and
 * 	Students earning $18,200 or less will get to keep all of the money they earn through work and won't need to fill out a tax return, because the tax-free threshold will triple to $18,200.
And from March 2013, the Government will deliver a new Supplementary Allowance to people on payments such as Youth Allowance and Newstart to spread the benefits of the boom. This will mean an annual increase of $210 for singles and $350 for couples.
Later this week more than 200,000 veterans and war widows will receive a household assistance advance payment of up to $250 for singles or $380 for couples combined.
And on 25 June, 281,000self-funded retirees who hold a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card and receive the Seniors Supplement, will also receive an advance payment of $250 for singles or $380 for couples combined.
This advance will be paid along with their quarterly Seniors Supplement, which assists with paying regular bills such as power, rates, phone and car registration.
For more information on household assistance people can visit www.australia.gov.au/householdassistanceor call 13 24 68. 



PM: Good afternoon, I'm here with Andrew Leigh the Member for Fraser and we're at the ANU talking to students about the benefits they will receive from the clean energy future package.
But before I detail those benefits I do want to say a few words about the circumstances of Melinda Taylor, an Australian who is being detained in Libya.
I am very concerned about the detention of Ms Taylor.
Ms Taylor is one member for a four person legal team under the International Criminal Court who has been in Libya associated with the legal work regarding former members of the Gaddafi regime.
We are advised that Ms Taylor is safe and well and we have been in contact with her family but we are calling on the Libyan Government to expedite the end of Ms Taylor's detention to get to the end of this matter.
Our Ambassador-Designate will be travelling to Libya as soon as possible and we are also working with other countries to raise our concerns and to say to Libyan authorities that we want to see Ms Taylor's detention come to an end as quickly as possible.
It's not going to assist Ms Taylor for me to be speculating about the circumstances that led to this detention but the Government will continue to press on Ms Taylor's behalf and in doing so we will be working with a number of other Governments particularly Spain, Russia and Lebanon who's nationals are members of the same legal team and we are also working with France and the EU.
I'll be happy to take questions on that just a little big later if there are any.
Today, I've been here with Andrew at ANU talking to students about our clean energy future package and the benefits that they will be receiving.
Young people work hard and study hard. Many of them can juggle both work and study.
It's an investment in their own future to be getting the qualifications that they need.
It's also an investment in our nation's future to see our young people getting themselves skilled and qualified so that they can take their place in our future economy.
We've got a proud track record in working with Australian universities and students to expand opportunities so I'm very proud that we've expanded the number of university places by 150,000 and that we've also worked to increase the number of young people at university who are getting help through youth allowance.
There's been a 21 percent increase in the number of young people getting that kind of help and we've also made available Start-up and relocation scholarships so now more than 300,000 students get the benefit of such a scholarship.
As we move to carbon pricing the biggest polluters in Australia will start paying a carbon price.
Individuals do not directly pay the carbon price but there will be some flow through impacts at 0.7 percent of CPI  -  that's less than a cent in a doll.
To assist young people, to assist students to get Youth Allowance, Austudy or ABSTUDY from today they will see a lump sum payment of up to $190 going into their bank accounts.
This is to assist them with the average flow through impact of carbon pricing.
Indeed they will come out in front because it's anticipated that for a student receiving Youth Allowance the average flow through impact with be $117 so they will come out $73 in front.
Many students also work part time to make needs meet and they will benefit from tax cuts flowing from our tripling of the tax free threshold.
So if you were working part time, studying part time and say earning $20,000 a year from the part time work we did, we will see a tax cut of around $600.
To date we have delivered $1 billion in assistance for pensioners and families for the flow through impacts of carbon pricing.
Pensioners have been receiving lump sums with more to come from March next year.
Families have been receiving increases in family payments with more to come too.
Now students will see increases as well and then self-funded retirees, war veterans and war widows will also see increases flowing into their bank accounts.
We are making sure that as carbon pricing comes into effect that we are supporting Australia families and what I'm doing here today with Andrew is talking to students about the way in which they particularly will be supported.
We are also going to be benefiting students like the ones I've met today from our sharing the benefits of the boom package.
We are intending from 1 July next year to ensure that families and people getting Youth Allowance and other forms of allowance get their share of the mining boom get some additional benefits funded by the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister has there been any Consular contact with Ms Taylor yet?
PM: The circumstances here are we're working to have full Consular contact with Ms Taylor.
We're working through obviously our Foreign Affairs Minister, Senator Carr who has been in direct contact with a counterpart in the Libyan Government.
We will also be working through our Ambassador-Designate who will travel from Italy to Libya for that purpose.
JOUNALIST: Prime Minister, the ACTU said yesterday that in the lead up to your economic forum in Brisbane they'd like to discuss the issue of greater industry assistance and the extension thereof to some industries.
What's your general view of that, how far, where do you draw the line, where do you move beyond just helping people who want help and actually getting a benefit for the economy?
PM: We can shape change to our purposes. We can shape change, we can't stop change.
We economy is undergoing a major structural adjustment.
That's because of the high dollar; it's also because of the strength of the resources sector so it is attracting labour and capital to that sector.
But I do want to come out of this period of economic change with a strong and diverse economy and that means we have some work to do and we have been doing that work with manufacturing.
It's not about Government assistance endlessly flowing into industries that ultimately won't be able to compete but it is working with industries in these days of transition.
It's also about making sure that we hold skills and innovation here in this country because if you lose a vital component of manufacturing, say for example car making then it can be much much more difficult to keep the skills and the innovation you need to keep producing jobs.
JOUNALIST: Prime Minister, just getting back to the payments.
Now it's a big payment so what sort of checks and balances are there to be sure that the payments aren't going to dead people or people who've dropped out of university, what sort of checks and balances are there?
PM: Well these payments are being flowed through the general student income support scheme so we haven't purpose built a new system.
We're using the bank account details and identity details that we have for our normal assistance payments.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what concrete reforms would you like to see come out of the business forum commencing tomorrow.
You talked about the economy-wide challenges we're facing what will we see do you think out of that session especially to ensure it's not a talkfest?
PM: I'm looking forward to the opportunity to meet with some of Australia's business leaders, members of trade unions, civil society representatives, Premiers from State Governments in Brisbane during the course of this week to talk about our economy now.
Our economy is strong and we've seen that reinforced by the economic data we got last week.
The doomsayers have been proved absolutely wrong but this is a time of change in our economy due to the strength of the Australian dollar.
It's a time of some uncertainty continuing in the global economy, particularly what's happening in Europe and it's a time of tremendous opportunity as our region becomes the growth region of the world.
So I'll want to be working through with the attendees at the forum all of the implications of those issues but certainly all of the opportunities that line in front of us as a country.
There's every reason for Australians to be very confident about our nation's future.
The economic data last week showed how strong our economy is and we come into this time of change with amazing strengths and with the real possibility of seizing new opportunities for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given that the Liberal Premiers aren't coming, is this a political boycott? Are they undermining your form?
PM: Well Premier Baillieu for example if attending and will be speaking at one of the sessions.
I understand of course Premier O'Farrell is delivering his budget, it's his budget week.
We'd still urge Premier Newman to be attending an important economic forum within his own state and we'd also be urging Premier Barnett to consider attending too.
We are talking at that forum as we've just canvassed a lot about the patchwork nature of our economy and Premier Barnett for example in Western Australia presides over a state where you can see and feel that patchwork nature of the economy very quickly.
The journey from Kwinana to some of the big mine sites in the North West, it's a long journey over land but it's also a long journey in terms of prosperity and opportunity.
That's the patchwork nature of the economy showing, which is why I think it would be great if the Western Australian Premier were at the forum.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Campbell Newman's office says he asked if he could send some Assistant Ministers because he's too busy with Cabinet meetings and Government issues but he says that your office or the department told him that RSVPs had closed.
Is this sort of a tit-for-tat stunt?
PM: Well there's a spot there for Premier Newman if he would like it.
JOURNALIST: On carbon pricing the New South Wales Treasury figures out today show that Government agencies like hospitals and schools will be slugged with enormous increases in electricity bills.
How can you say that only the biggest polluters will pay when NSW Treasury says opposite?
PM: Well let's go through the facts of this because I think the facts of it actually tell an important story.
The carbon price is paid by big polluters; they're the ones who pay the carbon price.
Schools and hospitals do not directly pay a carbon price  -  that is simply wrong.
What we have said to people consistently is because big polluters will be paying a carbon price there will be flow through impacts on things like electricity prices and that's why I'm here today talking about assistance to these students, why we've already paid $1 billion worth of assistance and why assistance will be ongoing to Australian families.
But when we look at the New South Wales Budget, so these are 2011-12 figures, the New South Wales Budget is at around $60 billion.
Around 40 percent of this was funded by payments from the Federal Government.
That means even using their figures the bottom line impact that's now being projected from carbon pricing represents less than 0.4 percent of the state's budget and with the projected impact on both health and education being less than 0.2 percent and then let's remember we're the Government that's almost doubled the funding going into schooling.
We're the Government that's put our hospitals on a path for growth in funding, stepping up to our responsibilities for being a 50-50 partner in growth and those payments are indexed and those indexation arrangements are affected by carbon pricing in the changing in the CPI.
So what you didn't read about today was those figures, schools and hospitals less than 0.2 percent and you didn't read about the record investments of the Federal Government in schools and hospitals around the nation including in New South Wales and you didn't read about the way indexation works to support those schools and hospitals.
JOURNALIST: I've got a Queen's birthday honours question for you from The Project.
They're wondering if it's fair enough for politicians to get the highest honours merely for doing their job.
PM: Well thank you for that question from The Project, Paul.
I think that for people who have given exemplary service, a lifetime of service then it is appropriate that they be honoured whatever walk of life they're in.
I think we see some people honoured for doing things that are very different to their day jobs  -  working in charities and for churches.
We also see people honoured for going above and beyond in their day jobs and for those special people who go above and beyond, it's tremendous to see that they get honoured. Including I should note the VC of this University.
JOURNALIST: Back on Melinda Taylor, who precisely is holding her?
Where is she being held? What are the circumstances? Is she in a house? Is she in a police lock up? How long will she be held for? Has she been charged with anything and is she likely to be?
PM: Well Karen there is a limit to what I can canvass here and it's not in Ms Taylor's interests for a great deal of the circumstances to be canvassed.
But on the advice that we have, as I've indicated, she is safe and well.
We have been provided with that assurance that she is safe and well and we are working as strongly as possible to expedite this matter and Ms Taylor's release.
JOURNALIST: Surely you can say who you believe is holding her? Is it some kind of Government authority  -  is it judicial authority, police?
PM: Well as we understand the circumstances, and I just want to be very careful here, as we understand it she is being held in a form of detention not in a jail and we have been assured that she is safe and well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, late on Saturday 32 asylum seekers were rescued from a remote island, the locals involved in the rescue said they were extremely lucky to have survived.
How concerning is that and why did the Government say that they had been intercepted on the boat when clearly that isn't the case?
PM: Well on my advice relevant authorities are still working to determine the full facts of this matter so you know when we're in a position to give you more information we will.
JOURNALIST: What do you think about the reports from the locals?
PM: I'll wait until we've got the full advice from relevant authorities.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the marine parks the Commonwealth Fisheries Authority raised some concerns about this map that has emerged today and suggestions that this process is unfair, that they're not being adequately consulted on how extensive the marine park's going to be.
What do you say in response to that?
PM: Well there are draft maps out for consultation. Those consultations have been ongoing for some period now and a decision has not been taken on final boundaries.
JOURNALIST: Are you tying up too much of the ocean?
PM: Well we have got this out for consultation so if people have got a view then they should express it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the weekend three Labor Senators said they feared for their seats under your leadership, that they were being sacrificed for not potent reason.
Two questions: firstly have you spoken to those three Senators and secondly what is your message to caucus members who actually do doubt your leadership or your ability to win at the next election?
PM: Well as I've said consistently I'll be leading Labor to the next election and I'm looking for to fighting it on who's got the best ability and best vision for this nation's future, the best ability to deliver it, best ability to seize a vision of a stronger and fairer future.
We have been in a difficult political period, there's no doubt about that, I've said that publically before too, as we build for some tremendously significant reforms including sharing the benefits of the resources boom through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax and seizing a clean energy future both of which will start on 1 July.
JOURNALIST: Tony Sheldon said that he believed that you were, the sort of policies you'd been pursuing this year were starting to energise the members of his union.
Is that the feedback that you are getting?
PM: Well we'll always as a Labor Government be there managing the economy in the interest of working people including the members of Mr Sheldon's union.
Many of whom work extraordinarily hard under very difficult circumstances, driving big trucks around our roads and we've been so concerned about their safety that we've legislated for safe roads.
Thank you. 



It does give me great confidence in our economic future to see you all here tonight.
I've got great confidence in Australia, because I've got great confidence in you.
You're Australians who understand the big changes at work in our country and who understand the opportunities those changes create.
You're Australians who know we can be the winner in the Asian Century and who, through your presence here, also show your commitment to work together to get us there.
And you're Australians who know that in a difficult global environment, we wouldn't change places with anyone in the world. 
Above all, because you know the facts.
Since Labor came to office:
Euro area: economy shrank, one point seven per cent.
Japan: economy shrank, one point seven per cent.
United States: economy grew, one point two per cent.
Australia: economy grew, ten point three per cent.
The facts speak up for Australia  -  but I will say to you, they don't just speak for themselves.
We'll have some detailed policy discussions tonight and tomorrow, we'll talk about some of the concrete things we can do together, identify specific problems, some of them big ones, develop new approaches and specific solutions. 
That's vitally important.
It's just as important that we all leave here tomorrow determined to speak up for our economy, to speak up for the facts.
The bad news from overseas is making more noise at the moment than hailstones on a tin roof.
Those of us who know how strong our economy overall really is do have to speak up to be heard.
We know it's in the interest of business that confidence grow, we know it's in the interests of working people that confidence grow too.
We all need investment to flow, we all need jobs to grow, we all need consumers to spend.
In truth, there is strength, and the facts of our economic performance support a pragmatic, soundly-based, long-term confidence in our country and in its future.
So speak up  -  because we are strong today, and we do have a chance now to build that strength for the future.
We can do things now to ensure that in ten and twenty and thirty years' time, this country is still fair, still strong, and we still don't want to change places with anyone, anywhere.
That's really the job before us at this Forum.
Now, that's never easy  -  the strength we have today came from decades of hard work.  Building tomorrow's strength will demand just as much.
And you know the challenges of the contemporary moment.
Global weakness, no one here needs reminding of that.
But I will be reminding my G20 colleagues in Mexico next week of the Australian example.
Here, we have put growth and jobs first  -  growth which in turn is the solid foundation for fiscal discipline in the long term.
Austerity alone is not the right path.  That's the case I'll be making at the G20.
And I'll be making the case that today's challenges cannot be allowed to distract us from the importance of acting now to shape the future.
Once again, I'll point to the Australian example.
Two crucial initiatives come into force next month.
The long debate about whether an economy like ours should tax minerals rents concludes for practical purposes when the MRRT begins operation.
I know we have a better model today because of the genuine process in which you've engaged with us.  And the facts of continued investment in the mining sector bear this out.
We've had an even longer debate about pricing carbon pollution and driving the shift to clean energy  -  and now the time for action has come with the implementation of a carbon pricing scheme which is market-based, efficient and fair.
So this is a demanding chapter in our nation's economic story.
But we have made great progress, in which we can all take pride, and last week's national accounts show that.
And it's quite false to say that this was built only on mining  -  consumer spending was measurably stronger this first quarter than last year  -  and there's a message in that for those who continue to jawbone the country down.
It's increasingly clear that we've got the macro policy settings right.
We stimulated in the down turn.
It was controversial, some in Australia wanted to go down a different path, some overseas did go down a different path.
But here, Government stimulated, in nation building, in jobs  -  business did the right thing, preserving employment and maintaining the skills base  -  unions were responsible partners and worked with the broader community to manage change.
And here we are, with growth back to trend, with more than 800 000 new jobs under our belt in five years, with more to come.
And, in line with the strict fiscal rules we adopted at that time, we're consolidating in the recovery. 
The sharpest fiscal consolidation on record in Australia, giving us a Budget surplus in 2012-13 and growing in subsequent years, even while tax receipts are forecast to remain below 23 per cent of GDP across the forward estimates.
Government making savings decisions, business and unions working with us to identify priorities, to build support for plans for our economic future.
And here we are, with prices under control, with the Reserve Bank given ample room to lower rates given difficult conditions overseas, with the benefits of those hard decisions being seen and felt.
Our country's made progress and the things we've done together are making a difference.
There are big challenges still before us and the job for tonight and tomorrow is as simple as this  -  to follow through on our investments and reforms to lift productivity, to do more to sustain and spread growth.
Let me nominate a couple of my areas of greatest interest in pursuit of these goals.
I am especially keen to hear your thoughts on competiveness.
The business tax reform conversation has been a wide ranging one, perhaps even a diffuse discussion.
I've got no doubt the company tax rate should be lower  -  and no doubt the revenue base has to be maintained as well.
And we understand that the benefits of a lower corporate rate would flow to workers and the wider community in more jobs and better pay over time.
So I think that's an area where there's a lot we can discuss tomorrow.
And we have to talk about labour mobility.
Workforce is one of the real nubs of the economic discussion in Australia.
We're doing structural adjustment at a time of employment growth, and that's a good thing, but it doesn't make the fact of a business closing its doors any easier on the day it happens.
And anyone here who was a bit reluctant to leave home and get up to Brisbane for this night will have a bit of insight into why working families need some convincing that their next job is on the other side of the country.
But we've got to crack this nut and it's one of those issues which genuinely demands a range of measures because it reflects a range of factors.
We've worked on national licensing of professions and trades and on incentives for welfare to work and now we're turning attention to more improvements to jobs services and to issues like State transaction taxes on property as well.
And there's a range of other issues on the table here as well.
Innovation ... infrastructure ... skills and education, and we know skilled workers are mobile workers, and that the national curriculum is a serious contribution to mobility too.
All of them, opportunities for investment, opportunities for reform, opportunities to build on the Australian endowment, opportunities to build the new economy of the future.
It'll take hard work, good ideas, thoughtful business and union leadership, a skilled and creative workforce, generations of private endeavour.
And Governments playing their part.
I know we can do it because we've done it before.
It probably wasn't Gary Player who first said “the harder I work, the luckier I get” but he certainly made that quote his own.
He could have been talking about Australia.
If we ever were just a lucky country, we're certainly not now.
It's not luck that makes this a top-ten country on low trade barriers, openness to international ideas, sophisticated and independent economic institutions, a list that goes on.
Luck didn't give us the three triple-A ratings which only seven other economies can claim  -  which no previous Australian government can claim either.
Luck didn't make us a top-two country on the measures that are most important to us: political stability, social mobility, ease of starting a business.
Luck didn't keep us out of the worst global recession in eighty years.
And luck won't build us a new economy for the future.
We have to make it.
Just as we made our location an advantage when we all worked hard to open this nation to Asia.
As we made our environment an advantage when we all worked hard to protect it and to show it to the world.
As we made our natural resources an advantage by making the most of mining.
And our people aren't born with skills and knowledge  -  the stork doesn't bring us human capital  -  we are making it.
In childcare, schools and universities and workshops and TAFEs and in the learning and training that goes on throughout the working lives of millions of our people.
It's up to all of us  -  we all have a place in making our economy more adaptive, flexible and better able to seize new opportunities.
Government's essential responsibility to business owners and to workers is to get the economic fundamentals right.
We have done it  -  and we'll keep at it.
We won't ever rest on our laurels. 
I know you won't either.
Australians should be confident: not because change is always good, but because Australia is always good enough to make the best of change.
What government, business and unions are already doing together is working  -  together we can do more.
That's why I wanted to bring you all here, to continue our good work together.
You're making a great contribution to our country by being part of the conversation tonight and tomorrow.
I look forward to joining with you. 



The Federal Government has paid $200 million to the states and territories in recognition of the 15 Seamless National Economy reforms which have been assessed as completed by the COAG Reform Council.
The 2011-12 reward payment recognises the 15 completed reforms up to the end of 2011, including the delivery of a national consumer law, standard business reporting, consumer credit reforms and a national health professionals registration and accreditation scheme, and provides an incentive to the states and territories to complete the remaining reforms in line with COAG agreed outcomes and timeframes.
These reforms are a key element of the Government's competitiveness and productivity agenda, which will help drive investment, jobs, innovation and growth in Australia's economy.
In determining the levels of reward payments for 2012-13 ($250 million), the Government will have regard to the extent to which remaining reforms have been completed, based on advice from the COAG Reform Council.
The Prime Minister has today written to the states and territories advising them that the 2012-13 reward payments will be paid dependent on the delivery by each jurisdiction on the final reform priorities, in particular the national occupational health and safety and trades licensing reforms.
Business continues to advise governments that a national occupational health and safety framework is its highest priority and the national benefits of this reform are supported by both the relevant COAG Regulation Impact Statement and assessments by the Productivity Commission.
Furthermore, under the licensing reforms, tradespersons, including electrical, plumbing and gas-fitting, refrigeration and air-conditioning, and property occupations, will require only one licence to work in all states and territories. 
This will not only lower costs for business and consumers but also enhance workforce mobility and allow employers to hire interstate staff to address local skills shortages.
It is the responsibility of all levels of government to ensure regulations are in place to lift national productivity and facilitate the mobility and efficient allocation of resources.
The Productivity Commission recently examined 17 of the deregulation priorities and estimated that, with full implementation, these reforms could lower business and other costs by about $4 billion per year and, through improvements to productivity, increase GDP by over $6 billion in the longer term.
State/Territory         Reward Payment  (paid on a per capita basis as agreed)
ACT                            $3.220 million
NSW                           $64.212 million
NT                               $2.062 million
QLD                            $41.010 million
SA                               $14.725 million
TAS                            $4.533 million
VIC                             $49.554 million
WA                              $20.683 million



Last night, I said that we would be discussing the strength of our economy - and that's been acknowledged by participants in the room from many different perspectives today.
I also spoke about the very difficult circumstances affecting the world economy and new ideas to address uneven growth at home. 
I said that  in today's discussions we would not  shying away from hard questions because we are committed to keeping our economy strong:  creating jobs, driving growth and improving productivity  -  they're all critical to securing our economic future.
And we have not shied away from those hard questions.
Together we have spent the day framing new grounds for confidence and new ideas for reform.
So allow me to try and summarise what's been a big day of discussion.
We've certainly heard about the need to bolster confidence - to appreciate our strengths and to forge together to build confidence, and to recognise that our glass is more than half full.
We've heard about the structural shifts underway in our economy.
The high terms of trade and high dollar - and the benefits and challenges presented  by those.
The normalised levels of wealth accumulation and consumption, after a period of unusual growth in both of these areas and the ageing of our population, and what the means for employment of the future.
We've heard a lot about the need to focus on productivity and lifting productivity growth.
And we've heard about the importance of investment in developing human capital, in developing our people.
The importance of the education system, the importance of maths and science of skills development or research and development.
You would have seen Governor Stevens this morning, in what I thought was a very description of the circumstances of our economy, talk about the need to address and then somewhat modestly suggest he wasn't the expert and people searching for ideas should go to the Productivity Commission.
It's not necessarily fashionable in life today to suggest someone might know better than you but he did point to the Productivity Commission.
And I would remind on this question of human capital that the Productivity Commission has found that VET reform is crucial to lifting productivity and delivering the COAG reform goals that we've set ourselves would raise GDP by 2 per cent.
So skills work is underway and vital to our productivity.
On infrastructure, we discussed new financing opportunities, risk management, how we use new infrastructure and maximising investment opportunities.
We had a discussion about construction costs particularly for multi-dwelling residential projects and I think it was good that we saw in the room in that discussion, the preparedness of stakeholders within this room to collaborate on this question of construction costs.
We also heard more broadly about the importance of collaboration right across our economy, the creation of such relationships within workplaces through management practices as a way of increasing productivity.
I was especially pleased to see the acknowledge of the effective and ongoing dialogue that there is on these questions maximising collaboration within firms and maximising our use of R&amp;D, employee engagement and minimising conflicts at work.
A clear thread running through today's discussions has been the acknowledgement that technology, is changing the way we live and work and will change the productivity of our economy.
That it's driving innovation in sectors like manufacturing and agriculture.
It's changing the way we do things and it's certainly changing the way government does things too  -  our ability to deliver services in a different and smarter way.
We heard in this last session a recommitment to the deregulation and competition agenda first outlined at the Business Advisory Forum which met with COAG in April, and I do thank people for the kind words about that initiative, bringing business leaders together for the first time with the Prime Minister and Premiers meeting in COAG to talk directly about deregulation.
It's imperative that we bring the reforms that we outlined through that process home this year and next year.
And coming back, once again to the Reserve Bank Governor pointing to the Productivity Commission and its analysis.
The Productivity Commission recently examined 17 deregulation priorities and estimated that these reforms could increase GDP by over $6 billion in the longer term - so working through that forum, an important productivity initiative.
So in thinking about these issues in advance of our Forum and thinking about the in the course of discussions today, I do now want to outline some priorities for attention.
On the key issue of competitiveness, we have had discussions in the sessions and through the proceedings, and I want to say this.
To the business representatives in the room, we've heard you loud and clear on the company tax rate and we see it as a priority for the next steps in tax reform, building on the Government's substantial record of tax reform.
Now I've lost count of the amount of times that Wayne, Penny or I have said we're in the cart for a lower company tax rate.
But it has to be affordable and that means that it has to be funded by other changes in the business tax system.
So today though, let's be very clear.
From today I want to see achieving this company tax rate reduction as the absolute top priority of the Business Tax Working Group.
I want it to be the focus, and I want it to be the outcome.
I want it dealt with before the other business tax issues in the Working Group's in-tray are dealt with.    
And if we do that, if we have the Business Tax Working Group addressing the questions of the right offset, you will get your company tax cut as a down-payment to help you be more competitive in this the Asian Century.
That's what we're on about, what you're on about, and ultimately it's why we're here.
To help our businesses be competitive, to ensure our economy remains strong and becomes stronger.
Another theme to emerge from the discussions today is this question of labour mobility.
There are thousands of jobs being created in our strong economy, but there are also some areas where industries are struggling and jobs are being shed.
And it's our collective task, for everyone in this room - as a matter of good economic management and good social policy - that we do our absolute best to match the demand for labour with those who are seeking employment.
The Government's going to continue to provide leadership, and work with other governments, other levels of Government and business and unions to promote a more mobile labour force - including through measures like ensuring skilled trades people can move seamlessly from one part of the country to another without having to get a new license. 
And it might seem puzzling to some that we are still in the modern age working on these questions like recognition of occupational licenses but we are  -  a simple measure, a very important measure and we're very determined to get it done.
But there is always more we can do.
The Government invests over $6 billion every four years on jobs services.
That's the services that go to assist people to find work.
These are the services right around the country, who reach out and help people who are out of work including those who have just lost jobs.
Our current arrangements for our employment services make it easier and more convenient and financially rewarding for a provider to place someone in a job in their local area, and less convenient and rewarding if a jobseeker moves out of the region or interstate.
To help us improve labour mobility, as a result of today I commit the Government to providing stronger incentives for our employment services to grasp interstate opportunities available in the jobs market.
We need to provide better incentives for employment service providers to put people into jobs wherever they are in the country, including the growing resources sector but let's not forgot to the growth we're seeing in the services economy including particularly the health and caring sectors.
Of course looking out on this room of many business leaders I would say this, employers also have a responsibility to train-up and employment people who are prepared to move.
We've got to help get the match between the people and the places that are available.
In a similar vein, I took a lot of notice of worthwhile comments made during the course of the day about training and income support and making sure that we have a better package of the two.
I'm keen to pursue the ACTU idea to better marry up income support and training.
Job services bring these things together already. But as an outcome from today's discussion, I want to explore further options to combine Government efforts to support individuals who need income support, many of whom also require further training to be successful in the labour market.
I also noted the suggestion made by small business here, by Peter of better integrating the training needs of small business into our training system and that is both employees and owners.
I think he made a powerful point about the need for our training system to work for owners as well.
And making sure that people in small businesses have the opportunity to up-skill even as they operate their business so we will be looking at that.
The new HECS for TAFE arrangements will help workers undertake further training to get those skills without forgoing income, that is without paying up front fees.
Of course, last night we heard from business and unions alike a desire to better capture the opportunities of this Asian century  -  our desire to make sure that Australia is a winner in this period of growth.
We articulated that last night as a search for greater people to people links and stronger economic integration.
It is my view that Australia has been slow to participate in global value chains, by one measure ranking third-lowest among OECD countries.
As Minister Emerson, the Minister for Trade and others mentioned, if Australian businesses participate in global value chains they can be producing for the vast and rapidly growing markets of Asia instead of relying on our relatively small domestic market. 
This economic transformation would be a big boost to both Australian manufacturing and to all the service industries that can participate in value chains.
My Government is willing to support this transformation, integrating our manufacturing and services industries more fully into the opportunities in the economies in our region. 
The Government will deploy the expertise and resources of Austrade and the Export Finance Investment Corporation in encouraging the participation of Australian manufacturing and service businesses in global value chains.
We will also ensure the Export Market Development Grants Scheme is helping to capture these new opportunities for Australian export businesses.
With my Ministerial colleagues and I intend to deal with many of the other very important points that have been raised today in the period ahead.
We are going to take what you have said forward and feed it into the ongoing policy processes we have underway.
By that I mean the business tax working group, with a renewed focus on company tax cuts.
The manufacturing taskforce, with an even further impetus for policies which drive innovation and high performance workplaces.
Through the high-powered Business Advisory Forum, which is working at great speed to deliver the deregulation agenda and of course in the vital work that is being undertaken to prepare the Asian Century White Paper.
Working through these processes will allow people in this room to continue to collaborate on solving some of the big economic challenges before us.
These processes, together with today's Forum, are helping to re-enliven important reform important conversations in the context of an economy that is once again undergoing structural change.
To make sure, at the end of the day, that we deliver the very best policy outcomes on the key questions that will govern our future, our economic security and our prosperity as a society.
I've certainly heard in the room a real hunger to continue these kind of collaborative processes and we will.
It's the best way of making sure that our policy outcomes are informed by a broad cross-section of views. It's the best way of making sure that we are taking those views and using them to secure our aim of more prosperity in our society and more fairness.
Finally, there have been a number of observations during the course of the day about the nature of the international economy and about how fortunate we are to live and work in an economy as strong as ours.
Many reflections both formal and informal about how there is no place in the world you would want to live or work than Australia.
Next week, I will be sitting at the table of the G20 and in view with that spirit about the Australian example I will be calling on my European counterparts to take the decisive action we all want them to take.
That means greater banking integration, greater fiscal integration and a strong focus on growth and jobs.
And that last point is particularly important.
As our own experience shows, and this is the power of the Australian example, growth and fiscal consolidation are not mutually exclusive.
But growth is a necessary precondition for strong public finances.
The Australian model has worked well for us and we've been remarking on it today just what we have achieved together and I will be commending it to my colleagues at the G20.
For the sake of the global economy, and for the sake of our own economy within that global economy.


HOST: Julia Gillard, thanks very much for coming back into the studio.
PM: Good morning Steve, good to be here.
HOST: Quick question, did you watch State of Origin last night?
PM: I was able to watch the second half, I had a commitment which prevented me watching the first half, but I got all the action in the second half. Very tense at the end.
HOST: Did you knit while you watched it?
PM: No I didn't knit while I watched it.
HOST: We had a number of inquiries about your knitting capabilities and the breakfast presenter said find out if she'll knit while on air this morning.
PM: Look I'm an evening knitter not a daytime knitter. I'm happy to answer knitting questions though, if people have got them. I'm working on a smock coat at the moment, so it's a complex pattern on the yoke. Now I'm gesturing and that's probably not helping on radio is it, but a bit of a complex pattern. You've got a repeating, you know, eight different kinds of rows and you've got to get them in the right order.
HOST: I look forward to seeing it in press photos and television coverage down the track. Now a couple of things first of all, is the glass half full or is the glass half empty?
PM: The glass is well and truly more than half full, and that's the point that the Reserve Bank Governor has been making including yesterday at the Economic Forum here in Queensland.
And certainly something we've wanted to convey to Australians, there's a lot of worry in our world, I mean people wake up every morning to news out of Europe. They're waking up today to news out of Spain.
There's a lot of aftershocks from the Global Financial Crisis so it's not surprising that people feel a bit anxious, but they can be reassured that our economy is strong, and there is nowhere else in the world that you would rather be during this time of global uncertainty.
HOST: Carrying on the analogy a bit further, there are some who suggest there is more than one glass. In other words the patchwork economy indicates the glass is half full for some, but it's being emptied, the different glass is being emptied for others, particularly people like small business and more people adversely affected from the rise of the resources and mining industry.
PM: Well I don't want to confuse people with too many glasses, but you're absolutely right.
HOST: You see the point though don't you?
PM: I certainly do, and I use the phrase ‘patchwork economy' to try and convey it. What it means is overall nationally, strong growth. We're back to the sorts of growth rates we had before the Global Financial Crisis, you know, the biggest global economic downturn since the Great Depression, the biggest thing we'll probably see in our lifetimes.
So we're back to strong growth rates, we've got low unemployment, low inflation, we've been seeing interest rates go down, and then when you delve down to the next level of detail, you see some industries and some regions racing ahead.
Mining, but not just mining. There are more parts of strength in our economy than just mining regions, but there are other areas, particularly manufacturing and tourism, that are suffering because the rest of our economic strength is making our Australian dollar very strong.
HOST: It looks like that Australians are voting with their money, we're saving at record levels. It was noted at your forum the last couple of days that savings levels indicate a return to old-fashioned banking. That indicates that in the subconscious mind or the mind of Australians they don't believe the half full argument, they think there's problems coming, and they're building up their store of money to face whatever may come.
PM: I think people are responding to what they've lived through with the Global Financial Crisis. The Reserve Bank Governor Glenn Stevens brought along incredible information. The Reserve Bank has economic information going back over a hundred years.
What he pointed out is before the Global Financial Crisis that we hit a time at one point where the savings rate was zero, people were often spending more than they earned because they were accessing credit. So that was never going to be a sustainable long-term strategy saving nothing during the course of your life, you know, it just makes common sense you can't do that forever. Then the Global Financial Crisis came along.
People absorbed that something big had changed in the world even though Australia didn't go into recession and we supported jobs and kept creating jobs, people saw the turbulence on global markets.
Many people have shares themselves and felt it directly. Many people felt it through their superannuation and what was happening to their super balance, and so that has, you know, caused people to be more cautious. That's an understandable thing and in many ways it's a good thing.
HOST: Are you going to reform something like super? Can you reform something like super? It's going nowhere, it's really damaged in terms of an investment vehicle, what are you going to do about the superannuation element?
PM: I don't accept that analysis. Superannuation is a fantastic thing for our country-
HOST: It should be.
PM: And it's a long-term investment, so people should not judge their superannuation on what has happened in one year or two years.
Superannuation is designed to be an investment that pays good rewards over the, you know, twenty, thirty, forty years that people will have their superannuation, and we are increasing it, moving the amount that goes into super from 9 to 12 per cent because I want ordinary working people to have the resources at their disposal to have a, you know, decent retirement with some lifestyle options when they're retired.
HOST: 22 to 9, my guest is Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard. My name's Steve Austin.
You've pulled back out of the satchel the idea of company tax cuts, cutting the corporate tax rate, and you said it was a priority. Now, why revisit this when it's been  -  you've been unable to deliver in the past. We hear from your alliance with the Greens, they've come out today, Christine Milne has come out today and said no, it's not going to happen while we have balance of power. Why revisit it?
PM: Well in terms of the past parliamentary processes, I did want to cut the company tax rate. I wanted to do that from the proceeds of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
Steve, you and I have just talked about the patchwork in our economy, and I thought one measure to address that patchwork was the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, the incredibly strong sector of our economy contributing some of its strength to other businesses around the nation through a company tax cut.
It became apparent I wouldn't be able to get that through the Parliament, the Opposition wasn't going to vote for it despite the fact that many people would think, you know sort of intuitively, that the Liberal Party stands for lower company taxation. They weren't going to vote for it.
Yesterday at the Economic Forum, I committed us again to continuing to find a way of delivering a company tax cut. I've said to business we all need to be responsible about this, so business needs to work with us to show how this can be affordable.
HOST: So the Greens though have still said ‘we're not going to allow it.' Christine Milne said it's not going to happen while we're there.
PM: Well, and there's a question for others in the Parliament, particularly the Opposition about what attitude they would take if as I am committed to do we work our way through, with the business community, to better business tax arrangements which deliver a company tax cut.
HOST: Alright. Now, today in the Australian Financial Review tourism industry bodies have pulled out a full-page ad and asked you to stop taxing and stop taxing Australian tourism. They list the Passenger Movement Charge, which comes in from 1 July, they say that you'll be forcing travellers to pay for airport police and the introduction of the carbon tax. They weren't at your forum yesterday, and yet you've acknowledged that tourism's a big area of potential growth for Australia. Why are you taxing tourism, of which Queensland relies a lot on?
PM: Well, first and foremost, we are not taxing Australian tourism through the increases in the Passenger Movement Charge. People will pay that increased Passenger Movement Charge if they are going to an airport to fly out of the country to take their money overseas and go and spend it in some overseas tourism destination, you know, anywhere round the world that people might want to go to-
HOST: Their advertisement says for the first time the Government is proposing that the PMC automatically increase every single year.
PM: But who pays it, is the question I'm posing to you Steve. And I'm explaining who pays it, you pay it if you're going to the airport today to fly off to Bali or Vanuatu or Paris or, you know, Las Vegas, wherever you want to take yourself to, you will pay that Passenger Movement Charge.
You do not pay it if you are coming from Melbourne to holiday in Queensland because you want to get some great Queensland sunshine. It is for people leaving our nation to go overseas where they will spend their money overseas.
Out of that increased Passenger Movement Charge, paid for by people going overseas, we will actually devote a new source of funds to helping our domestic tourism industry and particularly to helping the tourism industry develop its reach into China and other emerging markets.
HOST: Their advertisement also says, in the Fin Review, the Government will force travellers to pay for airport police despite our taxes already paying the bill.
PM: Well we all have to make appropriate contributions to the security of our airports, so you know, that's an appropriate feature of how we need to work as a nation. If you're going anywhere, whether you're coming from one of the colder states to Queensland or needing to go from Queensland interstate for business, you want to know that the airport you're going through is safe and secure, and unfortunately there are security challenges in the modern world in which we live.
HOST: The AM program this morning had a story observing that it looks like Mr Reece's office is compiling information, data, potentially embarrassing information on your political opponents. Are you aware of this?
PM: I'm aware of the AM story. I think we've just got to be clear about this.
You know, first and foremost, given all the Opposition ever says is no to everything, it's not surprising people are scrutinising them to try and ascertain if they're going to ever do anything else than just say no. And I think it is fair enough to get into the public domain things like the Opposition's been running round saying the world's going to end on 1 July when carbon pricing comes in.
The Leader of the Opposition has said that will be the end of the coal industry, over, done and dusted, no-one will mine coal in this country. And yet, opposition members have been buying shares in coal mining companies. Now I think people are entitled to know that, just so that they can weigh the worth of those doom and gloom claims.
If people really believed those doom and gloom claims, would they be out buying shares in the very companies they say are going out of business on 1 July?
HOST: But that's been raised in federal parliament by Greg Combet, he's pointed out that hypocrisy, whatever you want to call it-
PM: No but I'm talking about the benefits of scrutiny.
HOST: So you are aware  -  what would we call these, slime files? Dirt files? What are they? They look like if you're trying to get embarrassing material you're building what is commonly called a dirt file on your political opponents.
PM: Well I think in the AM story there's reference to one document that I haven't seen, but I'm indicating to you that I think, you know, scrutiny of things like opposition members buying things like share in coal mining companies at the same time that they're running round telling people that coal mining will end in this country, that that's a piece of information people are entitled to have.
HOST: So you are aware of it and you fully support it?
PM: No I've just  said to you one document was referred to on AM, I haven't seen that document, but I am talking more broadly about transparency and scrutiny in politics and how it's relevant to political debate.
HOST: So you won't ring Mr Reece and say mate stop doing this, it's not a good look to be digging up dirt on our opponents?
PM: Well, I'm not going to accept your characterisation. The AM program referred to one document and I've just given you the answer about the document, and also explained that, you know, scrutiny of the worth of claims about our economy can be a very legitimate thing.
I mean let's actually look at the public policy debate here. I mean for well more than a year now, the Opposition each and every day has been out there telling Australians that our economy will basically, you know, what was it, a wrecking ball would go through it on 1 July. Terminology has been used like ‘a permanent depression' to try and scare people about carbon pricing.
I think scrutiny, to help people weigh the worth of those ridiculous and extravagant claims, is something that informs the public debate. Doesn't it strike you as a little bit strange that people would be buying shares in companies they're trying to tell people will go out of business?
HOST: Time will tell. My guest is Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Tony Burke, the Federal Environment Minister, has announced a massive Coral Sea marine park, and a series of marine parks around Australia, particularly on and along Queensland's coastline. How will this Coral Sea marine park, this very, very large marine reserve, how will it affect people who live and work on the Queensland coastline?
PM: Well, firstly, Tony Burke today  -  Minister Burke will release the final maps. They will be there for a six week further consultation period, but they're final in the sense of, you know, we're now asking people, this is the thing to do, yes or no? The maps, I think everybody interested should get their hands on them and have a good look for themselves.
What we want to do here is to preserve in marine reserves, you know, important parts of our ocean ecosystems in the same way that on land we do things like preserve Kakadu. We obviously have special marine environments that need our care and concern now so that they will be there for our children and grandchildren into the future.
Minister Burke has worked hard in consultation, with commercial fishing interests, in consultation with people who like to just go and throw a line in, to get all of the balance right here.
And when people see the maps they'll see that people will still be able to go and, you know, take their young son fishing they'll still be able to do that, and in terms of the impact on commercial fishing, it's around 1 per cent of commercial fishing activity now.
HOST: And they'll be properly compensated if they're adversely affected?
PM: And there will be assistance available in the vicinity of $100 million. It obviously has to be worked through on a case-by-case basis.
HOST: It looks in part like it's a deliberate attempt to make life harder for the government of Campbell Newman and his team, who are trying to dig this place out of an economic hole, largely through exports of which a lot of it, in fact most of it, will be going through ships up the Queensland coastline to markets overseas. And it looks like all of a sudden you're giving them a nice little hurdle in their way.
PM: Oh Steve, you'd have to be the believer of the world's most complicated conspiracy theory because all of this started with Paul Keating.
That's how long ago the marine reserve discussion started. It continued during the years of the Howard Government, the Howard Government took a very, you know, limited step but they did take a step forward, a marine reserve in the southeast of the country, then we came to government in 2007 and have been working on it since.
So it's, you know, well before people knew Mr Newman's name, well before he was involved in the Brisbane City Council, work was happening federally under governments of various political persuasions on marine reserves, but I am pleased that after all of those years, you know, Paul Keating to now is quite a long period of time, after all of those years that Minister Burke has worked it through and worked it through in good consultation with people who care about our environment but also people who care about commercial fishing and recreational fishing.
HOST: You've been in Brisbane for the last couple of days. Campbell Newman wasn't at the forum, did you give his office a call and see if you could have a cup of tea with him and have a chat privately?
PM: Look, no I didn't but I would have liked to have seen Premier Newman at the forum. He would have had a great opportunity to spruik the Queensland economy to national business leaders and I think it's a pity that he missed that opportunity.
HOST: Is there a move by your Government to attack him? I mean we had Martin Ferguson yesterday in The Australian newspaper getting the drop on the fact that he was going to go him over uranium mining in Queensland. Tony Burke last week on environmental standards, you sent a letter to the Premier but it was leaked to the newspapers before the Premier got it. This looks like a political move rather than genuine attempts to work with a State Premier.
PM: I couldn't disagree with you more.
I am very, very keen to work with Premier Newman in the interests of Queensland and I'll continue doing that.
And to give you an example, I mean we worked at the last COAG meeting, Premier Newman had only just been elected, but we worked well and productively to invest in skills in this state.
We've talked about how this state's really an engine room for national economic growth, but how it too has a patchwork. There are places in Queensland that are going at a faster speed than others, so giving people the skills they need to get the jobs in the growth sectors is a really important challenge, and Premier Newman and I worked side-by-side to get a new skills package for Queensland and around the nation.
On the various issues that you refer to, you know, all I've said and I just think it's kind of fairly obvious and common sense, it would have been good for Premier Newman to come and tell national business leaders what a great place Queensland is, he had an audience there, and it's a pity he missed the opportunity.
Minister Ferguson, his job is obviously to talk around the country about resources and he was doing that this week.
And on the issue about environmental protection, you know, I'm determined that we work to seize the job opportunities coming to Queensland through the resources boom and we protect the environment at the same time.
Unfortunately Mr Newman got himself on a course where we, you know, were at risk of not properly protecting the environment and we were going to risk jobs because if you don't do all this stuff right it ends up in the courts and there are years and years of delay, and we've worked to sort it through and Minister Burke's been working to sort it through with the Deputy Premier here.
HOST: One final one and I'll let you go. On the issue of the media, we've been watching the Leveson inquiry in the UK, and the differing accounts of dealing with former Australian Rupert Murdoch, from Tony Blair and Gordon Brown in particular. Where's the Australian media inquiry, where's it at at the moment, the Finkelstein inquiry and more?
PM: We've had the Finkelstein inquiry and also the Convergence Review, so that's dealing with the fact that, you know, what used to be understandably separately regulated, so broadcasting, print-
HOST: So what's coming from those?
PM: We've received those reports, we've made material publicly available from those report processes. We're considering it and we'll work it through.
HOST: Okay, so you're still considering the report?
PM: Yes we are.
HOST: Have you met Rupert Murdoch personally?
PM: Yes I have.
HOST: How long ago?
PM: Oh look, I've met Mr Murdoch on more than one occasion, I think the last time I met him was when he was in Australia to give a series of public lectures and we met in Canberra and talked about a range of issues including particularly Afghanistan and as a result I authored an opinion piece, because he did want to get the Australian perspective about the engagement in Afghanistan published.
HOST: How do you find him personally?
PM: Oh look, I've had good productive chats with Mr Murdoch, I don't claim to know him well personally, but I have, as Deputy Prime Minister and as Prime Minister met him on more than one occasion.
HOST: Thanks for coming in.
PM: Thank you.


HOST: Prime Minister, good to see you.
Look the meeting was snubbed by the tourism and transport forum claiming you bail out car makers rather than help them.
They've taken out big ads in the newspaper this morning. What's your response to those claims?
PM: Kochie, right across the economy we're working to protect jobs.
We did that during the days of the global financial crisis and we're still doing it now.
Our economy is strong and we were talking about that over the last day here in Brisbane but some industries are under pressure because of our high Aussie dollar, tourism amongst them and we'll keep working with the tourism industry.
I've met with them personally to see what we can do to help tourism operators through.
We're seeing good numbers of inbound tourism. People from overseas who want to come and see our wonderful country.
But a big pressure for tourism is that the high Aussie dollar makes it cheaper for Australians to go overseas and they are in record numbers.
So we've got to keep working with tourism and manufacturing right across the economy to support Australian jobs.
HOST: Yeah because they're mad because every traveller leaving the country from 1 July will be hit with a departure tax.
They're saying a million Aussies are in the tourism industry and double the number of mining and automotive sectors combined.
So they're hurting, what are you going to do for them?
PM: Well this new payment, increased payment at airports is for people who are going overseas.
They're not going to be gong to Queensland or to other tourism destinations in our nation and spending their money; they're on the way out of the country.
So we thought, in the budget where we needed to make choices in order to return the budget to surplus because that's best for jobs and best for the economy.
Increasing that kind of charge for people leaving our country to go and spend their money overseas was a good place to earn an extra bit of revenue.
We want to keep working with the industry and they've raised things with me about you know supporting cruise ships who come and bring overseas tourists into our nation.
Supporting skills and training in the industry and we'll keep working on those issues with them.
HOST: Let's submit some questions from our viewers we've asked them to send in.
Via facebook, Topsy Kren, it says similar lines to what the tourism industry is saying, how can you keep bailing out companies and help to find mines when local hospitals are closing beds?
PM: Well we're investing more in hospitals than any Government has in the nation's history and we're stepping up to being an equal partner in the growth in hospital costs.
A big problem for our country was that burden was predominately falling on State Governments and they just didn't have the money to keep putting into their hospitals so now we're working along side them.
When it comes to working with industry we are working with major industries like car making.
There are a million Australians employed in manufacturing and the skills that come from having car making in your country support manufacturing more broadly.
So it's important to hold those skills, it's important to have that innovation in our economy because it means jobs for people.
HOST: Prime Minister, a lot of questions on the carbon tax including this one from Lisa Zachary.
Why are you not listening to the voting public when it comes to the laws that are being passed at the moment such as the carbon tax?
PM: I've got an obligation to keep our economy strong, to keep working for a clean energy future to make sure we're tackling climate change but also that we're getting the jobs of the future those clean energy jobs.
Our economy is strong now; we've got strong growth the best since the global financial crisis.
We've created more than 800,000 jobs. We've got low unemployment. Interest rates going down.
So we can as a nation now address this challenge of putting a price on carbon and we can do it in a fair way while giving people tax cuts, the benefits of increased family payments and increased pensions.
HOST: Prime Minister, that message isn't getting through.
For example the outlook that the average Australian has for their family finances over the next year is at a 22 year low, consumer confidence is still pessimistic, and Europe's on the brink of a cliff of tearing itself apart.
Whether you agree with a carbon tax or not beside the point, is it the right time to bring it in?
Would you sort of consider of sort of saying, hey I'm a great believer in the carbon tax but I'll delay it a year.
Or I'll drop the $23 a tonne which is one of the highest in the world to $10 to help boost confidence, to ease that uncertainty.
PM: Well Kochie, I think we've got to be fairly clear about what is causing uncertainty.
I mean we've just lived through the biggest global economic downturn since the Great Depression.
I mean the biggest downturn many of us will see in our lifetimes.
So it's not surprising that there are some aftershocks that are worrying people and affecting their confidence.
And when they get up in the morning and they watch your show and they hear about the news from Spain and Greece then of course that presses on people and it worries them.
But in all of that post the global financial crisis with the problems in Europe there's nowhere else you'd rather be in the world given the strength of our economy.
And given the strength of our economy we can conquer challenges like putting a price on carbon.
And Kochie, we've got to remember there's a bipartisan commitment to cutting carbon pollution in our nation by 5 percent by 2020.
So we've got to get started otherwise it's going to be a really dramatic adjustment for our economy if we don't get started now.



PM: Mr Secretary-General, welcome to Parliament House and welcome to Australia.
You've come a long we to see us I note and I hope that the warmth of our welcome, perhaps not the Canberra air, but the personal warmth of our welcome means that all of those air miles were worth it.
The relationship between Australia and NATO has been growing stronger and closer in recent years and that in part reflects the work we've been doing together in Afghanistan.
It also in part reflects the way in which NATO has rethought its role in contributing to global security beyond the Atlantic and the way in which you've embraced new partners as a result.
NATO's core purpose as a treaty organisation is of course the collective defence of its members but a NATO which looks outwards beyond its borders and which makes a contribution to meet the challenges as diverse as terrorism or piracy off the coast of Somalia or protecting civilians in Libya is a good thing for global security.
It's something that Australia very much welcomes and which is in our interest.
And as you put it so eloquently in your speech yesterday Mr Secretary-General, the security challenges we face today are complex and they're unpredictable but one thing is clear.
Wherever we are, we are connected.
Reflecting that closer relationship we have appointed an Ambassador to NATO, our first and we've strengthened our military representation at the NATO headquarters.
Today the Secretary-General and I signed a joint declaration on the relationship between NATO and Australia. Now this is a first for NATO.
There is a statement of intent by both parties that we value the partnership between us and we will look for ways to strengthen it.
It's a statement that's underpinned by our shared values and our interests in a stable international order and the peaceful resolution of disputes.
A separate partnership and cooperation program will be development under the auspices of this declaration and this will set out current and strengthened areas for cooperation between Australia and NATO.
Now of course Afghanistan will continue to be central to our focus for some time to come  -  the focus of the partnership between Australia and NATO.
So today we've had productive discussions about Afghanistan building on the work that we did together at the recent summit in Chicago.
We've agreed that transition is on track for completion by the end 2014.
The Defence Minister and I were pleased to brief the Secretary-General on Australia's plans in transition in the Uruzgan province where we were and we discussed Afghanistan's needs after 2014.
Beyond transition in 2014 our mission in Afghanistan will change and evolve.
Afghanistan will have responsibility for its own security.
ISAF will have made a shift from its combat mission but there will be a need to support through a new NATO led mission to train, assist and advise.
As I've indicated, Australia will contribute to the training of Afghan security forces after 2014 and we want to work closely with NATO in shaping this future.
Mr Secretary-General, once again you're very welcome and I look forward to hosting the dinner in your honour later tonight.
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Thank you very much Prime Minister for these kind words.
It is a great pleasure for me for me to visit Australia. Australia is a highly valued partner of NATO.
Australia can seem a long way from Europe especially after 24 hours sitting in an aeroplane  -  and it's true that we live on opposite sides of the world but we are on the same sides when it comes to values.
Freedom, democracy, peace and security for our citizens  -  we share those values and we share the commitment to defend them.
And we can also share the knowledge that security can start far from home.
A conflict or a challenge thousands of miles away can have a direct impact on our lives.
Threats like terrorism, piracy and cyber crime are global and they demand global solutions.
That's why Australia and NATO are working together to build security and stability in Afghanistan so that it never again becomes a safe haven for terrorist who can plan attacks on our citizens. 
Australia is making a vital contribution  -  you are the partner who provides most truths to our message.
You are playing a leading role in Uruzgan and your servicemen and women are doing a magnificent job.
I know that some of your troops have paid the ultimate sacrifice of their lives in our mission and I pay the deepest tribute to their courage and their sacrifice and in this regard I am honoured to have been able to lay a wreath at the war memorial today.
We will make sure that we maintain the gains we have achieved with such great investment and resources.
Across the country Afghan troops and Afghan police are taking charge of own security.
By the end of 2014 they will have full responsibility to keep their people secure.
At that time our combat mission will come to an end but we will continue to provide training and funding beyond 2014.
I know that Australia is committed to both and all of us in NATO thank you for your commitment.
But our relationship goes far beyond Afghanistan.
In this globalised world there are other common challenges we face such as terrorism, piracy and cyber terrorism and the more we cooperate to tackle them, the more we will all benefit and that's why we agree that our forces should keep on training and working together.
So that the lessons of cooperation we learnt in Afghanistan are put to good use and that is why we have both agreed to strengthen and broaden our political dialogue.
So that we can work together to prevent crisis, manage conflicts and keep our populations safe together because global challenges need global solutions and global friends.
NATO is a firm friend of Australia's and I look forward to making that friendship still stronger in the coming years.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you discuss Syria, and do you agree with the Secretary-General's view that military intervention in Syria would be unwise?
PM: We did discuss Syria and the Secretary-General yesterday explained, I think very well, the obstacles and problems with suggestions about military intervention.
But we do think given the very distressing violence that we are seeing in Syria that the world does have to put pressure on Assad to do what he needs to do and that is comply with the Kofi Annan peace plan.
So we do believe that the time has come for the world to work together on international sanctions to put further pressure on the regime in Syria.
JOURNALIST: And Secretary-General you were very critical yesterday that the United Nations Security Council hadn't delivered a strong resolution condemning the violence in Syria.
Australia's seeking a seat on the UN Security Council; Australia's looking to win a seat on the Security Council with the United Nations.
Is that something that you would welcome, and would you recommend that your members support that bid?
SECRETARY-GENERAL: NATO as an organisation never interferes with the election process when it comes to the UN Security Council.
We of course are very appreciative of all efforts to make the UN Security Council effective in its work, but NATO as an organisation does not comment on or interfere with these election processes.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rasmussen, since you've got here to Australia you've on a number of occasions expressed confidence that once the NATO mission has ended in Afghanistan the local forces will be able to maintain responsibility for security and that the country implicitly has a future.
Other people are much more pessimistic about the future and suggest that there might be a general collapse within a matter of weeks or months after NATO pulls out of Afghanistan.
Can you just go into a little more detail to explain why, as a person who probably knows more about Afghanistan than anybody else, you are so confident that this transition can actually be made successfully?
SECRETARY-GENERAL: I am confident that the Afghan security forces will be able to take full responsibility for the security by the end of 2014, according to the plan that we have laid out.
I base my optimism on several elements, firstly already now the Afghan security forces have taken the lead in around 40 per cent of our security operations, and they participate in all security operations. That's the first thing.
Secondly, we have seen how Afghan security forces handle security incidents in a very professional manner.
You will recall that some weeks ago we saw some spectacular enemy attacks in Kabul.
Actually the Afghan security forces handled that situation and turned what was planned to be spectacular attacks into a spectacular failure. So that's their work in practice.
And finally, some weeks ago I visited Kabul and I had an opportunity to observe Afghan special operation forces in action and I was very impressed by what I saw.
These special operations forces operated very skilfully and in a very professional manner, and based on this I'm confident that they can take good responsibility by the end of 2014.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rasmussen, NATO expended some effort liberating Libyans from the regime of Colonel Gaddafi.
What is your message now to those same people in Libya who are holding a delegation from the International Criminal Court prisoner, including an Australian lawyer Melinda Taylor?
SECRETARY-GENERAL: I strongly regret that certain groups in Libya have arrested and held representatives of the International Criminal Court, and I would urge them to release these individuals as soon as possible.
We have seen that the new authorities in Libya cooperate in a positive manner with the International Criminal Court, and I hope that would also lead to a release of these ICC representatives as soon as possible.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, another Australian injured in Afghanistan today, what do you know of his injuries and what does that say about our continued role?
PM: I don't want to comment too specifically about this matter.
We're always very careful to get the details right and often find that the first information that comes through, for good reasons, isn't the full information. So we'll release further details as we can.
Generally on, you know, the losses that we have seen in Afghanistan, as a nation we've sacrificed a lot and you've heard the Secretary-General speak about that today in his knowledge around the world.
We've sacrificed a lot in loss of life; we've also seen many soldiers wounded.
We went to Afghanistan though for an important purpose for our nation's security, making sure that it didn't become a continuing safe haven for terrorism, and of course we know that terrorists trained in Afghanistan did take Australian lives.
So, when anyone is hurt in Afghanistan, whenever there is bad news, we grieve about the bad news but we stay steadfast in our purpose in Afghanistan.
Thank you very much. 



Women aspiring to become board members have today been given assistance through the announcement of 70 scholarships in the Board Diversity Scholarship program.
Speaking at the Women in Leadership lunch in Sydney today, Prime Minister Julia Gillard said this initiative would help to lift the representation of women on boards in Australia.
The Board Diversity Scholarship program began in 2011, with 70 women awarded scholarships to undertake the Company Directors Course or the Mastering the Boardroom program run by the Australian Institute of Company Directors.  T
he Gillard Government will now fund a second round of the program  -  a total of 70 full fee scholarships over the coming two years - in cooperation with the Australian Institute of Company Directors.
Demand for these scholarships was significant when the scheme began in 2011, with nearly 2000 women applying.  This shows that there are plenty of women in Australia who have the desire and drive to become board members.
Successful candidates from the corporate, Government and not for profit sectors will benefit from world-class training and will receive a 12 month membership of the Australian Institute of Company Directors. 
The Government will provide $225,000 towards these scholarships, with the Australian Institute of Company Directors providing a matching contribution in kind. This program is crucial to ensuring that women are provided with the skills and training that they need to transition to Board positions.  This initiative is one part of the Government's broader commitment to achieving gender equality and advancing the status of all women in Australia.  
It complements the work we are doing to support women's participation across all levels of the workforce, from those women who face significant barriers to participating in any work, right through to women in senior positions.  This includes our Fair Work Act reforms, which provides fairness and flexibility for women and promotes opportunities and equality in the workplace. 
We have introduced the nation's first Paid Parental Leave scheme, to support new mothers and enable them to maintain an attachment to the workforce.  And we have invested a record amount to make quality early childhood and care more affordable and accessible.
We are also providing leadership and engagement opportunities to women at the grass roots level through our National Women's Alliances, and our target to achieve at least 40 per cent representation of women on Government boards by 2015. 



PM: I'm here with Minister Anthony Albanese and we're at Marrickville West Public School. We've had a great morning talking to many of the students, but also talking to many of the parents as well about the Schoolkids Bonus. And from Wednesday next week people will see the Schoolkids Bonus into their bank accounts.
It's a bit of money to help with the costs of getting the kids to school. We know families have to pay for school uniforms, the books, the computers, the excursions, all of the costs of getting the kids to school and it can really press on family budgets.
That's why from Wednesday next week people will see some help in the form of $410 for each primary school student and $820 for each secondary school student.
And this bonus will be ongoing. People will see help come every January and every July because we know that each and every years parents face the bills for getting the kids all they need for schooling.
Right around the country, many people are feeling cost of living pressures. They know that our economy is strong, that it is the envy of the world, that there's nowhere else you'd rather be given the strength of our economy.
But people can still feel cost of living pressures, and we want to work to support families and to share all of the opportunities of our economic strength and the current resources boom.
So, it's a great pleasure to be here this morning. Right around the country Labor members are doing exactly what Minister Albanese and I are doing this morning.
They're standing at school gates, talking to parents about the Schoolkids Bonus, and reminding them that they'll see some help from Wednesday next week.
So I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott said this morning that there would be no dirty files and there is no dirty files on the Coalition side of politics, that it's only something on the ALP side of politics. What's your reaction to that?
PM: Oh look, I'll leave all of that as a matter for Mr Abbott.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your reaction to some of the detail in the DLA Piper report into alleged abuse in the Defence Force?
PM: There are some deeply distressing matters dealt with by that report, individual claims of mistreatment and abuse that make for deeply disturbing reading.
We are working through the best way of responding to that report, and the response needs to be a two levels. There are some system-wide issues to think about, and then there's how to deal with the individual claims that have been made.
Minister Smith, the Defence Minister, is working on the best way of the Government responding to these issues. There are a number of options on the table about how we could best respond.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) Royal Commission?
PM: A Royal Commission for this matter, or at least for some of the serious allegations, is one option; it's one amongst a range of options that Government will consider and work through.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that there could be still serving members that are implicated in this? What's the Government going to do to find out who they are if they are still serving in Defence?
PM: I think it's appropriate to view this report in its context. As a Government we've been prepared to look at these issues that have been of concern for many years.
Much of the material in this report goes back a long number of years, but we as a Government have been prepared to look at it even though these problems have been of long standing.
So we now have to work out what's the best way of dealing with all this, given how far back in time many of these claims go. But it is concerning, it is disturbing, I certainly feel that and I know others looking at this report will feel the same.
JOURNALIST: Why did it take a freedom of information request to get this detail out? Why didn't the Government just release it? Do you think that leads to a perception the Government's trying to cover up these sorts of claims?
PM: Well we're only in this position because of the actions of this Government, because we've been prepared to look at these questions even though they have been emerging over a long number of years, well before this Government was in office.
Some material was released by the Minister for Defence in April, and of course when we received the freedom of information request we responded to it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, governments of both political persuasions have tried to tackle systemic issues within the Defence Force. Is it ever going to change?
PM: Well I think we've got to take this a step at a time. Minister Smith ordered this report. Now we have the report we need to find the best way to respond to it. That's clearly complicated given that it raises issues at a series of levels.
It does require us to think about some system-wide issues in Defence, but we're also talking about, you know, individual claims which are disturbing, but many of them go back a long period of time. They are from, you know, a large number of years ago. And so how best to handle that does require serious consideration.
JOURNALIST: Are there any thoughts on compensation?
PM: Look, we're going to canvass our way through a full range of options and when we're in a position to give a considered response we will.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Windsor doesn't look like he'll hold onto his seat in next year's election. There are suggestions it is because he backed your Government. What do you say to that?
PM: I think we'll have an election in the second half of 2013 and the Australian people will get to express their view at that time.
My view about the 2013 election, and I've certainly said it before, is it will be fought on who is best to keep the economy strong, share the benefits of the boom, and assist families with their cost of living pressures, and who's best to shape our nation's future to face up to the big challenges.
JOURNALIST: The Nationals say that Tony Windsor is just an echo of yourself. Do you think that's a fair assessment?
PM: I'm not surprised to hear negative comments from the Opposition.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it's Bob Brown's last day in school today. What's your report card on the ALP's relationship with the Greens under Christine Milne so far?
PM: Look, any comments Senator Brown wants to make I'll leave to him. We, both Minister Albanese and I, and the Government generally, seek to work broadly across the Parliament to deliver a Labor agenda.
JOURNALIST: Do you feel it's continued in that same vein, that there's been no change between the two parties?
PM: As I just said, we work broadly across the Parliament to deliver a Labor agenda.
JOURNALIST: Just on Bob Brown very briefly, this morning on radio he said that you just don't get gay marriage.
PM: Look, I've dealt with this publicly on many occasions as recently as Monday night on Q&amp;A, so I'll let those comments speak for themselves.
JOURNALIST: What assistance is being offered to the family of the young girl that's been assaulted in Bali?
PM: For any instances overseas of that kind of nature we provide full consular support through the Department of Foreign Affairs.
JOURNALIST: Do you know how they're going?
PM: Look, I'm not in a position to give you details with these questions about sensitive matters about individuals, but our Department of Foreign Affairs assists Australians overseas.
JOURNALIST: The Opposition Leader has labelled a literacy policy which you introduced yourself as a failure, that the latest figures show there hasn't been a substantial lift in literacy rates. What do you think about that statement?
PM: I'm glad you asked that question because I do want to talk about how the Literacy and Numeracy National Partnership works.
The benchmark we set ourselves for success in that program was lifting up the kids who were struggling the most. So we know from national testing that too many children don't reach the minimum standard, so year 3 reading or year 5 numeracy, they're not at the minimum standard for the nation.
So this National Partnership was targeted at those kids who were struggling. And when you actually look at the results for those kids, I mean in schools that have participated in this National Partnership, you know, year 3 reading we've seen changes in 70 per cent of schools, improvements in 70 per cent of schools for those struggling kids.
Year 5 numeracy we've seen improvements in 80 per cent of schools for struggling kids. Now that was always the aim of this program, the help those kids who were falling behind their peers, falling behind the national standards, to get a lift up so that they were doing better.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the NSW Government has announced it's putting up the cost of rent for public housing, and it's blaming the carbon tax. Is that something you anticipated, and is it fair?
PM: Well this is a decision by Premier O'Farrell and Premier O'Farrell has decided that he wants to reach into the pockets of pensioners and grab some money for himself.
There is no excuse for this conduct by Premier O'Farrell, and any attempt to blame it on Federal Government policies is just a con.
Barry O'Farrell has decided to line his own pockets at the expense of people in public housing in this state, some of the poorest in our community, and I think that is disgraceful conduct.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your message to people in NSW who are going to be facing an 18 per cent increase in their electricity bills from 1 July?
PM: I understand that here in NSW and indeed in many other parts of the nation people have really felt the pressure from rapidly rising electricity bills.
We've seen considerable rises over the last few years, largely because of under-investment in the capital stock  -  in the poles and the wires  -  by state governments, and then that investment having to be made quickly, and flowing  power prices and bills to put a lot of pressure on families.
And so, state governments need to be explaining to the people in their state what the state government is doing about those rapidly escalating costs. We've always been pretty upfront with people that carbon pricing would make a difference to electricity prices of around about 10 per cent.
Now the jury's in on what carbon pricing is going to do to electricity prices in NSW, and it's actually less than we predicted, less than we thought.  And we will be providing families with assistance because of that impact.
That impact on average in NSW will be just over $3 and we are providing around $10 of assistance on average.
So people will see tax cuts from 1 July, they've seen lump sum increases to their family payments, and they will continue to see increases in family payments.
Pensioners have seen more money and will see continued increases in their pension to help them.
But the big mass of the costs coming out of the new investment in poles and wires, something done by state governments, doesn't come with real assistance for families and that's a matter for state governments to address.
Thank you. 


Thank you very much for that kind introduction, and can I too start by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and in a spirit of reconciliation paying my respects to elders past and present.
Can I say what a great delight it is being here for today's lunch. I do get the opportunity to attend a number of women's events, but not necessarily of this size and status, so it is a great honour to be here.
In fact we were reminiscing in the car on the way here about the last women's event I attended. It was at my local football club in Melbourne, the Werribee Tigers. It was the women's day at the Werribee Tigers, I was there at about 3 in the afternoon, the women had been drinking champagne since 11, and they were more interested in having photographs with my security team than talking to me.
So I am anticipating, hopefully, a slightly different reaction today, but if I see you all clearing out of the hall looking for my security team I'll know I'm getting the same reaction.
I think we should, when we gather like this as women, of course with some of the men who are our friends, reflect on just how far we've come.
And we have been on a remarkable journey as a nation, and we should never forget the great achievements, the great strides forward that have been made for women in our nation.
From the first days when the first women spoke in the Australian Parliament, Edith Cowan, who said in that very first speech in a woman's voice, “I know many people think that perhaps it was not the wisest thing to do to send a woman into Parliament.”
Now, after all these years of history we can say it was a wise thing to do, it was a wonderful thing to do, and it was that first step by that brave woman that has led to everything else including me being here today as the first female Prime Minister.
Sixty years ago we also saw another brave woman, Dame Enid Lyons, who was there in the sea of suits in the Menzies' cabinet, the first woman to sit at that cabinet table.
Now I have the privilege of sitting at that cabinet table with incredible women, including Jenny Macklin, Penny Wong, Nicola Roxon and Tanya Plibersek.
And we get to go to Executive Council and be there with the first female Governor-General, and we know that there are three women on our High Court.
Change has happened.
Change has happened too from the days of the early suffragettes, and perhaps we should today be saying to ourselves thank heavens we're not in the days that we had to go on hunger strike to make our point, now we can come out for lunch.
Change is good indeed.
What change means is that things that are unthinkable become thinkable, and ultimately the things that are thinkable become normal.
Indeed the history of great social movements is that things were unthinkable, then they slowly started to change and in retrospect everybody says the change was inevitable.
The women's movement has been a bit like that.
We have made so many strides forward that now, with the remove of history, we see as inevitable. But they were only made because women of courage stepped up and got them done.
But here at today's lunch we can't just sit and raise a glass in celebration and say the journey is over, and that women have arrived because we now have the first female Prime Minister or the first female Governor-General, we still have work to do for women's equality and women's full empowerment in our society.
I think Hillary Clinton best caught this sense of progress but the need for more when she spoke after her defeat in the presidential primaries, and when she said, “although we weren't able to shatter that highest, hardest glass ceiling this time, thanks to you it's got about 18 million cracks in it, and the light is shining through like never before. Filling us all with the hope and the sure knowledge that the path will be a little bit easier the next time”.
Here in our nation our glass ceiling has cracks in it, but it hasn't been shattered yet.
It is 28 years since the Sex Discrimination Act became law in this country. Or put another way, a baby girl born on that day would be a 28 year old woman now.
And whilst in her lifetime there has been change, 28 years later the gender pay gap in Australia is still at 17.4 per cent.
Only 3 per cent of the ASX 200 companies have female CEOs.
Women on boards are now at 14 per cent. Now admittedly that's better than the 8 per cent two years ago, but it's certainly not good enough.
So in this room, I want to say to corporate Australia represented here, we have to keep pushing for change.
We have to keep pushing to see more women take their rightful place on those boards of our major companies.
If you believe as I do, and it's a fairly simple belief at base, that merit is equally distributed between the sexes, if you believe that and then you look and see a result like boards only having 14 per cent of women, then it means that women of merit that should be there aren't there, and in the interests of justice but also in the interests of the highest possible quality for those boards, we should fix that.
There may be some men in the room who now remark, “That would tend to imply there are some men there who shouldn't be there.”
Maybe that might be true as well.
We want to play a role helping this change, which I know corporate Australia is now very passionate about.
We want to make sure that there are women available to take those positions on those boards.
We've already made a start and a partnership with the Australian Institute of Company Directors to provide board diversity scholarships to help provide a pipeline of qualified women.
Now how many women are interested?
A story is told by the first round of these scholarships. They began in 2011, and we had 70 scholarships to award with nearly 2000 woman applying.
So I think that's telling you that there is interest out there.
So I'm very proud to be bale to announce today that the Government will fund a further round of these scholarships, because we want more women to get that qualification and we want to play our part as a Government seeing more women come through to the boardrooms of our nation.
But as we think about that glass ceiling, we should never lose sight too of the lino on the floor.
We've got to make sure that whilst, as women, we are thinking about the next stage for women's equality, those things still to be achieved which haven't been achieved in equal numbers, we must still, too, have our eyes on equity.
I know from my family, from my own life, from my mother, that Ten Pound Pom who has been spoken of, are that there are so many things as a society we need to do to help women, the vast mass of women, women in their day-to-day lives, in their ordinary lives, in the struggles in suburbia and our regional towns in raising the family and combining work, there are so many things that we need to do to support women on that journey. 
When my mother was raising my sister and I, raising her family, there wasn't paid parental leave, there wasn't subsidies for childcare.
Indeed my mother used to mind other people's children for money; something in modern parlance we talk about a family day care, but that was the way that she was able, when we first arrived in this country, to earn a bit of money while she cared for her children.
And she moved from that stage of caring for us, as my father worked unbelievably hard in a series of occupations and ultimately as a psychiatric nurse, she moved from minding other people's children to working in the kitchen cooking in an aged care institution.
And there wasn't after school hours care then, so she used to run across the road to infants' school, where I was, and I would sit in the kitchen with her until she finished work at 6:30 at night.
Not something we have happen these days, a small child in a kitchen cooking for 80 people  -  what could possibly go wrong?
The Occupational Health and Safety Standards aren't going to quite let us do that.
But for me, what might sound in some ways a bit Dickens-like, it wasn't at all. It was a wonderful experience of being in an aged care home, home to older women.
A young girl who didn't have a grandmother in this country, who didn't have any aunts or uncles in this country, got the opportunity of having 70-80 grandmothers to learn to knit and play cat's cradle and do your ABCs, so it was a wonderful experience.
But as a society we've learned that we can do better than that and we should do better than that to have the policies that give women raising their families options and choices.
And I've always felt it keenly as a responsibility as the first woman to hold this position that we need to be delivering, as a government and as a nation, the policies that will give women those options and choices.
So I'm very proud that we've delivered after so many years of debate Paid Parental Leave.
And I'm very proud too that we're putting more money into subsidising childcare than ever before.
Though we've still got a conversation to have about how our subsidy system can best meet the needs of working women today.
I'm proud that we've taken a big step forward in equal pay.
Those women who work in our social and community service areas, who do some of the most stressing work in our society, who for too long have been dismissed as the sort of people who do caring work, women's work, work that doesn't have to be well-rewarded. That we have achieved for them equal pay.
I'm proud we're on a journey now to look at other areas where women work. Area like aged care  -  truly value their skills.
And we have been recognising the real skills of the workers in childcare, not assuming that somehow it is inherent in women to care for children, but recognising that caring for children is a real skill and it deserves to be recognised for the skill that it is.
So we have made some big strides forward, but there are still things we need to do as a nation, and which we will only be able to do together in order to change women's experiences of their lives.
For too many women, it's still a struggle and a juggle.
For too many women there are so many thinking moments about the choices that they have made.
For too many women there are workplaces that aren't free from harassment.
For too many women there is the denial of their career aspirations and choice.
The mum track, the softer option that is laid out for them whether or not they want to embrace it, they're told that's their pathway at work.
And so we still have things to change, and we've got to change them together.
But when I come to events like this I am very confident that as a nation we will make those strides forward for further change.
But I'd have to say this  -  I don't think it's going to be easy.
Change is never easy, it always requires people to step up and say that they recognise the need for change and they're going to make it happen.
The change that we live today, the changes that have made our lives possible, brought to us by earlier generations, were not easy to achieve.
And so for us to achieve the things that we want to see for our daughters and our granddaughters won't be easy either.
They will take determination, but I know the women in this room are a very determined lot and we will get it done.
Recently, I got the best compliment of my lifetime from an unexpected quarter when it was said about me that ‘Gillard will not lay down and die.'
To which I thought, damn right.
And I think that spirit of determination is what binds us together indeed when we look back in history we see so many fine and so many strong figures who have brought us to where we are today.
We know that we can learn from them about taking our journey forward.
I want to point you to one wonderful quote from a female lawyer in Melbourne.
I know what it's like to be a female lawyer in Melbourne and the stories of this woman a female lawyer in the 1950s to the 1960s can still be told.
Her name was Joan Rosanove and she was working as a successful female lawyer well before that was the norm.
She uttered these immortal words, ‘You must have the stamina of an ox and the hide like a rhinoceros and when they have kicked you in the teeth you must look as if you hadn't noticed'.
Well in 19 years the job description for high achieving women probably hasn't changed.
But I'd be here today saying to you don't recount space in your head to the naysayers, to the people who say further change isn't possible and that we can't get more done.
I absolutely believe we can. I know that we will do that together.
We will reach days in this country when it is so norm for the Prime Minister to be a woman that no one even talks about her hair anymore.



And I thank each of you for your contribution to promoting economic and social progress, despite the deep problems affecting the global economy.
There are some 200 million people unemployed worldwide, with nearly 75 million youth unemployed. 
Growth is weakening in a number of countries and uncertainty and risks have intensified, driven in particular by events in Europe. 
The scale of the human cost tells us that a return to growth is urgently required. 
So it's important that we ask hard questions about plans to spread and sustain growth, to create jobs, to avoid the mistakes of the past.  Today I want to say to you very clearly:
In a world where it is easy to be downbeat, we must also be able to point to our successes and understand our strengths.
Difficult times in the global economy demand courage from leaders in government, business and wider society  -  but that courage can find its strongest foundation in confidence.
So for example, Australia takes considerable pride in the work of the G20 and of associated gatherings like this one, the B20.
The growth of the G20's importance and effectiveness is one of the global successes and strengths we can reflect on, and build upon, as we look to spread and sustain global growth. 
And today I want to say to you that Australia also takes considerable pride in our own economic achievements.
Our record of growth and job creation gives me confidence: because I have seen our own determination and decisiveness rewarded in Australia, I'm confident that determined and decisive leadership around the world will be rewarded too.
And I hope that Australia's strong economy can be a sign of confidence to other countries.
We know there is a path of openness, investment and reform which leads to jobs and fiscally sustainable growth for the long term.
We know that because it is the path we have followed.
And while we acknowledge that every country faces its own unique circumstances, we do believe that there are some lessons for the world in the Australian way.
So first, the dose of realism.
Some progress has been made on the global economy since we last met.
Importantly, in the United States, the recovery continues at a moderate pace. But challenges remain even there, particularly in the housing and labour markets.
European leaders have also taken important steps.
But despite an increase in bail-out funds; the bank restructuring that has occurred in a number of countries; the unprecedented liquidity injection afforded by the long-term repurchase operations of the European Central Bank; and the debt restructuring that has occurred in Greece, Europe's situation remains hugely difficult.
The euro area's unemployment rate remains at double-digits and many euro area economies appear to have re-entered recession.
Second, the signs of change.
It's now clear to more and more people that austerity measures  -  measures which we freely acknowledge have been followed in response to well-grounded concerns about sovereign debt  -  need to be accompanied by a commitment to growth which is equally urgent and strong. 
The growing consensus about this is a positive and important development.
We are seeing a reshaping of the debate in Europe and beyond: not before time, there is a growing recognition that growth is an important precondition for confidence, job creation and ultimately fiscal consolidation itself.
Europe must have credible fiscal consolidation plans to restore fiscal sustainability, but it is also essential that it has a strategy for growth that includes policies aimed at boosting trade and investment, freeing up product and labour markets, deregulating business, promoting competition and building skills.
Fiscal consolidation cannot be an end in itself.
It must be a part of a comprehensive approach to spreading and sustaining economic growth.
Plainly, one of the key pressure points of the global economic recovery is the magnitude of many nations' public debt.
Plainly, ensuring the sustainability of these countries' public debt positions is an important medium-term issue that cannot be ignored.
Indeed, that is perhaps the most important lesson of the current crisis.
But at this point, I believe the debate has often taken one of two missteps.
The first is the view that austerity alone is enough, when public debt is partly a function of other structural problems.
The second of these missteps is the opposite view  -  that we must choose growth instead of discipline.
For growth to be sustained, it must be sustainable  -  and so policies to promote growth must work alongside policies to deliver fiscal discipline over time.
The right path begins in recognising of a more complex reality.
It begins in understanding that in Europe and beyond there are at least two problems  -  the problems of fiscal sustainability and the problems of stagnant growth in the real economy, often underpinned by structural weakness.
Understanding, in turn, that these two problems are related  -  as the longer economic growth remains stagnant, the harder the task of reducing public sector debt to sustainable levels.
It requires acknowledging that fiscal sustainability can't be achieved by immediate cuts which choke growth.
Knowing, in turn, that growth will not be forthcoming without credible commitments to discipline - without action now to adopt medium-term fiscal consolidation plans. 
Businesses will not invest and consumers will not spend unless they have some confidence in the future and the economy.
If the need to keep a watch on longer term fiscal outcomes is the headline lesson of the crisis, the opening paragraph is that Governments must ultimately pursue policies which markets accept are affordable over time.
Ultimately, profligacy and austerity are each symptoms of simplification and short-termism.
What is needed in contrast is a comprehensive and long-term approach.
So  -  this is a sketch of the real strategy required.
Third, let me sketch the action that should flow from this strategy.
Governments in countries where growth is weak should not be looking to aggressively cut public spending or raise taxes now  -  in “real time” as it were.
Rather, I want to encourage policies that can maintain or even expand growth in the short term, but that can also be fiscally responsible.
Governments' immediate fiscal decisions must be made with an “eye on the future”  -  something which has been missing for far too long.
This leaves room for sound policies which impart short-run boosts to consumption and investment and which also add to productive capacity in the long run.
This approach must be applied strictly. It cannot be used as an excuse to repent now and repent later. And open trade is vital too. 
Pressures for protectionist measures remain high in many countries  -  often badged as a means to “keep jobs at home”. 
Yet we know that open trade is ultimately vital for growth and jobs.
Broadly speaking, this has been the Australian way  -  the policy path our Government has chosen  -  not only in 2008 and 2009 but now as well.
We stimulated in the downturn.
When growth was threatened by the onset of the global financial crisis, our fiscal response was timely, temporary and targeted.
This was coupled with a clear set of fiscal rules to ensure we returned the budget to surplus when growth returned to trend.
We went for growth on the way in and we went for discipline on the way out once growth had returned.
This took form in deeds, not just words.
Our stimulus contributed around two percentage points to real GDP growth in 2009 and without it we would have lapsed into recession.
Now that our economy is showing strong signs of growth, we have brought down a Budget which delivers a surplus in the coming financial year.
The recent Budget did not just bring our finances back into balance.
It maintained a policy balance as well  -  shaped by a clear set of priorities reflecting our commitment to the wellbeing of all our people and our understanding of the long-term drivers of economic growth.
So in a Budget which contained total cuts worth around one per cent of government outlays, investment in infrastructure was maintained, spending on education and skills formation grew, and our investment in high-speed broadband continued.
Friends, each country faces circumstances more or less uniquely its own: its own weakness and failings, its own successes and strengths.
It's certainly true that Australia's circumstances are importantly shaped by forces beyond our domestic policy settings  -  like growth in Asia, like our rich natural resources.
It's also true that Australia's historically strong public and private institutions, particularly our strong financial system, have held us in good stead.
It's equally clear to me, however, that Australia's economic strength can be an important sign of optimism to countries of the world.
And that our policy response can be an important sign of the right way ahead.
This is why, in coming days, I'll be urging my European friends this:
Take note of the Australian way.
A credible commitment to fiscally responsible growth is the only way forward: Australia has shown this is the way.
Consider this - unlike the recession Australia endured in the early 1990s, when our unemployment levels reached 11.2 per cent, since the crisis of 2008-09 we have been able to create over half a million jobs.
Indeed since late 2007, Australia has created over 800,000 jobs.
To give you a sense of the scale of this achievement in Australia's medium-sized economy  -  the equivalent would be creating over 10 million jobs in the US or more than 13 million in the euro area.
Australia's unemployment is currently 5.1 per cent.
Australia's GDP is now about 9 per cent above pre-crisis levels.
By contrast, around half of the world's other advanced economies have not recovered their pre-crisis GDP levels.
And by growing the economy and avoiding mass unemployment, we've prevented social dislocation and the destruction of human capital that other advanced economies have seen in the past four years.
During our own recession of the early 1990s, the number of people starting apprenticeships fell by one third in just two years  -  and even worse, took thirteen years to recover to pre-recession levels.
That loss of human capital meant skills shortages during the recovery and long-term joblessness even during periods of sustained growth. 
We learned from that experience.
In 2008 and 2009, Australia's Government invested in skills as the downturn hit Australia and cost jobs.
So while we had a drop in training starts as the down-turn bit, falling nearly one fifth in 2008-2009, they took just two years to recover and today stand at record highs.
And we have done all of this while putting Australia's public finances in the most enviable of positions.
Last year, for the first time in our country's history, we were awarded a Triple A credit rating from all three major credit rating agencies.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends. If I can summarise:
Realism demands that we recognise global weakness.
It also allows us to recognise some signs of positive change.
A more sophisticated understanding of the connection between economic growth and fiscal discipline is emerging  -  and not before time.
That understanding must lead to action  -  to decisive new measures to restart growth, combined with credible plans and practical steps for medium-term fiscal discipline to sustain growth.
And while that action will take courage, it can be based on confidence  -  and we offer the Australian experience as a sign that your confidence can be well placed.
And having summarised, if I can address you as business leaders in particular:
The type of approach I have outlined is not easy  -  if it were, it would already have been followed.
Your governments can only do so much and they need your support  -  business leaders are as important to this process as political leaders.
In Australia's case, in 2008 and 2009 the business community and government worked together and it was this sort of cooperation that helped pull us back from the abyss significantly reducing the human cost of the crisis in Australia.
We've maintained that commitment to co-operation in the years since and it is driving our agenda in areas as diverse as deregulation, trade, innovation and reforms to tax.
Across the globe, this same cooperative approach is needed to drive growth and jobs. 
Everyone has to support reforms to drive growth.
Everyone who does will benefit from such reforms.
That is the lesson of Australia's way. 



HOST: Prime Minister, welcome to Lateline.PM: Thank you very much.HOST: What are you hoping will be achieved from the G20 meeting there in Mexico this week?
PM: Well, I'm hoping the G20 meeting for the global economy achieves four things and certainly I will be advocating them. I'll be advocating that countries have country-specific commitments about what they're doing to bolster growth and jobs. I'll also be advocating that we've got to fiercely resist protectionism. It's too easy for countries during difficult economic times to slide away from free trade and that will end up being a problem for the whole world.
I'll also be advocating that countries that have made IMF commitments need to make - honour those commitments, need to take those commitments forward. And lastly, I will be arguing for an agreement on trade facilitation. The more freely we can trade with the world, the better for Australia. We are a great trading nation. Of course all eyes too will be on Greece and what is happening in the eurozone and I will be advocating to my European counterparts that they do need to take decisive action to address the problems in the eurozone.HOST: What exactly is that decisive action you're looking for?PM: Well I think it's really threefold. They need to strengthen and recapitalise banks. Second, they need to work together on greater fiscal integration and greater banking integration. I think that's very important to resolving the current problems in the eurozone. And third, they need to work together on a plan for growth.I've been speaking today about the Australian example. Emma, a lot of times austerity is put at one end of the spectrum and growth at the other. I think what Australia's example proves is you can have both. We went for growth during the Global Financial Crisis. That's why we stimulated our economy to support jobs.
But at the same time, we clearly charted a return to surplus and fiscal discipline, we charted the path, the rules that would guide us. So we went for growth, but we also outlined how we would engage in that with fiscal discipline. That's what we need to see the eurozone do: go for growth, but also with rules that enable them to repair their balances  -  their budget balances over time.HOST: It's a little unfair, isn't it, to compare European governments with your own? I mean, when you took office back in 2007, you arrived with a $21 billion surplus and unemployment around five per cent, and now you have no surplus five years later, unemployment is still around five per cent. We escaped the Global Financial Crisis, but many suggest that has more to do with good luck than good management. I mean, we have a bounty of resources and our chief trading partners are in Asia. It's hardly right for Australia to be smug about those things, isn't it?PM: Well, anybody who said that would be completely wrong, Emma, and wouldn't be analysing what had happened in our economy during the days of the Global Financial Crisis. We would've had a recession with hundreds of thousands of people thrown out of work, with young people not able to get that vital start in the labour market, that first training opportunity and apprenticeship if we hadn't engaged in targeted and timely stimulus.
The decisive action of the Government then did keep us going for growth. And here we are, past the Global Financial Crisis, with growth in our economy at 4.3 per cent. This is a truly remarkable result. It's not true to look at that result and say that's only mining; that is showing broader strengths in our economy. And as a nation we have strong public finances; a strong banking sector. So the Australian example I think does have some lessons in it. Of course I understand every country faces its own unique circumstances.But the lesson from the Australian experience is that you don't put austerity and growth and jobs as if they are polar opposites. You can work on them together, and we have, with a growing economy, 800,000 jobs created and a budget returning to surplus.HOST: Even Bob Zoellick, the head of the World Bank, just today expressed his frustration with the lack of certainty coming from Europe from a policy perspective. I mean, if the eurozone is going to function properly, in your view, do you think more economic and political union is a necessary part of that?PM: I think further integration is part what have the eurozone needs to achieve. European leaders will be here at the G20, the leaders of the major European economies. Then there will be some major meetings in Europe towards the end of this month. So the G20 comes at a good time for the world to strengthen the resolve of European leaders to act decisively in the face of the ongoing problems in the eurozone.HOST: Fiscal transfers between states are unlikely though given the resistance from Germany in particular. I mean, Angela Merkel has made the point that any kind of debt sharing exercise removes incentives for the deep structural reform that countries like Greece need to implement.PM: Well once again I don't think these things should be put as if they are alternatives. Nations like Greece do need structural reform. They do need economic change. That must be part of their future. But if we are to see a strong eurozone in the future, we also need Europe to be working on strengthening banks, recapitalising banks, we need them to be working on growth policies and we need them to be working towards greater integration.I don't underestimate the political difficulties of all of this and we're talking about a large number of countries coming together and finding common accord, but the world has an interest in seeing a strong and stable eurozone. When we look at Europe, it is the single biggest economic bloc in the world.
Our economy is not that strongly directly exposed, but of course, we are exposed through our major trading partners who trade with Europe. So, I will be rising Australia's voice about what needs to happen in Europe and then focusing on the rest of what needs to be done to strengthen the global economy at this time.Our economy's strong, that's something we should all be proud of, we built it together, but a stronger and more resilient global economy is in Australia's interests and that's what I'll be arguing for here.HOST: Given the relative strength of the Australian economy, do G20 countries seek your counsel about how they might improve their lot?PM: Well, at a meeting like the G20, because it is small in number, you do get the opportunity to speak to your counterparts, to speak to other leaders. That's one of the great strengths of this format. I've had the opportunity over a number of meetings to meet with Chancellor Merkel. I had the opportunity at the NATO ISAF summit to meet with President Hollande. Obviously I'd met with his predecessor President Sarkozy on more than one occasion. So it does give you an opportunity to share views.HOST: And do you have the kind of relationship with Angela Merkel for instance where you might be able to persuade her of your point of view?PM: Of course. And I've talked to Chancellor Merkel about these issues in the eurozone in the past.HOST: Prime Minister, looking back home, the governor of the Reserve Bank, Glenn Stevens, says productivity is Australia's number one challenge. Is he right?PM: Productivity is a major challenge for our economy, which is why each and every day we work on the drivers of productivity. The skills agenda of government, the education agenda has been one of our principal drivers and will continue to be. That's reforming everything from early childhood education through schools, through the huge expansion we've engaged in of university places, 150,000 more, and then at the last COAG meeting, we agreed a major vocational education package with the states and territories to bring benefits to students who want new skills like the benefit of HECS. That is, like university students, you don't have to have the money upfront. You can do a course, get new skills, when you're earning higher income, because of those skills, pay back your course costs. So, a very big driver of productivity. Infrastructure, a huge driver of productivity.We are a huge investor in traditional infrastructure, roads, rail, ports, but of course the infrastructure we will need for future, the National Broadband Network. Our telephone system's done a very good job. It's served us well, 100-year-old copper. Done a great job. But left unattended to, it's going to choke off future productivity gains and future growth in our economy, which is why the NBN is so important.And then we're working on some of the areas that don't necessarily get column inches in newspapers and many people would think, "Gee, that meeting's as dry as dust," and it probably is, but we're working on deregulation and a seamless national economy, because that's a big driver of productivity too.HOST: Glenn Stevens urged the Government to grab the Productivity Commission's to-do list and get on with ticking them off. Why aren't you doing just that?PM: Well we are ticking off some things that the Productivity Commission has talked about. One of the big ones of course being vocational education and training reform, which we ticked off, to use your terminology, firstly in the budget last year, by making the money available, and then through very detailed negotiations with states and territories to drive our education system, our skills system, to an entitlement model because I want people to have an entitlement to a training place that gives them the first certificate level that will make a real long-term difference to their employability and their income.HOST: You talk about skills, but we're still facing such a skills shortage that we're having to import workers from overseas, and on the matter of education, we're spending more, but it would appear still falling further behind.PM: Well we are investing in skills and we are spending more on education. We've doubled the amount of money that is going into school education from the Federal Government and we are getting results. If, for example, we're talking about the most disadvantaged students who are falling behind in literacy and numeracy, those struggling kids who are at the back of the class and who are at real risk of never learning to read or write, our national partnerships are making a difference for those children. We know that in 70 per cent of schools, a difference is being made in reading; in 80 per cent of schools, a difference is being made in numeracy.And that's vital because if we don't work with those children who are below national benchmarks, the real risk is that they'll end up hating school, they'll drift away from school and they'll be on a one-way path to a life of welfare dependency. So we've got a comprehensive reform agenda. It's about transparency through MySchool, it's about national curriculum, rewarding best teachers getting the best and brightest into teaching through Teach for Australia, putting money into disadvantaged schools and really focusing on literacy and numeracy and we are seeing results, as well as seeing results in closing the gap for Indigenous students.HOST: In a letter that you and your Treasurer penned to your G20 colleagues ahead of this meeting in Mexico, you wrote that strategies to promote growth should be underpinned by among other things flexible labour markets. Is the Australian example a good one for them to follow on that score?PM: Yes, I believe the Australian example is a good one. We of course got rid of the offence that was WorkChoices where we saw people go to work in the morning and have their penalty rates ripped off them that day without a cent of compensation, or even worse, lose their job, be sacked after many years of good service, never given a reason as to why they'd been tossed out the door.
We got rid of that because of how grossly unfair it was and we will always fight as a Labor Party and a Labor Government to prevent workers being ripped off through losing penalty rates or getting the sack unfairly. The Fair Work system responds to that need for appropriate decency and respect in Australian workplaces while ensuring that in workplaces people can bargain above a safety net so that working with their employer, they can make their workplace more productive and they can have more rewards for them to share. Of course when you do a change as big as that, and it was a big change, it's appropriate to look to see how it's working and we are doing that through the Fair Work Act review. But I believe our labour market system brings fairness together with flexibility.HOST: Well the Government's now received the review panel's report on the Fair Work Act. There's been some suggestion that your response is likely to include some sidelining of unions at greenfield sites.PM: Look, I understand there's some speculation in newspapers today and I'm not going to comment on speculation. We'll work our way through the review and when we've got a comprehensive government response to release then we will.HOST: Do you accept the view though that unions are wielding a kind of virtual monopoly when it comes to negotiating agreements at new project sites? I mean, employers are saying that that kind of monopoly is causing big increases in the costs of production and very long delays.PM: Look, I'm not going to deal with speculation about aspects of the Fair Work review. On construction costs and working around the country on construction, we understand at this time in our nation's history with more than $500 billion of resources projects in the pipeline, that there is pressure on construction, there's pressure on the number of people available to do the work, there is therefore some pressure on costs.
I want to make sure that we're maximising all of these opportunities for Australians so building workers can get the benefit of those jobs and we can see construction happening appropriately around the country. But let's not remember there are some big civil construction projects the Government's been involved in where we have done major highway works and brought it in quicker than the projected time and under the projected budget.HOST: Finally Prime Minister, you're off to Rio de Janeiro at the end of the week for the UN's Earth Summit. Realistically, what are your goals for that particular meeting given the absence of key players like President Obama, the UK's Prime Minister David Cameron and Germany's Angela Merkel?PM: This is an important opportunity for the world to come together and to talk about sustainable economic growth, sustainable in the sense of environmentally sustainable but also socially sustainable. This is the 20th anniversary of the original meeting which focused on these sustainability questions. Australia is an innovator in this field. For example, we have a good story to tell about what we have done to preserve our wonderful natural environment, whether it's Kakadu National Park on land or now moving to marine reserves in our oceans. So I think it's appropriate that I do participate there.HOST: Thanks very much for being there for us, Prime Minister, and all the best of luck for a very busy week ahead.PM: Thank you. 



PM: I've just arrived here in Los Cabos for a trip that really is in two parts.
First I will be attending the G20 and meeting with international business leaders.
Then, having discussed circumstances in the global economy and the need for growth, I will be travelling to Rio to discuss sustainability  -  both environmental sustainability and social sustainability.
Whilst the Australian economy is strong, this meeting of the G20 comes at a time when yet again all eyes are on Greece and we see a faltering economy in Europe.
Now what happens in Europe does matter to the economy of the world.
Europe is the single biggest economic zone in the world, so Australia does have a deep interest in what happens in Europe. 
We do of course directly trade with Europe, but far more significantly our major trading partners in our region export to Europe, and so what matters to Europe matters to them, and therefore matters to Australia's ability to export our goods to those nations.
So here at the G20 I will be urging my European counterparts to take decisive action on the issues in Europe and the eurozone.
Particularly I will be saying to my European counterparts that they need to be focussing on further banking and fiscal integration in Europe, that they need to be working on the recapitalisation of stressed banks  -  the strengthening of stressed banks, and thirdly they need to be focussing on growth.
Now in recent months there's been a renewed focus on the need for growth.
Fiscal consolidation alone is not enough. Ultimately, the answer to this economic crisis is growth.
It is growth that enables you to see jobs and investment; it is growth that enables you to realise your fiscal plan and to put your budget on a sustainable footing.
Here in Los Cabos my aims for the G20 are as follows.
I will be advocating the need for countries to commit to country-specific action plans on jobs and growth.
I will be advocating the need to fiercely resist protectionism in all its forms.
I will be seeking agreement on trade facilitation; that is, enabling trade to flow more freely.
And finally, I will also be focussing on the need for global growth. This is what is important to the Australian economy now.
Australia's economy is strong. We should all be proud of that. We built it together.
But what happens in the global economy matters to us, and a stronger and more resilient global economy is in Australia's interests.
I'm very happy to take questions. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any initial response to  -  it looks like New Democracy may be the dominant force in the Greek government in a form of coalition government, which would be pro-euro.
Does that strike you as being significant?
PM: Look, I'm not going to speculate on exit polls, comment on exit polls.
What I would say is that a strong Europe is in the interests of Australia and in the interests of the world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you spoke about the need to have further integration on banking and fiscal policies.
Is it true that the G20's really about trying to put pressure on the leaders and that the European leadership will meet in another few weeks when they will actually make those decisions, is this just about trying to increase the pressure on them?
PM: Look, of course here at the G20 we have a number of European leaders, but not all European leaders, and European leaders will meet in their own meetings later this month.
But I believe it is appropriate that here at the G20 we have a focus on what Europe needs to do, so I will be discussing that with European counterparts.
But our focus does need to be strongly on what the world needs to do at this time to strengthen the global economy.
So, as I say, that does come down to a few very significant measures. We do have to resist protectionism in all its forms.
I do want to see an agreement to strengthen trade facilitation. I do want to see countries committing to individual action plans on jobs, and of course there is the question of the IMF resourcing.
At the last G20 meeting I was an advocate for strengthening the resourcing of the IMF.
Australia has played its part, and I want to see other nations take forward their commitments to strengthening IMF resourcing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you and the Treasurer have written directly to all the other leaders of the G20 countries.
Why did you feel the need to make that direct plea in writing rather than just in your address to the plenary here at the meeting?
PM: Well we believed it was important to take all steps to make Australia's views known, so I have authored a letter with the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer.
I've also authored a letter with the President of the Republic of Korea, of South Korea, putting forward our views so that they can get maximum impact and airplay here.
JOURNALIST: Have any of the leaders responded as yet?
PM: My understanding from the senior officials' discussions is that the letters have become a talking point, and there has been focus on them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a Galaxy poll out today showing Labor's still behind.
Why isn't Labor getting the benefits of the boom?
PM: Well I've answered these questions many, many times in Australia, so I'm not going to become a commentator on the polls at any time, certainly not tens of thousands of kilometres away.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on protectionism, the International Chamber of Commerce has said today that the results of the G20 in Cannes were listed as incomplete as far as it goes on protection and trade.
Do you have a view that this should go further than Cannes on trade and protectionism?
PM: I think it's important that we maintain our current stance to resist further moves towards protectionism.
Of course, since the Global Financial Crisis started it has been a key risk that individual countries view it in their interest to start turning away from trade and global markets, and if one country starts doing that then it becomes harder for other countries to resist doing it too.
So here I will certainly be advocating that we continue to resist the siren song of protectionism.
On building on what was achieved in France, we did go into the meeting in France  -  I did at that time very strongly advocate the need for further IMF resourcing.
We've played our part and we will be wanting to see other nations take forward the commitments they made there.
JOURNALIST: The United States and Canada refuse to do that. Does that disappoint you?
PM: Look there were particular issues for those nations, but there are countries that did step forward when we were in France to say that they would assist with IMF resourcing, and we do want to see those commitments taken forward.
JOURNALIST: The G20, in Australia, are you likely to make an announcement on that?
PM: You'll have an announcement on that in coming weeks.
JOURNALIST: Not at this forum?
PM: Not at this forum, no. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Trade and Competitiveness Craig Emerson today warmly welcomed Mexico as a new member of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
The country's inclusion in the negotiations, announced during the G20 Leaders' Summit in Los Cabos, brings the number of parties seeking to conclude a wide-ranging accord on trade and economic integration across the Asia-Pacific region to 10. 
Speaking from Los Cabos, the Prime Minister said Mexico was an important partner to have at the table in the development of a modern, comprehensive trade agreement across Asia and the Pacific.
The TPP parties now around the table account for 27 per cent of global GDP.  
Mexico's addition to the talks today is another step towards APEC's vision of a free trade area of Asia-Pacific.
Minister Emerson said Australia looked forward to working with Mexico on this ambitious project.
The expansion of the TPP group translates into greater opportunities for Australian businesses and farmers to engage with the fastest-growing region on earth.
Mexico's inclusion was agreed by consensus among TPP members and reflects the country's commitment to trade liberalisation. 



Thank you very much to Bob for that introduction and it's a great pleasure to join Prime Ministers Harper and Cameron for this very special event.
One statistic really tells the whole story for all of us, and that statistic is that it is estimated that one billion people go hungry each day and we know that 1.4 billion men, women and children, 75 per cent of the world's poorest people, live in rural areas, and they are already struggling to produce enough food for themselves.
And yet the scale of the challenge is going to increase  -  by 2050 it's estimated that the world will need to feed an additional two billion people, as our global population reaches nine billion in total.
Now these are daunting figures, they are particularly daunting if you live  -  as we do  -  in the Asian region of the world, with so many growing nations.
These statistics about how many people are hungry are simply unacceptable and the world can't stand by and just watch this worsen, which is why today we are making a joint commitment to improve agriculture and to improve food production.
We know that we need better agricultural productivity, more open trade, greater investment, increased aid, innovation, research and development.
And we need a more sustained international effort and marshalling of all resources,  both public and private.
Ag Results will make an important contribution to meeting this challenge, by investing in creativity and harnessing technological innovation, we can improve agricultural productivity and food security in some of the world's poorest countries, for some of the world's poorest people.
And we can do that in a way that rewards real change, so I'm delighted that Australia will have an opportunity to play a role in this important new initiative and I'm very pleased to be able to announce that Australia will provide a contribution of $20 million.
We are a very efficient agricultural producer. We are in parts a very arid country, so we've got some relevant expertise and we're very happy to share.
I want to applaud the work of my colleagues here today, of Canada and the United Kingdom, and of course the important role of the World Bank in administering this fund.
And I'm looking forward to working with my other G20 colleagues over the coming day on tackling global food insecurity and delivering real improvements to the lives of billions of people around the world.
Thank you very much.



Prime Minister Gillard today joined Prime Minister Cameron and Prime Minister Harper to announce a new initiative  -  Ag Results  -  to improve food production in developing countries.
Ag Results will offer financial incentives for organisations that are able to develop and apply new technologies at an affordable price for farmers in developing countries.
This approach differs from traditional programs because incentives are paid only after results have been achieved.
In its first stages, Ag Results will help to improve crop storage, fight crop disease and produce more nutritious food.
Australia will provide $20 million over three years towards the $100 million joint initiative which includes contributions from the United Kingdom, Canada, the United States, Italy and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
Australia is well placed to make a significant contribution to this to this initiative.  We are an efficient food exporting nation and our agricultural expertise is internationally acknowledged. 
Speaking before the beginning of the G20 meeting in Los Cabos today, the Prime Minister said it was important for the world's strongest economies to support one of the most urgent challenges of our time.
Seventy-five per cent of the world's poorest people struggle to produce enough food for their families  -  and as our global population increases, this problem is only going to be more extreme.
The investment to meet the food needs of the global population in 2050 is estimated to be $83 billion a year.  Much of this funding will need to come from private sources which is why this initiative is aimed at stimulating private investment.
In addition to increasing food production, this investment will also produce better quality food.
Nearly one billion people currently suffer from a lack of crucial micronutrients in their diet - a “hidden hunger” that inhibits the development of children and reduces adult productivity. 



PM: I have just finished the G20 opening session and of course the leaders' working dinner as well.
These discussions at the G20 have already afforded leaders an opportunity for a comprehensive and frank exchange of views on circumstances in the global economy.
It would be no surprise to anyone that there was a particular focus on circumstances in the eurozone and recognition that the European Union is meeting in 10 days time.
Amongst the discussions about the eurozone circumstances, and more generally, it was acknowledged by many in the discussions that growth and austerity are not polar opposites that they are strategies that need to be combined.
That is, we need to see in the eurozone and beyond a focus on jobs, a focus on growth and by focusing on jobs and growth with fiscal discipline you can achieve fiscal consolidation; that this is not a question of fiscal consolidation alone but a need for growth and jobs and investment.
There was also some discussion about the imbalances within the eurozone itself and a recognition that there is things that need to be done within the eurozone including recapitalisation of banks, further integration in the banking system, further fiscal integration and there was a recognition of action taken to date but the need to keep building on this action that has been taken to date.
There was also discussion about the IMF and its role in the global economy. Steps were taken towards more resources for the IMF and this is a good outcome.
It's a good outcome to see extra resources available to the IMF for a global firewall and increasing IMF resources was certainly a feature of the advocacy that Australia engaged in at the last G20 meeting.
Tomorrow at the G20 the sessions will focus on trade and on IMF governance reform.
I've also had the opportunity today to meet with Prime Minister Monti of Italy where we focused on issues in the eurozone.
I also had the opportunity to meet with Christine Lagarde of the IMF, where she thanked Australia for its support of the IMF and our funding increase and reflected on the strength of the Australian economy, particularly the fact that we have recently been upgraded at a time when so many other nations are facing downgrades.
We of course hold a AAA credit rating from all of the major credit ratings agencies for the first time in Australia's history.
I had the opportunity yesterday too, so since the time that I last spoke to the media, to speak to Bob Zoellick the leader of the World Bank.
Bob is shortly to leave that position at the expiration of his term but it gave me the opportunity to thank him for the work that he's done at the World Bank.
One of the great features of the G20 is given its size it affords an opportunity to have one-on-one formal discussions with leaders and I have been able to do that during the course of today and I'm looking forward to more discussions tomorrow.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Head of the European Commission says that he's not here to receive lesson in terms of the democracy of how to run an economy. Do you think you were one of the leaders he was having a swipe at?
PM: I had a conversation with President Barroso today and advised him that he was running strongly in the Australian media. That came as a complete surprise to him given he hadn't had anything to say about Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on protectionism do you expect that the final communiqué will include a commitment not to introduce any more new protectionist measures and that can be extended to 2015?
PM: We have been a very fierce advocate of not lapsing onto protectionist measures.
We've been advocating the standstill that has been in G20 statements in the past and we will be advocating tomorrow during the course of the discussion on trade that the standstill should be continued.
What of course that means is that people give a commitment to not engage in any further measures.
There's always a temptation for leaders when economic circumstances are tough and unemployment is high and many people are anxious about fiscal consolidation, which ordinary people understand to be government cutbacks, it can be very tempting in those circumstances for leaders to lurch for protectionist measures.
So I think it's important that we do see a further standstill and I'll be advocating that tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given that Mr Barroso said that this morning that he wasn't prepared to take lectures from other leaders. Who do you think he was actually referring to?
PM: Well he was answering a question from a Canadian journalist who was asking very explicitly on behalf of the people of North America.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said yesterday Europe could learn some lessons from Australia. He said today that we're not going to learn lessons from nobody  -  basically slapping down your suggestion that they could learn lessons from us.
PM: As I've just explained to you, President Barroso is amused at the suggestion that anything he said anywhere would be reported in the Australian media as about Australia.
We were laughing about it a little bit earlier today so he's obviously crystal clear on that in his own mind, and I'll finish answering your question.
What I have done in the lead up to the G20, both in the letter that I co-authored President Lee of South Korea, in the remarks I made yesterday at the B20, is I have acknowledged the work that Europe has done  -  you know, things have been done in the eurozone which have made a difference, there has been action on banks, there have also been by individual countries action on structural reform. But it is clear that more needs to be done and it's in Australia's national interest that more be done.
It's in our national interest to have the most resilient and strongest global economy that we can and at a meeting like this, where leaders come together to talk about the global economy in a grouping that was born out of the Global Financial Crisis, after the events in Greece and Spain and ten days before a major meeting in Europe, I don't think it's going to come as any surprise to anyone that people are here talking about events in the eurozone, me included, and many other leaders.
But I would refer you to what I've just said to Dennis. The particular remarks of Mr Barroso that you are referring to were given in answer to a Canadian journalist who was making a reference to why the people of North America should care about or support or assist the people of Europe.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr Barroso's statement to The Australian the night before was in direct reference to your letter and he did suggest through a spokesman that you should acknowledge what the Europeans have already achieved.
Do you feel that you could have made more of what the Europeans have achieved in your letter?
PM: Well I did refer to what the Europeans have achieved in the letter that I co-authored with President Lee and I did refer to it in my speech yesterday.
If Mr Barroso that any concerns about anything, and I've said given I've spoken to him on several occasions today, I think he probably would have expressed them and he did not.
All he's done was express some surprise that his name is being bandied around in Australia. But of course he's always welcome in Australia, we were very pleased to host him when he came.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, any response to the result of the Greek election, and one of the leaders you had some informal words with today was Barack Obama. Can you give us a flavour of any discussions?
PM: Look, I have not discussed directly with President Obama the circumstances in Greece or the elections in Greece.
What I said yesterday remains true today, which is it's in Australia's interests, it's in the interests of the world to see stability in the eurozone. Karen.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, following up from Mark's question, we did see you though with President Yudhoyono chatting with President Obama. Can you give us an idea of what you talked about?
PM: We were actually referring to the fact that President Yudhoyono is very shortly to visit Australia and that he will be in Darwin.
And of course when President Obama came to Australia he visited Darwin.
JOURNALIST: Did you talk about American troops being based in Darwin?
PM: President Yudhoyono and I have on a number of occasions talked about the marines who are training in the Northern Territory, and as you may recall at the East Asia Summit there was a suggestion about the use of these marines in training exercises in our region for disaster relief.
For all of the obvious reasons, obvious and far too tragic reasons, when the East Asia Summit comes together disaster relief has been a focus because we've needed to go to each other's aid so many times.
President Yudhoyono is very enthusiastic about that suggestion.
JOURNALIST: Just to clarify, when the three of you were talking, did you speak about the marines?
PM: Only insofar as noting that of course that President Obama was there at the time that he announced the  -  I announced with President Obama the rotational training in the Northern Territory. It wasn't a comprehensive discussion.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Wayne Swan has said that Gina Rinehart's bid on Fairfax is a threat to our democracy.
Is that something that concerns you?
PM: Well I think it's very important that there is freedom of expression in our media, and that there is the ability for journalists to tell stories their way and for there to be editorial independence.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what gives you confidence that there is the political will in Europe to deal with the current crisis, and second related question, what's your message to the markets coming out of here?
Given there's still quite a lot of market jitters.
PM: The G20 will be in session tomorrow and a communiqué will be issued, so in terms of what the G20 will say to the world including those on our  -  who trade on markets, that will come out tomorrow and be clear from tomorrow.
What I would generally say of course about Australia, I'd say there's every reason for optimism about our economy when you look at our underlying strengths, our strong growth, our low unemployment, our prudent public finances, our strong banks and the list goes on.
On the eurozone, European leaders including Chancellor Merkel, have been very clear about their determination to see the eurozone continue, to see the integrity of the eurozone continue, and so I think their words are valuable words and speak of their very clear intention to work together on the current stresses and strains in the eurozone.
As I've said to you tonight and, you know, in the letter and in the speech and Wayne Swan and I have said on a number of occasions, actions have been taken and those actions are, it's been good to see those actions.
They were important actions, but it is transparent to all that more needs to be done.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned your meetings with your Italian counterpart.
One of the things you discussed, we understand, you talked about the detention of Melinda Taylor.
Senator Carr's been in Libya and has issued a statement with some requests for Libya.
Can you give us any update, has there been a response from the Libyan Government, is there anything you can tell us about the situation involving Melinda Taylor?
PM: I'm not in a position to take things beyond Senator Carr's statement from earlier today, so I'll have to refer you domestically to Senator Carr on that.
I did raise Melinda Taylor's case and the detention of the other ICC personnel with the Prime Minister of Italy given the ties that there are  -  ties of history between Italy and Libya, I thought that that was an important thing to do and certainly the Prime Minister understood why we would be so concerned about an Australian national in that position, and why more broadly people would be concerned about the detention of people who work for the ICC.
JOURNALIST: And we heard that President Obama and his Russian counterpart had discussions about Syria.
Did you talk about Syria with anyone today? Do you have any confidence that things are going to change in Syria and that there will be moves to stop the violence there?
PM: Look, in the margins of the meeting I've talked to people about Syria.
I'm aware that Presidents Obama and Putin have put out a joint statement today.
Australia's position continues to be as we've articulated it to date.
I think it's good to see the statement from Presidents Obama and Putin, the horrific violence in Syria would break anybody's heart, certainly the violent scenes we've seen involving children in particular would break anyone's heart.
We want to see an end to that violence. We want to see the Kofi Annan peace plan work. We want to see the end of the Assad regime.
And President Obama and Putin I think put it well in their statement today when our aspiration for the people of Syria is that they get a democratic choice about who rules them, and they get the opportunity to live in a peaceful nation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, back on Europe, President Barroso this morning also made a reference to the US and the fact that Europe's problems at the moment were not entirely Europe's fault; it started in the US. It was quite a pointed reference.
Do you agree that the European problem is partially a problem from the US that they inherited, and perhaps the US have to cooperate with them more rather than, as he said today, give them lessons in how to fix it?
PM: Well, we're all here working together at the G20 and I think that's the appropriate response.
Let's remember the G20 is an organisation that has two roles.
It was born of crisis, no doubt about that, the Global Financial Crisis, born of crisis and is still playing a role in responding to difficult circumstances in the global economy.
It does of course have another role which is in a changing global order with such new and significant players as China and India.
It is important that the most major economies of the world are round the table to talk more broadly about how we will work together and cooperate together, what, if you like, the accepted norms should be as we seek to grow the global economy.
But as for any statements by President Barroso, he can speak for himself on the statements.
Just take the last two and then I'll go.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said your letter yesterday was a talking point among the other leaders.
From speaking to the other leaders today, what's been their response if any to your Australian way speech and have they heard your Australian way speech?
PM: Look, I haven't been wandering around today talking about my speech from yesterday.
It was a speech to the B20; it was intended for business leaders.
The letter that I co-authored was referred to by some leaders when I spoke to them and it was also directly referred to in the discussions in the room.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's talk that the communiqué will be a roadmap for the global economy.
Is a roadmap enough and what does the roadmap look like to you?
PM: Well I'm not going to pre-judge what's in the communiqué, but for the global economy we need to see balanced growth in the global economy.
Now that does mean that we need to see a resolution of the problems in Europe. But it means more than that as well.
It means standing firm against protection and increasing trade, and the freedom of trade, which is why I think the trade facilitation area is an important piece of work for this G20 meeting, making sure that we can trade more freely between countries.
We need to see countries deal with imbalances. We've got surplus countries and deficit countries.
We've got countries that need to increase their savings and engage in fiscal consolidation.
We've got countries that need to increase their domestic demand.
Of course we need global institutions and global architecture to be robust, which is why the resourcing available to the IMF is an important question.
And right around the world countries need, within their own domain, to be focussing on structural reforms which will enhance their ability to provide for their people jobs and growth.
Now inevitably when we come to forums like this we talk a lot of economic talk.
That's to be expected, that's what we're here for, but put at its most simple what we're talking about here is people in the nations of the world having the opportunity to have a job, get a good job, provide for their families and have a decent life, and we know as we meet today that millions of people including 75 million young people don't have that opportunity because of circumstances in the global economy.
We'd all wish better for them, and that's what we're trying to do here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you give us a sense of what the tone of the references were to your letter in the session today, and why you actually took the step of having an open letter in the first place?
PM: Well open letters are a very commonly used way of leaders communicating views, so I think you'll find this G20 and other G20s a number of open letters have been issued, and obviously I've issued an open letter.
You do that to make your views known. You come here to make your views known. And what's my job here, it's to make my views known because the views I'm putting here are in Australia's national interest.
The letter was referred to in the meeting by, I think, Colombia, and you know obviously as I've talked to leaders and it's been referred to by others.
Thank you. 



PM: Thank you very much. I've been pleased to participate in the G20 Summit here in Mexico.  My engagements here in Mexico have reinforced in me how strong the Australian economy is. 
It really is an island of strength in a world of economic upheaval, and someone remarked to me in those terms about just how strong the Australian economy is.
And all Australians should be proud about our strong economy because we built it together. 
But we also have a stake in a stronger, more resilient global economy. 
In a globalised world, all of our fortunes are ultimately interlinked. 
That's why I am pleased to report that at the G20 here in Mexico, leaders have made progress on two fronts:  first on the immediate situation in Europe, and second on the current and longer term challenges facing the global economy. 
On Europe the G20 met at an important time. The current phase of the problems in Europe were started with the inconclusive election results in Greece and of course in a few days time there will be a very important meeting of the European Union attended by all 27 nations, including the 17 nations of the eurozone; 13 members of the eurozone are not G20 countries and we are not represented here. 
Here at the G20 world leaders outlined a plan for addressing the crisis in Europe, and a plan for growth and jobs. 
The plan makes very important advances on a long-term solution to the current problems facing Europe. 
First and foremost, there was a resolute and firm commitment to growth.
All G20 members committed to strengthen global growth and restore confidence. 
And that's growth accompanied by fiscal discipline, not growth or fiscal discipline, but growth and fiscal discipline. 
Second, European leaders committed to take all necessary steps to safeguard the integrity and the stability of the euro area. 
They acknowledged that this requires addressing the competitive imbalances within the euro area, including by continuing to undertake structural reforms at the national level. 
Third, there was a significant advance towards greater European integration  -  more Europe, not less- based on irrevocable economic ties.
As outlined in the communiqué, Europe is moving to greater integration of its banking system. 
That includes working towards a Euro Area Wide Deposit Insurance Scheme, bank recapitalisation and joint supervision of their banking system. 
This is a significant development which will help break the negative feedback loop between the stressed banks and governments with significant debt burdens.
Euro area leaders are also working towards all-important fiscal integration. 
Steps in this direction will strengthen the EU project now and into the future. 
In this context, euro area leaders also committed to use euro-wide financial instruments to spur growth such as investment through infrastructure bonds. 
On the world economy, the most significant immediate outcome of this meeting has been the increase in the resources available to the IMF. 
All up $456 billion has been added to the resources of the fund, including the $7 billion from Australia which was pledged in April.
This is a concrete illustration of the global community pulling together. 
There is now extra financial ballast to support the global economy in these times of ongoing uncertainty.
It's a breakthrough in terms of the countries' committing resources as well  -  big and small, including many developing nations. 
This is an important outcome which Australia has been advocating strongly for over the last nine months. 
Australia also co-chaired the G20 Working Group that helped deliver this outcome.
The G20 is also continuing to drive efforts to strengthen financial regulation.  Leaders committed to the timely, full and consistent implementation of the agreed measures to support a stable and efficient financial system.
The G20 also reaffirmed and advanced its commitment to free trade. 
World leaders formally committed to resist protectionist measures, the stand still and extended it until 2014.
They also agreed to make trade facilitation for global trade negotiations, keeping momentum in the WTO, so a very important outcome. 
We know free trade is a driver of growth, it's a driver of jobs and as a result Australia strongly welcomes these outcomes.     
On the broader challenges facing the global economy, the Los Cabos Growth and Jobs Action Plan represents an important statement.
The plan is important for at least three reasons.
First it commits leaders to country specific actions to promote growth.
In the case of Australia we are committed to ongoing investment in skills, tax, and transfer reform and investment in infrastructure.
China committed to progress its ongoing work towards exchange rate flexibility and reducing its current account surplus.
The US committed to work to avoid the upcoming fiscal cliff which it faces.
Second, countries committed to report transparently on their progress against these commitments.
Finally, and most importantly, this compact for the first time introduces a level of mutual accountability.
Countries' performance will be subject to peer review. If you like, we will be holding each other's feet to the fire. This is an important development for the G20.
So all in all, it's been a productive summit at a challenging time for the global economy.
We've made good progress, but as is always the case, the task we face to restore global growth is an ongoing challenge.
In these times when the global economy is such a strong talking point, Australians can continue to have confidence in their own economic situation.
Our economy is growing, we are creating more jobs, inflation is low, our Government's finances are strong.
Now, there will continue to be, no doubt, further problems and potentially further stumbles on the road to global recovery.
But throughout all of that, Australia with its strong economy will stand tall.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's in the action plan specifically with jobs and growth in Australia?
PM: Well as I've outlined it records our commitments to work in skills, to work in tax and transfer reform and investment in infrastructure.
Obviously the entirety of our Government's strategy has been focussed on jobs and productivity, so the measures that you are quite familiar with back at home are all about focus on jobs
We have a number of those things appear in this action plan. 
We'll always put jobs first. We did during the days of the Global Financial Crisis and will continue to do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said there would be significant developments and Europe agreed, that the eurozone members would agree to greater integration yet in the communiqué the eurozone said that they only had intentions to consider concrete steps toward more integrated financial architecture.
That sounds to me as though they're hedging their bets. Have they agreed to that or can you explain that in the context of your comments?
PM: Well I think we can and should have confidence that European leaders understand the severity of the issues which they face.
There was much discussion here at the G20 about the need for recapitalising  banks in Europe, greater banking integration, greater fiscal integration, much focus on discussions about the next steps forward in Europe.
The communiqué you have before you records those discussions at the G20 but, of course, at every step of the way it has been clear to all that European leaders themselves meet before the end of the month.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why did the United States not contribute anymore to the IMF?
PM: That's been a continuing situation for the United States so it's not new here at this G20 meeting.
It relates to the need for legislation and Congress approval which President Obama obviously believes would not be forthcoming so it's a specific situation for the US and it's not new at this G20 Summit.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the communiqué suggests that the money to IMF is not specific to any particular region it's available to all members.
How significant is that, is there concern by some countries that they didn't want the money to just go to Europe? 
PM: It's always been the position of the IMF and appropriately so, that its resources are about the whole world.
The IMF is there for the whole world, and so that is recording the fact of the IMF position and what is understood by leaders to be the position. That in my view is not new either.
JOURNALIST: Why do they need to say that? 
PM: Well I think it's just recording the simple fact that that's what the IMF does.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on trade, there was some expectation before the summit that the trade protectionism standstill would be extended two years. The communiqué only said one year. Was there some debate about that? Are you satisfied that there was a strong commitment against protectionism?
PM: Well clearly the words in the communiqué have been agreed so all leaders have agreed that there will be no lapse into protectionist measures and the standstill will endure to 2014.
From Australia's point of view, we are a great trading nation and because we are a great trading nation and we can confidently make our way in the world, we always press to see freer and freer trade, it's in our interests  -  we're good at it.
Obviously, nations have got a variety of perspectives on these things and it can be very hard for nations to resist a lapse into protectionism.
At the very first G20 Summit I attended, I made the point that I thought the real pressure to return to protectionist measures would actually not come in the immediate aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis but in the long years afterwards, as a number of nations continue to experience low growth, high unemployment and be in the business of fiscal consolidation  -  that is cutting back government expenditure of ten services that communities have come to rely on.
It was in those circumstances that leaders would feel the most pressure to return to protectionist measures.
So I think it's good that there is an extension of the standstill. Of course that means it will fall to Australia to be in the chair at the G20 when what lies beyond the days of the agreed standstill is defined.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) how would you describe the role that the German Chancellor Ms Merkel played, was she constructive at all? 
PM: Oh absolutely, constructive.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you describe today's actions as bold and decisive, and how confident are you that there will be short-term decisions by the Europeans, particularly in relation to banking changes such as the Banking Deposit Insurance Scheme?
PM: Well I answered that question when I responded to Simon. So I refer you to those words.
Yes Karen.
JOURNALIST: While you've been in the meeting today we've got news that Julian Assange is in the Ecuadorian embassy in London and is seeking asylum there. Can I get your response to that and how would you characterise Australia's relationship with Ecuador, and has your government had any contact with the Ecuadorian government over this issue?
PM: Well Mr Assange's decisions and choices are a matter for Mr Assange. We, our officials, our consular officials, will be in contact with him and also with Ecuador in London about this, but his decisions in relation to this matter are for him to make.
I would make this point, that Mr Assange has been in receipt of consular assistance every step of the way. Indeed the Foreign Minister has remarked that he has received more consular assistance than any other Australian in a comparable period.
He's received the benefit of full consular support and of course Australia will continue to support Mr Assange, just as we do support any Australian overseas who faces legal difficulties or dilemmas.
JOURNALIST: And why do you think he's saying that you have abandoned him then?
PM: You'd have to ask Mr Assange that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, he says that you are not protecting him from being extradited to a foreign country that applies the death penalty for the crime of espionage and sedition.
PM: Well, let's be very clear about this. Australia opposes extradition in death penalty cases. We do that for every Australian citizen.  We would do that for any Australian citizen.
The legal matters that Mr Assange faces are matters of a sexual complaints nature involving the laws of Sweden, so that is the legal issues that Mr Assange faces.
But the position of the Australian Government on death penalty cases and extradition is well known and applies for every Australian citizen.
JOURNALIST: So you'll go into bat for him if the US tries to extradite him to America?
PM: Well you're dealing with hypotheticals here and I'm not prepared to hypothesise about an individual, but I am going to be very clear with you.
For any Australian citizen, at any time, in any circumstances, we oppose extradition for death penalty cases.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on the UN Rio Summit you're about to go to. What would be your measures of success for that summit?
PM: Well the purpose of the Rio Summit is to talk about sustainable development, sustainable global growth, sustainable in two senses: environmentally and socially.
As a nation, I think we can point to a proud track record of both work in the environmental area and in the social policy area to create a fair nation that is very conscious of preserving our beautiful natural environment, including now extending to our marine environment through the marine reserves that Minister Burke has announced, so I will be speaking on those kind of questions when I get to Rio.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just to take you back to your first comments about the G20 itself and how this meeting over the last couple of days reaffirms your confidence in how strong the Australian economy was-
PM: Correct.
JOURNALIST: Is that because you're surprised about just how dire the situation is in Europe and globally after talking to all the world leaders.
PM: No, that's because of how strong the Australian economy is and so it's the subject of a lot of focus and a great deal of envy around the world.
When I go through how our economy is performing with other leaders, when I tell them about our growth rates, about our unemployment rate, about the situation of being Triple A rated by all major credit agencies, that we've been upgraded; their common response is to sigh with a certain degree of wistful envy because most of them are facing situations where they are seeing no growth, or very low growth, they are facing very high and persistent unemployment.
Many have sovereign debt issues  -  which of course have been well canvassed at this meeting and in other meetings  -  many of them are facing downgrades.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) the Australian way?
PM: I talk proudly about Australia and the Australian way in all circumstances.
JOURNALIST:  How was the relationship between European and non-European leaders inside that room? We've heard last Francois Hollande from France  -  he's concerned about getting advice from outside of Europe (inaudible). Did you detect any of that in the room?
PM: Look the situation in Europe is a stressful one. A stressful one for European leaders and, you know, and consequently I'm not surprised that people are feeling that pressure; that pressure is real.
But we come here to the G20 to talk between leaders about circumstances in the global economy. And what happens in the eurozone matters for the global economy. That's why it's been the subject of discussion here.
Of course European leaders will meet towards the end of the month, 27 of them, 17 in the eurozone, and have very detailed discussions.
But you would expect that a body focused on the future of the global economy and its current real stresses and strains  -  you would expect it to talk about circumstances in the eurozone.
I mean to put that to you very frankly, can you imagine the alternative?
Can you imagine that leaders of the top 20 economies in the world would have gathered at this time and not spoken about the circumstances in the eurozone?
I mean, clearly that's absurd. It can impact on the global economy. We live in a very interconnected world.
This is a severe set of circumstances and consequently it was the subject of discussion.
In terms of relationships between leaders, I think there was very constructive engagement on all questions, even some very difficult questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, were there any other discussions on the margins of the summit (inaudible)?
PM: Look I had the opportunity during the course of the two days to actually speak to all attendees, so it's a good opportunity because of the relatively small number of people who attend this meeting to be able to get round and speak to your counterparts so I've had the opportunity to do that.
I've just had a bilateral meeting with the President of Mexico where I congratulated him not only on the successful hosting of the G20, but Mexico has announced that it will become a party in the Trans-Pacific Partnership talks.
Australia is obviously involved in the Trans-Pacific Partnership talks. Canada has also announced that it is joining the TPP at this meeting. That is good news.
We are talking about a trade arrangement, the better facilitation of trade between nations that represent around 30 per cent of the world's GDP.
Thank you very much.



UNITED NATIONS SECRETARY-GENERAL: I had a very good meeting with the Prime Minister of Australia. It has been a great pleasure for me and an honour to work with the Prime Minister during many months, not only on regional issues but global issues.
She has been eloquently contributing to overcoming European crisis, or overall the global financial crisis. I was very much interested by what she was eloquently presenting her views on the ways and means about overcoming these problems.
And I'm also grateful for such a strong supporting partnership the Australian Government and people have been rendering to the United Nations in coping with all global challenges.
And today, I thank the Prime Minister for her accepting my invitation to serve as co-chair of the Millennium Development Goals Advocates.
I have established the MDG Advocates, composed of distinguished world leaders of government and business communities and civil societies. They are the experts (inaudible) people to accelerate this MDG process.
Now we have only two years and half to go before we hit the target of MDG 2015.
Member states have discussed during this Rio+20 Summit what would be the successor and how we can carry on these MDGs.
I am encouraged that member states have agreed to establish Sustainable Development Goals, and I really count on the Prime Minister´s strong, visionary leadership and courage in leading this MDG Advocate group, and I really am looking forward to working very closely with her.
And I'm also very happy to work in the context of PIF  -  Pacific Islands Forum. I was invited by the Prime Minister last year and I visited and had some meetings.
I'm looking to have another such round of UN-PIF high-level meetings on the margins of the General Assembly in September.
Thank you.
PM: I've been delighted to accept the Secretary-General's offer.
The Millennium Development Goals are about attacking poverty.
They're about things like halving the number of people who live in absolute poverty, getting people clean water, getting them access to food, to vaccines, to disease treatment, dealing with infant mortality rates, primary school education.
Some progress has been made but more needs to be done, so I'll be very pleased to work with the Secretary-General and the President of Rwanda, pushing the Millennium Development Goals and their realisation by 2015.
I've spoken to the Secretary-General about Australia's contribution in aid. We are continuing to increase our aid contribution.
We did make a difficult decision to push back by $1 million, the point at which we will realise a 0.5 per cent GDP contribution, but since the Government was elected in 2007 we've increased our aid by 60 per cent, and it will increase each year.
So Australia is working hard, we've got a lot to do in our region and across the world, and I'm very thankful for this invitation and very honoured to accept it.
MODERATOR: Thank you. We're very pressed for time, we have time for one question only.
JOURNALIST: Mr Secretary-General, what do you hope that Prime Minister Gillard can achieve in this role exactly, and also, given that Australia starts a carbon tax in a week's time, how do you view Australia's efforts or contribution to the effort on climate change?
UNITED NATIONS SECRETARY-GENERAL: Australia can provide a good (inaudible) inspirations for many in the developing world. The scorecards of the MDGs are uneven, depending upon the countries.
Australia is one of the few countries whose economy and whose development have been continuously making good progress, therefore these kind of good examples could be used as a source of their inspiration.
The MDG Advocate groups are composed of very dedicated committed world leaders, business leaders, government leaders and civil society, so she can lead these people together with the President of Rwanda.
On climate change, Australia has again been a strong supporter and Australia has been leading by example. We must address this one. A lot of areas of our lives have been impacted by the climate change phenomenon. We have to address this one.
This can solve many, many issues. All these global challenges which we are facing, experiencing, climate change (inaudible) water scarcity, energy shortages, all of these are interconnected. So that's why I am asking that all these issues should be addressed comprehensively in an integrating way.
That's why I´m emphasising the importance of energy. This can trade all the threat in addressing climate change; water, food, global health issues.
I really count on Australia's continuing leadership.
Thank you.
PM: Thank you. 



Australia today became a founding partner of a new international organisation, the Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI), which is designed to promote green growth partnerships between governments, business and NGOs.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Lee of South Korea were present to witness the signature by Australia's Ambassador to Brazil Brett Hackett and South Korean Foreign Minister Kim Sung-hwan of a treaty to establish the new organisation at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (Rio+20).
The agreement marks the GGGI's evolution into a fully-fledged international organisation that will promote partnerships across developing and developed countries, experts, academics and the private sector to pursue models of sustainable, climate-resilient development. Speaking at the Rio+20 conference in Brazil, the Prime Minister said Australia was proud to be working alongside our core partners, the Republic of Korea and Denmark, in establishing this hub for green growth. The Government believes the GGGI has the ability to deliver tangible results by shifting markets in developing countries on to green, low carbon pathways. The GGGI was originally created in 2010 by the Republic of Korea as a non-profit institution to support the creation and diffusion of sustainable economic development.
As a core partner of the Institute, Australia has strongly supported the Republic of Korea in converting the GGGI to an international organisation and has committed AUD$10 million over the 2011-12 and 2012-13 financial years. 
Australia's international participation in the GGGI complements domestic efforts to achieve low carbon economic growth and mitigate climate change. 
Australia's Clean Energy Future package, which will see a price on carbon start on
1 July 2012, is supported by the Republic of Korea's legislative decision to implement its own emissions trading scheme.
The Clean Energy Future package will also encourage investment in research and development in renewable energy through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency.
The GGGI is headquartered in Seoul and has regional offices in Copenhagen, Abu Dhabi and London. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for the Environment and Sustainability Tony Burke today announced a new program to link indigenous expertise and modern technology to improve the way we manage our environment globally.
Australia has joined with Brazil, Norway and New Zealand to form the Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities Land and Sea Managers Network.
The program will help share ancient environmental traditions with communities across the globe to create an internationally-focused network of Indigenous land and sea managers.
It will draw on existing networks, such as Australia's Working on Country program which funds almost 700 Indigenous rangers to use traditional knowledge, as well as cutting-edge science to manage over 1.5 million square kilometres of land and sea country.
Speaking at the outset of the Rio+20 conference, the Prime Minister said protecting our environment was a shared task.
That's why we have representatives such as the Australian Indigenous community of Ardyaloon in north-west Australia here at Rio to start the exchange.
Mr Burke said it took Australia a long time to recognise that indigenous rangers were often the best placed people in Australia to provide environmental management to the land and sea country.
“Over the past few years through Working on Country, the number of indigenous rangers has now built up to around 700 - that's 700 additional people engaged in environmental management with all the benefits of traditional knowledge,” he said.
“It's some of the best work our Environment Department is involved with and it's a credit to every ranger that this sort of expertise is now being recognised internationally.
“Every day, including in some of the most remote parts of our continent, there are indigenous rangers conducting surveys, eliminating pests and caring for country.”
Australia will formally kick-start the development of the Network through an international conference in Darwin in May 2013 to bring Indigenous peoples and local communities together from around the world to build the Network.
The Darwin conference will consider practical examples of successful knowledge exchange and call on all participants to help shape the initiative.
More information on the Network can be found at www.nrm.gov.au/indigenous/network



Thank you very much and thank you to our ambassador for that introduction.
Can I welcome the support of our co-hosts for this event: Norway, New Zealand, Tokelau and Brazil  -  thank you very much for your support.
If I was home in Australia I would commence this speech by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet and in the spirit of reconciliation paying my respects to elders past and present.
We do that when we commence a speech in Australia because we want to acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the land.
We want to offer a spirit of reconciliation; it's an important gesture of respect made by our settler society now to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples  -  the indigenous peoples of Australia.
It's also an important recognition of the special connection between indigenous peoples and the lands and waters for which they are custodians.
We're all now more than familiar with the importance of this year as the 20th anniversary of the original Rio Earth Summit.
In Australia, this year marks another momentous 20th anniversary.
On 3 June this year Australia celebrated the 20th anniversary of the Mabo decision of our High Court: the finding that Native Title existed in our nation.
This monumental decision acknowledged the traditional laws and customs of indigenous people by affirming the right of Indigenous people to their lands under Australian law.
So it is particularly fitting that 20 years on from the Earth Summit, after 20 years from the Mabo decision, Australia today joins with our co-hosts to acknowledge and support the profound and continuing connection between Indigenous peoples and their lands and waters.
Today we acknowledge the immensely important work of indigenous peoples and local communities as custodians with knowledge and expertise linking ancient traditions to modern practices as guardians of the natural environment all over the world.
A custodianship, a connection and guardianship  -  each of these are important and intense because there's so many indigenous people and local communities, the health the local eco-systems is vital to their economic livelihoods and social wellbeing.
Last year Traditional Owners of the West Kimberley celebrated the inscription of 19 million hectares of their country on our national heritage list.
The three year journey to include the West Kimberley on this very important list was one of the largest and most complex listings and allowed Traditional Owners to share stories about their culture and ecological knowledge of country, which had been passed down from generation to generation over thousands of years.
All the peoples of the world owe a great debt to the world's indigenous peoples  -  for their custodianship over the land. And sea and all of the peoples of the world share a responsibility to join with the world's indigenous peoples to protect and nourish the land and sea in the future.
Protecting our shared environment is a shared task.
So I am particularly pleased that everywhere today people are building relationships, sharing knowledge and ideas for best practice on land and sea management.
Contributing to the social and environmental health of their own nations, and of the world. And the Australian government is determined to play our part.
So I'm delighted today to announce that we are seeking partners from across the world to work with us to develop an Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities Land and Sea Managers Network.
Yes, protecting our shared environment is a shared task, and so we must come together. That is the purpose of the Network.
In Australia indigenous peoples have played an important role in shaping many of the initiatives that we are proud of.
For example, the Working on Country Program, through which 700 indigenous rangers, funded by the Australian Government, manage the environmental and cultural values of over 1.5 million square kilometres of land and sea.
Over the next twelve months we will be working with our partners and indigenous peoples from around the world to explore and test ways of effectively and efficiently connecting land and sea managers across the world.
Next year, Australia will host an international conference with our partners.
We want participants to help shape this initiative from the ground up. And to develop practical activities that will form a strong foundation for this innovative and well-grounded international network.
I take this opportunity to commend to you our book One Place, Many Stories, Our Country.
It tells the story of the Government's programs supporting indigenous people to care for country, including the West Kimberley story as told by the indigenous people we partner with.
This book is testament to the resilience of Australia's indigenous people and their communities, and the significant contribution they have made to towards conserving and protecting our environment and biodiversity towards sustainable development and poverty eradication.
The Australian Government continues to work with Australia's indigenous peoples for sustainable development outcomes.
The Government invests in a number of innovative programs, the Working on Country indigenous rangers, Indigenous Protected Areas and Indigenous Carbon Farming, but recognise protecting the environment is a shared responsibility.
It is an Australian Government priority to support indigenous people and improve social cohesion.
Better health and economic opportunities, as well as conserve biological diversity and sustainable use of natural resources.
We are determined to ensure that the indigenous people of Australia share in the wealth created by the rich natural resources on their traditional lands.
That is our determination at home, and it is one we extend to the world as well.
We are committed to supporting the indigenous people and local communities to share knowledge and best practice, to conserve biodiversity and to use our natural resources sustainably.
And, most importantly of all, we are committed to doing this in partnership by bringing people together.
It is a very great honour to be here for this launch today.
Thank you very much. 



PM: Thank you very much, and it is a great pleasure to join President Lee and colleagues and friends for this very special event.
Australia is here because we share a vision of a world where growth can be greener, where we continue to see economic growth, and see the benefits of prosperity, but where we no longer have to see economic growth at the price of more and more carbon and more and more pollution and degradation of our environment.
I'm also here because we are a good friend of Korea, and I wanted to pay a special tribute to the leadership of President Lee that has brought us to this moment.
Without his leadership, passion and enthusiasm for this project, we would not be here.
This has been brought together very carefully, but also very quickly.
An organisation that has started to function, now becoming an international organisation today.
President Lee is a good friend of my country, but I believe, in initiating this Global Green Growth Initiative, he will be remembered as a friend of the entire world.
This is a major legacy from his presidency of Korea, and I want to take this opportunity to pay tribute to him.
It's been a pleasure to be involved in the start of this organisation, and I look forward to Australia being involved as it goes from strength to strength.
Thank you. 



Your Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I welcome this historic opportunity to join with leaders of like-minded countries to renew our commitment to the marine environments of the world.
Oceans are the foundation of livelihoods, economies and cultures... a rich source of inspiration and life.
My island home Australia has a great stake in the life of our oceans.
The ocean is of profound innate value to Australians, who overwhelmingly live on the coast.
And Australia has a large stake in the Blue Economy.
So Australia welcomes the resolve expressed here at Rio+20 to step up our efforts for our oceans.
Our oceans are threatened.
Some threats vary in their size and scale in different regions  -  such as pollution, habitat destruction and overfishing  -  then there is the global threat that affects us all, climate change, including the significant resulting problem of ocean acidification.
And we know the ocean challenge is not simple.
Rather, it is a demanding and dynamic work of stewardship and ongoing management.
These are the challenges of sustainable development that governments have been attempting to manage for at least the last twenty years since the first Rio Earth Summit conference.
Australia is a committed guardian of the oceans for which we are responsible as a nation.
And we are a strong advocate for international action to ensure a sustainable future for the oceans of the world.
That is why my Government recently announced our plan to establish the world's largest and most comprehensive national network of marine reserves...
Putting more than three million square kilometres of Australia's oceans under conservation management.
Protecting the habitat for more than half of the world's species of dolphin and whale, home to six of the seven known species of marine turtle and containing thousands of species of fish.
The marine reserves network will include marine creatures and habitats ranging from the great reefs and green turtles of the Coral Sea to the deeps of the Diamantina Fracture Zone to the Blue Whales of the Perth Canyon off Australia's south-west coast. 
It ensures these remarkable natural treasures will be preserved for future generations and showcased for the peoples of the world and the many yearly visitors to our shores.
This achievement fulfils Australia's “Johannesburg” commitment to establish a representative system of marine protected areas by 2012.
We have a strong tradition of working with neighbours in regional fisheries management organisations, especially in the Pacific, to support the sustainable management of their oceans.
Australia is committed to providing practical support for developing countries to achieve their sustainable development objectives. We have doubled our Pacific fisheries assistance over the last four years, to about $11.7 million this year [2011-12].
This funding is helping improve food security in those communities that depend upon fisheries for their livelihood, by working with those communities to better manage coastal fisheries and near shore marine resources.
We have also provided more than $160 million over the past four years to help Pacific Island countries adapt to the impacts of climate change... as well as supporting Caribbean countries to reduce the marine impacts of climate change too.
I am pleased to announce today that we will increase our support for the Coral Triangle Initiative which has been led by my good friend President Yudhoyono.
Over 300 million people in Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Solomon Islands and Timor-Leste rely on healthy marine environments for food, livelihoods and economic prosperity.
The Coral Triangle Initiative is helping empower these communities to sustainably manage and utilise these resources.
We will provide a further $8 million in direct support over four years to augment the $5.4 million we have committed to date. This funding will provide support to Coral Triangle countries to help them effectively manage and utilise marine and coastal resources and ecosystems.
One project we are already funding is the provision of Landsat satellite imagery of Timor-Leste's north coast to the Timor-Leste government. This is a first step in mapping and assessment of the coastal marine habitats of Timor-Leste... a foundation for sustainable coastal management.
And I am also pleased to announce today that, over the next four years, Australia will provide up to $25 million to support the Pacific Oceanscape Framework being developed by the Pacific Islands Forum.
This will fund improved coastal resource management including for fisheries and climate change adaptation, support to Pacific Island countries to ensure maritime boundaries are internationally recognised as well as increased assistance to help address the threat of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.
Australia is proud to be an advocate for the world's oceans...
And we are proud to work with the peoples of the world who live near and depend on the marine environment; indigenous communities island communities or coastal communities.
The oceans of the world feed billions of our people, their wealth generates hundreds of billions of dollars and hundreds of millions of jobs.
They are a treasure we share  -  a treasure we can only benefit from by working together to ensure their sustainable future. 



Her Excellency, the Hon Julia Gillard MP, Prime Minister of Australia, visited Brazil from 20-22 June 2012 at the invitation of Her Excellency President Dilma Rousseff and to attend the Rio+20 conference. The two leaders held official talks on bilateral, regional and international issues of mutual interest.
 Taking into consideration the progress made in recent years towards the strengthening of bilateral relations and with a view to giving expression to the deepening ties and growing shared role of the two countries in the world, President Dilma Rousseff and Prime Minister Julia Gillard agreed to take the Brazil-Australia relationship to the level of a strategic partnership.
The leaders agreed the following statement:
Bilateral Agenda
1. The leaders expressed their determination to strengthen the bilateral dialogue between Brazil and Australia and to increase bilateral cooperation based on the shared values of democracy, human rights, cultural diversity, trade liberalisation, multilateralism, environmental protection, defense of international peace and security, and promotion of development with social justice.
2. The two leaders expressed satisfaction with their growing mutually beneficial bilateral cooperation, including in the context of the Enhanced Partnership agreed in September, 2010. They noted the results of the implementation of the Plan of Action encompassing political, social and economic relations, in areas such as trade, investment, energy, agriculture, science and technology, education, judicial affairs, sports and culture.
3. They welcomed the planned signature of the Agreement on Cooperation on Science, Technology and Innovation, which will support and enhance collaboration among research institutions and industries from both countries.
4. The two leaders agreed to start a program of placement of students and scholars in each other's institutes of excellence, in the context of the Brazilian program “Science without Borders”. They welcomed the signature of Memoranda of Understanding, between the "Group of Eight" and the Federal Agency of Support and evaluation of Postgraduate Education (CAPES) and the National Council of Technological and Scientific Development (CNPq), as well as between the Australian Technology Network of Universities (ATN)and both these bodies.  These instruments will promote bilateral cooperation among institutions of excellence in both countries on postgraduate education and research, as well as the interchange of scientists, students and teachers.
5. President Dilma Rousseff and Prime Minister Julia Gillard also welcomed the progress achieved in strengtheningcooperation in criminal matters and noted with satisfaction the planned signature of the Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters.
6. Both leaders recognised the important role played by Brazilian citizens in Australia and by Australian citizens in Brazil. They decided to improve bilateral cooperation on consular matters.
7. They also welcomed the partnership between Brazil and Australia for the development of trilateral cooperation and the progress achieved in the implementation of projects for the construction of clean water cisterns in Haiti. They welcomed the work carried out by the Brazilian Agency of Cooperation and AusAID with a view to identify further areas for trilateral cooperation in countries of Africa and in East Timor.
8. President Dilma Rousseff and Prime Minister Julia Gillard noted with satisfaction the growing trade and investment links between Australia and Brazil. The important role of business and civil society in ensuring increasing trade and investment flows was underlined.
9. They highlighted the progress achieved in the field of energy and recognised the potential for further cooperation and investment, in areas such as renewable energy, biofuels, oil and gas and mining.
10. The two leaders noted with satisfaction the increase in bilateral investment flows in the agribusiness sector and reiterated their interest in promoting reciprocal technical and business missions with a view to improve cooperation, trade and investment in agribusiness.
11. President Dilma Rousseff welcomed announcement by Prime Minister Julia Gillard that Australia will hold a focus program of cultural activities in Brazil in 2016.
12. The two leaders expect that the entry into force of the bilateral Air Services Agreement will provide the appropriate conditions for the consolidation of air transportation links between Brazil and Australia.
Multilateral Agenda
13. The two leaders expressed satisfaction with the results of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20). Prime Minister Julia Gillard congratulated President Dilma Rousseff on the successful organisation of the Conference and several other events held in Rio de Janeiro on that occasion. She also congratulated the President on her personal role as President of the Conference. President Dilma Rousseff acknowledged the important contribution made by Prime Minister Julia Gillard to the results of the Conference. The two leaders expressed their confidence that the two countries will continue strengthening their cooperation and dialogue on environmental issues and sustainable development, including in its social, economic and environmental dimensions.
14. They underlined that Brazil and Australia have increasingly shared interests in a world being reshaped by globalisation and new patterns of economic growth. This changing world calls for different networks of international partnerships. The two leaders' commitment to a deeper and broader relationship between Brazil and Australia is a recognition of these profound changes.
15. The rapid pace of globalisation brings Brazil's and Australia's interests together more intensely than before. The geographic distance matters less than their shared values and interests.
16. Australia and Brazil share an historic commitment to multilateral institutions, from their founding membership of the United Nations through to their present-day membership of the G20. They see these institutions as vital to bringing together developed and emerging nations and to help ensure prosperity and security in a changing world.
17. They discussedthe present international economic situation and agreed on theimportance of fiscal and monetary measures being set nationally and elsewhere to ensure global stability. They reaffirmed their willingness to deepen cooperation on G20 issues and emphasised the importance of prompt implementation of governance reforms already agreed and the completion of discussions on the formula for the review of IMF quotas.
18. The two leaders reaffirmed the importance of reform of the United Nations to better reflect today's complex international agenda. They reaffirmed their commitment to contribute to the reform of the United Nations, including the reform of the Security Council. They reiterated the importance of increasing the number of permanent and non-permanent members of the UNSC and improving the Council's working methods, in order to make it more representative and responsive to the today's political and economic global challenges. President Dilma Rousseff warmly welcomed Australia's continued support for Brazil as a permanent member in a reformed United Nations Security Council.  Brazilunderlined Australia´s continued contribution to international peace and security under the UN Charter and, in this context, acknowledged Australia's credentials for a non-permanent seat in the UN Security Council for the 2013-2014 term.
19. They also stressed their firm commitment to the settlement of disputes by peaceful means and highlighted the importance of sustained efforts of preventive diplomacy and mediation. They shared the view that the international community must be rigorous in its efforts to value, seek and exhaust all peaceful and diplomatic means available to protect populations under threat of violence, in accordance with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and as embodied in the 2005 World Summit Outcome.Australiawelcomed Brazil´s efforts to deepen discussions and refine concepts related to these issues.
20. The leaders reiterated both countries' strong resolve to support international efforts towards nuclear disarmament, aiming to achieve the peace and security of a world free of nuclear weapons. In this regard, they expressed support for the review cycle of the Treaty for the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). They assigned high priority to the goals identified in the Action Plan adopted by the VIII NPT Review Conference, which includes the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), the beginning of negotiations on a treaty related to fissile materials for explosive purposes and the undertaking of additional efforts for the reduction and final elimination of all types of nuclear weapons.
21. The two leaders recalled the commitment to democracy and the belief in good international citizenship shared by both countries. These values inform their approach to the world, from the commitment to the Millennium Development Goals and protecting the world's environment to their shared contributions to international peacekeeping. These closely shared values underline the commitment of both countries to act internationally to each other's mutual benefit, as well as to the benefit of people of countries most in need. 
22. The two leaders also recognised that Brazil and Australia have much in common in their economic structures, as they are both major exporters of agricultural products, minerals and energy. As their markets are global in nature, it is in the two countries' mutual interest to share expertise on common concerns such as food and resources security and cooperation in science and technology. Bilateral cooperation will help contribute to sustainable economic growth in both countries and beyond, as well as to the food, resources and energy security.
23. President Dilma Rousseff and Prime Minister Julia Gillard shared the view that international trade plays a fundamental role in the promotion of growth and development. They reaffirmed their commitment to the rules-based multilateral trading system and the World Trade Organization's (WTO) role in upholding it. The leaders reaffirmed their commitment to achieving a successful conclusion of the Doha Development Round, as soon as possible.
24. Brazil's commitment to regional integration in South America and Australia's commitment in the Asia-Pacific region were also acknowledged. Both leaders agreed to work together to promote regular dialogue between MERCOSUR, Australia and New Zealand, as agreed in December, 2010, in Foz do Iguaçu.
Strategic Partnership
High-Level Meetings
25. Recognising the important role of the high-level political dialogue in the promotion of bilateral cooperation, the two leaders agreed to intensify contacts between the two nations by committing to regular leaders meetings to discuss key issues of mutual interest to Brazil and Australia as well as shared action in multilateral institutions.
26. The leaders encouraged the regular exchanges of visits between Ministers as well as high-level government officials, for further discussion on areas of mutual interest, as set out in this statement and the Memorandum of Understanding on the establishment of an Enhanced Partnership. They also instructed officials to organise the meeting of the bilateral Trade and Investment Facilitation and Promotion Group as soon as possible.
Priority Areas of Dialogue and Cooperation
27. Officials of both countries were instructed to continue to work together, within the framework of the Plan of Action set out in the memorandum of Understanding on the Establishment of an Enhanced Partnership, to raise the level of engagement and cooperation between Brazil and Australia in the areas of trade and investment, climate change and the environment, agriculture, mining and energy (including biofuels), education, culture and other people--to-people links. They also highlighted the importance of the mechanism of political consultations between the two Foreign Ministries to advance bilateral relations and exchange views on regional and international issues.
28. The two Heads of Government emphasised the importance they attach to develop even further the dialogue on the following areas:
 * 	The Global Economy: As G20 members, both countries recognise that global prosperity depends on close cooperation between the major developed and emerging economies. They agree that the G20 has become established as the world's pre-eminent forum for international economic cooperation, playing a critical role in responding to international economic crisis and addressing longer-term challenges, including reforms to the global financial and monetary systems. They agreed to work together to support effective responses to international economic challenges, setting the path to a durable and sustainable global economic recovery, and long term global prosperity.
 * 	International Security: Braziland Australia share a strong tradition of supporting effective international measures to address global security challenges, including nuclear proliferation and terrorism. The two leaders agreed that with growing global interests in common, Brazilian and Australian foreign policy and defense officials will meet for the first time in a regular dialogue.
 * 	Trade and Investment: The leaders reiterated their strong commitment to the multilateral trading system and, as G20 members, to support open and effective trade to minimise trade-distorting measures. As members of the Cairns Group of Agricultural Fair Traders, they agreed to further strengthen cooperative efforts to progress multilateral agricultural trade reform in seeking a fair and market-oriented agricultural trading system. They agreed to further deepen bilateral trade and investment ties, including through engagement between business councils from each country.
 * 	Resources and Energy: They noted that the two nations are major global producers of resources and energy. They agreed that the two governments would deepen the dialogue and, where appropriate, practical cooperation on issues of mutual interest such as energy security and market volatility, renewable energy and biofuels. They noted upcoming practical examples of cooperation including the visit by a parliamentary delegation from Brazil to Western Australia to study mining in indigenous lands.
 * 	Education: They agreed that the institutions and peak bodies of the respective university and vocational educational systems should cooperate even more closely. They noted that both countries have developed comprehensive scholarship programs through the Australian Government's Australia Awards and the Brazilian Government's Science without Borders program. These programs will encourage and support stronger ties between the two countries, and promote greater understanding between the future government, education and industry leaders, as well as deepening understanding of the respective regions.
 * 	Science and Technology: Braziland Australia share many common environmental conditions and economic structures, including strong agricultural export industries. These industries are beneficiaries of the Agreement on Cooperation on Science, Technology  and  Innovation that has been negotiated between the two countries. They also agreed to increase cooperation on agricultural production and to enhance practical cooperation between science organisations, such as CSIRO and ACIAR in Australia and EMBRAPA in Brazil.
 * 	Development Cooperation: As both Brazil and Australia manage significant international aid programs, they have agreed to intensify cooperation between development agencies, including in the context of the G20 development agenda. Through the Memorandum of Understanding on Development Cooperation, signed in December, 2010, they envisage that both countries' agencies will share their expertise in the management and governance of aid programs.
 * 	Environment and Sustainable Development: Recognising the high priority that must be given to the sustainable development agenda, the two Heads of Government decided to initiate a regular dialogue on sustainable development and environment, including climate change, forests, biodiversity and environmental governance.  The twoleaders reiterated their firm intention to continue their efforts, bilaterally and multilaterally, in favor of sustainability policies.
 * 	Natural Disasters: As leaders of vast countries exposed to extreme weather events, especially in the tropics, as well as being leaders in humanitarian aid to less developed countries, they agree to implement the Memorandum of Understanding for Cooperation on Disasters Resilience. This will enhance the exchange of expertise between the two nations and ensure their governments and communities are best placed to withstand and recover from natural disasters both domestically and internationally.  



PM: As you know I've come to Brazil following the G20 meeting in Mexico. Over the last few days in Mexico the G20 has been talking about plans to strengthen global economic growth.
Of course that's of paramount importance, particularly at this difficult time in our global economy. But growth always needs to be sustainable. Australia is one of the great continents of the world. We are a people who inhabit a continent.
And so, being custodians of a land as diverse and rich in natural habitat as our nation, our focus on sustainability needs to be strong. Economic growth is necessary but we also must be focussing on sustainability.
So I'm pleased to be here at the Rio+20 conference  -  the United Nations conference on sustainable development.
Now this conference is bringing together the nations of the world for the third time in twenty years to collectively set a course for sustainable development.
Now, at its simplest, sustainable development means people having a decent standard of living, but also making sure that we are not compromising the standard of living and the natural environment of our children and the generations to come.
As a developed country, Australia has taken a number of steps to protect our natural environment. Here at Rio, we will be talking about steps on sustainable development for the world.
I'm here, as a leader, to work through issues on sustainable development, and I'm particularly here to support the work to establish comprehensive sustainable development goals for all the world's countries.
I'm also here to work to strengthen the UN institutional settings which are responsible for pursuing environmental matters at a global level.
And last but not least I'm here to support work on oceans, to recognise the value of our oceans, and to ensure that they are better looked after in the future.
Australia's got a proud record of promoting sustainable development.
Whilst here in Rio I will be participating in a number of events to showcase the things that we are already doing, and I've just been to one such event. But we are also here to talk about what is happening in other countries, and to learn from best practice around the world.
In attending this summit I'm also delighted to be here in Brazil. Whilst this is not a full bilateral visit to Brazil, I am the first Australian Prime Minister to come to Brazil.
I'm looking forward to discussions with the President over the period of time that I'm here  -  of course we've just been at the G20 together  -  this is a strongly emerging economy so it is a good time to be here in Brazil's history.
I am very pressed for time, I'll take some questions.
JOURNALIST: The document that the (inaudible) represented to sign off doesn't actually set out exactly what sustainable development goals should be. (Inaudible) What practically do you hope this conference will achieve?
PM: Look, officials have been working long and hard to get text that can be agreed amongst all of the nations of the world.
I'm not going to stand here and pretend to you that what is in that text is going to make some indelible mark on the world's history from tomorrow on.
But I do think this meeting is putting the spotlight on sustainable development, and that's important. I believe it's putting the spotlight too on oceans and that's important.
And in assessing what is being achieved here, I think we do need to remember that for example the Millennium Development Goals had pretty humble beginnings and were a long time in the generation, but they actually have worked.
More needs to be done, but they have worked to channel aid and development monies to most effective uses and to transforming lives. So I think identifying sustainable development goals as something that we need is a modest step forward.
JOURNALIST: Yesterday there was a significant grouping of the High Seas Alliance and a marine biologist who gave a damning assessment of the way that the section of the communiqué that deals with oceans was blocked by the United States and Venezuela amongst others. Where did Australia stand on the oceans part of the document and are you disappointed that it's been blocked by those other nations?
PM: Look, Australia has been working hard to time and get more ambitious language about oceans. Obviously this is a consensus-driven process and so that means that everybody's view get put in the melting pot.
As a said in response to Lenore's question I'm not going to overstate what is coming out of this summit but I do think having a focus on oceans at all is a good thing. It is only relatively recently that the importance of marine environments has come to the fore.
In our own country of course we very proudly announced the largest marine reserves in the world last week. This is a process that's been worked on in our nation over a long period of time. It originally hails from the days of Paul Keating so it's taken a long time to get change but we are achieving some change.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on Julian Assange, what's your knowledge of Nicola Roxon's (inaudible)?
PM: Well I said yesterday  -  I can't tell you chapter and verse. I think you are referring to a letter by the Attorney-General. Obviously I haven't been in a position to receive full briefings about all things in the Australian media but on Julian Assange the position is exactly as I described it to you yesterday.
He has been in receipt of consular support, he's entitled to consular support like every other Australian citizen. Given how long running his matter has been, Senator Carr has noted that he's received more consular support in a comparable period than anyone else.
I'm not going to get involved in speculation but I very clearly said yesterday and let me clearly say it again. The Australia Government always opposes extradition in death penalty cases for Australian citizens  -  anytime, anywhere, any individual.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well look I'm not prepared to comment on reports. I anticipate the Attorney-General will deal with the full letter today.
JOURNALIST: Will you be discussing it with Ecuador's representatives here?
PM: Look, I'm not scheduled to meet with Ecuador. Our High Commission in London is engaged in the process of discussing the matter involving Mr Assange directly with their counterparts from Ecuador in London.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Mr Assange's decisions are a matter for Mr Assange.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well as I've indicated to you I am not pretending that the outcomes here are going to make a huge difference from tomorrow on, I'm not trying to pretend that.
My reference to making change was a reference to a specific initiative in Australia where we have created the world's largest ocean reserves, and so that's something I think we can be proud of.
In Australia we've taken a number of other steps too to protect our environment. Whether it's the historic protections we've provided to areas like Kakadu and Uluru or whether it's our more recent focus on putting a price on carbon, as a nation we've focused on environmental issues.
But there's always things to discuss and things for the world to come together on and I'm here, as a leader, to lend political weight to the discussions that are happening here. 



The Australian Government will partner with non-government organisations to deliver better access to water sanitation methods for more than 1.8 million people across the Pacific, Asia and Africa.
The $97 million Civil Society Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Fund is expected to resource around 40 programs in 20 countries to help rural and urban communities access safe water and learn basic sanitation methods.
Diarrhoea kills 1.5 million children every year and is the second leading cause of death in children under five years old.
This new funding will build on the successful $32.6 million program which was completed in March 2012 to help reduce disease and improve health in some of the world´s poorest nations.
The Prime Minister also announced Australia would commit a further $50 million to the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) to help provide a regular and reliable food supply for the world's poor.
This contribution will assist more than 7.5 million people throughout the world by boosting agricultural productivity, increasing incomes and improving nutrition.
This is an important step towards achieving the Millennium Development Goal of halving poverty and hunger by 2015.
This contribution is in addition to our previous commitment of $50 million in 2010, making Australia the fifth largest donor to the GAFSP. 
The GAFSP Program has seen early results in Togo and Rwanda and signs are positive in other countries.
In Rwanda, farmers are reducing erosion and boosting agricultural productivity. Since 2011, the proportion of land protected against soil erosion has risen from 11 per cent to 27 per cent in the area being treated, potato yields are seven times higher and cereal yields have quadrupled.
In Togo GAFSP support is helping to implement a national agriculture plan and improve seeds, fertiliser and training for small holder farmers which will directly benefit 258,000 people.



In the twenty years since the first Earth Summit, the world's great environmental challenges have grown.
Biodiversity is being lost.  
Many oceans and forests are threatened.
Carbon emissions and other pollutants have grown dramatically.
But in the same twenty years, the strength of the world's peoples to meet those challenges has grown too.
The global economy is twice as large as it was in 1992.
Economic growth has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty  -  building new lives of hope and building the capacity for communities to protect their natural heritage.
New technologies have emerged  -  and continue to emerge  -  driving green growth and clean energy use.
And even through difficult days, international determination for shared action towards shared goals has endured.
World leaders and their peoples have united in the past to achieve great environmental goals. 
We can do it again.
That is why Australia believes that this Conference must agree to develop and then work towards a set of Sustainable Development Goals.
Everyone here knows that collective action is hard  -  and global collective action even harder.
Because through global collective action we seek complex change, with imperfect knowledge, through difficult actions.
Everyone here also knows that setting goals is important.
Because when we set goals, we put before ourselves a task which is practical and empirical. 
To allocate resources with rigour  -  to define progress through a measure of our outcomes, not of our efforts or intentions.
And even when we set ambitious goals, which stretch our resources and test our resolve, we bring a precision and clarity to our work together  -  and in doing so we set the firmest possible basis for long-term success.
The Millennium Development Goals have transformed global thought and action against extreme poverty.
While much remains to do, it also true that much has been done.
Including being on track to halve the number of people living in poverty by 2015.
Yesterday I was delighted to accept an invitation from the UN Secretary General to co-chair the Millennium Development Goals Advocates.
And through this role Australia will do its part in the vital ongoing task of pursuing the MDGs.
Our own aid program is set to increase sixty per cent in the next five years.
This is an act of a generous people  -  but undoubtedly it is one prompted by a determined global project.
And we believe global thought and action against environmental challenges can be similarly transformed.
Friends, Sustainable Development Goals are not the only important objective we will discuss here.
The world needs new models of clean growth.
This must be grounded in an acceptance of this vital fact:  that a growing global economy also consumes more energy. 
Innovative new mechanisms like the Global Green Growth Institute, launched yesterday as an international organisation, can help.
Australia is playing our part, adopting market-based mechanisms like carbon pricing and investment for renewable energy technologies.
And as an island continent we understand the world needs a new focus on the health of our oceans and on the‘blue economy' they underpin.
Australia welcomes the resolve expressed here at Rio+20 to step up our efforts for our oceans. 
Australia is pleased to see recognition in this conference of the need for greater action to conservethe high seas and their resources.
We hope that all states will act urgently on this global issue by developing a strengthened oceans governance regime under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, including for the establishment of marine protected areas.
We welcome agreement to take action to eliminate fisheries subsidies that contribute to over-fishing.
And to address the affects of climate change on our oceans, including acidification.
Again, Australia is playing our part.
Supporting collective action to restore depleted fish stocks, conserve marine ecosystems and improve the science of ocean management.
With additional funding of $8 million to the Coral Triangle Initiative and up to $25 million to the Pacific Oceanscape Framework.
And establishing a national network of marine reserves, placing some three million square kilometres under conservation management.
Women must be able to fully participate in and benefit from sustainable development.
I welcome warmly the Summit´s affirmation of the vital role of women in all areas of sustainable development.
I was proud to be one of the Leaders supporting the Call to Action on Women earlier today.
Friends, with unity we can achieve change and that unity must embrace the world's women and all of our people.
And the world must listen to the knowledge of indigenous people and work with them as custodians of their lands and waters.
Yesterday Australia launched the Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities Land and Sea Managers Network, a forum that will help us listen and learn.
Friends, Rio+20 has brought us together for the third time in 20 years.
We are  -  each of us  -  greatly privileged to be present here today.
Let us greet this privilege with passion and perspective.
We are not here this week just to talk to each other. 
We're here to decide, to agree  -  and then to act.



PM: I´ve spoken this morning to the Minister for Home Affairs, Jason Clare, who has been in our operations centre and been briefed on the boat sinking between Indonesia and Australia.
I´ve also spoken this morning to the Acting Prime Minister, Wayne Swan. At this stage details are sketchy, but what is apparent is that there has been a large loss of life at sea. 
This is a very distressing and tragic incident. We don´t know the full details yet, but clearly we have lost a number of lives in a very dangerous journey from Indonesia to Australia. 
The Minster for Home Affairs will make a comprehensive statement on the details of what has happened here in the morning Australian time.  The Acting Prime Minister will take responsibility for any national security arrangements that need to be made in Australia.
I, of course, will keep in contact with both of them by telephone.  I have had a brief conversation with President Yudhoyono about this matter. 
Our Indonesian and Australian personnel work well on search and rescue operations and all of our normal cooperative arrangements will be brought to bear in this case. J
OURNALIST: What did President Yudhoyono say to you about it and what was the nature of that conversation?
PM: President Yudhoyono was, of course, distressed about the news. He assured me that we would work together  -  Indonesia and Australia  -  on the rescue efforts. We have good understandings between us about the best way of working together with these kind of incidents.
JOURNALIST: Have the Indonesians reached the boat yet?
PM: Look, I´m not in a position to give you the precise details of this incident.  When I spoke to Minister Clare he´d received a briefing at the operational centre, but was going to take further time to make sure all of the details were clear before he makes a comprehensive public statement. 
JOURNALIST: Do you think this should be the catalyst for some sort of resolution of this policy issue in Australia?
PM: I don't, at this stage, want to talk about policy or other questions. Our focus now is on the search and rescue effort.  Thank you very much. 



Australia will commit $33 million to help developing countries in the Asia-Pacific sustainably manage their oceans, fisheries and coasts.
Speaking at a Blue Economy event co-hosted by the President of Indonesia and the Prime Minister of Grenada, the Prime Minister said that oceans were an important part of sustainable discussions here in Brazil.
We have a large stake in the Blue Economy. It is our livelihood and our culture.
Protecting the world´s oceans has been a major focus of Australia´s contribution to the Rio summit.
That's why we will provide up to $25 million over four years to help Pacific Island countries address illegal fishing and minimise the destruction of marine and coastal ecosystems.
Australia will also commit $8 million to the Coral Triangle Initiative to help our neighbours such as Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Timor-Leste protect native species and sustainably manage marine and coastal resources.
More than 1.5 billion people in developing countries rely on marine resources for their protein intake, and fisheries support 170 million jobs world-wide.
And yet these pressures impact on the people and communities that are most vulnerable, such as those in small island states.
Australia will also work with the World Bank to help shape its new Global Partnership on Oceans.
This new partnership will address threats to the health, productivity and resilience of the world's oceans.  



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced Australia would provide $500,000 over two years to support the role of women in building and restoring peace in the Asia-Pacific region.
N-Peace connects women in civil society organisations and government to share ideas on issues related to women, peace and security.
The funding will also support the 2012 N-Peace awards which showcase women who have showed leadership as peace advocates and men who support women's empowerment for peace and security.
Speaking at the Women Leaders Forum at the Rio+20 United Nations Conference, the Prime Minister said Australia´s contribution would help strengthen gender equality in Nepal, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste and Indonesia.
Australia is committed to addressing the impact of conflict on women and to supporting women's contribution to promoting sustainable development. 
This new funding demonstrates our continued commitment to the principles in Australia's National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security which aims to protect women and girls' human rights and promote their participation in conflict prevention, management and resolution. 



That I am here as Australia´s first female Prime Minister  -  alongside so many other female heads of government and several of the world´s most influential women leaders -  is only because of the extraordinary courage and tenacity of generations of women before us and because of the vision and commitment of the United Nations.
The Call to Action we heed today requires the full force of our focus and ongoing resolve.
Women and girls continue to bear the brunt of global challenges and inequalities.
Too many continue to be voiceless.
Too many continue to face unacceptable obstacles to education, employment and leadership opportunities.
The suffering of millions of women diminishes us all and obligates us.
How can we achieve sustainable development if we do not rectify these inequalities?
I commend the work of UN Women, under the valuable leadership of its Executive Director, Michelle Bachelet.
I support the Call to Action not only because the inherent dignity of women and gender equality is a right, but also because it makes profound economic sense.
By some estimates, two-thirds of the world´s illiterate people are women. That´s about 500 million women worldwide who cannot read or write.
According to UNESCO, more than 30 million girls worldwide are not even getting basic primary-level education.
That´s more uneducated girls than there are people in my entire country.
Failure to support women´s education and employment equals billions of dollars in economic losses.
The Asia and Pacific region alone is losing up to 47 billion US dollars annually as a result of women´s limited access to employment opportunities, as well as up to 30 billion US dollars annually as a result of gender gaps in education.
These statistics are graphic testament to the urgent need to elevate gender equality, they underscore the urgency of this Summit and they point to a serious economic blind-spot in boosting global prosperity.
If we are to achieve sustainable development, we must invest in women´s education and training.
We must include women in the workforce.
And we must increase the proportion of women in high-level decision making roles.
Of the 193 members of the United Nations, only about 10 per cent have elected a female president or prime minister.
Women hold less than 20 per cent of the world´s parliamentary seats, in the Pacific only about 2 per cent.
As Michelle Bachelet herself has said: “Democracy grows stronger with the full and equal participation of women.”
As one of the world´s top 20 economies, Australia has a responsibility to contribute to women´s equality globally.
That´s why nearly half of Australia´s aid expenditure in 2009-10 was in support of activities promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women.
Australia has a chance to show real global leadership.
I am delighted that from January next year Australia will actively further UN Women´s work as a member of its Executive Board.
In September last year, I was proud to appoint Penny Williams as Australia´s first Global Ambassador for Women and Girls, to advocate internationally for the empowerment of women, particularly in the Asia Pacific region.
I´m pleased she´s here with us today.
Penny and I are personally committed to improving conditions for women, both in Australia and internationally.
We must forge greater country-to-country links on gender programs and learn from one another.
If the determination and commitment of the remarkable women here today can be amplified globally, we can make our Call to Action a pledge that will benefit generations of women to come. 



I have been here in Brazil over the last few days attending the Rio+20 event and it's a great credit to Brazil that an international meeting of that magnitude has been held in this wonderful city.
During the course of being here over the last few days I've had the opportunity to meet again with the President of Brazil, President Rousseff.
We have come to know each other in the context of the G20 where we attend a meeting each year for economies to come together and talk about circumstances in the global economy.
But we met yesterday and entered a strategic partnership between our two countries which is a recognition that Australia and Brazil can have a more interlinked future.
I actually think that there are a lot of similarities between our two nations.
We both have a very sizable land mass, we are both great agricultural producers, we are both producers of minerals, of commodity that are in great demand in the world, we are both seeing the changes in our economy that that kind of demand for resources can lend.
Both here in Brazil and in Australia we can see a patchwork effect in our economy where the strength of your resources sector can mean some troubled times for other parts of your economy, for example manufacturing.
These are issues, policy issues, structural adjustment issues in our economy which we share and about which we can share perspectives.
We're also nations very focused on clean energy as part of what is going to power our future.
In Australia, we are focused on that through putting a price on carbon which will start on the first of July and focused on it through two new agencies we have developed as part of our carbon pricing package and Clean Energy Future.
The Clean Energy Finance Corporation, a $10 billion fund to partner with the private sector on clean energy developments and a body we're calling Arena which is really about supporting an catalysing the innovation we will need as a planet to see us move in an era of ever growing energy demands to cleaner and cleaner energy sources.
So I'm very much looking forward to the business roundtable discussion.
I think it is a nice symmetry that yesterday the President and I agreement on a strategic partnership between our two countries and here we are today, talking about making that very practical and real by building business to business links.
It's also terrific to be able to start that process off with a celebration.
So we shouldn't give the impression that we are starting this discussion on a clean sheet of paper as if there's been no work together in the past.
There's been good work together in the past but there is more to do to build on that work.
But here today we are seeing the products of the fruit of that good work together with the agreement between Pacific Hydro and Vale.
Pacific Hydro being involved in the development of wind energy here in Brazil and of course your company, Vale being such a global giant.
So this is a good partnership to be able to witness the signing of the memorandum and I think it starts as an example of what we can achieve together through this business dialogue and through the linkages between our two great nations. 



PM: As the Rio+20 conference draws to an end I want to speak about what has happened here over the last few days and what has been achieved.
This meeting is 20 years on from the original Rio Earth Summit  -  the time when the world came together to first address, through this forum, environmental issues.
Here at Rio+20 we have reviewed progress since that original summit and there have been some decisions which will affect the future.
I came here to both participate in this summit and to participate inside events to promote issues of great importance to Australia including the health of our oceans, the importance of clean energy and renewable energy, the wisdom we can draw from our indigenous communities about managing and maintaining our lands and seas, and the important role that women play in sustainable development.
In terms of the outcomes of this meeting, as I said in my contribution to the meeting last night, collective action is hard and global collective action is event harder but things have been progressed here at this Rio+20 event.
First and foremost we have seen on progress on sustainable development goals and I'm very pleased that at this meeting agreement has been reached to develop a set of sustainable development goals to focus our efforts and to drive collective action.
The experience of the Millennium Development Goals has been that having defined goals which can be measured does drive change.
I'm also pleased on the outcome in relation to oceans. There have been some important agreements here.
There is a commitment to address the subsidies which lead to over fishing.
There is recognition of the effects of climate change on our oceans and recognition that we need to address the management of our oceans beyond the exclusive economic zones of individual nations.
We now want to see, following this meeting, a stronger oceans governance regime under the UN convention on the law of the sea and we will work on this in New York.
In addition we wanted to see strengthening of the architecture that enables us to know about environmental issues and to monitor progress.
So I'm pleased that at this meeting there has been agreements to strengthen the architecture in particular there is a strengthening of the role of the UN environment program so that there is an authoritative voice on the environment with universal membership.
There has also been an agreement to replace the commission on sustainable development with a high level political forum because the view was taken that the commission simply wasn't working.
And there's also been a strengthening of the economic and social council so that it can fully integrate sustainable development.
As I said on my way into Rio progress will be made at this meeting and it has been made at this meeting.
I do not believe that this meeting will make change tomorrow but I do believe that the things that have been agreed here will over time make a difference to our world's environment.
Today, in addition to the meeting itself I have attended a number of bilateral meetings.
I've had the opportunity to speak to Secretary of State Hilary Clinton,I've had the opportunity to meet with the Prime Minister of Sweden, Prime Minister Reinfeldt, and I've had the opportunity to meet with the Prime Minister of Nepal, Prime Minister Bhattarai.
So I engaged in three discussions between Australia and those nations.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We discussed a variety of global issues, focused on issues including Syria and Iran  -  so common global challenges.
JOURNALIST: Did you discuss her plans to visit Australia later this year?
PM: She was expressing her delight at being able to visit Australia later this year.
We do have the AusMin forum later this year in Perth.
That is an annual forum where our Defence Ministers and Foreign Ministers meet.
It's held one year in Australia and one year in the United States.
Last time it was held in Australia it was held in Melbourne; it was the first time that Secretary Clinton had had the opportunity to visit Melbourne.
This will be her first opportunity to visit Perth and she's certainly looking forward to it.
JOURNALIST: You talked about how this conference is going to develop goals to be measured. One of the criticisms is that the goals haven't yet been defined.
How long do you think it'll take to define those goals and what are you hoping some of them will be?
PM: There is a process that's been outlined to develop the goals and the time line is associated with the timeline for the Millennium Development Goals.
So the Millennium Development Goals are being reviewed.
We want to see progress in defining sustainable development goals and in 2015 these can be brought together.
The Millennium Development Goals are being reviewed for that purpose.
JOURNALIST: So you think that green groups and others are off the mark when they question progress (inaudible).
PM: As I indicated at the start of my involvement here in Rio, I can certainly understand that there are many groups and many people around the world who would have had an ambition for more progress at this meeting.
The nature of global action is that it needs to be collective, it needs to embrace and involve everyone and this is the process that embraces and involves everyone.
So I do understand that there are people who will look at aspects of what has been resolved here and feel some sense that it's not enough but we shouldn't forget where progress has been made.
I think agreeing to sustainable development goals is progress and once again, looking back on the Millennium Development Goals, they were not easily achieved but once achieved they did make a difference to the driving of global action.
I think we will see a similar progress and similar outcome with the sustainable development goals.
I also think that progress has been made on oceans. This is an important issue for our nation.
At this meeting for the first time we've seen the world think about and move to address issues like subsidies that cause overfishing, issues like the abandoned marine equipment that floats in our ocean, the so-called ghost nets that have come adrift and are there sweeping up marine life and causing them to perish turtles, you know, all sorts of very precious marine life that's under challenge because of this marine debris.
Progress has been made on these issues here at this meeting and it's always important to see a strengthening of governance so that progress can continue to be made.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: This is a leaders-level meeting so I'm here as Prime Minister representing the nation.JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it's two years this weekend since you've become Prime Minister.
I was just wondering how you were going to mark the occasion or whether if there's anything that you particularly know now that you didn't know then about what it's like to be Prime Minister and how you respond to the increased chatter at home that some of your Labor colleagues are unhappy with your leadership?
PM: I've been focused here on my work in Rio and before that at the G20.
I will leave from Rio today and arrive back in Australia on Sunday morning and prepare for the Parliamentary week.
My focus as Prime Minister is always on what I can do to ensure that for the future, we're a stronger nation and we're a fairer nation.
My job is to keep our economy strong today and prepare so it can be even stronger tomorrow and we have made progress on that in the last year, in the last two years, and our economy is the envy of the world even in difficult economic times around the globe.
My job too is to ensure that Australia's get a fair share of the resources boom and that we're managing that strong economy for working people and as Prime Minister I've made progress on that including through the Minerals Resources Rent Tax and our benefits to share the boom with Australians around the nation.
And my job is to make sure our nation is ready for the challenges of the future which is why I've been so determined to ensure we put a price on carbon and tackle climate change and so determined to keep reforming our education system and our health system so both are ready of the challenges of the future.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: My focus is not on the politics or the policy debates. A search and rescue mission is still in progress.
That's my focus and that's the Government's focus.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: No I most certainly don't and I'd refer you to all of the information that Minister Burke released at the time that he released the maps of the marine reserves.
What you will see from that information is that the impact on commercial fishing will be around 1 per cent and Minister Burke's information makes that very clear.
So we're talking about a very very small impact on commercial fishing, we are talking about marine reserves that we manage as conservation zones because of how precious our ocean environments are to us as an island continent and here is this meeting we've been talking about how precious oceans are to the world.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)PM: There are always going to be debates in international meetings where people come from their own perspective informed by the history and contemporary circumstances of their nation but I do think the sustainable development goals are a global mechanism for action and change.
They are goals that the world will set itself so we are not talking about different countries having different goals or different aspirations but the world coming together and agreeing that we need to achieve something by working in common.
JOURNALIST: One of the goals both of Rio and G20 is start phasing out fossil fuel subsidies. You said yesterday that Australia wasn't in the business of subsidising fossil fuels but Treasury estimates (inaudible).
Will Australia start to make more progress on subsidies (inaudible)? 
PM: Well I think we've got to be very careful about concepts and terminology here.
We're not subsidising fossil fuels, we do have a tax system where companies are able to claim tax deductions for materials used in there commercial work and commercial processes so fuel is part of that efficient tax system and dealt with in the same way as other inputs.
What we have focused on in the course of this summit is inefficient fossil fuel subsidies that lead to increased consumption that is the problem that we've been trying to tackle here and have the world tackle where you have subsidy arrangements that actually increase consumption of those fuels.
In our own domestic circumstances, I mean it is not a fossil fuel subsidy but we brought to bear the same kind of analysis when we changed the tax system in relation to fringe benefits which had a perverse incentive for people to get in their cars and drive them and drive them and drive them towards the end of the tax year because if they triggered over a certain kilometre amount then they'd get a bigger tax deduction so we eradicated that because we didn't want there to be some incentive in the tax system that drove unnecessary over consumption.



HOST: Prime Minister, welcome to ABC News 24.
PM: Thank you Lyndal.
HOST: It's been four and a half years since Labor came to Government. There are people still dying making the dangerous journey from, usually, Indonesia to Australia to seek asylum. Do you have any regrets about junking the policies that operated under John Howard?
PM: Well certainly when you see any loss of life at sea it breaks your heart, and I do want to see us, you know, taking effective action so people don't risk their lives on these very dangerous journeys and we've seen too much loss of life in this year's major tragedy, but it's not the only tragedy that our nation's been witness to.
So I think on a time like this, people want to see us put the politics aside and act to get something done.
You may recall Lyndal that a while back we spoke to the Opposition about a compromise, about putting together elements of the Government's policy, the arrangement with Malaysia, with elements of their policy, particularly a detention facility at Nauru.
We put that compromise and it wasn't accepted by the Opposition.
HOST: But in the end the Opposition disagrees with Malaysia and the changes you have made to the legislation that they say takes the protection for human rights out. So you are not going to get their cooperation on Malaysia, are you?
PM: Well I think people can criticise each other's policy solutions, but to get something done then we need to work across the Parliament.
And I do want to be very clear, that we are willing to enact that compromise, which contains elements of the Opposition's policy, and I am willing to keep talking to the Opposition and across the Parliament so that we put the politics to one side and we work together to address the fact that people are risking their lives in these very dangerous journeys.
HOST: But work together on the policy you have already put forward  -  Malaysia with Nauru and Manus Island, and nothing different to that?
PM: Well certainly the Government continues to receive advice that the most effective deterrent is the agreement with Malaysia.
But I'm just trying to be very commonsense and straightforward here. We had a compromise on the table, had an element of the Government's policy, had an element of the Opposition's policy, we thought if we put the two together everybody could come together and support it.
That is still on the table to be accepted. But I'm also open for further discussions with the Opposition and across the Parliament.
HOST: So you are open to possibly changing the position you have?
PM: Look, I'm open to further discussions Lyndal, I can't put it to you more directly or simply than that. I'm open to further discussions.
I think it was very regrettable that on the weekend the Leader of the Opposition ruled out any policy changes or shifts by the Opposition. I think that was regrettable.
I think it is a time where people are looking to us to, you know, put the politics to one side, to stop the exchanges about the past, to try and work together across the Parliament to get something done.
HOST: Your Malaysia agreement would see 4000 refugees come to Australia, with 800 asylum seekers going to Malaysia. Isn't it the case that only a couple of weeks of boat arrivals in the last month would have seen that 800 quota fill up?
PM: The very clear expert advice to us from the same people, indeed centrally the same Departmental Secretary, Mr Metcalfe, who used to advise the Howard Government, as well as this Government, his very clear advice to us was if you enacted the Malaysia arrangement and boats arrived and you sent those people to Malaysia, then that would send a very strong deterrent message up the people smuggling pipeline that if you try and pay a people smuggler to get to Australia, you don't end up here, you end up in Malaysia.
HOST: But only if you're under the 800 number.
PM: And his clear advice to us is he thought returning a boat or a few boats would send that message and send it very clearly. That was his advice. So that is why we put forward the Malaysia agreement.
But Lyndal I do want to be clear.
We've got advice from not party political experts but senior public servants who advised the Howard Government at the time of the Pacific solution, so-called, that this is an effective deterrent. That Malaysia would be an effective deterrent.
But I'm not sitting here now to engage in advocacy about the Malaysia agreement.
I'm sitting here now because I think people want us to work together across the Parliament to get change in this area. I'm prepared to do that. I've been prepared to do that for a long period of time.
That's why we worked with a spirit of good faith towards a compromise that combined a bit of each other's policies and put them together as a package.
The Opposition didn't want to agree to that. That compromise is still well and truly on the table, and I'm open to further discussions.
HOST: Are you prepared at all to look at changing your legislation to put in more human rights protections, or having a look at the issue of Temporary Protection Visas beyond the inquiry?
PM: Well the discussion that we had in the days that the Government was putting forward the compromise I referred to included an expert-led process on Temporary Protection Visas, and whether or not they had any deterrence value, which really is the factual issue, if you like, or policy issue in dispute on Temporary Protection Visas between the Government and the Opposition.
Our view has been they don't have a deterrence value; indeed there's some evidence that they may encourage women and children to get on boats to reunite with their male family member who has come to Australia.
But Lyndal, that's not the purpose of having this conversation now.
The purpose of having this conversation now is to say, you know, I could sit here and Mr Abbott could come on this show in an hour's time and we could both comprehensively go through the policy arguments in favour of what we're saying, and at the end of you devoting a couple of hours of your life to that, then we wouldn't be any further along. I'm trying to say we should get further along.
We should be working across the Parliament. We did put a compromise forward out of a set of earlier discussions.
That is certainly there for the Opposition to agree to, and I'm certainly open to further discussions.
HOST: Are you open to discussions with the Greens at all, or do you see them as not coming anywhere near your policy to be worth talking to?
PM: Well I don't believe that the Greens are going to agree to a package of offshore processing.
It seems to me to just make the most intuitive sense if you put the, you know, sort of politics of opposition and government to one side and just come back to, you know, people working together, it would seem that it's easier for people who both agree that there should be offshore processing to come together and design an offshore processing solution here, than people who don't even agree with offshore processing.
Now I know that is well and truly putting the politics of opposition and government to one side, but I think that's really what the Australian people are looking to us to do.
HOST: Do you have any questions about the search and rescue process involved at the end of last week? Christine Milne, the Greens Leader, has raised a question about whether asylum seeker boats are treated any differently to private yachts or cruise boats. Do you have any question that that is in fact the case?
PM: No. A life at sea is a life at sea.
And the way in which the Australian authorities respond isn't based on who that person is or how they got into distress or, you know, any of that. The motivation is to go and save someone's life.
HOST: We've just had the second anniversary of your ascension to the Prime Ministership. This weekend we'll see the introduction of the carbon tax and the mining tax. Are you absolutely confident that the things you've said will happen, will happen after that? That it will not be as bad as the Opposition has portrayed it?
PM: Well there's no way in the world we're going to see the end of the coal industry on 1 July. No way in the world. There's no way in the world we're going to see Whyalla disappear as a township on 1 July and be wiped off the map.
HOST: But the reality is not much will happen on 1 July, will it, because payments under the tax aren't due until next June?
PM: Well, this is the problem though, isn't it, with the reckless fear campaign from the Opposition.
The Leader of the Opposition has used expressions like ‘a permanent depression;' ‘a wrecking ball through the economy;' ‘Whyalla wiped off the map;' ‘an astronomical increase in the cost of living.'
All of this was going to happen according to the Leader of the Opposition the moment carbon pricing came in, in our economy.
And now he's, you know, trying to furiously backpedal and he's got these very confused analogies about a cobra and a python and on and on it goes.
It's all a long way of saying none of those claims to try and induce fear in the Australian community are true, have ever been true, or ever will be true.
They were all just puffed up false claims for political campaigning purposes by the Leader of the Opposition.
HOST: Because your Government's position, your Government's position at the next election does rest, doesn't it, on the success  -  the perceived success of the carbon tax, doesn't it? If  -  there have been people setting a number of deadlines saying the Government's stocks will improve after the carbon tax has been proposed, after the legislation goes through the Parliament, now maybe after the carbon price begins. If the Government's stocks don't improve when the carbon price is a lived experience, what do you do then?
PM: Well firstly Lyndal I think that misunderstands the whole purpose here. The purpose of putting a price on carbon is to reduce carbon pollution, because we know carbon pollution is causing climate change.
The purpose of putting a price on carbon is so our nation can have a clean energy future. The purpose of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is to take some of that extraordinary wealth that is being generated by this huge resources boom and share it around the nation, so people can feel that they have got a stake in the resources boom too.
That's what's driven us to put in place those two arrangements  -  carbon pricing and the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
HOST: But if Labor loses the next election the Coalition will get rid of  -  is promising to get rid of a lot of what you have implemented including the carbon price and the mining tax and your health reforms and possibly whatever you do with the Gonski reforms. They'll all be gone if you lose the next election, so isn't it critical for you, for that legacy to be in place, for you to win?
PM: Well, it's not about me. It's about our nation's future.
The purpose of being in government, of being Prime Minister, is to drive the changes that give us a strong economy now, let us share its benefits, but also make all of those big, tough, hard, often controversial decisions that end up shaping a stronger, fairer future for this country.
That's what's driving the Government, and that's what's driving me. Of course I'm going to fight it out for every fibre of my being for us to win the 2013 election, because I think Labor's policies and plans will shape a better future for this nation that the kind of negativity we've seen from the Opposition.
But I would say this. I am not a believer that if Mr Abbott is ever Prime Minister he will actually take away carbon pricing. I think we'll see a little fiddle here and a little fudge there, but he won't take away carbon pricing.
He's been on the record in the past as supporting carbon pricing, as has his whole political party under the leadership of Prime Minister John Howard.
HOST: Tony Abbott says you're a bad government that's lost its way. Are you?
PM: Well look, I'll leave all of the, you know, politicking and sloganeering and all of that to the Leader of the Opposition. That's how he conceives his job, being negative.
How I conceive my job is getting things done today that'll make a difference not only today, but for tomorrow and for the Australian people.
We've got some difficult challenges. Dealing with the evil of people smuggling is one of them.
I want to see us working together to get something done, and then of course I want to make sure  -  I've just been to the G20  -  want to make sure our economy continues to be the envy of the world, that other leaders continue to look at the Australian economy and just go ‘how on earth have you achieved that, that's fantastic.'
And I want to make sure that we share the benefits of that strong economy right around our nation while we build for the future.
And big decisions like carbon pricing  -  they're not easy, they're not necessarily popular, but they're definitely right and I think people, practical Australians, will see as it comes into effect that the fear campaigning has been just that.
HOST: Finally Prime Minister, you'll have your last caucus meeting before the six-week winter break. You promised at the previous caucus meeting you attended that the caucus meeting tomorrow would be a discussion about the economy and about strategy and about things like the Asian white paper. What message will you be telling your MPs to take out to the electorate for the next six weeks?
PM: Well, I'll talk to my caucus colleagues first tomorrow. I mean we will talk about the work that we're doing as a government.
But the message from the Government whether it's out of tomorrow's party room meeting or on any other day, is we're, you know, a Labor Government, and consequently we do Labor things and we bring our Labor values to bear as we do them.
We've always conceived our job as, you know, growing and strengthening the economy, because if you grow it and you strengthen it there's more for people to share.
We're a fair-go political movement; that's where we started, and we want to share the benefits of this strong economy now.
And we've always been the political party  -  whether it's building Medicare or universal superannuation or floating the dollar or reducing tariffs  -  we've always been the political party that's been prepared to go to the Australian people and say, you know, life changes, our world changes, our region changes, pretending you can stay under the doona at home and nothing changes is never going to work.
Let's get in there, let's shape it, let's work it together, so that we can be sure that the future for our kids and their kids is a better one than we even live today in this great country.
HOST: And the people, the public of Australia are still prepared to listen to you?
PM: I'll be out there, speaking to the Australian people as I am right now Lyndal, as Prime Minister. You know, I'll let the political commentators do all of the judgements about, you know, performance and all of those kinds of things.
I don't let any of that worry me, I just get on with the job.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thank you. 



Well, friends after four years the preparation and the hard work are ending.
The countdown's on, London 2012 is now just an airline flight away.
And of course, for all these years, all, these months, every day, you've trained as individuals.
But today, with this official announcement, you become a team.
A team that bears the highest honour to which any sportsperson can aspire  -  you get to wear the green and gold and compete in our country's name.
Selection in this team means many things, but above all it means this.
You are the fastest, the strongest, the best  -  161 athletes who have been found worthy above all your colleagues and peers.
I know you will pile up a formidable medal tally, just as you and your mates have done before at Beijing and the Games before that.
We're looking forward to hearing that Australian national anthem time and time and time again.
But our cheers won't just be for the success of our country.
As Australians, we will also be cheering for your efforts and your victories, and the determination you have each shown in  individualjourneys.
Of course, these journeys began long before today.
They started in your backyard, your local park or the high school gym, where the joy of sport captured your hearts and imaginations.
Your journeys continued through the setbacks and the victories of district meets, state knockouts and national championships; through injuries, gruelling fitness tests and countless early morning training sessions.
And through your passion and persistent hard work, these journeys have brought you here to the honour of representing your country at the highest level of world sporting competition.
Now of course, it's Britain we're talking about, so you'll have to put up with a fair bit of bad weather and bad food.
I'm a ten pound Pom, so I'm able to make jokes like that.
But truly, I think our UK hosts have worked hard over the past seven years to present a Games that will be professional, friendly and welcoming, with great venues in one of the world's top sporting cities, which is also the place where the Paralympic movement had its beginnings back in 1948, so in that sense it's a homecoming as well.
I know you'll do great things in London, and if I can give just one quick plug to the work that we've been doing with you, I'm proud of the $13 million of funding we've provided this financial year plus the initial funding of $400,000 for the Green and Gold Project to strengthen ties between Paralympians and the Australian Institute of Sport.
As well as supporting the wheelchair rugby team to attend the final competition in North America before the Games.   
We've also got our eyes on Rio, I've just returned from there, with initial support for the development of future coaches and support staff in preparation for the next Games in Brazil.
All that talk about funding and support really means one thing  -  the Australian people are with you.
And I don't think there's a single taxpayer out there who would begrudge a single cent.
Before we go, I just want to mention one more thing that's close to my heart, the Prime Minister's Paralympic Challenge, which commenced in May and will run all the way up to your closing ceremony.
The Challenge gives kids the opportunity to try a range of your sports, get active and healthy, and perhaps even share the same dream you have.
The dream that one day they will enter a great stadium in a great city under an Aussie flag cheered and admired by millions and join the ranks of the world's best.
In a few short weeks, that's exactly what you will be doing.
And whether we're in the stands at that stadium or in our lounge rooms at home, Australians will be watching for that flash of green and gold racing through the water, or on the court, or on the track.
And we'll understand why the Olympics and Paralympics go inseparably together because they are both about a commitment to excellence and being the best that you can possibly be.
So thank you for your hard work, for your commitment.
Congratulations on your selection and good luck in these final weeks of preparation.
A proud and a grateful nation is just waiting for the moment we get to see you shine.
Thank you very much. 



I advise the House that a major rescue operation is underway right now, 107 nautical miles north of Christmas Island and 100 nautical miles south of Indonesia.
As this Parliament sits, we have planes in the air, merchant vessels on the scene, and HMAS Maitland has arrived.
The information I will give the House now is the latest information available. Of course the information can be changeable - it is always difficult to get accurate information when a search and rescue mission is under way.
But I am advised that this morning, at approximately 6:17am Australian Eastern Standard Time, the Australian Federal Police received a satellite call from a vessel, possibly in distress, two nautical miles north of Christmas Island.
Information about the vessel was immediately passed to the Australian Maritime Safety Authority.
Border protection command vessels rushed to the scene, but found nothing two nautical miles out from Christmas Island.
I am advised that at approximately 7:30am, the Australian Federal Police received a further call from the vessel, advising that it was actually 107 nautical miles north of Christmas Island.
This has prompted a major search and rescue effort, as I'm sure the House can imagine.
I can advise that a number of merchant vessels responded to the Australian Maritime Safety Authority's calls for assistance this morning.
By approximately 10:30am Australian Eastern Standard Time, two merchant vessels had reached the estimated location of the vessel in distress.
The Australian Maritime Safety Authority advised that a merchant vessel reported seeing a vessel stopped in the water with people on board wearing life jackets. No people were reported as being in the water.
At 11:37am Australian eastern standard time, the merchant vessel reported that the vessel was sinking and that there were people in the water.
I am advised that the merchant vessel did what it could to assist at that point, including deploying its life rafts to render assistance.
I am advised that the HMAS Maitland arrived on the scene about an hour ago. I am also advised a Royal Australian Air Force maritime patrol aircraft carrying life rafts has flown to attend to the scene.
I am advised that there are approximately  -  our numbers obviously can change, but there is reason to believe that there are around 123 to 133 people on board.
As we speak, my best advice is that 123 people have been rescued.
Madam Deputy Speaker, clearly then the lack of precision about the numbers of people on board does not enable us to be precise at this time, as to anyone who is unaccounted for.
Standing here in the Parliament now, I simply don't know. Australia has been called on once again to lead a very major search and rescue operation.
Once again, Australian men and women have raced to help, they've gone to the rescue zone, they've gone in search. Once again, we acknowledge their courage in doing so.
Madam Deputy Speaker, in view of these events and in view of the events of last week, I want to say to the Parliament now most sincerely that I believe the time for the party divide on this issue is at an end.
We have seen too much tragedy. And I can't, and I don't believe other Members of Parliament can now sit here with the prospect of more tragedy to come.
In these circumstances, I have requested that Mr Oakeshott be prepared at this moment to bring on his bill on immigration amendments so that the House can now, I hope, by leave and in agreement deal with it to finality.
As the House may be aware, that bill has finalised its second reading, Deputy Speaker, and consequently we would just need to deal with the third reading stages of the bill.
I actually think it's of significance to this Parliament that this is a bill brought to this place by an Independent Member of Parliament.
Given all of the circumstances here, Deputy Speaker, I as a Labor leader would want to walk from this place saying no-one won, no-one lost, we just got something done.
And I think an Independent member's bill gives us all the opportunity to do just that. To go from this place saying no-one won, no-one lost, it wasn't about party politics, it wasn't about who's got what sort of party ticket in their pocket - we just worked together do get something done.
Deputy Speaker, I have reason to believe that the bill, moved by Mr Oakeshott may be in a position to command majority support in this House of Representatives.
I seek to have that tested now and the bill dealt with to finality.
To the Leader of the Opposition, I understand that he is of a different view from me on the substance of the policy here and that is as it may be.
But I can undertake to the Leader of the Opposition is if Mr Oakeshott's bill passes this House of Representatives, if indeed it passes this Parliament, then what the Government will do on that legislative foundation stone is what the Government offered to the Opposition some time ago.
That is, that the Government would enact a policy position that the Opposition has advocated for quite passionately, and that is the opening of a detention centre on Nauru, as well as the Government taking the appropriate steps to enact its arrangement with Malaysia.
I would also undertake to the Leader of the Opposition that we would pursue in good faith the review of Temporary Protection Visas and their deterrence value that we offered to the Opposition some time back.
That we would do that in circumstances where we would make all reasonable efforts agree with the Opposition the identity of the reviewer or reviewers and the terms of reference of the review and that there would be full transparency to the Opposition at every stage.
That is, we would not seek to have the outcome of that review come back to the Government first. On the day I received it the Leader of the Opposition would receive it too.
In these circumstances, Deputy Speaker, I am now going to ask this Parliament by agreement to make some procedural arrangements and then I'm going to ask this Parliament I would hope by agreement to give a majority to the bill moved by Mr Oakeshott.
Can I also undertake to the Opposition that bringing the bill on at this time is not about whether or not we have Question Time today.
At the option of the Opposition having finalised Mr Oakeshott's bill, then I am well and truly content for us to have Question Time of the usual duration so that the Opposition has its ability as is appropriate to ask questions of the Government in this place.
It's in that spirit and in those words, Deputy Speaker, that at this stage I would ask leave of the House to move a motion to enable the Migration Legislation Amendment (Bali Process Bill 2012) to be called on and considered immediately. 



PM: I'm here this evening with the Minister for Immigration Chris Bowen and the Minister for Home Affairs Jason Clare.
As Australians know we have seen another day where there has been a tragedy at sea. I will ask the Minister for Home Affairs to update the Australian people on what is happening with that search and rescue at the conclusion of my remarks and the Minister for Immigration's remarks.
We have just come from a parliamentary vote on asylum seeker legislation. A significant vote has just been taken in the House of Representatives and what that vote means is we are on the verge of ending the impasse which has prevented our country processing asylum seekers offshore.
We are just one day away from having a solution which would enable us to better deal with asylum seekers and to send a clear message of deterrence to people smugglers. To say to the people smugglers that we do not want to see them continue to ply their evil trade and seek to profit on misery.
The vote endorsed by all of the Independents in the House of Representatives and a piece of legislation that Mr Mal Washer clearly viewed as one worthy of support is truly a compromise.
It is a Bill brought to the Parliament by an Independent, by Mr Rob Oakeshott.
A Bill that involves an element, the key element, of the Government's policy, the arrangement with Malaysia and combines it with key element of the Opposition's policy having a detention centre on Nauru.
It's also been improved by the work of Rob Oakeshott himself and by a proposition from Mr Wilkie the member for Denison.
This is an example of where the Parliament has come together and worked together to see a solution to a very difficult problem.
Tomorrow the Senate will have the same opportunity. The senate will debate this Bill tomorrow and arrangements will be made so that debate can be concluded in the Senate tomorrow.
I am calling on each and every Senator to accept that this is now the only Bill that can pass the Parliament before the Parliament goes into the winter recess.
The only way we can leave this Parliament this week with legislation to break the impasse on asylum seekers and people smugglers is for this bill to be carried by the Senate tomorrow.
There is no other way. No other path that will have us leaving the Parliament with laws in place.
It is also the only true compromise on the table combining key elements of the Government and Opposition's plans and brought to the Parliament by an Independent.
In those circumstances I believe each and every Senator should consider this matter deeply overnight. They should consider it deeply and individually.
The Senate tomorrow has the opportunity to break this deadlock.
The Senate tomorrow has the opportunity to ensure that Australians in the weeks ahead know that there are effective laws in place that can make a difference to the tragedies we have been seeing on our seas.
I'll turn now to the Minister for Immigration for some comments.
MINISTER BOWEN: Thank you Prime Minister. As the Prime Minister said, this is a significant day, with the House of Representatives voting for legislation to authorise offshore processing.
But it is not the culmination. It is not the end. The key is tomorrow seeing this pass the Parliament.
Tomorrow Mr Abbott has a chance. He has a chance to prove to the Australian people he doesn't have to say no all the time.
The Australian people know that Mr Abbott can say no. Tomorrow he has the opportunity to show them that he can act in the national interest as well.
People smugglers are watching as well. People smugglers are watching to see if tomorrow will be the day their business model comes to an end.
People smugglers are watching to see who will win this battle of wills: them or the Australian people.
People smugglers are watching to see whether they can continue to tell vulnerable people that they should risk their lives to come to Australia by boat, or they can no longer tell them to do that.
That is what is at stake in the vote that Senators will face tomorrow.
There was a lot of argument in the House today, appropriately. These are big questions. But what was clear from the Opposition's argument is that there is no coherent reason for the Opposition not to support this Bill.
You can't argue that people should only be sent to countries which are signatories to the Refugee Convention at the same time as you are arguing that they should be turned around to a country which is not a signatory to the Refugee Convention.
You can't argue that you can't vote for a proposition which has a cap of 800 people, when their own proposition has a cap of 1200 people in the detention centre at Nauru.
And above all, nobody, nobody could argue in the House of Representatives today, and nobody will be able to argue in the Senate tomorrow that if you do Nauru and Malaysia together, that will not be a disincentive to making those boat journeys.
The Opposition says they don't believe Malaysia will be effective, we disagree. We believe that Nauru would not be effective; the Opposition disagrees.
But nobody can coherently and sensibly argue that if you do both, as this legislation authorises and as the Government has made clear we will if the legislation passes, this will end this terrible trade and Australia will be able to say that we have dealt with this once and for all.
PM: Minister Clare.
MINISTER CLARE: Just quickly, I can provide the following information on the search and rescue effort that's been continuing throughout the day.
We've now managed to rescue 130 people. In addition, unfortunately I have to report that we've recovered the body of one person.
The information that we have is that there were as many as 150 people on the boat; that leaves many people still unaccounted for. Reports I have are that the boat has now sunk.
The search and rescue continues out there, some 107 nautical miles north of Christmas Island. That's led by one of our patrol boats HMAS Maitland. The other boat, a hydrographic ship, Leeuwin, is now making its way back to Christmas Island.
It's expected to return to Christmas Island in the early hours of the morning, and it will be bringing the survivors of this, yet another tragedy.
And can I use this opportunity to thank the men and women of the Australian Navy and Border Protection Command and the men and women of the merchant vessels that came to the rescue of the survivors once again today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, isn't the truth of this Bill that it's doomed in the Senate?
PM: Well that is a question you need now to put to Senators, Paul. But what is absolutely clear this evening is this.
The only piece of legislation that can give Australia effective laws on asylum seeking is the piece of legislation that passed the House of Representatives today.
The Senate's got a complete yes or no choice.
If they vote no, they are voting for our nation to have no effective laws, and that will mean that we will continue to see asylum seekers arrive and tragically we know when people risk the journey, too many of them lose their lives at sea.
Or the Senate can say yes, and by the end of tomorrow our nation can be in a position where we can have effective laws and start offshore processing.
This is the choice before the Senate. As I said in my remarks, we are on the verge, as a nation, of getting the laws we need. We could have those laws in place by the end of tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there were some pretty passionate speeches in the Parliament, you'd have to say this afternoon, over the last few hours. We saw some on the Coalition side even in tears, and there was a suggestion from your side as well that the Opposition is still playing politics on that. Do you believe that this is the case?
PM: Well I think we will be in a position to judge at the end of the parliamentary proceedings. I understand-
JOURNALIST: So if they don't support this in the Senate this is playing politics.
PM: I'll answer your question. I understand that people have different views. I do understand that. And I understand that those views are passionately held by individuals.
I called on the Parliament today at two o'clock to deal with this matter urgently because of its importance to the nation.
We had just seen another tragedy at sea.
And I asked people in that debate to put the politics to one side. And I believe many people across the Parliament did that; many people from all political persuasions did that.
They put the politics to one side. And there were some tears, and there was a lot of emotion, and I respect that.
I respect the fact that people come to this debate with different views, and because I respect that, I've been prepared to compromise and to accept the key plank of the Opposition's plan.
It's not my plan. I didn't agree with it. I didn't create it.
But in order to see change here  -  because change is so important  -  I've been prepared to see us as a Government embrace a proposition that has the central element of the Opposition's plan combined with the central element of the Government's plan.
It's a genuine compromise.
Now, as for whether people are going to put the politics first, frankly, I think it's too early for me to judge. I would prefer instead to see what happens in the Senate tomorrow.
But we've got to be very clear about the nature of the choice the Senate will face: the Senate will face a yes/no choice; laws or no laws; yes or no by the end of tomorrow.
The House of Representatives has spoken. I respect that there are others of a different view.
But the House of Representatives has spoken. The Bill of an Independent has been endorsed.
This isn't a proposition where someone politically wins and someone politically loses. I said that at two o'clock today.
But the House of Representatives has got an important step done: it has passed laws.
The Senate now has the opportunity. And it is an opportunity to create laws or to deny our nation laws. That's what the Senate needs to focus on tomorrow.
And I think, of course, that it would be a tremendous act of destruction and a tremendous denial of the national interest when the proposition is as clear as that; laws or no laws, to conduct yourself in a way which means that there are no laws.
JOURNALIST: Why wasn't the Oakeshott Bill introduced or pushed forward last week when we had the first asylum seeker boat incident? Why has it taken a week and why on the second last day before the winter break?
PM: I think since last week's tragedy and reinforced today, we've seen a mood across the Parliament for people to work together for change. I think we've seen that both early in this week on Monday and today, when backbenchers across the Parliament came together and said that they were prepared to talk and think and work together.
And I pay a tremendous tribute to people like Mal Washer who instituted that process and were so sincere about it and continue to be so sincere about it.
So in the face of last week's tragedy, I believe we started to see a mood for change in this Parliament.
And certainly as Prime Minister, as I indicated on Monday, I was more than willing to sit down and keep working, keep thinking, keep helping this Parliament find its way through to new laws.
I think we saw that mood reinforced today when we got the shocking news of yet another asylum seeker tragedy, and I think what you've seen tonight is people of goodwill who have seen so many tears and so much tragedy put some of the politics aside and work together to get something done.
And if you look at the people who've supported this proposition, many of them found it a very difficult thing to do.
Many of them really found this an incredibly hard issue to grapple with. Many have seen their views change over the months in which we've seen asylum seeker tragedies like the one last week and the one today.
People really wrestled with it, but having wrestled with the issue they found a conclusion, they found a compromise.
The Senate should respect that, the Opposition should respect that and we should leave this Parliament tomorrow with laws.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the deal with Mr Wilkie was obviously critical. At what stage today was that deal done?
PM: Look, we've been in discussions with Mr Wilkie during the course of today and the course of this afternoon.
You saw too, very clearly, from Mr Washer's conduct that Mr Washer was prepared to support this proposition had his support been the difference and his support been necessary to see it go through the Parliament.
JOURNALIST: He told you that?
PM: Yes, he did tell me that, absolutely. Mr Washer is a man of goodwill and I think he has found the last few days some tremendously difficult days.
I'm sure he's incredibly loyal to his political party  -  I know what it's like to be loyal to a political party.
I've had a Labor Party ticket all my adult life  -  I'm sure Mr Washer is someone who takes his belief in the Liberal Party very, very seriously and it is very close to his heart.
But he was sufficiently moved, over the last few days, to be prepared, if it was necessary, to vote with Mr Oakeshott, for Mr Oakeshott's Bill, if that was the difference between it going through the Parliament or not going through the Parliament.
Now, I think that's to be respected, and it says something about the preparedness of people to deal with this issue with the politics to one side.
And, you know, I'm standing here today with my ministers, but I am not here to crow about a Government's success.
As I said in the Parliament today, this is the Bill of an independent; no-one's won here, no-one's lost here. What we can do tomorrow, though, is make this a win for the Australian nation.
JOURNALIST: Eight votes are needed in the Senate, is that correct, and if that's the case  -  I think it is about eight  -  do you believe that enough impassioned speeches have been made today from your side of politics that you will get those eight extra votes?
PM: Well, I think that all of those questions now need be directed to Senators who have got a tremendously important decision to make tomorrow.
Thank you very much.  



PM: Yesterday the House of Representatives passed legislation which would have enabled our nation to have offshore processing of asylum seekers and refugees.
That bill before the House of Representatives was a compromise between the Government's plans and the Opposition's plans.
It was supported by the Government, by every Independent in the House of Representatives and would have been supported by a Liberal Party member, Mr Mal Washer, had his support been necessary for the bill to pass the House of Representatives.
This evening that same bill has been voted on in the Senate. The bill was supported by the Government and enjoyed the support of the two independent senators in the Senate.
So, broadly across the House of Representatives and into the Senate, this bill has secured support. Unfortunately the bill has not been passed by the Senate. Both the Opposition and the Greens voted against this bill.
The Leader of the Opposition has said on many occasions to the Australian nation that he wants to stop the boats. Tonight the Opposition voted against stopping the boats.
Progress has been made over this week; progress in a compromise being brought together and progress in the breadth of support in the Parliament.
But we have not secured the new laws that we need to enable the Government to create a detention centre in Nauru, and to enact its arrangement with Malaysia and to break the people smugglers' business model.
In these circumstances, I'm here tonight to announce the next step that will be taken.
Tonight I can announce that the Government has invited Mr Angus Houston, the former Chief of our Defence Force, to lead an expert group to work in the coming weeks; that is to work quickly and to provide a report to me and to the nation about the best way forward for our nation in dealing with asylum seeker issues.
The expert group that Mr Angus Houston will lead will also have serving in its number Paris Aristotle. Paris Aristotle is a name well-know to migrant and refugee communities.
He is a refugee himself, a survivor of torture, and he has worked over a long period of time with this Government and with the former Howard Government on detention centre issues, including being used as a lead negotiator in some of our most difficult issues within detention centres.
We will very shortly announce a third member to serve on the panel, with foreign policy expertise.
I want to be very clear about the role of this expert group. This expert group will receive the facts from government and beyond. They will be able at their option to receive briefings wherever they want to get those briefings from.
They will be able to assemble all of the material to help them form their views. They will be able to consult as they see fit.
The Government believes that the proposal we have put before the Parliament is supported by the evidence and supported by the facts. But we are certainly very prepared to see fresh eyes and new expertise brought to the task.
Now in terms of the parliamentary processes, there's been, actually it mightn't seem it on the surface, but there's actually been a lot of interesting goodwill generated during the past week, at least at the backbench level, where parliamentarians have come together across the political party divide to try and find a way forward for this Parliament.
I think it is important that the expert group has the opportunity to relate to the parliamentarians and to understand their perspectives and views.
Consequently I will invite the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the Australian Greens and the Independents to nominate parliamentary representatives to a reference group that will be able to be consulted with by the expert group.
So the expert group, using the reference group to understand the perspective of parliamentarians.
Should the Leader of the Opposition decline to formally nominate members of the Opposition to participate in this reference group, then I will invite across the Liberal and National Parties individual members to nominate themselves to participate if they choose to do so.
Now I understand how frustrating this all is for Australians. They rightly want to see us in this Parliament work to get things done.
They understand, I think all Australians understand following the period in which we've seen the loss of so many lives, that we need effective action. Effective action to ensure that we deter people from getting on boats and risking their lives at sea.
This is a complex problem that the Government has worked long and hard on. We do believe in the compromise that we've brought to the Parliament. We believe it is the right way forward.
But we also accept that with the Leader of the Opposition determining to vote against stopping the boats, that we do need another step to drive us to conclusion here, and to ensure that our nation can map the necessary policies to deter people from making very risky journeys at sea, and paying a people smuggler the price of that risky journey.
I'll turn now to the Minister for some comments, then I'll be happy to take your questions.
MINISTER BOWEN: Thank you, Prime Minister.
Today, the Australian Parliament missed the opportunity to do what the Australian people want: to break the people smugglers' business model.
The Government worked with the Independents of goodwill, members of the crossbenches and across the Parliament to get legislation which could give the government of the day the opportunity to implement policies of offshore processing which would remove the incentive to come to Australia by boat.
As the Prime Minister said, we've got the support of every Independent in the House of Representatives, some of whom had to revise their position and revise their thinking in a difficult process for them.
We also had the support this afternoon of Senator Xenophon and the Democratic Labor Party Senator, the Independent Senator for Victoria. This shows, I think, considerable goodwill across the Parliament.
But we do need to take it to the next step and the Government, of course, worked to compromise. We provided the Opposition with an offer to implement one of its key policy platforms: the opening of a detention centre at Nauru. The Opposition rejected its own policy.
As I've said repeatedly over recent days, we can argue about how effective Nauru may be, we can argue about how effective Malaysia may be.
I don't think anybody could argue that Malaysia and Nauru implemented together, opened together, would provide a significant deterrent. Nobody could argue that that is not the case, not one Member of Parliament, not one Senator could argue that that is not the case.
The political system has reached an impasse. So now we need to break that impasse. We need to call on the experts who've been advising the Government.
The Government's had the benefit of advice now for many months about what is necessary to break the people smugglers' business model. We've acted on that advice. We've made those briefings available to the Opposition.
But now we need a formal process to make that level of advice open more widely and broadly amongst the Parliament to see this impasse broken.
This impasse needs to be broken to save lives. This impasse needs to be broken to get a more orderly system. It is not acceptable to the Australian people that our two major political parties, both of whom support offshore processing, have not been able to implement this legislation.
The Government today progressed legislation to stop people risking their lives to get to Australia to claim asylum. The Opposition voted that down. That is not a sustainable, accountable position for the Opposition or for the Parliament
So the measures the Prime Minister has announced today are designed in every sense to provide all the expert information that the Government's had available more broadly for a formal structure.
The Opposition has been given that advice before. It's been available for crossbench MPs in a formal structure to review that advice, to refresh that advice and make it available more broadly so that this impasse can be broken.
PM: One at a time. Matthew Franklin.
JOURNALIST: Thank you. Prime Minister, you probably were aware of Mr Abbott's press conference a little while ago in which he said, he quoted John Howard saying you should take what you can get from the Parliament. And he was basically saying that you could have agreed at least to Nauru.
I know that that is not your position, but could you explain why you believe that going for that single piece of common ground, that is re-opening Nauru, would not have taken the issue forward?
PM: Firstly, let's just be very accurate about the history here and I didn't have to opportunity to watch Mr Abbott's press conference but I've been advised of its contents, and I think it's very important that the record here is clear.
Mr Abbott has not moved one millimetre in this debate. He has not moved in any way for a compromise on offshore processing. Yesterday he did make an announcement about the number of refugee places.
Well, we all want to see more genuine refugees come to this country, but that was not a compromise in the debate before the Parliament about offshore processing.
Mr Abbott has said consistently the only thing he is prepared to vote for is his plan of Nauru.
Now in contrast, the Government, recognising the seriousness of this issue, recognising the fact that people are drowning at sea, has been prepared to compromise and try and find a way of working together.
We said, originally, it was Malaysia that was the best way forward. Our expert advice said that; the same experts who advised Prime Minister Howard when Mr Abbott sat at Prime Minister Howard's cabinet table.
The same experts who advised the Howard Government when they created the Pacific Solution.
That obviously wasn't going to get the support of the Opposition and so we moved, and said you have a very entrenched view around Nauru, we have the benefit of expert advice around Malaysia, let's put the two of them together and get an effective package.
Let's also find a way of taking forward issues like Temporary Protection Visas through an expert-led process, and having an expert review of that.
Mr Abbott did not move one millimetre at any stage of this discussion. Mr Abbott tonight has basically reiterated he is not prepared to move one millimetre while people are drowning at sea.
But the Government has said  -  yes, and I'll answer your question  -  the Government has been consistently advised by the experts who advised this Government and former governments, that Nauru by itself will not work.
That is the reason for not accepting Mr Abbott's proposal about Nauru. Mr Abbott has received those briefings himself. The experts have looked him in the eye and said to him ‘Nauru will not work.'
Now we need to find a way here to move away from this politics, the politics that the Leader of the Opposition has mired himself in, and actually get people to look at the policy and look at the facts.
In putting together this expert panel, we are getting people of the highest calibre. I do not believe that it will be possible for anybody in this Parliament to utter one word of criticism of Australians like Angus Houston.
No-one will be able to do that. Australians of the highest calibre and we are making them available to independently provide advice and assistance and a report. We believe the outcome of that will be very persuasive.
Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST: By the appointment of this reference group, does that signal in any way you could abandon your preference for Malaysia if they come back (inaudible) or are you saying you're pretty confident of what they're going to find and report back?
PM: They will act independently, the expert group, Angus Houston, Paris Aristotle and the third person we appoint. They will act independently.
So they will form their own views based on the evidence and the facts.
For us, we have taken a lot of advice about the evidence and the facts, and that is what has informed our view. But I want to be absolutely clear here, Angus Houston and the team he leads are free to come to any conclusion that they want to, any conclusion that they believe is in the national interest.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, about 400 dead since the election, 100 or thereabouts in the last six days. We've got a six week break before Parliament comes back.
Are you asking Angus Houston to come up with his ideas, his (inaudible) ideas, within the next six weeks and that you will offer a response legislatively when we gather back in August?
PM: We have asked Angus Houston to provide a report as soon as possible, and certainly before the Parliament resumes, so the Parliament has it and can act on it in the next parliamentary session.
I can't be clearer with you than that. We have asked him to provide the report as soon as possible, and certainly before the Parliament resumes.
JOURNALIST: Back to Phil's question, if the report comes back saying not Malaysia, does that mean that you'll abandon the Malaysia plan?
PM: Look, I am not going to prejudge what is in a report from an expert panel that I have appointed today. I am asking eminent Australians of huge capacity to apply their intellect, their judgment, to this question and to provide a public report.
I would only be doing that if I think their views are of the utmost significance.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe this expert panel could convince the Greens, given that they've been key in blocking this legislation, can convince the Greens to back fresh legislation?
PM: I think you've misunderstood the Senate numbers. The single biggest bloc that voted against stopping the boats today is Mr Abbott's team.
Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if the expert panel  -  are you prepared to say now given that you want to break the deadlock, if the expert panel comes back with a series of recommendations, that you are guaranteeing that you will adopt those recommendations?
And you said you wanted to come back quickly, of they came back say in three weeks, would you be prepared to recall Parliament early?
PM: Well, let's get the expert group going. We are setting them a formidable task. A formidable task.
They will do it as quickly as they can do it, but we just need to be practical. We are asking them to do it as soon as possible, and certainly before Parliament resumes and I'm sure that they will get about that task with as much efficiency as they possibly can.
But we live in the real world and doing a lot of work takes time and there's no other way to do a lot of work than to take the time to get it done. So, you know, we'll get the report as soon as we possibly can.
In terms of what the Government will do with the report, I would not be setting up this group if I wasn't prepared to take on board with the utmost seriousness the recommendations of this panel.
Of course, we have government and Labor Party processes which will be gone through, but I am asking the group of very eminent Australians to find a way through here on such a significant issue to the nation's future.
Michael Gordon.
JOURNALIST: Mr Aristotle is very experienced in the area. Will the other members of the panel bring a fresh eye to the  -  have they got no preconceptions  -  to the area?
PM: Well none of these people are political partisans, none of them have got, you know, a political view to push here.
Mr Aristotle has expertise from his own personal life and in the work he does, and in the representative roles that he has engaged in; work with the Minister for Immigration, indeed with Minister Ruddock when he was Minister for Immigration. He has a wealth of expertise in refugee and asylum seeker matters.
Angus Houston obviously has a wealth of expertise in defence matters. But you don't get to be the Chief of the Defence Force in a nation like ours without having formidable public policy capacity. I know Angus Houston personally, he most certainly does.
We will want to add to that someone with foreign policy expertise given the importance of regional work to this agenda.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition Leader said not now, not ever in respect of the policies you put forward in this debate over the past few days. What makes you confident that  -  have any confidence at all  -  that the process that you're embarking on now will change the numbers at all in the Parliament?
PM: Well this is really a question that needs to be directed to the Leader of the Opposition.
But I would put the question perhaps slightly differently.
If, and they will do their work, but if an eminent panel with the likes of Angus Houston on it, came up with a recommendation, would the Leader of the Opposition say that was of no worth?
That would seem to me a very extraordinary conclusion.
JOURNALIST: But hasn't that been the case with Andrew Metcalfe's advice-
PM: We're talking about a man who served this nation as the Chief of the Defence Force as we had soldiers fighting overseas.
Relied on; viewed as an impeccable Australian by both sides of politics, I would think it remarkable indeed if the Leader of the Opposition said tonight or at any other time that an Australian of that eminence, his views are of no worth. I can't believe that's possible.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how quickly will you be setting up the parliamentarians' group?
PM: I'll be issuing the invites during the next days.
Thank you. 



HOST: The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
HOST: Prime Minister, you've been in charge for two years, boats are arriving in record numbers, horrendous number of deaths. Do you accept some responsibility for what's happening here?
PM: Well look, I'm the Prime Minister of the nation so of course I accept responsibility for the Government's programs and plans and I accept responsibility for the consequences.
I'm also accepting responsibility Neil for change. We need to see change. What we are doing now clearly isn't working and it isn't what the Government wants to see.
We want us to be able to process people offshore. We've been stopped from doing that by the High Court. We need to change laws, and a compromise which combines the central element of the Government's plans with the central element of the Opposition's plans, passed the House of Representatives yesterday and I want to see it go through the Senate today.
HOST: I guess nobody's happy about the situation. I think everybody's is decent enough to know it needs to be sorted out but we have to recognise don't we that your policies have failed?
PM: Well I've just said to you I want change. The High Court stopped us from pursuing offshore processing the way we wanted to. So they basically in fact stopped all offshore processing. So whatever view you've got, about processing asylum seekers beyond Australia's borders, you need to see change in the law.
We've been working to try and get change through the Parliament. We've been open to discussions with the Opposition every step of the way.
We've compromised Neil, including some very, very difficult things for Labor members to accept.
Now is the time, not to bang on about the politics of who did what when, but actually to look to the future.
We've got two choices today in Parliament House. We can leave here this evening with laws in place that enable us to process people offshore, or we can leave here this evening with no result.
Well I'm for action and for seeing the compromise get through the Senate today.
HOST: In the end, I guess politics is what's going to solve this though, in the sense of dealing with each other and negotiation. You had the Mid-Winter Ball last night, did you have a talk to Tony Abbott there?
PM: No I didn't, but my door has been open to Mr Abbott for days and days and days now, I've made that publicly clear over a long period of time. We also worked with the Opposition a number of months ago and we put to them a compromise where we said, we want to process people in Malaysia and you want to process people in Nauru. Let's put them together. The Opposition said to us, we want Temporary Protection Visas.
We said, we're really concerned that that will encourage women and kids onto boats, but let's agree an expert panel who can look at this for us with agreed terms of reference. We worked our way through all of that, put all of those compromises on the table and to date, the Opposition on offshore processing has not moved a millimetre.
My call today Neil is to senators of good conscience who don't want to leave the Senate today and watch over the weeks to come, boats arrive and potentially more tragedies at sea.
To endorse the only piece of legislation that can get through this Parliament before the Parliament leaves for the winter recess.
HOST: Well have your people been working on Coalition senators to cross the floor?
PM: I've said that my door is open to senators today. It's now a question for senators in good conscience, and I am happy to talk to anyone from any political party in the Senate.
HOST: But you have a particular relationship with the Greens, which is better than your relationship with the Coalition obviously. Have you talked to the Greens and said, look we have to get this through, because you can get it through with them, can't you?
PM: I've certainly said to anybody who will listen, I've been talking to people, certainly the Greens are well-aware of my views. Everybody in the House of Representatives has been well-aware of my views, the Opposition is well-aware.
HOST: I want to focus on the Greens here. With the Greens you've got the numbers. You've got a special relationship.
PM: Everybody's responsibility is the same, people are drowning at sea, Neil. Everybody's responsibility is the same. No-one gets a leave pass from making this decision. Every Senator has to vote.
It doesn't matter whether you're in the Opposition, in the Greens, Independent, you know, wandering around between political parties. To be frank Neil, I don't care. That's all the party politics of it.
Every individual who sits in the Senate irrespective of the party ticket in their pocket, has an obligation to the nation today.
HOST: Well it doesn't look good at this stage, what are the consequences of that?
PM: Well Neil, I'm going to keep pressing to see change here and we have approached this from the point of view of getting a result, getting change.
The bill that was endorsed in the House of Representatives yesterday wasn't a government bill. It was a bill from an Independent. It's not a question of, does the Government win, does the Opposition win, you know, argy-bargy politics. It's about an Independent's bill which would enable us to enact what the Government says and I say we need and what the Opposition Leader and the Opposition says we need. We would do both.
HOST: So Prime Minister, what is Plan B? If this doesn't get up today as it seems it's unlikely it will get up. What is Plan B?
PM: Neil, my focus now is on the Senate and it finding a way to do what the House of Representatives did yesterday, where the majority in the House of Representatives, not the Opposition, but the majority in the House of Representatives found a way to compromise.
And in terms of the breadth of that compromise, Government members voted for it, all of the Independents in the House of Representatives voted for it, and people of extreme good will, like Mal Washer in the Liberal Party, were prepared to vote for it if it was going to be the difference.
So it shows you this is a compromise, genuinely, or it wouldn't be attracting that breadth of support.
HOST: Is there a Plan B or is this the one shot in the locker?
PM: If this bill does not go through the Senate today, then we will leave this Parliament today with no change in the laws. This is now a yes/no proposition Neil.
Mr Abbott put his proposition to the Parliament yesterday. He moved it in the House of Representatives and it was rejected.
So the only bill, the only legal change that can happen today in Canberra, in Parliament House is the Senate endorsing the bill that has gone through the House of Representatives.
HOST: So if this doesn't get through this means more deaths?
PM: Well what it will mean is that we can't process people offshore. What it will mean is that we can't send an effective message of deterrence to people smugglers.
What it will mean is people will get on boats and Neil, we know now, from everything we've lived through in the past few days and on too many occasions in the months before, what we know is that people get on boats, unfortunately, tragically, awfully some get into trouble and people lose their lives.
HOST: Prime Minister, I know you need to go, but just very quickly, is there any suggestion to you that boats have been deliberately scuttled to overcome offshore processing?
PM: It's well-known Neil, I don't want to comment on the boats that have got into difficulties in recent days, there will be investigations for all of those, and the facts will come out. So I don't want you to interpret anything I'm saying now about the boat last week or the boat yesterday. But if were asking me generally, has it happened in the past, that asylum seekers have disabled their vessels or caused a circumstance where they have to be rescued from the sea, yes that has happened in the past.
We've said consistently to the Opposition who use this slogan, and it just is a slogan, let's turn boats around and tow them back, the reason the Navy says to us that's dangerous to do is because they do fear this conduct, where boats are set on fire or whatever. And I don't want to, Neil, let's be very clear, I'm not going to put Navy personnel into dangerous circumstances like that and see some of our Defence Force personnel lose their lives. I'm not going to do that.
HOST: Very finally, I was talking about decency and everybody wants a good solution to this, but your Parliamentary Secretary Mark Dreyfus did say this week that Tony Abbott saw political advantage in people dying. Is that right? Did you censure him for that or do you agree with him?
PM: This has been a week of strong emotions and passionate views. Yesterday we saw people with tears in their eyes in the Parliament.
Neil, I'm not interested in the politics of this. I want to see change. And there would be no-one in this country more delighted than me, and more prepared to acknowledge that the right thing had been done if Mr Abbott saw fit today to change his view and to say yes to offshore processing and the bill going through the Parliament.
HOST: I agree with that, but it's pretty tough to say somebody's taking political advantage from death. Is that fair?
PM: I don't want to be drawn on the politics of all of this. I'm not looking for you to say to me, you know, Prime Minister you've had a win or anything like that, that's not what I'm looking for.
I want a Bill from an Independent that is a compromise, that has the support of the House of Representatives to go through the Senate today.
Neil, if that doesn't happen, am I really worried that we will see more tragedies in the future? Yes I am.
HOST: Thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: To discuss this further, Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins us now from Canberra. Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Before we get to the deal, there was more tragedy of course about this time yesterday with another boat capsizing off Christmas Island. What's the latest on that situation?
PM: The latest situation is 130 people have been rescued and taken to Christmas Island. Tragically one body has been recovered, so a person has lost their life. And we believe that there were 134 people on board the boat, so that means that three are still missing.
HOST: Let's then talk about the so-called compromise deal. Is it a good one? Or is it more a case of the best compromise you could get?
PM: It's a case of acting and getting done what we need to do in this Parliament.
The arrangement that went through the House of Representatives yesterday combines a key element of the Government's policy, the arrangement with Malaysia, with a key element of the Opposition's policy, having a detention centre in Nauru.
It was a Bill moved by an Independent, Rob Oakeshott, and this takes it, I believe, outside the normal day-to-day of politics, of Government and Opposition criticising each other or dealing with each other. It takes it into a different space.
This is genuinely an attempt to end the politics, to have a true compromise and sitting here now this is the only Bill that has the option of passing the Parliament today.
This is the only Bill that is before the Senate so there's a very stark choice for Senators today, each of them.
Either they vote for this Bill and we will leave this Parliament with laws so that we can process people offshore, or they continue to play politics and we end this Parliament with nothing effective done.
I believe the time for politics is over, the Senate must act and must endorse what the House or Representatives passed yesterday.
HOST: Well I guess the question so many Australians want answered is if the Bill does in fact pass, will it stop the boats?
PM: Well we have been advised very clearly that our arrangement with Malaysia will be an effective deterrent.
What it will be saying to the people smugglers is that they can no longer pretend to asylum seekers that if people get on their very dangerous boats they will end up in Australia.
They won't end up in Australia. Under our arrangement with Malaysia, they'll end up in Malaysia and of course we will also, having adopted part of the Opposition's plan, have a detention centre in Nauru.
HOST: You haven't managed to persuade the Opposition though on this. This is what Tony Abbott had to say about the deal.
ABBOTT: And it should fail in the Senate because it is not good legislation and this will have bad outcomes for the Australian nation. It compromises our standards and it will not stop the boats.
HOST: Alright, a bad law that won't pass according to Tony Abbott. What's your response to that?
PM: Well I think it's Mr Abbott needs to recognise that this is the only law that will pass.
Mr Abbott put his proposition to the House of Representatives yesterday and it was defeated.
So that means the situation today is just a crystal clear one  -  absolutely clear.
There's no ambiguity about it at all. A Bill passed the House of Representatives yesterday; it would enable our nation to do offshore processing.
That Bill is before the Senate today.
Either we leave here today with that Bill having become law or this Parliament, and I would suggest to you the Leader of the Opposition, by taking a negative attitude, would have failed the Australian people.
HOST: Prime Minister, of course the major sticking point for the Coalition has been the fact that Malaysia's not a signatory to the UN Refugee Convention. This is what a very emotional Joe Hockey has to say yesterday.
HOCKEY: I will never ever support a people swap where you can send a 13 year old child, unaccompanied to a country without supervision. Never, it'll be over my dead body. How dare they.
HOST: Why are you so intent on keeping Malaysia as part of the equation?
PM: Because we have been very clearly advised by the same experts who advised the Howard Government, Mr Hockey when he was a Government Minister.
We've been very clearly advised by those experts that our arrangement with Malaysia is the most effective deterrent. It is the strongest message we can send to people smugglers and there was plenty of emotion in the House of Representatives. People spoke from a variety of perspectives and they were very very genuine when they did it.
I really understand that, that people come with different heartfelt views on this very difficult topic but I don't want to see that 13 year old girl drown at sea.
I want us to have effective laws and we can leave this Parliament today with effective laws if the Opposition votes in the Senate to pass the only law that can now go through the Parliament today.
HOST: If it is blocked in the Senate, where to next?
PM: Well we will go into the winter recess, this is last the parliamentary sitting day and we will not have passed laws for offshore processing.
That means that our nation cannot have at its disposal the most effective means of sending the strongest possible message we want to, to people smugglers, the strongest message of deterrence, I think that would be a very very disappointing outcome.
I am calling on each and every Senator today to look into their conscience, to think deeply about this.
I understand that it's not many people's preferred outcome, I do understand that, but it's the only outcome that enables us to leave the Parliament today with laws that enable offshore processing.
And this Bill, which is the Bill of an Independent, in the House of Representatives yesterday got broad support.
The Government voted for it, every Independent in the House of Representatives voted for it, people of good conscience in the Liberal Party like Mal Washer were favourably predisposed towards it.
This is genuinely a compromise  -  part of what the Government wanted, part of what the Opposition wanted  -  let's just stop the politics and get this done.
HOST: Alright, a critically important day today in our Parliament. Prime Minister Gillard, we appreciate your time today. Thank you very much.
PM: Thank you. 



The President of Indonesia,  H.E. Dr Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, will make an official visit to Darwin as a Guest of the Australian Government from 2-4 July 2012 for the 2nd annual Indonesia-Australia Leaders' Meeting.
Australia and Indonesia enjoy a close partnership based on shared democratic values, close trade, education and defence links and a common interest in building a stable and prosperous region. 
Indonesia is an increasingly important commercial partner for Australia, with two-way trade in 2011 valued at $14.8 billion. 
Our countries also work closely regionally and globally as fellow members of the East Asia Summit, APEC and G20. T
he Prime Minister will hold bilateral discussions with President Yudhoyono in Darwin, building on the strong outcomes from the inaugural Indonesia-Australia Leaders' Meeting held in Bali in November 2011.
President Yudhoyono will be accompanied by a delegation of senior ministers. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning and welcome.PM: Good morning Sabra.HOST: What can you tell us about these latest reports of another boat in distress in Indonesian waters? 
PM: There are some early reports of a boat in distress. We have our official agencies now trying to ascertain the accuracy of those reports. Of course, when information comes to hand we'll make it available.HOST: On the parliamentary debate yesterday, wasn't it a Pyrrhic victory for you? This will not get through the Senate today.PM: The Senate today meets and each and every senator needs to examine their conscience. My door is certainly open to any senator who wants to come and speak with me this morning about the bill before the Senate.I want us to leave Parliament today with laws that enable us to process asylum seekers offshore with laws that will send a message of deterrence.The House of Representatives achieved that yesterday, a compromise bill moved by an Independent.
This is not about the Government or the Opposition, someone winning, someone losing - this is about getting laws which enable us to act.HOST: Do you think it's acceptable though to send, for a people swap bill where you allow a 13 year old child to be sent to another country unaccompanied, without supervision, as Joe Hockey suggests?PM: Well I don't want to see a 13 year old girl drown at sea in the weeks between now and when this Parliament comes back in the spring. I don't want to see that. We've seen too many people lose their lives at sea. We have to act. It's time to put the politicking to one side.Now let's just be clear about the arrangement with Malaysia. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has been consulted every step of the way. We have assurances from Malaysia about the treatment of people there.We have been advised by the same people who advised the Howard government, the experts that advised them and now advise us, that this is the most effective message we can send to people smugglers to break their business model.But Sabra, at the end of the day I don't ask anybody in this Parliament to agree with all of my arguments about Malaysia. I understand that many people have got reservations about it. They've got a different view.But the truth is, if everybody just sits with their own view then nothing will get done. We as a Government have been prepared to compromise; we've agreed to the Opposition's plan for Nauru.Now we have to see today the Senate in good conscience enable the laws that went through the House of Representatives to clear this Parliament and to be enacted.HOST: Labor is in government because of the deal it did with the Greens. Have you spoken with Christine Milne about this? And why not make this an issue of confidence and say to the Greens we need this passed?PM: I'm prepared to say to every senator, I don't care what political party ticket they've got in their pocket, I'm prepared to say to every senator through your show today and with my door open today as well, that this is the right thing for them to do in all good conscience. That's true of every senator irrespective of their political party.HOST: You say your door is open. Are you prepared to negotiate further or not?PM: We have said very clearly that we are willing to talk. But we are in a situation now Sabra, where the only way we are going to leave this Parliament today with laws that enable us to process asylum seekers offshore is if the Senate passes the bill that went through the House of Representatives last night.This is now a yes or no proposition. Do you want laws or you don't want laws? If you do want laws then the only bill that can get through the Parliament today is the bill that went through the House last night.HOST: Well based on the current sentiment, and we only heard from Senator Christine Milne a short time ago, she is not for bending on this one. Neither is the Opposition. We heard their impassioned speeches yesterday. Some people hold very deeply held views about this and they've consulted their consciences.We are going to break from Parliament today and there will still be no deterrent in place.PM: People have to look at their consciences and say: am I prepared to act, am I prepared to compromise.Sabra, we have embraced the key element of the Opposition's plan in order to compromise.There are many members of my backbench who would have had tears in their eyes voting for a detention centre in Nauru.
Many of them time and time again on the public record have said how worried they are about a detention centre in Nauru, how inhumane they think such a centre is.But in order to get a compromise, in order to try and stop people drowning at sea, people who have got that deeply held view have been prepared to say: to get something done I will embrace the central element of the Opposition's plan.All I'm asking for from the Senate today is that senators, Opposition senators, Green senators, every senator, shows the same degree of goodwill and spirit of compromise. This is now a yes/no proposition.HOST: What about embracing Malcolm Turnbull's idea of trying Nauru and having a 12 month sunset clause on that?PM: Well what about actually getting laws today? We are on the verge of having laws that can pass this Parliament. They passed the House of Representatives yesterday.
If they don't pass the Senate today, we will leave this Parliament with no new laws, no new policies to prevent what is obvious to everyone now is a circumstance that can too easily end in tragedy.And I'd say to Malcolm Turnbull, I mean across the last few days and more generally over many months I have said to the Opposition, I'm prepared to talk, I'm prepared to talk, I'm prepared to talk and they have moved not one millimetre.So if Malcolm Turnbull thinks that they should be moving, he should be battering down the door of the Leader of the Opposition.HOST: I think that's unfair but Tony Abbott yesterday offered to drastically increase the number of asylum seekers, refugees that Australia would take.PM: Sabra, that's not a compromise on offshore processing. Whether you and I agreed right now to increase Australia's humanitarian intake would not make a difference as to whether or not a boat set to sea tomorrow. It wouldn't.In order to make a difference to whether or not that boat sets to sea and the people on it risk the dangerous journey, we need to come to an arrangement about offshore processing. And on that the Opposition has not compromised one millimetre.HOST: Parliament looks like it will reject this. Will you look at reintroducing Temporary Protection Visas as possibly another way of trying to deter people from making this dangerous journey?PM: Well Sabra let's be clear about the degree of compromise that's on the table here.
We have said, I said in the Parliament yesterday and I've said it very clearly: if these laws go through the Parliament as I believe they should, they went through the House of Representatives yesterday, we will operationalise our arrangement with Malaysia, we will create a detention centre on Nauru and we will work with the Opposition on an expert review of Temporary Protection Visas with an agreed reviewing panel and agreed terms of reference.We have been prepared to move, we have been prepared to compromise. Many Labor people find this very, very difficult too, many tears for them as well.
But they've understood that we cannot just sit in this Parliament and watch boats capsize and people drown and do nothing.Now the choice for the Senate today isn't a choice about, you know, a huge range of options, let's have a think about everything. There's one clear choice before them. The House of Representatives has spoken. There is a bill on the table.
That bill can be law by the end of today if senators in all good conscience say ‘I cannot leave this Parliament with the many weeks between now and the spring session knowing that there are no effective laws in place.'HOST: Onto another matter, the Financial Review today says the Government wants to introduce a strong public interest test for media owners. Are you looking to do that? Why do you need it?PM: We've received the Convergence Review and the report by Mr Finkelstein and we are still considering both of them. So when we are in a position to respond to those reports, we will.HOST: Okay, Prime Minister, thank you.PM: Thank you. 



HOST: We're joined now by the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard. Good morning to you.
Look your Minister is absolutely right, we have had a gutful full of this. We're sick of the politics.
Why won't you budge on Malaysia?
PM: The Bill that's before the Senate today, Kochie, is a genuine compromise and it's the only Bill that can pass the Parliament today.
It's taken the central element of the Government's plan, the arrangement with Malaysia and combined it with the central element of the Opposition's plan.
It passed the House of Representatives. So where we are today is a very, very clear choice facing the Senate.
Either people go home from Parliament tonight with laws in place that enable us to process people offshore or we leave the Parliament with nothing done.
I think the Australian people are looking to this Parliament to act. They want to see compromise. We've certainly been prepared to compromise. The House of Representatives yesterday endorsed that compromise.
HOST: Malaysia isn't a signatory to the UN charter, ok? One hundred and forty other countries are. Why not swap Malaysia with one of those? That seems pretty easy to me.
PM: Kochie, we have negotiated with Malaysia so that it would honour-
HOST: Negotiate with someone else.
PM: David, it's not that easy to actually find countries to enter into arrangements to take asylum seekers. It's not that easy.
The arrangement we've negotiated with Malaysia is one in which Malaysia has said it will honour the central tenants of the Refugee Convention.
The central tenant of the Refugee Convention is you don't return a person to a place where they could be persecuted, caught, killed, tortured. Malaysia has given that undertaking.
And we have expert advice from the people who advised the Howard Government too, this is the most effective way of sending a message to people smugglers that Australia is no longer an open place where they can pretend to people that they can sell them passage to get to Australia.
But David at the end of the day I can sit here, I can sit here for hours and argue why Malaysia's the right solution and Tony Abbott could sit here for several other hours and argue why Nauru's the right solution. 
At the end of the day we've got to work together and find a way of getting laws in place that will enable us to process people offshore.
What we've done is combined both perspectives, Malaysia and Nauru, and the only way that this Parliament will pass laws today is if what went through the House of Representatives yesterday is endorsed by the Senate.
So it's a very grave question of conscience now for Senators. The House of Representatives has spoken, the Rob Oakeshott Bill in the House of Representatives, not a Government Bill, but the Rob Oakeshott Bill, a genuine compromise, was supported by the Government, by all the Independents in the House of Representatives and people of very good conscience like Mal Washer from the Liberal party were prepared to view it favourably.
It's the only law now before the Senate and I am clearly calling on Senators. Today is the day we are on the verge of a solution, let's get this done.
HOST: But there are such, they are two such big sticking points and it looks like it won't go through the Senate despite your appeal this morning.
Where does this leave us? Will you cancel the winter break and keep going?
We need to find a solution and it appears the Senate is not going to be the way to go.
PM: Look the only way of finding a solution is for a compromise to be endorsed. We've been prepared to compromise.
It was not the Government's preferred plan to have a detention centre in Nauru and there are many members of the Labor party who've shed some quiet tears over endorsing that. It's something that they've found very, very hard.
But people have been prepared to work for a compromise so we are only going to see laws pass this Parliament if people say, let's put the politics to one side. Let's acknowledge I'm not going to get everything I want. Let's make sure that everybody can come together and vote for something.
That's what the House did yesterday.
HOST: See I know you're a big supporter of UN, the work at the UN and all the different agencies, I just can't understand why you're so stuck on a country that doesn't sign to that charter.
Despite the fact, if they'd said, oh we're going to agree to the central tenants, then why don't they just sign it? Why don't they just become a signatory to it and show us they'll stick with it.
And the other thing is the Greens. No one is mentioning these, these are a law unto themselves.
Do you feel like giving them a shake and a good slap and saying, guys get a life?
PM: Let me go through each of those questions, Kochie, because they're really important.
On Malaysia, you and I can't sit here and make other countries sign conventions but we have been able to work with Malaysia and the United Nations High Commission for refugees, the peak UN agency that deals with refugee issues has been involved in discussions as we have worked with Malaysia.
So, Kochie, if your central concern as an individual is what about the UN, well we've been talking to the relevant UN peak body all of the way through they have been involved with the Minister for Immigration Chris Bowen as he has talked to Malaysia.
HOST: Okay, what about the Greens?
PM: Then on the question of the Greens, Kochie. I don't care whether someone sitting in the Senate today is a Liberal person, a National party person, a Green person, I don't care if they're brown, red, pink, yellow, that doesn't worry me, I don't care less.
I care whether people are attacking in accordance with their conscience. I care whether people are acting today to stop more drowning at sea.
I don't want to see us leave this Parliament without laws and the only way now of a law going through this Parliament today is for the Senate to endorse what the House of Representatives voted for yesterday.
HOST: And if they don't will you cancel the winter break and keep going?
PM: Well if we can't get this through today then it leaves us in a very dreadful position.
The proposition that Mr Abbott put to Parliament yesterday-
HOST: Will you look at cancelling the winter break though?
PM: Well I'm answering your question because something would have to move to make that worthwhile.
The proposition Mr Abbott put to the Parliament yesterday was defeated so Mr Abbott's proposition did not get the support of the House of Representatives.
The proposition, the compromise, the genuine compromise did get the support of the House of Representatives.
If we're in a situation where Leader of the Opposition and his team isn't prepared to move a millimetre then we're not going to see change.
But we're not there yet, there's still the opportunity for Senators this morning to act in good conscience.
HOST: If it doesn't get through the Senate, yes or no, will you cancel the winter break?
PM: I would be prepared to sit here if there was going to be a probability- 
HOST: So yes? You will?
PM: Well Kochie, let me finish my sentence. I would be prepared to be here, of course I would if there was the prospect of getting something done but David, I want you to understand this, I don't want to you walk away with a misimpression.
If this Bill doesn't go through the Senate today then I do not see, even if this Parliament sat all through the winter break how a law would get through it.
HOST: Maybe we've got to keep you all in detention and just stay there and say, come up with a way of stopping this.
PM: Well David I agree, we have to come up with a way of stopping this. That's why, and there's a compromise on the table that's gone through one House of Parliament, it really is not the right thing for the other House of Parliament to stand in the way of that becoming law. 


PM: It's great to be here this morning with the Minister for Families, Jenny Macklin and with Laura Smyth, our local member here in La Trobe, and we've had the opportunity to meet with some local residents and talk to them about the start of carbon pricing tomorrow.
We have, as a nation, been debating putting a price on carbon for well over five years now. In the past twelve months the debate has been particularly intense.
From tomorrow, Australians will be able to judge carbon pricing for themselves. Australians are a practical people and they will be able to see carbon pricing at work and make their own judgment.
For example, they'll be able to judge ‘has the Sunday roast gone up by $100 as has been claimed?' The answer to that will be no.
They'll be able to judge ‘has my grocery shop gone up by twenty per cent?' That's been claimed too, and the answer to that will be no.
They'll be able to judge ‘has the coal industry completely shut down around the country?', and the answer to that will certainly be no. That claim's been made, and that claim will be shown to be wrong.
But there is a question that the answer will be yes, and that is ‘have I received an increase in family payments; in the pension; am I seeing a tax cut?'
We've talked today to people who've received the first pension increase, and that increase will go on.
We've talked today to people who've received family payments increases, and that will go on to keep assisting them with the cost of the kids.
From tomorrow, 1 July, people earning less than $80,000 a year will see a tax cut. So my message to Australians is make sure you have a good look at your next pay, and have a good look at what's happened with your tax.
If you earn less than $80,000 a year you'll see a tax cut. Many people will see a tax cut of $300. But in particular, people who work part-time, people who earn less than $18,200 a year should have a good look at their next pay packet.
We are tripling the tax-free threshold, and what that means is that a million Australians won't pay tax. They won't have to lodge a tax return. They won't pay tax.
There will be more than 600,000 Australians who, for the first time, will look at their next pay packet and see that they've gone from paying tax to paying no tax at all. That is, they'll get to keep every dollar they earn.
So, for Australians who work part-time, or for self-funded retirees who make ends meet by relying on a bit of investment income, they will see those big tax cuts, some in the order of $600 or $500 because of the tripling of the tax-free threshold. So for many Australians around the country, they'll see a tax cut from 1 July.
Ultimately when the dust settles following the furious debate we've had about carbon pricing, I think Australians will come to see that this has been an important reform at the right time.
An important reform whilst our economy is strong, to protect our economy for the future. An important reform to make sure that we seize the benefits of a clean energy future and all of the prosperity that will give our nation, and a reform that has ensured we are cutting carbon pollution and doing the right thing by our environment.
And we're in a very precious part of the country, where people care about their local environment. Right around the nation so many Australians are worried about climate change, and this reform will see us tackle climate change.
I'll go to Jenny Macklin now for a few comments, then we'll be happy to take questions.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister and it's very good to be out here again with Laura Smyth in this beautiful part of Melbourne.
So thank you very much Laura for having the Prime Minister and I here, and great to meet some pensioners, students, parents, who of course do understand first of all why it is so important that we have a price on carbon.
That we do everything we can for our children and our grandchildren to protect our beautiful country.
But what we've also done is made sure we provide assistance to those individuals and families, to pensioners and self-funded retirees who really need some extra assistance.
From tomorrow, there'll be a major change to the tax system, and around 7 million hardworking Australians will start to see a tax cut in their regular pay packet. That's a big change, especially for those hardworking Australians who earn under $80,000 a year.
We've already delivered 6.5 million payments to pensioners, so pensioners like the people we've met with today. Pensioner couples have received $380. If you're a family, people have received up to $110 per child, and we certainly have heard from parents today about how important that has been for them.
For students, there've been thousands of students who've received extra support to make sure that they can get the help that they need.
And of course for each of these groups  -  for pensioners, for low-income families, for students, for self-funded retirees who've been receiving their payments this week, we've provided extra support so that they have that buffer against the small but nevertheless expected price rises that will flow from the carbon price.
We want to make sure that low- and middle-income individuals, families, pensioners, self-funded retirees get the help that they need, but most importantly the message for anyone today who's a taxpayer earning less than $80,000 the tax changes start tomorrow, 1 July, and it will mean for around 7 million hardworking Australians there will be a tax cut for you.
PM: Happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what can you tell us about the power station contract for closure talks that are underway at the moment in the Latrobe Valley?
PM: We have a contract for closure process. That's a tender process and it's working around the nation, it's not a specific program for one part of the nation.
We've slightly extended the deadline for the end of tendering there because we want to take the time to get this right.
JOURNALIST: It's been said we're on the eve of destruction.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Especially if you're a tennis player!
PM: Well, I think really, the question just goes to show how absurd so much of this fear campaigning has been.
People will wake up tomorrow around the country and they will go about their normal Sunday. Doing what they do, catching up with family and friends, watching a bit of sport on TV, many people having to go to work, you know, doctors, nurses, our police, people who work on the weekends, our people in the hospitality industry like this cafe.
But people will go about their ordinary everyday business, but they will be in a position from tomorrow to judge for themselves the claims that have been made to see what carbon pricing really does mean, to see the change it means for a clean energy future and also to see for their household budgets what tax cuts mean, what increased family payments mean and what pension increases mean.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott has today pledged $100 million for the East West tunnel. Will you match it?
PM: I've seen that report today. First, you can't build a $5 billion project with $1.5 billion. Tony Abbott can't tell you where the $1.5 billion is coming from. He certainly can't tell you where the rest of the money is coming from. People can't drive on an empty promise, they can only drive on a fully funded, fully costed road.
JOURNALIST: What will you commit to the tunnel, Prime Minister?
PM: We have a proper process here, unlike Mr Abbott, who goes around making promises he can't fund. And he's already in a situation where he's going to need to cut back health and education and pensions and defence. $70 billion because he's made-
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'll come to that. Just let me say, he has already got $70 billion of cutbacks planned because of making promises he can't fund. What we do with big infrastructure is a proper process. For a major project like this you have got to work with the State Government, the Victorian Government.
And they've got to get their paperwork in and get it right and that hasn't been done yet.
JOURNALIST: The State Government's pretty happy with the $1.5 billion promised by Tony Abbott. Is there no way you can come to the party with something?
PM: Well really, let's weigh this. Where is the 1.5 billion coming from? Did you get a fully costed sheet when Mr Abbott announced it? The answer to that is no.
So this is just a little mythical promise, $1.5 billion for a $5 billion project, and he can't tell you where one cent is coming from.
JOURNALIST: What are your thoughts on the Coalition backflip on the NBN, they're going to keep it now.
PM: The only government that will build the National Broadband Network is this Labor Government.
JOURNALIST: It's been reported today that asylum seekers are rushing to Australia because they fear a change of government and they fear that Mr Abbott might stop the boats. What's your take on that?
PM: Mr Abbott and the Coalition in Parliament during the last week voted against stopping the boats. They walked into Parliament and voted against any effective action to deter asylum seekers from risking their lives at sea.
I want to see effective action. I've been prepared to compromise. I am certainly prepared to work with anyone who wants to put the national interest first and get this done.
JOURNALIST: The expert panel, I think Mr Abbott has described it as futile that he won't change his stance?
PM: We are bringing together three very eminent Australians to advise the nation on the best way of breaking this deadlock and having an effective deterrent to stop people getting on boats and risking their lives.
Those eminent Australians will do their work in coming weeks.
Mr Abbott, I think, needs to look at the outcome from those eminent Australians. Mr Abbott on the one hand can't say he respects these people, and then say that their views are of no worth.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: If the Opposition was ever in government and took that money away then it would destroy the jobs of those workers.
That money has been provided because of the current circumstance with the aluminium industry. It's about low global prices for aluminium and our high Australian dollar.
The company itself has said that it's not about carbon pricing. So you've got to make a very simple decision, are you pro those workers having their jobs or do you want to see them sacked? Clearly Mr Abbott is saying he wants to see them sacked.
Okay, thank you very much.



PM: I'm here today with Jenny Macklin and we're actually in her local electorate, so thank you very much Jenny, and to everybody who has come in to say hello today.
It is 1 July, carbon pricing starts today, and Australians can look around and see the sky hasn't fallen in.
For Australians right around the country they'll be going about their ordinary Sunday. Maybe some time with family and friends. But as Australians go about their ordinary Sunday, our nation is seizing a new future.
From today, our big businesses that generate carbon pollution will have to pay a price for generating that pollution.
From today, we will be seizing a clean energy future. And from today millions of Australians will see tax cuts. From their next pay packet they'll be able to look into that pay packet and see more money for them and less for the taxman.
From today Australians will be able to judge for themselves rather than listening to the politicians. They will have the evidence before their eyes to judge what carbon pricing means for them and their family.
They'll be able to judge all of the claims that have been made.
Is the Sunday roast now costing $100? They'll be able to judge that. Has the coal industry closed down? They'll be able to judge that. Is my weekly shop now 20 per cent more expensive? They'll be able to judge that. Has Australia entered a permanent depression? They'll be able to judge that.
Of course, all of these claims are reckless and false. What Australians will see from carbon pricing is that we will seize a clean energy future; millions of Australians will see tax cuts, many of them around $300.
Australians will see the benefits of going to work because the tax free threshold will be tripled from $6,200 to $18,000. That means that people will see more money in their pay packet as a result of going to work.
And our pensioners and people raising kids will continue to see extra pension benefits and extra family payment benefits.
People will be able to reflect on the past twelve months  -  all of the claims that have been made  -  and you will be able to judge for yourself.
And in the months ahead, I think as the dust settles from this debate, Australians will be able to see that we've done the right thing to tackle climate change and seize a clean energy future.
The right thing to protect our strong economy, to have prosperity in the future, and to do the best we can for our very precious environment.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: PM, you have been saying for while, the Government has been saying for a while that today is a game changer. How confident are you that Labor's fortunes will improve from now on?
PM: This is about the nation's future. What changes today is that people will be able to judge for themselves. Rather than listening to the reckless claims that have been made, they will be able to judge carbon pricing for themselves.
And with carbon pricing starting, our biggest polluters will be paying the price of their pollution and families, pensioners, taxpayers will see benefits.
JOURNALIST: How can you be sure that Tony Abbott wouldn't get rid of the tax if elected?
PM: Mr Abbott has promised to rip away tax cuts, pension increases and family payment increases. The only thing that is sure about Mr Abbott's promises is he has promised and confirmed today that the tax cuts you are seeing for the first time this week will be taken away by him if he's ever Prime Minister.
That he'll take way the benefits pensioners are seeing. He'll take away the increases in family payments. That's his promise to Australians. All the rest will degenerate into a fiddle and a fudge.
After all, Mr Abbott ran in the 2007 election on a platform of putting a price on carbon.
JOURNALIST: Every single price rise is going to be blamed by the Opposition on the carbon tax for the next year. How are you going to win that battle?
PM: Well, what your question assumes is that the Opposition continues its wild and reckless claims.
If the Opposition continues making wild and reckless claims, and I expect that they will, I think people will judge whether they've been upfront and credible over the more than twelve months since we announced the details of carbon pricing.
More than twelve months ago we announced the details and people will look at the claims the Opposition has made since and say "Have they been upfront? Have they been credible?"
Was it credible to claim a roast was going to cost $100? Was it credible to claim that the coal industry was going to shut down? Was it credible to say Australia was entering a permanent depression?
And if people find that those claims lack credibility, that they've all been wrong, then I expect they'll be pretty sceptical about future claims from the Opposition.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the carbon tax has defined a lot of your time as Prime Minister. In regards to being a game changer, what about a game changer for Labor? Do you think from this point on it will change the way that voters see your party?
PM: I'm not a poll commentator, but we didn't do this because of the opinion polls.
We did it for the nation's future. And when we look at the nation's future, I believe in the months to come Australians will look back and realise this was the right decision for our environment, the right decision for our economy, the right decision for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, about 300 companies I think are paying the carbon tax at the moment, or pay $23 a ton. It was meant to be about 500. If the Government doesn't reach the 500 target, will this put any pressure on the compensation that's being paid?
PM: No, not at all. The assistance that we're providing families, the tax cuts, the pension increases, the family payment increases are locked in.
JOURNALIST: Do you accept that the next election will come down to a referendum on the carbon tax?
PM: I believe the next election will be about who's got the best plans for the nation's future, who can keep our economy strong, and can share the benefits of that economic strength, and who's best positioned to keep preparing our nation for the future.
JOURNALIST: The mining tax also-
PM: Also starts today.
JOURNALIST: That's right Prime Minister. What can we expect from that?
PM: What people will see from the mining tax is that our biggest and most profitable miners will pay more and everyone will benefit around the country.
They will see us sharing the benefits of the mining boom.
Our economy is very strong compared with economies right around the world, and I believe Australians understand that as they look at the American economy, what's happening in the UK, what's happening across Europe.
But for many Australians they haven't been feeling those benefits in their own lives.
We want to take that economic strength and share it in increased family payments for people doing the hard work of bringing up kids, in increased superannuation for working Australians, and in better infrastructure, particularly for our mining communities who are seeing the benefits of growth but also the stresses and strains it can bring.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there are some suggestions this morning that Labor MPs are calling for TPVs to be re-introduced and Malaysia to be scrapped. Have any Labor MPs  -  have your colleagues  -  been telling you this? That TPVs should come back and Malaysia should go as an impasse to asylum seekers?
PM: No, not at all. And let's just be clear about the position the Government has taken here.
We don't want to see people risking their lives at sea, and potentially further tragedies. We want to do everything we can to avoid that.
We've been prepared to compromise in order to get that done. We believe the Malaysia agreement will send the strongest message of deterrence to people smugglers.
But, in order to get change, to make sure that we can send a message of deterrence, we've said we'd implement the Malaysia agreement, we've accepted the Opposition's plan to open a detention centre on Nauru, and we've said we would send the question of whether TPVs work to an expert committee.
We've already announced that, and unfortunately, to all of that, Mr Abbott has just said no.
JOURNALIST: Just very quickly on that issue about the multi-party committee, have the terms of references  -  when are you planning to release those terms of references for the politicians to have a look at?
PM: I've invited parliamentary colleagues to join a reference group that the expert panel we've set up could consult with. That's its mission.
JOURNALIST: But the Opposition says they won't join that group unless they see the terms of reference of the specific multi-party group. At the moment haven't the terms of reference just simply been for the three panel members?
PM: No, that's not true. I wrote to the Leader of the Opposition, to the Leader of the Australian Greens, to Independents, explaining that we had established the expert panel and that we wanted a reference group of Members of Parliament to work with it.
That offer is clearly outlined in the letters that I sent.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you must be relieved that today is the day. What's next?
PM: Well we've got a lot more to do. And you're right that our nation's debate has been very consumed by putting a price on carbon.
That debate didn't start last year; we've been debating that since before the 2007 election when both Prime Minister Howard and the then Leader of the Opposition Kevin Rudd went to the election saying that they would put a price on carbon.
Our nation's debated putting a price on carbon for a lot of years. We've debated it very intensively in the last year.
Now we've got it done, and we've got so much more to do including building a National Disability Insurance Scheme, continuing our education reforms by better funding Australian schools and making sure our nation is ready and poised to seize all of the benefits that are going to come with this century of change and growth in our region.
So that's what's on our agenda next, but for today, we will be out explaining putting a price on carbon and the tax cuts that start today and the ability of Australians from today to judge it for themselves.
JOURNALIST: So how are you feeling today? Relieved that they're finally at this point, or-
PM: I'm feeling like I do every day, full of enthusiasm.
Thank you very much. 


The Gillard Government has achieved a major milestone in its plan for Australia's clean energy future with today being the first day major greenhouse gas emitters will be required to pay for their pollution.
The carbon price which starts today means that in the year 2020, Australia's carbon pollution will be at least 159 million tonnes less per annum than it would be without this policy  - the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road.
To help families with the costs that some businesses will pass on to them, a new round of tax cuts are also starting today, including trebling the tax-free threshold from $6000 to $18,200.
Today we take the next steps the country needs to make to keep our economy competitive, to protect our environment and to provide a cleaner Australia for future generations.
The scientific advice is that the planet is warming and it is imperative that we cut greenhouse gas emissions. The economic advice is that a carbon price is the cheapest and most efficient way to reduce carbon pollution.
A carbon price will create incentives for large emitters to reduce carbon pollution.
It will start transforming our economy to clean energy sources like solar, wind, geothermal and natural gas. 
More than half the revenue raised will help households with the modest cost of living impacts through tax cuts, higher family payments and increases in pensions and other benefits and allowances.
Lump sum household assistance payments have already been paid and these will be followed by increases in regular payments of family payments, pensions, and other Government allowances and benefits from next year.
Tax cuts will start flowing into the pay packets of working Australians from today.
In addition to helping people with the cost of living, the Government is reforming the tax system by trebling the tax-free threshold from $6000 to $18,200 in 2012-13.
The Government is also supporting jobs and competitiveness in industries with high emissions and strong international competition.
The most emissions-intensive and trade-exposed industry activities are shielded from 94.5 per cent of the carbon price  -  meaning their effective carbon price is less than $1.30 a tonne.
This will preserve international competitiveness while maintaining incentives to invest in cleaner technologies.
A carbon price is a responsible economic reform.
Treasury modelling shows the economy will continue to grow with a carbon price in place  -  1.6 million new jobs will be created to 2020 and new industries in clean technology and renewable energy will be created.
Today also marks the commencement of the Climate Change Authority and the Australian Renewable Energy Agency.
The Climate Change Authority will make recommendations on pollution caps to apply when the carbon price moves to a flexible priced emissions trading scheme in 2015.
The Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) will provide grants and financial assistance for projects with a focus on renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies to make them more cost competitive.
ARENA will administer $3.2 billion in existing Government support for research and development, demonstration and commercialisation of renewable energy technologies.
Further information about the Gillard Government's Clean Energy Future plan is available at www.cleanenergyfuture.gov.au



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning, welcome.
PM: Good morning, Barrie.
HOST: So that's what you face if Tony Abbott has his way, a referendum on prime ministers who tell lies.
PM: Tony Abbott will have to look people in the eye at the time of the next election and explain to them how he's taking their tax cuts away, their family payment increases, their pension increases. 
He'll also have to look them in the eye and explain why he spent so many months making false claims about the effect of carbon pricing.
And the truth is, Barrie, even if Mr Abbott ever becomes prime minister in this country he won't take carbon pricing away. He'll engage in a little fiddle, a little fudge to kind of pretend but carbon pricing will still be here.
HOST: That language that he uses though, and he does call you a liar often, after a while you think it has to hurt politically, if not personally?
PM: Well, I've explained the circumstances of the last election campaign, and when I said those words about a carbon tax I meant every one. 
But our nation's been involved in a debate now for many long years about putting a price on carbon and tackling climate change and we have got this done. 
Yes, with a fixed price, a carbon tax, if you like, for the first three years and then an emissions trading scheme to follow. 
The kind of emissions trading scheme that Prime Minister Howard stood for and Mr Abbott stool alongside him advocating in the 2007 election.
HOST: Well you say he won't  -  there won't be a carbon tax under Tony Abbott but that would be partly because in opposition you will still support a carbon tax, you won't allow him to repeal it?
PM: I'm saying something completely different, Barrie. Mr Abbott will find a fiddle or a fudge and carbon pricing will stay.
HOST: But you will vote against any move by him to repeal it?
PM: We believe in putting a price on carbon, in tackling climate change, in protecting our environment, in strengthening our economy. As a Labor Party, as a Labor Government we haven't done all of this for no reason. 
We've done it because we believe it's pivotal to Australia's future. So of course we will seek to protect it. But I am putting a broader point to you.
HOST: But that's why he won't need a fiddle or a fudge.
PM: No, I'm putting to you a different point which is: carbon pricing starts today, tax cuts start today. 
People have already seen pension increases and family payment increases and this assistance to families around the country will continue. Businesses have got themselves ready for carbon pricing. New investments are being made.
Now against all of that backdrop Mr Abbott will find himself in a position where he cannot go to the next election pretending anything else than carbon pricing is going to stay.
I've seen these debates before, Barrie, I was opposed to the GST, but once it was in operation it was clear to all that there was no going back. 
And here we are, after all these years of the GST, a big divisive debate and it's not something top of mind for anyone in Australia's public debate today.
HOST: Were you wrong to oppose the GST?
PM: Look, in hindsight I was very concerned about the circumstances of low-income Australians, I was very concerned about it being a regressive tax. 
I still consider that those kind of taxes are regressive taxes, but the system changed and you had to accept the reality of the new system.
HOST: And you wouldn't have it any other way now, would you?
PM: Well Barrie, we're not debating the GST today, we're debating carbon pricing.
HOST: No, but there are parallels because oppositions oppose and Tony Abbott is constantly accused of being a negative but that's what Labor did during the GST?
PM: I think with Mr Abbott in particular, what we've seen is false claims, reckless claims made day after day. And today's the day that he's got to account for them. I mean has the coal industry shut down today, Barrie? 
Are your news rooms flashing up on their screens that coal is no longer being mined in Australia? Are your news rooms flashing up on their screens that everybody's Sunday roast today is costing them $100 a roast? 
Well of course that's not happening. And today and in the days to come Mr Abbott must be held to account for every false claim he has made about putting a price on carbon.
HOST: But even if a roast doesn't cost $100 people do feel the squeeze at the moment, they feel as if, whether it's true or not, that the cost of living is going up all the time. So every time prices go up no matter how, but whether it's at the margins or not they're going to blame the carbon tax?
PM: I think Australians are pretty smart, pretty practical people and they will judge it through their lived experience. They'll see, millions of them, seven million of them in their pay packet in the coming week the benefit of the tax cuts. 
And the significance of that shouldn't be underestimated. We are tripling the tax free threshold. That is we're putting a price on something we want to see less of, carbon pollution, and rewarding people for something we value, work.
A million Australians won't have their pay packet touched by the taxman. They will get to keep every dollar they earn and people earning less than $80,000 a year will all see a tax cut. Many of them a tax cut of around $300. 
So they'll get their pay packet, they'll see the tax cut, they'll go to the shops, they will do the weekly shop, they'll ask themselves ‘Does that cost me more than last week?' 
They will look at the tax cut and they will work it through the weeks and months ahead.
HOST: No doubt you've got your members right around the country sending that message this week but do you think they will be pulled up in the street a lot of them and given a bit of a serve over asylum seekers and the lack of action?
PM: I think people will be talking about carbon pricing. Yes, they'll be talking about asylum seekers too.
But in the period ahead, Barrie, whether it's today or in the weeks or months ahead, I think Australians will judge carbon pricing from the experience that they live. 
And I believe when the dust settles in the months ahead people will come to see it as the right move for Australia's future.
HOST: And on asylum seekers?
PM: That's where I think carbon pricing will take us to.
HOST: And on asylum seekers, there is no policy. That has to be embarrassing for you as a Prime Minister?
PM: I have been prepared every step of the way to work to get a solution here and I am still prepared to do so. In terms of, you know, the Labor Party's policy and plans; we with the benefit of expert advice designed the arrangement with Malaysia. 
We were very careful about the human rights protections that went with it, so the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has been involved in the discussions. 
The central tenet of the refugee convention that you don't return someone to a place where they would be persecuted or at risk will be upheld, and people smugglers would be sent the strongest message that they cannot represent to desperate people that they can get them to Australia. 
Now that's what the Government wants to see. I understand.
HOST: The Parliament didn't accept it any of it.
PM: I understand.
HOST: The Parliament didn't accept any of it.
PM: Yep, I understand Mr Abbott wants to see Nauru opened, and we said we would do that too. 
So, we have been prepared to compromise every step of the way. To that, we have seen Mr Abbott and the Coalition join with the Greens to just say no to any effective action here.
HOST: So what do you tell president Yudhoyono when you meet him this week, that you have no policy?
PM: I talk frequently to the president of Indonesia. We've got a strong and robust relationship between our two countries; and it's not fair, Barrie, to see it through the prism of people smuggling. 
Our relationship is a deep one on the economy and trade, on education links, on development links within the G20, in the East Asia Summit and the list goes on.
Indonesia is a very important partner to us and we do cooperate very strongly with Indonesia on people smuggling. And they have seen some success for their efforts in the past few years. 
They've disrupted around 300 people smuggling ventures, they've made arrests so Indonesia has been active working with Australia to try and combat this very evil trade.
HOST: They have been active and they would have been paying attention to what happened in Parliament last week as well. And now you have to sit opposite him this week, what do you say to him?
PM: President Yudhoyono, I'm sure, will be aware of events in Australia. 
I will say to him that the Government is still working and working hard to get an outcome here, and now we have asked three very eminent Australians to assist us with getting that outcome.
HOST: And that's called outsourcing, as Tony Abbott has described it as outsourcing?
PM: Well I think this says something very interesting about Mr Abbott actually. 
I mean the essence of modern government is that you do need expert advice, whether it's from the Treasury on your budget, whether it's from education experts on what we can do to lift kids out of disadvantage, whether it's from indigenous leaders about what we can do to close the gap for, say, life expectancies between indigenous and non indigenous Australians. 
Mr Abbott is basically saying he will not listen to advice, he won't listen to eminent Australians, he won't listen to anyone. 
He thinks it's satisfactory to just say no in the way that he did in the last week, where he basically voted against stopping the boats despite his sloganeering.
HOST: He said they're good people but I've got a policy thanks very much. So what's the point? He won't change his mind no matter what they come up with?
PM: Barrie, the point is of course that our nation should have the benefit of the most expert advice that we can. 
And I think these three Australians, Angus Houston, Michael L'Estrange, Paris Aristotle cannot be questioned on their credentials to provide such advice.
HOST: But you must know that Tony Abbott and the Greens are absolutely serious on this. They're not going to change their minds no matter what they come up with. So it makes it a pointless exercise, doesn't it?
PM: No, it makes it a question for them. As people drown at sea, as we see people risking their lives on leaky boats, as three eminent Australians deliver advice, what kind of person would you be? 
What kind of person is it who watches that misery, watches that pain, sees that death, hears the advice from experts and won't change their minds one millimetre, won't accept that advice at all? What kind of person does that, Barrie?
HOST: If they come out against the Malaysian solution will you accept that?
PM: I've said we will take with the utmost significance in terms of Government deliberations the advice of the expert panel. I wouldn't have done it, Barrie, if I wasn't in the business of taking the greatest regard possible for what they come out with.
HOST: So that puts Temporary Protection Visas back on the table as well?
PM: Well, Barrie, you need to be very clear about what's happened already to date. 
We had the High Court case, unexpected, prevented the nation from offshore processing, put this Government in a different position to governments in the past. We could remedy that by going to the Parliament. 
We went to the Parliament and said let's put governments in the same position that they've been in the past to make appropriate decisions as executive government about offshore processing. Mr Abbott said no. 
We said okay, what about, we combine elements of what we are pushing and what you believe, Mr Abbott; so Malaysia, Nauru and an expert led process on Temporary Protection Visas. Mr Abbott said no.
Now I think that says more about Mr Abbott's outlook and character than it says about anything else.
HOST: Geoff Kitney wrote in the 'Financial Review' that Australians who hated this parliament hate it even more. Are politicians conscious of that sort of feeling out there?
PM: I'm conscious of the need to be providing solutions to the problems that our nation faces. That's why I've been so determined to deliver nation changing reforms like carbon pricing. And I saw you had the little bit with Gary Gray. 
I mean today is a Sunday where Australians will go about their ordinary lives, but today is a day too when we seize the future. We seize a clean energy future. 
The Minerals Resource Rent Tax come into operation, we seize a future of better sharing of the benefits of the mining boom.
These reforms stand alongside our other reforms: improving education, improving health, making sure we've got the benefits of new technology like the National Broadband Network. 
People elect governments to get the big things done and that is what my Government is doing and will continue to do.
HOST: Just in the time left I want to ask you about media policy. Your Government is apparently considering a public interest test for media ownership. What sort of test? What will they be tested on?
PM: What the Government's considering is the Convergence Review and the work done by Mr Finkelstein. And when we're in a position to respond to both, Barrie, we will.
HOST: There could be a public interest test?
PM: Barrie, I'm not going to get into rule-in, rule-out games or speculation. We've received two reviews which we thought were important in this changing age for the media where all of the platforms are converging; so newspapers aren't just newspapers anymore, they're online sites, they're applications on your iPad. 
We thought it was important to look again at media policy. And when we can respond to all of that we will.
HOST: And the revelations that Steve Lewis and News Limited might have had some involvement in the James Ashby, Peter Slipper matter. In conversations you've had with your colleagues, has that had an impact on their thinking?
PM: You would be aware, Barrie, that we set out on the Convergence Review and on the work done by Mr Finkelstein well before any of these events.
HOST: Yes, but do you think it's hardened up their attitudes?
PM: Look I think my colleagues have been conscious that we live in a rapidly changing age for the media, that in the past it was appropriate to say you regulate TV and radio over here, you regulate to some extent, and obviously we have a very free press, but government's engagement with newspapers is over here.
Now of course the whole lot is coming together and that is what is required us to look again.
HOST: Just finally, do you think Peter Slipper will be back in the chair when Parliament resumes in August?
PM: Look, I'm not making predictions about any of that. Mr Slipper, of course, faced some allegations from Mr Ashby and that matter is still being dealt with in the appropriate forum.
HOST: And there's no question, if he is cleared of these matters he will be back in the chair?
PM: Look, Barrie, I'm not going to speculate beyond noting, of course, that there is a legal proceeding in train here. Of course it's had a lot of spectacular coverage and you've been referring to some of it today.
HOST: But if he is cleared of all those matters why are you not able to say he won't be automatically cleared to go back into the chair?
PM: Look I don't want to prejudge circumstances-
HOST: But this is not prejudging. If he was to be cleared-
PM: Where there is a legal case involved. So Barrie, I'm not going to take it further than Mr Slipper is dealing with the legal matters in front of him. 
Yes, they have been the subject of a lot of publicity because of not only Mr Ashby releasing his legal case to the media, I think it's true to say even before he filed it, but at least around the same time as he filed it, and subsequently the nature of the response from Mr Slipper and the Commonwealth becoming clear too.
HOST: Thanks for your time this morning, appreciate it.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister thanks for joining us. The latest Fairfax/Nielsen poll has found support for the carbon price and the carbon tax has fallen four points to 33 per cent. Fifty-one per cent of people believe they are going to be worse off. The message just isn't getting through that the compensation is going to cover them.
PM: People will have the opportunity to judge for themselves, Kochie. Not based on the claims of politicians, but by what they can see in their own lives. And what people are going to see is tax cuts. Pensioners have already seen increases, people have seen increases in family payments. And people are going to see that the claims like ‘the coal industry is going to shut down' are all untrue.
So this is the opportunity for Australians to judge for themselves, not based on what the politicians tell them.
HOST: Yeah, they're not listening though because rarely do I see any coverage saying that 43 industries including a lot of manufacturing industries that pollute, they'll actually be paying a carbon tax of $1.30 a tonne, not 23 bucks because of some of the free credits that you're passing through to them. Why aren't people talking about that?
PM: Well, I'm certainly happy to talk about it, Kochie. You're right. For industries that are trade exposed, that are out there making their way in the world, the effective carbon price they pay is $1.30 a tonne. Generally, our big polluters are paying $23 a tonne and that's a very important point itself. It's a price being paid by businesses that generate carbon pollution, not by individuals, not by families.
Yes, there is some flow through impact into prices and that's why people are getting tax cuts from this week and why we have increased pensions and family payments and we'll keep increasing those pensions and family payments.
And the tax cuts this week will benefit 7 million Australians and it will mean that you get to keep more of the money you earn rather than giving it to the taxman.
HOST: But people are scared. Number one, they still remember you saying ‘there will be no carbon tax in my government' which I bet you could throttle the Greens for having the balance of power because you've had to cave in to them on this basis. And we should be directing some of our anger at the Greens for forcing this on too.
But the latest Newspoll out today, saying that the Party would be wiped out in Queensland, how big a concern is that for you?
PM: Well, Kochie, let's just be clear about why we've done this. Our nation has been debating putting a price on carbon for well over five years now-
HOST: I'm talking about Queensland. Why-
PM: And I'm happy to talk about Queensland too, Kochie but I do want to say, the reason for putting a price on carbon is because it's the right thing to do for our nation's future.
HOST: Yeah but you said you wouldn't do it. That's what gets under people's skin.
PM: I am very happy to address that too-
HOST: You needed the Greens to be in government so you have caved in to them. But Queensland-
PM: Kochie, let me answer that and then I'll answer your question on Queensland. We went, the Labor Party, to the 2007 election saying we wanted to have an emissions trading scheme. So did Mr Howard. That everybody wanted to put a price on carbon. By the 2010 campaign, the Coalition had changed its mind but I've always believed putting a price on carbon was what we needed to do to lock in our prosperity and do the right thing by our environment and that's what we are doing.
HOST: Okay, you said no carbon tax, but Queensland. You're going to get wiped out there. Not one seat on this latest Newspoll will you maintain.
PM: Well, Kochie, this isn't about the polls. This is about what's right for our nation's future. I mean, you do have to take some big decisions in politics to secure the nation's future.
And Kochie we've had some very divisive debates in the past: the GST, universal superannuation, Medicare. Some big divisive debates in the past. And when the dust has settled and people have had the opportunity to judge it all for themselves, they've recognised it was the right thing for the nation. And in the months ahead, Australians will have that opportunity about carbon pricing.
HOST: So you'll hope that it will be a kick up in the polls.
Just quickly before we let you go, we're all disappointed in all sides of politics for not settling on this asylum seeker policy last week. You've flick-passed it, going to the winter recess, to Angus Houston and his committee. Will you guarantee you'll abide by his recommendation, rather than just shelve the report?
PM: There will be no shelving of this report, Kochie. I've only ordered this expert panel to start work because I want to see us break this deadlock. I've been prepared to compromise. We did compromise last week.
HOST: Will you guarantee you'll accept the recommendations?
PM: Look, I have only done this because I want the recommendations-
HOST: And we'll put this to Mr Abbott too-
PM: Look, I've only done it Kochie, because I want the recommendations-
HOST: Okay, so that's a yes?
PM: And I have only done it because I've been prepared to compromise. We compromised last week. Sadly, the Greens and the Liberals did not move one millimetre.
HOST: So that's a yes, you'll guarantee?
PM: I'm trying to find another way through. Kochie, I'm going to weigh them with the utmost seriousness. I'm going to get the report, but I've only put this process in train because I think it's a good way to guide our nation through.
HOST: Okay, Julia Gillard, thanks very much.
PM: Thanks Kochie. 



HOST: Prime Minister good morning, welcome back to AM.PM: Good morning Sabra.HOST: Nielsen pollster John Stirton, you just heard him there, he says Labor has more problems than just the carbon tax; that voters consider the broken promise a separate issue and they're dark over that. They're cranky over asylum seeker policy. And he says even if the anger over the carbon tax is mollified, that your Government is in deep, deep trouble.
PM: Well Sabra, the purpose of a government is to do the big things that are in the nation's interests. Putting a price on carbon is in our nation's interest. It means that we will lock in prosperity for the future and do the right thing by our environment.For example it will mean that we take the equivalent of 45 million cars off the road in 2020. That's the amount of carbon pollution we'll see cut out of our atmosphere because we're putting a price on carbon.HOST: Prime Minister, but you said that Australians would come around on this carbon tax once it was legislated through the Parliament. That happened, public sentiment didn't change.Then you argued that people would change their view when compensation was in their pockets. That is now happening, but the public is still very hostile to this. The Nielsen Poll shows 62 per cent of people oppose it. That's a record result.PM: People I think will now have the opportunity to judge carbon pricing for themselves.There has been a hysterical fear campaign from the doomsday merchants who have tried to convince people over the last 12 months that on the time that carbon pricing came into being, that we'd see for example the coal industry go out of business.Now people are in a position from the start of carbon pricing and in the days ahead to weigh the worth of those claims.And of course the false claims that we won't be mining any more coal, that your Sunday roast is going to cost you $100; that your grocery shop is going to go up by 20 per cent; those claims will be proved false. So I think in the months-HOST: You've talked about-PM: I think in the months ahead people will look at carbon pricing and they'll have the opportunity to judge, not on the basis of what the politicians have said to them, but on the basis of what they're seeing in their own lives.HOST: Well that lived experience that you talk about - how long do you think it will be before they make up their mind, and either way to think that this is either a good thing or a bad thing.PM: I think we will see people in the months to come working out what carbon pricing is meaning for them and working out what it is meaning for the nation.Sabra, we've been through these kind of cycles in the past with big reforms that have been very controversial at the time, that now when people look back on them, people can't imagine that there was even ever a debate.Medicare, universal superannuation, things that we wouldn't be without that we really identify as part of the experience of being Australian were incredibly controversial at the time. And now of course they are accepted by everyone, indeed they have become bipartisan politics because they are so accepted.So getting the big reforms done, even in the face of controversy, is important for our country.HOST: But you and your ministers have been selling this compensation package for quite some time now. Only 5 per cent of people actually believe that they will be better off; 51 per cent believe they'll be worse off despite you saying that most people will be either better off or the same. Why isn't your message cutting through?PM: Well I think people will judge from their own experience. They won't have to listen to the pollies, they'll be able to judge for themselves.Seven million Australians will see a tax cut in their pay packet when they get it at the end of this week or fortnight, they'll be able to see how much more money is in their pay. They'll also be able to see-HOST: But that's the kind of message that you've been talking about for months now and that's not cutting through. Do you accept that you haven't done a very good job at selling this policy?PM: Sabra, it's only the 1st of July that we were able to deliver the tax cuts. It's only the forthcoming pay period that people will be able to see those tax cuts in their pay packet.And it's only over the period ahead, the months ahead, that people will be able to judge for themselves from their own lives rather than what has been said to them.And of course as we've been out there putting the facts before people, explaining how the scheme is going to work, we've seen from the other side of politics the most incredible fear campaign.And I think it's very interesting that Mr Abbott is no longer repeating some of his most hysterical claims, like the coal industry shutting down, Whyalla being wiped off the map, because he knows those claims were never true and he knows that Australians will be able to see that those claims were untrue.HOST: The evidence to date though is that the opposition to this tax isn't receding, if anything it's becoming more entrenched. The Australian Industry Group survey has found that 42 per cent of businesses across a range of industries plan to recover their increased costs by putting up their prices immediately.Wesfarmers chief Richard Goyder also says that it will just be a matter of time before suppliers start passing on their costs too. Might sentiment fall even further when this happens?PM: Sabra we've always been entirely upfront that it is the biggest polluters that pay the price here, but that we did expect some of that to be passed on and that to make a cost of living increase of less than a cent in a dollar.And that's why we are providing tax cuts, we've increased pensions, we've increased family payments and those benefits will continue for the future.But I would also direct your attention to the 300 businesses that have come out today and spoken positively about carbon pricing and the opportunities that will come for our nation from a clean energy future - businesses like GE, a global company, one of the biggest in the world, Westpac, one of our big, strong, local banks, all talking about the opportunities that will come from carbon pricing.HOST: If the public sentiment doesn't change on this and the polling figures remain about where they are right now, do you concede that Labor is headed for an electoral wipe-out? On Newspoll's figures today, they've done a further analysis, you'd have no Queensland Labor MPs elected to the House of Reps at the next federal election.PM: Sabra I'll let everybody else do the poll commentary. There's no shortage of people in the media and beyond who will do the poll commentary.What matters to me is doing the right thing for our country's future. And the right thing for our nation's future is to have less carbon pollution in our atmosphere and to be seizing the benefits of a clean energy future whilst we protect the standards of living of Australian families.And the vast majority of Australians will see us put a price on carbon, the start of it yesterday. And for their own lives they will come out square or in front as a result of the benefits we're providing through the tax system, pensions and family payments.HOST: Prime Minister, you're in Darwin for talks with the Indonesian President Yudhoyono. Will you discuss the increased number of asylum seeker boats arriving in Australia and whether Indonesia can do more to help Australia combat people smuggling?PM: I am in Darwin for my annual discussion with President Yudhoyono. This is an important opportunity for our two nations to talk about the full breadth of our relationship.Indonesia is a very important strategic partner for us. We've got a rapidly growing economic connection between our two countries.We work together in our region through the East Asia Summit. We work together globally for the health of the global economy through the G20. We also of course work together on counter-terrorism and combating the vile trade of people smuggling.
So yes, that will be in our discussions. But we will be talking about all of the issues in this very broad, very deep relationship.HOST: Does Indonesia need more assistance either in additional naval assets to patrol their waters or extra personnel?PM: Look we will be talking about these questions as we talk through the full sweep of our relationship.HOST: Are they doing enough to stop the boats leaving?PM: We work very, very strongly with Indonesia. We've got a great deal of cooperation with them. And the Indonesians themselves have been tackling the problem of people smuggling. They have disrupted people smuggling ventures. They have made considerable numbers of arrests of people smugglers.HOST: Will you accept all the findings of this expert panel that you've now set up to look at options to deal with asylum seekers, even if it recommends the dumping of the Malaysia swap?PM: Look I set up this expert panel for a reason and I set it up because I want to see our nation break the current parliamentary deadlock.The truth is in the last parliamentary week, last week, Australians I think would have been disappointed to see the performance of people in the Parliament.We as a Government have been prepared to compromise in order to get a solution here. Unfortunately our preparedness to compromise was met by the Opposition and the Greens not being prepared to shift one millimetre from their views.HOST: The question now though is if this panel recommends-PM: Well I'm still in the business of working through to get our nation a solution and that's why I've asked eminent Australians to guide us to the next stage.Of course Sabra, everything that the expert panel says I am going to view as having the utmost significance. I would not have set the panel up otherwise.HOST: The International Criminal Court says it expects a four member legal team, including Australian Melinda Taylor, to be released either today or tomorrow. Is that your advice?PM: Look I don't want to go in detail into that right now Sabra. We'll be dealing with that during the course of the day.HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for talking to AM.PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good to talk to you again. Good afternoon.
PM: Hi Tim.
HOST: Can you tell me first of all about your anticipated agenda meeting with the Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono who's just arrived Darwin and of course the much-discussed, much-vexed topic of asylum seekers. Will that be on the agenda?
PM: I'm just about to go to an event with President Yudhoyono, so I've had the opportunity to welcome him to Australia today.
We are now going to look at a disaster centre that can bolt up a hospital for people in desperate circumstances, and Indonesia has taken a lot of leadership across our region trying to bring countries together to respond to natural disasters and we've seen far too many of them.
Tim, my agenda with the Indonesian President is a broad one. It will be across our economic relationship, our people-to-people links, the work we do together globally and regionally, but yes, we will be talking about the work we also do together on people smuggling.
HOST: Is it as pressing an issue for the Indonesian President as it is for you, the Australian Prime Minister?
PM: Look, I can't speak to you about the Indonesian President's top ten or top twenty issues. He is obviously a man with many issues on his mind, as Indonesia emerges on the world stage as they continue to lift people out of poverty, as they see dynamic growth in their economy, and of course it's a democracy that is going from strength to strength.
And one of the wonderful things I've got to do as a Member of Parliament was to go as an election observer to the first free, fair election in Indonesia.
HOST: Are you confident that you can at least come back to Parliament when it resumes in six weeks with something firm from Indonesia given the impasse from last week that will allay the fears perhaps of Australians that there is another massacre, another tragedy imminent on Australia's coast?
PM: We already cooperate very strongly with Indonesia in combating people smuggling, and the Indonesians do have a good track record, one that they can point to, of disrupting people smuggling ventures and arresting people for people smuggling.
So of course I'll talk to the President of Indonesia about these matters during the course of our discussions at a leader-to-leader meeting. But we can't ask the President of Indonesia to solve what is an issue for the Australian Parliament, which is getting Australia's laws in the right shape so that we can have at our disposal offshore processing options.
I've been working to do that, I've been prepared to compromise to get that done.
Unfortunately that preparedness to compromise has been met with, you know, not one millimetre of movement by either the Coalition or by the Greens, which is why I have created an expert panel to try and find a way for us to get out of this gridlock and to see compromise all round and effective action.
HOST: Prime Minister, Clive Palmer who of course you are very well-versed in, and of course who wants to unseat your Treasurer Wayne Swan, has said today he wants the Government to let asylum seekers get on planes and then let Customs and Immigration deal with them when they get to Australia.
Now we keep hearing the same solutions or variations of the same solutions, but could Clive Palmer, perhaps coming from a very different approach, have come up with something that is of some merit?
[AUDIO DROPS OUT]
HOST: Clive Palmer says that the Government should be allowing asylum seekers to get on planes and be processed by Customs and Immigration in Australia, rather than what's going on at the moment.
Is he onto something perhaps, with an unusual approach?
PM:  Look, not in my view, no, I don't think Mr Palmer is onto something, I'm just not sure how he's thought that through.
Clearly the concern would be that if you just let people fly on in then you will see them in astronomical numbers.
HOST: Now onto the carbon tax, how concerned are you that the Australian consumer is, perhaps in small increments or large, going to be the biggest loser if you like from the imposition of the carbon tax?
With the very best will in the world of your Government, the very best will in the world of the ACCC, that it will ultimately be the individual Australian or the Australian family that gets belted for the carbon tax.
PM: Well I'm very confident that that won't be the case and I can explain my confidence to you.
We've had Treasury, the same experts that advised government when the GST was enacted, model what is going to be the impact of the flow-through for carbon pricing for consumers.
They got it right under the GST, and they're saying for carbon pricing the impact for Australians who just go about their business and buy the things that they and their family need is less than a cent in a dollar.
The single biggest impact is a ten per cent increase in electricity, and the jury is already in on that. The price regulators around the country have spoken, and have said that the impact will be ten per cent or less.
So, they've already got the single biggest part of it right, and so I'm very confident that what they've said to us and we are saying to the Australian people is right too.
The cost of living impact will be less than a cent in a dollar and people will have at their disposal tax cuts, pension increases and family payment increases to meet that flow-through.
People  -  7 million of them  -  will see a tax cut in their pay packet to help them with the flow-through of carbon pricing, and around the country millions of households, millions of families will actually come out square or better off.
HOST: Should  -  the case we've been discussing here in Brisbane today  -  an energy supplier be talking about the carbon pricing mechanism and the impact it's having on prices.
I've got a letter from one that says, ‘The carbon pricing mechanism is just one of many factors that impact the price of energy we buy and in turn sell to you. As such we will not be separating out the cost of the carbon pricing mechanism'.
Is there enough clarity, perhaps, in this?
PM: Well I'd prefer people to have more and more and more information, but we know from the people who regulate electricity prices in Queensland, in NSW, around the country, that the impact of carbon pricing is ten per cent or less, that is that the Treasury modelling got it right.
The single biggest impact in terms of electricity bills is all of the cost that goes into the poles and the wires and the infrastructure. That is putting a significant imposition, but of course that's all about state government planning and state government arrangements.
HOST: Prime Minister, can I just read you a little of a letter I got from a listener, Greta, a retiree, who says she sometimes has a quick lunch at a restaurant, a fast-food restaurant, and as a pensioner she gets a free coffee but noticed that on 1 July when she had a quick chicken wrap at this restaurant that their prices had gone up form that day.
Not that surprising, but do you not think that a company such as this who puts up its prices that day, that a lot more companies are going to do the same thing?
The price of one lunch item went up by 20 per cent, and this is the sort of thing I'm talking about, where it won't be obvious but there will be increases where some are large some are small, that might be put down to the carbon mechanism, perhaps might not directly be put down to it but there will be profiteering taking place in the margins.
PM: Well if Greta is a pensioner, then she will see $338 extra to help her with the flow-through of carbon pricing, and we've deliberately factored that so that people like Greta are getting 20 per cent more than they need to deal with the average impact of carbon pricing on them.
That is, we wanted them to end up in front. In terms of profiteering from carbon pricing, any business that falsely misrepresents to anyone that a price has gone up because of carbon pricing when it hasn't, when they're just putting it up, is that risk of a million dollar fine.
HOST: Now, I would imagine you were expecting to wake up to disappointing polling today given the last week of course, and the carbon price coming in, but how long will it take do you think before Australians understand the true impact of this? And it's the impact that you're describing I guess, for the purposes of our conversation, rather than the impact Tony Abbott's describing.
PM: Well I think the important thing now is we've listened to months and months and months of fear campaigning: coal's not going to be mined anymore; Whyalla's going to get wiped off the map; the Sunday roast is going to cost $100; and it will become clear to people that all of these fear campaign items have just been completely ridiculous, completely false.
People now have the opportunity to judge for themselves. They don't have to listen to the politicians, they can just judge for themselves.
Look at their pay packets, look at their pension, see the extra money coming in, go to the shops, do their weekly shopping, buy the same items they normally buy and work out what they're paying for them and just judge for themselves.
I think in the months ahead, people will be able to work this through and I do believe too Australians will come to see this as an important reform for our nation's future so that we are tackling climate change and seizing a clean energy future.
HOST: Do you wish you had called it a pollution tax rather than a carbon tax? Do you think a pollution tax might not have been the controversy magnet, if you like, that the carbon tax has?
PM: At the end of the day I don't think it's about the words, I think it's about what happens.
I think it's about the lived experience, I think Australians are a common sense, practical people and they'll work out what actually happens.
And Tim, we've lived through big fear campaigns before. You know, Medicare, we wouldn't be without Medicare now. It was the subject of an enormous fear campaign. Universal superannuation, the subject of an enormous fear campaign, was going to destroy the national economy-
HOST: The GST?
PM: Australia was going to be kaput, and we all know that these reforms now are not only accepted, they are cherished as part of what it is to be Australian.
We've got decent health care and a decent way of helping people in their retirement. So, you know, we've lived through controversial reforms before. People ultimately end up judging them on what they can see and feel in their own lives.
HOST: Prime Minister, you've been very generous with your time, but can I ask a favour before you go, and that is could you please get Craig Emerson to stop singing?
PM: I'm not going to make any false promises!
HOST: Thank you for that, nice to talk to you again.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning John.
HOST: The latest polls show support for the carbon tax is at the lowest it's been since the idea was announced. That makes it pretty tough for you, doesn't it
PM: The important thing here John, is that this is right for our nation. I want us to be a nation that seizes a clean energy future, that does the right thing by the environment, and by putting a price on carbon we'll do the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road in 2020.
And does the right thing by our economy, keeping it strong and so we do have to move to a clean energy future, and at the same time I want to make sure we're protecting Australian families as we move towards this future.
That's why the vast majority of Australians because they'll see tax cuts, pension increases and family payment increases, will actually come out square or better off after carbon pricing.
HOST: It's still a broken promise.
PM: When I said those words during the election campaign John, I meant every one of them. And I certainly didn't mean to mislead anyone. I'd gone to the 2007 election and the 2010 election saying we needed to put a price on carbon and have an emissions trading scheme.
Prime Minister Howard went to the 2007 election saying we need to put a price on carbon and have an emissions trading scheme. We will get to that emissions trading scheme in three years time.
For the first three years we'll have a fixed price for big businesses to pay for the carbon pollution they generate, a carbon tax, but we'll get to where we wanted to go to, the emissions trading scheme.
HOST: According to many, it's a big price we're going to pay.
PM: The price for individuals will be less than a cent in a dollar. Seven million Australians will see a tax cut in their pay packet when they get it at the end of this week or the end of this fortnight.
For many that tax cut will be around $300, but for some it will be in the order of $500 or $600. That's because we are increasing the amount of money you get to keep before the taxman does anything to you. At the moment that amount of money is $6000. We're increasing it to $18,200. So you can earn that amount of money and the taxman doesn't get a cent.
John we've also increased pensions and will keep those benefits flowing through, and we've increased family payments.
HOST: But $23 a ton. It's pretty high, given the international price is a lot less.
PM: Well let's be very clear. Individuals are not paying a carbon price. They're not paying a price per ton. It is big businesses that generate carbon pollution who are paying that price. Around the world we see various prices for carbon pollution.
We see countries that have prices like Australia's. We see countries that have got prices above Australia's. But what we do know is that around the world people are moving to change their economies so that their economies are cleaner and generate less carbon pollution, and we can't afford to be left behind.
HOST: You keep calling it a carbon price. Why do you avoid that word tax? It's a tax.
PM: Look I'm not going to get hung up on words John.
HOST: But Prime Minister, with the greatest respect, and you know I do show you a great deal of respect, you always say ‘I'm not going to get tied up on words or semantics.' Why not? It's a pretty important word. It's not a price, it's a tax.
PM: It is a price. Let's be clear John, exactly what's happening here. Big businesses that generate carbon pollution will have to get a permit for each ton of carbon pollution they're going to generate. To get that permit they will have to pay a price. That price is $23 a ton.
When we move to an emissions trading scheme, the price will be set by a market that buys and sells these permits.
For the first three years, the price will be fixed by government. So it's a carbon price, a price per ton, fixed by government.
That means from the point of view of those businesses it's effectively like a tax, so call it a carbon price, call it a carbon tax, at the end of the day that doesn't really matter.
What really matters is that we are cutting carbon pollution, keeping our economy strong and providing benefits to people so the vast majority of people will either come out in front or square after the flow-through impacts of carbon pricing.
HOST: How can they be in front if they've got to pay more in tax?
PM: Individuals aren't paying more in tax, John. They're getting tax cuts.
HOST: Yes I know, but you're saying that people are going to be paying less in tax. They're not; they're going to be paying more.
PM: No, individuals, John pay tax through the income tax scheme. You know, the tax that comes out of your pay packet.
HOST: Yes I'm certainly aware of that.
PM: And people will see, people earning less than $80,000 a year will see less tax coming out of their pay packets. The carbon tax, John, is not paid by individuals, there's no individual person in this country who is paying the carbon tax.
That is paid by big businesses that generate carbon pollution. Those businesses will seek to pass some of that cost on. That's the impact for individuals. Some of that cost will flow through to the things you and I buy and everybody else buys. That impact will be less than a cent in a dollar.
HOST: How do you know that?
PM: We know that John because-
HOST: Aren't there going to be opportunists out there who are going to make the most out of increasing prices, blaming the carbon tax?
PM: Let's go through both your questions. How do I know that? We know that because the experts at Treasury  -  the same people who modelled the impacts of the GST  -  have modelled the impacts of carbon pricing.
The single biggest impact for individuals is on their electricity bill; a 10 per cent increase. Already around the country, the people who regulate electricity prices have said yes that's right, the increase will be 10 per cent or slightly less.
So the single biggest thing Treasury had to model and get right, the jury is already in. Their sums are right. And what that means is we can say with a great degree of confidence that the total cost of living impact will be less than a cent in a dollar, which means that we've factored the assistance to families and individuals right.
So that's the first question. In terms of people who seek to profiteer, if there is anyone out there who tries to whack on a big new price and pretend that that's about carbon pricing, people should be ringing the ACCC, the competition people, who are ready to bust down on that kind of conduct hard, and people who are trying to get away with that are at risk of paying fines of more than a million dollars.
HOST: I saw your comparison to the argument over the GST at the weekend. Surely isn't the difference that John Howard took it to an election, you didn't?
PM: Well, carbon pricing, needing to act on climate change, it's gone to the 2007 and 2010 election. What we've seen is a very big fear campaign run.
People had all sorts of myths peddled at them, you know, people have heard claims like Whyalla will be wiped off the map, we won't be mining coal in this country anymore, the cost of what they buy at the supermarket will go up by 20 per cent. None of those things are true John.
HOST: Where did these fear statements come from?
PM: The Leader of the Opposition has made a number of them, as have other members of his frontbench team, and these statements will be proven to be untrue. They're clearly untrue, Whyalla's still there, we're still mining coal, prices haven't gone up by 20 per cent at the shops.
HOST: That's true.
PM: So a lot of fear's been peddled but now, John, we are at the stage where people can judge for themselves. They can go out, work it out for themselves, they don't have to listen to the politicians.
They can look at their pay packets, they can look at how much they're spending at the shops, and they can make their own judgments.
HOST: Okay, if the Coalition wins the next election, and if you take any notice of the polls, and I know that politicians don't take any notice of the polls when they're not favourable, when they are favourable they do, but if they win the next election, do you think they'll be able to repeal the tax?
PM: I don't think they'll try, John. There'll be  -  should Mr Abbott end up as Prime Minister, and I'll be fighting this out every step of the way in our nation's interests, but should Mr Abbott end up as Prime Minister then he'll engage in a bit of a fiddle, a bit of a fudge, a bit of a name change and carbon pricing will stay.
HOST: Do you really believe that?
PM: Oh, absolutely.
HOST: A number of businesses have come out in support of the pricing system, I've noticed in today's newspapers. Do you think you're received enough public support from people generally?
PM: People will participate in the public debate how they choose to do so, but I think it is significant that 300 businesses have come out today. Global giants like GE, major businesses like Westpac, like Pacific Hydro, all talking about the benefits and opportunities that carbon pricing will give our nation.
HOST: Given the price, won't it put all our industries that export overseas at a massive disadvantage to them when they're competing with other countries?
PM: That's a very important question, John, and we were very conscious of it as we designed the scheme. So for our trade exposed industries that are out there competing with the rest of the world, we are actually providing them with assistance so the effective carbon price for them is $1.30 a ton, not $23.
HOST: In some cases, there either won't be a carbon tax charged at all by some countries, and other countries pay a lot less than Australia. We are still going to be disadvantaged.
PM: Well we are assisting those trade exposed industries, so their effective price is $1.30 a ton, so a very modest impost indeed.
HOST: Any price that comes along, and there will be plenty of price increases coming along, anything that people don't like is now going to be blamed on the carbon tax. How do you, as a Government, argue against that?
PM: Well John, I think we've all got a responsibility to make sure people have the facts. So you know, I think you, I, as a nation, people do want to have the facts. They do want to make up their own mind so anybody who's making a false claim that a price rise is due to carbon pricing when it's not should be exposed. They're not giving people credible information.
HOST: Okay, but there's going to be a lot of administration required to do this. You're expecting people not to take, grab hold of an opportunity to make some more money. It's a very big ask.
PM: Well John let's be clear about the administration. It is only the businesses that are paying the carbon price per ton that need to do any administration at all. That's less than 500 businesses in this country.
Any other business doesn't have to do anything different to what they do with their business systems now. There's not one additional piece of paper they need to get their hands on and fill out.
HOST: Okay, do you agree however that any price rise in business or anything that the people don't like, it's going to be blamed on your carbon tax?
PM: Not if people are dealing with the facts, John.
HOST: (Inaudible)
PM: I think Australians are a smart people, they're a practical people, they're a common sense people. I think there will be people like you who are taking very seriously their responsibility to give people the facts so they can judge for themselves.
And so, anyone who is out there making a reckless claim about a price rise when it's not due to carbon pricing should be exposed as trying to hoodwink the Australian people. That's not the right thing to do.
HOST: No it's not the right thing to do. Is Joe Hockey making reckless claims? Is Tony Abbott making reckless claims?
PM: Joe Hockey, Tony Abbott; have made ridiculous claims.
HOST: Reckless?
PM: Reckless and ridiculous, and they are already  -  you have probably seen over the last few weeks  -  trying to backpedal because they know how reckless and ridiculous these claims have been.
So they used to wander round talking about a wrecking ball destroying our economy, a cobra strike, we'd all be dead. Now they're changing their rhetoric to a python squeeze to try and give people the impression it makes a difference over time.
Every time Mr Abbott says python squeeze, what he's actually saying is that for the last more than 12 months he hasn't been making credible claims and he knows it. That's why he's changing what he's saying.
HOST: Tell me, how many people have now been employed to administer this carbon tax. How many extra people have you put on?
PM: We've got a Climate Change Authority that will do the administration of it, we've got a Clean Energy Finance Corporation, a $10 billion fund to make sure that we are generating the clean energy projects that we need for the future. I can't give you a total number of people employed, but John, are there people administering the scheme? You bet.
In the same way that there are people administering our income tax scheme, there are people administering Medicare, there are people administering our pension payments. You can't do big things in government without people who then attend to the necessary paperwork.
HOST: Just back to the poll. The poll in The Australian today suggests not even Kevin Rudd would survive the next election. That would seem to me to make the task virtually insurmountable. 
PM: Well I'm not a commentator on the opinion polls, John. I'm someone who's always got their eye on this nation's future, and the question that confronts us as a country is do we want to have a clean energy future, do we want to tackle climate change, do we want to reduce carbon pollution? I believe the answer to all of those questions is yes, and putting a price on carbon as we did yesterday is the cheapest and most effective way to get us there.
HOST: Even if the effect of the carbon tax isn't as great as Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey-
PM: Well already their claims have been proven to be, in the words of Gary Gray's mum, bunkum. Mr Abbott's been telling us for month after month that the coal industry would close down yesterday. Well there are people all round the country still mining coal today John.
HOST: But all that put aside, Prime Minister, it's still a new tax you promised we wouldn't get.
PM: Well John, I've fully explained that to you. I believe in carbon pricing, I spoke about that in the 2010 election. Every side of politics committed to that in the 2007 election, and now we've got it done.
Not the way I anticipated we would get it done  -  I didn't foresee this minority parliament, but we've got it done and that's what matters for our nation's future.
HOST: You've had a hell of a lot on your plate, you've been very busy. You've had to contend with asylum seekers as well  -  more than 90 boat people on a couple of boats trying to reach Australia. If this panel set up to decide on a solution doesn't back the Bali Process Bill, would you then agree to scrap it?
PM: I set up this panel because obviously I want to break the deadlock here. I wouldn't have set it up John if I was just going to discount its recommendations. I wouldn't have done that. I've set it up because I genuinely want our nation to have the recommendations of these experts at its disposal as a way to break the parliamentary deadlock.
But when we look and the parliamentary deadlock last week, I have been prepared to compromise, the Government has been prepared to compromise.
The Opposition and the Greens have moved not one millimetre from the original positions. I think that that is very disappointing, and I think Australians want to see us achieve change here
So having compromised and seen that compromise be met with people who are just prepared to say no at any price, I've now put in place this new way of trying to get us through.
HOST: The tears that were shed in Parliament, were they crocodile tears?
PM: At the end of the day, people are judged on what they get done, and the important thing is getting effective offshore processing here.
I mean, I want to see that, Mr Abbott says he wants to see that. But he's so negative he's actually now voting in Parliament against the things he says he believes in. He did that last week.
HOST: Yeah. Back to the tears  -  do you think they were genuine?
PM: Look I'm not going to cast doubts on motivations of individuals, but what matters is what you achieve out of it.
HOST: Will you broach offshore processing with Mr Yudhoyono when you talk to him today?
PM: President Yudhoyono is coming to Australia today. I'll be meeting with him in Darwin. It's our annual Leaders' Dialogue. This is important for both of our nations. I mean, Indonesia matters to Australia a great deal.
We've got a very strong economic relationship which is rapidly growing, we've got strong people-to-people links, you know hundreds of thousands of Australians every year go to Indonesia. We welcome Indonesian students into Australian universities.
We work together for the global economy in the G20 in our region and the East Asia Summit. And together we've been fighting terrorism and fighting people smuggling. So yes, I'll be talking to the President of Indonesia about people smuggling today-
HOST: And offshore processing?
PM: The issue about offshore processing is not one for Indonesia. I mean, it's not for the President of Indonesia to talk about bills in the Australian Parliament, but we work strongly together with Indonesia to fight people smuggling.
So yes I'll be speaking to the President of Indonesia about that but also so much more.
HOST: Okay Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time. As usual you've been extremely generous with it and we thank you.
PM: Thanks John. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good afternoon.
PM: Good afternoon.
HOST: Thank you for taking the time to talk to us. I know you are proud about bringing in the carbon tax yesterday, but you also feel any element of guilt considering you told the Australian people we wouldn't be getting one?
PM: I've explained that on many occasions, and I'm happy to explain it now. When I said those words, I meant every one of them. We talked in the 2010 election campaign about having an emissions trading scheme, a price on carbon and indeed both major political parties; John Howard's Coalition and the Labor Party went to the 2007 election campaign promising an emissions trading scheme. Well we're going to get to that emissions trading scheme in three years time, yes we're going to have this fixed price first, and I didn't foresee that as the route to get there, but we'll get to where we need to go to cut carbon pollution and tackle climate change.
HOST: So to my question is the pride mixed with an element of guilt as well?
PM: Well look I've just explained to you I meant every word of what I said during the election campaign-
HOST: But considering the circumstances since?
PM: I couldn't foresee the circumstances of this minority parliament, but presented with the opportunity to get this major reform done for the nation, so we cut carbon pollution whilst keeping our economy strong, then obviously I've used the opportunity because it's so important to our future.
HOST: Okay, so you don't feel guilty about those famous words?
PM: Look I've just explained my view to you.
HOST: Okay, you haven't answered the question though I should say Prime Minister.
PM: Well I've just explained my view to you, I meant those words when I said them.
HOST: Alright, those words, you're speaking about those words.
GRAB: There will be no carbon tax under a government I lead.
HOST: They are those. Is it appropriate for your front bench to be making light of people's concerns over the weekend. I notice the Treasurer, Wayne Swan on Twitter saying up on the roof today to check that it's in good nick in case the sky falls in tomorrow. Craig Emerson said, I thought the end of the world would be somewhat more dramatic, the suns even up. This is one of the biggest changes to our economy. It's based on a broken promise and your front bench is arrogant enough to be rubbing peoples' nose in it. Is that appropriate?
PM: I don't think that's what they've been doing at all. What they've been doing is sending up some of the most ridiculous fear campaign slogans that we've heard from Mr Abbott and other doomsayers. We've had Mr Abbott and others for more than a year now, predicting effectively the end of the world on the first of July. So I think what you're seeing Wayne Swan do and others do is to send up those claims-
HOST: Is that fair though considering the history here. As you've pointed out it's not the greatest history here in terms of you personally, considering those famous words. Isn't it one of those moments where it's best to say let's just shut up and move on, and hope for the best, as opposed to rubbing peoples' nose in it?
PM: I just don't agree with your characterisation at all. I think the important thing now is that the Australian people can decide for themselves. They won't actually have to listen to the politicians. They will be able to decide for themselves what's in their pay packet now as a result of receiving a tax cut, what increase they're seeing in their pension, if they're on the pension. What increase they're seeing in their family payment if they're looking after kids. And they'll be able to go to the shops and do their weekly shop and compare the result.
HOST: Prime Minister, if you want the people to decide for themselves, why not put it to an election?
PM: Well people will be able to judge from this experience of living with carbon pricing. I do think it's fair enough given so much doom and gloom and fear has been spread, to reassure people that none of those reckless claims are going to come true. We'll do that with straight information and occasionally with humour.
HOST: Okay, in terms of some business leaders today, I notice quotes from Richard Goyder, Wesfarmers, who says it's only a matter time before supermarket prices start rising due to the carbon tax. Dick Warburton, Manufacturing Australia, this will reduce competitiveness or result in job losses in Australia. Innes Willox, Australian Industry Group, businesses have said to us they are going to put their prices up, the carbon tax has started so people will start paying from today. They don't paint an encouraging picture, do they?
PM: Well I'm happy to go through each of those statements, but I think you should draw your listeners' attention too, to the fact that 300 businesses are out in today's newspapers, global giants like GE, Westpac and others, saying that carbon pricing will give our nation new opportunities. That they believe that carbon pricing will make a difference for our nation's future.
On the passing through of prices, we've always said carbon pricing is a price paid by big businesses who generate a lot of carbon pollution. Paying a price will give them an incentive to change, and cut that carbon pollution, and that's what they'll do. We've always said that there would be a flow through though, to the prices that you and I pay in the shops, and Aussies around the nation pay in the shops. That impact is less than a cent in a dollar, and that is why people will see tax cuts in their next pay packets if they earn less than $80,000 a year. And people are also seeing increases in the pension and family payments, which will continue.
HOST: We are talking live to Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Prime Minister you point out that business leaders say different things. In terms of the discussions though between you and the people of Australia, you said around the time of the 2010 election when you were announcing the ill-fated citizens assembly on climate change, you said that only when there was a deep and lasting consensus would you look at introducing a carbon price. Can you honestly say that there is a deep and lasting consensus that's already arrived on this?
PM: This is a tremendously controversial reform, I understand that. In the same way that Medicare, when it was introduced, was tremendously controversial. Universal superannuation was tremendously controversial, and the list goes on. And now, if you went out in the streets and said to Aussies, would you be without Medicare? Do you reckon universal superannuation is a good thing or a bad thing? People would look at you a little bit confused and say of course we want Medicare, of course we want universal superannuation.
HOST: You don't quite have that deeper, lasting consensus though do you?
PM: I'm making the point that I actually believe in the period of time to come, Australians will look back on the start of carbon pricing and come to see it as the right thing for our nation's future, to cut carbon pollution and to seize a cleaner energy future.
HOST: We had a look last week at refrigeration costs, particularly when you're talking about commercial operations and the cost of refrigerants. I saw a price list from a company Heatcraft. Refrigeration 23 was 748 per kilogram. It's now 1,690. Refrigerant 134A was I think $65 per kilogram. It's now $181 per kilogram. And then the vegetable growers around the country are talking today about costs being passed on. Are you sure that this is going to have what you describe as a minimal impact on the average person out there?
PM: I can say to you I'm sure, because we've had Treasury model the impact, the cost of living impact. These are the same professionals that modelled the impact of the GST for the Howard Government, and got it right. And the impact of the GST was three times bigger than the impact of carbon pricing. And the biggest impact people will see from putting a price on carbon is they will see a ten per cent increase in their electricity bill. On that, whether we've got the increase in electricity right, the jury is already in. The regulators around the country have spoken and said the increase will be ten per cent or less than ten per cent. So on the single biggest bit we already know, the Treasury modelling has got a tick.
On the refrigerant gases, I think we've just got to be clear about this. There is some information floating around about price changes here, which isn't right. But also what people might want to know about refrigerant gases is that those gases have been the subject of special payments and special levies for quite a long period of time now, going back to the Howard Government, because these gases are particularly powerful. Far more powerful than carbon dioxide. There's a long-standing arrangement for refrigerant gases, which is a different arrangement.
HOST: Can we move on to asylum seekers, I know you've got limited time, and the deaths of people at sea.  This is what you said in your first press conference as Prime Minister.
GRAB: I can understand that Australians are disturbed when they see boats arrive on our shores unannounced. But I am full of understanding of the perspective of the Australian people that they want strong management of our borders, and I will provide it.
HOST: Since then PM there's been 204 boats, 13,451 arrivals and hundreds die at sea.
PM: And since then we've seen the High Court change our understanding of Australian law and prevent this Government under current laws doing what governments in the past have been able to do. And that is, to determine to have offshore processing.
HOST: Well why were you so insistent on East Timor and Malaysia? There was an opportunity to adopt the Coalition's policy, was it that hard to admit that John Howard had it right?
PM: It's not a question of that at all. We are receipt of the clearest possible advice that the strongest deterrent we can send to people smugglers today is our arrangement with Malaysia.  But I didn't go into the parliament and insist that it's just my plan and no-one else's plan. I went to the parliament and said, we're all going to need to compromise here and I am prepared to compromise. I'm prepare to put with my plan for Malaysia, the Opposition's key plan, which is a detention centre in Nauru, and even to have an expert-led review of Temporary Protection Visas that the Opposition is so attached to.
HOST: Prime Minister, that expert review, putting this thing to a committee, we know we're going to get to the end of that committee and Tony Abbott's still not going to play ball. You've had two years to do something about this.
PM: What sort of person is it Ben, and I suggest you ask this question of Tony Abbott when you next speak to him, what sort of person is it who would say, people are drowning at sea and an expert panel has spoken and I won't listen to them.
HOST: Let me flip that for a moment, if people are dying at sea and you have an opportunity to get some offshore processing going up, but only under Tony Abbott's plan, why not do that? What kind of person stands by and allows people to keep on dying when you have an opportunity to get a deal up, albeit on the Coalition's terms.
PM: Someone who like me has accepted expert advice about what will work, the expert advice to us is that Nauru, by itself, won't work.
HOST: But the Coalition has never had Nauru by itself. There's TPVs, they're turning boats around.
PM: Well let's go through it element by element. Every step of the way here, I have been prepared to compromise and the Leader of the Opposition and indeed the Australian Greens have moved not one millimetre. Ben, you point to the Opposition's plan, turning boats around, the Navy says this is too dangerous for Navy personnel. And turn them around to where, when Indonesia won't take them back. Then on Nauru, we have direct advice from the same experts who advised the Howard Government, that by itself, it won't work.
On Temporary Protection Visas, I had my view about Temporary Protection Visas, but I have said, for the purpose of getting something done, let's put Malaysia, with Nauru, and have experts provide advice about the deterrents of Temporary Protection Visas, that is I've been prepared to work hard to get a compromise here, and I am still prepared to work hard to get a compromise here, which is why I've asked three eminent Australians to advise the Government and indeed the nation about what is the best way forward.
HOST: You were willing to let the Greens call the shots on the carbon tax to get into Government, why aren't you willing to let the Coalition call the shots to save lives at sea?
PM: Because your question is wrong.
HOST: But you didn't want a carbon tax?
PM: That's not what has happened here-
HOST: You didn't want a carbon tax Prime Minister, Bob Brown wanted one, he got one. Why not give Tony Abbott his boat plan if it means saving lives at sea?
PM: The comparison isn't a fair one and isn't right. On carbon pricing, the Labor Party has been to two elections saying we support putting a price on carbon. Indeed Prime Minister Howard said that when he was Prime Minister too. We have worked to realise that plan because we believe it's in the best interests of our nation.
On getting offshore processing, we have been prepared every step of the way to be reasonable and to seek a compromise that everybody can work with and everyone can live with. What we have been met with in response to that is belligerence and a preparedness to move not one millimetre. Now I am still striving for change here, I'm striving to get a solution and that's why I've appointed the expert panel and I think it really is remarkable that before the expert panel of eminent Australians who Mr Abbott says he respects, before they've even delivered their expert advice, Mr Abbott is saying no, he won't even listen to it.
HOST: You are critical of Tony Abbott's position on this. Do you acknowledge your own stuff-ups, excuse my bluntness, on this, considering East Timor, considering Malaysia. I mean, they've been two long years here Ms Gillard.
PM: And I would enact the Malaysia arrangement tomorrow if we got the legislative change we need.
HOST: But the High Court said no to Malaysia.
PM: Well let's just be accurate here, the High Court has effectively said no to all offshore processing. That is why we need legislative change, even if Ben, you woke up as Prime Minister tomorrow and said let's do Nauru, you would have to go to the parliament and get legislation to do it. To make sure it was on a firm legal footing.
HOST: Okay I'm going to hit you with two quick ones and then let you go. In the last Budget, 22,000 single soldiers over the age of 21 had their annual free flight home axed. All for the sake of $15 million, now how do you justify this kind of treatment of diggers when double that amount, $30 million, is blown on advertising the carbon tax?
PM: The recommendation about that treatment of entitlements wasn't something that came out of the direct Budget processes. It was something that came out of an ongoing review process in Defence, a strategic review in Defence.
HOST: Okay, there's a super trawler from the Netherlands, described as an ocean-going vacuum cleaner, rumoured to be heading to Australia to fish our waters. Can you guarantee that this won't be happening?
PM: There was that rumour floating around. There was a rumour about a super trawler fishing off Tasmania. When that was in the media, certainly I looked at it and what in fact turned out to be the case was that no application had been made by that trawler to the relevant authority. There is a fisheries authority here and you can't go fishing until you get a permit. The permit is not determined on the size of the boat, it's determined on the sustainability of the catch. So no-one will get a permit for an unsustainable catch, because the fisheries authority is there, making sure that people's applications are properly looked at and they only get permits for the right amount.
HOST: So in regards to that super trawler, is there any guarantee that it won't be coming?
PM: The fisheries authority will deal with it, and they won't care whether it's a super trawler or a super-super trawler or whatever size the trawler is. What they will look at is the fishery and what is a sustainable catch and so it might be a very big boat, after very few fish, but that is for the fishery authority to determine. They're not persuaded by the size of the boat.
HOST: We're one day into the carbon tax, obviously a lot depends on it, but your survival depends on this as well, doesn't it, in terms of the coming weeks and months. It's important that you get this right because you may not be around otherwise.
PM: Well this is about the nation's future. That's the important thing. The important thing is we live in a country that is cutting carbon pollution that we can say to ourselves for example in 2020 that we're seeing the equivalent of 45 million cars taken off the road. That we're seeing people seize the benefits of a clean energy future, and at the same time, we're seeing our economy stay strong, jobs growing, and people getting the benefits of a new tax system that better values work. You'll be able to earn up to $18,200 and not pay a cent of tax. Those are the kinds of objectives that drive me on.
HOST: Okay Prime Minister it's been a long time between interviews, but I appreciate you coming on this afternoon. Thank you so much.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Ms Gillard good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
HOST: Okay to be a little bit specific, a cup of coffee, how much will that go up?
PM: Oh look, Neil, it's not like the GST where there was a price impact item by item, that's not what carbon pricing is about.
HOST: But will it go up as a general principle? I suppose it has to doesn't it?
PM: Yes, look Neil, let's just through it and let's just be really clear, it's the biggest businesses that are paying the carbon price.
The businesses that generate the most carbon pollution, they are paying a price per tonne, that sends them a price signal to do what they do in a cleaner and greener way and because they will respond that way we'll have the equivalent of 45 million cars off the road in 2020.
Some of that cost will be passed through to the things you buy, I buy, Aussies around the nation buy.
That price impact will be less than a cent in a dollar and that's why we are giving people tax cuts and pension increases and family payment increases.
HOST: So on a cup of coffee, forget the exact figure but how will it be impacted?
PM: Less than a cent in a dollar. The cost of living increase will be 0.7 per cent, that is less than a cent in a dollar.
HOST: So you're saying, I want to get it clear though because I see electricity that grids the beans to brew the coffee to deliver the milk, to buy the milk at the supermarket, all that adds up to one cent on a cup of coffee.
Well actually it'd be 4 cents isn't it, because it's $4 for a cup of coffee so it'd be 4 cents on a cup of coffee.
PM: Yep, if you want to do it on average, Neil, and say what's it going to cost me, you're cost of living increase is less than a cent in a dollar.
Where is the biggest impa on you, well it will be on your electricity bills where we've said electricity will go up 10 per cent and around the country the regulators that set electricity prices have looked at all of this and have brought in figures that are either at what we were predicting or slightly less than we were predicting.
Which means that the assistAnce that we are giving households has been configured right.
HOST: So if I look at the cup of coffee and say how much is electricity in that and that goes up 10 cents, 10 per cent presumably.
PM: Yes that's right and so look, it's not like the GST where you can go, what did I used to pay and plus the GST, it's not like that.
What's your cost of living impact, it's less than a cent in a dollar.
HOST: So as a rule of thumb, if I look at what I'm paying for something and add a cent for every dollar, is that what it'll cost me extra?
PM: Well across your cost of living, yes.
HOST: Okay, do we really know? I mean it isn't like the GST because we did know there, you're quite right.
Do we really know what it's going to cost?
PM: The single biggest element of the price increment is on electricity bills and we already know that what we were predicting has come true on that. So yes the predictions were right.
The jury is already in on the single biggest element for people.
HOST: Obviously it's the cost of running every and then we add land fill. You see the demolition industry tells me there's a 70 per cent increase at the cost of demolishing a house. That's not a cent of a dollar, that's 70 per cent.
PM: Well I do not see how that claim can be correct and claims like that do need to be tested.
Look Neil, we over many, many long months now have heard claim after claim, you know, incredible claims about what carbon pricing was going to bring, you know, people trying to tell your, you know, roast if you were having the family around for dinner was going to cost you $100; that we'd be a nation that didn't mine coal any more.
All of these crazy claims, they will be proven to be untrue. They are untrue and the important thing about this period now that carbon pricing has now started, is that people can judge for themselves.
They don't have to listen at the end of the day to the pollies anymore, they can make up their own minds because they'll see their tax cuts, their pension increases, their family payment increases, they'll know what the weekly shop costs and they will be able to work it out.
HOST: Prime Minister, you're right about some of the scare stuff but in fairness can spare us the stunts.
I mean, Wayne Swan yesterday, is Vegemite not going up? He's produced his grocery bill, there you are, it didn't go up. I mean that's just nonsense isn't it?
PM: Well I think, Neil, when we have had over 12 months now of the most ridiculous claims-
HOST: But yesterday was ridiculous.
PM: The claims that were being made, claims that were being made from the first moment of carbon pricing, we would see a wrecking ball go through our economy.
We would be entering a permanent depression. You wouldn't see people mining coal anymore.
You know, people would see astronomical increases in their cost of living.
Well I think it is appropriate with all of that doom has been spread around for months and months, for us to say to people, look the doomsayers were wrong.
HOST: But Prime Minister, please we aren't stupid.
A couple of hours into the carbon tax, Wayne Swan, the Treasurer, not some backbencher, the Treasurer, presents a receipt from the supermarket showing it's the same as it was the previous day.
Now are you really saying he's got milk, vegemite, roast lamb, are you really saying now of that stuff's going up or was that just a stunt?
PM: I'm saying that debunks the kind of claims we've heard.
HOST: What 2 hours into a carbon tax?
PM: Yes, the kind of claims we're heard which has led people to believe that the Australian way of life was coming to an end on 1 July.
HOST: Well what about your Ministers in Whyalla pretending to hide in case the town explodes, how offensive is that to the people of Whyalla who might be concerned about their jobs?
I mean that was just a juvenile prank.
PM: Well, Neil, let's just actually go through what's happened here.
What's happened here is the Leader of the Opposition said to the people of Whyalla, your town will be wiped of the map.
You know, no ifs, no buts, no maybes-
HOST: Day one Prime Minister.
PM: Your town will be wiped off the map and then he said it about Gladstone and places around the country.
I think we are entitled to point out that those claims were wrong.
HOST: But we don't know yet, Prime Minister, we don't know yet.
PM: Well these weren't claims that were made about impacts over time, wrecking ball through the economy is not an impact over time.
It is the carbon price has been put up there by the Lead of the Opposition and others as if it would bring doom and gloom from day one.
We are entitled therefore to say to people, all of those doomsday scenarios were wrong, now is your opportunity to judge the facts, judge for yourself, judge from your lived experience.
Don't worry about what the politicians say, actually add it all up for yourself.
HOST: And you're telling me less than, just over 24 hours into the carbon tax we know that all these doom, these predications are wrong do we, 24 hours in?
PM: Yes we do.
HOST: We don't even know how much things are going up, how can we know?
PM: Neil, no don't leave that impression with people because that is not right.
We have had the people at Treasury, who did the modelling of the GST and got it right, do the modelling for us.
The single most important element of carbon pricing is the impact on electricity and already the Treasury prediction is right.
HOST: Prime Minister, did you know the price of funerals is going up?
PM: I've seen that claimed in some places and debunked in others but Neil, you've put a broad question to me about how do you know what is going to happen.
We know what is going to happen because the experts who have assisted Governments of all political persuasions over many long years have modelled in impacts and already the single biggest impact Neil, if I can finish this sentence, already the single biggest impact they've predicted on electricity prices they have got that right.
We know that from what the regulators have said, so Neil if they've got that right, the increase in electricity, there is no reason for you to assume that they haven't got anything else right.
What do their predications show? Less than a cent in a dollar, the economy keeps growing and jobs keep growing. That is what people should expect to see as they get their tax cuts, as they get their family payment increases, as they get their pension increases.
HOST: We'll take a quick call for the Prime Minister. Phillip, keep it short please, yes Phillip.
CALLER: Yes good morning Prime Minister. I'm just wondering, I've got a letter here from TruEnergy that states that my electricity bill  -  I've got a small engineering business with four people worker for me  -  my electricity bill will increase by 12 per cent approximately purely because of the carbon tax and it says it in black and white, I'm quite happy to send it to you know.
I do not get any compensation. My workers do, they get their tax and all that sort of stuff. I get zero.
Where do I pass that 12 per cent on?
PM: Well you would be in a position to pass that onto the people who buy services from your business and we have expected that those costs would be passed on and it feeds into that less than a cent in a dollar increase in prices that I talked about.
CALLER: All of my customers, I've got to now say to them, I've got to charge you around about 10 per cent more.
PM: Well I doubt that, you are not selling electricity, so you've seen an increase in your electricity bill, what component of your total business costs in your electricity bill?
CALLER: Around about $2000 a  quarter.
PM: And so what component of your total business cost is it? 
HOST: What percentage of your costs will be electricity?
CALLER: Well I really don't know it be quite honest but it costs to turn the lights on and operate the lathes and the mills, I would say it's about 75 per cent.
PM: More than your labour costs? Surely your labour costs are your biggest costs in your business?
CALLER: Our labour costs would definitely be the biggest costs but the electricity bill is our next highest overhead.
PM: Right, so if your labour would be about 80-90 per cent of your costs? Something like that?
CALLER: No it wouldn't be that much. Our labours would be around about $25,000 a year and we spend and we turnover about $1.2 million.
PM: Well the only reason for asking you that, in terms of the flow through impact for your consumers, we'd need to know how big a cost, percentage cost for you business your electricity is.
So to make the maths easy, it's a 10 per cent cost for your business and you're seeing that cost go up then that's what you're passing on .
It's not you passing on a total 10 per cent as the total cost of your business because electricity is not the total cost but that's part of the problem, it's the unknown.
But can I ask you about another area, Prime Minister.
You are, you do add say 10 per cent cost to running police stations, charities, medical research-
PM: That's not true, Neil. What's the biggest cost of running a police station, it's paying the police officers.
I mean, let's just be sensible about all of this. What's the single biggest cost of running a hospital, it's paying the doctors and nursing and it's great that we pay them because they're wonderful staff.
HOST: Will there be any compensation to these organisations? What if I run a cancer research institute and I pay big electricity bills, they're going up 10 per cent or 12 per cent, 10 per cent to the carbon tax, will I get any compensation?
PM: Federal Government grants are indexed and changes in the cost of living index effect how much more money we put in those grants.
So if you take a hospital, we have now stepped up to being a full partner in the costs of hospitals, 50 per cent is where we're going - $16 billion extra going into hospitals between now and 2020 and it's indexed so they extend that carbon pricing makes a difference to the cost of living.
It effects how we index those grants.
HOST: Prime Minister, I really know you need to get away, one more very last short question?
Do you feel any guilt or regret today that you broke this promise.
PM: I meant every word when I said during the election campaign, those words that have been replayed so many times about carbon pricing-
HOST: Tax.
PM: On a carbon tax. And during the election campaign 2010 in and 2007 I and the Labor party generally talked about how we wanted to see our nation price carbon and have an emissions trading scheme.
So we will get that emissions trading scheme, Neil, in three years time. Yes it's through a route that I didn't originally anticipate, by having a fixed price, a carbon tax if you like for the first three year
But I stood in the 2007 election saying we should price carbon. I stood in the 2010 election saying we should price carbon.
Now we are pricing carbon to do the right thing for our environment and cut carbon pollution and the vast majority of Australians are getting enough assistance they either come out square or in front.
HOST: Thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thank you.  



HOSTS: Good morning Prime Minister, do you get sick of hearing that? They do play it a lot. You know, over and over.
PM: They do play that a lot that's true. But I've had the opportunity because they play it a lot to talk about that and to say I meant every word when I said those words that I've always wanted our nation to have a clean energy future and to end up with an emissions trading scheme and putting a price on carbon and now it's started and people have got the opportunity to judge for themselves. 
You won't have to listen to the pollies any more. They can make their own judgements.
HOST: I don't really know anything about this. Don't know about the tax, don't care about the tax, don't know why they're doing it, don't care, but I'm sure people do.
What is it for?
PM: Kyle, let me explain it quickly. Why we're doing it is to cut carbon pollution, so you'll see things like the equivalent of 45 million cars coming off the road in 2020, because we're starting this scheme now. Cutting carbon pollution because it's carbon pollution that's causing climate change. Less carbon pollution, better for our environment. 
We're doing it by making big businesses that generate a lot of carbon pollution pay a price per tonne of the pollution they generate.
HOST: So it's the big businesses that are paying this tax, right?
It's the big businesses and that sends them a price signal, a real incentive, to work out how can I cut my carbon pollution, how can I change the way my business works.
HOST: Doesn't everyone pay though? Everyone has to pay.
PM: No, no, only the big businesses that generate a lot of pollution that pay the tax. Now some of them will try and pass some of the cost through to the things that you go and buy in the shop. 
HOST: Which they are.
PM: What that means is that you'll see your cost of living go up less than a cent in a dollar, and to help people through with that there are tax cuts starting today for people who earn less than $80,000 a year.
HOST: Oh, damn.
PM: And we've already increased pensions and family payments and they'll keep on going up.
HOST: Now Tony Abbott has come out and said that if he is in power, he's going to get rid of that carbon tax straight away.
PM: To which I would say, yeah sure. What he'll do is some kind of fiddle or fudge or name change or something like that, but let's remember, Prime Minister Howard in the 2007 election with Tony Abbott standing alongside him, was all in favour of putting a price on carbon. And Mr Abbott's said on many occasions that he's in favour of carbon pricing too. So wait for the pollies' fudge and fiddle, that's where that will all end up.
HOST: Fudge and fiddle sounds like a gay nightclub, I love the sound, I'm writing that down. That's a new enterprise for me.
HOST: Do you pay attention to the polls on popularity?
PM: Not when you are so determined to do what's right for the nation's future. I mean, we've been through big divisive debates in the past in our country. I mean, something we all take for granted now, Medicare, was the subject of a huge divisive debate. Native title, the subject of a huge divisive debate. It was going to be the end for our nation as we knew it. You weren't going to have your backyard any more. These were the kind of claims made, and look at it now, everybody goes ‘gee, Medicare, that's part of being Australia, native title, everybody's fine with it.
So in the months to come, I think Australians will be able to look back and say well now the dust has settled, now it's obvious that the coal industry hasn't closed down, that the Sunday roast isn't costing $100. Now all of those false claims have been proven to be untrue, I think people will say, well I'm pleased our nation did take a big step towards the cleaner future.
HOST: Emma's saying in our news here, oh maybe your groceries, your fruit and veg cos the truck's gotta take it from point a to point b and it's going to be more expensive, and they're going to try to make the tomatoes dearer. Well can't you just buy tomatoes that aren't as dear? That the idea was like, spend your money in the appropriate place?
PM: Well the impact of all of that will be less than a cent in a dollar. And depending on what you pay her, and I don't know, but I suspect she's going to get a tax cut. 
HOST: Right. Oh, Emma you're going to get a tax cut!
HOST: Emma, I don't think you will.
HOST: Well we pay ‘em well around here. We've got to pay them hush money to keep their mouths shut.
PM: And that's nice too, but the vast majority of Australians are going to get enough assistance through tax cuts, family payment increases, pension increases. So they come out either square or better off.
HOST: Now apparently parliament is on winter recess for six weeks, right? Is that right?
PM: That's right.
HOST: What does that all mean? Does that mean you get to have a break or what's the deal?
PM: No what that means-
HOST: No she doesn't have a break!
HOST: I wanted to know, does she ever have a break?
PM: What that means is your parliamentarians aren't sitting in parliament, but they're back out in their electorates doing all of that community work, and of course for me, the work continues.
HOST: How many hours a night do you sleep?
PM: Well it depends. 
HOST: Do you get woken up, like do you get the three am call, like, oh Prime Minister something you know bad has happened overseas. Do you get woken up about everything that goes on around the world?
PM: You do get woken up in the middle of some nights, and if that happens then it's really bad news.
HOST: Do they just come in or do they knock or ring or what goes on? 
PM: They ring.
HOST: Kyle and I are always having a big debate cos he has a blackberry and I have an iPhone. And we are always debating over which is better. What do you have? 
PM: I have a blackberry, I'm with you Kyle. 
HOST: Jackie, because that's what the workers do. Because we don't have time for toys, we're workers.
HOST: Oh, I thought you would have been an iPhone girl.
PM: Sorry about that.
HOST: So this weekend, barbie on? Yeah, no?
PM: The weekend that's just been?
HOST: No the weekend that's coming!
PM: Oh the one that's coming.
HOST: We can't set the date for the weekend that's been.
PM: Oh I see, when are we having that barbie?
HOST: look, I'm just going to come around unannounced. With a bun loaf.
PM: Like one of those phone calls that wakes me up in the middle of the night.
HOST: Good luck with this. Because I know everyone thinks half the country are for it, half are against it. I didn't know, so now I've formed an opinion. I don't mind paying one cent in the dollar.
HOST: Thanks for calling in Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: Your welcome, nice to chat. 



HOST: Joining me in the studio, the Prime Minister of the country, Julia Gillard, welcome once again to Darwin.
PM: Thank you very much it's great to be here and I am welcoming President Yudhoyono here a little bit later today and he will be here overnight and into tomorrow. 
So Darwin is where it all happens. President Obama, now President Yudhoyono.
HOST: It seems you're always in town. You've been here quite a lot in the recent times and it seems to be the place that you meet international guests. 
PM: That's right, a big focus on Darwin. So it's great that President Yudhoyono's here and he's bringing a sizeable delegation of his ministers too. So this is our annual leader-to-leader discussion, so it's an important meeting and very, very important that it's here in Darwin.
HOST: Why so important at the moment, to talk to the Indonesian President? 
I mean obviously the asylum seeker issue has been covered within an inch of its life in the media, but is that going to be the main thing that you'll talk about today or are there other things on the agenda?
PM: Everyday is an important day to be building our relationship with Indonesia. This is of such strategic importance to our two countries. 
We've got economic ties that are just going ahead in leaps and bounds, so we want to be making sure we're building on that growth. 
We've got strong people-to-people links, I mean, Australians in their hundreds and hundreds of thousands go to Indonesia each year and students study in each other's country, so the people-to-people links are so important. 
We share a strategic outlook about our rapidly growing region, we work together in the G20 for the benefits of the global economy and in the East Asia Summit for the benefits of our region. 
And of course we collaborate on things like counter-terrorism and fighting people smuggling.
HOST: I want to talk a little bit about the disaster relief centre and where you're going today with the President, but one of the other questions in from the Northern Territory Cattleman's Association. 
Of course we didn't have a great relationship there for a while, and in fact I think the last time I spoke to you in this studio we were right in the midst of the closure of the live export trade. 
The Northern Cattle Association have been obviously talking to you continually. 
Why for instance wouldn't you support or put money into an abattoir which was proposed here in the Northern Territory as part of the trade between Indonesia and Australia in the cattle industry?
PM: We're going to keep working with the cattle industry on the beef strategy and we're working on a Northern Australia strategy. 
Minister Simon Crean in particular has been working on that and leading that, and you're own Warren Snowdon and Trish Crossin are participating in that too. 
The issue that I needed to deal with here in the Northern Territory and beyond was the question of cruelty to cattle that was uncovered through Four Corners and we needed to act and we have now acted so exporters work through a supply chain, we know where the cattle are going, we know the abattoirs they're going to and consequently we are able to assure ourselves about the conditions that those cattle are being dealt with in.
HOST: There's no doubt though at that time, the trust between Indonesia and Australia was somewhat on shaky ground and do you still support the campaign for Indonesia to continue territory live exports, because it's such a key part of the Northern Territory's Cattle Association?
PM: I'm a big supporter of this industry. And for it to have a robust strong future, we needed to get these animal welfare questions sorted out. 
HOST: Then why wouldn't you support a local abattoir, which was one of the reasons, we it was one of the suggestions that came up, that in fact we would have an abattoir here?
PM: We're happy to keep working with the industry on suggestions that the industry makes. 
But we faced a moment where the Australian people were rightly saying, seeing images of incredible cruelty to animals on their TV screen, industries like the cattle industry need to have a social licence, they need to have support from the people of Australia, as well as the economic merits of the industry itself. 
And so in order to ensure that the people of Australia were going to support this industry, we needed to sort out how we were going to deal with animal welfare, and we have. So that's important to the long term future of the industry, of which I'm a supporter. 
HOST: One of the discussions that's come up on the text is with regard to roads. Obviously roads and infrastructure are very important in Darwin. And we've seen a time in recent times when the floods took the train line out and for a little while there, there was no road and there was no rail. It was like being back in the 1800s  -  roads are very important. 
One of the things with the upcoming election is that the CLP have said that they would reinvestigate whether to reintroduce open speed limits. 
Is Federal road funding dependent on us keeping our speed limits at 130km per hour?
PM: Look I'm not going to involve myself in the discussions about the forthcoming Territory election. 
We are big providers of infrastructure to the Northern Territory. We've been big investors in local roads. We understand how important they are to the people of the Territory. 
We've also been big investors in infrastructure, in health, in education because in this growing community you always need more to keep servicing community need. 
So we'll keep doing all of that work with the territory and you'll have your Territory election.
HOST: But the money has always been, the discussion has always been, if you didn't lower the speed limit from an open speed limit to 130 the Federal Government would withdraw its road funding. Is that the case now?
PM: Look, I'm not going to involve myself in local discussion for the Territory election.
HOST: Well let's involve ourselves in something that Jim from Berry Springs wants to know; dental care in the top end. 
He says he's faced a five-year waiting list to get new dentures. Where are we at with dental care?
PM: We've just made a major new investment through the Federal Budget of around half a billion dollars to have a dental care waiting list blitz. 
We believe that that's very important for people who have waited far too long for dental care. 
What happened with the history of all of this, is way back when, Labor in Government had a Commonwealth dental program, it was abolished by the Howard Government. 
Since then we've seen waiting lists blow out and we've been trying to work through to make sure that every dollar spent on dental care by the Federal Government does the most amount of good work. 
We're still working on that but in the meantime we're now going to inject a significant amount of money for a dental waiting list blitz.
HOST: Just on the question of the e-health records which have also started to come in. The Northern Territory already had some scheme that was already operational. 
Will eventually those two schemes go together? Because there seems to be some confusion about how people would match their e-health record from the Northern Territory Government system and the Federal system. 
PM: We'll want those systems to be working together, I mean, the aim here is for people to have their electronic health record and for it to be portable because you may be turning up for treatment in Darwin where you live, but you also might be down in Adelaide for something or across in Brisbane and need to have access to your health records and for the people treating you there to know precisely what's going on.
HOST: Questions coming through, one from Wazza who's a fairly regular texter, is in regard to turning off the beer fridge. 
There was a list of ways to respond to beating the carbon tax. The number one thing that they suggested that you do was turn your beer fridge off in between the weekends, whenever you had parties. 
I was wondering, does the Lodge have a beer fridge?
PM: I don't think we really have a beer fridge, we're not drinkers of that much beer. 
Look, I think however people want to do it, being energy efficient at home is obviously a good thing to do but let's remember with carbon pricing, it's not individuals who are paying the price on carbon, it's big businesses that generate a lot of carbon pollution. 
Yes, they pass some of that cost through, and that means people will see a cost of living increase on less than a cent in a dollar and I don't know what Wazza's personal circumstances are, but if he earns less than $80,000 a year, check your pay packet this week Wazza, because you're going to see a tax cut. 
And if he's someone that works part-time, you know, earning a bit of money, we are increasing the tax-free threshold from $6,000 to $18,200. 
You will be able to earn $18,200 and not one cent will go to the taxman. That means a million Australians just won't be paying tax. 
HOST: But it still encourages you to turn the beer fridge off. 
Disaster relief  -  you're here with Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono  -  one of the major things that you will do is go to the disaster hub, which was something that happened post the Bali bombings, and Darwin was seen as a key player in terms of international relief for the tsunamis and for bombings and for terrorism. 
What is the plan long-term for that disaster-relief hub at the Royal Darwin Hospital?
PM: We are going to go to the disaster-relief hub and I'm very well-aware, as is the President of Indonesia, about the pivotal role that Darwin played post both of the Bali bombings, not only to help Australian nationals but also to help the people of Indonesia. 
Australia and Indonesia have been working together on a leadership role in our region to try and coordinate how we all come together and respond when we see an emergency in our region and unfortunately we've seen too many, whether it's been the tsunami and the earthquake in Japan, or what happened in Christchurch, or what we faced with our own flooding and natural disasters. 
So we want people to be able to seamlessly work together. President Yudhoyono has played a big leadership role there. 
We've been working alongside him, and so that it will be part of what we're discussing over the next few days. And so to get to see people who do that work, who actually make it happen, is a very special opportunity.
HOST: I know you've got to go because you've got some other engagements as Prime Minister, that's the way it goes. 
I wanted to ask you a little bit about the Stronger Futures legislation, but perhaps do it next time. Did you sleep last night by the way or did you manage to get some crackers (inaudible)?
PM: I did get some sleep but certainly there was some continuing fireworks around 2.30am in the morning, so I was awake for that.
HOST: You should have reported that immediately to the police, you know they're supposed to shut down by 10pm?
Prime Minister, thanks for coming in. No doubt we'll hear more on the carbon tax particularly I would think and in terms of asylum seekers and the policies there.
PM: Thank you very much. 



Pak President, welcome to Australia. 
It is so good to see you again.
Your visit to this country two years ago and your address to our Parliament in Canberra was a moment of enormous significance in the history of our two nations.
I will long remember your words that day: 
We are not just neighbours, we are not just friends ... we are strategic partners.                                                                             
And the decisions made during that visit will be remembered too.
We are here this week because two years ago in Canberra our Governments agreed to a new annual leaders' meeting, agreeing to a closeness of co-operation we share with only a handful of countries.
Last year was the first meeting in Indonesia and this year is the first on our side.
It's especially fitting that we are meeting in Darwin, Australia's “northern capital”.
This city is at the centre of so much of the great and growing economic, strategic and humanitarian co-operation between Indonesia and Australia.
And so I want particularly to pay tribute to the people of Darwin, to the Government of the Northern Territory and my friend the Chief Minister Paul Henderson.
You have done so much to welcome us here this week and to foster relations between our two peoples.
So tomorrow, we will meet as strategic partners with much work to do.
We share a full agenda  -  our dialogue will be a powerful symbolic expression of good will.
But it will be much more than that too.
We will have our sleeves rolled up and there will be very real business to do.
Ours is a busy working partnership. 
Travel and study, investment and trade, are all growing, with great opportunities to grow more in coming years.
Our Governments exchange high-level visits every few weeks.
Indeed between APEC, the East Asia Summit, the G20, ASEM, it sometimes feels like you and I meet personally every few weeks!
Our Defence personnel work closely together, in the region and beyond.
Among the thousands of Indonesian peacekeepers serving in the some of the most difficult UN missions are those who serve alongside Australians in South Sudan.
Wearing the blue beret of the United Nations which you yourself, Pak President, wore with such distinction in the Balkans in 1995.
I remember that a few years later, in 1999, as a new parliamentarian, I was privileged to be an election observer in West Timor, witness to the birth of modern Indonesian democracy.
The patient enthusiasm of the people I saw, waiting to cast their precious ballot, is something I will never forget.
That was the 1990s. 
You and I have both come a long way since then  -  our countries have come a long way together as well.
Some of the issues for tomorrow are hard  -  terrorism and drugs, people smuggling, natural disasters management  -  threats as difficult as any in our shared history.
It's a remarkable tribute to the relationship between our nations that now, when faced by these hard issues, we turn towards each other, rather than turning away.
I believe problems which once threatened to divide us now only bring us closer together.
For two such diverse and dynamic nations to achieve a relationship of such stability and maturity is the real proof, Pak President, that we can meet the goal you set in Canberra in 2010: to build a “fair dinkum partnership”.
The people of these waters and lands have been neighbours for tens of thousands of years.
The Commonwealth of Australia was a friend of the Republic of Indonesia from the moment you proclaimed your independence in 1945.
Tomorrow, we meet sharing a partnership.   
And, Pak President, your share in this partnership, as a great neighbour and friend of my country, is high indeed.
I look forward very much to our discussions tomorrow with you and your delegation.
And we are so very pleased to be hosting your visit here in Darwin.  



HOST: Julia Gillard joins me now. Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Are you going to be fresh for your meeting with the President, given that you were kept up all last night with fireworks?
PM: Look, I am doing alright, but you're right, it was Territory Day in Darwin yesterday and Darwin is one of the few places in the country this you can get out and celebrate with firecrackers. So people took the opportunity, that's for sure.
HOST: These are your people down there, they were breaking the law because it they were supposed to stop setting them off at 11 o'clock and I was told they were setting them off until about 3 in the morning.
PM: I certainly hard some going off at 2:30 this morning, so yes, it was well after 11.
HOST: Alright, let's talk carbon tax. As you would be aware the Coalition are running a range of hoardings around the country saying they will definitely reverse the carbon tax.
They are also running television advertisements which focus on what they say is your lie; not on your watch and yet we have a carbon tax. Do you know regret having ever said that?
PM: I've fully explained why I said those words during the election campaign and when I said them I meant every one. But I have always supported our nation putting a price on carbon, so that we do the right thing by our environment, tackle climate change and lock in prosperity for the future.
I have wanted us to have an emissions trading scheme. So, in fact, did Prime Minister Howard in the 2007 election and Tony Abbott in that election and we are going to get to that emissions trading scheme through having this fixed price on carbon, this carbon tax for the first three years.
So we will lock in our prosperity, we will do the right thing for the environment and millions of Australians around the nation this week will see tax cuts. 7 million of them.
And pensioners have already seen an increase and so have people who have families and get family payments. And those increases will continue for the future.
HOST: I just can't help but think that you must regret having said that because those words have come back again and again and again to haunt you, haven't they?
PM: Ultimately, you have got to make a decision about what is right for our nation and what is right for our nation is to start cutting carbon pollution.
That is what putting a price on carbon is all about. That is why it's the right thing to do.
And businesses, and some of them are in today's newspapers, are already out there talking about the benefits of carbon pricing and a clean energy future. Global giants like GE, banks like Westpac, talking about the opportunities that this gives our nation.
HOST: The thing is, though, Prime Minister, you have got to take people with you in politics. Do you really think you have? If you look at the polls, people don't like this tax, but more importantly, perhaps, very few people think this will have any impact on the environment at all.
PM: Well now Australians get their own chance to judge, not based on what the politicians are telling them, but based on their own lives and their own experiences.
Already people will see that the fear campaign that the coal industry is going to close is false. That the claims that a Sunday roast is going to cost you $100. That that claim is false.
Already those myths that have been pedalled for more than the last 12 months have been shown to be untrue. When people get their pay packet this week, 7 million Australians will see more money in it.
HOST: Which in a funny sort of way highlights the fact that it probably won't make any difference to the environment at all because the only people who will have to pay money for using carbon are the people that can afford to. So there's no real, I mean there's going to be no real benefit.
PM: No, that's completely untrue and a direct misunderstanding of the scheme. It has never been individuals who are going to pay the carbon price.
It is our biggest businesses that generate the most carbon pollution who pay the carbon price. So in terms of reducing-
HOST: But that's obviously not true Prime Minister or you wouldn't be giving people-
PM: Let me explain that because I think it is very important that everyone understands the fundamentals of this scheme. Big businesses that generate a lot of carbon pollution pay the carbon price.
Because they pay the carbon price, they will find ways of reducing their carbon pollution. And because we put a price on carbon, we will see, for example in 2020, 160 million less tons of carbon pollution going into our atmosphere.
Now, some of those businesses do seek to pass through some of that extra cost. That is going to change our cost of living by less than a cent in a dollar and that is why we are helping families through tax cuts, pension increases and family payments.
HOST: I want to move onto the asylum seekers, but just, it annoys me, it is so disingenuous to say that it's only big business paying for it. Because big business pays for nothing. They're charged for things and then they - that is how business works. They have a cost of doing their business which they pass on to their consumers which is why you're handing out money to people to help compensate them for it.
But as I say, we need to talk about asylum seekers.
PM: It's only big businesses that directly pay the carbon price.
Some of that cost will be passed on, and that's why we're doing things like giving 7 million Australians a tax cut, and why we are taking the opportunity to reform our tax system by increasing the tax free threshold from are $6,000 to 18,200, which means you can earn that amount of money and not give the taxman a cent.
HOST: It's also why the poor sorry taxpayer is having to prop up some of these big businesses that are using a huge amount of fossil fuel, isn't it? They are being propped up to the tune of about 94%. Isn't that right?
PM: Well it's not individual taxpayers who are doing that, not at all.
HOST: No, collectively we are doing that.
PM: No, it is not collectively individuals who are doing it. The big businesses that pay the carbon price, that money is being used to help families in the way that I have described. It's also is being used to assist businesses that are trade exposed and that need to change the way that they work so that they have a clean energy future.
So that assistance is not coming out of your pocket or anybody else's pocket. It is coming out of the carbon price paid by big businesses.
HOST: Alright Prime Minister, just very quickly, I know we are running out of time. You are meeting the Indonesian President today and tomorrow. Do you think a solution will start to come out of that meeting with regard to asylum seekers?
PM: Our relationship with Indonesia is an important one for our country and it's a very broad one.
So I will be talking to the President of Indonesia over today and tomorrow about our economic links, which are ever-growing, about our people-to-people links, about our joint strategic interests in the region in which we live.
Of course we will also be talking about the evil trade of people smuggling. But to find a path through here requires the Opposition and the Greens to actually move a millimetre.
I have been prepared to compromise in this debate, to get a solution. We did that last week in the Parliament and sadly, neither the Leader of the Opposition nor the Australian Greens, were prepared to move one millimetre.
Now, they need to consider the cost of that kind of negativity.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us this morning. I appreciate it.
PM: Thank you. 



HOST: Let's welcome the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard. Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: Good morning Leon.
HOST: Now, we've done a bit of homework and found out that the cost of refrigerant gas is to go up about four times, which means a domestic air conditioner burnout will cost substantially more to fix than previous. Try $800 to $1,750. How are people going to afford that?
PM: Well Leon, all of this has been factored in the general cost of living increase that we are predicting of less than a cent in a dollar. The gases that you speak about have been the subject of special levies and arrangements for many long years now, going back to Prime Minister Howard's time in government because these gases do have a far more potent affect on our environment than even carbon dioxide.
But Leon, carbon pricing, let's have a look at the totality of it. This is a scheme where the businesses that generate the most carbon pollution will pay a price per tonne for doing that.
HOST: And they'll pass it on?
PM: Well they will pass some of it on. They will change the way that they do things, they're rational business people. They'll respond to that price. And as a result we'll see the equivalent of 45 million cars going off our roads in 2020.
That's the amount of carbon pollution we'll see reduced. Yes they will pass on some of the costs, which means people's cost of living will increase by less an a cent in a dollar. And people from today will get tax cuts.
If you earn less than $80,000 check your next pay packet and check out your tax cut. If you are particularly someone who works part-time, a limited number of hours, a student, a mum going back to work; we have increased the tax-free threshold from $6,000 to $18,200. You earn that, and the taxman doesn't take a cent. And of course there have been pensioners and family payment increases too, and they'll go on.
HOST: Small and medium businesses get no compensation. And that refrigerant gas issue has taken a big jump now because the gas itself has gone up four fold. This is going to have a profound effect on many businesses because most of them, if they're involved in the food supply chain, have to store food and refrigerate it, and indeed anybody who's got an air conditioner this will affect.
PM: Leon, number one, there have been a number of false claims going round about these refrigerant gases and number of figures being used that simply aren't right-
HOST: The figures I've given you today are from the industry, checked with the formula published on your own website.
PM: Right, well I just want to repeat, I saw a sheet last week for example, that simply did not have these figures right.
So number one, let's be very, very careful about the claims that are being made. Number two, of course these gases have been the subject of special arrangements for a long period of time now. Number three, in terms of the general position of small business, they are not paying the carbon price. They are not paying a price per tonne for the carbon pollution they generate-
HOST: But they pay what's handed down to them by other businesses who are.
PM: Yes, yes absolutely Leon, and they will be able to pass that through to consumers, which is why we are expecting the increase in cost of living to be less than a cent in a dollar. Let's remember, you know, a lot of businesses, the biggest cost in their businesses are labour costs, for example. That is not affected at all.
HOST: No. Prime Minister, given the fact that you've handed out this compensation, you've made some very substantial changes to the tax system per se, yet the electorate is saying on two fronts; one, two out of three people don't want the carbon tax, but more importantly, despite the things you're doing to compensate the population, you're polling at the moment is pretty awful.
PM: Well Leon, we've got to get big things done for this nation's future. I want our country to have a clean future, I want us to do the right thing by the environment to cut carbon pollution. I want to see us strengthen in our economy with a clean energy future.
HOST: What does that mean? What's a green job? What's a green job?
PM: Well, I think those jobs are really twofold, there are jobs in industries that will exist in the future that haven't existed in the past, for example in the solar industry.
They weren't jobs that we used to have ten or twenty years ago, they are jobs we'll increasingly have in the future. But very traditional jobs, Leon, being a motor mechanic, being a plumber, will be done in a different way because we're seizing a clean energy future.
So Leon, people elect governments to get the big things done. They don't expect us to sit there and not shape our nation's future to make us stronger and to protect our environment. And that is what I am determined to do.
But the other important this Leon is now that carbon pricing has started, it started yesterday, people can, you know, not listen to the politicians, they can just work it out themselves. They can have a look at their pay packet, have a look at the tax cuts, have a look at what they're spending at the shops when they go and do the family shopping, and see for themselves what the truth of carbon pricing is.
HOST: So you stand by your claim Prime Minister just for the record, that the impact of your carbon pricing, is going to have, you're still standing by the claim that it will have a minimal impact on the cost of living?
PM: Absolutely Leon. Let's be very clear. We had our experts at Treasury model the effect for people of carbon pricing, the flow through costs. These are the same people who for a government of a different political persuasion, modelled the effects of the GST and they got that right. These aren't politicians. They're not political people. They're experts that have worked for government over a long period of time and they've got the hard things right before. The single-
HOST: Prime Minister-
PM: Leon, if I can finish this, because I think it's very important, the single biggest impact people will see will be on their electricity bills, which will go up by ten per cent. Now that's the single biggest impact. Right around the country the people who set electricity prices have already said, yes that's right, electricity is either going up ten per cent or less. The single biggest thing that proves the Treasury modelling is right, has already occurred.
HOST: Prime Minister, given the polling today, which you'd be tremendously disappointed in, is there going to be more pressure on your leadership?
PM: Oh, look Leon, I'm not a poll commentator, and you've misunderstood what I'm determined to do if you think that's where my focus is today.
HOST: Well I'm just asking a very obvious question.
PM: And I'm not, Leon, going to engage in all of that, I mean the important thing for our nation isn't what's in today's newspapers.
The important thing for our nation is are we going to have our precious environment for the future, are we going to have a strong economy for the future, are we going to look after families on the way through?
That's where my focus is.
HOST: Are you absolutely certain still that Malaysia must be part of any solution in terms of the way we handle refugees?
PM: Look, I've got advice, the same advice has been provided to Mr Abbott, that the most effective deterrent we have available to us is Malaysia. But I have appointed an expert panel. I have been prepared to compromise in order to get a solution here. I was very disappointed when last week in the Parliament I was prepared to compromise and neither the Opposition nor the Greens moved one millimetre from their original position.
HOST: Is it possible the Parliament might be recalled?
PM: Having compromised last week, and having seen that met with, I mean Mr Abbott's got so negative now, he came into the Parliament and voted against offshore processing, even though he says he believes in it.  
You know, he's voting against the things he says he believes in now, I mean how much more negative can you get? But I am determined to find a new way through. And that's what the expert panel is there for.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for joining us. That's Julia Gillard and again, just on those numbers that I've been broadcasting about the refrigeration issues, I can promise you there's been no political party or organisation that have provided this information.
It's come directly from industry and we've had it confirmed, I've had a couple of people in fact who are economic experts, graduates with Honours degrees here check those numbers against the formula provided by the Federal Government and we are about to put that formula up on the Facebook site Don't Sell Australia Short. 



Australia and Indonesia today signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for the transfer of four Australian Defence Force C-130 Hercules aircraft to Indonesia.
The signing follows the Prime Minister's offer in November of last year to Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono to transfer up to four aircraft to Indonesia.
Australia is very pleased to make this contribution to Indonesia's airlift capability, which will support humanitarian assistance and disaster relief operations.
The C-130 heavy lift transport aircraft will contribute to Indonesia's capacity to respond to natural disasters and humanitarian crisis.
Indonesia will fund all refurbishment and ongoing maintenance costs associated with the aircraft.
The signing ceremony took place shortly after President Yudhoyono's arrival at the Royal Australian Air Force Base Darwin today for the second Australia-Indonesia Annual Leaders' Meeting.
Minister for Defence Stephen Smith and his Indonesian counterpart, H.E. Dr Purnomo Yusgiantoro observed the signing of the MoU by Chief of the Australian Defence Force General David Hurley and Secretary General of the Indonesian Ministry of Defence Air Marshal Eris Herryanto.
The C-130H gifting reflects the strength of the bilateral Australia-Indonesia relationship and close ties between the Australian and Indonesian Defence forces.
Minister Purnomo and Minister Smith also held bilateral talks at Headquarters Northern Command, located at Larrakeyah Army Base in Darwin.
The discussions focused on bilateral defence engagement and the critical role Indonesia and Australia play together in contributing to regional security and addressing global challenges, including through the ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting-Plus.
Australia and Indonesia are also working to bolster coordination on humanitarian assistance and disaster relief through the East Asia Summit framework. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono met for the annual Indonesia-Australia Leaders' Meeting in Darwin on 3 July 2012. They reaffirmed Australia's and Indonesia'scomprehensive strategic partnership, based on a mutual commitment to each other's progress, prosperity and security.  They acknowledged strengthened strategic dialogue through the inaugural 2 + 2 Foreign and Defence Ministers' meeting in Canberra in March 2012. 
The Annual Leaders' Meeting underlined the importance of the two countries' enduring and wide-ranging cooperation to confront regional and global challenges.  Australia congratulated Indonesia on its strong regional leadership, including through ASEAN and the East Asia Summit (EAS), committing to work together to maintain momentum in the EAS' important agenda.  The two leaders recognised the opportunities and benefits of collaborating in 2013 when Indonesia chairs APEC, the pre-eminent regional economic and trade forum, and in 2014 when Australia hosts the G20.
Great potential exists to promote trade and investment links between Australia and Indonesia -  the two largest economies in the region. Indonesia is an integral part of the Asian success story with its economy forecast to almost double in size over the next ten years.  Over the same period, Australia's economy is projected to grow by 40 per cent.  As trade grows, the two Governments can help shape an environment that encourages even closer business cooperation.  The two leaderswelcomed the entry into force of the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement (AANZFTA) for Indonesia in January 2012, and looked forward to the first round of negotiations on the Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IA-CEPA) taking place prior to the annual Trade Ministers' meeting later this year. 
Indonesia invited Australia to explore mutually beneficial investment opportunities, particularly within the framework of Master Plan for the Acceleration and Expansion of Indonesia's Economic Development/MP3EI.
The two leaders underlined the potential for mutually beneficial cooperation and trade in the beef and cattle industry, and in this connection the two leaders undertook to encourage interested Australian companies to invest in the Indonesian beef and cattle industry, particularly in the areas of breeding, fattening, butchering and marketing.
Thecooperation on security and defence between Australia and Indonesiareflects the maturity and depth of understanding in both countries' partnership.  The two leadersreaffirmed their commitments under the Lombok Treaty, including to one another's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Cooperation between Australian and Indonesiandefence forces goes from strength to strength.  They also placedgreat importance on the establishment of a Defence Cooperation Arrangement and agreed to continue negotiations with a view to signingthe Arrangement in the near future.
Reinforcing the comprehensive security cooperation between Australia and Indonesia, the two leadersencouraged senior officials of both countries to review existing security cooperation, including by coordinating and setting priorities for the Plan of Action of the Lombok Treaty through the Security Cooperation Consultation Group.
Australia and Indonesiaare committed to achieving a world free of nuclear weapons and recognise that the international community may need to explore further legal frameworks to achieve this outcome, including the negotiation of a fissile material cut-off treaty.  The two leaders also recognised the importance of attaining entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) in achieving the eventual abolition of nuclear weapons. Indonesia's recent ratification of the CTBT was an important step forward in this respect. Indonesia and Australia look forward to demonstrating the two countries' commitment made at the Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul to strengthen the global nuclear security regime.
Both countries emphasized the importance of sustainable management of marine and fisheries resources, including the elimination of illegal fishingthrough coordinated patrols in waters between the two countries, the continuation of the public information campaign to lower the number of cross-border fishers and the continuation of human and institutional capacity building. Both countries agreed to continue and enhance the level of ongoing cooperation.
The two leaders welcomed joint efforts by Australia and Indonesiato prioritise oceans issues in Rio+20 and to continue promoting subregional cooperation in both the Coral Triangle Initiative on Coral Reefs, Fisheries and Food Security (CTI-CFF) and the Regional Plan of Action on Responsible Fishing Practices and Combating Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (RPOA-IUU).  They believe in closer cooperation to promote sustainable development, protect the environment and enhance people's welfare.
International cooperation to combat transnational crime is critical.  The strong partnerships forged between Australian and Indonesian justice and security agencies have delivered significant wins against terrorism, drug trafficking, trafficking in persons, corruption, and people smuggling.  Australia and Indonesiawill continue to work side by side to ‘follow the money' from organised crime networks.  Strong anti-money laundering and asset recovery regimesare needed to break transnational crime networks, in particular people smuggling, traffickingin persons, and acts of corruption.
The two leaders renewed their commitment to address new and emerging challenges in counter-terrorism through our countries' co-chairing of the Global Counterterrorism Forum's South East Asia Working Group.  At its inaugural meeting in Semarang in March 2012, the working group examined challenges surrounding the management of terrorist detainees in prison.  They emphasised the need to enhance counter-terrorism cooperation on this and other emerging counter-terrorism challenges both bilaterally and regionally.
As Co-Chairs of the Bali Process, the two Leadersreiterated the two countries' commitment to the Process in its 10th anniversary year, particularly the agreement to the Regional Cooperation Framework and the establishment this year of a Regional Support Office in Bangkok.  Australia and Indonesiawill build on recent successes such as the Bali Process workshop that examined practical measures to combat trafficking in persons.  Australia and Indonesia will continue to counter people smuggling and trafficking in persons through the Bali Process in collaboration with other regional partners.
In accordance with respective national law and regulation, as well as relevant international law governing this issue, in order to advance both countries' strong maritime cooperation, the two leaders welcomed enhanced bilateral cooperation, particularly in promoting partnership in capacity building in communication and information systems.  This will allow Indonesia's search and rescue agency (BASARNAS) and its Australian counterpart to better coordinate with merchant vessels during safety-of-life-at-sea incidents, and may include an exchange program of search and rescue specialists.  Leaders welcomed the planned visit to Indonesia of Australian Ministers and Senior Officials for follow-up discussions with Indonesian counterparts on these issues.
The two leaders reaffirmed the importance of ensuring the welfare and interest of detained Indonesian crew.  Indonesia welcomed Australia's new arrangements for removing crew assessed as minors to Indonesia, as well as Australia's improved age determination processes.  The two leaders emphasised the need for a speedy process and early release of those minors.   Australia undertook to take all necessary steps to ensure the fastest possible repatriation of minors to Indonesia.  Together Australia and Indonesiawill conduct a joint public information campaign in Indonesia to prevent potential crew from being used by international people smuggling networks by helping them to understand the consequences, both in Australian and Indonesian law.  Australia welcomed Indonesia's determination to take all necessary steps to dissuade Indonesian citizens from becoming involved as crew on people smuggling ventures.  The two leaders recognised the need to tackle the criminal networks that organise people smuggling ventures, and to protect the victims of such crimes. 
In order to better protect its citizens abroad, including Indonesian crew suspected of having committed a people smuggling offence, Indonesia requested ongoing comprehensive and speedy consular access.  Indonesia welcomed Australia's efforts to work closely together on consular matters including providing prompt consular notification within three working days, implementing new materials developed in consultation with the Indonesian Embassy that make clear to Indonesian crew their right to receive consular access; actively reminding state and territory officials of their responsibilities regarding consular notification; regular consular working group meetings, annual consular consultations, and other initiatives under the Australia-Indonesia Consular Arrangement.
Bilateral cooperation on consular matters is an increasing priority.  The two leadersagreed on the importance of protecting Australian and Indonesiannationals overseas.  Building on the Second Indonesia-Australia Consular Consultations in Bali in April and the unstinting day-to-day efforts of consular officials in both countries, the two countries will hold joint training on the delivery of consular services and work together on the consular aspects of disaster response by co-hosting a workshop and inviting EAS partners.
In keeping with the two countries' tradition of helping one another when natural disasters strike, the two leaders welcomed the signing of an MoU to transfer four C-130H aircraft to Indonesia to contribute to its humanitarian assistance and disaster response (HADR) capability and enhance the two countries' ability to work side by side on humanitarian and disaster relief responses.  Australia undertook to consider any further requests from Indonesia in this area.  In this connection, the two leaders look forward to the early follow up and implementation of the joint Indonesia-Australia paper: “A practical approach to enhance regional cooperation on disaster rapid response”, adopted during the East Asia Summit in November 2011.  The two leaders agreed that Indonesia and Australia would cooperate on a table-top exercise this year on humanitarian and disaster relief, to which other East Asia Summit countries would be invited.     
Australia and Indonesia are committed to tackling poverty.  Indonesia welcomed Australia's pledge of $578.4 million in 2012-13, and the significant scale-up of the official development assistance budget over the coming four years. Funding will support Indonesia's development priorities in areas where Australia can best add value by building on existing success  -  such as education, infrastructure and social protection.  Strengthening people-to-people links, like the twinning arrangement between the Royal Darwin Hospital and Sanglah Hospital in Bali, will also help to bring the two countries closer together.  Australia and Indonesiaare also developing innovative new programs together.  The two countriesare working to empower Indonesian women through a new initiative which will improve the welfare of poor women by providing greater access to essential services and improving livelihoods.
Progress in both countries to address climate change informs theirongoing collaborative work towards a global response.  The Indonesia-Australia Forest Carbon Partnership is building capacity to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries (REDD+).  Thecooperation will continue including at the Cartagena Dialogue meeting Indonesia will host in October 2012 in the lead up to COP18/CMP8 in Doha. 
As responsible global citizens and fellow democracies, Australia and Indonesiahave a shared interest in the promotion of democracy in their region and beyond.  The two leaders are encouraged by the historic transition taking place in Myanmar, and the peaceful conduct of presidential elections in Timor-Leste.  Indonesia welcomed Australia's participation at the fifth Bali Democracy Forum in Bali in November 2012.  Thetwo countries have a proud history of contribution to UN missions.  Australia provided the first military personnel as peacekeepers under UN auspices to Indonesia in 1947.  Enhancing further both nations' contribution to peacekeeping, the inaugural bilateral table-top exercise  -  Exercise Garuda Kookaburra  -  will be held in 2013.
People-to-people links between Australians and Indonesians at all levels sustain the relationship and allow the two countries to approach theirfuture engagement with optimism and confidence.  The two leaderslook forward to the recommendations of the second Indonesia-Australia Dialogue, to be held in Sydney in September 2012, on ways to promote business and community links and they are committed to strengthen people-to-people links through reciprocal programs of arts, culture, design and technology in 2014.
Promoting tourism is important for both countries.  The two leadersare committed to further enhancing the cooperation between Australia and Indonesiain this area to strengthen friendship and mutual understanding between thepeoples. Indonesia invited more Australian tourists to visit the country, and Australia welcomes Indonesian visitors to Australia.  To further support people-to-people links, the two countrieshave also agreed to start work toward expanding the current Work and Holiday visa arrangements to provide 1,000 places per year for young adults to have an extended holiday in each other's nations, during which they can also undertake short term work and study.
Science and technology cooperation between the twocountries is assuming increasing importance.  Collaboration between Australian and Indonesian researchers is growing, with the annual output of joint research publications more than doubling in the decade to 2010.  Research partnerships in areas such as health, agriculture, food and the environment will ensure that the two countriesare positioned to meet the challenges both nations face now and in the future.
The two leaders welcomed the Indonesia Australia Vocational Education and Training (VET) Mentoring Program, which will build capacity to meet the growing skills needs of Indonesian industry through mentoring for the Indonesian polytechnic sector over the next two years.  Theyalso thanked the many teachers and students in over 100 schools across both countries who have made new friends and built new links through the Australia-Indonesia School Partnerships (BRIDGE) Project.  The exciting expansion of the BRIDGE program into the tertiary sector in 2012 will see Charles Darwin University forge valuable ties with Nusa Cendana University (Undana) in Kupang.  The future standing of Australia and Indonesiabilateral partnership is assured with this next generation's commitment to intercultural understanding and to becoming global citizens. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced a new hospital staff exchange program between Darwin and Bali to help Bali's Sanglah Hospital reach international medical standards.
The announcement came during a visit to the Royal Darwin Hospital by both the Prime Minister and Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono as part of the Australia-Indonesia Annual Leaders' Meeting in Darwin. 
The exchange will see doctors, nurses and health professionals travel from Royal Darwin Hospital to Sanglah Hospital to mentor and share clinical and leadership skills and knowledge. 
The program will also see the implementation of essential education programs for nurses in Sanglah Hospital.
The $600,000 program from 2012 to 2015 builds on Australia's previous funding support to Sanglah Hospital. 
After the Bali terrorist attacks in 2002 and 2005, Australia provided a range of assistance to the hospital, including $5 million towards a new intensive care centre and burns unit  -  the 12 October Australia Memorial Centre  -  the refurbishment of the morgue, the installation of a new hospital incinerator and training for hospital staff to operate specialist medical equipment.
Australia is Indonesia's largest grant donor. This funding builds on the successful development partnership between the two countries that is helping to save lives, open up opportunities for the poor and promote sustainable economic development. 



GENERAL HURLEY: Good morning ladies and gentlemen.
I'm deeply saddened to inform you that an Australian soldier serving with the Special Operations Task Group in Afghanistan was killed during an operating on the Chorah Valley region of Uruzgan Province yesterday morning, local Afghan time.
The soldier was shot in the chest during an engagement with insurgents while on a partnered mission with the Afghan National Security Forces to target an insurgent commander. The patrols advanced first aider provided immediate assistance and continued attempts to resuscitate the wounded soldier until he was evacuated by helicopter to the Role 2 Medical Facility in Tarin Kot.
Sadly, despite the best efforts of all, attempts to resuscitate the soldier were unsuccessful.
A team from the soldiers' unit informed his family overnight and they will continue to support them through this difficult period and for as long as they need.
The soldier's family have asked that at this time his name not be released and I ask you to respect their wishes. We will release personal details at an appropriate time.
In the meantime, I can provide you with some information about his service. The 40 year old Special Forces soldier was a member of the Perth-based Special Air Service Regiment. His colleagues describe him as a highly professional operator who earned great respect within the special operations community over many years of service.
The Special Forces soldier enlisted in the Army in 1990 and joined the Special Air Service Regiment in 1995, deploying on six operations during a career spanning more than 20 years. He was on his seventh tour of duty in Afghanistan.
On behalf of the Army and the Defence community I extend my deepest sympathy to this soldier's family, his comrades and his mates.
I know that these words cannot ease the overwhelming grief they feel today, but I hope they can find comfort in the knowledge that this soldier served his country with pride and with distinction. There are are tough days ahead but we will ensure that they do not face them alone.
Every combat death is deeply felt by all members across Defence. Despite this, our men and women remain committed to our mission in Afghanistan.
This man was a soldier's soldier and I know that the members of the Special Operations Task Group will ensure his service and sacrifice will not be forgotten.
Prime Minister.
PM: Our nation, once again, has to absorb the news of a loss in Afghanistan. We have lost another brave Australian soldier. This is a dreadful blow for our nation and I know Australians today will stop, will pause, will reflect and will mark with respect the loss of this brave soldier and will honour his service and his sacrifice.
While this is a blow for all of us, it will be felt most deeply by this soldier's family and friends. For his family, they have had news overnight that is the most shocking and distressing news that a family could ever receive. My condolences go to them.
On behalf of the Australian nation, I extend all of our condolences to his family as they mourn his loss.
This is an incredibly difficult time for them. The Defence family will be there to support them; the Australian nation will be there to support them. But we know that they will face so many difficult days ahead.
For many Australians, when they hear this news, they will ask themselves again ‘why are we in Afghanistan? Why do we continue to fight there? Why do we continue to see these losses in Afghanistan?'
To Australians, I want to say this: this is a tragic and incredibly difficult day. We are all absorbing tragic news. But this tragic incident is part of what we are doing in Afghanistan because that mission is so important to our Australian nation.
We went there to make sure that Afghanistan would not continue to be a safe haven for terrorists. That continues to be our mission, which has a defined purpose and a defined timeline. So, we will continue our mission in Afghanistan, even as we grieve this loss.
I'll have the Minister for Defence make some statements now.
MINISTER SMITH: Thank you, Prime Minister.
This is a terrible blow to our nation and a terrible blow to an Australian family. This will also be very deeply felt by the Special Air Services Regiment in Swanbourne, and this will reverberate through the local Swanbourne and Perth community.
Coming from Perth, as I do, I very much appreciate the iconic status in which the SAS is held, so this will be very deeply felt throughout the Swanbourne and the Perth community.
Can I join with Chief of the Defence Force and the Prime Minister in expressing condolences to the family of this lost soldier. And this will be a terrible moment and a terrible day for them.
This is, of course, our 33rd fatality in Afghanistan and our first for this year.
Indeed, our first in some seven or eight months. And over such a period of time, although one constantly says that one has to steel oneself for more fatalities, you can lull yourself into a false sense of security. So, this tragic loss will reverberate through the Australian community today.
33 lost members of the Australian Defence Force personnel. This will be the 16th from our Special Operations Task Group from the SAS and also from our commandos and incident response group.
So, a terrible day, a terrible blow for a family, a terrible blow for the Defence Force, for Army, for the SAS, and a terrible blow for the family and our condolences and our thoughts are with them.
PM: We'll take questions but in line with usual arrangements, we'll only take questions on this incident or on the mission in Afghanistan.
Brendan.
JOURNALIST: May I ask General Hurley?
PM: Certainly.
JOURNALIST: General, are there any other details you can give us about the timing, the location of the incident, what province they were in, and was the soldier wearing body armour?
GENERAL HURLEY: Okay. Within Uruzgan Province, Chorah Valley, early morning insertion into an operation by helicopter. That's as much as I can say at the moment. The operation is still ongoing and, yes, he was wearing his normal combat body armour and equipment.
JOURNALIST: And he was shot in the chest?
GENERAL HURLEY: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Did the bullet penetrate the body armour?
GENERAL HURLEY: I don't know any of the details of that at the moment, Brendan.
JOURNALIST: And sorry, when did it happen?
GENERAL HURLEY: Yesterday morning local time in Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: And was it the same operation in which the dog was killed in-
GENERAL HURLEY: It's a part of a series of missions within that operation, yes.
JOURNALIST: Right. And is there still comprehensive action in the Chorah Valley?
GENERAL HURLEY: This was after a particular person. So that would have been an intelligence-led operation for that particular person.
JOURNALIST: You're not able to tell us, General, what the outcome of that operation was?
GENERAL HURLEY: No, they're still continuing, so we'll leave that until they've finished the operation.
JOURNALIST: And can you tell us anything, Sir, about where he was originally from? He's obviously based in Western Australia at the moment. Is he from Western Australia originally? Where is his family based?
GENERAL HURLEY: We'll just leave those details for the moment, if you don't mind. Family still needs to contact wider family, so we'll let them go through that process and then we'll release those details when they're ready.
JOURNALIST: Can you say whether or not he was married at all General Hurley?
GENERAL HURLEY: No, I don't want to give any other details at the moment, thanks.
JOURNALIST: General, the Chorah Valley is generally been one of the safer areas of Afghanistan. Is there an issue there in terms of it sliding back towards the insurgency or-
GENERAL HURLEY: I don't believe so. I think this was a specific piece of intelligence they responded to.
JOURNALIST: You said it was a helicopter operation. Does that mean that he was in a helicopter or-
GENERAL HURLEY: No, no, they were delivered by and inserted by helicopter.
JOURNALIST: And somebody shot him on the ground?
GENERAL HURLEY: During that insertion process, yes.
JOURNALIST: Just one person or was there an ambush?
GENERAL HURLEY: No detail at the moment.
JOURNALIST: You said he was on his seventh operation of Afghanistan. How much time had he spent there in total and how does that compare? Is he one of the people who spent probably the most time in Afghanistan out of the Australian soldiers?
GENERAL HURLEY: I don't have the aggregate time he spent to hand at the present time. I've spoken to the Chief of Army about that this morning though. His seventh tour, which is probably unusual in terms of the number of tours people have undertaken.      
But reminding, I did, about this time last year when I took over as the Chief of the Defence Force, I raised my concerns about frequency of tours, had that examined.
I'm confident that the management processes are in place, in terms of the psychological management of members of the SAS, they're really individually managed by the commanding officer and all of them are volunteers to go back to serve in Afghanistan. But it's an issue we need to keep a sharp eye on.
JOURNALIST: Seven rotations. Are we asking too much of our Special Forces in Afghanistan?
GENERAL HURLEY: Again, they are volunteers for this, really hand managed within the unit and we very carefully assess whether or not they're fit for service on each occasion.
JOURNALIST: So, you're confident that he was fit for service?
GENERAL HURLEY: Yes.
JOURNALIST: General, can I just go back to the actual incident itself? Did Australian soldiers return fire? Was there air support called in or anything like that?
GENERAL HURLEY: No details of the contact for the moment; simply that it occurred during the insertion for the operation.
JOURNALIST: So it's just the one shot from-
GENERAL HURLEY: Don't know any of that detail at the moment.
JOURNALIST: Are we able to say whether the person they were going after was captured?
GENERAL HURLEY: Not yet, the operation is still ongoing.
JOURNALIST: Were any other soldiers injured?
GENERAL HURLEY: No, he was the only casualty.
PM: Thank you very much.
GENERAL HURLEY: Thank you very much. 



Thank you very much.
I have been delighted to welcome President Yudhoyono and his senior ministers to Darwin for the second annual leaders meeting. It's the first one to be held in Australia.
President Yudhoyono and I participated in the last one in Bali last year. It's been a special delight to be able to welcome the President to Darwin, which is the city of Australia closest to Indonesia, our closest capital city.
Indonesia is a close friend and neighbour and one of our most significant partners. It's a true strategic partnership of great importance to both our countries.
We are living in this Asian century of remarkable transformation and change. And in this time of change, Australia very much welcomes the transformation that has taken place within Indonesia itself.
It's now a strong and vibrant democracy, an economy that's growing rapidly and a leader in the region and beyond.
Today, we've had broad-ranging and productive discussions. The President and I have had the opportunity of meeting together personally and then conducting discussions around a table with our ministers.
We have agreed, through those discussions, that as close neighbours, we should continue to enrich our understanding of one another's country and culture.
I am therefore delighted to be able to announce that we will significantly increase the number of work and holiday visas available to Indonesians, up from 100 to 1,000.
I am also delighted that the second Indonesia/Australia dialogue will be held in Sydney on the 24thof September. That will be looking at a change of ways of strengthening the links between our two peoples.
And we're pleased today to welcome a new partnership between Charles Darwin University and Indonesia's Nusa Cendana University and that is going to build on research and education links currently in place between the Northern Territory and eastern Indonesia.
Mr President, we have a very strong interest in each other's prosperity and I have appreciated our discussion on how we can work together to strengthen the prosperity of both of our nations.
We are looking forward to the first round of the Indonesia/Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement negotiations, which will take place ahead of the annual Trade Ministers Meeting later this year and that will provide great impetus to our commercial relationship.
I have also taken very careful note of the President's interest in developing greater Australian engagement in the economic development of eastern Indonesia and we have agreed that our relevant ministers, particularly for Australia's behalf, our Minister for Trade, will work together to take that forward with Australian business leaders.
I am glad too that we could talk about trade in agriculture, including cattle. We look forward to continuing to support Indonesia's food security through our export trade and support for Indonesia's own beef industry.
I am also very pleased that Australia has contributed to a World Bank program for economic resilience in Indonesia through a $1 billion contingent loan to help safeguard our economic stability.
We also discussed how we can enhance our security cooperation and defence cooperation.
I am delighted that we signed a memorandum of understanding for the transfer of four Australian C-130 aircraft to the Indonesian air force. And we're looking forward to signing our Defence Cooperation Agreement in the near future.
The President and I discussed the importance of the Bali process in combating human trafficking and people smuggling.
I welcomed the strong cooperation we have with Indonesia on people smuggling, including Indonesia's law enforcement efforts against people smuggling syndicates.
We also discussed opportunities to strengthen our maritime cooperation, including in search and rescue. And I'm pleased that a delegation of Australian ministers and senior officials will visit Indonesia for discussions on maritime cooperation.
Australia will also work with Indonesia's search and rescue agency to help strengthen its ability to communicate with merchant vessels during safety of life at sea incidents. And we will explore an exchange program of search and rescue specialists.
President Yudhoyono, let me take this opportunity to thank you for the work that our two nations are doing together.
To thank you for your leadership in our region of the world, and to thank you too for the work that we have been able to share together at the G20, where you bring such a strong voice for Indonesia and on behalf of our region, more generally.
We can build on that partnership in upcoming years, in particular as Indonesia hosts APEC in 2013 and Australia hosts the G20 in 2014.
Mr President, a busy agenda is in front of us, we've agreed much and there is much to do. Thank you for making the time available to come here with your esteemed delegation, to spend this time in Darwin.
It's been a special opportunity for our two nations.
I thank you.



The Australian Government will join the World Bank's Program for Economic Resilience, Investment and Social Assistance in Indonesia (PERISAI) by providing a contingent loan along with the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank.   
This stand-by loan facility is designed to be a financing option of last resort, and can only be accessed if Indonesia's circumstances deteriorate markedly. 
The loan is similar to the loan facilities made available during the Asian financial crisis in 1997-1998, and during the global financial crisis, neither of which were drawn upon.
Australia's contribution of a $1 billion standby loan facility forms part of a package of international contingent loans to Indonesia of up to US$5.5 billion.
In the unlikely event that the facility is drawn upon, it would be repaid with interest and would not impact on the Commonwealth's budget bottom line.
Continued global uncertainty means that even countries with responsible macroeconomic and banking policies such as Indonesia are being impacted.
In light of this, we welcome Indonesia's proactive steps to safeguard their economic stability and their adoption of sound economic policies.
Australia is a close friend and neighbour of Indonesia. In this Asian century, we have a clear interest in ensuring growing economies in our region remain strong.
The Government will continue to support Indonesia to secure the country's continued economic prospects and ensure a stable and prosperous region more broadly. 



Sixty-five years since Bill McKell last held elected office in this State, his story still has much to tell us.
His was a truly remarkable Australian life  -  from our meanest streets to the very summit of our society  -  or as his biographer put it, “from boilermaker to Governor-General”.
He was born in the same year as our grand old party  -  1891.
Raised by a hardworking single mum, he left school to help support his family at 14, before winning a prized spot as an apprentice in the noise and heat of the workshops in Balmain.
There he gained more than an apprenticeship in boilermaking  -  he gained an education in Labor values.
Bill McKell rose through the union movement and the Labor Party through his ability, his decency and his integrity.
At just 26 he became a member of the NSW Parliament representing the inner city neighbourhood of Redfern.
As an MP, he put himself through law school and became a reformist Minister for Justice.
He served as Party Leader and Premier  -  uniting NSW Labor after the disastrous Lang split and leading the State through the Second World War.
In doing all that he created the model of steady and methodical, practical and progressive government which became the template for his great successors  -  like my own Foreign Minister, Bob Carr.
In Government, McKell expanded or created miners' pensions, workers' compensation, work safety laws and annual leave.
He founded the State's first conservation department, saved the Macquarie Marshes wetlands and established Kosciusko National Park.
He extended electrification to rural areas, and sat down with Chifley to help create the Snowy Scheme and the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement.
A lifetime later, these achievements still benefit the people of this city and this State.
Why?  Because great reforms endure.
Friends by next year, pricing carbon will be part of the “lived experience” of more than 860 million people worldwide.
Polluters are paying a price  -  in Ireland, $24 per tonne of carbon  -  in Sweden, $145 per tonne from fossil fuels for heating.
It's a reality seen and understood by more than 500 million Europeans, more than 200 million Chinese and starting this week, more than 20 million Australians.
Now, the facts are on the table  -  indeed, on the kitchen table.
For years, our people have heard extraordinary claims about what carbon pricing will be like.
Now, Australians can finally judge for themselves.
This is a point we reach, eventually, in debate about every reform.
Progressive governments always try to make important changes for the future.
Someone always says it'll be the end of the world.
When reform becomes reality  -  we find out who's right.
The doomsayers said that universal superannuation was “one of the biggest con jobs ever foisted by government on the Australian people”  -  that the Mabo and Wik decisions would veto mining investment  -  that our Fair Work Act would cost jobs and threaten the economy.
But Australians judge reform, not on the rhetoric, but on the reality. 
After months of the doomsayers predicting chaos and preaching despair, the reality can now emerge. The simple facts can become clear.
First, that our carbon price will cut carbon pollution.
Because we now have a price on carbon, Australia's pollution will fall by at least 160 million tonnes a year in 2020  -  a cut equivalent to taking forty five million cars off the road.
All the evidence shows that this is the right contribution for Australia to make to the global effort now.
Our world faces real and urgent threats from climate change like rising sea levels.
A one metre rise would see a million people in our region on the move.
Our country faces very direct threats too: worsebushfire conditions and droughts, more days of extreme heat, increased cyclone intensity, bleaching of coral reefs.
Climate change is a global issue that threatens us here, so we are doing our bit.
Second, our carbon price will not only cut carbon pollution  -  it will strengthen our economy.
I can see the world changing to cleaner sources of energy right now and I know we must not be left behind.
There is a clear threat to our future prosperity if our economy does not keep up.
I don't want all the scientific and technical expertise we have  -  especially in solar research and development  -  only to benefit companies in China and India, Europe and the United States.
I don't want precious investment funds to be lost to more energy-efficient economies.
I want Australia to develop and benefit from new technologies  -  whether that's energy efficiency in our commercial and industrial buildings and our homes  -  whether that's on our farms and in our food processing factories  -  even in our landfills and down our mines.
And the sooner we begin making the transformation, the sooner the benefits will be felt.
Did you know the Chinese company Suntech  -  whose CEO, Dr Zhengrong Shi was educated at the University of New South Wales  -  became the world's largest producer of silicon solar modules in 2010?
Or that a decade ago China had no sizeable wind turbine makers  -  and now, Chinese makers occupy four of the top 10 slots in the industry worldwide?
Individual examples of a worldwide transformation: in 2010, global investment in generating renewable energy such as solar and wind power overtook investment in generating energy from fossil fuels.
We've got to start the transformation to cleaner energy now 
With our price on carbon in place we can already forecast $100 billion flowing into renewables by 2050, the power of a market mechanism driving investment in the power of the earth, wind, water and sun.
And revenue from the carbon price is funding complementary measures.
This is a transformation incentivised by a price signal and supported by public investment.
The $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation will operate in the so-called ‘market gap', opening up new opportunities for business to invest in clean energy technology and infrastructure. 
Financing viable start-up projects, ones which in their nature find it difficult to attract bank finance  -  like community wind farms, modelled on those already built in Hepburn in Victoria and Denmark in Western Australia.
The Clean Technology Fund will deliver thousands of projects to help manufacturers modernise their businesses and cut energy use.
And the Carbon Farming Initiative will support new methods for farmers to reduce carbon emissions and earn extra income.
Under the Carbon Farming Initiative Australian farmers have the opportunity to save carbon through proven methods  -  like environmental planting of native species, destroying methane generated from manure in piggeries and carrying out savanna burning early in the dry season.
And more opportunities are on the way. 
Right now private industry and our leading scientific bodies, like the CSIRO, are working to research and develop new ways to cut carbon emissions from the land sector  -  as well as new methods to measure on-farm carbon savings.
Our Solar Flagships program is supporting AGL Energy and First Solar's solar projects at Nyngan and Broken Hill.
These will be amongst the largest solar projects in the world.
The Nyngan project site alone will occupy an area equivalent to two Sydney Olympic Park precincts.
The two projects combined will require over 2 million solar panels, they'll cut greenhouse gases by over 400,000 tonnes each year and  provide enough energy annually to supply over 33,000 average Australian homes.
Now, our economy has had a carbon price for only a few days.
But business decisions have been made with the carbon price in mind for more than a year.
And the sum of all those decisions is this: the Australian economy is strong.
Since the carbon price passed Parliament at the end of last year, the economy has grown 1.3 per cent, household consumption is up 1.6 per cent and new business investment is up 5.5 per cent.
In fact since the details of the carbon price were announced earlier last year, the economy has grown 3 per cent, household consumption is up 3 per cent and new business investment is up twenty per cent - the biggest comparable lift in investment in seventeen years.
There's no better proof that the scare campaign is nonsense. And the economic bottom line: with a carbon price in place, by 2020 our economy will create 1.6 million jobs.
Third, the carbon price is not only good for the environment, it is not only good for the economy but because we are a Labor Government, when we make change, we help working Australians to make ends meet.
I am acutely aware of the financial squeeze felt by many Australians. Not just families, but by pensioners and singles as well.
Wages are growing and overall inflation is under control but parts of the household budget are under tight pressure.
Bills like electricity and insurance add up. People often tell me that some of the small good things in life  -  an outing with the kids, a family holiday at the end of the year  -  are starting to feel like luxuries that are out of reach; that the uncertainty in the world economy means that they feel the need to save more and pay off debt more quickly as well.
And that while they hear about a mining boom, they don't see the benefits in their home.
So our Labor Government is determined to help.
The schoolkids bonus, the childcare rebate, paid parental leave record pension increases and we've kept interest rates low. 
These are all making a difference.
And now the carbon price is funding real assistance for working Australians.
Household assistance payments which will continue to rise over time  -  these are permanent increases, indexed like other government payments.
Australian families and pensioners have already received an initial payment in May or June to help with their utilities bills.
This pay day, all taxpayers with incomes up to $80,000 will get a tax cut, with most getting a tax cut of at least $300 a year.
This week, the tax free threshold is tripled: people earning $18,200 or below will now pay no tax.
That means that almost a million people won't pay any tax out of their next take home pay  -  including many students who work part-time  -  along with 600,000 working women.
Single pensioners will get $338 more every year and couple pensioners get $510 more every year combined  -  and these higher pensions will be maintained in future years.
Put it another way: the average impact of the carbon price on electricity bills will be $3.30 this week.
And this week, we are providing an average of $10.10 to each household, in tax cuts and payment increases.
In fact about 6 million households  -  two thirds of all households  -  will get tax cuts and increased payments which fully cover their expected average extra costs.
This reform is building us a clean energy future  -  with a stronger economy  -  where working Australians get help to make ends meet.
That's how Labor does reform in this country. That's the kind of reform that our country deserves and that's the kind of reform that endures.
I know we can do all those things  -  because we have done it before. 
Look at our decisive action in the global financial crisis: we saved jobs, stayed out of recession and got back to surplus.
And who would have thought then that we'd be where we are today: where we wouldn't change places with any economy in the world.
And the same kind of decisive actions are what will ensure that in the decade to come: we'll be making a difference to the climate  -  jobs will be growing  -  working Australians will find it easier to make ends meet and the carbon price will be in place.
The history of our country, our politics, our party, is this: great reforms endure.
And in the end, everyone says they were a great idea.
That day may seem a long time away while we are in the midst of this debate.
But in twelve months' time, how smart will it look to be promising to bring to a shuddering halt investments being made in solar energy and other renewables?
Or to throw people who work in new, cleaner businesses out of their jobs and on to the streets?
How smart will it look to take tax cuts off working people who are better off because of them?
Particularly when the Opposition promising to do these shocking things believed in putting a price on carbon when it was in Government?
Indeed when every other living Liberal leader has previously supported putting a price on carbon?
Perhaps history is a better guide than today's histrionics.
One of the proudest days of Bill McKell's long life must have been 17 October 1949.
When as Governor-General he went to Adaminaby with his great Labor mate, my great predecessor, Prime Minister Ben Chifley, to fire the first blast of the Snowy Hydro Scheme, the vast project he'd done so much himself to prepare.
The Snowy is one of the great nation-building achievements of the twentieth century in Australia.
It's become an icon of one of our greatest periods of shared national purpose and achievement and surely our most beloved renewable energy project.
But when Chifley was putting the Snowy bills through Parliament, the then Opposition Leader Menzies quibbled and wavered and found excuses to raise questions.
He was too sophisticated a figure for an aggressively negative campaign of the kind we see from the modern Liberal Party  -  but my conclusion from the record is that had Menzies been Prime Minister by then, he would have proposed a very different Snowy Scheme, if he'd proposed one at all.
Well, the Snowy had already begun when Menzies became Prime Minister in 1949 and Menzies didn't turn off the tap.
In fact his Government worked for years to finish what Chifley and McKell had begun.
One of the proudest days in this nation's life was the passage of the Native Title Act in 1993.
Surely no single piece of Australian legislation has done more to right wrong than that great law.
I was privileged to speak in Parliament last month on the twentieth anniversary of the High Court's Mabo decision and I saw the Liberal leader say, in essence, that the opponents of the Native Title Act which followed had been proven wrong.
Including, presumably, the handful of his own MPs still in the House who said, “no” when that great reform came to a vote in 1993 and none of them will say they would vote against it today.
That will be the story of pricing carbon  -  because really, that's always the story of reform.
In the end, the doomsayers always have to admit they were wrong.
In the end, the only question is whether it takes them twenty years or two.
And in the end, great reform endures. 



PM: I've just received an update brief on this. As I'm advised, South Korea at the International Whaling Commission has announced that it's going to commence scientific whaling.
I am very disappointed by this announcement by South Korea. We are completely opposed to whaling, there's no excuse for scientific whaling, and I have instructed our Ambassador in Korea to raise this matter today at the highest levels of the Korean Government.
JOURNALIST: And what does the Government intend to do about it?
PM: Well we're making our voices heard today.
Our Ambassador will speak to counterparts in South Korea at the highest levels of the South Korean Government and indicate Australia's opposition to this decision.
JOURNALIST: Just quickly on the carbon floor price, why are you looking to change it from $15?
PM: Minister Combet dealt with that in the paper today. We're consulting on the floor price and there's nothing new in that.
Thank you very much.



I thank Joy Murphy Wandin for the welcome to country, and join her in honouring the First Australians with whom we share this land in a spirit of Reconciliation.
Mr Adam Gilchrist, Chair, National Australia Day Council; my Parliamentary Secretary, Senator the Hon. Jan McLucas; other distinguished guests; and a special welcome to so many former recipients of the Australian of the Year awards here today.
We all shine in the light of your generosity and selflessness.
Friends, today we ask Australians to once again take a moment to think about who has caught their hearts and minds this year, and who should therefore claim the title of next year's awards across the four categories:
 * 	Australian of the Year
 * 	Senior Australian of the Year
 * 	Young Australian of the Year, and
 * 	Australia's Local Hero
The Australian of the Year awards remind us of the importance of maintaining and enhancing national traditions which celebrate all that is wonderful and all that is defining, about being Australian.
And about acknowledging and recognising what is best in us through a representative few.
These awards, part of our national fabric now for more than half a century, remain a salient reminder that it is people who make a nation.
Those who are born here.
Those who move here for a better life.
We should never take for granted, not so much that we are a lucky country, but that we are lucky to live in this country.
We owe it to ourselves and to those who dream of sharing the country with us to be our very best and to shine a light on those who inspire us, challenge us and make us want to be better people.
People who hail from all walks of life.
And people who may be your neighbours, your co-workers, your peers, your mentors, your competitors or someone you have simply admired from afar.
People who shine in science and medicine, philanthropy, sport, the arts and much more.
From young Australians who inspire us with their enthusiasm and the hope they bring to our future.
To senior Australians who bring such depth of experience and dedication that we can only marvel at their enduring and ongoing legacy to the community.
And the local heroes who want nothing more than to make a difference in their own community and see change for the better.
Often they want no fuss.
Well I am sorry to say a bit of fuss is needed.
Which is why I now officially encourage all Australians to take advantage of this opportunity to share the stories of people that they know, or know of by nominating them for the 2013 Australian of the Year Awards.
And therefore shining a light on someone they think we should all see.
Thanks to our major sponsor, the Commonwealth Bank, for more than 30 years of support for the Australian of the Year Awards.
And without further ado, it is now my pleasure to declare nominations for the Australian of the Year Awards 2013 officially open. 



PM: I'm here in Tasmania today. I'm with Sid Sidebottom, our Member for Braddon. It's a picture perfect Tassie day  -  typical  -  and it is fantastic to be here. We're here today specifically at Ulverstone High School.
We've had the opportunity of touring around, including having a look at the science centre that is just over there, built through the Building the Education Revolution program at a cost of almost $2 million, but helping teach the kids in this school about the world we live in and the science of our planet.
And we've had the opportunity to meet with student leaders, not only from this school but from a number of schools locally. They are really giving us an insight into the future  -  into the world that they will be the adults of.
They are very focussed on the environment and doing what we need to as a nation, as individuals, indeed as a whole planet, to address the challenge of climate change.
They were coming up with their own very practical ideas and they're going to take those ideas back to their own schools. They are seeking to achieve through their efforts what we are trying to achieve nationally through putting a price on carbon.
I want these students to live in an Australia that has an environment we can be proud of, that has cut carbon pollution and that has a strong economy that can offer them the benefits of lifetime opportunities. I want to see that for their future.
And putting a price on carbon is an important step to realising that future. It means we'll cut carbon pollution, our economy will grow strongly, there will be more jobs and opportunities.
So it's been a great delight to share their sense of excitement about acting on climate change. It's what we're seeking to do as a nation. So it's been great to be here with Sid and his connections with this school are very strong indeed. His own children went here.
SIDEBOTTOM: They did, yes.
PM: And good achievements when they were here.
SIDEBOTTOM: Indeed. I think.
PM: Okay, we're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: If anyone was going to give a positive response to the carbon tax, you'd think it was Tasmania with Hydro Tasmania, but there's a lot of fear about freight costs and things like that. Do you think the message is getting through?
PM: I think there's been a lot of fear deliberately generated with a lot of false claims about what carbon pricing will mean.
You know, a lot of claims have been made about electricity prices and we know that here in Tasmania electricity prices for individuals will go up 5.6 per cent.
Nationally they'll go up around 10 per cent.
It means the assistance that we're providing here through pensions and tax cuts and family payment increases is going to go further. And for this state, this wonderful clean state with its hydro and its clean sources of energy, this is a net benefit for Tasmania.
So, a lot of fear been around but over the course of the last week we've seen a number of the myths generated being absolutely busted.
You know, you were told Whyalla would be wiped off the map. That hasn't happened. You were told the coal industry would shut down. That hasn't happened. You were told that there would be astronomical increases at the local shops. That hasn't happened, and so the list goes on.
JOURNALIST: Have you been surprised, I guess, the build up to 1 July was so massive, have you been surprised at how quickly the discussion seems to have tapered off, even over the last 24 hours?
PM: In some ways I'm not surprised, because you've just had, run by the Opposition, the most ridiculous scare campaign. And it was very apparent that come 1 July, none of these doom and gloom prophecies were going to come true.
So the image had been created by the Opposition's fear campaign that on 1 July our nation would enter a permanent depression. There would be a wrecking ball through the economy. The Sunday roast would cost you $100. And so the list went on.
And of course people went about their ordinary Sunday and they're gone about their ordinary working week, but we as a nation are achieving a cleaner future because the price on carbon means we'll be cutting carbon pollution.
So this week is the start of people's opportunity to judge for themselves what all those reckless claims have been about.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on asylum seekers, do you need the Opposition to join your policy group for it to be effective?
PM: Thank you for that question. I am very disappointed that to date the Opposition has not nominated members to participate in the reference group. I want us as a nation to take effective action to deter people from risking their lives at sea and getting on leaky boats.
I want us to be able to have an offshore processing solution. Every step of the way we've been prepared to compromise to get this done for our nation.
I think it's incredibly disappointing that Mr Abbott and the Coalition he leads have not taken the opportunity of working together in the nation's interest for a compromise that we can all endorse and get on with putting in place.
JOURNALIST: The Liberals have made some sort of contribution to that today with former foreign minister Alexander Downer saying that if people smugglers were no longer able to guarantee that asylum seekers would be able to get to live in Australia, they might start heading elsewhere. Do you have a reaction to that?
PM: Well I do have a reaction. Those words are a ringing endorsement of the Government's arrangement with Malaysia. Unfortunately Mr Abbott is so negative he won't endorse that arrangement.
Our arrangement with Malaysia would enable us to take people who are striving to reach Australia and to transfer them to Malaysia. We would be able to do that to send a powerful message of deterrence to people smugglers.
But every step of the way we've been met with negativity. Today the former Chief of the Defence Force, Chris Barrie, has come out and said effectively that Tony Abbott's plans for towing back boats will put naval personnel at risk; that they won't work.
So, one element of Mr Abbott's plan keeps running into the wisdom from senior Defence Force personnel who say it will put the lives of Australians at risk. So given this, it's clear Mr Abbott needs to think again.
We are wanting to see the Opposition work for a compromise in the national interest and that's why it's so disappointing that they haven't as yet taken up their positions on the group that will be working in this debate to try and get the nation a solution.
JOURNALIST: In the past the Indonesian Government has expressed concerns about the Opposition's plan to tow back boats or to turn them away. Did they express that in Darwin when you met with the Indonesian President
PM: I'm not going to go to private discussions, but every time the Indonesian Government has been asked about this question they've said the same thing: that they will not accept towed back boats.
Mr Abbott had the opportunity publicly in front of President Yudhoyono to raise this if he'd chosen to do so, and he did not. So he goes around the nation thumping his chest about towbacks, but when he's in public in front of the President of Indonesia, he says not one word.
And that's because he knows that Indonesia is not going to agree with this, and he must accept the force of the words of people like Chris Barrie, former Chief of the Defence Force, that this would put Australian lives at risk.
This is an area not for sloganeering. It's for getting effective action done. We're prepared to work and compromise to get effective action. We're calling on Mr Abbott still to act in the national interest rather than play the negative politics.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the Coalition is deliberately snubbing this panel?
PM: Well you'd have to put that question to Mr Abbott. What I know to date is every step of the way, we as a Government have been prepared to compromise to get an outcome for our nation. Every step of the way to date, Mr Abbott has said no and played politics.
He's got a new opportunity now to show that he's capable of acting in the nation's interest, and I'd urge him to seize it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think some good might come from the Wikileaks release of two million emails from Syrian political figures, including Syria's relationships with some of its allies, particularly a story's come out about Italy providing communications support to the regime?
PM: Look, I'm not going to comment on documents by definition I haven't seen. I have made my concerns about Wikileaks known in the past.
JOURNALIST: Do you support Seafish Tasmania's plans to bring a super-trawler and operate it out of Devonport?
PM: Look, on this question of the super-trawler, there's been some media speculation about this but it continues to be the case that no application has been received by our fisheries authority for the super-trawler, no application's been received.
And if one were ever received, then it would be dealt with by our fisheries authority on the basis that they would consider all of the questions about sustainability of the catch and the environment, and only issue a permit if they were satisfied and with the relevant conditions.
So what drives them isn't the size of the boat  -  the boat isn't the relevant consideration  -  what drives them is what's in the best interests of sustainability for our fisheries.
We'll just take the last two and then we'll go.
JOURNALIST: Tasmania's set to lose $80 million under the new health reform, which comes in in 2014-
PM: That's not the case. Tasmania is hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars better off as a result of our health reform arrangements, and on top of that we have committed a new $325 million of expenditure. This health reform deal is particularly good for Tasmania. Tasmania is an area with growing health costs.
The Federal Government is stepping up to being an equal partner in funding that growth, and on top of all of that, we have committed to an extra $325 million.
JOURNALIST: But the Independent Pricing Authority says that we will lose 16 per cent of Tasmania's budgets.
PM: There's no version of life that has Tasmania anything other than hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars better off. This is a multi-billion dollar deal in Tasmania's interests.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on a much lighter note, your rise through Parliament has been very inspiring to women right across the nation. In regard to Lady Gaga and Katy Perry, in an artist's war, who would you pick as the favourite?
PM: Look, I'll leave that to Sid! He's the artist in the group!
Okay, thank you very much.
SIDEBOTTOM: Great, thank you.



The Government today announced the membership of the Multi-Party Reference Group which will support the work of the independent expert panel in examining ways to stop people risking their lives on dangerous journeys by boat. 
The Reference Group will provide an important mechanism through which the independent expert panel can canvass the views of the Parliament in conducting its work.
The Government sent letters to the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the Greens, and all crossbenchers, inviting them to participate in the Group. The Opposition were offered three spots  -  the same number as the Government  -  while the independents and Greens were offered two places each.
The Government has received responses from all groups except the Opposition. As a result, the membership of the Multi-Party Reference Group will be:
 * 	Mr Wayne Swan MP
 * 	Mr Chris Bowen MP
 * 	Mr Stephen Jones MP
 * 	Senator Christine Milne
 * 	Senator Sarah Hanson-Young
 * 	Senator John Madigan
 * 	Mr Tony Windsor MP
The Government remains willing to accept Mr Abbott's nominations.
If Mr Abbott chooses not to participate, we are willing to accept nominations from Opposition members, given the clear importance that many parliamentarians across all sides of politics attach to resolving this issue.
The task of the expert panel is to address asylum seeker and refugee issues, including the need to prevent people from risking their lives on dangerous boat journeys at sea. The expert panel will be led by former Chief of the Defence Force, Angus Houston, and will include Mr Paris Aristotle and Mr Michael L'Estrange.
The independent expert panel will examine all of the policy options available to respond to this complex challenge, including those canvassed in the Parliament. It will have access to all materials available to the Government and will be able to take any steps it believes necessary to ensure that its findings are based on all available information.



PM: It's a great pleasure to be here in Queensland with Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan and particularly to be in the federal electorate of Petrie with our local member, Yvette D'Ath. People today are enjoying a barbecue out here in this beautiful part of the world.
It's a week now since carbon pricing started and it's very clear that the sky hasn't fallen in; that Australians are going about their usual Sunday. And it's also very clear that the ridiculous claims made by the Opposition in the lead up to carbon pricing are simply not true.
People were told that a Sunday roast was going to cost $100. They were told that Whyalla would be wiped off the map. They were told that a great resources state like Queensland would no longer be mining coal. All of these claims are clearly untrue.
And Australians now have the opportunity to judge for themselves. Seven million Australians are going to see a tax cut in the pay packet that they're getting this week or the next week.
A tax cut to help them with cost of living pressures, and to help them with any flow through from putting a price on carbon. But with a debate that has been the subject of so much fear and so much doom saying, it's important to remind ourselves what it's all about. 
We live in a beautiful part of the world. We live in a wonderful nation; a great continent. We are a continent exposed to the effects of climate change. We have got great parts of our nation, great parts of Queensland, like the Barrier Reef, to protect.
And what that means is that we've got to play our part in combating climate change. We've got to cut the amount of carbon pollution that we're generating.
We've got one of the most carbon intensive economies in the world. And in order to change that economy, so we can seize a cleaner and greener future, we have to put a price on carbon.
All of the experts say that's the cheapest and most effective way to cut carbon pollution, and by putting a price on carbon on 1 July as we have, we'll see carbon pollution reduced by the equivalent of 45 million cars on the road in 2020.
So, we're playing our part in tackling climate change, while keeping our economy strong and whilst making sure that Australians get a hand through tax cuts and pension increases and family payment increases.
I'll go to Wayne Swan for some comments.
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER: Thanks very much Prime Minister.
It's great to have you here in Queensland because there's probably no state which will be impacted by dangerous climate change more than Queensland.
Our beautiful Barrier Reef, our coastal developments up and down the coast; this means that we do have to deal with dangerous climate change to protect and preserve our environment. But also to protect and preserve our economy.
It's a great thing that with the introduction of carbon pricing, there is very substantial tax cuts which will go to many people on low and modest incomes, particularly here in Queensland. And of course, what we have provided is additional payments to families to assist with the cost of living, the Schoolkids Bonus. All of these initiatives are good news for Queenslanders.
Bust most particularly, what's not good news for Queenslanders is what Mr Abbott intends to do with all of these benefits that we've put in for Queenslanders and for Australians.
There this morning was Mr Abbott looking very, very shifty. On the Insiders this morning we saw why he won't go out and do long interviews with journalists. Because he couldn't answer the most basic questions about what he would do if he were in charge of our nation.
We know for example that he would abolish the mining tax. The mining tax is going to deliver tax relief to up to 2.7 million small businesses. Half a million of those small businesses in Queensland; that's going to be ripped away.
He's going to rip away the tripling of the tax free threshold. That's a very big benefit to many people on low incomes, those who work part-time, self-funded retirees, millions of Australians will benefit from that. But he's going to rip it away. But he was just being shifty about that this morning.
But what was worse was he continued to talk down our great nation. There he was this morning spreading fear and lies about the future.
He said again, he said again that it wasn't safe for companies to invest in Australia. How unpatriotic for the Leader of the Opposition to make those sorts of statements.
The fact is that foreign investors and domestic investors are investing record amounts of money in the Australian economy in recognition of its underlying strength. But there was the Leader of the Opposition, talking down Australia. Devaluing the hard work of people in small business. Deliberately trying to undermine confidence in our economy.
What we have put in place through carbon pricing, what we have put in place for the Schoolkids Bonus will make our economy strong for the future, will continue to generate jobs, particularly here in Queensland, and make sure we look after families with cost of living pressures.
JOURNALIST: Do you support preferencing the Greens last in the next federal election?
PM: I'm happy to take your question, but I did want to say one thing following Wayne Swan's comments first.
I too saw the interview this morning with Tony Abbott on the ABC's Insiders program and I'd endorse the words of the Deputy Prime Minister. It was a truly remarkable performance.
And amongst the many things that were remarkable about what Tony Abbott said today, on Insiders today he confirmed he was too much of a coward to raise with the President of Indonesia, his so-called plan to turn back boats. And when pressed on details of how this place would work, he was simply unable to give them.
This is Tony Abbott that goes around the country with a slogan ‘stop the boats'; who says to anyone who will listen in Australia that he wants to turn boats back. But when he's got his opportunity to argue for that plan with the President of Indonesia, he's too cowardly to do so.
And when he's on TV this morning and he's got the opportunity to explain how that plan would work in detail, he's completely unable to do so. Mr Abbott's slogan from today on is a completely hollow one. He simply can't explain his plan.
So now is the time for Mr Abbott to put the politics to one side and to work with others across the Parliament including the Government, to get an effective solution to asylum seeker questions and the effective operation of offshore processing.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well Mr Abbott clearly didn't have the guts to raise it, so you need to put that question to him.
How is it that he can stand at interviews like this one and answer questions from journalists and talk about turning around boats, but when he's got the opportunity to put it squarely to the President of Indonesia, it's completely obvious from this morning's interview he failed to do so.
JOURNALIST: He said he wouldn't be part of the parliamentary reference group on asylum seeker policy. Will the reference group go ahead anyway?
PM: The reference group will go ahead. But given Mr Abbott can't explain his policy to turn back boats, lacks the guts to put it to Indonesia, he really should stop the politicking and should work with others in the Parliament through the reference group to get an effective solution for our nation.
He should have the decency to put the national interest first, particularly when he can't explain to the Australian people what his policy is.
JOURNALIST: Did you really want him in the group?
PM: Certainly. Absolutely.
JOURNALIST: Are you confident that the group will still be able to be properly representative of Australian opinion without the Liberals involved?
PM: Let's be very clear about the process that I've set up. I've asked three eminent Australians; Angus Houston, the former Chief of the Defence Force; Michael L'Estrange, a foreign policy expert; and Paris Aristotle, an expert in refugee and asylum seeker issues to provide the nation with advice about what we should do from here.
The reference group of politicians is there to meet with the panel, to give the sense of views across the Parliament.
It's a genuine attempt to find an outcome, to find a solution and that's why it would be so disappointing if Mr Abbott, who hasn't got a plan he can explain, hasn't got a plan he's prepared to put to Indonesia, refused to participate in this process.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you support the policy of turning the boats around?
PM: I've been very clear. We've received advice, during the time that the Government's been elected, we've received advice and it's been out there publicly. I've had it, you've had it, we've all had it.
We've received advice from some of the people who have served our Defence Force at the most senior levels, that it will put the lives of Navy personnel at risk and put the lives of asylum seekers at risk. Now having received that advice crystal clear, I am not prepared to risk the lives of Navy personnel.
JOURNALIST: Why do you insist on continuing an alliance with the Greens when several key Labor figures are so clearly against it?
PM: Well I'd refer people to the speech I gave at the Whitlam Institute last year, which fully describes my attitudes and views on all of this.
We are the Labor Party. We're more than 100 years old. We are our own political party with our historic mission for working people. We come to the Australian Parliament driven by those values; to run our economy in the interests of working people, to share the benefits of a strong economy with working people, to shape the future so that it's stronger and fairer.
We are a Labor Government governing in that tradition.
Of course I work with others in Parliament to get things done, but what we pursue in Parliament is Labor Party values, Labor Party policy.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Look, questions of preferences are for the organisational wing of the party.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that Mr Dastyari and Mr Nash didn't come to you with their concerns before raising them publicly?
PM: Look I've dealt with all of this, you know, the best part of a year ago at the Whitlam Institute.
JOURNALIST: But these comments were made  -  they made them over the weekend.
PM: Well they did that in circumstances where my views are well-known.
JOURNALIST: What's your response to Mr Wilkie's suggestion you've been dead on the pokies reform issue?
PM: I've seen these comments today. There is a suggestion about work that was being done for government that was brought to an end. The suggestion about the reasons for ending that work is completely untrue.
Government did commission that work. When we were satisfied we had what we needed from that work, the work was brought to an end.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you worried your relationship  -  your alliance with the Greens will be damaged by this recent (inaudible) in the Labor Party?
PM: I think we've got to be very clear about the nature of arrangements in the Australian Parliament.
The people who sat and voted together the last day that Parliament sat were Tony Abbott's Opposition and the Australian Greens.
They sat on the Senate benches together to stop our nation having offshore processing. That's the last significant thing that happened in the Australian Parliament.
For this Government, which I lead, we will always pursue Labor values and a Labor vision. We will be prepared to work with others who will help us enact those Labor values and that Labor vision.
Thanks very much. 



The Gillard Government will provide $21.4 million to construct a new cancer care centre at Springfield to help local residents suffering from cancer get access to quality care.
The new centre will offer day and radiation oncology, and include two new linear accelerators, consultation rooms and a research unit.
Speaking in Springfield, the Prime Minister said this funding would help improve cancer outcomes for patients in the region.
The Western Corridor has been identified as having one of the highest needs for radiotherapy services in Queensland.
This new centre will reduce the need for patients to travel to facilities in Brisbane or Toowoomba for treatment.
The Prime Minister thanked Mater Health Services for their in-kind contribution of the land on which the Centre will be built, valued at $2 million.
Mater Health Services and the Springfield Land Corporation are working in partnership to develop the centre, and their vision for the region is appreciated by the entire community.
Radiation Oncology Queensland, an experienced private radiation oncology provider, will also be working in partnership with them to deliver expert radiation oncology services at the centre.
The Government has already committed $650 million to 24 regional cancer centre projects that support people with cancer to access the right care at the right time, as close as possible to home and family.
This commitment builds on the Government's already significant investment in cancer research, prevention, detection and treatment. 


PM: It's great to be here today with some friends from the SES. I'm joined by Shayne Neumann, the Member for Blair, by Bernie Ripoll the Member for Oxley. I've got my ministerial colleague Joe Ludwig here who has played such a pivotal role for us in working with Queensland on flood recovery. I'd also like to acknowledge Cheryl Bromage who is here from the local council. I came here in January; we were here for commemorations of the Queensland floods.
We were here to talk about all of the things that the local SES had done to help people during those desperate days.
And one of the things we had a pretty big conversation about was the 11,000 sandbags that people had filled very, very quickly and by hand.
I've had the conversation with Jason today; he is here somewhere, who I think broke the record by filling 100 by hand himself in one hour.
That's putting the sand in and tying the bag - a pretty remarkable effort.
We talked about everything that people had been through and everything that they had lost in the days of the Queensland floods.
It was a great opportunity for me to catch up with people locally but I was left in no doubt that this local SES wanted a sandbag filling machine, so next time they were called upon to go out and help people from their community, that they would be there with a machine that could make that back breaking work easier.
During the months in between, I have been left in no doubt by Shayne and by Bernie that they wanted to see us get this machine here and make a difference for this community.
So I'm very pleased to be able to announce today that we are making available $46,000 so that a sandbag machine can be purchased.
It is not only going to make a difference for this local SES and this community but because our SES works together and shares resources right across the region, indeed right around the state, it'll make a difference for the SES throughout and I'm very pleased to be able to say to people here today that we talked about it, you wanted it, I wanted to get it for you and we are able to honour that commitment today.
So thank you for everything you do. Thank you Jason, for the 100 bags in an hour, thank you for everything everybody did during the dark days.
Talking today, people have told me that they haven't had to go to too many call-outs in recent days but they're still doing all the training work that they need to do to be ready and thank you for that.
We've also had the opportunity this morning to announce some good news for the local community and for the region, which is we will make available over $21 million to construct the Springfield Cancer Care Centre.
We are standing in a growing region, where more and more people come here to make this their home.
And at the moment, if people find themselves having to face a battle with cancer, in order to get the services they need, they need to travel into the south of Brisbane or sometimes people go all the way to Toowoomba.
Having a cancer centre here will mean when people face that very difficult time in their lives and they need to battle cancer that they'll be able to get the services they need here locally.
And I'm looking forward this evening to Ipswich Community Cabinet. We will be gathering together at Redbank Plains Sate High School, local community members with my Cabinet team and colleagues, with ministers for people to raise issues with directly, and of course supported by the remarkable members that we have here who do such a great job for their local communities  -  Shayne Neumann as the Member for Blair, and Bernie Ripoll as the Member for Oxley.
I'm very happy to take people's questions.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, what kind of questions do you think you will field tonight here at Ipswich?
PM: Well look that remains to be seen. I've actually given up predicting Community Cabinet questions because I haven't been that good at predicting them.
I think people will raise a range of issues that are on their minds. At Community Cabinets people are very interested in health care and health services, education, for themselves and for their kids, the quality of local schools.
People are interested in the local environment; here in Queensland of course they talk about flood recovery and the way that the community has had to pull together.
People talk about the big issues of the day too, so I'm sure some will raise carbon pricing and the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, jobs and opportunity in our economy.
But the purpose of having Community Cabinet is people get to have their say, ask their question and we'll give them the answers, you know, straight up  -  the best answers that is we can.
And we always hear too about new things that communities haven't raised with us in the past, there is always something to learn so I'm looking forward to it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott has refused to take part in the border protection committee. What do you make of that?
PM: Thank you for that question.
I am deeply disappointed that the Leader of the Opposition is not making an Opposition member available to participate in the reference group.
The reference group is there to support the work of Angus Houston and his expert team.
Angus Houston is a former Chief of the Defence Force, he's supported by two other experts: Michael L'Estrange, an expert in foreign policy, and Paris Aristotle, an expert in asylum seeker and refugee issues.
Mr Abbott is always able to say no, but he's got no real solutions when it comes to border security. So he should stop playing politics, he should step up to addressing the national interest and he should reverse this decision, and participate in a body that will support Angus Houston and his team in their work. And I would like to note today particularly; the Leader of the Opposition has been going around the country thumping his chest about how if he was Prime Minister he would tow boats back to Indonesia. Well he's happy to say that to Australians around the country, but he was too cowardly to say it to the President of Indonesia when he met with him in Darwin. And there's a reason for that. That's because Mr Abbott knows his policy won't work. He should also know that this policy is dangerous for our Navy personnel, our Defence Force leaders have made that abundantly clear, and I'd ask Mr Abbott; how many lives of Navy officers is he prepared to risk? How many lives of Navy officers would he be prepared to lose if he was Prime Minister?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm referring to the words of Chris Barrie, former CDF who's made it abundantly clear that this kind of practice is dangerous to Navy personnel and to asylum seekers. He's made it very clear that this policy would risk the lives of young Australians who are out there serving our Australian Defence Force.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think the renewable energy target is driving up electricity prices, and has the Government considered changing that target?
PM: The renewable energy target is an important part of our policies to get to a clean energy future. It works alongside carbon pricing, and of course carbon pricing will be picking up a lot of the heavy weight to drive us to a clean energy future. We always committed to reviewing the renewable energy target and that will be undertaken by the Climate Change Authority.
JOURNALIST: On the Defence report that was released today, is it time there was a Royal Commission into these issues?
PM: The Minister for Defence has dealt with that matter a little bit earlier today. A report has been released, the DLA report that the Minister ordered into concerns about sexual abuse and practices in the Defence Force over time, so there was the Skype incident, which led to a number of other people coming forward saying they too had a story that they wanted to tell, and so we created this review to enable people to come forward and put before that review what had happened to them and how that had made them feel and what that had cost them in their own lives.
As the Minister said today, some of the material is deeply disturbing. The Minister is going to be making some determinations about what is the best way forward from here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be committing to funding the Ipswich Motorway from Darra to Rocklea?
PM: Well we're here today making the announcements that you've seen. We of course have been big funders of the Ipswich Motorway, something that Shayne and Bernie raised with me, an incredibly important piece of infrastructure for this part of Queensland, and as a Federal Government we've stepped up to the infrastructure task in Queensland. We are providing more per head of population in infrastructure dollars than was ever provided by the former government. We know in this great community there are real infrastructure needs and that's why we've been prepared to work as a Labor Government on the Ipswich Motorway.
JOURNALIST: Chocolate company Darrell Lea has collapsed today. (Inaudible)?
PM: I just heard that news and I'm really saddened by it. Darrell Lea is such an icon of a business, we all know Darrell Lea, we knows its products, we've all been into its shops, everybody's probably eaten a lot of their Rocky Road over the course of their lives. I know I have eaten a lot of their Rocky Road, so this is sad news. As I understand it the business is in voluntary administration and is looking for a purchaser, so I certainly hope that we can see someone step forward and take this business over and keep that very famous Darrell Lea brand going for us. This is a very anxious time obviously for the people who work at Darrell Lea, and I'm sure we'd all be thinking of them  -  pretty tough news. And you know, many of them would be Australians who've got family and friends and next-door neighbours who are worrying about them now, so I'm certainly thinking of those working people, but I'm hoping their jobs can keep going under a new owner.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're spending a lot of time north of the border, what are you learning?
PM: Look I am spending a lot of time north of the border. I've been here since Saturday and I'll be going from Brisbane up further north. I'm enjoying my time here and very happy to be out and about in the community talking about local community needs. Very happy to be talking to people about whatever's on their minds.



PM: I want to acknowledge first and foremost the work of Shayne Neumann, in his capacity as the Member for Blair, and Bernie Ripoll in his capacity as the Member for Oxley, in bringing us here today.
We literally wouldn't be here for this announcement if it wasn't for Shayne and Bernie. And both I and Parliamentary Secretary Catherine King can talk about their persistence, indeed insistence, that we came to this community and made a difference for its future. So thank you for your very fierce advocacy for your local community.
These two great local representatives share a community vision for this place, and in this wonderfully planned community where so many people make their home, it's a vision that's shared broadly across the community and has been very driven by Maha and his team.
It's a vision of a community where people can come and make their lives and be able to get the services that they need. So we've looked out on the great schools, and I've had the opportunity to talk to young Holly about being a school kid in this community and the great school she goes to.
But there has been something missing, and that has been the ability for people to get care for cancer in their local community.
Unfortunately too many Australians are going to confront the problem of having cancer during the course of their lives, and all of us know from our personal experience from our family and friends people who have had to confront cancer and getting cancer treatment.
For local community members now, that can be not only a daunting personal experience with all of the fear and all of the stresses and strains that come with having an illness, but it can also be an experience about spending a long time on roads away from family and friends looking for treatment where you can get it, but because it's not available in your local community you have to travel.
So people have had to travel to the south of Brisbane, to the Mater Hospital, they've had to travel to the Princess Alexandra Hospital. Indeed some people have had to make the huge journey to Toowoomba in order to get treatment.
And if you just stop and think about it for a moment, what it would feel like, to know that not only do you have to think about your health and deal with all of those issues of confronting illness, but to get the treatment you need, the chemotherapy or whatever treatment is required, you have to travel a long distance every time you need that treatment.
So that has been a real service gap here. Shayne and Bernie have consistently said that service gap needs to be filled, so I am very proud to be with them and my colleague Catherine King to announce today that we will commit over $21 million to building the Springfield Cancer Care Centre right here. In fact it's going to be right across the road.
I want to acknowledge the generosity of Maha and his team in donating the land to put it on. That is really a contribution of around $2 million. Thank you very much for your generosity in making that happen.
This money will mean that a cancer care centre will be available for this community. Where they already come for services, they will be able to get that support if they need it during a very difficult time of their lives.
I think this is good news for the local community, I know if fits in with the local community's vision about its future.
We're here today because the local members Shayne and Bernie have understood the need for this new service, and it really is a great delight to be here and able to announce that we will fund it and get it done.
So thank you very much to everyone who's come to celebrate with us, and I'll hand back to Shayne who is able to say that he's been arguing for this for a long period of time.
I was joking before if you don't get confronted by Bernie and Shayne in the corridors in Parliament House, every time you look down at your phone there's a text or a message! So it's all worked, thank you for your advocacy, and good news today.
Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Member for Capricornia Kirsten Livermore today officially opened the Rockhampton State High School Agricultural Science and Languages Centre and the Engineering and Manufacturing Trade Training Centre.
The Federal Government has invested around $3.5 million towards these facilities to deliver first class science, language and trades training facilities for the students at Rockhampton High.
It is facilities like these that will help students get the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
The $1.5 million Rockhampton State High School Engineering and Manufacturing Trade Training Centre will provide industry relevant training in engineering that will best prepare our students for the highly skilled workforce of tomorrow.
Trade Training Centres are being established to help increase the proportion of students achieving Year 12 or an equivalent qualification and help address skill shortages in traditional trades and emerging industries.
To date, the Trade Training Centres in Schools Program has approved $1.2 billion to fund more than 370 projects, benefitting over 1070 schools around Australia.
The Federal Government has also provided more than $2 million in funding for the new Agricultural Science and Languages Centre, which is designed to combine academic study with practical learning such as traineeships in rural industries
The Centre will also provide unique language-learning opportunities such as video links with other schools and universities, including sister schools in Japan.
Between the Engineering and Manufacturing Trade Training Centre and the Agricultural Science and Languages Centre, all of the school's 1050 students are benefiting from world-class facilities.
And many more students will benefit in the years to come.



The Gillard Government will provide $46,000 to the Ipswich SES for the purchase of a sand bag filling machine.
This new machine will help the community fill bags quicker and prepare more effectively for future incidents of flooding.
The Prime Minister, Minister Assisting on Queensland Floods Recovery Senator Joe Ludwig and Member for Blair Shayne Neumann joined with the Ipswich SES today to announce the funding for this new equipment, which is designed to help protect the community from future floods.
During January 2011, Ipswich experienced the worst flooding in nearly forty years.
The efforts of the Ipswich SES personnel and emergency management volunteers to save the community during these unprecedented floods cannot be understated.
Over this devastating period, the SES hand-filled more than 11,000 sandbags in order to save homes and businesses.
This new machine will enable one person to produce more than 300 bags of sand per hour, freeing up resources to be on the front line when a flood occurs.
It will also minimise occupational health and safety risks to SES personnel and emergency management volunteers packing the bags.
The machine will also support the emergency management efforts of neighbouring communities such as the Lockyer Valley and Somerset. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today released the Federal Government's guidelines for the $6 billion Regional Infrastructure Fund, which will unlock investment in communities dealing with the impacts of the mining boom.
The Government has set aside $6 billion for the Regional Infrastructure Fund as part of the proceeds of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax to pay for major road, rail, ports and other economic infrastructure to support growth.
Making the announcement during a visit to Rockhampton today, the Prime Minister said the fund would spread the benefits of the boom across the entire nation.
“The Regional Infrastructure Fund is about supporting the communities who are at the forefront of Australia's resources boom.
“The Fund is already investing in for infrastructure in mining communities, including supporting the $85 million Yeppen North Lagoon bridge and roundabout project, which is currently under construction,” The Prime Minister said.
“The release of these guidelines today means that all communities - state and local governments and other stakeholders - will now be able to submit detailed proposals to Infrastructure Australia for assessment.”
Infrastructure Australia will be charged with advising the Federal Government on how best to allocate funding over nine years.
Queensland and Western Australia stand to be big winners under the Regional Infrastructure Fund, with allocations factoring in the level of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax raised in each state.
As an early down-payment, the Government will also provide $1.5 million from the RIF for the Queensland Government to develop an overarching infrastructure plan addressing capacity and supply chain constraints.
“This will help fund the infrastructure planning we need to unlock the enormous growth potential of Central Queensland,” she said.
 “It is critical work to ensure that Central Queensland continues to thrive well into the future by coordinating its planning and approach to the supply chain.”
The plan will bring together Federal, State and Local governments, to work with the resources and agriculture sectors and other industries and relevant stakeholders from Gladstone, Rockhampton and Mackay, as well as mining communities across the Bowen and Galilee Basins and the region.
The RIF guidelines are available at: www.infrastructure.gov.au/infrastructure/rifp/index.aspx



PM: It's a great delight to be here this morning to announce what I think is the best news for Brisbane and that is, in 2014 Brisbane will host the G20.
The G20 is the body that brings together the leaders of the 20 biggest economies in the world. It is now the premier forum for discussing issues in the global economy.
It was first brought together after the global financial crisis and the G20 is continuing to play a role in guiding the global economy towards stronger times and better days of growth.
This means that in 2014 Brisbane will see the President of the United States, the President of China, the President of Russia, the Prime Minister of India, the Prime Minister of Great Britain, the President of France, the Chancellor of Germany, the President of Brazil, to name just a few, right here in Brisbane at the G20.
This is tremendous news for Brisbane; it does mean that Brisbane will see a large number of people converge here in November 2014.
Apart from the 20 world leaders who come together in the G20, there are associated business events and labour events bringing together the international trade union movement.
All up around 4,000 people will come to Brisbane for these events. Bringing together some of the leaders of the biggest businesses in the world.
You'll also see 3,000 of the world's media here, having their lenses trained on Brisbane, taking the images of this incredibly beautiful place to the world.
Directly into the Brisbane economy this will be an injection of a considerable amount of money.
We're talking about $20 million in hotel accommodation alone, around $30 million in all of the services that need to be sourced locally to make a major event like this happen.
And that's before you get to things like the associated tourism and retail benefits with so many people in town all at the same time.
This for Brisbane, I think, will be days when the Brisbane community will be able to say to itself very proudly that they are being showcased in front of the world.
For Queensland generally, we want to make sure that throughout Queensland people feel a connection to the G20 and see some of its benefits.
In the lead-up to the G20, Finance Ministers meet. That means Wayne Swan and his counterparts around the world come together to prepare for the G20 meeting. We will want to see that meeting hosted in a regional location in Queensland.
I'm very confident that in 2014 Brisbane will be there on the world stage, and I am also very confident that we will see 20 world leaders jet in but we will see 20 fully fledged Queenslanders fly out.
I am very happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: When in 2014 will it be held?
PM: It'll be 15 and 16 November.
JOURNALIST: How much will it cost?
PM: Well the Commonwealth has allocated $370 million for the costs of the G20.
It is expensive to host because of all the associated arrangements including security arrangements for an event this large. But it's very important for the global economy, it means Australia has a special ability to stamp its mark on the G20 and stamp our mark on the future direction of the global economy, good for business to have global business leaders here coming to Australia, and of course direct injections into the Queensland economy.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Queenslanders will see that as money well spent given at the moment 20,000 public servants are being sacked up here?
PM: Well this is Federal Government funds, about the 20,000 public servants you'll have to direct that to Premier Newman.
JOURNALIST: Why Brisbane, what got Brisbane across the line?
PM: Well Brisbane was selected; we asked cities around the nation to put bids forward to host this important event.
Brisbane was selected because you've got the right facilities with your convention centre here.
You've got the right ability to deal with the logistics of such a big event.
Brisbane airport, the new Airport Link, all of these things meant Brisbane's bid was the stand-out for this event.
Of course that does mean that other cities are disappointed not to be able to host the G20. But I do believe that it's important that when we put Australia's face to the world that face is one of a number of world-class cities in our nation and Brisbane is certainly a world-class city.
JOURNALIST: Sydney says it's the only world city, what's your view on that?
PM: Well the G20 will be here, a huge world event, right in Brisbane.
JOURNALIST: Will it shut Brisbane down for those two days?
PM: There will need to be arrangements to deal with security, and I think just from a commonsense perspective everyone would understand that.
I mean we're talking about leaders like the President of the United States being here so of course security arrangements will need to be made.
We've got two years, or over two years to prepare and I'm sure that the Brisbane community will want to do what they've done in the past with big international events. You'll see people wanting to volunteer and get involved.
JOURNALIST: Is it fair to say this'll be Australia's biggest ever security operation? I mean, giving what's happened since the Sydney Olympics, the world has changed quite significantly.
PM: This will be a huge security operation, I mean we're talking about the leaders of the 20 biggest economies in the world, accounting for around 85 per cent of everything the world produces; people who come with security arrangements like the President of the United States comes with.
That's why when we've allocated money federally we have allocated $370 million because security arrangements do have to be up to the mark.
JOURNALIST: Has Campbell Newman indicated how much money the State Government will kick in?
PM: We'll work in partnership with Premier Newman. We'll be looking to Queensland to assist with Queensland Police. I've spoken to Premier Newman about that personally and I am sure we'll be able to work in a great partnership to get this done.
JOURNALIST: It wasn't so long ago that this river here was steaming. What does it say about Brisbane's rebirth to be hosting the G20 a couple of years later?
PM: Well I did come precisely to this spot during the days of the floods and it was a remarkable sight as we saw some of those huge things coming adrift and floating down the river and all of the concerns that the Brisbane community and right across Queensland people faced then.
This is a city that showed in those dark days a remarkable spirit of pulling together. This is a city that I think can show a great spirit of goodwill towards the world through the G20.
So it's exciting to come from those days of real despair to looking forward to a huge event of this global significance.
JOURNALIST: A regional city for the Finance Ministers, what do you think of Cairns?
PM: Well look we're not in a position to announce the city yet. Some work has to be done. But there are a number of places across Queensland that can be considered.
JOURNALIST: Will it only be Queensland?
PM: Yes, the city for the Finance Ministers' meeting will be in Queensland.
JOURNALIST: What will Brisbane look like for that two days? Will there be choppers up with the Defence Force, five metre high fences throughout the city, what will it look like do you think?
PM: Well look, we've got to lock in all the in detail arrangements. We're talking about a meeting that is more than two years away but, yes, people will see considerable security arrangements and I think people will understand that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do we have enough hotels to support everyone
PM: We as part of the assessment of Brisbane's bid did an assessment of hotels and we're satisfied that the city can accommodate an event of these dimensions otherwise we wouldn't have gone the tick to Brisbane.
JOURNALIST: Do you think you'll be attending as Prime Minister in 2014?
PM: Well that's for the Australian people to decide in 2013.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on another topic. Business leader Don Argus says there's little leadership across both parties at the moment here in Australia.
Do you have any response to that?
PM: I've seen Mr Argus's comments this morning and he obviously worries about complacency and he worries about the future for our nation's children and grandchildren.
Can I say very clearly, I am by no means complacent and every day we seeking to build a future for our nation's children and grandchildren. That's why we've invested in so many long-term policies and plans.
Some of them controversial like carbon pricing to make sure we get a clean energy future. Many of them big projects like the National Broadband Network to make sure we've got the technology of the future. Our investments in education to make sure we've got the skills of the future.
I don't take anything for granted about our place in the world. We've got to earn our stripes every day in this growing region and that's why as a Government we focus so much on shaping that future and building a stronger and fairer future for all of us.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, who put in a bid for the G20 here in Brisbane, was it the State Government or was it the City Council or was it a combination of both?
PM: It was a Federal Government to State Government dialogue. We asked leaders around the nation, State Government leaders, Territory leaders, to put forward proposals to host the G20.
There are only so many places of sufficient size and scale in our nation. So the State Government scale in our nation. So the State Government, the then Bligh Government, originally said that they were interested and when Premier Newman came to office I spoke to him about the matter personally and he has said Queensland is still very interested and that is why we're here today.
JOURNALIST: So today when he says we don't think we have that much money to kick in, is he going back on what he said to you previously?
PM: Look we'll work in a partnership here. We're obviously prepared to make the arrangements for this to go off well, for Queensland and for Australia, and I'm sure Premier Newman's prepared to do the same.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have anything to say to the Sydneysiders who I understand are really disappointed today that they missed out?
PM: Look, I can understand a sense of disappointment but we could only make this happen for one city.
When we looked at the comparative bids and the ability of a city to host this event, Sydney was in a situation where its main convention facility was actually out of action for the critical time period. It is having long standing scheduled renovations so that meant Sydney was trying to cater around that, that its principle convention facility was out of action. And then of course there were some concerns about the restrictions at Sydney Airport which is under a lot of day-to-day pressure.
Here in Brisbane, your major convention facility is in fantastic nick and was ready to be swung into full operation for this event and the airport, with the new Airport Link is in a position to deal with the pressure that will come with so many world leaders all arriving in quite a compressed window of time and then leaving in quite a compressed window of time as well.
I also do think it gives a great opportunity to say to the world that we are a nation of many world-class cities. Brisbane is one of them and for the rest of their lives it does mean that people like the President of the United States, the Prime Minister of India,  the President of China will be able to say to people, ‘I went to Brisbane'.
They will recall their days here, their time here and feel a sense of connection with this great place.
Thank you very much.


	PM: It's really great to be here in Rockhampton with Kirsten Livermore, our federal member for Capricornia, and thank you very much to everybody at Rockhampton State High School for making me feel very welcome today.
	I've had the opportunity to declare officially open today two new facilities at Rockhampton State High School; the agricultural and languages centre, the trade training centre in engineering and manufacturing; these are great new facilities to help the students of this school have more support for their education and more choices in their study.
	I'd like to pay tribute to Kirsten Livermore for the work she's done with this school to make sure that they could access this funding. We are working to bring the benefits of trade training centres to every high school around the nation. We provided the support for science and languages centres as part of economic stimulus. It was sought for right around the country, and it's a tribute to Kirsten and to the leadership of this school that their application was successful.
	Today in Rockhampton before coming to this school, I've had the opportunity with Kirsten Livermore to view the works that are happening  -  the Yeppin Lagoon bridge and roundabout works  -  these are works that we are supporting through the proceeds of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
	Kirsten has been able to explain to me exactly the difference that this project will make for the local community, relieving congestion, improving safety and of course improving flood resilience as well.
	Here today in Rockhampton, I can announce that applications are now opening for the next stream of funding through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. Through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, we are providing around the nation to mining regions and communities $6 billion worth of funds for vitally needed infrastructure works.
	This community benefited in the first round, now the second round - $4.5 billion  -  is becoming available. And from today the guidelines as to how those funds will be dealt with will be available to local communities.
	Communities will be able to see the guidelines that they will need to acquit in order to benefit from this funding. I can also say that central Queensland will benefit from $1.5 million of planning investment so that the local communities right across central Queensland can work together and work with local industry to ensure that their planning is right and that they can make the best possible applications into this pool of funds.
	In this time of change in our economy, we are seeing an incredible resources boom, and here in this region of Queensland people feel that boom every day. That boom is bringing great prosperity. But at the same time the growth the boom brings, brings stresses and strains as well. It puts a lot of pressure on local infrastructure, which is why we've always believed it was the right thing to do to tax additionally through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax the companies that are making the biggest profits during this resources boom, and to use that money to support new infrastructure works in mining communities that are seeing that growth.
	We are seeing the benefits here in Rockhampton already, and I'm looking forward to seeing more benefits in Central Queensland.
	I'm happy to take questions.
	JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott was in Gladstone last week and labelled central Queensland ground zero for the carbon tax. What do you think about that?
	PM: Well, we're standing here in Rockhampton, Gladstone's still thriving, and so the list across central Queensland goes on. Look this is part of a continuation of Mr Abbott's fear campaign on carbon pricing. Mr Abbott said Gladstone would be wiped off the map, he identified it like Whyalla as one of those places that would cease to exist on 1 July. Well already Mr Abbott's been proved wrong.
	JOURNALIST: Just some questions from Canberra, Prime Minister. On the G20 Summit, did the Federal Government specifically ask Queensland to make greater contributions to security costs and other costs?
	PM: We've had officials from the Federal Government talking to Queensland officials about how to work together to support this event. We're using exactly the same approach we took to working with the Government of Western Australia on the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, the same approach that was taken by Prime Minister Howard's government working with the state government in New South Wales to support APEC; we are providing $370 million to support the G20, and we'll work with Queensland on making police resources available to support the event.
	JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed, like other members in government, that Campbell Newman hasn't made a financial contribution commitment?
	PM: Look, there are guidelines and understandings about how these big events are supported, and we're working on the same guidelines and understandings as we've had with other events.
	JOURNALIST: Another national one. This morning's Newspoll there in Victoria showed Victoria (inaudible). What's your reaction there, do you think your lack of popularity in Victoria is affecting the party?
	PM: There was no  -  there was a story in the Australian today but there was no Newspoll today, I'm afraid. So the question's not right. Look, there's a state by-election going on in Victoria and it's a state government by-election and of course the voters of Melbourne understand that they're voting for a seat in the state parliament.
	JOURNALIST: Are you confident Prime Minister, it's a seat that the Labor Party's traditionally held. Are you confident that you'll retain it this time?
	PM: This is a question for the Victorian ALP, it's a state government seat.
	JOURNALIST: Here also in Rockhampton today you are at a school. What would you say to idealistic young people who wanted to get involved in politics but would lean towards the Greens Party? Why should they vote for the Labor Party?
	PM: Of course whether I was talking to a young person, a middle-aged person or an old person, I would say particularly standing in Queensland, the birthplace of the ALP, that if you believe, as I do, that working people and people from poorer backgrounds deserve a fair share in our nation, if you believe as I do in taking all of the steps necessary to shape a fairer future and a stronger future for our nation, then you believe in the cause of Labor. That's been our historic mission and it will always guide us into the future.
	JOURNALIST: Do you see that as enough of a differentiation, say between the Greens?
	PM: I'd refer you to my Whitlam Institute speech from last year where I canvassed these matters in a great deal of detail.
	JOURNALIST: Many of your colleagues have been quite vocal this week on this issue-
	PM: And I would refer you to a speech the best part of twelve months old which deals with these questions.
	JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, petrol prices in regional Queensland are a big issue. We're seeing them lower in metropolitan areas. What are you and the petrol commissioner doing to try and make petrol prices more affordable for regional Queenslanders?
	PM: Well it is the petrol commissioner that can crack down on any anti-competitive pricing practices in petrol. People do frequently question some of the weekly cycles, they see in petrol pricing and they do wonder whether is some work between petrol companies of what they are going to price petrol at. Of course all of that is anti-competitive conduct, and we do have the petrol price commissioner and the staff at the Competition and Consumer Commission generally to deal with any anti-competitive practices.
	JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied the petrol commissioner is doing enough to reduce prices in regional Queensland?
	PM: Look, I'm satisfied that the ACCC and as a result the work on petrol is adequately resourced for the task.
	JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you were talking about the defence culture issues of commercial radio this morning. Do you believe that a rotten culture has sprung up in certain parts of the Defence Force?
	PM: No, and that wasn't the implications from my words. We've received a major report which contains some very, very distressing material, some very serious allegations from people who have borne the scars across their lifetime of what they say they were subjected to. So given how serious that material is, the Government, through the Minister for Defence, is now considering what's the best way of responding and the best way of going forward.
	I was, you know, asked on radio today about people in the Defence Force or who had been in the Defence Force who were ringing in, and were saying ‘Look, I was in the Defence Force all of my life, I served my nation and I never saw anything like that happen.' And of course there would be many, many, many thousands of Australians who are either in the Defence Force now or have been in the Defence Force who are able to say that. That they've done the most remarkable job for their nation and they've never seen any of these unacceptable practices.
	But that doesn't mean that there aren't any problems. The report speaks to problems and instances that have happened over a long period of time, some of the individuals coming forward are talking about things that happened a number of decades ago, but every individual needs to be treated seriously and respectfully and that's what we're working through now.
	JOURNALIST: Are you worried that the law firm that's investigating the issues has encountered some resistance from certain sections of the Defence Force?
	PM: Look, I'll leave these matters for the Minister for Defence to deal with. He's released the report, he's indicated on behalf of the Government that we are considering very deeply what is the appropriate path to go down now, given the nature of this material, some of which is truly shocking, and most of which will distress people on reading it.
	JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on Don Argus again, we spoke briefly about it this morning when he criticised the lack of leadership in the country. What you said there was that you had to make some controversial decisions that would move forward, that would keep the country moving forward. He says, he's actually criticising these directly, saying they're not actually productive, they're actually hindering the country. Can you respond any more directly to what he said?
	PM: I don't accept an analysis that says the big decisions that we've made for this nation's future aren't necessary to shape that future. We've taken a controversial decision about putting a price on carbon. We need to do that to shape a cleaner energy economy for the future, to make sure that we can realise all of the opportunities of a clean energy future, and our nation doesn't get left behind.
	We've taken a big decision  -  one that is controversial in some parts too about rolling out the National Broadband Network. But I'm not prepared as Prime Minister to see our nation left behind with yesterday's technology while other nations in our region have the benefits of the technology of the future. And, I'm not prepared as Prime Minister either, to see our kids left behind. Which is why we've been engaged in such a comprehensive reform agenda in education, so that today's kids have the skills they need to seize tomorrow's opportunities.
	Now these are all big decisions for our nation's future, many of them have been hotly contested, but they are the right decisions to ensure that our nation's children and grandchildren get to live in a stronger and fairer country.
	JOURNALIST: Was it a mistake to enter a formal government agreement with the Greens? Plenty of Labor figures have been criticising the Greens this week, calling them loopy extremists. Was it a mistake?
	PM: Well I've dealt with that question and I dealt with all of this controversy quite a long time ago in my Whitlam Institute speech, so I'd refer you to that.
	Thank you very much.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Treasurer Wayne Swan today announced that Brisbane will host the G20 Leaders Summit on November 15 and 16, 2014.
The G20 Summit is now the world's premier forum for global economic co-operation and decision-making, bringing together Leaders and Finance Ministers of countries which account for more than 85 per cent of global economic output.
“It is a real honour for Australia to host the G20, and provides a vital platform to build on Australia's role in global economic decision-making,” The Prime Minister said.
“Our international standing goes from strength to strength, having fought off the global recession, achieved strong growth, low unemployment, a return to a budget surplus and key economic reforms.
“With Queensland a driving force behind the nation's economy there could be no better place to welcome the world's leaders than Brisbane.
“Hosting the G20 in 2014 provides an invaluable opportunity for Australia to influence the global economic agenda. A strong and stable global economic and financial environment is essential for Australia's long term prosperity.”
The Summit will be attended by 20 leaders, five non-G20 leaders, seven heads of major international organisations, and up to 4,000 delegates and almost 3,000 media.
Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan said Brisbane had played a key role in Australia's economic success in the face of huge setbacks presented by last year's floods, and would be an outstanding host city for this historic Summit.
“The benefits to Brisbane of hosting this Forum will extend across the hospitality, transport and tourism sectors, as well as many other service providers, delivering a major boost to countless Brisbane businesses over the five days of the summit. 
“The G20 will put Brisbane at the centre of world events for those five days, and will showcase our thriving River City and Australia at its best,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.
The Government sought expressions of interest from all states and territories to host the summit.  Brisbane was chosen on the basis of its overall capacity to host such a large and complex event.
The Brisbane Convention and Exhibition Centre will be the principal meeting venue and will host the leaders' summit and some preparatory meetings. Business and labour forums will also be held at venues across Brisbane.
Planning and delivery will be overseen by the G20 Taskforce within the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
This will include employing a large proportion of the Taskforce from the local community, contributing towards job creation and spending and up to 500 volunteers to assist with summit logistics.
The Prime Minister said the G20 Summit would also provide opportunities for communities across the country, with preparatory meetings of delegations from all participating countries being staged in the run up to the Summit.
“These meetings are also large events and are likely to take place in locations across Australia and those details will be announced as we get closer to the G20 Summit,” The Prime Minister said.


HOST: Prime Minister, good morning to you. Thanks for coming on the program.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Prime Minister, tell me first of all who made the approach to hold the G20 here in Brisbane?
Was it your office, the Premier of Queensland, the previous Premier or who was it do you know?
PM: Look I certainly do. I went to the G20 in France and secured the G20 for Australia in 2014, then I came back and spoke to state premiers and chief ministers in territories and said we've got this event, I'm interested in people putting forward whether they want to host it and if so, how they would host it.
We then had a number of states respond including Queensland that was under the former government, Anna Bligh's government. Then we got an expert team that assesses, you know, the ability of the city to do the hosting of an event of this size and scale.
When Premier Newman was elected I spoke to him and asked him whether he wanted to keep the Bligh Government bid in, and he did and we worked through and selected Brisbane as the best bid and the greatest place to host the G20.
HOST: The representative of the New South Wales state government, Planning Minister Brad Hazzard has accused you of, what's the word, using Brisbane to try and claw back votes across Queensland. He's indicated, he says it's insulting to the 20 leaders and it should be held in Sydney.
PM: Look I can understand that Sydney's disappointed and that New South Wales is disappointed, but there were a couple of bids big reasons why Brisbane was selected.
First, the convention centre here is, you know, ready to go, full operation, it's available for the period of time we need it.
In Sydney, the major convention centre will be undergoing repairs and renovations at that time  -  they've been long scheduled and can't be moved. So Sydney was going to have to try and fit people into alternate venues with its major convention facility out of action.
And then secondly, we needed to be reassured about airport capacity. We're talking about leaders from around the world bringing in their planes, you know, President Obama comes with Air Force One and then a spare Air Force One just in case he needs it.
And we're talking about the President of China, the Prime Minister of India, the Chancellor of Germany, the President of France, the President of Brazil - so lots of planes, lots of pressure on the airport all in quite a confined period of time.
And, you know, Sydney airport does have restrictions and a lot of pressure on it already, whereas Brisbane's airport can cater for all of that and the new Airport Link obviously helps with moving people from the airport to where they need to go.
HOST: So the problems at Sydney airport simply means it couldn't handle the air traffic that would be resulting from the number of world leaders flying into Australia.
PM: Sydney airport's under pressure every day from domestic travel, you know, anybody who routinely flies for business from Brisbane to Sydney would be able to tell you any number of tales about concerns at Sydney airport and getting held up. So that's its day-to-day reality and then putting all of this pressure on top obviously would have meant that there were difficulties catering for it. There's also a curfew in Sydney and different questions like that.
HOST: How many people are expected to be here as a result of the summit overall, not just the leaders of the nations but the entire, sort of support staff and more? Do you have a figure or a number?
PM: I certainly do and it is big. You can expect around 4,000 people to come associated with the leaders' meeting, or what's called the B20 which is the associated business event. So that will be global CEOs, some of the biggest businesses in the world gathering here in Brisbane.
And then there are other events associated with the G20. There's a thing called the L20 which brings together international labour movement representatives and the like.
So, 4,000 people coming in because of the G20 and then you can add on top of that 3,000 media from around the world.
HOST: So 7,000 people all up?
PM: It's of that size and scale, it's a big, big thing. You know, when you've got leaders of the major economies in the world meeting then yes, it's a very big event.
I mean right at the centre of it is obviously leaders in a room; the leaders of the top 20 economies, the G20, five additional leaders are given invites to join so it ends up 25 leaders around the table and then you have the major international organisations like the IMF and the World Bank represented.
HOST: The Treasurer Wayne Swan on the AM program this morning indicated that he was putting aside $370 million over four years in the budget for the G20 event.
I'm trying to work out the mathematics of that, does that mean we'll be paying for that a couple of years after it takes place, or just explain how it works. It's in two years time; he said he's putting aside $370 over four years for it. Just unwrap that for me if you would please.
PM: He would be using the terminology four years because four years is a standard budget period. Obviously some money is already being expended on preparations, I mean we've got a team that's being stood up that will do the logistics and arrangements but of course, the bulk of the money will be spent in the time period that the meeting is actually in progress and all of the security arrangements swing into action.
HOST: What will Queensland be required to commit or provide in terms of funding and resources for this? The Premier has indicated that the cupboard is bear financially in Queensland. What do we need to stump up for the G20?
PM: We'll be looking to Queensland to work with us and particularly to work with us on Queensland police resources so we, you know, Federal Government obviously has security personnel, our Australian Federal Police and associated security agencies and we'll work with the Queensland Police on making sure all the security arrangements are right.
We'll also be looking to the people of Brisbane because so many end up here at one period of time, there is a big role for volunteers helping with arrangements and greeting people and making them feel at home and Brisbane, Queenslanders have shown with international events in the past that they do like to get involved and really showcase their stuff for international visitors.
HOST: So Brisbane was selected because a) the airport can handle the massive in-flight of planes and jets that would fly in from leaders around the world. The convention centre is huge and available and the Airport Link tunnel means it's easy to get dignitaries from the airport to the heart of Brisbane.
PM: And of course we've done assessments of things like hotel stock and the like that you can, you know, physically cater for the number of people who will want hotel rooms all at the same time.
HOST: Seven thousand people's a lot of beds, do we have that many beds?
PM: We've done all of those assessments and we obviously wouldn't have said yes it's going to be Brisbane unless the team working on it was absolutely certain that appropriate arrangements could be made.
You know, because this is such a big event it usually has to be in one of our biggest cities and, you know, Brisbane came up trumps. It's a great place to be holding an international meeting like this. It means that the eyes of the world will be on Brisbane and I do think that's a good thing for Australia.
We want to be showcasing our nation to the world and one thing I'd like people to certainly get into their minds is that Australia is nation of a number of working class cities and Brisbane is certainly one of them.
HOST: A number of people have sent me messages saying that the G20 is incredibly disruptive. Will they be fencing off the area in which it's held?
That's the Southbank area of Brisbane here, the convention centre and a new ABC building and the Performing Arts Complex and more. When it's around the world it normally gets fenced off entirely, will that happen here in Brisbane?
PM: Look, all of that's going to have to be worked on and I can sit here today and take you through the details of the security arrangements that will need to be made but common sense will tell us, Steve, and you and I can certainly make this assessment now, when you are talking about the leaders of the world's biggest 20 economies, when we're talking about the President of the United States, the President of Russia, you know, the President of China and the list goes on; that there will be very intense security arrangements.
Yes, that does have implications for how the city works over those few days but this has got tremendous benefits too. All of the international exposure, world leaders being able to say for the rest of their lives, yep Brisbane I've been there, I remember my time there.
Having that sense of connection and familiarity with Queensland, direct economic benefits, all of those hotel rooms we've just talked about. That's $20 million of hotel accommodation being snaffled up; $30 million into the economy because local services will be needed to make the meeting happen and that's before you get to all of the associated tourism and retail benefits.
The people who come here, the 4,000, the media, they're going to need to eat drink, they'll go out and buy things. They might well stay for longer than the meeting itself and enjoy some of Queensland's great tourism experiences.
And in the lead up to the G20 Finance Ministers meet, so that's Wayne Swan and his counterparts.
HOST: What regional town are they meeting in, do you know?
PM: Well we haven't done that selection yet but that lead-up Finance Ministers' meeting will be in Queensland in a regional location.
HOST: Well hopefully it'll give the local tourism industry a boost. It's pretty depressed here so hopefully the Gold Coast will get some good spin off from it.
Prime Minister, thank you very much for phoning in this morning.
PM: My pleasure, thanks Steve.


HOST: The Prime Minister is due in Townsville around lunchtime. Julia Gillard spent the night in Rockhampton and joins us from our Rockhampton ABC studios, Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Regional Queensland is very interested in the prospect of attracting a G20 Financial Ministers' meeting, now when are you going to announce the region that will host that meeting?
PM: Look, we'll be working on that in the next couple of months so it won't be too long before people know. Obviously some work's got to be done and some assessments about where is the best place and has the necessary capacity to do it. But I do think it's very exciting news that the G20 is coming to Brisbane, and that the Finance Ministers' meeting will be in regional Queensland.
HOST: Will you be scoping venues while you're in Townsville?
PM: I don't get to do that myself, so the answer is no.
HOST: Will your people be scoping venues while they're in Townsville?
PM: Well look, I can't give away any secrets but it's not part of my visit to be looking at Finance Ministers' meeting arrangements.
HOST: What sort of capacity though would a region need to host that meeting?
PM: Well the Finance Ministers' meeting brings together 20 Wayne Swan's, if I can use that terminology, so we say Treasurer, but around the world they are referred to as Finance Ministers. So it's Wayne Swan and his 19 counterparts from the biggest economies in the world, plus of course the heads of all of the very important international agencies like the IMF and World Bank. That means that you will see sizeable delegations and officials supporting the very important work of the Finance Ministers.
HOST: Several hundred people or-
PM: More in the hundreds, absolutely. Well and truly in that order and probably a bit more, rather than around 50.
HOST: And what will you be doing while you're in Townsville today?
PM: Well I've got the opportunity to be blogging with the Bully, with the Bulletin, so people should get on the website and have a look at all of the details about how to get a question through and I'll be limbering up the fingers so that I can be typing as quickly as possible to answer them.
HOST: Why not face to face contact with people?
PM: Look I'll be going on a wander around and saying hello as well, but we find that blogging gives people a great opportunity to get their questions through, so it'll be a mix of good old fashioned talking and taking the benefits of new technology.
HOST: Alright, well while we're good old fashioned talking, we asked our talkback callers yesterday what they would say to you if they had a quiet five minutes to sit down with you, and I'd like you to hear what David had to say.
CALLER: Well I'd just like to see her take this opportunity to experience the Bruce Highway firsthand and leave the jet at home, get in the car and drive from Ipswich and come every kilometre along the Bruce, all the way up here to Townsville.
Pretty easy to put it on the backburner when it doesn't affect you personally, if she was in the car for two days, and she had to make emergency stops for cars pulling off onto side streets, they don't have a turning lane to do so, and get run off the road by trucks, hit all the potholes, pay for the maintenance, get the windshield chipped, she might be willing to listen to us a bit more on what the Bruce Highway actually needs.
HOST: Now North Queensland seems to be a broken record when it comes to the Bruce Highway, but this is the big issue for voters. Are you interested in the Bruce Highway?
PM: Absolutely and I am all ears about the needs for the Bruce Highway, and I hear about them consistently from our members in Queensland. So I certainly want to say to the people listening, I do understand the focus on the Bruce Highway.
We have been spending on the Brice Highway and we've got a pretty good track record, and I'm proud to stand alongside that track record, stand for it, of investing in the Bruce Highway. There is still more to be done, absolutely, but as a Government, we understand the infrastructure needs around the nation.
We've been heavy investors in infrastructure, we've more than doubled the amount of money going into roads and rail and ports here in Queensland. We've basically doubled the amount of money going in per head of population, compared with the previous Government, so we're investing very, very heavily in infrastructure but there's more to do.
Yesterday in Rockhampton I did take the opportunity to announce the guidelines for the next $4.5 billion of infrastructure funding which will flow from the proceeds from the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. And of course, that infrastructure is focused on mining communities and mining states and their needs as the resources boom brings more pressure on.
HOST: Will you ever drive the Bruce Highway in Queensland between Brisbane and Cairns? That was what David was trying to get at.
PM: Look, I'm not obviously doing that on this trip. I'm a person with a great deal of pressure on time and I think people would understand that. But just because I don't have the opportunity to get out for a couple of days of driving myself, doesn't mean that I'm unaware of the issue. I am very aware of the issue.
HOST: Cost of living is also a big issue in this part of the world. Petrol price today in Sydney and Brisbane is around $1.25 a litre, in Townsville it's a $1.439. Local economists say regional Australia is subsidising capital cities. Is that price difference acceptable to you, about 19 cents a litre difference?
PM: It's very concerning and that's why we do resource our Competition and Consumer Commission, and particularly the petrol commissioner to make sure that pricing isn't as a result of cartel-style behaviour, where people decide in a regional town in particular, that they'll all put the price up and they'll all make some money from it. So we do want to make sure that people are getting the benefits of competition in petrol pricing.
HOST: Well the Petrol Commissioner won't speak to us; we've tried twice now to get him to speak to us. You're Government promised to address this, but if the person you've employed to deal with won't be open on what's going on, how's that progressing the situation?
PM: Well I'm surprised to hear that, because I know the Petrol Commissioner has got out in some regional communities. I was speaking to Kirsten Livermore, our member for Capricornia yesterday and he certainly visited here in Rockhampton. So we can pass your interest on and get him on the line for you.
HOST: Yes that's right, because in the meantime, we're still paying 19 cents a litre or so more than those capital city drivers.
PM: Well we will certainly make sure that the Petrol Commissioner is available for you.
HOST: Prime Minister, if I can take you on to indigenous employment. Warren Mundine is reported as saying he wants you to bypass the Greens and deal directly with Tony Abbott on the issue of indigenous economic development. Has he spoken to you about this?
PM: No he hasn't, and what we do in indigenous economic development is Labor Government policies, and Labor Government plans. And we've, as a Labor Government, focused on delivering the Closing the Gap agenda, so that is record investments into closing the gap in education, closing the gap in life expectancy, closing the gap in employment.
We've got a long history of severe disadvantage for indigenous Australians, and every day we've been in Government, we've focused on making a difference to that long-term disadvantage. So to be frank, it's nothing to do with the Parliamentary situation, it's everything to do with the determination of this Labor Government to make a difference.
HOST: So why is Warren Mundine then saying he wants you to bypass the Greens and deal directly with the Opposition on this?
PM: Well that's a question you'd have to put to Mr Mundine. The Closing the Gap strategy is a Labor strategy.
HOST: Prime Minister, while you do get an opportunity to look out and about, will you head to the V8 track to see what Tim may have seen over the weekend?
PM: No I won't, I heard about it from Tim but I won't take that opportunity myself! He's the car enthusiast in the family.
HOST: Alright, so perhaps we won't see you at the V8 Supercars next year?
PM: No you won't see me at the V8 Supercars. Not my particular area of expertise, but a great event. He certainly enjoyed it and it seemed to capture the imagination all round, so that's fantastic.
HOST: Will you be making any announcements while you're in Townsville?
PM: Look, we do have something to say, which we'll do when we get there. I'm being mysterious, I know.
HOST: Well it will all be revealed no doubt later this morning. Now Prime Minister, thank you very much.
PM: Thank you.


PM: I'm very pleased to be here in Townsville. I'm joined by our Senator for Queensland, Jan McLucas who's very well known in this part of Queensland, and also by the CEO of our National Broadband Network Company, Mike Quigley.
We've had the opportunity just over there to watch some of the National Broadband Network fibre being rolled out. We've had the opportunity too to speak to some local business people and the local University about the difference the National Broadband Network is making here in Townsville.
We've had the opportunity too to chat to a few people who are just moving around including a number of people who have the good sense to come and holiday in Townsville.
So I am glad to be here today and of course Townsville has benefited from being amongst the first to see the rollout of the National Broadband Network and we know from international studies, from our own experience that having broadband makes a difference to productivity, to the economy and to jobs.
We're getting on with the job of building the NBN right here in Townsville. Already 3,000 premises have been connected to the NBN, right now work is underway to rollout the fibre to 14,500 more premises, and that's part of 43,600 premises that will see the rollout of the fibre in Townsville as part of the current three-year rollout plan.
So it's happening all around you and I just learnt myself about something called roding and roping which is to get the fibre through. Significantly the fibre in Townsville is being put underground because of the benefits of the deal we did with Telstra to get access to their infrastructure and for Townsville, which of course from time to time has to face natural disasters including cyclones, the security of having the fibre underground is very important.
I'm here today to make two important announcements about the future of the NBN and future rollout of broadband services.
We are rolling out fibre around the nation and it's going to over 90 per cent of premises. But for the premises that are in rural and remote Australia that lie beyond the reach of the fibre, we want to make sure that people get the benefits of broadband.
So for those people in remote Australia who will reply on satellite services, we have already announced that we will put two satellites into the orbit to meet their needs.
Today I'm able to announcement that NBN Co. has signed a contract worth $280 million to deliver the on the ground infrastructure necessary for those satellite services to be received.
This is the on the ground equipment; the satellite dishes, the infrastructure which means that the satellite service can work. It also means dishes will go on 200,000 premises in the most remote parts of Australia so they can get the benefit of broadband through the satellite service. This is going to create jobs; around 300 of them doing the construction. And it means that this work will happen and between 2015 when the satellite launches will occur.
Secondly, and significantly for people in the outer reaches of Townsville, I want to make an announcement about the way in which wireless services will be delivered. Of course the people of Townsville are seeing the rollout of broadband but for people on the outskirts of Townsville and the outskirts of many regional centres around the country, the way in which they receive their broadband will be through wireless services.
I'm able to announce today that we will be planning, in the coming period, the necessary work to ensure that around 15,000 people who live around Townsville, and around 30,000 premises in total around Townsville, Rockhampton and Mackay will get the benefit of these wireless services.
This delivers broadband at a rate which is in excess of that experienced by a lot by a lot of metropolitan Australia and we want this planning work to start now so we can get on with the job of providing these wireless services.
This is all part of our vision to transform our economy and the way that we deliver services for the future. As Prime Minister, I don't want to see our nation left behind. Other economies are getting the benefits of broadband, we can't afford for our nation to be left with yesterday's technology.
So the National Broadband Network is an important nation building project.
I'll hand over to Mike Quigley who is leading this important project and its delivery, for further details of today's announcements.
QUIGLEY: Thank you Prime Minister.
First of all, if I can thank our colleagues Colin Harkness, who is chair of broadband for the tropics, and also Prof. Sandra Harding who is the Vice-Chancellor of James Cook University. NBN Co. has been working quite closely with both of those organisations up here in Northern Queensland and it's been a very useful relationship. We expect it to continue as we go forward.
I'd also like to thank the folks who live in Aitkenvale and Mundingburra just to our south west here for their patience and perseverance as being one of the five first release fibre trial sites.
As the Prime Minister has said, we have close to 3,000 people who are now covered in that area and we have a take up rate or some 23 per cent which is, after just 12 months, is a very high figure.
Now it's interesting to see in fact we've got a bit of a competition going on I think between the four or five first release sites of who can climb up that take up rate the fastest. So I'd like to thank those folks for their perseverance and patience with us as we're going through the construction-build process, trying some of our processes.
As the Prime Minister has said we're now starting to rollout in other modules around Townsville. That's happening in Gulliver as we continue to work and also here in the Townsville centre itself, and you can see that work will be going on module by module over the next while.
I'd like also to acknowledge our partners here, Silcar and we have in fact the CEO of Silcar here and the General Manager with us. We have a very strong partnership with Silcar now in Townsville, and obviously right across the eastern seaboard.
We've got a big job ahead of us over the next 12 months as we now really are getting into gear and starting to ramp up.
So that's the fibre, as the Prime Minister said, we're also doing a lot of work now on fixed wireless. We have some 10,000 premises country-wide now covered, including Toowoomba in the south of Queensland here, Ballarat, Tamworth and Geraldton in Western Australia.
That work is also now proceeding and I just want to emphasise, that fixed wireless service is an excellent service. It's not just a question of speeds, which the initial speeds will be 12mbs now, as good as a typical ADSL2+ but it's also we have engineered this fixed wire solution for very, very good capacities.
So you'll be able to get a large number of gigabytes per month in terms of capacity on a fixed wireless server, unlike a mobile service. That's the distinction.
We put an antenna up on the premise and we have fixed number of people in the cell, so people don't roam about which means we can maintain a very good service on the fixed wireless service.
Likewise on the satellite service, which the Prime Minister just referred to, the announcement was made today of the $280 million to Via Sat, is the second piece, the first piece was putting these two large satellites into orbit, which we'll do in 2015, so the manufacturing of those has started.
Now we're constructing ten ground stations around the country. Each of those will have a 13.5 metre dish  -  a huge dish  -  which will communicate with the satellite and relay the signal back down to the smaller 0.8 metre dishes that will be on people's homes.
So there's a lot of work now taking place all around the country, on fibre, on fixed wireless and on satellite and I would like to emphasise for those people who are in the fixed wireless and the satellite footprint, you will be getting a very good service. Thank you.
PM: We'll take questions on these NBN announcements and then after taking those we'll do questions of the day. So are there any questions on the two announcements or the NBN generally?
QUESTION: You said there was a 24 per cent take up of it, is that really that considerate given how much has actually been invested in the NBN? 
PM: This is the take-up as people get access to the NBN. Many of them would be coming up off other arrangements for how they're getting their broadband, so they're switching over time, actually that's in advance of the projections of take up.
The projections of take-up initially were at a lower level, so we're very pleased with that rate. It shows that people are moving over to the broadband network and of course I think our history tells us Australians are very good technology adopters and adapters.
It's not that long ago that mobile phones were viewed as strange, clunky, brick-like things that tradespeople carried around, and everybody wondered to themselves why on earth would they want those and are they just a fad, will they be gone tomorrow? And now I'm sure most of the people standing here at this press conference are probably never more than two inches from their iPhone or their Blackberry.
So it just goes to show how quickly we actually adapt to new technology.
QUESTION: You mentioned you'll assist business, most businesses in Townsville are more concerned about the carbon tax, what do you say to them about this investment?
PM: I'd say this is the future. And it gives businesses here in Townsville the ability to trade around our nation and with the rest of the world, as if it was next door.
One of the issues for great regional centres like this one in the past has been distance from other population centres. So if you grew your business up here and then you thought, the future of my business is by getting a presence in Sydney, you were really torn. Do you stay in Townsville, where you love it and your family is, or do you go to Sydney to take the next step with your business.
Well, those kind of choices won't have to be made in the future. People will be able to live in Townsville and trade in Brisbane or Sydney or Melbourne or Shanghai of Beijing or Hong Kong or London, as if it was next door. This is the future.
QUESTION: Can you appreciate why those businesses are concerned about the carbon tax though?
PM: We'll take carbon questions once we've done any broadband questions. Okay, alright so, I'm happy to take other questions
QUESTION: Can you appreciate why local businesses are worried about what's going to happen under the carbon tax?
PM: Oh look I can appreciate that local people, businesses and families have been scared by the fear campaign that's gone on for more than 12 long months now. So they've been treated to ridiculous claims from the Opposition like, ‘Gladstone's going to be wiped off the map, no one will mine coal any more, buying a Sunday leg of lamb's going to cost them $100, that the price increases in the shops will be astronomical', they've been treated to all of that and of course that's made people anxious.
I understand that. Now people have got the opportunity to judge for themselves; they can judge for themselves, is Gladstone still there today? The answer's yes. Is the Sunday roast costing $100? The answer's no. Have price increases been astronomical? The answer is no. Are we still mining coal and seeing an expanding coal mining industry? You bet. And are people seeing the benefits of tax cuts and family payment increases and pension increases? Yes they are. And that assistance will be ongoing.
So, over the months ahead, people will be able to work it through and work it out for themselves.
QUESTION: Have you had much feedback from local business about the carbon tax pricing and stuff like that, much feedback?
PM: I'll be here in Townsville today and I'm very open to people's feedback. I'll be doing a bit of blogging so people will be able to ask any question that they want to.
But during the time I've been in Queensland I've had the opportunity to be in a business forum in Brisbane where we brought big businesses and small businesses together. I've attended a Community Cabinet. People have been raising with me a wide variety of issues about business today, about the strength of our economy, about the patchwork nature of our economy, the resources sector going so strongly but the high dollar also putting pressure on areas like tourism.
And people have been talking about the future of our economy and what we are here today to announce is a big part of that future. We simply cannot allow ourselves to be left behind the standards of the region and the standards of the world. And the nations we compete with will have, or already do have, access to broadband.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott says that he's the worker's best friend. Shouldn't the Australian Labor Party be fulfilling that role?
PM: Oh well with friends like that who needs an enemy?
Mr Abbott today was ducking and weaving about whether or not he would rip penalty rates off working people. We've been here before when Mr Abbott was in Government, and he and his cohorts were in on a plan to rip penalty rates off hard working Australians.
People who rely on that money to pay the mortgage or pay the rent and feed the kids. If that's been the worker's best friend then I'd hate to see an enemy of working people.
QUESTION: While he's tried to however position himself as the worker's friend, and yesterday you certainly gave an eloquent outline of Labor's credentials in this area. Do you agree with Malcolm Mackerra's position this morning that to really display, in some ways the worker's friend, you have to become the Greens' enemy?
PM: We've got to be a Labor Party and that's what we will always be, true to our heritage of benefiting working people and bringing that heritage to the future.
And if you look at something like the National Broadband Network, people might think that's a long way from historic Labor values, but there is a connection here. Either we shape the future or we allow ourselves to be shaped by it.
If we just said, let whatever's going to happen with broadband happen around the country, I'll tell you exactly what would have happened.
The wealthiest parts of our biggest cities would have had the benefit of the fibre, they would have had the world's best broadband and the suburbs and regional centres where decent working people live would have missed out.
That would have been the future; a digital divide that reflected the income gap and wealth gap in our nation.
Well, the National Broadband Network is a Labor plan because it says, whether you're a working person who lives in Townsville or whether you're a multi-millionaire who lives in one of our big cities, or whether you actually live on a station in outback Australia, you too should get the benefits of this new technology and not be left behind.
QUESTION: How about Malcolm Mackerra's broader point, which was that really you've positioned yourself there as the worker's friend. You do need to become the enemy of the Greens if you like. That was the actual term he used.
PM: I'm not going to, you can talk about position, I'll talk about what we believe in. There's a lot of talk about brand in politics. We're not a brand, we're a Party that's a cause. There are things that we believe in and we will always believe in. I'll allow the commentary to do what the commentary does, for us it will always be our Labor values that drive us forward.
QUESTION: Is it embarrassing that some state and territory leaders don't want your assistance in helping them to campaign, for instance in Western Australia?
PM: I actually made some comments about this yesterday. I mean, state campaigns turn on state issues. People who vote in state elections and territory elections, Australians called on to vote in those elections, know what they're voting for. They know the level of government they're voting for.
QUESTION: Do you anticipate federal implications from the Melbourne by-election?
PM: Look it's a state campaign that'll turn on questions for the state. People in Melbourne, you don't want to insult their intelligence, that would be very unfair. I know we're in Townsville and maybe people don't mind hopping into the people of Melbourne, but the people of the state electorate of Melbourne are smart enough to know that they are voting in a state by-election for someone who will represent them in the state parliament.
QUESTION: Will the G20 Summit actually be advantageous to Brisbane, given that we're spending millions of dollars to potentially see images of protesters beamed across the world.
PM: Oh it'll be hugely advantageous to Brisbane, and to Queensland. It's a coup for Australia to get this meeting in Australia. We went on a campaign to secure it and I was delighted when I went to the G20 in France to come back with the agreement of the G20 that it would be in Australia.
This is a very big thing for our nation. It enables us to have the leaders of the top 20 economies come to Australia, it enables us to put more of our stamp on riding the future of the global economy. So it's a very important moment for us.
And it will be a very important moment for Brisbane and for Queensland to have the leaders of the world come and gather here to have them familiar with this place, with Queensland as a result and for each of them to go back to their own nations I'm sure, singing Queensland's praises and saying to anyone who will listen, what a great place it is to go and visit.
QUESTION: You mentioned the Finance Ministers will meet in a regional centre. Campbell Newman wants that to be Cairns. Where would you like it to be?
PM: Well, we'll be going through a process to deal with that to make the necessary assessments about capacity to host such a meeting. It's a sizable meeting too.
The G20 attracts the leaders, but it attracts 4,000 people who come to support or to associated events. It attracts around 3,000 of the world's media.
Now the Finance Minister's Meeting is of a smaller scale, but it is still a very significant meeting, so we've got to do the due diligence to see who's got the best ability to host it.
QUESTION: Could it be in Toowoomba by any chance?
PM: We're going to be looking through regional Queensland. I'm not going to be in the business of ruling things in and ruling things out. But as I think you saw with the selection of Brisbane, there are some logistics and capability questions that need to be analysed properly.
QUESTION: Just returning to the carbon tax, are you concerned that the ACCC has reportedly received 600 complaints and are investigating 20 businesses?
PM: Well the ACCC itself has said that this is a modest number of complaints. And I would make the point, if anything the Opposition had said about carbon pricing was true, if one thing was true, you would have expected Australians in their millions to be ringing the ACCC and complaining.
I mean imagine if Gladstone, Whyalla and a series of other townships had been wiped off the map on 1 July. The ACCC would have been getting calls of complaint in the millions.
We've had carbon pricing now for over a week, around 600 complaints, I think the story that's telling you is how ridiculous the fear campaign's been.
QUESTION: The ADF, its released names of ten senior members of the ADF who it says is implicated in cover-ups. Is that concerning, have you seen that report?
PM: Look I am very concerned about all of the material that is in the DLA Piper review. We, as a Government, ordered this review following the Skype incident at the Defence Force Academy.
The ordering of the review has enabled people to come forward who have got allegations  -  many of them go back decades  -  but the material is truly shocking and disturbing.
We're now working through the Minister of Defence to find what's the best thing to do given this material is now there in the possession of the Government, and of course the community's had the ability to look at it too.
QUESTION: Will you be looking at the Bruce Highway anytime at all when you're in North Queensland?
PM: I am very familiar with the issues on the Bruce Highway, very familiar, and we've got some great Queensland representatives who make sure that I stay nice and familiar with the issues on the Bruce Highway.
We've been a big investor into the Bruce Highway, we've been a big investor into infrastructure in Queensland. If you do the figures per head, we've effectively doubled what used to be spent by the Howard Government on infrastructure up here.
Now there's always more to do, but we are proud of our record in basically doubling the amount of money going into road, rail and ports around the country. And certainly we've been investing in the Bruce Highway. But for the continuing issues there, I'm kept in very good touch by our Queensland representatives and I'm very well-aware of them.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, we learnt today that the unemployment rate rose in June, last month, are you concerned?
PM: There was a 0.1 per cent increase to 5.2 per cent. What that means is by the standards of the world, we continue to have a low unemployment rate.
We were talking just a moment ago about the G20. When I sit at that G20 table, and talk to my counterparts from around the world  -  whether it's the President of the United States, whether it's the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, whether it's any number of the representatives who are in European economies  -  they would literally do anything to have the same economic story and statistics as Australia.
It's one of growth, it's one of continuing low unemployment, it's one of strong public finances, it's one of strong banks. We are triple-A rated by the three global credit agencies for the first time in our nation's history. This is a good track record and achievement for our economy, and we should all be proud of it because we built it together.
QUESTION: The Bali bombings, the survivors coming back, someone suggested that the Federal Government funds their flights and stuff like that for the anniversary. Have you had any thought about that?
PM: Yes, we're working on this. We are moving towards the 10th anniversary of the Bali bombing  -  the bombing in which so many Australians lost their lives. It's going to be a very significant time of commemoration and reflection for the nation.
A number of the family members of those who lost their lives will want to be in Bali at the commemorative events there, and as a Government we will be providing some assistance for family members.
The details of that are still being worked through and determined. But as soon as they're available, they will be made available to family members.
Thanks very much.


Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy Senator Stephen Conroy today announced the next round of high-speed satellite and fixed wireless broadband for regional and remote Australia.
A new contract worth an initial $280 million has been signed between NBN Co and Via Sat Inc for the manufacture of satellite dishes and other equipment to deliver fast and reliable broadband to families and businesses in regional, rural and remote Australia.
The contract includes the construction of two 13.5 metre-wide satellite antennas for the National Broadband Network's ten satellite ground stations; as well as household satellite dishes and network infrastructure for NBN Co's data centres.
This investment in the NBN's next generation satellite service will ensure as many as 200,000 homes and businesses in some of the remotest parts of Australia are able to access fast, affordable, and reliable broadband.
Speaking from Townsville in North Queensland today, the Prime Minister said Australians living in our regional, rural, and remote communities have had to put up with second-class telecommunications infrastructure for far too long. 
Like water and electricity, the Gillard Government sees fast broadband as an essential utility that should be made available to all Australians, no matter where they live.
The Prime Minister also announced that planning and design work on the NBN fixed-wireless network would begin in rural areas around Townsville, Mackay and Rockhampton. 
This part of the fixed wireless network aims to cover approximately 30,000 homes and businesses and it is expected facilities will start to be switched on in stages from late 2013.
This is on top of 25,000 premises already announced, bringing the total so far in Queensland to 55,000 homes and businesses in rural areas that are expected to be served by fast, reliable broadband via fixed wireless.
The NBN's fixed wireless network and long-term satellite service are designed to offer speeds of up to 12 Mbps, better than many people in metropolitan areas receive today.
Fixed wireless and satellite technology will serve communities in rural and remote Australia with low population density, where it is impractical or uneconomical to rollout fibre optic cable.
The Long Term Satellite Service and fixed-wireless network are part of a comprehensive and unprecedented investment in broadband infrastructure for the bush, delivering access to much improved services at an affordable price that does not discriminate between the country and the city.
Further information about the rollout of the NBN is available on the NBN Co website at www.nbnco.com.au.
List of councils where fixed wireless planning proposals are expected to be lodged
Townsville
Tablelands Regional Council
Burdekin Shire Council
Charters Towers Regional Council
Townsville City Council
Hinchinbrook Shire Council
Cassowary Coast Regional Council
Mackay
Whitsunday Regional Council
Mackay Regional Council
Isaac Regional Council
Rockhampton
Rockhampton Regional Council
Central Highlands Regional Council



The Gillard Government will provide an additional $1 billion as part of our contribution to the historic pay rise awarded to Australia's social and community sector (SACS) workers in February of this year.
This takes our total commitment for equal pay for social and community workers to around $3 billion through to June 2021, as part of the phase in period.
From 1 December 2012, 150,000 of Australia's lowest paid workers will benefit from substantial pay rises of between 23 and 45 percent as a result of Fair Work Australia's decision to lift the wages of some of Australia's lowest paid workers.
Significantly around 120,000 of these workers are women.
Speaking at the NSW Labor Conference in Sydney, the Prime Minister said her Government was committed to meeting its share of the costs associated with this historic decision.
It was this Labor Government who allowed the case to be brought to the independent umpire through our introduction of the Fair Work Act.
And this Labor Government will continue to support this historic pay increase at every step of the process as it is phased in.
The Federal Government now expects state and territory governments to meet their obligations and commit their share of funds.
Employees in our social and community sectors work in some of the most challenging of jobssuch as counselling families in crisis, running homeless shelters, working with people with disabilities and with victims of domestic violence or sexual assault.
These employees make a real difference to lives of some of our most vulnerable community members and they deserve to be properly rewarded for their efforts.
We also need to do everything possible to attract and retain more workers in this sector of the economy.
Up-to-date information on the Government's commitment to pay its share of the Fair Work Australia decision is available on a dedicated website www.fahcsia.gov.au/node/10776. 



Delegates, our party members are our greatest resource. 
So after the last Federal election, I had no doubt at all - we had to reform our Party for our members. 
When we met here last July, you were ready for renewal, ready to rebuild.
At our National Conference last year we made important progress by embracing a new recruiting target and making the big decision to trial community primaries. 
Many of you were there, and you know: we had to overcome opposition and it was far from easy.
But we achieved real change.
Now here in New South Wales, you've used the rule changes of Conference to bring change to the streets of Sydney and the people of New South Wales.
Your primary pre-selection for the City of Sydney mayoral election was a truly historic step in the life of social democracy in Australia.
And you have held the Labor banner high and attracted 2700 new members, already passing the ambitious target we set seven months ago.
In 2012, New South Wales Labor is leading the country in building a stronger Party.
I congratulate you and thank you but I will continue to challenge you to do more.
So I say to Michael, Sam, to every delegate and member: keep leading the way to a stronger Party. 
Delegates, sometimes when reforming our great Party is talked about, people say there is a problem with the Labor brand.
But delegates, Labor isn't a brand, it's a cause.
We seek to strengthen our Party so we are better able to fight for that cause.
We started our historic journey as a movement, as a Party fighting for fairness and dignity at work, for an end to exploitation and contempt and that fight goes on.
In 2005, Work Choices demolished rights at work, including attacking the penalty rates so many working people need to make their household budget add up.
We fought back and in 2007, the Australian people demolished Work Choices.
In its place, we built a modern andfair system that has got the balance right.
And we will fight to keep it as the onslaught against penalty rates starts up once again  -  no matter what gets thrown at us.
Delegates, you know there are a lot of differences between the two major parties in Australian politics.
But we do have this much in common.
Beliefs about workplace relations run deep in Labor blood and they run deep in conservative blood too. We saw that this week.
On Wednesday, the Opposition Leader had one of those occasional moments when he accidentally tells the truth.
He said: “There's workplace relations changes over the last few years that are making it harder for you to stay open on Sundays, after hours, on public holidays ... [employers] do need more flexibility in your workplace arrangements.”
Delegates, when he said “more flexibility”, something tells me he didn't mean making it easier to get time off when your kids are sick.
So the fight's on and we will fight it and win it.
I am too proud of what we have achieved for working people, to do anything else but fight.
Safe Rates for truckies  -  we've got it done.
New protections for cleaners - done.
New laws to help stop the exploitation of outworkers - done.
A fairer deal for decent workers in building and construction - done.
Reforms to Australian shipping to keep ships under the Australian flag - done.
A Work Force Compact for those who care for our elderly loved ones  -  done.
And because of Labor, all workers can have security in retirement with our historic increase in super from 9 to 12 per cent.
Every step of the way we have been guided by our Labor values, by our essential belief that our nation can be both strong and fair.
Those values and that belief will guide us through our review of the Fair Work Act which is why I can tell you now what we won't ever do.
We won't make it easier to sack people.
We won't make it harder to represent working people.
We won't enter a race to the bottom in our region on wages.
We won't make it easier to cut pay or strip conditions like penalty rates or public holidays.
And we won't bring back a culture of confrontation that sets employer against employee and destroys productivity through conflict.
We will use the Fair Work Act review to lock in fairness, to lock in bargaining in good faith, to lock them in for the future.
To lock in the vision we fought for in 2007 and 2010.
To lift the true drivers of productivity in the modern workplace and to support a modern balance between life and work.
Delegates, speaking to you today, as our nation's first female Prime Minister, it is hard to convey to you in mere words how proud I am of our actions to close the gender pay gap and achieve pay equity for working women.
First and foremost among the working women we have sought to benefit are our friends in the social and community sector.
Every day, they're hard at work, leading teams of counselling professionals, taking charge of homes for homeless men and the mentally ill, running women's refuges, disability support centres and family support services.
Put simply, Australia cannot ever be a fair nation without the efforts of these workers and there are a few of these great people here today; better qualified than workers in most industries  -  more likely to be women than workers in most industries too.
But their average full time pay has been a lot less.
Getting equal pay for these workers couldn't be done by a “stroke of the pen”.
It took a Labor promise made in 2007, laws passed in 2008, an agreement struck between unions and Government in 2009, action in Fair Work Australia begun in 2010.
And last year, on the eve of the final decisions, I committed the Government to fund our share of the pay rises which Fair Work Australia was about to decide  -  thought likely to be worth $2 billion at the time.
After all of that, years of work, on the 1stof February this year, Fair Work Australia made its decision to give equal pay to these workers who had been unjustly treated for so long. 
Take one of the witnesses in the case: I'll call her Michelle.
Michelle has a law degree and a degree in youth affairs. 
She works full time, manages programs, supervises staff and volunteers  -  and helps clients with legal problems as well.
Today, she is paid just over $50 000 a year.
The equal pay decision means that when fully phased in, Michelle will get a pay rise of almost $18 000 a year.
But to make this judgement real, to get Michelle and her fellow workers the wage justice they deserve, every Government should now do the right thing.
And we're not waiting for the Liberal states before we fund our share  -  because frankly, we might be waiting a while.
So today, I can commit to $1 billion more for these workers' pay; taking our final additional Budgeted commitment to $3 billion over the phase-in period.
Delegates, I know you are as proud of this great Labor fair work reform as I am.
But remember the scare campaign about our fair work changes? 
Remember how the Liberal advertisements told us jobs would go and the economy would be threatened?
Remember how the headlines screamed?
‘Labor IR law bad for work'
‘Miners unearth holes in Labor's policy'
‘Heavy hand of regulation will crush jobs'
And my favourite, ‘Employers will avoid hiring mothers under Labor's policy, say Howard'
That was the scare but the economic reality is plain: strikes are still low, wages are up, we have created 800 000 new jobs and historic equal pay judgements are being delivered.
Delegates, in 2013, the reality of the carbon pricing scare campaign will be just as plain. 
The economic reality: with a carbon price in place, the economy will be growing, living standards will be rising and we will be on our way to creating 1.6 million jobs by 2020.
The political reality too: the next election will not be fought just on the Opposition's tired claims that Whyalla will be wiped off the map or Sunday roasts will cost $100 or our economy will be in a permanent depression. 
These slogans of the scare campaign will be sounding as silly by then as the Opposition's pretence that they will abolish carbon pricing.
Rather, the next election will be fought on the reality of our record and the whole of our plans.
Our strong economy with our surplus, low interest rates, jobs.
Our plans to spread the benefits of our strong economy and the boom to all: more dollars in the pockets of working people and pensioners, more doctors, nurses and dollars in health care, a new approach to aged care, help for small business and record investments in infrastructure.
And our positive agenda for the future: more jobs, better jobs because of Labor's winning embrace of clean energy, high speed broadband, fairness at work and the new opportunities created by the spectacular growth in our region.  
Greater opportunity because of Labor's plans to give our children the world's best education and our workers the world's best skills and the fairness that can only come with a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Delegates, we will build this future, even as the naysayers tell us that our nation can't be brave and strong and fair.
These preachers of doom always underestimate us  -  the men and women of Labor  -  and the men and women of our nation.
We've stared the scare campaigns down before and we will do it again and with courage, we will build that stronger, fairer future.
Delegates, when Tony Abbott was talking about his plans for penalty rate rip offs, he was actually speaking in this city to the Tourism and Transport Forum.
Doesn't it say something about the Liberal Party's absolute obsession with paying people less and ripping people off that their Leader turns up at a forum dedicated to tourism and transport and this state's long-term future and he doesn't talk about roads or rail, or a second Sydney airport or bringing life to the Harbour he talks about cutting wages for kids who work in cafes on weekends.
That's the difference between the parties in a nutshell: their small-minded determination to stop people getting ahead, our nation-building vision of investment for the future.
And delegates, we will build new infrastructure because a good city is a place where people can live a good life.
And the good life isn't a commute where you leave for work before the kids have breakfast and get home when they're in bed.
A good Government can make a big difference to people's lives by giving them less time on the train or in the car.
After almost twelve years of underinvestment and neglect from a Federal Liberal Government, Sydney strained at the seams.
Now, after almost two years of complacency and short-sightedness from a State Liberal Government, Sydney is straining at the leash.
Sydney needs a Government which will plan, will build, will support jobs.
The Federal Liberals wouldn't  -  too busy attacking workers rights to build for the future.
The State Liberals can't  -  a lazy party with small ideas.
Only Federal Labor can get the job done.
We're the party of infrastructure, right across the state.
We're switching on high speed broadband in the regions, making vast improvements to state-wide roads like the Hume and the Pacific Highways, ensuring jobs are created where the people want to live.
And in five Federal Labor Budgets, we have already pledged $3.7 billion to transport infrastructure in this city  -  more than ten times what was invested in the twelve Federal Budgets that came before.
And in this year's Federal Budget we outlined our detailed plans  -  projects that have been talked about for long enough.
We put money on the table to get these projects done to fill in the missing links in the city's motorway network.
To make existing roads flow more smoothly, to get interstate freight trucks off urban roads, to ease congestion on the tracks and crowding in the suburbs and funding to build the Parramatta to Epping Rail Link.
Fourteen kilometres of new line, a new station and five station upgrades  -  $2.1 billion in Federal Budget funding a major new connection to lift the performance of the whole network.
A major urban investment which would truly make Parramatta not just Sydney's geographic heart but Sydney's second CBD.
The cheque is signed, the money's in the account ready for the State Liberals to take up as soon as they wake up.
Barry, you don't even have to come into the office for a meeting. Just get on the phone, say yes and get on with the job.
Delegates, we're making it easier to get around the city, to get access to the Port and the Airport but we know one Sydney airport is not enough.
So the detailed investigation into the suitability of our preferred site of Wilton is already underway.
And today, I've announced new plans for Harbour tourism.
When the Queen Mary II, the world's biggest cruise ship, came to Sydney in March it brought 2500 visitors to the city on its own.
With a guarantee of expanded capacity, we could see a visit of that kind every month in summer.
That's why we're expanding the number of guaranteed berths for the biggest visiting cruise vessels  -  ensuring three visits this coming cruise season and another three the next.
And we'll prepare a plan to meet the long-term needs of our cruise industry.
Sydney needs better infrastructure, a link from Parramatta to Epping, a second airport, new life in the Harbour  -  only Federal Labor can get it done.
Delegates, a lot of things get said about Prime Ministers, some of them are even printable!
And this year, I received the best compliment I have ever had in my life time.  It came from the Opposition so never let it be said it's impossible to get agreement between the two parties!
Tony Abbott got it right, when he told his party room: ‘She won't lie down and die.'
Too right, I won't.
Not while I have our great program to fight for, not while I have our great movement to fight alongside. 
You see when he said that, he wasn't just talking about me. 
He was talking about you.
I will stand and fight because I know you will stand and fight.
And like you did in 2007 and in 2010 ... I know you will amaze us with your efforts in the 2013 campaign.
Delegates, and as we fight together, we know who we will be fighting for.
This year's Budget, a surplus Budget, with the lowest Budget spending forecast in thirty years, following a year in which business investment reached a fifteen-year peak  -  was called a plan for ‘class warfare'.
Now, myself, I'm not absolutely convinced that an $820 payment to parents of high school kids is a ‘class war'. 
But I took this much out of the debate.
If they've started accusing us of ‘class war' at least they've stopped accusing us of not knowing whose side we're on because only Labor stands for a strong economy and stands and fights to spread the benefits to all.
Because only Labor is here for every Australian family not a handful of Australian dynasties.
Because only Labor stands for every Australian who works and every Australian who needs help.
And only Labor tells the big story, the unifying story, the great national story; weaving all the threads together: fairness and strength, the suburbs and the regions, the courage to face and shape the future.
Labor tells that whole story  -  ours is the nation's truly comprehensive party.
No other party ever genuinely stands for the many. No other party ever will.
The politics of progress  -  the cause for change  -  the work of Labor  -  never passes through a wide gate or an easy way.
But a hundred and twenty years after our founding in this country, political Labor is still a unique force in the politics of Australia.
Only one party in the history of our democracy has ever stood and fought for working people  -  for progress and for the responsibility of governing Australia.
The great vested conservative interests always find their Parliamentary voice  -  the party names change but the song stays the same.
Other parties come and go  -  often promising more, always delivering less.
But we endure  -  not a brand, a cause.
Not captured by the privileged few, but sworn to serve the many.
Not a party for the moment, a party for the ages and, twelve decades on from Barcaldine and Balmain, not done yet. 



The Department of Defence and Carnegie Wave Energy have signed power supply and grid connection agreements which will allow Defence to purchase all the electricity produced by a wave power facility to be established on Garden Island, the home of HMAS Stirling.
The project will create 25 jobs within Carnegie and 100 more in manufacturing and construction by making use of the powerful swell off the back of Garden Island to help power the biggest naval base in Australia.
As our nation moves to a clean energy future, clean energy projects like this one are expected to bring jobs and investment to Australia.
The carbon price will provide an incentive for businesses to invest in more projects like this one in the years ahead.
It is estimated that the global wave energy sector will be worth US$760 billion by 2050 and annual revenue from the sector will be $100 billion by 2025.
With the clean technology industry gathering pace globally, it's important that Australian businesses are positioned to take advantage of the surge in investment.
Construction of the wave power facility at HMAS Stirling is expected to start later this year, with wave-driven power expected to be supplied before the end of next year.
When up and running, the project will provide HMAS Stirling with up to 1.25 megawatts of Greenpower per day, expected to save approximately 2.6 million kilograms of carbon emissions over five years.
The $31.5 million Perth Wave Energy Project is a joint venture with the Western Australian Government and private investors, to which the Federal Government has previously committed $9.9m under the under its Emerging Renewables Program.  



PM: It's a great pleasure to be here today at Carnegie Wave, which is showing the way to a clean energy future.
We know that the temperature of our world is rising and that that is climate change. We know that the last decade was the hottest one on record, and that climate change is being caused by an increase of carbon pollution in our atmosphere. That causes warming of our planet; it also causes more extreme weather events  -  cyclones, hurricanes and the like.
We've in fact seen a 300 per cent increase in such events since the 1960s. So, we have to tackle climate change, we have to cut carbon pollution.
In order to do that, the Government has put a price on carbon. That is the cheapest and most effective way of cutting carbon pollution. It's the cheapest and most effective way of unlocking new investment in clean and renewable energy.
Indeed, by 2050 we will see $100 billion of new investment in clean and renewable energy. And I'm so pleased to be here at a place where the leadership for that new clean energy is Australian leadership.
The technology here  -  making energy out of waves  -  is Australian invented new technology. It is Australia in the lead, showing the world how we can generate energy in a cleaner way.
I'm very pleased that we've been able to support the development of this world-leading technology, firstly by a $9.9 million injection of support, and now through a new relationship between Carnegie Wave and our Defence Force, which means the clean energy generated here will go to powering HMAS Stirling. Clean energy used by our Defence Force and less carbon pollution as a result.
As well as reducing carbon pollution, what we're going to see from this clean energy future is more jobs. There will be more jobs here at Carnegie and more jobs in the manufacture of the technology that I've seen today.
That's what carbon pricing is all about. Cutting carbon pollution, unlocking our clean energy future and unlocking the jobs and opportunities that come with that future.
We've been very clear with Australians as we've talked about carbon pricing, that the carbon price is paid by the big businesses that generate the most carbon pollution.
But we've always said to Australian families that there would be a flow-through impact to the prices of things that they buy. Overall that impact is 0.7 per cent, that is it's less than a cent in a dollar.
For electricity prices, the impact will be 10 per cent. That means for the average household, they'll see an impact of $3.30, but on average our assistance per week will be $10.10. Now I want every Western Australian, every Australian to be able to judge the facts for themselves.
I have wanted, in power bills in Western Australia, to see an insert that explained to people the impact on electricity pricing, the impact of the 10 per cent rise and also the assistance that's available from the Federal Government.
Unfortunately that won't be happening, because Premier Barnett, who has overseen a 57 per cent increase in electricity prices in this state, is hoping to not take responsibility for those increases but try and blame them on the Federal Government.
I believe Western Australians should know the truth, and the truth is that here in WA, under the Barnett State Government, electricity prices have gone up 57 per cent. That's an impost of $520 per household and there's no real assistance available.
Premier Barnett should take full public responsibility for that, and not try and hide behind the Federal Government and carbon pricing.
In denying Western Australians the facts, Premier Barnett is trying to hoodwink them on the actions of his government and the impact that has had on power prices.
Premier Barnett should agree to have information with power bills which clearly explain 57 per cent increase from the state government, no real assistance for households, an impost of more than $500 for each household and for the Federal Government the impact of carbon pricing, $3.30 a week, $10.10 in assistance.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: What is the risk, industrial relations-wise, if the Coalition gets back in?
PM: Well I dealt with this yesterday and it'll be one of the single biggest issues for the forthcoming election campaign.
The Leader of the Opposition Tony Abbott, last week in a speech in Sydney, made it absolutely clear that they're after cutting penalty rates, that they're after cutting at the kinds of benefits that working people rely on to make ends meet.
They've got form; in the past they've cut penalty rates over time, leave loading, public holiday pay, and it's clear that that's their vision of workplace relations for the future.
Well under Labor, you'll always see fair work and fairness and decency for working Australians in their workplaces. It's what the Labor Party has always stood for and always will.
JOURNALIST: Christine Milne, after you spoke to Labor in NSW yesterday, said the fact that you didn't talk about the Greens was a rebuke to the brawling boys of NSW Labor, and the fact that you acknowledged the achievements of your Government was an acknowledgement of the achievement of the alliance with the Greens. Is Senator Milne interpreting you correctly?
PM: Oh look, I'm sure there will be plenty of commentary but the speech I gave yesterday was about Labor's values and Labor's vision for this nation's future.
And it's a vision about more jobs, better jobs, including the jobs we're getting through our clean energy future.
It's about supporting families with more dollars in their pocket, through tax cuts and family payment increases and pension increases, as well as supporting them with things like improved health care and aged care.
It's a vision of our schools being world-leading, and it's a vision of the fairness that a National Disability Insurance Scheme will bring.
JOURNALIST: So is this the Greens claiming the positives of the alliance but not helping with the difficult things like offshore processing?
PM: Well, I've answered your question.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Our Navy personnel, our most senior Navy personnel have spoken about the risks to the lives of Navy officers from trying to turn boats around.
Our former Chief of the Defence Force, himself a Navy leader, has spoken about the real risk this would pose to the lives of young Australians.
Indeed even the Leader of the Opposition has acknowledged that this would put Navy personnel at risk.
Well I am not going to risk the lives of young Australians on a policy that won't work and a policy where boats are turned back to a nation that won't take them.
And I do remind, the Leader of the Opposition didn't have the courage to raise his towbacks policy with the President of Indonesia when he had the opportunity to do so.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm for action and I am prepared to give a tick to Nauru in order to act. So I am for acting and prepared to say yes to Nauru in order to get action.
To that, every step of the way Tony Abbott has said no. And his excuse for not working with the Government has been pointing to the Refugee Convention.
And yet today, on the front pages of our newspapers, we see his immigration spokesperson saying that the Convention isn't even really relevant to the modern age.
Today, Mr Abbott's team has exposed the sham, the pantomime that he has been involved in in not being prepared to work with the Government.
His team has exposed he's been involved in a pantomime to just say no to action to deter asylum seekers from risking their lives at sea.
JOURNALIST: Are people smugglers taking advantage of the Convention  -  the wording of it  -  and just jumping from country to country before lodging their asylum claims?
PM: Look, I've seen the commentary from Scott Morrison today, but the important thing that Mr Morrison has in fact revealed today Mr Abbott's excuse for not working with the Government has been pointing to the Refugee Convention.
Then his spokesperson is saying the Refugee Convention isn't fit for the modern age.
Now what this adds up to is Mr Abbott has clearly just been taking every opportunity to say no to effective action to deter asylum seekers.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We saw an incredibly tragic incident at the weekend, so a lot of grief around, a lot of hurt, and a truly shocking incident. So for the family, for the people of Western Australia, my heart does go out to them, very, very tough.
In terms of the great white shark, great whites are protected under federal law and under Western Australian law, but as I am advised even under current (inaudible) to put human safety first.
I also understand that the Western Australian Government through its Fisheries Minister will be seeking to work with Minister Burke on this issue.
Of course we will do everything to work together with the Government of Western Australia on this matter.
JOURNALIST: Do you support the culling of great white sharks?
PM: Where we are is the Western Australian Fisheries Minister will be dealing directly with Tony Burke, our Environment Minister on this issue, but on my advice you can take steps, even under current Western Australian and federal law, to put human safety first. And of course, we put people first.
JOURNALIST: Does that mean killing the shark? 
PM: That means we'll do all of the appropriate work together, but once again under current law you can put human safety first.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well we've still got to have, it's only following this incident and I don't mean that in any way in a critical sense, I absolutely understand why the Western Australian Minister is raising this with Minister Burke. But that work now has to be done.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday at the (inaudible) urged to move quickly on the Gonski review. Can you give a timeframe and is there a risk of trouble if you don't act quickly?
PM: Oh look, we received the Gonski review earlier this year. We've worked hard on it every day, every week since.
There are a number of working groups that have been looking at the technical material. Federal and state, Catholic and independent; we will certainly respond to the Gonski review before the end of this year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you meet Mark McGowan while you're here in Western Australia?
PM: Look I won't have the opportunity on this trip.
Thank you very much. 



PM: Thank you very much and thank you for making me feel so welcome. And thank you for having me in your place. It's been a special night to be here and to look at the arts centre, to see the dancing and to get to talk to people who make this community so strong. So thank you very much for welcoming me here.
I'm joined here by Gary Gray, who is a very frequent visitor and when he's not here, he's always talking up this community and the changes that are happening here and the real strength that is in this community.
Now I'm here, basically because I love visiting here. I had the opportunity to come around two years ago and thought then that it was a very special part of Australia and wanted to come back. Gary's been urging me to do so, and I'm going to enjoy the time that I've got here this evening and tomorrow.
I'm going to enjoy it in part, because what I see here is really a vision of the kind of future we want overall for our nation. You've taken your place and you've made sure that it's got stronger. You've taken your place and understood the benefits of diversifying its economy. And it's great to be joined by the representatives of the local chamber who have worked so hard to do that.
You've taken your place and you've understood the opportunities for it in this changing century that we live in. This century of change in our region; a century of economic growth in our region. And our whole nation, but particularly this part of our nation, is well-placed to prosper from those opportunities.
So whether it's the mining, whether it's the tourism, whether it's the food industry, whether it's the very exotic and wonderful things that happen here, whether it's the stuff that actually goes to making up everyday life, the stuff that we always need, your economy is supplying it, and going from strength to strength.
So I want to congratulate you for that.
I also want to congratulate you on the work we've been able to do in partnership through the East Kimberley Development Package. We've worked with the State Government, but most importantly, with you to see change in this region. And the dimensions of the change, I think, are very profound.
It's been delivered because of the vision and hard work that has happened here locally. It's one thing for us to be in Canberra and to take the decisions necessary to make funding available. It's another thing for that funding to go to the right projects, to have them delivered on time, to have them delivered through a community-driven process, to have them delivered in a way which means that they will be meaningful for this community, not only this year but for many long years into the future.
So, I want to congratulate you on all of the work that you've done to make sure that that development package makes a long-term difference to this community.
I'm looking forward to having the opportunity to just say hello to as many people as possible, and to have a chat while I'm here; to see the future issues for this community through your eyes. But once again, thank you for making me so welcome.
I did want to say one thing to you tonight, which is a bit of news for the community that I hope will be received as good news. And I particularly wanted to say it with Jeff Gooding here, from the Shire of Wyndham East Kimberley and to thank him for the work that he did on the recovery taskforce when you faced floods.
And I hope it will be received as good news that we, the Federal Government, will provide $14 million towards the replacement of the Big McPhee Bridge, which was forced to close because of those floods in March 2011, due to the major structural damage that was incurred.
The Western Australian Government is committed to providing the remaining $11 million so once again, I think, another example of the kind of partnership we're now so familiar with  -  Federal Government, State Government, working with this community.
So I'm looking forward to the rest of the evening. I had a great time here when I came in 2010. I well remember John Farnham on stage  -  he was looking pretty hot by the end of the night. I mean that in the temperature sense, not in any other sense.
A bit of a cooler evening this evening, and a good evening to spend some time talking and saying hello.
Thank you very much. 



HOST: The Prime Minister of Australia, and I'm delighted to have her on the program this morning, Julia Gillard. Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning John.
HOST: How are you today?
PM: I'm really well.
HOST: And welcome to Perth.
PM: Thank you very much. It's good to be here.
HOST: Now the forum last night, how do you reckon it went?
PM: I really enjoyed it. It was an opportunity to talk to more than 200 people from Perth about carbon pricing and a whole lot of other issues as well. People were free to raise whatever was on their mind. And I think what it showed is that we can change views about carbon pricing.
There's been a lot of false claims out there, a lot of things that have scared people. And the Opposition's been claiming things like, Whyalla's going to be wiped off the map. So it's good to be able to talk it through with people and present all of the facts of carbon pricing.
HOST: Yes, I asked people this morning to give me a call and give me a question that I should ask you, and you wouldn't have to be a Rhodes Scholar to realise that the most topics that people want is boat people and of course the carbon tax and the mining tax here in WA.
But one fella called and said he's a low income earner, he's a self-employed tradie. And he said that the Government's been telling him that lots of the costs will be offset when the carbon tax comes in but he said it doesn't seem to be helping them, Prime Minister.
PM: Well it's hard without knowing exactly what business he's in. But if he's a self-employed tradie, so going around from house to house, fixing things for people for example, he's really going to be pretty unaffected in his business by carbon pricing.
We've got to remember that the carbon price is paid by the big businesses that generate a lot of carbon pollution  -  less than 500 of them in Australia.
Now they will pass some of the costs that they're now paying for carbon pollution through, and that means that we'll see things like an increase in electricity prices in WA of 9 percent.
But that's why we've provided people with tax cuts and pension increases and family payment increases, and literally around the country millions of people will come out better off.
HOST: The last time we spoke, which was in your office, and I had a camera crew in tow you may remember, talking about the pensioners and how they were surviving on the pension each week. We were hoping to follow up that story, which I haven't been able to do Prime Minister, I'm disappointed.
But everybody seems to be now concerned with electricity prices. I know you've brought that up here, not only in Western Australia but across the country. These are the people who keep telling me that they can't turn their heater on at night, they're turning their lights off and going to bed, they can't turn their television on because the electricity prices keep going up and up and up.
In other countries, and I've brought this up with the Leader of the Opposition last week as well, in other countries they seem to look after people with a pro rata charge. High income earners pay more than low income earners. Couldn't the Government do something about that here?
PM: Well this is really a question for Premier Barnett so I'm not surprised you asked the Opposition Leader about it. What's happened here in WA with electricity prices is people have had to live with a 57 per cent increase as a result of state government actions.
That's more than $500 per household.
So I'm not surprised, John, that you're getting calls from people on low and fixed incomes who are telling you that it's very tough for them with their electricity bills when they've seen such huge increases from the state government, with no real assistance.
With carbon pricing, we've taken a different approach. Putting a price on carbon is about cutting the amount of carbon pollution we're putting up in the atmosphere, because we know that that's causing climate change.
We knew putting a price on carbon would put electricity prices up by 9 per cent, and so we have provided assistance to people. So rather than Premier Barnett's approach, a more than 50 per cent increase and no real assistance, carbon pricing; a 9 per cent increase and there's tax cuts and more money for pensioners, more money for people with kids.
HOST: Yes I understand you've done some work on that. But the point I was making is, I'm talking to you federally now, not necessarily just in Western Australia, about the fact that in other countries as I said, low income earners only pay a smaller amount than someone that's earning a lot.
Because we seem to be, not only pensioners affected here, but middle class people as well.
PM: The structure of electricity charging is a question for the state government, it's their asset. So you'd need to put that question to Premier Barnett.
But I've just been really mindful as we've done this big job to tackle climate change, that we've looked after the people that you're most concerned about.
HOST: I spoke to you in the office about some of the things and you said, wait til the Budget comes out, and then we'll talk again, John. But I mean, the set-top box issue was in the Budget, we've had pink batts and solar panels costing millions of dollars that haven't really worked, Prime Minister.
I mean that's where people are looking at this money that the Government's spending but they're not getting anything for themselves.
PM: Well we've delivered an historic increase in the pension; the biggest single increase in the pension since we've effectively had the pension.
And on top of that historic increase and regular indexation, through putting a price on carbon, we're delivering $338 more to single pensioners and $510 more to pensioner couples and we know that they will end up in front. That is, that amount of money is more than the average impact they will see from carbon pricing.
And we did want to make sure, for people who are on those fixed incomes, who do it tough, that we figured it all out so that they would end up in front.
HOST: This is a topic we could talk about for a long time. And I would love to once again sit down with you if I could Prime Minister and have a chat.
But the boat people of course, refugees, a lot of people are very concerned about this, and the first report is being released today from the former Chief of Defence, Angus Houston. Are you confident that some resolution is going to be found?
PM: John, I can understand that Australians are very frustrated about this. They want to see action, they want to see something done. I can really understand that frustration.
I've been prepared to compromise in order to get action. I've been prepared to give a tick to Nauru, which is the central element of the Opposition's policy and to combine that with the central piece of the Government's policy, the transfer arrangement with Malaysia.
So I've wanted to compromise in order to get change here. Unfortunately in the face of that what we've seen from the Opposition is them finding every way they can to just say no.
That's why I asked Angus Houston, a very eminent Australian, a former Chief of the Defence Force, to lead an expert process. It's not a report that he's releasing today, John. But it's a meeting that he's conducting in Canberra.
But we will receive a report from Angus and his team before the Parliament resumes in August. And I certainly believe that what comes from that expert panel should be used to guide our nation to action and to addressing this issue, which I know is on the minds of so many Australians, and they're very frustrated that they haven't been able to see the Parliament get new legislation through.
HOST: Prime Minister, I've got to go to the news unfortunately, but it's great to talk to you and as I said, if we could arrange another time, I'd really appreciate it.
PM: Sure John, I'll look to do that and thank you for talking this morning. 



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Welcome again to 720 Mornings. Welcome to ABC Perth. Unfortunately I think you're Labor Opposition Leader here in Western Australia sees you as somebody who's not so welcome. It seems you're bad for his popularity. He was on the program here with me last week and I'd like you to listen to what he had to say.
MARK MCGOWAN: The next state election will be a contest between the state Labor and state Liberals, their record versus our policy ideas. I wouldn't expect the Federal Government has any involvement whatsoever.
HOST: Would you invite her here to campaign for you during the election campaign?
MARK MCGOWAN: I wouldn't think so, I would think it's a contest between the State Labor and State Liberals.
HOST: Prime Minister, what's your response to that?
PM: Well I think Mark McGowan is saying something that's self-evidently true, that state elections are about state issues, and the people of Western Australia will know that what they're voting for is who should be the State Government.
HOST: But clearly you're not very popular here in the west. Labor at a federal level's not popular here. What's your plan to win back West Australians as Labor voters?
PM: Well my job as Prime Minister is to get the big decisions right for our nation today and for the future. Some of them aren't popular decisions. Some of them aren't easy decisions. But if they're the right decisions for the future then they have to be made.
So certainly, we've had a fast and furious debate about carbon pricing, I'm under no illusions about that; carbon pricing is not popular.
But I participated in a forum last night which showed very clearly that you can change people's minds about carbon pricing when people get the opportunity to talk it through and to have all of the facts at their disposal. And then the fear campaign falls away.
So, what I'll be doing is continuing to lead our nation, to make sure we've got the benefits of a strong economy, that we're managing this huge resources boom and sharing its benefits across Western Australia, so people don't feel like they're on the sidelines missing out.
As well as continuing to improve our hospitals and the services families rely on, whilst we build the education system we need for the future, and very new and important instruments of fairness like the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
HOST: 1300 222 720 if you would like to ask a question of Prime Minister Julia Gillard. John, good morning. What would you like to ask.
CALLER: Good morning, I've got two quick questions.
HOST: Well make it one, John, if you would, many people want to ask questions.
CALLER: Okay then, well I'd better stick to the most important one and that is, if this carbon tax doesn't work, if it makes no difference in carbon emissions, will it be rescinded?
HOST: Prime Minister?
PM: Well I'm happy to answer that, it will work and it will make a difference to carbon emissions. It will make a difference of 160 million tons in 2020, that's the equivalent of getting 45 million cars off the road.
And I personally have spoken to the business people about how they are going to transform their businesses and cut the amount of carbon pollution they generate, because it's now priced.
HOST: John, thank you for that. Jim, good morning.
CALLER: Good morning. And good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
CALLER: I'm really concerned that this debate on carbon tax is completely missing the point.
Neither you nor Tony Abbott is addressing the issue of what is going to happen environmentally in this state, and for instance, in Western Australia we're going to be seeing a new push to get more desalinated water here because in fact we've not got enough water falling in the south-west of this state.
We're seeing people slugged huge amounts of money with insurance in Collie because they live near a river and the floods in Queensland pushed up the price of that. And the price of bananas that Tony Abbott was standing in front of an IGA supermarket used to be $14 a kilo.
HOST: So what's your question Jim?
CALLER: My question is, why is the environmental side of this debate, and the cost of not doing anything, not being discussed?
HOST: Thanks Jim, Prime Minister?
PM: Well we are certainly motivated by the environmental debate to use your caller's words. I mean, what is this all about, why did we get on the journey of putting a price on carbon?
Well we did that because it is now beyond doubt that our climate is changing and that's because of the carbon pollution we, human beings, are making.
The last decade for example, was the hottest decade on record compared with the 1960s. We've seen a 300 percent increase in extreme weather events like cyclones and floods.
We've got the most emissions-intensive economy in the world; we generate more carbon pollution per person than basically anybody else on the planet.
So in those circumstances we've got to act, we've got to cut carbon pollution, we're choosing to do that in the cheapest and most efficient way.
It will not only bring environmental benefits, but it will make sure that we get the jobs of the future, the clean energy jobs, and I had the opportunity to look at some of those jobs yesterday at Carnegie Wave, using tidal power to generate clean energy.
And of course we're going to look after households and families on the way through, through tax cuts and pension increases and family payment increases.
HOST: Jim, thank you for your question. Prime Minister, on the issue of the asylum seekers, clearly frustrated with both the Opposition and Greens on asylum seekers. What else can you think of that might secure a breakthrough?
PM: I can understand the community's sense of frustration, they just want to see Parliament get something done. They want to see this issue addressed and addressed effectively. That's what I want to see too.
Now, I haven't wanted to see all of this bogged down in politics. I've been prepared to compromise, to secure action in the Parliament. I've been prepared to say yes to Nauru; to opening a detention centre on Nauru, the key element of the Opposition's policies.
So, basically I've said to the Opposition, let's get together, key element of our policy, the Malaysia agreement, key element of your policy, Nauru. Let's do them both.
To that, every step of the way, the Opposition's twisted and turned and said illogical and inconsistent things just so it can keep saying no. And the Greens have said no too.
So, I've asked Angus Houston, a former Chief of the Defence Force, and a very expert panel, to provide a report  -  not just to me  -  but to the whole nation about what we should do next in these circumstances. And that report will be available before the Parliament next meets.
HOST: Dallas, what would you like to ask the Prime Minister?
CALLER: Prime Minister, when the Howard Government was in office and they were dealing with the arrival of boat people, you had a constant refrain  -  another boat, another policy failure.
Given the number of boats that have arrived during your stewardship, how many policy failures do you allow yourself?
HOST: Prime Minister?
PM: Well, I am absolutely saying to you I want to see change here. What has happened, which didn't apply way back then when I was in Opposition, and I was Shadow Minister for Immigration.
Back then the Government of the day, the Howard Government, had the powers to decide to process people offshore.
The High Court has come out with a decision during the life of my Government, which means that that is not possible now under current law.
We need to change the law in order to have the same degree of power as the Howard Government did to make decisions about offshore processing.
That's why I need the Parliament to endorse change, and whenever I've sought to get that change from the parliament, unfortunately the Opposition has said no.
I do want to see change here, I'm continuing to compromise in order to secure it. And I'm looking now to the expert panel, to guide our nation through.
HOST: Dallas, thank you for that question. Prime Minister, I'd like to ask you a Western Australian question, one that relates to the state here. WA unions are furious about the deal that your Government has done with Gina Rinehart to allow foreign workers  -  1,700 foreign workers  -  to be imported for her Roy Hill project.
In retrospect, was there a better way for your Government to sell the deal to the union movement? After all, they are supposed to be on your side.
PM: I can understand people being concerned about Australian jobs. And when I've come to Western Australia in the past, I've certainly said to the people of Western Australia, I understand the concern that comes when mining employers are there screaming out for we want more labour, we need more people coming to work for us.
And yet at the same time, people who live here know a kid who lives in their street who can't get an apprenticeship and can't get a chance.
So I think the unions are expressing some of that concern that is in the community; what about the boy who lives at the end of my road, why can't he get a start in the mining industry?
Now we've got to make sure we get all of those linkages right so that kid can get a start in the mining industry. And we're very focused on that skills and training work, and so are our local members like Gary Gray, who's hosting jobs expos in his electorate to get people those opportunities.
Even with all of that, we will need some foreign labour, but I think it is the right thing to do, to look to create opportunities for Australians first.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for joining us this morning and enjoy your stay in Western Australia.
PM: Thank you very much. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the Federal Government would provide $14 million for the $25 million replacement of Big McPhee Bridge on the Great Northern Highway in partnership with the Western Australian Government.
Speaking to the Kununurra Chamber of Commerce and Industry today, the Prime Minister said the new bridge would make road freight transport more reliable for local mining and agricultural industries.
Big McPhee Bridge is located on the only sealed road between Kununurra and Broome, making it a critical and economically significant piece of infrastructure.
When it was forced to close in March 2011 after sustaining significant structural damage during the Kimberley floods, it caused major disruptions to local mining and agricultural operations.
The new bridge will replace the existing 55 metre long single lane-bridge with a new 108 metre long dual-lane bridge that is 2.5 metres higher, reducing the need for it to close during the flood season.
In the past, the bridge has had to close for an average three days every two years, with the longest recorded closure being 21 days - a real blowout for reliable freight transport.
Construction of the Big McPhee Bridge will be completed in the current dry season.
As part of the Government's Nation Building Program, $3.7 billion has been provided to upgrade and modernise Western Australia's road, rail and public transport infrastructure.
This financial year alone we're providing $1 billion.
Today's announcement takes the Government's total investment in upgrading and maintaining the Great Northern Highway to $239 million. 



The Australian Government today welcomed the formal start of transition to Afghan-led security responsibility in Uruzgan province, where the majority of Australian military personnel in Afghanistan are based.  
Australia's Ambassador to Afghanistan attended a ceremony held by the Afghan Government today in the provincial capital of Tarin Kot to mark the beginning of transition. 
The start of transition in Uruzgan reflects the progress made by Afghan, Australian and International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) military and civilian teams in training and mentoring the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) and strengthening security and development.  
It is a welcome sign transition in Uruzgan is on track for completion over the next 12 to 18 month period.  Australia has played a key role in readying Uruzgan for transition.  
Australia's Mentoring Task Force and Special Operations Task Group have worked closely with their Afghan and ISAF counterparts to improve security and build the capacity and confidence of the ANSF.
Australia's civilian efforts in Uruzgan have also played an important role through the funding of infrastructure upgrades, improving local governance and helping provide better access to education and health care as part of the Provincial Reconstruction Team.
Australia will continue to work closely with our Afghan and ISAF partners in Uruzgan during the transition period so the ANSF can assume full security responsibility at the end of transition.   



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Welcome again to 720 Mornings. Welcome to ABC Perth. Unfortunately I think you're Labor Opposition Leader here in Western Australia sees you as somebody who's not so welcome. It seems you're bad for his popularity. He was on the program here with me last week and I'd like you to listen to what he had to say.
MARK MCGOWAN: The next state election will be a contest between the state Labor and state Liberals, their record versus our policy ideas. I wouldn't expect the Federal Government has any involvement whatsoever.
HOST: Would you invite her here to campaign for you during the election campaign?
MARK MCGOWAN: I wouldn't think so, I would think it's a contest between the State Labor and State Liberals.
HOST: Prime Minister, what's your response to that?
PM: Well I think Mark McGowan is saying something that's self-evidently true, that state elections are about state issues, and the people of Western Australia will know that what they're voting for is who should be the State Government.
HOST: But clearly you're not very popular here in the west. Labor at a federal level's not popular here. What's your plan to win back West Australians as Labor voters?
PM: Well my job as Prime Minister is to get the big decisions right for our nation today and for the future. Some of them aren't popular decisions. Some of them aren't easy decisions. But if they're the right decisions for the future then they have to be made.
So certainly, we've had a fast and furious debate about carbon pricing, I'm under no illusions about that; carbon pricing is not popular.
But I participated in a forum last night which showed very clearly that you can change people's minds about carbon pricing when people get the opportunity to talk it through and to have all of the facts at their disposal. And then the fear campaign falls away.
So, what I'll be doing is continuing to lead our nation, to make sure we've got the benefits of a strong economy, that we're managing this huge resources boom and sharing its benefits across Western Australia, so people don't feel like they're on the sidelines missing out.
As well as continuing to improve our hospitals and the services families rely on, whilst we build the education system we need for the future, and very new and important instruments of fairness like the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
HOST: 1300 222 720 if you would like to ask a question of Prime Minister Julia Gillard. John, good morning. What would you like to ask?
CALLER: Good morning, I've got two quick questions.
HOST: Well make it one, John, if you would, many people want to ask questions.
CALLER: Okay then, well I'd better stick to the most important one and that is, if this carbon tax doesn't work, if it makes no difference in carbon emissions, will it be rescinded?
HOST: Prime Minister?
PM: Well I'm happy to answer that, it will work and it will make a difference to carbon emissions. It will make a difference of 160 million tons in 2020, that's the equivalent of getting 45 million cars off the road.
And I personally have spoken to the business people about how they are going to transform their businesses and cut the amount of carbon pollution they generate, because it's now priced.
HOST: John, thank you for that. Jim, good morning.
CALLER: Good morning. And good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
CALLER: I'm really concerned that this debate on carbon tax is completely missing the point.
Neither you nor Tony Abbott is addressing the issue of what is going to happen environmentally in this state, and for instance, in Western Australia we're going to be seeing a new push to get more desalinated water here because in fact we've not got enough water falling in the south-west of this state.
We're seeing people slugged huge amounts of money with insurance in Collie because they live near a river and the floods in Queensland pushed up the price of that. And the price of bananas that Tony Abbott was standing in front of an IGA supermarket used to be $14 a kilo.
HOST: So what's your question Jim?
CALLER: My question is, why is the environmental side of this debate, and the cost of not doing anything, not being discussed?
HOST: Thanks Jim, Prime Minister?
PM: Well we are certainly motivated by the environmental debate to use your caller's words. I mean, what is this all about, why did we get on the journey of putting a price on carbon?
Well we did that because it is now beyond doubt that our climate is changing and that's because of the carbon pollution we, human beings, are making.
The last decade for example, was the hottest decade on record compared with the 1960s. We've seen a 300 percent increase in extreme weather events like cyclones and floods.
We've got the most emissions-intensive economy in the world; we generate more carbon pollution per person than basically anybody else on the planet.
So in those circumstances we've got to act, we've got to cut carbon pollution, we're choosing to do that in the cheapest and most efficient way.
It will not only bring environmental benefits, but it will make sure that we get the jobs of the future, the clean energy jobs, and I had the opportunity to look at some of those jobs yesterday at Carnegie Wave, using tidal power to generate clean energy.
And of course we're going to look after households and families on the way through, through tax cuts and pension increases and family payment increases.
HOST: Jim, thank you for your question. Prime Minister, on the issue of the asylum seekers, clearly frustrated with both the Opposition and Greens on asylum seekers. What else can you think of that might secure a breakthrough?
PM: I can understand the community's sense of frustration, they just want to see Parliament get something done. They want to see this issue addressed and addressed effectively. That's what I want to see too.
Now, I haven't wanted to see all of this bogged down in politics. I've been prepared to compromise, to secure action in the Parliament. I've been prepared to say yes to Nauru; to opening a detention centre on Nauru, the key element of the Opposition's policies.
So, basically I've said to the Opposition, let's get together, key element of our policy, the Malaysia agreement, key element of your policy, Nauru. Let's do them both.
To that, every step of the way, the Opposition's twisted and turned and said illogical and inconsistent things just so it can keep saying no. And the Greens have said no too.
So, I've asked Angus Houston, a former Chief of the Defence Force, and a very expert panel, to provide a report  -  not just to me  -  but to the whole nation about what we should do next in these circumstances. And that report will be available before the Parliament next meets.
HOST: Dallas, what would you like to ask the Prime Minister?
CALLER: Prime Minister, when the Howard Government was in office and they were dealing with the arrival of boat people, you had a constant refrain  -  another boat, another policy failure.
Given the number of boats that have arrived during your stewardship, how many policy failures do you allow yourself?
HOST: Prime Minister?
PM: Well, I am absolutely saying to you I want to see change here. What has happened, which didn't apply way back then when I was in Opposition, and I was Shadow Minister for Immigration.
Back then the Government of the day, the Howard Government, had the powers to decide to process people offshore.
The High Court has come out with a decision during the life of my Government, which means that that is not possible now under current law.
We need to change the law in order to have the same degree of power as the Howard Government did to make decisions about offshore processing.
That's why I need the Parliament to endorse change, and whenever I've sought to get that change from the parliament, unfortunately the Opposition has said no.
I do want to see change here, I'm continuing to compromise in order to secure it. And I'm looking now to the expert panel, to guide our nation through.
HOST: Dallas, thank you for that question. Prime Minister, I'd like to ask you a Western Australian question, one that relates to the state here. WA unions are furious about the deal that your Government has done with Gina Rinehart to allow foreign workers  -  1,700 foreign workers  -  to be imported for her Roy Hill project.
In retrospect, was there a better way for your Government to sell the deal to the union movement? After all, they are supposed to be on your side.
PM: I can understand people being concerned about Australian jobs. And when I've come to Western Australia in the past, I've certainly said to the people of Western Australia, I understand the concern that comes when mining employers are there screaming out for we want more labour, we need more people coming to work for us.
And yet at the same time, people who live here know a kid who lives in their street who can't get an apprenticeship and can't get a chance.
So I think the unions are expressing some of that concern that is in the community; what about the boy who lives at the end of my road, why can't he get a start in the mining industry?
Now we've got to make sure we get all of those linkages right so that kid can get a start in the mining industry. And we're very focused on that skills and training work, and so are our local members like Gary Gray, who's hosting jobs expos in his electorate to get people those opportunities.
Even with all of that, we will need some foreign labour, but I think it is the right thing to do, to look to create opportunities for Australians first.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for joining us this morning and enjoy your stay in Western Australia.
PM: Thank you very much. 



I pay tribute to my parliamentary colleague and friend, Sharon Grierson MP, who has announced her retirement from politics after 12 years as Member for Newcastle.
Sharon has been a diligent servant of the people of Newcastle and a passionate ambassador for the Hunter as a region of opportunity fuelled by research, innovation and urban renewal.
She has worked hard to secure jobs and investment, including more than $2 billion worth of Commonwealth funding for facilities and infrastructure  -  an outstanding record.
The seat of Newcastle is one of the original electorates, created at the time of Federation, and has had only five Members in its entire history, all of them Labor.
Sharon has been a wonderful custodian of that tradition, describing herself in her first speech as “a proud daughter of the noble working class of Newcastle”.
That ethos has driven Sharon to stand up for workers' rights, for the needs of families and pensioners and for those doing it tough.
As a former teacher and school principal, Sharon has worked tirelessly to ensure every child in our nation receives a great education, no matter what their circumstances or background.
She has never shrunk from wearing her values of compassion and social justice on her sleeve.
It has been an honour to work with Sharon in making Labor's vision a reality in the Hunter and right across our land.
Sharon will leave office with my sincere thanks and my very best wishes for the future. 



HOST: Good morning to you Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Thanks for your time. You had a chance to speak to some locals last night. What were they telling you?
PM: I did have the chance to speak to some locals last night, and I enjoyed it very much. I had a range of discussions about the changes that are being brought by the East Kimberley Development Package, the way in which the community is changing.
I also had a range of discussions with local business people who were there about the economic opportunities that they see at this time in this region, how highly they value the strength of this diversified economy here and how they can see real prospects of growth for the future. So it was a very optimistic feel to the whole engagement last night, and a good, fun evening.
HOST: Of course one of the big things that's happening in that part of the world soon, it's ongoing, is the sale of the Ord River Stage 2. Would you be happy if Ord Stage 2 were to be purchased entirely by Chinese investors?
PM: Well we've got to go through the proper processes here, I mean we do want to see further opportunity in this region, but there's got to be all of the proper assessments, the environmental assessments, the commercial assessments, the views of the traditional owners.
The stage that this is at is that there is a negotiation about various proposals involving the State Government and traditional owners, and that will take a number of months to come, and we've got to see what comes out of that.
HOST: That's all fair enough but if at the end of that process it was deemed to be fine, would you have a problem with Chinese investors buying the large, or almost all of Ord Stage 2?
PM: Look, I don't believe it's appropriate for me to be pre-judging what may or may not come out of a proper process involving traditional owners.
HOST: Moving to the other side of the Kimberley, Prime Minister, and a proposed gas hub at James Price Point, the Environmental Protection Authority's process of recommending approval of the project to the Minister here in WA has been mired in controversy. There are ongoing court battles, there is strong opposition in some parts of the community. Is the Federal Labor Party's support of this project set in stone?
PM: We get engaged in the assessment of this project when the work of the State Government is done. The State Government still has more to do to complete the strategic assessment.
Then that all goes through to our Environment Minister, Tony Burke, who has power under the relevant federal environmental legislation, and he needs then to go through a proper process to assess it all. So once again we are a fair way from at being an engagement for the Federal Government.
The State Government's still got to do its work, and this is a very strict legal process. It's not one that I can pre-judge or just chatter casually about. The Minister has legal obligations under the relevant federal legislation and he'll deal with those obligations at the time the proposal gets to him.
HOST: Once again, that is fair enough from an environmental perspective but your Minister responsible, Martin Ferguson, has expressed support for this project overall. What I'm asking is would that support remain set in stone regardless of opposition or further controversy with the project?
PM: Look I'm not prepared to just speculate and there are real reasons under the legislation why I shouldn't be speculating. It's the Minister for the Environment who has the powers here. They're statutory powers under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Act.
They've got to be properly exercised otherwise they can be the subject of legal challenge. He can only properly exercise those powers when the State Government's finished its job and got all of the necessary work to him, and we're not at that stage yet.
HOST: Fair enough. We're speaking to the Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard this morning on ABC Kimberley Breakfast, it's 17 past 7.
The former leader of the Greens, the man who helped you into power, Bob Brown was on the Sea Shepherd's Steve Irwin vessel yesterday heading to the region to add weight to the campaign against the James Price Point project. Does this sort of action from Bob Brown, so recently retiring from Parliament, add urgency to the Federal Labor Party to distance itself from the Greens?
PM: Our environmental assessments, whether it's James Price Point or anywhere else, are done on strict scientific and environmental grounds. It's not about who's on which ship or who's holding up which placard. It is about the science and the environment, and what is best for our environment, so that's what the Minister will take into account.
HOST: But Bob Brown, as I say, recently in the Senate, recently next to you, well a while back now, signing a document. He's now on the Steve Irwin heading to this place. He's a central figure now in this project and will get national recognition for that point. Is this reason we have seen the Labor Party in NSW, certainly federally, have comments about the Greens? This sort of activity  -  does it damage the alliance with the Greens that you have?
PM: Look, our Labor Party values is what guides us when we come to dealing with issues about jobs, about health, about education and about the environment. I mean we're a political party with a proud track record of protecting the environment.
Major national assets like Kakadu are here because of the actions of past Labor governments. So it's about a Labor decision guided by Labor processes, that's what Minister Burke will do. It's a decision of government, it's not about the Parliament or parliamentary votes or anything like that. It's about the science before the Minister properly considered at the time.
HOST: It's a beautiful morning in Kununurra this morning Prime Minister, and you're a long way from Canberra. It must be nice to have a bit of distance between there, but I do have to ask you a Canberra question. Current polling has the Labor Party stuck at about 30 per cent of the primary vote. I know you don't spend time worrying about polls, I know you say the leadership issue was determined last February and I know you want to focus on getting things done, but you're also a realist and pragmatic, and is it the responsible thing for you to lead the Labor Party into the next election with these sorts of numbers knowing it will lead to electoral disaster?
PM: I can tell you what the next election's going to be about. It's going to be about our plans for keeping the economy strong and making sure people have got job opportunities. And not just a job opportunity, but a decent job where they're treated fairly.
All of our work building our future, whether it's the NBN or seizing a clean energy future or our outlook to Asia is about keeping our economy strong so people can have jobs.
The next election will also be about who best supports families with good hospitals, with cost of living supports, getting more dollars into people's pockets. It'll be an election about opportunity, our work in schools which is so severely challenged by the Opposition.
Even as recently as the last few days, the Opposition's been saying it's fine for kids to be jammed in huge classes. It doesn't matter if they can't get any of the teacher's time. And the next election will be about our places for the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
So I'm looking forward to fighting it. The reason people want to be involved in making decisions about our nation's future, the reason people go into politics, is that they're desperately concerned to make sure the nation has a stronger and fairer future, and every three years we get to decide as a country who's best to guide our nation and build that future, and that's what the next election will be about and be for.
HOST: So it won't be about your leadership?
PM: It'll be exactly about the things that I've just described to you, and of course it will be about who's got the best capacities to lead the nation and to deliver policies and plans that make a real difference, and I'm very happy to be fighting the next election on those grounds.
We're a government that's got big things done, hard things done, often against very entrenched opposition, but they've been the right thing for our country.
HOST: Finally Prime Minister, you're getting to plant a tree at Celebrity Tree Park this morning in Kununurra. Do you know what sort of a tree you got to plant?
PM: I think I'm getting a little bit of help with the tree-planting, so a few kids are going to be on-hand to maybe do all of that hard work of digging the hole, but I understand that it is a scarlet gum.
HOST: A scarlet gum? What a wonderful choice.
PM: Well you know they're supposed to have some connection, so I think from the scarlet you can see what the connection really is.
HOST: I wasn't going to go there, but I appreciate you letting us know that Prime Minister and I really do appreciate you spending some time on the Breakfast Program this morning. Please enjoy yourself in Kununurra and certainly in Wyndham as you enjoy that wonderful town there and continue your visit here in the Kimberley.
PM: Thank you very much, I'm looking forward to the day. 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today formally opened the new Wyndham Early Learning Activity Centre in Western Australia, funded through a $1.7 million grant from the Australian Government under the East Kimberley Development Package.
This purpose-built facility delivers a great new space and playground areas for the Wyndham Early Learning Activity Centre to deliver a range of highly regarded community programs, with a strong focus on supporting parents and early learning opportunities for children.
The Prime Minister was also pleased to announce $100,000 funding to help Indigenous women build leadership skills and improve their wellbeing. 
The centre will use this funding to establish a community garden and teach Indigenous women about gardening and growing healthy food, in partnership with the Kimberley Training Institute.
The centre will also teach women about how to prepare healthy meals and educate their children about the benefits of healthy eating.
Other activities include a family day with arts and craft and a sewing group where women can learn how to make items for themselves and their homes.
As well as teaching new skills, these activities will also provide the women with an opportunity to meet new people and make friends.
The Prime Minister visited the centre today to see firsthand the work they have been doing to support Indigenous families in the East Kimberley.
Wyndham Early Learning Activity Centre is one of 10 organisations across Western Australia which will share in more than $800,000 in Gillard Government funding for Indigenous Women's Grants in Western Australia in 2012-13.
The Government's investment will help these organisations to deliver a wide range of training programs, information sessions and workshops, including in retail and business administration training, leadership workshops, computer training, health and nutrition and an anti-bullying program.
These programs and workshops will help up to 630 Indigenous women to develop skills in business, finance, leadership, and health and wellbeing. 
Indigenous women will have the opportunity to further develop their skills and knowledge, giving them a sense of pride and purpose, and the ability to use these new skills and knowledge in the community and at home.
This funding forms part of the Government's long-term efforts to overcome decades of underinvestment, and continue to improve the lives of Indigenous Australians. 
Organisations in Western Australia                                          Funding (up to)
Wyndham Early Learning Activity Centre Inc                                        $100,000
Paupiyala Tjarutja Aboriginal Corporation                                              $100,000
Pilbara Indigenous Women's Aboriginal Corporation                               $100,000
Marninwarnikura Fitzroy Women's Resource Centre (Aboriginal Corporation)                                                                                         $170,000
Geraldton Streetworks Aboriginal Corporation                                        $95,000
Yawaru Jarndu Aboriginal Corporation                                                    $80,000
Kiwirrikurra Council Aboriginal Corporation                                              $52,128
Beananging Kwuurt Institute                                                                  $34,100
Dumbartung Aboriginal Corporation                                                       $38,100
Langford Aboriginal Corporation                                                             $32,800 



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Arts Minister Simon Crean today announced the winners of the 2012 Prime Minister's Literary Awards.
The inaugural poetry award went to Interferon Psalms byLuke Davies.
Gillian Mears was awarded the 2012 fiction award for her novel Foal's Bread.
When We Were Twoby Robert Newton won the young adult fiction award.
In the children's fiction category, the bedtime picture book Goodnight, Mice! by Frances Watts and illustrated by Judy Watson took out the prize.
An Eye for Eternity: The Life of Manning Clarkby Mark McKenna won the non-fiction award
Bill Gammage won the Prime Minister's Prize for Australian History for his workThe Biggest Estate on Earth: How Aborigines Made Australia.
The Prime Minister congratulated the winners who were selected from an impressive and competitive list of 30 shortlisted entries across the six categories.
This year saw the largest number of entries since the inception of the Awards. With the introduction of the new poetry award and incorporation of the Prize for Australian History, the number of works entered grew from 379 in 2011 to 509 in 2012.
The winner of each category receivedan $80,000 tax free prize and the shortlisted authors received$5,000 tax free as recognition for their achievement. 
The Prime Minister encouraged all Australians to read not only the winners but also the shortlisted entries that represent the most creative and engaging writing in Australia today.
In recognition of the importance of reading and literacy, the Gillard Government has invested $1.3 million in the 2012 National Year of Reading to encourage Australians everywhere to reignite their passion for reading and great Australian stories.
Mr Crean said this year's winning and short listed entries again demonstrate the breadth and diversity of Australian literary talent and historical expertise.
From powerful insights into moments in Australian history to skilled biography and technically daring poetry, Australia is celebrating an era of confident creativity.
For more information about the Prime Minister's Literary Awards, visit www.arts.gov.au/pmla
For more information about the National Year of Reading, visit www.love2read.org.au  



I was here in February, and since then you've had a real triumph with the exhibition to honour Patrick White's centenary, which closed relatively recently on 8 July.
That was a vivid reminder that this building's life-force is drawn from words  -  millions and millions of them.
Words that make you think; words that make you wonder; words that may even change your life; words by Australian authors, many now long gone.
But our cultural institutions are not just collectors of heritage. They are part of a living tradition of artistic excellence.
They are home to artists and writers who believe in their work and who believe in their nation and its creativity.
They believe that our nation's very soul is our creativity.
In these awards  -  and in this the National Year of Reading  -  we're celebrating excellence in writing.
Writing is perhaps the loneliest of art forms, and one of the hardest.
Indeed it was Patrick White who said: 'I am constantly meeting ladies who say, “how lovely it must be to write”, as though one sat down ... after breakfast, and it poured out like a succession of bread and butter letters, instead of being dragged out, by tongs, a bloody mess, in the small hours.'
So, writing a solitary and sometimes a frustrating pursuit.
We've all seen the films where the writer crumples up endless pages or faces a typewriter with a blank sheet sitting forlornly trying to get the words to come.
Today, that might be a computer screen or a tablet but the demands it imposes on the writer's creative resources are the same.
Fortunately for us, there are many ‘a-ha' moments and we are richer for it  -  that richness that comes from the intensity of the craft of writing.
It was John Keats who said, ‘the excellence of every Art is its intensity'.
For writers, that means drawing upon your experiences and your emotions  -  something that can often be painful and even physically draining.
It's important for you to know how much we value what you do and how much we appreciate what your families go through as you do it.
The consolation lies in the fact that your words will still be here long after we are all gone.
They will have formed an indelible imprint capturing what mattered and what caught our collective imagination in the early 21stcentury.
Friends, the Prime Minister's Literary Awards are now in their fifth year and I'd like to think they've already become a tradition that will be nurtured and respected by all who occupy this office.
This year, of course, we've introduced a range of reforms to make the awards even better.
We've introduced a poetry category that has received an amazing 56 entries in its first year  -  and that's not surprising.
Because, a country that can produce the likes of Kenneth Slessor, Les Murray and Judith Wright certainly deserves a poetry prize and I'm very glad in these awards we now have one to celebrate Australian writing and Australian poetry  -  a very special addition.
This year too, at Minister Crean's insistence, we've split the prizes so the short-listed nominees all get a sum of money as well, and that's well deserved too.
We've also recognised Australia's great historians as part of the Literary Awards.
And, moving with the times, we've opened up the Australian History Prize to formats other than books  -  things like multimedia and videos.
In this age of tablets and smartphones, it's not the format that matters  -  it's the words.
The words that speak to us, inspire, anger, inform and challenge us and perhaps even make us cry.
If you can do those things  -  and the writers in this room most certainly do  -  then we live in a very fortunate country indeed.
To the winners and nominees  -  my warmest congratulations, you make us rich in the things that count the most.
And now it's on with the announcement of those winners.
Thank you very much. 



Comments from a spokesperson for the Prime Minister: 
Prime Minister Gillard today welcomed Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai of Zimbabwe to Australia as a guest of government.
The leaders held formal discussions this morning followed by an official luncheon hosted by the Prime Minister in Mr Tsvangirai's honour at Parliament House.
Australia was a strong supporter of Zimbabwe's independence in 1980, including by playing a key role in the Commonwealth negotiations which led to the Lancaster House talks and independence.
More than 30 years on, Australia remains a firm friend of the Zimbabwean people as they continue their long struggle for peace and democracy.
The Prime Minister said that Australia was proud to host Mr Tsvangirai, whose personal courage and sacrifice embodied the aspirations of an entire population.  
After years in opposition, Mr Tsvangirai became prime minister in 2009 following a ‘Global Political Agreement' that led to the establishment of a Zimbabwean unity government and provided a framework for democratic reform in Zimbabwe.
The Prime Minister applauded Mr Tsvangirai's commitment to peace in the face of extraordinary adversity.
She called on all parties to the unity Government to implement the provisions of the Global Political Agreement and to respect human rights and the rule of law.
The Prime Minister noted in particular the importance of the adoption of a new constitution for Zimbabwe by referendum and the subsequent holding of free and fair elections. 
The Prime Minister assured Prime Minister Tsvangirai that Australia would continue to speak out against any attempts to undermine the path to free and fair elections, including political violence and intimidation.
The Prime Minister said the roadmap provided by the Global Political Agreement was the only credible way forward for Zimbabwe to emerge from its international isolation.
The Prime Minister also welcomed the role being played by the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the South African Government in ensuring adherence to the Global Political Agreement.
The leaders discussed improvements made in Zimbabwe under the unity government since 2009, including economic growth and greater access to food, water and basic services.
They noted Zimbabwe continues to face many pressing development challenges, including food security, water and sanitation, and governance reforms.
Australia was one of the first donors to help efforts to restore basic services in Zimbabwe following the economic crisis and collapse of 2008 and remains a leading international donor.
Prime Minister Gillard said Australia was supporting a number of development assistance programs in Zimbabwe that were delivering practical results, including in relation to water and sanitation and improving food security. 
Australian assistance has made a major contribution to rebuilding lives and livelihoods for the poorest and most vulnerable of those Zimbabweans devastated by the political conflict of recent years. 



Australia has lost one of our greatest track athletes with the passing of John Treloar on the eve of the 30th Olympiad. John was the first Australian to qualify for a 100 yard final at an Olympic Games and will always be remembered as a remarkable trailblazer for athletics in this country.
At the 1952 Games in Helsinki, John ran in the 100 yard final and narrowly finished in 6th place, only 0.1 seconds behind the winner. While John didn't medal in this race, his gallant feat on the track set the pace for Australian athletics to grow and prosper.  His success on the Olympic stage at the 1952 Games heralded Australia's emergence as a great sporting nation and helped to shape our reputation as a formidable force in international sport. His legacy to Australian sport will be showcased at the upcoming London Games in the passion of our athletics team which will strive to emulate his success and represent Australia. John was a great sprinter and a legend on the track, but he will also be remembered fondly as a family man and a remarkable team mate who inspired those around him. The thoughts of the nation are with John's family and friends as they mourn his passing.



PM: If I can start by saying what a great pleasure it is to be here in such fine company, to have a look around the set of Wolverine.
I am very proud to be here because this is a tremendous venture but it also means Australian jobs.
Last week, I was in WA and there we were talking about the future of the mining industry, the future of the north of our country, all of the jobs in resources, all of the jobs in agriculture and all of the benefits of a diversified economy.
It is great to be here in Sydney talking about how our creative industries can play their part in that strong diversified economy.
This movie is going to create over 2,000 jobs, and I have met some of the people who are already working today.
They are in jobs that, from the outside, you wouldn't really identify with movie-making.
Whether it is the people who are bent over the sewing machines making the clothes, whether it is the craftsmen who are making the soft furnishings or all of the vases and decorations you will see in this movie, it is bringing together people with a wide skills set and creating work.
So it really is great to be able to be here. I am proud we were able to support this movie with $12.8 million of government funds.
I spoke to Hugh about that earlier in the year and he explained to me that without government assistance it would be very hard to see this venture take place in Australia.
I wanted these Australian jobs, I wanted the injection into our economy.
I wanted the skills that it would mean for the future and I am very, very satisfied, having walked around, that this movie is going to accomplish all of that as well as be a great film.
So thank you very much for having me here.
HUGH JACKMAN: Thank you Prime Minister. Thank you Prime Minister for being here. I would like to introduce James Mangold our director. Thank you all for coming.
We start filming in a week and I am so happy to be home, to be shooting a movie of this magnitude here at home is one of the great privileges I have had in my career.
I am lucky that both 'Wolverine' movies have been shot here, which is such a great thrill.
We have a terrific Australian movie industry, as you all know, and I think what these foreign or international films do, by having them here, with really can train so many people within the industry.
As you all know we punch above our weight. Aussies punch above our weight.
Not only as actors but as crews, I think in the last 20 years five cinematographers have won Oscars,editors, costume designers, production designers and we really have a great reputation and movies of this scale, this movie will bring in over $80 million into the country and movies of this scale really help keep the skills high at a world class level.
I wanted to thank today in particular the Prime Minister and your Government for all that you've done to make this possible.
I want to thank the NSW government who have also contributed to make this possible and James, thank you so much for coming here.
JAMES MANGOLD: It is a pleasure.
I can guarantee you, you will have the best crew of your life here in Australia. Not only that, the best beaches, the best food. You will have the best time ever.
Thank you so much for coming. It will be a great four or five months. I am sure we will see you all again at some point.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: That's a good question and Hugh's certainly spoken to me about the importance of this for getting these big movies, these real blockbusters here in Australia. It is something that Minister Crean is working his way through as he deals with our cultural policy.
That is going to deal with movie-making but right across Australia's cultural landscape.
For example, yesterday I had the very special delight of giving out the Prime Minister's Literary Awards.
So we will be looking to that cultural policy later in the year, and Minister Crean will be dealing with those questions then.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: This is a grant, a support. The question before about better location tax arrangements, obviously it is the kind of support the movie would have got if we moved to that new tax regime.
It is about attracting the investment here but also the skills and profile.
We decided it was a good investment. The NSW Government played its part and I think for our industry  -  I mean Hugh said to me very consistently as we have walked around, these people with their very special skill sets, they've got to work and if we're not able to provide them with something that holds them in Australia, then they have got to go where they have to go to get work.
We haven't seen a blockbuster in Australia since Australia with Hugh and Nicole and we are at risk of the skill sets being dispersed around the world and importantly not bringing the next generation through and one thing that is definitely happening here, I have met some young people, they are getting to hone their skills, their craft because this movie is here.
[HUGH JACKMAN &amp; JAMES MANGOLD DEPART]
PM: I have had the opportunity to speak about WolverinesoI am happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the DPP today dropped its case against David Hicks. Do you have any comment to make about that? He says that David's been cleared.
PM: Look this is a decision for the DPP, independent of Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on Bob Carr and the US, have you had a chance to speak to him to find out if he said anything that you consider inappropriate or that could cause an international incident?
PM: Look I haven't sought to speak to Senator Carr and I won't. He's explained those comments already.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your reaction to the reports in the Sydney Morning Herald this morning about the HSU East?
PM: I've seen those reports. As I've said on more than one occasion, it's clear that there have been real problems at the Health Services Union and that's distressing, I think,to everyone who cares about working people getting decent representation from their trade union.
We've already acted by having an administrator appointed to the HSU, we've alsoalready acted by toughening up penalties for trade unions and registered organisations through new legislation.
But I would note that the overwhelming bulk of people who work in trade unions representing their fellow workers are decent people doing a great and professional job.
JOURNALIST: The report seems to give the Member for Dobell a good run, it was favourable to him in comparison to Mr Williamson?
PM: For the Member for Dobell, I've consistently said that the matters involving him need to go through a proper process and be resolved that way.
JOURANLIST: What's your message to the union members who see these leaders being paid $400,000?
PM: Well my message would be we've already acted. We have already acted to make sure that there's an administrator in the HSU and we've already acted so that there's new transparencies and indeed new penalties for trade unions and registered organisations.
But for union members around the country, my message too would be clear, overwhelmingly, trade union officials, the staff who work for trade unions are in there doing it all for the right reasons and doing it with decency and with professionalism.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the introduction of the carbon tax on 1 July was being seen as a game changer for the Government; at least with the respect to the polls today, more bad news for you.Why aren't voters listening to you? Why isn't their reallived experience of the carbon tax helping increase support?
PM: I don't comment on opinion polls and I'm not going to break the habit and comment on today's opinion poll.
But I will say this. Government is about governing, it's about getting the big things done, the hard things done that set our nation up for the future, that make sure we're stronger and fairer in that future.
And if we look at our Labor history, it teaches us that the big reforms don't come easy.
Floating the dollar, creating Medicare, universal superannuation, Mabo.
The big reforms don't come easy but our Labor history teaches us that if you want to make those big reforms, you've got to stick to your guns, stick to your guns on those big reforms and you can't afford to be obsessed by the opinion polls.
There will be the poll that matters, the election day in 2013 and on that election day, Australians will have a choice, a choice between a negative, destructive Liberal Party with absolutely no plans for the future, or Labor, that has got some big hard things done, that set us up for the future and has got a plan to make sure our nation keeps getting stronger, keeps getting fairer and keeps being a winner in the world in which we live today.
JOURNALIST: Willyoubeleading the Labor Party on election day?
PM: I most certainly will.
JOURNALIST: How do you keep your backbenchers calm in the face of repeated poor polling?
PM: As I've just said, government is about governing it's about getting big things done for the nation's future, even when they're hard.
JOURANLIST: Prime Minister, regarding the disability insurance scheme, do you believe can get a resolution with the states when you meet about the trial sites?
PM: I will be working very hard on that. We have the Council of Australian Governments meeting tomorrow and I'll first see the Premiers and Chief Ministers this evening.
I want our nation to take the next step forward to a National Disability Insurance Scheme. People with disabilities have waited too long.
We've got a billion dollars on the table to get launch sites in operation, making a difference for people and teaching us lessons about the full rollout of the scheme.
I will be putting the case very strongly to my State and Territory colleagues that this is a shared task, a shared responsibility and we've got to get it done.
JOURNALIST: How much money with the states have to give?
PM: Well we've got a billion dollars on the table.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we've seen more than 1200 people arrive on asylum seeker boats this month alone.
What sort of impact will that have on the budget bottom line?
PM: Well we'll make appropriate provisions as we always do.
But with the number of arrivals we've seen, I know Australians want to see us get this fixed. I've been prepared to give a tick to Nauru to get this fixed, unfortunately we've been met every step of the way with negativity from the Opposition, negativity that's truly destructive.
Now, of course, I have given our nation an opportunity to find a new way of resolving this with the expert panel led by Angus Houston.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on Tasmania and the forest peace talks that have beenextended there. Will you consider requests for more funding?
PM: We've been clear about the funding, that is already on the table through the intergovernmental agreement.
But we've also been clear that the money we are prepared to allocate to strengthening Tasmania's economy over the longer term and to diversifying that economy is contingent on the forest issue being resolved.
We've been prepared to give the stakeholders extra time, but parties in Tasmania need to be working to get this done, get it legislated and then unlock the money we've been prepared to put on the table to keep strengthening the Tassie economy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, other than the NDIS, what will be the important talking points at COAG this week?
PM: Well the central focus will be the launch sites for the National Disability Insurance Scheme. But COAG also has work to do on furthering our seamless national economy agenda.
That'sabout making sure that businesses around the country, and indeed working people around the country, can apply their trade, can run their business without tripping over different regulation in different states.
Things like occupational licensing nationally, so if you'vegot a trade certificate and you want to move interstate you don't have to re-credential in order to ply your trade in that state. We'll be focusing on those things too.
JOURNALIST: Back to Tasmania. Some of your Labor senators have come out against the super trawlercoming there. What are your thoughts on that, do you support it?
PM: This is dealt with by an independent authority, by the Fisheries Authority. It has to give a permit to any vessel for that vessel to gofishing. The permit doesn't depend on the size of the vessel; it depends on what the Fisheries Authority thinks is appropriate in terms of the sustainability of our fisheries.
So the fact it's a super trawler doesn't mean that it gets a super licence. The Fisheries Authority would only ever, if an application is made by this vessel, give it a licence for an appropriate amount of fishing that doesn't jeopardise sustainability of the fish stocks.
JOURNALIST: Standing in the studio today and on the back of Colorado, do you have a personal opinion or personal misgivings on the level of violence in movies and also in the games that kids are playing (inaudible)?
PM: Look,I don't think we can draw some simple link between movies, whether it's the Batman movie or anything else, and this act of violence.
I don't think can you draw a simple link. I think we were all shocked when the news first came through that people who were doing something as innocent and familiar as just going and sitting in a movie theatre, could be subject to so much violence and so much death.
Clearly, you can't just draw simple links here about what motivated the young man involved.
But our hearts do go out to everybody who is grieving and everybody who would still be suffering a tremendous degree of shock.
You're just out for an ordinary every day kind of event and then that happens, it's very hard to imagine the impact of that on people in that movie theatre.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just again on the super trawler, is there a split emerging on this issue? Does it bother you that these senators have come out against it?
PM: Well the decision is made by an independent authority and that is appropriate.
JOURNALIST:Surely that could be overridden?
PM: No, it's an independent authority that does it.
JOURNALIST: But parliamentary sovereigntyin the grand scheme of things.
PM: But Parliament has decided to give this responsibility to an independent authority thatthen gets about doing the task.
JOURNALIST: And they could call the authorities, their entitlement to do so, surely?
PM: But I don't think that there's any suggestion of that from anybody. Government sets up independent authorities for all sorts of purposes.
We have the Tax Office and Medicare and on the list goes. Because this is a scientific question about sustainability of the fish stocks, it is appropriate that it is with an expert agency.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how will the Government afford the education reforms that Gonski has recommended?
PM: We're working hard on making a difference to Australian kids. It's very important to note, we haven't simply waited for the report from David Gonski and his expert review panel.
We have ensured that out on the ground in schools today as we speak, there's more money in disadvantaged schools to make a difference tothe kidswho come from the poorest homes.
And to make sure they get a great education. There's money in literacy and from numeracy to make sure kids get the foundation stones of learning.
There's money in teacher quality, in bringing the best and brightest into teaching. There's new transparencythrough MySchool.
All of that reform agenda is already out there making a difference in Australian schools as we stand here.
We do want to make a long term difference by ensuring that our reforms continue and that they're appropriately resourced.
That's what we're working on through the process of responding to David Gonski's expert work and that response will come out from Government in coming months.
JOURNALIST: Have you sought a compromise with media organisations over regulation?
PM: We might make this the last question. It is fairly cold in here. You're all rugged up. Thank you for that question.
The Government's received the Finkelstein report and the Convergence Review and Government has not made any decisions yet about how to respond to these two reviews.
I haven't made any decisions about how to respond to these two reviews.
I value freedom of the press certainly, but also quality and diversity and weare working on the reform agenda flowing from Finkelstein and the Convergence Review, the Government response to these two reviews.
Of course we seek to talk to people in media as we work out the Government response.
But noone should assume that we are not serious about the reform agenda here.
Okay, thank you very much. 


Canberra
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: The Council of Australian Governments meeting has just concluded. The most important item for discussion at this meeting was the launch site arrangements for the National Disability Insurance Scheme. I am in a position to announce that there has been an agreement between the Federal Government, South Australia, Tasmania and the ACT on hosting launch sites.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme is the vision we need for this country to overcome a fundamental unfairness. At the moment your chance of getting assistance if you have a disability depends on how you got that disability, and it depends on where you live.
People who've acquired their disability, say, in a worker's accident will get worker's compensation. But for someone who was born with a profound disability, acquires it by an accident that didn't happen at work or didn't happen through a motor vehicle, or maybe diving into a river or some other sort of accident, or people who get a debilitating disease and acquire a disability, these people do not get appropriate support.
We've described this as a cruel lottery because that's exactly what it is. Your chances of getting help and care depended on how you acquired your disability and where you live. As a Labor Government we have been determined to address this unfairness. We asked the Productivity Commission to guide us, and they recommended a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
I have worked with my state and territory colleagues on this vision of a National Disability Insurance Scheme. The next step towards this vision of fairness is launch sites. Making sure that around the country we see people better assisted than they are now, making sure that in different circumstances around the country we are best able to assess what the full model of the scheme should look like.
That is, we can learn by doing, we can learn by helping people who have a disability. I am pleased that we will see three launch sites go ahead; in South Australia for young people, in Tasmania for adolescents and in the entire region of the ACT. Each of these jurisdictions stepped forward and was prepared to put money on the table. Each of these jurisdictions stepped forward and was prepared to work with the Commonwealth under agreed governance arrangements.
The Federal Government made the really tough decisions it needed to in the last budget so that a billion dollars is available for launch sites.
I am very disappointed that we have not been able today to strike an agreement with either New South Wales or Victoria, or indeed Western Australia on hosting a launch site. I do note that in Western Australia Premier Barnett has recently led a new disability initiative called My Way, and we will be working with Western Australia to learn what we can from this new initiative My Way, and the way in which it is assisting people with disabilities.
I am disappointed that for Victoria and New South Wales, we were not able to reach agreement today. An agreement with New South Wales would mean that 10,000 people in the Hunter region would have benefited from the launch of the National Disability Insurance Scheme. It means 5,000 people in the Barwon region of Victoria would have benefited from the launch of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The Commonwealth contribution to these launches would have been around $300 million in New South Wales, and $100 million in Victoria.
Unfortunately neither New South Wales nor Victoria was able to step forward with some relatively small amounts of additional financing to make these launches possible. We will continue to work with these jurisdictions in the hope of seeing change because I do find it disappointing that there will be people with disabilities in those regions tonight who will go to bed uncertain rather than knowing that they will be the subject of a launch site arrangement, and that they will see change and improvement in the care in which they receive.
In addition to the National Disability Insurance Scheme, COAG today has discussed the question of construction costs. COAG has agreed to a review to be led by three people; a panel of reviewers.
There is concern in a number of jurisdictions about cost drivers in construction. We are seeing productivity improvements in construction, but there are concerns about costs. We are a nation that is seeing rapid development in resources sector and beyond, and consequently that review has been agreed to and will be undertaken.
There's been agreement too that each of us is concerned about the escalation in electricity prices arising from the investments that we are seeing in poles and transmission. That is, if you like, the hardware of the system. It is certainly true that the biggest cost driver for households and their electricity costs for families, for small businesses, is the costs arising because of the investments into poles and transmission.
As the nation's leaders, we have said we are concerned about that cost escalation for families and for small businesses, and we have urged our energy ministers to ensure that their work is squarely aimed at improving the deal that customers get.
Then finally, whilst we have worked though some other areas including on the seamless national economy and better arrangements for business, finally we also dealt with the item of Royal Succession. We have been asked by the United Kingdom, we have been asked particularly by Prime Minister Cameron to review the way in which Royal Succession works in this country.
Prime Minister Cameron at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Perth made it very clear that he wants to achieve arrangements where the succession in the Royal Family does not have gender discrimination associated with it, nor discrimination against Catholics. In order to achieve that, countries like Australia need to act. We are all united in saying that we do want to act to achieve that result.
Can I thank my colleagues for their participation during today's talks and last night's discussions. I'll turn now to the Premier of South Australia, who is the Chair of the Council of the Australian Federation.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Thank you Prime Minister.
People with disabilities, their carers and their families have been advocating for many years for more services to assist them. In many cases we're talking about families and people with disabilities that have reached a level of desperation which has meant that they have regularly advocated their propositions to their elected representatives and in the states and territories we have heard their voices over a consistently long period.
This has culminated in the work to create a National Disability Insurance Scheme, and we can say today that those families, those carers, people that have been advocating for this for so long, today see the first concrete steps of their work. And this is a very important moment. While the National Disability Insurance Scheme has up to this point been an idea, today for the first time we are seeing the first concrete steps of putting it into place.
In South Australia, this means that young people, people from birth through to age 14 and that cohort moving up through the three years of the trial, will be able to experience a fuller range of services to meet their needs. We were particularly concerned in South Australia to focus on the early years because we believe investment in the early years pays enormous benefits in later life for those young people.
This is something that has been a difficult proposition for South Australia. We have very difficult financial strictures. In the last budget in May we were faced with having to make very considerable savings because of the collapse in revenues because of the global financial situation.
But the single biggest commitment we made in the budget was $212 million extra dollars in relation to disability services, because we knew we had to do more. And as part of that, we earmarked funds to contribute to the trial that we knew the Commonwealth were going to promote in the first phase of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
So we're very proud to be participating in this. We think that this is an incredibly powerful message to people with disabilities, their carers, their families, that we have heard them and that this scheme is going to happen and the first steps have been put in place.
In addition to the matters that the Prime Minister has mentioned, there were also some important discussions in the COAG meeting about the Commonwealth-State financial relations in relation to national partnerships. There's a range of national partnerships that are negotiated between the commonwealth and the states. Many of them are going to expire in coming years.
These represent massive risks to state governments and we've arrived at a set of arrangements that will mean that those national partnerships can be concluded in an orderly fashion with proper notice to states and territories so that we can jointly manage our financial relations and the expectations of the communities in which we all live.
I also want to add my voice to the remarks that were made by the Prime Minister concerning the national electricity market, the interconnected electricity market in the Queensland, Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia. We have seen a dramatic escalation in electricity costs, the lion's share of which has been driven by what we regard as gold-plated investments in relation to infrastructure.
We think that is a consequence in part of the regulatory system, and we believe that the regulator can take steps to ameliorate the growth in those costs which are driving the lion's share of the growth in electricity prices.
So that's an important indication we've given to energy ministers to focus their attention on that work.
PM: Just before we take questions, we also did note that it's Genia's last COAG. After seventeen years in local government, a very long time, she's moving to a different stage of the journey so we very much enjoyed her company and thanked her for her efforts.
Phil Hudson.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is this a setback for the disability insurance scheme, that the two largest states, Victoria and New South Wales, have not signed up? Can you say how much extra money you wanted from Victoria and New South Wales, and if I could ask you Premier Baillieu, why has Victoria not signed up? Was it a question of money? Did you offer any new money at all?
PM: Well I'll take those questions. The National Disability Insurance Scheme is starting. It's starting in three places around the country and I think that's great news. As the Premier of South Australia has said; that means we are moving from a great idea to it actually making a difference for people with disabilities.
We are doing what we need to do to test this scheme so that when our nation can roll it out nationally, and of course I want to see the national rollout, but when we do that we know we are doing it right because we've had the experience in these launch sites.
For New South Wales and Victoria and indeed Western Australia and other jurisdictions, if they want to continue discussions with the Commonwealth, with the Federal Government, about the National Disability Insurance Scheme, then we will participate in those discussions. But I am disappointed that we didn't get to an arrangement today.
The amounts of money above what New South Wales and Victoria had indicated in their bids, the amounts of money are in the order of $70 million across the forward estimates in New South Wales and $40 million in Victoria, these are in circumstances where the Federal Government has $1 billion and where its partnership with New South Wales would have seen it invest around $300 million and with Victoria would have seen it invest around $100 million.
Of course I want to see us working to get more people benefiting from this scheme, but I think it's fantastic that today we're emerging from this meeting with three places around the country where we will see the National Disability Insurance Scheme start.
PREMIER BAILLIEU: Can I say it frank from our point of view in Victoria we have been very proud to have been champions of an NDIS and we want to see an NDIS in place, and that remains and we are very keen to see the trials in place and we are very keen to participate in those trials.
I think for anybody in Australia, but I'll focus obviously on Victoria, but anybody who endures a disability knows how difficult this can be, and we want to assist, and that involves obviously some significant steps when we're prepared to take those steps. We put in a very comprehensive bid in conjunction with New South Wales, and indeed across the two jurisdictions we were looking to some 15,000 people being addressed through those proposals for trials.
It's certainly our view and we believe the view of those advising the Government and it's certainly advising us that the maximum benefit is afforded from a comprehensive trial, the sort of trial that both New South Wales and Victoria could offer. As I say we had a comprehensive bid on the table. In terms of a response from the Commonwealth, we had some concerns about that.
Suffice to say that an alternative response was put to us later today. We're more than happy to assess that as we have commenced doing. We will continue to have those discussions. We've advised the Prime Minister of that, and we look forward to reaching a final position on those.
It wasn't the case that we could reach a position on that today, and I'd say in terms of characterising that, there was a component of that revised response that involved an assessment of risk into the future. We need to make a legitimate assessment of that. That doesn't diminish in any way from our commitment to an NDIS or to the enthusiasm with which we would embrace a trial.
We believe both Victoria and New South Wales offer a positive approach to the trial, and we will work through the response that's been put for us, and look forward to getting a positive outcome.
JOURNALIST: Premier Baillieu, you said alternative proposal, another joint project with New South Wales? Was put to you late this afternoon?
PREMIER BAILLIEU: No, I'm talking about a response from the Commonwealth. And some suggestions and that involved a consideration of risks into the future. We want to make sure that gets fair consideration.
It's very difficult to sit around a COAG table or to stand in the corridors of Parliament House and assess these things in detail. I think we owe it to the disability sector to get this right, and that's what we intend to do.
We've said to the Prime Minister that we've made our ministers available to continue these discussions tomorrow. That will occur, unless there's any unwillingness, I don't think that's the case.
We want to reach a resolution on this but we have to make a fair assessment. I think it is fair to say that when these trials are embarked upon, that they do set an agenda for the future regardless of any statements to the contrary, so we want to make sure we get it right.
JOURNALIST: Premier O'Farrell, if I could, what was your reason for not being able to reach agreement today, and is your bottom line that New South Wales is not going to contribute any extra money above what it already spends on disability?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well Phil, obviously like Victoria I'm both optimistic but also disappointed we couldn't reach an agreement today. I'm particularly disappointed that we couldn't reach any sort of funding agreement  -  not for three pilot programs that will affect around 11,000 people  -  but for a National Disability Insurance Scheme that when set up will actually benefit more than 400,000 people across the country.
Along with the Liberal premiers today, I was pleased to meet Sean Fitzgerald in Ozzies. He's one of those people who would benefit enormously from a National Disability Insurance Scheme, and that's what ultimately our goal as state and territory leaders must continue to be.
So there was no way today I was going to short change people with disabilities. There was no way today I was going to deconstruct a Productivity Commission report which was clear about the way in which that National Disability Insurance Scheme should be funded.
We have more than $550 million on the table for the three-year trial in the Hunter Valley, to assist 10,000 people. That's a significant commitment, whichever way you look at it. That's on top of the $2 billion in growth funding that we've put forward for disability services in New South Wales under Stronger Together 2.
Last year, last year an additional $600,000 in our budget  -  a 14 percent increase in disability spend in New South Wales. This year, $800,000  -  12 percent increase. We are doing the heavy lifting. And I'm disappointed we couldn't get agreement today but we are happy to have our disabilities minister, Andrew Constance along with the Victorian disabilities minister come to Canberra tomorrow to try to keep those negotiations going so that the people within Barwon, within the Hunter, have hope of joining in a pilot.
But let's be clear about this, until this group signs up to a National Disability Insurance Scheme we will not be fulfilling our obligations to people across this country with disabilities.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, can you just clarify, is it possible that Victoria and New South Wales, and that's taken as a joint bid right, can still come into this trial at this point? And can you also clarify of those numbers you were requiring amounts to be put in, did those two states offer any extra money?
PM: The answer to your question is Victoria and NSW can still put proposals to me, which I will consider, to have a launch site. It would not need to come back to COAG again, it could be done between now and the next COAG.
But let's be very clear, we have had three jurisdictions  -  two states and a territory  -  step forward and say they are prepared to put more money on the table than is business as usual for disabilities, more money on the table and acquit certain benchmark for a contribution by a state or a territory to the care of an individual.
So people get care packages, care packages cost, the cost is going to be shared in the launch sites between state governments and federal governments, the territory government and the federal govermment. So the costs are going to be shared.
These jurisdictions  -  three of them  -  have stepped forward and said that they are prepared to lift to here in terms of their contribution. We have asked New South Wales and Victoria to do the same. In order to do that, the amounts of money involved for these states, New South Wales over its forward estimates it's around $70 million, Victoria it's around $40 million.
I am disappointed that we haven't been able to reach agreement over what are comparatively, for govermments in this country, relatively small sums against a Federal Government contribution of $1 billion, $300 million around into New South Wales and $100 million into Victoria.
JOURNALIST: Did they offer anything of that extra money?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Beside the $570 million we have on the table for the trial, is that what you're saying Michelle?
Let's be clear about the billion dollars here. Despite what I read overnight in some papers which are never believed, there was no additional money on the table today. And I have to say what frustrates me is that of that billion dollars, only $350 million goes to actually providing services to people with disabilities. The rest is admin and set up costs.
PM: The rest is the necessary arrangements to set up the scheme. But nothing gets us away from the maths here. I'm sitting next to a premier who was prepared to step up to a certain figure per care package. That's why he's got a launch site.
JOURNALIST: Given your disappointment, do you think the concept of cooperative federalism is no longer part of COAG?
PM: I'll leave the theorising to others. My determination is to get a better deal for people with disabilities.
JOURNALIST: Just on another issue, a lot of people in remote communities are warning of worsening, continuing problems with petrol sniffing. Some people saying that the answer to that is to make compulsory the roll out of Opal fuel; I don't think your Government's doing that, and I'm wanting to know what the reason is?
The reason I'm asking it in this forum is that there are other premiers here, I guess Western Australia and the Northern Territory who could perhaps reflect on how serious the problem is and what you think the solution is.
PM: Well that wasn't the subject of discussion today, but I'm very happy to say generally from the Federal Government, we think petrol sniffing is a big problem and incredibly destructive problem. I would not be the only leader sitting at this table who's seen a young person who is now being cared for in a nursing home because they've just destroyed their brain through petrol sniffing, and so they need full-time care.
So, dreadful tragedy when you see that for someone who should be absolutely in the prime of their lives in their teens or in their twenties. Now Opal fuel does make a difference. We acknowledge it does make a difference. And we've worked to spread where Opal fuel is provided.
Indeed my recollection is that we've provisioned around $100 million to facilitate the further roll out of Opal fuel. We've certainly done some of that in partnership with the Northern Territory, so I'll go to the chief minister now.
CHIEF MINISTER HENDERSON: Thank you Prime Minister, and yes I saw the stories in the paper this week. There has been a very significant reduction of petrol sniffing in the Northern Territory since Opal fuel started to be rolled out, Prime Minister I think about five years ago, maybe a bit longer than that.
And I absolutely support, as the Chief Minister, that where communities are experiencing petrol sniffing that Opal fuel should be rolled out. The issue in terms of the Lake Nash community that featured in the press this week, Lake Nash itself has Opal fuel in that particular community but across the border  -  and I'm not sort of making any accusations here  -  across the border in Queensland, obviously Opal fuel's not available locally so people who want to sniff petrol can find other ways of sourcing petrol.
But what I can say absolutely in the Northern Territory's experience there's been a very significant reduction. Now one child sniffing is one child too many and Opal fuel certainly is very much a large part of answer, and I'm prepared to work with the premiers bordering the Northern Territory to work on a further roll out because it does make a difference, it does work and it does stop kids sniffing.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
CHIEF MINISTER HENDERSON: In terms of the Northern Territory it virtually is in every community, it's just where people travel up the Stuart Highway from interstate, and if kids can access the cars. I think it's probably a bit unrealistic to say there should be a compulsory national roll out, but where we have problems, we should be working across state boundaries to ensure that we minimise the availability of leaded fuel to indigenous kids.
JOURNALIST: If I could direct my question at Mr Barnett. What attitude did you bring to the meeting with regard to hosting an NDIS trial and more generally speaking to all of you, how much discussion was there of the old GST carve-up, which is a very popular topic?
PM: You're definitely on Colin's favourite topic, so I'll go to Colin.
PREMIER BARNETT: First on the NDIS, and I have been to quite a few COAG meetings now, almost a veteran. Without exception, premiers and chief ministers arrived at COAG with a great deal of goodwill for an NDIS because it is the right thing to do.
However today, in my judgement, was an opportunity squandered. We did not make the most of what could have been achieved today. And with due respect to the three trials that have been set up, they are small scale, they are in the small states. And we should have seen at least one or two trials in the larger states.
As far as Western Australia's concerned, we put forward a proposal that would have required $135 million funding each by the Commonwealth and the State, I think it was broadly acceptable to the Commonwealth. In Western Australia it's recognised that the level of funding for disabilities is higher than elsewhere in Australia, and also the system is different in a sense, it is decentralised and people are more empowered over choice and control of the funding made available to them, which is where the NDIS is headed toward, and will surpass that.
So I'm disappointed in that sense, that that hasn't happened. I guess the showstopper for the Western Australian proposal related to the Government's model. I don't need to go into that.
With respect to the GST, if I could say so, the group of four met this morning over breakfast, they being the larger states of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia. And we have, I think I can say for the other states, we are trying to develop a joint position of the larger and the donor states, and we're probably close to a position where we believe that the majority of the GST pool should be allocated on a simple per-capita basis, and the remainder of the pool should be allocated according to needs  -  in other words to provide if you like that financial protection for the territories and the smaller states.
The system is clearly broken. It is not serving, not only my state, but it is not serving the Australian economy well. It's a broken system and tinkering with it will not solve it.
We need to go to a system that simply suits this century. Not something that was better designed for a hundred years ago.
PREMIER WETHERILL: The proposition that's been advanced by Western Australia would cost South Australia $600 million per annum. And for that to be advanced and any way suggest that this is somehow nation-building exercise or involves treating Australia as one nation borders on laughable.
We have prosperous jurisdictions promoting a carve-up of the nation's resources in a way which would have dramatic affects on the smaller states. Coming from a state itself that was a net receiver of resources from the rest of the nation just a few short years ago, it's breathtaking in its audacity.
Can I say that this is one nation. It was established as a commonwealth, and those words mean something. That the wealth of the nation should be shared equitably, not according to some notion of the rich states taking the resources and keeping them for themselves.
The principles that underpin the horizontal fiscal equalisation  -  the mechanism for distributing GST resources  -  are based on the simple principle that wherever you exist in this nation, as a citizen, you should receive the same level of services.
Now how could one advocate against that simple principle of equality across this nation? Are we one nation or are we a series of citizens that decide to keep for themselves the resources that they are just fortunate to happen to be living proximate to.
Now I think it is a proposition which is damaging to Australia as a nation. We came together as a group of equals, and frankly we are not going to be treated in an unequal fashion. We will never cooperate with such an arrangement.
CHIEF MINISTER HENDERSON: I'm disappointed that given the article in the West Australian today, by the Western Australian Premier saying they were, he was going to put forward this 60/40 splits today, I'm disappointed that the gang of four have not come clean with the rest of COAG about this unprincipled attack on the smaller states.
Now, you know, it's not a laughing matter for myself as the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory. We're talking about some of the most disadvantaged people in this nation who have a right, who have a right to access the same level of services as all other Australians.
And the proposition being put forward is not about fairness and equity across this nation, it's just an unprincipled dash for cash. It certainly not acceptable to the Northern Territory, and it goes against all the fundamentals of this great commonwealth nation of ours.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) with regards to the NDIS test site?
PM: The issue from my point of view is we are trying to launch arrangements for a National Disability Insurance Scheme. That means that it does have to have national features.
If we end up with a federation of state-based schemes, then even if they start off in the same place, in five years time, ten years time, fifteen years time, we'll end up where we are now, which is, there are differences around the country for how you get treated.
So we need to be testing national arrangements for a national scheme. Testing national arrangements also means of course, that this will give people with disabilities the benefit of knowing that they can move from place to place without jeopardising their service provision.
And I've certainly heard the individual stories of people who would like to move to somewhere else in the country, maybe be closer to family, but who are just terrified that if they move they won't get the same package of care put back in place.
So that's why we want genuinely national characteristics. Now we do absolutely acknowledge that WA is top of the leader board in terms of expenditure on people with disabilities. WA including through its recent My Way initiatives is trialling the kind of, well not trialling, it's got a system which is incorporating the kind of individualised approaches that we want to see for the National Disability Insurance Scheme, where the person with the disability gets to make choices about their care, rather than having the system blitzkrieg in and say you've got to have two of these, one of these and half of the other, even if you would prefer some other mix.
So I very much understand WA's going down that path. Consequently in terms of provision of care, I think there are things we can learn from Western Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if you can't get agreement on a trial that involves around $100 million of extra spending from the states, what chance is there of getting a full national scheme running that will cost an extra $7 billion, and was there any discussion today about where that money for the final scheme will come from?
PM: The discussion today was on the launch sites, the discussion today was on keeping moving on arrangements that we need to make to have a full national scheme. And you'll see in the communiqué that there's some work progressing around eligibility and around what the standard of care we're aiming at is.
I am disappointed, there's no doubt about that, but you focus, I certainly focus, to get the big things done. And the history of our nation is the big things don't come easy. Whether you're pointing to Medicare or universal superannuation, or native title, the big things don't come easy. Well this is a very, very, very big thing.
And so it's going to take a lot of focus and a lot of work and I'm very determined to do it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the GST, a question for you and then also a follow up for some of the premiers here. If the GST arrangements were changed and the Northern Territory lost out to the tune of a couple of billion dollars, would Canberra be willing to fill the gap and fund the Northern Territory?
And a follow up for Premier Barnett, for Premier Wetherill and for others as well, Ken Henry's talked about increasing consumption taxes, and reliance on consumption taxes. The Grattan Institute's raised options for reform here. Is it time to put a raising of the rate of the GST, and a broadening of the base of the GST, on the agenda, given the arguments that we're seeing?
PM: Well I don't agree with raising the rate or broadening the base of the GST. On the GST distribution issues, I determined quite sometime back that there should be a very high level review of these principles.
I asked two former premiers to do that from either side of politics  -  former Premier Brumby and former Premier Greiner. I actually announced that review when I was in Western Australia and Premier Barnett who's been a very strong advocate on GST distribution welcomed that review.
It is still doing its work and I think as you've already seen replicated from the discussion at the table, this is not an easy area because we do have an expectation about what it means to be an Australian citizen. We do have that expectation, what it means to be a person who lives in our country. And I don't think any of us would be happy to wake up in a nation where you could point to impoverished places that weren't getting assistance because the part of the nation that they were in didn't have revenue raising capacity.
Now to be fair, when I have discussed these questions with Premier Barnett and others in the past, they have acknowledged that there are places in the country that, with the best will in the world, do not have the same revenue base and revenue raising capabilities.
And Premier Barnett has acknowledged that for a long part of its history, Western Australia was a net taker out of the GST pool, and that's not surprising either. A vast, relatively sparsely-populated place, not surprising it was a net taker, and not surprising that as the economy's changed, those circumstances have changed.
So we do have a very high level review to look at all of this, that's the process that I determined would get us through here, and that review is not yet concluded.
JOURNALIST: I just wanted to touch on something Colin Barnett raised about the fact that they are small trials and they are in small states. Do you actually need a trial in a larger state like New South Wales or Victoria to justify moving to that next step?
PM: We have three trials, that's a good thing. Of course I would want to see further trials if that's possible. But we've got jurisdictions that have stepped up to the benchmark in terms of contribution for care per person and we are asking others to step up to the same benchmark.
JOURNALIST: Question to Premier Wetherill, you've supported NDIS but is it true that South Australian Health are going to cut up to 700 jobs tomorrow?
PREMIER WETHERILL: We are consulting with a range of representatives of health workers and the employees of the Department of Health about essentially getting the costs of our healthcare system under control.
I think this is matter about which I think there will be complete common ground amongst all state and territory ministers; that is that the costs of running a healthcare system are an enormous challenge. And we've done some very important work in controlling demand, but we now turn our attention to the efficiency of the system and that's difficult work. And we're having that conversation with our employees and we'll be having a broader discussion with the South Australian community tomorrow when we release a range of reports.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) cutting jobs?
PREMIER WETHERILL: No, no it won't actually. What we're talking about are efficiencies which are about delivering the same, if not or better services, making sure though that we can do that in the most effective way possible. We're looking at the way in which our system operates, being very careful to quarantine the things that affect frontline services.
JOURNALIST: Premier Newman, just wondering did you put anything else on the table today and you've been very firm in your position on this, I'm just wondering do you have any personal family or friends who face the challenges of a disability and have you visited any disability support services since becoming Premier?
PREMIER NEWMAN: Look I have, and that's as much as I'll say on that. Let's just be clear about a few things. Queensland is putting in excess of $900 million a year into the support of people with disabilities right now.
Should we put more in? You bet. Do we want to put more in? You bet. Can we put more in right now? I'm afraid we can't. And why can't we? Well go and ask Anna Bligh and Andrew Fraser.
This year, this financial year we'll see a deficit of over $4 billion on a $47 billion budget. We do have a crisis in Queensland's finances. We're working hard to solve the problem.
What I'm saying is that in the 2014-2015 financial year, with the plan that we've got to get the state's finances back on track, I believe we'll then be in a position to review our support for the scheme.
We want to be in it. Now we can't do a trial unless the Prime Minister sort of wants to fund it, and I accept that she's not in a position to do that. But we will watch very carefully what's going on. Indeed I'll be talking to our communities ministers about what we can do to try and deliver better services with the resources we've got right now.
And we will watch what's going on with these trials. By the way, I believe that these trials will tell us a lot. I think they're going to be very useful. We will take note of that and implement things as soon as we can out of those things.
So, the problem is in Queensland, we simply don't have the money. Final point is we are not seeing thousands of public servants lose their job as we speak because it's fun. It's not fun. It's really tough on those people, and frankly it's hard for everybody involved in the process.
So far 5,000 people have lost their jobs, there's going to be thousands more to get our financial position sorted out. And we have to make really tough choices right now.
So I'll just conclude by saying we are funding disability services in Queensland to over $900 million a year, we would like to put in more, we need to put in more, we going to try and find the money to do a better job. But it's going to take some time.
JOURNALIST: On another issue and I know you're probably limited in what you can say about it, but is there anything that you can say to reassure Australians that our national security hasn't been compromised by an alleged Canadian spy selling secrets to Russia?
PM: Look, I don't comment on intelligence questions but I can certainly assure people that our national security arrangements are robust and can be relied upon.
JOURNALIST: On the NDIS. There's a clear partisan divide amongst those jurisdictions which have signed up for trials and those that haven't. Can I just ask you and perhaps one or two of Liberal premiers, what do you say to disabled people tonight who may rightly or wrongly conclude this whole program may fall victim to partisan politics, which seems to become more and more prevalent in Australia at the moment?
PM: Well I'm determined to get this done. If the premiers of Victoria and New South Wales have said that they are prepared to keep working on this, I think that's a good sign.
So, I'm determined to get this done. I'm very proud that it's this Labor Government that's said it would do a National Disability Insurance Scheme. That putting the foundation work so we could even be talking about launch sites, very proud that we're in that position.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) to pay for this scheme?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: What I'm saying is that our contribution to the trial is currently in the order of more than $550 million. And what I'm saying is that we're increasing disability funding by $2 billion  -  14 percent last year, 12 percent this year.
We're doing the heavy lifting and Phil, you know, I'm disappointed. I'm disappointed because whether it's three or five pilots, it's not a National Disability Insurance Scheme and none of us should be happy until that scheme's established.
PREMIER NEWMAN: I just want to say as well, if I may Prime Minister, we want this to happen. I don't want to leave anyone with any doubt. We want it to happen. And as soon as we can find the money to actually increase our contribution, we're going to do that. Because we recognise we have to. And we want to help people with disabilities.
But it is simply a problem that we have right now. So the trials can occur, 2014-2015 financial year, we'll be revisiting our position on how we get involved.



HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for making time for us.
PM: Thank you Leigh.
HOST: Can you just give me a figure, how many Australians would stand to benefit from a fully functioning National Disability Insurance Scheme, just a ball park figure?
PM: There are probably around 400,000 Australians around the nation. Leigh, I think it's important people understand the essence of this scheme. Maybe it's a confusing title, but the essence of it is this. Currently today, if you end up with a major disability, maybe you were born with it, maybe you have an accident, maybe some debilitating disease means you end up with a disability.
Whether you get care, enough care, indeed sometimes any care, depends on the circumstances in which you got that disability and where you live. So if you're injured at work you will probably get worker's compensation. If you got the same injury at home you won't. If you're in one part of Australia you will get better deals through government services than in another part of Australia.
I want to end that kind of cruel lottery that we're getting people to play. I've met people with disabilities whose needs simply aren't being met; a couple of showers a week for example if all the care that they get. We can change that, we should change that and that's what the National Disability Insurance Scheme is for.
HOST: That example you give is appalling so how is it that then today at the COAG meeting we've seen another example of politicians failing to work together to get a policy through that would help 400,000 people in really desperate need?
PM: Well let's be clear about who did what at the meeting today.
Budgets are about choices and what you value and if you put your hand on your heart and say, I value having a National Disability Insurance Scheme then you've got to make the tough choices in your budget to make it happen.
We did that at the last Federal Budget in a budget where we had $35 billion worth of savings, we put together $1 billion of new money for launch sites around the country. That wasn't easy to do but that was our way of saying this is so important, we're going to do the tough things to make it possible.
Other states around the nation have said the same thing. You know, Tasmania, small state and difficulties in its economy but the Premier of Tasmania did some tough stuff to have some new money ready to go so she could have a launch site. So did the Premier of South Australia, so did the Chief Minister of the ACT and they will have launch sites.
Asked to do the same thing, no more, asked to do the same thing, the Premier of New South Wales  -  a big strong state; the Premier of Victoria  -  a big strong state, wouldn't do it.
What Barry O'Farrell was asked for today was $70 million of new money over three years  -  that's on the whole New South Wales budget. What Premier Baillieu was asked for was around 40. And whilst they say they value being involved in a National Disability Insurance Scheme and having a launch site they wouldn't put forward those relatively small amounts of money to get it done for their people in their states.
HOST: But it is your scheme, it's you initiative. Why should the Federal Government not put up the bulk of the funding for it?
PM: We've got a billion on the table.
HOST: Why shouldn't you pay for more of it?
PM: Leigh, let's be very, very clear here. I made the tough decisions to put a billion dollars into having launch sites, a billion dollars  -  new money.
Premier O'Farrell, who's got a budget a third of the size of mine; so if he was making a comparable effort, he'd be there with $300 million. I'm not asking him for $300 million, I'm not even asking him per capita to do the same that the Premier of South Australia is. He's putting in $20 million, if Barry was stumping up the same for his bigger state that'd be $90 million  -  not even asking him to do that. Seventy million dollars and he wouldn't do it.
HOST: It's the Labor Governments who've come in behind you and the Liberal Governments that are holding out which gives people the impression that it's just another one of these political rows where people can't find a way to compromise in the national interest.
PM: Well Leigh, let's look at this and I think it probably is a bit cofounding for people today. They watched the TV screens and they see that the Leader of the Opposition say he cares about a National Disability Insurance Scheme, he wants to get it done too, the Liberals believe in it as much I do. And yet when it comes to the moment to turn from words to deeds, to actually make a decision which makes something possible and relatively small amounts of money for big states then the Liberal states don't come forward and do it.
Now my door is still open to those states to get this done but I think that they've got to explain tonight; there is 10,000 people in Newcastle who would have benefited from a launch in New South Wales. Barry O'Farrell's got to say to them why they're not worth $70 million more over three years. Premier Baillieu, 5,000 people in the Barwon region, he couldn't find 40 million to look after them.
Now that's a lot of numbers and a lot of stuff about agreements but it speaks to values, what you care about, what you're prepared to do and when they were asked, Premier O'Farrell and Premier Baillieu, they weren't prepared to act.
HOST: On the inflation figure that was out today, it was low as we know. But when we look over the past few years at the costs of goods and services that Australians cannot live without  -  I'm talking about things like electricity, gas and water  -  they have risen enormously.
Why hasn't Labor eased cost of living pressures on Australians since it came to office, as it promised to do?
PM: We have certainly supported family budgets and we'll continue to do so.
Tax cuts, School Kids Bonus, increased family payments, stepping up to more of the costs of child care, historic increase in the pension, a tax cut from 1 July meaning that you can keep, you know, $18,200 you earn and the tax man doesn't take a cent  -  these are all things that support families.
HOST: I think people would still say that that isn't making up the different when you've got things like a 60 per cent increase in your electricity bill, a 50 per cent increase in your water bill, a 40 per cent increase in your gas bill. It does seem like it's harder to make ends meet.
PM: I certainly understand that there are people who are under cost of living pressure and who are finding it harder to make ends meet which is why in the recent budget, even in a budget where it was difficult to find dollars as I've just described, we did things like decided to give people the School Kids Bonus to help them with the costs of getting the kids back to school; why I wanted to see them get a tax cut; why we've increased family payments out of the proceeds of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, because Australians around the country are entitled to their fair share of the resources boom too.
But I do get that those big utilities bills really put pressure on people and interestingly today at COAG there was discussion about electricity where the Premier of Queensland clearly said the big cost driver here is the polls and the wires. The big cost driver is in the things that states predominately control and we've got to make a change to that big cost driver.
I agree with that, states do have to step up here to better manage what is happening in their electricity systems because that's where the big costs are coming from.
HOST: It's almost a month since the carbon price came in and the world hasn't ended as you and you're Ministers have repeatedly pointed out so we don't need to go over that ground again but people get their bills as I've talked about, they have a trip to their rubbish dump to drop off a load and what was $40 visit is now a $55 visit.
Isn't your problem that all these little things just keep adding up and every time people think, bloody government?
PM: I think Australians are pretty commonsense and pretty smart and when they get an electricity bill as people in many states will do and see an insert which explains that the impact of the carbon price is 10 per cent  -  we knew it would be that and so we factored all of the household assistance on the basis it would be 10 per cent-
HOST: Do reckon people do do that though? Would they just get their bill and sigh?
PM: Well I think they probably do look at it and go, that's going to be hard to pay. I think they do look at it and then I think they want to understand what's going on and, you know, I didn't raise it at the COAG table today, the Premier of Queensland raised the fact that the big cost driver isn't not carbon, it's the polls and the wires  -  he raised that.
Now people are entitled to that information, I've been trying to ensure they get that information. There have certainly been some states, some Liberal states, that want to play a bit of a trick here and pretend that all of the cost of electricity increases is about carbon pricing, it's not true and no one should work on the basis it is true.
But 10 per cent, yes that's about carbon pricing and that's why there are tax cuts, family payment increases, and pension increases and people should look at their state governments and say, how are you helping me while I'm paying 40-50 per cent more because of what the state governments have done?
HOST: Prime Minister, how does the real Julia feel about these constant leadership mutterings that would drive anyone up the wall?
PM: Look, I'm governing, that's what I do, making the changes that will shape our nation's future and, you know, there are times when you've got to make tough decisions and they're not easy but we've made, and I'm going to continue to make, the big decisions that will shape our nation's future.
So whether it's the NBN, whether it's carbon pricing, whether it's what I've already done in schools, whether it's the new health care agreement, whether it's the National Disability Insurance Scheme, what motives me and why I'm determined to keep governing and keep getting the job done is I want to lock these reforms in and then I want to build on them.
I've got more to do, I've got more to do in schools, I've got more to do to make sure we move from the launch of the National Disability Insurance Scheme to the full arrangement and I've got more to do to make sure that our economy isn't just ahead of the pack today but it's ahead of the pack in five years time, 10 years time, 15 years time, 20 years time, when you're new baby is out there looking for a job I still want Australia to be the place that people look at and say, gee that economy's the envy of the world.
If we're going to achieve that, we've got to set that up now. It's not easy  -  big decisions, tough ones, but you do this job to make them.
HOST: Is that the answer you'd give to that question if it was mate over a beer?
PM: Yes it is. Because, look I'd probably take a few sips of the drink in between answering but the people who know me will know that I chose to do this because I was fired up about making change.
Leigh, there's easier ways to live, there's easier jobs to do, I'm someone who had alternate career pathways, I came out of the law, I made a decision to do this. I made a decision to do it first and foremost because I was incensed as a young person that there were kids who weren't getting a decent education.
I was a lucky one, you know, ordinary family, migrant family, went to the local state school, we were zoned to go there and it was a great school. I was the lucky one, I was conscious even as a young person; there were lots of people just like me who didn't have that kind of luck. The school they went to was not a good school and they haven't had the opportunity to live the life I have as a result. That's what propelled me into politics; it's propelling me on today as we go work like the future of school funding.
HOST: All these things you care about though, I know you say you don't look at the polls, I know it's not a popularity contest but you will not be able to follow these things through unless you keep your own team on side and unless you lift that primary vote of 28 per cent.
You know, what are you going to do about that?
PM: Well I'll be here going this job, governing, getting the big things locked in and the new things done. Like better school funding, like building the next stage of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, like focusing on the jobs of the future-
HOST: But you won't get to do those things if you don't put these leadership rumblings to bed.
PM: I'll be doing them and continuing to do them until the 2013 election. Then it'll be over to the Australian people to decide as it should be.
Won't that be a stark choice  -  a stark choice between a Labor Government that can point to big achievements and a clear plan to keep us strengthening for the future, and a Liberal team that's hoping in a complacent and lazy way to coast in, just saying no without a policy agenda. That'll be the choice in 2013.
HOST: On 2013, I want to ask you about your source of confidence that you'll be leading Labor then because in the past week we've seen the Chief Government Whip effectively put you on notice. We've seen a by-election in one of Labor's safest seats where you've barely held on. We've seen union leaders talk about your possible departure and we've seen this Newspoll that I mentioned earlier.
Why are you confident, what is the source of your confidence?
PM: The source of my confidence is how I know I do this job and how the team works with me to do it.
HOST: So what do you say to the people in your team who are feeling nervous and antsy and gee, should we change leaders?
PM: Well what I would say to anybody, whether it was someone in my Labor team or someone in the local community, I would say, well you know, there are times in politics that are tough and that's probably telling you you're getting the big things done.
Where would this country have been if when you floated the dollar of when you did universal superannuation or you did Medicare people were out there going gee, losing a bit of skin, feeling a bit bruised, too hard, let's pack it in? Well that's not me and it's not Labor and that is the source of my confidence.
That whilst there's pressure around and I do understand that people sometimes say a few things responding to that pressure, the pressure is there because we're doing the big things, we're doing the Labor things, we're shaping this nation's future and my confidence is we've got so much more to do and I'm the person to drive it and drive the team as we get there.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much.
PM: Thank you.
[ENDS]


Melbourne
The Gillard Government will make a $500,000 contribution to the Auschwitz-Birkenau Foundation to assist with the preservation of the Auschwitz-Birkenau Memorial Site in Poland.
The Auschwitz concentration camp is an important place of reflection and memory. 
It continues to serve as a solemn reminder of the terrible crimes perpetrated against millions of people during the Second World War.
Speaking at the Jewish Holocaust Centre in Melbourne, the Prime Minister said the ongoing preservation of the Auschwitz-Birkenau memorial site was an important way for future generations to remember the horrific events of the Holocaust.
The Gillard Government is committed to supporting efforts that encourage education and understanding to ensure such atrocities are never repeated again.
Many Holocaust survivors, including from Germany, Austria, Poland and the then Czechoslovakia, found refuge in Australia and made it their home following the Second World War.
The resilience and courage of these survivors has contributed to Australia's vibrant multicultural society.
The Auschwitz-Birkenau Foundation was established in 2009 by former Polish minister Wladyslaw Bartoszewski, a former prisoner of the Auschwitz Concentration Camp, to secure the preservation and conservation of the Auschwitz-Birkenau Memorial Site. 



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Jon.
HOST: Is this hardball negotiations and brinksmanship on your part or are you going to do a deal?
PM: This is a simple question of values and what you put your priorities on, Jon. As a Federal leader, as Prime Minister of the country, I want to make a difference to people with disabilities around the nation.
I've heard too many stories about kids with cerebral palsy who aren't getting the help they need, adults who are getting limited amounts of care and only getting assistance for a couple of showers a week, for example. Imagine living like that.
I want to make a difference to that Jon, and I've asked state and territory colleagues to work with me to make a difference.
That means they too have to step forward with some additional funds and resources. Premiers and Chief Ministers from Tasmania, from South Australia, from the ACT have found a way to do that because they've put the right value on assisting people with disability. I'm simply asking Premier Baillieu to do the same.
HOST: And he's listening to you. I'll ask him for his response shortly. The Productivity Commission says that the Federal Government should take responsibility, quote “for the entire costs of the NDIS”.
PM: Jon, I'd be very happy for you to read every word of the Productivity Commission to your listeners, and if you did you would see that the Productivity Commission talked about the Federal Government taking full responsibility in circumstances where the states sent the money they currently spend on disability to the Commonwealth and look for revenue sources to send to the Commonwealth as well.
That is, that the states would need to sacrifice some of the places that they get money from, give that over to the Commonwealth in order for the Commonwealth to fund the full scheme.
April COAG, in which Premier Baillieu participated, decided to take a different approach to recognise that this should be a shared responsibility.
The states do want to stay in the business of looking after people with disabilities. I think that's a good thing.
But there's no point taking about it if you're not prepared to step up to the plate to get it done. There is a difference between words and deeds.
HOST: There is.
PM: In the last Federal Budget Jon, I a budget where we found $35 billion worth of savings, we made the room to put a billion new dollars into National Disability Insurance Scheme.
HOST: And you've got a bit more to play with than the states.
PM: I am asking Premier Baillieu for a very modest amount of money, and other state leaders with weaker economies in smaller states have managed to step up and get it done.
HOST: And I'll ask him about the details, he's listening to you this morning, and taking notes, and I'm sure he'll have some responses in due course. But at this stage you don't conduct negotiations standing in corridors, you don't ambush people saying we're holding a press conference in half an hour-
PM: And I didn't do any of that, Jon. I didn't do any of that, that's completely wrong. We had the Council of Australian Governments meeting yesterday.
This isn't a barbecue in a park on Sunday. This is a meeting that is prepared for over months and months by jurisdictions, by the Federal Government, by state governments.
We've got officials who work with us, who meet intensively in preparation for the meeting, and people come to that table to make decisions. That's what the purpose of the meeting is.
So you've got to be prepared, you've got to have done the work, you've got to have done the thinking, and you've got to have the capacity to get to that table and lead.
That's what people expect their nation's leaders to do.
HOST: Is it just coincidence that it's the Liberal Premiers of the big states  -  Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland and Western Australia  -  that are playing hard to get?
PM: Well you should put that question to Premier Baillieu. At the end of the day, this is about values. And I want to be very clear Jon, very, very clear.
I have not done some special deal for Labor states. I know there's been an implication of that in some of the statements in the reporting.
I am asking the Liberal Premiers to do no more or no less than Labor state colleagues have done. Now in those circumstances, you know, you would expect Jon, a Labor Government, Federal, a Labor Government, state, to put Labor values to the forefront and our Labor values are about looking after the people most in need.
HOST: You're trying to characterise Liberals as heartless.
PM: But Premier Baillieu is on the record as saying he supports the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Well you can't put your hand on your heart and say, I support this scheme but somehow it is too hard for Premier Baillieu to find a modest amount of money and proportionally he's not being asked to do anything more than states with weaker economies like Tasmania and South Australia have done.
HOST: I'll take those questions to him in a moment or two. But point blank, is this Liberal Premiers playing politics with the disabled? Yes or no?
PM: Well you ask Premier Baillieu that but I don't think anybody should play politics with this issue.
We should work together to get this done. I am concerned that politics has got in the way here. I am not going to let politics get in the way. I'm determined to get this done.
I've worked with states in good faith to get it done. I've had states step up to the mark. South Australia, Tasmania, the ACT prepared to put in a bit extra resourcing as the Federal Government then pours in a billion new dollars.
All I'm asking is that Premier Baillieu does the same.
There are people listening to your show right now Jon, in the Barwon region, that is the region where the trial for the National Disability Insurance Scheme would take place in Victoria.
Five thousand people who are looking forward to better services, to being the people who lead the way for a National Disability Insurance Scheme-
HOST: And $10 million a year out of the Victorian budget.
PM: And I think helping them is worth it. I think helping them is worth it. Premier Baillieu, in a very sizeable budget, is being asked to find around $40 million to get this done.
HOST: Over four years. I'll put that to him in a moment. Some other matters for you Prime Minister, also at COAG yesterday the West Australian Premier Colin Barnett led a charge to try and negotiate a new framework for dividing up the GST proceeds.
As a Victorian, we for instance have for decades subsidised Western Australia when they were in times of need. Now they have a boom economy and they're suddenly saying, well, we don't have to look after anybody else. We want more of the GST revenue.
Does anyone ever tell them to have a look at the last 70, 80, 90 years of federation and you've got a bit of catching up to do?
PM: Well let's just go through this from the start.
First and foremost, Premier Barnett didn't lead the charge in the COAG room on the GST, in fact there wasn't discussion at the COAG meeting on the GST, but Premier Barnett did continue his public campaign about the GST and the treatment of Western Australia.
Jon, you're absolutely right, for a large number of years, decades, Western Australia was a net receiver of the GST.
HOST: Have they just forgotten all of that?
PM: Well I don't think anybody would be surprised by that. We're talking about a huge landmass, people covering that huge landmass sparsely populated, so it's not surprising for a long period of time they needed the help of stronger states to get appropriate services to their people.
Now of course we're in a different era where the resources boom is particularly benefiting states like Western Australia. Now we want to have a fair sharing of the GST.
I want Australians, no matter where they live, to have decent services, to not be able to look over a border at another part of the nation and say, gee they are getting so much of a better deal than I am here.
HOST: Why won't you just tell him to put a sock in it and have a look at history?
PM: Well what I've done, and this is not new Jon, I did this some time ago. I've said we do want this to work well; we do want GST distribution to also take into account the efficiencies of states, whether or not state governments are running their own show in an efficient way.
I've asked two distinguished former Premiers  -  one from Victoria, Premier Brumby, one from New South Wales, former Premier Greiner  -  to provide a report here.
When I announced that review it was welcomed by Premier Barnett, so my message basically, whether it's to Premier Barnett or to anyone else is we do have a review process in train here.
HOST: A quarter to nine, a couple more quick questions if I could please, Prime Minister. Ted Baillieu, the Victorian Premier, also asked you to commission a Productivity Commission inquiry into construction costs. You declined that but agreed to a lesser level of inquiry. Why not a Productivity Commission inquiry?
PM: Well I think this is best done by people who have got expertise in the building industry, and so we will have a three-person eminent panel to do this job.
HOST: What's wrong with the Productivity Commission? Don't they know what they're talking about?
PM: Jon, we have the Productivity Commission, Federal Government body, obviously very smart people with economic backgrounds.
We get them to look at a wide range of issues and they've got a full book. They don't have spare capacity, they've got a full book, they are fully employed looking at very important issues for the Federal Government.
HOST: Or are you protecting the construction unions from being done over by the Productivity Commission, which is what Ted Baillieu pretty much thinks is likely to happen if a proper report is done?
PM: Well if Premier Baillieu is saying that this is all about smashing into working people, well I'm never going to agree with that. We've seen what smashing into working people looks like in this country, we saw it in the form of WorkChoices.
So there are decent people earning their money in building and construction, who should not be the subject of anybody's political games or political campaigns.
They're there each and every day getting the job done, going home to their families at night, and a big question on the minds of their families is whether or not they get home safely because too many building workers still lose their lives in building and construction.
If this is a genuine attempt to look at some of the cost drivers in building and construction, then I'm happy to do it and I'm happy to get an expert panel to do it.
HOST: The Financial Review today reports that Qantas is looking at tying in with Emirates and dropping its code-sharing with British Airways, and it would stop being a full-service international carrier. It would just be a shuttle carrier between Australia and the Dubai Emirates hub. Is this in the national interest?
PM: Qantas is the subject of special arrangements because of its significance to us as a nation, so it's always going to be majority Australian owned. It's always going to be an airline that has particular significance to us, our flying kangaroo.
For Qantas, commercial arrangements it makes are a matter for it.
I'm not going to, you know, respond to speculation about such arrangements, but I can assure people we have special legislation about Qantas, special legislation because of its meaning for our nation, and special legislation to keep it in majority Australian ownership.
HOST: And finally, do you agree with Tony Abbott's approach to the Chinese leadership, as he was in Beijing this week, saying that he would take a tougher line on foreign investment in Australia?
PM: Well the Leader of the Opposition has gone overseas, he's gone to America and he's criticised Australia's national security credentials.
He's gone to China and now he's put at risk our economic security. What he's been saying over there in China is basically something that would jeopardise Australia's economic growth and the strength of our economy.
This is really showing, Jon that negativity has its costs. And when you go overseas and you're negative about our national security in America, and then negative about our economic security in China, that does have its costs.
And I think it would cause people to reflect, what would an Abbott-led government mean for people's jobs and economic security when he's prepared to take this reckless and negative approach?
HOST: Thank you for making time for us this morning, and look forward to seeing you one day in the studio here in Melbourne.
PM: Thanks Jon.
[ENDS] 



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Prime Minister thank you so much for you time this morning.
PM: Good morning Linda.
HOST: Now Mr O'Farrell says that he is concerned about a blow out in bureaucracy rather than services out of the $1 billion that you're putting into the pot for these initial tests of the NDIS. What do you say to that?
PM: I would say that is a cheap piece of politics and an attempt to distract from Barry O'Farrell's failure here.
What Premier O'Farrell is being asked to do, nothing more, nothing less, what he is being asked to do is for 10,000 people in the Hunter region; he is being asked to put in on average $20,700 for their care. That's what he's being asked to do and he won't do it.
HOST: Well he says that New South Wales under both Labor and the current Coalition Government have increased spending substantially for this stage on disability services up last year by 14 per cent and $800 million extra next year, 12 per cent.
He says New South Wales is pulling its weight and it should be able up to the Federal Government to fund this scheme.
PM: Well once again, a cheap piece of politics. Certainly New South Wales has increased funding for disabilities, as has the Federal Government. Indeed New South Wales is in a position to do that because the Federal Government has already basically doubled the amount of money going in to support people with disabilities.
But we all know even with that extra investment there are people who are not getting the care that they need today, there are people who are not getting enough care. That's what's breaking our nation's heart and that's why we're determined to make a difference for people with disabilities right around the nation including in New South Wales.
Now what Premier O'Farrell is being asked to do, is to find around $70 million of new money over his budget period of four years. Now in the size of the New South Wales budget that is not much money.
And if we look at other states that came to Canberra yesterday and said yes, yes we're prepared to be involved, yes we're prepared to put money on the table  -  he is not being asked to do anything more than those states.
So let's look at South Australia putting $20 million in, given how much bigger New South Wales is than South Australia, for New South Wales that would actually be $90 million of new investment. Premier O'Farrell's not even been asked to do that, he's being asked to find $70 million to go directly into care for people in the Hunter region and he won't do it.
HOST: Prime Minister, everybody agrees that this is just such a vital change in the landscape for disabled people. If this scheme can be introduced, you know the overwhelming sentiment I think you would agree is, just get on with it.
Why don't you step over the top of that, what you're describing as his cheap politics and just put the money in and sideline the New South Wales Government?
PM: Well Linda why should the people of New South Wales have a State Government that is prepared to walk out in front of TV cameras and say they support the National Disability Insurance Scheme? Why should people tolerate Premier O'Farrell positioning in front of TV cameras about how much he supports this scheme but when the moment comes from turning words into deeds he does nothing? Why should people tolerate that?
From the Federal Government's point of view, in a budget where we made $35 billion worth of savings, we found a billion dollars of new money for people with disabilities.
Now budgets are about values, they're about choices, they're about what you put your ultimate regard for and in a very difficult budget the Federal Government said, we put an overwhelming priority on getting on with launching the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Other premiers have found a way in their budget to do the same and to make the space necessary. Why can't Premier O'Farrell do that?
Well the truth is he can, he just won't.
HOST: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard is our guest this morning as this standoff continues between the States and the Federal Government over how to fund a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
PM: But Linda, let me just pick you up there because this is not a standoff-
HOST: Well that's what I was going to ask you, what can we expect, in terms of a compromise because clearly if this is to happen, if this is as important as you're saying it is and the people of Australia are saying it is then how do you, what are going into the meetings today with, how are we going to make sure that this actually does happen?
PM: Well why I was going to pick you up Linda, is yesterday we announced there will be trials of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, they will happen in Tasmania.
Tasmania was willing to partner with the Federal Government. Tasmania is very a small state with some real economic challenges in front of it and even in Tasmania they found a way to put the new money on the table.
HOST: So you don't feel the need to compromise today?
PM: Well let me just finish my sentence. As did South Australia, once again South Australia is a smaller state with a far smaller economy than New South Wales, as did the ACT. Now this is a question at the end of the day  -  we're talking about agreements and dollars and of course that's appropriate, to get things done we have to talk about agreements and dollars  -  but at the end of the day this is about values.
It's whether or not Premier O'Farrell is prepared to say that he puts a high value on starting the National Disability Insurance Scheme; that is he puts a high value on making a real difference for people with disabilities.
Now we have the Council of Australian Governments meeting yesterday. That's not, you know, just a casual chat, that is a meeting that is prepared for over many, many months by officials, by premiers, by me as Prime Minister.
I had intensive discussions with the Premier of New South Wales yesterday. He had every opportunity yesterday to say, yes, I can get this done. Well I think that there are 10,000 people in the Hunter who would be saying to him today, Premier O'Farrell match your words with your deeds.
HOST: Can the trial be successful just based on those smaller states alone being involved, Prime Minister?
PM: Well it'll enable us to trail a region, the ACT. It will enable us to trail services to children, in South Australia. It will enable us to trial our services to adolescents at that critical time when many of them are moving from being cared for and nurtured in their family home to looking to a more independent style of living. So it will enable us to do that.
Would I like to see the people of the Hunter benefiting from a trial of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, a launch site, yes of course I would.
HOST: Politically it's tough for you though, isn't it? Because if you don't, if you don't get, you know, the scheme up and running across the country the trials up and running across the country, you're heading for an election, it's a difficult election environment for you. It just looks like you've failed.
PM: This is absolutely nothing to do with, you know, that kind of politics from my point of view. This is about making a difference to the lives of people with disabilities.
As Prime Minister I said I want us to do better for people with disabilities. I asked the Productivity Commission to look at the area for us. We've been working since to make the tough choices in the budget, to get launches happening and I am determined to see that through.
This is about, you know, a child with cerebral palsy who can't get the support they need. This is about someone who's had a tragic accident, now bound to a wheel chair with a profound disability and can't get the kind of assistance which would enable them to, you know, shower everyday and just do the things you and I don't even think twice about because they come easy in our lives. That's what this is about.
HOST: And certainly we've been hearing those stories from people as well so, you know, we wait to see, are you optimistic? I mean what do you think the prospects are for more talks today?
PM: Well my door is open. My door has been open for months. My door was open yesterday at the COAG meeting.
HOST: But there's no negotiating point from your side. The Premier has to come up with that $70 million?
PM: Well Linda, let's get a sense of context here about $70 million. For an individual, $70 million is obviously a mind blowing amount of money but we are talking about, let's be clear, the New South Wales budget is a third of the size of the Federal Budget.
If Premier O'Farrell was keeping pace, he'd be putting in $300 million of new money. He's only being asked for 70. Now I think Premier O'Farrell's got obligations here, as do I. As Prime Minister I am more than happy to equip those obligations. I want to get this done.
I'm just asking Premier O'Farrell to do the same thing that Premier Wetherill in South Australia has been able to do, that Premier Giddings in Tasmania has found herself able to do. For the people of New South Wales, for their Premier that is not a very big ask.
HOST: What about beyond the trial, Prime Minister? How should this unfold, assuming you can get through this current stuff?
PM: We'll be trailing the National Disability Insurance Scheme so that'll be happening. What we're talking about now, Linda is whether or not New South Wales participates or just sits on the sidelines.
So we'll be trialling the National Disability Insurance Scheme and we will be working based on what we learned from those trials to build the scheme around the nation.
HOST: You'll be expecting this, while I've still got you Prime Minister, as we all love to say.
Caltex has just announced that its main refinery at Kurnell in Southern Sydney is going to close. The 400-plus employees plus 300 contractors as we understand it are affected, that's in Sydney alone.
What's the information you have in terms of the economic impact and the employment impact of that?
PM: Look I am aware of this news and it is very concerning. It does mean around 700 people are getting some bad news about their jobs and their future.
This is a refinery that finds itself in a very difficult economic position. It has quite aged capital, it is quite a small size given the size of oil refineries in the world today and combined of course with things like the high Australian dollar  -  that has meant that Caltex has had to take a very tough decision.
I'm obviously very concerned about the working people here who will be distressed with this news. The closure process is going to happen over a couple of years. We as a Federal Government will be working with Caltex to provide appropriate employment services to people who will be looking for a new job.
Caltex is in a position to make sure that people get all of their entitlements and to provide assistance with redeployment and assistance with looking for new jobs and we'll certainly be playing our role in it.
HOST: And what do you make of your Foreign Minister's suggestion last night with Tony Jones that there should be a ban on media leadership speculation six months out from an election?
PM: Well you know, obviously Bob Carr, like I am, is very focused on making a difference for the Australian nation-
HOST: By suggesting a ban on news before the election?
PM: I think the point that's being made and, you know, for me I focus on this every day, you're Prime Minister because you want to do the big things to make this nation a better place for the future.
You know, as Prime Minister I've made some incredibly tough decisions but they have all been about setting us up for the future so that we stay ahead in the future. We've got a strong economy now, we've got the benefits of prosperity now, we've got to make the decisions today that give us the opportunity for Australia still to be ahead of the pack in the future-
HOST: Well putting a ban on leadership speculation doesn't seem to kind of fit in that scenario.
PM: Linda, for the long term future of this country, what's the most important thing we can be talking about today? Well it's the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
HOST: Indeed and just one more if I may, Prime Minister. The Chinese investment comments made by Tony Abbott in China during his visit in recent days  -  would seem to be a fairly measured and sensible approach, wouldn't you agree that there should be a pretty close look at investment by state-owned corporations wanting to take over companies in Australia?
PM: Linda, I think we've called that one wrong. We've got the Leader of the Opposition who is known for his negativity, travelling overseas and what does he do in the United States? He criticises our nation's national security credentials. He's negative about our nation's national security and then he goes to China and he's negative about our nation's economic security.
It was very interesting yesterday to watch the Liberal premiers scuttle to one side so that they were not caught up in Tony Abbott's negativity because they know that kind of reckless talk costs our economy and ultimately costs Australian jobs.
HOST: Prime Minister, very good of you to join us this morning. Thank you so much.
PM: Thank you.
[ENDS]



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: I'm delighted this morning to be at Black Mountain School. I'm with the Chief Minister for the ACT, Katy Gallagher. I'm also with our local member, Andrew Fraser. Andrew Leigh! The member for Fraser.
LEIGH: You've been spending too much time in Queensland.
PM: That's right. Andrew Leigh, the member for Fraser. It's been a fantastic opportunity to walk around to talk to some of the staff here, but to meet with some of the students. The students who come to this school have severe disabilities.
And this school is about making sure that they get an opportunity in life, once they leave school. They do some amazing work and I'm very grateful to receive a scarf made by the students here, and we're proudly wearing them.
Yesterday at the Council of Australian Governments meeting, we were focused on the future of kids like the kids in this school. We were focused on a better deal for people around our nation who have a disability.
At the moment, the kind of care you get depends on the circumstances in which you got your disability. So if you're injured at work, you'll get a different deal. If you're injured in a transport accident, you'll get a different deal.
But for too many Australians who are born with a disability, get it in an accident that's outside the workplace or outside a car, or become disabled because of a profound illness; these Australians don't get the care they need under the current system.
Care is rationed and for many people care is in short supply. We want to change that by introducing a National Disability Insurance Scheme. By making sure that the person with a disability gets options and choices and the care and support they need.
This is a huge reform, easily the size and scale of creating Medicare, which is why it's appropriate that we launch this reform in a variety of places around the nation and then we take what we learn from those launch sites into the design of the bigger scheme.
I am delighted to be standing here with the Chief Minister of the ACT, who was prepared yesterday at the Council of Australian Governments meeting to say that her Government would work with the Federal Government to have a launch site for the whole of the ACT.
That she would find the new resources necessary within her budget to make that possible. And the Federal Government's worked hard to make $1 billion available even though of course in current times, money is tight.
Yesterday we reached agreement with the ACT, with Tasmania, with South Australia to host launch sites. My door is still open to other premiers if they want to host a launch site in their state.
And as I said yesterday, I am very disappointed that Premier O'Farrell in New South Wales would not step forward and provide extra money for extra care for people in the Hunter region of New South Wales so that they could have a launch site.
I'm very disappointed that Premier Baillieu wouldn't step forward with extra money for extra care for people in the Barwon region of Victoria.
The money that they were being asked for is a modest amount in their state budgets  -  a very modest amount indeed. And it's money that would go into extra care for people with disabilities.
But my door is still open to those premiers and indeed to other premiers if they want to do what I believe is the right thing and host a launch site.
At the end of the day, a lot of words have been spoken about providing a better deal for people with disabilities in our society; making sure they get the care they need, making sure they feel embraced by and part of our community.
A lot of words have been spoken and there have been a lot of statements of support. But it's time to move from the words to the deeds. I've been prepared to do that, the Chief Minister's been prepared to do that, now it's time for the premiers of New South Wales and Victoria to do that too.
I'll turn to the Chief Minister for some comments and then we'll be happy to take your questions.
CHIEF MINISTER GALLAGHER: Thank you Prime Minister. It's great to be here. Yesterday the ACT signed up to a trial site for the NDIS because it's the right thing to do. I've worked for many years in disability. I've sat with people by their bed spending time with them because they don't have a support package to go out and spend time in the community.
I've spent time with parents worried about what happens to their kids when they finish a school like this. As a Government we've put in more resources into disability but it's very much like the health system, it's growing at about 9 per cent per year.
And it's hard. It's hard to do it on your own. The opportunity yesterday was to partner with the Commonwealth and to create a truly universal scheme for people. For kids, for older people and for the carers themselves who provide so much of their own investment into looking after people with a disability.
So the choice yesterday for the ACT was very simple; it was the right thing to do. It was about partnering and sharing the burden of the investment into disability. And I have no doubt that in time the National Disability Insurance Scheme will be looked back as a no-brainer and why didn't it happen earlier.
But we've got the skeleton of the scheme, the ACT's going to give it a really good shot. I think the feedback we've had from the ACT community has been very positive.
People are ready for this, they've been waiting for this, they wanted the leadership on it. And yesterday was an opportunity that we weren't prepared to give up.
JOURNALIST: Given that this reform is so important, and it is a big reform, you've likened it to Medicare, if you can't get New South Wales and Victoria (inaudible) is it a failure of your leadership to get that up?
PM: If Premier O'Farrell says to the people of the Hunter region and the people of New South Wales that they're not worth an extra $70 million of investment over three years, then I think people will judge Premier O'Farrell by that.
If Premier Baillieu says to the people of the Barwon region that they're not worth an extra $40 million over three years, then I think the people of Victoria will judge Premier Baillieu on that.
For me, we will get on with building this scheme  -  make no mistake. We hit the go button yesterday with the ACT, with Tasmania, and with South Australia.
I'm determined to get this done because I too have met with so many people who have a disability themselves or have a child with a disability.
One of the things we talked about as we wandered the corridors here and met with the people who work here and the students who come here, one of the things that Andrew and Katy and I were discussing as we moved around is that there's a really anxious time in the lives of these kids and their families when they're too old for school and they've got to find their way in an adult world.
That's frequently raised with me, and it's making sure that the children here have the supports they need to be productive members of our community in line with their capacities for the rest of their lives.
That's what the National Disability Insurance Scheme is about.
JOURNALIST: Will you still move forward to a national scheme if Victoria and New South Wales don't at least join the trial?
PM: We'll keep building and we'll keep building a national scheme. But to my state colleagues  -  Premier O'Farrell and Premier Baillieu  -  you can't walk in front of a TV camera and put your hand on your heart and say “I support the National Disability Insurance Scheme”, and then when it comes to actually supporting it, actually turning your words into deeds, you say no.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one of the sticking points is if too many of the people involved in the scheme cost more than $35,000 per person, you want the states to take 50 per cent of that risk, they want you to take 100 per cent. Are you prepared to budge on that?
PM: Well in no discussions that I had yesterday, Premier O'Farrell and Premier Baillieu didn't raise that question with me. We didn't even get there.
Because they weren't prepared to do the first bit, they weren't prepared to agree  -  like the Chief Minister here has, like the Premier of South Australia has, like the Premier of Tasmania has  -  that it was worth engaging in a very modest spend to be involved in having a launch site of the National Disability Insurance Scheme. Weren't prepared to.
JOURNALIST: If it's a modest spend, why are you then putting a price tag of $100 million (inaudible) wedge the Coalition on this issue?
PM: I've got no idea what you're talking about. What we have asked states to do  -  let's be very clear  -  states and territories came to the Council of Australian Governments meeting in April, sat around a table and agreed that this would be a shared new piece of reform.
That it was incredibly valuable, that we wanted to get it done. And that the Federal Government would partner with states and territories to do it. Following that meeting, in what was a very tough federal budget, $35 billion of savings, we found the room to put $1 billion of new money on the table.
Then building on what was agreed at April COAG, we then said to our colleagues in states and territories, come forward with proposals for a launch site. And every jurisdiction that has said yes has been prepared to step up to putting $20,700 into the care package of an adult in the trial.
Premier O'Farrell and Premier Baillieu have not been prepared to do that.
Now just ask yourself the question. Tasmania's a small place; the ACT's not the biggest place in the world either. South Australia is a smaller state.
These jurisdictions are prepared to make the arrangement on their budgets to spend $20,700 on care for people in the trial sites who are adults. Why can't Premier O'Farrell and Premier Baillieu in their big, strong states do that?
JOURNALIST: Over $25 million a year  -  that's a small amount of money for them and it's a small amount of money for you  -  why couldn't you put it in?
PM: Because we've agreed this is shared business. We are building this scheme in partnership with the states and territories. Overwhelmingly at the moment, the states and territories fund disability services.
We have basically doubled the amount of money the Federal Government puts into disability services. We sat round the table at COAG in April and said, we will share this, that's what we will do. Well we're asking people, particularly New South Wales and Victoria for a very, very modest share and they're saying no.
JOURNALIST: Have you or would you consider some sort of levy or an increase in the Medicare levy to fund it?
PM: We'll find ways of funding the National Disability Insurance Scheme just in the same way that we found ways of funding other big reforms. I'm not having people start speculating and starting fear campaigns about how this will be funded.
We will find ways within the federal budget, just as we've done with the trial sites. We've put $1 billion on the table. But the issue today is not the long-term funding of the scheme. The issue today is whether Premier O'Farrell and Premier Baillieu can find it in their hearts to do the right thing by the people that they represent.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the taxpayer has paid to have a raft of Green policies costed by bureaucrats. Why can't those costings be released publically?
PM: Well I've seen that criticism from the Opposition today and I must admit, it did bring a bit of a smile to my face, that the Opposition that refused to have anything properly costed at the last election and got themselves into a huge black hole, is refusing to have anything properly costed for the next election.
Because they know they're already in a diabolical position where if they were ever the Government, they would have to cut back services to families by $70 billion.
As for the FOI decision, the FOI decisions are made by departments, this one was made by Treasury. They are made by responsible officials without any say from the Government.
JOURNALIST: Will you release the costings then?
PM: The FOI process has gone through and a decision has been made independent of Government.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: This is bad news this morning for around 700 working people. The Caltex refinery has announced that it will be closing. There are a variety of factors here that have led to Caltex making what is a very difficult decision.
This is a refinery with aged capital by the standards of the world it's now quite a small refinery, so not at an efficient scale. Obviously the high dollar has played a role too.
So for the working people who are getting this news that over the next few years as the refinery moves to shut down, that there won't be a job for them, this is a tough day indeed.
For those working people, Caltex has said that it's in a position to fund all of their entitlements. Caltex has said that it will provide support for redeployment options for some.
We will certainly work alongside Caltex with our employment services to provide support to these people to get the next opportunity for them. So a tough day and these people would be thinking now, these hard working Australians, what's my next job, what's my next opportunity.
Caltex and the Australian Government will be working to support them.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned, week after week we see more job losses  -  this week we have Caltex, last week we had Ford  -  it's becoming a growing problem. Are you concerned that's going to be reflected in the next labour force figures?
PM: Let's be very clear about what's happening here. We have a strong economy. We have low inflation. Low unemployment. People would have seen the low inflation figure yesterday.
We have a strong economy, low inflation, low unemployment, low interest rates and no-one should be talking the strength of our economy down.
I know that the Opposition, because of its negativity, talks the strength of our economy down. But our economy is the envy of the world.
Now when we look overseas we see literally millions of working people who are out of jobs and out of hope because where they live is not going to offer them the ability to get a job. We are in a different position.
Now that doesn't mean that there aren't forces of change at work in our economy  -  there are. We've got a huge resources boom. We have a very high Australian dollar that's putting pressure on manufacturing, that's putting pressure on tourism.
And so as a Government we are working to share the benefits of that boom through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. And we're working to build the economy we will need tomorrow.
Part of my mission as Prime Minister is to make sure that in the 5, 10, 15, 20 years to come, people will still be saying, the Australian economy's the envy of the world.
To achieve that we've got to do some tough things today like pricing carbon, getting the NBN rolled out there, investing in skills, so that our economy will still continue to be the envy of the world tomorrow.
And I'm determined to keep getting that work done and to lock it in for the future.
JOURNALIST: Just on your own job, and last night on 7.30 there was a steely resolve to get the reforms done. The big reforms that you just spoke of. Does the NDIS give you more determination to hang around and do the job?
PM: I am absolutely passionate about the big reforms that we've made as a Government and we've got more to do. We need to lock in the National Disability Insurance Scheme for the future. We need to get it started and then build it for the nation.
I am passionate too about continuing to improve school education and we've got more to do to make sure that our kids get a world-class education.
And we've got more to do and I personally have got more to do to make sure that kids who get that world-class education go out into an economy that can provide them with jobs and hope and a prospect in life.
That's what drives me on, just as achieving the big reforms  -  even the ones that have caused a few bruises and cost us a bit of skin  -  even achieving those reforms I'm passionate about locking them in for the future.
Putting a price on carbon, rolling out the NBN, investing in skills, I'm not going to rest until these reforms are bedded in and ready for the long term future of our country.
And I'll certainly be here doing it.
Thanks very much.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
People with disability in the ACT will be among the first to benefit from the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) as a result of yesterday's historic agreement to have a launch site in the ACT.
About 6,000 people under the age of 65 with disability in the ACT will benefit under this first stage of an NDIS.
Under an NDIS, people with a disability in the ACT will for the first time:
• be assessed to receive individualised care and support packages;• have decision-making power about their care and support, including choosing their service provider;• be assisted by local coordinators to help manage and deliver their support; and• access a system they can easily navigate and will link them to mainstream and community services.
Speaking at Black Mountain School, the Prime Minister said that the Federal and ACT Governments would work together to provide people with disability, their families and carers with the care and support they need, when they need it.
This work will include developing a consistent approach to assessing people's needs; and working with service providers to build the capacity of the ACT disability care workforce.
The Gillard Government has delivered $1 billion over four years in the 2012-13 Budget to start rolling out the first stage of an NDIS.
Around $19 million will be delivered for a launch in the ACT.
The ACT Government is also contributing around $8 million to the costs of launch, recognising governments' shared responsibility to make this landmark reform a reality.
This funding will cover the costs of care and support for individuals, local area coordinators and a new agency to manage the first stage of an NDIS.
The ACT is one of three states that have been selected for the first stage of the scheme.
The first stage of an NDIS will begin in mid-2013 and will provide care and support to thousands of people with significant and permanent disabilities in locations across the country.
The Australian Government sought expressions of interest from all states and territories to participate in this first stage.
For more information contact 1800 800 110 or visit - www.ndis.gov.au  



The Prime Minister has paid tribute to the former Speaker and MP for Scullin, Harry Jenkins, who today announced his retirement from federal politics at the forthcoming general election.
Harry has a deep love of the Parliament and its history, customs and camaraderie.
Winston Churchill once described himself as “a child of the House of Commons” and it could equally be said that Harry Jenkins is a child of the House of Representatives.
Harry is the longest-serving Federal Labor MP and the second-longest serving member of the House overall. He has faithfully served the people of the Scullin electorate for 26 years since his election in 1986. He has been a source of wisdom and guidance for new Members, and has been a force for social justice and compassion within the Labor caucus.
For every one of those years, Harry's love for his community and devotion to its service could never be brought into question. Harry could have chosen any profession or career path but he chose instead to represent and serve his community and he did it admirably.
Harry joined the Labor Party at 16 and always stood for those values that have made the ALP one of the enduring institutions of Australia. Those values were ever evident in his contributions to policy development through the committee process, contribution of which he can be proud.
First and foremost, Harry is a loving family man. I know he is looking forward to spending more time with his wife Michele, sons Ben and Emlyn, and their partners Kerry and Clare, his daughter Amanda, and his granddaughters Zara and Asha.
Harry also served with distinction as Speaker of the House of Representatives from 2008 to 2011, uniquely following in his father's footsteps in that role. He also served as Deputy Speaker from 1993 to 2008.
In two decades as a presiding officer, Harry became renowned for his fairness, impartiality and good humour.
In addition to his service as a presiding officer, he also served proudly and with great distinction on a number of parliamentary committees throughout his career, including the Joint Committee on Human Rights, the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade and the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Climate Change, Environment and the Arts.
Australian public life has been enriched by the outstanding contribution of Harry Jenkins. He will leave the Parliament with the immense affection and goodwill of his colleagues from all sides of politics. 


Melbourne
E &amp; OE proof only
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Friends, we are here today because of those who are not.
We are here to be the voice of those whose voice was stilled by the greatest crime humanity has ever known: the Shoah, the Holocaust.
It was of such moment, of such horrific magnitude, that the world can and should never be the same again.
A part of us must always be on guard, always aware, because we know the depths to which even educated men and women  -  an advanced civilisation  -  can, and did, sink.
How quickly it can happen. How irreversible the consequences. How deep the legacy of grief.
In the decades since the Shoah, this community has so often come together to pay tribute to those who were lost.
In more recent times, I have been called upon by the Jewish community, to honour the memory of two extraordinary individuals who fought against the darkness.
Two extraordinary stories that give us an added dimension of the Holocaust and its lessons for us as human beings.
I was deeply moved by the story of Irena Sendler.
She saved some 2500 Jews, mainly children, from the Warsaw Ghetto and death at the hands of the Nazis.
As Irena herself described, “I sent most of the children to religious establishments.  I knew I could count on the Sisters.”
Extraordinarily, she carefully preserved the names of each of those children by writing them on pieces of paper and burying them in jars.
Eventually Irena Sendler was discovered, imprisoned by the Nazis and brutally tortured.
They broke her legs, but not her spirit.
Indeed, she never betrayed a single life, and after the war, retrieved her shards of paper and tried to unite survivors with parents.
But almost always, the parents had been exterminated at Treblinka.
“I could have done more,” Irena said. “This regret will follow me to my death.”
But she did so much, and her singular acts of courage properly saw her named as Righteous Among the Nations.
The memory of Irena Sendler has been recently honoured here in Melbourne through a magnificent concert inspired by her selfless deeds, and sponsored jointly by the Governments of Poland and Israel and their Ambassadors to our country.
This year, we are also marking the centenary of the birth of Raoul Wallenberg  -  so well known as one of the most heroic and courageous individuals of the 20th century.
His story has been often told but never grows dim.
Raoul Wallenberg single-handedly used his position and authority as a Swedish diplomat in Nazi-occupied Hungary, to save, in just a six-month period, 100,000 Jews from murder.
On one night alone, by defying the orders issued by Adolf Eichmann, Mr Wallenberg saved 70,000 lives.
For these reasons, Raoul Wallenberg has also been recognised as the Righteous Among the Nations by Yad Vashem in Jerusalem, and has been named an honorary citizen by the State of Israel, the United States, Canada and Hungary.
I am very glad that their stories have been recounted here in Australia this year, because we must never fail to appreciate the meaning of selfless and tireless devotion to human life, and the meaning of moral courage.
Indeed, the stories of Irena Sendler and Raoul Wallenberg pose for us the question whether each of us would have shown the same determination to act under such horrific circumstances, even though others did not.
Fortunately it is a question most of us will never have to face.
But there is one moral and civic response to the Holocaust that does concern us all: we must ensure the Holocaust remains as a sign and warning for all generations  -  especially as we face the possibility of a world without the survivors.
Therefore we must be the witnesses for the witnesses.
We must be the custodians of the records, the stories, the artifacts and the places that denial can never overcome.
This is why this museum, which I was privileged to visit this afternoon, is so important.
The more time passes from the Shoah, the more imperative it is to ensure that memories do not fade. That history is not re-written. That the Holocaust and its meaning is represented to every generation. That we never fail to bear witness.
This is the mission of the Jewish Holocaust Centre and its counterparts in Australia and around the world.
But no place speaks more starkly or hauntingly about the Shoah than Auschwitz-Birkenau.
It is, perhaps, the most infamous place on Earth.
The train tracks with their deadly terminus.
The barbed wire enclosing the stark rows of flimsy wooden barracks.
The sign that immortalises history's most brazen lie.
And the low, looming buildings with such wickedness at their heart.
Friends, in one sense, Auschwitz is so painful it would have been easier to demolish it.
But retaining that place was the harder, better choice.
Auschwitz-Birkenau is an irrefutable fact. It cannot be airbrushed from cognition. It cannot be denied.
It is a place that must command our attention and timeless moral concern.
All the camps where the Holocaust was perpetrated are places that make us profoundly uneasy, profoundly uncomfortable  -  they are places that afflict our souls.
And they are places where our conscience must reside.
So friends, when the Prime Minister of Poland wrote to me requesting a contribution from Australia to the Auschwitz-Birkenau Foundation, you know what my response would be.
With the support and advocacy of Mark Dreyfus and Michael Danby, I'm proud to say Australia has joined the community of nations by contributing half a million dollars to the Foundation's perpetual fund.
The intention of the fund is simple: to ensure that the Foundation will never want for money so that Auschwitz-Birkenau will always be conserved.
We make this gift because Auschwitz is a place and a story for all humankind and for all time.
From it and the other camps, six million deaths cry out through the ages for justice and for remembrance.
The enormity of their loss must not be forgotten.
So we pledge, once more, here today, joining with people of goodwill in every country to say, never again. Never, ever again.


Canberra
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: Today sees an important win for people with disabilities. We are now from today able to give people with disabilities around our nation more certainty and more support.
Earlier today I wrote to Premiers O'Farrell and Baillieu seeking to reach agreement on having National Disability Insurance Scheme trial sites in Victoria and in New South Wales.
I have received correspondence from Premier Baillieu. In that correspondence he agrees to the benchmark we had set for care and support coming from states for people with a disability.
That is Premier Baillieu agreed to the $20,779 per adult person that we have been seeking. That money goes into care and support and is topped up by Federal Government money.
Premier Baillieu, in that correspondence mentioned the contribution from Victorian and it looks like Premier Baillieu is agreeing to the $42 million extra the Federal Government has been seeking.
I've also received correspondence from Premier O'Farrell. Premier O'Farrell now also agrees to the $20,779 benchmark per place for care and support and whilst there is still some work to do Premier O'Farrell acknowledges that more money needs to be put on the table by New South Wales.
Having received these two letters I am now very optimistic that we will see National Disability Insurance Scheme launch sites in Victoria and in New South Wales. Specifically we will see a launch site in the Geelong and Barwon in Victoria and in the Hunter in New South Wales.
Now what does this mean, what has it all been about? Well it's all been about our nation working towards giving people with disabilities a better future  -  more care, more support, more choice about how they run their lives, more options, more possibilities.
In order for our nation to secure a new system and helping people with disabilities we need to have a new national scheme  -  a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
This is a huge reform, easily as big as Medicare and it was always going to require being launched in parts of Australia so we could test the system, we could learn from it and we could take those lessons to the national rollout.
We now have launch sites agreed in Tasmania, South Australia and the ACT and with the movement today from Victoria and New South Wales I am very optimistic we will see launch sites in those two states as well.
This is a big win for people with disabilities; it's a big win for their families and carers. It's a big win for all of us who want to see people with disabilities getting a better deal in our nation. It's a big win for those people in the Barwon region in Victoria and in the Hunter region who have spent a lot of this week distressed about the uncertainty are now very optimistic they will be participating in a National Disability Insurance Scheme launch site.
I'm very happy to take question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you feel vindicated in the stand that you took and the pressure that you've put on the states? And on the money, for just Victoria, they seem to be saying, the $40 million you asked for, they're saying that's only $17 million and that they're willing to throw in another $25 million for this transitional agency in Geelong. Could you explain that?
PM: Look, what this has always been about is people with disabilities, and this is a win for them. On the figures, yes there's some details in the figure work. We've always said we needed Victoria to step up to around $40 million more and Victoria's doing that. Of course Commonwealth officials and Victorian officials will work through the details but I'm very optimistic now we will see the NDIS launch in Victoria in the Barwon-Geelong region.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the $35 million as I understand it New South Wales is going to contribute, does that mean they're going to fund a trial with fewer people or are they not going to pay as much per head.
PM: Look we've got some more work to do with New South Wales and once again we've had Federal officials and state officials meet to discuss the matter but the key steps forward we needed to see from New South Wales, we needed to see them acknowledge the full care per place amount. So, you know, each person with disabilities has special needs, the need for special support.
On average we worked that out to be around $35,000 per person per adult. That's an average, some people will be more some people will be less, but that meant that the state contribution we were looking for is $20,779.
Premier O'Farrell has acknowledged that, he's acknowledged the need to put some more money on the table. Yes there's some work to do, there's certainly some work to do with New South Wales. But I am now optimistic because we've seen this step forward that we'll get there.
JOURNALIST: Just clarifying though, which would you prefer (inaudible).
PM: I want to see a robust launch site in the Hunter and I am optimistic we are going to see that.
JOURNALIST: Can you give us a general idea on how the Commonwealth thinks the full costs of the scheme should be shared between the Commonwealth and the states?
PM: We've still got work to do on that and in the run up to this COAG meeting  this week various of our state counterparts specifically said that they did not want at this meeting to discuss the sharing of the long term costs. They did not want to talk about that yet.
Of course we will need to talk about it. Costs will need to be shared between the Federal Government and states and territories around the nation and we'll keep working on that.
But the key thing we wanted to achieve from this COAG meeting is that there would be launch sites that we'd press the bottom to go one, that there would be a start and we will see that start now around the nation  -  Tassie, South Australia, the ACT and now I'm very optimistic about New South Wales and Victoria as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Colin Barnett put $135 million, which is far in excess of any other state, to have a launch site in WA, albeit at higher standards. Now his argument is that his higher standards were standards that would eventually be part of the NDIS. But wouldn't it be good to have a launch site in WA which is at the standards that are going to be closer to the NDIS, notwithstanding the fact they're higher standards that are going to be in the other states and territories?
PM: Look I'm not sure I'm going to accept your characterisation about the standards but I would say this about Western Australia. I acknowledge that Colin Barnett as Premier has made a step forward in disability services with his My Way package.
I believe there will be some things we can learn for the National Disability Insurance Scheme from the rollout of My Way in Western Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) Queensland or is completely ruled out for a trial in the next couple of years?
PM: Well unfortunately Premier Newman has decided that he is not prepared to put any extra money into people with disabilities. I think this is to be deeply regretted particularly the circumstances where Premier Newman presides over a state that spends the least per person in that state on disabilities of any state in the nation.
Unfortunately, you've heard Premier Newman talk so you will need to raise these questions with him. He's made crystal clear he's not putting any more money into disabilities. He doesn't seem to be concerned about the fact that they are the lowest benchmark for a state.
I presume if he was concerned he'd be looking to arrange his budget to put more money in and indeed in recent days there's been the problem of Premier Newman engaging in some cut backs, including a cut back of a $6.50 incentive going to cab drivers to encourage them to pick people with disabilities up and give them a ride. So it's, you know, disappointing but I have to say these signs from Premier Newman are pretty grim about what he's prepared to do.
JOURNALIST: Can I just clarify please that this is starting in 2013 not 2014?
PM: There are various dates for the trials of 2013 and 2014.
JOURNALIST: Just going back to New South Wales' situation. If it's agreed to 20,000 but not agreed to the 70 million then by definition surely there must be fewer people. Is that right?
PM: There are things to be worked on, Michelle. You're absolutely right. But where has the politics been from New South Wales over recent days?
The politics has been New South Wales saying it won't put any new money in and it had not acknowledged the Commonwealth's benchmarks of care for people with disabilities.
From today, now that I have received Premier O'Farrell's letter we are able to say that they are acknowledging their contribution to the care we want for people with disabilities and the need to put in new money.
Because we've seen that movement, I'm optimistic that we will be able to work to get an arrangement here.
As I have described it, I think it is a big win for people with disabilities. I think it's a big win for people with disabilities because we are seeing the politics swept aside. We will now be able to get on and work to get this done. I'm very optimistic we will be able to work to get it done.
You're point is, there's more work to do  -  you're right but now we'll get on and do it having seen the movement that has come from Premier O'Farrell and Premier Baillieu.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just to clarify Michelle's point, you're happy with the $35 million which is New South Wales' final offer as we understand it?
PM: Well I don't think you should be putting words in Premier Baillieu's mouth-
JOURNALIST: Andrew Constance has said that at this his press conference.
PM: Well, let's look the correspondence; let's look at what Premier O'Farrell has actually said. There is work to do but I'm optimistic and this is the important thing here, that we will see a launch site in the Hunter region.
JOURNALIST: So you believe you can work with that $35 million to make something happen, you're not expecting anymore from New South Wales?
PM: What I've said to you today is what I mean. Officials will have to keep working on this to get all of the details of the agreements but we've seen movement, we've seen change and I'm very pleased to see that because it matters to people with disabilities.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you see this as a back down by New South Wales and Victoria?
PM: You'd have to put those questions to the two Premiers involved.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that moving towards 2018, a state like Queensland that has not stepped up to the plate at all, do you think people with a disability in that state will be left behind?
PM: People in the great state of Queensland are already behind, people with disabilities. Queensland spends less per head than any other state in Australia. That means that people in Queensland are getting less care. That's what's happening in Queensland today.
I think that's pretty disappointing for the people in Queensland and particularly those with disabilities and their families and those who care about them. So that needs change, it absolutely needs change.
When you think of the kinds of things that people say about the care that they receive today, it's rationed, not everybody gets care, many people don't get enough care and those problems are, by definition worse in Queensland.
So I want to see a National Disability Insurance Scheme make a different to people with disabilities right around our nation, in every state, in every territory, in every suburb, in every town. To do that, I need every state leader to work with me to get it done.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you ruled out a levy or a tax to pay for this but it's, the Productivity Commission says it's going to cost $6.5 billion extra. That's about 2 per cent of current spending from the budget. How are you going to find such an enormous amount of money per year?
PM: I'm very happy for the Government to be judged on its track record of working hard to fund huge reform priorities that are in the nation's interest. Look at what we did in health - $20 billion more money to the end of this decade, us stepping up to being equal partners in growth.
Before I signed that deal at the Council of Australian Governments' meeting, you know, COAG meeting after COAG meeting, year in year out, Premiers and Chief Ministers had come to Canberra and complained and there wasn't a new arrangement in place.
We worked hard to make the budget space so those new arrangement could be in place. So if you look at our record of the big reforms, we worked to do them on Federal Budget and we will bring that same determination to this task.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think a peoples' revolt helped your cause today? There was a huge public backlash against particularly Victorian and New South Wales Premiers over the last two days  -  talk back radio, newspaper front pages, they were under immense political pressure. Was it a peoples' revolt do you think?
PM: I think right around our country there are people who care passionately about what happens for those with disabilities and this in modern Australia isn't someone else's problem, it's everybody's problem.
Everyone knows someone who struggles with a disability; everybody knows, you know, a friend who has a child with cerebral palsy or someone, you know, my age who's got an elderly parent now struggling with a serve disability. Everybody knows someone, so everybody cares.
So I'm not surprised, given everybody cares, that when people saw the results of the meeting this week and they worried that people in Victoria and people in New South Wales weren't going to be, that they stood not to have their say, I think that, you know, in truth a really optimistic thing. It's saying to all of us very loudly how much people care about the fortunes and futures of those with disability in our community today. That's a great thing.
[ENDS]


Geelong
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: Can I say what a genuine delight it is to be here today, and we've met some remarkable Australians. I'm joined by Jenny Macklin, the Minister for Disability Reform, and I'm joined by our local members here, Darren Cheeseman the Member for Corangamite, Richard Marles the Member for Corio.
You can see people working hard behind us because we are in Dal Cafe. We've had the opportunity to meet with Marie, who's played such a special role in not only conceiving of the possibilities of this place, but in bringing it together.
We've met with Tom and Noel and their parents to talk about what is being achieved here. And this is really giving us an insight into what the future can be for people with disabilities.
The work of this place is to offer job opportunities to people with disabilities, to give them training and support, to give them a purpose in life; job, somewhere to go, friends to be doing work alongside, a sense of achievement at the end of the day.
It's a remarkable success story growing from the very small room that we're in now to a thriving business and cafe.
I actually asked Darren and Richard what brings people here, whether they were aware of the remarkable work of this place for people with disabilities, and what they said to me is they come here for the great food and the great coffee. That's how much of a success story it is.
This is really telling us something about what we as a nation can aim to achieve for people with disabilities. What we can do if we act with the appropriate care and concern for people's futures.
If we give them options and choices about how they run their own lives. That's what the National Disability Insurance Scheme is all about.
That's why I'm pleased that we're making a start and we will be launching sites for the National Disability Insurance Scheme in three parts of Australia. But I'm standing in a community that wants to be a launch site too.
I'm standing in a community that the Victorian Government has identified as a launch site. Indeed, the Victorian Government has been here with local Liberal members raising expectations amongst this community about people being involved in the trial.
That is, people having an opportunity to see change very soon.
We all know that that hope has foundered because Ted Baillieu, the Premier of this State, hasn't been prepared to put an extra $40 million into the services in this region for people. He's being asked to put $40 million into their direct care, and so far he's refused to do it.
I'll turn to Jenny Macklin now to give an update on the state of discussions, and I'd also like to acknowledge John Eren who is with us too.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister, and I'd really like to join the Prime Minister in thanking everybody here in this fantastic cafe for having us today, and for giving young people with a disability the opportunity to learn a skill and to be independent and to have such a wonderful chance to work with other people and to provide such an outstanding service to the local community.
This is a very exciting time in Australia. We are starting the National Disability Insurance Scheme. From July next year it will start in South Australia, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory. And we want it to start here in Geelong as well.
The Australian Government has announced that we'll put $100 million into a National Disability Scheme launch site here in Geelong, for over 5000 people. $100 million of Federal Government money is there today for people in Geelong who need that extra care and support.
We've asked Mr Baillieu and the Victorian Government to make a contribution of $40 million; relatively the same contribution that the South Australian, Tasmanian and Australian Capital Territory governments are making.
So those governments have been prepared to put money on the table. We're saying to South Australia, to Tasmania and the ACT we're now ready to start in your states. But we want to start here in Geelong, and we also want to start in the Hunter in NSW.
Mr Baillieu and Mr O'Farrell need to put their hands in their pockets and put state money on the table so that we can make the National Disability Insurance Scheme real here in Geelong. Now our offer stays on the table.
If they want to come to the Prime Minister or to me and indicate that they now have their $40 million ready to spend here in Geelong, we'll do the deal.
JOURNALIST: Why do you refuse to meet either Mr Baillieu or his ministerial representatives so far?
MINISTER MACKLIN: We're ready to meet any time the Victorian Government  -  Mr Baillieu or his minister  -  puts money on the table. Yesterday we were available all day. They asked the Prime Minister for 24 hours, they have had their 24 hours. In that 24 hour period the officials met.
They agreed on the understanding about all of the numbers, all of the details of the offer, but we're still waiting for the Victorian Government to put money on the table. The other states have put money on the table, they have a launch site. It's now up to the Victorian Premier.
PM: Can I just add to that, I mean the unfortunate truth here is that Premier Baillieu and Premier O'Farrell are not being sincere. They're not being sincere about these discussions.
To be sincere about these discussions they've got to come to the table and say what they're prepared to do, what extra they're prepared to put in for the care of people in this community and in the Hunter region in NSW.
And the unfortunate truth is they're not being sincere with these communities.
Darren and Richard have been very clear with me as local members, a lot of expectation has been raised here about 5000 people getting the opportunity to participate in the trial of the NDIS, seeing a change in their lives, and then actually providing a pathway for the nation to a broader scheme.
People were rightly excited about that; a lot of expectations being raised. Well, if you're going to raise expectation, then you've got to be sincere about meeting it.
Premier Baillieu is being asked for a modest contribution of $40 million over his budget period of four years.
Premier O'Farrell is being asked for a modest contribution of $70 million over his budget period of four years. It's no more, proportionally, than their colleagues in other states have found themselves able to do.
So we just want to see some sincerity in their approach to discussions with us and to the representations they've made to the people of this community.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've accused them, effectively, of playing politics but aren't you doing the same by refusing to meet them until they've agreed to stump up that $40 million?
PM: Well there is no point talking and not acting. I mean we can  -  you look at the people here. The people here are engaged in activities today.
I'm sure there was some talk when people decided that this was going to be a great way of helping meet the needs of people with disabilities, but that talk was followed up with action. Talk matters if it leads to action.
There won't be action unless Premier Baillieu and Premier O'Farrell are prepared to be involved in the National Disability Insurance Scheme trial in a genuine way, and that means that they need to be prepared to put some resources into it.
And I do say again on the question of this community, and also the Hunter region in NSW, I mean, it's the people of Victoria, the people of NSW, the people of these regions that have had their expectations raised by their Premiers about what their Premiers were going to do for them and all we're asking is for them to live up to the expectations that they've put into the minds of their own community members.
JOURNALIST: What do you think of the Queensland suggestion of a levy-type system?
PM: I used the word before ‘insincere' and there is no more appropriate word to describe the approach of Premier Campbell Newman here. Premier Newman's approach is completely insincere.
This is the Premier, Premier Newman, who didn't bother putting in a real bid for an NDIS trial site; who has the embarrassment of leading a state where the per capita spend on people with disabilities is the lowest for any state in Australia.
This is the Premier who's just taken money out of services for people with disabilities  -  $6.50 that cab drivers used to get as an incentive to help a person with a disability  -  he has just ripped that away. And on top of that, today there is news of slash and burn cuts in his healthcare system.
So all of this from Premier Newman is insincerity designed to distract from the appalling approach he is taking to a National Disability Insurance Scheme. Not prepared to put in a proper bid, not prepared to spend one new cent, and he's in the business of disability cutbacks.
JOURNALIST: Do you favour a levy though, or do you favour money out of general revenue. The full  -  here's what Tony Abbott is saying  -  he's saying the full scheme should be paid out of general revenue.
PM: Look we will make the appropriate arrangements out of the Commonwealth's budget without a new tax, income tax, to fund the National Disability Insurance Scheme. But let's not follow Premier Newman down this burrow.
All this is designed to do today is to get you to ask that question in the hope that the story you'll put to air tonight won't be about Premier Newman failing the people of Queensland, won't be about Premier Baillieu and Premier O'Farrell.
All this is just a very callous attempt to distract from the real issue. The real issue here-
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Let's go to the question of certainty. In fact I might ask Jenny Macklin to talk about the discussions that were had in the lead-up to COAG on the long-term funding of the scheme, and having heard this you might want to reflect on why all of this issue has been raised now.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks Prime Minister. We had a select council meeting of disability ministers and some state treasurers just over a week ago, and we talked about the options for full funding of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The Council of Australian Governments had asked us to put forward different options so we did.
Then on the Friday of last week we had a call from the Minister's office in NSW telling us that they did not want to talk about the full funding of the National Disability Insurance Scheme at the COAG meeting this week. They wanted that off the table, they wanted to focus just on how we were going to get the launch sites underway.
So let's be very clear about what we're talking about here today. We're talking about getting the National Disability Insurance Scheme off the ground. It is going to start next year in three places in Australia, 10,000 people will benefit.
We want that to be increased to include Geelong and the Hunter.
But that depends on NSW and Victoria, and it is a complete furphy for them now to suggest they wanted to talk about full funding. They took it off the table.
PM: Can I just add to that. We will do, as we have done for big reforms in the past, make the appropriate arrangements on the Federal Budget. We have funded, you know, a huge reform agenda in health  -  $20 billion more in health.
We've doubled the amount of money going into school education. We've expanded the amount of money going into skills and into universities. We've, you know, increased the childcare rebate, we've put in new supports for families and the list goes on and on.
We are a Government with a proud track record of making hard budget decisions to support big reforms and we will do it again for the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
But you just raise the question of the Leader of the Opposition's position. Tony Abbott is the Federal Leader of the Liberal Party.
Tony Abbott today should speak to his Liberal colleagues and friends. He should speak to Premier Baillieu, a member of his political party, he should speak to Premier O'Farrell, a member of his political party and he should persuade them to put the money in.
If Tony Abbott isn't prepared to say that it's wrong for Premier Baillieu to not put $40 million in here, that it's wrong for Premier O'Farrell to not put $70 million in, in New South Wales; if he isn't prepared to call his colleagues wrong then I think people are going to doubt his sincerity about the National Disability Insurance Scheme as well.
JOURNALIST: Mr Baillieu said yesterday about (inaudible)
PM: Well spin, spin and spin from Premier Baillieu to get away from one just hard and immutable fact, he's being asked for a modest contribution of $40 million.
Let's go through the spin, spin and spin. What the Productivity Commission recommended was that the Federal Government should fund the scheme in circumstances where the states withdraw from the field of disability and provided new revenue sources to the Federal Government.
So when Premier Baillieu said that did he say that he was giving stamp duty across to me, payroll tax? If he wants to do the Productivity Commission report then he needs to do all aspects of it.
So unless he's able to identify to you the revenue sources that he is giving over, all of this is spin.
On the question of, you know, figures and arrangements of the launch sites, why is it that going through the same process, the Premier of South Australia can come to COAG and shake hands and get it done, the Premier of Tasmania can come to COAG, shake hands and get it done, the Chief Minister of the ACT can come to COAG and get it done.
And with all of the resources of this great and sizeable state of Victoria, Premier Baillieu is unable to do it.
Explain that to me, that he's got less public servants, he's got less advisers, he's got less people at his command than the Chief Minister of the ACT and the Premier of Tasmania?
This is spin; it is nonsense; because he doesn't want you looking at the core issue.
And the core issue is just so blindingly simple. He's being asked for $40 million over four years in the Victoria Government's budget. That's all it is.
He's being asked to put $20,700 into care packages for people who live here. That's all it is. Anything else  -  distraction, fudge, designed to try and get our friends in the media looking at other things that are wholly irrelevant.
JOURNALIST: There's evidence that the Coalition is planning to decapitate the Labor Party by trying to weaken the next generation of Labor leaders by piling on the resources. Have they got any hope of doing that?
PM: Well it says everything about the priorities or the Liberal Party, that on a day we're here trying to push through to get more trials for the National Disability Insurance Scheme, they're all about war-gaming and the politics of the next election.
I'll leave them with the values that that speaks to  -  it's all about them  -  while we get on with doing the job for the people who stand behind us.
JOURNALIST: Just back on the, it is a relatively small amount over four years. So are you really saying that Barry O'Farrell and Ted Baillieu are just being stingy? Given the political heat they've been coping, why wouldn't they agree or is it more about the process and the way they've been ambushed a bit on Wednesday?
PM: Well I absolutely reject this spin suggestion once again from the Premiers that there was anything other than a proper process here.
We would be very happy to talk about the hours and hours and hours and hours Federal officials, state officials and Minister Macklin herself, at the table with her state counterparts, have worked through these issues.
Look, I'm a Victorian, I live here, I chose to make this state my home when I was 20 which means I've been here a fair old time but let's just put that to one side!
I've lived here for a long period of time. I understand this state well and all of the feedback I get about Victoria today is people think from the perspective of the State Government it's adrift; that decisions don't get made quickly, that they don't get made well, that they don't get made at all.
Premier Baillieu's been asked for a fairly simple decision. Now we've made a decision, a billion dollars of new money. If Premier Baillieu was being asked for a proportionate amount, he'd be asked for something like $250 million. He's being asked for 40.
Now you're telling me, a competent state premier, after discussions between officials, can't sit with the nation's leaders and make a $40 million decision, a $40 million decision? Really, you're trying to tell me that?
MACKLIN: I'll just add a point on this because Victoria and New South Wales decided at the end of last week to join their two bids together and then from Monday refused to allow their officials to meet with the Commonwealth officials.
So not surprisingly, time was lost between that date and the date of the Council of Australian Governments. Yesterday we got officials together again to make sure that we all understood each other's numbers  -  that's been done.
It now is up to Premier Baillieu and Premier O'Farrell to make this modest contribution to the needs of people with disability.
This is what it's all about  -  people with disability and their families, here in Geelong and in the Hunter need this extra money from Premier Baillieu and Premier O'Farrell.
The Commonwealth has put $400 million on the table for those two places. We stand ready to spend that money for those people and their families.
JOURNALIST: Wouldn't it be better for those people involved if the Commonwealth just put in that extra amount on money?
PM: Why should Premier Baillieu say to the people here that they're not worth any new investment from him? Why should he be able to say that, why should Premier O'Farrell be able to say that?
This is fundamentally a question of values, that's what it really is about. We're going through all of the mechanics of Commonwealth-State negotiations because people are interested and a lot of incorrect claims have been made.
But let's step back from the mechanics of those relationships and say, what is this really all about?
Well at the end of the day, it's about who you are and what you value. We have put the highest possible priority on getting a new deal for people with disabilities in our country.
We are asking Premier Baillieu and Premier O'Farrell to put a priority on people with disabilities too. And whilst the expenditure figures are modest, they're not even prepared to do that.
So what does it say about their values, their perspectives, the attitude they take to the people who live in their state with disabilities, to their families, friends and loved ones when they won't step forward for this quite simple decision? I think people are entitled to judge them on that.
And this is against a back drop where they sat at a table in April at COAG and said this is shared between the Federal Government and the states and here particularly, it's against a backdrop where they come here to expectation raise about what they're prepared to do for this community.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'll take both those questions, two other topics.
Firstly, the current works at the Lodge and indeed at my home in Altona have been decided upon by our security people and they're being worked on now.
As for the longer term repair issues for the Lodge, the timeline of that is still being worked on and it is sometime into the future. It's not even known by me. But the current work is actually some security work, as is the work at Altona.
We are here with some pretty remarkable Australians but your question has got me to focus on some other pretty remarkable Australians that we will see proudly marching into that Olympic stadium.
So yes, we're in the final countdown now. It's not too many hours before people will be able to see the opening ceremony.
I'm really proud that we're seeing Lauren Jackson take the flag and take us in. She's a great leader and she's going to be a great leader of the team as it proudly marches in wearing its green and gold and getting ready for the games to come.
Australians love sport, we love the Olympics, our athletes are made of great stuff and I know they're going to do us absolutely proud.
Thank you very much.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much.
[ENDS] 


Cairns
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Treasurer Wayne Swan and Senator for Queensland Jan McLucas today announced that Cairns will host a G20 Finance Ministers' and Central Bank Governors' meeting in 2014.
Cairns is a favourite destination for both Australians and tourists from around the world.
It has world-class accommodation, international event meeting facilities and the perfect climate.
Hosting this meeting in Cairns will put this spectacular city on the international stage in the lead up to the G20 Leaders' meeting in Brisbane.
The G20 will provide a huge boost to Cairns particularly across the accommodation, hospitality, transport and tourism sectors.
It will also allow us to advertise everything that's great about Tropical Queensland to the rest of the world.
The G20 brings together Leaders, Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors from major developing and advanced economies to address the critical economic and financial challenges facing the world.
It accounts for 85 per cent of global GDP, 80 per cent of global trade, and all of Australia's major trading and investment partners.
The G20 Finance Ministers' and Central Bank Governors' meetings are a critical part of the preparatory process to support the Leaders' summit.
As the chair of the G20 Finance Ministers' and Central Bank Governors' meetings in 2014, we will be able shape a global economic agenda that promotes Australia's values.
This is an important and complex meeting to organise and it is critical for the Commonwealth, State and local governments to work together, and that is exactly what we plan to do to deliver a successful meeting.
We will announce shortly the location for a second Finance Ministers' and Central Bank Governors' meeting. The dates for these meetings are still to be finalised.


Cairns
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: I am delighted to be here today with Treasurer Wayne Swan and also with Jan McLucas our Queensland Senator and we are here in her home of Cairns. I've been spending the last few days having a wonderful holiday in tropical north Queensland. I've enjoyed it very much.
And I'm here today to announce that we are going to be sharing the delights of tropical north Queensland with the world. I'm very pleased to be able to announce that the G20 Finance Ministers' Meeting will be right here in Cairns in 2014.
An announcement very well received locally as you can tell.
A little while back I had the opportunity to say we would be showcasing Queensland to the world by having the G20 Leaders' Meeting in Brisbane. We said then that the Finance Ministers' Meeting would be somewhere in regional Queensland.
There are many strong contenders in regional Queensland to host such a meeting, but we've decided that the best place to host this meeting is right here in Cairns.
What it means in 2014 is that you will see the counterparts of Wayne Swan from 19 nations around the world, meet right here. These are the nations that represent the world's strongest economies. Indeed 85 per cent of the world's GDP.
They will be joined by their Central Bank Governors, the equivalent of our Reserve Bank Governor, Glenn Stevens. And you will also have here the leaders of organisations like the International Monetary Fund, a representative of the UN, a representative of the OECD, as well as a number of invited nations.
So you will have the G20 Finance Ministers' Meeting right here in Cairns.
Whilst the number of people who participate in the meeting itself is quite small, it is a big event. Including media, around 2,000 people will come to Cairns because of the G20 Finance Ministers' Meeting.
It will be a great opportunity to showcase this wonderful place to the world. To showcase the delights of tropical north Queensland, to showcase to the world Queensland and Australia.
Wayne Swan has attended a large number of these meetings. He's very keen to see it happen here in Cairns because he knows what an opportunity it will mean for the local tourism industry to not only welcome all of those guests, but to showcase this place to the world.
Of course Jan has been a great supporter of the G20 Finance Ministers' Meeting coming here.
I'm absolutely certain that this is going to be a fantastic success. Over the last few days I've had the opportunity to experience for myself the wonderful weather, the delights of the scenery and the warmth of the welcome and I know we will be showing that to nations from around the world right here in 2014.
I'll hand over now to Wayne Swan for some comments.
SWAN: Thanks very much Prime Minister.
As a Queenslander I'm really proud that we're having a Leaders' Meeting in Brisbane but also a Finance Ministers' Meeting here in Cairns. I've been to something like 20 G20 Finance Ministers' Meetings over a period of four and a half years. And I can think of no location better than Cairns, than tropical north Queensland, to hold a meeting like this.
Of course, this will bring not just the Finance Ministers, not just the Reserve Bank Governors, but many other people who will be introduced to the delights of tropical north Queensland. So it's a fantastic opportunity, particularly for the tourism industry here, to promote tropical north Queensland.
I think it's going to be a real boost to the confidence and to standing of the region and a chance to showcase our reef, our wet tropical rainforest and all the other attractions here in tropical north Queensland. It's a fantastic opportunity for the region, a great opportunity for the state, and a great opportunity for the nation. Thank you.
PM: We're happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a story in National Times says the leadership saga has to be dealt with by December, what do you have to say on that?
PM: Oh look, I can't be bothered with any of that today. Any questions?
JOURNALIST: What convinced you that Cairns was the right place to host the finance meeting?
PM: Of course this place, this location has hosted international events in the past and done it very well. And because Cairns has done that very well in the past, we're very confident that it's the right place for this Finance Ministers' Meeting.
You have to have the right hotel stock, the right meeting venues, the right outlook and atmosphere and certainly Cairns has got all of that. And I can imagine in 2014 journalists from around the world are being right here with cameras like this pointed at this beautiful backdrop, but it will be being beamed into France and Germany and the UK and the US and China and Russia and Indonesia, and the list goes on. So it will be a great boost for the profile here.
JOURNALIST: What do Cairns and the people living here and the people who run businesses need to do to make sure they're ready?
PM: We'll be working through our team organising the event with local business leaders, with the local council to make sure everything is in place. You know here how to welcome people, you do it every day, and the warmth of that welcome will be here I'm sure for the 2,000 people who will attend because of the G20 Finance Ministers' Meeting.
JOURNALIST: Will there be a financial impost on people who live here?
PM: No, what people will see is people come and inject money into the local economy. People will come for the meeting of course, and the meeting is serious business  -  it's about the strength of our global economy and that means jobs.
We in Australia have a strong economy, we've come out of the global financial crisis strong, but around the world nations like France and Spain and the US and the UK and so many others, are seeing huge unemployment rates, millions of people out of work.
So the G20 and what happens at that meeting is important to the strength of the global economy, but I am sure people will take the opportunity to soak in some of the delights and that means expenditure in local shops, local restaurants and at hotels.
JOURNALIST: Cairns has been hard-hit economically over the last few years, did that help you make your decision?
PM: We have wanted to benefit Cairns because we do know that it's been a bit tough in the recent period. Tourism has been impacted by our high Australian dollar.
We're working with the tourism industry here. Indeed Senator McLucas and our Tourism Minister, Martin Ferguson in the week that's gone by were making some announcements about support for local tourism. And we're very focused on growing the Chinese market as more and more Chinese people become middle class and have money to spend, more of them will want to travel.
But I do think this too will inject confidence for the future here in Cairns, in tropical north Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Will you be asking the State Government to contribute to the cost of hosting this?
PM: The State Government is going to be working with us. An event like this requires security arrangements. That means that our federal security people work very strongly with local police.
JOURNALIST: Will it be a similar arrangement to the G20 Meeting in Brisbane where the Federal Government is covering most of the cost?
PM: We have budgeted $370 million to meet the cost of the G20 in Brisbane as well as the Finance Ministers' Meeting here.
What we need a partnership with the Queensland Government on  -  the partnership will work well I'm very, very confident of that  -  is about security arrangements and that involves local police.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, who was our nearest rival in terms of (inaudible)?
PM: I can't do any of that for you. There are so many beautiful parts of Queensland, it was always going to be a tough contest. But you should be very pleased that you've come out winners.
JOURNALIST: Was this decision made before your holiday?
PM: Can't be divulging any of that either.
JOURNALIST: Do you have anything to say to David Farley about comments he made while you were on holidays?
PM: No I don't.
JOURNALIST: On other national matters, should the Government be spending more money on our athletes or Australian coaching staff given the disappointing results that we're seeing in London, do you think?
PM: I've had the opportunity, being on a bit of leave, to absorb some of the Olympic Games and I very much enjoyed watching it.
We're proud of all of our athletes and we've got a number of days to go where we can be cheering our lungs out for our athletes as they compete in their events in London.
In terms of support for the Olympic Games, all Australians have got their eyes trained on London, and they are urging our athletes on. We as a Government have provided record funding to support the Olympics team.
But what we need to do now is to keep those messages of support going to our athletes. We're proud of them, we want to support them and there are days of the games to come for us to still be showing all of that support.
JOURNALIST: Many Australian coaches are coaching international athletes to gold medals. What should we be doing to retain those coaches?
PM: I think there will be plenty of time after the Olympic Games is finished for people to reflect on the Games that was. At the moment I think our efforts need to be in putting our voice to the cheering and sending all of the messages through social media, all of our messages of support, to our athletes going about their work in London.
There's a lot of pressure on people's shoulders, many of them very young. But there's so much to be proud of as we watch our athletes at the games.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are your thoughts on Tasmania's decision to legalise same-sex marriage?
PM: The Marriage Act is a federal law and we do have a Bill before the federal parliament dealing with same-sex marriage.
I determined that this should be a conscience vote for the Labor Party and people will be free to determine how they vote.
As for any laws that may be the subject of consideration in Tasmania, we don't have any details at this stage so I'm not really able to offer a comment.
JOURNALIST: There are calls for you to rule out a legal challenge to the Tasmanian State Government's plans for gay marriage, would you?
PM: We don't have any details on them, so it's far too early for anything like that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your comments on the high cost of transporting refugees around? Is it worth around $70 million like Nine News reported?
PM: We've given the tick to Nauru and the tick to Malaysia, we want to see action here and I know that's what Australians want to see too.
Unfortunately Mr Abbott and his Opposition have voted against Nauru in the federal parliament. So we're prepared to act, we need to see a preparedness by the Opposition to act in the national interest here.
JOURNALIST: Just back on your holiday, why did you choose Port Douglas and what was the highlight?
PM: Well I have had a great holiday, I wanted to escape some cold down south, wanted to come to somewhere very beautiful and Port Douglas, tropical north Queensland, certainly fits that bill.
So somewhere that we could spend a little bit of time relaxing, we've done all of that, so the highlight for me really has just been being able to sit in wonderful weather, watch the beautiful scenery and have an opportunity to take a little bit of time out.
JOURNALIST: Did you go out on the reef, experience any of our (inaudible)?
PM: Not on this trip, I must admit, we very much stayed put. But the reef is a magical experience and I've had the opportunity in the past to enjoy its delights.
We did have a wander through Port Douglas, a meal out, got to meet some of the locals including two local cockatoos as you may have seen.
Okay, thank you very much.


The Project
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: And from Canberra we're joined now by Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Prime Minister, some of the best poll news in six months for you, and you just got back from a week off. You must be feeling pretty good.
PM: Well I am back from leave and I'm raring to go, lots of hard work in front of me but a week off in tropical North Queensland does you a lot of good.
HOST: Now in the news today power prices. They've been skyrocketing for years now, why all of a sudden are you guys jumping up and down about it? You've had the chance for the last four years. Why now?
PM: Well we've been doing a lot of work on power prices and now's the time to get all of that work at the COAG table before me and all of the state premiers and chief ministers and to get the job done.
We want to take all of the work that's been done, put it before state premiers and make a difference for power price rises in the future.
WILL FERRELL: Ms...Mrs...Prime Minister?
PM: Oh whatever!
WILL FERRELL: Can I just call you Jules?
PM: That'll do too.
WILL FERRELL: Julia, I have a question for you. I understand your partner is a hairdresser, is that correct?
PM: Yes he is.
WILL FERRELL: I suffer from horrible split ends. Would you have any advice for me or any way that I could  -  because this hair's terrible, it's like horse hair, and I'm at my wit's end.
PM: Well I can give you some very clear advice and I'm sure Tim would endorse it. You need to get yourself to a hairdresser straight away.
You need to spend buckets and buckets of money on in-salon treatment, and you need to buy everything that they recommend for you to take home!
WILL FERRELL: That's what I thought.
HOST: Now Prime Minister, the other big news this week is of course the Olympics. Everyone's got an opinion. How do you think we're going?
PM: I think people can be a little bit tough.
Our athletes are over there amongst the world's best, trying their guts out, doing everything that they possibly can and I think we're really at the stage where we should just be cheering for them and right behind them rather than starting to criticise or question.
WILL FERRELL: Julia, it's Will again. I'm wondering, do you have an opinion on the power prices? Did you  -  did someone already ask you about that? Never mind.
PM: Someone did ask me about that and I'm concerned that with all of these treatments in the hairdressers, you know there's a lot of power being used, blow-dryers and the like, so those power price rise issues are important for you too!
WILL FERRELL: Absolutely.
HOST: Fair enough Julia, I want to get back to the Olympics though. Because there's some real pain happening there for Australians, there is, and I mean we've got a lot of silver medals but they're not good enough. You don't want silver at the next election, do you, it's not going to work for you is it?
PM: Well Hughesy, the election is a two-horse race. When we're talking about the Olympics you've got people who have trained a lifetime and we're somehow full of criticism instead of saying that is a fantastic result.
HOST: Now Prime Minister, from my understanding you're saying that these are people that physically put themselves through the wringer, years and years of training, they push their bodies to the absolute limit. Given that seems to be what Tony Abbott has done to prepare for prime minister, would you say that we should be proud of his efforts as well?
PM: No I think that we should send him to the next Olympics.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time. We appreciate it, we'll chat again soon.
PM: Thank you. 


Canberra
One of Australia and the world's most respected art critics, Australian Robert Hughes, has died in New York at the age of 74.
With his death, Australia has not only lost a frank critic and writer, but also an esteemed historian who made significant contributions to tracing and telling Australia's colonial history.
Few people who ever lived can have been so completely cosmopolitan, and completely Australian as Robert Hughes.  His was, in every sense, a great Australian voice.
Through his writing and public role, he defined the artistic taste of a generation of educated Australians.  He combined substance and style in a career of decades.
His writings were so significant and influential that the titles of his books entered our everyday language.  His opinions were so influential  -  and controversial  -  that he established whole new orthodoxies which will long be debated and revised.
Mr Hughes was a highly respected author who wrote the important and comprehensive review of Australian painting from settlement to the 1960s, The Art of Australia.
He became the art critic for Time magazine in 1970 and furthered his already strong international reputation through the acclaimed television series and companion book The Shock of the New about the development of modern art. He later created an updated The New Shock of the New, which pictured an art world swamped by money and celebrity.
His book about England's colonisation of Australia The Fatal Shore was another major success.
Despite living overseas for more than 50 years Hughes remained an Australian citizen.
Among his many honours were a NSW Premier's Literary Award for his memoir Things I Didn't Know, and London's Sunday Times 2000 Writer of the Year.
He received honorary degrees from the universities of Melbourne and New York, was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, declared an Australian National Living Treasure and made an Officer of the Order of Australia in 1991.
Our thoughts today are with his wife Doris Downes Hughes and his family.


Sydney 
E &amp; OE proof only
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Too often the cost of electricity is talked about in two completely separate public conversations.
One conversation is about power bills.  There's a very concrete discussion going on at the kitchen table, in the school carpark and in the front bar, about this.
Power bills have become the new petrol prices: not just an essential of life that always seems to be going up, but a vital commodity, where what we consume each day, or pay every quarter, seems beyond our control.
The other conversation is about energy markets.
A very complex discussion at Cabinet tables and around board tables  -  dividend policy, reliability standards, peak demand.
A discussion both informed by, and leading to, the commissioning of a great deal of detailed work on the nature of the problem of higher prices, its causes and possible solutions  -  from officials, governments, industry and analysis.
While that talk has gone on, prices have gone up  -  have gone up far and fast.
But now, we are better placed to act. 
First, because much of the vital policy work is nearing completion, including the Federal Government's Energy White Paper.
Second, because the round of price determinations starting next year will begin setting prices for years to come.
And thirdly, and importantly, the last Council of Australian Governments meeting convinced me that there is an opportunity to act through COAG before the end of this year.
This begins with a very human problem.
People are paying a lot more  -  in some states, bills have gone up almost a thousand dollars in just a few years.
It is very clear that working Australians, pensioners, the sick, the aged, people who need the most help, the people Labor Governments are elected to represent. These are the people who are feeling the most pressure.
Meanwhile, some states, like New South Wales and Queensland, are doing very well out of this financially and their revenue from some electricity assets is growing much faster than in the private sector.
So it is also very clear that the States can, and should, do more to cut future price rises.
All this means power price increases need to slow down and there is an opportunity to do that now.
An opportunity finally to get the facts on the table  -  and then to get something done.
We have a chance to make our clean energy future a smart, affordable energy future.
It's absolutely natural that public discussion of power prices today should include the facts about the price on carbon.
Australia needed to put a price on carbon pollution: to tackle climate change, to seize a clean energy future, using our bountiful access to solar, wind and other clean energy, to not be left behind as the world acted.
When the government priced carbon, we forecast an electricity price impact on consumers of around ten per cent  -  a forecast which has now become reality.
So yes, Australia did need this ten per cent increase in retail prices. And help with tax cuts, family payments and pension increases.
Achieving a price signal for big businesses to change the generation mix to cut pollution. Funding investments in a clean energy future.
That was in the national interest. 
Most Australians pay no more as a result. 
But while we were developing and delivering the clean energy future package and putting a price on pollution, something else was happening at the same time.
Carbon price excluded, the average electricity bill went up by at least 48 per cent in the last four years.
And ordinary businesses and households have been entirely uncompensated for these significant cost increases.
This is the difference: Australia needed a carbon price.
Australia did not need price increases of fifty per cent or more for households over the last four years  -  and Australians can't afford the same kinds of increases over the next four years.
Now, I know there are complex factors driving aspects of these price increases.
The catch-up from years of infrastructure underinvestment.
The growth in peak demand.
Changes which have raised reliability standards and which have come at a high price.
And of course, there's the pragmatic, patchwork design of National Electricity Market itself  -  a complex mix of co-ordination and competition, public and private ownership, national and state regulation.
But, recognising that complexity, appreciating the conflicting objectives and incentives, and taking into account the long-term factors at play, I want to say very clearly: the last four years' price rises cannot continue.
Fifty per cent price increases in many states over four years  -  linked to demonstrable inefficiencies in resource allocation in the market.
Or in this state, New South Wales  -  nearly seventy per cent increases.
With half the extra cost due to increased network charges.
People are paying much more for the so-called “poles and wires”  -  not to produce electricity but just to move it around the system.
A long term trend of price increases like this cannot be sustained.
Not economically, not socially.  No market can sustain this, let alone a market which delivers one of the essentials of life.
It's a huge cost to our economy.
Just last Friday, the Productivity Commission released its advice on the sixteen reform priorities which business leaders, state and federal leaders asked it to review earlier this year.
The Commission found that effective implementation of energy market reforms is the single most likely to deliver gains. If there are large network inefficiencies and excessive regulated prices, then there would be major resource savings and national benefits from lower electricity prices. Even small price reductions would have significant impacts.
That's the Productivity Commission's economic advice.
And it's a real threat to fairness in our society.
As a recent AGL Energy review noted, while wealthier households can cut power costs through more efficient devices and solar panels, the poorest customers are exposed to the full cost of the increases.
As a Labor Prime Minister, I feel very deeply concerned about the plight of pensioners and poorer families who spend a greater proportion of their income on power.
The less disposable income you have, the harder it is to manage large lumpy bills, like power bills.
And buying clean energy appliances  -  everything from new and more efficient whitegoods to rooftop solar panels  -  is plainly easier if you earn more.
Solving these kinds of problems in people's real lives is exactly the kind of thing Labor Governments are elected to do.
So I am determined to get a plan in place to prevent unnecessary price rises in future.
It is also important Australians have the facts to explain why this is happening.
At the bottom of all this is this economic reality: the market for supplying energy services in Australia needs to be more efficient.
Take the current handling of peak power demands.
One quarter of all retail electricity costs  -  more than $500 a year for a typical family  -  is spent to meet the costs of peak events that last for less than two days each year in total.
One sixth of our national electricity networks  -  $11 billion in infrastructure  -  caters for peak events that last for barely four days per year.
It's like building a ten lane freeway  -  but with two lanes that are only used or needed for one long weekend.
It's a very good thing that more Australians can afford air conditioners to cool their families on our hottest days, in fact it's partly a tribute to their own hard work and the prosperity we've built through reform.
It's a very bad thing that the supply side response to this is so deeply costly and inefficient, and it's a clear argument for reform to go further.
Or take the current approach to ensuring secure supply.
Here, there are big forces at play.
Large scale electricity infrastructure established in the post-war period is reaching the end of its useful life and this is a very substantial component of the network.
My challenge, to industry, regulators and state governments, is this: your job now is to ensure that you respond to this with efficient investments.
Investment which gets the balance right between affordability and reliability.
We know that isn't happening today.
New South Wales has already asked the Australian Energy Market Commission to investigate how consumers value this trade-off between reliability and cost.
The review of Queensland's electricity network chaired by Darryl Somerville in 2011 found that smarter reliability requirements could reduce the requirement for capital expenditure by suppliers and ease the price impacts on consumers.
Most compelling of all, the Australian Energy Regulator itself, in the State of the Energy Market Report 2011 released in December last year found the regulatory framework has led to some price increases that are difficult to justify consumers are paying more than necessary for a safe and reliable energy supply.
That's the independent regulator, part of the ACCC, speaking.
At the heart of all this is a simple market design problem: a clear regulatory incentive to overinvest in infrastructure and pass on costs to consumers.
Indeed, in many places around Australia, the State Governments both own lucrative electricity assets and regulate parts of the electricity market.
The comparison between the private and public owned utilities shows the States are doing very well financially out of this arrangement.
Following the recent round of price increases, revenue for network enterprises wholly owned by State Governments is up fifty per cent over the previous five year period.
This was in a period when revenue for the rest of the market players grew less than thirty per cent.
In other words, revenue to the States went up nearly twice as fast as revenue to the private network operators.
This has hit consumers hard.
A typical household in New South Wales is paying over a thousand dollars more for power every year compared to four years ago.
And while due to a number of factors electricity demand is falling overall, families and pensioners are facing higher prices  -  even for those who are trying to do the right thing and cut their use.
For too long, some State Governments have been increasing their revenue at the expense of the family electricity bill  -  that has to stop.
Given all those facts and given the regulator itself says the present regulatory framework has led to price increases which are difficult to justify, how can we doubt Australians are paying more than they should for electricity?
So let's act.
First, let's give people more power over what they pay for power.
A typical suburban house today doesn't even have smart meters to measure peak demand, much less to help people control it.
People need and deserve more choice and control.
Already, the Federal Government has taken important steps to do this.
But we want to put even more effective control in the hands of energy users, in the hands of working people, pensioners, owners of small businesses.
The National Energy Customer Framework includes strong protections for Australians who are struggling to pay their electricity bills.
These include requiring fair contracts, better information in bills, and making sure customers know what they are signing up to when they begin a contract.
It also means people who can't pay their bills will get consistent protections across Australia  -  including the option of payment plans.
And as part of the Customer Framework, the Australian Energy Regulator operates its Energy Made Easy website, providing objective, free comparisons to help customers get the best energy deal for them.
The runaway success of the “Big Electricity Switch” campaign is a great example of the benefits this approach can achieve.
Entrepreneurial spirit, media support and online information have enabled nearly a quarter of a million Australians to be offered discounts as high as 16.5 per cent.
It's a remarkable story  -  a terrific tribute to One Big Switch and to the Daily Telegraph which has sponsored the campaign.
And it's a remarkable illustration of what supported and informed consumers can achieve.
But today the full benefits of the Customer Framework and the Energy Made Easy website are confined to Tasmania and the ACT, where governments have signed up.
The other States must now get on board.
The States should sign up to these protections for households  -  and this extra information  -  today.
Particularly New South Wales, where legislation has actually passed the Parliament, but the State Government continues to delay commencing and implementing, for no apparent reason.
Alongside the Customer Framework, the Australian Energy Market Commission's Power of Choice review is looking at how the design of the National Electricity Market can be reformed so that consumers have more control.
The Commission is due to make practical recommendations for changes to regulation which can help families, business and industry make informed choices about the way they use electricity and manage their bills.
All of us  -  Federal and State  -  must commit to acting on their recommendations as soon as they are made.
And the Federal Government is directly investing in demonstrating smart electricity networks.
In time, these will allow people to have far greater control over their own household electricity use, along with far more information about their own needs.
People should be able to use what they want when they want it and cut out expensive services they don't need.
Picture a smart phone app that means you can load the clothes dryer or a dishwasher before you leave home  -  and then turn it on when a low cost rate becomes available during the day.
Or consider new technology so home air conditioners can switch themselves between high and low power mode, keeping a house cool while limiting use in high-cost periods of peak demand.
Or in the same way many people use a travel agent or a mortgage broker to get the best bargains, small businesses could hire a clean energy adviser to analyse the data about their business's energy consumption and find a better deal. 
In Newcastle, under our Smart Grid Smart City trial, the CSIRO has installed battery storage devices and gas fuel cells, hooking up existing solar systems and linked electric vehicles to real time energy information
In South Australia, ETSA is building on its early success with a more sophisticated suburb-scale trial of the practical technologies, operating arrangements and cost structures.
These technologies  -  smart, affordable, clean energy technologies  -  are real and they are operating now.
These are important new ways for consumers to control what they pay for power.
There must also be new pressures on network operators to cut costs.
As I noted earlier there is a great deal of detailed work already in train in energy policy, above all, our White Paper. 
But leaders have a responsibility to set the goals and the timelines for that kind of detailed policy work.
So at COAG we asked for two very specific pieces of work to be done.
First, for Energy Ministers “to make sure these reviews focus on achieving efficient future investment which does not result in undue price pressures on consumers and businesses”.
That is, we made the policy goal for all the existing work crystal clear: slow down the price rises.
Second, for the inter-jurisdictional Business Advisory Forum Taskforce which COAG set up in April this year to tell us what additional changes are needed to the design of the electricity market to ensure investment is efficient and to protect the poorest customers.
Today I want to drive this momentum for change further.
I've written to the Premiers and Chief Ministers to say that I want all that advice drawn together and on the table for First Ministers to consider  -  and then I want solutions on the table for COAG to adopt  -  by the end of the year.
So when COAG meets next  -  I will be urging the Premiers and Chief Ministers to consider the advice and to act.
The inefficiencies that exist in the current system cannot be ignored.
Even decisions made this year will reap benefits over several years to come  -  so we must get on with the job now.
I want real decisions this year to guide price determinations beginning next year.
My preference is to work co-operatively with the States through COAG to deliver a better outcome for consumers.
We won't lightly use the big stick of regulation, of stronger powers for the Energy Regulator and the ACCC.
But it's a stick we hold and which we'll use if required.
One way or another, we're going to get this done.
This is the future of the price of electricity in Australia.
More efficient investment.
More empowered consumers.
Real delivery from the States and Territories on our agreed priorities for change.
Much slower price rises over time.
This is the future of Australian energy market reform.
New ideas and new understandings of the possibilities smart technology holds.
Energy services, not just electricity supply.
Clean generation, productive distribution, efficient use.
A rational, efficient price signal to cut carbon pollution.
Remaking the mix of power generation ... and remaking the networks which deliver power services.
More renewable energy, more distributed generation ... better management of demand.
And in turn, this is a smart, affordable, clean energy future.
The bad news is, today, Australians are paying more than they should for electricity, because of the price rises that have come without a dollar of assistance.
The good news is, we can do something about it.



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: I'm delighted to be here in Newcastle. I'm joined by David Bradbury, from Sydney, our Assistant Treasurer who is also very focused on consumer and competition issues and he'll say a few words in just a moment.
Newcastle is home to the Smart City, Smart Grid project. It's about learning the best way of making sure we are using the power in the most efficient fashion and consequently generating the cheapest bills.
What we want in our nation is a smart electricity network which gets power where it's needed. We don't want a dumb network that costs us more and more because of more and more investment in the poles and the wires.
What's happening here in Newcastle is helping us envisage that smart electricity network for the future. It's been a great pleasure to see what is happening here and how it's informing this local community about how to better use power and moderate the costs of using power. The more information people have about the power use, the better they can manage their use and the cheaper the bills they'll get.
It's been a great pleasure to meet with Paul and Nicole and their daughters Emily, Amy and Georgie. They are participating in this trial. They are living the experience of understanding their electricity use, of still using all of the appliances that they want to use and we have been joking about hair straighteners, amongst other appliances, but using all of the appliances, all of the power that a family needs to use, but doing that in an efficient way.
Yesterday, I spoke about the burden that ever rising electricity prices are on families around the nation. Many people, families, pensioners, get a rude shock when they open up their electricity bill. They've lived through 50 per cent increases in the last four years.
Of course, carbon pricing has caused a 10 per cent increase in electricity pricing and that's come with pension increases and tax cuts and family payment increases. But the 50 per cent increases people have lived through haven't come with a cent of compensation or assistance.
I want to make sure that state governments, territory governments work with me, the Federal Government, in December to get solutions. So we don't see power bills escalate another 50 per cent in the next four years.
Part of the solution is empowering consumers, giving them more choices and more information than before and I'll turn to David Bradbury for some comments on that.
ASSISTANT TREASURER: Well thanks very much. It is great to be here with you, Prime Minister, at the smart grid smart city facility and I think we've all learnt something more about energy use and how we can become more efficient.
Obviously, the rising costs of energy is something that's impacting on families and businesses right around this country and that has been the case for a number of years. As the Prime Minister indicated, we've seen increases here in New South Wales in the order of 50 per cent over the last four years. We are determined to try and ensure that increases in the future are minimised and that families and businesses do not face those same increases into the future.
Now there are a number of things that can be done in trying to tackle rising energy prices and of course that 50 per cent increase over the last four years, that's occurred separate, independent of the carbon price, these are increases that are happening regardless.
But the things that we can do and one important thing that we can do, is to implement a range of measures that have been agreed by the states and territories  -  the national energy customer framework.
This is a framework that sets out a number of important principles that will provide important protections for consumers. They will make sure that there are fair contract terms under which consumers enter into agreements. They will ensure that there is better information in relation to both bills that are provided and contracts that are entered into, so that consumers know what they're signing up for, and importantly they provide for national consistency, in terms of the arrangements that are in place to provide accommodation and payment plans for people that are experiencing hardship.
And in addition to these important protections, this is also an important part of ensuring that all of the relevant pricing information is available on the Internet, on the web, so that families and businesses can have a look at the web and work out exactly what the best deal for them is.
It is important that we empower consumers to give them the opportunity to get the best deal. It is disappointing that in May this year, the O'Farrell Government decided to defer implementation of the national energy customer framework here in New South Wales. This is one important thing that Mr O'Farrell and his government can do to help provide protections for consumers.
I call upon him to take immediate action in committing to the implementation of these measures. He made an announcement out of the blue without any indication as to why that was the case, but the longer he delays, the longer it will be that consumers here in New South Wales have access to the basic protections that even he has agreed they deserve.
Let's be clear about this, Mr O'Farrell and all of the states have agreed that these are sensible things to do, they've just decided not to implement them. It's about time they implemented them, that's what  consumers deserve and I'm calling upon him and his colleagues to deliver just that.
PM: Thanks you David. Just before we turn to questions, can I also say this. A very big congratulations to our golden girls, to Anna and Sally. I've had the opportunity to speak to both of them by phone.
They're celebrating, absolutely rightly, they should be celebrating and we're celebrating with them. What terrific achievements, Anna and Sally have made for themselves and made for our nation.
So it's pretty joyful day. Two very excited women and very big congratulations to them.
JOURNALIST: Still on that Prime Minister, two local boys from Lake Macquarie, the forty-niners, they'll take home gold tonight. Any comments on that?
PM: I think everybody here locally and right around the nation has got fingers crossed and we'll be watching tonight.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the power price rises, there has been an historical level of underinvestment in infrastructure as we know and Energy Australia and the other power companies around the country have invested heavily in poles and wires to bring us up to the level that we need.
Isn't it hypocritical to now turn around and say you shouldn't have spent the money when it was well-known that it was needed? And also that the large part of the power price increase has also been to subsidise the cost of otherwise inefficient green power schemes?
PM: I'm happy to take both questions. Of course we need investment in infrastructure. We need the right investment, the efficient investment.
What I'm concerned about is, at the moment, there is an incentive for state governments that reap dividends from power assets to keep investing in the poles and wires, to overinvest in the poles and wires. Because the more they invest in the poles and wires, then the greater the dividends they get.
So let's look here in New South Wales, a 70 per cent increase in prices over the last four years. That's separate to carbon pricing. And we have seen a 60 per cent increase in the dividends that the state government gets. And we see a marked difference between what's happening with state-owned assets, as opposed to privately-owned assets.
And so all of that says to me we can do better than this. We can do better than seeing consumers suffer through spiralling prices year after year after year.
So making sure that we get all of it right, so the right investments are made, efficient investments are made, that we do not see overinvestment. That we are dealing with peak demand in a sophisticated way which includes some of the things that we've seen here right now.
You probably heard me say, as I walked through chatting to Paul and his family, we at the moment, do the equivalent of building a ten-lane freeway, where two lanes of it are only used one weekend a year.
That is effectively how we're running the electricity grid at the moment. I think we can do better and more efficiently than that and stop the flow-through impact of that onto the prices that families pay.
JOURNALIST: The Hunter's National Disability Insurance Scheme pilot. Are you confident that's going to be a great success for the rest of the state?
PM: I'm very confident that the National Disability Insurance Scheme is the next huge social reform we need for people with disabilities.
For far too long people with disabilities here in the Hunter and right around the nation have lived with what's a very cruel lottery. Depending on how you got your disability, you will or won't get the care that you need.
People who have got a disability at work get worker's compensation, people who are injured in transport accidents get assistance through the transport accident system. But people born with a disability, who acquire it through just an accident, at home or in social circumstances, someone who gets a disability because of a debilitating disease, they haven't got the care they needed.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme is about changing that and I think it's great news for the people of the Hunter that this is going to be one of the trial sites.
It was pretty hard fought for and I'm glad that we are able to roll it out right here.
JOURNALIST: The NBN didn't do so well in Armidale. Will it do well in areas that are larger such as the Hunter?
PM: Well I don't agree with the premise of your question.
The National Broadband Network is rolling out in various places around the country: Tasmania, Armidale, in South Australia, Victoria. Right around the nation we're seeing roll-outs in different kinds of places: metropolitan corridors, country towns.
The NBN is rolling out, and the three-year roll-out plan is there for all to see. The NBN is important enabling technology so we can do things like we're talking about today.
For us to have the smartest use of big infrastructure, like our electricity system, the National Broadband Network is an important component. We can move information quickly, about things like power usage and with that information consumers can make a difference to how much power they're using and consequently what they're paying and they can do that without any dramatic changes to their lifestyle.
Getting the benefit of using off peak prices to do things like run the dishwasher or the clothes dryer.
JOURNALIST: Overall will it be delivered on time and on budget?
PM: The Minister for Communications and the head of our National Broadband Network company Mike Quigley will be dealing with some of these matters in some detail a little bit later today.
JOURNALIST: Regardless of whether it is on budget or not, surely the tens of billions of dollars that have been spent on that are the same sort of gold plated overspending that you're criticising the states for in the electricity system?
PM: Completely wrong. Your analogy is completely wrong. We need the National Broadband Network so our nation doesn't get stuck with second-class technology. We compete with nations in our region and around the world that have got the productivity benefits of a broadband network. It is absolutely proven and clear that broadband enables you to increase productivity, that means you can increase your national wealth and prosperity. That is what having the NBN is all about. A stronger economic future for our nation.
It is also about delivering services in a new way, health services, education, and enabling us to do things like you're seeing here.
JOURNALIST: Mass job losses in the manufacturing industry. In the Hunter it was all aluminium. Are you happy with the level of Federal Government support?
PM: I am very determined as Prime Minister to keep working with our manufacturing sector. I want manufacturing to have a strong long-term future as part of our strong diversified economy. The Australian economy is a world beater. We should be very proud of that. How we came out of the global financial crisis, how we kept our economy strong, we should be proud of it because we did it together.
But there's nothing about being a world beater now that happened by accident. We had to make sure we were in this position, through thoughtful government action and working with the business community, unions and communities around the country.
We're going to take that same spirit to ensuring we keep our economy strong for the future. It is about clean energy, it is about the NBN, it is about skills, it is about other forms of infrastructure, but it is also about working with manufacturing. These can be tough days for manufacturing because of the strength of the Aussie dollar. I understand that and that is why I asked a taskforce to work with me to chart the future of manufacturing.
JOURNALIST: Some Labor MPs are not showing any ALP branding on their pamphlets coming up to the Federal election. Is Labor being coy and why?
PM: People will do their local pamphlets the way they want to do them. I have certainly had a look at some of Sharon Grierson's on the way up today  -  a great way of getting information to the local community. There is no one way of doing it.
JOURNALIST: In terms of the election, are you worried? The Libs have put a lot of effort in. They're going hard, and in terms of the state election, they did very well. Are you worried about the Hunter heartland and Labor in the federal?
PM: People will make their decisions in 2013, whether it is here in the Hunter or other parts of the nation, on who's got the best plan of the future to keep the economy strong and to make sure we share the benefits of that strength, that we bring the new opportunities that people today need, whether they're people with disabilities, kids in our schools, people who want jobs in manufacturing or jobs in other areas. Here in the Hunter we have got a proud track record of investment.
We have worked alongside this community as it's diversified its economy so we can see the sorts of strengths that are being brought to bear in this centre. Your expertise in renewables, the presence of the CSIRO here. The importance of the University to your economic future.
All being brought together with private sector companies to do things like this Smart City Smart Grid initiative, so we've brought that passion to working with the Hunter and we will be continuing it, and in 2013 people will exercise their right to decide.
JOURNALIST: Will you be campaigning in the Northern Territory?
PM: The Northern Territory election will be decided on Territory issues. People in the Territory know that they're voting for who will be their local government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Paul Henderson hasn't invited you up for the campaign. Is that because he thinks you'll do more harm than good?
PM: It's because Territory election are about Territory issues. The people of the Northern Territory understand that, and the choice they will be making is between Paul Henderson and his team or the alternative.
JOURNALIST: Business and industry groups in the Hunter say we're the powerhouse of the state and for some parts of the rest of the country. Do you feel happy with the amount of money the Hunter sees coming back into the region?
PM: We have invested $2 billion into Newcastle. $2 billion into Newcastle and further investments into the Hunter region because of the importance of these communities to our nation. So it's been investment in hard infrastructure, like the Hunter express way, it's been investment in local schools, because of their importance to the economic future of this place and our nation. It's been investments into universities, into health, into things like this like this Smart City, Smart Grid project, a hundred million dollar investment.
I'm very proud of the investments we've made in this area to enable it to keep leaping ahead. I've always felt when I've visited here that there's a very special combination here in the local community, a very special combination about being prepared to deal with the challenges of change, about bringing together with that sort of courageous spirit, the intellectual powerhouse of the university, the can-do spirit of the business community, the community leadership of which Sharon Grierson has been such an important part, so it's a great place and it's got a great future.
Thank you very much.



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Prime Minister, good morning and thank you for giving us some of your time.
PM: Good morning John and power prices are on my mind but your birthday's on my mind too, so happy birthday to you.
HOST: Thank you very much, that's very kind of you Prime Minister.
Is this as much about sending a message to the caucus that you're in for the long run, or is it about rattling Barry O'Farrell's cage?
PM: John, it's about the power bills that people around the country are paying, particularly in New South Wales. Before we put a price on carbon, people had seen 70 per cent increases in their power bills  -  70 per cent.
That means for families that they've seen hundreds, indeed thousands of extra dollars going out the door in their power bill. Now those kind of big price rises are about some complicated factors but we need to act on them.
One is there's an incentive in the system to keep investing in more and more and more poles and wires, and the more you invest the more the state government earns. That's money straight out of the wallets and purses of the people of New South Wales into Barry O'Farrell's state budget.
I think we need to do better than that and I'm determined to do better than that in December this year when the Council of Australian Governments next meets.
HOST: In your speech yesterday you really gave it to the states over big hikes in power prices over the past few years, but that's a speech  -  good as it was  -  but it's a speech you could have made two years ago. Why did you wait until now?
PM: We've been working through our Energy Minister, through Martin Ferguson, on a whole lot of important technical work about what's driving power prices.
But the time to act is coming because the power prices determinations made in the first six months of next year will determine power prices for the next five years. So, the moment to act is now.
We've got the benefit of all of that technical work, which is coming up to us, but we need to make decisions and find solutions this year to affect the power price determination next year.
HOST: Okay, when I was looking at information yesterday, when we went to the website of the Energy Policy Institute of Australia, they'd indicated that the address was going to be given by the Energy Minister, the aforementioned Martin Ferguson. Why did you feel the need to replace him?
PM: I determined to do it because of the importance of this issue, and my real sense of urgency that as Prime Minister, working with state premiers and chief ministers, we have to act in December this year.
So I wanted to send out that message very loud, very clear, and also be very clear with people about what's driving power prices and where some potential solutions are to the increases that we continue to see.
John, to give you just a very simple example, there's a customer framework, a national customer framework which ensures people get better information, more power over their power bills if you like.
At the moment we're waiting for states to endorse that framework and to give people the benefit of a website which helps them understand their power use and moderate their power use. So let's get on with that.
There's no reason why the New South Wales government couldn't act on that today.
HOST: Okay, I'm just interested to know why you felt the need to replace Martin Ferguson. Did you think that you were better equipped to deliver the message?
PM: I wanted to deliver the message as Prime Minister because it's about what we do at the Council of Australian Governments meeting at the end of the year in December, the meeting I attend as Prime Minister with all of the Premiers and Chief Ministers.
HOST: You see even the respected TD Securities price index shows the impact of the carbon tax in just its first month of operation is having an effect. It's found a jump of 14.9 per cent in power prices and a jump of 10.3 per cent I think for gas prices, and they say almost all of those hikes are due to the carbon tax. How do you respond to that?
PM: Well we've always been upfront with people that the impact of carbon pricing on electricity bills was going to be 10 per cent. And it is 10 per cent.
And that's why we've also given people tax cuts, pension increases, family payment increases and for the majority of Australian households that means that they'll end up square or in front.
My concern is the increases we've seen around the country, even before carbon pricing, 50 per cent increases for families, 70 per cent in New South Wales and not one cent of assistance to help people deal with them coming from state governments who are reaping very good dividends out of these power assets.
HOST: Okay, now your own energy regulator, the Federal Government's Australian Energy Regulator, has complained it can do very little to keep prices down. What's the point of having a regulator if they can't regulate?
PM: The regulator has made the point that there's some limits on its powers and it is particularly concerned about the fact that when power companies put forward issues for it to make a determination on, that once it's made the determination then they can cherry-pick which bits they want to accept and which bits they want to appeal.
John, I want the regulation to work. I want it to work for Australian families, I want it to work so we don't, over the next four years, see another 50 per cent increase in power prices.
That's why I gave the speech yesterday. That's why I'm making it very clear what is driving power prices, and it's why I'm very determined that in December we find solutions that make a difference for the prices determinations next year.
HOST: Okay, what should Barry O'Farrell be doing? What would please you the most, not that he wants to please you I imagine, but what would please you the most from the O'Farrell Government?
PM: Well step one he could implement today the customer framework I talked about, so people have more control over their power bills. There's nothing stopping him doing that today John, and he should get that done.
Number two, he should acknowledge the full facts of power prices in New South Wales to the people of New South Wales. He should explain the big dividends that the New South Wales Government is getting.
He should explain that those dividends are higher than private sector power assets are paying, and he should explain why there is that big difference.
Why all of that money is going into the New South Wales government budget rather than staying in the budgets of families around New South Wales.
And he should say that he's prepared to work with me through the Council of Australian Governments to make a difference to the way power prices are rising in New South Wales.
HOST: It's very interesting to note that the Opposition has said that it might consider more regulation of the energy sector. Would you be willing to work with Tony Abbott to bring prices down?
PM: All I ever hear from the Opposition is, say no to this, that, the other thing. All they do is say no to stuff so I've not heard any positive proposals from them that makes any sense and I'm not expecting to, John.
I won't wait for them to change the habit of a lifetime. I'll just be getting on with the job.
HOST: You make me laugh sometimes, Prime Minister. The habit of a lifetime! But if the habit of a lifetime did happen to be changed would you work with Tony Abbott to bring prices down?
PM: Look John, let's not deal with figments of people's imagination. I mean there's no reason to assume Tony Abbott's going to do anything other than say no. That's what he always does.
HOST: Will you abandon the Malaysian solution since it's pretty clear neither the Coalition about whom we are speaking or the Greens are going to support it?
PM: I asked Angus Houston and some very eminent Australians to work together and provide the nation with a way forward.
I know Australians want to see action here, they're sick of the politicking, they want to see change, they want to see a solution and I want to see that too. I asked Angus Houston, a very eminent Australian-
HOST: Terrific man.
PM: A terrific man, former Chief of the Defence Force, to provide us with a report and a way forward and we'll be getting that in the coming days.
HOST: Okay, the whole point of the carbon tax really is to raise electricity prices, isn't it?
PM: The point of putting a price on carbon pollution is to reduce carbon pollution and that's exactly what pricing carbon will do.
We as a nation will generate less carbon pollution. The equivalent of 160 million tonnes of less carbon pollution will be in our atmosphere in 2020. That's like 45 million cars coming off the road.
It's a big difference that we will achieve through the carbon pricing plan that we've put in place.
HOST: If the carbon tax however, did not raise electricity prices it would be doing its job would it?
PM: We've always been clear John, the purpose of putting a price on carbon is to send a price signal to the big polluters that they need to reduce the amount of carbon pollution that they're generating and they will.
We've always been very clear too that that would flow through to some prices that people pay  -  households pay, you pay, I pay  -  and that there would be a 10 per cent impact on electricity prices.
That's why it's come with tax cuts and family payment increases and pension increases.
What's worrying me, clearly and what I was speaking about yesterday and you and I have been talking about today is the huge power prices bills people have seen without one cent of assistance.
HOST: Electricity prices when you look at it, and I'm looking at it now, have increased by something like 60 per cent under you and Kevin Rudd. Pretty dramatic increase.
PM: Well let's be clear on what's driving the increase and where they come from. The figure is 70 per cent in New South Wales  -  70 per cent in four years. During that four years the dividends to the New South Wales state government have gone up by 60 per cent.
We are continuing to see big investments, indeed I believe over-investments in polls and wires because there is a policy problem at the heart of this, John.
The more that gets invested in the polls and wires the more the state government earns. So the incentive is to just keep investing, indeed over-investing, to earn more money.
And who's paying all of that price? Well it's the families of New South Wales.
HOST: Okay, just quickly back to the Malaysian solution that is talked about ad nauseum. What is the solution to the Malaysian solution?
PM: I don't quite understand you question, John I'm sorry.
HOST: If the Greens and the Coalition are not supporting it, where do you go from there? What can you do about it?
PM: Well I am asking all Members of Parliament, irrespective of their political party, to do something which I think is pretty easy to do, which is to respect the views of an eminent Australian, Angus Houston, when he gives them.
We should respect those views when Angus Houston and his team gives their report. I think every parliamentarian should show the utmost respect for what I am sure will be a very high quality piece of work because it's been done by such high quality people.
HOST: Yes, I'm getting the impression that you feel that Angus Houston, deliberately or not deliberately, will come out on your side in this discussion.
PM: Angus Houston will come out with what he thinks is best and it's not a matter for me to have a view about that. Angus Houston and his panel have proceeded completely independently of government and that's appropriate.
HOST: Yes, it is appropriate and I think everybody would agree with both you and I that you couldn't get a better fellow than Angus Houston. I think he's a terrific man, terrific Australian and it'll be interesting to see how they work it all out.
PM: It will, John and I want to be very clear. I will be briefed on the Houston report when Angus Houston chooses to do it and having briefed me he will brief the Opposition and other Parliamentarians.
This isn't about a report that goes to Government and we get to sit on it or whatever.
I deliberately set up a panel of eminent Australians to act independently and to give their views fearlessly and frankly to every parliamentarian.HOST: As we constantly say, and you agree, it is a democracy in which we live so if other parties don't agree they shouldn't be forced to agree should they?
PM: The issue here is, if you agree, as we are both agreeing now, that Angus Houston is an eminent Australian, that having been the former head of the Defence Force he is bringing special expertise to bear, that the people working alongside him have expertise in refugee issues and in foreign policy issues then John, doesn't the question really become why wouldn't you listen with a great degree of regard and seriousness to what they have to say?
HOST: Well I think it would be eminently sensible to do so.
Just on another subject. There's been significant community angry over alleged cover-ups by the Catholic Church of Paedophile priests. Do you support the idea of a Royal Commission into this scandal and it's an outrageous scandal?
PM: I think that there are a variety of those ways people are going to get the facts here and get hopefully some sense of redress here.
A number of individuals of course have their own court cases, there are some inquiries for example in Victoria there is a state parliamentary inquiry is my understanding.
So John, yes, when we as human beings whatever position we hold in Australia today as human beings when you hear about some of the things that happened and happened to children it breaks your heart.
And it's important that those individuals get support and get some sense of recognition of the wrong done to them.
The Catholic Church I believe recognises that and the need for that and people are working through their own individual proceedings in some cases.
HOST: Okay, so if a Royal Commission you believe is necessary you would certainly support it?
PM: Look I don't have an intention of having a Royal Commission, John. But I do believe that every individual who has something to say about what's happened to them, every individual who's suffered needs to be treated respectfully and needs to have their suffering acknowledged.
HOST: Okay, on another subject how would you rate Australia's Olympic efforts so far?
PM: Well it's been a great sense of delight overnight. The women have done us proud, they certainly have and that's been fantastic to share in by watch some pretty remarkable TV and my sense is we should just be behind our athletes with all of our force and enthusiasm as they keep participating in these Games.
HOST: I think we're doing tremendously well and I think we are showing great style to the rest of the world and I think that that's very important when you consider the size of the country.
PM: Our athletes are people who've laboured so hard, often sacrificed so much in their own personal lives to get to the Games, to be competing amongst the world's best so let's just be cheering them on.
HOST: And finally, I like that colour blue you're wearing today.
PM: Oh thank you John!
HOST: It's a lovely blue, I'd like to have a car that colour.
PM: Well I can't promise to buy you one for your birthday but I'll forever think of it as, you know, John Laws' birthday blue.
HOST: Good on you Prime Minister. Thank you very much for your time. It's always a pleasure to talk to you. We mightn't always agree politically but it's always a delight to be able to talk to you.
PM: Thanks John. 



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Good morning Prime Minister and welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning Sabra.
HOST: I'll get to the electricity debate in a moment. But first up - is Tony Abbott right, Paul Henderson doesn't want you anywhere near the Northern Territory because you're the equivalent of political kryptonite?
PM: Paul Henderson is fighting a Territory election on Territory issues. The people of the Northern Territory are smart enough to know that they're voting for their local government.
HOST: The WA Energy Minister says you've got the credibility of a cane toad over your threat on electricity power pricing here, that you are just passing the buck on price hikes due specifically to the carbon tax.
PM: Well it seems to me if he's using terminology like that he's not trying to win the argument.
We've been upfront that carbon pricing was going to make a 10 per cent difference to electricity prices.
And it will and that's why we've given people tax cuts and family payment increases and pension increases. And that means most Australians will come out either square or in front.
But of course we've seen spiralling electricity prices well before there was a price on carbon - 50 per cent around the country over the last four years, 70 per cent in New South Wales.
Hitting people hard, And particularly hitting the poorest hard because it's those people who have got less room in their budget and less ability to buy things like solar panels and white goods that are more energy efficient.
That's why at the end of this year I want action on some of the true drivers of spiralling electricity prices.
HOST: Okay well you say that some states have been effectively price gouging, gold plating their pole and wire distribution systems. Why then did you say nothing about it when Labor was in power in New South Wales and Queensland?
PM: We've had a lot of technical work happening over the past few years on all of these issues. But now is the moment to act.
Now is the moment to strike because during the first part of next year price determinations will be made which will affect power prices for the next five years.
So my aim is to uplift this from all the technical work which has been proper and necessary and to bring it to the table of the Council of Australian Governments in December to get action.
And the big drivers here of costs for electricity, we've got big investments in the poles and the wires.
There's basically a problem, a policy problem here, that the more state governments allow investments in the poles and the wires, the more they earn, the more goes into their budget out of family budgets. We've got to solve that policy problem.
HOST: But again I bring you back to that point - was it an inconvenient truth to raise this issue while Labor was in power in Queensland and New South Wales?
PM: No Sabra, it's the right time. We've had our energy ministers working hard, Martin Ferguson's done a power of work.
But we are moving to the stage now where decisions will be made that affect power prices for the next five years. I am not having those decisions made without getting state premiers to the table to address their role in power price rises.
And let's look for example at New South Wales. They've enjoyed a 60 per cent increase in the dividend they get from their state owned electricity assets over the last four years.
That's money coming out of the budgets of families into Barry O'Farrell's budget.
HOST: The states correctly point out that ultimately it is a federal regulator who ticks off and signs off on these prices, and in June last year the national energy regulator warned that he didn't have the power specifically to tackle this issue. So why has it taken you 14 months to actually say something about it?
PM: We've been working on precisely this point about the federal regulator and what the regulator can and can't do.
And there is a problem with that at the moment that's been the subject of a review, and that is that the regulator can make determinations and then the power company interests can cherry-pick which bits to accept and which bits to appeal.
That is a policy problem and it does need to be resolved.
HOST: Given what the states had to say yesterday it seems when you need to change the role of the energy regulator you need to get all the states and territories on board this to approve it. Given the wall of noise that we heard from them yesterday, might you have to carry out your threat to wield this big stick and actually force them to cut their investments? Is that the likely outcome of what's going to happen?
PM: Sabra I expect that there's going to be plenty of shouting and some of that shouting's already started today.
Despite all of that shouting I'm determined that in December we get action here to make a difference for power price rises for families.
This is hitting family budgets. It's hitting people hard and I want to see action.
I always want to see action through cooperation. So despite all of the shouting my aim will be to get people to that table, working together to get solutions. But if that proves impossible then we'll find some other way to get this done.
HOST: So it is a serious threat?
PM: Of course. My aim here is looking after families who are worried about constantly escalating power prices, families that have seen $1,000 increase per year in their power bill. They're who I want to help out here.
Sure, I'd like it if state premiers could stop some of the shouting and work together, and I suspect that's where we will get to. State premiers actually realise this is an issue.
HOST: But the carbon price is also adding to this pressure on families as well.
PM: Well Sabra let's be very clear. We put a price on carbon and gave tax cuts and gave family payment increases and gave pension increases, and for most Australian households that means they come out square or in front.
Round the country, New South Wales 70 per cent increases in power prices, not one cent of assistance from the New South Wales Government, and so it goes. That's the problem.
HOST: Following the logic of your argument you seem to be suggesting here that Australia does have a gold plated electricity system. You say that that's not absolutely essential. So are you proposing then that more brown-outs are acceptable to Australia, a first world country, and specifically Australia which experiences so many days where the mercury pushes 40 degrees?
PM: We're a smart people, a very innovative people. And I think we can do better on questions of reliability and meeting peak demand than doing the equivalent in electricity of building a 10 lane freeway where two of the lanes only get used one weekend a year. We don't do that in our road system.
I think we can find better ways of meeting peak demand, keeping reliability, but doing better on prices than we are now.
This is making a big difference for families; $11 billion of investment in the network to meet peak demand, an impact of around $500 per year in family bills. I think we can do better than that. We can get smarter than that.
HOST: But if there's lower investment in the poles and wires and not the gold plated system, Australia might face more brown-outs.
PM: Sabra we need the right investment so we have a reliable system. We don't need over-investment that hits family budgets.
HOST: Obviously this morning is an exception with Sally Pearson and Anna Meares winning gold, but as Prime Minister are you worried, as the Australian Olympic Committee freely admits, that Australia's performance at this Olympics so far has been below expectations?
PM: I think it is too soon for all of this. What I want to be doing now, just as an Aussie let alone as Prime Minister, is cheering on the remarkable things our athletes are doing.
And the women have done us proud overnight. So let's share in that joy, share in the expectation of more fantastic performances to come.
There will be plenty of time afterwards to work through everything that people want to discuss in sport. We've proudly provided record funding.
But really now's the time to just be experiencing some sense of joy as we share in our athletes' delight, and I think we've got a lot more wonderful performances to look forward to.
HOST: Do you sometimes worry that as a nation that really loves its sports that sometimes Australia places too much emphasis on winning, actually winning?
PM: People want to see our athletes do well. They want to share in the triumphs. They want to also feel some of the heartache.
One of the reasons I think we're so attached to sport is it's an incredibly emotional business. And you get to share in the emotions; you get to feel the joy, you get to feel the pain.
That's why it's such gripping TV and why we're all just so addicted to watching the Olympics on our TV screens.
But you know on the sort of policy issues about sport, there's plenty of time for that. Let's just get into the spirit of it. And what a wonderful night we've had.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for talking to AM.
PM: Thanks Sabra.



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Julia Gillard good morning. Welcome back to Mornings.
PM: Good morning Linda.
HOST: Now, the Chairman of the Australian Energy Regulator has been telling the Herald that Australian consumers are paying too much for power. Who or what do you blame exactly?
PM: That's a very important intervention in this debate. You're right the regulator has said people are paying too much for power and when the people of New South Wales have seen 70 per cent increases over the last few years it's not surprising that he's saying that.
He's pointing to the regulatory arrangements, these are shared between the Federal Government and the states. Now, of course that's one thing that needs to be squarely on the table as we move towards the December meeting of the Councils of Australian Governments where I want to see action.
And Linda I am heartened that today both the New South Wales and Queensland Energy Ministers have shown some movement here. Now we've got to take that movement build on it and translate it into action that makes a difference to power price rises.
HOST: Tony Abbott this morning on AM said the arguments about the regulator and polls and wires and so forth are ‘a furphy' here's a little of what he had to say.
ABBOTT GRAB: This is a fabrication by the Prime Minister. This is an absolute furphy from the Prime Minister. Why would be believe the Prime Minister now about so-called gold plating of power infrastructure when she's never talked about it for the last five years?
HOST: Julia Gillard, it has been on the agenda for a while and you say 70 per cent increases in New South Wales over the last few years, Labor Governments were in power here. Why haven't you spoken about this before?
PM: Well actually I did speak about these matters in 2010, but really the timing of this debate is vital because of two reasons.
First, we have been commissioning a whole lot of technical work that we need. Our Minister for Energy, Martin Ferguson has been doing that and all of that technical work is coming to fruition now.
And second, in the first six months of next year, price determinations will be made which effect the next five years. That's why this is the window with the technical work coming on stream for us to act and to make a difference to those price determinations.
And on the Leader of the Opposition's intervention which you've just played to me, he's at odds with his state Liberal colleagues. The state Ministers for Energy in New South Wales and Queensland who in today's newspapers are recognising that there is a problem here.
So it seems that the Leader of the Opposition is the only person who's denying that there is a problem with the current system and that that's causing a problem for families, for pensioners, for people around the nation who are seeing rapidly escalating power bills.
HOST: The regulator says his powers need to be overhauled to stop the networks from over-investing. You've said that you'll act by December if reform isn't agreed. Now as you say, we've seen some movement by the states.
But what will you do if you can't get the agreement that you want.
PM: Well my aim is going to be to get agreement and we are seeing some movement from the states and that's good. Linda, I'm not going to outline today all of the Government's possibilities and options here but what I can certainly say to you is, no change is not on the table.
We have to see change. I would prefer to see that change done in a cooperative way. The recognition that there are problems with the way in which the poles and wires are being invested in from the Queensland and state ministers today is welcome. Let's build on that and get an agreement for change in December.
HOST: Prime Minister, if you're happy to take a couple of calls, we've got a couple waiting.
PM: Sure.
HOST: John is on the line. Good morning John. What do you want to put to the Prime Minister?
CALLER: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning John.
CALLER: My question relates to state and Commonwealth partnership in relation to development of, if you like, a better electrical distribution grid and I'm wondering if the states, given the revenue that they're getting as a result of the legislation that they have in place at the moment, adequately partnering with the Government to develop smart electrical grids that support distributor energy models?
HOST: Smart grids, Prime Minister.
PM: Smart grids, I had the pleasure of looking at the operation of a smart grid in Newcastle yesterday.  We've facilitated the development of that smart grid through a $100 million investment and it does enable the people participating in the trial of it to do amazing things.
I met with a family that's got a fuelled cell in their house and that is generating energy for them. It means that their power bills are not what they used to be.
The smart grid is also enabling people to get real time information about their energy usage and to therefore make decisions about how they're going to use energy rather than just getting one bad shock when they open up the power bill.
So, I'm a big supporter of consumer information, of smart grids, I actually want to see action now. We've got a national consumer framework which would give people better information. We're pressing the states to sign onto it including New South Wales which has failed to sign on for no technical reason. It could sign on today.
HOST: Prime Minister, Sue is on the line too. I think Sue has a question that sort of relates to other ways of looking at this problem. Good morning Sue.
CALLER: Good morning, good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Sue.
CALLER: Why are we not seriously discussing and encouraging our long term, our move towards a solar industry? That seems to be the most obvious choice to head towards  -  educating us as consumers and helping and encouraging the industry.
HOST: What do you mean by serious encouragement, Sue?
CALLER: Well putting money towards solar industry and seriously helping us, making us use our solar resource.
HOST: Prime Minister?
PM: Sue, that's a good observation. We are a nation of abundant sunshine. We've also got access to other sources of renewable energy  -  wind power, tidal, geothermal.
We have put $10 billion into the Clean Energy Finance Corporation and we've also been a significant investor in a body we're calling ARENA. ARENA is about catalysing the science, the developments that we need in renewable and clean energy and the Clean Energy Finance Corporation is about partnering with the private sector to get these new investments over the line so that we can see more widespread development of renewable and clean energy sources including importantly solar.
HOST: The power companies though, Prime Minister, are very powerful aren't they and the coal lobby, you know, in terms of encouraging alterative energies you've got those big networks, those big companies on your back. They've been sitting there for decades not improving networks, raking in the money. How is it that we could expect them to begin to adjust to a new environment if you like and play a part in the new structure of our energy supply?
PM: Firstly Linda, we've had a big fight and we've won it in favour of renewable energy and a cleaner energy mix for the future and that's putting a price on carbon. Putting a price on carbon, reducing carbon pollution, will drive our nation towards a clean energy future and Linda, you know as as someone who's in the media business and commentating everyday how hard that fight has been. But we've won through because it's the right thing to do for our nation's future.
I'm determined to also win through on a fight which is about the real drivers of rapidly escalating power prices.
HOST: Are you promising that consumers will have lower power bills, Prime Minister?
PM: This is about future price determinations, it's about not seeing the rapid rate of increase that we've seen in the past. I mean, 70 per cent in New South Wales; we cannot see in the years to come another 70 per cent and then another 70 per cent.
So I want to make a difference to the price determinations that will happen next year.
Then of course there are the issues of smart grids and the, you know, distributed networks and different ways of generating power which we've talked about as well and some of those new technologies and more information for consumers can enable people to actually realise a reduction in their power usage and power bill  -  the power that comes through the grid being reduced.
HOST: One of our texters earlier today said that she was pleasantly surprised when she got a bill  -  she thought the carbon tax was going to account for a lot more  -  it was only a tiny proportion she says. But she says of your Government, they've sold it so badly. Why call it a tax for a start, sold it so badly that everyone will associate it with their high bills.
Is that part of why you came out this week, Prime Minister? The politics of this has not been on your side?
PM: I came out this week because it's the right time to start a debate that should lead to action in December. We can't afford to miss this window and that's why I've made sure that this debate is well and truly on the national agenda.
And it's a debate that leads to action in a known time frame, and that timeframe is December.
On carbon pricing, there's been the mother of all fear campaigns, ridiculous claims made, people have seen a lot of false claims made and that's generated fear amongst people that they're going to see for example, bigger power price rises than carbon pricing actually delivers.
People now will be in a position to have all of the information because they're living the experience and judging for themselves. What they'll certainly see in their power price bills, they'll see a 10 per cent rise  -  we've always said it would be a 10 per cent rise  -  but it comes with the assistance from tax cuts and family payment increases and pension increases, which means that the majority of households are either better off or come out square.
HOST: A couple more callers if you would, Prime Minister?
PM: Sure.
HOST: Marie's on the line. Hello Marie.
CALLER: Hi, I've been supporting alternative energy generation by paying a premium for 100 per cent green energy for 10 years. Following the introduction of carbon tax, my energy supplier has still expecting me to pay a premium on my 100 per cent green energy when people who are not supporting those technologies are getting it cheaper than me.
I just am flabbergasted about that.
HOST: Should that change Prime Minister?
PM: Marie, I'm happy if you want to leave your details with Linda's producer to follow your specific case up for you and the case of your individual power bill. Obviously the carbon price is a price per tonne of carbon pollution. So it is paid by those businesses, big businesses that generate a lot of carbon pollution.
But I'm happy to look at Marie's individual case.
CALLER: I'm buying 100 per cent green energy, then they should not be expected to pay the carbon tax and therefore should hand a discount on to me if I've been paying a premium for all those years, wouldn't you say?
PM: I'm happy to look at it Marie and just get to grips to the details of your case.
HOST: Marie I'll put you on hold and you can leave your details. We'll pass them on to the Prime Minister. But Marie does have a good point, a lot of people must have complained to you, Prime Minister on this issue about having to pay extra for getting energy that is generated from green sources, to use that phrase.
Is that something you're looking at?
PM: I just think we've got to be a bit careful here about what is the source of costs for people. Obviously the carbon price  -  it's a price per tonne for carbon pollution  -  big businesses pay it. It will change their behaviour and they will reduce the amount of carbon pollution they're putting in the atmosphere.
Some of those costs are passed on and when I've talked about a 10 per cent increase in electricity, that is the passing on of some of that cost and that's why we've provided the assistance.
Separately to any of that, there are people, and Marie sounds like she's one of them, who over a long period of time have been prepared to pay their own premium  -  nothing to do with carbon pricing  -  to get cleaner energy because they believe in a cleaner energy mix.
So we've just got to make sure we're not confusing people about what is leading to what.
HOST: Just a very quick score check in the basketball Prime Minister. Fourth quarter, US  -  87, Australia  -  75, it's very close.
PM: Time to start biting nails I think Linda.
HOST: Bite away Prime Minister. A couple more calls  -  John's on the line. Hello John.
CALLER: Good morning, good morning Prime Minister. The question is, if there's a $23 a tonne carbon price, fixed for three years, does that mean there's only a one-off increase in the base of electricity prices that all of us are paying?
PM: The carbon price is continuing so you'll see a new price level if you like, from carbon pricing and that new price level will continue, as will the tax cuts, the family payment increases and the pension increases.
So it's a 10 per cent increase, it's not a compounding 10 per cent increase, it's a 10 per cent increase that you will see in your bills ongoing. And you'll get the assistance ongoing too.
HOST: Thank you very much for that John, and one last caller very quickly. Shankaran.
CALLER: Hello, good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
CALLER: Just want to you know, a lot of Australian homes doesn't have gas connections at their home, because the gas providers doesn't want to give connections. Now during the winter we use a lot of electricity just for heating purposes.
Why don't the Government give some sort assistance to these providers to give gas connection to every home? We have plenty natural gas in Australia, so we should utilise that resource. HOST: Okay, thank you for that.
PM: We do have plentiful gas and there are some constraints at the moment about moving it around the nation so that it does get where it's needed and where people want it.
I was a little bit earlier this week, when I made my first speech that started this electricity price debate, I was at an energy institute where we were also talking about some of the constraints on gas supply.
So yes, that is an issue too and one that we need to be thinking through, and our Minister Martin Ferguson is thinking that issue through in the context of the Government delivering an energy white paper, which will be about all sources of energy, not just electricity.
But whilst we're working through those issues, we can't miss the moment for acting on power prices, electricity prices for the future, which is why I've been so focused on that this week.
HOST: Prime Minister, in terms of this discussion about receiving now a gold-plated distribution network, as it's being described, that is over-investment in poles and wires. Should Australians wind back their expectations of the reliability of supply, and perhaps be willing to tolerate brown-outs, perhaps even black-outs on those few days a year when power demand peaks?
PM: We've got to have a reliable energy supply. There's some silly commentary around today about this whole debate is all about brown-outs and people not being able to put their air-conditioning on. Of course it's not about that  -  I want people to have a reliable energy supply and I made that point very strongly when I gave the speech a little bit earlier in the week.
But experts in the area are pointing to the fact that we are seeing very costly investment is poles and wires  -  some of it over-investment  -  above and beyond what we need for a reliable energy supply.
And we are not making the most of getting consumers information so that they understand about peaks and costs and make some decisions themselves about how they'll use energy.
HOST: Control over their own usage, via various meters that tell you what's happening at a certain time?
PM: Absolutely and I would point, there's a piece by Malcolm Roberts today in today's newspapers, who's the chief executive of the Energy Networks Association and he for example points to South Australia and says 20 per cent of network capacity is needed for the equivalent of 23 hours a year, and then goes on to talk about the benefits of having more information in the hands of consumers so they can make choices about how they're going to use their power.
HOST: Prime Minister, it's been good of you to join us today, I have a thousand other issues to ask you questions about but it won't be for today I'm afraid.
PM: We'll have to get back to chomping those nails and the basketball.
HOST: Yeah 90 to 75, Prime Minister in the fourth quarter, so it's not that close, but we can pretend anyway. Thanks for your time today.
PM: Thank you.



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Hello Prime Minister, how are you?
PM: I'm very well indeed.
HOST: I've got to say  -  and please don't take this the wrong way  -  I know you're a very powerful woman  -  but I'm just heartbroken, I thought you were visiting New FM yesterday and I brought in some of my mum's scones and I had them all ready for you.
PM: Now I feel bad, and I love scones. Say sorry to your mum for me.
HOST:  We'll send them your way. Did you enjoy your trip to Newcastle?
PM: I always love coming to Newcastle and you're really leading the way with the Smart City, Smart Grid initiative so I was having a look at all of that, helping people get more info about how to use power and how to save money. And I met a fantastic family  -  Paul and Nicole and their daughters  -  and we talked about how dad's always telling them to turn the lights off and not use the hair straighteners and that kind of stuff, so it was a good conversation.
HOST: Yeah we were on the list of people to visit but we weren't considered because of smartness unfortunately.
PM: Don't talk yourself down.
HOST: Thank you for saying we lead the way Prime Minister. We'll take that and run with it.
PM: Well you definitely are and it's an important combination of private business, CSIRO, your local uni, so it's great that it's happening in Newcastle. And I know people worry a lot when they get those big power bills and I'm very focused on making sure we don't see power price rises over the next few years like we've seen over the last few years.
So, one part of that is better information for people so they can make some choices about how they use their power. And another part is getting the state government on board to make some changes that will make a difference.
HOST: Julia, you said our local Tom Slingsby, his win of gold was a win for rangas everywhere.
PM: Absolutely.
HOST: How did you feel seeing him cross the sailing line?
PM: I was proud as an Aussie and proud as a redhead. One for the rangas  -  it's a good thing.
HOST: If you had a chance Prime Minister, at competing in an Olympic event, what would it have been?
PM: Barracking.
HOST: I love it. Give us an example Prime Minister, of how you barrack.
PM: I don't think I can just recreate that for you now, you've got to have the TV up loud and you've got to do a bit of jumping around.
HOST: Prime Minister, if you don't mind me asking a question, woman-to-woman, as a woman, as Prime Minister and congratulations on being the first, you are under a lot more scrutiny being a female. How do you cope with that?
PM: I always expected it would be like that and I don't let it worry me too much. But I do, you know, like the fact that I talk to a lot of women and I've met a lot of young girls and, it has sort of made a difference to them to be able to think that by me doing this job it really is another step forward to say it doesn't matter who you are in Australia you can aspire to be anything and do anything and you can do that as a woman.
HOST: Fantastic. You're such a busy woman, Prime Minister, with everything you've got on your plate. We were wondering just having a team chat this morning about how someone like you unwinds. Do you ever turn the mobile off or have a glass of Sauv Blanc?
PM: I occasionally do turn the mobile off. I occasionally do have a glass of Sauv Blanc. I'm probably more likely to have a glass of red than a Sauv Blanc and you know, I do some simply things. Chat with Tim, watch a DVD, I do a bit of knitting, I find that's a good way to relax. Stuff like that.
HOST: You knit with Tim?
PM: No, I do my own knitting. I chat with Tim and I knit.
HOST: Make sure you get that right Steve. We don't want poor Tim having that out there in the media.
PM: Something tells me Steve's not bringing a great deal of knitting expertise to this conversation.
HOST: My mother makes great scones and gee she knits well too PM.
PM: Well she's a woman who's increasingly endeared to me.
HOST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott's admitted to reading this famous book, Fifty Shades of Grey. Our own team member Sarah's reading it, it's sold over 20 million copies. Have you had a look at the book at all?
PM: No, I haven't and, you know, I've got a fair bit more work to do than Mr Abbott does. I've got to get everything done and he just wanders around saying no. So he's got a fair bit more down time.
HOST: And Prime Minister, can I just say to you it's not a great way to unwind and I'm just going to say that and we'll leave it at that.
PM: Okay, well I'm aware of the nature of the book and so I think that's probably the right end point of the conversation.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thanks for spending some time with us and next time please come in for some of those magic scones!
PM: You've talked me into it, absolutely.
HOST: Do you have full fat cream with it, Julia?
PM: You've got to do a bit of jam don't you.
HOST: Thanks Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you. 



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Well Brig there's a lot of talk about rising electricity prices so we have decided to go straight to the top and speak to the Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Now, can I start by saying Prime Minister magnificent work with Will Ferrell the other night on The Project.
PM: Thank you very much, truly terrifying as an interviewer.
HOST: Indeed, did you pass your advice onto Tim and did Tim agree that you gave Will Ferrell the best advice?
PM: I think Tim was very happy with that advice. Many hairdressers around the nation would quite like it too.
HOST: He actually does have bad hair, Will Ferrell, I've noticed that too myself. Now Prime Minister, you look quite fresh from your holiday, obviously you had a fabulous time?
PM: We did have a fabulous time. Tropical North Queensland, let me just talk it up for a winter break, we had a great time. So a few day off, a very nice way of refreshing and back into it, raring to go, lots of work to do.
HOST: Indeed, and before we get down to business we need to ask, the Olympic Games, are you loving it?
PM: I am loving it. I'm particularly loving it when we've got performances like Nathan and Iain to celebrate, so we're having a pretty good week of it.
HOST: Yeah absolutely. Now down to business as Lehmo suggested, Prime Minister. Electricity prices  -  it's all people are talking about at the moment in the streets.
What do you say to them? People who are finding it hard to make ends meet  -  how do you explain it to them?
PM: I can understand it's what people are talking about. When we look round the country people have had 50 per cent increases in electricity prices over the last four years. That's before you get to carbon pricing.
So people are talking about carbon pricing  -  I understand that, and that is bringing a 10 per cent increase in electricity prices, and people are getting tax cuts and family payment increases and pension increases to help them with that.
But people have already seen a 50 per cent increase and they're thinking to themselves, gee, how can this keep going on? If it keeps going on at this rate, the power price rises, how am I going to keep paying my bills?
Now there's a lot of complex factors at work here, but amongst them include the fact that there's an incentive now to just keep investing in poles and wires, more investment, more investment, more investment than we need, because that boosts up state government dividends from the electricity assets that they own.
So I want to get some action to fix some of these problems of regulation, to make sure that when prices get determined next year we don't see the same sort of price escalations for the next four or five years that we've seen for the past four or five.
And with all of the Federal Government-state government exchanges here, it's pleasing to see that today from New South Wales and Queensland there's a bit of movement, and I want to turn that movement into action.
HOST: I can't think of anything else that's risen as much in price as electricity over the last four years, as you mentioned a 50 per cent increase, who is making the money, because someone's got to be making out with a lot of cash here.
PM: State governments, the ones that own electricity assets, have been making some money out of it.
So take New South Wales, prices have gone up 70 per cent over the last four years and dividends to the state government have gone up 60 per cent over that period, so there is some money being made.
There are complicated issues here. We've got to get reliability right  -  we all want the power to be there when we flick on the light switch.
We are replacing some ageing infrastructure, but the experts in the area tell us that we are investing now in a way that means $11 billion of investment is to deal with the peak demand that we see on a very limited number of days of the year and there are better ways that we can address that so that we don't have to see some of that over-investment which then flows through to the prices you pay in your power bill.
HOST: Well I absolutely know that everyone listening to this today wants these price rises to electricity to stop, so whatever it takes you would no doubt have the support of everyone listening.
Now the NBN, we should ask about that as well. We're reading today that there's been a price blowout and they've added a few months to the time it's going to take to finish.
I was surprised to read that the NBN's fitting our six houses a day according to a story I read today, which means we'll roughly finish, I think, in about the year 2371. Which isn't as quick as I'd hoped. No we thought it might be quicker. What's the story there?
PM: Well I hope you are that long-lived, just in case you're not you won't have to worry about that.
There is a six-month delay, that's because we took some time, the National Broadband Network Company, to come to an arrangement with Telstra which was a smart thing to do because it means the Telstra infrastructure  -  all of the places that the wires go through now  -  can be used by the NBN instead of digging out new trenches and the like.
So it was a smart thing to do, the deal, but it's caused us the six month delay, but we'll see the NBN going by 750,000 households by the end of the year, and the construction will just keep going in leaps and bounds from there.
HOST: Oh very nice, we don't have to wait until 2371. Any spare cash floating round for the Western Bulldogs, Prime Minister? They're struggling a bit at the moment.
PM: I'm not surprised you got that plug in. There's some cheering going around, I will be there at the game on the weekend, and doing my best to urge the team on, particularly given Tim barracks for Richmond so I couldn't bear it.
HOST: He's a man of taste, Prime Minister. We'll get on board this weekend. Alright, Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you for your time this morning. 


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced the start of the COAG Review of Counter-Terrorism Legislation.
The Review will examine the Commonwealth, State and Territory counter-terrorism legislation that was introduced in 2005 after the London terrorist bombings. 
It will look at control orders, preventative detention and certain emergency stop, question and search powers held by police.
Terrorism is an ever-present threat and the review of our laws is important to ensure that our laws remain necessary and provide effective powers for our police and security agencies.
The Hon. Anthony Whealy QC, who recently retired from the NSW Court of Appeal, will chair the COAG Review. 
The other members of the Review Committee are:
•           Judge David Jones AM, retired Victorian County Court judge•           Mr Richard Bingham, South Australian Ombudsman•           Commander Justine Saunders, Australian Federal Police•           Assistant Commissioner Mike Condon, Queensland Police•           Mr Graeme Davidson, Office of the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
The Review Committee will provide a written report to COAG within six months.
The Independent National Security Legislation Monitor, which was established in 2010, also reviews Commonwealth counter-terrorism and national security laws.
While the Monitor's role is separate, the Review Committee will liaise with the Monitor, Mr Bret Walker SC, on this review.
The review has no relationship to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security's examination of potential national security reforms.
More information on the details of the Review, including the legislation the Review will cover and opportunities for public consultation can be found at www.coagctreview.gov.au.



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: Good afternoon. I'm joined today by Minister Bowen, the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship. At 7:00am this morning the Government received this report, the report of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers.
This is the report compiled since the Parliament last sat; by Angus Houston, a very eminent Australian, a former Chief of the Defence Force; by Michael L'Estrange, a foreign policy expert; and by Paris Aristotle, a refugee who is an expert in refugee and asylum seeker policy.
I want to thank each of these men for their work over the past six weeks. I asked them to do a very difficult thing. To provide a way forward to a Parliament that at the end of the last session had become gridlocked on legislative change necessary to deal with asylum seeker and refugee policy.
I thank them for their efforts and for their work.
Now in response to this report today, there have been plenty of politicians who have been out and about claiming wins from this report. I'm not going to do that. Because the truth of this report is, it has endorsed some parts of the Government's policy, but not all of it and the same can be said of every other political party.
And this report includes some new elements of policy not thought about before. So this isn't a day for commenting or for a political scoreboard. This is a day for action and getting things done.
Consequently the Government today has determined to endorse in principle, all of the recommendations of Angus Houston's report. That means that in the coming weeks and months, we will be working through those recommendations and the implementation of dealing piece by piece with those recommendations.
But we will urgently move on a set of these recommendations. First and foremost, we will in Parliament tomorrow, introduce amendments to the Government's bill before the Parliament to its piece of legislation on asylum seekers and refugees.
Those amendments will be to enable us to commence processing arrangements on Nauru and on PNG. They will be amendments in the form recommended by Angus Houston. That is, amendments that enable the Parliament to make a determination about each country that becomes part of an offshore processing arrangement.
We will also move to immediately implement the recommendations on family reunion, and Minister Bowen will outline some further details of that.
We have endorsed in principle increasing our refugee intake to 20,000. That is a key part of this report and we have endorsed that part in principle today with proper consideration to be made of managing the costs of an increase in the refugee intake.
And we will do what the report recommends, which is seek to enter into some further discussions with Malaysia on protections in the Malaysia agreement and on oversight of the Malaysia agreement.
Now I am keenly aware that what this report is calling on Parliamentarians to do is to compromise  -  to compromise and to act. This report is telling us to not stay in our fixed positions, but to act to get things done.
I am prepared to further compromise from the Government's position in order to get things done. When our nation looks at what's happening at sea as people attempt dangerous journeys to Australia, too many lives have been lost. And I'm not going to play politics or look at political scoreboards when too many lives have been lost.
This report charts the way forward and I will compromise in order to enact the recommendations of this report. I believe all Parliamentarians should take the same approach.
I'll turn now to Minister Bowen for some comments, and then we'll taking questions.
MINISTER BOWEN: Thank you very much Prime Minister and obviously I'd like to join with the Prime Minister in thanking these three eminent Australians for their very considerable efforts over the last six weeks.
Matters of border protection and saving lives should be above partisan bickering and these three eminent Australians have given the Parliament now the opportunity to do that.
The underlying theme of this report is that people who arrive in Australia by boat, should not be advantaged over those many other thousands seeking to be resettled in Australia through other means. That flows through their report.
That has also been the Government's objective as we've moved to implement arrangements under the regional framework that we negotiated at the Bali Ministerial process.
The report has given us suggestions which we have accepted in principle as to how to further implement that important principle of the Government that people who travel to Australia by boat should not receive advantage in terms of their processing and chance of resettlement in Australia.
As the Prime Minister indicated, we will be debating our legislation in the house tomorrow and I'll be moving amendments on behalf of the Government to reflect the recommendation of this panel.
That if a country is nominated for regional processing, that should be done by way of an instrument which is disallowable. There is no excuse frankly for any member of the Opposition to vote against that legislation because it would enable the Parliament to then pass judgement on each and every proposal going forward.
But I'd say this, over the last week, over the last month, we have seen a surge of people risking their life to try and get ahead of the Parliament taking action. We have seen what an impact it can have if the Parliament takes action.
The Parliament cannot, must not miss this opportunity tomorrow. The panel has provided the Parliament with one last opportunity to embrace what is a common-sense solution that the Australian people are demanding.
In addition, as the Prime Minister indicated, there are a range of recommendations which do not require legislative amendment, which we are moving to implement. Some of them require some detailed work. For example, we're accepting the recommendation for an increase in the refugee program to 20,000.
There's a considerable amount of work that needs to be done on settlement capacity and on how that would be implemented, and of course we will provide further updates. And one of the key recommendations of the panel is that that increase take into account the discussion paper that I released last May on possible community sponsorship options  -  there are some details to be worked through there  -  and of course I will keep you and the Parliament updated with that.
In addition, as the Prime Minister indicated, the panel makes some very important recommendations as to family reunion and changes again we accept those recommendations in principle.
The key principle here will be that somebody who arrived in Australia by boat would have family reunion applications processed on the same basis as every other Australian who is seeking to sponsor somebody into this country. That passes the fairness test and of course there is some detailed implementation which has been left to the Government and to me as the Minister to look through, which we will do.
The bottom line is this: there has been plenty of time for talk, there's been plenty of time for consultation, the panel has consulted very widely. The panel has reflected on all the evidence the Government has had at its disposal and community views. And the recommendation is very clear: we need to have a hard head and a soft heart as we try and deal with all the issues of resettling people into Australia and dealing with people who are seeking to come to Australia. But it's got to be done in a way which does not provide an advantage to those who seek to come by boat.
PM: We will comprehensively take people's questions, so settle down and we won't reward those who are yelling the loudest. I didn't hear Phil Coorey, so you can start.
JOURNALIST: Thank you Prime Minister, if the Opposition does cooperate here, are you hoping to get the legislation through both Houses this sitting fortnight, or sooner, and perhaps to you Mr Bowen, when do you realistically, what realistic time frame do you think you can meet those requirements on a Malaysia plan that (inaudible)?
PM: I'll go to Minister Bowen for that part, but let's be clear. If the Opposition cooperates I want these amendments through the Parliament by the end of this sitting week. If the Opposition cooperates, the Minister will then make the relevant determinations for processing on Nauru and PNG immediately and those determinations will come to the Parliament as disallowable instruments.
If the Opposition cooperates, then those instruments will not be disallowed. As a result we would be in a position in a number of days to commence all of the arrangements necessary to have the kind of processing on PNG and Nauru that Angus Houston and his fellow panel members talk about.
MINISTER BOWEN: Thanks PM. The report makes a recommendation in relation to accountability and protections in relation to Malaysia. It makes the point that there's a number of ways that can be achieved through pre-transfer arrangements. For example, there had been a considerable amount of work done on, and had been very well advanced before the High Court made its determination. That work will be reinvigorated.
Of course there has been considerable work done with Malaysia on treatment of unaccompanied minors, the report has recommended some of that codified. Again, I'm not going to put a time frame on it, Phil because obviously there is a lot to do here and obviously we'll talk both to Malaysia and the UNHCR and we will review our own processes on the pre-transfer arrangement.
I welcome the fact that the panel recommended that the Malaysia arrangement is an important one which should proceed. In fact I think they used the words, it's too important to discard. Obviously I welcome that and obviously we will take on board their input as to how it can best be progressed.
JOURNALIST: Have you or any of your Ministers or Government officials spoken to the Nauruan President or any Nauruan official and the same question with regards to PNG  -  that's today or recently. And secondly, when it comes to Nauru detention centre and re-establishing it, what do we know Mr Bowen with regards to the cost and how long it would take and what planning we've already got in place for that?
PM: I instructed our diplomatic posts to advise the Governments of PNG and Nauru and Malaysia that this report was coming, and then today to advise them of its contents, so that diplomatic work has been done.
Clearly to negotiate agreements now with Nauru and PNG and to further build on the Malaysia arrangement as Minister Bowen's outlined, will require intensive dialogue with those Governments and we'll do it.
MINISTER BOWEN: In relation to Nauru, obviously last year, when we offered the Opposition at that point to open a detention centre on Nauru, I asked my Department to go to Nauru and assess the suitability of the site and the amount of work that would need to be done.
The report was the amount of work was very, very substantial and that the site was not ready or anywhere near ready to be utilised as a facility and would require substantial rebuilding at considerable cost, which I released at the time.
I know that has been the matter of some controversy  -  today's not a day for point scoring  -  but I would point out that our costings have been done by relevant experts, not by firms which have no expertise in actually building a detention facility. Those remain the costings that we're working on in relation the amount of time it would take, we've got to get, first thing's first here we need to pass some legislation, have some discussions with the Nauruan Government and of course there will be some detailed implementation be do worked through and of course we will use, at the Prime Minister's direction, a range of capabilities available to the Government to ensure that happens as quickly as possible.
JOURNALIST: But we can expect you'll do the same as you did last year when you had the Malaysian deal, when you thought you had the Malaysian deal under your belt, you released the press release which said these people would be held in Christmas Island, tending their removal to Malaysia. Is that what we can expect from now on?
MINISTER BOWEN: This is an important point, thank you for the question. From this point forward, anybody who comes to Australia by boat runs the risk of being transferred to an offshore processing place. From this point forward, anybody who comes to Australia by boat should be very clear about the possibility of not being processed in Australia.
JOURNALIST: As in anyone after 4:45 Canberra time?
MINISTER BOWEN: I just answered your question, Andrew.
JOURNALIST: On that point though, are you worried given there have been a large number of boats in the past week and over the weekend, are you worried now that there'll be a surge if you like, of people trying to beat this deadline , trying to, sort of beat the Parliament signing off the instrument? And is there anything that you're working on with Indonesia or any other country to try and stop that and provide safety itself?
MINISTER BOWEN: I answered Andrew's question very deliberately because I do not want to see people thinking they can beat this arrangement by getting on boats over coming days and weeks. Hence the Government has considered this, and we have taken the decision that we need to be very clear with people about their expectations should they get on a boat to Australia and think that they can somehow beat the amount of time it will take to get a facility at Nauru or PNG or the arrangement with Malaysia finalised, that is not the case.
JOURNALIST: You always said that Nauru wouldn't act as a deterrent a second time; the panel seems to be saying that it would have some impact as a first step. Do you accept that now, were you wrong in your assessment before? And are you concerned that we might see the outcome that we get legislation and we get Nauru and Manus through the disallowable instruments, through the Parliament and then that's the end of the action and any future disallowable instruments and Malaysia arrangement can't get passed the Parliament, what would the impact of that action be?
PM: Okay, I'm happy to take those questions. On Nauru and PNG in this report  -  this is a new approach from the panel  -  it's actually different to what has happened on Nauru and PNG in the past.
The significant difference is that they say not only would you process asylum seekers on Nauru and PNG, but you would not give them a protection visa which would enable them to come to Australia until the passage of the same amount of time as if they had waited at a refugee resettlement place earlier in the pipeline. Maybe Malaysia, maybe Indonesia, maybe in the source country they came from.
So the whole panel's ethos, their outlook, their insight, is that you need to equalise treatment for asylum seekers so you don't get a better deal if you get on a boat.
And as part of that, they're saying the arrangements with Nauru and PNG should have those time frames built into them so you don't get a better deal if you get on a boat.
Having said that, Lenore, I'm well aware of the kind of political points that will be made about this and I'm not interested in any of them. I'm not going to play policy wonks' argument over here or a lawyers' argument about the wording. If people want to put banner, ‘this is a compromise from the Government', dead right, in order to start saving lives.
And about Malaysia, yes Malaysia, subsequent to the work Houston and his panel have pointed out, would need to come to the Parliament as a disallowable instrument. It is possible that the Opposition would disallow that instrument. If they did then that would be something I think the Australian people would judge the Opposition on.
But we are not making the amendments that we are bringing to the Parliament this week contingent on an agreement that at that stage they say yes.
Houston has said we should go to Malaysia and do a few things; we will do those things and then the Opposition judge Malaysia at that point.
But I would counsel the Opposition: Angus Houston and his team make it very, very clear in this report  -  and they've made it very clear today  -  this is an integrated package. And at your peril you try and pick one bit out, or pick another bit out, or say not to a bit you don't like.
The Government has taken the approach of endorsing the recommendations in principle as a whole because of the force of that.
JOURNALIST: In those last days of Parliament when the Parliament reached that deadlock position, you didn't have a meeting with Tony Abbott. Have you sought to have direct discussions with him or will you be doing that in the next couple of days?
PM: Look I'm open to whatever will get this done but let's be clear, we're saying this is the report, these are the recommendations, let's go.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, many of the recommendations have been considered previously by the Government in October last year and were rejected  -  the figure of 20,000 for instance  -  specific recommendations. Do you feel it's a missed opportunity in not adopting those recommendations earlier?
PM: Well I'll turn to Minister Bowen on the absolute details. I mean our aspiration as a political party over a long period of time has been to increase the number of refugees we take from overseas. Indeed I believe our party platform says that we've got an aspiration of 20,000.
What is recommended here by Angus Houston and his team is that that increase comes with companion measures that mean for trying to recalibrate the thinking of asylum seekers about risks and rewards.
So to recalibrate they are saying more places available to people will go into refugee processing overseas, yet get less, indeed you get no more if you move. So these are important aspects. They'd tied together and that's why we've endorsed the lot.
JOURNALIST: How confident is the Government that it will be able to successfully negotiate with Malaysia the complications proposed in the Houston report and if that happens is the Government as committed as ever to proceeding with the Malaysian arrangements?
PM: We are committed to the Malaysian arrangements and we draw strength from the Houston report on that, he uses the terminology at one point of ‘vital' about the Malaysian arrangements. But he's pointed to some work that needs to be done and we will obviously have a red hot go at doing that.
I'll turn to Minister Bowen for some commentary on that.
BOWEN: Thank you Prime Minister and obviously we would continue to engage with Malaysia and Malaysia has made very clear with us that they are very committed to this agreement, as we are because both Governments have recognised its importance.
Obviously there are some issue that we need to work through and as I said before some of those can be handled domestically by us. There's some engagement recommended with the UNHCR about pre-transfer guidelines and other issues and there are other matter that we would discuss with Malaysia.
I'd also make this point, the panel also says there are some things you should do before proceeding and there are some things you should build on as you go in this report in relation to Malaysia. So they see it as a building block.
There are some things which they indicate we should do as a matter of some urgency before we proceed, and there are other things which they say over time you would work with Malaysia to build on, and that's certainly something we would discuss with them.
The other point is the Prime Minister made is that this is a very fundamental change in approach, and this partly answers to Dennis' question from before, and I'm not sure I agree with every premise of Dennis' question with respect, when you recall that I moved at the Labor Party National Conference that we adopt 20,000 as an aspiration, Mr Morrison came out and condemned us quite roundly for that and said it was irresponsible to do so.
Then for a fleeting period, that was Liberal Party policy when he made that offer to Judy Moylan to stop her crossing the floor. As I understand it that is no longer Liberal Party policy. We remain committed to it.
And I also would point out to you the key paragraph in relation to the operation in Nauru, which represents a fundamental change in the recommendation, which is paragraph 350 of page 48, which makes it clear that Nauru and PNG work if there is a fundamental principle of no advantage and that people would only be transferred to Australia when they would have been transferred on your best assessment, under normal regional processing arrangements if they hadn't got on the boat.
And remember again, previous experience that people were processed as a refugee and then brought to Australia. And again I'd remind you that Mr Morrison again in a commitment to Ms Moylan said that he'd make sure that people were processed and transferred very quickly within 12 months.
The panel makes the very clear view that there should be no advantage which is a principle the Government is happy to accept and to implement.
JOURNALIST: If I can just take it to another matter. Slater and Gordon has said that it intends to ask the AWU to wave legal privilege to allow for the release of files relating to alleged misappropriation of monies (inaudible). Since you were working for the firm at the time, do you think that that would be valuable to the public debate and do you have any objection to that happening?
PM: It's a matter for Slater and Gordon and the relevant clients.
JOURNALIST: I was just going to ask, what then is Minister the time limit for processing  -  will you put a cap? For asylum seekers sent to Nauru?
PM: Let's just be a bit clear here about what's recommended in the report. What Angus Houston and his team are saying is it's not so much how long you take to do the processing; it is when you give someone a resettlement opportunity that is when you issue them with a protection visa.
We can make the determinations about how long that should take. Angus Houston and his team are saying we should make some assessment about waiting times in the region and generally to find out what's fair. To put people in the same situation as if they had not moved.
At the same time, we'd been making a difference to waiting times for people who don't move because we would be increasing the number of humanitarian places. We cannot give you what that time is today, we received this report at 7:00am and I think you would understand that.
But we certainly endorse the concept because the concept means that there is no benefit from putting your life at risk and getting on a boat. There is no benefit from paying a people smuggler. That is the fundamental underlying principle of this report and it's a good one.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in 2007 many people who voted for Labor voted to get rid of Nauru, get rid of Manus Island, get rid of the Pacific Solution. What's changed? What do you say to those Labor voters who wanted to get rid of that horrendous system that was causing people great anxiety and psychological problems?
PM: I would say to those people who were motivated by humanitarian concerns, now very, very squarely in front of us we've got another humanitarian concern. And that humanitarian concern is more people are trying to reach Australia by boat and more people are drowning as they do it. That's the humanitarian concern.
I don't precisely know whether Paris Aristotle said this in his press conference today, but he talked this morning to me and Minister Bowen about providing counselling to an asylum seeker who had lost six family members when a boat went down. That is the humanitarian concern that is squarely in front of us today.
And it requires us to do things that are really hard. We've been to our Labor Party room meeting today and we had endorsement for this position from the Labor Party and it is the policy of the Labor Government.
For many of our caucus members it is not an easy thing. For many members in the community it is not an easy thing. But I tell you what's a harder thing, and that's watching more people drown, and we're not going to do that.
JOURNALIST: Just on an update, one of the issues that Labor took up particularly when John Howard had this Pacific Solution, was the psychological damage to many people who were on Nauru for years and years and years. Now obviously if there's no cap, that situation could rise again, people being incarcerated for a long time. How concerned are you about that and what sort of mechanisms would you put in place to try to deal with those problems with that uncertainty?
PM: First and foremost I'd say stay where you are, don't move: message number one. Don't get yourself to Nauru in these circumstances. People do wait for a long period of time in other parts of the world, but don't get yourself to Nauru in these circumstances.
There will be more places available in refugee resettlement areas as a result of us working through the challenge that Angus Houston has set us about increasing the humanitarian intake and we have endorsed that in principle.
So message number one, don't move, don't put yourself in that circumstance. If people do move, then of course it is possible for people to negotiate with the Government return arrangements to places that they came from, which may in their view, offer them a better prospect than sitting on Nauru.
And like we do in detention facilities in Australia and on Christmas Island, of course we would be resourcing mental health professionals to work with people.
But I am not trying to shy away from the toughness of this policy, but if I can put a rhetorical question to you, Michelle, which I think all of us have to think about, what's the mental health trauma for that person who lost six of their relatives when a boat went down at sea?
These are the judgements we're making, they're hard judgements but they need to be made. Angus Houston and his team are providing us with assistance in the making of them; we've got to get this done.
JOURNALIST: If you move to processing at Nauru and Manus Island, what will be the treatment of unaccompanied minors in that situation?
PM: You will see in the Houston report that he talks about some arrangements for particularly at-risk people, including some special visa classes that may enable them to come to Australia, so when we've said we've endorsed the lot, we've endorsed the lot  -  endorsed it in principle, there's a lot of work to do with working through the implementation of these recommendations.
But in terms of the policy whole, he's dealt with that issue in the policy whole.
JOURNALIST: Does that cover all unaccompanied minors?
PM: We're not in a position, Denis, to give you that level of detail today, we are providing in-principle, endorsement to the recommendations and the panel has not left that issue unattended to.
JOURNALIST: What's your reading of the section referring to the turning the boats back? Was it an absolute veto of it, or did it say that with a bit of tidying up, it was a legitimate policy and therefore one that you would follow from now on?
PM: I think the, and I would turn to Minister Bowen on this as well, he'll be able to take you to the relevant paragraph. But the Houston panel observations are that so-called turning back of boats cannot be done in contemporary circumstances.
Cannot be done because Indonesia does not receive the boats back; cannot be done because the reaction of people smugglers has changed and they now sabotage boats and I think Angus Houston talked about that in the media conference today so cannot be done in current circumstances.
Now you have to deal with the facts of the world as you find them not pretend that you live in some different form of reality. They are the facts and they are the facts that we've got to deal with. Mr Bowen.
BOWEN: The report makes clear that (inaudible) or turn backs or whichever formula you want to use would only be viable under a very limited set of circumstances including the agreement of the nation for which the vessel is flagged and the nation of disembarkation.
So that is not turn a boat around on the high sea and pointing it off to Indonesia but it is a very different thing and the position of the Liberal Party has been that we don't care what Indonesia says, we're going to do it, I quote; that Indonesian flagged vessels disgorging their people into Australia has been Mr Abbott's approach and he has said they would implement the policy regardless of the view of Indonesia. I note that he did not have the gumption to raise it with the President of Indonesia in their bilateral visit as was alerted by the Indonesians not by My Abbott.
So it's very clear in the view of this report that this will be a policy that could only ever be implemented with the full agreement and cooperation and assistance of the Indonesian Government. So it's now up to Mr Abbott to say whether he maintains position that it would implemented regardless of what Indonesia says or whether next time he chats to Mr Yudhoyono he might actually bother to raise it.
JOURNALIST: Papua New Guinea has hardly been a stable political country for the last six or eight months or so. You yourself have expressed some real concerns about the direction the country's heading. Why is Australia able to criticise dodgy practices in PNG if we're relying on them to process people seeking asylum?
PM: Look we will always raise our voice appropriately about international matters. On circumstances in PNG we are in different days post the election than we were when I was indicating some concern about whether or not elections would be held, whether they'd be held on time and some of the other events that were then happening in PNG.
So we have seen Prime Minister O'Neill returned, the election has been, you know, held and counted, there is a Government in PNG now which I think will be able to proceed with governing PNG and entering into discussions with Australia about the proposed arrangements from the Houston panel's recommendations.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the business tax working group doesn't seem to have any concrete recommendations. Are still comfortable with the way that's progressing?
PM: I'll leave you to discuss that in detail with the Treasurer.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what will be the Government's response if the Coalition maintains its position and insists that offshore processing can only occur in countries that are signatories to the Refugee Convention and if they move amendments to that effect?
PM: Well, Paul, I would have thought that what is appropriate now is not politicians crowing about politics. To be very clear with you I think Australians are sick at heart at watching it, just, they're over it. I am over it, we're all over it.
It's time to get something done, so I would think that no one would have the temerity to play some lawyers' game about wording with legislation. For heaven sake, we want to get people to Nauru and PNG for processing under the arrangements outlined under the Houston panel, expert report. We want an outcome here, we want change. We don't want pedantry and politics. That's the spirit the Government is taking into this.
I said very clearly to you at the start, we have compromised; we set up this expert panel to bring change, to get change done. That's what Australians are looking to us to do; they don't want to see us mired in the politics and the pedantry.
We've got a good report here. The challenge is now for us to get on with it and we will be getting on with it as early as just after Question Times tomorrow in the House of Representatives.
Thank you very much.



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: This morning the Minister for Immigration, Minister Bowen, has been in discussions with his counterpart, the Shadow Minister for Immigration, Scott Morrison.
Those discussions about potential further amendments to the legislation are proceeding in good faith and I'm not going to run a running commentary on them.
But I do want to say this. The time for politics is over; the time for action is here. It's time to get this legislation amended, and the Government is prepared to make any arrangements necessary in order to facilitate a vote in the House of Representatives today.
We want this legislation through.
I am obviously concerned that people smugglers might seek to exploit this window, as I and the Minister for Immigration said yesterday, anybody who gets on a boat at this time is at risk of being transferred to Nauru or PNG.
But clearly people smugglers seeking to profit might be trying to exploit this window so the sooner we legislate, the better.
I spoke this morning to the Chief of our Defence Force, and asked him about the logistics for making arrangements for a processing facility on Nauru and in PNG.
He has advised me that if legislation passes the Parliament this week, it would be possible to have reconnaissance teams in Nauru and PNG on Friday looking at the sites for the processing facility, for the regional processing centre.
He has advised me that subject to what those reconnaissance teams find, it would then be possible for Defence to facilitate the construction of temporary facilities in both locations.
That means that within a month, we would hope to see people being processed in Nauru and in PNG. That's clearly subject to the work of the reconnaissance teams that could go as early as Friday.
This morning I've spoken to the President of Nauru and the Prime Minister of PNG.
I have explained to both of them the circumstances of the Houston report, the details of its findings, and also the work that is happening here in Parliament to amend the legislation.
I've asked them if we succeed in amending the legislation so that there can be offshore processing, whether or not they would be prepared to enter discussions with the Australian Government to host such centres.
Both of them have been positive about hosting centres and positive about entering those discussions.
Both of them have said that if legislation passes this week, they would welcome the reconnaissance teams from our Defence Force on Friday and they would work with those reconnaissance teams and with Defence to facilitate the establishment of temporary facilities.
That is the work that has been done to date.
Clearly the Australian people want to see us act. They are over listening to the yelling and shouting of politicians about this matter.
They want to see change and we can see change this week in the legislation and then act on that change as early as Friday.
I'm happy to take a few questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when you talk about temporary facilities, are you talking about tents or something more substantial than that. And having you picked up the phone to the President of Nauru, have you either picked up the phone or written to Tony Abbott to seek his support for the legislation?
PM: Well that work is happening through our relevant Ministers, so Scott Morrison is obviously empowered by the Opposition to discuss matters on their behalf and Minister Bowen is meeting with his counterpart.
He's done that this morning, and discussions are continuing.
As for the temporary facilities, yes they would involve tents and other sorts of temporary structures.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will any special payments be made to Nauru or PNG?
PM: Look I'm not in a position to talk to you about the details of an agreement that hasn't been struck yet.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister I understand last night the Opposition provided a list of 44 speakers to speak (inaudible). Is that your understanding and isn't it right there should be significant debate on this legislation?
PM: I can't give you a specific number but my understanding is the Opposition has quite a large number of people who have put their names on the speaking list.
My view is that the time for the politics, the political point scoring, the yelling, the shouting, that time is over. People want to see action.
We need this legislation to pass the Parliament so that we can get on with that action.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the former Defence Force chief yesterday said that there should be a limit of five years for asylum seekers sent to Nauru. Would you feel comfortable with genuine refugees being held in Nauru, or Manus Island for that matter, for five years?
PM: I've endorsed, in principle, the recommendations of the Houston report as I indicated yesterday.
One of those recommendations is about people who travel by boat being processed on Nauru or in PNG  -  and then remaining there for what would have been the same period of time as if they had not travelled on the boat.
So it's fundamental to the propositions in the panel's report that you don't get an advantage because you've got on a boat.
Now there's a need to implement that and work through what it means, what processing times are in our region, for example, and we would take UNHCR advice on that and work the implementation arrangements through.
JOURNALIST: It could be up to ten years.
PM: What I'm saying to you, and I'm not going to endorse figures that haven't been  -  obviously Angus Houston used a figure yesterday  -  what the report is saying to us we should do is we should work out what processing times are and make an equivalent that would require careful advice from UNHCR  -  we'd take that advice.
So I'm not going to nominate a figure before we take that advice, but as a question of principle, do I think we should do that, yes I do. The Houston report recommends it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott says that since Labor has had an absence of an offshore processing policy, hundreds of people have died at sea. Was it Labor's fault?
PM: Look on the politics of this, I think the time for the politicking has well and truly gone, including politicking of that nature. I don't think the Australian community want us exchanging insults  -  they want us to act  -  and that is what I am determined to do.
As people would be aware, and this is a very common sense point that everybody in this audience particularly would be aware of, there has not been a compromise on the table until we are working through this today.
So the Houston report has done what I hoped it would do, which is bring a fresh perspective and a new way forward in this debate.
As recently as six weeks ago, Scott Morrison wasn't able to say on television whether if the Government adopted every element of the Opposition's plan, the Opposition would back it.
That's where we were six weeks ago, I'm not interested in canvassing all of those matters of history, I'm not interested in finger-pointing or blame throwing. I'm interested in action and getting something done.
JOURNALIST: On this question of the timing, it obviously worries many critics, would you be willing not just to take the advice of the United Nation refugee group, but hand over the determination of that time to the group?
PM: Look, I'm prepared to do what the Houston report has asked us to do. That does of course require consultation with UNHCR.
You are asking me about the implementation of arrangements. We will implement carefully, we'll take the best possible advice, we'll work it through.
But the question for today is will we get there. Will we get to implementing these arrangements? In order to do that, legislation has to pass this Parliament.
JOURNALIST: I know you don't want to go back on the history but the report yesterday also seems to contradict the advice you're getting from the Immigration Department about the value of Nauru and Manus Island. Who's right, and what does it say about the quality of the advice you're getting from the Immigration Department if it is in fact now valuable to deal with?
PM: Well as I made the point yesterday, the model on Nauru and Manus Island is a different model than has been contemplated in the past, and consequently I don't think it's fair to look at advice that was given on a different model and say that that advice can somehow be uplifted to the new model that the Houston report is putting.
JOURNALIST: Did the Department never put to you an alternative model that involved keeping people there longer or removing this advantage?
PM: In my view, this is a new approach from the Houston team as part of an underlying strategy of ensuring that there is no net advantage from moving.
You would be aware, Karen, that the debate about public service advice and about the politics of this to date has been about detention centres on Nauru and PNG as those detention centres were run in the past.
The Houston panel has recommended a different approach to that. Now as I said very frankly yesterday, I'm not interested in the political scoreboard out of the Houston panel.
The truth is every political party in this Parliament can say ‘that bit gives me a tick, and actually I got a cross over here.'
That's true of the Government; it's true of the Opposition; it's true of everyone else.
That is not what we need to debate our way through today. We need to get this legislation done.
JOURNALIST: Just on this point of how long these people would stay there and whether it might be five years or whatever, isn't the point, isn't this the point of it all, and that the no advantage-
PM: Correct.
JOURNALIST: -means that this will provide the deterrent that will stop more people coming, so isn't that actually the design?
PM: Correct.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said you'd spoken to the leaders of Nauru and PNG. Have you spoken to Malaysia yet, because you said yesterday you were going to give that a red-hot go.
PM: Thank you for that question. I have sought to speak to the Prime Minister of Malaysia today. I haven't been able to do so as yet.
He is travelling outside Malaysia, and so it hasn't been possible in his program, but I certainly will be speaking to him as soon as it is possible for us to do so, and my message to him would be that we've received this report. I would explain what the report recommends.
I would explain what it recommends in relation to Malaysia, and I would seek his agreement for officials to have further discussions about the matters that are in the report and obviously for Minister Bowen to work with Malaysia in the way that he has in the past.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the expert panel was quite clear that the recommendations worked as a package. Would you be worried if you get support in the Parliament for Nauru and Manus Island, but you are unable either because of the Parliament or because of the international negotiations, to not get support for Malaysia, do you accept that in that circumstance this package won't work to achieve its aims?
PM: My view is an integrated package has been recommended to us and so my view is that we should do everything we can to keep true to that integrated package.
That's why I stood before you yesterday and said that the Government has endorsed in principle all of the recommendations of the Houston report.
Now I am not in a position to control the actions of others in this Parliament, and discussions with governments of other nations are discussions with governments of other nations and they will make their own decisions about how they respond to Australia's advances on these questions.
But I think the Houston report is an integrated package, so it is incumbent upon us to accept and work on the integrated package, and that is what we are intending to do.
We'll take the last two and then I'll go. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott went to Aurukun at the weekend and Wild Rivers has popped up again. The Senator Larissa Waters, Greens Senator for Queensland has written to Tony Burke about whether the Federal Government would look at protecting those areas under federal legislation. Do you support that move, or do you think that Aboriginal groups in the Cape area have a right to mine that area and go ahead with their own plans?
PM: Look, I'm going to have to refer you to Minister Burke on that.
JOURNALIST: Look back on that Malaysia stuff, I don't totally understand. Is the Government's strategy to effect somehow a legally-binding agreement with Malaysia which you can do without legislation so that you don't have to bring legislation or amendments to the Migration Act?
PM: Our strategy is to endeavour to implement what is in the Houston report. The Houston report talks about an MOU or comparable instrument.
It talks about building on Malaysia, the current Malaysia agreement. It describes it as vital, so our intention is to try and pursue the further recommendations in the Houston report about the oversight in the Malaysia agreement and about the protections in the Malaysia agreement.
That's what we would be endeavouring to do.
The only motivation is being faithful to what is in the Houston report, no other motivation.
JOURNALIST: Just further to that question, the report says that the Malaysian negotiations are to be conducted at the highest levels of government. I know it's only early days but would you be hoping to maybe have some sort of conversation with your counterpart at APEC, on the sidelines for example?
PM: Well I am the highest level of government, and I'm seeking to speak to the Prime Minister of Malaysia who is the highest level of his government.
Thanks very much.


Sydney 
We're all here in a spirit of joy and celebration to say we are so proud of you, welcome home.
We want you to be back in the warm embrace of the Australian nation and your family and friends.
So it's a tremendous opportunity to be here to share this moment.
You've only been gone a few weeks but it's been so vivid, each of those exciting days. It probably seems to many of you like it's a lifetime.
Some, like Malcolm Page, have capped a brilliant career with gold, and he's being welcomed back in fine style by his family here including young Alex, holding up his sign, welcoming his uncle back.
Others, like Brittany Broben, won unexpected honours and congratulations to her  -  such a young woman, such a fine achievement.
And yet others almost reached the top of that mountain only to find that there's another summit for them to climb.
But no matter what medal you're wearing around your neck today, or whether you're not wearing a medal at all, you are carrying the greatest of honours.
You're Olympians.
That's members of the elite band that was founded by Edwin Flack in 1896.
What an amazing thing, to have the opportunity to go to the Olympics and to represent your nation.
We're proud of each and every one of you.
Each of you is able to say something none of the rest of us will ever be able to say.
You'll be able to say, ‘I was there. I wore the green and gold.'
Others will admire or envy you, they'll listen to your stories, they'll read of your triumphs and disappointments, but only you will ever know what it was like to actually be there.
And for those who have been quick to rush out with the criticism, London in 2012 has been a remarkable result by any measure.
Tenth on the medal tally out of 204.
Our nation, still in the top ten.
Still fighting, still striving, still challenging the world and proudly doing it.
So as you get to move back home, whether Sydney's your home or you're on an onward journey today, I want to say to each and every one of our athletes thank you for your efforts, thank you for your sacrifices, thank you for all the perseverance and discipline that got you there.
You've given something incredibly special to your country.
And to those with dreams and ambitions still to be fulfilled, have a good rest and then get straight back to the training.
You did great things in London in 2012, and I know you're going to do even greater things in Rio in four years' time.
Welcome home, one and all. It's an absolute delight to be with you this morning.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Sport Kate Lundy proudly welcomed home members of the Australian Olympic Team at Sydney Airport today.
The Olympics is the pinnacle international sporting event and our Australian team were inspiring ambassadors for the nation.
We are enormously proud of our athletes for delivering a strong result in an increasingly competitive international environment at the London Games.
Our 410 Australian athletes saw Australia finish number ten on the medal table, winning a total 35 medals.
Competing at an Olympic Games is a momentous achievement and often the culmination of years of hard work, sacrifice and dedication.
The entire country cheered on our athletes as they competed at the London Games. 
We shared in the moments of triumph and disappointment.
The moments we shared over the last fortnight have also inspired young Australians across the nation to develop a passion for sport.
The Australian Government invested record funding to support our elite athletes and Olympians committing over $382 million in funding over the four years leading to the Games.


Sydney 
 E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us. Now what do you make of our performance in London?
PM: Good morning Kochie, it's just a delight to be here. There's an incredible atmosphere of anticipation, everyone body's joyful and I'm very proud of our team. I think we've done tremendously well in London and I'm looking forward to saying to every athlete on that plane, well done to you, it's an amazing thing to get to go and compete in the Olympics.
HOST: Have you had a chance to mingle around and chat to some of the family and friends who are there to greet them?
PM: I've had the opportunity to wander through the crowd you can see here and to say hello to a few people, met some tiny little kids who are wearing t-shirts welcoming home Uncle Dan  -  purpose made those t-shirts. It's just a beautiful atmosphere and I'm sure there's going to be lots of hugs and lots of tears and lots of joy.
HOST: All sides of politics have been great supporters of our elite athletes over the years, of course a lot of them focusing on Rio in four years' time. Will that Government support still be there or a little bit more over that four years?
PM: Absolutely Kochie, we're providing record funding now and we'll keep working with our athletes, with our Olympic movement for Rio in 2020  -  2016 is what I should be saying. I've got 2020 on my mind because we've got such a young team, I actually think many of the people we've seen put in good performances in London are going to be there for us, not only in Rio but for a long period of time to come.
Look at young people like Brittany; they are going to be a big part of our sporting future.
HOST: And what will you say to them? I mean there's obviously a few athletes on that plane that need at little, you know, need some nice, kind words and a bit of enthusiasm and a bit of, I guess sort of confidence building.
PM: I'd say to each of them don't forget what a big thing it is to go and represent your nation. However you've performed when you got there, whether you came first or whether you came last, to go to an Olympic Games, to represent your nation, to represent Australia is a special thing. Very few people get to do  -  we'll never get to do it  -  so be proud of that achievement.
HOST: Now we know you're a massive Western Bulldogs fan in the AFL, but what sport did you play when you were younger?
PM: I am a massive Western Bulldogs fan and I'm still grieving from the weekend so you're on a sore topic here! When I was younger I played a little bit of netball and a little bit of hockey but I wasn't very good.
HOST: You know what, you sound like the rest of us, don't worry. There's a pretty elite bunch on that plane. They're certainly above average, aren't they.
It's great to talk to you, I know that you need to get back to official duty, so Prime Minister Julia Gillard thanks very much for your time.
PM: Thank you very much.


Sydney 
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Lisa.
HOST: You and I never were good at coordinating each other before you appeared on the show on a Friday so what's changed?
PM: We should have texted this morning and said only one of us should wear the white coat, but here we are.
HOST: Indeed, good to see you.
PM: Nice to see you too.
HOST: What a very special morning. Of all the duties that you have to do as Prime Minister this must be one of the biggies that you really enjoy.
PM: This is right up there, there's such a sense of excitement and I'm really going to enjoy the opportunity of saying ‘well done, we're proud of you' to every athlete that gets off the plane. We've had a fantastic games and I'm just so proud of our team.
HOST: What were the highlights for you?
PM: There are so many of them but certainly Anna and Sally just changed our mood and lifted our nation didn't they. To see our young people like Brittany come through and know that she's got so many more Olympic Games in her.
HOST: Sixteen years of age and she looked totally shocked when she won the diving.
PM: She did look shocked, but you'd have to say what a tremendous amount of poise to be able to go and do that at sixteen years old, and that just shows what a remarkable career she's going to have in the future. Sixteen now, twenty next time, you know she's going to be with us for a long, long time to come.
HOST: As we said before there's going to be lots of hugs and tears as all of these families are reunited.
PM: There certainly are, I've wandered through and seen some of the family members, tiny little kids that are wearing t-shirts that say ‘welcome home, Uncle Dan' and things like that.
HOST: And lots of beautiful homemade signs as well.
PM: Some very beautiful homemade signs, so lots of people here are going to be jumping for joy in just a few minutes time.
HOST: This must be a very welcome break for you because it has been a very intense time over the last couple of days over the whole asylum seeker issue. Living in tents on Nauru and Manus Island; is that acceptable to you, because that is the prediction.
PM: It's a temporary measure as the permanent facilities are constructed, so Defence will get on with the job the way they do with all of their professionalism. There will be some temporary accommodation and then there will be permanent accommodation.
HOST: There's many more to deal with than anybody could have anticipated. The numbers just keep on growing, so the chances of them being in those tents for a longer period of time than would be desirable seems to be the case. How long would you be happy to see asylum seekers in tents?
PM: All of these measures that Angus Houston and his team have recommended are about stopping people getting on boats, so we shouldn't be saying ‘well the current rate of arrivals we're seeing now will just be continued.'
We're doing all of this, some of it very hard things. We're doing it all so that we don't see people risking their lives at sea. We've seen too many tragedies, too many losses.
HOST: We spoke to Tony Abbott earlier this morning and he says that of a three-pronged attack, there's only one prong that's been addressed. You still will not be happy with the idea of temporary protection visas, because that is what he says is going to take us back to what John Howard was doing when the boats really did stop coming.
PM: Tony Abbott is flying in the face of the expert recommendations we've got from three eminent Australians.
Angus Houston, former chief of the defence force; Paris Aristotle, a refugee policy expert; Michael L'Estrange, a foreign policy expert; they have not recommended temporary protection visas. They've said towbacks are not possible under current circumstances, they've given the nation a very good plan.
They've said you've got to do all of it, and the Government has said in principle we're going to do the lot.
HOST: Well Fairfax is reporting this morning on an asylum seeker in West Java, Mohammed Khani; he says living in a tent is no deterrent to him. He's coming anyway. This is somebody who's planning on coming, even though he knows exactly what's going on in Australian politics at the moment. Doesn't that mean you're back to square one?
PM: The aim of the Houston report, and it's not just going to Nauru and PNG, this is a comprehensive report, and the aim of it is to say to people like him you've got no greater chance of getting into Australia if you get on a boat than if you stay where you are now.
The only thing you'll do by getting on a boat is risk your life at sea and pay a people smuggler.
You won't get to Australia any more quickly than if you stay put, went to UNHCR, had your claim processed and got dealt with where you are now, so don't do it, don't risk it, don't lose your money, potentially lose your life.
HOST: Should our humanitarian intake increase to 20,000 and 27,000 in five years? Are you happy with that?
PM: In principle we've given that the tick, now we've got to work through all of the financial costs and they are considerable.
But the aim here is to be able to say to people like the asylum seeker you refer to, if you stay where you are and don't move, get your claim processed, you've got a chance of coming to Australia because we're a generous country and we're prepared to make places available.
If you get on a boat, you won't get here any more quickly. You'll go to Nauru and PNG, not just to have your claim processed, but you will be kept there for the same amount of time that you would have waited had you stayed where you were.
HOST: Alright another intense day in Parliament today but in the meantime you've got duties to perform, so I will let you go Prime Minister. Thank you very much for joining us.
PM: Lovely to see you Lisa, thank you.


Sydney 
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us. Now what do you make of our performance in London?
PM: Good morning Kochie, it's just a delight to be here. There's an incredible atmosphere of anticipation, everyone body's joyful and I'm very proud of our team. I think we've done tremendously well in London and I'm looking forward to saying to every athlete on that plane, well done to you, it's an amazing thing to get to go and compete in the Olympics.
HOST: Have you had a chance to mingle around and chat to some of the family and friends who are there to greet them?
PM: I've had the opportunity to wander through the crowd you can see here and to say hello to a few people, met some tiny little kids who are wearing t-shirts welcoming home Uncle Dan  -  purpose made those t-shirts. It's just a beautiful atmosphere and I'm sure there's going to be lots of hugs and lots of tears and lots of joy.
HOST: All sides of politics have been great supporters of our elite athletes over the years, of course a lot of them focusing on Rio in four years' time. Will that Government support still be there or a little bit more over that four years?
PM: Absolutely Kochie, we're providing record funding now and we'll keep working with our athletes, with our Olympic movement for Rio in 2020  -  2016 is what I should be saying. I've got 2020 on my mind because we've got such a young team, I actually think many of the people we've seen put in good performances in London are going to be there for us, not only in Rio but for a long period of time to come.
Look at young people like Brittany; they are going to be a big part of our sporting future.
HOST: And what will you say to them? I mean there's obviously a few athletes on that plane that need at little, you know, need some nice, kind words and a bit of enthusiasm and a bit of, I guess sort of confidence building.
PM: I'd say to each of them don't forget what a big thing it is to go and represent your nation. However you've performed when you got there, whether you came first or whether you came last, to go to an Olympic Games, to represent your nation, to represent Australia is a special thing. Very few people get to do  -  we'll never get to do it  -  so be proud of that achievement.
HOST: Now we know you're a massive Western Bulldogs fan in the AFL, but what sport did you play when you were younger?
PM: I am a massive Western Bulldogs fan and I'm still grieving from the weekend so you're on a sore topic here! When I was younger I played a little bit of netball and a little bit of hockey but I wasn't very good.
HOST: You know what, you sound like the rest of us, don't worry. There's a pretty elite bunch on that plane. They're certainly above average, aren't they.
It's great to talk to you, I know that you need to get back to official duty, so Prime Minister Julia Gillard thanks very much for your time.
PM: Thank you very much.


Sydney 
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Lisa.
HOST: You and I never were good at coordinating each other before you appeared on the show on a Friday so what's changed?
PM: We should have texted this morning and said only one of us should wear the white coat, but here we are.
HOST: Indeed, good to see you.
PM: Nice to see you too.
HOST: What a very special morning. Of all the duties that you have to do as Prime Minister this must be one of the biggies that you really enjoy.
PM: This is right up there, there's such a sense of excitement and I'm really going to enjoy the opportunity of saying ‘well done, we're proud of you' to every athlete that gets off the plane. We've had a fantastic games and I'm just so proud of our team.
HOST: What were the highlights for you?
PM: There are so many of them but certainly Anna and Sally just changed our mood and lifted our nation didn't they. To see our young people like Brittany come through and know that she's got so many more Olympic Games in her.
HOST: Sixteen years of age and she looked totally shocked when she won the diving.
PM: She did look shocked, but you'd have to say what a tremendous amount of poise to be able to go and do that at sixteen years old, and that just shows what a remarkable career she's going to have in the future. Sixteen now, twenty next time, you know she's going to be with us for a long, long time to come.
HOST: As we said before there's going to be lots of hugs and tears as all of these families are reunited.
PM: There certainly are, I've wandered through and seen some of the family members, tiny little kids that are wearing t-shirts that say ‘welcome home, Uncle Dan' and things like that.
HOST: And lots of beautiful homemade signs as well.
PM: Some very beautiful homemade signs, so lots of people here are going to be jumping for joy in just a few minutes time.
HOST: This must be a very welcome break for you because it has been a very intense time over the last couple of days over the whole asylum seeker issue. Living in tents on Nauru and Manus Island; is that acceptable to you, because that is the prediction.
PM: It's a temporary measure as the permanent facilities are constructed, so Defence will get on with the job the way they do with all of their professionalism. There will be some temporary accommodation and then there will be permanent accommodation.
HOST: There's many more to deal with than anybody could have anticipated. The numbers just keep on growing, so the chances of them being in those tents for a longer period of time than would be desirable seems to be the case. How long would you be happy to see asylum seekers in tents?
PM: All of these measures that Angus Houston and his team have recommended are about stopping people getting on boats, so we shouldn't be saying ‘well the current rate of arrivals we're seeing now will just be continued.'
We're doing all of this, some of it very hard things. We're doing it all so that we don't see people risking their lives at sea. We've seen too many tragedies, too many losses.
HOST: We spoke to Tony Abbott earlier this morning and he says that of a three-pronged attack, there's only one prong that's been addressed. You still will not be happy with the idea of temporary protection visas, because that is what he says is going to take us back to what John Howard was doing when the boats really did stop coming.
PM: Tony Abbott is flying in the face of the expert recommendations we've got from three eminent Australians.
Angus Houston, former chief of the defence force; Paris Aristotle, a refugee policy expert; Michael L'Estrange, a foreign policy expert; they have not recommended temporary protection visas. They've said towbacks are not possible under current circumstances, they've given the nation a very good plan.
They've said you've got to do all of it, and the Government has said in principle we're going to do the lot.
HOST: Well Fairfax is reporting this morning on an asylum seeker in West Java, Mohammed Khani; he says living in a tent is no deterrent to him. He's coming anyway. This is somebody who's planning on coming, even though he knows exactly what's going on in Australian politics at the moment. Doesn't that mean you're back to square one?
PM: The aim of the Houston report, and it's not just going to Nauru and PNG, this is a comprehensive report, and the aim of it is to say to people like him you've got no greater chance of getting into Australia if you get on a boat than if you stay where you are now.
The only thing you'll do by getting on a boat is risk your life at sea and pay a people smuggler.
You won't get to Australia any more quickly than if you stay put, went to UNHCR, had your claim processed and got dealt with where you are now, so don't do it, don't risk it, don't lose your money, potentially lose your life.
HOST: Should our humanitarian intake increase to 20,000 and 27,000 in five years? Are you happy with that?
PM: In principle we've given that the tick, now we've got to work through all of the financial costs and they are considerable.
But the aim here is to be able to say to people like the asylum seeker you refer to, if you stay where you are and don't move, get your claim processed, you've got a chance of coming to Australia because we're a generous country and we're prepared to make places available.
If you get on a boat, you won't get here any more quickly. You'll go to Nauru and PNG, not just to have your claim processed, but you will be kept there for the same amount of time that you would have waited had you stayed where you were.
HOST: Alright another intense day in Parliament today but in the meantime you've got duties to perform, so I will let you go Prime Minister. Thank you very much for joining us.
PM: Lovely to see you Lisa, thank you.



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: I'm here with the Minister for Industry and Innovation, Greg Combet, and also with Innes Willox, the leader of the Australian Industry Group and Dave Oliver, the leader of the Australian Council of Trade Unions. They have joined me and Minister Combet today because they have just handed us this.
This is a report from the non-Government members of my manufacturing task force, and I want to thank them and everybody in the room who has worked so hard on this report, thank you for your efforts.
I asked for this report because there is nothing more important to me as Prime Minister than making sure Australians have got jobs. A million Australians work in manufacturing.
I want to make sure that we are working with our manufacturing industries today during the days of the resources boom and that we still have a strong manufacturing sector in the future in the days that lie beyond the resources boom.
Manufacturing provides us with a skill base, with innovation and it provides working people with jobs.
Good, blue-collar jobs. Jobs on which people can build their lives and support their families. That's why manufacturing is so important.
Our manufacturing sector has been undergoing profound change since the 1970s, since we started the process of opening up our economy to the world.
Now there are some acute pressures on manufacturing, particularly because of the strength of the Australian dollar. It is changing business models in manufacturing, it is bringing pressure on our manufacturing businesses.
But this is also an era of tremendous opportunity for Australian manufacturing.
As we continue to see the incredible growth in the region in which we live, the rise of more middle-class consumers in Asia, we will see a greater demand for cutting edge manufactured products and Australia and Australians can play a role in satisfying that demand.
So a time of change and a time of opportunity for Australian manufacturing. There are some great success stories today.
Don't let the pessimists say that we can't have a future in manufacturing. We can see today strong businesses like Boeing making the Dreamliner, and I acknowledge that Ian is here today leading the Boeing business here in Australia.
Strong businesses like Hoffmann's that I visited myself in Western Australia, a manufacturing business making the things that the resources sector needs for its expansion, not only providing the resources sector here in Australia but exporting their expertise and product around the world.
In my home state of Victoria, SPC making its way in different circumstances but continuing to be in manufacturing and be successful in what it is doing. So there are great success stories.
But we want more businesses to win through in this time of change.
That's why I brought together the Prime Minister's manufacturing task force and that's why I am so delighted to receive this report. We want to ensure that manufacturing has a strong future in our country. This is a powerful vision of what that future can look like.
I thank everybody on the taskforce for their work. I will hand now to Innes who will speak first, then to Dave and then Minister Combet.
INNES WILLOX: Thank you Prime Minister. Thank you very much for the opportunity to present this Non-Government Members of your Taskforce on Manufacturing report to you today.
Australian Industry Group and other business representatives on the taskforce have worked very constructively with the unions, the CSIRO and a range of international experts to produce this report.
I would especially like to acknowledge and thank the contribution of the employer representatives: Ian Thomas of Boeing who is here with us today; Geoff Plummer of Arrium, otherwise known as OneSteel; Chris Jenkins of Thales; Rebecca Dee Bradbury of Kraft; Mike Devereux of Holden; Philip Binns of Agilent Technologies and Phil Butler from Textor Technologies; all of whom have contributed to this report in quite substantial ways.
The report has made 41 recommendations and they have been endorsed by the business and union representatives on the taskforce.
While there is much agreement on the pathway forward, there are some other areas that we haven't discussed here, which obviously are the subject of other discussion which impact on manufacturing, particularly around the area of workplace relations.
But, this report is a vote of confidence in the manufacturing sector, despite the head winds which it faces which are substantial.
These structural and cyclical pressures on the sector are coming from the strength and volatility of the dollar.
Pressures of the growth from the resources sector, particularly around wages and skills, global competition, particularly the industrial revolution in China and elsewhere and the re-industrialisation of the United States, high input costs particularly around energy, slow productivity growth which has led to relatively high growth in unit labour costs and slowdowns in areas vital to our economy such as residential and commercial construction and tourism, as well as greater difficulty for industry to access finance in the post global financial crisis environment.
These pressures are tremendously challenging for manufacturing sector.
And we can see that from the sharp fall in employment, in factory closures, and also from the many plants that are operating at well less than full capacity.
All of these pressures are cutting into our manufacturing capabilities and putting at risk our ability to respond to the emerging opportunities which the Prime Minister has outlined.
They are raising important questions about the direction, the balance and the resilience of our economic development and our vulnerability to growing reliance on exports of mineral commodities that are currently attracting such historically high prices.
Even though at the moment we have to consider that those prices and investment plans in the resources sector are being reconsidered because of the impact particularly of the dollar.
All of this is occurring at a time when we are on the cusp of very strong potential opportunities as a result of the unprecedented surge in living standards in Asia, but the erosion of manufacturing capabilities is putting at risk our capacity to take advantage of those opportunities.
Please remember that manufacturing directly employs nearly 1 million Australians and it is adapting to the challenges of the rapid growth of Asia and the needs of its middle class. This report recognises that we need to play to our strengths.
The report acknowledges the huge and ongoing opportunities provided by the resources boom and does not advocate winding the clock back on the industrial restructuring that is currently under way.
In fact, the heart of this report goes to finding ways to improve Australia's industrial productivity. It proposes concrete steps to address the current cyclical pressures and backs proposals to lift productivity and reduce tax and regulatory burdens.
Most importantly it looks to build a more innovative and better managed network community. It looks to provide us with a highly skilled and productive work place. If we lose manufacturing, we risk losing the vital skills that Australia needs to build our future.
And once we lose those skills, we never get them back. The report looks to build strong collaborative partnerships with public sector research and it also looks to build the global supply chains that are vital to the future of manufacturing and most importantly it looks to build a small and medium enterprise culture within Australia.
In short, this report provides a positive agenda to build smarting manufacturing for a smarter Australia.
It looks to provide the pathway for a manufacturing sector that can get through the current and future pressures and it looks to and forges emerging opportunities and that continues to make a strong and positive contribution to a growing, balanced and resilient economy.
This is a start, this report, of a new and necessary conversation and policy response to the challenges and tremendous opportunities for the manufacturing sector.
This report, we hope, will lead to a re-industrialisation of Australia with a clear focus on advanced manufacturing. Thank you.
DAVE OLIVER: First of all I'd like to take the opportunity to thank the Prime Minister and the Government for establishing the taskforce in the first place.
You may recall at the time that the taskforce was put together was on the back of some significant announcements that were made in the steel industry and the automotive industry, and at that time the Government saw the need and the benefit of bringing the key stakeholders together to identify and look at proposals to sustain a strong, viable manufacturing industry in this country.
We recognise that there are significant challenges. In the last five years alone, we have industry seen 100,000 jobs disappear out of the manufacturing sector and we're still on track to lose many more. We recognise the pressure that's on manufacturing due to, as the Prime Minister has recognised, the impact that a high Australian dollar is having or the decline in productivity, the decline in investment 20 years ago in our infrastructure, we are paying for the price for that now, and 20 years ago the lack of investment in skills.
So we recognise that there is significant pressure, but we also do recognise the importance of having a strong, viable manufacturing industry in this country.
As Innes and others have recognised, this is an industry  -  despite efforts to try and write it off  -  employs 1 million people direct, is a driver of innovation, a driver of skills and a driver of technology. It makes a significant contribution to the economy overall.
And it is important that we do recognise the need to have a diversified economic base and we can't purely just rely on a mining boom, because the mining boom will eventually bust.
And we need to ensure that we've got a robust economy, that can sustain that bust and manufacturing is a key part of that.
The taskforce was an opportunity for industry, unions and Government to come together. And that's always a good model. Where we can come together and identify and work together and collaborate. Now what I do want to say is, what you won't find in that report is a magic wand solution or a silver bullet.
This is a blueprint or a roadmap for the future. Now it will only succeed if we can continue to engage constructively and work together. That's industry, employers with Government.
Now, there's over 40 recommendations but the overall objective is it's about getting smarter workplaces, it is about collaboration, it is about innovation, it is about making the connection between research and development. It is about investment in skills and skills development.
It is about investment in infrastructure. It's about training employees and getting smarter management systems in place. It is better networking between small, medium-sized enterprises. It is about assisting small, medium-sized enterprises to get access to capital, to get access to finance.
It is about having co-investment schemes in place which attract investment. And one of the most recent successful stories we have seen there, was the announcement of Holden of investing $1 billion to continue operations in Adelaide where the Government had put up $250 million.
That is a formula that works. Of course, part of all of this too is about improving the perception of manufacturing so we can continue to attract the workers of the future in the industry, the apprentices and also retain existing workers.
The main recommendations, the key themes of it, are about exploiting the benefits of the mining boom.
We still don't think it is acceptable that we've got workshops in the Kwinana strip sitting idle, while we're importing lots of plant and equipment that are going into resource projects.
Now, we recognise and applaud the initiatives the Government has announced about trying to maximise ways to increase local content into those projects. We want Government support for manufacturing and procurement.
We don't see it's acceptable that we've got state governments around this country that are purchasing cars from overseas, where in their own backyard auto companies are laying off workers. We also want to see the opportunity about building a marine engineering capability in this country, ensuring we are building the future submarine project here in this country and not importing submarines off the shelf.
We want to exploit the opportunities of tackling climate change. We've applauded the establishment of the $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation which provides many opportunities to not only invent the technologies but make them here.
We also applaud the initiative of the Government of providing $1 billion for companies to invest in new energy efficient technologies, which has been taken up on a wide spread basis.
We want to invest in skills; that's a key part. Innovation  -  we want to maximise the opportunities of our getting into Asia and in doing so, to make sure we have a level playing field when it comes to trade and identifying the formal and informal barriers that preclude or prevent our manufacturers and providers of services to get into those markets.
So I want to make it very clear that this is only the start of the process. This report is the beginning, it doesn't end here.
And we are very keen, the union movement, is very keen to continue to work in a constructive way with industry, with employers and Government to work on those key recommendations to build a strong, viable manufacturing in the future.
And we all know that we have a role to play. This isn't a case of coming here with a begging bowl to Government saying “You are the answer and you will provide all the solutions”.
We'll roll our sleeves up, industry will roll their sleeves up and in doing so, hopefully we will see the support of the Government as we have enjoyed previously and into the future.
PM: Thanks very much. Thanks Dave. Greg.
MINISTER COMBET: Thank you Prime Minister. Firstly, I'd like to thank Innes and Dave in particular for the work that they and their organisations have put into the report, but also all of the other members of the taskforce.
The meetings that I've attended and the less formal gatherings we have had sometimes to discuss the issues I think are represented in the report, in that it is a realistic assessment of the economic context in Australia and globally that manufacturing in this country rests in.
That is, it does recognise that we have a very strong economy overall. We have GDP growing at 4.3 per cent. We've got unemployment down at 5.2 per cent.
We've had interest rates coming down. There are very good indicators in our economy. Jobs growth of 14,000 people during the month of July. Inflation at its lowest point in underlying inflation terms in 13 years.
A very significant level of investment in the private sector, obviously a significant degree of it in the resources boom, but significant private sector investment in the economy.
So there are a lot of good indicators, part of that as you are aware and has been touched upon is reflected in the high value of the Australian dollar and, of course, this is adding to structural adjustment pressures in the economy and manufacturing is one of those industries most affected by having a high Australian dollar.
Many of the business investments made in manufacturing over the years have been done on the basis of business models where, at our historical average, around 80 cents to the US dollar, business models have worked.
They are not working at $1.05 and that is why many manufacturing businesses are under pressure.
The thing that I really respect the most about what all of the task group members have brought to this effort, is that they've recognised those realities and have concentrated  - rather than on a yearning for the past that sometimes one hears in these discourses  -  on focusing on the future and what we can do in an industry like this that is so important to a modern diversified economy, so important to our economy, what we can do to drive improvements in productivity and competitiveness.
And the report touches on many important areas that have been traversed to some degree by both Innes and Dave, but they I think address five areas that as Minister, I will certainly be concentrating on and studying the report in detail.
Those five areas of course touch upon the structural adjustment pressures and the necessity to meet those and the necessity to meet those and work with industries to boost their competitiveness in pretty tough circumstances.
There are of course a number of observations made about the importance of economy-wide productivity in the report that's very important.
We've seen some positive indicators on that front in the statistics over the last 12 months but the report addresses those issues too.
One of the things that interests me as Minister, in particular, is the attention the report pays to the necessity to build smarter networks in this country between research organisations, large companies particularly international companies, Boeing is represented here today by the Australian CEO Ian Thomas who was a task group member, but bringing research organisations together, universities, CSIRO, large international firms, large Australian firms and SMEs in an effort to bring a closer collaboration between our research effort in this country and innovation, and apply it in our economy in a way that drives productivity and competitiveness, particularly in this issue.
Attention is also paid to the importance of driving capability within our small and medium-sized enterprise sector which is very important driver of productivity and innovation.
And also on smarter workplaces, and my colleague Bill Shorten has worked on this area in relation to the task group report, and I'd like to acknowledge his work but particularly given mine and his background as former trade union officials, we understand the importance of there being a strong cooperative effort when you are faced with times of difficulty in a workplace with the profitability of a company, of the importance of the employees, the unions and business working together to find the changes, the improved processes, the innovation that will ensure the sustainability of that firm and the jobs that it provides.
It is represented in this report. It is quite an extraordinary thing that at times like this, with pressures in manufacturing, the in Australian Industry Group and the ACTU and all of the other players in the industry are able to reach consensus about the analysis and the recommendations. It is a great credit to those involved. It does mean there is going to be a continuing cooperative effort.
In responding to the report, there are many of the recommendations that the Government, I suppose I can indicate at this stage, sees that it may in principle be able to agree with.
We will have to work on them, but in particular there are some very important observations in the report that we'll pay very close attention to. We'll immediately accept one of the recommendations of the report to establish a Manufacturing Leaders Group.
We have benefitted greatly, and I as Minister has benefitted greatly, in the cooperative effort in developing this report. And they are important inputs into government policy.
One of the recommendations indicates that that should be an ongoing collaboration between government and industry players and others with an interest in the industry and we will move immediately to establish that leaders group.
PM: Thanks very much. We will take some questions but I anticipate there will be some interest in media reports in relation to matters involving Mr Assange.
I am not in a position to confirm those media reports. It is around 2am in London, but we are in contact with our High Commission.
When we are in a position to provide any further clarity, Minister Carr will make a statement on behalf of the Government.
We will take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Dave Oliver said that they hadn't come here with a begging bowl, but is the Government prepared to throw some more money at this given that there are some very good ideas? Is that something you are turning your attention to in the next few months?
PM: We will be responding to the work of this report as Minister Combet has outlined. So we are not today going to pre-empt that response but we are very clearly saying to you we think that there is great merit in many of the recommendations of this report.
We have been prepared to work together in the past. We've got a shared analysis about many of the challenges that manufacturing faces and we will be getting on with the job of responding to this report because of our key concern about manufacturing jobs, blue-collar jobs and making sure that the economy is serving the interests of working people.
JOURNALIST: A question to Innes and Dave. I know you have said there is no single silver bullet but could you spell out just three concrete proposals in the report that you think will make a difference?
DAVE OLIVER: I won't go to our specific recommendations, but in a broad sense we see getting smarter work places, a key part is investment in skills. That has to be critical. I note reports in some of the newspapers today about a McKinsey report that's come out in regards to management systems and investment in skills. That's the key to improving productivity.
Secondly, it is ensuring we have got the capability to have the ongoing dialogue and collaboration. So the establishment of the leadership group is a very important step and we welcome it as a first initiative. As we have said, this will be done on an ongoing basis.
The third aspect of it would have to be in respect to the benefits of the mining boom.
And I would also throw in there the government procurement options which provide significant opportunities in the short and medium term to fill our workshops and to expand our manufacturing base, particularly in the submarine projects.
JOURNALIST: Can the pro Federal Government do more to buy Australian made goods? PM: I have taken steps as Prime Minister on things like procuring motor vehicles to make sure we are getting Australian-made goods.
On our recent purchases we have taken the percentage up to 76%, and last year I urged my state colleagues to do the same. Dave has just referred to a big piece of work in front of us which is the submarine project and the Government is carefully working its with way through some very important decisions in relation to that project.
There is also an aspiration here and you will see it reflected in the report, to make sure that manufacturing gets its fair share of the resources boom, that we are seeing partnership between our resources sector and our manufacturing sector so that Australian workers in our manufacturing industry can be supplying the things that the resources boom needs.
We have already put in place some policies about that but obviously there is some issues in the report that are worked through and we think require us to respond to the report and to do some more thinking about.
JOURNALIST: A question to Mr Willox just in continuation, but also your perspective of the people you represent; industrial relations, the fixed price on carbon, are they things you would like addressed in this report on behalf of the people you represent who tend to talk about that a fair bit?
INNES WILLOX: There are a couple of issues just to unpack there. This is a report about the future of manufacturing specifically and going to Tim's question, there are a couple of golden threads that run through the report.
One is looking at the need to play to our strengths which is in Asia, our skilled workforce, our capabilities. There is a specific recommendation in there, for instance, about a food sector strategy, looking at processed food into the region. So that is playing to our strengths.
We are looking at innovation and R&amp;D. They are crucial to the future of the sector; building the linkages with universities and research institutions which are sadly on the whole lacking at the moment, although there are some positive steps in that direction.
And we are looking at the whole innovation agenda generally. Innovation is the key. It is the way out for Australian industry at the moment and that will be key to what we believe will be the re-industrialisation of the country.
Going to workplace relations, obviously this is an issue which is a separate discussion, that's part of the Fair Work review and we are examining that under the auspices of that review, not in this report, and similarly on climate change and more generally that's a separate discussion with Government.
There are some quite clear recommendations here around energy policy and those sort of issues which play around the edges of that but they are not central to this report.
JOURNALIST: But broadly speaking, what do you think the impact of the carbon tax has been and will be on manufacturing?
INNES WILLOX: This is an issue that has to play out over time. We have made our position clear around price and regulation. (Inaudible) is a conversation we've had with the Prime Minister and Government many times. It is early days, we will just wait to see over the months ahead what impact there is.
JOURNALIST: Minister Combet, wondering if you could explain to us how this leadership group will work? Will it be given an agenda by the Government or will it be reactive to events? And what sort of role would you envisage it having in responding to the Asian century report that's coming out?
MINISTER COMBET: Essentially, what I'd like it to be is a collaborative effort with industry and with the research organisations to help develop and implement the response to the task group's report.
Obviously the Government has work to do and I've got to get my roller skates on now we've received the taskforce's report to develop our response to it. But I wish to continue an engagement with the people who have drafted the report and others in the industry and then in the establishment of the leaders' group.
What this clearly demonstrated to me, which is no great surprise, when we all put our heads together in an environment where we have got a common goal, we will be able to implement change in the future I think does boost the productivity and competitiveness of the industry.
That's fundamentally what I see it doing.
It is going to need support in that effort with research, with coordination of efforts across the country, with liaison with State Governments that have a pretty keen interest in this area, particularly in jurisdictions like Victoria and South Australia, but when you bring people together who have got the practical business experience both internationally and domestically, those who are keen innovators, those who are in universities and research institutions and policy makers in governments, you can make a difference. That's what I want it to do.
JOURNALIST: Will this leadership group be a forum that does not discuss IR issues specifically, (inaudible)?
MINISTER COMBET: It is a manufacturing leaders' group. It will focus on the issues I anticipate that are covered within the report, but the report does discuss, as I indicated earlier, the importance of having smarter work places, I think is the terminology used in the document.
Just to be practical about it, before coming into Parliament I think I spent the better part of 25 years representing working people and particularly had close associations with the manufacturing sector and the resources industry among many others.
During all of that time, there wasn't a single day when change was not occurring. We were in an environment of course all through the 1980s, 90s and the past decade of quite dramatic economic change, but those periods of reform have led us to have a very extended period of uninterrupted economic growth; very significant productivity improvements.
And one of the key parts of that is a cooperative effort at the workplace level. Whilst some industrial struggles receive a lot of attention in public discourse, understandably, the fact of the matter is that industrial disputes in this country have faded over many years.
We do have pretty good work place culture. We do have a decent safety net of pay and employment conditions for working people that are very important and we have a devolved system of bargaining at the workplace level which is where the decisions need to be made about ensuring the competitiveness of our firms and improving productivity.
Government can play an important role in that by many methods. One of them is a massive investment in skills and working with business and employees to lift skill levels in workplaces. And as the Prime Minister has well-articulated on many previous occasions, this Government is doing an enormous amount on that front.
Uncapping of university places, significant lift in graduates, massive investments in vocational education and training, working much more closely with industry. Those things are underway.
There are many other steps in this report that are foreshadowed, particularly in the area of collaboration on research and innovation that I think we can do some more work on. It is not just about industrial relations. It is about a cooperative effort to achieve an economic goal.
PM: I will take a few more questions. I'm going to pick up the Minister's image at some point and we will all have to get our roller skates on for the rest of the day.
JOURNALIST: On another matter, there are reports that some asylum seekers urged the captain of a boat to change direction to come towards Christmas Island and there have been calls for those people to be investigated or charged with piracy. What is your position on that?
PM: If there is a breach of any relevant laws, then of course it has to be properly investigated, but this is the week that in this Parliament we've moved to action and change after the parliamentary deadlock that we have seen.
The Senate has got to play its role today but I anticipate that we will leave this Parliament with new legislation.
We need that new legislation to implement the recommendations of the Houston report, particularly in relation to PNG and Manus Island.
And we have been very, very clear that anybody who gets on a boat and endeavours to come to Australia is now at risk of being transferred to Nauru or Manus Island.
JOURNALIST: I appreciate you can't comment on current matters regarding Julian Assange but on the broader issue, has Australia sought any promises from any government, particularly the US or Sweden, regarding extradition?
PM: I have dealt with these questions in the past. There is no change in my answers. I am not intending to take questions on this matter until we are in a circumstance where we have the facts from London.
JOURNALIST: One of the recommendations seems to be encouraging you to revisit the business tax level and there seemed to be some concerns about R&amp;D incentive arrangements. What are your inclinations on that?
PM: Let's be very clear, and I will go to Minister Combet, there has obviously been some publicity arising from the discussion paper from the business tax working group. They are ideas for discussion, they are not government decisions.
We asked the business tax working group to get on with the job of looking at ideas and they are doing that and people have an opportunity to participate in this discussion.
MINISTER COMBET: To reiterate that point, the business tax working group has canvassed a number of things, including ways in which the business tax arrangements might be rejigged and has raised an issue about the research and development tax incentive.
I just have to say, speaking for myself as Minister for a moment, the enhanced research and development tax initiative that we announced last year that effectively came into effect from 1 July is a very important contributor to the innovative effort in this country.
It is important within the business community that the business tax working group's discussion paper is discussed and considered and that views are brought back to the Government about it.
But I'm, in particular, very mindful of the importance of the R&amp;D tax incentive in our innovation effort, and it is one of the things given support to in a general sense in the task group report.
JOURNALIST: Are you attracted to call to set up an inquiry into the Iraq war?
PM: No, I'm not. I could have given you a long answer about the circumstances of the Iraq war but we've got other issues.
JOURNALIST: On Hugh's question, the Immigration Shadow Scott Morrison has just said that the Government should have sent the SAS to board that freighter and escort it to Singapore. Can I get your response to that?
PM: I am not going to make a response to a Mr Morrison comment that I haven't seen the full context of or got the full wording in front of me. But can I say generally in this area, the time for the political argy-bargy is passed.
The Australian people want to see us get on with it. We have in this week, in this Parliament, got on with it and now the Government is moving to take all of the action necessary to implement the recommendations of the Houston report about PNG and Nauru, including having reconnaissance teams on the ground as soon as tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Just to follow on that question, Ms Gillard, you have sent a very strong message to the asylum seekers not to get on boats, but would you also send a message that if they do get on boats and picked up by merchant vessels and create problems on them, that action will be taken, whether having military board or through some other means?
PM: Let me say something general rather than deal with these specifics that have been put. If anyone in any circumstance anywhere engages in unlawful conduct, then of course that unlawful conduct should be acted upon.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said you were getting on with implementing the Houston findings. Are you in a position to confirm the cost to the Budget will be as the report suggests $4.6 billion over the forward estimates and does that make it hard for you to implement the Gonski changes?
PM: We will work through proper government processes to get full costings. We will do what we always do which is make appropriate provision in the Budget. The Budget will come to surplus.
JOURNALIST: Can I come back to the manufacturing report. Can I ask each of you, do you think that the higher dollar is the biggest single problem facing manufacturing now? And if so, is it something you just have to live with or is it something that you would like the economic policy makers in the Government to be looking for ways to influence?
PM: I'm happy to turn to my friends on that and then I will say something.
DAVE OLIVER: Just a couple of ones. The high Australian dollar is having a significant impact on manufacturing, not only because of where it is sitting but for the amount of time it has been sitting there. This is what the report recognises, that we envisage the dollar will remain high for some time. So the main thrust is about being more competitive, being more smarter, being more productive, and this report will coincide with the Asian Century white paper which is about getting greater opportunities.
There are some recommendations in respect of looking at ways to try to minimise the impact of the dollar but the main thrust is about being smarter, more competitive and more efficient.
INNES WILLOX: When you talk to business about the situation they face with the dollar among a league table of problems or circumstances they are facing at the moment, the dollar is number one and it's about four games clear on top of the ladder when it comes to being a concern to industry at the moment. It is having a big impact on investment into Australia, it is having a big impact on our export capability, it is having a big impact on access to capital.
So across a whole broad range of issues, the dollar, not just the height that it's at but also the volatility it goes through. When it moves, it moves in big directions and very quickly. And that impacts on investment decisions as well. So the dollar, its volatility and its strength are significant concerns for industry at the moment and have been for a long time.
This report makes a series of recommendations, not getting into intervention in the dollar but looking at ameliorating the impact of the dollar around other frameworks to build industrial capacity in Australia.
PM: If I can just say we have got a world-beating economy and the strength of the dollar is a reflection of our economic strength, it is a reflection of our economic strength in resources. It's also a reflection of the fact many people are increasingly viewing Australia as a safe haven place and there is a hunger for assets that are denominated in Australian dollars.
So in those circumstances, it is a reflection of strength but it is also driving change and putting pressure on other industries of which manufacturing is clearly a very significant one.
One million Australians employed in manufacturing. That's why we are in this process working with partners from the trade union movement, partners from the business community and their organisations, because we all understand that we need to be shaping that change in the interests of our nation, in the interests of the businesses of our nation and fundamentally in the interests of the hardworking Australians who make their way and their livelihood in manufacturing.
We will take one more question and then we have to go.
JOURNALIST: Just to clarify, has the Australian Government had no contact from the UK Government regarding Julian Assange?
PM: We will deal with all of this when we are in a position to do so. What I have said to you is it is the middle of the night in London, past 2am now, and we are speaking to our High Commissioner.
Thanks very much.



Manufacturing can prosper and grow in Australia if the sector takes advantage of emerging opportunities in the Asian region, a national report into manufacturing has found.
Members of the Prime Minister's Manufacturing Taskforce - representing business, unions and the research sector - presented their report Smarter Manufacturing for a Smarter Australia today.
The Gillard Government is committed to ensuring that Australia retains a strong manufacturing industry and will respond to the report's recommendations with an Industry and Innovation Statement in the last quarter of the year.
The Taskforce report concludes that manufacturing is an important part of the Australian economy, with significant links to other industries including construction, agriculture, utilities and services.
However it says the sector currently faces challenges such as the high Australian dollar, the strength of the resources boom in terms of capital and labour, more intensive global and regional competition and the continuing fallout from the global financial crisis.
Acknowledging this economic context, the report maps out a powerful vision for the future of Australian manufacturing. It makes more than 40 recommendations designed to strengthen local firms as they adapt to global economic change.
The report makes it clear that manufacturing can prosper and grow by taking advantage of significant emerging opportunities, especially in the Asian region.
The Government is supportive in principle of most of the report's recommendations.
However the Government does not support recommendations in the report to further investigate a Sovereign Wealth Fund and a domestic reservation policy for gas.
The Australian economy is strong, with solid growth, low unemployment, contained inflation and a record pipeline of investment. While conditions remain uneven, recent interest rate cuts will provide some support to households and businesses. In order to support demand and address the immediate pressures in the manufacturing sector, the Government is implementing a range of polices, including:
• Lifting Australian industry participation in major resources projects;• Rewarding innovation in manufacturing by introducing a new R&amp;D Tax Incentive and boosting support through Commercialisation Australia;• Reducing the energy costs of manufacturers through the $1.2 billion Clean Technology Programs;• Encouraging investment in clean energy through the $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation and the $3.2 billion Australian Renewable Energy Agency;• Co-investing with industry in improved productivity and competitiveness in automotive manufacturing;• Strengthening the Australian Government's Fleet Vehicle Selection Policy requiring departments and agencies to select Australian-made passenger vehicles, unless there is a genuine operational requirement that means they have to do otherwise; and• Delivering $3 billion to create more training places and fundamentally reform the training system, including co-investing with industry to improve the skills of the manufacturing workforce.
In addition, the Government will immediately bring together the Industry Capability Network, the Buy Australian at Home and Abroad Supply Advocates, AusIndustry and Enterprise Connect to share information on opportunities for Australian manufacturers in large domestic investment projects, with a particular focus on the resources sector.
Once these opportunities are identified, these agencies will work with Australian manufacturers to assist them to secure work on these projects.
This network will be tasked to work closely with Austrade and the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation to identify and provide information on opportunities in export markets, with a focus on linking into global supply chains.
The report builds on current policy settings with a strong set of proposals to ensure manufacturing is a dynamic contributor to Australia's prosperity, with an economy that has a diverse base creating skilled jobs.
The Government also accepts the Taskforce's recommendation to establish a Manufacturing Leaders Group. We see an important role for this group in assisting the Government to implement its response to the Taskforce's recommendations.
One of the policy agendas identified by the non-government members of the Taskforce is to address Australia's competitiveness through the generation, dissemination and application of knowledge. This calls for researchers, research agencies and business to rethink how they can best work together to encourage innovation.Such collaboration will be facilitated through the Industrial Research Transformation Program (ITRP), which supports strong partnerships between research and industry and encourages PhD students and postdoctoral researchers to gain industry experience.The ITRP funding rules will be finalised in the context of the Industry and Innovation statement. The Australian Research Council will consult with Industry and the Research Sector in order to release the rules in coming weeks.
The full Manufacturing Taskforce report can be accessed online at the below website.
http://www.innovation.gov.au/Industry/Manufacturing/Taskforce/Pages/def…



Prime Minister Julia Gillard will travel to Bali to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the Bali bombings in 2002.
The Australian Government will be holding services both in Bali and Canberra on 12 October, with Their Excellencies the Governor-General Ms Quentin Bryce AC CVO and Mr Michael Bryce AM AE to lead the Canberra service.
Two hundred and two people died in the first Bali bombings, among them 88 Australians. Many more were severely injured.
It was a moment of horror that had a profound effect on Australia as a nation and on the lives of survivors and the family and loved ones of those who died.
Time has healed many of the physical wounds caused by the bombings but it can never diminish the sense of wrong we feel at this act of terror. Forgetting would be the ultimate injustice  -  and we will never forget.
This tenth anniversary will be an important moment of reflection and remembrance for all Australians, but especially for those touched directly by the senseless violence of 12 October 2002.
We also remember the many Indonesians and citizens of other countries killed in the bombings.
The Gillard Government will provide financial assistance to Australians who were seriously injured and to the families of the Australians who lost their lives in the 2002 bombings to help them attend either service. This will help cover the costs of flights, accommodation and ground transport, in line with the package provided for the first anniversary.
Further details on the assistance package and eligibility are available by calling the Bali hotline on 13 61 25. The hotline will operate Monday to Friday from 8.00 am to 5.00 pm.
The memorial service in Bali will be held at the Garuda Wisnu Kencana Cultural Park and the Canberra service will be held in the Great Hall of Parliament House.
The services will be open to all Australians and other nationalities who want to come together on this day.
Further details about both memorial services can be found at www.dfat.gov.au/bali-anniversary. Members of the general public and media wishing to attend either event are asked to register their details via this website.
Further details on the program for both commemorations will be released shortly. 



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks very much for your company.
PM: Good morning Peter.
HOST: About a decade ago you made an observation in the Parliament, slightly sarcastically about whether Nauru would still be up and functioning by now and for another decade from now.
Is it humiliating to have to be in a situation now where you're embracing a report that recommends the re-opening of Nauru?
PM: Peter, if your point is has the Government compromised, have I compromised, yes I have. And I've done that in the nation's interest. People smuggling is a resilient trade. It's a trade that mutates, that learns from experience and we have people smugglers out there enticing people to risk their lives at sea and we've seen too many deaths and too many tragedies.
So in those circumstances we needed to act. We've been prepared to compromise for some time. That has been met with no compromise from the Opposition.
I'm very glad that through Angus Houston and the report that he and his fellow panel members delivered, we've been able to put in place what they described as a circuit-breaker and now we need to put in place the rest of the measure recommended by the Houston report over time.
HOST: Do you agree with Kevin Rudd that you had a mandate as a Government in 2007 to unwind the Pacific Solution?
PM: Well we certainly stood in the 2007 election on a policy of not having offshore processing but we face a circumstance now where we're seeing large numbers of people lose their lives at sea because they are enticed by people smugglers who say, pay your money and get to Australia.
Which is why the underlining reasoning of the Houston report I think is so compelling; that we've got to be very, very clear with asylum seekers that you will get no advantage by having paid a people smuggler and having risked your life.
HOST: Prime Minister, what's the practical effect of your new policy? In particular, does this mean protracted or indefinite detention on Nauru and Papua New Guinea?
PM: It certainly means that people could be on Nauru or in PNG for an extended period of time. What the Houston report is saying to us, and we have certainly embraced this, is that you need to equalise the waiting times that people have whether or not they move.
So you look in the region where people are processed by UNHCR and you ask yourself the question, how long would they wait if they stayed where they were and waited for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and their officers to process their claims-
HOST: That could be years.
PM: And to a resettlement opportunity? Have them wait the same amount of time on Nauru and PNG.
HOST: Well it could be a very long period of time and surely we're talking here about many years?
PM: Well yes, this is a tough policy Paul. This is a tough policy. I can't give you what the timeframe is today. We need to do some consultations, including with UNHCR to ascertain what that timeframe is but let's not forget, there is a balance here in the Houston report.
He says equalise the amount of time that people wait so that there is no incentive, no advantage from having risked your life at sea and giving a people smugglers your money. He says also that we need to make available more refugee places.
So the measure to people is, if you stay, if you don't get on that boat then more places will be made available for you. If you do get on that boat then you won't get any advantage out of it.
HOST: I understand that trade-off but when you look at this, is it fair to say that your policy is now a tougher policy than John Howard's previous Pacific Solution?
PM: People will do all of this commentary-
HOST: But I'm asking you.
PM: And I'm going to answer your question Paul. People will obviously do comparisons between aspects of this policy and aspects of the policy of the former Government.
I actually don't think it's the comparison of aspects that's compelling. I think you've got to look at this as an integrated package the way that Angus Houston and his team asked us to do.
People will say some elements are tougher, people will say that there are some new elements that are humanitarian like the more refugee places. This is a package and we have endorsed the package in principle.
HOST: Well what's your response to the criticism, particularly from your own human rights Commission, which says that under your new law the High Court is not able to look and make a judgement about the human rights aspect of processing offshore?
PM: We will have a proper processing regime offshore to assist you as a refugee. The mechanics of all of that regime will be worked through. But yes, there'll be a proper assessment of who's a refugee and a proper assessment of who isn't and who ought to return to their home land.
HOST: But what about circumscribing the authority of the High Court when it comes to scrutinising this. I mean, that's the accusation, the accusation from the human rights lawyers is that this legislation is too tough and that it limits the capacity of the High Court to judge this in human rights terms. What's your response to that particular point?
PM: My response to that particular point is we needed in this legislation to make arrangements so we could process offshore. As a result of a High Court decision about the arrangement with Malaysia we could not.
We've taken a very rigorous legal approach to that, given circumstances in the High Court before and we stand by it. There will be proper assessments of whether or not people are refugees.
HOST: Prime Minister, a best case scenario here, if this does work, is that we're going to have at least a few hundred people locked-up indefinitely, possibly for years in Nauru costing taxpayers an awful lot of money and 70-90 per cent of those people, judging on estimates over the last decade, are going to be genuine refugees but are going to be sort of held in detention despite all the psychological issues and all the mental health issues that a whole range of Labor politicians talked about during the Howard years, that is going to be a best case scenario.
A worst case scenario is the boats keep coming and people keep drowning.
PM: Well Peter I'm going to disagree with you on aspects of that sentence. The Houston panel is not saying that people should be on Nauru or PNG indefinitely  -  no one is saying that. They're saying look to the times for resettlement if people haven't moved.
Second, when you used the terminology, ‘locked-up'. We are obviously working, particularly with Nauru, for arrangements where people will have some freedom of movement so that they can move around.
Yes, this is tough policy and I understand for many people that it's hard for them, that it's emotionally hard for them. I've seen that written on the faces of some of my Labor colleagues and let's be fair, there are some parts of the Liberal party too that were anxious in the days of John Howard's policy and I suspect have some heaviness of heart about aspects of the Houston report.
But our aim here is to stop people risking their lives at sea and too often losing that bet when they get on a boat and actually drowning at sea. Some of them we know about, some of them we don't even know when boats have gone down.
HOST: Well Paul Kelly before likened the policy or asked you to sort of compare it to John Howard. John Kudelka the cartoonist, one of the cartoonists at the Australian has a cartoon  -  I've just put it up on the screen now  -  where he has you morphing into John Howard.
Now, you know, it's making light of a serious issue but it must irk at least your Labor colleagues. Certainly on the Left, you are of course fractionally in the Labor Left before becoming Prime Minister. It must irk them to be compared to John Howard whether it's tougher or slightly less tough. It's so far removed from where the Labor party was during its years in Opposition.
PM: Well with respect, the feelings of me or any Labor member are a second order issue, indeed a 100th order issue compared with saving lives at sea.
HOST: Well can I just ask Prime Minister, what do you do if Nauru and PNG don't work? I mean you must be concerned that the boat arrivals are still coming at a very high rate. So is there a next step, what do you do if the boats continue to come?
PM: Well Paul, let's be clear about this and let's take it a step at a time. We have got through legislation which will enable us to do the things that Angus Houston and his review team referred as a circuit-breaker and we are getting about doing those things quickly.
I am not at all surprised that the people smugglers are running around saying to people, move now, get in quick, circumstances are changing. That is to be expected and I think we're seeing some of that evidence in boat arrivals now.
We will get in place the circuit-breaker but we have also committed, in principle to the rest of the Houston report that is about increasing refugee places to change the incentives about whether or not people move. It's also about building on the arrangement with Malaysia. So we will get on with all of that work as the Houston report has recommended.
HOST: Okay, just changing subject, I want to refer to the article in yesterday's Australian. Is it correct to that in 1995 you had to resign as a partner from Slater &amp; Gordon as a result of their investigation into the misappropriation of funds around the legal entity that you had established?
PM: I am not dignifying all of this scurrilous campaigning by going through these things point by point. Paul, we are talking about matters 17 years ago which have been dealt on the public record for most of that time. As long as fifteen years ago these matters were dealt with on the public record.
I did nothing wrong, if you've got an allegation that I did something wrong then put it. If you don't have an allegation I did something wrong then let's ask a question matters to the nation today.
On Slater &amp; Gordon, you're talking about a firm with which I've got continuing good relationships and as recently as the last few weeks was giving a speech in their building and greeting the staff in their Sydney office.
HOST: Okay well can I just ask, given your good relations with the firm, would you like to see them make some statement to clarify this matter.
PM: What Slater &amp; Gordon says is a matter for Slater &amp; Gordon but Paul, my essential point here is, there's a delving into matters 17 years ago  -  for what purpose?
If you've got an allegation I did something wrong, put it. If you can't put it, why are we talking about this?
HOST: I've got no allegation but the point is-
PM: Well if you've got no allegation and I've not seen in yesterday's Australian or anywhere else an allegation put about my conduct; if there is no allegation to deal with then why are we dealing with this issue when we could be dealing with the Australian economy, schools, health?
HOST: No we're very keen to deal with those issues Prime Minister but there were a series of allegations made in yesterday's Australian by a former senior partner which question your integrity. Surely you need to respond to those allegations?
PM: Well I am not going to get into a circumstance where we've got people blogging malicious non-sense and we're having some of this penetrate into the media, I'm not going to get myself into a circumstance where I spend my time dealing with these events 17 years ago when the people who are asking me questions about them are unable to even articulate what it is they say I did wrong.
This is just non-sense and a distraction from the important work I've got to do as Prime Minister and the important issues for this nation's future. I've just said to you Paul, I continue to have very good relationships with Slater &amp; Gordon, you know, going and greeting the staff and all of that kind of stuff. It's not the first time I've done that and it won't be the last time I do that.
HOST: Okay, I understand your point; you're saying it's all non-sense. Can I just ask you then this direct question? The central point was that the partner alleged that you had to resign because of this issue. Is that correct or not?
PM: Look Paul, I did resign from Slater &amp; Gordon, that's a matter of public record. I made the decision to do that. All the rest of this is just, you know, the sort of scurrilous-
HOST: But you're not answering the specific point.
PM: Paul I'm not getting into specifics about issues 17 years ago when you are not able to put to me any contention about why this is relevant to my conduct as Prime Minister today.
I mean join the dots for me Paul. What matters about this today, for Australia and me being Prime Minister? Just articulate that.
HOST: Well I will. I mean the point is that a partner in your former firm has made a series of allegations which go to your integrity.
PM: And the relevance to me being Prime Minister today, Paul?
HOST: Well I think when accusations are made about the integrity of the Prime Minister going to the professional position that she had before she came into politics, surely that is relevant.
PM: And Paul, I did nothing wrong. Are you challenging that?
HOST: No, I'm just asking questions?
PM: Well and this is the issue, isn't it? Because I understand you're being asked to ask questions today.
HOST: No, no, no sorry. There's no one asking me to ask questions.
PM: Well that wasn't my advice from a little bit earlier before this show.
HOST: I'm sorry Prime Minister, I ask my own questions. Nobody tells me what questions to ask.
PM: And I'll give you an answer to them. I did nothing wrong Paul. Have you got an allegation to put to me? If you do not, why are we discussing this?
HOST: Can I just ask one question on this and then we move on  -  last question. Why not just put it all out there? I believe you, that you did nothing wrong. I made a comment on Friday on my show the Contrarians that I thought this is all a beat-up and that we should move onto the major issues. But why not just address it straight down the barrel so that we can move on and all of the scuttlebutt that goes on online, which frankly I'm sick of people emailing me about this, we can just move one from it.
PM: Well Peter let me welcome but also question your grand naivety. The people who are dealing with this online in their malicious and motivated way would not stop no matter what explanation I gave.
You know that, I know that and that is why there is no point in flogging through all of the details of this, because the people who are pursuing this malicious campaign will continue to do it. They are not at all interested in the truth.
The truth is I did nothing wrong, no one has put any direct assertion to me. You haven't done it today, it hasn't been done in the newspaper, that I did anything wrong. In these circumstances why are we, 17 years later, when these matters have been dealt with on the public record for the best part of a decade and a half, still talking about this?
HOST: Well if we can go to the question of Gonski to move onto fundamental policy issue, how soon before we get the Commonwealth's response to the Gonski report? Can you meet the commitment of $5 billion which was mentioned in that report and do you anticipate that the states will come to the party and be part of the package?
PM: Well Paul I think for our viewers we've got to decode what we're talking about. Inside the beltway people are wondering around talking about Gonski, outside the beltway people are raising their eyebrows going, what on earth does all of that mean? To me it means improving Australian schools.
That's what doing work on school funding is about. We will be responding to the work of David Gonski and his review team and that won't be too far away from here. It'll be in a number of weeks' time.
But I want to make this point very clearly. If we're talking about money for Australian schools and David Gonski's work is centrally on the funding, we've got to be talking about what is that money for? That money, in my view, any money we give to schools needs to be about driving better outcomes for kids, higher quality and better standards.
I am worried as Prime Minister that whilst our school reform work is gathering results because our schools were neglected for too long under the former Government, we are now slipping behind the education race in our region and in the world. That's ultimately bad news for our economy, it's bad news for the lifetime opportunities of our children and it is that question of how we improve schools that's got to be front and centre of everything we talk about in this area.
HOST: And what about the financial commitment and whether the states come to the party?
PM: Well of course states need to be working too, to improve the outcomes in state schools. The work of David Gonski and his review team is work for every school and it's advice to all governments. And my concern as Prime Minister is for every child in every school. It's not about school systems or school sectors. It's about that child and their opportunity in life and the standard of education they get.
So we will certainly get looking to work with our state and territory colleagues with the independent schools and with the Catholic school system and our mission will be how can we improve each and every school for each and every child within it? Because it's not satisfactory for our nation to be slipping behind the standards of the world and it's not satisfactory for some kids to be left at the back of the class and slipping behind the standards of the other children.
HOST: Prime Minister, can I ask you, how do you do that in relation to the funding side of the mechanism? Whether it's schools or the National Disability Insurance Scheme, there's a lot of talk about, you know, state versus Commonwealth share of funding arrangements and do you acknowledge, I guess that state governments, whatever you sort of think of them at the end of the day they've got far greater funding pressures than the Commonwealth just by virtue if nothing else the vertical fiscal imbalance that exists and the regressive nature of the kind of taxation take that they have open to them?
PM: At every step of the way this has been a Government that's been prepared to step up and provide additional resources to states for important national outcomes  -  look at health.
I mean health, single biggest thing on the state governments' budget, single biggest pressure on them; health costs rising far more quickly than revenue rises or normal CPI rises.
In those circumstances we said we'll step up and be an equal partner in growth so we have alleviated in a big way what was going to actually bust state budgets apart if we didn't change arrangements.
In education we've more than doubled the funding. Every step of the way it's come with a reform agenda  -  better quality teachers in front of classrooms; more empowered school leadership to get on with the job; more information for school communities for parents than they've ever had before.
As we work on the next stage of improving schools and on the next stage of the National Disability Insurance Scheme we'll take the same approach of working with states. Understanding their revenue challenges but also being prudent on the Federal Government's budget.
HOST: But they still don't believe there is that understand about their revenue structure. They still believe that as things stand now they're under enormous pressure, much less with the kind of extra funding that you're talking about.
PM: Let me be a little bit clear about some of the things that get said in the public domain and about some of the things that get said privately. Of course I understand that state Premiers and Chief Ministers will be out there on behalf of their jurisdictions always arguing for more federal money  -  so is the way of the world until the end of time.
When I sit round the COAG table and people raise issues with me and I say, would you prefer to have the Liberal view of health funding, the way it used to happen or what this Government has done for you? I don't get too many hands up for the past and there's a reason for that.
We've been more generous and more prepared to tackle issues of national concern, like health funding, like education where we've got more to do and like disability where we've got a lot more to do for people in our nation who currently get left on the sidelines.
HOST: Just on that question of disability. When will you announce the final arrangements for the disability insurance scheme and what will it cost?
PM: Well the costings have been, the all up envelope has been dealt with a COAG and it's in the order of $7.8 billion is my recollection. Now we have said that we'll get the launch sites up and running, we will learn from the launch sites and learning form the launch sites we will work towards rolling out the full scheme.
So Paul, we've got some more decisions and more work to do in disability but we're taking the approach that the Productivity Commission recommended which is get the launch sites happening first so we can learn about the model.
HOST: But can I just clarify, will the policy be finalised before the election and will the cost of the policy therefore be in the Government's forward estimates in that period before the election?
PM: Paul, we will be working in the Government's budget arrangements on National Disability Insurance Scheme and on other issues including the further work we've got to do improving school funding.
You're next point is going to be, well how will the Government make provision for this  -  we will do it the way we have always done it. That is, we will work hard to ensure that we are dealing with savings, we are dealing with priorities in the Government budget so that the budget is in surplus as promised and we've got a very good track record of doing that.
HOST: Okay, so you'll make more savings?
PM: Paul, yes there's nothing new in that.
HOST: Sure.
PM: This is a Government that has been offsetting new spending with savings as a routine part of our approach. We live in, you know, limited fiscal times and so you've got to be prudent with every dollar and we are.
HOST: Will these be substantial savings?
PM: Well of course we'll be working through to support our further expenditure. You know, we've shown the ability to save tens and tens of billions of dollars in the Federal Government's budget to make available resources for the things that we believe that really matter to the Australian community and we'll continue to take that approach.
HOST: And as you've indicated, the surplus is non-negotiable?
PM: Correct.
HOST: Is that the same with the carbon price? There's not going to be a reduction in that going forward or indeed a lowering of the floor price once it floats?
PM: Well we've been consulting on floor price arrangements as is well known and we'll continue with those consultations and when we're in a position to say something about that we will.
For carbon pricing, all of the money arrangements for the Commonwealth's budget are there for all to see.
HOST: But presumably if you're having these consultations you do intend to change the policy.
PM: We said a long time ago we would be consulting about the floor price and we have been consulting about the floor price.
HOST: What's your thinking about thing? Do you think that it's desirable probably to alter the floor price or to alter the arrangement concerning permits?
PM: Paul, when we're in a position to deal with these issues we will. We've been in a period of consultation.
HOST: One final question Prime Minister before we let you go. Corporate taxes is something that we've seen hit the headlines again this week. Business is keen for a company tax cut. There's been some discussion that there may need to be, sort of, you know, reductions in other areas in terms of reclaiming for tax.
What's your view on this? Do you see room, not just in the next year but in the next couple of years, to be able to revisit this idea of a corporate tax cut which after all was originally going to happen but for various reasons hasn't?
PM: Well the corporate tax cut didn't happen because Mr Abbott and his Opposition didn't want to give businesses a tax break. That's why it didn't happen. We then said in those circumstances we were prepared to work with the business community for a revenue neutral change, to look at the whole area of business taxation and to say, how can we make it more streamlined, more efficient in a way that enables us to reduce the company tax rate?
Now that's hard work and you know we're seeing I think in the public dialogue some of the symptoms about how hard that work is. But we are still saying to the business community, keep working, keep discussing, keep trying to come to a consensus about the nature of the changes.
HOST: But there's always a bit of a leap of fair when you cut company tax because the argument from business is that it'll drive investment and therefore that will naturally bring in more tax receipts, but there is a leap of fair in the model doing that. Are you prepared to take that leap of fair  -  cut it and see if that's right?
PM: We don't take leaps of fair in the Government's budget. We get hard-headed analysis and numbers and that's what you see come into the Government's budget.
The work here between the business community needs to keep continuing. Yes, people are going to see the world through their own eyes, which sector of the economy they're in and the like. But we've said this is something that business wants to see so we expect the business community overall to try and work through a consensus for change here.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, you've been very generous with your time. We appreciate you joining us on Australian Agenda.
PM: Thank you.



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
 [ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Friends, welcome to Canberra. I love your conference logo  -  the whole world in your hands. It's so true.
You teach our children. You build our future. The whole world is in your hands. No pressure!
Timing is everything  -  and you do meet in interesting times. This year will bring the biggest decisions on school education in the life of this Government.
Of course, you know that we are all working together through an exhaustive and consultative process as we prepare those decisions. And as we work through those issues together, there's a balance to strike.
When you are talking about something as important as our children's future, our nation's future, you take the time to get it right  -  and we are.
The current system of schools funding is tremendously complex, and that means that even changes to simplify it have complex elements.  So this does take time.
I've worked hard in Government to maintain a close and continuing partnership with your sector .
But keeping that discussion open and real can mean we stay at the table longer to get better outcomes together.
Equally, I know you need to plan for the years to come.
I also know that you're looking ahead right now to budget for your schools in 2014 and beyond. 
So all this does take time, but I know that this needs resolution soon.
These days of preparation will over the next few weeks lead to days of decision and action.
Given all that, I'm not here today to tell you exactly what our decisions will be.
Instead, I want to tell you why those decisions are so important to me and how we will keep working together to achieve change.
Everyone should be clear about my purpose in commissioning the Independent Review of school funding.
This Labor Government has doubled federal education funding.
This Labor Government has driven change in schools harder and faster than any before.
This Labor Government commissioned the Independent Panel to deliver further detailed advice.
Their Report is an opportunity, one we deliberately created to give Australian children a better education.
To give our children better schools. To build on Labor's achievements in education for our children in the past five years.
Because Australia doesn't just need “a Gonski response”. Australia needs a plan for continuing improvement in our schools.
My goal is not simply “to reform school funding”.
My only interest in school funding is using school funding to drive improvement in school performance, to get all of our children a higher quality education.
And yes, reform is a good word, one which describes much of what Australian Governments must do, one which describes some of the most important aspects of my own agenda in office.
But in truth, it's not a word which is underused in Australian politics.
Our plans for schools are about improvement, not just change.
Australia doesn't just need “a reform to the school funding system”.
Australia needs a plan for school improvement, a plan which gives schools the resources you need to get better results for the kids you teach.
So those are the plans which we are preparing now. And they will be good news for independent schools. You know that, because you know me.
For a long time, my highest goal in politics was to be Education Minister and to make a difference in schools  -  2007 brought me that opportunity and you saw what I did with it.
Above all  -  you saw that as Minister, I made a difference for every school. For Australia's sake, I had to.
When I became Education Minister in 2007, school standards in this country were slipping.
By 2009, international tests like PISA, the Program for International Schools Assessments, showed we had been falling behind.
Our top students weren't doing as well as they had  -  and the gap between the top and bottom performing students was growing.
Worst of all? We weren't even measuring our results nationally.
At the end of 2007, I couldn't have told you which were the schools that needed the most help.
That was just unacceptable to me.
Our kids were falling behind.  Our economy was missing out. Other countries were sprinting past us in the education race.
And we didn't even have the stopwatch to tell us how fast we had to run to catch up.
So Federal Labor got stuck in.
We conducted new tests and published new information  -  for every school.
NAPLAN: annual, nationwide measures of how our students perform in the core skills of reading, writing and maths.
The My School website: rich, comparative information about NAPLAN results and school communities, giving parents and students the information they need to work with you.
We strengthened support for the basics  -  for every school. Specialist literacy and numeracy teachers, homework clubs, personalised learning plans and stronger links with parents and the local community.
Paid for through the $540 million Literacy and Numeracy national partnership and the $1.5 billion Low SES School Communities national partnership.
We lifted teacher quality  -  for every school. The first ever professional standards for teachers and principals, ongoing opportunities for professional development and programs to attract top graduates to the profession.
Agreement to a performance and development framework for every teacher  -  which will include an annual performance appraisal, clear feedback and support throughout their career. Paid for through the $500 million Teacher Quality National Partnership.
We began giving principals more powers to lead their schools. An area in which we can all learn much from your sector's success.
More powers in the hands of school principals and the local community through our Empowering Local Schools scheme.
Almost 1000 schools will have more say in staffing, budget, governance and maintenance over the next two years.
We started developing a new national curriculum  -  for every school. Every Australian student should benefit from the same high quality teaching and learning, no matter where they live.
We invested in new facilities  -  for every school. We have delivered computers to every high school in the country  -  more than 900,000 of them  -  and now every student from years 9 to 12 has access to digital learning.
We have built new classrooms, libraries, science labs and school halls through our hugely successful Building the Education Revolution program.
I am sure when they built the Library at Alexandria there was someone who wrote an editorial questioning the cost. Funnily enough, if so, the editorial hasn't been preserved for posterity, but the memory of that library has been.
The bottom line?
Under Labor, federal education funding doubled in four years. And we didn't do it by division, we did it by addition. Every school benefitted. 
This wasn't something I could do alone or the Government could do alone.
In all these changes, independent schools have been more than just engaged and co-operative.
You've supported the national education agenda  -  in many areas, you've led the way.
Precisely because I've pursued ambitious plans to lift standards in all schools, I've needed the support of leaders in all schools to get it done.
Many of the changes we've pursued have been controversial  -  most of them have been opposed in sections of the Parliament  -  some of them have been criticised in sections of the profession.
So I am incredibly proud of the way that as we've gone through this big journey of change, independent school leaders have been a partner with us, with me, in every step of the way.
You have never said go slower or don't go as hard, every stage of the journey you have urged us on, because you want to see the best for the kids you teach at every stage of their education.
Programs like the National Partnership for Low SES School Communities and the Literacy and Numeracy National Partnership helped more than 1 in 5 independent schools.
Two hundred and twenty five independent schools in communities around the country got extra help to address the needs of struggling students.
Even though it has meant a lot of work for you, new requirements, new demands on your staff and on your parents, you've always been there for the big changes that go with the extra resources.
Your sincere and complete support for progress in Australian schools has been vital to the success of our approach. And it has been a success.
Take that National Partnership for Literacy and Numeracy. And in year 3 Reading, 70 per cent of all schools funded under the program improved. 
In Year 5 Numeracy, 75 per cent of schools funded under the program improved.
Or take our investments in indigenous education under our great national project to Close the Gap.
Between 2008 and 2011, the proportion of indigenous students achieving at or above the national minimum standard significantly increased in Reading in Years 3 and 7, and in Numeracy in Years 3 and 5.
And NAPLAN results from 2008 to 2011 show that Australian school students are now making good progress across the board and results are lifting across the country.
For example, Year 3 students have shown statistically significant improvements in reading, grammar and punctuation.
And Year 5 students have shown statistically significant improvements in numeracy.
These things were achieved by Australian students, teachers, principals and schools, because the Australian Government helped all of them.
Not some schools, all schools. Not some kids, all kids.
That's my record as Minister and Prime Minister: I've never looked at a big independent school in an established suburb and thought “that's not fair”.
I look at a big independent school in an established suburb and think “that's a great example”.
I've never looked at a new independent school in a coastal town and thought “why aren't those kids at the public school”.
I look at a new independent school in a coastal town and think “I'm glad this Government is giving those kids the support and standards they need”.
You know that I've supported you and your schools because you've seen me do it: when I've been with you in your classrooms and your staffrooms, delivering the new computers and opening the new libraries.
I've spoken about BER's huge importance to you. Consider the scale of our program in its historical context.
Think back to that first, famous Menzies science laboratories program which gave so many independent schools a historic boost.
A genuine new frontier in Australian policy, it was an investment in your schools which, in today's dollars, would be valued in the hundreds of millions.
Our Building the Education Revolution program made an investment in your schools worth easily ten times as much. So I'm proud of the partnership and the friendship we share.
It's common to discuss all these questions of public support for the schooling of individuals in the specific context of education.
But I actually think this is a much bigger question of the relationship between citizen and nation.
I believe Government support for a child's education is one of the entitlements of citizenship.
No matter how rich or poor your parents are or where you go to school, our nation should provide a basic degree of support to your education: because you are Australian, because you are part of the whole.
Now naturally, one way this idea of an education entitlement derived from citizenship takes concrete form is in school funding.
There should be Australian Government support to educate every Australian child  -  in the poorest and most remote school  -  at the best known and best resourced school.
That's why our funding model will recognise the diversity and uniqueness of Australian schools and will support the choices parents make about the best school for their child.
That's why our plans will deliver funding security for your schools. All students, regardless of school, will be funded on a consistent basis for the first time.
Every independent school in Australia will see their funding increase under our plan.
This plan will lift school standards, not school fees. And this universal commitment, this idea of a citizen's entitlement to education, is not just how I see the funding question  -  it is how I see the work on school standards as well.
As Prime Minister of this country, I feel a deep responsibility to ensure every child in Australia has the education they deserve.
I feel accountable to every Australian parent and child to do everything I can to make sure their school is a great school.
And not just to seventy per cent of them  -  to a hundred per cent of them. We govern for all and when I worry about standards and work to improve them I do that for all.
But of course, in the end, while I'm the Prime Minister  -  you're the principals.
I can take the national lead and make the case for change, Government can increase resources and make detailed plans  -  but only you can lead the teachers and teach the kids.
That's why I've worked so hard to work with you  -  and why your partnership with Government is so important to us.
In the end, our plans to improve Australia's schools are all about helping  you improve Australia's schools.
So we'll support principals, lift teacher quality, expand parent information, increase funding: because that all helps you.
The key to the success of our plan to improve every Australian school is the plans you make to improve your school.
That is why  these coming weeks of decision and action on school standards are so important to me.
Because we have a chance to do more than just end the era of the public-private debate: we can start the era of the school standards debate too.
Every student will matter.  We will have the best teachers in every classroom.  School principals will be outstanding leaders.All students will study the same curriculum.  Every school will be a digital school. 
Parents and the community will know more about their local school.  Decisions will be made locally.  Schools will become community hubs.
Every Australian school will have the money it needs to do a great job. Struggling schools will get extra help. Put it another way.
I never forget Unley High, a great school then and now, where so much of my success in life began, but where other kids sat at the back of the room and did “make work” and were left behind.
It's thinking about the needs of the kids both at the front and the the back of the room that drives me on to improve Australian education. And I know the kids who struggle aren't only in Unley High.
They're at Saint Spyridon College at Unley  -  a terrific Greek Orthodox primary school, got a lot of green in NAPLAN 2011  -  one of your members.
And there are kids with real need at St Monica's up in Walkerville, and there are kids who need help at Scotch, too  -  there are.
There are world-beating independent, Catholic and public schools in every part of Australia.
There are independent, Catholic and public schools in every part of Australia which need more Government help.
There are kids with real needs, in every Australian school. There are kids with real gifts, in every Australian school.
Our vast and diverse nation defies every stereotype and cliché and our thinking about the future of education should never be governed by anything but the real best interests of every child.
They are why we are going to get this done.


Canberra
Today I extend Australia's condolences to the nation and people of New Zealand, who have suffered another grievous loss in Afghanistan with the death of three brave soldiers in a bomb blast overnight.
This news is particularly painful coming just two weeks after the deaths of two New Zealand soldiers, and the wounding of six others, in the same province.
The thoughts of the Australian people are today with New Zealand, and in particular with the families who have lost loved ones and with the soldiers who have lost comrades.
New Zealand has made a significant contribution to ensuring Afghanistan never again becomes a safe haven for international terrorism. 
As a valued partner of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), New Zealand is supporting Bamyan Province through the transition to Afghan security leadership.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED
It's a pleasure to join you tonight and I pay tribute to the AiGroup for its informed advocacy towards a stronger and more productive economy.
It's one of the most important debates we can have.
A lot of people have had a lot to say about productivity.
Tonight, I want to have my say.
Yes, higher productivity is how Australia will remain competitive and reap the advantages of the Asian Century.
As Professor Paul Krugman famously said, “Productivity isn't everything, but in the long-run it's almost everything.”
But too often the concept of productivity is forced to carry more weight than it can possibly bear.
It's become shorthand for old and stale agendas that have nothing to do with our genuine productivity challenge.
Too much ideology.
Too few facts.
So tonight I want to join AIG and other respected commentators like Ross Gittins in calling for a mature and sophisticated perspective based on the facts.
I start with the single most important fact: the level of labour productivity itself.
Fact: Australia's level of labour productivity ranks above South Korea, Japan, Canada and the UK.
Fact: Australia is one of the top 12 international performers when it comes to labour productivity levels.
Fact: In the year to March 2012, labour productivity grew at its fastest annual rate in a decade.
Fact: Exclude mining and utilities, labour productivity grew by a healthy annual rate of 1.7 per cent in the seven years to 2011.
Of course we can't read too much into quarterly or annual productivity figures.
Nor should we imagine that labour productivity can't be further improved.
Of course it can.
Productivity is the race that never ends.
But let's also keep things in perspective.
Unlike the early 90s, today we conduct this debate from a position of strength:
With 800,000 jobs created since 2007.
Half a trillion dollars in the investment pipeline.A combination of GDP growth, low inflation, low unemployment and low official interest rates not seen since 1964.
Along with steady wages growth, high profit share and relatively low levels of industrial disputation.
A gold medal performance, so vastly at odds with much recent reporting.
Yes our overall productivity rate has fallen over the past decade.
And there are some fairly common-sense reasons for that.
Not lazy or militant workers.
Not restrictive industrial legislation.
But a sharp multifactor productivity decline in mining and utilities, with some impact from agriculture as well.
Recently, the Productivity Commission and the Reserve Bank concluded that much of the decline in multifactor productivity growth could be attributed to these sectors.
The Productivity Commission attributes the productivity fall in those three sectors as high as 70 per cent of the overall decline.
In mining, because new investment takes years before it leads to output and because miners are accessing lower quality or less accessible deposits.
In utilities, because there has been increasing capital expenditure, often well beyond levels suggested by demand.
In agriculture, because our worst drought in a century led to falling agricultural output.
Many of these temporary factors are working their way through the system.
For example, agriculture has been the sector with the largest productivity growth since 2007-08.
Likewise, mining productivity will increase in the longer term as major projects move into production.
But the explanation goes further.
We're also recovering from a decade of neglect because our predecessors failed to invest in skills, infrastructure, communications reform, and federal-state regulatory reform.
Hawke and Keating bequeathed to the Howard government an impressive record of reform in all these areas.
We received no such inheritance.
These are the facts.
And friends,
Here's a myth: Individual contracts and the associated legislative regime boosted productivity.
They didn't.
ABS data show that multifactor productivity experienced virtually no growth when Work Choices was law.
The workplace model that best drives productivity improvements is enterprise bargaining.
As Saul Eslake has observed: “productivity only happens as a result of the decisions that are made and implemented in places of work.”
That is why enterprise bargaining has been the shared basis in three out of our four industrial regimes since the Keating era.
The fourth  -  Work Choices  -  is the outlier.
Workplace flexibility to increase productivity is the common thread that has delivered results.
That's why enterprise bargaining is the cornerstone of the Fair Work Act.
The success of that model was borne out in the recent Review that concluded:
“key outcomes such as wages growth, industrial disputation, the responsiveness of wages to supply and demand, the rate of employment growth and the flexibility of work patterns have been favourable to Australia's continuing prosperity.”
Yes, we can refine the Act to better meet its objectives.
So the Government is keen to consult with industry and unions on the Fair Work Act Review.
But labour regulation is not the whole story.
We need to take a much broader view of productivity rather than putting more focus than is warranted on our workplace arrangements.
That means accepting once and for all that you don't achieve productivity by cutting wages and conditions.
That just makes for poorer workers, and arguably more unhappy, less trusting and less motivated workers as well.
Not must it mean losing jobs.
Our record productivity growth cycle in the mid-90s showed you can grow productivity and grow employment together.
The Hawke-Keating era was indeed a remarkable time: rising high school retention rates, a huge lift in university enrolments, rapid adoption of new technologies, and the first wave of enterprise bargaining.
In other words, a golden age of productivity secured by working smarter:
Smarter people.
Smarter technology.
Smarter processes.
Smarter management.
These are what truly build productivity in a mature, advanced economy that competes on quality, not on price.
We did it then.
We can do it again.
That's why as Australia ventures upon the Asian Century, we are shaping a productivity agenda built around five factors.
The five pillars of productivity: infrastructure, innovation, tax, deregulation and skills.
On infrastructure, we've doubled the roads budget and increased investment in rail tenfold in just five years.
In fact, infrastructure investment is up 42 per cent in real terms since the Howard Government.
Look at high-speed broadband.
Each 10 percentage point increase in broadband penetration can add 1.3 per cent to a high income country's GDP.
A great case for why Australia needs the NBN and structural separation too.
Turn to innovation.
We know that Australian businesses that innovate are twice as likely to report increased productivity.
Yet Australia ranks poorly on the proportion of businesses collaborating in innovation compared to other OECD countries.
And our level of management expertise is relatively low, as first identified by Karpin in 1995 and highlighted in last week's McKinsey report as well.
On tax.
We know an efficient tax system cuts compliance costs and gives incentives to invest for the future.
We now have a menu of savings measures on the table to enable a cut in company tax.
In government, we now only fund new measures by re-prioritising existing funding, and this applies to corporate tax as well.
Any reduction must be fully offset within the business tax system.
So you can have a rate cut agreed before Christmas.
But the government cannot want a corporate tax cut more than the business community does.
On deregulation, we've removed 1,650 Commonwealth legislative instruments, with another 12,000 to go over the next year.
In transport, we are taking 23 regulators and replacing them with just one for each sector  -  maritime, rail and heavy vehicles.
On a wider canvas, we've completed 20 of the 27 COAG Seamless National Economy reforms.
I strongly urge you to press the Premiers to work toward completing the remaining ones, especially National OH&amp;S laws and National Occupational Licensing.
Then we can tackle the next big wave of regulatory reform discussed at the Business Advisory Forum and agreed by COAG in April.
None of those five pillars are more important than skills.
I know AiG has made skills a consistent priority, and indeed you helped drive the creation of the Workforce and Productivity Agency this year.
But yours has been a rare voice for skills in recent productivity debates.
Last week for example, we received the “Foreign Investor Perspective” report from the International CEO Forum.
It referred to education just twice, and then only briefly in passing.
Yet nothing is more critical to Australia's future economic success than education, skills and training.
Independent modelling by KPMG Econtech in 2010 shows that lifting human capital could increase per capita income by around $4,000 over the three decades to 2040.
A 2005 study from Britain found that a one percentage point increase in training increases labour productivity by around0.6 per cent.
Yet in the decade before we took office, education and skills were neglected in Australia.
This Government has put in five years of determined effort and long-term reform to turn that situation around.
Those efforts are beginning to bear fruit.
Apprentice and trainee numbers rose by 17 per cent between 2007 and 2011, while VET student numbers were up 13 per cent.
We're on track to see 40 per cent of Australians aged between 25 and 34 hold a bachelor's degree by 2025.
Just last week we learned five Australian universities are now among the world's top 100  -  giving us the fourth most successful higher education system globally.
None of these changes has come about by accident.
They are the result of investment, policy reform and very hard work by people in those sectors to deliver better outcomes.
In the long run, the performance of Australia's schools will be one of the greatest influences on our economic performance.
Australia has great schools that compare well with other countries.
But international evidence shows we are slipping behind.
Four of the world's top-performing school systems are now in our region: Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Shanghai.
These systems have dramatically improved their performance through rapid and transformative change.
Between 2000 and 2009, Australia slipped from equal second to equal seventh in reading and from equal fifth to equal 13th in maths in the OECD's PISA rankings.
In addition, the gap between our highest-performing students and the lowest performers  -  too often from disadvantaged backgrounds  -  grew wider.
I suspect a lot of our skills shortage among adults today is a result of the decade of neglect we inherited.
Australia cannot remain an economic powerhouse unless it also wins the education race.
We have a unique and diverse school system of which we should be proud.
We don't need to imitate systems where high student performance comes at a high human cost.
Improving our schools doesn't mean adopting every practice from Shanghai or Singapore, or Finland for that matter.
We don't want a system with much larger class sizes.
And our students don't have to adopt the high-pressure study cultures we see in some countries.
But we do need to follow what works.
We know, for example, that the systems improving fastest ensure their students have rigorous subject knowledge and independent reasoning and problem-solving skills to go with it.
And these systems have been pursuing strategies to pay attention to what works in the classroom and make sure teachers are able to do more of it.
We need to adopt those strategies and shape them into a uniquely Australian form of excellence.
That means focusing relentlessly on the things that improve performance and make a real difference to educational achievement.
The international evidence is clear about what drives excellence in schooling:
A high quality curriculum.
Highly skilled teachers able to focus their teaching precisely on what each student needs to learn.
Systematic use of performance information to drive continuous feedback and improvement.
Empowered school leaders able to focus resources on student outcomes.
And strong partnerships between schools and the wider community, reinforcing high expectations of all students.
These are priorities that we have focused on relentlessly since 2007.
We have put in place the foundations of an Australian school system that can excel throughout this century.
And we know that these policies can make a difference because the results are already starting to show.
For example, in our National Partnership for Literacy and Numeracy, 70 per cent of participating schools increased the number of children performing above the national minimum standard in Year 3 reading, and 80 per cent of schools increased the percentage of children in Year 5 numeracy above the national minimum standard.
The transparency we introduced through the My School website now shows how individual schools have lifted their performance to significantly higher than other schools with similar students.
We need to turn these positive movements into a sustained, national effort to improve student results:
This is isn't just an issue for school sectors, teachers or parents  -  it's a business issue.
It demands the full and active involvement of employers because you have a fundamental interest in school performance.
So much of our productivity challenge is an education challenge.
And I want you to be part of the solution.
I'm proud to outline tonight the contours of our productivity reform strategy to set Australia up for the Asian Century.
Of course, there is still much more to do  -  productivity is a task that by definition is never done.
That's why in coming weeks and months we will deliver the Asian Century white paper and our Industry and Innovation Statement, working with AiG and other stakeholders on the Manufacturing Leaders Group.
We'll keep a firm hand on outlays to ensure the budget comes into surplus.
And we'll consider changes to the Fair Work Act to ensure its objectives of fairness and productivity continue to be realised.
What we won't do is be party to stale old battles based on assertion, not evidence.
Our nation doesn't have the time or the luxury for such a phoney debate.
Let's have the real thing.
An informed, fact-driven debate about the true drivers of productivity in an advanced, mature economy that needs to move quickly up the value-chain.
That's the high road to lasting productivity outcomes, just like we did in the early 1990s.
The high road paved with facts, leaving the myths far behind.
In the spirit of the good work we have done together, I ask you to join us on that journey, and let's create a more productive and prosperous nation together.
Thank you very much.



E &amp; OE
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Women of the Australian Women's Land Army, I've been told to refer to you as the Land Army Girls. So from the Head Girl, I'm very pleased to be with you today for this very, very special occasion.
I'm pleased that so many of you were able to come to Canberra. I'm sorry it's so cold, but we've put some sunshine on for you to show you that with the sun shining you are going to receive a very warm welcome.
And you're here in Canberra to be recognised in the capital of the nation you served so well.
I'm aware that some of you have journeyed a long way to be here, I've talked to people from many parts of the nation, so hello.
And that long journey here might have been filled by memories, as you journeyed, of all those years ago, when you journeyed from your homes and families to the farms and fields where you were needed the most.
You went to take up the work of the men who had left for the front. Some of them were your fathers, brothers, or even sons.
In doing so, you brought victory closer, just as if you had picked a rifle yourself.
Now I know a thing or two about working in traditionally male domain.
But the life I've been privileged to lead is only possible because women of courage like you were there first; in the tough years, the desperate years, when the nation faced its ultimate test.
You helped Australia pass that test.
And today  -  here in the nation's heart  -  we thank you.
I know it's been a long time coming, these words of thanks, and so I pay tribute for the advocacy to get us here today, the advocacy from Parliamentary Secretary Senator Jan McLucas who has just spoken so beautifully, and before her, Maxine McKew.
To Senator John Faulkner, who's played such a role in getting us here today, my thanks. And to the wonderful Peggy Williams who always had faith that her campaign would succeed.
It has.
The campaign has succeeded and it has succeeded with the full measure of our gratitude today.
Ladies, each of you will return home with these certificates graciously signed by the Governor-General, and with booklets created by the Australian War Memorial and, above all, with a commemorative brooch to wear.
I know you will wear those brooches with a great deal of pride.
And I really hope, I genuinely hope they prompt younger Australians to ask you what they mean, because you'll be able to tell them.
You'll be able to say ‘I answered the nation's call. I stood up to be counted when Australia needed help the most.'
And a new generation will learn of the remarkable things you did and the remarkable women you are.
So today, on behalf of all Australians, I thank you for your generosity and your service.
The Australian Women's Land Army has achieved a lasting place of honour in the history of our nation.
May it be celebrated  -  truly celebrated  -  for many years to come.
Thank you very much.


Parliament House, Canberra
E &amp; OE
It is a great pleasure to be able to welcome you all here to Canberra tonight, and to be able to speak.
Fifty years since the several Australian branches of the British Medical Association merged and created our own national medical association, it's a night to celebrate.
For fifty years you've been advocates  -  not just on behalf of your members but in the broader cause of health in Australia.
Five decades as protectors of practitioners' independence and as promoters of ethical behaviour of the medical profession. 
Five decades of medical research and education through the widely respected Medical Journal of Australia.
Still a world-leading scientific publication, still Australia's only peer-reviewed general medical journal.
And of course, half a century in your most important role, which is being there to advocate for the medical profession.
It's quite an achievement that your association, representing your profession, who does from time to time relieve pain for others but give pain to governments, is held in such a respected light.
You've given us the occasional headache, and it's not just this government but governments before. But that's a testament to the power of your advocacy.
Can I congratulate you too on the launch of your history  -  More Than Just A Union.  With a title like that I'm looking forward to your application to affiliate with the ACTU. It can't be that long away! 
I have been working with the AMA for a long time, not for all of those five decades but for around ten years since I became Labor's Shadow Health Minister.
I have had productive dealings with all your Presidents.
In office we loved contrasting the style of 'Wild Bill' with the more mild-mannered but very persistent Mukesh.
And it's good to be able to be with you and think about some of that past, but also to look to the future together.
And in looking to the future I want to speak to you about two important areas where we are doing and continue to do so much good work, and they are the areas of Indigenous health and in smoking. 
But I can't let tonight go by, here with an audience of medical professionals, without making some comment on the cuts in Queensland's public health system, and particularly what's happening to BreastScreen Queensland.
I was amazed earlier this month to read the news and I have to say that my honest reaction when I read it was, that can't be right, that's a misreport and it will be corrected.  Well unfortunately, thinking it was a misreport was wrong, and the news is still shocking.
It shows me, and it should show us, how important national investment in health remains and how vigilant we must be to protect the progress we've made, particularly in women's health.
Women must have the right to health care and women must have the right to choose.
So the Federal Labor Government will be there supporting women's health.
Whether it's the independence of the TGA's decisions in regulating fertility treatments, whether it's allowing our foreign aid budget to include spending on family planning, whether it's supporting a woman's right to choose through Medicare-funded services, that's my commitment to Australian women as Prime Minister.
And I know the profession will be there with us.
And I know you're there with us on those issues, you will be there with us on Indigenous health.
Together, we are making progress towards Closing the Gap.
The AMA Indigenous Health Report Cards have been influential in guiding health policies for Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islander peoples for more than a decade now.
They have had a significant influence in our efforts to Close the Gap.
Of all the targets in Indigenous advancement, Closing the Gap on life expectancy by 2031 remains the most challenging of all. Of course in this room we know and understand that.
Progress towards the other health, education and employment targets are providing strong foundations to help us lift life expectancy.
And the life expectancy target is the longest term of the six  -  it is a twenty-five-year target.
We particularly recognise that Closing the Gap in life expectancy in the Northern Territory is enormously difficult.
The challenge is a very large one, but it is a challenge Government does not face alone.
The AMA has been a champion for improving Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health.
Your recent AMA Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Audit Report is only your latest important contribution to policy and practice, and I thank you for it.
You've played a key role in the national debate and just as important, you've played a vital role on the ground, in the communities, with our Indigenous people.
And our public investment is designed to work with you.
Our Stronger Futures in the Northern Territory health initiative is a comprehensive health package to deliver better primary health care, dental and allied health services to more than 65,000 Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory.
Funding for alcohol and other drug workers in communities which help develop Alcohol Management plans is part of the approach.
Expanding primary health care services through Aboriginal Controlled Health Organisations, is also a feature of the approach, with around 250 full-time staff delivering medical, nursing and allied health services in around 80 primary health care clinics.
An integrated health program for hearing for Indigenous children, focusing on remote communities, boosting audiology outreach and improving service co-ordination.
Oral health services for Indigenous kids are there too with a new focus on prevention.
Support for around 450 health professional placements in remote areas each year through the Remote Area Health Corps is also working.
And support for Mobile Outreach Service Plus, for four new communities, providing mental health services in the Northern Territory over the next two years and we're also proud to support three new Indigenous Health Research Centres.
It's a lot of work in a lot of areas, but one where we know progress is being made. 
It's critical that we talk about this progress, and that when we come together in gatherings like this we reflect on it.
It's critical that we speak out strongly on this progress to the Australian community, because the greatest threat to the progress of Indigenous Australians is the false notion that we can't make a difference, that nothing ever works.
You've seen things that work; I've seen things that work, and we should share them.
We can make a difference, we know we can, and we are making a difference with more to do.
In Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory the Indigenous mortality rate declined by 36 per cent from 1991 to 2010  -  and there was a significant narrowing of the gap in mortality rates with non-Indigenous Australians. 
Four years into a twenty-five-year project, health outcomes, employment outcomes, education outcomes are improving.
They need to, and they need to keep improving and to improve more quickly.
It's a big challenge to Government, a big challenge to you, but I take great confidence from your resolve to keep at it and keep making a difference where it is needed most.
Closing the Gap is a generational project.
It's a journey of countless short steps  -  not a journey where there are single days of brilliant victory.
But in the fight for better health in our country, there are some of those shining days, and as Tanya said, last Wednesday was one of them.
The High Court rejected the legal challenge by big tobacco to our plain packaging laws.
We won.
We won a victory for every Australian who has lost someone to a smoking related illness.
And we won a victory for every parent who worries about their child picking up this deadly and addictive habit.
Big tobacco threw everything at stopping this  -  and they failed.
They took out advertisements in national newspapers threatening that taxpayers would foot the bill for their legal action against plain packaging laws.
They lost.
So badly, that they had costs awarded against them.
Philip Morris Tobacco even took legal action against me, personally, trying to obtain copies of privileged legal advice about the policy at the Administrative Appeal Tribunal.
They lost that too.
And the news bulletins and front pages around the world have told the story.
You know better than anyone what a determined opponent big tobacco has been.
Even as late as the end of the 1980s, when they stopped saying smoking was harmless, they notoriously said that it was only as harmful as cooking potatoes on a stove top.
But the message here and around the world is now clear:
You can beat big tobacco.
You can't do it alone.
You can't do it without courage.
You can't do it without seeing the task through.
But with leadership, with evidence, with persistence, you can get it done.
As a friend of mine said to me, “I wasn't really sure if plain packaging would actually be effective in cutting smoking until I saw how hard the tobacco companies fought against them”.
Our fight against the death and disease smoking causes doesn't end there.
We have increased the tobacco excise.
We have invested around $100 million in support for Indigenous communities to reduce smoking rates.
Millions of dollars have been invested in anti-smoking social marketing campaigns.
We are restricting internet advertising of tobacco products in our nation and reducing the duty free allowance for tobacco products that we bring home.
Together we are building the world's toughest regime on smoking.
It's obvious, when we talk about these issues, that we're all on the same page and I thank you for your support along the way.
It's also obvious that we don't always agree, that's a given in a democracy.
But your expertise and advocacy is invaluable and there are so many areas where our goals and methods are shared.
Not just tobacco.
You are a staunch defender of our public hospitals.
Your support for the National Disability Insurance Scheme is greatly appreciated.
My Government has put a lot of effort and funding into medical training.  We have provided a record number of training places, and you've supported us as we've done it.
Your pressure on the States to provide more intern places and ease bottlenecks in the system in the years to come is important.
You are making a great contribution in the public health area.
Your voice is heard across the board  -  obesity, alcohol and drug abuse, immunisation, the health of asylum seekers, climate change and health, anti-bullying messages, food labelling, the social determinants of health, mental health.
Just this week your statement on health and the criminal justice system is a good example of how far and wide you go in the public policy debate.
Your call for a National Strategy for Health and Climate Change and recognition of the threat climate change poses to the health of Australians is another.
That's a broad body of work. And it touches and helps many of the more disadvantaged and vulnerable in the community.
A lot has changed in the AMA in the last fifty years, and a lot's changed in our nation too.
But what hasn't changed is the importance of your service and your voice.
So welcome again to Canberra, and I hope you have a very enjoyable evening.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: I'm here with Minister Bowen to make an announcement arising from Angus Houston's report into asylum seeker and refugee issues. There are some other issues today which I will deal with but we will deal with this immigration issue fully first. Minister Bowen has a booked telephone call with Papua New Guinea.
We received the report from Angus Houston last week and the Parliament did endorse the legislation necessary to implement what Angus Houston and his team referred to as a circuit breaker  -  that is, the commencement of processing on Nauru and PNG. But at the time we received the report from Angus Houston and his review team, we said we accepted Mr Houston's analysis that this was an integrated package, that you couldn't cherry-pick between the recommendations that you needed to do them all.
Today Minister Bowen and I are announcing we are actioning Mr Houston's recommendation that the number of humanitarian places be increased to 20,000. This is important because we want to send two messages to asylum seekers. Message No.1, if you get on a boat you are risking your life, you are paying a people smuggler your hard-earned money and you are at risk of being transferred to Nauru or PNG. But Message No.2, if you stay where you are and you have your claim processed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees then there are more resettlement places available in Australia. That is the purpose of announcing the 20,000 places - that is the purpose that Mr Houston identified.
Mr Houston also identified the need for some capacity-building in our region and we are making available as an initial step $10 million for such capacity-building.
I'll turn now to the Minister for Immigration who will speak about these matters but also give you a general update on the work that is happening on Nauru and PNG.
MINISTER BOWEN: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Firstly, to deal with the very significant announcement of the increase in Australia's humanitarian intake.
This was accepted by the government in principle, of course, when we received the Houston-L'Estrange-Aristotle report. And of course we've been working very quickly on the details and we are announcing today that the 20,000 increase will apply from this financial year, the increase to 20,000 people.
This is very significant. Of course it's important that we give people the very clear signal that there are better and safer ways available to pursue a better life in Australia, to flee persecution without taking the risky journey to Australia by boat. It's also very importantly the right thing to do. It builds on our - Australia's - strong record as one of the key humanitarian settlement nations in the world. It's in line with what we put to the ALP National Conference last year to work towards the increase in our humanitarian program to 20,000 and we're very proud that we're being able to implement that this financial year.
Of course, importantly, the key task of our humanitarian program must be to give as many people as possible the chance to flee persecution, to seek a better life in Australia in as safe and orderly a way as possible. That's what this recommendation does. This is the biggest increase to our humanitarian program in 30 years. It will mean that Australia becomes the second largest source of resettlement for UNHCR-referred refugees in the world after only the United States.
Of course, it's important in terms of initial action that we provide that message to people considering whether to take the journey to Australia by boat that there is a better way. Accordingly, as part of that 20,000, 400 immediate places are being set aside for processing on Indonesia, in Indonesia for people who are considering whether to make that journey or not. It's very important that we work with the UNHCR and the Indonesian Government and this has been communicated to Indonesia over recent days that this was what we were planning to do.
Also, I announced on Budget day that we would be moving towards a program for community and private sponsorship of refugees. This will be an important part of the 20,000 program. The consultation process for that has been completed and we will be working with not-for-profit groups, with community organisations across Australia to ensure that this year, the community sponsorship program is an important part of that 20,000 humanitarian intake.
In terms of the make-up of the 20,000, I know there will be interest where this will be targeted. Of course, key groups that will figure in the 20,000 are Afghans, whether they be in Pakistan, Iran or Indonesia; Iraqi minorities including Assyrians, Chaldeans and Mandaeans in Syria, Jordan, Turkey and Lebanon. Of course Sri Lankan refugees will continue to figure in our program, as will Burmese in Malaysia, Thailand and India, and a particular focus of course on continuing developments in Syria and Egypt. We'll continue to work with the UNHCR on key resettlement outcomes for people from the Congo, for Eritreans and Ethiopians and other people in retracted situations in Africa.
At this stage the indications are that increasing the humanitarian program by an additional 6,250 places in 2012-13 will cost around $150 million, with a potential cost impact of $1.3 billion over the forward estimates.
Secondly today we're announcing the first step - the down-payment and the implementation of Recommendation 3 of the Houston panel which is increasing capacity-building in our region. We have an initial payment, an initial allocation of $10 million which will be developed in consultation with the UNHCR and other non-government organisations with a particular focus on our near neighbours, of course Indonesia and Malaysia, in terms of improving protection outcomes, improving the options for registration, improving the management of asylum seekers throughout our region.
The report makes clear that this capacity needs to be increased very significantly, but it makes clear that this needs to be done incrementally over time and this $10 million down-payment is an important step in that process.
Finally I would like to give you an update on the situation with Nauru and Papua New Guinea and Nauru in particular. As you know, a reconnaissance trip took place earlier this week to both nations. This morning I spoke to Foreign Minister Kekei of Nauru, who confirmed Nauru's agreement for the deployment of defence assets to begin the work on the temporary facility on Nauru. Initial aircraft can deploy following formal approval by the Australian Government which will occur today within 24 hours.
This initial deployment will consist of 30 ADF personnel. One or two aircraft C-17s or C-130s will deploy every day over the next week. When this is complete, there will be a full team of 120 ADF personnel on Nauru. We envisage that the capacity will be 500 on Nauru by the end of September and of course, that capacity will come on-line before then and we will provide regular updates on progress in building to that capacity of 500 by the end of September.
Of course there continues to be further work with Nauru and Papua New Guinea on the implementation of agreements and assurances that are necessary under the Act to allow the designation of those countries. And I will provide further updates of course next week and over the coming period.
Happy to take questions Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you. So we'll take questions on immigration now.
JOURNALIST: Will the increase to 20,000 allow to you clear the backlog of people in detention centres and living in the community?
MINISTER BOWEN: Well, with respect, I think what we're talking about here is 20,000 places which are both onshore and offshore. So those people who are already being processed in Australia will continue. They will have come out of a pool of 13,750 places. They'll now come out of a pool of 20,000 places. The other places will be made up of offshore settlement.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister or Minister Bowen, has the money been offset? Have you found savings to offset the expenditure? And can you tell us what they are?
PM: In the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook we'll do the full accounting.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, something very odd just occurred - what have you been handed there?
PM: Mark, I wish I could help you but I've got no idea so I'll have to get it read. Something a young man wanted me to have but it's not apparent to me what the topic of it is, even from its title.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how many of the places will be part of this sponsorship arrangement and how many will the government be paying for?
MINISTER BOWEN: Well, of course, the 20,000 allocation is budgeted for a full government allocation. However, I would hope we could work with community groups over this financial year to achieve up to 500 places being sponsored under the community program and I would like to see it reach 1,000 by next year.
There's a considerable amount of work to do with the not-for-profit sector. This has been working in Canada for a long time but this is new for Australia. There has been a lot of interest and demand in this new proposal that we announced last May from not-for-profit groups, churches, other groups, ethnic-specific groups, a lot of excitement in the community about this. But there is of course a lot of capacity to be built even with our own not-for-profit groups. So I hope to have 500 this year but we'll work with them on that.
JOURNALIST: Have you been given a cost estimate, updated since the reconnaissance teams hitting Nauru and Manus Island?
MINISTER BOWEN: That work is well underway and of course my department is calling for various tenders and expressions of interest and working with potential providers on that and I'll provide further updates, not only next week but in the period beyond that.
JOURNALIST: Sorry Minister, what do you anticipate the capacities to be at Nauru and Manus Island and how long do you think it will take for them to be filled?
MINISTER BOWEN: Well, when we're finished, 1,500 on Nauru and 600 on Manus Island, and I'll provide further updates on the work.
JOURNALIST: They won't take long to fill, though, will they, 1,500 and 600?
MINISTER BOWEN: Well capacity is always an issue, Mark, and it always amused me when the Liberal Party said, oh this Malaysia agreement is terrible, there's only a capacity of 800. Well of course there's limited capacity whatever you do.
But of course we think the suite of measures - the full 22 or 23 recommendations of this report  -  when they're all implemented will have a very significant impact on flows.
But of course, this takes time to implement and of course there were challenges along the way. But we don't walk away from that.
PM: If I could just  -  we'll get to Lyndal in a second - but if I could just intercede there, I think your question very clearly focuses the mind on the fact that this is an integrated set of recommendations. Mr Houston and his very eminent panel made that very clear. You can't cherry-pick from amongst them. And the fact we're here today announcing the next response, this very substantial move, shows that the Government is determined to keep working to deliver the full recommendations of the Houston review.
JOURNALIST: Minister, every time a boat has arrived since last Monday, at the bottom of the press release it says there is a risk those people will be transferred to a regional processing location. Is it your aim to transfer all the arrivals since last Monday to places like Nauru or Manus Island or is there chance some of those who have arrived will be processed on Christmas Island?
MINISTER BOWEN: The position remains the same, Lyndal, and it's as referred to in those public announcements. Anybody who arrived from the date of the announcement runs the risk of being transferred  - 
JOURNALIST: But ‘there's a risk' doesn't mean they will be transferred, does it?
MINISTER BOWEN: The position is very clear and it's reflected in those words.
JOURNALIST: Minister, you're focusing the first 400 in Indonesia. Is it your intention that you will focus more regionally the 6,250 places?
MINISTER BOWEN: Well, I have outlined some of the groups that will figure very prominently. And really, what you look at is the entire pipeline, the entire pipeline on the journey through to Australia, whether it be from Afghanistan or Iran or Iraq or direct from Sri Lanka, you'd really have to look at the entire pipeline.
And of course I referred to those other groups that aren't reflected in boat arrivals in Australia because they shouldn't be forgotten either. People who would never dream of having the money to afford a people smuggler to come to Australia, whether they be in a very protracted situation in Africa or living in Syria or Jordan, having fled Iraq 10 years ago and waiting for resettlement, they won't be forgotten in this as well.
Yes there will be a focus on our region, not only Indonesia but Malaysia and up the pipeline. Yes, that will be reflected in the figures but those other groups won't be forgotten either.
JOURNALIST: When do you envisage the first planeload of asylum seekers going to Nauru?
MINISTER BOWEN: Well I've already said Michael, there is a planeload of ADF personnel going to begin work over the next 24-hour period, and then I will provide further updates from there.
We're providing updates as we go. And I've indicated that capacity will be 500, by the end of September, but that there would be capacity becoming available obviously in the interim, gradually, up to that 500 point by the end of September.
JOURNALIST: Minister, do you anticipate Serco taking over the operation of these centres?
MINISTER BOWEN: We're in a discussion with a range of groups about the operation of the centres. We're in discussions of course not only with private sector providers but with international groups and I'll be providing again further updates about that.
JOURNALIST: Minister, the opposition seems to think you're dragging the chain on the formal paperwork. Does it need to be in the Parliament today?
MINISTER BOWEN: I saw of course Mr Morrison's stunt this morning and it's quite a little stunt. While he's been doing stunts we've been getting on with the work and implementing the agreement and implementing the agreement and implementing the process.
Let's be very clear  -  a couple of points Paul. Firstly, there could've been a detention or a processing facility up in Nauru well over six months ago if the Opposition had agreed to the Government's proposal then. Now they're complaining we haven't done it yesterday. It could have been done six months ago.
Secondly, the Opposition appears to be unaware of the requirements that I need to be satisfied of to declare this as a place of regional processing in the national interest. And in declaring that, I need to take into account assurances given to the Government about [inaudible] and processing. The Opposition is asking me to make that declaration with regard to assurances I've received before I've received them.
I'm acting on legal advice as to how to make this process as legally robust as possible and how to reflect the best intentions of the Parliament.
And the declaration of Nauru or PNG will not delay  -  will not delay - the opening of the centres. I will provide further updates when I'm in a position to say that I have made the declaration. Of course then, there is a clause in the Act which reflects parliamentary approval - which I might say the Opposition asked and received our agreement to - to reflect a number of days it could sit before the Parliament or the Parliament would move to provide a positive affirmation. And I will provide further updates about that as well.
JOURNALIST: You said yourself that the Houston report says it's an integrated report, there's 22 recommendations, needs to be, can't be cherry-picked. Now, one of them is about turning back the boats.
Now, he says it's possible but you need a whole lot of things like diplomatic support and so on. My understanding is that when Jason Clare and Stephen Smith go to Jakarta in coming weeks, if not days, they will not be raising this with Indonesia.
Why is that? Given that you yourself have said that you can't be cherry-picking?
PM: Well, I will go to Minister Bowen for a comment as well but I'd remind you that Angus Houston and his team say it is not possible in current circumstances to do what Mr Abbott advocates and that the issue of what Indonesia will or won't accept is only one element of the risks and problems here.
Risks and problems include the response of people smugglers and asylum seekers and subsequently the risks for our Defence Force personnel. Minister Bowen.
MINISTER BOWEN: As the Prime Minister said, Recommendation 19 is clear. The panel notes the condition for necessary  -  for effective lawful and safe turn back for regular vessels carrying asylum seekers for Australia are not currently met. It then goes on to say this situation could change in future. Our policy is not to turn back boats  -  that's the Liberal Party policy, but Mr Abbott failed to raise it in his discussions with the President of Indonesia.
JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, the Government has said that it's not surprised that the boats are continuing to come for some time after the announcement. But do you have any indications that the message has got across to the people smugglers and that there will be a slowing in the foreseeable future? And secondly, could you tell us what you're doing to revive the Malaysian talks at a high level?
MINISTER BOWEN: Firstly, Michelle, of course we don't comment on intelligence. We do receive intelligence updates but no Minister will comment on them for obvious reasons. This will take some time of course. We are developing - it's no secret, I've said it - before a communications campaign. Again, that will be a matter for public release in the very near future. And that will emphasise the no-advantage principle and it will emphasise that people should not be taking the dangerous boat journey to Australia.
In relation to your question on Malaysia, of course we've been in contact with Malaysia. The report makes clear that we need as a matter of urgency to have the centres established on Nauru and PNG but the Malaysia arrangement - agreement - should be further codified and implemented. I've obviously been in communication with Malaysia and the UNHCR of course. We'll continue that work.
Of course, if the Parliament is of a mind to approve Malaysia as an offshore processing place, we would put that to the Parliament, of course, in line with our principle that we are the only party, not the Greens Party, not the Liberal Party, committed to implementing this report in whole. We are the only party. The Government is the one moving to implement each of these recommendations. Each of the other parties is moving to cherrypick their own position.
PM: Okay, thank you very much.
MINISTER BOWEN: Thank you Prime Minister.
PM: Okay, if we can turn to other matters. For a number of months now, there has been a smear campaign circulating on the Internet relating to events 17 years ago. Much of the material in circulation is highly sexist. I've taken the view over time that I will not dignify this campaign with a response either.
However, this morning something changed on that. The Australian newspaper republished a false and highly defamatory claim about my conduct in relation to these matters 17 years ago. It is a claim about me setting up a trust fund.
A claim was first published by News Limited in relation to me and funds during the election campaign in 2007. On that occasion, the claim was retracted and apologised for. The claim was made again by Glenn Milne, a then columnist with the Australian newspaper, such a dim view was taken of his conduct in relation to that matter his employment was terminated.
Despite these events, a similar claim has been recirculated by the Australian newspaper today. People may have already seen that the claim has been retracted and apologised for and that retraction and apology appears on the Australian web site and as I understand it on all News Limited web sites.
In these circumstances, where I am seeing, recycled again, false and defamatory material attacking my character, I have determined that I will deal with these issues. I'm therefore happy to take questions on these matters. I am going to do that today.
Given we have got to a stage where false and defamatory material is now being recycled in the Australian newspaper; I'll make this an opportunity to ask questions if people have them on their mind. This will be the only occasion on which I deal with this matter. I am not going to dignify it by ongoing answering of questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could you explain to us the circumstances of your departure from Slater &amp; Gordon? Were you at any time asked to leave? Was it suggested that you resign?
PM: I determined to resign from Slater &amp; Gordon. I did that in circumstances where there had been growing tension and friction amongst the partnership. I think these are matters of public record. Indeed, I believe you've commented on them yourself.
There was growing tension and friction amongst the partnership. I had also been preselected to stand on the Senate ticket for the Labor Party in 1996. As history records, I was not elected, narrowly missing out.
It had long been an aspiration of mine to move to a political career, so I made the determination to resign from Slater &amp; Gordon. That is also verified by Peter Gordon and statements that have been made in recent days, but there was considerable friction and tension in the partnership at that time.
JOURNALIST: There has also been that statements some people at Slater &amp; Gordon were considering terminating your employment. Was that the case?PM: Well I direct you to the statement made by Peter Gordon which deals with this matter. I think you are referring to a statement from Nick Styant-Browne in relation to his recollections. You would have to raise them with him. My recollections and Peter Gordon's recollections are as I've just outlined them to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one of the issues that's been raised in recent days is the disparity between the creation of this association and what you said in 1995. The former being that it was the creation of a workplace safety association and then three and a half years later, you said it was a slush fund.
Now, going back to the documents that have been released under FOI, with relation to the Officer of the Commissioner of Corporate Affairs, listed the 23 April 1992, is it your contention that in when Ralph Blewitt signed this document with nine pages attached which you, I believe, prepared and it says the objects of the association are, and there is like (a) to (h), and include things like promoting within unions the adoption of the association's policies, supporting union officials. 
Is your contention that those objectives of the association are consistent with being a slush fund?
PM: Well, let me answer your question and answer it in some detail because I agree that you've gone to a number of matters that have been raised in recent days.
First and foremost, the terminology that you used in your question, which was terminology I used in the discussion with Peter Gordon and Jeff Shaw some 17 years ago, is terminology with a particular overtone to it which I don't think helps with understanding these events. I'm not going to use it again. I will be far more precise than that.
I was a solicitor at Slater &amp; Gordon. I assisted with the provision of advice regarding the setting up of an association, the workplace reform association that you refer to.
My understanding is that the purpose of the association was to support the re-election of a team of union officials and their pursuit of the policies that they would stand for re-election on.
It was my understanding that the association would engage in fundraising activities, including, for example, there being regular payroll deductions from union officials who would be putting their money together to support their re-election campaign and that they may well have other fundraising activities like hosting dinners where it would be transparent to people that the money was going to support their re-election campaign.
My role in relation to this was I provided advice as a solicitor. I am not the signatory to the documents that incorporated this association. I was not an office bearer of the association. I had no involvement in the working of the association. I provided advice in relation to its establishment and that was it.
JOURNALIST: Can you say categorically, Prime Minister, that none of the funds in this entity were used to pay for renovations on your house?
PM: I've dealt with this allegation a lot in the past and let's be very clear about it. I paid for the renovations on my home in St Phillip Street in Abbotsford. Like millions of other Australians, I had the unhappy experience that I had a few blues with contractors along the way.
JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied, was your conduct as a lawyer throughout this matter ethical?
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think that, you say that you weren't a signatory to that initial document.
PM: No, I was not.
JOURNALIST: Did you help to draft the document that you knew was false because the purpose of the association was fundraising for a union election, not workplace safety, as stated in that document?
PM: I've just responded to Andrew's question, and let me re-state it. My understanding of the purpose of this association was to support the re-election of union officials who would run a campaign saying that they wanted re-election because they were committed to reforming workplaces in a certain way, to increasing occupational health and safety, to improving the conditions of the members of the union.
That was my understanding of the purpose of the association, and so I provided legal advice for the association. The document you refer to is not signed by me. The section of the document you refer to was not written by me.
JOURNALIST: The purposes of this, it talks about it being a workplace reform association which people would take to be for the benefit of workers. Nowhere in that does it say it was for the purposes of re-election of officials?
PM: Well, I'm being clear with you about this. I understood then the purpose of the association was to support trade union officials who would stand on a platform about reform and improvements in workplaces.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, the Melbourne house that was later bought with funds from this association. Can you tell us about how much you knew about that house, your involvement in that house and whether you knew it was paid for by the association and how that relates to workplace safety?
PM: Well, I dealt with this matter in the interview with Peter Gordon and Jeff Shaw of which you now have the transcript.
My understanding about that house was that it was being purchased by Mr Blewitt. It was being purchased as an investment property. It was purchased on the understanding that Mr Wilson would be the tenant of the property and that Mr Blewitt was in a position with a mortgage like an ordinary person to purchase the property.
I did not, at the time, understand that any funds from any other source would be used to support the purchase, that is funds from the association or any other accounts related to the union.
JOURNALIST: Can you tell us just quickly why didn't you open a file on this matter, as would have been common practice?
PM: I'm glad you've asked me that question because it gives me the opportunity to clarify this. Working at Slater &amp; Gordon in the industrial section as I did for a number of years, it was par for the course to routinely provide free advice to union officials and trade unions. 
We worked closely with officials. We worked closely with trade unions. We would provide limited free advice to them. Of course at a particular point when a job became big or it was occasioning disbursements for the firm like court filing fees or barrister's fees, a file would be opened.
But I would routinely sit with officials of a clothing trades union and provide them with free advice about pursuing a claim for an out-worker, and keep those documents either on a file labelled JEG General, my initials, Julia Eileen Gillard, or a file labelled CTU General, Clothing Trades Union, or sometimes on a file that you would create for the holding of those documents but you would not go to the stage of formally opening it up on the system because you didn't expect the matter to go further.
I'll keep answering the questions so there's no need to interrupt. I took the same approach in relation to this file for the Australian Workers Union association. With the benefit of hindsight, of course it would have been better that I had opened the file on the system, but at the time it did not strike me as a matter of particular significance.
JOURNALIST: You said that this has come from a smear campaign, but there's been MPs within your own party that have made statements to Parliament about this and the Fair Work Commissioner, Ian Cambridge, has called for a royal commission. Do you think there needs to be some sort of formal investigation so the process, we can move on from this and you can be cleared?
PM: Well you are conflating a number of things that is prejudicial to me. Mr Cambridge has never called for an inquiry into my conduct and you ought not to assert that. Mr McClelland made a statement to the Parliament which he has said subsequently did not relate to my conduct either. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, with the benefit of hindsight and leaving aside choice of renovators and stuff is there anything you would do differently apart from files?
PM: If you got to relive your life again, there would be a number of things that I would do differently. Life doesn't afford you that opportunity.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I just clarify because I think the most serious of these imputations is the one with regards to what your knowledge was then and later, and so I want to go back to this - you don't dispute that you created this 9-page document which was attached to Blewitt's - 
PM: I don't have that document in front of me, but, let's just be clear, so it's clear for everyone. I assisted with the provision of legal advice to incorporate this association. I'm happy to answer questions about the document you have in front of you.
JOURNALIST: Very few of us are actually with legalese but, and there's a bit of it here, and it talks about, you've talked about re-election, you know, of officials and so on. Is promoting within unions, the adoption of the aims of the association, things like supporting and assisting union officials and union members who contributed to the adoption of the association, is that consistent with re-election?
PM: Yes, it is consistent with what I've just said to you, which I understood the purpose of the association to be, to support the re-election of a team of union officials who would stand on a platform, a platform for change, the kind of change in the kind of areas outlined in the document you have in front of you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said that you didn't write a section of the document and you didn't sign it, but you obviously read it thoroughly at the time, I presume. Were you happy that that document accurately reflected what an association of that sort should be doing in all respects? And did you know that the association was going to seek money from big companies?
PM: The purpose of the association and the documents etcetera, I've just answered Andrew's question; my understanding was, as I have just outlined it to you. So obviously any advice I provided was consistent with that understanding.
I did not know anything further about the workings of the association until these matters commenced to be dealt with publicly in 1995. That is, I provided advice to assist with the incorporation of the association and then knew nothing further about its workings until allegations about these matters were raised in 1995.
JOURNALIST: Can you be specific about exactly when and how you were informed that it might have been put to questionable use?
PM: These matters started to come to attention in 1995 when they became the subject of controversy within the AWU itself. That is the first time that they came to my attention.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be making a formal statement to the Parliament and I ask this in the context of a statement to Parliament of course as a high duty of truthfulness?
PM: Well, I'm acquitting a high duty of truthfulness here. I won't be making a statement to Parliament. There's no need. I do note that I've been to three Question Times this week, I've taken a large number of questions and not one has been directed at me.
I also do note that the Leader of the Opposition has been asked on more than one occasion to articulate what it is that he would ask me, what any allegation it is that he says I should deal with, and he has been unable to do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why didn't you tell other members of the firm that you were conducting this work? And also, why wasn't the AWU National Executive, for example, informed of the creation of an entity within its boundaries? And also, can I just clarify the terms of the apology today  -  if we had called the ‘trust fund' a ‘slush fund', the story would have been correct, wouldn't it?
PM: No.
JOURNALIST: And my advice is that the newspaper stands by every other word of its coverage.
PM: Well, good defence for a newspaper that's apologised today for a clear error that it published first in 2007 and had to rush to change its second editions because it recognised it was defamatory and wrong and that it subsequently sacked a senior commentator over.
Good defence, Sid, but it's very, very hard to explain why, three times, these defamatory allegations would come around when on every occasion News Limited has ended up apologising for them and retracting them. That's a matter for News Limited and for its internal processes to work through.
On the other issues you've raised with me, obviously I acted as a lawyer on instructions from the people giving me those instructions. You do not, as a lawyer, take instructions from a client and then take it into your head to work out who you should be conveying those instructions to. That's the way that lawyers work.
JOURNALIST: Could you explain the protocol for working with the AWU? Who were you authorised to take instructions from? How did that work?
PM: You misunderstand the way law firms work. Law firms work on the basis that people who are clients come in and give instructions to solicitors. I was a solicitor.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, putting the issues of renovations to one side, when these allegations were first made in Victorian Parliament many years ago, as you know, there were allegations made around other companies, I think the Town Mode fashion, was raised in one instance.
Is there any way of you knowing whether you may have unwittingly benefitted from money from these accounts, for example, via gifts and so on and what's your understanding of the allegations that were raised in the past about the Town Mode?
PM: Well, because this matter has been dealt with on the public record for 17 years, yes, at some point in those 17 years an allegation was made that I had received clothing from a business known as Town Mode. That allegation is untrue. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, as I understand it, when these issues were first questioned within the AWU, the matter was looked at, at Slater &amp; Gordon by Bernard Murphy. Now, I presume he then informed you of these issues. What was your reaction at that time? This is specifically the activities of Mr Blewitt and Mr Wilson?
PM: Well, I'm not in a position, for all the obvious reasons about legal professional privilege, to canvas the contents of files operated by solicitors at Slater &amp; Gordon.
What I can say to you, Dennis, and what I think your question is trying to drive at is once I became aware that I had been deceived about a series of matters, I ended my relationship with Mr Wilson.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, at any point were you aware that this workplace reform association was to receive lumps of money from companies like THEISS and John Holland?
PM: I was not aware of the receipt of these funds. I had no knowledge about the operation of the association. I provided advice, as the association was established, I then knew absolutely nothing about its workings until allegations about its workings became the subject of discussion within the AWU and then more broadly.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned this was first disseminated, this situation, during the election campaign in 2007.
PM: No, not first disseminated, no. These matters have been canvassed on the public record for the best part of 17 years.
JOURNALIST: My apologies. They were again disseminated again in 2007 and that you believed that the timing of that was significant. Do you believe the timing of the dissemination of this now is significant? If so, what is the significance? And do you believe any of your Parliamentary colleagues have been involved in disseminating this information now?
PM: No, I don't. I believe the people who have been involved in disseminating this information are people like Larry Pickering who is operating a veil and sexist website and then of course you would be aware that the Australian and a number of journalists there have been reporting on it in recent days.
REPORTER: Do you think there is any larger political motivation behind this?
PM: I'm not asserting that, no.
JOURANLIST: In terms of the discussion around why you left Slater &amp; Gordon it's been suggested that you felt you had been shabbily treated in some way. Can you explain to us whether that's accurate, whether you were of that view and why, and did your departure have to do with other issues? Did it have to do for example with the Ian Smith matter? Did it have to do with the general discussion in the legal firm about moving from industrial practice to a client action base? Can you give us an honest answer about why you actually left?
PM: Well everything I'm saying to you today is accurate and honest. Slater &amp; Gordon, there were increasing tensions in the partnership, there were some underlying tensions about the direction of the firm.
Slater &amp; Gordon is an old firm, a historic firm, a firm that's proudly operated for working people. It commenced around this period of time to move increasingly into the class action area.
There was the class action on Wittenoom, asbestos; there was the breast implant litigation. There was the Ok Tedi litigation for people who had been prejudiced by the action of a mining company and so on.
So yes, there were discussions about the direction of the firm and you would expect people to have different views about that and they did. That underlying discussion was happening, causing some friction.
Friction was exacerbated around a very controversial case involving a woman called Ms Sheryl Harris; you've just referred to it. It also involved a matter called Mr Smith.
And then it is also true to say that these matters, these AWU matters also added to tensions in the firm.
JOURNALIST: What was your involvement with the Ian Smith matter, were you directly involved in it?
PM: No, I was not.
JOURNALIST: Did you feel shabbily treated and did it affect your relationship with Mr Gordon for some years thereafter?
PM: There were tensions in the partnership. Obviously I resigned from Slater &amp; Gordon as history records. Mr Murphy went to be a partner at Maurice Blackburn.
So yes, there was some sense of, you know, some personal emotional engagement in these issues. I think you would expect that  -  real world, real human beings.
From my point of view now, it's all history. I have a very good relationship with Slater &amp; Gordon. I'm very chuffed that a room there is being named in my honour. I'm a woman with very limited time, but from time to time I do say hello to staff in the firm.
I recently gave a lecture in a lecture theatre in the same premises as Slater &amp; Gordon in Sydney and took the opportunity to shake hands and have a photo with all of the staff who work there. I regularly see Mr Gordon, most particularly in the context of consoling each other about Bulldogs' losses.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, if you weren't aware until later on of the alleged corrupt uses for the workplace reform association that you set up at Slater &amp; Gordon, how was that part of the conflict and the tension between the partnership that led to your departure?
PM: You've got the time sequence wrong. There was a debate in the partnership about the direction of the firm. There was the Sheryl Harris matter and sometime after the Sheryl Harris matter, there were these public exposure of the matters involving the AWU and Mr Wilson.
JOURNALIST: What about Mr Styant-Browne, where did he sit in the partnership frictions and the personal and emotional engagements?
PM: Well you'll need to put that to him. As history records, Mr Styant-Browne left the firm himself.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried about any of the people giving releasing client-privilege  -  the AWU, Ralph Blewitt?
PM: That's a matter for the clients involved, not for me?
JOURNALIST: It doesn't worry you?
PM: Look, I'm not going to give advice to people about what they should do about their legal professional privilege. It's a matter for them. I'm answering your questions now. If you've got questions, put them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, should the AWU pay back money to companies that sunk money into this reform association?
PM: All of these are questions you're going to have to deal with elsewhere. We're talking about events 17 years ago. A series of allegations made, there were some police investigations at the time. No charges have been laid, so there've been processes engaged in. They are not processes that I oversaw. They were processes that were overseen by the union.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if the Opposition were to use Question Time to ask you about these issues and you answered them, would that in your view satisfy any calls for a full statement to Parliament?
PM: Well, I think I should be, I'm in the process of satisfying calls for the provision of further information. I remind you that there is not one direct question that has been put to me either in Parliament or through their regular media interviews by the Opposition that they say I have to answer.
In those circumstances where they are unable to articulate a question and I am sitting here in front of, what, 20, 30, people, answering any question they choose to ask me, I think that that is satisfactory to deal with the matter.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have a view about the fact that no charges have ever been laid over these allegations about the misappropriation of hundreds of thousands of dollars of union members' funds?
PM: I'm not in a position to give you an insight into the thinking of the police on the matter. I'm just simply not.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've said The Australian's published allegations, in your words, that are false and defamatory-
PM: And they've been retracted and apologised for.
JOURANLIST: Are you considering any legal action?
PM: No, I'm not.
JOURNALIST: And secondly, you've had your reputation and your integrity put under a lot of scrutiny. How are you handling it personally?
PM: Well I'm fine. I do  -  when I see claims that have been dealt with in the past, let me just put that a little bit more precisely. I have decided to come to this press conference today because this matter had got to the stage where we were starting to see recycled, false and defamatory allegations which I have dealt with in the past.
And every time I've dealt with them, retractions have been put onto websites, second editions have been pulled of newspapers because these are defamatory allegations and they are wrong.
When it was getting to a stage that these allegations were being recycled about my character, and they are so clearly wrong, I thought it was appropriate for me to come and deal with the matter. Apart from that, for many, many months now I've been the subject of a very sexist smear campaign from people for whom I have no respect, and I am not going to spend my time answering the ravings of Larry Pickering and the like.
JOURNALIST: Was there any bad blood or animus between you and Mr Styant-Browne? Were you surprised to see that he was the source of these renewed allegations?
PM: Look, I knew Mr Styant-Browne back in the days that I was at Slater &amp; Gordon. Those days are some 17 years ago. To the best of my knowledge, I have not seen Mr Styant-Browne since those days. Mr Styant-Browne subsequently left the firm.
You know, what is motivating Mr Styant-Browne is an issue you would have to raise with him.
JOURNALIST: Was there anything in your working relationship with him at the firm that may explain why he has spoken out the way he has?
PM: I'm not able to give you an insight into his thinking and I'm not able to explain it for you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it seems that part of the justification for the reporting in the last few days is that it goes to your character, it goes to your judgment as the Prime Minister, as the leader of the country, and that on face value you were at least naive and perhaps conned. Do you accept that?
PM: Well, what I would say, Mark, and this perhaps goes to issues about why these allegations are being re-circulated, it is my understanding of the media that the biggest selling newspapers in our country circulate on Sundays.
In 2007, on the Sunday before the election campaign, it is my recollection that those biggest selling newspapers ran with a banner headline, ‘Conman broke my heart'.
So I don't think anybody in this place or indeed any Australian who in their hundreds and hundreds of thousands would have bought and read those newspapers would be in any way surprised by this material. It's been on the public record before people were required to go and vote for the election in 2007.
So if Australian voters had a judgment about it, then they had the ability to record that judgment in 2007. If Australians had a judgment about it, they had the ability to record that judgment in 2010.
None of this is new. I am standing in front of you now as a 50-year-old woman. Have I learned a few things across my lifetime? Yes, I have.
JOURNALIST: One of your friends, Bill Ludwig, was at the AWU when this happened and is still the National President. Have you spoken to him about this since or in recent weeks?
PM: No.
JOURNALIST: Did you confront Bruce Wilson personally after certain matters were raised with you? What was the atmosphere of that meeting and what are your feelings towards him now?
PM: I ended our relationship and I know that there's some material in today's Australian which would lead people to believe that our national newspapers are for Mills &amp; Boon style recounts of words spoken between people who were formerly in a close relationship. It's not my intention to canvas those matters. And it's not my intention to canvas them because by definition there can be no public interest in them. I ended the relationship. That is the significant fact.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when the scandal erupted and it became known that this money had been stolen by two shysters, who told you? Was it someone at the AWU or was it Bernard Murphy who'd been told by someone else?
PM: Well, I can't go to matters of privilege, but first and foremost, allegations were being raised and dealt with within the AWU. Those allegations came to my attention. I formed a view that I had not been dealt with honestly and based on that view I ended a relationship I had back then, 17 years ago.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, these events, particularly the ones over the last few days, are they having any impact on your thinking about what to do about media regulation?
PM: My thinking about media regulation will not be defined by these events. I've well and truly got my eyes on the public policy questions and the future. So the test I will use in dealing with any issues about media regulation is not what difference it makes today, but what will be the circumstance for the ability of Australians to get quality, diverse information in five, 10, 15, 20 years' time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if I could ask you one question on another topic.
PM: Let's just exhaust this topic and then I will take others briefly.
JOURNALIST: Do you regret calling it a slush fund in that transcript and does the fact that you called it a slush fund in that transcript indicate that you knew when it was set up that it wasn't set up for the purposes stated?
PM: I'd refer you to the whole sentence. Read the whole sentence and you will see the sentence is about the purposes I've articulated to you today. It wasn't the best choice of words. We're talking about a transcript of an interview 17 years ago where I think you can tell from the way in which I deal with a series of issues, I'm talking to two people I know well.
Some of the discussions we are having are of a casual, even jovial nature, and some of the commentary today has remarked on some of the funnier things in that transcript. So it wasn't the best form of words, but I'd ask people to assess the form of words in the context in which it was being used in a sentence where the description of the purpose of the association, as I understood it, is exactly the same as the description I've given you here today.
JOURNALIST: Given your difference with Sid over the correction, could you just precisely tell us where it was wrong, your version of where it was wrong?
PM: I can certainly tell you where it was wrong. The Australian newspaper today asserted that I created a trust fund. That is wholly untrue and seriously defamatory.
The Australian, in the past, has asserted that I created bank accounts. News Limited has known that that allegation is wholly untrue and defamatory since the Sunday before the 2007 election campaign.
Indeed, so concerned about it were they, that they changed the second edition of the Sunday newspapers and put a retraction and apology on News Limited websites.
The Australian has certainly known that that allegation is defamatory and untrue since Mr Milne reproduced it, and the determination was made that the appropriate course of action was to terminate Mr Milne's employment.
That is why I am so amazed, I think is the right word, to see it reproduced today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, that's the only contention with the last week's reporting, isn't it?
PM: I've got other contentions with the last week's reporting, but I want to be clear with you, Sid, about what's motivated me today. I did not want to dignify what is, I believe, a very sexist smear campaign on the Internet.
The Australian newspaper commenced to report on a number of matters that I thought had been dealt with publicly before and which no wrongdoing by me was alleged.
Today, a move has been made from those matters to a specific contention which is highly wrong and defamatory, and I believe it is appropriate for me to deal with it. I am taking the opportunity to deal with related matters. I am answering all of your questions and today is an end of it.
JOURNALIST: The story today about Ralph Blewitt leaving Indonesia in 2009 with the police after him and left owing a lot of money. When you dealt with him, did you find him a shonky character then?
PM: Phil, that's a question really that no-one could answer. Did I have any reason to believe that Mr Blewitt was involved in the kind of conduct that has subsequently come to light? No, I did not.
JOURNALIST: Mr Blewitt is claiming that if he's given indemnity, that is the police promise not to arrest him and throw him jail, that he'll tell the whole story. Is there more to this story?
PM: I can't, Paul, work out for you what is in the mind of Mr Blewitt, but the only way of diagnosing that statement is that Mr Blewitt appears to believe he has done some criminal act for which he is seeking indemnity.
JOURNALIST: Can I assume you've had no contact with Bruce Wilson since 1995?
PM: Correct.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have any information which you are prevented from giving by lawyer-client privilege that could assist the authorities in relation to the funds, you know, that Mr Wilson-
PM: No.
JOURNALIST: And also, whose decision was it to tape the interview, between you and the partners?
PM: I don't recall.
JOURNALIST: Why was the interview taped?
PM: Sid, I don't recall and there is no significance in it. I simply don't recall. It was a discussion; obviously people thought it was best to have it on the record.
Let's remember  -  and for the younger ones in the audience, they might now faint from shock  -  the usual way of dealing with instructions at Slater &amp; Gordon back then was for lawyers to interview clients and then quickly dictate matters into a Dictaphone which was then sent to a centralised word processing pool we referred to as WANG because that was the word processing system that was operated by lawyers back then. Then it would come back, then you would correct the typos in it, then it would go back to WANG. And so life went on. So, you know, lawyers having tapes, Dictaphones handy was, you know, nothing unusual in Slater &amp; Gordon or any law firm at the time; that's how we did our work. Of course, life is now different and there are no centralised word processing pools to the best of my knowledge.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe workplace reform associations are legitimate bodies these days or should they be outlawed?
PM: Look, I think people who contest union elections will spend money on those elections if money is gathered transparently and it is clear to people what the purposes are, then there is nothing wrong with that. I would say the same about participating in a local council election and the like.
JOURNALIST: But the experience of companies like Thiess which, I mean, they put $380,000 of taxpayers' money into this association or the funds. Its experience was that the coffers  - 
PM: I'm not sure I understand your contention: taxpayers' money.
JOURNALIST: Well, the money they put in was actually from taxpayers, from the State Government. But with regards to the work of this association, Thiess refused to be a complainant because it thought it had got its service. Now, that service presumably was industrial peace. If these are still instruments that can maintain industrial peace, then it's a waste of money, isn't it?
PM: Well, first and foremost, I think you're putting a set of assertions to me I'm not in a position to deal with. I had no knowledge of the workings of this association from the time of assisting with legal advice when it was being incorporated to the time that allegations about it were being raised in 1995; no knowledge of the operation in the meantime. In terms of the motivations of anyone who was associated with it in the time period in between, I cannot assist you with their motivations. I had no knowledge of it.
I think we need to be clear here about the difference between entities and conduct. Is it wrong for anyone to deal with industrial disputes in any way other than for the best interests of the people that they're representing? It's wrong. Unions should be dealing with industrial disputes in the best interests of their members. Employers should be dealing with industrial disputes in the best interests of the employing firm. So it's wrong for that conduct between unions and employers to be distorted by any other factor except the best interests of the parties who are working on that industrial dispute.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you still stand by your appointment of Bernard Murphy to Federal Court judge last year?
PM: Well, let's be very clear about this, too: I am proud that this Government introduced reforms to the way in which we appoint people to the judiciary. There is now a system which engages independent and eminent people to provide recommendations on who should be appointed. Mr Murphy was recommended by those independent and eminent people.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just getting back to the interview, how was it characterised to you when you were asked to do the interview and did you feel your future was on the line at Slater &amp; Gordon?
PM: Sid, it's 17 years ago. I don't have a clear recollection about those matters. I can't tell you whether we drank coffee or whether we drank water. You know, it's 17 years ago. It is there in terms of the contents of the interview for people to read. And with respect, Sid, there is nothing about this line of questioning that is going to end up justifying the claim that has been apologised for today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, sorry, just going back to the incident earlier in the press conference when the gentleman came in and handed you that piece of paper. Were you concerned that he came through the public entrance and got into a restricted area and was able to get to you?
PM: Look, I don't know who the gentleman was and obviously I've been standing here since. I have not been able to engage in any inquiry of the circumstances. I didn't feel, you know, threatened in any way but in terms of the pass system and who has got where in the building, I will have to deal with that later. I've got no information. I just saw him hand it to me and I took it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you have said in the past that you were young and naïve when you got involved with Mr Wilson. But, I mean, you were 30 at the time. You were establishing your legal career. It might seem a bit odd to people on that defence; it wasn't like you were off the first train from Adelaide, for instance.
PM: Well, how old are you? How old are you?
JOURNALIST: Thirty-two.
PM: Right. Let me assure you, you will know a lot more by the time you're 50 than you do now.
JOURNALIST: On another matter, your Resources Minister this morning suggested the mining boom was over.
PM: I'm happy to take your question, but can we just deal with any other further questions about this matter?
JOURNALIST: On the builder, do you think that this will always be a cloud over you because you simply can't rule out the fact that there might have been some money from this association or this entity that ended up helping to renovate your house?
PM: I've just said to you I paid for my renovations.
JOURNALIST: Will you rule out  - 
PM: I paid for my renovations. And, well, in terms of people who continue to circulate these claims, will the misogynists and the nut jobs on the Internet continue to circulate them? Yes, they will, and it wouldn't matter what I said and it wouldn't matter what documents were produced and it wouldn't matter what anybody else said; they will pursue this claim for motivations of their own which are malicious and not in any way associated with the facts.
In terms of the conduct of more mainstream media, well, you are in a better position to answer that than me, but I've been on my feet now for, what, I can't quite recall, 50 minutes, something like that, taking every question that the journalist elite of this country have got for me. If that doesn't end the matter, then with respect I don't know what would.
JOURNALIST: Have you considered legal action against the people circulating the stuff on the Internet?
PM: Look, you know, it's dignifying them with a status that they don't deserve and as I understand it, a number of them, well, certainly Mr Pickering is bankrupt or something, so you would end up on a never ending trail; for what purpose? Because he could lose a dozen defamation actions and he would still pursue this. He would still be propagandising sexist and vicious stuff about me until the end of time.
So this is not reason, it's not facts, it's not anything to do with any of those things. It's to do with this, you know, sort of Americanisation of our politics, this eccentric lunar right Tea Party-style interventions that we are seeing in our politics and there is nothing that a person of reason can do to deal with it. The best thing I think you can do is just ignore it because I suspect giving it any attention gives them some satisfaction.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given that is the reality now of political life, this is the sort of stuff that you have to face every day, do you worry that people will not come into politics now because this genuinely is the sort of stuff that people have to deal with?
PM: I think the best way I can answer that is probably not about myself because if you answer it about yourself, you know, obviously people are going to try and analyse what it means for your own political position.
But speaking generally, look, it does worry me that we live in an age where a number of years later people in America can be wandering around saying, ‘President Obama wasn't born in America and did you know he is a Muslim?' Yes, it does worry me that that's where politics has got to, that things that are demonstrably untrue, indeed absurd, are circulated and recirculated and recirculated and somehow, at least in some section of the population, manage to worm their way in to become the orthodoxy.
What do I think is going to be the long-term future of all of this? Well, I can't quite tell you, but I do think we will see a couple of trends. I think the ability of voters to digest and process information will become more and more selective over time. We live in an age where information is just at you all day, every day, en masse, and so I think people will become far more discerning on the bits of information and what's truthful and what's not.
And despite the changing economics of the media industry  -  and we've had some news on that today from Fairfax  -  despite the changing economics of the media industry, I think highly professional, ethical journalism will become more valued, not less valued, because people will have this sea of stuff, much of which is just, you know, absurd  -  President Obama is, you know, not born in America  -  and they will look within that sea of stuff for the things that they believe they can trust, which puts all of you in an interesting position, as we go through this time of change, but doesn't, in the time of change, get rid of some of the pressing economic concerns that are there on media companies and are leading to redundancies and the reshaping of the way content is provided, and I know as individuals each of you live with those pressures.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there was one other aspect of the not filing, not opening a file: it has been suggested by various people that you did that because you were doing a freebie for your boyfriend and didn't want the firm to know?
PM: Look, I've described to you it was routine at Slater &amp; Gordon to do relatively small jobs which didn't occasion actual outgoings for the firm like disbursements, you know, as free legal advice. We are talking about a firm that was the first firm ever to advertise in this country and when it went out with its advertising in this country, its market advantage was first consultation free. You know, we worked in the industrial unit, providing legal advice.
I don't see any of you here asking me, ‘Do you think it was the wrong thing to do to not open up a file every time you assisted the Clothing Trades Union with something associated with an out-worker?' And, Paul, I would also put the following to you: do you really think if I'd opened up a file that we wouldn't be here today anyway? Karen.
JOURNALIST: What do you think motivates Slater &amp; Gordon to donate money to the Labor Party?
PM: That the ethos of the firm since its inception has been that it is a pro-worker, plaintiff personal injury firm. And so it takes a judgement about which political party can best support the interests of workers and that's the Labor Party.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Tony Abbott over the course of the week has given this story unnecessary oxygen, given that he throughout the course of the week has said that the media has legitimate questions to ask in this case?
PM: As I understand Mr Abbott's intervention in this debate, he has been saying I should make a statement to Parliament, but he has been unable to articulate what it is that he specifically is concerned about that that statement should be about. He has had plenty of opportunity to ask me if he was truly concerned and he has declined all of those opportunities.
JOURNALIST: This morning your Resources Minister said that the mining boom was over. He said we had done very well out of it but it's over. Your Finance Minister said it's not over. Is the mining boom over or isn't it?
PM: Minister Ferguson was making a point about commodity prices and we have seen commodity prices come off a little. We are still seeing strong investment in mining. That strong investment is being delivered now and there is further investment in the pipeline. Our nation will continue to see that growth in resources for a long period of time to come and it will be part of a world-beating economy, a strong economy which we have managed in the interests of working people and creating jobs.
JOURNALIST: Even if it's just the commodity price boom that's over, doesn't that have implications for the revenue you're seeking to raise from your mining tax and your ability to spread the benefits [inaudible]?
PM: We've got to get the time sequence right here. Minister Ferguson was talking about commodity prices; he was talking about future investment decisions. Obviously, the Minerals Resource Rent Tax revenue is figured off those businesses that are in production now, getting ore out of the ground, selling it, making super profits and those super profits being taxed in a more efficient way than in the past.
JOURNALIST: Does the Olympic Dam decision mean it's time to recalibrate the economic levers in this country? Is this a game changer? Do you need a new economic strategy?
PM: Well, let's be clear about what's motivated the Olympic Dam decision. I think anybody who wants to understand this decision should read the statement from BHP which makes it clear.
What I am amazed about is that Mr Abbott could be so reckless and so negative that he presented for a national TV interview last night, made a set of false assertions about what had happened here, and hadn't even bothered to read the statement from BHP about the motivations for its decision.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you concerned about the Qantas result today? And if I could just follow up from what Sid said, is it getting to any sort of point where the Government thinks it needs to put some sort of stimulus into the economy?
PM: We've got an economy that is growing, you know, at or above trend. Let's deal with the economic facts. I know every day we're confronted with economic negativity and vandalism from the Opposition, but let's remember the economic facts. Our economy is growing. It is creating jobs. We have low inflation. We have low unemployment. We have strong public finances. We have a triple-A rating from the three credit agencies for the first time in our nation's history.
It is also an economy that is seeing various transitions: transitions because of the high dollar, transitions because of the changing nature of the markets in which people work. Our transport market is changing with the advent of low-cost carriers with greater penetration into the market. Our media market is changing because of the advent of new technologies that even as, you know, two or three years ago couldn't have quite been imagined in their current form today.
So, yes, there are economic transitions and those transitions can be very concerning for the people who are at the centre of those transitions, which is why we work with communities and with industries as they adjust. But even as we do that, we cannot forget and we should never at any point forget the overall strength of our economy. It's something we should be proud of as a nation. We built it together.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the last question: Martin Parkinson, Ken Henry and Heather Ridout, to name three people, have warned about a revenue base that is permanently shrinking at the same time as the Federal Government is making promises on the NDIS, there's Gonski to come, there's a blowout in the cost of processing asylum seekers. How will your Government make up those revenue shortfalls?
PM: You will see us make prudent decisions on the Federal Budget, as we always do. We are a government that has shown strong ability to find savings, more than $100 billion of them in order to fund the Government's priorities and we will continue with that work.
JOURNALIST: So there is under no circumstances  - 
PM: I dealt with that in the question from Joe Hockey yesterday. Okay, thank you.
JOURNALIST: Thank you, Prime Minister.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris Bowen today announced that the Government will increase Australia's humanitarian program to 20,000 places in 2012-13, in line with the recommendation of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers.
The Government will also immediately allocate $10 million for regional capacity building projects with a special emphasis on United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
As outlined in the recommendations of the panel chaired by former Chief of the Defence Force, Angus Houston, we will be increasing our annual refugee intake from 13,750 to 20,000 places in this financial year.
This is a more than a 40 per cent increase to our humanitarian intake and the biggest boost to Australia's refugee intake in 30 years.
This increase is targeted to those in most need: those vulnerable people offshore, not those getting on boats.
People who arrive by boat will get no advantage. It's not worth the risk to life and it's not worth the money, because there is absolutely no benefit to getting on that people smuggler's boat.
As an immediate measure, the Government will resettle an additional 400 refugees from Indonesia to underscore our commitment to offering safe alternatives to dangerous boat journeys. 
We will consult with the UNHCR and regional partners to determine the allocation of the remaining resettlement places, and we expect to make further announcements on additional resettlement options from within our immediate region over the coming months.
This increase shows that people can pursue regular options and be safely referred to resettlement countries such as Australia as part of an orderly humanitarian program. Taking a dangerous boat journey is no advantage.
The $10 million boost to regional capacity building will also assist the UNHCR and non-government organisations in the region, particularly operations in Malaysia and Indonesia  -  a further commitment from this Government to safer and more orderly migration pathways.
The humanitarian program and capacity building increases follow the recent passage of legislation in the Australian Parliament to allow for regional processing of asylum seekers' applications.
Australia, along with the United States and Canada, has ranked consistently among the world's top three resettlement countries.  Australia is the UNHCR's largest resettlement country on a per capita basis.
We remain strongly committed to our humanitarian program as an engaged and leading international partner in sharing refugee protection responsibilities, assisting those most in humanitarian need.



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]  
It gives me great pleasure to be here this morning to launch this very special book here in our national capital and our national parliament.
For a man who was so deeply Australian in every fibre of his being, there could not be a better place.
In Fred's Footsteps is a remarkable record of the legacy of a remarkable man.
This book takes a loving look at the past two decades of The Fred Hollows Foundation and its work.
In effect, it's a survey of how Fred's sprit and memory have lived on long after cancer took his physical presence from us.
This book sets out clearly the work that has been done in his name in its full scope and ambition.
Many of you here today have, indeed, walked in Professor Hollows' footsteps in the two decades since his passing.
Some of you were fortunate enough to walk beside him while he was here.
To know him, to share his passion, to observe his genius.
All of you have kept his spirit alive, not only in your hearts, but also in the conscience of our national community and, indeed, our world where blindness is still so needlessly rampant.
This book is a marvellous testament to both his vision and your journey.
The journey of a small foundation hatched around the Hollows' kitchen table back in 1992, only to become one of Australia's great not-for-profit institutions of international development.
The record of the past 20 years is simply extraordinary:
Millions of sight-restoring operations across the globe.
Almost 50,000 eye health workers trained.
Millions of low cost lenses produced by factories in Eritrea and Nepal exporting to more than 75 countries.
Reducing the cost of cataract surgery to just $25 per operation in most developing countries.
Importantly the Foundation also continues to do incredibly good work in this country for the health of Indigenous Australians.
I say “good work” intentionally, because that is how Professor Hollows described it himself.
Being an eye doctor, he said often, is “good work.”
However, what he did was far more than merely “good work”.
I think it's safe to say it was truly exceptional.
Work that in previous eras would have been called a miracle.
But Fred's blunt humanism told us something very different.
This was no miracle.
It was the application of some fairly basic medical techniques and some fairly simple equipment, but mixed with an abundant dose of ambition and very deep compassion.
Wisdom too.
Because when Fred knew he was suffering from cancer and might not make it, he had the foresight to set up this Foundation to continue his work.
The poet Bruce Walker wrote of Professor Hollows:
Fred Hollows, Eye Doctor. The key he used to undo locks was vision for the poor.
The Foundation has taken that very small key and used it to open very large doors.
Doors that lead to opportunity and dignity for individuals with eye conditions.
Doors that swing wide to give hope and empowerment to whole communities.
Over the last five years, doctors working with the Foundation performed a million operations.
That's a lot of people.
People like Samuel, a Rwandan boy born with cataract blindness who can now see his mother's face. 
That's a lot of people.
People like Rose, a Kenyan woman who can now look after her daughter Simila, who dreams of becoming a doctor.
That's a lot of people.
People like Reggie, a proud traditional owner from Uluru who can now pass on ancient tribal knowledge to the young people in his community.
That's the story we share and celebrate today.
That's the Fred Hollows Foundation.
This is organisation that shares so many of the qualities of its founder.
Like Fred, it sees that regardless of achievements to date, there is always more work to be done.
It shares his impatience that the world has not been put to rights already, and that we all must do our part.
The Foundation still has much to do, especially given our ambitious goal of ending avoidable blindness by 2020
A seemingly impossible task.
But one that I'm sure the Foundation can help achieve.
Think of it this way.
The red dust from the Central Desert or Bourke often fell from the boots Fred Hollows wore.
He left his footprints all though the nation's hospitals and research institutions, and through the corridors of power here in Canberra and overseas. 
These footsteps marked the path that Professor Hollows travelled during his lifetime, and in another sense, he set up this foundation to follow in his footsteps when he was no longer here.
We gather here today, walking in Fred's footsteps.
Impatient for change.
Ready for more “good work”.
So on your behalf, and in Fred's memory, I proudly launch this book, and commend it to people of goodwill everywhere.


Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I'm a proud Australian but I'm a proud Victorian too. In Australia, I adopted a country. In Victoria, I adopted a State. I came here three decades ago and found the place to call home. I'll grow old here waiting for the Dogs to win the flag!
So you could say I'm an optimist. An optimist by nature. An optimist for this State. We've seen tough times before and found the courage to reshape our future. In 2012, it's time to do it again.
Friends, The theme of this conference is ‘Victoria at the Crossroads'and there's much truth in that. But I'd adopt a different characterisation and say Victoria isn't so much at the crossroads but at the starting line.
The starting line of the economic race in the Asian Century. The starting line of a new economic order following the GFC.
From growth fuelled by debt to a focus on deleveraging.
From fossil fuels to renewable energy.
From analogue to digital.
From Europe and North America as the economic centre of gravity to Asia.
These transitions are unstoppable.
The rise of China, India and the ASEAN nations alone amount to a change on par with the Industrial Revolution.
It is bringing a huge lift to Australia's national income and downward pressure on inflation.
But it also brings patchwork economy pressures that will be with us for the foreseeable future.
They include, obviously, the strong Australian dollar but also intensifying competition and ageing capital stock.
The resulting economic transition is very real.
For example, manufacturing has lost around 30,000 full-time jobs in the past five years.
At the same time, employment in services has increased by more than 100,000 full-time jobs.
So this can be a growing economy but it will be a changing economy as well.
Friends, This is not a future Victoria needs to fear.
Even now, a decade into the expansion of mining, Victoria's fundamentals are resilient.
Under pressure but resilient.
Victoria's year-on-year growth has been on par with national GDP growth, and exceeded it in 2010-11.
Victoria has consistently delivered almost a quarter of Australia's national output over the past decade.
Unemployment in Victoria at June was 5.5 per cent, not far above the 5.2 per cent national average.
And Victoria's exports of goods in 2011-12 was recently reported as growing at 10 per cent, faster than the national rate.
So the Victorian economy is holding its own.
Victoria has been written off before as a ‘rust-belt' state left behind by structural change.
But it has, in fact, re-emerged with a diverse, broad-based economy which includes dynamic manufacturing and primary industries and new service and knowledge-intensive sectors.
The evidence is all around us.
Victoria, with Melbourne as its capital, can proudly call itself Australia's sporting and cultural heartland.
We've seen major urban growth in Melbourne's north and west, and regional cities like Geelong, Ballarat and Bendigo offering great lifestyles.
Victoria has done so much to position itself as a smart economy that builds on its most precious resource  -  its people:
You've attracted one of only 11 IBM research centres in the world.
You've got Australia's top ranked university.
You've won recognition as a UNESCO City of Literature.
You're a leader in philanthropy and social innovation, hometo great organisations like the Brotherhood of St Laurence.
You've a got an institution  -  the CRC for Advanced Composite Structures  -  that helps Boeing to develop cutting-edge new technologies for its planes.
And Melbourne is ranked in some surveys as the most liveable city on earth.
So yes, with all those accolades and attributes, I am certainly an optimist for Victoria.
But friends, I don't just make this judgement on past or present achievements alone.
It is no use lamenting lost golden ages, real or imagined.
Instead, we must focus with hard heads and rigorous minds on the true sources of productivity for a mature economy entering the Asian Century.
Here's a measure of what that century implies: Asia's middle class will soon be bigger than the middle classes of the rest of the world combined.
That means our neighbours will want interesting places to take their holidays.
They will increasingly want a high quality educational services.
They will pay a premium for high quality food and wine, especially with ‘clean and green' credentials.
They will seek financial and legal services to manage their growing wealth and provide safe-haven security.
They will seek entertainment from the cultural industries, which will only grow as the number of platforms expand.
And their business leaders will seek research and industry collaboration as they seek to move up the value chain.
At the same time, our own changing needs will drive continued growth in industries like health, education and community services over the next 50 years.
Indeed national employment demand in health and social assistance will be more than double that of mining over the next five years  -  240,000 versus 100,000.
Victoria is well positioned in each of these areas.
We approach the starting line with advantages.
But as Tim Colebatch pointed out this week, “we must be tough, resourceful, patient and creative.”
Friends, We know none of these successes are possible without the investment and collaboration of the public sector.
Not bigger government but smarter government.
Supporting the drivers of growth and productivity in a modern economy:- education and skills, innovation, industry, infrastructure, clean energy, regulatory and tax reform.
Some of those drivers like the NBN are economy-wide.
Others involve huge new investments in local infrastructure like the Regional Rail Link and widening the Western Ring Road.
Or getting rid of regulation, like our National Seamless National Economy agenda which, if fully implemented, stands to save $1 billion a year in Victoria over the longer run.
Yet others involve targeted support to specific industries like manufacturing, for which we make no apology.
Indeed manufacturing is the lifeblood of employment, exports and economic activity in so many parts of Victoria.
It's also a major jobs multiplier in the supply chain, in the export chain, in the banking and services chain.
Our status as an advanced economy is unthinkable without manufacturing.
Yes, the high dollar is causing pain, and regrettably we can't support every firm or save every job.
But we're also seeing the structure of Victorian manufacturing reveal competitive strengths as it is tempered by change: In those areas linked to the Australian resources boom.
In those involving higher skilled workers.
In those advanced technology sectors such as machinery and equipment, as well as chemicals and plastics.
And in the automotive sector we're seeing the emergence of cars like the Territory and Cruze that Australians vote for with their wallets supported  -  I'm proud to say  -  by government co-investment.
Innovation and collaboration are the way to embed these outcomes for the future.
Just as we have a national competition policy, we need a national collaboration and partnership policy.
The recent Manufacturing Taskforce report represents a bold vision for the future.
Our Industry and Innovation Statement will involve working together with employers and unions to make that vision a reality.
I look forward to launching the Statement in coming months.
Friends, I'm a proud supporter of smart industry policy.
But I'm also quite prepared to say there's something even more important, and that's education.
We hear so much talk about industrial relations reform from businesses and commentators convinced it's the magic bullet.
But it's not.
In a high wage economy with strong labour standards and widespread community expectations as to working conditions, it can never be the panacea some commentators imagine.
I'm tired of hardworking Australian employees being told they are the cause of our productivity challenge.
And I'm certainly sick of lectures on productivity by the Liberal Party when some conservative governments can't find the will-power to pass even basic measures like national OH&amp;S laws and national recognition of trade qualifications.
So IR is not the magic bullet.
But there's something that is far more powerful and transformative: education and training.
Consider this fact: Low-skill roles will only make up seven per cent of new jobs over the next five years.
The future belongs to well-trained workers in well-managed firms, using the latest technology and supported by high-quality enterprise agreements.
The economists call this human capital.
I call it not letting any child or any school fall behind.
Either way, the effect on our economy is dramatic.
If the states and territories fully implement our COAG education reforms, we stand to increase GDP by 6.2 per cent, a national average of $10 billion by 2040.
More than $2 billion of that could flow to Victoria alone.
To put it another way, meeting the COAG goal to increase the number of young people who complete Year 12 could generate an average annual gain of around $11 billion.
The benefit not only flows to the economy but to individualsas they lead more prosperous and purposeful lives.
ABS data shows a person with a Certificate III level qualification or higher earns, on average, at least 10 per cent above the weekly wage of people without those qualifications.
In some cases, they could earn up to double.
NATSEM modelling shows university graduates earn70 per cent more over their lifetimes than someone who only finished Year 12.
Yet today, disadvantaged children in Australia are two years behind their peers in reading and writing by Year 9.
These are the kids who drop out.
Who don't acquire skills.
Who don't engage with the workforce.
Educational disadvantage is a human failure and an economic failure.
We can't have a high skill, high wage economy while there is such a waste.
But the problem isn't just confined to lower performing students.
Australian education results improved modestly but our competitors in Asia have been improving even faster.
So our relative international performance has fallen since 2001.
The respected Programme for International Student Assessment or PISA comparisons show we have slipped from equal 2nd to equal 7th in reading.
From equal 5th to equal 13th in maths.
Think about it this way.
When we dipped to twentieth on the medal tally half way through the Olympics, there was talk about whether sport should be compulsory in schools.It's a fair debate.
But remember this: when I became Education Minister national testing of English and Maths wasn't even compulsory in all our schools.
That was only four years ago.
Now, with NAPLAN and MySchool, we can tell the schools where students most need help.
So instead of arguing about whether we got enough gold medals, let's have an informed debate about how we can improve all schools across our nation.
And let's be clear on what that extra effort must entail.
It's not just about funding. 
Money alone cannot be sufficient, and funding is always just the servant or the tool.
The key is quality -  and how we improve it.
So I'm talking about a national plan for school improvement, which gives schools the resources they need to get better results for all students.
To make every teacher a great teacher.
And to make every school a great school.
Friends, The success of post-school education in Australia stems from the strong foundations provided through good schooling.
However some of the problems that students face in post-school education also have their origin in earlier years.
Young people lacking basic skills for work or traineeships.
Apprentices who drop out before getting their ticket.
Students who need remedial teaching in first year at university.
I think about the people in the region I represent.
Where education equals emancipation.
Without skills, a storeman in Werribee can't get a job in the mines.
Without a decent school education, his daughter can't get one of our new places at university.
If we get schools right, we can get skills right.
That's critical because we're pouring massive new resources into VET and higher education.
The number of Commonwealth supported higher education places in Victoria has risen by 28 per cent since 2007.
We've put $18 billion into VET nationwide since 2007,29 per cent of it in Victoria.
And we'll invest an additional $1.75 billion nationwide over the next five years to reform the VET system.
It therefore defies belief that the Victorian government should be cutting TAFE funding here in a State facing much of Australia's competitiveness challenge.
I can think of few things more calculated to harm Victoria's economic future.
It's also ironic that the Premiers agreed at April's COAG meeting to reforms aimed at boosting the quality and reach of vocational training.
Three weeks later, the Baillieu government delivered a budget that slashed $300 million per year from the State's TAFE Institutes.
Given all I've said about structural change and opportunity in Asia, that was just crazy.
A complete betrayal of every Victorian who wants to get ahead.
The Australian Education Union state president Mary Bluett described these cuts as “an act of economic vandalism”.
She was right on the mark.
Those cuts are particularly savage in towns like Warrnambool, Morwell and Mildura where local TAFEs are such an integral part of the economic fabric and also the social fabric.
But they're also a heavy blow for the dual-sector institutions like Victoria University and Swinburne.
You've spent 25 years pioneering a unique hybrid model, only to have your efforts undermined when they are needed the most.
The four dual sector universities in Victoria could lose more than $100 million by the end of 2013, more than $30 million at VU alone.
That's nearly 20 per cent of VU's TAFE income, an absolute body blow.
In the race of the Asian Century, it's like having ball and chain around your leg.
So friends, We get training cuts from our State Government counterparts here in Victoria.
Cuts to industry assistance and clean energy pledged by our Opposition counterparts in Canberra.
And no doubt they will seek to fill their funding black hole with cuts to higher education like they did in 1996 as well.
So not only does Victoria face an economic challenge.
It faces a choice as well.
Between those who will impair Victoria's future by their narrow, mindless, short term cuts.
And those who will deliver a plan for Victoria's future.
To build and nurture its strengths.
To ensure this State continues to be a crucible of innovation, reform and investment for the future.
A state where we win the economic race by winning the education race.
And, most importantly, where we win these races together.
Because in the Australia I lead, no State, no region, no person should be left behind.
And I'm here to say loud and clear today: Victoria will not be left behind.


Melbourne
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: I am delighted to be here in Melbourne Braybrook College with the Minister for School Education, Peter Garrett.
I can see a number of the students who have come round with us today as we've been on this great school visit. So thank you very much to you, students, for making us feel so welcome.
Thank you too, to Geraldine who's been in this school for 36 years, serving as the school principal. She's made us very welcome as well.
Peter and I have come to this great school today to talk about our plan for school improvement.
Right around the country we want to make sure every kid is studying in a school that's a great school.
We've been doing a lot of work on that including doubling the amount of money in school education  -  really focusing on literacy and numeracy, providing better support for disadvantaged schools, focusing on teacher quality, empowering school principals, making sure everybody's got the information through my school and the list goes on.
But as Prime Minister, I am determined we will do more to improve Australian school.
There's nothing more important to the future life of our nation than what's happening in Australian schools today. It will define our future economy; it will define our strength as a nation.
That's why we want to make sure we are properly resourcing schools and seeing them improve. We are working on the independent review we commissioned into school funding. It's a special opportunity given this is the first review in forty years of school funding.
But we want to make sure that this opportunity is one more we seize to improve school standards as well. So we're doing better for every child in every school including this school here in Melbourne's west.
I'll turn now the Minister for School Education for some comments; including maybe about the band!
MINISTER GARRETT: Thank you Prime Minister and thank you to the students at Braybrook College for the warm welcome they've given to the Prime Minister and myself and also to show us what they're doing in the school in terms of their learning, particularly we were so pleased to see the way in which this new science centre is being utilised by their students and also with the principal Geraldine, to see the way in which the school in continuing to focus on lifting its performance.
This is a school which has been the beneficiary of the considerable investments that this Government has placed in education.
Both through the socioeconomic partnerships, the special partnerships that we'd had underway through Building the Education Revolution and also some fantastic teaching that's going on the school and I heard that when the band were playing as we came in.
What's crucial now is that we build on that foundation of investment on policy reform by making sure that school improvement lies at the heart of the education journey this nation is on that is being driven by the view that we have for our future and for kids and their schools to have the best education possible.
I can't say to you how disappointing it is that the Opposition had chosen to go into a default position on education funding and deny the opportunity for the school sectors in this country to be able to take up an to pursue these reforms and the fact that Mr Abbott on Monday said that he thought it was an injustice that Government schools would receive funding and that neither he nor Mr Pyne have clearly read nor taken any interest in the Gonski panel review findings is a staggering indictment of their negativity and hostility to genuine education reform.
And what we're seeing in this school is a school that has benefited from the delivery in investments and support that we've made as a Government working in partnership, which is of course what we want to do in the future as well, so thanks very much to those students at Braybrook College for their warm welcome. It's been a terrific visit, we look forward to visiting more schools in the future.
PM: Thank you, so we're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition have again said that there are more questions they need to hear from you in regards to what happened at Slater &amp; Gordon. What are your thoughts on that today?
PM: How pathetic is this? I've been in Question Time four days this week, I've taken dozens of questions from the Opposition and not one about this matter.
When the Leader of the Opposition's been asked time and time again can he think of a question for me, he's been unable to do so.
So this is just a pathetic attempt from the Opposition that had the opportunity to ask questions and didn't use it.
JOURNALIST: Does Glenn Stevens still have your full support in light of revelations that some people at the RBA in senior positions might have known about bribery allegations in 2007?
PM: The Reserve Bank Governor most certainly does have my full support. He is doing a fantastic job as the Reserve Bank Governor, and he today has been before a parliamentary committee explaining the strength of the Australian economy.
And he's been very, very clear about how strong our economy is. He's laid down a challenge to those who continue to talk our economy down. Here is the man who leads our Reserve Bank, saying our economy is strong. I believe of course our economy is strong.
Every indicator tells us about the strength of our economy. We should, as a nation, be proud of our economy because ewe built it together. The naysayers, the doomsayers need to stop talking our nation's economy down.
Glenn Stevens himself was making a point about the damage the naysayers and doomsayers do to the Australian economy, the damage people do when they keep talking our economy down.
JOURNALIST: When did Glenn Stevens first raise these issues with the Government?
PM: The Treasurer's dealt with this all very comprehensively.
JOURNALIST: Blackrock Primary School has banned all balls from the playground. What do you think of that, your reaction?
PM: Banned all balls from the playground? Well I'm a bit surprised to hear that. I would have thought it's pretty commonplace for kids to want to engage in a bit of play with a bat and ball at recess and lunchtime.
JOURNALIST: First of all there was the school that banned the high-five, and now there's no balls. Is it ridiculous?
PM: Individual schools are going to make their own decisions and parents and communities will make it very clear what they think about those decisions and whether or not they've got them right.
My view, as Prime Minister, is my job is to worry about kids' education in every school and the quality of it. I mean we can't win the economic race of the future if we don't win the education race, and that's why we're here today talking about school improvement.
JOURNALIST: On that education outcome, what's the Government doing trying to encourage lots of young school leavers to get back into education? There was a University of Melbourne study today supporting coercing them back in with tough measures.
PM: We are the Government that has increased university places  -  150,000 more places.
We're the government that's invested in skills development for the future.
That means we're seeing more traineeships, more apprenticeships than ever before. We've doubled the amount of funding going into school education. We've invested in early childhood.
We understand that there's a group of kids who drift away from school, and they're at risk of a life of disadvantage unless we can get them back to the schooling system.
So we do work on what we call youth transitions and we do work to get kids back into schooling or training if they've drifted away.
Much of that work's done in partnership with some great not-for-profit organisations that have made it their mission to reach out to these young people.
It's tremendously important work  -  all of the studies show you that if in today's economy you leave school early, you end up kicking around for a few years unemployed, you are on a path to a lifetime of disadvantage unless we're able to get that young person and get them the skills they need for life and work.
JOURNALIST: Ita Buttrose said this morning that people like yourself and Gina Rinehart, in positions of power, are criticised because of sexism. Would you agree with that?
PM: I dealt yesterday with what I described as a vile and sexist campaign on the internet, so I think I've made my views pretty clear.
JOURNALIST: The intruder at the media conference yesterday, now you've heard a bit about how it happened, what are your thoughts about that? Should there be more security at Parliament House?
PM: I don't comment on security matters. I wasn't alarmed in any way by the young man handing me a document and obviously it will be properly investigated and any changes security people think are necessary as a result will be made.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it's acceptable that Australia's aid budget goes towards setting up offshore processing, or at least moving buildings around or creating new buildings with the aid budget?
PM: I don't quite understand your question, I'd have to say. We do use our overseas aid budget for capacity-building, for assisting the work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Yes I think that's appropriate.
JOURNALIST: Will it go towards setting up offshore processing centres, or moving, say education facilities that are currently in those centres to other areas?
PM: We will make appropriate provision for the creation of the processing centres on Nauru and PNG, but what our aid budget goes for is very specifically defined and internationally defined.
We work under rules that are known and that the international community works under, and our aid budget goes to things that assist development in countries that we want to see move from poverty to greater wealth.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, good sharp questioning there from Ryan Higginson about school funding. Can you appreciate that where Ryan sits in Braybrook College in the education debate, there is a certain degree of incredulity that a Labor Government will spend the next 12 months defending the current level of funding at very wealthy independent schools?
PM: I was happy to take Ryan's question, very happy to take it. But let's be clear about our mission and our purpose here.
It's about every child and every school. I went to a state school. I went to Unley High, I went to Mitcham Primary, I went to Mitcham Infants' School.
My schooling was entirely in public education, so I know what a difference a great public education can make to your life's prospects and life's chances.
I wouldn't be standing here if I hadn't gone to some great state schools, and that's back in the days where you didn't have choice, it was back in the days where it was zoned, where you went for your education depended entirely on the streets you lived in and you went to the local school and I did.
So I understand the power of a great state school, but I also understand that kids go to schools in all sorts of different circumstances, and whatever school they go to, I want them to have a great education.
Whatever background they come from, no matter how poor or how humble, I want them to have a great education. That's what our reforms will be about.
JOURNALIST: How confident are you working with the state government to deliver the (inaudible) reforms?
PM: I am very dismayed by the approach that the Liberal Government in Victoria has taken to the funding of TAFE. We're seeing huge cuts - $300 million taken out of TAFE.
We're seeing the best part of $50 million hacked out of the support for schools to kids who want a vocational education path.
This is bad news for the Victorian economy for the long term. It's bad news for the individuals who are bearing the brunt of those cutbacks. The Victorian Liberal Government has got this entirely wrong.
But, we do know that it's the Liberal approach to be there cutting back education, cutting back the services families rely on, and we certainly know at the end of the sitting week that we have just had, that Mr Abbott's approach should he ever be Prime Minister would be to cut back funding to Australian schools.
JOURNALIST: Just on the NDIS, will the NDIS agency be based in Geelong?
PM: We've talked about the National Disability Insurance Scheme here  -  I'm very proud there's a launch site here; not in a position to deal with the location of the agency today.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Welcome to The Lodge  -  this old and beautiful residence  -  and yes you're right, it's in need of a few renovations, I've had some comments on the paintwork as we've moved around.
But this old and beautiful residence is used by our Prime Ministers including me, and what that really means is it belongs to you, it belongs to all Australians.
I'm delighted to have the opportunity to be able to commend to you the magnificent work in this garden, and 25 years of magnificent work in opening up the gardens of Australia by Open Gardens Australia.
It's great to do so here in this garden city that is our nation's capital  -  turning a grand old 100 in just a few months' time.
It was Rudyard Kipling that once described his nation as a garden.
He took care to note that beautiful and nourishing gardens aren't made by sitting in the shade and saying ‘Oh, look how beautiful it is'.
I think he was right.
Gardens are a lot like nations because so many of the skills required to cultivate a beautiful garden are the same skills that are required to build a nation.
To produce a beautiful garden like those you'll be opening to the public this year requires a great deal of forethought, detailed planning and a healthy amount of ambition, and I think from the discussions I've had some sitting on your nerves!
The gardener must commit him or herself to a task that won't see any benefit for quite some time.
Because first comes the hard work, bending your back to till the soil and investing your resources of seeds, fertiliser and water in just the right place, at just the right time.
Sometimes these investments pay off.
Sometimes nature throws up something completely unexpected.
But as in life, we learn from experiences and we grow wiser for it.
The patience and perseverance that it takes to grow gardens and nations are not always valued in the modern world.
Too often, in our rush to deal with all the noise in our lives, we skip past those important lessons that everyone should learn.
If new generations were to miss these fundamentals, or if we were to forget them, then it would be a great loss to all of us.
Thanks then, to the gardeners.
They plot a course, put in the work and weather all the storms that come their way. 
The reward is a quiet place where we can reflect on life and its lessons; to remember what's important; and to quite literally stop and smell the roses.
I'm very thankful that Mike and his team here at The Lodge do such a great job in providing such a place of beauty and restfulness, just as the people who come and visit open gardens across Australia will be thankful for the enrichment that it brings in their lives.
I'm also thankful to those in the media who take their knowledge and passion for gardening and share them freely.
People like the legendary TV presenter and journalist Colin Campbell, who sadly passed away this week.
So many gardens around the nation reflect Colin's insight and enthusiasm, especially in Queensland.
I know many people will be remembering him as they celebrate Open Gardens Australia this year.
It will indeed be a remarkable garden season. We've had good rains.
And regions affected by floods and bushfires are bouncing back with resilience.
So to all of you  -  and I've met a considerable number  -  who are opening their gardens to the public, it's almost time to put away the shovels and the secateurs; almost time to open your front gates with pride, knowing all the hard work has paid off and we are a richer, better nation for what you have created.
I very proudly launch Open Gardens Australia in its 25th anniversary year, and I warmly wish Open Gardens Australia and each of you every success in this season.
Thank you for joining me here this morning.


Canberra
Neil Armstrong's death marks the end of an amazing era in human progress. 
The Apollo missions brought formidable achievements of science and knowledge that have helped change human history.
And with that new knowledge came a new wisdom: literally a new perspective on human life.
The image they brought to all our consciousness, of our lonely planet in space, transformed our understanding of the great tasks of human development, environmental protection and peace.
It was an American President who said his nation had "tossed its cap over the wall of space" - but it was the American astronauts who followed it - and when they did, it truly was "one giant leap for mankind".
I've never forgotten watching that great moment on television.
For me as a small girl, Neil Armstrong was the symbol of so much that is good in the world.
The Armstrong family has put it beautifully: 
‘‘For those who may ask what they can do to honour Neil, we have a simple request. Honor his example of service, accomplishment and modesty, and the next time you walk outside on a clear night and see the moon smiling down at you, think of Neil Armstrong and give him a wink.''
The mission of Apollo XI to land on the Moon in July 1969 was a fantastic achievement that lives today, from young students in labs in classrooms across our country who dream of miracles for the good of all mankind, to the rover now exploring the surface of Mars. 
Neil Armstrong's co-pilot, Buzz Aldrin, recently visited Australia, sharing with us the magic of that landmark mission. I was one of those privileged to shake the hand of a man who knew Neil Armstrong.
I salute Neil Armstrong and the explorers who have followed him, and the worlds they continue to open for us.
His example of service, accomplishment and modesty - his triumph of reason and science and knowledge, and wisdom - will never die.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today congratulated Terry Mills and the Country Liberal Party on their win in the Northern Territory election.
The Prime Minister also congratulated Paul Henderson, who has been an outstanding Chief Minister for the people of the Northern Territory since 2007.
Paul has been a dynamic and courageous leader at a time of enormous expansion and change.
He leaves the position of Chief Minister with an outstanding record of achievements in health and education, including a huge boost for education for remote Indigenous communities.
Importantly, he leaves an economy in superb condition, with an unemployment rate of just 4 per cent, down from 7.4 per cent, the envy of the developed world.
Above all, Paul worked so hard to secure the $34 billion INPEX Total Ichthys Project, the second biggest commercial investment in Australian history.
This project will deliver jobs and prosperity for Territorians for years and decades to come, and that's a fitting legacy for Paul Henderson to be remembered by.
It's been an honour to work with Paul during my time as Deputy Prime Minister and Prime Minister. He has been a complete professional who always put the needs of Northern Territory families first.
The Gillard Government has a big reform agenda in areas such as health, education, infrastructure and stronger futures for Indigenous Australians and we will continue to build on these reforms with the new Mills Government.


Sydney 
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I'm very proud to be here this morning for the next stage in the journey of the Alannah &amp; Madeleine Foundation.
I've had a long term association with this Foundation, and I've always admired the way in which it's pursued its mission of keeping our children safe from harm.
We are people who live in an age where we are challenged, both by old problems and new problems when it comes to keeping our children safe from harm.
We all know that if our children are to have a great future, if they're going to get the best possible education, then we need to make sure that they feel safe and are safe.
I'm absolutely passionate about ensuring that every child in this nation gets a great education and a great opportunity in life.
It starts with feeling safe at school and beyond school.
Now that confronts us as a community  -  parents, teachers, school communities, people of goodwill, policy makers with some challenges to think about.
One of them is the old challenge of bullying, the kind of traditional bullying - if I can use that terminology - that we all know that kids have experienced at school and have experienced across the ages.
The picking on the new kid, the different kid, the child with the funny accent, the one who can't keep up during school sports, the one who's not keeping up with the rest of the class as they learn.
We have an obligation to keep our children safe from bullying and to be explaining to children why bullying is always wrong.
But that traditional challenge has now been magnified by the challenges of the new age, by the digital age in which we live.
And this generation of children  -  today's children  -  are the first generation who in every way are going to be steeped in this new technology.
Who indeed can't imagine being without this technology, can't imagine the world that many of us gathered here today can all too clearly remember, the world before the internet, the world before the ubiquitous mobile phone, the world before this kind of technology.
Today's children can't imagine that world. They live in that world and they are in many ways the masters of that world.
And it gives them tremendous learning opportunities, it gives them the ability to access more information and more learning  resources than any generation of children in human history has had available to them.
But it also brings new dangers. It means that we do see cyber-bullying and even worse dangers on the internet.
People who stalk children, people who mean children very, very real harm. And we as a community are now challenged to try and keep our children safe in this new environment too.
We as a Government have worked with the Alannah &amp; Madeleine Foundation because they're doing such ground-leading work in this area.
I've been proud to support their work first as Education Minister with $3 million, and then the Government itself has been investing money - $4 million into a new safe schools framework helping educate parents and teachers about the dangers of this new world.
And that is a real challenge. You can imagine a child who goes home and speaks to their parents about being bullied in the playground, and most parents would instinctively have a sense of what that would mean.
They may have suffered it themselves at school, they may have seen other children suffer it, and so they would have full knowledge of what that can be like, feel like and the ability to offer sympathy and support for their child.
But for many parents and indeed many teachers, when a child talks about what is happening to them on Facebook, what is happening to them through the mobile phone, people won't feel the automatic sense of connection.
Many parents wouldn't know what it is like to be on Facebook, let alone to feel that you are being picked on in that environment.
It is because of that that we are working to get new information and resources, help and assistance into our schools and school communities so the parents and teachers in school communities can be ready to support children with all of these challenges, including the challenge of cyber-bullying.
Now the Alannah &amp; Madeleine Foundation is taking the next step.
We are a nation with a wonderful network of public libraries, and for many they are places of great delight, great engagement and great learning.
For many they are instinctively identified as safe spaces  -  somewhere that you can go, that you can hang out, that you can read, that you can be on the computer; somewhere that is warm and open and welcoming and supervised  -  instinctively viewed as a safe place.
But only truly a safe place if we are also dealing with any of the dangers that are coming into the library through the use of new technology.
Alannah &amp; Madeleine Foundation has rightly identified this as a new challenge, and that is why we are here today.
We've all got a lot to do and we've all got to keep working together with goodwill if we are going to keep our children safe for the future.
I am determined that as we work on our national school improvement plan, as a Government we take the next step.
That we are ensuring that those who teach our children, that their teacher training at university includes the learning that they will need to help children in the age in which we live.
Help children in better managing classrooms; help children through making sure that they can manage disruptive behaviours; help children by ensuring that they are fully aware of the challenge of bullying.
We also want to make sure, as a Government, that our teachers can access ongoing professional development.
What they need to know changes, and so how we support them must keep up with that.
And we want to provide effective feedback to our teachers through an annual performance review including looking at the effectiveness of their skills in dealing with bullying and disruptive behaviour.
So, we've got a lot to do as a Government, we've got a lot to do as a nation. And the Alannah &amp; Madeleine Foundation has set itself a big work program as well.
This big work program is supported by the Telstra Foundation and it is incredibly generous  -  almost $8 million over five years to support this work.
That means that eSmart is coming to a library near you. It is going to help with the safety of children in that library as they engage in the digital world.
Today is a moment that we should all remind ourselves that the safety of our children is our responsibility.
Whether they're on Facebook or in the playground; whether they're on Twitter or in the library; we want to make sure that we are keeping them safe.
With eSmart we will be creating an environment that is safer for them; with eSmart we will be supporting children so that they can be safer and more responsible as they engage in the digital environment.
So it's a very great privilege to be here, as Prime Minister but also as patron of this great Foundation, and it is a very particular pleasure to be able to declare eSmart libraries officially launched and to wish it every success over the years to come.
Can I echo John  -  I believe he's absolutely right  -  when he has said we will look back on this moment and the launch of this campaign as a very significant change for our nation's children.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard will travel to the Cook Islands to attend the Pacific Islands Forum from 29 August to 1 September.
The Prime Minister will meet other Pacific leaders to discuss common action to tackle the region's key political, economic and development challenges, including sustainable management and conservation of marine resources, economic integration and resilience, gender equality, human capital development and adapting to climate change.
The Forum will also provide an opportunity to progress discussions with regional counterparts on implementing the recommendations of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers.
Australia is committed to the stability and prosperity of the region, to its close partnership with Pacific Island neighbours, and to advancing our common interests. 


Sydney
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan and Minister for Health Tanya Plibersek today announced Sydney would have a new centre of excellence to research and treat prostate cancer.
The centre will be Australia's third Prostate Cancer Research Centre, located in the Kinghorn Cancer Centre at the St Vincent's Research Precinct in Darlinghurst, Sydney.
Speaking at the opening of the Kinghorn Cancer Centre, the Prime Minister said the new prostate cancer research facility would bring together both clinical and research expertise in a joint initiative between the prestigious Garvan Institute, St Vincent's &amp; Mater Hospitals, and the St Vincent's Prostate Cancer Centre.
This world-leading centre will be dedicated to improving diagnostic tests, screening tools and treatments for prostate cancer patients.
Ground breaking research will be rapidly translated from bench to bedside, meaning that people will get the best care based on the very latest evidence.
Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan said that prostate cancer was the most commonly diagnosed non-skin cancer in Australia, with around 21,000 new cases a year diagnosed. 
Mr Swan said Prostate cancer takes the lives of too many Australian men every year and that ensuring Australia remained a world leader in prostate cancer research was very important, as is the need to raise awareness amongst men of the need to get tested.
Australia punches above its weight in cancer research. The third Australian Prostate Cancer Research Centre will ensure that we continue to do so.
The centre will work closely with the two existing Australian Prostate Cancer Research Centres at Epworth Hospital, Melbourne and Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane.
Together, these three centres will save lives.
Minister for Health Tanya Plibersek said the new centre builds on the Gillard Government's unprecedented investment to reduce the burden of cancer in Australia.
The Gillard Government's has committed $2.5 billion to build a world-class cancer care system to improve the detection and treatment of cancer, and, through the nation-building Health and Hospitals Fund, establish a network of regional cancer centres and accommodation facilities.


Sydney
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Treasurer Wayne Swan today announced that Sydney will host a G20 Finance Ministers' and Central Bank Governors' meeting in 2014.
As an iconic Australian city and a dynamic business and financial centre, Sydney is an ideal host city for Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors from around the world. 
The G20 brings together Leaders, Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors from major developing and advanced economies to address critical economic and financial challenges facing the world.
Along with the G20 Finance Ministers' meeting that will take place in Cairns, this meeting will do important preparatory work for the G20 Leaders' Meeting to be held in Brisbane.
Members of the G20 account for 85 per cent of global GDP, 80 per cent of global trade, and most of Australia's major trading and investment partners.
Chairing the G20 Finance Ministers' and Central Bank Governors' meetings in 2014 will help us shape a global economic agenda which promotes Australia's values.
The Sydney G20 Finance Ministers' and Central Bank Governors' meeting will attract up to 2,000 delegates and support staff, including international media, putting Sydney in the international spotlight.
This will be a complex event to organise and the Commonwealth will be working closely with the NSW Government to deliver a successful meeting.
It is fantastic that during the G20 host year not only will we be showcasing regional Australia by hosting a Finance Ministers' and Central Bank Governors' meeting in Cairns, but we will also showcase the vibrancy, culture and iconic attractions of Sydney to a global audience. 
The dates for these meetings are still to be finalised.


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
The hundreds of workplace leaders who've gathered here tonight from around the country and to the work you're doing to grow in numbers and strength and ideas.
Yours is the model of a modern labour union.
Committed to the oldest union principles.
Sharing, sticking together, the strong in the workplace protecting the weak.
Organising always, working with the employer when you can, fighting when you must.
And committed to the future of unionism too.
To responsible leadership which sees the future, understands where change is necessary, ensures change is delivered for the many, not the few.
When people ask how should modern unions drive change in their members' interests I say: look at the way the CPSU engages its members and delivers for them.
And you do it in two distinct and vital ways.
Your contribution to the cause of labour through the movement and the Party is enormous.
Your contribution to the cause of Australia, in the Australian Public Service and your other workplaces, is indispensable.
In the same way, here addressing you all, I do wear two hats.
When I get along to dinner with the “tee dubs” or the “miscos” I can safely tell them to stand up for themselves and not to go easy on their boss. 
Here, I'm not quite so gung ho!
But for all that, I know that here, I'm among friends: because of the values we share.
The values I have always seen in the CPSU and your predecessors, in my life's work in the labour movement  -  the values I recognise in all of you here tonight  -  the same values I see in the public servants I work with and rely on every day.
A bright passion and a deep enthusiasm for the life of public service.
That enthusiasm and passion in you is the same fire that drives me on, that drives everyone in my Government on, every day in office, to build a strong economy, to make a fair society.
What you do matters to Australia and to every Australian.
Ours is a remarkable nation.  That didn't happen by accident.
Australians worked for it, you worked for it, our public sector worked for it.
Of course some of our advantages are natural  -  natural wealth and location. 
But I see our greatest advantages as human ones.
In world terms, we're a top ten country on many measures.
Openness to international ideas, public institutions that operate free from corruption, the list goes on.
And we're a top two country on measures that are most important to us. 
Like political stability, social mobility, human development.
We've worked for those things and we've done it our way.
We don't work exactly as others do. 
We've always seen the public good, the public interest, the public sector, in our own distinctively progressive and Australian way.
Just one example: the way we regulate banks, very different than the US for instance. 
It works, we've got four of the ten ‘AA minus' rated banks in the world here.
And it works because of you.
Those banks are regulated by public servants.
The same is true of so many areas where our nation has achieved good things.
No developed country emerged from the global financial crisis stronger.
The political decision to take strong and immediate action was the vital beginning.
But make no mistake, the best thing we did then was to get the best advice.
The Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz called our stimulus packages:
One of the most impressive economic policies I've seen.
But he went on:
Not only was it the right amount, it was extraordinarily well structured, with careful attention to what would stimulate the economy in the shorter run, the medium term and the long term ...
When I look around the world, it was, I think, probably the best-designed stimulus program in the world and you should be happy that in fact it worked in exactly the way it was designed to work.
That was a Nobel Prize winner talking  -  and he was talking about you.
That stimulus was designed and implemented by public servants.
And the same is true across so much of Australian life.
Who got the relief payments to the flood victims?  A public servant.
Who makes sure older Australians are cared for and safe in aged care homes?  A public servant.
Who keeps our planes flying and our airports safe?  A public servant.
Who helped Australians caught up in the earthquakes in New Zealand or Japan  -  who works to alleviate the suffering of the world's poorest in the Pacific or Afghanistan?  A public servant.
For that matter, who shows a group of school children a Sidney Nolan painting of Ned Kelly?
That person is a public servant too.
And to put it mildly  -  none of those people is in it for the money.
I know you make sacrifices, you move your families between cities, your forego higher private sector salaries.
And perhaps the most demanding sacrifice of all  -  all the time you spend at work and away from those you love.
You do it all for a reason.
For that passion, for that enthusiasm, that we share.
So I really do want to salute you for your life in public service.
And like anything that's important, the stakes are high, and sometimes the decisions are hard.
That's true of the decisions we make together, as public servants and ministers, true of the advice you give us, true of the work you do to implement our plans.
That work is sometimes hard but we get through it together.
That's also true of the areas where we negotiate as employer and employees.
Big decisions we work through, changing our workplace, improving how government works, and of course, balancing budgets.
You'll have discussed a lot of those issues while you're here and I'm sure you've been frank.
And it's important that I say clearly, I believe the latest round of APS bargaining showed us that we need a clearer bargaining framework and that before the next round more pre-bargaining work should be done.
And that I say, we will work with you to develop a more flexible and fact-based approach to lifting public sector productivity, through the Public Service Commission and the Strategic Centre for Leadership, Learning and Development.
And to achieve increased commonality of terms and conditions for APS employees.
I know you'll keep pressing us in areas where we don't agree and where you're making a case for change.
Whether that's how the efficiency dividend works or how agencies fund pay rises or the balance between agency and central bargaining.
We'll keep talking about all of it and I know you'll keep working for your  members' interests.
With all that understood, I'm proud that the Australian Government is a good and fair employer of around 170 000 Australians.
As a Labor Prime Minister, fairness at work is central to my task.
What I see as I look around Australia today, is that this is at risk. Profoundly at risk.
The decisions made by new State Liberal Governments in the past eighteen months have shown that dramatically.
First, remember what State Liberals say before their elections.
Barry O'Farrell: “we will need more public servants, not less”.
Ted Baillieu: “absolutely no reduction in public servants”.
Campbell Newman: “no forced redundancies”.
Then, look at what they do after elections.
In NSW the Liberal Premier has cut.
Almost 250 police.  Funding to 272 special needs schools. 
More than 400 hospital beds. One hundred child protection workers.
In Victoria the Liberal Premier has cut.
$481 million from the education budget. $300 million from TAFE.  $25 million from community health services.
In Queensland the Liberal National Premier has cut.
$400 million from roads.  30 beds from the Prince Charles Hospital in Chermside. 
$80 million from Metro North Health District. $22.8 million from the education budget. $2.5 million from services to protect vulnerable children.
He's even dismantled BreastScreen Queensland, a cut so brutal I honestly didn't believe it when I first read the reports.
The bottom line?
10,000 public sector jobs in NSW  -  gone.
25,000 public sector jobs in Queensland  -  gone.
That's how the Liberals roll.
Now, I would come here to warn you that Tony Abbott will do to the APS what the State Liberals are doing to their public services.
Because first term conservative governments are like that.
But  amazingly, it's actually worse than that.
Last week the Coalition announced plans to gift core Federal responsibilities to the Liberal States.
They won't just copy the Premiers  -  they'll actually hand you over to the Premiers.
In their own words, “to cut thousands of federal public servants from the payroll”.
Again, take their word for it, from Shadow Minister Robb: these plans are not “incremental”  -  they are “huge”  -  they are “more radical” than what happened when the Howard Government was elected in 1996.
Now  -  think about those brutal cuts delivered by State Liberal Governments which promised “more public servants, not less”.
And think about what they're doing to the industrial conditions of the public servants who remain.
What is going to happen if a Federal Liberal Government is elected which in Opposition already boasts of huge, radical cuts and from Opposition already promises thousands of public servants will go?
The difference could not be more plain.
Labor stands for jobs, the Liberals stand for cuts.
And in the words of your own campaign  -  cuts hurt.
I am just astonished by the total disrespect of conservatives for the public service, for expert advice.
Andrew Robb, who wants to be Finance Minister, tells the Australian Financial Review that much of the bureaucracy does no more than "leave a paper trail, to cover backsides".
That the problem in the public service is “bad apples”.
Campbell Newman, the Queensland Premier, is asked in Parliament why he's cutting public service jobs and says that his job is to “get the poopa scoopa out every day of the week”.
And that's all of a piece with a populist politics that rejects expertise and independent advice, whether it's from scientists, economists, lawyers, engineers, architects, pretty much anyone they don't agree with.
The public service doesn't deserve that.
Just like you don't deserve another 1996.
You don't deserve it  -  the country can't afford it.
My vision in Government, my Labor vision,  is very different.
And the reality of how we've governed and worked with you is very different.
The Australian Government and the Australian Public Service has worked together.
And we've worked with the whole public sector.
Many of you here tonight, Telstra, Australia Post, Medibank, the ABC, and of course the two Territory government services.
You've all served the Australian public.
To deliver better services, to engage better with citizens, to make government simpler and more efficient, to build your skills.
And the Government has relied enormously on your advice and expertise to meet the big challenges to our nation's wellbeing.
To restore balance to Australian workplaces.
To grow jobs and to build a strong economy.
To set the nation on the path to a clean energy future.
To get equal pay for caring workers.
To build hard infrastructure for the future, like the NBN.
To achieve hard policy reform for the future, like the MRRT.
And we'll only need you more for the work ahead.
In our plans for school improvement.
In our plans to care for our ageing generations.
In our plans for a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
There's much more to do.
I look forward to doing them together.


Sydney
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
When St Vincent's was established 155 years ago, cancer was almost always a death sentence.
The Sisters of Charity could bring comfort.
But not hope.
We just didn't have the medical knowledge.
Today, Australia leads the world in cancer care.
In the last two decades alone, the survival rate for many common cancers has increased by 30 per cent.
And we're doing better every day.
We have hope.
We have hope because of people like Rob Sutherland, Allan Spigelman and their colleagues around the world.
Outstanding researchers and clinicians who have made beating cancer their life's work.
When you come to work each morning, you come burdened with some very grim knowledge.
One hundred and twenty Australians will die of cancer today.
Another 300 will be diagnosed.
Those statistics demand a response from each of us as citizens and from the nation as a whole.
That is why since 2007, this Government has committed over $2.5 billion to infrastructure, medicines, screening and research to build a world-class cancer care system including $70 million to help build the facility we're standing in today.
In a federal budget stretching into the hundreds of billions,that may not seem much.
But in your hands, it is enough to create a place to work miracles.
To create a place of hope.
And friends, I want to say that is not the end of our ambitions for this site.
This corner of inner city Sydney may be small in area but it's very great in impact:
 * 	St Vincent's public and private hospitals;
 * 	The Garvan;
 * 	Sacred Heart Hospice;
 * 	The Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute;
 * 	The Kirby Institute;
 * 	And the wonderful work of the Nelune Foundation; and
 * 	I acknowledge Nelune Rajapakse's presence here today
Per square metre, perhaps the greatest concentration of medical care and research excellence in the nation.
Today I want to announce a new member of your family with the placement of the nation's third National Prostate Cancer Research Centre here in Darlinghurst.
It's a cause that's very close to Wayne Swan's heart and I'm to join him and Minister Plibersek in making this announcement today.
This third National Prostate Cancer Centre is a collaboration between St Vincent's Prostate Cancer Centre, St Vincent's &amp; Mater Health and the Garvan Institute.
You all know what a prestigious win this is for these three organisations.
You know the international research interest it will attract.
There will be less suffering and grief because of the work that will be done in this new institute, just like the Kinghorn Centre.
There will be new knowledge and new discoveries.
Better collaboration between these institutes, and indeed your colleagues around the world.
Above all, there will be personalised, multi-disciplinary carefor patients because the journey of cancer can be so complex and demanding.
So this must be their centre.
Their place of comfort.
Their place of hope.
And because of what happens here, the things we can't cure and treat today, we will be able to cure and treat in the future.
It may not happen this year or next.
But you don't build places like the Kinghorn Centre for months or years, but for decades.
This is an investment in decades.
An investment in hope.
Supported by many generous donors, led by the Kinghorn family itself.
And staffed by the some of the most brilliant minds in our land.
So, proud of your work  -  and confident in what you will achieve; I declare the Kinghorn Cancer Centre officially open and wish it every success.


Rarotonga, Cook Islands
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: It's great to be here in the Cook Islands. I've just arrived for the Pacific Islands Forum.
Australia is a Pacific Nation. This is our region. It's our part of the world and it's important to us.
We are deeply connected in this region - not just the ties of geography, though they're important - we are deeply connected as the regional power guaranteeing security in this region.
We are deeply connected in trade and investment and of course we are a very substantial aid donor.
That means that the stability and prosperity of the Pacific Islands matters to Australia and that's why the Pacific Islands Forum matters and that's why I'm here.
The Pacific Islands Forum focuses on a range of issues to do with stability and prosperity, and particularly important is the focus on sustainable development and mitigating the effects of climate change, the focus on economic integration and economic growth, the focus on the best use of aid dollars making sure that all aid dollars make the biggest possible difference, and the focus on good governance.
Whilst I'm here I'll be having discussions across this range of issues. I will be particularly focussing on three issues in my discussions and work within the Forum.
A key agenda item for this Forum defined by the Cook Islands is the Pacific Ocean, the maritime environment, the sense of these island nations being the custodians of a huge ocean area.
This fits very well with Australia's focus on our marine environment and this will be one of the things I will be particularly focussing on during these discussions.
Second, I will be very focussed on skills and skills development. For these nations to seize the best possible future they do need to see further work on education and training. That's important to see growth in their economies.
Thirdly, as the only woman attending the forum, the only female leader, I will be focussing on gender equality.
Gender equality matters, not only because of the basic principle that men and women are equal, but gender equality matters because it's one of the keys to unlocking development and so I will be focussed on gender equality issues.
During the course of the forum I also expect issues about Fiji to be canvassed and issues about success of the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands.
I'll be meeting with the President of Nauru and the Prime Minister of PNG, amongst other leaders.
In those discussions with the President of Nauru and the Prime Minister of PNG I will be discussing the work we are doing together on asylum seekers and regional processing.
I will later in the week be meeting with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton who is coming to attend the post-Forum dialogue.
So it's a big agenda and I'm looking forward to getting stuck into it.
JOUNALIST: Prime Minister, in your meetings with the leaders of Nauru and PNG, what progress are you trying to make in terms of offshore processing?
PM: Well work's already begun. We've sent the reconnaissance teams and as you will have seen from all of the pictures and footage work is happening, construction work, through our defence force.
We are negotiating a memorandum of understanding with Nauru so I'll certainly be discussing that with the President of Nauru.
Australia already had a memorandum of understanding with PNG, but I will be talking to Prime Minister O'Neill about the arrangements for the processing centre at Manus Island.
JOURNALIST: Nauru yesterday said that it didn't believe that people could be held indefinitely on Nauru and furthermore that they wanted to see asylum seekers processed efficiently. Does that gel with your Government's determination to make people wait for a comparable period of time that they'd face in say Indonesia or Malaysia, because that could be a very long wait indeed.
PM: Well it certainly does. Our policy push here is to make sure that people do not get an advantage from having got in a boat.
That is why when people are transferred to PNG or to Nauru they will have to have their claims processed to see whether or not they're a genuine refugee and if they are a genuine refugee then they will have to wait the same amount of time for a resettlement opportunity as they would have waited if they hadn't got in the boat.
Of course when we get to that stage, having acquitted the no-advantage arrangements, we would want to see people resettled as quickly as possible and we've been very clear all along that there's nothing about the Houston package that says people should be held indefinitely.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does that mean some of those people could be resettled in Australia and how quickly could that happen?
PM: It means exactly what I said responding to the Houston report, not a word different. The aim here is to ensure that people get no advantage from having got in a boat.
So we want to see arrangements on Nauru and Manus Island where people are processed to see if they're genuine refugees.
If they're not genuine refugees then they should be returned to their countries of origin. If they are genuine refugees, they will get a resettlement opportunity, but having waited the same amount of time they would have waited if they had not got on the boat and paid a people smuggler.
JOURNALIST: Are you at odds with Nauru and PNG on this, because they seem to be saying that their understanding of their agreements is that people will be processed as quickly as possible and then resettled, including in Australia.
PM: I think we're on the same page. Our intention is for people to be processed, to then wait for the same amount of time they would have waited had they not got on a boat, and then to obviously be resettled as quickly as possible.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on climate change, why have you changed your position on the floor price, and secondly, won't this destroy your budget figures given that revenue is based on the price put on carbon?
PM: Well I think settle back down might be the message. Minister Combet's dealt with this extensively in Australia, but let me say this.
First and foremost the fact that we are linking with the European scheme gives a complete lie to the fearmongers who have tried to tell the Australian people that it's only Australia that is acting on climate change.
That has always been untrue and now it is demonstrably untrue.
Australians would be asking themselves the question how is it we can be linking to a scheme that covers over five hundred million people if no one else in the world is doing this? It doesn't make any sense, never has made any sense, has always been a false claim.
Second, the announcement that Minister Combet made yesterday reinforces the fact that the fixed price for carbon - the carbon tax - lasts three years and then it becomes a fully fledged emissions trading scheme.
That's exactly the same system Prime Minister Howard stood for in the 2007 election.
It's exactly the same kind of system that Brendan Nelson, Malcolm Turnbull and indeed Tony Abbott have advocated in the past. It's the same system that every living Liberal leader is committed to.
On budget figures, we rely on Treasury modelling and forecasts as we do for every other area of the budget and we will on carbon pricing forecasts as well.
JOURNALIST: But isn't there a danger though that the price in Europe at the moment is lower I believe than the fixed price that you were looking at? So isn't that going to cut your revenue?
PM: Well let's be clear about what's happening in Europe. All markets in Europe have been volatile as a result of the eurozone crisis.
There's been significant volatility in all markets including carbon markets. The European Union is taking steps to bolster price in its market. We're talking about what the price will be in three years' time.
In order to predict a price in three years' time, you don't simply look at today's price and say to yourself that's inevitably going to be the price in three years' time. I mean that's nonsense, clearly nonsense.
What you do is you rely on the best possible advice about what the price will be in three years' time, that's the Treasury modelling, and that's what we rely on.
We rely on Treasury modelling and forecasting for all sections of the budget, just like governments have in the past.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned that Fiji's likely to come up in this. Will you be supporting any moves by the Forum to re-introduce Fiji or lift the suspension on Fiji, perhaps not at the whole level of the Forum but in some parts of the Forum?
PM: Our position on this is clear. We will continue to press for a return to democracy in Fiji and it is only that return to democracy that should see Fiji join the Pacific Islands Forum.
As the Foreign Minister, Minister Carr has said publicly and as he publicly demonstrated when he met with his counterparts from New Zealand and Fiji, when we see progress in Fiji we're prepared to acknowledge progress has been made.
When we see progress, we're prepared to as a result of that progress change arrangements, so for example, because we have seen some progress, there is now discussion of an exchange of High Commissioners.
But the key to coming back into the Pacific Islands Forum and to being acknowledged around the world as back from where Fiji has been is a return to democracy. It's having an election.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Government's announced a large dental program today back in Australia but it hasn't yet identified as I understand it exactly where the money's going to come from. When will we see those details and is it irresponsible to make a large promise without yet identifying where the funds will come from?
PM: Well the announcement today is about a large saving. That is through the closure of a scheme designed by the former Government, by the Howard Government.
Indeed the Leader of the Opposition was personally involved in its design and it's been the subject of economic blowouts and it's also been the subject of lack of fairness.
It's a scheme in which, literally, some millionaires are able to benefit whilst a teenager from a poor family can't get a filling for their tooth.
In those circumstances, that scheme is being replaced by a better and more cost-effective set of arrangements.
So the Minister for Health, Tanya Plibersek has both announced today the closure of the scheme that is inequitable and blowing out, as well as some new arrangements to better help Australians with dental care.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there were violent protests in Melbourne construction sites. Are you worried that these protests could spread?
PM: Violence is always wrong in whatever setting and of course everybody should conduct themselves peacefully. If they want to make a point, there are ways of making your point peacefully.
JOURNALIST: What do you say about Mr Abbott's plan though to bring the Building Commission in response to what's happened in Melbourne?
PM: Well Mr Abbott's always stood for the complete return to Howard Government policies, so WorkChoices would be back and the Australian Building and Construction Commission would be back absolutely.
And as a result of that people would see things like their penalty rates end. They'd see their awards ripped up and they'd be forced back on the kind of individual contracts that did so much harm to many working families when Mr Abbott was last in government.
JOURNALIST: What's the significance of the visit of Hillary Clinton?
PM: I think it shows visibly how deeply engaged America is in our region and I think it's very important that Hillary Clinton does participate in the post-Forum dialogue.
The United States has announced it's rebalanced towards the Asia Pacific. It is in Australia's interests, it's in the interests of the region for America to be deeply engaged.
JOURNALIST: Some analysts have interpreted it rightly or wrongly as an attempt to curb China's growing influence now for a decade or so in the Pacific. Do you see it that way?
PM: Well I would note that China will also be attending the Pacific Islands Forum post dialogue.
Thank you very much.


Rarotonga
Thank you very much to the Secretary General. I'm pleased to stand here today with my fellow Pacific leaders and with Michelle Bachelet, from UN Women, for an important announcement about gender equality in our region of the world, in the Pacific.
We stand here today wanting to enter a new partnership for gender equality.
We know gender equality is not a marginal issue. It's not just about fairness to women, but it's also about economic development and empowerment.
We know that societies only reach their full potential if women are politically participating as equals; that's a key indicator of social governance.
We know that food security is advanced by enabling women to work in the agricultural sector.
We know that if there was a better distribution between men and women of agricultural work, that up to 150 million more people would be nourished around our globe.
And we know, too, that a key indicator of economic advancement is the full inclusion of women in the life of a nation.
So  gender equality is the right thing to do; it's also the clever thing to do, and I am delighted that leaders are working here at the Pacific Island Forum for change and for gender equality in our region. Today, through a declaration on gender equality that will come from the Pacific Island Forum, and through the initiative that I'm announcing today, we will see further change. 
Now whilst we have been working on gender equality in our region, there's no doubt that significant challenges still remain in the Pacific as significant challenges remain for countries around the world:? In the Pacific, women hold five per cent of parliamentary seats. That's compared to a global average of 18 per cent;? women account for just one in three people in formal employment across substantial parts of the Pacific;? And violence against women and poor maternal health outcomes are only too prevalent in our region of the world.
But we also know change is possible, and change is occurring here and internationally.
Some countries in the Pacific have achieved gender parity in primary education.Working in partnership with regional governments, UN Women is making a difference through things like the Pacific Markets Program.
And we do know that there are nations, including Papua New Guinea, that have taken important steps forward to including women in their parliament. So change is possible.
Today I am pleased to announce that we will support further change through a partnership of more than $300 million over the next decade.
These funds will be directed to a number of purposes to increase the inclusion of women in the lives of nations in the Pacific.
Most specifically the work that this money will fund will include: empowering women to participate in the political life of their nation by enabling training and support for women who want to involve themselves in leadership processes. This money will go towards assisting the Pacific Markets Program that's already making a significant difference.
It's a simple idea, but if women can bring their produce to market, if they can bring their economic labors to market, they can earn money which makes a difference for them, for their families and ultimately for their nation.
In order to do that, markets need to be safe spaces with lighting, with water supply, sanitation and waste disposal, and women need to be able to participate in the governance and leadership of market places. And so this money will help finance such initiatives.
This money will assist with survivors of violence overcoming the experiences that they have lived through and finding safety and protection. And underpinning all of this work will be information campaigns and programs through churches, local governments and at markets to change perceptions of women's roles and women's lives, and men's roles in communities to assist women and men to live together as equals.
The Pacific is already on its way to empowering women, but this is the work of generations. Australia is pleased that we are able to support a decade-long partnership, and I have no doubt that we will continue to see further change for women in the region in which we live.
Thank you very much.



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: Our nation is confronting the most awful news. We have lost five soldiers in Afghanistan and two have been wounded. Five soldiers and two soldiers wounded in two separate incidents which have occurred very quickly after each other. These incidents are unrelated.
We have lost three soldiers in an incident at a patrol base when a man dressed in an Afghan National Army uniform opened fire on Australians. Three Australian soldiers were killed and two were wounded. In a separate incident, two Australian soldiers have died when a helicopter has crashed. This is a very big toll. This means that in a war of so many losses, this is our single worst day in Afghanistan. Indeed, I believe this is the most losses in combat since the days of the Vietnam War and the Battle of Long Tan.
This is news so truly shocking that it's going to feel for many Australians like a physical blow. This is news so saddening that many are going to feel the immense weight of it, and if we are feeling that, then it is hard to imagine what the families of these five men are feeling. Their loss is immense, their grief will be sharp, and our condolences go to each of them as they are confronted by this news.
Our Australian Defence Force family too will be grieving; the mates of these men, people in the Australian Defence Force more broadly will feel this very deeply. In particular, our hearts go out to those who are in the field, to the people who are now hunting down or endeavouring to hunt down the Afghan who has killed Australians, to those who are in the field on search and rescue mission associated with the helicopter crash, our thoughts are very much with them as they continue to show resolve in the face of such incredible sadness.
Whilst it will be cold comfort for me to say so, I will say that as we absorb this news, it is important that Australians understand this is a war with a purpose and it is a war with an end. We went to Afghanistan because we knew that in Afghanistan people had been trained who came and took Australian lives. We are only a few short weeks away from the 10 year commemoration of the loss of life in Bali  -  people trained in Afghanistan. So we went for the right reasons in our national interest, to prevent Afghanistan being a safe haven for the terrorists who would come and kill Australians and kill so many innocent others.
This is a war with a purpose and it's a war with an end. We have already entered transition in Uruzgan Province. We expect the process of transition to take 12 to 18 months and after the process of transition is completed, the bulk of the Australian forces will be able to come home. Some forces will remain to support with training, and we have left open a potential role for continuing special combat forces. To Australians who are absorbing this news, I do say today, I understand that this news is bringing immense sadness, but even as we feel that immense sadness, we must continue to show resolve. As Prime Minister, I have spoken to families who have lost loved ones in Afghanistan. I have attended a lot of funerals. And one of the things that has always struck me is the resolve of family members to complete our mission. It is for us to show the same resolve.
I'll take questions on this matter and this matter alone.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how will this affect your travel plans?
PM: I will return to Australian this evening. I have spoken to Prime Minister Puna of the Cook Islands. I have explained the circumstances. He has personally said to me he understands the circumstances and my need to return to Australia, and he wants me to understand that the people of the Cook Islands express their condolences to the people of Australia. So Richard Marles will represent Australia at the balance of the Pacific Island Forum. This is an important meeting for Australia, but in the wake of this news, I've made the judgement call that it is appropriate for me to return. That will mean that I can be in Canberra tomorrow to receive the most extensive briefings about each of these incidents.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you willing to contemplate any change to the withdrawal timetable for Afghanistan.
PM: No, I'm not.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, nearly 12 months ago there was a similar incident to this while you were at the CHOGM meeting in Perth. What has changed being in Afghanistan to give you faith that the reasons that you stated then for staying the course  -  what's changed in Afghanistan then that gives you the confidence that we should go on now in light of these incidents?
PM: Well my faith then is the same as my faith now. We are making progress, and I can tell you that, I've seen it with my own eyes when I have visited Afghanistan, but more particularly I've seen it through the eyes of our Defence Force personnel who have been deployed there on more than one occasion. And for our troops who have been there more than once, they can speak to you about the progress that is being made; about the security progress; about the progress in training Afghan troops.
We have entered the final process, the process of transition, we know that that process will be 12 to 18 months long, and we know that at the end of that, the bulk of our forces will be able to return home. So our strategy is well-defined, our strategy is constant, and we cannot allow even the more grievous of losses to change our strategy. We cannot have a circumstance where loss dictates how we will engage in this war and see our mission through. In my view, that wouldn't be appropriately honouring the men we have lost. In my view, it would be letting our nation down. We went there for a purpose and we will see that purpose through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the increasing numbers of attacks on Australian and other NATO soldiers from members of the Afghan Army is deeply concerning. NATO pointed that out earlier this year. What precautions are being made to prevent these sorts of attacks, and how can you have any confidence, given their increasing prevalence, that we won't see further examples of this sort of attack?
PM: We have seen attacks of this nature in the past, and so have other nations who have their troops in Afghanistan. These insider attacks, these green-on-blue incidents, there have been a number of them. We, in response to the last such incident reviewed our Force protection in Afghanistan and stepped our Force protection up. For all the obvious reasons about security, I cannot take you through the individual measures that were taken to step our Force protection up.
In the wake of this incident, some special measures have also been taken. This incident will now be reviewed. We've lost three Australian soldiers, we've seen two wounded in this incident; we've lost the other two in the helicopter crash. Both will be thoroughly reviewed and anything that we learn from those incidents will be implemented to better protect our troops.
But right now we have Force protection in relation to insider incidents that is above that that the ISAF team in Afghanistan adopts as its own procedures.
JOURNALIST: Do we know at this stage whether it was a case of Taliban infiltration?
PM: No, we don't. We are not in a position at this stage to speak with any confidence about the motivation of the man from Afghanistan involved. We know he was in an Afghan National Army uniform. Apart from that, I'm not in a position to speculate about further details. This is something that's ongoing. The hunt for this person is ongoing as I stand here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, some of the soldiers in Afghanistan must feel uncomfortable or at least uneasy about training Afghan National Army soldiers when there are these kinds of attacks. What's your message to those soldiers?
PM: We can't speculate on the motivation of this person, but what I can certainly say to you is these insider incidents are very difficult for trust between Australian soldiers and the Afghans that they train. They are corrosive of trust. That is a real difficulty for our soldiers in the field.
At the same time, their mission is to train Afghan National Army personnel so that they can provide security for their own nation and most particularly security for Uruzgan Province in which we work. And so, for our troops in the field, they do know what the mission is. They know that the mission is about training Afghan National Army soldiers. They know that that mission does come with risks, and we obviously take the best steps we can to deal with those risks based on the best advice that we get from the ADF.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe that public enthusiasm or support for the war will run further (inaudible)?
PM: I think people will be incredibly shocked. It is news of such dimensions that it's very, very shocking. I think people will be very saddened, and I do think many Australians will say to themselves, why are we still there, why can't we get everybody home? I think there will be that sense in the Australian community; many Australians will feel that. Which is why it is important for me to explain why we are still there, why it's in our national interest to be there, and the timeline in which we will see our troops come home.
Thank you very much.


Raratonga 
Pacific island countries will be given assistance to empower women and to promote gender equality, under a major new regional initiative announced today.
Announced at the Pacific Islands Forum, the $320 million Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development initiative will expand women's leadership and economic and social opportunities in the region.
This 10-year initiative will include measures such as: • Provision of mentoring and training to female members of parliament and candidates to help women influence national and local politics and run in elections;
• Making markets safer places for women to work and providing business training and better access to finance for female vendors, benefiting more than 30,000 female market vendors; and
• Helping Pacific women to feel safer in the community, by expanding services for survivors of violence. This will include an increase in health services, crisis centres and shelters, especially in rural areas. An information program to help change perceptions about the role of women in Pacific communities will underpin these initiatives. Nations thrive when women can participate in politics, business and society as equals. At present, women in the Pacific hold just 5 per cent of parliamentary seats and account for just one in three people in formal employment. We know that violence against women and poor maternal health outcomes persist in this region. Promoting gender equality is about addressing these injustices. It is also a smart economic decision. In the Pacific region, investments in women bring dividends to the entire region, including Australia, in terms of stability, prosperity and productivity. The International Labour Organization estimates that the Asia-Pacific loses up to US$47 billion annually as a result of women's lack of access to employment opportunities. In April 2012, Australia was appointed to the UN Women Executive Board. The tenure will start from 1 January 2013 and will further strengthen Australia's commitment to women's empowerment. Gender equality is needed to achieve all of the Millennium Development Goals.


Rarotonga
Australia and Nauru have signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for the establishment of a regional processing centre in Nauru, Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris Bowen announced today.
The MOU was signed in Rarotonga earlier today by Australia's Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs and for Foreign Affairs Richard Marles and the Nauru Foreign Affairs and Trade Minister Kieren Keke.
The MOU is the next step in implementing the recommendations of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers and an important development in setting up the regional processing centre for irregular maritime arrivals in Nauru.
The signing today formalises this arrangement between Australia and Nauru.
The Government is committed to working in partnership with Nauru to establish a regional processing centre at the earliest opportunity.
This MoU sends a clear message that countries in this region are working together towards a lasting regional response in taking action necessary to undermine people smuggling networks, stop those dangerous boat journeys and prevent the loss of life at sea.
It also reaffirms the commitment of both countries to the Refugee Convention, with people to be treated with dignity and respect in line with human rights standards.
The Government is committed to implementing the expert panel's key principle related to a strategic, comprehensive and integrated policy approach that provides no advantage to people considering risking their lives on dangerous boat journeys.
Defence personnel are continuing work on temporary accommodation on Nauru and the Government is progressing arrangements on a number of fronts including contracting service providers and sourcing supplies.


Canberra, Parliament House
I'm joined by the Chief of the Defence Force, General David Hurley.
Yesterday was a terrible day of loss for our nation. Today is a day of grief.
I know many Australians will be feeling the weight of this loss from yesterday. Still reeling from the shock. Still asking questions about what has happened here.
And then for five families this is a dreadfully bleak day as they struggle to come to terms with the loss of their loved one.
Last night I returned from the Cook Islands as a result of our losses in Afghanistan.
I've had the opportunity to bring the National Security Committee together this morning for a meeting and to be comprehensively briefed on the circumstances in Afghanistan and what has happened in relation to the loss of these Australians.
What we know from those briefings is we are in a position to confirm the identity of the perpetrator of the insider attack that took the lives of three Australians.
He is Sergeant Hek Matullah, a member of the Afghan National Army. He only recently arrived in Oruzgan Province where we work following training in Kandahar.
At this time, Australian, ISAF and Afghan forces remain in pursuit of him, in pursuit of the perpetrator. At this time too there are a series of investigations underway.
They include our own Australian investigation; the Afghan National Army security forces have also rapidly put together a joint Afghan-ISAF investigative team to conduct their own investigation into these events.
We have reviewed our force protection measures as a result of this incident.
And all Australian personnel, in cooperation with Afghan commanders, have adopted enhanced force protection measures including additional security at this time.
These events from yesterday are grave and truly shocking.
I am going to turn now to the Chief of the Defence Force for a more detailed update, and then we'll take questions on this matter.
GENERAL HURLEY: Thank you Prime Minister. Let me begin by extending my condolences to the families of the five soldiers who were killed in Afghanistan yesterday.
We all feel their loss deeply and our thoughts and prayers are with each member's family and friends during this extremely difficult period.
I'm also thinking of the soldiers who are wounded and we wish them a speedy recovery and we'll continue to support them and their families.
At this time I'm in a position to release the details of two of the soldiers who have been killed in these incidents.
With regard to the insider attack, the families of these men are not yet ready to release the names and other personal details at this time. I do thank the media for your approach on this matter to date and again ask you to respect their privacy.
With regard to the helicopter crash, the family of the two men killed in the accident have agreed to release their personal details.
Private Nathaniel Galagher was 23 years of age. Private Galagher was born in Wee Waa, New South Wales in 1989.
He enlisted in the army in October 2007. Private Gallagher's postings include the 1st Battalion Royal Australian Regiment and the 2nd Commando Regiment.
At the time of his death Private Galagher was on his second deployment to Afghanistan. He is survived by his partner, parents and sister.
Lance Corporal Mervyn McDonald was 30 years of age. Born in Carnarvon, Western Australia in 1982, he first enlisted in the army in May 1999.
He served for five years until his separation in February 2004, re-enlisting again in July 2005.
Since then Lance Corporal McDonald undertook several operational deployments in Timor Leste and six to Afghanistan. During his military career, Lance Corporal McDonald was posted to the 1st Battalion Royal Australian Regiment, the 4th Battalion Royal Australian Regiment, which is now the 2nd Commando Regiment.
Lance Corporal McDonald is survived by his fiancée, his mother and stepfather and three brothers. Again I extend my sympathies to the families, friends and their comrades.
As the Prime Minister said, overnight we confirmed the identity of the man we believe to be the perpetrator, Sergeant Hek Matullah, who arrived as the Prime Minister said recently - mid July  -  into Oruzgan Province, after completing his induction training in Kandahar.
We are not yet aware of any relationship he has with the Taliban. In addition to our own ADF investigative service investigation, the Afghan National Security Forces have rapidly established a joint Afghan-ISAF investigative team to conduct their own investigation.
As Air Marshal Binskin said yesterday we have again reviewed our force protection measures as a result of this incident and all Australian personnel have adopted these enhanced force protection measures, including some relocations and adapted to that new posture.
I can't divulge the force protection issues as you will understand they are operationally sensitive.
Today and tomorrow, are normally days of lulls in activity being Friday, day of prayer for the Islamic religion, so that gives us a bit of time to reset for the coming week.
Yesterday afternoon I had a conversation by phone with General Allen from Jakarta.
I have reinforced with General Allen my view that these incidents are of strategic significance to the ISAF campaign. This is a point I raised at the NATO chiefs of defence meeting over 10 months ago.
General Allen will be seeking further actions and responses from the Afghan government in relation to these insider attacks. And I will again be speaking with General Allen this afternoon.
At this stage of our operations in Afghanistan we see the Taliban claiming all insider attacks as being of their initiative.
The evidence does not necessarily support this but regardless of the motives, these attacks will be used by the insurgency to try to undermine our confidence and our relationship with the ANSF.
This relationship is based on trust. Trust has been hard to build and is hard to maintain. This most recent incident has challenged that trust, but we must and will continue to work with our Afghan partners to strengthen our relationship and improve their capability.
We'll work to complete the current task to conduct a successful transition to ANSF lead responsibility for security.
To return to the helicopter crash - we received an update from ISAF and as yesterday Air Marshal Binskin reported that one ISAF service member had been wounded; there were actually four wounded in the crash.
On behalf of the ADF I wish them a speedy recovery.
The helicopter has now been recovered. However, due to operational security measures, I can't disclose any further details about the location of the crash or information on the mission at this time.
An air accident investigation will be conducting by the United States Marine Corps and as Air Marshal Binskin briefed yesterday, we expect to be involved in that investigation.
In addition, Defence will undertake its own normal inquiry process.
It is fair to say that there is a range of emotions in the ADF today. That's understandable in the circumstances.
The advice I received from our commanders on the ground in Afghanistan, however, should offer some reassurance. They say that there is a positive relationship in the operating bases.
The members of the Afghan National Army share our sense of outrage at this attack. The ANA has been proactive in supporting the changes to our force protection posture and is actively attempting to capture Hek Matullah.
Our advisory teams are resetting themselves in the province to continue with their work. Our people have performed extremely well in Afghanistan.
I'm proud of them and the progress we have made and I intend to see that work honoured. Thank you.
PM: Thank you. We'll take questions on this issue.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, The Greens Leader Christine Milne has said today that 2014 is too far away to wait to bring our troops home and Andrew Wilkie has said that the five soldiers, he says that they died unnecessarily and that yourself and Mr Howard and Mr Rudd, his words, have blood on their hands, and he also said that it is again quoting one of the great lies of the Afghanistan war that we need to stay there to keep Australia safe.
I was wondering if you could respond to that?
PM: Well, it's no secret that there are a variety of views in the Australian community and indeed in the Australian Parliament on our mission in Afghanistan.
That's been very clearly shown when we've had the annual debates about our mission in Afghanistan.
I've been very clear too with the Australian people about the purpose of this mission and why it's in our national interest to be there.
We've got to remember why we went. We went because we had seen a terrorist attack which did take the lives of a number of Australians.
We witnessed other terrorist attacks where the terrorists have been trained in Afghanistan and took Australian lives.
As I reminded yesterday when I spoke from the Cook Islands, we were only a very limited number of weeks away from commemorating the 10th anniversary of the Bali bombing in which we saw Australian lives taken.
So we went to Afghanistan for our national interest, because people were being trained there who were taking Australian lives.
If we left now we would leave a security vacuum which would mean that in Oruzgan Province and then more broadly across Afghanistan if ISAF forces withdrew that you would see a security vacuum and what would fill that security vacuum would be what has been there in the past.
The kind of power structures that enabled terrorist training in Afghanistan.
So it's in our national interest to be there, to complete the mission of training and to enable Afghan people to provide security in their own nation. Now I don't in any way try and sugar coat how hard it is, how difficult it is.
We know from the way we all felt when we heard the news yesterday from the way we all feel today and from what we can imagine these families are feeling, I think we all know how hard it is.
It's incredibly hard, but it is also the right thing to do, to see our mission through and that's what I intend to do.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned that you had spoken to the US Commander some time ago on your view that these insider attacks are increasing in significance. Could you please explain a little more about that?
We've been bombarded over the last few months with a whole range of theories on what's causing the attacks, whether they're cultural factors, whether they're infiltration by the Taliban.
Do you believe that soldiers in the Afghan army are being coerced perhaps by families being kidnapped or threatened, or is it ideological? What's your belief is actually driving this and how serious (inaudible)?
GENERAL HURLEY: All of the above. There are many factors that drive members of the ANSF to conduct these attacks. Some have been subverted by the Taliban to conduct these attacks, some might be members of the Taliban.
Others are purely cultural disagreements, and the way the Afghans express a cultural disagreement is quite different to how we might.
They will pick up a weapon, they will fight, it's part of their cultural approach to these issues. There are about half a dozen different reasons we've identified why these events occur.
We've conducted our own detailed analysis with DSTO, consulted broadly on this, so has the United States. We've shared that information and we've shared it with studies from NATO to try to get underneath the lid of this to try to see what can be done.
So it's part of our force protection. It's not only what we do on the ground, it's the cultural training, cultural awareness and sensitivity that we train our people in before they go to Afghanistan.
So when this do their mission rehearsal exercises and so forth, this is part and parcel about how you conduct yourself when you're around them particularly in close quarters in a camp.
So it's a very complex issue. There are no absolutes here. People want to drive to absolutes, there are no absolutes. It's complex.
My discussion last year at the NATO chiefs of defence meeting, my view was that this is an own approach by the Taliban in the past to subvert your enemy. You get inside, create uncertainty.
We're seeing that play out now. I'm not saying I'm on my own here.
Others were thinking this. That's why you saw a lot of work over the last 12 months in these studies and prior to that analysis of data, studies, development of codification of force protection measures and so forth to allow us to stand this, but there's no 100% guarantee that you can stop it.
JOURNALIST: Do you still work despite this?
GENERAL HURLEY: It can still work and why is this a strategic issue? Because if we blink, the Taliban win.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it's one thing to have a view on whether we should still be in Afghanistan, but it's another thing to accuse the Prime Ministers of this nation of blood of their hands and of lying.
These remarks surely are offensive, aren't they?
PM: We're dealing with really serious issues here today. We're literally dealing with matters of life and death for our troops in the field.
And I'm not going to get side-tracked or waylaid into domestic Australian debate even if some ugly language has been used during the course of it.
The important thing isn't me talking about language which may have been used by others, it's talking about our national interest and our national purpose in Afghanistan.
I really feel that Australians were yesterday and today not only in a state of shock and sadness and grief, though they were certainly in all of that and I think people are feeling the weight of this very heavily today, but they're wanting to clearly understand why we're still there and what we're doing there that matters so much for our nation.
So for me, I'm going to be pretty single minded about explaining that to the Australian people and I'm not going to get side-tracked by some language use by Members of Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said if we were to leave now, there would be a vacuum that would inevitably be filled by the Taliban or whomever.
On that basis, either that's going to change dramatically in the short time between now and the time we leave, for that vacuum not to be filled that way, or else it is.
Are you confident that in the short time before we withdraw, the circumstances in Afghanistan are going to change that dramatically?
PM: We calibrated a mission to train Afghan forces to take security leadership of their own country. That's what our mission is now. And we calibrated the time to do it, and I've spoken to the nation before about the time to do it.
We've entered into transition and that's a process that will take 12 to 18 months.
Now, if we pulled out before that process had been completed, then we would be pulling out in circumstances where we knew that the Afghans were not ready to step up to security leadership of Oruzgan Province, were not ready to step up to security leadership of their nation.
And as you've just heard the Chief of the Defence Force say, if we, to use his terminology, if we blinked, then we would be handing a strategic victory over to the Taliban.
Well, after all that we have been through and all that we have lost, and all that we have done in Afghanistan, I cannot countenance leaving before the mission is completed, and I cannot and will not countenance giving a strategic victory to people who have made it their work to kill Australian soldiers.
JOURNALIST: If I could ask the General just a couple of things. It's been said that special measures  -  more measures  -  are being put in place to try to ensure more safety for Australian troops.
But given the problem of distrust and lack of trust that arises out of these incidents, are you putting in place any greater system of counselling of those people to cope with the ambiguities they must feel toward their Afghan colleagues.
And secondly, on this question of the reasons for this attack, these attacks, there seems to be quite a difference between the emphasis that the Afghan government puts on Taliban infiltration and the readings by governments outside who tend to put a lot more emphasis on cultural factors and personal grievances and so on.
What's your accounting for that?
GENERAL HURLEY: In relation to support in the field for our soldiers, we have counselling systems and staff in place to support people on operations.
I haven't received any call yet that we should beef that up and at the moment I think we've probably got the right mix in theatre.
In relation to who calls the reason, or describes what the balance is, in many of these cases we don't know what drove the person to do it because either we don't find the person or they're dead.
And unless you can then forensically track down (inaudible) contacts and so forth, either through our intelligence means or what the ANA might be able to tell us, we really would be guessing for some of the incidents.
But what our analysis shows, there is a variety, there is some outside influence. No doubt the Taliban play into that, but yes there are also a range of cultural responses that come into play as well, and unless you actually find the person and can talk to them as to what drove it, you really don't get the evidence.
JOURNALIST: For the General, while troops withdrew from other wars like Vietnam, the number of casualties spiked in the final few months. Do you expect something like this to happen over the next 18 months?
GENERAL HURLEY: I'll certainly try my darnedest to make sure it doesn't happen.
So again in terms of how we are planning to conduct the transition, the lessons learnt from, for example, the Australian Army Training Team Vietnam is foremost in our minds about how we structure that.
Let me just raise another point about what we're doing here in transition. There is a sense that we're just going to continue on with the same sort of work we're doing now for the next two years.
I've said on a number of occasions publicly that's not so. This is like letting a child learn to ride a bike. Gradually we take our hands off the steering wheel with the ANSF.
So for the next 12 months or so we're going to reduce the number of troops we have in the field over the ANSF, and that will change our risk profile.
So we just won't continue as we are for the next two years. We'll gradually step down, and step out of battalion-level operations, back up to brigade-level operations, and then up to corps-level operations, providing advice at that level so our exposure in the field changes dramatically over that two-year period.
JOURNALIST: We've heard about the danger of leaving this vacuum if Australia does pull out too early. Does that mean if things don't progress as planned there could be the possibility of staying longer?
PM: We've been very clear about the progress we're making and how we've taken that into account as we've moved into transition.
We believed Oruzgan Province was ready for transition, it was marked for transition through the processes within Afghanistan and we've started transition now.
Now we wouldn't have made that judgment call about saying Oruzgan is ready for transition unless we believed it to be true, and there's nothing that has happened since that suggests to me, that suggests to Defence, that we should change our perspectives on the time.
So we are in transition, we've always said that would take 12-18 months, that's what we anticipate it will take. Then at the end of that time period the bulk of Australian forces will be able to return home.
We've said that we would leave some forces engaged in Afghanistan in the NATO Train-Advise-Assist mission, and we've also said we would consider but no decisions have yet been taken, about a continuing role for Special Forces in counter-terrorism work.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask General Hurley, the unit the soldier's from, have any of his comrades been disarmed or had their weapons removed as a result of this incident, and can you give us a flavour of the hunt for this sergeant now, in terms of how it's being carried out and how important is it to capture him alive?
GENERAL HURLEY: In terms of the Afghan response, when the incident occurred the Afghan army with us voluntarily started disarming their people in those areas and helping separate and so forth.
Again, high-proactive in understanding the significance of what had happened and what needed to be done to reduce continuing risk there. So they've been very supportive in those approaches.
In terms of the search for this fellow at the present time, obviously we use a range of means to do this.
There will be patrols out there at the present time, our human intelligence sources, our electronic sources and so forth will all be put to work to try to track this fellow down.
JOURNALIST: General Hurley, I'm just wondering if you can give a more general circumstance of what happened at Patrol Base Wahab, which I understand is an Afghan-only facility.
Were our troops in residence there or were they just visiting?
GENERAL HURLEY: It was part of a patrol activity, so they have a main base in the area and depending where the patrols might take them through over the day they might need to overnight in a particular patrol base and then move on the next day. So I think it was conducted in that sense.
JOURNALIST: They'd only been there that afternoon?
GENERAL HURLEY: I don't know that detail, I'm sorry.
JOURNALIST: General Hurley, you said he'd just finished induction training in Kandahar. Was he a new recruit then, and what, if anything, can you draw from that?
GENERAL HURLEY: I believe he was. I don't have a lot of detail on him at the moment but he did a five-month induction course at Kandahar and then was posted up to Oruzgan Province, arriving in mid-July.
JOURNALIST: Was he a sergeant?
GENERAL HURLEY: Yes. They do have a difficulty with NCOs  -  it's not a concept  -  non-commissioned officers  -  that they deal with. He may have been selected, I don't know his background, I'd be only just guessing on that but that sort of thing we'll hunt down.
JOURNALIST: It's been said today that he was known to Australians and I took from that that he had some kind of record of making trouble.
Is that an incorrect assumption and can you tell us anything about this suggestion that there may have been some even short-term history of engagement?
GENERAL HURLEY: I've not any report of that kind.
JOURNALIST: And do we know where he was from  -  was he actually from Kandahar or was he from elsewhere?
GENERAL HURLEY: No, he was from another province  -  Ghazni Province.
JOURNALIST: Just one shooter? One rogue soldier?
GENERAL HURLEY: That is all I'm aware of at the moment, he was the only person who fired.
JOURNALIST: Do you know any more details of the circumstances on the (inaudible) base?
Air Marshal Binskin wasn't able to tell us a great deal yesterday, except that the soldiers, the Australians, were relaxing. Do you know if there was a verbal exchange between the perpetrator and-
GENERAL HURLEY: I don't have any of that detail. As Mark said yesterday, that's about as much as we know at the present time.
JOURNALIST: General, on the helicopter, does all the evidence point towards an accident, there's no evidence is there other than an accident?
GENERAL HURLEY: We believe at the moment there's no evidence of any contact at all, not at the time. I think this was an accident that rolled on landing.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
GENERAL HURLEY: No, ISAF is.
JOURNALIST: Are you able to say what sort of helicopter it was yet?
GENERAL HURLEY: It was a Huey.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you spoken to any of the families personally?
PM: No I haven't. We have an arrangement with Defence and there is a protocol here that we go through.
Ultimately this is all about the families' wishes but ordinarily, the Chief would speak to the family at the appropriate point and then following that if they wished to receive a call from me then I certainly would make it. But we're not at that stage yet.
JOURNALIST: And looking forward to, presumably the funerals, does that change your plans for APEC at all?
PM: Well look, we'll work through on all of those arrangements. I mean, first and foremost we would have the return from Afghanistan. We would have the ceremony as soldiers leave Afghanistan.
We would have a ramp ceremony as they return home. And then it's once again a question for the families, what they would like as the best way of honouring their loved one.
Whether they want a completely private funeral or one in which I and the CDF and the Leader of the Opposition attend.
So all of those arrangements are for the future.
JOURNALIST: General, it was a Huey helicopter, does that mean it was a civilian-contracted helicopter?
GENERAL HURLEY: US  -  United States Marine Corps.
[GENERAL HURLEY DEPARTS]
JOURNALIST: Do you have any update on the search for missing people in the water off Indonesia?
PM: I think they details of that are now best obtained from the various government agencies that work in this area.
They are periodically releasing updates. My advice is that around 54 people were rescued and that they are being transferred to Indonesia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is there a precedent now that asylum seekers rescued in Indonesian waters will be taken to an Indonesian port?
PM: It was a decision taken by Indonesia in this case. The vessel was very near to Indonesia when it got into trouble, and it's Indonesian search and rescue that have oversighted this search and rescue operation.
JOURNALIST: There's been some criticism of the Indonesians for how they've handled this. What is your view of it, and when Ministers go to Indonesia next week, will they be offering any further assistance beyond what you announced after your talks with the President?
PM: I believe Indonesian authorities did the best that they could.
Can I make a broader point, it's obviously a point that's on my mind following this incident but it's a broader point. We have seen what's happened this week, we have seen tragedies like this at other times.
It should reinforce the message about how dangerous these journeys are. It's a big ocean, it's a dangerous ocean.
We've seen too many people lose their lives trying to make the journey to Australia, and the message for people contemplating getting on a boat is first and foremost, the dangers are ever-present and second, they are at risk of being transferred to Nauru or PNG any event.
On the other aspect of your question, I did have an opportunity when President Yudhoyono visited to speak about capacity-building measures. Those discussions will be followed up at a ministerial meeting next week.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you able to say when the first people may be transferred to Nauru now after you signed the agreement (inaudible) Cook Islands?
PM: The setup is as has been described to you by Minister Bowen.
The setup at Nauru particularly you would have received emails from Minister Bowen about that, and so we are looking to finalise the first 500 places of accommodation using tents and the like.
Minister Bowen has consistently said that he wants that to be in place by the end of September.
Thanks very much.



Island countries at the forefront of climate change impacts will be given a stronger voice in international talks, through a training initiative announced today.
A new $750,000 training program will help to develop the negotiating skills of government officers in Pacific, Indian and Caribbean Ocean island developing countries.
This will give these countries a stronger voice at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change meetings.
The training program will help these government officers in small island developing states to improve their consultation and engagement strategies.
The training will also help bolster their negotiating skills in global climate change discussions outside of the UNFCCC meetings.



Pacific communities will receive support to manage and conserve their valuable fish stocks and marine ecosystems.
The Gillard Government will support strengthened regional efforts to ensure valuable tuna stocks are not over-fished by foreign fishing fleets.
The Government will also help protect environmentally threatened inshore fisheries which are a vital source of food for millions of Pacific islanders.  
Australia's $25 million commitment to the Pacific Oceanscape Framework was announced at the Rio+20 Conference.
Further details about Australia's commitment to the Pacific Oceanscape Framework were outlined at the Pacific Islands Forum today, including:• $9.1 million in support for the Forum Fisheries Agency to strengthen oceanic fisheries cooperation, development and surveillance;• $7 million to help Pacific islands countries define maritime boundaries, improve surveillance and enhance fisheries management and training;• $6 million to support community-based efforts to manage fisheries and coastal resources; and• $2.9 million to strengthen national fisheries policies and institutions.
The Pacific has the largest and best managed tuna stocks in the world. The region contributes almost half of the world's annual tuna catch.
However, the long-term sustainability of the industry is under threat of potential overfishing by foreign fishing vessels.
The Government will provide guaranteed core funding to support the Forum Fisheries Agency to strengthen regional cooperation on oceanic fisheries and to improve surveillance and reporting. Funds will be earmarked to help combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.
Australia will also assist Pacific nations to ensure food security for their people, noting that fish is a vital source of protein for Pacific populations.
Experts have recently assessed that climate change and other environmental factors will damage coral reefs and associated marine environments, including through sea temperature rises and acidification.Productivity of currently harvested species may fall significantly.  Australia will provide funding to the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research to support community based efforts to manage these processes better.
Australia will also provide Pacific countries with support to ensure their maritime boundaries are fully defined and internationally recognised, so they are better able to exert full control over their marine jurisdictions.  



Young people in the Pacific will be given the opportunity to develop new skills and gain regionally and internationally recognised tertiary qualifications, under an initiative announced today.
Australia will provide $85 million over the next four years to improve access to tertiary education in the Pacific.
This funding will initially focus on improving the quality of tertiary courses in engineering, construction, maritime transport, education and health.
Through this initiative Australia will fund pre-tertiary bridging courses for early school leavers, helping them to further their skills.
Australia will also support 2300 Pacific island students to graduate from tertiary courses with the skills needed to improve their employment prospects and provide employers with the workforce they require. At least half of these places will be reserved for female students.
This support will help build the workforce that Pacific employers need to boost productivity and innovation.
Australia will also upgrade research and teaching facilities for students and teachers at the University of the South Pacific, across its 14 campuses. A Pacific Research and Education network will be established to lift the Pacific tertiary sector into the digital age and help Pacific tertiary institutions overcome geographic and communication limitations. 
Many Pacific tertiary institutions struggle to provide basic email, internet and online research support to their staff or students. This inhibits good teaching, learning and research, and makes it difficult to attract international staff.
Through this initiative, at least 30 Pacific tertiary institutions across eight countries will be connected to international research and education networks, and each other.



Pacific island countries will receive assistance to become more resilient to climate change and to help save lives when disasters strike, under an announcement made today at the Pacific Islands Forum.
Low-lying Pacific countries are extremely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.
This assistance will help Pacific nations to be better prepared for natural disasters and extreme weather conditions.
The Gillard Government will fund a $58 million package in the Pacific:
• $32 million over four years for climate monitoring to plan for unusual and extreme weather;• $16 million over four years for disaster resilience projects in Vanuatu, the Solomon Islands, Fiji and Tonga; and• $10 million over two years to NGOs to help local communities in the region to become more resilient to climate change. This will focus on the creation of community action plans, and improvements to food and water security.
This funding will help Pacific countries with the production of clear response plans for natural disasters.
Pacific countries will be able to use local weather, climate and sea level data to plan for unusual weather conditions. This will help farmers, fishers and climate-sensitive industries such as tourism, healthcare and water management make better-informed decisions about their resources.
These plans will also help governments, communities and industries prepare for droughts and outbreaks of weather-related diseases, such as malaria and dengue fever.
Vanuatu, Solomon Islands, Fiji and Tonga are extremely susceptible to severe disasters due to their geographic location. This funding will help their governments to better manage these risks and respond more effectively in an emergency.


Canberra
JOURNALIST: Could I be so brutal as to go straight to the money question? Now you have got $8 billion for a National Disability Insurance Scheme, you have got $5 billion extra for asylum seekers, you have got $4 billion extra for dental and now we are talking about $6.5 billion for the Gonski response. 
You say that you want to sort out a deal with the premiers by COAG next year. Is your starting point the 70:30 split that you talked about today or are you going to have to pay a bit more than 30 per cent given the recalcitrant states? 
PM: My starting point is that our nation's children are worth it and we should have a way of funding schools that puts each child's needs at the centre of the funding system and which means that we can improve schools  over time. 
My starting point here is you have got to get the right combination of change and more resources. More resources by themselves won't make a difference. 
We need to combine that with greater teacher quality, lifting teaching standards, giving principals more autonomy, making sure we have all got more information. 
But yes, we will work through the money issues. There will be a six-year transition. We have done that deliberately because change takes time and so we will work through all of the changes that are necessary. 
To give just one example, if we are lifting entry standards to teacher education, then those new starting teachers, even if they start their course in the next couple of years, won't be teaching in our schools for several years afterwards. So change takes time. 
I'm not going to flag here today questions of funding shares. We do expect the states and territories to step up to the plate and to put in their fair share. The discussions are about to start. 
On the budget questions for the nation's long-term future, we are committed to this school reform work, as I have outlined today. 
We are committed to a National Disability Insurance Scheme and we will do what we have done so far, which is to make choices on the Government's budget in a Labor way, to do great Labor reforms of which this is one. 
JOURNALIST: Bianca Hall, Prime Minister, from the National Times. 
I'm just wondering whether you would still consider it fair that the states and territories take up 70 per cent of the funding given the Federal Government will be asking them to increase their funding share by several billion dollars? 
PM: That's the same question as Andrew's put another way. We all need to step up here. We need to step up. States and territories need to step up. 
I'm signalling today we are prepared to step up. We want states and territories to also participate for their fair share. 
You have gone to the questions of money and that's understandable. But the money is an input to drive change and the change we want is higher standards and higher outcomes for our kids. 
That's the way I'm viewing the money. The money is an input to driving that change, our aspiration has to be on securing that change. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, David Crowe from The Australian. 
You have talked very much about setting priorities, about choosing what is most important to achieve. Given the substantial cost of the program over the long-term, is this a kind of priority that requires a scaling back of some of the benefits that go to those who are not disadvantaged in the community? 
For instance, by means testing of welfare that goes to those who may not really need it in order to fund education for those who do? Would you consider means test on a wider scale? 
PM: Well, we do means test family benefits and the like now to target our assistance to families that need our assistance the most. 
And as a Government we have dealt with a lot of outcries and controversy when we have more tightly targeted some means testing arrangements. 
The private health insurance means test would well and truly be top of that list. So the choices we always make are Labor choices. You have seen that in our track record. 
People said for years private health insurance rebate, it was incapable of change, everybody muttering about the private health insurers having lists of people in marginal seats and so on and so forth. Despite all of that pressure, we went in and we got it done. 
When we are able to point to a track record like that, I think I am entitled to stand here as Prime Minister and point to a future where we will continue to make tough choices, we will bring the budget to surplus, but we will invest in those things that are closest to our heart and best for the long-term future of our country. 
If I can reverse engineer your question, where do you think the budget for the Federal Government will be in the years long after you have retired from journalism? 
But where do you think the Federal Budget will be, possibly not a great time indicator in the modern age, I meant many years into the future, not tomorrow - where do you think our nation will be if we have fallen behind the education standards of our region? 
Their economies have got higher-skilled and higher-equipped workforces than ours. 
That's one vision of the future and it's a vision that I am specifically rejecting by putting before you today this crusade, this national plan for change. 
JOURNALIST: Paul Bongiorno, Ten News, Prime Minister. 
You are going to legislate an aspiration by the end of the year and they then you have a six-year transition which of course is two parliamentary terms. Judging on the comments that are coming from the Opposition today, both the Opposition Leader and Opposition spokesman, you don't have bipartisan support for this. 
Do you have some political strategy that would put an Abbott-proof fence around it? In a sense, aren't we really talking about the never-never here? 
PM: Paul, thank you for your question. We do take a very different approach from the Opposition, absolutely. I'm for improving the nation's schools. I'm for better investing in the nation's schools. 
They're for cutting back funding to our schools. They stood at the last election campaign wanting to cut more than $2 billion out of our schools. 
They verified those cutbacks in Opposition. And as you know it is Mr Abbott's view that public schools very too much money. 
We have got diametrically opposed world views here. I'm for improving our schools and better investing in education. The Opposition is for ripping money out of our schools. 
This will be one of the great contests of the 2013 election, and Australians will have a choice. 
It will be a choice between better resourcing and improving our schools but a choice between two competing visions of our nation's future. 
Do you want us to be a nation on a high skill, high wage, high productivity path to prosperity or do you want to take our chances as we fall behind the skill levels and standards of the competitor nations of our region? 
Do you want a nation where the only kids that can get good quality education are the kids where parents can truly, truly, truly step up to the plate and pay for it, or do you really believe that every child in every school is a precious person who should get a great quality education? 
Well I am passionately for that. I am incredibly personally conscious that the difference between me standing here and not standing here is the difference between Unley High and having gone to a different state school. 
That's the difference. Yes, a whole lot of other things came in play. Politics is about luck and circumstance and effort and capacity and all of those things, but it's certainly true that if my parents had chosen to move to a different suburb, if I had gone to a disadvantaged school, I wouldn't be standing here today. 
That is the transformation education brings and I don't think we should be denying it to any child. 
JOURNALIST: Lyndal Curtis from ABC News 24, Prime Minister. 
If it's going to take six years to fully put in place a system that will in 13 years put Australia into the top five schooling systems while not willing to replicate the methods of the schools that are already in the top five and given by the time COAG reports next year, you will have had the Gonski Report for more than a year, if you are really on a crusade to right a moral wrong for those children at school now, are you taking a little too long to saddle up the horse? 
PM: The horse has been saddled and on that track since we were first elected to Government. When we were first elected to Government, I was appalled by the approach that was being taken to education. 
I was appalled by the fact that we were slipping behind the standards of the world. I was appalled by the fact that the best policy people that we have, and we have got great policy people here in Canberra in the Department, but the best policy people with all of their hard work and goodwill could not produce for you a list of the most disadvantaged schools in the country. 
Just not possible. No one had it. The Education Minister didn't have it, it was not possible to have. 
So we set about changing that. We have laid this out piece by piece deliberately. MySchool, so we could all have more information. Low SES partnership, $1.5 billion going into disadvantaged schools. 
More than $500 million going into literacy and numeracy work. Around $500 million going into teacher quality. Computers in schools. Building the Education Revolution, National Curriculum, Teach for Australia.
And because we have laid those pieces out in the order we have laid them out, I don't come here today saying I think I can improve schools. 
I don't come here to say, "I'm going to have a go at improving schools". I'm here today saying "I know how to improve schools". 
We have been out there and improved some. We have improved some with the reform agenda we have laid out. And we can now pretty forensically tell you what difference the money makes. 
That's work we have done and work that David Gonski and his panel did so you as a taxpayer don't have to sit there saying how do I know it's this amount of money and not that amount of money. 
We can show you the difference the money makes through the work we've done. So that's why it's the right moment to now move to an approach across 9,500 schools. 
I've timed the work of David Gonski and his panel deliberately because I knew I was putting our nation in a position where you could all test these propositions for yourself, get on MySchool, look at the national partnership scores, look at the improvements, look at two schools that get different amounts of money and get different results. 
Work it out for yourself now you can. So it's the right time to broaden it to all schools. 
But there are capacity constraints in the system. I can't click my fingers and generate teachers that have gone into teaching with higher entry standards, a higher entry calibre and get them teaching in 9,500 schools. I can't click my fingers and do that. I can do that over a number of years. 
In terms of working with teachers already in service, professional development, accountability, we can do that over time. But there are hundreds of thousands of them. 
So these are the challenges that we are going to work through. We are going to start in 2014 but we are going to build over the six-year period. 
If we just went, "Here is all the money in 2014", we wouldn't get the result because of the constraints in the system. So I want to make sure every dollar counts and that's why we are going through the transition. 
JOURNALIST: Malcolm Farr from news.com.au, Prime Minister. 
To put the perspective to your 2025 timeline. The first children to enter a secondary system ranked in the top five in the world have not yet been born. What sort of political capital does the Government have to expect the patience from the electorate in this sort of - you termed it a patient investment? 
PM: I think people can judge us on what we have done to date and having seen us do all of that, they can judge our intentions for the future. They can go to, look at, think about schools that have already been transformed and changed. 
I've spoken about a couple of them in my speech today but they are all around the nation. 
I can go to low-fee Catholic schools in my electorate, a school like Bethany, doing a fantastic job against the odds where we have brought change. 
So when we can show this change to people, I think that that will give people a lot of faith that we know that we can broaden and deepen this change around the country. 
And I think too, people intuitively get it, that when you are changing something as large as our education system, three and a quarter million kids go to school. There are hundreds of thousands of people who work in schools. 
They do it out of 9,500 places around the country. Changing all of that does take some time. 
For every dollar to count, for every dollar to make a difference to a child's life, we will take the right amount of time. 
JOURNALIST: Laura Tingle from the Financial Review, Prime Minister. 
If every school gets an increase in funding under this scheme but you are trying to transition to a different scheme which funds per student, how do you actually go about changing that grandfathering arrangement? 
Do you have different rates of indexation for schools that are currently above the standard to the ones that are below the standard? 
PM: Well, there are issues with the way in which school funding is indexed now. For example, there are a number of schools who have their funding frozen and don't experience any growth in funds. 
Under the system that we want, that would not be the case. There would be no school that is frozen and experiencing no growth in funds. In terms of working out what is the appropriate indexation rate, we will need to work that through in discussions with state and territory colleagues. 
That's part of the work that we have to do and obviously part of the work that goes to the partnership and financing arrangements here over the long-term. 
JOURNALIST: Jessica Marszalek from News Limited. 
I'm just wondering about the disadvantage loading, do you envisage each would be paid at the same rate, for example would a low socio-economic child compared to someone with a disability, would they get the same rate and how might you decide who fits these categories and also what happens to children who fit several of these categories? 
PM: We have got very good data about who fits these categories. So if you go on the MySchool website now, for example, you would be able to click up a chart that would show you the preponderance of kids in different quartiles from the poorest quarter through to the most advantaged quarter. 
So we have got good information about the kinds of kids and where they are in school. For example, to take disadvantaged children, we are looking at a loading for children who are in the too lower quartiles, from the poorer homes, but there would be a sliding scale from the most disadvantaged. 
Now each of these loadings is being worked through as purpose-specific. There's not one number that you would get out and use and say that's the right number for a child with a disadvantage in the sense they come from a low SES home and that number is exactly the same number as for a child with a disability. 
We are not taking that approach. It's much more fine-grained and consequently more complicated and that is part of the discussions that have been happening in the working groups that Minister Garrett has overseen and part of the discussion that needs to continue with states and territories. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Kieran Gilbert from Sky News. 
I want to ask you about the most recent asylum seeker tragedy of last week. Until recently when boats have been intercepted in the Indonesian search and rescue zone they have been taken to Christmas Island for processing. 
This one last week  -  it was obviously dealt with at the time of the tragedy, the survivors were taken to the port of Merak in Indonesia. Was there any communication between the Government and the Navy or the Defence Force to direct that boat to go to Merak? 
Does it mark a shift in policy or is it just coincidence it comes at the same time you are toughening the policy elsewhere? 
PM: This was a search and rescue that was oversighted by the Indonesian search and rescue agency, and it is my understanding that they made the decision to transfer the survivors back to Indonesia. 
The vessel in question was very close to, relatively speaking, close to the coastline of Indonesia. 
JOURNALIST: Michelle Grattan from The Age. 
Ms Gillard, you have put a quite short timeframe on the discussions for this scheme and I'm just curious as to why you won't at this point say how much you want the states to bear of this, and when will you be telling the states that fairly vital amount? 
And secondly, would you envisage that the bulk of the new spending would be loaded to the back end of the six years, the last couple of years or so? 
PM: Michelle, I've had a fair bit of experience negotiating with states and territories as it happens. You know, getting that health agreement done, getting the skills agreement done. 
When I was Minister, getting all of the partnerships done that we've been speaking about today. So you will have to excuse me if drawing on that experience about how it's best to negotiate with states and territories or have discussions with them in a COAG context, you will have to excuse me if the approach I take is the one that I've outlined to you. 
There are a series of things we will say in discussions to our state and territory colleagues that I am not going to flag publicly today. 
We have got a lot of work to do with them. This is a challenging agenda and it's challenging for all governments and it's challenging for all governments at a time when there are plenty of pressures on budgets, our budget and state budgets. I understand that. 
But I'm also cheered by the fact that premiers like Premier O'Farrell, in responding to the review when it was first released made positive statements about the insights and work of the independent review panel. 
And many of the jurisdictions are enthusiastic about the kind of reform directions I've outlined today. We know that because we have worked with them through the national partnerships that are already out there driving change. 
JOURNALIST: Mark Riley from the Seven Network, Prime Minister. 
You are going to be requiring a lot of teachers under these new programs. 
Higher entry levels so students at universities who will be looking at careers in other areas are much higher paid and annual reviews. 
What is your commitment to improving conditions for teachers? Shouldn't they be paid higher if they are going to be expected to doing a higher grade of work? 
PM: We already have a policy. One of the changes we have brought to schools which rewards teachers for higher and higher skill levels as part of our work in disadvantaged schools. 
We have seen jurisdictions use Federal Government money so the partnership we have with them to provide rewards to the best teachers who are prepared to go and work in the most disadvantaged schools. 
So as part of the reform work we have already done, we have recognised and rewarded excellent teaching, and I believe that that's appropriate. 
I also know from the work we've done with Teach for Australia and just from meeting many people who have gone into teaching, there are many, many high-performing Australians who, when they got that tertiary education rank and were making a selection about what they with would do and with the rest of their lives or at least what they'd do with a section of their lives, could have made another decision than going teaching. 
They chose to go teaching because they had that sense of passion and enthusiasm and commitment and I'm full of admiration for it. 
So there's a combination here. Yes, rewarding excellence in teaching I think matters. I think valuing our teachers matters. 
Changing the national conversation so that it's one about how great it is to be a teacher, about what incredible work people in teaching are doing for the nation, about how they're the arms and legs that are galvanising our nation in a crusade towards a goal that we all share. 
I actually think that discussion about status and valuing is also very important and you will certainly hear a lot more about that from me and Minister Garrett and the Government as we go about these reforms. 
Personally, when I go to schools I'm blown away by the calibre of people I meet. You meet some incredibly remarkable Australians who just go and do what can be really tough things day after day and are fired up every day about getting results for the kids that they teach. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Phil Coorey from the Sydney Morning Herald. 
Can I ask you about Afghanistan and the deaths of the five soldiers last week and you urged the Australian public to hold our nerve on our commitment there. 
We have had President Hamid Karzai criticising the Australians, that mission and a conflicting version of events as to the nature of the people we killed on that mission. 
Are you worried that going to further erode public support for this war, and do you have any plans to speak to President Hamid Karzai in the near future to smooth things over? 
PM: Going through it from the top. We work in a close partnership with Afghanistan, with the people of Afghanistan and obviously we work training soldiers for the Afghan National Army. 
I've met with President Karzai and personally received his condolences when we've lost Australian soldiers and it's been apparent to me in those meetings that he feels those losses very deeply and when I've spoken to him about some of the family circumstances for people we've lost, you could see that hitting him very hard. 
Now on the recent issue, the view of the Afghan authorities about a recent operation  -  let me be very, very clear. This was an authorised operation, it was a partnered operation, and it was conducted in accordance with our rules of engagement. 
Our ambassador in Kabul has already made representations to the Afghan Government to make those points very clearly.
JOURNALIST: Katina Curtis from Australian Associated Press. Prime Minister, if the funding under the new system is linked to improve schools' performance, what's going to happen to under- or low-performing schools?
PM: We're going to drive their performance up. That's why it's linked to school improvement. 
Because of the way that we'll do the accountabilities, because of the transparency about the data that I now have, that you now have  -  everyone has  -  we're in a position to be very clear that there's not places that people can sweep under-performance under the carpet. 
If there's under-performance it will need to be addressed. Each and every school will be required to have a school improvement plan and people will be held to account against that plan.
And as I made the comment in the speech, we ask our kids every day to set a goal, to strive to reach that goal, we test them to see how they're going to reach that goal. We encourage them if they need to improve. 
I want to see us put extra supports in if they need to improve. If we're prepared to ask that of the children, then we should be very passionate about asking that of the adults in the system being held to account for what is happening in our schools.
JOURNALIST: Chris Johnson, Canberra Times, Prime Minister. 
You've spent $16 billion on the Building the Education Revolution, which while it provided some nice new school halls it hasn't had a huge impact on student results or raised Australia's international standing. 
Now the pressure's on for this $6 billion plus for Gonski which you want the states and territories to contribute to. Do you feel that the priorities were right, or has there been wastage here?
PM: I think that's a substantial rewriting of history and I'm not going to let it go uncorrected. Number one, we did Building the Education revolution to support Australian jobs during the global financial crisis and downturn, which has swept millions of people around the world into the ranks of the unemployed. 
And if you want to go an live through that experience take yourself to Detroit, take yourself off to Spain, take yourself off to Greece, walk the streets of London and talk to them about what ait is like to have sizeable numbers of people unemployed with no hope and no prospects of getting a job in the short term.
We didn't want our nation to go through that kind of crisis and we avoided it through economic stimulus, one of the  -  indeed it's been reviewed as the best-targeted and best-designed stimulus package in the world. 
Now when you're stimulating the economy to support jobs, there's various ways of doing it. You could get people to paint rocks. We took a different view, because of the value we put on Australian schools and Australian education. 
We said if we've got to get a lot of money out there quickly, in a way that's dispersed around the nation so it supports jobs in communities around the nation, who are we going to benefit, how are we going to do it, and schools came up top of our list. And that was the right priority. 
That's exactly the same kind of passion and enthusiasm for school and school education I'm asking the nation to show today.
And then in terms of the difference the capital's made, well I'm not a woman with a great deal of time but if I had a great deal of time I could ensure that apart from weekends you did not go home between now and Christmas as you went around the country, school after school after school, where you could see how that capital is making a difference to the way they teach kids. 
Multi-purpose areas, teachers don't want to teach anymore in 1950s-style classrooms  -  door closed, kids in rows, one teacher. 
The capital forces a lot of that teaching style, where what people want now is flexible spaces, get kids over here doing the work that matters for their personalised learning, team teach  -  have a coach over there sitting with the young boy who's falling behind, running his fingers over the words, spelling out the letters. 
The flexible capital makes that possible.
Flexible capital has made possible a new approach to libraries, a new approach to digital technology. We need to improve in science  -  one of the areas we need to improve  -  and the science labs will make a difference to that. 
Kids don't want to sit there with a coloured book which has got a photo of someone else doing the experiment. 
They want to be hands-on in a modern lab doing the experiment themselves, learning from doing it, doing all the little things we want scientists to do. Generate the hypothesis, test the hypothesis. 
So if you want to pack your bags I'll make sure you get home Christmas Eve, and I'll be very, very grateful if you write a story across your newspaper group every day in between.
Thank you.
[ENDS]


Canberra 
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY                                                         
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Today, I am here to talk about our children, their education, their lives and their future.
As I speak, more than three million children are at school and millions more will follow them in the years to come.
On their behalf, I call on you to join me in a national crusade to give those children a better education and a better future.
Education transforms lives. I know because it transformed mine.
The story of my parents' lives is a story of education denied. 
My parents were born around the time of the Great Depression and their earliest memories are of World War II. 
My father, despite winning academic prizes and scholarships, left school at fourteen.  His family couldn't afford not to have him working.  My mother suffered ill health as a child and her schooling suffered too.
Despite their schooling history, both are intelligent and well-read and have lived successful and happy lives.
But born in a different era, or into different circumstances, my mother and father would easily have succeeded at university and pursued professional careers.
As an adult, I understand their stories aren't unusual for their generation.
But as a child, their stories were my world, the backdrop of my life.
Because my parents had hungered for education, they wanted their daughter to enjoy all its benefits.
And so as a young girl, I was painstakingly taught to read by my mother before I went to school.   As luck would have it the public schools I was zoned to attend were great schools. 
I liked school and succeeded at it.  I had some great teachers, a group of friends focussed on doing well, a family ready to support me in every way.
But even in great schools like Unley High, I was conscious of the kids who struggled, who got left behind.  Indeed achievement and underachievement were obvious  -  due to streaming and stigma. 
I was in the top class, others were in classes routinely and  cruelly referred to as  ‘veggie class'.  We were marked for success  -  they were marked for failure.
And in the days before it was commonplace for children with disabilities to be mainstreamed into schools, the one girl with a disability led a lonely life.  I have frequently reproached myself for not spending more time with her.
My parents' life stories are of education denied.  And I saw education's full power denied to some of my school mates.
I have always been conscious of being the lucky one  -  my life story is of education's transformative power.
So from my earliest years, the life changing unfairness of being denied a great education has struck me as a moral wrong.
For me, eradicating that moral wrong is what drove me into politics and drives me still.
All these years later, from the perspective of the Prime Ministership, I understand much more about what makes and what denies a great education than when I first started protesting against cutbacks to university funding as a student activist at Adelaide University.
And today, I want you to see what I see when I look at our nation's schools  -  I want you to hear what I hear when I talk to business leaders and the leaders of nations around our region.
Above all, I want you to share my passion and adopt my plan of action for improving our schools and our children's lives. I fought a ferocious battle as Education Minister to create My School and to get each of us, all of us, more information than we have ever had before on the education of our children.
On my first day in Government, no one in this nation could have given you the list of our best performing schools or our worst performing schools.
I was told that couldn't be fixed.  I was faced with political resistance from all sides.  But now you can get more information than our nation has ever had before on Australian schools on your smart phone.
I was determined to win the My School battle because I always believed that the more we knew about our children's education, the more we would be driven to improve it. 
Now we have the information from My School and other sources like international tests across the OECD, we must face up to the truths it is revealing.
The first truth is we have to aim higher for every child in every school.
Four of the top five schooling systems in the world are in our region and we aren't in that coveted top five.
To take one telling example, the average 15 year old maths student in Australia is two years behind a 15 year old in Shanghai.
The second truth is we particularly need to improve the education of our poorer children.
By year three, 89 per cent of children from the poorest quarter of Australian homes are reading below average.
These are not children raised in extremes of violence, neglect or disadvantage. 
Just kids whose parents pack their lunch, take them to school on the way to work and expect they're being taught to read and write while they're at school.  And they're not.
Today, unless those kids from the poorest quarter are brilliant, they are getting below average results in reading.
And once they are behind, far too many of them stay there.
By year nine, the average child from the same battling family is two years behind children from the most well-off quarter of Australian homes in reading and maths.
I see the faces of these kids in the school across the road from where I live in Altona. 
We shouldn't be letting them down.
And the third truth is we are failing our indigenous children.
There are about 18,800 indigenous school children in very remote Australia.
Today in very remote Australia the average indigenous child is still reading below a year three level in year nine.
And for any one tempted to shrug their shoulders and say ‘that's bad, but I don't have school-aged kids, so it's someone else's problem', contemplate this  -  we cannot have a strong economy and prosperous future if the skills of our workforce lag behind the skills of our competitors.
Leaders of Asian nations tell me when I meet with them of their relentless focus on education, of how, even as they drag people out of poverty, they are determined to shape their future economic success by driving their children to the top of the class.  
We mightn't want to replicate the methods of their schooling systems but you have to admire their drive for results.
Business leaders tell me about skill shortages today and how the future will demand higher and higher skill levels. 
Put bluntly, our businesses will be unable to compete if our children's education keeps falling behind.
To win the economic race, we must first win the education race.For our children to get the jobs of the future, we must give them a great education now.
And we can get it done. Change is possible. 
I can prove it to you because we have already created change. 
Take Cowra Public School. A rural primary school in the central west of New South Wales with around 370 students  -  nearly twenty per cent of the kids are Aboriginal.
The 2009 national testing scores showed Cowra's year three kids were at best level, and sometimes behind kids from comparable schools.
The Government ensured the school had that information but it was only the starting pistol.
The principal Brad Tom, the teachers, the parents and the kids were the ones who had to run.
The Kindergarten teachers used phonics to teach reading.
The school hired 6 extra School Learning Support Officers to run individual reading tutorials. 
They sat with every struggling child, every day, for half an hour.
One on one, side by side, uninterrupted, their fingers running along under the lines on a book, sounding out words, patiently and practically teaching how to read.The whole school community got stuck in. 
And it worked. 
In 2010 and 2011, Cowra's kids went from being level with or behind kids at comparable Australian schools to catching up  -  and often being in front.
Step by step, year by year: this is school improvement.
Or take Braybrook College in Melbourne's West.
A thousand kids from a disadvantaged district, with parents and grandparents from every part of the world, more than 600 from families in the poorest quarter of Australian homes.
A battling school community that knew it could do better for the kids who need school the most.
So we gave Braybrook targeted funding to support their improvement plans.
Four extra literacy lessons every week in year seven and eight.
Seven hundred and twenty two computers plus funding for external staff to help the teachers use them well.
We brought the school library into the digital age  -  and Building the Education Revolution gave Braybrook a new science lab.
And it worked.
Now, the school's mean VCE score is above the state average  -  up 6 points, to 30.1, in eight years.
Last year, almost seventy per cent of Braybrook's year 12 students were offered a place at university.
This is school improvement.
When I went there with the local Member Nicola Roxon and the Education Minister, Peter Garrett, the week before last, the principal Geraldine Moloney told me that having us there was the second most exciting day in the school's history.
The most exciting was last year  -  when for the first time ever, Braybrook had two kids get perfect scores in a VCE subject.
These are two quick examples. 
There are so many more.
Take Glenala State High at Ipswich, St Mary's at Warren in New South Wales, or Beechboro Christian School in Perth.
Where what we have done  -  new buildings and computers, national curriculum and better quality teaching, more empowered principals and whole school improvement plans, a greater focus on literacy and numeracy  -  and more money  -  has made a difference.
Where every day these schools are showing change is possible  -  and transforming lives.
And in thirty or forty years' time, maybe one of their students will stand here as Prime Minister and tell their story.
In the meantime  -  perhaps you could invite a few of our Teach for Australia alumni to speak  -  the highest performing graduates who have gone teaching in schools like Katherine High School, Manor Lakes College and Calwell High School and transformed children's lives.
But ten or a hundred or even a thousand great examples are not enough. 
We don't need a warm inner glow or an inspirational movie plot  -  yes I liked Mr Chips too, though when I think of a great teacher today, I'm more likely to think of Jihad Dib at Punchbowl Boys High School  -  what we need is improvement in every single one of our nine and half thousand Australian schools.
I want each of you, the whole of our nation, to join me in this crusade.
First, I want our nation to dedicate itself to an education goal we can measure, a goal that will galvanise us, a goal we will work together to achieve.
Second, I want our nation to commit to a National Plan for School Improvement, which will achieve that goal for our children. 
Third, I want us to commit to fund Australian schools in a way that puts a child's needs at the heart of our funding decisions. So how high should we aim for our nation's children?
Every day in classrooms and homes around the country, we ask our children to aim high.  We set goals for them, we test and measure their progress towards achieving that goal.
They are the kids, we are the adults.  How can we in all good conscience impose such discipline on them if we aren't prepared to impose it on ourselves?
This is why I announce today that before the end of this year, I will introduce a bill to our Parliament: To enshrine our nation's expectations for what we will achieve for our children, our vision of the quality of education to which our children are entitled and our preparedness to put success for every child at the heart of how we deliver and fund education. 
By 2025, I want Australian schools to be back in the top five schooling systems in the world. 
By 2025, Australia should be ranked as a top 5 country in the world in Reading, Science and Mathematics  -  and for providing our children with a high-quality and high-equity education system.
Currently, Australia is ranked 7th on Reading and Science and 13th on Mathematics and is rated about 10th on providing a high-quality and high-equity education system.
So today I am setting an ambitious goal.  I have set our sights on 2025 because that gives us thirteen years  -  the time it usually takes a student to complete his or her schooling  -  to make Australia among the best in the world.
The Parliament and the people will become accountable to this generation of children and every generation to follow. 
It was an Act of our Australian Parliament that truly created Australian citizenship: when the Nationality and Citizenship Act came into force in 1949 Ben Chifley was the first to receive a citizenship certificate.
The Australian Education Act will establish our nation's support for a child's education as one of the entitlements of citizenship  -  it will state our great aspirations for school education reform.
It will be the most important Bill of 2012 and the most important Act of 2013.
It is the gift of the Australian people to our children.
To reach our legislated national goal, today I am also announcing that the Government is committed to a National Plan for School Improvement.
We will take everything we have learned about getting better results for our children to every school in Australia.
We will ask the States and Territories and Catholic and Independent schools to sign up to new requirements:• Lifting teacher quality, including requiring more classroom experience before graduation and higher entry requirements for the teaching profession.• More power for principals, including over budgets and staff selection.• More information for parents through My School.
These are practical improvements you can touch, see and feel.
Nothing matters more to the quality of a child's education than the quality of the teacher standing in front of the class room.
I want that teacher to be someone who loves the job, who is of the highest calibre, who got the best training and support as a new teacher, who continuously hones their skills, who is delighted to have their skills measured and areas for improvement highlighted.
Under our plan, you will need to be at the top of your class to get in to a university teaching course. 
I want our nation to resound with the voices of parents saying to their teenage children: "Hadn't you better start hitting those books  -  after all you want to get in to teaching."
Instead of new teachers floundering or drifting away from teaching, they will be equipped for the classroom though practical experience during training and two years of support once in school.
Our young teachers will also have the support to ensure classroom discipline, to deal with bullying and cyber bullying, to prevent one or two disruptive children ruining school for all the others in the class.
And all of our teachers will be reviewed annually in their school, a thoroughgoing assessment of their skills and where they need to improve. 
Every school will have a school improvement plan and will be held to account against it.
We ask the children at school to face up to being measured and urged to improve, we are going to ask the adults to do the same.
Under our plan, children will be able to able spend longer in the school with breakfast clubs and after hours activities. 
Reading, writing, maths will be the foundation stones, taught, tested, improved.
Every child falling behind will get a personalised learning plan.
Principals will be empowered to lead their schools, making decisions that get improvements unencumbered by stifling bureaucracy.
Over the months ahead, we will legislate for our goals and for the framework for delivering the National Plan for School Improvement in schools.
And we will always respect that change is actually brought about day by day, minute by minute, on the ground in schools by principals, teachers and parents. 
So as we negotiate the detail of school funding and agree to the details of school improvement, we will harness the great insights of principals, teachers and parents around the nation.
There's no button you press for school improvement  -  schools are human organisations  -  but the change makers need to know you're on their side. 
And I am  -  prepared to fight alongside them and for them, to fight for change.
One of the biggest fights we had in creating My School was ensuring the site not only gave you details about a school's community and its results, but also about how much money each school gets.
I fought that fight and won it because I understood that funding mattered.
Not as an end in itself but as a means to an end  -  to improving schools.
It always seemed clear to me that if we could lay out transparently before the Australian people examples of schools teaching similar children but getting wildly different amounts of money and wildly different results, people would start asking the right question: "Can we make sure as a nation that every child's education is funded appropriately so they can succeed?"
I think we've done that  -  and now the Independent Review of Funding for Schooling has helped us answer this question.
Today I announce that the Government will adopt the Review's core recommendation that every child's education should be supported with a benchmark amount of funding: a new Schooling Resource Standard based on what it costs to educate a student at the schools we know already get strong results.
And that extra needs should be met through a system of “needs loadings”  -  extra funding, per student, to help students from low SES backgrounds, indigenous students, students with disability and students with limited English skills, as well as to help with extra costs for small and remote schools.
Funding should recognise that children are individuals, not standardised widgets. 
This is not just about disadvantaged kids, not just about gifted kids, it's about all students.
The resources needed to get a great quality education for children vary. 
And improving every child's education will need more resources in the future than have been available in the past.
The Government has not accepted every aspect of the Gonski model: above all because we want funding for all  schools to continue to rise.
But we agree with that broad standard plus loadings structure and that is the new model we will adopt for funding all schools.
It is a model that strips away all the old debates about private versus public and puts children at the centre of the funding system. 
Children with their individual strengths and needs.  
Children in whatever school their parents have chosen for them.  Children in every part of the nation.
It is a model that I will now take to the States and Territories, to Catholic and Independent schools, in order to win their support.
Currently, the Federal Government provides about thirty per cent of the public funding to schools and the States and Territories fund about seventy. 
So, it is a model that challenges all of us, the Federal Government and State and Territory Governments to change and to find more resources for education. 
Specifically, the Independent panel challenged all Governments to provide an extra $6.5 billion annually in today's money.
Should this be done? 
I believe as a nation we should aim to make new money of this order available to our nation's schools, provided we can ensure that every dollar of the money makes a difference by having an appropriate transition to the new system and tying the money to improving schools. 
In addition, everyone in our schools and State and Territory Governments must be prepared to play their part for change.
There should be no blank cheques.
The money should be for better results for our children not more jobs for bureaucrats.
State Governments must put in their fair share. 
No sleight of hand, no fiddling of the books to substitute Federal funding for cuts by the States.
And we should take the time necessary to get the right result.
We're proposing a six year transition to the new system and a thirteen year goal for the education of our nation's children.
Change of this scale takes time. Our schools are already funded for next year so the beginning of change will be in 2014.
New funding will be contingent on States and systems agreeing to and delivering school improvement  -  and school improvement takes time.
This is not a reform to a regulation through a stroke of a pen.
This is improving the performance of nine and a half thousand Australian organisations, our schools.  Lifting the skills of hundreds of thousands of teachers.
And then actually teaching children.
How long that takes is never simply a question of will, or of resources. 
Inherent to the task is time  -  not just to get it right, but just literally to get it done.
Education is a patient investment. 
Improving our schools will require our patience and determination.
It will also require some tough budget choices, for all levels of Government.
I am prepared to make those choices but I want the Australian people to understand that today I am asking them to support not just our goals for school improvement but the tough budget choices that go with that.
Governing is and has always been about setting priorities  -  and I want to make very clear this is not just one of my priorities, but one of the country's priorities.
As a Government, our minds will focus on keeping our economy strong and delivering jobs for working people and help for their loved ones while our hearts will beat strongly for our nation's children and Australians with a disability.
Head and heart will combine in a stronger and fairer future.
Those children with a great education will become the deliverers of prosperity in a high wage, high skill future. 
Australians with disabilities will be included in our nation's life and workplaces.
Together, as a nation, we can and will be good at this.
Making the right choices, even when they are hard.  Being fair to each other.  Building the future.
Look at the tough choices we have already made to fund our Labor priorities.
We got rid of the dependent spouse tax offset.
We got rid of tax breaks for golden handshakes.
We slashed tax concessions on super for high income earners.
We ditched the millionaires' dental scheme and fringe benefits loopholes for executives away from home.
We means-tested the private health insurance rebate.
Big controversy, big headlines, big criticism the right thing to do, the Labor thing to do.  And you'll see more of it.
And you'll see me asking the States and Territories to share my passion for improving our schools and putting our children first. 
I will personally lead these discussions and my aim is to settle the funding model through COAG processes. 
I want to conclude these discussions by the time of the first COAG meeting next year. 
But I won't be held to ransom by States who aren't genuinely committed to reform  -  and I am prepared to work quickly with those States and systems who share my commitment to school improvement.
And as I pursue this work, as the Government drives for change, the centre of our plan will be the children, their schooling, their future.
So the girl standing alone in the corner of the playground is noticed and the boy sitting silent in the back row learns.
So words of encouragement and community applause are heard as often for the stars of mathematics as they are on the sports field and in the music hall.
So the principal knows every student by name ... and every parent knows their child's teachers' names.
Our plan will ensure that the humane goals of education will remain supreme.
From a little boy's first book to a decade later when he first finds an unexpected irony in a Shakespearean sonnet.
From a little girl's first times-table to a decade later when she realises that a curve she's mapping describes a real world behaviour she's observed, but never understood.
In a study group, unearthing a new fact about our past ... and sharing new opinions on the historical controversies of today.
And our plan will make our competitors in the region sit up and notice.
Our kids catching Shanghai's kids.
More patents, more clever exports, another Nobel Prize.
Our schools in the top five in the world.
A national crusade, a chance for change, education transforming the life of every child.


ABC 7:30
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for your time. How can we take you seriously that school reform is the most important bill of 2012 when you've not given any detail about how it will be funded? 
PM: Leigh you can judge me and judge the government by what we have achieved so far in school education and how we intend to build on it. 
We are coming to this with a track record of having brought improvements to school which show in student results. Better literacy and numeracy. Better results on national testing. 
Overcoming disadvantage in schools around the country that teach some of our most disadvantaged kids. 
And today, I've laid out a further program for change, a national program for school improvement, lifting teacher quality, empowering principals to get on with the job, more information for parents and communities, as well as laying out a new funding system which puts individual children at the heart of the system and responds to their needs. So people can judge-
HOST: But you haven't actually laid out the funding for the new system? 
PM: Yes I have Leigh. I have laid out that in the future we believe schools should be funded on the basis of need. 
We believe that every child's education should be supported through a school resourcing standard. That is the amount of money that we can show by pointing at what is happening in schools today. 
HOST: And who will be putting that money forward? 
That money would be put forward collaboratively by federal and state governments and obviously in the private and Catholic systems parents also put in their fees.
HOST: And who puts in what?
PM: And then in addition Leigh, just as part of the system, we would have loadings to get extra resources because of those factors that we know can make it more difficult for a child to get a great education, like coming from a low SES background. 
In terms of who puts in the money, current shares are federal government puts in 30 per cent, state governments put in 70 per cent. 
I am going to have discussions with state and territory governments about each of us lifting our efforts in order to get this done. 
HOST: Will the Commonwealth put in more than the existing 30 per cent figure? 
PM: I am going to be discussing shares with states and territory governments so I'm not going to tip my hand on your program. 
But clearly, I wouldn't be out there calling on the Australian community to embrace this national crusade with a new vision for schooling and a new aspiration for the national achievement of our kids without the federal government being prepared to step up and put in additional resources, but I'm not giving any free passes or blank cheques to state and territory governments. 
They will have to step up too. 
HOST: Today's schools announcement brings to around $20 billion the cost of initiatives announced by the government over the past few weeks including a dental scheme, a national disability insurance scheme, and a new asylum seeker policy. 
Where's all this money coming from? 
PM: Leigh, we've got to be clear about the time frames on which we're talking about this new money. 
National Disability Insurance Scheme, we put a billion dollars in the last budget, and that's rolling out now to support launch sites around the country. 
And yes, we need to provision for the creation of the National Disability Insurance Scheme over time. 
On asylum seekers and refugees, we've got some budget adjustments to do to support the work we are now doing in Nauru and PNG and to create 20,000 places. 
On this work of school reform, I've been clear there will be a six year transition and I remind you Leigh, the dental policy we announced is better targeted than the one we're getting rid of. 
It's getting money to the right people instead of being full of waste. 
HOST: But Prime Minister, none of that answers my question of where the money's coming from. The timeframe is irrelevant. The money has to come, whatever the time frame.
PM: You've got to make the right budget choices whatever the time frame, that's right. 
HOST: What will they be? 
PM: We will make budget choices that put resources where we believe they should go the most. 
HOST: But I ask these questions in a context where tax revenue is slowing due to weak capital gains in the property and share markets, we've got falling commodity prices, yet the government's wanting to increase spending and promising to bring future budgets to surplus. It just doesn't make sense.
PM: We, over the last few budgets, have found $100 billion worth of savings. That is, we've moved expenditure from areas that we thought were of less priority than some of the things we wanted to get done for the Australian nation. 
Judge the budget figures when you see them. I'm very happy for to you do so. 
HOST: Is it fair say the government's calculation here is ‘look, it's highly unlikely we will be re-elected so let's just announce these initiatives and hope for a bounce and we'll worry about where the money will come from later'? 
PM: Leigh, you will see the budget figures over the forward estimates and you will see me fighting every day between now and the next election to do the right thing for our nation's future and that means putting our children first. 
HOST: Prime Minister, I'd like to turn to the war in Afghanistan. 
Given that Afghanistan is unlikely to look substantially different in 18 months, why are you continuing to risk the lives of young Australian men? 
PM: Because we have a mission, we've got a job to do and we're doing it on the timetable that we know it takes. 
HOST: Can you give me that mission in one sentence, please? 
PM: Yes I can, we went to Afghanistan to deny terrorists a safe haven for training; we will leave Afghanistan when we have acquitted our mission of training local Afghan people so they can provide security for their own nation that is, that they can prevent their nation once again becoming home to terrorist training. 
HOST: In terms of denying terrorists a safe haven in Afghanistan, if we look, for example, at the Bali bombers, they trained substantially in the Philippines, in Indonesia, in Pakistan; yet we're not at war in those countries?
PM: And Leigh if you want to go through the history here, the bomb maker trained in Afghanistan. There was contact between people involved in that Bali bombing and terrorist training in Afghanistan. We lost lives when the towers came down in New York. Contact between that event and terrorist training in Afghanistan. 
We know al-Qaeda had free range there and we know that al-Qaeda was motivated to take the lives of westerners, including the lives of Australians. These are facts that cannot be denied. 
HOST: But when you talk about this mission, I'm trying to get to what are we actually achieving now. 
If you look for example at the latest State Department report on global terrorism, it makes it perfectly clear that al-Qaeda these days is headquartered in Pakistan, so is Afghanistan really the grave threat to Australian national security that the government makes it out to be or does the threat to Australia lie elsewhere? 
PM: The al-Qaeda leadership has been significantly degraded not only by the work that is being done by ISAF in Afghanistan, but of course, we've seen Osama bin Laden killed, and a significant number of key al-Qaeda operatives are no longer in business, many of them dead. 
This job of making sure we keep Australians safe from the evil of terrorism will have to continue beyond the mission in Afghanistan. But Leigh, that's not an argument that says down tools on that mission. 
HOST: Let me come at it from the other end. If the mission is so important as you make out, why aren't we committing more troops and why aren't we prepared to stay longer than 2014 given the state that Afghanistan's in?
PM: We have got the numbers there that our CDF  -  the Chief of our Defence Force tells me is right to do the job. You obviously wouldn't put in extra men beyond what is required to do the job. 
He's given me advice on what the number is and that's the number that's there. The timeline is an internationally agreed timeline. We agree that working with our NATO-ISAF partners, that is, all of the nations who have gone in to Afghanistan. 
We have an agreed timetable for transition, agreed internationally.
HOST: Given what Afghanistan looks like today and what it's likely to look like when we do withdraw, have our achievements in Afghanistan honestly been worth the lives of 38 Australian soldiers? 
PM: We went there for the right reason. We are acquitting an important mission in our national interest. 
Every life, every life lost hits us hard. It's a tragedy for our nation and particularly a tragedy for the families who lose loved ones and I have spoken to a couple of them over the last few days and I will speak to more Australians who've lost their loved ones in the days to come, and Leigh I will end up at a number of funerals as well.
So I know about the cost. I've looked in people's eyes at those funerals, I have seen them wipe the tears away. I'm not in any denial about the cost. I have felt it. 
But for our nation, in our national interest, it was right to go, and it's right to stay there to get the job done.
That's a tough call but it's the call I have made and the government's made and it's the right call. 
HOST: Prime Minister thank you very much. 
PM: Thanks Leigh.
[ENDS]


National Press Club, Canberra
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
	Today, I am here to talk about our children, their education, their lives and their future.
	As I speak, more than three million children are at school and millions more will follow them in the years to come.
	On their behalf, I call on you to join me in a national crusade to give those children a better education and a better future.
	Education transforms lives. I know because it transformed mine.
	The story of my parents' lives is a story of education denied. 
	My parents were born around the time of the Great Depression and their earliest memories are of World War II. 
	My father, despite winning academic prizes and scholarships, left school at fourteen.  His family couldn't afford not to have him working.  My mother suffered ill health as a child and her schooling suffered too.
	Despite their schooling history, both are intelligent and well-read and have lived successful and happy lives.
	But born in a different era, or into different circumstances, my mother and father would easily have succeeded at university and pursued professional careers.
	As an adult, I understand their stories aren't unusual for their generation.
	But as a child, their stories were my world, the backdrop of my life.
	Because my parents had hungered for education, they wanted their daughter to enjoy all its benefits.
	And so as a young girl, I was painstakingly taught to read by my mother before I went to school.   As luck would have it the public schools I was zoned to attend were great schools. 
	I liked school and succeeded at it.  I had some great teachers, a group of friends focussed on doing well, a family ready to support me in every way.
	But even in great schools like Unley High, I was conscious of the kids who struggled, who got left behind.  Indeed achievement and underachievement were obvious  -  due to streaming and stigma. 
	I was in the top class, others were in classes routinely and  cruelly referred to as  ‘veggie class'.  We were marked for success  -  they were marked for failure.
	And in the days before it was commonplace for children with disabilities to be mainstreamed into schools, the one girl with a disability led a lonely life.  I have frequently reproached myself for not spending more time with her.
	My parents' life stories are of education denied.  And I saw education's full power denied to some of my school mates.
	I have always been conscious of being the lucky one  -  my life story is of education's transformative power.
	So from my earliest years, the life changing unfairness of being denied a great education has struck me as a moral wrong.
	For me, eradicating that moral wrong is what drove me into politics and drives me still.
	All these years later, from the perspective of the Prime Ministership, I understand much more about what makes and what denies a great education than when I first started protesting against cutbacks to university funding as a student activist at Adelaide University.
	And today, I want you to see what I see when I look at our nation's schools  -  I want you to hear what I hear when I talk to business leaders and the leaders of nations around our region.
	Above all, I want you to share my passion and adopt my plan of action for improving our schools and our children's lives.
	I fought a ferocious battle as Education Minister to create My School and to get each of us, all of us, more information than we have ever had before on the education of our children.
	On my first day in Government, no one in this nation could have given you the list of our best performing schools or our worst performing schools.
	I was told that couldn't be fixed.  I was faced with political resistance from all sides.
	But now you can get more information than our nation has ever had before on Australian schools on your smart phone.
	I was determined to win the My School battle because I always believed that the more we knew about our children's education, the more we would be driven to improve it. 
	Now we have the information from My School and other sources like international tests across the OECD, we must face up to the truths it is revealing.
	The first truth is we have to aim higher for every child in every school.
	Four of the top five schooling systems in the world are in our region and we aren't in that coveted top five.
	To take one telling example, the average 15 year old maths student in Australia is two years behind a 15 year old in Shanghai.
	The second truth is we particularly need to improve the education of our poorer children.
	By year three, 89 per cent of children from the poorest quarter of Australian homes are reading below average.
	These are not children raised in extremes of violence, neglect or disadvantage. 
	Just kids whose parents pack their lunch, take them to school on the way to work and expect they're being taught to read and write while they're at school.  And they're not.
	Today, unless those kids from the poorest quarter are brilliant, they are getting below average results in reading.
	And once they are behind, far too many of them stay there.
	By year nine, the average child from the same battling family is two years behind children from the most well-off quarter of Australian homes in reading and maths.
	I see the faces of these kids in the school across the road from where I live in Altona. 
	We shouldn't be letting them down.
	And the third truth is we are failing our indigenous children.
	There are about 18,800 indigenous school children in very remote Australia.
	Today in very remote Australia the average indigenous child is still reading below a year three level in year nine.
	And for any one tempted to shrug their shoulders and say ‘that's bad, but I don't have school-aged kids, so it's someone else's problem', contemplate this  -  we cannot have a strong economy and prosperous future if the skills of our workforce lag behind the skills of our competitors.
	Leaders of Asian nations tell me when I meet with them of their relentless focus on education, of how, even as they drag people out of poverty, they are determined to shape their future economic success by driving their children to the top of the class.
	We mightn't want to replicate the methods of their schooling systems but you have to admire their drive for results.
	Business leaders tell me about skill shortages today and how the future will demand higher and higher skill levels. 
	Put bluntly, our businesses will be unable to compete if our children's education keeps falling behind.
	To win the economic race, we must first win the education race.
	For our children to get the jobs of the future, we must give them a great education now.
	And we can get it done. Change is possible. 
	I can prove it to you because we have already created change. 
	Take Cowra Public School. Arural primary school in the central west of New South Wales with around 370 students  -  nearly twenty per cent of the kids are Aboriginal.
	The 2009 national testing scores showed Cowra's year three kids were at best level, and sometimes behind kids from comparable schools.
	The Government ensured the school had that information but it was only the starting pistol.
	The principal Brad Tom, the teachers, the parents and the kids were the ones who had to run.
	The Kindergarten teachers used phonics to teach reading.
	The school hired 6 extra School Learning Support Officers to run individual reading tutorials. 
	They sat with every struggling child, every day, for half an hour.
	One on one, side by side, uninterrupted, their fingers running along under the lines on a book, sounding out words, patiently and practically teaching how to read.
	The whole school community got stuck in. 
	And it worked. 
	In 2010 and 2011, Cowra's kids went from being level with or behind kids at comparable Australian schools to catching up  -  and often being in front.
	Step by step, year by year: this is school improvement.
	Or take Braybrook College in Melbourne's West.
	A thousand kids from a disadvantaged district, with parents and grandparents from every part of the world, more than 600 from families in the poorest quarter of Australian homes.
	A battling school community that knew it could do better for the kids who need school the most.
	So we gave Braybrook targeted funding to support their improvement plans.
	Four extra literacy lessons every week in year seven and eight.
	Seven hundred and twenty two computers plus funding for external staff to help the teachers use them well.
	We brought the school library into the digital age  -  and Building the Education Revolution gave Braybrook a new science lab.
	And it worked.
	Now, the school's mean VCE score is above the state average  -  up 6 points, to 30.1, in eight years.
	Last year, almost seventy per cent of Braybrook's year 12 students were offered a place at university.
	This is school improvement.
	When I went there with the local Member Nicola Roxon and the Education Minister, Peter Garrett, the week before last, the principal Geraldine Moloney told me that having us there was the second most exciting day in the school's history.
	The most exciting was last year  -  when for the first time ever, Braybrook had two kids get perfect scores in a VCE subject.
	These are two quick examples. 
	There are so many more.
	Take Glenala State High at Ipswich, St Mary's at Warren in New South Wales, or Beechboro Christian School in Perth.
	Where what we have done  -  new buildings and computers, national curriculum and better quality teaching, more empowered principals and whole school improvement plans, a greater focus on literacy and numeracy  -  and more money  -  has made a difference.
	Where every day these schools are showing change is possible  -  and transforming lives.
	And in thirty or forty years' time, maybe one of their students will stand here as Prime Minister and tell their story.
	In the meantime  -  perhaps you could invite a few of our Teach for Australia alumni to speak  -  the highest performing graduates who have gone teaching in schools like Katherine High School, Manor Lakes College and Calwell High School and transformed children's lives.
	But ten or a hundred or even a thousand great examples are not enough. 
	We don't need a warm inner glow or an inspirational movie plot  -  yes I liked Mr Chips too, though when I think of a great teacher today, I'm more likely to think of Jihad Dib at Punchbowl Boys High School  -  what we need is improvement in every single one of our nine and half thousand Australian schools.
	I want each of you, the whole of our nation, to join me in this crusade.
	First, I want our nation to dedicate itself to an education goal we can measure, a goal that will galvanise us, a goal we will work together to achieve.
	Second, I want our nation to commit to a National Plan for School Improvement, which will achieve that goal for our children. 
	Third, I want us to commit to fund Australian schools in a way that puts a child's needs at the heart of our funding decisions.
So how high should we aim for our nation's children?
Every day in classrooms and homes around the country, we ask our children to aim high.  We set goals for them, we test and measure their progress towards achieving that goal.
They are the kids, we are the adults.  How can we in all good conscience impose such discipline on them if we aren't prepared to impose it on ourselves?
This is why I announce today that before the end of this year, I will introduce a bill to our Parliament: To enshrine our nation's expectations for what we will achieve for our children, our vision of the quality of education to which our children are entitled and our preparedness to put success for every child at the heart of how we deliver and fund education. 
By 2025, I want Australian schools to be back in the top five schooling systems in the world. 
By 2025, Australia should be ranked as a top 5 country in the world in Reading, Science and Mathematics  -  and for providing our children with a high-quality andhigh-equity education system.
Currently, Australia is ranked 7th on Reading and Science and 13th on Mathematics and is rated about 10th on providing a high-quality and high-equity education system.
So today I am setting an ambitious goal.  I have set our sights on 2025 because that gives us thirteen years  -  the time it usually takes a student to complete his or her schooling  -  to make Australia among the best in the world.
The Parliament and the people will become accountable to this generation of children and every generation to follow. 
It was an Act of our Australian Parliament that truly created Australian citizenship: when the Nationality and Citizenship Act came into force in 1949 Ben Chifley was the first to receive a citizenship certificate.
The Australian Education Act will establish our nation's support for a child's education as one of the entitlements of citizenship  -  it will state our great aspirations for school education reform.
It will be the most important Bill of 2012 and the most important Act of 2013.
It is the gift of the Australian people to our children.
To reach our legislated national goal, today I am also announcing that the Government is committed to a National Plan for School Improvement.
We will take everything we have learned about getting better results for our children to every school in Australia.
We will ask the States and Territories and Catholic and Independent schools to sign up to new requirements:
 * 	Lifting teacher quality, including requiring more classroom experience before graduation and higher entry requirements for the teaching profession.
 * 	More power for principals, including over budgets and staff selection.
 * 	More information for parents through My School.
These are practical improvements you can touch, see and feel.
Nothing matters more to the quality of a child's education than the quality of the teacher standing in front of the class room.
I want that teacher to be someone who loves the job, who is of the highest calibre, who got the best training and support as a new teacher, who continuously hones their skills, who is delighted to have their skills measured and areas for improvement highlighted.
Under our plan, you will need to be at the top of your class to get in to a university teaching course. 
I want our nation to resound with the voices of parents saying to their teenage children: "Hadn't you better start hitting those books  -  after all you want to get in to teaching."
Instead of new teachers floundering or drifting away from teaching, they will be equipped for the classroom though practical experience during training and two years of support once in school.
Our young teachers will also have the support to ensure classroom discipline, to deal with bullying and cyber bullying, to prevent one or two disruptive children ruining school for all the others in the class.
And all of our teachers will be reviewed annually in their school, a thoroughgoing assessment of their skills and where they need to improve. 
Every school will have a school improvement plan and will be held to account against it.
We ask the children at school to face up to being measured and urged to improve, we are going to ask the adults to do the same.
Under our plan, children will be able to able spend longer in the school with breakfast clubs and after hours activities. 
Reading, writing, maths will be the foundation stones, taught, tested, improved.
Every child falling behind will get a personalised learning plan.
Principals will be empowered to lead their schools, making decisions that get improvements unencumbered by stifling bureaucracy.
Over the months ahead, we will legislate for our goals and for the framework for delivering the National Plan for School Improvement in schools.
And we will always respect that change is actually brought about day by day, minute by minute, on the ground in schools by principals, teachers and parents. 
So as we negotiate the detail of school funding and agree to the details of school improvement, we will harness the great insights of principals, teachers and parents around the nation.
There's no button you press for school improvement  -  schools are human organisations  -  but the change makers need to know you're on their side. 
And I am  -  prepared to fight alongside them and for them, to fight for change.
One of the biggest fights we had in creating My School was ensuring the site not only gave you details about a school's community and its results, but also about how much money each school gets.
I fought that fight and won it because I understood that funding mattered.
Not as an end in itself but as a means to an end  -  to improving schools.
It always seemed clear to me that if we could lay out transparently before the Australian people examples of schools teaching similar children but getting wildly different amounts of money and wildly different results, people would start asking the right question: "Can we make sure as a nation that every child's education is funded appropriately so they can succeed?"
I think we've done that  -  and now the Independent Review of Funding for Schooling has helped us answer this question.
Today I announce that the Government will adopt the Review's core recommendation that every child's education should be supported with a benchmark amount of funding: anew Schooling Resource Standard based on what it costs to educate a student at the schools we know already get strong results.
And that extra needs should be met through a system of “needs loadings”  -  extra funding, per student, to help students from low SES backgrounds,
indigenous students, students with disability and students with limited English skills, as well as to help with extra costs for small and remote schools.
Funding should recognise that children are individuals, not standardised widgets. 
This is not just about disadvantaged kids, not just about gifted kids, it's about all students.
The resources needed to get a great quality education for children vary. 
And improving every child's education will need more resources in the future than have been available in the past.
The Government has not accepted every aspect of the Gonski model: above all because we want funding for all  schools to continue to rise.
But we agree with that broad standard plus loadings structure and that is the new model we will adopt for funding all schools.
It is a model that strips away all the old debates about private versus public and puts children at the centre of the funding system. 
Children with their individual strengths and needs.   
Children in whatever school their parents have chosen for them.  Children in every part of the nation.
It is a model that I will now take to the States and Territories, to Catholic and Independent schools, in order to win their support.
Currently, the Federal Government provides about thirty per cent of the public funding to schools and the States and Territories fund about seventy. 
So, it is a model that challenges all of us, the Federal Government and State and Territory Governments to change and to find more resources for education. 
Specifically, the Independent panel challenged all Governments to provide an extra $6.5 billion annually in today's money.
Should this be done? 
I believe as a nation we should aim to make new money of this order available to our nation's schools, provided we can ensure that every dollar of the money makes a difference by having an appropriate transition to the new system and tying the money to improving schools. 
In addition, everyone in our schools and State and Territory Governments must be prepared to play their part for change.
There should be no blank cheques.
The money should be for better results for our children not more jobs for bureaucrats.
State Governments must put in their fair share. 
No sleight of hand, no fiddling of the books to substitute Federal funding for cuts by the States.
And we should take the time necessary to get the right result.
We're proposing a six year transition to the new system and a thirteen year goal for the education of our nation's children.
Change of this scale takes time. Our schools are already funded for next year so the beginning of change will be in 2014.
New funding will be contingent on States and systems agreeing to and delivering school improvement  -  and school improvement takes time.
This is not a reform to a regulation through a stroke of a pen.
This is improving the performance of nine and a half thousand Australian organisations, our schools.  Lifting the skills of hundreds of thousands of teachers.
And then actually teaching children.
How long that takes is never simply a question of will, or of resources. 
Inherent to the task is time  -  not just to get it right, but just literally to get it done.
Education is a patient investment. 
Improving our schools will require our patience and determination.
It will also require some tough budget choices, for all levels of Government.
I am prepared to make those choices but I want the Australian people to understand that today I am asking them to support not just our goals for school improvement but the tough budget choices that go with that.
Governing is and has always been about setting priorities  -  and I want to make very clear this is not just one of my priorities, but one of the country's priorities.
As a Government, our minds will focus on keeping our economy strong and delivering jobs for working people and help for their loved ones while our hearts will beat strongly for our nation's children and Australians with a disability.
Head and heart will combine in a stronger and fairer future.
Those children with a great education will become the deliverers of prosperity in a high wage, high skill future. 
Australians with disabilities will be included in our nation's life and workplaces.
Together, as a nation, we can and will be good at this.
Making the right choices, even when they are hard.  Being fair to each other.  Building the future.
Look at the tough choices we have already made to fund our Labor priorities.
We got rid of the dependent spouse tax offset.
We got rid of tax breaks for golden handshakes.
We slashed tax concessions on super for high income earners.
We ditched the millionaires' dental scheme and fringe benefits loopholes for executives away from home.
We means-tested the private health insurance rebate.
Big controversy, big headlines, big criticism the right thing to do, the Labor thing to do.  And you'll see more of it.
And you'll see me asking the States and Territories to share my passion for improving our schools and putting our children first. 
I will personally lead these discussions and my aim is to settle the funding model through COAG processes. 
I want to conclude these discussions by the time of the first COAG meeting next year. 
But I won't be held to ransom by States who aren't genuinely committed to reform  -  and I am prepared to work quickly with those States and systems who share my commitment to school improvement.
And as I pursue this work, as the Government drives for change, the centre of our plan will be the children, their schooling, their future.
So the girl standing alone in the corner of the playground is noticed and the boy sitting silent in the back row learns.
So words of encouragement and community applause are heard as often for the stars of mathematics as they are on the sports field and in the music hall.
So the principal knows every student by name ... and every parent knows their child's teachers' names.
Our plan will ensure that the humane goals of education will remain supreme.
From a little boy's first book to a decade later when he first finds an unexpected irony in a Shakespearean sonnet.
From a little girl's first times-table to a decade later when she realises that a curve she's mapping describes a real world behaviour she's observed, but never understood.
In a study group, unearthing a new fact about our past ... and sharing new opinions on the historical controversies of today.
And our plan will make our competitors in the region sit up and notice.
Our kids catching Shanghai's kids.
More patents, more clever exports another Nobel Prize.
Our schools in the top five in the world.
A national crusade, a chance for change, education transforming the life of every child.


Canberra
A new national school funding model and increased funding will be tied to concrete improvements in all schools under the Gillard Government's National Plan for School Improvement, announced today in response to the Gonski Review. 
The aim of these improvements is to ensure that by 2025 Australia is ranked as a top 5 country in the world for the performance of our students in Reading, Science, Mathematics, and for providing our children with a high-quality and high-equity education system.
The aim of reaching this goal by 2025 will be legislated to galvanise our nation's focus on improving schools. Australia's future prosperity depends on embracing a high-skill future and therefore depends on lifting the performance of our schools.
As part of its discussions with the states and territories and non-government school sectors, the Gillard Government will insist on improving schools by: 
• Lifting teacher quality, including requiring more classroom experience before graduation and higher entry requirements for the teaching profession.
• More power for principals, including over budgets and staff selection.
• More information for parents through My School.
Our National Plan for School Improvement will deliver change as well as more resources to every school in the country, and will be phased in over several years, as recommended by the Gonski review. 
Change of this scale takes time. The six-year transition gives schools time to adjust, and ensures the increased funding can be used to deliver the concrete improvements, which we know will take time. 
Over the past decade Australian students have fallen from 2nd to 7th in reading, and 5th to 13th in maths compared to students in other countries. To keep winning the economic race, we have to win the education race. Better schools will give our children the best start so that they can get highly skilled, highly paid jobs in the future.
We already have great schools and teachers in Australia, but we need to do better.
Labor wants to make sure we have a school system that ensures all Australian children reach their full potential. 
We will now start discussions with state and territory governments, and Catholic and independent schools, over the details of our plan. The Gillard Government is prepared to make a substantial investment over time to deliver this plan for better schools provided states and territories contribute their fair share and agree to the national plan for school improvement. There will be no blank cheques.
National Plan for School Improvement
Any extra funding will be tied to introducing changes that evidence shows deliver better results.
Labor's changes will deliver:
• A new way to fund schools that would ensure all our schools are getting the money they need to do their job.
• Higher standards for teachers, with at least a term's classroom experience for student teachers before graduation from university, an annual performance review for every teacher, and higher entry standards - entrants to the teaching profession will be in the top 30 per cent of literacy and numeracy results.
• Extra training for teachers in managing disruptive behaviour and dealing with bullying, so every child in the classroom gets a chance to learn in a safe environment, and a Safe School Plan for every school to prevent bullying. 
• More power for principals  -  like hiring staff and controlling the budget.
• Better My School information to make sure no school falls behind, with more information for parents so they can see how their kids are doing, including on: teacher qualifications, specialist teachers, Year 12 attainment, the results of parent, teacher and student surveys, and how many students go on to further education or get a job when they leave school.
• A School Improvement Plan for every school which will outline the steps that each school will take to improve student results.
• Identification of struggling schools and extra help to lift their results.
A better way of funding our schools
Many schools around Australia deliver great outcomes for their students. But too many students are not achieving what they are capable of, and Australia is slipping behind its international competitors.
Schools with similar needs are getting different levels of funding and that means too many schools and students are at risk of being left behind.  
Under the new plan announced today, we want to see all schools getting the funding they need to give students the education they deserve. 
We want funding for each school to be based on the needs of every individual student they enrol. This would be through a new benchmark amount for every student  -  a new Schooling Resource Standard  -  based on the costs of schools that are already getting great results. 
Schools with students who face additional challenges would be entitled to extra funding based on six categories: kids from low income families, Indigenous students, students with disability, kids with limited English skills, the size of the school, and those who attend rural and remote schools.  
This additional money would be a permanent feature of the new funding system. It would help pay for things like teachers' aides, specialist literacy and numeracy coaches, and special equipment. Schools would no longer need to rely on grants or short-term programs.
This extra money, called ‘loadings', would be fully publicly funded so every student who needs more support will get it, no matter what type of school they attend.
Other features of the new school funding model include:
• All government schools would continue to be fully publicly funded.
• Special schools (like schools for students with disability) would also receive full public funding.
• Like the current system, the government funding provided to non-government schools would be adjusted based on parents' capacity to contribute.
• Current annual indexation would be replaced by a new measure that reflects the real cost increases across all schools. 
• Every school would see its funding rise every year.
Funding would not be determined by whether a school is public or private  -  it would be determined by how much funding a school needs to deliver a great education. 
This is not just about gifted students, nor is it just about disadvantaged students: this is about all students  -  from all backgrounds  -  getting the support they need to achieve excellent results.  
Next Steps
The Government is serious about its commitment to work with the States and non-government schooling sectors on achieving these reforms. 
The Prime Minister will begin meeting each of the Premiers and Chief Ministers to discuss school improvement and funding reform. 
A special subcommittee of all Australian Education Ministers will be established to drive this reform, and the Government will also meet with representatives of independent and Catholic schools.
Precise funding details will be worked through in discussion with states and territories and any extra Commonwealth funding will be contingent upon the states signing up to these new arrangements.
As a first step, the Gillard Government will introduce legislation into the Parliament by the end of 2012 that will enshrine the core principles of our National Plan for School Improvement and a new approach to funding. As discussions progress the legislation will be updated to include the specific settings of the funding model agreed.
The Government thanks the members of the review panel for their work, which will make a difference to Australia's economy and education for decades to come.
This is a once-in-a-generation chance to improve our schools and give every student the opportunities they deserve. We owe it to Australia's children  -  and to the future of the country - to give them the best schools we possibly can. 


2SM
HOST: Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning John.
HOST: Early morning for you, you're in the West aren't you?
PM: Yes I am in the West so it's been a very early morning given the two hour time change.
HOST: Well thank you for getting up early for me. You were probably up anyway.
PM: I was John.
HOST: You want Australia's schools to be some of the world's best. That's a very honourable thought, but why aren't they in this league now?
PM: I think they're not in that league now because there was a long period where there was neglect and under-investment under the former government. 
When we got elected in 2007, we started making changes to improve schools piece by piece. 
First of all, there's MySchool, so we've all got more information about what's going on in schools than we've ever had before. 
When I first became Education Minister no one could even tell you which were the thousand worst-performing schools in the country. 
Now you can get that on your smartphone if you want John, and have a good look.
HOST: But why do we have a thousand poor performing schools?
PM: Well I think there's a few things, and some of them we've moved to address and now we need to do more. First and foremost, we've got to have a big focus on literacy and numeracy. 
It's not acceptable that any child comes out of school not able to read and write. 
We have been focussed on that and we need to do more. 
We've got to have a big focus on the quality teaching. 
Nothing's more important than the quality of the teacher in the classroom, and we've been working on that and now I want to do more by making sure we get the highest calibre people into teaching that they've got the skills they need to manage classrooms today. 
You don't want one disruptive kid meaning that the whole class can't learn, or you don't want bullying or cyber-bullying to mean that kids are distressed and not able to participate in school and get a good education. 
HOST: You talk about improving the standard of teachers. One can only assume then that they are now substandard?
PM: I think we haven't valued our teachers the way we should. To be frank I think we've got to lift standards in terms of who goes into teaching. 
I would like the best and brightest in our nation to aspire to go into teaching. 
We've made a start on that with a program called Teach for Australia, which does get very high-performing graduates into teaching, but we need to make a system-wide change. 
Our teaching workforce is literally hundreds of thousands of people. 
I want it to be harder to get into teaching  -  you'll need to be in the top class to go into teaching  -  and for the teachers who are in service now I want us to be focussing on lifting their skills, annual assessments. 
We assess kids, we should assess teachers too; and always be driving them to improve the way we ask our kids to always aim for improvement.
HOST: I don't see anything wrong with that. You're spending an awful lot of money - $6.5 billion and nobody seems to know where it's going to come from. Where's it going to come from?
PM: I've been proud to be a big investor in schools already. 
We've basically doubled the amount of money going into education because we value it so much. 
But now we know from the work that a review panel did for us, but also from the work we've done improving schools, we know that if you bring the right combination of money, partnered with lifting teacher standards, partnered with empowering principals to get on and manage their schools, partnered with more information so the community can play its part in working in the school to drive standards. 
We know that that makes a difference and the kids get a better education. I want to take that out to 9,500 schools. 
Yes it is going to cost money, and it's going to take time to build, to get all of this work done, to get the best and brightest into teaching, to lift teacher quality, to get our principals ready to take control of their schools. 
All of those things take time, so there will be a six-year transition, and we'll step up to the plate, pour more resources into schools, and I'm asking state and territory governments to do the same.
HOST: Aren't you effectively writing a blank cheque and expecting future governments to pay for it?
PM: Absolutely not  -  there will be no blank cheques in any of this in any sense. I'm not going to be giving money to states and territories unless they sign up to making sure that their schools are improving. 
And I mean every school having its own improvement plan, and being held to account for getting the kids a better and better education. 
More kids at school, more kids learning to read and write at the appropriate standard. More kids staying at school and succeeding at year 12. More information about what's going on at that school. 
And then for the Government's budget John, we will do what we always do, and you'll be able to see every budget figure and judge how we have delivered to our priorities. 
We'll bring the budget to surplus, we'll get on with this work of investing in schools. 
Yes there's a transition time because you can't make change in 9,500 schools overnight, but at the end of the day budgets are about choices, leading the nation is about putting your stamp on what's most important for our future, and there's nothing more important for our future than what's happening in schools and the standard of education our kids are getting.
HOST: How much do you expect the states to contribute to the cost?
PM: John, I'm going to have discussions with state premiers and chief ministers. I'm not going to tip my hand on your show.
HOST: Why, what better place to tip it?
PM: What better place to tip it? But I'll be having those discussions and I'll be looking the premiers and chief ministers in the eye and I'll be saying to them our kids are our future. We've got to work together to improve their education. 
We've got to get about rolling out some very practical things to lift teacher standards, to make sure schools are improving, to empower principals, to make sure we've all got more information. Very practical steps to improve schools. 
I want you to work with me on that, as well as work with me on better investing in our schools.
HOST: You won't tell me how much you expect the states to contribute, but they already seem to be expressing their reluctance to come up with much at all. They expect the Commonwealth to contribute the majority. Will you do that?
PM: I anticipate as usual when we've got big national projects of change that require discussions between me as Prime Minister and premiers and chief ministers, we'll see some of the usual posturing that happens in these areas. 
But I've worked with state and territory colleagues to do big things like reform our health system to make sure that people are seeing more doctors and nurses, better-resourced hospitals, more local control of the hospital that they and their family rely on. 
I'm going to take that same spirit to working with premiers and chief ministers. 
I'm not going to be held to ransom John, and I'm not going to be held back. 
I will be looking to work with those premiers and chief ministers who are as focussed and as passionate about our kids' future as I am.
HOST: If you're going to be spending a considerable amount of money, and I'm sure you agree it is a considerable amount of money, you're going to have to cut somewhere else aren't you, so that these reforms can be funded?
PM: We'll have to make choices John, and I'm well aware that we'll get people trying to run scare campaigns about what those choices will be. 
But I would say to you and to everyone we're a government that's shown a preparedness to make hard choices in order to get the big things done that are vital for our nation's future. 
For example we means-tested the private health insurance rebate. 
A lot of bitter words were spoken; a lot of political campaigning against it, but it was the right thing to do. I think that there are better uses of precious government funds than supporting my private health insurance or your private health insurance. 
So we've made a hundred billion dollars of savings over our budget. 
We'll take the same spirit to making sure we fund the things that truly matter for our nation's future. And John, you're right to ask me about the money but if I can perhaps put the question another way. 
We know that in the region in which we live, where the people we trade with are, in our region of the world, they're our neighbours; they're our customers; but they're also our competitors. 
Four of the top five schooling systems in the world are in our region, and ours isn't amongst them. 
And so what that means is they're winning the education race today and that means if we don't act they'll win the economic race tomorrow. 
So if we want to be a strong, prosperous nation for the long term, we've got to get schooling right for our kids.
HOST: When will taxes rise?
PM: John, it's not about that. We are a government that has kept taxes below the level that we inherited from the Howard Government. So let's just put aside any of this nonsense that you hear about taxation. 
We are a lower-taxing government as a percentage of our national income, our national GDP, than the government that went before  -  the Howard Government  -  which reached the highest taxing levels in Australia's history. 
So there's no need to be starting any silly scare campaigns about tax or any of that. We are focussed on making the right choices on the government's budget to put our kids first.
HOST: I don't want to start any scare campaigns  -  let me put the question another way. Will taxes rise?
PM: We are not going to have taxes rise John, no. And I know we'll see some silly political posturing around all of this, this is about budgets and choices.
HOST: How do we differentiate between the posturing and the truth?
PM: You will be able to do that because you will see the government's figures in front of you. 
We've got the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook, then we will deliver the budget next year. 
Of course we're due to have an election next year, and that requires people to comply with the charter of budget honesty and to put all of their figures as checked by Treasury out there. 
That's what we'll do, so you will have credentialed figures from the government checked by Treasury and you'll be able to judge us against our word. 
Right now on the other side of politics, and I think, John, this is something that really does need to be taken up with the Opposition. 
The Opposition is proposing to basically hide its figures, to not get them checked by Treasury, to not have any proper accounting, and that's because they're already in a $70 billion mess which means that they're planning big cutbacks a bit like Campbell Newman, and they just don't want people to see what those big cutbacks are. 
So I think people should be able to see all of that as well as all of the Government's figures.
HOST: But back to what I said. Obviously some areas of the budget will have to take a cut so that you can implement this further spending. Will there be any cuts?
PM: You've asked me about various areas of the Government's budget. Judge what I intend to do on what the Government has done so far. 
On tax, we're a government that has kept tax at a lower level as a percentage of GDP than the Howard Government did. 
On savings, we've made a hundred billion dollars of savings in order to fund the things that we think matter most. 
If we've done that in past budgets John, you can have a great degree of confidence that we will do that in the future. 
We are looking at a six-year transition for additional resources in schools. 
We've already increased resources to schools so we've been working hard since we were first elected, but a six-year transition to a full new school funding system and that's dictated by how quickly you can make every dollar do some work for you in the system because you can't do things like change the skill levels of hundreds of thousands of teachers overnight.
HOST: But can you answer this yes or no? Will there be cuts in other areas in the budget?
PM: John we will be making changes. There will be tough decisions that maybe some people won't like.
HOST: Okay so there will be cuts.
PM: And I said that yesterday at the Press Club. Please read the speech. 
I said in the Press Club yesterday that I'm not only asking the Australian people to join with me on a national crusade to improve our schools for our kids, but I'm going to ask the Australian people to recognise that that means some tough budget choices. 
And I'll make them, the Government will make them, because at the end of the day a budget is about what you think is important.
HOST: Prime Minister, you're not getting cross with me are you?
PM: No, I'm just being clear with you John and I just want to be clear with your listeners. 
Budgets are about choices, and I'd ask your listeners, many of them parents, many of them grandparents, when they truly sit down and think about what is important in their lives and the lives of their families, I doubt that there would be anyone listening to this show right now who wouldn't answer that question with ‘the most important thing for me is my child, my grandchild and their future.'
Well if we say that as individuals about our family, surely we can say that collectively as a nation.
HOST: You intend to get rid of the existing private-public school formula and replace it with a base rate per student, topped up with additional funds on a needs basis. It sounds  -  it may not be  -  but to me it sounds complicated. 
How does that work, and how does that take into account the private sources of funds available to those private schools?
PM: It's hopefully not  -  I don't think it's too complicated. Let me try and explain it as simply as I can. 
The independent review panel recommended that for every child's education there be an amount of funding that they called school resourcing standard. 
And they've worked out how much that amount of money should be by looking at some high-performing schools. 
But the concept here is every child's education needs to have an amount of funds brought to bear which gets the job done of getting that child a high-quality education. 
Now that school resourcing standard should apply in public schools, independent schools and Catholic schools. 
In independent schools and Catholic schools, just like we do now, we take into account the ability of parents to pay, their capacity to pay. 
So they will obviously to meet some part of the cost of their child's education. 
Then we know that you do need special efforts and special resources to make sure that a child from a disadvantaged background, a lower-income home, an indigenous child, a child with a disability  -  gets a great education, and that's where the loadings come in on top of the school resourcing standards.
HOST: Who's going to be the arbiter on what child is disadvantaged, or what child is not disadvantaged?
PM: For who's viewed as coming from a poorer home we've got very good information about the family circumstances of children going to school. 
We use that information now for what's on MySchool so you can pull up a school of MySchool now and click and see the distribution of the kids and which sort of homes they come from  -  are they from the poorest quarter of homes, the top quarter of homes. 
We'll use that sort of information so that a loading goes to the education of those kids from the poorest half of homes in our nation with the greatest amount going to those that are the poorest.
HOST: On another subject quickly, and I know you've got a lot to do. 
Do you think Australians understand why our troops are still in Afghanistan after recent incidents?
PM: I think this is a contest for many people between their heart and their head. I think you get news like we got last week and it does just break people's heart and they  -  it's terrible. 
And because people are bearing that pain then in the midst of that pain they do say ‘why can't we just end this, why can't we just get everybody home, let's just leave there, I don't want to ever hear news like this again.'
So I think there's that really human reaction as we all just deal with such an amount of pain. 
Then there's the head and the head has to tell you we went there for the right reason. We went there because people trained in Afghanistan, had taken Australian lives. 
They're terrorists, they've trained there, killed Australians and in our nation's interest we can't see Afghanistan once again become a safe haven for terrorist training. 
And so that's the mission we're on, to train the Afghan local people so that they can provide the security in their own country and stop it being a place that harbours terrorists. 
We've got a job to do, we've got a timeline in which to do it, and then we know once that mission is acquitted that the bulk of our forces can come back home.
HOST: Those people who are critical of our presence in Afghanistan, and there's no shortage of them as you know, they suggest that we are there in order to appease the Americans. 
How important is it to cooperate with our American allies and how much does that determine what's in our best national interest?
PM: We make our own assessments of our national interest. We're Australians and we'll always do our own thinking about what is in our nation's interest. 
We have a long term defence relationship with America. It's pivotal for our long-term stability and security. 
It's been pivotal to us since the dark days on World War II where we turned toward America and that alliance will continue for the future. 
And certainly when we saw the 9/11 attacks, when we saw what happened in the United States, when we saw the loss of American life and Australian lives  -  because there were Australians in those towers when they came down, then our alliance also came into play to work with America to deal with those who had brought such violence to America and to the city of New York in particular. 
And so we have worked alongside the Americans and partners from many other countries in Afghanistan to degrade al-Qaeda, to prevent them from being a terrorist outfit that can come and take the lives of innocents and we've enjoyed success at that. 
I mean Osama bin Laden is dead, many of the key al-Qaeda leadership members are now dead. The al-Qaeda network has been degraded. 
The fight against terrorism is something that is going to always be there for us. You can't let your guard down. 
But we've got a defined mission in Afghanistan and we're there to see the mission through.
HOST: Prime Minister, as usual you've been very generous with your time for which I thank you, and I presume you're off for a busy day now.
PM: I certainly am and it will include going to a school in Perth, so I'll look forward to seeing the kids.
HOST: You seem to like being around those little kids.
PM: I do, they're always energising and full of fun and full of excitement, and I get to meet some great teachers and amazing principals along the way.
[ENDS]


Perth
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's great to be back in Perth  -  the city that says so much about where our nation is headed.
It's great to be back talking with the mining industry  -  the sector that says so much about how we will get there.
I'm here because AMEC's member companies are the explorers; the discoverers.
If it's there, you'll find it.
If you find it, you'll dig it up.
You are tough and resourceful.
Qualities I know a bit about myself.
And so I meet with you here today in a genuine spirit of respect and shared concern.
Nothing has preoccupied me in public life more than how we ensure our nation remains prosperous and opens up that prosperity to all our people.
Yes, last week we saw some outstanding capital expenditure figures.
Mining investment was $47 billion in 2010-11.
$82 billion in 2011-12.
It's set to hit $119 billion by the end of this financial year.
That's 13 times higher than before the mining boom, much of it from overseas.
Let's make sure Australia's door remains open to foreign investment based on clear national interest rules, rather than the populist posturing we see in some quarters.
We can also take heart from Monday's exploration data, which showed that trend exploration expenditure rose 3.1 per cent in the June quarter, up 23 per cent on the same quarter last year.
But I know there is uncertainty out there as well  - 
From depressed conditions in Europe and the US.
From a softening of growth as China prepares for its new leadership and rebalances its economy.
And from the rise of resource competitors elsewhere in the Southern Hemisphere.
These factors are being reflected in commodity prices, with coal and iron ore coming off their highs.
And some of the stuff close to your hearts and hands  -  like zinc, nickel and mineral sands  -  are suffering set-backs as well.
I also know that investment decisions are becoming more complex as projects become more complex.
But let's be clear.
Reports of the mining boom's death have been exaggerated.
This is a boom with three distinct phases:
A prices boom - which is now passing.
An investment boom - still to reach its peak as seen in those remarkable capex figures.
A production boom - as all that effort comes to fruition in the years and decades ahead.
I talk of "decades" because the Asian Century stands firmly behind the peaks and troughs of the business cycle.
It's a transformation on the scale of the Industrial Revolution.
It's happening on our doorstep.
And it's not even half-way done.
China is still - in broad terms - only 50 per cent through its process of urbanisation and industrialisation.
JPMorgan chief China economist Haibin Zhu recently noted Chinese demand for Australia's resources would slow but remain at a very high level over the next five to 10 years.
Likewise, Rio Tinto CEO Tom Albanese said recently that Europe would contribute to a "soft demand period" until early next year, while China's industrialisation would drive healthy commodity prices for decades.
Again that word "decades"; and that's just China.
India is yet to undertake the most dramatic stage of its rise.
To say nothing of the development we expect to see in South-East Asia, South America and Africa over the next 50 years.
That's the race we're in.
A race that's ours to win or lose.
Friends,
It was famously said that Battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton.
It could be said that the race of the Asian Century will be won in the classrooms of Kent Street Senior High School down the road from here and its sister schools around the nation.
Our 9500 schools are the crucible where Australia's economic future is being forged.
That's why I was so proud yesterday to launch the Government's National Plan for School Improvement.
Nothing is more important to our future.
Because schooling equals skills equals jobs.
High skilled, high paying, high value-adding jobs.
And a mining conference is a great place to explain why higher school standards will make us winners in the Asian economic race.
Think about this way.
You are risk-takers  -  renowned for your drive and determination.
But what about our teachers.
They turn a four-year-old who has just graduated from pre-school into a twenty-four-year old engineer who has graduated with world-class mining skills.
Teachers see the potential in kids, you see the potential in a landscape.
You invest in mines.
They invest in minds.
Both yield big returns but only by playing it smart.
It wasn't luck that built a mining industry.
It was skill.
Our human endowment realising the possibilities of our natural endowment.
Great engineers.
Great geologists.
Great technicians.
Great tradies.
It's the common ground we share here today.
To put it simply:
You want skilled workers in Australia.
I want working Australians to have skills.
It would take a special sort of contrariness for us to find a way to disagree about that.
But we don't.
Some of my most productive discussions have been with the mining industry about skills.
I know that the struggle for skills raises your costs and blows-out your timelines.
When you undertake a big project, you can line up the funding, the approvals the equipment but still be left asking  -  where do I get the people?
Government action is part of the answer.
That's why our new HECS for Skills plan and our $700 million National Workforce Development Fund matter.
It's also why things like the Jobs Board matter.
There are more than fourteen hundred jobs on offer at the moment.
Australians need to be willing to take those jobs  -  and they are.
Over sixteen thousand job seekers are registered on the Jobs Board.
These are hardworking Australians looking to your industry for a chance.
The nation as a whole is looking to you as well.
Yes, migration has a place but it is not going to be the cure-all that some may think.
Why fly workers in from Manila or Shanghai when they could be flying in from Hobart or Adelaide, especially given the softening of construction and manufacturing in many parts of the nation?
Why hold job expos in the eastern states of America when you could be holding them in the eastern States of Australia.
I don't want the mining industry to hire a single foreign worker if there is an Australian worker who can do the job.
The heavy lifting will need to be done by the skills system and by your own efforts, in conjunction with the Commonwealth and State Governments, to attract more domestic labour to the opportunities on offer.
Of course, I recognise it's not always as easy as that.
Many Australians have the ambition to work in your industry but not the skills.
In some cases their lack of skills goes beyond VET certificates to the foundational skills of reading and writing and the whole ability to learn in a formal setting.
I see that among the unemployed in my own electorate in Melbourne.
I see it  -  and I'm angered by it.
These men and women are a lost educational generation.
The cohort our system has failed.
And because only seven per cent of future new jobs will be unskilled, a lack of skills is a passport straight to the dole queue.
We do still have a great education system.
But as places like China and South Korea aim higher, our educational performance is falling behind, especially in those key areas of science and maths.
Even our top students are not quite achieving what they did a decade ago.
Nothing should keep a leader, indeed a mining executive, awake at night more than improving the quality of education in this country.
Consider my “in tray” when I became Education Minister five years ago:
We didn't have nation-wide testing of English and maths.
We didn't have a national curriculum.
No way to reward top teachers.
No national plan to devolve more power to school principals. 
We didn't know the names of the worst performing schools or how to find them.
The only thing worse than seeing those results is hearing the Coalition say there is no problem and we should just stick with the status quo.
Well, we knew there was a problem, and here's what we did about it:
We doubled Federal investment in education.
Introduced new teaching requirements for literacy and numeracy.
A National Curriculum.
Measure to attract high quality teachers and empower principals.
New research into high performance and how it can be spread to every school.
We made NAPLAN testing universal and compulsory.
And we published the results on the Internet so every Australian can see the results.
You can look the numbers up right now and they'll tell you this:
Australia's school results are good but not good enough.
Over the last decade, we've fallen from 2nd to 7th in reading and from 5th to 13th in maths.
The average 15 year old maths student in Australia is more than two years behind a 15 year old in Shanghai.
And children from the poorest quarter of Australian homes are two years behind children from the most well-off quarter in reading and mathematics by Year 9.
That is just not acceptable to me. 
It should not be acceptable to you as the employers of Australia.
Or as the parents of Australia.
That's got to change  -  and it's going to change.
The blueprint is the Gonski Report, done not by an academic but by a hard-headed businessman well at home in the nation's boardrooms.
The first comprehensive funding review in 39 years.
Gonski tells us the same thing that the Karmel Report told us all those years ago:
Some Australian schools don't have the resources they need.
So we need a resource standard that ensures every school has the funds it needs to do the job.
Karmel thought we'd get that standard in place by 1979.
I'm just glad we'll start getting it in place from 2014.
But Gonski is not just a funding review.
It's an historic opportunity to stop school resources being the issue and instead make school improvement the issue.
By giving every school a benchmark funding allocation, the issue of resources can finally be taken off the table.
Performance stays on the table.
That's why I've called it a National Plan for School Improvement.
It will do all those things industry has been advocating for years:
The best teachers appointed, appraised and appreciated.
Strong principals with the right powers.
A strong ethos of learning in the school.
Using data to make sure all students are learning.
A strong partnership with parents and the community.
And the resources our teachers and principals need.
These are the things that will improve all our schools  -  government and non-government, religious and secular, city and bush.
Like any company here today, we have a strategic goal behind our thinking:
A child starting school next year will graduate in 2025  -  thirteen years' time.
That's as long as it can take to plan a big resources project.
You understand a thirteen year pipeline of investment in mines. 
I have a thirteen year pipeline of investment in minds.
So by 2025 I want Australia to be back in the top five countries educationally.
Getting there won't be easy.
It will take money for sure; but as we saw with the NDIS, the availability of money depends on the availability of will-power and cooperation.
Now the mining industry knows a thing or two about lobbying.
Let's say you can be influential when you get together.
So use that tremendous organising power to say to the Premiers and Chief Ministers: get on board with Gillard's plan.
This plan requires a nation-wide effort.
A nation-wide effort to get schooling right, and to keep it right.
Remember friends,
It's no accident that our National Plan for School Improvement is being announced in the same year we launch our White Paper on the Asian Century.
The two are linked, and they are linked fundamentally.
There is no question about whether we have a boom.
The issue is whether we make it last.
My school improvement plan is a plan to make the boom last.
Along with all our other work in broadband, infrastructure, clean energy, innovation, universities and skills, tax reform and deregulation.
It's the sophisticated, evidence-based package that will ensure the productivity of the future.
Not by raking over old debates or transporting us back on a cosy tide of mythology to an imaginary past.
Remember what Australia was really like five years ago:
Inflationary pressures were building and interest rates were high.
The tax take was at a record high as well.
Households were borrowing more than they saved.
Industry was complaining about skill shortages and falling educational standards.
You didn't have the infrastructure you needed.
And we didn't have a broadband plan two decades after the World Wide Web had been invented.
All that despite the biggest growth in national income our economy had ever seen.
Thoroughly unworthy of the great nation we are and can be.
We've set out to fix all that.
To identify the drivers of growth in a mature, developed economy where we compete on quality and value-adding.
To get beyond this myth we can ever drag our wages and taxes low enough to match our Asian competitors on price.
We can't.
And we wouldn't want to.
For two hundred years, we've worked hard to build what we have today.
A prosperous, advanced, resilient economy that offers wealth and opportunity for its people.
If you want to find the government and the party that has a plan for the future of such a country, look for the outfit that has a plan for education.
We have that plan.
And if we hew to the right path, it will take us where we need to go.
It requires something else too.
Something the kids down the road at Kent Street Senior High understand because it's their school motto: Courage.
We didn't get where we are as a nation by cringing in the face of challenges.
Or wrapping ourselves in the comfortable blanket of nostalgia.
Winning in the Asian Century will take courage.
It's not a journey for the faint-hearted.
And I don't believe for a moment there's a single faint heart in this room.
So I present to you my plan for educational improvement today as business leaders, as parents, and as citizens who hold high hopes for the future of our nation.
It's a plan to win the economic race by winning the education race.
And I believe with every fibre of my being that we can win those races.
We're good enough
We're smart enough.
Let's show we're courageous enough as well.


ABC AM
HOST: Prime Minister, good morning and welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning Sabra, and happy birthday AM.
HOST: The conservative states aren't happy with your plan. They've had an expectation that you would outline where the money's coming from, and New South Wales says you've just been plain antagonistic.
PM: I've got an expectation that with the premiers we'll be outlining where the improvements are coming from Sabra, because that's what this is all about. 
Yes of course money is important, but money is an input for change. 
What matters here is the quality of education that our kids are getting, and how they're achieving - how well they're reading, how well they're writing, how well they're doing in maths and science. 
And that's the national ambition I want to pursue with the premiers.
HOST: But you can't have improvement without money and the Gonski figures are now $6.5 billion extra that needs to be put into the system. 
The premiers - the Liberal premiers - are most unhappy; is that what you want, a dust up with them as part of your campaign roadmap to the next election to distract from the carbon tax?
PM: I want change in Australian schools and since this government was elected in 2007 we've been bringing change in Australian schools. 
And that means we're at the point Sabra, where we don't just outline plans we think will work, we outline school improvement measures we know will work. 
We know they'll work because we've already been delivering them in a number of schools around the country through our national partnerships approach, where we've worked with the same state governments you're talking about now to deliver change on the ground. 
So kids do better at reading and writing and attendance, do better at getting to year 12, teachers are higher calibre and quality, principals are more empowered to get the job done.
We've already done that in a number of schools around Australia and my plan is about rolling that around the country to 9,500 schools. 
That's what this agenda, this crusade, is all about.
HOST: Queensland says it can't afford the Gonski bill. Tasmania's coffers aren't exactly overflowing and Western Australia says its base funding formula per student is higher than what Gonski actually recommended. 
Is this a grand plan that is unaffordable and effectively dead on arrival?
PM: This is a plan that I will be pursuing step by step, and I outlined that yesterday. 
Let's just go through what I outlined yesterday: the legislation of a national ambition to make sure that our kids are in schools that are within the top five in the world. 
I am not going to sit by as Prime Minister and watch our schools fall behind the standards of the world, which means we will be headed towards being a low-wage, low-skill economy. We need to address that for the nation.
Yesterday I outlined a school improvement plan and I am determined that those improvements are delivered in every school around the country. 
And I outlined a new funding system which puts kids at the centre of how funding works - their needs; rather than any of the old politics about public versus private, we are focusing on the kids.
So that's what I'm going to take to the premiers. That's what I'm going to take to the Catholic and independent schools and that's what I'm determined to keep arguing and campaigning for, because it's about our children.
HOST: Prime Minister, but it's also about cash. You said in your speech yesterday that you want Australians to understand that you're not only asking them to support your goals on education, but the tough budget choices that come with it. 
In short, will you cut more so-called middle class welfare to pay for it?
PM: Budgets are about choices and they're about what you value and I am going to ask the nation to make some decisions, some tough decisions, about how we will fund the things we should truly value the most.
As Prime Minister I'm driven to make sure our economy's strong. 
That's the lynchpin, you can't do anything else unless you're keeping the economy strong and keeping Australians in work. 
I want to make sure we're doing that work, getting Australians jobs, helping their family members. 
But then I am saying unambiguously to the nation our priorities should be our kids and their future, which is the same as our nation's future. 
And our priority should be a better deal for people with disabilities.
Now that is going to require choices and people can judge us on the preparedness we've shown in the past to make tough choices, ones that were the subject of some bitter political campaigning when we first outlined them, but we got them done.
HOST: You pointed to the cuts to the private health insurance rebate as an example of the tough choices, one of the tough choices you've made in the past. 
What else could go? Axing the first home buyers grant, cutting superannuation tax breaks or even lifting the Medicare levy?
PM: Oh look I'm not going to play silly rule-in, rule-out games, and I well expected them Sabra. What you will see from the government is-
HOST: They're the types of things your alluding to aren't they?
PM: You won't have to guess Sabra. What you will see from the government is budget detail every step of the way. 
Every budget we've been very clear about our priorities, about what we've been prepared to cut and what we've been prepared to put at the top of the queue.
We've cut $100 billion in our budgets in order to fund things that really matter for the nation's future and we'll continue to take that approach. 
So you will see budget figures from Treasury, all costed, laid out there for you to judge.
Of course, I want to see the opposition abide by that same level of discipline. 
At the moment they're suggesting that they'll keep all of their figures fudged and hidden because they're already in a big mess around a $70 billion set of cuts to things that families rely on. 
So, judge us by the figures and you will see the figures.
HOST: And the full figures, given that you're hoping an agreement to this will come at COAG next year, we won't see all the full figures until the budget in May?
PM: You will see the full figures when I have worked this through in discussions with states and territories. 
I've got some hard talking to do to states and territories because I am saying I am prepared to lift federal government expenditure, but I've got to see states and territories step forward for their fair share. 
So there are discussions to be had, and of course, as we conclude those discussions then you will see the appropriate budget treatment for the government's budget period, for the forward estimates.
You'll be able to see all the details. We'll be very clear too about our long-term funding plans.
HOST: Still on the economy, retail sales came in much weaker than expected yesterday, and other parts of the economy are very strained. 
Are you confident about the strength of the economy and your promise to deliver a surplus?
PM: We will certainly deliver a surplus and our economy is strong. 
When you look at all of the big indicators of strength in an economy - growth, low unemployment, low inflation, low interest rates, a government budget that's moving to surplus, a government's that triple-A rated, a nation triple-A rated by all the major credit agencies. 
Of course our economy is strong. But we've also been very clear with people, it's in transition.
We live in an amazing time of change, huge growth in our region. That's meaning that there's record investment and demand for our commodities, for the things we sell like iron ore and coal. 
But it also means our dollar's very strong, and that is bringing a transition to sectors of the economy like manufacturing.
So when we look around the economy there is a patchwork effect. There are different industries and different regions that are experiencing circumstances that vary. 
So I'm here in Perth today, what's happening in Kwinana is very different from what is happening in Port Hedland. 
That is telling you about the different forces in our economy.
HOST: But given that commodity prices have been falling, the degree of difficulty in delivering your budget surplus now is increasing at a comparable rate.
PM: We will deliver a budget surplus and we will update all of our economic forecasts in the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook as we always do. 
But Sabra, let's be very clear about the true picture of the Australian economy; we have a world leading economy, we came out of the global financial crisis strong, you wouldn't want to be anywhere else in the world.
Other leaders, when I speak to them, are full of admiration for what we've achieved together, here in Australia; keeping people working, an economy that's growing, a huge pipeline of investment in resources. 
I want to make sure we use this time of change in our economy so that we emerge strong and resilient for the future. 
And there's nothing more important to that than making sure we get our schools improving. 
We live in the growing region of the world, that's where our future will be defined. 
Four of the top five schooling systems in the world are in our region, and ours isn't in that top five. 
They're our neighbours, but they're also our competitors and we can't win the competition against them unless we win the education race.
HOST: Prime Minister, on Afghanistan. New Zealand has decided to bring their troops home early, ahead of their planned exit, April next year. 
Is there any chance that Australia would bring our troops home early?
PM: Well I spoke directly to Prime Minister Key about this matter when I was at the Pacific Islands Forum. They are working on the timeline that has been in progress for some time. 
Prime Minister Key has made it very clear publicly that the timeline has not been effected by New Zealand's recent tragic losses of soldiers in Afghanistan.
For us, our timetable for transition has also been laid out very clearly. We are in transition now, that's a process that will take 12-18 months. 
What transition means is we are increasingly handing security leadership over to local Afghan forces and we will see that mission through.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you Sabra.
[ENDS]


South Fremantle Senior High School
PM: I'm absolutely delighted to be here at South Fremantle Senior High School. I've been here two times before, this is my third visit and we're here to celebrate the fact that this is officially Australia's first carbon neutral school.
I'm joined by Melissa Parke, the local Member who's been a great supporter of the work of this school and by Mark Dreyfus, the Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change.
We have the opportunity this morning to participate in a wonderful ceremony, marking this school as Australia's first carbon neutral school. Hearing about all of the things that this school has done to reduce carbon pollution. The kids in this school are leading the way for Australia and I hope that many schools around the nation follow the fine example of this school. 
So thank you very to Gerri the school principal, to Kathy who's led this work, to everybody who's made it possible but most particularly a bit thanks to the kids. They are really leading the way.
Being in a great school like this really brings home how important it is that every school, all 9,500 schools around the nation are truly great schools. The announcements I made yesterday were about making sure that every school's a great school. 
Yesterday, I announced a new national aspiration  -  a goal for 2025. For our schools to be in the top five schooling systems in the world. We cannot afford to let education in other countries get in front of education here. Or, put another way, if we don't win the education race, we cannot win the economic race of the future. 
I also announced yesterday a national plan for school improvement. You can feel in a good school like this the combination that is making it great  -  good school leadership, quality teachers who are motivated to do the job, kids that are enthusiastic about their learning because of those high quality teachers, a school that is full of information and information to be shared with the local community about what it is doing for the kids. That is the combination that we want to see right around Australian  -  empowered school principals, better quality teachers, more information for local communities. 
We also know to see school improvement schools need more resources and that's why yesterday I announced that we want a school funding system that puts a child and that children's needs at the centre of the system.
Yesterday, I spoke by phone with Premier O'Farrell in New South Wales and we've agreed to work together to have discussions on the new school funding system that I outlined yesterday. I will go from this great school to meeting with Premier Barnett to have the same conversation for the schools in West Australia. 
Over the weeks to come I will speak to all of my state and territory counterparts. I will work with independent schools and the Catholic school system. I want to see agreement across our nation to put our kids first, to make a promise from this generation of adults to the kids of today and kids of the future that we will be investing in their education, we will be improving their education and we will be winning the education race.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Premier Barnett so far hasn't been very enthusiastic about it. What are you going to say to convince him?
PM: I'm looking forward to the discussion with Premier Barnett and there's a very simple proposition at the heart of this. Do you think we should be continuously improving our schools, do you think we should be keeping up with the standards of the world or slipping behind, and should we work together to improve education for our kids?
I think Premier Barnett and I will be able to have a good conversation around those questions. 
JOURNALIST: He seems to have concerns, because Western Australia spends more money on primary and high school students than the Gonski benchmark, that you're going to take money from Western Australia and distribute it around to other states.
PM: I can absolutely rule that out. There's no way in the world that any dollar in Western Australia for school education is going anywhere other than to a Western Australian school.
JOURNALIST: You do it for the GST. 
PM: GST is the subject of a long standing formula which WA, you know, for more than 30 of the past 50 years WA was a net recipient. There is no comparison here, no comparison should be made. 
Any dollar that Premier Barnett wants to spend on state schools in Western Australia will be spend on state schools in Western Australia. But I'm asking him to do more and I'm prepared to say that the Federal Government will do more.
JOURNALIST: He says that a bureaucrat in Canberra won't know anything about running a school in Kulumbaru. Is that a fair assessment of what the reforms are going to equate to?
PM: The only people who will run schools in Western Australia will be the people of Western Australia. The whole reform drive here is to put more power and more control in the hands of school principals.
No one in Canberra will be running a school in Western Australia but what as a nation we will want to see for every school is a school improvement plan which is being delivered to year after year.
That is, we will want schools to be accountable for giving their children a great education.
JOURNALIST: What will happen about that accountability, will there be any funds withheld if they don't meet a certain benchmark?
PM: This is about improvement and this is about putting more resources into schools so that we can see higher standards. We know this works, we're not guessing, we're not making it up. 
Since we were elected in 2007, we have almost doubled the amount of money going into education and we've used that around the country in national partnership schools. That means there have been schools around the country where we have put more money and we've driven change in literacy and numeracy, in better quality teaching, empowering school principals, in rolling out the national curriculum, MySchool, better buildings, new commuters and we can track for you that that combination has lifted standards.
Kids are getting a better education, we're saying that same powerful combination needs to be rolled out in 9,500 schools around the nation  -  every school.
JOURNALIST: So what about holding the benchmarks, how are you going to ensure these benchmarks?
PM: We will be working to put more resources in. One of the reasons we're going to have a six year transition time is it takes time to change something as big as what's happening in education in 9,500 schools. 
To give you one example, we want the people who go into teacher in the future to be people who are very good at literacy and numeracy. They're going to go and teach kids to read and write so we want them to be good at reading and writing and maths themselves.
To get those new teachers in at that calibre, to teacher education and then out into schools takes some time. To lift the standards of more than, you know, hundreds of thousands of teachers around the country who are in service now takes some time.
So the new resources will be tied to making a difference where we see underperformance the whole aim is that we step in and we ensure that that underperformance doesn't continue. That's why there'll be school improvement plans and schools will be held to account for them and if they aren't meeting their goals for change and improvement then work will be done to ensure that they do?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you concerned that FMG's deferred its expansion plans and it's cutting staff?
PM: I've heard that Fortescue has made an announcement today. The timing of its investments is obviously a matter for it but a little bit earlier today I did have the opportunity today to speak at a mining conference about the huge investment pipeline that our country is benefiting from.
So we will continue to see hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars invested in new resources projects. That will make a difference for our long term prosperity as a nation.
JOURNALIST: This is the second major project in a couple of weeks that have announced a restructure, Olympic Dam and now FMG. I mean, there's no revenue flow from those projects is there?
PM: And there wasn't going to be. I think you're confusing two things. We have enacted a Minerals Resources Rent Tax and that started on 1 July and that applies to projects that are in production now. That is, they are getting ore out of the ground, they're selling it and they're making super profits.
The decisions from BHP and Fortescue are about the timing of new investments, that is when you would start the construction works which would later enable you to get the ore out of the ground. So you shouldn't confuse the two about what it means for government revenue.
JOURNALIST: It goes further for Fortescue though because they're talking about job cuts whereas Olympic Dam hadn't got started, Fortescue's talking about cuts.
PM: Once again let's look at the whole picture and the whole picture in our country is of a huge resources boom  -  half a trillion dollars of investment projects in the pipeline. 
This great state of Western Australia is seeing its economy rapidly growing because of the impact of this resources boom. The same is true in Queensland, the same is true in the Northern Territory and you've referred to projects in other parts of the nation. 
We are seeing a resources boom underway which will continue for some time. The peak of commodity prices has passed but we've still got the investment pipeline, the amount of investment that's actually happening, continuing to grow and then we will move to the production phase. 
This resources boom will be part of our nation's strong economy for a very long time.
JOURNALIST: On the iron ore prices, the state government here is looking at ways to address that in terms of the budget bottom line. Are you doing the same thing at the Commonwealth level?
PM: We update our forecasts twice a year and we'll update our forecasts in the Mid Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.
JOURNALIST: Beyond the mining industry through, there's also the announcement that hundreds of jobs are at risk because retailer Ojay is possibly going into administration. I mean is the whole thing, the whole economy starting to get a bit shaky?
PM: Certainly not. Our economy is a world beater, it's the envy of the world. Our economy now and into the future will continue to see strong growth. We've got strong growth now, low inflation, low interest rates, low unemployment compared with other nations around the world.
There's not a country you can name in the world that you would swap economies with. Certainly not the US, not the UK, not any nation in Europe. 
We came out of the global financial crisis strong, that's something we should all be proud of, we built if together. And we are taking the right steps now to ensure our economy's strong for the future.
And if I can go back to what I said about education, when we're looking at the long term future of our national economy, there's nothing more important than the skills and capacities of the Australian people.
If you want to be a high wage, high growth, high productivity economy in the future, you've got to be caring about the quality of education today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Campbell Newman says that he's trialling an NDIS of his own just weeks after not signing up to yours, has he spoke to you about this?
PM: No, he hasn't spoken to me about his and as I understand it Premier Newman has basically announced today that Queensland will still be at the back of the class for helping people with disabilities.
What he's announced today doesn't bring any new resources from the Queensland state government to supporting people with disabilities and Queensland per head of population spends less on people with disabilities than any other state in the nation.
So Premier Newman still needs to explain to the people of Queensland why he thinks it's good enough, it's fair enough that people with disabilities in Queensland get less assistance and support from their state government than anybody else in any other state in the country.
[ENDS]


ABC Sydney
HOST: Julia Gillard joins us from our Perth studio this morning. Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Linda.
HOST: The miners do have a lot of concerns don't they, should you have addressed them more directly head on yesterday?
PM: There's nothing more important to the future of Australian mining than people having the right skills to work in that industry. 
I spend a lot of time talking to people from mining companies and what they talk to me about is ‘can we get enough engineers, can we get enough geologists, can we get enough tradespeople  for us to actually get our projects up and running?' 
Now for the future, whether or not we've got a strong mining industry, whether or not we've got a strong economy, is going to be defined by what's happening in Australian schools today. 
There's nothing more important to our economic future, whether it's in mining or any other industry than the quality of Australian education, and that's what I spoke to the conference about.
HOST: Sure, but the miners do want to know about what is going to be done about a high-cost environment. Of course we've got Gina Rinehart again pushing that view that it's a high-cost environment, you need to act to make things a little easier for them. 
Is there something you'll do for them, for example Gina Rinehart's idea about this zone across the top of Australia with a low-tax environment for miners?
PM: No we won't, and we have a different view from Ms Rinehart about whether or not the mineral bounty in our natural landscape should be shared with all Australians or kept for the profits of a few. 
She's a well-known opponent of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, I disagree with her. I believe our natural wealth should be shared. 
She's also a well-known opponent of carbon pricing. Of course I disagree with her; I think we should be cutting carbon pollution. 
And I would point to the facts here too Linda. We've got $500 billion of mining investment in the pipeline. More than $200 billion of it at an advanced stage. 
We've seen billions of dollars of new projects announced by the mining industry since they knew that there was going to be a Minerals Resource Rent Tax, and since they knew that there was going to be carbon pricing. 
Indeed business investment has gone up 20 per cent since we announced carbon pricing. 
So let's be clear about the facts here. Strong investment pipeline, we are not going to have wage rates the same as wage rates in Africa, we're not going to compete on those kind of cost differentials. 
We're going to compete on our great mineral deposits, our application of technology and high skills to the task. We mine differently than in other countries. 
We're a world leader in some of the remote technology used, and keeping all of that going is going to require higher and higher skill levels and that's why I spoke about schooling yesterday to the miners.
HOST: But still at the same time we're seeing companies putting the brakes on planned expansion of mines, and of course Fortescue is just the latest, and they are concerned about the falling prices that they're getting for iron ore and about the high-cost operating environment, particularly the Aussie dollar obviously is a problem too. 
You would concede, would you not, that they are operating under increasing constraints.
PM: There are some challenges out there, so let's talk about the real challenges. We've got still-continuing economic uncertainty out of Europe and particularly the eurozone. 
We've got a sluggish US economy. We've seen some moderation in Chinese growth rates, and we've seen some moderation in commodity prices. 
We've said very publicly that we think we are beyond the commodity price boom, but we are still to see the peak of the investment boom and of course we are still to see the peak of the production boom, because you only get production happening after all of the investment's gone in and the construction's happened. 
So this is going to be a long-lived resources boom for our nation. The high Australian dollar is as a result of all of that economic activity. We've got a strongly growing economy. 
Many people around the world talk of us as a safe haven currency that is keeping the Australian dollar high. That does put pressure on industries like manufacturing and tourism, and we are working with those industries because I want them to have a strong future as part of a well-rounded Australian economy. 
We're getting the settings in place for us to be the big winners out of the century of growth we are seeing in Asia. 
I view the resources boom as a down payment on all of that growth. 
We'll see spectacular growth in demand for food, we'll see spectacular growth in demand for the high-end services  -  legal services, high-end manufactured goods  -  that's the future for our country and that's why we're doing things now like investing in infrastructure, the NBN, and driving skill levels up.
HOST: The education policy  -  you had a conversation last night I think with the New South Wales Premier  -  is the New South Wales Government going to be onside with your Gonski reform?
PM: I had a conversation with Premier O'Farrell actually on Monday, and he indicated that he is certainly prepared to talk through our school improvement plan and our desire to put a child's needs at the centre of the school funding system. 
I met yesterday in Perth where I am now with Premier Barnett, and he also indicated he has an open mind  -  to use his expression  -  an open mind, and is prepared to talk further. 
So I will be in the coming period talking to each Premier and Chief Minister so we can pursue these discussions. It requires all levels of government to take a step forward, and it requires us to work strongly together on a school improvement plan. 
Understandably people are talking about the money. 
I get why people are doing that, but the money matters if it is buying school improvement, and that's why my focus is going to be on lifting teacher quality, lifting the standards of people who go into teaching, empowering school principals, getting more information about what's going on; the combination of things we know has worked in schools.
HOST: Just on teachers  -  and the Prime Minister Julia Gillard is on the line from Perth  -  with us this morning, on teachers, do you think we have a strong enough culture of valuing teaching.?
I mean, we pay them an average of $47,000  -  it seems to indicate that we really do believe in that old adage, ‘if you can't do it, teach'. It's a little bit of a downcast profession isn't it?
PM: I believe we've got to value teachers more, and I think that there's a series of things we need to do to show them that we value them more. 
Part of addressing the issue of how we resource schools, talking about school improvement, putting this at the forefront of the nation's life, I've called it a national crusade, but whatever terminology you want to use I want every Australian focused on what's happening in Australia's schools. 
And if we harness that kind of national culture, then increasingly we will view teachers as the most valued profession in our nation doing the most important work to make us a strong and fair nation in the future. 
HOST: If you pay teachers more, Prime Minister, doesn't that mean  -  isn't that a good way of getting some of the best and the brightest into the job?
PM: Linda we've already started. We have a program for providing rewards for great teachers. We've got a great program  -  it's operated in New South Wales in partnership with the Government of New South Wales to pay the best teachers more to go to the schools that need them the most, the most disadvantaged schools. 
So I do agree great teaching should be rewarded, and our national conversation and national spirit should be one of valuing teachers.
HOST: You've talked about having higher entry scores, I think, as one way of getting the best and brightest into teaching. But the Universities Australia Chief Executive says this morning that that's not the best way to do it, that raising salaries is a better way. 
Do you agree with that?
PM: What we want to do is see people who are highly proficient themselves in literacy and numeracy go into teaching. Teachers are going to go into classrooms and teach kids to read and write and do maths. 
If they're struggling with those things themselves, then it's not possible for them to teach them and teach them with the kind of passion that then sparks the light in a kid's eye and that child then goes ‘Gee, I really love maths' or ‘I really love reading'.
So we are going to insist on higher literacy and numeracy standards for people who go into teaching. 
We also have the Teach for Australia program in operation now, which has been one way of getting the best and brightest graduates out into some of the most disadvantaged schools around the country. 
We also want to support new teachers more. The evidence tells us that a lot of people who start with real enthusiasm for the job drift away from teaching over five or six years. 
We believe that's about getting them more practical experience when they're training, and also more support in those early years of teaching when they might be struggling with the reality of managing a class and dealing with one disruptive child who's making it really hard for the rest of the kids to learn, or dealing with the challenges that face teachers now like cyber-bullying.
HOST: You need to find the money for all this and of course that's been a lot of the discussion this week after your announcement that you would go with the Gonski proposals largely. 
What will you do to find the money? What are you targets for cutting?
PM: We'll take the same kind of approach as we have in earlier budgets that has seen us find $100 billion of savings and redirect that money to things that we think are more important for the nation's future. And it hasn't been easy. 
You know, when we've pursued measures like means testing the private health insurance rebate, when we've done things like get rid of the dependent spouse tax offset, plenty of radio interviews like this one Linda have gone fairly combatively because people have been angry and upset, but they've been the right decisions for the nation's future. 
We'll take that kind of spirit to our future budgets.
HOST: Your budget will be looking all the worse for wear won't it, if iron ore prices continue to slump and mining companies continue to cut back on operations. Just how tight-
PM: Once again Linda, let's go to the reality. Yes, Fortescue has made an announcement yesterday, but the mining sector, the resources sector is far bigger than any one company. 
I remind you again - $500 billion of investment in the pipeline, more than $200 billion of that at an advanced stage, so we will continue to see strong investment in mining. 
In terms of the Government's revenue streams, our revenue streams are about those companies that are in production now and are at the most profitable phase of being in production.
HOST: A quick Sydney question if I may Prime Minister. The O'Farrell Government has put out a draft transport plan for a city that is screaming for solution, I think everybody would agree. No money attached to it at this point. 
Should this be  -  the future transport planning in our cities  -  more a collective federal enterprise, than just state governments who after all don't have huge sources of revenue to fund this sort of infrastructure?
PM: We've made record investments in infrastructure, I mean we're very focused on getting cities new infrastructure developments. 
We've been the first government since federation, for example, to be prepared from the federal level to invest in public transport and new public transport routes  -  incredibly important to the shape of our cities and to taking pressure off the roads system.
HOST: Sure but in the New South Wales context, Prime Minister, the argument over the funding of the Pacific Highway, the argument over the second airport-
PM: We've been record funders of the Pacific Highway, we've done more  -  much, much more  -  in our period in government since 2007 than was ever done under the earlier government, and there are as we speak Linda people out there working on the Pacific Highway because we've made the funds available.
HOST: I'm just seeing also Prime Minister that you've ditched the talks to close down high-emitting coal-fired power plants. What's happened there?
PM: Minister Ferguson will deal with this during the course of today.
HOST: What's happened with the coal-fired power plants? Are you unable to fund sufficiently, what's the context?
PM: I'm not in a position Linda to deal with the details of it, it needs to wait for Minister Ferguson's announcement.
HOST: The Prime Minister's with us. Just obviously we're heading into election zone broadly speaking, we're a year out roughly on the timetable, and we see news this morning in the Fairfax press of the formation of an election policy committee. 
Will you run a full term, Prime Minister?
PM: Yes we will.
HOST: That's an absolute commitment regardless of -
PM: Yes. There are some days where you wake up to the newspapers and you think to yourself ‘where on earth did all that come from?'
I know that there's some early election speculation in some of today's newspapers. There is no need for such election speculation. 
I have always said that the Government will run full term. Lots of journalists along the way have disagreed with me and said that's not possible and a minority parliament won't work and she'll never get legislation through, and on and on its gone. 
And here we are, two years later, more than 300 bills passed, and guess what Linda, I'm still saying the Government's going to run full term, because we will.
HOST: Prime Minister, enjoy my home town of Perth. Thanks for joining us today.
PM: Thank you.
[ENDS]


ABC Melbourne
HOST: Julia Gillard, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Jon.
HOST: The prophecies of the mining industry are starting to bear fruit. The predictions that they've made about some of the policies you've implemented are now starting to sound as if they are themselves accurate prophecies and advice that you should have heeded.
PM: Jon, let's look at the facts and let's look at the big picture.
We are a nation with $500 billion of mining investment in the pipeline, more than $200 billion of that in an advanced stage.  
So we've got big investments in mining to come. Tens of billions of dollars of those investments have been committed to since we announced the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.  The Minerals Resource Rent Tax is a profits-based tax.  
That is, it understands the cycles that there are in commodity prices and consequently in mining itself and it takes tax at the time that the industry is at its most profitable.  
We've got an economy that's growing strongly  -  low unemployment, low inflation, low interest rates, low debt, triple-A rated government system from all of the major credits rating agencies. We've never had that before as a nation. So our economy is strong.  
Yes, of course, Fortescue Metals made an announcement yesterday about some delays in work that it intends to do but the outlook for mining is strong  -  that's the big picture.
HOST: Gina Rinehart released a video message to the conference and, amongst other things, she said that your policies are wrong:
GINA RINEHART: Now the evidence is unarguable that Australia is indeed becoming too expensive and too uncompetitive to do export-orientated business. What was too readily argued as the self-interested complaints of a greedy few is now becoming the accepted truth.
HOST: Self-interested complaints of a greedy few. Is that how you've characterised Gina Rinehart, Julia Gillard?
PM: Gina Rinehart has always been opposed to the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, she's always been opposed to carbon pricing, she's still opposed to the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, she's still opposed to carbon pricing.  
Where's the news in that Jon? I don't share her view.
HOST: And yet her view is starting to sound as if it has more and more support and, according to the commentary in newspapers-
PM: Only if you deny the facts John. 
Five hundred billion dollars of investment in the pipeline, investments of record dimensions being made in Australia, a strongly growing economy, new investments announced since everybody knew about the Minerals Resource Rent Tax and carbon pricing.  
To give you one statistic about carbon pricing, since we announced carbon pricing, business investment has gone up by 20 per cent. 20 per cent. They're the facts.
HOST: So do you think the mining industry is insatiable? Is that the problem? They just seem to think they're entitled to eternal growth. Is that their problem?
PM: The mining industry will keep growing Jon and I'm glad it's going to keep growing.  
I think it's fantastic for our economy and our nation that mining is going to continue to grow. I do have a different view from Gina Rinehart and a number of others.
I think, as mining continues to grow, as we use this incredible wealth in our natural landscape, as we mine it, as we export it, as we generate that prosperity, that we should share some of that prosperity. I've got that view. They have a different view.  
We've had that debate. Our nation's resolved it. The Minerals Resource Rent Tax has started. 
Because we need to cut carbon pollution, carbon pricing has started and when you look at the economic data, none of the grim predictions that were made about carbon pricing or the Minerals Resource Rent Tax have come true.  
We are still seeing mining investments being announced. We are still seeing a growing economy. We are seeing quite spectacular growth in business investment. We're still seeing low unemployment. 
They're the facts Jon. 
HOST: You have expectations though and the expectations in Queensland and Western Australia are that even though prices are falling, the government shouldn't be making their jobs even harder.
PM: Well Jon I just think we're going around in the same loop. For our economy, what is happening in it? Well it is as I've described it to you. 
Are there challenges in our world? Yes, we know that there are issues in Europe, there's softness in the American economy, there's been some reduction in growth rates in the Chinese economy, we've seen some coming off of commodity prices.  
There are those effects in the real world, yes that's true. Where does that leave our economy? It still leaves it growing, it still leaves record investments being made in mining. It still leaves us with low unemployment, low interest rates, strong public finances.  
What does that mean that we need to do for the future? Well we need to understand that we live in the region of the world that is going to propel economic growth in this century.  
The resources boom we're seeing now is a down-payment on that. 
We can be the recipients of much of the growth of the Asian middle-class  -  more demand for our food, more demand for our tourism, more demand for legal services, health services, tourism, high-end manufactured goods and the list goes on. 
We're pre-positioning to seize that future. 
That's what a clean energy future is about  -  pricing carbon, infrastructure and the NBN is about and, of course, it's about what my drive for higher and higher skill levels is about.
HOST: Why do you use a mining conference to talk about education? The mining industry were expecting you to talk about matters relevant to them. Instead they got you talking about something they really, it's not front of mind for them, the Gonski reforms.
PM: There's nothing more important to the future of mining in this country than what's happening in Australian schools today.  
I have any number of mining people come to me and say that one of the constraints they face is that they can't get the skilled labour that they need. 
And, as we go through this resources boom, we see more investments being made, we see more mines actually moving to the production phase, we're going to need geologists and we're going to need engineers, we're going to need tradies, we're going to need people with skills and we're only going to get those people if what's happening in schools today is of the right quality and the right standard. 
So it's appropriate to go to a mining conference, to go to indeed any business event in this nation and talk about the standards and the future for Australian education.
HOST: All right, now your response to Gonski seems to be to talk about things that are going to happen more than ten years away from now and it's almost meaningless unless you provide some of the dollars and some of the source of the funds that are going to be needed to implement these recommendations. 
As we've said before the economy's not a magic pudding and no one can see the substance in your response to Gonski.
PM: Well, Jon I'm very happy to address that question. We are out there reforming and improving schools today. We've been doing that since we were elected in 2007.  
We've worked hard on school improvement: MySchool, new national curriculum, new investments in disadvantaged schools, more money in literacy and numeracy, better investments in teacher quality, empowering school principals, better rewards for the best teachers. 
And we can now show you schools around the country where that combination of improvement and new resources has been brought together and it's got results.  
That is, the kids are doing better at their education. They're doing better in writing, better in maths.
HOST: Australian standards are falling in international terms Prime Minister. That's simply not what's happening.
PM: Yes Jon, one day you and I can go out to Braybrook Secondary College and you can see the improvements that that combination of new ways of working and new resources has brought to a school in Melbourne's west.
HOST: You can't just cherry-pick one example. Overall we're slipping.
PM: Jon, I'm going to answer your question if you let me. We are working to improve schools and I can point to examples around the country where we have driven standards up.  
We now want to take that same combination of driving standards up and new resources right around the country to 9,500 schools. When you're going to do something that big, it takes some time and that's why it will take the six year transition.
Are we falling behind the standards of the world? Yes, Jon, we are and that is what is motivating me in part for this big crusade on education.  
We have been improving our schools; other nations have been improving their schools more rapidly. It's a race that everybody's running but some people are running faster than us and we've got to move more quickly and make sure that we win that race.  
That's what I've been talking about this week. That's what improving schools is all about.
HOST: Okay, yesterday the state government here, Minister Hall, said to us ‘show us the money' effectively and we said well where's your money and he was not happy with that line of questioning, but the same question to you Julia Gillard. 
Unless you are prepared to show how much you put on the table and what it gets to be spent on, why should any of this well-meaning waffle be taken seriously?
PM: Well people can judge us on what we've done to date, given we have almost doubled the amount of money going to education, I think people would, hearing that, prick up their ears and go ‘Gee they must be serious about this'.  
Number two, I've said the next step here is that I will go and discuss it with state premiers. I've had a discussion with Barry O'Farrell and he's open to working together. 
I've had a discussion here in Western Australia, where I've been for the past few days, with Premier Barnett and he's open to working together.
Premier Baillieu today obviously is in a big mess on education with a crisis on his hands that he needs to resolve with a teaching service which he promised he would make the highest paid in Australia. 
I'll have to let Premier Baillieu sort out that mess but at the appropriate point I will sit down with Premier Baillieu too and I hope I hear the same kind of response that I've heard from Barry O'Farrell and Colin Barnett. 
And then, of course, I'll speak to all of the other premiers and chief ministers around the country and we will get on to working for the conversations we need to have to drive shared change.
HOST: All right. For all the announcements you've made and you've, several times in the last few days, refused to say how you're going to pay for all of these things, the National Disability Insurance Scheme, the education spending, all these different policies you've announced, the dental plan and all the rest. Are you going to flog the NBN?
PM: The National Broadband Network's going to roll out exactly as we've announced it Jon, so don't try and start some silly campaign about what's going to happen with the NBN.
HOST: Well I'm trying to work out what other bits and things you could flog off to pay for all of this and that's the one that comes to mind.
PM: Look, how we're going to organise future budgets, once again, look at what we've achieved to date: $100 billion of savings, some of them very controversial indeed.
HOST: Will you rule out flogging off the National Broadband Network?
PM: I wasn't getting too many people applauding when I was on radio shows like this one talking about means testing the private health insurance rebate, talking about getting rid of benefits like the dependent spouse tax offset, people weren't applauding in the streets. 
It's tough decisions, the right decisions to make money available for what are higher priority areas for our nation's future.  
That's how we've acted to date, that's how we mean to go on.
HOST: Will you rule out flogging off the National Broadband Network to pay for all of these?
PM: Jon, the settings we announced at the time of the National Broadband Network announcements are nothing to do with anything announced about schools in the last few days, was that it would be publicly owned, there would be a roll-out. 
Sometime in the future there would be a looking at moving to a different ownership arrangement, we said that a few years ago, nothing's changed about that and nothing is going to change about that because of anything I've announced about school education.  
Don't try and put the two together, they're not connected.
HOST: I was trying hard. I thought I was getting somewhere. There's an ugly industrial dispute that's paralysing parts of the centre of the Melbourne CBD, Prime Minister. Grocon and the CFMEU are at loggerheads and each side, according to today's press, are calling in some muscle.  
There's a photo in one of the papers of some Grocon executives meeting with a Hells Angels bikie. Mick Gatto told us the other day what support he was providing to the CFMEU and in fact he suggested that John Setka would be a good Prime Minister.  
I don't know whether that's something that's crossed your mind as well but overall, surely all of this is why you need a strong watchdog for the construction sector and why you shouldn't have disbanded the ABCC.
PM: We do have a strong watchdog in the construction sector.
HOST: Not strong enough obviously.
PM: Well, Jon, let's go through it once again. We do have a strong watchdog in the construction sector and it is there policing industrial law. 
What is happening in the streets of Melbourne is grossly unacceptable. It's breaches of state law. It's illegal actions and picketing and everybody should take a step back and get this dispute resolved.
HOST: How?
PM: There's no excuse ever for unlawful conduct and no-one should be engaging in that conduct. At the end of the day industrial disputes are resolved by people being prepared to sit round a table and get them resolved and be willing to take a step back from the brink.
HOST: Bill Shorten tried that, Prime Minister, and it didn't work. It didn't work.
PM: Everybody should take a step back from the brink. Everybody should calm down, settle down and get this fixed.
HOST: Well saying that doesn't achieve anything. Bill Shorten tried exactly that approach last week. It's not worked, so what do you do next?
PM: This is a dispute, an industrial dispute that needs to be resolved between the parties. They need to engage in a process that will get them there and do that.
HOST: No, they're entrenched in their positions-
PM: And of course the President of Fair Work Australia is available to help.
HOST: And it's not working.
PM: On unlawful conduct, including blocking streets and that kind of conduct, that kind of conduct is unacceptable and shouldn't be pursued.
HOST: Any number of other topics that are occupying your mind at the moment. Is it a politically wise move to pick a fight with the tobacco industry, the pokies lobby, the mining industry and the Murdoch media empire all simultaneously?
PM: What I do as Prime Minister, Jon, is the important things that will set us up for the future. 
So I'm prepared to have a fight about improving Australia's schools and I'm going to be very, very persistent in that fight. 
I'm prepared to have a fight about creating a National Disability Insurance Scheme.  
I'm prepared to bring all of my efforts, along with my very strong economic team  -  Wayne Swan, Penny Wong, Craig Emerson  -  the strong economic team that I have to ensure that we continue to give people the benefits of jobs and a strong and growing economy. 
That's what I'm focussed on as Prime Minister.
HOST: Are you aware that the file about your activities at Slater and Gordon is still being hawked around? That former solicitor, Barry Nowicki, is still hawking around stories about your activities 17 years ago at Slater and Gordon and trying to rekindle interest in some of that material?
PM: I didn't specifically know that Jon, but I'm not surprised. I said on the day that I dealt with all of this in a record-length press conference that there would be various nut-jobs, was the term I used, various nut-jobs out there still pursuing this and it wouldn't matter what I said or what I did or what the truth was, they don't care. 
It's a bit like you see overseas, people who pursue the discussion that President Obama wasn't born in the United States of America. 
I mean there's people on the fringes of politics that deal with ridiculous things and unfortunately that's a feature of modern political life.
HOST: Well whether or not there's still something in it, we shall wait to see. Thank you for your time this morning.
PM: Well, Jon, if you, I'm not going to leave that unchallenged Jon. I gave a record press conference on this. I answered every question put to me. You haven't got a question to put to me.
HOST: No, no, on the contrary.
PM: I'm not going to leave your listeners with the impression that there's something here because someone on the margins of political life is hawking around nonsense.  
If you were interviewing President Obama right now you wouldn't end that interview by saying about the ridiculous allegation that he wasn't born in the United States that maybe something else will come out about it in the future.  
This stuff is all rubbish, I've dealt with it, it's over, it's done. Just because there are some idiots out there who will always pursue it no matter what the truth is doesn't mean that people like you or any person of reason should be following them down that path.
HOST: Quite to the contrary, I've stuck my neck out consistently right from the beginning saying it's a stack of cards that's built on the thinnest of foundations and I can't see the substance in it. In fact I've been consistently saying that from the beginning, that the mere fact that people are still going is astonishing. 
Prime Minister, thank you, I understand our time is up and look forward to seeing you one day in the studio here.
PM: Thanks Jon.
[ENDS]


Perth
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Tertiary Education, Science and Research, Senator Chris Evans today opened the $35 million multi-disciplinary health research and teaching hub at Curtin University.
The Curtin Health Innovation Research Institute (CHIRI) is a multi-disciplinary hub for research and teaching in biomedical sciences, pharmacy and public health that brings leading researchers and educators together in a single location.
CHIRI will carry out high-end research in key national priority areas like mental health, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health, ageing and dementia, population and biomedical and clinical sciences.
The research hub will also drive the search for improved diagnosis and treatment of chronic diseases and conditions like diabetes, dementia, obesity, cancer and malaria that affect people around the world. 
CHIRI has purchased more than $2 million worth of advanced instruments, many unique to WA, including a state-of-the-art microscope for the high-resolution imaging of cells responsible for chronic disease.
The precinct has 24 specialist suites and includes space for 100 researchers and postgraduate research students, providing an environment that encourages inter-professional practice and its incorporation into student learning.
A pharmacy practice teaching space will provide students with experience in a simulated consulting environment.
The Gillard Government contributed $13.7 million towards the CHIRI project as part of its landmark $5 billion investment in state-of-the-art infrastructure that is transforming the nation's higher education, research and vocational education landscape.


Perth
PM: This is an important step forward for this university, more than $13 million of federal funds invested in refurbishing this building and in creating this precinct. 
Great work happens here in training the health professionals of the future. 
I've met with some pharmacists in training to take one example, and great research work happens here today too. 
I've been talking today to people who are working on liver cancer, who are working on diabetes. 
It's truly impressive work and I'm very glad we've been able to ensure that there's a truly impressive precinct to do it in. 
I'm no stranger to this university, I've visited here frequently. I opened the engineering pavilion here. 
This is a university that is playing to the strengths of Western Australia, both now and into the future. 
It's part of our vision for tertiary education in the future, making sure that our great universities are working to generate the hardworking, thinking graduates we will need in the future and to do research which plays to our economic strengths and to our social needs. 
I'm proud we've been able to invest $4.5 billion in new buildings and equipment in Australian universities of which this is part, and I'm proud we've put universities on a path for growth with 150,000 more students able to access university because of our policies and plans. 
I've been since Monday talking a great deal about education, about making sure that every child in every school in our country gets a great education, that we don't fall behind the standards of the world, that we can only win the economic race if we win the education race. 
That starts in those early learning years before school. It continues through school where I want every child to succeed, and then it goes into what happens after school  -  that people get choices and options, whether it's an apprenticeship or whether it's aiming to be a PhD student. 
I want Australians to have those options and possibilities and we are working through vocational education and training and through our universities to make sure that Australia's young people and adults who want to return to study have those options. 
So with those words, I'm very happy to take any questions. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your reaction to the breakdown in negotiations over the power stations in Victoria and does that represent a very significant factor for your factor for your Government to walk away from that? 
PM: Minister Ferguson has dealt with this announcement already today. 
The Government worked on what we called the contract for closure process, looking to retire some power generation that is very carbon pollution intensive.
We always said we would strive for value for money. We haven't received a value for money proposal. 
JOURNALIST: It comes on the back of the decision on the carbon price last week. Is your reduction strategy starting to unravel? 
PM: The reduction strategy is right on target and we will reduce carbon pollution by minus 5 per cent by 2020. 
That means that we will reduce the carbon pollution in our atmosphere by 160 million tons. 
That's the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road. 
JOURNALIST: The discussions with the power stations was a major plank in that strategy? 
PM: Unfortunately you've got that factually wrong. The work to reduce 160 million tons is being done by the carbon price. Carbon pricing started on 1 July. 
JOURNALIST: Are you saying the negotiations, or the breakdown, has no consequence? 
PM: I'm saying we weren't prepared to do something that wasn't value for money. 
JOURNALIST: It was certainly part of how you were going to reach your target, so-
PM: The minus 5 per cent target is being reached by the work of the carbon price. We were also looking to retire some energy generation that is carbon pollution intensive. 
We always said we would aim for value for money. We didn't get a value for money proposal.
JOURNALIST: Christine Milne says it's a breach of faith and that Minister Ferguson didn't try hard enough?
PM: Minister Ferguson went about his duties diligently, but Minister Ferguson and this Government was not going to accept a proposal that wasn't value for money for Australian taxpayers. 
JOURNALIST: So those stations, as I understand it, will no longer get their carbon credits, is that right?
PM: No, that's a completely different system. 
JOURNALIST: Is there going to be any effect on the power price at all? 
PM: You're confusing two things, so let me be clear about it. The carbon pricing scheme requires big polluters to pay the price of putting carbon pollution in the atmosphere. 
That scheme is in operation now and applies to power stations in our country that generate a lot of carbon pollution, as we always said it would. 
That flows through to the bills that people pay, a 10 per cent increase. Here in Western Australia it's actually slightly less, it's a 9 per cent increase and that's why we've given people family payment increases, tax cuts, pension increases. 
This contract for closure process was separate to that. 
JOURNALIST: So what happens now though, if it's not going ahead, what's your back-up plan? 
PM: The carbon price will be doing its work to reduce carbon pollution. 
JOURNALIST: The net effect of this could simply be that these polluters pay more? 
PM: These polluters are still in the carbon pricing scheme in exactly the same way. This was a separate process. 
JOURNALIST: Do you believe Northern Australia should be its own economic zone?
PM: No, I most certainly don't. And you're obviously raising with me today comments from Ms Gina Rinehart.
It's not the Australian way to toss people two dollars  -  to toss them a two dollar gold coin and ask them to work for a day.
We support proper Australian wages and decent working conditions for Australian people. 
JOURNALIST: She seems fairly committed to this, because last week she was suggesting that a reduction in the minimum wage was a good idea and that Africa is a very attractive proposition to invest in, as opposed to Australia.
PM: Let me make my view very clear. We stand for decent working conditions for Australians. 
That's why we swept away the hated WorkChoices and why we will always campaign to keep it from coming back. 
Ms Rinehart has said that workers' wages and conditions should be cut. That's all of a piece with the Leader of the Opposition's plans for Australia's future. 
Well, the other side of the politics might stand for cutting wages and ripping off penalty rates. We never have and never will. 
We have always stood for decent working conditions for Australians and that's not getting tossed a two dollar coin for a day's work. 
JOURNALIST: Do you think they were unwise comments given that last week or the week before they shot dead protesting mine workers in South Africa? 
PM: I think Ms Rinehart's made her comments, not about that matter which you're raising with me, but about her view about appropriate wage rates and issues associated with mining. 
JOURNALIST: But she sees Africa as- 
PM: You'll have to put that question to her. 
JOURNALIST: Is Australia still competitive then? She claims it's uncompetitive.
PM: Let's look at the economy here and get some facts on the table. We've got an investment pipeline in resources of $500 billion, more than $200 billion of that at an advanced stage. 
Ms Rinehart is a long-term opponent of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax and carbon pricing. 
On both of those I fundamentally disagree. We should be sharing the mineral wealth that's in our grounds and that's what the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is about and we should be tackling climate change in the cheapest possible way, and that's what putting a price on carbon is about. 
I do note that since we announced the Minerals Resource Rent Tax we've continued to see new investments in our resources industry. 
Since we announced the carbon price, we saw business investment go up by 20 per cent. We have an economy that is the envy of the world. 
It's a world beater and this week I've been so focussed on school education, because we will only be a world beater in the future if we win the education race. 
JOURNALIST: Does she have a point at all about the urgency to improve productivity, to reduce approval delays and the cost of delays  -  does she have a point at all about those matters? 
PM: We've always got to strive to increase productivity, but that's not about cutting workers' pay and conditions. 
That's about working smarter; it's about working people and management working together. 
It's about investments in infrastructure, which we are doing in record amounts. It's about bringing the technology of the future to drive productivity gains, that's the National Broadband Network 
And more than anything else it's about driving up skills. 
The Minister and I will go from here to a jobs and skills expo which is all about helping people in Western Australia get the opportunities that they want so they get a share of the resources boom and the skills they need to enable them to get that opportunity. 
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, there's a lot of reaction to the fact that you talked to the miners yesterday about education. Do you think that was an appropriate thing to discuss with them and why? 
PM: I most certainly do, because there's nothing more important to the long-term future of the mining industry in this country than the quality of Australian schooling. 
There's nothing more important to our long-term economic future than what's happening in schools today. 
The business community should be a strong and vocal advocate for lifting education standards. 
If we don't, those countries in our region which have better schooling systems than we do, will be able to claim the high-skill, high-wage jobs of the future rather than us. 
That's why it's core business for people in mining. It's core business for everyone in this country and that's why I spoke about it yesterday. 
JOURNALIST: Marriage equality protesters were out the front this morning. Will your Government have a re-look at that?
PM: Our policies here are absolutely clear. There's a conscience vote and there's a bill both before the House and the Senate. 
JOURNALIST: Just with asylum seekers, there are reports that the Indonesians aren't happy about the high seas transfer of those rescued asylum seekers onto Indonesian boats to be taken back to Indonesia. 
PM: This was an operational decision taken by Indonesia. 
Thanks very much. 
[ENDS]


Perth
Around 580 West Australian apprentices in key trades stand to benefit from a mentoring program aimed at improving apprenticeship retention rates.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Skills Senator Chris Evans and Member for Brand Gary Gray today announced the $1.1 million joint mentoring initiative that will target apprentices who need additional assistance to complete their apprenticeship.
Right now, only approximately half of all apprentices currently complete their trades training.  
Mentoring is a proven way to increase these retention rates within the Australian Apprenticeship system.
Under this initiative, the Chamber of Commerce and the Industry Western Australia (CCIWA) will employ seven experienced mentors to provide support and advice to apprentices identified by employers across the state.
The mentoring project will focus on small and medium enterprises with a strong focus on school-based, mature-aged and first year apprentices, including fly-in fly-out apprentices.
It will also target people from Indigenous backgrounds, from rural and remote regions and people with a disability.
Apprentices will get intensive 24 hour mentoring support through face-to-face meetings, social media and other communications networks.
Many Western Australian industries are experiencing a skills shortage and it is anticipated that there will be a high uptake in automotive, engineering and construction-related occupations and the health and community services sectors.
Nationwide, more than $100 million has been allocated for the Australian Apprenticeships Mentoring Program which aims to improve completion rates and support the supply of skilled workers in the sectors and occupations where there is a current or emerging skills need. 
The Gillard Government is investing $912,000 and the CCIWA is contributing $216,000 towards the WA-based project.
Member for Brand Gary Gray said that mentoring is a proven way to increase these retention rates within the Australian Apprenticeship system.
The mentoring project will focus on small and medium enterprises with a strong focus on school-based, mature-aged and first year apprentices, including fly-in fly-out apprentices.
It will also target people from Indigenous backgrounds, from rural and remote regions and people with a disability.


Vladivostok, Russia
PM: I've just arrived in Vladivostok for the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum and I'm pleased to be here after what has been quite a long flight. I'm looking forward to the two days of meetings to come.
APEC is important to the Australian economy. I come here after Australia has recorded 21 years of economic growth. Our economy has grown by more than 10 per cent since the Government was elected despite problems of the global financial crisis. But even with that economic strength we need to keep building for the future.
APEC has stood the test of time and has helped with economic cooperation in our region. Australia was proud to be a founding member and driving force for the creation of APEC way back in 1989 and its uplifting to Leaders level in 1993. Since then it has established a good track record of enabling nations to better work together for economic growth. APEC represents more than 50 per cent of the world's GDP and around 70 per cent of Australia's trade in goods and services. Over the next two days I'm looking forward to pursuing three issues particularly here at APEC.
Firstly, at the last APEC we agreed that there should be a push to reduce tariffs on environmental goods so that there could be freer trade in the goods that will help all of us shape a clean energy future. It is a task for this APEC meeting to define the list of such goods. Good work has been done by Trade Ministers in the run-up to the meeting and I am optimistic that we will reach agreement on that list and see freer trade in environmental goods as a result.
Second, this meeting has a focus on higher education, particularly the mobility of students, researchers and education providers in the Asia-Pacific. As I have said consistently back in Australia, nothing will define more what kind of nation we become in the future than the quality of our education system, which is why we are driving for reform at every level including particularly in school education following the announcements I made on Monday.
It makes sense to build on that national development of our education system by looking towards the region in which our future will defined; the region of economic growth in this century, and to enable our students, our education providers and our researchers to move more freely across the region. So that is an important work-stream for this meeting of APEC.
Thirdly, this meeting of APEC will consider matters about better financial integration. This is an issue of importance to Australia enabling the freer movement of capital. We are hosting a symposium on this next year and it will be one of the areas I will be particularly focused on.
I am also looking forward to participating in the business events that are associated with APEC. APEC brings together government leaders and political leaders but alongside APEC stands two important business events. One is the APEC Business Advisory Committee that I will participate in and second is the CEO Forum which I will have the opportunity to speak to.
Then, this meeting bringing leaders together does give me the opportunity to meet with my counterparts from a number of countries. I will have formal bilateral meetings with Japan, with Vietnam, with Malaysia, with Peru, with PNG and with New Zealand. And of course the format of the meeting enables me to have discussions with leaders attending the meeting in the margins of the meeting. So it's a full work program for the next two days and I'm looking forward to it.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: What would your message be to Najib Razak on the future of the Malaysian people-swap deal?
PM: I've had the opportunity over the last couple of weeks to speak to the Malaysian Prime Minister about the agreement we have with Malaysia. I spoke to him by phone following the receipt of the Houston Report. I indicated that Australia is still interested in pursuing the agreement with Malaysia, that Angus Houston and his team had made some specific recommendations about what should be done and that I would look forward to our officials discussing those issues and of course Minister Bowen discussing them with his counterpart Minister Hishammuddin. Prime Minister Najib agreed in the telephone conversation with me that that would occur.
JOURNALIST: So you won't be bringing it up when you meet with him?
PM: Look, of course we will be discussing it but in terms of agreeing to further discussions that's already occurred.
JOURNALIST: And with Papua New Guinea will you be discussing Manus Island?
PM: Yes I will. I saw the Prime Minister of PNG very recently at the Pacific Island Forum and we are working hard to conclude the memorandum of understanding with PNG.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there has been a lot of attention in the lead-up to this meeting about territorial disputes over islands and so forth. Do you expect that to be something that affects these talks and will it be something you will have anything to say on?
PM: I think we have to be clear that items of that nature are not on the APEC agenda. This is an economic meeting dealing with economic issues but of course in the discussions that occur in the margins of the meeting I would anticipate that nations will be discussing issues in the South China Sea.
Australia's position is very clear  -  we do not take a position on competing territorial claims in the South China Sea. But what happens in the South China Sea is of importance to us. It is a very big trade route for what we export to the world. Consequently we do support the ASEAN efforts to get a code of conduct for the South China Sea.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you have arrived in a country where they have jailed three young women for an artistic performance, a controversial artistic performance, for two years. What do you think of the jailing of Pussy Riot, do you think they should be freed?
PM: We have indicated our view that the sentence for these young women we believe is disproportionate and that view has already been conveyed to the Russian Government.
JOURNALIST: How was that conveyed to the Government?
PM: That was conveyed through our Embassy at the time that the sentence was first announced.
JOURNALIST: Would you expect to have the opportunity to speak with President Putin himself and if you do would you raise it with him?
PM: Look, I'm not going to pre-empt the kind of discussions that I have in the margins of the meeting but I do understand I'll be seeing President Putin obviously as he chairs APEC.
JOURNALIST: You've made Higher Education a priority for this meeting, it's here at a university, but what can you say to people about what the chances of the timeframe of achieving this freer tertiary system would be?
PM: Realistically it will take some time, this is a big thing to do, to have nations work together to enable student recognition and exchange. I mean obviously some of that happens now, but to enable more exchange by being clearer what students qualification mean from one nation, and consequently for what purposes they can be used for entry into other courses in another nation or indeed entry into the work force, to credential education providers from one country into another country, to build the linkages and patterns of cooperation between researchers, these are all big picture things. Some work is already happening, but it will take some time. But it's a good vision of the future, that we, in a growing region of the world, would see greater and greater exchange between our higher educational institutions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I know it's dark but can I get your first impressions of Vladivostok, in particular the huge amount of infrastructure that has been set up for this event?
PM: Look, I've only seen it pass through the window of the car as we've driven from the airport, so I'm not going to pretend any great expertise in Vladivostok. I've never been to Russia before, I've never been to Vladivostok before, but I do understand that where we're standing now has been purpose constructed for APEC, and that it is on a journey to be a university campus.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said yourself that this has been a very long flight for you to get here, there's a lot of overlap with the various different leaders meeting that are occurring around the region, you have a lot of demands on your own time.
What do you think the future for APEC holds, do you think the organisation is drifting somewhat, might it disappear?
PM: I certainly don't think it will disappear, I think APEC has got a strong future and every Australian Prime Minister has attended APEC meetings because we've understood the importance of APEC to our economic future and to the economic future of our region, and it has enjoyed considerable success.
APEC is an interesting, indeed unique organisation that brings peer pressure to work to get people to embrace change and it has enjoyed success at that. And that success has meant freer trade, better economic integration and consequently more Australian jobs and more prosperity across our region.
So it's an important forum; by their very nature the issues that APEC has on its agenda are fairly complex issues, often technical issues, they require a lot of hard work and continuous labour. So you don't see overnight results, but we can track the journey of APEC from its first iteration as a leader's forum in 1993 and point to things that have been achieved, and given that, given the success APEC has enjoyed in the past, I think we can look forward to further successes in the future.
JOURNALIST: Do you think there should be any consideration, just following on from that question, as to whether the leaders should continue to meet annually, perhaps ministers having meetings annually and leaders biannually?
PM: I think it needs to be an annual meeting. Leaders meetings catalyse change, that's the purpose of bringing leaders together. Yes, Trade Ministers labour long and hard, and Dr Emerson has been here, making a difference to the negotiations in the lead up to the meeting; but bringing leaders together catalyses change, it sends a message through every nation that attends that this is important, this is a priority.
And let's be clear about what APEC has achieved. It set itself an ambitious goal about tariff reduction across our region and it has enjoyed success at that. Even this issue of environmental tariffs, and reducing tariffs on environmental goods, so important to a clean energy future.
Whilst it is not a done deal, I am optimistic we will see some change at this meeting, the issue having first been raised at the last APEC meeting. The WTO, the World Trade Organization, has been grappling with this for ten years without reaching a result yet. So I think you can see from that that APEC does make a difference.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how important is this meeting in terms of dealing with potential strategic tensions over time in the region, are these sorts of talks useful in terms of getting people talking together, to have a secondary purpose in some ways of lowering tensions, and how much might spreading education around the area, young people, future leaders get to meet each other, know each other, might also have an effect in doing that?
PM: The most important thing for nations understanding each other over time is people-to-people links. And that happens at a series of levels. Yes it happens when leaders meet other leaders. It also happens when a young person decides that they will travel to another nation to undertake a course of study, to spend some of their time in university and they come back from that experience with their outlook changed for a lifetime.
People talk about the success of the Colombo Plan from all those years ago and now of course in the modern age Australia more heavily invests in scholarship and exchanges with nations overseas than we ever did during the days of the Colombo Plan.
That's a recognition that if you can get people forming their individual links, collectively that ends up mattering for the destiny of nations. So, freer and freer exchange of study, of research, of educational providers, I think is a really good vision for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just finally, there was something interesting on the menu in the dining hall for the journalists the other day called ‘ear of rudd' which we are told was a sort of Russian fish, will you be asking to try that one?
PM: I understand Dennis Shanahan has already done that for the nation.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS]


Vladivostok, Russia
I'm happy to describe what's going on in our country though I think nations are always going to find their own pathways forward.
I would start by commenting, we've just seen from the video presentation that education is a gender question across the region and across the world. Too often it's women who miss out on education. It's a development question and so the level of education available to people in the developing world is not the same as the developed world. But the perspective we take in our own nation, it is a quintessentially economic question.
The standards of our education today are going to define how prosperous a nation we are for tomorrow. And so we have taken a very hard-headed approach to reforming education which has brought some of the tools which would be very familiar in the private sector and applied them to public policy.
Most particularly, we have insisted on transparency at every level of education. Early childhood education, we are making the quality of our childcare centres and early learning centres transparent to parents. We focussed a great deal on transparency in school education where the results of national testing are now available for all of our nine and a half thousand schools together with a great deal of information about the socioeconomic status of the children at the school, what the school conceptualises it's mission as, attendance rates, whole-school plans  -  these things are all available on what we call the MySchool website and you can contrast and compare between similar schools and the national average on testing.
We're bringing that same kind of transparency to our vocational education and training system through the MySkills website and the same transparency to our universities so that prospective students and employers can see quality and outcomes across universities.
That transparency is then partnered with the setting of goals  -  we have a set of 2020 goals about the performance of our education system. The numbers of Australians with vocational qualifications, the number of Australians with undergraduate or higher qualifications, and just last Monday I have joined to those 2020 goals a goal for 2025 that Australia's schooling system would be in the top five in the world.
Currently on the international testing, the PISA rankings run by the OECD, we've got a good education system but we have seen our schooling system start to slip behind and as other nations have worked to strengthen and reform their system.
And we have been particularly focussed on the fact that living in this region of the world where we will see so much of the globe's history written in the next hundred years and particularly the shifting of economic weight to this region, there are four schooling systems that are getting results in PISA testing above Australia's. They are Hong Kong and Shanghai and South Korea are getting results above Australia's so we are obviously concerned about that and wanting to focus on improving our schooling system.
In terms of the tools of reform, we believe a lot of innovation happens on the ground so the best thing that Government can do is support that innovation and change rather than try to micro-manage what happens in the classroom.
We have been huge investors in better quality teaching including attracting the best graduates to get into teaching through an initiative you call called Teach for Australia and we are now going to broaden that initiative by insisting on higher literacy and numeracy standards for people who go into teaching.
We've set quality standards for teaching in universities and we're also focussed on quality of teaching in vocational education and training and we have set qualification requirements for the people who teach preschool-age children.
We've also focussed a great deal on the impact of disadvantage. We know that children from poorer homes can get a great education but that you have to focus on it and put more resources into it. We are therefore on a journey to move our school funding system so that the child's needs are at the centre of the system and extra resources are available for the teaching of all students but particularly the teaching of students from disadvantaged homes and indigenous Australians.
We focussed on getting people from low SES backgrounds into universities and we've enjoyed some considerable success at that. We've embraced new teaching methodologies, we have national curriculum, we ran what we called the Digital Education Revolution to turbo-charge the number of computers in schools.
When we needed economic stimulus in the wake of the Global Financial Crisis we focussed a lot of that capital into education, not just schools but we've really revolutionised capital in vocational education and training and in universities.
So we're bringing this combination together on a journey of change. We're not done yet, we've got a lot more to do to reach our ambitious goals for 2020 and 2025, but it's very much a driving focus of what Government at the national level is delivering for the Australian people.
In our region we partner with the countries around the region in aid and development work which is focussed on education, but we also are big exchangers both at research and at the student level. I think the statistic is 175,000 students from the APEC countries are studying in Australian universities and vocational education training today. We would be looking to increase that number and we think the focus here at this APEC meeting on the mobility of students, staff and institutions setting up in each other's country's is a really a very important vision of the future.
So it's a great passion of mine, I know it's a great passion of everybody in this room and education, we believe, is the central driver of change for our own nation and for the region in which we live. 


Vladivostok, Russia
PM: I'm joined by the Trade and Competitiveness Minister Dr Craig Emerson this morning, here at APEC in Vladivostok. I've had the opportunity to meet with my counterpart, Prime Minister O'Neill from PNG.
We, today, have signed a Memorandum of Understanding between our two countries to enable a regional processing centre to be established on Manus Island in PNG. I thank Prime Minister O'Neill for the spirit in which he's entered into these discussions. I've had the opportunity to talk to him about this face-to-face on two occasions now  -  one at the Pacific Islands Forum and one here today. On both occasions he's indicated he understands that asylum seeker issues are a regional challenge and that he wants to work with Australia to address this challenge.
With the Memorandum of Understanding now signed, we can commence work on Manus Island as I believe people would be aware work has already commenced on Nauru. Reconnaissance teams have been to Manus Island as well. Our aim here is to establish both regional processing facilities as soon as possible.
As Minister Bowen and I have said consistently, now the legislation has passed the Parliament, any asylum seeker venturing to Australia on a boat is at risk of being transferred to Nauru or to Manus Island. But, even more worryingly, they are at risk of losing their lives because we continue to see so many tragedies at sea.
Our message to asylum seekers is, do not risk your life on a boat. Do not pay a people smuggler. Stay where you are and Australia is making available more resettlement places, 20,000 resettlement places, in our humanitarian stream, so that there are more opportunities for people to be processed and to get an opportunity for resettlement in Australia if they do not get on a boat.
I've also had the opportunity this morning to have a bilateral discussion with the Prime Minister of Malaysia. We talked about issues here at APEC, shared perspectives on the lead up to the East-Asia Summit in which we will both participate, and we reaffirmed the contents of the telephone conversation between the two of us following the Houston report, that Australian officials and Malaysian officials will talk about the Malaysia agreement and the findings of the Houston Review. And Minister Bowen will also be in contact with his counterpart, Minister Hishammuddin, on that.
I've had the opportunity today to participate in an education forum as well. It was a good discussion about the meaning of education in the modern age and how pivotal it is to the future of countries, including our own. I am now very confident that here at APEC, we will reach agreement to work together on increasing student mobility, the mobility of academic staff and of education providers in our region.
Education is a big export industry for Australia. It's our third biggest export industry, at $16 billion. Around $10 billion of that arises from trade in education services within APEC, within the economies of APEC. There are around 175,000 students from APEC nations studying in Australia.
People often ask themselves what will the future of our economy be beyond the days of the resources boom. Well, even during the days of the resources boom, which we expect to last for a long period of time, we are making a living in education services in our region and I anticipate that trade in education will be a strong part of Australia's continuing economic future.
We are seeing the century of growth and development in the Asian region, the economic weight of the globe moving to the region in which we live. The resources boom is a down payment on the prosperity that will flow during this century of change and, certainly, strong demand for Australia's services, including high quality education services, will be a boom industry for us during this century of change. It is, therefore, good news for Australia that APEC is getting on with the job of making sure that we can look forward to a future of greater mobility and exchange in education.
I want to see more students from our region study in Australia. I want to see more Australian students go into the countries of our region and do some section of their education in the countries of our region. I want to see exchanges between academic staff and I want to see Australian education institutions have further opportunities to develop campuses and places for students to come and study across our region in the future. So, with those words, I'm happy to turn it over to you for questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, now that you've got Manus Island and Nauru in place, with you be able to, at any point, upgrade your warning from there being a risk that people will be sent to these places to saying there will be a certainty that they will go to these places and thereby increase the deterrent effect of your stated public language?
PM: Well the message is that people are at risk of being transferred. We will work to develop the temporary facilities at Nauru and Manus Island. The tents are being bolted up on Nauru as we speak and people in the future will be transferred, we will see some people transferred, to Nauru and to PNG. So the message is, you are at risk of being transferred if you get on a boat now but I continue to point out the more profound risk is that you are at risk of losing your life. We have seen too many people die at sea because they have got on unseaworthy vessels because of people smuggling.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr O'Neill just told us that he is still keen for people to move through this centre on Manus Island as quickly as possible. There would still seem to be a contradiction between their position and your position on how long people will stay. How do you explain the contradiction?
PM: We have agreed, with both Nauru and with PNG, that the agreement between us acquits the ‘no advantage principle' of the Houston Review. I would remind that the central finding of Angus Houston and his team was that people should not get an advantage if they've got on a boat. That is, they should wait the same amount of time for a resettlement opportunity as if they hadn't moved.
Now, of course, when people have been processed and have waited that amount of time, then we would want to see them secure a resettlement opportunity as soon as possible. But our agreements with Nauru and PNG are on all fours with Angus Houston and his findings of ‘no advantage' for moving.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say there's no contradiction between what you're saying and what Prime Minister O'Neill was saying?
PM: I'm saying the memorandums are clear. I didn't have the opportunity to stand outside just then as you did, but the memorandum is clear. We had this conversation also at the Pacific Islands Forum, the ‘no advantage principle' is there in the memorandum and that is how we will work these regional processing centres.
JOURNALIST: Can you put a time frame on it? How long?
PM: We will work with UNHCR to specify the appropriate time frames that people would have waited if they hadn't moved.
JOURNALIST: Can you say yet when the first transfers to Nauru will occur?
PM: We've been clear that we want to see us looking to transfer people before the, in coming weeks, we've said we wanted the temporary facility in Nauru in a position to receive people by the end of the month.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in the last week, at the Pacific Islands Forum, Mr O'Neill was saying that Australia and PNG already had a series of agreements. He seemed to imply an MOU wasn't needed. Has the drive for this MOU, this agreement, come from the Australian side and is this about fireproofing against a potential high court challenge to offshore processing?
PM: Look, we did have a Memorandum of Understanding with PNG that was a memorandum we executed before the High Court challenge. As a result of the High Court challenge and, on the basis of legal advice, some amendments have been made and that's why a new memorandum has been executed today.
JOURNALIST: Are those amendments to protect human rights and ensure welfare of people who do go to Manus Island?
PM: The amendments were on the basis of legal advice and this puts the memorandum with PNG in comparable terms to the memorandum with Nauru. We have entered into arrangements with both that ensure we acquit our obligations under the refugee convention which, of course, we always wanted to do. That was clear prior to the High Court case. We've always wanted to acquit those obligations and proper treatment of people.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how would you characterise Malaysia's patience, or lack of, in the situation you're in now with the Malaysian deal? Having spoken to the Prime Minister this morning is he still willing to proceed and what are the prospects of actually getting that up?
PM: I think the Prime Minister of Malaysia has been very understanding about Australian domestic conditions and circumstances, first of all the High Court case and then a sharply partisan political debate following the high court case.
He indicated to me this morning that he's happy to receive a team of Australian officials to continue discussions. Now, in the light of the Houston Report, of course we do have an agreement with Malaysia. The Houston review recommends a set of considerations that should be worked through and that's the purpose of Australian officials going to Malaysia.
JOURNALIST: His embassy in Canberra has raised concerns about Malaysia's good name having been blackguarded through the courts of this debate. Did he make that point to you this morning and does he have a point in that regard?
PM: I've indicated to the Prime Minister of Malaysia in the past that I can understand that he and many people in Malaysia would have been dismayed to hear some of the statements made during the course of what was a sharply partisan debate and not at all times fuelled by the facts.
Clearly, as we would recall, the opposition thought that this was a convenient battering ram for them in pursuit of their negative politics and, both Australia's national interests and Malaysia's reputation, were viewed as secondary to a sharply partisan and negative campaign.
JOURNALIST: Is there any timeline, Prime Minister, to the negotiations with Malaysia? Is it likely we will see a resolution, a Malaysian agreement, before the end of next year?
PM: We've agreed officials will go and be received. We haven't set a timeline.
JOURNALIST: Do you actually believe there's any chance given the state of the Parliament, that you will ever be able to implement a Malaysian agreement?
PM: You need to put that question to the Leader of the Opposition and ask him whether or not he respects Angus Houston, his team and their work.
JOURNALIST: Is it a setback for your offshore processing plans that the IOM has indicated that it won't be involved with the early steps?
PM: Minister Bowen will continue discussions with international agencies, including the IOM, on the arrangements that we'll put into operation on Nauru and in PNG.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your comments on Pussy Riot last night, are you expecting any reaction from the Russians to that? Are you worried that you may have offended the president before you meet with him?
PM: Well, I met with our media friends last night and I was asked a direct question and I answered it factually.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition has complained about Malaysia's human rights. What do you say to the criticism that you are more concerned about the human rights of the Pussy Riot members then, say, treatment of asylum seekers in Malaysia?
PM: We, in our agreement with Malaysia, always worked on the basis that we want to see the human rights of asylum seekers transferred, protected in Malaysia. We work through that with Malaysia and we, you know, had the High Court case and the rest, as they say, is history.
Our concern about human rights is that human rights are universal and indivisible. We take that perspective when we deal with asylum seekers. We take that perspective generally on our outlook on the world.
Okay, thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Vladivostok, Russia
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship Chris Bowen today announced that Australia and Papua New Guinea have entered into a new Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in relation to regional processing arrangements on Manus Island.
PNG Foreign Minister Rimbink Pato and Minister for Trade and Competitiveness Craig Emerson signed the MOU today, which builds upon the previous agreement of 19 August 2011 and paves the way for processing on Manus Island, subject to the designation of PNG as a regional processing country under Australian law.
This is a significant step towards establishing a regional processing centre on Manus Island, as recommended by the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers.
The MOU contains new elements, including assurances relating to key elements of the Refugee Convention, as outlined in recent changes to the Migration Act.
The agreement underlines the Government's resolve to work with regional partners to break the people smuggling trade and prevent the tragic loss of life at sea on dangerous boat journeys.
The Government is committed to implementing the Expert Panel's recommendations. There will be no advantage for people risking their lives on people smuggling boats.
The MOU demonstrates the positive and long-standing relationship of our two countries on migration issues, and recognises the need for cooperative measures to tackle irregular migration in the region.
It also provides for ongoing discussions with PNG on the specific operational details of the regional processing centre.
We are committed to working with PNG to operationalise the regional processing centre at the earliest opportunity.
The MOU also reaffirms both countries' commitment to the Refugee Convention, with people to be treated with dignity and respect in line with human rights standards.


Asia-Pacific Focus, Australia Network
HOST: Prime Minister, welcome back to the program.
PM: Thanks Jim.
HOST: Let's deal with this first  -  the PNG Prime Minister says he wants asylum seekers processed on Manus Island as speedily as possible. You say they're to get no advantage over other refugees. Your own immigration department says that 75 per cent of applicants for refugee status can expect a visa within 12 months.
Does that mean that people on Manus Island can expect to stay there no more than 12 months?
PM: Jim there's three stages here.
Firstly, people are processed, and of course we do processing as quickly as possible, to ascertain whether or not someone's a genuine refugee. If they're not a genuine refugee then they can expect to be returned to their home country or to another country that they've got a right to enter.
Second, under the Houston principles, there is then waiting time. So even if you are a genuine refugee, you would not get a resettlement opportunity earlier than you would have got it if you hadn't moved by boat.
Then third, of course once those stages are acquitted, we want people resettled as quickly as possible, as does the Prime Minister of PNG and the President of Nauru.
HOST: But that means people in PNG on Manus Island are going to be there for years, does it not?
PM: We haven't as yet announced the times that they will be there. We will consult with UNHCR and others  -  the High Commissioner for Refugees  -  to ascertain what the right amount of time is.
But the aim here is so people don't get an advantage if they get on a boat, pay a people smuggler and risk their lives at sea.
HOST: Fair enough. Let's move to the APEC agenda itself. Your passion for education is well-enough known. The education crusade, as you've described it, that you're on now, it's also intersecting with the agenda for this summit. Vladimir Putin's initiative  -  the success of it  -  would appear to depend on incentive and quality.
If students are going to travel abroad to study they at least need to know they're going to get credit for what they do overseas back home. Is that right?
PM: I think that's a big element of it. We're very pleased that Russia, in its leading of APEC this year, has put this squarely on the agenda. And we believe leaders will agree to what is a comprehensive program of work to achieve a few things.
One is student mobility, so that is recognising each other's qualifications or at least getting an accurate description of what those qualifications mean, out of different systems so there's more mobility after people have qualified.
There's also mobility while people are studying. An Australian, perhaps coming here to Vladivostok and doing one year or one semester of their course and having it recognised.
There's the mobility of researchers and academic staff and importantly for Australia there would be Australian institutions able to go and set up campuses overseas.
Now they do that now, but the easier it is the better for Australian universities who are very export-oriented and want to take Australian education into the region.
HOST: Do you think that Australians underestimate the quality of institutions, of educational institutions available to them within the region? There are 175,000 students from APEC economies studying in Australia. Only a handful by comparison to Australians studying in Asia.
Is this something that we need to fix?
PM: When we chart the future course of our nation through the Asian Century white paper, we will be making very clearly the point that the global economic weight will be in our region of the world.
You will see Asia continue to rise and its middle classes boom. You will see the quality of its institutions like universities continuing to rise.
And so a young person in Australia in the future might well say to themselves that the best university they could go to is a university in our region rather than a sentimental view about going to Oxford or Cambridge or even Harvard in the United States.
This is going to be our future and I think we've got to deepen community understanding of it.
That's why I was so enthusiastic about the white paper process. It's not just about government, it's about everybody in our nation thinking about what this future of change in our region of the world really means for us.
HOST: When you say everybody in the nation, does that mean that you are thinking of enlisting business to have a role in expanding Australian students' educational horizons, either through overseas scholarships, even overseas cadetships?
PM: I'd like to see everybody playing their parts. I'd like to see business leaders helping the Australian community understand the tremendous opportunities for our economy in our region of the world.
I'd like them to talk about how important it is for young people to get an experience in one of the countries in our region of the world, and how they will value that Asia-literacy as an employer.
I'd like our media organisations to routinely report the economic news from Indonesia. I see plenty of news on our TV that's about the economy of Germany, the economy of France.
I can understand why that news is on our TV, but I think I'd find it pretty hard to get a channel on my TV screen that's telling me in detail about the economy of Indonesia or Vietnam or so many of the other countries in our region.
At every level we've got to be preparing for this century of Asian economic growth. It will be our future, an age of prosperity for us, if we get out there and seize it.
HOST: Will the white paper be recommending additional assistance, additional expenditure to help Australians study abroad, particularly within the APEC economies?
PM: I'm not in a position to tell you what's going to be in detail in the white paper, but I would make this point. We are already at record expenditure for scholarships for people from our region to come and study in Australia.
That's great for us, those people-to-people links, those future leaders of nations in our region, actually getting an experience in Australia. Obviously I want to encourage young Australians to get out and do the same.
HOST: Food security is once again on the agenda here at APEC. Do you understand why many Australians worry that food security  -  the term  -  is simply code for foreigners buying up Australian land?
PM: I do understand that people feel concerns, and there's often times when the way in which this is reported in the media, to be frank, is overly dramatic.
Let's get the statistics right. 99 per cent of Australian agricultural businesses are wholly Australian-owned. Only 6 per cent of land is wholly foreign-owned. So let's keep it in perspective.
We are a nation that cultivates an abundance of food and we export it to the world. That's how our farmers earn their income, and long may that last because that's a source of great prosperity for our nation.
We will best prosper in this century of economic change by having our face looking towards our region rather than closing inwards or succumbing to some very silly populist debates, even if they are being pursued by leading personalities in the Opposition like Barnaby Joyce.
HOST: Do you fear, though, that foreign investment could become as divisive an issue in Australia in the lead-up to the next election as asylum seekers proved in 2010 and right to this day?
PM: That's a question you'd really have to put to the Leader of the Opposition.
HOST: But isn't it also about your ability to market the benefits of foreign investment to Australians to assure them and reassure them that they don't lose anything from having foreign investors buying Australian land, buying Australian food producers?
PM: I will certainly be doing that, and that is my responsibility as Prime Minister, to explain to people what is in our long-term economic interest, even if it's not instantaneously popular.
At the end of the day that's what pricing carbon is about; in our long-term economic interest, not instantly popular. NBN, all of the work we're doing in education, infrastructure; about building this positive economic future for our country.
We've got 21 years of economic growth now. I want to keep building for the future.
HOST: One final question about this subject. Is foreign investment essential if Australia is to achieve its ambition of being an even greater food bowl for the burgeoning nations of Asia?
PM: We are a net capital importer. You will see investments from overseas in all sections of the Australian economy. There is a rigorous national interest test that we have through our Foreign Investment Review Board processes.
No one should pretend that somehow this is unregulated or that the statistics are anything other than the ones I've given you. That's the facts, that's the truth.
HOST: Prime Minister, it's been a pleasure talking to you.
PM: Thanks Jim.
[ENDS] 



I am pleased to announce that I have reappointed Ms Lisa Paul AO PSM as Secretary of the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations.
Having received a report from the Secretary of my Department, as required by the Public Service Act 1999, I have reappointed Ms Paul for a term of five years from 3 December 2012.
Ms Paul is a highly experienced Secretary who has already made a significant contribution to the Australian Public Service. In 2011 Ms Paul was made an Officer of the Order of Australia for distinguished service to public sector leadership in key policy and program implementation, particularly through driving reform in education, employment and workplace relations. I express my appreciation for her ongoing contribution. 


Brisbane
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's good to be amongst friends at the end of what has been a long and sad week.
I want to, through you, thank the Labor family for all of the expressions of condolence and support that I and my family have received at this difficult time.
My father, John, was a great Labor man.
He came from the coal mining valleys of Wales, he came from a life of hardship and he came with hope and courage and determination to make a life here in this land of wonderful opportunity.
And he found that opportunity.
He found a vocation that he loved as a psychiatric nurse providing care and concern and support for others, to people who needed that support the most.
He believed in public service. He always believed how important it was for people to give their lives to public service and to do good for others.
He believed in opportunity and the sharing of it. He had received opportunities in this country but he never wanted to close the door behind him.
He wanted to see that opportunity shared.
He was a Labor man through and through.
He believed in Labor, he believed in me, he believed in you, and your recognition of his passing has been truly heartwarming for me. Thank you.
Friends, you meet here this weekend with a great purpose for Queensland: the long march back.
Proud of your achievements in fourteen years in office.
Humbled by the judgment of the people and the State you serve.
More willing than ever to fight the good fight and absolutely determined to offer Queensland the choice of a good Labor Government in 2015.
Because after this week you don't need me to tell you:
Queenslanders deserve better than this.
The human cost of the LNP's state budget is dreadful.
Fourteen thousand Queensland jobs will be lost because of the decisions of just a few.
It seems that everyone in the State knows someone who fears for their job today.
So Queensland Labor has a great responsibility, to fight these job cuts, to fight this conservative Government, to give Queenslanders hope, to offer them a real choice at the next state election.
And Queenslanders do want a real choice.
They are taking a long hard look at what the LNP in Government really means. 
Our job is clear. To govern well, to govern for all.
And as Federal Leader, I can tell you, you meet here with another great responsibility: to our whole nation.
You will be on the front line in the fight to come in 2013.
For my part, I can promise you this: we are giving you a Labor program to work for, a plan for our nation you will be proud to fight for and defend.
Your Labor Government is building this nation's future. 
Day by day, piece by piece, a future that will see Australians be the winners in this century of growth and change in our region of the world.
A future of cleaner energy.
Access around the nation to the infrastructure of the future, to high speed broadband.
A future of higher skills leading to higher paid jobs.
A future of opportunity and prosperity which we can build together and share together.
Your Labor Government is delivering today as we build for tomorrow.
A strong economy, a budget surplus, job creation.
Fair workplace laws where your rights at work are protected for the future.
Expanded ports, new railways and roads.
Extra support for families and for small businesses, higher super, paid for by the returns from the minerals every Australian owns.
Higher pensions, help for carers, more choice and security in care for all our people as they age.
And delegates, next year when you walk the streets and knock on the doors and even when you climb trees to hang posters and stand on highways waving wobble boards you'll be able to say this: a vote for Labor in 2013 is a vote for a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Nothing could be more natural to Labor than this plan.
The disability system we have today is unfair, it's underfunded, it's fragmented and it's inefficient and we can fix it.
At COAG in July, we saw how hard this will be: without leadership from Labor Governments, it will never get done.
At the end of that COAG meeting only your Federal Labor Government and Labor in South Australia, Tasmania and the ACT had agreed to launch sites for the NDIS. 
It took days of public pressure and private talks to get the conservatives in New South Wales and Victoria to agree to help.
And delegates the LNP government here in Queensland still has not agreed.
Campbell Newman must not be allowed to draw a “Brisbane Line” through the NDIS.
And we  -  the women and men of Labor  -  won't let  him.
We will give people with disabilities a better deal.
We are going to get this done.
Delegates, our commitment to care for Australians with disability reflects our essential Labor passion that no one be left behind.
Australians are entitled to know that in times of hardship government has got their back.  
And Labor Governments always have.
In times of economic turbulence, like the global financial crisis, you can rely on Labor to protect our nation.
In times of personal need, when you fear you may fall, in sickness, with disability, you can rely on Labor to build the safety nets that catch you.
But people look to us for more and as Labor believers we understand our Labor cause runs deeper. 
Labor is always the party that strives to create and share hope and opportunity.
So our vision for education reflects our deepest dreams for every child, our fundamental Labor drive to ensure that everyone can get ahead.
So you can say this, out on the stump, every day next year: A vote for Labor is a vote for a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
And delegates, you will be able to say this too:
A vote for Labor is a vote to give every child more hope and more opportunity and to improve every Australian school.
All my life, I have been conscious of being the lucky one  -  my life story is of education's transformative power.
But even in great schools like Unley High, I saw education's full power denied to some of my schoolmates.
The life-changing unfairness of being robbed of a great education has always struck me as a moral wrong. 
I know you feel that too and together we are on a national crusade for change.
A moral imperative fuels our crusade  -  but it's teachers and the principals who show us our line of march from here.
Queensland's schools, public, Catholic and independent, are full of great teachers and leaders.
And this morning Angelo Gavrielatos from the Australian Education Union introduced me to some of the public system's best.
I saw Margaret Gurney from Goodna State School again.
We first met back in 2011, after the floods.
Half the children in her primary school come from the poorest quarter of Australian homes.
Many are Indigenous and Margaret focussed on lifting indigenous achievement in her school.  Regular health checks, oral language development, greater awareness in the school as a whole of those kids and their needs.
She created adult education classes  -  so the parents, the kids' most important leaning coach, are confident themselves.
I met Corrine McMillan from Glenala State High School in Durack.
This was a tough high school in a tough area. It took a terrific principal to lift it up.
Working with the local Vietnamese community, bringing on a Pacific liaison officer, offering breakfast at school events, getting parents involved. 
And doing a great job with her indigenous students.
Building a school where all kids turn up and turn up with their homework done.  Where more kids are staying on to year 12, more kids are going on to TAFE and lots more to university.
Corrine and her school richly deserved the recognition they got yesterday following the publication of NAPLAN results.
I met Andrew Thompson from Ipswich West Special School.
A brilliant and compassionate man who told me how with the right support from government, his school can genuinely teach children with the most profound disabilities and can create real opportunities for children to seize the potential they do have in life.
And I have been privileged to meet so many others. 
I already know Llew Paulger from Redbank Plains State High School  -  we met at Community Cabinet in July.
And he's here, with Tony Maksoud from Berrinba East State School and Belinda Leavers from Loganlea State High School and Jody Stehbens from Kruger State School and Roz Bowd and the "Gonski mums".
Along with more great principals and teachers than I can name.
Friends, I've been proud to work with them to change children's lives, to give them hope and opportunity.
MySchool, low-SES partnership, literacy and numeracy work, teacher quality. Computers in schools. Building the Education Revolution, National Curriculum, Teach for Australia.
Lifting standards for every child in every school, equipping them for the jobs of the future.
But Margaret and Corrine and Andrew and Llew - they are the people who can tell you what difference all that has made.
Ask them when you see them today.
About the kindies who are reading better, the young girls who are doing science in new labs and maths on new computers, the teenage boys who are staying longer in school about the Queensland families whose kids are aiming for apprenticeships and degrees, for well-paid skilful work.
These are our great principals and teachers: in our great national crusade to improve schools, they carry the banner high.
Working with them, we know from what has already been achieved that we can transform the lives of children.
If you give one child a better education you change a life.
If you give every child a better education, you change a nation, you change the future, you make it stronger and fairer.
For every child, for every school, for our nation's future, we are going to get this done.
We will dedicate our nation to getting back in the top five schooling systems in the world by 2025. 
We will commit our nation to a National Plan for School Improvement, which will achieve that goal for our children. 
Lifting teacher quality, more power for principals, more information for parents.
And we will  fund Australian schools in a way that puts a child's needs at the heart of our funding decisions.
And to those Liberals who say no to change, who want to see cutbacks rather than our schools at the cutting edge, we have gathered together here to say we will fight you, we will beat you, for our children we are going to get this done.
Delegates, our plan to care for Australians with disability is a great Labor plan.
Our plan to improve Australian schools is a great Labor plan.
And you know what the other side always say about great Labor plans.
First it's a bad idea  -  then it's a good idea but it'll cost too much  -  then, finally, oh no, they'd never get rid of it. Honest.
Just one thing - they might need a quick commission of audit to check over the books.
And then, if they win, they bring down their first budget.
Delegates, the cost in jobs of this is already shockingly clear.
But as Labor people, we are also genuinely shocked by the kind of values these cuts reveal.
Because of course, we're a party of government, we deliver budgets, we know it's hard.
We make tough decisions to bring a budget to surplus and to keep it there  -  those decisions are being made in Canberra right now.
And when we do that, we prove that if you have the right values, the right priorities, you can budget responsibly and help the people who need it most.
We know you can because that's what we've done: our budget is coming to surplus and we've cut taxes for working Australians.
What we don't ever do is conduct ourselves like the conservatives who enjoy delivering the cuts.
These blokes who crow about it and crack jokes about it and lick their lips as they do the dirty work ... and who show their true values in the cuts they make.
They've cut the Rural Fire Service  -  the ultimate frontline services.
They've cut palliative care beds  -  care for the dying.
They've cut the children's guardian.
They've cut domestic violence services.
They've even dismantled BreastScreen Queensland.
A cut so brutal I didn't believe it when I first read the reports, and so sad I still don't want to believe it now.
That's the difference between their values and ours.
Labor Governments cut millionaires' dental schemes  -  Liberal Governments sack ambulance officers.
And this is why Newman's budget razor is Abbott's curtain raiser.
Labor brings budgets to surplus responsibly, carefully, cutting waste, getting the priorities right.
The Liberals and Nationals always cut too much and they always cut the wrong things.
They devastate families, damage businesses, hurt communities.
Understand this: Tony Abbott and Campbell Newman are following the same game plan, every hour, every day.
Oppositions which just say no never achieve good things for working people.
Conservative oppositions which just say no are using that one short word to hide a plan to cut services and jobs.
And this is why I say to you in Queensland today, you do now have a special responsibility to Australians as a whole.
You will be fighters on the front line next year, but you are already more than that.
You are the sentries who can tell Australians what's at risk, what could be coming.
You've seen it. Tell your story. Make sure they know.
Every working Australian must know in 2013 what happened in Queensland in 2012.
In 2013 Australians will have a choice.
A clear choice between two visions of our nation's future.
Do you want a high-wage, high-skill, high-value-add society where everyone gets a chance?
Or a race to the bottom, cutting wages, cutting conditions, everyone going backwards, the weakest scrambling for two dollars a day.
Do you want a budget surplus, job creation, a strong economy?
Or a downward spiral of cuts, job losses and decline.
Do you want progressive government informed by reason with a plan for the future?
Or a regime of aggression and negativity with a secret plan for cuts?
You know my answer.  I know your answer.
Delegates, carry this message to the nation in 2013.
At every door, on every corner, over every back fence, in every front bar.
If you want a National Disability Insurance Scheme  -  you must vote Labor.
If you want a plan for school improvement  -  you must vote Labor.
If you want a stronger and fairer future  -  you must vote Labor.
And as every Queenslander knows today: if you want jobs not job cuts  -  you must vote Labor.
Friends, the fight is on, it's the fight of our lives, let's get out there and win it.


Perth
Following the appointment of The Hon Brendan Nelson as the Director of the Australian War Memorial, Mr Duncan Lewis AO DSC CSC has been nominated as Ambassador to Belgium, the European Union and Luxembourg. He will, subject to normal processes being completed, also be Australia's Ambassador to NATO.
Dr Nelson, as a former Minister for Defence, was a strong and experienced hand as our Ambassador to NATO. At this stage of Australia's involvement in Afghanistan it is important that we continue to have that strength and experience in our NATO representation.
Mr Lewis has had a distinguished career in both the Australian Defence Force and the Australian Public Service prior to being appointed as Secretary to the Department of Defence and brings considerable experience and expertise to his new role. I welcome his continued service to the Commonwealth.
Mr Lewis will leave the Department of Defence on 10 October 2012 to prepare to take up his new appointment.
Following a report from the Secretary of my Department, as required by the Public Service Act 1999, Mr Dennis Richardson AO will be appointed as Secretary of the Department of Defence with effect from 18 October 2012. Mr Richardson was Australia's Ambassador to the United States between 2005 and 2009 and was Director-General of ASIO between 1996 and 2005. He has been the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade since December 2009.
Mr Peter Varghese AO will be appointed as Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Mr Varghese is currently Australia's High Commissioner to India. Mr Varghese was previously Director-General of the Office of National Assessments. He has also served as Australia's High Commissioner to Malaysia and as a Deputy Secretary in the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. He will take up his appointment as Secretary on 3 December 2012.
I congratulate Mr Richardson and Mr Varghese on their appointments.
The appointments of Mr Richardson and Mr Varghese will be for terms of five years. 


Perth
Their Royal Highnesses The Prince of Wales and The Duchess of Cornwall will visit Australia for six days from Monday 5 to Saturday 10 November 2012, as Her Majesty The Queen's personal representatives in the Diamond Jubilee year.
It is expected that the Royal couple will visit Longreach, Melbourne, Adelaide, Hobart, Sydney and Canberra. 
Details of the program, and locations where the public will be able to see the Royal couple, will be made publically available closer to the visit.
The last visit to Australia by The Prince of Wales was in 2005 when he visited Perth, Alice Springs, Melbourne, Sydney and Canberra. This will be the first visit to Australia by The Duchess of Cornwall.


Parliament House, Canberra
In 2012 the process of post-war migration reached 'retirement' age - 65 - the full span of a working life.
Sixty-five years since the first post-war migrants landed on our shores and began the greatest change to our country's texture and fortunes since European settlement.
Those first migrants in January 1947 were British tradesmen, who'd left the bombed out cities of their old land to help build the newest city of their new nation.
When one of the new migrants saw the empty fields of this capital, he asked jokingly where's Canberra?
And one of the locals replied, with greater meaning than they probably intended, you're here to build the place.
They weren't just here to build offices and houses.          
They came to help build a nation.
That's what migration is: an act of nation-building. And multiculturalism is how we make it work.
Multiculturalism is not just the ability to maintain our diverse backgrounds and cultures.
It is the meeting place of rights and responsibilities. 
Where the right to maintain one's customs, language and religion is a balanced by an equal responsibility to learn English, find work, respect our culture and heritage, and accept women as full equals.
Where there is non-negotiable respect for our foundational values of democracy and the rule of law, and any differences we hold are expressed peacefully.
Where old hatreds are left behind, and we find shared identity on the common ground of mateship and the Aussie spirit of a fair go. 
What we saw in Sydney on the weekend wasn't multiculturalism but extremism.
True multiculturalism has a very different face.
It is the face of a new migrant studying hard in an English language class.
Working two jobs to put their kids through school.
Or lining up to vote for the very first time.
True multiculturalism includes, not divides.
It adds more than it takes.
In the end, multiculturalism amounts to a civic virtue since it provides us with a way to share the public space.
A common ground of inclusion and belonging for all who are willing to toil with hearts and hands.
And because it always summons us toward a better future, multiculturalism is an expression of progressive patriotism in which all Australians, old and new, can find meaning.
Those first post-war migrants understood these things in times much tougher than our own.
This generation must understand them as well because our multicultural achievement is too precious to be brought into question by the reckless actions of a few.
Remember, migration and multiculturalism aren't just another set of policies than come and go with the tide of politics and events.
They are nation-building commitments which transcend partisanship and politics, to stand at the core of our identity as Australians.
My predecessor Ben Chifley understood that when the first migrants came here to Canberra.
Chifley and our founding Immigration Minister, Arthur Calwell, met these young migrants outside what is now Old Parliament House.
Chifley also went out to the camp where they lived - anonymously and without a secretary or guard - to see how the men were being looked after.
There's a striking symbolism in those young brickies and carpenters being welcomed by the nation's Prime Minister in the heart of our democracy.
These gestures were not accidental.
They were the deliberate actions of leaders who understood what they had done by bringing those 200 tradesmen to Australia.
They knew they had begun a journey that would transform our nation forever.
A journey we must continue in the spirit it was begun.
Friends,
I am part of that journey.
I am one of the migrants who has made Australia's story their own, and I told my story at the Council's launch a year ago.
I told of the brave decision my parents made to leave everything that was close and familiar to venture upon a new and unknown land.
I told of how we arrived to be welcomed by a warm and generous people.
I told of how my parents taught me and my sister the value of hard work to earn our keep and do our best.
So I stand here before you today as the very proud daughter of John and Moira Gillard.
Migrants.
My late father spoke of the modest aspiration he brought to our prospects in Australia.
But in his long life, he came to learn that remarkable things can happen in a remarkable country.
Millions of other migrants know it too.
Years and decades of hard work, and suddenly your son is a doctor.
Your grandson is a judge.
Your daughter is Prime Minister.
It's what happens when you seize and shape the future rather than shrinking in fear of it.
If there is one Australian who understands these things only too deeply, it is Frank Lowy.
Frank's pathway was indescribably hard.
From Czechoslovakia and the perilous streets of occupied Hungary to France, Cyprus and Mandate Palestine.
Surviving the horrors of the Holocaust that claimed his own father's life.
Facing years of uncertainty in the aftermath of war.
And finally coming to Australia to begin the longest and greatest chapter of his incredible life.
Frank, you are, indeed, an extraordinary Australian.
And your family's life tells a great Australian story.
You couldn't get the education you deserved.
All your boys went to university.
You couldn't always find enough food or clothing as a child.
Now you enjoy prosperity beyond any childhood dreams.
Your father was a humble travelling salesman who did it tough during the Depression and wartime years.
Now you own the greatest retail network on earth.
You couldn't enjoy Europe's cultural riches because of the Nazis.
Now your son is President of the NSW Art Gallery.
All this because of that single decision you took to emigrate six decades ago.
This is the point upon which our whole multicultural experience turns: decisions and choices.
From those epic decisions like Chifley and Calwell's first big call around the Cabinet table.
To our millions of individual decisions as migrants to undertake the journey.
And our countless choices as Australians to extend our hands and share our home.
They are the brave decisions that start as a glimpse through a keyhole and end up swinging open a wide and welcoming door.
Together they form one of our nation's greatest stories, and to explore it further, I am proud to introduce the inaugural AMC lecturer: a distinguished Australian.
The wise and generous Frank Lowy.


Canberra
PROOF ONLY
PM: Can I thank everybody for coming to Canberra today  -  my colleagues of course had to be here because Parliament is sitting. But I want to thank everybody for coming to join us in this discussion.
I wanted to say to you in this discussion that we are certainly standing with you in this problem in New South Wales. We're certainly standing with you in this fight against funding reductions in New South Wales.
I think you know from everything that we've said and everything that we've done that we want to see schools properly funded; we want to see that in independent schools, in Catholic schools, in state schools. We don't want to see schools in any sector facing the kind of cutbacks that you are now face in New South Wales.
So across our team in New South Wales we'll certainly be working with you and working with local schools as they mount a fight back against these cuts.
We're working and going to continue to work on a new way of funding schools. I'm very conscious that one of the problems we now have is that the Australian Government schools recurrent cost index, the way in which we index school funding now gets manipulated downwards by state Liberal Government cutbacks. So it can become a compounding cycle as we see those cutbacks from state governments like Premier O'Farrell's government.
So as we work through the details of school funding reform, I did want to indicate to you today that we do want to see a new way of doing indexation that's got more certainty for schools and is less volatile because of the conduct of the state government. And know that that's something that's been on your mind and we'll need to pursue in very detailed discussions.
But thank you for coming along today and I'll throw over to you for some comments about how you're seeing circumstances and the things that you would be doing from your schools.
Happy to go in any order, what would be the best order?
MOST REV ANTHONY FISHER OP, CHAIR OF NSW CATHOLIC EDUCATION COMMISSION: I might begin, Prime Minister, by expressing on behalf of all of us, our condolences on the death of your father and prayers and sympathies of the whole Catholic school community, I'm sure the other independent schools too. Our little children were sad for you so we're with you.
PM: Thank you.
MOST REV ANTHONY FISHER OP: I'm delighted to hear you're very aware of our anxiety. When first the cuts were mooted, they were going to be bigger, immediate and very unfairly distributed. As a result of the reaction of our parents and school communities, they ended up not quite as big and got a little breathing space and a bit more fairly distributed.
But they are very challenging and they will mean essentially for us higher fees, larger classes, fewer curriculum options, and for struggling families, a number of the members here are from Western Sydney, and where I'm from, and that really says to me that they're juggling the electricity bill or the school bill because I can't pay both.
We're very comforted by your reassurance that you're aware of the anxiety that this effect on us could be multiplied several times if the Commonwealth grant follows.
We think that the Gonski report and Government's reaction to it gave great confidence, not to miss out in the education sector, that we want to be amongst the best educators in the world and I know that's your public aspiration and now there's the a lot of discomfort uncertainty about this and so we're very grateful to have this conversation to see what reassurance we can go round to people with, especially those worried parents and school communities.
DR GEOFF NEWCOMBE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF AIS NSW: Prime Minister, from the independent sector in New South Wales, I think following your comments at the Press Club people there was a very positive feeling about the introduction of Gonski. Our schools realised that there would be more funding and that there would be a real focus on the disadvantaged and that's very important to our sector.
I think one of the consequences of the decision by the state government to cut funding is now that now they've pushed now into an area where basically, so schools are saying to us, well what's going to happen, will Gonski be introduced, how will the Federal Government cope with the cuts in funding by the state government? So there's real concern.
Our funding cuts of course will be front line and whereas I appreciate the fact that they, the state government may be able to cut bureaucracy, not that we support that at all, but in independent schools we of course have very lean bureaucracy and I know the Catholic system does as well that so it will mean a sufficient per cent of increase in fees and also a reduction in teacher particulars.
And I think at a time when we're looking for investment, we've looking to focus on teacher quality, we're all a little confused as to why any government would start cutting education.
[END]


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard will travel to New York from 23-27 September to attend the opening of the 67th session of the United Nations General Assembly.
The United Nations is the world's pre-eminent multilateral body, and Australia, as a founding member state, is committed to active engagement on its agenda.
The Prime Minister will address the United Nations General Assembly and participate in a number of high-level events at the core of the UN's work, including on progressing the Millennium Development Goals, enhancing access to education opportunities, strengthening the rule of law and coordinating international peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
While in New York, the Prime Minister will also have meetings with a range of leaders. 
The Prime Minister's visit to New York will provide an opportunity to advance Australia's candidacy for a non-permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council for the 2013-14 term.


Sydney
It's great to be here to share this celebration with you.
Two decades ago was indeed a remarkable time for telecommunications.
In 1992, the World Wide Web was just months old. Our first ISPs were starting up.
Telstra was created and Optus came to our shores as part of the reforms that also gave rise to Macquarie Telecom.
And a year later, cable TV was introduced.
This was the beginning of the digital revolution that would change our economy and our society forever.
So much so that as Prime Minister I can read my Cabinet papers on an iPad, I can trouble my staff with emails from my BlackBerry and I can lecture at length on the benefits of the Application that enables you to count rows when you're knitting on your iPad.
Anybody who wants to hear the full lecture about the merits of the row counter App can see me afterwards. It mightn't be for everyone but it will be for some of you.
So the benefits of the digital world are compelling and they were spoken about this morning very eloquently in terms of people with disabilities and what I can mean for their lives.
Economically, the Internet directly contributes $50 billion a year to our economy and that's set to increase to $70 billion by 2016.
Each 10 percentage point increase in broadband penetration can add 1.3 per cent to the GDP of a high-income country.
And yet here in our own nation, as a share of GDP, the Internet generates around 25 per cent less in Australian than our peers in other developed markets.
That's a sign we didn't get everything right in the '90s.
By leaving Telstra as a vertically integrated monopoly, and only cabling up the richest areas of our cities, the biggest and hardest parts of the job we needed to do were left undone.
That is until now.
With the NBN, we leap those two hurdles in one jump.
Telecommunications in this country will finally be fully contested and competitive and high-speed broadband will reach every home and business.
Few investments will be more important to Australia's success in the Asian century than these investments.
Here, among this group, I'm preaching to the converted.
You know the benefits of competition because that's what gave you a start back in 1992.
And you know the benefits of universal high-speed broadband because it will underpin your work for the next 20 years.
In fact, I understand that IC2 is regarded by Macquarie Telecom as a companion investment to the NBN, and our development of the NBN gave your company the confidence to build this project right here in Australia.
So it's a great investment in local skills and capacity and it's a $60 million vote of confidence in the NBN itself.
As we roll out world-class broadband to homes and businesses around our nation, the world-class services that will be hosted in centres like this will become available to all Australians. 
As a government, we believe high-speed broadband is too important to be confined to the lucky few who the market has chosen to serve. 
I know that Macquarie Telecom shares this vision. 
IC2 is the kind of place where our digital future is being created.
So much of that future is about the exchange of ideas and the exchange of data. 
From confidential credit card numbers to top-secret communications, we need to be able to move that information around.
Just as the NBN provides the solution to moving this data around, Macquarie Telecom and its peers play a key role in answering the related questions about where to store it.
Data security is of course fundamental to the trust that people, corporations and governments place in the Internet.
So this IC2 facility is a place of security and is a place of trust.
Here your customers, including the highest levels of the Australian Government, will expect our information to be stored safely.
And I'm told that Macquarie Telecom's facilities have the highest level of accreditation for information security in Australia.
I'm also delighted by the work you've done to make this building sustainable, making use of waste heat to provide cooling which reduces the demand on energy-hungry air conditioners. 
And this is an Australian facility on Australian soil, providing an additional level of security for your customers.
The Government will have more to say on this in the coming months as we consider broader cloud computing policies. 
Here today on this day of celebration, I think we should see the potential of what is being achieved here.
It really is leading the way to the future of a high-skill, high-tech, high-wage economy that can win in the Asian century.
If there was ever a time in our history to invest in innovation, this is it.
If there was ever a time in our history to invest in smart technology, this is it.
If there was ever a time in our history to invest in schools and training, then this is most certainly it.
And now is the time to invest in a National Broadband Network, which is exactly what we are doing. 
I know we can be, with these kinds of policies, the nation that gets it right. Let's be that nation.
Just like we did in those historic reforms that gave rise to Macquarie Telecom two decades ago.
I proudly declare the IC2 facility officially open, with high hopes for the contribution it will make to our nation's prosperity and success in the future. 
Thank you very much.


Sydney
Australia's role in the growing digital economy will be discussed at a one-day Forum on the Digital Economy, to be hosted by the Prime Minister next month.
The rise of the digital economy presents enormous opportunities for the Australian economy. It is fundamentally changing the way business is conducted both within Australia and globally.
With the rollout of the National Broadband Network, Australian businesses can and should be able to capitalise on these opportunities.
The Prime Minister's Forum on the Digital Economy will bring together more than 30 senior business representatives, entrepreneurs and industry bodies to discuss how Australia can best maintain an edge in growing the digital economy into the future.
The forum will be hosted by the Prime Minister, Minister Conroy and Minister Shorten at the University of New South Wales on Friday 5 October.
The Prime Minister will open the Forum, with sessions to address these key issues:
 * 	The success of innovative digital organisations;
 * 	The opportunities and challenges of a digitally enabled world; and
 * 	Thinking about work in the digitally engaged world.
We know that Australian SMEs stand to benefit from the NBN and the growth of the digital economy.
The Forum will draw on the experiences of entrepreneurial companies that have been successful in the digital economy, to support others to transition.
The Forum will also look at ways to improve Australia's competitiveness and productivity, building on the Government's National Digital Economy Strategy and Productivity Agenda. The National Digital Economy Strategy has set a goal for Australia to become a leading global digital economy by 2020.



PROOF ONLY
PM: It's great to be here today at Our Lady of Mercy College in Parramatta. I'm joined by Peter Garrett, the Minister for School Education. And also Julie Owens, the local member. And Michelle Rowland, the member for Greenway went to this school, she was head girl here, so we're thinking of Michelle as well.
Can I say a big thank you to Kitty and all of the staff who have helped us round on this visit. And a big thankyou too to all of the girls who have shown a lot of spirit and lot of welcome as we've gone round.
This is a great school and I want every school around the country to be a great school.
I want to make sure every child gets a great education. And that takes a very special combination of great teachers, and I have met some today, of good school leadership and Kitty is here leading this school, of support from the community, but it also takes the right level of resources in schools.
We're absolutely determined to make sure we keep building on what we've done so far for Australian schools, so that they've got a future where our education system is amongst the top five in the world.
We've done a lot, new buildings, new computers, trades training centres, national curriculum, MySchool, new national partnerships for disadvantaged schools, for teacher quality, literacy and numeracy, the list goes on. But we want to do more.
As Prime Minister I'm determined that we make the right set of choices as a nation so that we can better invest in our schools and the future of our young people.
That's why I'm so disappointed that here in New South Wales, Premier O'Farrell has made a different set of decisions.
And unfortunately schools like this one across the state of New South Wales are faced with cutbacks as a result.
That's at risk of causing a double-whammy for schools because state government Liberal cutbacks feed into the way in which we index our payments to schools. 
That double whammy as Liberal states cut funds feeds into indexation. I want to make sure as part of our reforms for schools, starting from 1 January 2014, that we've got a better way of providing growth in funds for schools. A better index that helps schools see their funds predictably rise. There's been a problem where it's been unpredictable for schools, and now the way in which school funding is indexed is hit by state Liberal government cutbacks.
So part of what we'll be talking to schools around the nation about  -  to state schools, to independent schools, to catholic schools  -  is a way of indexing school funding for the future.
It's been a delight to be here today. Thank you to all of the girls who've said hello and we're very happy to take your questions. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why is the Australian Government, courtesy of Wayne Swan, referring to elements of the US Republican Party as cranks as crazies just weeks out from the US election? 
PM: The strength of the American economy matters to the global economy. America is of course a global economic giant, and what happens in the US economy matters to the world economy and it matters to us.
Risks to the US economy therefore matter for the global economy, and they matter for us. Wayne Swan was making that very commonsense point today. 
JOURNALIST: They are quite strong comments to make though. And you were very critical of John Howard when he criticised Barack Obama's pre-election pledge to bring troops home from Iraq. Aren't you being a bit hypocritical here? 
PM: The Treasurer's job is to be speaking to the Australian people about the strength of the Australian economy, but also things that are risks to the global economy and the Australian economy and that's what he has been doing today. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you agree with the Treasurer's comments? 
PM: Certainly the Treasurer's been making appropriate comments today about potential risks for the global economy and consequently for the Australian economy. You would expect him to be doing that. 
JOURNALIST: Will this affect your ability to work with the US Republican Party if Mitt Romney wins the election? 
PM: Look, the Treasurer's made a set of observations about economic risks for Australia. Let's remember the context we're working in. We saw the global financial crisis, the biggest economic downturn our world had seen since the Great Depression.
That proved to us yet again that our economic fortunes are part of what happens with the global economy. Now, we in those circumstances were able to keep our nation out of recession. 
But we're not immune from global economic events. We're not immune from what happens with the American economy and that's what the Treasurer has been speaking about today. 
JOURNALIST: On that, the IMF has warned that if the economy does worsen, to scrap plans for a surplus. Is that something you're prepared to do?
PM: We're determined to bring the budget to surplus and actually the IMF report backs the Government's economic strategy.
JOURNALIST: The Labor-dominated human rights committee has recommended that you hold off switching single parents to Newstart. Will you consider that recommendation? 
PM: What we want to see for single parents, for people on welfare benefits generally is that we are creating the right incentives and giving the right supports to get people into work at the appropriate time.
Of course when people are caring for very young children, they need to be there looking after their family. But all of the evidence shows that if a parent gets back into the work force as their child goes to school that's better for the parent and ultimately better for the child. That's what our policies are aimed at.
JOURNALIST: So the Government will not be waiting for the Senate inquiry? 
PM: We've already announced these policies in the last budget. 
JOURNALIST: Can we just go back to the cuts to education in New South Wales. Have you had any discussions with schools here that may have to increase fees at Independent or Catholic schools as a result? 
PM: I invited school representatives to meet with me in Canberra during the course of this week. I met with representatives of the Catholic school system and of Independent schools and they are very concerned about what the cutbacks from Premier O'Farrell mean for their schools.
They certainly said to me that they're concerned about potential fee rises and the position that that puts them in and the parents of the children at their schools in.
So there is a lot of concern around in the Catholic school system, Independent schools and also in State schools about what this means for school communities. I mean, at its most simple, I believe that even when they're tough budget choices you've got to make the right choices so that we are giving kids like the ones I've met today the best possible education and the best possible future.
The work we asked David Gonski and his school review team to do was to define the amount of resources a school needs to get the children in the school a great education. And that's what we're driving for, a great education in every school around the country. And that's why we're so concerned about these cutbacks here in New South Wales. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you surprised that the US Consulate has ordered its citizens to stay away from Sydney's Hyde Park and Martin Place this weekend, obviously in reaction to what happened here last Saturday? 
PM: I'd have a more general message and I certainly said it immediately after the conduct last weekend, and I'm very happy to say it again. There is no excuse for violence. We live in a wonderful multicultural democracy. That brings rights and it brings responsibilities. And amongst those responsibilities is always abiding by the rule of law. 
JOURNALIST: Some locals on Manus Island are questioning whether they deserve compensation to the tune of $45 million for the processing centre to be set up there. Is that something your government has been alerted to? 
PM: We've signed a memorandum of understanding with the government of PNG. We're now working through officials to settle all details and to construct the appropriate accommodation for asylum seekers on Manus Island. So all of these will be worked through by officials but the MOU has been signed. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Joe Hockey has asked the public service commissioner asking him to investigate the Treasurer's office after it used two public servants to create a document tracking how the Coalition votes. Is the Government politicising the public service? 
PM: Certainly not. I do note there is a set of stories about all of this today, so let's get some of the facts on the table. Fact number one, in terms of ministerial staffers and advisers, there are less under this government than there was under the former Howard Government. Something you might like to ask Mr Hockey about.
There's also a clear code of conduct for ministerial advisers, something that this government created. Once again, something you might like to ask Mr Hockey about. And in my experience people abide by the code of conduct. 
JOURNALIST: Liberal Party success in the local government elections is a reflection of your Labor Government?
PM: People will have the opportunity in 2013, in around about a year's time, to make their choice on who's best to lead the nation, who's best to be the Federal Government of this country.
And that choice will turn on whether or not you believe that this nation's future is being defined in Australia's schools, whether or not you believe in putting our kids first as the highest priority of government. Whether or not you believe in a better deal for people with disabilities, and whether or not you want a plan to keep our economy strong.
We've got a track record of doing it and a plan for building on that track record. That's what the 2013 election will be about. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just back on the public service question, should Mr Swan cooperate with any investigation? 
PM: Look, Mr Hockey obviously involved in a little bit of negative political carry-on. That's the Opposition, it's not really for me to have deal with it.
Okay, we're right, thank you. 


New York City, USA
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced Australia would join with the United States and other international partners to expand economic opportunities for women and to increase women's participation in politics and civil society.
Ms Gillard announced that Australia was joining the Equal Futures Partnership as a founding member. The Partnership was launched today in New York by US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
Member countries of the Equal Futures Partnership commit to taking action to expand economic opportunities for women and to increase their political and civil participation.
Other founding members include the United States, Benin, Bangladesh, Denmark, Finland, Indonesia, Jordan, the Netherlands, Peru, Senegal, Tunisia, and the European Union.
Australia has a strong record at home and abroad in supporting the goals of the Equal Futures Partnership but is always looking to build on these achievements.
Nations thrive when women are able to participate in politics, business and society as equals.
In addressing the Equal Futures Partnership launch, Ms Gillard highlighted recent Australian policy initiatives to help deliver an equal future for women.
These include taking steps to improve women's representation in male-dominated industries and a target of a minimum of 40 per cent women on Australian Government Boards by 2015.
The Prime Minister said the Government was also creating a National Centre of Excellence to Reduce Violence Against Women. 
The Centre will serve as a research hub to support the development of policy, professional practice and programs to reduce violence against women.
Australia is also committed to supporting gender equality in our region.  The Prime Minister recently announced at the Pacific Islands Forum in Rarotonga a ten-year, $320 million initiative, which will focus on improving women's leadership and decision-making opportunities; increasing economic opportunities for women; and reducing violence against women.
Ms Gillard is in New York to attend the 67th Session of the United Nations General Assembly.


New York City, USA
I am honoured to announce Australia's founding membership of the Equal Futures Partnership.
I am delighted to do so in the company of Secretary Clinton.
Hillary  -  you have done so much to inspire women and girls all around the world.
We stand taller  -  and walk freer  -  because of your work and your example.
Two years ago President Obama committed the United States to new steps to break down economic and political barriers which separate women and girls from their full human potential.
And he called on the nations of the world to join this effort.
From that commitment, the Equal Futures Partnership was born.
As Australia's first female Prime Minister, I am delighted to commit my nation to three domestic initiatives under the Equal Futures Partnership.
First, we're working to strengthen the pipeline of female talent in traditionally male-dominated industries.
It's great to have women Secretaries of State and Prime Ministers. But let's have more women engineers and truck drivers as well.
Second, we're committed to achieving a minimum of forty per cent of women on Australian Government boards by 2015  -  up from 35 per cent today.
Our progress so far is commendable.  But near enough is not good enough.
We're also creating a National Centre of Excellence to Reduce Violence Against Women.
The Centre will lead a national research agenda to support policies and programs to reduce violence against women.
No woman should live with violence or the fear of violence.
It is always and utterly unacceptable.
And I'm proud to say that Australia recently announced our A$320 million commitment to gender equality in our region: Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development.
In Australia, in the Pacific, in every corner of the world  -  all women are created equal.
This is the moral heart of our Partnership: 
Women and girls must have futures equal to those of their brothers and fathers.
That is what our work must achieve.


New York City, USA
PROOF ONLY
PM: Well I'm pleased to be here in New York after more than 20 hours of travel. It is good to arrive. I'm here for the United Nations General Assembly leaders' week.
The United Nations matters to Australia. We knew that when we joined as a founding member more than 60 years ago. The United Nations mattered to us then and it matters to us now.
The United Nations is the body that deals with issues like global security, the fight against global poverty and the fight to tackle climate change. So what happens at the United Nations matters for us.
Across the more than 60 years since the United Nations was founded, and we were a foundation member, Australia has made a strong contribution to the work of the United Nations.
We have been a leader on development assistance and striving towards the millennium development goals; a set of goals to try and do some very basic things for our planet that would make a difference for the people of the world, including addressing the circumstances of those who live in absolute poverty, getting kids into school, spreading clean water, safe drinking water for people.
We have been a strong contributor too to the peace building work of the United Nations. In the life of the United Nations more than 65,000 Australian Defence Force personnel and police have contributed to more than 50 UN and multilateral missions. So we've got a proud track record of engagement in the United Nations.
The United Nations General Assembly leaders' week is the time that leaders come together to make clear their views on the work of the United Nations. It's anticipated around 140 leaders will be here.
During the course of the week I've got five themes that I intend to be working on. First, I will be pressing on achievement of the millennium development goals. Much has been achieved to date but much remains to be done as the target of 2015 looms. I was asked by the UN Secretary-General to play a role in advocating the millennium development goals with a final push to see how much more we could do before the deadline of 2015. So I will be participating in discussions advocating the achievement of the millennium development goals.
Second, I will be involved in discussions about the work of the United Nations in its peacekeeping, peace building role. Here Australia's got very practical experience to share through the many missions we've been involved in including our mission in East Timor.
A third, I will be addressing the UN General Assembly and making clear Australia's view on a set of contemporary issues in our world.
Fourth, with so many leaders gathered in one place it's a good opportunity to have bilateral discussions to catch up with leaders and to exchange views.
And finally, I am here to personally advocate for Australia to be elected to the UN Security Council. The UN Security Council is at the core of what the United Nations does. So whether it's authorising a peacekeeping mission, whether it's prescribing a terrorist organisation, whether it's dealing with contemporary issues in our world like the threat of nuclear arms in North Korea, the violence in Syria, the nuclear issues in Iran, it is the Security Council that is at the centre of that work.
Australia, with its proud track record of work within the United Nations, has put itself forward for election for the Security Council and I will be personally advocating for that. We are encouraged by support we've received around the world, but this is a tight, close contest and I will be engaged in direct advocacy during the course of the week.
And then last, whilst my program here is very focussed on the United Nations I do look forward to the opportunity tomorrow to address a combined meeting of the economics club of New York and the Asia Society where I will be speaking about the Australian economy, our role in our changing region and the growth in Asia.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) we don't really have much of a chance at getting one of those two spots on the Security Council. What do you think? What do you think our chances are?
PM: As I said, it's tight and it's close and it will go right down to the wire. So we've got to be there putting Australia's case. Look we are encouraged by support we've received from many places around the world.
We've been endorsed by the Pacific Island Forum, by the nations in our region in the Pacific. We've received the support of the Caribbean Island nations, that's significant. We do have support from many places around the world. But it's tight and it's tough and so I'm here personally to advocate for our election to the Security Council.
JOURNALIST: If you had to rank it Prime Minister, do we have a greater than 50 per cent chance of getting this spot?
PM: Well, back home in Australia people this week will be interviewing coaches for the AFL grand final and the NRL grand final and you won't hear any of those coaches speculating on the results of the match. They'll be talking about what they're doing to get in there and win. I'm playing the same role on a very different stage.
JOURNALIST: Why is it important, why is it in the national interest?
PM: It's certainly in Australia's national interest to be on the Security Council. Is it is at the core of what the UN does. To take some very practical examples, we've been engaged in Afghanistan now for more than a decade and that is under a UN set of resolutions, and as our mission changes there and we look to the days beyond 2014 what the UN resolves as the further mandate for the mission is important.
So a really practical example of what the Security Council does that matters to us. Another really practical example: fighting global terror. It was through the UN Security Council that JI in Indonesia was prescribed as a terrorist organisation. JI, of course, having been involved in the Bali bombings which took Australian lives.
Then there's a set of issues that we are concerned about as a nation that affect the peace and security of our world. North Korea, Syria, Iran, these issues are important to us and they are dealt with at the Security Council.
So for all of these reasons we believe it's appropriate for our voice, the Australian voice, to be heard at the Security Council. We've got a proud track record of contributing to the work of the UN, development work, peace building work, we're a supporter through financial assistance to the work of the UN, the United Nations budget, so we think right across the board we have a strong case for election to the Security Council.
But it's not easy, it's tight, it's tough, and I will be here advocating it this week.
JOURNALIST: At the risk of throwing you a Dixer, is it the case that Australia being in the Asia Pacific region and a lot of the focus nationally going to the Asia Pacific region now, particularly the fact that there are a lot of development countries in that region, looking at the  -  do you think in this day and age necessary for a country like Australia to have representation on the council in a region that is now becoming so important?
PM: Well Simon, I might take you around as we do our advocacy work during the course of the week but you're right, one of the ways in which we are putting forward our bid is to say that we are in the region of the world that is growing strongly.
Global economic weight is shifting to our region of the world in terms of a set of strategic issues that matter to the world, for example, the issues with North Korea, they are something that are very much the focus of our region. So whether you look at the Pacific, whether you look at Asia, we believe Australia is placed to bring a perspective to the UN Security Council that our competitors could not.
Our competitors are Finland and Luxembourg so obviously they do not have the same kind of geographic positioning and long-term relationship with our region of the world.
JOURNALIST: In terms of the global representation the UN is supposed to provide, what message does it send if two European countries are elected to the UN Security Council?
PM: Well, I think really it comes back to the answer I've just given to Simon's question. Number one, we are encouraged by the support we're receiving and we're there striving for election and I will be advocating for that strongly this week so I'm not going to agree with the premise of any question about what the result might be and key amongst the many issues we bring as our credentials for election is our ability to be a representative for a growing region of the world.
PM: Prime Minister do you expect any reaction to the Treasurer describing some Republicans as cranks and crazies? And are you happy (inaudible)?
PM: Look, I dealt with this in Australia on Friday.
JOURNALIST: You don't believe the Treasurer has strained relationships (inaudible)?
PM: I dealt with this in Australia on Friday.
JOURNALIST: Just going back to question of the Security Council. Some people have maybe unkindly described it as the diplomatic equivalent of a World Cup soccer bid. Is it that based, is the lobbying at that level where countries are throwing around aid money just to get a vote?
PM: Well we certainly do not. Our aid priorities are about the millennium development goals, about doing very practical things. Educating children, getting food assistance to people in crisis, vaccinating kids so that they don't die of the kind of diseases that we've eradicated in our own nation, but around the world so many children continue to die of  -  diseases like polio, which no longer blight our country but still blight parts of the world.
So the focus of our aid and development work is on very practical things. Our focus of our aid and development work is also on empowerment of women because that's important to dragging countries out of poverty and I will be participating in an equal futures partnership event with Hillary Clinton during the course of the week.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you could tackle many of those issues much closer to home than in the Caribbean for example.
PM: We do tackle those issues very close to home.
JOURNALIST: What about the money being put into the Caribbean is money well-spent (inaudible)?
PM: We tackle those issues around the world and we tackle those issues close to home. I did very recently attend the Pacific Island Forum where I announced a more than $300 million investment in empowering women because we live in a region of the world where many of our small island neighbours do not, as yet, have fully integrated into their national parliaments, women as true equals.
So whether you're talking about disaster relief and assistance which we provided in our region, whether you're talking about support for schools in Indonesia, whether you're talking about climate change adaptation financing or support for the empowerment of women in Pacific Island nations we do work intensively in our region of the world.
But there is poverty and there is need beyond our region of the world and we respond to it.
JOURNALIST: There's a report today (inaudible) may have been involved in some kind of bribery offshore in the Phillipines. Following on from the security issue and (inaudible) concerned this might not just be one off, there might be a number of companies representing Australia, organisations representing Australia, involving questionable practices? (Inaudible)?
PM: Look, I've been advised of the report you're referring to which does state that the Australian Federal Police is looking at this matter, so in those circumstances I will leave it to the Australian Federal Police.
JOURNALIST: Can you clarify for us the amount spent on the campaign? There's been a few figures bandied about.
PM: The allocation we made for the campaign was around $24 million over five years.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: Well that's the budgeted figure, that's the resources available, around $24 million over five years. Obviously our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade which is resourced as the ordinary workings of Government, has put very, very strong efforts into the Security Council bid.
JOURNALIST: Quick fast forward to tomorrow and the speech (inaudible)?
PM: Right well we'll make this the last question.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) give us some idea of what you're going to be talking about (inaudible)?
PM: I'm addressing the Economic Club of New York in a combined meeting with the Asia Society, as I understand it I might be the first leader from another country to do that, and I believe I've been invited because we've got a close Australian perspective on what is happening in our region.
So I will be talking about the dynamic changes in Asia, the rise of the middle class in Asia and what that means for the future of the Australian economy and the future of the world economy.
JOURNALIST: Looking on the domestic front, do you support Morris Iemma (inaudible)?
PM: Look, pre-selections are all for the ALP.
Thanks very much.


New York City, USA
Your two societies, rich with history, perform a vital contemporary role.
One way I describe today's environment for decision-makers is this: almost every hand on the lens is tightening the focus.
Flattening our perspective, simplifying our picture  -  and missing complexity.
Yours is one of the few that is working to wind the other way  -  encouraging us back towards “deep focus”.
When half the world is looking through the camera lens of a mobile phone, you're seeing it like Orson Welles.
Dedicated to seeing the complexities  -  to seeing the world through the long view, in perspective, in depth.
So that's the kind of discussion I'm looking forward to joining in today.
Now, if there were a simple story of my country's economy today  -  it would be “strength”.
For those of you who are not familiar with Australia's position, let me describe our economy to you through the facts.
Private investment huge  -  record highs, up $983 billion since late 2007, equivalent to two thirds of our annual GDP.
Public debt small  -  peaking around a tenth of the level across major advanced economies.
Growth totalling eleven per cent over the past five years.
Unemployment at five point one per cent today.
Job creation strong  -  around 800 000 jobs in the past five years  -  in an economy with over eleven million workers.
Inflation under control  - at thirteen year lows.
And the bottom line, remarkable: the Australian economy has grown every year for the past twenty-one in a row.
Australians have lived through a generation of growth.
Some observers boil that all down this way:
A simple phenomenon, a mining boom  -  with a simple explanation, Chinese demand for commodities  -  and entailing a simple risk, slowing Chinese growth and lower commodity prices.
But a story that simple is rarely accurate. And if you only guard against simple risks, you won't be ready for the most challenging threats.
So let me add some depth and perspective today.
First, Australia's economy today is less reliant on our natural resources and our mining boom than you might believe.
Mining employs two per cent of Australians.
In the next four years, we expect three times as many new jobs to be created in health care, social assistance, education and training as will be created in mining.
That doesn't include Australia's professional, scientific and technical services  -  where employment is also forecast to grow faster than in the mines.
Our third biggest export is education  -  mostly tertiary education.
Nearly eighty per cent of Australia's gross value added is in services.
Our finance industry alone generates a greater share of our value-add than mining.
Domestic consumption accounts for over 55 per cent of our GDP.
Of course Australia gains greatly from our rich natural resources and the industries which develop them.
But resources is part of the whole.
With the scale of our resource industries within Australia's economy better understood, consider this next.
Australia's mining boom has long to run.
The key is to understand that Australia is experiencing a series of booms: first in prices, then for investment, then for production.
Our own economic planning took into account that the price peak would be reached in 2011.
Now, the scale of this peak has to be understood.
This year for iron ore, contract prices will come out around US$126 a tonne  -  and next year they're forecast by Australia's Bureau of Resource and Energy Economics to moderate to an average around US$101 a tonne.
Ten years ago we got around US$20 per tonne.
This year contract prices for high-quality hard coking coal will come out around US$211 a tonne  -  and the Bureau forecasts they will fall next year to $US183. 
Ten years ago we got US$50 per tonne.
These are pretty representative examples of the decline in commodity prices  -  in turn, pretty good examples of where the wide view gives you a very different impression from the close-up.
Clearly, we'd prefer prices to stay higher for longer.
And the easing in prices squeezes profits, meaning slower revenue growth for Government and hard decisions on the expenditure side.
But equally clearly, if you'd offered us today's prices ten years ago, we'd have grabbed them with both hands.
And if you offered any country Australia's fiscal position, they'd grab it with both hands too.
The larger point though is this: the peak of the price boom comes as an unprecedented investment boom is now underway.
The sources of those investments are themselves diverse.
We're not leveraged against any one national economy  -  indeed the United States was the biggest source of investment in Australian resources in the past five years.
And this investment is creating jobs and wealth now and building the capacity for the production boom which will follow. 
So the Australian economy is more than just mining.
The mining boom is more than just a price boom.
And the long term health of our resource industries and our economy as a whole is less exposed to a slowdown in Chinese demand for coal and iron ore than you might think.
Consider our plans for the future exploitation of our gas reserves.
Seventy per cent of our liquefied natural gas exports go to Japan  -  and changing patterns of energy demand in developed Asian economies are creating new market opportunities.
Take the Ichthys liquefied natural gas project in northern Australia which starts operation in 2016.
A Japanese-French joint venture between INPEX and Total, this is the biggest single investment by a Japanese company outside Japan.
This single project will boost Australian export income by $72 billion over its life. 
And the entire first fifteen years' production of LNG from the project is already priced and sold: mostly to Taiwanese and Japanese buyers.
Or the Santos Gladstone LNG project: another joint venture, this time involving French and Malaysian investors.
A pioneering project which will convert coal seam natural gas into liquefied natural gas for global export, this project alone will supply 11 per cent of Korea's domestic gas needs and 9 per cent of Malaysia's gas consumption.
These are only two examples of the projects which are securing the future of Australian mining and extraction.
Gas is a key example of the strength and diversity of the Australian resource industry.
Our gas exports should more than double as a share of our energy exports over the next two decades  -  they're now forecast to reach more than a quarter of Australia's net energy trade by the mid-2030s.
Now, Australia is an open trading economy, operating in a demanding world economic environment.
We must use the opportunity of today's strength to invest in the drivers of future prosperity.  We know this.
And in saying all this, the point I'm making is not to replace one simple story  -  fragile prosperity based on a boom and at short-term risk from slowing Chinese growth  -  with a different simple story  -  good times that will last forever with no risks at all.
What I want is to replace a simple story with a more serious and detailed account of what's going on in Australia.
With that said I also want to press on to a more serious and detailed account of what's going on around Australia  -  in Asia.
The best advice I can give anyone thinking about Asia is this:
Never mistake the waves for the tides.
Of course the waves, the short term changes, matter.
Knowing whether China is growing at eight, or seven and half, or seven per cent, understanding the different elements of that growth, and how that growth is now sustained, is far from trivial.
I'm not here as an economic forecaster  -  what I'd say about the debate about the likely outcome in China is principally this.
Even if growth were slower  -  even at six per cent  -  that is very substantial and continuing economic expansion.
The very fact that six per cent growth is the bad scenario  -  the so-called “hard landing”  -  is itself an illustration of a considerable degree of continuing strength.
Indeed with China forty per cent larger than it was five years ago, six per cent growth today is a bigger contribution to global GDP than eight per cent growth would have been in 2008. 
In any case, while it's rightly a matter of hot debate, the centre of my thinking is not on China's waves.
I'm more focused on reading the tides.
I am struck that many of the familiar illustrations of Asian growth also illustrate how much growth and change lies ahead.
We've all heard many times that the majority of Chinese people now live in cities  -  but the really startling fact is that this means almost half of all Chinese today don't live in a city.
Perhaps another 250 million Chinese will move to the cities in the next twenty years.
We're talking about a century of change, not a business cycle.
I know that many draw a simple inference from change in Asia:
China is rising as a near-term competitor in our product markets and we have to work harder to compete.
That simple inference is half-right, at best  -  and for a decision-maker, half-right might as well be wrong.
So let me add some depth and perspective to the picture of regional change.
First, it's not just China  -  it's Asia.
Our century will be defined by the rise of many countries and many cultures, not just one.
By Indonesia, a diverse society, a vast Islamic population, a democratic state, a nation of two hundred and forty millions.
By India, a vast democracy, a historic civilisation, home to more English speakers than the United States.
By the rise of social democracies and liberal markets in a region of change stretching not just from “Suez to Singapore” but north to Samarkand and east to Seattle.
It's not just new competition  -  it's new consumers.
We must understand what a middle-class century in Asia means  -  because it is a key point for advanced, service-based economies like ours.
What do we do best?  We make and sell goods and services to middle-class consumers and we invent new ones. 
What is happening in Asia this century? 
The creation of a middle-class which grows by more than a hundred million every year.
Not just new consumers  -  it's consumers who want to buy new things.
Once you've built cities, they fill with city-dwellers.
So once you've sold them concrete and steel, iron and gas they buy wine and movies and music, retirement financial products and bespoke tourism experiences and food which is the product of clean and sustainable agriculture.
There are a thousand examples  -  but one conclusion.
In the century ahead, it's precisely economies like ours  -  advanced, knowledge-oriented, service-rich economies  -  which are best placed to prosper.
But only if we keep lifting productivity  -  if we keep driving innovation, keep generating new ideas.
Australia's economy is a highly productive one today.
We rank above South Korea, Japan, Canada and the UK for labour productivity  -  indeed Australia is one of the top 12 international performers for labour productivity levels.
And in the year to June 2012, our labour productivity grew at two and a half times the average for the last decade.
So for us, lifting future productivity even further demands a really sophisticated agenda  -  from innovation to infrastructure, tax reform and regulatory reform.
Above all, we must stay in front in the education race.
Now education's centrality to economic development is far from new.
America's GI Bill is known the world over: Auden's veterans “encamped upon the campus plain” became the world's biggest middle-class in the 1950s and 1960s.
And education has already been central to the extraordinary rise and growth of Asian economies  -  Japan, South Korea, Singapore and Hong Kong: now China and India.
There's a reason nineteen universities in Asian nations are now ranked in the top 100 universities worldwide.
There's a reason that the symbol of Hiroshima University is the phoenix, that its motto can be translated as: “try new things, do new things”.
These nations know that a complicated world demands a quality education.
We know it too.  Education is more important to nations like Australia and the United States than ever before.
First, because the achievement of Asian nations in education sets us a standard we must meet at home.
That is why I have set a new goal for 2025  -  to return Australia to the top five in school educational attainment in the world.
Australia's universities are already highly ranked on the world stage.
According to the latest Shanghai Jiao Tong University Ranking of World Universities, one in eight Australian universities is in the top 100 in the world.
And we have sent ambitious goals for skill formation and university attainment.
By 2015, 90 per cent of young Australians aged 20 to 24 will have attained a year 12 or an entry-level qualification at certificate II or above.
By 2025, 40 per cent of all 25 to 34-year-olds will hold a qualification at bachelor level or above, up from 35 per cent in 2011.
Second, to prosper in Asia, we'll need to know Asia.
We'll need Asia-literate policies and Asia-capable people.
And those demands are ever growing.
Last year, I commissioned what in the Australian system is known as a “White Paper”  -  on Australia in the Asian Century.
This will be a national blueprint for a time of national change  -  designed to set ambitious national goals for lifting the Asia capabilities of the Australian Government and people.
And third, to prosper in this new Asia, we'll need to stay smart and innovative, productive and capable. 
Australia must be a country that makes and sells ideas.
Because the big unanswered question facing countries like ours isn't the growth rate of China's economy later next year.
It is what the basket of consumer goods and services will be for middle class Asian consumers later this century.
Can we conceive of the new products and services which fill that basket  -  will we make and sell those things  -  and keep our economies strong?
In turn, the most challenging risk to Australia  -  and to countries like Australia  -  isn't China growing more slowly than we predict in 2013.
Just as the real task of national preparedness isn't fiddling with the dials of the macro economy this quarter to take care of the third quarter next year.
The most challenging risk is if we can't make and sell the things that Chinese and Indian and Indonesian and Thai consumers are buying in 2033.
And the real task of national preparedness is this.
Building the skills and the knowledge of our people  -  accumulating and deploying the human capital  -  lifting productivity, generating innovation, making ideas.
So  -  that's the picture I see from Australia. 
The Australian economy is a “coat of many colours”: the miners' fluorescent yellow shines brightly as a part of the whole.
This century will see the rise of a region which spreads thousands of miles west and south beyond China, in which economic changes create new markets not just new competitors.
And education is more important than ever before, because Asia's people are learning, because our people must know Asia, because it is education which best equips our economies for the change all this creates.
Societies and economies like yours and mine have some superficial differences  -  but the things we share run very deep.
We're democratic and corruption-resistant.  We're already urbanised and internationalised.  We're already market-oriented. 
Growth for us requires enormous sophistication.  Many one-off historic step-shifts lie behind us.  We've picked the “low-hanging fruit”, we need to be smart to find our future.
And if I can leave you with one illustration that best demonstrates how decision-makers are thinking about this:
When the formal meetings at the G20 or APEC are over, the officials may still be talking about the macro-economy, investment, finance and trade the leaders are talking to each other about our people, about improving and expanding universities, skills and schools.
I've spoken today about a century of change in Asia and what it means: it's no accident that the conversation happens here in the American north-east, here in New York.
The fact that this truly global forum for free thought and speech is hosted in a truly global city in the United States is no accident or coincidence. 
Rather, it is a tribute to the history and values of this city, this nation, a tribute to your remarkable people  -  and to the history and values we share.
We are two free peoples of the New World, two young nations born of the Age of Reason, two friends and allies still in a century of change.
You are generous and far-sighted hosts and I look forward to our conversation.


New York City, USA
It's a great honour to take part in this panel discussion on the New Deal.
I'm reminded that in 2012, we mark 80 years since Franklin Roosevelt proclaimed the original New Deal:
That remarkable extension of hope to a people afflicted by the misery of unemployment, poverty and homelessness.
High ideals entrusted to practical and achievable measures.
Hope that could, in FDR's words, only be delivered with "statesmanship and vision".
That could just as well serve as description of the New Deal initiative.
It is a timely and ambitious agenda, and the g7+ members should be proud of the progress achieved to date  -  and determined to do more.
Australia was proud to be a founding member of the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding which led to the New Deal.
It is sobering to think that there are more than 1.5 billion people living in fragile and conflict-affected countries  -  more than one in five of all the world's people.
And that, on present trends, it is likely that not a single g7+ country will achieve even one Millennium Development Goal by 2015.
Nothing could better illustrate the vital relationship between ending conflict and achieving development.
People living in conflict-affected and fragile countries are twice as likely to be undernourished.
Their children are three times more likely to not attend school.
Unemployment is too high, economic opportunities too few and tragically, life expectancy too short.
These stark realities compel us to do more to build peace, to strengthen state institutions, to engage civil society and local communities and support country-led transitions out of fragility, to manage our aid better.
The New Deal Initiative offers real promise to achieve that  -  in turn, offering real promise to accelerate progress toward the MDGs in fragile and conflict-affected states.
As co-chair of the Secretary-General's MDG Advocacy Group, I have made a personal pledge to advocate for development in conflict-affected and fragile states.
Building the resilience of fragile states also remains a key focus for Australia's aid program
In 2012-13 more than 55 per cent of our bilateral and regional aid  -  almost $1.8 billion  -  will go to fragile or conflict-affected states.
Seven of the top ten recipients of Australian aid are fragile or conflict-affected countries.
We are proud to be the lead donor supporting the New Deal pilot in Timor-Leste  -  through a new partnership arrangement with the Timorese government.
By the end of this year, we will have provided access to safe water for an additional 90,000 people as well as access to basic sanitation for 35,000 rural people.
Together we are working towards the goal of rehabilitating all rural roads by 2015, creating some 52,000 jobs by 2016 and bringing opportunities to the rural poor.
By 2015 we aim to be providing quality basic education to 93 per cent of children aged between six and fourteen  -  and to reduce the drop-out rate to just five per cent.
Building on our work in Timor-Leste, we are moving to align our work in other fragile states with the New Deal.
In Afghanistan, for example, we recognise the importance of Afghan Government leadership and capacity. As proof of this, we now deliver 50 per cent of our assistance through Afghan Government systems.
These are not only good examples of Australia's commitment to the collective enterprise of building peace and fostering development.
They illustrate that the goals and ambitions of the New Deal are achievable.
Together we can deliver change. Our commitment to the New Deal must not waver. The world's poorest and most vulnerable need us now.


New York City, USA
Mr President, congratulations on your election.
You now preside over a forum for every voice  -  an Assembly of all people and nations  -  for no country or bloc to dominate solely or lead as one alone  -  where small and medium sized countries are truly heard. 
Australia welcomes your election warmly.
The story of the United Nations is a truly global story encompassing all the people of the world  -  a story of the progress of small and medium-sized countries, not just great powers.
It's a story of reconstruction after world war and resettlement of massing millions.
A story of navigating the “winds of change”, the end of colonialism, bringing self-determination to the world's great majority, the billions of the global south.
A story of harnessing new sources of wealth and new resources through a revolution of rising expectations and during decades of dictatorship, famine and war.
A story of bringing justice to the perpetrators of the worst international crimes  -  and preventing the worst of human atrocities.
Now, extending freedom and harnessing new markets, lifting billions more out of poverty and oppression.
This has been the work of the United Nations for seven decades.
This year we assemble, in the knowledge born of these years: neither expecting perfection nor accepting the status quo  -  understanding that there is much we can do together that we could never do alone.
The UN articulates humanity's highest ideals; but more, the UN makes practical progress towards realising those ideals in the world.
There is no better example of this than the Millennium Development Goals.
Specific, measurable targets of the highest human importance  -  goals now familiar to us all.
Twelve years on from 2000, three years out from 2015, the progress we have made must be just as familiar.
The global economy has grown  -  hundreds of millions of people have lifted themselves up.
And that first, fundamental Goal  -  to halve the proportion of the world's population living in extreme poverty  -  is now achieved.
One billion human lives transformed.
A decade ago 100 million children did not get to go to school.
This number has been reduced by fully one third.
33 million human futures entirely remade.
But we must all acknowledge that there are vital areas where the international community is failing to achieve change.
This is why I accepted the Secretary-General's invitation to co-chair the Millennium Development Goal Advocacy Group alongside Rwanda: to advocate for practical progress in the coming three years.
Where the world has fallen short of ambitious goals, our response must be action, not disillusion.
This is what Australia will do. We will act.
We will help improve education.
Australia's development spending on education has doubled in the past five years  -  we will be among the world's largest education donors by 2015.
I am especially pleased to join as an “education champion” in support of theSecretary-General's Education First initiative to mobilise global support to help achieve education for all children by 2015.
I am honoured to lend it Australia's support.
We will help increase gender equality.
I was proud to announce at the Pacific Islands Forum last month that Australia will work alongside our partners in the Pacific on an unprecedented gender initiative:
Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development.
Australia will provide $320 million over 10 years: to support women's political participation, to expand women's leadership, to spread economic and social opportunities in the Pacific.
This is a principle underpinning every Australian aid intervention and initiative: empowering women and girls.
We will help fight drug resistant malaria.
The Secretary-General has made malaria one of his key priorities for his second term. It is a priority we share.
Since 2000, the world has cut the number of deaths from malaria by 26 per cent.
Without these advances, 330 000 more people would have died of malaria last year  -  the great majority in Africa.
But malaria itself is fighting back  -  now, drug resistance in malaria must be overcome.
Later this year, Australia will hold Malaria 2012, bringing together political leaders, civil society and the private sector to accelerate efforts to control and eliminate malaria and combat growing drug resistance.
While we are working hard to realize the MDGs in the next three years, Australia is looking further ahead.
2015 is a goal but it is not a destination  -  rather it must be a new point of departure for much new work.
Australia pledges to contribute to the important work of the High Level Panel on the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
Australia brings considerable national experience in working with conflict-affected states and least developed countries  -  especially in our own region.
And we will seek to apply what we have learned in our work since 2000 to the world's plans for beyond 2015.
First, that peace is an essential foundation to development  -  and building peace is vital to the progress of societies recovering from conflict.
Peacekeepers today must be peacebuilders  -  not just stopping conflict but enabling development.
Second, that there can be no poverty alleviation without the creation of wealth and jobs.
Growth alone is never sufficient  -  but to achieve development in the interests of all people we must create jobs and wealth.
Third, thatwe cannot make poverty history until we also consign to history the argument that environmental protection and human development are conflicting global goals.
Climate change threatens the secure food supply which guarantees development  -  new clean sources of energy deliver a new source of economic growth.
Australia is one of the world's most successful multicultural and multi-faith nations.
The Australian experience proves a deeply important fact.
There is nothing natural or inevitable about violent conflict over religious belief.
We must reaffirm this again today.
Denigration of religious beliefs is never acceptable.
Australia seeks to be an example of freedom for all faiths  - and we support this in the wider world.
However, our tolerance must never extend to tolerating religious hatred and incitement to violence.
Whether these lead to attacks against members of religious minorities or diplomats, attacks against houses of worship or diplomatic missions the perpetrators of all such violence must be brought to justice and all such incitement must be condemned.
Mr President, Australia condemns violence and we work for peace. We proudly take our full part in the work of the United Nations for peace and security.
We stringently observe Security Council resolutions aimed at curtailing weapons proliferation activities like those of North Korea.
We take the leading role in the UN-mandated mission in Timor-Leste.
We lead the regional assistance mission to Solomon Islands which operates with the UN's endorsement.
And we have been the largest non-NATO contributor to the UN-mandated International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.
Australia will bring this record of service to the international community to our service on the UN Security Council should we have the privilege to be elected by the UN membership in October.
There and beyond, our work and the work of every nation for peace must continue.
As we meet, the Syrian Government is turning the instruments of state power against the very people who state power ought to protect.
Employing heavy weapons and ground-attack aircraft against civilians ... engaging in systematic human rights abuses.
Syria's neighbours  -  in particular Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon and Iraq  -  are burdened by growing numbers of refugees and are delivering vital help to desperate people.
The UN has done important work already.
Australia is playing our part to help through our humanitarian aid.
We must do everything we can to end the suffering of the Syrian people.
And to rebuild Syrian society, those who are committing crimes against humanity must be held accountable.
The international community must unite behind Lakhdar Brahimi, the Joint Special Representative for Syria.
We urge the members of the Security Council to do so and to act decisively.
The international community must also unite in guarding against proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
It is now six years since the Security Council first expressed concern about Iran's nuclear program.
Iran still refuses to take the urgent steps necessary to build confidence that its nuclear program is exclusively peaceful.
In contravention of successive IAEA and UN Security Council resolutions, Iran moves closer to having the capacity to produce weapons-grade material.
So we stand with the world, united in sending a strong signal  -  through Security Council sanctions  -  that Iran must change its behaviour now.
A nuclear armed Iran would be a major threat to regional and global security: especially given the shocking and aggressive statements about Israel by Iran's leadership.
There remains the opportunity for diplomacy, backed up by robust sanctions, to persuade Iran to change its course.
Iran must take this opportunity for change and the nations of this Assembly must press Iran to do so.
There must also be change in the Middle East process for peace.
Australia shares the frustration of the parties at the current impasse.
We understand the strong desire of the Palestinian people for national self-determination.
Australia is resolutely committed to the establishment of a Palestinian state which is both independent and viable.
This is why we provide significant support to the foundations of a future Palestinian state and build its infrastructure and economy  -  more than $300m in aid from 2011 to 2016.
We commend the genuine progress President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad have made in building the institutions and infrastructure for statehood.
And no one can doubt Australia's close and continuing friendship with Israel.
Our support for the right of Israel and its people to exist in security and peace is an historic commitment in Australian policy and it will endure.
We urge a return to direct negotiations  -  the only durable basis for achieving a two-state solution.
The present impasse must be overcome.
Both sides need to make compromises  -  and avoid provocations.
It will take sacrifice on both sides to settle complex and difficult issues such as settlements, borders, security and Jerusalem.
The Israeli and Palestinian people deserve no less.
Australia's ideals in the world are those of the UN  -  and Australians know the practical value of the UN's work.
This is why Australia seeks to serve  -  in all the work of the UN  -  and on the Security Council.
We are a strong democracy, welcoming all the people, languages and religions of the world. 
We are a country of the Asia-Pacific, a neighbour to developing countries, with a perspective of both the North and South.
We are a state with a decades-long tradition of capable and committed work in the United Nations.
We contributed to the first UN peacekeeping force in 1947  -  and we lead contemporary peace building in our own region.
We support the development of new norms to enable the UN and its member states to act to prevent atrocities and to make the perpetrators of the worst crimes accountable for them.
We act as a first responder to humanitarian need  -  as a donor who stays the course  -  as a partner in rebuilding after conflict.
Mr President, Australia embraces the high ideals of the United Nations and takes a practical approach to achieving change.
The work of the United Nations is an historic task in which Australia wholeheartedly joins.


New York City, USA
Prime Minister Julia Gillard has today been appointed by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon as one of 10 member-state champions of his Global Education Initiative Education First.
Education Firstcalls for strong political leadership, sound policies and increased financing to help all children and young people benefit from a quality education.
At the launch of the initiative in New York today, Prime Minister Gillard outlined how the Australian Government will help more children attend school for a longer and better education.
The government has embarked on a period of unprecedented reform to ensure that every child in every school in Australia gets a high quality education. Through Australia's aid program we are also helping children in poor countries benefit from a quality education.
By 2015-16 we expect our investment in education will:
·         Help four million more boys and girls enroll in school
·         Build or upgrade 24,000 classrooms
·         Improve education for around 20 million children through investments in teachers and schools.
Australia's support is already making a difference.
In Indonesia, our aid has helped build and extend 2,074 junior secondary schools to create around 330,000 new school places in some of the country's poorest and most remote areas. We have also helped improve the quality of education by helping the government to train 110,000 teachers and 640,000 school officials.
In Afghanistan, our support has contributed to an increase in school enrolments from around one million in 2001 (virtually none of whom were girls), to around eight million in 2012  -  including more than 2.7 million girls.
In Pakistan, our support in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa has helped provide stipends to around 320,000 girls, resulting in a 14 per cent increase in girls' enrolment at the middle and secondary school level.
In Samoa, Kiribati and Fiji we are assisting children with disabilities to attend school.
In Sri Lanka we have supported the training of more than 24,000 primary education teachers and personnel.
While progress has been made, 61 million children globally are still missing out on the chance to go to school  -  one third of these children are in Asia and the Pacific.
Around 171 million people could be lifted out of poverty if all students in low-income countries left school with basic reading skills. This equates to a 12 per cent cut in global poverty.
Improving the future life prospects for all children requires global action to target the children who are hardest to reach or excluded from a quality education by factors such as ethnicity, gender,disability, geography or conflict.
The Prime Minister urged all governments  -  donors and developing countries alike  -  to put education first to benefit the future of our nations and the prosperity of our people.
Prime Minister Gillard joins Heads of State from Denmark, Bangladesh, Guyana, Croatia, Russia, South Africa, Tunisia, Timor Leste and Liberia as Champions for Education First.


New York City, USA
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today co-chaired the annual meeting of the Millennium Development Goals Advocacy Group, working to drive progress in reaching the Goals by 2015.
The Prime Minister announced her personal priorities for advocacy would be promoting access to quality education, and achieving gender equality.
This work will occur alongside Australia's role in the Secretary-General's Education First initiative, and the recent action on gender equality announced at the Pacific Islands Forum.
While the world has made strong progress on the MDGs, there is a lot of work still to do in the final three years to the 2015 deadline to help the world's poorest people.
It is unacceptable in the 21st century that children fail to reach their potential because they go to bed hungry, suffer from preventable illness, or miss out on the chance to go to school and learn to read.
Reaching the Millennium Goals is about tackling these devastating barriers to opportunity and equality.
The eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) seek to:
·         End poverty and hunger
·         Achieve universal primary education
·         Promote gender equality and empower women
·         Improve child health
·         Boost maternal health
·         Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
·         Ensure environmental sustainability
·         Attain a global partnership for development.
Education is critical to making all the MDGs a reality. A good quality education provides a pathway out of poverty. 171 million people could be lifted out of poverty if all students in low-income countries left school with basic reading skills.
We also know that societies only reach their full potential if women are participating economically and politically as equals. For example, the Asia Pacific region is losing over $US40 billion annually because of women's limited access to employment opportunities.
During the meeting the group discussed actions it will take in the coming year to work with governments, business, civil society and communities on achieving the eight MDGs.
Set up in 2010, the Millennium Development Goals Advocacy Group helps to drive global efforts to achieve the MDGs. Ms Gillard became co-chair with President Kagame of Rwanda earlier this year at the request of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon, in recognition of Australia's strong international development credentials.


New York City, USA
It's a great honour to be champion of Secretary-General Ban's Education First Initiative.
This is a very significant tribute to Australia's work to improve education in developing countries through our aid program.
There's a reason universal education is second only to ending hunger in the Millennium Development Goals.
In my discussions with the Secretary-General, I've told him that for my country, improving education is a great national priority  -  one we want to share with our neighbours and partners in the world.
And for me personally, education is the great passion that brought me into public life, and I want to share the story with you today.
Recently my beloved father passed away.
He was a bright boy who grew up in a family of seven in a Welsh coalmining village.
His family knew great hardship and even though my father won a scholarship, he had to go to work at 14 to help put bread on the table.
He died at 83 but his lifelong dream of a higher education was never fulfilled.
My sense of injustice has never dimmed, and I am deeply saddened that John Gillard's story is a story lived out in homes and villages all across the world today  -  especially in the global south.
Bright kids who don't have a chance parents who send their children off to work knowing it's not the best thing for the future.
As members of the international community, we can help end that.
Education is vital to prosperity for nations and to opportunity for individuals it is the ultimate means of a civilised life for every person.
I am delighted to join my fellow Education Champions who are determined to put education first.


New York City, USA
The Sahel region is rich in ancient cultures and history.
But the convergence of complex political and security issues with a devastating humanitarian crisis presents serious challenges.
The human cost to the people of the region is very real.
And the international community should also be gravely concerned about the risk of northern Mali becoming a safe haven for extremists and a focal point for transnational crime.
These challenges demand the care and concern of the entire international community.
So I thank Secretary-General Ban for bringing us together to discuss them and commend the UN's work towards an ‘Integrated Strategy' to guide our development of a comprehensive response.
The Sahel is rightly at the front of our minds today.
More than 18 million people are at risk of food insecurity.
An area of northern Mali the size of France is currently without government.
I'm deeply disturbed by the destruction of UNESCO World Heritage-listed sites in Timbuktu  -  and I am appalled by reports of public stonings and amputations.
Peace and stability must be restored to Mali.
The international community must reject the claims of sovereignty in northern Mali and pursue regionally-led mediation to resolve the crisis.
Australia applauds the efforts of the ECOWAS to engage the parties in dialogue.
Australia welcomes the appointment of the National Unity Government, but recognises that there is a long way to go.
And we encourage the transitional government in Mali, ECOWAS, Mali's neighbours, the African Union and the UN Security Council to continue working together to develop strategies to restore stability and territorial integrity.
Restoring effective, representative government in Bamako is the necessary first-step in restoring peace and stability in Mali.
Together with these efforts to restore peace and stability in Mali, the international community must move quickly to address the humanitarian crisis in the Sahel.
Australia is playing a significant role.
In 2012 we have contributed AUD 30 million to deliver urgently needed food and medical relief, as well as training to local medical staff.
We will provide a further AUD 14 million in urgent humanitarian assistance including AUD 7 million through the World Food Program and AUD 7 million through the Red Cross and UN Refugee Agency.
But as always, humanitarian aid can only be a temporary measure.
So Australia is working with partner Governments in the Sahel to build long-term food security and resilience.
This includes a program in which Australian scientists work side-by-side with scientists from the West and Central African Council for Agricultural Research and Development to boost agricultural productivity in the Sahel.
Long-term security in the Sahel will be closely tied to economic development.
The international community must help to improve the economic prospects of the people of the Sahel.
This will reduce the appeal of extremism and provide a means for individuals to earn livelihoods and respect.
Australia's ‘Mining for Development' initiative and program of scholarships for Africa  -  over 1 000 in 2012  -  are designed to provide such opportunities and promote economic self-reliance.
Australia commends the governments of the Sahel region for their efforts to address the humanitarian crisis.
As friends and partners, we stand ready to support regionally-led solutions.
There is much to do  -  our partners in the Sahel region can be confident Australia will do its part.


New York City, USA
PM: This morning I've had the privilege of attending the opening session of leaders' week here at the UN General Assembly.
I had the opportunity to hear the address of the Secretary-General, to hear the address of the President of Brazil, President Rousseff, the address of President Obama of the United States of America, and I also had the opportunity to hear the address of President Yudhoyono of Indonesia, and congratulate him on the making of that address.
So the leaders' week here at the General Assembly has started in full and in earnest. I've also had the opportunity during the course of the day to conduct a number of bilateral meetings.
I've met with the Prime Minister of Japan, with the President of Egypt, with the President of Liberia and the President of Malawi, and engaged in a broad set of discussions with those four leaders.
I will shortly have the opportunity to make a statement at an event which is focused on peacebuilding. We're familiar with the concept of peacekeeping, it's what Australians do. And indeed since the UN was first founded, more than 65,000 Australians  -  Defence Force personnel and police  -  have deployed overseas to help build peace in other countries.
We've participated in more than 50 missions under the mandate of the UN or multilateral missions. Peacebuilding is catching the concept that to make a lasting peace often you need to do more than just settle the peace, you need to help rebuild the country.
This is work in which Australia has had experience. Whether it be in the Solomons or in East Timor, we have a proud track record of peacebuilding. And I will have the opportunity to speak at an event for the UN Peacebuilding Commission to talk about Australia's experience.
That event will lead to a declaration to try and sharpen the focus of the world on peacebuilding, which is so often required when countries that have a low development status are also emerging from conflict.
Later today, I will host a reception for UN representatives, an Australian reception, I am looking forward to that. We are anticipating quite a large crowd. And that will give me the opportunity to speak to many of the people who are attending here at UN leaders' week and many of the permanent representatives who are here in New York representing their nations.
So I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Just firstly, are you feeling better and secondly, what is your take on the vote? How are the numbers looking?
PM: As to the first question, I am a bit better, thank you very much. On the second, I'm not going to be engaging in a running commentary on all of this.
We're encouraged by the level of support that we are seeing for Australia's bid for the Security Council. So I am encouraged by the support we're receiving. But it is going to be a close contest and part of the work here during the week is talking to nations about putting their support for Australia.
JOURNALIST: The Egyptian President said that today the American press said he sees the US as a friend but not necessarily an ally. After your meeting with him, are you concerned by that? He is of course a senior member of the Muslim Brotherhood as well?
PM: We are dealing with a new Egypt, a new democratic Egypt and it's not surprising that as this new Egypt emerges, that it will take time for people to establish relations with the new Egypt. It will just take time for people to work through.
I had a good and comprehensive discussion with the President of Egypt about issues in his country, as it under goes this democratic transition and issues in the region in which Egypt lies, the region in which he lives.
We also had some conversations about religious tolerance, so it was a good widespread conversation.
JOURNALIST: No one would wish any illness on you at all but it would have been disappointing for you no doubt to have missed so many events yesterday including dinner last night with Barack Obama. How disappointing was it and did it derail your efforts this week on the lobbying front?
PM: Certainly not. I did miss a couple of events yesterday. I didn't feel able to deliver a 25 minute address right at that moment. So Senator Carr admirably stepped in and did a very good job, as I understand it. And I didn't have the opportunity to attend the reception hosted by the President and Mrs Obama.
But my program has proceeded normally today and will for the rest of the week.
JOURNALIST: The President of Malawi made a point she was disappointed that you hadn't managed to get to Malawi for the Organisation of African Unity. Did you find that, can they sway the vote one way or the other (inaudible) can make a difference in this vote?
PM: Two things happened with the hosting of the African union meeting in Malawi. First, because of circumstances in Australia, that is we were moving imminently to the start of the carbon price, I made the decision that I needed to be attending to that work in Australia.
Second actually the African union meeting moved from Malawi to another country, so it wasn't ultimately hosted in Malawi.
I've had a good conversation with the President of Malawi today, and I did of course forward apologies for not being able to attend the African union meeting. And Parliamentary Secretary Richard Marles attended in my stead.
JOURNALIST: I've seen two estimates of how much Australia's spent on the race in the last five years, $24 million and $40 million, maybe it's a US versus Australian dollars. How much have you spent and how do you think that compares to Luxembourg and Finland?
PM: If that is an American accent then I‘d possibly remind our dollar is worth more than yours at the moment. So if we were doing a conversion into US dollars we'd be taking the number down.
The amount allocated over a five-year period was $24 million. Of course, though, much of the work that our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade does routinely has been brought to bear to assist with the bid.
JOURNALIST: The President made much of the recent violence in the Arab world and the Muslim world against the video. What did you make of these points made by President Obama and have picked up any tone from other leaders that you've been meeting with on that issue?
PM: I thought President Obama gave a very moving speech, starting as it did with the life story of Chris Stevens, the ambassador who lost his life in Libya. And I thought by starting with a human tale it helped him tell the broader story, which is that intolerance, which leads to violence and leads to death, is a needless tragedy. That real people lose their lives, real people with families and that there is never an excuse, never an excuse for violence no matter what is said, violence is never the answer.
JOURNALIST: He touched on another point, a conundrum if you like, these competing interest of freedom of speech and also the problems that are associated with social media and the ability to spread messages around the world instantaneously which sparked those riots. Can you comment on that and how in a free world we deal with that sort of issue?
PM: I think we'd all say we don't want to see anybody engage in incitement to hatred and in Australia of course we've got laws to deal with these issues and I believe that they are appropriate laws.
But living in the world we live in today, it's well and truly possible for something to get rapid dissemination around the world, coming from somewhere where there are no laws for dealing with racial vilification or incitement to hatred, and the content be around the world almost instantaneously.
The technology makes that possible. What guards reactions though, is how human beings choose to react and I think the point that President Obama was making very strongly, and one I very strongly believe in too, is that there is never appropriate to react with violence.
I think the President made the comment today that you can engage in more speech if something has deeply offended you, not violence.
JOURNALIST: Just on the meetings with the leaders today, do you get the sense that they can still be swayed by UN Security Council votes or do you get the sense that positions are now locked in with it being so close?
PM: I think like any election in any field, there are a range of people who make up their mind very early. There are a range of people who make up their mind closer in and there are some who don't make up their mind until they're actually putting the pen to the paper.
That's true in our own domestic elections. I think that will be true of the Security Council bid as well.
JOURNALIST: Is it a good thing that it's a secret ballot? Might that actually be in Australia's favour?
PM: I think all of the voting procedures are really a matter for the UN.
JOURNALIST: You keep on using the term allocated in terms of what this has cost - $24 million allocated  -  there must be a figure on what's actually being spent towards this bid? What is the figure of what has been spent and if there is no figure, how do the Australian people work out if it's value for money?
PM: I think from a commonsense perspective, you would understand, if we have an ambassador in a particular nation who is doing his or her routine work, and then we ask them as well to commence lobbying for our bid for the Security Council, that that becomes part of their day-to-day work.
Now we would have had the ambassador in that location anyway, we would have been paying his or her salary anyway, we would have been paying for the rest of the people who are in the diplomatic mission anyway, but we have asked them to take on a particular task.
That is why I'm using the terminology what has been directly appropriated, as to what has been absorbed into the ordinary workings of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
JOURNALIST: How do they assess whether it's value for money then if there is no bottom line?
PM: I think Australians can look at what's been specifically appropriated because we would have devoted the rest of the money to our foreign affairs engagement in any event.
JOURNALIST: Lindsay Tanner is re-emerging in today's papers  -  probably not a surprise to you  -  but saying he didn't think Kevin Rudd should have been knocked off and in a separate essay he has decried the state of the Labor Party saying it's lost its purpose, it's motivated by political expediency rather than inner belief. Do you have any views on that?
PM: I can be very clear about the Government's purpose and the Government's purpose is to keep the economy strong, to make sure that not only today but tomorrow, Australians have got the best of opportunities and we maximise our prosperity as our region changes.
And then we find a way to share that, that is fair and meets the needs of the Australian people, which is why you have seen us in the last few months, and you will continue to see us as a government, very focussed on delivering better schools, very focussed on delivering better dental care and very focussed on delivering a National Disability Insurance Scheme, all great Labor reforms.
JOURNALIST: On the subject of Bank of Japan policy, (inaudible)?
PM: No, we didn't have a discussion about quantitative easing.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask, your Government is in the courts this week seeking documents from the Australian Financial Review, can you tell us why it feels necessary to do that and, given the history of the Labor Government's commitment to FOI and the subsequent perhaps failure to deliver on some of those policies of openness, would it not be good for a court to decide on the scope of the retractions from FOI documents?
PM: We have strengthened FOI legislation. The matter involving the Financial Review is a very particular issue turning on its own facts and it's being dealt with by the Minister for Climate Change.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) is time running out for Iran or would you like to see tougher action more immediately?
PM: Look, what President Obama said this morning was that there is still time and space for diplomatic action to do its work and I agree with that. We have a sanctions regime against Iran. We think there is still time for diplomacy to make a difference.
JOURNALIST: Tomorrow you are going to stand up and tell the UN General Assembly in part making your case for the Security Council. Could you tell Mr And Mrs Average in Australia why we should get a seat on the Security Council, in their language?
PM: I will do my best, Phil, having been set a challenge in very particular terms. The UN Security Council is at the core of the work that the UN does. When there are big and difficult issues in our world it's the UN Security Council that comes in to play to try and fix them.
We're a nation that's got an interest in peace and stability in our region and around the world. In an interconnected world, you can't draw a boundary and say that's us and nothing that happens beyond the boundary matters.
Things that happen around the world matter to us. And so we've had Australian lives taken by terrorists. So proscribing terrorist organisations matters to us, that happens at the UN Security Council.
Missions in order to go to nations to deal with security issues come from the UN Security Council. Difficult questions like the question of Syria are things that should be dealt with at the UN Security Council.
Sometimes they can seem a long way from our shores but in a modern, globalised world things that can seem a long way from your shores can still affect you.
Global terror is a very good example of that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what was it that struck you down yesterday? Was it food poisoning?
PM: It was a stomach bug of some indeterminate origin. All I can tell you is one other person on the travelling party got struck down by the same thing. So we don't quite know whether that means we ate something the same or whether it's a virus. But I'm alright now.
Thanks very much.


United States
I am pleased to announce that I have appointed Mr Andrew Metcalfe AO as Secretary of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and Mr Martin Bowles PSM as Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship.
The current Secretary of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Dr Conall O'Connell, has indicated his intention to finish in that role on 28 January 2013. Dr O'Connell has been Secretary since May 2007 and prior to that appointment was Deputy Secretary of the then Department of the Environment and Water Resources. I take this opportunity to acknowledge the outstanding service provided by Dr O'Connell over his career in the Australian Public Service.
Mr Metcalfe has been Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship since mid 2005 and was reappointed to that position in 2009.  He was made an Officer of the Order of Australia in January 2012 for his distinguished service to public sector leadership, through contributions to Australia's international relations and to major public policy development and program implementation in the areas of immigration, Australian citizenship, cultural diversity and national security, and to the community.
As an experienced Secretary, Mr Metcalfe is well placed to take on the role of Secretary of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. I am sure Mr Metcalfe's knowledge and experience will be a considerable asset to the Commonwealth in his new role.
Mr Martin Bowles has been the Acting Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship since March 2012 while Mr Metcalfe has been on leave. He joined the department in December 2011. Prior to that, Mr Bowles had been a Deputy Secretary at the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency and at the Department of Defence. Before joining the Australian Public Service in 2006, Mr Bowles held senior executive positions in the education and health portfolios in the New South Wales public sector. I look forward to Mr Bowles continuing his contribution in this important role.
Having received a report from the Secretary of my Department, as required by the Public Service Act 1999, I have appointed Mr Metcalfe and Mr Bowles for periods of five years from 29 January 2013.
I thank Dr O'Connell for his contribution and congratulate Mr Metcalfe and Mr Bowles on their appointments.  


New York City, USA
PM: I'm shortly to leave New York to return to Australia, this is my last day here. My day started visiting the 9/11 memorial. It is a stark, very stark, very solemn memorial. The cascading water creates an environment in which you can contemplate what happened there.
I had the opportunity to see the names of the Australians we lost on 9/11, ten Australians in all.
For all time I think that that will be a place that people go to mourn lost loved ones, to reflect on everything we lost on that dreadful day. For me it's been a reminder of the chilling images of that dreadful day of what we all felt as the news first came through. It's also been a real reminder of why we commenced our mission in Afghanistan.
Apart from that today I've had the opportunity to engage in a number of bilateral meetings. All in all as my week in New York draws to an end, it's been a busy week, it's been a productive week.
I came here with five objectives, and that was to advocate for the millennium development goals, to talk about the importance of peacebuilding, to deliver my address to the UN General Assembly, to meet fellow leaders in bilateral discussions and of course to advocate for our Security Council bid.
I've been able to do all of those five things across the week.
The work I've done across the week really has had four themes. I've been focused on global security and on regional security. I've been focused on making poverty history, I've been focused too on climate change in my discussions, and I've been focused on peace and human rights.
As the week draws to a close, I've certainly thought throughout the week as I went through all of these engagements that whatever happens with our Security Council bid, this week at the UN has reinforced to me that Australia is a nation that is respected in the world. Our practical contributions for change are much admired. And whatever happens with our Security Council bid, I've certainly been left with an impression of warmth for Australia.
Now I know of course that people will want me to give a status report on how we're going with the Security Council bid, and as I said a little bit earlier in the week, football coaches heading towards the grand final don't give a running commentary on what they expect the scoreboard to be at the end of the game. And I'm going to abide by that rule myself.
But I have been encouraged by the support we've received.  I've been encouraged by the warmth there is towards Australia.
I would, as we've gone about advocating for the Security Council, I've said to people that we would bring an Australian voice, an Australian accent, to the Security Council. We have been talking to people all week about the Security Council bid, and I am encouraged by some of the warmth that we've received in response.
But this is a mission that continues. Voting day is not until 18 October. And we will be continuing to work between now and 18 October to secure a spot on the Security Council.
I would take this opportunity to thank our ambassador to the UN, Gary Quinlan and his team. Not only for everything they've done to facilitate my visit here, but everything they do to hold Australia's name up high at the United Nations.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) running commentary-
PM: No I'm not.
JOURNALIST: But do you feel different now you're at the end of the week, more confident or less confident than you were at the beginning of this week about our bid?
PM: I said to you at the beginning of the week that we've been encouraged by the bids and expressions of support we've received from around the world. That we had been encouraged by that, but we were always expecting it to be a tight, close contest.
I leave the week personally encouraged in the sense that I've had the opportunity to sit with people, one next to another, face to face, eye to eye, and talk about our Security Council bid.
So I leave the week personally encouraged but still aware that it is a tough, close contest. And we won't know the result until all the votes are in on 18 October. And we won't stop working until all the votes are in on 18 October.
JOURNALIST: In a couple of weeks you're going to be in Bali as well, 10th anniversary of that attack. Is that something you pondered as you were there at Ground Zero today?
PM: I certainly pondered the direct loss of life on 9/11. I'm sure everyone in this room, and every Australian can remember where they were and what they were doing when the news came through about 9/11.
They can remember where they were when they first saw on their TV screen the images of the twin towers, of the plane, of the towers coming down. And as the rest of the news came through, and you just didn't know when it was going to end, because then there was the Pentagon and you didn't know what was going to happen next. I think we can all remember how that felt, how truly terrifying it was. It felt for a lot of it like you were watching a movie and yet you knew it was hideously real.
So I've relived the emotions of that day, and of course everything that has happened since; took us to Afghanistan, we saw the loss of life in Bali, and I'll have some time to grieve with families in Bali who still, ten years later, would be mourning and feeling in their lives the absence of those loved ones.
JOURNALIST: Senator Carr was asked earlier today whether the Security Council bid was about ego, as one commentator has suggested. And he said it was about Australia's ego. What do you think? Is it about Australia's ego?
PM: I'm a fiercely proud Australian, I'm very proud of our country, I'm happy to bend anybody's ear to talk Australia up, and so I do think we've got a sense of national pride, and so we should. So we should have a sense of national pride.
We're a great nation; you wouldn't live anywhere else on earth. When you travel overseas there's always that wonderful moment when you get back home and as you settle back into your home the first thing you say to your loved ones when they're clamouring at you for duty free gifts, is you wouldn't live anywhere else in the world.
So we're a proud nation, we feel that ourselves as individuals, we should feel it collectively on the global stage here at the UN.
JOURNALIST: And on the global stage at the UN, what was that like, yesterday speaking to the General Assembly. What's that experience like for you?
PM: It's a different kind of venue to any other that you'll speak in. It's obviously a moment for me, there's not that many times in anyone's life that they get to speak to the UN General Assembly. But my main mission there was to outline Australia's world view and I believe I did that.
JOURNALIST: And on the Security Council bid, when you speak to other leaders, have you been directly saying, will you vote for us? How have you gone about that and have people have actually said we will vote for you?
PM: I think you know I'm not particularly shy. So when you're canvassing in an election campaign, then you do have to ask people for their support. There's more or less subtle ways of putting that, there's a variety of options, but at the end of the day they all get to the same thing, you are asking people to vote for you.
Of course we have had expressions of support, but we don't underestimate how difficult this contest is, and it will go right down to the wire. UN contests are famous for multiple voting rounds, for unexpected results. We really do believe that this is tight and tough and that we won't know the outcome until all the votes are in.
JOURNALIST: The most burning question for Australians this weekend: who's going to win the grand final?
PM: On the AFL grand final I don't have a dog in the fight, as you're well aware, tragically no dog in the fight. So I've gone for Sydney. I've gone for Sydney for a few reasons. One I think it would probably be good for the game, for Sydney to win it this time round. Two, I thought Hawthorne played a pretty punishing match against the Crows, so how sore they are I'm not sure what the coach is saying about that, but it would seem to me human reason to tell you they'd have to pull up pretty sore.
So I've gone for Sydney but I don't think it will be by much. I think we'll be biting our nails right to the end.
On the NRL grand final I've gone for the Melbourne Storm, I'm the number one female ticket holder, so it'll be good to watch the Storm play up in Sydney.
JOURNALIST: I know this is not an economic week here but one thing we can't fail to notice here is that after 30 years of decline the US manufacturing sector has turned around. Australia has a lot of problems with its own manufacturing sector I wonder if there's anything now that you take from that or anything you think Australia can learn?
PM: I think you will see this phenomena is in part correlated with your currency. And the circumstances we're in are different from the circumstances of the US. Our dollar is very, very high, high by historic standards.
When I first came to the United States, when friends of mine first travelled here, if they were getting 60 cents for their US dollar they thought they'd done themselves a pretty good deal. Now of course our dollar trades above the US dollar and you were probably there when I joked, perhaps chided, at the US reporter about that the other day.
So our dollar is very high, that is what is putting pressure on manufacturing, there is also competition for capital and labour because our economy is growing strongly, particularly in the resources sector.
None of these economic factors are pressing on the US, the US has been in recession, it has a high unemployment rate, its currency is not as highly valued against comparative currencies as it was, including our own. And so all of those things are combining to enable a resurgence in US manufacturing.
Now I do think that that speaks to ultimately the adaptability and innovation that is inherent in the American economy. The American economy has often been written off in the past, only to defy its critics. This is an innovative nation where people find a way through and they'll find a way through the current economic predicament that the US continues to face  -  sluggish growth.
JOURNALIST: You made mention yesterday in your speech about Syria (inaudible). This morning we heard from the Foreign Minister about just how serious the situation is. He used statistics such one million people being displaced, 2.5 million people in need of medical aid.
Now we've included 1,000 refugees from Syria in terms of our humanitarian intake as part of the 20,000 program. Would you give consideration to actually lifting that number from Syria considering what we're learning now about what's going on there?
PM: We'll keep under close review humanitarian assistance and refugee intake and the like, the things that we can do to support the people of Syria.
JOURNALIST: To clarify I didn't mean to lift the 20,000, I meant-
PM: No, no within the quota, so we've moved to 20,000 that you're talking about countries of intake. Look we'll keep under close review our humanitarian assistance. We'll keep under close review the mix of our refugee intake. But at the end of the day, what needs to happen in Syria is the violence needs to stop.
The humanitarian crisis is the symptom of the violence. If the violence stops then there will be a lot to do to assist the people of Syria, but at least you won't continue to see people killed and new humanitarian tragedies unfolding before your eyes, which is why I did speak about the need for the Security Council to act decisively on Syria yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said you had some talks on climate change with various people this week. Did the state of the UN carbon market come up, because I think there's a proposal to actually pour money in to try to prop it up. We didn't get much of a mention of climate this week, is it going down the international agenda given Syria and Iran and various other things?
PM: In the UN itself, this is not a week focused on climate change, of course there is the annual event that is focused on climate change, and we will participate in that very important meeting, and some very important progress was made in Durban last year.
My discussions about climate change have mainly been in bilateral meetings where there is a widespread understanding of what Australia has done with putting a price on carbon.
I've met this week with a number of countries that are small island nations for whom climate change is an existential threat, and they look and they monitor and they see what countries are doing to act on climate change and they know that we have put a price on carbon, and they certainly view that as a very worthwhile reform.
JOURNALIST: Obviously you've not been 100 per cent well this week. Your team describes you as a tough cookie, was it difficult for you, did you find you had to kind of push yourself through it not feeling 100 per cent through the week?
PM: I've been a bit off colour, that's true. I've mainly felt it on Monday and I do regret that I wasn't able to give that speech, but at that moment I wasn't confident I could have stood for 25 minutes, and not a good thing to be half way through a speech and go over to one side. But since then I've felt like I could do the program and have basically done the program, and a few members of the team have also been a bit unwell but we've pushed through so it's not too bad.
JOURNALIST: There were some reports, however true or scurrilous, coming back from Australia that the source of your illness actually came from Tim, who had gone out and got some dodgy food, so is he to blame?
PM: I think we can absolutely rule out on the list of culprits Tim and the procuring of dodgy food. I can rule that out for you.
JOURNALIST: Just going back to climate change and what I raised earlier about manufacturing I was going to mention one of the big factors is shale gas in America. Not only boosting manufacturing and reviving chemical industry but their meeting their Kyoto targets if they hadn't, even if they hadn't signed the thing, Australia has been a lot slower to exploit unconventional gas sources, had a lot of opposition. I'm just wondering if that's something we could be doing a little more efficiently, a little better?
PM: We are a nation with a wide range of energy options, and that's a great strength for us. Of course we are bringing on stream considerable use of cleaner energy sources including gas, and including considerable use of renewables.
I certainly believe when it comes to things like coal seam gas that we should be making prudent use, and that is, having appropriate environmental assessments, and then using those sources that meet the appropriate environmental assessments. And we've put in place a process to help get that done with state governments so that there is good science available to communities who are seeking to assess coal seam gas projects.
JOURNALIST: Back to the Security Council bid, I know the P5 don't get too involved in this sort of thing but have you had any indication from the United States and UK as to whether they are going to support our bid, and have you asked them?
PM: As a matter of convention permanent members of the Security Council do not disclose their votes.
JOURNALIST: Have you asked them though?
PM: There's no point asking them because they don't disclose their votes.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: Well all I can repeat to you is the convention; they don't disclose their votes for obvious reasons.
JOURNALIST: Lindsay Tanner said that, in an interview yesterday, that you argued to cease the CPRS under Kevin Rudd. He said that, I think it's the first time publically that anyone involved has gone on the record. What do you say to that?
PM: Well I've dealt with all of this extensively before, and having lived with what we've lived through and endured all we've endured, I don't think anybody could doubt my commitment to putting a price on carbon.
JOURNALIST: We've got the US presidential election campaign at the moment, who do you think is in front?
PM: I don't comment on Australian opinion polls, I'm not going to start commenting on anybody else's.
JOURNALIST: You've had a lot of analysis while you've been over here back home from senior Labor figures about your leadership, state of the Party, state of the Government. You going to knock some heads together when you get home?
PM: I'll do what I do which is get on with the job and make sure that as a government we are doing those things that Australians want done.
We've been over here this week talking about how we're a practical people. I've been doing that because I genuinely believe it, and people look at their governments to get practical things done too.
So my focus when I get home will be on making sure our economy is still offering people the benefit of jobs, getting on with the school funding reforms, and getting on with building that National Disability Insurance Scheme.
JOURNALIST: Do you feel it's undermined your efforts over here though?
PM: Government, Labor Government, is about sharing opportunity. It's about a fair distribution of opportunity to do that, you've got to have a strong economy so the doors of opportunity are open.
To do that you've got to support people when times are tough, like when people are facing a disability, themselves or in their family, to do that you've got to make sure every kid gets a chance  -  that's going to be my focus when I get home.
Thanks very much, safe travels.


Launceston
People in northern Tasmania now have access to a full range of integrated health services to help manage several chronic and complex conditions.Officially opened today, the Northern Integrated Care Service in Frankland Street, Launceston, will provide accessible, customer-focused, integrated services for people in Launceston and the surrounding regionIt will also give patients more choice and control to self-manage their chronic conditions through life-style modification and education programs.The broad range of services includes diabetes services incorporating endocrinologist led clinics; diabetes education; dietetics; psychology; and podiatry; and the Tasmania Medicare Local chronic disease and mental health and psychology services. There are refugee health clinics, cardiopulmonary rehabilitation programs, nurse-led cardiac clinics and Active Launceston exercise classes.As well, negotiations are under way to provide respiratory, chronic pain, musculoskeletal and neurology services in the future.The Northern Integrated Care Service is funded through a National Partnership Agreement, with $18 million of combined funding from the Australian and Tasmania Governments, and $4.5 million from the University of Tasmania.Through national health reform, my Government is building a stronger primary health care system that promotes good health and health prevention, and supports privately provided GP services, community health and other state and territory government-funded services to work together.We want people to be able to get the care they need, when and where they need it  -  and the Northern Integrated Care Service fits the bill on all counts.This facility is proof positive that national health reform  -  and, in particular, improving primary health care for all Australians  -  is making a real difference in helping Australians get the high quality services that meet their needs and the needs of their family.The new service includes the University of Tasmania's Launceston Clinical School, which is training medical undergraduate, postgraduate and PhD students and conducting research into chronic disease. The clinical school development was supported by a $3 million grant from the Federal Government's Capital Development Program. 


Launceston
PM: I start by saying I understand that there is interest from members of the media about the matter involving Mr Alan Jones.
It is not my intention to make any comment about that matter. The only thing I want to say is this.
Both I and my family have been overwhelmed by the outpouring of support for us since the death of my father.
From the bottom of my heart, I would like to thank Australians in their tens of thousands who have been so warm and so supportive at what has been a very difficult time for us.
So thank you very much.
On with the job and I am here in the federal electorate of Bass in the wonderful town of Launceston with our local member, Geoff Lyons and it is a pleasure to join him here.
And we are here for a series of events today, including having a Community Cabinet tonight which will give us a great opportunity to meet with local community members.
I am also joined by the Premier of Tasmania and by the Minister for Health, Michelle O'Byrne.
We have had the pleasure today - and I can see representatives of this great place in large number. We have had the special pleasure today of officially opening this Northern Integrated Care Centre.
This is a fantastic building, an award winning building and it is here to provide care and support to people who have chronic and complex conditions.
They might have had diabetes, they might have heart disease and they are here getting support.
Whether it is understanding how to better manage their health through exercise classes, whether it is healthy living and learning how to cook for themselves through the kitchen, whether it is the exercise work that we can see people doing just over there.
I'm being acknowledged now with a fist pump by those engaged in that exercise work. This is a place that is really bringing an integrated model of care for this community.
It is also a place in which the health professionals of tomorrow are being trained and they are being trained in a way that doesn't have them in silos, they are working together because the future of healthcare is going to be about health professionals collaborating to support patients who have chronic and complex conditions.
I am glad that in a partnership with Tasmania, we were able to make this facility happen. This is an emblem of what we are achieving in healthcare in this state and around the country.
Working together for change, working together with more resources flowing into health than has ever been made available before by a Federal Government.
And we are doing that because we want Australians to have the best of care and the best opportunity to live their lives supported by facilities like this one.
I will turn to the Premier for some comments and then we will be happy to take questions.
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Thank you Prime Minister and it is indeed an honour to have you with us here today in Tasmania and your cabinet colleagues as well.
It is a fantastic opportunity for Tasmanians to have access to ministers across a number of portfolio areas.
We are very pleased to be part of this acknowledgement today of the partnership between the State and Federal Government which has culminated in this fantastic Integrated Care Centre here in Launceston.
It is important that we continue to work with those Tasmanians who already have a chronic disease and help them to manage that chronic disease.
But it is equally important that we encourage other Tasmanians to help look after their own health and wellbeing now, to try and prevent the onset of chronic disease and therefore prevent the onset of other complications which then require acute care assistance as well.
There is a lot of challenges in our community but the best way that we can meet those challenges head on is to be working with you and we welcome your interest in our State.
PM: Thanks very much. We're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the comments from Mr Jones were deeply personal. Surely you would like to say they are unacceptable?
PM: I am not intending to get involved in commentary on this matter.
JOURNALIST: Would you go on his show again?
PM: No, I would not. I haven't spoken to Mr Jones and I don't intend to.
JOURNALIST: Putting the comments aside, what is your opinion now of Mr Jones?
PM: I am not going to be drawn on comment.
JOURNALIST: Is it hypocritical for Labor ministers to be condemning Jones when they or Labor hasn't come out and condemned hurtful attacks on senior Coalition figures?
PM: Consistent with what I said at the start of this press conference, I am not going to engage in comment on this matter.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott's been directly quoted as saying the mining boom has ended prematurely due to bad policy by this Government. Do you have any comments on that?
PM: That is clearly a nonsense remark and it is wrong and inappropriate for anybody to be talking the Australian economy down. Let's be very clear about what is happening in our economy.
We came out of the global financial crisis strong. We saved 200,000 jobs. We didn't have a recession. We have an economy that is growing at trend. That means that it is expected to grow by about 3 per cent in the coming year.
We have got a resources boom where we are yet to see the investment peak and the production peak. They lie in front of us. And the Reserve Bank was crystal clear about that yesterday.
At the same time and partly because of the strength of the resources boom, we have got a strong Australian dollar, a very high Australian dollar.
That is putting pressure on other industries and so there are parts of the country experiencing that pressure.
We understand that and we have been working with those parts of the country.
We understand here in Tasmania, there are some special economic pressures arising from the changes to the forestry industry and we have been engaged in a good partnership with the Tasmanian Government on that.
So for Australians, I think it is important no-one talks our economy down. We acknowledge that it is an economy with strengths, which means jobs and opportunities for Australians.
It also means we have got to keep building on today's strength so we have got tomorrow's opportunities too.
JOURNALIST: But even the cut was somewhat of an admission from the RBA that the economy does need some form of stimulation?
PM: There are these pressures arising from the high Australian dollar. I have referred to it as the patchwork economy. It means different things for different industries and different places.
But when you read when the Reserve Bank says, in its statement yesterday, they verify their expectation that the economy will grow at trend.
That means if you compare us with nations around the world - look at the sluggishness of the US economy; look at their unemployment rate of more than 8 per cent.
Look at the problems being faced in the UK and high unemployment there too.
We have jobs and opportunities here. We have strengths in the Australian economy. There are of course some challenges and as a government, we have been managing those challenges and building for the future.
It is about clean energy; it is about the National Broadband Network; it is about giving the Australian people the skills they will need for the future.
JOURNALIST: Some of your ministers in the past couple of days have essentially been putting Tony Abbott and Alan Jones in the same category. Mr Abbott was quite sensitive and fairly (inaudible) in his remarks in Parliament in relation to your father. Do you believe that they are in the same class?
PM: I am not getting into it at all.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned before that you recognised there have been special pressures on the Tasmanian community due to the breakdown in the forestry industry. Is there anything at all else that the Federal Government can do for Tasmanians and the forestry industry in particular other than what is already in the IGA?
PM: The step forward we need to take here is the parties coming together for a final agreement. The Premier and I signed the inter-governmental agreement and we still want to see that inter-governmental agreement come to fruition in full.
We want to see the long-term diversification of the Tasmanian economy so that there are jobs and opportunities here.
Now we have been working on that together for some time, that is why Tassie is the stand-out and you are in front with the National Broadband Network. That's going to make a difference for jobs and opportunity and productivity in this State.
It is why our Minister for Regional Australia Simon Crean has been a very constant visitor here and very constantly in touch with the Tasmanian Government and we have made some resources available for projects that will help diversify the economy of Tasmania.
I actually think this economy has got a great future. I think you will see innovation from the National Broadband Network.
You have got your great strengths in clean, green food and your reputation for, not only growing that food but turning it into amazing dining experiences.
You have got the tourism advantages of the very great natural splendour of this place and all of the innovation that has happened in the tourism industry here.
You will see mining come on-stream in this state. I think you will continue to see people involved in innovative manufacturing and both the Federal Government and the Tasmanian State Government are focused on working together to keep lifting skills and capacities so people can get the best of these opportunities.
So there is a lot to be optimistic about, there is a time of challenge now and we are working together on those challenges.
JOURNALIST: Given the past couple of months and what's gone on in Tasmania concerning the IGA, are you still confident that that can be signed off with your agreement, or are you concerned that it's actually falling apart (inaudible)?
PM: I remain cautiously optimistic that people will see the need to come together for Tasmania's future.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) the trade deficit dropping 12 per cent?
PM: We are a great exporting country. We are also a country that imports some commodities and we're also an importer of capital which is important at this time of economic change and development.
When we look at our economic statistics overall though, we are seeing growth in exports, that is good. We are seeing growth in jobs; that is good.
We are seeing low inflation, low unemployment and low interest rates. We have strong public finances, AAA rated by all three credit agencies for the first time in our nation's history.
All of these things speak to the strengths of the Australian economy but every day you have got to keep building for tomorrow.
That is what the NBN is about; it's what the clean energy future is about. It is what my personal focus on skills and education and opportunity is about.
JOURNALIST: Should all banks be passing on yesterday's rate cut?
PM: I certainly believe that banks should be passing on the interest rate reduction from yesterday. I want to see Australian families get the benefits.
For a family, mortgage typical size, say $300,000, they are $4,500 better off as a result of the interest rate reductions that have happened during the time of this Government since its election in 2007.
That makes a difference to families. It makes a difference to their cost of living pressures and their abilities to make ends meet, so I do want to see interest rate reductions passed on.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how confident are you that a buyer will be found for Gunns' pulp mill project?
PM: The Federal Government has been a consistent supporter of the pulp mill. We continue to support a pulp mill project in this State.
Everything we need to do in terms of environmental approvals has been done, so that it is available for a new investor to come onto the scene and to pick up where Gunns has left off and to develop the pulp mill.
Now ultimately, that will be a commercial decision for any potential investor, just as Gunns had to make a set of commercial decisions about its future.
But we are supportive of the pulp mill and everything we need to do for the pulp mill to become a reality has been done. Last question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think Alan Jones should be taken off the air?
PM: I have indicated to you I am not going to be commenting on this question.
Thanks very much.
[ENDS] 



Online giants Google, Facebook, PayPal and Microsoft will join leading Australian businesses such as Commonwealth Bank, Australia Post and Virgin Australia at the Prime Minister's Forum on the Digital Economy to be held in Sydney tomorrow.
The Gillard Government has today released the full list of more than 40 attendees for the one-day Forum.
In addition to these major companies, several online start-up businesses including Shoes of Prey, Nicko's Kitchen, and Birdsnest, will attend the Forum to share their success stories.
Attendees from a diverse range of sectors will discuss Australia's role in the growing digital economy, and the significant opportunities this presents for Australian businesses. The rollout of the National Broadband Network will help businesses to capitalise on these opportunities.
The Prime Minister will open the Forum, with sessions to address these key issues:
• The success of innovative digital organisations;• the opportunities and challenges of a digitally enabled world; and• thinking about work in the digitally engaged world.
The Forum will also look at ways to improve Australia's competitiveness and productivity, building on the Government's National Digital Economy Strategy and Productivity Agenda.
The National Digital Economy Strategy has set a goal for Australia to become a leading global digital economy by 2020.
The forum will be held at the University of New South Wales and will be available through live webcast at http://www.pm.gov.au/digitalforum.
If members of the public want to contribute suggested questions for the Forum on Twitter, they should use the hashtag #pmdigital.


Hobart
PM: I'm delighted to be here at Cosmos. Thank you to everybody who's shown us round and been so friendly, particularly thank you to Catherine for organising today's event.
I'm here with Jane Austin, the candidate for Denison, and also with Julie Collins, one of my minister and also the Member for Franklin. And we're here talking about the need for the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We've been meeting today people who would be described as having disabilities, but they're full of abilities too.
We've seen their artwork, we've heard about their theatre performance; they're off to New Zealand to perform in a few short weeks' time, and before they go the people of Hobart will get to have a look on 15 October.
People with remarkable abilities. But for them to realise the full potential of those abilities, we've got to be supporting their care. That's what the National Disability Insurance Scheme is all about. 
We are launching here in Tasmania from the middle of next year, and what Tasmania's going to do is help us learn about how to roll out a National Disability Insurance Scheme for teenagers and young adults.
There will be 1000 people in the launch. They will be in the age range from 15-24. In anybody's life that is a time of real change. 
Any family with a teenager or a young adult could talk about all of the joys, but sometimes the stresses and strains that can go with having a teenager or a young adult in the house. 
As they start to move away from being fully controlled by their parents to wanting to live their own lives and make their own decisions, the same is true for young adults and teenagers with disability, and we're going to learn about how best to meet the options and choices they want at that stage of life through the trial here in Tasmania.
So it's an exciting time to be here, thank you to everybody who has been so generous with their time, Joseph for showing his artworks, everyone that we've met today, and we're very happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how exactly will the scheme help these young people that you've been meeting today?
PM: Well at the moment the kind of support you get  -  whether it's here in Tasmania or around the country  -  depends on how you got your disability. 
If you got it in a transport accident, that will be different from something that happened at home or if you were born with it. If you got it at work, that would be different again. 
We want to make sure that however someone has a disability, whether they were born with it, whether it's an accident, whether it's a result of one of the debilitating diseases people can get, that they get a package of care and support. 
It would be driven by the person rather than by the system. 
At the moment what you get depends on what the system can provide to you, so people get a bit of care here and a bit of care there, but there's a gap in the middle. 
We would empower the person to make a set of choices about how they put their package of care together.
It would work a lot like some of our best transport accident schemes, where people get to be the decision-maker about how they get their care.
JOURNALIST: And with you meeting with Jane Austin today, how confident are you that Labor will be able to win back Denison at the next federal election?
PM: Well Jane's a great candidate. We've been talking today about the needs of Denison, about the needs of all parts of the electorate. 
Jane's been talking to me about how people at the street stalls and as she doorknocks are talking to her about jobs and the future of the Tasmanian economy, making sure that Tassie gets a fair share of the GST, as well as the big government reforms like the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
These are only the things you can do as a government, and Jane is seeking to be a member of the Labor Government, to represent Denison in a government and have her voice directly heard.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) in the next campaign Andrew Wilkie will talk up all the things he's been able to guarantee for Denison. How many of those things are fair and how many are things that you provided?
PM: We always want to benefit the people of Denison, and we've worked with the current member to do that. 
And of course we would do that, I mean these are people who have got needs and concerns, and we want to be working with the people of Denison and right across Tasmania with the people of this great state.
But at the end of the day, government is about having a long-term plan for the future of the economy, for the future of health, for the future of education, for big Labor reforms like the National Disability Insurance Scheme. 
That's the work of government and it takes a member of government to best do it.
JOURNALIST: Does Andrew Wilkie's high profile make that battle even harder?
PM: Look, people in Denison will be making their choices come the next election. I think they've got a great option with Jane Austin standing to be the Labor member for Denison.
JOURNALIST: What's the key issue that will win it for Labor?
PM: Look, I think the issues here in Tasmania and in Denison as well are the future of the economy; people want to see the Tasmanian economy grow, they want to see people have the benefits of jobs today, and know that there's a strong long-term future for Tassie. 
I'm actually a huge optimist about the future of Tasmania. We live in an incredibly growing region of the world.
This is going to be the Asian century. We will live in the region of the world with more middle class consumers than anywhere else on the planet. 
And they will want to buy the things Tassie's got to sell - great food, great wine, great tourism experiences, the things you are doing through manufacturing, the new industries that you can harness through the National Broadband Network, the new industries you can harness through a clean energy future. 
That's why I'm an optimist about this economy. There are some is stresses and strains now and we are obviously working directly with the community through those moments of strain. 
JOURNALIST: How embarrassing is it to have the former ALP President Michael Williamson arrested over corruption? 
PM: I'm not going to comment on a police matter. Obviously there have been charges laid today, so I don't want to be speaking about a matter which will ultimately be dealt with by the courts. 
JOURNALIST: On the NDIS, what about those outside of the age bracket that you're looking at through the scheme, what will be done for them? 
PM: This is a launch for that cohort. In other parts of the country, we have got a launch site for younger children; we have got launches for a geographic area. So the launches are about learning how to roll out the full scheme. 
We are using the word "launch" deliberately because this is the start of something we are definitely committed to doing, rather than a pilot where we'll work out where we do the rest of it. So yes, it is going to take some time to roll it out right around Australia. 
This is as big a change as Medicare was for our health system when Medicare was first designed. And I think in years to come, it will be viewed like Medicare, can you believe the nation was ever without it? 
But to get it right and to roll it out around the nation, we do have to launch first and learn and then build. 
JOURNALIST: Backbencher Michael Danby is quoted today saying there is genuine concern about defence cuts. Has it been raised with you? 
PM: No I haven't had a Labor member come to see me directly about that. But of course people understand we are in a time where we are working on building the budget into surplus. 
We, as a government, have worked hard to bring our economy strongly through the have global financial crisis. 
No recession, saved 200,000 jobs; now we are working to deliver a budget surplus. That has required us to make some tough choices across the government's budget, including in defence. 
But all of the core capabilities we identified in the last defence white paper will be delivered. 
JOURNALIST: How do you respond to David Murray raising concerns about the Australian economy and comparing it to Greece? 
PM: Today I've seen that the Leader of the Opposition and his Shadow Finance Minister have once again taken the opportunity to talk Australia's economy down. 
It is absurd to be saying that our economy is in the same circumstances as the economies of Europe or Greece. 
From the Leader of the Opposition, that is a grossly irresponsible thing to say. I mean, markets listen to what political leaders say. This can have repercussions in the real world that matter for the Australian economy. 
Our economy is growing. It's going to grow at around 3 per cent this year. We have got unemployment just over 5 per cent. 
We have got low inflation, low interest rates, strong public finances, AAA rated by every major credit agency for the first time in our nation's history. 
To compare our circumstances, as the Leader of the Opposition has done today, to Greece, is grossly irresponsible and wrong. 
JOURNALIST: Just on this story in The Australian, what do you make of it about the carbon tax at The Lodge and do you think taxpayers would like to foot the bill? 
PM: I did see that story, and The Lodge is my residence but it's also a place where we have a large number of public functions. It functions differently to any family home. 
I think people would understand from a common sense perspective for example, there are security requirements that mean the electricity has to be used 24/7, 365 days a year. So you know, it's just one of those stories you see in the papers from time to time.
JOURNALIST: The Premier hasn't ruled out further budget cuts as a result of the State's credit rating being downgraded. Are you worried that your federal health bailout for the states could be undermined if she starts targeting the health system again?
PM: We will be working to make sure that the additional resources we're putting into health hit the ground and make a difference for people. 
So I do understand that like governments around the country, the Tasmanian Government faces some tough choices, but we want to see people in Tasmania with good quality healthcare. 
That is why we were already making record investments and on top of that we have now authorised a new $325 million package. 
There are some things that are special about Tasmania as it meets people's health needs. You're an island; that means that some of the options and choices that are there for bigger states just aren't here in Tasmania and we've recognised that with this $325 million package.
JOURNALIST: Is the Federal Government in crisis talks with the Forest Industries Association today to try and get them back to the negotiating table at all?
PM: We remain committed to working with the people of Tasmania so we can sort out the future of forestry. I would remind, and I think perhaps this has been a little bit lost in the public discussion; we did not sit in Canberra and seek to design a forestry plan. 
We did not sit in Canberra and say we wanted to get involved in forestry here in Tasmania. 
What happened here in Tasmania was the economics of the industry started to change, the markets were changing; that meant that there were going to be job losses, there were going to be people who wanted to exit the industry, and industry came to us and said in those circumstances would you support that changes, provide a backdrop of support as these changes happen? 
Now we've consistently said we are prepared to support but what needs to occur is the environmental movement, the forestry industry, the people of Tasmania have to come to an accord about a long-term plan. 
What we've done so far: $20 million invested in this economy and diversifying it, which is leveraging around 4000 jobs. We've supported the employees who have lost their jobs, and we are now supporting contractors who want to exit the industry.
JOURNALIST: But what happens if the forest industry doesn't return to the talks and they fall over?
PM: That's a question you need to put to the forest industry, and change will still occur in forestry, it will just be change that isn't managed with a long-term vision. That's the worst of all possible worlds for everyone.
JOURNALIST: There's a report in the Courier Mail today that cites Labor sources close to you suggesting that Kevin Rudd might have to have his ambitions crushed one more time before the election. Is that coming from you or your supporters?
PM: I'm not aware of that story, I'm not aware of those statements, so there you go. 
You don't want to believe everything you read in the paper. With all due apologies to the newspaper journalists in the room.
Thank you very much.


Sydney
Students of all ages will be encouraged to nominate their favourite teacher of all time and post an online message of support as part of a new program to highlight the important role that teachers play.
The Prime Minister will today launch a six-week competition for people to tell the story of their favourite teacher during a roundtable with student teachers and Minister for School Education Peter Garrett at the University of New South Wales.
The Prime Minister will kick off the campaign with a video in which she talks about her favourite teacher and the importance of education.
The aim of the new campaign is to generate a conversation on social media about the inspirational role that high quality teachers play in students' lives.
Pupils, past and present, will be invited to post a message, photo or a video about their favourite teacher on the Prime Minister's Facebook page.
The competition will be run online across a range of social media channels with the Prime Minister and other ministers.
A range of social media platforms will be used, including:
•             People posting their entry on the Prime Minister's Facebook page;
•             A video of the impact of education on the Prime Minister's life and how it has shaped the Prime Minister's views on education;
•             A Facebook Q&amp;A session on education; and
•             A live blog about education.
Under our National Plan for School Improvement we want Australian schools back in the top 5 schooling systems in the world by 2025, and we know that great teachers are the key to getting there.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong of Singapore will visit Australia from 9 to 13 October as a Guest of Government.
Singapore is one of Australia's closest regional partners, our largest trade and investment partner in ASEAN and our fifth largest trading partner overall.  
We share a long-standing friendship, built on our shared strategic outlook, successful cooperation in regional fora including the East Asia Summit, APEC and the ASEAN Regional Forum, and close Commonwealth, defence and people to people ties.
Prime Minister Lee's visit follows the Prime Minister's visit to Singapore in April.
Prime Minister Lee's visit is an opportunity to strengthen the relationship across the full range of our bilateral and regional engagement.
His program includes meetings in Canberra, Melbourne and Sydney, and attendance at a Singaporean defence exercise in Rockhampton.


Sydney
Thank you very much. Can I thank everybody for coming along today and for participating in this discussion. I think it's been a truly fascinating one and we have had people following the discussion online and participating in the Twitter conversation.
When we were trying to work out who to get together it's always a difficult judgement call, and we did cast fairly widely from people who have been involved in their own small business start-ups  -  and thank you very much to them for coming along  -  through to some of the giants in the world of the digital economy. 
We wanted people coming at this from a variety of perspectives, and I think the power of that combination has been on display today. So thank you very much to everyone for coming along and being involved in it.
In terms of take-out messages, I think Andrew earlier on talked about this as Australia's time; this is our time. But we don't have an endless opportunity to exploit the benefits that we have as a nation and to set up for what the future is going to bring. So there's a real sense of urgency that we've got to be working together now to seize the maximum opportunities that we can for the future.
I was taken by Ian's words about if we are to get those opportunities together, we need to bring together the dreamers, the doers and the dollars. I think that's a good set of words about how we can maximise the potential of this age.
And I was taken too by Phil's words about the enabling power of the National Broadband Network  -  not a word wasted  -  that opposition to the NBN is “stupid” and we need to get this technology  -  ubiquitous broadband  -  out there, because of how it will change our economy, how it will change service delivery and how it will change productivity.
It's fallen to me to try and come up with the difficult task of synthesising the discussion and perhaps pointing a few directions forward. 
What I'm going to do is point four directions forward, but then I'm going to take away the rest of what we've talked about today and we will keep in contact with people in various ways.
It seems to me two things we should do in the very short term. 
There is clearly a short term issue about the skills pipeline into ICT. It's been raised around the room, it's not something that we can let drift, because when people point to enrolment patterns now in our universities there is a real reason to be concerned, that in the relatively short term we will not have available to us the skills sets we need, the software engineers for example. 
So I will ask Chris Evans who isn't with us today, who is the Minister for Skills and Tertiary Education, to meet with a breakout number from this group to really bare down on that question in the relatively short term. 
So I think that that's something we can and we should do.
Two, I've been taken by the conversation about telework, about the changing nature of workplaces, about what that can do for workplace productivity, workplace participation, for the options and choices that working people want. For the shape of our cities and our nation, where people can live, and still do the work that they want to do. 
We do actually have a goal for the Australian Government about having at least 12 per cent of employees teleworking at least one day a week by 2020. We've already set that goal, and we do have this focus coming up with a week that will showcase what can be achieved by telework.
But I was also taken by the discussion that we, as a substantial employer, have got an obligation to model behaviours. And so what would I suggest too, is that in the relatively short term we get a breakout number from this group to meet with the secretaries of our departments, so across the public service  -  and with the Public Service Commissioner  -  to talk about Australian Government leadership in this area and what we can model as a major employer. 
Thirdly, we've all been talking about the cloud. 
For one of the less technically savvy people in the room I'm conscious that in ordinary parlance, clouds are not a good thing. Storm clouds gathering on the horizon, a cloudy day is not as good as a sunny day. So there would be a lot of people who are probably thinking I'm not taken by this dialogue about a cloud. I'm not sure about what cloud computing is, what it does and why it's supposed to be a good thing, and how it could possibly fit with my world and what I do and my work. 
A lot of the contributions really have been about the power of cloud computing. But also the need to spread understanding about what this mean, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises. 
So I will ask Minister Conroy to bring people together in a discussion about that. I think it needs to be a genuine government-industry partnership, and for us to embark on a cloud computing strategy so that we can capture in terms that are going to make sense to people, what is very powerful about this and do it in a synthesised way. So if Minister Conroy could do that I'd be very grateful.
Fourth, we have been in the process of putting together a Cyber White Paper. This really goes to something Suzanne brought to the table. We've been in the process of putting together a Cyber White Paper. White Papers are of course powerful cross-government strategic documents that then drive government actions and policies for a long period of time to come.
One of the White Papers that will shortly be delivered is the White Paper about our changing opportunities in this Asian Century of growth. 
But having listened to the discussion today I think we should broaden what we have been conceptualising as the Cyber White Paper, which would get people thinking about the security space, which of course is important. But I think we should be broadening that out so it is more a digital White Paper and helps us capture some of the more profound and longer term issues that have been brought to the table.
There was the discussion about skills and ecosystems and how we leverage all of this to sustain the development of the digital economy and the transformation of our economy generally. The sort of skill settings that requires, the innovation settings that that requires. 
I think we should try and bring that to the table for a broadened look through this White Paper and we'd not only take what's happened in the conversation here today into that process, but we'd be calling on individuals around the room to be making some direct contributions to that process too. 
So they are the four action items I'd like to outline now. I think that there is more that we can do and Minister Conroy, Minister Shorten and I will take the discussion from this table and have a think about what else. 
But it really has been a very, very energising conversation and I do want to thank you for that. And we've got a lot of work to do together in the future, so we will certainly be staying in touch.
So we will release you now to do whatever you normally do on a late Friday afternoon, early Friday evening. If a glass of good Australian wine is involved, that would seem to me a fairly appropriate outcome for this time of the week. 
Thank you very much for all of your efforts during the course of the day. Thank you.


Sydney
I think it's very appropriate that we've gathered here at a university, the places where so much of our destiny in the 21st century will be written, as much as the mines and gas fields to our north.
Just last week, a major breakthrough in quantum computing that will open up whole new opportunities in areas like drug manufacturing and materials design was announced in the journal Nature.
That breakthrough wasn't made at MIT or Stanford, but right here at UNSW.
So I'm very proud to be here today, and I thank the Vice-Chancellor, Professor Fred Hilmer, for his generous hospitality.
It is also, I think, quite symbolic that we've gathered in this beautiful building - the Scientia Building  -  the Latin world for 'knowledge' because that is why we are here today.
The commodity most precious in the 21st century, more valuable even than iron ore, is knowledge.
The way we create and share knowledge will be a key determinant of our success in the Asian Century.
It seemed not so long ago that thinkers like Barry Jones were counselling us to be ready for the digital future.
That future is here.
It is well and truly here.
In a range of visible and invisible ways, it's already integrated into all of our lives, and into our nation's economy.
Economic activity directly related to the internet contributed $50 billion to the Australian economy in 2010, but the indirect effects are just as important.
These effects aren't captured in GDP figures but they're worth an extra $80 billion a year.
Like the social connections the Internet age can bring to those confined at home through disability or illness. 
The benefit to a working parent of ordering groceries online and having them delivered to your door.
Or pregnant women wearing foetal monitors that can be monitored remotely by midwives to alert them to any problems.
It's certainly made my life easier.
For a century, each Prime Minister used to lug his Cabinet papers home in a bulky folder that would have felled a forest worth of paper over a year. I slip an iPad into my brief case.
I'm sure that everyone in the room could tell a story about how digital technology has changed things for them.
We've seen some extraordinary gains made so far.
Last year, there were 11.6 million internet subscribers in Australia, an 11 per cent gain on the previous year.
But there isn't an industry that won't benefit from finding more effective use of digital infrastructure.
A recent report by Deloitte Access Economics found that one-third of our economy will be significantly affected by digital-driven change in the next three years.
It would be a change on the scale of the tariff cuts of the 1980s, with the biggest impact to be felt in the retail, finance and media sectors.
So we have to be ready to take advantage of these opportunities, and that's why I've called this Forum today.
Nothing is more important to the success of Australia's digital economy than building the NBN.
Not only building it  -  but doing it right, upfront.
The NBN is what the economists call a ‘public good'.
One of those projects like the Transcontinental Railway, the Sydney Harbour Bridge and the Snowy Scheme that creates a wealth of indirect benefits beyond those that can be calculated on a spreadsheet.
Business recognises it.
In fact the Chairman of Google, Eric Schmidt, has said of the NBN, "The decision to have universal fibre access is one of the most important decisions the Australian government has made... investing in the national broadband infrastructure at this level is probably the highest leverage investment that the country can make because it touches so many aspects of the society."
I'm pleased that we have Google represented by Nick Leeder here today. 
The NBN will help Australians to exploit the digital economy by boosting productivity and creating new opportunities.
First to productivity  -  or working smarter.
We all know that the application of new technologies and digital innovations can improve the quality of our products, and reduce the cost of producing them.
Every nation ahead of Australia in the Global Competitiveness Index has the universal access to broadband that the NBN is going to provide.
Through better exploitation of the digital economy we can increase the output of both our capital and our labour, and make Australia more competitive.
The productivity improvements that the NBN will provide are absolutely essential for Australia, as they are for every developed nation.
Because if we can't compete on quantity with developing nations that can provide ten times the number of workers for the same price, we will compete on quality.
With quality skills, and quality infrastructure, we'll be better able to take advantage of the opportunities that come our way.
And there will be opportunities, some predictable, others not so much.
As the digital economy continues to alleviate the tyranny of distance, barriers to overseas markets will fall for Australian producers of goods and services.
As economies in our region develop further, demand for Australian goods and services high up the value-add chain will increase, particularly as internet penetration increases.
As well as opening up new markets to existing industries, further exploitation of the digital economy will create entirely new industries that none of us have imagined yet.
I'm not exactly sure what all the benefits of fully utilising the digital economy will look like.
No one is  -  and that's the point.
You just have to be ready, with the skills and infrastructure in place to create and capture change.
What I do know is that the digital economy will bring money, jobs and sustained prosperity to Australia.
The direct contribution of the internet to GDP is expected to grow from $50 to $70 billion by 2016 alone.
But we have to work closely together to get the benefit.
If we don't collaborate to get to the front of the digital pack, we'll see our competitiveness decline, jobs move elsewhere, and our overall prosperity reduced.
The National Digital Economy Strategy that the Government released last year outlined eight goals to reach by 2020.
The goals we've outlined aren't things that can be achieved just by new spending or the enactment of new legislation.
They require an economy-wide effort.
Government will provide enabling infrastructure, and seek to give Australians the education and skills they need to work in innovative Australian firms.
We want to equip Australians in their work to produce the new ideas, new products and new ways of working.
So today I'm looking forward to sharing ideas about how we can ensure that Australia remains at the cutting edge of the global digital economy.
About how business and government can work together on these important challenges.
In particular, how we can work together to improve digital literacy and ICT skills in Australia.
We'd also like to hear from you about what barriers you might be experiencing in exploiting the digital economy.
But today is not just a discussion between government and business. 
Today is also an opportunity for participants in the forum to share their experience, for business to learn from business.
I encourage you all to listen closely and gain from one another's experience.
Today is not just a one-off discussion either.
It is my hope that we will take the significant ideas tabled here today, refine them further, and that we continue to consult together on them.
In helping to start that conversation today, I urge you to share your views frankly and freely. 
And after we leave here room today, I urge you all to carry on that conversation with your stakeholders and with the Government.
By doing so, you contribute to the future of our digital economy and help make Australia a winner in the Asian Century.  
Thank you.


Sydney
It's a great honour to celebrate the 50th Joint Business Committee meeting and deliver the Australia-Japan Foundation Annual Address.
Tonight I see so many friends.
I see members of the Australia-Japan Foundation Board who give such rich expression to the spirit of cooperation that has been forged between our two countries.
I see members of the Australia-Japan and Japan-Australia Business Cooperation Committees proudly celebrating half a century of success.
You've come so far since those early days when you flew over the Pilbara and saw such potential in the landscape and in each other.
I pay tribute to the eminent former Chairs of the JABCC - Hugh Morgan and Takashi Imai, who honour us with their presence tonight.
I see Ambassador Bruce Miller, a great servant of Australian diplomacy and his counterpart Ambassador Sato, whose outstanding work in this country is soon to end.
We are not just fulfilling a courtesy of protocol in bidding Your Excellency goodbye.
It is truly sad to see you go and leave so many friends behind.  
There will always be a place of welcome for you in this open and generous land.
I see Mr Akio Mimura, one of Asia's most far-sighted business leaders, who has been honoured by an award in the Order of Australia.
Fittingly, this award has been made at the highest rank - Companion - because your contribution has been of the highest rank.
I'm also very proud to acknowledge Sir Rod Eddington who this week joins Mimura-san in receiving honorary doctorates from the Australian National University.
I can't think of a better way to mark this 50th anniversary than to celebrate those who have helped bring our relationship so far.
And in particular to recognise those truly pioneering senior business figures in Japan and Australia who, barely a decade after the end of the Pacific war, had the imagination to see what the economic relationship could become and the determination to realise that vision.
We can't gather tonight without remembering last year's terrible earthquake and tsunami and the difficulties many in Japan still endure.
Australians watched with horror as these events unfolded and we responded with our hearts, just as Japan did after our fires and floods.
My visit to the town of Minami Sanriku was one of the most moving experiences I've had as Prime Minister. 
I will never forget the scenes of destruction I witnessed there, but nor will I forget the resilience shown by the survivors and their families as they set about rebuilding their lives. 
I was deeply touched that the presence of a foreign leader could bring that small measure of comfort which comes from knowing you are not alone.
In turn, we are honoured tonight to have in our presence Mayor Sato from Minami Sanriku and Council President Sato from Iitatemura, another community Australia has been active in helping.
You represent the spirit of the survivors and their determination to ensure the earthquake and tsunami can never defeat their courage.
Natural disasters are a time of testing when the quality of people and relationships is revealed.
In this time of tragedy, we saw the endurance and strength of the Japanese people.
Just as in our response to tragedy, we saw the character of the bonds between our two countries.
Those bonds are warm and they are strong, so we gather here tonight to celebrate a relationship that is deeply valued and not ever taken for granted.
Our partnership has endured through changes of governments, economic cycles, circumstances and events.
It is an adaptable and enduring friendship, forged from the unlikely inheritance of a sorrowful past.
In the 1950s, Australians found the capacity to extend understanding.
At the same time, Japan has become a model liberal democracy, embracing human rights and the rules of the international community.
In this new Japan, Australians saw the emergence of values we had long prized.
So we forged a genuine friendship that has enriched the prosperity of our people, the strength of our economies and the security of our countries.
A friendship that provides a template for how countries with different histories and cultures can find agreement in unexpected ways.
This is not an instrumental or transactional relationship.
It is a sophisticated relationship based on rich personal connections built on the foundations of the trading relationship which the Business Cooperation Committees helped lay down, but now encompassing education, culture, science, sport and beyond.
And, of course, it is a strategic partnership built around common objectives and a shared view of the world and our region.
Our celebration of past achievements only has meaning if we draw inspiration from them to address the challenges of today and tomorrow.
So tonight we look to the future.
For us in this region, that future can be characterised as the 'Asian Century'.
In the next 30 years, one in two human beings born on this planet will be born in Asia.
And the Asian urban population will increase by over a billion.
Every year, the Asian middle-class will grow by 100 million.
That means opportunity for Australia and Japan, and change too.
It means looking at what more we can do together, even in such a long-standing and valued friendship.
The first thing we can do is get the Free Trade Agreement done.
Yes we've achieved a remarkable degree of economic complementarity over six decades.
At the end of 2011, the total stock of Japanese investment in Australia was over $123 billion and the pipeline remains strong. 
For example, Japan's INPEX has committed nearly $22 billion to the Ichthys LNG Project in the Northern Territory, whose construction I launched in May this year.
And In June, Mitsubishi Corporation bought a 24 per cent stake in milk processor Tasmanian Dairy Products.
Our trade with Japan continues to grow rapidly, more than doubling from $24 billion in 2001 to $52 billion last year. 
Australia supplies the lion's share of the resources that have made Japan an industrial powerhouse, including 60 per cent of its iron ore and coal, and now an ever-growing proportion of its LNG.
We have developed a reputation in Japan as a reliable supplier of safe, high quality food.
If you eat a Macdonald's hamburger in Japan, it's almost certain to contain Aussie beef.
If you eat Japan's famous “Sanuki Udon” noodles, chances are they are made from custom-grown Australian wheat.
If you drink a Japanese beer, it's probably made with Australian barley.
And these things are only possible because over the years, Australian and Japanese companies have built close ties founded on trust and reliability.
Japan is a critically important economic partner for Australia and will remain so in the future.
But in a dynamic and changing region, it's time to take the next step.
It's time to seal the deal on a Free Trade Agreement.
Free and open trade is the cornerstone of Australia's prosperity.
Opening markets and curbing protectionism increases prosperity and creates jobs all round.
Australia is working with regional partners to develop a high quality regional free trade agreement that advances the APEC vision for an economically integrated Asia-Pacific.
At the same time, we maintain a realistic focus on what can be achieved through bilateral free trade agreements.
No FTA should be more natural or logical than with Japan.
I recently spoke with my colleague, Prime Minister Noda, about this and I was encouraged by his response.
I am only too deeply aware that for 2011 Japan's focus was overwhelmingly on disaster recovery.
But in 2012 we have seen momentum gathering again in our FTA negotiations.
Perhaps now, as this special anniversary year enters its final months, we can find an opportune moment to finalise the FTA.
Such an agreement would be a fitting culmination of all our great work over the past fifty years. It would ensure Japan does not fall behind our other FTA partners.
An FTA would reduce the costs of inputs, encouraging previously protected Japanese industries to innovate and expand.
It would contribute to Japanese food security by making Japan an even more affordable export destination for Australian farmers.
It would help our bilateral trade reach its full potential in services.
And it would provide an achievable staging point on the way to Japan joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement if they so wish. 
Our FTA negotiations have come a long way in five years; only a few hurdles remain. 
They are important hurdles, but they can be overcome with a concerted political will on both sides.
Together, we can get the job done.
At the same time, we need to keep our people-to-people links strong.
There are, for example, 47 Japan-Australia societies in Japan and 16 Australia-Japan societies in Australia.
We have 100 sister-city relationships and six sister-state relationships.
On my visit to Japan last year, I was honoured to be able to make a small contribution by supporting a two-way exchange for students and academics from prefectures hardest-hit by the earthquake and tsunami. 
Nearly 60,000 young Japanese travel to Australia each year, to study, undertake school exchanges and learn English.
But only one-tenth of that number  -  about 6000 Australian students  -  go to Japan each year as part of their school or university studies, so I'd like to see us do better.
I also want to see Japanese language teaching in Australian schools and universities stay strong.
Japanese language remains the most studied foreign language in Australian schools and its teaching will be strengthened by the development of a new Japanese curriculum as part of our wider educational reforms.
In the Asian Century, Australians will need to be much more Asia-literate and Asia-capable than we ever have been before.
Indeed, this is one of the key themes I have asked the Asian Century White Paper team to examine.
Let us remember that all these things - trade and investment, student exchanges, tourism - are the works of peace.
All our achievements over the past 50 years have only been possible because of the long-term strategic stability in Asia.
Only if we maintain and enhance that framework of stability can the children of today grow up in a peaceful world like their parents have.
In this context, diplomatic and security cooperation between Australia and Japan has never been so important.
Australia and Japan must continue, and where possible strengthen, our cooperation in the G20, APEC, East Asia Summit and our other global and regional forums.
Australia is acutely aware of the important contribution that Japan makes to key decision-making bodies and global governance  -  to the rules-based international order that we both seek to promote.
So much so that Australia has long held the view that Japan ought to occupy a permanent seat on the UN Security Council.
Together we played a key role in the founding of APEC, and we have helped to expand and consolidate the role of the East Asia Summit and the G20.
Our partnership in the World Trade Organisation has served our shared interests in a global rules-based multilateral trading system.
Above all, we must work together on regional security.
As China and India and other large nations of Asia rise, our strategic landscape is becoming more crowded and complex.
Rising national wealth is allowing states to modernise their defence forces.
At the same time, economic growth is putting pressure on strategic resources, like energy, water and food.
And existing regional tensions remain, such as North Korea's nuclear ambitions and unresolved territorial disputes.
We need not be pessimistic about the future for our region but nor should we be complacent. 
New mindsets and creative approaches will be needed as we seek to build mutual trust and confidence between the countries of our region.
Australia and Japan must work together to this end, bilaterally and with all the countries of the region.  
Our Alliance relationships with the United States contribute to stability in the region.
We are working to strengthen the East Asia Summit, a forum now with the right membership and mandate to cover political, security and economic issues in our region.  
Our cooperation encompasses non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament as well as emerging issues such as space and cyber security.
Bilaterally, building on the 2007Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation, we now conduct annual high-end military exercises, have negotiated an Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement and an Information Security Agreement.
One of the key outcomes of the 2+2 Foreign and Defence Ministers meeting in Sydney last month was a joint Vision Statement, which will guide our deepening defence and security cooperation in the years ahead.
We will play our part in keeping Asia stable, peaceful and cooperative.
These are years of destiny for our region.
If we get this right  -  as I believe we will  -  this will be looked upon as one of the most extraordinary periods in human history.
It will be seen as the period when we were able to bring billions out of poverty.
To recast our global and regional links through freer trade and stronger regional architecture.
To manage the challenge of food security and environmental sustainability in a growing world population facing the very real threat of climate change.
And to maintain the stability needed for economic growth as the strategic order changes in our region.
I believe all this can be accomplished in our time.
Indeed, it must be because the alternative cannot be contemplated.
The partnership between Australia and Japan shows it can be done.
Two countries that put old enmities aside and embraced a common purpose.
It has taken judgment and committed diplomacy.
It has taken wisdom and patience through the occasional low points.
And, perhaps most importantly, it has taken a strong human dimension  -  beginning with that early friendship between Prime Minister Kishi and Trade Minister John McEwen, and continuing to the warmth and generosity that exists in this room tonight.
The governments of both our countries have high hopes and great ambitions for the next 50 years, and so we should.
This is a time of opportunity for us both.
We rightly call it the ‘Asian Century', and in creating that century, Japan led the way.
Japan was the first Asian country to modernise, providing an example and an inspiration to the other nations of the region.
The next 50 years will be harder.
The competition is steeper, and the low-hanging fruit has been long picked.
But if the energy and commitment shown by the organisations in this room over the past 50 years are anything to go by, we can have every confidence in the next 50 years.
Much will change in those decades.
But the friendship between Australia and Japan  -  warm, respectful and dependable  -  will endure.


Canberra
Can I thank Katy for her leadership of the ACT. As a part time resident in Canberra I am acutely aware that often we give your beautiful place a bit of a bad name.
When it runs around the country on the TV news as Canberra today has done this or that, what they're really talking about is what happens in federal parliament.
On a morning like this the attractions of Canberra and the ACT are clear. And Katy and her team  -  women and men  -  have provided fantastic leadership of the ACT during a time of change, and I'm looking forward to seeing that leadership continue after the election, shortly upon us, in 11 days' time. But no one's counting.
I've been asked today to speak about the role of powerful women and what that means for politics and for the life of our nation.
In truth I don't wander around thinking about myself as a powerful woman. I think about myself as a Prime Minister who's got a job to do, who is fantastically supported by a great team.
But when I do stop and reflect about women's roles in politics I don't think of us  -  this generation  -  as the trail blazers. The trail has already been blazed by the women who have gone before.
The women who went before in times when women in politics were so much more unusual than they are today.
I think of people like Joan Child becoming the first female Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Joan Kirner and Carmen Lawrence blazing a trail when it was truly tough.
Susan Ryan, of quitting her job as a minister when she truly alone, out trying to take that executive responsibility.
These are the women who have blazed the trail for us and we should be so thankful that they have done it.
The women of today's generation, including me and the women in my team, I believe are in the mid phase of change. Women aren't unusual in politics any longer, but we're not half-half either. And we are still blazing some of those first trails, including being the first female Prime Minister.
But life for us is different from those early women, and we are a generation that is shaping more change. And I believe the ultimate end point to this generation of change  -  and I absolutely believe I'll live to see it  -  is an Australia in which we don't bother to reflect on how many men and how many women are in politics any longer because it is so routine for it to be half-half.
That we don't bother to collect the statistics any longer about who is the first female Minister for Defence or any of those jobs because it is so routine for women to do them as well as men.
That we don't bother any longer to collect the statistics on how many women prime ministers there have been or women premiers or chief ministers, because it is so routine for those jobs to be held by women.
I genuinely believe that we will get to that place; we'll do it in my lifetime. But in order to do it we need to see further change.
One of the great delights of doing this job as Prime Minister is, I do believe, that around the country it's made women and men stop and perhaps have a conversation with their daughters about their lifetime aspirations. And reinforcing to their daughters that there are no closed doors for them any longer. It's a great delight.
Indeed a friend of mine who has a very young son told me about a conversation she had with her son where she said to him  -  talking about what you might want to do when he was a much bigger person, he was only four or five when this conversation happened  -  you could be Prime Minister. To which he said, “No I couldn't mummy because you've got to be a girl to do that job”.
That's not exactly the impression we're seeking to leave but the impression we do want to leave for the girls and the boys of Australia is that there are no closed doors. That this occupation, all occupations are open to women and to men.
And yes, being the first female Prime Minister also attracts some commentary of the negative kind, and you know what I'm talking about when I refer to that. But that is I think a by-product of this generation of change.
And for me, that negative commentary has never detracted from the real delight of having the opportunity  -  not only to change perceptions  -  but to change the nation.
Because ultimately our mission isn't about changing politics, it's about changing the country we live in and ensuring that the country we live in offers the best of opportunity to women, to men, to girls, to boys, to people from all backgrounds and all walks of life.
Which is why we're on a mission to do things like make sure that every child in every school gets a great education. To turn on its head the saying that demography is destiny. To ensure that poor kids get the same chance as children from better-off backgrounds.
I'm really proud of what we have achieved as a Government for women. It's not only changing politics, it's changing lives for Australian women.
Whether it's the introduction of paid parental leave, the changes we've made to make child care more affordable and higher quality. Whether it's the changes we've brought to the tax system so hundreds of thousands of women who work part time, often in low income jobs, don't pay a cent of tax until they've earned over $18,200.
These are big achievements for women.
I'm also particularly proud of our workplace relations legislation, bringing as it did for the first time in this country a principle that would enable women to truly achieve equal pay.
And I'm proud that under that principle we are seeing change for women who do some of the hardest work in our society  -  people who work in the social and community services sector  -  in the women's refuges, in the domestic violence counselling services, in the homelessness shelters.
Those workers, predominately women, are going to see their work revalued because of what we achieve through those laws, what we achieve working with the trade union involved, the Australian Services Union, and what we achieve through agreeing with them that this work shouldn't be undervalued because it's traditionally been viewed as women's work.
And I am delighted today to announce at the start of a sitting week, that is this sitting week that will see us introduce legislation to put in a special account $2.8 billion which is the Commonwealth's share of making sure that these workers, predominately women, are properly paid and properly valued in the life of our nation.
If you're trying to bring change of this dimension you can't do it alone and I do want to acknowledge today that Katy was amongst the first of the leaders of states and territories to say that she too wanted to see equal pay for these workers.
And one of the first to announce that rather than just good words, real money would be put on the table to make a difference for these working women.
I want to acknowledge the really genuine partnership I've had with Katy during the time I've been Prime Minister. Those exchanges around the COAG table aren't always easy ones; sometimes ‘robust' is a word that covers many sins. Sometimes they are very robust exchanges.
And whilst Katy's always been a very strong advocate of her place, of the ACT, she's been a progressive voice around that table for change.
Whether it be in health or education, whether it be justice for women workers; a progressive voice, a progressive advocate for change.
The women who will have power in this place in 11 days' time are the women who take themselves to the polling places to go and record their vote: 125,000 of them.
In the ACT you get a very special power when you go and vote. You get to vote for the political party of your choice, but you actually  -  because of the magic of your very unusual voting system  -  get to select the candidates that you want to select.
And my message to people who go to those polling places  -  to women and men  -  would be, to vote for candidates that embody the values and power of this place, the ACT.
Vote for candidates with the values that you agree with and the track record of getting it done. And if you do that, I know that Katy, the women in her team, and the men who work alongside them will be returned in that election.
It's great to be with you this morning and I'm looking forward to the conversation to come. I think we should all be a little bit scared of Jane though as she moderates it.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
I congratulate Labor MP Anna Burke on her election tonight as Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Ms Burke has been dutifully presiding over the chamber in recent months, and has performed her role with extraordinary strength and grace in the most challenging of circumstances.
Ms Burke will be the second female Speaker of the House of Representatives, following in the footsteps of Joan Child who served as Speaker from 1986 to 1989.
Her appointment represents a historic day, with women now filling the roles of Speaker, Prime Minister and Governor-General.
I also commend Nationals MP Bruce Scott on his election as Deputy Speaker.


Canberra
Daryl Melham has been an exceptional caucus chair, ensuring the smooth running of our caucus meetings for the past eight years.
Mr Melham has expressed a completely understandable desire to spend more time in his electorate as we head into an election year.
I thank him for his loyal service to the party in this role, and look forward to his continuing contribution inside and outside caucus.


Canberra
The Gillard Government will introduce legislation tomorrow to ensure its $2.8 billion contribution to equal pay increases for social and community sector (SACS) workers is secure now and into the future.
Workers in the SACS sector make a difference every day to the lives of the most vulnerable in our community and the Gillard Government wants to ensure its contribution towards increased entitlements can only be used for that purpose.
Under the terms of Fair Work Australia's historic equal remuneration order, around 150,000 SACS workers will benefit from regular wage rises totalling between 23 and 45 per cent from 1 December this year until June 2021.
The Gillard Government's creation of the new Social and Community Services Pay Equity Special Account will deliver peace of mind to these workers  -  who are some of the lowest paid in Australia.
FWA's ruling earlier this year marks a significant advance for equal pay for women - around 120,000 of the workers covered by the order are women.
Workers in the SACS sector have challenging jobs including helping women and children in refuges, running support centres for people with disability, leading teams of counselling professionals and managing family support services and emergency housing for the homeless and the mentally ill.
The Gillard Government will continue to work collaboratively with state and territory governments to ensure the historic FWA decision is fully implemented and fully funded for the benefit of workers in the sector.
The Government will also work with the sector to ensure the smooth implementation of the equal pay order across all states and territories.
The Government's $2.8 billion contribution is fully funded and accounted for in the Budget.
The latest information on the implementation process is available at: www.fahcsia.gov.au/node/10776.


Canberra
I am delighted to launch the International Day of the Girl Child in Australia.
I'm especially delighted to do so as this country's first female Prime Minister.
But also as the Adelaide girl who grew up safe, valued and loved, and received that standard of education I want to see for every child.
For most young girls, growing up in a country like Australia is a time of remarkable opportunity.
To be encouraged to think for ourselves.
To have choices and the freedom to exercise them.
To manage our careers, our relationships and our health as we see fit.
But for many girls and young women  -  here at home and especially in the developing world  -  the experience is very different.
Like the girl forced to work at home and watch her brother go off to school.
The girl forcibly married to someone she doesn't know before she has even come of age.
Or the young woman who dwells in daily fear of violence from those closest to her.
In many cases, they live lives unchanged from the days of their grandmothers and great-grandmothers.
Their shoulders weighed down by authority and unthinking tradition.
Arduous, limited, even dangerous lives.
Robbing them of a future.
And robbing us of their potential.
Many of us heard overnight of the shocking news that Malala Yousafzai, a teenage schoolgirl and renowned children's rights advocate in Pakistan, has been shot by the Taliban.
Malala was on a bus home from school when a man who asked for her by name shot her, seriously wounding her and her classmates in the attack.  Today she is in intensive care with bullet wounds to the head and chest.
This attack was no accident.  Malala was targeted because she is a campaigner for girls' right to education. 
The Pakistani Taliban have claimed responsibility, describing her as a Western-minded girl, known for speaking out against the insurgents, who had harmed their cause.
Malala's inspiring words have been widely reported and repeated today:
I will serve my people, I will speak up for my right of education and I speak for the girls.  If I lost my life in speaking up for the rights of girls, it is not a big deal for me.
Today we think of her and her family  -  we desperately hope she does not have to pay that price.
And we resolve to join in her work.
As Malala's life shows, widening the horizons of women and girls is a job for the whole world.
If girls live lesser lives anywhere, we are diminished everywhere.
When this country helped found the United Nations, we made a commitment to be good global citizens and to be a friend of humanity at all times and in all places.
Australia is a nation that keeps its commitments.
So we must all we can to alleviate the suffering of women and increase their rights and opportunities globally, especially here in our region.
Nothing is more important than education.
I don't want to see young girls working in sweatshops.
I want to see them in the classroom - well fed and clothed, immunised, safe from harm and free to learn.
Education is the key.
Education is aid that works.
Teaching girls and women is one of the most important investments in the development of a nation.
Education makes an enormous difference to the health of women and their children, to their job opportunities, their wage levels.
Educated girls tend to marry later, which increases their employment prospects.
Education plays an important role in giving women more control over how many children they have.
An extra year of secondary schooling can boost a girl's future wages by 10 to 20 per cent.
And because women typically reinvest 90 per cent of their income in their family, compared with 30 or 40 per cent of men's income, their children can lead better lives as well.
Friends, In my role as co-chair of the Millennium Development Goal Advocacy Group, I recently announced that promoting access to quality education and achieving gender equality were my personal priorities.
That's why in recent years, we've put our foot on the accelerator.
Yes, $320 million is the sum for our Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development initiative, and there's more for countries beyond the Pacific.
Australian aid means half a million children receiving support to go to school in Papua New Guinea.
It means 165,000 school places for girls in Indonesia.
It means 140,000 girls being able to attend middle and secondary school in Pakistan.
And in Afghanistan, we have made a significant contribution to an international effort which has increased school enrolments from one million in 2001 to more than seven million today  -  including more than 2.7 million girls.
But for all the opportunities being opened up, there are plenty of girls being left behind  -  abroad and here at home.
That's why the United Nations has created this day of observance - the International Day of the Girl Child.
This is the first, and it's been a long time coming.
It's day for symbolism - and symbols are important because where our heart and ideals go, our actions will follow.
Friends, Gender equality is one of the great goals of our time.
The first-wave feminists started the last century with such high hopes yet we reached the year 2000 with those goals not completely met.
Let this century be different and let us be the ones who make it different.
May this be the century when every girl is born wanted.
Where she grows up free from want and fear.
And lives out her years nurtured in dignity and abounding in opportunity.
That is our commitment to the women and girls of today and those of future generations.
That is the hope in which I declare the first international Day of the Girl Child officially launched.


Canberra
MINISTER COLLINS: Thank you to everyone for coming in today. It's great to have obviously the Prime Minister, Minister Shorten, Minister Macklin and I understand Minister Plibersek who are also dropping in to say hello.
It is obviously a great day for gender in terms of closing the gender pay gap. We do know that in Australia the gender pay gap is still at around 17 per cent.
And of course this equal pay decision is momentous and it's great to be part of a Government that is actually legislating to ensure that over the eight years that we will deliver on our commitment of almost $3 billion for this equal pay case.
And working across the Government of course there have been many people involved, many agencies, many ministers involved in getting us to this point. And so it's been great to work, particularly with all of you in getting us to this point, the sector, and of course the union and the delegates have all been working together to get to this point with the Government.
And it's a great day to see that legislation introduced. I'm very pleased that that's happened today.
LINDA WHITE, ASU: This is a fantastic day. It has been a couple of fantastic years.
The support we received from the Prime Minister and the Ministers has been absolutely fantastic, and from the Government.
This is an unprecedented thing that you are doing for us today to put this legislation through to guarantee this money.
Whatever happens in the future is something that the sector has been asking for and we are just so pleased about this.
It's been a very long journey. Many of us have been there from the start. But this has been absolutely fantastic and this is a red letter day.
PRIME MINISTER: Can I join Minister Collins in saying we're really pleased that we've got to this stage, and we've done it together.
And it's been good work to do together because it's really been about valuing women, predominately women  -  some men  -  predominately women who work in our social and community and services sector.
The sector is represented here today. People working in disability, people working in homelessness, people working in some of the hardest areas, the most demanding work, and their work's been historically under-valued because it's work performed by women. And it's just assumed that caring work is somehow innate, and therefore you don't have to value it and you don't need to treat the skills as professional.
This decision and the work we've done together really turns all of that on its head. I'm really conscious of how long a journey it has been.
We needed to get rid of WorkChoices, we needed to change the law, the law needed to come into operation, you had to take the case, we ultimately end up making an agreement with you about how the case should conclude and how the money should work. We then had to work to find the money.
And now we've got the legislation in the Parliament to lock it away so it is there to meet the needs flowing from the case and to ensure that pay is topped up and that we do get rid of that gender pay gap in this sector where it's been so pronounced.
Congratulations to all of you who have been involved in such a long running campaign. All of the ministers right across the board have worked very hard. I hope Tanya has the opportunity to pop through.
The other person we should be thanking who is not here today is Minister Wong, Penny Wong, who had the less than glamorous task of hunkering over all the budget and the figures to get it done.
But everybody's played their part. Bill from the IR perspective. Julie of course now with our Status of Women hat. Jenny because much of what her department does ends up being the interface between government and this sector. Tanya equally in health, working with this sector. And of course Penny working so hard on the money. So it's been a great team effort all round.


Canberra
JOURNALIST: What's the terror threat in Bali and are you worried going over there?
PM: Look, people should always check the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade travel advice warnings but I do want to be in Bali for the 10 year commemorations.
Families will be travelling there. It will be a day in which we pay our respects and remember what that moment was like for Australians.
JOUNRALIST: Do you feel betrayed by the Speaker Peter Slipper and the fact that you spent so much time supporting him yesterday for him only to resign two hours later?
PM: We supported Peter Slipper to become the Speaker by following his successful track record of service as Deputy Speaker. Now a lot has happened since Mr Slipper first became Speaker and these matters were fully dealt with in the Parliament yesterday.
We now have new Speaker and we're getting on with the job.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, some people have expressed concern about his state of mind and his health. Do you have those concerns and do you sympathise with him at the moment?
PM: Look, I said what I felt about this in the Parliament today following Mr Slipper's statement. I said anybody witnessing that statement would see the real human pain written across Peter Slipper's face.
He spoke in very emotional terms about the cost for his family and whatever other judgements people come to we've got to remember that there's a real live human being and his family at the centre of this matter.
He has now resigned and so I hope that he has the opportunity, with some privacy, to spend some time with his family after these events.
JOURNALIST: Was your defence of Peter Slipper in vein yesterday given his ultimate decision to resign?
PM: I didn't believe the Parliament should be a kangaroo court.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott says you should just ‘get over it': the gender issue, his comments yesterday. What do you say to that?
PM: Well that's a matter for Mr Abbott to explain what he meant by those comments.
JOURNALIST: What do you make of the worldwide reaction to your speech in Parliament yesterday? It got a bit of press overseas.
PM: I made my speech in Parliament yesterday because I formed the view, enough is enough. I've had enough. Australian women have had enough. When I see sexism and misogyny I'm going to call them for what they are.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard will make a state visit to India from 15 to 17 October.
India, the world's biggest democracy and one of the fastest growing major economies, stands in the front rank of Australia's international partnerships and will be a key part of Australia's future in the Asian Century. 
Our strategic partnership is based on shared values and mutual interests.  India is Australia's fourth-largest export market and a key strategic and economic partner in the region.  
There has been strong recent growth in the bilateral relationship spanning economic, cultural, education, science and strategic ties.  Indian investment in Australia in 2011 alone was over $11 billion.
In New Delhi, Ms Gillard will meet Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and senior ministers to discuss ways to further expand and deepen bilateral and regional cooperation, boost our trade and investment ties, and strengthen our political and strategic dialogue.  She will also call on President Mukerjee and meet with Congress Party President Sonia Gandhi.
Ms Gillard will meet with members of the Australia India CEOs Forum, address a lunch hosted by the three business chambers and have the opportunity to see first-hand the results of Australia-India collaboration on community and science and research projects.
Australia and India share longstanding people-to-people and cultural ties, with a flourishing Indian community here which has made a significant social and economic contribution.  Australia's largest ever cultural festival in India - Oz Fest - will be launched by Ms Gillard at a concert in New Delhi.
Oz Fest will run until February 2013 and involve over 100 events across 18 Indian cities. This will further enhance our cultural ties and understanding between the two countries. 
This will be Ms Gillard's first visit to India as Prime Minister.  She visited India in 2009 as Deputy Prime Minister.  


Canberra
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: I am absolutely delighted to welcome Prime Minister Lee to Canberra on his second official visit to Australia.
This visit by Prime Minister Lee caps off a particularly active year of engagement between our two nations.
Senator Carr visited Singapore in March on his first overseas trip as Foreign Minister. I was also very pleased to make my first trip as Prime Minister to Singapore in April.
And our Foreign, Defence and Trade Ministers had very constructive talks at the Singapore-Australia joint ministerial committee meeting last month.
Of course our relationship is not just founded on strong ties between our two governments. It's in every sense a real friendship that has been built over time. 
Australia was one of the first countries to recognise Singapore's independence in 1965.
Singapore is our largest trade and investment partner in ASEAN and fifth largest trade partner globally.
Around 10,000 Singaporeans are currently studying in Australia and almost 25,000 Australians call Singapore home.
So do more than 2,300 Australian companies, who use Singapore as a regional base.
Our defence cooperation is the strongest with any country of our region and Prime Minister Lee, on this visit, has visited Shoalwater Bay, the training area.
He was there yesterday to see Singapore's largest annual training exercise in Australia which is involving more than 4,600 personnel from the Singapore armed forces.
Today Singapore is one of Australia's closest and most important partners economically and strategically.
We have a shared strategic outlook on the region. We both support free trade and economic openness.
We are working together to further promote trade and investment in our region through APEC, the Trans-Pacific Partnership and through the proposed launch later this year of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership.
We both support inclusive regional security architecture, in particular the East Asia Summit, in order to build trust and habits of cooperation in our rapidly-changing region.
And we both support the stabilising presence of the United States in our region.
Prime Minister Lee and I a little earlier today had an excellent discussion on these issues and about strengthening collaboration on a number of areas of importance to both of us.
I was pleased to witness with Prime Minister Lee the signing of an MOU on combatting trans-national crime and developing police cooperation and that's an example of how we are working together to take very strong and practical action against serious and organised crime.
We have discussed increased cooperation and engagement on cyber issues. 
We welcomed a recent decision to establish a regular strategic dialogue between our Defence and Foreign Affairs officials and we discussed Australia-ASEAN relations in the lead-up to and during the 40th anniversary of relations in 2014.
I welcomed Prime Minister Lee's support for our proposal for a leaders level ASEAN-Australian summit in 2014 to mark this occasion.
Finally, I thanked Prime Minister Lee for his support for our bid for a seat on the UN Security Council.
Prime Minister Lee and I have taken stock of the strong progress we have made in our relationship and laid the foundations for continuing our partnership for the years ahead.
So Prime Minister I do thank you for visiting our country. You are always a very welcome and honoured guest and I'd invite you to make some remarks. 
PRIME MINISTER LEE: Thank you. Thank you Prime Minister. It is very good to be back in Australia again. It is a cool day but a warm welcome.
It is six years since I was last in Canberra and I'd like to thank Prime Minister Gillard for her hospitality and I'm very happy to have the chance to reciprocate her visit to Singapore in April this year.
I had a very good discussion with the Prime Minister.
Our bilateral relations as you have heard are in very good shape and we have regular exchanges at many levels, including the joint ministerial committee in which our ministers meet and exchange views every year.
We cooperate in many areas; trade, tourism, education, culture, defence and others.
I spent yesterday at the Shoalwater Bay training area near Rockhampton to watch our annual SAF training exercise, a live-firing exercise called Exercise Wallaby.
We deeply appreciate Australia's strong support for our armed forces to train here and we wish to thank both the Australian government as well as the local communities for welcoming us so generously.
We can do much more together, of course, and as you have heard we just witnessed the signing of MOU on combatting trans-national crime and developing police cooperation.
In a globalised world, crime is also globalised and the criminals have trans-national networks and therefore the governments need to work with one another to deal with the problem, not least when it comes to issue like extremist terrorism or for that matter money laundering.
The civil servants have a roundtable between Australia and the Singapore public service and it is a roundtable of our permanent secretaries and we also have 2+2 strategic dialogue between our Foreign Affairs and Defence officials.
I strongly support this because in all these areas we see much value in exchanging views with one another.
The Prime Minister and I also talked about regional developments and international events, including the situation in the South China Sea.
Singapore is a non-claimant so we take no sides in the disputes and the competing claims in the South China Sea. 
But we do have interests there and our interest is in maintaining freedom of navigation and stability in this important sea lane of communication. 
We hope the dispute will be resolved peacefully and in accordance with international law, including UNCLOS, the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.
We also hope discussions on the code of conduct will begin soon.
Australia and Singapore share many strategic interests. We work together in multilateral forums, the East Asia summit and APEC.
Australia and ASEAN have been dialogue partners for almost 40 years and I encourage Australia to build on this longstanding cooperation to build closer integration with ASEAN and other regional partners.
For example, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, the RCEP and in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the TPP.
And we will look forward to celebrating the 40th anniversary of this dialogue in two years' time, I hope with a commemorative summit.
We share commitment to trade liberalisation and to strong global institutions; the WTO, APEC, G20, the IMF or the UN. 
Singapore is therefore happy to support Australia's bid for a seat on the UNSC in the year 2013-2014.
I think the vote is happening very soon and we have given our support to Australia and we are confident that Australia will make a valuable contribution to the debate on the Security Council.
We also welcome Australia's active engagement in the region. We value Australia as an important partner and trusted friend.
We look forward to working more with Australia to strengthen and deepen our relationship across all fronts. 
Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: Thank you very much Prime Minister Lee.
We will take three questions a side from the respective medias who are here and, in deference to our friends from Singapore, I think we should give them the first question.
Prime Minister Lee, you might want to select someone. 
JOURNALIST: This question is to both Prime Ministers. I am wondering how both sides can enhance your economic links, maybe to look at new areas of economic cooperation so that both countries can ride the global economic slowdown. 
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: That's a very good question and we do want to keep enhancing what are already a set of very strong economic links.
One of the ways of doing that is making sure progress is made through the Trans-Pacific Partnership or through the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership so that we see a reduction in protectionist measures and freer flow of trade and services.
That's been a key focus of what we have discussed today. 
PRIME MINISTER LEE: We can always do more. I discussed the subject with the Prime Minister and the Treasurer, Mr Swan, just now.
We have a Singapore-Australia free trade agreement  -  SAFTA  -  which we concluded now nearly 10 years ago.
We have had two reviews of SAFTA to keep it up to date but of course the world keeps on moving and opportunities keep on opening up and I hope when both sides are ready, we can pick it up and we can have another review.
It is not just to look at the fine print but to see what new areas we can move forward on and, of course, from Singapore's point of view, as a transport hub, we always like to build up our aviation links and we believe we can enhance our civil aviation links and freedom of air services between our two countries and beyond, that will be beneficial to both sides.
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: We will take a question from the Australian media. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Lee, what was it about Australia's bid for the Security Council that got you over the line, and what was it about the other two bids that you didn't like the look of? 
PRIME MINISTER LEE: There are three good candidates and we are friends with all of them but we believe that Australia can make a significant contribution. 
Australia has been contributing to the security of the region in South East Asia and in Asia. You are in the FPTA which has continued now for nearly four decades.
You have been participating in security operations in Afghanistan, in the Gulf, together with us, and we believe Australia is an important part of the regional architecture and it is beneficial for the Asia-Pacific region to be well represented in the Security Council.
All the bids are good but we had to choose and in this case it was quite clear that Australia was our best choice. 
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: We will take another question from the media from Singapore. 
JOURNALIST: SAFTA has unresolved issues, including open skies, law degrees, government procurement.
When can we expect these issues to be resolved, and this is to each Prime Minister, which of these issues do you see as more difficult and which ones could become low-hanging fruit in the near future? 
PRIME MINISTER LEE: My attitude is all fruit can be picked.
When they are ripe, we will pick them and I hope we will pick them and I hope it will not be very long.
We all have political timetables to take into account. These items have to be seen as a bundle because you don't deal with them one by one but an overall package which both sides will find palatable and saleable.
And I hope we can put the package together for very long because the issues have been there for some time.
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: I wholly agree with what the Prime Minister has said.
We have worked between our two nations for freer and freer trade arrangements and we have shown a great deal of success at that.
It is time to look again and see if there is more we can do and I believe working together on that we can see progress.
Clearly the easiest things have been done and were done a long time ago, otherwise we wouldn't have had the development of the FTA and have had it endure and be of such long standing, but you always have to look again at the issues.
The world keeps changing, the nature of trade demands keep changing so we always have to be prepared to look again and see what more we can do. 
PRIME MINISTER LEE: We are ready any time Australia is. 
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: We will be talking about that.
I will take a question from the Australian media.
JOURNALIST: There is a report this morning about offensive remarks made at a CFMEU dinner by a comedian concerning Tony Abbott and his chief of staff. Do you have any comment or are you aware of it?
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: I was not in attendance when these remarks were made at the CFMEU dinner last night, but I did hear this morning that offensive remarks had been made.
Let me be very clear on the reports to me, the remarks that were made are deeply offensive, they are wrong, the comments should never have been made.
It was wrong for them to have been made and offensive for them to have been made.
In those circumstances, as soon as I possibly could, I rang the National Secretary of the CFMEU and indicated I thought these comments were offensive.
I understand the CFMEU has put out a statement in relation to this matter but clearly there is no place for offensive comments of this nature.
JOURNALIST: There has been a problem in Singapore in regards to the import of sheep from Australia for Korban, I was wondering if that was discussed and you had come to any long-term solution to this concern we have. 
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: We have been able to work through our own proper processes here in Australia to make some sheep available for this year's festival.
We of course are concerned about the welfare of animals that are exported from Australia and we have in recent times been working to strengthen the assurance about what happens with animals and the circumstances in which they are ultimately slaughtered.
So we have worked through our proper processes. The Secretary of our Department of Agriculture made a determination and he is the proper authority to do so, that we could have animals go to Singapore and they're in the process of being transferred to Singapore now.
As for the longer term arrangements, we have still got some work and discussions to do on that but we have been able to respond for this year's festival. 
PRIME MINISTER LEE: I discussed this with the Prime Minister and I thanked her for the Australian government's cooperation.
I think they went the extra mile to help us make sure we could get the mosques which had been audited cleared and qualified and to be able for us to have 2,200 animals this year exported live to Singapore for the slaughter ritual.
I asked what the Australian thinking would be for the longer term. 
That's something which is obviously still evolving but the Prime Minister said the Government does believe that Australia should continue to be exporting livestock, but of course there has to be suitable safeguards and the animal welfare will have to be looked into.
So this is something we will work out in practical terms. 
JOURNALIST: Are we likely to come across problems next year? 
PRIME MINISTER LEE: We don't know, we will have to see. 
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: Okay, we'll take a last question from the Australian media.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Lee, Singapore has significant investments, both state-owned enterprises and private businesses, in Australia.
There has been quite a bit of debate in Australia about the possibility of toughening foreign investment requirements.
Would Singaporean businesses and state-owned enterprises be comfortable having their Australian holdings listed on a public register?
PRIME MINISTER LEE: Singapore companies having - I don't understand. 
JOURNALIST: There has been quite a bit of debate. 
PRIME MINISTER LEE: I understand that, but which companies, what public register?
JOURNALIST: If Australia was to create a public register of foreign businesses that have-
PRIME MINISTER LEE: If those are your rules and they apply to everybody, our companies will look at them and if they are comfortable, they will list. If not, they will sell their holdings.
If you want closer integration then the less these special rules exist the closer the integration will be. 
Businesses are practical, they are not ideological, they are not political, they do not achieve foreign policy objectives. 
Their responsibility is to earn a return for their shareholders.
They will go where they are welcome and where there's business to be done.
Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: Thank you.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard will travel to Laos and Indonesia from 4 to 9 November to attend the 9th Asia-Europe Meeting in Vientiane and the 5th Bali Democracy Forum in Bali. 
Australia was invited to attend the Asia-Europe Meeting for the first time in 2010. 
The Prime Minister's visit to Vientiane for her second ASEM summit underscores the importance we attach to high-level engagement with Asian and European partners. 
It is an opportunity for leaders to discuss strategic and economic issues, including cooperation and coordination to strengthen global financial architecture.  The Prime Minister will also meet with business leaders at the summit to discuss their priorities and objectives in the region.
The Prime Minister is also pleased to accept a personal invitation from President Yudhoyono to co-chair the Bali Democracy Forum on 8 November. 
Australia has welcomed and supported Indonesia's evolution into a strong and vibrant democracy, and greatly values the constructive leadership role that our close neighbourplays in the region and beyond. 
The Forum, which Australia has supported since its inception in 2008, is a key inter-governmental meeting for advancing democratic reform.
While in Vientiane and Bali, the Prime Minister will hold a series of meetings with international leaders.


Canberra
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Craig Thomson's vote and Peter Slipper's vote or is there a difference?
PM: Mr Abbott has said consistently that he wouldn't accept Craig Thomson's vote and then he's got his team out there canvassing for it. It's a clear example of double standards.
I started the week calling out the Liberal Party on double standards and here we are at the end of the parliamentary week with double standards back on display.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) thousands of letters. Do you accept that this is just a mistake from Mathias Cormann and it was just a bit of an oversight on his part?
PM: It's for him to explain.
JOURNALIST: Very briefly have you had an update on Bali at all of the terrorism threat? Are you any more concerned today than you were yesterday?
PM: For all the obvious common sense reasons we don't comment on security matters or security arrangements. But I am intending to go to Bali. I want to be in Bali.
This is a moment of real significance for our nation. Ten years ago I think we would all remember where we were and how we felt, how shocked we were.
I want to spend some time with the families who have really had to absorb such grief. But also for the nation, speak about the journey over the ten years since, and everything that we've done to counter the threat of terrorism in Australia and beyond our shores.
It's what took us to Afghanistan, and of course we are still there making sure Afghanistan doesn't become a safe haven again for the training of terrorists who take Australian lives.
JOURNALIST: So what do you make of some publications like The New Yorker picking up events in the parliament on Tuesday and saying perhaps Obama could learn a few things from you and your speech?
PM: The motivation for my speech on Monday was; I'm just going to call out sexism and misogyny where I see it. And I made that point very clearly in the parliament on Monday, as for the reaction that's a matter for the people who have reacted. That was my purpose.
JOURNALIST: Do you really believe that Tony Abbott hates women, because that is the meaning of the word ‘misogyny'.
PM: I believe Mr Abbott should be held to account for the things he said in public life. What I referred to on Tuesday actually, when the House first sat. What I referred to in the House on Tuesday weren't ancient statements. They weren't statements that he's made at private events.
They are statements he has made since he's been in this parliament and indeed been a responsible office holder in this parliament as a minister in the Howard Government, and now as Leader of the Opposition.
People in public life should be held to account for their statements. I am. I absolutely expect that, I should be. And Mr Abbott shouldn't be held to a different standard.
JOURNALIST: Australians in Bali who have seen the site of the bombings say that it's being used as a public urinal and it's actually in quite a disgraceful state. Does that disturb you?
PM: It does disturb me and we've worked alongside representatives of the families to try and secure this parcel of land. Unfortunately there have been some difficulties with the purchaser and with the price being asked. So that I think is to be deeply regretted and I can understand why it distresses people when they see it.
Thank you very much.


Bali, Indonesia
Prime Minister Julia Gillard will today commemorate the 10th anniversary of the 2002 Bali bombings at a memorial service in Bali.
On this day a decade ago, 202 people lost their lives, including 88 Australians and 38 Indonesians, as well as citizens from 20 other countries.
The images and the stories from this day are seared on our national consciousness.
We will never forget the victims of this appalling act of terrorism and our thoughts are with their families and friends.
We also recognise the bonds of solidarity between Australia and Indonesia forged by this shared tragedy.  And we are particularly conscious at this time of the people of Bali, who showed an overwhelming generosity of spirit in the aftermath of the bombing and in the years since.
Our close and enduring relationship with Indonesia sends the strongest possible message to those responsible for this terrible act: attacks on tolerance and freedom will never triumph.
Our best defence against violent extremists is working together to build united, strong, resilient communities who share common values of tolerance, mutual respect and a commitment to the rule of law and democracy.
The close and effective counter terrorism and law enforcement cooperation built between Australia and Indonesia in response to the Bali bombings has grown into an enduring partnership, to the benefit of both countries.


Bali, Indonesia
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Today, we gather to commemorate the worst terrorist attack our nation has ever known.
88 Australians died here. And they did not die alone.
38 Indonesians died with them.
In all, 202 lives were lost and more than 200 were injured.
The bodies of the dead and the living bore wounds more often seen in wartime.
But these were not soldiers.
Our fellow Australians  -  those lost, those hurt  -  were doing nothing more than seeking a few carefree days amid full and busy lives.
They had come to a place loved for its sunshine and uncomplicated joy.
A place, like London and Gallipoli, where something of the Australian spirit dwells upon another shore.
This is what the Bali bombers struck at here.
On September 11, terrorists attacked the great symbols of American prestige.
Here in Bali, they attacked our people and through them, sought to overwhelm our values.
Here on these bustling streets, they inflicted searing pain and grief that will never end.
But even as the debris fell, it was obvious the attack on our sense of ourselves  -  as Australians, as human beings - had failed.
Rescuers ran towards the terror.
Volunteers extended their hands by the hundred, Indonesians and Australian alike.
A remarkable medical rescue effort swung into place.
A thorough policing effort methodically dismantled the terrorist network responsible.
And our two countries drew closer than we ever had before.
Amid the horror, it was a time for heroes. Like Peter Hughes and Jason McCartney, victims who became rescuers.
Like the Sanglah Hospital staff who provided frontline care in those first critical hours.
Or Len Notaras, Fiona Wood and their colleagues who were angels of healing back at home.
It was a time for leaders too.
President Megawati and then Minister Yudhoyono were quick to embrace international cooperation and a decisive security response.
Prime Minister Howard was a steadfast, reassuring voice for Australians in those dramatic days, and it is very fitting that he is here today.
Police Inspector General Pastika and Commissioner Keelty gave us confidence that justice would be done.
Ten years later and we witness today another sort of courage: the courage it has taken for the survivors and families to make this pilgrimage.
The physical journey by plane has been easy but the inner journey is wrenchingly hard.
This is a day of contesting emotions, from anger and unamended loss to forgiveness and reconciliation with a bitter past.
Wounds and scars abound, healed and unhealed.
But nothing can replace the empty seat at your family table.
The graduations and christenings you will never know.
And the fault line that will always divide your lives into two halves: “before” and “after” Bali.
There are, at least, some fragments of comfort on this day of recollection and return.
There is peace in this island, and the knowledge that millions still come here for the same reasons you and your loved ones did.
And perhaps there is a grim reassurance in knowing that the terrorists did not achieve what they set out to do.
They did not undermine Indonesian democracy, which has only grown stronger across the passage of a decade.
And though our vigilance is greater, we have not surrendered the freedoms that brought us here in the first place.
We were hurt and so were our friends, but we did not falter.
Instead, we endured and found strength in each other.
With that strength, we embrace those who suffered in Bali and lost so much.
With that strength, we affirm the endurance of our ideals.
Because in the end, terror is not beaten by policing or force of arms alone.
We prevail because we have a better way.
We prevail because our beliefs endure.
Terrorists have killed and maimed thousands around the world.
But they will never sunder or displace a single ideal.
So today we return here in remembrance, but we also gather in quiet defiance.
We will never forget all that we lost.
We will hold fast to that which remains:
To our determination as a free people to explore the world unbowed by fear; to our resolve to defeat terrorism; and to our duty to care for each other. 


Bali, Indonesia
PRIME MINISTER: I've had the absolute honour today of attending the Bali Memorial Service here in Bali.  I've had the opportunity to speak to family and friends since the service. They are gathered here now.  
There are tears in the room, there's hugs in the room, there's lots of reflections about everything that we've lost.  
There's also a lot of looking forward too.  People who are talking about how their lives have continued after the losses they've sustained.  
Everybody I've spoken to has been very appreciative about being here today.  It's helped them grieve and remember.  It's helped them reflect on the events the past.  It's helped them renew some friendships that were made at the time.  It's helped them too say thank you to many of the Indonesian people who helped so much during such a critical time of need.  
People are at all different stages of grieving and loss.  For some of the emotion you can tell is incredibly raw still.  Others who were very, very young kids who lost parents very young at the time, sharing their reflections too, and talking about where their lives are up to today.  
So, it's a really mixed picture of how people have got on with their lives and how they're experiencing grief today.
But it's been an incredible privilege to just have this opportunity to spend some time and talk to some of the victims and family members and those who did so much during our critical time of need.  
I'm happy to take questions just on this matter and then I'll go back inside and spend some more time with the families.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the site of the Sari Club at the moment is effectively a disused lot that gets used as a makeshift car park.  Indonesia has the power to take control of that property and turn it into a park or memorial but it hasn't used that power.  What would you like to see done with the site.
PRIME MINISTER: The Governor here in Bali has said he is very supportive of seeing this site used for an ongoing memorial. As a Government, we‘ve been very supportive too; we've got money available to assist. A number of State Governments have also stepped up to provide money too.  
So we're in a difficult situation at the moment.  The land is privately owned, but I would hope that we can see this matter resolved and we can see a proper memorial on the site.  I do understand why it distresses people to see it in the condition that it is now.  
JOURNALIST: The owner of the property wants about seven or eight million dollars. Would Australia consider putting some money towards buying the site so there's a permanent memorial there forever?
PRIME MINISTER: We have said that we would make some money available so that the site can be secured.  There is some real disputation about the value of the site and the price that's being asked and that's why there's been this sense of gridlock around it. 
But I do want to see that site used as a permanent memorial.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you make the question of the site something that you would raise in bilateral visits with senior ministers in Indonesia?
PRIME MINISTER: The appropriate level of government is the Governor here in Bali.  So of course, we will continue the dialogue with him.
JOURNALIST: The President is not here today.  Was he invited here? Is there a reason why he's not here?
PRIME MINISTER: There was never an expectation the President was going to be here today.  We did ask for the Indonesian Government to be represented.  
And they were represented by their Minister for Foreign Affairs, who spoke so eloquently about everything that we had been through as two nations and the fact that these events which could really have driven us apart actually brought us closer together. 
JOURNALIST: But was he invited?
PRIME MINISTER: We asked for a representative of the Indonesian Government.  There was never an expectation that the President was going to be here today.  
But I think we should note just how much care and trouble our Indonesian friends have taken to facilitate Australians travelling here today and to facilitate the Memorial Service.  
So there's been a lot of spirit of partnership and goodwill and cooperation.  And we do need to remember this is a day of memory for Indonesians too.  They lost a large number of their people.  There was a huge impact on this place.  This is beautiful tourist paradise, but for a long period of time, people suffered because tourists weren't coming.  
So this is a day of reflection for Indonesian people who are familiar with these events and so many of them on the night in question and in the days afterwards did extraordinary things to help Australians out.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in your speech you mentioned the spirit of Australia being partly here in Bali and you also likened it to ANZAC, sorry to Gallipoli.  Where in that kind of history does it hold a place for Australians?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it's one of those places in the world where we feel as Australians we've got a special connection.  
Around 900,000 Australians will visit Bali in the next 12 months and that's an extraordinary number when you stop and think about it for a nation that's just over 22 million people; 900,000 Australians will visit here.  
You know from your own family and friends, from your own lifetime experience, that so many Australians have visited here.  So many Australians have fallen in love with it.  For many young Australians, it's the first time they ever step overseas; they go to Bali.  
So I think we feel a sense of connection which means the Australian spirit is here.  
It's incredibly different to Gallipoli where obviously we grieve for everything that was lost and where the spirit of ANZAC was born, something so pivotal to our national character and how we describe ourselves and feel about ourselves.  But this is somewhere where we feel a real connection and that's why I refer to it as one of those places with a spirit of Australia in my speech.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we heard during the ceremony a lot of talk about what could have happened between Indonesia and Australia; the tension.  Can you talk to us a little about the sort of the relationship the countries have now?
PRIME MINISTER: I certainly can.  We've got an incredibly strong friendship with Indonesia and it spans government to government links which are very, very strong; business to business links; people to people links, including those hundreds of thousands Australians who come to this place.  
And so at every level, our relationship with Indonesia is a very strong one and I think when we reflect back on this event, you can easily imagine a different past. You can image such a searing event driving us apart, but it actually brought us together. 
And it is a good day to reflect on how Indonesia continued its journey into democracy, how Indonesia strengthened its counter terrorism capabilities, how Indonesia worked with Australian police, how they hunted down and dismantled the terrorist network that brought this hateful crime, and how the bonds between us have strengthened as result.  
So out of an event of such tragedy, there are some things that have come in our relationship with Indonesia which we would all rightfully admire and very, very much value.  
JOURNALIST: How much safer is it for Australians travelling to Indonesia today?
PRIME MINISTER: You've always got to be vigilant, but we've taken the step in the relatively recent past of reducing our travel warning for here in Bali and in Indonesia.  
But you've always got to be vigilant.  Global terror has been dealt a series of blows including here in Indonesia with what has been done to hit JI and to hit it hard, including what has been done around the world to hit Al Qaida and hit it hard, including the death of Osama Bin Laden.  
So a lot has been done to hit back at global terrorism, but we cannot allow ourselves the luxury of believing that global terrorism is dead.  As long as there is anyone who is prepared to engage in a hateful act of violence against innocence, then we need to be vigilant about terrorism. And of course, we are.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you refer to the spirit of Australia being in Bali.  Is there a spirit of the young Julia Gillard here? Did you come to Bali in your younger years?
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't come here as a teenager or a young adult in the sense that so many young Australians do.  I've travelled here twice privately. Both times have been family holidays.  
I came here with my sister and niece and nephew.  And then I came here with my sister and nephew and a mate of his.  
We were actually here in the lead up, we returned to Australia on the Friday and then the events of the weekend unfolded.  So it was very sharp for us because we literally had got back home and you were still dealing with the dirty washing out of the suitcase when the news came through, and you could just imagine yourself being in that streetscape.  
Now given it was a family holiday, we weren't attendees at nightclubs, we were travelling with some teenage boys so we were doing family activities.  But you could very much visualise exactly where this had happened.  
I spend a lot of time, I can remember ringing my sister and just talking it through as the news just kept coming through, because we'd just been here, we'd just been here.
Thank you very much.  Sorry, we'll take some questions from the Indonesian media.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this is the last commemoration (inaudible)?
PRIME MINISTER: We haven't made any decisions about future commemorations.  Save this, I do believe it is important that when we reach the ten years of the second Bali bombing, that we have those families who lost loved ones and the people who were injured offered a similar opportunity to come and to mark the ten years.  
For me, the decisions beyond that depend on discussions with the survivors, discussions with their families.  
People are at different stages of grieving and there were some who were saying to me, this is closure this will be the last time I come for this purpose of saying goodbye to my loved one, or reflecting on my injury and what happened as I fled out of the bombing site.  
For some, that I've met, this if the first time they've been able to come; that all those years in between it was too much, too hard, too painful, too soon.  And it's taken them to the ten-year mark before they could even imagine being back in this landscape and back walking the streets and back in the moment.  
So I think we're just going to have to judge in the future how we best assist Australians with grieving and healing. And every step of the way, we'll be talking to our friends in Indonesia.
Thank you very much.


Bali, Indonesia
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Indonesian Health Minister Dr Nafsiah Mboi today announced a new health program to improve access to quality primary health care for three million poor Indonesian women and children.
Indonesia has come a long way in improving the health of its population, but poor people in Indonesia still face significant health challenges.  For example an Indonesian woman is still 30 times more likely to die during childbirth than a woman in Australia.
The Indonesian Ministry of Health is committed to reducing maternal mortality and making basic health care more affordable and available.  Australia is supporting those efforts.
This new program will help poor people get better access to health care in their own communities.
This $50 million Australian aid initiative will help primary health care centres in five provinces, starting in East Java and East Nusa Tenggara, to get better staff and to get access to the finance they need to operate effectively. 
Approximately 3500 nurses and midwives will be trained and available in the locations where they are needed most.  The program will pilot reforms to speed up the use of health funds in 20 districts in these five provinces.
The new health program will also assist Indonesia roll out its new national health social security scheme that will better cover the costs of health care, particularly for poor people.
The tens of thousands of Australians who visit Bali each year would be proud to know that through our aid program, they are helping to train nurses and health workers to better care for women and children here and in other parts of Indonesia.
The Prime Minister also announced a new scholarship initiative for Indonesian health professionals.  
This initiative will honour all the people who lost their lives in the Bali bombings of October 2002.
Under the Australia Awards, 20 awards will be provided annually to Indonesian health professionals to complete postgraduate study in Australia.
Australia's scholarship program to Indonesia is our largest and longest, running since the 1950s.  It has supported thousands of young Indonesians to expand their knowledge and skills at Australia's most reputable institutions.


Bali, Indonesia
Can I say what a delight it is to be here with Ibu Nafsiah, the Minister for Health in this hospital, Sanglah Hospital. 
This is the hospital that met the needs of those hurt in the Bali bombings in those first few critical hours. I've spoken to a number of the survivors of the Bali bombing who have got very, very powerful memories of being brought to this hospital and their medical needs dealt with in this hospital until they were medically evaced to Australia. 
It played a substantial role in assisting Australians and assisting all the victims of the Bali bombings. As a result, a real friendship has begun between this hospital and Australia and I am very proud and pleased that this friendship has helped the hospital develop a new intensive care centre, a top quality burns unit and refurbished the pathology department and the morgue. 
I'm also proud that we've been able to assist to train medical staff and establish the Australia-Bali Memorial Eye Centre which has performed more than 6000 eye operations including through mobile clinics which reach people in rural areas. 
This has been a partnership between governments which has brought more resources to this hospital.
But perhaps even more importantly, it has been a partnership between people. People have been prepared to work together. So since 2003, 41 people from Bali have received scholarships to study medicine or in a health related fields in Australia and I've had the opportunity to meet some of them today. 
Ninety five Australian volunteers have worked in Bali, 11 of those, mostly nurses right here at Sanglah hospital, and I've had the opportunity to meet with two of the volunteers today. 
There is a partnership between this hospital and the cranio-facial work that happens in Adelaide and I've met the people who drive that today, both Australians and Indonesians and what a wonderful life changing partnership that is. 
And this year we commenced a twinning arrangement between Sanglah Hospital and Royal Darwin Hospital and it was my very great pleasure to take President Yudhoyono to Royal Darwin Hospital when he last visited Australia to talk about that twinning arrangement and that partnership. 
Today, I'm here to say we want to keep building on this people to people work, we want to keep building on this great partnership for the future. 
So, in recognition of the role health facilities around Bali play in meeting the needs of Australians who travel here, I am pleased to announce that Australia will provide 20 medical scholarships to Indonesia annually over three years beginning in 2014. So more of our friends of Indonesia can come and train in Australia. 
I am also very pleased to be able to announce today that we will continue to work together with Indonesia on health care, and in particular we will be focused on supporting the primary health care system to ensure that millions of Indonesian men, women and children have free access to quality health care.
We will be devoting a $50 million program to focus on training nurses and midwives, helping the health system plan for where they're placed and working with national and local health personnel to ensure they get the best results for the money that is being invested in primary health care across Indonesia. 
This is another way in which we are working with Indonesia in a partnership for the future.
This new health initiative is going to build on years of successful collaboration between Australia and Indonesia. And, the woman I am standing alongside has been a big driver of that work and collaboration.


Bali, Indonesia
PRIME MINISTER: I'm standing at what is effectively our ground zero at the site where we lost so many Australian lives. I've had the opportunity to lay a wreath and to pay my respects.
I've also had the opportunityto talk toFiona and Robin. They lost their much loved son, much loved brotherhere,David,and I've seen the photographs and seen the pain.
This has been a very emotional 24 hours in Bali;very emotional ceremony yesterday.
I've had the opportunity to speak to a large number of families who have gathered here in Bali. Heard the stories, the memories of the night, the ‘what ifs', the ‘it could have been me if I hadn't walked off the dance floor at that moment', ‘it could have been me if I'd just been 5or 10 feetaway from where I was'.
The feelings of  the survivors as they come back, many of them feeling a sense of reflection. Some of them still doing the ‘what ifs' in their head about whether or not it could have been them. Some of them still overcoming the injuries that they got in this place.
It's been a very emotional period, but a time for us to mark as a nation what wasa nation-changing event.
An event of such distress, of such magnitude. But also a time for us to reflect on our friendship with Indonesia on how it has been strengthened, on the way in which we have worked together.
And as I stood at the memorial I talked to the Governor, who was then the police chief, about what this site was like immediately after the bombing. Butalso about the partnership and cooperation that grew up between our police forces as a result of our joint hunt to get those responsible,which has happened and this terrorist network has been held to account.
People have been prosecuted and it has been dismantled because of thatpolicing effort.
So, it's with a great sense of sadness that I stand here today but I've felta real sense of privilege too, to havethe opportunity to speak to so many Australians yesterday and today. 
JOURNALIST: PM, did it take you back to the time you were here?
PRIME MINISTER: Look, all of it has taken me back to the time that I was here. This streetscape, walking up and down this road, buying things, having coffees, having snacks. So all of this journey has taken me back to that time and that place.
JOURNALIST: And do you feel the sense of unease here? Alot of Australians have said that they were worried the threats, the terror happening again. How have you personally felt?
PRIME MINISTER: Personally I've feltnotanxious about the security situation. Obviously I am very well looked after both by our own people and our Indonesian friends.
But I did speak yesterday to survivors who said that they came back on thefirst occasion they ever returned with a real sense of terror. For some of them the first time they came back was for the trials, for some the first time they came back was the first memorial, and just how gut wrenchingthat was,how actually scary they found it.
And I can understand that if you had lived through that incredible moment of terror, you would return here with a real sense of trepidation.
Fortunately we know,because of the policing work that has been done, that people can come to Bali and can experience Bali inallof its beauty withallofthe rest and relaxation that if offers for Australians.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what has been the most touching moment for you in the past 24 hours?
PRIME MINISTER: I thought for me the most touching moment of yesterday's ceremony was the reading of the names. I thought, in its simplicity, it was an incredibly powerful moment to just hear name after name and then to hear family names that are repeated more than once, it had a real sense of power to it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister why do you think people do come back to Bali? Since the bombings, Bali is now more popular than ever. You've been here, what is it about Bali that draws Australians?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a beautiful place, a physically beautiful place. People come here for the sun, for the beaches for the physical beauty of it. But more than anything else, I think people come because of the warmth of the hospitality of the Balinese people.
This is a lovely society where people can feel so at home. I think that is what has attracted Australians across the generations. And why this and the subsequent Bali bombing was such a rip in our understanding of Bali and everythingthatwe had ever experienced here.
It was just so offensive to us, so jarring with the reality that we had known of travelling in Bali because of the peace of this place and the real warmth ofthe hospitality of the people.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can anything be done from your end withregards to the future of the Sari site? Is there anything we can do to transform that space into something a little more memorable?
PRIME MINISTER: I understand the real sense of distress and discomfort people have when they visit here. You can feel ityourself. You do want to see something more there, that marks our emotions, than what stands there now.
I think that itis really verydislocating for people when they come to the sight. It's just notin keeping with the emotions that are welling up in them.
So we are going to keep working with the proponents of the Peace Park and with the Governor of Bali to try and secure the site so it can always be a place that you can come with those emotions inside you and have an opportunity for reflection,rather than being hustled paston astreetand seeing what is there today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr Abbott is already in Jakarta and is meeting with the President on Monday and is going to talk to the Presidentabout stopping asylum seeker boats and perhapsturning boats back-
PRIME MINISTER: I should have made itclear atthe start I am standing at a memorial and I'm not taking questions on anything other than the Bali memorial.
JOURNALIST: Were you dissappointed then Prime Minister that the President didn't make it to the Bali memorial?
PRIME MINISTER: I dealt with that question yesterday.We never anticipated that PresidentYudhoyono would be at yesterday's events. But I am very grateful that the Foreign Ministerwas there, that Marty was there.
And I'm very grateful for all the help and support we had from-
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I dealt with that yesterday, and I'm dealing with it in the same terms today because that's how I feel. We were never expecting the President of Indonesia to be here but we are incredibly grateful for the way in which the Indonesian authorities had facilitated the ceremony we had yesterday and so many Australians coming together.
JOURNALIST: Is Governor Pastika on side with you Prime Minister regarding the site?
PRIME MINISTER: The Governor has been very supportive in our endeavours to have the site be a true memorial for the lives that were lost here.
Thank you very much.


Tarin Kot, Afghanistan
PM: I've just had an opportunity to spend some time with our troops here in Afghanistan. I've been in Afghanistan today for two reasons. Firstly I wanted to say a big thank you to our troops for everything that they're doing in such difficult circumstances.
We have experienced many loses, there's been a lot of heart-ache. But talking to the troops today, morale is good and that is a real tribute to them.
The second reason I came to Afghanistan today is we are in the process of transition in Uruzgan province. This is part of the NATO-ISAF strategy for Afghanistan. Around Afghanistan provinces and areas are moving into transition and what that means is that Afghan local forces are increasingly stepping up to provide security for their nation.
As we move through transition, as the nation moves through transition, as we implement the agreed strategy at the NATO-ISAF level, I wanted to check progress here locally in Tarin Kot, but also with General Allen the Commander of the NATO-ISAF mission, and I also want to speak to President Karzai about how he is seeing progress.
All in all, the reports I've had from General Allen, the reports from President Karzai, his perspective, is that progress is being made and that the nation is on track for security leadership to be handed over at the end of 2014 as the deadline was agreed at the NATO-ISAF level.
Now that means that there is still hard work to do but here for our troops, we will increasingly see, as we move through transition, our troops no longer engaging in partnered operations but moving to an advising and assisting role.
Already in terms of the troops we train, there is one section of those troops ready to operate independently. And we anticipate that the troops we train will be able operate independently by the end of this year.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: What assurances did you get from President Karzai today about the transition, about governance and transparency?
PM: I spoke to President Karzai about our concern about insider attacks and sought an assurance from him that everything that can be done is being done.
He spoke to me about the steps being taken by Afghan forces to deal with insider attacks. I also raised that issue with the Governor of Uruzgan province where our troops were.
Clearly these have been tragic and disturbing incidents. They are designed to corrode morale and everything needs to be done on the Afghan side to deal with the possibility of insider attacks, and so I spoke about that.
I also spoke about the need for Australia and the international community generally, to be assured that the efforts here in aid and development are hitting the ground and are not being taken by corrupt practices. I raised that with President Karzai, I raised that with the Governor here in Uruzgan and we will continue to raise the need for accountability.
There was an accountability framework agreed when donors met in Tokyo. President Karzai has issued an anti-corruption decree and we will continue to speak out for the need for transparency and progress in governments here in Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's been a couple of pessimistic accounts in the last little while from the International Crisis Group and also the Red Cross about both the political outlook and security outlook. Do you feel that from the briefings you've received that they are being too pessimistic?
PM: From the briefings I've received, I've been very clearly told that the mission we defined for ourselves is on track and when I say we defined for ourselves, I mean NATO and ISAF.
We are here with a coalition of forces. We work under an agreed strategy and so what we are doing here in Uruzgan province is part of that strategy.
And so from General Allen, he indicated to me he believed that the mission was on track. He pointed out that there are still two years in front of the mission for getting the Afghan National Army and national police fully up to speed. That's two fighting seasons in which they will increasingly be operating independently.
The assessment here in Uruzgan province is that what we are doing here is also on track.
Now Afghanistan is a very poor country. It's a country which has been racked by war. It is a country that therefore needs a great deal of assistance and development work and I've made it very clear that we will be involved in Afghanistan beyond 2014 in the NATO train, advise, assist mission; we've left the door open of the possibility for a continuing role for special forces and we have signed an aid and development partnership with Afghanistan for the long term.
JOURANLIST: Prime Minister, the Australian Government always used to say there would be a conditions-based withdrawal but isn't it really now at deadline-based withdrawal?
PM: Conditions were assessed when NATO-ISAF met and dealt with the current strategy and the end of 2014 was the identified date from President Karzai who obviously had a vision about when his country would be able to step up its own security leadership.
JOURANALIST: And Australia's taken the lead in this province very shortly in terms of security responsibility for the US. What does that mean for the forces here on the ground and for the Government?
PM: Well we have worked every step of the way in combined arrangements here with coalition forces. It's actually a very unique structure where we are working with forces from other countries and integrated into the same team are aid and development workers.
So the work that's needed to overcome poverty and build governments is working alongside what we are doing to counter the insurgency and to train local forces.
Our leadership here obviously is something to be proud of as Australians. The way in which this area works, our combined team works will continue as it would have. But Australians will be in the lead and I think that's something we can be proud of.
JOURNALIST: And there's been obviously a recent big loss of life for Australians on one single day. What do you say to people at home who say we just shouldn't be here anymore at all and it isn't worth it?
PM: I'd say firstly, I come and get the opportunity, and it's a wonderful privilege, but I get to come here and see this part of the world through the eyes of our military personnel who are working here and they tell me we are making progress.
I also get an incredible insight from the families of those deceased soldiers and they say to me without exception that we best honour the memory of their loved one by seeing the mission through. They are unbelievably strong people and they make that point very forcefully.
JOURNALIST: Did you find the  -  you said the morale of troops was good  -  but did you find people have been knocked about by those losses or do they feel that the sacrifices are worth it and they are looking to the future more positively?
PM: When I attend the funerals of soldiers you not only get to meet their family, you get to meet some of their mates, mates that they fought alongside. You get to meet their commanding officers. And of course, to lose a mate  -  particularly to lose a mate in an insider attack  -  is a devastating experience for those people. And there is a lot of grief.
But it is also an incredible strength of our ADF that they overcome that grief and they get out there and do the job again. And that one of the ways in which they feel they best honour their mate is by getting out there and doing the job.
So it's an incredibly strong defence culture. It makes me remarkably proud. Just in fact, should all blow us away, the strength of these people, often very young people.
JOURNALIST: What sort of things did they talk to you about here tonight?
PM: They talked to me about one bloke's birthday, one got me to make a little video because his brother is getting married today, so he wanted me to say hello to his brother who is getting married.
I heard all about the band that plays on Thursday nights and now has put together a CD that is raising money for Legacy.
At the same time I asked people how they are going, how they are seeing things, how they're experiencing transition, what they are hoping to do when they get back home. So a lot of just very human exchanges, and a lot of photographs.
Okay, thank you very much. 


Tarin Kot, Afghanistan
Thank you very much and thank you for gathering like this.
I've actually come here from being in Bali for the ten year commemoration of the bombing on 12 October. And I just wanted to talk to you about that because I think it's so meaningful to what's happening here in Afghanistan today.
We got families, survivors together to go to Bali for the ten years. And I had the opportunity to meet with people who could tell me a story about how they were dancing at the Sari nightclub, didn't like the song that came on, left the dance floor, and if they had made a difference decision, if they had kept dancing, then they would be dead today because the people they were dancing with died.
I met people who can show you the scars of the burns that are on their arms and talk about how long they were in the pressure suit to get over it.
I talked to a girl who is 22 years old now. She was 12 in Bali, her sister died and she got separated from her father and was there just rattling around at the hotel they were staying at trying to find someone and trying to work out what was going on.
And when you think about those stories then they really add up to something very powerful about what terrorism is. About how it hits people, people who are just doing everyday things. Hundreds of thousands of people go to Bali each year, I think around 900,000 Australians will go there this year.
And they go, and they go to the beach and they shop and they go the nightclubs and they go to the restaurants, just such an ordinary thing to do. And that in one flash, one second, everything ordinary can be destroyed and people for the rest of their lives are either grieving for someone they've lost, or they are recovering from the injuries either physical or psychological, or both.
We know that for the Bali bombing and for the more than 100 Australians who have lost their lives in terrorist attacks since 9/11, that each of those attacks had a link to Afghanistan.
Each of those attacks involved someone who had been trained here; trained in bomb making, trained in the ways of terrorism.
And so it was fighting global terror that brought us here and that global terror had taken Australian lives. And we came here to make sure that never again would we see terrorists trained who came and took Australian lives.
Now it's one thing to define a mission, it's another thing to come and do it. And you are the people who come and do it, and it's really hard to do; really hard to do in every way.
The amount of time you are separated from family, the living conditions, the absence of hot showers, I've been briefed on that  -  I did say I thought that's a bit harsh, but you know, the Commander is the Commander  -  the absence of hot showers.
But then the really big things that you confront including the loss of some of your mates, and you've had to confront that over the recent period, including losses that have involved insider attacks so difficult emotionally and in every way.
It's one thing to understand that we need the mission, it's another thing to be the people who come and do it.
And so one reason I'm here today is just to say a big thank you to you on behalf of the Australian nation for everything that you do.
We understand how hard it is. You understand that better than we do, but I think the Australian nation has an insight into your lives here and has an insight into how tough it is, and they are full of admiration for the way that you've kept going even when it's been really, really tough.
The other reason I've come here today, to Afghanistan, both here and to briefings in Kabul, is to make sure that at my level, at the Government level, we are across everything that is happening with the transition and we are thinking about the days beyond.
We are doing the planning now, not only for how transition will roll out, but how our engagement will be here in the days that lie beyond 2014. So I wanted to be in country to do some of that work and that's very important to our future planning.
You know that the mission is in days of change, that we are moving through the transition process, and that is bringing change. It's bringing change as we move to a training, advise and assist mission. It will bring more change as we go through 2013 and into 2014.
And we will be thinking and developing those plans for change alongside of course the senior leadership of the ADF. But we also want to be here so we can listen to you about how you think things are going and what insights you've got as we go about that planning.


New Delhi, India
PM: I am delighted to have just arrived in India and I will be here over the next few days. This is a very important relationship for Australia.
In 2009, we entered into a strategic partnership with India. That was a recognition that we are two countries with a history of shared values and a history of mutual interests, but that we needed to broaden and deepen the relationship.
Now is the right time for my first visit as Prime Minister because we can broaden and deepen the relationship as our interests converge. Our economic interests are certainly converging with a spectacular growth in trade between India and Australia.
But whilst we have seen that spectacular growth in trade, I do want to see a broadening and deepening of the economic relationship. India is one of those nations that in our region of the world, in this Asian century, we will see grow spectacularly in economic weight. We will see the rise of its middle class.
And so I do want to see a deepening of our economic relationship, and I am also pleased that during the course of this visit, I will be able to meet with a number of Australian CEOs who are particularly focused on working with their Indian counterparts to strengthen the economic ties between our two countries.
Our interests are also converging because we have got a shared strategic outlook on our region of the world. Our interests converge as we work together in multilateral forum including the G20 and the East Asia Summit.
And the Indian community in Australia is Australia's fastest growing migrant community. We have more skilled migrants from India than we do from any other country in the world. That gives us a good opportunity to strengthen our people-to-people links.
In terms of objectives for my visit, I do want to see us working on a deepening of our economic relationship as I referred to. That will include work with CEOs; it will also include discussions about a comprehensive economic partnership agreement.
I will want to be talking to my Indian counterparts, including Prime Minister Singh, about strengthening the bonds between our two countries, the diplomatic architecture and relationship between our two countries, and strengthening our work together in the G20 and in the East Asia Summit.
I will also be focused on strengthening our knowledge partnership. We welcome to Australia Indian students in very large numbers. They are the second biggest source country  -  India are the second biggest source country for international students  -  and there are many partnership arrangements between Australian universities, vocational education and training institutions and India, and I will be focused on the strengthening of that knowledge partnership.
And finally I will also be focused on two issues, which are big domestic challenges for India. They are the issues of water and energy security, where I believe Australia can make a contribution.
I will tomorrow night have the very delightful job of launching Oz Fest. This is a cultural festival presented by Australia in India, in a range of locations across India.
For many Indians when they think of Australia, they think of cricket. We want to make sure that the full panorama, the full kaleidoscope of our country is on display, so there will be a set of events involving music, theatrical performance, book writing and beyond, for Indians to understand what contemporary Australia has to offer.
With those words, I am happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: PM, how much will the uranium exports feature in your discussions during this trip?
PM: I anticipate that I will have some discussions on uranium. Just taking this back to the start, I formed the view as Prime Minister that it was appropriate for us to sell uranium to India, and that it had become an obstacle in our relationship that we were not.
So I went to our ALP national conference and ensured that the party changed its policy.
Since then the Government has changed its policy too. We are now open to selling uranium to India. In order to do so we would need to negotiate a comprehensive agreement that would go to civil nuclear arrangements. So during the course of being here I am sure the issue will be raised.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you say to the critics in Australia who say no matter what safeguards you negotiate, that India can't be trusted on the use of Australian uranium?And how will you absolutely assure the public that uranium will only be used for peaceful purposes, it won't in any way be used for weapons?PM: Well, we know how to negotiate these agreements because we have done it in the past and we have done it on the basis that Australian uranium is only used for peaceful purposes. That the IAEA, the International Atomic Energy Agency, is involved in oversight, and that the nation that we sell uranium to has an appropriate protocol with the IAEA.
All of these things would be part of the kind of agreement we would negotiate with India.
I do note that India is a party to a range of international security arrangements  -  safety arrangements I should say  -  for uranium, and indeed the world is strengthening those arrangements post the Fukushima incident.
So we will work these issues through as we work through with India an appropriate agreement.
JOURNALIST:  Indian authorities have shot dead at least two anti-nuclear campaigners in the last few weeks.  Is that really the kind of a country we want to sell uranium to?
PM: India is a robust, liberal democracy. It's the largest democracy in the world. It is governed by the rule of law. And to the extent that there is an allegation that laws have been breached in any circumstances then people can take complaints about that.
But let's be very, very clear, we are standing now in the world's largest liberal democracy.
JOURNALIST: Is it appropriate for Australia to be encouraging investment from a company like Adani enterprises which has serious allegations of corruption leveled against it by (inaudible)?
PM: Well I think allegations about anyone or any company need to be dealt with by proper authorities. We don't act on the basis of allegations and nor should we. Due process should be followed and any allegation made should be dealt with.
JOURNALIST:  Given the serious allegations, should the Australian Government be accepting sponsorship money for Oz Fest from a company like Adani Enterprises?PM: Well I have just indicated I don't think it is appropriate to act on the basis of allegations. If allegations have been made then they need to be dealt with properly by the relevant authorities.
JOURNALIST:  Will you be meeting with Mr Adani during the visit here?
PM: I'll be meeting a wide range of people. The answer is I anticipate I probably will. I can't summon to mind every detail of my program and every person in attendance at every event. But I would make the point that we don't deal on the basis of allegations.
JOURNALIST: Back to the nuclear issue, the Indian Auditor General raised some serious concerns about the regulation of the civilian nuclear industry, saying that they are headed towards a possible Chernobyl-style disaster. How do you think (inaudible) by selling uranium?
PM: It's in India's interest to have the most robust safety standards for its own civil energy generation program out of nuclear energy. I also note that the Indian Government is in the process of legislating a new regulator in this area, and that India has a national interest in making sure its nuclear program is safe, and seen to be safe by the world.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, what is your anticipated timeline for all this. When would you see safeguard negotiations beginning and when is the earliest you can expect actual exports to commence?
PM: Well we have done the first two steps, which is changed our party policy and made a Government decision that we are open to selling uranium to India.
On the rest of it we will keep working through and I will let you know time frames when that is possible. But these agreements are complex ones and they do take some time to negotiate.
JOURNALIST:  India has a large and growing disparity between live births of boys and live births of girls. Given your status as a female leader in the world, is this, the killing of lots of girls in utero a thing that you think might come up? Might be appropriate to raise at any level?
PM: It may be raised during the course of discussions. I am going to see some of our aid and development projects here in India, and it may be the kind of issue that some involved with the aid community want to talk to me about.
But as I made clear when we had the parliamentary launch in Australia last week of the International Year of the Girl Child, that has been sanctioned by the UN, as a way of directing the world's attention to the way in which discrimination against girls matters at every level.
And certainly in many societies, the fact that girls are less prized than boys has an implication right from birth, from whether or not children are abandoned, whether they are cared for, whether they get the opportunity for a school education, and all of these things I think should weigh on us and are matters of conscience for us.
I made the point when I spoke at the event for education champions at the UN, that we will never see true equality for adult men and women in our world until we see true equality for boys and girls. That is the foundation stone for us having a world in which men and women are truly equal, and so to the extent girls are discriminated against in any way that does concern me.
A big part of our aid program is directed towards gender equality, a big part of it is directed towards securing education for children. And around the world that means that there is a special mission for involving girls in education, because too often they're the ones that are left outside formal education.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister is there a lingering strain on the Australia-India relationship from the student violence, particularly in Melbourne? And how will you be addressing that on this trip?PM: That is a good question and I will obviously be interested to hear the views of people here in India as I move around over the next two days. But my sense is, and I obviously had a very big insight into this as Education Minister and in fact traveled to India on the last occasion as Deputy Prime Minister and Education Minister because these issues have been such a huge moment in India and so spectacularly reported.
My sense is since then that we have addressed these concerns, we have got a comprehensive student welfare strategy that has has been agreed between the federal government and state governments, which goes to issues about housing and treatment of Indian students, making sure that they are facilitated.
Number two, we've worked long and hard on quality questions. We had within our vocational education and training sector particularly a number of operators who weren't at the right quality standard and they have been cracked down on.
And I think we did see, as a community in reaction to that violence, the community stepping forward to strengthen their embrace of Indian students. I certainly know that in my own local community in Melbourne's west that a shocking incident of violence that happened near the Werribee train station actually then meant community members in Werribee and Hopper's Crossing went out of their way to create ways of supporting Indian students who live in that local community.
So I think the Aussie character was on display as we responded to it. I think those actions by government, by education institutions and the community have been sufficient to respond to Indian concerns, but I will obviously be keen to hear the feedback from people as I move around.
JOURNALIST:  On an issue at home, Fair Work Australia has pushed ahead with the charges against Craig Thomson in federal court. I understand you probably won't comment on that matter given it will be coming up before the courts. But given it is a civil case, will the outcome have any impact on whether or not Mr Thomson is able to remain in parliament?
PM: Look I am not going to comment on a matter that is before the courts, and I am also not going to war-game a lot hypothetical questions about a matter that is before the courts.
Thank you.


New Delhi, India
Tonight, I have the pleasure to open Oz Fest  -  my country's biggest ever cultural festival in your country.
Oz Fest will bring a touch of Australia to India's shores.
Running from the middle of October through to early February next year, Oz Fest will reach out to audiences in 18 locations across India, in the north, the south, the west and the east.
Australia is known for the most part around the world, including in India, for its sporting prowess, its beautiful scenery and its relaxed lifestyle.
But we are also a nation that values our world class artists, who play a critical role in society - exploring, challenging, inventing and communicating.
Within and beyond our nation's shores, our artists interpret cultural differences and bring us together.
So Oz Fest is about bringing Australia's contemporary character to India in new and fresh ways.
We want to surprise and excite you. 
Amuse you and cause you to reflect.
And to show you the versatility and depth of contemporary Australian culture.
To give you just a few examples, for young audiences we feature the Melbourne International Comedy Festival and up-and-coming bands such as Sheppard, the Aston Shuffle and Big Scary.
The cinema culture of today will be featured through Save Your Legs!, a fabulous Australia movie about cricket and life, starring Pallavi Sharda, an Australian of Indian descent who is carving out a career in Bollywood.
“The Bookwallah” will take six writers, three Australia and three Indian, on a 2000 kilometre train ride across India, seeking out stories, conversations, and connections.
We will also feature great works of collaboration between our two peoples.
For admirers of physical beauty, The Pilbara Project will display photographs of Australia's rugged, starkly beautiful north-west region by Australian and Indian photographers.
And for theatre bugs there is The Lady of the Sea, a major collaborative work between the Brisbane Powerhouse and the Abinaya Research Centre.
Two Oceans will continue a long-term collaboration between the Australian Art Orchestra and some of the greatest exponents of India's Carnatic classical music to create a new musical language.
Through OzFest, we also want to build a bridge to our shared past.
For example, few people probably know that one of the great characters of Indian cinema in the 1930s and 1940s, Fearless Nadia, was played by an Australian, Mary Ann Evans.
Born in Western Australia, she came to India as a child, forged a very unexpected cinematic career here and married into the Wadia family.
India became Mary's home.
Oz Fest will present some of Fearless Nadia's classic scenes to a new musical score played by an orchestra of Australian and Indian musicians.
This production premiered to strong reviews at the OzAsia festival in Adelaide several weeks ago.
And friends, there will be more.
But tonight, to launch this festival, we begin with a musical interplay of the cultures of our two countries.
Shortly Mark Atkins, Gurrumul Yunupingu, and Anoushka Shankar, some of the most gifted musicians from our two countries, will be taking us on an equally magical musical journey  -  a journey celebrating the meeting of Australian and Indian contemporary culture and their grounding in ancient tradition.
On that score, I am delighted to announce the Ravi Shankar World Music Scholarship.
The scholarship honours the exceptional life and work of Pandit Ravi Shankar, who has done so much to bring Indian culture to the world and to fuse the old with the new.
The award will offer a Masters degree scholarship to study at the Victorian College of the Arts at the University of Melbourne in 2013.
It has the Shankar family's blessing, and support from the Australia India Institute.
Like OzFest itself, this scholarship symbolises everything we have to share and everything we have to learn from each other.
In that spirit, it gives me great pleasure to formally declare Oz Fest open in the hope it will bring joy to many and strengthen the bonds of affection and respect that exist between our two nations.
So let the music begin and let's build for the future together.


New Delhi, India
PM: It's a great delight to be here India. I have had the opportunity to meet some fantastic kids today.
Education changes lives, it transforms lives. That is true in our country; it is true here in India.
And when you combine sport with education, you get a very powerful combination.
We know that from a lot of the work we do in indigenous communities and with kids from poorer backgrounds in Australia; that if you combine sport, whether it is AFL, rugby, soccer or cricket, with aspirations to go to school and finish school, it makes a difference.
So it has been good to be able to say hello today to our Australian indigenous cricket development squad who are over here in India playing a few matches; unfortunately not successful in their first match, but determined to come back.
It has also been great to meet with the Magic Bus people and to hear about this remarkable story, where young people in slums become mentors for younger children, where those younger children participate in physical activities including cricket.
But importantly all of that is paired with them finishing school, getting vocational education and training and getting on with a job.
So this is a fantastic program of change, reaching out right across India and we have met with some delightful young people today from the most impoverished backgrounds you could imagine, but determined to make a life for themselves.
I am very proud that our Australian Sports Commission has been able to support this program.
If I can pay tribute too, to the staff of our High Commission, who through their own social club, through their own resources have been fundraising and we have been able to present a little bit of cricket gear because our High Commission staff have taken it upon themselves to support this program.
Cricket is, of course, a great bond between Australia and India.
We are both cricket-mad nations, so I am also very pleased that we are going to confer on Sachin Tendulkar membership of the Order of Australia; an AM.
This is a very special honour, very rarely awarded to someone who is not an Australian citizen or an Australian national.
Sachin is away playing cricket, surprise, surprise, but the award will be conferred on him by Minister Crean when Minister Crean visits India.
So a very special honour and a very special recognition of such a great batsman. I will be very happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: You were not tempted to showcase your skills for the kids today?
PM: I was not tempted to showcase my skills. Number one, because I do not really have cricketing skills, so that would be a problem.
Number two, whilst I didn't agree with Prime Minister Howard's policies in many respects, I watched and learned from his Prime Ministership, and a key lesson was to never pick up a bat in India in front of our friends from the media.
JOURNALIST: What are you saying about John Howard's cricket skills, Prime Minister?
PM: I am saying nothing about it but I do remember the media had a fair bit to say at the time.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about a domestic issue? Tony Abbott was in Indonesia; he met the President, and he didn't raise the tow-back policy apparently. What do you think of that?
PM: This is a very cowardly approach from Mr Abbott.
Firstly, looking at it through domestic eyes, Australian eyes, what it means, is it means that Mr Abbott does not have the guts to raise with international leaders issues that he says are important.
So he beats his chest at home but when he is overseas he doesn't have the guts to raise them.
Then looking at this with a foreign policy hat on, it is only a day or two ago that Mr Abbott was promising a no-surprises policy with Indonesia.
That he would talk through everything with Indonesia before it was implemented.
Well, that lasted about a day, and then it got thrown off because if he was truly interested in consulting with Indonesia on policies, why on earth wouldn't he raise such a big policy with the President of Indonesia?
Now we know why this has happened, it's because Mr Abbott is peddling a myth to the Australian people.
He knows the Indonesian government will not agree to facilitate tow-backs and he is trying not to be exposed as telling the Australian people something that can't and won't work.
JOURNALIST: Marty Natalegawa made quite clear this wasn't raised in the conversation with President Yudhoyono very immediately after the conversation. Is that in diplomatic terms a signal from the Indonesian Government that this is something about which they are displeased?
PM: The Indonesian Government will speak for itself.
My words are about Mr Abbott's conduct, who's been saying to the Australian people one thing and then doing something entirely different when he is overseas.
JOURNALIST: The Shadow Immigration Minister, has indicated that he raised the policy during his talks. Is that not good enough?
PM: It says something about Mr Abbott and his team that something that Mr Abbott hasn't got the guts to raise, he asks a shadow minister, someone down the hierarchy, to do for him.
Leadership is about having the fortitude to do some of the hard things yourself.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it's appropriate for the Opposition to be raising this issue of tow-backs with Sri Lanka? Apparently Scott Morrison and Julie Bishop are planning to go to Colombo to raise this whole issue?
PM: Well, on the current settings one would wonder what they are going to raise anywhere.
It is certainly not going to be the same, as what they say in Australia, if what we have seen so far is any evidence of how they're going to conduct themselves overseas.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, looking at the meeting on a whole it's quite unusual for an Opposition Leader to meet with a President. Do you think this is a signal that perhaps they think that at the next election, Tony Abbott might be Prime Minister and not you?
PM: This is actually entirely normal diplomatic courtesy. Indeed, here today in India I will meet the Leader of the Opposition. 
That's something I do routinely as I travel, and routinely opposition leaders meet foreign leaders.
It's a standard part of the program when foreign leaders come to Australia that they meet the Leader of the Opposition. That is always done.
That's why Mr Abbott met President Yudhoyono in Darwin, Mr Abbott's met every parliamentary guest we've invited; the Prime Minister of Singapore in the last sitting week to take one example, and it's absolutely routine for the leader of the Opposition, whoever he or she is, when they travel, to meet with counterparts overseas.
JOURNALIST: On cricket, Prime Minister, to your knowledge, has any other non-Australian cricket player been given an Order of Australia and if so, do you know who they might be?
PM: To my knowledge no. We can get you full details of that but this is a special thing to do.
But then, Mr Tendulkar is a very special cricketer.
JOURNALIST: Will you continue to accept Craig Thomson's vote in all circumstances in the Parliament?
PM: Mr Thomson is an independent Member of Parliament. He can vote on behalf of his constituents in Dobell.
And there's a lot of double standards being peddled about this by the Opposition who have accepted votes from opposition members and parliamentary members in comparable circumstances, indeed, when criminal charges were pending.
And I do note that a shadow minister was out looking for Mr Thomson's vote as recently as the last sitting week.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when you meet with business leaders, both Australian and Indian business leaders, what will be your message about Australia?
PM: My message about Australia will be number one, we are a nation open for business. We are a great trading nation.
Number two, we are a nation with a strong economy. We've come out of the global financial crisis strong and we now want to build on our strengths.
Number three, we understand that the nature of change in our region in this century is going to reshape the Australian economy. And if we play our cards out cleverly, then it can be an era of huge opportunity for us.
And no better opportunity than the one here with India where we've seen our economic relationship just go up and up, but we want to broaden and deepen it and that's what the CEO Forum is focused on.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how have the talks on uranium sales progressed with India so far?
PM: On that matter, I will be seeing Prime Minister Singh tomorrow. But we have changed our party policy, so that there is now no fetter for us selling uranium to India.
We've changed our government policy. The thing that would have to happen next is the negotiation of a comprehensive civil nuclear cooperation agreement.
Okay, I understand everybody's under time pressure including me so thank you very much. 


New Delhi, India
1.       The Prime Minister of Australia Ms Julia Gillard paid a State Visit to India from 15-17 October, 2012 at the invitation of Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh.
2.       Prime Minister Ms Julia Gillard was accorded a ceremonial welcome at the Rashtrapati Bhavan on 17 October, 2012. She laid a wreath at the memorial to Mahatma Gandhi at Rajghat.
3.       Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh held delegation level talks with Prime Minister Ms Julia Gillardon bilateral, regional and multilateral issues. Prime Minister Ms Julia Gillardcalled on President Shri Pranab Mukherjee, received External Affairs Minister Shri S.M. Krishna and Leader of Opposition Smt Sushma Swaraj, and met Chairperson, UPA Smt Sonia Gandhi.  Four Memoranda of Understanding were concluded and significant initiatives launched.
4.       The Prime Ministers acknowledged the strengthening of ties in recent years and agreed there was great potential for further growth in the relationship. The India-Australia relationship is anchored in shared values as liberal democracies, converging interests and shared opportunities in the Asian Century.  The bilateral strategic partnership is given effect through rapidly expanding trade and investment ties, common interest in a stable and outward looking Indian-Pacific region, growing collaboration in multilateral and regional forums, and fast growing people-to-people links.
Bilateral Cooperation
5.       The Prime Ministers welcomed the progress made since the relationship was raised to the level of a strategic partnership, in 2009. 
6.       Noting the considerable potential to develop further this partnership, the  Prime Ministers agreed to provide high-level political oversight to this process through annual Prime Ministerial meetings, either bilaterally or in the margins of international meetings.
Trade and investment
7.       Trade and investment ties are expanding rapidly. The Prime Ministers noted that trade between both countries had more than doubled in the past six years to over $20 billion. They noted that trade must expand for mutual benefit and encouraged balanced growth in trade as a long term, sustainable boost to economic growth in both countries.
8.       The Prime Ministers welcomed the progress towards a Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA) to facilitate greater trade and investment links. They renewed the commitment of both countries for achieving an equitable, comprehensive and high-quality agreement.
9.       The Prime Ministers noted the report of the second India-Australia CEO Forum and welcomed the contribution made by business in broadening and deepening the bilateral economic relationship.
10.     Noting the expanding economic links between India and Australia, the Prime Ministers welcomed more  regular engagement and dialogue between the two Finance Ministries.
11.     The Prime Ministers noted the potential to further develop and diversify commercial relations and that this would be supported by the conclusion of the Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation and Mutual Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters which would enable effective enforcement of Customs laws and facilitate legitimate trade.   
12.     The Prime Ministers welcomed the conclusion of the Memorandum of Understanding on Wool, which would further facilitate bilateral trade, and the Memorandum on Cooperation in Civil Space Science, which would create a framework for peaceful space cooperation. 
13.     Underlining the importance of greater connectivity to support growing commercial and cultural ties, including in the education and tourism sectors, the Prime Ministers welcomed the announcement that Air India would commence direct flights to Australia by the first quarter of 2013.
Energy and resources
14.     The Prime Ministers agreed to deepen the cooperation between India and Australia on energy security through an annual Ministerial-level dialogue, to be led by the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission of India and the Australian Minister for Resources and Energy. 
15.     Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh welcomed the decision of the Australian Government on uranium sales to India, noting that nuclear energy will play an important role in India's future energy needs.  The Prime Ministers announced that India and Australia would commence negotiations on a bilateral Civil Nuclear Cooperation Agreement which, for Australia, is a prerequisite for uranium sales to other countries.
16.     Australia's supplies of energy and mineral resources to India have been rising steadily.  Indian investment in Australia in the mining and resources sector has been growing rapidly. Australia welcomed the interest of both private and public sector companies from India in the resources sector.
17.     The Prime Ministers agreed that India and Australia should collaborate more closely on the common challenge of managing scarce water resources.  To give effect to this, they announced a Water Technology Partnership, under which Australia and India would share technologies to build capacity to better manage this vital natural resource.  The partnership would include sharing of advanced Australian modelling work on river basin flows.
Regional and international cooperation  
18.     India and Australia share a common interest in the Indian Ocean and in the maintenance of stability and security through the Indian-Pacific region.  As Indian Ocean states both also recognise the importance of the maritime theatre to our future security.
19.     India and Australia, as Chair and Vice Chair respectively of the Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation, will work closely to strengthen the Association, the apex pan-Indian Ocean multilateral forum, through concrete steps towards more effective practical cooperation in the six priority areas of maritime security and piracy; fisheries management; disaster risk reduction; tourism and cultural exchanges; academic and S&amp;T cooperation; and trade and investment facilitation; which were identified by the member countries in the 11th meeting of Council of Ministers held in Bengaluru, in 2011. Both countries look forward to taking this collaboration within the Association to deeper level during the 12th Council of Ministers meeting in Gurgaon, India on 2 November 2012.
20.     The Prime Ministers reaffirmed the positive security and defence ties between both countries, and committed to enhance maritime cooperation further, including through continued joint naval exercises.
21.     India and Australia both recognise the importance of the East Asia Summit (EAS) as a crucial regional institution with the mandate to consider a broad range of strategic, political and economic issues. The Prime Ministers reaffirmed the commitment of both countries to work together to strengthen further the agenda of the EAS. 
22.     The Prime Ministers welcomed ongoing cooperation through other regional bodies such as the ASEAN Regional Forum and the Asia Europe Meeting.  Prime Minister Ms Julia Gillard reaffirmed Australia's support for India's membership of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum (APEC). 
23.     As Australia prepares to chair the G-20 meeting in 2014, the Prime Ministers committed both countries to continue to engage closely in that forum to deliver concrete outcomes that will promote strong, sustainable and balanced growth of the global economy.
24.     The two leaders reaffirmed the importance of reform of the UN, including the Security Council, to better reflect contemporary realities. Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh warmly welcomed Australia's continued support for India as a permanent member in a reformed United Nations Security Council. India underlined Australia's continued contribution to international peace and security under the UN charter and, in this context, acknowledged Australia's candidature for a non permanent seat in the United Nations Security Council for the 2013-2014 term.  
International security
25.     The Prime Ministers underlined the importance of achieving universal nuclear disarmament and of countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Prime Minister Ms Julia Gillard noted India's sound non-proliferation record and expressed Australia's recognition of the importance of India's engagement with the four multilateral export control regimes with the objective of full membership. Both Prime Ministers agreed to annual bilateral non-proliferation and disarmament discussions at level of officials.
26.     The Prime Ministers noted the ongoing work of the Joint Working Group on Counter-terrorism and recommitted both countries to close collaboration against the threat of terrorism.
27.     The Prime Ministers committed both countries to continue to work together closely to fight organised crime.  They noted these efforts would be supported by the Memorandum of Understanding on Narcotics to be concluded by both countries, and announced the decision to negotiate a Agreement on Transfer of Sentenced Persons between India and Australia.
Knowledge partnership
28.     India and Australia continue to be enriched by high quality knowledge partnerships in education, skills and research that support mutual efforts towards greater economic and social progress. Central to this progress is fostering academic, scientific and professional links between India and Australia.
29.     The Prime Ministers welcomed the success of the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund in bringing together leading scientists from both countries for world-class research and fostering long-term scientific linkages.  The Prime Ministers noted the broad range of projects supported by the Fund. They welcomed the Australia-India Fellowship Scheme, which will support Indian and Australian researchers spending time at research institutions in the other country, fostering linkages that will underpin the bilateral science relationship into the future.
30.     The Prime Ministers noted the vital role played by the expanding bilateral education and training relationship and its contribution to our national goals for innovation, productivity and growth.  They commended the work of the Australia-India Education Council (AIEC) in providing strategic guidance to advance education, training and research partnerships.  Prime Minister Ms Julia Gillard launched the new Endeavour AIEC Research Fellowships, which will support two fellows per year. Under the AIEC, Australia and India agreed to build partnerships between India's Sector Skills Councils and Australia's Industry Skills Councils in key industry areas.
31.     Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh expressed appreciation for the continuing efforts of Australian authorities to ensure the welfare and security of Indian students studying in Australia.  In support of this objective, the Prime Ministers welcomed the new Memorandum of Understanding on Student Mobility and Welfare which will expand cooperation on student welfare matters.
People to People and cultural Links
32.     Rapidly growing people-to-people links between Australia and India underpin our developing partnership and will enable both countries to build even stronger relations into the future.  Both Prime Ministers noted with appreciation that the Indian community, which this year was the largest source of skilled migration to Australia and the second largest source of students, is contributing significantly to the economic and social life of Australia.
33.     The Prime Ministers agreed to the recommencement of Social Security Agreement negotiations, including consideration of totalisation provisions.
34.     Arts and culture can be powerful forces for bringing people together  and the two countries are committed to strengthening of bilateral cultural relationship. The Prime Ministers welcomed the staging of Oz Fest, Australia's biggest cultural festival in India, which will see 100 events across 18 Indian cities between October 2012 and January 2013.
35.     To give further impetus to expanding personal and cultural links, the Prime Ministers directed officials to pursue an Audio-Visual Agreement which would facilitate greater investment in film making in both countries. 
36.     Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh announced that India would establish ICCR Chairs of Indian Studies in five Universities in Australia to promote academic and student exchanges.  Prime Minister Ms Julia Gillard announced that Australia would provide additional funding of $1.5 million over three years for the Australia-India Institute, and confirmed a grant to help establish a Nalanda University Chair in Environmental Studies would commence in 2013.
37.         The Prime Ministers announced the commencement of negotiations towards a Memorandum of Understanding on the Movement of Persons which will promote dialogue on the regular movement of professional labour and combat irregular migration.
Agreements
38.     The following bilateral memoranda of understanding were signed in the presence of the two Prime Ministers:
	Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in the field of Wool and Woollen Products
	Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Student Mobility and Welfare
	Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Civil Space Science, Technology and Education
	Memorandum of Understanding between Skills DMC and the National Skill Development Corporation
39.     Prime Minister Ms Julia Gillard renewed her invitation to Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh to visit Australia. It was agreed that the dates of the visit would be finalized through diplomatic channels.
40.         Both sides agreed that the State Visit of the Prime Minister of Australia will lead to strengthening of the cooperative relations between the two countries, and will provide further impetus for the future development of the strategic partnership.


New Delhi, India
PM: I've concluded my discussions with Prime Minister Singh and attended the state dinner that he hosted in my honour. I've had a good set of discussions with the Prime Minister and pleased that we issued a comprehensive joint statement.
Of the most important things we've agreed; firstly we've agreed that Australia and India's prime ministers will meet once every year, that there will be annual meetings at leaders' level between our two nations.
This is important because having an annual leaders' level meeting keeps momentum in a relationship, gives high level oversight of how the relationship is developing and what more needs to be done.
Second, Prime Minister Singh and I have agreed that we will commence negotiations for the nuclear safeguards agreement, the civil nuclear cooperation agreement, given Australia is now prepared to sell uranium to India. So those discussions on that comprehensive agreement will now start.
Third, I'm also pleased that we have agreed on the defence side of our relationship to continue with naval exercises. I believe that this is important. We share the Indian Ocean, we have an under-developed defence relationship with India now, so I think it is good that we have agreed future cooperation in naval exercising.
We've also entered into a number of Memorandums of Understanding about various areas of activity from cooperating in space to cooperating on student mobility between our two countries.
Our discussions have been comprehensive ones, very warm ones, and I'm very pleased with this visit to India.
During the course of the day I did have the opportunity for a range of other bilateral meetings, including a meeting with the President, a meeting with the Leader of the Opposition, a meeting with the Minister for External Affairs and a meeting with Mrs Sonia Gandhi.
I will now return to Australia very shortly, but not before taking a few questions.
JOURNALIST: Does a reciprocal visit from Dr Singh look almost certain?
PM: I personally renewed to Prime Minister Singh an invitation to visit Australia. He said once again to me he would love to come, it's a question of finding a time that can work given the Prime Minister's busy program.
JOURNALIST: Apart from the naval exercises how else are you planning to deepen the defence cooperation with India?
PM: Currently our defence relationship is under-developed. Indeed we have stronger defence ties with China than we do with India. So naval exercising is an obvious way of taking the relationship forward given our shared interest in the Indian Ocean.
But we would be open to other forms of military cooperation including exchanges and training.
JOURNALIST: The issue with Indian students in Australia; did Dr Singh raise that with you, because he mentioned that in his remarks. And the Memorandum of Understanding that you've signed, that has been signed today on that, what exactly does that provide for in relation to students in terms of making further improvements?
PM: Sure. The Prime Minister did raise with me in our bilateral discussion, the incidents involving Indian students, but from the perspective of thanking me for the work that Australia has done to better assure the welfare of Indian students, indeed to personally thank me for that work, much of it was commenced when I was Minister for Education.
It's work not only done at the federal level though, it's required a partnership with state governments because they are responsible for so much of the first instance welfare issues like housing and the like.
The impression I had from the Prime Minister was that he was recognising that we had gone to considerable efforts to reassure Indian students of their safety and welfare in Australia.
The Memorandum of Understanding is not on welfare questions as such, it's about student mobility. So it's about occupational qualifications being recognised in both nations; occupational health and safety training and the like. So it puts people in a better position if they are going to the other nation to be able to access the labour market.
JOURNALIST: Do you think we've overcome the problems, do you think Australia's image is better in India now?
PM: I certainly think it's better than it was. I was here at the height of this, when the Indian community was very, very concerned about student welfare issues. We've seen some fairly sizable press packs during this visit, but actually let me assure you they were not the size as I had when I was Deputy Prime Minister and this issue was really hot in India and there was media feeding frenzy about the circumstances of Indian students in Australia.
My engagement with the Indian media during this trip has been much more measured, there's an understanding that we've responded and reacted to the welfare issues and certainly there's an understanding amongst India's leaders, including the Prime Minister himself, about those questions.
JOURNALIST: There's talk about greater cooperation on counter-terrorism. Can you give any details as to what form that might take in terms of intelligence sharing or any other new developments?
PM: We work strongly with India on counter-terrorism. What we're looking forward to here is a cooperative relationship between our various intelligence agencies.
Our National Security Adviser did accompany me on this trip and it's important in a world of globalised threats  -  whether they be terrorism or international crime, piracy  -  that we are exchanging intelligence information as appropriate.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that there are any outstanding issues in the relationship now with India, or that the action on uranium and on the students, has really cleared away all the issues?
PM: I don't think there are any outstanding obstacles. In any relationship, there is always more and more and more to do, to keep broadening it, to keep deepening it.
Whilst in this visit we've worked through a wide range of issues there is always more to do, and the reason for having annual leaders' level meetings is that recognition that there is always more to do, there is always another level to step up to.
But I do believe in terms of the obstacles that were there in our relationship that they have been dealt with, that we have reassured people about the circumstances for Indian students in Australia and we've changed our attitude on uranium and that has been appreciated here.
JOURNALIST: Kevin Rudd was on Lateline tonight and he said that the Labor Party needs to get back to bread and butter politics and stop some of these, at least in the Parliament, some of these personal attack on both sides. Do you think now going home that there will be a bit of a ceasefire in parliament?
PM: Well look I haven't had an opportunity obviously to see those remarks. It was Lateline was it? Haven't had the opportunity to watch Lateline. I am not sure exactly what time it is in comparison with Lateline right here right now.
But what I would say generally is this; we face in the Australian Parliament, the most negative opposition leader the nation has ever seen. Mr Abbott is unable to be anything else than negative and so that does affect the tenor of political debate in Australia.
JOURNALIST: You don't take any personal responsibility for any negative comments, personal comments in politics (inaudible)?
PM: I presume that you're referring to my speech from last week and I made it clear that if I see sexism then I'm going to name it.
JOURNALIST: The Space MoU, are we going to be launching any of their rockets or anything or is it just research?
PM: No we're not going to be launching rockets. I think, the best way of summarising that is India's got a specialty in the hardware, we've got some specialties in the software and the sorts of collaborations we're looking at are things like better using space technology and Indian satellites when we're trying to track the progress of natural disasters.
There is some potential for applications in looking at the landscape and the prospect for mining and of course I think we'd want the young people of both of our countries to be excited about the education, research and ultimately job potentials of what's happening in space.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will India be a big part of the White Paper that is going to be released soon?
PM: India will certainly be part of the story of the Asian Century, a very big part of that story and consequently you should expect it to be dealt with in the Asian Century White Paper.
JOURNALIST: When will it be released?
PM: I can't give you a scoop on the date today Michelle but we're looking for that paper to be released relatively soon.
Okay we've got a plane to catch, thank you very much, travel safe.


New Delhi, India
PM: It has been a great honour to be formally welcomed by the Prime Minister of India and I'm looking forward to a day of events. Now the events include a formal meeting with the Prime Minister and a state dinner, they include a business lunch, and I will have the opportunity to meet a range of political leaders here in India.
Our relationship with India is of shared sentiment, we have got very strong people-to-people links, but in the past we have not had sufficient shared interest to drive the relationship forward.
In the modern age all of that has changed. As we have both reformed and grown our economies, the economic relationship between our two countries has grown. We have grown together. And that means that there are huge possibilities for the future in our economic relationship, and I will certainly be raising that in my discussions today, and speaking to the business audience about it.
And then secondly, we have shared strategic interests. We share a region of the world; we share an ocean, where we can work together on issues including maritime security.
So India is at the forefront of our thinking and the forefront of our relationships in the world. Just like we put at the forefront of our thinking our relationship with the US, with China, with Japan, with Indonesia, with Korea, India is now at the forefront of our thinking.
So, I will be very pleased to be getting on with today's events, I will return to Australia overnight, but this is a very important visit and the key political discussions are during the course of today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned the countries that are at the forefront of your thinking, Britain is not mentioned in that anymore, is this a signal that we have moved on? That we are so Asian now that we have moved on from Britain, it is no longer in the field?PM: We will always have the bonds of history with the United Kingdom and a shared outlook on the world, obviously Australia's history and the history of the UK are intertwined, and so that is a very special relationship for us. But in the modern age, when we look at our economy, when we look at our strategic interests in our region of the world, it makes sense for us to look to the US, to China, to Japan, Indonesia, Korea and India.
JOURNALIST: Have you been surprised by yesterday's reaction to the announcement of [inaudible] and by the reaction to your speech back home, given some new status [inaudible]?PM: I have been left in no doubt that a lot of people have clicked on and watched that speech here in India.
When I gave it, I did not quite expect the kind of reaction that we have seen around the world and the dissemination through all of the new technology, but people have raised it with me and raised it with me approvingly.
JOURNALIST: The Macquarie Dictionary has announced that it is extending its meaning of the word misogyny to include, I can't remember the exact word, does that surprise you?
PM: I will leave editing dictionaries to those whose special expertise is language.
JOURNALIST: On uranium, when you meet with Prime Minister Singh today how advanced do you think it will get in discussions on negotiations for safeguards, and will you be raising some of the sticking points that you have?PM: Negotiating a comprehensive safeguards agreement is going to take some time.
We have found this when we have negotiated them with other countries, and that will be true of India. We will of course, want the assurances about the use of Australian uranium, and oversight by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
So with Prime Minister Singh today, I will not be discussing the specifics, the word by word of what would be in a comprehensive agreement; that lies for the future.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any response to David Hicks saying he wants to sue the Australian Government after developments overnight, and if I may, do you also, are you surprised there has been some of the criticism of the announcement that you made on Sachin Tendulkar?PM: Well on the two quite different topics, taking the matter involving Mr Hicks, it is important to remember that Mr Hicks was convicted under US law, not under Australian law, and there has been a case to which Mr Hicks was not a party, but a case in the US overnight, which Mr Hicks is clearly considering, and considering his future action following that case.
What Mr Hicks does in light of that decision is a matter for him and whether or not that case is further appealed by US authorities is a matter for the US.
On the award for Sachin Tendulkar, you know, people love to discuss cricket, so they love to discuss every aspect of cricket, and I expect in the sport pages and beyond there will be some discussion of this, but the assessment we made was across the breadth of his career and his status as one of the finest batsmen the world has ever seen, the finest since Bradman, and the fact that he has enthralled and delighted Australian crowds with his skills.
JOURNALIST: The UN Security Council vote goes very soon, how do you feel about Australia's chances now, and if we are unsuccessful, will Government blame and Kevin Rudd [inaudible]?PM: I am not going to war-game about what lies beyond the vote, but let us be very clear here. This is a tight, closed, contest, it has been all along.
It is a contest in which, in the UN, size of your nation is not a determinant of your success, where nations around the world obviously make decisions for a range of reasons, it is tough and it is close, so I am not going to predict the outcome until we have the outcomes.
In terms of laying any blame at the former Prime Minister, of course not, this was a decision of Government to enter the race. Whenever we entered the race, at any stage, it was always going to be tight and tough for Australia.
JOURNALIST: There has been some evidence in Estimates about Nicola Roxon's involvement in the Ashby case. Do you still have confidence in how she has handled the case, how the Attorney-General has handled the case?
PM: Absolutely.
JOURNALIST: Could you elaborate on the comment you made about closer defence links with India evolving?PM: We of course do seek to have defence relationships with our close strategic partners. We share an ocean that is important too, and there is an organisation that brings together the countries that ring the Indian Ocean.
India has been in the leadership of that body, we are to take over the leadership of it, so it makes sense for us to work closely together on circumstances in the Indian Ocean, including maritime security questions.
JOURNALIST: Is it time to return to the idea of Japan, US, Australia, and India [inaudible] Indian Ocean as was occurring, [inaudible] February 2008?PM: The approach we are taking to [inaudible] is because there is an organisation that brings together the Indian Ocean rim countries. We believe the best approach is to be working through that organisation and working in a very close partnership with India.
JOURNALIST: I seem to be the one left asking these questions, Prime Minister, but the little slip over there, you're okay?
PM: Yeah, I'm okay. For men who get to wear flat shoes all day every day, if you wear a heel it can get embedded in soft grass, and then when you pull your foot out and the shoe doesn't come and the rest of it is as you saw.
If you are in any doubt about the logistics of this some of my friends here can help you with the description
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: We're going to have one of those discussions are we?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned yesterday countries need to economically reform to grow their economies, will you be raising Foreign Direct Investment in Retail with your Indian counterpart today?PM: It is not for me to discuss domestic Indian policies that would not be an appropriate thing to do, but generally what I can say is, we as a nation know that economic reform makes a difference for economic growth.
We have entered our 21st year of economic growth, and that has only been achieved because of some hard and often unpopular reforms, things like floating the dollar and reducing the tariffs, done by earlier Labor Governments, and I believe the reforms that this Government is bringing to the Australian economy are, some of them not popular, including carbon pricing, will set us up for growth and potential in the future.
Here in India, this is an economy which has doubled its share of world output that has reformed and changed.
What happens with the future of the Indian economy is a matter for the Indian Government and Indian people, but I do think we can generally say that around the world, economic reform makes a difference to economic growth.
JOURNALIST: Would you see benefits for Australia, if Australian supermarkets were allowed into the retail space here?PM: That would be a commercial decision for our big supermarket chains.
About the outlook we take, whether it is here in India or in other parts of the world is freer and freer trade - it is better for the economy, and it is better for Australia. We are a great trading nation that can hold our head up in the world, and ensure that our people have jobs and growth with freer and freer trade.
JOURNALIST: It has been 26 years since the last time an Indian Prime Minister visited Australia. Does that show that India is still not really that into us, and are we extending fresh invitation to Manmohan Singh today?
PM: I am not sure that in international relations that we have degenerated to using the terminology that they are ‘not that into us'! But so I will not be adopting that but maybe we will see it in some of the pieces.
It has been a long time, as you say, 26 years since we welcomed an Indian Prime Minister. We would love to welcome Prime Minister Singh if he was available to visit, and of course he has a standing invitation to visit Australia. But leaders' travel in the modern world is intensive, we meet together regularly in a series of International forums, I see Prime Minister Singh at the East Asia Summit, I see him at the G20, I see him at a variety of events around the world, that puts a taxing burden on leaders in terms of the international travel they do. So I am not surprised that selections have to be made about further travel.
JOURNALIST: The Coalition seems to be arguing that they did raise the idea of interceptions with President Yudhoyono, were you a bit hard on Mr Abbott yesterday?
PM: Mr Abbott has done two press conferences where he has had the opportunity to say the simple words ‘we raised tow-backs with the President of Indonesia'.
Despite being questioned he has declined to do so, it seems to me Mr Abbott is now spinning like a top because he is embarrassed by his failure to raise with the President of Indonesia something that he beats his chest about when he is home in Australia.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] India's thinking and relationships, and [inaudible]?
PM: Well I am certainly here, to talk to the Prime Minister of India and beyond about our converging interests and the way in which we can work together.
I certainly believe whether it is across economic exchange, investment, dealing with pivotal challenges like water, energy security; Australia can be a strong and reliable partner for India, and that is what I am here to pursue in the discussions today, and on that note I better get about those discussions.
Thank you.


New Delhi, India
PM: I want to thank the Indian Government and the Indian people for the warmth of the welcome that we received and the very great honour of this state visit.
Yesterday Prime Minister Singh I was privileged to see some of the human dimensions of the relationships between our two countries.
I was able to see things like how sport and education are changing the lives of Indian children.
I was able to see how scientific communities are working together to fight the scourge of malaria.
And last night I was very privileged to see world-class musicians from both our countries perform at last night's OzFest opening against the backdrop of an amazing live show.
A number of us enjoyed that very much last night.
The people to people links between our two countries are the fastest-growing element of our bilateral relationship.
Today, Prime Minister, I am very pleased that we have been able to have such productive discussions.
I think the positive and strong state of our bilateral relationship is obvious from the discussions we've had.
There is a growing convergence of our economic and strategic interests; that is obvious too.
And so there's the goodwill and the desire to do more to build our strategic partnership.
As I said a little bit earlier today when I was speaking to our business communities, I am committed to building a productive and enduring partnership with India; one which stands in the first rank of countries which matter to our nation, to Australia.
I am therefore delighted, Prime Minister Singh, that you and I have been able to agree on a number of very concrete measures that will help forge that relationship for the future.
I'm pleased we've been able to agree that Australian and Indian leaders should meet formally each year, either in each other's country as we are doing now, or in the margins of regional or global bodies in which we share membership, such as the G20 or the East Asia Summit.
These meetings will help provide high-level oversight of our strategic partnership and continue its momentum.
Prime Minister, I'm also pleased we've been able to meet on a number of occasions over the past two years.
I think it is important that today we have decided to formalise that arrangement.
I'm pleased that we were able to agree that we would commence negotiations on a bilateral civil-nuclear cooperation agreement in the near future.
This is something that is personally important to me given the change in my party's policy and the Government's policy on this matter.
In addition I am pleased that we've been able to add to the architecture of our relationship by agreeing to a new energy security dialogue between our respective ministers and a water technology partnership to focus on the issue of water management, which is vital to both of our countries.
I'm pleased we were able to discuss our growing economic relationship, and that we agreed on the importance of making progress in our comprehensive high-quality bilateral free trade agreement.
I'm also pleased we've had a good discussion about working together regionally and globally.
This is important to us as we join each other in forums such as the G20 and the East Asia Summit.
And as the Chair and Vice-Chair of the Indian Ocean Regional Cooperation Forum, I believe we have the opportunity to continue to work together to strengthen Indian Ocean cooperation.
So Prime Minister Singh, thank you very much for your hospitality and for the very productive discussions that we have had today.
I'm looking forward to continuing to work with you as we take this strategic partnership between our two countries into this Asian century.
Thank you very much.


New Delhi, India
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Thank you for your welcome.  I am delighted to be here with you in Delhi today.
The people of Australia and India have long been friends.
My great predecessor, Prime Minister Ben Chifley, Australia's Prime Minister at the end of and following the Second World War, was someone who was driven to work for the betterment of all people, not only in Australia but “anywhere we may give a helping hand”.
He led an Australian people who were friends to the newly free world  -  friends to the new nations of the global south.
So, naturally, he formed a working friendship with Prime Minister Singh's great predecessor  -  Nehru.
They met more than once, Chifley cited Nehru in his speeches, and in correspondence with Chifley's biographer Nehru wrote of his deep distress at Chifley's untimely death in 1951. 
Chifley's admiration for Nehru was expressed in an interview for the Indian media which he gave only hours before his death. 
Chifley said:
Tell Nehru not to lose heart, but to carry on. 
India will still show the way to peace.
In him not only you but the world has a great man.
Friends, as you were then, you remain today: a sign of hope to the world.
Not least in the global importance of your national success as a great democracy in Asia.
And as Australians were then, so we are now: as you take your rightful place in the affairs of the globe, you do so with the affection and respect of our people, your friends.
Of course, one manifestation of this friendship is our shared love for, and friendly rivalry in, cricket: that “Indian game accidentally discovered by the British” as the great Indian thinker Ashis Nandy described it.
At the start of this year it was my pleasure to host the Australian and Indian cricket teams at my Sydney residence.
The summer was a celebration of the game and of the ties it has created between our peoples.
And many Australians gathered for what could be their final sight of Sachin Tendulkar in Tests.
Sachin Tendulkar is almost as widely admired in Australia as he is here in his homeland.
So, as I announced yesterday, we are delighted that he has accepted an honour from the Australian People, Member of the Order of Australia.
NEW PARTNERS
Friends, in past decades, I believe the strong friendship between our peoples has not been matched by the strength of the connection between our Governments.
Above all because while shared sentiment was often strong, shared interests were too often weak.
This has been changing for some time.
In the 1980s and 1990s both Australia and India undertook economic reforms which turned our economies outwards to the world.
While we each followed our own respective economic paths, we sought the same goal of economic growth.  Two facts tell the story of our efforts.
Twenty years on, India's share of world output has almost doubled while this year, Australia reached 21 years of uninterrupted economic growth.
And although our economies have come from very different points, in going for growth, we have grown towards each other.
Now, in a new century  -  one I describe as an Asian Century  -  the case for a stronger, broader and deeper relationship between India and Australia is compelling.
THE ASIAN CENTURY
The Asian Century is the setting for the great national opportunities and challenges each of us faces.
In this century, the tide is running to Asia.
Global economic and strategic weight is shifting eastwards towards our region, driven by the rapid modernisation of Asian nations, by economic dynamism and by population growth.
By 2025, four of the top 10 economies in the world will be in Asia.
Asia is becoming the world's largest consumer market.
For Australia, we are in the right part of the world at the right time. 
And our record of economic management reinforces this advantage.
As the Global Financial Crisis of 2008 created recession and mass unemployment in many advanced economies, Australia stood out as one of the few to maintain growth in employment and GDP. 
The Australian economy has recently been confirmed as the twelfth largest in the world, up from fifteenth.
Our comparative advantages include our natural resources, strong institutions and diverse, highly skilled workforce.
Our status as a reliable supplier of energy, minerals, services and manufactured goods to our regional partners gives us an important role in Asia's economic transformation.
India is itself a vast demonstration of the trends defining this century.
The proportion of India's population living in poverty has fallen over the last two decades from almost a half to less than a third.
New and growing cities are housing new and growing industries.
India is home to an emerging middle class that will shape social change and global markets in the decades to come.
Across the board, India doubled per person income within a decade.
To put this into perspective, it took the United Kingdom over fifty years to double per person income when it industrialised in the nineteenth century.
That same Industrial Revolution reshaped the dynamics of economic growth, as technology eclipsed population in determining the power of nations. 
Now, as Asia's rapid advances see Asian nations returning to their historic place as a share of global GDP, the strategic importance of population size has also returned.
For a nation like yours, and for your friends, this is a great and a good thing.
GOVERNMENTS BUILDING PARTNERSHIP
This is the context for the growing partnership between Australia and India.
In a century of growth and change, our interests are closer than they have ever been.
But while the convergence of our interests creates the conditions for a new partnership, leadership from Governments remains essential.
This is why it was so important that when my predecessor Prime Minister Rudd visited India in November 2009, he and Prime Minister Singh issued an historic joint statement:
Agreement to upgrade relations between our two countries to the level of a Strategic Partnership.
This is a vital symbol  -  and it is the basis of very practical work.
We issued a Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation to ensure closer and more regular collaboration on security issues.
We agreed new programs for joint research and development in areas like clean energy, water efficiency and sustainable agriculture.
The annual meetings between our Foreign, Trade and Education ministers and important ministerial contact between Defence and Energy ministers are adding new vitality.
In the past year, another barrier to relations has been removed: Australia has opened the door for uranium sales to India.
We did this because, to quote Prime Minister Singh in another time and place, it is “an idea whose time had come”.
So I look forward to discussing the next steps for our peaceful nuclear co-operation when I meet with Prime Minister Singh today.
These discussions are much more than an opportunity for jobs and exports or even a step for energy security.
They demonstrate in the most practical way that the Strategic Partnership between India and Australia is founded on enduring shared interests.
NEW ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES
In recent years our economic relationship has grown stronger.
Two-way trade has grown at 13 per cent per annum in the past five years.
Indian investment approvals in Australia grew last year alone to over $11 billion.
This is a one hundred fold increase from ten years ago.
Last year, Australia was India's largest supplier of coal and wool.
Indians are the fastest growing group of new migrants to Australia.
And Australian universities and training providers are an invaluable source of education for Indian students, who are the second largest group of international students in our country.
But there are important gains for both our nations if we broaden these links.
The dramatic changes in Asia are creating new patterns of Indian growth.
Unlike comparable economies in the past, as India's share of output from agriculture has fallen, it is the services share, rather than the industry or manufacturing share, which has risen.
This reflects not just the development of new information and communications technologies, but the integration of these services into global value chains.
The growth of knowledge and its application have never been more important.
This century is one of opportunity for Asia's innovators  -  and that means opportunity for India and Australia.
India has a genius for opening up new markets and meeting people's needs through “frugal innovation”.
Take TATA's Swach a benchtop water filter.
The Swach is an innovation based on advanced knowledge, using the properties of nanoparticles of silver.
Yet it also uses rice husks, one of India's most common waste products, runs without electricity or moving parts and costs about a tenth of comparable previous products.
In a nation where two million people die every year from drinking contaminated water, this is a lifesaving device.
And in a nation which makes and sells ideas, it is one of a thousand cases where your dynamic technology and service sectors are already contributing to the global knowledge economy.
Australia's firms are globally recognised as businesses who deliver innovation with their partners.
From transport and logistics, to mining and environmental services, from medical research to food science education to financial services.
So the next stage of our partnership should focus on areas of collaboration which build on these respective strengths  -  and which encourage innovation and specialisation in our economies.
Witness the growth of “knowledge partnerships” between Australia and India: today 32 Australian universities take part in 380 active collaborations with 250 Indian institutions.
Ranging from academic co-operation and joint research to encouraging student and staff mobility and recognising course credits between institutions.
Indeed, it is just this work which brought me here when I last visited in India in 2009, as Australia's Deputy Prime Minister and Education Minister. 
A commitment to education, research and innovation should be at the heart of our economic and social ties  -  indeed our Australia India Strategic Research Fund is another important example of this.
We are also seeing the expansion of our partnership to other areas of growing interest.
This is why my discussions with Prime Minister Singh will cover proposals for new cooperation in areas such as water technology and energy security.
But while the work of our two Governments can develop this potential, it is businesses and people who actually realise it. 
That is why leadership and collaboration among the business communities of India and Australia is vital to our partnership.
And why we are working so hard to encourage the development of business relationships, including through investment, partnership and joint ventures.
To make the most of all this broadening of economic ties, we must truly be makers and shapers of change.
Australia has changed, in determining to export uranium to India. 
India is changing, through important economic reforms in areas like energy, aviation and retail.
Our work together on a truly liberalising Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement will change both of us.
We have already set a goal of $40 billion trade in 2015  -  in other words, our trade could double by 2015.  
Both our economies have felt the vast human benefits of change on our path to economic growth in the past two decades  -  great benefits lie ahead if we persist.
SECURITY AND STABILITY
Economic and social progress also depends on security and stability through a time of rapid and far-reaching change.
We are partners in our region.
In principle  -  as open, democratic and pluralistic societies  -  we both seek a region which is stable and rules-based, outward-looking and inclusive, where all countries work together for peace and growth.
In practice  -  we see common security interests in what is increasingly described as the Indo-Pacific region.  
We both want security of maritime routes. 
And we both seek to build habits of cooperation and trust across our region, in particular through the East Asia Summit.
Next year, when Australia takes over from India as Chair of the Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation, we will continue to build on the work India has done to strengthen Indian Ocean cooperation.
We are committed to our cooperation in counter terrorism.
We each remain undaunted in the face of international terrorism and determined to defeat it. 
Our defence and security interaction has been stepped up in recent years and we should look to increase them further.
In time this could include more regular and combined talks at ministerial level, and stronger co-operation between our Defence Forces, including full naval exercises.
We are regional partners  -  and we work together in the world.
So Australia argued strongly for the G20 to replace the G8 as the preeminent international economic forum.
When Australia hosts the G20 Summit in 2014, we plan to do that in close cooperation with India. 
I welcome Prime Minister Singh's leadership at the G20 in promoting human development and economic growth.
And India and Australia have pressed for reform of the IMF and World Bank so that they better represent today's world.
Even when we do not immediately see eye to eye  -  when there are tough issues on the table, as at the Doha Round and in climate change negotiations  -  we continue our quest for common ground.
NEW PARTNERS, OLD FRIENDS
In all that we do to seize the opportunities of the Asian Century, the task for our two Governments is simply this:
To build a partnership just as productive and enduring as the friendship our peoples have forged.
For Australia, our goal is for a partnership with India which reflects your standing  -  along with the US, Japan, China, Indonesia and the Republic of Korea  -  as one of the handful of countries which matter most to Australia.
Australia's future in Asia is firmly grounded in relationships of respect with Washington, Tokyo, Beijing, Jakarta, Seoul ...  and Delhi.
We know India's importance in the Asian Century.
You long ago “woke to life and freedom” today it is the world waking to the global role your freedom and life have made for you.
The economic transformation you have achieved is remarkable the assets you hold today are rich indeed.
A great democracy, a vibrant private sector and entrepreneurial culture, and a demographic dividend as you invest in the skills and knowledge of a creative people.
These are assets Australia and India share.
Assets well fitted to growth and prosperity in the Asian Century.
This is a moment in history for nations like ours.
A century when reformers and innovators, will flourish in Asia  -  this is a century for India and a century for Australia.
Thank you.


Canberra
Australia has been elected to serve as a non-permanent member on the United Nations Security Council for 2013 and 2014.
For the next two years Australia will have a direct hand in shaping solutions to the world's most pressing security challenges.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Foreign Minister Bob Carr thanked Australia's regional and global partners for the confidence they had shown in Australia and underlined that Australia would play a constructive role across the breadth of the Council's peace and security agenda.
Australia's key priorities will include Afghanistan, Syria, Iran and North Korea. Australia will also work to ensure the effectiveness of UNSC sanctions regimes, including those targeting individuals associated with Al-Qaida.
Ms Gillard and Senator Carr congratulated Luxembourg, South Korea, Argentina and Rwanda, which were also elected to serve as non-permanent members for 2013-14.
The UN Security Council is at the core of the UN  -  it has primary responsibility in the global system for the maintenance of international peace and security. It has the power to make decisions that are binding on all UN Member States and to authorise coercive measures including sanctions and the use of force.
The Security Council's work matters to Australia  -  its decisions directly affect Australian personnel deployed under Security Council mandates, including in Afghanistan and East Timor.
The Council oversees 15 peacekeeping operations (with 117,000 personnel deployed) and 13 political and peace-building missions across four continents. After the US, the UN has the largest number of troops deployed in the world. These deployments are authorised by the Security Council.
The Council also manages 13 sanctions regimes and eight subsidiary bodies covering topics such as weapons of mass destruction, terrorism, women and children and armed conflict, and women, peace and security.
This will be Australia's fifth term on the Security Council since joining the UN as a founding member in 1945. Australia held the first Presidency of the Security Council in 1946. It has been 27 years since Australia last served on the Council in 1985-86.
Australia's re-election to the Council for the 2013-14 term reflects Australia's positive standing in global affairs  and the significant contribution Australia makes to international peace and security.
Australia is the 12th largest contributor to the UN regular and peacekeeping budgets and has deployed 65,000 personnel to over 50 UN and other peace and security operations since 1947, including in East Timor, Solomon Islands and Bougainville.


Canberra
PM: I'm joined by the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs Dr Emerson. This is a great day for Australia. We have succeeded in our bid for the Security Council.
It has been 27 years since Australia served on the Security Council and that is far too long for a nation of our status and our contribution to the United Nations. 
We were a founding member of the United Nations and we have been involved in UN activities around the world, including peace-building and including alleviating poverty around the world.
I am delighted that Australia's campaign for the Security Council has succeeded.
What it shows is that our reputation is high. It also shows that our bilateral relationships are in good repair.
The UN is important to us because it is the body globally that builds the rules-based order under which we seek to live, and consequently it is a force for peace and stability.
The UN will be particularly important to us over the coming two years.
So as we are on the Security Council, we will be dealing with issues of importance to our nation, including the UN engagement with the mission in Afghanistan, and the future of that mission beyond 2014; the UN engagement with East Timor and what that holds for the future; the UN's approach to sanctions regimes to deal with the scourge of proliferation in our world, and particularly the circumstances in Iran and North Korea.
The continued fight against global terror will also be on the agenda of the Security Council over the coming two years. 
And it is the Security Council which will have to continue to wrestle with the violence in Syria and the way in which that violence can be brought to an end. 
So, this is a proud day for Australia with a lot of people to thank for having got this tremendous result overnight in New York.
I would like to thank the former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd for having the foresight to launch Australia on this campaign for election to the Security Council, and for all the work he did as Foreign Minister to pursue that campaign and to pursue our election to the Security Council. 
I would like to thank Stephen Smith, who in his time as Minister for Foreign Affairs, was also a tireless advocate of this campaign.
I would like to thank Bob Carr who has travelled endlessly and has put his shoulder to the wheel in the closing stages of this campaign, including in New York this week. He has been a very firm advocate for Australia's interests and done a lot of hard work. 
I would like to thank Dr Emerson in his capacity as Minister for Trade who has managed to advocate for Australia's election to the Security Council, even in the context of discussions that were supposedly about something else.
I would also like to thank Parliamentary Secretary Marles who has done a tremendous job in our region of the world in the Pacific and beyond to represent Australia in this campaign. 
I would like to thank the large number of special envoys that we sent around the world to advocate for Australia.
And I would also like to thank those from our diplomatic corps who have gone above and beyond for this campaign, particularly Dennis Richardson for his leadership at DFAT, Gillian Bird for her leadership of the bid at the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade here.
They've both put in remarkable efforts and I've had the opportunity to thank the two of them personally during the course of the morning, as I thanked the departmental staff generally for their efforts.
I would like to particularly mention the efforts of Gary Quinlan, our Ambassador to the United Nations. He has been truly magnificent.
Running a UN campaigns requires a lot of work, a lot of skill, a lot of fortitude, there is a lot of tension involved and Gary has been absolutely tremendous through that.
I would also like to thank Caroline Millar who has been an indispensable part of this campaign and without her hard work alongside Gary, I cannot see us having succeeded in this campaign. 
I would also like generally to pay tribute to Australian diplomats here and around the world.
This is a victory for Australian diplomacy and our staff here in Canberra but in missions and posts around the world have all been central to our effort in this campaign to holding the reputation of Australia up high. 
I would also like to thank the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, a key reason why Australia has such a high reputation around the world is because of the work the ADF does.
I would like to thank our aid workers. They, too, working in the poorest and most difficult regions of the world, help build a perception of our nation and help build our name as Australians. 
And I would like to thank the men and women of the Australian Federal Police who go around the world and do policing work and police training work.
Once again, we send them often to very difficult, sometimes dangerous places, but they too build Australia's reputation.
This is a victory for all of those people. This is a great victory for our nation. It is a very exciting day and I'm very proud to be here and able to speak about it. I will take some questions now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in your speech to the General Assembly, you singled out inaction of the Security Council over Syria.
Will a priority of our membership be to back the United States and UK in pressuring the Chinese and the Russians to take a more active or interventionist approach to the Assad regime? 
PM: During our two years on the Security Council, we will take an Australian voice, an Australian accent into the Security Council, and in our Australian voice we will say the same things in the Security Council that we have said beyond it.
We do believe that there needs to be action to address the violence in Syria, and so we will certainly advocate for that.
Our active advocacy will start from the start of next year. The term formally starts at the start of next year.
We will, from the start of November, 1 November, start to attend Security Council meetings for the purpose of observing, that's the way of working your way into the agenda, and then our active role starts from 1 January next year. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we're told that nations who sit on the Security Council bring their own strategies for that two-year term. What's Australia's broad strategy for the Security Council? 
PM: Well, our strategy is the same as our strategy for Australian diplomacy generally. We, as a Labor government, are very proud of Labor's track record in the United Nations. 
It was Labor that took our nation into being a founding member in the United Nations. It's Labor that has held those values up high, of multilateral engagement through the UN. So we will take our philosophy about foreign affairs into the Security Council.
It as a philosophy about seeking to strengthen the global rules-based order. It is a philosophy about being prepared to be engaged in peace-making and peace-building, understanding that that is a pre-condition for development and the true alleviation of poverty.
It is a philosophy about being prepared to take your energies and efforts into the humanitarian realm, that you don't stand by when disaster strikes and you don't stand by when there are pressing circumstances of poverty, famine and the like. 
We've got a proud track record around the world of taking a humanitarian perspective, a fair-go perspective.
And then of course on the security front, we have been strong supporters of sanctions against regimes that would seek to proliferate nuclear weapons.
We've been strong combatants in the fight against global terror and that fight is also engaged in, in the UN Security Council through the work it does in Afghanistan and the work it does on sanctions regimes for individuals associated with al-Qaeda, and other agencies of global terror. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Rupert Murdoch has tweeted, "Big deal. No Aussies care."
Could you give us your response to that comment, and also, average Australians might be thinking this is all a bit esoteric, why should we care. Why should they? 
PM: Well, Mr Murdoch is entitled to his view. Obviously I don't share it.
Why should Australians care? Well, I think Australians care about our soldiers in Afghanistan. They care about the mission there and they care about its future and that will be on the table at the UN Security Council.
I think Australians care desperately about the future of East Timor, particularly our veterans care desperately about the future of East Timor.
If you want a discussion about East Timor, take yourself to an RSL. And part of the future of East Timor will be worked through at the Security Council.
We are people of peace. Australians care about living on a planet that is a peaceful planet, and that relates to the work of the Security Council.
Australians are concerned about nuclear weapons being in the wrong hands, in the hands of a regime like North Korea, in the hands of a regime like Iran.
These issues concern us, as they concern the peoples of the world, and they are dealt with at the Security Council. 
Australians are big-hearted people. We care about humanitarian disasters; we care about the fight against global poverty. This is the work of the UN.
And Australians, I think, too, understand that in an increasingly interconnected planet, the way in which we can make our way in the world is increasingly defined by the circumstances of the world generally.
It's never been true that you can be just your own island and a fortress.
We've always had to engage with the world, but that is more true today than it has ever been in the history in the planet on which we live, and that's why the Security Council is important. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it's often said that at some point Australia will have to choose between America and China. Is it likely that on the Security Council that choice will actually be crystallised and are we ready to make that decision? 
PM: I think that analysis is infantile. I know that it's pursued in the media from time to time but I think it's infantile and in the face of the facts.
Here we stand today with a strong defence alliance with the United States of America which is understood and known in our region.
We didn't sneak up on anybody with this defence alliance.
It's been there for decades and decades and decades and known in the region for decades and decades and decades, so we have a strong defence alliance with the US, and we have a robust relationship with China. 
And I know that it's fashionable in some parts of the media to talk this relationship down. That analysis is infantile.
We are engaged with China deeply at every level. Strongly economically, government to government links, people to people links, military to military links, academic to academic links, and the list goes on.
So let's not create a world of silly analysis and false choices. That's not the world we live in.
JOURNALIST: You've come back from a highly successful state visit to India and you now have this diplomatic triumph. Do you regret or have you moved on from your earlier statement that you do not have a passion for foreign affairs? 
PM: What I said then I absolutely stand by because I was describing the things that motivated to me to get into politics and what's truly closest to my heart and, yes, what got me into politics and truly closest to my heart is creating opportunity and making sure that we get every child in every school a great education.
That was true when I was 20 at Adelaide University. It's true as a 51-year-old Prime Minister. And if I get the opportunity to live to 80 or 90 it will be true then.
That shouldn't be interpreted to say that I don't have an enthusiasm for working in other areas.
For example, as a minister, workplace relations, where the men and women of the press gallery would be able to say I showed a great deal of enthusiasm and as Prime Minister on Australia's reputation in the world.
I'm a fiercely proud Australian and I'm proud of Australia today. This is good for us and we should be proud of it. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I ask your attitude towards the Opposition's statements about the bid, particularly given there is an election next year and it's possible that there could be a Coalition government during our position on the Security Council? 
PM: We're elected to the Security Council now for two years, so full stop on that sentence.
I think it is disappointing that the Opposition today hasn't had the generosity of spirit to say that this is a great day for Australia. It is. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in relation to the Middle East, there was some discussion about how we would vote in relation to Israel and Palestine during the year. Will Australia be taking into the Security Council its traditional position on Israel? 
And secondly, just on a personnel matter, would Mr Quinlan be expected to continue through the full appointment to our Security Council? 
PM: Well, if I can take them in the reverse order, I think provided he is willing to continue to serve - this is a big and stressful job - but provided he is willing to continue to serve, I think Gary Quinlan is the right person to continue to represent our nation in New York.
And having done so much to ensure that this campaign was successful, I think it's well and truly fitting and appropriate that Mr Quinlan gets to represent our nation on the Security Council. So, that's the answer to your second question.
On your first question, we are long, historic friends of Israel and we will continue to be friends of Israel. We are not friends who never criticise. We obviously talk to Israel, as we talk to the Palestinian Authorities about the pathway to peace. 
We would all want to see a durable peace in the Middle East, but we will take with us into the Security Council everything that has always been known about the position of Labor and the Government on Israel. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, further to the question on the Opposition. They've had a gripe about the costs. What do you say to people who say it's just too expensive, the whole thing? 
PM: Well, there have been around $25 million devoted to this campaign. Of course the work of DFAT has had to be geared towards the campaign as well, but $25 million spent on the campaign.
To hold Australia's reputation up high and to have us on a body of such importance to the world, I consider that money well spent, and as a proud Australian, I think people do want to see Australia having its own voice, an Australian voice, in the main decision-making bodies of the world, and that is what we've secured. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a number of foreign aid commitments have been made in the years leading up to this bid, are they all going to be honoured and is there going to be any change to the foreign aid budget when you do the mid-year budget? 
PM: We've shown a strong commitment on foreign aid and you should expect us to continue to show that strong commitment and we work around the world with a focus on poverty alleviation, on gender equality, because gender equality matters so much to development.
We obviously work on education around the world. 
We are very focused on the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals in nations that are struggling to achieve those goals about maternal mortality, kids in school, lifting people out of absolute poverty, and we've got a lot of work to continue to do in our region and around the world to achieve those goals. 
JOURNALIST: Is the aid budget safe from the mid-year update? 
PM: Well, for all the obvious reasons, I don't get into what is a slippery slope here where you put one part of the budget to me and then 50 questions later you've gone through every other line item in the budget, so I would direct you to the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook when it's delivered. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe the position on the Security Council opens doors, in terms of bilateral talks with more countries - people come knocking on Australia's door for not only talking to us not only about Security Council issues, but also trade issues and so on, would that be a spin-off? 
PM: I think the fact that we have succeeded shows that our bilateral relationships are in good repair, that Australia around the world is valued as an international player, so I think it shows our bilateral relationship are in good repair.
Being on the Security Council is not a piece on the economic table as we go around trade discussions. It doesn't play that role, and we wouldn't seek to have it play that role. 
But clearly nations will be wanting to talk to us about matters that are on the agenda at the Security Council, and that's a good thing. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about offshore processing. The Coalition has suggested that asylum seekers could stay on Nauru or Manus Island for five years. Is that an acceptable period of time, and how does that compare to Labor's no-advantage policy?
PM: Well, we are implementing the recommendations of the Houston Review. I would remind that that review was delivered by Angus Houston, former Chief of our Defence Force, by Paris Aristotle, a well-known refugee advocate, and by Michael L'Estrange, an expert in foreign policy.
They are the authors of the no-advantage test and we have adopted it as government policy, so we will continue to do what we've promised which is implement the recommendation of the Houston Review - or the recommendations, I should say - implement the recommendations of the Houston Review.
The Houston review doesn't invite people to make stuff up as they go along. It invites people to deliver an integrated set of policy measures that will deal with the question of people smuggling and asylum seekers, so we're not making stuff up along, as we go, the way the Opposition is.
We are determined to implement the full recommendations of the Houston Review. 
JOURNALIST: Well, how (inaudible) is it no-advantage then? 
PM: Well, the Houston Review gave guidance on how to determine this question, and said it should be done in discussions with UNHCR.
The idea is to define what is the period of time someone would have waited if they had not moved but had stayed where they were for processing by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, further to Lauren's question, with regards to offshore processing, on current arrivals and arrivals since 14 August you've only got about a 40% chance of being sent to an offshore place. 
Don't you need to sort this problem out because you're going to have a system that's already overflowing, and a system that can't cope with the processing threat that your Government has? 
PM: Well, you are focused on Nauru and PNG, and I can understand that, but I would remind you that is part but not all of the recommendations of the Houston Review, and we will be implementing or seeking to implement the rest of the recommendations.
And we will, through the existence of processing on Manus and Nauru, be continuing to send a very strong message that getting on a boat, risking your life does not get you an outcome in Australia, because of this no-advantage test. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) this is the point. You've got over 4700 or thereabouts, about 2100 maximum offshore. The other people who aren't sent there are going to be processed here, I take it, and when it that going to start? 
PM: Well, the aim here is to be true to the Houston Review and we will continue to make and announce decisions which are true to that review 
JOURNALIST: Given what the review said, has the Government made any progress in the further discussions with Malaysia? 
PM: We are continuing those discussions. Minister Bowen would be in the best position to give you a very detailed update, but those discussions following my conversation with the Prime Minister were to keep occurring at the level of Minister Bowen to his counterpart, Minister Hishamuddin. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think Tony Abbott hates his wife and daughters, as a misogynist? 
PM: I gave a speech about this in Parliament as you might be aware and I said what I wanted to say about sexism and misogyny.
I stand by every word of that speech and as I indicated in that speech, when I see sexism or misogyny, call it for what it is.
Thank you.


Canberra
Thank you very much and it's fantastic to be here with my ministerial colleague Dr Emerson on what is such a great day for our nation.
Now it's not too many venues that you speak in that you've got people on three levels, so I'm going to be looking around a bit to try and take you all in to this speech.
But you, working here, know how important this is for our nation. It's been 27 years since we served on the Security Council.
We are a nation that is a substantial contributor to the UN. And so it was more than time for us to return to the Security Council and to play a role over the next two years in shaping events that are truly important to our nation.
The Security Council is going to be at the heart of shaping what happens next in Afghanistan as we work towards the completion of the NATO-ISAF mission. It's vital the UN to what happens next in East Timor. It's vital to our efforts against poverty and peace-building around the world where we have got such a good track record and where we are continuing to make such strong contributions now.
The Security Council will be vital to what happens with the sanctions regimes against Iran, against North Korea, the fight against global terrorism, the fight against weapons and their illegal use in our world.
It will also be pivotal to what happens in Syria and the ending of the violence there. So, so much to do over the next two years, but we've only got there because of the hard work of the people gathered here and beyond.
And so my real purpose today has been to come along and to say a very big thank you to everyone who has been involved in making sure that we won this bid. It's never been easy.
There's been some casual predictions from some in the newspapers about how easy it is to get yourself on the Security Council. This group of people knows that it's really hard. And it takes a lot of work.
And so I would like to thank in order, firstly Kevin Rudd for having the foresight as Prime Minister to put our name forward and to commence the bid process, and then to pursue it so energetically as Minister for Foreign Affairs.
I'd like to thank too, Stephen Smith who in his days as Foreign Affairs Minister also was very determined to pursue the bid around the world.
I'd like to thank Dr Emerson for having played his part across all of those years as Minister for Trade, sneaking in advocacy of our Security Council bid to discussions that were supposed to be about something else entirely.
I'd like to thank Minister Bob Carr who I've spoken to over in New York. I accused him of drinking apple martinis in a bar in New York. Being Bob Carr of course he wasn't drinking apple martinis in a bar in New York. But he is tremendously excited and you all know the great efforts he's put in in this, the closing stages of the campaign, including in New York in recent days.
I spoke too to Richard Marles, who is tremendously excited and has played a major role for us in the Pacific and beyond and has been a very vigorous advocate of this bid.
I'd like to thank here, Dennis Richardson and I'd also Gillian, like to thank you for your leadership of the departmental efforts here and around the world. This has been an effort not only out of this building in Canberra, but in all of our missions and posts around the world, people have been involved in the bid and involved in the advocacy for it.
I've had personal experience of dealing with DFAT staff who around the world in those missions and posts, have been going that extra mile to make sure that our credentials for the bid are put to the forefront.
I'd like to thank the amazing Gary Quinlan who has led our bid in New York.
I'd have to say having had exposure to Gary; I really don't know how he does it. It takes tremendous energy, a lot of fortitude and Gary shown all of that. A few moments of great stress along the way, Gary's known for having the occasional stressful moment I think we'd all acknowledge that. But the fact that we have won and won in such style is a tremendous credit to him.
I'd like to thank Caroline Millar as well for her efforts. She's been there driving it hard too, and without her efforts we wouldn't have got there.
And I know all of these great representatives  -  Dennis, Gillian, Gary, Caroline  -  work with big teams and they're as good as the teams they lead. They can't be better than the teams they lead. And so that is a great tribute to all of you, to each of you.
And I think the fact that we came through is not only a tribute to Australian diplomacy, it's a tribute to Australia's reputation around the world. And that reputation is built by the activities of our diplomats.
It's also built by the work of our Australian Defence Force as we do such difficult missions overseas. It's built by the work of our aid workers as they go into some of the poorest and hardest places on earth to make a difference to people in real poverty and as they do so, to hold the reputation of Australia up high.
It's also a tribute to our federal police who deploy around the world, and who are so well received as they take those missions on around the world. And I've seen that with my own eyes too, the difference that our federal police can make in some of the hardest and most dangerous places on earth.
All of this is to be celebrated. It's to be the subject of a great deal of thanks. I'm looking forward to spending some time with you today and saying thanks to as many as I can personally.
Now I know in these days of budget restrictions that we're not at this point raising glasses of champagne.
Though I do understand there may have been the occasional person who sustained themselves late into the night by having drinks through to get them there, but I don't expect in a group this large for people to identify that they have been up all night drinking. But there were a few were they Dennis? Alright, he' got his senate estimates face on in answer to that question.
But I hope at some point you do get the opportunity to raise a glass and to savour the moment because it really is about you and your efforts.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that His Excellency Benigno Simeon Aquino III, President of the Republic of the Philippines, will visit Australia from 23 to 26 October at the invitation of the Governor-General of Australia, Ms Quentin Bryce AC CVO.
Australia and the Philippines enjoy a warm and wide-ranging relationship with a long history of bilateral cooperation, and share mutual interests in the prosperity, development and security of the region.
President Aquino will be accompanied by senior ministers and Philippine business leaders. 
In addition to Canberra, President Aquino will visit Sydney, where he will focus on trade and investment links and meet with the Philippine community.
The President's busy schedule includes a visit to the Australian War Memorial, where he will lay a wreath and make a tour of the galleries.
The President will also call on the Governor-General during his visit, and attend a State Lunch held in his honour at Government House, Canberra.
The visit will also provide Australian business leaders with an opportunity to engage directly with President Aquino and Philippine Ministers and business leaders during an evening function hosted by the Asia Society and the Australia-Philippines Business Council.


Canberra
PM: As the Chief of the Defence Force and Minister for Defence have advised the nation, overnight our time we have lost a 24 year-old soldier in Afghanistan.
I offer my most sincere condolences to the family and friends of this young man. My thoughts are with them; my very loving thoughts are with them at this time of great stress and distress for them. My thoughts are also with his mates.
We cannot at this stage give a great deal of information about the circumstances in which this young man died. The operation in which he died is still ongoing.
We're also not in a position to give a great deal of detail about the young man himself. Understandably his family have requested privacy at this time.
But what is clear is we have lost a brave soldier who was going about difficult and dangerous work in Afghanistan. That is clear to us.
And his loss will be mourned by the whole nation.
Having just been in Afghanistan, I can say that our troops there are in good spirits. Their morale remains high even though during the course of this year they have seen a great deal of loss. And they are very determined to see the mission that we have set ourselves through in Afghanistan; a mission with a defined strategy and a defined end point.
But none of that makes absorbing the news of this loss any easier. The news of every loss is as hard as the news of the first loss. So there will be a lot of people grieving today and our thoughts are with them in their grief.
I'll take questions but only on this matter.
JOURNALIST: Is there any doubt in your mind that the defined strategy will be reached by the defined end point?
PM: No there is not. Our mission is on track. We're on track to train the Afghan national security forces which is our mission in Uruzgan province. We also take the fight to the insurgency through our special operations.
I reaffirmed when I was there in Afghanistan through the briefings I received from our own people in Uruzgan province, and then also from General Allen in Kabul, that the mission is on track.
One of the kandaks that we train is operationally effective on its own and the others will be operationally effective on their own by the end of this year.
We will though still engage in special operations. And there is no way of being in Afghanistan that comes without risk. And so today is yet another reminder  -  though we didn't need one  - today is another reminder that Afghanistan is a very dangerous place.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when is the Government likely to make a decision about keeping special forces troops on in Afghanistan post-2014? And are you any closer to deciding how big that commitment will be?
PM: We've left the door open to leaving special forces in Afghanistan and of course we've got to define the nature of our commitment as part of the NATO train, advise, assist mission.
We are some way from defining those numbers and that is because NATO-ISAF is still some way from defining its forces and numbers. For example, the United States has not as yet been clear about its contingent in Afghanistan post-2014.
So we need to keep consulting with NATO-ISAF, with all of the coalition forces who are there, before we can make final decisions about that matter. Certainly those decisions would not be taken during the course of this calendar year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe that an incident of this type happening indicates that it's going to be some time before Uruzgan, the province we're responsible for, is actually pacified to the extent that the local troops can take over?
PM: Well there's two things here. One, the continuing nature of the insurgency, and two the capacity of the Afghan forces to meet the insurgency.
Our predictions of Uruzgan province is that there will still be active fighting needed against the insurgency. What we are seeking to do is to build up the capability of Afghan forces so they can take the fight to the insurgents. And we are on track with that training mission in the way in which I've described, with one of the kandaks already been operationally effective on its own.
But even when those kandaks, that brigade is operationally effective on its own, there will be a continuing role for special forces until transition is complete. And that comes with very particular risks. Then we still have to define the nature of the mission beyond 2014 and we need to do that with our NATO-ISAF partners.
Thanks very much.


Sydney
PM: Can I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and in the spirit of reconciliation, offering my respects to elders past and present.
Can I acknowledge my federal parliamentary colleagues the Minister for Health, Tanya Plibersek and Chris Hayes,the Member for Fowler who is here among a large number of federal parliamentarians, state parliamentarians and local representatives.
It's great that we've all be able to gather here today.
Can I also acknowledge the Ingham family. We wouldn't be here without you. What a fantastic speech and to see the video too was truly heartwarming.
So thank you very much for letting us be here today in what is really your place.
Can I acknowledge too Terry who has spoken to you, Michael and Amanda. I think their enthusiasm for this project just shines through and has shone through in those contributions to date. So it's been great to be able to listen to them.
Can I also acknowledge Gary Gray. Actually Minister Gray wasn't able to be here today, but he particularly asked me to bring his good wishes to this gathering.
He had a long association with Bob, he has enjoyed that long association, he is today with his mother in Whyalla, which I can report to you has not been wiped off the map, and his mother introduced or reintroduced us to that wonderful term bunkum on national television so we should be acknowledging her as well.
But Gary did particularly want me to bring his best wishes to this gathering.
It's nice to share a stage with local girl Lisa and whilst I don't normally acknowledge members of the media, because where would you start, where would you finish and some days what terminology would you use; I do understand that Peter Harvey is with us today back at work so a special hello to him.
I was here in 2009 turning that very first sod and it's great to be back.
Thank heavens we didn't have to do all the work in between the turning of that very first sod and where we're standing today.
But because I was here in 2009 I have kept an eye on this project ever since and I was always full of confidence that on time and on budget was going to be the only way.
And so it's great to be back today having paid a special attention to this place for the opening.
When it comes to medical and scientific research, our nation, Australia, is a world leader. We should congratulate ourselves on that.
And that means that Australians themselves are living longer and living more fulfilled lives than ever before.
And that happens because of the dedication, persistence and sheer hard work of generations of medical researchers.
Now, the economic value of medical research is real but it's never the whole story.
The human value is what it really is all about and the human value is beyond calculation.
The work of institutes like this improves lives; it saves lives. And we can think of some of the triumphs of the past that I know will be added to in this place.
Australians have brought medical triumphs to the world including developing penicillin for use in humans, medical ultrasound, the heart pacemaker, the Humidicrib, trials of chemotherapy for children with leukemia, Cochlear ear implants, most recently the Gardasil vaccine.
I mean, what a miracle - a vaccine now going to protect generation of girls and women to come from cervical cancer and recently extended to Australian boys.
It's that kind of research that our nation has done in the past that we can do in the future.
The Gardasil vaccine - I remember when I first heard about it, just thought it was inconceivable that you could get a vaccine for a cancer, what an amazing thing and yet that's Australian research.
So I'm very proud of our researchers, proud of what they've achieved and proud that they are working today on the breakthroughs that will make a difference tomorrow.
And now, Sydney's south-west is firmly in the race to be the custodian of that next big breakthrough.
There's no law of nature that says great medical research institute institutions, great hospitals, and great healthcare have to be in the inner city.
Just like there's no law of nature that says successful people have to forget where they came from.
Quite the contrary.
Bob and Jack Ingham decided to found this institute back in 1996 because they always remembered where they came from and they wanted to give something back to Liverpool.
We've heard from Bob himself about how his ultimate vision was for a state-of-the-art research precinct integrated with Liverpool Hospital and the local community.
How he had that tremendous vision and no doubt many thought that it was unachievable and thought, it's a pipe dream, I'm sure there were many who indulged him and the family, listened politely and respectfully and thought to themselves on the inside "gee, that will never happen."
And here we are, that vision has taken shape and become a reality.
I'm glad we were able to help along the way with $46.9 million of Australian Government funding.
We're in the market for good ideas and this was a great idea whose time had come.
The Liverpool community will be closely involved in the pioneering work that is carried out here by some of Australia's finest medical minds and this vibrant and flourishing community will be first in line to benefit from that work.
Bob, if I can say to you, if I can say to every member of your family, I want you to know and I want the people here to know that we are all so proud of you.
We are proud of what the Ingham family has achieved here, the people of Liverpool are proud of you, the people of the south-west of Sydney are proud of you, proud of your family's success.
That is to be celebrated, but proud too that you've taken that success beyond your own family and delivered it back to the community. It's a lovely thing.
I am therefore very, very honoured to be the one who after the sod-turning in 2009 gets to declare this magnificent building officially open.
We are going to work our way to the front entrance for some formal ceremonies, but I think we should all applaud the endeavours of those who brought us here, the Ingham family, everybody who has worked so hard along the way.
And I think some applause is due for the research to come, I'm sure it's going to be truly groundbreaking.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
I want to begin by saying to the men and women of Australia's farming communities: because of your hard work and that of your forebears, Australia is an agricultural powerhouse.
Our agricultural industries export over $30 billion worth of food a year.
They provide enough food to feed our own population three times over.
And our food supply chain employs around 1.6 million Australians, or 15 per cent of the nation's workforce.
All this in a continent that poses huge challenges of climate, logistics and workforce availability.
Our success didn't happen by accident.
Australian farmers have never been better educated or better connected.
We have better science.
We have better tools and equipment.
And in the Asian Century, we have bigger markets than we've ever had before.
Australian farmers are no strangers to Asia.
Your parents and grandparents led the way in the 1950s on our breakthrough deal with Japan that paved the way into the region.
So Asia is not new  -  but the scale of this opportunity is.
The Asian middle class is around 500 million strong today but will grow to 3.2 billion within two decades.
By 2025, half of the world's economic growth will come from this region.
Growth equals demand.
Demand for minerals. Demand for manufactures. Demand for services.
And, of course, demand for food.
Agrifood demand is set to double between 2007 and 2050.
Not just in China but in India, the ASEAN region and South Asia as well.
So unlike the past two centuries when our markets were far away, this time we are in the box seat.
A farmer in the US Midwest is twice the distance from Beijing than a farmer in Kununurra.
So Australia has an Asia advantage.
By seizing that advantage, we'll see agriculture's share of the Australian economy rise through to 2025, reversing the fall we've seen in the past decade.
Of course, even if we doubled our production levels, we couldn't put food on every Asian table.
But we can target the region with clean, sustainable produce, renowned for its quality and consistency.
Australia's opportunity is to provide high quality product to a growing middle class in areas where we have experience and advantage, especially beef, wheat, dairy products, sheep meat and sugar.
But more than that.
I want us to sell our ideas and innovative capacity as well.
Australia should be a supplier of choice for agricultural solutions like technologies to increase yields, reduce water use and lessen environmental degradation; soil management systems; and improving feed sustainability for marine aquaculture.
We've got so much to offer to the region and the world.
Succeeding in the Asian Century will demand a lot of us too.
The strategies that have worked for the domestic market won't always work in Asia.
Success will require a whole-of-Australia effort, with farm businesses, communities and governments being partners in a profound transformation of how we think and operate.
It will mean becoming more Asia-capable, like having more business people on company boards with direct expertise in the region.
Businesses must continue to increase adaptability and resilience to changes in the environment and economy, including drought and climate change.
They must become fully part of the region, adjusting their strategies, linking with regional value chains and developing long-term relationships.
And some businesses will need to look at their size and structure, finding new ways to grow and scale-up.
Finally, engaging with our north will demand new and deeper Asia-relevant job capabilities include adaptability, flexibility, resilience, creative thinking, and the confidence and readiness to operate in Asia.
We also face significant agricultural skill shortages spanning the entire value chain, especially in agribusiness and agricultural science.
Addressing these factors will require sustained effort.
We cannot build stronger relationships or learn new skills overnight, or even over five years, especially given the diversity of the countries in our region.
But we can begin now.
At the heart of Asia-readiness is productivity.
So since 2007, we've been focused on building the long-term productivity and sustainability of our nation's agriculture, fishing and forestry industries.
Australia's producers know the value of investment in rural research and development.
That's why we've provided $1.1 billion to rural research and development corporationsover our five budgets so far.
Our rural R&amp;D policy included a commitment to continuing matching funding and outlined improvements that will drive productivity, investment and adoption of innovative practices.
We've also invested more than $1.6 billion in biosecurity, to minimise threats and keep Australia's primary industries strong.
Released draft legislation to replace the century-old Quarantine Act.
And announced a state-of-the-art post entry quarantine facility in Victoria.
But we don't just need to refine what we sell but how we sell it.
In an increasingly interconnected world market, a premium is being placed on joined-up supply chains and partnerships.
So stronger entrepreneurial and management skills will be necessary to be successful in an increasingly interconnected global food industry.
Investments in water and transport infrastructure help farmers better integrate into supply chains.
Governments have an important role to play in getting the settings right and enabling the sector to do what it does best.
Through APEC we are working in the region to improve cross-border supply chain performance by 10 per cent by 2015.
This includes identifying and fixing choke points that limit fast, cost-efficient movement of goods.
In the Asian Century, our production and exports will expand, but our soil and water resources remain finite.
Farmers more than anyone know how fragile our natural assets are and how preserving them must be a priority.
As Prime Minister, I recognise you as frontline caretakers of our greatest assets  -  our soils, our water, and our biodiversity. 
Soil is the very basis of our survival.
Clean air and water; food and fibre; and our unique biodiversity all rely on protecting our soil.
This valuable asset is threatened by climate change, land degradation and competing land uses.
So I seek a deeper partnership in trying to increase our soil health, our water quality, our biodiversity and vegetative cover.
Throughinnovation, researchand improving on-farm practices,we can reduce our impact and increase our output.
Late last year we established a Working Group on Water, Soil and Food in recognition that the condition of our soils must be a national priority.
Akey step in this direction is the appointment of a person with the authority and trust of the community to raise awareness of the importance of soil -  an Advocate for Soil Health.
I'm pleased to announce that this important role will be filled by an eminent Australian, the former Governor-General, Michael Jeffrey.
As Governor-General, Michael Jeffrey had a passion for regional development and the future of our rural industries, a commitment he has continued since leaving office.
This role will also involve the development of soil research priorities to complement existing efforts to develop a national soil research, development and extension strategy.
Government departments, CSIRO and our rural RDCs must continue to take an integrated approach to ensure resources are used sustainably and we target investment to the right areas.
We also need to engage better with our soil scientists to take advantage of new ideas and provide the information that farmers need to look after theirsoil.
The Government recently announced the new $700 million ‘sustainable agriculture' stream in the next phase of the Caring for our Country program.
Helping farmers to improve the health of their soil will be a major component of this.
Healthy soil underpins biodiversity and the provision of ecosystem services.
The Government recognises the importance of biodiversity conservation, now and for future generations.
We also know that in this dry land, we know the next drought is only a matter of time.
So we're working with industry as well as State and Territory governments to reform drought management in Australia.
In these relatively good times, it's a unique opportunity to move from crisis management to preparedness.
The work is ongoing but we look forward to delivering a new and improved system to help producers deal with the impacts of climate variability.
Most important of all our land use challenges, we need to resolve the Murray Darling Basin Plan.
It's hard to believe we've gone 111 years as a Federation without such a plan.
2012 will be the year when we get the job done.
None of this will be easy.
As you all know so well, nothing in agriculture ever is.
In a way, growing and selling goods to Asia is the simpler part.
Putting in place the policy and regulatory settings here at home is where we need to dig deeper.
There's no single ‘big bang' but rather our method is to weave together complementary strategies to ensure that all the resources of government are focused on the task.
Like removing the heavy hand of centralisation and getting our wheat marketing right.
We believe that those who own the wheat should decide how they want to sell the wheat.
Taking the politics out of foreign ownership.
Foreign investment is not a new thing.
It has helped build Australian agriculture over the last two hundred years and it is important for the future as we seek to boost food production and food security.
Foreign direct investment in agriculture, forestry and fishing accounts for just 0.1 per cent of total foreign investment.
And 89 per cent of our agricultural land is entirely Australian owned, with a further 6 per cent majority-owned by Australians, roughly similar levels to what they were 30 years ago.
But we also understand the need for more information to foster an informed public debate.
That's why I am announcing that the Government will be introducing a foreign ownership register for agricultural land.
The register will provide the community with a more comprehensive picture of the specific size and locations of foreign agricultural landholdings over and above what is currently available.
We will shortly be releasing a paper to begin discussions with stakeholders, including many people in this room, plus the States and Territories, about the design and content of the register.
We're continuing the hard grind of negotiating the Free Trade Agreements that are so vital to market access.
The Government is working overtime to support Australia's industries in getting their products to the world.
That's why I spoke with Prime Minister Noda at the United Nations last month because I want to see the Japan FTA done.
Just as I want to see the China and Korea FTAs done, and the Trans Pacific Partnership as well.
We're completing Australia's first ever National Food Plan to look at our food system from paddock to plate.
This plan will help ensure we have a sustainable, globally competitive, resilient food supply that supports access to nutritious and affordable food and that our agricultural sector makes the most of the opportunities, like the growth of Asia.
And bringing it all together, we're very close now to delivering the Asian Century White Paper.
Charting our path as an export-driven economy with a smart, innovative, Asia-literate population.
We can't accomplish this work without the advice and input of the NFF and its fellow peak bodies.
The NFF's contribution to the Asian Century White Paper has been thoughtful and substantive.
I'm also proud of our work on the Coal Seam Gas National Partnership, which went from an idea Jock and Matt presented in my office to a signed-off COAG policy in record time.
But for every success and occasional controversy that gets a front page in the papers, a lot goes unsung as well.
Like the North Queensland irrigated agriculture strategy, where we're working with the State government, industry and CSIRO.
Or the Northern Australian Beef logistics initiative, again working with industry, State and Territory governments and other stakeholders to get a good result.
This policy work won't always win headlines.
But the farmers and communities involved know its value.
Work that will be earning export dollars for Australia long after we have all left the stage.
That's really what this work is all about  -  the future.
Like when Trade Minister John McEwen renewed our relationship with Japan 60 years ago.
He didn't know precisely what the opportunities would be.
He couldn't guess that within a few years we'd be extracting iron ore from the Pilbara, or farming fish in Tasmania.
But he helped ensure we'd be ready for whatever chances presented themselves along the way.
We don't quite know what Australia will be like in 2050.
But we do know we'll have to be living within the natural limits of our soil and water resources.
Drawing our energy from sustainable supplies.
Linking ourselves to high-speed broadband.
Better understanding Asian cultures and manners.
And putting ourselves back in the top five countries educationally.
All of these things are within our grasp right now.
Yes they are complex in execution, but they are not hard to understand in principle or design.
Most importantly, let's remember this:
Australia is up for the challenge of the Asian Century.
We are no longer the small, isolated nation of our grandparents' fears and imaginings.
We are the world's 12th biggest economy on the doorstep of a historic economic transformation.
But for all of the opportunities, the journey doesn't get any easier from here.
The low hanging fruit has been picked, so we have to reach higher up the tree.
We have to be smarter and stay smarter to not only hold our own in the international market place but grow our share of the opportunities.
That's why it's time to get the right settings in place now.
We can't afford to be arguing about stuff like the Murray-Darling in ten years' time.
The Asian Century, like the Industrial Revolution, is a rare moment in history.
You don't too many chances like this in the life of a nation.
We've got one  -  and we won't let it slip away.



HOST: Good morning Prime Minister and welcome to AM.
PM: Thanks Sabra.HOST: The budget update has few or no friends this morning. The Financial Review says it's tax trickery, News Limited papers say that middle Australia has become the fall guy. Have they?PM: This is the right economic statement for the Australian economy. Sabra, we would not be sitting in the United States or in the UK or in many other major developed nations around the world and talking about bringing a budget to surplus.This mid-year economic statement is part of our long-term strategy to keep the Australian economy strong, to deliver a budget surplus as our economy grows, our economy will continue to grow, we'll create jobs, unemployment will be low, inflation will be low, and all of that gives the Reserve Bank room to move on interest rates if it chooses to do so.And, you know, a family paying a $300,000 mortgage off is paying $4,500 less a year than before this Government took office.HOST: The changes to the baby bonus have raised some eyebrows. Mr Swan argued yesterday that often families don't need to pay for those extra costs when it comes to the second and subsequent child.Mr Abbott was asked about this on Channel Seven this morning, let's listen to that.ANDREW O'KEEFE GRAB: When you've already bought the cot and the pram and the, you know, the first lot of clothes and all that, everyone knows the first child is the golden child Tony don't they?ABBOTT GRAB: Well Andrew in our family every child is a golden child, but often Andrew, one child is still in the cot when the second one comes along, one child is still in the pram when the second one comes along.So you actually need to get an extra cot or a double sized pram. I think if the Government was a bit more experienced in this area, they wouldn't come out with glib lines like that.HOST: Does the Opposition Leader have a point here, does the leadership group of Labor understand the pressures of families with children?PM: Well I think Mr Abbott can explain what he meant by that line. On families and pressures with children, the Government is certainly working with Australian families and we understand many families are struggling to make ends meet, and for example they face costs when the kids are going back to school, which is why we provided the School Kids Bonus.And let's be clear about the way we're working with Australian families and working with them on cost of living pressures. For a family with two children, the School Kids Bonus is worth $15,000 across the life of the kids at school, all of the years that they're at school.Mr Hockey has very clearly said that Mr Abbott, if he was Prime Minister, would take that away, and yet at the same time, we've got Mr Abbott on TV this morning complaining about a change to the baby bonus which means a $2,000 difference once for a family.This doesn't add up Sabra.HOST: So you're saying that families get enough payments and help from the Government already, you shouldn't notice this.PM: I'm saying it's in the interests of Australian families for us to have a budget that brings a budget surplus in; we've got a growing economy so this is the right economic strategy for jobs and for growth.It's the right economic strategy too to make the maximum possible room for the Reserve Bank to move on interest rates if it chooses to do so and lower interest rates have been, in the interests of Australian families who are paying off a home. 
At the same time, we will continue to work with people on their cost of living pressures, for example, the cost of getting the kids back to school.We have made a structural save on the baby bonus, that's absolutely true, and that's part of a long-term strategy to get our budget in the state that it needs to be and of course we will be working to fund things that people value.As I move around the country, people do talk to me about the quality of their child's school, they do talk to me about a better deal for people with disabilities, and we'll want to be making the room over time for those things in the budget.HOST: Okay, but should export prices continue to fall, and there's a strong risk that they might, that is going to affect the Government's tax take too. Is there anything that you are prepared to do to save the surplus?PM: Look Sabra I'm not going to deal with hypotheticals, I'm going to deal with the facts and the facts are-HOST: Well but the hypotheticals here  -  some forecasters are also saying if Treasury and the Government are being way too optimistic on those predictions.PM: Well on Treasury predictions, the same people have done the economic predictions now as did them under the Howard Government, as did them under earlier Governments. These are the expert Treasury and these are their predictions, which are broadly in line with predictions from other sources in the Australian economy.HOST: With every MYEFO since 2010, they've had to revise down.PM: Well we get the experts at Treasury, the same people who assisted Prime Minister Howard, to do their best expert projections and that is what is in MYEFO. 
On your broader question, we're not dealing with hypotheticals here, we're dealing with facts. We delivered the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook yesterday and it has a surplus in it despite us having a revenue write-down of more than $20 billion.Now that shows that we are prepared to do some hard things in order to have a budget in surplus. We're a Government that's made more than $130 billion worth of savings, we've got tax to GDP at a lesser rate than the former Howard Government, so less tax.We are making those decisions because they're right for the economy and to support jobs.HOST: Half the savings announced yesterday are from changes in the way that corporate tax is paid. Did the Government consult its business tax working group on this change, because it seems like they've been taken by surprise.PM: Look we made this change because it simply strikes us as fair that when working people pay their tax weekly or fortnightly, perhaps monthly, depending on how they get paid, that companies should also pay their tax as they go along.HOST: But you've got this consultation group, did you actually consult them?
PM: Well we've got a process here now too; this is a change that's going to take effect-HOST: It sounds like you haven't.PM: Well this is a change that's going to take effect from 1 July 2014. The purpose for the business tax working group was to see whether within the tax envelope that businesses pay, there were ways of re-gearing it to lower the company tax rate by forgoing other concessions.Sabra, this move on company tax is not an increase in company tax; it's about the time of payment of company tax. 
I do note that there is a political party with a policy to increase company tax and that's Mr Abbott's Liberals.HOST: It's not more tax, but it certainly increases the red tape and the compliance, and for some businesses their intake isn't smooth over the year, they have seasonal lumps and dips. It certainly will be harder for them to calculate and factor in this. It makes it more difficult for business.PM: Well on the mechanics of how it's going to work, of course we'll be open to feedback from businesses, let's be clear here Sabra, businesses account for their GST, for example, on a monthly basis. Businesses keep their accounts forensically, indeed if you talk to some of our biggest businesses, particularly those in the consumer retail sector, they're basically able to give you 24 hour data, that's how forensically they track what's happening in their business. And the businesses that are coming on stream first for this change are the biggest businesses in Australia  -  350 of them. 
So it's not a tax increase, it's a change in time of tax accounting and it mirrors what working people are required to do and working people too can face changed circumstances during the year.HOST: Are you prepared to talk, you said you're ready to talk to them, will you move, is there any-PM: No, this is the policy. If people have got ideas on the best mechanics of the accounting, then obviously we would be open to those but this policy will be implemented.HOST: Can you explain how cutting half a billion dollars in research funding sits with your desire to boost Australia's productivity? Professor Fred Hilmer, the chairman of the Group of Eight universities, says it will obliterate 1,500 jobs and that it will damage Australia's reputation overseas.PM: Well I don't agree with Professor Hilmer, he's a good man and I respect what he's done and respect what he's done for the university that he's most associated with and I've been with him to his university, but I don't think he's called this one right.We've increased research funding by more than 40 per cent. We set a target of, in this program reaching a goal of $300 million a year, what we've done is we've deferred that goal from reaching it now to reaching it in 2016.Every year in our budget, research funding will continue to go up. Every year in our budget, university funding will continue to go up and as universities continue to experience those increases, they can of course continue to pay all the staff and do the things they want to do.We've increased the number of student places by 150,000 through changing the way in which university funding works, so this has been a big commitment to universities. We are seeking to put this program on a more sustainable footing for the long term.HOST: The independents have signalled that they'll consider each measure on its merits when it comes before Parliament. Is the surplus gone if they don't pass this stuff through?PM: I think first and foremost we need some clarity from the Opposition here about their position. I have noted that the Opposition's been full of its usual negative huff and puff and I'm sure we will see Mr Abbott and Mr Hockey out negative to the last breath.But our experience in the past has been, even though they've been negative until they were blue in the face, then they've come into the Parliament and they've backed in the Government's legislation. We'll wait to see what the Opposition says about supporting these changes.HOST: Since last time we spoke, you labelled Tony Abbott a misogynist. Were you surprised by the public reaction to that and now in hindsight do you regret saying that?PM: I stand by every word of that speech and I meant every word of it. Yes, I have been a bit taken aback by the dimension of the public reaction here and around the world and the way it's gone through social media to so many places around the world.People were certainly raising it with me overseas and many, many Australians have raised it with me here back at home. But I stand by every word of that speech, I meant it.HOST: Those women who are close to Tony Abbott say that they vehemently disagree.PM: Well I've put my views and I stand by every word that I put in the Parliament, and I pointed to some very clear statements by Mr Abbott which I think indicate his attitudes to Australians and to Australian women in particular.HOST: When you appointed Peter Slipper, the Speaker, a year ago, many of your colleagues predicted that it would end in tears and it has. Do you regret that decision and also, many people say it now clouds your judgement, your ability.PM: Well I made it very clear on the day on which gave the speech you've just asked me about that I viewed the text messages that Mr Slipper had sent as grossly sexist and vile, so that conduct cannot be excused and should not be excused.Of course, I was not aware of that when Mr Slipper became Speaker at the end of last year.HOST: Certainly there were questions about his performance prior to this, long prior to this.PM: You can't work on the basis of rumour in Parliament House, rumours churn around here very frequently. What I worked on the basis of is that Mr Slipper had served as Deputy Speaker. I think he'd been perceived by many to do a good job as Deputy Speaker.I actually think, Sabra, for the time he was Speaker, in his management of question time, for example, many people thought he did a good job at that, indeed many in the media talked about how he did a good job in managing what can often be an unruly and difficult part of the day.But the circumstances are as they were revealed and those text messages were grossly offensive and Mr Slipper took the decision to resign and that was the right decision.HOST: Maxine McKew's publishing a book in the next week  -  are you poised for another round of destabilisation based on its contents and do you wonder why, as a Labor woman, she's doing this to you?JULIA GILLARD: Well Maxine McKew is, you know, she obviously has written a book. Before she was in Parliament she was of course a journalist and so she's taken those skills into writing a book. 
I'm not aware of its contents other than what, you know, has been publicly reported to date, so I'm not going to speculate about a book I haven't seen.HOST: Okay, Prime Minister thanks for your time this morning.PM: Thanks Sabra. 


Canberra
Her Excellency Ms Quentin Bryce AC CVO was appointed as Australia's 25th Governor-General in September 2008.
I am pleased to announce that Her Majesty The Queen, on my advice, has agreed that Ms Bryce will serve as Governor-General for an extended term until March 2014.
The Governor-General has carried out her duties with distinction. 
On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia I wish the Governor-General and Mr Bryce well for the remainder of her time in office.


Canberra
Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard met with Philippine President Benigno S. Aquino III on 24 October 2012 as part of his State Visit to Australia.  Their meeting was followed by discussions between Australian Ministers and Philippine Cabinet Secretaries.
Since establishing diplomatic relations in 1946, Australia and the Philippines have been enjoying a warm and wide-ranging relationship based on shared democratic values and interests, with important and growing people-to-people links.  The two countries also have a shared desire for regional prosperity, development and security. 
Prime Minister Gillard congratulated President Aquino on the signing on 15 October 2012 of a Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, an insurgency movement in Southern Philippines that entered into negotiations with the government in the late 90s.  Both Leaders hoped the Agreement would provide a basis for genuine, lasting peace in Mindanao.  They agreed that it would now be important for the Agreement to be fully implemented, resulting in significant improvements to the security and prosperity of communities across the southern Philippines. 
The Leaders agreed the economic relationship between Australia and the Philippines holds great promise, building on the strong foundation provided by the Agreement Establishing the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area.  Both Leaders also shared the objective of increasing two-way trade and investment flows and agreed on the importance of a stable and predictable regulatory environment.  Prime Minister Gillard acknowledged President Aquino's reform agenda to promote good governance, transparency and accountability in government.  The Leaders agreed to continue to work in regional and multilateral forums to advance regional economic integration and resist trade protectionism.
The potential of the mining sector to contribute to the Philippines' development was also discussed.  Prime Minister Gillard described the mining industry's role in Australia's economic success, its leadership in environmentally sustainable and socially responsible mining, and the contribution Australian companies could make in the responsible development of the Philippine mining sector, particularly the development of Mindanao.  Prime Minister Gillard welcomed President Aquino's recent announcement that the Philippines will apply to join the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. The Leaders also noted the development cooperation activities provided by Australia that will support responsible mining in the Philippines.
Prime Minister Gillard announced a recent agreement to extend Australian market access for Philippine mangoes.  This will be welcomed equally by Australian consumers and mango growers in the Philippines. 
The Leaders welcomed the recent entry into force of the Status of Visiting Forces Agreement between Australia and the Philippines.
The Leaders also welcomed the recent signing of a Memorandum of Understanding on Combatting Transnational Crime and Developing Police Cooperation between the Australian Federal Police and the Philippine National Police.  The Leaders noted the high level of cooperation between Australia and the Philippines on counter-terrorism.
Prime Minister Gillard warmly thanked President Aquino for the strong support for Australia's United Nations Security Council bid.  The Leaders agreed to increase collaboration in regional and global forums. 
The two Leaders underlined the importance of a successful East Asia Leaders' Summit in November 2012, including discussion of political and security issues.  Both Leaders noted that the Philippines is the country coordinator for ASEAN-Australia dialogue for the next three years.
In relation to the South China Sea, Prime Minister Gillard noted that Australia did not take a position on competing territorial claims, but called on claimant governments to clarify and pursue their territorial claims in accordance with international law, including the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.  President Aquino stressed that peace and stability in the region is a concern of all states and that central to this is a rules-based approach in addressing issues in accordance with international law.  Both Leaders recognised the need for governments to exercise restraint and refrain from actions that could further increase tensions.  The two Leaders encouraged ASEAN countries and China to conclude a regional Code of Conduct in the South China Sea at an early date.
The Leaders agreed that Australia's development assistance to the Philippines has made an important contribution to achieving poverty reduction and the development priorities of the Philippine Government.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Aquino announced a development program to contribute to building peace and stability in Mindanao, by improving access to education.  BEAM-ARMM (Basic Education Assistance to Mindanao  -  Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao), will support the most disadvantaged conflict-affected communities.  The program will introduce community-based education in remote communities, integrate health and hygiene programs in schools, develop technical and vocational training for out-of-school youth, and increase access to quality early childhood and basic education.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Aquino also witnessed the signing of a new Air Services Agreement between Australia and the Philippines which will help lay the groundwork for increased trade and people to people links.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Aquino expressed satisfaction that the two countries' strong government to government relations were underpinned by close and growing people-to-people ties.  The Leaders noted that Filipinos are one of the fastest growing immigrant communities in Australia, with some 225,000 currently living in Australia, making an important contribution to the Australian economy and society.  In addition, some 6000 Filipino students are currently enrolled across all sectors of the Australian education system.
The two Leaders welcomed their deepening and broadening partnership that would further enhance already strong bilateral, regional and multilateral cooperation on shared strategic interests.  They welcomed the inaugural bilateral Strategic Dialogue held in October 2012 and agreed to consider ways to further deepen and broaden the political, security, economic, and people-to-people relationship.
Finally, the two Leaders welcomed recent high-level bilateral engagements and visits, including the visit to the Philippines by Australia's Governor-General Quentin Bryce AC CVO, and the visits to Australia by a number of Philippine Cabinet Secretaries.  


Adelaide
The Prime Minister and members of the Gillard Government today joined thousands of people across Australia to share a cup of tea with friends, family and fellow campaigners in support of a National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS).
More than 1700 DisabiliTEA events are being held across the country, bringing together people with disability, their families and carers, service providers, advocates and other community members for morning or afternoon tea.
The Gillard Government has delivered $1 billion for the first stage of a National Disability Insurance Scheme, which will be launched from mid-next year.
The first stage will roll out in the Hunter in New South Wales, the Barwon area of Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania and the ACT.
About 20,000 Australians with significant and permanent disability in the launch sites will benefit from the first stage of the scheme and will:
 * 	work with local people to identify their plans and goals for the future;
 * 	be assessed to receive individualised care and support packages;
 * 	have decision-making power about their care and support, including choice of service provider;
 * 	be assisted by local coordinators to help manage and deliver their support; and
 * 	access a system they can easily navigate that links them to mainstream and community services.
The Gillard Government is committed to building a National Disability Insurance Scheme that will give people with disability the care and support they need over their lifetimes  -  a scheme that is sustainable now, and into the future.
For more information on DisabiliTEA events, go tohttp://everyaustraliancounts.com.au/disabilitea/
For more information on the NDIS, go to www.ndis.gov.au


Goolwa, SA
PM: Well, I am delighted to be here in South Australia, to be here in Goolwa, to be at the River Murray with the Premier of South Australia Jay Weatherill, and with our Minister for Water, amongst other things, Tony Burke.
We are here today for an important announcement about the future of the river.
I'm delighted to be in South Australia in part because I grew up in this great state, and growing up in this great state, you know what the River Murray means to South Australia.
You don't need anybody to tell you about its importance, you know it's the lifeblood of the state, you know what the health of the Murray means to the people of South Australia, and since the days that I grew up in South Australia, we have seen this river under enormous pressure. 
We all remember what it looked like during the most severe days of the drought, when there were literally jetties going to nowhere, when people were worried about the acid that was there in the soils and what that would mean.
We all know what the Murray looked like with a closed mouth, and we were all worried about what that meant for its long-term health.
I think as a result of those shocking images the nation has increasingly woken up to the need to ensure that the Murray-Darling Basin is in good health.
This is a major national issue, and unfortunately it's been put in the too-hard basket for far too long, being left without a national plan, being left without resolution.
I'm pleased that we have been working to get that national resolution, and that we are in a position today to announce a landmark step for the health of the Murray-Darling, for the health of the River Murray.
Put simply, it means more water, and more water means better environmental outcomes. It means that the river, the basin, will be more resilient for the future.
So when in the future we are again challenged by drought, as we inevitably will be, then the Murray-Darling Basin can be more resilient. 
This plan is one that we've worked with the Premier of South Australia on.
It will see 450 gigalitres of water being preserved for South Australia, and a trust fund, a special fund being set up of $1.7 billion to ensure that that 450 gigalitres can be made available.
We have been working on the Murray-Darling Basin plan, and that has in it a figure of 2750 gigalitres of water. It contains a mechanism to increase the amount of water, and we intend to use that mechanism for the additional 450 gigalitres.
That means that we can look to achieve the environmental outcomes that the modelling has told us will be achieved with 3200 gigalitres of water. It means a healthier river.
The $1.7 billion will be put in a legislated fund, in a locked box, and that legislation will be introduced into the federal parliament next week. 
That money will go so that we can fund on-farm changes and other works which means that we are using water more efficiently and more water can be made available for the river.
This is a great outcome for South Australia. The people of South Australia have been very concerned about the state of the Murray.
So many of them have campaigned long and hard, but they've campaigned not only for what's happening in South Australia, but for what's happening for the nation. 
They've wanted to see a healthy Murray-Darling Basin. They've wanted to see the nation address this issue.
So I'm very pleased to be here in South Australia and able to make this announcement today.
I will hand over to the Premier and then we'll go to the minister. 
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Well, thank you, Prime Minister, and today represents a great win for South Australia, and a great win for the nation.
It also shows South Australians what we can achieve if we stand up and fight. We've been having this fight for a long time now. 
We've seen the effects of too much water being taken out of this river, the effects on our Lower Lakes, the acidification, the salinity levels rising, the riverbanks slumping, the bird life, the plant life, the marine life all being degraded. 
But today we have made an historic decision. We've decided to restore this great river to health and by restoring the river to health, by protecting our natural environment, we also protect all of those river communities that rely upon it.
There is no productive river without a healthy river, and today this incredibly important result for the South Australian community, the South Australian community, has been achieved because we stood up and we fought for it. 
I want to pay tribute to the people that decided to accept that responsibility. Here in South Australia, we decided to take a unified approach.
Irrigators and environmentalists, city and country, young people and old people, all came together to raise their voices in favour of this river. We have with us today a group of schoolchildren.
They produced some wonderfully moving material about the effects of the degradation of our natural environment on the turtle population down here and I think those moving images played an incredibly important role in capturing the imagination of the whole of the nation.
Today is a very important step in the process, but there is another very important step in the process, and that's the attitude of the national parliament.
So we call upon all of the federal members of parliament to get behind the federal government in ensuring that we make this plan a reality.
Now, there will be people who will speak out against this plan. People in South Australia need to realise that this is a fight that has to be continued to be waged and won.
We've achieved an enormous step today, but we cannot allow this incredibly important step in the process to not reach its ultimate outcome, and that's why we need everybody to maintain their support, to continue the campaign for a healthy river.
I would like to congratulate the Prime Minister and the Minister for the step they've taken today.
I would probably more importantly, though, like to congratulate the South Australian community for standing up and fighting, for fighting for what they believed in, for fighting for this great national river. 
MINISTER BURKE: Thanks Premier and PM. Today is the day that we decided to restore the river systems to health.
The Murray-Darling Basin Authority have given us a plan of 2750 which has a mechanism in it that says, "Here is a pathway to minimise impact on communities but maximise the improvement for the environment if you want to take it."
And when the modelling came out a few weeks ago that showed what a difference you could make to the health of the river system when you modelled 3200, we decided that it was time for us to put together the architecture of making sure that we could add an additional 450 gigalitres.
Now, the extra 450 gigalitres is acquired through the sorts of on-farm infrastructure projects that we've run to date.
It is more expensive than just straight buyback, but environmentally it achieves the same benefit and for those communities, it is a way of making sure that we work with them. 
For too long we've had a situation where the waters that are immediately behind us were managed as though they would stop and pay attention to the boundaries of different states. 
The environment never works that way, and the river did more than negotiate back. 
We've got a situation now when we don't know when the next drought will be, but we do know whenever it comes, the river system will approach that drought with a level of resilience that it hasn't had in more than a generation. That is what today's announcement means.
There are final details that I'm still working through with my colleague water ministers from different jurisdictions on the plan, but I have no doubt we will be in a situation where there is a basin-wide plan, signed off this year for the health of the Murray-Darling Basin. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how confident are you that you will secure the agreement of the eastern states but more importantly the crossbench MPs in federal parliament? 
PM: Well, you've just heard the Minister talk about how he is continuing to work with water ministers, but on what happens in the federal parliament, first and foremost we need the Opposition to be clear about its attitude to the announcement that we are making today, to this step that we are taking today. 
Already today we've seen the Opposition be negative and be divided. I think the people of South Australia and the people of Australia are entitled to a better approach than that from the Opposition.
They're entitled to know whether or not the Opposition is going to support the Government's approach, the 450 gigalitres, the legislation to create the special fund to enable us to get that 450 gigalitres, and whether they're going to work with us on the delivery of the plan, the Murray-Darling Basin plan, as Minister Burke has outlined. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you explain a little bit about that special fund, when money starts flowing into that fund, how safe that fund will be - it's supposed to last 10 years - and where the money is coming from? 
PM: The money will start in that fund in the financial year 2014/15. It is a 10-year fund.
The money is already provisioned for in the Government's accounts through us using sources that were already in the Federal Government's budget, and additional was provisioned for in the recent mid-year economic and fiscal outlook.
So it is already in the Government's budget bottom line.
In legislating for the fund, we want to give a level of security about the future, that it will be there, that it will be able to be relied on to achieve the outcomes that we want to see for the river through the mechanisms that Minister Burke has described.
And the important way that Minister Burke has thought about all of this is how can we make sure that we are restoring the river to its best health while also ensuring that we've got viable communities up and down the length of the river, and that's why the focus of this $1.7 billion is on things like on-farm changes that can make a difference for the amount of water in the river. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you see that the public might be sceptical thinking, 2024 for when the full benefit of this is supposed to arrive, it's just too far away? 
PM: Well, we've already made a start, of course, on what we've done with the water in the river through water-purchasing arrangements. 
But let's be very clear, you can't change the health of a river overnight. For a plan like this, you do take time to realise its full potential. 
Even talking about the river today with so much water in it now, the ecology is only just being restored from the days of the worst of the drought.
It takes time to restore the river to health, but this is a plan that would be locked away, money that would be locked away, to get the changes that the river needs. 
JOURNALIST: Are you saying that because of your roots in South Australia and the work that South Australia has done, whether it be the media or the Premier's campaign, taxpayers' money being spent, is that what clinched the deal? 
PM: I think it's been important for me to understand as Prime Minister what it's like to live in this state and to worry about the river in drought. I know what that feels like.
When my parents first migrated here, they came here in days of drought. I know what it's like to worry about the River Murray.
I know what it's like to go for family events next to the Murray and to see it at its best, and to see it at its worst, and so I have brought that with me to this decision-making.
I've been guided by the very high quality work undertaken by the Minister and his persistence in dealing with his state and territory colleagues. That has been very important.
But let me assure you, I've had lots of phone calls back to South Australia with my family where when we've talked about the family topics and we finish talking about those, and if they want to talk about something other than direct family business, the topic that's top of their list is what's happening with the Murray.
My family is like that. I think the people of South Australia are like that, and so I've always understood that. 
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask about the $1.7 billion. With decades of bickering over the river system, how can we be any more certain that this plan won't get bogged down and even if it gets through parliament the upstream states might launch legal challenges without any benefits for the river? 
PM: I will let the upstream states respond and you can analyse their responses, but we've been through a major process, Minister Burke, the Murray-Darling Basin Authority. 
As Minister Burke says, there is still some work to do, but we are optimistic about continuing that work with other states and territories, and it's in everyone's interest in the nation to get this resolved.
In terms of meeting the particular needs for the 450 extra gigalitres, in making sure that we could get to the environmental outcomes, we know from the modelling that 3200 gigalitres gets you to, and then we have designed this plan, made available the $1.7 billion because we're serious about getting this done. 
JOURNALIST: Can I ask about that $1.7 billion figure. You say it's already allocated in the Budget at the moment. To what is it allocated at the moment and how much is already factored?
PM: It's completed factored into the bottom line through MYEFO.
JOURNALIST: $1.7 billion?
PM: Correct.
JOURNALIST: And what is that based on? Where are those costings? Where does it come from?
PM: Well we've made available some funds that were in other areas to do with water and then we've topped those funds up and that topping up was done in the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook, so it's already provisioned with the budget bottom line you saw in MYEFO.
JOURNALIST: But how do you know removing those capacity constraints will cost $1.7 billion? 
PM: The way in which that costing has been done? I will go to Minister Burke on that. 
MINISTER BURKE: First of all, the normal process of departments doing independent costings to make their best estimate of what the different parts of this will cost is how the process follows.
The order of events is this: Once the plan's in place, one of the things the Authority has said needs to happen is that over the course of around 12 months there needs to be a constraints management strategy in place.
That will identify the constraints that need to be removed.
For the first couple of years, the funding is for the removal of those constraints. Once those constraints are removed, we then move to the significant infrastructure programs which allow the additional environmental water to be taken on. 
JOURNALIST: And will it include any funding for land buybacks and/or compensation for farmers whose land might be flooded. 
MINISTER BURKE: You don't need to buy a block of land to buy an easement over it.
And if anyone heard the comments from floodplain irrigators over the past couple of days, they would be very clear that there are no shortage of people who have properties on flood plains where they believe their property has taken a similar hit to the environment, where they from time to time need a good inundation of water and over-extraction hits those farmers the same way it hits the environment.
So many of these easements, people will be very willing to offer up for the environmental and agricultural benefits they get from the extra water. 
JOURNALIST: Minister  -  the Premier  -  you heard him declare victory there for his public campaign, if the State Government has been successful in its public campaign, does that mean the Federal Government has bowed to political pressure in making this decision? 
I think it means that we've done it together, but I think the Premier is right to point to the campaigning efforts of people around this state who care about the river.
They've come to Canberra, they've cooked fish for us, to explain to us, to all federal parliamentarians from all political parties what the river means and means to them.
The kids who have been here today have been champion little campaigners, making videos, waving their flags. 
They've also been engaged in their own efforts to help with the health of the river, looking after the turtles and those sorts of efforts.
So what's happened here in South Australia of course has been significant. It's been people standing up and saying they care about this river.
But I think the people who have stood up in South Australia would be the first to say that there are others in other parts of the nation who have been as passionate about this issue as they are.
So, it's a win for South Australia. As the Premier said, it's a win for the nation to get this right. 
JOURNALIST: Premier, can we just ask you, you've spoken a lot about High Court challenges. On the basis of this plan is that off the table now? 
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Well, we've always said that we will do whatever it takes to get a healthy river, and if that meant prosecuting our case legally in the High Court, we never said we would rule that out.
But if we get the plan we need for a healthy river, then of course that won't be necessary, but it may be that others may challenge the plan, and so we may be there defending this plan for a healthy river. So we're just interested in the outcome, but the process is the detail for us. 
JOURNALIST: Just on another issue, Maxine McKew has said today that you were a disloyal deputy. What's your response to that? 
PM: These issues have been well traversed in the past and I'm just not focused on this. 
JOURNALIST: Are you still happy to accept Craig Thomson's vote? 
PM: Craig Thomson as the Member for Dobell is entitled to vote in the federal parliament, so nothing has changed on that.
JOURNALIST: So you're quite happy to accept everything he does? 
PM: Well, that's an entirely separate question from the one you first asked me.
The issue about people voting in Federal Parliament has also long been the subject of discussion.
Mr Thomson is entitled to vote on behalf of his community in federal parliament. I've dealt with these issues a million times and there is no change. 
JOURNALIST: Did you show internal polling to a senior member-
PM: Look, all of these issues have been dealt with. 
JOURNALIST: Can you rule that out?
PM: I've actually dealt with all of these issues before. I'm on the public record and I just refer you to that. I haven't got anything further to add.
JOURNALIST: To answer the question-
PM: Have a look at everything that's on the record and you will get the answer.
JOURNALIST: The Chief of Army David Morrison is going to publicly rail against budget cuts to the army. What's your response to that course of action? 
PM: The Chief of Army is entitled to raise any issue he wants to in the public domain. The Government has spent $1.7 billion on force protection measures for our troops.
I've been over to visit the troops in Afghanistan very recently and spoken to them about the force protection measures that we've made available.
And Afghanistan is a dangerous place, and there are still risks; risks that cost lives, and we know that with the loss very recently of Scott Smith who is from this State.
So there are risks, but in terms of force protection, what can be done to assist our troops?
When I spoke to them, they were satisfied with the force protection measures that have been made available, and we will always do what is necessary to give our troops the maximum safety as they go about difficult and dangerous work. 
Now, let's be common sense about it. It doesn't eliminate risk when you're fighting an insurgency and there are IEDs and there are insider attacks.
It doesn't re-eliminate risk, but we provided the best force protection measures we can and we've certainly adopted every force protection measure that has been recommended to us by the hierarchy of Defence
JOURNALIST:  The Nauruan Government, are they being opportunistic by charging thousands of dollars through visa fees?
PM: We'll keep working with the Nauruan Government on the offshore processing arrangements that were announced a while back.
Thank you very much. 


Adelaide
I'm here to really offer my congratulations to Adrian, to Ben and to Richard for what they've achieved here. And I'm very proud to be able to do it in my home state.
This is the place I grew up. This is the place that my mother spent quite a lot of time yelling at me to turn lights off that shouldn't be on. Telling me, “you weren't born in a tent”, as her way of – you recognise that one? “She's the cat's mother” would have been up there with her other favourite sayings I think.
But you weren't born in a tent so shut the door, keep either the heat in or the cool in because she was very focused on making sure that we saved electricity and we saved power.
It wasn't just electricity that she was talking about, she brought her great thrift from the United Kingdom with her into Australia and she didn't want to see us waste money. And here we are all these years later, and we're focusing on electricity for a different reason.
Yes we're focusing on it because families still worry about the family power bills – and I'm sure that there are plenty of parents who are saying to their kids not only turn the light off, but what's the computer still doing on and why is games console still plugged in, and the list goes on and on.
But we're talking about the way in which we generate energy for another reason and that is because of our need to combat climate change and reduce the amount of carbon pollution in our atmosphere.
So it's great to be here at a business that has had the foresight to forge ahead and to bust two big myths that I think are unfortunately too common to our national debate.
Myth number one: that there's really nothing that we can do in the face of climate change; that there's no action that we can take.
Well we can act and we have acted as a nation by putting a price on carbon and consequently forever changing the economic equation about where we get our power from.
And that means having changed that economic equation, that there are plenty of opportunities for clean energy businesses to come along and to fill that growing need. And here we are today at Tindo Solar, one of those great businesses.
And the other myth that's been busted is that we are a country that can't manufacture anymore. That can't see new manufacturing enterprises; that we can't compete. And yes, competing is tough and it's hard and we are never going to roll out manufacturing the way countries with a lower cost environment roll it out.
We are never going to win a race with China or India or Indonesia on wages. We can't do it and we wouldn't want to do it because our future as a nation isn't going to be going to the bottom in terms of a race on wages. It's going to be forging our future as a high skill, high wage, high innovation economy.
And the innovations here speak for themselves. You see being done here through advanced robotics what in other nations would still be done by a factory of people by hand. And it's because of that degree of innovation that you can see us being able to compete with those other nations.
Now I've taken on board the words about the trade equation and some issues about dumping and I can assure you that as a Government we are continuing to focus on what should be the trading rules that make the trading system work properly. So that's not about protectionism, but it's about the global rules system for trading and making sure that there is no unfair advantages taken. So I've certainly taken those words on board.
But standing here we can really say this is a business that is going to make a contribution for the future. I know that you are looking to quadruple over the next 12 months, having made such a good start, and I certainly wish you well with that.
And I wish everybody in the business well as you go about that challenge. It takes a degree of courage to start a business like this. It takes a lot of hard work to keep it running. It takes an eye for continuous improvement so that you can see the growth and harvest the rewards. And I know here in this business you are doing all of those things.
Today in South Australia I feel like the Premier and I are working together and speaking about two of the great environmental challenges of our age. One is climate change, and a bit later today we will be talking about that great environmental challenge of water, and the River Murray.
It's nice to be able to start the day therefore in an audience with some children in it, not the world's youngest workers as I found out as I met the children. Certainly kids who are going to have to do a bit of homework on the weekend to make up for a day off school – I've seen a frown there – you didn't do any extra homework on the weekend? I can kind of understand that.
But when we're thinking about these great environmental challenges and how we work to address them, really it is about the kids who are here today. The kids of our nation and the kids of the world, and because of how long term these challenges are it's about the generation that follows them, and the generation that follows them.
So it's great that being here, declaring Tindo Solar formally open, that we are not only surrounded by management and the workforce, but also the families, the children who have all come together to make this a very special business venture.
So without further ado, I would like to declare Tindo Solar formally open and we will now do what is always the truly terrifying thing which is to see if we can get the plaque unveiled.


Adelaide
The Gillard Labor Government will today announce a landmark step in the plan to return the Murray-Darling Basin to health.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Water Minister Tony Burke will today visit the Coorong, Lower Lakes and Murray mouth region in South Australia, where they will announce that the Government will deliver an additional 450GL of water to achieve greater environmental outcomes to the Basin through water recovery projects that minimise the impact on communities.
The additional environmental water will benefit major wetlands across the Basin and the lower lakes in South Australia and help ensure the system never again goes into a period of drought lacking the resilience it needs to survive.
Recent modelling showed these environmental outcomes can be achieved with the return of 3200GL to the Murray. Today's announcement, together with real time management, reflects the Government's determination to achieve these environmental outcomes.
The modelling, released by the Murray-Darling Basin Authority earlier this month, showed that through a combination of relaxing capacity constraints and providing an additional 450GL of water above the 2750GL described in the plan, we can deliver better environmental outcomes for the basin.
The Gillard Government has today resolved to provide $1.77 billion over ten years from 2014 to relax key operating constraints and allow an additional 450GL of environmental water to be obtained through projects to ensure there is no social and economic downside for communities.
The Gillard Government is committed to reform for the Murray-Darling Basin that restores our rivers to health, supports strong regional communities and ensures sustainable food production.
That's why we will invest primarily in on-farm efficiency works that generate water savings for the environment and other projects as agreed by states.
Implementation of the Plan will be an historic event for water reform in Australia and provide greater certainty for future water availability ensuring all those dependant on a sustainable river system can face the future with greater confidence.
This announcement represents a critical stage in the development of the Basin Plan which is on track to be finalised before the end of the year.
Of the extra funding, $200 million will be used to remove constraints such as low lying bridges and undersized dam outlets that currently limit both the volume of water that can flow through river systems and the environmental uses to which it can be put. 
The extra funding will be secured through a special account and advance appropriation of future funds to ensure its availability through to 2024 by which time the additional water will have been recovered. 
Legislation to establish the special account and advance appropriation is expected to be introduced into Parliament before the end of the year.
The Gillard Government is also working with the South Australian Government to provide funding to support environmental infrastructure and remedial works, and to assist South Australian irrigators to diversify and secure their economic future.  Further details of these initiatives will be released as they are finalised.
The Gillard Government continues to work towards a genuine consensus with Basin states on the final elements of the Basin Plan and Minister Burke will fully consult with the Basin States before presenting the final plan to Parliament.
Funding for today's announcement, and these further proposals, will be met from within existing resources and from funds set aside in the recent Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.


Adelaide
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
It really is good to be back. Back here in this State with such a proud progressive tradition and such a great Labor government.
Hiring 700 extra teachers.  Investing $900 million in healthcare.
And under Labor, South Australia has found room in a tight budget for priorities we all believe in and share.
You've said ‘yes' to a national plan for school improvement. And you've said ‘yes' to a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Jay, leading your Labor Government is leading a Government that is fighting for the people of South Australia every day. And it is a Government that we will fight to see the re-election of in 2014.
It's good to be back here amongst friends. Can I acknowledge your State President, Matt Pinnegar. State Secretary, Reggie Martin. Ministers and Parliamentary colleagues. Thank you all for being here today. A roomful of true believers. Keepers of the faith, every one.
Most of all, it's great to be back in the city that made me who I am. The city where my father first taught me to stand up for what is right.
Where some wonderful teachers gave me lessons I've carried throughout my life. This place of incredible leaders who inspired a young woman growing up with high hopes for the future. Leaders like Doug Nichols, Roma Mitchell, Len King, Mick Young and Don Dunstan. A great South Australian track record.
From their wonderful examples I absorbed lessons about progress in society. And about what optimism and resolve is needed to achieve progress.
For those of us in the Labor family, that optimism and that resolve leads us to find our “to-do list” in the “too hard basket”. Where the big decisions sit, where the big problems have been left for someone else to solve.
Throughout Australian history, that someone else, the people who get things done, is always our Party, always Labor. 
And in 2012, it's up to Labor once again.
No other Party could deliver national high-speed broadband. We're getting it done.
No other Party could deliver for this nation a clean energy future. We're getting it done.
No other Party could deliver a national plan for school improvement, or the first full reform of school funding in forty years. We're getting it done.
No other Party could conceive of, let alone deliver, a National Disability Insurance Scheme. We're getting it done.
And friends  -  no other Party could deliver the Murray Darling Basin Plan. Our Party in Government will get it done.
I know nothing is more important to South Australia than the waters of the Murray. Everyone who grows up here knows this, everyone who lives here knows what the Murray means to us.
I know how the people of Adelaide feel about being at the end of the Murray-Darling system. I grew up here listening to all of the jokes about Adelaide water whenever you travelled interstate. I know what that is like. I know what it's like to worry about the waters of the River Murray during drought. I've lived here during drought; I know how the people of Adelaide feel. The waters of our great river, which nourish and feed our great nation, must be shared all the way down the stream.
And as Prime Minister, I've brought that understanding of this city and this state to this great national task. I've been out to the Coorong and the Lower Lakes and I've seen the environment in crisis.
I've put out a hand of co-operation to the Premiers of the basin states. And I've lent an ear to their advocacy for their legitimate interests.
I know South Australia is not asking for rivers of gold. You're just asking for a river that flows, and that's not too much to ask.
And Delegates, I want you to know today  -  your State Government has been a strong and powerful voice for you.
Both our Governments want a Basin Plan that delivers a healthy River Murray. Both our Governments want decisions that are based on sound science. Above all both our Governments want a plan for the River's future that is based on the facts. And we have the political will to achieve it.
The facts show us what to do. The will to get it done is what we possess. And these two things have not come together before.  The facts and the will. Not in all the entire 111 years since Federation.
There remains work to do in the coming weeks and months to gain agreement to the Murray Darling Basin Plan.
But you all now know, that yesterday we reached a key milestone.
So I was so proud to go to Goolwa yesterday. To stand alongside your Premier to announce new measures to ensure South Australia will get the water South Australia needs.
And that is thanks to new scientific modelling that we've been able to understand what it is that South Australia needs. We now understand the environmental outcomes that can be achieved with 3,200 gigalitres being returned to the Murray.
By relaxing capacity constraints and providing an additional 450 gigalitres  -  that is, above the 2,750 described in the plan  -  we know by doing that we can deliver better environmental outcomes.
The water outcomes South Australians have sought for decades can be achieved. More water in the Lower Lakes; more water for our wetlands and our River Red Gums; more productive soils with less salinity; and more days when the mouth of the Murray can be open at the sea.
And we can deliver these outcomes in a way which gets the balance right. We'll achieve it, in the main, by investing in infrastructure, preventing water wastage and cutting river management red tape.
This change requires investment.
And infrastructure-based solutions come at a greater direct cost than water buybacks  -  that's widely understood. To protect this vital investment in our nation, the Commonwealth will put our funding in a new Water for the Environment Special Account  -  a locked box for the river's future.
Doing it this way, we can ensure South Australia gets the water it needs  -  and we can ensure more.
I know you have not just campaigned hard for what is fair for your state. You have campaigned hard for what is in the national interest. This is not just a plan for a fair share of the water here, it is a plan for the smart use of the water everywhere.
By focusing on that national interest, we can ensure the Murray - Darling Basin remains the foodbowl of Australia, as it is now.
We can deliver new infrastructure for the future of regional communities.
And we can secure the food and fibre industries which will be vital to our prosperity in this Asian Century of change.
This is the right outcome for this great state. It is the right policy for our nation. And it is the kind of decision which only Labor ever makes.
Nation-building.
Planning for the future.
Working together for progress.
The Murray-Darling has been a test of Australian governments for more than a century now. It is a test your State and Federal Governments are ready to pass. Now it will become a test for the conservative Opposition too.
This is no time for aggressive negativity. The Murray matters too much, the national interest matters too much.
This is no time for political blood in the water. This is a time to sign up to a plan for the future.
We know the Federal conservatives have turned their back on South Australia before.
When they promised to turn off the construction of the submarines here. When they promised to rip out support to manufacturing jobs. All so vital to your state's high-wage, high-skill economic future.
When they promised to dig up the NBN. The NBN has been connected in Willunga. It's being rolled-out in Seaford/McLaren Vale, Aldinga, Modbury, Port Augusta, Victor Harbour, Port Elliot, Prospect, Strathalbyn, Stirling and Yankalilla  -  with the rest of the state to come. The lifeline of the digital economy, and they want to pull it out of the ground.
In many areas of our national life, the truth is the conservatives always choose negativity and destruction rather than building for the future. The Liberals just won't help build for the future.
On water, time is running out for the Opposition to put the nation first and do the right thing.
We know what they say about the Murray when they're upstream. We know what they say about the Murray when they're downstream. We know their key lines change whenever they cross a state border.
What matters now is what their Leader does.
I call on the Opposition now to do the right thing by the country.
Mr No should say yes to our plan for more water in the Murray.
You know the people of South Australia and the nation are looking for him to say yes and to say it very clearly today. The facts are on our side. Australians look at the closed mouth of the Murray and we know we can make it flow.
Australians look at the 400,000 people living with disability and we know we can help.
We look at the 500,000 children scoring below the national benchmarks in literacy and numeracy, and we know we can act.
We look at suburbs and towns stuck with slow, unreliable broadband and we know we can invest.
The facts are on our side in all the big decisions, on our side in water policy, on our side in the big national debates.
And when you hear the economy is anything but strong, remember; the facts are on our side.
Australia stands tall. 21 years of economic growth. 51st in world population, 12th in world in national wealth. New business investment at a 40-year high  -  over 17 per cent of GDP. AAA ratings from all three credit rating agencies. Federal government outlays at or below 24 per cent of GDP through our Budget forward estimates  -  the longest sustained period since the early 1980s.
Eight hundred thousand jobs created.
And official interest rates at 3.25 per cent. Lower than on any day in the eleven years of the last Liberal Government. Those numbers mean real benefits for Australian families. Take interest rates. The average family with a $300,000 mortgage is around $4,500 a year better off because of where interest rates are now.
All of these facts mean our nation is strong. And our strength means our nation has an opportunity in the years ahead.
Our nation is changing. The world around us is changing. This is a time when true security lies in building on our strengths, in building for our future, in shaping our own destiny, not just drifting with the tides. This is a time when great national goals can only be delivered with a real national plan.
The Australian people know it.
This is a time which calls for nation-building, and so this is a time which calls for Labor.
We are the only ones who will get it done.  The only Party with the courage and the optimism to build the future. The only Party who believes in building a future that can be fairly shared by all of us.
The only Party with a clear plan to deliver that future for South Australians; for the nation.


Sydney
PM: Today I have delivered a plan for Australia to be the winner in this Asian century. The region in which we live is transforming. It is on track to be the biggest economic region in the world.
What that means is that Australia has unprecedented opportunities in this Asian century of growth and change.
We've already seen the first down-payment in our economy through the demand for our raw materials. It is prudent to get ready for what Asia will demand from us next, what Asians will next want to buy from our nation.
As Asia changes, as it becomes home to the world's biggest middle class, then it will want to buy the things that Australia has to sell. Whether it's high quality food, top end tourism, international education, elaborately transformed manufactures, and the list goes on.
The White Paper I delivered today is a plan for Australia to be the winner in this Asian century. What that means for our economy is that we need to keep our economy strong and more engaged with Asia.
What that means for the people of Australia is we need to keep boosting skill levels and the ability to engage with Asia. For our young Australians it particularly means that they can look forward to a future of diverse and high-quality careers.
And for our business community it means assisting them to seize the business opportunities that come with this century of change and growth.
Put simply, this means higher skills, higher incomes and more job opportunities for Australians.
It means that we are aiming to see a growth in national income for Australians, putting our country in the top 10 in the world, and by 2025 seeing an average increase in incomes of $11,000.
We have been working to get our nation ready for this century of change. The White Paper brings together these policy directions and adds to them. It's a policy paper, not just for government, but for our whole nation.
I want it to guide debate and decision-making. Not only in the governments of our nation, but around the board tables of our biggest businesses. Around the decision-making tables of our universities and education institutions. In our media organisations as they make selections about what to report and highlight. In civil society and in our trade union movement.
I'm very pleased to be here today and the Lowy Institute to deliver this White Paper. I thank them for the hospitality they've shown us and I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Do you (inaudible) to 2025, from what I can see one of the key announcements is increase in income and also the one-third of board members having a knowledge of Asian society. What are the benchmarks over the next 13 years? Do you have an aim for the next five years, 10 years and then? Or is it just over (inaudible)?
PM: At every stage we have set goals for 2025, but in order to get there we are going to have to see change start and change continue. Looking at the lift in national income that I'm speaking of, that will require us to lift productivity over a business as usual case.
In order to have our board rooms of Australia including people with a deep knowledge of Asia, we'd have to start planning for that now; identifying the capabilities, identifying the way of training people in those capabilities.
Of the announcements that I've made today, one of them is 12,000 Asian century scholarships. That's about exchanges between Asia and Australia, people coming from Asia to study here, people from Australia getting the opportunity to study in Asia.
Of the announcements I've made today, it's giving every child access to studying an Asian language at school. These are the things that will build the capabilities that enable us to realise this full vision.
JOURNALIST: Given that Australia is now on the UN Security Council, and you have released the White Paper, what do you think Australia's future engagement with Iran should be, particularly over its nuclear program? And my second question is given that over the past couple of weeks we've had the recent debate regarding sexism in Australian politics and of course your speech you gave in the parliament, what do you think it the best way to keep out sexism in Australian politics?
PM: Well, two questions not on the Asian Century White Paper, but I'll answer both of them briefly.
As I said at the time that I spoke about our successful bid to be on the Security Council, one of the things that we will focus on is the issue of nuclear capability and Iran. We do not believe that Iran should have a nuclear capability. We are involved in a sanctions program now, as are nations around the world. And we will focus on getting the Security Council  -  on Iran and the region, the Middle East  -  stepping away from that threat.
On sexism in politics, or sexism anywhere, in order to combat sexism what we've got to do is have the ability for men and women to be treated equally, it's as simple as that.
JOURNALIST: If you look at the policy aspects, obviously the benchmarks are very ambitious. In terms of policy, a lot of it seems to be a continuation of existing policy. Looking at the economy, to what extent have we got new economic policy here?
PM: The White Paper brings together policy directions that the Government has already embarked on, and adds to those policy directions. So yes, to be ready for this century of growth and change, we do need to seize clean energy sources. We do need to have the National Broadband Network and the ability to move information quickly around the nation and between our nation and the region in which we live.
We do need the human capital revolution that I have been guiding, focus on making sure that at every level we are better educating our people. Whether that's our smallest kids who are in preschool, or whether that's the ability for people to succeed at university or in higher levels of research.
These are things that assist with our capability to navigate this century and to end up being a winner in it.
But I've announced today a set of changes that work with what we have already begun, very focused on Asia capability so that these changes can be used to drive our economic footprint in the region in which we live.
JOURNALIST: You've set here some very long-term goals about Australia's engagement with Asia. What are you going to do to encourage bipartisan consensus around this  -  this has been a very divided time in Australian politics over the last few years. For instance, Mr Abbott has talked about abandoning the NBN and you've presented that in this paper as being central to Australia's engagement with Asia. So what will you be doing to try and bring the Coalition on board with your vision?
PM: My job as the nation's Prime Minister is to articulate a plan for the future and to lead its implementation. That's what I am doing today and that's what I will intend to do.
My job is to chart the course for a stronger and fairer future. That's what this plan does. And then my job is day-by-day to set about implementing it.
For others who participate in the political process, then they can speak for themselves.
JOURNALIST: Your announcements today are across almost every single portfolio area you have. Kevin Rudd is a member of your team. He's well known and famously speaks Mandarin. Why isn't he part of your announcement today?
PM: Kevin Rudd has made a contribution to the things that are discussed in the White Paper, both as Prime Minister and as Foreign Minister he made a strong contribution to a number of things that are dealt with in the White Paper.
For example, achieving what we have through the architecture of the East Asia Summit. A huge tribute to Kevin Rudd and dealt with in the White Paper. I will see every member of my team engaged in the delivery of the work of this White Paper. But Kevin, as Prime Minister and as Minister for Foreign Affairs, has made a very important contribution to our nation's outlook to the region.
Every member of my Labor team will be engaged in delivering this process.
JOURNALIST: He's written that he felt betrayed by you in relation to the coup. Did you betray him?
PM: I'm not focused on any of that today. I'm focused on a plan for our nation's future.
JOURNALIST: In relation to schools, you've got some details here about schools policy and one of the provisions is that all schools will engage with at least one school in Asia, which seems to be a pretty sweeping change from where we are now. What sort of engagement would that be and how would that work?
PM: It's a growth  -  rapid growth of a development that is already out there now. I've been in places in the region where I've been beamed back into a classroom in Australia where that school has a partnership with where I've been standing. For example, when I visited South Korea I did that.
Now it's fantastic because for young people particularly  -  not wanting to make any references about the age of you or me Paul, I don't mean that  -  for young people particularly, using this medium, all of the connections that new technology brings is not second nature to them, it's deep within them.
They intuitively understand every bit of it. So if you build a connection between a school here and a school somewhere in the region, then the students will actually build quality people-to-people links.
It's not like the old day of getting an aerogram and shoving it in the post and waiting for a long time to get the message back, it's instantaneous. So the engagement can be deep.
I've seen the ability of that to inspire young Australians to study an Asian language, to want to travel to that country, to go there and meet the mates that they have met through this school-to-school program. And then perhaps to understand for themselves the economic opportunities that can come from thinking about that country and how you could have a job that took you there, or engage with that country.
I want to see that for every Australian child in every Australian school as part of our national school improvement plan.
JOURNALIST: Does every Australian child want to learn an Asian language? At the moment there is a serious decline in Asian languages in schools. Are there going to be the teachers to provide this continuous access that you are talking about, and the engagement from students who want to learn?
PM: Getting students engaged in learning languages, getting the teaching capability, rolling it out, isn't easy. I've got direct experience of this as Minister for Education. It's going to be made a lot easier by the National Broadband Network where instead of having in every school someone with every language facility, you can get kids to study a language, even though their teacher is in another part of Australia.
So this gives us a huge capability we haven't had in the past, to use our teaching workforce and to actually use their capabilities to spread language studies across Australia.
Will kids want to do it? Well partly that's up to us and how inspiring we are about the opportunities that this will give them as adults in their future life.
If I'm here as Prime Minister saying this is the century you will live in, if their teachers are saying to them, this is the world you will seek a job in, if their parents are saying to them, for you in the future a fantastic career opportunity will arise from studying that language, from getting that understanding of the countries of our region and the region in which we live, then I think we will motivate and inspire young people.
But that's a job for all of us  -  our friends from the media  -  as much as a job for me as Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: The report says that if we continue as business as usual wages will be about $69,000 and the difference between continuing business as usual and fostering the Asian century is about $4,000. Do you think the Australian public perhaps might be hoping to get more money considering we are in the region? And how much did the report cost?
PM: I think you will find the statistics are; if we hit our goal of being in the top 10 of economies in the world by 2025, then the average income growth is $11,000 for each Australian.
Let's be proud of what we have achieved so far. We are 51st when it comes to population size, and we have moved from 15th to 12th when it comes to the size of our economy. We should be proud of that, Australians have worked hard to get us there.
In terms of the costing of the report, I'm happy to get someone to supply you with that figure. But nations prosper when they plan. You don't just drift towards your future and say, gee that will be good enough, that will be alright. I suspect you don't do that in your own life. And I am not prepared to see us do that in the life of our nation.
And so every dollar has been well spent in generating a national plan for the nation's future.
JOURNALIST: In terms of the funding for language training, Australia (inaudible). Is there going to be any allocations specifically for language training? And second, you are asking or hoping Australian society changes (inaudible) how do you measure when that has happened?
PM: We've got various measurements that we've set in our goals. Whether it be the number of people with a deep understanding of the region on boards. Whether it be the access for Australian students in schools studying Asian languages. So we've set ourselves some clear benchmarks and targets.
But to answer your question more broadly, I believe as a nation, people do understand that we live in a changing region. And I think people do get it, that that change has meant huge demand for our resources.
But people often ask themselves the question, what next? And this plan charts what next. This plan tells you about the growth in the middle class in Asia.
I spoke in my speech how many Australians  -  myself included  -  grew up with a perception of Asia as a place of poverty, as a place of low wages, and so all of your thinking about your economic model was that we couldn't compete because they would always bust us on cost.
They would always be able to beat us on cost.
We live in a different age. Asia will be home to more middle class consumers than anywhere else on the planet. That means that in our economy, the things that we are good at doing, if we build on those strengths we can seize that opportunity.
We are uniquely placed with our power of adjacency to this growth region in the world, that is the opportunity that this national plan is about seizing.
JOURNALIST: And costing Prime Minister?
PM: And costing  -  we are doing something far more systemic than layering an Asian languages program on top of what happens in schools. We are going to make our national school funding reforms contingent on this goal of Asian languages.
To use the public policy language you're familiar with, the school funding reforms that we are talking about arising following the report of David Gonski. We will make money available through those reforms contingent on achieving this change for the study of Asian languages.
JOURNALIST: In terms of having a greater degree of Asia-literacy in the boardrooms of our major companies, when you talk about 2025, you are clearly talking about executives who are already in the workforce who have already gone through university. What can the government actually do in a policy sense to guide that, given they are not going to be able to go through this new education system?
PM: I think we can do a few things and one of them is set the aspiration and explain why it's I important. I think there would be many in middle management who aspiring over time to be CEOs and then aspiring to be on boards, who would be thinking to themselves, a smart thing to do would be to make myself capable in the region in which I live.
In the same way in which people position to be on boards by making sure that they have got the requisite skills in financial oversight and management. This will become one of the requisite skills that people are looking for.
People are very adaptable and very adept at responding to signals that are sent about advancement. I'm asking the boardrooms of our country to send a very clear signal; if you want to join us in this boardroom tomorrow, then you will have to bring something that perhaps we haven't got enough of now, and that is the ability to move with capability through the region and to understand it's economic potentials.
JOURNALIST: In a policy sense does that involve university courses, does it involve Asian languages?
PM: We have put universities on a path for growth. There has never been more money in universities than there is today. And we don't micromanage universities anymore, they respond to student preference and demand.
If students demand it, universities will do it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) legislation go through parliament to get some of the changes through. Have you spoken to the crossbenchers about this and are you confident there will be support in the chamber?
PM: I'm outlining the national plan today, others can speak for themselves.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask about the way in which this report will be interpreted in the region itself. Labor put out another White Paper, a Defence White Paper only a couple of years ago and its subtitle was Australia in the Asia-Pacific Century  -  Pacific of course includes the west coast of the United States. Should we interpret too much about the fact that the Pacific has now been dropped from the Asian century  -  is that a signal you are sending to the region?
PM: In this paper we are focusing on the huge economic transformations happening in our region. So we are not focusing on the mature economy of the United States. We are focusing on the huge transformations happening in our region, hence the title.
In terms of liaison with countries in the region and more broadly, through our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade personnel we are ensuring that the countries of our region and beyond are briefed on the contents of the White Paper.
JOURNALIST: There was mention that the two biggest leadership changes coming up are the US and in China. We know very little about what is going on in Beijing. Could you perhaps say how (inaudible)?
PM: All of these issues day-to-day the Minister for Foreign Affairs responds to, so I'm not intending to respond on the question of Falun Gong or any other issues like that today.
Clearly, what happens in the transition in the leadership in China is tremendously important to our nation and that's the point I made in the speech. And I made that point in the speech because I did want our nation to be thinking about the way in which we get information and where we focus to get that information from.
How is it that as a general population we tool up, if you like, on what is happening in our region, how can we be more adept at getting that information and using it. That's one of the things I want people to be talking about, arising out of the White Paper.
JOURNALIST: Just on a state issue, Alex Greenwich, a prominent same-sex marriage advocate has been elected to the NSW Parliament and he intends to continue to push for marriage equality. Do you welcome that, and also the maintenance of an independent voice in Sydney?
PM: All of these are questions for the people of Sydney.
JOURNALIST: On the White Paper then, you haven't said too much about Australia's population compared to India and China. Is it time to perhaps re-embrace the idea of a big Australia?
PM:For population, the projections we have are the projections in the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook, so there's nothing about the White Paper that changes that.
On the question of sustainability, in the sense of how do we meet people's needs in the suburbs and towns of Australia, for the infrastructure and the kind of lifestyle they want, I think that there are a few things in government policy and a few issues in the White Paper to think about in that area.
We have of course embarked on some sustainable Australia policies that Minister Burke has overseen. We have talked about the way in which economic opportunity and opportunity for services will be expanded around the nation as a result of the National Broadband Network.
Some of the things that have kept people from making the choice to take their family to regional Australia for example, will be taken away by broadband being around the nation.
And the White Paper itself, in talking about the huge opportunities that lie in front of our food industry, is sending a huge message to regional Australia about a forthcoming boom. The Minister for Trade who is here has talked about that as a boom like the resources boom.
The rising middle class of Asia, more middle class people than there are anywhere else on earth will want access to clean food, high-quality food, high-quality wine, the same way that way we do.
This is a huge opportunity for regional Australia and one we want people out there ready to seize.
Okay, thank you very much.


Sydney
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today released the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper, a roadmap showing how Australia can be a winner in the Asian century.
The White Paper lays out an ambitious plan to ensure Australia will emerge stronger over the decades ahead, by taking advantage of the opportunities offered by the Asian century.
In this century, the region in which we live will become home to most of the world's middle class and will be the world's largest producer of goods and services, and the largest consumer of them.
The scale and pace of Asia's rise is staggering, and there are significant opportunities and challenges for all Australians.
It is not enough to rely on luck—our future will be determined by the choices we make and how we engage with the region we live in. We must build on our strengths and take active steps to shape our future.
The White Paper sets out a number of targets for our country over the next 13 years to 2025 to ensure Australia can fulfil its ambitions and compete effectively within Asia, including:
·         By 2025, Australia's GDP per person will be in the world's top 10, up from 13th in 2011, requiring a lift in our productivity.
·         This will mean Australia's average real national income will be about
$73,000 per person in 2025 compared with about $62,000 in 2012.
·         By 2025, our school system will be in the top five in the world, and 10 of our universities in the world's top 100.
·         Globally we will be ranked in the top 5 countries for ease of doing business and our innovation system will be in the world's top 10.
·         Studies of Asia will be a core part of the Australian school curriculum.
·         All students will have continuous access to a priority Asian language—Chinese (Mandarin), Hindi, Indonesian and Japanese.
·         Our leaders will be more Asia literate, with one-third of board members of Australia's top 200 publicly listed companies and Commonwealth bodies having deep experience in and knowledge of Asia.
·         Our economy will be deeply integrated; our trade links with Asia will be at least one-third of GDP, up from one-quarter today.
·         Our diplomatic network will have a larger footprint across Asia supporting stronger, deeper and broader links with Asian nations.
The White Paper sets out a comprehensive agenda for making the most of the opportunities ahead. It considers how Australia will successfully navigate the years ahead across five areas: strengthening our economy; building our capabilities; connecting to growing markets; ensuring sustainable security; and nurturing deeper and broader relationships.
It sets out what actions can be taken by governments, and also calls on businesses and communities to play their part in shaping our future.
By 2025, this means real change for Australians.
Children in kindergarten now will graduate from high school with a sound working knowledge of Asia because, throughout their schooling, the curriculum will have included studies relevant to Asia and access to a priority Asian language.
Work and holiday agreements between Australia and its neighbours in Asia will mean more opportunity for work and study in the region and to take up professional opportunities as they emerge.
The financial markets will be better integrated and capital will flow more easily across borders for investment, innovation and jobs growth.
Global and regional value chains will be broader and deeper across the region—with opportunities for both small and large businesses.
Explosion in demand for high-quality agricultural products will mean opportunities for our farmers and regional Australia.
More tourists from nations in Asia will choose Australia as a holiday destination and more students from the region will study here in more advanced universities.
The National Broadband Network will reach across Australia giving access to the furthest corners of the region.
Australia will have more comprehensive diplomatic ties with key regional nations—China, India, Indonesia, Japan and South Korea—and will have expanded them with many others, from Mongolia to Vietnam and beyond.
Australia comes to these challenges with firm foundations: a strong economy, a track record of engagement in the region, and the person-to-person connections many Australians already have with people in Asian countries.
The White Paper calls on all of us to play our part in becoming a more Asia-literate and Asia-capable nation.
The Australian Government will play its part in leading our nation to this vision of the future during a time of enormous change. Like past Labor governments, we will manage and shape change with the aim of providing better opportunities for all.
To support the implementation of this ambitious plan for the future, Craig Emerson, Minister for Trade and Competitiveness, will take on the responsibility for assisting the Prime Minister to deliver on the objectives of the White Paper. His new responsibilities, as Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Asian Century Policy, will complement his existing portfolio responsibilities.
Prime Minister Gillard thanked each of the White Paper Task Force and Advisory Panel members, and those organisations and individuals who contributed to the White Paper consultation process, both in Australia and overseas, as she asked for the broader community to consider their part in shaping a shared future.
Copies of the White Paper will be made available online at www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au


Sydney
MICHAEL FULLILOVE: You have travelled extensively as Prime Minister to China, India, Indonesia and Japan and South Korea. What are the signals you have picked up personally that the Asian century is upon us?
What impresses you in China and Indonesia and India about the rising Asia?
PM: Well if I can share some impressions that I've had the privilege to gather myself and also to witness in eyes of others as I've travelled, perhaps one of the most startling: I went to Korea with some of our veterans who had fought there in the Korean War. Some of them had made Korea a passion and they've been back there many times.
But for many of them, it was the first time they had returned to Korea since they walked out of the battlefield 60 years ago. And to be with them, as they went around the city of Seoul, that told you the story of Asia's rise and where we are going to get to next.
They had literally walked out of blood-soaked battlefields and they come back to what one of the truly great cities of the world in my view, so, a very sharp impression.
In China, the impression I always have as I go around is that the noise you can hear around you is the noise of new buildings rising out of the ground  -  it seems to happen that quickly.
In India, the impression I always have is one of youth. I think the mean age is 25 or 26 and it's an incredibly young country and you feel that sense of youth and energy as you move around.
In Indonesia I am always heartened by what I think of as a modern miracle. I went as a young parliamentarian to be an election monitor in the first free and fair elections in Indonesia. I was moderately resentful in the sense that other people got to go to Lombok  -  I went to West Timor  -  so it wasn't exactly the same experience as others had.
But I remember that first election and the villagers gathering and voting, and now we've got this vibrant, liberal democracy.
At the UN, amongst other things during Leaders' Week, I appeared on a platform with the President of Indonesia and with Prime Minister Gusmao. If anybody had told you that was going to be possible several years ago  -  an Australian Prime Minister, a Timor-Leste Prime Minister, a President of Indonesia, exchanging not just pleasantries but warm words about each other sitting at a platform at the UN  -  people would have said that's not possible.
This is the change that's all around us and this is the change we are surveying for this national plan for the nation's future.
QUESTION: In the White Paper, your Government's intention to keep the mutual political trust and confidence is very clearly stated. I'd like to ask what will be the Government's (inaudible) measures towards building this trust with one of Australia's key partners; China?
PM: I'm happy that you've asked that question because it gives me an opportunity to address what I think is some of the simplistic critique and some of the very childish-style analysis that we see in the media.
We are deeply engaged with China at every level. We are engaged politically. There are strong business-to-business links. We are engaged with military-to-military links. We are engaged through education links, including with our great universities partnering in China.
Indeed, if you get a grid, and I've seen this done, if you get a map of our research relationships and how they've changed over the last 30 or 40 years, when you first look at the map all of the dots are going from here to Europe or from here to the US. And then over the time sequence, they start driving into Asia and particularly into China. So we are engaged in every way.
Of course we have got to keep building on that engagement that is a focus of the White Paper. We have to keep investing in the regional architecture which is helping build habits of cooperation and trust as the norm, and the East Asia Summit is pivotal in that regard.
Other institutions will continue to serve us well like APEC, but we believe the East Asia Summit is the right body with the right membership, with the expanded mandate to help reinforce these habits of trust and cooperation.
So you will see, in the White Paper, our intention over time to expand our diplomatic foot print, our intention to continue to engage strongly bilaterally and in these multilateral regional forums.
QUESTION: The paper presents some very inspirational and inspiring calls for Australia, that they mostly demand that we redraw and continue our practices, our perceptions here in Australia. What do you see as some of our biggest investment challenges?
PM: The White Paper is meant to address at every level for Australian society our need to more deeply engage. But if I could make some comment s in answer to your question, I believe it's important we as a government get what we do right, to build on the down payments we've already put in place for us to thrive and prosper in this Asian century of change and growth.
The big reforms that we've driven, from seizing a clean energy future, through to rolling out the National Broadband Network, through to the human capital agenda that we are building at every level from early childhood education all the way through to the highest level of research.
But one of the reasons we wanted to put a White Paper out was not just to add more government policy and perceptions to that, but to challenge business, civil society, unions, the media, to think about this at every level too.
I touched on this briefly in the speech. But one thing I'd definitely like to see is if I turn on to the news on one of our big commercial broadcasters, I would like to see the economic correspondent who brings us the news talking as routinely about the economic circumstances in Indonesia or Japan or Vietnam or Korea or what's happening in the Philippines. Talking about that as routinely as we get the news out of Washington, out of London, out of Paris, out of Germany, out of Berlin.
You will turn on your TV and yes, there has been a lot of coverage of the Eurozone crisis. We can understand that if that had caused a contagion into the world economy then of course that would've been of significance to all of us.
But I think it is time we asked the question, is the best economic outlook we can get on the world endlessly seeing Chancellor Merkel run in and out of rooms in Europe looking harried and stressed? Or is it getting deeper real-time information about the region we live in?
FULLILOVE: It is striking that there's two massive leadership transformations going on in the next month or two; in the United States and China. We know every detail about the United States down to the marathon time that the Republican candidate for Vice-President did or did not run. We know much less about the people who will make the decisions in Beijing.
Can I ask you a question about our diplomatic network, as you know we have one of the smaller diplomatic networks in the OECD. I know in the paper there is reference to opening new posts in Thailand and eastern Indonesia and Mongolia and so on, when circumstances allow.
How much of a national priority is it for us to bulk up our diplomatic network, especially in Asia?
PM: It is a priority, but in what are fiscally tight times, we need to work through these priorities around the expenditure review committee table where there are lots of difficult conversations had.
And that's why we've expressed it as an aspiration over time. But I do believe that over time our nation needs to be served by a broader diplomatic footprint.
When you say that it probably conjures in people's minds  -  as it should  -  ambassadors doing important government-to-government work, but we've got to remember that our diplomatic footprint also helps with people-to-people links, cultural links and importantly, through the work that Dr Emerson oversees, business-to-business links through Austrade and associated agencies. And that's very, very important to this century of growth for us.
QUESTION: What is your opinion of technology and how it will pave the way for Australia (inaudible)? What is the Government's view on that?
PM: Certainly we have to be connected to the region and connected and moving information around as quickly as everybody else can move it around.
That's why we've been so determined to build the National Broadband Network, because to leave us with the copper wire technology  -  served us well but it's not going to serve the needs of this century  -  which is why fibre to the premises is our vision for the nation's future, and part of integrating into our region.
We've got to remember that for much of the region, we are in the same or very similar time zones and that means business-to-business links. If you can move information more quickly, then you can do everything in real time very quickly. So that's important to us.
But yes, there are security considerations and there's intellectual property protection where people rightly fear that in some other nations  -  not our nation but in other nations  -  that their intellectual property could be taken and misused.
This is part of what we've got to address as we work through a genuine regional economic integration agenda. It's not just about the old days of talking about trade barriers, though there's still some work to do on that. But it's also talking about market rules and regulations, including appropriate protections so that people can trade and engage with confidence.
FULLILOVE: Thank you PM.
PM: Thank you. 


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
History asks great nations great questions. Australia is no exception.
Through generations, our great nation has been asked great questions  -  and we have answered them.
Could we feed a people on this driest of lands?
Could we unite a nation on a continent without the pressures of revolution or war?
Could we carry our weight in the world and fight for the freedom of our friends?
Could we defend ourselves in our greatest hour of need?
Could we rebuild after decades of Depression and War?
Could we embrace change and find new sources of wealth in demanding new times?
Could we say Sorry?
You see the answer in the nation around you:  We got it done.
This is a hard place and we're not angels or saints: the big things are never easy and we don't get everything right.
But we stand today, a proud people in a free land. 51st in global population  -  12th in global wealth  -  one of the most equal economies and mobile societies in the world. 
Respected by our oldest friends in the world  -  welcomed by our newest friends in the region.
But history is calling to us again  -  today, history asks us another great question.
Can Australia be a winner in this Asian Century of change and growth?
Today, I launch the plan which answers this question. 
Today, I launch the Government's White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
UNDERSTANDING OUR STRENGTHS
To plan your future, you have to clearly understand who you are today. Put another way: to build on our strengths, we must know our strengths.
Thirty years ago, there was still a crisis of complacency in Australian public life  -  still a culture of cruise and snooze, still a belief that the world owed us a living.
But today, we don't need a crisis to shake us out of complacency. Quite the contrary.
Despite the strengths our people have built and the confidence they have earned, too often our public debate is marked by an economic cringe.
I am too proud of our nation to let this stand unanswered, to have it wrongly shape our thinking.
We are the nation that deregulated the banks, floated the dollar, introduced enterprise bargaining. We are the nation that had the courage to take what was rigid and brittle and make it agile and strong. We are the nation that stared down the Global Financial Crisis.
We are the nation which has produced twenty one years of economic expansion  -  a generation of economic sunshine.
We are the nation with low inflation, unemployment and interest rates. With strong public finances, triple-A rated.
We are the nation that is now poised to seize a clean energy future, to capture the benefits that flow from ubiquitous broadband, to share the benefits of high profitability in mining, to create a higher skilled workforce.
I am determined that we will be a nation self-confident enough to feel our strengths and wise enough to know we must build on them.
We will embrace change. Not because we face immediate crisis. Not because we are standing on a burning platform.
But because we face unprecedented opportunity. Because we burn with ambition for our nation's future.
That's why I have chosen this moment to lay out a plan for our nation's future, which weaves together the policy approach we have been pursuing in government with new policy directions to create the next chapter in our nation's story.
THE OPPORTUNITY 
Planning for our future not only requires us to understand our strengths, it requires us to understand the scale and nature of the opportunity before us.
While Australia was changing  -  Asia was changing too.
Whatever else this century brings, it will bring Asia's return to global leadership, Asia's rise. This is not only unstoppable, it is gathering pace.
The weight of world's economy is genuinely moving in our direction. When we map the centre of gravity of global consumption we see it is shifting east by more than one hundred miles a year, as demand grows on our side of the world.
By 2025, it will have reached as far as central India. The world economy is coming our way.
We are living through an economic and social transformation on a scale and at a speed which defies comparison.
A new Indonesia, Islamic and democratic  -  a new China, urban and soon ageing  -  a new India, reforming and young.
Above all, a new urban middle class.
Asia will become home to most of the world's middle class by as early as 2025. Not only becoming the world's largest producer of goods and services; becoming the largest consumer of them.
This is good news for Australia and it should drive a profound change in our thinking about our economic relationship with Asia.
Deep in our Australian culture are the assumptions that equate low wages with Asian labour.
Not just in populist politics or at the front bar. These assumptions are never far behind debates about workplace flexibility and international competitiveness either.
In the Asian Century, that changes.
The opportunity which a middle-class urban Asia creates won't fall into our laps. The world will still be a competitive one where we must make our own living and our own way.
But with the right plan, we can make the new middle-class Asia a new market for a high-wage, high-skill Australia.
Think of it this way: back in the 80s Fosters beer tried to get into China. Today it is Grange carrying the flag.
For the first time in our history, Asia is not a threat to our high-skill high-wage road. It is a reason to stay on it.
Our national challenge is to do the things which will ensure that it is Australian products and services  -  Australian workers  -  who get the benefit of this new Asian demand.
A PLAN FOR AUSTRALIA'S FUTURE SUCCESS
Success in this century will be hard fought and hard won. We must have a clear plan to shape our future.
This is the White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
National objectives for 2025, the pathways to get there, across the five key areas where we need to act.
First, economic strength  -  through building a productive and resilient economy.
We will maintain the stable macro-economic framework created after 1983  -  a floating currency, independent monetary policy and strong fiscal rules.
This is the essential platform for the next stage of our economic strategy.
Our national effort will extend our comparative advantage in sectors where Australia already performs well and new markets are emerging.
We will still benefit from Asia's appetite for raw materials and energy. Butbeyond that, we mustbuild greater resilience in the Australian economy.
Strengthening sectors like agriculture, tourism, financial services, health and education, transport and logistics, manufacturing.
Helping Australian firms win work and create jobs here in Australia. Helping them open up new opportunities to export and win business in the region.
Shaping these efforts will be our relentless focus on Labor's five pillars of productivity: education and skills; innovation; infrastructure, tax reform and deregulation.
Tax reforms to create the right incentives to invest in the new capital and research.
Long term planning and partnership for future infrastructure needs, including in those parts of Australia where Asia's rise is driving greatest change, like Darwin.
Greater collaboration between universities and firms, helped by Government, to turn specialist knowledge into commercial advantage.
Shared commitment to developing an 'Asia-capable' workforce.
Our plan is to grow: business innovation, new partnerships, new methods, new practices, new ideas.
Our 2025 goal is to be in the world top five for ease of doing business and the world's top 10 innovation systems.
Second, strong minds  -  an education and skills plan to build capabilities.
More than ever before, it's impossible to maintain a strong economy without a world-class education system.
I am determined that our nation will set high expectations for every student and deliver the support they need to meet them.
Unlike in ages past, we will not settle for a student sitting at the back of the class not learning and then drifting away from school early. 
We can no longer tell ourselves this is all ok because a manual job will materialise for the child who cannot read, write or count. 
Our national passion must be to ensure all students are achieving, not just some. With the nation benefiting from the skills and knowledge of all Australians, and with all Australians getting the opportunity for a life of dignified secure work.
Above all, success for an open Australia in a middle-class Asia starts in the classrooms, training centres and lecture theatres of our nation.  
Where we open minds, not just markets, to our region.
Our plan is to drive excellence, grow equity, get the most out of everyone. 
Our 2025 goal is that our school system is in the top five in the world, 10 of our universities are in the world's top 100.
That every Australian student has continuous access to high-quality education through our national plan for school improvement and that education includes access to Asian language learning.
Third, expanding and integrating regional markets, and building the presence of Australian firms in those markets.
For the whole economy to be as strong as mining and agriculture, the whole economy must be as engaged in the region as mining and agriculture.
Yes, we are actively working to lower trade barriers, particularly at APEC and through comprehensive free trade agreements.
We want capital and ideas to flow more easily across borders for investment, innovation and jobs growth. 
New integration of regional markets is needed but we must aim higher and create new regional business relationships, new models and partnerships.
This means business pushing into the new spaces and operating across the borders we are lowering.
Broader and deeper supply chains across the region, enabling small businesses as well as multinationals to take advantage of growing markets. 
Our plan is for a new kind, not just a new level, of private sector engagement.
Our 2025 goal is that Australia's trade links with Asia will be at least one-third of GDP, up from one-quarter in 2011.
Fourth, deep and broad relationships with the region at all levels.
We should devote a truly national effort to building more comprehensive relationships with our key partners across the region, including through our diplomatic networks.
Australian social and cultural life will gain greatly from enhanced people-to-people links.
Leisure and sport, work and holidays, learning and culture are all being refined and redefined in contact with neighbourswe will know even better through this century.
Our "diaspora" in the region are not just an asset to our economy  -  they are faces of our cultural diplomacy.
And through these kinds of personal connections, our public conversation will become more Asia-centred.
Think about the media time given over to reporting the challenges of fiscal policy in Portugal or Greece or the US presidential elections. 
Should less time really be devoted  -  as it is now  -  to reporting the economic trends of Indonesia, the debates around freer trade in Japan, the political transition in China?
Our plan is for a myriad of stronger, deeper, broader cultural links with the nations of Asia at every level of society.
Our 2025 goal is drive broader change by ensuring one-third of board members of Australia's top 200 publicly listed companies and one third of the senior leadership of the Australian Public Service will have deep experience in and knowledge of Asia.
History tells us as economic weight shifts, so does strategic weight. 
The new Asia dissolves simple strategic triangles; we seek our security in a region of dozens of strategic intersections.
So fifth, sustaining the security of our diverse region.
Our past engagement is a strength in this crowded and complex environment.
Regional militaries are modernising.  Economic growth will put more pressure on energy, water and food resources. 
At the same time, all countries in the region, particularly the major powers, have a deep interest in strategic stability.
So we need not be pessimistic  -  but just as we work to shape the economic future of our region, so too do we work to shape our security environment.  
We are supporting the stabilising presence of the United States, a strong DefenceForce, building habits of trust and co-operation in our region and a rules-based regional order.
We have an ally in Washington  -  respect in Beijing  -  and more. 
An open door in Jakarta and Delhi, Tokyo and Seoul.
We are engaged institutionally through the developing East Asia Summit and at the United Nations  -  now through Australia's membership of the Security Council. 
Our plan is to stand strongly in our changing region as a mature and confident power. 
Our 2025 goal is for Asia to be a region of sustainable security in which habits of co-operation are the norm.
These are our five long-term national directions.
And with these long-term directions as our guide, I announce today the first policy steps.
All schools will engage with at least one school in Asia to support the teaching of a priority Asian language, taking advantage of the National Broadband Network.
We will fully implement the Australian Curriculum, which includes the cross-curriculum priority of ‘Asia and Australia's engagement in Asia'. 
All students will have access to at least one priority Asian language: Mandarin, Hindi, Indonesian and Japanese.
These strategies will be part of our National Plan for School Improvement.
We will provide 12,000 Australia Awards to Asian nations over the next five years, to promote people-to-people links between Australia and the region.
We will support business missions through an Asian Century Business Engagement Plan, which will be led by Trade Minister Craig Emerson.
We will appoint a Jakarta-based Ambassador to ASEAN to support engagement with the ASEAN Secretariat, ASEAN members and ASEAN-related forums.
We will make it easier for low-risk visitors to come to Australia and we will encourage more tourists from China and other Asian markets.
We will expand work and holiday program agreements with countries in Asia over time, starting with an increase to 1,000 places in our Work and Holiday Visa program with Indonesia.
These are important, immediate steps for Government.
They are the beginning for our long-term national plan.
OUR VALUES
My aim is not only to have a plan to succeed in this century. My aim is that we succeed on our own terms.
Right from the beginning, our nation has been different and we have tried to build a new kind of society and economy here. 
Free of privilege given at birth.
Free of the snobbishness and obsequiousness that infects older nations. 
And free also of the deep economic injustices that so many of us, or our forebears, left behind in another country. 
A hundred years ago, we spoke of the “workingman's paradise”.
Today we speak of the “high-wage, high-skill road”.
We have always wanted to do it our way.
We long saw Asia as a threat to all this  -  racially, militarily and economically.
Indeed this was precisely the moral paradox of the “workingman's paradise”  -  a hundred years ago, high wages meant white man's wages.  No more.
Thirty years ago, Australia was still a closed and isolated economy, pockets of engagement were the exception and the old model of economic and social protection was breaking.
Thirty years ago, Asia was still largely a continent of poverty where the ascendant islands of opportunity in the North East didn't outweigh the reality of the whole.
Back in the 80s we had to liberalise a closed economy to compete with the old Asia.
Today we have to educate an open society to compete in the new Asia.
Today, we no longer have to juggle our social democratic values and our Asian regional context  -  they come together as our two great national strengths.
There has never been a better time or a better age to be a Labor Prime Minister.
Today, our strength doesn't defend our social model  -  it relies on our social model.
Today, Labor still believes in opportunity for all as the best vision of the future.
Today, opportunity for all, through education and work is also the best national plan for prosperity.
Because we can only win in this century if every child gets winning results at school.
We can only win in this century if every working person can win a great job.
We can only win in this century if every sector of our economy is dynamic, productive, engaged.
Australia in 2025: Winning in the Asian Century.
This is the plan Australia needs in the Asian Century.
A plan for national success.
A roadmap for the whole of Australia  -  governments, business, unions and the broader community.
We know Australia has changed and Asia has changed and we know this demands new changes of us today.
We know what national success means to Australians.
Australia only wins if every Australian wins. Australia is only strong if every Australian is strong.
We know we need a plan to build on our strengths. 
This White Paper is the plan.
And with this plan, we know the answer to the question asked of Australia today.
Can we be a winner in the Asian Century?
Absolutely we can get it done.


HOST: Prime Minister good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Jon, I think this is the first white paper on the Asian century, this is a plan for our nation to be a winner in our region of the world during an era of incredible change.
HOST: Every Prime Minister I've interviewed in the last sixteen years doing this job, Julia Gillard, has released a document of similar complexion and surely, we're entitled to be sceptical about this latest one.
PM: Well Jon, I'm going to disagree with you about the facts.
Yes, prime ministers in the past have released white papers, but this is the first white paper to take an over-arching look at our nation's future during the century of change we're living through.
And what it brings together is some of the Government's current policy directions, which have been deliberately about positioning us to seize the benefits of the changes in our region, as well as putting forward new goals and aspirations and policies.
Things like making sure kids have got access to things like studying an Asian language. Things like-
HOST: It's all been said before though, Prime Minister.
I mean you've just cut $750 million from universities in the MYEFO, you've just cut foreign embassies and the budget of the foreign affairs department and you're asking us to judge you by what you say rather than what you do.
PM: Oh please, judge me by what I do.
There is more money in Australian universities under this government than there has ever been before in the nation's history, and it will continue to grow year on year Jon, that's the facts.
We have funded universities so well that they have expanded by 150,000 places, and there will be more growth in the future.
HOST: You've been Education Minister before Deputy Prime Minister and Prime Minister, languages and Asian languages have declined on your watch, not increased.
PM: Certainly Jon, we have a problem with the study of Asian languages now, and what we're going to do is to take a whole of schools system approach.
I think this has been part of the problem, that studying Asian languages has been the top-up, it's been the extra program that you load on top of what schools do.
We are going to do this differently. As you know, we are in the market for changing the way that schools are funded.
We had the first over-arching look at how schools are funded in many decades.
We are working hard now with states and territories and Catholic and independent schools to have a new way of funding schools from 1 January 2014, associated with a national school improvement plan to drive up quality, and I want at the centre of that plan to be the ability for kids to study an Asian language.
Then we are bringing to bear tools we haven't had at our disposal in the past when people have talked about Asian languages even as recently as five years ago.
The penetration of new technology into our schools and the further penetration to come from the National Broadband Network means that you can teach languages will and competently without every school having a language teacher sitting at a desk in front of a classroom doing the teaching face-to-face.
HOST: Talking about a thousand scholarships and opportunities for young Australians to go and work in Asia, I remember Alexander Downer making exactly the same commitment and promise about the equivalent of an Australian peace corps. It never happened.
PM: Well you'll have to interview Mr Downer about things Mr Downer has said.
HOST: No but Prime Minister, governments make these lavish promises but they don't follow through.
PM: Jon, let's actually deal with the facts. We are already offering a record number of scholarships for people from the region to come and study here.
People talk about the Colombo Plan. What we now do today dwarfs the Colombo Plan.
Now it was pivotal  -  the Colombo Plan  -  to that era of Australia's development. What we do today dwarfs it.
And what we are looking for in the future is 12,000 Australia in the Asian Century scholarships which will not only enable people in our region to come here and study, but kids from here to go and study in parts of Asia.
This is making sure that our young people are Asia-capable and Asia-ready for the opportunities of this century.
HOST: What are you going to do, Julia Gillard? Are you personally going to do anything?
PM: Well I'm leading the Government, and we'll deliver these policies and plans.
HOST: Are you going to learn an Asian language, for instance? You're asking us to.
PM: No I won't be Jon, because I am already more than full-time deployed. But I do regret that-
HOST: So is everybody else. Everybody's busy and you're telling us we've got to squeeze in these extra commitments and priorities.
PM: Well I think, Jon, let's really unpack this. We're talking about kids at school having the ability to access language training.
We create schools and we fund schools because we want kids to learn in them.
When I went to school, which is admittedly quite a long time ago, but when I went to school we were streamed and if you were in the top class you studied French and German; if you were in the bottom class you studied Indonesian.
I mean what a crazy set of incentives and messages to have sent kids, that if you're smart-
HOST: But wouldn't it send a signal that if the Prime Minister took half an hour of Indonesian language lessons a week, wouldn't that send a signal?
PM: I think the thing that sends the signal is for me to deliver a national plan and then get on with its implementation, rather than me spending half an hour learning a language myself Jon. I don't agree with you.
HOST: Speaking of sending a signal, the South Australians have sent a signal to Penny Wong. Is it sexist for them to demote her from the top to second position on the senate ticket?
PM: Well South Australian state conference has voted, and it's voted so that Penny Wong and Don Farrell are in positions which mean they will be returned to the next parliament.
Penny Wong is a fantastic contributor.
I am the Prime Minister who promoted her into being Minister for Finance, and I did that deliberately because I wanted her at the heart of the Government's decision-making and deliberations.
HOST: Do you agree with Anthony Albanese that it's an indulgence to put the factions ahead of every other factor?
PM: Well state conference has voted to have two senators  -  Penny and Don  -  in spots where they will be returned to the next parliament.
HOST: I've read Maxine McKew's book over the course of the weekend, and she'll be a guest on this show shortly.
She writes with insight, she writes with passion; do you accept her bona fides that she says she cares about the Labor movement?
PM: Look, I'm not getting into an exchange with Maxine. She's written a book, she's entitled to do that.
I am not focussed on Maxine's book, I'm focussed on delivering what we need for us to turn up a winner in this century.
Over the last week Jon, what I've done is delivered the Asian Century White Paper yesterday, a plan for our future.
On Friday I delivered a landmark announcement for the future of the Murray-Darling Basin, and earlier in the week the Government delivered the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.
These are the things that are shaping our nation and its future, and they're the things I'm focussed on.
HOST: Prime Minister, selamat pagi, sawadee and xie xie.
PM: Thank you very much Jon, in every language you want to say it.
HOST: Thank you for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you.


HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard thanks very much for you time.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: On the Asian Century White Paper, one of the goals is to have all students having continuous access to one of the priority languages  -  Mandarin, Hindi, Indonesian or Japanese.
Access is one thing but having them chose to take it up is another. How does the nation promote students taking on these languages?
PM: I actually think that's a job for all of us, Kieran, to send messages to kids about how important it is to be ready to seize all of the opportunities of this century of change and growth in Indonesia.
I was actually joking yesterday during the course of talking to people about the Asian Century White Paper, when I went to school, which is some time ago, but when I went to school kids were streamed and if you were in the top class you were offered French and German - well actually not offered you were told that you were going to study French and German; if you were streamed in the bottom class then you learned Indonesian.
And looking back at it now, I mean what an inverse set of incentives for kids where really we've got to be sending to kids the message that being able to speak one of the languages of our region and understanding our region, being Asia-capable, is going to be pivotal to their future and to them enjoying a good career in a century that is going to offer them tremendous opportunity.
HOST: Do you think the nation is yet to grapple with the scale of the transformation that is unfolding in our region?
PM: I think we are still grappling with it which is why I delivered the national plan yesterday for Australia to be a winner in this Asian century of change.
I mean, we've been changing our nation for the past 30 years as we've opened our economy to the world and of course we've engaged in our region in many ways. But now as the growth of our region is turbocharged so does our engagement have to be turbocharged.
So I'd like to turn on Sky and listen to you knowledgably commentating about the politics of Indonesia or what's happening in China today or what's happening in a media organisation in India that you've got a link with, that would help all of us get more immersed in the region in which we live.
And across the board I want us to keep strengthening our economy and seizing these new opportunities. I want people to have the skills that they need to engage with the region and I want businesses focused on getting the opportunities that this century will provide us.
HOST: I spoke to a few analysts and academics yesterday on this paper and largely positive but one of the criticisms they had was, while it's big on vision it's light on dollars.
What do you say to that?
PM: Well it is big on vision, it is a national plan for the nation, it is drawing together many of the things we have done to prepare for this century; the National Broadband Network, putting a price on carbon, the revolution we've been leading in education.
But it is challenging us to do more including giving kids access to language studies at schools, including getting the biggest companies in our nation around the boardroom table more Asia capable; including focusing on our innovation systems, driving the quality or our universities, driving our ease of doing business in this country.
So it's a vision, it's going to take some time to deliver but if we get this right, in 2025, what it will mean for Australians is more jobs, higher skills and an increasing income on average of more than $10,000.
HOST: The Opposition has described it, much of the paper, as predictable common sense. That's a fair assessment isn't it?
PM: Look, I've heard various things from the Opposition. I've heard that said, I've heard them be very negative about it, I've heard them say the Government should spend a lot of money at the same time that they try chide us for spending too much money so I really don't worry about all of that negativity from the Opposition.
Essentially the contrast in Australian politics is between a Government that's got a clear plan for the future and an Opposition with no plan.
HOST: Onto a related issue, the prominent economist Chris Richardson often describes our budget as having a ‘Made in China' sign on it and last week we saw the fact that the mining tax reportedly has brought in no revenue for the first quarter. In that context, the softer commodity prices, what's the status of the surplus? Is it a guarantee or an aspiration, where does it stand?
PM: Look on that critique about commodity prices and the Minerals Resources Rent Tax, the Treasurer dealt with that last week. We have downgraded the forecasts as to how much will come from the mining tax.
It's a profits based tax and so you would expect that as a profits based tax to go up and down as commodity prices do but Treasury has given us a new forecast for this financial year and of course we stand by that Treasury forecast and that is part of a Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook which delivers a budget surplus.
So we're very determined to bring the budget to surplus but on the ‘Made in China' stamp on the budget, I don't accept that analysis but I do think that Chris is trying to get us to think about something very important which is what we've seen in resources is really a down-payment in our economy of what this century of change can mean for us.
Asia has been saying to Australia, ‘we want your raw commodities, it's feeding our urbanisation, sell us those raw commodities'. Now we've got to be ready for what Asia will want next when Asia is the region of the world with more middle class people than anywhere else.
Where two million people are connecting to the internet every week; where people will want, all of the things that you and I want. Great food, good wine, holidays in interesting places, legal services, financial services, health services, the ability to get kids the world's best education and Australia will be well positioned with our good universities to offer that education.
Elaborately transformed manufactures; not manufacturing that's all about cheapness and cost but manufacturing that's customised and is the identical thing that you want.
This is the future we're looking for in this Asian century of change and we're in the right region of the world to seize these opportunities.
HOST: At the start of this parliamentary sitting week I want to ask you about a few other issues around at the moment. We saw a protest in Nauru yesterday, cases of self-harm reportedly as well increasing.
Do you concede it's going to be a long and problematic detention for many of these asylum seekers, whether it be three, four, five, six years?
PM: Yes, people can expect to be on Nauru or Manus Island for a long time. That is pivotal to the no advantage test that came out of Angus Houston's review of asylum seeker policy but if you pay a people smuggler, you get on a boat, you risk your life, you end up in Nauru or PNG and you wait the same amount of time you would have waited if you hadn't moved.
So for many people, they're going to be feeling the pressure of some of those long hard days. Of course we roll out mental health and support services but we are sending a very clear message to the region here: you don't get an advantage by getting on a boat.
HOST: Onto Penny Wong being the number two stop on the senate ticket in South Australia. Is that appropriate given she's one of your key ministers; that she's number two behind Don Farrell who's been described as one of the faceless men, one of the union powerbrokers?
PM: Well the South Australian state conference has made a decision here that both Penny Wong and Don Farrell are in positions that will see them returned to the parliament after the next election.
Penny Wong is a critical part of my team, I deliberately promoted Penny Wong into the job of Finance Minister because I'm very admiring of her capabilities and she's done a great job and she'll continue to do a great job.
Don Farrell is a Parliamentary Secretary dealing with a very important issue for the state he represents and that's the issue of water.
They'll both be here in the next parliament.
HOST: Anthony Albanese's going to try and have this overturned at the National Executive on Friday. Do you support him in that?
PM: Look, I'm not going to comment on these internal Labor Party questions but as I've said, we can look forward to Senator Penny Wong continuing to play a role at the heart of Labor's team.
We can also look forward to Don Farrell continuing to play the role he is now which is for the people of South Australia working alongside Tony Burke on the issue of water.
And the Government generally has been very focused on this issue of water and the Murray Darling Basin Plan and that's what enabled me to deliver the announcement that I did in South Australia on Friday.
HOST: Onto the Maxine McKew book, we you've repeatedly said your decision to challenge Kevin Rudd was made on the day and I know that you said that on the record and you don't want to elaborate on it but don't you think these allegations made by someone who was your Junior Minister when you were Deputy Prime Minister and Education Minister, that they should be addressed?
PM: Look, I dealt with all of this extensively on the public record-
HOST: She's saying that you showed private polling, internal polling to one of your colleagues. Do you deny that?
PM: And I've been asked about these questions in the past too Kieran and it's just simply not my focus. I delivered a major national plan yesterday, a plan for this nation to win in this century.
On Friday, I delivered a landmark announcement for the future of the Murray-Darling. Earlier in the week we delivered the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.
My focus is on those things that shape and change our nation.
HOST: I know you've got to get going; one final question on the Newspoll. You don't comment on polls, we've discussed that many, many times before but the up-tick in the Newspoll must be encouraging for you.
PM: Kieran, I'm going to say what you're expecting me to say, which is that I don't comment on polls.
What I do comment on is things like the plan we delivered yesterday for our nation. As I said to you earlier in this interview, I think there is a contrast in Australian politics.
It's between Labor's plan for the future and the Opposition lacking any plan.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you very much.


HOST: Prime Minister welcome, thank you for joining us this morning.
PM: Good morning Linda.
HOST: We've heard the Asian message for more than what, 20 years now. What's new, what makes this paper necessary now?
PM: What makes this paper necessary now is having us appreciate the full scale of the opportunity in front of us.
Yes, Asia has been growing and changing for some time now, and our economy has been opening itself up to the world over the past 30 years.
But it's important we get a sense nationally at every level of our society of the scale of the change now.
You're in the media and you probably think about media penetration as one snapshot of how societies are changing. If you look at India, it went from having two television stations in 1990 to having more than 800 now.
HOST: It's pretty amazing stuff.
PM: It's amazing. And penetration of television is telling you about more than just people watching shows, it's telling you about the changing nature of a society and how it is moving to being a middle class society and a consumer society.
So our image of Asia has been of this low-cost producer we need to worry about. We now need to change that national image into it being the home of the world's biggest middle class, people who will want to buy the things that Australia has got to sell if we lay out a national plan now, which I did yesterday, and if we are clear about the policies and decisions we need to make to seize this opportunity.
HOST: Indeed, I mean three billion middle class Asian citizens by decade's end. But that is a massive internal market that is more than capable of trading with itself, does so very effectively for example in the ASEAN states. Where does Australia fit in that? Doesn't Asia have the capacity to cater for itself?
PM: We are home to things that that Asian middle class will want. We've seen a down-payment in our economy as Asia has said please sell us resources, commodities because we're urbanising and we need all of that to feed our urbanisation.
HOST: We need to go beyond minerals, don't we, and the commodity price shock has certainly underlined that.
PM: I think shock is too big a word.
HOST: Probably.
PM: We've seen commodities come off and we've seen commodity prices start to cycle back up, that will happen. But the focus of the paper is to say what will Asia need next? And what they'll need next is this middle class will want to consume quality food, clean food, safe food, food that has higher protein sources, more meat for example, more dairy.
They will want high quality tourism experiences. They will want a world-class education. They will want access to financial services, to legal services  -  not to mass-produced commodities  -  but elaborately transformed manufactures, which are customised.
They will be on the internet; people at around two million a week are joining the internet across the Asia-Pacific. This gives us huge opportunities and that's why we need this national plan to guide the right decisions for the future.
HOST: Prime Minister, education is front and centre here obviously. A lot of people have been talking about this. The Asian Education Foundation estimates it will cost $1 billion to have half of our young people studying Asian languages. Where is that money going to come from?
PM: Instead of rolling out a program on top of everything else that schools do which has been the approach taken in the past language studies, we are going to embed it at the heart of Australian schooling.
We are working on a new system for funding schools; you've talked to me about that on the show in the past. We had David Gonski deliver his review of school funding and since then, we've worked hard to say we will have the national school improvement plan and a new funding system starting in school year 2014.
We are going to make that new funding system contingent on access to languages through the school improvement plan. So it won't be, let's do everything else we do in schooling and then people scurrying around and going oops what about Asian languages.
Asian languages will be at the heart of our expectations.
HOST: What does that mean Prime Minister in a school classroom? What do you envisage that means for a child going into a classroom, what will that look like?
PM: I think for a child going into a classroom it will mean two things. They will have access to studying a language, now that might be not with a teacher who's in the playground and then hanging out in the staff room and then sitting at the desk at the front of the class; our very traditional image of schooling.
It might be that that language specialist is in another school in another part of the country and kids access those lessons through the national broadband network.
And as you and I know, that's not just like watching images flickering on a screen; that can be real time engagement where the kids can talk to the teacher and the teacher can talk to the kids.
HOST: So that's critical but that's just the language. What about beyond language?
PM: Beyond language our national curriculum, our Australian curriculum, the first wholly online curriculum in the world, has embedded in it  -  as a cross cutting priority  -  Asia capability. So that means, when we talk about the history of the world, there will be a focus on our region.
People understanding what has shaped our region. People understanding the cultures of the various countries within our region so that there's this deeper literacy about what the region is like as well as the language capability, and then kids being kids they learn as much from each other as they do from adults, parents and teachers.
So we will get Australian schools to buddy up with a school in Asia. We already have a program that is doing that now. But we will expand it to all schools. So that means you can be sitting in your classroom in Sydney or country New South Wales talking to your friends in a classroom in Asia. Once you've made those connections through your formal lessons then, once again, kids being kids and the new technology just being innate for them, they'll then Facebook, they'll then Twitter, they'll then make real friendships with the kids in that class and that will guide their knowledge of that nation.
HOST: Well that existing program is actually very successful so it will be interesting to see that expanded.
Just changing tack a little bit Prime Minister, the business council says that you need a national prioritised infrastructure plan. Now infrastructure is an issue that's discussed at length in this paper, tax reform, workplace reforms the business council also wants on the agenda. These are the issues we are already  -  your government is already grappling with  -  all governments are grappling with. What specifics will you do on this front? Particularly that call for a national prioritised infrastructure plan?
PM: We've created Infrastructure Australia for the very purpose of creating national priorities for infrastructure. I'm very proud as a government that we've taken to record levels investments in traditional infrastructure in ports, in road and rail. And that we're as well rolling out broadband around the nation which is the infrastructure we need for the future.
So yes, the white paper as a government policy means we will be looking to do more on getting the national priorities right as part of a national infrastructure plan. That's pivotal, getting infrastructure right.
Across a whole suite of areas as a Government we've been working, understanding that we did need to be ready as a nation to seize these opportunities in our region. But the white paper not only brings together what the Government is currently doing, it adds to it with a deep understanding of the changes that will drive this century.
HOST: How does government get involved in getting boardrooms to appoint more Asia-experienced members, that's also in there, isn't it?
PM: Yes it is, and I think we in part lead and that's why we've set a target for the public service leadership as well.
We in part hector, to be frank. We talk to our friends in the business community and say that your business needs to have a full appreciation of the opportunity here. That full appreciation can best be guided by people who have been immersed and bring knowledge of the region. So you should look for those kinds of people in your board appointments.
And then once businesses decide to embrace that, then they'll obviously send a signal out that if you want to be the next board member that will be a capacity looked for, and people will respond to that.
HOST: Prime Minister, there are no downsides examined here and we really don't have time to go into potential downsides but should there be a more robust discussion about the potential pitfalls of Asia's rise, including strategic competition in the region?
PM: The white paper does canvas the strategic outlook for the region and talks about the diplomatic architecture we have in the region, the pivotal importance for Australia of seeing peace and security in the region and how we work with things like the East Asia Summit to develop habits of cooperation; nations talking through issues of dispute.
HOST: That's why they want more ambassadors as well?
PM: Yes we do want, over time to expand our diplomatic footprint. That helps us engage on the strategic security questions. But of course it helps us engage on people-to-people links, cultural links and importantly economic links.
HOST: A lot to examine here and it would be very useful for us I think to come back to some of this at another time Prime Minister.
Can I just ask you finally though, the former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and his written claims that you and Wayne Swan betrayed him despite what Mr Rudd said was his desire that you be the next and first female Prime Minister. We saw that in the papers on the weekend. Ms Gillard, were you impatient and wrong to seize the leadership?
PM: Look, I've dealt with all of these things on the public record extensively and dealing with all of this just simply isn't my focus.
Yesterday I delivered this plan to make us a winner in this century of change. On Friday I was in South Australia delivering an important announcement for our Murray-Darling Basin's future. Earlier in the week the Government delivered the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, so I'm focused on the things that strengthen and shape us as a nation.
HOST: Did it worry you though that also on the weekend in South Australia your Finance Minister Penny Wong was taken off the first place position on the senate ticket, put into second place in favour of one of those faceless men, Don Farrell?
PM: South Australian state conference had a vote and made a decision that both Penny Wong and Don Farrell will be in positions which mean that they will be returned to the Parliament after the next election.
HOST: But you would have preferred to have Penny Wong at the top of that list, surely?
PM: South Australian state conference had a vote. What I do is I decide who serves in which role and I deliberately promoted Penny Wong into the pivotal position of Finance Minister, putting her at the centre of Government decision making and our economic team because I'm so admiring of her capabilities.
Senator Don Farrell is serving for me as a Parliamentary Secretary in South Australia, focused on this pivotal South Australian issue of water.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks so much for your time today.
PM: Thank you.



HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins us now on RN Breakfast from our studio in parliament House. Prime Minister good morning and welcome to Breakfast.
PM: Thank you very much Fran, good to be with you.
HOST: You said yesterday the world economy is coming our way and this is what this blueprint is all about.
Now to some extent this is not news, but can you describe for us the scale of the change occurring in our region; the world's biggest middle class emerging?
PM: To give you just a few little snapshots Fran, in the first half of this decade in our region, 100 million people were being lifted out of poverty every week.
If we look at a nation like India, it had two TV stations in 1990; now there are more than 800 TV stations.
When we look across the region in which we live, 2 million people are being connected to the internet each week.
I think those statistics give you a sense of the scale of the change. What it means is that Asia  -  the region in which we live  -  which has so long been associated with being a producer of cheap goods, is actually going to become a middle class consumer of high-quality goods.
And that's what gives us the Australian opportunity of selling those high-quality goods that  the growing middle classes of Asia will want.
We've got a down-payment in our economy now through the huge demand for our resources. The focus of the white paper is on what Asia is going to demand next and how we can seize those economic opportunities.
So this is a plan for the nation's future to grow opportunity and to share opportunity.
HOST: Let's talk about how we seize those opportunities, because in your own words it's an ambitious plan to ensure Australia is the winner in the Asian century.
So if this is the road map, I think a lot of people want to know who's driving the car. How do we make this happen?
PM: Well I'm driving the government car, but this white paper is actually a challenge to all of us  -  to businesses, to trade unions, to civil society, to media organisations to embrace the opportunities that come with this century.
Put simply, it's about keeping our economy strong and making sure that we are ready to seize the opportunities in Asia.
It's about our population being skilled and being Asia-capable, and it's a about businesses having the capability to also reach out to Asia and get into the supply chains, get into the markets, get into the opportunities for growth.
HOST: Is it recognition that in Australia, culturally, we're not Asia-centric enough, we're not looking at the countries nearest to us and the opportunities within and what's changing within it?
Are we still too focussed on the US and Europe?
PM: We are engaged in our region, and we've worked hard over the last 30 years as we've opened our economy to the world to engage in our region, but Fran, yes we need to do more.
We need to do a lot more. People like me, people like you grew up with this image that Asia was largely a place of poverty, that they were going to compete against us on cost, that they would always be the low-cost producers and they would challenge us in our traditional markets like the US and Europe.
Now all of those assumptions are getting turned on their head. Asia is going to be home to the world's biggest middle class.
We will be competing in the markets of Asia against the US, against countries in Europe, to sell high-quality goods. But we're the ones with the advantage of adjacency; we're right here in the region.
So whether it's selling wonderful food, wonderful wine, great tourism, high-quality education services, health services, legal services, elaborately transformed manufactures; we're right here, able to seize this opportunity if we make the right decisions now and have a clear national plan.
And yesterday I gave the nation that clear national plan.
HOST: With respect Prime Minister, it's not news to most of us really that there is this emerging middle class, that the economies in our region are changing and you're not the first Prime Minister to talk about that and to talk about developing a way to position Australia for it.
Is this an admission that we have failed to re-orient ourselves, our policies, our business focus, our schools, our manufacturing and our markets, and how are you going to do that now in real terms, because one of the immediate responses is this document is certainly light on dollars if not actual policy detail.
PM: This document is charting a long-term plan. It talks about how some of the policies that this government has delivered are putting us in the right position to seize the opportunities of this century, for example, a National Broadband Network.
But there are new policy initiatives in this document which will make a very big difference.
Looking at having our population Asia-capable; I do want to see every Australian child in every Australian school having the opportunity to study a language in our region.
I do want to see the people sitting around the boardroom tables of our great companies being Asia-capable and Asia-literate.
I do want to see us being in the top five places in the world for doing ease-of-business and focussing on our innovation system and getting in the top ten for innovation systems, because if we're going to compete in this century, then we're going to have to keep getting better and better and better, and that's about innovation.
If we get this right, what it means for Australians is higher skills, more jobs and higher incomes.
Our aim is to get into the world's top ten in terms of size of our economy and that means a growth in our average incomes for Australians of more than $10,000.
HOST: It's twenty to eight on RN Breakfast, our guest this morning is the Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Prime Minister, let's zero in on a couple of examples. All students from their first day of school through to year 12 will have continuous access to a priority Asian language.
That's one of the promises in this white paper. Mandarin, Hindi, Indonesian and Japanese are the four; how many more Asian language teachers will have to be trained and employed to cater for this demand, and how quickly can we do that?
PM: Well Fran, we will need more teachers but I actually think we'll need different ways of working.
As education minister, I had a very good insight into how difficult it can be to grow the study of languages. We did have a program to grow Asian language studies and we hit a few constraints.
One of the constraints is the number of teachers; another of the constraints is whether we've sent the right message to our kids about how important it is for their future and the careers that they will choose for them to have Asia language capability and general Asian literacy and understanding of the region in which we live.
Now I think we're at an age where we can do a lot better on language teaching. This cannot be a vision of having in every school someone who is expert in Indonesian, and expert in Japanese, and expert in Hindi.
It's not going to work like that, we haven't got enough teachers of Mandarin for one to be popped in every primary school and every secondary school.
HOST: So how is that going to work?
PM: We live in an age of different learning possibilities and choices. What we can do through the National Broadband Network, what we can do through having the world's first online national curriculum, which is what the Australian curriculum is.
It means we can get a deeper penetration of language literacy and learning-
HOST: Could you explain that a bit more to us, just a bit beyond the line of ‘with the NBN?'
What does that mean? Kids in the classroom in a suburb in Melbourne learning down the line from a teacher somewhere else, is that what you're saying?
PM: Absolutely. And if you've ever clicked onto one of the websites that has educational products on it, a website like TED and watched talks from experts around the world, people that you and I are not in the same room with, but you can look and learn from them, and then of course the exchange on the NBN doesn't have to be one-way. It's not like watching TV.
It can truly be two-way where the language teacher is interacting with every child. And we want those children interacting with kids in a school in Asia, and I've seen that happen myself.
I've been to a school in Korea, which is buddied up with a school in Australia and the kids get to know each other, they then take that connection from the formal in the classroom, through the broadband to being on Facebook together, being on Twitter together, actually getting to know each other and something about each other's lifestyles.
And I think if you can do that, then you can help inspire the passion of children to say ‘I really want to get to know about that country, part of getting to know about it is understanding the language.'
HOST: And we have had trouble with this in the past, and again you're not the first leader to commit to extending the teaching of foreign languages  -  Asian languages  -  in our schools.
Kevin Rudd introduced a $62 million national Asian languages and studies in schools program and the money's due to run out in December. Is this your first test  -  will you extend that funding?
PM: No we are going to do something far broader and far more systematic than that.
Fran, as you are aware, we commissioned the first over-arching review of school funding in four decades.
We are working hard now with states and territories and the Catholic and independent school systems to say yes, we are prepared to do better funding arrangements for schools but tied to a national school improvement plan. I am going to put-
HOST: So come January, will that kick in?
PM: No, I am going to put this access to Asian languages at the centre of that national school improvement plan.
These funding reforms will be on the ground for school funding from calendar year 2014.
HOST: Business is key, obviously, to us maximising the potential of an Asian middle class, a growing Asian middle class.
Another promise in your blueprint is that one third of board members on our top 200 companies will have a deeper relationship with Asia. How do you make that happen?
PM: Well people respond to signals Fran. They respond to aspirations and goals.
I think if we say to our business community we want to work with you to make sure that you are well-positioned to seize the opportunities of this century, to understand what it is to go into the markets of our region, to integrate into the global supply chains that are developing there, to do that it's a good idea to have people on your board who bring that knowledge and that capability, then I think we can work with the business community on that.
And if the business boards of today send a strong message that the people they will be asking to join them tomorrow will be people with that capability, then of course people with aspirations in the business community to be on boards will respond.
HOST: Business says this is the right vision, but they doubt whether you have the determination, the resources needed to make it happen.
The shadow foreign minister Julie Bishop says the white paper is little more than a grab bag of domestic policies put together by Labor spin doctors. Do you have a problem here that a number of the goals, the rhetoric doesn't quite match with the action on the ground?
One of those for instance, extending our diplomatic footprint in Asia, and you government have cut back our representation at posts overseas.
PM: Well on the Opposition, you'd expect them to be negative, you know, so it is and so it always will be.
On your broader question, I don't think anybody would doubt my determination to get things done Fran.
Whether it's putting a price on carbon; whether it's a new national healthcare agreement; whether it's a new national skills agreement; whether it's the determination to keep improving Australian schools; whether it's bringing the budget to surplus and what we did through MYEFO last week; whether it's solving the almost intractable problem of the Murray-Darling Basin which I announced a new approach for on Friday in South Australia, I am determined to make sure that this nation seizes the opportunities on the future.
I am tremendously proud of our country; we've got a strong economy now and we should be proud of that. We built it together.
I am now determined that we build on its strengths so it is stronger for the future, there are more opportunities more Australians and so those opportunities are shared too.
HOST: It's thirteen minutes to eight on Breakfast, our guest this morning in the Parliament House studios in Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
Prime Minister, on another issue, your former colleague Maxine McKew will join us on Breakfast after eight. She says in her new book that in the lead-up to the leadership switch in 2010, you were, quote, “not a passive player.”
She writes about you, quote, “she was impatient for the prime ministership and allowed others to create a sense of crisis around Rudd's leadership. She then cut down a prime minister in his first term and pretended it was in the national interest to do so.”
What's your response to that?
PM: I've dealt with all these issues on the public record before and it's just simply not my focus. My focus is on this nation's future and the delivery of the plan that I outlined yesterday.
My focus is on those kids in schools today and whether they're going to have great opportunities in the future; whether our population is going to have better skills and better jobs; whether we can keep building a stronger economy and whether we can work with business to seize all of the opportunities that this Asian century offers.
Of course my focus is beyond that plan to things like the Murray-Darling, where we'll be introducing the legislation this week to put money away to make sure that we realise that big change for the nation and for the people of South Australia, so Fran I'll leave the commentary about these things to others.
HOST: It's not just commentary though, is it? It's detail  -  it's important to get the details of history right. Maxine McKew writes in some detail about the party research that she says was being touted by your supporters including Brendan O'Connor to convince Rudd supporters to switch sides.
Now, you've been asked this before but let me ask you again. Do you recall that research?
PM: Fran, I've been asked it before and answered it before, so please feel free to get out the transcript. As I've said, I've dealt with all of these issues in the past. They're not my focus.
HOST: We now have one unnamed MP saying you showed that research to him in your office and he regarded it as part of a pitch to switch leaders. Did you do that?
PM: Fran, I've dealt with these issues extensively in the past and you can put the question 900 different ways and you're going to get the same response. It's just simply not my focus.
I am focussed on the nation's future and the plan for the nation's future in this century of change I delivered yesterday.
HOST: Prime Minister, just one final issue. On the weekend, South Australian ALP conference placed the little-known but factionally powerful Senator Don Farrell ahead of the Finance Minister Penny Wong as number one on the South Australian senate ticket.
In your view, is he the number one senator in South Australia, and do you support a move to get the national executive to overturn that decision?
PM: Well the decision that South Australian conference has made means that both Penny Wong and Senator Farrell will be returned to the federal parliament after the next election.
Penny Wong is an incredibly valued member of my team. I am the one that promoted Penny Wong to the pivotal role of Finance Minister because I was so-
HOST: Shouldn't she be the automatic pick for number one spot then?
PM: Because I was so admiring of her capabilities, I put her at the centre of the economic team. Don Farrell is serving the government well in that pivotal issue of water for South Australia.
HOST: Yes but there can be no comparison really between their profiles and the role they contribute. Shouldn't the number one senator be on the number one spot?
PM: Well Fran, the decision that's been made is that they'll both be in the next parliament. Penny Wong will continue to be right at the centre of this government and a core and pivotal member of my team.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us.
PM: Thanks Fran.


Canberra
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Speaker, eleven years ago, under Taliban rule, terrorists trained freely in Afghanistan to kill Australians and to attack our ally the United States. 
Today, international terrorism finds no safe haven in Afghanistan.
The fifty nations of the International Security Assistance Force, the eighty nations engaged in development and governance, the United Nations, our Afghan partners  -  we are all determined to make sure it never does again.
Speaker, today the House, and through it the people, should know what progress we are making in Australia's mission in Afghanistan  -  and what this progress means for our commitment in the coming year and the years ahead.  The House and the people should know what the Government is doing to help Afghanistan prepare for its future after transition is complete.  And the House and the people should resolve not only to remember the thirty nine Australians who have died in Afghanistan  -  but to care for those they left at home and their mates when they return.
2012 has brought important progress in transition in Afghanistan. 
Three years ago, at West Point in December 2009, President Obama announced a new strategy: focussed on counter-insurgency, designed to achieve transition.  Two years ago at Lisbon in November 2010 the nations of NATO, ISAF and the Afghan Government agreed to the transition plan: for Afghanistan to take charge of its security by the end of 2014. 
These are the facts on the ground in Afghanistan today.  Three of the five tranches of Afghan provinces and districts have begun transition.  All the provincial capitals and 75 per cent of the country's population are in areas where the Afghan National Security Forces lead on security.  The forces they lead are close to their full surge strength of 352 000.  They lead on more than 80 per cent of all security operations and make up more than three-quarters of all uniformed personnel in the country.
As transition proceeds, international forces will do less partnering in the field and provide more support through smaller advisory teams.   This does not mean the end of combat for international forces, but it does mean, gradually and carefully, international forces are moving to a supporting role. By the middle of next year, when transition is due to begin in the fifth and final group of provinces, the ANSF will have lead responsibility for security across the whole country.
I met General John Allen, the ISAF Commander, on the 14th of October during my visit to Kabul.  He is pleased with what he sees as the ANSF continues to demonstrate this increasing capability and capacity.  With two years remaining before the end of transition, he is confident that ISAF's mission will conclude with the ANSF well prepared to maintain long-term security in Afghanistan. The Minister for Defence will also update the Parliament on detailed developments in Afghanistan today.
We can and should conclude that today, across Afghanistan, the process of transition is on track.
In Uruzgan province, where Australia's efforts are centred, transition commenced on the 17th of July of this year and will follow this model. These are the facts on the ground there.
Transition has commenced and the 4th Brigade is assuming the lead on security operations.  The main district centres are under government control.  The Afghan security presence in outlying districts has expanded over the past two years with the growth of the ANSF.  Insurgent attacks have fallen.   One of the 4th Brigade's Kandaks is now operating independently  -  and based on current progress, the other three should commence independent operations by the end of this year.
As transition proceeds in the province, Australia will adjust our military and civilian posture there.   Our main focus will be at Brigade Headquarters and the provincial Operations Coordination Centre.  The ADF will advise and train the Afghan National Army's logistics, engineering and other combat support elements.  Our Mentoring Task Force will shift to a smaller Advisory Task Force model, we will cease routine partnered operations at the Kandak level and our presence will consolidate in the multi-national base in Tarin Kot.
Speaker, let me emphasise that this shift in posture, likely to occur around the end of this year, is not the end of our combat operations in Uruzgan. 
Our Special Operations Task Group will continue to operate against the insurgency and our Advisory Task Force will retain a combat-ready capability.
This is the course of transition in Uruzgan.
On the 18th of October, Australia assumed command of Combined Team  -  Uruzgan.  We now oversee the critical phase of transition in the province.  We will take account of the conditions on the ground and the evolving capabilities of the 4th Brigade.  The shift in our posture will be gradual and measured  -  closely aligned with the broader ISAF transition strategy and consulting closely with Afghan and provincial authorities.
This is the key judgement which will be before us in the year to come: judging the progress of transition and delivering the phases by which it is completed.  When I addressed the Australian Strategic Policy Institute in April, the Government's view was that once started, transition in Uruzgan should take twelve to eighteen months and that when transition is complete, the majority of our troops will have returned home.  Six months on, and three months in to transition, our analysis is that this remains the case.
As we begin detailed planning for its final phases, which of course remain some time off, it is likely that we will identify the need for some additional personnel and resources to complete those final phases of practical extraction and repatriation.  We will apply the lessons of previous operational drawdowns, to ensure stability and security through the whole period.  And when transition in Uruzgan is complete, we will remain committed to the ISAF strategy for nationwide transition  -  advising the ANSF as they develop their command and logistics capabilities and providing institutional training.
The Australian Federal Police has done important work training the Afghan National Police at the Police Training Centre in Tarin Kot.  As transition proceeds, our future effort will focus on leadership training and strategic advisory support at the national level.  This will help the Afghan National Police manage their own transition: from paramilitary activity as part of the counter-insurgency to a constabulary force performing conventional civilian policing roles.
Our development aid effort will continue.  Australian aid is making a real difference to the lives of the Afghan people  -  and helping their nation on the path to development and peace.  In Uruzgan, the Australian-led Provincial Reconstruction Team does great work: contributing to a six-fold increase in the number of schools operating, tripling the number of active health facilities and a stronger provincial administration.   As transition proceeds in Uruzgan, our aid workers and diplomats will continue their important task.
This will be the work of transition through the year ahead.
A new threat to our mission has been emerging in Afghanistan for some time  -  insider attacks.  In my discussions with President Karzai this month, it was clear to me that he understands the threat these attacks pose to our mission. 
In my discussions with General Allen, he expressed his personal sympathy with Australia's losses.  He was also just as conscious as our own commanders of the need for the right mix of force protection measures.
Australia is not alone.  Many of our international partners have also suffered casualties.  Overnight we have received reports of an insider attack on British troops in Helmand province. Indeed, insider attacks have targeted Afghan troops in even greater number than international troops. 
This is how we are protecting our troops. 
First, in order to know how best to counter the threat, our commanders have analysed the attacks and their circumstances.  Each attack has specific motivations and specific circumstances.  We must understand them to defeat them.
Second, in the wake of the insider attack on the 29 August this year, we reviewed force protection to counter the risks of insider threats.  Naturally, we do not publicly detail the nature of these.  The Government continually reviews the professional advice on force protection measures to ensure the risks of such attacks are minimised: I am confident that we are doing all we can. 
Third, the Afghan Government has now been conducting biometric screening and other information gathering of all ANSF recruits for two years.  Recruits are subject to an eight-step vetting process; supported by information sharing and overseen by the international force.   The Afghan Ministry of the Interior, along with coalition partners, works to identify insurgent sympathisers and subversive elements within the security forces.
These are important counter-measures.
We know it would be a strategic mistake to overestimate the enemy's strengths or achievements.  To see an adversary's hand where it may not exist only enhances the propaganda value of an attack.  This difficult military environment and determined insurgent enemy breeds asymmetric threats  -  spectacular attacks, roadside bombs, insider attacks  -  often designed to influence international opinion.  We know the impact of these attacks on the troops and their units, their families and the Australian public is very significant.  Australia has suffered four insider attacks in all so far, with seven killed and 12 wounded.   The greater strategic threat of insider attacks comes not from the attacks themselves, but from the risk that we respond to them wrongly.
The best evidence that we will prevail against the threat from insider attacks is this: we have not allowed it to disrupt our training and operations with the 4th Brigade.  Every day, our troops and police, diplomats and development advisers get on with the job.  I saw them during my most recent visit to Kabul and Tarin Kot on 14 October and I can tell this House:  Their courage will not fail.
They are getting the job done today.  And they are determined to complete their mission of training and transition.
2012 has brought progress in Afghanistan  -  it has also brought important decisions on our future course there.  As a partner of Afghanistan, as a member of ISAF and, now, as a member of the UN Security Council, Australia will be an active participant in this planning in the coming year.  In May, when President Karzai and I signed a Comprehensive Long-Term Partnership, Australia joined a growing group of countries, including the United States, India and China, who have partnerships with Afghanistan to help consolidate and build on the gains of the past ten years.  The Chicago NATO-ISAF Summit set milestones for transition and agreed to a new NATO training mission post-2014.  The Tokyo Conference saw international agreement to an aid and development plan and specific pledges of support.
2013 will now bring important preparations for the period after transition is complete.  When transition is complete across Afghanistan at the end of 2014, the Government of Afghanistan will have full responsibility for security.   The broad outlines of a comprehensive framework for supporting Afghanistan beyond 2014 are now agreed.
There will be substantial international financial support to sustain strong Afghan defence and police forces.   The international community is looking to commit $3.6 billion in US dollars each year from 2015 to 2017.   As I announced in Chicago, Australia is contributing $100 million in US dollars for three years.
There will be a new NATO-led mission after 2014  -  not for combat, but to train, advise and assist the ANSF.   Australia will make a contribution to this mission including through the Afghan National Army Officer Academy.
To guard against any possibility of a return of international terrorism to Afghanistan, I expect the United States and Afghan Governments to discuss possible future arrangements for counter-terrorism training and operations.  As I have stated previously, the Government is prepared to consider a limited Special Forces contribution  -  in the right circumstances and under the right mandate.
There will be substantial international development assistance and support for Afghanistan's economic and social development: the ultimate proof against conflict and instability.  At Chicago, I pledged Australian development assistance to Afghanistan will rise from $165 million Australian dollars in 2011-12 to $250 million Australian dollars by 2015-16  -  as part of the international community's commitment to provide $16 billion US dollars over four years from 2014.
Beyond 2014, Australia will still have a national interest in denying international terrorism a safe haven in Afghanistan.   It will still be in our national interests to remain part of the broad international effort to support Afghanistan  -  and to ensure the Afghan Government remains an active partner.  At Tokyo, Australia joined in the Mutual Accountability Framework, by which the Afghan Government made important commitments in this respect.  Through our aid program we will encourage the Afghan Government to fulfil its reform commitments.   It must strengthen governance, combat corruption, promote the rule of law and uphold the rights and freedoms for Afghan men and women guaranteed in the Afghan Constitution. 
We will also help the Afghans prepare for the 2014 Presidential elections.  I welcome the Afghan Government's commitment to announce the elections timeline soon.  Credible, inclusive and transparent elections  -  following the Presidential elections of 2004 and 2009 and the parliamentary elections of 2005 and 2010  -  are among the most important signs of Afghanistan's decade-long transformation.  So our aid will support the electoral process.
With Afghanistan firmly responsible for the security of its sovereign state after 2014, international political and diplomatic efforts to support peace and stability in Afghanistan and in its region will be central.  We will continue to support an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned process of peace-building which protects the gains of the past decade in areas such as democracy and human rights, including the rights of women and children.  We support reconciliation and the reintegration of insurgents who are prepared to lay down their arms, renounce violence, cut ties with Al Qaeda and respect Afghanistan's constitution.
The constructive engagement and support of Afghanistan's neighbours, in particular of Pakistan, is also essential over time.  For instance, the Istanbul process to strengthen trade links and tackle common security concerns through what is known as the "Heart of Asia" region is an important international initiative.  In a conflict-riven region, there is growing recognition from regional leaders that all have a long-term interest in a secure, stable, self-governing Afghanistan.  I welcome the comments of Pakistan's President Zardari that his country respects and supports reconciliation and peace efforts by the Government of Afghanistan.  I also welcome the Pakistani Government's direct appeal to the Taliban to participate in these reconciliation and peace efforts.   We will work with Afghanistan  -  and with Pakistan  -  in those areas where our best judgement is that co-operation against terrorism which threatens both states is effective and real.  And we will do whatever else we judge best makes a difference in this difficult and sensitive task.
Our progress since 2009  -  our plans through to 2014 and beyond  -  should give Australians cause for measured confidence and resolve.  We are part of a sound international strategy:  transition to Afghan-led security, then support to Afghanistan for development and peace.  Our contribution today is proportionate to our own interest and to the contribution of our allies and the world: our troops number around 1 550 out of a 100 000-strong Coalition force supporting a near 352 000-strong ANSF.  Our mission in Uruzgan is clear and achievable: to prepare the 4th Brigade for a handover of full security responsibility. 
And our commitment to Afghanistan is in Australia's national interest.  We are there to deny international terrorism a safe haven, to stand firm with our ally the United States.
In Afghanistan and in Uruzgan, we see progress, but of course it is not perfect.  We know this  -  I know this  -  and our plans reflect this.  Throughout the three years of the new international strategy, the international coalition and the Afghan Government have held a very realistic view of the evolving environment and changes in the nature of the insurgent threat. 
We know that as Afghan forces increasingly take the lead through 2013, the Taliban will seek to test them.  We know that not every valley or village in Uruzgan or Afghanistan will be peaceful or free from insurgency.  There will be difficult days ahead, setbacks in the transition process, days when our resolve will be tested.
We will stand firm.   As a nation, we have a job to do: it is difficult and dangerous and we are determined to complete it.  Not to make things perfect, but to ensure that Afghanistan will never again be what it was in 2001: a place where terrorists prepared to attack us.   Across Afghanistan, the national Government, the Afghan and international forces are making progress in transition.  And we are preparing for the future beyond 2014.
Speaker, thirty nine Australians have been killed in action in our decade in Afghanistan.  Each that we lose takes part of us.  We have not known loss like this in forty years.
Seven Australians have died since my statement to the Parliament on our mission last year.
Sergeant Blaine Diddams was killed in a fire fight with insurgents on the 2nd of July.
Lance Corporal Stjepan Milosevic, Private Robert Poate and Sapper James Martin were killed by an insider attack on the 29th of August.
Private Nathanael Galagher and Lance Corporal Mervyn McDonald were killed in a helicopter crash on August the 30th.
Corporal Scott Smith was killed by an improvised explosive device on the 21st of October. His funeral will be held in coming days.
The poet John Manifold wrote of the "cairn of words" we build over our silent dead.  Yes, we will remember them.  And it is right that we give words to our sorrow and pride.  But we must do more.  Their widows, their children, their wounded mates these Australians live on, they live amongst us as we who are left grow old. 
I had the privilege of visiting some of them last week. I was overwhelmed by their determination to overcome, to return to their supreme physical fitness, to return to their duties. But they will never forget  -  the bomb, the bullet, the helicopter crash  -  they could not forget, even if they tried. We have an obligation to them too.
The next decade will see more young Australian combat veterans live in our community than since the 1970s.  This is demanding changes in the way the Department of Defence and the Department of Veterans' Affairs care for service personnel and veterans.
Organisations such as Legacy and the RSL have performed nearly a century of service to care for those to whom we owe so much  -  that invaluable work goes on.  In continuing to provide this support and care for Australian soldiers, these organisations will be seeking to adapt to the changing, younger profile of the Australian veteran.  New organisations such as “Soldier On” have been established to help our wounded servicemen and women and their families achieve great things despite their wounds.
Every Australian should know  -  you can lend a hand.  Give generously, buy a badge, visit, volunteer.  Respect for our soldiers and veterans is precious: say g'day, say thanks.  We have known loss in Afghanistan  -  but we have known more.
We have seen astonishing courage.  Some Australians have performed acts of the most extreme bravery in the presence of the enemy.  Many more demonstrate a quiet courage  -  in their devotion to duty every day under the strain of war ... in the villages, on the airfield, in the workshop.
Their service has kept us safer from terrorism.  They have given us cause for confidence and an example of resolve.  For us, they march down a hard path in Afghanistan.  They know that for our nation, any other path would risk much more. 
We will support them as they serve us in Afghanistan and when they return.  We will see them through.


Canberra
It's a great pleasure to welcome you all to our nation's parliament and our nation's capital.
I know you spend your days in labs, classrooms and field stations.
And often it's not very glamorous being dressed in lab coats and protective glasses.
Though I was recently at Ogilvie Girls High in Tasmania helping the students out with an experiment (someone can explain the meaning of “titration” to me later on) and my staff reckon they couldn't get the lab coat off me!
But tonight, the lab coats have been put away, the black tie and cocktail frocks have been put on – and it's a night to celebrate.
At the highest level, it's a night to celebrate the values of reason and scientific inquiry that underpin a civilised society.
It's also a celebration of your value as scientists and science teachers.
Each of you has chosen science as your life, and for many of you, that journey dates back decades.
Perhaps you were inspired by one of those great science promoters like Harry Messel or Julius Sumner Miller.
Perhaps a childhood gift of a microscope or an ant farm.
Or a teacher whose memory you treasure.
A few weeks ago I set-up a ‘Who is Your Favourite Teacher?' competition on my Facebook page.
Already hundreds of ordinary Australians are testifying to the inspirational role that great teachers played in their lives.
One young woman, herself now a teacher in Victoria, said this about her science teacher Mr Peter McLaren: “He never settled for less than your best, and worked hard as hell with you to get there. Endless time, endless effort and with the strongest positivity and encouragement any student could ask for.”
That's science and science teaching as we want it to be.
I know you make it look easy, but it's not.
It takes a long journey to get there through hard years of study and research.
Sometimes you will have buried your head in your arms in despair.
Other times you will have rejoiced in a moment of revelation.
Or been humbled by the power of science to upturn an entire field of knowledge overnight.
So enjoy this evening – because it is special for you, your families and your colleagues.
It's also special because we tonight we can assess what science means for our country, our region and the world.
This week I released a plan for our nation's future. A plan for Australia to prosper and thrive in this century of growth and change in our region – the Asian Century.
The world's centre of economic gravity is shifting our way.
It's a transformation of unprecedented speed and scale.
That is why we need a national roadmap to make sure that Australians benefit from Asia's extraordinary rise.
We burn with ambition for Australia's future and for the possibilities of this century.
Science and education are at the heart of those possibilities.
As our Chief Scientist Ian Chubb has said, many of the solutions to the big problems facing humanity will increasingly require some form of science at their core.
Food production alone will need to increase by 70 per cent by 2050.
And 1.2 billion people lack enough water to meet their needs.
We will need more innovative and bold ideas that translate into real solutions, if we are to rewrite the future of our planet.
Australia can seize these opportunities by building on our strengths in science and education.
By improving the capabilities of our people and using our specialised knowledge to enhance the prosperity, health and environment of the Asian region
By forging closer links to the nations of Asia, including through science collaboration and shared endeavour.
China is now Australia's number one collaborative partner, in terms of publication volume, in the fields of chemistry, engineering and mathematics.
And then there are practical projects like the CSIRO's long-term project to help improve marine aquaculture in Vietnam.
And the partnership between Indian and Australian scientists working to develop a vaccine for malaria - I had the honour of meeting some of those scientists in New Delhi just two weeks ago.
That's why I am pleased that as part of the $10 million research effort of the Learned Academies there will be a focus on the role and potential of Australian science of in the Asian Century.
Our plan for the nation's future also rests on achieving a world class school system across the board.
That is why I have set a goal of Australia being in the top five by 2025 – for maths, literacy, science and for having a school system that is high quality and high equity.
That's the thinking behind our National Plan for School Improvement and our embrace of the Gonski reforms:
-        Lifting teacher quality
-        Providing more power to principals
-        Making more information available for parents
-        And ensuring every school has the resources it needs.
Within one educational generation, I want our system turned around. And science education has to be a big part of that.
At the moment, we've got almost 50 per cent fewer senior school students studying science than we had two decades ago.
We have to do better.
That's why in this year's Budget we committed $54 million to lift the engagement and participation of students in science.
And there's no better way to do this than by having a first-class teacher in every classroom.
Every year on this night we hear about teachers who are just that – first-class.
Teachers who run oversubscribed lunch-time science clubs.
Teachers who ask students to do interesting and challenging things like test the antibiotic effects of Manuka honey.
Teachers who explain not just what science can do but what science means.
Teachers like who integrate cutting-edge science into their teaching like Francesca Calati, a 2007 Prime Minister's Science Prize winner who is with us tonight.
This morning I was able to celebrate the success of this year's science teacher winners with some of their classes back home, using Skype; a great example of the real time technology transforming our classrooms.
Francesca and our winners tonight exemplify the quality of teaching I want every Australian child to enjoy.
We can't win the race of the Asian Century without them.
Tonight we have so much to celebrate.
Australia continues to produce world-class breakthroughs which will improve the future of our planet and its people.
Like the first prototype retinal implant, which opens the way to restoring vision for the sight-impaired.
Or the first working components of a quantum computer, tested recently at the University of New South Wales.
We produce public-spirited Nobel Prize winners who lend their voices powerfully to the public debate like Brian Schmidt and Peter Doherty.
We're spending record amounts on new facilities, like the Kinghorn Cancer Centre and the Ingham Institute I've opened in recent weeks.
The Commonwealth is investing almost $9 billion in science and research, a 35 per cent increase in just five years.
And we're preparing to refresh Australia's innovation agenda and to build a new wave of collaboration between government, industry and the research community.
These measures are a sign that your work has never been more valuable, and has never been more appreciated.
So I trust that these awards confirm the esteem in which all Australians hold you, and the very high hopes they invest in what you do.
I congratulate the recipients and nominees for the 2012 Prime Minister's Prizes for Science.
I'm proud to lead a nation that can produce such remarkable individuals.


Canberra
Five of Australia's best and brightest scientists and science teachers have been recognised at Australia's most prestigious science ceremony  -  the Prime Minister's Prizes for Science  -  at Parliament House tonight.
The Prime Minister's $300,000 major Prize for Science has been awarded to Australian National University Professor Ken Freeman for his exemplary work as an astronomer.
In 1970, Professor Freeman overturned our understanding of what makes up the Universe. He discovered that what we see of galaxies  -  stars, gas and dust  -  is only a small fraction of their mass and determined that the rest is dark matter.
Today he is exploring the archaeology of the Milky Way, mentoring the next generation of astronomers and helping to develop world-leading telescopes.
The $50,000 Prime Minister's Prize for Excellence in Science Teaching in Primary Schools has been awarded to Mr Michael van der Ploeg from Table Cape Primary School in Wynyard. He is inspiring his students to continue to study science at secondary and tertiary levels by giving his students practical experiences  -  exploring beaches and fossil cliffs on Tasmania's northwest coast and interacting with robots.
Mrs Anita Trenwith, a teacher at Adelaide's Salisbury High School, received the $50,000 Prime Minister's Prize for Excellence in Science Teaching in Secondary Schools. Mrs Trenwith recognises that every student deserves a science education and has created a unique hands-on program for special education students. The program includes a hands-on agriculture subject, where students plant and manage crops, drive tractors and look after livestock.
University of Western Australia Professor Eric May received the $50,000 Malcolm McIntosh Prize for Physical Scientist of the Year. This young engineer is making LNG, the cleanest fossil fuel, even cleaner through his analytical understanding of gas behaviour. His work will save billions of dollars in processing costs.
Dr Mark Shackleton from the Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre in Melbourne received the Science Minister's Prize for Life Scientist of the Year, a prize of $50,000. During his PhD, Dr Shackleton demonstrated for the first time that an entire solid organ, a functioning breast, could be grown from a single cell  -  a stem cell. Now he is redefining our understanding of melanoma tumours and opening up new pathways for treatment.
The Prizes honour Australians who have made significant contributions to building a more prosperous and progressive society through scientific achievements and science education.
Past winners include Elizabeth Blackburn AC and Brian Schmidt, who went on to be awarded Nobel Prizes.
Presenting the Prizes tonight, the Prime Minister and Minister for Science and Research, Senator Chris Evans, congratulated the winners on their outstanding contributions to science.
High level science and research, in universities and in collaboration with industry, is essential for building an innovative and productive economy for the 21st century and keeping Australia at the forefront of global innovation.
The Government is investing record funding to support science and research to drive the new and innovative products, processes and services that will be in demand in the coming decades.
Support for research and development across Government science, research and innovation programs will be almost $9 billion this financial year, up 35 per cent on 2007.
We have committed $54 million to science education in schools and universities to set new benchmarks for raising the engagement, the curiosity and the participation of students.
When it comes to science, Australia has an impressive track record. Australian scientists will remain at the forefront of scientific discovery in the 21st century.
Australian research has yielded breakthroughs like the Gardasil cervical cancer vaccine, the Cochlear implant and Wi-Fi, and our scientists are continuing to collaborate on major international research projects like the Square Kilometre Array radio telescope.
Labor's investment is cementing Australia as one of the scientific centres of the world.
More information, photos and video are available online: www.innovation.gov.au/scienceprizes


Government House, Canberra
It's with a tremendous sense of pride that I am here today to honour Corporal Daniel Keighran.
I join with Her Excellency and with every distinguished guest here in paying tribute to you and to your courage.
Daniel, Kathryn, if I can say something personally to you.
We had the opportunity to meet yesterday but it was only for a brief time.
But I've left that meeting with a very clear impression of the two of you.
And I'm very clear in my impression that pomp and circumstance is not your natural home and that there are aspects of today that you have probably thought about a great deal and maybe even lived a little bit in trepidation of. 
I've also left with a very clear impression about your modesty, about the amazing acts of valour that you performed. 
And so to you, Corporal Keighran, here today despite your modesty, we acknowledge those acts of valour.
We acknowledge them because it is always important to accurately record the history of our nation and what makes our nation.
And these acts of courage speak to who we are as Australians.
You don't need to be a religious person to understand the force of the words that greater love hath no man than to lay down his life for his friends.
You showed your preparedness to lay down your life for your mates.
We are so glad that your spectacular acts of bravery still saw you returned home to us safe and to your family and friends safe.
But they were spectacular acts of bravery, where in the moment you did not put your personal safety first but you put that Anzac tradition of mateship first. 
That's why we are honouring you today; that's why it will be another moment in our history where we can say that this is the best of who we are and the best of what Australians can do.
Thank you for proving that once again for our nation.
I trust in the days to come that apart from the whirlwind, there are some quiet moments for you to reflect with your family and friends on what this means.
You can tell some remarkable stories.
You told me some yesterday about the difference in sound a bullet makes depending on how close it is to your head and that you were conscious of that in the moment.
A remarkable story.
Kathryn told me that perhaps she didn't really know why you were getting the VC until it was clear that you were getting the Victoria Cross because you hadn't come home to share that.
That was something that you had kept to yourself and to your mates.
All of that speaks of a tremendously Australian character.
That's who you are and we honour you today.


Canberra
The House will now be aware this is a very special day for Australia.
This morning I attended Government House to witness the award of a Victoria Cross to Corporal Daniel Keighran.
In Afghanistan, Australia has seen moments of great sorrow and great courage; on the 24th of August 2010 in a single engagement we saw both.
That day, our troops were patrolling with soldiers of the 4th Brigade, Afghan National Army at the village of Derapet in Uruzgan province.
Our patrol was attacked from three separate locations at once by a numerically superior enemy.
It was vital that the Australian and Afghan forces could direct their fire accurately against the enemy positions.
Corporal Keighran and another member of the patrol moved to an exposed ridgeline to identify the enemy and to direct our fire.
Corporal Keighran then deliberately drew enemy fire, pushing forward over the ridgeline to identify targets for our gunners  -  and he exposed himself to enemy fire again when he came back to the crest to direct the fire of our light armoured vehicles.
He helped turn the fight in our favour.
Speaker, the fighting brought an Australian casualty.  
Corporal Keighran risked his life, drew enemy fire away from the team treating his Australian mate, and then helped clear the landing zone for his mate's evacuation.
That was Lance Corporal Jared MacKinney.
The 24th of August 2010 was a day of sorrow: Lance Corporal Jared MacKinney was killed in action. 
We remember him.
And it was a day of honour: Corporal Daniel Keighran earned the Victoria Cross. 
We honour him.
And we honour the four other Australians who have been decorated for their acts on that day.
Some Australians in Afghanistan have performed astonishing acts of individual courage which will be remembered forever.
Corporal Mark Donaldson VC, Corporal Ben Roberts-Smith VC and now Corporal Daniel Keighran VC.
Today we pay tribute to their exceptional and extreme acts in the presence of the enemy.
Today we should also pay tribute to the quiet courage of every Australian who deploys.
Whether they are the ground crew who serve the airfield at Tarin Kot, the workshop supervisors who train the Afghans and manage our equipment, the headquarters staff who plan transition, the development advisers who walk the villages of the south to help the Afghan people; their devotion to their duty is incredible. 
Their presence amongst us is one of the privileges of our generation.
We are lucky to have them all and we should be proud they are Australians.


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
We should never underestimate the boldness of the decision taken by Ben Chifley to open the doors to mass migration almost seven decades ago.
Yes, we had small ethnic communities like the Chinese who'd been attracted by the gold rush and the Italians who came to work in the canefields in the 1920s.
But overwhelmingly, we were a small, insular, homogenous community, and we were asked to embrace profound and lasting change.
Yet it worked.
Immigration worked.
And it worked because we made it work.
We accepted that our nation would never be defined by race or ethnicity like so many other countries.
Instead, we would define ourselves by our values and our way of life.
Our love of freedom and democracy.
Our egalitarian cast of mind and our relaxed outdoor lifestyle.
Our willingness to work hard and play fair.
And we said that anyone who embraced these things could be called an Australian.
Your admission ticket was your commitment.
The commitment to choose this place from all the world.
To serve it and fight for it, and to always call it home.
Friends,
That's the decision my parents made.
That's the decision you and your parents made around so many kitchen tables  -  in Sicily and Saigon, Beirut and Bangalore.
All those decisions converged, from the four points of the earth, upon this land  -  its future  -  and its possibilities.
In a sense, this is the story of two journeys. Our journey of post-war immigration and our journey of economic modernisation. And how they have intertwined across these extraordinary decades.
Australia was a great country before post-war migration.
But our migrants showed us a way to make it greater still.
Ethnic businesses are a big part of the story.
Your hard work and self-sacrifice are legendary, from the smallest corner store to the great enterprises founded by migrant pioneers like Westfield to business leaders like Ahmed Fahour at Australia Post.
And so many of you have invested time in building links between Australia and the countries from which you've come.
Today, the skills and connections of our ethnic businesses are more valuable than ever as the world's centre of economic gravity shifts our way: the transformation unprecedented in speed and scale, we call the ‘Asian Century'.
On Sunday I released a plan for our nation's future in the Asian Century. A plan for Australia to prosper and thrive in this age of unparalleled growth and change.
This is a century when innovators will flourish.
A century when Australia will be well served by its creative entrepreneurial culture and its vibrant multicultural society.
Our ethnic businesses are custodians of many of the capabilities we need to succeed: language skills; people to people links; knowledge of how business and government operates in Asian societies; and perhaps most importantly, helping to develop greater understanding of the diverse cultures of Asia among all Australians.
Since the first post-war migrants landed in Sydney in the summer of 1947, we learnt to value diversity as a source of strength for our society.
In more recent years, it has also become clear that diversity is a source of strength for our economy as well.
So in 2012, we can say with greater confidence than ever:
Post-war migration began as our nation's greatest experiment.
And it has become our nation's greatest success.
Because as migrants, we accepted that in a new land, we shouldn't only take but give as well.
And if the road was tougher because of our background, we would try all the harder to succeed.
Our parents didn't come here just because they sought jobs or prosperity. They come because they saw a country worth believing in.
A place so compelling they were willing to leave everything they knew and loved to be part of it.
And here on these bountiful shores, they would repay freedom and opportunity with effort and excellence.
The very effort and excellence represented in these awards, and in the remarkable men and women who receive them tonight.
On behalf of all Australians, I thank you for all that you have given to our country.
United in our diversity, and unafraid of the future, let us seize the opportunities of the Asian Century together.


Central Coast, NSW
The Australian Government today opened the refurbished Laurie Maher Coast Community Centre on the NSW Central Coast.
The Government contributed funding of $890,000 towards the $2.2 million refurbishment.
The refurbishment was completed using funding from the first round of the Regional Development Australia Fund (RDAF), worth almost $1 billion.
The improved centre will now offer improved access to many people in the local community who are in urgent need of assistance.
Free services offered at the refurbished Laurie Maher Coast Community Centre will include meals, shower and laundry facilities, food parcels, community meeting room and conference room and referrals.
The Laurie Maher Coast Community Centre provides a place for the most vulnerable and marginalised members of the local community to help them with the difficulties they encounter.
The Government pays tribute to staff and volunteers at the Laurie Maher Coast Community Centre for the vital work they do in helping the most vulnerable and disadvantaged in their local community.


Central Coast, NSW
PM: It's a very great pleasure to be here today with Deb O'Neill in her electorate of Robertson. We've had an absolutely fantastic day.
I'm here at a tremendous school, at Saint Edward's, and I've had the privilege of not only meeting some of the boys who study here, but girls from Saint Joseph's as well.
This is a school where Deb O'Neill taught, so she knows it well, and we've had the opportunity to hear from these kids today about the things that are on their mind.
I've also had the opportunity today to meet with some great local volunteers, to open the Community Centre in North Gosford and to honour Laurie Maher in its opening. So we have had a tremendous day.
I've been speaking to these children today about the future they will live in, where we are turning to the Asian region for our economic future. Making sure that we can seize all the possibilities of this age in which we live, where our economic future will be defined in our region and our region will be home to the greatest number of middle class people on earth.
If we're going to win that economic race, we've got to win the education race. There is nothing more important to our nation's future than what is happening in Australian schools, which is why I'm so disappointed that as we are seeking to build up the resources in education, we are seeing the New South Wales State Government cut that funding back.
I'm particularly disappointed that now Premier O'Farrell has found another billion dollars in his budget, that he isn't looking to use that billion dollars to make up for the cut backs to these great schools. So I'd say to Premier O'Farrell  -  standing in a fantastic school today  -  with a billion dollars more in his budget, he should be looking at investing that money in schools rather than cutting them back.
I also note today that Tony Abbott has been out giving a speech on productivity. Giving a speech in which he has rehashed and recycled some tired old ideas.
He has re-announced an idea from May this year about cutting red tape. But I also note that he's announced a productivity committee today to be led by Mr Steve Ciobo, who made it absolutely clear a little bit earlier this year that his answer for productivity is bringing back WorkChoices and individual contracts.
Australians don't want these rehashed ideas from the past like WorkChoices. They want us to be building for the future, which is why I delivered a national plan for our nation's future on the weekend. And I've been here in this wonderful part of Australia talking to kids who are going to live their futures in this new age about what it means for them.
I'm very happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Now that Ralph Blewitt has admitted he committed fraud in relation to setting up a slush fund with the AWU, would you welcome a police investigation into that matter?
PM: It's all a matter for the police and they can do whatever they want to do.
JOURNALIST: Would you welcome that?
PM: I'm not at all worried about anything to do with any of this. It's 17 years ago. The fact that the Opposition is in this sleaze and smear is just telling people they haven't got any ideas for the future. Any authority that wants to do anything about any aspect of it  -  fine by me.
JOURNALIST: In Tony Abbott's speech today he indicated he'd set aside sitting to (inaudible)?
PM: This is part of Mr Abbott's con job on the Australian people. He's trying to tell Australians he will get rid of carbon pricing  -  he never will. They'll have a little fiddle. They'll have a little name change if they are in a position to after the next election. Like every other living Liberal leader, he believes in carbon pricing.
But, what the next election will actually be about isn't this tired old scare campaign. Or Mr Abbott's name changes for policies. What it will actually be about is who has got a plan for the nation's future.
We've delivered a plan for Australia's future to make us a winner in this time of change. To make sure we're the economic winner, and we win the education race. That's what the next election's going to be about  -  our plan versus the negativity and tired old rehashed announcements we're now seeing from the other side.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: If asylum seekers raise claims that aren't credible, then action will be taken as we've taken over the past few days.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: They didn't raise a claim which would give you any reason to believe that they had a well-founded fear of persecution.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: What we are doing is as people arrive, making assessments about whether or not they have any credible claim and if they don't have any credible claim, then they should return to where they came from.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: The processes that are being gone through are proper processes. If people don't have any credible claim, then they should be returned to where they came from.
JOURNALIST: Craig Thomson, one of your former MPs was pretty critical of it yesterday, saying that it's basically saying that the Howard policies were right. What's your reaction to that?
PM: We've been guided in the policies we're taking by a review led by Angus Houston, a former Chief of the Defence Force. And we have committed to implementing every aspect of that review.
I think Angus Houston is an incredibly powerful voice. He's a man with a depth of experience in defence matters. He was assisted by a foreign policy expert and a refugee policy expert. We have said we will implement the recommendations of that most high-level review.
JOURNALIST: Can I just get you on the record saying now, 17 years on from AWU, that you can categorically rule out that you received any-
PM: I've done it a thousand times, we'll send you 100 pages of transcript.
JOURNALIST: Just going back to Craig Thomson, obviously he's no longer a member of the Labor Party, or certainly a suspended member of the Labor Party. It means the Labor Party doesn't necessarily have a representative in Dobell at the moment. The Central Coast is renowned as a swinging area. Less than a year out from the election is it something that you need to look at potentially, pre-selecting someone there?
PM: There will be a Labor person for people to vote for in Dobell come the next election.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it will be Craig Thomson?
PM: Mr Thomson is no longer a member of the Labor Party. There will be a Labor person for people to vote for at the next election.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott's speech today he also indicated (inaudible)?
PM: Well decoded that means he hasn't got any plans.
JOURNALIST: Just to be clear you said Craig Thomson's no longer a member of the Labor Party. Does that mean that suspension will never be lifted  -  he'll never return to the caucus?
PM: Mr Thomson is an independent member of parliament now. What I've just said to you is there will be a Labor person for people to vote for in Dobell at the next election.
JOURNALIST: How important is the Central Coast  -  obviously Deb doing a great job in Robertson  -  but both seats have swapped hands so many times.
PM: Every part of the country is important to me as Prime Minister. But I do get Deb raising with me very, very routinely how important this part of the world is, how beautiful this part of the world is, and the needs of the Central Coast.
So I get great advice on what's happening on the Central Coast and we will keep working here the way we have. We've invested here in the new integrated cancer centre to meet this community's needs. We've invested in the GP super clinic to meet this community's needs.
We're rolling out the NBN here to meet this community's needs. We're continuing to make record investments in local schools so these kids of this community have a great future, and the list goes on.
I've very proud to be working alongside Deb O'Neill on everything that her electorate needs, and of course across the Central Coast, across New South Wales, across Australia we'll be working with Australian communities as we deliver our plan for the nation's future.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: Persistence, in a word, persistence.
JOURNALIST: Can I just throw the AWU thing forward if you will so (inaudible). Would you welcome the release of further legal documents in relation to your setting up the fund and would you free Mr Blewitt or Mr Wilson from any legal or professional privilege that he may have had?
PM: You completely misunderstand the situation. Legal professional privilege is about the client, it's absolutely nothing to do with me.
JOURNALIST: If they cleared you of it-
PM: It's nothing to do with me.
JOURNALIST: Would you welcome-
PM: The premise of your question is wrong. It's nothing to do with me. It's a matter for them. They are the holders of the legal professional privilege not me, nothing to do with me.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) the legal documents?
PM: You're on completely the wrong tram, you misunderstand the situation. I've answered all of this before. Questions of privilege are nothing to do with me. The privilege relates to the client.
Okay, thank you very much.


Central Coast, NSW
The Australian Government today announced 4,800 not-for-profit volunteer organisations will receive $16 million as part of the Volunteer Grants 2012 initiative.
These grants of between $1,000 and $5,000 are being delivered to recognise the valuable contribution volunteers make to Australian society.
These grants will help community organisations to purchase much-needed equipment or as a contribution towards training courses, background checks and transport costs of volunteers with disability who are unable to drive.
More than 166,000 volunteers are set to benefit from this year's grants.
The most commonly requested items for use by volunteer organisations are computers, fuel, and training courses.
Volunteer Grants are one way that the Government can say thank you for the selfless work and commitment of the nation's volunteers.
The grants support volunteers who work in disadvantaged communities, assisting vulnerable people within our society, including Indigenous organisations.
Organisations such as the Country Women's Association will use the grant to purchase kitchen equipment and marquees, which will help their volunteers organise events which build support networks in rural and remote communities.
Through these grants, volunteers are better equipped to assist those who are marginalised, disadvantaged or facing hardship remain connected to their community.
In Australia, more than six million people volunteer each year, accounting for over one-third of the population.


Central Coast, NSW
The Australian Government is partnering with Facebook and two youth not-for-profit groups, headspace and PROJECT ROCKIT, to take a stand against cyber bullying through the Be Bold, Speak Up campaign.
Bullying is a real issue for everyone - for parents, teachers and kids. 2009 research by the Edith Cowan University gave us a staggering statistic: one in six students are bullied weekly. They also found one in five students has experienced some form of cyber-bullying.
Bullying no longer takes place in dark corners behind school buildings or at the bus stop. It's happening online for the world to see, and it's happening now.
We want to ensure every child has a positive and meaningful experience at school, and this means getting everyone involved. We must work together as a community to put an end to bullying.
The campaign was officially launched at Matraville Sports High School in Sydney today by Minister for School Education, Early Childhood and Youth, Peter Garrett, Minister for Mental Health, Mark Butler, representatives from headspace and PROJECT ROCKIT and ambassador Ruby Rose.
A video message from Prime Minister Julia Gillard was played at the event.
Facebook users can make a personal commitment to stop bullying by downloading the Social Pledge App.
The App is about saying ‘I will not tolerate bullying.' It also enables parents and kids to recruit others to join the campaign. 
We hope many of the 11 million Australian Facebook users will make the pledge, by the next National Day of Action Against Bullying and Violence on 15 March 2013.
This Government has been taking a stand against bullying  -  this includes equipping school communities with resources so they all have positive and pro-active safe school policies in place.
We held the first ever national anti-bullying forum earlier this year to bring together teachers, parents and young people to work out what more can be done.
We committed $4 million to develop new online toolkits to help parents, teachers, and students deal with school bullying. They include resources for parents, teachers and school support staff, well as equipping graduate teachers with the knowledge and skills when they first enter the classroom.
As part of the National Plan for School Improvement, we want every school in the country to have a safe school plan in place which details how they will tackle bullying. We need to ensure our National Safe Schools Framework is endorsed by all Education Ministers.
To support young people experiencing broader mental health issues the Government has also invested nearly $200 million to expand headspace services nationally and online, while also investing in school-based supports like Mindmatters.
However, all of these tools, while valuable, will only be effective if everyone works together to address bullying.
Everyone involved in this initiative should be congratulated for their commitment to this important issue.
You can join the campaign by taking the pledge on Facebook:  https://www.facebook.com/beboldstopbullyingau/app_225649917566630 and you can spread the message in your community by liking the Facebook page: https://www.facebook.com/beboldstopbullyingau


Sydney
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Defence Science and Personnel Minister Warren Snowdon today released a new commemorative pin for Defence families.
The pin is the culmination of the efforts of Milan Nikolic, a former UN peacekeeper who served in Rwanda, and Deb O'Neill, the Member for Robertson and Milan's local MP, who suggested to the Prime Minister that families of Defence Force members deserve official recognition.
Designed to recognise the sacrifice Defence families make when our military personnel are away from home, the pins will be provided to families across Navy, Army and the Air Force.
This is a small but important way of recognising the family members that go through the emotional and at times difficult experience of having a loved one deployed overseas.
As a nation, we appreciate the bravery and service of our military personnel, however, we should also remember the sacrifices of their families, going for long stretches without their loved ones, and the heightened anxiety knowing they are deployed in a conflict zone.
Following an announcement in April by the Prime Minister and Minister for Defence Science and Personnel, the Department of Defence has worked on the pin's design with family support organisations including Defence Families Australia.
This is the first time that a universal and official pin of recognition has ever existed to recognise the contribution made by the families of Defence Force members.


Sydney
PM: I'm here this morning with the Minister for Defence Science and Personnel, Warren Snowdon and also with Deborah O'Neill, the Member for Robertson.
I'm actually going to get Deb to tell the story of what has brought us here today, and then I'll say a few words about the new Defence Force pins for Defence Force families. So Deb, over to you.
DEBORAH O'NEILL MP: Thank you Prime Minister.
On Remembrance Day a couple of years ago I met a man by the name of Milan Nikolic who had served in Rwanda, and he said he wanted to talk to me about an idea and he eventually came into my electorate office and put before me an idea about acknowledging exactly what it is that families give in terms of their service of the nation by keeping the home fires burning while our men and women are off serving.
Milan spoke about his family, and about a particular moment where he wasn't in the best physical, mental shape, and his wife said we deserve a medal for what we have to put up with as a family sometimes.
And I think he's a very frank and generous spirited man, and I think that really cut through. And his son said yes, a badge or a pin would be a good idea.
So Milan worked on that idea and when he came to see me with that idea, he was very, very encouraging and I thought that's an opportunity for democracy to act.
So with that sense of an idea growing from a good heart and a real response to a real family's issues in dealing with returning from service.
I was very happy to put forward the idea of a badge of respect, a badge of honour for the families who do so much and give so much while the loved one that they have is away serving.
So that's Milan's story, it's from the kitchens of the Central Coast, and I know that families right across the nation who are now able to receive this badge will be delighted that Milan had the courage of his convictions to come forward and I'm delighted to see democracy in action.
Because when I presented the idea to the Prime Minister, I think she understood exactly as I did that there was a resonance that this was a truthful, honest and timely acknowledgement of the hundreds of thousands of people who've had to manage having mum or dad not there with them.
PM: Thanks Deb. Thank you very much to our Member for Robertson.
This was a fantastic idea and as soon as Deborah came and spoke to me about it, I believed we should get this done.
So today I am very proud to stand here with our Minister and to say that Defence Force families who have a loved one serving overseas will be eligible for this pin.
This pin will acknowledge for us, as a nation, we will be acknowledging to those family members that they too share in their loved one's service.
They too pick up part of the burden. The burden of having your family member overseas and away from home. The burden of worrying about their safety. The burden of dealing with all of the moments of family life in the absence of a family member.
Whether that's the birth of a new baby, or the first day a child goes to school, the day a child ends school, the day they get the all-important university offer or perhaps an apprenticeship, the day a family member's sick.
All of these things are dealt with by our Defence Force families in the absence of loved ones, and so this pin recognises that sacrifice and that service.
It's also a way of identifying to the general Australian community who in our nation has a loved one serving overseas, who we should be looking out for, we should be having a quiet word with, seeing if they're going alright, if there's anything that we can do to help.
So a way of the nation knowing who amongst our midst should be honoured by us and should be offered care and support.
I think this is a very exciting development; it's been a great pleasure to meet with some Defence Force families today.
I'll turn to the Minister to describe the way in which the pin will be distributed and eligibility for it, and then we'll be happy to take your questions.
MINISTER SNOWDON: Thanks Prime Minister.
Can I just endorse all of your remarks about the importance of this pin firstly, and can I think Julie Blackburn from Defence Families of Australia for her great leadership role in working with us around the design of the pin.
The pin will be made available for those people operations and those on future operations. It will be done through the Defence Community Organisation, and it's very important that people understand that there is an entitlement to get access to this pin.
So if people have someone who's serving overseas and they'd like one of these pins, all they need to do is contact the Defence Community Organisation and they'll be forwarded to them.
Can I thank you Prime Minister for today and the Member for Robertson for her great initiative.
It's great to see us coming together as a result of a kitchen table discussion between a local member and a constituent, to come down and hear an announcement by the Prime Minister of this type, which will be very important to all Defence families.
PM: Thank you. We're happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Nick Greiner's GST review says it's not raising revenue and that perhaps it should. Will your Government consider looking at it and raising the (inaudible)
PM: No we won't. We won't be raising the rate of the GST; we won't be broadening the base of the GST. We asked Nick Greiner, along with former Victorian Premier John Brumby and assisted by others, to look at the question of the distribution of the GST.
So we will receive their report and analyse their report, but in the past I've ruled out any increase to the GST and I rule it out again today.
JOURNALIST: Do you support legal action against Rob Oakeshott over comments he made about the mining tax?
PM: Minister Ferguson will not be pursuing such action against Mr Oakeshott and he will be releasing a statement to that effect very shortly.
JOURNALIST: Were you aware he was taking this action at the time?
PM: Minister will be releasing a statement shortly. I had the opportunity to speak to Minister Ferguson about this matter this morning.
Minister Ferguson is a very honest man with a great deal of pride in his reputation for honesty and that's appropriate.
He was therefore offended by comments that he saw in the Sydney Morning Herald, an article in the Sydney Morning Herald, but he does not believe that pursuing legal action is the appropriate way forward and he will be releasing a statement to that effect shortly.
JOURNALIST: Has this damaged the Government's relationship with Rob Oakeshott?
PM: We'll keep working with Mr Oakeshott as we work with members across the parliament to get the job done that the nation needs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there was a teenager in Afghanistan that wandered onto a live-firing range. Do you have any more details on that and why we have people walking on live-firing ranges?
PM: This is obviously a very sad matter. It is going to be the subject of an investigation, and so I don't want to make comments about it until full details are available. But obviously our thoughts are with the person involved.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We have implemented the mining tax that we believe is the right one for the nation. I worked on that directly with Martin Ferguson and with Wayne Swan. We agreed it with some of the nation's biggest mining companies.
So we have enacted the Minerals Resource Rent Tax we think is appropriate, and consequently we won't be taking advice from the Greens political party or anybody else on this question.
JOURNALIST: Are you pleased with the eventual outcome of the ACT election?
PM: I am pleased to be able to congratulate the Labor Party there, and to congratulate specifically Katy Gallagher.
She has been a fantastic leader of the ACT. She's a very valued colleague when the Council of Australian Governments meets, and I'm very glad that she has been returned to leadership in the ACT.
I think that's great for the people of the ACT, and she'll continue to be a very strong voice for them as she deals with the federal government and as she puts their case at the Council of Australian Governments table.
JOURNALIST: With the Labor Government working closer than ever with the Greens Party, is this going to change how Labor policy is at an ACT or at a federal level?
PM: Certainly feel free to speak to the Chief Minister of the ACT about her approach. As to my approach, we're a Labor Government delivering Labor policies and plans for the nation's future.
Thank you very much.


Vientiane
Thousands of the poorest families in Laos will be given assistance to generate thriving small businesses and to improve their incomes, under a new $41.5 million rural livelihoods program.
Laos is reducing overall poverty but poor families in rural communities, particularly in remote and difficult-to-access regions, are vulnerable to shocks and crises like natural disasters.
More than 360,000 children under the age of five in Laos - half of the childhood population - are stunted through malnutrition and around 1.8 million people do not have reliable access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food.
This program will increase the economic security and resilience of poor women and men in rural Laos, and help to reduce poverty levels.
Australia will provide around 350,000 people with the help they need to access financial services, including places to save profits and access loans.
The program will expand and strengthen village banks and provide education on savings, loans and avoiding debt traps, as well as work with Lao regulators to make financial services more accessible for the poor.
More than 35,000 of the poorest people in selected communities will receive intensive support packages.
The support will help households meet immediate basic needs, while providing longer-term opportunities to earn income.
Opportunities include the start-up of household businesses like retail shops and food vending.
Assistance packages will provide a cash safety net to households to cover food and basic necessities while their businesses grow. 
Business support will involve provision of basic equipment, goods and technical guidance from a community facilitator.
Australia will continue to help clear unexploded ordnance that contaminates more than 800,000 hectares of land and provide rehabilitation services to survivors and other people with disabilities.
Up to 250,000 people in rural communities will have safe agricultural land cleared of unexploded ordnance.
Australia will work with the Government of Laos and other development partners including international non-government organisations to deliver these programs from 2012 to 2016.


Vientiane, Laos
PM: Well I'm delighted to be here in Vientiane to attend the Asia-Europe Meeting. I arrived last night and since my arrival I've had the opportunity to meet with the Lao Prime Minister. I've also attended a business breakfast this morning.
In my meeting with the Lao Prime Minister last night I was able to make points about the strong and enduring ties between our two countries. Indeed, we are celebrating our 60th year of diplomatic relations. 
We have a strong economic relationship, particularly based on mining, but one we are working to broaden, and I was pleased at the business breakfast this morning to meet a number of leading Australian business people who are here making their way for Australian business. 
We also have significant people to people links, with 10,000 Lao people living in Australia. And we're very strong partners for development, indeed Australia is one of the top two development partners here in Laos.
Yesterday, I was able to advise the Prime Minister of two new initiatives that we intend to take for development in his nation. Firstly, we will make a $43 million commitment to assisting with rural livelihoods. This is working with people who are subsistence farmers, working to develop their prospects. It goes to very practical measures like de-mining arable land which currently can't be used for faming because of left over unexploded ordinance. It also goes to micro finance and enabling people to start small businesses through micro finance initiatives.
There is also a second initiative which is the development of an institute, a $20 million program, so that we can share our expertise in public policy capacity. So these are two great programs which show in practical ways the way in which Australia can make a difference for countries in our region.
I'm looking forward today to attending the opening of the Asia-Europe Meeting. This is a meeting attended by around 50 leaders and senior ministers from Asia and from Europe as the title would imply. Nine of our top ten trading partners are members of ASEM, as are more than half of the G20 membership and four of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council. 
The agenda of the Asia-Europe Meeting is truly a broad one. It covers the global economic outlook, multilateral trade, non-proliferation issues, and global and regional challenges such as Iran and North Korea.
I will be addressing a section of the meeting this morning on economic matters, and I will be taking the opportunity during the course of the meeting, in my capacity as a Millennium Development Goal co-chair as appointed by the UN Secretary General, to raise the need to push on the achieve the Millennium Development Goals. I'll come back at the end to the intervention I intend to make on economic matters.
I will also, whilst I'm here, take the opportunity to engage in a number of bilateral meetings. I will be seeing the President of France, the President of the European Council, the Cambodian Prime Minister, the Prime Minister of Pakistan and the Foreign Secretary of the UK. I will also be seeing Myanmar's President, Burma's President, and that will be the first formal bilateral meeting between an Australian Prime Minister and a leader of Myanmar, of Burma, since 1984.
On the intervention I will be making in the economic discussions, my focus will be this. The Asia-Europe Meeting brings together two regions of the world which are mutually interdependent but are facing very different economic circumstances.
Europe is facing challenges of restarting growth. It is seeking to come out of recession and to harness growth to create jobs. Asia is facing different challenges.  This is the growing region of the world, where economic weight is coming to this region of the world, where rapid growth is being experienced.
Whether facing either of these two challenges, nations need a clear plan, and regions need a clear plan. For Europe that means individual nations need to deal with the difficult problem of finding a fiscally sustainable path forward, whilst promoting growth and jobs, and Europe needs to build on its current endeavours to address the crisis in the Eurozone to find long term sustainability for the Eurozone  -  in the language of Europe, to create more Europe not less.
Here in Asia, nations need to be managing growth, and particularly managing a switch towards domestic consumption and servicing the needs for infrastructure in their nations.
Here in our region we will continue to work with APEC to address behind the boarder barriers and regional integration through the East Asia Summit. So different challenges, different regional strategies but ultimately mutual interdependency which is why it is important that this meeting endorse the work of the G20 to guide the globe to sustainable long term growth which supports jobs, and to resist protectionism.
This is the first meeting that I've been able to come to where we can say three things. Australia is going to be hosting the premier global entity in the world, the G20. Australia is becoming a member of the UN Security Council and Australia has a clear national plan for its own outlook for growth which is the white paper that I delivered for Australia in this Asian Century.
I think that they are three things that Australians can rightly be proud of, and I will certainly in the course of my discussions with fellow leaders and representatives here, be briefing people of the contents of our White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century, our plan to ensure that Australia is an economic winner in this time of growth in our region.
I'm happy to turn to questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how do you think your message to European leaders will be received?
PM: Well, I find whenever I have these discussions, media reporting put to one side, I find whenever I have these discussions that they are productive ones. Europe knows that the rest of the world has been very focussed and concerned on European measures to address the Eurozone crisis.  Now that wasn't just a bystander's interest that was because the rest of world understood that should matters in relation to the Eurozone become even more problematic that it risk contagion into the global financial system and we'd just seen that with the Global Financial Crisis.
Happily, we are in the situation where Europe has taken a number of effective and important measures to address issues in the Eurozone and more broadly to address issues about fiscal integrations, to address issues through the European Central Bank, to assist those nations that are seeking to recapitalise their banking systems  -  so a lot of good work has been done. Now as Europe turns its eyes to building on that good work, it forces the subject of discussion at a meeting like an Asia-Europe Meeting.
JOURNALIST: What issues will you be raising with the Burma President and how significant in your view is this first meeting in almost 20 years?
PM: I think it's significant in the sense that it's another way of recognising the progress that has been made in Myanmar, in Burma, in progress towards democracy.
I think many Australians have followed issues in Burma closely, many Australians are very big admirers of Aung San Suu Kyi and her ongoing struggle for democracy and change in Burma and we have seen change happen. And as change has happened, every step of the way we have welcomed that change and we have shifted Australian foreign policy settings to recognise that change.
So we have opened up for example economic and trade links. Minister Shorten was recently there, Minister Carr has been there; I think this meeting is another recognition of that change.
Now more needs to happen, you know, more needs to happen on questions like human rights for ethnic minorities so that there is still more to do but we should be welcoming the journey that is being undertaken in Myanmar.
JOURNALIST: Will you be actively encouraging change in the relationship with Burma?  Actively encouraging trade for example?
PM: We've already changed.  We've already changed, we used to have a very comprehensive sanctions regime and we have moved to lift those sanctions so that at every stage they have been appropriately addressed as Myanmar, as Burma, has changed and so you've had Minister Shorten in the last week or so leading a delegation there including Australian business people.
Our remaining sanctions are very limited indeed, targeting as they do a limited number of members of the regime, in terms of their personal ability to deal with Australia and we've still got some decisions to make on future defence cooperation.
JOURNALIST: In that meeting, will you mention the atrocities and will you make it clear that Australia won't stand for that?  What will you be saying about human rights?
PM: I will certainly say, as I have said here, that we have continuing concern about human rights questions for ethnic minority groups.
JOURNALIST: On the white paper Prime Minister, there's some criticism of it today from Richard Woolcott who's made the criticism of it that it's not addressed in relation with China fully. He's suggesting that there be a top law regular, top level contact between Australian and Chinese leaders and to assure China that we're not, that Australia does not believe in a policy of containment.  What do you think of his comments on that regard?
PM: One of the things I wanted to do through delivering the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper was to provoke what I hope is an all-consuming national debate about our future in the region in which we live, so I welcome all of this commentary and dialogue. It's exactly the national debate that we should be having.
On the Asian Century White Paper and it's the outlook on China. The white paper is very clear, as the Government has consistently been clear, we welcome China's rise into the global rules based system. We've got deep relationships with China at every level, we will continue to build on those deep relationships and we do not support and we do not engage in a containment strategy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you be, like to meet a victorious Obama in Phnom Penh in a couple of weeks?
PM: I don't comment on elections in other nations. Obviously, all of the talk is of the American election which is understandable. I know many people who'll be back at home watching the coverage as it comes through. 
Whoever is the President of the United States, we will continue to have a strong relationship with the United States. We are the oldest of allies; we are the deepest of friends. That alliance, that friendship has survived the twists and turns of politics in both nations over decades and decades and decades and it will endure for the future, whatever the outcome of the election in America, in and around our Melbourne Cup day. We call it Melbourne Cup day but the time change makes it slightly different.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are promising to deliver a budget surplus even though Deloitte Access Economics is forecasting now a $4 billion deficit?
PM: Well the Treasurer's dealt with this domestically and let me say what he said and what we said in the Parliament last week. We faced revenue write-downs of more than $20 billion when we delivered the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.
We made the hard decisions necessary to ensure that when we delivered that outlook there was a budget surplus. We stand by the predictions, the entries in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, we stand by the figures and we're on track to deliver a budget surplus.
JOURNALIST: Can you promise, can you guarantee that you will deliver it?
PM: And mining, MRRT revenue got written-down in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.
JOURNALIST: And can you guarantee or promise that that surplus will be delivered?
PM: We've just delivered MYEFO including big savings which just once again shows our determination to reach surplus. We are a Government that each budget, each Mid-Year Economic Outlook has made big savings, tough decisions and as you see from the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook we are determined  to deliver a budget surplus, we stand by the forecasts and we're on track to deliver it.
JOURNALIST: If global growth though continues to slow as has been forecast, have you allowed for that?
PM: We don't produce a budget or a Mid-Year Economic Fiscal Outlook which is based on hypotheticals. We produce those based on the best projections that Treasury can give us.
These are the professional people who assist this Government, who assisted the former Liberal Government, on whose projections budgets have been made since Adam was a boy.
JOURNALIST: When you say you're on track though, do you acknowledge that there are global risks that could mean that you go off track?
PM: Well, we don't deal with hypotheticals. We deal with what's happening, and what's happening has been taken into account in the Treasury forecast in MYEFO.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott says if there's another interest rate cut that would be a sign of economic weakness, do you agree with that?
PM: Well you'd want to walk up into the home of an Australian family buying a house and say, I don't believe you should have an interest rate reduction.
I mean what a ridiculous thing to say. What an offensive thing to say to Australians who work hard and whose dream it is to buy a home. It shows a complete misunderstanding of the economy for which Mr Abbott is famous. His colleague Peter Costello thought he didn't know anything about economics and he's just proved that again today.
One of the reasons we are very focussed on fiscal discipline is it gives monetary policy, that is interest rate policy through the Reserve Bank maximum room to move. 
The Reserve Bank makes those decisions independently of Government which is of course appropriate, but the fact that a family today on a $300,000 mortgage for their home is paying $4,500 less a year for that mortgage than they did when Mr Abbott was in Government is a relief to those families. Clearly, Mr Abbott doesn't think they should have the benefit of those kinds of interest rate reductions.
JOURNALIST: Is Treasury being politicised given the leakings of the Coalition's policies and given that the leaking is clearly aimed to damage the Coalition?
PM: This is the kind of offensive nonsense we've come to understand from the Opposition.
If a climate change scientist speaks, they attack the climate change scientist. If an economist speaks in favour of carbon pricing, they attack the economist. If public servants professionally get about their jobs, then they attack the public servants. 
The truth is, as anybody familiar with the operations of Government would know, that Treasury, full of professional people, is doing its job for this Government, the same way that Treasury used to do the job for the Howard Government.
To suggest anything else is an insult to those hardworking professionals, and I trust in due course it will be apologised for.
JOURNALIST: Did the Government leak the Treasury analysis?
PM: Well Treasury does its job. If people have got issues with the Government then direct them at the Government, don't criticise hardworking public servants. 
Okay, thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: Any tips for the Melbourne Cup?
PM: I'm going to go for Americain on the basis that everybody is very focused on US election. So, I'm not an expert when it comes to horse racing so I'm not suggesting people should be necessarily following my tips. There's a whole industry to help people with this who spend more time studying the form.
JOURNALIST: Are you putting money on this?
PM: I understand a strong stayer, so a good horse to back.  I'll be participating in a sweep right here with our Embassy staff. Which horse I'll get in the sweep, I don't know.
Thank you very much.


Vientiane, Laos
Workers in Laos will be given training and skills to help their country to tackle key development challenges, including improving women's empowerment and helping people with disability.
The Prime Minister today announced in Vientiane the establishment of a new Laos-Australia Institute to provide comprehensive training to Government, civil society and the private sector.
The Institute  -  opening in 2013  -  will deliver $20 million in funding over four years to administer this training.
Education is one of the best investments the Government can make. Education transforms people's lives and helps to build a new generation of global leaders.
Australia is proud to support the Government of Laos in their efforts to achieve this major development priority.
This program will help selected organisations improve their human resource development planning - leading to more efficient delivery of basic services.
Australia, through AusAID, provides Laos with around 45 scholarships for study in Australia each year. To date, more than 1000 Lao people have been provided with the opportunity to study in Australia through Australian scholarships.
Many now occupy senior positions in government and private enterprise, and are playing leadership roles in Laos' development.
In addition to managing the Australia Awards in Laos, the Institute will provide at least 280 scholarships to students from disadvantaged backgrounds for study in the country's own institutions.


Vientiane, Laos
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: I've had a good time being able to watch the Melbourne Cup with our hardworking embassy staff here. It's fantastic to be able to spend some time with our embassy staff here. I try and do it as I travel because I always want to say a very big thank you to them for everything that they do for Australia's reputation around the world.
There's been a few moments off to watch Melbourne Cup but our staff here and around the world really do work very hard indeed, holding Australia's reputation up high, making representations for our nation to governments overseas, supporting Australians who need consular assistance overseas, dealing with migration matters and of course delivering our precious AusAID. So a very big thanks to them.
I'm here for the second day of the Asia-Europe Meeting, and this morning I've had the opportunity to speak in a discussion about global issues. I focused particularly on the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. 
I have been asked by the UN Secretary-General to play a role as a co-chair of a working group, an advocacy group, on the Millennium Development Goals. To say around the world that we need to focus on achieving the most change to combat poverty by the end of 2014.
Tens of millions of kids don't get to go to school. Hundreds of thousands of women die in childbirth and they would have lived, and their child would have lived, if they'd got some basic medical assistance.
These are problems that the world knows how to fix. There are very effective programs out there. And today I have been advocating that we focus our efforts, focus our drive, on achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
I understand what it's like as a leader of a nation to struggle with budgets and priorities, but this is an important moment for the world to focus on delivering the most effective form of aid to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
Yesterday, at the Asia-Europe Meeting, I had the opportunity to talk about circumstances in the global economy, and circumstances in the two regions of the world that come together at this meeting.
Europe faces challenges with recession, with no growth, indeed with negative growth, with not enough jobs, with people experiencing the misery of unemployment and Europe has a journey of building to create jobs and prosperity for the people of Europe.
Much has been done already to stabilise the situation and through the actions of the European Central Bank. But individual nations and Europe as a whole is looking to add to growth to create jobs.
The nations of Asia face different challenges. Many are continuing to grow rapidly even though growth rates have moderated somewhat. But that growth means that increasingly nations in our region, in Asia, need to turn their eyes to domestic demand and increasing it, to the establishment of social safety nets, to investment in infrastructure, and to ensuring that they don't get trapped on a middle income path, that they keep increasing productivity and move to a higher income path.
These are different problems for nations and regions to face, but they require nations to have a plan, regions to have a plan, and for the world to have a plan to promote jobs and growth.
Our nation comes to this meeting with its own plan for the future, the White Paper in the Asian Century, which I delivered, which is about jobs and growth for Australians in the future. And so it's been great to be able to contribute to the discussions on the global economy here.
I've also had the opportunity to engage in a range of bilateral discussions. I met with the President of Burma, of Myanmar. I met with the President of the European Council. I met with the Prime Minister of Cambodia. I met with the President of France and I met with the President of the European Union.
So, it's been good to be able to engage in those bilateral discussions as well. 
JOURNALIST: You talk about the need for a plan to revive the world economy. Do you think that this meeting, this summit, is going to develop that plan?
PM: Well, I think these discussions are always useful as the world struggles with the challenges that it faces post the global financial crisis. The premier economic forum is the G20, and this meeting is responding to the G20's calls for a plan for global growth. I think it is important that nations come together and talk about what each is doing to achieve growth and jobs, what we can better do together regionally and what we can better do together globally. 
I've certainly taken the opportunity to speak about the white paper we've delivered, our plan for Australia's future and our plan to be a winner in this century of growth and change in our region. There's been interest in that and interest in Australia's economic circumstances and of course we come to this meeting with a strong economy.
JOURNALIST: There's talk here about China doing more to assist with the Eurozone crisis, perhaps by using some of its financial reserves to support those Eurozone emergency funds. Does Australia support that idea? Do you think that there's a role for China to play?
PM: Well, I think that there's a role for China to play in the global efforts to enhance growth and jobs, and China has been involved in those discussions at the G20 table. It's been involved in and active on issues like IMF resourcing, so what further it chooses to do, obviously I'll leave to the leaders of China to speak about. But China has been active at the G20 table and beyond as the world has sought to work together to overcome the impact of the global financial crisis.
And whilst our economy is strong and we've got, you know, low unemployment rates by the standards of the world and low inflation, we're a growing economy, we need to remember that around the world, tens of millions of people are still paying the price of the global financial crisis, in the form of unemployment with all of the misery and desperation that comes with that.
JOURNALIST: You also met the Pakistani Prime Minister. 
PM: Yes. Sorry if I neglected to say that, I should have. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Can you also just mention, what exactly did you say to him and what guarantees did he give you about Australian sheep?
PM: We had a broad-ranging discussion, including discussing questions of Afghanistan and our engagement there. But I did raise with the Prime Minister of Pakistan my concern about the graphic and very cruel images we've seen of the treatment of Australian sheep.
I explained to him that Australians are distressed to see these acts of cruelty and that I wanted the matter investigated. He responded that he would investigate this culling of Australian sheep which has been done in circumstances that rightly distress Australians.
JOURNALIST: So what sort of investigation would he undertake? What could it lead to in your view?
PM:  Well, look, he undertook to investigate the matter. I can't prejudge or pre-empt that, or say what structures will be used to do that.
But I was very clear about Australia's concerns, very strong in raising those concerns and very clear that this is something that has distressed the Australian people.  
JOURNALIST: Do you believe this live export industry is sustainable? Or do you think, as some people called for, that it, maybe we should see an end to it?
PM: Well, we've been working hard to ensure that this is a sustainable industry, with appropriate standards for animal welfare. We responded to acts of cruelty in Indonesia and we put in place a supply chain assurance scheme so that we can now work through and track where animals are being slaughtered and whether or not the circumstances of that slaughter meets international standards.
This issue with Pakistan is a different one. This was a false claim about disease in the sheep, and the industry has already voluntarily responded by suspending live sheep being sent to Bahrain and to Pakistan. These sheep were originally due to go to Bahrain and then ended up in Pakistan, so the industry has already responded.
JOURNALIST: On interest rates, they're on hold, what does that say about the Australian economy?
PM: Well, the Reserve Bank sets interest rates independently and explains its reasons in the RBA Minute and my colleague Senator Wong will be speaking directly about these matters in Australia today. Indeed, I suspect she's already done so.
But what I would say about the Australian economy is we have a strong economy. We are looking forward to growth which is in line with the general trend of growth. We've got low unemployment by the standards of the world, low inflation and a family with a $300,000 a year mortgage is $4,500 better off a year under this Government as a result of lower interest rates.
JOURNALIST: Is it a sign that your fiscal strategy isn't working?
PM: Our fiscal strategy is appropriate for the circumstances of the economy now. The Reserve Bank sets interest rates independently, which is appropriate. But our fiscal strategy is right and it is right to give the Reserve Bank the maximum room to move should it choose to do so.
JOURNALIST: The Governor's statement raises some questions about where growth is going to come from, once the investment boom subsides. Where do think it's going to come from? What's your answer on where that future growth will be?
PM: First, on the investment boom in resources, we are yet to see the peak of this investment boom. We are seeing projects worth billions and billions of dollars, tens of billions of dollars that are being invested in right now. So we are yet to see this investment peak.
But, when I delivered our national plan to ensure that our economy is strong and is a winner in this century of growth and change, I specifically talked about the shape and sources of strength of the Australian economy across this century and in the days that lie beyond the resources boom. Though I believe the resources boom will be with us for a long period of time to come. We haven't seen the investment peak yet and we haven't seen the volume peak.
But our economy is seeing a downpayment now in demand for resources from this century of growth in Asia. That demand will ripple out to our food industry, to our wine industry, to our services sector, legal services, health services, education, customised manufactures, tourism. 
All of these industries can benefit from the growth of middle class people in our region, with our region being home to more middle class people than anywhere else on earth. I've charted the future of the Australian economy in the paper I delivered, our national plan for the future.
JOURNALIST: It's now become apparent that Wayne Swan's office commissioned and then gave to the media the costings of the Opposition's policies. Is that a good use of Treasury officials?
PM: Well, it's very routine for Treasury to cost policies that are being talked about in the public domain. And let's be clear here, I understand that the Opposition's involved in a round of look for and then shoot the messenger.
But no amount of spin from the Opposition gets away from the simple fact that three of the policies they say they are committed to have been costed, and they will cost businesses more than $4 billion in the first year.
So, the opposition's out there with a set of policies which would impose a more than $4 billion burden on Australian businesses in year one.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed by your horse's race today?
PM: Well, I amazingly managed to pick out of the sweep the same horse that I backed yesterday, Americain, and it didn't come first, second or third.
But I'm delighted that the Ambassador's son picked the winner out of the sweep, I think there's a nice symmetry in that given that I'm here to thank the staff of the embassy and have an opportunity to meet with their families who do amazing things, come and live in so many places around the world. Young kids going to school around the world, including here, so it's kind of nice he picked the winner.
JOURNALIST: Why did you decide to leave the session early this morning to attend the Melbourne Cup? How did you explain that to other world leaders?
PM: We are represented as the session continues and it's the race that stops a nation and when I'm travelling I still consider that it's the right thing to do, to stop for the Melbourne Cup, just like Australians have right around our nation and right around the world.
JOURNALIST: The former AWU official, Peter Trebilco, has said that if he'd been told by Slater &amp; Gordon back in 1995, 1996, they could have acted about that slush fund more quickly. So the question for you is why didn't you communicate to the AWU what you knew about the creation of that fund?
PM: Well, I'd like to be very clear about the timeline here. Firstly let me say I've dealt with all of these matters extensively on the public record and I've dealt with them in parliament. I know the Opposition is making some points about this, but the statement I made in parliament that they are pointing to I stand by and it is wholly true.
Just on the timeline here, in August 1995 it was becoming apparent within the AWU there were some issues here. In September 1995, it was the subject of an internal review in Slater &amp; Gordon. That internal review is out there in the public domain and what I said in that internal review is not contradicted in any way by any other things that have been said. What I said in that internal review is the truth.
JOURNALIST: Do you regret-
PM: Let's just, there's issues here with the coverage, and because of issues in the coverage, there are issues in your questions.
My role here was as a lawyer. I provided advice on the incorporation of an association. I was never connected with the operation of any fund. Never connected with the operation of any fund. I was not an office bearer of the association. I was not involved in its activities. I was not involved in any bank accounts it may have held. I was not an official of the AWU. I was not in charge of the conveyancing file. So you are effectively asking me why didn't I report to authorities things I did not know.
JOURNALIST: One last question on Myanmar, please. Did you raise the issue of the (inaudible) with Thein Sein and, if so, what was his reaction?
PM: I did raise with the President my concerns about the treatment of ethnic minorities in Myanmar, in Burma, and that at a time of so much progress on human rights, we would also look for progress on the treatment of ethnic minorities.
Okay, thank you very much.


Vientiane, Laos
PM: It's been a very great delight to visit this school today. I'd like to say a very big thank you to the principal and the kids, to the teachers here at Hom Neua School. We're here today to mark the friendship between our two countries.
And as I frequently say in Australia, there's nothing more important happening in any nation on any given day than what is happening in the schools of that country.
So if you want to see the future defined, go to a school. That's true of our country, it's true here in Laos and it's been great to be able to visit this school today.
I'm glad we've been able to make a little bit of a difference for this school too, by presenting 100 books. And our embassy through its own fund, which helps with small works, is donating $40,000 to get this school a new roof. I think you can see why it's required.
I'm here too to formally announce that Australia will fund two new aid initiatives for the Lao people.
First we will be devoting $43 million to a rural livelihoods program. This will be working with some of the poorest Lao people, people who are farmers, who are looking for an opportunity.
It will do very practical things like help clear unexploded ordinance from what is arable land so you can get to it safely. It will help with financing arrangements so people have somewhere safe to store their savings, and so that they can get the appropriate support to start a small business if they want to.
It's about boosting incomes for some of the poorest people in this nation.
I'm also pleased to announce today that we will fund through $20 million an institute jointly for our two countries, which will be about boosting public sector capacity; making sure that we are assisting with training and capacity development so that the Government of Laos has available to it better skills and resources to roll out its own programs of change.
It's been good to be here today with some government representatives who I know are very passionately focussed on education in their own country. I very much enjoyed my visit to this great nation. I very much enjoyed participating in the Asia-Europe Meeting.
I want to thank this nation, Laos, for its hospitality, for everything that it has done to make me and my fellow leaders and representatives of nations in Asia and Europe so welcome for what has been a productive meeting.
Now I think I have failed though  -  and must frankly acknowledge  -  I haven't talked up Australian cuisine, so I'm going to have to hone my pitch when it comes to selling vegemite around the world because I've spectacularly failed to do that today!
But I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Are you off to Bali, can you give us an idea of the message you will be taking there. You're co-chairing that conference?
PM: I will leave here to fly to Bali. I'm doing so because President Yudhoyono has asked me to co-chair a session of the Bali Democracy Forum.
This is President Yudhoyono's initiative. He started it a number of years ago to talk about the development of democracy. Indonesia is uniquely placed to speak about the development of democracy. It's been amazing I think, as an individual and for our whole nation, to watch Indonesia's amazing journey of change.
As a very young parliamentarian I had the opportunity to act as an election monitor for the first free and fair Indonesian elections. I went to West Timor and watched villagers with delight cast their ballots in that election.
We've seen our neighbour move from that election to being a strong democracy and President Yudhoyono wants to take his experience and the strength of the Indonesian democracy and its message out to the world.
My predecessor, Prime Minister Rudd, participated in the first of these forums at President Yudhoyono's invitation. So I'm delighted to accept his invitation to co-chair a session of the Bali Democracy Forum.
JOURNALIST: The Human Rights Commissioner, on a more domestic issue, has raised concerns about Nauru. She says that any more than six months there is a breach of international human rights obligations. What's your response to Gillian Triggs?
PM: Our intention is to fully implement the recommendations of the review of Angus Houston, which has at its basis a no advantage principle. So if you get on a boat, if you pay a people smuggler, then you don't get any advantage. You don't get a resettlement opportunity any more quickly than if you would have stayed put.
We are very determined to implement the recommendations of the Houston review and will do so. This is not a system for indefinite detention, but it is a system to make sure that you get no advantage because you've got on a boat to Australia.
JOURNALIST: What about that Australia will be breaching human rights, international human rights obligations because of this policy?
PM: I'm sure opinions on these questions will vary but the Government is determined to implement the recommendations of the Houston review.
JOURNALIST: Gillian Triggs wants to visit Nauru. She needs the permission obviously of the Australian Government and the Nauru Government. Will you grant it?
PM: She is welcome to work with the Minister of Immigration on that. We are not trying to keep secret what is happening on Nauru or on Manus Island. But we are determined to implement the recommendations of the Houston review.
JOURNALIST: Were you able to use any of your discussions at the ASEM to discuss regional migration issues, even further regional agreements on migration, any progress on that?
PM: It wasn't the focus of the meeting here, so no it wasn't the focus of my discussions. The focus of the Asia-Europe Meeting and the things I was able to discuss both in the meeting and with my fellow leaders included the challenges to the global economy. Asia and Europe are in different positions but we've got a joint interest in a strong global economy.
I talked to leaders about challenges for the world like Syria, like Iran. I talked to leaders about the continuing challenge too with North Korea. And I also made it a personal mission to speak in my capacity as an advocate of the Millennium Development Goals. So that's been my focus.
JOURNALIST: Just on the domestic issue of the Treasury leaking. Do you get your department to conduct analysis of Opposition policies and if so, and when and if you and Wayne Swan do that, are you effectively diverting those resources away from implementing your own policies? Is it a waste of resources?
PM: I believe in an informed public debate. I believe if policy proposals are put out there for the consideration of the Australian people, then they should be fully costed. I think Australians are entitled to know what a policy will cost our nation and their entitled to know if the Opposition's policies are going to cost businesses more than $4 billion in the first year.
Now I do understand that the Opposition sort of worked itself up into a hysterical state about all of this. But the facts here are, their policies  -  three of them  -  will cost Australian businesses more than $4 billion in the first year alone.
I think businesses, the Australian people, are entitled to know that.
JOURNALIST: The fact that it was leaked information rather than a press conference was held doesn't that show that there is a political nature to this? That in fact Treasury is being used to promote the Government's political agenda, it's being politicised?
PM: Facts are facts. I know in much of the Australian debate about things like carbon pricing the Opposition forgets facts are facts and just wanders around and tells you Whyalla's going to be wiped off the map and so on and so forth  -  ridiculous claims.
But at the end of the day, facts are facts. And those policies will cost business. That's a fact. It's been costed. It will cost business more than $4 billion in the first year. That's a fact.
Why would anybody in the Australian political debate say people aren't entitled to those facts? If you were in the Opposition and they were your policies, why would you be ashamed for people to know those facts? Why doesn't the Opposition want people to have the facts? That's the question.
JOURNALIST: One of the other domestic issues is the sheep trade and I see that some of your caucus colleagues were talking about it. I see some remarks from Melissa Parke about needing to move Australia towards a different model where it's domestic processing and then chilled exports. Do you think that's worth aiming for? Do you think it's even achievable?
PM: I'm not at all surprised that people both within and beyond Labor are very concerned, very disturbed, very upset at what they've seen on their TV screens. These are graphic images, they are appalling images of animal cruelty and I'm not surprised that right around the nation, including amongst my own caucus colleagues, there's a great deal of distress about this matter.
I believe that there is a sustainable future for the live animal industry. It is about having the best possible standards and we've worked hard with the industry to ensure that we can track and trace and ensure Australian animals are being slaughtered in circumstances that comply with international standards.
But I do understand people's sense of distress and so I'm not surprised that they're speaking about it.
JOURNALIST: Bob Carr just quickly has been in the region as well in Malaysia. Has there been any movement there in terms of the Houston recommendations?
PM: The discussions between our two countries there are being held between Minister Bowen and his counterpart, Minister Hishamuddin. That's how the original agreement was worked through in detail as well as of course me engaging with my counterpart.
So that's a continuing work, but it would be dealt with by Minister Bowen.
JOURNALIST: Just quickly do you reckon that Barack Obama might be slightly ahead?
PM: I'm not going to put myself in the shoes of election commentator particularly given I'm not bunkered down in front of a TV screen watching the results come in. There'd be a lot of people who are in an easier spot to engage in election commentary than me. I know many Australians will have the TV flicked on and they'll be following it.
Whatever the outcome of the US election, the friendship and alliance between our two countries will be strong. It has been strong for 60 years, it will continue to be strong for the future.
But I'll let the election callers in the US and their friends in Australia actually present the details of the result to people.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 



On behalf of the Government and people of Australia, I offer warm congratulations to President Barack Obama on his re-election and wish him every success for his second term in office.
Australia has worked closely with President Obama and his Administration over the past four years. I look forward to continuing this friendship. 
Australia and the United States are unique partners, linked through culture, values, shared sacrifice and a commitment to international peace and security.
Our Governments and countries share a similar outlook on the world and similar hopes and aspirations for our peoples.
Australia's ANZUS Alliance with the United States has endured for 60 years and continues to make a contribution to the stability and security of our region. 
Our economic ties are deep and broad, benefiting both countries.
The United States is one of our top trading partners and our largest investment partner, including in the Australian resources which are helping fuel Asia's economic growth. 
We are fellow members of the G20, APEC and the East Asia Summit and will work together on the UN Security Council in 2013-14 during Australia's term as a non-permanent member.
US leadership remains vital to meeting global challenges; international financial stability and global economic growth, peace and security, and the impacts of our changing climate. 
Australia has a long history of working with the United States to make a difference on these global challenges.
I look forward to continuing to do so with President Obama on behalf of the people we serve.



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: I think there have been some good things that have come out of this meeting.
There's certainly been an endorsement of the G20 agenda and its perspectives and views about ensuring that we maximise global growth.
There's been much talk of resisting protectionism and not turning our back on the way we can enrich each other through trade and investment exchanges.
I also think that beyond the economic agenda this meeting has done some good work with strong statements for example about Syria as well as about Iran and the problems with North Korea.
HOST: But did you tell the leaders when you were talking about the white paper that it doesn't have any funding attached to it?
And again, was there any practical movement in that sense or was it just generic talk about the white paper and the direction Australia wants to go?
PM: Well I say here to leaders what I say to Australians when I speak about our nation's future, which is our economy is strong, we've avoided a recession during the global financial crisis and leader after leader that I met during the course of the Asia-Europe Meeting is struggling with recession.
That is the common story of nations in Europe; that we are a nation that is seeing a big resources boom.
But there are many more opportunities for us during this century of growth and change.
HOST: Well I will have to ask you, given it did receive worldwide attention - your misogyny sexism speech in the Australian Parliament - did any of the leaders that you met while you've been here raise that with you?
PM: Yes, the President of France congratulated me on the speech, as did the Prime Minister of Denmark and some other leaders just casually as I've moved around have also mentioned it to me.
So some approval here from some leaders at the Asia-Europe Meeting.
HOST: Now if I can just briefly turn to some domestic issues.
Why do you think that it's appropriate for Wayne Swan to get public servants in the Treasury to do costings on Opposition policies for the sole purpose of the Government releasing them to the media to then damage the Opposition, the Coalition?
PM: It is very common for departments to cost and look at proposals that are in the public domain.
I actually think the Australian people are entitled to know what the policies of every political party and what they would cost.
I think the Opposition is really here trying to distract people from the very simple point that it's clear that their anti-business policies would cost businesses more than $4 billion in the first year.
I think Australians are entitled that information.
HOST: But it might be routine for Treasury to do costings on things that are in the public domain. The fact is that the Government has released that information to the public. Does that not politicise Treasury?
PM: Really, I come at it from a different point of view.
We have what is called a Charter of Budget Honesty which obligates Treasury officials to cost policies in the context of an election campaign from all sides of politics.
So the costing of policies by Treasury officials of all sides of politics is routine.
The problem we have is that the Opposition knows that it's in such budget difficulty, that it would need to cut services to Australian families by $70 billion, that it wants to hide everything.
It doesn't want Treasury to see it. It doesn't want Australians to have the facts. Well, I think Australians are entitled to have the facts.
And I think the essential issue here is Australian businesses and the people who work for them are entitled to know that in the first year of an Opposition government, if it were elected, those businesses would be hit by more than $4 billion.
That's a material fact to those businesses, to the people who work in them, and of course to the Australian economy. Why shouldn't Australians have access to that fact?
HOST: There's fresh evidence this week of course that the surplus is on very shaky ground, in fact that the Government won't reach it at all. Can you guarantee, as you've been asked in recent weeks, that the surplus will be delivered by your Government?
PM: I've dealt with this question many, many times and the answer is the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.
We've just worked hard to deliver the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.
We needed in that budget update to deal with the fact that revenues had been written down again by more than $20 billion.
And we did in that budget update what we did in the budget and the budget update before that and the budget before that and so it goes on.
We worked hard to identify savings, many of them controversial. So we stand by the figures in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.



PM: I would like to offer President Obama my warmest congratulations on his re-election. President Obama is a great friend of Australia and I have had the opportunity to work closely with him.
I am looking forward to continuing to work closely with President Obama. Australia and America are the oldest of allies and the firmest of friends. We share values and we have a history of shared sacrifice and we've got so much to do together in these years. 
First and foremost, we have to see our mission through in Afghanistan and continue to make our contribution to peace and security in our world. We've got to work together on the global economy, strengthening jobs and growth, including through the work we do at the G20.
We've got work to do together on liberalising trade and investment, including the work we do through APEC and the work on the Trans-Pacific Partnership. We've got work to do together in the context of the East Asia Summit, which will be held very shortly and which is an important meeting in our region which President Obama will attend.
And of course, we will be working together on the UN Security Council dealing with global challenges. So I do most sincerely and most warmly welcome the re-election of President Obama and I look forward to continuing to work with him as Australian Prime Minister on our shared agenda.
I am happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister did you ever have any doubt that Obama would be re-elected?
PM: I am not an election forecaster, this decision was always in the hands of the American people.
JOURNALIST: What do you think this means now for America for the next four years?
PM: I think President Obama has outlined his policies and plans for the next four years. Domestically he's had made it clear that he will be very focused on the American economy, on ensuring that it creates jobs. He will be very focused on education, on making sure every kid gets a great start in life. We've got a shared passion for education and he has mentioned challenges like tackling climate change and of course this is a global challenge and a challenge for both of our nations.
JOURNALIST: Did you get any inspiration from someone who has won an election with his back against the wall?
PM: My inspiration is in the work that I do in Australia for the Australian people. Every election is different every nation is different, so we will decide the Australian election in 2013 on our own terms.
JOURNALIST: What do you expect to get out of the Bali Democracy Forum, it's the fifth year and it hasn't delivered anything major so far, do expect there can be anything big out of tomorrow?
PM: I am here at President Yudhoyono's invitation. President Yudhoyono asked me to co-chair a section of the Bali Democracy Forum with him. The Bali Democracy Forum is his initiative, it's not a meeting of democracies, it's a meeting about democracy. And President Yudhoyono takes very seriously his role as someone who leads a nation that has become a thriving democracy to talk about the merits of democracy around the world.
So I accepted President Yudhoyono's invitation and I look forward to co-chairing a section of the Bali Democracy Forum with him tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Which leaders have you lined up bilateral meetings with and will you be seeking a meeting with President Ahmadinejad?
PM: Most certainly not on the last.
JOURNALIST: Why not?
PM: Well for all the obvious reasons. On the bilateral meetings I will be meeting with President Yudhoyono for a direct discussion as well as participating in the Bali Democracy forum and co-chairing a section with him. I will be meeting with the President of Korea, with President Lee, and we will look to other bilateral arrangements. But clearly I won't be meeting with the President of Iran.
JOURNALIST: What are the obvious reasons for not meeting, isn't it a good idea to open diplomatic relations with a country that causes friction in the Middle East?
PM: Well we do have an embassy in Iran and we through our embassy and more generally make clear our views about the conduct of Iran, particularly their conduct in relation to nuclear material, the issue that the world has been dealing with. We've made very clear our attitude to that conduct, were engaged in sanctions, as is the world on Iran. And we have also made very clear our disgust at the statements made threatening the future of Israel.
JOURNALIST: With the US elections just passed, both potential candidates, Obama being the winner, have expressed a need to open up to Iran and open up a diplomatic dialogue. You don't seem to share that view?
PM: I am not going to engage in some false divide here. You have asked me a direct question about whether or not I have a bilateral discussion with the President of Iran. I do not.
We of course have diplomatic relations with Iran. We have an embassy in Iran and we use our embassy and other channels to make our views very clear as do other nations around the world use the channels available to them to make their views very clear. So let's not set up a straw man divide here, there isn't one.
JOURNALIST: There is one session on human rights, is it going to be something that is a bit more difficult for Australia to lecture on be upstanding given the very hard line stance on refugees?
PM: We of course raise our voice around the world on human rights questions and the way in which we conduct ourselves in accordance with our obligations under the Refugee Convention upholds human rights standards, I don't accept the premise of the question.
JOURNALIST: Will you be raising asylum seekers with SBY in your talks with him and what will you be seeking to resolve?
PM: I am not going to canvass in advance issues that will be dealt with in bilaterals but I would be happy to speak with you after we have had various bilateral discussions.
Okay, thank you very much.
[ENDS]



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Foreign Minister Bob Carr today announced Australia will support a program to help emerging leaders and officials put democratic ideas into practice.
Announced at the Bali Democracy Forum in Denpasar, the program includes training, visits and dialogue between Asia-Pacific nations. It also supports the independent non-profit Institute for Peace and Democracy which was launched by Indonesian President Yudhoyono in 2008. 
It is fitting that the Institute, which promotes human rights, political party reform and the participation of women in politics, is located in Indonesia, now the world's third largest democracy.
Promoting democracy helps to secure peace, prosperity and stability in our region.
Democracies respect human rights, allow ideas to be put forward and generate the trust in government that helps to achieve economic success.
Australia's aid will continue the Institute's Political Leadership Program, mentoring Asia's young leaders and activists in shaping parties to be more democratic, representative and accountable.
Mentors have previously worked with 15 young political party leaders and activists from countries including Afghanistan, Fiji, Iraq, Pakistan and Solomon Islands in areas including increasing women's political participation in conflict areas and party reform.
Australia's support will also enable the design of a program of activities to increase women's engagement in politics and expand the successful dialogue between Egypt's emerging democratic leaders and the leaders of Indonesia's Reformasi movement to include Tunisia.
Australia provided approximately $800,000 to the Institute from 2008-2012 and has supported the placements of an Australian Business Volunteer and a staff member of the Centre for Democratic Institutions from the Australian National University to the Institute. Australia will provide $1.75 million to the Institute from 2013 to 2015.


Bali, Indonesia
PM: I am delighted to be here in Bali with the Foreign Minister, Senator Carr. I am here to attend the Bali Democracy Forum. I've come at the invitation of President Yudhoyono to co-chair this forum with him and the President of South Korea, President Lee, so it's a great honor to be here.
There is no better place to talk about democracy than here in Indonesia and I want to pay tribute to the leadership of President Yudhoyono in creating the Bali Democracy Forum.
This is a nation that can tell a story about a journey to democracy. In fact I very clearly remember coming here as a young parliamentarian for the first free elections in Indonesia and on my many visits since you've seen over time the development of this strong and vibrant democracy.
What that means is that President Yudhoyono is uniquely positioned to talk about democracy here in the region and around the world. 
This is a meeting about democracy, not a meeting of democracies. But it is a credit to the leadership of President Yudhoyono that so many nations have gathered here for the discussions that will happen today and tomorrow.
Australia has been a big supporter of the Bali Democracy Forum since President Yudhoyono first created it. My predecessor Kevin Rudd co-chaired the initial Bali Democracy Forum with President Yudhoyono. And we have been supporters too of the Institute of Peace and Democracy that supports the work of the Bali Democracy Forum.
And I'm very pleased to be here with Senator Carr to announce that we will make available a new $1.75 million to continue Australia's support for that institute over 2013, 2014 and 2015.
Australia works in our region to support democracy. Whether it's our work in Cambodia, our work in East Timor, our work in PNG, our work in the Solomon Islands, our work on the democracy challenges in Fiji, we work on the spread of democratic practice here in our region and around the world. 
I have had the opportunity to listen to some of the contributions this morning and I will co-chair a session of the Bali Democracy Forum this afternoon. I have also had the opportunity since I have been here to have a bilateral meeting with the Prime Minister of PNG.
We had a discussion about his forthcoming visit to Australia where he will address the National Press Club. I intend to go to PNG in the first quarter of next year which will be my first visit as Prime Minister.
We've had the opportunity to share perspectives following PNG's election in which of course we provided assistance through a number of Australians who went there to support election processes including officials from our Australian Electoral Commission.
I thanked him for the cooperation that his nation is giving us on the issue of people smuggling and the creation of the centre at Manus Island and we had the ability to share perspectives on some of the issues in our region.
Later this afternoon I will have a bilateral discussion with the President of South Korea, with President Lee, I will also have a bilateral discussion with the Prime Minister of Turkey, Prime Minister Erdogan. I am hoping to have a discussion with President Karzai of Afghanistan.
Then tomorrow morning in addition to a bilateral discussion with President Yudhoyono, I will meet in a trilateral format with Indonesia and with East Timor.
This is the first time that at leader level an Australian Prime Minister has meet with an Indonesian President and the Prime Minister of East Timor. When you think about the history in our nations, the history that we share this is a development that I think is significant and I am very much looking forward to those discussions tomorrow.
As I remarked when we were at the UN during UN Leaders' Week, and as I referred to in my remarks to the Bali Democracy Forum this morning, if ten years ago anyone had suggested that in a decade's time democratically elected leaders from Australia, Indonesia and East Timor would sit and meet together in a trilateral format they would have been dismissed as a dreamer, as an idealist. And yet here we are and that is precisely what will happen tomorrow.
I'll turn now to Senator Carr for some comments and then we will take some questions.
SENATOR CARR: It's a great honor to be here as Australians with this initiative of the Indonesian President and for a practical example of its affect on the region, think of Myanmar.
President Yudhoyono took a lead role in the opening of Myanmar, he went there and said the role of the military is in the barracks. And this was very, very supportive of President Thein Sein's Government embarked as it was at the time, on the transition that has transformed the political situation in that country.
We applaud Indonesia's lead role in promoting the ideas of democracy, and it is in that spirit that Australia has got a presence here. Again we thank the Government and the people of Indonesia; this is a great tribute to them. Thank you.
PM: Right we're happy to take some questions and then we'll have to keep on the move.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister today President Ahmadinejad of Iran has described the US election and the result there, said that justice and freedom and human dignity had been sacrificed by the selfishness of a minority, your reaction to that? Something you disagree with obviously?
PM: Well look I didn't hear the President's remarks, I was having a bilateral discussion with the Prime Minister of PNG. So I don't really want to make comments on remarks I haven't heard.
But obviously as you would have told from me comments yesterday about the US elections, the people of America have made their decision and re-elected President Obama. Whatever the political leadership of the US and Australia over many, many decades, our two nations have been firm friends and allies.
I am looking forward to continuing work with President Obama, work in our region, work at the G20, work on an agenda that we share.
JOURNALIST: How do you feel about sharing the stage with President Ahmadinejad?
PM: I am here at President Yudhoyono's invitation as are other leaders and so I am here at a meeting about democracy as I have said to you it's not a meeting of democracies and I am pleased to be here at President Yudhoyono's invitation for what as I have described to you I think is a very important continuing initiative on democracy.
JOURNALIST: Does the President of Iran's presence here undermine the purpose of the meeting?
PM: President Yudhoyono's purpose is to spread democratic practice. That's why he created the Bali Democracy Forum.  He wants to talk about democratic practices and norms and this is a meeting to talk about democracy, it's not a meeting of democracies. So of course the invitation list was a question for President Yudhoyono.
The decision I made was whether or not I would accept his invitation to co-chair this forum and particularly to co-chair the session that will happen after lunch. Given the closeness of our two countries, given my admiration for President Yudhoyono, given the journey that this nation has been on in creating its own democracy, I thought it was a very important opportunity for me to be here as Australian Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: Slightly off topic, given the growing relationship between Australia and Asia (inaudible)?
PM: With nations around the world our practice isn't about visa on arrival, but we do have with some nations around the world e-visa arrangements, so obviously using the power of new technology to make visa arrangements easier.
We worked through those issues with nations bilaterally and obviously it is a judgment call for us and those nations about what best suits.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: We are seeing growth in tourism for example, we are seeing growth in the number of independent tourists from China, and we anticipate that we will see more and more growth of tourism.
We have got to get with our countries in our region and around the world visa arrangements right. It's about balancing ease of access, because of course we want tourists to come to our beautiful nation, against security concerns and other concerns that need to be weighed into the system.
JOURNALIST: As a matter of principle isn't it better to engage with pariah states than isolate them. If you agree with that then why wouldn't you speak to the Iranian President?
PM: We are engaged with Iran. We engage diplomatically with Iran, we have an embassy in Iran and the world is engaged with Iran through the P5+1 process.
What I am obviously concerned about is that despite that engagement, Iran and the President of Iran does not appear to be listening to the concerns of the world about Iran's nuclear program.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister would you have listened to his speech today and been in the room had you not had that bilateral meeting scheduled with the PNG Prime Minister?
PM: We make bilateral arrangements, we make the best use of the time that we can. I was at a bilateral with the Prime Minister of PNG, I wanted to have that discussion to update me personally on matters since the PNG election and that is how I determined to use my time.
JOURNALIST: Did Peter O'Neill raise any concerns at the unrest seen at Nauru and in relation to Manus Island?
PM: No he did not.
JOURNALIST: When the UN mission ends in East Timor this year there will be 900 local staff who potentially face lose job, will you be able to give any assurances to East Timor in that trilateral meeting tomorrow of any support from Australia beyond the end of the Australia UN mission in East Timor.
PM: One of the issues I am sure will be discussed tomorrow is the winding down of the UN mission in East Timor, in Timor-Leste, and what that means for future. So I do anticipate that this will be a subject of discussion.
JOURNALIST: Two questions, firstly when you intimated earlier that your decision to co-chair the Democracy Forum was (inaudible), and my second question is  -  because I am from The Australian  -  with Slater &amp; Gordon (inaudible) why didn't you contact (inaudible)?
PM:  On your second question I refer you to the answers that I gave to a journalist from The Australian when I was in Vientiane.
On your first question, no I wasn't meaning to imply that at all. I made a decision about attending this Democracy Forum because of my respect for the vision and leadership of President Yudhoyono, because we are the closest of neighbours and friends with Indonesia. Because I understand and respect his vision of bringing nations together to talk about democracy, and in our own region, we, Australia, have been a supporter of the spread of democracy.
As I indicated we've supported the spread of democracy in Cambodia, we've supported the spread of democracy to other nations in our region. I believe we appropriately calibrated our foreign policy responses in relation to Myanmar and we've seen remarkable change there.
JOURNALIST: Are you confident of getting the states on board to support the proposals before today?
PM: Like all COAG arrangements it takes a bit of charm and a bit of force and I will be exerting that come December.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: We worked on the Energy White Paper long and hard for a reason and that is because it s very important to our nation. Minster Ferguson in particular worked on it long and hard.
Energy security, energy pricing is of key concern to Australian consumers and businesses. As I made very clear in August there are some clear factors here that are causing increases in energy prices. There is the question of the gold plating of the network, there is the question of dividend to state governments.
I do want to see these issues worked through an addressed in December at COAG. And like all other COAG discussions it does require a bit of charm and a bit of force; I'll be applying both.
Thank you.


Denpasar 
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's a great pleasure to be back in this beautiful island to support this important meeting.
I want particularly to acknowledge our host, the founder of the Bali Democracy Forum, President Yudhoyono.
Your Excellency, Indonesia is a close neighbour but, more than that, you are a close partner and friend.
Your personal initiative in launching this Forum in December 2008 is only one example of your statesmanship and vision.
The Bali Democracy Forum is also striking proof of Indonesia's own remarkable democratic transformation since 1998.
Australia has been proud to work with you in this important Forum.
From the first, Australia has shared and understood your vision: for this to be an open means to promote discussion about democracy, not a closed meeting between democracies.
In your words here last year, “to exchange views, promote dialogue and produce solutions”.
We have enthusiastically joined with you.
My predecessor, Kevin Rudd, co-chaired the inaugural meeting with you in 2008 and the Australian Government has been represented at senior levels at every Forum since.
It is an opportunity for Australia to show our support for your initiative and to share our support for democratic practices and values in our region  -  and the fact that we do so here, in Indonesia, is fitting indeed.
Australia and Indonesia are democratic neighbours.
Indeed Mr President, we recall your own words at that first forum four years ago, when you said:I do not believe in the notion that ‘democracy is not for Asia'.   Many of democracy's success stories have occurred in Asia ... There are many records of the practice of pluralism, consultation, tolerance, consensus building, mutual accommodation, egalitarianism, protection of minority rights throughout Asia.
Mr President, I could not agree more  -  indeed I have seen this with my own eyes.
Australia is proud to have provided not just moral support and encouragement but practical, active assistance for Indonesia's three national elections since 1998.
As a young parliamentarian I came here to Indonesia to be an election monitor for those first free and fair elections fourteen years ago.
I'll never forget the remarkable days I spent among the villages of West Timor as they gathered to vote  -  and it is a great privilege to return once again to a democratic Indonesia today.
Here is a thoroughly democratic system, thoroughly home grown and rooted in the people's own culture and values.
Mr President, the experience of your own nation and that of many others has shown us that the practices and values of democracy can be applied in this region.
This is important for the rights of the people.
Human rights are most secure where government is limited by constitutions and laws, where powers are separated, where free and fair elections are the norm.
Where political speech is free, decision-making is transparent and open and the views and aspirations of citizens find a voice.
And your own nation and many others have also shown that over time the path to democracy is also the best path to development and peace.
The wellbeing of societies, no less than the rights of individuals, is built by our democratic practices and values.
The rule of law, stable property rights, functioning markets and free trade unions all foster economic prosperity and social stability, not just individual freedom.
With all this in mind, Australia comes to Bali as a willing partner to all nations who are on the democratic path  -  our people have a democratic temper.
Australia was amongst the first to adopt the secret ballot, to remove property qualifications for the vote, to extend the right to vote and the right to stand for election to women.
As it does for all democracies, our progress took time  -  we bring with us hard-won lessons of many patient decades of democratic innovation.
We are not complacent  -  we work to improve our democratic practices, to increase transparency of political parties, to improve electoral systems.
And our experience of working with our friends in the region as they build their own democracies is considerable.
Right here and right now the question that must be answered is this: what is the best way that we can support the goals and aspirations of this Forum.
First, we can provide practical support to the conduct of elections.
While there is more to democracy than voting, no single measure does more to embed democracy in a society than the effective conduct of free and fair elections.
Australia funded the Global Commission's recent report, Deepening Democracy: A Strategy for Improving the Integrity of Elections Worldwide  -  and we endorse its key recommendation that donor funding and political engagement continue throughout the electoral cycle, not simply at election time.
Through our development aid program, Australia has supported the strengthening of electoral cycle processes in Indonesia, PNG, the Solomon Islands and Afghanistan.
In Timor-Leste, we have also provided electoral support since 1999, including working with the National Electoral Commission to assist with this year's successful Parliamentary elections. 
We help train election officials, civil society organisations and media representatives in civil education and election management, in order to increase the public understanding of, and support for, these electoral processes.
Australia has also supported the Indonesian Government's Institute for Peace and Democracy since its inception here in Bali in 2008, including in its work with emerging leaders of Egyptian civil society.
And I am pleased to announce today that Australia will further support the work of the Institute through a partnership over the next 3 years, from 2013 to 2015.
Australia is also ready to offer practical support and encouragement where countries have taken positive steps towards a democratic future.
As we have when for example, we acknowledge recent progress towards elections in Fiji, where we have been supporting voter registration.
As we have when we respond to political opening in Myanmar, where we have lifted sanctions, normalised trade and investment links and resumed leader-level political contacts.
Second, we should support the development of the civil society institutions which participate in democratic electoral processes  -  and support measures to include minority groups in democratic politics.
Through the Centre for Democratic Institutions, Australia supports the efforts of governments in Melanesia, Timor-Leste and Indonesia to achieve democratic reform through parliamentary and political party strengthening activities.
Australia partners with Transparency International to strengthen citizen engagement against corruption in the Asia Pacific, sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America.
Australia is also currently Chair of the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (IDEA).
Through IDEA we support the strengthening of election observation, capacity building for electoral management bodies, strengthening of political parties and support to constitution building-work in member states.
Third, we must encourage the participation of women in democratic processes.
In Australia, in the region, in every corner of the world  -  all women are born equal to men.
Yet this inherent equality is far from reflected in the politics and functions of our societies.
Consider the Pacific, where women hold five per cent of parliamentary seats  -  compared to a global average of 18 per cent.
This is why Australia's new 10-year $320 million Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development program will include mentoring and training to female members of parliament and candidates  -  above all, so they can run in elections and win.
I recently took up a role as Champion for the UN Secretary General's Global Education Initiative, Education First, with a particular focus on lifting the education of women and girls  -  and in turn, to lift their social and political participation.
As co-chair of the Secretary-General's Millennium Development Goals Advocacy Group my personal commitment is to prioritise education and the rights of women and girls.
Not only because of the transformative power of education in human development but because of the importance of education to deepening democratic norms.
Finally, Australia lends not only our hand, but our voice.
We not only support democratic practices, we speak out for democratic values. 
Our region has many histories and stages of political development.
There is no single template for democracy.
But there are universal and enduring values, enshrined in international law, which underpin democracy and bring dignity to every individual.
Values such as non-discrimination, the right to liberty, equal treatment before the law, freedom of thought and religion, and freedom of speech and assembly.
Australia is committed to internationally stated and agreed values of development, democracy and peace  -  above all, to the right of all societies and nations to exist in security and peace.
A peace in which the rights of every person and every nation are respected  -  in which agreements between nations are respected and no nation threatens another.
I want to leave you with one final, vital observation.
Fifteen years ago, a person who predicted that today the Australian Prime Minister, the Timor-Leste Prime Minister and the President of Indonesia would all be elected leaders of democratic nations would have risked being dismissed as utopian or naïve  -  never mind had they predicted that all three elected leaders would meet in an atmosphere of friendship and goodwill.
Yet that is now unremarkable  -  and I am so pleased to be here with President Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Gusmao again today.
The lesson is that we should never be imprisoned by the past  -  indeed if the history of the nations gathered here tells us one thing above all, it is how quickly democratic change can come.
The past informs the future, but it should never determine it. 
I look forward to the discussion which will follow, and I know many other important points will emerge.
Thank you.


Bali
PM: I was delighted this morning to participate in the first ever trilateral meeting of Australia, Timor Leste and Indonesia. I've just met with President Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Gusmao.
This is really a moment in history given the history between our three nations; it was really a delight to sit down in this trilateral format. As I said yesterday, 10 years ago if anybody had predicted such a meeting would happen, they would be dismissed as a dreamer. But we have had a good discussion this morning about cooperation between our three nations.
There was a particular focus on connectivity, on what we can do to work together to connect up economic opportunities for our three countries. That is a focus on infrastructure. It's a focus on transport. It's a focus on communications. It's a focus on capacity building and people to people links.
We've agreed this morning that we will take this work forward with a meeting next year in Dili of officials  -  a technical workshop to be held in March or April next year. So it's been a great pleasure to participate in those discussions this morning.
I also had the opportunity this morning to meet with President Yudhoyono and his Foreign Minister. I was accompanied by Foreign Minister Bob Carr. I welcomed President Yudhoyono to Australia in the middle of the year for an annual leaders' summit, so we had a comprehensive discussion then.
I have had the opportunity since to see President Yudhoyono including appearing with him at an event he organised on oceans in Rio at the UN meeting. I also was with him for an event at the UN Leaders week in New York. I've had the opportunity to talk to him at those events, and then again to have a bilateral discussion today.
Our relationship with Indonesia is strong and it is progressing well. In fact, it was those exact words that President Yudhoyono used to describe our relationship at the opening of our bilateral discussions. We've had a discussion this morning about our work together in our region and particularly the East Asia Summit that we will both participate in around a week's time. We've talked about the work that has happened in our relationship since we meet in the middle of the year in Darwin. We've seen Defence Ministers meet, we have seen Trade Ministers meet and Ministers Smith, Clare and Albanese have been here in Indonesia talking about our cooperation on search and rescue.
We were able to talk about some of the challenges that we face together. Issues like people smuggling where we cooperate well with Indonesia. This relationship is very important to Australia. It consequently featured for discussion in the White Paper we delivered on Australia in the Asian Century. President Yudhoyono congratulated me on the delivery of the White Paper and was particularly focused on the words in there about Indonesia and the fact that we will be encouraging Australian students to study Bahasa.
So we've had a good discussion this morning capping off a good period here in Bali participating at President Yudhoyono's invitation in the Bali Democracy Forum.
I am looking forward to returning to Australia in not too long away from now, but I will take a few questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, for you explain when you are talking about connectivity, what does that mean in terms of how Australia, East Timor and Indonesia and East Timor will work [inaudible]?
PM: If you look at the future of our economies in this globalised age, what the future of our economies hold is even more intense business links. When you look at the Asian Century White Paper we talk extensively about the future of global supply chains, the fact that in the modern age, long gone that a nation could try and do it all, it is also we are moving from an economic model where a nation and a business would do all things within one nation, to looking to how we can connect into supply chains across a region. So that kind of connectivity matters to us, it matters to Indonesia and it matters to Timor Leste, to East Timor.
President Yudhoyono has got a vision about the development of the part of his country that touches upon East Timor. How he can encourage more trade and investment there. One of the things he and I have discussed in the past is the sort of economic opportunities for Australian businesses there.
So it's really about encouraging our business sector to be involved in understanding the opportunities that span that section of the world, that section of Indonesia and East Timor. It's about the people-to-people links that help make that happen. It's also about very practical things like transport and communication links. And they are the sorts of things I anticipate will be the subject of further discussion in March and April.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what specifically did you ask from President Yudhoyono for on asylum seekers and cooperation on asylum seekers and did he offer anything specifically to stop the flow of boats?
PM: We talk very, very regularly to Indonesia about people smuggling and cooperating on people smuggling. It's a continuing dialogue between our two countries and President Yudhoyono and I touched on the subject again today, discussed the subject today. We cooperate strongly with Indonesia on the disruption of people smuggling ventures and I'm very thankful for Indonesia's cooperation in that.
In our Darwin meeting we talked about cooperation on an awareness campaign to point out to Indonesian crew, potential crew, the dangers of becoming involved with people smuggling. That awareness campaign, following our discussions in Darwin has rolled out in Kupang and in Bali and we will be continuing that kind of cooperation.
JOURNALIST: Is it fair to say that you have had a key meeting with the President of Indonesia, but you haven't asked for any further specific cooperation or measures by Indonesia to stop boats from leaving, given the record numbers leaving since your most recent meeting?
PM: Allow me to finish my sentence. We cooperate strongly with Indonesia at every level. The President of Indonesia has said to me today that he wants to continue that strong cooperation, he wants to keep working with us on what is a shared challenge. And so for us and Indonesia it is about continuing to focus on disruption activities, stopping people smugglers, particularly focusing on the high value targets, the people who are the masterminds behind these ventures; Focusing on disruptions and that kind of high value target.
It's about focusing on awareness campaigns, particularly to dissuade Indonesians from crewing these vessels given the high risks that it comes with and it's about working within the region together for regional cooperation. This is, at the end of the day, a regional problem.
Since we met in Darwin, where we discussed this issue, we've followed up that meeting with the awareness campaign, and with Ministers Smith, Clare and Albanese coming to Indonesia. So we will continue that kind of intense cooperation. We're already so deeply engaged, we need to sustain that effort and we will.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how successful do you think that cooperation is so far?
PM: Well I believe when you look at the disruptions statistics for example that our work with Indonesia has successfully disrupted many ventures from setting sail.
We work intensively on policing and following up high value targets. I think the work we have done to dissuade people from crewing these ventures too is important work.
President Yudhoyono's role in the region working with us through the Bali process on people smuggling is also important.
JOURNALIST: So new measures were raised today?
PM: We talked about our continuing cooperation, that's right. We are intensively engaged every day with Indonesia on combating people smuggling.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, was the internet filter a bad idea from the outset?
PM: The essence of all of this was about not having on the internet access to material that is repugnant and unlawful. I have said in the past, we would not tolerate a situation where you could see child abuse and child pornography at the local cinema. Consequently we don't want to tolerate a situation where that kind of material is freely available on the internet.
Now this is a difficult challenge, there is the internet, because of the very nature of it, trying to deal with these things on the internet is difficult. But public policy wise that is what we are trying to achieve and as Senator Conroy has made clear in Australia today we will continue with trying to achieve that goal.
JOURNALIST: You've wasted several years now getting to this point. Why didn't you just do that in the first place?
PM: We've worked through to try and find the best approaches and the best solutions here. I don't think effort that is aimed at trying to deal with true evils like child pornography is ever wasted effort.
JOURNALIST: You're not clearing the decks for the election next year? Getting rid of another problematic issue?
PM: I see all sorts of silly speculation in newspapers and through media from time to time. As I've said every time I've ever been asked, the election will be held in the normal cycle in 2013.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd said that he thinks there could be a legal challenge against your approach (inaudible). Do you share that view and have you discussed the threats  -  any potential risks of this arrangement President Yudhoyono today?
PM: Look, I think Kevin Rudd was making the common sense point that in questions of migration law and asylum seekers it's quite routine to see legal challenges. No, I didn't discuss with President Yudhoyono what would be, you know, legal proceedings if they were brought under Australian law.
JOURNALIST: There have been calls by a senior NSW long-serving detective that there should be a Royal Commission into the Catholic Church's alleged cover ups of child abuse. Do you agree that it's got to the point where there needs to be a proper inquiry now into the role of the Catholic Church in this regard?
PM: Well I think like any other Australian I'm very concerned about this issue and about the distressing human stories that we continue to hear what happened to people, and what happened to people over a long period of time. I haven't had the opportunity from here in Bali to in detail review the material that is in today's newspapers and the associated material. I will do that when I return to Australia and if I have something further to say at that point then I'll say it.
JOURNALIST: There's talk of this so-called fiscal cliff in the US prompting a recession, their economic would go back into a recession which has wide implications for the global economy. Considering that, do you still guarantee a surplus in Australia next year? Do you have any concerns about the impact of the so-called fiscal cliff on the Australian economy?
PM: Look the Treasurer and Deputy Prime Minister has been dealing with this matter in the context of the G20 meeting  -  Finance Ministers meeting he's just been to. Of course we are concerned about the fiscal cliff in the US and we are concerned that if this matter isn't resolved that it will have severe implications for the economy of the United States and that's got implications for the global economy including our own.
But I'm not going to deal with hypotheticals about our budget position. We have just delivered very recently the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook. We've got in there the projections that Treasury believes are appropriate for the Australian economy and we've made savings in there  -  hard savings to bring the budget to surplus and we stand by the work that was done for the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in your phone call to Barack Obama last night was the topic of your misogyny speech in Parliament raised at all?
PM: I'm not going to go into private discussions but I think it's fair to say he was aware of it.
JOURNALIST: Can you tell us what else you discussed?
PM: It was a warm discussion of congratulations on President Obama's re-election. I was very glad I had the opportunity by phone to congratulate him. Of course I have publicly offered my congratulations. I've written to him about our continuing work together. But it was great to have the opportunity to speak to him directly, to personally congratulate him on his election victory and to commit ourselves yet again to continuing our work together on the global economy on all of the issues that we share cooperation with the US.
We've got a very big shared agenda with them. Such important issues for our nation: Afghanistan; the future of the global economy; stability here in our region and their engagement in our region of the world. So I'm very much looking forward to continuing to work with President Obama on those questions.
JOURNALIST: What did the President have to say about your misogyny speech?
PM: I'm not going to go into the details of private conversations but it is safe to say he was aware of my speech in the Parliament.
Okay, thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
Your Royal Highnesses, I bid you a special welcome to our country and our capital.
To The Prince of Wales, you are a familiar visitor to these shores.
In you, the people of Australia know they have a true and sympathetic friend.
To The Duchess of Cornwall, I hope you have discovered the warmth of the Australian character and a land you will always feel welcome.
Since landing at Longreach on Monday, these have been days to explore and revisit the facets of our landscape and culture:
From the Outback, to the vineyards of South Australia, and the race that stops nation.
Now, we gather here in this capital to reflect on the bonds of history and affinity which made Australia the nation it is today.
The Father of Federation, Sir Henry Parkes, called it the “crimson thread of kinship” and the associations are all around us.
Not far from here is found the writing table Queen Victoria used to sign into law the Constitution that led to the creation of this capital.
Up on Capital Hill meets the Federal Parliament first inaugurated by King George V as Duke of Cornwall and York in 1901.
A quarter of a century later, another Duke of York came to open these old Parliament buildings  -  a shy prince who came to show the ‘heart and stomach of a king'.
Like Your Royal Highness, he too was accompanied by a gracious Duchess. Your beloved grandmother.
It is a story also inscribed in the streets and parks of this beautiful zone where, one by one, the East-West terraces have been named in recognition of our monarchs since Federation: Queen Victoria Terrace, King Edward Terrace, King George Terrace.
Today, the symmetry is made complete with the naming of Queen Elizabeth Terrace.
At the same time, the green space in front of Old Parliament House and two roads either side will stand in honour of Sir Henry Parkes reflecting the mix of ancient tradition and contemporary democracy that underpin our constitutional order.
This place will be a lasting tribute to Her Majesty The Queen on the occasion of her Diamond Jubilee inscribed forever in the architecture of this capital.
It will remind future generations that for more than half of our journey as a united nation, Elizabeth the Second has been our monarch.
No-one in the history of our Federation has shared more consistently in the affairs of our Commonwealth or followed them with deeper interest and goodwill.
As Canberra prepares for its centenary, it is fitting that The Queen's life of duty is given recognition here in our nation's heart and her wisdom and dignity are honoured among the people she has so faithfully served.
I thank Your Royal Highnesses for sharing this commemoration with us.
And I know you will convey to Her Majesty the sentiments we share in naming this place today.
No Head of State could be more worthy of this honour, and no nation could more freely or gratefully bestow it. 


Canberra
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: I'm here to announce that I will be recommending to the Governor-General that a Royal Commission be appointed to inquire into institutional responses to instances and allegations of child abuse in Australia.
Any instance of child abuse is a vile and evil thing. Australians know that, and Australians know from the revelations that they've read in recent weeks that too many children have suffered child abuse.
They have also seen other adults let them down.
They've not only had their trust betrayed by the abuser, but other adults that  could have acted to assist them have failed to do so.
There have been revelations of child abusers being moved from place to place rather than the nature of their abuse and their crimes being dealt with.
There have been too many revelations of adults who have averted their eyes from this evil.
I believe in these circumstances that it's appropriate for there to be a national response through a Royal Commission.
This I hope will help the healing, but I specifically hope that its recommendations will help us ensure that this never ever happens again.
The Royal Commissioner will be recommended by me to the Governor-General under the 1902 Royal Commissions Act.
On the terms of reference for the Royal Commission, I want to take the time necessary to get this right.
So over the next few weeks we will be consulting with the organisations that represent the survivors of child abuse, with religious organisations, with state and territory governments, to ensure that the terms of reference are right.
I have spoken very recently to the Premier of New South Wales and to the Premier of Victoria.
As is well-known in both states, there are inquiries on foot in relation to child abuse.
I have said to them that it is my intention to create this Royal Commission and that of course we will be consulting them about the terms of reference.
Both of them are prepared to take a very cooperative approach and to consider how the work that they are doing can best be used to support the work of the Royal Commission, and I thank them for that.
I have discussed this with my cabinet colleagues and my cabinet colleagues are very supportive of taking this approach, and so we will in coming weeks work on the terms of reference in a collaborative way.
That work will be done in detail by the Attorney-General Nicola Roxon, working with the acting Minister for Families Brendan O'Connor. That consultative approach will be led by them.
Then at the same time as we work on the terms of reference and that consultation, we will consider the appropriate person or persons to act as the Royal Commissioner or Commissioners for this inquiry.
Child abuse is always wrong, always heartbreaking, always distressing.
I know so many Australians would have seen stories in recent days that really did hurt them to read, and that they want to see action taken.
I think we all want to do everything we can to ensure that we do not see in the future institutions fail to respond if there are allegations of child abuse in their midst.
I hope that this Royal Commission can guide us to that place.
I'll take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it right to say that this will look beyond the Catholic Church to all institutions?
PM: Absolutely correct. It's institutional responses to instances and allegations of child abuse in Australia.
We will work of the specific terms of reference, but this is about children who were in the care of religious organisations, so that's all religious organisations.
It's about children who were in state care. It's about children who were in the care of not-for-profit bodies other than religious organisations.
It will therefore go as well to the response of children's' services agencies and the response of the police.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it's a very large scope for this inquiry. Have you any sense of the length of time and the amount of money involved?
PM: I think, to be frank, it will take quite some time.
And I believe the time should be taken to get it right to make sure that the Royal Commission does the work that we want it to do.
In terms of costs, the Government will make appropriate provision for them and the matter will be accounted for in the budget in May next year.
Clearly the costs will become apparent as the inquiry goes on, and the Government will make continuous provision as necessary.
JOURNALIST: Would you hope this Commission starts work this year?
PM: What I would hope, by the end of the year, is that we have finalised the terms of reference and that the Commission has been appointed.
I think in terms of work being out there in the community that would not start until the new year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how long do you think that the period of investigation would cover? How far back would the inquiry go, and do institutions include schools?
PM: Yes, institutions do include schools, and obviously schools possibly run by churches, possibly run by state governments.
I haven't set a time cut-off as to how far back this would go.
It would become a question, I think, for the Commissioner to work out what is beyond the realms of taking proper evidence and getting appropriate material on which to base firm conclusions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think the terms of reference should include considerations about compensation for victims?
PM: We will take some advice on the terms of reference, but the focus here is on institutional responses to child abuse.
Child abuse is of course wrong, and wrongdoers should be punished.
This is an incredibly evil thing, and I think we'd all hope that anybody who has ever abused a child would be accountable for that in a criminal court.
But beyond the evidence of abuse here, there is also I believe cause for concern that other who adults could have done something to make a difference to the lives of these children didn't do what they should have, either by becoming complicit in people being moved around for example, or by averting their eyes and by acts of omission.
Now I think we need to learn the lessons about how institutions can best respond when there are allegations of sexual abuse of children.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I just check  -  I understand the point you're making about institutional responses, but obviously there's a huge well of people who want to talk about what happened to them and look at identification of people who were involved.
The Royal Commission would still cover or embrace those sorts of individual allegations, would it?
PM: I think it's impossible to look at the institutional response here without understanding as best as can be done what has occurred and what the responses or lack of responses were.
I understand that for some people it can be healing to get the opportunity to tell their story.
Now exactly how that occurs and in what circumstances and how that is most sensitively done would become a question for the Royal Commissioner or Commissioners to work through.
This is an incredibly complex and sensitive area.
Some people may want there to be the maximum public airing of what happened to them. That might be the biggest healing that they could have.
But for others, standing somewhere public and telling their story would be their version of hell.
So this will have to be dealt with sensitively and be a job for the Commissioner.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you made the point about people averting their eyes and so on.
Would you imagine that such an inquiry would actually go to individuals who averted their eyes, and that does seem to be quite a difficult area because there might be a head of an institution who was obviously responsible but people further down the line would be hard to identify  -  what they did or didn't do without a full investigation into each one?
PM: There are going to be limits and ways of working that need to be thought about by the Commission.
I think that it's just common sense when you are looking at things that happened a long time ago in some instances, then the Commission is going to have to work through what's the best way of getting evidence and assessing what happened.
I'm not going to pre-judge that.
And we are going to take a consultative approach to the terms of reference, and so this is the start of a few weeks where we will work in a consultative way on the terms of reference, and I think we will get insights from survivors' organisations about how this best be done.
We will get insights from religious organisations and from state and territory governments about how this can best be done and we are open to those insights.
So I don't want to pre-judge that. Common sense would tell you that there are a range of complexities and difficulties here that need to be worked through. That's one of the reasons that we will be so careful about the terms of reference.
JOURNALIST: Cardinal Pell has described these issues as historical ones. Is that believable when there are still suggestions that information's being concealed and maybe in some cases destroyed?
PM: I'm not here to comment on the public statements of others. I'm here to announce that there will be a Royal Commission.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you already have a very broad inquiry. Are you looking at limiting what the definition of abuse is, because there are some punishments that were dealt out in establishments over times gone past which might be seen now as being abuse?
PM: The focus of this is child sexual abuse. That will be the focus.
Obviously we will in this consultative process talk about how we can best define the terminology that is in the terms of reference, but the focus of this is child sexual abuse.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have there been any representations to you by survivors' groups and others in the last little while that's had an impact on you coming to this final conclusion to do this?
PM: The impact for me, clearly, over the past few weeks we've seen revelations in the newspapers and more broadly which really go to the question of cover-up, of other adults not doing what they should have done to come to assist.
We also are now in a circumstance where two states have different inquiries on foot and because of the allegations of moving people around, this is something that goes beyond the borders of any one state.
I've come to the view in those circumstances that a national approach is best.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I just take you back to David's question on compensation. So if there are criminal proceedings, is that what would give the compensation?
PM: I think we've got to be clear here about who does what. I have just announced a Royal Commission.
Police need to continue to do what police do, and one of the things that we will need to be careful about, and we will be careful about, is that nothing in the Royal Commission process ends up holding up prosecutions that would otherwise have happened through usual police processes.
So I have just decided we will have this Royal Commission.
Police investigations need to be conducted as police investigations normally are, and of course I don't want a Royal Commission in any way to add time to those police investigations.
On the question of compensation, as I think you would be aware there have been some survivors who have already made compensation claims against relevant institutions, and so once again I don't want to see the Royal Commission impede any compensation claim which may be on foot.
So those proper processes happening in other places I think need to continue as they would whilst the Royal Commission's in progress.
There is a clear question about how the work of state government inquiries relates to the Royal Commission, and I've had a preliminary discussion with Premiers Baillieu and O'Farrell about that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did Barry O'Farrell express that concern, as he did this morning, that a Royal Commission could cut across and interfere with his special commission into the allegations over the Hunter Valley? Did you leave that conversation with him, was he comfortable with what you were doing in relation to what he's doing?
PM: Both Premier O'Farrell and Premier Baillieu indicated that they wanted to take a cooperative approach.
Obviously they will be involved in the consultation about the terms of reference. That will be the opportunity to work through issues in detail.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will the inquiry look at police reactions and responses as well, and the legal system?
PM: I believe it does need to look at the police response, yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how long do you anticipate the Royal Commission will take from start to conclusion?
PM: It's not knowable. I anticipate it will take some time, and it should take the time necessary.
So I think there will be an iterative process between the Commission and the Government about how much time is needed, and possibly what resources are needed, and our doors will be open and ears will be open to all of that.
I think it would be foolish indeed at this point, at the threshold point, to pretend that one could define the number of days, months or years that this would take.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned the fact that you would hope to say when the time has come for it to stop.
Would one of the aims of the Royal Commission be able to provide indication, say mandatory reporting, on behaviour of institutions in the future to try and ensure that there isn't a passing around of problems?
PM: I'm not going to pre-judge what will come out of the terms of reference that we work through in a consultative way.
But I think the best response I can give to your question is I wish I could wake up in a world where there was no child abuse.
Obviously I wish I could wake up in that world, I'm sure all of us wish we could wake up in that world, and all of us are worldly wise enough to know we're not going to wake up in that world.
So given we're not going to wake up in that world, then we need to do everything we can to prevent child abuse and we need to do everything we can to ensure that if abuse happens, it is appropriately responded to so you don't get a continuation of the pattern of behaviour.
And child sexual abuse is a vile thing, it's an evil thing, it's done by evil people, but what we've seen too I think in recent revelations, it's not just the evil of the people who do it.
There has been a systemic failure to respond to it and to better protect children and I particularly want to get the insights about what would stop that kind of systemic failure happening again.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there were other options available to you to have a national inquiry or examination.
Can you talk about why it's got to be a Royal Commission, for instance why  -  is it important that it's got the power to compel witnesses? Why do you want it to have that full force?
PM: The option of a Royal Commission is the option that gives us the broadest suite of potentials for the working of the Commission. That's why I've chosen it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I just clarify, when you say not-for-profits, you're talking like scouts and sporting clubs there as well?
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: And also, you talked about Royal Commissioner or Royal Commissioners.
Is that a sense that this job is going to be so big that it will need many, it will be more than for one person, and have you got an idea of who you'd like to see in the Royal Commission?
PM: No I'm not announcing the identity of anybody who might undertake this task this evening. We will have to work and think through who could best do this task.
Why I am saying potentially more than one person is it may be that we want to see combined expertise in legal matters, because obviously to guide a Royal Commission one needs to have the legal training and legal background, but we may also want to see available some expertise in child protection issues.
So in order to get the right expertise, I would rather have more than one person rather than lock a potential source of good expertise out of the process.
JOURNALIST: Just another point of clarification.
You said you didn't want to talk about a timeframe now, but are you saying you won't have a timeframe when you give the terms of reference that essentially will be up to the Royal Commission to determine its own timeframe?
PM: I think we would be saying to the Royal Commission that the Royal Commission should scope the task to be reporting back regularly to government.
So I don't want some artificial sense of deadline to impede what could be good work that we want done.
So that's a conversation to be had whether you would even set an indicative timeframe, but my sense is that we would be better off to say to the people who are  -  person or people who are doing this work  -  give us a continuing sense of what is needed to do the job right, rather than do the job quickly or to a mandated specification about time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you call Cardinal Pell?
PM: I have spoken to Cardinal Pell, yes I have.
This is a Royal Commission that would be looking across religious organisations as well as state-based care as I've described and into the not-for-profit sector.
So this is not a Royal Commission targeted at any one church. But given the nature of some of the material in the public domain, I thought it was appropriate to speak to Cardinal Pell.
JOURNALIST: Did you speak with other religious leaders or other social group leaders?
PM: No I've spoken today to my cabinet colleagues, I've spoken to Cardinal Pell, I've spoken to the Premiers of Victoria and New South Wales.
As I've indicated there are others who need to be spoken to. I selected those two state colleagues because they were the ones with active inquiries.
We will be consulting with all state premiers and chief ministers.
We will be consulting with all religious organisations, and we will be trying to get feedback from survivors' groups on the terms of reference.
JOURNALIST: Was Cardinal Pell supportive of the (inaudible)?
PM: I think it's probably best for His Eminence to speak for himself.
JOURNALIST: You said the Premiers indicated a willingness to cooperate.
Did you get that same willingness from Cardinal Pell?
PM: My discussion with Cardinal Pell indicated that he's taking a very cooperative attitude, but I think certainly George Pell can speak for himself.
JOURNALIST: Just a final one, Bill Shorten appeared to rule out a Royal Commission on Friday. What changed the Government's mind?
PM: I think for all of us as we've looked at the nature of the material that is increasingly coming into the public domain, as we've thought about the best way of responding, as we've seen a new state inquiry added to an already-going state inquiry, for all of us we've been absorbing this and thinking about this and thinking about the best way of responding.
And I think the best way of responding is as I have announced  -  to have a national response through a Royal Commission.
Now I think what is happening in various jurisdictions in Victoria and in New South Wales can play a useful role feeding into the work of the Royal Commission, so we've all been thinking about it, me included.
As I indicated on Friday when I was overseas, when I returned to Australia I would be further considering this question and I've done so.
JOURNALIST: If some of the reports are correct, then the level of knowledge about child abuse in some institutions goes right to the top and takes in management roles and then people below it.
That could actually threaten the existence of some of these institutions, so what do you say of that? Should this inquiry in regards to those sorts of institutions threaten their existence, or should the process be more of reconciliation?
PM: I think you're war-gaming a series of hypotheticals, but if you believe as I do and I'm sure we all do that child abuse is a very great wrong, and that we've seen some systemic failures to deal with child abuse, then I think this is the appropriate response.
And we'll allow the Royal Commission to go where it needs to in order to give us a comprehensive response here.
But the specific terms of reference to guide it will be the subject of the consultative processes I've spoken about. We'll take a last question here.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect widespread resistance from some of these groups, like the church groups?
PM: There's nothing before me that would indicate that, not at all.
Thank you.


Canberra
Today I have announced that I will be recommending to the Governor-General the establishment of a Royal Commission into institutional responses to instances and allegations of child sexual abuse in Australia.
The allegations that have come to light recently about child sexual abuse have been heartbreaking.
These are insidious, evil acts to which no child should be subject.
The individuals concerned deserve the most thorough of investigations into the wrongs that have been committed against them.
They deserve to have their voices heard and their claims investigated.
I believe a Royal Commission is the best way to do this.
The proposed terms of reference and proposed Commissioner will be submitted to the Governor-General in due course, pursuant to the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
I will speak with relevant Premiers and Chief Ministers in coming days to discuss how the Royal Commission should relate to any current inquiries into similar matters currently proposed or underway in their jurisdictions. Discussions will also take place with victims' groups, religious leaders, and community organisations.
The Attorney-General and the Minister for Families will co-ordinate this work on behalf of the Government in coming weeks.
Further announcements, including the proposed Commissioner and detailed terms of reference, will be made in coming weeks.
I commend the victims involved for having the courage to speak out.
I believe we must do everything we can to make sure that what has happened in the past is never allowed to happen again.


Canberra
The Prime Minister today committed the Australian Public Service (APS) to achieving the goal of 12 per cent of APS employees regularly teleworking by 2020 at the launch of National Telework Week.
Telework, which is a big part of the future of work in Australia, is a flexible work arrangement where employees are able to work from home or other locations away from the office, using broadband and digital technology. 
The APS commitment is in line with the Government's National Digital Economy Strategy goal for telework.
To inform delivery of this goal, a select number of APS departments and agencies will conduct a series of telework trials commencing in the first half of next year.
The Prime Minister also released new research by Colmar Brunton and Deloitte Access Economics at the launchwhich found:
·         66% of people with disabilities who are not in the labour force would take up telework if it was available to them;
·         74% of people with family or carer responsibilities who are not in the labour force would take up telework if it was available to them;
·         60% of people nearing retirement age would take up telework if it was available to them; and
·         70% of people living in regional/remote Australia who are not in the labour force would take up telework if it was available to them.
The research also found that by 2020-21 these participation impacts of telework alone could:
·         Help grow annual GDP by $3.2 billion; and
·         Create the equivalent of an additional 25,000 full-time jobs, with 10,000 of these jobs in regional Australia. 
Leading companies such as Cisco, Telstra, Westpac, Medibank Health Solutions, Microsoft and KPMG are already using telework to retain and attract skilled staff and make cost savings by reducing pressure on office accommodation.
The Government's investment in the National Broadband Network will give more employees and employers the confidence to engage in telework by delivering reliable, affordable high-speed broadband to all Australian homes and businesses. 
The NBN will help unlock the potential of telework to boost productivity in the workplace; reduce commuting time and urban congestion; and allow employers to compete for the best employees, no matter where they are located.
The inaugural National Telework Week runs from 12th to 16th November. More than 130 companies and organisations have committed to the Week as official Telework Partners.
More information on National Telework Week and for employers and employees on the benefits of telework including an interactive tool to assess the costs and savings from telework is available at www.telework.gov.au. 


Canberra (via TelePresence)
PM: We are living in what I term the Asian Century.
It's a time in which our economy has shown to be a resilient one.
When we compare ourselves with what's happening around the world, what we see is our economy being resilient.
We've got low unemployment, strong public finances, good growth and the list goes on.
But we're only going to seize the opportunities of this century of change if we're prepared for it and if we make the right decisions now.
Our future is not assured. You've got to make the right decisions today that will enable us to have jobs and prosperity tomorrow.
One of the big decisions the Government's made which will shape that tomorrow is the rollout of the National Broadband Network.
And there's just no doubt that broadband being around the country with fibre to the premises will make a different to national productivity; to the way we live and work.
But the rollout of broadband is going to do more than lift national productivity; it's also going to facilitate people having more options and more choices about the way in which they do their work.
At the moment, many people make long journeys to get to their workplace.
To give you just a few quick statistics on that if you were travelling in Hobart or in Sydney: in Hobart you can easily lose a week of the year just in your commute; in Sydney you can lose 12 days of your year in the commute.
That means Australians in capital cities spend on average between 40 and 70 minutes a day travelling to and from work.
That's lost time with family and friends, lost time doing things that people would prefer to do rather than being in a long commute to work.
Teleworking gives us some options. It means that people can do some or all of their work from home.
Now obviously the ability to do work from home is going to vary in different occupations, but I believe teleworking can become an increasing feature of the Australian workforce, meaning people don't have to do a long commute.
A section of their work can be done at home or a section of their work can be done in local business centres where they're doing a very short commute to the centre of their community, rather than a long commute to the CBD.
Telework also opens up new opportunities for people in regional Australia, and there's a reason why regional Australia is being so enthusiastic about the National Broadband Network.
So, it's important that this meeting is happening today and that we are launching National Telework Week to get people thinking about these options and possibilities and I know that we will be canvassing them today.
Teleworking isn't just giving options and possibilities to people who today do long commutes.
Teleworking has also got the ability to be an instrument of fairness, to get people into the workforce who currently can't get into the workforce.
And I'm thinking here of people who are parents with childcare responsibility, people who have a disability which means that it's difficult for them to access workplaces, older Australians, people in regional and rural areas - people who would want to be in the workforce through teleworking if they got the opportunity but who are locked out of the workforce now.
I'm very pleased to also be launching today a report from Deloitte Access Economics and Colmar Brunton about these questions of the ability of telework to give people job possibilities that they haven't had before.
And their research indicates that 25,000 new jobs could be created and annual GDP could be increased by $3.2 billion by the time the NBN is finished in 2021. So that's important research for the future.
I believe that the Government has got an opportunity and indeed a responsibility to show some leadership here, which is why I'm also pleased to announce today that we are aiming to increase the penetration of telework in the Australian Public Service to 12 per cent.
Now, that's going to take some time and it's going to take some thinking by our agencies but I believe we can be demonstrating, as a big employer, the kind of options and choices that other employers can make to facilitate their workforce in having a different way of working, a different way of running their lives and to facilitate people who currently aren't in the workforce accessing meaningful work.
So Glyn, with those opening words it's over to you and I'm very happy to participate in the question and answer session.
GLYN DAVIS, VICE-CHANCELLOR, UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE: Prime Minister, thank you very much. How are you going to telework? How are you going to use telework as part of your office?
PM: Well we do telework, to give you a couple of examples, some more spectacular than others.
Perhaps the less spectacular examples are that we currently conduct some of our meetings in government, cabinet meetings, cabinet subcommittees, our meetings with officials for briefing and decision making through the use of teleworking, through telepresence facilities.
So we have them around the nation and we make good use of them for those meetings.
Perhaps more spectacularly, when we face the need to get briefed urgently on situations that may be very, very serious ones - indeed crisis situations - we also use teleworking, telepresence to reach out around the world.
I can tell you a story about how we met constantly as a National Security Committee during the days of the Japanese earthquake and tsunami when we were wanting to get real-time reports on what was happening with the recovery from the tsunami, what was happening with our search and rescue team that had been deployed and importantly what was happening with the Fukushima reactors.
We wanted real time information on that, so we were able to use telepresence facilities to have our experts from our nuclear agency online and also to have our Japanese Ambassador online including one time where literally, he bent down to pick up a helmet to put it on his head because he was in the midst of an earthquake aftershock in Tokyo.
But they're resilient people, our diplomats, so we just kept the meeting going.
GLYN DAVIS: Thank you Prime Minister. I've got four questions lined up and I'll start with Paul Geason if I may.
PAUL GEASON: Thank you Glyn, good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
PAUL GEASON: My question is, if perhaps you could share a little bit more detail on how you see telework being connected to your economic agenda and perhaps a second question, what role or part telework might play in your policy work on the Asian Century?
PM: Well they are both good questions.
I've just been travelling in the region talking to people about our Asian Century White Paper and explaining how our nation is now very focused on making sure that we keep building on the strengths of our resilient economy and we seize all of the opportunities that we've got in our nation's future.
I think teleworking and the use of the National Broadband Network can fit with this agenda.
We are in or close to the time zones of Asia depending on which part of the country you're in.
Perth in particular, if you look north from there you can see yourself in time zones for so many of our big neighbours and partners.
That means that we can engage in real time exchanges of information during the times that businesses want to work in our region.
So, that's a great comparative advantage when you compare ourselves with the economies of Europe or with the economy of the United States of America.
So, I can see us using the benefits of the National Broadband Network to even further enhance the benefits of adjacency we've got in this century of change.
I think what that means is that we will be able not only to spread those benefits - the new opportunities in this century - to big businesses, but they will be able to be realised in real time by small and medium enterprises around the country.
So I can image a boutique tourism venture in regional Australia that makes its trade through its broadband engagement into Asia.
I can image bespoke fashion outlets that are working in our cities or in regional Australia that once again get their clientele and market by engaging into Asia.
And then of course we've got all of the opportunities that come through the food industry, through elaborately transformed manufactures, through our services sector including international education.
So there are a lot of possibilities here.
In terms of our own economy, I think our broadband will reshape our economy by enhancing its productivity and the size of our GDP.
The statistics are very clear that having a ubiquitous broadband means that you do increase your national income, you do increase your Gross Domestic Product and as a nation that wants to see greater jobs and wealth and prosperity for our citizens, that's important to us.
GLYN DAVIS: Thank you. Paul, of course, is the Group Managing Director of Telstra, so let's now hear from the Vice President of Asia Cisco, Les Williamson.
LES WILLIAMSON: Yes, good morning Prime Minister.
Do you see telework as being the way of the future for workers in the whole economy?
PM: I don't think it's going to be there for the whole economy.
There are a number of jobs where the nature of doing the task is that you must be physically present in a particular space at a particular time.
So it's not going to replace all ways of working but I think for many workers it can give them options for a section of their work and for some workers it can give them an option for all of their work and I do think that we will see increased penetration.
For us to set ourselves a 12 per cent target, I think is a good indicator about the way in which we'll see change over the coming years.
GLYN DAVIS: Maha Krishnapillai is the General Manager for telecommunications at Australia Post, Maha.
MAHA KRISHNAPILLAI: Thank you, Prime Minister. You've talked a lot about the digital economy in recent speeches and I think that there are many industries and businesses going through their own, if you like, digital Kodak moment.
What do you think is going to be the major driver behind that and what can the Government do to facilitate the move to the digital economy?
PM: Well, a Kodak moment sounds very dramatic, doesn't it, but I know what you mean.
I actually think, for us at the moment - and if I can just take up your Kodak moment usage of terminology - I think for us at the moment, one of the great things about the age in which we live is because we've come through the Global Financial Crisis in the way in which we have, because we haven't had a recession, we can actually be tooling up for the economy of the future.
Not because we're standing on a burning platform and we're in a moment of crisis, but because we've got the ability to make the decisions now which can realise our big ambitions for the future.
I think if I was a leader in Europe, I would be approaching this task differently because of the real problems that their economies are facing.
Here, with our economy the way it is now, we can see I think through making today's decisions well, that we will get a great deal of benefit tomorrow.
So I think many Australian businesses can come to this task too in a planned way rather than with a sense of crisis in the moment.
What I think government can do is we can engage with businesses and explain the nature of this opportunity.
Now for many big businesses that's redundant. They're already well and truly engaged in the digital economy or they've got the kind of expertise easily available to them on tap which will shape their digital future for them.
But for small and medium enterprises, I think we can make a real difference in their understanding of the benefits of the digital economy.
Today, we know that many, many, many of our small businesses don't even have a website, so they haven't even taken the first step into the use of new technology, let alone all of the other steps to follow.
So I think government can play a leadership role; we can lead by example, we can bring people together for education and support and we can bring people together too in the way in which we did in the digital economy forum to get the synergies between smaller and bigger businesses and get everybody thinking about what this age can mean for us if we're properly prepared.
GLYN DAVIS: Thank you and we have a final question from a broadband champion. Helen Thompson is from the University of Ballarat, Helen.
HELEN THOMPSON: Prime Minister, I'm interested to know whether telework has deeper implications for business models. Is it just about changing patterns of work for current jobs or is there something there about future employment as well?
PM: I think you're absolutely right, there's certainly something there about future employment.
When I was first coming into politics, if someone had said to me at that stage that there would be people who make their living as bloggers, for example, that that's what they do for a job, that is how they earn their income, I would have looked a bit quizzically at them I think and said, what on earth are you talking about, what is this word ‘blog'? And that's how the conversation would have gone.
I think that there will be jobs that can be realised tomorrow that we can't even properly imagine today.
That is where the technology is going to take us to and I think that that's a wonderful creative force.
Just like now there are so many people who make their living from the way in which the technology is shaping our economy today and we've seen the rise of whole new occupations and ventures as a result.
I think we will see that even more tomorrow.
So all sorts of creative possibilities in front of us and to give you some examples of the people I've had the opportunity to meet.
Based in regional Australia, a clothing story that saturated its own market in its regional town and now trades around the nation and around the world.
These are the kind of things that we wouldn't have imaged as job possibilities in regional Australia five, 10, 15 years ago but are there now for people to get those jobs and get that work and have that highly skilled work in regional Australia.
So we're in a dynamic time of change. We can't see all of these future possibilities but we certainly can get ready for them.
GLYN DAVIS: Prime Minister thank you. You've shown us in the most practical way possible that you can have a conversation at a distance, and that the technology is now good enough to have a real sense of presence and a real capacity to engage with people.
So I'm sure other will want to join me in saying, Prime Minister, thank you very much for participating in our conference.
PM: Thank you Glyn.


Perth
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: It's fantastic to be here in Western Australia. I'm joined by my ministerial colleague Chris Evans and I'm joined by another great West Australian, Melissa Parke the member for Fremantle. Thank you for having us in your electorate.
I'm here in Western Australia for two big reasons today, and the first big reason we're actually standing in. This is the $100 million GE Skills Development Centre. And I'd like to thank Steve and the team at GE for inviting me here today for the official opening. And I'd like to thank them for everything they've done to create this facility.
This $100 million training facility is telling you the story of the Australian economy today and tomorrow. Just a few weeks ago I delivered our blue print for Australia's economic future. For the future of the resources industry and for the future that we will share in the days beyond the resources boom. For the future that we can build together.
I think Australians know our economy is resilient. And unlike so many nations around the world, we've come through the global financial crisis with low unemployment, with good growth rates, with strong public finances.
But the future is up to us to make. Nothing about the future is ever assured. But what we do know about our future is it can be an era of opportunity and prosperity for Australians if we make the right decisions now. The economic blueprint I've outlined charts us a path to ensure that Australians have high skill, high wage jobs. That people on average are earning $11,000 a year more. That our nation is one of the top 10 economies on earth. That our kids go to school in a schooling system that is one of the top five on earth.
That's the future we can realise, but it's going to take making good decisions now and a focus on skills, which is where this remarkable centre comes in.
This centre is telling you that there are long-term high-skill, high-wage jobs available to the people of Western Australia if they are trained with the right skills. That the oil and gas industry here offers people high-skill, high-wage jobs for the next 10, 20, 30, 40 years.
We've got to get the skills right and GE is investing in those skills. So people can come into this industry and make their future. My big congratulations go to GE. It's been a real privilege to be here this morning.
Secondly, I'm in Western Australia today to participate in Ausmin, in the event where Australia and the US sit down and talk about foreign policy and defence issues.
This is held every year, every two years it's in Australia and the other year it's in the US. And I'm so pleased that it's being hosted here in Perth.
What that means is that during the course of today I will meet Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, I will meet with Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta and I will participate this evening in discussions about the shared security arrangements we have with the United States.
The United States is the oldest of allies. We've been in an alliance for more than 60 years and we are good mates at every level. We share a strategic partnership and defence relationship. We share strong economic bonds with the US being a huge investor in the Australian economy. We share strong people-to-people links. We share values and similar cultural outlooks on the world.
During the course of the discussions today I will be focusing on the outlook for the East Asia Summit. Next week I will be in Cambodia at the meeting that will also be attended by President Obama.
This East Asia Summit is an important vehicle in our region, an important discussion point in our region, and we are working patiently with the US and others so that the East Asia Summit can realise its full mandate of being a regional body that works on political issues, economic issues and security issues. So I will be focusing on the talks to come in the East Asia Summit.
I will also be focusing on the future of our mission in Afghanistan. We have continuing work to do in Afghanistan. We are there as part of the NATO ISAF forces. And I will be keen to exchange views on the outlook of that mission and this time of transition in Afghanistan to the leadership of the security of the nation being done by local Afghan forces.
And as we come on to the UN Security Council, having been successfully elected, I will want to share views on some of the big challenges our world faces, including what is happening in Syria, and the nuclear issues involving Iran.
These talks will also deal with discussing what President Obama and I agreed last year about military cooperation between our two countries. Last year President Obama and I announced that we had agreed that US marines would be training on deployment in the Northern Territory. These talks will stocktake that progress and further Defence cooperation.
So I'm very pleased to be here in Western Australia for what's going to be a big day. And I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: The big decision we made last year was about marines coming into the Northern Territory for training. We are involved in further talks for what will be medium-term plans, not short-term plans, about cooperation on ships and also cooperation on aviation.
But I do stress these are medium-term plans. This meeting will be very focused on stocktaking where we've got to after last year's major announcement with President Obama.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: We're talking a number of years.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: It's us that would make decisions about the deployment of our Special Forces, so that is a matter for the National Security Committee of Cabinet, for Cabinet and for me.
Of course, we will be talking about the outlook for Special Forces, and counter-terrorism needs in Afghanistan after transition. So after transition, after the end of 2014, we know that we will be a continuing participant in the NATO train, advise, assist mission.
We have left the door open to a continuing presence for Special Forces should that be necessary and the work of those Special Forces would obviously be on counter-terrorism questions.
But decisions haven't been taken at this stage about what our engagement would be beyond 2014, on Special Forces we've left the door open.
The strategy for Afghanistan is to find at NATO ISAF meetings of course the outlook of the Americans is incredibly important to that and I should say that these Ausmin talks come at a critical time with President Obama having been re-elected and with his administration now making and getting ready to put in place their views and policies for the next four years.
JOURNALIST: On the Royal Commission, (inaudible)?
PM: I think it's about working it through in detail and cooperatively with each jurisdiction as to how they best relate to the Royal Commission. So I don't think there is a general answer about that.
The Attorney-General has already started to communicate with her counterparts, so the Attorney-General Nicola Roxon talking to State attorneys-general about the best way of working together with a focus on those jurisdictions that have inquiries in progress.
In addition to that, the acting Minister for Families, Minister Brendan O'Connor, as well as the public service, has commenced to reach out to the groups that represent survivors and victims of child abuse.
There is an ability for people to register their interest through an email address that is available to people on the Prime Minister and Cabinet website. So for anybody who's interested, that's pmc.gov.au.
And my Chief of Staff has been in contact with the Leader of the Opposition's office because they will be involved in these consultations too and we will reach out over time to other parliamentarians.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: As long as it takes to do it right.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: I made it very clear yesterday we are talking about what could be an extensive period of time and we should not set artificial limits on getting this done properly.
JOURNALIST: Would you expect (Inaudible)?
PM: This is going to be a set of questions for the Royal Commission about how they want to take evidence, who they want to take evidence from and I'm not going to pre-judge any of that and I don't think anybody else should.
Where we are is I've announced we will have a Royal Commission, we will work in a very consultative and cooperatively way about getting the terms of reference right, we will then appoint a Royal Commissioner or a number of Royal Commissioners to work on this job for us.
It will be a big thing to do, an extensive inquiry, and consequently there will be a set of issues for them to work through about how to gather evidence, how to take evidence, how to deal with people, how to deal very sensitively with people who may be in quite distressed circumstances. So all of that will be the work of the Royal Commission itself.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: I'm not going to pre-judge a time frame. What we've got to do here is get the terms of reference right. I think it's very important we work collaboratively on that and we are prepared to do so and we've hit the ground running on that today. We're already reaching out to the people we need to have discussions with.
We'll work to get the terms of reference right. Then the Royal Commission itself will be constituted and we will take continuing advice from them about what is necessary in terms of time to get this done and get it right.
I think it's not the right approach to say, let's do it quickly, and not do it thoroughly. It's also not the right approach to be hypothetically war-gaming how long it could take. Let's just take a step at a time, and do it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: I'm looking forward to meeting again with Hillary Clinton. We've had the opportunity to meet on a number of occasions and spend some time together just her and me, so that's been very valuable for me. And I'm looking forward to having another chat. We will have the opportunity to have some discussions one-on-one as well as the more formal discussions about our defence cooperation and our cooperation in foreign affairs questions.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott's quoted this morning talking about his backbencher Ken Wyatt saying (inaudible) he's not a man of culture. He then went on to talk about (inaudible) he said, I think it would be terrific if as well as having an urban Aboriginal in the Parliament, we had an Aboriginal person from central Australia (inaudible).
PM: I think the best thing is for me to say, the only person who can really explain those comments is Tony Abbott.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: I don't comment on opinion polls. I've had cause to say that to you in the past when I've been in Western Australia, so I don't comment on opinion polls. I am very happy to say this though, and I said it when I spoke at the opening of this great centre; not precisely in these words but you will see in my speech how we're talking about our plan for the nation's future.
There's only one political party in this country that has got a clear plan for our nation's future and there's only one political party that is delivering the policies to realise that plan, and that's the Labor Party, that's the Government.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: Once again I'm not going to engage in continuing commentary around a matter that's been before ICAC. Anybody who has done the wrong thing whilst in public office should obviously be held to account. But I'm not going to pre-judge matters involving individuals that are the subject of an inquiry right now.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: I think you are confusing two things. If there's any suggestion that anybody in public office has done the wrong thing, then proper accountability processes, including work of bodies like ICAC, should happen and that work is happening now.
I don't think any of us can properly pre-judge what will happen out of those inquiries and indeed I don't think ICAC itself would want continuing commentary from me as Prime Minister on its workings.
So anybody who has done anything wrong should be held to account. That's not a matter of political argy-bargy, that's a matter of values. And for all of us, we value the honesty of people who are serving in public office, it's one of the things that our nation prides itself on; having a system that is very corruption-free. That doesn't mean you can never let your guard down, you've got to be constantly vigilant and the proper processes always have to work through.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: I don't want to be involved in a commentary about the words of Cardinal Pell, they're a matter for him. The reasons I announced the Royal Commission were made plain by me yesterday when I made the announcement.
JOURNALIST: What does it mean for hundreds of thousands of Australians (inaudible)?
PM: I think for Western Australians who are looking for work, the very existence of a centre like this should give them a cause for optimism and hope about their ability to find an opportunity in the economy in Western Australia.
This economy in WA is strong, our national economy is a very resilient economy and we should be proud of what we've achieved together in our national economy during some very dark days in the global economy.
For an individual who's looking for work, what this is telling you is that there isn't a short-term need for people with high skills engaging in the oil and gas industry here in WA; there's a very long-term need. These are going to be high-skill, high-quality jobs for decades and decades to come.
So there are great opportunities here in the Western Australian economy, and indeed in the resources sector across the Australian economy.
So thank you very much, thanks to everyone.


Brisbane
The highly anticipated Moreton Bay Rail Link is under construction, with earthworks and bridge construction underway at Mango Hill - one of a number of new bridges being built for the project.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard visited the site today to inspect progress.
Once complete, the Moreton Bay Rail Link will provide crucial infrastructure for the growing Moreton Bay area.
It will deliver a 12.6 kilometre dual-track passenger rail line between Petrie and Kippa-Ring, providing much needed public transport options for one of the fastest growing areas in the country.
The new rail line will ease congestion on the surrounding road network, including the Bruce Highway.
The Moreton Bay Rail Link will also be a major part of regional and economic growth and will create more than 8400 jobs over the life of the project.
The Gillard Government's Nation Building Program is providing jobs today by building the infrastructure the nation needs for a more productive future.
Six new rail stations will be built as part of the project at Kallangur, Murrumba Downs, Mango Hill, Kinsellas Road, Rothwell and Kippa-Ring.
The $1.147 billion project is being funded jointly by the Gillard Government ($742 million), the Queensland Government ($300 million plus land) and the Moreton Bay Regional Council ($105 million).
Representing Queensland Transport Minister Scott Emerson, Murrumba MP Reg Gulley said the early construction works, involving road and bridge works, would minimise the impact on local traffic once the major road works began in 2013.
“While these works are being completed, design of the rail corridor, including the track, structures, and the six new stations will continue,” Mr Gulley said.
“Construction of the rail components for the Moreton Bay Rail Link will then get underway in the later part of 2013, with the new line scheduled for delivery by late 2016.”


Brisbane
PM: It's great to be here in Queensland. I'm joined by the Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan and by Yvette D'Ath our member for Petrie. And we've just been inspecting with our state representatives as well the progress right here.
This is progress on the Moreton Bay Rail Link. This is something the local community's been waiting for, for more than 100 years.
This is a community that is seeing spectacular growth. Yvette D'Ath, the member for Petrie in the Federal Parliament represents this rapidly growing area. What that rapid growth has meant is that there is congestion.
About half of the people who live here journey out of the area every day. More than 80 per cent of them do that in a private vehicle they're driving. And so you've got a lot of people on the roads waiting for an alternative; waiting for this rail link.
I'm really pleased that we were able to make this possible after 100 years of waiting with a $742 million investment.
And I acknowledge that this has been a partnership with the Queensland Government and also with the local council who played their part to support this project.
What this means for this community is more time at home with the kids rather than in the car. More ability to access job opportunities through getting on the rail. More economic opportunities brought to the region itself because of this work. Literally thousands of people will take a pay packet home because this infrastructure project is being built.
This community, with its rapid growth, is very similar to the electorate that I represent in the Federal Parliament. It has got all of the stresses and strains of growth. People want to know that their government is planning for the future, and right here you are seeing a delivery of that plan with better infrastructure.
I am also looking forward to being here for the rest of the day and into the evening. We have a Community Cabinet here. We will be at the Hercules Road State School and I think everybody for making us welcome there, and we will be meeting with the local community members and answering their questions.
Whether it be about jobs, whether it be about health, whether it be about education or the National Disability Insurance Scheme. And I expect we will get people who raise with us their concerns about job losses here in Queensland because of the actions of the Newman Government. About cutbacks to education and cutbacks to TAFE that the Newman Government is engaged in. About cutbacks to health.
People in this community need to know that governments are investing for the future. We are certainly getting on with that and I am looking forward to the discussion with the community to come and I thank Yvette D'Ath as our local member for having us here.
JOURNALIST: The claim in The Australian that you received $5000 in your bank account, is that true?
PM: I have read today's Australian and having read today's Australian closely, there is not one substantiated allegation in today's Australian. It does not contain one allegation of wrongdoing by me.
The Australian newspaper has spent months and months and months in so-called investigative journalism looking at this matter. And after all of those months and months and months of looking, there is not one substantiated allegation of wrongdoing by me.
This matter has been trawled over for the best part of 20 years and at the end of it being trawled over for the best part of 20 years, there is not one finding of wrongdoing by me. And there is a reason for that, I didn't do anything wrong.
This kind of smear that we are seeing in today's Australian, no allegation of wrongdoing by me, but the stories being published today, this is smear pure and simple and I'm not going to dignify it by becoming involved in it.
JOURNALIST: Do you remember getting the $5000 from Bruce Wilson?
PM: I have just dealt with the nature of these smears.
JOURNALIST: But Prime Minister, does unsubstantiated mean untrue? That there was no cash deposit?  
PM: There is no allegation in today's Australian of any wrongdoing by me. This is smear, pure and simple. And let's look at the week that we've just been through.
On Monday I announced that we would have a royal commission into child abuse in institutions in Australia. Yesterday I was in Perth meeting with Secretary of State Clinton and Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta, talking about our national security in our region, working with our ally the United States of America.
Here I am today in Brisbane, in the federal electorate of Petrie, looking at progress on a major infrastructure project and looking forward to Community Cabinet tonight. And during these three days, what's the Opposition been doing? Well everyday they've been out further pursuing these smears.
Every day they have been engaged in smear. Even though Tony Abbott as Leader of the Opposition has said that he's not going to engage in endless personal smears, even though he said that he's going to get on with the things that matter.
Well, I say to the Leader of the Opposition with this smear day after day, is this really getting on with the things that matter?
I'm here pursuing my vision for Australia's future, and the Liberal Party can throw anything they like at me and I will still be standing here pursuing that vision for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the AWU officials at the time weren't concerned about any Liberal or Labor links to this, they were just concerned about what they saw as an unusual payment. Do they have reason to still have those concerns?
PM: If you've got a substantiated allegation to put to me then put it, otherwise don't engage in this smear. There is no allegation in today's-
JOURNALIST: There is no allegation.
PM: No, precisely. Smear.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, should there be more indigenous Members of Parliament and should they come from the city or the bush?
PM: Yes, I do believe that our Parliament should represent our national including indigenous Australians.
I am not going to engage myself in the kinds of things that have been said in recent days, trying to divide indigenous Australians up into neat little columns and descriptors. People are people; people bring with them into the Parliament all sorts of attributes and outlooks on life.
I do believe our Parliament is at its best when it represents the nation it's there to serve. That means we do want to see more indigenous Australians, we want to see more women, we want to see more Australians from multicultural backgrounds in our Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, should the Royal Commission examine removing the seal of the confessional, so priests have to say what happened in there?
PM: When I announced the Royal Commission on Monday, I talked about people averting their eyes. So, not just the incredible wrongdoing by adults who have engaged in these vile acts involving children, but the people who averted their eyes.
Adults have got a duty of care towards children and it is not good enough for people to engage in sins of omission and not act when a child is at risk.
As for the way that the Royal Commission will take evidence and deal with getting the facts together in this matter, that is going to be a matter for the Royal Commissioner or Commissioners that we appoint.
As I have said consistently since I announced it on Monday, we want to take a really careful approach here. That means that we're going to consult on the terms of reference. We're engaged in that now and we've been out forging the necessary links with the representative groups of the survivors as well as talking to a State and Territory counterparts and of course we will be talking to institutions, including churches, about this Royal Commission and its terms of service.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned this afternoon the Community Cabinet; you're probably anticipating you'll get some angry people there. Are they going to be angry towards your government; I know you've said that there is a state issue there as well. But they haven't been entirely happy with how you've been doing.
PM: Well let's see Community Cabinet and then we can judge. My experience of Community Cabinet around the country is people come talking about the real issues that matter in their lives.
Now, some people come because they are a member of a representative group and forever and a day what they've wanted to see is more expenditure by government on a particular area. But there are many people too, who are not involved with any group that is agitating for anything, because people live in the local community, they care about jobs, they care about education, they care about health, they care about giving their kids a future and they want to hear what our plan for the nation's future is.
We've made clear our plan for the nation's future with the delivery of the Asian Century White Paper, how we're going to be a strong and prosperous and fair society in this century of change. So I'm looking forward to the exchange with local community members.
But when I've travelled to Queensland I have heard a fair bit of anger about Campbell Newman's cuts, a fair bit of anger about the job losses, a fair bit of anger about what that means when your kid is sick and you need some assistance, or the quality of your child's local school or whether you or your child will be able to get a better opportunity in life by going down the road to the local TAFE. So I would not be surprised if some of those things are raised tonight.
Thank you very much.


Perth
Prime Minister Julia Gillard will travel to Cambodia from 19 to 20 November to attend the 7th East Asia Summit (EAS) in Phnom Penh.
East Asia is vital to Australia's political, economic and strategic interests.  Australia is a founding member of the EAS, whose membership represents half the world's population and over a third of its GDP.
The Summit is the region's key forum for discussion of political, security and economic issues of common concern with the aim of promoting stability and economic prosperity in the region.
During the Summit, the Prime Minister will join other leaders in launching negotiations for the Regional Economic Comprehensive Partnership, a proposal for a free trade area which includes the 10 ASEAN countries plus Australia, New Zealand, China, Japan, the Republic of Korea and India, and will hold a number of bilateral meetings with key regional leaders.


Sydney
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Throughout my time in Government, I've been struck by the desire of many businesspeople to see a plan for Australia's future. 
That's the purpose of our White Paper. And tonight I want to reflect on the projects over the next couple of years which get it done.
As a nation we've got a clear choice: to drift into our future or to actively shape it. 
When I commissioned the White Paper I took a clear decision that our nation should shape its own future.
Now you can't do that without a view about what the future will look like, and predicting the future has its risks. 
But whatever else this century brings, it will bring Asia's rise.
Australia can shape our future from a position of strength.
The White  Paper is a plan to make change work for us  -  not because we face immediate crisis  -  not because we are standing on a burning platform.
But because we face unprecedented opportunity  -  because I burn with ambition for our nation's future.
We can shape our future from a position of strong engagement.
We have an ally in Washington, respect in Beijing, an open door in Delhi and Jakarta, Tokyo and Seoul.
We're engaged through the ongoing strength of the APEC forum and the now-developing East Asia Summit where I will take part with President Obama and Premier Wen next week in Cambodia.
As you know, I've also recently been to India, where we revived the relationship between our countries.
And I'm just back from the Asia-Europe Meeting and from co-chairing a really important regional forum, President Yudhyono's Bali Democracy Forum, a unique enterprise in Asian diplomacy.
We can also shape our future with a strong budget and a strong economy.
We stimulated in the downturn, we made the right call, that's clear.
And now we're returning to surplus.  
That's keeping inflation contained  -  and keeping business costs down.
On the latest RBA data for average business interest rates, the net reduction in the last 4 years has been around 240 basis points. 
With Australian business sector debt in the order of $730 billion this now yields a saving for the business sector of around $18 billion a year.
And we're doing it at the right stage of the cycle and in a targeted, responsible way  -  while delivering solid growth, continued investment, low unemployment.
And I know there's a few small government advocates in the room: well, you got it.
We've cut badly targeted subsidies, means-tested benefits, reformed the tax and transfer system to lift participation  -  and now we're sustaining spending below 24 points of GDP for the first time since the oil shocks.
The long-term savings decisions we've already made improve the Budget balance this year by around $14 billion this year  -  and they'll be making a $51 billion difference in a decade.
Take away the politics, look at what the market is saying about us. 
Three triple-As and a stable outlook on each. Just six other sovereigns are rated so highly.
Australia's budget is one of the seven economic wonders of the modern world. 
That means we're strong at the right time, reinforcing confidence in trying global circumstances.
It means with further structural savings, we will have the opportunity to improve schools and deliver the NDIS on a sustainable budget footing.
That's our track record  -  major reform in health, aged care, dental, paid parental leave, pensions  -  alongside smart savings to improve the budget position over the long term.
We've managed fiscal policy well though a challenging economic cycle.
We will maintain the stable macro-economic framework  -  a floating currency, independent monetary policy and a strong fiscal framework. 
We will also maintain the investments in education and skills that spread opportunity to all and that mean all can contribute to wealth creation. 
This is what has brought us twenty one years of growth, a generation of economic sunshine, and it is what gives us a moment of strength when we can shape our future.
In structure, what the White Paper does is to weave together the policy approach we have been pursuing in government with long-term policy ambitions for the nation's future.
 * 	First, economic strength  -  building a productive and resilient economy.
 * 	Second, strong minds  -  an education and skills plan to build capabilities.
 * 	Third, expanding and integrating regional markets and building the presence of Australian firms in them.
 * 	Fourth, deep and broad relationships with the region at all levels  -  leisure and sport, work and holidays, learning and culture are all being refined and redefined.
 * 	And finally, sustaining the security of our diverse region.
This is a set of specific goals to guide us  -  specific policy measures to start the work  - and a call to action to all parts of Australian society  -  with the business community central to that.
I know that many of you already lead Asia business strategies  -  and work on the new business models and new ways to engage with these growing regional markets.
Private sector engagement is vital to the success of our plan.
To build on the strength of mining, but also the strength of financial services, of education, of legal and professional services, of architecture and design.  And yes, of manufacturing, of transport and logistics.
That's why we're not driving a set of categories of government policy or slicing up the economy into sectors, but instead driving a cohesive, coherent, collaborative approach.
Think about the connections which emerge when we use APEC to drive further deregulation in our region, when we use the Business Advisory Forum and COAG to streamline environmental regulation, when we get rid of single desk wheat marketing, and our firms can sell their sorghum in Korea with a marking saying what field it grew in and charge a premium for that kind of high end service.
Or when we lift school standards, have a rational model for school funding, give our schools the broadband our competitors take for granted and then we revive our relationship with India, agree to uranium sales, identify Hindi as a priority language, and for that matter, give Sachin Tendulkar the AM and make the front and back page in the biggest newspaper market on earth.
These are genuine and clever deployments of all the elements of national power to achieve a national goal: success in Asia. 
That's what you can do with a plan for the nation's future and with a nation strong enough to seize it.
This is a national plan and one that calls on genuine national effort. 
It's also a very authentic Labor plan.
These five pillars of productivity I speak about  -  education and skills; innovation; infrastructure, tax reform and deregulation  -  these aren't laws of nature, they're the policy of a Labor Government.
It's been observed by some that there are controversial Labor policies reflected in the White Paper  -  like the NBN, like school improvement, like pricing carbon.
Well, yes.  First of all, because this Australian Government is an Australian Labor Government.
Second, because this is national plan is a plan to win in Asia  -  and the policies which get us ready for Asia come from Labor Governments.
There's always national consensus on Labor's past achievements in getting into Asia.  We'll have a forty year anniversary shortly of the commencement of diplomatic relations with China. 
It'll be universally hailed as the right decision and it will be an entirely non-partisan event.
When Gough Whitlam visited China the year before he established diplomatic relations, Australia's conservative Prime Minister of the day said he'd been “played like a trout”.
And there was nothing inevitable about the decision to open up our economy in the 1980s. 
If Labor lost the 1983 election, those changes wouldn't have happened when they needed to.  It's that simple.
So we have a national plan for a moment of strength, policies on the table and ambitious goals for 2025  -  and a Labor Government with a vision for Australia: winning in the Asian Century.
I want to leave you with this thought:   What I am really focussed on now is a fascinating sequence of work over the next couple of years, the 2014 and 2015 projects that sit in the space between our immediate policy agenda and the generational goals.
This is a time when complacency equals defeat, when political negativity must be met by disdain from thoughtful people.
This is a time when you only win if you do the work, when you only succeed if you shape your own future.
Consider this: in just ten years, Apple's market value has increased from US$6bn to around US$500bn.  Nokia's market value has declined from US$70bn to under US$10bn.  I know which path I want us to be on  -  that's why we have a plan.
While all of you are working through what I think of as the “Kodak moment”, what some call the digital disruption, remaking your business models and retooling your workforces for the new economy, we're playing our part to keep you ahead of the game.
Building the NBN and encouraging the use of IT services such as telework and cloud computing across Government.  In three years' time, we'll have fibre broadband connected at around 3.5 million premises and two satellites will be up. 
The benefits of our reforms to the tax and transfer system and the benefits of our investments in skills will be being felt - in particular what we're doing for women.
Tripling the tax free threshold, delivering paid parental leave, extending gender equality - and I'm looking forward to seeing that flow from the shop floor up to the leadership level, where I'm sure that in a couple of years' time I won't still find myself meeting with boards where the only other woman is serving food.
In 2014, the first stages of our National Plan for School Improvement, including the funding architecture that to its credit the BCA has supported, will be in place  -  and the real work to put Australian schools in the top 5 globally by 2025 will just be beginning.
With the election season now past in the US, President Obama's immediate task is to keep the US economic recovery on track while solving their fiscal problems; and I'm looking forward to the work that follows, where we'll be working together with other leaders to rebalance the global economy, including when the G20 meets here in Australia in 2014.
And the “other Presidential contest”, the Chinese leadership transition is taking place today.  In 2015, China should take its pilot emissions trading scheme national. 
In total around sixty per cent of the world's GDP is either subject to a carbon price today, or has one legislated or planned for implementation in the two or three years ahead.
International carbon markets will cover billions of consumers this decade.  Ask the bankers at your table whether they want Australia to clip that ticket.  We're going to help them get their share.
So that's the work of coming years, that's what preoccupies my thoughts as I think through the agenda for this country.  
Big opportunities for the future-makers  -  complacency the greatest risk of all. 
I'm looking forward to working with you as we get it done.


Sydney
Australia is gravely concerned by escalating conflict in the Middle East.
The Government condemns the repeated rocket and mortar attacks on Israel from the Gaza Strip and calls on Hamas to cease these immediately.
	Australia supports Israel's right to defend itself against these indiscriminate attacks. Such attacks on Israel's civilian population are utterly unacceptable.
	Further escalations in rocket attacks from Gaza, such as those seen overnight, will not serve the interests of the Palestinian people or their cause for self-determination and statehood.
	We urge both Hamas and Israel to exercise restraint and to protect the lives of civilians.
	The Government of Australia will work earnestly with other countries to end further attacks from Gaza and to encourage a de-escalation of this conflict.  We encourage regional countries, particularly Egypt, to support efforts to restore peace.
	The only way forward is a two-state solution based on direct negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis.


Phnom Penh, Cambodia
PM: Well it's good to be here in Cambodia for what is my last overseas visit this year and I‘m here to attend the East Asia Summit.
We make the point very clearly in the Asian Century White Paper that the East Asia Summit is an important piece of regional architecture. This is an important meeting.
As economic and strategic weight moves to our region then of course the landscape is becoming more crowded and more complicated, which is why it is important that there is a body, the East Asia Summit, which brings around the table the right people to talk across a broad mandate of issues; political, economic, and security issues.
My predecessor Kevin Rudd worked hard to ensure that the East Asia Summit extended its membership to the United States of America and to Russia. And so I am delighted that President Obama will be here in Cambodia so early in the second term of his presidency, so early after the election.
It will be the second East Asia Summit that he attends and I think that sends a sign about how important this meeting is to the United States of America and to our region.
We will be working at this East Asia Summit to keep broadening and deepening the purpose of this meeting. It's important that it gets on with practical work. It's important that at the East Asia Summit we are building habits of trust and cooperation.
Australia has played a continuing role about suggesting practical initiatives that the East Asia Summit can take forward. So for example, at the last East Asia Swe focused on disaster management in our region.
At this East Asia Summit we will be bringing to the table a very practical initiative on malaria, which of course is such a scourge in the region in which we live.
In addition to the direct work of the summit, Australia has long been a supporter of further economic integration in our region, of better trade links, of better investment links, of ways of trading in our region so people do not encounter behind-the-border barriers.
I think it's a very important part of our vision for this century, as laid out in our white paper, that we see further and deeper economic integration in our region.
I'm therefore delighted that in the company of the Minister for Trade, Dr Emerson, I will attend two important meetings on trade here in Cambodia during the period of the East Asia Summit.
We will participate in the launch of negotiations for a new trade agreement, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, known for better or worse as RCEP. RCEP has ASEAN at its centre and brings together 16 nations.
 Australia will be supporting a Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership that is comprehensive, covering trade in goods and services as well as investment, which is ambitious and which has the door open to new entrants, to new countries to join should they wish to do so.
In addition I will be attending the meeting convened by President Obama on the Trans-Pacific Partnership. These two initiatives we believe are complementary and Australia will participate in both.
Finally, whilst I'm here at the East Asia Summit, I will also be participating in a range of bilateral discussions. I will be meeting with Premier Wen of China. This is a good opportunity to have a formal bilateral discussion as we approach the fortieth anniversary of diplomatic relations between our two countries.
And of course there will be some events when I'm back in Canberra to mark that very special anniversary of diplomatic relations.
I will also be meeting with Prime Minister Noda of Japan, the Sultan of Brunei who will chair the East Asia Summit next year, and the Prime Minister of Thailand.
I will shortly go to pay my respects and to convey the condolences of the Australian people on the loss of the King-Father of Cambodia. I did express Australia's condolences by way of letter shortly following his death. But I will have the opportunity to convey those condolences in person very shortly.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Some trade officials are talking about 2015 as a possible date for the trade agreement to be done. Are you confident about that date?
PM: Well, we will be doing everything we can to press forward with both sets of discussions as expeditiously as possible. As Dr Emerson can tell you in painstaking detail from his engagement in trade negotiations, they can be very complex matters. But of course we are approaching this with a spirit of wanting to get it done.
JOURNALIST: What do you expect to discuss in relation to security? There is obviously some tension involving with ASEANs and China on the South China Sea. How do you expect those discussions to unfold?
PM: Well, our vision of the East Asia Summit is that it does bring the right people around the table to talk broadly across political, economic, and security matters and those discussions need to be frank discussions.
So we don't believe any issue should be off the table. We do know that ASEAN and China have done some good work on questions involving the South China Sea. But no issue should be off the table.
JOURNALIST: RCEP could include other countries down the track. What possible other countries? US and Russia?
PM: Look, I'm not nominating new members at this stage; we are at the commencement of this process of sixteen countries.
But clearly if you are negotiating an agreement then to have the door open to further entrants  makes sense because the  more participants the freer the trade, the freer the investment, the more jobs we see in Australia. That's the equation.
JOURNALIST: How important is economic and trade liberalisation to the process of democratisation in political reform of the region?
PM: I think our focus on trade liberalisation is just driven by a fundamental belief that freer trade drives greater economic prosperity and growth. It means more jobs. For us it means more jobs.
We are a great trading nation and we've got nothing to be afraid of. When it comes to economic integration in our region we can seize a high skill, high wage future if we make the right decisions now.
On democratisation, of course there's a set of issues that play into calls for democratisation in nations around the world. I don't think that you can say there's only one trigger and that is freer trade; I don't think that it's as simple as that.
But we believe freer trade, freer investment, the creation of more prosperity and more jobs is good for everyone; it's good for our region.
JOURNALIST: There's been some serious concern about human rights in Cambodia, particularly in relation of forced evictions and the jailing of people who've been standing up against that. The EU has come out and said trade and aid will be wound back unless those evictions stop. Will Australia be pressing that directly?
PM: On Cambodia, we believe a great deal of progress has been made since the days of the Khmer Rouge and all the civil upheaval, associated with that, but we do raise with Cambodia our concerns about human rights in our bilateral relationship. We also raise them through the UN Human Rights Council.
We believe that more needs to be done. We believe particularly more needs to be done with a focus on extrajudicial killings, land disputes, electoral reform and freedom of speech. So we do raise and will continue to raise human rights issues with Cambodia.
JOURNALIST: Is that something that will be raised at this forum though?
PM: We raise them in the context of our bilateral discussions. The East Asia Summit is not a place for bilateral exchanges. Obviously this is a multilateral forum focused on multilateral issues.
JOURNALIST: Are you confident that RCEP and TPP can co-exist?
PM: Yes I am.
JOURNALIST: Do you see there's a possibility of those two partnerships merging at some point on the road to free trade in the Asia Pacific?
PM: We think that there is a vision here at the end, which is a region in the Asia Pacific, which is a free trade region, which is an integrated economic region. It's the region in which we live and that would be in Australia's interest.
It would mean more jobs for Australians. We think that there are various ways that can get us to that broader vision. And we're prepared to be in all starters that can get us there to that broader vision, which is why we will be there for the RCEP, it's why we'll be there for the TPP.
Now how these negotiations for each will roll out, how they will ultimately relate to each other is something that will develop during the course of the discussions. But we're clear on where we would like to get to and we're prepared to be in all potential starting discussions that help us get there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on a domestic matter, your Government's issued a discussion paper today ahead of setting terms of reference for the Royal Commission into Child Abuse. But it only allows one week for responses to come back. Why have you only allowed one week and is that really long enough for people to respond, for individuals as well as institutions that wanted to respond before you set those terms of reference?
JOURNALIST: The paper that we've put out is about consultation on the terms of reference on the structure of the Royal Commission and a number of issues associated with it.
We're balancing here, wanting to get on with the job and giving people an appropriate time to respond. So we have asked people to try and respond in that timeframe.
Certainly if there was a body and they really wanted to have their voice heard and they were not able to provide their feedback in that timeframe then we would receive it beyond that timeframe.
But in order to keep the process moving of establishing the Royal Commission we did think it was appropriate to set a target time for people to fold back their views. We're out there in the market for consultation, but to set a target time for them to fold back their views to us.
JOURNALIST: Should the federal government fund the whole thing?
PM: Well, we are prepared to do what is necessary to get the Royal Commission up and functioning. One of the issues raised in the consultation paper, and it's been the subject of discussion between the Attorney General and her counterparts in the states, is whether or not there would be a joint endeavour; Commonwealth-State. Those discussions are continuing.
I don't think any of this should bog down on questions of financing or money; I haven't got that in my mind at all. What I've got in my mind is how we can best make this work. So we will continue to have those discussions with the states.
JOURNALIST: There's a poll today Prime Minister that suggests you've got 95 per cent support for this Royal Commission. Are you concerned that expectations may be raised too high and that people may feel that it's going to be able to do more than, physically, it can?
PM: The Royal Commission was the right decision and so I think it is being received well by the nation because it's the decision the nation needed. People do want to see these tragic instances of child abuse addressed and they do want to see our institutions in the future not repeat these mistakes of the past.
Now, people will come to this process with a variety of expectations. The best thing we can do is be consultative and clear as we move through this journey, which I've indicated in a very forthright way will take some time.
The best thing we can do is be consultative and clear about what we're trying to do, what we're trying to achieve and how people can engage in it.
JOURNALIST: Other than the TPP meeting tomorrow morning, are you hoping to have a meeting with Barack Obama?
PM: I will see President Obama at the TPP meeting. We do not have a formal bilateral discussion with President Obama but I expect to see him in and around the course of the next day and a bit.
JOURNALIST: What's your response to Obama's tour of Southeast Asia? Is it a positive thing for the region and what does it mean for Australia?
PM: I think it's a great thing for the region that the first international trip President Obama has taken since his re-election is to our region and that he is here attending in person his second East Asia Summit.
JOURNALIST: What's the key point from the white paper that you want to get across to regional leaders?
PM: We've been briefing regional leaders on the breadth of the white paper. So we've been talking to them about our vision for our nation's future, and our understanding of these challenges and opportunities of the era in which we live and the region in which we live.
So we've been talking right through it. Our strategic outlook on the region as outlined in the white paper, the economic opportunities of this age, the people-to-people links which matter so much in nations having an understanding of each other, the cultural exchanges which help with understanding, our language program which we want to see in Australian schools which has been well received by leaders in the region.
You would have heard, for example, President Yudhoyono when I met with him say very forthrightly that he was, I'm going to use the expression, ‘tickled pink'. He didn't use the expression ‘tickled pink' but he was very, very pleased to see that Bahasa was one of those languages.
So, we are briefing comprehensively on the white paper.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned with your meeting with Premier Wen following the meeting of AUSMIN in regards to more troops in Darwin?
PM: Not at all, and I've had the opportunity to speak formally and informally to Chinese leaders well and truly since the announcement of that decision. Indeed, I had the opportunity to brief President Hu that we were making a decision of that nature before it was announced publically, so it's been very well known to China for a very long period of time now.
Okay, thank you very much.


Phnom Penh
Australia will work with Asia-Pacific leaders to accelerate the fight against malaria and tackle the emergence of drug resistant strains of the disease. 
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, speaking in Phnom Penh at the East Asia Summit, today outlined a commitment of $1 million to support the establishment of an Asia-Pacific Leaders Malaria Alliance to bring countries of the Asia-Pacific together in the fight against malaria. 
Malaria, a wholly preventable and treatable disease, killed more than 42,000 people in the Asia-Pacific in 2010 and causes more than 650,000 deaths worldwide every year. The emergence of drug resistant malaria is a serious threat to regional and global efforts to combat this public health challenge.
The Asia-Pacific Leaders Malaria Alliance will promote regional political leadership and collaboration on combating malaria. Australian funding is expected to support the establishment of task forces to explore options to meet financing gaps, improve access to antimalarial medicines and technologies, and identify key research and development priorities.
The Alliance will complement this year's EAS leaders' declaration committing to a regional response to the growing threat of drug-resistant malaria.
The Alliance will also build on the agreement reached by Asia-Pacific regional leaders at the recent Malaria 2012 conference in Sydney to strengthen and coordinate the regional response to the disease.  At this conference, Australia also committed $100 million in funding over the next four years to help reduce death and illness from malaria in the Asia-Pacific region.


Phnom Penh
PM:  Well it's fitting to finish my year of international travel here in Asia and together with leaders of Australia's most important partners at the East Asia Summit. The East Asia Summit is an organisation that is vital to promoting habits of trust and cooperation amongst the countries of our rapidly emerging region.
This is my last international trip for the year. If I was to give a comprehensive report on everything I've done during the course of the year it would take quite some time. So it's not my intention to do that. But I do want to point out some of the main features of what I've sought to achieve during the course of this busy but productive year. 
First, with our NATO ISAF partners we have kept transition on track in Afghanistan and we've set in place a strong framework for supporting Afghanistan after 2014. Second, we have secured the hosting of the G20 for Australia and of course that is going to be held in Brisbane and we are also looking forward to the Finance Ministers Meeting in Cairns.  We've secured a position on the Security Council where we will sit in 2013 and 2014 as the UN deliberates on some very important issues including Middle East peace, Iran and Syria and the final stages of transition in Afghanistan. 
We've set out our ambitious agenda at home about Australia's engagement with our region and our plan for Australia's future:  Australia in the Asian Century.  And that document has been warmly received by our Asian leaders as I've briefed them on it. 
We've launched a new chapter in our ties with India, including through establishing annual leaders' level meetings and clearing the way for negotiations to begin on a Nuclear Safeguards Agreement to allow the sale of uranium to India for its power industry. 
We've strengthened other key relationships during the course of the year. We've held our second annual level Leaders' Summit in Darwin with Indonesia, our first 2+2 Defence and Foreign Ministers' Meeting with Indonesia and the first round of negotiations have been held on our Comprehensive Economic Partnership between our two countries. 
We are shortly to have our very formal celebrations of 40 years of diplomatic relations with China including by proposing new high level architecture for the relationship and funding a new Consulate in China. We want to expand our diplomatic footprint there and expand the reach of our businesses.   
We've kept our alliance relations strong through the implementation of our Force Posture Review commitments including the first successful training rotation of US marines through the Northern Territory. 
And as a woman leader I've been privileged to be able to lend Australia's support to international efforts to increase women's leadership and participation, including through our Gender Empowerment Initiative in the Pacific. 
We've been working in the trade agenda in a very busy way and I will turn to Dr Emerson for some comments on that specifically, but we've concluded our Free Trade Agreement with Malaysia and we are expanding pathways towards a greater economic integration with the region in which we live and we've made some progress on that today both through the meeting of the Trans Pacific Partnership and the launch of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership and Dr Emerson will talk very specifically about those. 
At the East Asia Summit today there was strong support for Australia's very practical initiative on malaria. This is the kind of practical initiative that deepens the work of the East Asia Summit.
I've been pleased with the discussions at the East Asia Summit today. They've been comprehensive; they've been across a wide range of areas. We've been able to have some frank discussions about key challenges in our region including issues involving the South China Sea and North Korea. And that is exactly what we want the East Asia Summit to do and to be. We want it to be a regional meeting where nations, large or small, can come and put their views and discuss issues and challenges within our region with no issue being off the table of discussion. 
Finally, during the course of the day I did have formal bilateral discussions with Premier Wen of China and with the Prime Minister of Thailand. Both of those were productive engagements.
Premier Wen of course will very shortly step down as China's Premier.  He's been a good friend of Australia and I had the opportunity to thank him for the collaborative and cooperative spirit in which he's worked with me and worked with our nation. 
MINISTER EMERSON: This evening leaders gathered to launch negotiations for a Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership. This involves the 10 ASEAN nations plus six countries with which ASEAN either has or is negotiating free trade agreements. This grouping constitutes 30 per cent of global GDP and almost half of the world's population. 
When we look to the Asian Century and the work that we've done and continue to do on Australia's place in the Asian Century, we reflect on the growing middle class of Asia and when we have a grouping that constitutes 30 per cent of the world population and growing in income and wealth this is a lot of purchasing power and it's a great honour that Australia has been asked to be a member of the team that is negotiating the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership which is being driven by the ASEAN countries and we already have a high standard agreement with the ASEAN countries with the ASEAN-Australian-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement. This is designed to build on that and not only in goods but services and investment collaborations. 
So again, it's a reflection of the priorities that we identified in the Asian Century White Paper, we did anticipate the likelihood of this launch today, it is an historic launch, and the ambition of the negotiations is to have them complete by the end of 2015.
So we have two tracks towards the ultimate goal of a free trade area for Asia Pacific, both of which have genuine momentum. We're in both negotiations for a total of 21 countries; we are amongst six only, that are in both negotiations.  And I think that itself is a reflection of the regard and the importance that others attach to Australia's place in the Asian Century. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, earlier today you saying with these trade agreements, it's all about creating Australian jobs. Can you tell us a little bit about where you're expecting these jobs to be, where you're expecting jobs growth as a result of these agreements that have been signed or could be signed?
PM: Sure, well look, I'll talk to that and I'll also get Dr Emerson to make some comments. 
But I'd refer to you to our plan for Australia's future and it very clearly charts what is happening in our region of the world; the growth of Asia's middle class, the fact that this region of the world will move from not only being the biggest productive region of the world but to the region of the world doing the most consumption; people buying things and services that they want and those middle class consumers in Asia will want the same kinds of things that Australians want for themselves. 
And so where are these job opportunities for us? Well clearly in agriculture, clearly in food processing, in tourism in customised manufacturing, in high-end manufacturing, in manufacturing which comes with an imbedded services component, in our services industries, financial services, legal services, a continuation of international education, health services. I actually think we will be doing good business in public policy services too. 
We live in a region of the world where governments are increasingly turning their attention to social safety nets and the sources of domestic consumption. We've got a proud Australian record; I would say a Labor record, of social policy innovation. So people do come and ask us about Medicare, how does it work, they do come and ask about universal superannuation, how does it work, how does it make provision for your ageing society. 
We are engaged with provinces in China about the intellectual property that's imbedded in carbon pricing, how you set up an effective carbon pricing scheme. This is on top of what we're already seeing in our economy with the huge down payment in resources which not only creates construction jobs, of course it does create that, but creates long term jobs.  Those 20, 30, 40 year investments continue to generate the commodities that they sell. 
So for us to be in a region where we don't have barriers, when we try to engage with these growth markets, it's good for Australian jobs. 
MINISTER EMERSON: A very comprehensive answer, PM. By the end of this decade, the combined economies of Asia will be larger than the combined economies of Europe and North America. By 2035 there'll be 3 billion middle class customers in Asia and the Prime Minister has reflected on the opportunities and the splendid diversity of career paths that will be available to young Australians as we take our place in the Asian Century. 
So the diversification will reflect the diversification of the economies of the region. Yes, we have a very strong investment and trade in minerals and energy, that will continue, but as we move into these high value services, high value manufacturing and back into agriculture, which has the opportunity to move from, let's say old economy to new economy, we can have market driven regional development in Australia.  And wouldn't that be great for our country towns and regional centers. 
So these opportunities are boundless. They are rich in their diversity and I'll add this, they are not simply for university graduates. They are very much for young people who go through our training colleges, our TAFEs  -  that's why we are so committed to investing in them. Because our tradies, our electricians, our plumbers have a very good reputation and standing in the region.
When I have discussions with other trade ministers they say, how can we get that sort of expertise in this region to build the cities, to build the transport networks, in ways that are very high quality.  And we have the high quality young people to do it. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, two years ago on your first overseas trip as Prime Minister, you said that foreign affairs wasn't your passion and that you would rather be reading to school children at a school at home. Two years on at the end of a year of a lot of travel and looking ahead to a Security Council seat, how do you feel about it now?
PM: Well it will always be the case that the passion that brought me into public life was a passion for education and its transformative power. And actually I've managed to combine reading books to school kids with international travel. I had the opportunity to do that when I got to go to a school following the Asia-Europe meeting and I do those kinds of things because if you want to see the future of a nation, go to a class room. That's true of ours.  That's true of the countries to which I travel. 
And that's way imbedded at the heart of our plan for our nation's future, is what we intend to do in education.  Because there are all of these opportunities awaiting Australians tomorrow but they'll be opportunities people can only seize with high skill levels and they can be trade skills. We've got great trade skills training in Australia and that gives people an entrée, not only in to good jobs in our own country but around the region and it means that we need to have the kind of skill level that keeps developing our economy as there's a competition about skills around our region and around the world. 
So I'm always proud to represent my nation overseas, I'm a very proud and patriotic Australian. It will always be true that the passion that brought me into politics is education but I'd invite people not to create a false divide between these two public policy areas. 
What we're doing here today is important. What's happened today in Australian class rooms is as important to the future as well. 
JOURNALIST: You talked about malaria repeatedly today, are you aware of corruption allegations involving the global fund with which Australia is involved and how concerned are you about that and how are you going to prevent that from happening again with money that you're now putting into malaria? 
PM: Well I am aware of these allegations and of course like all allegations they've got to be looked at and properly worked through. We, through our aid program, take a very rigorous approach to the expenditure of Australian dollars and we have monitoring and checking processes. But to the extent that there are ever areas of concern then of course we work on them. But in terms of the work that we want to do on malaria, we've hosted a major conference in Australia, Senator Carr did that, we've committed $100 million. This is going to be built on the kind of experiences we have already had fighting disease in our region and around the world. 
We do know how to make a difference. We've made a difference to a lot of kids' lives.  We've got a lot of vaccine into kids' arms and down their throats that will make a difference to them, to diseases like polio. So we do know how to do it but of course you've always got to be vigilant about the expenditure of every Australian dollar. 
JOURNALIST: I understand though that AusAID's been aware since May that there was corruption in the global fund and that corruption involves fake anti-malarials essentially being given to people. Why doesn't Australia get on the front foot on this, because people's lives are at risk as a result of this as a result of this?
PM: Well I believe we can be very proud of the work of AusAID and very proud of the diligence that they show in distributing Australian aid dollars. I am aware of the allegations that you refer to and they are being worked through. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what can you tell us about the downside of the global economy? I understand the Asian Development Bank gave a briefing at the start of the Summit talking about China and India growth easing off.  Are you concerned that there could be a downturn in the global economy which could make these trade negotiations a bit redundant?
PM: Well I don't agree with your conclusion but let me go to the substance of your question. We did receive a briefing today from the Asian Development Bank and the take on the global economy is a familiar one; which is that Europe continues to face very entrenched difficulties. They have worked hard to try and stabilise the situation but even after all that hard work European economies still face fiscal challenges. They face the challenge of recession with millions of people literally out of work and it is going to take time, and it's going to take growth, in order to get those economies offering job opportunities to people who are now languishing on the sidelines - Too many of them young people, so many young lives that are blighted by unemployment. 
So, we know that there's a problem in Europe. We know that President Obama has his challenges with the US economy including a very pressing challenge with the fiscal cliff and making sure that he manages his way through that and keeps managing growth in the American economy.
Here in this region of the world we are still seeing good growth rates. We've got to remind ourselves when people talk about a moderation, for example in China, we are talking about a moderation to what is a very high growth rate. So, you know, we, in our own forecasting in Australia as reflected in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook have computed all of this in through Treasury and we stand by the forecast we've made. 
As the Treasurer has said consistently, particularly when he goes to G20 Finance Ministers' Meetings, there are risks in the global economy, they're risks on the downside to use the language of economists, and they're ones that we've got to keep a very keen and prudent eye on. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you talked about comprehensive and frank discussions including on the South China Sea, what was said at the Summit today? 
PM: Well you've got to respect the fact that this is a closed door meeting and the fact it's a closed door meeting enables us to have frank discussions. So I'm not going to characterise the contributions of individual leaders. But what I can say is that there was a discussion of the South China Sea, there was a sense of welcoming of the ASEAN-China process to work through issues with the code of conduct to try to achieve a code of conduct.
You would have expected leaders to put forward different perspectives and they did but it was a good discussion. It was a discussion in a constructive spirit, it was a frank discussion and it was in my view, the East Asia Summit realising its mandate as the body where nations large and small can come and talk about challenges in our region and put their views. 
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that if the forum doesn't have that role that these things can fester, that there'll be real problems? 
PM: Well I'll put it the other way, this is the only meeting in our region that brings the right people round the table to have discussions across political, economic and security concerns and that means that it's the right place for nations to come when they've got concerns and to have a frank discussion. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Prime Minister Hun Sen said there was consensus on the issue. Is that how you would characterise the talks? 
PM: He will issue the Chair's statement so of course that's in his hands. I think that there was a very constructive spirit in the discussions so I would certainly characterise them like that.
As you would expect in any meeting where there's a number of people in the room of course you get some differences in emphasis and views, you would expect that too. 
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, when you spoke about the Gaza conflict earlier today and said Israel had a right to defend itself. But in the past 24 hours Israel has fired on a building in Gaza which houses Palestinian and international media. Does that constitute just defending itself or does it go further than that? 
PM: Israel does have a right to defend itself and Israel has taken incoming rocket fire from Gaza launched by Hamas and others so Israel does have a right to defend itself. 
When I spoke to you earlier today too I talked about the need for restraint and doing everything possible to avoid civilian casualties and I put that view to the Prime Minister of Israel when I spoke to him on Friday. 
JOURNALIST: So do you consider that the responsibility for restraint falls on both sides and not only on the Palestinian side?
PM: Certainly the responsibility to avoid civilian casualties lies on everyone which is why when you see rocket fire from Gaza into populated areas of Israel, what you are seeing is rockets that are being launched at civilians.
So the responsibility to avoid civilian casualties lies on everyone. There's hope now to try and de-escalate this conflict. We've got the very strong engagement of the United States, of Egypt, of the UN Secretary General and what I would hope is that everybody is able to participate in those discussions to give diplomacy some time to do its work. 
JOURNALIST: By the tone of your language though, you do sound as though you consider that the Hamas and the Palestinians are responsible for this state of this conflict. Is that an accurate summation of your view? 
PM: Well I think we could have a long and theological debate about issues in the Middle East stemming back hundreds indeed thousands of years if we had the time to do it, but talking about now, clearly what we saw from Hamas and others in Gaza was the launching of rockets into Israel. This is where this started and Israel responded, Israel has a right to defend itself. So that's my position and the view of the Australian Government.
Having said that, of course if we can see this conflict de-escalated then you would want to see that and I'm sure we'd all share that hope, and there are now very many who are very active in trying to secure that outcome. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you gave Premier Wen a photo of Gough Whitlam, what was the thinking behind that? 
PM: Well the thinking behind that was we are celebrating our 40 years of diplomatic relations between Australia and China. 
We will have a formal event in the next couple of weeks in the Great Hall to celebrate and it was Gough Whitlam as Opposition Leader and then as Prime Minister who opened diplomatic relations with China. 
At the time he first travelled to China he was the subject of partisan criticism, viewed as having been, I think the terminology was, ‘played like a trout' by the then Liberal Prime Minister of our nation, and it just goes to show doesn't it, that with the perspective of history, things that were controversial at the time become so much part of the norm that it's no one who criticises them any longer and we may well see that play out about some controversial issues in our domestic politics today. 
Thank you very much. 


Phnom Penh
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, accompanied by Trade and Competitiveness Minister Craig Emerson, today joined leaders from 15 countries of the Asian region to launch negotiations for a new trade agreement, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP).
RCEP will bring together the ten ASEAN countries, along with Australia, China, India, Japan, Republic of Korea and New Zealand.  The 16 countries account for almost half the world's population and 30 per cent of global GDP.
The Prime Minister and Minister Emerson congratulated ASEAN on initiating RCEP.
Australia's participation in RCEP delivers on the vision for Australia's engagement with Asia set out in the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper. 
RCEP will support the goal of a more open Australian economy, integrated with Asia, and help improve the flow of goods, services, capital and ideas.
The countries involved include nine of Australia's top 12 trading partners and account for almost 60 per cent of our two-way trade and 70 per cent of our exports. 
RCEP will form part of the Government's strategy for lowering trade barriers and securing improved market access for Australian exporters of goods and services and Australian investors.
The agreement will provide Australian businesses with a genuinely regional platform for trade and investment decisions, enabling them to compete and succeed in regional value chains.
RCEP will build on the high-quality free trade agreement that Australia already has with ASEAN and New Zealand. It will complement Australia's participation in bilateral trade negotiations and in Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) negotiations.
Australia's participation in each of these negotiations will add momentum to the process of competitive trade liberalisation.


Phnom Penh, Cambodia
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that Australia will fund the $50 million Australia-Asia Program to combat Trafficking in Persons, which will reduce trafficking in persons by strengthening criminal justice systems in Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.
Investigators and prosecutors will be supported to increase convictions and reduce opportunities for trafficking, while victims of trafficking will be supported through the criminal justice process.
Trafficking in persons is a global issue that ruins the lives of its victims and profoundly affects their families and communities.
The International Labour Organization estimates that, each year, more than 20 million people become trapped in situations of forced labour globally.
Women and young people are particularly vulnerable, with school age girls often forced into conditions of exploitative labour, domestic work, or prostitution.
The program is part of the joint work being carried out by Australia with ASEAN members to combat trafficking in persons.


Phnom Penh
PM: I'm joined by the Minister for Trade and Competitiveness, by Dr Emerson. We've just come from a meeting convened by President Obama on the Trans Pacific Partnership.
This is an important economic arrangement for our nation. It is a trade deal that would cover 30 per cent of the world's GDP. We have a high level of ambition for the Trans Pacific Partnership. We do want to see freer trade in goods and services in our region. As I've said consistently, Australia is a great trading nation and freer trade arrangements mean more jobs for Australians.
At the discussion this morning, it was agreed between the countries participating that we would aim for October next year as the deadline for negotiating the Trans Pacific Partnership; that is, by the time of the next APEC meeting.
We also had a discussion about the level of ambition of the agreement, and President Obama was very clear about the high level of ambition that is being sought in this agreement. So the Trans Pacific Partnership discussions today were very good, very constructive discussions.
I had the opportunity to have a bilateral discussion with the Prime Minister of Japan after arriving yesterday. Today I will be meeting with Premier Wen of China, and the Prime Minister of Thailand.
I've had the opportunity during the course of being here to have a number of informal discussions with fellow leaders. The East Asia Summit itself will then move into formal session a little bit later today.
In the course of the East Asia Summit, as I said yesterday, I will be highlighting a number of practical steps Australia is taking to support the work of the East Asia Summit and work within our region. In particular, I will be highlighting our efforts to fight malaria in our region.
Malaria is a disease which disproportionately affects the poor. In fact, in 2010 it was estimated 42,000 people in our region of the world died from malaria. And disturbingly we are seeing the emergence of drug-resistant strains of malaria.
So there is a lot to do to fight malaria in our region of the world. Senator Carr recently hosted in Australia an international conference on malaria and announced a $100 million program from Australia to fight this disease over the next four years.
Today I will be pleased to announce at the East Asia Summit that we will be providing $1 million to support the establishment of an Asia Pacific Leaders Malaria Alliance, and I do believe that today the East Asia Summit will issue a declaration on malaria, which Australia has worked on hard, highlighting the importance of coordinated regional responses to this disease.
So I certainly hope that the mobilisation of this high level political effort will lead to a new attack on malaria in our region.
I'm also very pleased to be announcing today a $50 million Australia-Asia program to combat trafficking in persons. Trafficking in persons is a dreadful evil where people are forced into exploitative labour situations and tragically, young people in particular, are forced into prostitution.
The program I am announcing today will enable us to work with a number of our neighbours to reduce trafficking in people by strengthening criminal justice systems. If we can see better investigations and prosecutions of people who seek to traffic other human beings, then that will assist in combating people trafficking.
As I said yesterday the East Asia Summit is an important engagement for Australia. It brings together around the table the right people with a broad mandate to talk about political, economic and security issues, so I'm looking forward to those discussions today.
I will, with Dr Emerson, also be participating in the launch of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership later today. I'll get Dr Emerson to make some comments on the Trans Pacific Partnership and then we'll be happy to take questions.
MINISTER EMERSON: It was a great discussion in fact and the President of the United States was very enthusiastic and highly ambitious for the Trans Pacific Partnership.
As a second term President of the United States it is clear that he wants to get this deal done, and indeed, he wants it to be a high quality, truly liberalising agreement. The importance of that is that it creates more jobs, and better jobs, in the region and beyond.
We are still dealing with the aftermath of a global recession and the best way to create good jobs in the region and around the world is to open up our markets. Australia has demonstrated that over a period of 25 years, and we are very keen and very heartened by the President's indication that he wants a high quality agreement, that these things are worth fighting for, and the level of support that he gained from other members of the TPP who were here in Phnom Penh.
So I think it is a very encouraging outcome from that meeting. It is now over to the Trade Ministers to deliver, but the instructions couldn't have been clearer that the parties to the TPP who were here, particularly led by the President of the United States, are keen to get this deal done.
It would be good news for Australia. It's right up the alley of Australia in the Asian Century. This is what we've been on about; consistency. It's very much anticipated and covered in the white paper and we will give our very best efforts, our enthusiasm, our energy, to bring this to a successful conclusion.
PM: Okay, we'll take some questions.
JOURNALIST: When you say there's an October deadline, what specifically will be achieved by October this year?
PM: Well the ambition here is for the agreement to be reached by October.
JOURNALIST: Involving all the parties?
PM: Involving the 11 Trans Pacific Partnership nations. There are a number of nations, other nations, that are contemplating involving themselves in the Trans Pacific Partnership. Obviously they need to make their decisions through their own political and decision-making processes.
But what has been made clear all along is that if other nations seek to join then they can't take the process backwards. They need to come into the process where it is at that point.
JOURNALIST: Why is there a need for two trade agreements to be discussed? Is one more US-focused, the other more China-focused? What's the synergy between the two deals being done?
PM: Well our perspective  -  and I'll get Dr Emerson to comment as well  -  but our perspective is getting economic integration which benefits Australia in our region is a pretty hard thing to do. So any opportunity we've got to prosecute that agenda we will take.
The Trans Pacific Partnership was launched by President Obama some time back and there have already been rounds of discussions involving trade ministers and involving officials. The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership agreement is one that is ASEAN-lead, which is just at the starting point. But of course we have done a lot of good work with ASEAN nations on freer trade and getting economic integration in our region.
So from our perspective it makes sense to be involved in both and to be maximising our efforts in both. I'll turn to Dr Emerson for some comments.
MINISTER EMERSON: Thank you. I recall, as set out in the Asian Century White Paper, the goal of both the Trans Pacific Partnership and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership is to realise the vision of APEC for a free trade area for Asia and the Pacific.
We now look like we are going to have two pathways to the one destination: a free trade area of Asia and the Pacific. This is very heartening and if one set of negotiations lends momentum to the other set of negotiations that's all for the good, and that's entirely possible.
We'll see how the dynamics unfold but I imagine parties in both of the negotiations will be having an eye to how the other negotiations are going. The good news for Australia is that we're in both. In fact we'll be in every trade negotiation going because we have proven time and time again, as a free trading nation, that this is a pathway to more jobs and better jobs.
JOURNALIST: Concerns have been raised in Thailand about the TPP, specifically that it gives the US too much power over what are essentially still developing nations in Southeast Asia. Was that something that was discussed in the meeting this morning?
PM: No. It's a matter for Thailand to make a decision whether it wants to involve itself in the Trans Pacific Partnership negotiations.
But let's be clear here, this is an economic arrangement. This is a trade arrangement, this is about people plying their way and making their living and creating jobs.
And Dr Emerson is right to refer to the overarching plan for the country we have, through our Australia in the Asian Century White Paper. This is about jobs for us.
We've seen a down-payment in our economy from the growth in our region in resources. It's a down-payment because you are going to see huge growth in demand for food, demand for tourism, demand for high end services, demand for elaborately transformed manufactures.
Us being able to get those goods and services into the growing region of the world where we live without them subject to tariffs or quota restrictions is in our interests, and that's what we're aiming for.
JOURNALIST: At the gala dinner last night, do you think you had the best seat in the house?
PM: Well I had the opportunity to sit next to President Obama and next to my partner Tim. I had a wide-ranging discussion with President Obama.
I congratulated him on his election. I'd had the opportunity to do that by phone, but did it in person. He congratulated me on Australia being successfully voted onto the UN Security Council. We had the opportunity to talk about issues that are on the agenda for the East Asia Summit, as well as circumstances in the Middle East. So we had a wide ranging discussion so it was a good opportunity to catch up.
JOURALIST: Did the President give you any tips on how to beat the conservatives?
PM: We'll get about doing that in our own way.
JOURNALIST: What will you say to Premier Wen about the dispute in the South China Sea?
PM: Well Australia's position here is clear. First, it is clear that the view we take of the East Asia Summit is that it needs to be a meeting of leaders where you can bring any issue to the table. That any issue ought to be able to be brought to the table and be the subject of frank discussion.
On the South China Sea in particular, Australia's position is that we do not take sides on the territorial claims. We do not have a view about the territorial claims. But we do have a view that the South China Sea questions need to be worked through peacefully and in accordance with international law. And we are very supportive of the work of ASEAN and China to establish a code of conduct for the South China Sea.
Now this is important to Australia. One, because we think to realise the full promise of the East Asia Summit you need to be able to bring anything you want to the table. But number two, we are talking about an area of the world that our shipping needs to go through to take our goods to the world. This is a very heavily used trade route for Australia and consequently what happens there in terms of maritime security is important to us.
JOURNALIST: Back home there seems to be some reluctance on the part of some states to fully cooperate with your Royal Commission proposal. How well can that inquiry function if states decline to be fully involved?
PM: We will have a Royal Commission. As I made clear when I announced it, we will have a Royal Commission.
The Federal Government is absolutely committed to that and we are negotiating on terms of reference now and ways of working, and we wanted to do that in a broad and consultative way. States and territories involved, survivors groups involved, Churches and other institutions involved.
Now states will ultimately make their own decisions about how they chose to relate to the Royal Commission but from everything I've heard from my state colleagues and counterparts they are going to take a cooperative approach. The precise form of that approach is still the subject of discussion at the level of the Attorney General.
But there will be a Royal Commission that is effective to look at the key questions here which I outlined to the Australian people when I announced it. We want to look at institutional responses to child abuse and I do believe that the Royal Commission can play a role in helping with some healing, and we all want to see that.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned your partner Tim. We understand his son is with you. Some people asking questions back home about why he's here and who paid for him to be here, can you clear that up for us?
PM: Tim's son Kane is on a private visit to Cambodia, he's been here for some time. He's on his own private visit. Of course because Tim is here in Cambodia he is taking the opportunity to catch up with his son. But I do want to be clear about this; he is on a private visit. He did not travel with us. He was here in Cambodia. He is in accommodation that is his own accommodation.
JOURNALIST: Just on a domestic issue, the issue of euthanasia is coming up in Parliament and the Greens have a private members' bill. Will you be allowing a conscience vote for Labor MPs?
PM: Euthanasia issues are always a conscience vote for Labor MP's. It doesn't even require discussion. It is long time established, through earlier rounds of discussion of euthanasia in the Federal Parliament, that matters associated with euthanasia are a conscience vote issue.
JOURNALIST: Even a private members' bill?
PM: It doesn't matter the source of the bill, that's not where the issue comes from. It's a long established protocol within our political party that matters associated with euthanasia are conscience votes.
JOURNALIST: On GST, Rob Oakeshott's reported today saying that both parties have given him an assurance that there will be some sort of review after the election, of the GST. Is that factual?
PM: Look, I've been briefed on those reports. I don't know from what they arise from, I simply don't know. Let me be very clear about my position and the government's position on the GST.
We will not increase the rate or broaden the base of the GST. People would remember that Labor was opposed to the GST, we were opposed to it because it is a regressive tax. We accepted, following all of the arrangements that were made in our economy, to put the GST in place, that you couldn't unscramble that egg. But it is a regressive tax. Labor will not be increasing it, Labor will not be broadening the base of it.
JOURNALIST: Is it an issue that it seems to be that every time you go overseas Kevin Rudd pops up on national television?
PM: No it doesn't worry me at all.
JOURNALIST: Just on the South China Sea issue, Australia being a relatively neutral observer on this, how do you generally see Hu Jintao just two weeks ago just ignore China's continued ambitions to expand its military in the region and they're willingness to wage a local war. Do you think a code of conduct would help actually, China's ambitions in this regard?
PM: I'm not accepting part of the premise of your question, so not accepting the characterisation of President Hu's remarks. But let's be clear here about our perspective on the South China Sea. We don't take a position on the territorial claims but we believe it is in everybody's interest that issues in the South China Sea are managed in a peaceful way in accordance with international law. That's Australia's perspective.
And we do believe that a code of conduct would assist with making sure that any issues in the South China Sea, any conduct there, could be managed in accordance with the code. That is, that the rules and manner of responses would be predictable and knowable. That's Australia's position, it's been one of long-standing and its one we'll continue to argue for.
JOURNALIST: Just on Gaza and Israel, there have been more attacks overnight and we've seen the death toll rise. As an incoming member of the Security Council, what is Australia's position at the moment as to the direction of this conflict and what are you encouraging the parties to do?
PM: I spoke to Prime Minister Netanyahu on Friday night about the issues in the Middle East that we have seen. So I had the opportunity to have a conversation with him then.
I made the points very clearly to him then that we absolutely condemn as a Government the rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel  -  absolutely condemn those rocket attacks and they must cease.
Israel has the right to defend itself and I stated that to Prime Minister Netanyahu. Of course, we would want to see de-escalation of these current, very severe tensions between Israel and what is happening in Gaza. We would want to see a de-escalation and we would want people to act with restraint and we would want people to conduct themselves in a way which minimises the risk of civilian casualties.
JOURNALIST: What about the possibility of ground attacks?
PM: Since I've had that discussion with the Prime Minister of Israel, we've seen more activity and engagement and we do welcome the fact that the United States of America, Eygpt, the Un Secretary-General and others, are now active trying to manage these issues and trying to bring about a cease fire and deal with these tensions. That's Australia's position.
It is very concerning what we are seeing there. The rocket attacks are obviously absolutely condemned by us. The rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel and auspice by Hamas and others. But we do want to see this de-escalated in terms of tension and we are obviously hoping that the efforts of those now involved in trying to secure that de-escalation are successful.
Question: When you ask Premier Wen, will you urge him to have formal talks on a code of conduct?
PM: I will say to Premier Wen in the course of our discussions about the agenda for the East Asia Summit the same things that I have said to you here, and I'm getting a signal that I need to go and commence that discussion right now.
So thank you very much.


Canberra
The Australian Government welcomes the ceasefire between Hamas and Israel which commenced at 6:00am AEDT today.
Australia urges all sides to adhere to the terms of the ceasefire.  It will be particularly important that there be no return to rocket fire from Gaza.
Australia commends Egypt's leadership role in brokering this agreement, supported by the efforts of the United States, United Nations Secretary General and other regional countries. 
The intervention of Egyptian President Morsi is a welcome demonstration of Egypt's regional leadership.
Recent events highlight the importance of a durable solution to the Israel-Palestinian conflict.
Australia reiterates its call on both sides to resume negotiations towards a two-state solution comprising an independent Palestinian state with agreed borders alongside a secure Israel.
Australia condemns the terrorist attack on a bus in Israel on November 21, which injured more than 20 people, and expresses sympathy to those affected by the attack. 


Canberra
Eligible authors, poets and historians have today been encouraged to enter Australia's richest literary prize.
Now in its sixth year, the Prime Minister's Literary Awards continue to recognise and reward excellence in Australian literature and history.
The 2012 awards saw a 34 per cent increase in entries with a total of 509 individual entries.
The total prize pool for the awards is $600,000 with the winner of each category  -  adult fiction, non-fiction, Australian history, poetry, young adult fiction and children's fiction  -  awarded $80,000 tax free and shortlisted entries each awarded $5,000.
These awards play an important role in highlighting the outstanding literary talent Australia and the valuable contribution Australian literature and history makes to the nation's cultural and intellectual life.
Three judging panels of 11 industry experts will judge the entries and will recommend shortlists and winners for each of the six Awards.
Solicitor General for New South Wales and published author on Australian politics and history, Michael Sexton SC, will chair the non-fiction and history panel.
Australian Booksellers' Association CEO Joel Becker returns in 2013 to again chair the fiction and poetry panel, as does children's and young adult fiction panel chair, published author and editor Judith White.
This year, minor changes have been made to the entry criteria to allow collaborative works by a community group or a community group and named authors to be entered.
This change will ensure high quality collaborative works by artists in community group settings, for example Indigenous groups, multicultural groups or groups of writers with disabilities, can be considered by the judges.
To be eligible for a prize, entrants must be living Australian citizens or permanent residents. Entries must have been first published in English between 1 January and 31 December 2012 and offered for general sale in Australia between these dates.
For the Prime Minister's Literary Award for Poetry, collections of poems published in book form written by one or two poets are eligible for entry.
Entries for the Prize for Australian History can be film or radio documentaries, websites, DVDs, or other forms of multimedia. Producers of works that document Australian history in any format are encouraged to enter the Awards.
To be eligible, historical works must be first published, produced or broadcast between 1 January and 31 December 2012.
Entries close at 5.00pm on Wednesday 16 January 2013 and the shortlists will be announced in May 2013.
For entry forms and eligibility guidelines and information about the judging panels visit www.arts.gov.au/pmliteraryawards.


Werribee, VIC
PM: I want to start by offering my condolences to the family of Bryce Courtenay, following his passing today. Bryce Courtenay is such a well-known name to Australians, and much loved.
Many, many people, indeed millions and millions of people, have loved to read his books to absorb his stories. Bryce Courtenay came to Australia from South Africa and the way in which he told that tale of apartheid I think helped people really understand at a human level what apartheid meant and what a great evil it was.
He has delighted Australians and he's delighted people around the world with his storytelling. And I do want to pass my condolences today to his wife Christine, to his sons Adam and Brett, on the loss of Bryce Courtenay. Many Australians will take a moment today to reflect on his remarkable career.
Secondly, can I say it's good to be back in Melbourne's west in my own electorate. I've had the opportunity this morning to address a forum of chief executive officers of councils from around the country. They've come to Wyndham to meet and reflect on the role of local government.
I've had the opportunity to speak to them about what local communities can do in this Asian Century of change. What they can do to make sure that their local community enjoys jobs and prosperity as the region in which we live becomes home to more middle class people than any other part of the planet.
And the National Broadband Network rolls out and brings the global economy to the door of local communities. It's been a good opportunity to have that discussion.
I'm shortly,in this building, in the civic centre here at Wyndham, to join an event to launch an initiative about healthy communities. Wyndham Council is joining almost 100 councils around Australia, rolling out a very locally based program about healthy living.
It's part of what we are trying to achieve with our focus on preventative health measures through our national partnership to resource community activities that make a difference to people's health.
In the modern age, the biggest burden of disease is chronic and complex conditions, many of them can be prevented. And they can be prevented by simple lifestyle steps, a better choice of diet, getting some exercise.
Getting that message out into the community and helping people find a way to change their diet, to get more exercise into their lives, is what this program is all about. It is going to resource at a local level some incredibly practical things, like the Heart Foundation's walking program, which gets people into walking groups. Lift for Life which helps people with strengthening exercises. Community gardens and community information and support on healthy diet and healthy lifestyle.
So it's good to be here in Melbourne's west able to talk about our future in the Asian century, and also our future as a healthier nation.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: What do you make of Tony Abbott's announcement that he plans to slash Australia's humanitarian refugee intake?
PM: I have heard these words from Tony Abbott. First,I would say Mr Abbott publicly supported the increase of the refugee intake to 20,000. Indeed he was prepared to offer that in parliamentary negotiations.
And as recently as yesterday, a member of Mr Abbott's team was out supporting a 20,000 refugee intake and saying the matter should be beyond politics. So what we've seen from Mr Abbott today is not only a backflip, but it's a backflip to some tired old policies that you will actually find in the 2010 election documents that he put out.
JOURNALIST: So is Australia being peacefully invaded like he says it is?
PM: This is inflammatory language from Mr Abbott. It's meant to cause fear and concern in communities. It's part of his campaign of trying to divide our nation and cause people to be fearful and afraid.
We face a challenge with asylum seekers, there's no doubt about that. And we are working, guided by the expert report of Angus Houston and the team to address this issue. And Minister Bowen's made some important announcements this week about our policies towards asylum seekers and refugees.
But there's no place in this debate for inflammatory language and dealing with anything other than the facts.
JOURNALIST: The Victorian Premier Ted Baillieu has come out and said that the Federal Government needs to take action to deal with the increase of picket lines. Is the Federal Government going to do something and what are you going to do?
PM: We have our industrial relations laws in place through the Fair Work legislation. They have been the subject of review and Minister Shorten is working through that.
But I can certainly say this, as a Labor Government we will always support fair laws that treat working people decently. We'll never endorse Mr Abbott's agenda of WorkChoices, and we will never endorse a proposal coming from a Liberal Premier that tells us to go back to WorkChoices.
On picketing, that can actually involve state laws, so that's a matter for Mr Baillieu to consider himself about his own state laws. For us, we'll always make sure as a Labor Government that there's fairness and decency at work for Australians.
JOURNALIST: Turning to the claims made by your former colleague Nick Styant-Browne. How can you explain the discrepancies that he is claiming are in your story about this supposed slush fund?
PM: I have obviously seen all of the media about this. Let's be very clear about it. What this boils down to is that 17 years ago I couldn't recall events that happened two and a half years earlier. That's what it boils down to.
And let's be very clear that the event I couldn't recall, the matter I couldn't recall, related to Slater &amp; Gordon issuing a mortgage. Not a matter associated with any union fund or account.
So I think that there would be plenty of people who would say, yes looking back over two and a half years, it's a bit hard to remember every piece of paper that's come across your desk. In fact looking at this audience if I asked people right now to give me an account of every piece of paper that came across their desk two and a half years ago, I suspect I'd find an audience of people who would struggle to do so.
So what this all means is that this whole campaign of smear actually boils down to absolutely nothing-
JOURANLIST: So you didn't see that document?
PM: We've had 20 years of this. We've had a campaign of smear and innuendo, and it all boils down to absolutely nothing. There has not been one substantiated allegation of wrongdoing put against me across the full 20 years and the whole campaign of smear.
JOURNALIST: So you didn't know about the March 1993 document that has come out now?
PM: Seventeen years ago I gave my best recollection of events that happened two and a half years earlier.
JOURNALIST: Is it possible you could've seen the document?
PM: I can't take the matter further than this, and let's just apply common-sense. If I asked you, if I picked a date, 19 and a half years ago, and asked but pieces of paper you saw then? Let's just be sensible about it.
Seventeen years ago I gave my best recollections about something that happened two and a half years earlier. Let's also be clear this wasn't a file that I ran, I was not the partner in charge of it, I was not the solicitor operating it, and so I don't think that it's remarkable in any way that I wouldn't have full recall of documents that were on a file that I didn't run as a solicitor.
JOURNALIST: But the documents that were shown to the ABC have your name on it. Is that unusual for you not to see a document that has your name on it and for a junior to handle that? 
PM: Well in law firms of course documents get handled by paralegals, they get handled way back when in those old days by mailrooms and the like. What I gave 17 years ago was my best recollection of something two and a half years earlier.
JOURNALIST: Why do you think these accusations are coming about then? Why has this former colleague come out now and started to bring forth documents he says show this discrepancy in your account?
PM: Well, that's a question you would have to put to Mr Styant-Browne. But I would say this; really we're dealing with events 20 years ago. No one has ever put a substantiated allegation of wrongdoing against me across 20 years.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition was on radio this morning and challenged on multiple occasions could not even articulate a question I should answer about all of this. And we're here discussing my recollection of events 17 years ago about something that had happened two and a half years earlier, which actually is a recollection about a Slater &amp; Gordon mortgage, not a matter involving a union account or a union fund.
Now really, are you going to say to me you hopped in your cars and driven from the CBD of Melbourne 30-odd kilometres over the Westgate Bridge and you haven't got any questions about jobs or the future of the Australian economy or the future of healthcare? We've had obviously asylum seeker policy issues. But 17 years ago, that's the best we've got?
JOURNALIST: Well then on another matter, do you then agree with Bill Shorten that the CMFEU shouldn't tell CBUS super where to invest its funds?
PM: Superannuation funds, including industry funds, need to run under the guidance of the trustees. That's the point Minister Shorten would be making.
JOURNALIST: Just back on that matter though, in relation to the mortgage. Were you in any way involved in the mortgage at Kerr Street?
PM: Look, you've seen the documents. They're now there on the public record. And what they show is if you want to look at all of the documents look at the answers that we provided to the 7.30 Report and others yesterday,there is a question about a certificate of insurance, the conveyancing file shows that Mr Blewitt personally followed that matter up.
We're talking about a file that I was not the solicitor or the partner for. And what's the relevance of the question? Where does it take you? Well precisely, you've rolled your eyes because it doesn't take you anywhere.
So we've got front-page headlines about a matter in which there's no allegation of wrongdoing at any point. And apparently it's the stuff of front-page headlines that 17 years ago I didn't accurately recall an event two and a half years earlier.
JOURNALIST: You seem quite adamant that you're the victim of smear campaign. But why do you think you're a victim of a smear campaign?
PM: Well I wouldn't use the terminology ‘victim'. I think first and foremost we've got the Opposition trying to use these matters to cover over the fact they haven't got any policies or plans for the nation's future.
So we could be having a red hot debate about the future of the Australian economy but the Opposition doesn't have a jobs plan. We could be having a red hot debate about the future of government budgeting, but the Opposition is going to refuse to put all its figures in for costing.
We could be having a red hot debate about the future of our schools but the Opposition doesn't want to engage in that debate, doesn't have a plan for our schools for the future.
We could be having a red hot debate about the future of healthcare, but I'm not aware of any Opposition plan in that area. And so, when you don't have any plan for the nation's future, you've got to fill the airwaves with something.
And we've had Julie Bishop's attempt today, and she couldn't even articulate a question I should answer.
JOURNALIST: With all respect though, it's not the Opposition that's raising these issues, it's a former colleague.
PM: And of course the Opposition has raised these issues as you would be well aware. And as I said when I dealt with this very, very comprehensively at one of the longest Prime Ministerial conferences ever held, and took every question that the Canberra Press Gallery had to put to me until they had no more questions, as I said then, I expected that this campaign of smear would be continued, be continued by the Opposition, it would be continued by some fringe elements that we've seen continue this campaign.
It's a question for you about weighing the worth of it in today's agenda for the nation. So, 17 years ago, something two and a half years earlier, if someone wants to explain to me the importance of that for the future of Australia then please have a go. I'd be interested.
JOURNALIST: Who's running the smear campaign?
PM: Well the Opposition is clearly engaged in a smear campaign and I've named people in the past who were engaged in this. Larry Pickering and people like that have been engaged in repulsive material being circulated on the internet and through the so-called blog.
And then we've got a question of whether or not this is dealt with and accurately reported by mainstream media outlets. And that's a question for the standards and accuracy of those mainstream media outlets.
JOURNALIST: So the questions about the power of attorney documents that were prepared for Ralph Blewitt, is that just all part of this smear campaign?
PM: I have dealt with those matters before in the past. I do remind you in one of the longest ever press conferences by a Prime Minister in the nation's history, I took every question that the federal Press Gallery had to ask on this matter. And here we are, 20 years, acres of news print. Anybody's got an allegation of wrongdoing by me of any substance, please feel free to put it.
JOURNALIST: The Australian Medical Association in Victoria recently said that it's damaging patients,this constant bickering between the Federal Government and the states over health funding. What's your response?
PM: I'm just about to go down to an announcement about health funding and we're dealing with that announcement because this is the Government that decided to put health funding on a sustainable footing for the nation's future.
That is, we stepped up to more than $16 billion extra of health funding before the end of the decade. We stepped up to being an equal partner in growth between state governments and the Federal Government because we knew that the growth rate in health care expenditure was ultimately going to break state government budgets.
So I'd say to anybody who raises this debate, recognise what has been done and the big reform agenda that comes with it. We've worked to put healthcare funding on a sustainable long-term future and of course we want to keep working in partnership with the states in the delivery of that agenda.
And one of our matters of partnership is the subject of our announcement today and that is these local initiatives to get people engaged in healthier living and healthier eating.
JOURNALIST: And just quickly, the inquiry into construction costs that the Federal Government is setting up, when will you be announcing who is on the panel and some more details about that?
PM: We put out for consultation to states and territories names of people we believe should serve on the panel. There were discussions about that, there's been no agreement from Victoria about the identities of the people to go on the panel.
Given it was Victoria that was particularly pressing for this inquiry, we're really waiting for Victoria to step forward and agree to the very eminent Australians whose names we've put forward, including some very eminent Victorians.
Okay, thank you very much.


Canberra
A little over 20 years ago, three men in Toronto, Canada, decided to act.
Responding to the senseless massacre of 14 female university students, Jack Layton, Ron Sluser and Michael Kaufman established a campaign that has gone on to become an international force for good.
A campaign; led by men, to end violence against women.
The White Ribbon movement reached our shores in 2003. And each year more and more Australian men pledge themselves to its principles.
More than 58,000 Australian men have now sworn an oath to reject violence in their own lives and speak up when they encounter it in the lives of others.
Some of Australia's first White Ribbon Ambassadors are still spreading the word in 2012.
Staying the course, driving cultural change. Continuing to act.
Refusing to accept the attitudes and behaviours that contribute to violence against women and girls.
Refusing to be silent, or to make excuses for other men.
To every Australian man, every partner, husband, brother, father, son, colleague and friend who takes the White Ribbon pledge, thank you.
The impact of your actions is real.
You challenge the behaviours and cultures around you.
You lead through example.
You look to your own behaviours, and inspire the men and boys around you to do the same.
Just two months ago in Melbourne, tens of thousands of people were galvanised by another atrocious act of violence against a young woman.
They marched peacefully through their community to say ‘no more'.
But to achieve a sustained reduction to violence against women and girls, every sector of the Australian community must act.
Everyone must take ownership and responsibility, in every home, in every workplace, every school, every campus, every church, and on every street.
That's where White Ribbon is so effective. It has evolved, growing out of, and involving, the communities of which it is a part.
Finding practical ways to raise awareness and change behaviour.
Practical actions like the White Ribbon pilot workplace project which is seeing the Australian Army, the AFL and ARL, government agencies and private-sector workplaces looking at their own cultures and exploring strategies to drive behavioural change.
Practical initiatives like the information day organised by students at Loftus TAFE, in Sydney.
Practical campaigns like the “See, Hear, Speak” campaign, which is raising awareness of workplace sexual harassment among Australia's youngest working men and women.
Practical sharing of expertise, like the inclusion of a White Ribbon Ambassador on the panel at a recent Victorian forum discussing violence against women with disabilities. 
Practical on-the-ground work like this, deep in the community, is crucial.
It encourages open conversation, often the first step towards real change.
Conversation and collaboration is also going on at the governmental level, through the National Plan to Reduce Violence Against Women and their Children and a new action plan, released in September.
But just as crucial as practical exertion and action is robust research.
In May next year White Ribbon will hold an international conference in Australia for the first time, in a bid to connect research, policy and practice.
Today it gives me pleasure to announce that my Government will support this important Australian ‘first', with funding through the Women's Safety Agenda.
I hope that the lessons from this conference will be shared widely and help inform future White Ribbon initiatives.
Once again, congratulations and thanks to all of the White Ribbon Ambassadors here today, including the Ambassadors here in the nation's Parliament.
Your leadership is important, your example essential, if, as a community, we are to really bring about the changes that will ensure the greater safety of Australian women and girls, tomorrow and in the future.


Canberra
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: We're here at the start of the final sitting week for 2012. During the course of this sitting week I will personally introduce into the Federal Parliament the Government's legislation giving every Australian child an entitlement to an excellent education.
I will be doing that because education is the foundation stone of my plan for our nation's future. We cannot win the economic race in this Asian century of growth and change unless we win the education race, and so I will be bringing that bill to this Parliament.
I will also during the course of this sitting week be introducing the bill to establish the National Disability Insurance Scheme. Like Medicare, this will be a Labor instrument of fairness in our society. In the way in which Medicare has ensured that illness striking a family does not end family finances, break families, the National Disability Insurance Scheme will ensure that if disability strikes your family that you get the support that you need and deserve.
These will be the defining issues for 2013, how in this Asian century we continue our track record of having a strong and resilient economy and how we build on that strength and resilience for the future. How we make sure every child gets a great education and a great opportunity in life, how we share the benefits of future prosperity through things like the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The Opposition has signalled that this week, from their point of view, will be about something else. It will be about the continuation of sleaze and smear. The Opposition has well and truly signalled that that will be central to their strategy in this final sitting week.
Well, I'm here to say that there is a reason that the Opposition has adopted that as their political strategy for this final sitting week, and that reason is crystal clear. The Opposition's political strategy and particularly the strategy of the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Abbott, since the 2010 election has been to use negativity to try and bring this Parliament to an end and have an early election.
We're actually in the sitting week he didn't want to have. He never thought that the Government would get here. He never thought that I would get here. He has been engaged in relentless negativity since Australians voted in 2010.
That negativity has also been displayed to the Australian people through the nature of his anti-carbon pricing campaign. It's been a campaign of lies and deceit. And it's a campaign that is running out of huff. It is apparent to Australians that their claims, the wild claims that Mr Abbott has made about carbon pricing are not true and that the very things that he said to them would happen, will not happen under carbon pricing.
In this situation, Mr Abbott has led the Liberals to where they've got nowhere else to go except sleaze and smear. His negativity is running out of campaign huff in terms of carbon pricing, they've got no positive plan for the nation's future.
So in those circumstances they've got to insert something in the vacuum and what they've determined to insert in the vacuum is smear and sleaze and we will see that on display during this final sitting week. 
There are many Australians who will contemplate over the course of coming months and into 2013 who to vote for in the 2013 election. Many of those Australians might be thinking to themselves that they'd like to exercise a vote for John Howard-style Liberals.
I've got news for those Australians; there are no John Howard-style Liberals anymore. The political party known as the Liberal Party in this Parliament is an entirely different creature from the political party led by John Howard.
John Howard believed in proper costings of policies. John Howard could speak with sophistication about the Australian economy. John Howard, whilst I didn't agree with many of his ideas, had ideas for the nation's future.
Mr Abbott doesn't believe in proper costings of policies. Mr Abbott is an economic illiterate and cannot and does not speak about the future of our economy. And Mr Abbott has no ideas for our nation's future.
In these circumstances, it is sleaze and smear that is filling the void. I think Australians are sick of it. Sick of stories they don't understand about events 17 to 20 years ago.
But in circumstances where this Parliament's time is going to be wasted on these matters I will take questions from the Press Gallery today on these questions. I'll do it in the hope that that minimises the amount of parliamentary time that is wasted on these issues.
I'll take questions now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the last time we had one of these press conferences I asked you about the time when your colleague Bernard Murphy spoke to you about what had been uncovered within the AWU, the Victorian branch the AWU, and you explained that one of your reactions to that was to break-off your relationship with Mr Wilson. 
I was wondering if you could give us a broader outline of exactly what took place, what was the context of that conversation and what did you and your legal colleagues do as a result of what was uncovered? 
PM: Well it's a matter of public record that rumours and concerns started in the AWU in around August 1995 about matters particularly involving the Victorian accounts of the AWU. It's also a matter of public record that these concerns came to the attention of the Slater &amp; Gordon partnership; consequently they came to my attention.
The Slater &amp; Gordon partnership then did things like the internal review, the transcript of which is in the public domain and you've had the opportunity to read it, as has anybody else who is wanting to follow the details of this matter.
As for me, obviously at the time these matters came to the attention of the partnership they came to my attention too. I did not have in front of me any evidence of criminality or wrong doing but there was a lot of rumour about what was happening in the Victorian branch of the AWU at that time.
In those circumstances I came to a personal decision about ending my relationship with Mr Wilson and I did so. Then of course the Slater &amp; Gordon internal review went through and you see the outcome of that review.
I know that there's been a lot of focus on what I should have reported to authorities at that time. Well you can't report things you do not know. I did not know about transactions on the accounts of the AWU Workplace Relations Association. My role was as a legal adviser providing advice about the incorporation of that association. This is a common misreporting and let me clean it up right here and right now.
I have been defamed on a number of occasions with forms of words saying that I set up a fund or a bank account. Those defamations have been apologised for and retracted on a number of occasions. Despite that, those kinds of references are now littered through media coverage of all sorts: electronic, print and radio.
I did not set up a fund. I did not set up a bank account. Any such claim about me is a defamatory claim and I'd look to this Press Gallery to try and show some leadership in standards and accuracy here.
What I did was I provided advice as a lawyer about the incorporation of an association. I did not incorporate an association. The only entity that can incorporate an association is the Registrar of Incorporated Associations.
Let's use an analogy here. If a lawyer provided advice on the incorporation of a company, would you say that they incorporated the company? No you wouldn't. Would you say that they are responsible for the conduct of that company after it is incorporated and in operation? No you wouldn't.
Well, the same circumstance applies to me. 
JOURNALIST: The AWU Workplace Reform Association had the AWU name in it and you knew it was not a workplace safety association; in fact the slush fund phrase was your own phrase in that transcript. So were you a party to a deception against the union?
PM: I dealt with this extensively at the marathon press conference that I did in August and before I answer your question let me just go to some of the issues here about the amount that I've dealt with this on the public record.
There has been an emerging kind of consensus amongst the media, perhaps egged on by the Opposition, that I need to give a full and frank account of these matters. Let me just remind, I first answered these matters on the public record in 1995, when they were raised by a Liberal Party minister.
I then dealt with these matters on the public record again in 2001 when they were raised by a Liberal Party backbencher. I dealt with these matters on the public record in 2006 when I filmed an Australian Story. I dealt with these matters on the public record in 2007 after the shopping around of a dirt file by persons employed then in the ministerial office of the Liberal Party. It might be a question some of you want to ask as to whether that person is still employed by Mr Abbott. 
I dealt with these matters on the public record in a marathon press conference in August, one of the longest prime ministerial press conferences ever held. I have dealt with these matters at press conferences in Melbourne, in Brisbane. And so let me come to your question.
I refer you to my answers in the marathon press conference in August where I explained to you that I acted on clients' instructions, that in terms of the use of the words 'slush fund' I said very specifically, I did not think that that helped with the understanding of this matter, that my understanding on the instructions provided by my clients was that this was an association which would support the re-election of union officials running on a particular platform of change, hence its name. 
JOURNALIST: One of the allegations made by Ralph Blewitt is that the power of attorney here, which you witnessed, you weren't actually present when it was witnessed. I think he told Michael Smith as recently as October that he can remember signing it or thereabouts on 4 February and yet it was dated 23 February. So were you there to witness this power of attorney? 
PM: I've said publicly on more than one occasion I did nothing wrong, and I did nothing wrong in the witnessing of this power of attorney. I witnessed thousands and thousands and thousands of documents for clients during an eight-year  -  I'll answer your question  -  I witnessed thousands and thousands of documents over an eight-year legal career for clients and I did that witnessing properly.
So it's going to come down to Mr Blewitt's word against me. Let me remind you who Mr Blewitt is. Mr Blewitt is a man who has publicly said he was involved in fraud. Mr Blewitt is a man who has sought immunity from prosecution.
Mr Blewitt is a man who has fled Indonesia to avoid a police interview in relation to land fraud, although he denies wrongdoing in the case. Mr Blewitt says he owes money on another Asian land deal.
Mr Blewitt admits to using the services of prostitutes in Asia. Mr Blewitt has published lewd and degrading comments and accompanying photographs of young women on his Facebook page.
Mr Blewitt, according to people who know him, has been described as a complete imbecile, an idiot, a stooge, a sexist pig, a liar, and his sister has said he's a crook and rotten to the core. His word against mine, make your mind up. 
JOURNALIST: Can you just clarify the point about whether it was wise to include the name of the union in the association when it was set up? And secondly on the matter of what happened in 1995, given the problems that have emerged, or the suggestion of problems, was it appropriate for you to advise the AWU about the existence of the reform association, or was there a client issue there about who was your client? 
PM: Hindsight's a wonderful thing, isn't it? It's a wonderful thing over 20 years. But put yourself in my shoes incorporating that association. This did not strike me as a non-standard transaction; unions incorporate associations to support the re-election of union officials.
As I made clear in August at the very long press conference in fact that is done to better assist with the management of these funds, that there had been circumstances in the past where a team of people who are all going to support each other at the next election decide at the time of the election that they're going to go separate ways and create new tickets.
And if the only way in which you've done the fundraising for your re-election is that it's kept in a shoebox as cash or it's popped in someone's personal bank account, it means that when you then divide and go your separate ways it can be very difficult to work out what's what, what money is whose.
So it is common for unions to incorporate associations for this kind of purpose. In those circumstances dealing with this matter during my legal career, a matter which at the time struck me as pretty routine, pretty low level, indeed so low level I didn't even charge for it, a matter of that nature, then it was being set up to support the re-election of a team of union officials in the AWU  -  hence the name  -  and they were intending to stand on a certain platform, hence the objects of the association.
So, and the second part of your question was?
JOURNALIST: In 1995, given that there were questions being raised about the funds of the union, would it have been appropriate, or should it have been appropriate that you advised the AWU of the association? 
PM: The questions then in circulation in the AWU related to arrangements and circumstances in the Victorian branch. But I think it is true to say, and history records very extensively, that the AWU was well and truly seized of this matter.
And then in terms of who else was involved in looking at the matter, Mr Gude who first raised claims about me publicly in October 1995, advised the Victorian Parliament at that stage that the National Crime Authority was involved in the investigation, that the matter had been referred to the Victoria Police and he personally was referring it to the employee relations commission in Victoria. So, AWU involved in its own investigations and other authorities getting involved as well.
Once again, you can't report things you don't know and I didn't have before me any details or any evidence about transactions on the accounts of the association, any bank accounts, that had been established by the association. 
JOURNALIST: You've described that association as fairly routine just now. Is Bill Shorten then wrong in saying it was inappropriate, unauthorised and out of bounds? 
PM: Well I refer you to that interview by Bill Shorten where he says, he's crystal clear about my conduct, and crystal clear that I engaged in no wrongdoing. What he was talking about 17 years later, 20 years later, after all of this is on the public domain, is the AWU-view of those transactions. Well, yes, it's 20 years later. But Mr Shorten is crystal clear about my conduct and about no wrongdoing by me. 
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about a report about Mr Wilson putting $5,000 into your account? Can you remember that happening and do you know what it was for if it did happen? 
PM: I'm happy to address that but let me say this about that claim. On the day that claim came out publicly I referred to it as smear because it is a matter associated with my personal life. And whilst I'm going to answer your question, I just ask you for one moment to assume that that is true, that $5,000 was put in my bank account by a person I was then in a relationship with, who the witness involved said had had a big night out at the casino. Can you piece together for me the personal wrongdoing involved in that? I doubt you can.
Number two, in terms of that being personal smear, The Australian newspaper that published that report said in a comment piece by Hedley Thomas and in other ways in that edition of the newspaper, that this was a claim that had some particular veracity about it because it relied on diaries which were contemporaneous notes from the time, hence all of this needed to be viewed very seriously.
What The Australian didn't tell you is on the day that that edition of the newspaper was reported, as is clear from the next day's edition of the newspaper, The Australian at the time of that report was in possession of information that showed at least one entry in the diary did not accord with an individual's recollection.
So we are told on one day, well this is a diary, all very serious, contemporaneous. We're told on the next day, actually this bloke reckons the diary's not right and this information, that the diary's not right, was available to The Australian newspaper when they published this edition. Hence my degree of dissatisfaction with that reporting.
On the actual assertion, I do not  -  to the best of my knowledge  -  I do not remember $5,000 being put in my bank account. Across most of my working life, my engagement with ATM machines has been like everybody's else's, you get a surprise on the downside when you put your card in and check your account balance, not a surprise on the upside. You're normally very unhappy about how little is in your account rather than happily surprised that there is extra there. That has been my experience over most of my working life.
Now I do not have a memory of this money going into my account. However, it is a long time ago. And so I have taken steps to try and check. I specifically made inquiries of the Commonwealth Bank, the Commonwealth Bank was mentioned in the report, I did have a Commonwealth Bank account at the time. They have advised me it is not possible to get records from 17 years ago.
I had hoped to be in a position to produce my bank records to help verify recollections here but I cannot be put in that position because the records are not available. 
JOURNALIST: What's your thoughts about companies such as Woodside and Thiess putting money into a Workplace Reform Association and that money being used for electioneering? This is company money. 
PM: You have to speak to the companies about it and you would have to speak to their state of knowledge about what they thought the funds were being used for. I can't speak for them.
JOURNALIST: In August you said that the money for the renovations on your house you paid for, you're quite clear on that. In the statement from 1995 you seem to leave some doubt or area of possibility that perhaps there might have been some other supply that went in towards the renovation on your house, that was closer obviously to the time, the 1995 statement. Can you explain why you are so emphatic and certain that you paid for everything now? 
PM: I refer you to the Slater &amp; Gordon transcript and what I say on that transcript is that I'd spent some time on the weekend trying to look through my receipts about my renovations. Subsequent to that interview with Slater &amp; Gordon I spent more time getting my receipts together and adding it up and thinking about it. And having done so at the time, which I did in 1995, I am confident that I paid for the renovations on my home. And I did it in the way in which people normally do it.
I did things like extend my mortgage, I renovated over time. There was the time when the bathroom was demolished and all the rest of it which I detail extensively and perhaps in colourful terms in the Slater &amp; Gordon transcript. But I believe I paid for all of my renovations, I took steps to check in 1995. I took some steps before the Slater &amp; Gordon discussion and I took other steps afterwards.
Can I just, and this is a bit frustrating with all of these matters, if anybody has a piece of evidence that says I knowingly received money to which I was not entitled for my renovations, please feel free to get it out. If anybody's got it, it's only been 20 years. 
JOURNALIST: Did you reimburse anybody for your renovations? 
PM: No, no I did not. And I've been dealing with this allegation over the best part of two decades as well. I refer you to the Slater &amp; Gordon internal review where I discussed, again in colourful terms about the quality of trades personship in our society, or perhaps in those days, or the ones I was dealing with. Where I discuss all of this in colourful terms and I very, very clearly say that there was an incident where a person who I hadn't paid because of my dissatisfaction about the work had gone to the AWU looking for payment and was sent away and I paid that person's account. 
JOURNALIST: Just going back to the specific power of attorney which was mentioned a little bit earlier. It says on this, signed, sealed and delivered by Ralph Blewitt with his signature underneath. It says then witnessed by you. Did you see him sign this document? 
PM: As I said in answer to the earlier question, I witnessed thousands of documents across an eight-year legal career for clients. I can't point you to the moment in time and the decor of where I was sitting when I signed this one, but I witnessed documents in my legal career for clients properly and you are talking about a contest here between me and Mr Blewitt, and you can work out who you believe: the person who is standing here, Prime Minister of Australia who has done nothing wrong, or the man who says he's guilty of fraud and is looking for an immunity. Work it out. 
JOURNALIST: He says he was there, was it your memory that he was with you? 
PM: I've done the best I can. It's like asking you to remember the colour of every jacket or every tie anybody's ever worn whilst you've interviewed them for the 7.30 Report. That's what it's like asking you to remember. I witnessed thousands of documents for clients during my legal career. 
JOURNALIST: Back to the original issue of the advice that you provided in the establishment of the AWU Workplace Reform Fund. Did you seek advice from the AWU, or seek authorisation from the AWU as your client, to use the AWU in the title of the incorporation? And did you seek advice or get that advice direct from Mr Wilson and Mr Blewitt as your clients? Who was your client in this and did you have any specific authority to use the AWU's name? 
PM: Well, let's be clear about this and let's be common sense about it. Unions aren't big blamange things that wander around talking for themselves in the some way that companies don't. Companies speak through company office bearers, unions speak through elected officials. The people I was dealing with, Mr Blewitt and Mr Wilson, were both office holders of the AWU.
My client in creating the Workplace Reform Association was Mr Wilson and Mr Blewitt acting as representatives as a team of officials who were going to run together for election in the trade union. But did I need to separately advise the AWU this was occurring? Of course I didn't. The people I was dealing with were elected officials of the AWU. 
JOURNALIST: Did you or did anyone connected directly or indirectly speak to Bruce Wilson before he made his comments at the weekend and why do you think he chose this time? 
PM: Look I'm not a mind reader and no I didn't speak to him. 
JOURNALIST: You said to Laura that you didn't know about the association accounts and so forth, the transfer of money, but did you have a duty to the AWU in August 1995 to at least tell them that the association existed? Would that not have been useful information for them at that point in time? 
PM: The existence of the association was known to two office bearers of the AWU by definition. At that time in August 1995 I didn't have anything before me which would suggest that the association's accounts had been misused in any way. What is it that you are suggesting I would have told the AWU that they could not have otherwise known? I didn't have bank account numbers, this is the common slip here with reporting made on more than one occasion by news outlets and on more than one occasion apologised for as a defamation, which it is. I had no dealings with the bank accounts of the association. 
JOURNALIST: With respect, the slush fund was raised in your exit interview in September 1995 by those interviewing you. 
PM: Yes and feel free to reacquaint yourself with those four words. I was describing such re-election funds and I used the terminology slush fund and I said in my marathon press conference in this room in August I don't think the term is assisting anybody understand what happened here. 
JOURNALIST: The Workplace Reform Association was raised. It was discussed at your exit interview. And yet the authorities were not alerted to the existence of that until April ‘96 when Ian Cambridge came across it.
Can you explain why it took six to eight months for the existence of that association to be identified by other union officials? And is it the case, you mentioned earlier police inquiries, at that stage they were only concerned with the Victorian accounts, at that stage they had no idea as I understand it that the Western Australian account, the Workplace Reform Association, which you provided legal advice to help establish, even existed. Didn't Slater &amp; Gordon, didn't someone at Slater &amp; Gordon ask questions about your knowledge of that association and whether or not further inquiries should be made, should have been made at that stage? 
PM: I'm not in a position to speak for other Slater &amp; Gordon partners, and I'm not in a position to talk to you about what they should or shouldn't have concluded. What I can tell you about is what I concluded. Yes, I provided legal advice for the incorporation of an association. Yes, there was scuttlebutt around about whether or not I had received money from places that I should not have received money from in relation to the renovation of my property. I've dealt with that here, I've dealt with it before, I've dealt with it publicly for a long, long time now.
In terms of any evidence available to Slater &amp; Gordon about the misuse of the Workplace Reform Association, well as I understand it, the only thing that's been waved around here is a cheque supposedly relating to the conveyancing file. Let's once again be very clear here about what's the truth as opposed to what is commonly reported. I was not the solicitor in charge of the conveyancing file, I was not the operator of the conveyancing file. In a file more than 400 pages long, there are 12 references to me. In a file more than 400 pages long, there is no reference to the AWU Workplace Relations Association, no reference. And what the file shows in terms of the deposit for the property is it was a direct deposit from Blewitt. 
So those documents were available to people at Slater &amp; Gordon, but out of having those documents what is it that you say that they should have reported? 
JOURNALIST: So alarm bells weren't ringing at Slater &amp; Gordon even after Gude got up in Parliament, I think it was October and was the first to raise publically these allegations that monies from an alleged slush fund may have been used on renovations on your property? 
PM: Well, get the timeline right. Get the timeline right before you draw implications from it. I've taken a lot of questions on this and let me answer your question. As I understand it from public reporting in 1996, and you may want to refresh yourself about this, as I understand it from public reporting in 1996, it is contended that monies were moved from the Workplace Relations Association accounts in April 1995. I'm not in a position to tell you whether or not that's true, I've got no idea but I think it was publicly reported in 1996, it may have been publicly reported in News Ltd newspapers.
In terms of the timeline, in August 1995. There were rumours going around about issues in the Victorian branch of the AWU. Slater &amp; Gordon's partnership has these matters come to their attention. One of the things they do is the internal review, you have the transcript of that internal review. I deal with the question of renovations there and I deal with them as clearly as I can, and as I've indicated to you today I did post that interview better check and better compile my receipts and my accounting from my renovations.
Mr Gude in October 1995 then made a set of allegations against me in Parliament which were wholly untrue. So what are you suggesting it is Slater &amp; Gordon partnership should do? Report to the police that there is Hansard that raises allegations against me which are wholly untrue? Is that what they should have done? 
JOURNALIST: You said earlier today that the Opposition started this campaign of smear, however in June your former Attorney-General Robert McClelland made a speech to Parliament saying he was concerned that the Government's response to the HSU scandal wasn't strong enough and he raised this case of back in the 1990s of corruption at the AWU. Do you admit that he was the first, that his statement predated the Opposition's questioning of you, and have you spoken to him regarding this case? 
PM: Let's be a little bit clearer about the Opposition timeline. Who was it from the Opposition that was pedalling a dirt file in the run up to the 2007 election campaign which canvassed these matters? That's well before Robert McClelland made the speech that you refer to. So in terms of how long the Opposition has been peddling these matters around, well the Liberal Party has been peddling them around since 1995.
The Opposition, as is a matter of reporting  -  I'd refer you specifically to a Jason Koutsoukis piece  -  as is a matter of reporting, had someone, then working for the Liberal Government in the Ministerial offices somewhere out here, calling Jason Koutsoukis into his office, I'm assuming it's a him, into his office for a glass of red wine and a look at this red hot dirt file which repeddled these allegations about renovations.
So excuse my cynicism about where all of this comes from. In terms of Mr McClelland's contribution in the Parliament, Mr McClelland has subsequently said about that contribution that it wasn't a reference to me or my conduct. 
JOURNALIST: Further to Michelle's question earlier, has anyone in your office been in contact with Mr Wilson?
And secondly, when you're talking about the interview with Slater&amp; Gordon, and you said you'd checked afterwards with all your receipts and everything, why would there have been a confusion in your mind or uncertainty during the original interview about the receipts? 
PM: Lenore, look at every form of words in that transcript. Look at every form of words where I go through saying "I don't think so, I don't see how it can have happened. It doesn't seem to me to add up that it has happened. Note of caution, can I 100 per cent exclude it?”
The form of words used by me at a time of what was a fair bit of personal stress - perhaps I'm more hard boiled than I used to be - dealing with these matters and being ultra-careful.
That's what that form of words is about and being ultra-careful I then went and looked at my receipts in greater detail following that discussion at Slater &amp; Gordon.
That's why I'm in a position to say as I've said publicly I paid for the renovations at my house.
In terms of contact between my office and Mr Wilson, not to my knowledge.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in relation to the establishment of the Workplace Reform Association, didn't that require a resolution from the AWU, so wasn't the incorporation of that in contravention of the rules of the AWU which as the lawyer for the AWU you had to uphold?
And secondly, given that Mr Wilson, his reputation was somewhat tarnished at time of the Slater &amp; Gordon interview with you, why didn't you tell at least the AWU of the creation of the incorporated entity in Western Australia? 
PM: Sid, with respect you completely misunderstand everything to do with this matter and maybe that explains some things for us.
I was not incorporating this association on the instructions of the AWU; I was incorporating this association on the instructions of Mr Wilson and Mr Blewitt as representatives of a team of union officials who would run together for re-election.
My state of knowledge as disclosed in the Slater &amp; Gordon interview from 1995 was that they would engage in the kind of ordinary fundraising events that people had to support union re-elections, payroll deductions from union officials who are going to participate in the team, fundraising dinners where it was clear what the purpose of the fundraiser was for and the like.
That was my state of knowledge. I've then been asked during the course of this discussion today, why wouldn't I get those instructions from Blewitt and Wilson and then take it into my head that I should separately advise the AWU that this was occurring?
The two people I was dealing with were office bearers of the AWU. I'm therefore, I think, entitled to say the AWU - people who were office bearers of the AWU - knew about it. 
JOURNALIST: But you're not.
PM: How on earth do you contend that?
JOURNALIST: Under the rules they needed a resolution. 
PM: You might be more expert in these matters than me. But I doubt - don't Hector me thanks Sid - you might claim to be more expert in these matters than me, but if you want to identify to me an AWU rule that would require AWU authority for a team of union officials who want to run together for re-election to form an association in order to support their re-election, then please identify that rule for me. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's thousands of people who've been abused in the Australian Defence Force; a lot of them would have liked to be here to witness that apology. Why did you make the announcement at such short notice? 
PM: We'll deal with the rest of this stuff and then I'll try and quickly do a few questions at the end. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've spoken about the fact when you became suspicious about Mr Wilson's activities you broke-off the relationship. You've also said today that you've tried to check back your bank account records to check on a particular deposit.
How confident are you that you never inadvertently received any money, benefit, gifts from Mr Wilson or anyone else that may have originated in this fund that we're discussing and if you are confident, given that you can't check your records thoroughly, how can you be confident? 
PM: Nothing happened in the course of my relationship with Mr Wilson about who paid for what that you would say was in any way unusual for people in a relationship.
We'd go out for dinner, sometimes he'd pay, sometimes I'd pay, sometimes we'd split the bill. Nothing unusual in the course of my dealings with him.
I've done everything I could to check the $5,000 - it's not capable of being checked with this remove of time - so there was nothing that happened which would lead me to conclude that there was somehow lots of money around or lots of benefits around that somehow I couldn't explain. 
There just wasn't anything that would lead me to that conclusion. So once again, hindsight is a wonderful thing, isn't it?
But if I'm in a personal relationship where the way in which it works in terms of expenditure is basically garden variety for personal relationships, then what is it that is supposed to have alerted my suspicion? There wasn't anything. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, with regards to conveyancing for him, you made mention before that in the 425 page document there's 12 mentions of you.
Your critics say that some of the nagging doubts that you didn't know about this as you say, was the fact that your name does exist within documents that date from February and March of 1993.
I know that you say that you just don't recall it being brought to your attention, but can you tell us how did Slater &amp; Gordon  work in that instance. Was it that partners who had some kind of association with the original file would be like a watermark with regards to all the communication? 
PM: You can tell the coding of the file, when you look at the file the coding is NSB:NOB. NSB is the name of the partner in charge, that's Nick Styant-Browne.
NOB is the initials of the paralegal who did the conveyancing. She went by the name of Olive, she must have had a first name that started with an N, I didn't remember any of that.
My files were coded IU:JEG or sometimes just JEG, so it wasn't a code, it wasn't Enigma in terms of breaking the code.
When you got to Slater &amp; Gordon you would have been AP or if there was another AP already there working away, they would have inserted whatever is the letter of your middle name. 
JOURNALIST: With regards to Olive then, did she work for you? 
PM: No, she worked for Nick Styant-Browne in commercial. 
JOURNALIST: Why does something that's “Attention Julia Gillard” go to Olive to sort out?
PM: Let's be very clear about this. The conveyancing file was a file of Nick Styant-Browne's, he was the partner this charge.
In terms of the day to day work on the file, it would have been done by the paralegal, Olive Brosnahan.
When you look at the file that is apparent from the file itself, from the coding NSB:NOB, and from the various documents that refer to Olive, or Olly, or Olive Brosnahan, on the file.
Have a look for the file users yourself. It was dealt with in the Slater &amp; Gordon commercial section, not in the section where I worked. I worked in a different section of the firm. 
In terms of my engagement with the file, having had the opportunity now it's in the public domain to look at the documents on it, what I believe has happened here is I ran a few messages back and forth between Olive Brosnahan and Mr Blewitt in terms of the certificate relating to the insurance.
I'd refer you to a hand-written file note that is in Olive Brosnahan's handwriting which refers to Ralph chasing that matter up with the Commonwealth Bank, that is him personally attending to it. 
JOURNALIST: In referring to the messages between Olive and Mr Blewitt, do you now concede then that you might have become aware that there was a mortgage?
PM: What I said publicly last week, it appears in giving my best recollection 17 years ago, of events two and a half years earlier, it appears whilst I was giving my best recollection 17 years ago that there are these documents.
Now once again, let's deal with this from a common sense perspective, I was a solicitor working at Slater &amp; Gordon dealing with hundreds of my own files every day and paper just came and came and came across your desk.
Now do you have a clear recollection of every document that came across your desk two and a half years ago? I suspect not.
So 17 years ago I gave my best recollection of events two and a half years earlier, but in terms of one of the reasons I say to people what's the allegation here, well what is the allegation here? That I had knowledge-
JOURNALIST: If indeed you did know of the mortgage and you'd just forgotten, what would be the big deal in him being given a mortgage through Slater &amp;Gordon? 
PM: Couldn't have put it better myself. Thank you, Andrew. What is the big deal? 
Anybody got any contention about how Ralph Blewitt getting a Slater &amp; Gordon mortgage goes to any conduct by me, or any assertions of wrongdoing? What is the big deal?
JOURNALIST: Just going back to Dennis's opening question. Have I got this right, that when you became aware that Mr Wilson had been involved in untoward activities in Mr Murphy's presence, your sense of betrayal and hurt was such that you terminated the relationship immediately basically in his presence? 
PM: No, in answer to Dennis's question, I went through how I see those events and how I see those events was in August ‘95 these things came to the attention of the Slater &amp; Gordon partnership and they came to the attention of me.
There was matters with which the AWU, in the Victorian branch, matters they were dealing with, I didn't have proof about those matters.
What I knew was that there were a set of allegations within the Victorian branch of the AWU and the AWU was seized of that matter.
I made some decisions about my personal life as history records. In terms of me having evidence of wrongdoing that I could take to the authorities, then I ask people once again - what evidence is it that they suggest that I had?
I'd provided legal advice on the incorporation of an association. I didn't have anything to do with the bank accounts. I didn't know the numbers of the bank accounts. I didn't know what the bank accounts had been used for. 
That was my state of knowledge at the time. So, in those circumstances, there's a question about inquiries and investigations. I do refer you to Mr Gude's Hansard where he talks about who was involved in those inquiries and investigations.
As for decisions in my personal life, I make those decisions based on personal matters. I did not make those decisions because there was some evidence available to me which was capable of being reported to the police.
The way in which human beings beings deal with each other in close relationships, I think common sense would you tell is a little bit different than that. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I just ask, do you have any regrets about your handling of this matter at all and will you now release the full transcript of your exit interview from Slater &amp; Gordon? 
PM: I don't have the full transcript of my exit interview from Slater &amp; Gordon. 
JOURNALIST: Would you have a problem with it being released? 
PM: I don't think anybody's got it. I don't have it. So I don't have my full transcript of the Slater &amp; Gordon interview. As I understand it, it was redacted because of issues associated with a legal professional privilege, and so you'd have to deal with all of that and they're not matters for me.
In terms of all of these years later, of course I would prefer that I wasn't standing here today taking questions like this and we were talking about the National Disability Insurance Scheme and education. 
But we could be in that position, if the political strategy of the Opposition wasn't about sleaze and smear, but it was about issues of substance for the nation's future.
What I can confidently say is I did nothing wrong. And these things have been cycled and recycled and re-recycled and re-recycled over 20 years. I did nothing wrong.
And out of all of this; all of these questions; the last marathon press conference; the times I've taken questions in Melbourne, in Brisbane; all of the peddling of this right back to Phil Gude in 1995; across all of those years in between there is not one person who is able to come forward and clearly say I did something wrong.
And I do note when the Opposition is challenged to do it as Mr Abbott was today and as Ms Bishop was last week, to articulate what it is that I have done wrong, they are unable to do so.
So in these circumstances, I am saying to people to weigh this appropriately for what it's worth, in light of the facts of the matter that I have outlined.
Now I'm seriously going to have to go to Question Time. Thank you. 


Canberra
Labor MPs today showed their support for White Ribbon Day  -  Australia's only male led campaign to stop men's violence against women  -  and announced funding for a new initiative.
Attending a Parliament Stands Behind White Ribbon Day morning tea, the Prime Minister announced the Government would provide funding for an international conference into domestic violence programs to be held in Australia next year.
From May 13 to 15, White Ribbon and the University of Wollongong will host the international conference in Australia in an effort to connect research, policy and practice in this important area.
The Gillard Government will provide $20,000 in funding from the Women's Safety Agenda to support this important Australian-first conference.
The conference will help increase awareness of the best ways to combat violence against women. The hope is that lessons from this conference can be used across the globe, including in the programs and White Ribbon initiatives.
To achieve a sustained reduction to violence against women and girls, every sector of the Australian community must act.
Each year, more Australian men pledge themselves to the principles of the White Ribbon movement, which reached our shores in 2003.
The Gillard Government is committed to primary prevention activities aimed at reducing violence against women and their children.
The National Plan to Reduce Violence Against Women and their Children 2010-2022 brings together the efforts of governments across the nation.
The Gillard Government has committed $86 million to initiatives under the National Plan to improve the lives of women who have experienced violence.
This is the first national plan to focus strongly on prevention, on building respectful relationships and improving gender equality.
Funding for the conference will be provided through the Women's Safety Agenda.


Canberra
This week, the member nations of the United Nations are expected to vote on the Palestinian observer status resolution.
Should the Question of Palestine resolution come forward, Australia will abstain.
The Government's position balances our long-standing support for the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and their own state with our concern that the only durable basis for resolution of this conflict is direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians.
This draft resolution, if passed by UN member states, will accord non-member Observer state status in the UN to the Palestinian Authority.
It reaffirms the rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination but does not confer statehood.
Australia strongly supports a negotiated two-state solution that allows a secure Israel to live side-by-side with a secure and independent future Palestinian state.
We urge both sides to return to negotiations in good faith.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard has named Queensland premium auto manufacturer PWR Performance Products as the 2012 Australian Exporter of the Year.
PWR Performance Products caters to the high-performance racing industry and automotive aftermarket. Its range includes light-weight radiators, oil coolers and intercoolers.
Over 50 per cent of Formula 1 teams and 90 per cent of NASCAR teams now use PWR cooling solutions and the company recently secured contracts with Porsche, Pagani, and Jaguar-Williams among others.
Last financial year it increased export sales by 33 per cent.
The Prime Minister congratulated PWR Performance Products on setting a new benchmark for high-value Australian manufacturing.
The Australian Export Awards this year marked its 50th anniversary, making it one of the country's longest-running business award programs, as well as one of the most prestigious.
The Awards honour successful Australian exporters and celebrate their contribution to the national economy.
The Prime Minister's Australian Exporter of the Year is selected from the winners of 12 national categories.
PWR Performance Products was also the winner of the Small to Medium Manufacturer Award.
The 50th Australian Export Awards ceremony was hosted in Canberra tonight by Trade and Competitiveness Minister Craig Emerson, and co-presented by the Australian Trade Commission and Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.


Canberra
The Gillard Government has taken the next step towards a National Plan for School Improvement with the introduction to Parliament today of the Australian Education Bill 2012.
The Bill enshrines in law our commitment to giving every Australian school student access to a high-quality, high-equity education, no matter where they live, the school they attend or their personal circumstances.
It also commits to the ambitious target of being in the top five schooling nations in the world for reading, science and maths by 2025.
And it confirms the Gillard Government's intention to introduce a fairer school funding model, based on the key recommendations of the independent Gonski Review of school funding.
This includes a benchmark amount per student, with extra money for students and schools facing educational disadvantage. Every school will see its funding continue to rise under this new model.
The Australian Education Bill sets out the core reform directions of the National Plan for School Improvement:
 * 	Quality teaching  -  making sure we have the best and brightest teachers in our classrooms
 * 	Quality learning  -  including a world-class curriculum, a safe school environment and individual support for students
 * 	Empowered school leadership  -  giving principals more say over how they run their schools
 * 	Better information  -  giving the community more detailed information on schools and their performance
 * 	Meeting student need  -  more help for disadvantaged students and schools
Under the plan, every Australian student will have significant exposure to studies in Asia across the curriculum, including access to studying an Asian language from their first day of school.
The Government is serious about improving our school education system and giving all Australian students the chance to receive the life-changing benefits of a great education.
We are prepared to invest significantly more money into schools over time, focused on the things that we know can work to lift results. But the state and territory governments need to play their part and invest their fair share.
School improvement is a national priority and must be a shared responsibility between all Governments.
Over the past decade our results in international tests have stalled or gone backwards, and too many students are still being left behind.
If we want Australia to remain strong and prosperous, and if we want our children to be able to take advantage of the opportunities the Asian century will bring, then governments, schools and the community must work together to improve our schools.
The Gillard Government has already delivered record investment for our schools. We've introduced a national curriculum, built new or updated facilities at every school, and delivered billions in extra funding for literacy and numeracy, quality teaching and support for disadvantaged schools.
The next step is to build on these reforms with a national plan that will deliver fair funding and better results for every school and every student.
We will continue to discuss the National Plan for School Improvement with state and territory governments, and the Catholic and independent sectors, over the coming months.
Our goal is to reach agreement with states and territories, and the non-government sector, early in 2013.
The Australian Education Bill will be updated in 2013 to reflect the details of these agreements. If passed, the Bill will come into effect on 1 January 2014, with a transition period to give schools and systems time to adjust.
This Bill will be the most important Act of 2013. These reforms will lay the foundations for a world-leading school education system. They will help keep our economy strong and innovative, and help give every young Australian the best possible start in life.


Canberra
Thirteen outstanding individuals and organisations were tonight honoured for their work to improve the lives of people with disability at the annual National Disability Awards.
The Awards, now in their sixth year, celebrate the remarkable contributions of people with disability and those who support them to create a more inclusive and diverse society.
The Prime Minister congratulated the award winners, and commended all nominees for making a difference to the lives of people with disability.
The calibre of the finalists and award recipients highlights the work Australians are doing to raise awareness and support for people with disability.
The award winners' achievements include strengthening community accessibility for people with disability, supporting education and employment opportunities, advocating for disability reform and improving access to cultural events.
The winners were chosen from more than 200 nominations from across the country.
This year's Awards come at an exciting time for people with disability, their families and carers, as the Gillard Government works towards the launch of a National Disability Insurance Scheme from the middle of next year.
The Government is investing $1 billion for the first stage of the scheme, which will provide more than 20,000 people with disability individualised care and support in five locations across the country  -  in the Barwon region in Victoria, the Hunter in New South Wales and across South Australia, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory.
Legislation for the National Disability Insurance Scheme will be introduced to Parliament tomorrow. 
A special award was awarded to Dr Rhonda Galbally AO in recognition of her outstanding contribution to the disability sector.
Dr Galbally has been a tireless campaigner for more than 30 years for disability rights, women's rights, health reform, more resilient communities and innovation in philanthropy. She played a key role in bringing together people with disability, carers and providers of disability services to campaign for change. She also spearheaded the establishment of the National Disability and Carer Alliance, and with the Alliance has been a driving force behind the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The National Disability Awards form part of the Australian Government's celebration of International Day of People with Disability, which occurs annually on 3 December, and which this year celebrates its 20th anniversary.  
2012 National Disability Awards recipients
Prime Minister's Outstanding Achievement Award - Dr Rhonda Galbally, of Richmond, Victoria
Dr Galbally has been a tireless campaigner for more than 30 years for disability rights, women's rights, health reform, more resilient communities and innovation in philanthropy.
Rhonda played a key role in bringing together people with disability, carers and providers of disability services to campaign for change. She spearheaded the establishment of the National Disability and Carer Alliance, and with the Alliance has been a driving force behind the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Rhonda is the Chair of the National People with Disabilities and Carer Council and the Deputy Chair of the Advisory Council for the establishment of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Minister's Award for Excellence in Disability Reform  -  Michael Small, Sandy Bay, Tasmania and Samantha Jenkinson, Karrinyup, Western Australia
Throughout his lengthy career, Michael has dedicated himself to advocating for the rights of people with disability, particularly through the development of government policy and accessibility standards. Michael was closely involved in developing standards for accessible public transport and banking services, led negotiations to improve cinema and television captioning, and now runs an access consultancy that focuses on making practical changes to improve the rights of people with disability and their families.
Samantha has dedicated her professional life to fighting for disability reform in Western Australia and across the country. Samantha's many achievements include her work on a number of projects to increase the choice and control of people with disability, participation on a number of ministerial advisory committees, and her contribution to the state's Count Me In: Disability Future Directions strategy.
Emerging Leaders Award  -  Gerard O'Dwyer, Guildford, New South Wales
As an actor with Down Syndrome, Gerard is using his profile to challenge entrenched stereotypes, particularly of people with an intellectual disability. His work includes dramatic performances in film and television, including his role in the film Be My Brother, for which he won Best Male Actor at the 2009 Sydney Tropfest Film Festival. Gerard is currently an ambassador for Karelle Life Enrichment Service, a provider of services to people with intellectual disability.
Excellence in Improving Social Participation Award  -  The Captioning Studio, Adelaide, South Australia and Australian Communication Exchange, Stones Corner, Queensland.
From the Sydney Opera House to the Arts Centre in Melbourne, The Captioning Studio's innovative, accessible technologies and services are helping people with hearing impairment to better access performing arts. An example of the studio's innovations is the world-first technology GoTheatrical, which enables people who are deaf or hearing impaired to enjoy live theatre by accessing live captions on their mobile devices, such as smart phones and tablets.
Australian Communication Exchange is considered Australia's leading service provider for the deaf, hearing and speech-impaired communities. Examples of its range of technologically advanced services include silent tweets - a smart phone app that allows users to post and receive important public announcements - and its new web captioned telephony service, which provides live captioning for telephone calls that can be accessed from a computer or smart phone over the internet.
Excellence in Improving Employment Opportunities Award  -  Telstra Corporation
Telstra Corporation is expanding its successful Supported Workforce Program, which currently partners with 13 Australian Disability Enterprises (ADEs) nationwide to provide meaningful and ongoing employment for more than 200 people with disability. With a demonstrated commitment to delivering accessible services to Australians with disability for many years, Telstra was the first major Australian corporation to develop a Disability Action Plan in 1996.
Excellence in Accessible Communities Award  -  Safe Futures Foundation, Eastern Region, Victoria
Safe Futures Foundation delivers early intervention, emergency and crisis support, as well as accommodation for women and children with disability who are experiencing family violence. The organisation fills a vital gap in the area of family violence and safety, and acts across the domestic violence and disability sectors to raise awareness of the risks faced by women with disability.
Excellence in Improving Personal and Community Support Award  -  Mary D'Elia, Hobart, Tasmania
In her role as State Operations Manager, Family and Community Services, for Baptcare, Mary D'Elia has played a pivotal role in policy reforms to improve the lives of Tasmanians living with disability. She has worked extensively with the Tasmanian Government to help develop and deliver the state's Gateway Services  -  a single entry point for consumers to family and disability services in Tasmania.
Excellence in Advocacy and Rights Promotion Award  -  Communication Rights Australia  -  Moorabbin, Victoria
Communication Rights Australia is an advocacy and information service for people who face challenges communicating. For more than 30 years, it has advocated for people with communication difficulties to ensure that their rights and interests are respected and realised. In addition to working with individual clients, Communication Rights Australia provides a range of outreach services, including presentations and seminars at public forums.
Excellence in Improving Health Outcomes Award  -  Family Planning Queensland, Fortitude Valley
Family Planning Queensland in Fortitude Valley were awarded for their commitment to ensuring people with disability have access to the information and resources they need to make informed choices about their sexuality and reproductive health. The organisation also delivers positive messages to people with disability about their sexuality, sexual development and safe sex.
Excellence in Improving Education Outcomes Award  -  Geoffrey Warren, Clifton Hill
As the Principal of Clifton Hill Primary School for the past 23 years, Geoffrey's extraordinary leadership has ensured inclusive educational practices have been embedded across every aspect of school life. A culture of respect and the expectation of achievement is a striking characteristic of the entire school community, and the judges were impressed by Geoffrey's dedication to creating a collaborative culture. The school consults regularly with families and allied health professionals so that it can benefit from the extensive knowledge and expertise of all parties.
Yooralla Media Award of Distinction  -  The Project, Network Ten, Victoria
The Project has received this year's Yooralla Media Award of Distinction for its unparalleled commitment air a range of issues across the disability sector, and to follow up stories to enhance the viewers' understanding of these issues and their consequences. One of its stories, Finding Hope, was named the winner in the Television  -  Best TV News, Feature or Documentary (less than five minutes) category at the 2012 Yooralla Media Awards.


Canberra
I pay tribute to my parliamentary colleague and friend, Kirsten Livermore MP, who has announced her retirement from politics after 15 years as Member for Capricornia.
Kirsten and I came into Parliament at the same time and have forged a strong friendship.
Kirsten has been a fantastic local representative and a great mate.
I attended Kirsten's wedding and have watched on as she has raised her two young children while her husband has been the primary carer with mum away so much of the time.
Kirsten has chosen to devote more time to her family and we can all understand and respect that.
Kirsten will continue to serve the people of Capricornia with distinction until the next election and leaves this place with the affection and respect of her colleagues.


Canberra
Speaker, the Bill before the House today gives this 43rd Parliament an opportunity none of our predecessors have fully shared.
We can enshrine in law our nation's expectations for our children's achievements at school.
We can enact in law a plan, not only to teach them well, but to fund them well.
This Bill is the Government's plan for the future of Australian education  -  our National Plan for School Improvement.
Speaker, five specific new legislative measures form the centre of this Australian Education Bill.
First, a new citizenship entitlement.
A quality education for every Australian child will no longer be a privilege extended by the State from time to time, it will be an entitlement arising from their common citizenship in our Commonwealth.
This Bill places learning at the centre of Australia's beliefs and rights, liberties and laws.
Second, new goals for Australian education.
For Australia to be ranked as a top five country in the world in Reading, Science and Mathematics by 2025.
And by the same year, for us to be ranked as a top five country in the world for providing a high-quality and high-equity education system.
Third, a new National Plan for School Improvement.
The Bill provides for the directions for our plan: quality teaching, quality learning, empowered school leadership, transparency and accountability and meeting student need.
The Bill further sets the basis in law for agreement between the Commonwealth, the States and Territories, and Catholic and independent school authorities, to implement the plan in full.
Fourth, new principles for school funding.
The Bill provides for a new funding standard, based on what it costs to educate a student at schools we know already get strong results.
With a benchmark amount per student and extra needs to be met through a system of loadings: additional funding to help children who the evidence shows need help.
And fifth, a new link between school funding and school improvement.
The Bill provides that the Australian Government will deliver future funding on the principles legislated in this Bill, to those States, Territories and non-government authorities, which agree to implement the National Plan.
Speaker, this is a truly national plan for a matter of the greatest national import: the education of all our nation's children.
No matter how rich or poor your parents are, the school you attend or the circumstances of your birth, our nation should provide a core level of support to your education.
There should be Australian Government support to educate every Australian child  -  in the poorest and most remote school  -  at the best known and best resourced school.
And Speaker, this is a distinctively Labor plan for a matter of the highest Labor purpose: to eradicate the great moral wrong which sees some Australian children denied the transformative power of a great education.
It's now clear, with the information we have today, that in Australian schools, it is poorer kids who have been let down most in the past.
By year three, 89 per cent of children from the poorest quarter of Australian homes are reading below average.
By year nine, the average child from the same battling family is two years behind children from the most well-off quarter of Australian homes in reading and maths.
Just having this evidence is an achievement of this Government.
This is only now clear because under this Labor Government, we test the reading, writing and mathematics of our children and publish the results of those tests.
When Labor came to office there was no one who could say which Australian schools needed the most help.
Imagine if Treasury couldn't tell you the unemployment rate: that was the state of Australian education policy in November 2007.
And fixing it took more than good intentions: we were told it hadn't been done because it couldn't be done.
The unions would never allow NAPLAN results to go on My School.
The profession would never accept greater principal powers and community involvement.
The States would never agree to a national curriculum.
Australian education has been on an enormous journey of change since then  -  a journey of change which has opened the opportunity for the Bill I bring into the House today.
None of it was done without opposition.
No doubt there are still voices of opportunism and negativity  -  and I am sure there are still some who doubt our will.
But all my determination, all our resolve, is directed toward getting this done.
Making sure no child misses out on the education which could change his or her life has been the ruling passion of my life.
Applying the power of education to preserve the Australian fair go and strengthen the Australian economy is the governing purpose of my Party and my Government.
And we have worked at this every day in office.
Speaker, the detail of this legislation  -  above all, the school improvement agenda and the structure for school funding  -  rest on the solid foundation we have established over the past five years.
My own project in Government has been to build the opportunity, to make the case, to create the model, for this plan.
I drove My School because I knew if we could measure school results and understand the backgrounds of students the nation would see the need for improvement and respond.
I drove the Low SES National Partnership because I knew if we could demonstrate that when it is used well extra funding for disadvantaged schools lifts performance, then the nation would support extending that approach. 
I drove the National Partnership on Improving Teacher Quality because I knew improved teaching and getting the brightest graduates into the classroom were the most important levers of change. 
I drove big modernisations: computers in schools, Building the Education Revolution, National Curriculum. 
And new rigour: the Literacy and Numeracy National Partnership, new professional standards for teachers.
As Minister for School Education, Peter Garrett has driven these changes further.  
I also drove our White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century  -  a plan to make Australia the winner in the century of growth and change in our region  -  because I wanted the nation to understand that to win the economic race we have to win the education race.
We have to lift quality for every child in every school and properly fund the education of every child in every school.
All this work has made a difference in schools.
For example, at Yarrunga Primary School in Wangaratta, Victoria.
National Partnership funding has helped teachers to improve their professional skills in data analysis and student monitoring so they can teach literacy and numeracy more effectively.
The school has also used specialist mathematics coaches and an After School Support Program. 
The results? 
The proportion of students who achieved above the national minimum standard in Year 3 Reading increased by 23 per cent and in Numeracy by 14 per cent.
While the proportion of students in the highest two NAPLAN bands increased in Year 3 Reading by 24 per cent and in Numeracy by 36 per cent.
We have looked at the results and at the evidence of student background and now we know what the factors are which show that kids need more help.
Students from low SES backgrounds, indigenous students, students with disability, students with limited English skills and students in regional schools all need additional resources and support to succeed.
With the right support, we know they can.
Take Bega Valley Public School in New South Wales.
The school used investment from our Low SES National Partnership to improve teacher skills, develop better classroom resources and offer learning support to indigenous students.
The results?
Bega Valley increased the proportion of students achieving above the national minimum standard in Year 5 Reading by around 26 per cent and in Numeracy by 21 per cent.
In that school the proportion of high performing students increased in Year 5 Reading by around 31 per cent and in Numeracy and 21 per cent.
These are examples of the kind of nation-wide innovation and improvement we have delivered these past five years.
Where we have made a difference in schools  -  but more than that, where we have shown what makes the greatest difference in schools.
Skilled, dedicated teachers, using data and evidence to improve their own teaching strategies, giving constant feedback to students, delivering a high quality curriculum and drawing on specialist expertise.  
We know what works  -  when schools apply these approaches rigorously, results improve.
And we know what extra resources they need.
This is the crucial judgement the Review of Funding for Schooling has helped us form.
I asked an expert panel, chaired by respected businessman Mr David Gonski, to conduct the first comprehensive review of school funding arrangements in almost forty years.
Their national consultation process was comprehensive: the Panel received over 7 000 written submissions, met 70 education groups and visited 39 schools  -  as well as commissioning detailed analysis and research.
Their report is impressive and their findings are important.
The Review found that current arrangements for funding, accountability and transparency of our schools are not supporting quality outcomes for all our students.
Some schools do not get the resources they need to educate Australian children to the best of their ability.
Barriers remain to educational achievement for too many students.
This is why the Review recommended a fundamental overhaul of the way that Australian schools are funded.
This is why the Government has adopted the broad architecture of a benchmark account per student, with extra needs to be met through a system of loadings: a dramatic simplification of the way we fund schools.
And this is why the Bill before the House sets those principles in place.
The Bill before the House legislates for the Commonwealth's funding model and the National Plan for School Improvement.
This Bill legislates for a clear link between school improvement and school funding: agree to the National Plan for School Improvement, get the Commonwealth's funding.
And the Bill sets the grounds for a practical and working transition.
Speaker, the Bill thus provides the architecture of funding, the connection between funding and school improvement, and the directions of the improvement plan.
Let me then turn to the detail of the Bill before the House.
First, the Bill creates a new citizenship entitlement to quality education.
The preamble to the Bill acknowledges that all students in all schools are entitled to an excellent education.
Second, this Bill legislates for new national goals.
These are specific and measureable, ambitious and achievable goals which we must work towards with urgency and realism.
Third, to deliver the entitlement and achieve these goals, this Bill legislates the directions for the National Plan for School Improvement.
In the Government's response to the Review of Funding for Schooling in September this year, I announced that the Commonwealth would work with the states and territories and with independent and Catholic authorities to introduce this National Plan. 
Further, the Bill sets in law the basis for agreement between the Commonwealth, the States and Territories, and Catholic and independent schools, to implement the plan in full.
The agreements we strike will not allow fiddling the books.
We will not allow Federal funding to substitute for cutbacks by Liberal States.
Under this Bill, there are no blank cheques.
The funding flows to States, Territories and Catholic and independent schools who agree to the actions, targets and reporting for improvement which we agree under the National Plan.
Actions, targets and reporting for improvement which will deliver on the five directions we legislate today.
The Bill requires quality teaching.
All the evidence tells us that the single greatest variable in student performance is teacher quality  -  and that the single greatest factor in school improvement is lifting teacher quality.
Our plan will deliver it.
Under our plan, teacher trainees will be among the best and brightest.
New teachers will be more ready for the classroom  -  with practical experience during training and two years of support once in school.
Our young teachers will also have the support to ensure classroom discipline, to deal with bullying and cyber bullying, to prevent one or two disruptive children ruining school for all the others in the class.
Teachers will meet rigorous professional standards and be recognised for improving their skills and performance.
All teachers will be reviewed annually in their school. 
The Bill requires quality learning.
I want all parents to have the confidence that their child, regardless of school or state, will be offered the highest quality learning experience.
Every Australian student is entitled to access a rigorous, world class curriculum. 
A curriculum which sets out the basic knowledge and understanding they need to achieve through education and in later life.
A curriculum which lays the foundation of the skills and dispositions that support them to succeed in the 21stcentury and to contribute to their community.
We have delivered that world class national curriculum.
The first four subjects  -  English, Maths, history and science  -  are already being taught in Australian schools.
Under this plan that curriculum will be extended and delivered to every student in every school.
Quality learning demands even more  -  our Plan will deliver it.
In this digital age it means digital learning.
Through the NBN we will deliver a world class digital infrastructure for Australian students.
In the Asian Century, quality learning means learning more about the region where we live and where our future lies.
Our White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century sets the goal: all Australian students will have the opportunity, and be encouraged, to undertaken a continuous course of study in an Asian language throughout their schooling.
All schools will engage with at least one school in Asia to support the teaching of a priority Asian language, taking advantage of the National Broadband Network.
And every Australian student will have significant exposure to studies of Asia across the curriculum to increase their cultural knowledge and skills.
The Bill requires empowered school leadership.
Ultimately, improvement comes classroom by classroom, school by school, from principals, teachers, parents and communities, who have the authority not just to educate but to lead.
School-level leadership is crucial  -  our Plan will deliver it.
All principals will meet the professional standard  -  to demonstrate their leadership ability, knowledge and skills.
All principals will have the responsibility for building a culture of continuous improvement in their schools  -  with regular performance appraisals linked to development and training.
Crucially, our Plan will empower principals to make the right decisions about staffing and teaching in their schools.   
School communities will be encouraged and supported to work with principals to deliver programs that meet the educational needs of their students.
The Bill requires transparency and accountability.
The datasets underlying the My School website are already invaluable tools for school improvement and policy development.
We are building a system of information in which local communities who want their children to do better in life and who want their local school to improve will no longer have to proceed on hope or expectation or anecdote or prejudgement.
I want local leaders to be able to act on the facts.
Even more transparency and accountability are needed  -  our plan will deliver it.
Students and their families will have access to detailed reports on school performance and to more information on how their school's attendance and finances compare to other, similar schools.
Teachers and principals will have access to more data on their school's performance. 
So we can ensure that students currently falling behind, especially disadvantaged students, can be identified and given extra support.
This information about performance will hold teachers, principals and school communities accountable.
Schools which are falling behind will be given extra help and assistance to lift their standards and keep improving  -  but we can only do this if the whole community, Government, parents, principals and teachers are better informed about performance.
Every school will have a school improvement plan and will be accountable for delivering it.
The Bill requires meeting student needs.
That means getting extra support to every school student who needs it.
Identifying the needs of every child and delivering what he or she needs.
We now have clear evidence about how disadvantage holds many students back.
And we know that when those kids aren't supported with the right resources, every child in the classroom misses out.
So our National Plan will see resources allocated to reflect student need.
Our Plan will deliver it.
This is not just about disadvantaged kids, not just about gifted kids, it's about all students.
To meet their needs, I want a system which is rational, which supports excellence and which is fair. 
A system of per student funding, with extra loadings based on need.
That is the model we legislate today.
Speaker, this is the Government's approach: a national plan for school improvement and a new model for school funding.
It should now be clear to every reasonable observer that we must have a new plan for school improvement alongside a new school funding system.
There truly is no alternative.
Above all  -  because without the Government's plan, the status quo will mean cuts to funding of schools.
The House should understand this point very clearly.
The existing National Partnerships are time-limited  -  new agreement is needed to extend the benefits of the funding they have delivered.
In other words, without new agreement, those National Partnerships simply expire.
What is more, under the current system created by the former Liberal Government, Australian Government funding for schools is directly linked to what State and Territories spend on government schools.
New analysis indicates that the impact of keeping the current funding model means schools could be more than $2 billion worse off over 4 years.
Because when the big Liberal States cut education  -  as they are doing today  -  this automatically means less funding from the Australian Government for all schools.
In every State and Territory.
Speaker, the Government rejects the politics of education cuts and social division.
Through this Bill, we assert that every Australian student is entitled to an excellent education.
And we assert that we as a nation, as a whole community, share a responsibility to deliver that entitlement.
We must accept the need for investment, the need for improvement and the need for accountability.
Speaker, another school year is coming to its close ... an education era is ending too.
For too long, education policy in this country was a playground of division and disregard.
The election of 2007 was the beginning of the end and now the Australian Education Bill 2012 rings the bell on all that.
Flag poles, culture wars, hit lists, the politics of setting school against school: that was yesterday.
This is tomorrow: national education goals, an ambitious national plan, a commitment to smarter funding; parents, teachers, authorities and Governments working together.
Higher standards, better schools, educated children, creative citizens Australia winning the education race and winning the economic race.
That is the purpose of the Australian Education Bill 2012.
I commend the Bill to the House.



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Few actions in public life give me greater pleasure than introducing the National Disability Insurance Scheme Bill does today.
The Scheme to be established by this Bill will transform the lives of people with disability, their families and carers.
For the first time they will have their needs met in a way that truly supports them to live with choice and dignity.
It will bring an end to the tragedy of services denied or delayed and instead offer people with disability the care and support they need over their lifetimes.
This is a complex Bill, yet at its heart is a very simple moral insight: Disability can affect any of us and therefore it affects all of us.
To be born with or acquire a disability is to encounter one of those “shafts of fate” of which Ben Chifley spoke in his last great speech as Prime Minister.
The existence of disability in our community cannot alwaysbe avoided.
But the consequences of disability  -  isolation, poverty, lossof dignity, stress, hopelessness and fear of the future  -  can be.
Every 30 minutes on average, someone in Australia is diagnosed with a significant disability.
Only those of considerable wealth could possibly afford the costs of lifetime care that are required in response.
Most Australians with disability cannot bear the burden alone, nor should they be left to.
Yet in relying on public provision, they are forced to endure a level of care that is often shameful and generally insufficient.
It is a system that reacts to crisis.
A system that metes out support rationed by arbitrary budget allocations, not real human needs.
A system that I have rightly compared to a lottery  -  a cruel lottery where even the best outcome is far from satisfactory.
So today our nation says enough.
Our current system is inadequate and indefensible. It must be replaced.
The risk of disability is universal, so our response must be universal.
The only solution is therefore a nation-wide, demand-driven system of care tailored to the needs of each individual and established on a durable, long-term basis.
That can only be accomplished through the united effort of the community through the positive action of government, supported by the Australian people through our public revenues.
Therefore, this Bill will inscribe in our laws a substantial and enduring reform that will fundamentally change the nature of disability care and support in this nation: the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The Scheme is ambitious, and necessarily so.
Because more than 400,000 people are living with significant and permanent disabilities.
Because carers are required to stretch the bonds of obligation and kinship past breaking point.
Because the nation is being robbed of the human and economic potential of people living with disability and the contribution they can make to our shared future.
Because while the promise of fairness and equality that lies at the core of our national ethos is denied to some Australians,we are all diminished.
The need for this Bill is urgent, and the wait has been long.
My distinguished predecessor Gough Whitlam sought to introduce a national compensation scheme 40 years ago.
Today, a new generation  -  no less idealistic  -  seeks to perfect and complete the work.
So I am proud to present this Bill to the House today.
This Bill has two principal purposes:
 * 	To establish the framework of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
 * 	And to establish the National Disability Insurance Scheme Launch Transition Agency, to operate the first stage of the scheme in five locations around the nation starting from July 2013.
The Bill reflects the extensive work on design, funding and governance undertaken with states and territories and with people with disability, their families and carers, and with key stakeholders.
This Bill will be subject to scrutiny, to further work, too.
The Government intends to refer this Bill to a Senate Committee to allow consideration in detail.
And we will continue to work with the States and Territories, with people with disability, their families, carers and advocates.
We will also undertake public consultation on the legislative instruments that will be developed in conjunction with this Bill.
Any comments received through NDIS consultation processes will be considered.
It is our intention to bring a final version of the Bill for a vote in the Budget session of Parliament next year ahead of the start of the first stage of the NDIS from July 2013.
This National Disability Insurance Scheme represents a transformational approach to the provision of disability services in this country.
Rather than attempt to patch and mend the existing system through further incremental change, we will build a new system from the ground up.
The current funding model based on historical budget allocations will be replaced by an insurance approach, based on actuarial analysis of need and future costs.
The scheme will respond to each individual's goals and aspirations for their lifetime, affording certainty and peace of mind for people with disability and their carers alike.
The Agency will work with people to plan, and to take account of their individual circumstances and needs.
The Scheme will give people the care and support that is objectively assessed as being reasonable and necessary over the course of their lifetime.
It will give people real choice and control over these supports, including the ability to manage their own funding, if they wish.
It will offer early intervention therapies and supports, where it will improve a person's functioning, or slow or prevent the progression of their disability over their lifetime.
The scheme will move away from the crisis model, where families only receive support if they are unable to continue in their caring role and there are no other options.
Instead, it will work with families before they reach crisis to make sure that the valuable informal care they provide is sustainable.
The scheme will also aim to foster innovative services that are delivered and coordinated by local people.
This Bill also clearly states the rights of people with disability within the scheme, and will give effect in part to our obligations under the Convention on the Rights of People with Disability.
I turn now to the detail of the Bill.
Chapter 1 of the Bill outlines the objects and general principles underpinning the legislation.
The legislation aims to support the independence and social and economic participation of people with disability.
It clearly recognises the right of people with disability to exercise choice and control over the planning and deliveryof their supports.
The legislation is designed to ensure that people with disability can access reasonable and necessary supports, that there is an assurance of support over a person's lifetime, and that the scheme remains sustainable over the long term.
It will facilitate the development of a national approach in access to, and planning and funding of, supports to people with disability, and will promote innovation and quality in the provision of those supports.
The legislation also provides a foundation for all governmentsto work together to implement the launch of the NDIS.
Chapter 2 of the Bill sets out a broad role for the National Disability Insurance Scheme Launch Transition Agency to provide general supports to people with disability and their families.
As part of this role, the Agency may provide funding to individuals and organisations to help people with disability participate in economic and social life.
Chapter 3 of the Bill then sets out the process for how to become a participant in the scheme, and how to develop a personal, goal-based plan with the Agency and receive individualised supports.
A person may make an access request to the Agency to become a participant, and the CEO of the Agency must determine whether they meet the access criteria.
To meet the access criteria, individuals must meet age and residence requirements relating to the five announced launch sites. 
Each prospective participant will also need to meet either the disability requirements or the early intervention requirements for assistance.
The disability requirements assess whether a prospective participant has a current need for support under the scheme, based on one or more permanent impairments affecting their ongoing daily living and social and economic participation.
The legislation also sets out early intervention requirements, which allow support to be provided to help minimise the impact of a disability from its earliest appearance or prevent a deterioration in function over a person's lifetime. 
Additional matters may be specified through a legislative instrument as we learn more about the real-world situations of the people who need this support.
A participant's plan will include a statement of participant supports, prepared with the participant and approved by the CEO of the Agency.
This will specify, among other matters, the reasonable and necessary supports that will be funded by the scheme. 
The concept of reasonable and necessary supports will determine the scope of what the scheme provides.
It means the scheme will provide a participant with what is necessary to achieve their goals and aspirations and take part in the community, in keeping with what it is reasonable to expect a scheme to provide.
The legislation reflects community consultation on the factors to be considered in determining what are reasonable and necessary supports, including:
 * 	whether the support will assist the participant to pursue their goals, objectives and aspirations,
 * 	whether the support represents value for money, and
 * 	whether the provision of the supports takes account of what it is reasonable to expect families, carers, informal networks and the community to provide.
The legislation is designed to allow participants and their families to choose how their funding for supports under a plan is managed. 
It also sets out how a participant's plan may be reviewed over time to take into account of the participant's changing circumstances
Chapter 4 of the Bill sets out the structure for the NDIS, including comprehensive rules to protect personal information and rights to review of decisions.
It also sets out the process by which a nominee can be appointed to make decisions on behalf of a participant, while ensuring that the rights of participants are maintained and that nominees must consider the participant's wishes. 
Chapter 5 of the Bill addresses the interaction between the scheme and other compensatory schemes and common law actions for people with disability, such as those arising from motor vehicle or workplace accidents.
The provision of support and assistance under the scheme is not intended to replace existing entitlements to compensation. 
Accordingly, the legislation enables the CEO of the Agency to require a person to take reasonable action to claim or obtain compensation in circumstances where the CEO is satisfied that the participant has reasonable prospects of success and where taking that action would not cause an unreasonable burden to the person with disability.
The costs of supports paid under the scheme before a compensation claim is settled or before a court judgement may also be recovered.
Chapter 6 of the Bill establishes the National Disability Insurance Scheme Launch Transition Agency.
In addition to delivering the Scheme, the Agency will perform a range of other functions.
These include managing the financial sustainability of the scheme, building community awareness about disability and undertaking research about disability.
In accordance with the Productivity Commission recommendation, the legislation establishes the Agency as a body under the Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act 1997.
This was recommended in order to give the Agency a high degree of autonomy and legitimacy, placing it beyond the vagaries of politics, electoral and budget cycles.
The Agency will be overseen by a Board made up of people with extensive experience in the provision or use of disability services, and in financial management, governance and the operation of insurance schemes.
There will also be an Advisory Council comprising people with lived experience of disability and caring and other relevant experience.  This will ensure that the Board maintains ongoing connection with the interests and lived experience of people with disability, their families and carers.
To ensure the Agency is accountable to government, a Ministerial Council will be established through the Council of Australian Governments.
All governments  -  state, territory and Commonwealth  -  will be represented on the Ministerial Council. 
Finally, there is specific provision for an independent review of the new Act after two years of operation.
The purpose of this review will be to consider how the Act has operated during launch, and to inform all governments on whether changes to the legislation are needed as we move to a national scheme.
These are the main provisions of this Bill which, when translated from dry legal words into action, will change the lives of thousands of Australians  -  lastingly and for the better.
In bringing this Bill before the Parliament, I acknowledge a deep debt of gratitude to some remarkable individuals and organisations whose persistence and belief have made this Scheme possible.
I take this opportunity, publicly, to thank the Productivity Commission, Commissioners Patricia Scott and Associate Commissioner John Walsh, for their thorough and compelling analysis that has been critical to the shape of the NDIS.
I also pay tribute to a remarkable story of advocacy, led by Bruce Bonyhady and Rhonda Galbally, the National Disability &amp; Carer Alliance, the National People with Disability &amp; Carer Council, and friends, activists and advocates in communities right across the country.
Lastly I thank my Ministerial colleagues:
Bill Shorten for his passion for this cause as Parliamentary Secretary and his ongoing support.
Jenny Macklin for her public policy genius in realising our vision for change.
Jan McLucas for her patient, caring and accessible approach in dealing with all who need to be heard.
And to all our colleagues in the Ministry, the parliament and the public sector who are working so hard to make the NDIS a reality.
From our different sectors and backgrounds, we have united around a single idea.
A compelling idea.
An idea whose time has come.
For four years, this idea has grown from seed.
Over the past year, we have built the foundations.
Now this legislation will make the Scheme real.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme is the greatest change to Australian social policy in a generation.
And a mark of how deeply the conscience of our nation has been touched.
The NDIS will stand alongside the minimum wage, the age pension, Medicare and universal superannuation as one of the great Labor pillars of social justice and opportunity for all Australians.
It will change our society in profound and lasting ways, enabling those who live with disability to fulfil their potential as valued and valuable members of our society.
I count it as a privilege to introduce this legislation today.
I commend the Bill to the House and to all those who have waited so long and worked so hard for this moment.


Canberra
The Australian Government today took another step towards giving people with disability the care and support they need over their lifetimes, with the introduction of the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) Bill into Parliament.
The Gillard Government has delivered $1 billion for the first stage of a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
From the middle of next year, an NDIS will be real for more than 20,000 people with disability in five launch sites across the country - in the Barwon area in Victoria, the Hunter in New South Wales and across South Australia, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory.
An NDIS will ensure people with disability, wherever they live, receive care and support based on their needs, and have choice and control over this support.
The Bill will give people with disability the right to realise their potential in life, and to make choices and be in control of the decisions that affect their lives.
The Bill establishes the NDIS Launch Transition Agency as an independent body (under the Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act 1997) to deliver the scheme. 
The NDIS Agency will work with people with disability to develop a personal plan that identifies their goals and aspirations, recognises the support they receive from family and friends, and provides a statement of the support they will receive through the NDIS.
The Bill also supports people to manage their own funding where they choose to do so.
The Bill has been heavily shaped by the feedback the Government has received from people with disability, their families, carers and service providers, during numerous consultations across the country.
The Government has asked the Parliament to refer the Bill to the Senate Community Affairs Legislation Committee for consideration, so that we can continue to receive feedback about this important reform. 
We will also continue to work with states and territories as we work to build a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
People with disability, their families, carers and advocates will also have an opportunity to comment on the Bill on the Your Say forum on the NDIS website.
For more information about the Bill, visit www.ndis.gov.au


Canberra
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
We are now commencing that section of business at the end of the parliamentary sitting which is Christmas valedictories.
I know, to many people who are listening, this will seem quite a strange custom because we are here still in November and talking about Christmas valedictories.
I do want to assure those who are listening that does not mean that their members of parliament, or their government, is ceasing to work on this day.
What is happening on this day is that it is our last parliamentary day. For myself, I have a lot to do before the end of the year and I am raring to getting into doing it, particularly some very big work that we have to do at the forthcoming Council of Australian Governments meeting.
For members of parliament and senators who are returning to their home communities, they have big work programs too.
This is the time of year, particular, that people attend a lot of end-of-year events at local schools and enjoy the opportunity to do that very much.
But this is also the time where we do say thank you to those who make parliament possible for us, and reflect on the year that has been - the year 2012.
In so doing, I do want to mark that the final day of House sitting is actually on a significant Australian anniversary.
It was 60 years ago today that Gough Whitlam won the by-election which bought him to this House. Our thoughts are with him this year and on this anniversary.
I recall particularly the example he has given us in the House of a parliamentary career dedicated to the highest of purposes: the public good.
We will, as we celebrate the 40th anniversary of diplomatic relations with China in the weeks to come, have an opportunity to reflect on his remarkable legacy to the nation in opening us up to our world, and particularly to China.
As we reflect on the year that was, this was a year of some happy days. Every Australian who takes even the smallest interest in diplomacy felt pride in our international status when we were elected to the United Nations Security Council.
It was a good day to be an Australian. But good days in Australia often revolve around sport more than they do around diplomacy, if the truth is told. It was a year of Australian achievements in sport, too. Sydney won the Australian Rules Grand Final and Melbourne won the Rugby League Grand Final, and the world has changed.
Unfortunately, the Bulldogs were not there in the AFL Grand Final.
Queensland won the Sheffield Shield and the A-League - with Brisbane - and the State of Origin series, again - so not everything has changed.
The achievements of our athletes were simply olympic. We cheered for seven superb Olympic gold medals for our athletes at the track, the velodrome, in kayaking and sailing and, of course, in the pool.
We were delighted by the world-beating performances of our Paralympians. We were proud of all who represented us in two sets of great games: the Olympics and the Paralympics.
This has been a year of some historic events: the Diamond Jubilee of the Queen of Australia. I was able to pass on the nation's congratulations through her Majesty's son, Prince Charles, who visited us so recently.
We saw the re-election of an American President, and I was able to pass on the nation's congratulations to him in person this month.
We welcomed the Chinese leadership transition, which saw General Secretary Xi Jinping rise to lead our largest trading partner.
It was a year with some sad days too. Some remarkable Australians died this year. Murray Rose, who swam like a fish; and Jimmy Little, who sang like a bird.
Sir Zelman Cowen, who spoke of a touch of healing. Robert Hughes, who showed us the shock of the new.
Bryce Courtenay, who taught us the power of one.
We farewelled the indomitable Jim Stynes and the incomparable Margaret Whitlam.
We have not forgotten Pete Veness, just as it is hard to believe that it has been five years without Matt Price.
Also, my family and I were so moved by the kindness of so many members of the House and the Australian people on our own loss.
We remembered friends and members of the House who died - Joe Riordan, Frank Walker, Lionel Bowen, Gordon Bilney and Senator Douglas Barr Scott. The loss of Senator Judith Adams is still keenly felt by her many friends in this place.
Seven Australians died for us in Afghanistan this year.
The parliament has honoured each of them as we should. As the year ends, we will remember them. We will think of their families facing the toughest Christmas of their lives. We will care for their 32 mates wounded in service in Afghanistan this year.
We had the opportunity, too, to acknowledge the amazing courage of Corporal Daniel Keighran that saw him awarded the Victoria Cross.
Then, of course, Dan amazed us again with his grace and humility having seen that huge honour awarded. We have a good thought for their mates still serving us overseas in Afghanistan and around the world.
Coming closer to this parliamentary chamber, there are many people that I acknowledge and to thank.
To the Leader of the Opposition and the opposition generally: I hope that you enjoy some rest and respite over Christmas with their families.
To you, Speaker Anna: my sincere congratulations, and on some days I feel like I should be offering words of apology.
To your predecessor, Mr Slipper: thank you for your service as Speaker as well during the course of the year. Thanks to the Deputy Speaker and the panel and everybody who works so hard, sitting in that chair to keep the business of parliament turning through.
To Henry Thomson, my department's parliamentary liaison officer, and his team: thank you very much, and thank you very much for making sure that I listed everybody in these remarks, including them - that was very clever - but they do a great job.
To the Clerk and Deputy Clerk: thank you very much for everything you do for both sides of parliament and for the parliament generally to keep the business of the parliament on track here in the House of Representatives.
To the Serjeant-at-Arms, to the attendants, to the guides and to all those who reach out to people in the parliament and help make it work: thank you very much for your special efforts.
To the Parliamentary Library, Hansard staff, the Table Office, the Parliamentary Relations Office, to those who look after our magnificent lawns and gardens, to those who do the cooking, to those who operate the switchboard, the computers, security and everyone else who makes sure that parliament works: we thank you.
We thank, too, our parliamentary cleaners  -  and if I could sneak in just a little reference to my own cleaners, to Ana and Luzia who come and clean my office, they lift my spirits on a lot of mornings. To Aussies, thank you for the coffee  -  I am still very reliant on it  -  it is an institution. Don Watson called it the only place of communion in the building, and he might be right about that.
To the child carers, they are doing some of the most important work that gets done under this roof: thank you for your efforts.
To the staff of HRG who diligently got people where they needed to be, sometimes under extraordinary pressure: thank you for your efforts.
To COMCAR drivers who assist us in getting us where we need to get to: thank you very much for your ongoing courtesy and support.
To broadcasting staff, I do not know that Australians are always grateful for the work you do, seeing some of the images of parliament on your TV screens, but you do your best to faithfully record parliamentary proceedings out in the wider world, and we thank you for that.
To the press gallery, I will host a function for them tonight, and I think what I have to say is probably best reserved for off the record.
To my Deputy Prime Minister, the Treasurer, thank you for being the guardian of our budget, making sure that all of our budget works for us. Thank you for being acknowledged around the world as a great Treasurer, for your stewardship of our national economy, and also for being a guardian of Labor values and Labor purpose. Thank you very much.
To the Leader of the House, Albo, our minister for Fighting Tories and for doing so much more: thank you very much for everything you have done to contribute to the successful work of the parliament this year. I think many members are aware  -  certainly on our side of the parliament  -  of the extraordinary lengths that you go to.
To the Senate leadership team, to Senators Evans and Conroy, possibly a study in contrasts, they are a great Senate leadership team and Senator Evans has been on a tremendous health kick, as people would have seen, so he has not only done well as a Senate leader this year but he is also a far more svelte human being and a healthier human being for it.
I thank them for their efforts and for their occasional reminders about how long they have been dealing with difficulties arising from not having the numbers in that chamber  -  they have reminded us of some of those things from time to time  -  my thanks.
To my cabinet, my ministry and parliamentary secretaries, time does not permit me to name them individually but they are a remarkable team.
I thank them for their extraordinary efforts. They are always full of enthusiasm and full of ideas. I always go out of my way to listen to my colleagues and to treat their ideas with respect. I thank them for being so supportive and for their enthusiasm and Labor faith.
I thank the team of whips here and in the Senate. They do remarkably hard work. I thank them for their efforts.
I say generally to my parliamentary colleagues, to all of them, whatever office they serve, to the backbench here and the backbench in the Senate: we have emerged from 2012 strong and as a political party of purpose.
No-one can leave 2012 doubting the courage of the Labor Party to come to this parliament and get the big things done. I am tremendously proud of you and the way that you have worked under some extraordinary pressures.
To the Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Dr Watt: in the tradition of frank and fearless advice, Ian is amongst the best. Thank you to him and to all at PM&amp;C for their support of me. I am very well served by my department and very grateful for it.
To the entire Australian Public Service, I pass onto you the thanks of your ministers. Thank you for what you do to support the agenda of government and to serve your fellow Australians.
Too often, public service is denigrated in our society; this is a moment to applaud it. Thank you for what you do.
To George Wright, the ALP organisation, staff and volunteers and our true believers in their many thousands and growing  -  and thank you for our new true believers as well  -  I know how hard you work and I know you will be out there for us in 2013 as we move finally to an election phase.
To the staff who work with Labor MPs and senators, whether as staff in electorate offices or as staff in ministerial offices, thank you very much for your efforts. There has been some public commentary on political staff this year, but I want our staff to understand my view about them and my view about what they do.
To a person, they are people who could ply a more profitable trade in the private sector. They choose instead to dedicate their lives to the future of our nation, and that is to be applauded. Thanks to you for what you do for Labor and for our country.
I particularly want to acknowledge Jim Chalmers, Dr James Chalmers, who departs the government after years of service. He has been a remarkable contributor to his party and to the work of this government, and I expect that in the years to come he will continue to be a remarkable contributor to our nation.
To my chief of staff, Ben Hubbard, all of my staff in the Prime Minister's office, my electorate staff  -  some of whom have been with me since the very start of this journey when I was first elected in 1998  -  thank you very much for everything you do.
To my branch members and volunteers, I wish that I could be with you for more time than I am able to be, but thank you for keeping the faith locally and doing all your hard work.
To my speech writers  -  they have deliberately inserted a little reference to themselves in these notes! I think it is probably worth saying they have got one of the less enviable jobs in Australian public life; people are always very, very keen to give them a character assessment along the way. I thank them for their hard work too.
To my friends from the Australian Federal Police, we have survived another year together, sometimes in more difficult circumstances than prime ministers and AFP details have faced in the past. Thank you very much to them for their efforts.
Finally, to my own family. To my partner, Tim, to my family in Adelaide  -  I am looking forward to spending some time together. We will make sure that we spend some time in Adelaide over the Christmas break and make sure that we are there together for what will be a different Christmas for us and our family.
Speaker, in a few weeks when the working year ends, I wish everybody a time of rest and recovery. I will be doing that. I know those around the parliament will be doing that. And then we will be back, ready to go, full of energy in 2013, and I am really looking forward to the contest to come.
Thank you.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Sport Kate Lundy today paid tribute to Australian cricket legend Ricky Ponting after he announced he will be retiring from Test cricket following the upcoming Test against South Africa in Perth.
Ricky Ponting is one of Australia's most successful sportsmen and one of the world's leading batsmen. 
Ponting is Australia's leading Test run scorer and one of only three players in history to score over 13,000 Test runs.
Ponting also holds the record for most Test centuries by an Australian with 41.
Ponting oversaw 48 Test victories, making him the most successful captain of all time.
His last Test for Australia will be his 168th, equalling Steve Waugh for the most Tests played by an Australian.
Ponting's stellar cricket career has spanned nearly two decades and over this period he has inspired many Australians who look to him as a role model.
We thank Ponting for his tremendous contribution to Australian sport and wish him all the best for his future.


Canberra
Around 150,000 social and community sector workers across Australia are set to benefit from historic equal pay rises that take effect from today (December 1).
Today's pay rises are the first of nine increases over the next eight years that will lift salaries for workers in this sector by between 23 and 45 per cent.
This is a significant advance for equal pay for women. Around 80 per cent of these workers are women and many of them are low paid simply because they are women.
From the beginning, the Gillard Government recognised the significant contribution SACS workers make to caring for those who most need our help in our community.
These important roles include counselling families in crisis, running homeless shelters and working with victims of domestic violence or sexual assault.
We are proud to have supported this case being brought forward to the independent umpire, through our introduction of the Fair Work Act, and we supported workers' ability to seek gender equity in rates of pay.
The Gillard Government will meet its share of these historic pay increases.
Throughout November, around 4,400 social and community services organisations across Australia were sent letters detailing the Government's offer towards the pay increases for their workers.
Payments have begun to flow to those organisations that have accepted offers and will continue throughout December.
We have set aside $2.8 billion in the Social and Community Services Pay Equity Special Account, to ensure we meet our share.
The Government's contribution is fully funded and accounted for in the Budget.
We are working cooperatively with all State and Territory governments to ensure the historic Fair Work Australia decision is fully implemented and fully funded for the benefit of workers in the sector.
The latest information on the implementation process is available at:www.fahcsia.gov.au/node/10776



E &amp; O E - PROOF ONLY
HOST: Good morning, Prime Minister. 
PM: Good morning, Paul. 
HOST: Well at the end of the year, at the end of the Parliamentary session, it seems that the AWU slush fund affair is inconclusive. The Opposition are still making allegations, even though they've shifted ground somewhat. But you haven't delivered a knockout blow. 
Wouldn't a short, sharp inquiry, an independent inquiry, judicial inquiry, end the matter? 
PM: Paul, the Opposition will continue carrying on about this matter, not because they've got any proof, but because they don't have positive policies for the future. 
Australians are rightly sick of this campaign of sleaze and smear. They don't want to see Mr Abbott fighting me over these sorts of issues. What they want to see is, they want to see the nation's leaders fighting for them and things that matter to them. 
So I'm going to get on with fighting for Australians, making sure we keep our economy strong, and fighting for the things that Australian families need now, including a better deal on power prices. 
Mr Abbott's made it perfectly clear that he's going to stay wedded to this sleaze and smear, not only now, but even if he was elected Prime Minister. The driving force of his Prime Ministership would be continuing the sleaze and smear. 
HOST: I was going to come to that. Yes, that's right. A new promise from Tony Abbott is that if he wins the election, he will have a judicial inquiry into this issue. He says  -  in fact, he told his party room that Labor and you are trying to bluff the Opposition out of it, that's because you're afraid of it. 
PM: Mr Abbott is now going to ask the Australian people in 2013 to vote for him on the basis that the centre of his Prime Ministership would be continuing this personal campaign of sleaze and smear. 
He is going to go to the next election in 2013 with no real plan for jobs, nothing on health, nothing on education, nothing on power prices, nothing on national security, and the list goes on. 
The driving purpose of his Prime Ministership would be to continue a fight against me, rather than a fight for the Australian people. Well I think Australians are heartily sick of this, Paul; heartily sick of this negative, personality-based politics from Mr Abbott. 
We'll let him just carry on with all that sleaze and smear, whilst we get on with the job for Australians. I'm here today, Paul, to talk about my plan to make a difference to power prices for families who are struggling with those big electricity bills. 
HOST: And we will talk about that, Prime Minister, but there's a Galaxy Poll this morning in the News Limited papers  -  it finds 31 per cent believe you've been economical with the truth. Thirty one per cent believe you've lied. Only 21 per cent think you've been completely honest. And the poll says 60 per cent want a full account in the Parliament. Will you deliver a full account in the Parliament? 
PM: I don't comment on opinion polls, Paul. I've answered questions about this matter for the best part of 20 years. I've answered them in the Parliament this week and in other weeks. I've answered them publicly. I've told the truth about this matter, and I didn't do anything wrong. 
I am not going to become bogged down in Mr Abbott's campaign of sleaze and smear. The fact that he's got no positive plans for the nation's future is his problem and a matter for him. 
I am not going to be diverted from delivering my positive plans for Australian families, and, really, Paul, at the end of the week that was, where Mr Abbott didn't ask a question about jobs, didn't ask a question about health, didn't ask a question about education, didn't ask a question about childcare, or power prices, let's get on with the job. 
HOST: Prime Minister, it's a very big allegation for the Opposition to make, that you misled the WA Corporate Affairs Commissioner. 
Now union sources tell me  -  union people I've spoken to  -  is that it's very unusual for the name of the union to be put on these associations or accounts that are used and, as you've told press conferences, every union does it, but it's unusual to put the union's name in the name of the association, and that's where the misleading comes into it. 
PM: Paul, this is all sleaze and smear from Mr Abbott and his team, because they haven't got anything positive to say. I did not do anything wrong. The Opposition spent the week in overreach and then humiliating backdown. 
One moment, apparently, I'm guilty of a crime, the next moment it slipped right back down to ‘conduct unbecoming'. What that is telling you is that the Opposition doesn't really have anything to say here of substance. It just wants the sleaze and smear to keep going. And, indeed, Liberal strategists have been talking to people in the media saying ‘no, we don't have any evidence of any wrongdoing, we just want to keep this going because it fits our political strategy'. 
Well let's name their political strategy. Their political strategy is one of negativity, because they do not have any positive plans for the nation's future, and Mr Abbott will never have any positive plans for the nation's future. That's why the nation's been treated to the spectacle that it has this week. 
HOST: Prime Minister, you've spoken about electricity reform. I wonder when the last time was that that you spoke privately to the New South Wales and Queensland Premiers, and I wonder if it's possible to introduce this $250 saving for consumers if they don't sell a lot of their electricity assets? 
PM: This isn't about the ownership of electricity assets; it's about the way in which our power system works. I will have the Council of Australian Governments meeting at the end of this week, and I will be taking there a plan to make a difference; a plan to make sure that families pay $250 less per year for electricity than they would if we just let the current system run. 
And it's about addressing the real drivers of high power prices  -  the overinvestment, the so-called gold-plating of the network, the fact that consumers don't get enough of a say, empowering the regulator at the centre of this with more resources, and making sure too that we reward big electricity users, big businesses, that moderate their consumption during peak time periods of pressure on the electricity network. 
We can make a difference; the Productivity Commission said this all adds up to difference of around $250 a year for a family. I'm determined to make the difference. 
HOST: To clarify, is that without a sell-off? Can you get the $250 saving without a sell-off of assets in New South Wales and Queensland? 
PM: Absolutely you can. This is not about the ownership of electricity assets, it's about the market design features that I've talked about, and giving consumers more of a go, more of a say, more information about their own power usage. 
HOST: Prime Minister, good morning, firstly. Now how can consumers understand gold-plating enough to actually challenge it, and haven't we gone down this road before with grocery watch and fuel watch and all of those schemes? 
PM: I think people can understand gold-plating really easily. What it means is there's an overinvestment in the poles and wires, and under the current market design  -  the rules for electricity  -  there's actually a perverse incentive for companies to keep investing, keep investing, keep investing  -  and passing all of those costs on to consumers. Indeed, there's been around about $11 billion of investment for the peak loads on four days a year. 
Well we can do better than that. We can do better with a regulator that has more resources available. We can do better with consumers at the centre of the decision-making process. We can do better with consumers getting more information in their own homes about how to manage their electricity consumption. 
HOST: Is it different to those schemes that failed? Is it different to the grocery and fuel watch schemes, or is it essentially the same model? 
PM: What we are talking about is a detailed plan to change many features of the way the electricity market runs, and it is not an appropriate comparison to saying this is about a website with more information. 
This is about changing, going through from the top  -  at the moment, a perverse incentive to gold-plate, more investment in poles and wires  -  changing that so these things are set more independently. 
Number two: putting consumers at the centre of the decision-making process through a consumer challenge panel, giving mums and dads in their own home more information about their electricity usage so they can make choices, knowing what it's going to cost them. 
Number four: actually getting through to the regulator more resources to help them go about their job. 
And finally, rewards to big businesses that use a lot of power to lighten the load on peak days. That's the plan that adds up to a $250 difference. That's the plan I'll be fighting for at the Council of Australian Governments meeting. 
HOST: Okay, switching to another issue. The Israel lobby and the Opposition are very unhappy you were rolled on Australia's vote in the UN, giving the Palestinian authority observer status. Here is Tony Abbott this morning: 
TONY ABBOTT GRAB: It seemed to put in jeopardy 60-odd years of settled bipartisan policy of rock-solid support for Israel. 
HOST: Prime Minister, you said over the weekend that your Cabinet's position on Israel will create further problems in terms of the peace process. How can the Prime Minister's position be at odds with her Cabinet and party's position on such a crucial foreign policy area? 
PM: I did not say that over the weekend, Patricia, number one. And number two, there is a Government position here, which is my position, which has already been put into operation. We abstained on- 
HOST: Do you fully support the Government's position on abstaining? 
PM: I announced at our party room meeting that we would be abstaining, and we did abstain, we abstained on the vote. 
HOST: Will you feel completely comfortable with that position? You think that position is- 
PM: Well, Patricia, let me answer your question, and you'll understand my perspective here. 
I announced at our party room meeting we would be abstaining on the vote before the UN, and that vote is to give the Palestinian people the same status at the UN as the Vatican has now. We abstained, the vote was always going to be carried, and it was carried by a substantial majority. 
Coming back more broadly to questions of peace in the Middle East, there is no peace plan on the table at the moment for people to vote for. What I would love to see, what my party would love to see, what I think so many in the Australian nation would love to see is a peace plan that resolves the ongoing conflict in the Middle East. Unfortunately there's no such peace plan in the offing right now, which is why, of course, we will always say that we want to see peace in the Middle East, we want a two-state solution, we want to see both Israel and Palestine with states, with secure borders and peace for the future. 
HOST: More than 30,000 boat people have arrived since Labor came to power, and 1,000 have drowned. The Opposition blames the Government, and on Thursday tried to bring back Temporary Protection Visas. 
SCOTT MORRISON GRAB: To deny people smugglers a product to sell before the Parliament rises, and the onset of the monsoon season, which is the most dangerous period of the year for people to travel on boats to Australia. 
HOST: Prime Minister, November was the latest record month for boat arrivals, none of your policies have worked at stopping the boats, stopping the arrivals. Is it time to consider Temporary Protection Visas and turning back the boats, considering they're the only policies you haven't yet tried, and the ones that you have tried have failed? 
PM: Temporary Protection Visas didn't work when they were part of our nation's policy last time. They were implemented by the Howard Government and we continued to see people arrive in very large numbers. And on turning back the boats, we've got the clearest possible advice from people of the authority, of Angus Houston, that that is not a policy that can work in current circumstances, and we've got advice from our Defence Force leadership that it would put ADF personnel at risk. 
We have put in place and are continuing to put in place the recommendations of the Houston panel, the former chief of the Defence Force's advice about this matter. 
Every step of the way, of course, we continue to encounter negativity from the Opposition, always negativity, and no preparedness to work with us on any of these issues. They delayed the creation of offshore processing, for example, by around 12 months. 
HOST: Do you think any of it is working, because they keep coming on boats? 
PM: Well, we will continue to put in place the policies that Angus Houston has advised us through the panel to do. This is a complicated issue for our nation, for nations around the world. 
Anybody who says that there is a simple fix to you is not telling you the truth. It takes a range of policies, and we are putting that range of policies in place. 
HOST: Looking forward to next year, many people, including the Opposition of course, but others, doubt you'll deliver either a Budget or a surplus. Do you pledge to deliver both of those next year? 
PM: Well we've delivered the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, which shows we're on track to achieve a Budget surplus, and we stand by the forecasts in MYEFO. 
We will in the course of next year be delivering a Budget. We will be delivering the funding packages for the National Disability Insurance Scheme, and for school reform, because I, as Prime Minister, want to be there with the Australian nation, building for the future. 
There's nothing more important to the economic and social future of our country than getting kids a great education, and I don't want families to be broken because someone has a disability. I want them to be supported. 
HOST: Prime Minister, I want to take you to the Newstart allowance. The Senate reported this week, Labor Senators broke ranks with the Coalition, and called for a rise in the single rate of the Newstart allowance. Bill Shorten, your own Minister, has said that it's inadequate, and he's worried about it. 
Will you put this on the table, and is it something you will consider in the Budget process? 
PM: I can understand community concern here, I can understand concern amongst my colleagues, indeed, to a person, where in my Cabinet, in my Ministry, in my caucus, people are concerned about jobs, about making sure people get the benefit of work, about how hard it is to be unemployed, how alienating that is. 
The best thing that we can do for Newstart recipients is keep the economy strong and resilient and offering people the benefit of work. And that will be our focus  -  making sure that jobs are being created, and we are providing people with employment services and support to get those job opportunities. 
HOST: But do you look at ruling out that payment specifically? 
PM: We always work through Budget decisions very carefully. We've got a set of difficult choices in front of us, because we're very prudent about Government funds. 
I do understand concern about the rate of Newstart, but across the Budget we've got some difficult decisions to be taken to fund great Labor priorities like making sure every kid gets an excellent education, and that people with disability don't get cast to the margin of our nation's life. 
HOST: Prime Minister, just very briefly, because we're nearly out of time. Aren't you going to stand politics on its head if you want to get to a surplus with a slash-and-burn Budget just before an election? 
PM: What we do, Paul, is we approach every Budget decision in a Labor way, and when we make them, they're done with Labor values. That's why we've done things like means test the private health insurance rebate, and got rid of a poorly targeted dental scheme. We take savings in a Labor way to fund Labor priorities, better dental care for Australians, better healthcare for Australians. And now we'll get on with even more money into schooling for our kids, and more support for people with disabilities. 
HOST: Okay, Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you very much for being with us today. 
PM: My pleasure, Paul. 



HOST: Prime Minister, compliments of the season to you.
PM: To you too, Leon.
HOST: Now we've just had Laurel Fox-Allen from Electricity Week point out that if we all get smart meters, then not everyone is going to get a power discount because it favours those people who are big users. What do you say to that?
PM: Appropriate arrangements will always be made in the system for small users, for people who are in our most disadvantaged categories in our society. We want to make sure that people are getting a better deal.
So this isn't about imposing things on people, making them pay for things, it's not about that. It's about putting people in a position where they can have more information and use that information should they choose to do so.
Let's just cut that one right off at the knees now. No one should be afraid that they are going to be forced with a cost that they don't want and no one should be afraid that they will be forced to do something they don't want to do.
HOST: Yeah, because Pat Conlon as you might know, our former Energy Minister, made the decision some time back that he didn't want a mandate for smart meters. So in this proposal that's not going to happen, you can have one if you want one?
PM: We'll be making appropriate arrangements for everyone, Leon. So let's focus on what's actually happening.
HOST: Absolutely.
PM: Not fear campaigns about what might happen. The problem at the moment and people in South Australia know it only too well, that their electricity bills have been skyrocketing. People have seen 40, 50, 60 per cent increases.
HOST: Yes.
PM: That is not about carbon pricing. That is about problems in our current electricity system; over investment in poles and wires. Consumers not getting enough of a say about how the market works.
Big users  -  and by that I mean very, very big businesses  -  having no incentives to just moderate their power use during times of peak demand.
All of that means that we're in a situation where $11 billion has been spent on infrastructure that is only used four days of the year, but the cost of that $11 billion is paid by everybody every day.
Now we can do better than that. We can be smarter than that. We can design a market that works more fairly than that, and that's what I'm determined to do.
HOST: What would you like of the South Australian Government at the COAG meeting this Thursday, Prime Minister?
PM: What I would like of the South Australian Government  -  and of governments around the country  -  is that they endorse the plan that I will be putting forward. Energy ministers have been working on it intensively and have recommended something by agreement.
But I think at COAG when leaders meet we can push the envelope a bit further than what energy ministers have agreed; get a bit more done. That's what I'd like to see come out of COAG.
HOST: By how much do you think  -  and I won't keep you to the exact dollar  -  but in general terms, by how much do you think with these changes that you're talking about, do you reckon you can bring down an average power bill?
PM: Well the Productivity Commission has said that it would make a $250 a year difference for households, so that's the Productivity Commission's figure.
We face the spectre that power prices just keep going up and up and up. I want to make a difference to way in which prices are worked out so that we don't see that continued rapid escalation.
HOST: Now this consumer panel that you'd like to have a say, as I understand it, they're only comment will actually be on the networking charges but not the other parts that make up the bill. Why not have it across the entire bill? And what kind of regulatory or disciplinary power would that consumer panel have?
PM: Well the consumer panel would be asked to fundamentally engage with the thing that drives the biggest cost escalation in your bill. That's why we want them focused on the network charges and the way in which all of that is rolling out, because that's what's driving the biggest cost escalation.
Their voice would be heard as the rules for the market are designed. And once the rules are designed and everybody's got to abide by them; they've got legal force.
HOST: So you'll be asking our Government to give power to COAG to have national regulations and oversight of the electricity market?
PM: This will be still shared work, States will play a role, the Federal Government will play a role. But together we would design a new system for the rules for our electricity; the way electricity works around the country. That will make a difference for prices
HOST: We went down the path of trying to get rid of coal-fired power over time, and then we decided that we for whatever reason, obviously budgetary, we couldn't compensate the coal powered industry for its contribution to electricity generation. So in a sense we're now subsidising them.
PM: I wouldn't quite put it like that. Separately to all of this we through carbon pricing have obviously created incentives which will drive usage of cleaner energy sources. Cleaner energy sources like gas, and like renewables  -  solar, tidal, wind  -  so that incentive is in the system.
And yes, carbon pricing did cause an increase in electricity prices, we were always upfront that is was going to cause a 10 per cent increase. And so we assisted people with tax cuts and pension increases and family payment increases.
What's really put the pressure on though is the 40, 50, 60, 70 per cent increases that people have had to try and deal with, with not a dollar to assist them along the way.
HOST: What do you think of companies who deliberately withdraw supply to force the price up? It's called gaming.
PM: Well obviously anything that puts the price up artificially is bad for families, bad for Australians.
HOST: What would you like the national regulator to do about that?
PM: Well I want to see a market that's got fair rules, so if there's untoward gaming of the system then we'd obviously want that to be addressed.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us today.


Canberra
Australia has taken its place on the G20 “troika” joining Mexico and Russia on the group of past, present and future chairs that manages the G20  -  the world's most important forum for global economic growth and stability.
As part of this group, Australia will play an enhanced role in guiding the G20's work in the lead-up to our G20 Presidency in 2014.
To mark the occasion, the Prime Minister has written to the President of Russia, Mr Vladimir Putin, congratulating him on taking over the G20 chair, and looking forward to a close working relationship leading up to the leaders' summit in St Petersburg in September 2013. 
She welcomed Russia's plans to focus on the G20's core objective of promoting economic growth and jobs.
The Prime Minister has also written and congratulated Mexico's new President, Mr Enrique Pena Nieto, on his inauguration and Mexico's achievements as G20 host in 2012.
The G20 is the forum best equipped to deal with the ongoing economic and financial challenges confronting the world, bringing together at the same table the leaders of the major advanced economies and the emerging market economies. 
The G20 is a dynamic and flexible forum dedicated to resolving the global economic problems of the day and laying the foundations for prosperity and stability for the years to come.
The centrepiece of Australia's 2014 host year will be the Summit in Brisbane, which is expected to attract 25 world leaders, 4,000 delegates and up to 3000 members of the world's media.  Meetings of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors will be held in Sydney and Cairns; and a range of officials-level meetings and stakeholder engagement events supporting the policy process will be held throughout Australia during 2014.


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
The members of National Disability Services support some of the most disadvantaged Australians  -  those to whom we owe the greatest duty of care.
Every day you provide support and assistance that changes lives.
But I know each of you are frustrated that our fragmented and underfunded disability support system doesn't allow you to offer to everyone in need the right level or quality of care.
So today I want to say two things: firstly, I say thank you. Thank you for your great work. Thank you for always believing in the dignity and rights of those with disability.
But thank you is not enough. You know it. I know it.
Patching and mending a broken system doesn't cut it anymore.
That's why beyond the thanks and the hopes and the kind words, there's something better on the way: the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The NDIS will be transformational. A plan that spells hope. A once in a generation opportunity for change.
The NDIS is starting and as Prime Minister, I am determined it will be here to stay.
We started the journey on Budget Night in May with our commitment of $1 billion of new funding.
The scheme will be complete by the end of this decade. And like the old age pension, it will serve for decades as a trusted and fundamental part of our nation's social safety net.
As disability organisations, you are part of the NDIS from the beginning. You will help forge the Scheme's final legislation through your input to the Senate Committee.
We want to work closely with you on the NDIS rules, including the process of registration.
You will also help shape the unfolding nature of the launch sites as we learn from experience.
In all of this, we will value your advice and rely on your expertise. Because while the government can create the NDIS, it is you who will deliver it.
This is where your organisations, with their wealth of experience, can help shape the future  -  including your experience of how not to do things.
But of most immediate importance is the policy work required this week.
This is, of course, the week of COAG  -  the Council of Australian Governments. When those of us entrusted with the future of our nation sit down to establish how that future will look.
In the room will be just nine of us as First Ministers, plus our colleague representing local government. But the ten of us will be watched by 410,000 Australians.
The 410,000 Australians living with disability who are waiting to see their lives transformed.
Five of those Premiers and Chief Ministers agreed earlier this year to be part of the NDIS launch sites.
So this Friday, on behalf of all Australians with disability, I will be holding those five Premiers and Chief Ministers to their word, as they will be holding me to my word.
I want you to do the same.
Talk to the Premiers and Chief Ministers, the State and Territory Treasurers and Disability Ministers. Tell them that you want to see this done.
But don't leave it there.
Remember that as we begin this journey, it is incomplete because our two wealthiest and most dynamic States haven't yet come on board.
Tell them that you want them to stay engaged and at the table, so that they are part of the national scheme when it is agreed.
But notwithstanding, I want to leave the COAG table on Friday with the key arrangements to launch the first stage of the NDIS settled and bilateral agreements secured with the jurisdictions that will host a launch site: NSW, Victoria, Tasmania, South Australia the ACT.
With those Agreements, and the legislation to be passed next year, we can get the launch sites underway.
Starting in the middle of next year, those launch sites mean that 20,000 Australians in five regions with significant, lifelong disabilities will start to benefit from the NDIS.
These are not trial sites. Let's get that word out of our lexicon. This isn't an experiment or a pilot scheme that may or may not go ahead.
It is the beginning of the full NDIS. That's why we call them launch sites. Just as when you lay the foundation slab of a house, you don't says it's trial. You say you've started building the house.
Our house of care and inclusion, the NDIS, is under construction.
The foundation stone has been laid. And we will keep building until the house is completed and everyone is safe and secure inside.
The launch sites will be where it all unfolds.
There we will gain insights into how best to support Australians with disability at different stages of their lives, including through times of transition.
So different approaches will be taken to the first stage of the NDIS across the launch sites.
At the South Australian launch site, for example, we'll be focusing on services and support to children from birth through to age 14. This will be a chance to explore options and opportunities for managing early intervention.
Across the Bass Strait, at the Tasmanian launch site, the focus will be on 15- to 24-year-olds. This will let us learn how to better support young people through the testing physical, emotional and practical transition from adolescence to adulthood.
It will also let us develop a system that is better able to manage the all-important transition from school to post-school options like work, or further training.
These transitions are crucial not just for the young Australians living with disabilities, but also for their carers.
Without meaningful post-school options, parents and carers can find their own work options and life choices dramatically circumscribed.
At the ACT launch site there'll be an initial focus on addressing capacity gaps in 2013, followed by a more general subsequent roll-out to eligible members of the community.
Here in NSW, three local-government areas in the Hunter Valley will be first participants.
In Victoria, it will be residents of the Barwon region.
The work done at these first five sites will shape the full roll-out of the scheme in later years.
But be in no doubt:
We have started a journey that I am determined will only end in one way: with the full NDIS, completed, funded and fully in place in the years ahead.
The full roll-out of the NDIS will take years, not months. Even the most passionate advocate accepts that. Even the Productivity Commission accepts that.
It will be carefully staged. It has to be, if we are to get it right. And together we will get it right.
We'll get the NDIS right because the disability sector will continue to renew and upgrade and unify itself.
You've come a long way already.
The launch sites are just the beginning.
You and your organisations have an important stabilising and steadying role to play in this regard. That in itself may be confronting for some. For people with disabilities and for service providers.
My assurance to you today, and the message I want you to take back to your communities is this: change will be staged and it will be managed.
My Government will work with providers to make sure they understand what the transition means for them, and for the individuals they support.
We propose a series of local conversations over the coming months between program managers, the Launch Transition Agency and service providers.
So far, some small-scale, informal conversations have been held in South Australia, Tasmania and Victoria.
Similar sessions are planned for NSW and the ACT.
In the New Year there will be more of these conversations. There will also be a series of public forums in launch locations, to prepare the broader community and potential NDIS users for the transition.
These conversations will help us all make a smoother transition and allow us to manage the change.
So too, the practical ideas that will emerge from projects funded under the $10 million Practical Design Fund will give us ways to prepare everyone for transition to the NDIS.
I'm looking forward to seeing submissions from those with ‘lived experience'. People living with the challenge of a serious disability. Their families and carers. Disability care workers, service providers and advocates.
Coming up with projects that explore practical solutions to challenges of providing support and services to people in remote locations, perhaps. Or innovative ways of attracting and retaining the staff we'll need in our future disability workforce.
The Minister for Disability Reform Jenny Macklin will announce the successful applicants to that Design Fund later today.
Also critically important during the early days of transition will be the $122.6 million my Government has allocated: to prepare the sector for the new way of delivering disability services; and to help people with disability develop the capacity to exercise more choice and control. 
This investment will drive innovation and support current providers through the transition ahead, with a focus on the launch sites.
It will also help people with disabilities, their carers and families understand the options available to them through the NDIS.
The key to this journey we're embarking on is that it is adaptive.
We'll learn from each other as we go. We'll share successes. We'll pass on lessons.
That means we'll need to hear from you, and from the people you serve. We really need you to talk to us  -  and we'll be listening.
I know that what we are embarking upon is change on a scale the disability sector won't have been confronted with previously.
We'll all be expected to think differently about what we do, and how we do it.
So there's a lot you need to think about.
But there's also a lot we need to do as the national government.
I've spoken often about my determination to get the NDIS done. You can see that in the legislation I brought into Parliament last week. Historic legislation that will change our nation forever.
But the Australian people want to know that those legal words will have meaning where they count  -  in funding.
So I can say this today: we are inscribing the NDIS in the laws of our nation. We will also inscribe the NDIS in the finances of our nation.
It is true we don't yet have the full details on our funding package beyond the $1 billion already committed.
We will need to find responsible savings across the Commonwealth's outlays.
That will require some tough decisions  -  but government is about setting priorities.
We can have responsible economic management and invest in the new services our nation needs.
This work is underway and will continue in earnest over the summer break and into the New Year.  And we will have more to say on this important question in the Budget ahead of the launch of the NDIS in the middle of next year.
We'll fund the NDIS in the same way we've funded landmark reforms like our historic pension increase and paid parental leave: by making tough decisions which also happen to be the right choices.
Just as we have done by means-testing the private health insurance rebate.
Just as we have done by closing fringe-benefits loopholes and getting rid of tax concessions on superannuation for high income earners.
Just as we have done by eliminating tax breaks for golden handshakes.
We also need to work respectfully with the States and Territories on what might be an appropriate share for them to contribute, and those discussions are underway right now.
But be in no doubt about the commitment I bring to the NDIS.
As the 12thbiggest economy in the world. We will fund it.
As a nation with a big and generous heart. We will fund it.
As a government that gets the big things done. We will fund it.
And if you hear people saying the NDIS is a cruel hoax, or we have jumped the gun, or we're raising un-meetable expectations, then those saying such negative, bitter words will simply be proving they are policy weaklings, who lack the capacity or will for a change this fundamental.
As a government of purpose and strong policy commitments, we won't be distracted by their weakness and negativity.
On this, the International Day of People with Disability, I tell you and the Australian people, we will deliver this historic reform and we will deliver in all its parts.
The legislation, the rules and the public sector framework. The Agreements with the States and Territories. The training and sector development. And, yes, the funding as well.
To those who say the country cannot afford this reform, I say we cannot afford to any longer tolerate a broken system. A system that condemns almost half a million of our fellow Australians to a kind of second-class citizenship.
NDIS is the right thing to do. Now is the right time to do it. And led by me, we will get this great thing done.
Thank you very much.


Laverton, VIC
PM: Can I start by offering my congratulations to Prince William and Kate on the news that they are expecting a child.
This is delightful news, it is going to bring joy to them and to their family and I think it is going to bring joy to many around the world. Clearly it is a time of joy.
It can also be a time of challenge and I am sure many will be thinking of Kate as she deals with morning sickness and is in hospital.
But from the Australian people, to Prince William and Kate, delightful news and our congratulations.
I am here at OneSteel in Laverton in Melbourne's west and I am accompanied by Ministers Combet and Clare.
We are here today to make an important announcement about Australian jobs.
The Australian economy has been resilient and it is only Labor that has a plan to keep it resilient for the future.
Our economy has shown it can be resilient even in the toughest of times.
But nothing about the future is assured. In order to have strength and prosperity tomorrow, we have to make the right decisions today.
That is why Labor has developed a plan for the future of our economy. To make sure we have jobs and opportunity tomorrow.
We laid that plan out in our policy paper about Australia being a winner in this century of growth and change in the Asian region.
And we're making the right decisions today to seize the benefits that will flow in that future.
Rolling out the National Broadband Network, making sure that we are focused on skills.
Developing ports and roads and rail so that we can keep our competitive advantage.
It is only Labor that has a plan to ensure that our economic resilience today continues tomorrow.
During all of this we have had a particular focus on manufacturing. Manufacturing has been facing some difficult times as a result of the strength of the Australian dollar.
That means that for places like OneSteel and manufacturing around the country, they have had to face some pressures.
Manufacturing is an important industry to this country. It employs almost a million Australians and it is important to our skills and innovation for the future.
One of the challenges that manufacturing has been facing is competition from dumped, cheap imported product.
This is product that is being sold at less than its true cost. Australian manufacturing can be strong for the future but Australian manufacturing can only be strong if it gets a fair go and a level playing field.
Which is why today I do announce, with my ministerial colleagues, that we will create an Australian anti-dumping commission.
It will be the job of the anti-dumping commission to be the policeman, to make sure that we are enforcing fair rules so that Australian manufacturers don't face competition from dumped cheap imported product which is actually being sold for less than cost.
Here we are today around three weeks from Christmas, and as we move from this year into next year, our announcement today shows that one of the big things that the Government will be focused on in 2013 will be jobs and opportunity.
We are a government that is focused on job creation during the most difficult times.
We have worked with the Australian community to make sure that, unlike the rest of the world, we have low inflation, low unemployment, economic growth and sound public finances.
In 2013, we will be focusing on jobs and opportunity for the future by making the right decisions today.
I will turn now to Minister Clare for details of today's announcement.
MINISTER CLARE: Well thanks Prime Minister and thanks Greg.
We are a trading nation and boosting trade is critical to our success. One of the things that can harm that is dumping.
Dumping is cheating. It is where goods are imported at less than their real cost and it can cost Australians their job, it can hurt Australian industries and it can undermine confidence in free trade.
That is why it is so important that you have a strong cop on the beat to make sure that people play by the rules.
It is important that that cop on the beat has the resources they need and the powers they need - that is what today is all about.
There has been a lot of reform already in this area but there is more that is needed. There is a lot more that is needed.
In the last couple of years, we have seen a tripling in the number of anti-dumping investigations.
And that has been driven by a weak global economy as well as a strong Australian economy with surplus commodities out there looking for a home and Australia is an attractive market.
And expectations are that that is set to continue.
In July I asked John Brumby, the former Premier of Victoria, to give me advice on the best structure to tackle this issue.
He gave me his report two weeks ago, I released it last week and today we are announcing that we are going to implement his recommendations.
As the Prime Minister has said, the first of these is we are going to set up an anti-dumping commission and it will be based right here in Melbourne, the heart of Australia's manufacturing.
The anti-dumping commission will report directly to me.
Second is we are going to boost the resources available to this anti-dumping commission, a massive increase in resources, over $24 million over four years.
To put that in perspective it is more than double the resources that we invest in anti-dumping at the moment and it will mean that we almost double the total number of investigators that will do this work.
On top of that it needs the powers to do the job properly and higher penalties - increased penalties - to make sure that people play by the rules.
And so today, we are also announcing that we're going to introduce more reform into the parliament so we can impose higher duties where people break the rules, increase infringement notice penalties and make it easier to retrospectively apply dumping duties where people break the rules.
All of these reforms have been developed by working closely with Australian industry, including the team here at OneSteel.
And very importantly, they also comply with our obligations under the World Trade Organisation rules. The purpose of all of this is to make sure that people play by the rules.
And to do that, you need a strong cop on the beat, somebody that has the resources they need and the powers they need to make sure that people play by the rules, that will help support Australian jobs and help support Australian industry and I will introduce the legislation to make this happen next year when parliament returns.
PM: I will call on Minister Combet now to explain how today's announcement fits with our outlook for jobs and innovation.
MINISTER COMBET: Thanks very much Prime Minister and thank you to Minister Jason Clare.
I spent many years as a trade union official representing people in factories such as this before I entered parliament.
From time to time that included representing them in circumstances where they were up against unfair competition from overseas where goods had been dumped into the Australian marketplace.
So now in the role as industry minister and formulating an industry and innovation policy for the Government, one of the important priorities for the Government and myself as minister has been to strengthen the protection against anti-dumping in our laws.
Minister Clare, as he's just indicated, will be introducing legislation to achieve the changes that we're announcing here today.
But the fundamental purpose is to support the jobs of Australian workers in important industries such as this from unfair practices such as the dumping of products at below their true cost.
This is the first step, the first part in introducing a wider set of measures that will comprise the Government's industry and innovation policy statement.
There will be further measures announced in coming weeks and months, but principally we are going to be focusing on supporting the jobs of Australian workers and especially in the manufacturing industry, and also focusing on what we need to do to win more work in the resources sector where there is still a boom very strongly going on, and also to create more jobs through innovation and being more competitive and winning more work by exporting overseas.
So these are the focuses of the Australian Government in this area; supporting Australian workers' jobs and also looking to create more jobs by being able to export more overseas and I look forward to explaining more of the policy in coming months.
PM: We are happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, which countries are doing the dumping? Who is responsible for the dumping?
PM: We face dumping challenges from many nations so this is not directed at any one country, it is directed at making sure that our great manufacturing businesses get a fair go and that there is a cop on the beat that can enforce the rules.
JOURNALIST: What size is the dumping market and how much impact do you think this will have?
PM: We know from businesses like OneSteel, which has successfully taken and fought an anti-dumping case, that this is a challenge for Australian manufacturing and for Australian jobs. Minister Clare might take you through some examples.
MINISTER CLARE: Sure. There are thousands of Australians who work in industries that are affected by attempts by companies to import goods at below their real cost. So this helps to protect those jobs.
Thousands of Australians work in areas where if we don't have a strong cop on the beat, their jobs could be at risk. That is why this is so important.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
MINISTER CLARE: Goods are imported from countries all around the world which potentially are the subject of anti-dumping measures.
The issue here is not where they come from; it is the impact that it has in Australia, the impact on Australian jobs, the impact on Australian companies.
It is important that there is a level playing field; that everybody plays by the same rules and that is why this anti-dumping commission is so important.
JOURNALIST: So what is the value of dumped goods in Australia?
MINISTER CLARE: It is important to make the point that most people do play by the rules. But we have seen an increase in the number of goods that have been dumped into Australia.
The reason for that is, as I said earlier, you have a weak global economy, there is goods out there looking for a home.
Australia is an attractive option because the dollar is high and because our economy is so strong.
So companies around the world are looking to sell their goods into Australia. Some of them are trying to dump them into Australia. That is against the rules.
We have got an anti-dumping system at the moment, but as I said, we have had a tripling in the number of investigations. Our team needs the resources and the powers to do the job.
The extra resources will be delivered and the extra laws, the extra powers, will be implemented by legislation next year.
JOURNALIST: On the value, do you have a tonnage, to try and quantify  - 
MINISTER CLARE: It is not about tonnage, sometimes it is steel, sometimes it is aluminium and sometimes it is agricultural products.
It is not how much it weighs, it is about the impact it has on the Australian economy and the impact it has on Australian jobs. It is about making sure that everybody plays by the rules.
JOURNALIST: You are putting $24 million into it; it must be worth at least that much to the Australian market?
MINISTER CLARE: It is worth much more than that. It is worth Australian jobs.
It is worth making sure that Australian industry has a fair playing field on which to compete to deliver goods to Australians but also to export to other countries around the world.
JOURNALIST: Did the report say how much it is worth?
MINISTER CLARE: No, it didn't put a figure on it.
PM: Do we have more questions?
JOURNALIST: On another matter, Paul McClintock and a number of experts have said that the GST needs to be reviewed. This is something that you're strongly against. Why don't you listen to their advice and why don't you think that it should be reviewed?
PM: We have ruled out increasing the rate or broadening the base of the GST. Labor is the political party that opposed the introduction of the GST because it is a regressive tax.
And so of course you would expect a Labor Government to say that we're opposed to broadening the base or increasing the rate.
We will be working through the Council of Australian Governments for change, for things that matter for Australians.
I have talked about the resilience of the Australian economy but we have got to keep making the right decisions that make us competitive for the future.
So later this week, I will be meeting with leading business identities as well as premiers and chief ministers to talk about our economy and how we can make it a more seamless national economy; that there aren't rules that you trip over when you move from one state to another.
We will be focused on the electricity market, on making sure that we do what we can so that families aren't faced with continuous rapidly escalating power bills.
The plan I have put forward for the consideration of premiers and chief ministers would make a difference for households of $250 a year.
We will be very focused on the National focused Disability Insurance Scheme.
It is the kind of benefit you can bring to Australians if you do the right thing to keep your economy growing.
It will make a real difference for the more than 400,000 Australians who live with profound disability and those who care for them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how likely is a surplus given the weak economic data?
PM: Let's just deal with the premise of your question. We have a resilient economy. We have come through testing times with a resilient economy.
What that means is that we have got low inflation, low unemployment, strong public finances, economic growth.
We have to make the right decisions today so we have got economic strength for the future, and it is only Labor that has a plan to make sure our economy is resilient tomorrow the way it has been resilient during tough times.
Now the Reserve Bank will meet today and independently of government, as is appropriate, make a decision about interest rates.
For our economy, we do know that there are parts of the economy facing strain, particularly from the high Australian dollar, and we are dealing with part of that today through the announcement that we have made about the anti-dumping commission.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible consecutive rate cuts means the economy is weak, it's all about stimulating the economy isn't it, that is why the rates are cut, so the economy has to be weak?
PM: The premise of your question isn't right. The economy as the Reserve Bank itself says, is growing at around trend growth.
The Reserve Bank is obviously making a decision looking at the whole of the economy, the strength of the Australian dollar and what that means for all sectors of the economy.
But you can't just do one simple snapshot the way that you have looked at it.
You need to look at all the information; low unemployment, low inflation, economic growth, strong public finances, a Reserve Bank making a decision about interest rates.
What we already know about interest rates is for a family with a $300,000 mortgage, they are already paying $4,500 less per year under this Government than they were under the former Liberal Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you worried about the teachers' strike action that is continuing in Victoria at the moment? Teachers aren't going to write comments on kids' reports?
PM: When we look around the country, Liberal governments are just rolling out a cookie cutter approach to education.
There is a Liberal plan when it comes to education and the Liberal plan is always for cutbacks in education.
You can see that here in Victoria, you can see it in New South Wales, you can see it in Queensland. A Liberal Government means cutbacks in education.
People obviously then react to those cutbacks in education. There is a better way than all of this cutting back and division.
It is the plan that we are rolling out for the future of Australian education, where we say that there is nothing more important to our future as a nation than the education of our children and we are prepared to invest in it.
JOURNALIST: If there is a rate cut should the banks pass it on?
PM: The banks should certainly pass on in full any interest rate reduction if it is made.
It is very close to Christmas and so if an interest rate reduction is made, the banks should take into account that Australian families will be looking to them to pass the interest rate reduction on in full.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if the economy is going so well, what does it matter if they pass it on or not?
PM: I always want to benefit Australian families. I think it is good that Australian families are paying $4,500 less a year now than they used to on a $300,000 a year mortgage.
Even with the resilience of the economy, many families find it difficult to make ends meet and so when interest rates have gone down in the past we have wanted to see families benefit from that and of course we want to see families benefit from any interest rate reduction that flows today.
JOURNALIST: How interested do you think Australians are in a royal baby?
PM: I think people will stop and look at the news and they will be chatting about it over lunch and as they go about their work and I think there will be a sense of delight about it.
JOURNALIST: Do you have a comment on Israel's plans for the new homes in East Jerusalem and its timing soon after the vote taken last week on the Palestine status?
PM: We have already indicated publicly that we're very concerned about this development, very concerned that all sides should act with restraint and very concerned that everyone should find a way back to a path to peace.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that the Royal Commission inquiry into child abuse should look at the evidence that has become available to the Victorian and other inquiries?
PM: We certainly think that the Royal Commission that I have announced should work in a productive way with other inquiries around the nation.
There has been an inquiry here - a parliamentary inquiry. In other parts of the nation there are inquiries in progress now.
We will certainly be working with our State and Territory colleagues so that the Royal Commission we're creating works well with what has already been done through those inquiries.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Sure.
JOURNALIST: Obviously the Federal Government has given more, has provided the company with money to make it cleaner. How many more companies can the Federal Government keep bailing out or keep giving money to, to transform their practices?
PM: You need to have a look at the details of that matter.
What we have actually done is provided some monies by way of loan through our export finance corporation to help the company transform.
It is not a grant, as you have phrased your question. That is not how it is being done.
We have, through the Export Finance Corporation, provided a loan to enable this business to transform so that it is viable for the future.
This is important to the regional economy of South Australia. It is also got impacts for the economy of Tasmania. So we have worked through and we have assessed risk here.
Minister Crean is still working on arrangements with the South Australian Government and with the business.
Okay, thank you very much.
[ENDS] 



Business leaders will meet with the Prime Minister and First Ministers in Canberra on Thursday to discuss ways to seize the opportunities of the Asian Century by lifting productivity through regulatory and competition reform.
The Gillard Government's plan to secure the nation's economic future is underpinned by a broad productivity agenda centred on five pillars  -  tax reform, skills and education, innovation, infrastructure and broadband and, the focus of this meeting, regulatory and competition reform.
This will be the second meeting of the Business Advisory Forum (BAF), ahead of the COAG meeting on Friday.
All states and territories will be represented at the BAF, with Premiers and Chief Ministers from the ACT, New South Wales, Northern Territory, South Australia, Tasmania and Victoria attending.
Queensland and Western Australia will be represented by officers from their respective Departments of Premier and Cabinet.
Local Government will be represented by the President of the Australian Local Government Association.
Business leaders attending the meeting will be:
Mr Michael Fraser (AGL Energy)Mr Innes Willox (Australian Industry Group)Mr Peter Anderson (Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry)Mr Ross Pilling (BASF Australia)Ms Catherine Tanna (BG Australia)Dr Marius Kloppers (BHP Billiton)Dr Ian Thomas (Boeing Australia &amp; South Pacific)Mr Tony Shepherd AO (Business Council of Australia)Mr Nigel McBride (Business SA)Mr Peter Strong (Council of Small Business of Australia)Mr Craig Arnold (Dow Chemical Australia and New Zealand)Mr Dale Elphinstone (Elphinstone)Mr Nick Leeder (Google Australia)Mr David Crombie (GRM International)Mr David Tudehope (Macquarie Telecom)Mr Stephen Cartwright (NSW Business Chamber)Mr Grant King (Origin Energy)Mr David Peever (Rio Tinto Australia)Ms Ann Pickard (Shell)Ms Kerrie Mather Sydney Airport)Mr Grant O'Brien (Woolworths)
Following the inaugural Business Advisory Forum in April, COAG agreed to an ambitious regulatory and competition reform agenda.
This agenda included energy market reform, streamlining environmental regulation, major projects and development assessments and rationalising carbon reduction and energy efficiency schemes.
Progress on these issues will be discussed, along with ways in which all Governments can lift regulatory performance.
Leaders will also discuss Seamless National Economy reform priorities to reduce red-tape for business, increase productivity and enable an efficient economy where resources can move to where they can make the greatest economic contribution. 


Melbourne
The Gillard Government will deliver stronger protection for Australian industry against unfair competition from overseas by reforming the anti-dumping system.
Manufacturing employs nearly one million Australians in skilled and decently-paid jobs and is a central part of a resilient, diverse and broad-based economy.
The sector faces challenges from the high Australian dollar, economic weakness in Europe, intense global competition and an oversupply of some traded goods in international markets.
A key concern is evidence of a significant increase in dumping  -  the unfair trade practice where imported goods are sold in Australia at prices below their normal value, injuring local businesses and their workers.
It is not acceptable for Australian jobs to be put at risk by products being dumped into this country.
Manufacturing provides a quarter of Australia's business R&amp;D expenditure, a third of our traditional trade apprenticeship completions and almost 30 per cent of our exports.
The Government will support manufacturing by strengthening the system for investigating dumping and applying remedies where dumping is injuring local producers.
The key reforms will:
·         Establish a new Anti-Dumping Commission to investigate complaints; 
·         Boost funding to Customs by $24.4 million over four years so it can deal with cases speedily and fairly  -  this will almost double the number of investigators;
·         Make the anti-dumping system easier for small and medium-sized businesses; and
·         Introduce stricter remedies against overseas producers who deliberately circumvent Australia's anti-dumping rules.
Australian-made products affected by dumping in recent years include steel, chemicals, aluminium goods and paper products. Sectors manufacturing these goods employ more than 150,000 Australians.
It is neither economically efficient nor fair for competitive Australian businesses to be disadvantaged by products dumped into our market.
We do not allow unfair trade practices by our own businesses, so we should not allow Australian jobs to be jeopardised by unfair trade practices from overseas producers.
These reforms will ensure competition is on a level playing field, supporting jobs in manufacturing and other industries.
They implement recommendations of the former Victorian Premier John Brumby's report on the administration of the anti-dumping system and include additional initiatives to strengthen the system.
Mr Brumby's report concluded that dumping into Australia is highly likely to increase and that an efficient and effective anti-dumping system is critical to retaining public confidence in free trade.
The Government will introduce legislation in 2013 to establish the new Anti-Dumping Commission.
The Commission will be based in Melbourne. It will report directly to the Minister for Home Affairs and utilise the systems of the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service.
Funding will also be extended for the International Trade Remedies Adviser to continue providing information, advice and support to small and medium sized enterprises on anti-dumping issues.
Today's announcement builds on existing Gillard Government policies, including:
·         The $5.4 billion New Car Plan, which is supporting automotive manufacturing in Australia;
·         The $1 billion Clean Technology Program which is investing in new energy-efficient equipment at manufacturing businesses around Australia;
·         The $300 million Steel Transformation Plan which is supporting investment in steel manufacturing.
The Gillard Government's policies demonstrate its commitment to Australian manufacturing in tough times.
By contrast, the Coalition voted against the Clean Technology Program and the Steel Transformation Plan and would cut $1.5 billion from the New Car Plan, putting hundreds of thousands of Australian manufacturing jobs at risk.


Canberra
Gold medal Paralympic swimmer Jacqueline Freney has tonight been awarded the Prime Minister's Women in Sport Award.
Ms Freney is one of Australia's most successful Paralympians. She won eight gold medals at the London Paralympics  -  one for every event in which she competed. Two of the eight gold were won in world record time.
Minister for Sport Kate Lundy tonight presented Ms Freney with her award at the Australian Women's Health I Support Women in Sport Awards.
The award was reinstated by the Gillard Government earlier this year, making Ms Freney the first recipient since 1996.
The Awards recognise the achievements of Australian sportswomen in all levels of sport from the grass-roots through to high performance. They celebrate female athletes from all fields and aim to encourage more women to participate in sport.
The Gillard Government is a proud supporter for the Awards and has committed to funding theAustralian Women's Health I Support Women in Sport campaign and awards night through to 2013.
Australia's female athletes performed exceptionally well at both the Olympics and the Paralympics this year, making their nation proud.
The Gillard Government wants to ensure their achievements continue to receive the exposure they deserve.


Canberra
Ninety of the best and brightest students from across Australia and the Asia-Pacific region have been awarded a 2013 Prime Minister's Australia Award.
Forty undergraduate and postgraduate Australian students will receive scholarships to study, undertake research or take up a work placement across the region. Twenty students from Asia and 30 students from the Pacific will receive the same opportunity in Australia.
The Awards develop enduring education, research and professional links between Australia and the Asia-Pacific region, as well as promote leadership skills.
The students and researchers will have the chance to experience international study and work experience in countries across the region including Australia, India, Indonesia, China, Japan, Malaysia and Vietnam.
The Asian Century presents a world of opportunities for our students and the Government is determined to make sure more Australians have the chance to benefit.
The next generation of Australian leaders will need to be increasingly Asian-literate and these are skills best learnt by experiencing Asia first-hand.
Award recipients from the region will undertake international work placements and participate in leadership development workshops to enhance their ability to contribute to the development priorities of their home country.
In the Asian Century, Australia needs to deepen its engagement across the region by enhancing industry and education links and strengthening people-to-people ties.
This year's Australian recipients come from six states and territories and are undertaking study or research in a diverse range of fields including the visual arts, mental health, environmental science, law and anthropology.
The Prime Minister's Australia Awards strengthen Australia's international education sector and build long-term links with individuals and organisations in the Asia-Pacific region.
Through the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper, we aim to have a larger number of Australian university students studying overseas and a greater proportion undertaking part of their degree in an Asian country by 2025
In addition to the Australia Awards, the Government has established AsiaBound. From next year, more than 10,000 Australian students will be supported to undertake some of their study in an Asian country. Thousands more students will have access to greater OS-HELP arrangements.
The recipients of the 2013 Prime Minister's Australia Awards will be recognised at a Presentation Dinner at the National Gallery of Australia tonight.


Melbourne
Dame Elisabeth Murdoch lived a great Australian life. 
Her example of kindness, humility and grace was constant.  She was not only generous, she led others to generosity. 
Australia's children and Australia's artists have lost one of their greatest benefactors.
 Dame Elisabeth's name will rightly be remembered by countless Australians and in many Australian places where her philanthropic work was so deeply appreciated.
Australia has lost an amazing Australian woman. 
As many have recalled today, Dame Elisabeth was the first woman trustee of the National Gallery of Victoria, chair of the committee which established the Victorian Tapestry Workshop, trustee of the regional McClelland Gallery and a benefactor to many including the Australian Ballet, Opera Australia and the Bell Theatre Company.
The death of a parent at any age is one of the saddest moments we endure in life.  Dame Elisabeth's children, grandchildren, great and great-great-grandchildren and her large extended family have lost a beloved matriarch.
On behalf of the Government, I send my condolences to the Murdoch family.


Canberra
A Queensland researcher developing a new clinical therapy for patients suffering from painful eye disorders has received the inaugural Prime Minister's Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Award.
Queensland University of Technology's Dr Laura Bray will receive up to $118,000 of post-doctoral assistance to perform the research in Dresden, Germany over two years.
The new award, announced as part of Australia's commemoration activities for The Queen's Diamond Jubilee, will allow a high achieving Australian female postgraduate or postdoctoral student to undertake research overseas.
The Award is designed to develop recipients into internationally-aware and skilled future leaders.
The Award will allow Dr Bray to use the world-class facilities at the Leibniz Institute for Polymer Research, in collaboration with the Dresden University of Technology.
Dr Bray's research will help improve outcomes for patients with severe injuries to the surface of their eye, for which there is no current long-term treatment option anywhere in the world.
The Prime Minister's Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Award will help Dr Bray become a leader in biomedical research in Australia and globally.
Having Australia's best and brightest female postgraduate students and postdoctoral fellows undertake research or study overseas will help develop enduring links between Australia and the host country.
The experience of studying and living overseas also helps Australian students build life-long professional connections and friendships, and develop leadership skills.
Dr Bray will be recognised at the 2013 Prime Minister's Australia Awards Presentation Dinner at the National Gallery of Australia tonight.
The Prime Minister's Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Award is an achievement-based scholarship awarded through the merit stream of the Australia Awards  -  the Endeavour Awards.
The Endeavour Awards is the Gillard Government's international, merit-based scholarship program providing life and career changing opportunities for recipients in countries around the world.


Melbourne
PM: I just wanted to take this opportunity to say a few words about Dame Elisabeth Murdoch.
Dame Elisabeth Murdoch was a remarkable Australian.
Today we start our fond farewells to a woman who lived a long and amazing life.
We particularly admire her love of charity and doing good works for others.
She's been a fantastic patron of the arts in our country and has helped so many people forge their careers.
I do, as Prime Minister, want to offer my condolences to the Murdoch family and say that Dame Elisabeth will be missed.
She will be missed for her kindness and generosity.
She will be missed as an example of a long life well-lived.
Thanks very much.


Canberra
PM: We're here today together to make a very important announcement about the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The reason we are so determined today deliver a National Disability Insurance Scheme is we want to make a difference for the lives of 410,000 Australians who have serious disabilities.
For those 410,000 Australians, they currently face an underfunded system and a fragmented system and it can be hard for them to get the care that they need.
But having a National Disability Insurance Scheme, whilst it is about those Australians, it is actually about all of us because any Australian is at risk of getting a disability during their lifetime.
Any Australian could face the birth into their family of a child with a profound disability. Any Australian could be involved in an accident that left them with a profound disability. Any Australian themselves or through a family member, could see the ravaging effects of some of our most debilitating illnesses and the disabilities that they give people.
So creating a better system of care for people with disabilities is creating a better system of care for all Australians; giving Australians a reassurance that with our resilient economy, we can keep on building the great Australian project of a proper social safety net. We can keep on building the great Australian project of a fair go.
Piece by piece we have worked to develop the National Disability Insurance Scheme. At the last Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting we sat, and in the days that followed the COAG meeting we agreed to launch sites around the country, including in New South Wales.
Since then, I have introduced into the Parliament the legislation for the National Disability Insurance Scheme. And today, here with the Premier of New South Wales, I am in a position to announce that the Federal Government and the New South Wales Government have reached an agreement about how to support the full National Disability Insurance Scheme in New South Wales.
We are agreed on having a launch site in the Hunter region of New South Wales and then when it comes time to move from that launch site to the full scheme in 2018, we have reached an agreement about funding shares and mechanisms for that full scheme.
At its most simple, what it means is that the Commonwealth and the State will share around half of the burden that the Commonwealth and the State will each put in an extra $3 billion more for care and support of people in New South Wales.
This means 140,000 people in New South Wales with disability now can look forward to being supported by the National Disability Insurance Scheme. And it means all of the people of New South Wales can look forward to having the reassurance of knowing that should trouble ever strike them or their family, they would be supported through such a scheme.
To give you the precise details, the Commonwealth will contribute 51.4 per cent of the total cost of the National Disability Insurance Scheme in New South Wales from financial year 2018/19.
That means that the Commonwealth will contribute $3.319 billion and the New South Wales Government will contribute $3.133 billion, a large injection of funding to care for people with disabilities.
We have worked hard on this arrangement together and I want to thank Premier O'Farrell for his leadership and for being the first premier to enter such an agreement with the Federal Government.
I do want to reinforce that this deal now sets the benchmark. It shows to the other states and territories that it can be done and I am determined that it will be done.
I want to build a truly national scheme and other states and territories can now look at this example and work with us to build on this example with this deal setting the benchmark.
Around the country, many people, many Australians with disabilities, their loved ones, their carers have looked forward to seeing a National Disability Insurance Scheme developed. Many of them thought that they would never see the day.
I hope from this announcement today that piece by piece they are seeing this get done. That piece by piece they are seeing us build this major reform for the Australian people and I am very proud to be here to do it.
PREMIER O'FARRELL: This is an important day for 120,000 people with disabilities, their families, their carers across New South Wales.
This gives them the guarantee that they have always deserved. This delivers to them the National Disability Insurance Scheme that has long been sought after.
What I am delighted about today is that in New South Wales, where we have the Stronger Together program which has always been a matter of bipartisanship, we also have bipartisanship within the Federal Parliament on NDIS.
That is important because this should be above politics and I think this agreement today demonstrates it is above politics.
This will ensure that for those families, those individuals, those carers who are affected by disability, that that long term support beyond the launch will continue.
Prime Minister, thank you, thanks Jenny Macklin, I want to particularly thank Andrew Constance who is the Minister for Aging and Disabilities in New South Wales; hasn't only worked hard on this program but has worked hard particularly to give control and choice to those with disabilities within New South Wales.
We think this is not just a fair deal, this is the appropriate deal, this is the necessary deal that people with disabilities deserve and I am delighted that New South Wales is the first state to reach agreement with the Federal Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, by 2018, I think that there is at least two federal elections before then and possibly at least one state election. To what extent, if any, are these spending commitments binding on future governments should either of you not be there by 2018?
PM: I think for both of us you really need to talk to the other side of politics about that. But for something as big as the National Disability Insurance Scheme, people in the sector understand that it takes some time to build to the full scheme. The Productivity Commission understood that too.
You have got to get in there and build it a step at a time. Now a lot of people would have said we weren't going to get this far. There has been a lot of scepticism around about would we get agreements to launch sites, and then the scepticism started would we get an agreement to the full roll-out.
Here the Premier and I are today saying we can get this done and we are going to work together under this agreement to do it.
It does mean of course, that we're going to both need to make some tough choices on our budgets. I have been very clear with the nation that I will be saying to people, we need to make some tough choices, some good decisions in order to find the money to back in the roll-out of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
But I am determined to do it, Premier O'Farrell is determined to do it and here we are today getting it done.
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Can I just add that I think that as New South Wales has demonstrated, with Stronger Together, which is our program for people with disabilities, it requires bipartisan support. Developed by the former Labor Government, embraced in Opposition by the Liberal National Party and pursued in Government so that we have $2 billion worth of growth funding sitting there waiting for this scheme.
That is what I think is important about Monday, where you saw the Federal Opposition Leader embrace the concept of the National Disability Insurance Scheme; embrace the fact he was going to be ‘Dr Yes' when it came to NDIS and say yes he was prepared to work with the states to ensure this became a reality.
JOURNALIST: Does it have to be embedded in legislation and secondly what has happened to the Victorians, did they refuse to sign up?
PM: We've got to separate the agreements for the launch sites and the agreement for the full funding of the scheme. What I am announcing here today with Premier O'Farrell is an agreement about the full funding of the scheme. So Premier O'Farrell is the only premier to enter such an agreement to this point.
In terms of legislation, I introduced the legislation we need for the National Disability Insurance Scheme in the final sitting week.
JOUNALIST: But the funding, does that have to be embedded in legislation or is that just-
PM: The funding can be a decision of executive Government but the set-up of the scheme is the legislation I introduced last week.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect that the break down will be markedly different with other states depending on the starting point that they have? Also, how does that funding escalate over the years after 2018/19?
PM: I will go to Minister Macklin on the escalation provisions but I do want to be clear about benchmarks here. No-one is going to be able to get a better deal than New South Wales got. We have set a benchmark here and we will be judging the proposals of other states against this benchmark.
Having said that, some states have got a bigger journey to travel than New South Wales, because their disability services are not at the same starting point.
We do have states at different starting points. I have made the point publicly in other places that, for example, Queensland spends less per head of population on disability services than any other state and territory. That means they have a bigger journey in front of them.
We will be working with states and territories, but Premier O'Farrell and the Commonwealth, through this agreement, have set the benchmark about how we will approach these agreements.
Minister Macklin can talk about escalation clauses.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks Prime Minister. We have agreed with New South Wales to start the transition to the full scheme from 2016. By 2018, we expect to have it fully implemented across New South Wales and we have also agreed with New South Wales that there will be a Productivity Commission inquiry at that point to make an assessment of the issues that go to your question.
JOURNALIST: Of escalation?
MINISTER MACKLIN: That's right.
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Can I just say in relation to the negotiations, what has impressed me is these negotiations have been conducted with goodwill, they've been conducted as those affected by disability would expect with a clear intent of delivering this goal and yes, the Prime Minister's again proven herself to be a tough negotiator because both of us have tight fiscal situations. But this is the right outcome and as the Prime Minister's made clear all the way through the negotiations, this would set the benchmarks for other agreements.
JOURNALIST: Is the formula that you've got, the 51.4 from the Commonwealth and 48.6, is your understanding that is how it will be in perpetuity and if I may on the question of where the money comes from, is it inevitable that in order to make that $3 billion  -  just over $3 billion  -  that you will need to make cuts in other areas of the New South Wales health budget in order to get it into this area?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: We're confident that within the stronger together program we have we can fund this proposal. Our funding is both real growth dollars. As I say we have $2 billion in growth set aside, as well as in kind support. What I can also say is every dollar New South Wales puts in will go to delivering a service for a person with disabilities. It won't go into bureaucracy, it won't go into administration.
JOURNALIST: Will the formula stay the same, is that part of the agreement, that the formula stays the same, or over time is that formula, as part of the design, likely to shift?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well in 2017, as you'll see from the agreement there is proposal for the Productivity Commission to have a look at a number of things, including jurisdictional capacity, also impact of wage pressures, and the Productivity Commission may make some recommendations, on the other hand it may not make those recommendation.
So, I think the good thing is there is a relief valve there that provides an opportunity after 2016 start of this roll-out for all the issues to be considered.
JOURNALIST: If my maths is right, then you will probably need about $10 to $11 billion by 2018. Now, with so much money required just from the Federal Government, would it be foolish for you to now rule out having some sort of levy to pay for it, given that Australians are sensible people and if they are given a sensible proposal that has a worthwhile cause, then they might be convinced to support it?
PM: Let me assure you as we factor the full costs of the scheme, we will probably be relying on something more robust than your maths sitting in a press conference. I want to give the Australian people that reassurance. I can see two hard working officials at the back, Ian Watt and Chris Eckles who are a bit disturbed that that is how we are going to do the figures.
But you're right, funding this around the country is going to take considerable Federal Government investment. And I have said consistently, and let me say it again  -  and I'm being clear about it because I want people to understand it  -  we will be asking people to make some hard choices to get this done. We will be saying to people unashamedly, we are putting a priority on this and when you put a priority on it then your budget choices reflect that priority.
At the end of the day, budgets are about choices. That is true for people in their individual life, whether they value buying a home over taking an expensive overseas holiday. It is true for governments in our life whether we value a National Disability Insurance Scheme over competing uses of taxpayers' dollars.
I have in the past ruled out a levy and I will do it again now. We will make the necessary decisions on the Federal Government budget to get this done.
JOURNALIST: On the breakdown of the money, at the moment both you and Premier O'Farrell, you spend money on disabilities, is this $3 billion, is that new money from both of you. Or is there a bit of, are you keeping some of the money that you give to the states and re-spending it? I suppose my question is: is this going to be new money from both parties or is there a bit of recycling?
PM: Over time you would expect both of us to have factored growth into disability funding. We don't produce budgets as long out as this period of time. You'd be aware of that too. We don't produce forward estimates out that far. But what we are doing is instead of just adding money into the current system, which we know can do some good but not the complete good that we want done, because however much money you put into the current system, you are going to end up with fragmentation in the system.
We want to take this whole new approach so we are talking about making new resources available to back-in that approach. In terms of the quantums we have talked about here, they are the quantums flowing from our understanding of the costs of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, and what is a fair share. Then each government needs to go away and do the hard work on its budget to make it possible.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you creating too high an expectation given that, for example, over 65s won't be part of the NDIS and people like New Zealanders working in Australia also won't have access to the scheme?
PM: I will go to Minister Macklin on this issue of over 65s because I think it would be a good day to clarify it.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks Prime Minister. In the legislation that the Prime Minister introduced last week, we have put in the provision, as recommended by the Productivity Commission that the National Disability Insurance Scheme apply to people up to the age of 65. This is though still an issue for discussion and debate.
We have had many consultations around it so far but we will continue to do so over the next few months before the legislation is finally put to a vote in the Parliament.
JOURNALIST: And the situation with New Zealanders?
PM: The residents' requirements are also in the legislation. So the normal residents' requirements that go with Commonwealth services but of course all these matters are open for discussion before the legislation is finally voted on.
JOURNALIST: On another issue-
PM: We are only taking questions on the NDIS.
JOURNALIST: Can you give us some sort of indication of where you're at in terms of negotiations with the other states?
PM: Well, I am not going to give a call of the card with other states. But I am delighted that we have been able to reach this agreement with New South Wales which is of course our most popular state.
PREMIER O'FARRELL: And the state where there are more people with disabilities who will benefit from this historic agreement.
PM: Before Premier O'Farrell starts doing a commercial for New South Wales, which would be understandable as the Premier, but we will take one last question before we go.
JOURNALIST: You said you won't give a call of the card with the other states but are you having the same conversations with the other states and is it basically haggling over the share of the money?
PM: Once again, not giving a call of the card or running commentary about negotiations, but what today shows is you can get it done. We have just done it.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
The Australian and New South Wales governments have today reached an historic agreement that will allow for the full roll out of a National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) in New South Wales by July 2018.
The agreement will provide care and support to around 140,000 NSW residents with significant disability, and provide coverage in the event of disability to around one third of the Australian population.
It will provide peace of mind to people with a disability, their families and carers, and to the Australians who will unexpectedly face misfortune in the future.
It will give people with disability choice and control over the care and support they receive, rather than exposing them to the cruel lottery that currently exists, where care depends on a range of unpredictable factors.
Under the agreement reached today:
 * 	The Commonwealth will provide funding of $3.32 billion in 2018  -  51.4 per cent of the funding needed. This will cover the administration of the scheme and contribute to the cost of individual care and support packages and other supports for people with disability, their carers and their families.
 * 	New South Wales will provide more than $3.13 billion in 2018  -  48.6 per cent of the funding needed. This will contribute to the cost of individual packages and other supports for people with disability, their carers and their families.
 * 	The full scheme costs will be reviewed by the Productivity Commission in 2018-19 to inform COAG agreement on final scheme funding arrangements.
Today's agreement builds on the agreement to launch in the Hunter region of NSW from the middle of next-year. Other eligible New South Wales residents will start entering the scheme in 2016, and by July 2018, all eligible residents will be covered by the NDIS.
The implementation of the NDIS in NSW provides a framework for a national scheme to be rolled out in all states and territories.
An NDIS will also be launched in South Australia, Tasmania, the Barwon region of Victoria and the ACT and final bi-lateral agreements for these launches will be considered at tomorrow's COAG meeting.


Melbourne
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
PM: Today marks the start of Toyota's new global engine line, and the dawn of a new generation of Camry engine production here in Australia.
Put simply, this is a red letter day for blue collar workers and you should be very proud of it.
Today is a win for Australian jobs in this century of growth and change in the region in which we live.
And to get to this day has required an investment from Toyota, commitment from workers, support from government, all showing what we can do when we have a plan for the future and when we work together to achieve it.
So first and foremost, to everyone here, congratulations.
To get here I know you've had to work hard and overcome some very significant barriers.
I know that these are tough days for companies like Toyota Australia, that reach into local markets and have strong export products.
More intense global competition and the strong Australian dollar are making it tough for you and I realise that.
That's why Australian manufacturing is competing on quality and innovation as much as on price.
And I'm pleased that as a Government, we've assisted in the establishment of the engine line here through a $63 million grant under the New Car Plan.
I know to get here you've had to innovate, you've had to be smart.
This new modular facility with its state of the art technologies and highly skilled workforce is an example for the kind of innovation driving modern manufacturing in our nation.
Toyota will be producing both conventional petrol powered and hybrid engines; a capability which is new to Toyota and new to Australia.
The new locally made engines are significantly more fuel efficient and produce less carbon dioxide than their predecessors.
So it's good news for the environment, good news for buyers who need to fill up the petrol tank; they will be saving money every time they go to the bowser.
And it's a great example of the opportunities for manufacturing that come from Australia's move towards a clean energy future.
This demands a lot of the workforce and the management here, and it demands a lot of Australia.
Our products and goods need to be smart, efficient and sustainable.
Our workforce must be skilled, productive and engaged.
Our world-class researchers must link their work with industry so that consumers around the world can benefit from their knowledge and research.
Australian industry must be better linked into the global value and production chains.
But today shows we can get all of these things done.
We are one of the few countries in the world with the capabilities and skills involved in the manufacture of cars from the design stage right through to the production stage.
And that means that our auto industry is a crucible of new skills and new technologies.
It's an industry that employs almost 48,000 people and which supports the jobs of around 200,000 others across the nation.
It's an industry with $4.5 billion in value adding to the broader Australian economy.
It's an industry worth $3.2 billion in exports.
And so it's an industry we value and we're very proud to support.
Now we can only get that done working with you, supporting you, if it's part of a plan for our nation's future and we're realising that plan every day.
Working with you is part of our plan to ensure that we've got a resilient and diverse economy in this century of growth and change.
So I am so pleased to be here for this important event.
And can I say as someone who's lived locally for a very long period of time, I've driven day after day past this place and I know looking at the Toyota factory that not only are we seeing place where cars are made.
We're seeing a place where people make their lives, where you can get the opportunity to have a good job, a secure job, a job that enables them to make a life for themselves and their families.
So it's a great credit to everyone that we are now going to see a continuation of that right here in Altona.
As a Government we've got to keep working with you and I'm pleased today to announce further steps in our plan to promote a strong manufacturing sector.
First, the Government is appointing the first automotive supplier advocate to boost sales of Australian made cars to government and business fleets and to work with your industry to win new markets.
Second, the first funding grant of the $236 million Industrial Transformation Research Program will focus on further research, making sure that we're adding to our manufacturing sector strengths, including production as well.
And third, the manufacturing leaders group will be led by Boeing Australia President Ian Thomas to help manufacturers seize the opportunities ahead.
We're working with you; we want to keep working with you, the car industry and manufacturing, and these are the next three steps for the future.
In conclusion, thank you for getting us to this day. I wish you all of the best for the future.
I'm going to look with pride in the years ahead as I continue to drive to my home in Altona past this place knowing that we achieved a future for it together
Thank you very much.


Melbourne
The Gillard Government today announced a further suite of measures to ensure Australia has a dynamic manufacturing industry which continues to provide skilled and well-paid jobs.
A high-level Manufacturing Leaders Group will be led by Boeing Australia president, Ian Thomas, to help manufacturers seize the opportunities of the Asian Century.
The Government is appointing William Angove as the first Automotive Supplier Advocate to boost sales of Australian-made cars to government and business fleets and to work with the automotive industry to win new markets.
The Government has also agreed that the first funding round of the $236 million Industrial Transformation Research Program (ITRP) will focus on food research.
Food processing is a key area of opportunity as the rise of a large Asian middle class will lift demand for high-quality food products.
The ITRP is designed to develop partnerships between firms and researchers to boost the competitive edge of Australian industry.
Manufacturing employs nearly one million Australians and is an essential part of a broad-based Australian economy.
The sector is facing increased pressure due to the high Australian dollar and competition from low-cost economies in our region, which is why the Government established the Prime Minister's Manufacturing Taskforce.
Today's announcements follow other recent steps including:
 * 	Establishing a new Anti-Dumping Commission with increased powers and resources to provide a fair go for Australian manufacturers and farmers.
 * 	Support for innovative manufacturing through the $240 million 16th Cooperative Research Centres selection round, which will open for applications in February 2013.  At least $50 million from this funding round will support the development and application of new technologies to support growth and competitiveness in Australian manufacturing.
 * 	Provision of more than $38 million in Clean Technology Grants for food processors to improve energy efficiency, reduce costs and improve productivity.
 * 	Establishing a Centre for Workplace Leadership to encourage higher performing workplaces and stronger leadership capability to boost productivity.
These further steps to strengthen Australian manufacturing and services reflect the recommendations of the Prime Minister's Manufacturing Taskforce, which reported this year.
Early next year the Government will release an Industry and Innovation Statement setting out a long term agenda to strengthen Australian industries, create Australian jobs and seize new opportunities in the Asian Century.
The Statement will outline the Government's plan to encourage the growth of a competitive, productive manufacturing sector built on innovation, quality products and services underpinned by the application of new research and knowledge.


Canberra
The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) today agreed the most comprehensive package of reforms to Australia's electricity markets in more than a decade.
The reforms are designed to return the interests of consumers to the centre of Australia's electricity markets. 
The Gillard Government has worked with state and territory governments through the Standing Council on Energy and Resources (SCER) and with business through the Business Advisory Forum (BAF) to agree on reforms that will limit future electricity price rises.
The Gillard Government called for solutions on the table at COAG and we're pleased that Premiers and Chief Ministers have agreed to this comprehensive package which will help Australian families with the cost of living and help keep Australian businesses competitive.
Agreement to this package is a starting point; it's now up to the states and territories to implement these actions so that consumers reap the benefits.
If state and territory governments make all the changes proposed in this package, consumers will have greater choice and greater control over their electricity costs.
Key features of today's agreement include:
Rule changes to ensure no over-investment in networks: 
 * 	Commitment in-principle to a new national framework of best-practice reliability standards which give added weight to the interests of consumers and in-principle agreement to transfer reliability setting to the Australian Energy Regulator;
 * 	Early implementation of new rules that will ensure investment by network businesses is more efficient; and
 * 	A public consultation process to improve the Limited Merits Review Regime to minimise the risk of ‘cherry-picking' by network businesses while also ensuring review arrangements provide an effective back-stop for business.
Giving consumers a voice in the electricity market:
 * 	Establish a Consumer Challenge Panel, comprised of industry experts, to represent consumers' interests in regulatory determinations;
 * 	Implement national consumer protections (including for smart meters) by 1 January 2014; and
 * 	Develop a national consumer advocacy body, in close consultation with stakeholders, to provide a national consumer voice for energy policy and regulatory development.
A strengthened independent regulator:
 * 	An additional $23 million in federal funding over four years for the Australian Energy Regulator to support additional expert resources, clearer and more transparent reporting, and greater consumer engagement. The strengthened Regulator will remain in its current structure as part of the ACCC.
More choice for consumers:
 * 	A commitment by jurisdictions to report back to COAG next year on pathways towards more flexible electricity prices, where effective competition exists, to allow retailers to offer consumers a better deal; and
 * 	A commitment to make it easier for retailers to offer innovative products to give consumers the choice to have such things as smart metering, in-home displays, and time-of-use-pricing so they may better manage their energy use and reduce costs.
Actions to reduce electricity peaks:
 * 	Agreement to provide for greater demand-side participation to make it easier for consumers to reduce demand, particularly at peak periods, to minimise the need for new investment in energy infrastructure  -  drawing on the AEMC's Power of Choice review.
Business welcomed the direction of the reform package at the BAF yesterday and called for urgent and concrete action by all governments to help moderate the impact of high electricity prices on consumers and business.
Only through cooperation can effective energy market reform be achieved.
Minister Ferguson, as chair of SCER, will continue to work with Energy Ministers to ensure the Government can deliver real outcomes to consumers.
COAG will require Energy Ministers to report regularly on progress in 2013.
Further information on the reform package is available at www.coag.gov.au.


Canberra
HOST: I'm pleased to say the Prime Minister joins us now from the lawns of the Lodge. It's a very chilly morning there I believe this morning Prime Minister?
PM: It certainly is Lisa. It's not what you would expect from a December morning. It's actually quite cold.
HOST: Well thank you for doing this, let's get started. You have declared your determination to build a truly National Disability Insurance Scheme. You have New South Wales now on board. Which premiers do you think are going to provide most obstacles today?
PM: This is a scheme that is vital for those Australians who have a disability and at the moment fall through the cracks. But it's also vital for you and me and everyone because we never know when a disability is going to strike us, or a member of our family.
I was very pleased to be able to announce that Premier O'Farrell and I have come to an agreement about the scheme in New South Wales; that's a third of the country.
I'll be saying to other premiers and chief ministers today, if New South Wales can do it then you can all do it.
I think it's going to take some more time, and some more work. But having struck a deal with our biggest state  -  in terms of population  -  I'm confident we'll be able to work around the rest of the country to get this done for Australians with disability today, and to give reassurance to all Australians about their lives tomorrow.
HOST: Do you think Queensland and WA will be the toughest to get on board?
PM: Well Queensland has certainly got the biggest amount of distance to cover. Unfortunately per head of population, Queensland spends less on people with disabilities than any other state.
So that makes it challenging for Queensland, but it also makes it vital for Queensland people because we don't want Queenslanders to have a second-rate system. So Premier Newman will be continuing discussions with me about a National Disability Insurance Scheme. And we've got to do better for the people of Queensland than what they are getting now.
For Western Australia, they have been investing in their disability services. I will want to keep working with Premier Barnett about a truly national scheme. I don't want this to be a scheme that's different in different parts of the country. Or causes you a big challenge if you have a disability and then you move interstate.
So we're going to keep working with everybody to get this done.
HOST: The scheme itself is still six years away and at the moment this is only going to be a signed agreement. Why not legislate it as the Productivity Commission says is essential to ensure that future governments are committed to it and that those families that are affected by this can actually rest easy?
PM: We're definitely doing that Lisa. In fact I introduced the Bill to legislate the scheme into the Parliament in the last sitting week. I did it personally, which is quite an unusual thing for a Prime Minister to do, to personally introduce a piece of legislation. But I did it because of the importance of this scheme for the nation and its future.
I do want people with disability  -  and everybody who's rightly worried about what might happen to them or a family member in the future  -  to have the security of knowing that this scheme is the law of our country.
HOST: Okay, let's move on. Last weekend you announced your plan which could save households $250 a year on those soaring power costs. Estimates out of WA say it will actually cost about $1000 per household to buy, install and monitor each of the smart meters. If households are only going to save $250 is it actually worth it?
PM: No one is going to make a household buy a smart meter, that's not what this is about. What it's about is smart meters particularly for the biggest users of electricity. The biggest users of electricity are our big businesses; that's understandable. They need a lot of power.
But if we can give them more information about how they're using their power  -  and reward them for getting out of using power at really peak times  -  then that can take a lot of pressure off the system, including a lot of pressure on infrastructure investment.
At the moment, we've invested $11 billion as a country to satisfy peak demand four days of the year. Yet you pay for that $11 billion on your power bill every day. We can do better than that and in August this year I said to the states and territories I am going to come to this meeting today with a plan to make a difference for families and I want people to sign up to that plan.
And that plan will make a difference of $250 for families.
HOST: Alright moving on. Last week the Opposition Leader had this to say on our show regarding the AWU slush fund scandal.
ABBOTT GRAB: She gave false information to the West Australian authorities. Now for a legal partner, for a senior lawyer to make false claims to an important statutory body like this is a very, very serious matter. It's in breach of the law I would think.
HOST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott there accusing you of breaching the law. Are you going to sue?
PM: Well doesn't this say it all, Lisa. Here are you and I talking about things that really matter for Australians: what's going to happen if a child's born in their family with a disability, what their power prices are going to look like for the future.
And there's the Leader of the Opposition tossing around stupid claims about matters 17 years ago, claims that he had the opportunity to back up in the Parliament that day and just couldn't do.
HOST: On this issue, you have insisted for 20 years that you did nothing wrong, so why not support a public inquiry which would get to the bottom of this considering it deals with union corruption, which is an issue that is at the heart of Labor's credibility?
PM: This is a distraction from an Opposition that can't really engage in a discussion about the things that matter for Australian families. They don't have anything to say on the substance, so they're trying to distract people with this.
This matter has been canvassed over 20 years publically by inquiries, that's all in the past. The only thing that's bringing it to public attention now is the desperation of the Opposition to find something to talk about because when they haven't got any plans for the future, they've got to fill the space with something.
HOST: But Tony Abbott said he's not going to back off on this next year?
PM: Well won't that tell you everything about the Opposition and its views of itself and the nation.
Tony Abbott's not saying on your show Lisa that he'll be talking to the Australian people about jobs, because they haven't got a plan for the economy. He won't be talking about health, because they haven't got a plan for hospitals.
He won't be talking about education because they haven't got a plan for schools. He'll be talking about sleaze and smear from the best part of two decades ago.
HOST: Alright, now finally Prime Minister you issued this message on Triple J radio.
PM GRAB: My dear remaining fellow Australians. The end of the world is coming. It wasn't Y2K. It wasn't even the carbon price. It turns out that the Mayan calendar was true. Whether the final blow comes from flesh-eating zombies, demonic hellbeasts or from the total triumph of K-Pop, if you know one thing about me it is this: I will always fight for you to the very end. And at least this means I won't have to do Q&amp;A again. Good luck to you all.
HOST: So Prime Minister, I guess this is it then, we should just say our goodbyes?
PM: Lisa I think you and I will survive to talk again next year! I'm very confident of that!
HOST: Who talked you into that?
PM: It's Triple J having some fun, so I went along with it. But don't worry too much Lisa. We're definitely going to be back in 2013.
HOST: Alright, okay Prime Minister. Thank you very much for your time this morning. You need to get inside and put a coat on.
PM: Thank you.


Canberra
HOST: They say that if you can remember being at COAG, then you weren't really there.
Someone who definitely was though was the Prime Minister Julia Gillard. She joins us now.  Julia, are smart meters really going to save us all money?
PM: We are looking to make a difference to power bills and I'm glad the first ministers - that's what we like to call them - the Premiers and Chief Ministers agreed to my plan today. It is about using new technology to help people manage their demand.
HOST: Can you understand people's concerns though? There's been a report that one caught fire, reports of illness as a result, and some people are concerned that the devices will really just allow the power companies to charge us more, not less.
PM: Well the devices won't be compulsory; we're not going to put that on anyone. People will have choices. But there are smart meters and there are other forms of technology that are emerging to help people with their power demand.
To take an example, we talked about in COAG today; you can get a device that changes a little bit the way your air conditioner works.
It doesn't really make any difference to the temperature of your home, it's a half a degree difference, but it saves you a lot of power.
HOST: To something lighter and yesterday you filmed a sketch with Tom and Alex from Triple J acknowledging that the Mayans were right and the world was going to end. Let's take another look at that.
PM VIDEO: Whether the final blow comes from flesh-eating zombies, demonic hellbeasts or the triumph of K-Pop...I will always fight for you till the very end.
HOST: Hilarious stuff, we all loved it around the office. But isn't there a problem if, say, sometime in the future you actually have to inform the Australian people of an upcoming apocalypse they will not believe you, in essence, you are the PM who cried apocalypse?
PM: We've certainly had the Opposition Leader who's cried apocalypse, that happened consistently for the last two years with Whyalla wiped off the map and all the rest of it.
But you'll be able to tell when I'm calling the end of the world because I will start that community service announcement by saying “I'm really serious this time.”
HOST: Just one other thing I wanted to ask you about. Obviously a number of issues you faced this year, one was marriage equality and I wanted to share a photo. This is my favourite photo from the news this week.
This is from Washington State where they've legalised gay marriage, these are two of the first men to have availed themselves of equal marriage.
And I just want to say, is there any good reason why here in Australia guys like this, members of ZZ Top cover bands, shouldn't have the same rights as everyone else?
PM: They look like two very fine fellows but my view on this is well-known, and we've have had a parliamentary vote on it too. But I'm sure there's going to be a lot of continuing community debate, and we'll all look at photos like that and think about the issues.
HOST: Well, if we don't speak to you before, have a good Christmas, and we appreciate your time tonight.
PM: I'm looking forward to Christmas and spending some time with family but thank you very much, Carrie.


Canberra
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: The first thing I'm going to do is sign and then hand over to my colleagues an agreement about the National Disability Insurance Scheme. This agreement will be signed by all states and territories and it's committing all states and territories to learn from the launch sites.
So we have reached agreement for launch sites around the country in Victoria and New South Wales, in the ACT, South Australia and Tasmania.
Those agreements are between the Federal Government and individual jurisdictions. This agreement means even those places not participating in launch arrangements will learn from the launch arrangements, so this will be shared work.
As people are aware, yesterday the Premier of New South Wales and I executed an agreement which commits us to the long-term arrangements for the scheme, and I will be working with state and territory colleagues to secure with them such an agreement for the full rollout of the scheme.
But I'll just sign this multilateral agreement and pass it through as we do the rest.
So can I thank my state and territory colleagues for the further discussions we've had today on the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
I'm pleased that we've been able to make progress on the launch arrangements, I'm pleased we're all going to learn from the launch arrangements and I'm very pleased that New South Wales and the Federal Government have come to an agreement about the long-term funding of the National Disability Insurance Scheme in that state.
This is important to people with disabilities today; it is important to all Australians for tomorrow because any of us or any member of our family could at some time during their lives be struck with a disability and need the care and support of their nation and their community.
Today we have also worked on electricity prices. This is a big issue for Australian families and for Australian businesses.
People have seen rapid escalation in the power prices, and that has put a lot of pressure on people's cost of living. At the last COAG meeting there was a discussion about the pressure that this was putting on families.
In August this year I said I would bring to this meeting of the Council of Australian Governments a plan on power pricing.
I'm pleased today we have reached agreement on such a plan.
And the agreement that we have reached will make a difference of $250 for Australian families on power pricing. We know that figure from Productivity Commission work.
In summary what's been achieved today is that we will be addressing the gold plating of the system and overinvestment in the poles and wires.
We will be hearing the voice of consumers at the centre of how we design the market for electricity.
We will be working with consumers to give them more options and choices about how they consume their power.
We will be introducing rewards into the system so that big users, big businesses can moderate power loads that they put on the system during peak times, and we will be ensuring that there is an empowered regulator who can deal with the rules of the road, the rules of this market.
We have lifted ambition from the work that was done by energy ministers. They did a lot of good work, as did the Business Advisory Forum taskforce.
We have lifted ambition in the room today on these power price reforms, which will make a difference to Australian families, and will make a difference of $250 a year for the future.
Third, we have discussed today and between First Ministers over the course of COAG the Royal Commission into child sexual abuse in institutional contexts.
This is a very important piece of work for the nation. We are working together discussing the terms of reference for the Royal Commission and we will continue that work and issue the terms of reference before the year is out.
We do want to start what will be an important Royal Commission for healing for members of our community and an important Royal Commission to learn lessons for the future.
Amongst the various things we have discussed as leaders, we have discussed the lessons learned by state-based inquiries being brought to the table in the course of the Royal Commission.
So very quickly we will see come to Canberra people who have worked for inquiries in states and territories bringing their learning and their insights to Canberra as we are structuring the work of the Royal Commission here.
We have agreed that we will work cooperatively on this. The Federal Government has made it clear that we will bear the costs of the Royal Commission, but we will be working cooperatively with jurisdictions with some in-kind support looked to as the Royal Commission gets about its work.
In addition, there is a predisposition by First Ministers here to issue letters patent. What that means is that the powers of the Federal Government can be bolstered by the powers of state governments  -  the legal powers  -  for the Royal Commission's work.
So that would give the Royal Commission that the Federal Government is creating the maximum legal power and backdrop to get about its work.
I want to thank First Ministers for their cooperation on what is a truly important piece of work for the nation.
We have discussed a number of other issues very briefly. We worked through the outcomes of the Business Advisory Forum yesterday. We had a discussion about school improvement. This will be the work of COAG in 2013, and education ministers are talking about the National School Improvement Plan today.
We have determined to release a ten-year roadmap for mental health, an important area of healthcare for the community, and we've talked today too about cooperating on arrangements for the Royal Succession.
This is achieving the aspiration here in our nation that for the future of the Royal Family, that men would not be given preference over women in terms of who becomes the monarch, and we would remove the embargo that there is at the moment of a Royal Family member being or marrying a Catholic.
So we have got on with some very important work. I will turn now to the Premier of South Australia in his capacity as chair of the Council of the Australian Federation, the group where states and territories meet, and then we'll take your questions.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Thank you Prime Minister.
I want to focus on three areas of the work that COAG undertook today; the National Disability Insurance Scheme, the energy market reforms and the Royal Commission into sexual abuse.
Each of these matters are fundamentally directed at protecting vulnerable Australian citizens, and so the work of COAG, the cooperation that existed between the Australian Government and the state and territory governments could not have been of more importance. And in each of these areas we've achieved substantial gains.
In relation to the National Disability Insurance Scheme we are now free to embark upon the launch sites which will inform the ultimate shape of this scheme.
To give you some flavour of the launch sites, in South Australia we have signed up to a launch which is based on a children's model. That is from birth to age 14, we're going to be trialling the effects of that so that it can inform the broader national scheme.
We know that about 30 per cent of the national disability insurance population are children, and of course intervening early is fundamentally important to determining the life trajectory, the health and wellbeing of young people as they seek to live in a world with disability.
This will be phased in over three years between 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2016, and of course the South Australian Government has made a contribution, $20 million, and the Commonwealth Government has also made a substantial contribution to bring this about and this will assist us to inform the ultimate scheme that will begin in 2018.
Can I also make some remarks about the energy market reform.
The reforms that we are introducing today are directed at giving primacy to affordability for consumers at agreed levels of reliability to take into account all of the considerations that exist across the national electricity market; those regional considerations that throw up different results in different parts of our Commonwealth.
The reason why we've had to sharpen up the rules for the national electricity regulator is that as the national electricity regulator attempts to protect consumers, they keep getting upended in the courts.
So we need to change the rules so that they can protect consumers so that we have an electricity market that works not just for the big end of town but for the consumers that use the electricity market.
Another important element of this will be the demand side. We know that by sending the right signals to consumers, they can make choices about how they use electricity.
There's some important technologies which are emerging which will assist us to drive down electricity prices.
Some of them are smart meters, some of them are devices that can be attached to air conditioners which make little or no difference to the use of air conditioners during peak times but make a dramatic difference to the amount of electricity that's being used during peak time, which in turn has a dramatic effect on electricity prices.
These are the intelligent technologies which are now being explored which can make a massive difference to electricity pricing.
The third thing we want to talk about is the Royal Commission into sexual abuse.
South Australia has had a very substantial experience in this regard. We had an inquiry into child sexual abuse in relation to children in state care, and we paid careful attention to the way we constructed that inquiry and we learned a number of very substantial lessons.
One of the lessons that we learned is that we cannot afford to have another inquiry that just produces an enormous report that sits on a shelf somewhere gathering dust.
What is crucial to an inquiry of this sort is that the process allows those people who have survived child sexual abuse to have an opportunity to respectfully be listened to about their stories.
That is something that has often been denied them; denied to them because they felt guilty about coming forward in the first place; denied to them because often the first person they raised it with either didn't believe them or concealed it from the appropriate authorities; denied to them because people were embarrassed because they couldn't bring themselves to believe that such a horrible thing could happen to a child.
So many of them have live with guilt for years and have suffered the consequences of that, so the absolutely crucial message out of what we learned is the process of the inquiry is as important as any of the recommendations it may make for the future.
So we paid a lot of attention to that and we're going to work, all the jurisdictions will work cooperatively with the Commonwealth to ensure that we have a first-class inquiry that assists those people who have suffered these horrible incidents to heal.
PM: Thank you very much. We'll take questions now and I'll try and direct a bit of traffic, so on your best behaviour.
JOURNALIST: Two questions about energy market reform. The first is the new reliability standards, is it clear that they would be lower standards than before, or if they're not lower then how will that save money by cutting back on investment?
The second question is about the $250. As I understand it, the Productivity Commission said that might be the maximum future price rise that would be avoided if we had a mandatory rollout of smart meters and time of use pricing, but as I understand it that's not what you're doing?
PM: There's a range of elements here. To take your first question, we will have national standards set by the relevant body but we have specifically said we want those standards set with a focus on consumers.
And what we're dealing with here is a situation where we've seen $11 billion of infrastructure rolled out to deal with peak loads on four days of the year. But every day people are paying the price of that infrastructure in their electricity bill.
We believe we can do better than that. We believe that some demand management techniques will make a difference to that.
Now often in the public space that plays out about the choices of individuals, and yes, individuals with more information about their power usage may choose to make some different choices about how they use power.
But actually it is very much about the big users, big businesses, and how much demand they are putting on the system at peak times.
So you'll see the wording in the communique but the focus of the standards that we are looking for are ones that really take a view about the perspective of Australian families and the costs that they're paying in their power bill. The Productivity Commission figure is generated form a range of reforms.
Yes, the details of some of the things that are being discussed here are different. For example, Premier Weatherill has gone to the ability to roll out other devices than smart meters which are newer technology which have got the ability to help individuals make choices about how they use their power.
But when you look at this combination we believe it will be effective to make the same kind of difference for future pricing and what that means for Australian families is bills different to what they would have got if we hadn't set out on this path.
So I am pleased having raised this issue very forcefully in August, that here we are in December agreeing to a plan for change which will make a difference for Australian families.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I just clarify, are bills going to go down as a result of these measures and how soon will these measures take effect in terms of seeing that in a household bill?
PM: I've been clear about this as I've described my plan to people. This will make a difference for future power price determinations. It will make a difference for what people pay in 2014. It will make a difference for the long term.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the communique on energy, in that section, says it will take a sustained commitment over time. Can I ask is there a deadline in any of the agreement in terms of when a national agreement would be reached?
And I'd also like some comment from the state Premiers as to whether there's any acceptance of the need to install smart meters for instance, given the experience in Victoria with cost blowouts?
PM: Well I'm happy for the Premiers to get into that discussion but I would remind one of the things that Premier Weatherill talked about was the broader range of devices that are available. We've made some direct agreements today which will be actioned from here on power prices.
Then you will see in the communique there is some work that needs to come back to COAG during the course of next year. But we did, from what energy ministers discussed at their meeting, lift ambition in the room to get more done to make a difference for power prices.
I'm happy for any Premier or Chief Minister who wants to reflect on the rollout of devices that give consumers information. Maybe Jay might have to do that.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Yes, well just to go into a little more detail about the proposition that we were advancing. We believe that smart meters should be an option but not compulsory.
The particular technology that we're talking about goes to the question of the use of air conditioners which is the fundamental cause  -  one of the fundamental causes  -  of peak demand at least for householders.
The technology in question's being trialled in South Australia at the moment involving 5000 households. It concerns essentially load shedding for compressors so the air conditioner continues to circulate the air.
It makes almost no difference to the ambient temperature  -  about half a degree  -  because it shuts off the compressor for one minute in every hour.
Across the whole system though, that leads to an enormous saving of electricity during peak demand and gets you a very effective and efficient way of actually reducing power use during peak demand.
We're obviously concerned about some demand measures which might place pressure on vulnerable consumers, especially if they happen to be forced to make decisions, their own choices about how to do things, when to do things, based on some metering arrangements.
I think we need to look carefully at what the effect would be on a vulnerable consumer by moving to some of these differential tariffs and metering. We think this is a technology that is likely to be very beneficial, so the overall proposition is that we should look at demand side measures. We shouldn't be exclusive as to which technology might give us the outcome.
JOURNALIST: Was there any discussion today around the table at all about changing the GST in any way, shape or form, in particular about the threshold for overseas online, and can I also just clarify, in the communique I couldn't see any mention of the inquiry into construction costs. Where's that at?
PM: I can address both of those and I suspect Premier Baillieu will want to say something as well.
On the first of them, there was some discussion in the room about the GST, as you're aware, the Federal Government will not be changing the rate or the base of the GST. There has been a taskforce into low value purchases and GST arrangements. Minister Bradbury's dealt with that publicly and has indicated that the costs of changing current arrangements outweigh any revenue that would be gained.
JOURNALIST: Was there consensus around the table?
PM: Just the Federal Government position on what was discussed in the room, that taskforce has a final report in 2013.
On construction costs, the Federal Government's taking the view we are prepared to have such an inquiry where there's some  -  I don't want to use the names of individuals  -  but there's some disputation about who makes up the panel and that would need to be resolved for the inquiry to proceed.
Ted, did you want to say anything?
PREMIER BAILLIEU: When it comes to the online GST I think there were a range of view around the table. I won't speak for others. I think the members of COAG would look forward to that taskforce returning its advice.
When it comes to construction costs we are committed to an inquiry on construction costs and I believe that's the view of the majority of states and jurisdictions.
We are committed to it proceeding on the basis that COAG determined last time round to the extent that there's a stumbling block it involves the panel members, COAG determined last time around that those panel members should be agreed by COAG.
Jurisdictions have nominated people for those positions. We have nominated people for those positions. Those we have nominated have not received any objections that I'm aware of. Others have nominated others.
They are not agreed, and we have had that discussion again today and it would seem the Commonwealth and at least one jurisdiction do not wish to proceed unless their nominee is agreed.
PM: Right, well that's an insight into COAG processes for you. Phil Coorey and then Michelle Grattan.
JOURNALIST: This may be a little bit cheeky, we might be able to do it by a show of hands, but is there any Premier or Chief Minister who does not support at least reviewing the rate or the base of the GST?
PREMIER NEWMAN: Our position is we don't favour an increase in the rate, put it that way.
JOURNALIST: What about the base?
PREMIER NEWMAN: The issue of the online purchases, I think that is something that's worthy of consideration because it is presenting significant revenue leakage in the future and it's only going to get worse and I think ideally that would be confronted, although the Prime Minister I think has spoken to us about some of the real challenges of dealing with that in terms of how that might work, so it is difficult to do that.
JOURNALIST: Could I ask Mr Baillieu when you think Victoria might sign up to the disability agreement  -  bilateral agreement  -  what is the problem of doing that immediately and-
PREMIER BAILLIEU: We just signed, Michelle, to the launch. We're very pleased about that.
JOURNALIST: What about the funding agreement?
PREMIER BAILLIEU: We're very pleased to have signed up to the launch. We have been champions of the NDIS. I do note that what we have signed with all our signatures on it doesn't actually refer to anything other than an agreement.
It's an interesting piece of paper which we've just signed. But we will continue to work with the Commonwealth with a view to establishing a sustainable model for the NDIS and we want to proceed with the NDIS, we believe it is in the interests of all Australians.
But it needs to be on a sustainable basis. We'll continue that.
JOURNALIST: But when do you think you might be able to deal with funding and why are you behind New South Wales?
PREMIER BAILLIEU: Well I don't think we're behind anybody. We've actually been out in front on these issues, Michelle.
If you go back to before the last election we were out in front on these issues. We advocated for a trial in the Barwon region and last COAG there was a bit of noise after that COAG around the launch conditions in Victoria.
I can assure you that we signed up on the terms that Victoria had proposed for that launch. We're pleased now to have signed up to it today, and we'll continue to work with the Commonwealth and other jurisdictions on a sustainable outcome for the long term.
JOURNALIST: Has it got a funding-
PREMIER BAILLIEU: Well I can't give you a date Michelle, I'm sure we'd all love to give you a date.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the pressing issue of the day, the Royal Succession. Is there unanimity among all First Ministers to change the law so that men don't get an advantage in the system from women and if there are any hitches from any First Ministers can we get any clues as to what they might be?
PREMIER NEWMAN: I don't think there's any issue about the changes that have been contemplated.
JOURNALIST: Why wasn't it settled today, why are you seeking further discussions about this? The communique says you have more work to do on it.
PREMIER NEWMAN: Because there are some different ways we can do it.
JOURNALIST: Why? What are they?
PREMIER NEWMAN: Well Queensland has a view that others don't agree with.
JOURNALIST: What is that view?
PREMIER NEWMAN: Well our view is that we will pass legislation in accordance with our position as a separate sovereign state. We're a federation of states, we're going to do it the right way, the proper way and that's our view.
PM: Perhaps if I can assist here. The advice that the Federal Government has very loud and very clear is that there is one crown in Australia.
Obviously that one crown plays a variety of purposes  -  Governor-General, Governors  -  and that the way in which we should deal with this, the most legally affective way to deal with it is that states would pass legislation referring to the Commonwealth the ability to make these changes to succession.
For that to be a legally effective process all states have to do it. If one state doesn't do it then it doesn't work. We are continuing some discussions in that regard.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well there's some legal advice about what's affective for the one crown in Australia and that's the legal advice that the Commonwealth has.
JOURNALIST: Are you the only Premier with that position, Campbell Newman?
PREMIER NEWMAN: It seems so. It's the advice I've received from my Attorney-General and it's the position of my Cabinet so, I'm being true to that and I'm being true to their views on the way forward on this.
And it can be done the way we're saying and it achieves the outcome which is as the Prime Minister described earlier.
So we're not disagreeing with what we'd achieve here. We're not going to discriminate against anybody, there you go.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PREMIER NEWMAN: We're always happy to look at things again.
JOURNALIST: And you're willing to stymy it?
PREMIER NEWMAN: No, no, no, hang on. No, no, no, you're missing the point with the greatest respect.
It doesn't stymy it, it's just that we believe the end objective is achieved by the states passing their own legislation and the Commonwealth and that's the advice I've had.
Anybody who goes away and says today we're against this happening, not true.
We want it to happen; we believe that it should be done in this particular way because that respects the issue of the federation of states.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PREMIER NEWMAN: No, it's the principle of the thing.
JOURNALIST: So you want each of the states to pass their own legislation rather than the Federal Government?
PREMIER NEWMAN: That's right. The Commonwealth had a position that there was another half-way house as well which we might have a look at.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I ask two questions; one to you and one to the Premiers in the non-resource states?
Could I just clear up, if growth gets below trend are you still committed to a budget surplus? And to the Premiers in the non-resource states are you concerned that the Federal Government's push for a surplus is having an impact on your economies?
PM: As I would have said to you in any other press conference when we're not joined by all my friends from the states and territories, we dealt with these matters in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook and we stand by the figures in that statement. Now in terms of non-resource states-
JOURNALIST: Mr O'Farrell, Mr Baillieu?
PM: They do a fair bit of mining in New South Wales as it happens.
PREMIER O'FARRELL: We do. It contributes more than a billion dollars in royalties each year, thank you very much, the mining industry.
Sid, can I make the point that what worries me and my colleagues more than anything else is the state of revenues, particularly GST revenues, $5.2 billion down, state revenues down, increasing demand for services at a state level.
There is no doubt that with in the national economy states are the losers because we have the demand, we provide the services and of course in a national economy with increasing reliance upon GST as it was occurring, when GST falls we suffer.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, some of your colleagues are worried about the damage being done to Labor because of the New South Wales ICAC investigation. What's your message to those voters who are turned off Labor because of these allegations?
PM: I'm not sure that's a question about COAG.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be disappointed walking away today not having any other states signed up for the full rollout of the NDIS?
PM: No, I'm delighted that we entered an agreement with New South Wales.
I did not expect Premiers and Chief Ministers today when we only announced that agreement yesterday to be in a position in 24 hours to fully analyse it and understand what that benchmark meant for their state.
But I will be saying to my colleagues assembled here, the fact that we have got this done with New South Wales means that we can now work through with other states and territories and reach long term agreements about the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how serious can the closing the gap program be when placing like the Northern Territory and WA have an unacceptably high level of incarceration rates?
And also, the second question would be, Paul McClintock earlier suggested that he was quite concerned about the dropout rates of Aboriginal students in secondary schools.
What kind of guarantees can the First Ministers provide that they do their best in this but those two question please?
PM: Well neither of these matters has been under direct discussion today. That doesn't mean that they're not important matters but we're obviously principally here to report on what's happened in this COAG meeting.
On circumstances for indigenous students, we are working together and have been for some period of time now on a national action plan for indigenous education  -  it's part of a broader suite of school reforms where we are trying to close the gap in literacy, numeracy and year 12 attainment because we don't want kids to drift away from school.
We don't want indigenous kids to drift away from school and we know if people do drift away from school that that can be the first step on what becomes a lifetime of disadvantage.
We are working together and operating some very effective programs, things that integrate sport into school including Clontarf and other programs that are making a difference to retention rates.
So we're on a vision here about closing that gap and it's something that all jurisdictions have been working on.
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Can I just add, Prime Minister, which is to characterise incarceration rates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders as high only in the Northern Territory and Western Australia understates it.
They're high in every state of the nation. It is a national disgrace and most of us are working hard to try and rectify it.
JOURNALIST: How much discussion was there on the advice regarding school funding and how was that advice received?
PM: Today, we had a brief discussion about the school funding reforms because I indicated to my colleagues that I want to make that central work to the first COAG meeting next year.
We are in the position where education ministers are also meeting today and so we are working on the National School Improvement Plan. Education ministers were discussing that today themselves.
We want to get the benefit of that work and we want it to be a centrepiece of COAG discussions next year.
I know that there has been some very silly attempts today to try and suggest that you weigh the worth of things by number of minutes talked about in the COAG room.
Only someone who is a fool with no plan would take that kind of approach.
JOURNALIST: On environmental regulation, what convinced you that the bilateral agreements to reduce duplication and streamline those processes were not the way to go, and were there any Premiers who felt they had done a lot of work and were close to getting an acceptable standards for approvals of major environmental, resources and other project and were then disappointed that the Commonwealth walked away from that approach?
PM: Well let me say on behalf of my colleagues and they may also want to add, jurisdictions have done a lot of work, there's no doubt about that. Jurisdictions have done a lot of work and I thank them for it.
But it was also clear as that work got done that we were in a situation where jurisdictions were taking a very different view.
We had some states that were looking at 25 per cent of decisions being in these arrangements.
Some states that were looking at 90 per cent of decisions being in these arrangements and I became increasingly concerned that we were on our way to creating the regulatory equivalent of a Dalmatian dog and that, for businesses, that would be the worst of all possible worlds.
There would be legal risks and more litigation. You would have projects that were identical around the country the subject of different treatment and that wasn't an outcome that I thought was good in terms of business processes.
Also the Federal Government always has its eye on high environmental standards and the legislative certainty that comes with high environmental standards.
So we are going to continue to work on this area. Indeed we've agreed some things today which I think are important.
The Federal Government has indicated that we will legislate the changes arising out of the Hawke review.
These were very warmly welcomed by the business community when they were first announced and they will make a difference.
We will work together. We've already worked together to try and deal with the spectrum of sequential assessments and to get parallel assessments.
We'll now take a further step about making sure our bodies and agencies doing assessments are looking for the same data set and asking the same questions instead of businesses affectively having to do two sets of documentation.
And we will keep working with our state and territory colleagues on further changes to make sure we achieve twin goals here of streamlining for business and high environmental standards.
PREMIER O'FARRELL: And the alternative view from a disappointed Premier is that we could have engaged in the same sort of bilateral approach as we had in relation to NDIS.
In other words, for Commonwealth and State officials to work together to satisfy themselves that we were going to protect the highest environmental standards but do so in a way that was to reduce the burden upon business which of course creates jobs that our communities so desperately want.
That could have been done on a state or territory basis and the Federal Government could have obtained its powers in those other states that it didn't believe had come up to the mark.
That's the disagreement but we're happy to continue to work because ultimately if we want to go out of the economic hole we're in the resource projects are the major projects that are important.
And the only way to compete there is to reduce the cost of regulation.
JOURNALIST: Are the other states ready to sign up?
PREMIER NEWMAN: If what the Prime Minister outlined occurs, if what's in the communiqué occurs that's great, that's all we want.
But I do say that we are disappointed in Queensland with the progress over the past eight months and that's what I said today.
So there are some things that are on the table that the Commonwealth are going to do and then we do move forward and I look forward to seeing that.
JOURNALIST: A couple of questions for Premier Barnett.
On energy reform, do you because of WA being outside the NEM do you believe that it's achievable, the $250 reduction in tariffs for WA consumers and did you bring up the problems that the GST carve-up and the report from Greiner and Brumby is continuing to cause WA?
PREMIER BARNETT: Can I just make the observation that the current problems in the energy sector are the result of the last round of industry reform. We shouldn't forget that.
I don't think you'll see a $250 reduction and I guess as the Prime Minister was saying, if some of these changes are made then hopefully future price increases will be less than they would otherwise have been.
On GST, I am disappointed with the report. It was set up to deal with an issue that I had raised and that was a mismatch, if you like, a dysfunctional Grants Commission process that was no longer serving the country and it failed to address that.
I understand the position of the smaller states but if you get a scenario where Western Australia gets arguably in two years' time less than 30 cents in the dollar when every other state is getting well over 90 cents, you've got a dysfunctional Federal-State relationship and basically Western Australia doesn't have a relationship with the Commonwealth.
I don't think that's in the best interests of this state given that most of the investment and probably most of the employment growth happens to be in Western Australia.
And while I've got the floor if I can just comment quickly on the green tape issue; I think we went backwards today.
The work that was going on at an officials level was going in the right path and I would hope that the Commonwealth would be more trusting of the states to deal with environmental assessments including biodiversity issues because what this is doing is diverting Australia's scientific and financial effort on biodiversity into minutiae, whereas the real threat to biodiversity is feral plants, feral animals and the like. That's not getting the attention.
We're putting a huge resource into in think minor issues and Australia does have good and high environmental standards.
The Commonwealth would always have the right to call a project in if it thought it was not going properly. But look around Australia now, major projects have the world's highest environmental standards.
JOURNALIST: Mr O'Farrell, do you think New South Wales consumers are going to avoid $250 in future power bill rises?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well I certainly hope so. We are in the process of saving $400 million across our energy companies.
That's been returned in our income rebates with capped dividends. We're engaging in a range of savings. We'd like Fair Work Australia to apply the same 2.5 per cent wages cap to the workers in the sector employed by public corporations.
These would apply to other public sector agencies in New South Wales.
Look, I think every State and Federal Government is determined to try and do what we can to keep power prices low.
That includes in New South Wales getting rid of green schemes because of the costs that they add to consumers who often don't get the benefits directly of those green schemes.
JOURNALIST: Premier, are you confident that the new reliability standards won't lead to any brownouts and that they will be able to sustain peak demand?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Ultimately if you look at the issue of gold plating it does go to reliability and it goes it reliability on a number of days a year.
So the key is going to be to ensure that you don't dumb-down or dumb-up in a sense in a way that going to hurt individual communities. I think that's the challenge that we have until the end of next year when decisions are made.
JOURNALIST: Mr Baillieu, just getting back to my earlier question on the surplus and the impact on Victoria, I think you wanted to say something? You opened your mouth.
PREMIER BAILLIEU: I was going to make a couple of points.
If you look around the states and territories now we all are challenged financially. The aggregate position across the states and territories at the moment, the operating balances are between eight and nine billion dollars in deficit.
We face significant infrastructure shortfalls that we have to find ways to fund. We face demographic change and shifts which will significantly change the demand profile for services in the future.
Decisions and policy positions proposed by the Commonwealth are set to impose expenditures on the state of up to $50 billion over four years.
That's a very significant set of challenges and so we are very conscious of that.
I think the discussion amongst the states has been one where all states and territories are conscious of this position.
We've sought to address our expenditures. We're keen to see those expenditures addressed across the board.
When it comes to the Commonwealth surplus position the Prime Minister is keen to remind us that we all make our choices.
I'd simply make the observation today, December the seventh, cheques go from the Commonwealth into the pool for Victorian hospitals and for other hospitals through other states and the cheques that have gone from the Commonwealth today into the pool are less than the cheques that went in November.
And that represents in this financial year $107 million withdrawal of funds and over four years some $470 million plus.
That simply adds to the challenge that we all face.
PM: Well I don't like to argue with you Ted but just let me argue with you.
Of course, we don't accept the figures about $50 billion, that's clearly untrue.
This is a Federal Government that has a tax-GDP ratio that is less than when this Government took office and took over from the former Howard Government.
Tax is less as a percentage of GDP, spending is less as a percentage of GDP and there has never been more money flowing from the Federal Government to the states than there is now including in healthcare where Victoria, over a three year period can look for a more than 20 per cent increase, indeed will be better off by around $900 million.
That's a direct outcome of the healthcare agreement I struck with states and territories.
JOURNALIST: This morning you said you wanted the energy regulator to have more teeth and be separate from the ACCC. How did discussions go on that?
PREMIER BAILLIEU: I think the energy regulator is still a bit gummy.
We would like to see the energy regulator separated from the ACCC. I don't think everybody around this table shares that view but that's the view of the Productivity Commission, the view of other organisations who have looked at this.
So I think the communique and the decisions of COAG were to have a further review of that.
We would like to think that Victoria has been at the cutting edge of energy market reforms for some time going back to the years of the Kennett government.
In those days, those reforms were not supported by many on the other side of politics but they have since been supported through Victoria and we've been part of the energy market development  -  privatisation, deregulation, the rollout of demand side equipment and we think that's important but it's important to get the education side of that right.
And it's important to get the flexible pricing right in the sense that that's where the option ought to be whether consumers adopt flexible pricing, that giving them access to it is part of it and educating them about that has got to be part of it and they need to be supported in that regard.
And when it comes to protecting vulnerable consumers we've rolled out across the calendar a 17.5 per cent energy concession and that's pretty significant.
So we're disappointed that we haven't got there yet with the energy regulator. My view is that it is inevitable.
We need to have a regulator that is capable, resourced and forceful in sticking up for consumers and we have sought that over the last two years.
We've been effective to some degree in terms of pushing particular issues to the regulator but an independent regulator would be much better. Let's give him some teeth.
JOURNALIST: Was there anything that you all agreed on?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Yes, we're very happy that William and Kate are expecting a child.


Canberra
At the Council of Australian Governments (COAG) meeting in Canberra today, all governments took a major step towards giving people with disability the care and support they need over their lifetimes by signing an Intergovernmental Agreement for the first stage of the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS).
The Agreement provides the foundation for all governments to work together to develop and implement the first stage of these important reforms.
The Agreement also sets out shared roles and responsibilities for working collaboratively on the policy for a full scheme and establishing arrangements for the review and evaluation of the first stage.
The Agreement will be overseen by a new Standing Council on Disability Reform, which will have representation from Ministers and Treasurers from all jurisdictions. The Standing Council will be responsible for making decisions and formulating advice on matters arising from the launch and the transition to a full scheme.
More than 20,000 Australians are expected to benefit from the first stage of the NDIS, which will commence in launch locations around the country from the middle of next year.
The first stage of the NDIS will provide valuable information and experience to inform the transition to full scheme.
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory today signed bilateral agreements with the Commonwealth which confirm the operational and funding details for the roll-out of the NDIS in each launch site.
 * 	Around 10,000 people will benefit from the launch in the Hunter region of NSW,
 * 	Around 5,000 people will benefit from the launch in the Barwon region of Victoria,
 * 	Children aged 0-14 in South Australia (around 5,000 people with disability) will benefit from the first stage.
 * 	Young people aged 15-24 years (around 1,000 people with disability) will benefit from the launch in Tasmania.
 * 	The whole of the ACT, around 5,000 people with disability, will benefit from the launch in the ACT.
.
The Commonwealth will be investing $1 billion over four years in the first stage of the NDIS.
The Council of Australian Governments also noted the historic agreement between the Commonwealth and New South Wales governments to establish the full NDIS in New South Wales by 1 July 2018. 
From this time, all eligible people with a disability, their families and carers in NSW will benefit from a fairer, more sustainable and equitable approach care and support.
Today's system of disability support is a cruel lottery of services, which the Productivity Commission has described as unfair, underfunded, fragmented and inefficient.
An NDIS will ensure people with disability, wherever they live, receive care and support based on their needs, and have choice and control over this support over their lifetimes.
It will provide peace of mind to people with a disability, their families and carers, and to Australians who unexpectedly face misfortune in the future.
For more information contact 1800 800 110 or visit www.ndis.gov.au.


Canberra
The Hon John Brumby has been appointed to chair the COAG Reform Council for the next three years.
The COAG Reform Council assists the Council of Australian Governments with its reform agenda.
The Council reports directly to COAG on reforms of national significance, providing regular reports on the performance of the Commonwealth and the States and Territories in achieving the benchmarks set out in National Agreements and National Partnerships.
Mr Brumby takes over from Paul McClintock who has led the Council with distinction since its establishment in 2006.
Mr Brumby has a wealth of firsthand experience and knowledge of the Council's operations from his time as Victorian Premier and Treasurer and brings to the role a strong commitment to reform.
During his time as Premier, Mr Brumby was heavily involved in the negotiation of the Intergovernmental Agreement on Federal Financial Relations, the seamless national economy agreement and health and hospital reform. 
Mr Brumby also recently jointly conducted the GST Distribution Review and led the review into the feasibility of the establishing a Commonwealth Anti-Dumping Authority.
The Chair of the COAG Reform Council is appointed by the Australian Government with the Deputy Chair appointed by the States and Territories.
The COAG Reform Council comprises a Chairman, Deputy Chairman, four Councillors and an Executive Councillor.
Mr Brumby will take up his appointment at the beginning of January 2013.



HOST: Prime Minister, I know there's a bit on the COAG agenda today but if we can focus on the NDIS; for those who are wondering, what in a nutshell should this scheme deliver, for whom, and by when?
PM: Sure, I'm very happy to go through that. What we face at the moment Linda, is a situation where for people with serious disabilities, they rely on a patchwork of services.
Often they're capped and queued and people can't get the support they need.
We want to replace that around the country for people with serious disabilities so that there would be an insurance based model, a case manager who would work through the support someone needs and they would get those supports.
The best of our transport accident systems work like that now or the best of our workers compensation systems, but if your disability comes from an accident in private life, or you're born with it, or it's a result of a degenerative disease then you really can face some very trying times.
And for all of us, you never know in your life when it's going to be you who has to confront life with a disability.
So we have agreed with states and territories that there will be a number of launch sites and I'm hoping to finalise those agreements for launch sites today.
But in New South Wales we're going a big step further and I've actually agreed with Premier O'Farrell the way in which the full scheme would be funded in New South Wales.
HOST: Now that's a $6 billion arrangement isn't it, basically split half and half?
PM: That's absolutely right.
HOST: Now, in terms of the overall scheme, over 65s I understand are not included in the Bill that establishes the NDIS, why not?
PM: We, the Federal Government, are the supporters of people in the aged care arrangements, so we already finance supports for people who have disabilities in that age range.
So they're not in the same circumstances, caught between federal and state arrangements as a lot of other people with disabilities.
But we are open to looking at how the model can work for people above 65, so we have said that that's something we would consult on, but they are in a different position now from people generally.
HOST: Prime Minister, the difference for those who are born with a disability and those who acquire one; will they be treated differently in this scheme?
PM: No they wouldn't. What would happen is you would be assessed for your needs.
So whether that need comes because you were born with cerebral palsy or whether that need comes because in later life you get MS, it's not the source of the disability that matters or how you got your condition, it's what needs that condition gives you.
Of course, some disabilities at the moment are catered for through transport accident systems or workers' compensation systems and for those people you would still look to those systems for support.
But there's a huge gap if you fell over in your bathroom today and ended up with a profound disability then you would be thrown onto an underfunded fragmented system.
If you had the same injury arise at work then you would get supported through workers' compensation.
So it's a bit of a cruel lottery at the moment depending on how you got your disability.
HOST: Does that lottery remain the case for somebody who does fall over in their bath today and acquire a disability because the scheme doesn't come into full force until 2018?
PM: The scheme won't deal with people based on the date that they got their disability. It will be looking at people's needs.
So just to go through the ramp up in New South Wales, from the middle of next year we will be starting a launch site in the Hunter region, so working with people in the Hunter region to show how the scheme can work and to learn the lessons.
I mean, this is a big endeavour so we are going to learn from the launch sites.
Then from 2016 to 2018 it would be ramping up across New South Wales and by the first of July 2018, it would be in full operation across New South Wales for around 140,000 people with disabilities.
But then everyone in New South Wales would have the reassurance that if they were unlucky, got an illness, had an accident, a child was born into their family with a disability, then they would be able to get the support that the scheme provides.
HOST: Prime Minister, you decided against a new levy to fund this. It does, I think to many of us, seem the logical thing to do given the size of the endeavour you've described. Have you shied away from that just because it would be politically unpopular?
PM: We've decided to take an approach of asking the nation to make some pretty tough choices. I mean, we've got limited government budgets; we do federally, states do as well.
People want to get on with their lives so I'm proud that we're operating government where tax to GDP ratios are less than what we inherited from the former Howard Government.
So I'm glad that we've been able to do that and do things like stop people having to pay tax for the first $18,200 that they earn so they see the benefits of working.
I am proud we've been able to do that but the Government's budget isn't endless and we will be asking people to make tough choices to move money on the Government's budget to the higher priority areas.
And certainly helping Australians with disability should be one of those absolute high priority areas.
HOST: Now in terms of the deal you did with Barry O'Farrell yesterday, you've still got two other states holding out too, WA and Queensland. But really it's not a problem is it, because after all the Opposition Leader Tony Abbott is backing this, he will want those states to come on board won't he?
PM: I don't think Mr Abbott's view is really very pressing in terms of what Premiers decide, they will decide from a point of view of their states.Where we are with premiers and chief ministers is we've worked with states to get launch arrangements.
We will have launch arrangements in New South Wales as we've discussed, in South Australia, in Victoria, in Tasmania and in the ACT.
We've not been able to agree launch arrangements in WA or Queensland but they are still at the table.
It is only with New South Wales that we have the arrangement, the deal for the long term funding of the scheme.
And my message to other premiers and chief ministers is, if New South Wales is been able to do it then please come forward, we want to work with you.
HOST: And just finally, Prime Minister, on the economy more generally with clear signs of slowing economic growth, weaker than you were forecasting in the mid-year budget review, have you now given up on a surplus?
PM: I'm very happy to explain how I see our economic circumstances.
Where we are at the moment is mining continues to show strength and resilience and we've got very high levels of business investment.
Indeed, we've just gone over the $1 trillion mark for business investment under the Labor Government.
HOST: Sure, but the figures this week showed that growth was slowing, my question is about the surplus and your commitment.
PM: I'll come to that but I wanted people to understand the true currents and pressures in our economy.
So, mining's still strong but the prices we are getting for our mineral exports have come down a bit.
Other sections of the economy are feeling pressure particularly from the high Australian dollar. So they're the forces at work in our economy.
Even with those forces at work we've got a resilient economy  -  look at yesterday's unemployment number-
HOST: But the surplus, Prime Minister?
PM: Coming to the surplus. Linda, I'm going through this deliberately because I think that there's a lot of snapshot talk about the economy and people do actually want to understand in some detail what's happening.
Even with these pressures  -  commodity prices coming off, high Aussie dollar  -  our economy's fundamentals are still strong.
Our last economic update had us at trend growth and that's why the last economic update had us with a surplus.
We are still determined to deliver the surplus.
HOST: Prime Minister, good of you to join us today. Thank you very much.
PM: Thank you.


Sydney
An English teacher at Mary MacKillop College in south-west Sydney, has taken out the title of Australia's Favourite Teacher after a national competition launched by the Prime Minister in October.
Mark O'Connor was nominated by HSC student Rebecca Knox for his dedication and commitment to helping his students achieve their best.
Mr O'Connor has also inspired Rebecca to become a teacher when she finishes school.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for School Education Peter Garrett and Member for Fowler Chris Hayes today visited Mary MacKillop College in Wakeley to congratulate Mr O'Connor, and meet with students, staff and parents at the school.
The Prime Minister also took part in a Q&amp;A session with students to discuss the importance of teaching, and the Government's National Plan for School Improvement.
The favourite teacher campaign was aimed at starting a national conversation about the importance of teachers and the inspirational role they play in students' lives.
Over six weeks around 20,000 people engaged in the campaign using social media, either by commenting, liking or sharing, and more than 130,000 people were reached on Facebook.
There were 125 entries from current students, to people who left school 40 years ago and still remember a special teacher. The Prime Minister also hosted an online Q&amp;A on Facebook, and an i-Village live blogging session.
Rebecca lodged her entry on the Prime Minister's Facebook page, saying: “When I was struggling with my Extension 2 English major, he was always willing to meet and provide helpful feedback, encouragement and advice. He even took personal time out of a weekend to accompany our class to an English conference. Mr O'Connor is not only an amazing educator but also became a friend, and he is one of the reasons I was inspired to go into teaching.”
The Gillard Government is committed to supporting our teachers and attracting the best and brightest graduates into the teaching profession.
We have invested $550 million in the Teacher Quality National Partnership to provide extra training and professional development opportunities to teachers across the country.
We have also introduced the first ever National Professional Standards for teacher and principals.
But we know we need to do more to lift the quality of teaching. That's why our National Plan for School Improvement will include:
• Higher entry standards for the profession• A mentoring program and reduced workload for beginning teachers• Annual performance reviews to help teachers continuously improve their practice• Ongoing professional development and support for every teacher
Our plan will help ensure that teachers are supported at work and feel valued and respected for the vital role they play. That way more students will have the benefits of a highly trained and motivated teacher helping them reach their full potential, just like Mr O'Connor and Rebecca. 


Sydney
PM: It's great to be here at Mary MacKillop College.
I'm joined by local member Chris Hayes, who is certainly no stranger to this school and I've come to this school today to award Who's Your Favourite Teacher?
I called on the nation to tell us stories about who's you favourite teacher; who made a very big difference to your life, and out of all of the entries from that national conversation, we picked a teacher here at this school, Mr O'Connor, as the favourite teacher.
A young student here, Rebecca, nominated him and said what a difference he had made to her study of English and how she now wants to be a teacher.
So it's been a very special opportunity to come here to meet a great teacher, to meet a delighted student whose nomination has had her teacher recognised, and to meet a great principal in Narelle and the teaching staff and students of this school.
So a great spirit, great atmosphere, a great school assembly, so great day all round.
I'm happy to take some questions and then we've got some other things to do before the day is done.
JOURNALIST: Yes Prime Minister, the Newspoll results must have been disheartening.
Next year looking impossible?
PM: We'll have an election in 2013 and I can tell you one thing about that election for sure.
It won't be decided on yesterday's polls, it will be decided on who has the best plans for the nation's future, who can ensure that the nation in an uncertain world is guided to a stronger future.
JOURNALIST: The results were fairly stagnant from the beginning of the year compared to now.
Does it show that your Government isn't making any inroads with voters at this stage?
PM: Well, we'll have the election next year and I'm very clear about what that election will be decided on.
It'll be about Australia's future, and who's got the policy muscle to bring the solutions Australia needs in an uncertain world.
JOURNALIST: You talk about negative politics, but will you stop those attacks on Mr Abbott next year?
PM: I don't know what you're referring to.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how do you think the regulator should deal with the 2Day FM situation?
PM: That's a matter for the regulator, but this is a heartbreaking tragedy all round.
JOURNALIST: Did you see the interviews last night?
PM: No, I wasn't in a position to, I had commitments, but I've obviously seen the news reports this morning and it's just a heartbreaking story all round, a really heartbreaking set of circumstances.
JOURNALIST: The Opposition is saying that the Government is slowly crab-walking away from the budget surplus.
How confident are you of delivering that?
PM: Well we delivered the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook and we stand by the forecasts in it.
Okay, thanks very much.
[ENDS] 


Mary MacKillop College, Sydney
STUDENT: (Inaudible)
PM: Thank you very much, that was about Australia's future. I could talk a long time about that, but I think here at school the best thing to say is that my plan for Australia's future is actually all about you as we look at the century in which you're going to live, it's going to be defined by growth in the Asian region of the world, the region we live in.
So it's going to be a century full of opportunity. I can't predict to you everything that's going to happen in the century but I can certainly confidently predict that this century is going to see Asia's further rise, and that's going to give you all sorts of job opportunities for the future if we're smart enough to seize them.
And seizing them means making sure that we've got a great quality education system. So it's going to be about you, your skills and capacities, and it's going to be about a drive to make sure our schooling system  -  all of our schools  -  are in the world's top five.
That we are running behind the pace when it comes to education. Because if we let ourselves run behind the pace in education, we'll end up running behind the pace in everything.
So you're at the centre of my plans for the nation's future, which is why I always love to come to schools. Thanks for the question.
STUDENT: (Inaudible)
PM: Okay that was a question about resilience in the face of the media, we might be able to get some of the media to comment on that.
I think the most important thing whatever your walk of life is, and obviously being the first woman Prime Minister I'm in a pretty high pressure role and a very publicly exposed role.
But whatever your walk of life is, you will get criticism, you will get people who try and make you feel badly about yourself.
Indeed I'm sure that there are some students in this assembly who during the course of their time at school or during the things that they do outside of school, have encountered a bit of criticism and maybe that's upset them when the criticism has come.
I think the main thing about resilience is to make sure you've got a really strong sense of yourself and a really strong sense of purpose.
You shouldn't let your image of yourself be buffeted by what others say about you.
You've got to have a really strong sense of who you are and also a really strong sense of what you want to do.
And if you can stay true to that purpose and make sure that you're staying true to your sense of self, then I think that brings a real resilience to it.
So don't be hostage to other people's opinions. Make sure that you're being very strong in your own image of yourself and very passionate about what you choose to be your life's driving purpose.
Thanks for the question.
STUDENT: Prime Minister, what do you believe are the key challenges for being in political life and being a woman in political life?
PM: Alright, challenges for political life and for being a woman in political life. Political life I think is pretty challenging for everyone because itis a job of such responsibility.
At heart it means that people  -  your local community, your nation  -  has asked you to do a series of very difficult things on their behalf to guide the policies and plans for the nation's future, entrusting you with the nation's security, entrusting you with the future of our economy in jobs and opportunity, entrusting you with the future of education, the future of healthcare.
So these are big, responsible things, so they're challenging for anyone who goes into public life, particularly going into public life in federal politics.
That challenge is added to by the amount of time that you're away from home, so every member of parliament  -  Chris would be able to speak about this, Peter would be able to speak about it  -  spends a lot of time away from home in Canberra, around the nation, missing out on family events.
And particularly for members of parliament who've gone into parliament and had family while they're there, their kids are very young while they're in parliament. That can be a very testing thing.
So public life's full of challenges, I think particularly for women, for me as the first woman to do this job, I'm amongst the generation that is normalising an image of women being in politics and an image of women being in leadership, so I think at the time perhaps you decide you would like to be Prime Minister of this country it will be very common for a woman to be Prime Minister, a man to be Prime Minister, and people won't bother that much about whether it's a woman or whether it's a man because they'll be normal images of leadership.
For me being the first, it's brought some new, I think, focus  -  things about hair, things about dress, things about the occasional stumble in high heels (inaudible)  -  perhaps they needed to be but perhaps that's part of the process of making this a very normal image to the nation about what leadership's about.
STUDENT: (Inaudible)
PM: In terms of what motivated me, what got me into public life, what was the first thing that I ever did publicly, revolved around education.
I talked to you about my school days in South Australia.
I went from those school days to Adelaide University and I also felt very privileged to go because it had not been the norm in my family to go the university. My fatherhadn't gone, my mother hadn't gone, so it was a big privilege to go.
It is a big privilege that only came to me because of the action of a Government, of a Labor Government, of the Whitlam Labor Government, abolishing upfront fees for university because it would have been terribly difficult for my family to have saved up to try and pay fees for me and my sister to go to university.
I don't think they would have been able to manage it. So I've always had this special sense of privilege about going.
When I was there, there was an agenda about cutting back university funding and the first thing that really got me involved in saying anything publicly was getting involved in a campaign to try to stop those funding  cuts.
Because I thought it is such a great thing to get to go to university it was really bad that a Government was making a decision which might limit those opportunities for people in the future.
And we did have some success. We had a student protest around the country and lots of lobbying and all the rest of it and the Government proceeded with some of the cutbacks but not all of the cutbacks.
And that reinforced to me if you lifted your voice you could make a difference to the future of the country and that was the starting point that all these years later has led to this.
So that is what motivated me to get involved in public life.
How I feel about it, being the first woman, it is a great privilege, it is a great responsibility.
I get to do some amazing things, but the thing I like absolutely the best is making decisions today which I know will make a difference to our nation in the future. And having been in government now since 2007 I can see some things that I decided to do  -  like the National Partnership system  -  which are making a difference, they're making a difference in your school.
So that's the best thing about it and I would certainly say for all of the stresses and strains, and occasional adverse commentary, getting to represent your nation and lead your nation is a tremendous privilege and something that is a good thing for young women and young men to aspire to.
STUDENT: (Inaudible)
PM: Role models? Well there's a few people that have made a difference to my life. My parents have been great role models for me about hard work and good values and where that takes you as an individual.
Joan Kirner, who was the Premier of Victoria, was a good role model for me and continues to be. She's an older lady now but she's pretty ferocious on the texts I'd have to say, still gets in occasional words of advice.
I didn't get to know her as a big-time politician, I got to know herbecause she was the mother of a friend that I went to university with, but I got to watch her journey through public life and that helped me learn a few things too.
STUDENT: (Inaudible)
PM: What advice would I give someone who wanted to be Prime Minister?
I actually do meet some young people who talk to me about going into politics and what advice have I got, and the thing that I always say is make sure you're clear on what it is that you want to do and what's driving you into public life.
If you don't have a strong sense of purpose about it then the rigours, I think, of public life will become too much.
You've got to be really clear what that sense of purpose is. And so for me it was about changing a whole lot of things to do with opportunity in our nation and particularly education  -  that's what drove me into the first steps into public life, and drives me now.
For other people in public life it will be about representing their local community, if they're really passionate about their the future of their community and that's what they want to make a difference to.
For others it will be other things, but you've got to be really sure about what your purpose is and that's the thing that will sustain you even when sometimes the going can be a little bit tough.
So thank you very much, I will allow myself to be wound up now, thank you.


Canberra
The Gillard Government will boost community awareness and education campaigns and review Australia's legal framework in an effort to stop the barbaric practice of female genital mutilation in this country.
Following a disturbing report on ABC 7.30 in October, the Prime Minister and the Minister for Health have been investigating additional measures that can be undertaken to address this horrific practice.
The stories told on 7.30 were truly tragic. These are stories all Australians should heed  -  governments, police, the medical profession, communities, families and individuals.
Female genital mutilation intentionally alters and causes harm to the female genital organs for no medical reason. The UN World Health Organization estimates that 140 million girls and women worldwide are currently living with the consequences of female genital mutilation.
It is often performed on girls under the age of ten. It is a violation of the human rights of women and girls and there is no place for it here in Australia. Its occurrence in this country cannot be excused by culture.
The Gillard Government today announced it would immediately implement the following measures:
• Provide $500,000 in grants to fund organisations to run education and awareness activities and support change within communities, as we know public education and awareness is key to change.
• New research and data collection on female genital mutilation will be undertaken as a priority. This will help us build the evidence needed to support women and girls affected by female genital mutilation. 
• Minister Plibersek will hold a national summit on this subject early next year, bringing together community, health, legal and policing experts to discuss how we can increase awareness and support and reduce incidence in Australia.
• The Attorney-General will review the current legal framework in Australia, and provide advice on whether any changes are required to ensure full protection against female genital mutilation, at home or abroad.
These measures will be led by the Minister for Health, who will coordinate efforts across the Government at the request of the Prime Minister. The Minister has been meeting with experts and key stakeholders over the last few weeks.
The Gillard Government will be speaking with states and territories to seek their cooperation on this issue.
All Australian states and territories have already enacted legislation making female genital mutilation a criminal offence, with penalties in some states of up to 20 years imprisonment.
In November this year United Nations member states approved a draft resolution urging member states to take the necessary measures to protect women and girls from this harmful practice and to end impunity. This resolution is expected to be acted on by the United Nations General Assembly later this month.
Australia will stand firm with the International community and support all necessary measures to eliminate the practice of female genital mutilation.
We do not know how widespread this practice is in Australia but we know there have been instances, and anecdotal evidence suggests these are not isolated.
One such procedure performed in this country is one too many. One girl taken overseas to have it done is one too many.
We must work together to help put a stop to this act from ever being performed on girls who live in this country.  


Canberra
Australia unequivocally condemns today's launch of a long-range rocket by North Korea.
The launch is a provocative and irresponsible act which has allowed North Korea to again test its ballistic missile technology.
North Korea's nuclear and long-range missile programs and its proliferation of sensitive technologies threaten the stability and security of our region.
North Korea's testing of long-range rockets violates United Nations Security Council resolutions and the Security Council's Statement earlier this year, and it defies the will of the international community.
Australia urges the Security Council to meet urgently and respond firmly.
This was another disappointing example of North Korea choosing a path of militarism and isolation.
This is North Korea's second, costly, long-range rocket launch this year.  And all the while its people struggle to get the food they need to survive.
We call on the North Korean Government to abide by UN Security Council resolutions, stop its provocations, improve the wellbeing of its people, and engage constructively with the international community.
Australia will be expressing its concerns directly to the North Korean Government. 
We will continue to work vigorously with our friends and partners in the region, including with the Republic of Korea, to uphold peace and stability in North Asia. 


Parliament House, Canberra
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED 
In a formal sense, we gather as friends to acknowledge a single diplomatic event in the life of our two countries.
On December 21, 1972, in Paris, the Governments of Australia and China signed a joint communiqué.
A brief document  -  only five paragraphs  -  recognising One China and marking the beginning of a lasting friendship.
Yet in these diplomatic phrases lay a great act of daring.
For two decades, the Government of Australia set its face against recognition.
Yet one man stood firm all his political life  -  Gough Whitlam.
Gough went to China in 1971 not because it was easy, but because it was right.
The war in Vietnam was still raging and the weight of domestic opinion was against him.
But there was a certain grandeur in the courage of his journey.
Stephen Fitzgerald wrote recently that:
“There is nothing in Australian foreign policy history to compare with that China visit. ... It was an expedition of great bravado and exposure but great political judgment and luck.”
So in this Great Hall of the Australian people, we recall a meeting in another Great Hall of another great people, four decades ago.
It was a modest group  -  just six Australian members  -  but its impact on our foreign policy was profound.
The meeting with Premier Zhou Enlai was simple and gracious.
Two statesmen ready to embrace reality and open the doors upon an unlikely friendship.
Whitlam made that journey because he understood China was not a country to be feared.
But a nation seeking to right historic wrongs and engage more widely with the world.
For Australia, engagement with China reflected our more confident voice on the world stage.
Like the rest of the Whitlam venture, it was a time of optimism and new beginnings.
Four decades on, let us never forget how high were the stakes or how great was the prize being sought.
So tonight we honour “those who were there”.
We remember those who shared in the drama of those days but are no longer with us: Margaret Whitlam, Alan Renouf, Tom Burns, Mick Young.
Gough Whitlam cannot be with us in person but he is so very much in our hearts tonight.
So are Graham Freudenberg and Rex Patterson.
With us, though, are others who made this anniversary possible, including Stephen Fitzgerald, who became our first Ambassador to the People's Republic.
The extraordinary evolution of our relationship with China stands on the shoulders of this generation. 
Trade levels increased a thousandfold.
Great Chinese cities built with Australian iron ore.
Growing investment.
The tens of thousands of Chinese students and tourists visiting every year.
Today, we welcome China's rise into the rules-based global system.
We value deep relationships with China at every level.
And we understand that with such different cultures and histories, we will occasionally disagree on matters of policy and principle, yet will always express any disagreement with a sense of proportion and respect.
If this is a night for celebrating a remarkable past, it is also a night to look to the future.
For many years now, trade and people-to-people links have formed the bulk of our relationship.
As we approach the half-century of our diplomatic ties in the years to come, we must craft a new and deeper phase of our relationship.
That will mean stronger government-to-government links.
Stronger bilateral architecture to better coordinate the breadth of our modern relationship, including on foreign and strategic issues, the global economy and our trade and investment ties.
A comprehensive country strategy that gives greater clarity and ambition for our shared objectives for our relationship.
And a stronger diplomatic footprint in China, including a new consulate-general in Chengdu, which I announced earlier this year.
And my Government's commitment to a further post to follow later, in Shenyang.
I am the seventh Australian Prime Minister to have visited China since Gough Whitlam became the first in 1973.
And I hope to have the great honour to return next year as China's new leadership moves into place.
Much has changed in both our countries since our diplomatic relations began.
The Australia of 1972 was an insular land.
Asia was unfamiliar to many Australians, and China more so.
Today one in ten Australians speaks an Asian language and China is the largest source of migration to our shores.
The reality of living in Asia is more present to us than ever before.
China can look back on decades of reform and truly say that her people have never been more prosperous.
The land of Mao suits and bicycles has become the nation of shining cities and high-speed train networks.
When we see poverty halved and high school enrolments doubled, we are admiring of your success.
When we see China lead the world in renewable energy, we are confident in your future.
Forty years on, the work begun with such high hopes endures.
Our partnership is now of deep strategic importance to us both.
Our peoples are partners: working together still.
Creating wealth together.
Working for peace together.
And sharing a bright future together.
So tonight I pay tribute to a nation esteemed by Australia and honoured in the world.
Our true and enduring friend: The People's Republic of China.



Prime Ministers Julia Gillard and John Key today released the joint scoping study by the Australian and New Zealand Productivity Commissions identifying possible options for further reforms that would boost productivity, improve competitiveness and drive deeper economic integration between Australia and New Zealand.
The Prime Ministers agreed to the joint scoping study in January 2012 for consideration at their 2013 Leaders' meeting, which will mark the 30th anniversary of the Australia New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement.
The report finds that, today, Australia and New Zealand are among the world's most closely integrated economies, with the Closer Economic Relations at the core of this.  This joint study looks back on what has been achieved, and forward to what more can be achieved as both countries pursue their shared aspirations in the Asian Century.
The Governments of Australia and New Zealand are firmly committed to further strengthening our economic relations.  The Closer Economic Relations and the Single Economic Market agenda have brought down barriers to trade, reduced costs for business, encouraged investment and created jobs and economic growth for both Australia and New Zealand.
Australia and New Zealand also work closely together to promote trade in goods and services, and investment in the Asia Pacific region through APEC and the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement, and through negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership. The successive rounds of integration of our economies have contributed to the prosperity of both countries.
The Productivity Commissions identify more than 30 initiatives in their report aimed at further integrating the two economies to mutual benefit, including through reductions in regulatory and other barriers to trade in goods and services, to foreign investment and to people movement between the two countries. 
The Productivity Commissions also found that there is further potential for each government to cooperate with and learn from the other in policy development, service delivery and regulatory approaches.
In welcoming the report, Prime Minister Gillard has noted that this report from the two Productivity Commissions presents the most important opportunity for many years to shape the next steps in trans-Tasman economic integration in this the Asian Century.  The report provides a thoughtful analysis of our economic relationship and considers the scope for its future development to create jobs and boost productivity for both Australia and New Zealand.
Prime Minister Gillard acknowledged the relationship which has developed through the Closer Economic Relations agreement has served both countries well for nearly 30 years, making Australia and New Zealand two of the most integrated economies in the world. 
Prime Minister Key agreed on the importance of the Closer Economic Relations agreement noting that the report provides recommendations to assist the shared goal of a Single Economic Market to increase trade and create a seamless business environment across the Tasman.  It also emphasises that the integration of our economies, and our commitment to an international partnership, will support our joint interests in the Asia-Pacific region and beyond.
Prime Minister Key also recognised that this study into shaping the future of trans-Tasman economic relations comes as both countries prepare in 2013 to mark the 30thanniversary of the signing of the Closer Economic Relations agreement. 
Both Prime Ministers will consider the report's recommendations in detail and opportunities to further the trans-Tasman economic relationship at their annual leaders' meeting, which will be held in New Zealand in February next year.
The Productivity Commissions' final report can be found on the joint scoping study website:
Australian Productivity Commission: http://transtasman-review.pc.gov.au/
New Zealand Productivity Commission: http://transtasman-review.productivity.govt.nz/



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning and welcome to AM.PM: Good morning Sabra.
HOST: You've heard what Tony Abbott's had to say in London. What's your response?PM: Mr Abbott is using weasel words to avoid answering very simple questions here. Sabra, let's take the broader view. I mean when Australians voted in 2010 they got the result right. Australians always get elections right and our nation accepts the result. The result here was an unusual Parliament, a minority Parliament but Government was formed.Unlike Oppositions when there have been minority Parliaments in the past, Mr Abbott never accepted the result, he never accepted the will of the Australian people and so we've been treated to two years of negativity, two years of personal attacks and two years of smear.Now I think Australians want this to stop. They want to see a debate on policies and issues and certainly that's what the Government has been doing and we will keep doing.Mr Abbott to get to that stage now needs to come clean about the mess his political party is mired in following this adverse judgement from the Federal Court.HOST: Well, Mr Abbott says that Mal Brough has been transparent and upfront about his involvement in James Ashby and he's also pointed out that his pre-selection will stay.PM: Well, Mr Abbott in saying that is insulting the intelligence of the Australian people. Mr Brough when he was first asked about this matter lied about it and then was forced to come clean as a result of media enquiries. Mr Brough has been anything but transparent in this matter.Mr Abbott needs to require Mr Brough to come here to Parliament House and to stand in front of the Federal Parliamentary Press Gallery and answer every question put to him and then he should still disendorse Mr Brough. Mr Brough has been the subject of a judgement by a Federal Court judge that he, with others, conspired to attack Mr Slipper to change the balance of power in the Federal Parliament.Mr Brough has been involved in using sexual harassment claims as a political tool. In standing by Mr Brough, Mr Abbott is standing by conduct like that.HOST: The judge didn't find a conspiracy. Certainly in his judgement he talks about alleged conspirators. Has the Government over-egged this? You've got Ministers talking about Australia's Watergate, you've got Anthony Albanese talking about a conspiracy, Craig Emerson talking about a conspiracy. Are you over-egging this?PM: Sabra, read the judgement, read the words.HOST: I have read the judgement.PM: I'd be very happy for you to read the extracts of it on air word by word. The judge finds facts that cannot be denied, the judge finds that Mr Brough conspired with Mr Ashby and one other person to try and destroy Mr Slipper's involvement in politics in order to change the balance of power in the House of Representatives; that Mr Ashby in making sexual harassment claims was doing that for a political purpose. Not actually about the sexual harassment matter but motivated by a political purpose.Mr Abbott's answer to that is weasel words  -  no ‘specific knowledge' about details. Well, Mr Abbott needs to come clean so the nation can move on to what ought to be the next stage of Australian politics which is debating the issues.HOST: The Government's talked about an enquiry into this. Why not have an enquiry?PM: Well, the Government will consider that matter. We won't rush to judgement on it. We will think about it.HOST: Would it be a waste of taxpayer's money putting money towards an enquiry into this?PM: Well, the issue here is will Mr Abbott, Mr Brough, Ms Bishop, Mr Pyne, any other Coalition member with knowledge of this matter come clean and answer questions about it. This is really an issue of leadership for Tony Abbott. I want Australian politics to be a red-hot debate about the issues.I spent the last Parliamentary week for example putting the big issues on the table for the nation's future, making sure our kids get a world class education so we can have a world class economy, making sure people with disabilities get a fair go.Mr Abbott answered that with a torrent of sleaze. I would like to see this cycle of politics about sleaze and smear and negativity, the cycle Mr Abbott started the day after the last election, come to an end and come to an end before the end of this year. For that to happen Mr Abbott has to extract himself and his political party from the filth they're rolling in and the only way of doing that will be by coming clean.HOST: Wouldn't a good circuit breaker on this be a full enquiry then? That would clear the decks wouldn't it?PM: Wouldn't a good circuit breaker be an act of leadership by Mr Abbott.HOST: Mr Abbott says that he only knew about this case on Saturday the 21 April, the morning that it was published in the newspapers. The metadata date on the press release that he's issued shows the document has a time date of 11PM the evening before. Mr Abbott's office says there is a simple explanation for this, that there was a problem with that computer. Do you accept that explanation?PM: Sabra, you haven't used all of Mr Abbott's weasel words. Mr Abbott is saying to us that he didn't have specific knowledge of the details of the allegations before they were in the newspaper. Well, specific knowledge, what knowledge did he have if it wasn't about the details, what knowledge did he have about the matter generally?HOST: Specifically on his press release, his office says that there was a problem with that computer. Do you believe that?PM: Look, I am not going to put myself in the position of being a computer expert but what I do know absolutely is this, Mr Abbott is using fudge words to stop coming clean about this matter. Mr Abbott ought to stand and frankly answer every question.Mr Abbott is very good at calling on others to make full statements. Let's just do the comparison, Sabra. I'm happy to. Mr Abbott spent a Parliamentary week on a matter involving me that happened the best part of two decades ago. I answered Parliamentary Press Gallery questions on two separate occasions until effectively the Press Gallery was out of questions.I took questions in Parliament. We ended up with a Parliamentary debate on the matter. If that's the standard for something that happened 17 years ago and has absolutely no implications for public life today, what's the standard for this? Well, 100 times more and Mr Abbott ought to acquit himself of that obligation.HOST: If you feel that Mr Slipper has been wronged here, why not reinstall him as the Speaker?PM: This is the most ridiculous straw man debate being put up by the Coalition as a shield.HOST: Is it?
PM: Absolutely.
HOST: The man was forced aside because of these allegations.PM: Absolutely Sabra, a most ridiculous straw man debate put up by a Coalition to try and avoid answering questions. Joe Hockey started this yesterday.HOST: It's a question now for you. You officially installed him as Speaker.PM: And I'm prepared to answer it. Mr Slipper resigned, full stop. Mr Slipper resigned. This is not about Mr Slipper's resignation. This is about Mr Brough, Mr Ashby and the conspiracy they were involved in and who else was involved in it.HOST: But if you feel that Mr Slipper has been wronged here, surely-PM: Mr Slipper resigned appropriately having seen in the public domain text of an unacceptable nature. Let's not conflate the issues.HOST: But I'm also asking you whether you would like to see him back in the role?PM: Mr Slipper resigned, Anna Burke is doing a good job. Anna Burke will be continuing as Speaker. Sabra, let's not pretend that the Coalition raising Mr Slipper's future is an answer to specific and legitimate enquiries about what they knew, when they knew it and what they did about it.HOST: But it is also a question for you in your judgement as well.PM: Well, I've just answered your question. Mr Slipper resigned, Mr Slipper resigned appropriately. So that has been done, that's dealt with. This is not about that. This is about what did Mr Abbott know? What did his office know? What did Ms Bishop know? What did Mr Pyne know? What did Mr Hockey know? Who else is involved in this conspiracy? What were their motivations in misusing sexual harassment as a political tool of attack?HOST: Mal Brough also says the issue here is one of those vile text messages that were sent and that Mr Brough says that he has acted appropriately at all times.PM: Well Mr Brough should have absolutely no problem then coming to Canberra, standing in, I'll happily make the press conference room available, standing in the press conference room, take questions hour, hour and a half, two hours until the Press Gallery hasn't got any more questions.If he has done nothing wrong, Mr Abbott is very fond of using this phrase, if Mr Brough has done nothing wrong, he's got nothing to hide why isn't he here today?HOST: The economy will be front and centre next year heading into the election year. The Government Chief Whip Joel Fitzgibbon says he thinks it is time for the Government to ditch its promise of delivering a surplus. He thinks that people will understand that and that the Government could do things with extra money to help boost productivity. Is he right?PM: Well, Mr Fitzgibbon is entitled to his views but these decisions will be made by me, the Treasurer, the Finance Minister and the Cabinet. We have released the most recent economic forecast. We don't jump at people's figments of imagination here. We deal with the facts, we deal with the forecasts and I refer you to what we said in that mid-year statement.HOST: He is your Chief Government Whip. He says there are many in caucus who think the same way. Are they wrong?PM: Look Mr Fitzgibbon is, yes he is the Chief Government Whip. He plays an organisational role working with Mr Albanese who is the Leader of Government Business. Policy is made by me and the Cabinet. We have published the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.HOST: Are his suggestions helpful in your organisation of Government?PM: Look, people are entitled to a view and we'll get on and make the decisions.HOST: Mr Fitzgibbon says he thinks your Government and you have been spooked by the Opposition.PM: Well, once again, we'll get on with the decisions.HOST: And there are many economists, respected economists who also argue the same thing, that now with Government spending slowing to such a point that you actually could do more harm to the economy than good.PM: Sabra, we deal with the facts. We deal with the forecasts. They are in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook. I don't come in, in the morning into this building where very important decisions are made and run around the corridors seeing what people have thought up overnight. I deal with the facts.HOST: You speak to economists?PM: I deal with them carefully. I deal with Treasury forecasts and if you want to see the most recent forecasts, have a look at the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.HOST: Respected economists like Bill Evans don't know what they're talking about, is that what you're saying?PM: That is not what I said. I do what Governments in the past have done. We work with the Treasury forecasts. That is the appropriate thing to do. I would remind you that the most recent Treasury forecast published in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook showed us at trend growth.HOST: The budget, will Australians know come budget time how you're going to pay or how the Government's going to pay for the National Disability Insurance Scheme, how the Gonski education reforms are going to be paid for? Are they going to know where every cent is going to come from?PM: They will see from us every cent for Gonski and the National Disability Insurance Scheme over the forward estimates and they'll see more than that. They'll see us detail a long term funding strategy. We will be absolutely transparent with the Australian people. Budget forecasts properly done, Treasury forecasts, all the rest of it, every dollar, every cent and a long term funding strategy.The issue here for 2013 is one, Mr Abbott needs to extract himself from the pile of mud he's standing in so Australian politics can move on and number two, when he's done that, he should commit to acquitting every word of the charter of budget honesty so next year's election campaign is about people being able to see the figures and having them at their disposal for both sides of politics, not one side of politics. They will certainly have them from us.HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for your time this morning.PM: Thanks Sabra.


Canberra
Australia grieves with America today following the mass shooting of primary school children and teachers in Connecticut.
Like President Obama and his fellow Americans, our hearts too are broken.
We share America's shock at this senseless and incomprehensible act of evil.
As parents and grandparents, as brothers and sisters, as friends of the American people, we mourn the loss of children, aged only five to ten years, whose futures lay before them.
We mourn the loss of brave teachers who sought only to lead their students into that future but were brutally murdered in a place of refuge and learning.
Our thoughts today are with the people of America.
We hold in our hearts the families who have lost loved children and who face grief beyond measure. We think of the families of the teachers.
And we hope for the recovery of those injured in body and spirit.


Canberra
PM: Today we stand by the people of America on their day of loss and grief.
Today is a truly shocking day for Americans.
Twenty children have died; a number of adults have died.
This is a day that is breaking America's heart and has brought the American President to tears.
As Prime Minister I get to visit a lot of primary schools, and they're places of hope and joy and excitement, young kids going about their day, learning, being with their mates.
It is almost beyond comprehension such a happy place could be reduced to a place of death and terror, but that is what we have seen today.
Our heartfelt sympathies go to those families who have lost a child, to those families who have lost a loved one, to those families who are now trying to counsel their young child who has been witness to such shocking scenes and will be so distressed as a result.
Alongside the loss of children, we've seen the loss of some very brave teachers.
It's a time to remind ourselves just how precious a thing it is that so many people devote their lives to the care of children and even in the most extreme circumstances think about the children in their care first.
They are some very brave Americans, and we know we are home too to some very great teachers.
This is a very difficult day. It's a day on which Australians will be thinking of our friends in America and sharing their grief and their sense of loss.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
PM: Today we stand by the people of America on their day of loss and grief.
Today is a truly shocking day for Americans.
Twenty children have died; a number of adults have died. 
This is a day that is breaking America's heart and has brought the American President to tears.
As Prime Minister I get to visit a lot of primary schools, and they're places of hope and joy and excitement, young kids going about their day, learning, being with their mates.
It is almost beyond comprehension such a happy place could be reduced to a place of death and terror, but that is what we have seen today.
Our heartfelt sympathies go to those families who have lost a child, to those families who have lost a loved one, to those families who are now trying to counsel their young child who has been witness to such shocking scenes and will be so distressed as a result.
Alongside the loss of children, we've seen the loss of some very brave teachers.
It's a time to remind ourselves just how precious a thing it is that so many people devote their lives to the care of children and even in the most extreme circumstances think about the children in their care first.
They are some very brave Americans, and we know we are home too to some very great teachers.
This is a very difficult day. It's a day on which Australians will be thinking of our friends in America and sharing their grief and their sense of loss.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
Australia congratulates Mr Shinzo Abe on the Liberal Democratic Party's victory in Japan's lower house elections on 16 December.
Australia's close strategic partnership with Japan is built on shared values, common security interests and a longstanding friendship. 
Japan is Australia's second largest trading partner with two-way trade more than doubling in the past ten years to reach $75.6 billion in 2011-12.  Japan is also our largest Asian source of foreign investment, with a total stock of $123 billion in 2011. 
Together we played a key role in the founding of APEC and in developing the roles of the East Asia Summit and the G20.  Japan is a major contributor to the United Nations and we look forward to working with it during Australia's term as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council. 
As Japan's Prime Minister in 2007, Mr Abe visited Australia to participate in the APEC leaders' summit in Sydney. 
I look forward to working with Mr Abe after he is sworn in to deepen and enhance our ties, including through completion of a high-quality and comprehensive Free Trade Agreement.
I would also like to acknowledge the contribution by Japan's outgoing Prime Minister, Mr Yoshihiko Noda, to strengthening Australia-Japan ties.  


Canberra
After all the days of preparation and anticipation, Christmas is finally here. 
However you and your family celebrate Christmas, whatever your own Christmas traditions are, I hope you have a wonderful day.
When I was a child, the run into Christmas always started with mum baking the Christmas pudding and cake.  Even though my mum worked part-time, she always found the time and was rightly proud of the results.
Today, getting ready for Christmas is different. 
For most, the days of mum being able to spend months at home preparing for Christmas are long gone.  Today, dads do more than simply go out and buy the tree.
Now, mums and dads, adult sons and daughters all play a role in scrambling to get ready but when we get to Christmas Day it is still a time of joy.But, even in a nation as blessed as ours, not everyone will have Christmas with family and friends.
For some, work doesn't stop on Christmas Day.  I remember when I was young we would wait for Dad's roster to come out so we'd know whether he would be with us on Christmas Day or at work. 
I am sure many families have done just that in the run up to this Christmas.
So to those who need to work and to their families, we say thanks  -  thanks to the police and the firefighters, the ambulance officers and the nurses, the emergency personnel, the churches, charities and volunteers, to every one we can't do without and to their families.
To our troops abroad, we honour and admire you and I hope your families know how grateful we are to you this time of year.
For some, the joy of Christmas is marked by sadness. For me this will be the first Christmas without my father and I will be thinking of him and of my fellow Australians who will be without a loved one for the first time this year. 
I will be especially thinking of our military families who have lost a loved one.  Your nation pays tribute to their service and your sacrifice.
For some, Christmas can be a time of loneliness and isolation. To those without family, I say please reach out a hand and in this wonderful country you will find a hand of friendship reaching back out to you.
Whatever 2012 has brought you, I hope this Christmas brings you a time of rest, reflection and peace. 
A time to renew our sense of purpose and unity.
A time to look forward to the future with hope and confidence.
A merry and safe Christmas to you all.


Adelaide
Every year, on the anniversary of the Proclamation of “a great free colony”, we gather to renew our spirit of unity and confidence in this great free state.
More than 170 on from the brave words of our “worthy Founders”, this is a rare and important day, when our civic leaders publicly reflect on what this city of Adelaide and this state of South Australia mean to our nation and our people.
Today, our words turn to our city of Hindmarsh and Gawler and Light; of our State of dissent, innovation and achievement.
But for me, this time of year, here in Adelaide, is one of personal reflections.
This is the city where I grew up.
This is the city of my childhood memories.
This is the city my father and mother chose to be their home in 1966.
This is the city where my family will make its future. 
These public and private reflections are brought together for me here at Glenelg every year on the 28th: because in his ships Hindmarsh brought more than British custom and law, more than a Government to establish; he brought men and women and their families.
In the years that followed, it was the resilience and hard work of those families that built the city and the state we are proud to call our own today.
And we recall too the suffering and the resilience of families who had lived and loved here before Hindmarsh even sailed.
So in renewing the spirit of unity and confidence in which we govern, let us equally renew our determination to govern for all our people: for the families of every shape and size who will build the city and state in the years and decades to come.
Our task as leaders is to know how family life is changing today and to make family life easier for our people as it changes.
Not only to raise living standards for families, but to meet their changing needs.
Each year when I come to Adelaide, I get to celebrate the next step my niece and nephew have taken in their adult lives - even though it feels not so long ago we talked about their favourite teachers and school friends.
Each year my parents have got older too and this year was our first without Dad. 
Like so many families today, my family knows what it is to wrestle with the options and choices ahead for an ageing parent.
With the annual Christmas trek home, I have come to reflect not only on the changes that come with age but the changes that come to family life through changes in society over the years.
So as we govern for our people, these are changes we must help families navigate too.
The juggling of demands, the changes in expectation: families who will swap shifts and arrange holidays to care for the kids, but perhaps hope at most for a few days where everyone is together at once; the families who spend these days each year sharing care and negotiating where children will spend Christmas morning and Christmas afternoon, or who will be together on New Year's Eve.
So much has changed since 1836, since John Hindmarsh stood near here, as “His Excellency Governor and Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Province of South Australia” and as “a Knight of the Royal Hanoverian Guelphic Order”, to call for “order and quietness”, “industry and sobriety”.
Much has changed in the way we live even in the years I have been coming here to Glenelg to address this day.
What doesn't change is that the future of the city, the state, the country, relies on the hard work and resilience of the families who live here.
What doesn't change is that building the future requires leadership, facing up to tough decisions, optimism and unity.


Sydney
Australia has lost one of the iconic voices of sport with the passing today of Tony Greig.
A former English cricket captain, Tony Greig went on to become an enduring voice on television as a cricket commentator.
Greig was a wonderful example of someone who came to Australia from somewhere else in the world and embraced his adopted country as his own.
As a superb all-rounder, ambitious national captain and authoritative commentator over the best part of half a century, Greig's standing in the game is matched by very few others.
Most Australians would be deeply familiar with Greig the commentator, in particular his unique brand of colourful game-calling and entertaining banter with his Channel Nine colleagues.
His life in cricket wasn't always without controversy, but no one could doubt his passion and commitment to the sport he loved.
Tony Greig devoted every ounce of his professional life to cricket, and the sport is much greater for his enormous contribution.
Cricket has lost a giant today, but we're better as a sporting country for the life of Tony Greig.
The thoughts of the nation are with his wife Vivian and his children Mark, Sam, Beau and Tom as they grieve the loss of their husband and father.



Australians enjoy ringing in the New Year. It's a time of fun and celebration, of optimism and of making New Year's resolutions.
As we mark the start of 2013 we have so much to be thankful for.
We live in the best country in the world.
We enjoy the benefits of peace and security.
Unlike the rest of the world, our economy has proved itself to be resilient.
We are improving health care and aged care.
We are tackling climate change and protecting our environment.
We have a clear plan for our nation's future in this century of growth and change in the region in which we live.
Australia is a wonderful country.  But even for our great nation, every year brings its challenges.
Let me be clear about the ones that confront our nation in 2013.
Our world faces ongoing security challenges.
In this year, as a member of the United Nations Security Council, we will be involved in addressing pressing problems like Iran's nuclear program and the missile tests of North Korea. 
We will also continue our difficult and dangerous mission against global terrorism in Afghanistan.
Five years on from the global financial crisis and despite some progress in the US in recent weeks, problems there and in Europe still threaten global growth. 
Once again we will need to manage our economy carefully to keep creating jobs and economic growth.
And, as always, our future is not assured. We have work to do to ensure that today's children enjoy lives of better opportunity, better health and higher living standards than we do today. 
But as we face these challenges we can enter this year with the confidence that comes from having the right policies and capabilities to ensure we succeed in a changing and sometimes worrying world.
Friends, amongst the many New Year's resolutions made, we should make one for our nation. 
Let's start 2013 with a resolution to embrace a renewed national spirit of unity and confidence.
We have much to do and we will do it best by working together.
I am determined that 2013 will be the year when we together write the next great chapter in our nation's history. A chapter about jobs, opportunity, a better education for our children, a better deal for Australians with disability, and that we do so with a renewed Australian spirit.
Happy New Year. 



PM: First and foremost people need to keep themselves safe. This is an ongoing situation so listen to local authorities, make sure that you're absorbing all of the local warnings.
We want to keep people safe.
For those that have lost their homes, a devastating experience, and we'll be working with them as will the state government to support people through.
There are media reports that a life has been lost. I'm not in a position to confirm that but bushfires are very dangerous things.
So right around the country we're seeing hot weather. Please keep yourselves safe. The one thing that's irreplaceable here is you. Make sure you're looking after your own safety.
JOURNALIST: There are reports of about 85 homes that have been destroyed in Tasmania alone.
Is there any concept of what support may be offered at this stage, or is it just too early? What is the situation there?
PM: We're still at the stage where fighting the fire is the main focus.
We will move to the recovery stage, and when we do that of course there are payments and support that do flow and we'll be making announcements about that when we can at the appropriate point.
We want to make sure now as the fire's still there that people are safe, and then we'll support communities.
I've been in contact with our local member Dick Adams who is there working with the community.
Tassie's a strong place; really strong community bonds and I'm confident that people will work to support each other at this difficult time.
JOURNALIST: And how often are you being kept updated? Is that through the authorities in Tasmania or more through  -  how's that being done?
PM: We have arrangements where our federal government officials work closely with state government officials.
We've had to do this on a lot of occasions unfortunately; Queensland floods, cyclone; we've had a lot of practice about how best to work together.
So the systems are very good and that means I get continuous feeds of information which is fantastic.
And I would like to say a word of thanks to everybody who's out there, whether it's the fire fighters on the front line or the officials who are somewhat further back but who are also working hard to make sure the emergency gets dealt with.
JOURNALIST: What are your thoughts when you see the pictures of the television coming through, particularly this morning?
PM: They always break your heart when you see those sorts of pictures.
I'm obviously from Victoria, we saw that huge loss of life in the Victorian bushfires, and the destructive power of fire is just so awesome, the actual destructive power of it.
So whenever you see those pictures, whenever you see that kind of loss it really does touch a chord in you.
It's a very Australian thing to fear and also to understand the devastation of bushfire.
JOURNALIST: And obviously monitoring across the other states as well at this stage?
PM: Well this extreme heat is very widespread and that means there are risks in more areas than Tasmania. The best thing people can do is stay in touch with their local authorities and local community warnings.
We do have more ways of getting information to people now, and that's a good thing, but it still means people need to take the information on board and respond to it.


Sydney
The Federal Government today announced that arrangements are being made to ensure that natural disaster assistance is available to help communities in south eastern Tasmania recover from the devastating bushfires that have hit the region.
This will help fire-stricken communities in Tasmania get back on their feet as soon as possible.
The assistance will be available in coming days in the Sorell and Tasman Local Government Areas. The needs of other areas are being closely monitored.
This is a tragic time for those who have suffered loss in the devastating Tasmanian bushfires.
The Australian Government, through Emergency Management Australia, is liaising closely with Tasmanian authorities who are the first responders.
A range of assistance grants are in the process of being made available through the Tasmanian Department of Health and Human Services:
·         Emergency Assistance Grants to meet the immediate needs of individuals/families ($200 per adult, $100 per child, maximum of $750 per family)
·         Temporary living grants of up to $8,875 (over a maximum period of 6 months) to assist with living expenses
·         Essential household goods grants of up to $5,600 per household (plus $500 per additional household member up to a maximum of $8,875) for costs not covered by insurance, to assist with the replacement of essential household items
·         Repair/replacement grants of up to $8,875 to assist with the re-establishment of the principal place of residence.
The assistance will be jointly funded by the Commonwealth and the Tasmanian Government under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements to help alleviate the personal hardship being experienced by individuals and families. It will also assist local authorities conduct counter-disaster operations to assist individuals.
Information on the range of assistance that is available can be found atwww.disasterassist.gov.au or at www.dhhs.tas.gov.au
As severe hot weather affects other parts of Australia, everyone should ensure they take the appropriate precautions to stay safe and monitor information from your local emergency service agencies.
The work carried out by the emergency services personnel, police, fire, ambulance, SES and other volunteers across Tasmania, Victoria and South Australia recently in such extreme conditions reminds us of the pride and dedication we have as a nation to keeping our communities safe and protected.
With the hot weather predicted to continue in the next week, these and other men and women will again be called upon to protect their communities across Australia.
This is yet another sobering reminder of the need to prepare for the risk of bushfires and staying regularly informed of developments through local radio and local emergency services websites.


Sydney
The Australian Government has strengthened its commitment to fighting breast cancer by providing a further $18.5 million to the McGrath Foundation for specialist breast care nurses.  
The funding will allow all 44 existing McGrath Breast Care Nurse positions to continue, and expand the program by 10 full-time equivalent places. The new funding will provide approximately 13 new nurses who will support the new Regional Cancer Centres and also provide services in outer metropolitan areas where there is a great unmet need. Eighty five per cent of the current breast care nurses are located in rural and regional areas.Australia has made huge strides in diagnosing and treating breast cancer, with a current five-year relative survival rate of 89 per cent compared to 72 per cent a generation ago. But around 14,000 women who are diagnosed and treated for breast cancer each year still require the best treatment and support we can give them to survive and manage this potentially fatal illness.
Breast care nurses are specially trained registered nurses who act as patient advocates, coordinating care for women with breast cancer, their family and carers. 
In doing so, they work to ensure physical, psychological and basic support needs are met.
The breast care nurse program began after the Government committed $12 million to the McGrath Foundation in 2008 for recruitment, training and placement of specialist nurses around Australia. Since the program began, more than 11,900 women with breast cancer and their families have had their burden eased a little by the helping hand of a Government funded McGrath Breast Care Nurse. The Government is very pleased to continue to work with the McGrath Foundation to help Australian women with breast cancer. Breast cancer causes the second largest number of cancer deaths in Australia (behind lung cancer), with 2,864 deaths in 2010.   Fighting all types of cancer through prevention, early detection and evidence-based treatment and care remains a key Government priority. Since 2007, the Government has committed an extra $2.5 billion to improve the detection and treatment of cancer, including a record $2 billion in the 2009-10 Budget to build a world-class cancer care system for Australia.


HOST: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Sarah, I'm here in the pink as you can see and the ground's starting to fill with everybody sporting their pink as well for Jane McGrath Day.
HOST: Well Prime Minister it looks very good on you indeed, but before we get to the funding announcement could we just chat bushfires for a moment. 80 properties have been destroyed in Tasmania so far, we're looking at a horror few days with temperatures continuing to soar right across the southern states.
Is financial assistance to those affected by bushfires something the Federal Government is already putting together?
PM: We are working with Tasmanian officials. We've got very clear arrangements for how local authorities, state authorities and federal authorities work together.
Unfortunately Sarah, our world has given us the opportunity to test all of this time and time again, for example in the Queensland floods. So we'll keep working to support communities.
At the moment, the focus of course is on still fighting the fires and I know you've been giving people some very important information this morning about where fires are located and how to keep themselves safe.
So that's got to be the focus right now, and we'll keep working with the state government and local authorities to support communities through.
HOST: Okay Prime Minister, let's talk about that pink hat and $18.5 million in funding for the McGrath Foundation. How exactly will this money be used?
PM: Well it's not often you see me in a pink hat, a pink bandanna and even a pink skirt.
I'm doing that today because this is the day at the cricket that we say we can come together and fight breast cancer.
One of the ways we do that is by supporting the Jane McGrath Foundation for breast cancer nurses. They're an incredible support to women on their journey through breast cancer.
We are announcing today that we are renewing the funding for 44 nurses, and we're increasing the funding so that there can be 10 more.
As a woman in my fifties, I don't think there's any woman in the country who's got to my age who hasn't got a friend who's gone through breast cancer. And many of them can tell you how important a breast care nurse has been as they go through that journey.
So we want to see more of them out and around Australia and I'm very pleased that overwhelmingly these positions are in regional Australia where we want to increase survivability rates and make sure that wherever you are in the country, if you get breast cancer you get the best of care.
HOST: That is absolutely wonderful news. Of course this is all happening at the SCG for Jane McGrath Day. We know, Prime Minister, that you are mad about AFL, but what about the cricket?
PM: I am not going to pretend to be a cricketing expert. I am not giving up my day job to become a commentator, but I am looking forward to the cricket today, it's going to be-
HOST: I just wanted to say Prime Minister, you might not be as mad about cricket as you are about AFL, but Mike Hussey's kids are mad about your spoodle Reuben.
Did you know they've actually hassled their dad into buying one after meeting yours at Kirribilli House on New Year's Day?
PM: Mike Hussey is a great person, bit of a pity about the run-out yesterday, but when we had a chat on New Year's Day, yes he was hassled by his kids into getting their cavoodle, which is the same as our dog Reuben. A cavoodle, so a king cavalier mixed with a poodle.
We reckon Reuben's a pretty special dog, but now they reckon they've got a very special dog too called Coco and I did make a promise on New Year's Day.
We've got to find a way of having cavoodle chaos. We'll bring the two cavoodles together and see what that does to furniture and rugs as they all get chewed through.
HOST: Yes, Ms Gillard, I'm sure Mike Hussey will be cursing you when it comes to puppy training in the months to come. Now Prime Minister, you are fresh from a Christmas break. You had about a week off.
How exactly does a Prime Minister spend her holidays?
PM: Well pretty quietly. I spent them with family in South Australia. So Tim and I, and in fact the dog, all went to South Australia and spent Christmas with my family.
Tim and I managed to cook a turkey on Christmas Day so we were pretty proud of ourselves and we just had a good time with family, with friends, just doing some quiet things.
Meals together, playing cards, walks on the beach, all of that kind of very casual stuff that I really don't get much of an opportunity to do when I'm working full-pelt during the year.
HOST: So daggy trackies on the couch and watching daytime TV?
PM: Absolutely. There's a great delight when you've got my job to spend some time not having to worry about what you're wearing, not having to worry about makeup or anything like that and knowing that everything's in safe hands with Wayne Swan.
But I'm back at work now and feeling very refreshed after the break.
HOST: You're a woman my own heart. Now tell me Prime Minister, this was your first Christmas without your dad John. That must have been hard on you and your sister as well as your mum.
PM: It's been a difficult time for my family, losing Dad last year and of course this was a different Christmas without Dad round the Christmas table.
I know that my family is going through an experience that's shared by so many other families around the nation, when Christmas really brings home to you yet again the loss of a loved one. So it was a different and a difficult time for us with Dad not there.
HOST: Well Prime Minister you are back. 2013 is going to be a huge year for you, an election this year. Can you reveal have you set a date yet?
PM: I can't do that scoop for you Sarah.
HOST: Come on, a Weekend Today exclusive Prime Minister!
PM: It would be a big story if we did that, I'm sure it would. But no I haven't set a date and we've got lots of governing to do before worrying about the election.
This is the year we'll be launching the National Disability Insurance Scheme on 1 July, so I've got my eye on all of the preparations for that.
And this is the year we're going to make sure we're really driving reform in every school.
We got a bit of a wakeup call about how our kids are going against the standards of the world through some international testing.
I want to make sure every Australian child gets a great education, so I'll be focussing on those things well before we start worrying about election dates.
HOST: Brilliant. So you've got some New Year's resolutions for the country, but finally Prime Minister, what about personal resolutions that you'll be undertaking this year?
PM: You've always got to make some resolutions don't you, and I did, about making sure I'm doing all of the things to keep myself healthy and fit and well.
I'm someone who likes to get a little bit of exercise and watch the diet and that kind of stuff.
You've got to be kind of match-fit, particularly in an election year, so a few resolutions like that, and then I always focus on what I want to achieve for the nation.
So I've got some resolutions about what I want us to get done together during the course of the year, and none of them bigger than what I want us to do for Australia's kids.
HOST: Okay Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you very much for joining us this morning. Have a great day at the SCG. Over to you Steve.
PM: Thanks.


Sydney
Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payments (AGDRP) are now available to residents in the southeast and east of Tasmania covering the affected Local Government Areas of Sorell, Tasman and Glamorgan-Spring Bay.
Eligible people affected by the recent bushfires that commenced on 3 and 4 January in southeast and east Tasmania will be able to claim payments of $1,000 for each adult and $400 for each child.
These bushfires have had a devastating impact on some communities.
This is a very difficult time for many Tasmanians and these payments will assist individuals and families to get back on their feet.
People directly affected by the bushfires are urged to take advantage of this assistance.
Centrelink has deployed officers to recovery centres in Tasmania to assist with the claims process.
Claim forms will be available online later today at www.humanservices.gov.au/disaster. The easiest way to lodge a claim is by calling the Australian Government Information Line on 180 22 66 from 8am to 8pm or in person at a disaster recovery centre.
This assistance is over and above the support to be provided by the Australian and Tasmanian Governments under the jointly funded Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) in coming days.
Affected residents may also be eligible for personal hardship and distress assistance, including a range of grants administered by the Tasmanian Government.
Further information on Australian Government assistance is available online at www.disasterassist.gov.au.



HOST: Prime Minister, thanks so much for your time and for speaking to us. I understand you've got an announcement to make.
PM: That's right I do. I'm here in Tasmania today and I've been visiting with the Tasmanian Premier.
We've had the opportunity to be briefed by the local fire and police and I've seen some remarkable scenes of destruction and met some amazing community members as well.
But I did want to take this opportunity to confirm that if you are thinking of donating to one of the appeals that is helping people in Tasmania, please do.
Your cash makes a difference and I can announce today that that donation will be tax-deductible.
So for Australians who are thinking I really want to do something to help, please make a cash donation and come tax time you'll be able to see some benefit of doing that.
HOST: Tell us Prime Minister, how important is that? I mean, you've been touring the region. What have you seen firsthand this afternoon?
PM: Well I have had the opportunity to see here what the fires have done, and we do need to remember Wendy this fire emergency is not over yet.
Fires are still being fought, and depending on what happens with temperatures and wind conditions in the next few days, we could see fires once again destroying things in Tasmania.
So the message is please keep listening to all of the local announcements. What I've seen here is the loss of homes, the destruction of community property.
For example, where I'm standing now, this is a township that's lost its local school as well as these community tennis courts that you can see behind me.
People are all pulling together. There's heaps of donations of food and toiletries and the kind of things people need in the first few days of an emergency.
But beyond that, what does the most good is actual resources, money to do things that the community needs.
So if you've got the will to put in a little bit of money then that would be very, very welcome by the people in Tasmania so hard-hit.
HOST: Prime Minister, as you say you've heard so many stories. Is there one or two in particular that have really touched you?
PM: I've heard a lot of stories.
I met a young girl at the local school who'd just come through to have a look at the school she's been going to. She was so distressed and just wanted to know what had happened.
She hadn't been eating but whilst she's seen some devastating scenes it seems to have helped her that at least now she knows what her school looks like.
I've heard stories of people who raced for the jetty to get into a boat, to get into the water to escape the fire.
The fire here obviously burned with incredible intensity because you're seeing big bits of metal absolutely twisted and destroyed, so incredibly hot.
But you know, we've been at the local pub and there's the local publican and he's providing free food to help people out, so amazing community spirit.
HOST: Just on that point, are people getting what they need at this point?
PM: At this point there are obviously stresses and strains and people are under a lot of pressure, but people have pulled together to make resources available.
So there are emergency centres in operation where people can get assistance with food, with basic necessities like soap and a razor and all of that kind of stuff.
People can register for the emergency payments that can help them out.
There are payments coming from the Tasmanian Government and from us, particularly the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment that puts some money in people's pockets.
But like any natural disaster, it's going to be a long way back for this community and for communities like it around Tasmania.
HOST: Which is why it is so important that we do donate. Just tell us the details, Prime Minister, again if people are just joining us at home.
PM: Well the details are if you donate to one of the appeals that is helping people in Tassie, it will be tax deductible.
The Red Cross is running one of these appeals, so get on the Red Cross website or give the Red Cross a call and they'll be able to tell you how to go about donating.
HOST: Alright Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you very much for joining us on Nine News now. I appreciate your time this afternoon.
PM: Thanks for the opportunity.


Hobart
The Australian Government will provide tax deductible status to relief funds established to help Australians affected by the Tasmanian bushfires.
The Acting Assistant Treasurer, the Hon Gary Gray AO, MP, today declared the January 2013 Tasmanian fires a disaster for the purposes of establishing Australian disaster relief funds.
This declaration ensures that new funds and qualifying existing funds established for the relief of people in communities affected by the bushfires, can receive tax deductible donations.
While funds still need to apply for formal endorsement, the Tax Office has established a fast track process to get applications approved as quickly as possible.
As communities in Tasmania hit hard by recent bushfires start to count the cost, Australians from all around the country are coming together to help out.
These donations can be used to provide money or direct assistance for relief, recovery and community reconstruction work to assist affected individuals and communities. 
The Government will also continue to assist affected communities as they undertake the long task of rebuilding and re-establishing.
Donations to Australian disaster relief funds, established to provide relief in the aftermath of the bushfires, will be tax deductible for a period of two years from the date of this declaration. 
These events have caused devastation to communities in Tasmania and have resulted in widespread damage to property and the environment.
Further information on establishing an Australian disaster relief fund is available at www.ato.gov.au.


Hobart
PM: Thank you. Thank you very much to the Premier. It is good to be here with representatives of the Federal Labor team.
I've come to Tasmania today for one purpose and that's to say to the people of Tasmania that the nation is standing with them at this very, very difficult time. We'll be standing with them in every way.
Indeed, I've already met today Victorians and people from New South Wales who have come to work in support of their friends in Tasmania as Tasmania continues to fight these fires and then moves into the recovery phase from this fire crisis.
I've met Victorians here today who were assisted by Tasmanians when Victoria faced the 2009 devastating bushfires. They feel like they're returning a favour.
I think they're showing great Australian mateship at what is an incredibly difficult time.
For many they're still worried about family and friends and still seeking to be reassured that their family and friends are okay. It is a very anxious time.
For a number of people, they know their home has been destroyed but as yet, for safety reasons, they haven't been able to return to their home to see the damage themselves.
So a really stressing position to be in, knowing that you've lost so much, but not being able to see it for yourself.
And for many, they've been displaced and moved around.
People who wanted to do something as simple as go on a family holiday have had to confront the forces of nature at work.
To all of those people I do want to say we're thinking of you in these moments of grief and despair and we will be working with you in the days to come.
At a practical level The Federal Government is working with the State Government and with the Tasmanian Fire Service here and police and local authorities. 
We're working through our Australian Defence Force that has provided some assistance. 
We're working through assisting with practical things like managing telephone call loads and helping with the overflow with as people ring in in their hundreds to get information about family and friends. 
We're helping too, by triggering some important emergency payments that help people when they are in these dark days.
We're working with the Tasmanian Government on that and we have also triggered that for a number of areas; the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment to give people some immediate assistance to help them through.
And we will be assessing the damage and what needs to be done to help communities rebuild.
I do want to echo some of the words of the Premier here in Tasmania. 
Fires are still being fought, and it is very important that people stay alert to continuing information from local authorities about what they need to do to stay safe.
And that message also continues to be true around the nation. 
And I do want to say some particular words about forthcoming circumstances in New South Wales.
We know that New South Wales is about to move into an extreme heat period.
That does mean there about will be fire warnings in parts of New South Wales, that fire risk is extreme, indeed in parts of NSW fire risk levels could be moved to catastrophic.
In those circumstances, people in New South Wales need to do what so many in Tasmania have been doing over the past few days, which is staying alert, listening to local authority warnings, thinking about what they would do, their bushfire plan, activating their bushfire plan.
This is the time to be vigilant and I do want to particularly want to pass that message to the people of New South Wales as the temperature gauge starts to rise. 
I will with the Premier and others be here talking to people who have been affected in Tasmania and it's been great to be able to get such a comprehensive briefing from the Tasmanian Fire Service and from local police.
And I do very much thank them for that and I want to thank everybody who has been out there helping, whether they're police, firefighters, SES, volunteers, so many people who have done so much to be helping their fellow citizen, their fellow Australian, at this time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a lot of people without food and water. Do you think the response to this bushfire has been good enough? 
PM: Well, we've just taken a briefing about the movement of food, water and other resources to assist people, so you've got very specific questions about where those resources are available, then I'm standing here with some very great experts who will be able to give you specific answers to that.
I think the Tasmanian Fire Service and Tasmanian police and indeed all of the agencies and authorities have been doing everything they can in what are incredibly difficult circumstances to support people through.
So this is a time where we've got to be pulling together and making the best of what inevitably are very difficult days, but this immediate crisis has been worked on very professionally and hard by the people you see standing behind me and so many others that they represent. 
JOURNALIST: What is your message to the farmers and the primary producers so severely affected? 
PM: I'm happy to take that question. I think the Premier wanted to say something though.
PREMIER GIDDINGS: We're still in dangerous circumstances as well which has been part of the problem of being able to get resources down to the Tasman Peninsula.
My understanding is a convoy has been successful in taking resources down to the people on the Tasman Peninsula who have been isolated. 
But there is fire activity still right up to the roadside and we will not put other people in danger.
But we of course have also been providing resources with ferry services that have helped to ensure that people have been able to get off the Tasman Peninsula in safe circumstances as well, so I too would join with the PM in commending the work of everybody who has helped to either fight the fires or support those in community refuges.
And there are so many Tasmanians who are involved and it really is showing just how strong the community spirit is with the support that's been provided. 
PM: Yes, there's been property damage and loss, we're not in a position yet where that can be mapped in every detail but of course we know people have sustained property damage and loss.
We do work with people who have sustained economic damage to help them get back on their feet.
We'll see this unfold over coming days, fires are still being fought and those fires have to be dealt with.
People's immediate needs for shelter and food and water and access to fuel and electricity have to be met and work is happening on that.
Of course, we're still working through where everybody is and whether everybody is safe and then in coming days increasingly the recovery work starts but this is still an ongoing and unfolding situation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you by reports that rental car companies are likely to charge customers who can't get their cars back, they're stuck in limbo as such?
PM: I'm not going to may any assumptions about how companies are going to react in these circumstances.
I think everybody would realise that if you get trapped by a fire and can't get your car out then that's not fault of yours. 
I'm sure everybody would imagine what it's like to be on holiday with a rental car and then to have to scramble around and start worrying about fire and what you're going to do next. 
So I think at a human level we would all understand that.
I'm not going to may any assumptions about how companies will respond.
Companies will make their own statements but of course I think everybody would understand that there are people trapped in this who didn't choose to be, that's just the circumstance they're in. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're hoping to visit some of the worst affected areas later on today. There are many locals haven't been able to get back to their homes to see what state they're in, they're very desperate to do that.
Can you understand their frustration that the Prime Minister who has no direct assets involved can go and visit those areas but they can't? 
PM: I will be doing exactly what I would ask everybody else to do, which is abiding by the instructions and requests of the fire service and the police.
I won't do anything personally that the fire service and police say shouldn't be done, of course I wouldn't do that.
I understand the frustration of people who want to get back and see what's happened to their homes but the thing that would be worse than not seeing your home would be to try and go and see it and get hurt doing so.
We don't want anybody to sustain an injury trying to get back and looking at their homes, so safety of human beings always has to be the thing that we put first.
So I can understand that kind of really pressing personal frustration but I'd also ask people to understand there's actually nothing more important than their safety and their health and their welfare and that's what the emergency services personnel are putting first.
JOURNALIST: At this point, despite it being a catastrophic fire it's been fatality free, what would be your message nationally about the way that this crisis was handled in Tasmania that perhaps is a lesson for the rest of the country? 
PM: I think we have to take this a step at the time.
Inquiries are still being made and there are anxious relatives and friends who are still working through to make sure that their loved one is safe.
So let's have all of that process worked through so we can actually reliably assess what has happened over the past few days.
What I would say more generally is our nation has learned and we continue to learn more, about how best to address bushfires.
We learned things from the ACT fire, we certainly learned from what happened in Victoria.
These are extreme events, we do get better and better management systems as a result, but we live in a country that is hot and dry and where we sustain very destructive fires periodically so there's always going to be risk.
Whilst you would not put any one event down to climate change, weather doesn't work like that, but we do know over time that as a result of climate change we are going to see more extreme weather events and conditions. 
So we live with this risk and we need to have the best systems to manage it and I'm satisfied that our emergency services right around the nation share information, share lessons learned, so that they can improve for the next time. 
To give just one example of that, that has happened here, in this crisis, out of what happened in Victoria a lot of work has been done on using mobile phones to get messages to people.
That's been done very systematically here so that people could get information on their mobile phone; that's a great example of how you can learn and improve and the technology can take you to a different way of communicating with people.
Twitter and social media and all the rest would have been one way in which people got their information about these fires, as well as the traditional sources like putting on your radio. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
PM: I don't think I'm the best person to handle that. I think maybe our police might want to say a few things about that so this is a question about an update on people missing, numbers of people missing. 
TASMANIA POLICE SPOKESMAN: There's been the national registration inquiry system operating now for the last couple of days. 
The Australian Red Cross are responsible for that and we're working very closely with them. 
There's obviously a lot of people making requests for information, they're concerned about relatives and friends who were down in the area at the time or may have been, and those requests are coming in not just from around the country but from overseas in some instances as well.
So up until this morning we still had about 500 inquiries that we were working through.
Part of that process involves cross checking to see whether several inquiries have been made about the same person, also cross referencing that with records that have been maintained at the community refuge centres and people are coming and going from those periodically.
So it's quite a complex process to identify exactly who is unaccounted for and who isn't and that's why we're encouraging people, even if they're previously registered at a community refuge centre, to also again reregister with the national registration system so that we can be certain that they're okay. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
TASMANIA POLICE SPOKESMAN: About 500 inquiries still need to be confirmed that people have definitely been accounted for.
There's a significantly lower number of people that we do have more serious concerns about. 
Yesterday, it was around about 100 people; now that's not to say that there's 100 people that may have come to harm, it's just to say that we really need to focus on those people as a priority, particularly as we work through the process that we're doing at the moment of going around all of the properties that have been destroyed or damaged by fire.
We've got our teams working on that, there was 11 teams down there yesterday, the teams are back in there today doing that work, but it is, I'm sure some people would see it as a slow process, but it's a necessary process to work through.
And until we've had the opportunity to do all the screening that we need to do at each of those premises, we can't say for certain that there hasn't been a human life or more than one human life lost as a result of these fires.
So there will be a period of time to come yet before we're in a position to say that no-one has died as a result of these fires unfortunately.
JOURNALIST: How far into that process are you and has it been a negative response so far? 
TASMANIA POLICE SPOKESMAN: It's been negative in terms of not identifying that anybody has died but the process itself started on Friday afternoon, early evening, as soon as it was safe to fly our initial team into Dunalley, and it's continued since then and been ramping up since that time.
The teams that we've got working on this at the moment are joint agency teams with New South Wales fire assistance, police, SES, Tasmania fire and assistance and assistance from Defence Force reservists as well and they're working through the process as quickly as they possibly can but it does need to be done thoroughly and it needs to be done safely from their perspective as well. 
JOURNALIST: In terms of the Arthur Highway, you mentioned you were going to try to convoy people out from the peninsula, have you been able to do that or are you able do that today? 
TASMANIA POLICE SPOKESMAN: We're hoping that we will be able to do that today.
We've been trying to do that now for the last couple of days as most people would be aware.
We've been able to, under escort, have some emergency service vehicles going in at various times over the last couple of days and that's been important not only to ensure that we've got the resources that we need on the Tasman Peninsula but also taking in some of those urgent supplies that people do need. 
We've also had supplies going in on the vessels that have been taking people out to maximise the usage that we're getting out of those vessels and coordinates that with all of the agencies that need to get resources down there, so depending on the conditions today, an assessment will be made as to whether or not when we do another escort in whether we can then also escort people coming off the peninsula.
We've been saying since this began that we will only do that when we can guarantee the safety of those involved.
JOURNALIST: We started off with thousands down there and there has been ferrying back and forwards. How many are still stranded? 
TASMANIA POLICE SPOKESMAN: At the moment in terms of people that have wanted to come off the peninsula we're satisfied that the vast majority of those have had the opportunity to come off.
There were some on Friday evening, they were the high priority people that needed to come off, particularly people with medical conditions, some of the international tourists for example that had flights they needed to catch.
There was 1,000 people approximately on Saturday, another 400 came off last night, so there's been significant numbers of people that wanted to come off.
In fact all the people that we could identify that wanted to come off have come off.
Some people have elected to stay for various reasons and of course some are the local people who don't want to leave the peninsula anyway.
So at this particular point in time, the Nubeena Recovery Centre is servicing the needs of about 500 people.
That's not to say that there's 500 people actually camped at the centre. There's a much smaller number of people camped at the centre sleeping in cars and whatnot. 
Most of those people are coming and going amongst the community, in some cases to their own properties down there.
Down at Port Arthur there's still about 200 to 250 people being looked after, and at Sorell a much smaller number that have been serviced through our facility.
So the numbers are significantly down on what they were but a number of people are still in the area and it's important that we support them as best we can. 
JOURNALIST: What do you have to say about the cause of the Forcett fire? 
TASMANIA POLICE SPOKESMAN: That's been the one that's been subject to the most investigation over the last few days.
What we are in a position to advise now is that that our investigations in conjunction with the Tasmania Fire Service lead to us believe that was an accidental fire.
There was a tree stump at a property at Forcett that had been burning for a week or two prior to the fire and prior to the fire bans being imposed.
It was thought that that had been completely extinguished but it now appears that there might have been a root system underground that was still burning that's worked its way to the surface and ignited the fire.
So that is an accidental lightage and in fact we have no indication that any of the fires that we've been dealing with have been deliberately lit. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) any charges as a result of those- 
TASMANIA POLICE SPOKESMAN: It's too early to say that but the indications that I've been given at this stage is that it was accidental and we're approaching it on that basis. 
JOURNALIST: Premier, have budget constraints affected the State's ability to handle the fires? 
PREMIER GIDDINGS: No. Resources have been on foot as you would see, the Tasmanian Fire Service have been doing all that they should be doing on the ground with the SES, Tasmania police. 
In fact I must say I was overseas and I would commend the SES, the Tasmanian Fire Service and the police-
(INTERRUPTION)
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Just very quickly, I believe everything is happening as it ought to happen, of course in time we will review what we have been doing to ensure that if there's things we can do better that we learn.
But right at this point in time, we are still fighting fires, we are still working with families who need our help and all of that help is being provided.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PREMIER GIDDINGS: No. We're not at any stage of that or any need for that at the moment, but even as we're going through both police and the fire service are inquiring as to what is happening on the ground.
As you've heard just now, we already know where we believe the Forcett fire began so that level of inquiry is already happening to that extent and we will work through these issues. We'd better move. 
PM: We'd better move.


ABC 7.30
HOST: Prime Minister welcome to 7.30. You've just been for a tour of the affected areas. How bad is it?
PM: It's pretty bad. I've seen fire-affected areas before, so I kind of knew what to expect.
But what always strikes you is the real destructive force of fire, the power of it, to even twist and bend metal, to make properties look like they've exploded rather than been burned.
And also the randomness of it; that you can be in one place next to twisted metal - the fire has been that hot - and then move five or ten feet in another direction, and there will be plants and plastic shielding plants that's absolutely untouched.
HOST: And what's the extent of the damage?
PM: The official fire fighting service here in Tasmania and the police are still coming to a final estimate of the damage, so Ben I'm not in a position to give that to you.
But clearly, quite a number of houses have been destroyed and there's been a lot of community property too, including the school at Dunalley.
HOST: You were obviously speaking to people on the ground. What were they saying to you?
PM: Well they all have a story to tell about where they were and what they did and whether or not their homes survived.
Many of them had stories to tell me about fighting the fire till the last possible moment and then getting out onto the water because this is a seaside place so people could escape into the water to get away from the fire front.
But clearly it's been a very distressing and very frightening time for people.
I met a young girl called Billie who'd come back to see the ruins of her local school.
She'd clearly been very, very distressed about not knowing exactly what had happened to her school and she wanted to see it for herself.
So by the time you're having a conversation with a young kid who literally hasn't been eating because she's been so distressed, the full force of what's happening to people and how it's messing with their lives and putting pressure on them really comes home to you.
HOST: Tasmania's obviously a state that's already got a pretty fragile economy. This has hit the farming sector hard, the stock and pasture, it's hit the tourist areas hard, so it needs to rebuild fast.
Now what can you offer when you obviously can't take a one-size-fits-all approach to government assistance?
PM: No, we most certainly don't. We have a number of programs that hit the ground immediately and we're already rolling those programs out.
Today I've met with Centrelink officials who are here processing payments for people.
That's the early money, the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment, and the hardship money that we make available alongside the Tasmanian Government to help people through the personal hardship of losing their home.
Then we make an assessment about what else is needed, and particularly what infrastructure and community infrastructure has been lost.
So every circumstance ends up needing its own unique assessment and it needs community engagement, because when community assets have been lost, then we want to make sure that the community gets to have a say on how things are replaced, what is done for the future.
People don't necessarily want just a replica of what's been there in the past.
HOST: We've heard this afternoon some extremely dire warnings about the situation in New South Wales tomorrow, which could possibly, according to what the conditions say, be even worse than what's happened in Tasmania.
Have you been briefed on that situation?
PM: Yes, I've been continually updated about New South Wales and indeed fire conditions around the country.
We've seen many days of extreme weather now in various parts of the country, and we are going to see an extreme weather day tomorrow in New South Wales.
We know that there are around 80 fires burning in New South Wales now. Eleven of them are not within control lines.
So there is already fire in New South Wales, and what everybody is worried about is that a day of extreme heat, and that's what New South Wales will face tomorrow, will fan those flames.
So the best advice I can give to people is be ready, be prepared, already have your plan in place as to what you will do if your house, your property faces the worst, and stay in good touch with all of the warnings coming from local authorities.
Today in Tasmania I've met people who were prepared, who knew what they were going to do, who got all of the community warnings and acted on them.
That's the way in which we can see this kind of challenge through.
So please, to the people of New South Wales, tomorrow is a day when they need to take real care.
HOST: Prime Minister we'll leave it there. Thanks for your time.
PM: Thanks very much.
[ENDS]


Sunrise
Let's go straight to Prime Minister, welcome. First up I want to get your reaction to these catastrophic conditions in New South Wales. Have you been briefed on the situation and what's your view?
PM: Yes I have been briefed, Kochie and I will be continuously briefed during the course of the day. I have also touched base with Premier O'Farrell.
We, of course, are very concerned about these extreme weather conditions in New South Wales.
The word catastrophic is being used for good reason, Kochie.
So it is very important that people keep themselves safe, that they listen to local authorities and local warnings. This is a very dangerous day.
Now, I'd like to end this day with nothing having happened and everybody saying, "Gee, what was that all about?" That would be the best think that could happen.
It is a dangerous day and people do have to stay focused.
And even if you aren't in a region at any risk, this extreme heat is very damaging for human health.
So we have got to keep an eye on each other and particularly on older relatives.
HOST: Really good tips. Have you offered Federal Government resources to New South Wales, for example, Defence Forces if needed?
PM: Absolutely, and people from our Defence Force are integrated into the New South Wales planning.
We've had the opportunity to learn a lot about the best way to work together.
Unfortunately, Mother Nature has provided us with too many opportunities to practise for all of these emergencies.
So we have now got very good systems where federal officials, state officials, the Defence Force all start collaborating early so when it gets really rough they are already working with together and know what to do.
HOST: You spent yesterday in Tasmania looking at the worst-affected areas. What did you see? How did it affect you?
PM: Well, I saw a lot of devastation, Kochie, and Tassie was in the same position as New South Wales a few days ago.
It knew that it had fires burning and that extreme heat was coming, and for Hobart particularly, extreme heat is a very, very rare thing. And that extreme heat did then fan these flames.
The flames have done a lot of damage to homes and community infrastructure, to vital community places like schools.
I got the opportunity to see it for myself yesterday and to meet people who have been affected; lots of really human stories.
A young kid called Billie I met who was looking at the ruins of the school that she'd gone to and that she was going to go to this year. She had been so distressed she hadn't been eating.
And then on the other side of the ledger you meet some amazing people; the publican of the local pub who had been turning out free meals for days to keep everybody going.
Just a great Australian effort of pitching in the best way he knew how.
HOST: If only we could bottle it for the rest of the year, that community Australian spirit in times of need, it's wonderful.
But situations like this again raise the question, maybe is there need for a national disaster insurance scheme? Are you giving any more thought to this?
PM: There have been some looks at this question, Kochie.
We don't have any immediate plans to move to a new model.
The model we've got now is one where we make provisions for disasters and we are able to step in and give people emergency money and then work with our state colleagues for the rebuilding.
We did, of course, have to strike a levy for what was the most costly natural disaster Australia had ever faced in Queensland.
We'll be out there providing support.
We are already providing payments in Tasmania.
But gee Kochie, it would be nice if we could end today with no one needing a payment because no one had suffered any loss and that is what we've got to aim for.
HOST: Yep absolutely. Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: Thanks, Kochie.
[ENDS]


Sydney
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and NSW Premier Barry O'Farrell today announced natural disaster assistance in 37 Local Government Areas in NSW affected by bushfires.
“Yesterday across the state we faced extreme bushfire conditions and the threat remains with more than 130 fires still burning,” Mr O'Farrell said.
“Thankfully there has been no loss of life or large scale loss of houses, however the bushfires have had a devastating effect on livestock and farmland.”
Today the NSW Government announced Natural Disaster Declarations in the following 37 Local Government Areas, which will now lead to joint Commonwealth-state funded disaster assistance becoming available for these communities;
·         Albury
·         Berrigan
·         Blayney
·         Boorowa
·         Cabonne
·         Conargo
·         Coolamon
·         Cooma-Monaro
·         Cootamundra
·         Corowa
·         Cowra
·         Deniliquin
·         Forbes
·         Goulburn Mulwaree
·         Greater Hume
·         Gundagai
·         Harden
·         Jerilderie
·         Junee
·         Lachlan
·         Lockhart
·         Murray
·         Orange
·         Palerang
·         Parkes
·         Queanbeyan
·         Shoalhaven
·         Snowy River
·         Tumbarumba
·         Tumut
·         Upper Lachlan
·         Urana
·         Wagga Wagga
·         Wakool
·         Weddin
·         Yass Valley
·         Young
More Local Government Areas may be declared in coming days as further assessments are completed.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard said that recovering from disasters is not just a local effort, but one that reaches nationwide and that this joint Federal-State funding will make a real difference to affected communities as they bounce back from these events.
A range of assistance grants are in the process of being made available:
·         disaster relief grants to eligible individuals and families whose homes and essential household items have been destroyed or damaged are available
·         transport freight subsidies of up to 50 per cent on the carriage of livestock and fodder are available to help primary producers to a maximum of $15,000 per annum
·         loans of up to $130,000 are also available (subject to certain eligibility criteria), at a concessional interest rate, for primary producers and small businesses in urgent need.
·         grants are also available to councils to help them meet the additional costs of emergency work to restore essential services
·         a special scheme is available to assist sporting clubs in meeting the costs of restoration of essential club facilities that have been damaged or destroyed
Noting this is a very difficult time for many NSW residents, the Prime Minister said these payments will assist individuals and families to get back on their feet.
Mr O'Farrell said a range of assistance measures will be available, including grants for eligible individuals and families whose homes and essential household items have been destroyed or damaged.
“I want those affected by these bushfires to know that help is there for them as they recover from this natural disaster,” Mr O'Farrell said.
“One of the heartbreaking outcomes of the bushfires has been the loss of about 10,000 sheep.
“For our state's farmers that represents a financial loss of about $1 million.
“There has also been significant damage to pastures, crops and fencing on rural properties across NSW.
“I would like to take this opportunity to thank our emergency services personnel for their hard work and professionalism during this crisis – particularly the volunteers.
“These brave men and women have done an extraordinary job in the toughest of conditions.
“While most employers do the right thing – I want those who volunteered during this emergency to know employment protection provisions are in place to ensure they cannot be penalised by their employer for missing work,” Mr O'Farrell said.
This declaration triggers a number of disaster assistance schemes to assist with the cost of disaster relief and recovery. These disaster assistance schemes are made available by the NSW Government through the NSW Disaster Assistance Arrangements and they are supported by the Commonwealth Government through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.


Sydney
On my advice, today the Governor-General has appointed a six-member Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse.
Child sexual abuse is an evil crime.
Anyone who has ever suffered child abuse deserves to have their voices heard and their claims investigated.
The Royal Commission will inquire into how institutions with a responsibility for children have managed and responded to allegations and instances of child sexual abuse and related matters. 
It will investigate where systems have failed to protect children, and make recommendations on how to improve laws, policies and practices to prevent and better respond to child sexual abuse in institutions.
The Commissioners can look at any private, public or non-government organisation that is, or was in the past, involved with children, including government agencies, schools, sporting clubs, orphanages, foster care, and religious organisations.
This includes where they consider an organisation caring for a child is responsible for the abuse or for not responding appropriately, regardless of where or when the abuse took place.
The Commission will not specifically examine child sexual abuse outside organisations, such as in the family. However, any recommendations made by the Commissioners are likely to improve the response to child sexual abuse wherever it happens.
The Royal Commission will be led by Justice Peter McClellan AM. Justice McClellan currently holds one of the most senior judicial positions in New South Wales judiciary as the Chief Judge at Common Law of the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
Justice McClellan has an extensive legal career  -  including chairing the Sydney Water Inquiry and working on the Royal Commission into British Nuclear Tests in Australia.
Given the scope, scale and seriousness of this Royal Commission, we asked the Governor-General to appoint a further five Commissioners to support the inquiry. 
We have carefully selected a panel of individuals that draws together the right experience and understanding for this incredibly important task.
Bob Atkinson, the former Queensland Police Commissioner, brings over 40 years of policing experience to the Royal Commission, including 12 years as Police Commissioner.
Justice Jennifer Coate served for 20 years as a magistrate and county court judge in Victoria, including for five years as the President of the Children's Court and most recently as the Victorian Coroner. Justice Coate has also now been appointed to the Family Court of Australia.
Robert Fitzgerald has served as a Commissioner in the Productivity Commission since 2004.  He also has experience in commerce, law, public policy and community services, including as Community and Disability Services Commissioner and Deputy Ombudsman in New South Wales.
Professor Helen Milroy is a consultant psychiatrist with extensive experience in child and adolescent health, including the mental health impacts of child sexual assault, and is currently Winthrop Professor and Director of the Centre for Aboriginal Medical and Dental Health at the University of Western Australia.
Former Senator for Western Australia Andrew Murray brings tremendous experience as a legislator and member of landmark Senate inquiries into children's experiences in institutional care.
We have heard from survivors and their families that they want concrete changes in a reasonable timeframe. Many survivors have already waited a long time.
All Commissioners have been appointed for a period of three years and will begin their inquiry as soon as possible. The Commission will prepare an interim report by no later than 30 June 2014, so that governments and organisations can start taking action on the Commission's early findings and recommendations.
In this interim report, the Commissioners will also identify when their final report will be completed. The final reporting date has been set initially at the end of 2015, but this will be subject to advice from Commissioners in their interim report.
Child sexual abuse is a crime, and a terrible breach of the right of every child to grow up safe and happy.
Child sexual abuse is often associated with other forms of abuse including physical abuse, exploitation and neglect.
All have long-term effects on survivors and their families. There are also costs to the economy and society as a whole.
The Government has worked closely with stakeholders, receiving input from organisations representing survivors of child abuse, community and legal leaders, law enforcement, governments and religious organisations, to develop terms of reference that balance the real and legitimate perspectives of a range of stakeholders.
The Government will also introduce legislation into the Parliament to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902 to allow evidence to be taken by a single or multiple Commissioners rather than requiring all Commissioners to be present. This will improve the efficiency of the evidence gathering process and avoid delaying the Commission's work.
We thank every individual and organisation who has provided input into the establishment of the Royal Commission and the terms of reference. We also acknowledge those who have campaigned for many years for a full and proper investigation into child sexual abuse in Australia.
This Government will do everything it can to make sure that what happened to children in the past is never allowed to happen again, and that survivors receive the support and justice they deserve.


Sydney
PM: Good afternoon.
With Ministers Macklin and Roxon who are here with me today, I have just visited the Governor-General, and the Governor-General has agreed to my request to establish a Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse in Australia.
In November, I announced the Government's intention to have such a Royal Commission.
Since that announcement in November we've been involved in a process of consultation about the terms of reference and Minister Macklin will detail some of the consultations that have been gone through.
In addition, I had the opportunity to speak directly to my State and Territory colleagues about collaborating on this at the Council of Australian Governments meeting towards the end of last year.
Following those consultations and discussions, today we can announce the establishment of the Royal Commission.
I believe our nation needs to have this Royal Commission. Child sexual abuse is a hideous, shocking and vile crime.
And it is clear from what is already in the public domain that too many children were the subject of child sexual abuse in institutions.
That they've had to live with the trauma of that child sexual abuse for the rest of their lives; that they weren't provided with a safe childhood and a safe place to be.
And that too many adults who could've assisted them turned a blind eye so that they didn't get the help that they needed. 
The Royal Commission will provide us with recommendations about what we can do better for the future.
The Royal Commission will be recommending to us what we can do to better keep children safe in institutional contexts; what we can do to ensure that child abuse is reported and responded to; what we can do to clear away any impediments to the reporting of child abuse.
I believe our nation needs to learn these lessons and act on them for the future.
In addition, our nation needs to send a very clear message to those who have survived child sexual abuse.
For too many the trauma of that abuse has been compounded by the sense that they have had that their nation doesn't understand or doesn't care about what they've suffered.
To those survivors of child sexual abuse today, we are able to say we want your voices to be heard.
Even if you felt for all of your life that no-one's listened to you, that no-one has taken you seriously, that no-one has really cared, the Royal Commission is an opportunity for your voice to be heard.
And in acknowledging that we need to hear those voices, I hope we can provide some measure of comfort to survivors of child sexual abuse, and I hope in having the opportunity to tell their story they will find some opportunity for healing.
I do want to be clear about what the Royal Commission will do and what it won't do.
The Royal Commission is into child sexual abuse and related matters.
The Royal Commission is into child sexual abuse and related matters in institutional contexts.
It will not deal with child sexual abuse in the family. It also will not deal with abuse of children which is not associated with child sexual abuse.
We have consulted and we've made some choices so that the Royal Commission can focus on child sexual abuse and provided advice and recommendations to government in as timely a way as possible. 
This is a big task, such a Royal Commission, and we have worked to find people to serve as Royal Commissioners with the right mix of skills and personal attributes to get the job done.
Today I announced the appointment of six Royal Commissioners who will work as this Royal Commission into child sexual abuse in institutional settings.
The Royal Commission will be led by Justice Peter McClellan. He is currently a New South Wales Supreme Court judge.
Justice McClellan brings a wealth of judicial experience to this role and I thank him for making himself available to serve.
He was appointed as a judge in 2005.
Prior to the current judicial appointment he holds, he has held other judicial appointments, including being the Chief Judge of the Land and Environment Court of New South Wales, the Chairman of the Sydney Water inquiry, and he was Assistant Commissioner at the Independent Commission Against Corruption.
He also served as counsel assisting in the Royal Commission into the British nuclear tests at Maralinga.
Justice McClellan will be the Chief Commissioner. He will be assisted by the following Commissioners.
First, Bob Atkinson the former Queensland Police Commissioner, who will bring over 40 years of policing experience to the Royal Commission role, 12 of those years as Police Commissioner.
Justice Jennifer Coate will also serve. Jennifer Coate has served for 20 years as a magistrate and County Court judge in Victoria, including for five years as the President of the Children's Court and most recently as the Victorian Coroner.
Justice Coate has now also been appointed to the Family Court of Australia. 
Robert Fitzgerald. Robert Fitzgerald has served as a Commissioner on the Productivity Commission since 2004.
He also has experience in commerce, law, public policy and community service, including as Community and Disability Services Commissioner and Deputy Ombudsman in New South Wales.
Professor Helen Milroy, who is a consultant psychiatrist with extensive experience in child and adolescent health, including the mental health impacts of child sexual assault.
Helen Milroy is currently Winthrop Professor and Director for the Centre for Aboriginal Medical and Dental Health at University of Western Australia.
Former Western Australian Senator, Senator Andrew Murray, who will bring with him his tremendous experience as a legislator and a member of the landmark senate inquiries into children's experiences in institutional care.
He is certainly well-known for his contributions to our nation's consideration of the Forgotten Australians of child migrants, so Senator Andrew Murray is the final appointment to the Royal Commission.
All Commissioners have been appointed for a period of three years and will begin their inquiry as soon as possible.
The Commission will prepare an interim report by no later than 30 June 2014 so that governments and organisations can start taking action on the Commission's early findings and recommendations.
In the interim report, the Commissioners will also identify when their final report will be completed.
The terms of reference do set an end date for the Royal Commission of 31 December 2015, but that end date can be extended if necessary.
Today is the day that we start to create a future, where people who perpetrate child sexual abuse cannot hide in institutions; where we work together to find a better way of keeping our children safe.
I will turn now to Minister Macklin for some comments on the consultations and her work with survivors' groups. 
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thank you very much Prime Minister.
Today is a very significant day for survivors and victims of child sexual abuse and related forms of abuse and I do want to acknowledge and congratulate all of the individuals and organisations who for many, many years have campaigned for this day.
People have campaigned for this day so that they get the opportunity to be heard and to be believed.
I do also want to acknowledge the way in which individuals and organisations have helped us over the last month or so to make sure that we get the terms of reference for this very important Royal Commission right and have also helped in the selection of the Royal Commissioners.
So to all of the victims and also the survivors of child sexual abuse, we do understand just how important this day it for you. 
This Royal Commission of course will provide the opportunity for individuals to come forward and share their experiences, and we know that for many, many people it will not be an easy thing to do.
For many people it will open up very old wounds and for that reason the Government will make sure that we provide support for individuals.
We'll also provide financial resources to those organisations that individual survivors know and trust; the organisations that will be very important in supporting people as they come forward and present their evidence to the Royal Commission.
The Royal Commission will also of course have the capacity to support people as they go through what will be a very, very difficult process of telling their stories and, we hope, healing.
We do hope that this Royal Commission will bring about the systemic changes that people have been wanting for such a long time.
To make sure that people get the justice that they deserve. To make sure that people get the redress that they need so much; that they get the care and support and possibly the treatment that they need.
That the way in which perpetrators are dealt with is done much more quickly and more effectively than it has been done in the past.
To make sure that those things that were previously covered up are uncovered.
This is a very significant Royal Commission, a Royal Commission that will make sure that the terrible wrongs that have been done in the past to children in our country, to the greatest extent, never happens again.
Thank you. 
PM: I will now ask the Attorney-General to detail some matters about the way the Royal Commission will work and also some forthcoming legislative amendments.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL ROXON: Thank you Prime Minister.
I just wanted to flag for the media and for the public that the Government intends to introduce some legislation into the parliament in our first week returning to parliament.
The current Royal Commissions Act only provides for evidence to be able to taken by the Commission constituted as a whole.
Part of our purpose of appointing six Commissioners is because we expect that there will be very large numbers of people who may want to present to the Commission.
They may want to do it less formally than would normally be expected and we certainly don't intend that all evidence would need to be given to every one of the six Commissioners at the one time.
We have spoken to the Opposition about this change and we do hope that it will have the enthusiastic support of all of the parliament.
It is something that I think people can understand will enable the Commission to do its work more thoroughly, more sensitively and more quickly.
I also want to just briefly make a comment about some of the things that the Commission will do and some of the things that the Commission will not do.
It is important to remind the public that this Royal Commission is not a police force. It is not a prosecuting body.
And child sexual abuse is a crime. And we do encourage all people to refer those matters to the police.
We understand, however, that many of these matters are from a long time ago.
Some people have hesitations in going to the police.
And we do think that the importance of the work of the Commission will mean many people will come forward to the Commission and may want and indeed need assistance in referring to the matter to the police.
So we have asked the Commissioners in the terms of reference to consider how they will carefully liaise with police forces across the country. 
We've suggested the establishment of an investigation unit, so that the Commission itself is able to work with people who bring forward matters that may need to be referred to the police in order to be able to refer it to them perhaps with a more detailed brief or with more information that allows the police to do their work promptly and thoroughly.
There are a range of other matters which we are happy of course to take questions on.
But I did also want to flag that the Commission once established now with the Letters-Patent signed following the recommendation by the Prime Minister to the Governor-General, will now establish itself and decisions of a range of very complex procedural issues will need to be made by the Commission itself.
The Commissioners will meet by phone on Monday and meet in person on Wednesday and I'm sure following time that they need to deliberate with each other will make further comments about these procedural matters.
But I do need to emphasise that a large number of those, and some of the areas that have been speculated in the media, will need to be handled by the Commission once they've had the opportunity to work carefully through those issues and talk with each other about how they intend to conduct those particular parts of their inquiry.
PM: This is obviously a very serious matter, so we'll take questions on this. Then at the end we'll take questions on any other issues of the day. 
JOURNALIST: Will the Commission be looking at the issue of confessions?
PM: All of that, how they want to take evidence, where they're going to get that evidence from, is a matter for the Royal Commission itself. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, where will the hearings be held? Will they be held around the country?
PM: Once again the Royal Commission will have to, the Commissioners will have to meet and will have to work through how they want to take evidence and the best way of doing that.
There are people around the country who will want to have their voices heard. There are also people who lived in Australia as children but who no longer live in Australia who may want do have their voices heard.
So this is something that will be the subject of very in-detail consideration by the Royal Commissioners. 
I would anticipate that they will put in place mechanisms to make sure people can tell their story no matter where they are.
MINISTER MACKLIN: I'd like to add to that because it is a very significant issue, particularly for people who do have special needs.
So there will be people with disabilities who will require particular support. There will be people who don't speak English who will require particular support.
And we're also aware that for many, many people who grew up in institutions, they did not get the opportunity to learn to read or write and so they will need support to be able to put their point of view other than by a written submission.
There are former child migrants of course whose parents or relatives may live elsewhere around the world.
So all of these matters we've asked the Royal Commission to consider. 
JOURNALIST: You mentioned the difference between child abuse and child sexual abuse, and this Royal Commission will be dealing with child sexual abuse. Obviously it's quite a legal definition, the differences between those.
Can we bit of a layman's difference between those two for people listening at home. What is the difference? 
PM: I think people probably would've seen that there's been debate between some of the groups that represent survivors about how broad this Royal Commission should go.
So whether or not this Royal Commission should direct its attention to physical mistreatment of children or neglect in circumstances where there was no child sexual abuse.
Of course physical mistreatment, neglect, are very evil things. Anything that stops a child having a safe and happy childhood is an evil thing.
But we've needed to make some decisions about what makes this process that can be manageable and can be worked through in a timeframe that gives the recommendations real meaning. 
So this Royal Commission will focus on child sexual abuse and related matters. Now that is a recognition that in some circumstances where child sexual abuse was occurring, physical mistreatment and neglect was also occurring to the same individuals.
So individuals may want to bring forward their own experience about what happened to them in being sexually abused, but also how that sexual abuse was in the context of broader mistreatment. 
JOURNALIST: You mentioned that there's going to be quite a lot of individual stories. How are you going to actually get through everyone in what does seem like quite a short period of time? 
PM: I will go to the Attorney-General, but we have to be very clear here about what the Government does and what the Royal Commission will do.
On my recommendation today, the Governor-General has established the Royal Commission. The Royal Commission consists of the six individuals I've described to you.
They will now work independently as is appropriate, making decisions about the best way for them to collect evidence to form their views and to make their recommendations for the future.
They will be meeting first by telephone on Monday, then for the first time face-to-face on Wednesday, to start dealing with a number of these procedural and logistics questions which are terribly important to make sure that people get the access that they want and need to the Royal Commission to have their stories heard.
I will turn to the Attorney-General for some further comments. 
ATTORNEY-GENERAL ROXON: I think the Prime Minister has covered all of those issues, other than to emphasise the point I made about the change to legislation which will allow the Commission to take evidence in a manner of different ways, both formally and informally.
We have learnt from other inquiries that have been conducted that having sensitive and innovative approaches to the way you allow people to tell their stories can actually be a significant part of the healing process. 
So, for example, the South Australian Mullighan Inquiry will inform the sorts of discussions that the Commissioners will have about the most appropriate way to hear people's stories and for that to inform the recommendations that the Commissioners also make to the Government. 
JOURNALIST: And Attorney-General, what kind of resources will the investigative unit have? Could you describe that, and also, will anyone be offered immunity from prosecution for giving evidence? 
ATTORNEY-GENERAL ROXON: Well, a number of these matters you will obviously have to address to the Commission as they work through their procedural issues.
We will need significant resources to establish this Commission as a whole.
You can clearly see by the appointment of six Commissioners that we expect that it will be a far-reaching inquiry that involves a lot of people and a lot of organisations.
The way the resources are divided between legal assistance, support that might need to be undertaken to tell particular stories in different settings, the legal advice or research teams that Commissioners themselves will lead and the investigative units will be a matter for the Commission.
We have had very good offers of support.
For example, the Federal Police have already indicated that they will happily second people to the Commission, which I think is an important step in making sure that the way matters can be investigated and handled and referred on to perhaps state police forces will be significant.
But we're not in a position today, without the Commission having had the opportunity to talk amongst itself, to give you the detail, other than to say our Government has been committed to provide the resources that are necessary.
Again, with emphasising the point that the Commission will not replace police authorities and that criminal matters still will need to be referred to police to be able to be handled properly. 
JOURNALIST: What about the question of immunity from prosecution? It was a big issue in Ireland? 
ATTORNEY-GENERAL ROXON: Again, all of these matters will be matters for the Commission. The Commission has very far-reaching powers. It can require people to present before it.
And there are a range of complex issues about concerns people have flagged with confidentiality agreements that might've been struck before. These issues will need to be addressed by the Commission. 
They do have far-reaching powers that enable them to override those agreements or indeed to issue immunities, but it would be pure speculation which we are not prepared to make now whether the Commission will indeed take that approach or not. 
JOURNALIST: But those powers could override those confidentiality agreements. 
ATTORNEY-GENERAL ROXON: The Royal Commission has extensive powers.
We have in the terms of reference the Letters-Patent make clear that the Royal Commission does not have to and ought not duplicate the work of previous inquiries.
That they will be able to look at work that's been done in institutions or in state organisations and accept recommendations that have come from those inquiries or indeed they may ask for more information if they have particular evidence before them that leads them down that path. 
I understand why people want to be able to answer these questions now, but we really do need to respect that we've just appointed six very eminent Australians.
They need some time to work through these issues.
And as the Commission does its work, they will then address whether any of those issues that people are speculating about will be necessary for them to deal with or not. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've taken national leadership on this issue. Are you expecting the most senior leaders of the churches and institutions to be prepared to give evidence at public hearings? 
PM: Who will be asked to give evidence is once again a question for the Royal Commission.
But I would be saying to all of us, to the whole nation that we've all got an obligation to shine a light on what's happened in the past and to learn from it. And to help people heal.
It was a big decision to announce, as I did last November, that we would have this Royal Commission, a big decision.
And I did it because I thought we needed it, as a nation.
And I did it because I thought people would cooperate and assist with the work of the Royal Commission. 
Many public statements have been made since by a variety of organisations and indeed State and Territory Governments about their preparedness to cooperate.
So I do want to see this Royal Commission achieve the full mission we've set for it. It's a very big mission; it's going to take some time.
But I think the terms of reference that we are laying out today are the right terms of reference.
The powers for the Royal Commission are comprehensive, and I think the six Australians that we've nominated today to serve as the Royal Commission are very eminent Australians with a great mix of skills for the job. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, has there been any discussion as to whether there will be or what time compensation will be given to victims of child sexual abuse? 
PM: When you look at the terms of reference you will see that the Royal Commission can make recommendations on redress for individuals who have suffered child sexual abuse.
The conversation before about confidentiality agreements is an indication that there are some people who have separate to this process received some forms of compensation for child sexual abuse.
But that is open to the commission to make recommendations on. 
JOURNALIST: You mentioned new funding for some of the organisations that child abuse survivors trust. Is that new funding, or is it coming from somewhere else?
MINISTER MACKLIN: We're working through the funding arrangements right now, but we certainly do understand that there will be increased demands on organisations that have been advocates and supporters of those who are victims or survivors of child sexual abuse.
So we will certainly make that funding available through my department. 
JOURNALIST: Any idea at the moment as to how much funding? 
MINISTER MACKLIN: We're still working through the actual numbers. 
JOURNALIST: So no ballpark figure?
MINISTER MACKLIN: Not yet.
JOURNALIST: Is it fair to say you may never really be able to construct any ballpark figure on that? 
MINISTER MACKLIN: No. We will work through the detail with the organisations and you will see those figures in our budgets. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's different about this Royal Commission? Australia has a history, particularly over the past 30 years, of some very big-ticket Royal Commissions, Aboriginal Deaths in Custody being one, and recommendations only partly being acted upon.
What makes this Royal Commission different? 
PM: I think there have been Royal Commissions in the past dealing with very important topics and the one you refer to, Deaths in Custody, which had five Royal Commissioners, five people serving, did a very comprehensive job in a hugely difficult area.
What we've got to do is now work through this, have the Royal Commission work through it, to recommendations that the nation can then absorb and respond to.
I think for this Royal Commission, and I don't want to be seen to be creating some hierarchy with Royal Commissions past; past Royal Commissions have played important roles for issues in their time.
But this is a tremendously important step; this really is history being made.
And it's our nation saying, we are prepared to stare in the face some uncomfortable facts and some deeply, deeply troubling truths.
And there have been people, as Minister Macklin has said, people who for all of their life have campaigned to have the opportunity to really be taken seriously and have their voices heard.
And one of the things that certainly has compounded hurt and harm is the sense that doors have been slammed in people's faces after they individually have sustained so much trauma.
I want, through this process, people to feel that the door is open for them to walk through.
Now, for some that will still be too hard. This is too much, too deep, too hard, too painful, and they will never come and tell anybody what happened to them, because they just can't.
For some, I think actually sitting with someone who treats them with dignity and respect and who takes them seriously, will in and of itself be a moment of healing and I think that's very important.
Then there's what we can learn for the future.
Any child being subject to child sexual abuse is an evil and horrible event.
Apart from the evil and horrible events for individuals, what I think is so confronting about much of what is in the public domain now is the sense that there were systemic issues and that there were eyes averted and children left in harm's way when changes could have been made and issues of abuse addressed.
We've got to learn from that so that we do better in the future. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just quickly to another issue, Kevin Rudd was out this morning-
PM: Let's deal with all the Royal Commission issues. 
JOURNALIST: We know a lot of people who were victims of abuse have ended up homeless or in the prison system. Have your consultations made you wary of the fact that a lot of these victims will be missed? Will you be making efforts to ensure their voices are heard? 
PM: The Royal Commission itself will be in charge of its outreach mission, how it gets information into the hands of people.
That will be a question for the Royal Commission, but I do believe because we have worked in such solid consultation with the groups that represent survivors and who are in good contact with them, that through their agencies and networks we will be able to get the message out. 
This is the kind of thing people have campaigned for, for a long period of time, and those people who have carried the campaign very bravely over many, many years when perhaps it seemed to them that nothing would ever change.
But for the people who very briefly carried that campaign to now see the Royal Commission happen, I think that they will do everything they can with the extra resources we will provide to reach out to those who need to know that the Royal Commission is in progress. 
JOURNALIST: What about the families of the victims? There's been cases where spouses have committed suicide due to abuse. Will their wives or children or parents be able to give any evidence? 
PM: Certainly all of that is open to the Royal Commission.
It's a question of how it chooses to work through its proceedings. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe that the Federal Government may be required to introduced compensation for victims? Or do you believe that compensation should come from the institutions involved? 
I don't want to be speculating about what a Royal Commission that we're establishing today is going to find.
But when you go to the terms of reference, we have asked the Royal Commission to make recommendations about redress for individuals and will of course be very keen to hear what those recommendations are as the Commission works its way through and does its interim report in 18 months' time with a view to a final report in three years' time.
Though of course, the date can be extended if necessary. 
JOURNALIST: In that investigations unit, there is a lock of prosecutorial powers. What was the decision making in that? Why not give them far-reaching powers as an investigations unit? 
PM: That's a legal question. 
ATTORNEY-GENERAL ROXON: There are very good reasons that we have separate responsibility for these sorts of issues.
We have established police forces and Directors of Public Prosecution across the country, who investigate crimes that are referred to them.
The Commission's key work is to make recommendations to government and therefore to the community about the processes and procedures that we can improve for the future to better protect children.
And the Commission is it not designed to duplicate or compete with police forces. They're designed to actually assist, and in certain circumstances we imagine, will help prepare briefs and material that can be provided to police to allow them to do their work even more quickly.
So it's very important that that separation remains, that's always been the history of Royal Commissions and there's some good technical legal and constitutional reasons for it, as well as practical ones, that we don't need to establish a new police force or a new prosecuting agency.
But we do need to establish the Commission in a way which will complement and liaise well with existing authorities to help victims  of child sexual abuse get the sort of justice that they're looking for. 
JOURNALIST:  Attorney-General, will the cameras be allowed into the Royal Commission rooms? 
ATTORNEY-GENERAL ROXON: That will be a matter for the Commission as well.
It would be my expectation that there would be some hearings that would be public and some that would not. 
There will be a number of people who would only be prepared to tell their story in closed circumstances and settings.
But ultimately all those matters will be before the Commission.
And we understand the very complex nature of allegations that can be made and matters that might be before Commissioners, and it's why we've been very careful to include in our six people as well as the chair two senior judicial officers who are well used to dealing with these types of issues and understanding what might be appropriate to do in private and of course the importance of being able to conduct as much as possible in public. 
JOURNALIST: How soon will the first hearings be? 
ATTORNEY-GENERAL ROXON: It will be a matter for the Commission to identify that. 
I think you would appreciate that the work of the Government has been to ensure as soon as the announcement was made, a transition team is available, but the Commission although they‘ll have those people, will obviously be doing recruiting.
They do need to make some strategic decisions together as Commissioners and they need to ask the public to come forward.
The Government websites and communications teams have already received lots and lots of submissions on our consultations for the terms of reference but also people who want to give evidence and contact the Commission as soon as it's established.
I don't think people should expect those hearings to start in a matter of weeks.
I think there are quite a lot of preliminary things to be resolved, but the Commission will then be able to report to the public when there are hearing dates that have been established. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the matter of the dole, do you support an increase in the dole and if so, is it on the cards in this budget time?
PM: I've dealt with this question publicly before and indicated I understand it's very, very tough for people on low and fixed incomes to make ends meet.
We keep our focus on creating jobs because the best thing we can do for anybody who's experiencing unemployment is to make sure that there's a job available for them.
I would remind that this is the week in which people will see the Schoolkids Bonus.
For the first time the Schoolkids Bonus will be paid and that is about helping people make ends meet with resources for the costs of getting the kids back to primary school and high school as the school year starts. 
JOURNALIST: If you were unemployed though Prime Minister, do you think you would have enough on Newstart to be able to go look for work and have a meaningful? 
PM: I have dealt with this publicly in the past and as I've indicated, of course it's very tough for people to live on low or fixed income.
If someone is unemployed absolutely the best anything we can do is to be creating job opportunities for them. 
JOURNALIST: What Kevin Rudd actually said was this Government needs to have a heart now that you've abandoned your budget surplus promise.
Do you take that as Kevin Rudd commenting that this Government doesn't have a heart and that maybe you do need to think about those less well off? 
PM: Well I think you have to put all of that, it's a question of interpretation, so you will you need to put that question not to me. The Government's position is just as I've outlined it. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, regarding the review conducted by the Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee, do you believe that the legislation around disclosure for executive remuneration is too complex for shareholders, and do you have any thoughts on BHP's proposal to put a single remuneration figure?
PM: I think it's important that executive pay is clearly disclosed and that shareholders get an opportunity to have a say. 
That's what we've been striving for with the changes that we've made.
We've tried to make those changes in a way that doesn't impose too much of a red tape burden.
As for dealing with suggestions from BHP or others about improving the system, that would be a question for the relevant minister. 
JOURNALIST: Ms Macklin, I understand that your office has actually received some protest about your Newstart comments in the past, even this morning. What is your comment to those people who are angry about your views on the Newstart allowance? 
MINISTER MACKLIN: I can understand that people are angry about what I've said. I have heard that message clearly over the last week or so.
I do acknowledge that my remarks were insensitive, that I could've been clearer in the way that I expressed myself.
I do understand that it is very hard to live on a very low income, including unemployment benefits.
That's why, of course, the Government is so determined to do everything we possibly can to support families and also to help people get work. 
As the Prime Minister has just indicated, we have just this week started the payments of the new Schoolkids Bonus to help families with their costs of sending their kids to school.
But I do acknowledge that my remarks were insensitive and I'm certainly very sorry for that. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the bar that allegedly served the Western Australian teenager Liam Davies the lethal cocktail with methanol, they're still selling those drinks.
Is the Federal Government and the Foreign Minister going to be acting and speaking to international authorities to try to ban the sale of these drinks or to do anything about this?
PM: We can make our concerns heard, and what a dreadful tragedy this has been, such a young man losing his life, just a shocking and awful thing to have your young son go overseas for what should be the time of his life and to have this happen, so just awful.
So we can make our concerns heard, but at the end of the day when you are travelling to Indonesia or indeed to any other nation around the world, there's not the same laws and standards that we've come to expect here in Australia.
You can't assume going into a bar in any country around the world that there is going to be the same licensing and regulation that applies here to food and drink outlets.
So the Foreign Minister has been making some comments about people keeping themselves safe and what they can do with their selection of drinks to try and minimise risks. 
For the family involved with this young man, what a dreadful thing and our condolences most sincerely go to that family. 
JOURNALIST: Will you follow up at all with the Indonesian authorities? 
PM: We can raise our concerns but we don't make laws for Indonesia.
Indonesia makes laws for Indonesia just the same way in which we would not have Indonesia make laws for Australia.
If you are travelling overseas, you are not in Australia, you are not subject to Australian law and consequently you can't assume that the sorts of rules and regulations that apply here apply elsewhere.
That, unfortunately, is very routinely true about the safety of food and drink and drinking water. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) that Twitter is going to be starting up an office in Australia. I was just wondering if you had any reaction to that and if it might help with cyber-bullying and those other joyous things that happen on social media?
PM: Senator Conroy has spent a long period of time liaising with bodies like Twitter and Facebook and others about cyber-bullying, about trolls, about some of the ugly and very hurtful things that get said.
It hasn't been so much a question of the location of the organisation as opposed to the will to address the issue.
And we will keep urging these bodies that have some control over content to have policies that mean, not to stop people having a genuine conversation or anything like that, but some of the extremes that have caused real harm, to try to deal with that conduct. 
JOURNALIST: We're heading into a hot weekend and there's been charges placed against particularly younger folk here in New South Wales over arson. Do you have anything to say in terms of that? Have you got any reaction?
PM: My reaction is as any other Australian.
What would possess someone to be stupid enough, reckless enough, evil enough to deliberately start a fire on a high fire risk day, given the damage we know such fires can do?
I can't understand it, I'll never understand it and it should be punished with the full force of the law.
Okay, thank you. 


Kirribilli House, Sydney
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
Acknowledgements omitted 
This isn't a day for really big speeches. It's a day to come together and to talk about what you've achieved through having the Royal Commission start, and how we can work together to maximise the opportunity that now flows from the Royal Commission having been established.
I'm really aware looking out on this group of people that I'm looking out on a group of people who over years  -  indeed decades  -  have fought for justice for people who were abused as children.
I know that people here have raised their voices time after time after time to say that our nation has to face up to the consequences of what happened.
We have to shine a light on it, it's going to be painful, it's going to be hard, but we've got to do that so that we can learn for the future.
So yesterday's announcement is really a tribute to you for having sustained that campaign over many, many long years.
And I know that there are a lot of people here, individually and as representatives of their groups, who probably thought they would never see this day.
It's probably been very, very hard for many long days to sustain the enthusiasm for campaigning and calling for our nation to really look at child sexual abuse, to look at what happened to people in institutions, to be prepared to listen to the voices of individuals and treat them with dignity and respect as they tell their stories.
And then to learn from that to see what we can do to keep children safer in the future.
So a big tribute to you. We wouldn't be here and we wouldn't have made yesterday's announcement without you. So thank you.
And we can mark all of the work that's happened to date, but I'm actually going to call on you to keep doing a little bit more.
Establishing the Royal Commission is the start of something really big, really emotional, really hard and a lot of people are going to need a lot of support as we go through that process.
So, I can't promise you that there are easy days ahead. I suspect that there are some very traumatic days ahead as people come and tell what happened to them, many of them for the very first time, many of them with a real sense of trauma and emotion as they do it.
But I'm hoping that out of those hard days, can come some really special things.
One, the healing that comes with recognition. I think it's really important that people get the message that we want to hear their story. I know you can carry that message for us to the so many hundreds and thousands that you're in contact with.
I think us saying we want to hear from you after many years of people being shunned and spurned and having doors slammed in their face, to tell those individuals it's your time now to tell your story, I hope that that in and of itself brings some healing.
And then the recommendations of the Royal Commission using all of that information I hope brings some healing to individuals and to us as a nation.
But to get there we're going to need to stick together through what will be at times a very hard process.
So, thank you for everything you've done to date, and we're certainly looking forward to working with you as the Royal Commission swings into action and works its way over three years  -  maybe a bit more time will be necessary  -  but over three years to get our nation some recommendations for change.
Thanks for coming this morning. It's a bit with a sense of a spirit of let's come together and mark what's been achieved through your long years of work with the Royal Commission being established.
And let's commit to doing a lot more work together as the Royal Commission works through.


Sydney
The Federal and Tasmanian Governments today announced further financial assistance for communities as they overcome the state's worst fires in nearly half a century.
Additional support under Category B of the National Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements will be available in the Sorell, Tasman, Glamorgan Spring Bay, Central Highlands, Derwent Valley and Circular Head Local Government Areas.
This will include grants for counter-disaster operations and the restoration and replacement of essential public infrastructure.
Category C grants of up to $25,000 will be available to eligible small businesses, not-for-profit organisations and primary producers in the Sorell, Tasman and Glamorgan Spring Bay Local Government Areas.
We know there are far too many families in these areas who have had to leave their homes and businesses.
One of our priorities is to help businesses get back on their feet as these communities rebuild and recover from this tragedy. Not only have they suffered trading losses but the cost of cleaning up is substantial.
Category C grants will help primary producers with the clean-up, and cover debris removal, disposal of dead livestock and taking steps to ensure production and viability isn't disrupted beyond the next season.
They will also help small businesses resume trading as soon as possible, including establishment costs in temporary premises.
This assistance may also be extended to other areas once the impact of the fires can be properly assessed.
Category C assistance does not compensate for income losses and is not intended to replace insurance. 
With fires still burning across the state, everyone should ensure they take the appropriate precautions to stay safe and monitor information from local emergency service agencies.
Information on the range of assistance that is available can be found at www.disasterassist.gov.au  or at www.dhhs.tas.gov.au


Sydney
As I think is well known, I love visiting schools. I love visiting schools so much I've contrived to manage to visit one during school holidays. So thanks to everybody who has made that possible.
To our wonderful principal who came off leave to make sure that we could be here today and to our school kids who without any grudging sense have come back to school to participate in this Life Education program. Thank you very much for being here. I know you had other choices today, it being school holidays so it's good to see the kids back at school.
We live in a remarkable age, with many modern opportunities and many challenges. And when we are talking about what happens on the online world with the internet, where we are with the digital age in which we live, we should never forget the opportunities it is giving us.
It's giving us an opportunity to transform education as we roll out the National Broadband Network. So kids in school can get the best of curriculum around the world. They can hook into the best teaching around the world. They can leave school having developed friendships with children in Japan or Korea or China.
They can use that online experience to help them learn a language in our region. They can take all of that with them into the world of work, as well as the benefits of staying in touch with friends through social media.
So this new age and our rollout of the National Broadband Network is creating new opportunities for our kids and our schools, just as it's creating new opportunities for businesses and new opportunities for people to stay in touch.
Ask anybody who regularly Skypes with a friend overseas or grandmum or granddad overseas about how this is transforming our world and the way in which we live.
But with all of those opportunities, there are actually new risks as well and we need to face up to those new risks.
We have taught our kids generation after generation about how to be streetwise and how to face up to stranger danger. If I had a dollar for every time my mother lectured me on the way out about not getting in cars with people you didn't know and not talking to strangers, I would be a far wealthier woman.
So generation after generation we have taught our kids about the dangers that they might encounter in the world that they inhabit and live in.
Now we've got to teach our kids about new dangers in a new environment in the cyber world.
We know many parents worry a great deal about cyber bullying, about the kind of bullying that follows you from the school gates into your home, that never gives you a break, that is there even when you are on school holidays or weekends, that is there even in the middle of the night because kids wake up and check their devices.
They do worry about that cyber bullying and the impact it has on their kids.
They worry too about the predators, the adults who are there, using the internet for their purposes. Pretending perhaps to be children, asking to meet children in the real world.
And I would have to say I was a little bit startled by that statistic that you gave us about how many children responded to your survey saying that they had gone and met someone in the real world that they had first met online and didn't know any other way.
And we don't need to draw too many word pictures for all of us to intuitively understand all of the risks that can come with that happening.
So there are dangers out there. And that's why this program is so important, and I am so pleased to be here to launch the new online cyber safety module that has been developed by Life Education and by McAfee. We really do thank them for it.
It will help our kids learn and I've had an insight into that sitting in the Life Education Australia van as we've worked through some of the things that kids go through in this program. And thank you very much for showing us how all of that works.
But it's very sensible, very practical information about who you would share the most secret and sensitive things with, like your password, as opposed to who you would share things with that you are more happy to have in a broader group, and how you make those judgments between what you would share with absolute strangers, what you would only share with your parent, what you would share with close friends, what you would share with people at school.
The really practical judgments that kids are faced with every day.
So I'm very pleased to be here to launch this online learning. It is going to be taken out to more than 600,000 children in 3,500 schools. I think that's truly remarkable and I want to congratulate everybody who will be involved in that process.
It's very important that our children in this modern world understand all of the opportunities, but also the risks that can come with the new environment in which we live.
I want to take this opportunity to talk about two other matters associated with safety and security.
We know that some of the risks with the online world aren't just risks for children. Through social media, we've seen some of the pressures that can be brought to bear by an environment in which unfortunately people with the benefit of anonymity sometimes say the cruellest and harshest things things to each other.
The trolling that happens, the bullying that happens  -  and that happens to children but also happens to adults. It's true, I think part of human nature, that people will say things that are sharper and harder under the cover of anonymity than they would say to someone's face.
And we see that in the online environment every day.
This has caused a lot of problems for people as they have felt the pressures of being bullied on Facebook or through Twitter or in other social media environments. I think we can all imagine what that feels like.
I think we all know what it feels like to be in a room of people, perhaps you can remember back to a day in your school days when you felt humiliated in front of the classroom or in front of your sporting team and that happened in front of ten, twenty, thirty other people.
Many people are living with the feeling of humiliation in front of thousands, indeed tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of people because of the way that these social media environments work.
So that is a cause for concern and it has brought pressures on to individuals.
So I'm pleased that today we will be releasing new guidelines for social networking sites which commits companies such as Facebook and Google, Yahoo! and Microsoft to work in accordance with these protocols. And these companies have agreed to make this commitment.
This commitment is about protocols and guidelines which sets out clear information about the acceptable use of these environments, education and awareness-raising about what is acceptable and not acceptable behaviour online.
And a single point of contact for government, as well as a point of contact for further information.
I think this is a step forward by these giants of social media. We need to see a further step forward. We need to see Twitter also agreeing to use these protocols and guidelines because it is on Twitter that so much of the damage has been done by trolls.
And I do call on Twitter to replicate what has been done by other major social media companies, and embrace these guidelines.
This is part of a continuing package of work from the Government, including our cyber safety help button, which more than 660,000 people have downloaded so they can have an app that gets them help if they are feeling uncomfortable with what is happening online.
So this is an important development, not only because it will help keep our kids safe, but it also will make a difference, I believe, for the way in which adults engage with social media and some of the harm we've seen come from social media.
Today in my view is all about safety and security: safety and security in a new environment, in a modern world. Unfortunately the online environment is not the only safety challenge we face.
And standing here with Julie Owens in this part of the world, I do want to take this opportunity to make a comment or two about some other safety questions.
We've seen overnight yet again a report of another shooting in Sydney's south-west. Unfortunately news of shootings in Sydney's west and south-west has become all too common.
We are seeing reports of violence in suburbs in Brisbane.
Now people who make their lives in these suburbs, in these parts of our great nation, deserve to be able to get about their business, to raise their families in an environment that is safe and secure and peaceful.
Australians overwhelmingly go about doing the right thing every day. They get up early, they work hard and their biggest aspiration is to make a good life for themselves and their children, and they deserve to do that in an environment where they can feel safe and secure.
So whilst these questions are always principally for State Governments and for our police authorities, they do concern me. It's not my intention as Prime Minister to try and step into the shoes of State Government. That wouldn't be right.
State Governments needs to get about their responsibilities and I'm not going to be running commentary on how Premier O'Farrell or Premier Newman or indeed anybody else is responding to this violence.
I also do want to congratulate the police. They do an incredibly tough job in very difficult circumstances and often don't get much thanks as they do it.
But I do think that at this time, all levels of government need to be doing everything that can be done to address this violence.
So in that spirit I have asked Jason Clare, our Minister for Home Affairs, to prepare for Cabinet and for Government some options to address this violence and to explore the limits of the Federal Government's legal and constitutional responsibilities in this area.
What we can do, we will be working through that because I am very concerned about the circumstances for communities in Sydney's west and more broadly.
If I can go back to where I started at today's event, I do want to thank everybody who is involved.
I want to thank those people who have shown such dedication to making a difference for our kids. I suspect when people first conceived of some of this idea that there was plenty of fashionable advice that that wouldn't ever work, you are going to take a van around the country and do what?
And here we have a real demonstration today that it can work and can make a difference to kids. And when I can be told sitting in that van that upper primary school-age kids sit engaged for an hour-and-a-half in this module of learning, and that they want to know about it and they want to take all of the lessons with them, I think that's a remarkable thing to learn.
Many Australians would be shaking their heads in wonderment that kids can be engaged for an hour-and-a-half in anything. So well done to you for achieving that and I'm very proud to be here today and to be associated with this launch.
Thank you.


Sydney
Social Networking Sites have agreed to continue promoting user safety as well as undertaking education and awareness raising about antisocial behaviour online under new guidelines announced by the Prime Minister.
The Cooperative Arrangement for Complaints Handling on Social Networking Sites commits companies, such as Facebook, Google (YouTube), Yahoo! and Microsoft, to:
·         Set out clear information about its acceptable use guidelines;
·         Undertake education and awareness raising activities about what behaviour is acceptable and not acceptable online;
·         Have a single point of contact for Government; and
·         Have robust processes in place for reviewing and acting on complaints,
The Protocol is another step in the Government's ongoing work targeting antisocial behaviour online like cyberbullying.
The Protocol also demonstrates that Social Networking Sites understand that they need to work cooperatively with the Government to meet the expectations of the Australian community when it comes to combating inappropriate conduct online.
It is never acceptable to be harassed or bullied online. The protocol ensures that Social Networking Sites have clear and easy to follow processes so that complaints are handled promptly and in accordance with their abuse policies.
The Government is encouraging other Social Networking Sites to join Facebook, Google, Yahoo! and Microsoft and sign up to the Protocol; and has commenced discussion with Twitter about doing so. We will continue to work with Social Networking Sites to further develop and enhance the Protocol.
The Acting Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, Senator Kim Carr, said that the protocol is another demonstration of the strength of the Government's Cybersafety Plan.
The Protocol was developed in response to recommendations of the Joint Select Committee on Cyber-Safety's June 2011 Interim Report, High-Wire Act: Cyber-Safety and the Young.  Its development has benefited from the cooperative work undertaken by the government, industry and non-government organisations, through the Government's Consultative Working Group on Cybersafety.
The Protocol also complements the government's popular Easy Guide to Socialising Online which provides information and advice to families about how to safely navigate many popular social networks.
The Protocol is available at:
http://www.dbcde.gov.au/online_safety_and_security/cybersafety_plan/#re…
	The Easy Guide to Socialising Online is available at: http://www.dbcde.gov.au/easyguide


Coonabarabran
Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payments (AGDRP) are now available to residents affected by the Wambelong bushfire in north-west New South Wales.
Eligible people in the Local Government Areas of Coonamble, Gilgandra and Warrumbungle can claim payments of $1,000 for each adult and $400 for each child.
These bushfires have had a devastating impact on some communities.
This is a very difficult time for many communities in New South Wales and these payments will assist individuals and families to get back on their feet.
People directly affected by the bushfires are urged to take advantage of this assistance.
The easiest way to lodge a claim is online at www.humanservices.gov.au/disasteror by calling the Australian Government Information Line on 180 22 66 from 8am to 8pm local time, seven days a week.  Completed claim forms can also be lodged in person at a Commonwealth Department of Human Services service centre. 
This assistance is over and above the support provided by the Australian and New South Wales Governments under the jointly funded Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
The Commonwealth Government will work closely with the New South Wales Government to ensure communities have all the assistance they require.
Further information on Australian Government assistance is available online at www.disasterassist.gov.au.


Coonabarabran
The Australian Government will provide tax deductible status to relief funds established to help Australians affected by bushfires in the Coonabarabran region of NSW.
Acting Assistant Treasurer, Senator Penny Wong, has today declared the January 2013 Coonabarabran bushfires a disaster for the purposes of establishing Australian disaster relief funds.
This declaration ensures that new funds and qualifying existing funds established for the relief of people in communities affected by these bushfires can receive tax deductible donations.
While funds still need to apply for formal endorsement, the Tax Office has established a fast track process to approved applications as quickly as possible.
These events have caused devastation to the community around Coonabarabran, and have resulted in widespread damage to property and the environment.
As communities in the Coonabarabran region begin to count the cost of these bushfires, Australians from around the country have already begun to offer their support.
Donations to Australian disaster relief funds which are established to provide relief in the aftermath of the bushfires will be tax deductible for a period of two years from the date of this declaration. 
These donations can be used to provide money or direct assistance for relief, recovery and community reconstruction work to assist affected individuals and communities. 
Further information on establishing an Australian disaster relief fund is available at www.ato.gov.au.



HOST: Prime Minister welcome to the program.
PM: Thank you very much.
HOST: Yes we were able to see some of your press conference from Coonabarabran today where you had the opportunity to meet so many of the firefighters who were involved in the battle, and not only them but their support, their family and everybody else who is lending a hand.
What was your impression of being up there?
PM: A mix of impressions and I think a mix of emotions too. I mean, so much damage has been done. The fire there, such a ferocious one, such an intense one.
There's blackened ground that if someone just took a photo and sent it to you and said that's a photo of a part of the moon, you'd go oh yeah that makes sense.
So devastating, intense fire and yet with all of that devastation and intensity, because of the way in which it was fought  -  the bravery, the dedication of everybody who got out and did it  -  we haven't seen any loss of life and that is truly incredible given this was kind of the perfect fire storm.
And then you've got a community that's just pulling together in every way. I met a five-year-old girl, Tilly, who has been handing out ice blocks to people after they come from fighting the fires, so just an incredible sense of community spirit.
HOST: Yes you get that impression, and we've had coming through on the program too obviously broadcasting into the area where so many people have just been speaking about the number who are willing to lend a hand to do anything.
PM: Oh, everywhere. The spirit of goodwill is everywhere, but lots of tears in peoples' eyes too, with people, tears in their eyes telling me that their home was gone.
HOST: I was going to ask about that. You would have met some of the people who had lost, if not everything, certainly their homes and perhaps everything involved with them. Again, what stories did you hear and what effectively did you say to them?
PM: I met with Bob Fenwick who has been in our newspapers  -  such a senior volunteer firefighter and out fighting the fires as his home was lost, the home he shares with his wife Jeanette.
They're incredibly stoic Australian people, determined to rebuild. You can look at their property and imagine how beautiful it is at other times, a wonderful place to live, but obviously a place with real dangers too.
And it says something that Bob, towards the end of our discussion is saying, I've actually got to go now, I'm off to a meeting of the recovery committee. So he's continuing to volunteer even in those circumstances.
I met a woman on my way in to the community meeting which they have around the middle of each day to keep everybody informed, a lady called Chris who said, my home's been vaporised, was the way she put it.
And she was relying on her kids, who I think would be adult kids to help get her through and get her organised and able to face it all. But the first thing she said to me as I started to sympathise with the loss of the home was, I've got my children, we're all here, we're okay, that's the most important thing.
HOST: And that is the side of it, as you pointed out, the efforts of everybody pulling together and the loss of life is still zero and hopefully it will stay that way throughout the rest of summer as well. But Prime Minister you were also able to make an announcement while you were there about the relief payments that are available?
PM: Yes I was. So we've already got some assistance out there working with the State Government through our natural disaster arrangements.
But I was able to announce today that we're adding to it with a Federal Government payment called the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment, which is a long way of saying there is some immediate help available; $1,000 per adult, $400 per child for people who have lost their homes, been evacuated, been put in difficult circumstances by the fire.
And if you are in one of those communities, for example in Coonabarabran itself, there's a recovery centre operation at the bowling club, we've got Centrelink staff in there.
For others who want to check their eligibility they can ring 180 22 66 or get on the Human Services website or the disaster assist website.
HOST: And get all that information which will help them. Prime Minister the irony is there in some ways I suppose that this time last year you were in Queensland with the floods, and the year before that looking at the Toowoomba situation. It seems that every year Australia moves from one crisis to another.
PM: Last year I was out in the same federal electorate  -  the Member there is Mark Coulton  -  I was out with him around the same time last year in another part of his electorate and we were wading through flood water. And I'm out with him this time, this year and we're looking at the consequences of such a devastating fire.
HOST: What do you come away with because seeing the situation as you've seen today it's pure reality, isn't it? It is what people are facing with and dealing with straight away. Does it give you  -  and I mean this in the nicest possible way  -  a reality check about what's important to people overall?
PM: Oh yes of course it does. These circumstances really make people come back to just absolute core basics about what's the thing that you most value. And what's the thing that you really couldn't do without.
For all of the pressure under which we all live in this modern Australia of ours, the pressures of getting on and working and paying off the house, and getting the kids to school, and juggling the fact that the kids are still young and the parents are getting older and you've got to try to meet all of their needs.
With all of those things that we face every day, and the things I face as Prime Minister, when it comes right down to it, there's nothing more important than people staying safe. Being there, being alive, being with family, being supported by their communities, that's kind of the baseline.
HOST: And the values you've seen on display so clearly today. Prime Minister obviously this is a big year and I'm not going to ask today any other questions about the year ahead because there's another time for doing that. But look forward to having you join us if we can more regularly this year on Statewide Drive and talk about some of the issues as we approach the federal election.
PM: Certainly will and to everybody that I met today out at Coonabarabran, thank you, thank you very much for welcoming me at what is a difficult time for people and fantastically well done to everybody right across the state of New South Wales in all of the places who have fought the fires or stood watch and kept alert.
And we can't say this is over yet, there's some stressing weather to come, so people need to stay in touch with the warnings and keep safe.
HOST: Prime Minister, appreciate your time in joining us this afternoon.
PM: Thank you.
HOST: And thank you for the opportunity to talk to the people you visited today.
PM: Terrific, thanks a lot.



HOST: Prime Minister, welcome.
PM: Hello.
HOST: What have you seen today?
PM: I've been out there talking to people in Coonabarabran and having a look around at the fire damage. I saw some incredible sights, is the best summary, Richard. I saw earth looking like it was moonscape. I saw the people at the observatory; some very brave people who looked after the observatory, made it out themselves but some of them have lost their homes. I had the opportunity to talk to people who are just digesting the shock of losing their homes.
But I also saw incredible community spirit, and that's what always blows you away in these circumstances. Including some young kids that I'd met when their school had brought to Canberra who are now taking a turn packing sandwiches and getting food ready for people who are fighting the fires.
HOST: Well of course it's not over yet is it? Still a bad day tomorrow  -  total fire ban around the state and the blaze is still going there.
PM: Absolutely, I addressed a community meeting. They're having community meetings in the middle of each day to give people the latest updates. And I said to them, look I wish I could just talk about all of this in the past tense. I really wish I could talk about the fire that was but the truth is there is still fire there and crews are working very, very hard to get a containment line around it, a hard line, to use their terminology, because they are expecting adverse weather conditions tomorrow. So that bad combination of hot so, wind up and very low humidity.
HOST: It's amazing no one's been killed, really.
PM: Look, it is miraculous and a tribute to the professionalism and dedication of everyone  -  the people who work in paid capacity and the many, many, many thousands of volunteers.
A fire that ferocious, and you can see all around you the signs of how ferocious a fire it was, not taking any life is an incredible result and even as we count the losses in terms of lost home and property and stock, we've got to remind ourselves it is fantastic we're able to say to each other no one lost their lives.
HOST: The animal situation is, I remember going down to cover the terrible fires in Victoria and when you look at the koalas where the paws had been singed so badly from the trees burn while they were on them, you sort of imagine the amount of wildlife, apart from the amount of livestock, that have been through just this terrible experience.
PM: Absolutely and for people who have seen so much damage to their properties to then to have to turn around and the first big task is to put down a lot of their animals, heartbreaking stuff, truly heartbreaking. And talking to the people who got through, just after the fire had been through, they talk about the kangaroos at the side of the road that weren't impaled on fences or anything; they were free to move but even going as fast as they could they couldn't out run it.
HOST: Which shows you the speed and intensity of this fire. You were able to announce some emergency measure today.
PM: Yes, I was. We had already put in place cooperative arrangements we have in place with the New South Wales state government under our natural disaster relief arrangements. So there was already in place some support through personal hardship money and support through concessional loans to primary producers and small businesses. But we have activated a Federal Government payment that's called the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Repayment, so it's $1000 for adults, $400 for kids, it's just upfront first instance money for people who have lost their homes, been evacuated, may not have too much left with them, may not be able to go and deal with banking and all the rest because they've lost all their personal papers.
So for the people who are actually in the fire area in recovery centres like the one at the bowling club I went to today, we've got our Centrelink staff in place. For everybody else and for anybody listening to you who thinks they may be eligible or want to check it out, they can ring 180 22 66 or get on the Human Services website or the Disaster Assist website.
HOST: So 180 22 66 is it?
PM: Yeah believe it or not, it is.
HOST: Yeah okay, slightly odd number.
PM: It is and every time I saw it I do the mental check, have I got that right. But it is surprisingly 180.
HOST: Okay for you a massive hooray for you, I'm sure from everybody for that assistance.
A more muted I suppose to your comments yesterday. You talked about cyber bullying on one side but then talked about Sydney violence and whether the Federal Government could do more to help that. That was described by some as a political stunt yesterday. Were you playing politics with what for Sydneysiders is really a terrible situation?
PM: I'm very serious about this and I think your words are right, it is a terrible situation. And terrible for people to feel that, there they are in their own homes getting about their business, going to work, looking after the kids this time of year with a view to getting them back to school as soon as school starts, and you don't feel safe in your community. I do, as Prime Minister, take that very seriously.
Now, I'm not in the business of the Federal Government trying to jump in the shoes of what state governments do, and as I said yesterday, I'm not going to get into argy-bargy with a state government for no apparent reason. I'm not here to run commentary on Premier O'Farrell and the policing approach that they take here in New South Wales or the work of very dedicated police officers. But I do want to see what there is that we may be able to do that can better assist.
HOST: The response by some here is if you want to help just stop all the guns coming in. It's the main thing the Federal sphere is in charge of is customs and that's been failing.
PM: We've more than doubled the number of illegal packages that are being seized at our borders so we're doing better than we have in the past in actually grabbing hold of packages that shouldn't get through. Whether they have got drugs in them or guns in them or gun components in them. So through an intelligence-led policing model we're actually doing a lot better at that but I want to see what else there is we can do.
HOST: Let me just as you quickly about the unemployment rate, 5.4 per cent today, figures out. Not good are they?
PM: Overall the performance of our economy continues to be a good one. If we look around the rest of the world, unlike the rest of the world, we've got relatively low unemployment. Of course, I'd always want to see unemployment going down and more jobs being created.
We did create jobs across last year and got around 140,000 more people into work. But there are pressures in our economy, as well as real strengths, the high Aussie dollar is putting a lot of pressure some businesses.
HOST: Some of your frontbenchers have put the blame on the Queensland Premier for dismissing civil servants.
PM: There's no doubt there have been big job cutbacks in Queensland and that does feed into the figures, as does other things in our economy. High Aussie dollar is as a result of the resources boom going well and the resources boom is a great thing. It's also a result of us increasingly being viewed as having a safe haven currency status.
HOST: The real problem is neither Queensland; well the currency is the real problem- 
PM: You cannot dismiss that.
HOST: No, you cannot dismiss that, of course. But a lot of the problem seems to be this lack of confidence. That's got to be something the Government's got to take some responsibility for. Consumers don't want to spend and businesses don't want to employ, because they're scared about the future, uncertain about the future.
PM: I just think we've got to analyse why people are feeling uncertain and of course, we've got to play our role as the Government. Being out there explaining to people what's going on in the economy and I don't think people want to be talked down to about it. I think they want to understand it in all of its complexity.
The reality is, we've lived through the biggest economic shock you and I will ever see in our lifetimes. You're not old enough to remember the great depression and neither am I. But the biggest economic shock we'll see in our lifetimes that did cause uncertainty around the world. It's not surprising that it psychologically impacted on people here.
People are wondering what's going to happen next. There's this big contagion around the world. Whenever they go to check their superannuation accounts they've plummeted down. Then they start worrying what's my house worth. All of those things have been pressing on people even though in our real economy we have continued to create jobs and we've got an economy that's more than 10 per cent bigger than when the Government came to office and has continued to grow since the Global Financial Crisis.
Now we've got this differential picture because, you know, high Aussie dollar, it's got some upsides to it, a high Australian dollar, but it's got some big downsides too if you're working in a sector like manufacturing or tourism.
HOST: And it could all be worse because we could be living in Coonabarabran and going through what our friends there are going through. Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks Richard.



HOST: The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, joins us now from Kirribilli House. Prime Minister, the pictures coming out of New South Wales over the last few days have been nothing short of extraordinary, devastating. How was it on the ground today?
PM: It was a pretty amazing experience and I'm glad I was able to go and see it for myself. We are talking about a fire that burned with incredible intensity, so the land's just blackened, the trees, taken out.
I saw some homes that have been burnt to the ground, got to talk to some people who have lost their homes, and also saw what had happened with the observatory, with the fire racing up to the top of the hill on all sides, but the observatory is still there.
HOST: Given that these things are so devastating, that the fire conditions are so widespread, there's fires burning in every state around the country, and it feels as though this is happening more and more frequently.
What's the advice you're getting about that? Is this just the new normal? Do we have to prepare for this every summer now?
PM: Well I don't think you can ever look at one weather event and say, that weather event is climate change. What we know about what's happened to our country over the past few weeks is we had this incredible mass of hot air in the centre of the country that then came to more populated areas. And we've seen fires as a result.
So we have seen this incredible pocket of hot air. You can never say though that one event is climate change, but we can conclude from what climate change is doing to our country we're going to see more weather events that are extreme more frequently, that's what the scientists are telling us.
And that's why it's really important we combat climate change, and we're reducing the amount of carbon pollution we're putting up there.
HOST: Prime Minister, a change of topic now but a significant issue none the less. You have announced a crackdown on gun crime in wake of Sydney shootings. Sydney shootings aren't new though, and some people are calling this a stunt on the back of Barack Obama's announcements. What's your take on that?
PM: I'm very serious about this because I just think people should be able to live in Sydney's west or anywhere around the country in safety and not worry as they go about their daily business and all of the things you do to make your life work.
Going to work, having a job, earning a pay packet, getting the kids to school, all of the things people have to do, that you don't have to worry while you're doing that about gun crime and personal safety.
HOST: Prime Minister I've never been one to shy away from the big questions, so I'm going to ask you, Guns N' Roses are touring, have you got tickets and are you more of a Use Your Illusion fan or Appetite For Destruction?
PM: Ah I'm probably going to have to pass on most of those questions and certainly say no I don't have tickets.
HOST: Okay, we can organise that.
PM: You may be able to organise the ticket, it's organising me the night off that would prove the impossible thing. I really don't think  -  as powerful as The Project panel is  -  that you are going to be able to do that for me.
HOST: Well it's great to have you with us again Prime Minister, and we'll talk again as the election year pans out ahead of us.
PM: Thank you very much and I may get to sneak to Bruce Springsteen. That might be my one big night out for the year.
HOST: You and Swanny!
PM: I might even do it with Swanny!
HOST: Cheers, thank you very much Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you.


Coonabarabran
PM: I have had the opportunity today to meet, to discuss what has happened here but most importantly of all, to see it for myself. And the overwhelming impression I am left with is of the destructive power of this fire; incredibly destructive.
There are parts of the landscape that now look like moonscape. This fire has burnt so hot.
And even people who have been fighting fires for years and years said in many parts there was nothing that could be done to stop this fire when it was at its greatest intensity.
So an incredibly destructive fire that's done a lot of damage.
With that awesome power in the fire, it is incredible that no lives have been lost. And that is an incredible tribute to everybody who has bravely fought these fires.
To the firefighters, to the police, to the volunteers, to the council workers, to everybody who has been involved, they have done an amazing thing.
With a fire that is rightly being described as the perfect storm of fires, for us to be here counting the cost in property damage is bad enough. But we are not counting the cost in lives and that is a tremendous achievement.
I have had the opportunity to see the way this community is pulling together. To meet people who are working so hard on behalf of their community, from weary firefighters who are still out doing it, through to Tilly, a five-year-old girl who has been handing out ice blocks to firefighters when they come in for some relief.
So to everybody in the community who has pulled together with such great spirit, thank you for what you are doing and continuing to do to deal with this fire situation.
I have been up to the observatory and I've met the employees there who protected the observatory and ultimately had to flee as the fire came up what is inevitably a very steeply-sided hill because it is the right place for the observatory.
They wanted to tell me about how they could report to me as Prime Minister that they had protected a federal government asset, that they had protected the telescopes and the principle observatory.
I'm glad I had the opportunity to say to them the principle federal government asset isn't the building, it's them, and they are all safe having shown such bravery and I thank them for it.
And I thank them for everything that they will do in the weeks to come to get what is an important scientific asset and a great tourist attraction back up and operational.
I have had the opportunity to meet with Bob and Janet, their story is well-known I think. They lost their own home as Bob was fighting the fires.
He said he fought his first fire when he was 14. I think maybe some wagging of school was involved to go out and do it. But he's a man who knows a fair bit about fire and said when it took his home; there was just no stopping it. That it was burning grass that had water running across it; such was the intensity of the fire.
To Bob and Janet and to everybody else who has lost their homes, we are thinking of you and I am overwhelmed by the bravery and stoicism that people are showing in such difficult circumstances.
I want to make two announcements and then I'm going to ask Shane to make some comments on the fire situation because we are expecting weather to become more adverse tomorrow.
We have already, working with our State Government colleagues, triggered some natural disaster relief and recovery payments. These are payments that help people through personal hardship, people who have lost their homes.
These are payments that too help people like primary producers who have suffered losses, and the loss of stock and people needing to put down animals has been a very big pressure on people. And those arrangements too can also help businesses affected by fire.
Today, on top of what has already been activated, I want to announce that we are activating for these communities, for the local council regions in this area, the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment.
This is an emergency payment that gets $1,000 to adults and $400 for people with kids for the kids, for people who have lost their homes, for people who have been evacuated, for people who really aren't sure what they're going to do next but have got immediate needs.
People can access this payment by ringing 180 22 66. They can get on the Human Service website, or for people here directly in this community, we have got Centrelink workers in the recovery centre at the bowling club. They can go there.
So that payment has been triggered for three local government areas, for Coonamble, Gilgandra and the Warrumbungle local government areas. If you are in those areas and you have been really hard hit by fire, please check out your eligibility. There is some money and some assistance available for you.
Even as we talk about people starting to move into recovery from everything that they have lost, fire is being fought, containment lines are being reinforced and I will turn now to the Commissioner for some comments on that.
SHANE FITZSIMMONS, RFS COMMISSIONER: Thank you Prime Minister. We still have across New South Wales some 84 fires that we're dealing with. Fourteen of those fires remain uncontained.
So clearly, like we are seeing right across the fire here in Coonabarabran, the efforts of the firefighters go unrelenting. They are all about seeking to contain as much of the fire as they can and consolidate those containment lines ahead of more deteriorating weather forecast for tomorrow.
We are expecting, indeed as we have seen here while we're standing here, more fire trucks have been responded out to provide protection to properties that are coming under threat with flare-up in the north-eastern area of this fire today and the north-eastern edge. The south-western corner remains a point of focus, particularly in light of the weather conditions tomorrow where we are expecting temperatures to return into the high 30s.
We are expecting to see those nor-westerly winds come through in the order of 20-30km/h, gusting even more. So those already incomplete and indeed tenuous containment lines will be tested again tomorrow.
But we've got the fire fighting effort, we've got the community coming together, we've got those trigger points. We will be able to work with the community and advise them of any impending risk under those circumstances.
But much further afield, the worse weather across New South Wales is forecast at this stage to be right across our more southern areas where we still have those large fires burning yet to be contained in places like the Shoalhaven, the Cooma region and the Yass areas.
Lots of work still going on to consolidate those containment lines. But we will be expecting, once we get a briefing this afternoon, probably to see total fire bans in effect right across southern regions of New South Wales, possibly extending from the Hunter region down the coast through greater Sydney and the south coast and then right out to our central regions and our Riverina areas down to the Murray River.
Through those parts we are expecting to see temperatures in the low to mid-40s. We are going to see that north-westerly wind pattern dominate very much across most of New South Wales.
That is where it will be its strongest. We are talking 40-50km/h gusting 60-70km/h and even 80km/h across the ranges, so some tough times ahead for firefighters and communities living in those areas.
And that's all in light of obviously the fires we know about. We will have firefighters and other key resources on standby to deal with any new outbreaks of fire under those sorts of conditions.
We have revised the figures here today as you know. We are talking about 49 homes being confirmed as being destroyed across this fire ground here in Coonabarabran. And more work continues as we speak to identify other homes that may be damaged or destroyed.
So there is still a lot of work to go yet, but we have seen people return to their homes, particularly on Timor Road to start assessing their damage.
A long way to go, people need to remain alert. They need to remain across the conditions locally and monitor the website, listen to local radio, watch TV and be ready to act on your local plan.
Thank you.
PM: Can I just conclude by saying thank you to everybody who has helped me get around today.
Peter as we have gone around has told me that they have set up a local fund here for people to make contributions to and that it is already at $59,000 in donations from community members, which is a fantastic result.
I am in a position to announce that donations to that fund and any like funds in this local area will be tax deductible for people. So that's our way of giving a bit of support to a local fund raising effort.
Thank you to the local community for everything they're doing, including pitching in to that fund.
I am happy to take some questions on this.
JOURNALIST: Just on the disaster fund, is there a website or a number that you can donate to?
CR PETER SHINTON, WARRUMBUNGLE SHIRE MAYOR: It is on the council website, yes.
JOURNALIST: I have a question for the commissioner. Commissioner, a volunteer RFS firefighter and a retained fire rescue firefighter are charged today down here making hoax phone calls to Triple 0. How concerned are you by this?
FITZSIMMONS: That is something that can't be tolerated. We don't tolerate it, we won't tolerate it.
We have been working with the police on that matter. He has been charged. Hopefully he gets the appropriate weight of the law thrown against him and we have already moved to take action pertaining to his membership once we see the outcome of that charge.
JOURNALIST: Are you happy with the measures in place when someone joins up, you know who you're getting?
FITZSIMMONS: Yes. We have a very good program where new members seeking to join the organisation are the subject of probity checks, criminal history checks and of course they are on six months' probation, and importantly their local brigade runs assessments.
Their senior management team runs assessments, and it is not until after a period of probation, a clearance on those background checks that anyone is even considered to be entitled to full membership.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you going to Cooma today?
PM: I won't be in Cooma today, no. But I have had the opportunity to have a good look here and I'll have a chat with a few more people.
JOURNALIST: The last couple of weeks, going to Dunalley, coming here Prime Minister, a country that continues to burn, what you see, how does it affect you?
PM: I have had the opportunity to be in Tasmania and to be here and the destructive power unleashed by fire always startles you.
Even when you're prepared for it you know from the images that you guys bring to our television screens, and thank you for doing such a good job keeping people informed.
But you know from those images it's bad but there is nothing like seeing it for yourself, smelling it, seeing the smoke, seeing the destruction and seeing the heartache that comes with it.
And I feel that it's very important for me to be out and about just saying to people we understand that this is an incredibly difficult time for you, the whole nation is thinking of you and we are going to try and do what we can to help.
So I hope that in coming along, I can provide a little bit of reassurance to people that they're not being forgotten. That people right around the nation are focused on their struggle, even many days into a fire event like we are many days into this one.
It is a remarkable nation we live in when I can chart the course of my summers by the disaster events I have been to.
As Prime Minister I can chart the course of my summers as to whether I have been in Queensland looking at huge floods, whether I have been up north looking at the effects of a cyclone, whether I have been here talking to people who are trying to get filth out of their shops because of flooding, here in this local electorate.
Or whether it has been this, going to fire grounds and seeing the destruction that has happened and the loss of property.
What is amazing, I think, is the way in which people come together and I think we always learn something from past events.
And the fact we have the warning systems now and all of that, things that we learnt from Victoria, means that we are getting better and better at keeping people safe. That's a tremendous thing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we keep talking to people and we keep hearing the same story that they didn't have any insurance. Will these kind of payments be enough? What can they cover?
PM: Well there are these payments available but if you are asking me what advice I would give people having seen-
JOURNALIST: Do you think they're enough?
PM: The relief that we give is not there to substitute for insurance. We help people out; we want to help people out.
But we do also want people to get the message that in a country as unpredictable as the one we live in, when you never know whether it is going to be fire or flood or something else that hits your home, that it's prudent to be insured. People should be insured.
Now I know that is really tough for a lot of people because they are on low and fixed incomes and some people live in places where insurance won't be offered because of the risk factors.
So we do take that into account, but I just don't want people to get the impression that what we do is a substitute for having thought about insuring your home.
And we actually had a chat as we moved around about insurance companies will be on the ground taking claims in the way in which I saw them in Tasmania on the ground taking claims.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned that the funding was going to help people whose houses were destroyed but what about people who have lost stock?
PM: Already what has been triggered under the natural disaster payments that we have and we work with the State Government on, already there has been triggering of payments that help primary producers and help small businesses.
So I would say to people please be ringing the telephone line, talking to Centrelink staff in recovery centres, getting on the website to work through the different eligibility.
There is a range of payments because they are trying to help people in different circumstances. But the payment I have announced today is first instance money to get people through when they are out of their home and can't go back to their home and consequently there are all sorts of stresses and strains.
For some people they won't have their banking details and banking records and all the rest of it because of what they have lost.
JOURNALIST: Commissioner, in terms of your focus tomorrow is it more down south and less sort of in this area?
FITZSIMMONS: No. What you have got to do is focus on active fire grounds and the enormity of this fire ground, clearly is going to require a deal of focus again tomorrow.
But also we are mindful that the forecast weather conditions are going to be at their most severe elsewhere. That is that large southern area, south-eastern area of NSW where we're expecting to see some fairly widespread severe to catastrophic fire danger ratings in the forecast at this stage.
So clearly as we do routinely, it is about ensuring that the resources are deployed and are on standby where they are likely to be needed most.
And tomorrow we will see resources continue to be engaged, firefighters, aircraft and heavy plant and all the other machinery that needs to be there to support the fire fighting effort will continue to be here.
Yes, they are working very hard to secure this fire ground, but there's still a bad weather day ahead tomorrow.
But elsewhere it's about a) looking at those known fires and continuing to work in anticipation of the potential outbreak and the impact that might have on communities in the fire path.
But it's also about having firefighters, incident control teams and indeed assets like aircraft and other things strategically located on standby so that they can deal with any new outbreak of fire that might occur tomorrow.
As I indicated earlier, we are expecting to see total fire bans across a fair geographic area of the state tomorrow. But that will largely be in the southern areas where the weather is forecast to be the worst.
JOURNALIST: Can we just get you on one other-
PM: I'm only dealing with these matters today.
Thanks very much.



HOST: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning John.
HOST: Now have you had a chance to have a holiday? Have you had a break?
PM: I have had a break. I had ten days off entirely when Wayne Swan ran the show, he was Acting Prime Minister. Swanny in charge, and I was in Adelaide with my family.
So Tim and I actually produced the Christmas lunch, which was a fairly stressful experience in what was supposed to be a holiday, producing turkey and all the rest of it. It isn't the sort of thing Tim and I do every day. But we managed to get it done, it was all edible, so it was all good.
HOST: It was all good. Any chance to do any reading, put the feet up, look at something you like which isn't a brief?
PM: I did have a look at a few books. I'm doing a bit of knitting, all that kind of stuff.
HOST: This knitting business, I don't know if I buy that. When we look at the hobbies of say, former Labor Prime Ministers, well Kevin, buggered if I know what he did really, or what he gets up to in his spare time.
But we know with Paul it was clocks and classical music, Mahler mainly. With Bob, punting and sport. Gough, books, history. What are your, what do you get off on, hobbies-wise?
PM: Well the knitting, definitely. And if I could just talk it up for a moment, being Prime Minister is a pretty stressful job. A lot of pressure is on your shoulders. You often get in back at home really late at night. And you've got to get to bed and you've got to get to sleep, you can't afford to potter around for hours because an early morning in looming.
And so the thing that's good about the knitting is it takes enough of your attention that your mind can't be racing a million miles an hour on everything else. But it's repetitive and consequently soothing, so it helps you transition from full-on work speed to I-need-to-go-to-bed-now, quite quickly.
HOST: So pearl and plain does it?
PM: Pearl and plain. In all sorts of combinations, including the counting of stiches as you go.
HOST: Indeed, I always ended up with more stitches than I began with.
PM: Well if you were trying to increase, that would be okay.
HOST: Yeah sure. Now you were in Coonabarabran yesterday. What did you take out of that?
PM: It's always a huge experience when you go and visit bushfire regions or anywhere in the country that has had a natural disaster. And as Prime Minister, every summer I've spent time visiting Australians who have been hard-hit.
The images, what you see stays with you and yesterday the intensity of that fire was just so obvious. The ground, black, it just looked like moonscape, like the soil had been turned to char all around you.
But also the way in which people face it, so brave, so stoic about it all. And even when they've kind of got a tear in the eyes they're telling you about the loss of their home. The next thing they'll do is crack a joke or say something about a positive experience that's come out of it. It's just amazing that people can be that tough in the face of such a huge loss, to lose your whole home.
The other thing I take out of it is, we have got better, and we continue to get better at dealing with these situations. The emergency warning system, the mobile phone alerts that have come out of the Victorian bushfires are doing a lot of good out there.
HOST: Do you think we're going to get to a point when it's going to be very difficult for people to get insurance who are living in areas that are vulnerable to either bushfire or flood?
PM: I think there are always going to be some parts of the country where it's very hard to get insurance. One of the things that came out of looking at Queensland and the floods there is housing was on flood plains and people can't get insured if their house is on a flood plain. So, there are always going to be some parts.
For bushfires, I don't think we're quite going to get there but I do think people's focus will continue to go on what can I do to make my property safe.
Now there are some fires where, no matter how well prepared your property is the nature of the fire is that destruction is going to come. But well-prepared properties do make a difference and I think insurance companies will be working with people on that.
HOST: Yes. What's becoming obvious is that really the whole area needs management. We've got to manage the environment now. Now, that means managing fires, that means having a lot of winter burnings, doesn't it?
PM: I think we've got to manage the environment and we've got to keep learning and keep getting better. But I think we've also got to do something that we find it quite hard to do as modern human beings because we think we can dominate and control everything.
We do need to recognise that there are some things that are inherent, that are going to be there, we will face natural disaster from time to time. We can't say to ourselves we'll always be able to control it or defeat it.
Sometimes there are just fire conditions and fire storms that are going to do damage and the best thing is for people to get out of their way. And if we're making the calibration between do I stay and try and defend my property or do I get out and guarantee that I'm saving my life, then it's better to get out and guarantee that you're saving your life.
HOST: One of the issues that came up over the Christmas period  -  two things really  -  firstly, whether we should have compulsory voting. My feeling's always been that the price of our particular democracy is a small one, you've got to participate. You've got to vote.
Now, then a change to an optional preferential system of voting perhaps. Now I'm not really interested in canvassing that or talking about that, that can be done some other time. But it's one of those issues that pulls the head for a moment.
Now can I suggest a good issue that could pull the head is the role of states. Is it time to get rid of the states, Prime Minister? Could we get rid of them? Have they outlived their usefulness  -  I'm talking about state governments. Have they outlived their usefulness?
PM: I'm now waiting for your interview of Premier O'Farrell where you canvas this.
HOST: I'm sure he'll have an attitude.
PM: I think he would have an attitude. The truth is if you were starting again from a blank page, if you were just there with the map of Australia and a country our size and an economy our size, and said, let's create a system of government, I don't think you'd create the one that we've got now with three tiers, local, state and federal.
I think you would create a two-tier system, so you would have large regional councils which intersected with the federal government. But I'm also a realist and given history has grown us to where we are now, I don't think we're going to be getting rid of the states any time soon.
What we can do is always find ways of working together better, but state governments are going to be there. And what would we do without State of Origin matches and the like? People would all go a bit mad.
HOST: States as symbols, I think that's fine.
PM: They just don't need governments?
HOST: Thank you.
PM: Right, well.
HOST: Take an issue, like a national issue, like the Murray Darling River System. Coming to an agreement about that, to try and get more water flowing so there is a river, so there are going to be communities going into the future to use a cliché. It's impossible to get agreement from the states.
PM: Well we have got change, and we do have a plan for the whole of the Murray Darling, and yes it's taken us-
HOST: But the New South Wales State Government's just said well no, we're only going to allow three per cent to go back in buybacks.
PM: All of that's a bit of political kind of flibberty-gibberty on the side.
HOST: That's what I mean. See, just a speed hump. They're a speed hump, state governments, aren't they Prime Minister?
PM: There are days when I would sit in my office and say to myself there'd be things that were easier if I wasn't negotiating with all of these state governments. But we're not going to wish them away, we're not going to get them out of the picture.
And there are days when I've sat in my office too and had really productive discussions with state governments, we've got a lot done. And as the level of government that is there, closer in to service delivery, they've been prepared to work with us to really do the right thing for change.
To give Premier O'Farrell one tick, Murray Darling we've had to push hard, but to give him a tick, he stepped forward as the first state premier to do the National Disability Insurance Scheme with us. So it's a good thing.
HOST: It is a good thing. That is a good thing, the National Disability Insurance Scheme. I don't think anyone would disagree about that.
Moving on, is it possible to assess the success or otherwise of the carbon tax? The much-maligned carbon tax, which sort of slipped in and people seem to be living with it. Is it possible to assess its success or otherwise, Prime Minister, or is it still too early?
PM: I think we can see some things that have happened under carbon pricing. What we can do is wholly discount the fear campaign. So enough evidence is in that if anybody was out there having heard repeatedly that this was going to be the end of the world, and the economy was going to stop, and there were going to be no jobs, and inflation was going to be cantering out of control, all of those things have been disproved.
Jobs have kept growing, our economy has kept growing, inflation is contained, interest rates are low. So the fear campaign is over in terms of the facts. People will keep recycling it because that's what they do. But no one who deals with the facts could say the fear campaign should keep going.
In terms of businesses reducing their emissions, I think we can see evidence of that too. And I talk to businesses all the time who are there exploring new ideas about how can they cut their electricity use, cut their emissions, because now they're paying the price.
And in businesses that wouldn't necessarily spring to your mind as a great example first off, businesses like abattoirs are finding new ways of working, new ways of dealing with the waste, which means that they are going to be beneficiaries under carbon pricing.
So remarkable things are happening out there, there's no limit to the ability of human beings to innovate, and if you put pressure on a business person and say there's a price, you can avoid that price if you do something differently, then they'll get along and they'll do things differently and they are.
HOST: Well, whisper reaching me is that firstly, businesses are using less electricity. Secondly, that private householders are now more conscious of the use of electricity. I mean we have a rule around our house that if there's no one in the room, the light's off at night. Now do you have something like that at the Lodge?
PM: I was schooled in my parents' home. You would never be allowed to leave a light on in a room that no one was in. And if you were trying to heat an area, then if you left the door open, there would be the traditional ‘you weren't born in a tent' shout resonating around the house.
The Lodge can be a little bit different from an ordinary home, there are some security things that go with being Prime Minister that chew their way through a bit of power. But sensible rules help.
Households have had to put up with really big increases in electricity that are nothing to do with pricing carbon.
HOST: Is this the poles and wires business, the gold plating.
PM: That's right and it has put a lot of pressure on household budgets. But it does mean too that people are being a little bit more rigorous about how they use their power.
HOST: Yes, which is why it's a bit of a direct action thing, isn't it. This is the Opposition policy, isn't it? Direct action, I think the plan is to pay businesses to clean up their act a little bit. Now I would have thought cleaning up the act you would do anyway?
PM: Well the trouble with the so-called direct action plan is it's really mistitled. It should be called a subsidies-to-polluters plan. And the problem with it is that you are going to take a whole lot of money, and no one has said where it's coming from, and give it to a whole lot of businesses that are generating carbon pollution.
But then another business opens generating carbon pollution and you don't do anything about that. Right around the world, economists, rational people who deal in the business community tell you that the cheapest way of getting people to reduce their carbon pollution, of changing the way that businesses do business, is to put a price on it, price signals business people, they act.
HOST: Now, negotiation is your great skill, isn't it? To anyone who has had any dealings with you they say you are a wonderful negotiator. Where did these skills come from?
It takes the Wisdom of Solomon, doesn't it? Weighing up, for example, the competing interest and state vested interests say with the Murray Darling that we touched on earlier. Where is your starting point with negotiations like that?
PM: Well thank you for the compliment. I have had to negotiate some complicated things. New health agreement for example-
HOST: Well, getting a government up for a start.
PM: Getting a government up, health agreement with states, making sure that it got done. I've had to work my way through some quite complex things.
I think in the age in which we live, the kind of command and control models of leadership aren't the models that work today. People don't respond to someone barking commands at them.
People want to be listened to. They want to have their perspective understood. Ultimately someone's got to make a decision, and that person is me. But I've tried to deal with people respectfully and see things through their eyes and understand the pressures and tensions on them.
HOST: It's interesting you should use the term ‘people barking at each other gets nowhere'. It seems to me, having been a great student of Question Time over the last 12 months, that it is just a barking show.
PM: I think Question Time is a combination of something that's pivotal to our democracy  -  that is the ability of parliamentarians to ask executive government questions  -  combined with some political theatre which has played out differently in different times in Australian politics.
Question Time under Bob Hawke was something different from Paul Keating who was such a master of it. Was something different again from John Howard.
I think in this parliament we've seen an element come in that hasn't been there before, which is that the Opposition right from day one decided that it would run a negative blitzkrieg campaign in the hope of forcing the Government over and creating an election.
So there's been a level of negativity and bitterness that hasn't been there in earlier parliaments and I don't think has stood political debate in good stead.
HOST: Well probably there are parallels with '75, got pretty bitter then from memory. You've nominated two battlegrounds for the 2013 federal election, which is looming, September I think was the agreement you had with the independents, was going to be in September.
PM: Did you want to pick a date John?
HOST: No, lord please no. Now you've nominated two battlegrounds  -  education and family. Now why have you selected those?
PM: We've got a lot of governing to do before we go and fight the election. And the big things we'll be governing for, as well as taking to the election, are about things we need to do to give people an opportunity today. So it's about making sure people can have the benefits of work and we've done a lot to keep our economy strong enough to generate jobs.
It's also about making sure people get the best of opportunities tomorrow. We live in a time where our region of the world is coming into its own.
I can't predict everything for you that's going to happen this century, but one thing that will definitely happen is we will continue to see Asia's rise. And we've got to be ready for it and ready to get the opportunities that flow from it.
That's why big picture policies like the National Broadband Network and pricing carbon are so important. But the thing that's pivotal is that our kids are getting an education that not only keeps them up with their peers in the region and the world, but hopefully in front, and the truth is, we've in that battleground seen some sliding back in Australian standards.
So a big feature of this year will be a school reform agenda associated with a new funding system so that we can say our kids are getting the best of the best when it comes to education. I've said we need to be in the top five schooling systems in the world.
And then there's an agenda about how families live today. We were joking before about mum and dad yelling at me to turn lights off, maybe that's the same, mums and dads yelling in the home about kids having every electronic device on and telling them to turn a few of them off. But a lot has changed.
Mums working, going back to work quickly, dads wanting to be really involved in the upbringing or their kids. Mums and dads sandwiched between the kids who are still quite young and the parents who are ageing, and needing to make choices about how you balance it all up.
I want us as a government to always be responding to those modern needs. So something like paid parental leave for dads we brought on this year because dads want to be there when the baby comes. Not there for a while and then gone. They want to be very active parents, and we want to respond to that.
So, understanding that modern world and making sure government's working with it is a big agenda for us too. And things like the National Disability Insurance Scheme actually fit in with that.
Right around the country so many families are having their lives really put under acute, sometimes unbearable pressure because they have a family member who has a disability.
And it could happen to any of us. The next baby born in the family has cerebral palsy. Someone in your family gets diagnosed with MS or Parkinson's or one of those really debilitating diseases.
A young person does something perhaps a little bit foolish and has an acquired brain injury for the rest of their lives. If you're in that situation you want to know Government's there working with you, and that's what the NDIS is about.
HOST: Just two things  -  your negotiating skills could be very useful for President Obama. Do you feel with him, having to negotiate with the NRA at the moment? Is there any advice you could give him?
PM: It's not for me really to involve myself-
HOST: Basically they're loony people. How do you deal with loony people?
PM: Well perhaps rather than commenting about American politics, I'd make a more general observation about leadership. Sometimes you can work issues through with people and get to an outcome that everybody owns and is happy with.
Sometimes you just have to stand up to people and call them wrong.
HOST: And secondly  -  and this is just random and coming from left-field  -  how is our relationship with PNG at the moment? Is it okay? I've noticed Ross Garnaut I think is not allowed to travel up there anymore. Is everything alright?
PM: Everything's alright in the Government's relationship with PNG. They had an election last year and there were some issues in the run up to the election that caused us some concern.
But they did have an election that was credible and free and fair, and Prime Minister O'Neill was re-elected. And we have a good relationship with him and a good relationship with his government.
There has been an issue involving BHP and the settlement they came to with the people of PNG about Ok Tedi and the pollution that flowed from that mining development. And some issues around Ross Garnaut's role in that where Prime Minister O'Neill has obviously taken a particular view.
But generally the relationship between the two governments is a very strong one.
HOST: Prime Minister thank you for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you very much.
HOST: Happy New Year and we'll watch the year with renewed and extraordinary interest.
PM: Thank you very much, thanks John.



HOST: Ms Gillard, good afternoon.
PM: Good afternoon Tom.
HOST: I assume you've been kept up to date with what's happening down here in Victoria. Any plans to visit in the next couple of days?
PM: Tom, what we do is I certainly get briefed on what's happening at the fire front and we let everybody get in there and do what they need to to fight the fire and then make an assessment as things start quietening down about when's the right time to come and say hello to people.
So I can't answer that question for you now. The last thing I ever want to do is distract effort when the emergency is really in the midst and everybody is all hands to the pump and getting the job done.
HOST: Indeed. Now obviously the fires today have been obviously nothing like the black Saturday bush fires almost four years ago but a reasonably substantial number of homes and other forms of property have been lost.
What would you say to the people who have suffered damage?
PM: There are people who are caught up in this, this is a horrible day for them, and whilst you're right the scale is not what we have tragically suffered through in the past. If it's your home, it's your home and it means the world to you.
So I want to say to anybody who's in that position, in this summer the Australian people are thinking of you and people will be there to support and one of the amazing this that happens at real times of stress like this is people do come to the aid.
We see the worst on display at the same time we see the best of human nature on display as people pull together.
HOST: Well in terms of assisting people who have been badly affected. What can the State and Federal Governments do?
PM: Well we work together in these emergencies. We work at the time of them together and then in the aftermath as people recover. So we'll work with the Victorian Government.
We have very clear natural disaster assistance programs and we'll work with the Victorian Government on helping people out.
But the focus right now has to be on the warnings, responding to them, people doing what they need to do to keep themselves safe.
HOST: Has that contact with people in the Victorian State Government, has that already started?
PM: We start that in preparation for the fire season and that is ongoing and there are very good communication systems. So we don't wait until the smoke is in the air and the fire is out there and running to click the coordination systems into place. That's done in advance and unfortunately this isn't the first time we've had to test these systems.
Our Australian climate, whether it's bush fires or cyclones or floods, particularly at this time of year, always throws us up challenges and so the federal agencies are very well used to working with state government agencies at a time like this.
HOST: Yes, unfortunately that's true. Just if I could just change tact briefly if I may, I saw today in the news that you said that if we were redesigning Australia over again we probably wouldn't have the states. Is there a chance you might be planning to get rid of them?
PM: No, no I was making the point that we're not working from a blank page and we do have our system of government  -  Federal, state and local as a result of history. If you were coming again to the proposition of how best to govern a nation our size I think you'd probably answer the question differently than three levels of government.
But our institutions of government are going to be there.
So no plans to be abolishing state governments; don't worry about that.
HOST: Is there a particularly state government that you'd like to get rid of if you could?
PM: No, I couldn't possibly single anybody, or any state government out.
HOST: Alright, we'll leave it there. Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you so much for joining us.
PM: Thanks Tom.



HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: And happy New Year.
PM: To you too.
HOST: Alright, there's a few elements to this that's quite exciting. Apart from having you on the radio on 2UE, we're also live on the Sydney Morning Herald's website at smh.com.au and in Melbourne we're on 3aw.com.au but something also I've got to thank you for right off the top is you want to take some calls so here's your chance.
How often in your life do you get the chance to speak one-on-one with the PM and actually have her telephone number? For the next 15 minutes or so her telephone number is 13 13 32. That was a worried look just then, you thought I was going to give out your-
PM: Mobile number, yes.
HOST: Yeah, exactly. Alright now let's have a chat about a couple of things here including, how was your summer? I should ask the obvious up front. You been seeing much, reading much?
PM: My summer was fantastic. I had a great time in Adelaide with my family. A different Christmas for us because no dad. But we all came together and we had some really great family time. Tim and I produced the Christmas lunch. We were very proud of ourselves.
HOST: What was it?
PM: It was a turkey, vegetables, the whole nine yards.
HOST: And I've got ask, how is mum? Obviously the first Christmas is horrible and it would be tough for yourself, but how is mum?
PM: She's going okay. My family is a strong one and my sister has moved in with her, which is a big thing to do but that means she's not alone so that's helping a lot.
HOST: There's plenty of things that children have of their parents, but is there something you have of your dad's that you've got in your office or that's at home, something that over recent months it's really taken on even more significance, you know, your bit of dad in the corner?
PM: Yeah, the main thing I've got is some fantastic photos including a photo of him washing dishes on a Christmas day where it's obviously a surprise shot and he's kind of turned to the camera and, you know, tea towel over his shoulder and it's just a very, you know, that's how I remember him, a very natural kind of capturing of the moment.
HOST: I'm glad your mum's not home alone because that's often the toughest thing for women after husbands go or any partner after a husband goes.
PM: Well it's a long, long time. My parents would have celebrated their 55th wedding anniversary on 28 December. They got married shortly after Christmas way back when in the UK. So it's a long time to live with someone and a very, very big loss.
HOST: Good stuff. Alright now let's have a chat about yesterday when you went to the fire ground. You're the most powerful person in the country; the assumption is that you can fix every problem but when you're standing in front of somebody who's lost a house is that one of the moments that you feel truly powerless as a person who has the top job in the country?
PM: There are some things I can do and there are something that I just can't and when you're touring around fire grounds like that and seeing how intense and ferocious that fire must have been then it's not only as Prime Minister but really as a human being that you recognise some of our limitations.
I think one of things of our ages is we feel as we've got so much technology, so many resources at our disposal that we can kind of do anything. But there are times in nature, times in life when there is a limit to what we can do and there was certainly a limit to what could be done to fight that fire. Everything that could be done was done and it's amazing that we didn't lose any life. It's a great tribute to everybody who fought it.
HOST: When you're standing there and you're looking at people, apart from offering comfort it's built into any politician that you want to fix something you feel you have the ability to. How do you reconcile that you can't rebuild somebody's house tomorrow.
PM: Well you've just got to recognise that limitation and be settled with it in yourself and also as you're talking to people, I can offer comfort I think I can embody that fact the nation is thinking about them. The fact that the Prime Minister is there I hope gives some reassurance that the nation is thinking about them. We can offer some practical help and we triggered some new government payments yesterday to give people a helping hand. But there's nothing I can do to bring back the family photo album or the trinkets that we've kept from your daughter's wedding or any of those kind of things that have gone in the blaze.
HOST: I don't know if it's a stylistic question or it's one of linguistics but you often say the nation, not the country. Why is that?
PM: I'm not really sure.
HOST: Because that's one of those terms that you do weave quite often into things. Is there any reason for that?
PM: No, I'm not really conscious of it. You're the first person who's ever raised that with me.
HOST: I'm sorry now you're going to think about it next time you're at a press conference.
PM: That's right, I'll be stuttering as to whether to say our nation or our country and I'll think back to you and say, woah!
HOST: Yeah, sorry Prime Minister. Unemployment figures yesterday, there was 5,000 people who in December lost their job in the lead up to Christmas. We often talk about how Australia is compared to Greece or the United Kingdom or the United States but Australia this month compared to last month the unemployment queue is 16,000 people longer. There are 5,000 people who lost their job over Christmas. What do you want to say to the people who lost their job in the past 30 days?
PM: To anybody who lost their job, particularly in the run up to Christmas, a devastating blow and we all rely on having work. It's what enables people to make a life for themselves and a life for their family and our job is to keep running the economy as strongly as we can so that there are new jobs, new opportunities.
Across the year, 148,000 more people in work than at the start of the year. So our economy has got strengths and there are so many things about our economy that's unlike the rest of the world.
But I get it, if you're that person who's lost that job then it's about your world and your experience rather than comparing the big statistics of the rest of the world. And for your world and your experience I'd want to say we're doing everything we can to keep job opportunities coming.
HOST: But also as a Labor Prime Minister, you would know better than most, is that a huge number and this would have been worse than 5,000 if there wasn't a significant jump in casual employment.
There's a lot of people listening to us right now whose hours are cut, whose conditions are changed. Technically they have a job so that you or the Treasurer can argue about the overall numbers but the individual circumstances of people have changed. Now they might have a job but it mightn't be a fulltime job. It mightn't be the one that pays the way that they believe it deserves.
PM: Now that's true and it's always been true of the way we do our unemployment numbers so there's nothing different in the way we do the count. When we look at our economy I think it's complex in detail and political debate often doesn't give you the space to work through all of the complexities.
It's undoubtedly true that our economy is strong compared with the rest of world. We came through the global financial crisis strong. That's something that we can and should be proud of. It's also true our economy is continuing to generate jobs.
But there are pressures as well. High Aussie dollar; result of the resources boom which is a good thing. That's generating jobs and wealth and prosperity but pushing the dollar up high.
The very fact we came through the global financial crisis so strong that our banks didn't have some of the problems that the rest of the world did means that we're increasingly viewed as a safe haven currency.
Now you'd think to yourself, gee that's something to be proud of too, being viewed as a safe haven currency. People who make decisions around the world saying, I want assets in Australian dollars. But that's pushing our dollar up and the result of that is a mix of good things and bad things.
It means imports are cheap. It means if people are going overseas then they're getting a better deal when they trade their Aussie dollars into the currency of the country they've gone to. But it also means for manufacturing, for tourism, for international education, for a whole lot of industries that trade with the rest of the world that there's a lot of pressure on.
So depending on where you are in our economy your experience will be quite different. For me the challenge is, yep, we've got to keep creating jobs now, people need work. But it's also how do we come through this time in our economy with still a diversified economy.
I don't want us to be a nation that's got all of our eggs in one basket in the resources basket. I want a strong manufacturing sector, I want a strong services sector, I want us to have the industries of the future. And that's what we've been doing with the policies we've been putting in place.
HOST: Once again, if you've got any questions for the Prime Minister, pick up the phone give her a call. Let's take a couple of calls here including Lisa, who is listening to us in Eastwood with a question about the bionic eye. Lisa, here's the Prime Minister.
LISA: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Lisa.
LISA: I'm a blind person. I've been blind now since I was 28, I'm now 43. My daughter was 13 at the time I went blind, she's now 27 and I don't know what she looks like. I don't know what you look like actually.
I'm ringing to ask you about the bionic eye because I think that we have a lot of medical research going on and we have some of the best researchers in the word, and they have been making a lot of progress with the bionic eye, but they need to have continuous funding.
So my question is, will your Government be continuing the project for the bionic eye and be funding this project?
PM: Lisa, thanks for ringing in and thanks for being prepared to share your story with me and with everyone. And when you said the words that you've never seen your child I think a lot of people would have stopped whatever they were doing in their kitchen or their lounge room to really listen to that. That's a very powerful thing to say.
We've got more money in research than ever before, including health and medical research. As the Government we have councils of experts including the National Health and Medical Research Council, you would have heard of, that advise us and help make decisions about where to put those research dollars.
So I'm very happy Lisa, from having heard you, to go and work out what's happening in with research and support for the bionic eye. Those experts will have had a look at it. But I'll go and make some enquiries and if you can leave your number with the people who are assisting us make this show, then we'll make sure we get back to you.
HOST: Okay, if you've got a question for the Prime Minister call us now. Now Prime Minister, a couple of other things to get to including there's been some conversation about guns and gun protection and also border protection. I know that you said the other day that the Home Affairs Minister needs to step up here, there's a national approach to be done.
New South Wales fires back pretty quickly and says well great, the one thing the Federal Government can do more than anything else is tighten the borders. To make sure that we check more containers that come through and make sure the border protection  -  when it comes to firearms  -  is a higher priority. Is that a part of his job?
PM: Well big problems need us to understand the facts. And I'm glad you've given me an opportunity to get some of the facts in to this debate.
The Australian Crime Commission in 2011 looked at sources of illegal firearms in Australia, so they're pretty expert people. And they said around one per cent come over the borders, that is they're imported, 44 per cent are out there in the hands of criminals because they're guns that should have been given back at the time of the buyback after Port Arthur and the guns change, but people didn't give them back.
Around 12 per cent are stolen, so started off as legitimate firearms with someone who was entitled to have them and then they got stolen and into the hands of criminals. So one per cent coming across the borders.
In terms of how we go about policing the borders and picking up packages of stuff that shouldn't come in, we have more than doubled the interceptions of illegal packages. So that means something that's got drugs in it, something that's got a firearm in it or a component for a firearm.
So, more than double the number that we're catching, and it's one per cent of illegal firearms problem. So in all of this of course we'll always keep looking to do what we can and should do strengthening our borders.
But there's a problem out there from other areas that we've got to think through and address. And that's one of the reasons that I've asked Jason Clare to give us some advice because there is this broader issue.
HOST: There was something, and I don't know whether I'm reading into it, but yesterday in talking about this you said that you wanted parents to feel comfortable that they could send their kids off to school knowing that this country had a good handle on guns.
Now, I don't know whether you were deliberately trying to be evocative about what had happened in the United States, but school shootings is not something that happens here. It isn't something that happens here. Was that the point you were trying to make?
PM: No, I wasn't trying to conjure up images of the United States. The United States has got quite a different problem from us, and a worse problem than we do. They are well behind where we are with gun laws.
We tightened up after Port Arthur and all credit to Prime Minister John Howard for leading the nation through that. All credit to him, he did the right thing. Even before Port Arthur, we had better firearms laws than they have in the United States, and certainly post-Port Arthur we have much more rigorous laws.
So they've got a different problem, different politics, we don't have an NRA equivalent here, and thank goodness we don't.
But we've still got a problem and people live in communities, they go about their business, they do the right thing every day, and I don't think it's right or fair or can be tolerated that they sit there wondering whether that's the night that a bullet's going to come somewhere in their street. That was the point I was making.
HOST: Okay, a couple of other calls here. We've got Luke who wants to ask you, guess what, about the carbon tax.
PM: No problems.
HOST: Okay Luke, here's the Prime Minister.
LUKE: Hi Prime Minister, I'd just like to ask you a question that ever since the carbon tax come in, air conditioning re-gas or the gas you put in air conditioners has gone up like 300 per cent, 400 per cent. When you get the normal LPG and other gas, it hasn't risen so high.
Like, we used to buy it for 12.5 kilos for $280. We're now paying up to $800 for 12 kilos.
PM: I can explain that for you. Those refrigerant gases have actually been the subject of particular levies for a long period of time, even before carbon pricing. Because they are very strongly polluting gases in terms of the amount of carbon pollution  -  it's actually not carbon, it's about form of greenhouse gas that they generate. But in terms of their generation of greenhouse gases, they are incredibly powerful. More powerful than other sources of greenhouse gases.
And that's been recognised for a long time here and internationally and they've been the subject of levy arrangements. And yes, their pricing has been affected by carbon pricing too. But it is really recognising their potency.
In terms of costs for people, you don't re-gas your fridge every 24 hours, that's something that you do periodically but over a long period of time. And all of that's been factored in to the cost of living increase we expected from carbon pricing, 0.7 per cent of consumer price index  -  less than one per cent, less than one cent in a dollar  -  and what we said would happen has happened. The cost of living impact has not been more than we expected.
HOST: Something that I know a lot of mechanics who literally own small businesses have as an issue is specifically about the air conditioning gas, is that they can't tell their customers the reason that it has gone up is because of, further down the line, the carbon price.
Now, this is something that clearly the only people who are allowed to say that something is a result of the carbon tax is the original producers of something. Because there's actually fines. The ACCC will fine a business if they turn around and say that well this price went up because of the carbon tax.
But if it's the real reason why it's going up, why couldn't a business like a mechanics say, hey this if going up because of a price on carbon?
PM: The ACCC is only interested if people are making false claims. False and misleading claims. You are allowed always to get out there and give people the facts and tell them the truth.
What the ACCC was always poised to crack down on, and what we wanted to make sure didn't happen, is that people just profiteered. So you walk into the shop one day and everything's gone up 50 per cent and they're cheerfully smiling and saying, oh you know all that's carbon pricing. And of course all of it is nonsense and they're just trying to rip you off. We didn't want anybody to be in that rip-off business. But if you're patiently explaining the facts to people, that's fine.
HOST: Okay, now I've got to ask you a couple of other questions as well as calls, and I'm being very greedy with your time here, but yesterday we had a story that was around about a former legal secretary at Slater &amp; Gordon who is speaking to Victorian Police about the matters way back when. Have police spoken to you about it at all?
PM:  No.
HOST: Would you be willing to speak to them should  they want to speak to you?
PM: The question doesn't really arise, I mean the only thing I know about that is I saw it in the newspaper.
HOST: But are you surprised that this investigation, that you've said very directly about your own involvement is one that you've done nothing wrong, are you surprised though that the investigation seemingly the Victorian Police keeps going on and on and there are plenty of people who may potentially have a pretty serious case to answer here.
PM: Look, all of that is a question you are going to have to put to the Victoria Police. What I can tell you is over 17 long years of listening to any amount of political carry-on about this, including the Opposition deciding to waste all of the last sitting week last year on a matter the best part of 20 years old, I didn't do anything wrong, and it's a question for the Opposition whether they want to continue with that kind of negative carry-on during the course of election year.
HOST Okay, and something I've been very passionate about in the lead up to this election year, and I know it was part of the original deal done with someone like Robert Oakeshott. I think we should have a debates commission. I like the idea that sure, it's up to you to decide when an election is called.
But I think that the public deserves to know that there will be a minimum of three debates, and they won't just happen early in the campaign, they'll be timed. And we know that over the 33 days of the campaign, there will be three debates, they will be in the following settings, and who the participants are, well that's up to the political parties.
Can you, at the start of this election year say, whether you want to sign up to the debates commission and also have three debates.
PM: Well what I can say is I do think it's a good idea to have all of this sorted out well before the election period, rather than have it the subject of a furious debate during the election period.
We have said that we're interested in a debates commission, and that will be the subject of discussion between the political parties relatively soon during the course of this year. And I hope agreement can be reached.
HOST: What's your personal view? Are you willing to stand there three times, do you want to do three one-hour chats?
PM: I think the problem with me now outlining my preferred personal view is that it really undercuts the endeavour to get a debates commission doing it. That is, someone that's not me and not someone that's in politics at the moment.
HOST: But that's got to be something that hopefully happens sooner rather than later? That we're not waiting desperately until two minutes before the election for this to be signed off on. This is something that can be done pretty easily, you get everyone in a room and you work out many and that's the deal done.
PM: This will be something that Gary Gray, one of our Ministers will be dealing with. He brings to that position of course some experience in political parties, he's a former National Secretary of our great political party. And I'm sure there will be discussions between him and counterparts in the Opposition, and organisational people in political parties too.
HOST: Okay, rather than me having the last question we'll take one from the phones. Bill with a question here for the Prime Minister, Bill, here's the PM.
BILL: Good morning Julia, doing a great job.
PM: Thank you Bill.
BILL: Julia, as pensioners the wife and I get a discount from our electricity company. The GST takes the lion's share, if not 99 per cent of it. Don't you think it's about time we scrapped the GST for pensioners?
PM: Well Bill, thank you for saying I'm doing a good job. And now you know I'm going to disappoint you because we're not in a position to take the GST back off things.
Once big, new economic arrangements have been made  -  and the GST was one  -  then it really becomes very costly, a big source of business uncertainty to start winding back arrangements.
I think we'll actually have some of that discussion during the course of this year about carbon pricing as well.
But what I can say to you Bill, is that your circumstances are ever present in our minds, we do know that there are lots of older Australians who do it really, really tough, which is why I'm glad we were able to deliver and fund an historic pension increase, and why we've been able to put some new resources in your hands associated with carbon pricing.
But more than you need to deal with the average impact of carbon pricing to help you get that little bit in front.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you so much for your time. I know we said 15 minutes and I've been, well, more than greedy with your time. But thank you so much.
PM: Thanks very much.


Sydney
It was ten years ago today that fire tore into our nation's capital, killing four people, destroying almost 500 homes and changing forever the lives of so many Canberrans.
Ten years ago Australians watched-on as Canberrans pulled together and fought back. We saw tremendous scenes of selflessness, neighbours helping neighbours, first-time volunteers fighting fires alongside veteran emergency service personnel.
Many of the physical scars from ten years ago are now long faded. But, the emotional scars still linger.
Sadly, this story has been told before of other Australian communities, and it will be a story that is told again. But, with each fire we learn important lessons. Our preparedness, response and recovery becomes smarter, more efficient and more effective every year.
Today, I pay tribute to the people of Canberra and all those who supported the people of our nation's capital recover from this devastating day. 
As we remember the tragic events in Canberra a decade ago, our thoughts are also with the many communities in Victoria and New South Wales that are today facing high temperatures and major bushfires.
Everyone should ensure they take the appropriate precautions to stay safe and monitor information from local emergency services as they work to protect lives and property.


Parliament House
PM: I'm here today to say that as Federal Labor leader I am very proud of the Labor Party's track record in working with and for indigenous Australians.
From the days in which Gough Whitlam trickled dirt into the hand of Vincent Lingiari to signal our understanding of land rights, I believe our political party has much to be proud of.
Gough Whitlam's work was carried on by other Labor Governments.
We all remember Prime Minister Hawke handing Uluru back to back to its indigenous owners.
We all remember the work of Prime Minister Keating after the Mabo and Wik decisions and his powerful Redfern speech.
We all remember the remarkable moment when Prime Minister Rudd apologised to the stolen generations and when he launched the Closing the Gap strategy, which focuses on indigenous disadvantage and changing lives.
As Federal Labor leader I am very proud of that work but I have also been very troubled that we have never been able to count amongst our number an indigenous Australian.
There has never been an indigenous Australian who has served as a federal Labor representative.
I am determined that at the 2013 election we change that.
And that's why I am very proud to be standing here with Nova Peris and to be in a position to announce that I have invited Nova to join the Australian Labor Party, and I have invited her to seek preselection for the Senate in the Northern Territory.
I have asked the Federal National Executive of the Labor Party to work with me on achieving this.
Nova is a household name. Many would remember Nova's sporting triumphs.
I think what they show is grit and determination to get things done and I am very admiring of that grit and determination.
I believe Nova will make a great contribution in the federal parliament; for the Labor Party, for the Northern Territory and for the nation.
Not just because of that grit and determination but because of the work she has done since her sporting career on building opportunities for young Australians, on focusing on the health of children, on focusing on the educational opportunities of children.
Nova was the first Aboriginal Australian to win an Olympic gold medal.
With the support of the people of the Northern Territory, I want her to be the first Aboriginal woman to sit in the federal parliament.
And I'm very pleased that she is here with me today, along with her family and friends and I thank them for being with us.
I would like to say a few words about Senator Trish Crossin, who has served for the Labor Party as the Northern Territory Labor Senator.
Trish is a remarkable woman who has achieved some amazing things during her federal parliamentary career since she was first elected in 1998.
She is a fiercely proud Territorian and she's spent a lot of time making sure that this parliament never forgets the views and perspectives of the Northern Territory as we make policies and plans.
She's someone who has travelled relentlessly throughout the Northern Territory so she could always ever an ear to the ground to get the views of Territorians and bring them to the federal parliament.
She has served with distinction on many parliamentary committees, the Senate having such a big committee load, and indeed she is doing that work even today as we stand here.
She has a lot to be proud of across her federal parliamentary career and there are many Australians with a passion for social justice who have pursued their causes with the help and support of Senator Trish Crossin.
She will of have course continue to serve as the Northern Territory Senator until the next election.
Now without further ado, I'd invite Nova to say a few words.
NOVA PERIS: Thank you Prime Minister.
Firstly, I want to say thank you for this amazing opportunity, having been asked by the Prime Minister to contest preselection for the Northern Territory Senate.
I stand here before you all today not only as an Australian but as a proud Aboriginal woman; proud of my heritage and culture.
I certainly understand the significance of this opportunity and I am very honoured and humbled. Thank you Prime Minister.
I firstly just want to acknowledge my family, my husband Scott, Destiny, Jacky-boy, my nephew Dante, Danny and Dion.
I am very honoured and humbled, thank you Prime Minister.
Today, with this announcement I want people to know that I am a Territorian, a proud Territorian who is extremely passionate about health, education and our youth.
I understand the significance and enormity of the challenges that I face and I'm the first person to put my hand up and say I don't know everything. I'm here to learn.
I believe I can also help regain the faith in the future and especially of my fellow indigenous Australians.
With this Labor Government I want to be able to help the Australian youth to live constructive and fulfilling living and to also become healthy and educated citizens of this fantastic and brilliant country of ours.
In my life I've never taken anything for granted.
I believe in hard work and I will be doing everything in the weeks and months ahead to get the opportunity to represent all Territorians in the Senate.
Thank you.
PM: We're happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did Trish Crossin offer her resignation or did you ask for it?
PM: I made an approach to Nova to stand for us in the Northern Territory.
Trish Crossin is today serving for us on a parliamentary committee getting about the work of the Government. She'll make her own statement in her own time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there is obviously a process to go through. Can you guarantee that Nova will be at the top of the ticket?
Also people will observe that you have had to ask Nova to join the Labor Party and they may draw the conclusion that there is no Aboriginal member of the Labor Party who is deemed to be a suitable candidate for this. What would you say to that?
PM: Firstly, on process, the National Executive Committee has met today and National Executive will meet tomorrow and I have asked the National Executive to work with me on ensuring that Nova is eligible to stand for preselection and that she is preselected as our number one candidate for the Senate in the Northern Territory.
On membership of our political party, we very proudly have amongst our number a number of indigenous Australians in the Northern Territory and in other parts of the country.
But as Prime Minister, as Labor Leader, I have decided on this occasion to engage in a captain's pick and I think that Nova, particularly, has a track record which shows she will make a great contribution in federal parliament.
Now that isn't to diminish the work of others. The reality of seeking preselection for the Labor Party in the federal parliament is that there are many people willing to serve with capacity and ideas and interests.
Many people who could make a contribution seek to be preselected and don't ultimately get to come here.
I know what it is like to fight a few preselection battles myself as it happens; probably fought more than most.
So it always is difficult, judgements have to be made and I've made one.
PM: We'll just go one at a time. I have promised Nova that it is a new year and you will all be on your absolute best behaviour. So I don't want to see anything that lets me down.
JOURNALIST: The sitting senator, Trish Crossin, has been involved in the debate over single mothers, moving people from the parenting payment over to Newstart when their youngest child reaches the age of eight.
You have trained with your oldest daughter I think when you were a single mum, are you concerned about any of those changes?
Do you think it is too early to be forcing mums off of those parenting payments that are higher, onto Centrelink payments when their youngest child reaches eight?
NOVA PERIS: I understand wholeheartedly how hard it is to be a single mother. I have been down that road before.
And my understanding is it is actually set up to support the younger mothers to move them back into the workforce.
JOURNALIST: Again Nova to you, just about your motivation to do this. We saw at last year's Northern Territory election a strong rejection of Labor by indigenous Australians in the Territory. They embraced the CLP for the first time really.
Why do you think that was? Is Labor getting something wrong when it comes to indigenous Australians in the Territory in particular? What sort of change do you want to see in how the party approaches these issues?
NOVA PERIS: From my view I truly believe Labor pretty much took their eye off the mark.
I guess there was a lot of work done by the CLP with regard to working hard in the bush and they got a lot of voters to vote, probably a lot of voters who have never voted before in their life.
I think the way that the CLP is now, there is a lot of things that are unravelling, there is a lot of broken promises.
As an Aboriginal woman, I've seen and I've been around the ropes long and hard enough to know that Aboriginal people have been disappointed with government for a long time and hence the intervention.
I was at the midst of that and I saw first-hand that you could have policies, but if you don't have the right people implementing it, it's never going to work.
So I am proud and honoured like I said, and humbled to be part of this Government and we are working very hard to win the next election and get the right people working.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, one of the problems that's been identified in the Labor Party has been the disillusionment of branch members at executive and administrative committees overriding the branches and making choices.
What do you say to those in the Northern Territory who say that they should have had a vote in this matter? And secondly, will you be using your prerogative as captain to get in some other local champions?
PM: I am a huge respecter of our own internal processes and consequently it has not been my track record to intervene in those processes.
I respect that our members around the country in part join the Labor Party because they want a say about who then goes on to contest elections for the Labor Party.
So it is not my intention to be a federal leader who routinely intervenes in party processes.
I have though taken a different view on this occasion because I believe Nova's selection is a matter of national significance, as well as a matter of significance for the Northern Territory.
A matter of national significance because it would be the first time that our political party has put forward an indigenous Australian in a winnable position at a federal election; has said to Australians indigenous and non-indigenous, that if you elect this Labor team, you will see amongst its number an indigenous Australian.
I think that is a nationally important question and that is why I have determined to take this course of action.
JOURNALIST: And local champions?
PM: And so, Michelle I think I have answered your question. I am not going to make it a routine for me to intervene in party processes. I am a big respecter of party processes.
But I think there is a national significance here, a national significance for our political party, a significance too for the nation generally because we have not, in the building that we are standing in a courtyard of today, seen an indigenous woman serve in this parliament. I think it is time that changed.
JOURNALIST: Nova, do you fully support the NT intervention and all of its programs?
I do believe that something needed to be done.
Without a doubt, like I said, I have done a significant amount of work, not only in the Northern Territory but at an Australian level, and worked in many remote communities across Queensland and also WA.
Women in particular; children, were crying out for some sort of change and like I said before, the way that the intervention was implemented was wrong.
I now know that this Government has the Stronger Futures legislation which now hopefully I will be a big part of that to ensure that voices of Aboriginal Australia is actually heard here now at the federal level and I can ensure that these new programs are implemented the correct way.
JOURNALIST: Are there any changes you would like to make?
NOVA PERIS: There is a lot. I could be here, I mean, education, essential services in remote communities, getting kids to stay at school. There is a number of things.
Health, I am a big advocate for health. There is a lot of issues around Aboriginal health. So I'm an advocate for all those and I would love to see big changes.
JOURNALIST: Nova, when and how did the Prime Minister approach you? And what was your initial reaction?NOVA PERIS: I actually was approached about seven or eight years ago. At that time, as you can see, my two young kids were babies at the time.
I wasn't ready then. I have always been a Labor voter, so has all my family. And I didn't think I was ready.
I wanted to get the runs on the board and I know that to be given  -  not given a position  -  but to be put into a position where you have a voice for Aboriginal Australians, I had to do a significant amount of work.
So I have been doing an enormous amount of work at a national level for the past seven or eight years.
JOURNALIST: Just to clarify, you weren't a member of the Labor Party until the Prime Minister approached you or have you been a member before?
PM: Nova is not currently a member of the Labor Party, so that is a matter that National Executive will resolve for me.
Just in terms of process here, I obviously knew a bit about Nova Peris like all other Australians. She's a familiar name and someone whose history I knew a bit about.
So I think many of us have watched her on the sporting field. Many of us have followed her journey since, all of the work she's done for reconciliation.
She was a Young Australian of the Year. Nova's been a public figure for quite some time now. So of course, I knew about Nova.
I did form the view that Nova would be a great person to run for the Labor Party.
I asked our National Secretary to make some enquiries of Nova about her preparedness to serve.
It is not all that routine to get someone knocking on your door talking to you about running for federal Labor. Nova had that experience and out of those discussions we are standing here today.
JOURNALIST: What was the timeframe for those discussions, and Ms Peris can you tell us whether you have had any discussions with Trish Crossin at all about your candidacy?
NOVA PERIS: I was actually approached formally about six to eight weeks ago.
George Wright, the Secretary of the national Labor Party, I had several discussions with him, and this is a big step that I have had to make. It is life changing.
This affects everyone in my family but in a way that we have all said yes I am ready, we're ready.
And like I said, there are a lot of challenges ahead but I have been a person that's overcome a lot of things in my lifetime and I am ready to step forward in this new role.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you have told us why you think it is important to have an Aboriginal woman in parliament.
But Trish Crossin, as you've said yourself, was a hardworking member of the parliament. What do you say to people who will view this as a ruthless decision?
PM: Inevitably there is change in politics. Our political party selects new people. We change, that is appropriate.
And so over time, people come to the parliament, serve in the parliament, move from the parliament and new people replace them.
Trish is someone who is continuing to work now. When she goes at the next election she will go with my thanks.
She will have served the Labor Party for 15 years in the federal parliament.
And of course there are only so many positions and that makes tough choices, inevitably tough choices.
But choices need to be made about the Labor team and about the people that we put forward.
None of that diminishes the significant work that Trish Crossin has done across her political life.
And I am sure, knowing Trish, that she will continue to find ways to serve the social justice causes that she holds so dear.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you personally spoken to Senator Crossin?
PM: Yes, I have.
JOURNALIST: About this, how long ago was that?
PM: Look I'm not going to go into private discussions but yes, I have.
JOURNALIST: It is one thing for a Prime Minister to make a captain's call on who should be preselected.
Isn't it another thing for a Prime Minister to suggest a serving Member of Parliament should hang up their hat and move on?
PM: Well I have made a decision and that's it.
JOURNALIST: Are you planning to move any other senators on?
PM: I have answered Michelle's question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say that you believe in a party process but it has also been unable to preselect a female indigenous candidate.
So you obviously didn't believe it could do that as you move forward. Why is that?
PM: I think around the nation, when you look at preselections, people inevitably view them as individual contests. So they're looking at the person in their seat on their senate ticket.
And there has been times in our party's history where we have had to say, across our political party, let's broaden the view.
That is what we did with the affirmative action agenda where we said people making up their minds in their individual contests, some great people are being selected.
But when you add it altogether, what it means is that we are getting a lot of men and not that many women. And we need to find a way of balancing that up.
Because if you believe as I do, fundamentally, that merit is distributed equitably across the population, across genders, across races, then if you're looking at an outcome where you are seeing lots of men or not many indigenous Australians, then people of merit are missing out.
And so, our whole political party had to have a look at that for women and I think this is a moment when our whole political party needs to look at it too so that we are joined by an indigenous Australian in our Federal Labor Caucus.
So there are times when you have got to step back and have a look at the whole picture. That is what I ever done on this occasion.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I just ask on climate change, President Obama spoke quite a bit about it in his speech overnight. What do you make of his remarks?
What are you expecting and what would you like him to do on climate change?
And just reflecting on the summer as well, heatwaves, bushfires, did they have anything to do with climate change?
PM: On the first, a great speech, absolutely great speech. People wouldn't expect anything less from President Obama and it was a wonderful speech.
What I was taken by in the speech was all of the work that President Obama has committed himself to which matters not only to the nation he leads, but matters to the world.
We have got work to do with the United States to strengthen the global economy.
We have got work to do on climate change and President Obama was very forthright about the need to tackle climate change.
We have got work to do together in our region of the world as increasingly the US focus sharpens on our region of the world.
So I saw all of that in the speech, the shared agenda that we have as two nations.
I also saw in the speech some domestic public policy issues that are obviously at the forefront for both of us.
President Obama, very focused on education. President Obama too, making reference to better circumstances for people with disabilities.
So as we go about improving our education system, as we go about building a National Disability Insurance Scheme, I think we will be able to have a lively public policy exchange with the United States.
On the specifics of what President Obama is committing the United States to, that is clearly a matter for President Obama.
But I think his statement reinforces climate change is real and pretending it is not or pretending that there are slipshod solutions to it is not good enough.
And here in this nation we have resolved for ourselves that we are going down the most effective path for reducing carbon pollution and that is putting a price on carbon.
On the extreme weather events that we have seen over the summer, I have got family in Adelaide so I have heard at length about sweltering Adelaide. I was in Sydney the day that the records tumbled. I have been to bushfire grounds in two states.
You can't ever put down one weather event and say this is climate change, but you can accept the science that the scientists are telling us.
They are telling us very clearly climate change means more extreme weather events.
I am not a scientist, but from a layperson's point of view it is a pretty startling day when the weather bureau says that they have had to pick a new colour for their map because they don't have a colour that tells us about a land temperature of 50 and above.
I think that is a pretty startling day.
So you can't look at one weather event but you can look at the broad sweep.
Our scientists do and just like we accept the science when they tell us smoking and lung cancer are related, when they tell us standing in the sun too long and melanomas are related, we should of course accept their science that carbon pollution, what we are doing on the planet, is making a difference to our climate.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you share the concerns of Japan about the incursions by China into its airspace over the Senkaku Islands as something you're attending to address when you look at national security for our nation?
PM: I will make a statement about national security tomorrow and I will be launching our National Security Strategy so I will ever an opportunity to address some of these questions then.
On the tensions between China and Japan, we have made it clear, indeed some of these discussions I have done personally myself, we have made it clear that we don't take a position on contesting territorial claims but we do have a very clear view about matters being resolved peacefully with no provocative action.
That is in the interests of China and Japan. It is in our interests, it is in the interests of the world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Victorian police have been travelling around the country interviewing people about the Australian Workforce Reform Association. Have they spoken to you at all since the Christmas break or in the last few weeks?
PM: No, they have not.
JOURNALIST: Back to President Obama's speech, what do you make of the portion where he says our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law?
PM: I don't think it is of any surprise to people that President Obama has announced and did in the run-up to the election his support for same sex marriage, so I presume he's referring to that.
JOURNALIST: You say this election is going to be about supporting the families of Australia. Will you be looking at increasing Newstart and by how much?
PM: I have dealt with this question before.
I do recognise it is very, very tough for people when they lose a job, incredibly tough, incredibly tough to get by on a low or fixed income and our job is to keep creating jobs, whatever the global economic conditions throw at us.
We have kept creating jobs, even during the biggest meltdown since the Great Depression, and a key focus this year will be on the future of our economy and creating jobs.
I want us to be a nation with a diverse economy that doesn't have its eggs all in one basket; that is tapped into the growth in Asia and is ready for the future with things like the NBN and clean energy sources and a better focus on skills and education.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well look, I've answered your question.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) several Australian lawyers including Julian Burnside has said could have a decent chance of success?
PM: This is a matter for the PNG judicial system now and I'm not going to start predicting the outcome of a court case which I don't believe has even been formally filed yet.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition has criticised the proposed reforms of anti-discrimination laws. Do you share any of their concerns about there has been a possible incursion on freedom of speech?
PM: Well, let's take a step back and perhaps clarify all of the tenses we should be using in that question. I don't like to lecture on grammar, but perhaps I will.
What is happening is there is an exposure draft that has been put out for public commentary because we're interested in the public commentary.
So before anybody concludes that anything has happened to anyone, it's not possible for anything to happen to anyone because an exposure draft is out for public commentary.
What is possible is that people can put their views in and they will be considered.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you think of Mr Windsor's public commentary this morning on the proposed anti-discrimination (inaudible)?
PM: Tony Windsor, like any other Australian who wants to have a say, the reason you put out an exposure draft is you're expecting people to have things to say.
People are saying things. There is a parliamentary committee process. All of that feedback is wanted.
We would not have gone down an exposure draft route if we didn't want people's feedback, so we will get the feedback and consider it.
JOURNALIST: So you do have a genuinely open mind on the fundamentals of that bill, not just around the edges?
JOURNALIST: We put out there what we thought was most worthy of consideration, so we're not starting from a blank page.
We put out there what we thought was most worthy of consideration, but we put it out there for feedback and we'll consider the feedback.
JOURNALIST: Nova, can I ask you before you go, it was obviously tough for you to come out here today on a personal level-
PM: And we will go and this is a long time to stand on very hard stone, for young people.
JOURNALIST: If you are successful, what would be, given the significance that the Prime Minister spoke about, what would be the greater achievement, that or winning an Olympic gold medal?
NOVA PERIS: Do you know what, this is amazing, amazing part of my life and, and it's certainly up there and I guess in a way through my sporting successes, I've always been in control of my own journey.
When you lose you take it on the chin, whereas here, I'm all about being successful, I want to be the best person that I can possibly be for the Australian youth and also Aboriginal Australia and I'm going to give it one hell of a go.
I'm determined to be successful, like I said, and this without doubt would have to cap it off.
PM: Thanks very much.
[ENDS]


Canberra
Today I have asked the National Executive of the Australian Labor Party to endorse Nova Peris OAM as a candidate for the Senate in the Northern Territory.
Australians first came to know Nova as an outstanding Olympic and Commonwealth Games medallist.
Since then, Nova has devoted her career to working with young people and indigenous Australians across the country.
Her passion for health and education makes her the right choice to succeed Senator Trish Crossin.
I look forward to working with Nova as she works hard over the coming months to become the endorsed candidate and ultimately, the first Aboriginal woman to enter the Parliament of Australia.
I pay tribute to Senator Crossin for her extraordinary contribution to the Northern Territory, the Australian Parliament and to her advancement of indigenous Australians.
Trish has been a highly effective, selfless and tireless advocate for the communities she has been proud to represent since 1998.
As a teacher, a unionist representing teachers and lecturers, and as a Parliamentarian, Trish has been a significant contributor to the debates and policy development in our Parliament and particularly the opportunities that education provides for indigenous children and youth.
This is a record that extends back to 1981 when she first arrived in Yirrkala on the Gove Peninsula as a school teacher.
Trish has a long commitment and an outstanding record of service to the questions of constitutional reform and rights for the residents of the Territory and the recognition of indigenous Australians in our constitution.
She has been a true role model for Labor people, unionists, women and all Australians with a sense of social justice.
I thank her for her service and look forward to her continuing contribution to national and Territory life.


Canberra
Australia's first National Security Strategy highlights the dramatic economic and strategic shift towards the Asia-Pacific region and provides a blueprint for national security over the next decade.
Complementing the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper, the National Security Strategy will ensure Australia takes advantage of the opportunities of the Asian Century whilst focussing national security efforts on the risks and challenges that come with change in the region.
The attacks of 11 September 2001 remain the most influential national security event in recent history. The threat of global terrorism heralded a new era for national security in Australia and worldwide.
But it is critical we continue to review and update our priorities and policies as the national security environment evolves with the rise of Asia.
The National Security Strategy will ensure Australia remains one of the world's safest and most secure countries.
The Strategy  -  which builds on the Government's 2008 National Security Statement  -  will guide the country's response to risks and identifies the main challenges and threats to Australia's national security, including instability in our region, conflict and coercion affecting our interests, malicious cyber activity, terrorism, espionage, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and serious and organised crime.
The number of cyber incidents has increased by 42 per cent over the past two years. The strategy emphasises the necessity of partnerships  -  with the Australian community, business and international governments  -  to better protect the country against potentially devastating cyber-attacks and to meet other national security challenges.
It will also encourage the innovation Australia will need to help manage the security risks of the future.
The National Security Strategy will ensure our Defence Force, police, diplomats, border protection personnel and intelligence agencies continue to work cohesively together by providing focus across government.
The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, under the guidance of the National Security Adviser, will drive implementation of the Strategy across Government.
Copies of the Strategy will be made available online at www.dpmc.gov.au


Canberra
HOST: Julia Gillard is the Prime Minister of Australia. She's in the national capital and even at this early stage in the election year calendar she has a plate full of issues to deal with. Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Jon and happy new year.
HOST: Thank you and the same. Yesterday we ran through a roll-call of Victorian hospitals: the Alfred, Peninsula, Eastern, Melbourne Health, Barwon Health, Peter Mack, St Vincent's, the Children's Hospital today have confirmed also in excess of 100 beds being closed across the state, and somewhere round my estimation is $50 million worth of cuts and hospital after hospital are saying that this is because of Commonwealth funds being reduced.
Why are you reducing funds to Victorian hospitals?
PM: We most certainly are not reducing funds to Victorian hospitals. What's happening here Jon is a blame game and I think people are pretty sick of blame games between state and Federal Governments.
I think people too can judge from the facts and judge for themselves. And the facts are these: we are increasing funding to Victoria for health at $900 million.
HOST: That's for health. This is hospitals. They're not the same thing.
PM: And overwhelmingly what we give Victoria for health is for hospitals, Jon.
HOST: But the hospitals themselves, Prime Minister,  say that these are because of Commonwealth funds being cut.
PM: And that's because the hospitals have received advice in part from the Victorian Government that's desperate to put a spin on this Jon, and to try and get away from taking responsibility for their more than $600 million worth of cutbacks.
So let's just do the maths, use the figures; our funding is going up $900 million.
The Victorian Government's funding is going down by more than $600 million. Of course Premier Baillieu is desperate to get away from political responsibility for that $600 million cut, and so he has been representing to hospitals that somehow this is all about the Federal Government.
HOST: Prime Minister, the actual hospital budgets themselves come from various sources; it comes from Commonwealth allocations and state allocations, the total pool of Victorian funds available from the Commonwealth for Victorian hospitals has been reduced.
Even if health funding's gone up, hospital allocations have gone down. Yes the state government has made a cut, but so has the Commonwealth.
PM: Jon, get out the figures and look at the year on year increases and you will see Federal funding going up by $900 million over a four year period.
HOST: The reductions that the hospitals say they're experiencing will cut jobs, and we'll speak to the Children's Hospital a little later this morning.
This is an election year. The state government's not facing the ballot this year but the Commonwealth Government is.
You are going to have this thrown at you in Victorian electorates  -  marginal electorates  -  seats you need to secure and win, right through the course of this year.
PM: And I'm happy to be judged by increasing Victorians' funding for hospitals and health, and all of that money predominantly goes to hospitals.
I'm happy to be judged by increasing that funding by $900 million by making more money available for Victorian hospitals from the Federal Government than has ever been made available before.
HOST: So this is going to be a credibility test between you and Ted Baillieu as you each point the finger in the other direction, and the voters are basically going to be asked who they believe.
PM: Well there are these things called facts, Jon, you know, facts. I know they might sound old-fashioned, heavens above, facts, but there are these things called facts that can't be denied.
And you don't really have to have a PhD in mathematics to work out that if one level of government is putting an extra $900 million in and another level of government is taking more than $600 million out, that the problems are associated with the $600 million cutback, not the $900 million increase.
HOST: Prime Minister, speaking of facts, there's some unfortunate facts being unravelled on Darwin ABC radio yesterday and today over your announcement of what you've called a captain's pick for Nova Peris for the winnable Senate seat.
This is just a little bit of what's been heard on the ABC on talkback in Darwin.
ABC DARWIN CALLER: After 37 years of being a Labor Party activist or a member, that this would be thrown upon you in this disgusting way.
HOST: A talkback caller to the ABC in Darwin describing your conduct in taking a captain's pick to elevate Nova Peris over Senator Trish Crossin as disgusting.
PM: These are always tough decisions, it's a leadership decision and I made one.
Jon, I expected that there would be a reaction, I expected that there would be people who weren't happy with my decision, but I came to my decision because I thought it was so important that we as a Federal Labor Party embrace amongst our numbers an indigenous Australian, an indigenous woman of incredible merit, and that is Nova Peris.
HOST: But why did you do it this way is the question everyone's asking?
Typically when Prime Ministers want to install and hand-pick someone for elevation to the Senate. The traditional way is to offer Trish Crossin a diplomatic posting or something that can't be refused; you move her sideways and elevate somebody in that way.
PM: I chose, Jon, to do it this way because the outcome is so important. I believe Nova Peris is a person of incredible merit.
She is well-known to Australians from the sporting field but she has done so much more besides that in education, work with children, work on opportunities in life.
I formed the view that I wanted her to be a Federal Parliamentary candidate, that I wanted Labor to break the history that we have had of not having an indigenous person serve in the Federal Labor caucus in the Parliament.
Now I knew that it would be controversial amongst some and that there would be a reaction, but I decided that this was the best way forward for the party. Now as leader I do make some tough calls. This was a tough call.
HOST: I understand the objective, but the methodology is what's being questioned and there are those including Senator Doug Cameron and others within your own ranks who are publicly saying that this is clumsy politics and it should have been done another way.
PM: Look there will be people who put all sorts of perspectives about those kinds of things.
In reality Jon, in terms of who comes into the Federal Parliament, who gets supported by political parties, there's a very limited number of spots and there's always more people that would like to be in there than get there so it's always controversial, there's always going to be disappointment by some.
That's kind of the nature of the way that things work. I've decided on this occasion that it is important that we endorse Nova Peris for the Northern Territory Senate spot.
When I spoke to Trish Crossin and as I said publicly, I'm very admiring of the work that Trish has done-
HOST: Well you can't be.
PM: As a Federal Labor Senator she's served for 15 years in the Senate representing Territorians and doing a good job.
I do think this is an opportunity at the next election for an indigenous Australian, Nova, to come in in that spot.
HOST: Are you going to deny that it was in any way a factor that Senator Trish Crossin was a Kevin Rudd supporter?
PM: All of that is completely irrelevant.
This was about my desire to ensure that Labor had within its caucus, representing people in the Australian Parliament, an indigenous Australian.
HOST: As we speak the polls have closed and votes have been counted in the Israeli election. You aggravated some of your Labor Party colleagues and cause a bit of a diplomatic storm over your stance on recognition at the United Nations of a Palestinian representation at nation-level.
The Coalition likely to be elected in the new Knesset in Israel looks like it is going to oppose the peace process. What does that do to our relationship with Israel?
PM: I am getting some reports coming through on the results in the Israeli elections. They are coming through off the Financial Times website and other places, all the international news sources.
Jon, I'm not an election commentator and I'm not going to comment on the nature of the Israeli Government until all the election processes are finished, counted and a government is formed. That wouldn't be appropriate.
HOST: But we have a commitment at the United Nations and a seat now on the Security Council and we have a belief, we have a publicly stated, internationally recognised view that we believe in a two-nation solution and we may now have as a close ally, and we're told a strong friend, a government in Israel that no longer agrees with our position.
PM: Well Jon I've just said to you, I'm not going to run commentary on Israeli politics.
What I can say is we as a government are strong supporters of a two-state solution in the Middle East.
We always have been as a Labor Party. We always will be and we will advocate that irrespective of who is in which positions in government. That's our long-held view.
HOST: President Obama, in his second inauguration speech placed extra emphasis on the current spate of extreme weather events and the need to urgently tackle climate change.
Do you have a renewed sense of urgency about tackling climate change because of extreme weather events right across Australia; particularly bushfires of course  -  Tasmania, New South Wales, Victoria and now cyclones already on the top end of Western Australia?
PM: Jon, we've already stepped up and done the single biggest thing we can do to tackle climate change, which is put a price on carbon and reduce the amount of carbon pollution we're putting in our atmosphere.
And you would see from reports in today's papers that our emissions are being reduced by the way in which the Government's policies have been smoothly implemented and they're making a difference.
We've lived through this summer. We've seen some horrible bushfires, some extreme weather events.
Now you can't point at one individual day, or one day's temperature and say that that's climate change, but our climate is changing.
The scientists tell us that and the scientists tell us that climate change will mean more extreme weather events.
Which is why it's important that we act, and we have acted. It's been a fast and furious debate but it's done and all of the claims that were made about carbon pricing, the hysterical nonsense that people had to listen to during 2012 has all been disproved.
People were told no one would ever work again in this country. Apparently the economy was going to have a wrecking ball through it. No one would ever be able to eat roast lamb again. Inflation would be cantering out of control. And they we also told that it wouldn't work.
Well, all of those things have been proved to be untrue.
HOST: So your sense of urgency is going to be expressed in what particular changes to government policy or which particular parts of the election campaign?
PM: Jon we've done it. We've done the single biggest thing you need to do to reduce carbon pollution in this country, putting a price on carbon.
We've done it. The nation has had a big debate. It's been a hard debate. It at times has been a very hot debate, talking about matters associated with temperature a very, very hot debate, but it is done and it is the right policy for the country.
HOST: Do you expect it still to be a high priority issue in the election campaign?
PM: I anticipate that we'll see a continuation of the sort of negative fear nonsense campaign against carbon pricing. Yes, I do think that will continue.
HOST: And do you expect to face a campaign of promises that if you vote for, in fact the current Opposition, then the carbon tax will still be abolished?
PM: I think that that will be stated but that's masking-
HOST: Do you think it's achievable?
PM: That's masking a grand intention that if the current Opposition was ever to end up as the Government then they'd have a little fiddle and a little name change and that'd be the end of it.
HOST: We will see in due course. I'm sure I'll get a chance to speak to Tony Abbott.
And just finally, Prime Minister there is a committee meeting in Melbourne today for the first public hearing over the Attorney-General's draft law on discrimination changes and there's a curious and quite unprecedented coalition of opposition to it from people who are normal fellow travellers with you on many issues such as Julian Burnside as a civil libertarian through to indeed representatives of the churches and the like.
It seems to have united people across the spectrum in opposition to what seems to be an ambit claim on discrimination laws.
Why are you pursuing something that's already attracting so much ire across all parts of the political spectrum?
PM: Well I don't want to quibble with your question, Jon, but I'm certainly not going to endorse the terminology ‘ambit claim'. It's quite the reverse.
HOST: It's an exposure draft. I'm calling it an ambit claim.
PM: What the Government is seeking to do here is we've got quite number of different pieces of discrimination law.
That all brings complexity as to which law applies and different processes and all the rest of it in different pieces of discrimination law.
We are trying to consolidate them into one piece of legislation and therefore make the system easier for everyone.
Now, we always understood this is an area where people would want their views to be heard, which is precisely why we put out an exposure draft so people could engage in commentary and people could put forward their opinions and we would get the benefit of that. So that's the process that's underway now.
I think what we're seeing in terms of the reaction to the discrimination law, the exposure draft, is that there are some areas of concern that have been raised.
I suspect too we're seeing some people who have had a long term opposition to discrimination law in any form coming back around again.
But we will get all of this feedback. We deliberately set out to get feedback and we'll consider it.
HOST: I'm indebted to you for your time and I think I've gone over what was allocated for which I apologise and I look forward to speaking to you again shortly.
PM: Thanks Jon.


Canberra
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OMITTED]
In Coonabarabran recently I met a woman who told me with tears in her eyes that she had lost her home.
The next thing she said was, ‘but the family's all safe and that's what matters'.
Words from the heart and words of wisdom.
When you have faced the worst, the recognition that life, safety, security is what matters most is sharp.
As Prime Minister, for our nation, I have to keep that recognition sharp every day.
To join realism with patriotism and to act to keep our nation secure in the modern world.
Our national security is and will always be the most basic expression of our sovereignty.
Through the work of national security, we secure our borders, protect our people and pursue our interests in the world.
Like every country, those interests often overlap with those of allies, neighbours and partners.
But ultimately, our national interests are distinctively our own  -  pursued for our own reasons, driven by our values and dictated by no other.
So conscious of the weight of the responsibility and conscious too of the need to continually refresh our thinking in this time of change, I today launch Strong and Secure: A Strategy for Australia's National Security.
This National Security Strategy is Australia's first. I have decided that our nation must have such a strategy for three clear reasons.
First, because national security is the most fundamental task of government.
Second, because we are transitioning from one decade, the decade of 9/11, to a post 9/11 era where some risks and challenges endure and others are evolving rapidly.
Third, because national security absorbs some eight per cent of what the Federal Government spends on behalf of the Australian people, and the priorities for that expenditure should be defined.
For each of these reasons, clarity is demanded in our strategic thinking and actions.
Today, I will outline that thinking and those actions.
On September 11, 2001, in those dreadful short moments when we watched the twin towers collapse half a globe away, we all learned what it feels like to have your assumptions about your life and your security ripped away.
Even as we mourned our losses, it was clear to lay people and security professionals alike that the world had changed in an immediate and fundamental manner.
We entered what Allan Gyngell has described as the ‘national security decade' but what could also be described as the 9/11 Decade.
A decade in which we also lived through the Bali attacks, the Iraq war and Afghanistan, where the fight continues.
A decade in which we were called to mount missions in East Timor and Solomon Islands.
In the wake of 9/11, new anti-terrorism laws were introduced and our overall intelligence budgets tripled.
Terrorism dramatically changed the way national security was conceptualised and the way it was undertaken.
It broadened our view of which agencies across government contribute to our nation's security.
It keenly highlighted the need for a “joined up” national security community  -  within and between intelligence agencies and across the fields of intelligence, law enforcement and border protection.
The private sector and the wider community became closer partners in achieving this endeavour.
We looked at how we could maintain cohesion and harmony in a multicultural, multi-faith society placed under a period of tension and strain.
We understood that 9/11 was an attack on our values and way of life and so in responding we carefully weighed what needed to be done for our security with our values of democracy, fairness, respect for individuals, their rights and freedoms.
Adding it all together, we carved out a new understanding of our national security.
Australia's responses to this period of transformation culminated in Prime Minister Rudd's National Security Statement in 2008.
This Statement outlined, for the first time, a pathway of “binding the detailed and diverse work of the national security community into a coherent, coordinated whole.”
The Statement recognised the need for even closer integration of our national security effort, and the modernisation of Australia's national security structures.
As a result, the Government appointed our country's first National Security Adviser to improve strategic direction within the national security community and across the public sector.
We introduced better coordination of budgets across national security agencies.
We established this institution, the National Security College, to educate Australia's current and future national security leaders.
And since the galvanising events of September 11 and Bali, our partners and Australia have secured some significant successes.
Osama Bin Laden is dead.
Al Qaeda's senior leadership is fractured.
Jemaah Islamiah has been decimated in our region.
Here at home, numerous terrorist plots have been thwarted, and 23 convictions have resulted from the prosecution of those who planned such attacks.
Afghanistan will soon take full responsibility for its own security, with transition in Uruzgan on track to be completed by the end of this year and by the end of 2014 for Afghanistan as a whole.
There have been other changes since Mr Rudd's statement.
Our work in Iraq has been completed.
In East Timor, our security presence has been drawn down after almost 13 years of involvement.
Likewise, the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands is transitioning to a law enforcement assistance mission.
At the same time, the effects of the Global Financial Crisis  - only then beginning to unfold in 2008  -  are now very clear.
We can see that years of fiscal stringency lie ahead for Australia and for our allies and partners in the United States, the UK and Europe.
These changes and continuities inform the National Security Strategy I launch today.
The National Security Strategy is an open statement to the Australian community, our business sector and to domestic and international partners.
Our plans and intentions are clear for all to see.
The Strategy identifies our national security objectives and surveys our national security outlook.
It sets out what we judge to be the key risks to our security and describes the policies, institutions and capabilities  -  the key pillars  -  which protect us.
The National Security Strategy will also inform priority-setting in a time of fiscal constraint.
This will ensure we maximise the return on the considerable investment made by taxpayers in our national security efforts.
It will also help bring our national security agencies closer together, providing greater coordination of effort as we meet the challenges of the future.
Importantly, the Strategy builds on the changes heralded in the 2008 National Security Statement and complements the Asian Century White Paper and the forthcoming Defence White Paper.
The Asian Century White Paper is the roadmap for how Australia can thrive in an Asian Century replete with opportunities.
But it also made clear that our national objectives in the region can only be realised if there is sustainable security in Asia.
The National Security Strategy therefore charts the course for Australia to play its part in achieving that aim  -  a secure nation in a secure region.
This Strategy is being released as Australia enters a new eraof national security imperatives.
I offer you three intersecting conclusions about the national security imperatives of the next decade and consequently the risks our nation will face.
First, our principal national security focus will be on our own region, as the global economic and strategic centre-of-gravity continues to move east, bringing great opportunities but also risks and challenges that must be managed.
Second, it will be an era in which the behaviour of states, not non-state actors, will be the most important driver and shaper of Australia's national security thinking.
Third, it will be an era in which diplomacy will be critical as we and our friends and partners in the region strive to master the complexities and new dynamics of a multipolar world.
The key risks that we see ahead include:
• The traditional and familiar risks that nations have always faced such as espionage and foreign interference,state-based conflict, and coercion affecting our interests;
• The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, specifically Iran's nuclear program and North Korea's continuing missile and nuclear programs, which are serious threats to world peace and regional stability; and
• Instability in developing and fragile states.
While understanding and managing state-based risks will require renewed effort, this does not mean that terrorism is defeated or we should ignore the malign intent of non-state actors.
Therefore, the National Security Strategy also identifies as clear risks:
• Terrorism and violent extremism; and• An increasing burden from serious and organised crime.
Recent events in Mali and the terrible murders in Algeria remind us that terrorism remains an enduring threat
Global terrorism showed us on 9/11 that it has the capacity to surprise us and surpass our worst fears.
It could do so again, so we will always be vigilant.
And as we transition in Afghanistan, our commitment to our goal of ensuring it is never again a safe haven for terrorism remains undiminished.
As a result we are making a significant commitment to funding the Afghan National Security Forces after 2014, and we will make an ongoing contribution to their training.
The Government will also consider a contribution to a Special Forces counter-terrorism mission in Afghanistan, but under the right mandate.
In fighting organised crime, we work at the interface between national security and domestic policing issues.
For example, our current work at Australia's borders to stop and seize illegal guns matters for community safety.
Communities, such as those in Sydney's West, rightly want to know every level of government is acting on their concerns about community safety and we are working together.
In this digital era we also face the new and growing threat from state and non-state actors of malicious cyber activity which poses such dangers to government, to business and to individuals.
So this too is a risk clearly identified in the Strategy.
Understanding these risks clarifies the strategic environment and the likely contours of the decade of the ahead.
But in commissioning this Strategy, I did not want this merely to be a list of risks and challenges, or a statement of doctrine.
I also wanted clear priorities to direct Government activity and resources in a real and concrete way.
Accordingly, the National Security Strategy identifies three specific areas where the Government will be dedicating increased effort over the next five years.
First, effective partnerships.
In an increasingly complex and interconnected strategic environment, we can only succeed by working smart and by working together.
Working smart means clear priorities.
Defining those priorities is the purpose of this Strategy and I today commit to updating this strategy every five years or sooner, should events require it.
Under the auspices of this Strategy, we will continue to refine our analysis of national security risks and further improve our coordinated national security budget process.
We will also develop a National Security Capability Plan to complement the Defence Capability Plan.
In pursuit of clear priorities, it is easier to reach out and include others in the effort.
By others, I not only mean all parts of the Federal Government, but also our colleagues in the States and Territories, foreign governments and non-governmental partners, particularly business.
So, in pursuit of partnerships, my message to our national security community is: if you see a silo, dig it up.
Not just because a silo mentality constrains thinking but it also risks wasting resources.
The National Security Decade was a time of rapid ramp-up in resources.
Now, inevitably, we are in a period of consolidation and we need to get the most value out of every dollar expended.
Therefore our national security arrangements must adapt and respond, harnessing information, ideas and capabilities from all sources and prioritising our spending in a clear-headed way.
The second identified area for increased effort is cyber security.
As we roll out the National Broadband Network, we are deploying a more sophisticated focus on cyber security.
Australia is an attractive target for a range of malicious cyber actors, from politically-motivated hackers and criminal networks to nation-states.
This not only has the potential to affect governments but businesses and the community alike.
For the public sector, we must ensure that our most important networks are some of the hardest to compromise in the world.
But government alone cannot develop a secure and safe digital environment.
We must continue to work closely with industry and international partners to develop a set of global ‘norms' for online behaviour.
The Internet must remain open but also be secure.
The Government has already committed substantial funding and additional effort to strengthen our cyber capabilities, including $1.46 billion out to 2020 to strengthen our most sensitive networks.
I have also established the Office of the Cyber Policy Coordinator within my Department to provide leadership and coordination on this important issue.
In the same spirit, tomorrow I will formally announce the development, by the end of this year, of a new Australian Cyber Security Centre
This will be a world-class facility combining existing cyber security capabilities across the Attorney-General's Department, Defence, ASIO, the Australian Federal Police and the Australian Crime Commission in a single location.
It will provide Australia with an expanded and more agile response capability to deal with all cyber issues  -  be they related to government or industry, crime or security.
Importantly it will also create a hub for greater collaboration with the private sector, State and Territory governments and international partners to combat the full breadth of cyber threats.
Malicious cyber activity will likely be with us for many decades to come, so we must be prepared for a long, persistent fight.
Perhaps nothing better characterises the National Security Strategy than the third of our key focus areas, enhanced regional engagement.
This acknowledges the shift in the global strategic and economic centre-of-gravity to our region and the need for security as the indispensable foundation of prosperity.
Asia's rise is, of course, no surprise for Australia.
As far back as 1989 the Garnaut White Paper served notice, if any was needed, that Australia's future lay in Asia.
Indeed, our engagement with the region can be traced back to the Chifley government's support for Indonesian independence in the 1940s and the commerce agreement with Japan in 1957.
We have a long tradition of engagement to draw on.
But Asia is changing as economic growth leads to shifts in the established strategic order.
We are seeing rising government incomes enabling many states to modernise their defence forces with more advanced capabilities.
At the same time, population growth and rising wealth levels are putting pressure on energy, water and food resources.
All this means our strategic landscape is becoming more crowded and complex.
But it also remains true that it is the relationship between China and the United States that more than any other will determine the temperature of regional affairs in coming decades.
We remain optimistic about the ability of China and the United States to manage change in the region, but their relationship inevitably brings with it strategic competition as China's global interests expand.
None of these developments of themselves make major power conflict inevitable but they do make the consequences of any conflict more far-reaching and dangerous.
They raise the cost of any miscalculation that may occur in a range of regional flashpoints such as North Korea, the Taiwan Straits, the South China and East China seas or India-Pakistan.
And they underline the need to build a regional order in Asia which can manage strategic change peacefully.
The remarkable growth we see in Asia could not have happened without an environment of relative peace and stability.
Continuing and deepening that climate of relative peace and stability is at the forefront of Australia's national security agenda.
Indeed, nothing is more important in Australia's security outlook.
That is why last year's Asian Century White Paper made it very clear that we need to construct
“a peace in which all the region's countries have a voice in its future, which is guided by established rules and transparent behaviour and in which decisions are taken without threats of the use of force or other forms of intimidation.”
In other words, we must strive to shape a secure international environment that builds trust and is built on trust.
It is the only the way we will continue to enjoy the growth and prosperity that has so transformed our region and its future.
In preparing for the future, Australians need to be confident that we can also shape that future.
The post-war period has taught us just how successful we can be as a creative middle power with links to the old and new worlds, backed by credible military and economic strength.So Australia has a key role to play in building patterns of cooperation and trust, in the Asia-Pacific and in the wider world.
This understanding is an enduring pillar of Australia's approach to national security.
We know that no single relationship, arm of government or multilateral body will deliver the understanding, trust and action required to secure a peaceful and stable Asian Century.
It is more complex than that but I am optimistic of our ability to manage this complexity.
After all, Australia is the world's twelfth largest economy.
We have a place on the G20 and have secured its hosting.
We now hold a non-permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council, putting us at the centre of international cooperation on peace and security.
We have long championed a multilateral, rules-based order in our region in which disputes are resolved peacefully, without the use or threat of force or coercion.
We support efforts to build a stronger East Asia Summit in which all countries have a voice and which can help manage regional strategic change and build confidence.
We are helping strengthen defence-to-defence dialogue through the ASEAN Defence Ministers “plus” meeting.
We support our ally the United States in continuing to play its role as a stabilising force in the region.
We are building deeper relationships with China, Indonesia, India, Japan and Korea, amongst others.
We will increase our diplomatic footprint abroad, and increase the expertise of our professionals working in the Asian region.
Our diplomatic efforts are complemented by an aid program that focuses on the Asia-Pacific and a strong network of law enforcement and intelligence relationships.
Importantly, Australia will continue to maintain one of the strongest military capabilities in our region.
Let this be clear: in a time of fiscal constraint, we will keep the Australian Defence Force strong.
Our level of defence expenditure will ensure that Australia remains one of the top 15 nations for absolute defence spending, and second only to the United States on a per capita basis among the G7 countries plus China.
Our ADF will have the best people with the right equipment for the challenges of the Asian Century.
As we transition from East Timor, Solomon Islands and Afghanistan, our Defence Force will fix its sights on extending and deepening relationships across the region.
This will include joint military exercises and high-level military exchanges with China, reflecting in defence the cooperative spirit that exists in the other aspects of our friendship.
A strong nation will possess a credible defence force.
A wise nation will work hard never to require its use.
The 9/11 decade is ending and new one is taking its place.
That's why I launch this National Security Strategy today.
As an active middle power with global interests, Australia will work hard to anticipate threats and protect the nation.
Nothing in our grasp will be left to chance.
We will shape the world in our interests and values not just respond to events as they arise.
We will ensure that Australia remains secure at home and strong in the world.
We will keep our nation safe.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
PM: Thank you very much.
I can see this is going to take a bit of neck-craning from me to be able to include everybody as I speak, but I'm very pleased to be here today and I'm here with the Minister for Defence, Stephen Smith, and of course with the Secretary of Defence too, Dennis is with us as well.
I've never been here before as you know so it's a great opportunity to come and say hello and a great opportunity to say thank you too.
I've chosen today to come here to the Defence Signals Directorate, to you, because yesterday we launched our National Security Strategy.
There's no more important role for government, for any of us, than keeping our nation safe.
And that means we always have to have the strategic analysis which is up with the times. We've always got to make sure that we are doing the deep thinking necessary to guide our national security efforts.
And we've done that work and put it into the National Security Strategy, which we want people across the Australian Public Service, but across the Australian community too, to understand and absorb.
As we've looked at the challenges ahead, the challenges in the next decade, the decade beyond 9/11, we have identified cyber security as a principal challenge.
Which is why it's been a great opportunity for me to meet with and better understand some of the work that you do down in the pit, to use the terminology, the Cyber Security Operations Centre, and thank you to the staff down there for their time this morning in explaining their world to me as best they could with television cameras rolling.
The importance of cyber security isn't just reinforced by a visit to the pit.
We've also reinforced it from yesterday's National Security Strategy where we have said it will be a key focus of the work ahead and that we will by the end of this year launch a new Australian cyber security centre which will bring together people across all arms and agencies of government who work on cyber security.
An important initiative because cyber security encompasses so much, so much in terms of threats, the threats that we see from state and non-state actors, and so much in terms of the security of our community.
Not only government networks but business networks; critical networks across our community.
I was joking with Stephen Smith as I walked round. I'm someone who sits with a Prime Minister &amp; Cabinet computer on my desk and when you haven't used it for a while it flicks to the rotating screen saver, one of which is a message on cyber security which does say in a very pithy way “That Nigerian prince does not need your help.”
A message for community members but of course what you do here is much more sophisticated.
Can I say more broadly to all of the staff that work here at DSD, all of the big range of work that you do here, cyber security and so much beyond, thank you for the work that you do to keep our nation safe.
Thank you for every effort you make and efforts that we can't thank you for, one success at a time.
We're never going to go out there and say ‘Guess what DSD has done today, they've done a really good job.' We never go out there and say that for very good reason.
But even when we can't go out there and say that, I'm really conscious that the work that you do here is a pivotal part of our national security efforts, it's a pivotal part of keeping our nation safe. And thank you very much for doing it.
I do also want to congratulate you on having, I think, the most succinct and powerful mission statement of any of our arms of government: ‘Reveal their secrets, protect our own.'
Thank you for the clarity of that vision and that statement and thank you for living up to the mission that that vision says.
That is what we need to do, reveal their secrets and protect our own.
So it's a good opportunity to be here. Obviously I can't be here every day with the Minister for Defence, but I do want to say to you every day we are conscious of the work you do, of the efforts that are happening from this place.
So thank you very much.


Canberra
A new Australian Cyber Security Centre will be established in Canberra to boost the country's ability to protect against cyber-attacks.
By drawing on the skills of the nation's best cyber security experts, the ACSC will help ensure Australian networks are among the hardest to compromise in the world.
Cyberspace is increasingly a strategic asset for Australia.
Already around 73 per cent of Australians use the internet more than once a day. Australians' use  of cyberspace is estimated to be worth $50 billion to our economy, with the rollout of the NBN only expected to accelerate these changes.
Yet Australia's cyberspace is subject to threats:
 * 	In 2011-12, there were more than 400 cyber incidents against government systems requiring a significant response by the Cyber Security Operations Centre.
 * 	In 2012, 5.4 million Australians fell victim to cyber crime with an estimated cost to the economy of $1.65 billion.
Securing and protecting our networks, and ensuring confidence in the online environment, is pivotal to Australia's economy.
The ACSC will be responsible for analysing the nature and extent of cyber threats, leading the Gillard Government's response to cyber incidents. It will work closely with critical infrastructure sectors and key industry partners to protect our nation's most valuable networks and systems. The Centre will also provide advice and support to develop preventative strategies to counter cyber threats. 
The ACSC will be the hub of the government's cyber security efforts. It will include, in one place, cyber security operational capabilities from the Defence Signals Directorate, Defence Intelligence Organisation, Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, the Attorney-General's Department's Computer Emergency Response Team Australia, Australian Federal Police and the Australian Crime Commission.
Industry and state and territory partners will have the opportunity to collaborate with the Government through the Centre.
Establishment of the ACSC will begin immediately and is expected to be fully operational by late 2013.


Parliament House, Canberra
PM: Thank you very much.
Over the past half century we've learnt to celebrate our national day in a very special way: by singling out some of our fellow citizens who absolutely embody the best of what it means to be Australian.
Tonight four names will be added to the roll of honour as Australians of the Year: a roll of men and women who collectively tell our nation's story.
Some of the Australians of the Year can trace their connection with this land back countless centuries, like the Yunupingu brothers, Neville Bonner and Mick Dodson.
Others, like Fred Hollows, Gus Nossal and John Yu, were born elsewhere.
But all of them, every Australian of the Year, has helped shape our nation.
They've helped made a nation of men and women who take on the world's greatest medical and scientific challenges; a nation that excels brilliantly in the sports and the arts; who extends a hand of healing and friendship to those doing it tough.
The men and women we honour are our tall poppies, who have grown high in achievement and stature under our very bright southern skies.
Through the Australian of the Year awards, we don't cut them down, we lift them up; honouring in them all that is best about our nation, our values and ourselves.
I warmly congratulate the 2013 Australian of the Year award winners and commend them to the nation; a nation they've done so much to enrich and so much to serve.



HOST: Happy Australia Day eve.
PM: Thank you very much, to you too.
HOST: My first question to you, given the announcement of the Australian of the Year, I know, we're about the same age and I know I have danced in the 80s to Cold Chisel's Ita. Prime Minister?
PM: Well when you say we're about the same age, we're really implying to the audience that we're quite young.
And I grew up in South Australia where Cold Chisel came from so I remember the incredibly, incredibly, incredibly early days. I don't want to confirm whether or not I was in licensed venues when perhaps my age wasn't 100 per cent right.
But I do remember Cold Chisel from a long time ago and I've certainly danced to Ita, and any other Cold Chisel song you care to name.
HOST: Ita Buttrose is only the twelfth woman to receive this honour. A deserving recipient?
PM: Absolutely and it's been a long time since we've seen a woman be the Australian of the Year, so it's nice to see a woman this year.
And Ita is a very deserving recipient. I think her story has come again to Australians because of the TV series Paper Tigers-
HOST: Giants, Paper Giants.
PM: Oh Paper Giants. Sure it wasn't Paper Tigers? Maybe it should have been Paper Tigers. Paper Tigress.
HOST: You've got (inaudible) in your mind there Prime Minister.
PM: Maybe I do. But the story's come again because of that and it's incredible that she is here tonight and accepting the award.
But whilst people would cotton on to that part of the story  -  and women like me who remember very clearly that part of the story  -  the work she's doing now for awareness of diseases like Alzheimer's is absolutely fantastic.
HOST: She's thrown out a challenge on that and looking of course for funds to back up research into that. What are your thoughts on that?
PM: We've been working with Ita  -  and absolutely in a good dialogue about the things that she wants to see done  -  and I can understand her analysis about the burden of disease as we age.
So we're going to keep working with her during the course of this year and I don't think she's going to be backwards about coming forwards on what she's thinking is the right thing to do.
HOST: Paper Giants was in a way history lessons of the many barriers that women faced. You have broken through many glass ceilings  -  perhaps the ultimate glass ceiling  -  do you thank the women who went before and the battles they fought, such as Ita?
PM: Oh, certainly. It's only possible for me to be here in this position because I'm standing on the shoulders of women who have come before. And I'd like to hope that me doing this position will make a difference for the women to come.
HOST: What does Australia Day mean to you? Your mum and dad chose to come here and bring their young family here. Does it have special significance?
PM: For our family it is about our migration story and our choice. If you're born here you get to experience this country from the very first breathe.
For us, my family chose it and we also made a conscious choice to be Australian citizens. And I remember that discussion in the household. So it is about love of country, about coming here, choosing to be here, and everything that's meant for our lives and our life stories.
It would be impossible for me to have lived a life like this if we'd stayed in the United Kingdom.
HOST: This is a time, and perhaps a date that does bring around discussion about who do we think we are and what do we value. What are your thoughts on that?
PM: Who I think we are? I think we are a young nation, a nation that is more and more assertive with its sense of self confidence.
We are there knowing that we can tackle any problem. I think we can carry a spirit of quiet optimism with us. We're not a showy type. We're not lots of really pompous ceremonies or anything like that. But I think that quiet confidence does get shown day by day.
HOST: It's a debate that won't go away, and it's been raised again this year and that's the date. It is a date with its routes in white settlement  -  some say invasion  -  many Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians want a change. Is it time for a proper discussion about that rather than (inaudible). And I know the ACT Australian of the Year, the wonderful Indigenous leader Dr Tom Calma wants the discussion to be had by younger Australians. What do you think?
PM: I think the day is going to stay the same, frankly, I do. And I think it should. And I think it's up to us to interpret and re-interpret its meaning.
I did listen very intently to the speech of the now Young Australian of the Year, Akram's speech where he said the dreaming continues and now we're all a part of it. I thought that was a very nice way of putting how we can say our national story is coming together from first Australians to the Australians who have joined them.
HOST: But it is a day that has brought about division. I mean, just last year you were smack-bang in the middle of that. You don't think it should be up for discussion if it is hurtful?
PM: I don't think  -  of course people will discuss whatever they want to discuss, and I'm a great respecter of Tom Calma and his views. I don't agree with changing the date.
But I do agree with on Australia Day looking in a very clear-eyed way about our history and what lessons we should learn from that for the future.
HOST: You've now found yourself in another kind of melee around your pick of Nova Peris for the Senate. Is this unfortunate timing?
PM: Absolutely not. I've decided that our political party will support a woman who I think is very likely to become the first Indigenous woman in Australian Parliament.
Of course the people of the Northern Territory are going to go to their polling places and cast their vote. But I'm very optimistic that she'll right that part of our history for us.
HOST: Prime Minister, it's also a time when all too often our country has faced disaster; fire and floods. Have you got a message to our emergency and volunteer workers?
PM: You are absolutely right. I can count my summers by the natural disasters that as Prime Minister you worry about day by day and then go and visit communities following.
So every summer as Prime Minister there have been floods, bushfires, cyclone, damage, devastation to worry about. And great community spirit to applaud. And I am always amazed by the volunteer efforts and by what communities will do when they come together in times like this.
So I think that there are some very fatigued people around the nation, it's been going for a long time now, and they've been turning up and doing it day after day. So to them, every tribute should flow.
And on their behalf I would say please, in every community around the country, listen to the local warnings and do what you are asked to do and make their jobs just that little bit easier.
HOST: We're hoping that they get a day off on this Australia Day as well.
PM: Wouldn't that be nice?
HOST: This award of a person of the year is unique in this country. No other country does this. What do you think that says about us, that we do single out people?
PM: I've actually had a little bit of that conversation with Geoffrey Rush today who was telling me about filming overseas and explaining to people that he was the Australian of the Year, and how intrigued they were that we have such a thing, and also that someone from the arts  -  from film  -  would be the Australian of the Year.
I think what it says about us is it's a reflection of a very democratic, classless spirit that we want the ability for any of our number to be the person who is given the accolade of Australian of the Year. We don't want it to be a birthright, we don't want it to be an inherited title. We want it to be something that through our own processes we award to each other.
HOST: You said it's not about cutting down tall poppies. It's about holding them up.
PM: It certainly is and I think perhaps there was a time in our culture when we were a bit keen to cut down tall poppies, but I actually see it differently today.
I think we're always going to shun snobbish conduct and I think we're never going to be an obsequious people. But I think we can celebrate in our own spirit success, and that's what we are doing right here.
HOST: And Prime Minister, sitting with you is of course our two 2012 recipients, Marita Cheng and Lynne Sawyers, Lynne Sawyers who has fostered over 200 children, who had a happy childhood herself and just decided that other children should have happy childhoods. And Marita who of course, just wants girls to chose engineering. Is it great to see the range of contributions that Australians have made on a day like this?
PM: It certainly is. And I love the videos when they come up, every year I've come and done this the videos just show you the incredibly different ways in which people can make a contribution.
And if you sat around your dining room table and said let's talk about how people contribute to the nation, I would defy people to actually imagine the huge range that we see on display at these ceremonies that we saw tonight, that we saw last year. It's just incredible.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks so much for being part of our special outside broadcast. And have you got a message for all Australians on this Australia Day eve? How should they celebrate?
PM: Well on this Australia Day eve I'd say make sure you're having a good night wherever you are having it, you're having a safe and enjoyable night, and that you get the opportunity tomorrow to reflect on what a wonderful country live in.
And however you chose to do that, whether that's going to a local community event or simply spending some time with family and friends, take a moment because we do live in the best country on Earth and we should always remember that on Australia Day.
HOST: Have a great 2013  -  a big one for you  -  an election year.
PM: They're all big ones and I've got a lot of governing and work to do.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard thank you so much. Happy Australia Day.
PM: Thank you.


The Lodge, Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
We're here to honour every finalist, everyone who is here. Some very excited people who are part of the Australian of the Year process.
You all should be very proud of yourselves and you are very welcome here.
And if you needed to explain to anyone what Australia is, what our self-image is, then perhaps the easiest way to do it would be to bring them to this room and to ask them to look around these faces as I am doing now.
Because by looking across this crowd, you are seeing the diversity of Australia, you are seeing the best of Australia.
People who have made contributions and who have been honoured for those contributions by their communities; people that their fellow Australians wanted to put forward to be acknowledged.
And certainly diversity is the word. We are looking at a crowd of people from representatives of our First Australians, to people who made Australia home during their lifetime.
We're talking about people who have had distinguished careers and can point to a lifetime of achievement, and people whose lifetime of achievement still lies in front of them.
We're talking about people who always go that extra yard to make a difference to their fellow Australians and their community and we want to acknowledge you for it.
So it is truly great to be able to welcome everybody here and to once again participate in the remarkable set of events that end up giving us the Australian of the Year, the Senior Australian of the Year, the Young Australian of the Year and our Local Hero.
Whenever I get the opportunity to go walking in Canberra  -  it's not all that often but sometimes I do get the opportunity  -  and one of the best places to walk is past the plinths on the edge of the lake that honour each Australian of the Year.
It tells you a story of our nation; it tells you about the many ways in which people can serve our nation.
Whether it's being in the military, being in the arts, being successful in business, being a philanthropist, being a scientist, being a farmer; the many ways in which people can contribute to our nation.
This year we are adding to that rich history.
So I'm very much looking forward to tonight's event followed by the concert.
I know that I will see you all there and that there will be a real air of excitement as we go into the final announcements of the Australian of the Year, the Senior Australian of the Year, the Young Australian of the Year and the Local Hero.
But one of the best things about this process is how it brings people together.
I was talking to Gilly before and one of the things that we remarked upon is that this really does create an esprit de corps between a very special group of Australians that endures as people leave these events and go back to their lives.
A very important thing for the future.
So it's with a real sense of welcome that we have you here for this morning tea.
Adam will say a few words too and then please feel free to just wander and enjoy.
That's what it's all for.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
I begin by honouring the traditional owners of this country upon which we gather, and in the same spirit of friendship, I greet all indigenous Australians.
On this day above all days, I honour and recognise your ancient cultures, your unbroken story of pride and endurance, and your continuing connection to this land.
And in a spirit of reconciliation, I pledge my untiring efforts to build a nation in which all Australians walk in dignity and equality together.On this day of celebration and affirmation, I acknowledge the outstanding work of the National Australia Day Council in bringing Australia Day festivities to all Australians.
And I extend a very warm welcome to everyone gathered here today in our national capital in the centenary year of its founding.
I greet those of you about to become citizens and those who have come in support.
Not just friends and family but those local residents and visitors who have chosen to celebrate their Australia Day by sharing your first Australia Day.
In 1949, my great predecessor, Prime Minister Chifley, officiated at the inaugural Australian citizenship ceremony.
It was held here in Canberra, and seven aspiring Australians read the new pledge that swore them to ‘bear faithful and true allegiance' to King George VI and his successors.
Today in 430 ceremonies across Australia, a record number of people  -  more than 17,000  -  are taking the pledge of citizenship.
The words of the pledge have changed and so has our nation.
Since that day in 1949 more than four million people, drawn from every nation in the world, have chosen to swear their loyalty to Australia.
And I am proud to be one of those four million.
As migrants, we did not just adopt a new country.
We helped transform and enrich it.
And together, as new Australians and old, we made this experiment work.
My colleague, Penny Wong, has used the term “muscular multiculturalism” to describe how it was done.
In this concept of multiculturalism, our nation is not just a patchwork of identities and backgrounds.
Ours is a land where flag and oath, mateship and fairness, work and opportunity, are open to all and embraced by all.
In this way, our multiculturalism is revealed not as an ornament, but as an organising principle not as a decorative feature of our society but as a decisive element in our national success.
This is true nation-building  -  firm in the faith that Australia's best days lie ahead and firmly determined to make those days possible through the loyal, productive lives we lead and the national purpose we share.
As migrants we have come from many places and on many pathways.
Whether yours was a flight across the Tasman that lasted hours or a flight from persecution that lasted years, those journeys measured in time and distance are over now.
A new journey  -  a journey of the heart and spirit  -  can begin.
It begins in the words of citizenship today and it continues in a lifetime of deeds here on this ancient soil.
This is your new country, and you'll never want another.
Welcome to citizenship.
Welcome to Australia.
Welcome home.


Canberra
The thoughts of the nation are today with the people of Queensland who are battling a new round of natural disasters.
For many Queenslanders, the memories of the floods of two summers ago are still fresh.
Areas of Queensland are today facing very serious weather conditions, in particular Gladstone, Bundaberg, Gympie and the Sunshine Coast. And severe weather is likely to impact on other communities in southeast Queensland over the next 24 hours.
The Federal Government is working with the Queensland Government and local authorities to respond to this threat. The Australian Defence Force is assisting. 
I pay tribute to our emergency service workers who are among our finest and bravest. Across the nation, they have been tested by bushfires that are still raging across several other states. Now in Queensland, they are being tested by the ferocity of the wind and rain. 
I encourage Queenslanders to listen to local warnings, stay abreast of the developments and to take care over the next 24 to 48 hours.



PM: Today, we've been accompanied by Premier Baillieu, with Deputy Premier Peter Ryan, with local Member Darren Chester and we've been accompanied too today by the local Mayor Scott Rossetti.
We visited Heyfield and Seaton to talk about the consequences of this devastating bushfire.
This is a bushfire that moved five hours more quickly than expectations. That meant people had to respond to their emergency pagers at 2am.
A fire that has created a fire ground with a 200km circumference and a fire which has taken one life and also a number of homes.
I've been here today with Premier Baillieu to say a very big thanks to everybody who has fought this fire, to all of our emergency services personnel, to all of the volunteers, to everyone who has lent a hand as this fire has needed to be fought.
I've also been here too to say to the community that we are thinking of them and it's important to recognise that this fire danger isn't over.
We are yet to face what could be the worst of the bushfire season. Often in Victoria the weather in February is at its hottest and most dangerous.
This fire is not out; it is contained and so the community here will be vigilant and I'd be asking people here in Victoria and around the nation to recognise that the bushfire risk is not over and people do need to be prepared and need to be very careful.
To everybody who has made us feel so welcome today, a very big thank you.
At the same time that I've been here talking to people about bushfire, in Queensland we've seen the devastating consequences of wild weather, rain and flooding with that weather system now moving into northern New South Wales.
Whether it's bushfires, whether it's floods, we are being challenged by nature.
But we are a strong and smart nation and will get through this as we always do by pulling together.
I spoke to Premier Newman of Queensland yesterday.
Our agencies, the Federal agencies that work on emergencies were already working side by side with Queensland authorities.
I said to Premier Newman, if there was anything else that he needed from the Federal Government, then we would work with him to supply it.
We have made available as well assistance from the Australian Defence Force.
Across Queensland, the wild weather has broken a lot of hearts. It's a very tough period.
Bundaberg in particular has been a scene where so many people have had to wait for hours on roofs for evacuation.
We've got flooding in Gladstone, in Rockhampton  -  widespread flooding.
We've got flooding too in Ipswich and consequences for the Brisbane CBD.
Communities in Grantham and Laidley have been evacuated.
So communities are needing to pull together as we face this weather.
Given everything that has happened in Queensland over the last two years, this is a particularly heartbreaking time for people.
There will be people who are facing their second or third flood in a two year period.
Psychologically for people who went through the devastating events at Grantham in the Lockyer Valley, I think this is a particularly difficult time.
So our thoughts are with them and we will be there with practical support as well.I've spoken to the Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, who's out in Ipswich today and also getting all of the local briefings in Queensland.
He's already sighted the Mud Army out and about cleaning up homes, helping each other, the way that they did in the floods in 2011.
So to the people of Queensland, we will be there working with you, alongside you as we face the consequences of this wild weather.As this weather moves into New South Wales can I reiterate to everyone, it is very important you keep yourself safe.
We have seen three fatalities and my condolences go to the families and friends of those who have been lost.
We have got grave concerns for a number of others.
Even what can look like relatively shallow water can be very dangerous if it is moving swiftly.
So please keep yourself safe, listen to local warnings and respond as you are asked to do.
The most important thing out of all of this at the end of the day is that people come through safe and we are looking after each other.
I'll hand over now to Premier Baillieu.
PREMIER BAILLIEU: Thanks Prime Minister.
I join with the Prime Minister and Peter Ryan and others who are here, including the Mayor, to say thank you to the community here for all the work they have done.
It is remarkable to be standing here on blackened earth burnt by the fires with the smoke still rising from the forest behind us, behind the cameras, and at the same time to be talking about floods in Queensland and New South Wales.
And it is only a couple of years ago at this time of year we were standing in floodwaters as well.
So we say to the community here, we are here to help. We will work together with the local Government and the Commonwealth Government to ensure that all available assistance is online.
It's important at a time like this that everybody works together and that's what's occurring here.
This fire has a long way to go. There are other fires burning in Victoria as we speak and the effort that's been made by all the relevant agencies and all the volunteers is quite extraordinary.
And you have seen it here today. We have seen it here today.
There are a million stories to tell; some remarkable stories of survival.
You only have to drive down this road to see houses that have survived where everything else around them has burnt.
That comes off the back of passionate commitment from local people, from the CFA, from the SES, from all of those volunteers working with the local full-timers to do whatever is possible.
Again, this fire has a long way to go. We have some dangerous weeks in front of us and we will maintain all the effort we possibly can.
The Prime Minister obviously quite rightly referred to the floods in Queensland and the effort that is going on there.
I likewise spoke to Campbell Newman over the weekend and to the extent that they may require some assistance and to the extent that we can make that assistance available we have offered to assist.
We will continue to work with the Queensland Government on any requirement which may be useful to them.
We have all been through this many times and those of us in positions of leadership experience these crises, whether it is fire, flood or otherwise from time to time.
Australians come together, Victorians come together, and we will continue together to fight these fires, to deal with these flood events and to make sure our communities stay as safe and connected as they possibly can.
PM: We'll take questions but just on events; these natural disaster events here in Victoria or Queensland. I'm not dealing with anything else today.
JOURNALIST: Given the emergency situations up north is there any danger that this community and other communities like it will be overlooked at this time?
PM: No, there's not. We will be working around the nation.
We are being challenged in many parts of the nation.
We have seen bushfires in Tasmania. We're standing here on burnt ground and now we are seeing widespread flooding and wild weather across Queensland and New South Wales and we have still got all of the February fire season to go.
So we are being challenged around the nation but we are up to meeting that challenge, up to making sure that in each community we are responding to community concerns and needs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister could the severity of this fire and I guess similar events have been reduced if cattle was allowed to graze in some of these very thick and high country areas where the fire started?
PM: There is certainly no advice to me that that's the case.
What this fire did was burn incredibly quickly and incredibly hot. It made its own weather. It defied predictions about how fast it was going to move.
So there are going to be many scientists and many people who know a lot about fire who are going to be analysing this fire but there is certainly no advice to me that says it is related to grazing issues.
JOURNALIST: Is it possible to counter these sorts of situations. As you say, as you explained as it moved in the front and the spotting was unforeseen, is it possible to counter these sorts of situations?
PM: I think we've always got to be pretty common sense about what we can do and what we can't.
We have got better and better and better at fighting fire  -  better and better.
Indeed, the things that get achieved today with helicopters dumping water, with the way in which containment lines work, with the science that's brought to bear, some of which we saw on display today, when you see all of that the sophistication with which we fight fires now is truly remarkable and it is a great credit to a very dedicated firefighting services around the nation that we've got that level of sophistication.
But we would be kidding ourselves if we said to ourselves we can control everything about fire. We can't.
The areas it burns, the intensity with which it burns, the fact that it makes its own weather.
When it makes its own weather then it makes its own lightning and that lightning can start new fires.
These are the truly destructive things that can happen with very hot fires and then our priority is save lives, look after property but you can't do everything and we shouldn't pretend to ourselves that we can.
So, we will get as good as we can but nature will always have a way of throwing up something that brings a big challenge, that even with our sophistication the best we can do is keep a focus on saving lives and that has always got to be the most important thing, and really that message holds true too as we fight floods and high winds in Queensland.
There was a lot that was unpredictable about that weather event, the creation of a number or tornados for example was a very unpredictable spiral off that weather front, so a lot of things that are unpredictable.
We know a lot about water now, a lot about how it flows, a lot about where to put the sandbags and those kinds of things but you can still get carried away in your car by a relatively shallow amount of water if it is moving fast enough.
Don't underestimate the power and don't get in anyway casual about the power that's in these natural events.
People have to be very savvy about keeping themselves safe and listening to local warnings.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what sort of support is going to be available for communities here in Victoria who have been affected by these fires from the Federal Government?
PM: We've already, through our Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements worked to make available a number of community supports including personal hardship grants, including money that helps people re-establish their homes and including concessional loans for primary producers and small businesses.
That's already been done.
JOURNALIST: Has there been enough funding for flood-affected communities in Queensland given that some of them are still recovering from what happened only a short time ago?
PM: We made available resources to rebuild Queensland.
People would probably recall I fought a very controversial fight for a flood levy to make sure that we had the resources available to rebuild Queensland after those devastating floods.
Where we are now is we are right in the grip of this emergency so we can't take stock yet as to everything that has been lost and what the cost of replacing it will be.
We will need to do that a step at a time.
At the moment all of the focus is on getting the warnings out, helping people who have got stranded like they did in Bundaberg, helping people who are in evacuation centres, getting the sandbags down; all of those things that make a practical difference.
JOURNALIST: Do you know what sort of Defence Force resources have been deployed up there?
PM: We have deployed Blackhawk helicopters which we've deployed them before in circumstances of natural emergency and they can make a difference for evacuating people from all sorts of situations including the kind of thing we are seeing in Bundaberg where people are trapped on roofs.
JOURNALIST: How do you balance your priorities at the moment given the geography of these situations?
PM: It is fortunately not just me. We're supported by a fantastic emergency management team across Government that marshals all of the resources of Government.
In many ways I wish it was different but we've got tried and tested systems because we have had to use them a lot.
So they've faced up to some pretty rigorous tests and we now have good systems for working with state authorities.
We don't wait until an emergency starts. We are in there at the ground floor working together even as circumstances start turning adverse.
So we're there working together. We can deploy assets quickly as a result like ADF assets.
We can get payments and support on the ground quickly when that's required.
We can field Centrelink teams quickly.
We know how to do all of that and we track these emergency situations and do it as required.
These emergencies have a lifecycle where in the first instance it is dealing with the emergency and then we move into the recovery phase.
So right now in Queensland and northern New South Wales we are in the emergency phase where it is very important people are listening to local warnings and keeping themselves safe.
People are dealing with things like power outages; they're dealing in some sections of the state with loss of telecommunications.
So it is pretty rugged and pretty tough and that is the focus today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you have the opportunity to discuss hospital funding with the Premier today?
PM: We are not dealing with any other issues today given the nature of the reason we are here.
JOURNALIST: When are you going to be expecting to visit Queensland?
PM: I will make an assessment of that as to when is the best time to go.
The Deputy Prime Minister is there and he is out on the ground today.
He has been to Ipswich today.
He will be directly in the emergency briefings and I will look to go myself but there is always a judgment call between when's the right time to go so that you're there and able to hear from people but the right time to go so you're not distracting from local efforts to do what needs to be done in the moment.
JOURNALIST: It is unusual for a fire such as this to take place in January. Do you think with the increasing frequency of high fire danger days that there is going to need to have to be quite a large investment in emergency services?
PM: Our emergency services are responding well and there is no suggestion to me that we are facing resourcing constraints.
People are pulling together and pulling together well and we pull together across state lines.
I actually met particularly one red headed woman who I remembered very clearly from Tasmania.
She is a Victorian who deployed to Tasmania to help out in those fires.
As Premier Baillieu has made clear we have seen Victorians deploy and maybe some might deploy to assist Queensland, so there is a good system of sharing and maximising resources.



PM: Today, we've been accompanied by Premier Baillieu, with Deputy Premier Peter Ryan, with local Member Darren Chester and we've been accompanied too today by the local Mayor Scott Rossetti.
We visited Heyfield and Seaton to talk about the consequences of this devastating bushfire.
This is a bushfire that moved five hours more quickly than expectations. That meant people had to respond to their emergency pagers at 2am.
A fire that has created a fire ground with a 200km circumference and a fire which has taken one life and also a number of homes.
I've been here today with Premier Baillieu to say a very big thanks to everybody who has fought this fire, to all of our emergency services personnel, to all of the volunteers, to everyone who has lent a hand as this fire has needed to be fought.
I've also been here too to say to the community that we are thinking of them and it's important to recognise that this fire danger isn't over.
We are yet to face what could be the worst of the bushfire season. Often in Victoria the weather in February is at its hottest and most dangerous.
This fire is not out; it is contained and so the community here will be vigilant and I'd be asking people here in Victoria and around the nation to recognise that the bushfire risk is not over and people do need to be prepared and need to be very careful.
To everybody who has made us feel so welcome today, a very big thank you.
At the same time that I've been here talking to people about bushfire, in Queensland we've seen the devastating consequences of wild weather, rain and flooding with that weather system now moving into northern New South Wales.
Whether it's bushfires, whether it's floods, we are being challenged by nature.
But we are a strong and smart nation and will get through this as we always do by pulling together.
I spoke to Premier Newman of Queensland yesterday.
Our agencies, the Federal agencies that work on emergencies were already working side by side with Queensland authorities.
I said to Premier Newman, if there was anything else that he needed from the Federal Government, then we would work with him to supply it.
We have made available as well assistance from the Australian Defence Force.
Across Queensland, the wild weather has broken a lot of hearts. It's a very tough period.
Bundaberg in particular has been a scene where so many people have had to wait for hours on roofs for evacuation.
We've got flooding in Gladstone, in Rockhampton  -  widespread flooding.
We've got flooding too in Ipswich and consequences for the Brisbane CBD.
Communities in Grantham and Laidley have been evacuated.
So communities are needing to pull together as we face this weather.
Given everything that has happened in Queensland over the last two years, this is a particularly heartbreaking time for people.
There will be people who are facing their second or third flood in a two year period.
Psychologically for people who went through the devastating events at Grantham in the Lockyer Valley, I think this is a particularly difficult time.
So our thoughts are with them and we will be there with practical support as well.I've spoken to the Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, who's out in Ipswich today and also getting all of the local briefings in Queensland.
He's already sighted the Mud Army out and about cleaning up homes, helping each other, the way that they did in the floods in 2011.
So to the people of Queensland, we will be there working with you, alongside you as we face the consequences of this wild weather.As this weather moves into New South Wales can I reiterate to everyone, it is very important you keep yourself safe.
We have seen three fatalities and my condolences go to the families and friends of those who have been lost.
We have got grave concerns for a number of others.
Even what can look like relatively shallow water can be very dangerous if it is moving swiftly.
So please keep yourself safe, listen to local warnings and respond as you are asked to do.
The most important thing out of all of this at the end of the day is that people come through safe and we are looking after each other.
I'll hand over now to Premier Baillieu.
PREMIER BAILLIEU: Thanks Prime Minister.
I join with the Prime Minister and Peter Ryan and others who are here, including the Mayor, to say thank you to the community here for all the work they have done.
It is remarkable to be standing here on blackened earth burnt by the fires with the smoke still rising from the forest behind us, behind the cameras, and at the same time to be talking about floods in Queensland and New South Wales.
And it is only a couple of years ago at this time of year we were standing in floodwaters as well.
So we say to the community here, we are here to help. We will work together with the local Government and the Commonwealth Government to ensure that all available assistance is online.
It's important at a time like this that everybody works together and that's what's occurring here.
This fire has a long way to go. There are other fires burning in Victoria as we speak and the effort that's been made by all the relevant agencies and all the volunteers is quite extraordinary.
And you have seen it here today. We have seen it here today.
There are a million stories to tell; some remarkable stories of survival.
You only have to drive down this road to see houses that have survived where everything else around them has burnt.
That comes off the back of passionate commitment from local people, from the CFA, from the SES, from all of those volunteers working with the local full-timers to do whatever is possible.
Again, this fire has a long way to go. We have some dangerous weeks in front of us and we will maintain all the effort we possibly can.
The Prime Minister obviously quite rightly referred to the floods in Queensland and the effort that is going on there.
I likewise spoke to Campbell Newman over the weekend and to the extent that they may require some assistance and to the extent that we can make that assistance available we have offered to assist.
We will continue to work with the Queensland Government on any requirement which may be useful to them.
We have all been through this many times and those of us in positions of leadership experience these crises, whether it is fire, flood or otherwise from time to time.
Australians come together, Victorians come together, and we will continue together to fight these fires, to deal with these flood events and to make sure our communities stay as safe and connected as they possibly can.
PM: We'll take questions but just on events; these natural disaster events here in Victoria or Queensland. I'm not dealing with anything else today.
JOURNALIST: Given the emergency situations up north is there any danger that this community and other communities like it will be overlooked at this time?
PM: No, there's not. We will be working around the nation.
We are being challenged in many parts of the nation.
We have seen bushfires in Tasmania. We're standing here on burnt ground and now we are seeing widespread flooding and wild weather across Queensland and New South Wales and we have still got all of the February fire season to go.
So we are being challenged around the nation but we are up to meeting that challenge, up to making sure that in each community we are responding to community concerns and needs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister could the severity of this fire and I guess similar events have been reduced if cattle was allowed to graze in some of these very thick and high country areas where the fire started?
PM: There is certainly no advice to me that that's the case.
What this fire did was burn incredibly quickly and incredibly hot. It made its own weather. It defied predictions about how fast it was going to move.
So there are going to be many scientists and many people who know a lot about fire who are going to be analysing this fire but there is certainly no advice to me that says it is related to grazing issues.
JOURNALIST: Is it possible to counter these sorts of situations. As you say, as you explained as it moved in the front and the spotting was unforeseen, is it possible to counter these sorts of situations?
PM: I think we've always got to be pretty common sense about what we can do and what we can't.
We have got better and better and better at fighting fire  -  better and better.
Indeed, the things that get achieved today with helicopters dumping water, with the way in which containment lines work, with the science that's brought to bear, some of which we saw on display today, when you see all of that the sophistication with which we fight fires now is truly remarkable and it is a great credit to a very dedicated firefighting services around the nation that we've got that level of sophistication.
But we would be kidding ourselves if we said to ourselves we can control everything about fire. We can't.
The areas it burns, the intensity with which it burns, the fact that it makes its own weather.
When it makes its own weather then it makes its own lightning and that lightning can start new fires.
These are the truly destructive things that can happen with very hot fires and then our priority is save lives, look after property but you can't do everything and we shouldn't pretend to ourselves that we can.
So, we will get as good as we can but nature will always have a way of throwing up something that brings a big challenge, that even with our sophistication the best we can do is keep a focus on saving lives and that has always got to be the most important thing, and really that message holds true too as we fight floods and high winds in Queensland.
There was a lot that was unpredictable about that weather event, the creation of a number or tornados for example was a very unpredictable spiral off that weather front, so a lot of things that are unpredictable.
We know a lot about water now, a lot about how it flows, a lot about where to put the sandbags and those kinds of things but you can still get carried away in your car by a relatively shallow amount of water if it is moving fast enough.
Don't underestimate the power and don't get in anyway casual about the power that's in these natural events.
People have to be very savvy about keeping themselves safe and listening to local warnings.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what sort of support is going to be available for communities here in Victoria who have been affected by these fires from the Federal Government?
PM: We've already, through our Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements worked to make available a number of community supports including personal hardship grants, including money that helps people re-establish their homes and including concessional loans for primary producers and small businesses.
That's already been done.
JOURNALIST: Has there been enough funding for flood-affected communities in Queensland given that some of them are still recovering from what happened only a short time ago?
PM: We made available resources to rebuild Queensland.
People would probably recall I fought a very controversial fight for a flood levy to make sure that we had the resources available to rebuild Queensland after those devastating floods.
Where we are now is we are right in the grip of this emergency so we can't take stock yet as to everything that has been lost and what the cost of replacing it will be.
We will need to do that a step at a time.
At the moment all of the focus is on getting the warnings out, helping people who have got stranded like they did in Bundaberg, helping people who are in evacuation centres, getting the sandbags down; all of those things that make a practical difference.
JOURNALIST: Do you know what sort of Defence Force resources have been deployed up there?
PM: We have deployed Blackhawk helicopters which we've deployed them before in circumstances of natural emergency and they can make a difference for evacuating people from all sorts of situations including the kind of thing we are seeing in Bundaberg where people are trapped on roofs.
JOURNALIST: How do you balance your priorities at the moment given the geography of these situations?
PM: It is fortunately not just me. We're supported by a fantastic emergency management team across Government that marshals all of the resources of Government.
In many ways I wish it was different but we've got tried and tested systems because we have had to use them a lot.
So they've faced up to some pretty rigorous tests and we now have good systems for working with state authorities.
We don't wait until an emergency starts. We are in there at the ground floor working together even as circumstances start turning adverse.
So we're there working together. We can deploy assets quickly as a result like ADF assets.
We can get payments and support on the ground quickly when that's required.
We can field Centrelink teams quickly.
We know how to do all of that and we track these emergency situations and do it as required.
These emergencies have a lifecycle where in the first instance it is dealing with the emergency and then we move into the recovery phase.
So right now in Queensland and northern New South Wales we are in the emergency phase where it is very important people are listening to local warnings and keeping themselves safe.
People are dealing with things like power outages; they're dealing in some sections of the state with loss of telecommunications.
So it is pretty rugged and pretty tough and that is the focus today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you have the opportunity to discuss hospital funding with the Premier today?
PM: We are not dealing with any other issues today given the nature of the reason we are here.
JOURNALIST: When are you going to be expecting to visit Queensland?
PM: I will make an assessment of that as to when is the best time to go.
The Deputy Prime Minister is there and he is out on the ground today.
He has been to Ipswich today.
He will be directly in the emergency briefings and I will look to go myself but there is always a judgment call between when's the right time to go so that you're there and able to hear from people but the right time to go so you're not distracting from local efforts to do what needs to be done in the moment.
JOURNALIST: It is unusual for a fire such as this to take place in January. Do you think with the increasing frequency of high fire danger days that there is going to need to have to be quite a large investment in emergency services?
PM: Our emergency services are responding well and there is no suggestion to me that we are facing resourcing constraints.
People are pulling together and pulling together well and we pull together across state lines.
I actually met particularly one red headed woman who I remembered very clearly from Tasmania.
She is a Victorian who deployed to Tasmania to help out in those fires.
As Premier Baillieu has made clear we have seen Victorians deploy and maybe some might deploy to assist Queensland, so there is a good system of sharing and maximising resources.


Canberra
The first Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payments (AGDRP) have today been made available to eligible people in the severely affected local government areas of Gladstone, Gympie and Fraser Coast.
Individuals who have been impacted by the severe weather and associated flooding in Queensland can claim payments of $1,000 for each eligible adult and $400 for each eligible child from the Australian Government.
The flooding has had a particularly severe impact on these communities. These recovery payments are being made available now to the communities of Gladstone, Gympie and Fraser Coast as they move into a clean-up and recovery phase.
The Government will make a further announcement about support for the community of Bundaberg after the immediate emergency threat has passed and the community enters the recovery phase. Jointly funded emergency personal hardship and distress assistance payments are currently available for Bundaberg residents through the Queensland Department of Communities.
The Commonwealth will consider if additional assistance is required for any other severely impacted communities after the immediate threat has passed and where the evidence demonstrates the community has met the threshold for activation of this recovery payment.
This is a very difficult time for these people and their families, many of whom are still recovering from the floods of two years ago.
People directly affected by the floods are urged to take advantage of this assistance. However, we urge people to stay safe until the immediate threat has passed. That means, if it is not safe to leave your home or evacuation centre to make the claim, please wait until it is safe to do so.
The easiest way to lodge a claim is by calling the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 22 66 from 8am to 8pm local time, seven days a week. You can also lodge a claim online at humanservices.gov.au/disaster.
This assistance is over and above the support already being provided by the Commonwealth and Queensland Governments under the jointly funded Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
Affected residents may also be eligible for personal hardship and distress assistance administered by the Queensland Government under the NDRRA, which are designed to act as emergency payments.
The Commonwealth Government is making available Australian Defence Force resources to assist with the unfolding crisis in Queensland.
The ADF has formed a Joint Taskforce which will have operational responsibility for all personnel and air support requests.  There are 100 ADF field personnel, four Black Hawk helicopters and two RAAF C-130 Hercules aircraft involved in responding to this emergency. A further C-17 is due with the transportation of equipment from Brisbane to Bundaberg for the Queensland Fire and Rescue Service and the Queensland Ambulance Service. This will be dependent on the airfield inspection.
Further information on Australian Government assistance is available online at www.disasterassist.gov.au.
Further information about Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements for individuals is available from http://www.qld.gov.au/community/disasters-emergencies/recovery-after-di…  


ABC Brisbane
HOST: Australia's Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins me this morning. Prime Minister, good morning to you, thank you for coming on this morning.
Can you just give south-east Queensland a briefing on what sort of Defence Force services are assisting in the evacuation of the Bundaberg Hospital which is just underway now?
PM: I certainly can Steve, and thank you for the opportunity.
At every level, federal authorities are working with people in Queensland to help people get through. We have made Defence Force assets available.
Four Blackhawk helicopters have been assisting with evacuations in Bundaberg, obviously that's the centre of so much of the concern.
100 personnel will be deployed there too to assist in Bundaberg.
We also have aircraft  -  the Hercules aircraft people are familiar with  -  two of them that are assisting with the evacuation of patients from the Bundaberg Hospital to Brisbane, and they are journeying back and forth, so taking stuff from Brisbane that is required for efforts in Bundaberg as well as evacuating hospital patients back the other way.
We'll also be making available one of the huge aircraft  -  the C-17s  -  to transport equipment that is needed in Bundaberg for the Queensland Fire and Rescue Service and for the Queensland Ambulance Service.
HOST: Where does the C-17 come in, do you know?
PM: It's already being deployed, so I can't say to you it's in the air right now but it's on task.
HOST: I understand, so two Hercules, four Blackhawks, 100 Defence Force personnel and a C-17 [Globemaster].
This would be one of the more major civilian operations that Australian defence forces have had to do, at least in my memory of recent times. Do you know off the top of your head?
PM: Certainly in the floods of 2011 and then when we faced the cyclone as well we deployed considerable Defence Force assistance then.
So I can't do the stocktake in my head for you about how much was deployed then, but we've certainly made available helicopters and C-17s and Hercules aircraft before.
They're very useful when you've got search and rescue and you've got evacuations.
You would probably recall that in 2011 we had to evacuate a hospital and an aged care facility because of the cyclone, so in those circumstances we've turned out Defence assets in Queensland in the past.
HOST: How long will we have them for, Prime Minister?
PM: Well as long as they're needed. At every level we're working with Queensland authorities. Steve, I wish I could put this differently but the truth is our systems between us and the states and us and Queensland in particular have been tried and tested time and time again.
Because we've had to face so much in Queensland, so we know how to work together, we know how to do it well, we know how to start doing it.
We don't wait until there's a big crisis underway. We've got people working together in anticipation so that when you need to go, everybody's ready to go.
HOST: Just let me interrupt very briefly.
For listeners in Brisbane, if you have cars parked in Black Street in Milton, it's about to flood. You might like to move your vehicle immediately.
So this is for listeners in Milton in Brisbane City, if you have cars parked in Black Street, Milton, and in Hague Road in Milton, your cars may be flooded.
So if you've got those cars in those low-lying areas of Milton, there's a number of cars in the street there, you'd better move them quickly, they may be flooded.
I'm speaking with Australia's Prime Minister Julia Gillard. This  -  I assume this has been declared a formal federal disaster area  -  is there some sort of disaster funding available for residents of places like Bundaberg, Maryborough, Gympie and even up further north?
PM: Yes, this is a disaster so we have been doing disaster declarations, working with Premier Newman and all of his team.
What we've done already is working with the state government we've commenced what is called the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.
They're active in 46 Local Government Areas. And to just give you a sense of how widespread that means it is, you've got 73 Local Government Areas in Queensland.
We're talking about 46 of them, so in those areas various payments have been triggered, including in a large number of them the Personal Hardship Assistance Scheme has been triggered.
So that does help people out when they're in very, very difficult circumstances.
We are also moving to trigger what is called the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment. That is first instance money to help people through.
We are working through in Bundaberg on the absolute emergency response so we'll have something to say about Bundaberg and recovery in coming days, but we want people to be focussed there on the absolute emergency response.
HOST: In some of the regional areas further north of the southeast corner, it hasn't got the sort of prominence, but the number of dairy farms and others have been entirely washed away, farmers have lost everything, all of their crops, their equipment, their cattle and a whole lot more.
They're available to access this funding fairly quickly as I understand it?
PM: When we trigger payments under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements there's assistance for personal hardship, there's also assistance that flows through for essential public assets, things that have been lost that the whole community needs.
And then we tend to work through too on assisting primary producers and small businesses with things like concessional loans. So as we move into recovery we will be working with the Queensland Government on providing this assistance.
Direct from the Federal Government is a hardship payment for families we have, this is the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment.
We have triggered that for Gladstone, Gympie and the Fraser Coast, and of course we'll have something more to say about Bundaberg in coming days.
But right now in Bundaberg we're saying please, focus on the emergency. There are evacuations underway.
We want to keep everybody focussed on what is dealing with the immediate circumstances there and then as we move into recovery in the coming days we'll have something more to say.
HOST: I'm speaking with Australia's Prime Minister, Julia Gillard.
Prime Minister, I'm not sure if you've been advised but one of the issues that came up late Sunday, sort of north and west of Rockhampton right up to the Cape and the Gulf was that because of the flooding, one of the major Telstra cables was wiped out.
And this knocked out all of the emergency services - Triple 0 services - off of the Telstra system.
Is there any way the Federal Government can talk with Telstra to look at future-proofing, flood-proofing, disaster-proofing their cabling?
They knew about it but there was absolutely nothing they could do about it because the flood waters were preventing the Telstra guys from fixing it.
Now that presented some major problems when the Triple 0 service went down. You may or not have been briefed on this I don't know, but it was a major issue for people from Rockhampton North.
PM: I certainly was briefed on it and it was the subject of discussion between me and Premier Newman on the weekend.
So I've had the opportunity to speak periodically to Premier Newman. I've been getting very, very regular briefings about what's happening.
Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan's on the ground in Queensland and integrated into the efforts there and I will be coming to Queensland myself during the course of the week.
So yes, I was very well aware of this Telstra issue and very concerned about it.
When people can't dial Triple 0, that's a substantial problem.
My understanding is that the essential cabling is, there is a workaround now which means that Triple 0 is available to people across Queensland, perhaps some residual problems, but not the huge loss of Triple 0 that you're raising with me now and which was so concerning on the weekend.
We will follow up with Telstra about what happened here and what, if any, engineering solutions are available for the future.
I don't want to say to you I have those solutions at my fingertips now.
At this stage what we do through our emergency management people and Defence is working on the emergency situation itself.
And then lessons learnt are digested once the emergency's been dealt with.
HOST: I ask this because if climate change predictions are accurate and are related to these sorts of events, it's likely that we'll have this problem again and so we need to somehow future-proof the infrastructure of Australia.
PM: I agree with you that if there's a lesson that can be learnt here about the future and how we can make sure that Triple 0 services are available in the future, then let's learn it.
And let's make sure it and let's make sure it's in operation for the future.
Every time our nation has to deal with a natural disaster situation we learn something.
One of the big things, for example, we learnt out of the Black Saturday fires in Victoria was the need for mobile warnings.
And that mobile warning system has been tested now in bushfire and in these flood situations and is getting information to people in a way that wasn't possible before.
So we do learn, and then something else happens as happened this time with the loss of this Telstra facility, and we learn for the future.
HOST: It's like that Dorothea Mackellar poem about Australia, I love a sunburnt country.
You were inspecting bushfires in Gippsland a day ago and now you're coming up to inspect floods in the north of Australia.
PM: It's not lost of me Steve, that's for sure.
I said at the time of the bushfire emergency in Victoria that I would go and meet with people who had been affected and the firefighters who had done such amazing work, as well as talk to people who'd felt the pressure of it and who had lost their homes or lost part of their property.
So I honoured that commitment yesterday and was looking at blackened landscape, burnt trees, black earth.
I saw some homes that just were completely destroyed, some that were remarkably saved because the bushfire had encircled them, but the CFA, the local firefighters, had managed to save the house.
They were the images in my eyes directly yesterday, then whenever I saw an image coming from Queensland it's of wild weather and cascading water and that then causing lots of stress, lots of problems, flooded homes and tragically too we've lost a tiny young boy.
HOST: Yes, sadly four deaths from the floods here in Queensland and they've still got bushfire warnings in western Queensland as well.
PM: Yes, well doesn't that say something about Australia.
If you had the ability to take some water from one part and just put it on another part and put those fires out in Victoria then you would. But life's not like that.
But the way in which we do pull together in these times, whether it's fire or whether it's flood, one thing that's common around the country is the remarkable way that people pull together and look after each other in the most difficult of times.
HOST: ABC radio news just reported the comments made by your partner Tim Mathieson. Did you think his joke was funny or offensive?
PM: Tim's apologised for a joke that was in poor taste. I think that that was the right thing for him to do, to offer an apology.
HOST: Do you think we need to lighten up a bit and not be so judgmental about people who are attempting to lighten the mood, or just use simple levity to change the atmosphere?
PM: Tim's very passionate about men's health causes and he does go round the country talking to men about getting regular check-ups.
Men aren't necessarily all that good at taking themselves off to their GP and talking sometimes about pretty hard to talk about things.
So he does try and persuade people to make sure that they get the checks done that are recommended. So it's important to get that message across.
Obviously there's various ways of getting that message across, but he's certainly acknowledged that the joke cracked last night was in poor taste.
HOST: Look I really appreciate you giving me so much of your time this morning. Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you.
PM: Thanks Steve.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
The National Panel for Economic Reform (the Panel) held its inaugural meeting in Canberra today, bringing together leaders from the Government, business community, union movement and community sector to work in collaboration to develop, agree and champion reforms which will drive long-term productivity growth.
The Panel consists of the Prime Minister and representatives from the Business Council of Australia, the Australian Council of Trade Unions, the Australian Industry Group, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Council of Small Business of Australia and the Australian Council of Social Service.  Reflecting his role as the Government's primary economic manager, the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer is a permanent invitee to the Panel.  Given unfolding events, the Deputy Prime Minister remained in Queensland to oversee the Commonwealth's contribution to supporting communities affected by the floods and did not join the Panel for its first meeting.
Through its focus on reforms which support long-term productivity, the Panel will advance the national goal of ensuring that Australia's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per person is in the world's top 10 by 2025.   As noted in the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper (the White Paper), this goal will be achieved as a result of concerted and coordinated efforts across the entire community.   The Panel agreed that this improved economic performance should occur in the context of improving equity, participation and reducing disadvantage. The Government will continue to progress productivity-enhancing reforms across the five pillars of productivity  -  skills and education, innovation, infrastructure, tax reform and regulatory reform, which all contribute to high-performing and productive workplaces. 
In recognition of the fact that Australia's greatest asset is its people, the Government has decided that the Panel's initial focus will be on human capital and the role of the skills and education system in preparing, and continuing to up-skill, Australians so they can contribute at the workplace and delivering against the needs of the economy, as well as on how to promote innovative and productive workplaces.  This focus on human capital reflects that “Our greatest responsibility is to invest in our people through skills and education to drive Australia's productivity performance and ensure that all Australians can participate and contribute”, as noted in the White Paper. 
Consistent with the skills and education focus of the first topic for discussion, the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations and the Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research were also invited to participate in part of the meeting.
Australia's Current Economic Conditions and Fiscal Outlook
On the Deputy Prime Minister's behalf, the Treasury briefed the Panel on the current economic environment.  
Australia's economic performance has been underpinned by a robust and flexible macroeconomic framework, the pursuit of policies over more than 30 years that are outward-looking and open to the economic opportunities in our region, and wide-ranging productivity-enhancing structural reforms.
The Panel noted the outlook for the Australian economy and agreed that productivity growth will need to improve in order to sustain growth in Australia's living standards.  The Panel also discussed the need for short term fiscal settings to be appropriate for growth and jobs and the importance of maintaining sustainable public finances over the medium term.
Human Capital
Australia's Skills and Education System
The skills and education system plays a critical role in delivering sustainably higher living standards through forming one of the five pillars of productivity.  The system has been the subject of wide-ranging reform over the last five years.  Skills and education create social and economic benefits through enhancing civil society, providing greater opportunities and generally improving life outcomes. 
Although there may be broad agreement as to what the objectives of the skills and education system are in Australia, there is no formal statement of them across the system as a whole.  This is likely to be because the system is often looked at in a piece-meal fashion due to its size and complexity.  The Panel agreed a high-level statement of system objectives:
That Australia's skills and education system should deliver the skills and knowledge required for employment and participation for: Australians to achieve sustainably high living standards and lead productive and rewarding lives; the economy to be globally competitive; and to enrich our society.  
The Panel agreed that it should focus on addressing questions that have the potential to significantly improve Australia's productivity performance, and which would benefit most from joint deliberations by government, business, unions and the community sector.  The Panel had a preliminary discussion on the system and agreed to consider the following questions in more detail, in the context of broad-based reform, at its next meeting:
 * 	How can we ensure the foundation skills of literacy and numeracy are built from early childhood through to mature education?
 * 	How can we ensure the skills and education system equips people for the workplace, thinking -  in the first instance - about the design and operation of the vocational education and training system?
 * 	How could the skills, training and education system better prepare Australians to be highly productive and to support the speed of adjustment needed to adapt to structural and technological change?
 * 	How could the skills and education system better serve disadvantaged Australians?
 * 	What are the appropriate roles and responsibilities for individuals, institutions, governments and industry in the education and skills system?
Productive and Innovative Workplaces
The Panel noted that productivity growth requires that people have the right mix of skills and that the skills and knowledge of Australians to be applied to enable innovative and productive workplaces.  The enterprises that will contribute most to increased productivity in the coming years will be highly adaptable, will respond quickly to competitive pressures and opportunities, will draw the best from their people through utilising and developing their skills, and will have relevant and effective collaboration.  The Panel had a preliminary discussion on this issue and agreed to consider the following questions at its next meeting:
 * 	Why do some enterprises systematically improve their management and work practices and skills utilisation, while others do not?  How can enterprises, unions and government work together to encourage more businesses to improve in this regard?
 * 	How can the particular issues facing small and medium-size enterprises be best addressed?
 * 	What impacts are structural changes in the economy, including greater competition in export sectors, having on the need to improve skill utilisation?
 * 	What can be done to ensure that those working continue to develop broad-based skills in the workplace, and are adaptable as work evolves?
 * 	What is it that needs to be done to build more collaborative workplaces?  What are examples of where it is working well?
Working Group
The Panel will be supported by a Working Group of representatives from each member organisation.  The Working Group will assist the Panel by presenting relevant facts and data to the Panel to assist it in making recommendations.
Next Meeting
The Panel agreed to hold its next meeting in late April 2013.


Manuka Oval, Canberra
It's a delight to be here at Manuka Oval. 
I had the rare joy of seeing a Bulldogs victory the last time I was here and I says rare, I mean rare joy, and I think that that good run can continue as we go to the next session of play with the Prime Minister's XI.
This is a great special occasion for Canberra and for cricket: the first match played under these magnificent new lights.
And I know that the people of Canberra have waited decades to be able to see day-night cricket, here it is.
The light towers are going to make a transforming difference to complement to the ground and this is a fantastic ground with the scoreboard, caretaker's cottage and the rows of trees, so retaining much of its traditional atmosphere.
It's a tribute to the modern Canberra and the way in which Canberra seeks to preserve the best of its past.
It is also always a good time to be here with our friends from the West Indies here for a game of cricket.
Such a diverse collection of islands, nations and peoples brought together by their shared love of cricket.
And of course it brings us and the West Indies together; cricket force for breaking down barriers between us.
There, and here, cricket is a game for the people.
As the Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, observed last week, Australians' attitude to cricket is a “democratic code” and I know the West Indies are no different.
Just as fun and just as fiercely contested in the backyard and on the beach as it is in the middle of Kensington Oval or at the MCG  -  we're always enjoying a terrific contest between bat and ball and we are enjoying that today.
For Prime Minister's XI selection is really the heart of this match and like all complicated decisions I take the best possible advice.
So thank you for every one of the selectors who've done such a great job.
The PM's XI has a long and proud history of giving the rising stars of Australian cricket an opportunity to perform against top international competition. 
In future years, we might be saying of one of today's team ‘I saw him first at Manuka.'
The crowd has always turned out to support the local champions who play in this game and there's no prouder vice-captain than Brad today and no prouder product of this district.
And this match has a record of honouring great champions like Border, Hayden and Langer.
And I think it's been a thrill for everyone to see Ricky today  -  one of the genuine greats.
Over the years, the match has hosted some amazing performances. I just want to give you an insight into one.
Back in 1955 a dashing young all-rounder by the name of Richie Benaud made a quick-fire 113 here.
Richie's spectacular century delighted the crowd that day as you'd imagine.
But it was also the source of mounting unease for one local businessman, who had pledged to donate to local charities 30 shillings for each six and 10 shillings for each four in the game. 
That gentleman ended up 35 pounds out of pocket.
And the story of that match goes on.
On that day, the then-Governor-General Sir William Slim even managed to catch one of Richie's sixes.
I've already advised Major-General Jeffery that if the ball comes in our direction the pressure is on.
We'll see what happens in the next session and if a ball is coming that fast, our way, I'll be getting out of the way.
So thanks to everyone who's made today possible.
There are so many people involved, so many people who've worked so hard to bring this to the people of Canberra; a very big thank you.
It is no exaggeration to say that in Canberra's centenary year this is one of the most exciting weeks in the history of ACT cricket, and I'm sure each of you who has worked hard to achieve it will be very proud of the part you have played.
I hope you have all enjoyed the match so far there's plenty more cricket to come so please enjoy the evening under lights.
Thank you very much.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard and NSW Premier Barry O'Farrell have today announced ten Local Government Areas will have access to jointly-funded national disaster assistance following extensive flooding.
Natural disaster assistance is available to affected residents, small business owners and primary producers in the following LGAs:
 * 	Ballina Shire
 * 	Bellingen Shire
 * 	Byron Shire
 * 	Clarence Valley
 * 	Coffs Harbour City
 * 	Kyogle
 * 	Lismore City
 * 	Nambucca Shire
 * 	Richmond Valley
 * 	Tweed Shire
The deluge right across northernNSW has resulted in extreme flooding in a number of areas.
The NSW State Emergency Service has been inundated with calls for assistance with the heavy rain, strong winds and flash flooding bringing down power lines and trees and ripping roofs off homes.
Just two weeks ago we were in the midst of a bush fire emergency gripping large parts of the state and now we are inundated with rain and flooding.
The declaration triggers a number of disaster assistance schemes to assist with the cost of disaster relief and recovery.
These disaster assistance schemes are made available by the NSW Government through the NSW Disaster Assistance Arrangements and they are jointly funded by the Commonwealth Government through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.
These measures will help families, business owners and primary producers to restore any damage caused by the floods and ease some of the associated burden.
As ex-Tropical Cyclone Oswald continues to track south, more communities are being affected by damaging winds, heavy rainfall and flooding.
Further areas could be declared in the coming days as the clean-up effort continues.
Australian Government agencies are working hand-in-hand with local emergency services to ensure that people receive the assistance they need during these difficult times.
Anyone needing help from the SES should contact their local unit on 132 500. In a life threatening emergency, always ring Triple Zero (000).
For more information about disaster assistance go to www.emergency.nsw.gov.au


Canberra
Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payments (AGDRP) have now been extended to people severely affected by flooding in Bundaberg.
The flooding has had a devastating impact on the Bundaberg community, with many families now waiting in evacuation centres for the flood waters to recede.
With the community now looking towards recovery, individuals who have been impacted by the severe weather and associated flooding can claim payments of $1,000 for each eligible adult and $400 for each eligible child from the Australian Government.
While this assistance is now available, some areas of Bundaberg remain under threat and people should stay safe until the immediate threat has passed. That means, if it is not safe to leave your home or evacuation centre to make the claim, please wait until it is safe to do so.
People can lodge a claim by calling the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 22 66 from 8am to 8pm local time, seven days a week, or online at humanservices.gov.au/disaster.
Today's announcement means that Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payments are now available in the severely affected communities of Bundaberg, Gladstone, Gympie and Fraser Coast following this flooding event.
This assistance is over and above the support already being provided by the Commonwealth and Queensland Governments under the jointly funded Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).Affected residents may also be eligible for personal hardship and distress assistance administered by the Queensland Government under the NDRRA, which are designed to act as emergency payments.
Further information about Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements for individuals is available from http://www.qld.gov.au/community/disasters-emergencies/recovery-after-di…
Further information on Australian Government assistance is available online at www.disasterassist.gov.au.


Canberra
New years bring new reflections and new work to do.
So it is as we get down to business in 2013.
Today, I intend to do three things:• To take stock of our nation's position;• To outline the action needed to shape our future;• To detail a plan for this year.
First, let's take stock.
Action begins with the evidence. So let's take a warts-and-all look at who we are today and the opportunities and risks which confront us.
We are a nation of 23 million people, whose median age is 37, an average which continues to rise.
Around four in five men and women will have children, and the average age of a mother when her first child is born is now 29 years.
We share the world's twelfth-largest economy, up from the fifteenth-largest under this Government, and the median wealth of Australians is among the highest in the world, ahead of nations like Japan, Italy, Belgium and the UK by a considerable margin.
Our travel time to work keeps getting longer: we know that in our biggest cities, the time spent travelling every week has increased by as much as an hour and a half in the past decade  -  as many as 1 in 6 workers spend more than an hour every day getting to and from their job.
The price we pay for electricity and gas has increased by 120 per cent in the last decade and 26 per cent in the last two years.
Despite low inflation and low interest rates, we still feel these pressures on living standards.
Superannuation returns are only just beginning to recover from the hit delivered by the Global Financial Crisis. Capital city housing prices have not grown at all in the past twelve to eighteen months, compared to the average yearly gains of eight to ten per cent in the years before the GFC.
These two impacts have us worried that our dreams of financial security are harder to achieve than ever before.
Today, we save over 10 per cent of household income. In the years before the GFC, we used to save nothing as a nation.
It was a phase that could not last  -  but unsurprisingly, many Australians miss those days when they could spend all of their income, see wealth increase through ever-rising house prices, and through easy credit, borrow against the house again to spend more.
We have seen 9/11 and the Iraq war, we fight still in Afghanistan, we are living through climate change, through the aftermath of the biggest economic meltdown since the Great Depression and through an economic and strategic re-ordering from West to East as well as the upheaval of the Arab Spring.
While an Australian is four times less likely to be a victim of homicide than is an American, some communities are understandably concerned about crime and cohesion.
We get our information and connect with each other in new ways. Australians use 16.2 million mobile phones, 3.5 million iPads or tablets  -  a number expected to double this year  -  and we have 11.7 million Facebook accounts.
What does all this mean?
It means it can be a struggle to make ends meet and it can seem far harder to get ahead in the post-GFC world.
It means we are more likely than earlier generations to face the challenges of parenting and caring for older parents at the same time.
Combined with the travel time to work and, for some, concern about community safety, life can be very stressed and pressurised.
Through all this, we are more connected with information about world events and causes of community anxiety than ever before.
Over time, the uncertainties and pressures we live with have led some of us to be concerned that our children won't live a better life than us.
I want this audience to feel all the force of that concern.
I most certainly do.
These are complicated facts, driving big changes  -  in family life and in society as a whole. My stock-taking tells me this:
Australia is a great country with a smart, hardworking people.
We face ever-changing, ever-new challenges and opportunities in a fast-changing world.
Our future is never assured, shaping it is up to us.
In the real world, “real solutions” means understanding the modern world, developing serious policies ... and offering detailed costings.
That is the only way to build a nation's future.
We enter 2013 with more strength to shape our future than anyone else in the world.
While our world has risks, we live in peace and security at home, and we have a comprehensive strategy for our future national security, which I delivered last week.
While the strategic order of the world is changing, we have accrued new opportunities and new respect as we move on to the United Nations Security Council and prepare to host the premier economic forum of the world, the G20.
We are a democracy with our squabbles and contests but above all with an inherent strength that is served by quality institutions.
As we live through climate change, we've done, painfully but for good, the single biggest thing we need to in order to reduce carbon pollution  -  pricing carbon.
As our nation ages, we are modernising our health care, aged care and retirement incomes policies.
As the global economy still splutters, unlike the rest of the world, we have managed our economy so we have low inflation, low interest rates, low unemployment, solid growth, strong public finances and a triple-A rating with a stable outlook from all three of the major ratings agencies.
We live in the economically strengthening region of the world and we have a clear plan to make sure Australia taps in to this growth in Asia and enjoys the opportunities it brings.
As a generation of Australians, our greatest task, our highest calling, is to build a future of greater shared opportunity and less risk for the next generation.
I want to eradicate any sense we can't get this done.
As a nation, we are strong, fair by instinct, smart.
I know that we have it within us to ensure the next generation of Australians is stronger, fairer, smarter.
I am an optimist; everything we have achieved as a nation reinforces that optimism, everything we are planning delivers on it.
This is the central work of government  -  leveraging our strengths, addressing risks, implementing our plans, shaping our future, delivering security and certainty.
Today, I will outline my approach to this work of governing, my approach to delivering jobs, opportunity and fairness and meeting the needs of families feeling the weight of modern pressures.
Both for the creation of jobs today and to shape a future of prosperity and shared opportunity, we have to manage our economy well.
We have done this well so far with more than 836,000 jobs created during the worst of economic times. More than 836,000 ways in which we have reaffirmed that for our Labor Government nothing matters more than the jobs of working people.
That belief will guide us and drive us as our nation now faces up to further challenges: specific challenges to our economic diversity and competitiveness  -  as well as a revenue challenge.
At the intersection of my concern about economic diversity and competitiveness is the strength of the dollar.
Our dollar has appreciated around sixty per cent in the last three years.
Economic orthodoxy prescribes that falling terms of trade and falling interest rates will result in a fall in the value of a currency.
But even though our terms of trade peaked around fifteen months ago and interest rates have been falling, our dollar is now actually higher.
Consequently, we have to have a plan which can withstand the possibility of a persistently strong dollar into the future  -  not simply rely on the economic assumption that our dollar will fall.
This is critical because over the coming year or two we expect to move beyond the peak of the investment phase of the mining boom.
Before any one is tempted to construe this as me saying the mining boom will end in eighteen months' time, let me be clear that beyond this point mining investment will remain historically high for some time, while a sustained higher level of production will deliver enduring incomes and export returns for our nation for years.
But when the peak of the investment boom is behind us, associated as it is with peak demand for labour as huge ventures are built, we will see slowing jobs growth in the resources sector.
Ordinarily, economists would tell you this change, bringing with it a lessening of demand for capital, would be associated with a reduction in the Australian dollar that would assist export exposed industries like manufacturing, tourism and services that are exported, like education. This would enable these industries to grow jobs faster, offsetting slower jobs growth in resources.
However, just as the dollar's strength has persisted in this period of declining terms of trade and interest rates, we need to be prepared if it persists despite a lessening of demand for capital.
The economic diversity and competitiveness pressures our nation faces now, because of our strong dollar and the huge boom we've had in mining investment, may well persist even though economic orthodoxy would predict their lessening.
We cannot control a number of factors that have kept our dollar strong: like the weakness in the global economy, the close-to-zero interest rates of many nations and the increasing view that Australia is something of a safe haven.
Where we can make a difference is to other factors that matter for competitiveness and economic diversity.
So we can and must focus on increasing skills, building a national culture of innovation, rolling out the national broadband network, investing in infrastructure, improving regulation and leveraging our proximity to and knowledge of a rising Asia into a competitive advantage.
These are the five pillars this Government has identified as key to increasing jobs, prosperity and productivity.
We can also make a difference to the diversity of our economy through industry-specific plans.
I am determined that we will always do everything to support jobs and growth in our nation, to give individuals and families the best chance to build a life and get ahead.
Conventional economic forecasts are also being severely tested by the persistence of relatively low government revenue.
What we know for a fact is this: in Australia, revenue to government for every unit of GDP has been at its lowest since the recession of the early 1990s.
In other words, for a given amount of economic income generated, less money is finishing in the public purse, to be used for the Australian people.
We are experiencing a proportional reduction in the amount of revenue being generated from any given amount of economic income.
This is part of a trend which is felt worldwide.
Now, the immediate effect of this was made clear by the Deputy Prime Minister last December.
While within our medium-term fiscal strategy, spending is tightly constrained, the amount of tax collected from all sources  -  particularly from company tax  -  is significantly lower than independent forecasters or the Treasury have anticipated.
Compared to the public revenue which was forecast on the eve of the global financial crisis in 2008, what has actually been collected in tax since is far lower  -  on average, lower by more than thirty billion dollars every year.
Even compared to what was forecast once the worst of the global financial crisis had passed, annual revenue is tens of billions of dollars below what was expected.
There are domestic and global factors at work.
The domestic factors include our nation being in the investment phase of the mining boom, not its peak production phase; the new savings and consumption approach of families; the slowdown in capital gains; and the lack of profitability of many firms in trade exposed areas due to the high dollar.
Some of these factors are cyclical, some will be longer lived.
A number of these have their sources in global events and there are other global factors at work.
For instance, we see more genuine competitive movement of capital and of profit centres to seek the highest private returns than there has ever been; although, as the Assistant Treasurer has noted, some of the movement does look like it is about movement of the accounting of capital and profit.
This is an area where the G20, which Australia will chair next year, can and should find a fruitful agenda and we will be using our special status to get this done.
With pressure on revenue, it is the wrong time to be spending without outlining long-term savings strategies which show what will be foregone in order to fund the new expenditure.
Put another way, we are in an era when new structural calls on the Budget need to be associated with new structural savings.
This is the approach the Government will take as we make sure every child gets a great education and every Australian can live with the greater peace of mind that comes with knowing that if they or someone in their family become profoundly disabled they will get a fair chance and a fair deal.
I am determined that every child in this country gets the chance at life that can only come if he or she gets a world class education. I believe in this as a moral cause  -  a crusade  -  but I also believe that our future prosperity is inextricably linked to us winning the education race.
I will fight to get this done.
At the same time, as modern medicine saves the lives of more people who in earlier ages would have died, our modern nation must be able to provide those who then live with disabilities with decency and respect.
I will fight to get this done.
As we build a future of jobs, opportunity, fairness, I am determined to support modern families as they cope with the pressure of modern life.
Indeed we can't be at our strongest as a nation unless we help families be at their strongest.
Australians, overwhelmingly, are people who work hard and show personal responsibility.
They want government to work with them as they live their modern, busy, pressurised lives.
Whether it is dads wanting paid parental leave to spend time with their new child, teenagers being supported to stay on at school, steps to counter the scourge of cyber bullying, women wanting a Government that understands their lives and respects their choices, older Australians wanting dignity and real choices about their care, or communities asking for new approaches to community safety, I will always be determined to modernise government to better meet those needs.
Spreading jobs, opportunity, fairness.
Helping modern families with modern pressures.
Delivering security and certainty for the nation.
This is the work of government. This is the work of 2013.
First: in coming weeks, the Government will release our Industry and Innovation Statement.
The Statement will lay out our plan to secure jobs in Australia.
It also forms our response to last year's report of my Taskforce on Manufacturing.
Backing Australian firms to win work at home, win business abroad, and create new jobs and growth, above all through co-operative innovation, through firms and employees, researchers and governments all working smarter together.
Second: In the lead up to and in the Budget we will announce substantial new structural savings that will maintain the sustainability of the Budget and make room for key Labor priorities.
Our record of cutting wasteful programs, in line with our Labor values and purpose, is already strong.
The dependent spouse tax offset, the tax breaks for golden handshakes, tax concessions on super for high income earners, the millionaires' dental scheme and fringe benefits loopholes for executives living away from home all gone.
The private health insurance rebate is means-tested: something many said could never be achieved.
This year we will make the tough, necessary decisions to ensure our medium-term fiscal strategy is delivered, and our centrepiece plans for Australian children and Australians with disability are funded, in this new low-revenue environment.
Third: I will put to April's Council of Australian Governments the critical decisions to implement the National Plan for School Improvement: quality teaching and learning, power for principals, new transparency on results and in return, the future funding arrangements which will meet the needs of every student.
Across all our schools, over more than a decade, we have been slipping behind the education standards of the region and the world.
Changing that is the crusade which defines this term of my Prime Ministership.
Then in May, the Budget will set the fiscal and economic course for the coming four years and beyond.
Strong modern families can only thrive in a strong modern economy. Fairness can only be funded through economic strength.
On 1 July, we launch the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme Launch Transition Agency will be operating the first stage of the scheme in five locations around the nation.
Like Medicare and universal superannuation, a smart policy to make us a fairer nation; like fair pay and the aged pension, a model of Labor's vision for Australian society.
This is the plan for 2013.
A plan to govern.
A plan to deliver for modern families.
A plan for certainty and security.
A plan to take the right decisions now to build a stronger, fairer and smarter future.
A future of shared opportunity, where those given the hardest starts in life can still rise to the greatest heights and those who work hard can still get ahead.
A future where risk is shared as well, where those hit with life's cruellest blows get the help they need.
A future in which our nation puts aside yesterday's squabbles and unites to share the work of today.
In a world of many risks, our future is not assured.
Time is not for wasting.
And so, decisions have to be made about how we use our time this year.
We must get on with the business of governing and an election must be held.
In that order.
Governing first, electioneering second.
In 2012, the patience of Australians was tried by months of boiling hot political debate, with most of it  -  somewhat ironically  -  about global warming.
In 2013, I am determined their patience is not tried again. That policies and plans are at the centre of our national discourse.
The principal concern of Australians isn't what a day in 2013 means for the politics or timing of the election campaign, but what it means for the life of the nation.
What does it mean for their job, their family, their future?
Not everything about the tenor and temperature of debate this year is in my control.
But I can act to clear away the carry-on that comes with speculation about when the election will be held.
And I can act to create an environment in which the nation's eyes are more easily focussed on the policies not the petty politics.
I can act so Australia's Parliament and Government serves their full three-year term and it is clear and certain when the election will be held.
So I today announce that later this year, I will advise the Governor-General to dissolve the House of Representatives with writs to be issued on Monday the 12th of August for an election for the House and half of the Senate, to be held on Saturday the 14th of September.
I do not do so to start the nation's longest election campaign. Quite the opposite, it should be clear to all which are the days of governing and which are the days of campaigning.
Announcing the election date now enables individuals and business, investors and consumers, to plan their year.
But the benefit of fixing the date now is not just the end of speculation about election timing.
It gives shape and order to the year and enables it to be one not of fevered campaigning, but of cool and reasoned deliberation.
Not a year without passion, because elections are the time in our national life when values should contend, when alternate plans can be compared and considered.
No surprises also means no excuses.
Australians aren't interested in campaigns without content, platitudes devoid of purpose.
There is now clearly the time and certainty necessary for the people and parties contesting the election to lay out their fully detailed, costed plans for the timely consideration of voters.
There's plenty for this Government to be getting on with  -  plenty of work to do for our nation.
I will devote the days of governing to that work and then, at the time now fixed, to asking the Australian people to endorse my plan to keep building a strong, fair, smart nation.
I'm looking forward to all of it, and I look forward to your questions about it all.
[ENDS] 


National Press Club, Canberra
JOURNALIST: I have to ditch my first question now. We've had another summer of natural disasters. Have you got a sense yet of what impact that will have on your budget?
And despite the higher level of household savings that you mentioned, there's a large incidence of underinsurance by Australian households. Are you concerned about that and is there anything your Government can do to address it?
PM: The answers in turn is, no we don't have a cost estimate yet.
What we know about flood waters is you can't cost and see the damage until the floodwaters subside, until they go away and you can see what's left underneath.
That was our experience when we last saw devastating floods in Queensland. That will be our experience in these floods.
So the costing will take some time and we'll work with the State Government to assess damage and to make appropriate arrangements to rebuild Queensland and other parts of the nation that have been hit by natural disasters in the last few weeks.
And we've still got the worst of the fire season to come so there are still potentially some difficult days ahead.
On insurance, it does concern me if people are underinsured. We've worked with the insurance industry to clarify definitions, to try and get out of the system some of the things that drive people most crazy about their insurance policy; that they think they're covered and when they get it out they're not, so we've worked on that.
But my message is always to people that they should be appropriately insured. We do work to support people at times of natural disaster, but government will never be able to be wholly there to substitute for the benefits of appropriate insurance.
MODERATOR: In terms of local government underinsurance Prime Minister, do you have a particular concern about that, councils themselves?
PM: We had a good look at this following the 2011 natural disasters and I think some good work was done to talk about insurance and who needs to be insured.
Also to talk about some of the facts about premiums that would come with some of our big infrastructure assets, which actually wouldn't make it worthwhile.
So I think we're better informed than we were.
But the extent that anybody is underinsured, whether that's a household, a business or a government instrumentality, then that's something that they need to direct their attention to.
Government can assist, will be there, we always will. But we cannot substitute for appropriate prudential arrangements.
JOURNALIST: As we come into the third year of minority government, it would seem  -  based on observations of a number of factors  -  that Australians hold our political process in some sort of contempt. Hold our Parliament in some sort of contempt, if not dismay.
What can you do to restore confidence, to restore the electorate's confidence in our parliamentary institutions, and do you accept any blame for the toxicity of our political debate. Tony Abbott, your opponent today is promising to reform parliament. Should this be part of your agenda as well?
PM: Minister Albanese has dealt with the announcement made by his opposite number Christopher Pyne, so I won't bother to deal with that.
On the topic overall, I think Australians want to see stability, they want to see certainty, they want to see you getting down to the work, they want to see you've got a plan for the future.
That's what I've outlined today, that's what's driven us during this period of government. And that's what will be presented by me to the electorate when it comes time for electioneering, and I've outlined the date for you today.
In terms of the atmosphere of politics, this in my view has been a difficulty since the days of the last election because there was a strategic decision taken by the Opposition that it was in their interest to maximise the appearance of chaos and all the rest of it in Parliament.
Here we stand a few years later in election year with the Parliament going to election on the normal date. That tactic has been a spectacular failure and I hope it would therefore dissuade people from pursuing it in the future.
JOURNALIST: The Government said it's unlikely to deliver its promised surplus because of the falloff in taxation revenue, which you mentioned during your speech. Will the deterioration in the budget bottom line be solely due to that falloff in tax revenue? Will all your new spending between now and September 14 be fully offset, not just your big signature policies, but all policies?
And also given that Labor in opposition didn't release its full costings until the election campaign, isn't it reasonable for Tony Abbott to do likewise, and if you don't think so, why not?
PM: Okay, happy to take those questions too. We are sticking to our medium-term fiscal strategy, which means that we are offsetting spending with savings across the forward estimates for our major new structural expenditures like the work we need to do in schools, and the work we need to do for Australians with disability.
You will see the long-term savings strategy to match those expenditures, or to support those expenditures, so as I said in the speech, structural spending needs to be associated with structural saves.
What you will see in the Budget and what the Treasurer made clear at the end of last year, is that we've seen revenue downgrades happen again. I've explained in the speech how they are in breach of the economic orthodoxies that have been around.
We are not offsetting those revenue downgrades and we are not offsetting the operation of the automatic stabilisers.
On costings, I do believe that particularly having made an $11 billion error last time, it is incumbent upon the Opposition to put forward detailed costings this time.
They have two things that an Opposition has never had before to enable them to do that.
One, they've got the benefit of a fixed election date now, with several months' notice. Two, because of what we've done with the Parliamentary Budget Office, they've got more resources available to them than an Opposition has ever had before in the history of our nation to produce proper costings.
I think people are entitled to conclude if they can't produce costings with that level of resources over a time period of months that is because they either can't do it or they deliberately don't want to do it because they don't want you to know the truth.
JOURNALIST: Just following on from Lenore's question, I'm just wondering if you're going to commit to a surplus in the next term of Parliament if Labor's elected.
And secondly I'm also very interested about September 14. How did you come up with the date, who did you consult, did you tell Cabinet you were going to do this last night? Could you just explain how we came to September 14?
PM: The well-known fascination with a good process story. When served up with a big outcome story there's always something to write, but if you need the process story to go with it, the process story is this.
I have always said that the Parliament would serve full-term, always said it. I've said it in the days that the hysteria about the life of this Parliament was at its maximum effect. Said it in those days because it was right then, I'm saying it now because it's right now. And I've given you the date. So Parliament going full-term.
If you have the opinion that Parliament ought to go full-term  -  and I always have  -  then there's only a limited number of dates on which the election could be held.
I reflected on this over the summer and thought that it's not right for Australians to be forced into a guessing game, and it's not right for Australians to not face this year with certainty and stability.
So in the interests of certainty, in the interests of transparency, in the interests of good governance I've made the date clear today.
What it means is people can make their plans. It means they can look at the Government and know very clearly which are the days of governing and which are the days of campaigning.
Other participants in the political process don't have to worry about surprises, they can be very clear too about when they will outline their fully detailed, fully costed plans.
I consulted with the Deputy Prime Minister and a few senior colleagues. I discussed with them the decision I'd come to over the summer and I'm announcing it today.
MODERATOR: I think there was a first part to your question, I was so taken with your second part that I've forgotten what it was.
JOURNALIST: Just interested in whether you'll commit to a surplus in the next term.
PM: We're not delivering the May Budget for you as well today, Sid. You'll have to wait.
JOURNALIST: I sense, it's probably early, but I sense a collective sigh of relief across the nation today, your announcement, for the business community and journalists and people in general.
PM: I couldn't take another month of Kieran Gilbert standing out in the rain and the cold, it's too much.
JOURNALIST: Given what you've done do you think there's a case just to move to fixed terms in this country for the very reason you've just outlined, why you've done what you've done?
PM: I think there will probably be a debate about that because of the decision I've announced today. But I'm really not going to be distracted myself by that debate.
I took a decision about this year. I took a decision about this election. I've always been crystal clear that we were going to go full-term and it seemed to me the right thing to do.
If I settled on a strategy and settled on a date to make it transparent to the Australian people it seemed to me the right thing to do in the interests of good governance to be clear about what days people could look to their Government for the days in which we'll be acting as a Government and the days in which we will be in the campaign period.
And I thought it was good to give people certainty, so I have.
JOURNALIST: In your speech you outlined some of the concerns of Australians, and I note that some of them are things like travel time to work and community safety when you gave statistics saying that we're actually safer than a lot of other places, and seemed to be suggesting that these are not well-founded fears.
Are there some things that governments just cannot address for Australians? Would you acknowledge it's just not all about the money that there are some sentiments and some things that you just can't fix.
And secondly, going back to yesterday, and you're departing Senator in the Northern Territory, Trish Crossin. She has called for the Federal Government to compensate the Stolen Generation's members in the Northern Territory as has been done in the states around Australia. Will you do that, if not why not, is it because you can't afford it?
PM: Well I'll take the second question first. Trish Crossin over I think more than two years now has pursued this idea, policy idea of hers about having a compensation arrangement for members of the Stolen Generations in the Northern Territory.
It's something she is in discussions about with Jenny Macklin. I'm not in a position to give you an outcome to those discussions today, but I do very much respect that it's something that Trish has worked long and hard on and is very dear to her heart.
In terms of your first question, just remind me?
MODERATOR: All things, can you really do all things for all Australians.
PM: Okay, no of course government can't do all things for all Australians. We don't try to, and we never would.
People want to get about their lives getting the benefits of their hard work, getting the benefits of the responsibility they show in their own lives, building their own lives, having their own love affairs, making their own matches, nurturing their own families, all of the things that go to make up a life. Of course they want to do that.
But they have got a legitimate expectation that government has got a plan for the future, it's a plan which means there will be opportunities available to them to be seized. That they can look forward to the opportunity for their first job, or a better job, or the opportunity to open a small business.
That they can look at their kids and know that they will be in a nation that can offer them the best of those opportunities too; a good job, a better job over the course of their life.
That's what we are seeking to achieve through the work we're doing to build our economy robustly enough for the challenges of the future.
And people want to know that there is some sharing of risk, that if the worst happened to you, someone would be there to assist you.
People don't ask to have a child born with cerebral palsy. They don't ask to be the person that got Parkinson's disease. They don't ask to be the mother of the teenage boy who didn't think about all the risks and dived off that pier and came up with an acquired brain injury.
No-one asks for that. And I think as a nation, there are times in which we should share risk.
Labor, through its history, has been the party that has created the opportunities of the future, the opportunities to get ahead. And we're party that has better shared risk.
People used to go to bankruptcy court because they couldn't pay their medical bills. Labor fixed that with Medibank, and then Medicare. That's what I mean about the sharing of risk.
And those things, properly construed, give you more ability to shape and structure your own life than you would have had if government hadn't acted. It is an empowering thing to put people in a world of opportunity. It is a comforting thing to know that if you fell, someone, government, would be there to help you.
JOURNALIST: Could I please clarify, did you negotiate or discuss the election date with Rob Oakeshott, Tony Windsor and the Greens as your agreement said that you would, so was there conversations with them before the announcement?
And you've talked today about good governance and being clear with the people and calling on the Opposition to show their costings. Can you please update your costings, the Treasurer announced before Christmas that the surplus was now unlikely. So can you tell the people watching this broadcast what size deficit for this year they should be preparing for given there's a bit of speculation it could be in the order of up to $10 billion?
PM: On the surplus/deficit issues, on all aspects of government accounting, you will see the May Budget and you will see the most up-to-date figures and then the pre-election fiscal outlook will be delivered during the campaign.
There will be no mysteries, no surprises, you will be able to read every figure. And I can certainly say on behalf of the Government you will be able to read our costings of the policies we're implementing as a Government and that we put forward for the consideration of the Australian people.
They can be there, they should be there, and from us, they will be there.
In terms of others in the Parliament, I did speak by telephone to Mr Windsor and to Mr Oakeshott and advise them of the decision I'd made.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned in your speech new opportunities and respect coming to Australia now that we're on the UN Security Council. Yet quite recently the UN's refugee agency has condemned the Government over the treatment of asylum seekers. I'm just wondering just how you reconcile those and if there's any sort of cause of embarrassment for Government that we're actually on the Security Council yet being quite severely criticised by the UNHCR?
PM: Absolutely not. No, none. I don't think there's any difficulty reconciling them. They're not inconsistent.
We are founding members of the United Nations. We are people at the United Nations held in high regard. We would not have been successful in a ballot for the United Nations Security Council if that were not so.
We fought a hard campaign, and won through because people do respect our nation around the world, its efforts in peacekeeping, in peace-building, what we achieved through our aid program.
And we've got a proud track record of welcoming refugees into this country. And will continue to do so.
The arrangements we make as a nation state about dealing with unauthorised arrivals and the assessment of people's refugee claims are a matter for us. And we need to make the right decisions, honouring always our obligations under the Refugee Convention, and we do.
Now, in terms of criticism from any instrumentality of the United Nations, one of the reasons we have the United Nations is so it can raise issues, spark debate, have consideration, whether that's the women's agency or Helen Clark running the development agency or whoever else. That's a good thing in terms of the democratic fabrics of nations around the world.
But I don't accept criticism of our approaches to asylum seeker and refugee issues. We've got a lot to be proud of and I don't think anybody can maintain that we are somehow viewed badly around the world because of those things, how do you square that up with having been elected on the Security Council?
JOURNALIST: You've talked again about the pressures on revenue. Do you have any plans to revisit the MRRT? There's a lot of initiatives tied to the MRRT. If you're not going to re-examine it, how are you going to pay for them given that revenues are a shadow of what was forecast? And do you regret tying so much to the MRRT revenue given that it was always going to be volatile?
PM: Well you don't solve problems by misdiagnosing cause and effect. And the way in which we've seen revenues fall as a unit of GDP is not about the MRRT and no-one should mistake it as being about the MRRT.
The huge write-downs have been in company tax and we've also seen a lessening of capital gains. The huge write-downs are in company tax.
There's this fashionable commentary that somehow there's lots of revenue that's flowing in from mining at this stage, including through company tax. Because we're in the investment phase of the boom this is not the phase of the boom where people pay a lot of company tax.
They pay company tax when they've done the investment; they've started pulling the oil or the gas or whatever it is out of the ground and selling it and making a profit on the transaction.
The MRRT, we always understood, would be a tax with movement in it. It is deliberately calibrated as a profits-based tax because that's the most efficient way of doing it.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott has promised that he'd introduce no adverse changes to superannuation during a first term of a coalition government. Do you care to match that promise or do you think it's an irresponsible pledge?
And secondly, is media policy still on your agenda and if so, will you introduce a public interest test during those months of governing?
PM: There's a difference between a policy and a platitude. In order to convince people that the Opposition has got a policy for superannuation, then they would need to produce a fully detailed, fully costed plan which shows how they will integrate it into the government's budget.
If they're unable to do that then it's a platitude, not a policy.
So if the Opposition produces a policy in that regard, I will respond to it at that time, and I won't be holding my breath for the time in between.
On the question of media policy, we are still considering the government's policies and plans following the various reviews that Minister Conroy initiated; the convergence review, the Finkelstein review and the like. And once again when we've got something to say in that area, then we will.
JOURNALIST: A couple of questions. You mentioned PEFO, the Pre-Election Fiscal Outlook. That's usually released about ten days into the campaign. Usually oppositions wait for that until they start releasing their own costings.
Given you have given Treasury a bit of advance notice in the election day, can PEFO be released earlier than this in the campaign, perhaps the first day? Particularly because more and more people are voting early too.
And secondly you mentioned aged care early in your speech, but there was no further mention of it. You've released a plan, but we haven't seen any legislation, when will we see aged care reform legislated and operating?
PM: We've certainly outlined comprehensive changes to aged care which we're committed to, and will do all the things necessary to make sure that they are put into effect. So yes, what Minister Butler has said to the Australian people is the plan that we intend to enact.
On PEFO, I'm not in a position to tell you what conclusion Treasury may or may not come to having heard this speech. But I don't think you should talk yourself or anybody else into the position that people need to wait for PEFO.
There will be the May Budget. There will be an election on 14 September. May budget, 14 September. It is a limited amount of time for any forecasting or revenue matters to change. A very limited amount of time.
So in those circumstances, in receipt of the budget figures, then there's absolutely no impediment on anyone contending for the election putting out fully costed policies and plans.
And I would note too, given a number of things that seem to be referred to in this platitude sense are expenditure commitments, there's absolutely no embargo right now on costing them and then outlining where the revenue source would be.
That doesn't need you to know the full sweep of the budget bottom line, or to have the full May Budget details sitting on your table. If you've come up with a policy that costs a billion dollars then you look at other expenditures in the Budget and you find a billion dollars.
If you can't cost it then there are people who can help you. If you can't find it then you are not going to get it done. If you don't want to tell people where that's coming from, why don't you want to tell people where that's coming from?
JOURNALIST: You've given away what's normally regarded one of the advantages of having your job by revealing to us all when the election will be. Do you think we should have fixed terms federally and also some have pointed out online September 14 is Yom Kippur, the holiest day of the year for Jewish people. Was that a factor in your thinking at all?
PM: There are only a limited number of days because of international events where we continue to need Australia to be represented. It's only a limited number of days because of things like football finals. So I do understand the significance of the day in question for the Jewish community.
But there would be many of my Melbourne Jewish friends who would also understand the significance of AFL grand final day. So there are only so many days and so many selections.
As people are aware, there's more pre-poll and early voting now than there has ever been before. And so people who face a reason, anything that means it's not convenient or proper for them to vote on election day, can make alternate arrangements and have their voices heard.
On my thinking, my decision is about election day 2013. And I've made it. So I've exercised traditional prime ministerial prerogative. I've just done it in an unusual fashion and taken everybody into my confidence at a far earlier stage than is done, and I'm pleased to be able to do so.
I think it gives certainty and shape to the year that Australians having lived through last year are entitled to.
In terms of fixed terms as a standing feature of how we do federal elections, I think there will be a debate. I wasn't making a policy decision about that for the long term. And for me, it's not the uppermost policy matter on my mind.
I'm very focused on jobs, opportunity, fairness, on getting done the big things that will shape this nation for the future so that's where I will be putting my energies.
MODERATOR: The Prime Minister has indicated she can go beyond our normal finishing time, at least to some extent so I would ask each of those remaining journalists to keep their questions reasonably short.
JOURNALIST: Obviously an optimist, do you think the Bulldogs will go straight through to the preliminary final in September, but I'd like to ask given the recent events in the Northern Territory, do you plan to intervene in the preselection to replace Robert McClelland and if so, who do you favour to replace him? And what will be your lasting memory or tribute to Robert McClelland and his career?
PM: Well, on football and the Bulldogs, I've given you the election date. I can't give you the Grand Final winner. Though I must admit I have done pretty well with my tips in the last few years but I need to get closer to the Grand Final to make sure I have got my tip right.
For AFL devotees, the weekend, the Saturday I've selected, obviously there are semi-finals being played.
I don't know what the AFL has got planned this year but over the last few years they've made that a Friday night game and a Saturday night game so you're still in a position to get out there, do how-to-votes for several hours and still get to the footy. So there that's no cause for alarm amongst people of Melbourne or anywhere else around the nation.
One of the things that the Deputy Prime Minister and I canvassed was the implications for NRL as well and I think Swanny's satisfied we haven't done any damage there. So that's the election timing and the footy.
On Robert McClelland. Robert McClelland has been a terrific local member. He cares a great deal about his community. I know that from my many discussions with him.
He has been a good contributor to the Labor team over a long period of time. Both in opposition as a shadow minister and then as a minister in the Government, including in my cabinet and did a terrific job.
So he will go to another phase of his life, he's someone who's very dedicated to family; his wife Michelle and the kids, and I'm sure they're looking forward to the next stage of the life of the McClelland family, without some of the stresses and strains that come with this life.
In terms of who will be preselected for that seat, when I announced that I intended to secure the preselection of Nova Peris for the Northern Territory senate spot, I indicated then I am a respecter of party processes. I was not going to make it a usual feature of how I did my work as Prime Minister.
So for that electorate, normal party processes will apply, including normal preselection processes for the New South Wales branch.
JOURNALIST: Do you favour anyone?
PM: If normal preselection processes are applying then it's not for me to put the tip in.
JOURNALIST: Following your captain's pick of Nova Peris which is forcing Trish Crossin out of the Senate against her will, the Opposition has again seized on the issue of trust.
Do you believe or do you accept that you do have an issue when it comes to trust out in the community, out in the electorate, and if so, can you fix that between now and 14 September?
PM: Well I think there comes a time in federal politics when we've got to speak a fair bit more frankly about these questions.
I am not the only Prime Minister or political leader who has decided that somebody's of such merit that they ought to be preselected. It's been done in the past by Labor leaders, I am sure if you scour the history books you will see that it's been done in the past by Liberal leaders.
I believed on this occasion for the nation that it was important that an Australian of the standing and significance of Nova Peris presented for election for our party and that she, the electors of the NT willing, was the first indigenous woman to come into the Australian parliament. I think that's an important thing.
On these issues of political conduct more generally, which the Opposition is fond to have a carry on about, as I understand my history, Mr Abbott is in his position because a ballot was held against a leader of the opposition, that is there was a contest against a leader. As I understand my political history, Mr Turnbull was there because he had a contest against Mr Nelson.
So I understand my political history, John Howard was there because of a number of contests and twists and turns with Mr Peacock. If this conduct is viewed as unsatisfactory in Australian life then we'd want to rewrite the history of the last 30 years and we'd want to cull down pretty far in our Parliament before anybody presented for election.
Now people mightn't like some of the things that happen in politics. It's not for the faint hearted and I make some tough decisions. The decision I made about Trish Crossin was a tough decision. I've made some other pretty tough decisions in my life too.
You need, in this job, to be up to making the tough decisions. I'm happy to be judged by them.
And so I would say to people who are thinking about character questions, the one thing that they would see when they look at me is someone who has shown a capacity, even in the most difficult of times, to get things done.
And in the world in which we live that can throw up the unexpected and the hard around every corner, then I think maybe that's a merit in a political leader, not a deficit.
JOURNALIST: Our farmers are one of the sectors that are coming under increasing pressure because of the high Australian dollar and other financial factors that are quite immediate. This is not just a story about whinging farmers. There's actually some concerns, genuine concerns about ongoing viability.
Given those immediate circumstances what sort of vision can we see from the Labor Government for our agriculture sector and farmers, and do you regret closing down the live cattle trade in June 2011 and what sort of damage do you think that's done for Labor's cause in getting re-elected?
PM: Well, I'm happy to take both questions. Farmers face some extraordinary pressures. I've talked extensively in the speech about the pressures on our economic diversity coming from the high Australian dollar and those pressures impinge on farmers in a variety of ways.
Farmers are facing the consequences of climate change. Climate change is not a future tense proposition; we are living through climate change.
And people who have worked their land for year after year can often talk to you passionately, movingly, about the way in which their land has changed and things about how they go about making their land productive have needed to change as a result. So there's lots of pressures around.
But in our agricultural sector there are also some incredible opportunities and that is what we are focused on. On helping our farmers realise those incredible opportunities.
We live in the region of the world where people, as they become middle class in their hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of millions, we know because we've watched that happen with Asia's rise, that they will change their diet; that they will want more of the kind of food that we produce; that they want more protein, that they will want more meat; that they will want more dairy; that they will want more wine.
That they will want to eat and enjoy the kind of things that you and I like to eat and enjoy. This is a huge opportunity for Australian farmers and we've got to be ready and right to seize it.
It's about what we do overseas, it's about the productivity of on-farm, it's about working with the agricultural sector, it's about getting the export links right. All of these things are things we continue to work on with the agricultural sector and we'll continue to work through them, including with the food strategy that Minister Ludwig has been working on.
On the live cattle trade, I took what was not an easy decision, and I knew when we took it that it would cause heartache and dislocation from a major industry.
But my real concern, apart from the welfare of the animals involved, my real concern for the industry was if we didn't act then the Australian people would have effectively withdrawn the social licence of that industry and campaigns would have started in a way which meant that it could not be a continuing industry in our nation.
We live in a democracy. And if enough people get their campaigning up with sufficient force then they change markets, they change economics, they change the way that people do things. And if we did not, and people got their own views about that conduct and I've got my own view about some of that conduct too, but it's a reality.
And if we did not work so that Australians could be satisfied, or more satisfied than they were about the animal welfare standards, then I think that would have been a threat to the existence of the industry.
So it's a pretty tough call. You take the short term disruption and have an industry for the longer term, or do you try and tough it out and maybe not have the industry for the longer term?
Well on that call I thought the short-term disruption was better.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, congratulations on becoming the first Prime Minister in Australian history to announce a 225-day election campaign.
PM: It's most definitely not that, Sam.
JOURNALIST: But you've promised some nasty cuts in that speech, not a lot of detail of where they would be.
In terms of families planning their budget is the 50 per cent child care rebate safe? Would you look at reducing that for wealthier families or axing it? What about the baby bonus, have you gone as far as you can in terms of reducing that for a second child and means testing that also?
PM: Let me assure you, as I did in the speech, my purpose here is not to see the longest election campaign. Quite the reverse.
I know people are being treated to mini-campaigning and the like so people were already potentially having to settle in for a long campaign. That is the exact opposite of my perspective about fixing the date today.
I want to be clear with people. What they will see me do over the coming months is the work of government and that is because I said in the speech time is not for wasting.
We have got big things we need to do and I'm going to get them done and they will be submitted to the judgment of the Australian people now on a fixed time and people can outline what they think and why they think it on 14 September.
So for me this is about governing and getting the job done and that's what you will see me doing.
In terms of the rule-in-rule-out games, we've played this game before and I'm not going to play it, so I know inevitably now there will be stories which says PM refuses to rule out cuts to CCTR and baby bonus and all the rest of it and people get themselves into a bit of a frenzy and a bit of a carry on. Well knock yourselves out.
What you will see from us is those structural saves and you can judge them when you see them.
And perhaps rather than creating an atmosphere of could it be this or could it be that, why don't we take the approach we've now taken with the election campaign. You will know and you will be able to judge it from there.
MODERATOR: We'll conclude there. Thank you.
[ENDS] 



PM: I'm here in Bundaberg today. I've had the opportunity to not only see the damage in Bundaberg itself, in North Bundaberg, I've had the opportunity to see the damage at the port, to see it in Burnett Heads, to see it at Bagara.
I want to thank everybody who has come around with me today.
Of course I'm accompanied by the Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan. I was accompanied by Premier Newman at a briefing this morning, and it was good for the two of us to be in a briefing together and to get more information together about the situation here.
I've been here throughout the day with Paul Neville, the local member. And Paul is one of those local members who always knows what his community needs. And I want to thank him for being a key point of contact for the Government during this difficult time.
I know that he's been in contact with Wayne Swan, he's made sure that we've known what's happening on the ground, so Paul, thank you very much.
And I'd like to thank Mal too, the local Mayor. At a time like this you need your local leadership and Mal and his team are doing a tremendous job and I had the opportunity to thank them when I saw them earlier today, and let me publically thank them now.
We've had an amazing day, an amazing experience. Whether it's been talking to Terry at the evacuation centre who lost her house but just wanted to tell me what a great job the Red Cross volunteers were doing.
Whether it's been at Bagara seeing the bowling club that was literally ripped apart in ten seconds of tornado.
Whether it's here at this school, as the East Bundaberg State School where you can see so much damage.
Whether it's the damage we saw at the port and the concerns there. Right around we've seen some remarkable sights.
This is a one in 200 year flood it's been described as. It's a record in terms of any records that have been kept since records were kept.
It was accompanied by tornados that did damage in seconds, and which people had no forewarning of. I met a lot of shocked people who were just in their homes going about their ordinary everyday business and then everything around them is destroyed.
So, it's been good to be here and to be able to see with my own eyes, and to hear the local community stories about what has happened.
Every step of the way we've wanted to work with the local community and the State Government to make a difference as this community got itself through the emergency and then into the recovery phase.
We've made available assets from the Australian Defence Force and I want to thank the guys that we can see over there who are doing so much work.
We quickly made available four Blackhawk helicopters, which were pivotal to getting people off roofs and rescuing people out of danger.
We made available Hercules aircraft  -  two of them  -  to assist with the evacuation of Bundaberg Hospital.
We made available one of our huge aircraft, a C-17, which is capable of moving enormous amounts of equipment, and did so to assist with what was happening here.
The ADF has assisted with the provision of fuel, and now we've got 220 ADF personnel here, boots on the ground, integrated with this local community  -  indeed all of these communities  -  helping with the clean-up. So I'm really proud of their efforts.
We've also triggered payments to assist people of various natures across 50 local government districts in Queensland, and ten in New South Wales.
We do this is partnership with the State Government through the natural disaster relief and recovery arrangements. And so now in various parts of Queensland there is assistance for personal hardship, there is assistance to help with clean-up for households.
And we have just made available assistance with concessional loans for primary producers and small businesses that have been knocked around by these floods and tornados.
That has also been turned on, put into activation for people here in Bundaberg and people will be able to get all of the details, and that's something Paul was very anxious to see done, to support primary producers and businesses through.
In addition, as a Federal Government, we have triggered what is called the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment for here in Bundaberg, and as necessary we will make the payment available as communities around Bundaberg also move into recovery.
This is a payment to give people a first-instance assistance of $1000 so that they can deal with the emergency cost they face when they're out of their homes, when there's severe damage to their homes.
So people can work out their eligibility for all of that by ringing the hotline, which is 180 22 66, and we do have 40 of our Centrelink staff on the ground here to assist people.
In conclusion we are also today announcing that on top of what will be hundreds of millions of dollars of expenditure into Queensland to help communities through these floods and tornados, we will make available $1 million for the Queensland flood appeal 2013, and we will ensure that people's donations to that flood appeal are tax deductable.
So if you've been moved by what you've seen across Queensland and here, then you can do something practical no matter where you are in Australia, and that's get on the website and make a donation. And I know that that money will go to assist communities in all of the special ways that communities want to work together as they recover.
Community effort helping with community needs so I urge people to take that donation opportunity very seriously.
If I can just say finally, congratulations too to the representatives of the Mud Army who are here, we've got ADF here, real army personnel here, but the Mud Army are famous themselves, they're the Queenslanders who come out in the worst of times and get themselves covered in mud in order to assist their fellow Queenslander.
I've seen a lot of that on display today, and congratulations to them.
I'll turn now to the Deputy Prime Minister for some comments.
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER: Thanks very much Prime Minister. I too wanted to pay tribute to the efforts of the Mud Army, not just here but right across south-east Queensland where communities have been devastated.
We can see behind us here literally dozens of volunteers have come out to work, and the local community deeply appreciates that. But of course, Government has to play its role.
And that's what the Federal and State Governments have been doing here. The Federal Government, in particular, through the deployment of our Defence forces.
I want to pay tribute to the work of Paul Neville and the Mayor, Mal Foreman. They were in touch with me I think Sunday afternoon through Monday talking directly to us about what the needs of this local community were.
And we worked with the State Government to make sure that Defence forces were deployed, the Blackhawk helicopters were particularly important in saving lives here early in the week.
But also you can see the great work being done by our personnel here today assisting the local community.
So we're all up here to get an update if you like, but of course the recovery is going to take a long time and we will be there working with local government and the State Government to make sure we can do our very best to assist local communities like this.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in all how much do you anticipate these measures costing?
PM: Can I say we are here because of the natural disasters people are facing so we will take questions on that.
We can't tell yet. Because you can't tell the degree of the damage until the flood waters are all gone and you can see what's underneath.
We have certainly seen some damage today to roads and the local bridge and to community assets, but we can't do the full evaluation until we're further into the recovery. And we will be working through all of the proper arrangements with the State Government to support communities as they recover.
I anticipate we are talking in the hundreds of millions of dollars of Federal Government investment, and in addition we did want to spur others to donate for those community needs by making $1 million dollars available for the appeal.
JOURNALIST: What is your reaction to the arrest of Craig Thomson?
PM: I will take this first and then come back to you.
JOURNALIST: Is there any chance of introducing a levy to help cover the costs?
PM: I will get the Treasurer to answer that.
DPM: It is far too early to speculate about how much this will cost or how it will be funded.
I mean, there are people here who are still putting their lives back together. This river has got a way to go down. Thorough assessments must be done.
It is far too early to put a number on the cost of this tragic event, but we will handle it responsibly.
So I'm not going to speculate about any of those matters. It is totally inappropriate at this stage to be in that sort of speculation.
JOURNALIST: The Queensland Treasurer is accusing the Federal Government of reneging on a disaster relief funding arrangement from over the last couple of years.
DPM: Look I don't think that that's so. The Commonwealth Government is providing well in excess of $6 billion to Queensland for the natural disasters that occurred two years ago.
As I understand it, the state Auditor-General must sign off on the payment of this money from the Federal Government. As soon as the state Auditor-General signs that piece of paper, the money can be provided. That's just the law of the land.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your reaction to the arrest of Craig Thomson?
PM: I've heard that there are media reports about this and I don't know anything else about it except getting briefed that there are media reports. It's something for the police.
JOURNALIST: Did you have any prior knowledge that he was going to be arrested?
PM: Of course not.
JOURNALIST: His lawyer has confirmed that he has been arrested under the Victorian Police investigation and he has been down to the police station. Surely you have got some sort of reaction to that?
PM: You may well be in front of me. I've been focused here on what's happening in these communities and I've just been quickly told about things that are in the media and I don't know anything more about it than that, so it's a matter for the police.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried about a by-election in Craig Thomson's seat?
PM: Look, it is a matter for the police. All I know is that there are some media reports. I don't know anything else about the matter, so I can't take it any further.
JOURNALIST: Is this is a rocky start to your election campaign?
PM: I dealt with this this morning and I'm not here to talk about these matters. But I would refer you to my words this morning about when the election is.
Today is a day to be here talking to communities about what's happening to them in circumstances of natural disaster.
JOURNALIST: Should Craig Thomson stand aside if he has been arrested and charged?
PM: Look, I'm not going to speculate when my state of knowledge is I've been told there are some media reports.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott says the Craig Thomson issue is an issue of your judgment. What do you say to that?
PM: Look I'm not going to engage in any of that sort of argy-bargy today. I'm here to talk to local communities about the natural disaster
JOURNALIST: Is this embarrassing on your first day of the election campaign?
PM: I refer you to my comments this morning about what this period is; it's a period of governing.
REPORTER: There are suggestions that you could have possibly been here sooner. What are your comments on that?
PM: I always try to get on the ground to meet with local communities. It's always a question of judgment about when it's best to come.
I don't want to come when the emergency is right in the thick of it when people's attention is going to be on getting people off roofs and saving lives, because I don't want to in any way divert anybody's attention or anybody's effort.
So I try to make a judgment call about as soon as I can get there, after the immediate emergency phase has passed, and people are moving into recovery. 
JOURNALIST: Police have in the AWU investigation have been conducting interviews in New South Wales and Queensland, have police contacted you or your office?
PM: No, I've dealt with that previously and the answer's still no.
JOURNALIST: Have you taken any legal advice in regards to that investigation?
PM: Once again, I saw, I think, there was a report in The Australian a week or so back and that's all I know about that too.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it frustrating for you, I mean you have the momentum yesterday at the Press Club, you're out here today but all you seem to be talking about is a Labor scandal, is that frustrating?
PM: Well what we're here doing is the work of Government. And I was very clear yesterday that these are the days of governing.
And it's central to the role of government that we are there to assist people when they most need the helping hand of government.
I spoke yesterday about what my vision for Australia is. It is a place where people have a great opportunity to get ahead, but when something really bad happens, they know that they won't just be left by themselves, that there will be people there to support.
That's our role and that's what we're doing today.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) announced an election date yesterday while people were still suffering?
PM: Well, let's be clear about yesterday's announcement. I would refer you to what I said on TV  -  sorry at the National Press Club yesterday.
The election will be 14 September. So no-one who is dealing with anything to do with this emergency needs to give that a moment's thought.
There will be plenty of time in the run-up to 14 September for people to turn their minds to that.
That's why I announced the election date so it would be absolutely clear to people the days of governing, as opposed to the days of campaigning.
The election will actually be called on 12 August, for voting on 14 September. Everybody here has got something else to do, and they can well and truly keep their focus on it.
We're governing, that's what we're here doing.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried that it is a new strategy, I mean more than 100 years of federation and no-one has ever called an election so far out. Is there a political reason for that?
PM: I gave all of my reasons yesterday and I'd refer you to the speech. I'm here today to talk about what's the happening here in Bundaberg and also in the other communities that I have visited.
JOURNALIST: If there were to be a by-election in Craig Thomson's seat, would the date of the federal election change?
PM: I'm not speculating about a police matter about which I have only been briefed, I haven't even read myself the media reports.
The election is the date I announced yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does it surprise you how the communities such as Bundaberg come together in these types of events?
PM: It's great community spirit, and in many ways I'm not surprised. I've been here before in tough circumstances in the summer between 2010 and 2011 when Bundaberg faced flood, and had the opportunity then to see the way that people were pulling together.
Now this is so much worse and I've gone and pointed at the gauge myself to show how much worse it is. I mean, this is an absolute record-buster, so, so much worse and consequently so much more to do.
But everything I saw on display at that time, of the sort of spirit that's here, I'm seeing on display today and it is a great tribute to the local people.
Thanks very much.
[ENDS]


Bundaberg
PM: I'm here in Bundaberg today. I've had the opportunity to not only see the damage in Bundaberg itself, in North Bundaberg, I've had the opportunity to see the damage at the port, to see it in Burnett Heads, to see it at Bagara.
I want to thank everybody who has come around with me today.
Of course I'm accompanied by the Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan. I was accompanied by Premier Newman at a briefing this morning, and it was good for the two of us to be in a briefing together and to get more information together about the situation here.
I've been here throughout the day with Paul Neville, the local member. And Paul is one of those local members who always knows what his community needs. And I want to thank him for being a key point of contact for the Government during this difficult time.
I know that he's been in contact with Wayne Swan, he's made sure that we've known what's happening on the ground, so Paul, thank you very much.
And I'd like to thank Mal too, the local Mayor. At a time like this you need your local leadership and Mal and his team are doing a tremendous job and I had the opportunity to thank them when I saw them earlier today, and let me publically thank them now.
We've had an amazing day, an amazing experience. Whether it's been talking to Terry at the evacuation centre who lost her house but just wanted to tell me what a great job the Red Cross volunteers were doing.
Whether it's been at Bagara seeing the bowling club that was literally ripped apart in ten seconds of tornado.
Whether it's here at this school, as the East Bundaberg State School where you can see so much damage.
Whether it's the damage we saw at the port and the concerns there. Right around we've seen some remarkable sights.
This is a one in 200 year flood it's been described as. It's a record in terms of any records that have been kept since records were kept.
It was accompanied by tornados that did damage in seconds, and which people had no forewarning of. I met a lot of shocked people who were just in their homes going about their ordinary everyday business and then everything around them is destroyed.
So, it's been good to be here and to be able to see with my own eyes, and to hear the local community stories about what has happened.
Every step of the way we've wanted to work with the local community and the State Government to make a difference as this community got itself through the emergency and then into the recovery phase.
We've made available assets from the Australian Defence Force and I want to thank the guys that we can see over there who are doing so much work.
We quickly made available four Blackhawk helicopters, which were pivotal to getting people off roofs and rescuing people out of danger.
We made available Hercules aircraft  -  two of them  -  to assist with the evacuation of Bundaberg Hospital.
We made available one of our huge aircraft, a C-17, which is capable of moving enormous amounts of equipment, and did so to assist with what was happening here.
The ADF has assisted with the provision of fuel, and now we've got 220 ADF personnel here, boots on the ground, integrated with this local community  -  indeed all of these communities  -  helping with the clean-up. So I'm really proud of their efforts.
We've also triggered payments to assist people of various natures across 50 local government districts in Queensland, and ten in New South Wales.
We do this is partnership with the State Government through the natural disaster relief and recovery arrangements. And so now in various parts of Queensland there is assistance for personal hardship, there is assistance to help with clean-up for households.
And we have just made available assistance with concessional loans for primary producers and small businesses that have been knocked around by these floods and tornados.
That has also been turned on, put into activation for people here in Bundaberg and people will be able to get all of the details, and that's something Paul was very anxious to see done, to support primary producers and businesses through.
In addition, as a Federal Government, we have triggered what is called the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment for here in Bundaberg, and as necessary we will make the payment available as communities around Bundaberg also move into recovery.
This is a payment to give people a first-instance assistance of $1000 so that they can deal with the emergency cost they face when they're out of their homes, when there's severe damage to their homes.
So people can work out their eligibility for all of that by ringing the hotline, which is 180 22 66, and we do have 40 of our Centrelink staff on the ground here to assist people.
In conclusion we are also today announcing that on top of what will be hundreds of millions of dollars of expenditure into Queensland to help communities through these floods and tornados, we will make available $1 million for the Queensland flood appeal 2013, and we will ensure that people's donations to that flood appeal are tax deductable.
So if you've been moved by what you've seen across Queensland and here, then you can do something practical no matter where you are in Australia, and that's get on the website and make a donation. And I know that that money will go to assist communities in all of the special ways that communities want to work together as they recover.
Community effort helping with community needs so I urge people to take that donation opportunity very seriously.
If I can just say finally, congratulations too to the representatives of the Mud Army who are here, we've got ADF here, real army personnel here, but the Mud Army are famous themselves, they're the Queenslanders who come out in the worst of times and get themselves covered in mud in order to assist their fellow Queenslander.
I've seen a lot of that on display today, and congratulations to them.
I'll turn now to the Deputy Prime Minister for some comments.
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER: Thanks very much Prime Minister. I too wanted to pay tribute to the efforts of the Mud Army, not just here but right across south-east Queensland where communities have been devastated.
We can see behind us here literally dozens of volunteers have come out to work, and the local community deeply appreciates that. But of course, Government has to play its role.
And that's what the Federal and State Governments have been doing here. The Federal Government, in particular, through the deployment of our Defence forces.
I want to pay tribute to the work of Paul Neville and the Mayor, Mal Foreman. They were in touch with me I think Sunday afternoon through Monday talking directly to us about what the needs of this local community were.
And we worked with the State Government to make sure that Defence forces were deployed, the Blackhawk helicopters were particularly important in saving lives here early in the week.
But also you can see the great work being done by our personnel here today assisting the local community.
So we're all up here to get an update if you like, but of course the recovery is going to take a long time and we will be there working with local government and the State Government to make sure we can do our very best to assist local communities like this.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in all how much do you anticipate these measures costing?
PM: Can I say we are here because of the natural disasters people are facing so we will take questions on that.
We can't tell yet. Because you can't tell the degree of the damage until the flood waters are all gone and you can see what's underneath.
We have certainly seen some damage today to roads and the local bridge and to community assets, but we can't do the full evaluation until we're further into the recovery. And we will be working through all of the proper arrangements with the State Government to support communities as they recover.
I anticipate we are talking in the hundreds of millions of dollars of Federal Government investment, and in addition we did want to spur others to donate for those community needs by making $1 million dollars available for the appeal.
JOURNALIST: What is your reaction to the arrest of Craig Thomson?
PM: I will take this first and then come back to you.
JOURNALIST: Is there any chance of introducing a levy to help cover the costs?
PM: I will get the Treasurer to answer that.
DPM: It is far too early to speculate about how much this will cost or how it will be funded.
I mean, there are people here who are still putting their lives back together. This river has got a way to go down. Thorough assessments must be done.
It is far too early to put a number on the cost of this tragic event, but we will handle it responsibly.
So I'm not going to speculate about any of those matters. It is totally inappropriate at this stage to be in that sort of speculation.
JOURNALIST: The Queensland Treasurer is accusing the Federal Government of reneging on a disaster relief funding arrangement from over the last couple of years.
DPM: Look I don't think that that's so. The Commonwealth Government is providing well in excess of $6 billion to Queensland for the natural disasters that occurred two years ago.
As I understand it, the state Auditor-General must sign off on the payment of this money from the Federal Government. As soon as the state Auditor-General signs that piece of paper, the money can be provided. That's just the law of the land.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your reaction to the arrest of Craig Thomson?
PM: I've heard that there are media reports about this and I don't know anything else about it except getting briefed that there are media reports. It's something for the police.
JOURNALIST: Did you have any prior knowledge that he was going to be arrested?
PM: Of course not.
JOURNALIST: His lawyer has confirmed that he has been arrested under the Victorian Police investigation and he has been down to the police station. Surely you have got some sort of reaction to that?
PM: You may well be in front of me. I've been focused here on what's happening in these communities and I've just been quickly told about things that are in the media and I don't know anything more about it than that, so it's a matter for the police.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried about a by-election in Craig Thomson's seat?
PM: Look, it is a matter for the police. All I know is that there are some media reports. I don't know anything else about the matter, so I can't take it any further.
JOURNALIST: Is this is a rocky start to your election campaign?
PM: I dealt with this this morning and I'm not here to talk about these matters. But I would refer you to my words this morning about when the election is.
Today is a day to be here talking to communities about what's happening to them in circumstances of natural disaster.
JOURNALIST: Should Craig Thomson stand aside if he has been arrested and charged?
PM: Look, I'm not going to speculate when my state of knowledge is I've been told there are some media reports.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott says the Craig Thomson issue is an issue of your judgment. What do you say to that?
PM: Look I'm not going to engage in any of that sort of argy-bargy today. I'm here to talk to local communities about the natural disaster
JOURNALIST: Is this embarrassing on your first day of the election campaign?
PM: I refer you to my comments this morning about what this period is; it's a period of governing.
REPORTER: There are suggestions that you could have possibly been here sooner. What are your comments on that?
PM: I always try to get on the ground to meet with local communities. It's always a question of judgment about when it's best to come.
I don't want to come when the emergency is right in the thick of it when people's attention is going to be on getting people off roofs and saving lives, because I don't want to in any way divert anybody's attention or anybody's effort.
So I try to make a judgment call about as soon as I can get there, after the immediate emergency phase has passed, and people are moving into recovery. 
JOURNALIST: Police have in the AWU investigation have been conducting interviews in New South Wales and Queensland, have police contacted you or your office?
PM: No, I've dealt with that previously and the answer's still no.
JOURNALIST: Have you taken any legal advice in regards to that investigation?
PM: Once again, I saw, I think, there was a report in The Australian a week or so back and that's all I know about that too.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it frustrating for you, I mean you have the momentum yesterday at the Press Club, you're out here today but all you seem to be talking about is a Labor scandal, is that frustrating?
PM: Well what we're here doing is the work of Government. And I was very clear yesterday that these are the days of governing.
And it's central to the role of government that we are there to assist people when they most need the helping hand of government.
I spoke yesterday about what my vision for Australia is. It is a place where people have a great opportunity to get ahead, but when something really bad happens, they know that they won't just be left by themselves, that there will be people there to support.
That's our role and that's what we're doing today.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) announced an election date yesterday while people were still suffering?
PM: Well, let's be clear about yesterday's announcement. I would refer you to what I said on TV  -  sorry at the National Press Club yesterday.
The election will be 14 September. So no-one who is dealing with anything to do with this emergency needs to give that a moment's thought.
There will be plenty of time in the run-up to 14 September for people to turn their minds to that.
That's why I announced the election date so it would be absolutely clear to people the days of governing, as opposed to the days of campaigning.
The election will actually be called on 12 August, for voting on 14 September. Everybody here has got something else to do, and they can well and truly keep their focus on it.
We're governing, that's what we're here doing.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried that it is a new strategy, I mean more than 100 years of federation and no-one has ever called an election so far out. Is there a political reason for that?
PM: I gave all of my reasons yesterday and I'd refer you to the speech. I'm here today to talk about what's the happening here in Bundaberg and also in the other communities that I have visited.
JOURNALIST: If there were to be a by-election in Craig Thomson's seat, would the date of the federal election change?
PM: I'm not speculating about a police matter about which I have only been briefed, I haven't even read myself the media reports.
The election is the date I announced yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does it surprise you how the communities such as Bundaberg come together in these types of events?
PM: It's great community spirit, and in many ways I'm not surprised. I've been here before in tough circumstances in the summer between 2010 and 2011 when Bundaberg faced flood, and had the opportunity then to see the way that people were pulling together.
Now this is so much worse and I've gone and pointed at the gauge myself to show how much worse it is. I mean, this is an absolute record-buster, so, so much worse and consequently so much more to do.
But everything I saw on display at that time, of the sort of spirit that's here, I'm seeing on display today and it is a great tribute to the local people.
Thanks very much.
[ENDS]



HOST: Good morning to you. The date is almost eight months away. Virtually the entire population of Australia is groaning saying, "Having you mob in our faces for eight months.” Why call it now and not a couple of months?
PM: Kochie, this is not day one of the election campaign, so please relax. This is not day one of the election campaign.
What I made clear is day one of the election campaign will when the writs are issued on 12 August and then people will go and vote on 14 September. And I did that for two reasons.
Number one, I think the election date speculation drives people absolutely nuts. The months and months and months of them feeling like they are being toyed with as there is all this speculation about when it is going to be.
So we can forget all of that now, everybody knows when the election is going to be. Everybody can plan their year with certainty.
And number two, because I have set the date, it is now perfectly clear for everyone who is going to contest the election what is the time to get out their fully costed policies and plans.
There is no excuse for anybody running around in the last week of the campaign saying "I haven't got my costings done yet." People have got time to prepare.
I was also really clear yesterday Kochie, there are days of governing and days of campaigning.
These are the days of governing so I'm off to Bundaberg today to talk to people about the emergency response there.
HOST: So in other words, basically this is to flush the Opposition out, to put pressure on them to say, "Stop throwing stones from the sidelines. If you say you are going to get the budget back into surplus, tell us how you're going to do it. Cost it for us, give it to the public."
PM: Kochie, it's for certainty, I wanted people to be able to plan their year.
It is for transparency, I don't think I should have the date in my head and not share it with people and let people plan their year.
Number three, it is about good governance. You will see us in the days of governing getting on with the job.
But I think when people vote on 14 September, they are entitled to everybody's fully detailed, fully costed plans.
And there are no excuses for producing them when people have got this kind of lead up.
HOST: This was another captain's pick, if you like, many of your colleagues didn't know about it. Bill Shorten says he didn't know you were going to call the election.
Reports are though that the Independents and the Greens knew; you gave them a heads-up. Do you think it damages your reputation as people say “Who is running the country?”
PM: Well, I am. And this is a Prime Minister's decision. It has always been the Prime Minister's call when the election date is.
Whether I announced it in the traditional manner and went to the Governor-General's one day and came out and announced the election with people chasing the car as I did it, or whether I did it in the way I chose to yesterday, the date is my decision and I made it.
A couple of courtesy calls were made to let people know before I announced it.
HOST: As a fellow bifocaled Australian, is this the new look? Everyone is talking about it.
PM: Well Kochie, there comes the time in a woman's life when she has just got to reach for a pair of bifocals and that's what I've done.
HOST: And a bloke.
PM: And a bloke, at least I'm in good company.
HOST: Okay Prime Minister, thank you for that. I you well on your trip to Bundaberg too. Thanks for joining us.
PM: Thanks very much.


HOST: Good morning, PM.
PM: Good morning, Karl.
HOST: Nice of you to be with us this morning. An eight-month campaign, are you trying to kill us?
PM: Karl, relax, relax, relax. This is not day one of the election campaign.
I made it perfectly clear yesterday, what I wanted to do was cut out all of the silly nonsense that goes with election date speculation.
Let people know when the election is so that they can plan their year. It is 14 September.
And also, give enough notice so everyone contesting the election can put out all of their detailed and properly costed plans before election day.
The writs will be issued on 12 August. That's the first day of the election campaign.
For now, these are the days of governing, and what I will be doing today is going to Bundaberg to meet with people and to get local briefings about the situation there.
HOST: But PM, in effect, it is day one of the campaign, isn't it? Everything you and Tony Abbott will do from here on will be through the prism of election 2013.
PM: Not on my part, Karl. I've got work to do as Prime Minister.
Serious issues of governing, serious issues about strengthening our economy and making sure people have got the benefit of jobs, serious issues about improving our Australian schools, so we're not left behind the standards of the world, and every kid gets a chance, and I want to start the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
So I'll be doing my work as Prime Minister and it is now perfectly clear to everyone which are the days of governing and which are the days of campaigning.
HOST: The Australian reports this morning that Rudd supporters are calling this an act of bastardry, designed to save your leadership. Your response?
PM: Look, whatever to all of the flibbertigibbet politics that goes on in newspapers and beyond.
The reasons for my decision were outlined yesterday. They are about cutting out election speculation, Karl.
You and I know that a lot of this year would have been spent on stories and rumours and half-truths about when the election was going to be.
I would have had my car chased down the street to see whether or not it was going to the Governor-General's.
All of that nonsense is now out of the way, and we can get on with the serious business of governing.
Time's not for wasting. There is a lot to do. And for the election, people have got all the time they need to get their policies and plans out there.
HOST: You have also managed to get Kevin Rudd out of the way by doing this, haven't you?
PM: Look Karl, nothing about this decision was in any way related to that. We decided those things last year.
HOST: Okay. Tony Abbott says this election will be about trust - that was his response yesterday. No doubt this from your last campaign will be part of their campaign. Take a listen.
PM GRAB: There will be no carbon tax under the Government I lead.
HOST: So if it is about trust, how will you combat that tactic-wise?
PM: Well, I'll be perfectly clear with people that I always wanted us to tackle climate change. We are living through climate change. It is a serious issue for our nation, and for the whole planet.
I always wanted to tackle climate change. I always wanted to put a price on carbon.
I didn't imagine we would have a fixed price, a carbon tax for three years but yes, we are having it for three years and then it will go to an emissions trading scheme.
So the case I will be putting to people, Karl, is climate change is real, the best way of tackling it is pricing carbon and we have it done. That is done. Carbon is being priced.
Our economy is still working well, all of the horror claims and all the rest that people had to listen to have not come true.
So we've got that job done. We should leave it being done and get on with the rest of what we have got to do for the nation.
HOST: PM, why did you tell the Independents before members of your own party about the election?
PM: In the agreement with the Independents, there's a reference to the election date, so I thought as a matter of courtesy, I would let them know.
HOST: But why wouldn't you tell your own party before them?
PM: Well Karl, obviously, I told the whole nation through the National Press Club.
HOST: But not your own party before the Independents. Are there problems with your own party in relation to your communication with them?
PM: Karl, all of this kind of process stuff, political commentators care. I don't think anybody else does.
Setting the election date has always been the decision of the Prime Minister, it would have been my decision had I chose to make it later in the year.
I've chosen to do an unusual thing, admittedly, but something that I think is in the interests of the nation, and I announced that decision. I made a couple of courtesy calls along the way.
HOST: What do you say to members of your party who may well be justified in saying, "Hang on a second, you told Rob Oakeshott before you told me, what does it say about our relationship?"
PM: Karl, I don't think any of this is meaningful or matters. People in the Labor Party in the Labor caucus can always get on the phone and speak to me.
I speak to my colleagues regularly. But this is my decision as Prime Minister and I've made it.
HOST: Okay, there appears, just before we finish up, a bit of anger in Queensland anecdotally, that you have not visited the flood zone, and the timing of the announcement.
What would you say to Queenslanders?
PM: Well, I'm going to be in Bundaberg today. I of course get round the country to visit Australians who are facing natural disasters.
This year already, I've been to Tasmania to see the site of the bushfires, I've been to country Victoria to see what happened there, and I'm going to Bundaberg there to get on-the-ground briefings and to see it for myself.
There is always the right time to go and I'm very careful that I don't go during the absolute emergency response, because I don't want my visit in any way to distract resources from the emergency effort.
So today is the right time to go, so that I can be on the ground talking to people.
HOST: I think the response so far from what I saw on the ground in Bundaberg has been exceptional from State and Federal Governments thus far.
Appreciate your time PM on another busy day.
PM: Thanks very much.


Bundaberg
Financial assistance is now available for flood-affected primary producers and small business owners in some of the hardest hit regions of Queensland, including Bundaberg.
This assistance will help with the economic impacts that these devastating floods have had on local businesses and the wider community.Primary producers and small businesses in the local government areas of Bundaberg, Banana, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan City, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs will be able to apply for concessional loans under the jointly funded Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.Concessional loans up to $250,000 can assist re-establish primary production enterprises by covering costs such as repairing or replacing damaged plant and equipment, repairing or replacing buildings, purchasing livestock to replace those lost in the disaster event and re-planting, restoring or re-establishing areas affected by the disaster event.For small business, these loans can be used purposes such as repairing or replacing damaged plant and equipment, repairing or replacing buildings, supplying stock for up to one month to replace lost stock and maintain liquidity of the business.Primary producers in these areas will also be eligible to apply for freight subsidies.Small businesses in the Brisbane City Local Government Area are also able to apply for concessional loansPersonal Hardship and Distress payments for food, clothing, accommodation and medical supplies of $180 for individuals and $900 for couples/families is now also available in the Goondiwindi local government area.Assistance has also been extended to more councils to help with the clean-up and the restoration of essential public assets as part of the longer term reconstruction effort.There are now 50 local government areas eligible for various types of assistance across Queensland. 
 * 	Personal Hardship and Distress assistance is available in the 22 local government areas of: Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
 * 	Concessional Interest Rate Loans and Freight Subsidies for Primary Producers are available in the 20 local government areas of: Banana, Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
 * 	Concessional Interest Rate Loans for Small Business are available in the 21 local government areas of: Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
 * 	Counter Disaster Operations assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 42 local government areas of: Aurukun, Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Burdekin, Burke, Cairns, Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cook, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Hinchinbrook, Isaac, Ipswich, Gympie, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Mackay, Mapoon, Moreton Bay, Napranum, North Burnett, Palm Island, Pormpuraaw, Redlands, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Tablelands, Toowoomba,Torres Shire, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs and Whitsunday.
 * 	Restoration of Essential Public Assets assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 33 local government areas of: Aurukun, Banana, Burdekin, Burke, Carpentaria, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cloncurry, Cook, Doomadgee, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gympie, Hinchinbrook, Hope Vale, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Mapoon, McKinlay Mornington, Napranum, North Burnett, Palm Island, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Toowoomba, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs and Wujal Wujal.	 
NDRRA assistance will be extended to other communities if they are impacted.More information about the assistance that available in each affected local government area can be found at www.disasterassist.gov.au.More information about how to apply for concessional loans and freight subsidies is available at www.qraa.qld.gov.au and www.daff.qld.gov.au.More information about how to apply for hardship and distress payments is available at http://www.qld.gov.au/community/disasters-emergencies/recovery-after-di…


Canberra
Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payments (AGDRP) have now been extended to people severely affected by flooding in the Lockyer Valley and North Burnett local government areas in Queensland.
The Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister visited North Burnett yesterday and it's clear  these destructive storms and flooding have had a devastating impact on the community. With residents now looking towards recovery, individuals who have been impacted by the severe weather and associated flooding can claim AGDRP payments of $1,000 for each eligible adult and $400 for each eligible child from the Australian Government.
People can lodge a claim online at humanservices.gov.au/disaster, by calling the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 22 66 from 8am to 8pm local time, seven days a week, or in person at recovery centres or any Centrelink Service Centre during their usual business hours.
Extra staff are being deployed to the Department of Human Service's service centres in the region  -  as well as in some recovery centres  -  where they can assist people with their claims. Outreach services are also being provided to some impacted areas and the Australian Government Mobile Service Centre is delivering services in Bundaberg.
The payments are designed to assist individuals severely affected by the floods to get back on their feet. The AGDRP is already being provided to individuals who have been severely impacted in the local government areas of Bundaberg, Gladstone, Gympie and Fraser Coast.
Further information on Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payments Australian Government assistance is available online at www.disasterassist.gov.au.
This Australian Government assistance is over and above the support already being provided under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA), jointly funded by the Australia Government and the Queensland Government.
There are now 50 local government areas eligible for various types of disaster assistance under the NDRRA across Queensland.
Personal Hardship and Distress assistance is available in the 22 local government areas of: Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs. Concessional Interest Rate Loans and Freight Subsidies for Primary Producers are available in the 20 local government areas of: Banana, Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Concessional Interest Rate Loans for Small Business are available in the 21 local government areas of: Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Counter Disaster Operations assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 42 local government areas of: Aurukun, Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Burdekin, Burke, Cairns, Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cook, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Hinchinbrook, Isaac, Ipswich, Gympie, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Mackay, Mapoon, Moreton Bay, Napranum, North Burnett, Palm Island, Pormpuraaw, Redlands, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Tablelands, Toowoomba,Torres Shire, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs and Whitsunday.
Restoration of Essential Public Assets assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 33 local government areas of: Aurukun, Banana, Burdekin, Burke, Carpentaria, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cloncurry, Cook, Doomadgee, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gympie, Hinchinbrook, Hope Vale, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Mapoon, McKinlay Mornington, Napranum, North Burnett, Palm Island, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Toowoomba, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs and Wujal Wujal.
Further information about Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements for individuals is available from http://www.qld.gov.au/community/disasters-emergencies/recovery-after-di… on 1800 173 349.


Canberra
Today I pay tribute to Senator Chris Evans and Attorney General Nicola Roxon who will step down from the Cabinet immediately.
I thank them both for their tireless efforts in Government since 2007 and in Opposition. They have worked in critical portfolios and leave a proud legacy of Labor reforms which have helped create a stronger, fairer modern Australia.
Their departure leaves big shoes to fill. But it paves the way for fresh talent, new ideas and new energy during the days of governing in 2013. It means a rejuvenated team who will keep building a smarter, fairer modern Australia.
Senator Evans has led Labor in the Senate since 2004 and acted as Prime Minister on several occasions. He has served as Minister in the demanding portfolios of Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research, Immigration and Citizenship and Workplace Relations.
He implemented substantial changes that transformed the nation's tertiary education system.  An additional 190,000 students are now studying at university – many of them the first in their families to do so.
Elected to the Senate in 1993, Senator Evans established the National Workforce Development Fund, the first employer-led training partnership that ensures we are training Australians for jobs not just for the sake of training.
As Immigration Minister, Senator Evans shaped the temporary and permanent skilled migration system to serve our economy and restored integrity to the 457 visa program. He abolished Temporary Protection Visas and detention debt and introduced Labor's detention values for the treatment of asylum seekers.
Ms Roxon was elected as the Member for Gellibrand in 1998.
As Australia's first female Attorney General, she will be remembered for her passion for law reform. I will always be grateful for her help in establishing the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse.
She has fearlessly taken on big tobacco and driven Australia's world-leading plain packaging laws, winning international recognition.
As Minister for Emergency Management, she has been at the helm of the nation's response to natural disasters on many occasions.
As Health Minister, Ms Roxon oversaw major reforms to Australia's public hospital, primary care and preventative health systems.
I know they will continue to work hard for their constituents in Western Australia and in the electorate of Gellibrand and wish them and their families the best for the future.
Chris Bowen will replace Senator Evans as Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research. He will also have responsibility for Small Business.
Mark Dreyfus will replace Ms Roxon as Attorney General and Minister for Emergency Management, relinquishing the role of Cabinet Secretary to Jason Clare, who retains Home Affairs and Justice.
Brendan O'Connor will become Minister for Immigration and Citizenship whilst Mark Butler takes on Housing and Homelessness.
Mike Kelly enters the Ministry as Minister for Defence Materiel.
I also welcome new Parliamentary Secretaries Yvette D'Ath (Climate Change and Energy Efficiency), Kelvin Thompson (Trade) and Melissa Parke (Mental Health, Homelessness and Social Housing) and thank Justine Elliot for her contribution in the Trade portfolio.
I will recommend to Her Excellency the Governor-General that new members of the Ministry be sworn in on Monday 4 February 2013.
A ballot for the Senate leadership position will be held at Monday's caucus meeting.


Fairfield Showground, Sydney
In 1977, a small wooden vessel threaded its way through the Gulf of Thailand and the waters to our north before finding landfall near Darwin.
The boat's cargo:
 * 	Thirty one people in search of a better life.
The boat's name:
 * 	“Tu Do”... Freedom.
Friends, this land tells us many stories.
From the world's oldest living culture to those who came on the first wooden boats of the First Fleet, to today's newest migrants coming from war-torn Africa.
But perhaps one of the most remarkable is the story of the Vietnamese.
Vietnamese migration was particularly challenging for us because it was the first broad-scale migration from Asia since the gold rush.
I don't want to minimise the challenges you sometimes faced.
But overwhelmingly, Australians opened their doors and opened their hearts.
Now, 38 years after the first Vietnamese came to Australia, this community is seeing its pioneers grow old.
Its children succeed and prosper in all aspects of national life.
Its grandchildren speak in broad Aussie accents.
But one thing that does not change is Tet.
A time for visiting loved ones, honouring ancestors and giving gifts.
A time to forget the worries of the year just past and to embrace the possibilities of the year ahead. 
A time to remember your old homeland from the safety and prosperity of the new.
Friends, you came from a sad and difficult past.
And sought a place to build a new and brighter future.
You looked out across those seas to a land under the Southern Cross.
A place that celebrated freedom in its laws and intuitions in the same way you treasured freedom in your hearts.
Friends, so many Vietnamese refugees came to these shores with only the clothes on their backs.
Yet you did not come empty-handed.
You came with hope to this land of new beginnings.
Hope, ambition and high expectations that honoured the welcome offered by your new home.
You matched opportunity with effort.
Citizenship with commitment.
Acceptance with goodwill.
So four decades since the journey began, we are here as civic leaders to share this festival and to say: thank you.
We enriched by your culture.
Strengthened by your hard work.
And blessed by your faith in the nation you chose and made your own.
Happy New Year!
May the Year of the Snake bring happiness and prosperity to you and all those you love.


Canberra
PM: I'm here with Senator Chris Evans and with Nicola Roxon, two of my most senior and most valued colleagues.
I'm here with them to announce that they are stepping down from their ministerial roles, and in the case of Chris Evans, from the Senate leadership as well.
Around 12 months ago, Nicola and Chris both came to me to talk about what they wanted to do with the rest of their lives.
We agreed that at the right time they would relinquish their ministerial roles and I would make new appointments to the ministry.
They'll have the opportunity shortly to say a few things themselves about the decisions they've made.
Both Chris and Nicola have done amazing things for this Government, for the nation, and for the Labor Party.
They certainly go with my thanks and they will be able to reflect on a proud track record of achievement.
In Chris's case, Chris has served as Senate Leader for eight years now. It is not an easy job.
He came into the Parliament in 1993. He has served in various portfolios, including importantly now in the portfolio that is at the centre of making us a smarter notion, at the centre of Australians getting the skills they need to have a real opportunity for the future.
Under Chris Evans' leadership we have seen 190,000 additional students getting opportunities at university.
He has been implementing our higher education reforms. And it is not too much to say that because of the work of Chris Evans, kids of poorer families are finally getting a chance to go to university and get skills and opportunity for the future.
At the same time, Chris Evans has driven major reform of our training system, including creating the National Workforce Development Fund and putting an employer-led partnership for the first time at the centre of how people acquire skills, so that they are getting skills for a job, not just training for training's sake; a very major reform.
Chris Evans also served in the very difficult portfolio of immigration. He shaped changes to our temporary and permanent skilled migration streams.
He made sure that that was serving our economy and he played a major role in cracking down on the rorts in 457 visas, the temporary visas which were bringing people into the country who were being exploited once they got here.
He abolished Temporary Protection Visas and detention debt and introduced Labor's detention values for the treatment of asylum seekers.
Chris Evans has made a major contribution to the Government. He was a leading force for us in Opposition. He's proudly served the people of Western Australia, his much loved state too and certainly from me, thank you very much Chris for everything you've done.
Nicola Roxon, too, has had a very proud career in federal politics.
We entered the Parliament in the same time, in 1998. So Nicola has been in the Parliament for a while with me.
She has had a very distinguished ministerial career. She's served as the first female Attorney-General this nation has ever had.
And I certainly want to express today my gratitude to her for the work she's undertaken as Attorney-General, and none of it more important than the work we did together to establish the Royal Commission into child sexual abuse which we announced a little bit earlier this year. That is a major development for our nation and for people who have been survivors of such ill treatment.
Nicola in both her health portfolio and as Attorney-General has fiercely taken on the power of big tobacco and she has won, and has an international reputation for taking on big tobacco and winning.
And it's not too much to say that our nation will be a healthier nation, and indeed the laws of many nations around the world will be changed because of Nicola's work against big tobacco.
As the Minister for Emergency Management, she's also been a guiding hand during many of the natural disasters that our nation has had to face.
As Minister for Health, she oversaw real change and reform at all levels of the health system: a focus on preventative health, a focus on bringing healthcare into the community, a focus on reforming hospitals and our agreements with state governments to that ensure hospitals are properly funded into the future.
Indeed, there would be many who said at the time it wasn't possible to get a new healthcare agreement with State and Territories, and under Nicola's leadership this got done.
So to Nicola Roxon, I want to say a big thank you too.
We have served together in Melbourne's west. Nicola is a very proud representative of her electorate of Gellibrand and I know a lot of people in that local community will be very sorry to see her go because of the great advocacy she has provided for Melbourne's west and for Gellibrand.
I'll turn now to Chris Evans for some comments.
EVANS: Thank you very much Prime Minister. You were so generous I thought I mightn't go now.
Thank you for your very kind remarks.
I wanted to announce today that I'm stepping down as Labor Senate Leader, Leader of the Government in the Senate, also resigning from the Cabinet and indicate that in the next couple of months I'll resign from the Senate.
I'll stay until such time as a replacement can be selected in Western Australia.
I want to thank the Prime Minister for her support. She indicated that we had a conversation a fair while ago now about a planned departure, but I indicated I would go at the time of her convenience as she reshaped the team for the coming election.
I indicated that I didn't want to serve following the next election and, quite frankly, my focus has been that as eight years as Senate Leader it was time for someone else to take on that role.
I've done that role in Opposition and Government. It is taxing; it is hard to say to the troops after eight years that what you're saying is fresh and new and I think it's time for someone else to have an opportunity.
I decided that I would make a clean break at that stage and while I've really enjoyed the role, it's time to allow the Government to put in place a new team.
It's been a tremendous privilege to serve in the Parliament of Australia. It's been a great honour to be a member of a Labor Government, and I cherish the opportunities that I've been given.
As a less famous migrant of Welsh parents, I came to this when I was nine years old and was part of the Welsh takeover of the government of this country
PM: But can you sing?
Evans: We are the two that can't sing.
But to come as a migrant and be able to be elected to the Parliament I think says a great thing about this country and the opportunities it provides.
We came to this country because my father got the chance of an education and to get out of the coalmines of Wales.
And again I think that speaks to the empowerment of education.
Can I say I also had the great opportunity to be Acting Prime Minister for a few days and it was a tremendous honour and I also was very pleased to know that nothing went terribly wrong when I did that role. No one was more relieved than the Prime Minister.
It was a tremendous privilege and, as I say, I had enormous opportunities and got to meet many great Australians, and engage with them, and I'm forever grateful for those opportunities.
It is the case that there are many people around the Parliament and who are outside the Parliament now who I have provided advice to. And that advice has always been - make your contribution, never believe you are indispensable and go out while you are on top; never become bitter, never stay too long.
And it is about time I took my own advice.
I have enjoyed the speculation of the last 18 hours or so. I see yesterday it was a shock that I was going and today it is old news and apparently it was expected.
I notice that some of you in the room have made both of those remarks in the last 18 hours.
Luckily Nicola is now the new story.
I want to make it very clear, I am not leaving tired, sick or bitter.
I am leaving fit, healthy and confident of the future of the Government.
I was most annoyed to see the file footage of me  -  it had me looking a little on the heavy side.
I made a decision that I would try to leave as I looked when I arrived. I found that impossible so I thought the least I could leave at the same weight I was when I arrived.
But as I say it has been a tremendous honour to serve the Government and be part of a Labor Government.
I enjoyed the challenges of immigration  -  it is a challenging portfolio but bringing humanity back to the portfolio and reform of skilled migration were issues that I took on and am very proud of.
In workplace relations, along with the Prime Minister, I was able to be part of the decision to bring equal pay to female workers in the community services area among the many other workplace relations reforms of which I, and the rest of the Government, are proud.
In tertiary education, as the Prime Minister referred to, implementing the Bradley reforms started under the Prime Minister  -  opening up access to tertiary education for working class kids, for Indigenous people, for children of migrants who, quite frankly, have been denied it in the past.
Too much of tertiary education participation had been determined by postcode and now that opportunity is much more broadly available for those who have got the ability and commitment to take it up.
The work in tertiary education and skills has been very rewarding. It's one of the reasons I got into politics so to get a chance to be part of that in a Labor Government has been great.
In terms of the science portfolio, I just wanted to make a point that is often overlooked in Australia.
We have some of the best scientists in the world, we do world class science and research here, and while I am a sports fan, it would be nice to see more focus on our achievement there and the people who are providing for that.
I was very pleased to be part of the decision when we won the bid to host the Square Kilometre Array. I don't think people understand the importance of that project and what it's going to do for Australia over the next 40 to 50 years.
So, I'd like to finish by; I'm mindful that I don't want to do a Rob Oakeshott, I'm a big fan of Rob's but I'd like to thank my colleagues for the great support I've had as Senate Leader. I can't complain about the support I've had from any of my colleagues.
I particularly want to thank my staff. In this game you're only as good as your staff; I've had great support from my staff  -  tremendously talented and loyal people.
I know Steve Lewis will write his column again about turnover, but one of my staff has been with me for 14 years, through the good times and the tough times, and I thank him and the rest of the team for that.
Finally, I'd like to thank my family. They pay an enormous price for your participation in federal politics, particularly from Western Australia, and I can't deny that their support's been critical, but that we have paid a price for me being allowed to pursue my career.
Can I also just thank the PM for her support, and I've actually been someone who has believed for many years that the Prime Minister is the outstanding politician of her generation.
I'm pleased to see her as Prime Minister of this country and I leave knowing that the Government is in good shape. I would not have left if it wasn't; I would not have left if I thought it would do harm to the Party or the Government.
I am very confident of our chances of success at the next federal election.
Thank you very much.
ROXON: Thank you Julia. Well today I also announce that I am not intending to contest the next election, and accordingly have offered my resignation to the Prime Minister as Attorney-General and the Minister for Emergency Management.
Like the Prime Minister has mentioned, and like Chris, it's been an absolute honour and privilege to have this job, to have the opportunity to deliver to the community, to be able to deliver on Labor values.
And I'm very proud of what I've been able to be part of as a Labor Government in delivering on those things that matter to Australians, and let me say right up front Prime Minister, how much I admire what you have made our Government do for Australian families and I really appreciate that you understand the needs of mine.
I promised that I would hold it together.
Of course these are extremely exciting, important and very demanding jobs, and I have always believed, like Chris, that they're jobs that you do at 200 per cent, and if you ever get to the point where you don't think you can do it at 200 per cent - even if your 190 per cent might be pretty good - it's time to move on; and I have reached that point.
I've been in Parliament since 1998, and a lot for me has changed personally in that time.
I hadn't even met my husband. My daughter was a long way from being thought about, and if I did contest this next election and run for a sixth term in Parliament she would be starting high school before I might retire.
And all of us need to make decisions about the right time to leave, and I believe the right time is now. And I must say, Prime Minister, what was a very difficult decision was made a lot easier by the fact that the Labor Party does bat so deep.
The Prime Minister has a wealth of talent and ability and enthusiasm to choose from in replacing me and in replacing Chris, and I feel very confident that she is spoilt for choice really on people that can fill this role and take us to the election and successfully contest the next election.
Like Chris, I believe that we can win the next election. I believe that we will win the next election, and Prime Minister, I believe that the community needs us to win the next election.
For all those people who rely on Labor Governments to provide the protection of the NDIS, to make sure that kids can get a proper education, to make sure that they get the help into jobs, that they get dental care that's needed.
Your Government is the only Government, the only team that is offering that; and that's why I believe under your very tough and very wise leadership, we will win the next election, and I will certainly be working very hard to make sure that that can happen.
I am proud of what I've been able to be part of in the last five years.
I've only been the Attorney for 12 months. I've had the wonderful opportunity to make some very significant changes - and the Prime Minister mentioned one of them, the establishment of the Royal Commission.
I've also had the great honour of being able appoint two High Court judges. Some people are Attorneys for a lot longer than that and never have an opportunity to do something that is so important, something that really gets little attention but is part of good governing, and I believe that the Prime Minister and our government has been governing well in making those and many other decisions.
I'm also very proud of the work that I've done in the health portfolio. I held that portfolio for four years and we under-saw reforms that touched every part of the health system, whether it was getting more focus on patients in front-line care, whether it was investing in infrastructure, whether it was putting more focus onto preventative health, the tobacco battle being only one of those - but a focus that's an important one - whether it's doubling hospital funding, these are things that make a difference to people's lives each and every day, and some of them will make a difference for decades to come.
The sort of backroom fixing that needed to be done in health in terms of how we finance health, not really sexy for reporting but fundamental for good government, and I'm very proud of being able to deliver that.
My only regret I have to say, as Health Minister, is the inordinate amount of time we took fixing many of the problems that Mr Abbott left from his time as Health Minister - a lot of my time, a lot of the Government's time, a lot of staff and bureaucratic time fixing issues that were simply neglected for the nearly four years that he was the Health Minister.
As a local MP, I'm really proud of the work that I've been able to deliver, and Prime Minister because our electorates are so close to each other, you know the sorts of areas that I'm talking about.
But when Julia and I were first elected, if you were a keen young, bright student in the western suburbs and wanted to become a doctor, you could not stay in the western suburbs and do that.
Now, at the time of my resignation, you can do all your training to become a doctor right in the western suburbs, where the population needs you.
And those investments, whether they're in child care, primary school, high school, TAFE, university are things that have really been a signature of the Prime Minister's leadership both as the Minister for Education and now as Prime Minister, and the sorts of things that I think as Labor people we can be proud of across the country.
And whilst it's time for me to retire from politics, I do want to say to the next generation that they should think about public service.
It is an enormously rewarding opportunity to fight for things that you believe in, and particularly for women I want to say that they should think about it. They can do it. It's been proved, and we need you, and I hope that people will see this as an opportunity to think about moving into politics, not to think that it's too difficult for them to do.
I've found constant inspiration from those goals that we've been working towards, and whether it is the sorts of examples I used of being able to train as a doctor, whether it's regional kids and families being able to get cancer treatment closer to home, whether it's the training opportunities in all sorts of areas that we've now invested in across the country, whether it's dealing with the ravages of natural disasters, which are all too frequent, these are all issues that as Labor Governments we deal with each and every day.
And I have to say I have one frustration that delivery is often reported on as a slogan, when actually almost every day that I have been in Parliament in the last 15 years, I've seen the difference that delivery makes to people on the ground, and our Government's been very focused on that.
As I've said, Prime Minister, I think the mission that we have as a Labor Government is a very good one and a very strong one, and I never cease to be amazed that we seem to have a Prime Minister made from titanium, really, with the strength and vision and leadership that as a minister you can only dream of.
So in resigning today, although it's personally a difficult decision, I am very confident that we are leaving the Government, as Chris said, in extremely good hands and in a good position, and with a great story and plan to tell to offer to the people at the next election, and I for one will still be handing out busily on election day - not only campaigning up until that time - to make sure the good that our Government under your leadership can do is understood by the public. And I am sure that in September it will be rewarded.
Finally, let me thank Julia of course, Kevin, my Cabinet colleagues, my caucus colleagues, my wonderful staff, particularly Chris Picton, Narelle, Angela and Hamdi.
Chris I have to owe you a belated apology.
When I became the Shadow Health Minister, I rang Chris Evans and said: Look, I believe you've got someone that knows a little bit about health in your office, could I borrow her for a couple of days?
Five years later, when she finished with me I said to Chris that I was happy for her to return to Chris's service. And it just goes to show I think that amongst the Labor staff we have very capable, very talented people, many of them who've been with us for very long periods of time. And like everyone else up here at the front are determined to make sure that we can win the next election.
I want to thank the people of Gellibrand for their confidence in me and their support and for their endless politeness at the supermarket, always saying we're a bit surprised to see you here, but we're glad that Julia gives you time to do this.
I would have been quite glad if she didn't give me time to do the supermarket shopping actually.
And can I also particularly thank the Labor Party and my family, the incredibly steadfast Michael and my amazing mum, not to mention my sister and others who've made this possible for me.
Thank you.
PM: We've got more to do before we get to questions so if you'll just excuse me for a moment.
What I want to do now is announce who is going to fill these incredibly big shoes and incredibly big shoes they are as you've just heard.
But there are some incredibly big shoes to fill and it does give me an opportunity now to promote some fresh talent, with fresh ideas into the Government's Executive and I'm very pleased to do so.
It means that we will be able to present to the Australian people a rejuvenated team as we move into the Parliamentary year in 2013.
I've been able to select a number of my colleagues for promotion and I thank them for their preparedness to serve.
So first, Chris Bowen will replace Senator Evans as Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research. He will also have responsibility for Small Business, acquitting my promise that small business would always be a Cabinet portfolio.
This is a promotion for Chris, a significant new challenge.
As you've heard from the words I've said and Chris has said today, this work is at the heart of Labor's agenda for our nation's future and there is nothing more important to Labor values and Labor ideals than making sure that Australians gets the best of opportunity for the future, and to do that they've got to have the best of skills.
So, Chris Bowen will take that responsibility.
Chris as Minister for Immigration and Citizenship has never shied away from what is hard work in one of the Government's most challenging portfolios. And Senator Evans also knows what that is like.
I know Chris Evans is going to bring his same drive and determination to this new challenge.
Mark Dreyfus will replace Nicola Roxon as Attorney-General and Minister for Emergency Management.
Mark Dreyfus is known to everybody in this room, I believe, he came to Parliament as a senior barrister, indeed as a Queens Counsel and will have the skills and attributes necessary to perform as Attorney-General and as Minister for Emergency Management.
I have promoted Jason Clare, he will take the role of Cabinet Secretary, sit in Cabinet, and he will take with him his Home Affairs and Justice portfolio.
As I've indicated earlier this year, we've got a lot of work to do in the Home Affairs and Justice portfolio.
There are concerns around the nation, including in western Sydney on questions of community safety and community cohesion and Jason Clare will lead our effort on that.
Brendan O'Connor has been promoted to take the job of Minister for Immigration and Citizenship.
Mark Butler has also been promoted, taking on new responsibilities. I have added the Housing and Homelessness portfolio to his current responsibilities.
There are clear linkages with the work that he does in mental health and indeed and in aged care and his general work in social inclusion.
Mike Kelly is being promoted into the ministry and into the ministry as the Minister for Defence Materiel.
Mike Kelly is someone who served in the ADF and brings that wealth of experience with him, as well as a wide range of talents and abilities.
I'm promoting today a number ofpeople into the Parliamentary Secretary ranks. Yvette D'Ath will take on the role as Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency.
Kelvin Thomson will take on the role of Trade. Melissa Parke will take on the role of Mental Health, Homelessness and Social Housing.
Three Parliamentary Secretarypositions are available because Justine Elliot has approached me to relinquish her Parliamentary Secretary job.
Justine is an incredibly fierce advocate for her local community. She is spearheading a campaign about community concerns relating to coal seam gas.
She has grown increasingly uncomfortable having the Parliamentary Secretary for Trade obligations given that's a job where we get out and spruik all of our export industries, including the coal seam gas industry.
And so she wants to resolve that conundrum by relinquishing the Parliamentary Secretary role and focusing on her obligations as local member and particularly this local campaign.
In terms of the Senate Leadership, that is not for me to decide, that is for Labor caucus to decide. I respect that my caucus colleagues will come together on Monday and make a decision about the future Senate Leadership.
So that is for caucus and I won't engage in any speculation about that ballot, but the decision will be made on Monday.
The swearing in for the new ministers will also occur on Monday.
That suits the Governor-General's convenience. She does have some commitments next week including going to Antarctica. Not something that can be moved around given she's there for commemorations related to Mawson. So we will get on with the swearing in on Monday.
So, that's enough from me apart from saying I will miss my colleagues very much in the future but I know I will continue to see them as human beings for a long, long time to come.
JOURNALIST: Nicola Roxon and Senator Evans you said 12 months ago, can I ask you about the timing of this announcement, why you didn't do it before Christmas? Can you appreciate that outside today's announcement looks very chaotic after what's been a tumultuous couple of weeks for you this year?
PM: I don't agree with that analysis at all. This is precisely the right time because Parliament will resume next week, which gives my caucus colleagues an opportunity to deliver their judgment on who should be the next Senate Leader in a timely way so that we can get on with the job as Parliament comes together.
I've always had in my mind that this was the appropriate time to announce new arrangements as we move back into the Parliamentary session.
PM: Have any other MPs had conversations with you, Prime Minister, about leaving and are you expecting more resignations before the election?
PM: Colleagues come to me from time to time, as Nicola and Chris Evans did. I don't have before me at the moment anybody who is saying that they want to leave at the next election other than people who have already publically stated.
JOURNALIST: Did you ring other ministers to sound them out about their futures and did you consider a wider Cabinet reshuffle?
PM: No, my view was always that this should be a limited reshuffle, so just the necessary arrangements to replace Chris Evans and Nicola Roxon.
And then once you do so, obviously there's a set of consequential and changes.
JOURNALIST: What do you say to people who are saying this looks like a Government in chaos? The events of the last three days have just created this impression of total turmoil.
PM: Well why on earth would anybody say that?
Number one, I've named the election date giving people more stability and certainty than they've ever had before.
Number two, I'm here today making what is a very long-planned announcement having had the opportunity to discuss with both Chris and Nicola their views about their futures in the course of last year.
JOURNALIST: But even that order, with respect Prime Minister, seems rather odd. You announce the election date on Wednesday of last week and you said that it was going to allow you to get on with the serious business of governing, you could remove politics from the equation and get on with the serious business of governing.
And now we find that you are having a major personnel change.
PM: Well this is governing. This is the real world. People make decisions about their own lives and their families and their futures. Chris and Nicola came to some decisions about that.
This is the right time to announce this change, moving as we are into the Parliamentary week and a caucus ballot to fill Senate Leadership.
I decided this is the right time to do it, it's the right way around.
JOURNALIST: There's a lot of speculation that one of the reasons why you announced the election so far out was because in the event of by-elections arising you can delay them.
Should for example, Robert McClelland take up a new job, we learned today that he's been applying for jobs with the New South Wales Government, and leave before the election, how far do you plan to delay by-elections if that occurs.
Will you hold by-elections in the next couple of months if they arise or will you attempt to delay them?
PM: All of this is not a decision for me; it's a decision for the Speaker if the occasion should arise in which a by-election would be held.
So it's a decision for the Speaker.
Common sense will tell you when, indeed history tells you, that when you are close in to the normal time for an election, it might well suit the convenience of the people to not be required to go out and vote twice, and to have a vote for their electorate at the normal election time. But these are decisions for the Speaker.
On the story about Robert McClelland, I read it this morning and I must admit it struck me as a speculation upon speculation.
I don't think it's any mystery to anyone that Robert McClelland is a very senior lawyer, and that he may have an aspiration post his time in politics to use his legal skills again.
JOURNALIST: There's a suggestion around today that some lawyers are saying that there may be a sort-of faux caretaker principle that applies because of the announcement of the election date so far in advance.
And there may be some requirements for the Opposition Leader to be given equal billing ahead of the official election campaign.
Can you tell us what legal advice if any you've taken on whether or not any kinds of caretaker principles will apply ahead of the August dissolution of Parliament?
PM: Well the technical caretaker period is once the Parliament is dissolved and the writs are issued, and I haven't done anything to change any of those arrangements other than give people certainty and transparency about the date.
I note that there's some speculation today about obligations about balanced coverage. Well frankly balanced coverage I think is a very good thing.
I would quite like to see around the nation an outbreak of balanced coverage. So if we do see that outbreak around the nation that will get a big tick from me.
What I would say about balanced coverage is it ought to bring to the Australian people the facts and the details that they need.
The Australian people are now in the situation where they don't have to walk into a polling booth wondering.
There is a sufficient time and sufficient space for them to have every detail that they need, every policy detail, every costing detail, and the obligation is on every participant in the 2013 election to put people in that position.
And if they refuse to put people in that position, then I think people will be very, very suspicious why they are refusing.
JOURNALIST: Have you taken any legal advice though on this issue?
PM: No, I haven't taken legal advice.
JOURNALIST: You've elevated Mike Kelly and Justine Elliot has left. But you've got three new Parl Secs-
PM: That's because Mark Dreyfus has been promoted, so his Parliamentary Secretary is vacant, Mike Kelly's been promoted and Justine Elliot has chosen (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: Is this the team you are taking to the next election now? Is this the team for the next election, the front bench team?
PM: I believe this is the team for the next election.
Look, we live in a real world and you can never wholly discount that someone has a family circumstance, has an illness present. These are the things of real life, the real world.
Of course, I don't want to see that happen to anybody in the Parliament regardless of which political party they're in or whether they serve in anybody's Executive or don't serve in anybody's Executive.
But I've been here long enough to see colleagues announce that they've got breast cancer, to see colleagues announce that they're facing other major health issues.
So I can't wish away the real world, whether it's for us, whether it's for you or anybody else, but this is the team that I intend to take to the election.
JOURNALIST: Did Chris Bowen express a desire to be removed, or had he requested a move from immigration?
PM: Chris Bowen is very enthusiastic and welcoming of this move. He believes it's the right time for a new challenge and so I've been able to meet that desire for a new challenge.
JOURNALIST: Did he express a desire to move from immigration?
PM: He wanted a new challenge, so that necessarily means he was looking for a change of responsibilities. He served as Minister for Immigration for a long time now, it's a difficult portfolio, very demanding portfolio.
He's looking forward to the opportunity to do something else.
JOURNALIST: Senator Evans, you said you welcome the fact you brought humanity back to the immigration portfolio.
But just about everything you did has been rolled back. Nauru is open again, and we're looking at Manus Island. Are you comfortable with those policies? Do you think that you made a mistake as Minister?
EVANS: No look, I think the main change we made under my leadership in the portfolio was to try and treat people as human beings.
You have to make difficult public policy choices all along.
When people debate these issues they don't necessarily apply much balance. I'm the Minister that abolished TPVs, I'm very proud of that. I'm also the Minister that opened Christmas Island, the facility at Christmas Island.
When one tries to write the story it's always one-dimensional.
I always believed we needed stronger border security, always believed that we were going to face this challenge of unauthorised arrivals throughout time.
Unauthorised migration is going to be a huge issue this century. All countries are dealing with it. And you have to keep responding with public policy responses.
But I am proud of the changes I made. We did things like abolish detention debt for people who are found to be owed protection they weren't then saddled with paying debt when they were in detention.
So there were a lot of things we did that remain. But we always have to make public policy adjustments to deal with this huge issue.
So I do remain proud of the changes about the way we deal with people, that was a major change we made.
We got rid of the cynicism that saw an Immigration Minister refer to a child as ‘it' and brought back, I thought what was a much more, a policy that reflected Australian values.
And I think that's continued under Minister Bowen.
JOURNALIST: And Ms Roxon, you thanked Kevin just a few minutes ago, but you launched an absolutely savage attack on him during the leadership dispute on behalf of Julia Gillard.
Do you regret that, do you think you went too far?
ROXON: No I don't. But I think it's appropriate to thank, and in fact the list could also be a lot longer, to thank the leaders that you serve under as a Minister; the great opportunities and the confidence that people put in you when they chose you for those roles.
And I've always been very public about the good work that Kevin led in the health department and despite comments and differences that we had, I've been quite open about the strengths of that work.
And it's something that as Prime Minister, he will always be able to be proud of his time as Prime Minister.
I could just as much  -  in fact I will take the opportunity too since you asked  -  to thank Simon Crean, the leader who first gave me the opportunity to be on the front bench to be the Shadow Minister for Children and Youth Affairs.
I think it's the one time I seriously have embarrassed myself in thinking Shakira was a cocktail. So my youth portfolio work was perhaps not as strong as some of my other work.
I am very pleased though for example that that time went right back to when we wanted in Opposition to have a Children's Commissioner, something that shortly the Government will be able to announce the first appointment of the first Children's Commissioner.
A lot of good work that we get to do that comes from time in Opposition and time in Government, and I don't think there's any reason that people shouldn't be properly thanked for showing confidence (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: Who do you think will replace you in Gellibrand and would you be happy for it to be Senator Feeney  -  is that a possibility?
ROXON: Preselection fights will no doubt go with all the enthusiasm they always do in Gellibrand.
Part of the importance of being able to make this announcement now is that there is the opportunity for the preselection to go ahead.
There isn't somebody who already in the wings or been anointed  -  that process will be undertaken by the state.
I haven't got any immediate plans post-politics. My immediate plans are to spend the next six months here in Parliament as part of Government, and make sure that I do my bit to ensure that Julia and the Labor team are re-elected, because I believe we've got a lot of good work to keep doing.
JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister has shown a lot of confidence in you, promoting you and making history in doing so. How torn were you in making this decision, and can you give us some idea of when you started thinking about it given that you were only promoted fairly recently.
ROXON: Well I was very torn because it's a huge privilege, it's a great opportunity, and it's an opportunity to make a difference to the community.
But the good thing about the Labor Party is actually we're full of people who want to make a difference for the community. And I do truly believe that everyone has a different personal capacity.
Some of us can only work at 200 per cent for a certain amount of time. Others can keep going for longer.
So it was a difficult decision, but it is also one that I can make with some pride. I'm very satisfied with work that I've been able to be part of, as part of the Government. And I have no sense as Chris Evans said that any of us are ever indispensable.
And I think Mark will make a fantastic Attorney, he's got years and years of experience, he's very well-regarded, he will step into that role seamlessly. And I wish him all the best and will work closely with him to assist him in any way that he needs me to.
JOURNALIST: Any updates on Morris Iemma for the seat of Barton? Have you spoken to him? And lastly can you confirm there is a meeting tomorrow for Labor?
PM: On matters associated with New South Wales, you need to speak to the New South Wales branch.
About the preselection in Barton, I've said everything I've got to say on that. I've made it clear that it's not my intention to involve myself in that preselection when I announced Nova Peris for the Senate.
I said I would only use my capacity as Leader rarely and I was content to leave preselections to party processes, and so the process in Barton will be a New South Wales branch process.
JOURNALIST: Senator, you're replacement as Senate Leader, given the right tend to win most ballots in the ALP, will it go to Senator Conroy or is there a deal that it goes to the left?
EVANS: You know how our party processes work, having observed it many times. Reality is that it's an election by the full Labor Party caucus.
We have no shortage of people could serve in that role, five Cabinet Ministers and a couple of junior Ministers.
I expect the successful candidate to come from that group.
Senator Conroy's been my deputy for eight years, he's very experienced. But we also have people like Senator Wong, Senator Carr, Senator Ludwig, I think they all have to make their decisions about those things.
I've never been one for predicting Labor Party ballots, if there is to be one. But there'll be a strong field of candidates if they were to choose to run.
No doubt we'll see how it moves over the next couple of days and the Prime Minister indicated there will be nominations on Monday in full caucus.
JOURNALIST: How demanding is that particular job?
PM: How long have you got?
EVANS: It is a challenging job, it does take a lot of time. But as I say, we've got a very good team in the Senate with a lot of cooperation and discipline.
And we were a very effective I think in Opposition during the time of the Howard absolute majority in the Senate Parliament.
And I think since then we've been a very successful team for the Government in the Senate.
The fact that you haven't been writing a lot about the Government in the Senate means we must be going okay.
PM: Okay, we will complete it there. Can I just say two things.
Number one, we don't normally hear applause at press conferences and I think we did hear applause because members of Chris and Nicola's staff are here, so thank you to you.
And number two, I hope you spend part of the day saying a final farewell, which may or may not involve the drinking of Shakira.
Thanks very much.


Canberra
Good morning to everyone and I know that I am speaking to a group of people who are here because of their passionate belief in Labor's purpose.
And across all of the years of our political party  -  the Labor Party  -  we have pursued a mission with two things at its centre.
One, to create and to share opportunity.
Two, to protect people in the most difficult of times.
This has always been Labor's driving purpose, the driving purpose of Labor Governments over the ages. And the driving purpose of the Labor Government I am very proud to lead.
When we reflect on what the Government has done so far, we have held true to that vision of creating opportunity and sharing opportunity.
No better definition of that than creating more than 800,000 jobs during the worst of economic times around the globe.
Everything we have done to give kids a better start in life.
To improve schools.
To increase apprenticeships.
To bring a historic shift in our universities.
To create 190,000 more places.
And for the first time, to be able to say truly in our nation a kid from a poorer household can get a chance and a start and a university place. And we see this in our communities already working and transforming lives.
So we have held true to that purpose of creating opportunity.
But we've got more to do for our nation to be able to say that no matter what the circumstances of your birth, you will always be in our great nation able to seize an opportunity, to see the benefits of your hard work, and to have the place in our nation that lets you get ahead.
The Government has started doing that work. It's work very much based on the future of our economy because we can't create and share opportunities if we don't have a strong economy.
And we live in a time of tremendous change. We're seeing the out-workings of the global financial crisis.
The world economy is never going to be the same as it was in the days before the global financial crisis.
We are in a period of profound transformation in the global economy, and in our economy.
It shows in a variety of ways.
People are saving more, and that's a good thing, but it has changed the way in which they live.
People are anxious about their job security. They're seeing the consequences of the high Australian dollar press on many industries and many regions around the nation.
They know that we live on the doorstop of a lot of future growth in Asia, and that this can give us opportunities but we need to reach out and get them.
They know that what is happening with information technology is changing our world and changing our future.
And they know that climate change is real and there's no point denying the consequences of a changing climate. We are living through climate change. We know it and we can see it.
So the Government has been making prudent preparations so that we in the future can still be a land of creating opportunity and shared opportunity.
That has meant that we've needed to take tough decisions like putting a price on carbon so we do seize the clean energy sources of the future, and I'm very proud that we've got that done.
It does mean that we've needed to focus on modernising our infrastructure.
We inherited from the former Government a nation with a huge infrastructure deficit, and piece by piece we have been working to improve our infrastructure.
Traditional infrastructure: roads, rail, ports to make travel times for working people; to ensure that we can get our goods to market.
But also the infrastructure of the future: the National Broadband Network. Because we cannot be a competitive economy in the long-term, we cannot roll out the services that we want to for working Australians unless we have the National Broadband Network around our country, and we are working to get that done.
We've also worked hard to boost productivity by looking at the regulations in our nation.
We do need clear laws and clear rules about how we do business. But they need to be efficient laws and efficient rules, and we've worked hard to do that.
And we've played out a very clear strategy to make sure that we can seize the growth that is happening around us in the region in which we live.
I mean, what a change in our world.
When I grew up people used to think of Asia as a place of poverty and their eyes would look across Asia to Europe or America.
What the smart young things wanted to do when I was growing up, they wanted to go and spend some time in London, see Europe. They wanted to go to the west coast of America.
Now young people still legitimately want to do those things but increasingly we know the wealth of our age and our era will be Asia's wealth.
Asia's rise will transform the opportunity for us as that middle class grows and wants the things that we have and have to sell in abundance. Whether it's agriculture, whether it's wine, education services, legal services, manufactured goods, the list goes on.
So to be a nation of opportunity for the future which can be shared, we have to tap into that growth and we've laid out the strategy to do so.
Nothing is more important to opportunity in the future than what is happening in our schools today.
We've already brought a transformation in Australian schools, and I'm very proud of it. I'm proud of the national curriculum. I'm proud of MySchool.
I'm proud that I can walk into disadvantaged schools today who through our national partnerships can get out the information  -  the cold hard data  -  and show me that they are giving kids a better life and a better start than they were able to do before we started our education reforms; practical changes.
Children who used to struggle to learn to read and write, now being able to do so. And if they learn to read and write and do maths in primary school, they can succeed in high school, they can get an apprenticeship, they can get a job. They can get one of our new university places.
But if your life goes off the rails when you're five or six or seven or eight, and you never learn to read or write, you never learn to deal with numbers, to deal with maths, then we know that sets people up for a lifetime of disadvantage.
We have been changing that, but we've got more to do so that we can say that every child in every school has the resources available at his or her disposal to get a great education.
That it doesn't matter whether we're talking about an indigenous girl in the Northern Territory, a boy in the western suburbs of Melbourne where I'm from, or people in your communities.
Where ever in the nation most children are getting educated, they are getting a great education.
This is the work of governing, and this is the work of 2013.
And we will do it as we deliver our response to the funding review undertaken by David Gonski, and as we outline our national plan for school improvement.
Creating opportunity, sharing opportunity. A Labor purpose, a Labor mission.
But we also know that life brings with it human risks. Anybody could have a child with cerebral palsy born into their family.
Anybody could be diagnosed in middle age with one of the worst degenerative diseases, Parkinson's disease.
Anybody could the family member of someone who  -  perhaps a young person, an incautious moment, dives off that jetty and the water is too shallow. Drives a little bit recklessly and has an accident.
These are the things of real life, and these are the things that can give people a disability.
We have worked hard to protect people from risk. Whether it's the risk of ill-health and their need for a great healthcare service, we've been building that as a Labor Party over many years now through Medibank and Medicare and free public hospitals.
And this Government has done its share to improve our health services for the future. To make them sustainable, to put them on a strong footing, to bring reform and change which means that there are more doctors, more nurses, more local control.
To change our aged care system so that older Australians have more options, more choices, more dignity, more respect than we have afforded them in the past.
So we have worked hard on life's risks.
But we've got more to do to make sure that the risk of disability isn't something that keeps families up at night worrying.
That if a disability strikes, it doesn't break families and their finances, potentially for generations.
But that they know that their community through their Government is there with them to help out and to give people a fair go and a fair chance.
That's the work of governing, and that's the work of 2013 as we roll out the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We've got a lot to do in this period of time. To make sure in this era of change we are securing Australian jobs, continuing to add to our proud track record of more than 800,000.
Securing new opportunities for our nation to make its way in the world, and to profit as it makes its way in the world.
Securing a new future for our kids through world-class schooling.
And better protecting our families through the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
I'm looking out on the front line of taking these arguments, these debates, these values to communities around the nation.
I'm looking to you to be out there in your communities explaining to them that this is the work of governing and we are not done yet.
That for us to keep increasing opportunity, to keep protecting people from risk not only requires us to work hard between now and the election day in September.
But it requires us in the Labor Government that lies beyond that election to keep working with their interests always at our forefront with our Labor purpose always driving us on.
That's why we're here today and I'm very proud to be able to have the opportunity to spend the time with you.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
Clean-up and recovery grants of up to $25,000 are now available for small businesses, primary producers and not-for-profit organisations in areas severely affected by flooding in Queensland.
This assistance, available under Category C of the jointly funded Federal/State Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA), will initially apply to organisations and primary producers in Bundaberg, North Burnett, Fraser Coast, Gympie and Lockyer Valley.  The Commonwealth and Queensland Governments will continue to assess the impact of the floods on other areas to see if this assistance should be activated elsewhere.
The assistance is designed to help with the economic impacts that these devastating floods have had on local businesses and the wider community.
The Commonwealth Government is also ready to work with the Queensland Government to establish a community recovery fund to restore community networks, functions and facilities.
The activation of Category C assistance is in addition to the range of support already available, including concessional loans up to $250,000 for primary producers and small businesses.
These loans will help primary producers cover costs such as repairing or replacing damaged plant and equipment, repairing or replacing buildings, purchasing livestock to replace those lost in the disaster event and re-planting, restoring or re-establishing areas affected by the disaster event.
For small business, these loans can be used for purposes such as repairing or replacing damaged plant and equipment, repairing or replacing buildings, supplying stock for up to one month and maintain liquidity of the business.
Primary producers in these areas can also apply for freight subsidies.
There are now 53 local government areas eligible for various types of assistance across Queensland.
 * 	Clean-up and recovery grants of $25,000 for eligible primary producers, small businesses, and not-for-profit organisations in the local government areas of Bundaberg, North Burnett, Fraser Coast, Gympie and Lockyer Valley.
 * 	Personal Hardship and Distress assistance is available in the 23 LGAs of Banana, Brisbane, Bundaberg, Cherbourg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
 * 	Concessional Interest Rate Loans and Freight Subsidies for Primary Producers are available in are available in the 22 LGAs of Banana, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Fraser, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs..
 * 	Concessional Interest Rate Loans for Small Business are available in the 23 LGAs of Banana, Brisbane, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs,  Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs..
 * 	Counter Disaster Operations assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 45 LGAs of Aurukun, Banana, Brisbane, Bundaberg, Burdekin, Burke, Cairns, Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cook, Etheridge, Fraser, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Hinchinbrook, Ipswich, Isaac, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Mackay, Mapoon, Moreton Bay, Napranum, North Burnett, Palm Island, Pormpuraaw, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, Southern Downs, South Burnett, Sunshine Coast, Tablelands, Toowoomba, Torres, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs and Whitsunday.
 * 	Restoration of Essential Public Assets assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 41 LGAs of: Aurukun, Banana, Bundaberg, Burdekin, Burke, Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cloncurry, Cook, Doomadgee, Etheridge,  Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Hinchinbrook, Hope Vale, Ipswich, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Mapoon, McKinlay, Mornington, Napranum, North Burnett, North Peninsula, Palm Island, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, Southern Downs, South Burnett, Toowoomba, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs, Wujal Wujal and Yarrabah.
NDRRA assistance will be extended to other communities if they are affected.
The Commonwealth Government today also announced income support for communities severely impacted by the destructive floods in Queensland.
The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy is being made available to individuals in the hardest hit areas of Bundaberg, Gympie, Fraser Coast, North Burnett and Lockyer Valley.
There are far too many families in these areas that have lost their income as a result of this disaster, adding further hardship to an already difficult recovery process. 
This additional assistance provides payments to individuals that have lost their income.  The Federal assistance will ensure that employees are able to stay in these disaster affected areas and will support the longer-term recovery of the devastated local and regional economies.
More information about the assistance that is available in each affected local government area can be found at www.disasterassist.gov.au.
More information about how to apply for concessional loans and freight subsidies is available at www.qraa.qld.gov.auand www.daff.qld.gov.au.
More information about how to apply for hardship and distress payments is available at www.qld.gov.au/community/disasters-emergencies/recovery-after-disaster/. 


Canberra
PM: First, in relation to Michelle Grattan of the press gallery.
Speaker, before there was a female Governor-General, before there was a female Prime Minister, indeed before you were, Speaker, a woman performing that role, Michelle was there in the press gallery, blazing a trail for women in what was when she joined it a very blokey industry indeed.
What we can say about Michelle Grattan though is any woman who's got the nickname ‘Cobber' obviously was able to make her own way in this blokey world.
Michelle Grattan is a watchword in Australian politics and in the Canberra press gallery for work ethic.
Anybody who's seen her in the press gallery so early in the morning and so late at night can attest to that.
For a very-old-fashioned devotion to accuracy, indeed at an earlier stage in my parliamentary career I would frequently joke with Tim that if my phone rang at 10:30 at night then it was Michelle Grattan checking copy for the next day, a relentless focus on the facts.
She will be sorely missed in the press gallery, having announced as she has that she is off to The Conversation. So we will get the opportunity of her insights and her experience in a different way.
Speaker, I do ask myself in these circumstances though what explains the timing of this announcement, who spoke to who about this announcement, who was consulted about this announcement, and how long can this chaos in the press gallery go on. I do ask myself these questions.
But Michelle does go from the press gallery with the best of our sentiments and I know she will continue to make a great contribution.


Canberra
The Prime Minister will visit Queenstown, New Zealand, from 8 to 10 February for the annual Australia-New Zealand Leaders' Meeting.
Australia's ties with New Zealand are the closest and most comprehensive we have with any country.
Our partnership has been forged through shared values and history, strong people to people links, and close government, security and economic ties.
The visit marks the 30th anniversary of the Australia New Zealand Closer Economic Relations (CER) Trade Agreement, one of the world's most successful and comprehensive free trade agreements and a key driver of trans-Tasman economic integration.
In Queenstown, the Prime Minister will meet New Zealand Prime Minister John Key to discuss opportunities for closer bilateral economic engagement and cooperation on shared regional challenges.
In recognition of our shared Anzac history, and ahead of the 2015 Anzac Centenary, Ms Gillard and Mr Key will lay a wreath at the Queenstown War Memorial Gate. 


Canberra
The Government is very pleased to announce Mr Richard Goyder AO, Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer of Wesfarmers Limited, has accepted our invitation to lead business engagement during Australia's presidency of the Group of 20 in 2014.
Mr Goyder will head the Australian B20, which will bring together senior Australian business people to work with the Government on the G20 policy agenda for our host year in 2014.
As one of Australia's largest employers, Mr Goyder will bring tremendous experience and unique perspectives to this important role.
Mr Goyder leads one of Australia's most diverse and successful companies and is exceptionally well placed to work closely with Australian and international business to help deliver outcomes in a time of global economic uncertainty.
The B20 is the key business advisory body to the international economic forum and will include business leaders from all G20 economies.
Hosting the forum will give local industry the unprecedented opportunity to help shape and drive the global economic agenda.
The Government will work closely with the business community throughout 2013 and beyond as Australia formulates an agenda that will deliver on the G20's core goal of promoting economic prosperity and jobs.
We are also pleased to announce the following key leaders from across the local business community will join Mr Goyder on the Australian B20.
• John Borghetti  -  Virgin Australia• Jillian Broadbent  -  Clean Energy Finance Corporation• Mark Burrows  -  Credit Suisse• Cameron Clyne  -  National Australia Bank• John Denton  -  Corrs Chambers Westgarth• Elmer Funke-Kupper  -  ASX Limited• Jerry Harris  -  News Limited• Gail Kelly  -  Westpac Banking Corporation• Grant King - Origin Energy• Nick Leeder  -  Google• James MacKenzie  -  Mirvac and Yancoal Australia• Pip Marlow  -  Microsoft• Ian Narev  -  Commonwealth Bank of Australia• Ann Pickard  -  Shell• Heather Ridout  -  Reserve Bank of Australia• Steve Sargent  -  GE Australia and New Zealand• Tony Shepherd  -  Business Council of Australia• Catherine Tanna  -  BG Australia• David Thodey  -  Telstra• Ian Thomas  -  Boeing Australia• David Tudehope  -  Macquarie Telecom• Hamish Tyrwhitt  -  Leighton Holdings• Innes Willox  -  Australian Industry Group• Marius Kloppers  -  BHP Billiton
The G20 offers an excellent opportunity to showcase local business to an international audience, and to strengthen links between Australian industry, our regional partners and the rest of the world. It will also be an avenue to pursue goals set out in the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper to support growth and jobs for Australians.
The B20 has become an integral part of the G20 process and makes a significant contribution to the G20's work. Australia will seek to strengthen the G20's dialogue with the private sector further still during our host year. We see business input as essential to achieving the G20's core goal of stronger global growth and job creation. We expect the Australian B20 will play an important role in working with the wider business community to develop pragmatic and practical suggestions for the G20 agenda.
Queensland will also benefit with Brisbane hosting the G20 Leaders summit November and Cairns hosting a finance ministers and central bank governors meeting. There will also be opportunities to showcase other parts of the country during 2014.
Further information on the B20 is available in the fact sheet included as Attachment A.
BUSINESS 20 FACT SHEET
The Group of Twenty (G20) is the premier forum for global economic and financial cooperation. It brings together the world's major advanced and emerging economies, representing around 85 per cent of global GDP. Russia is hosting the G20 in 2013, and Australia will host in 2014 with the leaders summit to be held in Brisbane in November 2014.
In recent years, business leaders from G20 countries have come together to form the Business 20 (B20) to provide private sector input to the G20. The B20 was first convened as part of the Canadian G20 Presidency in June 2010 and continued to play an important role during the following Korean, French and Mexican presidencies.
The B20 generates policy recommendations to inform the deliberations of the G20 with a view to influencing the final outcome of G20 summits. The B20's recommendations have typically been presented to leaders for their consideration. The B20's contribution reflects the broadly-shared view among G20 countries that the private sector, as the main driver of economic activity, has a key role to play in achieving the goal of strong, sustainable and balanced growth.
The approach to organising B20 activities has varied to some degree between different host years and continues to evolve. Participants in B20 activities have included CEOs and senior executives from companies across a broad spectrum of sectors, along with industry bodies.
Since the 2010 Seoul summit, the B20 has found it useful to form taskforces focused on issues that generally reflect the G20's priorities set by the host country. In 2012, for example, during Mexico's year as host, B20 taskforces focused on: food security; green growth; employment; improving transparency; trade and investment; information and communication technologies and innovation; and financing for growth and development.
Arrangements for the Russian B20 are well underway. A B20 meeting was held in Moscow in December 2012 and B20 taskforces have been established on: trade; financial systems; investment, infrastructure and development; job creation and investment in human capital; and transparency and anti-corruption. The major B20 summit will be held at the St Petersburg International Economic Forum in June 2013, ahead of the G20 leaders summit in September.
The B20 also engages with the work of other G20 stakeholders, including the Labour 20 (L20) and Think 20 (T20). 


Canberra
There are now more Indigenous children than ever before with access to preschool or kindergarten programs as a result of the Gillard Government's unprecedented efforts to Close the Gap on Indigenous disadvantage.
The Closing the Gap target that all Indigenous four-year-olds living in remote communities have access to early childhood education by 2013 will be met this year.
This means young Indigenous Australians are getting a better start to life and are ready to learn when they get to school.
Achieving this target is an important first step towards closing the gap in educational attainment between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
The Gillard Government is now working to ensure this improved access to early education also leads to improved school attendance, so children continue to build on the great start that a preschool or kindergarten program provides.
The Closing the Gap Prime Minister's Report 2013 tabled in Parliament today also shows strong progress being made towards the target of halving the gap for Year 12 attainment.
The target of halving the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under five by 2018 is also on track to be met.
The Australian Government committed to the Closing the Gap targets because we knew that previous haphazard approaches to ending Indigenous disadvantage had not been good enough.
The Closing the Gap targets commit all governments to an overarching framework and hold them accountable to specific targets. This, together with our unprecedented investment, is beginning to make a difference, but the Government recognises that this work will take time and continued effort.
Government cannot close the gap alone. Closing the Gap requires a genuine partnership with Indigenous Australians at all levels and the Government is committed to a relationship based on trust and mutual respect.
The Closing the Gap report is available at https://www.fahcsia.gov.au/our-responsibilities/indigenous-australians/…


Canberra
The Australian Government has today announced funding of $14.4 million over four years for Reconciliation Australia's work to promote reconciliation and build stronger relationships between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Reconciliation Australia helps businesses and organisations develop Reconciliation Action Plans (RAPs) which include practical steps to build understanding and create opportunities for Indigenous Australians.
So far more than 350 organisations have developed a Reconciliation Action Plan. Approximately 1.7 million Australians work or study in an organisation with a RAP. 
The plans have helped to secure almost 20,000 jobs for Indigenous Australians, more than $15 million for educational scholarships for Indigenous students and about $58 million in transactions with Indigenous businesses.
Recent research conducted by Auspoll for Reconciliation Australia indicates that trust is significantly higher between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians in RAP organisations, when compared to the wider community, and that prejudice is much lower.
In July 2012, the Australian Government also provided $10 million to Reconciliation Australia over two years to promote public awareness and community support for Indigenous constitutional recognition.
This Government is committed to recognising Indigenous people in Australia's Constitution and we want meaningful reform that reflects the hopes and aspirations of Indigenous people.
Constitutional recognition of Indigenous Australians will be a significant step towards reconciliation and building a nation based on strong relations and mutual respect, which recognises the unique and special place of our first peoples.
We encourage all Australians to become involved in the reconciliation process.  Visit www.reconciliation.org.aufor more information.


Canberra
Speaker,
On behalf of the nation, I present the fifth annual Closing the Gap Statement.
I am here today because the Indigenous and non-Indigenous people of this country have decided to walk the path of Reconciliation together.
Because the workers of Wave Hill said no and the voters of 1967 said yes.
Because in a proud Labor tradition, Gough Whitlam poured the soil and Bob Hawke handed Uluru back.
Because Paul Keating inscribed native title in our laws and Kevin Rudd said our nation was Sorry.
Because this Government intends that our Constitution must speak for all Australians and the gap that separates our opportunities and living standards must be closed.
Speaker,
Closing the Gap is a plan of unprecedented scale and ambition.
A plan not only to uplift the lives of Indigenous Australians but to do so in a shared endeavour of partnership and respect.
That high level of ambition commits us to two decades of annual reckoning until we bridge the gulf that stands between us.
Few if any of the men and women who sit in this Parliament today will still be here when a future Prime Minister delivers the final Closing the Gap Statement in 2031.
A short walk to this despatch box that we hope will mark the end of a monumental journey.
Wherever we are on that day, the people of this land will want to hear one thing.
That we have, at last, accorded Indigenous Australians the health care, education, job opportunities and community services they deserve.
Above all, the opportunity unknown to many Indigenous people today  -  the chance to grow old.
These goals require us to raise our eyes and lift our expectations; to invest, plan and think for the future.
It is the work of an entire generation and work that has begun with us.
So I account to the Parliament and people of Australia today.
Speaker,
This is the fifth such Statement since the task began in 2008.
Already we know that some targets, like life expectancy, will be enormously challenging to meet, even with almost two decades still to run.
On others, progress has been encouragingly swift.
Across the board, our sources of data and information are stronger than ever before.
The report I make today is especially significant because this year, the very first of the target deadlines established five years ago falls due.
In 2008 we pledged to deliver access to early childhood education to all four-year-olds in remote communities within five years.
Well, the five years are up.
I'm proud to say  -  we've got it done.
This target is on track and will be met on schedule.
That means little children like Curtisha Kalinic, a pre-schooler at Robinson River in the Gulf country can now go to pre-school.
Her mum, Roberta, was never given the opportunity to attend school when she was a girl, let alone pre-school.
Think about that.
An Australian woman young enough to be just now making a family of her own.
A woman who, in our own lifetimes, while we did our exams and gained our qualifications, was denied the chance to go to school.
Yet already Curtisha has completed preschool  -  she knows how to hold a pencil, listen to the teacher, and adapt to the formal routines of the day.
She's ready for school.
Ready for the future.
The mistakes made in one generation are being repaired in the next.
The gap is being closed.
So for all the challenges we will inevitably encounter between now and 2031, this is a moment to savour.
Not just because we reached a target  -  but because we showed what we can do together.
Speaker,
Pre-school only takes us to the schoolyard gate.
We must ensure that progress flows through to the other targets relating to later schooling and employment.
One of the first things we need to do is ensure that improved access to early childhood education is accompanied by improved attendance rates at school.
That the children who reach the school gate enter and stay there until education has done its transforming work.
Supporting regular school attendance will be one of the 2013 priorities of the Stronger Futures program in the Northern Territory.
It will also be one of this Government's early priorities as we implement the National Plan for School Improvement, in partnership with States and Territories and non-government sector.
The National Plan for School Improvement complements Closing the Gap philosophically and practically.
Both programs are about cultural change and generational change.
Resourcing schools according to their need  -  and measuring them according to their success.
Thus, with reliable data, we can swiftly see what works and what doesn't work.
With reliable data we can turn access into attendance.
Attendance into achievement. Not just in pre-schools but right through the educational journey.
Speaker,
Encouraging progress is also being made on two other Closing the Gap targets.
In 2008 the nation set itself the challenge of halving the gap in Year 12 attainment by 2020.
In 2006, just 47 per cent of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders aged between 20 and 24 had a Year 12 or equivalent qualification.
In the 2011 Census that had risen to 54 per cent, a level of progress that puts us ahead of schedule to meet our Closing the Gap target.
Yet compared to the 86 per cent rate in the non-Indigenous population, it's clear that substantial further improvements will be needed if our target is to be met in 2020.
Another Closing the Gap target is now also within sight.
In 2008 leaders pledged to halve the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under five within a decade.
I can report that real progress is being made and, if current trends continue, our target will be met.
This is a precious human achievement.
Babies will live who might have died.
Infants will thrive who once would not.
And the tragic reality of Indigenous children dying before their fifth birthday at twice the rate of other Australians will become a sad relic of history.
Behind these positive trends lie a lot of hard work and a lot of investment:
Improvements in antenatal care; access to public health services; immunisation; neonatal intensive care.
Anyone who says things can't change: you are wrong.
Anyone who says change is not a matter of extra staff or extra funding: you are wrong too.
Time and effort and resources are saving lives today.
Speaker,
I can also report encouraging progress on another key indicator: Indigenous employment.
Our pledge in 2008 was to halve the gap in employment between and non-Indigenous Australians aged 15 to 64 years.
This is one of the truly vital indicators, because each job not only brings opportunity and esteem to the person who secures employment.
It models habits of work and self-discipline to children, younger siblings and the wider community.
So every job advances a virtuous cycle.
The 2011 Census shows progress since the previous Census in 2006.
The number of Indigenous Australians in mainstream employment has risen from 42.4 to 44.7 per cent, a small but encouraging increase.
There was a particularly striking rise in mainstream employment in the Northern Territory  -  from 21.3 to 30.3 per cent.
This reflects the progress made by Indigenous Territorians who are seizing the growing economic opportunities in their communities.
Overall, Indigenous employment has been rising steadily since 1996 and the long-term trends are positive.
However, with the rate of non-Indigenous employment standing at 72 per cent, it is clear a massive and unacceptable gap remains.
Last night I attended a dinner hosted by Reconciliation Australia, along with business leaders representing organisations who have signed Reconciliation Action Plans.
1.7 million Australians now work for an organisation with a plan in place.
This is Reconciliation in action, happening every day, right across the country.
Speaker,
On the final of the five Closing the Gap indicators  -  literacy and numeracy performance  -  progress is more mixed.
On Year 3 Writing, for example, 78 per cent of Indigenous children reached or exceeded the national benchmark in 2012.
That's well on the way to the non-Indigenous level of 96 per cent  -  a gap of 18 percentage points.
In Year 9 Writing, however, the 2012 gap is almost double that  -  35 percentage points.
Overall, significant disparities remain between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students.
Most troubling, some results such as Year 3 Reading actually declined in 2012 after improving between 2008 and 2011.
Overall, only three out of eight indicators in Reading and Numeracy are tracking as expected and the other five will need considerable work.
So NAPLAN will continue to challenge us with its annual output of hard, clinical data.
I cannot conceal that these literacy and numeracy results are a source of personal disappointment.
Last year's optimism gives way this year to a starker realism.
Yet that is how Closing the Gap will be.
The set-backs that make us aim higher.
The successes that make us glad we did.
Speaker,
In 2013, we will reach our first formal Closing the Gap target and can see two more within reach.
These results show that the gap is not only closing but closable.
They are proof of what we can achieve when we work together.
When we hold ourselves strictly to account.
When we end decades of chronic under-investment.
When we genuinely involve Indigenous Australians in the design and delivery of programs.
At the same time, I'm acutely conscious that gains can be contingent.
Yesterday's breakthrough can be today's failure if we let our vigilance falter.
Speaker,
Progress on Closing the Gap is hard enough without taking retrograde steps and undoing the good work that has already been accomplished.
This is why I am very concerned about the alcohol policies adopted by the Country Liberal Party since it came to government in the Northern Territory.
I am concerned about plans touted by the Liberal National Party in Queensland to wind back restrictions in that state, too. ‘Tragedy' was the word Noel Pearson used to describe the Newman Government's plans.
I have a real fear that the rivers of grog that wreaked such havoc among Indigenous communities are starting to flow once again.
The Government will take action in response to any irresponsible policy changes that threaten to forfeit our hard-won gains.
We saw the Banned Drinkers Register dismantled by the Northern Territory Government on 29 August last year four days after the NT election.
Yet we know the Register was working.
According to the then Northern Territory Government, after its first year of operation, alcohol related assaults dropped in Darwin, Palmerston, Alice Springs and Katherine.
There were 10,000 fewer anti-social instances reported.
People felt safer walking around their home towns. 
Now, since it was pulled down by the Country Liberal Party in the Northern Territory, we're hearing worrying reports about the rise in admissions to the emergency department at Alice Springs Hospital due to alcohol-related accidents and abuse.
People are witnessing more alcohol related violence. In and around Alice Springs over the Christmas/New Year period there were at least five alcohol related deaths.
Former banned drinkers are now again on the long list of alcohol related offences coming before the Alice Springs Magistrates Court each day.
Today I call on the Country Liberal Party to reinstate the Banned Drinkers Register, immediately.
I call on the Liberal National Party to exercise extreme caution in reviewing remote community alcohol restrictions in Queensland, too.
Every Australian who puts the interests of Indigenous children first and the alcohol industry second will support this call.
Let's always remember:
Closing the gap is not inevitable.
Keeping it closed is not inevitable either.
We must guard our gains and never allow a backward step.
Speaker,
Closing the Gap is Reconciliation in the sense that when we truly embrace our shared humanity and equality, we embrace equal rights to services and support.
Let us also remember that Closing the Gap is not the solution to every problem in Indigenous communities.
So many of the problems faced by Indigenous Australians since 1788 are not just issues of material deprivation.
They are matters of the spirit.
Matters of fundamental justice and human understanding.
So as we comprehend a complex and sometimes bitter past, we must also pursue Reconciliation by finding the right words to express our co-existence in this ancient land.
No specific act or event will make us reconciled  -  but each sign and gesture plays its part in our healing and brings forward the moment of its accomplishment.
Half a century ago, this Federal Parliament made possible the first step in the journey we now know as Reconciliation.
In 1963, all Indigenous Australians were able to vote in a national election for the first time.
In 2013, I hope this will also be the year in which our Parliament delivers another landmark on the journey of Reconciliation  - 
 * 	an Act of Recognition acknowledging the unique and	special place of our First Peoples.
This Act will be a down-payment on that great piece of unfinished national business: constitutional recognition.
It's a vital opportunity for this Parliament to show its commitment to recognition.
It's a striking way to attune and prepare our nation for the profound decision that lies ahead.
Speaker,
I believe that constitutional recognition is fundamental to the process of Reconciliation so that all Australians can feel pride in our Indigenous heritage and understand its centrality in our national story.
Without it, that story will remain incomplete and the soul of our nation will remain unhealed.
We also know that amending the Constitution is far from easy.
Just eight out of 44 attempts have enjoyed success, and only two of those eight referenda concerned social issues.
The most shining of those attempts  -  and the most relevant to us now  -  is the referendum of 1967. It was a time of healing, uniting our nation in empathy and accord as never before.
I want this constitutional amendment to be equally unifying, so I am determined that the referendum will be held only when the nation is ready.
As the nation's leaders and representatives, it is our job to do all we can to bring that unifying moment closer.
That is why my Government is investing $10 million in a campaign, led by Reconciliation Australia, to build support for constitutional recognition.
It's why there's a Joint Select Committee to secure multi-partisan consensus for the Bill and on the timing and detail of constitutional reform.
And it is why we are proceeding first with the Act of Recognition this year.
As referendum day draws closer, so too may all Australians draw closer.
Reconciliation is a journey but it must also be a journey with a purpose and an end.
Speaker,
That journey is not yet over.
Yes, we are far from the days when the Aboriginal activist William Cooper sought to petition the King but the Federal Government of the day refused to forward the petition to London because it would serve “no good purpose”.
Now we have a good purpose.
An abiding purpose.
Now we share a purpose that goes to the very integrity of this nation, its founding, it history and its future.
Closing the Gap is part of that purpose since our democratic temper rejects notions of inherited privilege and equally drives us on to eradicate inherited disadvantage.
Here in this country, we believe, everyone must get a fair go.
The oldest and the newest Australians alike.
In that hope, I present the fifth annual Closing the Gap Statement to the Parliament and people of the nation, proud of our successes, more determined than ever to remedy our failings and cautiously optimistic for the long road ahead.
[CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY]


Canberra
Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payments (AGDRP) have been extended to people severely affected by flooding in the local government areas of Rockhampton and Somerset in Queensland and Clarence Valley in New South Wales.
This is a difficult time for people affected by these floods, which have had a devastating impact on a number of communities. With the people of Rockhampton, Somerset and Clarence Valley now looking towards recovery, eligible residents can claim disaster recovery payments of $1,000 for each adult and $400 for each child. 
The easiest way to lodge a claim for the AGDRP is online at www.humanservices.gov.au/disasteror by calling the Australian Government Information Line on 180 22 66 from 8am to 8pm local time, seven days a week.  Completed claim forms can also be lodged in person at a Commonwealth Department of Human Services service centre. 
These payments will assist individuals and families to get back on their feet as they begin to recover. The AGDRP is already being provided to individuals who have been severely impacted by flooding in the local government areas of Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gympie, Lockyer Valley and North Burnett. Further information on AGDRP and other Australian Government Assistance is available online at www.disasterassist.gov.au.
The Commonwealth Government's Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy is also available to individuals that have suffered a loss of income as a direct result of ex-Tropical Cyclone Oswald and associated flooding in the Queensland local government areas of Bundaberg, Gympie, Fraser Coast, North Burnett, and Lockyer Valley.  The subsidy provides fortnightly payments for 13 weeks equivalent to the maximum rate of Newstart Allowance and can be claimed through Centrelink.
This Australian Government assistance is over and above the support already being provided under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA), which are jointly funded by the Australian Government and the states. 
There are now 53 local government areas in Queensland and 15 in NSW eligible for various types of disaster assistance under the NDRRA.
In Queensland:
Personal Hardship and Distress assistance is available in the 23 local government areas of: Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Cherbourg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Concessional Interest Rate Loans and Freight Subsidies for Primary Producers are available in the 22 local government areas of: Banana, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Concessional Interest Rate Loans for Small Business are available in the 23 local government areas of: Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Clean-up and recovery grants of up to $25,000 are available for affected small businesses, primary producers and not-for-profit organisations in the following 5 local government areas of: Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gympie, Lockyer Valley and North Burnett.  The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy is also available in these local government areas.
Counter Disaster Operations assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 45 local government areas of: Aurukun, Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Burdekin, Burke, Cairns, Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cook, Etheridge, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goodiwindi, Gympie, Hinchinbrook, Ipswich, Isaac, Ipswich, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Mackay, Mapoon, Moreton Bay, Napranum, North Burnett, Palm Island, Pormpuraaw, Redlands, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Tablelands, Toowoomba, Torres Shire, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs and Whitsunday.
Restoration of Essential Public Assets assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 43 local government areas of: Aurukun, Banana, Burdekin, Burke, Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cloncurry, Cook, Doomadgee, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gympie, Hinchinbrook, Hope Vale, Ipswich, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Mapoon, McKinlay Mornington, Napranum, North Burnett, North Peninsula, Palm Island, Pormpuraaw, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Toowoomba, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs, Wujal Wujal and Yarrabah.
Further information about Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements for individuals in Queensland is available from http://www.qld.gov.au/community/disasters-emergencies/recovery-after-di… on 1800 173 349.
In NSW:
Personal Hardship and Distress assistance, Concessional Interest Rate Loans for Small Business and Voluntary not-for-profit organisations,  Concessional Interest Rate Loans and Freight Subsidies for Primary Producers, and Grants for Voluntray not-for profit bodies are available in the 15 local government areas of Ballina, Bellingen, Byron, Clarence Valley, Coffs Harbour, Glen Innes Southern, Gloucster, Kempsey, Kyogle, Lismore, Nambucca, Port Macquarie-Hastings,  Richmond Valley, Tenterfield and Tweed.
Counter Disaster Operations assistance and Restoration of Essential Public Assets assistance is also available to councils and state government agencies in these 10 local government areas.
Further information about Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements for individuals in NSW is available from http://www.emergency.nsw.gov.au/nddassistance.


Canberra
Farmers in the local government areas of Central Highlands and Derwent Valley can apply for clean-up and recovery grants following the devastating Lake Repulse bushfire earlier this year.
The grants of up to $25,000 are available under the jointly funded Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.
The grants will help eligible primary producers with the cost of cleaning up and removing debris, disposing of dead livestock, and help ensure their business isn't disrupted beyond the next season.
This assistance does not compensate for income losses and is not intended to replace insurance.
.
Small businesses, not-for-profit organisations and primary producers in the local government areas of Glamorgan-Spring Bay, Sorell and Tasman are already receiving this assistance to help them get back on their feet.
Personal hardship and distress assistance  and funding for councils to conduct counter disaster operations and restore essential public assets is also available in the six local government areas of Central Highlands, Circular Head, Derwent Valley, Glamorgan-Spring Bay, Sorelland Tasman.
With fires still burning across the state, everyone should ensure they take the appropriate precautions to stay safe and monitor information from local emergency service agencies.
Information on the range of assistance that is available can be found at www.disasterassist.gov.au  or at www.bushfirerecovery.tas.gov.au/
The Commonwealth and Tasmanian governments will continue to work closely together to assist communities as they rebuild.


Queenstown, New Zealand
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: I'm delighted to be here in Queenstown in New Zealand.
When I spoke to the New Zealand Parliament in 2011, I made the point that whilst Australia has many friends in the world, the relationship between Australia and New Zealand is one of family.
So it's good to be here, as part of the annual leaders' exchange in that very close relationship.
I also made the point when I spoke to the New Zealand parliament in 2011 that I didn't want familiarity to slide into forgetfulness. This is still a relationship that requires focus and work, even though it is such a close family bond.
As Prime Minister, I have instituted annual leaders' dialogues between Australia and New Zealand, and tomorrow will participate in the third such dialogue between me and Prime Minister Key.
This exchange comes at a time when we are celebrating and marking the anniversary of our Closer Economic Relationship.
It is a relationship over three decades that has brought two liberalising economies closer together.
It's an economic relationship that means that there is free movement of people and ideas.
There's trade, there is exchange between our two countries that enhances jobs and growth for both of our nations.
Whilst the mechanics of the Comprehensive Economic Relationship between our two countries may not be transparent to the people of Australia and New Zealand day to day, the benefits are present with us each and every day.
As part of this special anniversary, Prime Minister Key and I authorised our Productivity Commissions to work together and to provide a report on how to even deepen our Comprehensive Economic Relationship  -  the close economic relationship between the two of us.
We will be considering the work of that joint Productivity Commissions approach tomorrow. It's the first time it's been done: getting our Productivity Commissions to work together.
Whilst I don't think we will be able to respond at depth and in detail to all of the recommendations of that report, I'm looking forward to discussing that report with Prime Minister Key and what work we can do based on it.
In addition, I'm looking forward to talking to Prime Minister Key about a set of challenges and issues that Australia and New Zealand face in our world, including the challenge of people-smuggling in our region, the future outlook for Fiji, the work that we are doing in Afghanistan, the challenges and opportunities we face in this Asian Century and also the work that lies beyond the RAMSI drawdown in the Solomon Islands.
So there is a lot to be working through and talking about.
Tomorrow too, I will have an opportunity to pay my respects at the Queenstown Memorial Gate.
The centenary of Gallipoli is fast approaching, and this is a centenary that we will share together - the Anzac spirit being celebrated and marked in both of our nations.
I will be able to announce who has the winning design for the Australian memorial that will be constructed in Wellington as part of the way in which we mark 2015.
I think we will also be able to spend just a little bit of time talking about the opportunities from the Cricket World Cup in 2015. So there's a lot to do, and I'm looking forward to it.
JOURNALIST: Will you be telling John Key or alleviating any concerns about New Zealand citizens treated as second-class in Australia when it comes to social welfare benefits and the like?
PM: Well, because of our special relationship we have arrangements for New Zealanders that have a generosity associated with them, that is not given to any other nationals from any other country when they come to Australia.
First and foremost, New Zealanders can come to Australia and access our labour market without restrictions; we don't confer that benefit on any other nation.
New Zealanders who live in Australia are also entitled to a range of benefits: things like the Family Tax Benefit, Baby Bonus, access to Medicare, the pharmaceutical benefits scheme-
JOURNALIST: So the status quo will remain though?
PM: Well, I'm just going through in relation to the terminology of your question.
I think it is important to understand that New Zealanders in Australia do get access to these benefits: Medicare, PBS, Family Tax Benefit, Baby Bonus, to name just a few.
So it is a relationship we don't accord to any other nationals from any other part of the world.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) pay for its promises, when the receipts from mining tax are so low compared to the estimates? And why weren't these figures released yesterday?
PM: Well, I think the Treasurer's dealt with all of this in Australia.
As you know, we were in receipt of some advice about taxpayer confidentiality, and the Treasurer has taken appropriate advice about whether or not these figures could be released.
The MRRT is a profits-based tax, and we saw a big reduction in commodity prices last year. In some sectors, commodity prices are now starting to track back up, but there was a big hit to commodity prices last year.
As a profits-based tax, you'd expect that to show in the figures.
JOURNALIST: What's your response, Prime Minister, to the sports scandal that's erupted back home, and also what will you be telling John Key about the involvement, if any, of New Zealand teams and players.
PM: I don't have any message for Prime Minister Key.
JOURNALIST: He has asked for a briefing, has he not?
PM: Prime Minister Key of course can have a briefing, but I personally don't have any message for Prime Minister Key on this matter.
On the question of the things that were revealed, I think all sports fans, including me, find this pretty sickening.
We are people who go and sit at grounds or watch sport on TV and marvel at amazing sporting prowess.
We cheer on the deeds, and the sense that anything we've seen has actually been fuelled by banned substances I think would be pretty sickening for sports fans. It's pretty sickening for me.
JOURNALIST: Do you think (inaudible) the details should be released though? Because at the moment, there are concerns on both sides of politics that all sports in Australia are being tarred with the same brush at the moment.
PM: Well this is for the expert agency involved to deal with and work through. Of course I understand people want more information.
We've had the Crime Commission working with our Anti-Doping Agency, and they will need then to take the next steps to get all (inaudible) people the rest of the information.
JOURNALIST: Would you like to see it released though?
PM: I don't think it is for me  -  when we were talking about agencies, like the Crime Commission and an anti-doping agency  -  to be issuing instructions.
I think they need to get the work done the best way they can with all of the expertise that they bring to bear.
JOURNALIST: If Prime Minister Key needs or asks for assistance from the Australians in terms of identifying New Zealanders or New Zealand sports teams that have been affected by the doping scandal, will that be made available to him?
PM: Prime Minister Key can certainly get all of the information he wants, and if there's any assistance Australia can provide, of course we would provide it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Government has talked a lot about sharing the benefits of the boom. Isn't the reality now that you've spent money that you simply don't have?
PM: Let's just be very factual here about what is happening in our economy. I spoke extensively about these matters at the National Press Club last week.
We came out of the global financial crisis strong. We all pulled together to get that done  -  that's a good thing.
We're in a phase of economic change now where the high Aussie dollar is bearing down on a number of industries and affecting corporate profitability and we need to keep working to make sure we've got jobs and growth and a diversified economy for the future.
What we've seen in the resources sector, we are moving towards the peak of the investment boom, and then beyond that we will move to the peak of the production boom.
Profitability is at its highest when people are in peak production. Profitability is obviously impacted by volatility in commodity prices.
What we said to the nation with the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is that we wanted to tax profits in our minerals sector in the most efficient way, that is, to take tax when they are at their most profitable.
There was always going to be volatility in the MRRT as a result, but I still think it's absolutely fair that at the peak of the profit cycle, Australians see tax from mineral wealth that is dug out of the grounds we all own and the grounds we all share.
JOURNALIST: So if you factor in the royalty rebates and the cost of administering the tax, then could it come back down to zero in terms of revenue?
PM: Well the figures have been released today, and the architecture of the tax is as I've described it.
JOURNALIST: But do you now concede that you'll need almost a miracle to reach that $2 billion predicted profit that the mining tax was going to get in the first year?
PM: Well, the figures have been released today.
JOURNALIST: It's a long way from $2 billion though.
PM: The tax works as a profits-based tax  -  that's the appropriate design.
We've always said we wanted an efficiently based tax, and that is a tax that takes when mining is at its most profitable.
Now I'd remind people  -  if we just want to go through this debate. When this debate first started, what we were told in the national discourse  -  and let's remind ourselves of it  -  we were told by the other side of politics that the existence of a profits-based tax in mining would destroy the mining industry and everybody would be unemployed.
That was what we were told. It's an irresponsible scare campaign which once again has been proven to be an irresponsible scare campaign.
We deliberately designed a profits-based tax.
Last year we saw some volatility in the global economy; we saw some concerns at thatpoint about the economy of China; it had an impact on commodities prices.
Now as we move into this year, I think all of the doomsayers about China have been proved wrong, and we are seeing good economic conditions and growth in China and we're continuing to see good demand for our resources exports, and we've seen some recovery in commodities prices.
A profits-based tax is purpose-designed so that when you get these cycles, including very quick-changing cycles like the one we've seen over the last six to nine months, it can respond.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we're told that asylum seekers will be on the agenda when you talk with Prime Minister Key tomorrow. Will Australia be asking New Zealand to take the asylum seekers out of Nauru as happened under the Howard Government?
PM: Look, we'll have something to say when we've actually had the leaders' discussion, but certainly people-smuggling is on the agenda for the discussion.
JOURNALIST: Just back to the issue of New Zealanders' entitlements when they're living in Australia. Will you entertain the idea during the bilateral meetings of any changes at all to those entitlements?
PM: I anticipate Prime Minister Key will want to raise this matter with me, so we will have a discussion in the room.
But I would remind that close relationship with New Zealand and that close relationship is reflected in current arrangements for special category visa holders from  New Zealand in Australia.
No other nation on earth has its citizens come to Australia and enjoy those entitlements or benefits.
JOURNALIST: Could I just take you back to the sports and drugs scandal at the moment. Would you agree with some of the commentary made today that the release of a report which did not have a lot of detail in it has cast a cloud over the entire sporting fraternity in Australia, and do we need to get a quick resolution to it?
So people who have done nothing wrong can be assured that they're not going to be caught up in the muck of it all?
PM: I think it's important that the Crime Commission and the Anti-Doping Agency go about the work and public release of the work in the way that they think is best.
I can understand people involved in sporting codes who are now anxious to see the next bit  -  I can well and truly understand that. But I think we've got to let the experts get on with the job.
As an individual I'd have to say I've been pretty shocked by this material. If you'd asked me to make a guess about doping in Australian sport, I wouldn't have intuitively come out with the work that the Crime Commission and the Anti-Doping Agency have.
So we've already benefited from their hard work, their expertise, and they'll bring that to bear for the next bit.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can we have a couple of words on the relationship with New Zealand, just to describe your relationship with New Zealand?
PM: The best description, I think, of the relationship with New Zealand is the one I used when I had the very distinct honour of addressing the New Zealand Parliament in 2011.
It is a relationship of family. There is a bond between Australia and New Zealand that is different to any bond that we share in any other part of the world.
The very fact that it's fundamental to our soul and how we perceive ourselves; the legend of Anzac is part of us and it's part of New Zealand.
That is, I think, showing us the depth of the bond that we feel together. So, forged in history, here in contemporary times, and always here for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, was your Government's decision about the Tarkine just about winning votes, or what do you say to the Greens and other groups who are outraged by what's happened today?
PM: Well, first and foremost, these decisions are taken by Minister Burke as the appropriate decision-maker under legislation, which is very specifically done.
There are legal obligations here that Minister Burke has to acquit, and he exercises his judgement against those legal obligations.
JOURNALIST: Does it help you though to win (inaudible) support in Tasmania?
PM: I'd remind you: this is legal obligations; an appropriate decision-maker having exercised that decision-making power.
So it's a decision of Minister Burke under a piece of federal legislation properly informed by the best of research.
Thanks very much.


Canberra
I am pleased to announce that I have appointed Mr Drew Clarke PSM as Secretary of the Department of Broadband, Communication and the Digital Economy.
On 26 November 2012, the Government announced its intention to recommend the appointment of the current Secretary of that Department, Mr Peter Harris, to the position of Chair of the Productivity Commission.  I take this opportunity to acknowledge the high quality service provided by Mr Harris in the role of Secretary and, more generally, over his career in the Australian Public Service.
Mr Clarke has been Secretary of the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism since 2010.  His earlier roles include Deputy Secretary for Resources, Energy and Tourism; Head of the Energy and Environment Division and Executive General Manager of AusIndustry and leadership of science agencies.  As an experienced Secretary, Mr Clarke is well placed to take on the role of Secretary of the Department of Broadband, Communication and the Digital Economy and his knowledge and experience will be an asset to the Commonwealth in his new role.
Having received a report from the Secretary of my Department, as required by the Public Service Act 1999, I have appointed Mr Clarke for a period of five years from 11 March 2013. 
I will announce arrangements for the position of Secretary of the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism in the near future.


Queenstown, New Zealand
PM KEY: Good afternoon. I'm just going to make some opening remarks and pass over to the Prime Minister to make some opening remarks before we take any questions, as you might like.
But firstly, I'd like to extend a warm welcome to Prime Minister Gillard. I'm delighted to host the Prime Minister and her delegation here in Queenstown, one of New Zealand's most beautiful destinations.
These annual leaders' meetings reflect the unique strength and depth of the relationship between our two countries.
I've expressed to Prime Minister Gillard our sadness at the loss of life and the toll on people's livelihoods from the floodings in Queensland and New South Wales, as well as the bushfires across several states.
It says a lot about our relationship that we stand by each other when times are tough.
New Zealand was able to provide some assistance to the recent fire-fighting effort in Tasmania, and New Zealanders will never forget Australia's valuable help immediately following the Christchurch earthquakes.
As well as being our closest relationship, Australia is also our most important.
It's our biggest trading partner and business partner, our largest source of investment, and our closest ally in matters of defence and security.
Our talks today have covered all of these areas, as well as issues that affect us across our region and internationally.
We have looked at what we can do to best position both countries to take advantage of the opportunities that are emerging across the Asia-Pacific region, and how we can work together to ensure our prosperity, security and wellbeing in the years to come.
In that context, this year marks 30 years since the signing of the Closer Economic Relations agreement.
Both of us acknowledge the vision that made CER a gold standard trade agreement 30 years ago, and the successive rounds of liberalisation and integration that have maintained this status.
CER has brought down barriers to trade, reduced costs for business, encouraged investment and created economic growth and jobs for both countries.
To mark the 30th anniversary of CER, we are announcing further steps to make it easier for people and businesses to operate in the trans-Tasman economy.
The first of those, on mobile roaming: we have agreed to give our regulators the tools to ensure that roaming rates become more competitive on both sides of the Tasman.
I welcome Prime Minister Gillard's decision to help streamline the travel experience between the two countries by making a new investment in SmartGate.
The CER investment protocol will enter into force on 1 March, further reducing barriers to trans-Tasman investment, and new arrangements for the portability of personal retirement savings will come into effect on 1 July.
These measures underline our Government's commitment to continuing the process of economic integration which has contributed so much to both of our countries.
And there's more work to be done. Prime Minister Gillard and I have today discussed the first joint report of our two Productivity Commissions on strengthening trans-Tasman economic relations, and especially on ways to increase productivity and competitiveness.
We agreed that we are likely to be able to move ahead with many of the recommendations in the report quite quickly, while theirs will obviously need more consideration and a little more time.
I've asked officials to do some work on the recommendations, with the aim of providing a formal response to the Commission's advice by the middle of the year.
We also discussed the growing problem of people smuggling in the Asia-Pacific region, and its tragic consequences, including loss of life at sea.
Both countries are committed to a regional approach, including the implementation of the Bali Process regional cooperation framework to counter people smuggling.
Australia is grappling with the huge challenge of illegal arrivals by sea and is at the forefront of the efforts to disrupt people-smuggling across the region.
As part of our support for a regional approach, New Zealand will resettle 150 genuine refugees annually from the Australian system.
There is more detail on this initiative in our joint statement, but it's fair to say this will now be part of the 750 refugees that we annually take as part of the UNHCR programme.
So, in essence, it's not an increase in the number of refugees that New Zealand takes, but it's a different sourcing of location of those refugees.
In terms of cyber security threats, they are of increasing concern for governments on both sides of the Tasman, and we have agreed that our officials will continue to work very closely in this area, including new work on cyber instance response under Australia and New Zealand's cyber security dialogue.
We have agreed that both governments will provide funding over the next two years to support the development of a potential vaccine for rheumatic fever. This follows reports that we've both received from our chief science advisors.
Rheumatic fever, as you'll be aware, is a significant issue for Maori and Pacific, and Aboriginal Australians, and an effective vaccine would be a major step forward for the health of these communities in both countries and across the Pacific.
We've also agreed to get officials to do some more work on how we might operate a mutual student debt recovery scheme.
This would be another useful step in our efforts to share information and connect our systems, and would ensure that student debt could be recovered from graduates wherever they end up in the trans-Tasman economy.
This is a rich and complex relationship, and we've discussed a wide range of other issues, including issues about our region and internationally.
I won't mention them all individually, but you'll see many of them are mentioned in our joint statement, and I'll be happy to take a few more questions.
But, after that introduction, Prime Minister Gillard, over to you.
PM GILLARD: Thank you very much Prime Minister Key, and I won't repeat all of Prime Minister Key's remarks, but I will pick up on some specific areas.
First, Prime Minister, can I thank you for the warmth of your welcome and for the very productive discussions we've had during the course of this morning.
You've decided to host this annual leaders' exchange in a tremendously beautiful location, so thank you for that too, and I can assure people that The Remarkables are well-named; they are truly remarkable.
The relationship between Australia and New Zealand is one of family.
We work very closely together. As the Prime Minister has said, we are always there for each other in times of need, and we did have some of those times of need in recent weeks, facing floods and fire  -  and New Zealand once again came to assist us during that period of time.
So thank you very much for that ongoing support.
Our relationship and the depth of it manifests in many ways. One way it manifests is in the Close Economic Relationship we've had for the last 30 years.
Prime Minister Key has referred to it as a ‘gold standard free trade agreement'.
What it has meant is that two open economies have turned towards each other and we have worked to ensure free exchange and more jobs and more growth in each of our nations.
I'm pleased that for the 30th anniversary of the Closer Economic Relationship between our two countries we've been able to identify some areas to build for the future.
One of those areas is the very practical issue of mobile roaming rates for Australians and New Zealanders when they travel.
Often when we talk about things like CER, a Closer Economic Relationship, people probably wonder, well what does that mean for me in my own life? It all seems a little bit hard to judge. But this is a very practical thing.
A million Australians come to New Zealand every year. They bring with them their mobile phones.
Many of them are on holiday, so they do the kinds of things that people do on holidays: they take a photo and they try and send it back to people at home. They ring up friends and family at home to tell them what they're up to on their holiday.
At the moment, that can cause extraordinary charges, many of which people wouldn't be aware of until they get back home after their holiday and get their next mobile phone bill, and get a very rude shock when they do.
So to give people a sense of that, at the moment it's possible to be charged $40 if you're trying to get a photo through. It's possible to be charged $8.50 a minute if you are chatting to friends and family back home.
This isn't just a problem for Australians in New Zealand who are on holidays  -  it's obviously a problem for business people too who are routinely travelling between the two countries, needing to access mobile phones in order to do business.
Their choice at the moment is to put up with very high charges or have to get another sim card and go through that process every time they move one side of the Tasman or the other.
We have identified this as a practical area for cooperation, and today agreed that there needs to be annual reporting and more transparency.
But ultimately if we don't see reductions in these kind of charges, we will empower our competition regulators to act and to intervene in the market to get people a better deal  -  a very practical outcome for the people of Australia and New Zealand as they travel in such huge numbers to each other's nation.
So I'm very pleased we've been able to agree that today.
I'm also pleased we've been able to agree to fast-track automated border processing procedures for Australians and New Zealanders when they travel to each other's nation.
We currently have SmartGate technology on arrival; we are now looking at it on departure.
We will be testing various technologies because we do ultimately want to see the experience of travelling between Australia and New Zealand as a domestic-like experience  -  something that people can easily do and not feel that they are encountering a set of impediments which come with travelling overseas to other destinations.
I'm also pleased that we're able to announce that we are looking forward to the entry into force of the CER Investment Protocol that will come into force on 1 March 2013, and that will make it easier for investment in each other's nations.
I want to thank Prime Minister Key for the agreement that we have struck around a regional approach to asylum seeker and refugee issues.
This is truly a regional challenge: one that we work on together through the Bali Process.
Australia expends a lot of effort in detecting and disrupting people smuggling ventures and prosecuting people smugglers.
This is transnational crime, and we take a very rigorous approach to detecting and disrupting ventures and making sure that those who have profited from them are actually held accountable for what they're doing.
I'm pleased that Prime Minister Key has agreed that New Zealand will settle 150 refugees each year from Australia's system, as part of New Zealand's refugee cohort.
We've had broad discussions about a range of bilateral and regional issues. To mention just one, we have spent some time talking about our shared desire to see democracy return to Fiji.
We've got more to do as part of the annual leaders' exchange, and apart from once again thanking Prime Minister Key for the warmth of the welcome and the productive discussions today.
I would like to say I am looking forward to the two of us a little bit later today visiting the War Memorial in Queenstown and there reflecting on what our nations will do to commemorate 100 years of Gallipoli.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, what is the benefit to New Zealand of taking refugees that otherwise wouldn't have got here?
PM GILLARD: Well, I think from Prime Minister Key's statement, it's not taking additional refugees.
You resettle 750 refugees each year  -  now 150 of them would come from the Australian system, so it's not additional, it's part of efforts that you already make.
I think the benefit of taking a regional approach and collaborating together is obvious: this is a regional problem.
What we do in detection and disruption, intelligence gathering, is shared with and affects New Zealand.
We are happy to make those efforts; we're happy to share the benefits of those efforts.
It shows that this is a regional problem and the more you cooperate and the more you do together, the better it is.
JOURNALIST: How many years is the agreement for? When does it start? Where do the refugees come from? Are they going to come from Manus and Nauru? And if that's the case, how does that fit with the no advantage test?
PM GILLARD: Well I'll take that question. Prime Minister Key might want to say something.
The aim here is to have it start in 2014 and be ongoing. We need officials to have a set of discussions to make all of the appropriate arrangements.
The 150 could be drawn from people who are in Australia now, and we would want to work with PNG and Nauru to make the appropriate arrangements over time.
So it is possible that some of the 150 could come from people who are processed on PNG and Nauru - but I stress that will take the agreement of those two countries, so that there is work to do.
It will fit with the no advantage test: the people who would be the subject of resettlement would have acquitted the no advantage test, because we don't want any message sent anywhere around the world that by transiting to Australia you get some form of advantage, whether it's resettlement in Australia or resettlement in New Zealand.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Key, are you concerned that by doing this, this will make us more of a target for boats trying to reach New Zealand, which is one of your concerns  -  the fact that it makes us look like a soft target, that we will take people on boats that get to Australia? It might make it easier for a boat to come to New Zealand.
PM KEY: Well my view is no, and for the very reason that the Prime Minister has just indicated: the no advantage rule is in place, so if people try and short-circuit the system, they won't get an advantage of that. So no, I don't think it makes any difference.
I think it's quite practical from New Zealand's point of view. We're going to take 750 refugees every year.
It's now just a debate about where they come from. So in taking them from the Australian system, that seems quite logical to us, so it doesn't alter the number that comes to New Zealand.
Secondly, Australia has far more resources and a more sophisticated intelligence network when it comes to trying to disrupt boats that would come through the Australian system.
Now some of those boats want to come to New Zealand, and we've seen examples of that in the past where they've ended up on Christmas Island, but fundamentally were on their way to New Zealand.
So we get something out of the deal, which is we get a huge amount of support from Australia  -  it's less resources that we have to put in.
And I think the third part of it is we're not ruling out the potential, one day, for New Zealand to look at potentially, if we had a massive arrival, sending them to an offshore processing centre.
Our legislation doesn't support that at the moment, so we would require a law change if we were going to do that, and that would be quite a big step from New Zealand's point of view, but it's part of the work the Government undertook over the last few years.
We looked at how we would handle a mass arrival and where those people would go and how they would be processed, and certainly that is an ongoing area of discussion.
Now that's not on the table today, primarily because we're not driving it, but let's just see in the future. So I think it's a logical step.
JOURNALIST: You say it won't affect the numbers, but we don't always take our full quota of 750. Are you saying from this point on, we will always take the full 750?
PM KEY: No, because the reason we sometimes don't take 750 is obviously because there isn't a huge amount of demand to come to New Zealand.
It sort of ebbs and flows and as we go through the process, it's absolutely identifying the person as a genuine refugee and would fit into the category. So there may always be a few unders and overs, but in real terms we take 750.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Key, aren't you punishing the people who go through the right channels, by giving them less of a chance now to come to New Zealand?
PM KEY: No, because the people that come to New Zealand via the Australian system have to demonstrate they are genuine refugees.
So in essence, it's really just a question of where you're sourcing those refugees from. In my view, we're demonstrating we're a good regional partner.
I think it's helpful in terms of what we're combating in the region, and I'm quite comfortable with the process that we've got. I think, as I said earlier, we get something out of this.
Australia's been extremely helpful to us over the last four or five years. There are boats that we could point to that were on their way to New Zealand where Australia has effectively taken those people.
So despite what some people think, I don't think it's a theoretical issue that a boat could turn up in New Zealand any more than it was theoretical that one turned up in Canada.
JOURNALIST: Is this a high price to pay though for extra support with processing?
PM KEY: No, I don't think so. I mean in the end, we're going to take 750 refugees a year; the debate is now about where those refugees come from.
If we take 150 from the Australian system and 600 from other camps around the world, what difference really does it make to New Zealand whether they come from the Australian system or not.
JOURNALIST: But Ms Gillard, can you explain how this is a disincentive for boat people to arrive in Australia rather than an incentive?
PM GILLARD: Well, I'd refer you to all of the work we did through an expert panel led by Angus Houston, the chief of our Defence Force.
And what Mr Houston and his panel most clearly recommended was that we needed to set up a system where you got no advantage if you got on a boat and got to Australia.
So what we've done is we are equalising waiting periods. So we are saying to people, if you come to Australia, if you are processed and you are a genuine refugee, you will not get a resettlement opportunity permanently in Australia or indeed in New Zealand until you have spent the same amount of time that you would have if you hadn't moved.
So you don't get any advantage by moving: you wait the same amount of time, but you've paid a people-smuggler and you've risked your life.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this is a very small number of refugees you're talking about compared to the vast number of asylum seekers that arrive by boat. Is this more about perceptions rather than actually practically reducing the numbers that Australia is dealing with?
PM GILLARD: Well it is what we've announced. It's 150 places out of New Zealand's 750 place-strong system.
I think, when we are looking at what is a regional problem, collaboration, working together - including working together in this way - is of merit. 
JOURNALIST: Have we offered anything to New Zealand financially?
PM GILLARD: Well we just talked about the way in which we collaborate and will collaborate in the future.
We do have people who've expressed that their desire when they got on a boat was to try and get to New Zealand. Now getting to New Zealand from the places asylum seekers come from is a long and incredibly dangerous voyage.
We are talking about some of the roughest and most dangerous waters in the world that people would be trying to cross to get here.
So that means that New Zealand hasn't seen a boat arrive. It's not impossible, but given the treacherous nature of the waters, you'd have to say there's natural barriers that are preventing people from getting here.
But I think it just goes to reinforce this is a regional problem, it's not just one nation's problem, so collaboration on things like intelligence gathering, intelligence sharing, disruption, detection  -  it's in everybody's interest.
As a nation we are in a position to do that and to resource that and to benefit New Zealand with it-
JOURNALIST: I was asking specifically about any financial incentive-
PM GILLARD: No, no, no, it is just as we've described. What I've just described to you is the nature of the arrangement that is being activated out of today's discussions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, who asked who for this arrangement? Did Australia ask New Zealand to take the 150 or did New Zealand offer?
PM GILLARD: Some time ago, Prime Minister Key and I talked about people smuggling, the regional nature of the problem, and emerging out of those discussions we came to this agreement.
JOURNALIST: How long ago did you discuss it?
PM GILLARD: We've seen each other so frequently that I'd have to think about at which meeting we had the first conversation.
But it's been over a period of a number of months  -  I mean we saw each other a number of times last year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Key, do you think you'll take any political heckling or heat from this?
PM KEY: There'll always be some people who have some concerns, but my simple message to New Zealand is you're taking 750 refugees a year  -  this is simply a debate about where they come from.
JOURNALIST: But doesn't this reward asylum seekers who try and get on a boat to Australia ahead of other asylum seekers from all other parts of the world who want to come to New Zealand, because that 150 is going to decrease the number who get the great benefits of refugee status here, and it's going to favour people who jump on boats and try and get into Australia?
PM KEY: No, I don't think it does, for the very reasons the Prime Minister pointed out earlier.
And secondly, from New Zealand's point of view, we rely very heavily on the work that Australia does on the ground in places where these boats are coming from.
We can try and freeload on that process if we like, but I think as a regional partner it makes sense for us to not be duplicating those resources, not putting more and more intelligence people on the ground to try and work out what's going on.
It's better to use Australia's system, which is very well connected, but in the end we'll take some people through their system.
JOURNALIST: Feasibly though, a person who gets on a boat in Indonesia may well end up in New Zealand.
PM KEY: Could do, but I mean they could also be in a camp in Sudan. I mean in the end we're taking 750 people.
PM GILLARD: And I would just stress, because of the no advantage principle, having got the opportunity to resettle in New Zealand no more quickly than if they had stayed put in Indonesia or wherever they've stopped and contacted UNHCR and local authorities and had their claim processed there.
You do not get an advantage because you've got on a boat.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, can you confirm that Stephen Smith is making a move to WA Labor this year?
PM GILLARD: Stephen Smith is the Minister for Defence, and that's the job he'll be doing.
JOURNALIST: Have you had discussions about-
PM GILLARD: No, of course not. It's absurd.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, can I ask you, just back to the asylum seeker issue: notwithstanding this is a completely different arrangement to deal that you tried to get up with Malaysia, but you had problems with the parliament, because they're obviously in the process.
Is it possible that you will now seek to emulate this type of agreement with other countries in the region? You called it a regional problem or a regional process, but to have a similar sort of view on the process of refugees going to other countries in the region?
PM GILLARD: When we look at our region, there are only a limited number of nations that operate the kind of refugee settlement programme that Australia does and New Zealand does.
That is, we do say to the world that we will resettle refugees from around the world into our nation.
As you know, Australia is on a journey to increase those numbers to 20,000; New Zealand resettling 750.
So in those circumstances, I'm not going to suggest  -  and we aren't  -  in active discussions with anybody else in the region at this stage, to enter this style of agreement.
But given our two nations do operate these kind of resettlement programs, it's a natural fit to come to the kind of agreement that Prime Minister Key and I have announced today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) the regional process really isn't working-
PM GILLARD: Well I think you are focussing on one aspect, and that's not appropriate.
When we look at the Bali Process, don't just focus on, ‘are there more arrangements like this?' This is one aspect of the kind of regional cooperation we seek.
The regional cooperation we seek is about people changing their own domestic laws so that they're in a position to make people smuggling a crime. So for example, we've seen Indonesia do that.
It's about people resourcing their own intelligence and domestic policing agencies so that they are able to pursue people-smugglers.
It's about people working together in all of the ways that we have to share information, about who is moving where, people smuggling, all of the things that we do to try and catch the Mr Bigs.
So there's many, many lawyers to the kind of regional cooperation we have. This is one layer, and so you shouldn't judge from one layer the nature of the whole process.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how will you be getting mobile phone providers to reduce their charges before moving in?
PM GILLARD: Well, they're on notice from this press conference today that we are going to give our competition people the ability to intervene in the market.
Clearly we would prefer it if mobile phone companies responded voluntarily rather than required that market intervention.
I do note that we have seen charges come down over the last few years, and I think one element of why that has happened is that governments, Australia and New Zealand, have signalled over the last few years that we are focussing on this issue.
JOURNALIST: Like a 20% reduction by the end of this year?
PM GILLARD: I'm not going to take it further than what I've just said, but there's a clear notice that we will be empowering our competition agencies to intervene in the market, if that proves necessary.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, just on legal migration for a moment. What are the skills shortages facing Australia, and I suppose if Kiwis are looking at moving over there, what kind of Kiwis are you looking to attract?
PM GILLARD: I'd say to anybody who's interested in migrating to Australia, please get onto our immigration website. You will see there the kind of occupations in demand in Australia.
There's a points test about people skills and qualifications. We do offer New Zealanders access to our labour market; they're the only people who do get that free access to our labour market.
But if they want to become citizens, then there are plenty of opportunities if they've got the kind of skills that will help bolster the Australian economy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Key, did you raise any concerns with Prime Minister Gillard about the way New Zealanders are treated in Australia  -  the conditions that they enjoy?
PM KEY: We had discussions on that issue, and yes it's fair to say we have made representations for those New Zealanders, but we'll go back to the point I was making to my press earlier this morning.
This isn't something that Australia enforced on New Zealand.
It was a negotiated agreement that took place about a decade ago, so the vast bulk of New Zealanders that go and live in Australia, they do enjoy all of the conditions that a permanent resident or a citizen can in Australia, and they even can become permanent residents or citizens, and indeed do.
So yes, there are some isolated examples and maybe over time there'll be more work that will take place, but I just say to New Zealanders, if they're thinking about going across the Tasman, they need to fully understand what that might mean for them and what the pathway for residency might look like.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed though that you've had this request knocked back?
PM KEY: I don't see it as being knocked back. I mean we have ongoing discussions as always about our citizens in Australia, just as the Prime Minister does if there are issues here in New Zealand.
The most important thing really for the vast bulk of New Zealanders is that they have access to that Australasian labour market if they choose to want to move.
And that's the basis of the agreement that was reached back in 2001, and that still stands. That would be of a major concern to New Zealanders.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, 54,000 Kiwis left to move to Australia permanently last year. Is that a wake-up call for your Government? 
PM KEY: No, it's a recognition that in Australia there's a mining boom taking place, and if you look at places like Western Australia and the Northern Queensland area, there's been huge capital investment going in, and that has sucked people across the Tasman into those areas.
That's one of the reasons why the Government is taking the steps on this side of the Tasman to try and expand our footprint in mining and exploration.
JOURNALIST: Does it tell you the Government hasn't addressed the core issues of why Kiwis are leaving?
PM KEY: No, I don't think so. If you go back to the point I made earlier. If you look at what's been happening in Australia, they've had a different economic profile from pretty much every other OECD country.
They've been growing very rapidly, but that has been driven very heavily off a mining boom which is phenomenal and probably will continue for quite a long period of time.
JOURNALIST: Can our economy afford to lose those people?
PM KEY: Well, our net population continues to rise pretty much year in, year out.
So yes, of course, we want to keep people in New Zealand as much as we can, notwithstanding there'll always be some New Zealanders that will go and live in Australia and other parts of the world.
You went overseas for a while, and guess what, you've come back. So it's not unique to everybody. Lots of people do that. I did the same thing as well  -  we shouldn't get too wound up about it.
JOURNALIST: Would you like to see Sonny Bill Williams come back?
PM KEY: I'd probably like to see Sonny Bill Williams have a rematch.
JOURNALIST: Will your cooperation on cyber security strike problems because of your different attitudes to China and Huawei?
PM KEY: No, I don't think so. Our officials continue to exchange views and understanding of the perspectives and what's taking place.
I'm not in a position to go through all of the reasons of why New Zealand has made the decisions it has made in relation to Huawei but I am in a position to say I'm comfortable and remain comfortable in the advice I've had from my most senior officials in that area  -  that we are taking appropriate steps.
But the involvement of that particular organisation in different parts of the telecommunications sector varies around the world, and it's not unique to New Zealand, that Huawei operates. They're a very significant player in lots of countries, including the United Kingdom.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, why didn't Australia want to have Huawei in its broadband network?
PM GILLARD: Well I think we've just got to be a little bit clear here. Huawei trades in Australia and employs Australians and does all of the things you would expect a big corporation to do.
We took a particular decision about our National Broadband Network which we dealt with publicly at the time, so I'd refer you to the remarks back then.
I think we are in a rush.
PM KEY: We are out of time. Thanks very much.


Queenstown, New Zealand
Australia and New Zealand will give their independent regulators new powers to investigate the high cost of mobile roaming across the Tasman and to intervene in the market to bring down prices.
Prime Minister Gillard made the announcement with New Zealand Prime Minister John Key at their annual leaders' summit in New Zealand today.
The announcement marks the 30th anniversary of the Closer Economic Relations (CER) agreement between the two countries. 
CER has been critical in the economic development of both countries  -  bringing down barriers to trade, reducing costs for business, encouraging investment and creating jobs and economic growth.
Since CER came into effect in 1983, two-way trade has grown on average 8 per cent per year.
To further deepen economic integration between the two countries, the two Prime Ministers also announced that Australia and New Zealand would be:
 * 	streamlining travel between the two countries through an $8 million trial of automated border processing technology for departures from Australian airports;
 * 	driving investment by raising monetary thresholds for screening trans-Tasman investment proposals through the entry into force of the CER Investment Protocol from 1 March 2013;
 * 	assisting Australians and New Zealanders to consolidate retirement savings in their country of residence, and avoid paying fees and charges on accounts held in two countries, through the commencement of new superannuation portability arrangements from 1 July 2013; and that
 * 	New Zealand has agreed to resettle 150 refugees who are subject to Australia's offshore processing legislation
A new report into trans-Tasman telecommunications has found that the market is characterised by a small number of participants, with wholesale margins, on average, above 300 per cent and retail margins above 90 per cent.
The margins are well above the usual margins in the telecommunications sector of around 10 per cent to 20 per cent.
Sending data can cost $20 per megabyte. One photo sent from a smartphone can cost almost $40. Phone calls can range between $2 and $8.50 per minute, with text messages around 75c each.
The report clearly demonstrates the need for government action on roaming charges.  Consumers and businesses have had enough of being gouged and putting up with high mobile roaming charges.
Under the proposals announced today, the independent regulators in Australia and New Zealand will be empowered to take coordinated action. 
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) is currently unable to resolve the issue for Australian customers with its existing powers.
We will both introduce legislation into the parliament that ensures that the regulators are able to investigate, and if necessary, take action to regulate prices.
If the telecommunications providers act to bring down prices themselves, then of course action by the two regulators will not be required.
This is just the tip of the iceberg. If we can drive down prices in New Zealand, we can also start to act to bring about lower prices in other advanced economies such as the European Union.
This proposal will allow Australian and NZ businesses and consumers to use, at reasonable cost, their existing mobile devices and existing telephone numbers when visiting each other's country. 
The joint report, prepared by the Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, and New Zealand's Ministry of Business, Employment and Innovation, is available from the DBCDE website.


Queenstown, NZ
Prime Ministers John Key and Julia Gillard met in Queenstown on 9 February 2013 for the annual Australia-New Zealand Leaders' meeting, reaffirming their strong commitment to the closest possible relations between Australia and New Zealand.
They reiterated their expressions of deep sympathy for the victims of the floods and fires in Australia and noted that helping each other in times of need had become hallmarks of the bilateral partnership. Prime Ministers welcomed good progress made in Christchurch's recovery following the terrible earthquake of 2011. They also expressed their sadness at the loss of life and damage in the Solomon Islands caused by the 6 February tsunami.
30 Years of Closer Economic Relations
This year marks the 30th anniversary of the Closer Economic Relations (CER) agreement, one of the most successful and dynamic economic agreements internationally. The Prime Ministers observed that the relationship which has developed through CER has served both countries well, making Australia and New Zealand two of the most integrated economies in the world.
CER and the Single Economic Market (SEM) agenda have brought down barriers to trade reduced costs for business, encouraged investment and created jobs and economic growth for both Australia and New Zealand.
The Prime Ministers emphasised that the integration of the two countries' economies, and their commitment to an international partnership, will support Australia and New Zealand's joint interests in the Asia-Pacific region and beyond. They agreed the best way for the two governments to position their economies to secure the enormous potential benefits of the Asian Century will be to enhance their productivity and competitiveness.
The Prime Ministers agreed on the following immediate steps to mark the 30th Anniversary of CER and deepen integration:
- Joint action under the CER to address the high cost of mobile roaming rates between the two countries through new powers for Australian and New Zealand regulators.- Further investments for streamlining the travel experience between the two countries, including an Australian Government $8m trial of fast-track automated technology for departures from Australian airports and New Zealand's trial of next generation ‘SmartGate Plus' technology for departures.- Entry into force of the CER Investment Protocol from 1 March 2013 to encourage and drive further trans-Tasman investment.- Commencement of new retirement savings portability arrangements from 1 July 2013 to facilitate greater labour mobility.
The Prime Ministers welcomed the report of the Productivity Commissions' joint study, commissioned at their 2012 Leaders' Meeting, to identify options for further reforms to boost productivity, increase competitiveness and drive deeper economic integration between Australia and New Zealand. Prime Ministers acknowledged the Commissions' conclusions about the benefits of CER to both countries and the extensive economic integration and cooperation achieved over the past 30 years. The recommendations of this groundbreaking joint study, the first of its kind, were a focus of Leaders' Meeting discussions. The two Governments welcomed many of the recommendations related to business law, commerce, regulation, trade and investment, biosecurity, transport, telecommunications, taxation, people movement, government services and coordination of the next steps in the economic relationship, and committed to finalising their joint response to the report by mid-2013 with an emphasis on measures that will produce net trans-Tasman benefits.
The Prime Ministers noted the findings and recommendations of the Productivity Commissions on mutual recognition of imputation credits. They noted officials are preparing a full response to the Productivity Commissions' report which would cover all recommendations including this issue.
The two Leaders welcomed the ongoing work being done through the CER Ministerial Forum to realise the full potential of CER. They looked forward to the further opportunity to share Australia and New Zealand's experience of trans-Tasman integration with ASEAN at the third ASEAN-CER Integration Partnership Forum later in the year.
Defence and Security Cooperation
The Prime Ministers underlined the importance of close cooperation and coordination on national security and defence. Prime Ministers recognised the growing cyber security threat to government and business networks, and to individual citizens. Noting the important role that enhanced trans-Tasman cooperation has to play in complementing domestic efforts to address this challenge, Prime Ministers welcomed the Australia-New Zealand Cyber Dialogue, established in 2012, as a strong and practical platform to address common cyber concerns. They agreed that officials would work on arrangements to enhance cooperation between the Australian and New Zealand Cyber Security Centres, including New Zealand participation in the new Australian Cyber Security Centre, and that both countries will work together in the cyber incident response area to ensure that networks of national importance remain resilient to cyber intrusions.
Prime Ministers acknowledged the depth and breadth of defence cooperation, and committed to maintaining high levels of defence force inter-operability and effectiveness especially as operations in the Solomon Islands, Timor Leste and Afghanistan are drawn down or come to an end.
Continuing Trans-Tasman Cooperation
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed their agreement to work closely together in the lead-up to the Centenary of the ANZAC landings in 2015, and other important First World War centennial commemorations. In addition to being solemn occasions of great historical importance, these events also present opportunities to celebrate the ANZAC spirit and to serve as major milestones in the bilateral relationship.
Prime Ministers noted the success of the Criminal History Information Sharing trial for employment vetting announced at their 2012 meeting. Prime Ministers look forward to the evaluation of the trial, which will consider the merits of expanding the trial to all Australian states. They confirmed their commitment to reciprocal information sharing for immigration and law enforcement purposes.
In recognition of the close cooperation that exists between Australia and New Zealand on crisis management, New Zealand was invited and became a full member of the Australian National Emergency Management Committee in 2012.
In the past year, New Zealand has also become a full member of the Australia-New Zealand Counter-Terrorism Committee (which includes both the Australian Federal and State governments) in recognition of the need to collaborate around terrorism threats.
The Prime Ministers noted progress to date and reaffirmed their commitment to see the Australia New Zealand Therapeutic Products Agency (ANZTPA) operational by mid 2016. Recalling that the agency should provide for efficient and cost-effective regulation of medicines and medical devices, Prime Ministers also recognised the benefit of a trans-Tasman centre of regulatory excellence for positioning Australia and NZ therapeutic producers in the regional and global market place. ANZTPA will establish an important precedent as the first fully joint trans-Tasman regulator.
Prime Ministers agreed that officials from Australia and New Zealand would work to investigate the possible implementation of a reciprocal student debt recovery scheme on a without-prejudice basis. Prime Ministers looked forward to a report from officials in advance of their 2014 Leaders' Meeting.
The Prime Ministers underlined their commitment to strong tobacco control measures and undertook to cooperate closely in their efforts to reduce tobacco use domestically and in the Pacific region. New Zealand will closely follow progress in implementation of Australia's plain packaging legislation. Australia welcomed New Zealand's in-principle agreement in 2012, subject to the outcome of a consultation process, to introduce plain packaging, and awaits with interest New Zealand's further consideration of tobacco control measures following the completion of its public consultation process.
The Prime Ministers agreed to provide NZ$3 million in matched funding over two years to support Trans-Tasman collaboration to identify potential vaccines for rheumatic fever. Rheumatic Fever is a significant issue for Maori, Pacific and Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities and an effective vaccine would be a major step forward for the health of these communities in both countries and across the Pacific.
Regional and Global Issues 
The Prime Ministers acknowledged the sacrifices made by defence and civilian personnel from both Australia and New Zealand in Afghanistan. They welcomed the good progress made on transition to date, and reaffirmed their commitment to work closely with Afghan and coalition partners on troop drawdowns and planning for the international community's involvement in the country once transition is complete at the end of 2014.
Prime Ministers noted Australia's and New Zealand's close cooperation over the past decade in Timor Leste and welcomed the recent completion of the UN mission as a critical point in Timor Leste's political and security transition. The leaders reaffirmed their support for Timor-Leste as it moves into this new stage. The Prime Ministers welcomed the close cooperation between Australia and New Zealand, along with the Solomon Islands Government and regional partners, in the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI). They committed to continue working closely with the Solomon Islands Government to consolidate RAMSI's gains as the mission's gradual draw down progresses.
The two leaders reaffirmed both countries' commitment to addressing people smuggling in the Asia Pacific region and its tragic consequences, including loss of life at sea.
The two leaders emphasised that people smuggling was a regional concern requiring a strong regional approach and reaffirmed their commitment to the effective implementation of the Bali Process Regional Cooperation Framework (RCF) to counter people smuggling. They welcomed the establishment in September 2012 of the Bali Process Regional Support Office, and its active work program, as a practical step in the implementation of the RCF.
To advance both countries' strong interest in preventing asylum seekers risking their lives on dangerous boat journeys, the two leaders agreed to enhanced bilateral cooperation to deter people smuggling and address irregular migration through practical cooperation on migration, asylum and humanitarian issues.
The Prime Minister of New Zealand advised that New Zealand will work closely with Australia to annually resettle 150 refugees who have arrived irregularly in Australia by boat to seek asylum, as part of a regional approach to irregular migration. The arrangement will be within New Zealand's Refugee Quota Programme and operate so that irregular maritime arrivals gain no advantage through choosing irregular migration pathways.
Prime Ministers reiterated the importance of enhanced regional cooperation through the East Asia Summit (EAS), Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF).
Both countries agreed to maintain close consultation with each other and with international partners on developments in Fiji. Prime Ministers remained concerned about the Fiji interim government's recent handling of the draft constitution process and the onerous requirements imposed around the registration of political parties. They reaffirmed the need for Fiji to return to democracy and the rule of law.
The two Prime Ministers reinforced their commitment to work closely together in the Pacific to build broad-based economic growth and sustainable livelihoods. In this context they supported the forthcoming review of the Pacific Plan. They also highlighted the importance of renewable energy in the Pacific, including the Pacific Energy Summit to be hosted in Auckland in March 2013.
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to free and open trade in the face of global economic uncertainty. Both countries will do all they can to move the WTO agenda forward in the lead-up to the 9th WTO Ministerial Conference in Bali in December and in the period thereafter.
The Prime Ministers also reaffirmed both countries' commitment to eliminating tariffs and other barriers to trade and investment, through the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) negotiations. They highlighted their ambition to achieve agreements that are comprehensive, high-quality and contribute to regional and global economic growth and development.
The Prime Ministers remained resolutely opposed to commercial whaling, including so-called "scientific" whaling, in particular in the Southern Ocean.
Protection of the marine environment in the Southern Ocean was also a focus for Australia and New Zealand, with each country strongly supportive of proposals for large-scale marine protected areas in East Antarctica and the Ross Sea region under the auspices of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.
Australia and New Zealand continue to work closely and constructively on climate change issues, and are committed to on-going climate action. Australia has taken a second Kyoto commitment and New Zealand will set a firm post-2012 emissions target under the Protocol's parent body (the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change). Both countries have the shared objective of negotiating an ambitious new global climate change agreement, which will see all major developed and developing economies taking legal commitments to reduce their emissions from 2020. Australian and New Zealand officials will continue to work together on ways to enhance and ensure the viability of international carbon markets, which are  -  and will increasingly be  -  a centrepiece of many countries' mitigation efforts.
Prime Minister Key congratulated Australia on its successful election to the UN Security Council, while Prime Minister Gillard confirmed Australia's full support for New Zealand's bid for Security Council membership in 2015-16. 


Queenstown, New Zealand
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced plans to build an Australian Memorial in Wellington, New Zealand, to be completed in time for the Centenary of Anzac on 25 April 2015.
The Australian Memorial will be located in Wellington in the National War Memorial precinct, a park being developed by the New Zealand Government as the centrepiece of New Zealand‘s Centenary of Anzac commemorations in 2015.
The memorial will commemorate the shared efforts of both countries in both war and peace, and will complement the Australia-New Zealand Memorial opened on Canberra's Anzac Parade in 2001.
Australia and New Zealand share an extraordinary relationship  -  one born on the bloody battlefields of Gallipoli and in the trenches of France and Belgium during the First World War.
Australia and New Zealand have fought alongside each other in the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps in almost all wars, conflicts and peacekeeping operations, from the Boer War through to modern conflicts in Afghanistan.
And our shared and continuing Anzac story has been strengthened by the modern social, economic, cultural and sporting links of today.
The Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the Centenary of Anzac, The Hon Warren Snowdon, recently approved the Memorial design submitted by Australian architectural firm Tonkin Zulaikha Greer.
It will comprise of 15 columns made of rugged Australian red sandstone, symbolic of the Australian ‘red centre'. The memorial itself will be surrounded by eucalypt trees to represent the Australian landscape.
Interpretative material on the columns will address the shared Anzac wartime experience, but the memorial will also commemorate our shared experience of indigenous history, settlement, immigration, culture and other links.
Amongst the columns is a central plinth, providing a focus for commemorative ceremonies.
The Australian Government has funded the $5 million cost of the memorial.
The memorial will be completed in time for the Centenary of Anzac on 25 April 2015.
High resolution architect's impressions of the images are available at www.dva.gov.au/media.


Queenstown, New Zealand
PM: First can I say, this has been a very successful visit to New Zealand. I want to thank Prime Minister Key for the warmth of his welcome and also for the very constructive discussions we've had whilst I've been here.
This is an incredibly close relationship, a family relationship, and I'm pleased that we've been able to build on that relationship in a very practical way over the last few days.
I'm returning today to Australia and in the week to come the Government will be making a number of announcements about workplace relations.
As a Government we got rid of the hated Work Choices, the Liberal Party scheme for Australian work places that did so much damage and saw so many workers ripped off.
We said when we replaced Work Choices with the Fair Work Act that we would have a review and see what else we needed to do for the future. We've already in part responded to that review.
This week we will make some further announcements and then a bit later on there will be more announcements to come. What has been described as the second tranche of announcements following the review will be partly dealt with this week and partly dealt with later.
The focus this week will be on that part of the workplace relations agenda which is really about work and family life.
Modern families can find it very difficult to balance the demands of work and the demands of caring for kids and sometimes the demands of caring for older relatives too.
We want to make sure that our workplace relations system is helping take some of the burden off modern families.
One of the ways we will do that is by extending the right to request flexible and part time work to mums who are returning from maternity leave, and indeed for dads who are returning from caring for children too.
What that means is when people are trying to make the transition back to work, they will be able to request flexible and part time work and their employer will have to respond to that request.
We already have as part of our ten national employment standards a right to request, this is an extension to that right that Labor introduced.
During the course of the week we will also be talking about ways in which we can help working people if they're faced with a roster change.
People make all sorts of arrangements for work, knowing what their roster is, building their child care around it, and when rosters change that can be very difficult.
So during the course of the week we'll be talking about some protections from roster changes, some abilities to be consulted when rosters change.
So, it will be a big week back in Australia and very shortly I'll be making the journey there but I'll take a couple of questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the changes to industrial relations you're talking about, when will they take affect?
PM: I will be seeking to legislate them as soon as possible.
JOURNALIST: Is this just political, is this just about driving a wedge with Tony Abbott on women's issues?
PM: This is about Labor's profound belief in fairness for working people, something that we've believed in for more than 100 years and everyday of the Labor Party's existence you've seen on display.
JOURNALIST: Julie Bishop has suggested today that women can't have it all. Do you feel women can have it all?
PM: I haven't seen any of that so I'm not in a position to comment on it.
JOURNALIST: She's talking about work life balance  -  and if you choose a busy life in politics you can't always have children, would you accept that?
PM: I don't want to comment on an article that I haven't seen.
JOURNALIST: While you have been in New Zealand Kevin Rudd's been quite active at home on Twitter and in newspaper articles.
He's also released some documents into the investigation into that leaked video a few years ago.
Do you think that the police have done a thorough job or does Kevin Rudd have a right to request that the police get to the bottom of this?
PM: Look, I'm not going to run commentary on the actions of the police.
JOURNALIST: I understand that a number of individual sporting clubs now know about the ACC enquiry into doping and they can out themselves.
What message do you have for them?
PM: Well, I would have a very clear message, I think fans are anxious to get to the bottom of this and fans are very anxious to know what the circumstances of their own club are.
So I would say to clubs, please come clean; make sure that you tell your fans what is going on.
For clubs that have got absolutely nothing to hide, then it will come as a great relief to fans to know that.
For clubs that have had problems, then it's better off to step forward and be very clear about them.
So from the perspective of fans of sport, and I'm certainly one, I think people do want to know what's happening with their own club, so my message to clubs would be, get out there and explain what is going on with your club.
JOURNALIST: Will your IR changes force employers to be able to offer part time work and if it's not compulsory how is it actually different from the current system?
PM: Well it's an extension of the rights in that it extends to a new category of workers in a different circumstance.
What we found with the current right to request is around 80 per cent of requests are satisfactorily resolved.
What we wanted to do with the right to request was to change behaviour.
When I was Workplace Relations Minister I looked at other workplace relations systems around the world that do have rights to request and the fact that you formalise the right gives employees comfort that if they step forward, then that's okay, that they can ask, and if you formalise the right, it also means that employers actually start thinking through, is this possible, can we make it work?
So you get better outcomes, and already with the current right to request, we're seeing better outcomes in around 80 per cent of cases.
JOURNALIST: But an employer can still knock it back?
PM: But the experience is 80 per cent of times in the current system, it works to the advantage of the employee and employer. That's a good result.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you say to the Coalition concerns that the announcement on refugees yesterday with New Zealand is actually going to encourage people smugglers to send more people on boats?
PM: Well I expect the Coalition to be negative.
JOURNALIST: But do you understand that they do have those concerns?
PM: I expect them to be negative and whatever we say they will say something negative so I don't bother with it.
Okay, thank you very much.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and NSW Premier Barry O'Farrell have today announced more New South Wales communities will have access to jointly-funded natural disaster assistance following extensive flooding.
A natural disaster declaration has been made in the following four local government areas:
 * 	Great Lakes
 * 	Inverell
 * 	Moree Plains
 * 	Upper Hunter
 These measures will help families, small business owners, not-for-profit bodies and primary producers to restore any damage caused by the floods and ease some of the associated burden.
This declaration triggers a range of assistance through the jointly funded Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements, including Personal Hardship and Distress Assistance, concessional loans for small Business, primary producers and not-for-profit bodies, freight subsidies for primary producers and grants for voluntary not-for-profit bodies.
Assistance is also available to local and state government authorities for counter disaster operations and the restoration of essential public assets.
There are now 19 local government areas across northern New South Wales eligible for disaster assistance following the recent flooding and storms with Ballina, Bellingen, Byron, Clarence Valley, Coffs Harbour, Glen Innes Severn, Gloucester, Kempsey, Kyogle, Lismore, Nambucca, Port Macquarie-Hastings, Richmond Valley, Tenterfield and Tweed already receiving assistance.
Australian Government agencies are working hand-in-hand with New South Wales authorities to ensure that people receive the assistance they need during these difficult times.
For more information about disaster assistance go to www.emergency.nsw.gov.au


Canberra
More flood-affected primary producers and small business owners in some of the hardest hit regions of Queensland can now apply for clean-up and recovery grants.
The grants of up to $25,000 will provide extra help with the economic impacts these devastating floods have had on local businesses and the wider community.
Primary producers in the local government areas of South Burnett, Gladstone and Scenic Rim and targeted areas in Banana, Goondiwindi, Ipswich, Somerset, Southern Downs and Toowoomba will be able to apply for the assistance under the jointly funded Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.
Small businesses in targeted areas within the Gladstone and Southern Downs local government areas will also be able to apply.
These grants are already available in the local government areas of Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gympie, Lockyer Valley and North Burnett.
The grants will help recipients with the cost of cleaning up and removing debris, replacing damaged equipment and stock, and help ensure their business isn't disrupted beyond the next season.
This assistance does not compensate for income losses and is not intended to replace insurance.
There are now 53 local government areas in Queensland eligible for various types of disaster assistance under the NDRRA across Queensland.
Personal Hardship and Distress assistance is available in the 23 local government areas of: Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Cherbourg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Concessional Interest Rate Loans and Freight Subsidies for Primary Producers are available in the 22 local government areas of: Banana, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Concessional Interest Rate Loans for Small Business are available in the 23 local government areas of: Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Counter Disaster Operations assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 45 local government areas of: Aurukun, Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Burdekin, Burke, Cairns, Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cook, Etheridge, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goodiwindi, Gympie, Hinchinbrook, Ipswich, Isaac, Ipswich, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Mackay, Mapoon, Moreton Bay, Napranum, North Burnett, Palm Island, Pormpuraaw, Redlands, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Tablelands, Toowoomba, Torres Shire, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs and Whitsunday.
Restoration of Essential Public Assets assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 51  local government areas of: Aurukun, Banana, Brisbane, Bundaberg, Burdekin, Burke , Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cloncurry, Cook, Doomadgee, Etheridge, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Hinchinbrook, Hope Vale, Ipswich, Isaac, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Mackay, Mapoon, McKinlay, Mornington, Moreton Bay, Napranum, North Burnett, North Peninsula, Palm Island, Pormpuraaw, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, Southern Downs, South Burnett, Sunshine Coast, Tablelands, Toowoomba, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs, Whitsunday, Wujal Wujal and Yarrabah.
NDRRA assistance will be extended to other communities if they are impacted.
More information about the assistance that available in each affected local government area can be found at www.disasterassist.gov.au.
More information about how to apply for the clean-up and recovery grants is available at www.qraa.qld.gov.au
More information about how to apply for hardship and distress payments is available at www.qld.gov.au/community/disasters-emergencies/recovery-after-disaster/


Canberra
Australian singer-songwriter Gotye has created Australian music history at the Grammy Awards in Los Angeles, winning three awards, including for Best Record for his hit song Somebody That I Used to Know featuring Kimbra.
Gotye, real name Wouter (Wally) De Backer, is the first Australian to win multiple Grammys for the same release and only the second to win Best Record after Olivia Newton-John with ‘I Honestly Love You' in 1975.
His album Making Mirrors took home the award for Best Alternative Music Album, while single Somebody That I Used to Know featuring Kimbra, won Best Record and Best Pop Duo/Group Performance.
After taking Australia by storm in 2011, the Federal Government provided Gotye with a $10,000 Australia Council grant to showcase his talents at the CMJ Music Marathon in New York.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Arts Minister Simon Crean congratulated Gotye on his Grammy wins, as recognition of the overwhelming success and popularity of his winning single and album.
Gotye is an outstanding example of the quality of the artistic talent in Australia today and highlights the need for continued investment in young artists and musicians.
In recent years he has achieved much-deserved global recognition for his work, with Somebody That I Used to Know going platinum in Australia and the US, and achieving number one status in more than 18 countries.
At home he was recognised with six ARIA Awards in 2011.
Gotye will land in Canberra on Friday to join Minister Crean and officially open the Fractured Heart interactive sculpture at the National Film and Sound Archive of Australia.
The event brings together school students to discuss film and music in a virtual roundtable using high-speed broadband.
Gotye will also launch Fractured Heart which he created with arts collective illuminart for his 2011 ARIA Awards performance of Somebody That I Used to Know.
Fractured Heartis on long-term loan to the National Film and Sound Archive.
For more information visit: http://www.nfsa.gov.au/whats-on/gotye-at-nfsa/


Canberra
Speaker, on indulgence, as you would know, Australia's Catholics and their many friends received remarkable news overnight that His Holiness, Pope Benedict XVI will resign in coming weeks.
You would have to have lived several hundred years to have heard news like that.
The Pope's announcement marks a genuinely historic moment which many Australian Catholics will greet with great emotion. 
Many Australians saw Pope Benedict during his visit here for the Church's World Youth Day in 2008, and I'm sure many members remember the scenes and the crowds on that visit.
Thousands of others travelled to Rome in 2010 to see him declare Mother Mary MacKillop as our nation's first saint: Saint Mary of the Cross. And that was a time of jubilation across the nation.
They will miss him.
Australia's Catholic community has made an enormous contribution to our nation, in absolutely every field of life. 
But our thoughts naturally turn to the contribution in school education, health care and relief for the most disadvantaged in our society.
I personally think of Mary MacKillop who, as the Pope put it when he was canonising her “attended the needs of each young person entrusted to her, without regard to station or wealth”.
I think too of my own Party: our historic achievements and enduring purpose are unimaginable without the influence of the Catholic tradition.
Since 2008 Australia has had an accredited Ambassador resident in the Vatican State, reflecting the importance of the many global issues in which the Catholic Church is so vitally engaged.
Whoever is elected to take Pope Benedict's place, the Catholic Church will remain one of the most important human institutions, containing within it all the strengths and faults of its hundreds of millions of believers; one facing all the challenges of the modern world.
My thoughts today are with Australia's Catholic community as they prepare for Ash Wednesday tomorrow and the season of Lent, and as they live through what is an historic coming few weeks.


Canberra
Today, North Korea's official news agency claimed North Korea had conducted a successful nuclear test. 
Seismic data supports this claim and a third North Korean nuclear test is consistent with North Korea's dangerous nuclear ambitions.
The Australian Government condemns in the strongest possible terms nuclear testing by North Korea.
Nuclear testing by North Korea clearly violates United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009) and 2087 (2013) which demand North Korea not conduct any further nuclear tests. 
North Korea's development of nuclear weapons and missiles and its proliferation of sensitive technologies threaten international peace and security. 
North Korea's actions challenge the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
Only last month, in unanimously adopting Resolution 2087, the Security Council expressed its determination to take significant action in the event of a further North Korean nuclear test.
Australia has called for an urgent meeting of the Security Council.  As a Security Council member, Australia will work for the strongest possible response to North Korea's continuing defiance of the will of international community.
Australia will also be making its deep concerns known to the North Korean Government directly, as well as in international and regional forums.
North Korea's future security and prosperity can only be secured through constructive relations with its neighbours and the international community.
Australia will continue to work closely with our friends and allies for peace and stability in North Asia.


Canberra
Australia has moved closer towards constitutional recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples with the Act of Recognition passing the House of Representatives today.
The Prime Minister was joined in the House by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and community leaders to mark this significant step towards a referendum.
The Bill recognises the unique and special place of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
This reflects wording suggested by the Expert Panel on Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, whose significant report has put in place the foundations to enable us to progress constitutional recognition.
Today also marks the fifth anniversary of the National Apology.
On 13 February 2008, we said sorry to Indigenous Australians, in particular the Stolen Generations, for past wrongs.
We apologised for the pain and suffering and hurt that successive policies had inflicted on Indigenous Australians for more than two centuries.
This was the first step in building a reconciled Australia with relationships based on mutual respect and understanding.
The recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in the Constitution is another part of this journey.         
This Australian Government is committed to meaningful constitutional reform that reflects the hopes and aspirations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
The Bill passed today includes a sunset date of two years to allow the campaign for change to continue to build momentum and ensure the focus remains on the ultimate goal of a successful referendum.
A review will be carried out 12 months after the Bill is enacted to consider levels of community support for amending the Constitution and proposals for constitutional change.
The Gillard Government has committed $10 million towards a campaign being led by Reconciliation Australia to continue to build support for constitutional change.
The Government agrees with the findings of the Expert Panel that a referendum should be held at a time when it has the most chance of success.
The Government encourages all Australians to get involved in building support for constitutional change by visiting www.recognise.org.au


Canberra
Speaker, this Parliament is the gathering place of our nation's representatives.
But we stand on land that was, from time immemorial, the gathering place of the Ngunnawal people.
So I speak here today, as I always do, in a spirit of friendship and respect for the First Australians, and with honour to Elders past and present.
I'm also conscious that on this special anniversary, we acknowledge the courage that enabled Kevin Rudd to offer the Apology and the generosity of spirit that enabled Indigenous Australians to accept it.
We are only able to consider this Act of Recognition and constitutional change because the Apology came first.
Speaker, the Constitution of our Commonwealth came into force on January 1, 1901.
It was the start of a new century and a new year.
Alfred Deakin wrote that“Never on this side of the world was there a New Year's Day with such high expectations.”
Those expectations were high because with the Constitution had come Australia's birth as a nation.
But not all our people shared those expectations.
In the decade of deliberation that created our Constitution, there were conventions and debates across this land.
But there is no record of any Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander person taking part.
Indigenous people did not ordain our Constitution nor contribute to its drafting.
They had no opportunity to vote for it, and yet all were affected by what it said and what it failed to say.
They were affected by provisions that even by the standards of the time seem questionable and strike us now as harsh and inhumane.
But they were also affected by the “great Australian silence” which fell upon our founding document.
Because among the 128 sections of the Constitution, there is no acknowledgement of Australia's First Peoples.
No mention of their dispossession.
Their proud and ancient cultures.
Their profound connection to the land.
Or the unhealed wound that even now lies open at the heart of our national story.
Speaker, in 1967, the people of Australia sought restitution and repair, but their work was incomplete.
Today, a new generation dreams of finishing the job with the same idealism and the same means.
Not through protests or law suits.
But by this Parliament summoning every Australian elector to a referendum.
And there, in the sanctity of the polling booth, to inscribe their agreement to a successful constitutional amendment.
On that day, as the polls close and the ballots are counted, individual assent will merge into a collective “yes”.
In that way, we will forge an accord  -  bi-partisan and unanimous  -  to right an old and grievous wrong.
A step that will take us further on the path of Reconciliation than we have ever ventured before.
Speaker, voting is the solemn act of our democratic order.
But amending the Constitution is even more profound, because it occurs so rarely and succeeds even more rarely still.
At the election of 2007, it seemed the prospect of constitutional recognition was very close at hand, supported, as it was, by both major parties.
But in difficult and volatile times, we have not yet found the settled space in our national conversation to make the promised referendum a reality.
So the government has advanced this Bill for an Act of Recognition.
To assure Indigenous people that our purpose of amendment remains unbroken.
And to prepare the wider community for the responsibility that lies ahead.
This Bill is thus an act of preparation and anticipation.
In this legislation, we, the nation's 226 legislators will serve as proxies for Australia's 14 million voters, bridging the time between now and referendum day.
That is why this Bill has a sunset clause of two years.
So that the 44thParliament can achieve what the 42ndand 43rd have been unable to do.
Speaker, this Bill introduced by my friend and colleague, the Minister for Indigenous Affairs, has two main purposes:
Firstly, it acknowledges in law that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are the first inhabitants of this nation.
It acknowledges they occupied this land from time immemorial  -  they honoured and cared for it, and do so to this day.
Secondly, this Bill seeks to foster momentum for a referendum for constitutional recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
The Bill gives the Parliament some of the tools it will need to build the necessary momentum for constitutional change.
These include a legislative requirement for a review of public support for a referendum, to be tabled here in Parliament six months before any referendum bill is proposed.
This Bill, and the referendum to come, are closely informed by the work of the Expert Panel, itself an outstanding example of Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians working together.
The Expert Panel's report was informed by intensive consultations across the nation  -  from Sydney to Ceduna, Longreach to Launceston.
That work gives us the solid foundation upon which to build parliamentary and community consensus.
I again thank the Expert Panel, ably co-chaired by Patrick Dodson and Mark Leibler, for its important work and I acknowledge the Panel members who are present today.
But ultimately, a Referendum Bill will be the creation of this Parliament.
So I also commend the work to date of the Joint Select Committee on Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples.
And I look forward to their continued work in the months ahead to prepare the way for the Parliament, most likely in the course of 2014, to debate and pass the Referendum Bill.
This is the critical work because it will require all of us in this Parliament to find consensus around the wording and the content of the proposed constitutional amendment.
Speaker, the work of preparation is vital and timely.
But, ultimately, recognition is not a matter for politicians or experts.
Instead, the Constitution belongs to the people.
It was created by them.
It serves them.
And it is amendable by them alone.
So this is a task in which all Australians must share.
I do believe the community is willing embrace the justice of this campaign because Australians understand that Indigenous culture and history are a source of pride for us all.
But I also believe that their good will needs to be galvanised.
Some of the work of building consensus is being led by the Joint Select Committee.
Some of the work is being led by Reconciliation Australia and other organisations that are building grassroots support for change.
The Government is investing $10 million in this community-based work.
But most of all, the push for change is increasingly being led by ordinary Australians  -  Indigenous and non-Indigenous  alike.
This morning I met with some remarkable young Indigenous leaders who are deeply engaged in the campaign for recognition.
Men and women who were not born in 1967 but who share the spirit and optimism of those days.
They will be among the many Australians actively working in communities around the nation in coming weeks and months.
I trust that we will be out there too, every one of us, in our electorates, doing the same.
Campaigning with optimism  -  campaigning with hope.
Speaker, the experience of 1967 gives us abundant cause for such hope.
In an era where the nation was perhaps less open and socially-aware than our own time, that ballot yielding the highest “Yes” vote ever recorded in an Australian referendum  -  almost 91 per cent.
I believe we can do it again.
This year the youngest voters of that referendum are turning 67.
I hope they will soon be able to return to the ballot box, perhaps with their children and grandchildren, and again make history.
After all, a foundation document is more than just a set of rules and procedures.
It can articulate a nation's sense of itself.
But our nation cannot articulate such a sense of self when there is still great unanswered questions in our midst.
How do we share this land and on what terms?
How adequate are our national laws and symbols to express our history and our hopes for the future?
We must never feel guilt for the things already done in this nation's history.
But we can  -  and must  -  feel responsibility for the things that remain undone.
No gesture speaks more deeply to the healing of our nation's fabric than amending our nation's founding charter.
So I commend this Bill to the House as a deed of Reconciliation in its own right.
And as a sign of good faith for the referendum to come.
We are bound to each other in this land and always will be.
Let us be bound in justice and dignity as well.


Canberra
The Gillard Government will make a substantial investment to establish a new Bushfire and Natural Hazards Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) from 1 July 2013.
This will build on the work of the existing Bushfire CRC and expand research efforts into other natural hazards.
The Government will contribute up to $47 million over eight years to ensure that the valuable work done by the Bushfire CRC can continue while developing a complementary natural hazards research program into flood, earthquake, cyclone and tsunami events.
The Commonwealth contribution is contingent on the states and territories making similar commitments to this expanded research activity, at a level equivalent to state financial support for the existing Bushfire CRC.
State and territory governments have been closely involved in the existing Bushfire CRC and we expect that they will be prepared to make a substantial contribution to this important initiative.
Communities across Australia have been severely impacted by bushfires, floods and severe weather events again this summer.  This increased investment in research will improve approaches to mitigation, operational responses and community resilience to natural hazards.
The expanded focus of the new CRC appropriately reflects the impact of broader natural hazards on the Australian community.  The new CRC will conduct coordinated and interdisciplinary research, including work with communities, to improve disaster resilience and reduce the human, social, economic and environmental costs from bushfires and other natural hazards.
The Bushfire and Natural Hazards CRC will undertake vital research to support the development of cohesive, evidence-based policies, strategies and tools to build a disaster-resilient Australia.  The funding will enable the CRC to provide a long-term research base that directly supports our emergency services as they work to prevent, prepare for, respond to and recover from natural disasters.
The structure of the new CRC will be determined in consultation with key stakeholders and participants, including the Bushfire CRC, the Australasian Fire and Emergency Service Authorities Council and state and territory governments.
The Gillard Government will also establish a priority public good funding stream within the CRC program to deliver primary research outcomes with wider social and environmental benefits to Australia and the broader community.


Canberra
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) has been extended to people severely affected by flooding in the local government areasof South Burnett and Cherbourg, Queensland.
These floods have had a devastating impact on this community and it is a very difficult time for the people affected.  The AGDRP will provide a much-needed helping hand to the people of South Burnett.  Those directly affected by the floods in this area are encouraged to test their eligibility for the AGDRP.
The AGDRP is already being provided to individuals who have been severely impacted by flooding in the Local Government Areas (LGAs) of Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gympie, Lockyer Valley, North Burnett, Rockhampton and Somerset.  Further information on Australian Government assistance is available online at www.disasterassist.gov.au.
The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy (DIRS) is also being made available to individuals in the LGAs of Banana, Gladstone, Ipswich, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Goondiwindi and Toowoomba. This assistance provides payments to employees, small business persons and farmers who can demonstrate they have experienced a loss of income. 
The assistance will ensure that people are able to stay in these areas and will support the longer-term recovery of the devastated local and regional economies. The DIRS is already being provided to individuals in the LGAs of Bundaberg, Gympie, Fraser Coast, North Burnett and Lockyer Valley.
The easiest way to lodge a claim for the AGDRP or the DIRS is online at www.humanservices.gov.auor by calling the Australian Government Information Line on 180 22 66 from 8am to 8pm local time, seven days a week.  Completed claim forms can also be lodged in person at a Department of Human Services service centre. 
This Australian Government assistance is over and above the support already being provided under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA), which are jointly funded by the Australian Government and the states.
In Queensland:
Personal Hardship and Distress assistance is available in the 23 local government areas of: Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Cherbourg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Concessional Interest Rate Loans and Freight Subsidies for Primary Producers are available in the 22 local government areas of: Banana, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Concessional Interest Rate Loans for Small Business are available in the 23 local government areas of: Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Clean-up and recovery grants of up to $25,000 are available for affected primary producers in, or in parts of, the following 14 local government areas of: Banana, Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, North Burnett, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs and Toowoomba.
Clean-up and recovery grants of up to $25,000 are available for affected small businesses and not-for-profit organisations in, or in parts of, the following 7 local government areas of: Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gympie, Lockyer Valley, North Burnett and Southern Downs.
Counter Disaster Operations assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 45 local government areas of: Aurukun, Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Burdekin, Burke, Cairns, Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cook, Etheridge, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goodiwindi, Gympie, Hinchinbrook, Ipswich, Isaac, Ipswich, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Mackay, Mapoon, Moreton Bay, Napranum, North Burnett, Palm Island, Pormpuraaw, Redlands, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Tablelands, Toowoomba, Torres Shire, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs and Whitsunday.
Restoration of Essential Public Assets assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 51  local government areas of: Aurukun, Banana, Brisbane, Bundaberg, Burdekin, Burke , Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cloncurry, Cook, Doomadgee, Etheridge, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Hinchinbrook, Hope Vale, Ipswich, Isaac, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Mackay, Mapoon, McKinlay, Mornington, Moreton Bay, Napranum, North Burnett, North Peninsula, Palm Island, Pormpuraaw, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, Southern Downs, South Burnett, Sunshine Coast, Tablelands, Toowoomba, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs, Whitsunday, Wujal Wujal and Yarrabah.


Canberra
I bid you all very warm welcome to Parliament House  -  this place of gathering that belongs to every Australian.
I welcome you all to Techfest in this, NICTA's tenth anniversary year.
And I offer you a very warm welcome to Canberra in its centenary year.
I can't think of a better place to be holding Techfest because at their best, this House and this city are places of ideas.
The nation sends 226 of us to this parliament as legislators, not just to debate the issues of today but to imagine the nation of tomorrow.
Our best ideas are the ideas whose results are measured in decades.
Stanley Melbourne Bruce established the CSIRO at the same time as this city was being carved out of the Molonglo plain.
Sixty years later, the brilliant researchers at CSIRO came up with something that has changed the world called wi-fi and one those pioneers, Dr Terry Percival, now works for NICTA and joins us today.
The same concern for the future saw Bob Hawke set-up the Cooperative Research Centre program as part of his vision for the “clever country”.
In a bi-partisan spirit, I can say the same for the Howard Government's decision in establishing NICTA.
NICTA is one of the real game-changers transforming the Australian economy.
NICTA has brought scale and depth to ICT research, training and commercialisation in this nation.
Ten years later, NICTA is the largest and most successful ICT research organisation in Australia.
Last year NICTA had a stellar performance in attracting wealth and creating new jobs  spinning-off four new companies and working with major companies such as George Weston Foods, Healthscope and the Commonwealth Bank to improve their productivity and competitiveness.
A Deloitte study estimates that NICTA projects will have a combined annual impact of $3 billion a year on the national economy.
Innovations conceived through NICTA are part of our everyday lives.
One NICTA invention now provides the live audio platform for major outdoor events and concerts all around the world.
Another provides the operating system for 1.5 billion mobile phones.
I know NICTA didn't come here today empty-handed; there are some amazing innovations on display here.
For example NICTA has today announced the spinout of new company, Saluda Medical, which has developed a miniature smart chip implant that will transform the way chronic pain is managed.
Today I witnessed the signing of a landmark agreement with NICTA and the global software leader, Infosys.
I acknowledge the presence of Mr Narayana Murthy here today, the co-founder of Infosys, who is also on NICTA's international Business Advisory Board.
In my walk-through today I've also had the opportunity to see a fantastic new initiative that NICTA is developing called the lens.
It's an open-access tool to help start-ups and entrepreneurs navigate the incredibly complex world of intellectual property and break down the barriers to innovation.
I acknowledge the presence of the Global Senior Vice President of Qualcomm, Roger Martin, who has come from the US today to support this initiative.
These announcements are a measure of NICTA's ten-year journey to date and the qualities that have brought you so far: ambition, curiosity and a restless search for excellence.
It's no coincidence that Techfest is the single most important event in the NICTA calendar.
The scientific mind is inherently optimistic.
Innovation is always about the future.
Always asking the question “what's next?”
In an advanced economy like Australia, that's the way it has to be if we are to secure high-wage, high skills jobs for our children.
That's the way it has to be if we are to succeed in the Asian Century.
The way we get there is innovation.
Innovation equals productivity, equals prosperity.
That's why next week I'll be making a major statement on Australian innovation and jobs.
Studies show that in advanced countries like Australia, more than half of all growth in productivity comes from innovation.   
We know that growing productivity is the best way to create and support jobs for the long-term.
That doesn't happen by accident.
It comes from deliberate investments like NICTA, CSIRO, our CRCs, and the policies that go with them.
Investments and policies that help bring the future closer.
That's a perfect description for NICTA.
It's also a perfect description of the NBN  -  bringing the future closer.
We won't be the nation we want to be in ten or twenty years' time without universal high speed broadband.
Not half-baked, but the real thing.
Not to the node, but to the home.
Earlier this month I was privileged to spend some time with Sir Tim Berners-Lee.
Sir Tim congratulated the Government on the NBN and our vision for the digital economy because he knows that the Internet is the great equaliser.
So much of how we deliver services - education, social welfare, health care, even energy use  -  will be mediated through the Internet and that means the NBN.
But it's more than just services.
It's about an outlook and a philosophy.
A free and open Internet served by a universal, competitive, world-class broadband market is about empowerment.
It's about choices and possibilities.
We think we understand the digital world, but we haven't even scratched the surface.
When I entered this Parliament in 1998, there was no wi-fi, no smart phones, no iPads, no apps.
But the ideas were there; the people were there; the research facilities were there.
And in those facilities, remarkable men and women were rehearsing the future that is now our today.
Here at Techfest we see the very best Australian ICT innovation and development.
And here we also catch a glimpse of the future.
We see that future not just in the inventions being showcased but in the young people present with us.
I know some of you students are road-testing the new smart phone app to that gives you a window on a career in ICT.
It's my hope that in a few years, your own ideas and apps will be showcased here at a future Techfest.
Now Hugh Durrant-Whyte, Ian Chubb and the other scientists will have lots of advice for you today.
I'll just leave you with this thought as the Prime Minister who is delivering the NBN, the NDIS, the price on carbon and our National Plan for School Improvement:
The future doesn't belong to the timid.
And no dream is ever big enough.
I warmly congratulate NICTA on its ground-breaking achievements over the past decade.
I look forward to your continued work to strengthen our economy and improve our lives.
And I proudly declare Techfest 2013 officially open.


Canberra
The Australian Government today introduced legislation to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902 to assist the work of the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse.
The amendments will allow one or more of the six Royal Commissioners to conduct hearings.  The Royal Commissions Act currently only permits hearings to be conducted by all members of a multi-member Commission or by a quorum. 
This amendment will assist the Commission to distribute its hearing work efficiently where this is appropriate.
The other purpose of the Bill is to allow the Commissioners to receive information from those affected by child abuse at less formal ‘private sessions'. 
For many, telling their stories of child sexual abuse will be very traumatic and these private sessions will mean that people affected by this crime can voluntarily participate in the Royal Commission in a less formal setting than a hearing.
People attending a private session would not be required to give evidence under oath, and their information would be used in a way that did not disclose their identity.  The Commissioners could also authorise people to support a person attending at a private session.
The Royal Commission is as much about assisting victims of past abuse to be heard, as it is about investigating systemic failures to prevent future abuse.
The proposed amendments will provide similar protection to participants who give information at a private session as would apply if they were giving evidence at a formal hearing.
This Government believes that every child has the right to a safe and happy childhood. 
For more information on the Royal Commission, led by Justice Peter McClellan AM, call 1800 099 340 or go to www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au


Melbourne
This is a great day for this shipyard, for our Navy, for the Australian Defence Force and for the defence of Australia.
Seventy one years ago today, the great British fortress of Singapore surrendered.  The Royal Navy's Prince of Wales and the Repulse had been sunk only two months earlier.
Within days, Darwin was bombed.  Within months, the first Canberra would be fighting in her final battle for us. 
In those days, we truly learned that while our alliances are vital and our friends are many, our security is always ultimately in our own hands.
That is the lesson of the 15 February 1942 and it is a lesson we carry with us on the 15th of February 2013 as we name this ship.
That the best defence is self-defence: that for an island nation, its own Navy is its historic guarantee.
From those days to these, from Savo Island to the Middle East Area of Operations, the name Canberra has served our Navy and our nation well.  
I am proud that soon it will serve us again.
The Canberra and her sister Landing Helicopter Dock ship will give our Navy, and our Defence Force as a whole, an entirely new ability to defend Australia and our interests.
They will give our Defence Force an unprecedented ability to exercise and operate on land and sea – supporting amphibious operations and operating independently in our region and beyond like never before.
And when the Australian Navy is called on to provide humanitarian assistance, the Canberra will be ready.
The new Canberra will carry some of our finest war fighters – and it is a tribute to some of our most impressive skilled workers.
935 Australians will work on the Landing Helicopter Dock ships before they put to sea: hundreds of fine Australians doing great Australian jobs.
The Government is committed to maintaining industries here in Australia with the capability to support the Australian Defence Force – and we are committed to creating and supporting the kind of skilled, well-paid work done here at Williamstown.
That's why projects such as the Air Warfare Destroyers and the Future Submarines are so important.
To the veterans and members of the HMAS Canberra/HMAS Shropshire Association – we honour you on such an important day.
I pay my deepest respect and our nation's deepest gratitude to the veterans who served on the first HMAS Canberra during the Second World War.
They never let us down.
No HMAS Canberra has ever let us down – I know we will be proud of the new ship Canberra and all who sail in her.


Melbourne
I am pleased to announce that I have appointed Mr Blair Comley PSM as Secretary of the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism.
I recently appointed the current Secretary of that Department, Mr Drew Clarke PSM, to fill the vacancy in the Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy.
Mr Comley has been Secretary of the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency since 2011.  Prior to this appointment, Mr Comley was a Deputy Secretary in the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency and previously held a range of senior positions in the Treasury.  He also represented Australia for three years on economic matters at the OECD and was the Acting Chief Executive Officer of the Australian Office of Financial Management
Mr Comley's knowledge and experience mean that he is well placed to take on the role of Secretary of the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism.
Having received a report from the Secretary of my Department, as required by the Public Service Act 1999, I have appointed Mr Comley for a period of five years from 11 March 2013. 
I will make a further announcement in relation to the position of Secretary of the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency shortly.


Melbourne
The first of two new Landing Helicopter Dock (LHD) ships was officially named Canberra in a traditional Navy ceremony at Williamstown, Victoria today.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Defence Stephen Smith attended the naming ceremony. 
They were joined by the Chief of the Defence Force, General David Hurley, and the Chief of Navy, Rear Admiral Ray Griggs, for this special occasion.
The Spanish Minister for Defence, Mr Pedro Morenés Eulate, was also in attendance.
The new LHD was named by Mrs Vickie Coates, wife of the late Rear Admiral Nigel Coates AM, RAN, who served a distinguished career in the Navy and sadly passed away in June 2010.
Today's ceremony reinforces the importance of the naming tradition and the pride that is entrenched in a ship's name.
The naming of a ship is an important and very special occasion. The Canberra name carries with it decades of spirit, courage and distinguished service inherited from all personnel who served in Canberra's (I) and (2) and the USS Canberra.
This is the third Australian Navy ship to bear the proud name Canberra. Canberra (I) was a County Class heavy cruiser which served with distinction until she was heavily damaged and sunk during the Battle of Savo Island in August 1942.
In 1943 the United States Navy (USN) named a Baltimore class heavy cruiser the USS Canberra in recognition of the valour displayed by the HMAS Canberra during the Battle of Savo Island, the United States President Franklin Roosevelt wished to commemorate the Australian ship's loss by naming a US ship in her honour.
The USS Canberra is the only USN warship named for a foreign warship or a foreign capital city.
Canberra (II) was a Guided Missile Frigate and participated in numerous operations, the most recent being Operation Slipper as part of the international coalition against terrorism. Canberra (II) was decommissioned in 2009.
Nu Ship Canberra has been proudly assigned the “02” pennant number, the same as Canberra (II).
The naming of Canberra marked an important milestone in bringing the LHDs one step closer to service.
LHDs will deliver the most sophisticated air-land-sea amphibious capability in the world and will greatly strengthen the Australian Navy's delivery of sea power.
These new platforms will be able to land a force of more than 2000 personnel by helicopter and water craft, along with all their weapons, ammunition, vehicles and stores – this capability is a quantum leap for Navy and the wider Australian Defence Force (ADF).
The Canberra class LHDs are bigger than Australia's last aircraft carrier HMAS Melbourne and will be more than 230 metres long, 27.5 metres high and weigh around 27,500 tonnes.
The hull of the new Canberra Class LHDs was designed by Spanish company Navantia. BAE Systems is completing the build with the superstructure, combat and communications systems currently being consolidated.
Nu Ship Canberra is due to be accepted into Navy service in the first quarter of 2014. The second LHD is due to be named this time next year for accepting into Navy service in 2016.


Melbourne
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
This is a great day for this shipyard, for our Navy, for the Australian Defence Force and for the defence of Australia.
Seventy one years ago today, the great British fortress of Singapore surrendered.  The Royal Navy's Prince of Wales and the Repulse had been sunk only two months earlier.
Within days, Darwin was bombed.  Within months, the first Canberra would be fighting in her final battle for us. 
In those days, we truly learned that while our alliances are vital and our friends are many, our security is always ultimately in our own hands.
That is the lesson of the 15 February 1942 and it is a lesson we carry with us on the 15th of February 2013 as we name this ship.
That the best defence is self-defence: that for an island nation, its own Navy is its historic guarantee.
From those days to these, from Savo Island to the Middle East Area of Operations, the name Canberra has served our Navy and our nation well.  
I am proud that soon it will serve us again.
The Canberra and her sister Landing Helicopter Dock ship will give our Navy, and our Defence Force as a whole, an entirely new ability to defend Australia and our interests.
They will give our Defence Force an unprecedented ability to exercise and operate on land and sea – supporting amphibious operations and operating independently in our region and beyond like never before.
And when the Australian Navy is called on to provide humanitarian assistance, the Canberra will be ready.
The new Canberra will carry some of our finest war fighters – and it is a tribute to some of our most impressive skilled workers.
935 Australians will work on the Landing Helicopter Dock ships before they put to sea: hundreds of fine Australians doing great Australian jobs.
The Government is committed to maintaining industries here in Australia with the capability to support the Australian Defence Force – and we are committed to creating and supporting the kind of skilled, well-paid work done here at Williamstown.
That's why projects such as the Air Warfare Destroyers and the Future Submarines are so important.
To the veterans and members of the HMAS Canberra/HMAS Shropshire Association – we honour you on such an important day.
I pay my deepest respect and our nation's deepest gratitude to the veterans who served on the first HMAS Canberra during the Second World War.
They never let us down.
No HMAS Canberra has ever let us down – I know we will be proud of the new ship Canberra and all who sail in her.


Melbourne
The Gillard Government will invest over $70 million to help Cooperative Research Centres (CRCs) improve the lives of Australians by driving world class research in areas including cell therapy, autism, eye care in remote communities and workplace safety.
The Government will fund three new CRCs – focused on Alertness, Safety and Productivity; Cell Therapy Manufacturing; and Living with Autism Spectrum Disorders – and provide additional funding to the existing Vision CRC to expand its research programs.
These CRCs will bring together researchers, industry, communities and government to produce world leading research that addresses major challenges in the public and private sectors.
The CRC for Alertness, Safety and Productivity will receive $14.5 million to reduce the burden of impaired alertness on the safety, productivity and health of all Australians.
The CRC for Cell Therapy Manufacturing will receive $20 million to help make Australia a world leader in the manufacture of cell therapies, which offer exciting possibilities for a range of previously incurable and difficult-to-treat conditions.
The CRC for Living with Autism Spectrum Disorders will receive $31 million to enhance the lives of individuals with lifelong development disabilities arising from an autism spectrum disorder.
An additional $5 million will enable the Vision CRC to revolutionise the delivery of eye care in remote environments by developing a world first, intelligent retinal camera.
The camera will be able to be used in extreme environments by non-specialist staff to accurately and rapidly detect sight-threatening conditions such as diabetic retinopathy and glaucoma.
These projects have been chosen following a competitive, merit based process as part of the 15th selection round of the CRC program. There is $240 million in available funding for Round 16, which closes in June 2013.
The Government is committed to maintaining the CRC program, with a total of $619 million in funding for 2012-13 to 2015-16.
More information on the CRC program and the successful CRCs is available at www.crc.gov.au.


Melbourne
PM: I'm pleased to be here at Boeing with Minister Combet to launch a plan for Australian jobs and I'd like to think Ian and the team at Boeing for hosting us today.
Today, we are launching a plan for Australian jobs, a plan for the future. Our economy is under some stress and strain as a result of the economic conditions of our times.
The aftermath of the global financial crisis where we are continuing to see problems in the global economy and particularly stresses and strains in the American economy and the economy of Europe.
At the same time we, as a nation, pulled together during the worst of the global financial crisis and unlike other countries around the world, we have emerged with low unemployment, low inflation, low interest rates, strong public finances, triple-A rated by all major credit ratings agencies and with an economy  that's growing.
But there are still challenges and amongst the challenges for the Australian economy is the strength of the Australian dollar.
Our dollar is so strong in part because of the weakness of the global economy compared with our economy.
Our dollar is so strong because we are yet to see the peak of the investment phase in the mining boom, which means money is coming into our country to invest in mining. 
Our dollar is so strong too because many increasingly view Australia as a safe haven.
But the strength of that Australian dollar does have implications for businesses seeking to export around the world.
It literally means that the goods they take to market are more expensive than they were before, so if you were selling something for 500 euros, now you would be selling it for 750 euros.
In this environment, there are some who say slash workers' wages and conditions and try and be a low wage, low cost economy.
As Prime Minister, I specifically reject that as a plan for Australia's future.
As a Labor Prime Minister, my vision for working Australians is of a high skill, high wage future.
I want modern Australia to be a place where there are great blue collar jobs; secure jobs, high wage jobs, secure jobs, high wage jobs, high skill jobs.
The plan for Australian jobs we announced today has three components.
It's about making sure that we win more of the work available here in Australia.
It's about supporting our businesses so they can seize more of the work in our region of the world, more exports, more opportunities and consequently more jobs.
And it's about supporting small businesses to grow.
Key to all of this is innovation. It's doing things differently, it's doing them better.
We are here at Boeing, which has the work to make the flaps for the Dreamliner aircraft, because it's doing it differently and doing it better.
A new material, a lighter material which means this place is doing something not done anywhere else in the world.
That kind of innovation leads to jobs and prosperity. 
Minister Combet will announce the details of these three approaches and then we will be happy to take your questions. 
MINISTER COMBET: Thanks very much Prime Minister.
As the Prime Minister has indicated, there are three key components to the $1 billion plan for Australian jobs that the Government is releasing today, the first of which is to support Australian firms win more work at home and therefore create more jobs.
And in particular, the specific part of that policy, the main part of it, is that projects worth more than $500 million will be obliged by the Australian Jobs Act that will be introduced to parliament in the near future, to do Australian industry participation plans.
This is not to mandate the use of local firms in large projects but it is to oblige the major project proponents at the earliest point that is feasible in the development of a project to make clear what opportunities for contracted goods and services there will be in that particular project.
The legislation will also establish an Australian Industry Participation Authority that will oversight these opportunities and these industry participation plans and also help facilitate the relationships between Australian firms and the large major project proponents.
The advice to the Government is that this will add somewhere between $1.6 billion to $6.4 billion of economic activity per year.
So a significant measure that we anticipate will lead to a significant increase in jobs as the policy is taken up and is implemented.
The Government has also announced a set of reforms to anti-dumping arrangements in Australia to ensure that there is a fair and level playing field, that Australian manufacturers are not unfairly disadvantaged by dumped products into our market.
And $24.4 million has been allocated to the establishment of a new anti-dumping authority and a number of improvements in the way in which the Customs will go about applying the anti-dumping arrangements.
We have established an Automotive Supplier Advocate whose one job, amongst others, will be to try and lift the level of participation of Australian made vehicles in Government fleets.
In Victoria, in this state, and South Australia and at a Commonwealth level, more than 70 per cent of the vehicles in those fleets are Australian made.
In other states and territories, there is  a long way to go and we estimate that possibly a further 8,000 Australian made motor vehicles could be added to fleets in the future with a greater consciousness, I think, by state and territory governments to purchase Australian made vehicles and there's no reason why they shouldn't be.
The second key part of the policy announced by the Prime Minister is to establish up to 10 Industry Innovation Precincts.
These will bring the best minds in Australian research, in universities and organisations like the CSIRO together with businesses that are keen to expand, that are keen to lift their export market opportunities. 
We have worked over this policy in close consultation with the manufacturing industry in particular over the last 12 months. It is a policy change that manufacturers in particular have sought and argued for.
It was a recommendation in the Prime Minister's Manufacturing Taskforce.
We can perform much better in our economy at bringing research to being commercialised.
We don't perform the best amongst all of the advanced economies in that respect and we can certainly make some significant improvements.
That will be the key in future years to accessing growing markets in the Asia Pacific region.
The Government has released the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper a short time ago.
One of the opportunities identified in that paper is the opportunity to expand in the markets in food sales and food manufacturing in the Asia Pacific region.
Yet we have an industry and food manufacturing that is under a great degree of pressure in this country and that is highly disaggregated.
These precincts will enable manufacturers in the food sector to come together with researchers, identify the market opportunities that exist, the technologies that may be applied, the innovation that is necessary to take up those export opportunities and to do them at larger scale.
We would expect large international firms along with their supply chains to be working with the universities in the establishment of these precincts and they will be industry led.
We have had close co-operation with the CSIRO and the universities in the development of that policy as well.
The third part of the policy is to support mall and medium size enterprises in particular.
They are often times the engine of job gross and innovation.
One of the difficult things for many SMEs with great ideas in our economy is to get access to venture capital, to help them commercialise new products and ideas.
The Government will invest a further $350 million in an industry investment fund that will expect to partner with the private industry to add another $350 million so that we can deepen the venture capital market in this country.
There are also changes to venture capital tax arrangements. And we will be establishing a greater range of services from Enterprise Connect to help small businesses improve their businesses improve their business management systems.
Many SMEs, we expect, would work through the industry and innovation precincts that will be established.
There will also be a new $27.7 million enterprise solutions program to help SMEs provide solutions to Government for the contracted goods and services that Government is seeking.
Oftentimes it's difficult for smaller businesses to be able to commercialise and develop solutions the Government is seeking and this program will assist.
Finally, as the Prime Minister indicated earlier, the Government intends finding a saving to finance these measures.
We will make some changes therefore to the R&amp;D tax incentive.
That incentive will no longer be available to companies which have a turnover in excess of $20 billion within the Australian economy.
We expect that that will affect less than 20 companies in our economy and probably in the region of 15 companies.
This is a clear prioritisation the Government is making to try and stimulate more jobs, more Australian jobs through the support of firms to get into the major projects and to support export opportunities and more Australian jobs through the establishment of industry innovation precincts.
We think it's a prudent saving that targets the resources that are available in the most effective way to achieve jobs growth.
PM: We are happy to take your questions. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM:  Minister Combet has given you some statistics about the extra work we believe will flow from the Australian Industry Participation Plans - $1.6 billion a year - so that's important.
But in combination we believe that this will make a long-term difference to jobs. 
We are here as an economy that has got comparative strengths now but we do need to be focused on jobs and growth for the future. 
We have gone from the fifteenth largest economy to the twelfth largest economy.
We are in the region of the world where we can make the best of the opportunities to come.
So it's about seizing all of that and doing the best with all of that. We can't just drift into that future.
So you can't just instantaneously go how many jobs here and how many jobs there, but I can certainly tell you this.
The result of this plan will be a more prosperous future with more jobs. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I will get Minister Combet to specifically address that question, but I do want to say something about the saving and make a point about the Government's budget.
We have and continue to be in a period where the global financial crisis and its aftermath have hit government revenues by $160 billion.
Now sometimes in the public debate, it is pretended that that didn't happen. It did happen; $160 billion of revenue write-downs over five years. 
Now if you had wanted to cut government expenditure to match that degree of revenue write-down, you would have had to have done something as big as stopping paying the aged pension to older Australians. 
And of course, a responsible government would not do that. 
Now, having seen those revenue write-downs and having them still impact on the Government's budget, we are determined to be offsetting new expenditure with savings. We have done that since 2009 and we are continuing to do it.
So to finance a $1 billion plan for Australian jobs, some tough choices did need to be made and we have decided that some of the biggest businesses in our nation can forego an extra research and development tax credit in order to fund this package.
On the specific issue you raise, I will turn to you Minister Combet. 
MINISTER COMBET: Thank you Prime Minister. The short answer is no.
This is an assessment of what our key priority is and we're going to get the greatest economic dividend from the arrangements we have in place.
I made the comment earlier that we expect this change to affect less than 20 companies, something probably more in the order of 15 companies at the moment.
And it's also important to emphasise that R&amp;D expenditure by those companies in any event, with a turnover of greater than $20 billion a year in the Australian economy, that's a large company indeed, that those companies will have ordinary tax deductibility for their R&amp;D expenditure. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
MINISTER COMBET: It's a bit in excess of that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
MINISTER COMBET: Yes, that change to the R&amp;D tax incentive will finance this policy initiative, that's correct.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
MINISTER COMBET: We will be doing so, they will be listening closely to the announcement but there has been a lot of discussion with many firms about the R&amp;D tax incentive over a period of time and including the development of this policy provision and many of those larger firms I think would be very supportive of not necessarily the R&amp;D change but certainly the initiatives that we've announced.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you give us an idea of your take on manufacturing in Australia? Many governments have been impaled on this issue. What's your view about the role of manufacturing and the role of government in manufacturing?
PM: I believe in Australian manufacturing and I believe it's important to our long-term future.
If you think of our economy on a time sequence, we have taken the hit from the global financial crisis and it continues to have its aftershocks.
We have seen the peak or we are about to reach the peak of the investment phase of the mining boom. We won't hit the production peak for some period of time.
But it's at the investment phase that you see the peak jobs in mining.
And so as we move from the investment phase to the production phase, we need to make sure that our economy is creating jobs in other areas and that our economy has many sources of strength.
It is impossible to imagine the Australian economy for the long term without manufacturing as one of those sources of strength.
It's important to our skills development. It's important to providing employment to Australians. It's important to our future.
And thinking again about that time sequence, as the region of the world we live in continues to grow and to be home to more middle class consumers in their billions, they will want high value manufactured goods in their lifestyles, the same way we do.
They will want to get a trip on one of the planes that is being built here.
They will want to come to Australia on tourism holidays.
Many of the things that we can have a comparative advantage in making, they will want.
So as a government, we have done things like support the car industry.
It's important to Australian manufacturing overall that the car industry is there, feeding skills and development.
I mentioned to Ian as we walked around, last time I came to Boeing, one of the key takeout impressions I had, was how many of the workers I talked to got their start in car making and had the skills to come and work here because of the car industry.
So manufacturing is going to be part of our future. Blue collar jobs, great blue collar jobs are going to be a big part of our future and that's why we have announced our plan for Australian jobs today. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Senator Xenophon arrived back in Melbourne today. (Inaudible)
PM: Yes, we will. Yes, we will. I was surprised and disappointed to see the treatment of Senator Xenophon yesterday and as the Foreign Minister has dealt with publicly, we made immediate and strenuous representations on his behalf, not only in relation to him being detained, but into him being allowed to be in Malaysia.
Clearly we didn't succeed in getting the agreement of the Malaysian Government for him to remain in Malaysia.
I'm glad that he is back safe and well, but we will continue to pursue this issue with the Malaysian Government. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have a view on the Dutch MP Geert Wilders coming and speaking in Australia this week?
PM: I think my ministers have made clear the Government's abhorrence and my abhorrence for his views. 
Okay, thanks very much. 


Melbourne
A $1 billion investment in boosting Australian innovation, productivity and competitiveness will generate business opportunities and economic growth for the future, as part of the Gillard Government's plan to support and create jobs.
The Government's Industry and Innovation Statement, A Plan for Australian Jobs, will back our firms to win more work at home, support industry to win new business abroad and help our small businesses to thrive and grow.
Our plan will give Australian firms a fair chance to win work on major resources and infrastructure projects, improving their opportunities to gain the experience, scale and business connections needed to successfully become part of global supply chains.
It will translate the nation's research effort into better economic outcomes by promoting collaboration between businesses and research institutions through a major new network of Industry Innovation Precincts.
Small and medium-sized businesses and start-up companies will also be provided with expanded business assistance and better access to finance through measures to further stimulate Australia's venture capital market.
The Government's strong economic management during the global financial crisis has provided a solid foundation for businesses, delivering contained inflation, low interest rates, low unemployment, solid growth and strong public finances.
Our industries and workers now face fresh challenges from factors like the high Australian dollar and intense global competition – but there are also tremendous opportunities from the growth of Asian economies.
A Plan for Australian Jobs will help Australian businesses seize the opportunities for growth in our region and adapt successfully to changing economic conditions.
This plan has three core strategies.
Backing Australian industry to win more work at home
·         A new Australian Industry Participation Authority to help businesses build the capabilities and connections to win work on major projects.
·         Legislating Australian Industry Participation (AIP) arrangements, requiring major projects worth $500 million or more to implement AIP Plans to give local industry opportunities to win work on a commercial basis.
·         Requiring projects worth $2 billion or more that apply for concessions under the Enhanced Project By-Law Scheme to embed Australian Industry Opportunity officers within their global supply offices.
·         Reforms to the anti-dumping system to provide stronger protection for Australian industry against unfair competition from overseas.
Supporting Australian industry to win new business abroad
·         The Government will invest more than $500 million in establishing up to 10 Industry Innovation Precincts to drive business innovation and growth in areas of Australian competitive advantage.
·         Precincts will bring firms, research institutions, technology experts and business service providers together to achieve the innovations, connections and scale our businesses need to succeed in the future.
·         A new Industry Innovation Network will allow businesses around Australia, including in regional areas, to take part in Precinct activities, gaining access to knowledge, support, services and partnerships regardless of their location.
·         The first two Precincts will be a Manufacturing Precinct with locations in South East Melbourne and Adelaide and a Food Precinct headquartered in Melbourne.
Helping Australian small and medium businesses to grow and create new jobs
·         A new $350 million round of the Innovation Investment Fund to stimulate private investment in innovative Australian start-up companies.
·         Changes to venture capital tax arrangements to improve clarity and certainty for investors and encourage participation by “angel” syndicates.
·         A new Growth Opportunities and Leadership Development (GOLD) initiative to provide focused support for SMEs with high-growth potential.
·         Extending the successful Enterprise Connect program for SMEs to more manufacturing firms and to new sectors like professional services, information and communication technologies, and transport and logistics, improving the productivity of businesses in key enabling sectors for the broader economy.
·         A new Enterprise Solutions Program to help SMEs develop solutions to public sector needs and become better equipped to win work through public tenders.
Labor's vision is for a diverse, innovative and competitive Australian economy which delivers well-paid, skilled and rewarding jobs.
Along with the Government's investments in education and skills, infrastructure, clean energy and the National Broadband Network, A Plan for Australian Jobs will ensure our nation captures the opportunities of the future.


Melbourne
Thank you very much. Thank you to everybody here, and particularly thank you to Ian and the Boeing team for having us here again.
I've always enjoyed coming here because I do feel as I wander through that I'm seeing the future of Australian manufacturing.
So thank you for having us. And it's good to join my ministerial colleague here, Minister Combet.
I want to say a few words about a plan we are announcing today and it is a plan for Australian jobs.
I believe that modern Australia can have a great blue collar future.
By that I mean that we can continue to be a manufacturing nation, we can be a nation in which people make their living through blue collar jobs.
Blue collar jobs that aren't intermittent or insecure or low paid; blue collar jobs that are highly skilled and highly paid.
But we aren't going to get there by accident. We have to make sure that we shape that future. 
Which is why you need a plan that shapes that future for you and is right for current economic conditions.
And if I can say a few words about current economic conditions, and it's a discussion I've had with Ian and others through the Prime Minister's Manufacturing Taskforce.
The world in which we live today has been shaped by the global financial crisis and its aftermath.
What that means is that a number of the wealthier countries around the world that have been our traditional customers for exports are still struggling with their economies.
President Obama presides over an economy where 12 million people are unemployed. That is the size of the Australian labour force unemployed.
Around the world, 28 million people have fallen into unemployment because of the effects of the global into financial crisis.
And if we look to Europe, what we see is over the last 12 months, they have gone backwards by around 1 per cent, and even an industrial powerhouse like Germany, in the last quarter of last year, went backwards by 0.6 per cent.
So when we look at the global economy, developed nations around the world are struggling in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. 
And that has an effect on us because they are nations to whom we want to sell the things we make.
At the same time we have seen a resources boom in our economy and, of course, that's a good thing. It's been creating jobs and growth.
We are yet to see the peak of the investment phase in the resources boom but $270 billion of investment has been committed in the Australian economy.
What that means is that we are seeing a big capital inflow to our country. 
So combined with global economic weakness and Australia's status increasingly as a safe haven currency, because of our strong economy, we are seeing the Australian dollar very high.
Now that means there are some good reasons why our dollar is high. 
Of course, we want the resources boom and of course, we are proud that everyone worked together during the days of the first impact of the global financial crisis; employers, unions and government, to save jobs in this country.
And we're glad that in this country we do not see unemployment rates like you see in America and Europe. 
But it does mean that our strength, the inflow of money into our resources sector compared with weakness around the world is keeping the Australian dollar very high. 
Indeed, our dollar has gone up by more than 50 per cent in the last few years.
What that means is that the things that we sell overseas are now more expensive for people to buy.
Put simply, something that we used to sell into Europe for 500 euros now cost 750 euros.
So what do we have to do in the face of these economic conditions, knowing that by the standards of the world our economy is strong? 
Unlike nations around the world we have got low unemployment, low inflation, continued growth, triple-A rated strong public finances; but with this ongoing pressure from the Australian dollar, what should we do faced with those economic conditions?
Well, we could simply hope for change and hope that our dollar was going to go down.
Economic orthodoxy tells you that as we move beyond the peak of the investment phase in the mining boom that our dollar should come down.
But our dollar has been stubbornly high now so I don't think we can just rely on that working for us.
We need to have a real plan to deal with a persistently high Australian dollar. 
Some would say to you ‘Well it's all about cost cutting. If we just keep cutting and cutting and cutting, if particularly we cut wages and conditions, then we will be able to compete around the world'
But that ignores the fact just how severely you would have to cut in these conditions. If your currency has gone up more than 50 per cent, if you were looking at your wages cost in your business to try and get back to something that looked like square, with you would have to be cutting wages by 30 per cent.
We would have to see the average wages for a full-time income earner move from $70,000 a year to $50,000 a year.
Well Australian working people don't want to see that and I don't want to see that for them. 
Which is why the plan that I outline today takes a different path.
It recognises the pressures that are on the Australian economy through current economic conditions, but it charts a path to a high wage, high skill future.
And it is particularly pitched at making sure we get the opportunities from what is going to change in our region of the world during the economic times in which we live.
For much of my life, the place that we wanted to sell things to were places that we were far away from.
We wanted to sell things to Europe, we wanted to sell things to the UK, we wanted to sell things to America.
Now, in this economic time, whilst we still want to sell to those economies, we have actually got a geographic advantage.
We are in the right place of the world to sell things to the booming Asian region and by 2030 there will be more than 3 billion middle class consumers in the world in which we live.
More than three billion people in our region of the world where we are geographically near, who want the kind of things in their lives that we are able to make and sell, whether it's manufactured goods like getting a ride on a tremendous plane, whether it's food, wine, whether it's services like health and education.
So I want to see us with a plan that makes sure we seize the benefits of these opportunities.
So that brings us to the focus today, and the focus today is on making sure we get high skill, high wage jobs in the future by focusing on innovation.
When people hear the word ‘innovation,' many would think about a person in a lab wearing a white coat who is coming up with something that that's never been invented before and then taking it out into the business community.
And that is one source of innovation and we want to see more of that kind of invocation.
But innovation too is what is happening in this factory behind me where a different way, a different material for the building of the flaps on planes is going to change those planes forever and that work can be done here because the intellectual work to make it happen, happened in Australia.
Innovation can be coming up with new ways of combining old things.
We are all used to opening a tin and getting fruit out to have for dessert. But, of course, it was innovation that put that fruit in a plastic cup with a lid you could peel back so that you could take it with you to work to have at lunch time or you could put it in the kids' school pack for lunch at school.
Those things are all innovation, and if we can focus on innovation, that will drive productivity growth and new jobs.
In developed economies like our own, half of productivity growth comes from innovation.
So today I announce a plan for Australian jobs; a plan that focuses on innovation; a plan that means we will be seizing the opportunity in our region as well as the opportunities at home.
It's a plan for blue collar jobs. It's a plan to make sure that we are a manufacturing nation and we have many diverse sources of strength in our economy.
The plan has three essential component parts.
First, it's about making sure we win business here in Australia. Australia is home to many big projects in the resources sector and beyond.
The plan I announce today means that when there are projects worth more than $500 million, they will need to have an Australian Industry Participation Plan.
They will need to look to how they can involve Australian businesses and create Australian jobs in what they do.
Many of our big businesses, whether it's resource companies or other forms of big business, are integrated into global supply chains.
That means that they can often look to suppliers that they deal with overseas for things that could be made here.
Through our Australian Innovation Plans, we will be getting the focus on those big businesses creating jobs and opportunities in our country.
We will bring to the parliament the Australian Jobs Act to put this focus on Australian industry participation in businesses worth more than $500 million, projects more than $500 million. This is all about getting work at home.
The second component of the plan is making sure that we are supporting businesses to win work overseas. We are living in a region of huge growth and change.
We need to be supporting our businesses as they seize those exports and seek to grow.
So we will be investing in up to 10 industry precincts which will begin together researchers, innovators, sources of new knowledge with businesses so we can get the move from the creation of that new knowledge into new products, new ways of doing things, so we can seize that innovation and we can be the best at what we do and sell it into the region and sell it into the world.
We have the 13th-largest economy in the world, but when we look at how well we do at innovation, unfortunately we tend to lag behind.
And many Australians would know that intuitively, that Aussies have invented great things but we haven't been the nation that has got the benefits of that great invention.
These industry precincts will be focused on making sure we capture that benefit.
There will be a manufacturing precinct located in Melbourne and in Adelaide.
These precincts will be networked together, and there will be a precinct which focuses on food too, because supplying food into our region and making sure we get to process that food is a big part of our future as well.
Third, we will ensure that we are working with small businesses to help them grow.
Australia is actually a nation of many small businesses, micro-businesses who have fewer than five employees.
Indeed, when you look at that percentage penetration into our economy, we are right up there in the world for numbers of small businesses. 
But it can be hard for those small businesses to grow, to upscale, to get to a bigger size, to employ more people. And one of the constraints on their growth has been lack of access to finance.
And so we will be making sure that there are new ways of businesses that have got a great idea getting access to the finance they need in order to grow Australian jobs and opportunities.
All in all, this is a $1 billion plan for Australian jobs. It's a $1 billion plan for our opportunities in the future.
In the world in which we live, we do not want to be adding to the budget bottom line, not one cent.
We, as a government, want to make sure that when we come up with good new ideas like this plan for Australian jobs, we do not add to the bottom line.
And so we have identified a saving which means bigger businesses currently benefiting from a special research and development tax advantage will be foregoing that tax advantage in order to fund the rest of this package.
We, as a nation, have seen government revenues written down by $160 billion as a result of the global financial crisis.
Now there was no way of cutting government expenditure to match that $160 billion write-down.
If you had chosen to do that, you would have had to do something as big as cut out all payment to aged pensioners, cut out the pension for older Australians.
That, of course, would have driven our economy into recession, put people out of work, destroyed our skills base and thrown Australians into poverty.
So we have seen a big write-down in government revenues, but the right focus now is to make sure that new expenditure is offset with savings and that's what we are going to do today.
What does this all mean for the nation's future? How will we know that we have succeeded?
Well, I think we will know we have succeeded when we see Australians working in the kind of opportunities that we can see here today; that we can see Australians in good blue collar jobs for the future.
We will know we've succeeded when we can see Australian exports penetrating increasingly into the Asian region.
We will know we've succeeded when we combine all of the things that we are putting forward to create the economy of the future; clean energy, the National Broadband Network, traditional infrastructure, a new approach to schooling and a new approach to schooling and a new approach to skills developments, all combining with businesses to make a difference to opportunity and growth for the future. 
So I'm pleased to be here. It's good to be here in such a wonderfully modern establishment, so proud of its innovation record, to talk about jobs, innovation and prosperity for the future.
So Ian, to you and the team, thank you very much.



HOST: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins us now. Good morning to you. Are you devastated by this poll out today? 
PM: Good morning, Kochie. I see a lot of polls come and go and so I just don't focus on them.
We launched a major jobs plan yesterday, and that's my focus.
HOST: Okay, we'll talk about that in a moment. But these figures, the swing has been quite remarkable. What's going wrong do you think?
PM: Oh Kochie, I just don't commentate on opinion polls and there is a reason for that. We see a lot of opinion polls; we get them at least fortnightly, often we get them more frequently than that.
If I spent my time worrying about and commentating on opinion polls, then I wouldn't have time to get my job done, and the job is more important.
So each and every day I just let that wash through and I focus on what I need to do as Prime Minister so that we've got a strong economy today and everything we need for families today, and we're building a better future.
HOST: Your colleagues get worried though. For a lot of them their jobs are on the line if polls don't improve. Have they given you a deadline to turn things around, to turn the polls around?
PM: Certainly not Kochie and the Labor team is a team of people who came into politics because they believed in things. They believed in Labor values and putting them into operation.
That means we focus on things like jobs, we focus on education, getting every child a chance. We focus on healthcare.
People would have come into Labor politics because of lifetime experiences that told them how important a good Labor government is to making a difference to life's chances.
So that's what motivates people, it's what motivates me. It's not the reading of opinion polls.
HOST: One of that team is Kevin Rudd. He has been very aggressive over the weekend saying you have his total support. He is completely behind you, that he has no intention of launching a leadership challenge. So is that comforting, is that part of the unity of the team?
PM: All of these issues were resolved by the Labor team February last year. So none of that is what I focus on.
I was out yesterday, $1 billion plan for jobs because we are in such a changing time in our economy.
Kochie, you can ask these questions a million different ways and you are going to get the same answer.
If you want to know what I do minute-by-minute, what I worry about at night, it's the nation's future. It's not what tomorrow's opinion polls are going to read.
HOST: I am getting that message loud and clear now but it's on the front page of every paper today. Everyone is talking about it.
But let's talk about this jobs package, $1 billion to help manufacturing. Unemployment is low at 5.4 per cent. Why do you think we need to spend $1 billion on helping manufacturing and create new jobs?
PM: We need to be supporting new jobs because our economy is in a real time of change. Our world has been shaped by the global financial crisis and we are still feeling its aftershocks.
For us, we stayed strong and that's fantastic. We have got a big resources boom and we haven't seen the investment peak of that boom yet.
But the investment peak will come. Less people will be involved in resources at that point. And we need to have many sources of strength in in our economy. Not just have all our eggs in the resources basket.
Now people might think we have got a strong economy in lots of places so that should be pretty easy, but the difficulty is that the dollar is high and likely to stay high. So something that we used to manufacture and sell to Europeans for €500, now costs them €750.
We are not going to be able to compete on cost. But we can compete on quality and innovation and that's what the $1 billion package is all about.
HOST: And I suppose it's the issue too while the Australian dollar is high, you don't want manufacturing to be decimated because when the dollar falls, and we become more competitive, we actually want a manufacturing sector still there to take advantage of that.
PM: Kochie, that's absolutely right except what worries me, is that the dollar isn't going to fall.
Now, reason will tell you, economic orthodoxy will tell you, that when we move from the peak of the investment phase of the resources boom into the production phase, and we've got less capital flowing into the country, that at that time we would see our dollar fall.
But our dollar has been persistently high despite things that traditionally would have taken its value down like commodity prices coming off and interest rates going lower.
So we have to prepare ourselves for a future where we still want to be making things, manufacturing things, exporting them whilst the dollar is high.
So that really puts the weight on us to step up, compete, quality, innovation and that's why we needed yesterday's jobs plan to chart that course for that kind of future.
HOST: Okay, I wish you the best with it. Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.


Gold Coast
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Thank you very much. Thank you to Paul for that very kind introduction.
Paul, a man of so few words that you really value it when he breaks his silence.
Paul, accused perhaps in the past of being a faceless man, but no one's ever accused him of being a voiceless man.
That is a good thing, that is a good thing for the members of the Australian the Workers Union because what that means is that Paul raises a passionate voice to put your causes, your concerns at the centre of the national debate so I congratulate him on his leadership of this great union.
I congratulate too Bill Ludwig, a legend of this union honoured today with a life membership, appropriate for a man who has been a union member, a member of this union, for more than 60 years.
He's dedicated his life to this union. It is impossible to record the history of this union without talking about Bill Ludwig's role.
It is impossible to write the history of this state without recording Bill Ludwig's role.
He is a great unionist, a passionate Queenslander, a great Australian and he's got our thanks for the contribution he's made to our nation's life.
And every member of the Australian Workers Union gathered in the audience tonight, if William Guthrie Spence was here this evening I think he would look at these members assembled and he would be amazed at how far your union has come.
He would be amazed by the degree of change that has happened in all of those years in between.
But something tells me that if he was able to be here and sit with us tonight and talk to the delegates gathered from all around the countries and listen to their stories and struggles what he would actually be impressed by is the fact that no matter how much has changed in our nation and in this union's life you have always held dear to that passion, his values, they're still the values of the Australian Works Union and you should be so incredibly proud of that.
I want to acknowledge a great friend of the AWU who is here tonight and a great friend of mine, the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, Wayne Swan, has joined us this evening.
Wayne has actually flown back from Russia to be here tonight.
Now I don't tell you that so you get in anticipation about seeing vodka drinking and Cossack dancing.
I don't think Wayne had time to pick up those pursuits when he was over in Russia.
He has been attending the G20 Finance Ministers meeting and when he attend that Finance Ministers meeting he is gathered in a room of people who really understood what it was like to be there during the most dangerous moments of the global financial crisis.
And in that room when they look for leadership they look to Wayne Swan, a man honoured as the world's best treasurer, a man so honoured because of his passionate commitment to jobs.
Wayne, thank you for everything you've done and continue to do for the working people of this country and for their jobs and opportunity.
Can I acknowledge too, Simon Crean here tonight, Joe Ludwig here tonight and so many members of my Labor team that it is impossible to mention them all.
But thank you for coming from all corners of the nation to be here on this special occasion and to be here and say to the Australian Workers Union and we understand your determination and we share it with you.
We understand the values that have brought you here tonight and we share those with you as well.
Friends, as Labor leader it is a great privilege to be here tonight.
A great privilege to be amongst a room of people who truly understand in every way, in every dimension that what enables a person to build a life for them and their families, what enables them to have a decent life and to aspire to a better life is access to work, access to a job.
Not just any job, but a job that offers them fairness and decency at work and the opportunity to have their voice heard through their trade union.
A job is an incredibly precious thing.
We are in a world shaped by the global financial crisis where literally tens of millions of working people have been thrown out of jobs  -  on the scrap heap, in their countries, with all the misery that that implies for them, their families, their children, the prospects for the rest of their life.
Work is a precious thing.
You understand that and you feel it when any union member loses a job.
We understand that and we feel it when any working person loses a job.
Which is why, having work, the importance of work, in national economic debate it is front and centre this year, because of the importance of work.
We come to that national economic debate having protected jobs during the global financial crisis when the going was really tough, when the other side of politics simply slept through a global financial crisis they now seek to deny ever happened, we didn't rest.
We didn't rest, we worked with you, we worked with the employers to protect jobs in this country  -  such a precious thing.
What that means is we have come out of the global financial crisis unlike other nations around the world, unlike other nations around the world that have seen millions of people thrown out of work, their skill base destroyed, we have come through the global financial crisis with economic strength, unlike the rest of the world.
But you know that doesn't mean that our future is assured.
You know that we still have to plan and think and work to shape our future.
We can't simply drift into the future thinking, well, it doesn't matter, everything will be all right.
We can't adopt the politics embraced by the other side of the national debate in Australia, by the conservative side of politics.
We cannot embrace and I agenda of cost cutting and wage reduction as our future.
They would call on us, as we've seen on the video tonight, to increase our country's competitiveness by decreasing the wages of working people.
Well, we won't do that, we will never do that.
We understand that the strong persistent strength of the Aussie dollar is putting a lot of pressure on, a lot of pressure in many of the industries that you represent.
The strong dollar that has resulted because so much of the world's economy is weak.
The strong dollar which has resulted because of the resources boom and the big capital inflow that we have seen.
The strong dollar that his persisted even when the price for resources has gone down.
The strong dollar that has continued even as our interest rates have gone down.
The strong dollar which will continue to be a feature of our economy for quite some time to come.
Those who say the answer to the challenge of the strong dollar is cost cutting are asking working people to forego a third of their wages.
That is what you'd need to do - cut the average wage for a full-time working people from $70,000 to $50,000, to try and offset the effect of the dollar's rise.
That is not a future for our country and we won't embrace it.
We will choose a different path.
It is the path that I outlined yesterday, a plan for Australian jobs, a plan for our future.
You would have recognised many elements of the plan because they are things your union has been calling for and the union movement in total has been calling for.
We embraced your ideas through a process that included you and the plan that we announced yesterday is a comprehensive plan to make sure that we are a country that makes things; proud to have this union making things as part of our national economy and national life.
We will make sure through that plan that we win work here at home, that the proponents of the biggest projects in our country don't simply look at their global supply chain, don't do business here the way that they would do it in any other country on earth.
No, instead they will have to think.
Who in Australia can do this work?
Who in Australia could benefit from these jobs and these opportunities?
At the end of the day we want to make sure that prosperity is shared through the Australian economy by giving Aussie companies and Aussie workers a fair go at the work that is generated here at home.
Projects in Australia, employing Australians  -  that is the way it should be.
That's part of our plan for Australian jobs, for blue collar jobs, for secure job, for jobs that help people build a life and feed their families and give their families a future.
We want to focus on making sure that we get to seize the opportunities that will come due to the spectacular growth in our region of the world.
For much of my life, for much of the life of many people in this room we looked to markets in the US and Europe, we looked over Asia and we looked over it because we identified it as a place of poverty or a place of competition.
Now in the age in which we live as the European economies still face so much stress and strain from the global financial crisis and its aftermath, as the US economy still faces challenges with 12 million people unemployed, the same number of people as our total labour force, here we are in this region of the world, the growing region of the world, the region of the world that will soon become home to the biggest middle class on earth.
That middle class will want to buy the things that we've got to sell provided we get the plans right now.
So our product is there: high quality, available, desired in the region in which we live.
That's why we are investing in industry precinct and innovation precincts to bring together researchers and businesses to make sure the great ideas are spread and adopted, to give us that comparative advantage that will help us sell our exports into Asia and create Australian jobs.
The third part of our plan is to make sure our small businesses grow.
We have a vibrant small business economy but often they hit a constraint and can't get any bigger.
Access to finance is a bit thing that keeps small businesses small even though they've got good ideas and good products to sell.
We will be helping those businesses grow and to grow Australian jobs.
A plan for Australian jobs, a plan for the future.
A plan that will work with everything else we are doing to modernise the Australian economy.
To get it ready for the age in which we live and the prosperity we want to see for Australians.
It will join with our plan for a clean energy future.
Our role out of the National Broadband Network.
Our investments in infrastructure, in road, in rail and ports.
Our investments skills, more apprenticeships and traineeships than ever before.
More university places too.
These are the ingredients of the vibrant, modern economy with many sources of strength.
Not all of our eggs in the resources boom, not all of our eggs in any one basket but a vibrant economy with many sources of strength including manufacturing as an ongoing source of strength for our nation.
That is our plan and I am determined that we realise that vision of our country's future  -  high skill, high wage jobs, a country that makes things.
Friends, as part of that future, a country that is offering jobs and prosperity to its people, it can only be the Australia we want if it is a country offering jobs with decent working conditions and fairness and respect at work.
We got rid of the hated WorkChoices because it wasn't the Australian way to have that kind of exploitation at work.
Let's never forget WorkChoices particularly pressed on the young, pressed on women workers, on workers who don't come to the labour force, don't come to the labour force, necessarily able to demand for themselves.
WorkChoices wasn't the Australian way and we got rid of it with the Fair Work.
Friends, when it comes to fairness and decency at work we have more to do.
We announced some new measures last week that will make a difference to all of our modern families around the country trying to balance work and family life.
Which will make a difference to people who face bullying in their workplace, particularly the young, particularly the apprentices who can face that bullying at work.
These are important measures but they are not the end of our workplace relations agenda.
We will keep making announcements for change in workplace relations because the Fair Work Act is good but for me good is never good enough.
We will keep improving to give Australians the fairness, the decency, the respect at work they deserve and you want to see for them.
We're not done yet when it comes to health and safety at work.
I know your union is still mourning the loss of two firefighters in Victoria, Katie Peters and Stephen Cader.
We know that whenever anyone loses their life at work it is a dreadful tragedy for them, for their family but we feel it too.
We've always got more to do to make sure that people not only go to work but they come back home safe and well and we will keep working with you to achieve that too.
Friends, it's always been in us as a nation, as a generation, as a people to aspire not only to change our life's conditions, to do better hopefully for ourselves, but to change our nation so it offers better opportunities to our nation's children.
Every generation of Australians has worked so that the next generation can live a better life than them.
More opportunities for their children.
This generation is not going to let Australia's kids down.
We've got work to do to make sure that every Australian child, no matter the circumstances of their birth, goes to a great school and gets a real chance at a great life a real chance at a great life as a result.
That they aren't written off as a 7-year-old, a 10-year-old, a 12-year-old, a 15-year-old, that they aren't denied the things that will give them the power, the options, the choices to structure a life for themselves.
We've worked hard and I've been very passionate about making sure we are improving the nation's schools for our nation's children.
But we've got more to do to ensure that we can say to each other that we can say to each other that every school is a great school.
That every school's got the resources it needs.
That a great education isn't something that comes with a life of privilege, that it comes to every Australian child.
We will be working hard on that this year and I know you will be working alongside us as we do it.
Friends, this year too will see us start a transformation for Australians who live with disabilities and their families.
At the end of the day any Australian - any Australian's family member - would end up with a disability that changes their life forever.
Getting that disability shouldn't put that person on the scrap heap.
It shouldn't put that family into a life of ongoing strain  -  help should be at hand.
Which is why I'm particularly proud that on 1 July this year we will launch the National Disability Insurance Scheme to make a difference.
The watch-words of this year; the watch-words of our Labor cause; the watch-words of this nation's future: jobs, opportunity, fairness, being stronger, being smarter.
Making sure that the next generation enjoys a better life than we do.
Getting work pumping through the work troughs and the factories and the offices now.
Creating the economy that will give back prosperity to the next generation of Australians and beyond.
That is our mission, that is our cause in 2013 and beyond 2013.
I come here to this union's gathering as a Labor leader.
I'm not the leader of a party called the progressive party.
I'm not the leader of a party called the moderate party.
I'm not the leader of a party even called the social democratic party.
I'm a leader of the party called the Labor Party deliberately because that is what we come from.
That is what we believe in and that is who we are.
As the leader I can say to you 2013 will be about fighter for the Labor cause each and every day.
Fighting each and every day as we govern and then each and every day of the election campaign.
I am very confident that as we fight that campaign Australians will see that we have the plan for the nation's future that is right for their families and for their children and for the nation beyond that  -  I am very confident about that.
Friends, I know we'll be working together.
We'll be fighting together as we govern and then campaign across 2013.
But enjoy the night.
It's a night to be enjoyed and on with the fight tomorrow.
Thank you very much.


Brisbane
PM: I'm here at Primo Smallgoods because yesterday I announced a billion dollar plan for Australian jobs.
It's a plan for blue collar jobs. A plan for blue collar jobs today and tomorrow.
And as I made the point inside talking to the workers here, many people when they visualise a blue collar job in manufacturing would think of someone working on an assembly line in a car plant.
And certainly there are Australians who do those jobs, and they're very valued jobs. High paid, high skill jobs.
But manufacturing extends so much broader than that. What happens here at Primo is manufacturing too. Taking great Australian produce  -  meat  -  and adding value and then exporting it to the world.
Primo not only sells to Australians; they export to 40 countries around the world. And they've achieved that because of their reputation for quality and innovation; always coming up with new products; always coming up with ways of doing the job better.
This industry, food processing, is a huge opportunity for Australia as we move into this Asian century of growth and change.
Yesterday when I announced the billion dollar plan for Australian jobs I made the point that many of the more developed, richer countries in the world like the US and Europe are battling with sluggish economies.
The growth region of the world is here in Asia, growing so that we will see more three billion middle class consumers by 2030.
And those middle class consumers will want great Australian food products including what is made here.
The challenge is not for us to just be a great agricultural exporting nation, though of course we are that, but to capture the jobs which come with food processing, with adding the value to food before we export it. And that is what is happening right here.
So the plan that I announced yesterday will benefit businesses like this one. It's a plan with three elements.
To make sure that we maximise work here in Australia by capturing for Australian firms the benefit of work on big projects worth more than $500 million. That Aussie firms get a fair go at that work.
Number two, helping businesses become the best they can be so that they can seize export markets. I said yesterday that we would create up to ten industry precincts.
One of them will be in the food industry. It will bring together researchers and industry so that they can collaborate and so that they can come up with the next wave of innovation that will drive jobs and opportunity in that industry.
And third, yesterday I said we would be helping small businesses to grow.
This is a comprehensive plan for our future. We have found savings so this plan doesn't add a cent to the budget bottom line. And it is a plan that will help Australian manufacturing, including manufacturing like this.
At the same time as we implement our plan for Aussie jobs, we are doing the other things necessary to get our economy ready to seize the benefits of the future.
That's what rolling out the National Broadband Network is about; what rolling out traditional infrastructure in roads and rail and ports is all about.
It's what investing in skills is about, whether it's in schools or in vocational education and training or universities.
And I'm proud we've got more apprenticeships and traineeships than ever before.
But it's also about seizing a clean energy future.
So I'm glad that here today I'm able to announce the Government, through our carbon pricing arrangements, will make available a $1.2 million grant to Primo Smallgoods that will enable it to have more energy-efficient technology, lighting, refrigeration, different ways of heating water.
That will save them $1.4 million a year on the power bill.
That's good for this business, good for our environment, cuts carbon pollution and shows the way in which our carbon pricing scheme can work with manufacturing and for manufacturing for the future.
I will turn now to Bernie for some comments, then we will take your questions.
BERNIE RIPOLL: Thank you Prime Minister and thank you everyone here and a huge thank you to Primo Smallgoods.
I'm really proud that a Labor government can be here in the Brisbane western corridor supporting jobs, supporting great manufacturers like in food manufacturing, and training the jobs of the future.
And it's really pleasing to see it right here in the heart of the western corridor.
There are new jobs being created where there are fantastic skills, fantastic transport corridors and all the opportunities and things that we have in the 21st century.
So as the local member I'm really proud that it's our government that is supporting these jobs, supporting the innovation that goes on here.
PM: Thanks very much, we're happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I haven't had a direct discussion with President Obama but his words are clear from his State of the Union speech.
He has challenged his Congress to develop a market-based solution, and he specifically references the McCain-Lieberman Bill.
Now that was a proposition from a few years ago and it was a proposition about an emissions trading scheme.
So President Obama has effectively said to his congress, I want you to get on with the job, a market-based solution, he's referred to an emissions trading scheme. And then if they let him down he has said he will act.
What this just goes to show is that in pricing carbon, we are moving in the direction the world is moving.
Carbon pricing is in many nations around the world and President Obama has firmly laid down a challenge for his own nation.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I don't do commentary on opinion polls and I'm focused here today on my plan for Australian jobs.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: What you will continue to see from this Government is a focus on the economy, making sure that it's strong and it's giving people the benefits of work.
We did that during the global financial crisis. I'm here doing that today.
Without a strong economy, without work, we can't be a strong and fair society. And at the same time, we will be talking to people about modernising for the future.
You can't just let yourself drift into the future. You've got to shape it; you've got to determine what your future is going to be.
That's why we laid out the Asian Century White Paper and why we're focused on modernising our economy.
And as a traditional Labor government we will be talking about opportunities for kids in every Australian school and making sure people with disabilities get a better deal in life.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say you don't comment on polls, but the current figures (inaudible) surely that must be a concern?
PM: I don't comment on opinion polls. I'm very focused on the billion dollar plan for Australian jobs that I laid out yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe that Tony Abbott will actually scrap the carbon tax and the mining tax if he wins office?
PM: I've said in the past that I do not believe that Mr Abbott would scrap the carbon tax. I think what all of this would come to, if he were ever elected, is a bit of a fiddle and a bit of a name change.
At the end of the day, Mr Abbott and his colleagues have stood in the past for an emissions trading scheme. Our country will have an emissions trading scheme in two years' time.
JOURNALIST: Is there any room to move in terms of going to an ETS and carbon price so that business and industry don't have this jolt, they can adjust to a much slower (inaudible)
PM: We've laid out the settings. They are there, they are law, they're legislated, a fixed price for the first three years, a carbon tax and then an emissions trading scheme.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: What's there is the law. Business knows that's it, that's the scheme, and we're working through the fixed-price period, the carbon tax period, to an emissions trading scheme.
And I would remind that it was the Howard Government that in 2007 stood on a platform of an emissions trading scheme, which is why in answer to your question I said where I think this would ultimately end up if Mr Abbott ever became Prime Minister is a bit of a fiddle and a bit of a name change.
JOURNALIST: Perhaps without commenting why, are you surprised that Tony Abbott is personally more popular than you?
PM: I don't comment on opinion polls.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) how do you quell the nerves within your own party? Obviously a lot of your fellow MPs are very nervous at this stage.
PM: My MPs  -  I'm standing here with Bernie Ripoll. There are things that drove people to choose joining Labor and then to devote their life to becoming a member of parliament. Labor beliefs about jobs and opportunity; Labor believes about fairness.
It's those beliefs that drive me and this government and every policy we choose, including the plan for Australian jobs we announced yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think that (inaudible) you are not the preferred Prime Minister in the polling. Do you think your leadership is still secure?
PM: Look, I don't comment on opinion polls and any of those questions were resolved last February.
JOURNALIST: Are you relieved Paul Howes said today that you had 110 per cent (inaudible)
PM: Look, I don't comment on opinion polls and as I said in answer to this question, all of those issues were resolved last February.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Julian Assange has commented that he is going to seek a seat in the Senate, and he says it might be his ticket out of the embassy in London. What do you think of that?
PM: They are all matters for Mr Assange.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Not at this time, but we will be continuing to pursue some further details with Malaysia.
JOURNALIST: Do you think business will be comfortable on the plan announced yesterday, is it more red tape, having this prior notice required for businesses?
PM: Let's be very clear about what we announced yesterday and I do want to particularly address one point that has been raised today.
What we said yesterday is if you have a big project, more than $500 million, then instead of just looking to your global supply chain and saying, "Well, if we were doing this in a dozen other countries around the world, we would use the following suppliers because we always do," having an obligation to look and see if an Australian business can do that work for you.
Now I think that's fair enough, that work that is being done in this country, not that Australian businesses should get some artificial advantage, but that they should get a truly fair go and that businesses need to look and see if they can deal with Australians here to give them the work and the benefits.
I've seen it claimed today by Mr Hockey that our plan is about putting public servants into businesses.
That is completely untrue, and it is the kind of negativity we always see from the Opposition, and it is the kind of negativity you can only see when people don't bother to inform themselves of the details.
Anybody who had read our policy yesterday, and clearly Mr Hockey must not have, anybody who had read our policy would see what we're talking about is for the biggest projects - more than $2 billion - that that business would have to employ someone whose job it is to look how they can use other Australian businesses.
Well surely that's fair enough that mega projects have a dedicated team looking to see how they can benefit fellow Australians.
JOURNALIST: After what happened with the reaction to this today and also the mining tax, is it time to more closely consult with big business while making policies rather than make announcements (inaudible)?
PM: We consult very, very closely with businesses and the policy I announced yesterday builds on a report I was given by the Prime Minister's Manufacturing Taskforce, a purpose-specific group that I brought together, including representatives of business.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott is trying a bit of a low-target strategy. How do you flush him out so that the public can see what you want them to see?
PM: Look, at the end of the day when people vote next September - in September - they will make a choice, and I think they will make a choice between who has got the better plan for the nation.
I'm out here talking about the policies and plans that matter for jobs, for families, for the future.
Okay, thanks very much.
[ENDS] 


Melbourne
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the Centenary of Anzac Warren Snowdon today announced grants to encourage communities across Australia to become involved in the Centenary.
The Anzac Centenary Local Grants Program, providing $100,000 per electorate, will enable and empower communities across Australia to commemorate the Centenary of Anzac in their own way.
Communities are encouraged to start identifying local initiatives that recognise Australian service during the First World War.
The Centenary of Anzac 2014-2018 stands to be one of the most important commemorative periods in Australia's history. Around 330,000 Australians served overseas during the First World War including more than 50,000 at Gallipoli. There are a large number of Australian families with links to our first Anzacs and diggers and the impact of the war was felt by every community across the country.
A committee will be created in each electorate to work alongside local Federal MPs on grant proposals.
The grants will provide communities throughout the country with an opportunity to pay tribute to those involved in the First World War and to reflect on the lives of those who served and sacrificed in Australia's name.
Projects which could be considered for grant funding include:
·         Public commemorative events
·         New First World War memorials or honour boards
·         The restoration of existing First World War memorials or honour boards
·         The preservation, interpretation and display of First World War wartime and military memorabilia and artefacts
·         School projects related to the First World War
Grant funding will be available in 2013-14.
Information on the grants including the Program's guidelines will be available on the Anzac Centenary website shortly: www.anzaccentenary.gov.au


Adelaide
Adelaide will be home to a key manufacturing precinct, as part of the Gillard Government's $1 billion jobs plan.
The Adelaide Defence Precinct will service the state's strong defence industry.
The Precinct is scheduled to be fully operation by August 2013 with initial services delivered from May this year, Prime Minister Julia Gillard announced today in Adelaide.
The Adelaide Defence Precinct is part of the Gillard Government's Industry and Innovation statement - A Plan for Australian Jobs. In total $504.5 million has been announced for Innovation Industry Precincts.
The aim of these precincts is to drive productivity, improve connections between business and the research sector and mobilise Australian industry to compete more successfully in global markets.
Australia has strong capabilities in designing and manufacturing world-class defence products and there are major opportunities to win new work in global supply chains.
The Defence Precinct, while based in South Australia, will link businesses, universities and government agencies nationally to generate economic benefits for Australian industry.
The Precinct will complement the Melbourne- based Enterprise Connect Defence Industry Innovation Centre and will work closely with defence focused organisations such as the Defence Materials Technology Centre and Defence SA.
It will foster greater collaboration across SA and the nation's diverse defence sector and will assist the state in realising its vision of employing over 37,000 workers and contributing $2.5 billion to the economy by 2020.
Nationally, A Plan for Australian Jobs - announced on Sunday - will help Australian businesses seize the opportunities for growth in our region and adapt successfully to changing economic conditions.
The plan has three key elements:
•           Backing Australian industry to win more work at home;
•           Supporting Australian industry to win new business abroad; and
•           Helping Australian small and medium businesses to grow and create new jobs.
The location of the Adelaide Defence Precinct is expected to be announced in coming months.
The remaining precincts will be selected in 2013.


Adelaide
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: It's great to be here in South Australia, back in my home town of Adelaide.
I'm joined by the Premier of South Australia Jay Weatherill and by the Minister for Finance Penny Wong.
We've been walking through this fantastic facility at Techport looking at the Air Warfare Destroyer and we've been talking about how, in 2007, what you would have seen here was sand dunes.
Now you see all of this and all of this is home to thousands of jobs for South Australians.
This is the kind of work that we can perform in our country, a country that can have a comparative advantage at making things; that can have a great Defence industry, a great manufacturing industry.
On the weekend I launched our plan for Australian jobs and it is about places like this.
It's about making sure that in the future we continue to have these high-skill, high-paid jobs.
Now, there are plenty of stresses and strains in the global economy at the moment and some of them impact on us.
The global economy still hasn't fully recovered from the days of the global financial crisis and of course because we stayed strong during the global financial crisis, we now have a very strong Australian dollar and that can make it tough for manufacturers and people who want to export.
But even with those pressures we can succeed, we can win through, we can have these jobs for the future.
The plan for Australian jobs that I launched on the weekend had a particular strategy of focusing on precincts  -  precincts where you would bring together the best of our researchers with business people, large and small, to innovate, to think, to design the work and work practices and work products of the future.
In other countries overseas there is a better transmission of knowledge from research into industry than there is in our country, and given our advantage in the world is going to be based on how well we can innovate and the quality of what we do, it's important that we speed up that transmission, that collaboration between researchers and industry.
I'm very pleased that we will see a precinct in South Australia that will focus on Defence, on manufacturing, on areas that have been very central to this state's economy and will continue to be central to it for a long time to come.
Premier Weatherill has been charting the future of the economy in South Australia.
It's a vision compatible with our vision for the Australian economy.
It's about jobs, good quality jobs, high-paid jobs, high-skilled jobs for the future.
I'll call on the Premier to make some comments now.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Thank you, Prime Minister and welcome to South Australia again. You're always welcome here.
PM: Thank you.
Can I say that South Australia believes in a manufacturing future for South Australia and it's an advanced manufacturing future.
What we're seeing here is precisely that future being played out, bringing together large principal contractors together with research institutions, together with small- and medium-sized businesses to create jobs for South Australians.
Just to give you an example of the sort of things that are being spawned by these developments here; a company, a small-to-medium enterprise called Sage Automation in 2006-7 saw the state government's push into the Defence and mining sector and on the strength of that strategic vision they decided to get into those sectors. They hadn't been in those sectors before.
Now they have 15 per cent of their work that's being won through the Defence sector and not just here at Techport, although Techport was the basis for their foothold in the Defence sector, but also now they're winning contracts in Victoria and in other parts of the world.
So this is what can happen if you make a clear strategic vision for your state, you back it up with public investments like our $300 million ship-lift facility here, you have a Commonwealth partner that's prepared to use the power of their procurement to actually drive Australian jobs.
Defence contracting decisions, Defence procurement decisions, are industry development decisions.
So that is why it's so crucial that we continue to invest in South Australian jobs, back South Australian ingenuity so that we have a future for the workers here, a future for them and their families.
There's a very big procurement project which is on the horizon. It's the future submarines project, procuring something in the order of 12 submarines estimated to be in the order of $36 billion.
The largest single procurement the Commonwealth Government will ever enter into.
The Commonwealth have already committed to the assembling of those future submarines here in South Australia based at Techport.
What we're calling on the Federal Coalition to do is to make a similar commitment.
At the moment, Tony Abbott has refused to rule out buying these future submarines off the shelf.
This is absolutely crucial. Why wouldn't you back in Australian ingenuity to build these submarines?
Because we can see here this is the basis upon which you can actually grow an industry.
So we very much welcoming the Commonwealth's commitment to future submarines being assembled here in South Australia.
They've made two very important decisions in that regard: the land-based testing site will be here and the design centre will be based here.
Those two projects are getting up and running and we're expecting the first decision to be taken in the 2013-14 year.
These are very important decisions for the future of South Australia.
They will secure skills and capabilities here in South Australia that are not only important for the Defence sector but they also allow these industries to step out into mining, step out into other areas of advanced manufacturing, securing jobs for South Australians.
MINISTER WONG: Thanks very much, I'll just say a few words before we move to questions.
Can I say first, as a South Australian Senator, as a Minister from South Australia and as the Minister responsible for the ASC, it's a great pleasure to welcome the Prime Minister as well as the Premier to these facilities.
As we walk through, what we're reminded of today is the importance of government policy, of government decisions to help deliver jobs for Australians and to help deliver jobs for South Australians.
There are over a couple of thousand people who work at this facility.
Highly skilled people, people who are showing the rest of us the future of manufacturing in this country and as the Premier said, it's a reminder of what can happen when industry and government work together to ensure those jobs.
We in South Australia, we get it; we get that federal government policy, when it comes to industry, when it comes to the Defence industry, matters.
It matters to us, it matters to our economy and it matters to South Australian families.
That's why this Labor Government has been so clear about our commitment to Defence and Defence manufacturing here in South Australia.
Thanks very much.
PM: Before we move to questions, if I could just say two quick other things.
First, yesterday the Leader of the Australian Greens, Christine Milne, indicated that she was bringing Greens' agreement with the Government to an end.
This is my first opportunity to comment publicly on that.
What I would like to say is in 2010 Australians voted for a parliament in which no major political party could form government without working with others in the parliament.
In 2010, I entered a series of agreements to enable us to form a government and get on with the job; get on with the job of keeping the economy strong and making sure that it offers people the benefits of work; get on with the job of helping families who are under all of the pressures of modern life, make ends meet and help their families; and get on with the job of the big things we need to do to shape our nation's future.
When I entered those agreements we then worked as a government and we will continue to work as a government.
I am unsurprised that in this election year the Greens party has chosen to walk away from its agreement; unsurprised by that because at the end of the day the Greens party is fundamentally a party of protest rather than a party of government.
The Greens party is fundamentally a party that would prefer to complain about things than get solutions.
And second, I'm not surprised that the Greens party has walked away on the basis of a difference about jobs.
We will always stand up for the jobs of Australian workers here and right around the nation.
As a Labor Party, we understand that there's nothing more important to families and to them making a life than having access to work, decent work, high-quality work, good working conditions.
It's at the centre of what we do and of course we will never deviate from that.
In terms of the stability of the Government, the Leader of the Greens has indicated they will continue to provide confidence and supply so there are no consequences in relation to stability.
The only other thing I wanted to say before going to questions is the Premier mentioned Sage  -  I'd just like to say my nephew works there.
Let's take some questions.
JOURNALIST: You talk about jobs, Prime Minister, unemployment in the northern suburbs is 43.4 per cent and in the southern suburbs where you're going tonight it's 31.6 per cent I think.
What are you doing about jobs for the northern suburbs and the southern suburbs if it's all about jobs?
PM: Well I'm not necessarily going to accept your figure work but what I can say we are doing about jobs is, first, the things that we've talked about here today, through our plan for Australian jobs.
Our economy is undergoing a time of change and you can't wish that away or pretend it's not happening.
The world changed when the global financial crisis happened and we won't be going back to that old world, the world changed.
And the way in which it changed meant that we are going to see for a long period of time Europe struggle to get back to growth, the American economy struggle.
At the same time, a big resources boom, that's a good thing but it also means our dollar is very strong, putting lot of pressure on, and the dollar is going to be sustained high for a long period of time.
So we are dealing with a transformation in our economy that we've got to manage to make sure we are getting people good-quality work.
Now there's plenty of upside because we live in the region of the world that is going to be the source of the biggest growth in this century.
That's why we last year released the Asian Century White Paper, to make the point that we will be living in the region of the world with more middle class consumers than anywhere else.
And so we can take advantage of those opportunities if we get the policies right and the plan I announced on the weekend is about getting the policies right.
In terms of distribution of jobs across cities, we always provide extra resources and support for those parts of cities, our nation, that have particularly high unemployment rates.
We do that through our local employment coordinators and like approaches that focus on particular places.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, getting back to the Greens situation, how much of the decision, do you think is that there is, from the Greens' point of view, they have a total lack of support in you as Labor leader?
PM: The leader of the Australian Greens announced her decisions yesterday so they're not mysterious, they're known. You can read the speech that she gave at the Press Club.
And she fundamentally said in that speech that they've got a different view about jobs than the Labor Party does.
They don't think that we should be allowing any exploration in the Tarkine. Well, that's about jobs for Tasmanians.
They've got a different view about jobs across the economy.
Well, we're a Labor Party, we're the party of work, we're the party of making sure working people have got access to decent jobs and good working conditions so that's the difference.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your response to suggestions today that there is enormous pressure within the party on Bill Shorten to bring support over Kevin Rudd?
PM: Well I don't run commentary on columns in the newspaper because if I did that I wouldn't get anything else done and I've got lots of important things to do.
JOURNALIST: What do you say to your MPs that are spreading this disquiet, that are leaking effectively against the Government?
PM: We've got a lot of work to do and we've got a very clear plan between now and election day and a clear plan that we will present for our nation's future.
When we entered 2013, I said that at the centre of our nation's life in 2013 would be policies and plans for the economy for the long-term, and meeting the needs of modern families who are under all of the stresses and strains in family life today.
As Prime Minister, across this year, I will be working on both strengthening the economy and helping modern families get through.
On strengthening the economy, nothing more important than jobs, and that's why we announced the plan for Australian jobs on the weekend.
And we will follow that up with the work that we've got to do in Australian schools, making sure every child gets a chance, every child gets a great education, but our economy also has the benefits in the future of those highly-skilled, highly-capable individuals.
And we've said too this year will be about launching the National Disability Insurance Scheme, because that's a big challenge for families today, supporting someone with disability.
So that's the plan for now until the election and the plan beyond is about keeping our economy strong, focussing on jobs and fairness and opportunities for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, were talks about the leadership the reason for you being late today or delayed this morning?
PM: No, not in any way. I actually had some calls to make this morning relating to the announcement of BHP and Marius Kloppers and I do want to take the opportunity to say I wish Marius Kloppers well with his future life beyond BHP.
I've the opportunity to work with him whilst he's been in that role and I'd certainly say that we'll look forward to working with his successor Andrew MacKenzie.
JOURNALIST: Is that the final dagger in the heart of the Olympic Dam expansion, if Mr Kloppers gets his marching orders?
PM: I don't accept your characterisation of the change at BHP and you need to talk to people at BHP about that.
On Olympic Dam, this is a set of decisions that have related to commodity prices, particularly the price of uranium, and we have seen some reductions in uranium prices.
BHP has continued to say that Olympic Dam is there and something that they're keen about.
There's been a lot of myth-making about the future of Olympic Dam and I don't think we should be starting myths today based on analysis of-
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, I think you will find when you actually look at BHP and its personnel that the incoming CEO, Mr MacKenzie, has been very strongly involved in this project.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the Greens, if you could see this coming and if you have such fundamental differences with them on the issue of jobs, why didn't you end the relationship?
PM: We entered an agreement with the Greens and with a number of independent members of Parliament to pursue issues that we thought were of importance to the country and we've got a number of them done.
And for that period of time I do think the Greens stepped up to taking some responsibility for some of the changes our nation needs, but I did always anticipate that they would revert to type and they've done so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what did you actually say to Christine Milne when she called you?
PM: She rang and advised me she was about to make a speech and outline this at the Press Club and I said sort of, "thanks, righto," and that was it.
JOURNALIST: Do you share the ‘good riddance' sentiment?
PM: I've just said to you what I feel about this.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this morning Tony Abbott said on 3AW that his office was preparing for a strategy for a third option as Prime Minister or as leader. How are you dealing with that, given Abbott's already preparing for whether it's Bill Shorten or an alternative to even Kevin Rudd?
PM: Well that's just more of Mr Abbott's negativity and what he's not spending his time doing is producing a plan for jobs, a plan for health, a plan for education.
JOURNALIST: Do you feel secure in your position?
PM: I've addressed all of these. We dealt with it all last February.
JOURNALIST: Will you be leading the party to the next election?
PM: I've dealt with all of that in the past too.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're holding Community Cabinet tonight in a marginal Liberal seat. Is that overly ambitious given the events of the past few days?
PM: Well I'd like to see Boothby better represented in the Federal Parliament.
I grew up there so I know about that seat, I know about its issues, I know what could be done for that seat if it had a more active representative and that's what we want to see at the next election.
So we'll be in Boothby talking to people about the issues that matter to them, but I'll certainly be advocating, come election day, that it's time for a change and time for a more vibrant representative than Dr Southcott.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS]



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
JULES: Well Fifi, as you know, on the Fifi and Jules show we don't muck about. So on the line right now is the Prime Minister of Australia.
FIFI: I won!
JULES: Julia Gillard, to answer your hot questions.
PM: Hello Fifi.
FIFI: Prime Minister Gillard! Welcome back to the show and sorry about the Julia bit. That was a bit informal and disrespectful. Sorry but I did think we could give you a call. How are you?
PM: I am fine, thank you but are you aiming for your child to be our 23 millionth person?
FIFI: I am, Prime Minister. Firstly, before I aim for that, because it's going to be, there's lots of logistics, is there some sort of a reward if it is the 23 millionth?
PM: Well there are some very strict rules. You will have to name the child ‘Twenty-three-million'. You'll have no other choice about the name.
But if you aim there and get there then I'm sure I can knit up a pair of booties and get them across to you.
FIFI: Oh, I would love that! From the Prime Minister, that would be amazing.
JULES: Prime Minister, I don't necessarily want to encourage this because I for one hate crowds.
PM: I don't think Fifi's baby is going to take up that much space.
JULES: I know but the truth is that we are growing. Have we ever considered a one child policy? Is there argument for not having kids?
PM: No, we've never considered such a policy. I think people have to be free to make their own decisions about how many kids.
But 23 million, you've just got to make sure all the infrastructure and all the services are right and that's my job.
FIFI: He's just annoyed because there's a suggestion he might have to help bring up my child. So he's trying to cut back.
JULES: There is a good question here, Prime Minister. Would you actually have the data of the 23 millionth?
If it isn't Fifi for instance, because it's a couple of weeks after her due date, I did wonder, it would be nice to us as a show to provide some sort of prize for the baby.
PM: I'm sure that our ABS people, the people at the Bureau of Statistics, do a lot of tracking of this. So they may well be able to identify the 23 millionth person, the baby or immigrate that takes us to 23 million.
I'm not sure what prize you would get from the Bureau of Statistics. They've probably got some back catalogues of statistics that they've collected in the past they could give away.
FIFI: We could just knock up something on iMac and laminate it. Like just a little certificate.
JULES: The prize cupboard. We've got like a Karise Eden CD.
FIFI: Yeah we've got some mini snack sized Mars bars.
JULES: Prime Minister, I would like with your help to get that data to speak to those people at that official job and for us to just sniff around birthing suites and wait for that one with a catcher's mitt and give them some stickers and an icy cold can of Coke.
PM: I think that would be fantastic but if I can just give you some advice, I'm not sure that a new born baby is going to have that much use for a can of Coke or some baby mars bars.
FIFI: Yeah.
JULES: Fifi's might.
PRESENTER: Thank you Prime Minister, we've already wasted four minutes of your valuable day. Obviously we will get in touch with the ABS. You don't need to do that.
JULES: Really?
PRESENTER: She's got a few other things on.
JULES: Can you just text me that number please?
PM: I'll do my best.
PRESENTER: Thank you Prime Minister.
[ENDS]


Adelaide
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: Can I acknowledge my great friend Amanda Rishworth, who's just spoken to you, the Member for Kingston and a very active and passionate member representing your part of the world in federal parliament.
Can I thank Tony, the principal, for having us in his school today, and Jonathan from the Inspire Foundation for his words to you.
Can I also thank Karl and Emma, your school leaders, for showing us around and making sure that we got here.
I really like coming to schools. As Prime Minister, I've made it a bit of a mission to make sure wherever I go that I do get the opportunity to go to a school.
And the reason I do that is when I come to a school like this one, whether it's Wirreanda or whether it's a school in another part of the country, I feel like I can see our nation's future being made.
Because no matter what else is happening in our country today, in the boardrooms of big companies, in the mines, on farms, whatever else is happening in our nation today, the most important thing happening is happening in Australia's schools.
Because the quality of what happens here will define what kind of nation we are tomorrow, which is why, as a government, as a prime minister, I've focussed so much on the quality of your education.
And we are working hard to make sure that your principal, your teachers, your parents, the community that supports you gets the resources that they need to give you a really great education.
And I can tell from this school where you are taught to aim high that it is making a difference to your lives.
I grew up in South Australia and one of the reasons I particularly like visiting schools when I'm here is it reminds me of my own school days in South Australia.
Now the truth is they were quite some time ago that I was in school. I went to Unley High School and I finished in 1978.
Amanda, who went to the same school, finished in 1995. So there's a fair difference there when you stop and think about it.
It was a different world when I went to school but I remember my school days as some of the best days of my life.
I enjoyed school. I enjoyed the study at school. I enjoyed hanging out with friends and making friends at school.
I enjoyed doing things like playing hockey, even if it was pretty badly, so I remember my school days very fondly and some of the friendships that I made during those school days are with me still.
And amongst the most valuable friendships you will ever have in your life are the friendships that you make during your school days, the people who have known you across all of your life's journey.
But whilst I reflect on my school days as a happy time, when I think about my own time in school, it is clear on reflection, looking back with the eyes of an adult, that there were a number of children in that school, a number of kids who went through school with me who were finding that time in their lives a lot harder than I was.
They were finding it a time of stress and strain and they weren't always knowing who to reach out to during that time of stress and strain.
Sometimes it can be difficult to talk to your parents. Sometimes you might want to tell a teacher about your problems but then that might feel uncomfortable too.
So we want to make sure in this very changed world, where there are new sources of pressure on our kids, including everything that has happened with the information technology revolution in the days since I was in school, we want to make sure in these days that there is always someone that you can reach out to.
And we want to make the best of the new technology to bring new sources of help and new sources of connection.
We know that you choose to spend a lot of your life online and to make friendships there, to find out information there, to use it just as an embedded tool in your life; for all of you in this room it would be impossible to imagine what the world was like before the internet, before mobile phones, before Facebook, before all of it.
Some of us can remember that. You wouldn't know what that world was like.
So in the world in which you live, we want to make sure that there are good sources of information and support to you, which is why I'm really pleased that we've been able to work with Inspire through a grant of just over $4 million to enable the Reach Out service to be there and to be available not only to you but to kids right around Australia.
So thank you for having me in your school today.
When I walked in with Karl and Emma they said I was going to get asked some questions whilst I was at school today and that they were really, really hard question, so I'll see how I go with the answers.
But I'm very pleased to be here and to spend a little bit of time with you.
Thank you very much.
RISHWORTH: Okay, I think I'm now calling for questions from people on the floor. Who has any questions?
QUESTION: (Inaudible)
RISHWORTH: I think that question was about Saturday being a school day, and whether or not there was any intention of Saturday being a school day, and some serious concern about that.
PM: Well we might engage in a little bit of direct democracy, so who thinks Saturday should be a school day? We've got one or two, a few! Who thinks Saturday should stay the way it is, in that there should be no school?
Well, you know we don't always make big decisions based on public opinion. Sometimes we've got to make big hard decisions that aren't popular, but I can tell you on this occasion we are going to go with the opinion in the room.
There's no suggestion that we make Saturday a school day, so you can relax.
But we are going to do a series of things to make sure schools have got enough resources so that they can offer programs before school; many schools offer breakfast clubs, programs after school, and they can also run to school holiday programs, particularly for those students who are at some risk of getting behind the group.
And that is not because we want to keep you imprisoned in school for more than you want to be there, but it is really important that you come out of school with the skills and capacities that you are going to need for the rest of your life.
The jobs of the future are going to be jobs that require higher skill levels than our nation has had before, so the more knowledge, the more capacity, the more skills you pick up at school, the better for the rest of your life. But you can still get Saturday to yourselves.
RISHWORTH: That's a popular acclamation. So who's got another question? I might just get you to stand up.
QUESTION: (Inaudible)
JONATHAN NICHOLAS, INSPIRE FOUNDATION: For those that didn't hear, the question was ‘if you've got great friends and you reach out to your friends, why would you need supportive programs like Reach Out online?'
I must admit I'm a little bit biased. I think it's great that the Government provides this ongoing support, and the reason I'm biased is that last year reachout.com got accessed 1.4 million times by over 600,000 young people.
And so one of the things that we know is that the more support and the more options you get, the better you are. And that sometimes your friends are exactly the right people to talk to, sometimes mum and dad are exactly the right people to talk to.
But like most things in life when we don't have an answer to a question, we start at Google. And what we wanted to do is that when anyone starts at Google, and they have a question that they're not sure the answer to, whether it's ‘what is depression, how do I cope with exam stress,' that they come to reachout.com first.
So for us, probably similar to the last question, it's really about voting with your feet and for a lot of young people they sit online, we just want to make sure if they've got that question they know where to go.
RISHWORTH: Okay, I think we've got someone at the back there with a microphone.
QUESTION: Why do you think wellbeing should be a big focus in schools?
PM: I think wellbeing has to be a big focus in schools because we're, through our education system, through our schools, we're trying to impart to you knowledge and skills, but in terms of the capacities you will need throughout your life, you will need resilience.
We live in a world that's got all sorts of pressures and stresses and strains, and so during the course of your life there will be many times when you've got to deal with pressure.
Maybe you get a job you really like and then something happens at that business and you're made redundant. Maybe some other pressure happens within your family, someone in your family ends up with a disability, to take one example, and that puts a lot of pressure on the family.
Maybe during the course of your life you have an accident or something like that that puts a lot of pressure on you as you are recovering from that accident.
There are all sorts of things that can happen across a person's life and your ability to cope, to be resilient, to focus on wellbeing, to have the personal capacities that enable you to deal with life are as important as everything else we try and do in school.
So that's why we do want to focus on wellbeing, and why we're so proud to be supporting the Reach Out program and getting you the information you need from a source you know you can trust, and also a source that's confidential for those times that you feel it might be too hard to actually go and ask someone.
RISHWORTH: Okay, I think we have a young lady down the back.
QUESTION: How do you get more young people to access different programs that deal with wellbeing and resilience like the Wellbeing@School program?
PM: I think part of it is doing what we're doing here today, and that's having the conversation and making sure that people know it's okay to talk about these issues and it's okay for them to indicate that they've got questions, that they've got concerns, they want to talk to someone, their teacher, their parents or they want to get information through Reach Out.
So I think that focus is important. We're also working hard in a non-school environment to make sure that young people who are worried about mental health issues can access the support that they need.
Amanda, as your local member, has worked hard to bring to your community a service called Headspace, which is a youth model of mental health support  -  an easy place to walk through the door, deliberately designed like that, to have a sense of informality and to be including of people.
But to also help people get the support they need if they feel, as a young person, that there's anything, whether it's exams, whether it's the changes that they're experiencing in their life as they grow up, whether it's making decisions about their future, whether it's relationship issues, whether it's problems with friends, which might be putting some pressure on.
QUESTION: In what ways are politicians trying to improve school environments?
PM: That's a good question. We're trying to do it in a whole lot of way. First and foremost, we have focussed on every school in the country.
So there's been a lot of times in our nation's life when there's been conflict between school systems. State schools saying one thing, Catholic schools saying one thing, independent schools saying one thing.
We've tried to break that down and say it doesn't matter which school you go to, whether it's an independent school, a Catholic school, a state school; what matters is the quality of education in that school.
So it's about every child in every school in 9,500 schools around the country.
So first we've made sure there's more information about what's happening in schools than ever before through the My School website.
So we know what's going on in all of those 9,500 schools. We didn't used to know  -  when I first became education minister, there was no way of getting a list of say, the 1,000 most disadvantaged schools in the country. No one could give that list to you.
Now because we've got My School and more information than ever before, we've got that available to us.
And with that information we can then put in new funding, and we've done that through our national partnership programs that focus on literacy and numeracy, that bring new resources into disadvantaged schools, and that focus on teacher quality, because at the end of the day the most important thing to your education is the quality of the teacher who's standing up in your classroom.
We've also brought a national curriculum. Lots of kids move interstate each year, kids in Defence Force families might move five or six times during their schooling career, and they used to go from school to school and not even recognise what was being taught.
Now we are working to have a high-quality national curriculum taught in every school.
We've also brought more money into school buildings and school computers, equipment that you need, facilities you need for your education.
And we try to make sure that this isn't just a time when more resources have flowed and then it's all gone and it's back to business as usual, by working to bring a new funding system for the long term which means funding will go depending on the characteristics of students, so it will go where it is needed to make a difference to every child's education.
So there's a lot happening and a lot more change to come, but it's all about the quality of what is happening in schools today.
QUESTION: How can the Federal Government support teachers and other school professionals around the resilience and wellbeing of young people?
PM: I think you've raised the question of resilience for teachers too, as well as young people, and that's an important new element to this discussion.
We want to make sure that in schools around the country that for everyone who participates in school life there is a focus on wellbeing and a focus on personal resilience.
Part of that is what we teach in the curriculum, part of it is teaching practice and supporting teachers as they go about what is an incredibly hard job, and part of it is partnering up with services like Reach Out which we're announcing here today.
QUESTION: To what extent are the voices of young people being considered when making policies and decisions?
PM: We want to listen to the voices of young people.
There's always a lively debate when I come to schools about what the voting age should be, and whether it should be lower than 18 so young people get to participate directly in our democracy. And I think that debate will probably continue for some time to come.
But even in the days before you can vote, we want to make sure that we're hearing your views which is why I come to a lot of schools and Amanda as your local member is also very frequently in your schools, so we can hear directly from you about what's important.
And that has made a difference to government plans and approaches.
For example, it was the raising of cyber bullying as such a big issue by young people that caused us to focus on bullying as an issue; cyber bullying, the way in which bullying can follow you from the school ground home, and to put new resources into combating cyber bullying. So hearing your views does make a difference.
QUESTION: I'm a member of Student Voice. How can we as Student Voice get involved in improving student wellbeing on a big scale, working with the Government?
PM: I think as a member of Student Voice, and I know that you do have a very active engagement here at the school which is terrific, I think the important thing is for you with your peers to be leading the conversations that help people be very honest about what reinforces their sense of wellbeing, but also what challenges their sense of wellbeing.
Often students will be more frank, more upfront with their fellow students than they will with adults, which is why your involvement really matters.
QUESTION: What do you enjoy most about coming back to Adelaide?
PM: First and foremost I get to visit my family, so that's pretty good, and I‘ll take the opportunity whilst I'm here to see my mother and my sister, so I'm looking forward to that.
Second, I get to spend time with some of our great MPs, including Amanda, and third I get to visit a number of places that I've known about ever since I was small, and to see what they look like now and what's happening there now and what the differences are.
This place, South Australia, is always going to have a very big place in my heart from growing up here and from it still being where my family home is.
And we think about South Australia as we design the big policies for the nation's future, including the focus that we've had on jobs during my visit here to make sure that when you're out of school and you've gone through university or got an apprenticeship, whatever future course you've got for your life, that there are high-skill, high-paid jobs here in South Australia so you can stay here and make a life here if that's what you choose to do.
QUESTION: I'd just like to say thank you, this is the last question. For my research project I'm concentrating on the effects of social media on mental health, and I just wanted to know what the Government was doing to address the concerns around this area.
PM: We do have a lot of concerns. I raised the topic of cyber bullying beforehand.
We're concerned, there are community concerns and probably here in this school there have been concerns too, that the immediacy and anonymity of some of the social media engagements  -  Twitter and Facebook and other ways of engaging with people  -  means that there can be cruelty in that environment.
I think people will say things through Twitter, when they can stay anonymous, that they would never say to someone's face.
And there have been instances where not only for young people but for older people, for people in the public eye, for some of our celebrities, that that kind of vicious criticism has got on top of them and has really challenged their mental health and made them think suicidal thoughts.
So this is of real concern, and we're very focussed on a set of programs including working with the Alannah and Madeleine Foundation to help work with schools and people generally to address issues with cyber bullying.
And also to work with some of our big media companies including companies like Google so that if there are really big problems online, that people can't be shielded by anonymity, but they can be held accountable for what they're doing in that environment.
But it's a continuing challenge and often we get some of the best ideas form people who are really immersed in social media, so we'll be interested to see what comes out of your research project.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS]



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: Thanks Leon, it's great to be here.
HOST: Just breaking news, Telstra have announced Sensis are getting rid of 650 staff. You're reaction?
PM: That's dreadful news, really dreadful news particularly for the staff members who are hearing that today.
It's always incredibly tough when someone loses a job, Leon. That's why we do so much to try and make sure that there are job opportunities in our nation because you need a job to build a life for you and your family.
HOST: I want to talk about the innovations package that you announced a couple of days ago. Now there are two things about it that put a slight fly in the ointment.
One is that Treasury have suggested that the savings that the Government think they'll get may not be realised but more importantly the Greens have announced today that they won't support this package unless you give something to them and they're looking at a change for the mining tax. Would you be prepared to go back and revisit that?
PM: Look, I'm not dealing with the Greens on that basis. We've said what we've said about the Minerals Resources Rent Tax. We've said we've got no plans to change it. There's an ongoing process between us and the states about royalties.
But Leon, let's just get serious about this, are the Greens really saying that they're going to come into the Australian Parliament and vote against Australian jobs?
Are they really saying that they're going to come into the Parliament and vote for some of our biggest companies including mining companies to keep a tax break which we want to use to support Australian jobs?
And the Greens only matter if Mr Abbott directs his team to come into the Parliament and vote against Australian jobs.
HOST: So from your point of view, Christine Milne has announced today that they're not going to pass this jobs innovation package without giving them something that you don't want to give, so they can block it.
PM: They can only block it if the Liberal Party votes against Aussie jobs. Now I know Mr Abbott and his team have been saying they will do that, vote against Australian jobs.
They have in the past, Leon, they voted against the stimulus package that supported 200,000 jobs but let's actually get to the parliamentary moment.
What I find, Leon, is a lot of the positioning and stalking around in the media, by the time you get to the actual vote in Parliament, doesn't follow through.
HOST: Okay, I want to ask you about this jobs issue because one of the blindingly obvious points about jobs in Australia is supporting the local brand.
Now, I want to talk about labelling for a moment because I think this is a huge issue here.
There's no doubt that when you go out and buy stuff, particularly food, the labels are very confusing, made from important and local ingredients.
Customers want to know that when they go to a shop they want to know what it is, what's in it and where it's from.
Now we still have, even Neil Blewitt admitted on this program 18 months ago, that there is an anomaly where an exporter can send something to New Zealand, make them repack it, send it here as a product of New Zealand but it really isn't. Are we going to fix that?
PM: Leon, I think that is a real area of concern and we did have Neil Blewitt do some work for us on food standards and food labelling.
I am always in the cart of better and better transparency and people will make their own mind up-
HOST: Would you fix that?
PM: I'm happy to keep working on it. Of course there are costs involved in this when big businesses and small businesses need to change the way in which their packages are printed up.
But I am generally in your cart, that as a consumer you should be able to walk in and say, that's a genuinely Australian product. You should be able to walk in and say, that's genuinely a free-range egg.
If you want to make consumer choices you should have the information you need.
HOST: I'm pleased to hear that in principle you support it but we are coming up to an election. It's an election winner in my view, a no brainer, to go to the people and say, we will close this anomaly.
Now I'm not against imports and the people listening aren't either but what we do want is to make sure our food is safe.
And that's another issue because we've got stuff coming in here that's either of lesser quality or contaminated with chemicals that are banned here. You wouldn't be happy with that, surely?
PM: Well we do have good food safety standards and we do have inspections and monitoring but I think it's this question of consumer preference and consumer choice.
Leon, at the end of the day we make Government policy because it's the right thing to do not because we're looking at it being election year.
So I'm certainly prepared to say to you, in principle I do think it's very important consumers get clear choices.
HOST: Chris of Golden Grove you're talking to Julia Gillard.
CALLER: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
CALLER: I would like an answer to this question. If you are re-elected at the election this year will there be a carbon tax on fuel starting on 1 July 2014?
PM: There would be carbon pricing for heavy road haulage. That's part of the carbon pricing package and that's already been announced.
HOST: Is that fuel?
PM: Yes, on heavy road vehicles, you know, the huge trucks.
HOST: Yes, sure.
PM: But there would not be carbon pricing on the petrol that households use or that light commercial vehicles use, or petrol or other fuels.
HOST: So commercial vehicles of a large size will pay a carbon tax on their fuel. That will be passed through to the consumer won't it eventually?
PM: Yes Leon, we were always upfront about that and weren't we right.
We were right when we told Australians that there would be carbon pricing passed through to the things that they bought, that the change would be 0.7 per cent, less than 1 per cent of CPI and that figure work has been right.
It has not been any more. All of the nonsense that people have had to listen to of $100 roast and all the rest of it  -  wrong, wrong, wrong.
And what that means is that the assistance we've given people  -  pension increases, family payment increases, a change to the tax free threshold so you don't pay tax until you've earned $18,200  -  that that money is there and helping families in the way we thought it would.
HOST: We've got a call now from the Dairy Farmers Association's David Basham. David, you're talking with the Prime Minister.
CALLER: Good morning. Prime Minister, when the carbon tax was introduced it was clearly stated that agriculture was excluded.
The dairy industry is a high energy user, both as at farm level and at processing level and it's estimated that it's going to affect the average dairy farmer by $14,000 to $25,000 in extra costs.
We can't pass this onto any of our customers because we complete in a world market and competing with countries that don't have the same unfair tax burden, and we also have in the domestic market the retailers saying they won't pass any of the costs onto the consumer.
What is the Gillard Government going to do to make sure the carbon tax does not destroy any chance of the dairy industry's surviving the current industry difficulties?
PM: Well the industry will survive. It will not only survive it will thrive. Carbon pricing isn't a theoretical proposition, it's here, it's working and so are our dairy farms.
HOST: A lot of them shutting though.
PM: But Leon let's be really practical about this. Has the fear campaign about carbon pricing come true? Carbon pricing started in the middle of last year.
Have you seen astronomical price increases? No. Inflation is very modest and the inflationary effect is not more than we anticipated. Have you seen the economy grind to a halt and us thrown into a depression? No you haven't.
HOST: The insolvency rate in this state-
PM: But Leon, I'm not going to have you associate that with carbon pricing.
HOST: I'm not doing that.
PM: Because that's not fair and that's not right.
HOST: No, no, no, no, no. Prime Minister, I'm not doing that.
PM: So let's finish with carbon pricing and then I'll be very happy to talk about the insolvency rate.
I want to make this point and make it very strongly. People had to listen to all sorts of nonsense from Mr Abbott and his team about the impact of carbon pricing.
Here we are, people can judge for themselves, they know what's happened. None of the fear campaigning has proved true.
So that's it, carbon pricing  -  done. The impacts that we said would happen have happened. The money flowing to families is flowing to families.
The debate for our nation now is whether or not they want to go with Mr Abbott's crazy suggestions that he would get rid of carbon pricing in a few months, throw our economy into turmoil and rip money out of the hands of families.
HOST: Okay, I want to ask you about the five year trend on ASIC's information here. Insolvency in South Australia 32 per cent, on average it's 23.
So we're doing it a little worse, in fact, marginally worse than anywhere else in Australia.
You are telling me people that economically, compared to the rest of the world, things are not too bad. But the insolvency rate over five years has gone up nearly a third. That's not a good message is it?
PM: No, it's not and let's be clear about what we are saying to people about the economy because it's a story that needs to be understood in detail.
I mean, we did come out of the global financial crisis stronger than nations around the world. We kept growing. We didn't have a recession. We've got relatively low unemployment.
So there's a lot to be proud of in our economy: low inflation, relatively low unemployment, low interest rates, strong public finances.
But then when you get to the details of what's happening in different states and different industries, our economy is undergoing this huge transformation driven by the strength of the Australian dollar.
And our dollar's strong because resources are strong and we're seeing big capital inflows to build big resources projects.
It's strong because we kept strong during the global financial crisis and people are viewing us as a safe haven currency.
Now that puts a lot of pressure on. Strong dollar means, if you're a manufacturer and you make something and you used to sell it to a European for €500, our currency has gone up so much that to get take same product that European now needs to give you €750.
So a lot of pressure on, a lot of change and churn in the economy-
HOST: It's actually worse than that because-
PM: Which is why we've charted the long term course with the plan for Australian jobs.
HOST: Much of the food coming out of Europe has subsidies of 23 per cent so it's not just the high dollar. It's the taxpayer subsidies that we endure and our growers have to compete with.
PM: And Leon, we fight them. We fight them internationally.
HOST: How do we fight them?
PM: We fight them through trade organisations. We fight them when I go to international meetings with fellow leaders. We say we believe in trade that can happen and no unfair subsidies in it. We want our producers-
HOST: But we're still enduring them.
PM: Let me assure you we'll keep the fight up. I'm not pretending to you we've won the fight. But we fight to get our producers on a level playing field.
HOST: When other countries do things to us that make is hard for our exporters, we will often say we don't like it but we won't do anything practically.
PM: No, we do take cases to the World Trade Organisation. We take people on. That does happen.
HOST: Have we won any?
PM: We've been through cases, I'd have to go through the list Leon, but we do challenge them.
HOST: I want to talk just briefly about electricity. You made a promise to Australia a while ago that you through that you could get $250 off the average power bill.
Now there is a major problem here because when power companies charge consumers they charge for the carbon excess, if you like, that they are going to use.
We all have to pay that, right. And then, and you compensate for that, but those companies then get compensated for the money that they've just charged the consumers for.
PM: No, there's been some false reporting about that in the last few days. There was some report put out, Greg Combet's dealt with it and it's just simply wrong.
HOST: Well I spoke to Laurel Fox-Allen from Electricity Week and the power companies are able to go back under the rules that were made in 2008. Because we thought at that time that we had a problem with electricity and we did.
But now we've got wind power and we've also got solar, which is working very well, so the peaks that we used to have that put our prices up don't exist anymore yet we're still being charged for them.
PM: Well let's deal with that and let's unpack it very clearly. We said to people that putting a price on carbon would put up electricity bills by less than 10 per cent. We were right.
HOST: Businesses pay more though.
PM: Less than 10 per cent for consumers, this is the important thing, and we were right. The changes in power prices as a result of carbon pricing, they're all in, you can see them and it's less than 10 per cent.
So that also means that the money we gave families to help them through was figured right.
Then separately to all of that, separately to carbon pricing, we've had big increases in electricity because of investment in poles and wires and there are some distortions in the system now that give people an incentive to just keep investing, keep investing, keep investing and making money back.
HOST: Can you deliver on the $250 that we promised?
PM: We agreed that the last Council of Australian Governments meeting a new way forward, a new set of rules which will deal with those odd incentives that there are in the system at the moment which are truly adding to people's electricity bills.
HOST: Just quickly, how helpful is Kevin Rudd to your re-election?
PM: Look, I expect members of the Labor team to be out there campaigning for Labor values and the Labor Party.
HOST: You feel totally safe as leader between now and September?
PM: I dealt with all of this last February, I dealt with it all last February and there's nothing more to say.
HOST: Prime Minister, you've got members of your party backgrounding the media on matters such as this. You wouldn't be happy with that surely, would you?
PM: Leon, I don't get distracted by any of this. We had a ballot last February. We resolved the issue of the Labor leadership. That's where it lies. Done.
HOST: Just quickly, GST. We get $1.26 per dollar GST. A lot of other states want to reform. Are you going to do that in the next few months or are you going to leave it as it is?
PM: I'll always make sure that South Australia gets supported. There's stalking around about this issue.
I do note that the other side of politics when they're in Western Australia say we're going to get you more but when they come here they don't say to South Australians that means that we're going to give you less.
I'll never go for a system that punishes states like South Australia.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for coming in.
PM: Thank you very much.
[ENDS]



PM: It's a great pleasure to be here at Wirreanda High School as you can see behind me with their banners, with Amanda Rishworth, the Member for Kingston.
I'm still here in South Australia and very much enjoying my visit. And we've come to this school today to launch reachout.com, which is a new resource for young people who might feel that they are struggling with issues in their lives.
During teenage years into young adulthood, for many young people it can be a time of stress and strain and they don't always know who to go to to ask for help.
We want kids talking to their parents, we want them talking to their teachers but we know that there are times when they feel there's something that's on their mind that's quite difficult to raise with an adult in their life.
Which is why I'm pleased we've been able to provide $4.2 million to the Inspire Foundation to resource reachout.com.
It's another resource for our young people to help them with their sense of wellbeing.
Here with Amanda, the local member for Kingston, I'm standing in a community where Amanda has worked hard as local member to bring new services to help support people with their health care needs, including a Head Space, one of the new models of health care for young people who might be worried about mental health issues.
An open door, a person you can talk to, an informal environment all based on the model of former Australian of the Year Pat, McGorry.
And Amanda Rishworth too has worked hard to honour our promise to construct a GP Super Clinic in this area, in Noarlunga to help people with their GP needs and some after-hours access, as well as investing more in primary care across this electorate. So I'm very pleased to be here today.
I'll turn now to some comments from Amanda and when she's made some comments I'll say something about the circumstances with Victorian health care.
AMANDA RISHWORTH: Thank you Prime Minister. I'm very pleased to be here at Wirreanda and I'd like to commend Wirreanda and the Inspire Foundation for really putting wellness and resilience of young people at the forefront of their agenda here.
I think today's launch of the Inspire's resources that will be used here at Wirreanda  -  in fact at many schools across the nation  -  really focuses on ensuring that young people are healthy, they're happy, and with that comes a great opportunity for learning.
So I would like to congratulate everyone involved, thank the Prime Minister for coming here today and really, as she's pointed out, delivering a lot of great health services for our local area including the GP Super Clinic and including the local Head Space that has had many, many young people through its doors since it opened.
PM: And thank you very much to Tony, the principal of this great school, for hosting our visit today.
I did too want to stay something about health funding in our country.
I struck an agreement with premiers and chief ministers to increase health funding, to make sure the Federal Government became a 50 per cent partner in the growing costs of health care, of hospital care.
I struck that agreement because I wanted to end the blame game and the politics played between federal governments and state governments and territory governments about health care.
This is an agreement that is delivering more funds; $1.1 billion more delivered this year than if we'd stayed with the health agreement of the former Government, that of course is the health agreement of Prime Minister Howard and then Minister for Health Tony Abbott.
And each and every year health funding under this agreement will grow. To look at Victoria's circumstance, health funding will grow by $900 million.
This is an agreement that works on funding formulas that were agreed between me and premiers and chief ministers.
It's an agreement where the Federal Government pays money upfront and then as necessary adjustments are done through the formula.
Unfortunately Premier Baillieu has decided in Victoria to pursue a very dishonest campaign about health care funding.
Whilst Federal Government investment is going up $900 million, he is cutting by $616 million. Despite this, he has tried to pretend to the Victorian people that an adjustment under one of the agreed formulas is somehow a cutback from the Federal Government. The amount in question is $107 million.
If Premier Baillieu properly managed his hospitals then he would be able to keep that money flowing to hospitals. Instead of properly managing his hospitals and keeping that money flowing, he's chosen to play politics with health care needs in Victoria.
So I have decided that because of this incompetence and politics from Premier Baillieu, that we will go around him. That we will send money direct to local hospital networks.
We will send $107 million direct to hospital networks in Victoria.
That money won't pass through Premier Baillieu's hands, it will go straight to local hospital networks.
And what we will do to balance the books is we will cut $107 million off other sources of funding to the Victorian Government and we will immediately implement a $55 million cut of reward money that the Victorian Government was hoping to get under one of our arrangements for modernising our economy.
They've let us down, they've let the nation down by not doing the right thing to modernise their economy and they won't receive that $55 million.
And we will look to recoup the balance against other future grants to Victoria but not in a way that will affect front-line services.
In addition to conveying that decision to Premier Baillieu, I have written today to premiers and chief ministers around the nation. I have reminded them of the spectacular benefits of the new health care agreement to them and the people of their state.
The huge extra resources we are putting in compared with Prime Minister Howard and then Health Minister Tony Abbott.
I have said to premiers and chief ministers very clearly that the Federal Government is not going to tolerate the continued playing of politics with health.
So if we see any other premier playing this kind of politics the way that Premier Baillieu has, then there is a very clear message to those premiers.
We will go round you, we will deal direct with hospitals and local hospital networks and we will rearrange your budget for you.
So to reemphasise that; if we see this kind of politics emerge then, as a Federal Government with health care funding, we will go around state governments, direct to local hospital networks.
We will rearrange state budgets by cutting them back in other areas.
We are not going to allow state governments to play politics with health under an agreement that they signed up to and under an agreement which provides new benefits to patients with more doctors, more nurses, more local control and more money than there has ever been in health care in the past.
So I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Are you angry at having to fix this problem?
PM: This is a grand act of incompetence by Premier Baillieu which will be judged by the Victorian people.
He could have kept money flowing to health. He deliberately decided not to do it.
Well if he's going to play that kind of politics I'm not going to see patients suffer so we've gone round him.
JOURNALIST: Is it legislatively complicated, or do you have to (inaudible) red tape?
PM: It's done. We create a special account, we put the money in the special account and the money flows from the special account direct to local hospital networks.
JOURNALIST: This presumably is a big stick being waved at either Premier Baillieu or anyone else. Is that a deliberate policy now leading up to the federal election?
PM: It's a policy because of the campaign we've seen in Victoria which is just so dishonest.
Let's look at the options here, and I've outlined the options very clearly to premiers today. I entered a new agreement to give people record health funding.
If they don't like that agreement they are go back to the old agreement, Prime Minister Howard's agreement, then Minister for Health Tony Abbott's agreement, and lose billions and billions of dollars which we will then fund direct to hospitals.
We pay in advance and when you pay in advance inevitably under formulas there needs to be adjustments over time. That's common sense.
If you prepay in advance, then there are adjustments over time. Premier Baillieu has campaigned against one of those adjustments.
Well, if premiers don't want to be paid in advance, I'll pay them in arrears after the health care work is done, with all of the consequences that will have for state government budgets.
But the better thing to do would be for everyone to cut out the politics and get on with the job of implementing this health care agreement.
JOURNALIST: But is this is a deliberate collision course with Victoria that you've set yourself on?
PM: There's no collision. There's us, there's hospitals, and there's Premier Baillieu over here. We will now give money direct to hospitals. Premier Baillieu won't even see it.
JOURNALIST: Is paying that money directly to hospitals in breach of the national agreement?
PM: It's Premier Baillieu who's kicked up about the terminology in the national agreement, so I don't think he or anyone else can start kicking up about this approach that we're taking.
We're taking this approach because Premier Baillieu has been out there playing politics with the terms of the agreement.
JOURNALIST: You seem to be blaming Premier Baillieu for the situation but at the same time saying you don't want to play the blame game.
PM: Well, we're fixing it. We're fixing it. Let's actually go through the chronology here and anybody who's seen the chronology could not come to the conclusion you've just put to me.
We were there, new health care agreement, more money than ever before. Stepping up to being an equal partner in hospital costs. Doing away with the old agreement under Prime Minister Howard and Tony Abbott which would have seen the Federal Government share of hospital costs go down and down and down.
That's what we were prepared to do, honouring the agreement every step of the way.
The agreement has got various funding formulas in it, objective formulas, using things like population data, not things that politicians do. You get the data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics and you feed it into the formula.
Against that backdrop, Premier Baillieu has started a political campaign. Well, I've said today that political campaign is irresponsible, it shows great incompetence in running Victorian hospitals, and I'm not having Victorian patients suffer because Premier Baillieu isn't doing his job.
So I will deal directly with Victorian hospitals.
I would of course prefer that Premier Baillieu and every other premier and chief minister around the country didn't play this kind of politics and just honoured the agreement.
That's what I'm prepared to do.
JOURNALIST: The State Government here in South Australia has objected to the use of that particular data and believes we have been short-changed. So it's not just a political game is it?
PM: Well the game that is being played in Victoria is a game where Premier Baillieu has directly administered cuts to hospitals and sought to blame them on the Federal Government. We do not see that conduct here in South Australia.
JOURNALIST: The South Australian Government has also questioned the data being used by the Federal Government. Is that not the case?
PM: It's one thing for people to raise technical questions about data. The information flow between the Federal and State Governments across funding in health, in education, in all areas of work, is of course huge.
Every day we have federal officials and state officials who are working through complex problems with oceans of data in front of them.
Running Government is a complicated thing. I do not in any way dismiss that in those discussions, from time to time, officials will look at data from the ABS or someone and say they think technically there should have been a collection this way or there should have been a seasonal adjustment of the data that way across the whole range of activities that we do. Of course there will be technical questions about data.
What that shouldn't result in is direct cutbacks to patients and the playing of politics like we've seen in Victoria.
JOURNALIST: Is this a failure of the health and hospital funding model?
PM: No, it's nothing to do with the model. It's to do with the conduct of the human being involved in the model, and that human being is Premier Baillieu.
JOURNALIST: Is your jobs package now sunk now that the Greens say they won't pass it unless the Government fixes the mining tax?
PM: Well, thank you for that question. Our plan for Australian jobs announced last weekend is funded by asking one per cent of companies, our biggest companies, to forego a current tax benefit in favour of 99 per cent of business.
Now at this stage we have the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Abbott, saying that the Liberal Party will vote against Australian jobs. They'll vote against this package.
Well, in some ways that's not surprising because they've marched into the parliament and voted against Australian jobs in the past.
Mr Abbott voted against 200,000 Australian jobs by voting against stimulating our economy at the time we faced the worst of the global financial crisis.
But there will come a day of voting in parliament and Mr Abbott will truly have to say to the Australian people is he intending to vote against Australian jobs?
Now the votes of the Greens are only relevant if Mr Abbott votes against Australian jobs. If he does that then from what the Greens political party is currently saying, we've got the spectre of them going into the parliament to vote to protect the tax breaks of some of Australia's biggest companies, including mining companies.
How does this add up? On the one hand they say to us, the Greens political party, they think mining companies should pay more tax, and then apparently they're going to walk into the parliament to increase the tax breaks for mining companies or to keep the tax breaks for mining companies.
Well, I'll let the Greens political party explain that contradiction if they're able to do so.
JOURNALIST: What is your reaction to the loss of 650 jobs through Telstra's Sensis division?
PM: This is really bad news. Any day a worker loses their job in a circumstance of redundancy is a difficult day for that person and their family.
And then when we see figures like this obviously it does cause a great deal of concern and there will be a lot of people who are thinking what am I going to do next? How am I going to keep my family budget going? What's the next opportunity for me?
We'll certainly be working through our employment services and the like to support people during this difficult time in their lives.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask about the funding for the independent schools sector. They've called for some clarity on the funding model that they're likely to face with news they could lose up to $5,000 per student. Are you able to give them some clarity?
PM: We've given a continuing guarantee that no school will lose a dollar, and no school will lose a dollar.
We are working hard with the independent schools, Catholics, state and territory governments on the most recently available data and the funding model.
There was a census collected, there is information that is released from the census periodically.
We are working with some of the most recent data releases to give people the sense of how the model can work  -  various iterations of the model can work  -  and we are going through that information process at the moment.
So we'll continue to collaborate closely with independent schools in that, but there is no cause for concern by any Australian school. We've got a long-standing guarantee no school will lose a dollar.
JOURNALIST: Back on the health system, would you like the Federal Government to take over running the hospitals altogether to stop the duplication and the blame game?
PM: We've been through this debate before and of course when it comes to something as big as that, you're talking about a change that could only be implemented over more than a decade, and it would require cooperation from state governments.
It would require recutting of current tax arrangements between the Federal and State Government. It would be a huge thing do.
I've always thought that states do have an obligation to step up to their role as systems managers. Whenever I sit with premiers and say do you want to manage your health care system, they say yes.
Well if they want the responsibility they've got to acquit the responsibility, and that's why Premier Baillieu's conduct is so disappointing.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it's almost libellous, your description of Premier Baillieu?
PM: In what sense?
JOURNALIST: Well you're saying he's dishonest, he might object to that very strongly.
PM: Well, how else can you describe a campaign that has been out there day after day getting people false information? It's a dishonest campaign.
What is being said is not the facts. I don't hear Premier Baillieu walk out the door and acknowledge $900 million up from us, $616 million down from him. That's a fact.
So when he's not dealing with the facts, and he's trying to manipulate things, then I think that's got to be called for what it is.
JOURNALIST: Why is the Government not sending anyone down to monitor or police the situation with the Sea Shepherd in the Antarctic waters?
PM: Look, we go through this each year and Mr Hunt from the Opposition goes out and makes his calls and various others and they don't answer the next question. To do what, under what authority, and with what powers?
When did we become the nation that apparently has got the capacity to police every ocean in the world?
JOURNALIST: So you feel no responsibility?
PM: That's not what I said. That's not what I said. What we've done in the past is we've sent a vessel to monitor, to collect information for the International Court of Justice case. That's what we've done.
In circumstances where we've got conduct on the seas with Japanese vessels and with the Sea Shepherd and the Brigitte Bardot, we are not empowered to be there, somehow putting an Australian boat or Australian vessel between these two ships. We are not empowered to do that.
What we are being asked to consider and do would put Australian personnel at risk.
The way in which we are dealing with whaling is we collected the information we needed and we are pursuing the International Court of Justice case.
I'm really going to have to get on the road. Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: Just one more on the health funding. Do you expect other states to follow Victoria's example and mount political campaigns to try and secure the funding and are you open to redistributing some of that funding directly to hospitals in other states?
PM: Let me be very clear. If we see this conduct from another state we will go around them, we will deal direct with hospitals and we will cut them back in another area.
[ENDS]



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Prime Minister, welcome to the studio.
PM: Thank you very much, I was just worried that that chair was squeaking then and you could hear the squeaks.
HOST: We'll get some WD-40 on it.
PM: Good, thank you.
HOST: Try and spend some of that extra money you've given the ABC on a new chair. Prime Minister, you're here to listen as well as to spruik your message. What have you learned? What have you heard?
PM: Well we have Community Cabinet around the country, we do it regularly. We did it last night in Boothby and the reason we do it is to get feedback from people about what's on their mind.
It was a really broad cross-section of questions ranging from youth violence to mental health, a focus on refugee and asylum seeker questions.
But the feedback there, the messages I'll take away is people are very concerned about a number of things involving our young people, particularly young kids who drift away from school and then maybe get caught up in things that can mar the rest of their lives and their ability to make a future for themselves.
HOST: Is it a problem for you, though, that people have stopped listening to you, you might be listening, but they've stopped listening to you?
PM: Well as Prime Minister I get on with my job and speak to the Australian people about the issues that matter.
I make myself as available as I can be to meet with Australians in all walks of like and around the country and to have a good old conversation, and I always enjoy that and I think it's a conversation both ways. I'm heard and I listen.
HOST: I know the standard line is ‘well polls, I'll just let them wash over me,' but we know and you know as a pragmatist, that polls count in politics otherwise political parties wouldn't spend so much money on polling.
You know that the latest Nielsen Poll is very bad for you personally, and for your Government. You have Tony Abbott now as preferred Prime Minister, not by a lot but he's preferred Prime Minister.
How do you tackle  -  I mean has it got toxic, and if it gets toxic and people stop listening, then what do you do?
PM: I just don't accept any of that analysis.
HOST: None of it? None of the fact that the Labor Party spends money on polling-
PM: Let me go through it right from the start. There are published opinion polls weekly, basically, we get Newspoll every fortnight, then there are AC Nielsen polls and there's Galaxy and Essential and on and on and on it goes.
If I worried about the contents of every poll and the volatility between polls I literally would not do anything else. So I don't.
HOST: But is that a problem, that many in your party are literally not doing anything else, they're just worrying, and leaking, and upset, and panicking?
PM: I believe that at the end of the day people came into politics, I came into politics, with a sense of purpose about what you want to get done, what you believe in, what you think should be changed in our nation.
I came into politics having grown up here in South Australia in the electorate of Boothby, understanding I think what really makes a life for a family  -  access to good work, making sure that kids get the best education, the only reason I'm sitting here is because I did get a great education, making sure that there are Government services when your family needs them, so we want to extend, for example, Government services into supporting people with disabilities. So it's those things that drive me still.
What am I focussed on this year? Our economy, in this time of change, and making sure people have got jobs, delivering the new funding system for schools to make a difference to kids' life chances and starting the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
And I don't let the atmospherics and the polls and all the rest of it deter me from that.
HOST: You believe Labor can still win. Why do you think people will return to Labor on polling day?
PM: I certainly do believe we can win the election when it's held, and I believe that election will be a very clear choice between a Government with a plan for the future, with a focus on what matters for families, the strength of the economy, meeting the needs of families now under modern pressures as opposed to just negativity on the other side of politics.
HOST: You believe in your heart of hearts that despite all that's gone on, come polling day in seven months' time, there's going to be a change of heart?
PM: Absolutely.
HOST: People will wake up on that day? When I say wake up, they'll just wake up!
PM: Well I hope everybody wakes up on election morning! I hope everybody wakes up on election morning feeling fit and well!
HOST: But why would they turn around like that? Why?
PM: People will focus on what is then the decision and the choice in front of them. The choice that matters is not the choice that you gabble down the phone to someone who rings up from a polling company.
The choice that matters is when you're standing in a polling booth, you've got the ballot paper in front of you, you've got the pencil in the hand and you're going to mark the squares.
HOST: Now Prime Minister we've got lots of questions and we'll move on from polls to policy, and you'll probably be quite happy about that. This is a question earlier this morning though, after 6am this morning, from Christina. Are you able to hear that okay, we'll just make sure you're getting audio there through your-
PM: Yes I am now.
HOST: You are now, that's great. Our studio's cleverly designed so that the dials are confusing. This is Christina, Prime Minister.
CALLER: I'm just wondering how she expects the single parent families out there, both male and female, to survive on the money that they receive at the moment when there's no jobs available, where there's jobs that as soon as they find out you've got children they're not interested in hiring you, and rent costs and living costs are going through the roof. It's impossible. Each week I have to decide between food and rent.
HOST: Prime Minister.
PM: It is very tough for single parent families; it's very tough for a lot of low-income families.
We've got to focus though on helping single parents get the benefits of work  -  often part-time work because that's what enables them to balance up work and family life  -  and the reason we're so focussed on that is all of the evidence tells you that if kids grow up in a home where no one works, then they can take that disadvantage with them into the rest of their lives.
HOST: So it's a deliberate policy to make it harder on single parents?
PM: No, it's a deliberate policy to make sure that we are working with single parents so that they get a work opportunity. It is not in their interests to be there, out of the labour force for ten, fifteen, sixteen years and then try and get back into the labour force. That doesn't work. It's not in the interests of their child to grow up in a home where no one works.
By the standards of comparable countries, we have less single parents working than in comparable nations, so we're trying to support people through into work, appropriate training, childcare support, all of that is available.
HOST: This question came in earlier via our SMS line: The changes, says Gary, to the private health insurance will hit in the new financial year delivering a $1000 slug for a lot of middle Australia. He asks, how you think that's going to affect your popularity?
PM: Well it's not about popularity. It's about what's right in terms of the use of resources that taxpayers put into the Government pot. The money we've got is the money the taxpayers give us, and we've got to use it wisely.
And I simply don't believe that someone on my income level for example should be getting public support for their private health insurance.
So we've taken what for many might seem like a tough decision, but I think it's the right use of taxpayers' dollars to say that people who are in a better position to look after themselves do, people who need support still get support, and we focus on putting more money into health, which we are most certainly doing.
HOST: Elizabeth from the Adelaide Hills has called us on 891 Breakfast at 8.50am with Prime Minister Julia Gillard in our studios. Good morning Elizabeth.
CALLER: Good morning. I'd like to say firstly it's a disgrace that there are only five weeks of sittings between now and the next seven months, but my question to her is, could you please tell us exactly what the debt is? In my listening I have heard that it is over $200 million and that they are still borrowing money.
HOST: Prime Minister, I think it means $200 billion but you'd be quite happy with a $200 million debt level.
PM: There's more than five weeks of sitting  -  I think she's referring to the session that we're in now, and then we'll have the budget session.
But we have Parliament when we need it in order to get legislation through, and we've been very successful in this Parliament in getting legislation through.
In terms of Government borrowing and Government debt, we're going to peak at less than 10 per cent of GDP, but I'll take the opportunity to explain-
HOST: When's that going to happen?
PM: The peak is soon, and then of course we'll start seeing debt go down.
HOST: Why?
PM: Because we'll be repaying it. But can I explain why the debt is there, because I think this is one of the least understood questions and needs to be understood. We got slugged in the global financial crisis just like the rest of the world.
So around the world, the global economy starts to tumble, it hits into company profits. That hits into Government revenues, and it reduced Government revenues by $160 billion. That's a lot of money.
Now if you were going to cut Government expenditure to match a reduction in revenues like that, you'd have to do something as big as stop paying the aged pension to all pensioners. It's simply not possible.
And if we'd done that, a cut as mammoth as that, that would have tumbled our economy into recession and obviously thrown people into poverty.
So what we chose to do at that time - $160 billion slug to revenues  -  was stimulate the economy. That required some money too. That is what has caused the debt and deficit, and as you move to the next stage of the economic cycle, into growth, then you start repaying it.
HOST: Sure, you say you're going to start repaying it. Is that the same Treasury projections that said you'd get $2 billion from the MRRT, the mining tax, and you're getting $126 million?
I mean, why would people have confidence in any of those predications; that you're going to repay debt?
PM: Well people should have confidence in the professionalism of Treasury.
HOST: That's exactly my point, the Treasurer and Treasury.
PM: Let's be clear. The projections, the forecasts come from Treasury, from the professional public servants whose job it has been over time-
HOST: And they got it wrong.
PM: Well, over time, to advise this Government, the former Howard Government, governments in the future, so it's not appropriate-
HOST: And they got it wrong, Prime Minister.
PM: I'm going to address that, but it's not appropriate to cast aspersions on their professionalism and what they do.
In terms of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax, we saw commodity price volatility that took everyone by surprise, including those in the mining sector that did have implications for MRRT revenue.
That doesn't mean that the professionalism of the public servants who exercise their best judgment in doing to forecasts should be questioned, and it doesn't mean that the budget forecasts generally should be subject to question.
HOST: Okay now Prime Minister we know you've got other engagements, I think, so we're just about to wrap up. We've got a little function we want to do with you.
PM: Sure.
HOST: On Tuesdays in Adelaide on this program, and this is the only program in the world I think that does this. We have something called lucky dip Tuesdays, it's based on the old fete, we have a lucky dip and listeners get to ask us a question. And then depending on the best question we let them dip into the lucky dip box. Now, I'll show you the luck dip box. This is a new one for you, this is it here.
PM: Okay, right. Well no expense spared on the box, clearly.
HOST: Nope. My wife bought me a new mop during the week.
PM: You're wife bought you a new mop!
HOST: So this is our lucky dip box. We're quite proud of that box. It's a lot better than the photocopier box.
PM: I'm impressed.
HOST: Now, we'll spin the chocolate wheel. We do this every Tuesday. Do you have a question for us?
PM: Can I ask, where is the chocolate wheel?
HOST: Prime Minister, nobody has ever asked us that question.
PM: I can hear a chocolate wheel. I can't see a chocolate wheel.
HOST: That is worthy of a lucky dip prize from the lucky dip box. Would you like to pick something? Just be careful because there's some ABC merchandise in there that's defunct. We don't want to tell you what to pick but there's a box in there with, ‘PM pick me' on it.
PM: I've picked the box that says, ‘PM pick me'.
HOST: That's right, everything is rigged on the ABC. Be very careful of this.
PM: Okay, I have some trepidation in opening this. Righto, I've got it open. Oh, hang-on.
HOST: What do you think?
PM: Um, thank you very much.
HOST: Describe. It's a brown-
PM: It's a brown; it's a kookaburra, is it?
HOST: Yes!
PM: Right, yes. It's a brown kookaburra.
HOST: It's a brown ceramic kookaburra. Now some people think we just cleaned out our sheds.
PM: Yes.
HOST: We did.
PM: Well I think if you're going with the fete theme. Certainly at a fete on a second-hand odds ‘n' ends stall you could have seen this kookaburra. I think that's true.
HOST: Would you put in in the Lodge?
PM: Do you want me to put it in the Lodge?
HOST: Yes. My wife would be so chuffed if you put that in the Lodge.
PM: What if I take it to the Lodge and we get a photo of it sitting there and we'll send it through to you? Would you like it in the garden or in the house?
HOST: No, in the house on the mantelpiece.
PM: In the house.
HOST: You're not going to put it in your shed are you?
PM: Ah, no, it will go into the Lodge because you've ask for it to go into the Lodge and we'll put it on the mantelpiece and we'll take a photo of it.
HOST: Straight to the poolroom as they say. Based on your experience would you encourage people to ring in on a Tuesday morning and play lucky dip Tuesday?
PM: I don't see why not.
HOST: It's the calibre of prizes.
PM: If that was supposed to make a point about ABC funding, you've made it!
HOST: Oh dear! Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you for coming into the studio. We know you have other media engagements.
PM: Thank you very much.
HOST: And thank you for struggling with the traffic too.
PM: I was a little bit of a hard journey this morning.
HOST: Well it's almost mad-March in Adelaide. It's the time of year. Prime Minister, thank you.
[ENDS]


Melbourne
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
As a proud graduate of public education, I'm delighted to be with you today.
As a proud trade unionist, I'm delighted to be with you today.
You know the respect I have for you and all that you do.
I wanted to become a teacher myself.
I ended up becoming a politician.
But I trust that means I can make as a big a difference for our children as you strive to do.
I know the abiding commitment you have for education.
Believe me, I feel it too - because the future of our nation depends on it.
And every waking moment I have is dedicated to Australia's future.
I want every school to be a great school.
All 9,500 of them.
City and country.
Public and private.
Large and small.
I've called it a crusade, and it is.
It's a crusade because 3.5 million young lives are at stake.
If we fail them during 13 years of schooling, you don't get those years back.
If education counts, then teachers count.
Each teacher is an agent of change.
In some cases, the only figure who can bring aspiration and inspiration into a young life.
So much is asked of you.
Yet many of you feel you work with so little.
You chafe at the lack of resources.
You yearn to restore the standing that your profession once had in our national life.
Some of you also resent the heavy hand of bureaucracy in your state.
And, yes, some of you are concerned that graduates joining your ranks don't always have the skills they need.
Our National Plan for School Improvement is a plan to fix these things and much more besides.
It's a plan for great schools.
And so it's a plan for great teachers as well.
Education is a keystone of Australian citizenship.
Of realising the human potential of every student.
And as the Asian Century unfolds, it is vital to our economic success.
We cannot win the economic race without winning the educational race.
But at the moment, we're behind.
The average 15 year old maths student in Australia is two years behind a 15 year old in Shanghai.
89 per cent of children from the poorest quarter of Australian homes are reading below average by Year 3.
So our most fundamental conversation in education has to be about results.
What are we doing right.
What are we doing wrong.
How can we do better.
That's why we need a comprehensive National Plan for School Improvement.
Yes, dollars matter.
But they are only ever a means.
The end  -  the goal  -  is achievement by students.
That means better schools.
Great schools.
Each and every one.
Our first and biggest challenge is to hold a mirror up to ourselves.
How are we going?
Well today, we have the data and the transparency to know how we are going.
We have put in place the reforms that mean we can do better. 
A world class national curriculum, creating an entitlement to learning for every student.
A focus on literacy and numeracy for those falling behind.
Empowering principals to focus on teaching and learning and work together with parents and the local community.
A relentless focus on quality teaching, underpinned now by rigorous, national professional standards.
Only then does it make sense to talk about money.
With these reforms defined and being delivered, we can focus on funding reform.
I've spoken often of the opportunity denied to my father.
But that was 70 years ago and in another country.
I've spoken of the opportunity denied to some of my own classmates at Unley High. But that was almost 40 years ago.
Since then, Australian education has improved.
Overall, our schools are better equipped and better resourced than ever before.
Since 2008, funding has doubled, driven by the National Partnerships I was proud to introduce while Minister for Education.
But still children are being left behind  -  one in 12 are not meeting minimum standards in reading, writing and maths
In the dramatic growth of school funding since 1974, we became so focused on the competing claims of public and private, federal versus state, that our formulas stopped working.
Too many schools and students fell through the cracks.
Some in non-government schools.
Many in our public schools.
Our nation's generosity was passing them by.
Friends, it's time to fix a broken school funding system for the century ahead.
For the first time, every school will be supported by a Resource Standard based on evidence of what it costs to educate a student at the schools we know already get strong results.
On top of that, extra needs will be met through a system of “needs loadings”.
That's extra funding, per student, to help students from low SES backgrounds, indigenous students, students with disability and students with limited English skills, as well as to help with extra costs for small and remote schools, the very areas where public schools carry the heaviest load.
Our kids need a plan for change in their schools.
Every school will see their funding continue to rise.
No school will lose a dollar.
Because it's not about systems, it's about students.
We won't do school funding based on assertion or tradition or ideology.
We will do it based on need, informed by fact.
That's a great progressive outcome for all who care about schools in Australia.
But it comes with a responsibility.
When these reforms are delivered, teachers will finally be assured of the resources they need to do their job properly.
That's only ever what you've asked for.
The chance to give your best.
In his appeal for American help in 1941, Churchill famously said:
“Give us the tools, and we will finish the job.”
With the National Plan for School Improvement, you will get the tools.
And with those tools, I know you will finish the job.
Education is the defining passion of my political life. 
That's why I commissioned the Gonski report back in 2010 and launched it one year ago.
So like you, I want this thing done.
But like the NDIS, it must be done properly.
This isn't just tinkering around the edges.
It is the biggest reform to schools policy in 40 years.
It's a long-term funding plan for all our schools, and all our students. 
I can say we are much closer to the end than the beginning.
In fact, we're at the pointy end.
A great deal of analysis and modelling has been done.
Peter Garrett has led fruitful dialogue with his State and Territory colleagues.
And there's been a huge amount of work at officials' level.
There are still gaps to fill.
But one simple understanding is enough to bridge them: we can't afford not to reform our schools.
I don't just mean in a moral sense.
I mean financially.
We are the twelfth-biggest economy on earth.
While the model proposed by Gonski has been costed in the order of $6.5 billion a year, this sum represents less than 0.4 per cent of our annual GDP.
Our nation spends twice that amount each year on tobacco.
We spend twice that amount again on alcohol.
We can afford school reform.
I'm not asking the Premiers to put money on the table today.
The full school improvement plan will come into force gradually between 2014 and full completion in 2019.
At the moment, most states are engaged in fiscal consolidation, just like the Commonwealth.
Admittedly, many of the Premiers' particular funding cuts are ones I oppose.
Federal Labor is showing how you can make responsible savings if you have the right priorities.
It's time for all State and Territory First Ministers to share the leadership on schools.
The big test will come at COAG in April.
I hope the Premiers will rise to the challenge.
Australia's children are counting on them.
The job isn't up to them alone.
It's up to me and Wayne Swan and Penny Wong as well.
As leaders of the national government, we have to find our share of funds for the School Improvement plan.
We will get this thing done.
Since NDIS and Gonski are huge reforms, our savings will be correspondingly ambitious.
They won't be a nip and tuck.
They will be a statement of where our priorities lie.
That in times of fiscal stringency, when dollars are scarce, we save from where it needed least and invest where it is needed most.
Without fear  -  without favour.
It's time to think big in this nation.
Big solutions.
Big ideas.
2013 will be a memorable year.
The year we launch the NDIS.
The year we begin the National Plan for School Improvement.
It's also the year in which we, the nation's elected representatives, return to face the people.
So if you value my National Plan for School Improvement, it's not enough to just nod in agreement or hit ‘like' on a Facebook page.
The Government I lead will deliver Gonski.
If this Government goes, Gonski goes with it.
Mr Abbott's Liberals will always stand in the way of this reform.
As their time in government proved they have never shown any care or concern for disadvantaged children.
Now Mr Abbott's Liberals are being joined by the Greens Party.  
Senator Milne will tell you today that it is all about the mining tax.
It isn't.
It's all about your commitment to Australia's children.
If this moment is missed - frittered away in petty politicking by the Greens Party - then it will never come again.
The only way this major change can be delivered for this nation is by this Labor government this year and by this Labor government in the years beyond.
So you as teachers and unionists need to be part of the fight.
We have a vision worth fighting for.
An Australia that is not just prosperous but smarter, fairer and stronger.
An Australia where every school is a great school and every child receives a great education.
In the weeks and months ahead, I will govern to that end - working with the Premiers for the school improvement plan our kids need and deserve.
And I ask you to join with me in the fight for the future of our nation.
Remember I walked with you in that sea of ‘Gonski' hands on the lawns of Parliament House.
I planted one myself.
I know the passion and impatience you feel.
The sense of injustice.
The sense of unfinished business.
The sense that our schools  -  and our nation  -  can do better.
I feel these things myself.
I feel them very deeply.
And so I say:
Don't lose heart.
We're nearly there.
The goal is in sight.
United in purpose, and joined in respect, we will get this done.
And we will get it done together.
For our kids.
For our nation.
For the future.


Adelaide
Clean-up and recovery grants of up to $15,000 are now available for primary producers in areas severely affected by bushfires in New South Wales.
This assistance, available under Category C of the jointly funded Federal/State Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA), will initially apply to primary producers in Warrumbungle, Coonamble, Gilgandra, Harden, Yass Valley and Cooma-Monaro. The Commonwealth and New South Wales Governments will continue to assess the impact of the fires on other areas to see if this assistance should be activated elsewhere.
The assistance is designed to help with the economic impacts that these devastating fires have had on local farms and the wider community.
The activation of Category C assistance is in addition to the range of support already available, including personal hardship and distress assistance, loans to primary producers and small businesses, assistance with essential public asset restoration and freight subsidies for primary producers.
There are now 71 local government areas eligible for various types of assistance across New South Wales, including:
Albury, Bathurst,Bega Valley, Berrigan,Bland,Blayney, Bogan, Boorowa, Bourke, Brewarrina, Cabonne, Carrathool, Central Darling, Cessnock, Cobar, Conargo, Coolamon, Cooma-Monaro, Coonamble, Cootamundra, Corowa, Cowra, Deniliquin, Dubbo, Eurobodalla, Forbes, Gilgandra, Goulburn-Mulwaree, Greater Hume,Griffith,Gundagai, Gwydir, Harden, Hay, Jerilderie,Junee, Lachlan,Leeton,Lithgow, Lockhart, Mid-Western Regional, Moree Plains, Murray, Murrumbidgee, Muswellbrook, Narrabri, Narrandera, Narromine, Oberon, Orange, Palerang, Parkes, Queanbeyan, Shoalhaven, Singleton, Snowy River,Temora,Tumbarumba, Tumut, Unincorporated NSW, Upper Lachlan, Urana, Wagga Wagga, Wakool, Walgett,Warren,Warrumbungle, Weddin, Wellington, Yass Valley and Young.
Primary producers in the fire affected parishes should contact the NSW Rural Assistance Authority on 1800 678 593 to see if they are eligible for the grant.
Information on disaster assistance in NSW can be found at www.mpes.nsw.gov.au.
Information on the range of assistance that is available under the NDRRA can be found at www.disasterassist.gov.au


Geelong
Thank you very much and what an exciting day getting to walk for the first time on this new stretch of road.
And I'm very pleased so many people have come out to enjoy the experience, coming as it does with face-painting, fairy floss, heavens above there's a lot to do. So it's good to see everyone here.
I'd like to particularly acknowledge the State Minister, Terry Mulder, and also my federal parliamentary colleagues, Darren Cheeseman, the Member for Corangamite and Richard Marles, the Member for Corio.
This journey creating this bit of road all started in the lead up to the 2007 federal election when the Federal Labor Opposition as it then was committed to building this section of the Ring Road, Section 4B.
And that commitment was quickly matched – we decided to do it in partnership – and the then Bracks-led Labor Government said yes, the Ring Road should be brought into operation.
So the commitment made then. A very important commitment for the community in this part of the world, a very important commitment for the nation given the nation looks to this region for so much.
It's one thing to make the commitment; it's another thing to get to actually walk on it after the years in between.
And that has happened because of a lot of hard work from all of the people who have been involved in the design, all of the people who have been involved in the construction, and I'd like to thank VicRoads, all the employees, all the staff, all the contractors for their care and dedication in getting this job done.
This has actually meant a major economic injection into this region, into this part of the world.
I'm told that 1,320 jobs were created directly and indirectly through this construction: so, important to the economy.
It's also going to be important to the economy and amenity of this place for a very long period of time to come.
What it means is that we will see about 9,400 vehicles, 15 per cent of which are freight vehicles, travel this section of the Princes Highway instead of being on other roads, roads where they would be competition with local traffic. They will be using this section of the Geelong Ring Road, Section 4B.
So, it's good news if you live in Geelong, if this is your part of the world and you want to keep that extra traffic and those vehicles off your road.
It's good news if you live in the broader region because it's going to make your journey from place to place easier.
It's good news for those who love to come to this part of the world because of its physical beauty and tourist attractions. It means that your journey will be a shorter one, an easier one, and you won't need to worry about too many traffic lights along the way.
Indeed as a result of all of this you can now travel from Melbourne to the surf coast without stopping for a single traffic light – a great achievement.
So, it's with a really great sense of pleasure that I join the local community in celebrating this achievement today.
It's part of what we are trying to achieve in Victoria for infrastructure. We have been investing in Victorian infrastructure in record amounts.
We've more than doubled the annual Federal Government investment into roads and rail in the great state of Victoria from an average of $89 a head per Victorian, now to $201 a head.
A recognition that infrastructure had been neglected before our Federal Labor Government.
A recognition that the growth in Victoria means new infrastructure is needed.
A recognition that we want to plan and make a difference for the long term.
So, it's all good news and really tremendous to be here to join everyone for it.
I'd like to thank everybody who has been involved. I'm pleased and proud that we were able to make our contribution to this being achieved, and we were able to partner with the State Government in order to get it done.
So, a genuine partnership, one that is making a difference and will continue to make a difference.
So enjoy your opportunity to saunter back and forth. This will be the only time you get to do that – the sauntering will be over, the vehicles will be on it, the road will be in full operation.
Thank you very much.


Geelong
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Victorian Minister for Transport Terry Mulder today officially opened Section 4B, the final section, of the Geelong Ring Road to traffic.
The Prime Minister and Victorian Minister joined locals from across the Geelong region at a Community Day in Waurn Ponds to celebrate the opening.
Construction began on the Geelong Ring Road in early 2006. Thirty kilometres of freeway-standard road and almost seven years later, motorists can now travel from Melbourne to the Surf Coast without stopping at a single traffic light.
Section 4B is the final missing link joining the Ring Road to the Princes Highway, and is vital in developing and improving the road network between Melbourne and south-western Victoria.
The Geelong Ring Road demonstrates the commitment of both governments to deliver safer, more efficient roads for freight and commuter traffic, as well as encourage tourism to popular regional destinations.
The opening of the $110 million Section 4B provides motorists with a seamless connection from the Geelong Ring Road to the Princes Highway and on to Colac.
Since the first stages of the Geelong Ring Road opened in 2009, it has significantly transformed the way people move in and around greater Geelong. The Ring Road has slashed travel times for motorists and greatly reduced truck volumes on key roads in Geelong - by 50 to 75 per cent in some places.
Two environmentally sustainable rest areas have been constructed on this final section, which are furnished with parking, toilets and other facilities to help combat driver fatigue.
After years of extensive planning, community consultation and construction work, the local community, commuters and tourists can now enjoy the considerable benefits this project delivers.
Construction is also underway to provide a safer duplicated Princes Highway from Waurn Ponds through to Winchelsea with completion expected in mid-2015. At the same time, planning is on track to continue the duplication to Colac. Together with the Ring Road, inland routes to popular coastal destinations will be more accessible for holiday makers.


Canberra
A new national ‘reading blitz' for all students between Foundation and Year 3 is set to be launched next year to help tackle falling literacy standards and prevent thousands of Australian children from falling behind in their schooling.
The Federal Government will ask all schools, in every sector and every state, to sign up to an intensive three-year program as part of the National Plan for School Improvement, as part of the national crusade to make Australian schools among the world's best by 2025.
We want every school to focus on using the right teaching methods, specialist teacher skills and data about student progress to make sure that all kids are reading well and reaching the right standards early in their schooling. Teachers would identify and help struggling children, and parents, employers and community groups asked to help support students to improve.
Reading is a core skill that all students need to succeed in school and beyond. Yet too many Australian students aren't getting the basics in place in the crucial early years of their life.
Around 75,000 students failed to meet national minimum standards in NAPLAN last year. Without improvement, that number could climb to more than 150,000 by 2025, when the children starting school this year will complete Year 12.
And in last year's Progress in International Reading Literacy Skills (PIRLS) results, Year 4 students came 27th out of 42 countries taking part.
This isn't good enough. We need to do more to get the basics of reading in place in the first years of schooling, so that every Australian student can read confidently and proficiently to help them progress through their education.
We can learn from the success of teachers and schools around the country which have improved literacy results, helped by programs like the Numeracy and Literacy National Partnership.
We want to see schools focus on the reading skills of all their students from the first day of school, and step in with extra help and resources as early as possible.
As part of the blitz schools will be asked to adopt evidence based strategies such as:
Teachers will maintain a ‘running record' on the progress of each student to ensure no student slips through the cracks. This would include regular diagnosis of student progress throughout the year.
·         Schools will set out in their reading plan how they will teach reading, including through phonics and phonemics, and what methods they will use to identify students at risk of falling behind.
·         Schools and school systems will provide parents and carers with simple learning methods they can use at home to support their child's reading. For example, parents could get a list of basic teaching tips or access to interactive digital resources.
·         There will be more opportunities for parents and community members or organisations to volunteer in classrooms and share their love of reading with young children.
·         Schools can hire community engagement experts to organise parent workshops, helping build their skills and understanding of reading and literacy.
Improvements in early years reading would be included in schools' annual reporting, and schools will be asked to share information about successful strategies.
Under the National Plan for School Improvement there will be more money flowing into all school systems from next year, as part of our new and fairer school funding model.
We will ask education providers to use this additional funding to support the reading blitz, supporting techniques and activities which are known to improve student learning.  This might include paying for intensive training for teachers, buying new resources or hiring specialist staff where needed.
Around 1.1 million students across the country will benefit from this renewed focus from next year.
Our plan will give teachers and schools the resources and support they need to focus on the reading skills and needs of students as they start their schooling journey.
Parents will also have the reassurance of knowing that if their child needs extra help with their reading, that help will be available.
The Government will work with state and territory governments, and the non-government school sector, to finalise the National Plan for School Improvement and reading blitz in time for the 2014 school year.


Canberra
PM: I'm here today with Minister Garrett and with Andrew Leigh the Member for Fraser and we've just done some reading to kids. 
It's been a fantastic morning, some very excited young people here at the Lodge; very interested though in their reading. And we want young people around the country to be passionate about reading which is why today I am announcing our reading blitz for 1.1 million children.
What we know is around 75,000 kids at the moment aren't reading as well as we would like. 
We know that because we've got more information about schools than we've ever had before as a result of the policies of this Government.
We always wanted to understand what was happening for every child in every school so we could make a difference for every child in every school. 
Through this reading blitz we want to make a difference. We want to make sure that every child is assessed, every child's strengths and weaknesses on reading are known and every child gets the opportunity to become a great reader. 
When kids start school around 74 per cent of them are at risk of not learning to read well. 
We can reduce that. 
Indeed studies show that we can reduce that to six per cent but it takes focus and it takes a focus on every child. 
This is important in a moral sense. We want to do the best for every kid in the country but it's important in an economic sense too. 
In our nation today around eight million Australians don't read and write as well as they should. Now in the future when jobs will need to be more highly skilled, particularly to be more highly paid, we can't afford our schools to be churning out young people who can't read and write. 
So I'm very pleased to announce today this new endeavour, this new focus on reading. 
We will make this reading blitz one of the aims of our school funding reforms. 
As we've said consistently, we want to see more resources in schools but we want to make sure those resources are tied to a real agenda of change  -  an agenda of change that is about better quality schooling. 
I'm determined that we make a difference to the reading of every child in every school and that's what I'm proud to announce today.
MINISTER GARRETT: Thank you Prime Minister. Making sure that every young Australian student when they get into primary school can read well is one of the most urgent tasks that faces us as we want to lift the education for all kids in all schools. 
The advice is absolutely compelling. If a young child has got good levels of literacy under their belt then they will continue to be good learners and they will get great jobs in the future. 
The converse is that if we don't make sure that we are providing that support at an ear
ly stage between foundation and year three for kids in schools then they can continue to fall behind and we'll be left as a nation with the low levels of literacy that we currently experience. 
One of the most important things about today's announcement is recognising that making sure that every child is a good reader means making sure every child can be a successful student and I think that it's extremely important given that in the National Plan for School Improvement we have specifically said that every school will need to have a plan for addressing the progress that students are making in their school. 
As a consequence of this announcement today literacy and a focus on literacy in the early years will be a very important part of that process. 
I think this is really important for us to recognise what a difference it makes when kids can read well. It sets them up for learning and it sets them up for life.
ANDREW LEIGH: Thanks Prime Minister. As someone who researched a little in this area when I was an ANU academic, I can attest to the fact that there is no better way of raising a country's long run productivity than boosting literacy and numeracy. 
If you care about the gap between rich and poor there is probably no better anti-poverty vaccine than a great education.
I know as a parent though that it's not always easy. Sometimes at the end of the day you come home tired and you don't exactly feel like sitting down on the couch and opening up Barnyard Dance with your three year old. 
But it really does make a difference and that moment when the lights switch on and a young child starts to read themselves is such an exciting one and such an important one for them and for the nation. 
I'm really pleased to be here today with a group of Canberra families supporting a great Government initiative.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how much is this program going to cost and where is that money coming from?
PM: This is going to be embedded in the work we're already doing for school funding reform. As you're aware I think, when I became Education Minister we embarked on a major program of change for Australia schools. 
It has involved new buildings and new equipment, things like new computers, a world class curriculum, a series of new National Partnership, more money in literacy and numeracy, disadvantaged schools and teacher quality. 
And we know from that work that you can make a difference. This is a problem we can solve. If you bring the right combination of resources and change you can make sure more children are reading at a higher level. 
Now through our school funding reforms we want to make sure that's happening in every school for every child. 
The new money is going to be tied to initiatives that make a difference for the quality of education including this one and the reason why in reading we're focused on the years from prep to grade three is if we can get kids successfully reading at that stage of life it'll make a difference for the rest of their lives. 
If you miss out on literacy then it can be very hard to catch it up later on. 
And the evidence shows that if you come out of year three not reading well you're very likely to come out of year nine not reading well either, which means you're very likely to end up an adult who never reads well with all of the consequences that's got for the jobs you can do and the jobs that are locked away for from.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you take us through the logistics of that as well and when will it come into effect?
PM: Well it would be a part of what we're phasing in through the work we're doing on school funding reform and we've made a difference already in many schools with our National Partnership program which is focused on literacy and numeracy. 
What this would do is take a very system-wide approach  -  every child, every school  -  to the things that we know work. And the things we know work include a focus on phonics. 
It includes making sure that you understand where every child is at. You're not guessing how good a reader the child is. We're actually measuring that and then we're measuring progress and there's a plan for every child to make sure that we're working on what is mattering to them for their literacy. 
Every kid is different. Their journey to being a good reader is going to be different. Some of the tools are the same including things like phonics, but how to work with an individual child will be about that child's needs.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We're on the biggest transformation in Australian schooling for 40 years. So we've got to get it right. It's vital to our nation and our economic future. We want to be a high-skill, high-wage country in the future. 
We want to be the winner out of all this century of change in our region. We want to be the people who tap into Asian growth and make money out of it. 
In order to do that we've got to be able to compete and so we've got to win the education race. 
If we're going to win the economic race, when you're doing something as big as the biggest change in schooling for 40 years, yes it takes some time to do it right and we'll take that time.
JOURNALIST: What year will the first child be the beneficiary of this reading blitz?
PM: There are kids out there benefiting from our literacy and numeracy work now and then our school funding reform and these new plans for school improvement will start coming on stream from next school year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does it mean extra teachers going in to sit down with the child going through reading, will that require extra teachers in the classroom?
PM: I'll throw to Minister Garrett as well but in the National Partnership schools that we know are doing things that make a difference, there's a wide variety of approaches. 
It can include things like breakfast clubs and after school activities because kids maybe come from homes where they don't necessarily come to school having eaten. 
If you've got a rumbling tummy it's pretty hard to concentrate on your reading. Those kids might need extra effort and so longer hours after school. 
Indeed some reading recovery done during school holiday times can make a difference. 
It can also be about getting master literacy coaches in who are not only working with kids but they're working with the teachers to increase the teacher quality and improve the skills. 
It can be about programs that bring the parents into the school so they are actually increasing the number of people who can sit with kids, word by word, sound by sound and make a difference to their reading. 
But Minister Garrett would also be familiar with a lot of examples.
MINISTER GARRETT: Prime Minister, I think you've covered it well. The important thing to remember is that where we've seen additional investment in the National Partnerships by this Labor Government, we have seen improvements against the trend of decline in literacy. 
For example we're seeing larger numbers of schools that are applying National Partnership funding, seeing better results in literacy and numeracy as a consequence. 
But we need to make that happen nationwide and that will mean a series of specific measures that schools can identify and deliver, whether it's things such as the Prime Minister's mentioned, literacy coaches, looking at the application of phonics and literacy learning, for example the MultiLit program which is a recovering literacy program which is used quite widely. 
But most important of all, for each school to track the progress of kids when they start in foundation through to year three to make sure that when they get to year three that they are at or above those minimum leaves for literacy learning. 
That will involve much greater use of data by the school community and the school leadership and teachers, much greater interaction with the parents, making sure that in the school improvement plans that are a part of the National Plan for School Improvement this focus on literacy happens early. 
Again, just to repeat, the evidence is very clear that if we do provide targeted intervention and support in the early years, and of course as Andrew Leigh said, encouraging parents to read to their kids as well then you can lift those literacy levels and then of course the child's learning is on a much more solid foundation from year three on.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the indigenous literacy rate is a lot lower than the rest (inaudible). Are there provisions in this policy specifically for indigenous and rural kids?
PM: The aim is the same for everyone. We want every child to be a good reader so we've got the same aim for everyone but we're well aware from our Closing the Gap work that there is still an unacceptably large gap between the achievement or indigenous children and non-indigenous children. 
Now that means that we need to keep doubling-down and 
focusing on the efforts for indigenous children which we are going through the Closing the Gap strategy and which will also be associated with this work. 
As a result of all of the information we now have about schools, which we never used to have - I've said it before but when I first became Education Minister no one in Canberra in all of the federal bureaucracy could give you a list of the thousand schools that were doing the worst in our country or the thousand schools doing the best. 
No one could give you that. No one had ever compile
d that information. Now we have information school by school including the percentage of indigenous children in the school so we can track achievement in those schools including achievement for indigenous children and we can bring to bear the tools we know make a difference. 
There are some schools that teach indigenous children where we have worked with them with extra resources that are getting truly remarkable results. We want to see that around the country.
JOURNALIST: Are you actually setting a benchmark for success here nationally or individually and would we be right to conclude that there's no incentive element to this against performance?
PM: There will be constant monitoring and incentives against outcomes. What we've said about our school funding reform is we want to set the goals, the aspirations, the targets for education. 
We want everybody to have the information  -  you, me, the parents, communities, teachers, everyone  -  to have the information. 
We want schools to have a school improvement plan including this reading plan and schools will held to account for their performance against the plan. 
If at the end of the day the adults in the system are failing the children we need to know that and we need to take action. But you can only know it if you measure it, make it transparent, give people the resources that they need, help them with the changed agenda and then monitor the outcomes and hold people accountable.
That's the combination we're bringing to bear in school reform. If you didn't know what was going on then you couldn't start. 
If you didn't monitor what change was being achieved then you wouldn't know if you were making progress. 
If you don't get the resources right then you aren't giving principals and teachers the things at their disposal which enable them to make the maximum difference for the kids. 
But then you've also got to hold people accountable. Adults in the system have got a duty, an obligation to the children. 
We want to see them acquit that duty. The 
best teachers, the best principals do that every day.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is there a change in the teaching method for reading, like there's been more mention of phonics (inaudible)?
PM: It's been changing over time so we are not suggesting that somehow teaching method is changing as a result of the reading blitz that we've announced today. 
We've been changing the methodology over time. Both as Deputy Prime Minister and Prime Minister I've been very clear about this. 
I'm not interested in any of the warring between contending theories; I'm only interested in the results and so if what gets a result for a child is phonics then phonics it is. 
If what gets a result for a child is some other teaching strategy then some other teaching strategy can be engaged. It's all about that child. 
This isn't something to get ideological about. They're the old days when the Howard Government used to play the reading wars and no one actually sat down with the child and taught them to read while the adults were too busy having a fight amongst themselves. 
We've move past those days to where we are now and it's all about the child. For a child that comes to read anew, phonics, sounding out letters, is the foundation of literacy. 
For a child that comes to reading with some capacity  -  the kids I was talking to in there, some of them were reading out big words like ‘imitate'  -  well they're past phonics and may need the next teaching strategy that's going to help them keep adding new words and new comprehension and new understanding and then obviously bolster their creativity as they start writing themselves.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you concerned about the Pentagon grounding the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter fleet?
PM: We have committed to purchasing two Joint Strike Fighters. We don't want there to be a gap in our air warfare capability and we won't allow such a gap to arise. 
Yes, we'll continue to monitor and be in discussions about issues that have arisen and need to be addressed in the performance of the Joint Strike Fighter but we do have the agreement to purchase two and we will go ahead with that purchase.
JOURNALIST: Do you have a message about the floods in New South Wales at the moment?
PM: I certainly do. Like Australians around the country I've watched this circumstance in New South Wales and I think we've all been hit pretty hard over news of the loss of two lives, particularly the news about the loss of Luke O'Neill, the 17 year old doing something I think we can all imagine a 17 year old and his mates doing, going after golf balls in flood waters but such a dangerous thing. 
To see a young man lose his life like that is truly heart breaking. My message to the communities in New South Wales would be two-fold. 
First, keep yourself safe. Water is a dangerous thing, deceptively dangerous. Even very low levels of water if it's fast moving can sweep people away. 
So keep yourself safe. Stay away from the flood waters. We as a Federal Government will do what we need to do to help. No requests have been made of us at this stage. 
Obviously, it's local communities and state governments that always do the first instance response and that's the right way to do it. They're the ones on the spot. But if any requests come in for assistance then we will do them, meet them as quickly as possible and with all human endeavours to do everything that's asked for.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
I am deeply saddened to learn of the passing of the Hon. Joan Child AO who died over the weekend aged 91.
With Joan Child's passing, Australia has lost one of its pioneering female political leaders, and I have lost a role model.
Joan was the first female ALP Member of the House of Representatives and our nation's first female Speaker.
Widowed at a young age, Joan brought up five boys on her own, and for a time worked as a cleaner to make ends meet. She came to politics later in life, bringing remarkable gifts of common sense, good humour and persistence against the odds.
Though she attained high office, Joan always retained a sense of perspective. Her hobbies - gardening, reading detective fiction, listening to her idol Elvis - kept her firmly grounded.
As a confirmed 'true believer', Joan never forgot who had put her into politics or why. She was a powerful voice for the needs and rights of women, especially working women and women doing it tough.
Joan Child displayed great purpose and dignity in public life, setting an example that led the way for women's participation in the modern Labor Party.
Joan Child will remain for me an abiding source of inspiration.
On behalf of all Australians, I honour her memory and offer my deep condolences to Joan's family, her friends and her many Labor colleagues.
Ms Child's family has graciously accepted the offer of a State Funeral, which I have extended as a mark of respect by our nation.


Canberra
The Gillard Government today announced the appointment of Ms Megan Mitchell as Australia's first National Children's Commissioner.
The Government congratulates Megan Mitchell on this important and historic appointment.
The Gillard Government is establishing a dedicated advocate for children and young people at a national level as part of our commitment to giving kids the best start in life.
Ms Mitchell is a strong voice for vulnerable children in her current role as New South Wales Commissioner for Children and Young People and she will bring that experience to the national stage
We want every child to grow up safe, happy and well. The new Commissioner will make sure the needs of children and young people are put front and centre.
Importantly, Ms Mitchell will have a clear focus on vulnerable or at-risk groups of children, such as children with disability, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children, homeless children or those who are witnessing or subjected to violence.
The appointment of the National Commissioner is a key achievement under the National Framework for Protecting Australia's Children 2009-2020.
The work of the former Attorney-General Nicola Roxon MP in establishing Australia's first ever National Children's Commissioner was acknowledged by the Government.
The National Children's Commissioner will sit within the Australian Human Rights Commission, Australia's national independent statutory body dealing with human rights.
The Commissioner will promote public discussion and awareness of issues affecting children; conduct research and education programs; consult directly with children and representative organisations; and examine Commonwealth legislation, policies and programs that relate to children's human rights
The ACT Children &amp; Young People Commissioner, Mr Alasdair Roy, ran a series of sessions in the ACT with students between the ages of 9 and 11 as part of the selection process.
Ms Mitchell has been appointed as National Children's Commissioner for a period of five years commencing 25 March 2013.  


Canberra
PM: I want to thank the Attorney-General, Mark Dreyfus, for that introduction.
It was just my enthusiasm to get up that was cutting it short, and I'm joined too by Jenny Macklin, the Minister for Families and Community Services, and also by your local federal member, Andrew Leigh, who is the Member for Fraser.
I get to go to a lot of schools as Prime Minister, in fact I deliberately organise my time so that I do go to a lot of schools, and I do that because the most important thing that is happening in our country today is happening in Australia's schools and that's because young people are our future. 
The future of our nation can't be better than you are.
You're the people who are going to make it, you're the people who are going to shape it, and so our future can't be better than you are.
Which is why Australia's young people are so precious to us and across all of the aspects of their lives we want to make sure that young people are safe, that they're healthy, that they get a great opportunity at education, that they get to feel inclusion as an Australian, truly feel part of the nation, and that with all of that grounding and all of that background they then go on to be great Australians.
As the adults in the system, we've got a responsibility to you, a responsibility to make sure that we build that healthy, safe environment for you, a responsibility to make sure every school is a great school, a responsibility to make sure that when you leave school you've got great options and choices, whether that's being an apprentice, whether that's going to university, whether that's going straight into the world of work.
So it's a big responsibility but it's our responsibility as the adults to help create that Australia for you.
It's one that I take very seriously, which is why I focus so much of the time on what's happening in Australia's schools and why particularly in the last few days we've been talking very passionately about making sure every young person gets the chance to become a really good reader because if you don't learn to read at school then unfortunately it can be very, very hard to pick up those reading skills in later life and it can make a big difference to your life.
So there's a lot of things to do to improve schools, a lot of things to do to make sure that our young people enjoy the best environment to grow up in. 
We've been thinking about what's a way of ensuring that the voice of children is always heard as government goes about making decisions and what's the best way of making sure that as we make decisions across the really big array of things that government does, that we are taking into account the needs and perspectives of Australian children.
And actually young people, including in this room, were consulted about what was the best way forward and what we should do and we've listened to you and we've come up with having a National Children's Commissioner and we've consulted with you about what that person should do to make sure that government is responsive to the needs of young people. 
Now we're going to take the next big step in creating the National Children's Commissioner and that's announcing the very special person who's got the job.
That person is with me today, it's Megan Mitchell and congratulations to her. 
And so this is really her first big thing as National Children's Commissioner and I know she's going to always remember coming to your school as the start of a very important job in the life of the Australian nation. 
So thanks very much for having us here this morning. Thank you.


Canberra
PM: Can I thank everybody here at Kingsford Smith for having us in this great school today. We've had a great morning.
I'm joined by the Minister for Families and Community Services, by the Attorney-General, by the local member Andrew Leigh, the Member for Fraser, but most perhaps most importantly of all today I'm joined by our new National Children's Commissioner Megan Mitchell, and I thank her for being here this morning.
We are a Government committed to making sure that every young Australian gets an opportunity to grow up safe, healthy, happy and gets a great education.
We are very focussed on making sure that we change Australian schools so that our schools are in the top five in the world and every child in every school is getting a great education.
But of course we want to do more for children than that which is where the National Children's Commissioner comes in.
The National Children's Commissioner's job will be to ensure that the voices of young people are heard by Government; indeed those voices have been in putting this position together and its role and responsibilities.
That as Government gets on with doing tasks across a wide range of portfolios, that the National Children's Commissioner is there to make sure that the outlook of children and their needs is always being taken into account.
Around the country, state governments have children's commissioners but no comparable position at a national level.
We think it's an important step forward to create the National Children's Commissioner and I congratulate Ms Mitchell on her appointment.
I might just throw to her to say a word or two then we'll take any questions on today's announcement and then we'll move to issues of the day. 
MEGAN MITCHELL: Thank you Prime Minister.
It is a great honour to be appointed as the first National Children's Commissioner, and I do want to congratulate the Government for establishing the position.
It is something that's been missing; that there is a voice for children at a national level; that looks at national laws and policies and systems and services for children, and that there is a focus on child rights at a national and international level in terms of Australia's obligations.
As I say I feel deeply honoured and I'm really very, very keen to ensure that children's voice is up there and heard by adults who are making decisions on behalf of and for children. 
So thank you. 
PM: If there are any questions on the Children's Commissioner we'll take them now. I'm conscious that the kids have done all the hard ones.
JOURNALIST: Are there any laws you've identified, I know you've only had the role for not very long, but is there anything that has come to your attention? 
MEGAN MITCHELL: In fact I'm not even in the role yet.
I would like to say it's a little bit premature to be definitive about particular laws, but we're always reviewing laws and policies in this nation, whether state or federal and one of the roles of the Commissioner will be to be involved in that debate and to ensure that children's rights, interests and needs are privileged in those debates.
So at this stage I wouldn't say there's any one particular law that I'd single out. I just think there is a job to do more generally. 
JOURNALIST: Is there a priority area that you have identified? 
MEGAN MITCHELL: I think that's one of the first things I need to do, is to be identifying what the priority areas are and that'll involve a lot of talking with people who care for and work with children and talking to children themselves. 
That will be a really important priority for me.
Personally and professionally I do have an interest in ensuring that we identify kids that are at risk of disengaging from education and social life as I think there are lots implications of that.
That's an area I have and personal and professional interest in that I'd like to look at the laws and policies of this nation and states and territories to make sure that we very early on pick up any risk factors for kids and act on that so that they can be safe. 
JOURNALIST: What sort of role during or after the Royal Commission do you see yourself playing?
MEGAN MITCHELL: Well I see that the role would obviously have a relationship with the Royal Commission and I understand the Human Rights Commission has already offered to help. 
Exactly what that looks like, I think it's a bit early to say, but I would want to stay very close to what's going on in that space, especially in order to identify additional system changes and reforms that can safeguard our children into the future. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what sort of extra resources is the Human Rights Commission getting to do this job properly? 
ATTORNEY-GENERAL: There's $3.5 million of new money that's been allocated over the next four years for the establishment of this position. 
As you've heard, the Children's Commissioner will be part of the Human Rights Commission, but I'd stress again it is $3.5 million new money for the position. 
JOURNALIST: The Greens are already taking the responsibility for this. Why has it taken so long to have a National Children's Commissioner? 
PM: I'm happy to say something about that, and then the Attorney-General and the Minister for Families may want to as well.
This is a proposal that has been pursued by the Labor Government for some period of time now and as you heard from Minister Macklin, very passionately by the former Attorney-General Nicola Roxon, who thought that it was a very important move for us to make. 
Inevitably doing the set-up does take some time, making sure that you have the foundations right, the basis of legislation right.
So that has taken some work by us but I'm glad that we've got to this stage.
And really, standing here, it's about looking to the future and what difference this position can make for our nation's focus on children. 
JOURNALIST: Do you think the states are playing politics by not supporting some of your key initiatives like Gonski, like the NDIS in an election year simply because they want to make you lose face in some ways? 
PM: I've seen some of the reporting today about the attitude of the Victorian Government, the Queensland Government and indeed the Western Australian Government to change in Australian schools.
First and foremost, I'd remind everybody involved, we're the adults. We're the ones with the responsibility for change.
We're the ones with the responsibility for making sure that every child in every school get as great education. I'm determined to make sure that happens.
We've seen Victoria float a proposal after having taken $550 million out of schools in cuts, some of them cutbacks to the support of the most disadvantaged children in schools through the education maintenance allowance and now apparently Premier Baillieu is saying it's a grand initiative to put $400 million back.
That's not good enough and it's not going to give our kids the kind of opportunities they need to have a great education and an opportunity at a great life. 
As I've said consistently since we launched the white paper in Australia's role in this century of change in our region, there is nothing automatic or preordained about us being a high-skill, high-wage economy in the future.
We will have to work for it and there that's no more important place to work for it than in Australia's schools, which is why I've set the national goal of putting us in the top five around the world.
Inevitably when you are bringing the biggest reform to education in 40 years, there will be some argy-bargy and some carry-on around it, but I am determined to push through all of that and to get this done. 
JOURNALIST: There is a lot of mud-slinging at the moment between the states and the Federal Government.
Do you need to get an agreement at the April COAG meeting?
What steps are being taken between now and then and will this all be put to bed by budget time? 
PM: We've been in intensive discussions with states and territories and indeed the Catholic and independent schools about this reform. We've been in those discussions for some period of time.
The discussions have recently been updated with data that only just became available arising out of the analysis that happens from the census. So that data was not available more early than this. 
What that means is that there is intensive work going on behind the scenes between officials to look at these changed proposals.
But at the end of the day it will take political will to get this done. I've got the political will to do it and we will fight through to get it done.
Now I hope that that fight is concluded in April around the COAG table but if there are states that are still holding out from giving kids the best possible education then we will certainly fight on to secure that for those children. 
JOURNALIST: Did you say the states were acting like children, you said that, ‘we are the adults'?
PM: We are the adults. We've got a responsibility to kids and we've got a responsibility to kids and we've got a responsibility to get on with the job. 
JOURNALIST: Meaning the Federal Government or the states?
PM: Meaning everybody and we will certainly acquit our responsibility to get on with the job. 
JOURNALIST: But Prime Minister, you've only got seven sitting weeks after this one to get legislated a reform that isn't negotiated yet. Haven't you run out of time and didn't you take too long to get the original plan to the states? 
PM: Certainly not. We will get this done in the time available to us. The critical date here is the start of the 2014 school year and schools will be well aware of what have their financial resources will be from the start of the 2014 school year.
There have been just practical, common sense steps that needed to be taken here, like the availability of data flowing from an analysis of the census which was not available until recently and of course schools legitimately wanted to know how the model would work, what the possibilities within the modelling was, against the most recent data.
So we've been in a process where the most recent data is being used to generate a variety of models for consideration.
There is no one model that has got the tick yet, so anybody who's out there representing to you they know what is happening to an individual school isn't telling you the truth.
We've got the most up-to-date information being worked through a series of models to fuel a genuine discussion and it couldn't be done before that data became available.
There's been lots of discussion about the principles and mechanics of the things that were recommended by David Gonski and his team but we needed the most up-to-date information. 
JOURNALIST: Are you (inaudible) self-harming and hunger strikes at Nauru? 
PM: Any time we hear reports of people in our detention centres who are on hunger strike or anything like that, the first point to make is it doesn't get you anywhere. 
Doesn't get you a changed outcome.
Unfortunately people do sometimes take that step, but I do want to be very clear. Having a hunger strike or anything like that does not change people's outcomes.
The only thing that happens for people in our asylum seeker facilities is there is a proper assessment of whether or not they are a genuine refugee.
We make sure that mental health support is available to asylum seekers. 
JOURNALIST: Are you sick and tired of talk of a Rudd comeback and of disloyalty from your colleagues? 
PM: I've dealt with all of that before. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you concerned, do you think the Murdoch companies have too much influence at Channel 10 and do you think these ownership issues need to be addressed by the new media laws? 
PM: During the course of the last year we received the Convergence Review and the Finkelstein Review. 
We said that we'll respond to them in due course and when we've got something to say about that we will. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
PM: When we've got something to say about it, we will. We've received the reports and we're continuing to work through them. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
PM: I read the newspapers too and then there's the things that happen in the real world. When we're in a position to respond to those reports, we will. 
JOURNALIST: On Gonski, will you go it alone if you don't get all the states' cooperation? What's your Plan B if they don't all sign up in April? 
PM: First and foremost I think premiers and chief ministers around the country would need to indicate to their schools and the children who rely on them for a great education why they don't want them to have a better one. 
I believe that around the nation parents look at their child's school and they always want to see improvement, they always want to see their child getting the best education.
The best schools each and every day ask themselves the question, how can we do this better? We've got to match that will for improvement with the resources that are needed to get the job done.
That's what David Gonski's review was all about and we'll keep fighting and arguing for it. And let me assure you, I'm well and truly up for that fight.
I started us on this process of changing schools when we first came to government in 2007. Piece by piece, we've put a reform agenda into place.
More information than we've ever had before about Australian schools. You couldn't have a sensible discussion about further changes until you had that more information.
National partnerships that show you can make a difference.
A new world-class national curriculum.
The biggest single investment into school infrastructure in the nation's history.
The bringing of better equipment into Australian schools.
And now we've got to do the rest, we have to make sure that all of that combined with great quality teaching makes a difference to our kids and we're determined to do it. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your government has tightened the 457 system because of abuse and rorts. Where is the evidence of that?
PM: Minister O'Connor referred to the growth that we've seen in the use of 457s.
He referred to some concerns that have come to his attention about the use of 457s.
And each and every day we'll always put Australian jobs first, and that's what we've done in saying we would further crack down on inappropriate use of 457 visas. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) and whether there have been any requests for assistance? 
PM: Thank you for that question.
Around New South Wales, people are doing it very tough. We've not only seen flooding, we've seen loss of life and now we've seen the devastating impact of these freak storms, the tornados, that have done so much damage.
As I said yesterday, we were prepared to do anything we could to assist New South Wales.
During the course of today arrangements under our natural disaster relief arrangements will be triggered in partnership with New South Wales.
They will be triggered in 11 local government areas including Kiama. People who want full details of that, details will become available during the course of the day in the normal way. 
Unfortunately, we've got to put these kind of details out all too frequently because of the things that the weather does. 
But the full information will be available through our Disaster Assist web site. And then there's the help line number which is 180 22 66.
That information will become available during the course of today, so if people can hold off calling or logging on just for a previous period of time and then the information will be up and available for people. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
PM: I don't comment on polls. I take that to be a reference to a poll in today's papers. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) John Howard last night, who predicted a Kevin Rudd comeback? 
PM: I didn't watch it. 
JOURNALIST: Paul McClintock has raised questions about the COAG process. Do you think it's broken? 
PM: I think COAG can do great work for the nation, and we've done some important work for the nation in areas like skills, indeed in health we've done great work for the nation.
What it then requires is people to honour the agreements and to show the care and concern for their populations that is about the hard graft of implementation rather than the cheap playing of politics.
When we see the cheap playing of politics we'll crack down on it the way we did in Victoria, where for the payments we're making now, we've sidelined Premier Baillieu and we are dealing direct with local hospital networks. 
JOURNALIST: Are you worried about the constitutional validity of doing so? 
PM: No I'm not. We obviously take careful advice. I brought the world's best lawyer with me, but I take that to be a reference to the Williams and Pate case and all the rest of it.
We always work through very carefully on these questions. But in terms of people talking about constitutionality, Premier Baillieu did raise that.
Is Premier Baillieu really saying he would take a court case to deny hospitals in Victoria more money? Is he really saying they'd spend all of that money on legal costs to stop money going to patients? Is that what he's really saying?
I think the people of Victoria would be a bit happier if he's got cash lying around for a legal case, maybe he might shift it to a hospital to help out.
JOURNALIST: When we talk about Gonski and how it's going to be paid for, obviously everyone is watching the upcoming May budget.
Can the public expect to see at least the Federal Government side of this fully funded for the forward estimates in this coming budget? 
PM: I'd refer you to my Press Club speech at the start of the year.
Admittedly there was other news in that that that people focused on, but during the course of that I outlined the year to come and that we would be very clear with the Australian people about the funding for the National School Improvement Plan, the funding for the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
It would be clear to people not only over the Government's area four year budget period that we would be outlining the long-term funding strategies for those major changes, and I was very upfront then.
It will require people to make some tough choices. We will be saying to the nation if we value these things then, we've got to make sure the resources are available.
Every promise has to be fully budgeted and fully accounted for and we will do that.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and NSW Premier Barry O'Farrell today announced financial assistance will be made available in 11 local government areas affected by the weekend's severe storms and flooding in NSW.
This is the second major flood event northern NSW has experienced this year and it is important we support the region's local communities as they recover.
The damaging winds and heavy rainfall along the east coast of NSW has resulted in severe wind damage and major flooding in a number of areas along the coast between Byron and Kiama.
The NSW State Emergency Service received a large number of calls for assistance, with the heavy rain, strong winds and flash flooding bringing down power lines and trees and ripping roofs off homes.
A natural disaster declaration has been made in the following 11 local government areas:
 * 	Ballina
 * 	Bellingen
 * 	Byron
 * 	Camden
 * 	Clarence Valley
 * 	Coffs Harbour
 * 	Kempsey
 * 	Kiama
 * 	Nambucca
 * 	Port Macquarie Hastings
 * 	Randwick
This declaration triggers a number of disaster assistance schemes to help with the cost of storm relief and recovery.
These disaster assistance schemes are made available by the NSW Government through the NSW Disaster Assistance Arrangements and they are jointly funded by the Commonwealth Government through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.
These measures will help families, business owners, primary producers and local councils to restore any damage caused by the severe storms and flooding and ease some of the associated burden.
Further areas could be declared in the coming days as the clean-up effort continues.
Everyone is urged to listen to their local emergency warnings and never ever go into flood waters.
Anyone needing help from the SES should contact their local unit on 132 500. In a life threatening emergency, always ring Triple Zero (000).
For more information about disaster assistance go to www.emergency.nsw.gov.au.


Brisbane
The Gillard Government is pleased to announce the formation of the Queensland 20 (Q20) - a new peak group of Queensland business leaders to ensure the state reaps the maximum benefit from next year's G20 Leaders' Meeting.
The Q20 will be chaired by Ms Catherine Tanna, Chairman of resources group BG Australia, based in Brisbane.
Queensland's role as host state for the summit in Brisbane and a G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors' meeting in Cairns provides an opportunity to showcase not only these locations, but the entire Sunshine State.
The G20 brings together leaders, finance ministers and central bank governors from major emerging and advanced economies to address the critical economic and financial challenges facing the world. 
It is expected to attract 25 world leaders, 4,000 delegates and up to 3,000 members of the world's media. 
It is the premier forum for global economic co-operation and decision-making and its member nations account for more than 85 per cent of global economic output.
There are enormous benefits that will flow to Australia and Queensland from hosting this global event, both now and into the future.
Led by Ms Tanna, the Q20 will help make sure that the whole of Queensland reaps the benefits of this tremendous opportunity.
The Q20 will work to ensure that all of Queensland can make the most of hosting the G20 by highlighting the state's diverse economy, including the resources, construction, education, agriculture and tourism sectors. It will highlight Queensland as a great place to visit, learn and do business.
It will help Queensland business to directly engage and work with the B20 - the advisory body headed by Mr Richard Goyder AO to lead business engagement for the G20 - to help facilitate the significant contribution Queensland business can make.  
Ms Tanna brings invaluable experience to the role. Raised in Gladstone, Queensland, Ms Tanna has forged a successful career as a leader in the resources industry.
Ms Tanna joined BG Group in 2009 after a long career with Shell and BHP Billiton. Ms Tanna has been a member of the Reserve Bank of Australia Board since 2011 and is a member of the 2018 Commonwealth Games Board.



EDDIE MCGUIRE: Also today, a big blitz in the west, it is the Western Bulldogs Club's Win the West Blitz. They're going to be out at 24 different schools right across Melbourne's west today, pumping up support  -  not only for the Bulldogs but getting kids engaged in football.
MICK MOLLOY: And it's all about the players, volunteers, members, fans, staff, everyone's hitting the streets and just trying to make sure we get a big a base as we possibly can.
And who else would you want to front the campaign than the Prime Minister herself, Julia Gillard, who is on the line.
Morning to you Prime Minister, thanks for your time and you've got my vote so long as you keep hitting the streets on behalf of the Bulldogs. Congratulations!
PM: Well, thank you very much. And this is a great initiative by the Bulldogs. I spoke to Simon yesterday and they were already out and about street-stalling, and a lot more is going to happen over the course of the next few days.
So the Dogs have always been the team in the west, but that's going to be reinforced by everybody being out in the west saying ‘come and join the Bulldogs'.
MCGUIRE: And a nice little segue into the front page of The Age today Prime Minister, where Victoria is expected to receive a quarter of the additional $6.5 billion yet to be spent on schools.
How is that going to filter through to Victoria  -  and tell us some good news on the campaign trail  -  this is great.
PM: It is great. I've been working on school change, school reform, school improvement since we first came to Government in 2007 and it's so important for the kids because every kid should get a great education.
But it's actually so important for our nation too. Even if you don't have children or school-age children, I think it's a pretty common-sense proposition that we can't have a strong, high-wage, high-skill economy in the future if our kids are coming out of school and what they have learned is less than kids in the countries we compete against.
So we're very focused on school improvement, and better funding for schools. I'm trying to work out cooperative arrangements with states and territories to do just that.
Inevitably when you are trying to do something as big as the biggest change in school funding in 40 years there's plenty of criticism and commentary on the sidelines. But I'm very determined we'll get this done.
MCGUIRE: Prime Minister, how do you cut through this? Because while  -  and we're not going to get into opinion polls and things like that other than obviously you've got some challenges there.
But at the same time how do you put the point across to people that in Australia at the moment we have got low inflation, low unemployment, low interest rates, we've got through the GFC, the share market is coming good. Every indicator would suggest we're actually in Shangri-La at the moment, yet people still think we're going around in a third world country?
PM: Eddie I think when you live through the biggest economic shock since the great depression, it's no wonder that it leaves people a bit anxious and cautious for quite a number of years afterwards.
You're right, by the standards of the world our economy is in good shape and there's some good news around.
For example, in Melbourne we've seen the property market starting to come back and clearance rates at auctions be very good  -  so that's a sign people have got a bit more confidence to get out and about and buy a house or an apartment.
But at the same time, our economy is undergoing a big transformation because of the high Aussie dollar and that's putting a lot of pressure on businesses, particularly in Victoria, because we're such a great manufacturing state.
And we've got to work with that transformation and make sure we're doing everything now to ensure we've got the jobs in the future. And that's what things like our plan for Australian jobs is about; rolling out the National Broadband Network, really focusing on infrastructure, and really focusing on schools and skills.
MCGUIRE: Do you think there is a future in manufacturing though? Or is that just something that was, right okay, China's best position, the Australian dollar not showing any real signs  -  although I suppose a lot of people would hope that it maybe drop down to mid-80s to give than manufacturing sector a bit of a kick.
Is it something that we should be concentrating on or should we be looking elsewhere  -  what's your thoughts on this?
PM: We can still be a country that manufactures things. But we're going to have to do it differently.
The dollar is likely to stay high for some period of time. We've lived through a 50 per cent rise in our currency.
So if you put yourself in the shoes of someone overseas, a European who used to buy something Australian for €500 is now having to shell out €750.
So I think the competitive disadvantage of the high Aussie dollar is obvious, but we can still manufacture things provided we're at the forefront of innovation and quality.
And when you go to some of the manufacturing establishments in Victoria  -  Boeing for example, they're working on part of the Dreamliner aircraft. They're able to do that in Australia because we were at the front of coming up with the new material that the wing flaps would be made from.
It's lighter, lighter is always good for an aircraft, less fuel to get it to fly, and because we are the owners of that innovation we are now the owners of that work.
That's going to be the future of Australian manufacturing.
MOLLOY: Great news. Prime Minister, we like to keep our eye on international politics here a lot as well on Triple M's Hot Breakfast and there's a bit happening in Italy at the moment.
Silvio Berlusconi  -  he's been a favourite of ours for a long period of time. I'm interested if he does get up, and it's looking more likely that the miracle could happen, he gets back into power.
Can I get an insight into the conversation you have when you pick up the phone and congratulate Mr Berlusconi? What do you say to him Prime Minister?
PM: I had the opportunity to sit next to Mr Berlusconi at a G20 meeting. I was actually a little bit bemused as to why I was sitting next to him because the cable was all done in alphabetical order, which wouldn't tend to suggest you put Australia next to Italy, but you know.
MCGUIRE: He changed the tags!
MOLLOY: He's requested!
PM: I got the pleasure of sitting there and having a conversation through an interpreter in Italian, and sometimes in a bit of English  -  Mr Berlusconi doesn't speak much English and I don't speak any Italian, so interpreters in use.
He's an interesting character; can I put it like that? And if I end up placing a congratulations call to him I'm sure it will be one I'll remember for a long period of time to come.
MOLLOY: Prime Minister, we haven't seen a lot of Tim lately. He seems to have gone missing in action, how's he going?
PM: He's fine.
MOLLOY: Is he?
PM: Tim's absolutely fine, still a mad Richmond supporter.
MOLLOY: He's a good Richmond man; I look forward to seeing him around one. By the way, if he's in town there's a comedy festival on. Might get on the same card as him  -  me, Tim and Ricky Nixon.
PM: I'm worried Mick that he's taken too much inspiration from you and so-
MOLLOY: He is, he's doing my material!
PM: Yeah, we're cutting out the comedy routine.
MOLLOY: That was a killer look you gave him.
PM: The words afterwards; stop pretending to be Mick Malloy.
MOLLOY: A lot of people have said that.
MCGUIRE: Did you look back on that shot where you gave him the stare  -  fantastic, we love it, laser, right through the back of his head. We've all felt it one stage in our lives when we say something stupid, it's pretty funny.
MOLLOY: I thought that's got to be a quiet trip home in the car for Tim.
PM: Well we were at home so there was no car trip required.
MCGUIRE: Just a point out to the kennel.
MOLLOY: He is a good Richmond man and above all that it's a great cause he represents there too for men's health, so good on him.
MCGUIRE: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us this morning. We'll talk to you as we get a bit further into the campaign on some of the other issues.
But today it's all about the Bulldogs out in the western suburbs. A great initiative, well done to Simon Garlick and Peter Gordon and all the team out there.
That is called the Win the West Blitz, and the Prime Minister obviously right behind her beloved Bulldogs. Thanks very much for joining us this morning.
PM: Thanks very much.


Canberra
Flood-affected primary producers in more of the hardest hit regions of Queensland can now apply for clean-up and recovery grants.
The grants of up to $25,000 are available to help with the economic impacts of these devastating floods.
Primary producers in targeted areas within the local government areas of Central Highlands, Gold Coast, Logan, Rockhampton, Sunshine Coast, and Western Downs are now able to apply for this assistance under the jointly funded Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.
The eligible activation area for grants in Goondiwindi and Toowoomba has also been extended to ensure similarly affected primary producers can also access assistance.
These grants are already available in the local government areas of Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gympie, Lockyer Valley, North Burnett, Scenic Rim and South Burnett in addition to targeted areas within Banana, Goondiwindi, Ipswich, Somerset, Southern Downs and Toowoomba.
The grants assist with the cost of cleaning up and removing debris, replacing damaged equipment and stock, and help ensure business isn't disrupted beyond the next season. This assistance does not compensate for income losses and is not intended to replace insurance.
In addition, concessional loans and grants of up to $650,000 have been extended to these local government areas in recognition of the impact of primary producers in South East Queensland.
The exceptional loan and grant package is now available to eligible primary producers and businesses the LGAs of Banana, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, North Burnett, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy (DIRS) is also being made available to individuals in the Central Highlands, Gold Coast, Logan, Rockhampton, Sunshine Coast and Western Downs local government areas. This assistance provides payments to employees, small business people and farmers who can demonstrate they have experienced a loss of income.
The assistance will ensure that people are able to stay in these areas and will support the longer-term recovery of the devastated local and regional economies.
The subsidies are already being provided to individuals in Banana, Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, North Burnett, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs and Toowoomba local government areas.
This assistance is over and above the support already being provided under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements which are jointly funded by the Australian Government and the states.
In Queensland:
Personal Hardship and Distress assistance is available in the 23 local government areas of: Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Cherbourg, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Concessional Interest Rate Loans and Freight Subsidies for Primary Producers are available in the 22 local government areas of: Banana, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Concessional Interest Rate Loans for Small Business are available in the 23 local government areas of: Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Moreton Bay, North Burnett, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Clean-up and recovery grants of up to $25,000 are available for affected primary producers in, or in parts of, the following 20 local government areas of: Banana, Bundaberg, Central Highlands, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Ipswich, Lockyer Valley, Logan, North Burnett, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Toowoomba and Western Downs.
Clean-up and recovery grants of up to $25,000 are available for affected small businesses and not-for-profit organisations in, or in parts of, the following 7 local government areas of: Bundaberg, Fraser Coast, Gympie, Lockyer Valley, North Burnett and targeted areas within Gladstone and Southern Downs.
Restoration of Essential Public Assets assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 52 local government areas of: Aurukun, Banana, Brisbane, Bundaberg, Burdekin, Burke , Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cloncurry, Cook, Doomadgee, Etheridge, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goondiwindi, Gympie, Hinchinbrook, Hope Vale, Ipswich, Isaac, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Mackay, Mapoon, McKinlay, Mornington, Moreton Bay, Napranum, North Burnett, North Peninsula, Palm Island, Pormpuraaw, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, Southern Downs, South Burnett, Sunshine Coast, Tablelands, Toowoomba, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs, Whitsunday, Woorabinda, Wujal Wujal and Yarrabah.
Counter Disaster Operations assistance to councils and State government agencies is available in the 45 local government areas of: Aurukun, Banana, Brisbane City, Bundaberg, Burdekin, Burke, Cairns, Carpentaria, Cassowary Coast, Central Highlands, Cherbourg, Cook, Etheridge, Fraser Coast, Gladstone, Gold Coast, Goodiwindi, Gympie, Hinchinbrook, Ipswich, Isaac, Kowanyama, Lockhart River, Lockyer Valley, Logan, Mackay, Mapoon, Moreton Bay, Napranum, North Burnett, Palm Island, Pormpuraaw, Redland, Rockhampton, Scenic Rim, Somerset, South Burnett, Southern Downs, Sunshine Coast, Tablelands, Toowoomba, Torres Shire, Torres Strait Island, Western Downs and Whitsunday.
More information about the assistance that available in each affected local government area can be found at www.disasterassist.gov.au
More information about how to apply for the clean-up and recovery grants is available at www.qraa.qld.gov.au
The easiest way to lodge a claim for the DIRS is online at www.humanservices.gov.au or by calling the Australian Government Information Line on 180 22 66 from 8am to 8pm local time, seven days a week. Completed claim forms can also be lodged in person at a Department of Human Services service centre.


Brisbane
PM: I'm joined by two very passionate Queenslanders, Wayne Swan and Catherine Tanna. It's good to be here in Brisbane.
I want to talk about the G20 but before I do that I just want to say a few words about Peter Harvey.
Peter Harvey is well-known to Australians around the nation, how could you ever forget that very distinctive voice; Peter Harvey from Canberra telling you the news of the day.
Peter Harvey's voice is one of authority and as a television journalist he has a reputation for authority and truth-telling.
Peter Harvey is gravely ill and we do want to say at this time our thoughts are with him and his family, our thoughts are with Peter and his wife Anne and his children Adam and Claire during what is a very difficult day for the Harvey family.
I did want to say too that Gympie is also facing a difficult day. It's been a really heartbreaking summer for the people of Gympie and flood waters have hit yet again.
We will continue to work with the State Government and the people of Gympie to help them through this difficult time.
During the course of today we are triggering some more flood assistance for the people of Queensland. In particular, assistance for primary producers and small businesses and assistance for those who work for primary producers or small businesses who aren't able to pursue their normal occupation because of the impact of flood waters.
A bit later today people will be able to get on our disaster assist website or be able to ring 180 2266 for information about what has been newly triggered and is newly available.
Today, Wayne and Catherine and I have had a tour here at this great convention facility to talk about how the G20 is going to be hosted right here in Brisbane.
The G20 is the premier economic meeting in our world. It brings together 20 world leaders who between them oversee economies that account for 80 per cent of global trade, who between them lead nations who account for two-thirds of the world's population.
The G20 was formed in the immediate aftermath of the global financial crisis so leaders could come together, deal with the crisis and try and find a way back to jobs and growth for the global economy.
The G20 is still playing a role dealing with global volatility, and we've seen a new source of volatility in the last few days as a result of the uncertainty of the political outcome in Italy.
Even when volatility isn't present, there's still a lot of work to do to get the global economy back on a path for sustainable growth, which will offer people around the world the benefit of jobs.
Here in Australia we stood strong during the global financial crisis and unlike the rest of the world, have low unemployment, low inflation, low interest rates, economic growth and a triple-A credit rating as a result of strong public finances.
But we have work to do with other leaders around the world to help get a path for jobs and growth for the global economy which would be good for Australian jobs and growth too.
I was delighted to be able to secure the G20 hosting for Australia. It's a tribute to our nation that the leaders of the world's biggest economies will gather here in 2014.
And I was also delighted to be able to say that it's Queensland where the G20 will meet, with the leaders meeting here in Brisbane and the finance ministers, the treasurers meeting in Cairns.
This is a fantastic opportunity to showcase Queensland and its economy. And so we have decided to create a body called the Q20, which will be led by Catherine Tanna, a well-known Queenslander, bringing together business identities, local government representatives, community representatives to make sure that not one aspect of this opportunity to showcase Queensland in the eyes of the world is missed.
This is going to be a great time for taking images and perspectives from Queensland around the world.
We have also created nationally a B20 group, business leaders on which Catherine also serves, an L20 group bringing together representatives of working people, and a C20 group, representatives of civil society.
So we will be engaging all parts of Australian society in the work of the G20.
Apart from global leaders you will see, come here to Brisbane, to Queensland, around 4,000 delegates and up to 3,000 of the world's media. It's going to be a huge event, and no better place to have it.
I'll turn now to the Treasurer for some comments.
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER: Thanks very much Prime Minister. I'm really proud as a Queenslander and a long-term resident of Brisbane that we have the opportunity to showcase our state and our city to the world through the G20 meetings.
Finance ministers' meeting in Cairns and also the leaders' meeting here in Brisbane.
This is going to be the biggest thing that's happening in Queensland next year. It's a very big event for Australia, a unique opportunity to showcase our wares to the world, and in particular Brisbane will be up in lights during the leaders' meeting.
It's great to be here also with Cath Tanna, for her to chair the Q20. It's a really great opportunity for us in Queensland to maximise all of the opportunities that will come from having a G20 leaders' meeting and I'm really looking forward to that meeting next year.
PM: So if I could invite Catherine to say a few words too, thank you very much.
CATHERINE TANNA: Thank you very much Prime Minister. Good afternoon everyone. I'd like to say that it's a real honour to be asked to chair the Queensland 20 and I look forward to working with the Government to ensure that we do our upmost to showcase Queensland as a great place to visit, to learn in and to invest in.
And so my objectives include concentrating on education, on tourism, on resources, on agriculture, and on construction.
And what we must do is ensure that hosting this amazing event leads to lasting benefits for Queensland  -  not just Brisbane  -  but all of Queensland.
So I'm really looking forward to working with the Government and also working with Richard Goyder on the B20 to ensure we maximise the opportunities for Queensland when it hosts G20 next year. Thank you.
PM: We'll take questions now just on the G20 and the Q20 and subsequent to that we will take questions of the day. So are there questions on the G20 and Q20?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it's November of next year. How does that sit, though, with the very strong possibility you're not going to be here?
PM: Well I'm not sure that is a question on the G20 or the Q20. Has anybody got a question on the G20 or Q20? No. Okay, well we'll ask Catherine to step to one side.
The Treasurer will just say a few words about Queensland Health and then we will take questions.
DPM: I think this is a very sad day for the Queensland health system.
Over the past year there has been something like 4,000 workers sacked from Queensland Health which has put the quality of Queensland Health under question by those actions from the Newman Government.
So they've taken a sledgehammer, if you like, to Queensland Health and to its employees. But today we now hear that the Newman Government is going to outsource or privatise wholesale functions within Queensland Health.
This really puts a fundamental question about the commitment of the Liberal-National parties to this fundamental concept of Medicare, that people have access to quality health care in a free public hospital system.
That is now clearly under threat from the LNP in Queensland.
And I note today they've had a fundraising lunch which is raising funds to promote this destruction of Medicare, this agenda to privatise public hospitals, and they're using those funds to campaign for Tony Abbott's privatisation agenda; his agenda to slash expenditure when it comes to health care and when it comes to education.
So I think we've seen here in Queensland over the past 12 months the Liberal Party take a sledgehammer to the Queensland public hospital system and now they're going to privatise or sell some other bits of it.
This is a real threat to Medicare and it goes to the very core of what our country should be doing to provide quality health care for all Australians, but particularly Queenslanders.
JOURNALIST: Are these changes likely to impact on funding, federal funding?
DPM: Well, federal funding for Queensland is increasing quite significantly.
But you see Mr Newman has cut $3 billion from expenditure in Queensland Health and has sacked over 4,000 workers, and as I understand what they're saying today, is they may outsource the jobs of many more, as well as privatise entirely some public hospitals.
The essence of Medicare is a commitment to quality health care through free public hospitals. I believe that is now directly under threat here in Queensland where the Newman Government has ripped out $3 billion from expenditure in health and now is threatening the quality of care.
You've only got to walk down the street in Brisbane and you run into someone who has lost a job in Queensland Health, or you run into people who have had relatives in nursing homes such as Eventide or other facilities across the city or across the state.
This is a savage assault on the very concept of Medicare and it's coming from the LNP both state and federal.
JOURNALIST: Is there anything the Federal Government can do to stop this?
DPM: Well, everything we possibly can. We have a fundamental commitment to Medicare and to providing adequate funding for our public hospitals system.
The Prime Minister here last year signed an agreement with all of the state premiers to substantially increase funding for public hospital care, and that has now been directly threatened by the actions not only of the Newman Government but also of the Victorian Liberal Government as well.
JOURNALIST: Is there anything concrete that the Federal Government is going to do now in response to-
DPM:  Well, highlight all of these issues. We will do everything we can within the legal framework that we have signed with these governments to stop these things from happening.
But at the end of the day these governments are pursuing an agenda which is opposed to the fundamental principles of Medicare, and I believe the Australian people have a very strong view in support of Medicare, quality hospital care from free public hospitals, the capacity to go to a doctor and get access to medical services when you need them.
Well on the hospital front they're threatening that, but over and above that they're also threatening care out there in community health as well with community nurses now under threat across the state.
These are all approaches from a government or state governments which are pretty hostile to the very concept of Medicare.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do agree the Labor Party needs to inject [inaudible] spirit to engage MPs to fight the next election?
PM: I think you're referring to a story in The Australian newspaper today. Ministers from the Government go and speak at all sorts of forums and put the Government's view.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the subject of ministers. Mark Butler on radio in Adelaide this morning has said that he doesn't think he could check into the Rooty Hill RSL with a straight face and make jokes, comparing it to the Carry On movies. Does that help your cause to connect better with the people with western Sydney?
PM: Well I will be out there in Rooty Hill, I've been there before, I've enjoyed visiting in the past and I will enjoy visiting again.
JOURNALIST: But does it help when Mark Butler makes remarks like that, are they appropriate remarks for a minister of yours to make?
PM: I will enjoy being there.
JOURNALIST: Is it an act of desperation?
PM: It's about governing. Here we are today governing, here for the people of Queensland, talking about having secured the biggest international meeting Australia has ever hosted and it's going to happen right here in 2014.
Around the country what I do is, as Prime Minister is as we govern, you travel to communities and you talk to them about what's on their mind, what are the big issues for them, you get the opportunity to explain some of the things that the Government is doing, and you get the opportunity having listened to chart the future for our country and for the communities within it.
That's what I will be doing in western Sydney.
JOURNALIST: Is it a concession that Labor is in peril in that area?
PM: Look, I travel right around the nation. Of course I've been very routinely to western Sydney before.
I travel as routinely as I can to places around the country, whether it's Hobart or Darwin, right around the country, getting through, talking to people and I'll be doing that in Sydney's west.
JOURNLIAST: That distinction you made at the beginning of the year when you announced the election date, next week is governing not campaigning? Is that correct?
PM: Absolutely and that's we're doing here now, and that's what we'll be doing next week.
JOURNALIST: Will you be doing a similar thing in Queensland?
PM: I'm very frequently here in Queensland too. Indeed I'm right here today.
JOURNALIST: How are the Australian people meant to know when you're in governing mode and when you're in campaign mode?
PM: Because I will have been to the Governor-General's and had the election formally called when we are campaigning.
JOURNALIST: We're in Kevin Rudd's electorate at the moment. Any reason why he wasn't available today?
PM: This is obviously an announcement by me and the Treasurer and Catherine Tanna about the Q20.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Coalition says that there needs to be freeze on bridging visas following the assault on a woman by an asylum seeker on one of these visas. What does Government think?
PM: I'm glad you've raised the issue of immigration because I'd have to say I'm concerned as Prime Minister about the circumstances with 457 visas.
We always want to put Australian jobs first and that's why the Minister for Immigration Brendan O'Connor, on the weekend announced a further crackdown on the use of 457 visas.
Australians getting jobs first is always going to be the Labor plan. I'm very disturbed that the Coalition has said, indeed the Leader of the Opposition himself has said that 457 visas  - temporary foreign labour  -  is going to be a mainstay of their immigration policy if they are ever in Government. I think that's something to be deeply concerned about.
On the issue of any act of violence, anybody, irrespective of their immigration status who has engaged in an act of violence against another person should feel the full force of the law.
And of course if you commit an offence it can affect your immigration status if you're here in our nation.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, Andrew Robb says you should be in Canberra preparing for Budget rather than out campaigning.
DPM: Well, I'm out governing and I have been in Canberra working on a range of matters, including the Budget. That work always starts early.
I get up pretty early in the morning and go to bed pretty late at night and I do a lot of work in between and being here today is part and parcel of that.
PM: Can I just say, I do think standing here anybody who is truly interested in Australian jobs would be interested in having the G20 in Australia. We're talking about the body that was formed after the biggest economic crisis the world has known since the Great Depression.
Ask the more than 20 million people around the globe who lost their jobs because of the global financial crisis what it has meant to them, ask people in the banking sector what it meant to have the G20 come together quickly and effectively to try and stem the crisis, what it meant to banking, financial security and jobs and growth.
It's obviously very important, having lived through those global economic shocks for us to be the nation that gets to host the G20 in 2014.
It means that we've moved on to the troika, the set of three chairs that guide the work of the G20. We get to do that for three years  -  in the run-in, in the year of our hosting, and in the year afterwards.
This is substantial work about the global economy and stripped right down to its essence, it's about whether people here in Queensland and around our nation get the sorts of jobs and prosperity they want in the future.
Anybody who is diminishing that is diminishing Australian jobs.
DPM: I just wanted to add to that as well because it was only the weekend before last that I attended a G20 finance ministers meeting in Moscow, and there was a lot of anticipation there amongst finance ministers about them coming to Australia next year.
So they are very much looking forward to it. But the problem we've got with our Federal Opposition is they don't understand either the importance of the G20 or the policies that were put in place to avoid recession in this country during the global financial crisis because they opposed that policy response, a policy response that received a strong endorsement and support not only of the G20, but of the IMF.
So in making these comments I think he is just demonstrating yet again how unqualified he is to comment on or run a $1.5 trillion economy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister was it your idea to go out to Rooty Hill or were you asked by western Sydney MPs?
PM: I get right around the country and I stay where I can so that I'm available as early as possible in the morning and as late at night as possible.
JOURNALIST: Was it your idea?
PM: I get right around the country and I will do that in western Sydney next week.
JOURNALIST: Why is it going to be such a long stay?
PM: Because obviously in western Sydney we are talking about a region that is one of our biggest regional economies.
If you look at the economic powerhouse that is western Sydney, one of our biggest regional economies, one of our most populated places in the whole of Australia, I want to get around and talk to people.
So in order to do that it obviously makes sense to stay locally so that you're not losing time in the transit time; you're there as intensively as possible.
I've been out to western Sydney before. I will be out to western Sydney again in the future. It is a good opportunity for me to be there over a number of days, maximising the time I've got with local communities.
JOURNALIST: Who's going to be paying the hotel bill for your stay?
PM: I'll be paying mine.
JOURNALIST: In terms of the extra disaster relief assistance, is some of that going to go to primary producers on the Sunshine Coast?
PM: You look at the announcement we've triggered it in a large number of local government areas. So I think the best way of people getting all the information is to go to the disaster assist website or to ring the telephone line.
There is now quite an extensive range of assistance over Queensland, different places obviously with different levels of assistance depending on the flood events they have faced. So I think it's best if everybody who is in these circumstances makes sure that they get the right information for them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why is it necessary to stay in a hotel in Rooty Hill when you could commute from your place in Sydney?
PM: Well, my place is actually a house in Altona, that's the home I own so it would be pretty hard to commute from there.
In terms of commuting from the Prime Minister's residence in Sydney, that would involve transit time and it's just going to maximise my time on the ground if I take that out of the day.
JOURNALIST: Have there been any further discussions on implementing Gonski given that Queensland now are threatening to go with the other states?
PM: Those discussions are continuing. Basically there is work happening every day. There has been the need to get available data that has flown out of the census that has only become available in the last few weeks.
So there is just a timetable here that is as a result of the availability of data, not what the Government has decided, but just census gets taken, data gets crunched and it gets crunched and it gets crunched and then the ABS make it available.
So data that is necessary for these discussions only became available in the last few weeks.
Against that backdrop there have been continuing discussions between state and federal officials, between federal officials and independent and Catholic schools.
What I can certainly say is I am very determined that we make sure that every child in every school gets a great education, whether that's here in Queensland or any other part of the nation.
Now our children are slipping behind the standards of the world and I don't think that there is going to be a parent who would thank the Queensland Government if it tries to stand in the way of making sure every Queensland child gets a great education.
We're not only talking about the moral need to make sure every child is invested in, we're talking about the economic need to make sure we are a high-skill, high-wage economy in the future, and we cannot do that unless we win the education race.
Thanks very much.


Brisbane
The Gillard Government will invest $100 million over two years to reduce flood risk and bring about real reductions in insurance premiums.
The National Insurance Affordability Initiative will invest $50 million a year in targeted flood and other natural disaster mitigation measures, as well as establish a National Insurance Affordability Council.
The Council will manage the national coordination of flood risk management, make recommendations to the Government on flood and other natural disaster mitigation projects and undertake other functions directed at reducing natural disaster insurance premiums.
The Government has identified three priority areas of work for the Council to commence immediately. This includes a $7 million contribution to building the Roma levee and $10 million to upgrade flood defences in Ipswich. The Government will make available up to $50 million over two years to any NSW Government proposal for flood mitigation in Western Sydney by raising the Warragamba Dam.
Despite a series of significant reforms to the flood insurance market by the Gillard Government, in flood prone areas affordability of flood cover remains a problem.
Minimising damage from flood and other natural disasters is the only sustainable way to reduce insurance premiums over time.  Experience in Australia and internationally has shown that mitigation can sustainably reduce insurance premiums.
For example, average insurance premiums in Roma are currently around $3,000. This is almost triple comparable premiums in nearby Chareville (which has a flood levee) of around $1,200. Suncorp has estimated that the construction of a flood levee by the Goondiwindi Council reduced insurance premiums by an average of 33 per cent.
Government expenditure on natural disaster recovery over the last 4 years has amounted to more than $6 billion.  As well as reducing private insurance premiums, this initiative has the potential to save expenditure on disaster recovery across all levels of government.
Given that the States and Territories are principally responsible for disaster mitigation, we hope that they will support these initiatives by increasing their own contributions to similar projects.
Rather than have taxpayers cross-subsidise insurance premiums for those in areas of high risk, this initiative will identify and supplement the funding of mitigation works that will have a real impact in terms of lowering risk and achieving sustainable reduction of insurance premiums in areas exposed to high risk.
The Council will also complement existing flood risk management strategies by ensuring that Government action in areas such as flood mapping aligns with insurance industry needs and assists in the goal of reducing premiums.
The Council will also closely track developments in strata title insurance markets in Northern Australia.  Work is being undertaken in Australia by James Cook University and the Insurance Council of Australia on assessing the vulnerability of strata-title buildings in tropical Australia.  The Council will consider whether there is a role for Government in sponsoring mitigation work to alleviate insurance premiums in those regions.
The Government has consulted with the insurance industry on today's announcement and the Insurance Council of Australia has endorsed the Initiative and the establishment of the Council.


Brisbane
Today the Prime Minister officially opened the new $230 million Science and Technology Precinct at the Queensland University of Technology.
The Australian Government provided $75 million for the Science and Technology Precinct project through Round 2 of the Education Investment Fund. Other funding was received from the Queensland Government, Atlantic Philanthropies, and QUT.
The new facility will focus on the disciplines of science, technology, engineering and mathematics  -  key disciplines that drive innovation, productivity and economic growth.
The Precinct, which includes two multi-storey buildings for teaching and related facilities, will provide contemporary, flexible spaces that encourage interdisciplinary learning in a collaborative setting. 
The Australian Government has made record investments in our universities  -  both in expanding opportunities for more students to get a university degree and promoting world class research, innovation and development.
Today the Prime Minister officially opened the new $230 million Science and Technology Precinct at the Queensland University of Technology.
The Australian Government provided $75 million for the Science and Technology Precinct project through Round 2 of the Education Investment Fund. Other funding was received from the Queensland Government, Atlantic Philanthropies, and QUT.
The new facility will focus on the disciplines of science, technology, engineering and mathematics  -  key disciplines that drive innovation, productivity and economic growth.
The Precinct, which includes two multi-storey buildings for teaching and related facilities, will provide contemporary, flexible spaces that encourage interdisciplinary learning in a collaborative setting. 
The Australian Government has made record investments in our universities  -  both in expanding opportunities for more students to get a university degree and promoting world class research, innovation and development.


Brisbane
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning and welcome.
PM: Good morning Steve.
HOST: A couple of ephemeral or esoteric questions I wanted to ask you, first of all, are you a Marxist or a progressive social democrat as many on the centre-left describe themselves these days.
PM: I'm certainly a centre-left politician so in the social democratic tradition. We're a Labor Party. We started out with our links with organised labour and of course here in Queensland the Australian Workers Union and the birthplace in Barcaldine.
After all of these years, more than 100 years of existence, I'm in the mainstream of that Labor traditional. So it's about how you can grow your wealth, grow your nation's wealth but also share it fairly so you don't leave people behind.
HOST: Do you describe yourself as a ‘progressive' in inverted commas.
PM: I am certainly a progressive in the sense that I believe in progress, I believe in shaping the modern world. There is no point hankering for yesterday, whether you remember yesterday fondly or whether you didn't like your own personal past, however you remember yesterday, there is never any going back there so you've always got to be striving for progress and change and the shaping of change.
The future is going to happen. The only question is are we going to shape it or are we just going to let it happen to us.
HOST: I've always wanted to know what we are progressing towards when someone describes themselves as progressive. What are we progressing towards, what's the end point?
PM: For me there is never going to be an end point because, well I hope there is never an end to human progress.
Human beings will always strive for better, to do better tomorrow than they've done today. I think that that's deeply within us.
For me, therefore, that direction of change has to be how we can do things better, how we can be a wealthier country, how we can be a fairer country, how we can offer people the benefit of better jobs, how we can make sure all of our kids get included in the life of our nation by getting a truly great education. That for me is better.
You take your core values with you, so we'll always be driven by a love of country and a love of family, those things won't change. But the future will be different from the past so let's get out and make it rather than just drift into it.
HOST: We don't call it patriotism here, do we? We call it a love of country rather than, we don't like the term patriotism, do we?
PM: Well I would describe myself as a proud patriot.
HOST: Would you?
PM: Absolutely.
HOST: Really, okay.
PM: Yeah, I love this country and I would do everything within my power to defend it and keep it safe.
I don't think we are into the showy sort of patriotism that perhaps we associate with some American war films. We are not necessarily a hand on heart kind of patriotism, but I think we feel love of country very deeply.
HOST: Is it true that the Labor Party sees itself as sort of an Australian version of the US Democratic Party, is that accurate?
PM: We are sister political parties so at an organisational level, we exchange policies and views and ideas and young people come and go and have a turn with the Democrats, come here and have a turn with the Labor Party.
We are very different countries, though. Despite so much that binds us together with our American friends, culturally we are very different places and I think that shows in the political tradition of parties.
I've always thought when you look to Americans, fundamentally at base the American culture is one of individualism rather than collectivism.
Our culture at base I believe is one of mateship and fairness and solidarity.
HOST: So we're more collective?
PM: I think we are, I think we are. And it's a quote I have used often but I think it is just so summarising of the Australian outlook.
The great war historian Daws, who wrote about Changi, made the observation that right down to the absolute depths of starvation and death, in the camps people kept their national identities.
So the Americans were the great individualists. The British had the class structure hold and he said about the Australian men in those prisoner of war camps, that right down to the last they were trying to form male-bonded welfare states.
That is, they were trying to be mates and look after each other. I think that is the Australian identity.
And because that identity is different to the American identity, the way in which Labor, the Labor Party here comes at political issues is different to the way in which the Democrats do, even though we have a lot in common.
HOST: Is it true that the Labor Party here is trying to paint Tony Abbott as a Mitt Romney figure, a Mitt Romney type? In other words, an Australian Republican if you like.
PM: No, we're just trying to paint Tony Abbott as Tony Abbott. That's enough.
HOST: What does it mean to be Labor versus tribal Labor? We heard Paul Keating say this. I think he was talking about Kevin Rudd I think in that context.
He said he is Labor but not tribal Labor. What's the difference?
PM: Look, I'm not sure what Paul had in his mind and I wouldn't want to reinterpret his words.
For me, being a member of the Labor Party means you have not only publicly said, ‘I have this set of values and these are the values that drive me,' but it does mean that you've brought into a sense of belonging, a sense of history, a sense of collectivism which binds you together and which means that you will always be there barracking for your team, barracking for Labor.
I have been an active member of the Labor team since I was a very young person and-
HOST: I have all assumed that was tribal Labor in a sense.
PM: I think maybe the word 'tribal' is about how emotionally or deeply you feel those bonds.
I don't know how Paul meant it. But I think it's the sense that there is a lot of emotion and a lot of self in your belief in Labor values.
HOST: What principle or value would you die in a ditch for? I don't necessarily mean policy  -  not the NDIS, not the Gonski review  -  but a fundamental principle on which your life, your world view stands.
What will you die in a ditch for?
PM: I think that fundamental principle would be fairness. It offends me when people are treated unfairly, and it offends me if there is anything that says someone gets a lesser go, a lesser chance, because they come from more humble origins than someone else.
I am a believer in equality. I'm a believer in merit. I think you should get to shape your life.
I am not a believer in inherited privilege.
I don't think just because your mum and dad are wealthy people and they've been able to roll out advantages to you that you should get any better go in life than a kid that comes from the poorest home in the worst suburb in our nation.
HOST: Then let me ask you, what was the most important thing you learnt from your dad?  He passed away last year, what did you learn from him, the most important thing?
PM: I think it was probably that. He too was offended by unfairness and he, in his life, had lived through unfairness.
He grew up in a coal mining village in a coal mining family. His father was injured so he had to work on the surface which was the less remunerated work.
He was one of the seven kids. He passed in the 11 plus exams as they had them then so highly that he was being offered a scholarship but his family couldn't afford not to have him working so at 14 he went out to work.
Now he had a great life, he built a great life for himself. He came to Australia. He loved the work that he did in this country. He got to raise his two daughters, me and my sister. He got to see his grandkids succeed. So he had a great life.
But he could have had a different life if he hadn't had that unfairness dealt to him and that was very burned into him.
Not a sense of bitterness about his own past, but that that was wrong and that shouldn't happen to anybody else and he was certainly damn sure it wasn't going to happen to me or my sister.
HOST: Was he the biggest influence on your thinking? It is often said that a father's relationship with his daughter is a really pivotal connection and really pivotal relationship. Was it for you?
PM: Absolutely. Both my parents are incredibly important to me.
My mother is in Adelaide, she is an older lady now, she just turned 85 and she is very, very precious to me. But in terms of shaping my ideas, I think dad played the biggest role.
He was someone who was always interested in current affairs in the world, would talk to you about it and it was a very, very strong bond and it continues in my heart to be one.
HOST: Now, he was a Baptist, you rejected that Protestant Christianity, why? What was it about it you have rejected?
PM: I think over time my father moved away from the Church too. The Church played a big role-
HOST: This is the Baptist Church.
PM: The Baptist Church, so yes, Welsh Baptists, so the defining belief of Baptists is the role of John the Baptist, the belief in adult baptism, that you should make a choice as an adult as to whether or not you want to be baptised. Baptists don't hold with drinking, that kind of thing. 
You get very strict variations of Baptists that repudiate entertainment and amusement and dancing and that kind of thing. We weren't quite down that track!
But my parents were brought up that way. I think for them, the Church played the biggest role when we first migrated to Australia and it was a good place to go and find Australian friends.
They didn't know anybody except one family in Adelaide, and so church was the place they made connections. In their later lives, both of them have drifted away from that and in my younger life, in my  -  I would have said early 20s  -  I made an active decision that whilst the values meant a lot to me  -  and continue to mean a lot to me  -  the formal elements of religion didn't capture my heart, my soul, my mind.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard is my guest. Do you ever feel misunderstood?
PM: Oh yes.
HOST: When?
PM: By the media cycle that you refer to. I think there is a lot in this time of change in the media industry that pushes the cycle towards more schlock, more horror.
And I think we tend to look at this as if it's about us and about Australia and about today's politics here. Actually it's about a change across the world in the media industry.
So, more and more content, more and more things. Even you and I today, we've had a picture taken so you can tweet it. There is a TV camera here.
More and more content, more and more things, and that means you need more and more drama or you can't sustain it so even the simplest things get puffed up in a way that's really pretty absurd.
HOST: Is there a particular event that annoys you? Now is your chance. A particular event where you felt you'd been utterly misunderstood and you haven't been treated fairly. Is there a particular moment?
PM: How long have you got!
HOST: Just give me one.
PM: We'll be here all day. Look, the cabinet reshuffle. I thought the media reaction to that was absurd.
Two wonderfully competent ministers who have decided to go and do something else with their lives, seamlessly replaced by two fantastically competent ministers. And this is written as ‘crisis'. Like, excuse me?
I am sure every day at the ABC you hear about someone around the nation who has decided ‘I have loved my job at the ABC, I have been here ten, 15, 20 years, now I am going to do x, and guess what Sally's got the promotion'.
And you all go, ‘that's sad to lose Bill, but Sally will be fantastic'. And does anybody write up, ‘gee the ABC's in crisis, Bill's gone!'
HOST: We are always in crisis!
PM: Are we going to have one of those funding discussions now?
HOST: Please, yes!
PM: So that was complete silliness.
HOST: My guest is Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard. When the doors of the Cabinet close, there are no cameras there and everyone can speak freely.
Who is the intellectual in your Cabinet? Is there one?
PM: It depends what you mean by 'intellectual'. If you wanted to do I guess the well-read, understanding of the artistic world, understanding of the world in general, you would go Bob Carr, Simon Crean.
If you wanted to go a mastery of the law, you would go Mark Dreyfus.
If you wanted to talk about connection and touch with working people, Wayne Swan, Jenny Macklin, Bill Shorten, the list goes on.
People are different in their presentation.
HOST: You are being way too diplomatic, Prime Minister.
PM: No, but I genuinely value my colleagues a great deal. They are all different and bring a different perspective, and that's what's good about frank discussions around a Cabinet table.
I specifically say to my Cabinet colleagues I don't expect people to come in and just automatically agree with each other.
What I do expect is for them to give the best of themselves and to operate what I call a positive climate where if something is said, people don't go ‘oh that's stupid, that's ridiculous'.
They listen, think, take it in and then strive to have a positive conversation.
HOST: To you, is there a person in Cabinet who privately you sidle up to and say, mate, I need a reality check; in other words, a confidant. Someone that you feel particularly you can trust who will tell you as it is personally to you privately?
PM: I think because I am someone who welcomes honest discussions, lots of my colleagues come and have frank conversations.
HOST: We all have almost like  -  not a mentor  -  but a workplace, a sounding board you go to who just somehow gets you. Whether or not they even know you terribly well, but somehow gets you. Is there one of those people there?
PM: I wouldn't say there is one person there. I would say there are a number. And I do try and keep the door open to all of my colleagues, not just my Cabinet colleagues, but colleagues in the Labor team and the broader labour movement and community generally to come and pitch up an idea.
I always strive to treat people seriously and respectfully. I don't go ‘oh that's crazy' or ‘why are you wasting my time?'
HOST: Do you knit in Cabinet? We know you knit.
PM: No, no, no I don't knit in Cabinet!
HOST: Does anyone else knit?
PM: No, no, no-one knits in Cabinet.
HOST: You are the only knitter in Cabinet?
PM: Sorry, I don't believe anybody else knits in Cabinet in their spare time, and certainly no-one knits in the Cabinet room! We have got a few more things to do!
HOST: So if that happens, you need to tweet it. Take a photo and tweet it.
PM: Well you can't take a  -  because of the security arrangements  -  you can't have your mobile phone in the Cabinet room because it has all been swept and cleared and all the rest of it.
HOST: You tweet but I think reluctantly, don't you?
PM: I do tweet, no, not reluctantly. I think it has got its limits. I think it is a fantastic way of engaging people and getting quick information out there and giving insights into your day.
There are some things that are too serious and too weighty to be dealt with by Twitter. I joked with you before; you cannot put your whole strategy for the war in Afghanistan in 100-and-something characters.
Some things require bigger engagements than that.
But I think Twitter, those things, they're a new way  -  at their best  -  they are a new way of enlivening conversations in our democracy.
At their worst they are just terrible anonymous ways of putting vile things about people out in the public domain.
I hope it ends up that the good overwhelms it is bad.
HOST: I'm worried about the Freudian elements of Twitter, there's always the subconscious things that come out and I'm paranoid I will end up on the front page of some paper for saying something inappropriate, so I don't.
PM: I certainly thing that the old saying, my mum would say something like ‘if you are going to write a letter in anger, put it aside, read it again 24 hours later and then think about whether or not you want to put it in the post box'.
I think for the Twitter world, there is certainly is a tweet at haste, repent at leisure. Maybe if you are really steamed up, put it aside, come back to it later.
HOST: Wise woman. Which cartoonist in the country gets you right? All sorts of cartoonists draw you, who gets you right?
PM: I was always a fan of Mark Knight in the Herald Sun. I have actually got one of his cartoons of me in my office which is a profile, so of course it has got an extraordinarily large nose.
And people come into the office and just look a little bit bemused that I would have something like that up there but I've always thought it was a good cartoon representation.
Look, I wouldn't really pick one. There are lots of days the cartoons just don't grab me and then there will be one day when you say that has caught a moment in politics just incredibly well.
And I think that's the beauty of cartooning. It would be a great job. It would be the best job in politics if you could draw. Unfortunately I can't draw.
HOST: I'm getting the wind up but I want to squeeze something else in. When do you listen to Tim, your partner? When do you really listen to him, feedback-wise?
PM: I listen to him on  -  he has got a great emotional sense of how people are feeling. I think it probably comes from long days in the hairdressing business where some people will go to their hairdressers and just get their haircut; others will go spill out every trouble in their life.
So we will go to a function or an event and he'll come back and talk about the emotional state he thinks someone is in and be very incisive about it.
HOST: I have to let you go sadly. I have got some more personal questions I want to ask you, but another time. Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you very much.


Ipswich
PM: It is great to be back in Ipswich. I have been a very frequent visitor here but I always love it when I come and I get the opportunity to spend some time with Shayne Neumann, our local member, the Member for Blair.
And we are joined today by Sharon as well our candidate for Wright, Sharon Murakami is here today.
They have introduced us to a number of local community members who have had to face the agony of being flooded and re-flooded and sometimes flooded again.
Businesses and homes hit by floodwaters here in Ipswich.
So today I am very pleased to be with my colleagues, the Minister for Emergency Management, Mark Dreyfus and Bill Shorten our Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations and also with a special responsibility to deal with insurance and with flood issues, to make three important announcements about the future.
Put in summary, what we want to ensure is that we not only help people to recover from flood but we help them be protected for the future.
We don't just want to be on a cycle where people are flooded, get some assistance and then they're flooded again.
We want to help people recover but we also want to better protect them for the future.
So today I am very pleased to be able to make three announcements.
The first does go to recovery here in Queensland.
Already we have more than $120 million into people's bank accounts as a result of this year's floods. That's to help people through.
And already there are a range of grants and assistance measures available to help people as they recover from the most recent floods.
But today we are adding to that with a new $45 million package. The aim of this package is to better assist primary producers and small businesses.
It is to provide some resources into local communities, including resources to help people with counselling and the mental health issues and pressures that come from having faced up to floods.
One of the things we have just been talking about is it's not just the mental anguish that comes with dealing with the floodwaters, but whenever you hear heavy rain, everyone gets a sleepless night because they're worried about it happening again.
So we want to put some resources into communities to help with those issues.
We also want to put some resources into better protecting our environment. Floodwater hits homes and businesses, but it's also got consequences for the environment including great icons like the Great Barrier Reef and we are allocating some money to assist with reef recovery.
And we want to continue what has been a very successful trial of a day labour scheme.
So that's assisting local councils keep their day labourers, the people who routinely work for them, and get those people to do flood recovery work instead of going down the more expensive route of getting contractors in and often contractors come in from outside so they aren't assisting with local jobs.
Second, today we are here to announce too, a $40 million Federal Government contribution to a betterment fund, and we are calling on the Queensland Government to match this dollar for dollar.
This is a betterment fund to go to local councils to assist with the rebuilding of local roads and local community infrastructure. But to rebuild it  -  not at the same level that it was  -  but to rebuild it so that it is better for the future and can face floods in the future without sustaining damage.
We are hoping this fund can help us end some of the cycle where a local road is washed away or a local community facility is hit, money is put into repairing it, rebuilding it and then floods come 12 months later and it is damaged or flooded again.
We want local government to be able to have the extra resources so when they rebuild a section of road or they put a roundabout back or they put a community facility back, they can put it there at a standard that it won't be flooded again.
We have deliberately pitched this package at local government because it's local government that ends up often dealing with a lot of the damage, but they've got the least resources to do so, and they've got the least ability to add to their revenue.
That is, they don't want to put up the council rates at a time that people are recovering from flood and damage; they don't want to put that extra burden on their local community members.
Then thirdly and finally, I'm here today to announce a package which will make a difference around the nation but also here in Ipswich.
This is a new set of measures to assist with disaster resilience and insurance affordability.
We are now in a cycle where, because we've seen floods, insurance premiums skyrocket, people can't afford the insurance, and so next time they face a flood they do it uninsured.
We are trying to get us away from that cycle of flooding and then insurance premiums skyrocketing and people being priced out of the market.
This is a package that Minister Shorten has been working on and has worked on as well as making sure that we've got better insurance policies to deal with floods.
One of the big arguments following the floods in 2010 and 2011 here in Queensland was that people thought they were covered for flooding and found out that they weren't and they got into all of these difficult arguments about what's flooding and what's stormwater.
We've worked to try and end those disputes and get people a better deal from the insurance industry, and today we're here to announce a new approach to assist with funding flood mitigation measures so that insurance premiums don't have to sky rocket because some of the risks have been taken away.
This is a $100 million commitment, $10 million of which will be spent here locally in Ipswich to make a difference to this community, to this federal electorate of Blair, to the people I have just been talking to who have suffered so much.
Seven million dollars of this package will go to the Roma flood levee because we know that people in Roma have suffered a lot too.
And we are indicating that we are prepared to make a $50 million commitment in New South Wales to raising the level of the Warragamba dam because it too has caused problems in the past with flooding.
The New South Wales Government has over many years talked about, but done nothing to deal with flood resilience in that area, and so we are putting $50 million on the table to help get it done.
I will turn now to the Minister for Emergency Management and then to Minister Shorten.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Thanks very much Prime Minister. As the Prime Minister has just said, we are announcing today a $40 million contribution to betterment here in Queensland, and we've called on the Queensland Government to match that funding so that there will be an $80 million fund for betterment of works.
It is too build roads and bridges stronger and better so that next time there is a flood event, those roads and bridges and road works are better able to withstand the damage done by floods.
It is very important the Queensland Government step up and match that funding so that money is going to be available for in particular local councils to do those works.
As you have also heard, the Prime Minister has announced another special amount of $45 million, it has got a number of components, it's package to better assist Queensland communities recover from, as quickly as possible, the dreadful flood events that there have been across Queensland in many communities since around the middle of January so as to help people like those we have been hearing from today recover quicker from their lives having been turned upside down.
I take this opportunity to say also that we are still experiencing floods in parts of Queensland and other parts of the country. It is very important that people pay attention to flood warnings.
Very important that people stay out of floodwaters. We know the risk that that can bring. I'd also take this opportunity to thank our emergency service workers right across the country.
We've had floods and fires this summer in five out of six states. Our emergency service workers and the rest of the community has as usual risen to the occasion and I'd again thank them for their work.
MINISTER SHORTEN: Good morning everyone. I would first of all like to thank the residents, the small business people and the farmers of the Lower Somerset region and Ipswich who have told their story and made sure, as the Prime Minister's visit reflects, that they are not forgotten, that this is a Federal Government who is interested in supporting flood victims and making sure people can get back on their feet.
The part of the announcement today which goes to insurance and financial services is that the insurance industry since the very difficult floods in south-east Queensland in 2011 has been on notice to lift their game when it comes to having one definition of what a flood is across all policies and all companies.
We have seen good cooperative progress, so a lot of the distressing arguments which residents in Ipswich who had to be helped by Shayne Newman and the local member sort out, hopefully will be a thing of the past.
Flood insurance as part of home and content policies of Australians has gone from a very small proportion of Australians a few years ago to 83 per cent of all policies.
But the next piece of the puzzle is that in high risk areas, flood insurance is simply quite unaffordable.
Through negotiations with the insurance industry in Australia the Government is proposing to set up a national insurance affordability council which will work on better flood-mapping, flood mitigation policies and getting the priorities right so we can put downward pressure on people and small businesses' flood insurance policies.
Specifically today the Government, after consultation with the insurance industry, has identified a levee in Roma, flood works in Ipswich and significantly making up to $50 million available over the next two years to assist with plans to start increasing the flood protections of western Sydney.
The insurance industry have informed the Government over the last period of months that they regard  -  along with South East Queensland  -  one of the greatest economic risks to Australia is flooding in parts of the Hawkesbury-Nepean region.
And so this Government is moving on mitigation with the promise from the insurance industry that when governments at all levels fund mitigation, we expect insurance policies for householders to go down.
The insurance industry has indicated in a place such as Roma, insurance home and content policies should and could go down by as much as 70 per cent.
The Federal Government will do its bit supporting state and local councils and our private insurance sector to offer the best possible protections to all Australians, small business and home owners.
PM: Thanks very much, we are happy to take your questions. And can I just say a big thank you to everybody who has made us feel so welcome today. And thank you particularly to the people at the table who have told us their stories.
JOURNLAIST: The flood recovery minister in Queensland says we've been essentially left out in the cold in favour of western Sydney voters. What do you have to say about accusations?
PM: He is clearly wrong. We're here today announcing $45 million for recovery, a $40 million contribution to betterment and we're today announcing measures in this local community and in Roma to protect for the future.
That's on top of $120 million that has already hit people's bank accounts and on top of all the other natural disaster recovery arrangements we've already triggered.
JOURNALIST: How much of that $100 million over two years will actually be spent in Queensland?
PM: Well, today we are able to announce $10 million here locally into Ipswich and the surrounding region and $7 million into Roma for the levee, and then of course the balance of the funding is there for the consideration of proposals.
JOURNALIST: How will you make sure that insurance does go down?
PM: I will turn to the minister for a comment on that.
MINISTER SHORTEN: One of the parts of the charter which will set the national insurance affordability council is to monitor prices, is to work with the industry.
The industry has been up-front. When we have banged on the table and said listen, we can get you a common definition of flood but you are making flood insurance too expensive in some areas and we want you to better calibrate the risk to the cost, the industry said well we need to see more work on mitigation.
The Government's picked up that challenge. Industry will work with us.
The real-life case studies  -  towns in northern New South Wales and Queensland  -  who have flood mitigation works, have lower home and contents, small business flood insurance policies.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect premiums will actually reduce or will this just stop them spiralling out of control?
MINISTER SHORTEN: I think if you have got a flood levee in Roma, where there currently isn't one, yes I do expect it to reduce.
That's simple law of risk management. If you diminish the risk, the case for the higher premiums goes down, and we've seen that happen.
There are towns in Queensland which where they have the flood mitigation works, it is $1,200 versus an average cost of $3,000. So yes.
JOURNALIST: That $100 million that you mentioned [inaudible]?
PM: Let's go through it right from the start. We have spent in Queensland more than $6 billion following the huge floods in the summer between 2010 and 2011; $6 billion.
More than spent in any other state around the nation and for good reason because Queensland was harder any other state around the nation.
And that money went into supporting people. It went into infrastructure recovery following those floods. There were roads that needed to be rebuilt, bridges that need to be rebuilt, things like the river cats on the Brisbane River.
We've been working to make a difference to Queensland's recovery since the dreadful summer of 2010-2011 when we saw the cyclone as well.
Then we have seen more flooding and that's why the people here today can tell me about being flooded two or three times in recent years and we've responded to the most recent floods with more than $120 million already in people's bank accounts and a range of relief and recovery arrangements already triggered.
Then today, we're here announcing for Queensland $45 million extra in recovery, a $40 million contribution to betterment and some benefits from this new resilience pool.
So I would invite you to add it up. I'd invite you then to work out the per capita share in Queensland and you will see across what the Federal Government has done; more money spent here than any other part of the nation by an absolute country mile and that's been appropriate because Queensland has been the hardest hit.
JOURNALIST: Appreciate the money that's been spent to help recover and rebuild and I'm sure all they want is money to be spent for it to not happen again. And of that $100 million so far less than a fifth-
PM: And out of the $6 billion that was spent arising from the 2010-2011 floods, there was infrastructure restored including some considerations of betterment as we went.
We now want to get a sharper focus on betterment so that we get into this virtuous circle with insurance premiums that Minister Shorten talks about.
There is more funding available than has been announced today, and obviously further Queensland projects can come forward.
JOURNALIST: It is a bit late though now isn't it, to be funding to be starting to focus on betterment considering you have spent $6 billion. Has that been wisely invested?
PM: Well you would be making an error to think that betterment was not considered in infrastructure redevelopment.
It was part of the work we did with the $6 billion but we want to sharpen the focus now on a number of individual projects which we think can change the equation for insurance premiums.
JOURNALIST: In relation to the Warragamba dam, what implications are there for downstream residents?
PM: I'll get the minister to talk through that.
MINISTER SHORTEN: The western region councils of metropolitan Sydney  -  by answering this question about Sydney, I don't want to be interpreted as not talking about Queensland, but my question was on Sydney.
Councils, Infrastructure New South Wales last year have said it's a big risk and what the insurance industry also says when we sit down and talk to them, is they say what's your number one concern for a big cost and a big hit on the industry and households? And they say western Sydney just because of the sheer size of the population.
The Hawkesbury-Nepean flood plain area is probably the most densely developed in Australia. We understand $50 million doesn't buy you the whole heightened dam.
Traditionally though, local governments and states have been the ones who've had the province of mitigation.
We accept though there should be a down payment to make sure that we can at least provide certainty, provide opportunity to have lower house and content insurance fees.
Today's announcement, in terms of the national insurance affordability council, is plainly a good idea. To these questions about priorities, this will be inviting experts to give their view to the council about what is the priority.
One thing is for sure, the Commonwealth Government is saying that we think that flood mitigation is an issue and it builds upon our other reforms in terms of affordable home and contents insurance for consumers and for small business.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what about Gympie? It's flooded twice in one month, four times in a year; they want a temporary levee. They have been saying this for a year. Why were they not considered?
PM: We will be very happy to receive a proposal from Gympie. We are obviously working there in the recovery arrangements and it has been obviously all hands have been focussed on that in recent days and that's understandable.
When people are through that immediate urgent phase, we will be very happy to talk to Gympie about its long-term needs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you called for a dollar-for-dollar betterment match by the State Government with your betterment fund, is that $40 million conditional on the State Government matching?
PM: We will make the $40 million contribution. Disaster mitigation is traditionally the province of state governments, and so in making this contribution we are prepared to say that as a Federal Government we will do even more than Federal Governments have done in the past.
And following the huge floods of 2010 and 2011, we have certainly taken the approach of doing more in Queensland, even when that has been politically opposed in the Parliament.
So we want to do more but we also want to see the State Government acquit their responsibilities so I would be calling on them to match our contribution dollar-for-dollar.
JOURNALIST: But if they don't match the contribution will the $40 million still be spent?
PM: We are prepared to make $40 million available, we will make $40 million available, but given this is extra resources from the Federal Government in an area that has traditionally been of State Government management and concern I would expect the $40 million to be matched by State Government money.
JOURNALIST: Will it be paid directly to local government?
PM: Well yes. What we want to do here with the betterment fund is it will go to local government for local infrastructure.
JOURNALIST: Directly?
PM: Yes, local government for local infrastructure.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in regards to immigration policy, the Opposition's attacked the Government's 457 visa system. Do you have any response?
PM: This is a very simple question about whether or not you believe in putting Australian jobs first.
I believe in putting Australian jobs first. The Opposition has now got so negative; it doesn't want to put Aussie jobs first, it wants to put temporary foreign workers first in the queue for any jobs available.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the community should be made aware of asylum seekers being resettled in their areas?
PM: Look I've seen some coverage on this this morning and my understanding is the Opposition has got so negative on these questions that even members of the Opposition themselves are disgusted by it so they need to sort themselves out.
JOURNALIST: Are you dog whistling on 457 visas as Tony Abbott claims?
PM: We'll put Aussie jobs first and the Leader of the Opposition can use any terminology he wants to. I will always stand for putting Australian jobs first.
Unfortunately Mr Abbott is taking a different approach.
JOURNALIST: Do you agree with Dawn Fraser that swimmers caught using Stilnox should be banned for life?
PM: We let all of our sporting codes, whether it's swimming or any of the others, deal with these issues.
We have worked through the Crime Commission and the anti-doping agency, but what's appropriate for an individual swimmer isn't something that should be decided by me.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Joe Hockey says that under a Coalition Government wages would be kept high. Surely that's good news?
PM: Joe Hockey today is giving a speech in Brisbane where, when you strip it right down, he is saying he agrees with the Government's economic plan and that's because he doesn't have an alternative. He has got no plan for the nation's future.
Mr Hockey today  -  and it's been commented on in today's newspapers because he obviously released extracts of the speech  -  Mr Hockey today is endorsing the approach this Government has taken to creating a high-skill, high-wage future for our country.
Unfortunately every step of the way, Mr Hockey has opposed that approach that he is now claiming today somehow is his own.
This is all a masquerade for not having any policies. When you go across what is happening on the other side of politics today  -  Mr Hockey with no plan for the economy; Mr Abbott lecturing universities about teaching online when he wants to stop the roll-out of broadband.
I mean, run that by me again?
It is like saying a child should be studying at a desk with a lamp but you're not going to roll out the electricity grid so that they can turn the lamp on.
And then we've got Mr Abbott criticising the Government's approach to putting Australian jobs first.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott is rescheduling his diary so that he can be in western Sydney next week as well to campaign. What do you make of that?
PM: Oh, whatever.
JOURNALIST: Have you got him running scared now by going to western Sydney?
PM: Whatever.
JOURNALIST: Are you aware of when the last time was that western Sydney suffered major flooding?
PM: We have seen flooding in some parts of Sydney. Even with the tropical storms and heavy rain we saw some flood events in recent weeks.
Not at the scale that you've seen in Queensland, but because of the deluge that Sydney has got at various points there has been flooding events in Sydney as a result.
JOURNALIST: In western Sydney or the dam?
PM: I am not saying the dam flooded but residents were actually on clean-up, and water on properties, yes that's has happened in recent weeks as a result of huge rains, very intense rains in very short periods of time.
As you would recall, that weather system came across the country, came down from north to south, affected here, affected northern New South Wales and then had its effect in Sydney as well.
It was starting to lose power as it moved from north to south but there was still a lot of water dumped on parts of Sydney, and as result there were localised flooding events.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on your stay in western Sydney you said that you were going to base yourself because the commute would be too long between Sydney and western Sydney. Council is saying that you were getting a green light run to western Sydney so surely this commute would have been pretty short.
PM: Look, I have chosen to make myself available in western Sydney. People can make any comment they like but as Prime Minister what I do is I endeavour to get around the nation to make sure I'm talking to local communities about what matters to them.
I'm here in Ipswich today talking to the local community here, I have been a very frequent visitor to this part of the world and I've always learnt a lot on every visit including today getting to talk to some people hit by floods.
So that approach that I roll out around the country, that I've done when I've been to western Sydney in the past, I will do over a number of days in the coming week and it just suits logistically to base myself in western Sydney as I do it.
Thank you.


Brisbane
The Gillard Government has today unveiled a Support Package to provide approximately $45 million to help Queenslanders recover and rebuild after the Australia Day floods.
The Commonwealth will also contribute $40 million toward a Betterment Fund that will rebuild council-owned roads and assets so they are more flood proof.
This assistance comes on top of the significant contribution that the Gillard Government is making already to assist Queenslanders to recover from the latest disaster events. The Government knows what needs to be done and we want to get on with the job of providing assistance where it is needed most.
The Queensland Support Package will target the worst hit areas and includes specialised assistance to aid clean-up efforts, community recovery initiatives, impacted businesses, primary producers, and day labour costs.  The Commonwealth will meet the majority of costs for this assistance.
Under the package, $5 million will be allocated for standalone Community Recovery Packages for Bundaberg and North Burnett to roll out mental health services, community events and facilities designed to help communities heal together.
A $2 million Small Business Advisory Service will provide low cost business advice to small businesses requiring management capability, business skills and financial management support.
Targeted clean-up programs for primary producers in Bundaberg, North Burnett and the Lockyer Valley worth $10 million will support up to 160 casual labourers to remove debris, assist in the hire of machinery from local contractors and fund local organizations like Blazeaid and the Queensland Rural Fire service.
Debris will be cleared from waterways, particularly for areas creating hazards downstream, aiding environmental clean-up efforts. 
Programs like Reef Rescue and state environmental programs will be supported to undertake environmental cleanup and resilience work.
Specialised industry recovery officers within agriculture organizations like AgForce and the Queensland Farmers Federation will be funded to provide tailored support to farmers as they prepare for the next season's crop.
The Rural Financial Counsellor program will receive a one off boost to help manage increased demand.
Local councils will be supported by the extension of the Local Government Value for Money Pricing Model, commonly called the day labour trial. This program, which particularly assists rural and regional councils, will be extended to cover the work created by the latest natural disasters.
Category D concessional grants and loans will also be funded through the package.
The package will include joint contributions from the Queensland Government.
In addition to the Queensland Support Package, for the first time the Gillard Government will contribute $40 million toward the establishment of a Betterment Fund to rebuild council-owned roads and assets, making them more flood proof.
The Queensland Government has been asked to provide a matched contribution to the fund in order to deliver $80 million to Local Government Areas hardest hit.
The fund will streamline approvals and fast-track works needed to build back local council infrastructure well above current engineering standards, making at-risk local government areas stronger and more resilient.
The fund will target councils that do not have the means to repair their own roads above current standards but where there is a clear need to do so, including Bundaberg.
Under the fund, projects to improve drainage, strengthen road sealings, and stabilize slopes and shoulders will improve the resilience of council-owned roads to withstand flood events.
The fund will be administered through a value-for-money process by the Queensland Reconstruction Authority, with small projects of up to $2.5 million able to be automatically funded.
The Commonwealth will have oversight for major projects to guarantee Australian taxpayers get value for money and that the funding covers as many projects as possible.
Under current arrangements roads and assets are required to be built back to current engineering standards. In many cases, that means when roads are damaged and replaced they are already improved from the standard they were previously.
The Betterment Fund will only cover local government roads and assets. State Governments should self-fund improvements to their own infrastructure or can continue to use betterment arrangements, available since 2007, to repair State assets.
The Fund will operate through a new framework once it is agreed to by the Queensland Government under the National Partnership Agreement. Either party can make a contribution to the fund at any time, which will only operate while solvent.
The Gillard Government understands what is needed to get Queensland communities back on their feet, and we have paid almost $120 million into the bank accounts of over 100,000 disaster-affected Queenslanders since January through the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment.
This new package is addition to the support already being provided under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements, which are jointly funded by the Australian Government and the states (see Attachment A). 
Under those arrangements, the Commonwealth will meet 75 per cent of the costs for restoration of essential public assets  -  the single largest expense to get communities back on their feet.
More information about the assistance that available in each affected local government area can be found atwww.disasterassist.gov.au.


Brisbane
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Small Business Chris Bowen today announced a new $2 million Queensland Natural Disaster Assistance program to help small businesses impacted by recent natural disasters to access expert advice and assistance so they can recover and grow.
The program  -  part of the Australian Government's Small Business Advisory Services initiative  -  will provide vital help to hard-working small business men and women impacted by ex-Tropical Cyclone Oswald.
The Queensland Natural Disaster Assistance program will help local small businesses recover from the recent devastating natural disaster by increasing access to expert advice and tailored business services.
Small businesses are the backbone of local communities and we know that many have been impacted, either directly or indirectly, by flooding and other natural disasters.
This program is about making sure these businesses are able to bounce back and continue to be vital parts of their communities and the local economy.
The program will provide funding to not-for-profit advisory organisations like Business Enterprise Centres or Registered Business Organisations, which in turn will offer expert low cost business advice, including referral services to other available support that meet the needs of Queensland businesses.
The program will provide total funding of $2 million over two years, for around ten business advisory projects that will receive around $100,000 per annum.
Applications received from eligible applicants for grant funding will be assessed on their merits in a competitive process. This program will be delivered by AusIndustry.
A similar program  -  the Small Business Advisory Services National Disaster Assistance program  -  ran in 2011 and helped around 3,700 businesses in about a 12 month period.
Businesses or advisory organisations looking to register their interest for assistance should contact the AusIndustry hotline on 13 28 46 or through www.ausindustry.gov.au.



HOST: Who would you speak to if you wanted to talk about politics? Might as well go straight to the top; indeed we will. We do have on the line, Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Good morning and welcome to the show.
PM: Good morning and it's great to be here.
HOST: Is this your third trip now? Second trip this year?
PM: I feel like I'm always here. I haven't done the count for this year, but I am a very frequent visitor to Tassie.
HOST: I said to Nick, I was a little bit upset because I didn't get a Facebook message. You sneak in and then someone goes, Julia Gillard's in town, where is she?
PM: I'm sorry about that.
HOST: That's alright, and what's the purpose of the visit this time down in Tassie?
PM: Well we're announcing 750 new jobs. This is the expansion of Vodafone, creating 750 new jobs here.
We've been working with Vodafone to secure these jobs for Tassie, for Hobart. We've made available $4 million to get this done.
And of course the fact the National Broadband Network is here and here first is a big part of attracting jobs like this.
HOST: And speaking of Vodafone, so it's going to be up to 1,500 people or workers there, which is just mammoth for Tasmania. I used to work there!
PM: Oh did you?
HOST: Yeah I used to work in Huntingfield at Vodafone. And I was there as they were doing this process and kind of  -  it's the main hub for Vodafone call centre.
I was terrible at my job but it was a massive place. To see the 750 jobs increase is amazing.
PM: I am sure you were not terrible at your job! And if you want to go back to Vodafone there will be 750 opportunities to do so.
But you are probably pretty happy with the current job you've got.
HOST: I don't know I'm probably terrible at this one too! No, but it is, it's a great effort and of course you are also going to be at the jobs skills expo at the DEC, yeah?
PM: Yes I am. So we are having a jobs skills expo today. We've done these around the country; we've done them in Tasmania before too.
They are an event that brings together employers who are looking for people, and people who are looking for work.
And we always find that creating the event, bringing people together in the same place at the same time, means people can find the connections and we get jobs out of it.
So for people who are looking for work, that's the place to be today.
HOST: Now, normally the DEC is used for things like gigs quite often. Are you able to pick up any music while you're over there?
PM: I won't be doing any singing or anything like that, no.
HOST: We got the Opposition Leader Tony Abbott to sing on our show a couple of weeks ago. That's a shame. But that's alright.
PM: I didn't get to hear that, and I'm kind of glad I didn't!
HOST: You're not going to use Bob Katter-oke or Tony Abbott was sort of thinking of doing it as part of his campaign?
PM: Well should we need to have a sing-off I think we'd probably field Peter Garrett.
HOST: Fair enough, if you do have him in your arsenal then you would be silly not to use him.
PM: That's right, we are the custodian of the only rock star in Parliament, so I reckon we'd get him out.
HOST: Now Prime Minister, summer is over of course. Yesterday was the last day sadly. But our good mates Hamish and Andy were talking to us about summer jobs.
And you know when you were younger and you did whatever you could to get a few extra dollars?
Now, Nick laughed at me because I used to have a homemade lemonade stand. We used to live on a farm, and not many people came past and I sat there all day and I didn't make a cent.
Did you have a summer job Julia Gillard?
PM: I had a variety of summer jobs. Probably the one I remember the most is working in a caravan  -  one of those vans that you buy your chips and your hotdogs and your sausage rolls at  -  at the tennis at Memorial Drive in South Australia.
South Australia can be amazingly hot during summer, that dry, burning heat that South Australia has.
So you would be in there, 40 degree days, the fat's frying, the urn going, and so it would be ten degrees hotter.
I distinctly remember going on break one day and sitting in the stands for the 15 minute break and thinking to myself, gee isn't it cool out here. And then the temperature came up on the stand and it was like 41 degrees, and I was thinking it was a hell of a lot cooler!
HOST: I could imagine you Julia Gillard being at school and you would be the kind of person that's, ‘the sausage rolls have changed in length and now they've gone up but the size of them have gone down. I'm protesting or I'm going to make a policy in school to change this'. Were you that person Julia Gillard?
PM: Look I was a prefect and all of that, true. I don't think we ever had a sausage roll protest, but we did used to come up with policies and plans that we thought would mean a lot to the school and its future.
I'm not sure any of them have still endured at Unley High School, but I'll have to go back and check.
HOST: Well thank you so much for your time. I hope you enjoy our wonderful state and thank you for chatting to us.
PM: Thank you, thanks very much.
HOST: And we hope you're not catching a bus to the expo Julia Gillard.
PM: I've fortunately got a car, but I know there's lot of people finding it pretty wearying process to get where they need to go today.
HOST: Well good luck with the traffic.
HOST: Thank you so much Prime Minister.
PM: Thanks, bye.



HOST: Good morning Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
PM: Good morning, great to be with you.
HOST: It's great to have you, and we are having a lot of politicians in Tasmania at the moment. We've had a lot in the north of the state. It seems with an election coming up, we're going to get a lot of visits between now and September 14.
PM: Well I think you've seen a lot of visits from me anyway. I love coming to Tasmania, I'm a very frequent visitor here.
And I'm glad that I'm able to be here today to announce some very good news for Tasmania, which is 750 new jobs with Vodafone  -  making sure that there are 750 more opportunities for people to be employed here.
We've worked hard to get this announcement to happen. I know that the Tasmanian economy's been undergoing a big change, and a lot of people have been doing it pretty tough.
HOST: So what happens during an election campaign? Do you just suddenly go oh, what's that up my bottom? That's 750 jobs for Tasmania! Why couldn't you find them before an election?
PM: It's got nothing to do with the announcement of the election date. We've been working on this for some period of time, and provided $4 million to Vodafone.
The State Government has also provided some support.
The fact that the NBN is rolling out here makes it possible too.
So look, we work on this stuff every day, every day since the election in 2010 and we'll continue to do so.
It's not easy to swing big jobs announcements like this. But I'm glad we've been able to do it.
HOST: Well, we certainly are very happy to have more jobs in Tassie. You're going down to Dunalley very shortly. And you'll be going down to see the fire devastated area.
What are you announcing down there? You've got a little bit of an announcement about the historic hall?
PM: Well I might have to make it when I'm actually there, but as you probably remember I went immediately after the fires to see the devastation there, what had happened to the school, what had happened to people's properties. It was a community that was pulling together, but doing a lot of grieving too; very, very tough.
So I'll be there today and making a bit of an announcement to help people through.
We've been providing individual support to people through national disaster relief grants, to help people get their lives back together.
And then there's community infrastructure that's been lost. So I'll be saying something about that today.
HOST: Now we've seen a lot of you in recent weeks. And I have noticed something, because you're about the same age as me. You're wearing your glasses a lot. My eyes have deteriorated in the last couple of years-
PM: Did you want to borrow a pair?
HOST: Have you got plus one's from the chemist or are they prescriptions? And are your eyes deteriorating?
PM: No, they are definitely prescription. And I've got to that very unpleasant stage of life where I've always been short-sighted, so looking at things in the distance needed some help.
But now I've got this bad combination of short-sighted, and then when I go to look at the newspaper or whatever I'm putting my arm out and pulling my arm in and putting my arm out to try and get a good focus on it. So I've gone to the multi-focal lenses.
HOST: Well they suit you, so they work well with you. Okay, let's mention a couple of other things that have happened recently; obviously a series of bad polls.
How do you keep on doing the job when you've just seem to have headline after headline saying you've got no hope of winning the election. Kevin Rudd's looking over your shoulder and there's a possibility of him fighting for the leadership.
What do you do at night? Do you go home to Tim and say, Tim I need a glass of red wine? How do you cope?
PM: I normally go home and do a pile of paperwork! Because getting everything happening we need to in our country requires a lot of paper to move through a very big system which is called government.
I just don't let any of that worry me or deter me from getting the big things done that we need to for the country's future.
So all of that kind of chatter will just happen whatever I do or say, the best thing to do is just get on with it.
HOST: You must have a giggle with Tim when Kevin Rudd's doing things like barefoot bowls on a Friday night! You must just roll your eyes and go, oh Ruddy.
PM: I'd have to say when I get a few precious moments with Tim we're more likely to focus on family life and genuinely personal things than reflect on the week in politics.
HOST: What do you make about the future of Tasmania very quickly? Obviously we have been going through a very difficult time. From a national perspective what do you see as Tasmania's future?
PM: Our whole economy is in transition. We did well coming out of the global financial crisis but we've got that strong Aussie dollar and it's going to be with us for a long time to come.
Here in Tasmania, the pressure of that strong dollar has been on manufacturing and on tourism, at the same time that the forestry industry has been undergoing a big shift.
So it's all combined to make very difficult economic circumstances here. I'm very confident though the future of Tassie is a bright one.
The NBN is going to attract businesses here. And we've got the Vodafone announcement today. The future of tourism is going to be a very strong one here and we've got billions of people becoming middle class in the Asian region, and they'll want great tourism experiences and they'll want to come to Tasmania.
And of course we've made sure too with recent announcements by Minister Burke that mining is a possible aspect of the Tasmanian economy for the future  -  another source of strength.
And I do think you can still be a place where things are made. So a diverse economy; manufacturing, tourism, your great agricultural produce obviously being exported but also being part of the tourism experience, all of the work that can come with the NBN.
HOST: Well thank you very much for finding time in what is a very busy schedule today to have a chat to us, and no doubt we'll speak again before September.
PM: Thanks very much. Thank you.


Hobart
Hundreds of jobs and training opportunities are up for grabs today at the Australian Government Jobs and Skills Expo at the Derwent Entertainment Centre in Hobart.
Today's Glenorchy Expo puts local job seekers in touch with employers, training organisations and industry representatives.
This is a great chance for local job seekers and businesses across southern Tasmania to come together and explore local job opportunities.
Amongst the many jobs on offer are some very diverse employment opportunities from jobs in construction to accounting and from hospitality to retail.
From early childhood educators and cooks to apprentice chefs and housekeepers  -  whoever you are, there are great job and training opportunities at the Jobs and Skills Expo.
The Gillard Government understands that breaking into the workforce can be difficult. This Expo is a practical way of making the search for a job a bit easier.
With more than 60 exhibitors at the Hobart Jobs and Skills Expo, job seekers are encouraged to come armed with their resumes to take advantage of this unique opportunity to do months' worth of job searching in a single day.
To help people access the Expo, the Government has put in place a special free bus services that will operate to and from the Expo throughout the region to ensure everyone has a chance to explore all the employment opportunities available. 
The Gillard Government's Jobs and Skills Expos are achieving real results for job seekers across the country  -  we have delivered 69 Jobs and Skills Expos and we know that they work because we've now seen nearly 25,000 Australians find employment at an Expo, and many thousands more sign up for training opportunities.
To place a job vacancy or to find out more about the Australian Government Jobs and Skills Expos call 13 11 58 or go towww.humanservices.gov.au/expos


Hobart
The Prime Minister has today announced that the Commonwealth Government will make a $250,000 contribution towards the rebuilding of the Dunalley Community Hall.
Prime Minister Gillard visited Dunalley today to meet with members of the local community and see the status of recovery efforts following the devastating bushfires of January this year.
The contribution to the Dunalley Community Hall will build on the other offers of assistance that have been made by local businesses and others.
It will be delivered under the Commonwealth's Community Infrastructure Grants Program, which funds community and social infrastructure identified by local communities as priority investments for their region.
This funding is in addition to the support already being provided under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements, which is jointly funded by the Australian Government and the Tasmanian Government.
More information about the assistance that available in Tasmania can be found at www.disasterassist.gov.au.


Hobart
Vodafone Hutchison Australia has today announced 750 new customer service jobs in Hobart, thanks to a $4 million investment by the Gillard Government.
Backed by the Gillard Government and the Tasmanian Government, Vodafone will create up to 70 extra jobs a month over the next year  -  750 jobs in total  -  by expanding its call centre headquarters at Kingston.
And it will more than double employment at the Kingston call centre, which currently employs over 680 people. 
The company is making the investment with funding of $4 million from the Gillard Government, and a commitment to work together with Vodafone to increase the skills of the company's Tasmanian workforce and to help them harness the benefits of the National Broadband Network (NBN).
The $4 million in funding will contribute to the cost of transition from Vodafone's offshore operations.
The Tasmanian Government is providing $850,000 for infrastructure costs and waiving payroll tax for Vodafone's new employees.
The new jobs would include positions in highly skilled and technical roles and widen employment opportunities for Tasmanians.
In addition to the direct employment which would flow from this proposal, there will be significant additional benefits from the building and operation of new infrastructure and the flow on effects to the local economy.
This is a vote of confidence in the abilities of local employees to provide the level of service required by Vodafone to meet its customer needs.
Vodafone Chief Executive Officer Bill Morrow said the investment was an example of how both government and private industry can work together to create jobs, respond to consumer preferences about service delivery and support local communities. 
“We are thrilled with the support of Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Tasmanian Government, as we strive to deliver the best experience for Vodafone customers,'' Mr Morrow said.
We have a long-standing commitment to Tasmania and we are proud to be strengthening our ties to this community.''
Premier Lara Giddings said today's news was one of the biggest jobs announcements in the state's history.
“The investment by Vodafone to double their Tasmanian workforce up to 1500 employees is a massive boost for the economy,'' Premier Giddings said.
“This is great example of State and Federal Labor working together with the private sector to grow jobs and opportunities for Tasmanians.''
The NBN is at an advanced stage at Kingston and this will complement Vodafone activities.
The NBN is likely to feature in Vodafone's longer term planning of the services that it will deliver out of the expanded centre.
This is an exciting opportunity for Tasmanians and a welcome development. It will provide training, employment and business opportunities for the region.
It demonstrates the commitment of the Gillard Government to policies which support and create Australian jobs.
Vodafone expects the employment targets to be achieved over the 2013-14 financial year.


Hobart
Vodafone Hutchison Australia has today announced 750 new customer service jobs in Hobart, thanks to a $4 million investment by the Gillard Government.
Backed by the Gillard Government and the Tasmanian Government, Vodafone will create up to 70 extra jobs a month over the next year  -  750 jobs in total  -  by expanding its call centre headquarters at Kingston.
And it will more than double employment at the Kingston call centre, which currently employs over 680 people. 
The company is making the investment with funding of $4 million from the Gillard Government, and a commitment to work together with Vodafone to increase the skills of the company's Tasmanian workforce and to help them harness the benefits of the National Broadband Network (NBN).
The $4 million in funding will contribute to the cost of transition from Vodafone's offshore operations.
The Tasmanian Government is providing $850,000 for infrastructure costs and waiving payroll tax for Vodafone's new employees.
The new jobs would include positions in highly skilled and technical roles and widen employment opportunities for Tasmanians.
In addition to the direct employment which would flow from this proposal, there will be significant additional benefits from the building and operation of new infrastructure and the flow on effects to the local economy.
This is a vote of confidence in the abilities of local employees to provide the level of service required by Vodafone to meet its customer needs.
Vodafone Chief Executive Officer Bill Morrow said the investment was an example of how both government and private industry can work together to create jobs, respond to consumer preferences about service delivery and support local communities. 
“We are thrilled with the support of Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Tasmanian Government, as we strive to deliver the best experience for Vodafone customers,'' Mr Morrow said.
We have a long-standing commitment to Tasmania and we are proud to be strengthening our ties to this community.''
Premier Lara Giddings said today's news was one of the biggest jobs announcements in the state's history.
“The investment by Vodafone to double their Tasmanian workforce up to 1500 employees is a massive boost for the economy,'' Premier Giddings said.
“This is great example of State and Federal Labor working together with the private sector to grow jobs and opportunities for Tasmanians.''
The NBN is at an advanced stage at Kingston and this will complement Vodafone activities.
The NBN is likely to feature in Vodafone's longer term planning of the services that it will deliver out of the expanded centre.
This is an exciting opportunity for Tasmanians and a welcome development. It will provide training, employment and business opportunities for the region.
It demonstrates the commitment of the Gillard Government to policies which support and create Australian jobs.
Vodafone expects the employment targets to be achieved over the 2013-14 financial year.


Hobart
PM: I'm delighted to be here in Tasmania today, here in Hobart. I'm joined by Minister Bill Shorten, by Julie Collins, a Minister in my Government but also a very proud Tasmanian, so it's good to be here with her and from the back, Senator Carol Brown and our candidate for Denison, Jane Austen.
Today here in Tasmania it's all about jobs. It's all about jobs and opportunity for the future.
I'm very pleased to be able to announce today that we have worked with Vodafone so that they will be offering 750 new jobs here in Tasmania, here in Hobart.
We have provided a $4 million subsidy from Federal Government. The Tasmanian State Government has provided some support too and that has secured 750 new jobs.
These jobs will come out of Mumbai and here to Tasmania to create opportunities in this economy for Tasmanians. It will inject $135 million into this economy.
So it's very good news for people in Tasmania who are looking for work, and for the Tasmanian economy generally.
It joins other good news here at the Jobs Expo we are holding today.
This is the 70th Jobs Expo around the country and we've certainly had them in Tasmania before.
They are a great way of bringing together employers and employees, putting them together to create new jobs.
Apart from the 750 Vodafone jobs, I am announcing today, we have already seen around 350 jobs go up on the jobs board here at the Jobs Expo  -  so more opportunities for Tasmanians.
This is an economy that has been undergoing real change, like much of the Australian economy.
What we have seen since the global financial crisis is a period of change and transition in our economy.
What that means is we have come out of the global financial crisis strong and we should take pride that unlike nations around the world, we have got low unemployment, low interest rates, low inflation, we have got economic growth, sound public finances and we are AAA rated by all the major credit ratings agencies.
That's a good outcome out of the global financial crisis and so different from so many nations around the world.
But there are pressures on in our economy, pressures on because the strong Australian dollar  -  which has been particularly turbo-charged by the strength of the resources sector  -  is putting weight on other parts of the economy.
In our manufacturing sector, our tourism sector, sectors that are trading with overseas have felt that pressure and it has been felt strongly here in Tasmania.
In Tasmania that has been joined with the pressures coming out of the changes in the forestry industry.
So it's been some difficult days in the Tasmanian economy, but there is good news. These 750 jobs are good news.
The fact that the rollout of the National Broadband Network is here and here first is good news because it is creating new jobs and opportunities in Tasmania.
The long-term future for our Asian region means good news today and tomorrow for Tasmania.
We are becoming home in this region of the world to more middle class consumers than anywhere else on the planet and they will want the things that Tasmania does best.
So plenty of opportunities around, plenty of opportunities to announce today and I'm very pleased to be able to be here to do it.
Whenever we see jobs created in our economy, I want them to be decent jobs, jobs with decent working conditions.
As a Government we have worked hard to get rid of the hated WorkChoices and to create a new system that gives people fairness and decency at work.
We will fight anyone who wants to roll back that system to the days of WorkChoices.
It's clear from today's newspapers that the Coalition has not given up on going back to WorkChoices; they haven't given up on putting back in place the system that used to rip off pay and conditions from working people.
For us it's about jobs, it's about decent jobs, it's about good jobs and that's what I'm doing here in Hobart.
I will turn now to the Minister for some comments.
MINISTER SHORTEN: I will make brief comments about the latest workplace relations policy discussions.
Today, the Opposition has put a cloud over the job security of Australian workers by not having a clear policy on workplace relations.
Specifically, the Opposition has said that on the one hand Australia has a problem with its current industrial relations framework.
They have said there is a problem with productivity and flexibility and other issues. Mr Abbott has been saying that for a while.
Yet today they have said despite having said one thing for the best part of 12 months, they have said by the way this issue was so urgent, we are not going to deal with it until 2016.
It shows the Liberals you cannot play for in the policy traffic and be taken seriously. If you want to form a new alternative Government of Australia, you have to be ready with policies.
Mr Abbott doesn't seem to realise the election is in September 2013, not September 2016 because Mr Abbott and his spokespeople have been said they are not going to work up a policy. They are going to give it to an independent body to investigate in 2016.
I think that the inconsistency of the Opposition complaining about the current system but saying they won't act actually shows that they haven't changed their DNA which is to attack working people's working conditions and job security.
They've said for instance they support penalty rates being set by independent umpire but surely they realise that some of the rules around people's penalty rates are set by the laws in the Parliament of Australia.
The agreed hours which people work from six to six could be changed by-laws in Parliament, not just the Fair Work Commission.
Job security can depend upon a law which says you can be unfairly dismissed and have no right of recourse.
There are issues which can be dealt with in the Parliament. We have seen what the conservatives are doing at the state level on the mainland with Campbell Newman, with Barry O'Farrell, with Ted Baillieu, sacking people, reducing conditions, causing strikes with their hard right-wing attitudes.
So it is necessary for the Opposition, if they want to be taken seriously and say they have changed their spots on workplace relations, which they desperately want people to believe, they need to start ruling out unequivocally, will they change people ace unfair dismissal rights, full stop?
Will they agree that they won't do anything to undermine people's ability to get special rates for working unfamiliarly friendly hours, full stop?
They also need to make it very clear, will they rule out categorically using individual statutory contracts which can undermine people's conditions?
PM: We are happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this is your second visit to the state in two months. Is it part of the strategy to win back Denison?
PM: It's part of my strategy continuing pattern of visits here. You look at all the time as Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister how many times I've visited here. I've been a very frequent visitor to Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you by the sight of asylum seekers living in squalor in Sydney with up to 10 people living in a small house?
PM: I dealt with this issue yesterday and I don't have anything to add to my comments yesterday really.
JOURANLIST: On the repatriation of call centre jobs, Prime Minister, is this a trend you want to see more of, do you like to hear an Australian voice at the end of a phone?
PM: I think the reasoning that Vodafone has deployed for bring these jobs back is right.
Australians do want to be talking to someone who recognises their problems and their issues, someone in Australia who can help them through their problems.
Vodafone obviously recognised that it wasn't the right service offer for its customers, to have these jobs offshore, that people wanted to deal with Australians, deal locally and I am delighted we are going to see these 750 jobs here.
JOURNALIST: How sustainable is it if it's costing $4 million?
PM: Well of course and these are long-term jobs for the future.
JOURNALIST: Minister Shorten has just spoken about the Coalition wanting to put the debate about the industrial relations on hold until 2016. What are your thoughts?
PM: As I made clear in my opening, the Coalition has not given up the drive or the will to bring back WorkChoices and they never will.
JOURNALIST: Why have you selected Vodafone to support in this way when there is quite a significant track record of unhappy customers, that sort of thing, and a class action in process at the moment?
PM: We had an opportunity with Vodafone to bring these jobs here to Tasmania. So Vodafone obviously thought its service offer wasn't right when you rang the call centre.
That gave us an opportunity with a very limited subsidy, $4 million for 750 jobs, to generate 750 jobs here in Tasmania, an injection to the local economy of $135 million.
Clearly that stacks up, it more than stacks up. It obviously stacks up to be a great benefit for Tasmania and that's why we are here today announcing it.
JOURNALIST: What guarantees, if any, have you obtained from Vodafone about the longevity of those jobs?
PM: They have made it clear their strategy is to bring these jobs here because they didn't believe their service offer was right.
JOURNALIST: There was no guarantee  -  they could take the $4 million and sack everyone in three years' time?
PM: That doesn't make any sense, does it, just stop and think about it. We're talking about  -  well just think through the maths and the economics of it.
Vodafone has made a decision about moving what was happening in Mumbai to here in Tasmania. That's got costs associated for it with Vodafone that are well in excess of $4 million.
Costs associated with construction of where these workers will work from. So it wouldn't make any sense to pursue the strategy that you are suggesting.
Vodafone is doing this because it fits with its company strategy to get its service offer right for a very limited investment from the Federal Government; $4 million to secure 750 jobs, $135 million into the economy. It makes absolute sense and it's great news for Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: You haven't visited northern Tasmania much recently. Have you given up, has Labor given up on Bass and Braddon?
PM: I travel to Tasmania regularly and all parts.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on Arthur Sinodinos's transgression and declaration, do you accept his explanation for someone with the depth of experience in parliament that he has, that he just forgot to declare?
PM: This is a very murky matter and it's not one for me, it's a question of leadership for Mr Abbott and how he will respond.
JOURNALIST: How likely is it your Gonski reforms won't actually come to fruition?
PM: We are working hard likely to deliver the reforms to schools, the improvements to schools and I'm absolutely determined to get it done.
JOURNALIST: Is there any point in the talks that you flagged in April given that Victoria and Queensland have indicated they might go their own way on Gonski?
PM: Well, I'm absolutely determined to get this done.
JOURNALIST: How much responsibility do you take for Tasmania's unemployment rate, which is at a ten-year high at the moment?
PM: I've described to you the factors that are driving the shape of the Tasmanian economy.
They are factors like the strong Australian dollar, factors like the change in the forestry industry. So we are working hard to make sure that there are jobs here in Tasmania.
We live in a global world. We can't wish away huge international events like the global financial crisis. We can't change the fact that our currency has gone up by 50 per cent.
So that means if someone overseas used to pay €100 for that something they got from Australia, now they pay €150.
What that means is that pressure from the dollar is doing its work in our economy. It means to be the strong economy we want to be in the future, we have got to be innovators, we have got to be offering unique offerings, we have got to be best at what we do.
Tasmania is well placed to do that in a range of industries; tourism, mining, manufacturing. Of course it's agricultural produce and all of the things that will come with the NBN.
We're putting in place the foundation stones so we can compete in this environment and be the best at what we do: NBN, infrastructure, skills, the strategy around the Asian Century, all of the work that we have done to strengthen our economy.
That's what drives change to make sure you have got a strong future full of opportunity, and that's the work we are dedicated to doing as a Government.
JOURNALIST: One project that would bring a lot of jobs to Tasmania is the pulp mill, Prime Minister. Are you considering any assistance for that project with the receivers trying to sell the assets to get it up and running?
PM: Everything that government needs to do in terms of approvals is well and truly done.
The issue with the pulp mill has been finding a private sector proponent that would take on the mission of constructing and operating a pulp mill. We of course are happy to talk to any private sector proponents who come forward.
I would very much want to see this secured for Tasmania, but we do need a private sector proponent to come forward for it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why haven't you included a visit to the north of the state in the last three visits to Tasmania?
PM: Look, I go to different parts of the state and travel to Tasmania very frequently. It depends the purpose for which I'm coming.
My purpose on this visit was to be here at this Jobs Expo, to be making the announcement about 750 new jobs in this part of Tasmania and I took the opportunity too to return to Dunalley where I had been immediately post the fires.
JOURNALIST: Is it an acknowledgement though that Bass and Braddon in are gone for Labor.
PM: No, it's an acknowledgment that we're announcing 750 new jobs are here today and we're standing at a Jobs Expo.
JOURNALIST: Do you have plans to visit the Bass and Braddon electorates?
PM: I will do what I've since  -  well really, since I first took on a shadow ministerial responsibility in parliament, which is travel very frequently to all parts of Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: You have made criticisms of the Greens in recent times. How is it that the Labor Party is considering then a preference deal with the Greens in Denison to nobble Andrew Wilkie?
PM: They are all questions for the party organisation.
JOURNALIST: Can you make a comment on the Greens as a party though?
PM: Preference arrangements are done by the party organisation.
JOURNALIST: You are doing a five-day blitz next week in western Sydney-
PM: We're just going to  -  Bill wanted to say something. Then we will take your question.
MINISTER SHORTEN: One final point. Some in the media have been saying that there's the Liberal attack on the current workplace relations system was valid, that there is a productivity challenge, there's a flexibility challenge, there's a militancy challenge.
Today, Tony Abbott has contradicted his whole last year of attack where he has put out the message that in fact we don't think there is a problem.
Because if you think that there is a workplace relations fire going on, to say that we are not going to call the fire brigade for another three-and-a-half years is a remarkable backflip.
I actually think though that people don't trust the Opposition on this, that you can't be half-pregnant on workplace relations. You either think there is a problem or you don't.
And if you do think there is a problem, I think if you actually want to get people to trust you to be the alternative Government of Australia, you need to put up.
It is not sufficient in Australian politics to buy a white flag and to come along to policy and say we are not going to do anything.
It is not sufficient to rewrite the script of Tootsie where you sort of say some things to one person and when you go to the board rooms, yeah we will be tough, we'll be strong, we'll sort it all out. And then when you go and see the workers say, oh no we don't think there is a problem, you will all be fine.
You can't have it both ways.
The best thing the Opposition could do is come clean, not just on their union bashing but on what are they going to do to guarantee the security of workers' entitlements and the security of their conditions.
The Opposition has caught itself playing in the traffic and it is in a very awkward position and they have contradicted their whole attack for the last two years, if in fact they say there is nothing to do for the next three years.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd is going to be in the north of the state in Sid Sidebottom's electorate hosting a quiz night in a couple of months' time to help him get re-elected. Are you planning anything like that?
PM: I regularly visit Tasmania. I've regularly visited Sid and Geoff and of course I was with Dick today, here with Julie and Jane now.
JOURNALIST: A report says you snubbed Kevin Rudd by not inviting him along on Wednesday to your trip to Brisbane.
PM: That's absurd.
Okay, we'll take a last question over here.
JOURNALIST: You are going to do a five day blitz in western Sydney next week. How are you feeling about that and will we see a similar five-day trip to Tasmania?
PM: Well if you added up all of the times I've been in Tasmania it would add up to a lot, lot longer than that.
I've been to western Sydney before. I'll travel to western Sydney again.
What I do as Prime Minister is I go around the country and I make myself available to communities when we've got things to announce there, like we're doing today.
When we've got major events to be at, like the event here today  -  the Job Expo  -  or when we want to create an opportunity to hear community views like we do through Community Cabinets and the very many other engagements I have with community members.
It's a routine part of what we do. It's a routine part of what I'll continue to do including here in Tasmania.
Thanks very much.


Hobart
HOST: Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Leon.
HOST: And thank you for talking with us this morning. Prime Minister, you know the figures that surround Tasmania well  -  a small population, a large land mass, economic indicators on health, on education, on unemployment.
As you look at these trends and the future in front of us, are you concerned that Tasmania might be on the road to becoming unviable financially?
PM: Certainly not. Tasmania has been going through a difficult period of change and transition in the economy.
Part of it is because of what's having an impact across the Australian economy, and that is  -  we came out of the global financial crisis well, seeing a big mining boom, as a result very strong Australian dollar. That's got its upside, but one of its big downsides is that it puts pressure on manufacturing and tourism, on export industries.
So put simply, someone who used to come from overseas to Tassie for a holiday, now has to spend more of their own currency to come here for the same holiday.
So that's putting pressure on the Tassie economy.
You've at the same time had that combined with the big transition that we are seeing in forestry. So, the economy has been doing it tough here, but I actually think when you look to the future there are some very big upsides emerging.
Number one, with the National Broadband Network rollout here first; that will develop jobs.
Number two, as manufacturing and tourism get used to the high Australian dollar, we can find ways of doing things that enable us to still sell our produce and sell our wares overseas.
Number three, I think here in Tasmania as a result of [inaudible] we can see mining playing an increasing role in the economy.
There are strengths here in this economy that can be grown and nurtured for the future, and can be strengths that are really competitive in today's world in the growing Asian region, servicing the burgeoning numbers of middle class consumers.
HOST: Why then Prime Minister, given all of that, has it taken so much federal and state subsidy to get 750 extra jobs here from Vodafone today?
PM: I don't accept the premise of your question. We've invested $4 million and the State Government has made some resources available too.
HOST: And if you divide that up that comes to more than $6,000 a job. Why did that subsidy have to happen?
PM: Well I think that's a great value for money proposition to get 750 jobs here, which is a huge injection into this economy.
HOST: On the issue of forestry; the proposed peace deal that you will fund and that Simon Crean talks with us about repeatedly, it's still seriously contentious as you would no doubt know. It might not pass the Upper House.
Does the Federal Government have a Plan B if the bill doesn't pass?
PM: We're not talking about Plan Bs, we're staying on track, staying on course to work with Tasmania to maximise the future here.
I would remind  -  because I think this is often forgotten in the debate  -  this is not a process that the Federal Government started.
We did not sit in Canberra and try and make decisions about Tasmanian forestry.
The parties here in Tasmania who have been at war of so long sat around a table and said can we find a way through this, and then approached the Federal Government to come and assist with the transition the industry was having and with enlivening the agreement that they had made between them.
Now, it's been a hard old road, but absolutely clear, and the legislation is still in the Tasmanian Upper House.
But the studies are in and it's also very clear that there will be less job loss and dislocation if the agreement and the legislation goes ahead, than if it stymied.
HOST: Prime Minister, you would broadly understand no doubt the literacy rates that are so low in Tasmania, also our low completion rates of year 12.
Your Government at the moment is proposing serious education reform, commonly called Gonski reforms.
When will the Tasmanian Government  -  when will the people of Tasmania  -  clearly understand what this is going to cost the State, and how the reforms are going to work in the state and private system here, because that is still unclear at this stage.
PM: Well, firstly we've been working with Tasmanian schools and bringing change to Tasmanian schools since we were first elected as a Government.
So in Tasmania today there are schools teaching the new national curriculum. In Tasmania today there are schools with better buildings because of the Building the Education Revolution program.
There are schools with more computers, there are schools that are participating in our national partnerships which are putting money into teacher quality and literacy and numeracy, and into disadvantaged schools. So that's at work today.
Now I make that point because it enables people to judge the kind of reforms and changes that we want to bring; we want to bring more of that because we can show from our national partnership schools that's it's working for kids' outcomes, and that they are getting a better education.
On the school-by-school specifics of our national plan for school improvement and the new funding arrangements, we are in dialogue with the Tasmanian Government about that, as we are with the Catholic and independent sectors.
A lot of information has been made available  -  some information has been awaiting the final crunching of some data that only came through when new census material came through, so it just couldn't be done more quickly than that.
HOST: The question Prime Minister is when will the Tasmanian Government and the state and private system clearly understand what the potential cost of this will be?
PM: They have been in discussions for a long period of time now building those understandings piece-by-piece.
HOST: But the question again is when will the Tasmanian Government understand clearly what it will cost? When will we know what it will cost? When will there be available answers on that and the negotiations on whether or not we can afford it, be in?
PM: Well I think you are misunderstanding the process. There's not one day where against a blank page everybody goes ta-dah and rolls back a curtain and there's something there that no-one has ever seen before.
This is an iterative process going back and forth that has been going on for a long period of time now.
HOST: The question then in the broader community might be, is this something that seems like an excellent idea on paper, but that as a country  -  as a Government  -  we can't afford?
PM: You can't and will never persuade me of that! You think our nation can't afford to invest in our children?
HOST: No, but the question is, when will it be actually laid out and budgeted for by the Government? When will you have a timetable for budgeting for this and when will it appear in the Budget papers?
PM: Let me go through it again. We had the reform work done by David Gonski and his panel. That's been available publically for a long period of time.
We've then had very detailed discussions with state government, the Catholic and the independent schools.
Part of the way in which the model is conceptualised is you need to have good information about the socio-economic status of each individual school.
We've got updated very recent new material from the census that goes to that question  -  the socio-economic status of each school. So that most recent information has been worked through and is being made available now and it just couldn't be made available before.
The new funding system will start for the next school year and you will see the Government in its Budget make all of the necessary provisions and all of the necessary savings to get it done.
HOST: On the issue of poker machine reform Prime Minister, Clubs ACT have deferred their mandatory pre-commitment trial until after the federal election.
Are you sorry now that you pulled out of the deal with Andrew Wilkie on poker machines? Would it have meant on reflection less harm done through poker machine addiction if we had stuck to that deal?
PM: Well I think that's a re-writing of history. My simple point to Andrew Wilkie was, there were not the numbers  -  there was not sufficient support  -  in the House of Representatives to pass the plan that he advocated for.
And I understand he advocated for it passionately, he wanted to see it, he wanted to see mandatory pre-commitment technology. He wanted to see a mandatory pre-commitment scheme, which obviously needs, the technology needs to be on each machine.
But when it came to the House of Representatives, the Opposition said it was going to vote against it. Even with the Government voting for it, there would not have been sufficient support in the Parliament to pass it.
So in those circumstances we continued to work with Mr Wilkie to get change, to minimise harm from problem gambling. And that legislation did ultimately pass the Parliament and it will mean that there are rules so that machines do have to have pre-commitment technology fitted to them.
HOST: The Labor Party feel like they are in the race for his seat, the seat of Denison. Why would a vote for Labor be a better idea than another vote for Andrew Wilkie, or indeed a Greens or Liberal candidate in the upcoming federal election?
PM: Well whether it's the seat of Denison or any of the federal electorates in Tasmania, or any part of the nation, a vote for the Government is a vote for jobs, a plan for Australian jobs.
It's a vote for opportunity for the future  -  most particularly making sure that every child gets a great education.
And it's a vote to continue and add to our Australian tradition of fairness. Labor is the party that built Medicare, we now want to build the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
So we will present at the forthcoming election as the only political party with a clear plan  -  not only to support families today  -  but to make sure our nation seizes all of the opportunities coming through the economic change in our region, and then shares that wealth fairly.
HOST: Appreciate you talking with us this morning.
PM: Thank you.


Canberra
Our nation's media has lost a giant today with the death of Peter Harvey.
He was a true newsman to his bootstraps, starting his career as a cadet at the Sydney Telegraph and going on to cover all the big stories of the past half century including the Vietnam War, the Dismissal, the fall of Marcos and the Gulf War, along with Australian political life from  Menzies to Gillard.
It was, by any measure, a remarkable five decade career.
From 1975, Peter was a central part of the Channel 9 family, his rich baritone voice bringing trusted news and analysis into millions of Australian lounge rooms.
He was well known to Australians, and he was well loved.
Peter Harvey was one of the greats and so will be greatly missed.
On behalf of the nation, my sincere condolences go Peter's widow Anne, to their children Claire and Adam who have continued Peter's proud tradition in journalism, to Peter's colleagues at Channel 9 and his mates across the media landscape.


Sydney
A National Anti-Gang Taskforce will be established to fight gang-related crime across Australia.
The $64 million Taskforce will be made up of 70 members from the Australian Federal Police and State Police forces and will also include officers from the Australian Crime Commission, Australian Customs and Border Protection, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, the Australian Taxation Office and Centrelink.
The National Anti-Gang Taskforce will:
·         Directly target, investigate and arrest gang members in Australia;
·         Provide State and Federal law enforcement agencies with intelligence on gangs across Australia and overseas;
·         Provide State and Territory Police with better access to key federal agencies like the Australian Taxation Office, Centrelink and the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, to get the information they need to make arrests;
·         Investigate the activities of Australian based gangs overseas and the link to crime back in Australia; and
·         Work with international law enforcement agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the United States Drug Enforcement Agency, the United States bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives and Interpol to exchange intelligence and conduct joint operations.
A new Australian Gang Intelligence Centre (AGIC) will also be established to provide national criminal intelligence on gang activity across Australia and its links overseas.
Strike Teams will be established in Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane. Liaison officers will be established in Adelaide, Darwin and Perth.
The Strike Teams will be made up of Australian Federal Police members, State and Territory Police officers and Australian Taxation Office officials. They will work with State and Territory police to target gangs, conduct investigations and make arrests.
The Strike Teams will be supported by physical and technical surveillance teams in Sydney and Melbourne to collect and provide valuable intelligence on the activities of gang members.
Because criminals organise, recruit and communicate online, the Strike Teams will also include Cyber Investigators.
The AFP Criminal Assets Confiscation Taskforce will support the Strike Teams through asset confiscation in relation to gang related crimes.
All of these teams will be mobile and flexible. They will be able to be deployed anywhere in the country dependent on intelligence leads.
The National Taskforce has been developed following consultations between the Australian Federal Police and State and Federal agencies. The Australian Federal Police has consulted with State and Territory Police Forces on how federal law enforcement agencies can assist them in the important work they do.
The Taskforce is based on the FBI's Violent Gang Safe Street Taskforce model that has resulted in over 55,000 arrests in the United States since 2001. The FBI Safe Street Taskforce is built on co-operation between local, state and federal investigators.
Australia already uses this model for counter terrorism and to target crime at the border.
In 2010 the Federal Government established Taskforce Polaris to investigate organised crime on the waterfront in Sydney.  It involves officers from the Australian Federal Police and the New South Wales Police Force as well as officers from Customs, the Australian Crime Commission and the New South Wales Crime Commission. 
Polaris has resulted so far in 34 arrests, 154 charges laid and more than 12 tonnes of illicit substances seized.
It is now being expanded to Melbourne and Brisbane. It commenced in Melbourne late last year and is called Operation Trident. It will begin in Brisbane in July this year and will be called Operation Jericho.
The taskforce will commence operations on July 1 and be fully operational by 1 January 2014.


Sydney
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: I did want to start by offering my condolences on the death of Peter Harvey. I had the opportunity to make contact with his family last night, to personally express my condolences.
Peter was simply a great journalist, a voice of authority for the Australian people about the events of the day; a much-loved family man who is going to be missed by his wife Anne, his daughter Claire and his son Adam.
Australians will miss that very distinctive voice telling them the news of the day from Canberra. This is a real tragedy and I know that there will be a lot of grief and loss around. I certainly can feel the force of that myself. So my most sincere condolences go to the Harvey family on what is an incredibly difficult day for them.
I'm here in Sydney and I'm joined by the Minister for Home Affairs, Jason Clare, by the Australian Federal Police Commissioner, Tony Negus and by the head of our Customs agency, Mike Pezzullo.
We are here to announce new measures to tackle serious and organised crime, new measures to get the guns and gangs off our streets, new measures to tackle the manifestations of serious crime that we see in the Australian community.
Serious crime trades in guns, it trades in drugs, it profits from misery. Serious crime has its outworkings on our streets as hardened criminals take shots at each other, causing safety issues for community members around the nation.
Even though we have seen general reductions in gun crime, we have certainly seen increases in shootings in public places. Most particularly when we look at the New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research, we see that over the past 15 years, shootings in public places have soared.
The number of drive-by shootings in this state, in New South Wales rose from 73 in 2010 to 88 in 2011, with around seven incidents per month last year. More than 130 shootings took place in this city.
The threat is not just isolated to here in Sydney. Victoria regarded a 10 per cent rise in the use of firearms in robberies in 2012. There were 14 shootings in South Australia in the first five weeks of this year.
Indeed, in Victoria today there is news of a shooting in Melbourne's west  -  a shooting in an industrial estate in Melton involving a bikie gang member who actually lives in my electorate and who has been involved in shootings before, including shootings in a shopping centre which were witnessed by passers-by and obviously put the community at risk.
Consequently, we want to take new measures and a new approach. These gangs are very sophisticated. It means that not only are they trading in guns and in drugs and causing shootings on the streets, it means that they are moving a lot of money around. It also means that their activities span beyond the borders of any one state and indeed they have links overseas.
Consequently, whilst police forces around the country are working hard to counter the gangs and the guns, we believe new measures are appropriate and that the national level of Government needs to assist and get involved.
Consequently, I today announce that we will create a National Anti-Gang Taskforce. This will have strike teams in Sydney, Melbourne and in Brisbane and liaison officers in other parts of the country.
The work of these strike teams will be to directly target and investigate gang members in Australia. It will be to work with State police, to reinforce and assist their efforts and particularly to provide better intelligence.
The taskforce will reach out to other key federal agencies because money is being moved around, important information can be got from agencies like the Australian Tax Office, Centrelink and from the Department of Immigration and Citizenship.
We will work with comparable agencies overseas to make sure we are getting the best of intelligence on these gangs. We have modelled this new approach on the FBI's Violent Gang Safe Street Taskforce and that resulted in over 55 arrests in the United States since 2001.
Put at its most simple, these are new measures to try and make sure we are combatting the gangs and guns on our streets. These are new measures to flush out gangs where they are and to stop their activities.
In order to do so, we also want to take a new measure to target our borders and I will turn now to the Minister for Home Affairs for a description of that.
MINISTER CLARE: Thank you very much Prime Minister. Last week, we saw the biggest seizure of the drug ice in Australia's history, worth almost half a billion dollars and that was the work of a joint taskforce made up of the Federal Police, state police, Customs, the New South Wales Crime Commission and the Australian Crime Commission.
Our law enforcement agencies, state and federal working together and that's what this is about. That's what this taskforce is about. It's about state and federal law enforcement agencies working together to target criminals, arrest them and seize their assets.
In January the Prime Minister asked me for recommendations on action that the Federal Government can take to target organised crime and violent gangs and I've sought the advice of the Australian Federal Police Commissioner, Mr Negus, and this is his recommendation, to establish this taskforce, a national anti-gang taskforce.
It will involve an intelligence centre in Canberra and strike teams in Sydney, Brisbane and Melbourne, liaison officers in Darwin, Perth and Adelaide. Its job is to target, investigate and arrest gang members and seize their assets, to provide state police across the country with more gang intelligence; intelligence on what's happening from coast to coast, from Sydney to Perth, from Darwin to Adelaide.
To also provide state police with better access to federal agencies like the Tax Office and Centrelink because what police are telling me is they want that information, they want better access to the information that the Tax Office and Centrelink can provide them.
Bu this taskforce will also investigate the actions of Australian gangs overseas and work with the FBI, the DEA, the ATF and Interpol and other international law enforcement agencies to investigate their activities overseas.
As the Prime Minister has said, this is based on a proven model. The FBI's Violent Gang Taskforce has been very successful. It's also based on a model that works here in Australia right now.
Taskforce Polaris which is focused on border crime here in Sydney has been very successful and it adopts the same model  -  Federal Police and state police and Customs and our Crime Commissions working together to target criminals. We have adopted the same approach when we have focused on counterterrorism.
Our police do a great but they've got a big challenge and I've spoken to a lot of police over the course of the last few weeks. Their advice to me is that the Federal Government can help by providing greater powers to seize the assets of criminals but also provide better access to federal agencies like the Tax Office and Centrelink to help them do their job and that is what this taskforce is about.
We have gangs in western Sydney and right across the country fighting over drugs, fighting over turf but ultimately it's about money. Money creates power in the criminal underworld and the more we do to help police to seize the cash, seize the houses, seize the cars of these criminals, the more we can shift balance of power on the street and that is why this is a very important part of the work this taskforce will do. That's why we have brought the Tax Office into this work, that's why we're bringing Centrelink in as well.
That's the first announcement. The second announcement that we're making today is the establishment of a National Border Targeting Centre. And again, this is been established based on the advice of the experts, talking to Commissioner Negus as well as Mr Pezzullo.
Their advice is criminal intelligence is the key to seizing drugs and other contraband at the border. The more intelligence we have got, the more we seize and that's borne out by the facts.
Eighty five per cent of the drugs we seize at the border is based on criminal intelligence that our law enforcement agencies get before the drugs even arrive in Australia and with that intelligence it helps to target the right parcels and the right packages.
The more intel we've got, the more we seize that's why I've taken the advice of Mr Negus and Mr Pezzullo to establish a National Border Targeting Centre and that will fuse together for the first time all of the criminal intelligence that's collected by Customs, the Federal Police, as well as ASIC, the Department of the Transport Security and other federal agencies; fuse all of that data together to target high risk passengers and high risk cargo. It's a model that's been developed in the United States and the UK and it's a model that works.
So both with the Gang Taskforce and the Border Targeting Centre the method is the same. Law enforcement agencies state and federal, working together, target the right packages but also target the right crooks, arrest them and seize their assets.
I might ask Mr Negus to say a few words.
TONY NEGUS: Thank you Minister and thank you Prime Minister. The Prime Minister and the Minister have articulate what the taskforce will look like and how it will work.
I want to say from the outset that as the Minister stated, we recognise the hard work that state and territory police do every day in dealing with violent crime on our streets and they do a very good job.
This is about looking at another dimension and looking at a national picture in the national interest of how we can help fight the violent crime we are now seeing in various cities around the country.
The other thing that's important is the AFP's international reach and we have seen push of some of these motorcycle gangs and other criminal gangs into South East Asia and into Europe. So the AFP's international network will also be looking to have that expertise translated back into the Australian context and provided to state and territory police to allow them to do their job every day.
These taskforces will be made up of mainly Federal Police but with the assistance of state and territory police to support them in their day-to-day business, their day-to-day outcomes.
As the Minister and Prime Minister mentioned, this is loosely based on an FBI model in which 170 separate taskforces between state, federal and local police exist across 39 states of the United States. It's been seen as very much a force-multiplier in what are sometimes complex jurisdictional areas across countries like the United States and Australia with multiple jurisdictions at play.
We are very excited. I briefed all of the Commissioners last night on this plan. They would like to see some more information of course and we will do that over the coming months. We'll be looking at an implementation date of 1 July but all are generally supportive of doing a more, getting more information and having more resources at the disposal of the police on the streets, whether they be federal or state.
As the Minister has also said, we have shown in recent times with joint counterterrorism work, with the joint drug work we do that this is the way of the future; multiple jurisdictions working together, bringing the resources and skillsets that exist across each of those respective agencies in into one team.
When I was sworn in as Commissioner three and a half years ago I said the AFP will do very little by itself while I'm Commissioner because I think my own personal view is this is the best way to fight crime across the country.
To do it together and bringing in experts from the Tax Office, from Centrelink, from the Australian Crime Commission and of Customs to work with state and territory police is the most effective way of getting very good results and very probable results of arrests and seizures being made.
With that I pass to Mr Pezzullo to talk about the taskforce.
MICHAEL PEZZULLO: Thank you Commissioner, Prime Minister, Minister. I would like to briefly remark on the establishment of the Border Targeting Centre. It's going to be a very important capability.
The border protection task that we face is becoming more and more challenging with every passing year. Volumes are increasing, both of traders and travellers. People expect to cross the border quickly and expeditiously and wherever possible we want to support them in that.
However, the criminal groups are becoming far more sophisticated. They are getting very clever at their concealments and they are getting very clever at masking the background to either travel or trade.
What this centre will do will allow us to pull together all of our data we have, all of our intelligence systems, all of our analysts together into the one hub where we can better target the high risk travellers and traders, the people who are moving goods illicitly, contraband and the like and working with our partners, the Federal Police but other authorities, both at the federal, state, territory and indeed international levels.
It will allow us to target scarce resources on to the high risk transactions, travellers or traders and allow others to pass through who are conducting their business in a lawful and legitimate manner. Thank you very much.
PM: We will take questions on these announcements before moving to questions of the day.
JOURNALIST: Presumably there will need to be a lot more resources to fight this. Is there more money or new money?
PM: We are making available $64 million for the taskforce. That's $64 million for the National Anti-gang Taskforce. That will fund the officers that Commissioner Negus refers to, who will be working in the strike teams, who also will be liaising in the intelligence centre and it will fund the effort across government because we are bringing together not only police, but also people from the Tax Office, from Centrelink, to focus on this work.
To track the criminals, you have got to be able to track the money and we want to be able to increase our ability to do that. So, yes, there are new resources available for this important task.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition said today, Opposition Leader Tony Abbott said today a lot of what is being announced this morning, he is saying a lot of is Opposition policy that was announced at the 2010 Federal election. What do you make of what he has to say?
PM: I will turn to Minister Clare for some comments but the proposals we are announcing today have been worked up on the best of professional advice from the Federal Police Commissioner and from our other agencies to tackle the problems that we are seeing now.
I do want to echo the comments that have been made. Local police, state police do a good job and it's a hard job and I take my hat off to anybody who devotes their life to being a police officer. They do a great job in difficult circumstances.
But as we are seeing more and more sophistication by the gangs, then we have got to respond with more and more sophistication too. Some of these gangs are in motorcycle leathers; some of these gangs are people who wear suits. We are talking about sophisticated and organised crime, people who can easily move themselves, move guns, move records across borders within our country, people who would have international links and would strive to be able to move incriminating evidence overseas as well.
That's why across these initiatives we've got the National Anti-gang Taskforce and a new initiative to strengthen our already stronger efforts at tracking guns and other contraband at the border. I'll turn to Minister Clare for some comments.
JOURNALIST: Is this about buying votes in western Sydney?
PM: We'll just take the question over here.
MINISTER CLARE: This is a recommendation from the Australian Federal Police and it's a taskforce that will be led by the Australian Federal Police. The model that Mr Abbott is talking about was one that involved the Australian Crime Commission leading that work. This is a different model.
The key difference is the involvement of the Australian Tax Office and the involvement in Centrelink and that's based on the discussions that I've had on the ground from Blacktown to Bankstown, talking to police, saying, what do you need, how can the Federal Government, the federal law enforcement agencies help with the work that you do?
The key message I keep getting is the more we can do to help seize the assets of criminals the better, and working with the Tax Office and Centrelink, that will help them with their investigations and that's why they are a key part of this anti-gang taskforce.
JOURNALIST: Minister, the New South Wales Government, if you could just ask, says you've been ripping money out of Customs and that's meant that the drugs and the weapons have been coming in and that's the source of the problem. Can you respond to that please?
MINISTER CLARE: A short and simple answer. We are seizing double the amount of drugs now than we were five years ago. The reason for that is because instead of just relying on x-ray, we are now using intelligence to target the right packages and the right parcels.
Ask any police officer, state or federal or anyone in Customs and they will tell you the key to stopping drugs getting into the country, the key to seizing drugs on the street is criminal intelligence.
Information from the general public, information from police on the ground in Australia or information from law enforcement agencies overseas is the key to seizing drugs and that's why we are announcing today a boost in our intelligence capability by fusing all of that information together into a National Broader Targeting Centre.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you referenced the shooting in Melbourne. Can you just explain what practical impact this announcement will have on cases like that, that isn't occurring already?
PM: That man involved in that shooting is a member of the Bandidos, a motorcycle gang. Now, I am not going to pretend I'm the Federal Police Commissioner and I can give you chapter and verse about the history of that motorcycle gang, I can't. But clearly a gang involved in violence, we have seen a shooting that's reported in the newspaper today in Melbourne.
The general approach here, of course state police around the country are doing what they can to deal with such gangs, trying to police, trying to deal with outbreaks of violence, trying to work out what such gangs may or may not be doing with drugs, with firearms, with money.
The issue here is that they can move from Melbourne's west to Sydney's west, from Melbourne's west into Adelaide  -  move resources, move drugs, move guns, move gang members  -  and so the importance of the National Anti-gang Taskforce is it will bring national resources to work seamlessly with state police forces so that they can share intelligence about the activities of these gangs, the movements that they engage in interstate, the movements of money that they cause where the wealth is and that will strengthen law enforcement.
So you have got the sharing of intelligence and then you have got more people doing the work because we will have these strike teams in a state like Melbourne, able to work very closely with state police to strengthen their ability to do the job.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is this about buying votes in western Sydney?
PM: I've just outlined how this is a national problem. This is a problem certainly on the streets of Sydney's west and we've seen many reports of shootings in western Sydney. But it's also a problem in other parts of the nation.
It's a problem in South Australia which is very strongly reported there. I know that myself from time spent recently in South Australia, including time spent with my family over Christmas; a real concern in South Australia.
It's a real concern too in Melbourne and the fact that there has been another shooting reported in today's newspapers verifies that concern. This is about a national plan and bringing new national resources to make a difference.
JOURNALIST: In terms of the timing, isn't this just about buying votes in western Sydney?
PM: Well, the timing is because we have been working on this in the manner I outlined earlier this year. I asked Minister Clare earlier this year to provide a report to Cabinet on what more we could do to address gang violence and gun crime.
He provided that report based on the best of advice from our agencies. Cabinet deliberated and as a result we are announcing the measures today.
JOURNALIST: There has been a lot of he said, she said, about what the actual numbers of Customs officers and AFP officers is, whether it's gone up or down in recent years. We have the two gentlemen who can answer that question right now. In recent years have your numbers gone up or down and by roughly how much? Same question to Mr Negus.
MICHAEL PEZZULLO: You just need to look at portfolio budget statements and annual reports over about a five year period, our full-time strength has gone from 5,700 officers to just over 5,100 officers and over that time our detections and seizures have gone up.
The reason why that has occurred is that we're getting much smarter, not just in our screening technologies and detection technologies, which are very important, but we are applying intelligence and we've been doing so for three years. This initiative being announced today will take it to the next level.
JOURNALIST: So from five years to 5,700 from 5,100?
MICHAEL PEZZULLO: Our average staffing level on an annualised basis, yes.
PM: And doing more with it as Mr Pezzullo was just outlining.
TONY NEGUS: To the second part of the question, likewise for the Australian Federal Police, in the last five years I think our budget has gone up around $300 million over that period of time.
We've also had internally a move to push more people that are employed by the AFP into frontline of policing and we actually have 700 more sworn police today than we did five years ago.
I have to say that many of those have transitioned from being protective service officers at airports into being sworn police at airports which is a different model of trade. But suffice to say there is substantially more police now than there were five years ago and as I said $300 million more in the budget.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, western Sydney is obviously the focus this week. You talked about guns and gangs being a priority or a real concern in different places around Australia and you mentioned it being a real concern for people in western Sydney.
Do you think that that is the priority for people in western or are they more concerned about things like infrastructure?
PM: I think safety is important to everybody, whether you live in western Sydney, whether you live in Melbourne, in Brisbane, in Adelaide, in Darwin, in Perth. Wherever you live in our great nation, people want to be safe and they want to know that their loved ones are going to be safe.
When things happen like a shooting in a suburban street or in a suburban shopping centre then of course it causes concern and it causes people to worry and it makes them worry whether next time they should take the walk down the street or the trip to the shopping centre.
These are ordinary human reactions and people have felt these ordinary human reactions right around the country, including in Sydney's west but other parts of the nation as well.
I'm sure that there are many people who live in Melton today who are sharing stories about the last time they went to the industrial park where the shooting that is reported today happened, what they were doing there and how they will feel about going next time they go to that industrial park.
When people are feeling that kind of pressure around the country and the official advice to us is we can do more than we are doing now through working nationally, with state police forces then it's the right thing to do. And that's why I'm announcing these measures today with the Minister and with the Police Commissioner and obviously with our leader in Customs too.
We are seeing more sophistication by criminals. It has got to be met by more sophistication by us and that is the genesis of the measures that I'm a announcing today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's been an incident in Afghanistan, have you got any details on that?
PM: My understanding is the Chief of the Defence Force will make a statement about that later today so I would prefer you to that statement and he will be able to deal with those issues for you.
JOURNALIST: Picking up on that last question, Prime Minister, it's something that gangs and street crime is an issue in western Sydney. The broader question was what do you think it is that's important to those people you're visiting for the next five days?
PM: We will take questions on this and then if you have got broader questions for me on western Sydney or any other matter then I will take them.
Are there more direct questions on the initiatives that we are announcing today?
JOURNALIST: The question was what do you think the issues are that are exercising the minds of the people you are visiting over the next five days and what can you do about it, what will you do about it?
PM: I've been to western Sydney many times before, as I've been to many other parts of the country and what I've done when I've travelled in western Sydney before and what I do in other parts of the country is try and immerse myself and understand from local communities what's on their mind.
It's not surprising that I'd be spending more time in western Sydney. We are talking about a region of 1.6 million people. We are talking about a very diverse region and a growing region. We are talking about a region too that is a very substantial contributor to the national economy.
Just like last year, I spent some dedicated time in south-east and central Queensland. This week I will be spending dedicated time in western Sydney. Sometimes it's only possible to go for a day or half a day. I have organised myself to make some more time available.
I anticipate that like when I've been in western Sydney in the past, people will raise with me issues including safety on the streets. They will raise with me cost of living questions. They will raise with me issues about jobs and the future of our economy. They will talk to me about infrastructure and traffic. They will talk to me about the National Broadband Network. They will talk about schools and opportunities for their kids. They will talk schools about local healthcare services and how they are experiencing those services.
I think that will be the range of issues that's raised. There may well be many more besides. Whenever I travel around the country, whilst you tend to get those kind of issues raised with you, you'll always meet that one person who has got a very passionate attachment to a particular cause or particular issue and they want to purse that with you.
JOURNALIST: Is Ed Husic going to be available tonight and if not, why not and what does that say about him given he's the local member?
PM: My understanding is Mr Husic is also attending a major ethnic community event and he is simply trying to manage the logistics of coming and going to a couple of places in a short period of time.
JOURNALIST: Do you think he should be there though?
PM: I think he's got a commitment to an ethnic community event, indeed I think he may be representing me at that event so we would have asked him to do it and in those circumstances he's trying to manage through the best he can.
JOURNALIST: PM, can you give us an idea of what you're going to be doing over this coming week, are you going to be holding forums, are you going into shopping centres, train stations, are you going to be meeting residents of western Sydney in that capacity or is it just going to be the meetings and rallies like tonight?
PM: Well you've I think been with me when I've been out on the road before talking to people. We will be doing all of the things that we do to stay in touch with the community and to hear what's on their mind.
We've been very strongly working with the community in western Sydney. I've been there a number of times. When you look back over the years of the government, what mattered after the global financial crisis was making sure people were still in work. What mattered in many of those schools was making sure dad had a job constructing new facilities at the school and the kids got the opportunity of a better education.
What's mattered in Sydney's west when I've been there in the past has been health care services and I had the great delight of being able to open some new facilities in Sydney's west. People have talked to me about these issues in the past, they'll talk to me about them during the course of the next few days I'm sure.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] Can you confirm that Australian soldiers were responsible for the deaths-
PM: I'm not going to deal with the details of the incident in question. The CDF will be making a statement later today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, western Sydney is such a big area. You've talked about a couple of days. Do you plan on coming back in the next few months?
PM: Absolutely, I'm a very regular traveller to western Sydney and I'll continue that.
JOURNALIST: Have you got plans for this afternoon between now and the speech, Prime Minister? What are you going to be up to?
PM: I've got a bit of work to get done so I'll get about doing it.
JOURNALIST: Can I just clarify the answer to Michael's question. Will there be opportunity for just average people to come up and talk to you?
PM: I'm always happy to have a chat and Mark you've been out with me enough to know that happens wherever I go and whatever street I walk down and whatever community facility I'm in. It happens all the time.
JOURNALIST: So shopping centres-
PM: We'll go about our work day-by-day as we do our work but every day I'm out in any part of Australia people come up and say hello and have a chat.
JOURNALIST: Western Sydney I obviously a big area, it's obviously a big concern to you given it's one of the first areas for you to visit-
PM: I don't agree with your question at all.
JOURNALIST: But you're obviously concerned about losing a number of seats there. How many seats do you think you'll lose?
PM: You've misunderstood and misframed what's happening this week. I travel very consistently around Australia. I do it to meet the local communities. I do to announce things that the Government has decided to do which make a difference to local communities. I do it because I want to go to schools and see kids and chat to them. I do it because I want to go to hospitals and talk to doctors and learn from them and so it is a routine part of what I do.
I've done it in many places over the course of the days of this year already. Friday I was in Hobart for example making a major announcement about 750 new jobs  -  very good news for an economy the size of Hobart's.
I've been to western Sydney before. Sometimes I've gone for the day. Sometimes I've gone out for one meeting. Sometimes I've gone for longer. This week I'll be in a position to go for longer. Last year for example I was in a position to spend some dedicated time in south east Queensland and central Queensland.
That's what I'll be doing over the next week. I'll have other obligations and things I'll need to do and I will certainly be attending to them.
JOURNALIST: Can we therefore say, beyond a shadow of a doubt that the next week will be a week of governing rather than a week of campaigning?
PM: If you want to come and sit with me, not looking at what I'm working on but looking at me as I sign and deal with incoming paperwork you'll be very welcome.
JOURNALIST: Okay! With a photographer?
PM: It's a real pity you weren't there yesterday because you could have brought, I would have said probably two thermoses of coffee and as I sat there doing paperwork for seven or eight hours yesterday you could have happily sat the other side of the desk.
Something tells me given the restless intellects of our friends from the media, fifteen minutes in you would have been looking for something else to do.
JOURNALIST: Scott Morrison has spoken again on the asylum seeker issue this morning and he said that it's a fact that the asylum seekers when they're on bridging visas at that point haven't actually been thoroughly vetted by ASIO.
Isn't it fair for the Opposition to have concerns about asylum seekers and that more checks or protocol should be in place given that they haven't had their full checks at that stage?
PM: Mr Morrison would well know that people who get visas are people who've been the subject of health and identity and security checks.
I would also say the thing that I noticed from Mr Morrison today was once again advocacy in the newspapers that 457 visas should be a mainstay of the immigration program.
That's code for the Opposition's plan to have large numbers of temporary foreign workers in our nation. That's code for their plan to put opportunities for those workers first and opportunities for Australian workers last.
Thanks very much.
[ENDS]


Sydney
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I want to share you with a story David Bradbury relayed to me just last week.
Denis Mars is the co-founder of Meetings.io a start-up based in San Francisco which develops technology for online video conversations and conferences.
David and Denis met at a convention in Silicon Valley and because Denis is Australian they got to talking.
It turned out that while Denis is finishing his graduate degree at Stanford in California, his first degree, like David's, was from Sydney University.
He and his wife, Renee, are both from the western suburbs.
In fact, Denis grew up right around the corner from David, in the next street, not so far from here in Fairfield West. 
Here's a young man from these streets, who's founding firms on the other side of the world, who's making new ideas pay, who's making his living building new technologies.
His is a genuine local success story we can admire. A story of aspiration and achievement.
But no one person's story is the story of this entire region, home to 1.6 million people, including 350 000 children  -  and the third biggest economy in Australia.
Indeed, no one community's story is the story of this region.  Penrith isn't the same as Parramatta; Campbelltown isn't the same as Castle Hill.
But there are some things we do want for this region as a whole and for every person in Sydney's west.
First, the recognition and respect that should flow to people who work hard and do the right thing by their family, community and country  -  each and every day. 
I understand first hand, in my role as a Member of Parliament in Melbourne's west, a region's yearning for recognition and respect.
For far too long the community I made my home, the communities I represent, have been the kind of places people hurried through  -  not places where you stopped to stay.
Being from the west should never be viewed as being second-rate. 
In this region, your fierce sense of pride in your home and its achievements should engender recognition and respect.
Second, what I want for this region as a whole is that as you live your life and strive to create a better one for your children and grandchildren, you feel government working with you. 
I love it when I hear the stories of what has actually helped.
The way the new school hall at St Patrick's Primary School here in Parramatta has transformed teaching and learning  -  one insight into the 650 schools we've improved in this region with $1.3 billion in extra funding here. 
The fact the pay cheques kept coming in 160 000 western suburbs businesses, because we stimulated the economy to protect jobs during the global financial crisis and came through strong, unlike the rest of the world.
The jobs saved, the 850 000 new jobs created, with 135 000 of them in this city.
The help the School Kids' Bonus has provided to over 115 000 families in this region.
The women I meet who get to keep more of their pay to support their family  -  because they don't pay tax anymore and Government pays more of their childcare costs  -  they're among the 565 000 taxpayers who live here who received a tax cut last year and the 60 000 families who received extra help with child care.
The fact the upgraded Nepean Hospital is now seeing patients in facilities we funded with $130 million  -  the GP clinics at Blacktown and Liverpool  -  the millions of people here who can bulk-bill because of Medicare  -  through the hundreds of millions of dollars in extra health funding now flowing here.
I take delight in these improvements because I want to make sure that areas like Sydney's West  -  and the people who live and work here  -  get a fairer share of what you create. 
You deserve it because of your work and your endeavour  -  your care for your kids, families and communities  -  your determination to knuckle down and do the right thing.
This is what drives us as a Federal Government today and every day.
Put simply, we don't accept that other suburbs come first and you come second.
We don't accept that other suburbs need broadband before these suburbs.
We don't accept that hospitals in other suburbs should be better class than the hospitals here.
We don't accept that other schools need libraries, trade training centres and great teachers and that you don't.
We don't accept that you should feel less safe, or have less opportunity, or worse infrastructure than other parts of this city or our nation.
Look around at this institution itself, where we meet tonight built here in the West by one of the greatest Labor Governments, the Government of Neville Wran.
There is no greater example of our Labor faith, of the substance of the things Labor hopes for in Sydney's West, than this place itself.
This is more than a home of higher learning; it is a factory for suburban opportunity the University of Western Sydney.
Look around you and what you see is your dreams for a better life, most of all for your children, fulfilled by a practical, yet visionary, Labor plan for change. 
Your future, our purpose then.
Your future, our purpose now.
We won't promise the sun, the moon and the stars  -  we won't fill every pothole or catch every crook.
But I am determined to deliver five things to make your life easier and improve your future.
We will support your job and put Aussie workers first.
We will bring high speed broadband to your business and home.
We will get your children a world-leading education.
We will insure you against disability and keep improving health.
And we will help you manage the pressures of modern family life and modern society.
Let's talk frankly about how we are going to do these five things.
First, jobs.
You rightly want to know how our country will prosper, how we will have jobs beyond the mining boom.
You worry no more mining boom means Australia is bust.
So first, the good news.  The mining boom isn't going away any time soon. 
We haven't even reached the peak of the investment phase yet, the peak of new money coming on stream to build new projects.  Even when we pass that peak, the projects built will be extracting minerals, ore, oil and gas for decades to come.
But, not all the news is good.
Because of the mining boom, unlike the rest of the developed world we came out of the global financial crisis strong  -  with low inflation, low unemployment, low interest rates, triple-A rated and growing  -  our Australian dollar is strong and it's going to stay that way.
That's good news if you are going overseas or you are buying goods imported from overseas  -  our strong dollar makes it cheaper, it helps keep inflation down.
But it is bad news if you are manufacturing or trying to export services. 
Our strong dollar literally means our customers overseas need to spend fifty per cent more than they used to, to buy Australian.
Common sense tells you that if people are going to pay half as much again for something than they paid before, it had better be unique or incredibly good.
So that's our future. Being the innovators, being the ones smart enough to come up with the new goods and services the world wants and can only get from us.
Or being so incredibly good at what we do that our goods and services are such high quality they're worth the premium price.
This is the story across the nation  -  but the businesses and exporters of Sydney's west feel this pressure of the high Aussie dollar more than most.
This is a manufacturing region. 
Sydney's west represents about a third of the city's economy  -  and about a half of the city's manufacturing output.
This is also an exporting region  -  the west is a strategic hub for goods produced around Australia and transport and logistics is the third largest industry in the region.
So this is the region, you are the people, who are going to be charting the way, showing us how to innovate, to be unique, showing us how to deliver superb quality.
If we can do this together, then our opportunities beyond mining are huge.
By 2030, our region of the world will be home to 3.2 billion middle-class consumers, the world's biggest middle-class. 
They are exactly the kind of people prepared to buy the best  -  and with the money to do it.
They are exactly the people who we want to buy Australian.
I want Australia to win the benefits of this growth. 
I want Sydney's west to come up a winner and you have the natural advantages to do so.
This is the most socially and ethnically diverse region in the nation, in a century when we must know the languages and cultures of our customers and competitors like never before.
So let's go and get that work, seize that opportunity, create those jobs.
I have a plan to make sure we do, a plan for Australian jobs that will deliver benefits which will be felt here every day.
A plan to support your industries to increase exports and win new business overseas  -  especially by helping them innovate.
A plan to back your firms to win more work at home  -  to take the opportunity that comes from big mining projects to create blue-collar jobs, especially in manufacturing, right here.
A plan to help your small businesses grow  -  to support home businesses, contractors and the self-employed  -  because we know being your own boss is the dream of so many working people.
Of course, there is another path. 
That's cutting wages so hard you counteract the effect of the high dollar  -  that would mean cutting wages by almost a third. 
Doing that would require Work Choices to be back or something worse. 
I'll always fight anyone and everyone who wants to take us down that path.
And I'll work with you to deliver my plan to create the high skill, high wage jobs of the future.
It is obvious we can't be the innovators, we can't be the best, if we are trapped with yesterday's infrastructure. 
Imagine trying to compete in today's world if half our houses and businesses didn't have electricity.
To be economic winners we have to have the best of infrastructure and that means the National Broadband Network, right here in the west: in Blacktown, Prospect, Penrith.
To be economic winners also requires having the best skills.
That's why we have created more apprenticeships and university places here and around the nation than ever before.
It is why I am so determined that our children get a world-leading education. 
It's not right that children in Shanghai and Singapore get a better education than our kids. 
It's not right that our schools lack resources, that so many of our children never learn to read and write, that not every child has a great teacher and that principals chafe against being tied down by bureaucracy.
We will deliver, from the first day of school next year, the improvements your school needs  -  in Sydney's west and right around the nation  -  so every child gets a great education.
Jobs, world-leading infrastructure like the NBN, world-leading schools  -  a plan for opportunity, a plan to seize the benefits of the growing wealth in our region for our nation.
A plan to be stronger and smarter.
A plan to be fairer too. 
We will give those with disabilities a better life today and we will for all time give you the peace of mind that comes with knowing that if life delivers you or your family a cruel blow, then you will not be left behind.
In seventeen weeks' time we are launching the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
At the same time we are improving Medicare and bringing more doctors, nurses, hospital funding and local control to your hospitals than ever before.
Last, we want to help the modern families of this region as you go about the hard work of making a good life. 
The hard work of raising children, holding down a job, helping your ageing relatives. 
The grind of long daily commutes, on infrastructure that's barely coping, on roads that need co-operation between Governments  -  and we'll have more to say about that in coming days.
That's why here, in Sydney's West, we're helping with the household budget. 
We've made sure that Mum and Dad on the old age pension are $182 better off a fortnight than when we came to Government.
That Mums and Dads can get paid parental leave with their new baby.
That you'll see $15,000 in School Kids Bonus if you have two kids in school and more family benefits when your children are teenagers.
Payments on an average mortgage are down by $5 000 a year, saving almost $100 every week  -  that's real help with the cost of living  -  and we are forcing the States to implement changes to stop your electricity bills continuing to skyrocket.
Modern challenges demand modern responses.
Whether it has been protecting jobs during the GFC or creating a clean energy future by pricing carbon, your Government has been prepared to stand up and act.
Government can never stand still or be flat footed when new challenges confront us.
One of those new challenges is the increasing sophistication of gangs and organised crime.
The hardened criminals with the guns. 
The people who might take aim at each other in one of your streets today and be over the border in to another State tomorrow  -  or have sold or sent their weapon interstate to make it harder to trace. 
I make no apology for saying this is vital business: not when a nine-year-old boy in Bankstown can find bullet casings fired into the bedroom he shares with his mother and three other children.
Not when the industrial estates of my own community in Melbourne's west become bikie battlegrounds.
The number of drive-by shootings in this State rose from 73 in 2010 up to 88 in 2011, with around 7 incidents per month  -  and last year, more than 130 shootings took place in this city. 
The threat is not isolated to Sydney: Victorian police recorded a ten per cent rise in the use of firearms in robberies through 2012  -  and there were 14 shootings in South Australia in just the first five weeks of this year.
This Government has been working to meet the evolving threat.
In 2012 we introduced legislation with tough new penalties for firearms trafficking across state and national borders, with a maximum penalty of life in jail for people who traffic firearms.
In 2010 we introduced new “unexplained wealth” provisions into the Proceeds of Crime Act  -  so that if a person can't prove their wealth came from lawful means, the court can seize their assets.
We also established Taskforce Polaris, targeting organised crime in the cargo system in Sydney, bringing together officers from five State and Federal authorities.
All this has made a difference: today, our agencies are seizing more than double the amount of drugs, weapons and cash and more than triple the amount of criminal assets that they were seizing before we came to office.
The States are playing their part  -  in Sydney, the NSW Police Force has been fighting this threat  -  but they should not have to do this on their own.
Organised crime, including the activities of outlaw bikie gangs, is estimated to cost Australia $15 billion a year. 
Combating all this needs a new, nationally-led approach.
Based on current intelligence, the Australian Crime Commission estimates that 72 known organised crime targets have each generated $10 million or more in illicit funds or profits over a two-year period. 
Six of these had an estimated value of illicit funds or profits of over $100 million.
While on our streets, we are seeing violent conflict between crime syndicates with national and international connections  -  financed by the trafficking of drugs, guns and money into and out of Australia, and across state borders  -  with connections to tax avoidance, bank fraud and criminal activity overseas.
This is why earlier today with Commissioner Negus and Minister Clare, I announced that the Government will contribute an additional $64 million over the next four years to establish a new National Anti-Gang Taskforce and National Gangs Intelligence Centre.
These will lead the effort to identify and then dismantle national and transnational crime networks.
We will also establish a National Border Targeting Centre, to target high-risk international passengers and cargo.  The Centre will deploy an intelligence-led, risk-based approach to seize drugs and other contraband at the border.
Tackling gangs and guns  -  this is part of my plan for the nation and for Sydney's west.
Jobs, infrastructure including the NBN, a world-leading education for our children, insurance for disability and better health care, challenges for modern families and modern society understood and acted on.
This is my plan for you.
This is my plan for the nation.
Jobs and opportunity.
Stronger, smarter, fairer.
I have a plan to deliver.  We all have a fight to win. 
A fight to stop the broadband roll-out being brought to an end.
To stop foreign workers being put at the front of the queue with Australian workers at the back.
To stop your cost of living being hit by cuts to benefits for families and pensioners, increased tax and less super.
To stop your rights at work being threatened again.
To stop cutbacks to your hospitals and schools.
A fight to win for the people of Sydney's West.
I didn't grow up here.
I didn't grow up on the North Shore or in the East either.
I grew up a lot further West and a lot further South.
In Adelaide, in a family where I was taught to believe deeply in the human importance of opportunity, of social mobility, of a chance to make your own life better, of the responsibility to make a better life for your kids.
These are my values, these are my beliefs. 
This is my plan for the nation, this is my plan for Sydney's west.


Sydney
A new National Border Targeting Centre will be established to target high-risk international passengers and cargo.
The advice of Australian law enforcement agencies is that intelligence and targeting is the key to seizing drugs and other contraband on the streets and at the border.
The National Border Targeting Centre will use an intelligence-led, risk-based approach to target high-risk international passengers and cargo.
85 per cent of seizures at the border are the result of intelligence developed by Customs and Border Protection and other law enforcement agencies in Australia and overseas.
The more intelligence that law enforcement agencies have, the more they can seize.
The National Border Targeting Centre is based on the model developed by the National Targeting Centre in the United States and the United Kingdom's National Border Targeting Centre.
It will provide the basis for co-locating agencies like:
·         Australian Customs and Border Protection Service;
·         Australian Federal Police;
·         Australian Security Intelligence Organisation;
·         Australian Crime Commission;
·         Department of Foreign Affairs' Passports Office;
·         Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry; and
·         Office of Transport Security.
The National Border Targeting Centre will also provide a basis for Customs and Border Protection to work more closely with the Department of Immigration and Citizenship.
The new Centre will be able to work alongside targeting centres in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom and New Zealand.
As international trade and travel continues to grow, it will become increasingly important to share data, information and intelligence to target high risk passengers and goods crossing our borders.
Around 30 million passengers passed through our international airports in last year. That is expected to increase to 40 million by 2020.
Between now and 2020, sea container arrivals are expected to increase from around 2.2 million to more than five million. Air cargo consignments will increase from around 11 million to about 22 million.
The National Border Targeting Centre will improve the ability of all agencies to work together to identify and deal with the border risks posed by this massive increase in travellers and goods.
It will ensure border and law enforcement agencies have the information and intelligence they need to target threats to the border and the community.
The National Border Targeting Centre will be established in two stages.
Stage 1 - the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service will work with other federal agencies to expand information sharing and joint targeting efforts. This will build on the intelligence led border protection system that has led to more seizures of contraband than ever before in 2012.
Stage 2 - the National Border Targeting Centre will move into a dedicated facility where the resources of law enforcement agencies will be under one roof planning joint operations, sharing intelligence and undertaking investigations.



PICKERING: And an even bigger hello to our good mate Dave Hughes, who is in Western Sydney with the Prime Minister, welcome.
PM: Hello.
HUGHES: We are just hanging in the hood, aren't we Julia?
PM: That's exactly what we are doing.
HUGHES: Hanging in the hood.
BICKMORE: Well, Prime Minister, you held a press conference right by the M4 Motorway  -  a busy motorway in Sydney today.
Hughesy, you were there for us, asking the hard-hitting questions. But it seemed like Julia you were having a couple of problems. Let's take a look.
[CUT TO PRESS CONFERENCE INTERRUPTED BY TRAFFIC NOISE]
HUGHES GRAB: Prime Minister, Prime Minister, what are you going to do about truck noise, it makes press conferences a nightmare?
PM GRAB: Hughsey, I knew you would get a question in. What we are going to do is we are going to make sure The Project is actually getting you a better microphone with a clearer directional sound so you don't have to worry about it. 
HUGHES GRAB: So it's our fault!
HUGHES: Now, Prime Minister, is that a clear promise?
PM: That's a very clear promise, Hughesy, I just can't believe the way that Hughesy gets sent out on locations like that without the right equipment.
I mean, I knew it was a serious press conference when I saw Hughesy there, and there he is, he's struggling with a mic that can't even pick up the sound.
BICKMORE: It has been a busy day for you. Let's see how your first big day in Sydney's west played out.
PICKERING: Back in January when the PM announced the election eight months out she said-
PM GRAB: I do so, not to start the nation's longest election campaign.
PICKERING: But today, with 194 days still to go until the 2013 poll, Canberra has come to western Sydney for a Gillard versus Abbott throwdown.
In their sights the crucial votes of Sydney's heartland  -  who are we kidding, it's an election campaign.
The PM's first big move  -  flash some cash  -  a funding commitment to extend two of Sydney's motorways.
PM GRAB: I am prepared to fund a proposal that sees the M4 extended so it gets people to the city, and the M5 extended so it gets people to the port.
PICKERING: Somewhere close by Tony Abbott was trying to convince everyone that he'd always planned to be in western Sydney today, and is not copying the PM.
TONY ABBOTT: The last thing I would want to do is imitate a Prime Minister who is incompetent and untrustworthy!
PICKERING: Then he accused the PM of copying him.
TONY ABBOTT: She does seem to be playing catch-up politics, it's some six months since the Coalition said that we'd put $1.5 billion towards the WestConnex project.
PICKERING: But the PM had more than cash in her arsenal. She also had new figures that show families in western Sydney will pay more tax than lose payments of up to $2,500 if Tony Abbott gets the chance to kill the carbon tax and scrap the School Kids Bonus.
She's probably going to need a lot more than that though. Weekend polling suggests that Labor is facing annihilation in Sydney's west, with seats previously considered ultra-safe in real danger of being lost unless the party switches back to you-know-who.
So, with four sleeps to go in Rooty Hill, can the PM turn things around out west and prevent an election catastrophe for the Labor Party?
BICKMORE: PM, as we just heard, a western Sydney wipeout was predicted for Labor in one of the polls over the weekend.
You've had a day there, have you convinced a few more people to stay on board?
PM: Well I've had a great day here, I've had the opportunity to meet with local council reps. I have been out with the Wanderers; local sporting team.
I've met with people who are providing disability services and doing just some amazing things by their fellow Australians.
So, it's been a big day and we have made a big announcement about infrastructure in western Sydney too.
So I very much enjoyed it and I have got a few more days to go. I have been to western Sydney in the past and enjoyed it.
I'll be here in the future, but today was a particularly good day.
PICKERING: In what must have been one of the great scheduling coincidences of all time Tony Abbott was also in western Sydney this morning.
Is he technically stalking you, and what are you going to do about stalking?
PM: Look, I don't think that there's anything that I could take up in a legal way or anything like that.
Not worrying about it. He can knock himself out and do whatever he wants to do, and I'll get on with my job.
HUGHES: It was also a coincidence that I'm here as well, you've got to remember that Julia.
PM: So, are you stalking me or you're stalking Tony Abbott?
HUGHES: Well, no, I'm focusing on you.
PM: Right, okay.
HUGHES: What about Kevin, do you think he may turn up ‘Where's Wally' style?
PM: Will you be stalking him as well? Hughesy, I actually think you are the common denominator here.
HUGHES: I love you all, alright?
PRICE: Prime Minister, as you said you have been in the western suburbs before. Indeed when you were there at Rooty Hill during the 2010 election campaign you made a whole range of promises that you have not been able to keep.
Why should anyone believe any of the promises you are making this time around?
PM: You are always a bundle of joy, aren't you? Just such a positive outlook on the world.
PRICE: The odd question that we might get an answer to perhaps?
PM: I don't know what happened in your household this morning, but I got out of bed feeling very energetic and ready to get out in western Sydney.
And ready to get out honouring the policies and plans that we promised for the people of western Sydney.
Things like cost of living relief with the School Kids Bonus, helping them with the traffic that's out here and that's extending the M4 and the M5; people into the city, freight to the port.
We have got a lot of work to do out here improving schools and to keep investing in the hospitals. And we're going to build that National Disability Insurance Scheme.
So things promised, things being delivered.
PRICE: But you did promise the Epping to Parramatta rail line and never delivered. I mean, so why should people believe you?
PM: I'd happily build the Parramatta to Epping rail line. We have got the money available.
Premier O'Farrell says he doesn't want to build it, and given it's a state rail line, if he doesn't want to build it, then I can't get it built.
But inevitably at some point in Sydney that rail line is going to have to be built, but it's not going to be built while Premier O'Farrell is here.
PICKERING: Prime Minister, can I ask you about a more important promise than any of that. We are 194 days out from the election.
Can you promise the poor people of western Sydney that you and Tony Abbott aren't going to spend all of those days out there? Cos they will be over it, I swear.
PM: I can promise the people of western Sydney I will be doing what I do as Prime Minister, which means that I'm here some of the time talking to the people in western Sydney, around the country, doing the job, governing, long hours of paperwork at the desk where Tony Abbott is nowhere nearby, so everybody can just relax a bit.
HUGHES: Can I tell you though the people of western Sydney are enjoying the show. And Tony may not be at the desk but Tony is delivering the laughs on television.
This morning he was on Sunrise with Kochie. We only showed a little bit of his gag. We didn't show the reaction from Kochie, from Tony's great gag. Watch this.
[GRAB FROM CHANNEL SEVEN SUNRISE]
DAVID KOCH: So you reject Bill Shorten's allegations that you are just imitating the Prime Minister, you are just following her lead.
TONY ABBOTT: The last thing I'd want to do is imitate a Prime Minister who is incompetent and untrustworthy!
DAVID KOCH: Okay.
HUGHES: Okay. Kochie gave it an okay. What do you give that?
PM: Umm, okay.
HUGHES: Two okays!
BICKMORE: Prime Minister, thank you for your time tonight and enjoy your week in Rooty Hill.
PM: Thank you very much.


Sydney
Today our nation mourns the loss of one of its premier business and philanthropic figures, James Strong AO.
Mr Strong led some of Australia's foremost companies including as CEO of Qantas, and Chairman of Woolworths and IAG, displaying remarkable vision and dynamism during a period of rapid economic change.
Mr Strong's impeccable sense of dress, manners and style marked him as a true gentleman, and he was widely admired as an accomplished public speaker.
Mr Strong brought his exceptional business skills to the benefit of the arts and sports sector, and drove reform in these sectors through his philanthropy and leadership.
He was a true champion for the arts over many years, most recently as Chairman of the Australia Council from 2006-2012, where he promoted innovative arts performances, exhibitions and festivals, and the need for stronger partnerships between government and the private sector.
Mr Strong also served as Chairman of the Sydney Theatre Company, the Australian Brandenburg Orchestra, the Australia Business Arts Foundation and the State Library of Victoria. In addition, he served as a director of Opera Australia, and chaired a review in 2005 which helped place our nation's orchestras on a more sustainable financial footing.
A proud advocate for motor sports, Mr Strong was Chair of V8 Supercars and a member of the Australian Grand Prix Corporation. In addition, as Chair of the ICC Cricket World Cup 2015 he worked passionately to ensure Australia and New Zealand will host the best ever Cricket World Cup in 2015.
He was also a member of the Anzac Centenary Advisory Board and made a significant contribution towards the planning and preparations for the 100th anniversary of the First World War.
With the death of James Strong, Australia has lost one of its most gifted corporate leaders who significantly enriched the life of our nation.
Our thoughts are with the Strong family on the passing of this great Australian.


Today
HOST: The Prime Minister joins us now from Blacktown, good morning to you PM.
PM: Good morning Karl.
HOST: Nice to see you and front pages of the dailies in Sydney  -  the Daily Telegraph and also the Sydney Morning Herald  -  some positive PR for you this morning, you must be pleased?
PM: I spoke yesterday about WestConnex which is an important infrastructure project for the people of western Sydney. But I want to see a plan that actually gets people to the city, gets freight to the port, and make sure people don't pay tolls on roads they currently get to use for free.
So that's what the newspaper is about. It's a big need out here to move people around. Too many times people are just stuck in traffic, not going to get home to see their kids while their kids are still up, losing too much of their day in the transit to and from work.
So I want to see that made easier, but that does require a plan that actually moves people to where they need to go, and moves freight to where it needs to get to.
HOST: Critics have called your trip out here over the next five days a stunt. You'd have to think looking at the papers this morning that it's a good stunt?
PM: People will say whatever they want to say, Karl. I'm not worried about any of that. I've been a frequent visitor here in western Sydney and what I'm doing here this week is what I've done when I've travelled in the past.
And what I'll do when I travel in the future here, which is immerse myself, talk to people in the community, work out what's on their mind, as well as talking to them about the Government's programs and plans and the difference we're trying to make for peoples' future.
So it's good to be here. I talked last night about our plan for western Sydney and the nation, and it's all about jobs, all about rolling out broadband, getting kids a great education, making sure we not only improve health but we build that National Disability Insurance Scheme.
And we're working with families as they face all of the pressures of modern life.
HOST: Graham Richardson was on our program this morning and he told me why would you bother, you're going to lose. Your response?
PM: Such a sunny optimist, Graham, isn't he? I'll leave all of that to the political commentators, none of that ever worries me.
HOST: What about the fact that he also says that Kevin Rudd will have a crack in as little as four weeks' time. You worried about that?
PM: Something tells me, Karl, that you could have played that story or got a political commentator to tip that any time over the last few years. I don't worry about any of that. The Party resolved that last February.
What motivates me, what gets me up in the morning whether I'm here in western Sydney or anywhere else in the nation, is doing what we can today to help Australians with their busy lives and doing what we need to do to build a prosperous future for the country.
That is more than a full-time job so that's what I keep my eyes on.
HOST: You have, you must concede, your work cut out for you out here in the western suburbs of Sydney though?
PM: People will decide come election time. What I am doing here now is talking to people and listening to them about the things that matter to them.
When I've come out here in the past, people have talked to me about cost of living pressures: ‘I've got get stuff for the kids to get them to school, the childcare bills are really pressing on me.'
So we've worked as a Government on those sorts of pressures  -  Schoolkids Bonus, giving you some money to help with the costs of getting the kids to school. That's in contest at the election, whether you keep it or whether you don't.
Taking some of the tax burden off people, making sure you get to keep the first $18,200 that you earn, makes a big difference, takes a bit of pressure off  -  that's in contest at the next election.
So people will decide those things come election day. In the meantime, I'll be here talking to people, talking about the Government's policies and listening to what's on peoples' minds right here, right now.
HOST: There are some people, plenty out here that think, that a very cynical about you being out here, they say where have you been? You've been the PM for the last two years and you aren't tracking that well in the polls. You're not going to talk about the polls of course. But they say why all of a sudden  -  we're in election campaign  -  are you here?
PM: Well Karl, it's not all of a sudden. I've been a very regular traveller to western Sydney. Sometimes I've come out for one meeting. Sometimes I've come for half a day; sometimes I've come for a whole day.
A bit like what I did in Queensland last year, in south-east Queensland and central Queensland. I've set up for a while because it enables me to spend some more dedicated time.
So travelling around the country, talking to people, it's a routine part of what I do. In fact there would hardly be a day goes by that I don't have a conversation with someone in Australia about what's on their mind, even those days when I'm most intensively in Parliament or in Cabinet, you're always meeting people who are saying look, this is what matters to me, what are you doing about that, have you thought about the other?
And they're all in enriching conversations that give us great feedback.
HOST: I suppose the concern is from some folks out here that you may not make it to the next election. Do you think you will make it to the next election.
PM: Well look, we dealt with all of that last February, and done and dusted.
HOST: You're confident that you'll be the PM come the next election?
PM: Absolutely. And I don't spend any time wondering about it. We dealt with it last February.
I'm a person with a lot to do. I've got a lot of work to do from very early in the morning to very late at night.
Doing all of the things necessary to keep our nation safe, to keep our economy creating jobs, to keep working with families on the pressures that they face day-to-day and also to take the right decisions now to build our future.
Nothing about our future's assured. If you make the wrong decisions now then you won't get to that strong prosperous future I want for Australians. So that's my focus and all the rest of it I leave to the political commentators like Graham Richardson.
HOST: In terms of looking ahead, I guess the concern must be  -  and I'm going to ask you this  -  do you worry about, I know you don't worry about specific opinion polls, but do you worry about polls that constantly say for example the last one over the weekend that 60 per cent don't agree with what you've been doing, that are dissatisfied with what you've been doing out here.
Does that weigh on your mind that you're not connecting to people and that people aren't receiving your message  -  they're not getting what you are putting out there?
PM: I worry about the nation. I worry about making the right decisions for the nation. And I know many of the biggest decisions, the toughest decisions aren't popular ones.
You don't step up with a plan for the nation's future because you say to yourself I want to do the easy things. Building a nation's future requires you to do hard things. And that's true for our country.
So I've done some big, tough, hard things; not always popular, right for the nation's future. And so, that's good enough for me. If I can look people in the eye and say we will be a stronger country, a fairer country, a smarter country because of the things that I have done as Prime Minister  -  and I want to keep doing as Prime Minister  -  then, that's me.
I'm not going to go the easy route and just tell people what they want to hear. I'm going to tell them the truth. Building the nation's future isn't about making five or ten easy decisions that are all popular.
Sometimes it requires you to make some very tough ones.
HOST: We've already spoken to Tony Abbott this morning. He's been out here next to me at the Rooty Hill RSL carpark. Are you worried that he might be stalking you?
PM: No, I'm not, no I'm not. And good luck to him. I think he's probably got some explaining to do today when he's talking to people in western Sydney I think he's going to meet a lot of people who say to him actually, that Schoolkids Bonus money does help me, Tony, it helps me put shoes on the kids' feet and pay for their uniform.
And that tax cut did help me Tony, and why do you want to take those things away from me and my family?
HOST: You are out at the Wanderers' today, who are performing very well in terms of the soccer. We appreciate your time today as well PM.
PM: Thank you and I'm very much enjoying it out here. Thanks a lot. I've got to say hello to the team and I've even got one that says Gillard now, to wear myself!
HOST: Righto Prime Minister, thanks for your time today. We appreciate it.
PM: Thank you.
[ENDS]



HOST: Prime Minister, good evening. Thank you for your time. You say people of the west should not be regarded as second rate. Who says that they actually are?
PM: I was referring to a community's need for recognition and respect.
Sydney's west is a fantastic place. I've had a great day here today and I've had the opportunity to meet people who are doing things like caring for their fellow Australians with disabilities.
I've seen people in local sporting groups. I've had the opportunity to meet with the local councillors. Greater Western Sydney is a place of incredible strength.
And as a Government, we want to work with western Sydney to help today and to build a stronger future tomorrow, which is why of course I have announced that we would invest in an infrastructure project which got people to the city and freight to the port.
HOST: Prime Minister, there are people tonight that can't even put food in their fridge in Sydney's west. They can't do that.
Do you realise it's as bleak as that and you talk about the investment, the potential investment in roads, but what about helping them put food on the table?
PM: We've been working with people here in western Sydney and around the country to alleviate cost of living pressures.
I understand it can be really tough, which is why we have the School Kids Bonus to help with the costs of getting the kids to school; the shoes on the feet, the uniform thank you need to buy, the books, the pens, the paper.
We've also got the tax cut, meaning you don't pay any tax until you've earned more than $18,200.
That matters here in Sydney's west to more than half a million people and it matters right around the country.
Unfortunately these things are in contest at the next election.
We're saying that they should definitely stay because they help people manage cost of living pressures.
HOST: Well PM, I think they want more from you. Thank you for your time.
PM: And I will be here, happy to keep talking to people out here in western Sydney. I've very much enjoyed today.



HOST: Prime Minister, it seems you have a big job convincing voters that you can follow through on your promises there.PM: I have really enjoyed being in western Sydney today and of course I will be available here during the course of this week.
I have travelled to western Sydney before, I have always enjoyed it.
This is a series of communities, but joined together by a sense of aspiration and achievement.
And today, I have announced that we want to help the communities is in Greater Western Sydney by easing some of the pressure of the commute to work.
I am waiting for Premier O'Farrell to put a plan like that on the table and then we will certainly make a funding offer.
HOST: Despite the promises though Prime Minister, are you feeling anger in the western suburbs, because that is the feedback we're getting from people.
PM: What I am feeling is a sense that people here are going about their everyday business, they work very hard, they have got a real sense of community.
They want government to be working with them as they live their busy lives and the picture is one of achievement.
But they want the government working with them and I am pleased to be working with them.
HOST: So would you say western Sydney will be the big winner from this election with you and Tony Abbott making big promises for the region?
PM: I think the next election will come down to a choice between who has got a plan for the nation's future and to support working families, modern families, as they get about day-to-day living with real, modern pressures.
That decision will be made in September.
For now, I am very pleased to be here, having the opportunity to talk to people, explaining what the Government is doing but also hearing community feedback and what is on people's minds.
HOST: Alright Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time this evening.
PM: Thanks Chris.


Sydney
PM: I'm delighted to be here today with the Minister for Transport and Infrastructure, Minister Albanese and also with my colleagues. We are here to talk about the traffic and congestion issues in Western Sydney.
What this means for people who live here is just too much time on the road getting to work  -  a frustrating journey often in traffic gridlock.
It means you have to leave very early in the morning, get home very late at night. It costs you precious time with family, time you would rather be spending at home rather than travelling to and from work.
It can mean that you need to leave before the kids are up and you get home after they have gone to bed.
At the same time, the traffic in western Sydney imposes a real cost a businesses here.
This is a great manufacturing region. It's a great transport and logistics hub. But the longer trucks spend in the traffic, the more money it costs. So getting freight to the port efficiently is a big productivity issue for western Sydney.
We are determined to see these issues addressed for the people of western Sydney and for the businesses here.
Put simply, I want to see people able to get into town; I want freight to be able to get to the port.
So I am prepared to fund a proposal that sees the M4 extended so it gets people to the city, and the M5 extended so it gets people to the port.
Premier O'Farrell has put forward a plan. He is calling it WestConnex. The problem with Premier O'Farrell's current plan is it doesn't get people to the city, it doesn't get freight to the port and people are at risk of paying tolls on sections of road they currently use for free.
So my offer to Premier O'Farrell is the day that he produces for us a plan that meets those three conditions  -  people to the city, freight to the port and no tolls on current roads  -  we will make a funding offer.
We will make that funding offer out of the funds available in our Nation Building 2 package.
We have been rolling out Nation Building 1. We have made budget provision for Nation Building 2. But we have to see that plan from Premier O'Farrell.
What we have so far is a plan that doesn't meet those vital needs. We don't have a final costing. Estimates are between $10 and 13 billion.
We don't have a schedule of works, a start date, when this vital work would start.
We have funded planning for this important proposal; $25 million was made available in the last Budget to get the planning done.
Now we want Premier O'Farrell to produce that plan and we will make a funding offer so that the people of western Sydney can be relieved of much of the congestion that gets in their way today.
I will turn now to Minister Albanese for some comments and then we'll be happy to take your questions.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Thank you Prime Minister. I'm very pleased to be here today for this announcement.
We have been working with the New South Wales Government constructively on making sure that the proposals for western Sydney motorways are actually up to scratch.
Everyone knows that when you get on the M4 and it stops at Strathfield, that isn't good enough.
But the solution isn't to take it a bit further and then stop it again. That will just transfer where the existing problem is.
What we need to do is make sure that people who are on the M4 can actually get into the city.
Importantly also, we need to make sure that freight that needs to get to and from Port Botany can get so directly.
So that's why we have put as a condition of further funding offers, making sure that people can get to the city through the M4, and people can get freight to the port through the M5.
In last year's budget, we put on the table $25 million for the planning for western Sydney motorways.
In addition to that, this is a part of the $3.2 billion under Nation Building Program 1 that we have committed here in Sydney.
Part of that includes projects such as the widening of the F5 near Campbelltown. It includes also important rail-freight projects on the southern Sydney freight line that we opened just a month ago at a cost of $1 billion, and also the northern Sydney freight line.
That's about separating passenger rail from freight rail.
Previously to and from the port, the port stopped and had a curfew in the morning peak and afternoon peaks for some eight hours a day.
Now that's why these issues of dealing with freight, but also dealing with passenger transport, are related and that's why we have insisted that Sydney and the New South Wales Government get this proposal right.
All up $11.7 billion under Nation Building 1 has been allocated to New South Wales and that's making a big difference to transport infrastructure here.
One in every $3 nationally comes here in New South Wales. And for Nation Building 2 and Nation Building 3 beyond it, given that this is a ten-year proposal from the New South Wales Government, there will be funding made available if these criteria are met.
But at the moment we don't have a route for the project. We don't have any costings or business plan for the project. And prudence and good use of taxpayers' money requires governments to ensure that those details are built in up front, not as an afterthought.
And that's why we have made these three conditions  -  people to the city, freight to the port and no tolls on existing motorways that people have already paid for  -  as a condition of this funding.
I hope that the New South Wales Government takes this offer in the constructive way in which it is being put and that we do get this right, which is why we allocated the $25 million in last year's budget to make sure that the planning actually occurred properly and before people made just on the run commitments. Thank you.
JOURNALIST: When could you give this money to the State Government? Is it before the State Budget?
PM: I'll make a funding offer on the day I see an appropriate plan but we are clear about our conditions for an appropriate plan.
It's not good enough to invest billions of dollars and not ease peoples' journeys all the way into the city.
It's not good enough to invest billions of dollars and not get freight all the way to the port. And it's not good enough to ask people to pay tolls on roads that they currently use for free.
So, on the day we see an appropriate plan we will make up a funding offer.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]?
PM: Well, you'll need to ask Premier O'Farrell on what day he will produce that plan for us.
JOURNALIST: Is it good enough for the New South Wales Government to be required to meet your conditions when they're getting not even a clue as to how much money might come from the Commonwealth?
PM: The New South Wales Government has submitted a proposal into Nation Building 2, so they are clearly interested in federal government support for this project.
I can understand that, it's a very sizable project. The estimates are between $10 billion and $13 billion.
But if you are going to invest money into a project this big, then you want to get it right and everybody knows that the bottlenecks happen when you've got a big road that suddenly ends and then you are back on the normal streets and roads.
As Minister Albanese says, this is moving gridlock from one place to another, not solving problems.
So we are very clear on the conditions here, we have provided money for planning and we are asking Premier O'Farrell to put forward a plan that will work for the people and businesses of western Sydney.
I will actually get Minister Albanese just to address the New South Wales Government's submissions for Nation Building 2.
MINISTER ALBANESE: The New South Wales Government had made a submission, as have other state and territory governments for Nation Building 2.
Their submission asked the Commonwealth for $1.8 billion for this project.
This project has had an initial assessment from Infrastructure Australia that has raised a number of questions, including some of the costings that have been made.
Now the instructions to Infrastructure New South Wales when they did some work for the New South Wales Government, was to come up with a proposal with a final costing of around $10 billion. And guess what?
The figure they came up with was $10 billion to $13 billion but's a matter of whether that adds up in terms of the rigour.
Previously the M4 project itself and the M5 project itself were costed together at greater than $15 billion.
So we need to make sure that the costings are got right. We need to make sure so that there aren't cost blowouts as we have seen on other road projects in New South Wales and around the country.
That's why we have a rigorous process of Infrastructure Australia making these assessments. They will be doing that.
If you look at the map that was put out on the original proposal, it had the suburb of Waterloo being in between Marrickville and St Peters.
Anyone who knows Sydney's geography knows that was a detail that was lacking to say the least.
So we need to actually make sure that this work is got right. That's why not only have we provided funding, we have also provided the secretary of my department to be available, to be on the committee that is overseeing some of this planning work.
Half the funding for the planning, $50 million, $25 million from each level of Government and that has been confirmed with the New South Wales Government.
JOURNALIST: Would you be prepared to reallocate the money from the Parra-Epping rail link towards this if Barry O'Farrell does what you want him to do? And separately on infrastructure in this region, local government level support the second airport out at Badgerys Creek. Is that something you've been prepared to reconsider?
PM: Let's go through both questions. The source of these funds is Nation Building 2 as I have outlined and has been outlined by Minister Albanese.
On Parramatta to Epping, Parramatta to Epping is a project that Sydney needs. And at some point it will need to be built for Sydney.
It is, of course, a rail project. We have got to be developing proposals to deal with congestion, not only by roads proposals but also proposals for rail.
It's a rail project and it's a project to bolster Parramatta as the second CBD for Sydney.
So at some time, Parramatta to Epping will need to be built but it is abundantly clear that when Premier O'Farrell is Premier of this state it is not going to be built.
The source of funds for the road projects we are talking about today  -  extending the M4, extending the M5  -  the source of funds for that is our Nation Building 2 source of funds which is already budgeted for.
On the question of a second airport, I don't accept Premier O'Farrell's analysis that there is no need for a second airport and that the current airport can cope with all future traffic. I don't accept that.
We have been involved in a joint study with New South Wales which unsurprisingly said that there was a need for a second airport.
We since that time have been involved in studying the site at Wilton and that is our focus and we are still working on all of the assessments to do with the Wilton site.
JOURNALIST: How can voters have any faith in your promise today when you're not putting a top dollar and a bottom dollar on what you're going to do for this road?
PM: Well, in terms of having faith in infrastructure proposals, I think that you best build people's understanding about future infrastructure when you are able to put before them a clear plan, where they can look at it and they can see how it is going to make a difference for them or for the business that they work for.
And at the moment there is no such plan before me or the people of western Sydney that you could look at and see and understand the difference it's going to make for you.
We are talking about a huge infrastructure investment, huge infrastructure investments need to be properly planned, properly costed.
We have made available $25 million to do that and when we see a proper plan then we will make a funding announcement.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, those voters will need to have that clear plan well in advance of the election. What sort of timeframe?
PM: Premier O'Farrell will need to produce that clear plan, and we have assisted him with $25 million of planning money to do just that.
JOURNALIST: Are you just playing a game of political bluff with Premier O'Farrell?
PM: I'm being very practical here. In order to make a difference for the people who get in their cars every morning and try and get to Sydney's CBD for work, they need a better way of getting there.
Not getting part of the way there, they need a better way of getting to the city. That's what I want to see for those people doing those long commutes currently.
For the businesses in Sydney's west that need to get products to the port, I want to see them get their products all the way to the port, not to some other location.
I do not have a plan before me that does that. It's in the interests of the people and businesses of western Sydney that we see an infrastructure proposal that gets people to the city, freight to the ports, and doesn't charge them tolls on roads that are currently there.
JOURNALIST: It's now been revealed that the UN special rapporteur on extreme poverty wrote to your Government in October last year.
It's quite worried about the reduction to the single parenting payment and it believes that it might put Australia in breach of its international obligations. Why hasn't the Government responded and what is your response?
PM: We will respond to the correspondence in due course as we do, and our response will be that we don't agree with that analysis given all we are doing with parenting payment is equalizing the treatment of a class of recipients currently grandfathered with the conditions that apply to people generally.
They are not being put on new conditions unknown to the Australian population. A class of people who have been the subject of grandfathered arrangements are being put on the same rules as everyone else.
JOURNALIST: On foreign workers, Labor has been in power for six years but six months before the election you have discovered you have an issue with 457s, what do you say that you're just playing to peoples' prejudice and xenophobia?
PM: We inherited from the former Government a 457 temporary foreign worker visa program that was out of control. And every step of the way we have been putting in place new conditions to crackdown on the rorts.
We have done that in the past and we will continue to crackdown as necessary.
I understand that there can be legitimate skills shortages where businesses need to source labour from overseas.
But I also understand there are too many times when people have got the skills to get the job and they don't get the job. And in those circumstances I want to make sure that Australian workers are coming first.
That's what Minister O'Connor has been talking about as Minister for Immigration.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, where did the figures about the impact of Mr Abbott's policies on families come from and what do they say?
PM: The analysis is obviously an analysis that we have generated using ABS data to feed into the analysis.
Put at the most simple; it means that families can lose up to $2,300 a year because of Mr Abbott's plans.
That happens because Mr Abbott wants to get rid of the Schoolkids Bonus. This is the money that helps with the cost of getting the kids to school.
It's the money that would give you $15,000 over the journey of two children through school; typical family, raising two kids, seeing them through primary and secondary school, $15,000 worse off.
And then of course, too, Mr Abbott is saying that he will take away our changes to the tax-free threshold. That means that people can earn $18,200 without paying a cent of tax.
More than 40,000 people in Western Sydney now no longer pay tax because of that measure. More than half a million have got a tax cut, and Mr Abbott wants to take that away.
I will turn to the Assistant Treasurer who is very familiar with the details of this.ASSISTANT TREASURER: What we have seen from Mr Abbott is a plan to jack-up taxes, to rip away assistance to families and wait for it, to cut pensions.
We have been a Government that has been increasing pensions. We are now heading into an election where Mr Abbott would have to be the first Opposition Leader in living memory to go to the election with a plan to cut pensions.
Now there are hundreds of thousands of pensioners in western Sydney, in places like the Rooty Hill RSL playing the bingo or the pokies that need to know that a change of Government means a cut to the pension.
And we have been increasing the pension, that's made a big difference.
But it's not just cuts to pensions. It's also jacking up taxes. At the moment your first $18,200: tax-free under this Government.
Previously you started to pay tax after $6,000. Well he would unwind that.
And of course, families all around the country, but in particular here in western Sydney, have been receiving increases in their family payments.
They will be ripped away.
Now it's about time Mr Abbott came clean with the people of western Sydney and the people of Australia about his plans to put his hand in people's pockets and to rip away the assistance that we have provided.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, two children were killed in Afghanistan last week. The local Governor says it was Australian forces who fired the deadly shots. Can you confirm that? We have heard nothing yet from the CDF confirming or denying that. Can you confirm it?
PM: What the Chief of the Defence Force said yesterday is that there will be a proper investigation, and until the Chief of the Defence Force has worked his way through all of the facts and circumstances here I'm not going to offer you a conclusion. It would be wrong of me to do so.
What we obviously find about circumstances in Afghanistan is because people are there on operations, in such a difficult environment, it does take some time to get all of the facts of operational incidents clear.
But what we do know is that there have been two children who have lost their lives. That is a genuine tragedy.
The loss of life is tragic, the impact on families is tragic and the impact on soldiers involved in the operation is tragic too.
I'm not in a position to give more details than have currently been released by the Chief of the Defence Force. I'm sure when the Chief of the Defence Force is in a position to release more details of this operational matter, then he will do so.
JOURNALIST: This is running down the clock though. It must be not that complicated to get some basic facts down about what might have happened and to keep people informed?
It's plainly a device that can be used quite usefully to just let time pass and eventually deliver some information well-past the event.
PM: Hugh, I don't know what your experience is in an operational theatre war fighting but the people who have that experience say that it does take time to clearly establish facts.
I've known myself across other instances in Afghanistan, that the first reports you get of an operational matter are later clarified by subsequent information.
This is the Chief of the Defence Force being very proper and very appropriate, making sure any facts that are released are right, rather than rushing to judgment, putting something out that later has to be clarified.
JOURNALIST: Can you tell us how many years it will be before the NDIS is fully funded and how long before every resident of western Sydney can access the National Broadband Network?
PM: Well, we have got the rollout plans here. And I refer you to the rollout plans and you will be able to see it suburb by suburb.
On the National Disability Insurance Scheme, we have got an agreement with the O'Farrell Government to roll it out right around New South Wales, so that means in western Sydney and the rest of New Sydney South Wales.
What that actually means is this is the first state in the nation that has got a plan for the full rollout of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
This is the kind of reform that would not be done without a Labor Federal Government.
It would never have been on the political agenda if it wasn't for this current Government and we are determined to see it benefit people here in western Sydney, across New South Wales, and around the nation.
But to do that requires us to strike further agreements with other states and territories.
JOURNALIST: Is this an election campaign because it certainly feels like one?
PM: That's probably the way in which you are dealing with each other. I know that you like wandering around and being in a pack together. Look, I can see the smiles!
For me I've been very clear; we have got a lot of governing to do. As we govern, we make announcements which are important for the people of our nation, including the announcement we are making today about infrastructure in western Sydney, about new roads to get people through to the city and freight to the ports.
This is a big infrastructure project and I'm very proud to be here today announcing the Federal Government's approach to it.
JOURNALIST: If Barry O'Farrell doesn't come good with his side of what you are asking him to do, will you take a proposal about this road and the roads that people need fixed up to the election?
PM: Well, let's take a step at a time. Why would Premier O'Farrell stick with a plan that doesn't take people where they need to go or freight where it needs to go?
JOURNALIST: You are demanding that the O'Farrell Government provide a business plan for this project.
Isn't that the same criticism that's been made in relation to the NBN, and how can people in New South Wales have any faith in the Labor to deliver infrastructure when there was such a monumental failure over so many years of state government?
PM: Let's unpack all of that. Number one, we have made $25 million available for the planning.
When you are planning major roadworks then you have got to get every detail right as to where the construction is going to go and you have got to understand the expenditure over years.
On the National Broadband Network, I would refer you to the very detailed work that's been done on planning. You can access that yourself on the National Broadband Network website.
And I'd have to say one of the most common things that gets raised with me as I move around the country, is when is it going to get to my street, when is it going to get to my suburb, can you do everything you can to make sure it gets here first.
Now the National Broadband Network is a piece of basic infrastructure in the modern age, the same way that the electricity grid was a piece of basic infrastructure in its age.
The choice for people is whether we complete the National Broadband Network or whether its rollout is stopped.
To stop it would be like stopping the rollout of electricity half the way through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are you going to do about truck noise that makes press conferences a nightmare?
PM: Hughesy, I knew you would get a question in and I knew when you did I would probably regret answering it.
What we are going to do is we are going to make sure that The Project is actually getting you a better microphone with a clearer directional sound so you don't have to worry about it.
JOURNALIST: So it's our fault?
PM: I'm urging your network to make sure that you have got the right equipment.
JOURNALIST: We don't have any money!
PM: Well you need to speak to Lachlan and others about that.
Okay, that was supposed to be the last question. I'm not sure we will be able to top that but very last one for Phil Coorey and we're going to go.
JOURNALIST: Just back on to the airport. You said Wilton is your focus at the moment. Does that mean you cannot rule out revisiting Badgerys in the future?
PM: We have been very clear about that, about all of this. I'd refer you to my words.
We are engaged in a study of Wilton and that is what we are focusing on now.
Thanks very much.



PM: When I've come in the past it might have been for one hour, one meeting, one engagement, a half day, a full day.
I've got the opportunity to spend a few days here, and so I'm doing that.
I've had some great experiences today.
I've certainly met some local disability services providers working with Australians with disabilities who are just doing the most magnificent job, and who are anxiously awaiting the start of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, which happens in just 17 weeks' time.
REPORTER: Well, traffic congestion was on your mind today. With already the State Government scoffed at your proposal, and you didn't put an actual specific dollar figure on the table.
Are you just picking a fight with Barry O'Farrell or playing catch-up politics, as Tony Abbott suggests?
PM: As a responsible Government, if we are going to put big money into a roads project, then we want it to be properly planned and we want it to do the things that need to be done. We have given $25 million to the O'Farrell Government for planning.
Now, until you see the full plan and really understand what is happening with this project, then it would be reckless to do a funding commitment.
Now, Mr Abbott may have taken a different approach and decided to commit $1.5 billion without knowing anything about the plan; I'm not going to do that.
I have got clear conditions for this project; what I'm prepared to fund. And that's because I want dollars well spent and a project that truly works for western Sydney.
REPORTER: In all cities, people worry about crime, congestion, cost of living. But the Federal Government can't solve those problems, can it?
PM: As I said yesterday, you can't do everything, you can't fix every pothole, you can't catch every crook were my exact words last night.
But you can make the big decisions now which build a future for our country, and you can help modern families with the stresses and strains they're under.
REPORTER: All your events in western Sydney so far have been very Labor friendly. Are you planning to engage with voters who may be less Labor friendly?
PM: I have done things today which really have given me a great sense of what's going on.
I met with representatives of all the local councils, for example, and they have got their shopping list of things that their communities are talking about and we had a good discussion.
And you always learn something, you always pick something up, and more than anything else, you always find something to admire.



The Federal Government has committed to providing funds towards the Westconnex road project, if planning currently underway identifies a detailed business case and direct routes through to the CBD and Port Botany.
This is part of our commitment to support jobs and growth in Sydney.
This infrastructure commitment is also helping western and south-western Sydney residents to cut back on travel times and improve the quality of life they can enjoy with their families.
The Federal Government has already provided an initial $25 million  -  announced in last year's Budget  -  to the NSW Government to undertake initial planning work and identify a process for bringing it to market.
The Federal Government will provide a detailed offer to the NSW Government in the coming budget.
The NSW Government's current proposal does not connect motorists along the M4 motorway directly to the City nor does it does take freight directly to Port Botany from the M5. Infrastructure Australia will continue working with the NSW Government to ensure the project achieves these objectives and is delivered in a way that ensures best value for tax payer's money.
Our first priority is to work with the NSW Government to resolve these issues and ensure the early planning work can identify detailed routes which will take people to the City and freight to Port Botany.
The Federal Government believes that new tolls should not be imposed on existing un-tolled roads.
The congested western and south western Sydney road network will put the handbrake on the state's economic future, with the cost of urban congestion in Sydney expected to rise to $7.8 billion by 2020 if no action is taken.
Currently, over 200,000 vehicles use the M4 and M5 every day. Over the next twenty years, one out of every three new jobs created in Sydney will be along the M4 and M5.
All levels of government need to make sure that the western and south-western Sydney roads network is able to support future jobs and growth.This funding commitment comes on top of the $3.2 billion we have already invested in the Sydney basin. That includes:
• $840 million for the Northern Sydney Freight Corridor Upgrade (underway);• $172 million for the Port Botany rail improvements (underway);• Construction of a new intermodal at Moorebank (in planning);• $980 million for the construction of the Southern Sydney Freight Line (completed);• $93 million to widen the F5 at Campbelltown (completed);• $300 million to upgrade the Great Western Highway (underway).
Work is also underway on a joint $17 million project under our National Smart Managed Motorways Program to help the M4 function better by looking at putting in new variable speed limit signs, traffic lights on entry ramps, better lane control, closed circuit TV and variable message signs.
Over the last five years, the Federal Government has more than doubled annual infrastructure spending in NSW, from $132 to $265 per person.
All up, the Federal Government is investing $11.6 billion in NSW under the Nation Building Program  -  which is more than 30 per cent of the federal transport infrastructure budget. 



The Federal Government has committed to providing funds towards the Westconnex road project, if planning currently underway identifies a detailed business case and direct routes through to the CBD and Port Botany.
This is part of our commitment to support jobs and growth in Sydney.
This infrastructure commitment is also helping western and south-western Sydney residents to cut back on travel times and improve the quality of life they can enjoy with their families.
The Federal Government has already provided an initial $25 million  -  announced in last year's Budget  -  to the NSW Government to undertake initial planning work and identify a process for bringing it to market.
The Federal Government will provide a detailed offer to the NSW Government in the coming budget.
The NSW Government's current proposal does not connect motorists along the M4 motorway directly to the City nor does it does take freight directly to Port Botany from the M5. Infrastructure Australia will continue working with the NSW Government to ensure the project achieves these objectives and is delivered in a way that ensures best value for tax payer's money.
Our first priority is to work with the NSW Government to resolve these issues and ensure the early planning work can identify detailed routes which will take people to the City and freight to Port Botany.
The Federal Government believes that new tolls should not be imposed on existing un-tolled roads.
The congested western and south western Sydney road network will put the handbrake on the state's economic future, with the cost of urban congestion in Sydney expected to rise to $7.8 billion by 2020 if no action is taken.
Currently, over 200,000 vehicles use the M4 and M5 every day. Over the next twenty years, one out of every three new jobs created in Sydney will be along the M4 and M5.
All levels of government need to make sure that the western and south-western Sydney roads network is able to support future jobs and growth.This funding commitment comes on top of the $3.2 billion we have already invested in the Sydney basin. That includes:
• $840 million for the Northern Sydney Freight Corridor Upgrade (underway);• $172 million for the Port Botany rail improvements (underway);• Construction of a new intermodal at Moorebank (in planning);• $980 million for the construction of the Southern Sydney Freight Line (completed);• $93 million to widen the F5 at Campbelltown (completed);• $300 million to upgrade the Great Western Highway (underway).
Work is also underway on a joint $17 million project under our National Smart Managed Motorways Program to help the M4 function better by looking at putting in new variable speed limit signs, traffic lights on entry ramps, better lane control, closed circuit TV and variable message signs.
Over the last five years, the Federal Government has more than doubled annual infrastructure spending in NSW, from $132 to $265 per person.
All up, the Federal Government is investing $11.6 billion in NSW under the Nation Building Program  -  which is more than 30 per cent of the federal transport infrastructure budget. 


Sunrise
HOST: Good morning, Prime Minister. Poll results indicate your visit to the western suburbs is futile and not going to change voters' minds. Why are you there?
PM: I am not worry about any of that, Kochie. I am here for the same reasons I've come to western Sydney in the past.
This is a big region, home to 1.6 million people, 120,000 businesses. If you carved it out it, it would have the third biggest economy in Australia and just like when I've come in the past, it's an opportunity to immerse yourself, to get to say hello to people, see what is on their minds, and also talk to them about what the Government is doing in this region and around the country to build their future.
HOST: Prime Minister, we are getting a lot of feedback from viewers out here. We're sort of checking the pulls of western Sydney as well.
Cara sends in this question and health and education seem to be two of the biggest issues here.
She says, why do you have to wait two and a half hours to see a doctor and why does her children's school have to hold fundraisers to get money for air-conditioning?
What is your response to that?
PM: I am happy to go through both of those because they're hugely important issues.
We have been investing in health care services here and we needed to to make a difference; they'd been neglected for a long period of time.
So we have invested, for example, $130 million in the Nepean hospital and we've created two GP super clinics, including in Blacktown where I'm standing now. So that is getting more services into the community.
I want people to be able to see GPs. I want them to be able to get the hospital services that they need.
And that's why there is more money in health care than ever before and more doctors and more nurses and more ability to have a say locally over what your hospital is doing.
On schools, we've pumped more than $1 billion into the 650 schools in western Sydney; that's for school capital.
On top of that, we are pumping in extra resources for our national partnership schools. That's all about reading and writing and teacher quality and those important things. And of course, I am fighting hard to make sure that we better fund schools from the start of the school year next year.
HOST: Okay and another question from Richard which questions the economic management of the Government saying, why does Labor always manage to get our finances into the red? What do you say to him?
PM: Well, there was this huge economic shock in the world called the global financial crisis.
It's probably the biggest economic crisis you and I will live through, Kochie, we are not old enough to have been around during the great depression but we have lived through the global financial crisis.
So that's what has hit our economy including hitting into government revenues and therefore the Government's budget.
We had to find ways of having our nation stand strong during the global financial crisis, so we invested in jobs.
And unlike the rest of the world, that means we have now got relatively low unemployment, low inflation, a growing economy.
But there is pressure around including here in western Sydney because the strength of our economy and the resources boom means our dollar is very high.
People are rightly saying what will we do when the minerals run out, and that was one of the questions I talked about last night.
What we'll do is we will innovate; we will be the best at what we do. We will tap into the growth in the Asian region. We will still be a region here in western Sydney and a nation that makes things, that manufactures things.
So a diverse strong economy is our future but we have to get all the decisions today right to get there.
HOST: And to be fair, we are one of the few countries in the world still to have a AAA-credit rating which is pretty amazing.
Cost of living concerns is a really big issue we are getting here. While unemployment is low, because so many companies are reducing the hours of workers, we have enormous under-employment; people not being able to work as much as they want to to pay the bills.
How can you ease that issue?
PM: The cost of living is a real pressure on people Kochie and I understand that.
That's why we have brought some new benefits to try and help people with just the day-to-day costs of getting by.
The Schoolkids Bonus, for example; $410 for a primary school-aged student; $820 for a high school student; worth $15,000 across two kids in school during a family's journey through school.
These are practical measures to make a difference to cost of living. As well as increasing the tax free threshold, which is a complicated way of saying you now don't pay a cent of tax until you earn more than $18,200.
And just to use western Sydney as an example, that's benefited more than half a million taxpayers here.
These are practical things. They are under threat and they will be in contest at the next election.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thank you very much for joining us. Enjoy your five days out here in Sydney's west. I appreciate your time.
PM: Thanks very much.
[ENDS]



HOST: Prime Minister thank you very much for your time. The Government's going to announce a boost for the aged care sector workforce of $1.2 billion today.
Catholic Health Australia is already saying this is just a drop in the ocean; that it's rebadged money and it's going to take a lot more money to improve pay and attract people into the sector. That's even before it's announced.
PM: Kieran, we don't make any apology for being very prudent with government funds, and as a nation we've got to keep preparing for the ageing of our society.
We're all getting older one day at a time but our society is going to the have more older people in it than younger people.
That means the aged care workforce needs to triple by 2050. We do have problems in attracting people into this workforce and having them stay there, which is why Minister Butler, later today, will make an announcement about conditions in the aged care sector.
HOST: Aged care providers apparently are going to have to sign enterprise bargaining agreements. Do you accept that that's likely to see the unions expand their reach across that sector?
PM: I'm for fairness and decency at work Kieran, I always have been, which is why I fought so hard to get rid of Work Choices when it was brought into being by the former Liberal Government; Mr Abbott and the members of the Howard Government.
We've brought fairness and decency at work into the system; we'll continue to do that. We want people to get a fair go at work.
HOST: So that's a yes I take it?
PM: What that means is people around the country can make their own choices about whether or not they want to be a member of a union. We've guaranteed freedom of association.
Gone are the days where under Work Choices your boss could stand over you, threaten you, sack you and you had no remedy, take away your penalty rates and you had no remedy.
That's the Liberal system, that's Mr Abbott's way. We've ensured that people have got fairness and decency at work, and they can make any choice they want to about union membership.
HOST: Prime Minister, on 457 visas, the Government's been talking a big game on this but the fact is the number of workers arriving on that category of visa has actually increased over the last couple of years. Do you concede that?
PM: We inherited a system here from the former government that was riddled full of rorts; riddled full of rorts that had people brought in to Australia not to take occupations because there were genuine skills shortages, but brought into Australia because the employer thought it would be easier to have a foreign worker.
Well we've worked to get those rorts out of the system, and we'll continue to work to make sure that this program does what it should do: address real skills shortages. And not what it shouldn't do, which is substitute temporary foreign workers for Aussies who are ready, willing and able to do the job.
HOST: You and the Minister have said that these visas have been abused, but we haven't been given any examples. Can you give us an example of where a 457 visa has been abused?
PM: Around the country, I and members of parliament in the Labor team do hear concerns from people about them being ready to take a job and with the appropriate qualifications, and not getting a go.
And so when I am getting that kind of community feedback, it wouldn't be responsible to not take it on board. Now we'll always need a program to deal with temporary genuine skills shortages.
I want to be strongly investing in Australian schools, our training system, our universities so we're giving Australians the skills they need to get the jobs. And I always want to make sure that Australians come first.
So when we're getting that kind of feedback, of course we take it on board, and we look again and if a further crackdown is necessary then we make it.
HOST: Feedback and anecdotal evidence  -  can you understand why people see this as kneejerk reaction? We haven't been given an example of where 457 visas have been abused.
PM: We make policy based on evidence, but community concern is there. People have raised examples, and of course, when we get that kind of feedback we should respond.
There's just a big difference here between the approach that I want to take to these kinds of issues and the approach on the other side of politics.
Mr Abbott says he wants 457 visas, temporary foreign workers, to be a mainstay of Australia's immigration system.
My view is we have a migration system that is about permanent migrants coming to our country, getting a job, being real contributors to building the nation.
When we have temporary skills shortages, yes, we do rely on instruments like 457s, but they've got to be properly administered so Australians have the reassurance of knowing that if they're there with the skills, ready to do the job, then they get the job.
HOST: You said this week in western Sydney that you'll put Aussie workers first, you've said it again this morning; foreigners should be at the back of the queue.
I want to tell you something that Tony Abbott said overnight. He says that he's found those comments jarring, ‘I'll tell you what we'll never do,' he says. ‘We won't run around the place demonising foreigners the way the Prime Minister has sought to do over the last 24 hours.'
Doesn't the sort of language that you use pander to people's concerns?
PM: Kieran, you know as well as I do that those words ring hollow in the mouth of the Leader of the Opposition.
This is the man who in the run-up to the 2010 campaign and almost every day since has been out in the community supported by his team trying to raise fear.
The man who has used expressions like ‘peaceful invasion', the man who has let his Shadow Minister for Immigration stoke community fears day after day.
That's the cynical approach that the Leader of the Opposition has taken to these issues. In contrast, what we have done as a Government, and what we will always do, is we will properly make policy and respond to the evidence.
In difficult areas like asylum seeker policy we have been guided by experts, and on the other side of politics we've just seen a report authored by people as eminent as the former Chief of the Defence Force Angus Houston, just tossed over the shoulder as if it was worth nothing.
They've preferred to be on the fear campaign. Well, we deal with the evidence, we deal with the facts across all areas of immigration.
HOST: I want to ask you about a couple of other issues  -  I know you've got to get going.
But on the carbon tax compensation, you've said that families are going to be more than $2,000, or up to $2,500 worse-off under the Coalition plan, but isn't that figure misleading given it doesn't factor in Mr Abbott's promise to have tax cuts without the carbon tax, and this morning he's suggesting that you might not necessarily see the tax-free threshold return to $6,000, that that might stay where it is as well.
So he's promised compensation, he says families won't be worse off under the Coalition Government.
PM: Well Kieran, let's just go through the simple facts here because I think people are entitled to them. Mr Abbott is saying he will abolish the Schoolkids Bonus  -  that's absolutely nothing to do with the carbon tax.
If he's trying to pretend that's something to do with the carbon tax it's simply not right. You know that, I know that.
That's a benefit that that we decided to provide Australian families to help with the costs of getting the kids to school; $410 if you've got a primary school-aged student in your family, $820 if you've got a secondary school-aged student, a bigger child. If you've got two kids in your family it's worth $15,000 to you as your kids go through school.
Mr Abbott says don't pay that money. I believe families need that assistance.
Then Mr Abbott has pledged to do things like get rid of the low-income contributions for superannuation.
This is a special government program to bolster the super of low-income Australians; he says that's gone too; nothing to do with carbon pricing.
And then there are a set of changes like the changes we've made to the tax-free threshold, so Australians have moved from paying tax to no tax; they're better off as a result of those changes.
Australians have seen tax cuts, some of them $600, many of them $300.
Mr Abbott has said he will take all of that away, and he's saying that in circumstances where none of his wild and outlandish claims about carbon pricing have proved to be true.
Well he's now got an incredible obligation and a very big burden to spell out to the Australian community how on earth this possibly works or adds up, how families are going to experience life if he is ever Prime Minister of this country.
On the simple facts now, life for families would be about cuts, cuts and cuts. You would be losing money in a variety of ways.
Mr Abbott needs to spell out his alternative  -  if he's got one  -  or people are entitled to conclude he doesn't.
HOST: You say that he's going to take all of that away, but he's made it clear that that's not the case, that there will be tax cuts under a Coalition Government.
He's made that very plain, and this figure of up to $2,500 that families will be worse off, it's hardly robust when you don't even look at the impact of price reductions in power prices and so on.
PM: Kieran, let's just go through what's in the figure, because benefits like the Schoolkids Bonus are nothing to do with carbon pricing, absolutely nothing to do with carbon pricing, and no one should pretend that they are something to do with carbon pricing.
I was glad to see today that finally in the course of this debate Mr Abbott has acknowledged that the impact on power prices of carbon pricing is ten per cent. He's been making wild and outlandish claims about how much power bills have gone up.
Now he's acknowledged (inaudible) it's ten per cent, what we always said it was he's acknowledged it is.
That means he must also acknowledge the assistance we've provided has made many families and Australians better off, and he's taking that away.
Now if Mr Abbott says he's going to fund a tax benefit somewhere, well he's got to spell it out.
Where's the money coming from? Who's it going to? How much is it worth a week? When will it start? What can families expect to see given they're losing their Schoolkids Bonus? How does it square up against the benefits he's taking away? Where are those details Kieran?
HOST: Okay, a couple of quick questions to finish. You've been dealing with cost of living, with roads in western Sydney, but as you know the New South Wales Labor brand has copped a hammering with that corruption scandal there.
Do you in the next couple of days need to make a strong statement or pursue some reform as a sign of good faith to voters in western Sydney and in New South Wales generally?
PM: I've already made my views very clear about the issues here in New South Wales.
Now I'm not in a position to prejudge an inquiry that's in train now, but I've made very clear that I'm very disturbed by things that are being looked at before that inquiry, and that there is no place in my political party  -  in the Labor Party  -  or in any political party in this country for people who are seeking to profit themselves rather than devote themselves to the public good and public policy.
HOST: In the last couple of weeks you've drawn a close embrace with the unions. Do you think that might turn off a few voters?
PM: Well Kieran, let's look at the facts here and not some of the commentary.
We are a Labor Party; we have historically had strong links with working people and organisations that represent them; that is the trade union movement.
That has been true across our history and it will be true in the future. As a Labor government, what we do is we govern from the centre of Australian life.
We are a centre-left political party dedicated to the improvement of living conditions and building the best possible future for modern families, for working Australians.
That's what we've always done, that's what we will always do.
We find, therefore, common cause with the union movement on a range of issues.
Sometimes we disagree because we make a national interest judgment call that the national interest lies elsewhere; that's what we will always do as well.
What we don't have any truck with is the people who would say smash unions, smash working conditions, take away penalty rates, let workers get sacked with absolutely no remedy or no recourse.
That's the Liberal way. We saw that through Work Choices.
We've deliberately taken a different path, we always will, because we believe in fairness and decency at work, and we believe if people want to be a member of a trade union then they should be able to make that choice and never be intimidated out of it.
HOST: Prime Minister, I know that you're attending the state funeral of Joan Child today, the first female Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Finally, you reflections on the life and career of Joan Child?
PM: I'll have the opportunity at Joan Child's funeral later today to say some words about her.
She was a genuine trailblazer for women in Australian politics at a time when women were absolutely on the periphery of public life.
There was Joan, blazing a trail, showing the way, and so we will be reflecting on her life today.
It was a life of achievement, including reaching the position of Speaker of the House of Representatives, the first woman ever to do so.
HOST: Prime Minister Gillard thanks for your time today.
PM: Thank you.


Melbourne
[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OMITTED]
On this day of sadness and farewell, we hear many stories and many voices.
We've heard from Peter, supported by Andrew, Geoff, Gary and Roger - the five sons who Joan brought up on her own with such love and determination.
We've heard from Robert Ray, a giant of the modern Labor Party who saw in Joan a colleague to be respected.
And now, I share these words with you as one of the women who walked through the door that Joan so brilliantly opened.
Female representation in federal politics came late for our Party  -  1974.
Well into the 20thcentury, Labor embodied the “Australian legend” of shearers and dockworkers bonded in a spirit of male mateship.
It took a remarkable woman to break the mould  -  and Joan Child was that woman.
For Joan, the Labor ethos was etched deep in her soul.
She didn't need to be told of it or read it in a book.
Everything about her life and experience spoke of this belief.
She'd worked in a factory. She'd worked as cleaner.
She'd raised these five boys alone.
And when she came to public life as candidate in 1972, she'd already lived a full life, so when electoral success came her way eighteen months later, she was ready.
At the outset, Joan Child began her political journey as she meant to continue it  -  on her terms.
When the news photographers came to her house, Joan refused to adopt the domestic poses that previous female MPs had adopted  -  baking a cake, holding the vacuum cleaner.
Joan saw the danger and put it astutely to one side.
Instead she raised a glass of champagne to Gough's remarkable re-election, and that was the photo that beamed out from the pages of the press.
Bold, defiant, and just a little bit cheeky.
That is not to say Joan wasn't proud of her accomplishments as a mother or of her lovely home and garden, or wasn't careful as to her presentation and dress  -  she was.
Joan had understated style and class in all these things.
But she never let them define her.
This was a woman determined to be judged on her character, not on her gender.
And always, always  -  Joan was a proud daughter of the Labor movement.
She was an activist.
She understood that Australian politics is essentially and fundamentally a contest of values.
Joan was faithful to those values in the good times and the bad.
And no days we were worse than 11 November 1975 and the election to follow when Joan, like Bill Morrison who we also mourn at this time, lost her seat.
Yet like Bill, Joan returned to the arena.
She finally made it back in 1980, and this decade was Joan's finest time.
The time of her Speakership.
The time when Joan's face and voice became familiar to Australians.
The time when our belief that women can do anything finally began to be realised in our nation's institutions.
The women like Joan didn't have a guide book.
Instead they wrote it.
That is why we can say today that Joan left us many gifts:
Her spirit of service to the Parliament and the people.
Her faith in the Labor cause.
Her ambition for her electorate and the nation, especially in terms of how we care for the disadvantaged and people with disabilities.
But most importantly of all, Joan gave us her example.
The example of a smart, confident woman succeeding in the public sphere.
Not only succeeding against the odds but resetting those odds for those who came in her footsteps.
Through it all, Joan seamlessly blended toughness and kindness, and with her beloved Hawks, her Elvis recordings, her books and her garden, Joan remained - resolutely, calmly, refreshingly - normal.
Today we bear witness as the Labor tribe, we gather to mourn one of our own - one of our best.
And as Australians, we acknowledge a woman who believed that our nation's creed or fairness and opportunity must also have space for women, must also have space for her too.
By any measure, Joan Child had a remarkable life.
In its balance of struggle and achievement, it was a life we could recognise as a fortunate life.
A life of meaning and purpose.
A life long in years but short in regret.
After 91 summers, that life is now over.
Joan's body, weakened by frailty and age, has found its rest.
But this proud Labor matriarch, this model and mentor, will long live on in our hearts and hold an honoured place in our nation's story forever.



HOST: Julia Gillard, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: The Opposition Leader Tony Abbott has stepped up his criticism overnight of the Government's crackdown on that 457 foreign skilled worker visa scheme.
He says the Government is now demonising foreign workers. What do you make of those comments?
PM: Well, I think this is an amazing intervention from Mr Abbott.
Let's remember this is the man who has profited from fear, who has been out there warning people of a ‘peaceful invasion', who even as recently as the last few days has had his immigration spokesperson out there trying to stoke fear in the community.
The Government's plan is a very different approach. We believe that when we are having people come to our country to work a temporary basis that we need to ensure that they are meeting skills shortages, that if there are Australians who can do that work, then they should get that work.
That is, we want to run a system that has got rigour.
When we came to Government the 457 visa system was out of control.
The former Liberal Government of which Mr Abbott was a part had lost control of it.
And we've brought new rigour to the system and we will continue to crackdown as necessary to make sure that 457 visas are being used for their proper purpose which is skill shortages, not replacing Australians who are ready and willing and able to do the work.
HOST: But why the need for the crackdown? The Immigration Department only a month ago was saying that the 457 visa was working well and in fact was working well, factoring in a softening in demand for labour?
PM: This is a demand-driven program, but I hear and my Ministers hear and our local community representatives hear too many stories of times when people were appropriately qualified to do the work and didn't get the opportunity.
So when I'm getting that kind of feedback, the responsible thing is to look again at the program and make sure that it's fit for purpose.
At the end of the day if there are work opportunities in our country and there are Australians who need those jobs and have the skills to do them, then we want them to be matched up with the job.
HOST: Okay, you talk about putting Aussie workers first, you were there earlier accusing the Opposition of stoking fear over asylum seekers.
We have of course the Immigration Spokesman Scott Morrison talking about behaviour protocols for asylum seekers going into the community.
Are you worried, Julia Gillard, about creating this us versus them atmosphere? Are you completely comfortable where this debate is going when it comes to foreigners?
PM: I'm a migrant to this country and this country will always welcome migrants who come here to make this nation their home, who come here to get a job, work hard, enjoy every aspect of Australian society and adopt Australian values and contribute to Australian society.
We are a great multicultural society that has literally welcomed millions of migrants and we will continue to do so.
Of course, people who come here make Australia their home go and get a job and do all of the things that we expect of Australians, they are welcome here, but what I've always objected to-
HOST: Excuse me for interrupting, but no one on either side of politics would agree with the great benefit from migration over the decades but the debate in the last week or so has become particularly nasty and brutal on this front.
Would you like to see it continue down that path?
PM: I think you're misunderstanding the history here. I've outlined Australia's approach to immigration because I think the discordant notes, the notes that have been deliberately injected into the debate to stoke fear have been done by the Opposition, not just in the last few weeks, but consistently now in the run-up to the 2010 election and beyond.
Mr Abbott and his team have been out there in the community trying to stoke fear and trying to profit from that fear.
I take a different approach with all aspects of immigration policy  -  we get advice from experts, we did that in refugee and asylum seeker policy.
On something like 457 visas, I want to say very clearly this program should serve its proper purpose.
I do want Australians to have work opportunities. I don't want to hear stories of Australians missing out on a job because a 457 visa has been misused so that is the approach that I will take.
Mr Abbott, while stoking fear on the one hand, is there saying under him 457 visas would be a mainstay of our immigration system.
Well, he needs to explain that and justify that to Australian workers who too many times worry that they or their children are going to miss out on a work opportunity.
HOST: One of the issues that keeps coming up and we speak to voters on the ground in Western Sydney, Prime Minister, is what they see as the breach of trust; the often massive breach of trust in your breaking of that have carbon tax promise.
Do you concede you've lost a lot of voter faith on that front?
PM: I'm very happy to explain that and when I said those words during the 2010 election campaign I meant every one of them.
I didn't foresee the circumstances of the minority Parliament, how could I? It wasn't until the election had been held that we knew the Parliament that Australians had voted for.
But we did in that election campaign in 2010 talk consistently about the need to put a price on carbon and have an emissions trading scheme.
I mean, let's remember this was bipartisan politics in this country for a long period of time; an emissions trading scheme.
Now, I didn't expect we would get a minority Parliament, but we've worked to get to that emissions trading scheme, and by the time people are voting in the September election the carbon tax will have less than two years to run.
So I really think in those circumstances people will weigh these issues and weigh the facts of these issues, but one of the clear facts is the carbon tax will have less than two years to run.
One of the other clear facts is everything people have been told to fear about the carbon tax has proved not to be right.
All of the crazy claims made by the Opposition about the impact of the carbon tax have been proved to be wrong.
HOST: Tony Abbott says he is reminding us that of course a Coalition Government would scrap the carbon tax, but he is now saying it would want to keep some of the tax cuts associated with it. Will that be possible?
PM: Well, it's up to Mr Abbott to spell out his plan, but let's be very clear here, Mr Abbott's current statements add up to taking up to $2,300 away from families here in western Sydney and around the country.
He said he would get rid of the Schoolkids Bonus. That is nothing to do with carbon pricing, absolutely nothing to do with carbon pricing.
That's just taking away a benefit from families who are pressed by all of the pressures that come with modern living.
That's money in their pocket; $410 if they've got a primary school-age student in their family, $820 if your child is in secondary school. Obviously lots of families have got two kids.
It's a $15,000 benefit across the time your children are in school.
Mr Abbott just wants to take that away; absolutely nothing to do with carbon pricing.
And then when it comes to things like increasing the tax-free threshold, which is giving people up to $80,000 a tax cut, which means many Australians have gone from paying tax to paying no tax, Mr Abbott is now saying somehow magic pudding-style he can make all of this happen whilst not having a price on carbon.
Well, Mr Abbott should spell out the figures. Where is the money coming from? Where is it going? Who is he going to put taxes and charges on to raise this money if he reckons he can raise it?
Or is this just a bit of flim-flam because he has got no serious plan?
HOST: Prime Minister, you have been in the region now since Sunday. When are you planning on going out and meeting actual voters, going to a shopping mall, walking local streets?
PM: I met a lot of people yesterday here in western Sydney. I do have to travel to Melbourne today, I'm going to the funeral of Joan Child.
But I met a lot of people yesterday, people in western Sydney who are doing incredibly impressive things, like devoting their lives to helping Australians with disability.
I met representatives of local councils. I met people just as I was coming and going. I got the opportunity to talk to people about what's on their mind and I'll keep doing that.
I've done that when I've come to western Sydney in the past and I will certainly do it this weekend and in the future.
HOST: But that's very different, Julia Gillard, to an unscripted walk down the local street to meet voters and hear what they're concerned about.
PM: Well, I don't agree with your distinctions. When I met with people yesterday, they were at liberty to say whatever was on their mind.
HOST: It wasn't a scripted event; it wasn't staged for the cameras?
PM: You walk up to people, yes, there are TV cameras rolling. Your crew and other crews are out here with their TV cameras, certainly, but the people who I talk to can say whatever they like.
HOST: Just finally before you go, Prime Minister, the ICAC corruption inquiry resumes again in Sydney this morning.
Are you concerned that is going to tarnish the Labor brand, not just the state Labor brand but the federal Labor brand as we head towards the federal election?
PM: I've made very clear my attitude to all of this. What we are hearing in this inquiry is truly disturbing.
I'm not in a position where I can prejudge the outcome of the inquiry. That wouldn't be proper for me to do, but I can certainly say I've got no tolerance for conduct within my political party, or any political party, which is about profiting for individuals rather than pursuing the public good.
HOST: Julia Gillard, thank you very much for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you.


Sydney
PM: I am delighted to be here.
I am joined by the Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus, the Minister for Home Affairs Jason Clare, Tony Burke who is here in his capacity as local member for where we are standing right now in the electorate of Watson and Daryl Melham, my old friend, the Member for Banks.
We have just had the opportunity to meet with local community members and to talk about community safety.
I would have to say it has been an incredible meeting; a really remarkable meeting.
People have come to the table from all different walks of life here locally and different experiences  -  a GP, a high school principal, people who have served on community safety committees, a woman who has lived here since the end of the Second World War.
They were able to share perspectives and experiences about community safety in this community.
And the message loud and clear was a lot of good things have been happening, indeed in this local community, community members feel like they have done a lot to address community safety, addressing some challenges that were particularly pressing a few years ago.
But they do also recognise that there is a continuing problem with gang violence, with shootings and with the fear that that causes.
Indeed overnight, just a few kilometres from here in Padstow, there was a shooting in a suburban street.
The message to us has been a very clear one, that the community wants to keep working on community safety, that they want to address circumstances for their young people to make sure people get a great education in the context of community safety.
We even talked about our school funding reform agenda.
They want to make sure kids get a great education.
They want to see them get a job opportunity.
They want to support them in choosing the best possible paths in life, not getting outside society's mainstream and becoming subject to the enticements of joining a gang.
They also want to see politicians working together to make a difference for community safety.
On Sunday, the Minister for Home Affairs Jason Clare and I announced a new approach to get police working together; federal police and state police working together in strike teams to address gang violence and to crack down on gangs.
Today, I am here to announce a plan to get politicians working together so that we can make a difference to gang organisation around the country.
Particularly I will at the next meeting of the Council of Australian Governments ask state premiers to refer to the Federal Government the power to make laws about gangs and to make laws to attack unexplained wealth.
We as a Federal Government, without this referral, would lack the power make to do so, but with the referral, we would be able to make national laws about gangs.
That would enable courts to proscribe gangs, to issue control orders on people who are members of gangs, to stop them continuing to fraternise with other gang members, to stop them going to the clubhouses where gangs get together.
National laws are needed because obviously gangs work nationally and any one state, even doing its best, can only address the activities within that state boundary.
And so if a gang member goes over a state border, if they send a weapon border, if they send wealth over a state border, then a state government and state police can't chase that down.
I will be asking my premiers  -  the colleagues around the COAG table to refer these powers to make sure that politicians are working together to crack down on gangs.
I will also be asking for referrals for unexplained wealth laws.
We want to make sure that criminals do not profit from their criminal activity.
At the moment there are some difficulties with tracking wealth that is generated from criminal activity and even in the meeting here today, some frustration was expressed that there is unexplained wealth and that people aren't able to deal with it.
These laws would put a spotlight on unexplained wealth.
They would require individuals to bear the onus of describing where their wealth and assets came from, rather than police having to prove that those assets came from the proceeds of crime.
That simply means that if it comes to the attention of police that a gang member has a very expensive motor vehicle, has a very expensive property, has a lot of money in the bank and they can't explain that that was got legitimately, then it can be seized because it is wealth that has been gained from criminal activity.
These are the changes that we want to make which would make a practical difference for community safety by cracking down on the most serious end of organised crime and gang operations.
I will turn now to the Attorney-General for some comments.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Thanks very much Prime Minister.
As you have heard, we are going to be asking the states to refer powers in relation to the unexplained wealth laws and work with us on both a national scheme for national criminal organisation laws and a national scheme for unexplained wealth laws.
Gangs operate across state, territory and national borders and gangs don't respect state, territory and national borders and that is why it is important that we get national laws to deal with gangs, national laws to deal with criminal organisations.
It will enable police to take action in court to get orders as the Prime Minister has explained, that prevent criminal organisations from getting their organisation started, that prevent criminal organisations from continuing.
And the unexplained wealth laws. Again, criminal operate across state, territory and national borders, they exploit inconsistencies between state, territory and national laws and we want to make sure that there are no gaps in our laws that deal with unexplained wealth.
We want to make sure that there are powers for police to take people who have unexplained wealth.
This is targeted at high level criminals, so that they can be taken to court and explain to court and have to justify in court where their wealth came from and be exposed to having that wealth confiscated if indeed they cannot come up with a reasonable explanation.
We heard from community representatives that we have just been meeting with that they don't want to see state, territory and Commonwealth governments fighting.
They want to see state, territory and Commonwealth governments working together on this shared problem, working together to bring in national laws on criminal organisations and national laws for unexplained wealth.
Thanks very much.
MINISTER CLARE: Our state and federal police do a good job working together but we have to make sure that state politicians and federal politicians work together, Labor and Liberal politicians work together to give the police the powers they need to tackle gangs.
It is a national challenge because criminal move from state to state and if one state clamps down on gangs then what we've seen in the past is that criminals will move from one state to another.
That is why we need national laws so there is no safe haven, no place to hide, one set of laws for the country to tackle gangs and to seize their assets.
Asset seizure laws or what we call unexplained wealth laws are particularly important.
We all know the story of someone driving around in a flash car that doesn't have a job, doesn't pay any income tax.
National unexplained wealth laws mean that if you can't explain where the income comes from to buy the flash car or to buy the big house, then those assets can be seized off you.
State police and federal police already have asset seizure powers; this would create comprehensive or national unexplained wealth laws to seize even more assets.
The federal police last year seized assets worth about $100 million.
That is triple what they were seizing five years ago but police tell me the more powers we've got here, the more successful we can be.
I have been talking to police in western Sydney over the last few weeks and their constant message to me is money is power in the criminal underworld.
It is all about money, selling drugs to make money and if you can seize their assets, seize the cash, seize the car, seize the jet ski, seize the house then it really makes a difference and can shift the balance of power on the street.
Last year, at the request of the Prime Minister, I put to the state attorneys-general that we should create national anti-gang laws and national unexplained wealth laws.
They rejected that offer and I think it is a mistake. I have been saying since, think we need to prosecute the case for this again.
The best way to do that is to take it to a meeting of the Prime Minister and the premiers  -  take it to the top of the table and get the leaders of our country to sort this out.
The police want these powers. The Police Federation of Australia has called for these powers. Both the Labor and Liberal Party have agreed that we need these powers.
A Joint Parliamentary Committee last year agreed on a bipartisan basis that we need to have these powers.
It is our obligation now to work together to make sure we get these powers to police.
That will mean more criminals in jail and more assets seized.
PM: Thank you, we're happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you talked to any of the premiers about this or any of the ministers and why should they say yes when the AGs didn't last year?
PM: I think we need this dealt with right at the top with all due respect to our attorney-general colleagues.
I think this needs to be dealt with by the nation's leaders and that is why I am intending to take it to the Council of Australian Governments meeting.
I did refer to it in my telephone conversation with Premier O'Farrell over the weekend but I do want to work genuinely, in the spirit of cooperation with premiers to get this done.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask about the unexplained wealth, do federal unexplained wealth laws exist and if so has the Government (inaudible)?
PM: I will turn to the Attorney-General on this.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL: There are already Commonwealth unexplained wealth laws but they have got a very severe constitutional limitation.
That is that they can only deal with wealth gained by committing Commonwealth offences and what we are keen to do is close down the gaps that exist.
Not all states and territories have unexplained wealth laws either. There are clear inconsistencies and clear gaps.
The purpose of having a seamless national scheme is to close those gaps.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, regarding the 457 visa issue, the Mines and Mineral Council has today described the Government's approach to this and your public comments in recent days as pathetic and bordering on xenophobic. Are you xenophobic?
PM: We are dealing with a simple issue here and a very important issue.
I want to see Australian workers put first full stop. That's it.
The purpose of the 457 visa program is if our nation does not have skilled people who can fill a particular job, then for a short period of time, you fill that with a temporary foreign worker.
That program is not and should not be used as a substitute for Australians getting work or Australians getting the appropriate training and skills so they can get a job.
So, I will always put Australian jobs first.
Clearly, there are some continuing areas of concern in this program and the Minister for Immigration has outlined some of those in recent days.
And so we cracked down on this program when we came into government.
We have continued to try and drive rigour in the program and we will continue to act as necessary to make sure that Australian jobs are put first.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Pauline Hanson says those comments are a vindication of what she was saying 15 years ago. What is your response to that?
PM: That is a matter for her.
JOURNALIST: She's also said that it's validation of the view that you're moving to the far right on this issue. How do you respond to that?
PM: I believe in putting Australian jobs first. Others can use whatever label they choose to for that.
I believe in putting Australian jobs first.
I don't believe the Australian training system should let Australians down.
INTERRUPTION: You're full of it! You're full of it!
PM: Thanks. I don't think the Australian training system should let Australians down.
I don't think it is satisfactory, for example, that in the health care system, because we didn't train Australians at the right time, under the Howard Government, that we are now so reliant on 457 visa holders.
Australians could have trained to be those nurses. Australians could have trained to be those doctors.
The Howard Government and Minister Tony Abbott, when he was health minister, took a different approach and they basically limited training opportunities for Australians and so we're reliant on foreign workers now.
I believe Australian workers should come first. They should have access to the skills and capacities they need to get a job for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think that the 457 visas in substantial numbers may actually drive down Australian wages or is that a bit over the top?
PM: I think it is a concern when there are employers who have said that they want someone who is a program manager and they have identified that as an area of skills shortage and then on inquiry it becomes transparent that what they are really looking for is a security guard. Australians could perform that work.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what makes you think that you can actually get the premiers and leaders to agree to these laws that you want when Jason Clare failed on this last year?
PM: The reason that we escalate things to the Council of Australian Governments is so that leaders can meet and leaders can get thing done; even things that have proved to be difficult at other levels of Commonwealth-state discussions.
So very routinely the Council of Australian Governments deals with and solves issues that have become bogged down in ministerial councils.
I want to make sure that we are working together to make a real difference here.
This is about bringing the full force of national laws onto gangs and their operations and it is about bringing the full force of national laws onto unexplained wealth and seizing assets criminals shouldn't have because they have got them through criminal activity.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've just said that it is a concern that 457s might push down wages in some areas.
Do you have any information to support that? Is there any data that you can give us?
PM: I think it stands to reason that if 457s are being  -  employers are coming forward trying to get people for jobs that Australians could fill  -  it stands to reason that that is a concerning thing and Australians jobs should be put first.
There are wage and salary conditions on 457 visas and so there should be.
But I do not believe we should tolerate any difficulties with a short-term temporary migration program for Australians.
Australians should always come first with their jobs.
JOURNALIST: You are saying there is a concern about wages-
PM: No, I answered a question over here about issues in the program and I pointed to an issue where, and Minister O'Connor has dealt with this in recent days, I pointed to an issue where on inquiry it became apparent people were looking for security guards not for a higher level skill which was what, on the surface, it looked like.
That does concern me. I am not putting it more broadly than that. I answered a question over here in that way.
But we will support Australian jobs first. Now, this is a debate in our nation.
The Leader of the Opposition has clearly said he would expand the 457 visa program so it became a mainstay of the Australian immigration program.
Well I don't agree with that. I will never agree with that and we will put Australians and their jobs first.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the people inside, the community representatives, said that crime rates are falling. Are the national laws really necessary?
PM: Well, I think it would be good for Tony, who is the local member here, to really outline what was said in the meeting about the history of this place. It is very interesting history.
MINISTER BURKE: Thanks very much. For those of you who don't know the area well, over the last 10 years some incredible ground has been made.
If you drew a two kilometre circle around here, you have basically got, 10 years ago, drive by shootings, the shooting up of the Lakemba police station, the bashing of Edward Lee to death and the gang rape at Greenacre.
There was a really bad run around here with some horrific outcomes.
At that time, the community dealt with it at every level.
Work was done with policing; a whole lot of people who should have been put in jail were put in jail.
But also, some incredible work started to be done at a community level, finding ways of taking young people at risk out of what was going to be a terrible path.
And that is why, when you have a meeting about community safety, one of the people we have got here is a high school principal.
That is why we have got people running community centres here today.
Now what we have seen in very recent times is a beginning again of some patterns and some stories and some reports and some shootings that we haven't seen for a while.
And when you get that, you need to do two things.
One, the community work on taking people out of that pathway needs to be advanced and needs to be continued to be pursued.
It is incredibly important. It changes peoples' lives.
Secondly, gangs can offer as they move from one area of the country or the world to another, they can offer immediate incentives that take people who are on the right track off the right track.
To be able to have new laws that deal with those gangs make sure that the incredible community work that has been done in this part of Sydney, doesn't get derailed by people with a whole lot of cash in a bag.
JOURNALIST: Can I just the Prime Minister or Attorney-General if these laws will apply to union officials who have large amounts of unexplained wealth?
PM: These laws apply to any Australian who has got large amounts of unexplained wealth.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there has been some criticism this week that you have gone to a number of stage managed events and haven't actually gone out and done those mall walks that we saw Joe Hockey do yesterday.
Are you worried about criticism on camera or anything like that?
PM: I have just been in a meeting with members of this community talking about issues that are very serious and something that as the local member here, Minister Burke, has just outlined, are things community members have worked on for a long period of time.
So, I have just been in a local community meeting, I will continue to be available in various ways over the coming few days.
And I see a large number of community members have joined us to even see what is being discussed right now.
JOURNALIST: It is a controlled environment though and the question is do you feel safe to walk down the streets-
PM: People are at liberty to say whatever they want to say and people took that opportunity.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you aware of the case of Fawad Ahmed the Pakistani refugee who's a pretty good spin bowler and he's trying to get citizenship so he can play in the Australian Ashes team?
PM: I am aware. These are matters dealt with through proper processes and by the Minister for Immigration.
JOURNALIST: Will there be any special treatment for him?
PM: We deal with every application on its merits.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We've got to, number one, get the referrals. We don't have the constitutional power to act without the referrals.
If we succeed in getting those referrals at the Council of Australian Governments meeting, then we would get the legislation into the parliament as soon as possible thereafter  -  as soon as we possibly could, absolutely.
JOURNALIST: On the mining tax, Fortescue Metals are taking their case to the High Court today (inaudible)?
PM: Yes we are.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this morning the former Roads and Transport Minister here in NSW, David Borger, said he didn't think the Labor Party had done enough to reform itself and there is still too many cardboard cut-outs as MPs.
PM: I took the biggest set of reforms to Labor National Conference that have been taken in Labor's recent history, indeed taken since the time that Simon Crean was leader of the Labor Party.
So we did adopt a fairly major reform process.
Of course, as a political party we always need to be reforming how we work and we will continue to work our way through political party reforms, but a very major tranche of reforms was adopted.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this has been a listening tour as you called it. How would you gauge the success of it so far and do you think the people of western Sydney have listened to you and will that translate into votes?
PM: I actually don't think I ever used those words. I said that I had been out to western Sydney many times in the past.
I am here in western Sydney again for a number of days.
In the past I have come out here, sometimes for an individual meeting and so I have been here a few hours, sometimes I have been here across the course of a day, from morning until evening.
I have got the opportunity to spend a few days here. I am taking it. I took the opportunity into the same thing in south-east and central Queensland last year.
It is part of what we routinely do  -  governing, talking to people, listening to community members, taking the opportunity to explain what the Government is doing and also taking the opportunity to explain new policies which will make a difference here but also a difference around the nation.
Okay, thank you very much.


Sydney
The Gillard Government will take a plan to introduce national anti-gang laws, national unexplained wealth laws and reforms to tackle the illegal firearms market to the next Council of Australian Governments meeting in April.
The Prime Minister will seek agreement at COAG from States and Territories to refer powers to the Commonwealth to further strengthen Australia's anti-gang laws.
Organised criminals move from state to state. They also have assets in different states and overseas. It is vital that state and federal law enforcement agencies have the powers they need to break up gangs and seize their assets. National anti-gang and asset seizure laws will help ensure police have the powers they need and there are no safe havens.
National Criminal Organisation Laws
Criminal organisation laws give a court the power to declare that a particular organisation is a criminal organisation and then impose control orders on designated members. These orders prevent members engaging in activities like meeting with other club members, holding a liquor licence, visiting clubhouses or holding weapons or explosives licences.
A number of States and the Northern Territory have introduced different types of criminal organisation legislation. Some have not.
The introduction of national criminal organisation laws will enable a court to declare criminal groups and make orders relating to members of those groups – with immediate effect across the country.
National laws will prevent members of organised criminal groups from easily shifting their operations to other States and Territories and eliminate the need for complex mutual recognition laws and procedures.
National laws will ensure the most efficient and seamless approach to controlling criminal organisations and combatting organised crime. To implement these laws the Commonwealth requires a referral of powers from the States.
National Unexplained Wealth Laws
In 2012 the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Law Enforcement recommended the Commonwealth seek a referral of power from the States and Territories to establish national unexplained wealth laws. This was a bipartisan recommendation.
National unexplained wealth laws are an important tool in the fight against serious and organised crime. Money creates power in the criminal underworld. Most criminals are more afraid of losing their money than going to jail.
National unexplained wealth laws would give police across the country more power to seize cash, cars and houses that have been obtained illegally and reverse the onus of proof so that criminals have to explain how they obtained their cash or assets through legitimate means.
Having national unexplained wealth laws would benefit all states and territories. They would not prevent States and Territories from operating their own unexplained wealth regimes if they wish to. It would give them the option of using their state laws or the national system. The proceeds of asset seizures would be shared between jurisdictions. It would mean more money seized from criminals and more money for states and territories.
National unexplained wealth laws also require a referral of powers to the Commonwealth.
The Police Federation of Australia and the Australian Federal Police Association have recently called for national unexplained wealth laws. In a statement to the Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs they said:
"A truly national, harmonised unexplained wealth regime is needed to effectively target those who benefit most from organised crime in this country. Those who gain the most from criminal enterprise are often those most disconnected from it”.
Working Together to Tackle the Illegal Firearms Market
The Prime Minister will also seek COAG's agreement to implement the package of reforms to tackle the illegal firearms market that Minister Clare took to the Standing Council on Police and Emergency Management in 2012.
These reforms are designed to tackle the illicit firearms market from every angle – to seize illegal firearms, to break the code of silence, to improve our ability to trace illegal firearms, to strengthen laws and harden the border.
The Commonwealth will seek COAG agreement to:
·         Immediately establish an Australian Ballistic Identification Network (ABIN). The ABIN uses advanced technology to undertake ballistics analysis of firearms that are seized from criminals. It can link firearms seized to previous crimes. The ABIN is currently used by the Australian Federal Police and the NSW Police Force. Rolling out the network nationwide will build a database of all weapons used in crimes recovered by Police in every State and Territory. It will be able to be accessed by Police Forces in every Australian jurisdiction.
·         Give Police additional search powers to target offenders who are banned from carrying or owning firearms. States and Territories should introduce laws to give police the legal authority to search a person who is subject to a Firearm Prohibition Order (FPO), as well as any vehicle or premises they are in, for the presence of a firearm without the need to demonstrate reasonable suspicion. South Australia is currently the only jurisdiction that gives the police these powers.
·         Identify and remedy gaps and inconsistencies in state and territory firearms laws. States and Territories to fix gaps and inconsistencies in their firearm legislation.
·         Continue co-operation to develop a national interface to track firearms. There are currently more than 30 different registers and databases across federal, state and territory agencies which are not linked. A national firearms interface is critical to sharing information between law enforcement agencies around the country – and allows a firearm to be tracked through the course of its life.
In addition to these measures the Commonwealth Government has passed legislation through the House of Representatives to create new aggravated offences for trafficking firearms or firearm parts across State or Territory borders, or Australia's national border. These new offences will carry a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.
The Commonwealth has also reached an agreement with the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) to deliver firearm identification courses to Federal, State and Territory police and firearms officers from Commonwealth agencies including the Customs and Border Protection Service. The course will enhance the skills of Australian law enforcement in identifying firearm markings, parts and components.
Minister Clare reached agreement with the ATF to provide this training during a visit to the United States in July 2012 and this training is now occurring in Sydney.
The Commonwealth Government is also developing further measures to tackle organised crime and these will be announced in due course.


Sydney
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research, Chris Bowen, today opened the new University of Sydney Centre for Carbon, Water and Food at Camden  -  worth more than $20 million and built with Gillard Government support.
The state-of-the-art teaching and research facility, which received $4.69 million from the Gillard Government, will help Australian agriculture meet the challenges of producing more food, of better quality while using less water and putting less carbon into the atmosphere.
The Centre for Carbon, Water and Food will help tackle some of the country's largest environmental challenges, including those in the Murray-Darling Basin, issues around interaction between agriculture and mining, and the sustainable management of public and private rural land.
The new Centre will also house an interdisciplinary team of world leading researchers, working to face the challenge of feeding a growing world population, and strengthening Australia's potential as the food bowl of Asia.
As the ‘Australia In The Asian Century White Paper' notes, the growth of the Asian middle class - to 3 billion people by 2030 - will provide opportunities for Australian businesses including those in the food technology and production industries.
The Centre also announced a new milestone in Australian-Chinese collaboration with the signing of agreements with two leading Chinese agricultural research institutions, in the presence of the Ambassador of the People's Republic of China in Australia, His Excellency Yuming Chen.
An agreement with the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science will result in a Sino-Australia Joint Laboratory for Sustainable Agro-Ecosystems housed at the centre, with a mirror facility in Beijing.
The Centre will establish a Sino-Australian Laboratory for Food Security, at the centre and in Nanjing in collaboration with Nanjing Agricultural University.
The Centre builds on Sydney University's 100-year history of agricultural research and education, by strengthening evidence-based teaching in global change biology, sustainable ecosystems and sustainable agriculture. It is co-located with other university faculties in related agricultural and primary production areas.


Sydney
The resignation of Victorian Premier Ted Baillieu tonight is significant news for all Victorians.
This decision must have been a very difficult one for Mr Baillieu and for his family.
I wish Mr Baillieu all the best for the future.
I will seek to work in the interests of all Victorians with Mr Baillieu's successor, Denis Napthine.


SBS World News
HOST: Prime Minister, when you talk about issues surrounding 457 visas and you use language like ‘foreigners taking Aussie jobs', aren't you yourself guilty of the sort of dog whistle politics that you've accused your political opponents of?
PM: Certainly not. I'm just making a very simple point, which is jobs in Australia are there to be filled by Australia.
The purpose of 457 visas is if we have short-term temporary labour shortages, that is skill shortages, we fill them from overseas.
In my view that's the appropriate use of the program.
If it's being used for any other purpose then it's not the right thing to do and it's not giving the appropriate priority to Australian jobs.
So I believe in putting Aussies first when it comes to employment opportunities in our nation.
I want to make sure that Australians have the chance to get the skills and training they need so that they can seize job opportunities.
Of course, from time to time businesses will face genuine skill shortages and look to full them from overseas, but it shouldn't be for any broader purpose than that.
HOST: A large chunk of these people on 457 visas though go on to become permanent residents  -  Aussies  -  isn't there a danger if you crack down on those people that migration numbers might fall, the economy might hurt?
What safeguards are in place to prevent that from happening?
PM: Absolutely no risk whatsoever. Our economy is a strong one.
We are operating a sizeable permanent migration program which has a skills focus as well as a humanitarian and family reunion component.
This is the way in which we grow and build our nation, through our own efforts to strengthen our economy and of course through permanent migration too  -  I'm an example of that.
The use of the 457 visa program is to give people short term visas to fill short term skill shortage needs.
Now if we're operating that program for a purpose other than for temporary needs, then in my view we're not doing the right thing.
If you look at our current healthcare system there are a lot of 457 visa holders working in healthcare.
That's because at an earlier point in time under the Howard Government with Tony Abbott as Minister for Health, we denied Australians training opportunities to become doctors and nurses.
We're short now, and we're filling them from overseas.
Well, my view is we should have extended to Australians those training opportunities.
HOST: But you're not really leading by example on this one are you? Let's look at your communications director. He's currently on a 457 visa  -  was there no Australian that could fill that position?
PM: Look, this is a little sideshow debate started by the Opposition.
All of my staff have met all of the regulatory and other requirements for working in my office.
It's not that that concerns people walking here on the streets of Parramatta.
What concerns them is they've heard too many stories where a tiler has been brought in and someone who has got tiling skills didn't get the job.
They've heard too many stories where a business has said they are looking for someone in a very high skill band, but when you actually drill into it they're looking for something like a security guard and someone on these streets could have filled the job.
HOST: This is an issue though, I mean you're advocating local people getting local jobs. Why did you have to look overseas?
PM: Look, it's one of those distraction issues and it's not the main game and I'm not going to get involved in it.
The issue for Australians here is about putting Australian workers first and making sure our training system is right.
HOST: How much were the unions behind this crackdown on 457 visas?
PM: The national interest is behind this crackdown. It's in the national interest to put Australian jobs first.
HOST: We've seen Pauline Hanson come out in support of your stance on 457 visas.
How does that sit with you, that someone who's known to have quite extremist views on migration is endorsing your point of view?
PM: Well, that's a matter for her.
HOST: Well it's more than a matter for her isn't it; it's a matter for you and your party.
You have criticised her as being extremist in the past, and if she's endorsing your views, voters no doubt associate you with her views as well.
PM: Well my views are right. I believe in putting Australian jobs first, and that's what I'm going to do.
I'm not going to have a 457 visa program that is being used not for proper purposes, and we have cracked down on that in the past, and we will continue to crack down on it in the future.
Third parties can engage in any commentary that they like.
I will do what's in the interests of Australians and Australian jobs.
The genuine political debate about this is a debate between me and the Leader of the Opposition.
I believe Australian jobs should come first.
He believes that temporary foreign labour should be a mainstay of our immigration system.
That is, he wants to see far more 457 visa holders.
So that is the real difference in Australian politics, and based on that, people will form their views about the policies of the political parties going into the election.
This whole debate, from all politicians of all stripes though on immigration, isn't there a danger that it's whipping up prejudice against all foreigners?
PM: Well certainly not. I'm making a very simple point here. We are a great multicultural society, a fantastic multicultural society.
We've done what has eluded many other nations from around the world, and that is build a peaceful, harmonious nation with people from many nations in our population.
We're here in Parramatta today  -  50 per cent of people who live here were born overseas.
I am a supporter of permanent migration, I'm a permanent migrant to this country myself.
We operate a sizeable permanent migration program, so the only way in which Australians should treat anybody is with respect.
But then we do, for the needs of our economy, sometimes source from overseas people who come here for a temporary basis and then go back home. That's what 457s are for.
That should only be done when we cannot meet those skill needs in our economy and it shouldn't be an excuse to not provide Australians with appropriate training opportunities.
HOST: Well asylum seekers that come here don't have work rights so they're dependent on welfare to get by.
What measures do you have in place to get them out of that welfare trap?
PM: Well we had very clear advice that the ability to have work rights may have been acting as an incentive for people to make a very dangerous journey and potentially lose their lives at sea on a boat, give money to a people smuggler, perhaps not make it here.
Well I'm not going to have a circumstance where someone gets on a boat because they think even if their asylum claim fails that they will get a number of years of access to the Australian labour market.
I don't want people to get on those boats.
I don't want to hear about people drowning at sea.
HOST: Surely you don't want them stuck on welfare either?
PM: Well this is a tough policy area, but let's war-game the alternative.
If we said that there were work rights and people did get on that boat and several hundred of them drowned.
We've seen that happen. We know what that looks like. We know what it looks like to see people lose their lives at sea.
You've got to make a judgment here, and we've made it.
HOST: Well, you've said that you're here on a listening tour-
PM: Well I actually haven't said that, that's something the media have said.
What I've said about my visit to western Sydney is I've come here regularly, I've been here in the past, I'll be here in the future.
I come for a few reasons and one of the reasons I come is to talk to community members about what's on their mind.
One of the reasons I come is to make announcements about government policy which matter to this region of the world.
One of the reasons I come is to explain what the Government is doing that matters in this part of the world, and so I've been doing that over the past few days and I'll continue to do that.
HOST: Well you are certainly here to hear some of the views of the people of western Sydney.
When are you going to step out from some of these stage-managed events and actually get out amongst the people in the streets and hear some uncensored, real views of voters here?
PM: I've been hearing uncensored real views and once again this is a bit of media flimflam and I'm not going to get involved in it.
I've been meeting people, I've been listening to what they're saying to me, of course I want to hear their views, people are at liberty to say whatever they want.
I've sat this morning talking with community members, talking about community safety. They had the opportunity to say anything that was on their mind.
I've met with people in a variety of circumstances over the last few days where they were at liberty to raise any issue with me that they wanted to.
HOST: Well tell us, how has it gone? Have you managed to hold on, do you think, to even the most rusted-on voters? They haven't corroded off yet?
PM: I'll leave the political commentary to the political commentators.
I'll get on with my job as Prime Minister, and what that means is yes I do come and talk to communities.
I spent a comparable amount of time in south-eastern and central Queensland last year. I was in Hobart talking about jobs  -  750 new jobs  -  on Friday.
I'll be travelling of course as I always have as Prime Minister and as a member of parliament, to listen to communities, to talk to communities and to govern for communities.
That's what I'm doing here and that's what I'll keep doing.
[ENDS] 


We are particularly pleased to be joined by our Chinese friends today: His Excellency Ambassador Chen Yuming, Chinese Ambassador to Australia along with representatives and special guests from the Academy of Agricultural Sciences China and the Nanjing Agricultural University.
We can learn a great deal together and we can learn a great deal from each other.
China is Australia's most valuable destination for exports of agricultural products and two way trade is growing, with Chinese sales to Australia growing at more than eight per cent a year.
We appreciate the significant recent increases in access for a number of products including beef, Tasmanian cherries and dairy products.
And I am absolutely delighted that this Centre will work so closely with the Academy and the University.
The understandings and agreements which will see shared endeavour in teaching and learning, research and innovation here and at your institutions in China are exactly the kind of positive human connections which bind Australia and China together more closely every year.
The great themes of the Australian future  -  the great themes of change and progress in our century  -  are all contained in the work of the Centre which we are here to launch today.
Asian partnerships, Asian growth, food security, clean energy, education.
The work of this Centre is exactly the kind of work I envisaged in our White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
The White Paper, plan which guides Australia's efforts to be among the winners in the Asian Century, specifically identified the food and agricultural sector as a major priority for work.
Currently Australia produces twice as much food as we consume  -  we export as much as we eat.
For decades, we have been well served by our reputation as a safe supplier of high quality food and fibre.
The work we do now in research and innovation to seize the opportunities our clean energy future will create for our food and fibre industries will be a key in coming decades  -  and the shifting centre of economic gravity, from west to east, creates vast new opportunities for us in our region.
This is why, following the release of Asian Century White Paper, ‘Feeding the Future: A Joint Australia-China Report on Strengthening Investment and Technological Cooperation in Agriculture to Enhance Food Security' was released by Minister Emerson and Minister Ludwig in December last year.
China's Minister for Commerce and Minister for Agriculture are co-signatories to the report.
Feeding the Future identified new grounds for future collaborations between agricultural producers and agribusinesses in both countries: developing water and soil resources in northern Australia; commercialising new technology, particularly new plant varieties and making improvements in food processing and logistics.
These are all areas where the nexus between carbon reduction and food and fibre production  -  and these are all areas of cooperation which are strongly reflected in the work of this Centre and the collaborative arrangements that you have struck.
While the high quality tertiary courses in the agri-food sector which will be offered here and with your partners are vital to the future prospects of farmers around the country  -  and  in turn, vital to the future prosperity of Australia's regional communities. 
So the launch of this Centre drives partnerships in our region, in a century of growth, it supports food security, it finds economic opportunity in clean energy and carbon reduction.
All this is done, ultimately, through research  -  through education.
Nothing matters more to me personally, nothing matters more to the nation I lead or to the nations we work with in the world, than improving the education of our peoples.
As Prime Minister I take particular pleasure in seeing the work we are doing to prepare our nation for the future take shape in such practical ways in an outer urban community.
Here, at the University of Sydney's campus at Camden, I can see all our hopes and plans for our nation becoming very substantial and real.
I am very pleased to be back at the University of Sydney and to see the results of the Australian Government's contribution of $4.6 million to this Centre.
I commend the hard work of all the institutions who have been involved in the delivery of this centre and the cooperative arrangements we are celebrating today.
I look forward to seeing the results of your work in coming years.
Congratulations  -  and thank you.


Sydney
More than 1000 jobs and training opportunities are up for grabs today at the Australian Government Jobs and Skills Expo at the Whitlam Leisure Centre in Liverpool.
Today's Liverpool Expo puts local job seekers in touch with employers, training organisations and industry representatives.
This is a great chance for local job seekers and businesses from throughout south -west Sydney to come together and explore local job opportunities.
Amongst the many jobs on offer are opportunities from apprenticeships in a number of different trades to jobs in hospitality and retail.
From truck driving and construction to childcare and hospitality – whoever you are, there are great job and training opportunities at the Jobs and Skills Expo.
The Gillard Government understands that breaking into the workforce can be difficult. This Expo is a practical way of making the search for a job a bit easier.
With more than 80 exhibitors at the Liverpool Jobs and Skills Expo, job seekers are encouraged to come armed with their resumes to take advantage of this unique opportunity to do months' worth of job searching in a single day.
The Gillard Government's Jobs and Skills Expos are achieving real results for job seekers across the country – this is the 71st Jobs and Skills Expos we have delivered and we know that they work because we've now seen more than 25,000 Australians find employment at an Expo, and many thousands more sign up for training opportunities.
To place a job vacancy or to find out more about the Australian Government Jobs and Skills Expos call 13 11 58 or go to www.humanservices.gov.au/expos


Sydney
HOST: I'm delighted to say that we have the Prime Minister on the telephone. Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Hello John.
HOST: Thank you very much for giving us some of your time.
How's things in the western Sydney area gone or you?
PM: I've very much enjoyed it John and I'm sure I'm going to enjoy today as well.
I've had the opportunity to talk to a lot of people about issues that matter to them in western Sydney.
For example we had a great community safety forum yesterday and I've met with some amazing school kids who are determined to achieve and to build a great life for themselves, so it's been a good time and I'm looking forward to today.
HOST: Okay, well you've had, after your fourth stay in western Sydney, you've done all sorts of things.
You've done media conferences, fundraisers, party events, private meetings, but a lot of people are saying you're yet to meet a voter who wasn't part of some sort of scripted event.
PM: Well that's all nonsense John.
The media when they're following you around, press packs, they've got to talk about something.
When I'm here I wander around and talk to people.
I've had the opportunity to talk to a lot of people and they are able to say whatever they want to say.
HOST: What are ‘mummy bloggers'?
PM: ‘Mummy bloggers' is a term used to describe women who run internet sites, so they're blogging and talking about their lives and what they do, raising kids and work and family life and all that kind of thing.
HOST: Okay, you had a meeting with the mummy bloggers, I think it was a private dining room at Rooty Hill RSL.
But again people are saying almost none of those people live in Sydney's west.
PM: John, I've been here for a few days and in all sorts of circumstances.
I've had the opportunity to talk to people.
So I know there's always a bit of media carry-on around these things, I don't let any of that worry me.
When I'm talking to people I have a real conversation with them and they're able to raise anything that's on their mind.
HOST: Tell me, what are the problems western Sydney voters are most concerned about?
PM: I think concerns vary across different parts of western Sydney, and everybody's story is unique.
So you've always got to be careful of generalising.
But if I was going to try and pick the key issues that I think matter to people out here, people are concerned about jobs and how they will make their future, how they will continue to provide for themselves and their family, and how our nation will go through in the days beyond the mining boom  -  what the source of Australian jobs will be.
So I've been able to talk to people about our plan for Australian jobs and I'm going to a jobs expo today to get jobseekers and job opportunities together.
People are very focussed on cost of living pressures, understandably, and I've been talking to people about benefits like our Schoolkids Bonus  -  help with the cost of getting the kids back to school at the start of the year when you've got to get the new shoes and everything else, and of course that's in contest  -  I support it, Mr Abbott does not.
People are very focussed on the quality of their child's school and on local healthcare services, whether they're going to get the education they need for the kids for the future, whether the hospitals will be able to offer the service you need if you're in a crisis situation and you really need to get to the hospital for something.
So we've been talking about improving schools and improving hospitals. And infrastructure  -  traffic is a big issue out here-
HOST: Big, big, yeah.
PM: Very big issue.
As is community safety, and I've had the opportunity of talking to local people about that and their perspectives on some of the things that have disrupted a sense of community safety including firearms being discharged in suburban streets.
HOST: Tell me, no matter which way you look at it, it's hard to deny that you're not on the campaign trail.
PM: This is what I do, John.
As Prime Minister, for all of the time I've been Prime Minister, when I was Deputy Prime Minister and indeed in Opposition before that, I always took myself out and around to talk to people and I'll continue to do so.
I've done that in western Sydney in the past. I'll do it again in the future. It helps to collect views, to talk about what's on people's minds-
HOST: Sure.
PM: And have the opportunity to explain what the Government's doing. You always learn something and that, to me, is part of governing.
HOST: So you're not on the campaign trail?
PM: We'll have the election, and I've already announced the date so there's no mystery John, no guessing games, we'll have the election on 14 September.
HOST: I see. You want to avoid that campaign trail phrase, don't you?
PM: Well, John, I last year, for example, took myself to south-eastern Queensland and central Queensland for a comparable amount of time, out and about talking to people.
People weren't then saying to me, ‘are you on a campaign trail', they just accepted there was the Prime Minister doing what she does, governing the country, talking to local communities.
That's what I'm doing now.
HOST: Okay. You claimed somewhere that gun crime has soared, but in reality non-fatal shootings in Sydney have fallen.
PM: My point was the number of weapons, shootings in streets, so weapons being discharged in public places, that has gone up.
The phenomenon of shooting at premises, you know, shots being fired into houses, that has gone up, and it's that that I think has particularly shattered people's sense of confidence in their safety in western Sydney.
But not just western Sydney, John, in Melbourne, in my own electorate over the weekend there was a bikie-inspired shooting in an industrial estate  -  a man who actually makes his home in my electorate.
So there have been problems in various parts of the country but it's obviously terrifying for people who are in and around when a gun is fired.
HOST: You bet.
PM: And more broadly than that, if a gun's been fired somewhere in your community, it impinges on everybody's sense of safety.
HOST: Okay, tell me, do we really need a national anti-gang taskforce? Why can't the states look after that themselves?
They've got their own police forces, why can't they handle it?
PM: Because these gangs are national and tremendously sophisticated.
Indeed, they have international links.
We are talking about gangs that can count their earnings in the tens of millions; indeed, some of them are worth more than $100 million.
So these are very sophisticated gangs doing business around Australia, able to move people, weapons, wealth, money around Australia and unless you've got a national response, then they're obviously going to move from one state to another to try and avoid local law enforcement.
So state police do a tremendously good job tracking down gangs and dealing with gang violence, but there's a limit to what they do.
New South Wales police can't run over the border to Victoria, they don't have jurisdiction there, which is why we are getting our federal police to work in strike teams with local police to deal with gangs and the violence they bring, and also to crack down on the unexplained wealth they earn.
Lots of people have got a story about a person who's apparently got no job, but seems to be driving around in a very expensive sports car.
Well if that is happening, and if that is the proceeds of crime, then we want to seize that wealth.
HOST: Okay, I've got some questions that have been sent in by listeners. There's one here from Jan Kerr, who says, ‘why the glasses?' It seems like a stupid question, I suppose you wear the glasses because you need them, do you?
PM: That's right, that's right because they help me see better.
HOST: Pretty simple. A fella called Rich Salt asks, ‘what do you think your legacy will be?'
PM: I'm not thinking about any of that. I'll leave that all for the long distant future.
My focus is on getting done what I need to do every day, so that I'm making a difference for families today, supporting them, as they face all of the pressures of modern life.
And I'm building a future for our country that will have jobs and prosperity and opportunity in it for all Australians. And better services to support people including a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
HOST: Okay, so you intend to hang around, in other words, you're not going anywhere?
PM: No, of course not.
HOST: Do you think people would like you to go somewhere?
PM: John, you're going to get onto that tired old conversation that we resolved in the Federal Labor Party last February.
HOST: Prime Minister, I never get onto tired old conversations.
PM: Well we won't bother having that one then.
HOST: Alright, so you haven't got any concerns, put it that way?
PM: No, I don't.
HOST: Okay, do you think you've been  -  a woman called Tracey Denholm asks, ‘do you think you have been judged harshly because you're a woman?'
PM: I think that there are some things that are different about being the first woman to do this job.
Some of them are incredibly delightful things, like I get young women rushing up to me, or mums or dads bringing something to me to sign for their young daughter because they want young girls, their daughter to look and to see me doing this job and for it to be a message that women can do anything in our society.
So there are some great things about being the first woman.
There are some different things about being the first woman to do this job  -  the endless fascination with shoes and hair and clothes and all of that kind of carry-on has come with it too.
HOST: Do you have advisers in regard to clothes and shoes and stuff?
PM: You've got to take  -  just like male politicians do  -  some advice about what works on TV, you know, things that make lights strobe and fuzz and all of that kind of stuff, but male politicians get that kind of advice as well.
HOST: They all seem to be wearing pale blue ties.
PM: I think Mr Abbott has taken to that, that's true.
HOST: What do you do to relax, I mean, the job you've got is awful. I wouldn't like it, what do you do to relax?
PM: Well I think the job I have is a fantastic one, a tremendous privilege, and the thing I like about it the best is it gives you the opportunity to do things that you can see making a difference.
You know, I can go to a school and I can see the difference the programs we've brought have made for those kids' lives.
I can go to a hospital and see patients being treated because of the decisions we've made.
I can go to a manufacturing business and see people in work because of the decisions we've made. So it's a great job.
Everybody needs to relax sometimes and I can read book, do a bit of knitting, watch a bit of TV, all of those sorts of very ordinary things.
HOST: Knitting's very ordinary. I didn't know people still knitted. My mother used to knit all the time.
PM: Heavens, there's a whole tribe of knitters out there John, who are still clicking away with the needles and also finding each other on all sorts of internet sites so that they can swap patterns and tips.
There are some cafes that are for knitters, where people go and knit and have a cup of coffee and chat.
HOST: You're kidding?
PM: No I'm not!
HOST: Really?
PM: You'll get people ringing in now John, telling you all about where to go if you're a mad knitter.
HOST: Yeah, purl one, plain one, drop one. I remember.
PM: No dropping.
HOST: You don't  -  maybe you could give me a knitting lesson one day. They tell me blokes-
PM: I would happily do that!
HOST: They tell me blokes do knit.
PM: Absolutely right.
HOST: Really, well I haven't quite taken to it yet and I don't know that I will. So what's happening today, what are you doing today?
PM: I'll be at a Jobs Expo today.
This is in fact the 71st Jobs Expo that we've had around the country, and it's where we create an event for businesses that are looking for workers, and workers who are looking for jobs to come together.
We get people in their thousands turning up and it always works to put the right people with the right employers so we see new jobs.
HOST: Okay. Prime Minister, do you feel comfortable, do you feel threatened?
PM: In what way?
HOST: By people around you?
PM: No, of course not.
HOST: Why of course not? It's a tough business and there are a lot of tough people involved, and a lot of people would like to be leader.
PM: No, I don't worry about any of that John.
HOST: You're very strong.
PM: I don't worry about any of that. A lot of media carry-on from time to time, but I never let any of that worry me.
HOST: Okay, well you've certainly got to have a tough hide to be in the job that you're in and I suppose a lot of  -  well not too many women  -  Margaret Thatcher probably experienced it, she was terrific, she did a good job.
PM: Well, you wouldn't expect me as a Labor politician to endorse Margaret Thatcher's policies and plans, but of course as the first woman to do that job in the UK, to be Prime Minister there, she faced a lot of stresses and strains that came with being the first woman to do it.
I absolutely acknowledge that.
HOST: Okay, who do you admire?
PM: A range of people. I'm a Hillary Clinton fan  -  I think she's changed perceptions of women around the world.
HOST: Yes she has.
PM: Yeah, tremendously personable, lovely woman.
I've enjoyed the times that I've met her and I think her example kind of shines around the world, so she's a very impressive figure.
HOST: What about the Queen? Do you admire the Queen? I know you're not a monarchist.
PM: No, I'm not a monarchist, but personally, looking at her as a woman fulfilling a role and doing it day after day, year after year, I do think she's a very impressive person.
I got to see her up close when we had the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting here, and she came on tour, and she's not young John, let's put it like that, she's not young, and she's tremendously focussed, tremendously strong and a very impressive person.
HOST: Very.
PM: A great person to talk to about world events because she's got this encyclopedia in her head, not from having read it but from having been there.
HOST: Yeah, well she would have I imagine.
Are you going to stand by what you said when you announced the date of the election, that you will clearly define when you go from governing mode to campaigning mode?
PM: Yes John, there's doing the business of Government and then there will be the election campaign as people have known them in the past.
HOST: Okay, so you're not in campaign mode now. Not even for a minute or two?
PM: Well I'm chatting to you now John.
I don't know what label you want to put on that, but I'd put the same label on it as to when we've had conversations last year or the year before or a long, long time back.
You and I have talked regularly, so there's nothing different about this conversation.
HOST: Okay, it's been good to talk to you; it's always good to talk to you. I enjoy very much you giving us time.
You've dismissed suggestions that the 457 visa stance is xenophobic and a move to the far right, saying that you were simply putting Australian jobs first.
Following your comments on Sunday night that foreign workers should not be put at the front of the jobs queue at the expense of Australian workers, you've come under fire from the Coalition and you've come under fire, believe it or not, from the Greens.
PM: Well others can say what they want. My view is Australian workers should come first for opportunities in our nation.
HOST: Of course they should.
PM: Now there are times when businesses have legitimate skills shortages, but we want to put Australians first and get them into jobs first.
It does concern me if I ever hear a story about someone missing out on a job opportunity because the employer got instead someone on a 457 visa, so a temporary foreign worker to do the job, and it does upset me that there are jobs being filled by 457 visa holders now because a few years back our training system let people down.
So under the Howard Government, Mr Abbott was Minister for Health, we weren't training enough doctors, we didn't train enough nurses, and now our hospitals are reliant a lot of the time on temporary foreign workers holding 457 visas.
Well there's nothing about that program that should ever be an excuse for not giving people training opportunities, creating apprenticeships, delivering university places, and Australians should always be the ones who get first go and first benefit from the job opportunities in our country.
Now this is a big difference between the political parties. Mr Abbott says he wants 457 visas  -  temporary foreign workers  -  to be a mainstay of the Australian immigration program, and I think we don't agree.
HOST: Okay. We're losing you on that telephone. Are you in a car or something?
PM: No I'm not, so maybe the telephone gods are letting us down but no I'm not moving.
HOST: Okay, Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time, and it's been enjoyable to talk to you.
It always is, though we may not agree politically on a lot of things but nonetheless I enjoy the fact that you give us time so generously.
PM: Thanks John.
HOST: Good to talk to you. Prime Minister Julia Gillard, and she is generous with her time.


Sydney
Western Sydney will be designated as an Innovative Region that will help the region bid for a new innovation precinct as part of the Gillard Government's $1 billionPlan for Australian Jobs.
The Government's Plan for Australian Jobs will create ten new Industry Innovation Precincts across Australia.
As an Innovative Region, the Gillard Government will provide $1.5 million for dedicated staff and other resources to work with regional industry organisations, local governments, businesses, local universities, and communities to develop an innovation plan for the region.  This will support a local drive for an Innovation Precinct in Western Sydney.
Home to over 1.6 million people and adding $85 billion a year to the nation's GDP, Greater Western Sydney has the potential to provide a large proportion of Australia's future jobs growth.
At Liverpool Jobs and Skills Expo, the Prime Minister spoke on the importance of innovation for the future of Western Sydney.
To capitalise on the opportunities of the Asian Century, Australian businesses, especially those in Western Sydney, can benefit from more support to develop new products, technologies, skills and ideas to break into new markets.
Australia has one of the best education and research systems in the world  -  but we can do more to translate this advantage into business success on local and world markets.
As part of the Plan for Australian Jobs, announced last month, the Gillard Government has committed $500 million for Industry Innovation Precincts that will bring industry, firms, research institutions, technology experts and government agencies together. They will work to achieve the innovations, connections and scale that our businesses need to succeed in the future.
The prospects for innovation in Western Sydney are extensive and include opportunities in industries such the built environment with as many as 32,120 construction firms based in the region, defence and aerospace in Bankstown, food in Luddenham and transport and logistics across the region.
It is also the home to world class research facilities. Yesterday, the Prime Minister opened the University of Sydney's Centre for Carbon, Water and Food at Camden and researchers at the University of Western Sydney are undertaking ground breaking research in the areas of water, communities, children's futures and urban and community development.
Consultation is underway on the developing new precincts, and applications will be considered throughout 2013.
This new industry and innovation network funding will help put Western Sydney in the driver's seat to host a new Innovation Precinct.
In addition, it will also help Western Sydney firms to participate in other innovation precincts around the nation.  
Total funding of $1.5 million over four years will commence this financial year.
Further details on precincts can be found at http://www.aussiejobs.innovation.gov.au


Penrith, NSW
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I am here to say to you that the future belongs to the people who step up and shape it. You can drift into your future and see what comes, or you can actively shape your future and make sure that you prepare and get the best of opportunities; that you get ready.
And what is true in the life of an individual is true in the life of a nation. We will have the best of opportunities in the future if we take the right decisions today to shape that future.
Your future is never assured in a competitive world  -  no one owes our nation a living  -  you have got to get up and work for it, and you've got to make the right decisions so that you do have that strong future.
And we've been very focused on that as a Government, and I've been very focused on that this week as my visit in and around has caused so much media attention  -  including this visit today to Penrith.
The simple message that we've been taking to people is that we need to actively plan and shape a future that gives people in this region of the world, and more broadly, the benefit of jobs. Good jobs, long-term jobs, jobs for the future.
Jobs that involve the highest of skill and consequently draw the highest of rewards; the highest of pay.
And that just doesn't happen automatically. It particularly doesn't happen automatically when the world has been through a global financial crisis and when the Australian dollar is so strong and likely to be sustained so strong for a long period of time, and that puts pressure on businesses like manufacturing, puts pressure through the economy.
We've got to take the right decisions now in this environment to shape a prosperous future.
Part of taking those right decisions is to make sure that the traditional infrastructure we've all known and relied on  -  roads and rail and ports  -  is fit for purpose.
Which is why one of my clear messages when I've been in greater western Sydney this week has been that we do need a road that takes you all the way into the city.
That it is not good enough for this community to be denied that kind of access, to be asked to endorse a plan that takes you further into the city, but not all of the way to the city.
And it's also not good for this community  -  or not good enough for this community  -  to be asked to pay tolls on roads that you currently travel on for nothing.
That's an important thing for jobs and mobility in this community.
Because so many people have to make the long commute in the morning and the long commute home, and the longer that commute takes them, the less time they get with family and friends at each end of the day.
The leaving before the kids have got up, the getting home after the kids have gone to bed.
So a very important announcement from us which is about this community and its future.
But getting people to where they need to go more quickly and easily is one strategy for this community's future. Another strategy is the one referred to by the mayor, and that is to better distribute jobs so people don't have to always embark on long travel to get jobs and to get to the high-skill, high-wage jobs that they want.
One thing that we want to do to ensure jobs are present locally in communities like this one is to create innovation precincts  -  job precincts in those communities that bring together researchers and businesses so that our great researchers can transmit the innovations of the future to business, we can seize those business opportunities and create jobs.
One thing that really frustrates Australians I think is when they hear about a great Aussie invention that ends up getting commercialised somewhere overseas and people overseas get the benefit of that work.
So I have announced today we will be investing $1.5 million to bring people together; researchers, businesses across the greater western Sydney area so that you can put up the best possible pitch for at least one of our innovation precincts.
New precincts, new ways of working together, researchers and business creating new jobs and jobs you don't have to travel to town for.
So I think that's good news. But the even better news is the rollout of the National Broadband Network, because there is nothing that will work more effectively to distribute jobs and job opportunities across this part of the world than the rollout of the NBN.
It closes that sense of distance  -  any sense of distance. It means that you can pursue right here locally a business that is not only connected to the CBD of Sydney; it is connected to the world.
It means that you can do that if you're running a business from home and it's just you, or you're deciding as a major company to locate one of your workplaces here.
It means that work can be distributed far more easily than it is now because you can engage in real time in a real way with people right around the world.
That's the employment benefit of the National Broadband Network.
The benefit is not just limited to employment, it's about new services as well.
The things that can mean that an older person gets to stay at home. The new health services which mean things that you used to have to go to the GP for, you can monitor yourself and send the GP the results in real time.
That you can have medical consultations without ever leaving your lounge room. That you can access the best of education from around the world, and our young people can access the best of education from around the world.
These are incredible benefits for the community unlocked by the power of the National Broadband Network.
As we bring that power to communities we are very conscious that people come to this new world of digital technology with different skill levels and different abilities to seize the moment.
I think we all know that if right now if we ended up having some catastrophic failure with our phone or something happened with our iPad we didn't understand, the best thing we could do in this room is ask one of these school children to sort it out for us.
So, we all know that there are people who because they are young they instinctively take to this world, and have all of the skills and aptitudes that they need to immerse themselves in it.
Then you've got older people  -  my father was a good example  -  he didn't trust the automatic teller machine. He never used the automatic teller, he didn't think it was right that you put your card in a slot in the wall and that money came out of it, and he was going to go into the bank and he was going to have a conversation with the man or woman behind the counter.
So, some older Australians who actually need some help to adapt to this new world so that they can get the benefits of it.
And then there is all of us in between who manage to adopt some of the skills along the way but perhaps don't intuitively see the full power of this technology the way some younger people do.
So, having local strategies to help people understand and get the skills they need is pivotally important. If we just roll out the NBN then the uptake will be amongst some who instinctively take to this world, but not amongst all.
We can make sure in partnership with you that everyone  -  young and old, the digital natives, the people who first pick up an iPad with a sense of wonderment  -  that everyone gets the benefits of this new technology.
Which is why I am so impressed at the work going on here at your local council, and it is a great tribute to you and to the team, and I know many of them are in the room today, that you have thought your way through this digital economy strategy.
That you are taking active decisions to shape the future of the people that you serve, and we've seen some of those active decisions and their power as we've gone to the digital hub.
Had the ability to cut the ribbon, but also seen people learning there about the digital world  -  including one woman who said to me as I walked out, now I've met you I'll be able to ‘like' you on Facebook.
Obviously getting into the digital world and starting to understand it and presumably not that long ago before she started taking those classes even the language of that sentence would have been entirely alien to her, let alone being on Facebook herself and understanding the use of it.
So these things are really important and they get driven by local leadership, they get driven by a partnership with the federal government, and I'm very pleased that our partnership with you has enabled the digital hub to be here, has enabled you to engage in the digital enterprise strategy, and that you have the overarching digital economy strategy for your part of the world.
So I get the special delight of saying that the strategy and that work is formally launched. I'm the one who got the benefit of the very ornate scissors to cut the ribbon with, but really it's not about me cutting the ribbon, it's about the work each and every one of you has done and will continue to do to make this meaningful in your local community.
So congratulations to you. I always love it when I get to come to a part of the world that's got a real sense of energy and achievement and aspiration, and possibly most important of all, a very clear plan for your future.
I'm very pleased to be here today, thank you very much for the invitation.


Female Orphan School, Parramatta
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I've had quite a week. It started here and it's finishing here, so what could be more appropriate than having started at the University of Western Sydney and finishing here at the University of Western Sydney.
It started when I came on Sunday evening to address friends of the Labor Party  -  Labor members and friends  -  about our vision for the country and our vision for this part of the country, for western Sydney.
And when I spoke in the Turbott Auditorium I made the point that this university is a factory of suburban opportunity.
It speaks to us about the things that we are trying to achieve for Australians around the nation, including particularly women. Because when we trace our life as a nation, for too long it was women who were locked out of the doors of universities.
For too long it was women who didn't get an equal opportunity for higher education  -  indeed for education at all.
And we are changing that. This university is changing it. Our policies are changing it.
Moving to a time when universities can grow  -  and this one is  -  there need be no false debate about standards dropping because of growth. Janice and I had a discussion about that on Sunday evening.
A university of high standards still able to offer more in opportunity and to offer that opportunity to people who traditionally haven't got a go at a university education, and who in great numbers are the first to come from their family to a university.
So I'm very proud to be here, and nothing really lifts up my heart more than hearing these stories of opportunity and achievement.
I spent a great deal of time out in western Sydney in the community this week. But I did go to Melbourne for one occasion  -  and I do want to just mention it because it was an occasion at which we honoured a great woman.
I went to the state funeral of Joan Child, the first Labor woman ever elected to the House of Representatives, and that happened in 1974.
Now there are probably some young women in the audience who are going ‘1974, before the dawn of time'. Actually for most of us, 1974 doesn't nearly seem that long ago that we could be talking about the first ever Labor woman to serve in the House of Representatives.
But serve she did, she was a formidable woman, a formidable campaigner.
For those of you who know something about the political scene there is always a scramble come elections to get out in front on the postal votes; to make sure that those people who are getting to vote by post actually get your ticket and they know how to vote for you if they are so-minded to vote for you.
Joan Child is famous for having when necessary climbed through a bathroom window into a suburban home to ensure that someone marking their postal vote did get a Labor ticket.
I'm sure the person in question did want a Labor ticket and somehow had managed to lock themselves in the house, but undeterred, she got through that bathroom window to make sure that they ended up with a how to vote card.
So she was a formidable woman!
But when we farewelled her, the first Labor woman in the House of Representatives, the first woman to serve as Speaker in the House of Representatives, a colleague of mine in saying farewell used these words:
She lived a life of strength, so others could live alife of opportunity.
A life of strength because she was the first woman to be elected  -  Labor woman to be elected to the Parliament.
A life of strength because she was effectively a single mother to five sons.
A life of strength because she lived to such a great age and made sure she continued to be active and supported her community.
But all of it was dedicated so others could live a life of opportunity.
And I think those very simple but powerful words actually catch the spirit of what International Women's Day is about in the modern age and why we do want to have occasions like this and honour women in our community; in this case, women in the west.
Because there are so many women from various walks of life who live lives of strength so others can have lives of opportunity.
And I know many of the women here this evening well and truly fit into that category and I'm looking forward to being able to meet people during the course of this evening's event and talk to them about the way in which they are harnessing opportunity for others in their community.
As a Government we strive to do that to. But we can only be as good as the local community efforts that work with us.
We can only be as good at bringing early childhood education to children, as the people  -  predominantly women  -  working in those child care centres and working as early educators.
We can only be as good at creating opportunity for kids in primary school as the teachers  -  predominantly women are  -  as they go about transforming lives for those young children.
We can only be as good as the teachers in secondary school, as the people in university, as the people who guide young apprentices are.
So in trying to create a life of opportunity for the nation, we know we've always got a lot of big and sometimes difficult decisions to make, but we know the carrying of our work into reality in communities rest on the shoulders of citizens of goodwill who want to work with us.
Fortunately right around the nation I find those citizens of goodwill and I've certainly found them in large numbers here in Sydney's west during the course of the last week.
From the people I've met who are spending their lives creating opportunity for Australians with disability and who are anxiously awaiting the start of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, to the teachers and principals I've met who are transforming lives of the young people in their care.
To the New South Wales Young Australian of the Year, Corey Payne, and the work he is doing to inspire others to live a life of opportunity.
To the people I've met at suburban libraries, in small businesses, just walking down the street, all of whom have a story about how they are trying to enrich this community, their community in their place.
So it has been a great week, and no better way to end it than right here celebrating some women of achievement. So it's a delight to join you.
We gather in this building, and this building I think too is a tremendously significant place. I'm glad we were able to help with that renovation, which is still going on.
But it says something about Australia that when we look at our universities  -  our great institutions of learning  -  that the oldest surviving building is this building. And it was a school for orphaned girls.
Now I suspect in its day it was making a difference  -  of course we would never conceptualise an institution like this in the modern age, we would never seek to recreate it  -  but you do have to admire the spirit that did create it.
And did create it so early in the life of our nation.
And did create it to make a difference for girls who otherwise would have lived lives of absolute disadvantage.
Did create it for those girls to give them some opportunity and some access to a life and learning so this place, something we wouldn't create now but created with the best of intentions.
And if we can take from what is in some ways a beautiful and other ways a very austere building, take with us from this evening tonight some of that spirit of endeavour that the creators of this building had  -  Anna King, Elizabeth Paterson and others  -  when they first decided that their fledgling colony did need to make a difference for the life of orphaned girls, if we can take some of that spirit with us then I think it will be a better place.
So it's truly a great pleasure to join you here this evening and I'm looking forward to hearing the individual stories of the women who are being honoured in this place.
Thank you.


Sydney
PM: It's great to be here in Liverpool. I'm joined by the Minister for Employment Bill Shorten, by Chris Hayes, the Member for Fowler, and by Laurie Ferguson, the Member for Werriwa.
And we're here at the Whitlam Leisure Centre which today is hosting a Jobs Expo.
Jobs Expos are held around the country and they have been an incredibly successful way of bringing people with work to people who need work.
We commenced the Jobs Expo program because we knew around the country that there would be a real benefit in creating an occasion which brought employers together with job seekers.
This is proving already to be a tremendous success. More than 3,000 people have gone through so more people have come and gone even since the time that we were on stage addressing the crowd.
More than 3,000 people have come through; there are 1,200 jobs on the jobs board so that means we are forging real links for people to get a job.
Today, I am also announcing a strategy to help the greater western Sydney region get more jobs locally, jobs in the region itself.
We're talking about the third-biggest economy in Australia after the CBDs of Sydney and Melbourne  -  a great manufacturing region, a transport and logistics hub.
People here in greater western Sydney, south-western Sydney, often have no choice but to spend a long period of time journeying to work.
We have announced during the week that we want to see the right infrastructure proposal, the right roads proposal to get people to the city and freight to the port.
But another thing we can do to relieve congestion is to create jobs in this region itself which is why I'm pleased to be able to announce a $1.5 million investment to bring together people who can facilitate researchers in this region working with local businesses to make sure they put forward really high-quality proposals to attract at least one innovation precinct to this region.
There are going to be 10 such precincts around the country and they are a strategy to create jobs.
Many Australians I think get frustrated when they hear that we have invented something new, a great new idea, and then it gets commercialised overseas.
Often that happens because there aren't the great links there need to be between our researchers and business people.
Our innovation precincts are about building those links and we will facilitate the best quality proposals coming forward from this part of the world.
So I'm genuinely delighted to be here. I know time is short for everyone but we will take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in a speech this morning Kevin Rudd praised the contribution the successive generations of migrants to our international standing and our living standards.
This week you've put out a tough message about Aussie jobs first and I'm wondering how that message promotes Australia's living standards, our international standing and your own aspirations about our push in the Asian century?
PM: Well, you've heard me talk this week comprehensively about Australia, its future and migration to Australia.
I'm a migrant.
We've built a great multicultural society together  -  not without problems, there are occasionally problems  -  but our success in the world, in blending people from around the world into a peaceful, harmonious society is something we should be very proud of.
It's been good for Australia, our migration program, it's been good for our economy, it's been good for our society and we continue to have people migrate to this country to make it permanently their home, to become Australian citizens, to get a job, to raise their families just as my mother and father came here.
I've talked this week too about one migration visa class which is for people to come to this country on a temporary basis.
The reason for that visa class is so businesses, if they face acute skills shortages, can source a worker from overseas.
And I've said when it comes to that visa class we do have to make sure we're putting work opportunities for Australians first.
The purpose of that visa class isn't for someone from overseas to get a job whilst an Australian ready, willing and able to do it misses out.
That's not the purpose of 457 visas and so to the extent that there are any rorts in the system, and clearly there's some material that would concern people, we're going to crack down on them.
We did when we came to government crackdown on 457 visas because they were being abused and they were taking jobs that could have been performed by Australians.
When we hear evidence that that is happening again then we crack down again and that is the appropriate thing to do.
So a great migrant nation, Australia, a specific visa class which should not be used to substitute for opportunities for Australian workers and, second, should not be used to down tools on training.
We need some 457 visa holders now and we do need them.
But it's because our nation didn't invest in training at an earlier point in time.
When you go to hospitals and you meet nurses from overseas, doctors from overseas, we need their skills for our hospital system absolutely, but we are reliant on them because in the days of the Howard Government when Minister Abbott was Minister for Health, we didn't train enough doctors and nurses so we don't have enough now.
Well, I'm very determined that our training system is there giving Australians the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
I love it when I hear a story like David's about getting a way through as a young person to a job and an opportunity.
I'm proud that we've created more apprenticeships than ever before, more university places than ever before, trade training centres in schools offering great training opportunities and school-based apprenticeship programs to get kids in and find them a pathway.
That's what we do and that's what I stand for.
JOURNALIST: How big a problem though, Prime Minister, is the abuse, as you say, of the 457 visas really?
Tony Abbott says that you're really exaggerating this for political purposes and you've given some examples but what's the dimension of the problem, how big a problem is it?
PM: This is a clear difference between the political parties because I believe we should only be looking for temporary workers from overseas if there are skill shortages that we cannot fill any other way.
Mr Abbott believes that temporary workers from overseas should be a mainstay of our migration program.
Well I just don't think that's right.
That is a dispute between me and Mr Abbott. It's a different way of looking at the world.
In terms of abuses, well there is some evidence around that the Minister for Immigration has gone to about misuses, people describing jobs as highly skilled where they end up being jobs for security guards, people sourcing a worker and then that person ending up working for another business in circumstances where an Australian could have got that job.
So to the extent that there are any problems, I want to get them out of the system.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the resignation of Ted Baillieu, is it somewhat of a relief given that there might be a fresh start and that given that he's given you a bit of grief, certainly over the last couple of weeks?
PM: My sense is that Victoria, the people of Victoria have grown weary of the cutbacks of the Victorian Liberal Government.
There is a huge campaign to fight the cutbacks in TAFE because that's denying people jobs and opportunities and denying kids the start they need in life.
There is also a fight back against the health cutbacks from the Victorian Liberal Government.
So I think in the Victorian community the sense really is that they're sick of the Liberal cuts and what I don't think people should have to risk is those cuts being added to by a Tony Abbott-led Liberal Federal Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Pauline Hanson is running at the next election, your reaction to that?
PM: Well, of course I would fight Ms Hanson. I don't agree with her views and I don't think people should vote for her.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your sense of what's happened in Victoria overnight? Some people have been comparing it to Kevin Rudd's demise. Is there any comparison there?
PM: You would have to speak to someone from the Liberal Party about the ins and outs of it.
In my view, the focus of many Victorians is on the cutbacks and what they mean in their everyday life.
JOURNALIST: People criticised you in the week for not doing a street walk. That looked like a walk and meet-and-greet to me. Were you pleased with that reaction and how do you think the week has gone generally?
PM: I have been and meeting people all week in a wide variety of circumstances including here now at the Jobs Expo.
I enjoy meeting people, I enjoy having a yack. Sometimes you're there, sometimes you're not, but I get the opportunity to meet people in a wide variety of circumstances and I always enjoy it.
I enjoyed walking through and meeting people in the crowd today.
JOURNALIST: And the week generally?
PM: The week generally I think has been a good week.
I've travelled to western Sydney before, I'll be here again, I've had the opportunity to be in these communities in the past and I'll look forward to the opportunity to do it in the future.
Every time you visit this part of the world you learn something, you meet someone who makes a real impression on you.
I've met workers in disability who've made a real impression and who are so anxiously awaiting the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
I've met young people whose life chances have been accelerated because of the work we're doing in schools through our national partnerships.
I've met people who are concerned at work and the long-term future for Australia.
I've met people who talk about the travel times and do want to see a plan that gets them out of travel congestion, takes them out of the traffic and enables them to spend more time with their families.
I've met people concerned about community safety; they don't want the kind of shattering of their sense of peace that comes when firearms are fired in suburban streets.
We have talked too about the quality of local health services.
It really matters to people that as a government we are putting more money into health, including more money into health in New South Wales.
So I have met a lot of individuals who have made an impression. I've had the opportunity to speak about our plans for roads, our plans for jobs, our plans for community safety.
JOURNALIST: On the issue of health services Prime Minister, the AMA today is calling for a complete rebuild of Westmead Public Hospital, one of the main hospitals out here. Are you sympathetic to that?
PM: I'm always very focused on making sure that we're improving health.
That's why I, as Prime Minister, struck an arrangement to make sure there's more money going into hospitals and health care than ever before in the nation's history and we become an equal partner in the growth in hospital costs.
We are providing an extra billion dollars here, unfortunately at a time that Premier O'Farrell is taking $3 billion out.
A lot would be possible if Premier O'Farrell kept pace with what we are doing in funding.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, back to the Liberal leadership in Victoria, are you expecting a fresh approach from a new leadership team?
PM: I deal with premiers and chief ministers around the country; I will of course make contact with and speak to the new premier, Premier Napthine, and talk to him about issues in Victoria.
During the time I've been Prime Minister there's been some coming and going from the COAG table and obviously I'll have a new face at the COAG table come April.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd and Stephen Smith say they were unaware of the Ben Zygier case. Does that surprise you?
PM: What's happened here is DFAT, our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, has provided a report to our Foreign Affairs Minister, Minister Carr, who released it yesterday.
What that report makes clear is that there could have been better work between ASIO and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade on Australia actively, proactively, engaging in consular work with this young man.
As it was, the family never requested consular assistance but I think we've learned some lessons about protocols for working when people are detained on issues associated with intelligence.
JOURNALIST: Just on western Sydney, Prime Minister, all the polling says that Labor's dead in the water here, the members next to you there are going to lose their jobs.
What's the sense you've got over the last four or five days? Is it just a lost cause or can you win the seats out here?
PM: I don't comment on opinion polls and people will make their own decisions in September about how they want to vote and the choice will be an incredibly clear one.
Who's got a plan for the nation's future so that we are stronger and smarter and fairer; who is helping modern families today with all of the stresses and strains of modern life?
This Government has a very clear plan for the future. We've charted the course and we want to pursue it.
We've got very clear programs to help families with things like the cost of living.
On the other side of politics we just see negativity.
Come September, people will make their choice.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you picked up a mood or an anger out there this week that people want change and want to put you out?
PM: I have been talking to people about the real issues that they confront in their daily life which are things like how long am I going to be in the car this morning and this evening to get from home to work and back again and what will I miss out on at home whilst I do that long bills journey?
How will I pay the bills when they come in, can I make it all add up?
What would happen if one of my children were sick and I needed to rush to the hospital?
Is my young son, my young daughter really getting the best quality education and are they going to get the best jobs in the future?
Should I be concerned about safety in my streets and what better can be done on safety in my streets?
These are the things, the real-world things, that people have been raising with me and I've been talking to them about.
JOURNALIST: Can we ask the local members about these things, about the mood out here?
PM: Look, I think I've answered for the team and we're not here to talk about opinion polls.
We're here to talk about the issues that matter for the people we've met walking through the Jobs Expo and what they'd be worried about is getting a job, that's why 3,000 people have come here today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on Sunday you said that shootings in outdoor areas have surged over the last 15 years but the New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics says that's not quite accurate. Can you clarify those figures?
PM: I certainly can. I was referring to the figures about shootings in public places and particularly firing into premises, guns being let off in streets, fired into houses.
When you look at the trend there, it has been up over the last few years.
There was a slight fall-off in the figures towards the end of last year but it's still up compared with the past and that's what people are concerned about and understandably so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Labor leader in Victoria has expressed doubt that this will be the end of the Liberal leadership turmoil. Do you share that view?
PM: I will leave those comments with Daniel Andrews as Opposition Leader.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott's repeatedly attacked you for the way you deposed Kevin Rudd, do you think what's happening in Victoria somewhat blunts that consistent attack on you?
PM: I think that's a question for Mr Abbott.
JOURNALIST: One of the issues for the people of Liverpool is the proposed Moorebank Intermodal. Do you share their concerns about bringing more trucks out to this area?
PM: I understand those concerns. We want to do better by freight movement in Sydney and that does require new infrastructure and the Defence land there at Moorebank has been identified for some period of time including under the former Howard Government.
But movements of freight always have to be properly planned so that they're not impinging on people's quality of life and we'll want to stay very strongly engaged with local people here as that work rolls out.
Okay, thank you.


Sydney
The Australian Government welcomes UN Security Council Resolution 2094 which responds to North Korea's nuclear test on 12 February 2013. 
As a Security Council member, Australia worked closely with fellow Council members and international partners to pursue a strong response to North Korea's provocative and dangerous actions.
This resolution sends a clear message to North Korea that the international community will respond robustly to such actions. 
North Korea's nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programs pose a threat to international peace and security, and to the stability of the Asia-Pacific region.
Pyongyang's actions clearly demonstrate an intention to strengthen this capability.
This resolution breaks new ground for the Security Council on North Korea.
It builds on and expands Security Council Resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009) and 2087 (2013), with new sanctions to further constrain North Korea's nuclear and ballistic missile programs, and significant new financial and travel sanctions.
We call on North Korea to abide by this resolution and its international obligations, and engage with the international community through negotiation, not provocation.
We also urge North Korea to respond constructively to South Korean President Park Geun-hye's call for it to cease its nuclear program and provocations, so that trust can be developed on the Korean Peninsula.


Canberra
The Gillard Government today announced a new Australian Government Anti-Slavery Initiative which seeks to eliminate modern slavery in Australia and overseas.
In 2013, as we celebrate International Women's Day, the Gillard Government will ensure that its procurement rules and practices assist in identifying and stamping out slavery.
Slavery and people-trafficking are crimes that affect almost every nation on earth  -  as either source, transit or destination countries. And it is not a phenomenon to which Australia is immune.
That is why we are announcing this whole of government strategy which improves procurement arrangements by:
-       Processes: the Department of Finance and Deregulation will ensure that Commonwealth procurement arrangements adequately identify slavery as an important issue when considering the ethical behaviour of suppliers.
-       Advice to Agencies: the Department of Finance and Deregulation will issue revised procurement guidance to reinforce the need for specific actions or behaviours to eliminate the chances of slavery being used in supply chains.
-       Training: the Department of Finance and Deregulation will strengthen training and development arrangements for Commonwealth procurement officers to reinforce specific legal and policy requirements, including reporting of breaches of policy.
The Gillard Government is a significant contributor to the national economy and our economic footprint extends to all industries and regions.
The Commonwealth will show leadership in the fight against slavery, and we encourage state, territory and local Governments and businesses and organisations of all sizes to participate in this effort.
Over the past decade, more than 20 million people around the world have been the subject of forced labour, slavery and human trafficking.
Eighty per cent of them are women  -  women who are poor, who have little or no education, who are victims of domestic violence, who are shut-out from economic opportunities and who shoulder family responsibilities without legal or financial support.
This year as part of Australia's membership of the United Nations Security Council and as we move to host the G20 in 2014, Australia will continue to pursue global action to combat slavery and people-trafficking.
Four months ago, the Gillard Government announced funding of $50 million to continue the Asia Regional Trafficking in Persons program that trains police officers, prosecutors and judges to better combat people-trafficking in our region.
Our aid program supports initiatives to prevent violence against women, increase educational opportunity, and create economic opportunity within communities.
Today's announcement complements work done over the last nine years, where the Australian Government has invested over $150 million in anti-people trafficking measures.
In fact, we take all the funds confiscated from criminals convicted of trafficking and slavery and give them to NGOs in this field.
As a result, we've been able to help around 200 women and their dependents in Australia.
Yesterday, the Governor-General signed into law the Slavery, Slavery-like Conditions and People Trafficking Act which passed through both Houses of Parliament last month.
This legislation creates new offences of forced marriage and harbouring a victim, and standalone offences of forced labour and organ trafficking.
It ensures that those who help people commit trafficking, slavery or slavery-like offences can be charged as well as the primary perpetrators.
It raises the penalties for existing debt bondage offences, and also increases the availability of reparations to victims.
Alongside these new laws, we are updating Australia's National Action Plan to combat trafficking, slavery and slavery-like practices, such as forced marriage - which will come into force next year.



HOST: The Prime Minister is our guest, Julia Gillard, thank you so much for your time this morning.
PM: Good morning Adam.
HOST: What do you think you've achieved in the last week focussing on western Sydney?
PM: Adam, I've been to western Sydney before on many, many occasions and I'll go again in the future.
I had the opportunity to spend a bit of dedicated time there so I took it.
It gave me time to talk to a wide range of community members about a lot of different issues and we made some announcements on things that are really top of people's minds  -  community safety being one of them, with a better approach, federal police working with state police and a better use of national laws to crack down on gang crime.
And we took the opportunity too, to make an announcement about the preparedness of the Federal Government to put funding on the table for a road project that really works to get people into the city and freight to the port.
And yesterday I had the delight of participating in a jobs expo, and I want to make sure that western Sydney benefits from our plan for Australian jobs and our plan for innovation precincts, so we talked about making sure we've got people on the ground facilitating that.
HOST: But in terms of meeting people, Prime Minister, some people have suggested you haven't mixed with just the real regular voters of western Sydney; to a large extent this has been a stage-managed event.
There's been criticism that you bussed in some mummy bloggers from the eastern suburbs who you've met before when you could have just been out doing a traditional street walk.
I mean, has that aspect of interaction with just the general, randomly selected public been lacking?
PM: No, not at all. This became just one of those little silly media games that cycle in on itself-
HOST: But even the jobs expo was a Labor Party organised event-
PM: That is completely untrue, Adam. Completely untrue.
Jobs expos are events that the Government organises around the country.
We've done more than 70 of them, they are completely open access to the public, anyone can come.
Of course, the people who come tend to be the people who are looking for work and the employers who are putting up their hoardings and saying they've got jobs.
But it is a public access open event and we've done more than 70 of them, and so the little media game goes on but the truth of my week in western Sydney is there were countless, countless times where I was talking to people, they were able to say whatever they wanted to say on the real issues on their mind.
And let me tell you not one of them ever raised the way in which my itinerary was organised.
They were too busy talking about jobs and their kids' school and their family member with a disability.
HOST: When it comes to some of the promises that have been made, specifically with WestConnex, one of the ideas you want there is to get people all the way connected through to the city.
But a slew of experts have come out and said that's out-dated 1970s road planning, they're giving up on that sort of stuff in the United States.
Countries around the world where freeways dump people in the middle of the city are being turned back on now. Is this an old way of thinking?
PM: I don't think it is at all. I mean, the main point here is there is not much point extending a motorway  -  the M4  -  so that it gets you closer to town but still dumps you out where you then have to find a way through.
I mean we all know that the worst gridlock happens when a big road, a motorway, comes to a shuddering halt and then you're left on ordinary-sized roads and streets trying to find your way through.
Now what Premier O'Farrell unfortunately is proposing would cost between $10 billion and $13 billion, and yet it would fail to get people through to the city, fail to get freight to the port and people would get tolled for travelling on roads that they currently travel on for free.
Well I don't think that's good enough, I think we need to see a better plan.
HOST: It's at least $1 billion for the WestConnex, you've recently promised a $1.2 billion salary increase for aged care workers, Gonski is still to come online, the NDIS, the dental scheme, against the backdrop of an economy that won't quite make surplus, a mining tax that's going well short of predicted revenue.
Many people are asking where will this money come from, is the Government writing cheques that it just can't cash?
PM: Well let's get the facts on the table, and I'm sure that people will find the facts reassuring.
Fact number one, any contribution to what you're calling the WestConnex project, the M4, the M5, any contribution to that project would come out of currently budgeted funds in our Nation Building 2 program.
They're already in the budget, already in the bottom line.
The aged care  -  money for people who work in aged care and to expand that workforce because we'll need to as an ageing society  -  is already in the budget, already in the bottom line.
The money for dental funding, already in the budget, already in the bottom line.
HOST: Gonski?
PM: Yes, we've got two big programs to finance.
One is the school funding reforms, school improvement program following the work of David Gonski and his review team, and one is the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
And I've been crystal clear with people Adam, and let me be very clear again, there will be some tough budget choices made to find the money for these two big priorities.
People will see those budget choices in the May budget, and they can judge them.
But I will be asking the nation to make some choices because these things should be our highest priority, getting our kids a world-leading education and giving people with disabilities a better deal.
HOST: Prime Minister, you've focussed on the issue of 457 visas this week. There's been a degree of emotional response from some people. Can you clarify, what's the point you're making about 457 visas and the current regime?
PM: The point I'm making is a very simple one. There are times when businesses have a legitimate need to get in someone from overseas on a temporary basis because there is an acute skill shortage and that's the only way they can get the job done.
But 457 visas, when we came to government, the program was out of control.
We've cracked down on it and I think we've got more work to do to make sure that's all it is being used for  -  those genuine skill shortages by businesses  -  and it is not being used to substitute people from overseas coming into work on a temporary basis for Australian workers, for people who are already here, indeed including people who have migrated to our country who are here looking for work and are ready, willing and able to do the job.
HOST: What are the sort of jobs that are being taken in front of Australian workers. You mean the feedback that's been gathered is from engineers and mining people that say you just can't get people with specific skills to go and work on mines a distance away.
As much as we hear of carpenters heading over to the west and making hundreds of thousands of dollars, these are places where 457 visas are playing a crucial role.
What are the sort of things you've been clamping down on, what are the sort of things that are happening that shouldn't have been?
PM: Well, of the various things that concern me, I've certainly heard about people brought in to do tiling work in city construction projects when there are people with those skills available who haven't got the work opportunity.
I've heard about businesses making jobs look like they are really high skilled jobs in order to get the visa but in truth people who come here end up working as security guards and that work obviously could have been made available to someone in Australia.
I've heard about businesses bringing someone on only to then effectively transfer the worker to another business in circumstances that doesn't meet why they said they were bringing the worker in in the first place.
They concern me and they concern me because work opportunities in our nation should first and foremost be for Australians, be for the people in our country.
HOST: This is a scheme that affect tens of thousands of people, as well as it's administered there's always going to be, I presume, a couple of instances that people might not be happy with.
But you've been accused on a deeper level of playing almost a race card. When the first person that comes out and endorses your position is Pauline Hanson, are you worried about the spin that's been put on this?
Are you worried about  -  some people fear that this is the beginning of what's going to be a very ugly election campaign?
PM: Well I think there will be ugliness in the election campaign, Adam.
I mean, we saw ugliness in the 2010 campaign from the Opposition about asylum seekers and refugees. We've seen ugliness every day since.
We see continued ugliness from Scott Morrison on these questions and so that will feature in the 2013 campaign unfortunately.
For me, I can't control what other people say. What I can control is what I say and I am putting the very simple proposition that Australian workers should come first.
And clearly Australian workers are people who are in Australia, born here, migrated here, made this country their home, our nation and work opportunities in our economy should be for Australians first.
HOST: Prime Minister, you say you've met a lot of people in your time in western Sydney.
Some commentators talk about a visceral hatred of Labor in the west. Some people say that people are lining up metaphorically with baseball bats waiting to attack the Government at the polls.
In your visit, have you encountered  -  we've spoken with ABC reporters who said they polled 30 people, 28 of whom want to vote Liberal at the moment. Are you sensing a degree of real animosity towards where the Government's at, at the moment, this far out from the election?
PM: I interact with people as I find them, of course. Some are full of praise, full of warmth, want to get a photo, you get a really fabulous reception.
Some people have got issues and concerns and complaints they want to raise with you, such is the nature of our wonderful democracy.
HOST: But especially on issues of trust is where a lot of the feedback we get is where some of the ill sentiment lies.
PM: Well, look when I've had discussions with people in western Sydney across the week, what they've really been wanting to tell me about is their lives, their perceptive, their issues.
So a lot of things that get very intensive coverage in the media they are not interested in at all, very personal, very much about their son's school, their daughter with a disability, their job, their future, their house, their drive to work, their concern about community safety.
The real essence of what it means to live and work in greater western Sydney.
HOST: Prime Minister, I know you're off to the United Nations International Women's Day breakfast today so happy International Women's Day.
Thanks for your time this morning.
PM: To you too Adam, happy International Women's Day and I'm looking forward to sharing it now with 1,700 women, I suppose a few blokes will sneak in, but 1,700 women.
HOST: Okay, thank you very much Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you.



RUSCIANO: It's Mamamia Today, Em Rusciano and Dave Thornton here with you on your International Women's Day and Dave I can think of no one better to talk to than the first female Prime Minister of our country, Julia Gillard, hello!
PM: Hello.
RUSCIANO: Happy International Women's Day Prime Minister!
PM: To you too!
RUSCIANO: How exciting to have you on, thank you for chatting with us today.
PM: It's my pleasure and a great day to be doing it.
RUSCIANO: Prime Minister, this morning when you had your blow-dry, - I'm sure Tim does it, that's how I like to imagine it  -  did you look in the mirror and did you finally go ‘you know what JG, well done on being the first female Prime Minister,' because that's a big deal.
PM: I'm going to have to shatter all of your illusions now because no, Tim wasn't with me this morning, so life wasn't as easy as that.
But it is a fairly special thing to be the first woman Prime Minister of our nation on International Women's Day.
RUSCIANO: It really is.
THORNTON: Absolutely, and I think for everyone out there who grew up on ABC comedies that their fathers and mothers inflicted them on, Yes Prime Minister.
It's great to have you here, I just wanted to ask though, being the first female Prime Minister of Australia, were there other inspirations for you growing up?
Because surely you are in a bit of a minority when it comes to world leaders. Was there anyone growing up that you aspired to?
PM: Well in the minority unfortunately. When I go to these big international meetings there aren't too many other women around.
When I was growing up I mean really my inspiration was pretty close to home. It was my parents, some of my teachers that I very much looked up to.
In my adult life I've always been a Hillary Clinton fan, I think she has reshaped the way the world sees women in powerful positions and I've got to know her a little bit through being Prime Minister so that's been very delightful.
RUSCIANO: I'm a big Hillary fan too. Do you call her? Are you good buddies? Do you catch up?
PM: We do speak a bit, but mainly I've seen her at international meetings or when she's come here for things associated with the work of the Government, but I do hope to stay in touch with her even as she moves on to the next stage of her life following being Secretary of State.
RUSCIANO: Yes now Prime Minister, I have two daughters coming into the world. Who do you look to now, modern day women that you admire in Australia? Who are the ones now that we can be looking to?
PM: I think there is a tremendous range of women to look up to.
In the corporate world where you can see people like Gail Kelly there at the top of a huge corporation I think that gives women a sense that the doors of business are increasingly open to them, but we've got some more to do there, that's for sure.
Leigh Sales or Laura Tingle, people in the media  -  when I was growing up every reporter was a man, every newsreader was a man, everybody who wrote for a newspaper was a man.
Those diversified images, those voices of authority, I think that's a fantastic role model for women growing up too.
But I suspect for many young girls they'll pick a role model that's more directly in their environment.
So it'll be that very special teacher that inspires me, it'll be their mum, it'll be their grand-mum.
RUSCIANO: If my children pick me they may end up as drag queens so that may not be the best role model! I do wear a lot of feathers and sequins Julia, but that's okay!
PM: That's fine too!
THORNTON: Julia, please do not say that. For the Prime Minister to say you can dress like Em, which is unicorns and leggings, is not a good example to set!
RUSCIANO: I wear a daytime sequin, Prime Minister, I'm sure you'd support that.
PM: A daytime sequin?
RUSCIANO: Yes!
PM: Okay, I'll think about that.
THORNTON: But Julia the good thing is, if you don't like that attire, just push it towards Tony Abbott. Just say ‘mate, a little bit of glitter will be fine'.
PM: Oh dear, I'm getting a really bad thought here about what that could all look like!
THORNTON: I think we all are unfortunately!
RUSCIANO: So Prime Minister, what will you be doing today on International Women's Day, as the first female Prime Minister, as the most powerful woman in the country, what do you do?
PM: I decided to start my day with 1,700 other people, predominantly women, at the UN Women organisation's huge International Women's Day breakfast.
And we got to listen to a woman who is a magistrate in PNG, and she told us about her own journey coming from a village where she was subject to an arranged marriage that she tried to get away from, and her own struggles to end up doing what she does now, which is to be a law officer, a magistrate, in Papua New Guinea.
And a lot of what she does is dealing with questions of violence, particularly violence against women, in a society which is unfortunately all too characterised by violence.
RUSCIANO: That's amazing, and thank you for being a trailblazer and an amazing woman.
Thank you for being here on our show today on International Women's Day. Prime Minister, thank you very much.
PM: Thank you.


Sydney Convention and Exhibition Centre
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I acknowledge each of you  -  the women drawn here by the power of this day.
You are women of achievement.
Women who reach out to shape the future.
This is a day of celebration, and rightly so.
Even if the women's movement had changed just one life, it would be worth it.
Yet over the past century, it has changed millions of lives, including my own.
But today our celebration must be tempered by realism.
The first International Women's Day was 102 years ago.
This is an old struggle.
Yet the level of assault and abuse is still too high.
The gender pay gap is still too wide.
The number of women in senior roles is still too few.
We should be impatient.
It's time to get a move on.
And friends, let's never forget that women's rights are indivisible.
If women are marginalised or oppressed anywhere, it's as though it happened to one of us.
This year America has been celebrating 150 years since President Lincoln ended slavery.
We imagine slavery as something from the pages of history.
But it's not.
It's hard to imagine from the safety and comfort we know, yet slavery still exists in our world and in our land.
The setting is different than it once was.
Today the people forced into slavery work in factories, in domestic servitude, in brothels  -  often in big cities like this.
But the violence and coercion they face is exactly the same.
In February this year I had the opportunity to meet with two women who were victims of human trafficking.
They had been brought to Australia by their employers under false pretences.
They had their passports taken from them.
They weren't allowed to leave the house without supervision.
One of them wasn't paid properly; the other wasn't paid at all.
When they challenged their employers, they were abused and threatened.
That occurred here, in Australia.
Not 150 years ago but in the last three years.
I was introduced to those women by Andrew “Twiggy” Forrest and his wife Nicola, who were talking to me about their role in establishing ‘Walk Free'  -  a global movement that aims to eradicate modern slavery.
There are many things on which Mr Forrest and I do not agree but ending modern slavery isn't one of them.
Twiggy and Nicola Forrest have shown amazing leadership on this issue.
Not only that.
The Forrests have pledged to donate the vast majority of their wealth to this and other causes.
A gesture that will change lives in the most basic possible way  -  restoring people to freedom.
Friends, remember these women are among 16 million women who have been enslaved and trafficked over the past decade and this is their Day too.
Those women don't have a voice so we must speak for them.
Not just to speak but to act.
That's why since 2004, Australia has invested over $150 million in anti-people trafficking measures, in our region and here at home  -  including $50 million I pledged last year.
Already we've been able to help around 200 women and their dependents in Australia, and today I pay tribute to the special role the Salvation Army has played in this.
But as Australia's first female Prime Minister, I've wanted us to do even more.
That's why we passed the Slavery, Slavery-like Conditions and People Trafficking Act which our Governor-General signed into law yesterday.
This Act creates new offences of forced marriage and harbouring a victim.
It enables accomplices to be charged as well as the main perpetrators.
It raises the penalties for existing debt bondage offences, and also increases payments to victims.
Alongside these new laws, we are updating Australia's National Action Plan to combat trafficking, slavery and forced marriage  -  which will come into force next year.
And today I'm proud to announce a new whole-of-government strategy to reinforce ethical behaviour in procurement so that no firm providing goods or services to the Commonwealth is tainted by slavery or people-trafficking anywhere in the supply chain.
While there's no evidence this is the case at the moment, we know slavery or people-trafficking are becoming a greater issue as the global economy becomes more interlinked.
I'd hate to see a single cent of public money go to any entity involved in this vile trade.
Friends, this is one of the many ways that Australia is saying ‘no'.
No to people trafficking.
No to slavery.
No to treating women like objects or chattels.
That is not a world we will accept.
That is not a life we want for any woman or any girl.
Not here.
Not overseas.
Not anywhere.
Not ever.
Instead, we seek a different future and a different world.
Where every girl is born with freedom in her heart and has the chance to grow old with that freedom.
And so, on International Women's Day, we affirm this simple but enduring truth: change is always possible, and the hope we share can never be in vain.


Sydney
International Women's Day had today been marked with a pledge to continue Australia's efforts to eliminate and prevent violence against women and girls.
The United Nations theme for International Women's Day this year is a promise: time for action to end violence against women.
The first International Women's Day rallies were held in March 1911, a time when support for the right for women to work, vote and hold public office was building momentum.
We have a come long way since that time and made significant gains in achieving greater gender equality and enabling women's social, political and economic empowerment.
But tragically, far too many women around the world are still victims of violence by their governments and armies and by those who should love and protect them - by partners and family members.
And we know that there are other areas where action is still required to address inequality. The gender pay gap is still too wide and the number of women in senior roles is still too few.
Hundreds of events take place around the world for International Women's Day and it truly is a day when countries can unite and work together to end and prevent all forms of violence, whether physical, sexual or psychological.
The Prime Minister spoke about the challenges facing women and girls at an IWD Breakfast in Sydney.
In Washington, Ms Collins participated in a panel examining domestic and international initiatives aimed at improving gender equality and to attend the International Women of Courage Ceremony.
Ms Collins has been in New York to lead the Australia delegation at the 57th session of the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women, the world's main policy-making body, at which countries agree to a set of concrete recommendations to be implemented to improve gender equality.
The theme at the Commission this year is the elimination and prevention of all forms of violence against women and girls.
Domestically and internationally – including through our aid program and advocacy – Australia is promoting a world where women and girls can thrive and where their safety is guaranteed.
To join in the CSW conversation on Twitter, use the hashtag #OZCSW57.


Canberra
The Prime Minister congratulates Colin Barnett on his re-election as the Premier of Western Australia.
The Gillard Government looks forward to continuing to work with the Barnett Government on a range of important initiatives which will benefit the people of Western Australia and recognise the importance that WA plays to the national economy.
The Prime Minister acknowledges Mark McGowan and the WA Labor team for their hard-fought campaign.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that President U Thein Sein of Myanmar will visit Australia from 17 to 20 March at the invitation of the Governor-General of Australia, Ms Quentin Bryce AC CVO.
President Thein Sein's visit will be the first by a head of state of Myanmar since 1974. The visit comes during a period of far reaching change in Myanmar and deeper bilateral engagement in support of reform, including enhanced development cooperation and high-level ministerial contact.
President Thein Sein's visit is an important opportunity to forge closer ties, including cooperation to support political reform, social development and trade and investment in Myanmar.
The President will meet the Prime Minister in Canberra, and will also call on the Governor-General and attend a State Lunch held in his honour at Government House.  While in Australia, the President will have an opportunity to interact with Australian business leaders and Myanmar recipients of Australia Award scholarships.


Federation Mall, Canberra
Today we gather to celebrate this city ordained by our Constitution to be the heart of our nation's democracy.
At a time when Britain was still Home, the ‘federal generation' was astute enough to give this place an Aboriginal name,a wise and evocative choice.
Though “Canberra” has several meanings, the one we settle upon is “meeting place”  -  as if the meeting place of the new Australia could only recognise and rest upon the old.
So it was on this hill one hundred years ago that Lady Denman drew a card from her gold cigarette case and named this city “Canberra”, the world's newest capital on the world's oldest continent.
The naming of Canberra completed a remarkable quartet of events: the idea, the site, the plan, the name.
The idea owed its debt to Washington DC  -  and so this is a day to honour our abiding friendship with the United States.
Like its elder sister, Canberra was a neat solution to a federal dilemma, placing the capital outside any one state and thus belonging to every state.
The site was chosen in a process that was complex, yet the result was sublime.
Nestled within a bowl of hills.
The Brindabellas majestic in the west.
The Molonglo valley forming a natural amphitheatre for the great institutions to come.
And the plan  -  this was a work of rare and timely genius.
Walter Burley Griffin perhaps saw us better than we saw ourselves, seeing this landscape with fresh and open eyes from half a world away.
His vision was superbly realised by his partner in life and work, Marion Mahony Griffin, whose drawings form a national treasure in their own right.
It was a plan created by two Americans and yet so distinctively Australian.
A plan that honoured and embossed this landscape, embracing its contours, working along its ancient grain.
But friends, the process of selecting and naming this city was only a beginning.
From the start of Canberra's construction to the opening of new Parliament House took three-quarters of a century.
At every stage, it was the work of human hands.
Hands that graded the roads and laid the bricks and planted the trees.
We honour also those who now govern this city and tend it.
We honour those who give their best to our national institutions and to the ideal of an impartial public service.
And we honour those who have come here through the years to make a life in Canberra's suburbs and in the hamlets beyond.
So for the nation, Canberra is our enduring capital.
For the world, it is a model of urban design.
And for locals, it is simply our much-loved home.
Canberra is all these things.
A city whose promise was a long time in gestation and which, at its hundredth birthday, has finally attained a mature grace.
Yet it is a capital whose history has barely begun.
Because today we do more than mark the centenary of Canberra's founding.
Today we mark the beginning of Canberra's second century, and so dedicate ourselves to all the future achievements of city and nation.
Across these ten decades, we have made here a fine and decent city  -  a city invested with a certain grandeur.
A city that has become a place of learning and culture  -  the memory-house of a new nation slowly growing old.
A city that is “a focal point for national pride and sentiment”.
A capital which truly merits our affection and esteem.


Canberra
Schools taking part in the Gillard Government's National Partnerships on Literacy and Numeracy and Low SES Schools have increased the number of students achieving at or above national minimum standards at a greater rate than other schools, a new analysis published today has shown.
The analysis is based on data published today on the updated My School site, which has been refreshed to include 2012 NAPLAN results and 2011 financial data for every school in the country.
The results clearly demonstrate that targeted investment, coupled with specific strategies, can lift results for students and schools across the country.
Schools taking part in the Literacy and Numeracy National Partnership were more successful in reducing the percentage of students at or below the minimum standards when compared to all schools in Australia across all years and subjects.
For example:
 * 	For Year 3 Reading, 71 per cent of LNNP schools reduced the percentage of students at or below minimum standards, compared to 61 per cent for all schools in Australia.
 * 	For Year 5 Numeracy, 70 per centof LNNP schools reduced the percentage of students at or below minimum standards, compared to 59 per cent for all schools in Australia.
More than 50 per cent of the schools taking part in the Low SES School Communities National Partnership improved their mean scores in Year 3 Reading, Year 5 Reading and Year 5 Numeracy.
These partnerships are targeted at schools that face significant education challenges, or that are starting from a lower base than other schools. The rate of improvement shown since 2008 is a remarkable result and demonstrates what can be achieved with extra resources, school improvement strategies and dedicated teaching staff.
The results for all schools taking part in the National Partnerships are available for all the community to see on the My School site, which is continuing to shine a spotlight on student and school performance.
This latest update to the website will help us continue to learn what is working in our schools and where we need to direct our attention and resources. It provides parents, teacher and the community with more information about schools than ever before.
With this year's release, five years of NAPLAN data and three years of finance data are now available. With each additional year of data, My School presents a more complete picture of school progress. This will help us make the right decisions to keep improving our schools.
The 2013 update also includes more details on Vocational Education and Training (VET) in schools, including information on enrolment and qualifications students are achieving.
The 2012 NAPLAN data has also confirmed that the link between student background and achievement is still too strong in Australian schools. Students from high SES backgrounds achieving well-resourced schools are consistently out-performing their peers from less advantaged backgrounds, attending schools with fewer resources.
That's why the National Plan for School Improvement is so important. It will ensure every school has the funding it needs to educate every student to a high standard, no matter where they live or which school they attend.
Future additions to My School will include results from parent, student and teacher satisfaction surveys and more information on senior secondary outcomes.
To access the My School website go to: www.myschool.edu.au
To access the new analysis of National Partnership schools visit www.deewr.gov.au


Canberra
PM: It's fantastic to be here at Latham Primary School and I am joined by the Minister for School Education Peter Garrett.
This is a great day for Australian education. It is the launch of this year's version of My School.
The fifth time that people have been able to jump online and have a look at the performance of their child's school.
I well remember as Education Minister determining that we should create My School, and I did so because I wanted parents to have more information than they had ever had before about the performance of their child's school.
I have told the story before but it pays to tell it again.
I was absolutely astounded when I became Minister for Education that no-one in the nation could tell you which were the most disadvantaged schools in the country, which schools were underperforming, which were the best schools in the country.
It continues to astound me that the former Government didn't care enough about the quality of children's education to even bother assembling that data.
It was a big fight to get that data assembled and to get it up and out for parents to look at. 
Here we are five years on and My School is more powerful than it has ever been before.
It is giving you more information than people have ever had before.
Now it is giving you five years of information and that means that we can show the improvement over time in what schools are doing.
We can show the growth they are bringing in children's education because children are tested every two years and with five years of information you can show the change in children over time. 
It is bringing you information too about the financial resources in school. And information as well about the kind of kids in school: the backgrounds of the children who come to school, the advantages and disadvantages that they bring to school.
This information is powerful  -  who is in school, how they are achieving, what resources are being brought to the task of their education.
This is the information the nation needs to have as we work to improve education for every child in every school.
What we are also releasing today, and what is transparent to people from My School, is the results that are being achieved in our National Partnership Schools.
Now unfortunately My School is telling us that there are still too many kids who get left behind and don't attain the benchmarks that they should in literacy and numeracy.
But what My School is also telling us is in our National Partnership Schools, where we have brought a powerful combination of new resources and new methods to make a difference  -  a difference is being made.
Put simply, kids are getting a better education. 
I think the best way I can tell that story is to point to the example of this school, of Latham primary school.
And where we are standing here today, this school is a literacy and numeracy National Partnership School.
Let's have look at what has been achieved here through these extra resources, coupled with the best teaching methods  -  and we have just seen those on display.
We have seen a drop in year three students who struggle with reading of 21 percentage points.
A remarkable statistic, a great achievement in this school and that kind of achievement is being replicated in many National Partnership Schools around the country.
Even more impressive, at the year five level we have seen huge changes in both reading and numeracy in this school.
In 2008, just under half of this school's year five students were at or below the national minimum standard in reading and in numeracy.
Now we know just 10 per cent of the kids in year five are below the minimum standard, at or below in numeracy, and only six per cent are at or below in reading.
That is an incredible transformation in this school.
It is an incredible transformation in the lives of the children that are being taught here.
So this is a good day for education and it is showing you what we want to achieve around the country through our National Plan for School Improvement, combined with new resources so that the great combination of the best teaching with real resources can make a difference in the lives of our children.
MINISTER GARRETT: My School is a powerful tool. It means that schools and parents have got more information than ever before about student progress. 
And it is a success story in education and I want to commend the Prime Minister for her leadership in making sure that school communities right around Australia now have this information at their fingertips.
This year's My School has three important new features. It is the school by school NAPLAN results that we are now starting to see.
It is cumulative information about the financial resources that schools have at their disposal, and there is additional information as well about vocational learning.
As we continue to improve My School over time, more information will come onto this site to provide parents, teachers and the school community with additional information about both schools and how kids are travelling. 
Five million unique visitors, and we are starting to see in the tracking opportunities that schools have the potential for focused interventions to make sure that kids get on a solid pathway for learning.
I was particularly pleased to see that in the investment in National Partnerships in literacy and numeracy we are seeing improvements greater than the national average in those schools that we supported in National Partnerships in year three literacy for example, and in year five numeracy
They are really good results and the reason is this  -  the schools that have received the National Partnership investment have some of the most disadvantaged students in them and the work that is required to bring those students up to national minimum standards is intense and difficult work.
And we are starting to see it succeed and that is a great result for us.
As well as that we are seeing good and positive results in our low socioeconomic National Partnerships, particularly with Indigenous education; a big challenge where we have closing the gap targets and where much more needs to be done, but we are again seeing improvements proportionally by young Indigenous students, particularly in the areas of literacy.
So this is a great day for education and importantly when we visit a school like this school, Latham Public School, we can see the focused effort by teachers that the Prime Minister referred to, with the results and improvements in literacy that these young students are achieving.
We want to see this happen in every school in the country under our National Plan for School Improvement, and having the data and the information available so we can shine a spotlight on how schools are doing as we are able to do through My School, makes that possible. 
JOURNALIST: The additional information about how schools are travelling, what is that additional information. Can you elaborate on that?
PM: What is new in this version of My School? We might bring Barry in just on this if you want the absolute details. Barry who has been leading our My School efforts since we first started, so congratulations to you.
Do you want to go through the technical differences in this version from last time? 
PROFESSOR BARRY MCGAW: The biggest change actually is more data and more data available with analyses of the kind we introduced last year starting to show trends where you can see for every school the fair comparison with other schools with similar students, how this school is tracking, compared with those schools.
We actually do this very carefully by, in a school like this, taking those students who are in year three and those students in who are in year five  -  but only those who are in this school on both occasions.
So that we can get a good measure of what it is that this school is doing with its students and then compare that with its other comparison schools, but also now compare it with students in the nation as a whole who started exactly where this school's student started. 
That is a very important growth comparison.
What has this school achieved from year three to year five compared with what has been achieved with other students in the country who started exactly where they are.
It is those powerful analyses that will give schools a capacity to see the effects of what it is they are doing.
And then to talk to other schools that are doing better because they can identify those schools on the site.
And there is a set of conversations that can open up, and I know are opening up, across state boundaries even between schools that can see other schools from which they can learn lessons. 
PM: If I can just hop in there. This is the kind of stuff that could only be achieved over time.
When we first put My School up, yes it was a snapshot at that period in time but now we have done the five years, you can get a genuine look at the growth in knowledge and capacity that schools are bringing to children.
And that is such an important comparator, rather than just having the snapshot in time. 
JOURNALIST: Putting aside the National Partnerships, across the board which areas have seen improvement, which areas have seen a downward trend this year, have there been also some negative signs?
PM: As I think we made very clear when we did the Closing the Gap statement, there are some signs in the 2012 results in relation to Indigenous children where we are still analysing it and want to do better.
One possibility for the falling away in those results is we are actually, in some places, getting more kids into school and so they have got a further journey to travel in their education.
But that of course did trouble us and we were very explicit about that when we did the Closing the Gap statement. 
I will turn to Minister Garrett for comments too. 
MINISTER GARRETT: Look, I think the thing to say here as well is that whilst we are seeing improvement across domains we still have big gaps in education performance between students from lower socioeconomic backgrounds and those from higher socioeconomic backgrounds.
And if we look at the international comparators we can see that the performance of equivalent countries either in our region or in the OECD is exceeding ours.
What today's data tells us is that the investments we have made in the National Partnerships has worked.
It tells us that it is hard work to lift the education performance in literacy and numeracy from kids from low socioeconomic backgrounds, and Australia has a diverse education system and we have many kids particularly in the western suburbs cities like Sydney and Melbourne who come without much first English language under their belt.
But what it also tells us that we can see where schools are doing well and how they are applying themselves.
As both the Prime Minister and Barry McGaw have said, that is a powerful driver of school improvement nationwide. 
JOURNALIST: Can I ask about media policy? 
PM: We will just see if there are any other education questions.
JOURNALIST: Have you had any direct talks yet with the new Victorian Premier about Gonski? And how confident are you of being able to convince him that there won't be any school in Victoria that goes backwards, that you might be able to get him on board? 
PM: I haven't had the opportunity to have direct talks with the new Premier.
We did exchange courtesy messages when he became Premier, and I certainly saw with interest the words that he spoke to the media over the course of the weekend.
I have respected the fact that the new Premier would have a lot to do and be getting all of the briefings and getting familiar with all of the material.
What I can certainly assure the new Premier in Victoria, and right around the country, is we have been very explicit that no school will lose a dollar as a result of our school funding reforms.
And that there is a lot to look forward to as we bring more resources combined with strategies for school improvement to make a real difference in the lives of kids, just like a difference is being made here.
And in terms of parents and their children, of course there is nothing more important to a parent than whether or not their son or their daughter is going to succeed at school and get a great start in life.
So, vital to parents to have this information and to see us improve every child's education in every school.
But vital to the nation too, because as Minister Garrett says very clearly, we cannot be a high skill, high wage nation in the future if our standards in schools fall behind the rest of the world.
It is not possible to have a high skill, high wage economy if your school standards are slipping behind.
And when we say slipping behind, of course that it is in a race where not everybody's static and we are going backwards; everybody is running forward and if you don't run as fast as everybody else then you are comparatively behind.
That is the challenge; winning the education race so that we can win the jobs and opportunity and prosperity that can come with our future in this region of the world.
Which is why when we're standing here, we are focused on the future of the economy as well as being focused on each child, each very precious child, and whether or not she or he learns to read and write and count.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on Gonski. Has the Government finalised its funding model yet and do you plan to present it to the states before the COAG meeting? 
PM: We are in very detailed discussions between officials. Obviously there is a lot of information and a lot of work that has been done and is continuing.
I will, at the forthcoming COAG meeting, be saying to my state and territory colleagues that for the future of our country we have got to get this done. 
JOURNALIST: On media policy Prime Minister  -  a question in two really. Is this a campaign to tame News Limited? It's pretty obvious from the papers this morning they see it that way and it probably hasn't worked thus far. 
Secondly, relaxing the 75 per cent reach regulation, wouldn't that just lead to further concentration of broadcast media? 
PM: I am happy to take your question and explain what the Government's policies and plans actually are.
And I think it is somewhat ironic that these questions of free speech are being canvassed today, because I remember very well when I started putting My School together as Minister for Education, that there were a lot of loud voices that were saying you can't trust the media with this information; if you put My School up, then it will be misused, schools will be blamed and shamed and targeted and victimised.
And I was always a great believer that if we gave this information to the community and the media, it would inform a rich debate.
And I think the evidence is in, that overwhelmingly, whilst I haven't agreed with every education story in the last five years and you wouldn't have expected me to, but overwhelmingly this information has informed a richer debate.
So I think that example from me shows that I am passionately committed to free speech, passionately committed to free speech, and also committed to a diversity of voices.
I think both are essential underpinnings of our democracy.
Which brings us to what the Government is actually doing.
What Government is actually doing is supporting self-regulation of print; self-regulation models that people come together in press councils and form.
The Government is not directly regulating in any way the activities of journalists. 
The Government is not taking away from individual journalists the benefit of shield laws; that is simply not true.
The only thing the Government is saying is when media organisations come together to create a press council, to create a self-regulation model, that that self-regulation model should come up to certain standards. 
And when it comes up to certain standards, the news organisations participating in that press council, get the benefit of the exemption under the Privacy Act.
So once again I stress that it's about news organisations, not individual journalists.
It's about self-regulation and it's about freedom of speech.
To do a comparison, there is actually a Government regulator for television stations and radio, the Australian Communications and Media Authority, and I don't hear anybody ever say that that in any way constrains freedom of speech in our TV stations or on our radio stations.
Indeed anybody who has looked at the media over the last 12 months, two years, I think would be laughed at if they suggested in any way that the existence of that Government regulator had constrained what is broadcast on news services or what is talked about on radio.
What is proposed in relation to print is much, much less than that; much, much less.
It is a self-regulation model and with self-regulation model that acquits certain standards then the exemption from the Privacy Act flows to news organisations. 
What is also proposed is if there is a further consolidation in our media industry, that it be looked at by a public interest advocate to look at the diversity of voices in our media industry. 
Not looked at by government but looked at by someone who is independent to take a view about what it means for diversity of media.
And just to give you a sense about the media in our nation today, in Australia, we have got two newspaper companies which deliver their services online understandably in the modern age.
They take 86 per cent of the Australian market.
If we looked at the top two newspaper companies in the US, they only take 14 per cent of the market.
In a smaller market like Canada, so comparable to us but smaller than the US, the top two newspapers take up 54 per cent of the Canadian market.
So there is a degree of concentration.
In the 1950s, there were 15 national or metro newspapers and they were owned by ten different individuals or companies in Australia.
Now we have 11 national or metro newspapers with only three owners.
Even with the advent of the Internet, and so many people get their information that way now, eight out of the nine most popular news media websites are owned or run by traditional media organisations.
Now what does that all mean?
Well I think it means that it would be appropriate, should there be further consolidation in our media industry, for someone independent of government to make an assessment about what this means for the diversity of voices in our democracy and in our debate.
Nothing more, nothing less.
Not a decision taken by government, not a decision made by government; made independently of government.
On the 75 per cent rule, there appears to be some diversity of views by media organisations about whether abolition of this rule is a good thing or a bad thing.
I don't want to make a statement about that. 
What I am concerned about personally, is I do think that it is important that in regional areas of our country, to the extent possible given market dynamics, we see newsrooms providing regional news.
Now I think we have got to be common sense about this.
News organisations, private corporations, they need to make money or they can't employ people obviously.
They go out of business if they don't make money.
But, I think within the ambit of having organisations that are sustainable in what is a difficult economic environment in a world of change for media organisations, there is community concern about regional news and whether or not, if you live in a regional town in our nation, as well as hearing the news from the capital city and the news from Canberra, you can hear some of your news locally. 
And those things have been very important during times of natural disaster and the like.
Which is why we thought it was appropriate that that proposal go before a parliamentary inquiry.
It can be the subject of relatively quick inquiry and report but that really is a matter for the parliamentary committee to work through.
I think it is a discrete question that could be looked at.
And then we have got a number of other questions that we'll ask the same parliamentary inquiry to look at. 
JOURNALIST: Do you think media ownership at the moment is too concentrated?
PM: No, I'm just giving you a snapshot of the current facts. 
JOURNALIST: The snapshot that you've given would suggest you perhaps think it is too concentrated and how do these reforms actually change that?
PM: They don't. The facts I have given you are the facts. There is no proposal from Government to change anything relating to current media arrangements in terms of ownership.
I have given you a snapshot of the facts and I have posed the question, given those facts clearly reveal we have quite a concentrated industry when we compare ourselves to comparable nations.
Canada is a pretty comparable nation; comparable in terms of population, a population our size spread across a vast land mass, we've actually got some very keen comparisons too in the nature of our economy.
So when we see that degree of concentration now, which is a fact and no-one is suggesting it be changed, I think it is appropriate that if there is to be further consolidation, that someone independent of Government ask and answer the question, ‘What does this mean for diversity of voices in our democracy?'
Full stop, nothing more. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you think of the front page of the newspaper referring to or relating Stephen Conroy to Stalin? Do you think that is too much? 
PM: I'm going to leave that to the judgment of others. As you would see from the package I have outlined, our focus is not on Government bringing standards to news organisations to the extent that that has been appearing anywhere in the media today, that is wrong.
Our focus is on freedom of the press and self-regulation that meets appropriate standards. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the privacy provisions in this Act, surely that is the thin end of the wedge and that is the stick with which you can threaten media organisations if self-regulation doesn't measure up to standard.
Doesn't that mean that you're the first non-war Prime Minister to crack down on, to curtail the freedom of the press? 
PM: That is absolute nonsense, Sid. Absolute nonsense. The media industry says to me that they believe in self-regulation, well tick, so do I.
If you're going to have self-regulation, then it seems to me it should be self-regulation that works.
I don't know if the media industry is suggesting you should have self-regulation that fails.
So if the media industry is saying they should have self-regulation that works, I agree with that too, that is good.
So we, I think, then need to ensure that there are models of self-regulation that work. And we know that with the current patterns of self-regulation, we have had media organisations come in and out of press councils to take one example.
What is being suggested here is media self-regulates, the self-regulation needs to come up to a standard, that is not an individual standard for a media company, it is not a standard that's specified for what X or Y or Z media companies should be.
It is a standard for the operation of the council, the self-regulation. The press council created or any press council created should come up to this standard in its workings.
And if it comes up to this standard in its workings and its workings happen absolutely independently of Government with no influence, if it comes up to this standard in its workings, then people get the benefit of the privacy exemption and that benefit flows to the news organisations.
This is not the shield laws which protect individual journalists.
So when you say you, I would have absolutely nothing to do with it and neither I should. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, who sets the standards, the Government? 
PM: No, the independently appointed public interest advocate sets the standards away from- 
JOURNALIST: Who appoints the advocate? 
PM: We would in line with the best of what I referred to as the Nolan principles; we would appoint that person in consultation with the Opposition. 
JOURNALIST: Does that give the Government control over the advocate? 
PM: If you were going to pursue that then you would have to pursue the argument that the Government controls the judiciary because we appoint judges.
I don't hear that argument routinely pursued in our democracy and neither it should be, because there is no evidence, no evidence, anywhere, that despite the fact that we appoint High Court judges, which we do, that we somehow get beneficial decisions from them.
If anything, the life of this Government would show we have gone to the High Court and come back a few times with a bit of a bloody nose.
So we've appointed High Court judges, they act responsibly completely independently of Government.
I think it is possible to appoint someone of integrity and good faith who acts independently of Government, the way our judges do and to give maximum rigour to the appointment, we would go to the maximum extent of the known principles, called the Nolan principles, where you consult the Opposition about the appointment. 
JOURNALIST: But you do appoint judges, the High Court is a bench of judges and there are dissenting views. This is one individual who will have incredible powers.
What sort of apparatus will there be there and also oversight of this individual's decision-making? 
PM: I think you are over-egging it to be frank.
What this individual will do is set the standards for the way in which a press council should work.
So they might go to things like  -  and this is entirely a matter for them so I am just floating ideas here, this is in no way binding on the person.
When they are appointed they might well say something entirely different. 
But they would go to things like how much notice an organisation would need to give to leave a press council because if you're going to self-regulate, then it is not very good practice if a media organisation that thinks it might be about to get an adverse decision pulls out of the organisation before the decision is made.
Adverse decision not made by Government, not made by the public interest advocate, made by the press council.
So simple things like that, that ensure a self-regulation model has got some rigour about it.
Remember the standards are not standards for journalists, they are not standards for newspapers, they are not standards for media organisations, they are standards for the operation of the press council or any press council. 
JOURNALIST: Can you give us an example of self-regulation where it hasn't worked? 
PM: Well, I think when you look across  -  I am not pursuing a personal case here so you would need to ask people who have taken up something with the press council and who have thought that there wasn't a satisfactory dealing with it. 
I think you would be aware that because there obviously have been some concerns in the past about the operation of the press council, that there has been a move over the last few years to increasing rigour in the press council.
I think that is a good thing and media organisations have participated in that, presumably because they thought there needed to be change. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned judges before, about how the Government doesn't interfere in the operation of judges, but there is a Westminster tradition that Government doesn't interfere in the operation of judges.
There is no Westminster tradition that says that the Government can't sack a public servant or a department head. And also isn't there a Westminster tradition of freedom of the press and isn't this measure potentially undermining that?
PM: Absolutely not, no. Government every day appoints people to statutory positions where they have independence and where their tenure is guaranteed apart from very limited circumstances like being convicted of a criminal offence or becoming bankrupt.
You would be aware of the many, many pieces of legislation that create statutory office holders of that nation, in our political system, our system of government and have done so over the ages, nothing to do with this Government.
You could go right back, any Government you want to name.
People like the head of the ACCC. Is anybody seriously suggesting, it is seriously being contended by anyone that when Government has made appointments of that nature that somehow the people involved haven't been fully professional and fully independent?
Can anybody sustain a case against the current head of the ACCC or past heads of the ACCC? That is just one example.
But if that is being done, right and well over time by Governments of different persuasions, appointing people into the job, it seems to logically follow to me that of course this can be done well and in order to do it well there would be consultation with the Opposition.
So if there was a slightest whiff of political controversy about the nature of the appointment, then I am very sure indeed that all of you here would report that uphill and down dale and it would become exercising your absolutely untrammelled freedom of the press and that would become a very big political issue and a very big political crisis. 
JOURNALIST: Members of your backbench and frontbench today have expressed concerns about the protesters in Question Time yesterday.
I think every one of them this morning was really pointing the finger of blame at Tony Abbott for creating this culture, whereby protesters can call out from the galleries. Do you agree with that? 
PM: I think Mr Abbott has made it his business as Leader of the Opposition to be recklessly negative and to bring into Australian politics the tactics of the Tea Party in the United States of America.
That is what the people's revolt and his call for it was all about.
He wanted to create a culture where abusing Parliament, heaping abuse on Parliament, being disrespectful towards Parliament was viewed as standard practice each and every day.
Well if you go out and create that culture it is unsurprising that some people then reflect and mimic that culture. 
JOURNALIST: Darren Chester yesterday said he's tired of the public (inaudible) on you, and wants it to stop. Are you tired of it yourself?
PM: I am not going to get into a debate about what people say about me.
At the end of the day, I don't care and people can make their judgments about the people who say those things.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask about tweeting in Parliament? Anna Burke could potentially restrict politicians from tweeting during Question Time, what is your reaction to that? 
PM: So you will be taking that up as a freedom for the media issue presumably, given it's the issue of the day.
Look, I don't want to prejudge a statement that the Speaker may or may not make today.
I was not physically present in the Parliament yesterday when this issue was canvassed post Question Time.
I understand from reading today's media that she may make a statement today, but she's an independent Speaker and that is entirely a matter for her. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the budget, Barclays Australia forecast a $20 billion deficit for this financial year compared to the $1 billion surplus you forecast last year. 
Should we, in the updated budget in two months' time, expect a blow-out of that magnitude? 
PM: I don't want to disappointment you but you will see the updated budget in two months' time, in two months' time.
Thanks very much.



Prime Minister Julia Gillard today welcomed the President of the Republic of Mozambique, His Excellency Armando Emílio Guebuza and his delegation to Australia.
Ms Gillard expressed Australia's condolences following the recent floods in Mozambique, noting Australia too had experienced damaging floods in recent years. President Guebuza expressed Mozambique's solidarity with the victims of the recent floods and bushfires that affected Australia. 
The two leaders noted the warmth and friendship that underpinned the bilateral relationship and the growing high-level contact between Mozambique and Australia.  The Governor-General of Australia, Ms Quentin Bryce AC CVO, visited Mozambique in 2009; President Guebuza attended the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Perth in 2011. 
Following last year's signing of a Memorandum of Understanding on Bilateral Cooperation, the two leaders welcomed closer relations between Australia and Mozambique, including on international issues of mutual concern such as climate change and food security.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Guebuza noted the significant engagement between Mozambique and Australia in the mining resources sector. Ms Gillard said that the skills and capabilities of Australia's mining industry were world class and welcomed interest by Australian companies in helping to accelerate the development of Mozambique's mining sector.
The two leaders expressed their shared commitment to a sustainable mining future, through initiatives such as the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. President Guebuza welcomed the development assistance Australia was providing to Mozambique in strengthening natural resources governance. This has been consolidated through a new Memorandum of Understanding on a Mining for Development Partnership signed today at Parliament House, in the presence of both leaders.
The two leaders reviewed progress and challenges in the world, in particular on the African continent.  Ms Gillard thanked Mozambique for its support for Australia's successful bid for non-permanent membership of the UN Security Council for 2013/2014.
President Guebuza acknowledged the valuable contribution Australia was making to address peace and security issues in Africa, including through its work on the UN Security Council, and welcomed Australia's increased engagement in Africa more broadly.
Ms Gillard acknowledged Mozambique's contribution to maintaining peace and security in Africa as the Chair of both the Southern Africa Development Community and the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries.
Prime Minister Gillard and President Guebuza discussed steps to strengthen the bilateral relationship and cooperation, including in water and sanitation, agriculture and capacity building through Australia Awards.  They agreed to encourage the efforts of the private sector in both countries to deepen trade and investments links, including in infrastructure. 
The two leaders agreed on the importance of regular consultations between Ministers and officials on bilateral and multilateral issues.  In that respect, they welcomed the inaugural Australia-Mozambique Foreign Ministers' Dialogue held in Canberra during President Guebuza's visit.
This visit also included discussions between Australian and Mozambican Ministers and Members of Parliament.


Canberra
I look forward to working with the new Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, Adam Giles.
I will seek to work with Mr Giles and his new team in the interests of all Territorians.
The news that Australia has our first ever indigenous head of Government is also to be welcomed.
I wish Terry Mills well in the future.


Old Parliament House, Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
The topic you are here to discuss, creating secure jobs, has moved to the centre of national debate this week.
For Labor people, that's a development we welcome.
We want more jobs and more secure jobs for all Australians.
We want more skills, more apprenticeships, more training for young Australians.
We want more Australian workers to fill the skilled jobs our economy creates.
This is exactly what the Australian people expect the Australian Government to stand for.  It is exactly what I will fight for.
For this Labor Government, it's a debate we are ready to have.
Here, we are particularly discussing the two million Australians whose jobs are not secure today.
Who don't know how many hours they'll work next week or next month  -  who can't save or plan to get ahead  -  whose opportunities in life are restricted and whose family's future is constrained, simply by the conditions of their employment.
Cleaners, drivers, labourers, bar staff, wait staff.
People who earn around 85 per cent of the average wage of Australians for the hours they work  -  $4 to $5 an hour less than most people.
Who as your own inquiry found, have fewer entitlements, are more likely to have poor English skills, who find it harder to get a home loan or a car loan and have less super for retirement.
Of course, it's obvious that many Australians benefit from casual work and that many businesses create wealth and opportunity through its use.
Hardly anyone hasn't had a casual job in his or her youth.
Of the million women who go out to work every week with flexible rosters, a good number do so knowing that they can pass up a shift if they need to and that they can work a few extra hours when they want.
And there are people on contracts who are succeeding in a dynamic economy and very glad to be their own boss.
Yet for all that, the evidence is clear: that is not the whole picture and indeed it is only half of the picture.
It is a plain fact that most of the two million working Australians with insecure jobs deserve a greater opportunity to get ahead in life  -  and this Government has a plan to give them that chance.
All our work to keep our economy strong benefits the insecure millions very directly.
Making sure their employer can offer more hours, making sure they have the qualifications to get a better job, making sure they can keep more of their take home pay, protecting their rights at work.
We will also continue to take specific steps to improve the job security and working conditions of people who remain in insecure work.
That is why today I can announce a new policy to improve the living standards and the working conditions of the insecure millions.
We will insert a new modern awards objective in the Fair Work Act to protect penalty rates.
We will ensure that penalty rates, overtime, shift work loading and public holiday pay are definite, formal considerations for the Fair Work Commission when it sets award rates and conditions.
We will make it clear in law that there needs to be additional remuneration for employees who work shift work, unsocial, irregular, unpredictable hours or on weekends and public holidays.
It is particularly good to see that some of the hard working people who will benefit from these changes are with us today.
Australian Labor is politically, organisationally, spiritually, even literally, the party of work.
We always govern for jobs: we govern to create jobs and to support jobs, we govern to make jobs better paid and more secure, we govern to spread the opportunity for a job to every Australian who is willing to take their chance.
This Labor Government has been defined above all by what we have achieved for Australians who work.
Since we came to office at the end of 2007, through the worst global economic circumstances in over eighty years, we have created 850,000 new Australian jobs.
When almost every other developed country went down the opposite path, we secured the financial system, stimulated the economy, invested in infrastructure, protected our skills base and we have grown the economy and grown employment.
This is so important for the Australian people.
We tore up Work Choices and I wrote the Fair Work Act and today we are taking more steps to improve the working conditions of Australians.
More flexibility for families dealing with modern pressures, more protection for penalty rates, plus lower taxes and higher take-home pay. 
When working people around the world have lost so much and when austerity measures overseas have hit so many so hard, Australians have more rights at work than before.
We have given more people skills than ever before and preserved the skilled base of our economy in tough times.
Economic downturns can destroy skill formation for years, leading to skills shortages during the recovery and long-term joblessness even during periods of sustained growth.
In the early 1990s recession, apprenticeship starts in Australia fell by one third in two years  -  and they took thirteen years to recover to pre-recession levels.  In Government, we learned this lesson.
When the GFC hit, we had a drop in training starts  -  down nearly one fifth in 2008-2009.  This time though, it took just two years for us to bounce back.
In fact by 2011, 146,000 more students undertook vocational educational training and studies than in 2007.
There were 100,000 more apprentices and trainees  -  and around 35,000 more people with university degrees added a vocational qualification to their skills.
By doing all this we have spread opportunity to more Australians than ever before.
Because of these decisions, more people got their first job or got a higher paying job; more people have been the first person in their family to get a trade or to go to university; more people have become their own boss.
Now none of this was an accident.
This Labor Government has made the decisions and delivered the plans to create jobs, improve working conditions, give more people more skills and spread opportunity.
There were other paths our nation could go down and those were paths many other nations followed.
That was true of the work of the past five and a half years and it will be true of the years to come.  No one owes us a living and nothing is guaranteed.
Especially when our economy is entering a complex period  -  and when the opportunities of the Asian Century are so great.
The immediate economic context is demanding.
The peak of the investment phase of the mining boom over the next year or two will see growth in mining and resource jobs slow down.
The weakness of the global economy, close-to-zero interest rates in other developed nations, all this is holding our dollar high, making our exports more expensive and making it harder for our exporters to employ Australians.
The long-term economic outlook is exhilarating.
The centre of gravity of global consumption moves East by over 100 miles every year; by 2025 it will reach central India.
That's also the year when Asia becomes home to most of the world's middle class  -  a new market of around two and a half billion middle class consumers on our doorstop.
The world economy is coming our way, fast.
But there is no law, no promise, that Australia will remain strong, fair and smart.
The intersection of these pressures on our economy today with these possibilities for our economy in coming years is the point at which the real choice confronts us.
Our nation has a choice  -  a choice between two quite different futures.
The Asian markets will grow, with or without Australia being ready to sell the goods and services they want. 
Some would let a few Australian firms prosper while many fall behind.
They'd be content to see a few highly competitive or specialised sectors hang on while big employers in manufacturing and services, education and tourism are all hollowed out by currency and cost pressures.
The Asian producers will need our minerals and resources, and some big extraction projects will long continue. 
Some will argue against getting a good return on them for all Australians and argue against making sure the projects deliver training and jobs for young Australians, for indigenous Australians, for Australians in the regions and towns where too few jobs are created today.
Some would cut training to our young people and let the standards of our schools fall behind, then allow employers to import more temporary workers to fill the gaps.
And they'd ask the great bulk of working Australians who don't compete on skills to compete on wages and conditions, as they did in the past, under Work Choices.
They'd argue work should just be more “flexible”  -  in other words, less secure  -  making it simpler to cut people's hours or to lay them off and allowing their wages to fall to compete on price if the dollar stays high.
Big business and government could agree it's easier and cheaper  -  no doubt they'd say, “more efficient”  -  to share the new opportunities with a few Australians and let the rest take care of themselves.
That is one way  -  but it's not my way, it's not Labor's way and I don't believe it's Australia's way either.
The things we have done together have built a remarkable nation: 51st in global population  -  12th in global wealth  -  one of the most equal economies and mobile societies in the world. 
With that strength, we stand ready to seize unprecedented national opportunities in the decades to come.
I see a very different future for our country.
In the coming century, we can be one of the winners in Asia. 
But Australia can only truly be among the winners if all our people, especially our young people, get to be among the winners too.
If we get that right  -  if we keep good jobs growing and if we keep the economy strong  -  then the rewards are rich for us.
In the coming decade, Australia can have new infrastructure including the NBN, a world-leading education for our children, insurance for disability and better health care; we can be a nation where challenges for modern families and modern society are acted on and understood.
By 2025, our school system can be in the top five in the world, our innovation system can be in the top ten in the world, ten of our universities can be in the world's top 100, our economy can reach the world's top ten for income per person.
In the coming century, we can still be a nation where people are confident their children will have more opportunities than they did, as a result of their hard work.
That is the vision  -  that is the goal.
That is also the heart of the public debate about the abuse of section 457 visas for temporary workers from overseas.
I offer absolutely no apology for putting the opportunities of Australian working people first, front and centre, wherever they were born.
I have absolutely no doubt our policy approach to temporary foreign work is good economics and good social policy.
The purpose of the 457 program speaks for itself  -  subclass 457 (Temporary Work (Skilled)) Visa  -  that is the policy objective, that's what it says on the packet.
Or as Innes Willox, the Chief Executive of the Australian Industry Group itself, said just last week: 457s are a gap-filler for our skills-poor economy at times and places of highest need.
Yet that is simply not what is happening today and that is why we must fix it.
The widely held assumption that the typical person on a 457 visa is performing urgently needed work for economic expansion in remote Australia  -  on a project where a tough combination of specialist skills and extreme conditions make labour impossible to come by  -  is just not supported by the facts.
107,000 people work in Australia as temporary overseas workers. Indeed of those 107,000 people, barely one-sixth is employed in mining and resources.
In fact, while the overall program has rapidly grown, new applications for temporary overseas work in mining have fallen nearly 17 per cent compared to the same period last year.
And increasingly there is a shift in these workers from those with higher skills, degrees and advanced trades, to lower skills.
So, let the facts speak for themselves.
Fact: temporary overseas work is growing much faster than employment is growing.
Temporary overseas worker numbers are up 20 per cent compared with the same time last year. Employment growth in the same period is around 1 per cent.
That in itself is evidence of a problem: the number of people coming here to fill short-term gaps should not be growing twenty times faster than employment overall.
Fact: there is clear evidence that in some growing sectors, importing workers on 457 visas is a substitute for spreading important economic opportunity to Australian working people.
Outside the resource states of Queensland and Western Australia, the single largest sector for temporary overseas work isn't mining  -  or even construction  -  it is information technology. One in twenty temporary overseas workers in Australia is doing IT work in New South Wales alone.
It is just not acceptable that information technology jobs, the quintessential jobs of the future, the very opportunities being created by the digital economy, precisely where the big picture is for our kids, should be such a big area of imported skills.
An occupation where we have brought in 5,800 temporary workers in just seven months  -  compared to just 4,500 Australian IT undergraduate student completions in 2011.
Fact: the areas where temporary work from overseas is growing show that this is work for which we can and should train young Australians.
The number of applications in Accommodation and Food Services has almost doubled compared to the same period last year, now exceeding five thousand. Applications in Retail were up 80 per cent to just under two and a half thousand.
These are plainly areas where the two million Australians in insecure work or the 660,000 Australians who are unemployed could be trained and could find secure, skilled work.
Most striking of all is the widespread use of temporary skilled labour in hospitals and health. 
There are nearly as many visas in the health sector today as there are in construction: fully twelve thousand seven hundred temporary workers from overseas have ongoing employment in the health and social care industry in Australia.
This in a stable, steadily-growing, predominantly public-sector industry which every advanced society has to staff as part of a balanced workforce.
If nursing or medicine is a gap to be filled  -  if health is an area of skill shortage today  -  the responsibility is no one's but the previous Federal Government and their Ministers for Education and for Health.
It is absurd to rely on temporary overseas labour to fill ongoing skilled work in public hospitals while contracted local labour cleans those same hospitals in the middle of the night for around twenty dollars an hour.
That is an absolutely damning failure of long-term national economic policy.
We don't want to be a nation which can't care for its own sick and can't provide jobs for its own kids.
Just as it is deeply dangerous for conservative State Governments to cut hundreds of millions of dollars from their training systems, for thousands of young people to be locked out of training, while a conservative Federal opposition offers business the solution of more temporary workers from overseas to fill the hole this creates.
I will fight to keep Australia from going down that path.
That is not the future we want for Australia.
That's why this Labor Government is putting in place a package of reforms to ensure that temporary skilled workers only come from overseas when there is genuinely no local worker who can fill the job.
I want temporary overseas skilled work to be dealt with as a policy issue about jobs, wages and working conditions  -  not just immigration management.
So the measures announced by Minister O'Connor in recent days are all designed to ensure that temporary skilled work from overseas serves its proper purpose in our economy.
Employers must demonstrate that they are not nominating positions where a genuine shortage does not exist.
The English language requirements for certain positions have been raised.
The enforceability of existing training requirements for businesses that use the program will be strengthened.
The market salary exemption will rise from $180,000 to $250,000.
On-hire arrangements of 457 visa workers will be restricted.
Compliance and enforcement powers will be beefed up to stop employers who have routinely abused the 457 system.
Stakeholders will be consulted to ensure market rate provisions more effectively protect local employment.
Naturally we will work with business to make sure genuine skill shortages can be addressed, but we will not allow Australian workers to be denied the opportunity to fill Australian jobs.
Labor's policy on Australian jobs is to put Australian workers first.
If there are local workers  -  Australians in insecure work, unemployed Australians, young Australians  -  who can do these jobs then they should get that chance.
The Australian people expect this to be our approach and they are right.
Our vision is for our nation to be one of the winners in Asia. 
We can only do that if we stick to a plan for jobs.
We can only do that if we stay strong, fair and smart.
We can only do that if all our people, especially our young people, get to be among the winners too.


Canberra
The Australian Government congratulates Cardinal Jorge Mario Bergoglio, now Pope Francis, on his election this morning as the Pope of the Roman Catholic Church.
The election of a Pope from the "new world" is an occasion of genuinely historic proportions.
Today is an exciting day for Australian Catholics and perhaps especially for Australians of Argentinian descent.  My thoughts are with them all.


Melbourne
The Australian Government congratulates Mr Xi Jinping on his appointment as President of the People's Republic of China and Mr Li Keqiang on his appointment as Premier of China's State Council during this week's National People's Congress in Beijing.
China's new leaders are well known to Australia. Xi Jinping visited Australia as Vice President in 2010. Premier Li's visit to Australia as Vice Premier in 2009 saw the conclusion of an important joint statement setting out principles for closer cooperation between our two countries. 
President Xi and Premier Li take up their positions at an important time for the bilateral relationship. China, our largest trading partner and biggest single export market, is one of Australia's most important partners in Asia. 
Last year's anniversary marking 40 years of diplomatic relations between our two countries provided an opportunity to celebrate the remarkable evolution of our relationship with China, which is stronger and more broadly based than ever before.
There is great potential to develop our partnership further in this Asian Century. Prime Minister Gillard looks forward to meeting President Xi and Premier Li at an early opportunity and to working closely with them to advance ties with China on all fronts, including through deeper economic, political, security and people-to-people links. 
The Prime Minister would also like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the contribution by China's outgoing President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao to strengthening bilateral ties in the past ten years.


Melbourne
The Centre for Innovative Justice at RMIT University in Melbourne will receive $300,000 to investigate ways to improve access to justice for Australians.
The Centre, which forms part of the Graduate School of Business &amp; Law, was officially opened today by Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus.
The Commonwealth funding will support research into ways to make private legal assistance affordable for more Australians.
The new Centre will investigate the most cost-effective way to assist people whose income is too high to qualify for legal aid, but cannot afford full legal support.  It will consider options such as fixed fees for legal services and ‘unbundled services' where lawyers can provide advice or assistance on one particular element of a legal issue.
The Centre will also work towards establishing a community legal centre to provide legal services to the public and give students the opportunity to learn about the justice system in a practical setting.
Led by former Victorian Attorney-General Rob Hulls, the Centre for Innovative Justice is the first of its kind in Australia with the goal of increasing the capacity of the justice system.
RMIT is Australia's largest tertiary institution and has three campuses in Melbourne and two in Vietnam.
The Gillard Government has committed more than $1.35 billion in legal assistance funding nationally  -  the biggest boost to legal aid in more than a decade.


Melbourne
Clean-up and recovery grants of up to $15,000 are now available for primary producers in areas severely affected by flooding in New South Wales.
This assistance, available under Category C of the jointly funded Federal/State Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA), will initially apply to primary producers in Clarence Valley and Coffs Harbour. The Commonwealth and New South Wales Governments will continue to assess the impact of the floods on other areas to see if this assistance should be activated elsewhere.
The assistance is designed to help with the economic impacts that these devastating floods have had on local farms.
The Gillard Government today also announced that it will provide additional Commonwealth support for employees, small businesses and farmers who have lost income as a direct result of the floods crisis.
The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy is a fortnightly Commonwealth payment of up to the maximum rate of existing Newstart Allowance for a period of 13 weeks.  The subsidy will be available to those in Clarence Valley and Coffs Harbour who have experienced a loss of income as a direct result of the flooding and are not currently receiving, or eligible for, any other income support payment.
The floodwaters and storms have hit people's livelihoods and made it difficult for people to continue their everyday lives - including going to work or operating their small businesses.
These activations are in addition to the range of support already available, including personal hardship and distress assistance, loans to primary producers and small businesses, assistance with essential public asset restoration and freight subsidies for primary producers.
There are now 27 local government areas eligible for various types of assistance across New South Wales following flooding and severe weather in January and February this year, including:
 * 	Ballina, Bellingen, Byron, Camden, Clarence Valley, Coffs Harbour, Glen Innes Severn, Gloucester, Great Lakes, Greater Taree, Hawkesbury, Inverell, Kempsey, Kiama, Kyogle, Lismore, Lithgow, Moree Plains, Nambucca, Port Macquarie-Hastings, Randwick, Richmond Valley, Shoalhaven, Tenterfield, Tweed, Upper Hunter, Walcha.
Primary producers in the flood affected areas should contact the NSW Rural Assistance Authority on 1800 678 593 to see if they are eligible for the grant.
Information on disaster assistance in NSW can be found at www.mpes.nsw.gov.au.
For more information or to claim the Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy, people should visit www.humanservices.gov.au or contact the Australian Government Emergency Information line on 180 22 66, 8am to 5pm, Monday to Friday.
Informationon the range of assistance that is available under the NDRRA can be found at www.disasterassist.gov.au


Melbourne
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
We meet today on the traditional country of the Kulin Nation and I offer my respects to their elders past and present.
Up in Sydney when I've been at St Patrick's day events, the St Pat's Day lunch is hosted by a financial journalist, Michael Pascoe, who does a great job keeping the mob in line. 
In Melbourne of course, we've got a champion footballer instead.
It's tempting to reflect on what this says about our two great cities, but as I'm sure St Patrick himself would counsel me: resist temptation. So I will.
So let's just talk about Melbourne for the moment. Truly it is impossible to imagine Melbourne without the Irish influence.
We're just down the road from St Patrick's Cathedral, that “work of centuries crowded into years”, a triumph of Gothic Revival and of Gaelic pride.
I'm sure some of you have come straight from confession to here.
We're a stone's throw away from that legendary Young and Jackson's, named for two Dubliners.
Perhaps some of you a little bit later in the day will pop over for a pint of cappuccino following lunch.
Even the river running past us now through the middle of Melbourne bears a resemblance to Anna Liffey. 
Iris Murdoch had one of her characters say:
No man who has faced the Liffey can be
appalled by the dirt of another river.
And she didn't know the Yarra when that character uttered those words.
So on such an Irish day in such an Irish town it's very fitting that I can announce a special series of measures which will be in effect in this state this weekend to celebrate St Patrick.
This weekend, Phillip Island will be renamed ‘Old Ireland'.
Every bar and cafe will substitute Vic Bitter with Guinness.
Seal Rock will be renamed Selkie Rock. The Nobbies will be re-named the O'Nobbies.
The traffic lights on the way through town won't be red orange and green – they'll be green, orange and white.
I ‘m contemplating name myself Taoiseach Gillard for a day too, I reckon that'd be fun too.
And Laura Smyth is heading straight from here: she'll be up all night dressing the fairy penguins up as leprechauns.
Now, as you know, it is certainly true, I'm not Irish: I was born in Barry, in Wales.
And I was raised in the Baptist tradition: we weren't really allowed to believe in Saints.
Or in drinking.
Or in dancing now that I come to think of it.
And the kind of songs I first heard the O'Connor brothers sing at uni would have gotten the Gillards expelled from chapel for life – that's certainly true!
So coning from that background the basic rituals of this day are something I still find a delightful novelty.
But as I'm sure most of you know, my Welsh blood is actually why I have some authority on the subject of St Patrick.
Never forget that St Paddy's Day is actually all about a Taff – someone from Wales.
I'm always struck that while it took pirates to bring young Patrick into Ireland and they took him there as a slave, once he gained his freedom, the first thing he did was to swear to go back.
After all, he had met the Irish people.
That was the great good fortune in St Patrick's life and it's one of the great good fortunes of life of Australia.
We've been so blessed by the contributions of great Irish individuals who've made names for themselves and their people.
We've been even more blessed by all the millions who've come – their millions of descendants – and the tens of thousands of Irish-born Australians who live with us today: the countless, nameless nation-builders of Irish Australia.
You've come a long way, we've come a long way, and we've achieved so much together.
Today is the perfect day to celebrate it all.
Because the story of St Patrick, at its human core, is the story of a man who breaks the chains, who works and learns, who dedicates himself to others and who changes a nation.
And that, friends, is the story of the Irish in Australia.
So enjoy the holy-day.
Sláinte!


Melbourne
It's humbling to be among people who have got such a strong personal connection to the fight against bullying and I really can't imagine how many of you bear the losses that you have, the bravery, the courage, it just takes my breath away.
But what is so inspirational is that you've brought part of that, part of that sense of loss, that bravery, that courage and you've challenged it into this urgent and inspiring national initiative.
It's a great tribute to all of you that that energy has been brought to this place.
And we need that energy because in Australia in 2013 there are still too many children whose school days are filled with fear and dread instead of laughter and play and I think that and the images of that were brought very powerfully through to us as we listened to the song and saw those images.
As well as too many children spending their days with that fear and dread, there are too many apprentices who really just can't face another day of humiliation at the workplace, too many employees who come home from work feeling worthless and feeling defeated and worst of all, there are those who never come home.
Those for whom suicide seems like the only way out, the only escape from physical and psychological torment  -  from the physical and psychological torment that is bullying.
Last year more than 2,500 Australians committed suicide, more than 450 were children.
Bullying was identified as a factor in 80 per cent of these deaths.
Now the death of any Australian, particularly any young Australian is a tragedy and we're here today because we know that this should no longer stand; that we have to do something about it.
I'm here to tell you that as a Government we're very determined to join with you in the fight against bullying and I'm very delighted that we will be working together with the Bully Free Foundation as part of the dedicated and passionate fight against bullying.
We need the kind of cooperation that the Bully Free Australia Foundation represents, the kind of cooperation that brings people together across sectors, states and agencies  -  a mix, and a powerful one, of families, of politicians, of police officers, of lawyers and other professionals all working for the common goal of ending bullying.
In recognition of the power of bringing people together in 2012 we held the first ever national anti-bullying forum.
That brought teachers, parents and young people together to discuss what needed to be done.
We've channelled that and we've introduced a national safe school framework that requires every school in Australia to have an anti-bullying strategy.
But, we've got to keep working together to find the new and creative solutions because bullies and bullying has evolved.
The spread of texting and social media means that for so many people it feels like there's no safe space anymore.
Gone are the days when you could leave the playground or leave work, go to your home, shut the door and fell like safety was there around you.
Instead, because of the penetration of social media the fact that a jibe can now be instantly seen by so many, victims can feel harassed 24 hours a day.
Les Twentyman put it very powerfully when he said in the hands of a bully an ordinary smart phone can be a weapon of mass destruction.
Two years ago I said the major problem we face was the technology had run ahead of the existing systems, rules and ethics required to combat bullying.
Today, as Bully Free Australia officially opens its doors, I'm pleased to say that we are catching up.
Yesterday the Minister for Schools, Peter Garrett, launched the Safe Schools Hub, a central site to support a suite of dynamic online resources for school leaders, teachers, specialist staff, parents and students and this will help all of them enabling their student community to be a safer place.
In January this year I launched Be Cyberwise, an online learning program; a program that will teach more than 600,000 children all around the nation how to deal with the risks of the digital age.
This, together with the protocol the Government has negotiated with Facebook, Google, YouTube, Yahoo! and Microsoft, makes a new cooperative approach a reality to the problem of online bullying.
There's more to do but at least I feel now like we are meeting cyber bullying on its ground.
We are also tackling bullying in the workplace as Minister Shorten has outlined.
The costs of this is truly amazing  -  gobsmacking.
The Productivity Commission estimates that workplace bullying costs the Australian economy each year between $6 billion and $36 billion  -  an amazing cost.
And those costs of lost productivity are only eclipsed by the enormous personal costs of workplace bullying.
Over 300 individuals and organisations gave evidence to the inquiry we had about the devastating effects of workplace bullying on victims, their families, their colleagues and their employers.
That means, as Minister Shorten has said, that next week we will act.
We will introduce into the House of Representatives a new provision which means that from 1 July this year an individual who has been bullied at work will be able to go to the Fair Work Commission and have that conduct stopped.
This new pathway will allow people to have their concerns addressed quickly and affordably with the focus on restoring relationships and preventing bullying  -  simply stopping the problem so that it doesn't go so far and doesn't hurt people in the way that we've heard the stories today.
Friends, there's always more to do.
There's action now in schools, there's action now for workplaces, we actually had our school children yesterday out for the National Day of Action Against Bullying and Violence and we had school kids around the nation rallying to the catch cry, bullying, no way.
Well that's a simple message and it's a heartfelt one and if we can ask our school kids around the country to march through the day saying bullying, no way, then I think we can ask ourselves to do the same.
And that's what we are doing today, gathering to say as a nation bullying, no way.
And when I look out at this gathering I know I'm looking out at the proof that we are going to succeed in this struggle.
Because it's your courage and your determination  -  your determination to keep working and to not rest until success is assured that it's going to get us there.
So it truly is a very great honour for me to be here and to declare the headquarters of the Bully Free Australia Foundation officially open and I know we are all going to be truly amazed by the results of the work that happens from this place.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
Australia will increase its support for reform and engagement with Myanmar, in recognition of the country's progress towards democracy.
The Gillard Government today made several significant announcements in support of Myanmar and its people:
 * 	As part of a growing aid program, Australia will provide an additional $20 million over two years for the first phase of the new Myanmar-Australia Partnership for Reform.
 * 	Australia will lift some restrictions on defence engagement and will post a resident Defence Attaché to Myanmar.
 * 	Australia will facilitate increased trade and investment links with Myanmar, and will shortly post a resident Trade Commissioner to Yangon, Myanmar's commercial centre.
Australia's commitment to expand its constructive engagement with Myanmar recognises the unprecedented process of change underway there towards political freedom and the new opportunity this brings to help promote the prosperity of Myanmar and its people. 
It also recognises President Thein Sein's leadership in driving these critical reforms. 
As a close neighbour, Australia will benefit from a more open and prosperous Myanmar that is fully integrated into the region and able to share in the opportunities of the Asian Century.
Building on our already substantial commitment to Myanmar, Australia will provide an additional $20 million over two years for the first phase of the new Myanmar-Australia Partnership for Reform.
This program will help the Myanmar Government build capacity to deliver on its reform agenda - strengthening democratic institutions, promoting human rights, improving economic governance and advancing the rule of law.
The Partnership will include support for the Myanmar Human Rights Commission and will promote human rights accountability and provide training to government institutions and civil society.
The Partnership will also provide assistance for the development of a sustainable and equitable mining sector in Myanmar. Australia will support the Myanmar Government's commitment to join the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative and this year will host a visit by Myanmar ministers to share the experience of Australian mining experts.
The Partnership will help to maximise the impact of our existing aid program, which is set to double in size to $100 million per year by 2015. Our aid will focus on governance, providing essential health services, improving access to basic education, supporting the peace process, and improving the livelihoods of Myanmar's rural poor.
In view of the significant reforms that have taken place in Myanmar, the Government will also lift some restrictions on defence engagement.
Our objective is to encourage the development of a modern, professional defence force in Myanmar that continues to support democratisation and reform.
The Government will therefore post a resident Defence Attaché to Myanmar to allow for greater engagement and dialogue with the Myanmar Defence Force.
The Government is also lifting restrictions on defence interactions in certain areas, including humanitarian and disaster relief activities and peacekeeping. Australia will maintain its arms embargo with Myanmar. Further moves towards a normalised bilateral defence relationship will be considered over time on a step-by-step basis.
Australia is committed to working with Myanmar to provide aid to those who are most in need.
We have recently provided a further $2.5 million in emergency aid to meet pressing humanitarian needs in Rakhine and Kachin States, which will also include preparation for mine removal in southeast Myanmar. This assistance complements the $5 million we have previously committed to support efforts to bring peace to Myanmar's ethnic minority areas.
To ensure the benefits of Myanmar's reforms are felt by all, Australia will facilitate increased trade and investment links between our two countries.
In 2013, Australia will establish a commercial presence in Myanmar's business centre in Yangon headed by a resident Trade Commissioner  -  assisting Australian companies to do business and bringing important economic opportunities and skills to Myanmar.
Australia's engagement with Myanmar has been made possible by the extraordinary process of change underway there and through the leadership of its people and government. 
There are important challenges for Myanmar's people and its government and Australia stands as a ready partner in this enterprise.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Multicultural Affairs Senator Kate Lundy have congratulated Sir James Gobbo for being awarded the Australian Migration and Settlement Lifetime Achievement Award at the inaugural Australian Migration and Settlement Awards.
The awards, which are presented by the Migration Council of Australia, recognize finalists from around the country who are exemplary in their commitment to providing world-class services to migrants.
The Gillard Government congratulates the Migration Council Australia for showcasing the dedication of community organisations and individuals, who work tirelessly to assist new migrants to settle, feel included in communities and participate in the workplace.
The awards show that Australians are making real differences to settlement experiences, and this support is vitally important to assist new migrants to navigate the path in establishing a new life in their adopted country.
The major award, presented to Sir James, former chairman of both the Australian Multicultural Foundation and Council of Multicultural Affairs, is in recognition of Sir James' ongoing commitment to Italian community affairs in areas of welfare, language teaching, oral history and care of the aged. 
Other winners at the awards include:
 * 	Settlement Innovation Category  -  Diversitat for the Northern Community Hub
 * 	Case Workers of the Year Category  -  Say Htoo Eh Maero (Wyndham Community and Education Centre)
 * 	Business Inclusion Category  -  Luv-a-Duck
 * 	Sports Leadership Category  -  The Huddle, North Melbourne Football Club
 * 	Journalism Excellence Category  -  Back to Where You Came From Series 2 (Nick Murray)
 * 	Diversity and the Law Category  -  Legal Services Commission of South Australia for the Migrant Information Legal Education (MILE)
These awards are taking place during Harmony Week, which culminates this Thursday on Harmony Day.
This year's theme for Harmony Day is Many Stories  -  One Australia, which recognises that by sharing our stories we can foster a sense of belonging, acceptance and understanding of other cultures.
The Migration Council Australia was launched on 1 August 2012, and is a nationally recognised policy and advocacy not-for-profit organisation, seeking to bring together corporate Australia and the settlement sector to enhance the productive benefits of Australia's migration and humanitarian programs.


Canberra
My Government looks forward to working in partnership with the Migration Council on this important plan.
Work like that matters because one in every four Australians was born somewhere else.
We are a nation of migrants.
I know  -  because I'm one myself.
My family made that journey of hope and courage to a new land.
A land where we found welcome.
A land where we found opportunity.
And long before we got our certificates of citizenship, we were already Australians deep in our hearts.
In this most multicultural of nations, our social fabric has never been measured by the fineness of its thread.
It's a fabric we have embroidered and embellished, and when necessary, patched and darned  -  but it is not something fragile or easily torn.
My family has been fortunate enough to be able to stitch its initials into this social fabric.
Two adults and two small girls, among the seven million who have sought to make new homes here since World War Two.
Great waves of us.
First, from the UK and northern Europe.
Then from the Mediterranean and the Middle East.
Later from South-East Asia, India, China, Africa.
And of course these post-war waves were not the first.
From the earliest colonial times this land has exerted a pull on the hearts and imaginations of dreamers.
Matching and tracking the world's great events.
From the Irish fleeing the potato famine in the 1840s to the “Ten-Pound Poms” leaving behind the bombed-out cities of Britain.
From Jewish people seeking a safe haven after the horrors of the Holocaust to the Vietnamese fleeing in the aftermath of a terrible war.
The Australian story is the world's story also.
And I suspect that the things that led my own parents to emigrate in the 1960s were not so very different from the hopes and dreams of all who have made the journey.
Packed away in acid-free paper in the vaults of the National Archives are some remarkable records: records that tell of thousands upon thousands of these hopes and dreams.
The faces of our migrant nation, photographed by Department of Immigration staff between 1946 and 1999.
Expectant faces looking down from passenger vessels docking at our ports.
Faces bent over books at migrant English classes.
Labourers hard at work on the Snowy Scheme.
Faces under sunhats, picking fruit, or looking out from beneath hairnets on the factory floor.
Now, all 22,000 of these photographs have been digitised and are online.
The Destination: Australia website lets people search for photos, share stories, add descriptions, even upload their own photographic memories.
These memories will feed into a major National Archives exhibition on post-Wold War II migration, planned for 2014.
The exhibition will be entitled A Ticket to Paradise?
Complete, as is our Australian way, with an upward inflection, a final question mark.
For many millions of migrant Australians, I suspect, there is no question mark.
The decision to come here was right  -  full stop.
Just as Chifley's decision to open our doors was right.
Of course, there are challenges, sorrows, moments of doubt.
No nation is built without these.
But overwhelmingly this is a place where dreams are fulfilled.
Where a form of “paradise” can be found  -  at least as much as is possible on this earth.
Towards the end of Anna Funder's award-winning novel All That I Am, the character of Ruth is spending her last days in reflection, recalling her flight from Hitler's Germany, the losses wrought by war and finally her new life in Australia.
“After the war,” she says, “I came to this sunstruck place. It is a glorious country, which aspires to no kind of glory.
Its people aim for something both more basic and more difficult: decency.”
Together we have built a nation that strives to be classless, confident and compassionate.
But above all, a country which is decent.
A country that has been enriched by the hand of welcome each generation holds out to those who come after us.
The gesture of inclusion and belonging that enlarges us all.
These qualities are found in abundance among the finalists in the inaugural Migration and Settlement Awards.
Individuals and organisations who are there for migrants and refugees in those first bewildering months, offering good counsel and local know-how, and bringing “paradise” a few steps closer.
So congratulations to all the finalists and category winners.
Thank you for proving, by your example, that we are a nation of welcome and a place of opportunity.
Australia has given us everything, so we give everything in return.
That means no matter how far we've come, our best days still always lie ahead.


Canberra
PM: It's a very great pleasure for me to welcome the visit of President Thein Sein to Australia.
This is a historic visit; it is the first by of a head of state of Myanmar since 1974.
The President's visit reflects the remarkable progress of reform in Myanmar since civilian government was established in 2011.
Your Excellency, I would like to pay particular tribute today to the important role you have played in initiating and driving the reform process.
In doing so you have opened the door to trade and investment, to economic growth and greater prosperity for your people, and to a future in which a secure Myanmar takes its rightful place in our region.
Of course there is much work to do.
Myanmar's transition has only just begun and great transitions like this face many difficult challenges and require much hard work and commitment.
Australia will be a ready partner, encouraging further steps to entrench civilian government, to uphold the rights of all of Myanmar's people, to promote national reconciliation and peace among ethnic groups and to adhere to global non-proliferation norms.
We offer not just the arm of friendship and words of encouragement, we offer practical support.
In June last year, Senator Carr announced that Australia would lift its autonomous financial and travel sanctions.
We have moved to normalise our economic relationship.
We are establishing an Austrade presence to assist Australian companies to do business in Myanmar. And in coming days we will appoint the Trade Commissioner who will take up this task.
In January we signed a landmark agreement on development cooperation, the first such agreement that Myanmar has signed with a western country, and this agreement will see bilateral aid increase to $100 million a year by 2015, and that will improve the lives of your people.
For example, by helping 34,000 children access early childhood education, training more than 9,500 teachers and providing essential school supplies to more than 620,000 primary school students.
Today, I am delighted to announce an important new component of our aid program; a partnership for reform between our two countries.
A $20 million commitment to strengthen democratic institutions, deliver human rights training, improve economic governance and promote the rule of law.
This program will be tailored to help meet priorities identified by the Government of Myanmar.
Initial activities will focus on helping develop the mining sector in a way that is equitable and environmentally sustainable, and that maximises benefits for the people.
I'm also delighted that one of the early activities of the program will be support for the Myanmar Human Rights Commission, as well as human rights training for government agencies and civil society.
The Government's aim  -  our Government's aim  -  in moving step by step to normalise our relations with Myanmar, has been to recognise the genuine change that has occurred and to encourage the reform progress onwards.
Consistent with that philosophy, I'm also announcing today that the Minister for Defence and I have agreed to ease some of the restrictions on defence cooperation between our two nations.
The Australian Defence Force and the Department of Defence currently have only very limited engagement.
Australia's defence attaché to Myanmar is resident in Thailand and our restrictions only allow a small number of visits each year.
Australia wants to encourage the development of a modern professional defence force in Myanmar which continues to support democratisation and reform. We cannot do that with our current policy settings.
The Government has therefore decided that it will post a resident defence attaché to Myanmar to allow for greater engagement and dialogue with the Defence Force.
We will also lift a number of other restrictions on defence cooperation.
These steps will allow engagement with the Myanmar Defence Force on peacekeeping activities, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, as well as Track 2 activities held in Myanmar, and engagement in multilateral forums.
Restrictions on some bilateral activities will remain, including our arms embargo.
It will take time to move to a full normal defence relationship and we will do so carefully on a step by step basis. Today, we have taken the first vital step.
Your Excellency, I welcome the discussions we have held today and the progress we have made in mapping out the future direction of our increasingly important relationship.
You are a welcome and honoured guest and I invite to you make some remarks now.
PRESIDENT THEIN SEIN (THROUGH INTERPRETER): First of all I acknowledge the media people present here today.
I'm a visitor to Australia at the invitation of the Right Honourable Governor-General of Australia.
I am also proud to pay this visit as the first ever visitor as the Head of State of Myanmar to Australia after 1974.
I had the opportunity to discuss with Her Excellency the Prime Minister on multilateral occasions and discussions covered on the bilateral relation as well as the cooperation for the mutual benefit.
I took some time to exchange views with Her Excellency for further enhancing of bilateral cooperation and regional cooperation.
Today I would like to apprise you of the developments between two our countries and some issues about Myanmar.
My visit to Australia is one that I have looked forward to for a very long time.
This is because I know that Australia and Myanmar are destined to be good partners and more importantly that the people of Myanmar and Australia are destined to be good friends.
We are distant neighbours but part of the same region. We are smaller countries in the region of big powers and giant economies.
It is my sincere wish and aspiration that, like Australia, Myanmar will enjoy peace, democracy and prosperity.
We have much to learn from Australia and I hope and believe that Australia will be generous in sharing her knowledge and experiences with us.
I feel certain that our relations will now enter a new and special phase.
We have a long history of good relations. Even though we seem different in many ways, our histories are not independent of each other.
We were both under the same colonial rule in the 19th century and achieved independence in the 20th century.
Many Australian people have visited Myanmar, and Myanmar people have travelled to Australia for over 100 years.
Australian soldiers and airmen fought in Myanmar during World War II and I pay tribute to their bravery and sacrifice.
The graves of young Australian men lie in a cemetery just outside Yangon, and the remains of no fewer than 1,348 Australians have been buried in Thanbyuzayat to the south of country.
This is a connection that will always be with us.
Australia is now home to thousands of people born in Myanmar or of Myanmar descent. I hope that many who are from Myanmar who wish to return may now consider returning to help build our nation at this critical juncture.
But I also hope that those Australians who have a specific connection to Myanmar, and I know there are many who are now second or third generation young Australians, that they do help to forge a stronger connection between our two countries, visit Myanmar in the future, and contribute to better understanding and economic and cultural ties.
Our ties after independence were also strong. We are grateful for support and assistance from Australia.
I know that for many years, the Australian Government and the Australian people were concerned over the situation of human rights in Myanmar. I'm grateful for that concern.
I'm here in part to explain the changes that have been taking place and ask for your country's kind support and assistance in making our transitions to peace, democracy and prosperity a success.
I hope you will appreciate that what we are undertaking has no parallel in modern times.
This is not just a single transition but three together.
It's a transition from military rule to our democratic rules.
From 60 years of armed conflict to peace.
And from centrally controlled and isolated economy to one that can end poverty and create real opportunities for all our people.
I also note that Australia's working to assist our new efforts for urban conservation and urban planning, and that Australia has assisted New Yangon Heritage Trust. For this we are sincerely grateful.
And I am also sure that my stay in Canberra and Sydney will give me an opportunity to understand better the potential of cities in our conservation efforts.
I believe one area in which Australia may provide special help and expertise is mining and more generally in the natural resources component of our economy.
Like Australia, we are a country rich in natural resources.
We have to make sure that the extraction and export of these resources is done properly, in a way that does not damage the environment and that benefits the vast majority of people.
We want to maintain efficient and effective management of our mining sector. We want it to be an engine for growth and we look forward to you for kind assistance, training and knowledge.
We are greatly thankful for all Australia has done and is continuing to do to help Myanmar people in health care, education and livelihoods.
I know Australia has provided tens of millions of dollars in aid bilaterally as well as through multi-donor organisations such as LIFT, Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Funds, and the 3D funds.
I hope that this assistance will remain but may also be expanded to other areas  -  new areas  -  that you will keep helping us to develop our economy.
I would like to call upon the Australian supporters in our more general request to normalise our relations internationally.
At the UN, we believe that we should no longer be the focus of country-specific resolution.
I would like to seek your continued support in removing numerous resolutions in the UN General Assembly in 2013.
And I thank you all.
PM: Thank you Your Excellency. We'll now take some questions from the media. We'll start with a question from the visiting media if there is one. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Good morning Your Excellency. I'm very much honoured to interview you like this. Thank you for giving me a great chance like this. Being a lady, I'm very proud of you for you are the first lady prime minister in Australian history.
Your Excellency, Australia is in Asia-Pacific region, actually you are our neighbour.
When we think about Australia, we appreciate the way in which Australian Government think of our country.
We are very grateful for you have contributed to our country and you have lit up this at home.
We know that Australia have super education, excellent health care, world-class agriculture and many others, so we know that Australia is a country for to us enhance the bilateral cooperation.
How do you hope to progress forward now that Myanmar have opened up a new chapter and how would Australia have Myanmar adopt regional progress?
PM: Thank you very much for your question. And thank you for noting that I am the first woman to serve as Australian prime minister.
The President and I were talking about the performance of women ambassadors when we had our discussion, so it's been a bit of a theme of the day.
We do want to work in a good and deep partnership with Myanmar during this period of change.
As I outlined in my opening remarks, we are deepening our aid relationship because we know that you are still lifting people out of poverty.
We are strengthening our trade and economic development relationship because to sustain progress you need to see jobs and you need to see an equitable distribution of wealth and opportunity through your society.
We are continuing to work together to see progress on human rights, including the treatment of minority groups. And we're continuing the dialogue around national reconciliation in your nation.
There is much to do and many pressing challenges. But we have been very admiring of the progress to date.
And given the remarkable amount of progress that has occurred to date, we are optimistic about further progress, which is why for example today I am announcing a change in our view about defence discussions between our two countries; that is being done to note the progress that has been made so far.
Thank you very much. We'll take one from the Australian media.
JOURNALIST: Just on your media reforms, is it still the government's position that it's all or nothing on the passage of the bills or are you now prepared to negotiate certain elements?
And are you yourself prepared to get involved in those negotiations with the independents?
PM: The Government's got its proposals before the parliament. What we've said is we don't want the intent of our reforms to be distorted in any way.
Of course, we've got a parliamentary committee process in train now.
And we will see what, if anything, arises from the parliamentary committee.
So our intention remains to pursue the legislation that is before the parliament now.
If there are sensible suggestions consistent with our reform intentions that come out of the parliamentary committee process then certainly we will listen to those.
But we're not in the business of cross trading or horse trading on these bills.
JOURNALIST: Good morning Excellency. I'm the chief editor of a news journal from Myanmar. I'd like to ask three questions to the Honourable Prime Minister.
The first one is Australian investment in our country, because as you all know in our country it's the best time for the good opportunity to invest in our country, because we start new foreign investment law with the market-oriented economy.
And then our country is quite stable, and then we have a lot of raw material and a lot of natural resources in our country, and you can get cheap labour, they can do hard work, they can understand English.
And then they should market our population is around about 60 million, and two neighbouring countries, India and China, more than 1 billion.
That's why I like to know which sector, which area and which kind of investment, Australian investment in our country in future? That's my first question. Can I continue?
PM: Yes, sure.
My second question is our Government is doing the total peace process in whole country within our country starting from negotiation and then together to the peace.
That's why the one thing that is important, it's the rehabilitation for the ethnic community.
That's why to increase socio-economic development and to get rehabilitation, we need some kind of help from donor countries.
But we can try as much as we can but we need, that's why I think the rehabilitation program and then socio-economic government program can cooperate for our country.
That question is military training. I think our country got military training program in 1950 and 1960, so in the future, is there any military training program for our military officials in your country? I would like to know. Thank you.
PM: Thank you. On the first question, with us changing our sanctions regime because of the progress that has been made, so the door has well and truly been open to Australian investment, trade and exchange with Myanmar.
And the fact that I am announcing that we will have an Austrade person stationed there is all about facilitating business links.
I think that there are opportunities across the board for cooperation. But if I was going to single out one area I would identify the same area as you, and that is the area of mining.
Australia is a great mining nation and consequently I think we've got a comparative advantage when it comes to working with you and assisting you as mining potentials open up to the world.
The President and I had a discussion about this in our conversation and I would say that that is a particular area of focus for us and for businesses, great mining businesses that do work in our own country.
On the question of military training, what we've done today is taken a first step on defence relations between our two countries.
It is not fully normalising defence relationships, but it is opening the door and it is a vital first step so we can then consider further proposals in the future, including proposals about training.
The fact that we will have a defence attaché there means that it is much easier to have that dialogue than it has been with someone periodically, indeed quite intermittently, coming in from outside Myanmar.
So we are not fully normalising defence relationships today but we are taking an important first step.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, if you aren't able to get your media reforms through in the next few days will you take them as a platform to the election?
PM: We'll deal with this week a step at a time. So our focus is on securing passage of the reform bills that are before the parliament.
After the week has been through, then we'll make further statements depending on what has happened in the parliament.
We did have an agreement for two questions a side, and thank you very much, the President has another commitment.
Thank you.


Canberra
The Prime Minister has determined that there will be a ballot for the leadership and deputy leadership of the Labor Party at 4:30pm today.


Canberra
PM: Thank you very much. I intend to make a short statement. I don't intend to take questions today. There is very much work to do.
I'm grateful to my colleagues for their continuing support of me as just demonstrated in our Labor Party meeting.
I accept their continuing support of me as Prime Minister and Labor Leader, with a sense of deep humility and a sense of resolve.
I never sought office for its own sake; I have only ever sought office in the interests of the nation, and to assist our nation to prepare to meet the challenges of the future.
It is in that spirit that I intend to continue to govern.
We've got a lot of work to do and we will continue to do it, making sure Australians have got the benefit of jobs and opportunity, making sure that in our nation we are getting ready for the future.
Rolling out the National Broadband Network, improving support for people with disabilities through our new scheme Disability Care, making sure too that we support modern families with the stresses and strains of everyday life and cost of living pressures.
And above all, ensuring that every Australian child gets a world-class education and a ticket to the future.
That is the purpose with which we govern, and that is how we intend to continue. That is what matters to Australians, and it is what matters to me.
Today the leadership of our political party, the Labor Party, has been settled and settled in the most conclusive fashion possible.
The whole business is completely at an end; it has ended now.
The Government has a plan for the nation's future. We've got plenty of work to be getting on with it, and we'll be getting on with it in a few minutes' time.
I'll turn now to the Deputy Prime Minister for some comments.
DPM: Thanks very much Prime Minister. I think it's pretty fair to say that there was very strong support in the party room for the Prime Minister today.
And that's because this Prime Minister is a tough leader, and a leader who is a great champion for our country and for the reforms that are required to create future prosperity. And also to spread opportunity around our country.
Now I think today's result does end these matters once and for all, and what we will do is rededicate ourselves to working every minute to put in place a program which will lift our country up and maximise all of the opportunities which will flow in our region and to this country in the years ahead.
For my part, I've got a Budget to prepare. I've been working on that very, very hard over the last few weeks and the Government will continue to do that.
But from our perspective, it's back to work.
Thanks very much.
PM: Thank you very much.


Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
In just over an hour's time, the following words of apology will be moved in the Senate and the House of Representatives:
Today, this Parliament, on behalf of the Australian people, takes responsibility and apologises for the policies and practices that forced the separation of mothers from their babies, which created a lifelong legacy of pain and suffering. 
2. We acknowledge the profound effects of these policies and practices on fathers.
3. And we recognise the hurt these actions caused to brothers and sisters, grandparents, partners and extended family members.
4. We deplore the shameful practices that denied you, the mothers, your fundamental rights and responsibilities to love and care for your children. You were not legally or socially acknowledged as their mothers. And you were yourselves deprived of care and support.
5. To you, the mothers who were betrayed by a system that gave you no choice and subjected you to manipulation, mistreatment and malpractice, we apologise. 
6. We say sorry to you, the mothers who were denied knowledge of your rights, which meant you could not provide informed consent. You were given false assurances. You were forced to endure the coercion and brutality of practices that were unethical, dishonest and in many cases illegal. 
7. We know you have suffered enduring effects from these practices forced upon you by others. For the loss, the grief, the disempowerment, the stigmatisation and the guilt, we say sorry.
8. To each of you who were adopted or removed, who were led to believe your mother had rejected you and who were denied the opportunity to grow up with your family and community of origin and to connect with your culture, we say sorry.
9. We apologise to the sons and daughters who grew up not knowing how much you were wanted and loved. 
10. We acknowledge that many of you still experience a constant struggle with identity, uncertainty and loss, and feel a persistent tension between loyalty to one family and yearning for another. 
11. To you, the fathers, who were excluded from the lives of your children and deprived of the dignity of recognition on your children's birth records, we say sorry. We acknowledge your loss and grief.
12. We recognise that the consequences of forced adoption practices continue to resonate through many, many lives. To you, the siblings, grandparents, partners and other family members who have shared in the pain and suffering of your loved ones or who were unable to share their lives, we say sorry.
13. Many are still grieving. Some families will be lost to one another forever. To those of you who face the difficulties of reconnecting with family and establishing on-going relationships, we say sorry.
14. We offer this apology in the hope that it will assist your healing and in order to shine a light on a dark period of our nation's history.
15. To those who have fought for the truth to be heard, we hear you now. We acknowledge that many of you have suffered in silence for far too long. 
16. We are saddened that many others are no longer here to share this moment.  In particular, we remember those affected by these practices who took their own lives. Our profound sympathies go to their families.  
17. To redress the shameful mistakes of the past, we are committed to ensuring that all those affected get the help they need, including access to specialist counselling services and support, the ability to find the truth in freely available records and assistance in reconnecting with lost family.
18. We resolve, as a nation, to do all in our power to make sure these practices are never repeated. In facing future challenges, we will remember the lessons of family separation. Our focus will be on protecting the fundamental rights of children and on the importance of the child's right to know and be cared for by his or her parents.
19. With profound sadness and remorse, we offer you all our unreserved apology.
This Apology is extended in good faith and deep humility.
It will be a profound act of moral insight by a nation searching its conscience.
It will stand in the name of all Australians as a sign of our willingness to right an old wrong and face a hard truth.
As Australians, we are used to celebrating past glories and triumphs, and so we should.
We are a great nation.
But we must also be a good nation.
Therefore we must face the negative features of our past without hesitation or reserve.
That is why the period since 2008 has been so distinctive  -  because it has been a moment of healing and accountability in the life of our nation.
For a country, just as for a person, it takes a lot of courage to say we are sorry.
We don't like to admit we were mistaken or misguided.
Yet this is part of the process of a nation growing up:
Holding the mirror to ourselves and our past, and not flinching from what we see.
What we see in that mirror is deeply shameful and distressing.
A story of suffering and unbearable loss.
But ultimately a story of strength, as those affected by forced adoptions found their voice.
Organised and shared their experiences.
And, by speaking truth to power, brought about the Apology we offer today.
This story had its beginnings in a wrongful belief that women could be separated from their babies and it would all be for the best.
Instead these churches and charities, families, medical staff and bureaucrats struck at the most primal and sacred bond there is:
 * 	the bond between a mother and her baby.
Those affected by forced adoption came from all walks of life.
From the city or the country.
People who were born here or migrated here and people who are Indigenous Australians.
From different faiths and social classes.
For the most part, the women who lost their babies were young and vulnerable.
They were often pressurised and sometimes even drugged.
They faced so many voices telling them to surrender, even though their own lonely voice shouted from the depths of their being to hold on to the new life they had created.
Too often they did not see their baby's face.
They couldn't sooth his first cries.
Never felt her warmth or smelt her skin.
They could not give their own baby a name.
Those babies grew up with other names and in other homes.
Creating a sense of abandonment and loss that sometimes could never be made whole.
Today we will hear the motion moved in the Parliament and many other words spoken by those of us who lead.
But today we also listen to the words and stories of those who have waited so long to be heard.
Like the members of the Reference Group personally affected by forced adoption who I met earlier today.
Lizzy Brew, Katherine Rendell and Christine Cole told me how their children were wrenched away so soon after birth. 
How they were denied basic support and advice.
How the removal of their children led to a lifetime of anguish and pain. 
Their experiences echo the stories told in the Senate report.
Stories that speak to us with startling power and moral force.
Like Linda Bryant who testified of the devastating moment her baby was taken away:
When I had my child she was removed. All I saw was the top of her head  -  I knew she had black hair. 
So often that brief glimpse was the final time those mothers would ever see their child.
In institutions around Australia, women were made to perform menial labour in kitchens and laundries until their baby arrived.
As Margaret Bishop said:
It felt like a kind of penance. 
In recent years, I have occasionally passed what then was the Medindi Maternity Hospital and it generates a deep sadness in me and an odd feeling that it was a Dickensian tale about somebody else.
Margaret McGrath described being confined within the Holy Cross home where life was ‘harsh, punitive and impersonal'.
Yet this was sunny postwar Australia when we were going to the beach and driving our new Holdens and listening to Johnny O'Keefe.
As the time for birth came, their babies would be snatched away before they had even held them in their arms. 
Sometimes consent was achieved by forgery or fraud.
Sometimes women signed adoption papers while under the influence of medication.
Most common of all was the bullying arrogance of a society that presumed to know what was best.
Margaret Nonas was told she was selfish.
Linda Ngata was told she was too young and would be a bad mother.
Some mothers returned home to be ostracised and judged.
And despite all the coercion, many mothers were haunted by guilt for having ‘given away' their child.
Guilt because, in the words of Louise Greenup, they did not ‘buck the system or fight'.
The hurt did not simply last for a few days or weeks.
This was a wound that would not heal.   
Kim Lawrence told the Senate Committee:
The pain never goes away, that we all gave away our babies.  We were told to forget what had happened, but we cannot. It will be with us all our lives.
Carolyn Brown never forgot her son:
I was always looking and wondering if he was alive or dead.  ...
From then on every time I saw a baby, a little boy and even a grown up in the street, I would look to see if I could recognise him.
For decades, young mothers grew old haunted by loss.
Silently grieving in our suburbs and towns.
And somewhere, perhaps even close by, their children grew up denied the bond that was their birth-right.
Instead they lived with self-doubt and an uncertain identity.
The feeling, as one child of forced adoption put it, ‘that part of me is missing'.
Some suffered sexual abuse at the hands of their adoptive parents or in state institutions.
Many more endured the cruelty that only children can inflict on their peers:
Your mum's not your real mum, your real mum didn'twant you.
Your parents aren't your real parents, they don't love you.
Taunts vividly remembered decades later.
For so many children of forced adoption, the scars remain in adult life.
Phil Evans described his life as a:
rollercoaster ride of emotional trauma; indescribable fear; uncertainty; anxiety and self-sabotage in so many ways.
Many others identified the paralysing effect of self-doubt and a fear of abandonment:
It has held me back, stopped me growing and ensured that I have lived a life frozen.
I heard similar stories of disconnection and loss from Leigh Hubbard and Paul Howes today.
The challenges of reconnecting with family.
The struggles with self-identity and self-esteem.
The difficulties with accessing records.
Challenges that even the highest levels of professional success have not been able to assuage or heal.
Neither should we forget the fathers, brothers and sisters, grandparents and other relatives who were also affected as the impact of forced adoption cascaded through each family.
Gary Coles, a father, told me today of the lack of acknowledgment that many fathers have experienced.
How often fathers were ignored at the time of the birth.
How their names were not included on birth certificates.
How the veil of shame and forgetting was cast over their lives too.
My fellow Australians,
No collection of words alone can undo all this damage.
Or make whole the lives and families fractured by forced adoption.
Or give back childhoods that were robbed of joy and laughter.
Or make amends for the Birthdays and Christmases and Mother's or Father's Days that only brought a fresh wave of grief and loss.
But by saying sorry we can correct the historical record.
We can declare that these mothers did nothing wrong.
That you loved your children and you always will.
And to the children of forced adoption, we can say that you deserved so much better.
You deserved the chance to know, and love, your mother and father.  
We can promise you all that no generation of Australians will suffer the same pain and trauma that you did.
The cruel, immoral practice of forced adoption will have no place in this land any more.
We also pledge resources to match today's words with actions.
We will provide $5 million to improve access to specialist support and records tracing for those affected by forced adoptions. 
And we will work with the states and territories to improve these services.
The Government will also deliver $5 million so that mental health professionals can better assist in caring for those affected by forced adoption.
We will also provide $1.5 million for the National Archives to record the experiences of those affected by forced adoption through a special exhibition.
That way, this chapter in our nation's history will never again be marginalised or forgotten again.
Today's historic moment has only been made possible by the bravery of those who came forward to make submissions to the Senate Committee and also of those who couldn't come forward but who nurtured hope silently in their hearts.
Because of your courage, Australia now knows the truth.
The report prepared so brilliantly by Senator Siewert and the Senate Committee records that truth for all to see.
This was further reinforced by the national consultations that Professor Nahum Mushin and his reference group undertook to draft the national apology.
Their guidance and advice to government on the drafting of the apology have been invaluable.
Any Australian who reads the Senate report or listens to your stories as I have today will be appalled by what was done to you.
They will be shocked by your suffering.
They will be saddened by your loss.
But most of all, they will marvel at your determination to fight for the respect of history.
They will draw strength from your example.
And they will be inspired by the generous spirit in which you receive this Apology.
Because saying ‘Sorry' is only ever complete when those who are wronged accept it.
Through your courage and grace, the time of neglect is over, and the work of healing can begin.


Bangalow
The $862 million upgrade of the Pacific Highway between Tintenbar and Ewingsdale is progressing well with important work continuing in the next three months. 
This project is a good example of getting on with the job of upgrading the Pacific Highway from Hexham to the Queensland border.
The 17 kilometre Tintenbar to Ewingsdale upgrade starts at the northern end of the Ballina bypass at Ross Lane and will upgrade the highway to a four-lane divided road to the Ewingsdale interchange.
The upgrade will reduce travel times, freight transport costs and boost safety. The improved road alignment will increase road capacity and travel distance.
When completed it will provide benefits such as interchanges for motorists to safely enter and exit the highway and a continuous alternative local road link between Tintenbar and Ewingsdale for school buses and motorists who do not wish to use the upgraded highway.
Work in the next three months will include:• Clearing of vegetation, bulk earthwork, installation of erosion and sediment controls, fencing, drainage installation, building large drains and water quality basins  • Building of bridges at Minor, Emigrant, Skinners, Byron and Tinderbox creeks and Broken Head Road• Continued controlled blasting at the southern tunnel entrance and the start of controlled blasting at the northern tunnel entrance • Start of St Helena tunnel excavation  • Completing building on the site compound at Ewingsdale and starting site compound building at Minor Creek and the southern tunnel entrance  • Local road upgrades at Bangalow Road• Local road upgrade of Tinderbox Road• Building further site access gates at Newrybar and Bangalow• Implementation of temporary traffic diversions along Broken Head Road • Working on the Pacific Highway at Bangalow and Ewingsdale to establish contra-flow traffic arrangements for future work• Rock crushing work near Ross Lane, the old fish farm, William Flick Drive and the tunnel openings.
Work on the upgrade is generally carried out on weekdays from 7am to 6pm and on Saturday between 8am and 1pm.
Traffic management and reduced speed limits will be in place where needed to ensure the safety of workers, motorists and other road users.
Motorists are advised to plan their journey, allow extra travel time and follow all signs.
Residents and businesses are invited to attend the next round of community information sessions for the project. The meetings will be held on Tuesday 26 March at Bangalow A &amp; I Hall, Station Street, Bangalow. The first meeting will run from midday and the second from 5.30pm. 
For more information on traffic conditions, contact the Transport Management Centre on 132 701 or visit www.livetraffic.com.
The Tintenbar to Ewingsdale upgrade is jointly funded by the Federal and NSW governments.
For more information call the project's toll free information line on 1800 882 787, write to Reply Paid 85913, PO Box 604, Bangalow NSW 2479, email communityinfo@t2e.com.au or visit www.rms.nsw.gov.au/pacific. 


ABC Melbourne
HOST: Julia Gillard is the Prime Minister of Australia. She is this morning still the Prime Minister of Australia. Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Jon.
HOST: Politics is always treacherous and yesterday was more poisonous than most. How do you in any way stop Kevin Rudd and his backers from having another go?
PM: Well it's over, clearly over Jon. There was an opportunity for Kevin or indeed anybody else in Labor caucus to nominate for the leadership or deputy leadership. No one chose to do so, so that's it. It's over.
HOST: Because they didn't have the numbers. They will keep trying.
PM: I think if anybody wanders into a journalist's office in the future from the Labor Party claiming to have a numbers sheet they will be met with gales of laughter. This is over Jon.
HOST: How can you be sure, is my point and the point in most of the newspapers and elsewhere this morning. Because it seems whilst your support in the opinion polls is at such a disastrously low level, there are people within your own party who doubt your capacity to win the next election.
PM: Jon, I think I'm very good at reading the mood of my caucus colleagues and I can tell you the mood. The mood is there was an opportunity. The opportunity wasn't used.
People are sick of any conduct that undermines our ability to govern well and to go to the next election and prevail at the next election. So it's over.
For myself, through this period I've been focussed on the business of the nation and that's what I'll do today and every day between now and the election when Australians will make their choice.
We've got some big things to do including the school funding reforms we've been working on for so long now.
HOST: I'll come to those in a moment but do you call Kevin Rudd and say this is appalling and it has to stop? Do you do that?
PM: The message is clear from our own party room meeting yesterday.
HOST: Do you embrace those in the party who have been undermining you or do you punish them?
PM: I'll get on with the job. I do have a ministerial reshuffle to deal with and I'll select the best team for the Government, for the months ahead of governing, and then of course for the campaign to follow.
HOST: Do you punish those who plotted against you? Kim Carr, Martin Ferguson, Chris Bowen are all named in the papers today.
PM: As I think you've seen last night, there are people who are considering their position.
Richard Marles did that as Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs and I think did an honourable thing in offering his resignation, which I accepted.
I anticipate there will be a few more people considering their position.
They will do that, I will also consider the view as to what is best for the Government over coming months, for the nation over coming months, the best team to exercise ministerial discretion and authority in the nation's interest and then to go to the election campaign.
HOST: Or is it the best team to be loyal to Julia Gillard?
PM: No, it's the best team.
HOST: Chris Bowen?
PM: Sorry Jon, I'm not dealing with details of the ministerial reshuffle now so you can put any name to me in the current cabinet and I won't be responding to it.
HOST: Well Chris Bowen, Kim Carr, Martin Ferguson. But what about Senator Conroy whose media laws triggered  -  well I'm not sure  -  did they trigger what happened this week?
PM: I don't think that it's any piece of legislation. I think political watchers would know that for some period of time there's been an undercurrent in our party and it was dealt with yesterday and brought to an end.
HOST: What role did the media laws have? Was it because Senator Conroy rushed them in because he thought if there was to be a Rudd challenge then he would be  -  he, Senator Conroy  -  would be sacked under Kevin Rudd's prime ministership, so he thought he only had this week to try to bring them in?
PM: No Jon, that's completely not true and not the way the story unfolded. We-
HOST: Well how did it unfold? Because the public, the voters, are just left bewildered.
PM: We've been working on media reform proposals over a long period of time. It was as long ago as late 2010 when we announced the Convergence Review.
That was followed by a review led by a very eminent Australian Mr Finkelstein. We received their reports; their reports were the subject of further consultation and discussions.
The nature of the media laws in contemplation had been reported in newspapers on more than one occasion. So this had been a long time coming, worked through, brought to the parliament this week.
As a Government I think we've shown a lot of courage in getting big things done, and a lot of courage in trying to get some more big things done.
As it unfolded during the course of the fortnight, we didn't have parliamentary support for these reform proposals, so they have been withdrawn.
HOST: Old saying, never pick a fight with people who buy ink by the barrel-load.
Do you sit down now, do you invite Kim Williams from the News Limited corporation, do you invite Chris Mitchell, do you invite the editors of the Murdoch tabloids to sit down and in some way come to, I don't know, a peace agreement? Because they've been absolutely campaigning against you.
PM: I've met Mr Williams on more than one occasion and when it's appropriate for me to discuss anything with him then of course I'll meet him again.
So Jon, what you're describing is really routine business from my point of view. I meet with leading business identities almost every day.
HOST: How do you set the reset button then, Prime Minister?
PM: I don't think  -  I heard your introduction  -  and I don't that there's a reset button.
I think it's about getting on with the job and governing in the interests of the nation.
I've got a very clear plan, not only for this period of government, but for the nation's future. (Inaudible) economy during this incredible era of change through which we're living, where our region of the world, which for so long we thought of as a place of poverty and we looked over to the markets of Europe or America, will be the biggest consumer market in the world, the biggest middle class in the world.
This is an amazing opportunity for our country and I've got a plan to seize its benefits and make sure that they're fairly distributed. So that's what the days of governing are about and that's the plan I'll put forward for the nation's consideration and decision in September.
HOST: When you come back for the Budget session, Tony Abbott said on AM this morning, on ABC radio, that he will try to move a no-confidence motion and he'll seek support from the crossbench members of the House  -  Windsor, Oakeshott, Wilkie, Katter and the Greens  -  for a no-confidence motion.
PM: I've heard Mr Abbott huff and puff about no confidence motions over many occasions and it never comes to anything, so something tells me that he's thinking that he can get some media today saying that, and then by the time we come back in May you won't hear anything more of it.
HOST: But even the Greens  -  Christine Milne, their leader  -  said the Government yesterday had lost its way.
PM: Well, other political party leaders can say what they like but Mr Abbott's track record on threatening no confidence motions is that they are threatened when it suits him for a headline and then quickly forgotten about.
HOST: The Financial Review is full of the business community calling for change, saying the Government's dysfunctional.
PM: We work strongly with the business community. We don't always agree with them on everything, I mean our interest always has to be the national interest, the absolute centre of Australian life.
Businesses absolutely legitimately come to Canberra and put a perspective from their industry, from their business. I listen to those, I take on board some of their ideas, we agree sometimes, we disagree other times and that's how it will continue.
HOST: There's very little support though at the moment across the board. Usually the business community have various champions; Heather Ridout particularly has been Labor friendly for a very long time.
The business community is now virtually unanimous in criticising pretty much everything that the Government's doing, whether it's the mining tax, the NBN rollout now being accused of being politicised; left, right and centre.
PM: I don't agree with that analysis. I meet with business people very routinely, even in the course of this week which has had its stresses and strains.
I've met with a number of businesspeople and they don't talk to me about the inside-beltway of politics. They talk to me about the big things that matter from their industry's perspective.
Some of the talk to me about the National Broadband Network because they understand its pivotal role in the nation's future and our productivity. Some of them talk to me about traditional infrastructure projects; what are we going to do to ease congestion in our big cities.
Some of them talk to me about the environmental policies of the Government and how we deal with making sure we protect our environment, and getting on with appropriate development proposals.
Many of them talk to me about skills and training and are very admiring of the work the Government has done to create more university places, more apprenticeships and more traineeships than ever before.
And then they talk to me too about their analysis of the global economy, what's happening in Europe, what's happening in America, what's happening in China, what it means for our exports, what it means for the future of our economy. So those discussions; they're rich, they're deep and they'll continue.
HOST: The budget challenges though now loom large, Prime Minister. Do you rule out tax rises or any change to the GST for this year's Federal Budget?
PM: Yes, we've absolutely ruled out any change to the GST and Jon, what you're clearly thinking about is funding some very big picture new reforms for our nation.
I do want Australian families to have the reassurance that would come with disability care, with the National Disability Insurance Scheme, so that if you have a family member now with a disability, or anybody in your family has a disability across their lives, that they are appropriately supported with options and choices.
That's a big picture piece of work; the Medicare of the modern age. It is expensive and we'll have to make some tough budget decisions to fund it. But as you know, the GST doesn't come to us. It goes to the states, and we've absolutely ruled out any increase in the GST.
HOST: There's just not enough money to go around. It's as simple as that, particularly because of the failure of the mining super profits tax to generate the revenue you were counting on.
PM: Let's be very accurate about what's going on in the Government's budget. Yes you're right, the Minerals Resource Rent Tax as a profits-based tax has not delivered what we originally forecast.
And when I say we, obviously we rely on the advice of the forecasting people at Treasury. So it hasn't delivered what was forecast.
But the significant issue in the Government's budget is the problems with revenue across the board. It's not all about the Minerals Resource Rent Tax  -  indeed it's not predominantly about the Minerals Resource rent Tax  -  it's about the fact that per unit of GDP now we are seeing less revenue come into the government's coffers than at any time since the recovery from the recession in the early 1990s.
This has confounded economic professionals who find it hard to explain why revenue has recovered so slowly from the global financial crisis, and in part they're finding that hard to explain because they're finding some current economic conditions hard to explain.
HOST: Yes.
PM: Our dollar's gone up 50 per cent in the last few years. That means we ask people overseas to pay 50 per cent more for our goods and services than we used to.
Normally when the terms of trade come off and interest rates go down, the dollar comes down. That hasn't happened, that's different to economic orthodoxy and it has put some pressure on our economy and some pressure onto government revenues.
HOST: So we're back to the question. There's a huge hole in the budget  -  how do you fill it? You haven't got the money to spend on the things you've promised to do.
PM: We, number one, do what we've done over the last five budgets, which is we identify savings, many of them very tough savings and they cause moments of concern and moments of opposition.
Many of them very tough savings but we make those savings in order to fund things that we think are a higher priority.
And the two things we've identified as the highest priorities for the forthcoming budget are disability care and school funding reform because we just cannot be as strong a nation as we want to be in the future, or as fair a nation as we want to be, without making sure every child gets a world-class education.
So you will see us in the budget making some big calls. There will be people who are saying “oh no, they've cut this, they've cut that, we don't agree with that” and I will have that argument that we should be putting our children first and offering a new deal for people with disabilities.
HOST: That suggests then the Gonski reforms. Yesterday in the parliament in the morning there you were with Tony Abbott on the stage in the Great Hall providing a most emotional scene of an apology to people who had endured forced adoptions. What was your reaction when Tony Abbott was heckled?
PM: I think it was very unfortunate that Mr Abbott was heckled when he gave his speech.
I had to say Jon, I heard  -  he used an expression which people object to and was heckled, and then I must admit because I was sitting behind him and the microphone is predominantly pitching his voice forward, then in the moments that followed I actually couldn't hear the things that he said next because there was continuing noise in the hall.
I do understand from reading the media reports that he then offered an apology if he'd said anything that had caused people discomfort, but it was a pity.
HOST: Is that the difference between a woman making an apology over adoptions to a hall mostly filled with women, compared to a man?
PM: I don't think it's that. I really don't. I must admit I hadn't considered that perspective so I'm musing in my mind even as I'm answering you, but I really don't think it was that.
I think this is an area of incredible hurt and consequently incredible sensitivity, and I understand that.
I was conscious of every word that I said, and it was an amazingly emotional, and I hope cathartic, occasion for not only the people in the room but the people who are still so torn apart by what happened to them that it wasn't possible for them to come to that room but who would have listened to it on the radio or watched it on TV.
The stories that I have been told face-to-face are truly horrifying of children taken away, of kids that grew up believing their mother was dead, or their mother didn't want them. Of reconciliations, of people coming back together and finding a way forward in life, but also of times that mothers have found children and that hasn't brought a new relationship that's worked. So it's just heart-tearing stuff.
HOST: Sure, but let's not shy away from  -  I mean your misogyny speech in the parliament against Tony Abbott has had literally millions of hits on YouTube now. You've since then also revived claims of special treatment being meted out to you because you're a woman.
So is that a recurring theme with what happened yesterday? There are people on the Liberal side who say there was a rent-a-crowd there who were determined to embarrass Tony Abbott. I wanted to know how you see it.
PM: I think if anybody said that I think that is grossly unfair. What happened, I believe, is that Mr Abbott used a term that people object to and that started some heckling and then all credit to him, I think he then apologised for using that term, though as I say Jon, I couldn't actually hear sitting behind him at that point.
Though the incident itself was clear to me that there was upset in the room, so I think it's really very disrespectful of the people there to refer to them as rent-a-crowd.
In terms of gender in politics, what I've said and what I'll continue to say is if I see sexism, if I see misogyny then I will name it and I will call it out.
I don't wander around thinking of myself moment-by-moment as “gee I'm the first woman to do this job”. I don't do that. I get on with the job.
But there are times when I think treatment is different and when I see those times I'll be very express about it.
HOST: I've gone way over time. Thank you for taking our call this morning and I look forward to seeing you in the studio. Maybe you have a chance to take some talkback from the listeners that would be good.
PM: That would be good. Thanks Jon.
[ENDS] 


Today FM
KYLE: We've had a special phone call from the office of the Prime Minister!
JACKIE O: She is still the Prime Minister.
KYLE: And so she should be.
JACKIE O: Julia Gillard.
KYLE:  Are you sitting behind the big desk this morning Prime Minister?
PM: I'm not behind the big desk right now Kyle, I'm sorry, but I did want to say good morning to you and to Jackie O and to say we've got to go Easter egg hunting, don't we?
KYLE: Oh, last time we spoke to you we said we had the idea of the Easter egg hunt. And you said you'd get back to us. Is this the official confirmation?
PM: This is it. I've actually got some time on Sunday so let's go and look for some Easter eggs, and I can't wait to see you in a rabbit outfit!
JACKIE O: You promised you would be in a rabbit outfit.
KYLE: She's a woman of her word.
JACKIE O: That's fantastic, so we can do that Easter egg hunt! When we asked you about this originally we had in mind that we would treat a bunch of children and their families from Bear Cottage this lovely privilege to go to Kirribilli and do this big Easter egg hunt.
And we were so hoping that you would say yes. And that is just fantastic news because I know the guys down at Bear Cottage who give end-of-life care to young children and their families-
KYLE: They do an amazing job.
JACKIE O: They do do an amazing job. And I just feel like they need some joy in their life and this would be incredible for them.
KYLE: Yeah but forget them, I'm going to Kirribilli!
JACKIE O: Something you've always wanted to do!
PM: Kyle, it's not all about you, it's about those kids from Bear Cottage and I've heard about Bear Cottage too, and they do seem like amazing people.
And it will be a real delight to invite some kids around and we'll hide some Easter eggs and we'll go hunting.
And of course to see Kyle dressed up as the Easter Bunny  -  that will be a moment to savour and remember for a lifetime.
KYLE: Hang on, need to get through a few things. Can I drive? Because it has always been my fantasy to drive my car with a flag on the front through the gates of Kirribilli. So have I got a spot?
PM: We can organise that, no problem.
KYLE: Good, I'm getting car spots all over the place this week.
PM: You can only have your car there Sunday, Kyle. I don't want you to think that somehow this is now your parking spot in Kirribilli.
JACKIE O: He has already got one at Channel Nine apparently.
KYLE: Now congratulations about yesterday. That was a big out of the blue sort-of thing that happened and you were so  -  man I don't know  -  the girls around here and the boys this morning have all been talking about-
JACKIE O: We've all been talking.
KYLE: That you were very inspiring yesterday and we thought you were slick, you were powerful and you were the winner at the end of it, which I thought was incredible and just a brilliant move.
PM: Thank you very much. We did have a big day in politics yesterday. But on with it all today, getting on with the business of governing and of course honouring promises like the Easter egg hunt.
JACKIE O: So how did you feel Prime Minister yesterday when you first heard about this call for a leadership spill? You were angry?
KYLE: I would have been spewing.
PM: Well my focus for the morning was actually on delivering the apology for Australians who have been put through forced adoption.
So we planned this for a long period of time. And we had the Great Hall filled with people who have just lived through such trauma: mothers having their children taken away, kids growing up not knowing who their parents were or whether their parents loved them or whether their parents gave them up voluntarily.
Often sold stories that the child was dead or the mother was dead, so just horrible things have happened.
And I really wanted to make that a moment for those people, and a moment of healing.
So that was my focus in the morning and then it quickly became-
JACKIE O: But then Simon Crean ruined it all, didn't he?
PM: Increasingly transparent we were going to have a big day and I thought, well you get on with it and you meet head on  -  so that's what I did.
JACKIE O: I want to play you something  -  this, I loved this moment yesterday when Question Time-
KYLE: She's been talking about it all morning.
JACKIE O: Let's play it. Take a listen.
KYLE: Jackie's favourite bit of the Prime Minister yesterday.
PM GRAB: For the information of the House I have determined that there will be a ballot for the Leadership and Deputy Leadership of the Labor Party at 4.30 today. In the meantime, take your best shot.
JACKIE O: Take your best shot!
KYLE: I love that. And they gave it their best shot and they failed.
JACKIE O: Yes.
PM: They did.
JACKIE O: Is it bad that I love it when you get angry?
PM: No I don't think so. I think a lot of women who know what it's like in male-dominated workplaces  -  not suggesting that your workplace has got big male characters in it or anything like that.
KYLE: No, we're very in the background here.
PM: Very in the background! But I think a lot of women in male-dominated workplaces like to see a woman pushing through and getting on with it. And that's how I feel as I do this job, and sometimes it shows more than others. But I certainly feel that every day.
JACKIE O: Well you definitely would have to be a strong woman to do that job. Is it difficult where a lot of the time you just don't know who you can trust, people stabbing you in the back. That's a tough job.
PM: It is a tough job, but it has got such amazing reward in the sense that you get to look at our nation and think about its future and see the problems and say “I can fix that” and then design the policies and implement them and see it being fixed.
So that privilege of leadership outweighs anything else.
KYLE: I loved the big pimp walk at the end where all the guys were in black suits and you were pimping up the front in the white suit, strutting down the hall.
And it was just a power shot, it's on the front of the Telegraph this morning, it looks brilliant. I'm glad. I'm glad all the infighting is finished because it must have been hard for you to run the country while that was going on.
JACKIE O: Well has it finished though? I mean, that's the big question.
KYLE: It was finished yesterday.
PM: It was definitely finished yesterday. So it's over and we're moving on and getting on with the big policies we've got coming out between now and the Budget.
And one I've been working on literally for years is our new funding system for schools. So that's what's happening next.
JACKIE O: When you went home last night after such a big day, were you that exhausted you could just fall asleep. Did this keep you up all night? Do you talk to Tim about this? Who do you let off steam to?
PM: Well Tim's actually away at the moment, so it was me and Reuben the dog, so he was full of wise words.
JACKIE O: Oh Julia that makes me sad that you were just home alone with the dog after such a brutal day!
KYLE: Jackie's fishing for friends. She wants to be the one you phone.
PM: I'd have to say I spent some time with people into the evening, and then got back here and had a few telephone calls to make and all the rest of it.
But at the end of a long hard day I was happy enough to hang out, pat the dog, and then get some sleep.
KYLE: Did President Obama ring up and say yeah good one, yeah that's it.
PM: I think he's a bit busy at the moment. He has been in Israel as you might see in the newspapers, so he's got very big issues on his mind.
KYLE: I see Simon Crean has gone; he was the Arts Minister. Here we go, I want to offer my services  -  free of charge  -  to be the new Arts Minister.
Because I've hung out with people like Snoop Dogg, Guy Sebastian, I've been in Priscilla Queen of the Desert  -  I was an Asian prostitute. So I'm across the arts. I'm your man.
And if you have that guy from Midnight Oil there, I thought it's a good chance I could get this. For free!
PM: Let me think about that Kyle. There's a couple of problems like you can't be a minister unless you are a member of parliament. But what I might be able to do is when I appoint the new Arts Minister I will tell them  -  get straight on the phone to Kyle and work it all out.
KYLE: Oh great, so I could be like a shadow  -  oh no shadow's the opposition.
JACKIE O: Every time we've got the Prime Minister on you're always hitting her up for a personal favour, rather than asking her the questions we want to ask!
PM: He gets away with it, doesn't he?
JACKIE O: I don't know how, and somehow you've agreed to doing one of them, which is fantastic.
KYLE: I think it's lovely because it's for the kids, the Easter Bunny thing. Are we going to do the egg and spoon race?
PM: We can do an egg and spoon race, we can be out in the garden  -  hopefully it will be a beautiful afternoon  -  looking for Easter eggs.
KYLE: Do I get to see inside?
PM: Oh, of course absolutely you can see inside, and I've got an image of you hopping up and down the stairs in Kirribilli  -  it will be fantastic.
JACKIE O: I've got an image of him tripping actually.
KYLE: Thank you.
JACKIE O: Before you go Prime Minister, just a couple more questions I wanted to ask. Did it surprise you when Kevin Rudd didn't stand in the leadership spill? Or did you always feel that he would stand by his word?
PM: I was a bit surprised given all of the build-up that Kevin didn't stand. But having chosen not to stand that does underline that this is all definitely over.
JACKIE O: How stable is the Labor Party now, because that's the big question?
PM: People can be reassured that all of this is done and dusted now. So they don't have to worry about that anymore. And we'll just be getting on with the big things that really matter for governing and for the future of the country.
So it's definitely  -  yesterday was it.
JACKIE O: So you think yep, Kevin no more, that's it.
PM: Correct. Correct. He'll be serving in his capacity as his local member  -  the Member for Griffith  -  so that's a big job and he'll be out there doing all of those things as a Labor backbencher.
But in terms of all of these issues we've seen internally, they're all over and done with.
JACKIE O: I know you come across as a very, very strong woman and there's no doubt about that. But there must be a part of you that  -  do you have a little cry every now and again because of all this craziness?
KYLE: A cry!
JACKIE O: Who wouldn't, in your shoes, with so much-
KYLE: Do you think I have a cry every now and then Jackie?
JACKIE O: Yeah I do.
KYLE: Strength comes from within.
PM: Well I kind of agree with Kyle. I did get a bit teary yesterday, but it was as I was being hugged and mobbed by people who had received the apology for forced adoptions. And these people had suffered so much and it was such a big moment for them.
And many of them were crying and they just wanted to hug me and thank me for delivering the apology. And it's that kind of thing that makes me feel emotional and teary  -  not things about myself.
KYLE: When you can make a difference to people's lives  -  that's a nice thing to cry about.
PM: It did have a real sense of healing about it. One of those times when it's kind of good tears; it's helping people get through some pain.
JACKIE O: Yeah. Well, congratulations on yesterday Prime Minister. We're glad to be able to talk to you this morning and so glad that you're giving the families at Bear Cottage something very joyful in their lives, and they need it right now, so they will love this.
KYLE: What time is this thing on Sunday?
PM: I think we're on in the mid-afternoon, so I will see you there.
KYLE: That ruins the whole day then. Couldn't we have done it early or late?
JACKIE O: We're just appreciative that you're doing it.
KYLE: Oh yeah, you're right.
PM: I didn't want you in a bunny suit in the heat of the day.
KYLE: Thank you Prime Minister, you're lovely. And congratulations, I'm glad you're in charge. I'm glad it's back to business as normal and the election is on September 14.
And I tell you what, two of the ladies I've spoken to on the way to work this morning both said, “well you know what, I wouldn't have voted for Julia Gillard before, but after yesterday she has got my vote”.
JACKIE O: I think this will do very well for you in the polls, what do you think Julia?
PM: I don't ever worry about polls. We've got a press gallery full of reporters who do very little else. So I leave that to them.
JACKIE O: Thanks for talking to us.
KYLE: See you Sunday.
PM: See you Sunday.
KYLE: I've got a fleet of cars bringing me too; it's not just the one car. It's a big thing for me!
PM: Righto, I'll be organising that fleet of parking spots.
KYLE: Let the feds know I'm on the way darl. Okay, see you later.
JACKIE O: Bye.
PM: Bye bye.


Bangalow
PM: I'm delighted to be here with Justine Elliot, the Member for Richmond and looking at this truly impressive road project. This is part of what we are dong to upgrade the Pacific Highway.
This is known as the T to E section. It's 17 kilometres of road, more than $860 million of joint investment between the Federal Government and State Government, of which we are providing more than $560 million; more than half a billion dollars.
It's an important project for safety. This has been a section of road which unfortunately has seen far too many accidents. And with the benefit of duplication, this will be a safer road.
It's also a road that sees thousands of vehicles. This is a beautiful region of the world. Home to locals but home to many visitors from other parts of the country, and from right around the world.
And so to deal with the pressures of traffic and traffic volumes this section of road will be very important.
This all up is part of what we are doing to make the Pacific Highway safer, and to ensure that for motorists it's a better section of road that they can travel on more quickly. It's been a huge project.
As a Federal Government, we have devoted more than $7 billion in resources to upgrading the Pacific Highway. That's a very sharp contrast with our predecessors who over 13 long years only put in just over a billion dollars.
Our aim is to make this a road that from start to finish you can travel on as a duplicated road. That improves safety, it improves efficiency, it improves the driver experience.
Justine has long wanted me to come and see this project which is the biggest piece of infrastructure ever in her electorate or on the northern coast, so the biggest piece of infrastructure ever built here.
So I'm delighted to be here, able to see it for myself. It's certainly come a long way since the sod was turned last October, and it will be finished at the end of next year.
I will be here locally with Justine today and tomorrow, and I'm very much looking forward to it. And I'll hand over to her now.
JUSTINE ELLIOT: Thanks, Prime Minister. I've been asking the Prime Minister to come up here and have a look at the great T to E  -  Tintenbar to Ewingsdale Pacific Highway upgrade.
And I'm really pleased she is here today and some other events right around the electorate that we will be doing as well.
This project is wonderful, and the Federal Labor Government has delivered over $560 million of the $860 million for this project, as the Prime Minister said; the single biggest ever infrastructure project on the north coast.
And it's the Federal Labor Government that's delivered that.
Further north in the electorate we've got the Sexton's Hill upgrade at Benora Point as well, again delivered by the Federal Labor Government.
So very proud as the local MP to be delivering this vital Pacific Highway upgrade, particularly as a local and as a former police officer.
Projects like these are really important. They are important to locals and important to the many tourists that travel through here as well.
So I'm really pleased the Prime Minister is here and accepted the invitation to come up here. She has been up here many times and knows the area and understands the people up here very well. So it's great to have her here today.
Thanks Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you and before we take questions can I just say thank you to all the workers that we met today. The great staff here, I'm not sure that we've added to your productivity during the course of the day but thank you for making us so welcome.
And this is a part  -  the people that we see here are part of the hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of jobs that have been created through this infrastructure investment.
So we're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask when you made the decision to come up here today?
PM: I've been talking to Justine for quite some time about coming up locally. So it fitted into the program and we wanted to get it done.
JOURNALIST: This issue seems that even though you've poured a lot more money in than you say the previous Government has-
PM: We most certainly have.
JOURNALIST: It seems that it has almost been gazumped by the Opposition now promising 80 per cent of funding should they win government. You're only offering 50?
PM: Well, I think it always pays to look at the reality not the rhetoric.
And when you look at the reality, you can't get away from the fact that if the former Howard Government, of which the Leader of the Opposition was a pivotal part, if they had invested at the rate that we've been investing we wouldn't be having this conversation now because it would have been done by now.
Instead their track record in government  -  and I think that's the best way to judge them  -  their track record in government was to largely ignore the pressing need of the Pacific Highway.
So talk's cheap, action counts and what we're seeing here is action.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it was necessary for Janelle Saffin to resign as a Government Whip yesterday?
PM: That was a decision for her and she made it.
JOURNALIST: Could she go back on that position?
PM: She has made the decision. So her decision stands.
JOURNALIST: Have you seen Kevin Rudd's statement?
PM: I've seen the media reports of the statement and I think it reflects the reality. This issue is over and done with.
I was very clear about that yesterday and let me be very clear again today.
This issue has been resolved for all time and I think Kevin's statement reflects that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you what your first thought was when you woke this morning? Was it a “what was that” moment?
PM: No, it was, right time to bolt out of bed and start getting a few things done.
JOURNALIST: Have you given any more thought to Cabinet?
PM: There are a number of people clearly considering their position. And I too will consider ministerial arrangements over the next few days.
JOURNALIST: Is it really difficult to do something like this? Justine has made no secret of the fact she was a Kevin Rudd supporter, yet you are basically campaigning with her today.
You're going to find yourself in situations like that time and again between now and the next election. How do you handle that? Is it personally uncomfortable?
PM: No, no, no, Justine is a great Labor member; a great local representative of these communities in the Federal Parliament and I've have always enjoyed travelling here and spending time with Justine and supporting her local efforts.
I'm very proud of what she has achieved for the communities here. And I know at the forthcoming election, she will not only be able to stand before these communities, talking about what she has achieved, but she will be able to stand here talking about what she is going to achieve for them in the future.
JOURNALIST: On that note, it's been a professionally difficult year and a personally difficult year. Can I ask you what your source of resilience is? Because it is inspiring.
PM: Well, thank you very much. Look, I'm someone who's made of pretty strong stuff. And I think that's been on display.
Politics is not an easy business. But what's always driven me throughout all of my days as a member of Federal Parliament, and what drives me as Prime Minister, is a vision of our country and getting that achieved.
So you wouldn't do it if you weren't driven by a sense of purpose and I am driven by a sense of purpose about making our nation stronger than it is now, fairer than it is now, smarter than it is now, and the next big thing we've got to do is making sure every Australian school child gets a great quality education.
So that's what gets me bolting out of bed in the morning.
JOURNALIST: What's your advice to women that come under fire when they're in the top job?
PM: I would say always remember what's important about being there.
So I think it's very important to have a strong sense of yourself, not be buffeted by other people's opinions or reflections, and stay true to the purpose that you set yourself.
I came into parliament with a purpose about opportunity and education and jobs and helping working people. And it's the same today.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) given what happened with Mr Crean yesterday, when will it be announced?
PM: I will make some decisions about the ministry over coming days, and then we will announce them when those decisions are made.
So I don't have any scoop news for you today. I will reflect on that over the next few days.
JOURNALIST:  (Inaudible) was that a difficult conversation with one of your ministers?
PM: I did speak to Chris Bowen this morning, and he indicated to me he thought the appropriate course was for him to resign.
I accepted his resignation and said to him personally that I thought it was a very honourable decision.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
PM: I indicated in answer to a question over here that there are obviously people who have been thinking about these issues.
I will think and reflect too over coming days and then we will announce new ministerial arrangements.
JOURNALIST: Is there any chance the events of the last day have been an altruistic bid to deflect some pressure from the Australian test cricket team?
PM: You might be wasted at the ABC. You might have a career in doing commentary on politics. But no, I don't think that's true.
We've been unfair here. We'll take one question here.
JOURNALIST: I just want to know, with all of the build-up and all of the destabilisation, was it totally gutless of Rudd?
PM: Look, I will leave those sorts of commentary issues to others. I made my views clear yesterday. I have made them clear today. It's over, and over for all time.
Yes we're being very naughty now, last, last, last question.
JOURNALIST: We are represented by two members of the Rudd faction. Will the region suffer as a result?
PM: Certainly not. I'm proud to be here alongside Justine Elliot and the very fact that we're here looking at the biggest infrastructure project that has ever been created in this part of Australia says something about Justine's advocacy and something about how much we value working in partnership with these communities.
Thanks very much.


Murwillumbah
The Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that the fibre rollout of the National Broadband Network is coming to the Far North Coast of NSW.
The Government will be releasing its next three year plan shortly, with Murwillumbah to be the first of many places to receive the fibre network.
Construction will commence to around 5,000 homes and businesses in the 2015-16 financial year.
The NBN will be a great boost to the local community. It will revolutionise how residents work, access healthcare and education, and do business.
The NBN is ensuring that we have the infrastructure for this century that our nation needs.
It is impossible to imagine us being a strong, productive economy in the future if other nations have the benefit of high-speed broadband and we do not.
It is also wrong to deny pensioners, to deny people in their homes, or to deny students who want to learn, the benefits that come from the services that can be delivered using the NBN.
Our children will not get a world-leading education if other children around the world have the benefit of learning through broadband and our children do not.
Our older Australians deserve to have the benefit of the state-of-the-art technology that enables them to stay in their homes longer, with their medical conditions and welfare appropriately monitored.
The NBN will mean that regional Australia should no longer feel the tyranny of distance. Businesses in Murwillumbah and surrounding areas will be able to compete with businesses around the world in the same way they could if they were in Melbourne, Sydney or Brisbane.
Last month the Government also announced that the NBN's fixed wireless and satellite services, which will be delivered to parts of rural and remote Australia, are being upgraded so they can provide a better broadband service than what is available to most people on the ageing copper network today.
These services will deliver a 25 Megabit per second download and 5 Megabit per second upload, meaning all Australians can gain the benefits available through the NBN's high speed affordable broadband.
Only Labor will deliver the National Broadband Network.


Murwillumbah
PM: I am very much enjoying my morning here with Justine Elliot in her electorate, the electorate of Richmond.
And we are here in Murwillumbah and joined by a lot of community members, and thank you very much for coming along.
I do want to say something about here, and an announcement for this community. But before I do so, I have got a couple of other issues I need to deal with.
People will have seen on their television screens the footage of the devastation caused by the tornado in Victoria's north-east.
This has been a truly startling event. People would have seen that 20 have sustained injuries, there have been homes damaged, destroyed, trashed, vehicles have been overturned. A lot of damage has been done.
So, we have worked with the Victorian Government and we are activating disaster assistance to help people who are affected by the tornado and the storms associated with it.
What this will mean is that there is some first-instance assistance available to help people with the costs of getting food and absolutely essential supplies and replacements of essential items.
This assistance is available to people in the Alpine, Benalla, Greater Shepparton, Indigo, Moira and Strathbogie local government areas.
People can find details of that assistance on our Federal Government disaster assist website, or the telephone number to ring is 180 22 66.
So, our communities in Victoria, particularly in Victoria's north-east, are facing a very difficult day and our thoughts are with them and some practical assistance is available.
And then second, I do want to welcome the release of Warren Rodwell.
Warren Rodwell is an Australian citizen who has been kidnapped over the last 15 months. He was kidnapped in Mindanao in the Philippines.
Mr Rodwell's family have shown a great deal of courage and stoicism in what has been a tremendously difficult situation.
I do want to pay tribute to the Government of the Philippines and their agencies and personnel who worked so hard to secure Mr Rodwell's release, including particularly those who combat kidnapping in the Philippines for the Philippines Government; they have done some remarkable work.
I would also like to pay tribute to our own Australian officials, including those from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, from the Australian Federal Police and indeed from Defence who have also worked hard on this matter.
Our thoughts are with Warren Rodwell on this day of his release, and with his family.
I know that his family is keen to ensure that their privacy is respected at this time, and I am sure that our friends from the media will do that.
But I think all Australians will be very pleased to hear this news and delighted on behalf of the Rodwell family.
And then third, coming to events right here where I have had the opportunity to talk to a number of community members today.
I am in a position today to announce that the National Broadband Network is on its way to communities here on the far north coast of New South Wales, and for the community members who are listening around, it is going to come here first. This is the first community.
Murwillumbah will be the first of a number of communities in this region to see the benefit of fibre to the premises.
What that means is we will see construction of fibre to the premises for 5,000 homes and businesses in 2015-16, in that financial year.
NBN Co will shortly be releasing its updated maps. It does that around this time every year. And for everybody locally, when you see that map come out, make sure that you get on the NBN website and have a look because you will see your name emblazoned there.
The National Broadband Network is an important development for our nation. We simply cannot be a strong, prosperous economy in the future full of opportunity if we don't have this infrastructure of the 21st century.
This is as pivotal to the century in which we live as electricity and the copper wire telephone network was to the last century.
That copper wire network of telephone calls has served us well but now we need this infrastructure.
So it will not only transform our economy, enable us to bring services, including health and education services, to people in new ways, but it will end the burden of distance for regional communities including regional communities here in the far north coast of New South Wales.
It means that people will be able to get access to the world, local businesses can trade with the world in the same way that businesses in Sydney's CBD or Brisbane's CBD can.
It means schools can get the best of education from around the world and it does mean we can provide things like GP consultations  -  health care in the home for older Australians  -  in new and innovative ways.
So I know this is going to be received as good news today here locally and I am very proud to be here to announce it.
I will hand over to Justine for some comments including about this wonderful centre we are in, and then we will take some questions.
JUSTINE ELLIOT: Thanks so much Prime Minister and welcome to Murwillumbah. It has been a great morning this morning.
Thank you for coming and making this really important announcement for our area.
The fact that Murwillumbah will be the first of many for the fibre rollouts of the NBN is going to make a huge difference to people here on the north coast.
As you said, that's 5,000 houses and we will be having that NBN fibre rolled out from 2015. And what a huge difference this will make to the people of the north coast.
I speak to small business people every day who can't wait to have the NBN here.
School children, it will be remarkable for them. Right across the area it will make such a big difference for business, for health services, and we are so excited you were able to come here today and make this really important announcement.
And thanks to everyone who has come along to share the great excitement.
I'd also like to note that we are here making this announcement at the Murwillumbah Community Centre. Now this centre is here today because the Federal Labor Government delivered more than $2 million for this fantastic community project, it really is a great venue.
We were very pleased to make that commitment prior to the last election.
And we did that, here we are, we committed, we promised and we delivered. That's what Federal Labor Governments do.
And now Murwillumbah has this outstanding community centre. And I understand that since we opened it in late November, I think they've seen thousands of people.
It makes such a big difference in the lives of so many locals.
So we were very proud to open it that day and we're even prouder to be here today in this great Murwillumbah Community Centre announcing the NBN rollout for our area.
So thank you Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you. We are happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Labor has just eight seats in Queensland. Four of which I think at the moment are on less than six per cent. Would you consider accepting Kevin Rudd's invitation to join you in campaigning in Queensland in the lead-up to the September poll?
PM: As I have made clear we will be out there, the full Labor team, working together during the days of governing, and campaigning together during the election campaign.
So I will certainly, when the election campaign comes, be campaigning with every member of my team, including Kevin Rudd.
JOURNALIST: Joel Fitzgibbon says that Labor chose to lose the election over returning Kevin Rudd, what do you think about his comments?
PM: All of this is behind us. We are here getting on with important things for this local community and for the nation.
The National Broadband Network is so important for our nation's future. It's about jobs, it's about opportunity, it's about the best of services.
My focus is now very much on the future for Australian kids. We are joined by a lot of kids today.
My focus will be on what's happening in their classrooms and making sure that they get a world-class education so that they  -  as our future citizens  -  can live in a nation with the best of infrastructure, the best of skills and consequently the strongest prosperity that we can give our nation's future
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, who will be your Cabinet replacements?
PM: I will deal with the ministerial reshuffle in coming days.
JOURNALIST: Are you expecting any more people to leave your ministry, or are you planning to sack anyone from your ministry?
PM: I will deal with the ministerial reshuffle in coming days.
I am very lucky to be supported by so many great ministers who are doing very, very good work.
I will make the final arrangements for the ministry in coming days and announce it then.
JOURNALIST: Do you support Anthony Albanese  -  do you still support him?
PM: Minister Albanese is doing a good job, a fantastic job. He is a very valuable minister and I work very closely with him.
JOURNALIST: What about Mark Butler? Do you support him?
PM: Minister Butler is a very able minister who is continuing to do very important work for us in some difficult areas.
Mental health care is an area that had unfortunately been long neglected in Australia's national life.
Minister Butler has brought a new focus to it, and he has brought too a preparedness to deal with the big reform agendas that we need in aged care as our society ages.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Kevin Rudd supporters should all go?
PM: I am dealing with ministerial reshuffle arrangements in a few days' time.
JOURNALIST: Did you ask Minister Mark Ferguson to resign?
PM: Mr Ferguson made his own decision.
JOURNALIST: Will there be enough talent in the Government so close before the election?
PM: Absolutely. One of the things about the Labor team is it is an incredibly deep team. There is a depth and wealth of talent there.
My problem when it comes to ministerial reshuffles is making the fine judgments about who to promote because there are so many possibilities, and so many people with real ability who could step up and do the tasks before them.
Unfortunately there are only so many spots. But the difficulty in it isn't finding people to do the job; it is being spoilt for choice.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you consider returning to the old system where ministers were selected by the caucus and not yourself?
PM: My view has been that it is appropriate for me as leader to make ministerial selections, and I will certainly be making these ones.
JOURNALIST: Do you believe that you can win? Essentially obviously this has been very damaging over the last few days. Do you think it's still a possibility for the Labor Party to win the election?
PM: Of course, and the election will come down to an incredibly clear, incredibly stark choice for the Australian people.
Our future is not assured. You can't just say well a prosperous strong future rolls out for Australia as an automatic thing.
We only secure that future by making the right choices today.
Our future is not assured.
And we will be the only political party presenting at the election with a clear plan for our nation's future which is all about jobs and opportunity and prosperity for all, and a clear plan to support families today as they go about the all-important work of raising the next generation.
On the other side of politics, all we'll ever see is negativity and that's all we'll ever see come the election campaign.
JOURNALIST: Would you consider putting Kevin Rudd in your Cabinet again?
PM: I am making ministerial selections. Mr Rudd some time back made clear that his future is as the Member for Griffith. He verified that as recently as yesterday.
RESIDENT: As a Murwillumbah resident, with many thanks for what you've done so far, we still find it a little bit hard to serve the people that we're here to serve. Hopefully there may be a grant for us?
PM: One of the things I am going to leave this community absolutely sure about is that you are incredibly proud and you are not backwards about coming forwards when it comes to the future, so I actually think we are going next door to talk about what's possible there, which is what you wanted me to do.
Thank you very much. 


The Domain, Sydney
[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OMITTED]
It's a great honour to join you for Greek Independence Day.
The Greek struggle for independence which began in 1821 not only freed a nation  -  it inspired the world.
When the Greek people fought for the rights and liberties “graven ... in the hearts of all men” you won the admiration of all free people and it is an admiration you have never forfeited since.
This is a day of seriousness and also of enjoyment: a day to commemorate great patriots and a day to celebrate what they won and what their descendants have built around the world.
It's strange to think that at the time of independence, most Greeks had not even heard of Australia. 
Back in 1832 a Greek geography textbook advised that “very little is known about [Australia] ... And scarcely anything is worth mentioning”.
Fortunately for us, your ancestors didn't believe that!
Instead, you've come here, throughout our history, stayed here, raised families and built a proud community.
This Government works with you: we support Greek language in the national curriculum, our National Culture Policy is accessible to your community, our aged care programs are culturally and linguistically sensitive.
It's also no surprise that the people who invented the very idea of citizenship are among the most enthusiastic of all our migrant communities to become citizens of this country.
Let mecongratulate the local Greek community and Government of Greece for revivingour joint military heritage  -  especially rememberingthe island of Lemnos as the base for the Gallipoli campaign, as well as remembering the Greek campaign and the Battle of Crete in the Second World War.
This has quite a personal aspect for me, as some of you know.
During World War One, my mother's father, Alexander MacKenzie, fought alongside the Greeks in the Salonika Front in northern Greece.
When my grandfather left Barry in Wales in 1915 he left as a very young man ready to fight for freedom  -  when he returned home after three years of war he brought home with him the wounds he earned in service.
He also brought home a great privilege  -  the memory that he had fought for freedom alongside the Greeks, the knowledge that he had fought for freedom in freedom's home.
He witnessed your people's great courage and sacrifice and I was proud to commemorate that with you today.
My grandfather also witnessed the great generosity of people who know how to celebrate, and I am very glad to see this hasn't changed!
In what is now Thessaloniki it would have been the first time he tasted feta cheese and olive. 
BeingWelsh he certainlyenjoyed Greek hospitality with local wines, beer and the tsipouro. 
So enjoy that too!
I know many families are focused on economic issues in Greece and Cyprus. We wish them well.And we wish peace and justice for Cyprus.
My congratulations on today's magnificent occasion.
It's a marvellous day to commemorate and celebrate! 
A great day to remember  -  and to have fun.
Enjoy.


The Project
BICKMORE: And the Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins us now. Prime Minister, a big few days, Tony Abbott's called your new-look Cabinet a bunch of L-platers. You've lost I think it's 52 years' of combined Cabinet experience to the backbench. Is it going to be hard having them sitting behind you like backseat drivers?
PM: Well, I'd expect Tony Abbott to be negative. I mean, he is never anything else. What I have done is created a team that will take us to the election and in these days of governing we will govern well.
We had an appalling week last week. There is no point trying to gloss over that, and I'm not going to do so. But now we are in a position to move on with unity and with confidence, and certainly with a sense of purpose.
PRICE: Prime Minister, Simon Crean was sacked for his role in the Kevin Rudd debacle. How come it is that Anthony Albanese, who was one of Kevin Rudd's numbers men and doesn't want you in the job of Prime Minister, gets promoted?
PM: Well Minister Albanese has spoken publicly about the events of last week. For myself I have been able to work very closely with Anthony Albanese. He has done a fantastic job in the Infrastructure and Transport portfolio and I am very confident I will be able to work with him.
PRICE: But you have got someone sitting there who wanted to stab you in the back. That mustn't be comfortable when you're doling with him face-to- face, one-on-one?
PM: Well I think that is a very unfair summary of Minister Albanese's position. I have known Anthony Albanese basically all of my adult life and we will be able to work very strongly together in a united team with Minister Albanese providing complete support to me as Prime Minister.
ROCHFORD: Now, in Question Time last Thursday before all the fun and games happened, you addressed the Parliament and the Opposition and you had a very specific message for them. Let's take a look.
PM GRAB: There will be a ballot for the leadership and deputy leadership of the Labor Party at 4:30 today. In the meantime, take your best shot.
ROCHFORD: Have to say one of my all-time favourite Julia Gillard quotes. But what exactly did you mean by that? And what did you expect to happen?
PM: Thank you. I knew that the Opposition would be trying to make merry with the circumstances of last week. You never go to Question Time expecting them to raise an idea for consideration.
You expect them to go the blitzkrieg negative and I knew that they would be particularly punchy on Thursday. So I thought I would indicate I was ready for them.
BICKMORE: Just looking at that clip then Prime Minister, would you say you are at your strongest, you are at your best when your back is against the wall?
PM: I think I am made of fairly strong stuff. I think I have had to be made of fairly strong stuff! I have got the opportunity to test that personal resilience a bit over the last few years as it happens.
Look, I bring my attributes, my character, my values to this job every day. What has always driven me on is a sense of purpose about creating opportunity in our country.
You wouldn't do this; you wouldn't get out of bed every morning unless there was a fierce passion for our nation and its future driving you on.
ROCHFORD: Now, it is easy to say Kevin Rudd has been somewhat of a thorn in your side. He has extended somewhat of an olive branch to you saying that over the next six months he is more than happy to campaign for the seats in Queensland alongside you. Can we expect to see you two out kissing babies together?
PM: You will see me governing with all of my Labor team. And then when the time comes campaigning with all of my Labor team, including Kevin Rudd.
ANDERSON: Now Prime Minister your misogyny speech made world-wide headlines but you have copped some flak over the last couple of days for hosting a charity event with Kyle Sandilands. But I need to point out, it was a kids' charity and Kyle is great with children.
JACKIE O GRAB: And all your family that could make it today for our Easter egg hunt we thank you for coming along.
[CHILD SCREAMING IN BACKGROUND]
KYLE SANDILANDS GRAB: Quiet that child down there!
ANDERSON: Is it really a good look Prime Minister to be hanging out with Kyle over the weekend?
PM: What that was all about was an Easter egg hunt, an hour of sunshine and lots and lots of chocolate for kids who are very, very unwell and are in the care of the great staff at Bear Cottage.
Bear Cottage looks after kids, many of whom are in the last period of their lives. And so if I can find a way to put a smile on those kids' faces, well that is enough for me. I think it was an hour well spent.
PRICE: But if Tony Abbott's a misogynist, what is Kyle Sandilands?
PM: Mr Abbott is running for Prime Minister of the country and that I think brings with it special scrutiny, and so it should.
BICKMORE: Prime Minister, I just want to talk to you about the events of today before we let you go. Another boat has capsized off Christmas Island. We understand a mother and a child have died, and a pregnant woman is critical. This is a 12th boat since last Monday. With calmer seas now, are you worried this surge is going to continue?
PM: I worry every time we hear that a boat is out on the water. Too many people have lost their lives getting on these very dangerous boats, paying people smugglers to do so, and what a dreadful tragedy this is.
So my message is a very clear one. Do not pay a people smuggler. Do not get on a boat. If you take the chance then tragically too many people lose out on the way.
BICKMORE: Prime Minister, we appreciate your time today. Thanks for coming on.
PM: Thanks very much. 


ABC 7.30
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for joining us.
PM: My pleasure.
HOST: After recent events, aren't Australians well within their rights to conclude that the Gillard Government is a dysfunctional mess that deserves to be consigned to opposition as soon as possible?
PM: I can understand people being appalled when they watch the events of last week. As I said today, I was appalled too.
But ultimately I believe people should judge the Government on what is achieved for our nation and for them in the lives of their families, and the plans that we've got for the future.
So even during last week when there was an unseemly display, even during that week, we passed into law Disability Care, the new system to make sure people with disabilities get a decent chance at life.
We made sure that 3.5 million pensioners got more money. We made sure that there was more money in child care for child care workers and the week before that we saw record job creation numbers, the biggest monthly result in job creation in 13 years.
So we have had a governing sense of purpose. What we've lacked is a sense of unity and now that is resolved.
HOST: I'll come to some of the achievements, or the lack of achievements in a moment. But you say people should look to your plans for the future. Why should we trust Labor's plans for the future when you've had so many problems and so much dysfunction in your past?
PM: People are entitled to look at what we've achieved, what we've said we would do, and what we have done.
We said we'd create jobs and keep strengthening our economy and we've done that. More than 900,000 jobs created, even during the worst global economic downturn since the Great Depression.
We said we'd make a difference for school kids, for skills, for apprenticeships, for university places. And we are improving schools. We're seeing record numbers of apprenticeships and traineeships, more university places and more kids from poorer homes getting the chance to be the first in their family to ever go to university.
We said we'd help families with cost of living pressures, paid parental leave, more money in child care, less money paid in taxation.
And we said we would set our nation up for the future for this Asian Century of growth and change. And we're doing that through things like rolling out the National Broadband Network.
Now, people can look at that, what we've said we would do and what we have done. We've also done some big hard controversial things, like putting a price on carbon, but they've been the right thing to do for the nation.
We've got more to do, Leigh.
HOST: Prime Minister, you've given me a laundry list there, so let me give you one back.
When people look at what you've done, they also see a promise not to introduce a carbon tax broken. They see a promise to deliver a budget surplus this year broken. An East Timor solution for asylum seekers proposed then withdrawn. A Malaysia solution proposed and then abandoned even as today we see a ship sink and people killed in another incident.
A ban on live cattle imports imposed and then withdrawn. The disastrous appointment of Peter Slipper. The redesign of a mining tax so it now returns a fraction of what was banked on.
I return to my earlier question: how do you expect the public to have any faith in what you're planning to do going forwards?
PM: Well Leigh, I'm happy to go through those one by one if you would like. We said we would introduce a price on carbon. I always wanted to see an emissions trading scheme.
And by the time people vote in September, we will be less than two years from that emissions trading scheme, and the end of the carbon tax.
HOST: But Prime Minister, you're not addressing my central problem there, which is there was a broken promise-
PM: I'm not agreeing with your list Leigh.
HOST: There was a broken promise there, and there is a long list of initiatives the Government has introduced that have been failures or have not come to fruition, the most recent of course last week, the media reforms. Let me put it to you-
PM: If you're going to go through a list, I think you've got to give me the opportunity to answer it.
And certainly on carbon I've addressed that before. I meant every word of that during the 2010 campaign. I didn't foresee a minority Parliament; we'll get to that emissions trading scheme we spoke of.
On the Malaysia arrangement, I would implement that tomorrow if Tony Abbott got out of the way.
On the live cattle ban, I think it was the appropriate thing to do, and it has secured the future for the live cattle industry because they were not going to get the social license they needed unless we addressed animal welfare standards.
HOST: It was very messy in the way it was done.
PM: Well, I think that industry has got a more secure long-term future now than it would have had we not acted.
Now, on the rest of the list, you can keep going through it. But when we worked through some very difficult things like carbon pricing, our eyes have always been on what is best for the nation. What's in the national interest, what's in the interest of a strong, prosperous, fair, smart future, and I am very happy to be judged on that.
HOST: Some of your own colleagues, when they decided to step down from Cabinet  -  Martin Ferguson and Simon Crean  -  have raised concerns about the process of government, and in particular the media reforms last week saying that it was mishandled and that it was a debacle.
Doesn't that go to the very heart of the way you run government when senior ministers in your own team have stepped down and made that criticism?
PM: I think it's very important that Cabinet plays a central role in government. As I said today, being a Cabinet member comes with rights and it comes with responsibilities and I will certainly be looking to the Cabinet team that now exists to exercise both those rights and those responsibilities.
On media law reform, we got through two important pieces of legislation during the week, including of course broadening the ambit of what the ABC does, and that's a good thing.
Leigh, it was always going to be a controversial debate. There are some loud, loud voices and some big vested interests in media policy debate.
And I really think at the end of the day those voices were going to come to the table loud and strong, irrespective of any of these process questions.
HOST: But those factors you've outlined there were a given, that there was always going to be opposition to the content. But let's actually go through the process and how you and your team handled that.
How is it good government that your minister, presumably with your approval, produced legislation with a minimal consultation of Cabinet and the Caucus and then demanded it be passed in just a week's time, without amendments, and without negotiation?
PM: Well Leigh, I think you've forgotten that this ran out of two long-standing reviews conducted by the Government in the full glare of the public-
HOST: I haven't forgotten that. I'm just asking why you put legislation up with one week's notice and said no negotiation no, amendments?
PM: Well, let's go through it. The Convergence Review, we started that in late 2010, very public process, everybody got to make their submissions. Then the report was made public, everybody got to speak about that.
We did the same with the review led by Ray Finkelstein. Everybody got to make their submissions, the report was public. Everybody got to make a commentary on that.
The nature of the reforms ultimately brought to the Parliament had been the subject of public discussion on more than one occasion. I'd read them in the newspapers several times myself.
So it's simply not correct to say that this content was somehow unknown or undiscussed or unconsulted upon.
HOST: The content of the reports and the reviews weren't unknown but the content of the legislation was unknown until Stephen Conroy produced it.
PM: I had read in the newspapers on more than one occasion the kind of reforms that the Government had in mind in this area.
HOST: So can I ask-
PM: So there was a long process leading up to it.
HOST: If we judge  -  sorry Prime Minister to interrupt  -  if we judge the process on the end result, you put up six pieces of legislation and only two of them got through. So therefore on any assessment you'd have to agree it was a mishandled and a botched process?
PM: We have a minority parliament; you come to this minority parliament. We've got an amazing track record in these circumstances of a minority parliament of getting things through. But we haven't been able to get everything through.
And I wasn't prepared to cross-trade and do any deal to get these bills through.
HOST: You were quite happy with how that process was handled last week from woe to go, the media reforms?
PM: The last fortnight has been the last fortnight, but the point I'm putting to you is that there was a long period of review and reflection that led up to the last fortnight.
What I've said very clearly today is after the week that was, with the internal issues of the Labor Party, with what I believe was some self-indulgence by my much-loved political party on display, certainly what we've got to do is make sure that every day we're getting up and saying to ourselves how can we do better today for the Australian people than we did the day before?
And our focus has to be relentless on what it is we need to do to strengthen our nation for the future and what we need to do to support families today.
HOST: You said today that last week's events make it clear now that you have the confidence of your colleagues. Isn't the reality though that many of your colleagues are in despair about your leadership and about the ALP's prospects in the election, but that they just don't see a viable alternative?
PM: Well Leigh, it's done, it's dusted. Anybody who wanted to had the opportunity to nominate for consideration in Labor Caucus last Thursday. No-one did. This comes on top of the emphatic endorsement of my colleagues in February last year.
It comes on top of the fact I was ultimately uncontested for the leadership in 2010 and then following the 2010 election.
Leigh, it's over. I don't think that any of this is worth speaking about any more.
HOST: But you can understand, can't you, how Australians would be looking at your side of politics and feeling very nervous about taking a gamble on you again.
Given that a number of senior members of your own Cabinet have stepped down in recent days, criticised the process by which you govern, and basically indicated they don't have any confidence or faith in your leadership?
PM: Well, we had the week that was and I've described it as appalling. I've described the week that was as self-indulgent.
Colleagues who found themselves in a position where they thought they couldn't, in all good conscience, offer their ongoing service, did the honourable thing and went to the back bench. I think that is appropriate.
What is then appropriate for me as Prime Minister is to renew the team with quality and talent, and that's what I've done today.
HOST: But Prime Minister I don't think that Australians can quite so neatly as you have done draw a line under everything they've seen for past few years and then just ignore it and do what you want them to do which is to concentrate on what you're promising going forwards?
PM: When you vote in an election, and we'll get there in September, you are making a decision about the next three years and who's got the best personal capacity and the best plans for that future.
Who has got the ability to lead the nation, who has the right policies and plans to make sure in a difficult world where our future is not assured, that our nation comes up with a stronger economy, more jobs, more opportunity and that those things are fairly shared.
Australians will make their judgment in September, and I will certainly be there saying we are the only political party with those positive plans for the future and I am the only leader with the capacity to guide our nation through in what can be a very rough and tumble world.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for making time to come on the program tonight. Hopefully we'll see you again as the election draws closer.
PM: Thanks Leigh. 


Canberra
Today Gary Gray joins the Cabinet as Minister for Resources and Energy, Minister for Tourism and Minister for Small Business.
He has been a tireless advocate for business in his own community and in Western Australia and will bring that purpose to promoting the interests of the tourism sector and small business.
His current roles as Special Minister of State and Minister for the Public Service and Integrity will be taken by the Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus.
Jason Clare joins Cabinet as a full member while retaining his current responsibilities.
Anthony Albanese is promoted and takes on the critical role of Minister for Regional Development and Local Government, taking over the work done by Minister Crean across regional Australia since the 2010 election.
Anthony has previously held these portfolio responsibilities and they neatly complement his existing role as Minister for Infrastructure and Transport.
He will be supported by Catherine King in the Outer Ministry as Minister for Regional Services, Local Communities and Territories, and as Minister for Road Safety.
Tony Burke adds Arts to his existing portfolio work. He has a longstanding interest in the arts and was a keen recruit to the task.
He will be assisted by Michael Danby as his Parliamentary Secretary whose lifelong commitment to the arts started when, as a teenager, he worked in his mother's art gallery.
The critical human capital and productivity portfolio of Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research will be taken by Craig Emerson. Craig will retain his current roles as Minister for Trade and Competiveness and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Asian Century Policy.
Craig will be assisted by two junior Ministers  -  Don Farrell, as Minister for Science and Research and Sharon Bird as Minister for Higher Education and Skills.
As part of today's changes, the Department of Climate Change will be merged with the Industry Department and will become the Department of Industry, Innovation, Climate Change, Science, Research and Tertiary Education.
As such, Greg Combet is now the Minister for Climate Change, Industry and Innovation and his Parliamentary Secretary, Yvette D'Ath will also have a revised title.
Jan McLucas is appointed Minister for Human Services. Jan is a very experienced Parliamentarian, having served as a Shadow Minister and as a Parliamentary Secretary since 2007. I am delighted that I have been able to promote Jan to this role.
Don Farrell will also be Minister Assisting on Tourism, and Bernie Ripoll will be Parliamentary Secretary for Small Business, both in Minister Gray's portfolio.
Andrew Leigh will be Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister. Andrew will bring to this post his distinguished academic record in public policy and economics.
Matt Thistlethwaite becomes Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs and Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs. Matt strengthens our team with his ability to focus on the large multi-cultural communities in Sydney.
Amanda Rishworth, a great local campaigner, becomes Parliamentary Secretary for Sustainability and Urban Water, retaining that portfolio in South Australia. She will also be Parliamentary Secretary for Disabilities and Carers.
Shayne Neumann MP, who before his parliamentary career established and ran a successful law firm, will be Parliamentary Secretary to the Attorney-General and Parliamentary Secretary for Health and Ageing
I will recommend to Her Excellency the Governor-General that new members of the Ministry be sworn in on Monday 25 March 2013.



PM: Thank you very much, good afternoon.
As Prime Minister, I strive to lead a government of purpose and a government of unity.
I have always been and continue to be crystal clear about the values that drive me, drive this Labor Government.
We are the only political party prepared to face up to modern challenges and to shape a future that will deliver for all.
We are the only political party capable of strengthening our economy and managing it in the interests of working people.
We are the only political party dedicated to opportunity for all, not just a few, particularly the opportunity for every Australian child to get a world class education.
This sense of purpose and these values are what drives me and what drives the Government.
And even in the last fortnight those values and this sense of purpose was on display, when we saw the best monthly job creation figures in 13 years.
When we created a new and fairer deal for childcare workers.
When we passed into law Disability Care Australia, the most important institution created in our nation since the creation of Medicare.
But while purpose was driven us on, unity has eluded us.
And that unity spectacularly eluded us last week.
Like Australians around the nation, I was appalled by the events of last week.
My political party, the Labor Party that I love very dearly, was self-indulgent.
Our eyes were on ourselves rather than doing what we should  -  being focused on the nation.
It was an unseemly display but out of that has come clarity.
It is now very clear indeed that I have the confidence of my colleagues to lead the Labor Party and to remain as Prime Minister.
It is also clear that Kevin Rudd has appropriately acknowledged he will never lead the Labor Party again.
In these circumstances the leadership contest that has been within Labor is over.
So today, as a government, we can be united and with a sense of purpose  -  a government of purpose and a government of unity.
In the months ahead, I am determined that we will show to the Australian people self-belief, not self-indulgence.
To show them that we have always got our eyes on them and their needs, not our eyes on ourselves.
My challenge, our challenge, is to get up every day determined to do better that day for the Australian people than we have done the day before.
In a world where our future is not assured there's nothing automatic about a strong and prosperous future for our nation.
In a world where our future is not assured we must get up every day determined to make the right decisions to shape a strong, smart, fair future or our nation.
To get up every day to make sure we are meeting the needs of families under all of the the pressures of modern life. 
And as a political party too we must get up every day determined to win the only political contest in Australian life that matters, and that is the contest between the Government and the Opposition come 14 September.
That contest is about whether or not on 15 September, I will lead a majority Labor Government or Mr Abbott will lead a Liberal Government focused on taking money out of the hands of Australian families, cutting jobs and cutting services. 
Today, I announce the team of Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries I have selected to get on with the job of governing in the interests of all and to lead our campaign for Australia's future.
I will be today recommending a range of ministerial appointments to the Governor-General.
First, Minister Anthony Albanese is being promoted and will take on the critical role of Minister for Regional Development and Local Government, taking over the work done by Minister Crean across regional Australia since the 2010 election.
Minister Albanese will add these responsibilities to his current portfolios of Infrastructure and Transport. These portfolios complement each other.
He will be supported by Catherine King in the outer ministry as Minister for Regional Services, Local Communities and Territories and as Minister for Road Safety.
As the Member for Ballarat she is one of our strongest voices in regional Australia and she will build on the excellent work she has done as a Parliamentary Secretary. 
Tony Burke adds Arts to his existing portfolio. He has a long-standing interest in the arts and is a very keen recruit to this task.
He will be assisted by Michael Danby as his Parliamentary Secretary, whose lifelong commitment to the arts started when, as a teenager, he worked in his mother's art gallery.
The critical human capital and productivity portfolio of Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research will be taken by Dr Craig Emerson.
Craig will retain his current roles as Minister for Trade and Competitiveness and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Asian Century policy.
I believe this combination has great synergies in our Asian Century agenda.
That means of course that we are seeking to secure for our country all of the economic opportunities that can flow from this century of change in our region.
Dr Emerson will bring a personal passion and credibility to this role.
Craig will be assisted by two junior Ministers: Don Farrell as Minister for Science and Research, and Sharon Bird as Minister for Higher Education and Skills.
They are both proven Parliamentary Secretaries and are ready to take on these new responsibilities.
As part of today's changes the Department of Climate Change will be merged with the Industry Department and will become the Department of Industry, Innovation, Climate Change, Science, Research and Tertiary Education.
As such Greg Combet is now the Minister for Climate Change, Industry and Innovation and his Parliamentary Secretary Yvette D'Ath will also have a revised title.
Gary Gray joins the Cabinet as Minister for Resources and Energy, Minister for Tourism and Minister for Small Business.
He brings personal knowledge and experience to the role, as of course he is a former senior resources sector executive.
He has been a tireless advocate for business in his own community and across the state of Western Australia and he will bring that sense of purpose to promoting the interests of the tourism sector and small business.
Energy policy is of course no longer just about supply as we move to a cleaner and more productive economy, energy efficiency is central to energy policy and it will be central to the work undertaken by Gary Gray's department, the department known as DRET.
Gary will be assisted in tourism by Don Farrell and in small business by Parliamentary Secretary Bernie Ripoll.
His current roles as Special Minister of State and Minister for the Public Service and Integrity will be taken by the Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus. 
Jason Clare joins Cabinet as a full member while retaining his current responsibilities.
Jan McLucas is appointed as Minister for Human Services. Jan is a very experienced parliamentarian, having served as a Shadow Minister and Parliamentary Secretary since 2007 and I'm delighted that I've been able to promote her to this role.
Further Parliamentary Secretary appointments are as follows. 
Andrew Leigh will be Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister, to me. Andrew will bring to this position his distinguished academic record in public policy and economics. 
Matt Thistlethwaite will become Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs and Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs.
Matt strengthens our team with his ability to focus on the large multicultural communities in Sydney; obviously the lead Minister, Minister O'Connor, is Melbourne-based.
Amanda Rishworth, a great local campaigner, becomes Parliamentary Secretary for Sustainability and Urban Water, retaining that portfolio in my original state of South Australia where I think it belongs.
She will also be Parliamentary Secretary for Disabilities and Carers.
Shayne Neumann MP, who before his parliamentary career ran a successful law firm, will be Parliamentary Secretary to the Attorney-General and Parliamentary Secretary for Health and Ageing.
I am happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say your Government governs for all.
A couple of your Ministers have expressed, or departing Ministers have expressed, concern about the reversion to class warfare, issues concerning the focus of the Government not being at the middle ground.
What do you say to that today? 
PM: My focus is on Australian classrooms and what happens in them and that's at the centre of Australian political life and the life of our nation.
We as a political party have always been dedicated to ensuring that there is opportunity for all.
That kids get a chance at a great life by getting a great education.
That people get a chance at a great job and prosperity for their family. 
That's what drives me, that's what drives Labor; it's driven us in the past, it's driving us today and it will drive us in the future. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Anthony Albanese seems to be a protected species in Labor.
A lot of his contemporaries, who were doing as he did last week, in Kevin Rudd's office talking about numbers and about how they thought they might be able to defeat you have stood down, you've said took the honourable decision, and Anthony Albanese has been promoted.
Can you explain the difference in your approach to those?
PM: A number of my colleagues determined to resign from the executive, from being a Minister or a Parliamentary Secretary. They've taken those decisions and I have described those decisions as an honourable course.
For Minister Albanese of course he has given a public explanation of his position. I have always been able to work with Minister Albanese well. He has been very central to the life of this Government.
And I believe he will serve very well and with a very strong sense of loyalty into the future. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, further to Kieran's question on criticisms from the outgoing Ministers, Martin Ferguson was saying that the class envy, the class war which started back in May 2010 with the beginning of the RSPT as it was then.
He also said that your party, the Government, needs to improve relations with the business community and start acting in a more inclusive way.
Do you take on that criticism or do you deny its veracity? 
PM: Well, former Minister Ferguson will offer his own views.
But my views are as follows. It is in the Labor tradition to have profit-based tax for turbocharged sections of the economy that are very profitable.
I'll remind that it was a Labor Government that brought in the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax, a tax designed to tax the most profitable part of that industry, when it is at the peak of its profitability.
It is therefore in the absolute mainstream of Labor tradition to have a similar arrangement for other sections of the resources sector, and that's what the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is; a tax for when mining ventures are at their most profitable so that can be used for the benefit of the Australian nation. 
Both of them, both taxes  -  the PRRT and the MRRT  -  recognise that the underlying asset that is being exploited belongs to the Australian nation as a whole. 
As for the Government and our relations with the business community, we each and every day have to do better and strive better than the day before.
I have said that to you, I am determined that I and the Government, every member of it, gets up every day determined to do better than we have done the day before.
So I am always prepared to pursue deeper and better relationships with stakeholders in Australian society, including the business community.
But I have very deep connections and continuing exchange with the business community now.
I have invited them to the table in new and innovative ways including the tripartite council I have brought together and the work we've done through the Business Advisory Forum at COAG.
I'm always open to building on that for the future. 
JOURNALIST: Two questions if I may. Stephen Smith spoke about zero tolerance from now on.
Between now and the election, if any people in the Cabinet or frontbench starts destabilising, will you not hesitate to push them out as you did with the others last week?
And on a completely separate matter, Kyle Sandilands, do you regret appearing with him on the lawns of Kirribilli yesterday? 
PM: I'll take the second part of it first. What I did at Kirribilli yesterday was have around a large number of children from Bear Cottage.
Bear Cottage is a service for very, very ill children. Indeed for children who are on some occasions in the last stages of life; they don't have long to live.
And what I did yesterday was spend some time which meant between chocolate, sunshine, games and Kyle appearing in a rabbit costume, people had a smile, had a joke, had a laugh, engaged the hour. 
I think as Prime Minister, making those kids happy for an hour is a very good use of my time.
On the first question, as I said last week and I'm happy to say it again, the contest within Labor is over, it's done, we can now proceed with unity to the next election and beyond.
There of course should be no tolerance for any conduct which diverts eyes from our proper purpose, which is concentrating on the needs of the Australian people. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the Climate Change Department merger, do you expect to save money from that, first question?
The second part is, what will you say to criticism that you're watering down your commitment to climate change by doing that? 
PM: To the second I would say that would be irrational indeed.
Anybody who thinks you can survey the names of departments and somehow come up from that survey as to what a government's policy priorities are I think is really engaged in a fool's errand.
On the reason for the merger, we of course, in delivering carbon pricing and in its initial implementation, had to have a sizeable number of people who were doing the very complicated policy work and then of course overseeing the initial implementation. 
We are well into the implementation now. Carbon pricing is working well, so it is inevitable, natural, logical that the number of people you need for the task has reduced.
So yes, compared with the peak of the staffing of Climate Change when the policy work was in full flight and when the implementation work was in full flight, of course part of the natural cycle is less resources are needed.
And given all of that, it makes sense logically to merge it with Greg Combet's other department and when you stand back from it of course, what is putting a price on carbon about?
It's about the future of jobs, the future of industry and the best innovation we can have in our economy, which is why that is the logical fit. 
JOURNALIST: Did you have a dysfunctional Cabinet up until the events of last week?
Does this give you a chance to change the way the Cabinet works, refocus it, is there any indication of a change in direction with the announcement today? 
PM: I've been very clear with you about our priorities as a government. 
It's about jobs, it's about opportunity, it's about getting every child a great education, it's about getting ready for the future including having the best of infrastructure like the National Broadband Network. 
It's about building the new institutions of fairness like Disability Care Australia. 
It's about making sure that we support families under day-to-day, very modern pressures with that precious task of family life. That is what drives the Government. That's what we are working on. 
Of course, I will work properly with my Cabinet colleagues.
I do want to make sure that Cabinet is functioning and functioning well.
And I am very confident with this Cabinet that it will do so. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I have spoken to key Aboriginal leaders across the country who say they were hoping for a new Indigenous Affairs Minister today.
That's not the case. Is Labor ostracising black voters across the country? 
PM: We are ensuring that Indigenous Affairs is in the most capable hands that it can be in and that is Jenny Macklin's hands.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) she is the right person?
PM: She is a fantastic Minister doing remarkable work and I never for one second considered not having her continue in that role. She is an amazing person doing a great job. 
JOURNALIST: In your answer to Mark's question, you said you can work well with Mr Albanese. There is an implication there that you work less well with some of the Ministers whose resignations you've accepted.
Can you tell us in your mind, what is the distinction between the support they offered for Kevin Rudd and the support Mr Albanese offered?
And secondly, do you accept the criticisms of the likes of Martin Ferguson and Simon Crean about some decisions that have been made and the way they've been communicated, and will you be changing your approach? 
PM: I will be doing what I've outlined today. So that's what I'll be doing.
On Minister Albanese I'm not going to be dragged back into what I have rightly described as an appalling week. 
Minister Albanese has been very clear publicly about his conduct last week. I've always felt a sense of comfort with Minister Albanese and his position.
I felt that last week, I feel it now, it's appropriate for him to not only continue but to be promoted and that's why I've taken the decision. 
JOURNALIST: You didn't feel it with others; you didn't feel the same way?
PM: I think Minister Albanese has dealt publicly with this matter. I don't have anything to add on that. I'm not recanvassing the events of last week. It's done and dusted. 
JOURNALIST: On the specific criticisms that have been made of your style and decision making from Mr Ferguson and Mr Crean, what do you say to those criticisms? 
PM: Being in Cabinet comes with a set of rights and it comes with a set of responsibilities. My Cabinet colleagues as selected by me today will be fulfilling both. 
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, on the class issue, I think that criticisms have not just been of the mining tax and so on but also the rhetoric of the Government, of Wayne Swan, of yourself on occasions, the attack on the billionaires and so on.
Do you think with hindsight that that language could have been, should have been chosen better? 
PM: I think for us as a Government we have got to be clear about our values and about our priorities, and as a Labor Government we do govern in the Hawke and Keating tradition.
And if I can give what you I think is the best example of that and much under-commented on in the modern age, it is that we are the only political party presenting at the next election with a belief in the power of markets and their role in a modern economy.
I believe in the power of markets, as did Hawke and Keating. I believe you can have well-functioning markets that enable you to run a nation and a society of fairness.
Mr Abbott doesn't believe that. Look at his climate change policy. It would make a Soviet central planner blush, his climate change policy.
So in the mainstream of the Hawke-Keating tradition, we believe in the power of markets, we believe in their efficiency. Of course they've got to be properly regulated; we believe that markets can be used to strengthen an economy. 
We've overseen growth in our economy at the worst time in the global economy, so a lot of the nonsense you hear about do we believe in growing the pie or better distributing the pie, we have grown our economy and yes, we believe that its benefits should be fairly shared and that that growing economy should be managed in the interests of working people.
That is the Hawke-Keating tradition. That is the tradition of this Labor Government. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've created a couple of super-ministries and a couple involve a fair bit of domestic and foreign travel, particularly Dr Emerson's and Mr Albanese's ministries.
Do you think that they will have too much on their plate and how disruptive are all of these changes in the lead-up to the budget and having Ministers with ERC and so forth? 
PM: The budget preparation will continue as it is continuing now.
In terms of the balance of work for Ministers, I did very directly consider that.
To take a Minister like Dr Emerson, number one he is assisted in the trade portfolio by a Parliamentary Secretary so he does have a team to support him.
Number two of course, Minister Emerson is now a very experienced Trade Minister. So he's not dealing at the upswing of the cycle where you've got to learn every bit of what's in these very complex transactions.
If you want him to give the oration about everything that's under consideration in all of the international trade negotiations he involves himself in, well, good luck and we'll see you back in June because that's how long it will take.
So because of his experience and that depth of knowledge, I am very confident he can perform both roles. And there are clear crossovers between these roles. 
We obviously discuss resources when we come together like this because of their importance to our economy. But don't forget the importance of international education.
Don't forget that that's one of our big trade items, and don't forget it's the sort of thing that is often discussed at international meetings because we seek to encourage people to come here and study in Australia and pay good money to do so. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do the independents  -  just on Anthony Albanese  -  did the independents indicate to you that they would like him to remain as Leader of the House? 
PM: I didn't speak to the independents about Minister Albanese's role as Leader of Government Business. I did speak to the independents and talk to them about Minister Albanese performing this role. 
One of the agreements we have with the independents is that there be a minister in this role. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one of the things did mention out of last week was the media laws. It was obviously something that you believed needed to be reformed. Will you be taking a new package to the election campaign? 
PM: As we indicated last week, those  -  we succeeded in getting two media law Bills through that are important to our media market and to their operation; one the licence fee rebate which recognises the changing economics of free-to-air television; two the verification that there wouldn't be a further free-to-air network given the changing economics of free-to-air TV.
The expanded mandates for the ABC and SBS, the further support to community television, and all importantly, the obligations about Australian content across the multichannels, recognising the changing platforms across which everybody works whether they be public broadcasters or commercial broadcasters so we did succeed in getting that through.
On the other Bills, I've indicated that they were over at the end of last week; that is the Government's position.
We made an endeavour to get them through. That endeavour wasn't successful.
So that is the end of those Bills. As for any further statements on media policy, you should not expect them to be in the form of the Bills before the Parliament last week.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, continuing on the independents and their involvement in these changes, is it reasonable to say that the chances of any substantial increases is regional funding is now greater under Mr Albanese than it was under Mr Crean? 
PM: Our funding, remarkably increased funding for regional Australia, is already there in the Government's budget papers so I would refer you to all of the decisions we've taken for the benefits of regional Australia.
Of course the independents represent regional seats and so Mr Oakeshott, Mr Windsor, you would expect them to be fierce advocates of regional Australia and they are.
As is so many of my own political party  -  Catherine King, for example, who has been appointed as a Minister today; just one example of a Labor person who fiercely advocates for regional Australia.
We've responded to that advocacy by already allocating new resources and we will continue to allocate from those resources. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the current generation of union leaders today basically described Martin Ferguson, his views, as being 30 years out of date and really not understanding the reformist spirit of the Hawke-Keating Government.
Do you agree with those views? And secondly, what do you say to the suggestion that Gary Gray will be too close to the resources sector having worked for Woodside for seven years? 
PM: I'm not going to involve myself in the details of that debate.
What I would say for the reforming agenda of this Labor Government, is I think when we look at the history of workplace relations reform, we've got to understand the history in a time sequence.
I very much supported the enterprise bargaining focus of the Hawke and Keating Governments.
It was controversial at the time; came against a backdrop of a far more centralised system and they moved to enterprise bargaining including the ability of people to enter an enterprise bargain without the involvement of a trade union.
That concept, enterprise bargaining, possible with unions, possible without unions, is at the centre of the Fair Work regime that we have brought into effect.
What that means is under Hawke and Keating they had a very centralised system and moved to a system with more movement in it.
Then of course, the Howard Government of which Mr Abbott was a key member, blew that out of the water and went to a system where working people's conditions could be smashed and people could be sacked unfairly and never have any say about it, against that backdrop of having blown up any Australian understanding of how workplaces should work, we've introduced the Fair Work system.
And at the heart of it is the concept that came out of the Hawke-Keating era of enterprise bargaining.
On Gary Gray, Minister Gray I think brings appropriate expertise to the portfolio of Resources and Energy. 
JOURNALIST: Did Minister Albanese or any of the other Ministers you retained offer at any stage their resignations in discussions you've had? 
PM: No, I did not and I did not seek them. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Simon Crean today went on Alan Jones and discussed a fair few things. Amongst others, he said one message you have to get is not to attack superannuation.
I think he put it that the Government shouldn't build their surplus by attacking the surplus of retirees. What do you say to that? 
PM: Well, superannuation is a precious Labor creation.
It is only in this country because of the work of Labor Governments and it only be increased in this nation for working people because of the work of this Labor Government.
And so superannuation is only ever safe in Labor hands.
In the hands of the other side of politics, what you see is the cuts that Mr Abbott wants to impose on some of the lowest income Australians in our nation, the people who most struggle for a dignified retirement because they retire with very low superannuation balances. 
So, I can assure everyone, superannuation  -  that is a system which gets working people a decent retirement and treats working people with the dignity  -  that will always be at the core of what we do. 
JOURNALIST: What about new taxes on nest eggs? 
PM: Well look, I have already ruled out, as you would be aware, taxation on the withdrawals that come in the retirement phase. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how are these changes, particularly the merging departments, impact on public service numbers? Will we see a decrease or increase? 
PM: These changes in and of themselves are not impactful on the total number of public servants.
Obviously there are people moving to take different responsibilities, but for Climate Change, that has been happening for some time now, obviously people who were in the absolute depths of the policy work weren't needed to keep performing that policy work once the model was struck and legislated and done.
People who were there at the absolute height of the implementation, many of them have gone to other functions already because we are well into the implementation phase, and as you all know, every bit of nonsense we had to listen to from the Opposition about what carbon pricing would mean and how the implementation would work has been proved spectacularly wrong. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why did you keep Mark Butler and Bob Carr in their current positions and are you concerned at all about what role they played in the destabilisation? 
PM: Well, clearly not. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said that the leadership was done, it's all over.
Was there a sense of satisfaction that you finally disposed of Kevin Rudd last Thursday, and if he is running for Griffith, how will you campaign with him? 
PM: I've described last week as appalling for good reason and so that was my sense of feeling about the events of last week. 
As I've said over the weekend when I was asked these questions, I will campaign with all members of the Labor team, including Mr Rudd.
JOURNALIST: At the start when you said unity spectacularly eluded us, last week was appalling, Labor was self-indulgent.
Is that in a sense you trying to  -  is that sort of an apology to the Australian people for what happened and trying to  -  because a lot of the polls and pundits and people on your own side say there is no way Labor can win the election now.
Are you trying to, I guess, apologise to the people? 
PM: Well, the words mean, Phil, what the words mean.
And on the question of the election, as I said in my statement to you at the start, the only genuine contest there is in Australian politics is whether on 15 September there is a majority Labor Government led by me with a clear plan for the nation's future, with a plan to keep growing and strengthening the economy and a plan to support working families, or whether Mr Abbott is Prime Minister, with all of his negativity, with his plans to take money away from Australian families, and his plans to cut jobs and cut services.
That's the real contest.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Defence Stephen Smith today announced that the Australian Army's Special Operations Command will receive the first Army Battle Honour since the end of the Vietnam War.
The Battle Honour is for outstanding performance during the Shah Wali Kot Offensive in Afghanistan from May to June 2010.
The Battle Honour, titled Eastern Shah Wali Kot, has been awarded in recognition of the operational actions of the Special Air Service Regiment (SASR) and 2nd Commando Regiment (2 Cdo Regt) from the Australian Special Operations Task Group Rotation XII.
The Prime Minister congratulated the Special Operations Task Group on the Battle Honour, which was awarded under revised guidelines that acknowledge the way the Army fights in the modern era.
“The combined achievements of SASR and 2 Cdo Regt during the Shah Wali Kot Offensive are worthy of the highest praise,” the Prime Minister said.
Minister Smith said “We acknowledge the efforts made by all elements of the Special Operations Task Group including significant contributions from Special Operations engineers, signallers, logisticians and headquarters support staff, as well as the United States 101st Airborne Division.
“Their outstanding performance has now been recognised in the same manner as similar performances have been recognised in the past.”
The efforts of the SASR and 2 Cdo Regt during the engagement were highly commended by the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) command for the contribution it made to overall ISAF efforts to disrupt insurgent activities in the region around Eastern Shah Wali Kot, one of their traditional stronghold areas.
The Chief of Army, Lieutenant General David Morrison, recommended that the SASR and 2 Cdo Regt. receive formal recognition for their outstanding performance during the offensive.
The Chief of Army directed the Battle Honour Committee to examine all Army engagements since the Vietnam War to determine whether actions since then are eligible for formal recognition under the revised guidelines. 
The Battle Honour will be formally presented to the Regiments later this year. 


ABC AM
HOST: Julia Gillard, good morning and welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning Sabra.
HOST: Newspoll shows that your Government is heading for electoral oblivion and you must concede that with the primary vote of 30 per cent and a two-party preferred vote of 42 per cent, it means an electoral wipe out for Labor.
PM: Sabra, as you know I don't comment on opinion polls but I don't need a poll to tell me that last week the Labor Party had an appalling week. I made that very clear yesterday. When we present to the Australian people self-indulgently talking about ourselves there are consequences.
HOST: Your own personal approval ratings have crashed, 65 per cent of voters are dissatisfied with you and you have an overall net satisfaction rating of minus 39 per cent. Why don't people like you, Prime Minister?
PM: Well, once again Sabra, I don't comment on opinion polls but after last week in federal politics, I don't need a poll. I don't think any political observer - indeed any community member - would need a poll to say that people looked at the conduct of the Labor Party last week and were just shaking their heads.
HOST: When you announced a reshuffle in January, you said that your ministry was the team that you'd take to the election but you've lost eight people all up now, including the whips. How can this team now, that you've got now, be the best team for the job?
PM: Well fortunately, federal Labor has a depth of talent. As I said on the weekend, as I pondered the reshuffle I was spoilt for choice. There are a lot of people in our ranks with the capacity to make great ministers and I've selected a number of them to be part of the team.
HOST: But you could have chosen these people in January and you didn't so by that reasoning alone, this isn't your best team.
PM: Well, there is inevitably change in politics across the life of a government. Now that, of course, doesn't excuse the circumstances of last week and I'm not trying to but inevitably there is change in politics.
What matters is the depth of your team and the ability of people to step up and do a great job. I'm very confident that the people I selected yesterday will do precisely that.
HOST: Have you had to sacrifice your best team possible for unity?
PM: Well, a number of ministers made a decision based on their conduct during the course of last week and whether or not they thought in those circumstances it was the honourable thing to step back from serving in the ministry.
Those decisions were made, I accepted those decisions and described them as honourable because that was the right word.
In those circumstances of course, I am choosing people as replacements and the people that I have brought in, as well as the new allocation of portfolios, gives me a team which will perform well with a sense of purpose and a sense of unity.
HOST: You've talked about a team and I know that you like football analogies; you've loaded up Mr Albanese, Mr Combet and Mr Emerson with extra jobs. They already have pretty full plates. How is that responsible? Are you, in football terms, just asking them to be full forwards and full backs?
PM: No, I'm not. I'm most certainly not. What I've done is I've put together responsibilities that fit. Minister Albanese has been dealing with infrastructure and transport and if you took yourself to a regional area today, they would be talking to you about their infrastructure needs, about the quality of local roads. So it makes sense to combine that with the regional development portfolio and that's what I've done.
Minister Emerson of course, travels the world talking about Australian exports and trying to get more exports. International education is one of our biggest export industries and nothing will define our future more clearly in this Asian century of change than what is happening with apprenticeships, traineeships and university places. So it made sense to ask the person who is leading our course into that Asian century at a ministerial level to do that work.
Minister Combet, of course, is continuing to perform magnificently on all of the industries and innovations of the future, including clean energy.
HOST: Simon Crean was on the Expenditure Review Committee. It's meeting all day today. Who will take his place?
PM: It's my intention to keep the Expenditure Review Committee with the same membership as currently - that is, not to appoint a replacement for Simon Crean.
HOST: He was on it given his broad ministerial experience. Is that committee now going to suffer because his experience is no longer there?
PM: That committee is full of people with broad experience led by the Treasurer Wayne Swan, with participants like Jenny Macklin and Stephen Smith.
HOST: Former ministers and former ACTU leaders Simon Crean and Martin Ferguson have both warned you against the class war rhetoric. Will you heed their call?
PM: Well, Sabra, this is one of those debates where a term or a couple of words start being used and I think it's important to drill down and see what people actually mean by it. So when you put that question to me, what are you saying those words mean?
HOST: Well, the class war rhetoric in the Minerals Resource Rent Tax fight, certainly Martin Ferguson said that picking a fight with the likes of Gina Rinehart was wrong.
PM: Well, Labor governments in the past and this Labor Government have taken the proper view that the resources that are in our grounds and in our seas - whether it's petroleum or whether it's coal or iron ore - that those resources belong to the Australian people, and so it's appropriate for them to be the subject of a profits-based tax.
That was the approach of the Hawke and Keating government which created and then administered the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax. That is the approach of my government with the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
HOST: But even your new Resources Minister Gary Grey said last night that language from leadership should be more "thoughtful and cautious".
PM: Well, Sabra, here we are having a thoughtful discussion.
HOST: Mr Crean says, and he's back by Bill Kelty here, that it makes no sense to tax people's surpluses, their super, in order to help the Government surplus. He's right, isn't he?
PM: Well, superannuation is a Labor creation. It will only ever be safe in Labor hands. It is only Labor governments that have ever worried about a decent retirement for working people. That's why we are doing things like insuring the lowest income Australians can have a special extra contribution with government support to bolster their retirement income.
And you know, the true contest here in Australian politics, Sabra, is the contest that will be resolved on 14 September between me as Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition.
One of the things in contest on 14 September is whether low income Australians get to keep that extra superannuation contribution or the nation endorses Mr Abbott's plans to take that benefit away from them.HOST: And for higher income earners, will you be increasing the tax on their superannuation?
PM: I've already made a series of statements ruling out certain measures in superannuation. We've always got to make sure that the system is sustainable and is meeting the nation's needs and the needs of individuals.
But let me be very clear about this. It is only Labor that will ever safeguard superannuation in this country. It is Labor that brought superannuation to this country for working people.
HOST: Simon Crean's done you a favour hasn't he with all the conspirators and backstabbers gone now from Cabinet and from here on in all the responsibility is on your shoulders?PM: I described last week as an appalling week and that's what I meant.
HOST: There are a significant number of ministers now facing the task of being involved in their preparation for their first budget in incredibly constrained fiscal circumstances. How is that responsible governing?
PM: Look, we have a very strong economic team that will shape and lead us in the budget debate.
Of course, Wayne Swan here delivering another budget. This is the man who saw us through the global financial crisis and was lauded around the world for his economic performance as Treasurer, and of course he is assisted by Penny Wong.
HOST: The trip that you're heading off to today to Western Australia, is that governing or campaigning?
PM: I'll be there doing a series of very important things for the people of Western Australia. I've travelled to Western Australia frequently.
Of course, as Prime Minister I travel around the nation to meet with local communities and particularly to conduct Community Cabinets. This is something that we've done consistently across the life of the Government.
HOST: To asylum seeker policy, a policy that is particularly strong in Western Australia, there has been a sharp rise in the number of boats in recent weeks coinciding with the end of the monsoon season. We had two deaths yesterday. Your policies clearly failed, hasn't it?
PM: Well, there are incredibly distressing circumstances from yesterday and of course I think many Australians will have been moved to see that loss of life, particularly the loss of life of a child.
This just reinforces the message how incredibly dangerous it is for people to get on these boats, to put their lives in the hands of the people smuggler and too often, too tragically we see lives lost in those circumstances.
I've taken the best advice possible on this area of policy from the former head of the Defence Force, Angus Houston, from a foreign policy expert, Michael L'Estrange, from a refugee expert, Paris Aristotle, I have been stopped from implementing the full suite of measures that they recommend because of the belligerence and negativity of the Opposition and I think that is to be regretted.
HOST: But the Opposition isn't in government. You're the Government and you have deals with the independents and the Greens here. Why not bring pressure to bear on the Greens to make something happen?
PM: Well, I think an obligation lies on the shoulders of those who will say to the Australian community on 14 September that they are ready to govern, an obligation lies on their shoulders to show that they can put the national interest first.
In this debate very, very sharply each and every time it has been presented to the Parliament, they have said ‘no' to the national interest, they have said ‘yes' to their political interests and they have preferred to see more boats on our horizon because they think it's good for them politically.
It is an incredibly destructive attitude but it's been their attitude and it continues to be their attitude. 


Perth
Prime Minister Julia Gillard will host the Government's 40th Community Cabinet meeting in Ringwood on Wednesday 17 April.
This meeting will be the fifth Community Cabinet to be held in Victoria, and will provide a unique opportunity for members of the community to meet federal government ministers face-to-face.
The Prime Minister and Member for Deakin Mike Symon today encouraged local residents to register to attend the meeting, which will be held at the Norwood Secondary College.
“Everyone is welcome to register to attend the meeting, with opportunities available to meet ministers face-to-face or ask a question at the forum,” said Mr Symon.
Ministers are looking forward to discussing the Government's plan for Australia's future at the forum – ensuring every child gets a world-class education; delivering Disability Care Australia; creating new jobs; and investing in infrastructure like the National Broadband Network.
Registrations open from Tuesday 2 April to Friday 5 April, but may close earlier if capacity is reached.
If people want to attend the public forum only, they can register online at http://www.pm.gov.au or by calling 1800 088 323.
Further information can be found at: http://www.pm.gov.au


Rockingham, WA
PM: A big thank you to Kolbe Catholic College, to the students over here and our principal, Robyn Miller for making us feel welcome.
I'm here with Gary Gray, this is actually his community and his part of the world. He has just been promoted to Minister for Resources and Energy, Minister for Small Business and Minister for Tourism and in our discussion with the very intelligent students here today, we had the opportunity to canvass some of those topics.
We are also joined today by Roger Cook who is acting Leader of the Opposition, and we are also in and around the community that he serves and some of the students who come to this great school would come from his electorate.
Today, I want to talk about two big topics: one, Afghanistan and then one relating to education funding for this school and for schools around the nation.
First on Afghanistan, I'm pleased, with Minister Smith, the Minister for Defence and of course a great Western Australian, to today announce that we will-
[Interruption by announcement over PA system]
PM: Oh, we're holding up the bell! Okay, that's really not a popular initiative from us, is it? Holding up the bell? Someone's being forced to do a triple period of maths as we speak but anyway, apologies to everyone.
So first, I'm very pleased today to be able to announce with Minister Smith, the Minister for Defence, that we will be awarding the first Army Battle Honour since the end of the Vietnam War.
This Battle Army Honour will be awarded to the Australian Army's Special Operations Command.
That means that it will be awarded to the Special Air Service Regiment and to the 2nd Commando Regiment.
I know that the awarding of this honour will have particular significance for the people of Western Australia, given this is home to the SAS.
And this special honour is being awarded because of the incredible bravery and courage shown during the very intense conflict, the Shah Wali Kowt Offensive, in Afghanistan from May to June 2010.
That is actually the Offensive for which Ben Roberts-Smith was ultimately awarded his Victoria Cross.
He played a role in that battle which merited that incredible award for gallantry; the Victoria Cross.
And now the SAS as a whole, and the 2nd Commando Regiment as a whole, is being recognised through this battle honour.
So I know that will be meaningful to all Australians, but it will be particularly meaningful to the people of Western Australia who proudly host the SAS in this great state.
Today too, the Minister for Defence joined by the Chief of the Defence Force has made an announcement about the future of our mission in Afghanistan.
In April last year I indicated that we would move into transition in our work in Uruzgan Province, the transition would take around 12 to18 months, and at the end of that transition period the nature of our engagement in Afghanistan would have changed and the bulk of our forces would be able to come home.
As I spoke to the Australian people last April, so it has come to pass.
So we did move into transition in Uruzgan Province. We are well into transition now. The work of the provincial reconstruction team will come to an end. And the base in Tarin Kot in Uruzgan from which our forces work will be closed at the end of this year; at the end of 2013.
What that means is beyond the closure of Tarin Kot, around 1,000 Australian personnel will come home.
We will see a reduction in our mission to Afghanistan of around 1,000.
We have maintained a complement in Afghanistan of on-average around 1,550 personnel.
At the moment, we are slightly above that number because we do have going in an extraction team. It does take some people to go in to make the arrangements to finalise the closure of the base.
But we will, at the end of this year, see around 1,000 personnel come home.
The ongoing role for the remainder in Afghanistan will be working with other forces who are there in Afghanistan in training roles.
So for example, we are working with a range of allies and partners to continue artillery training and other training obligations in Afghanistan.
We have said that we will consider a continuing role for Special Forces, and we will consider a continuing role beyond 2014 when transition throughout Afghanistan comes to an end and we move from the current mission to a new era in Afghanistan.
The Government will continue to consider that potential role for Special Forces and at the appropriate time, having consulted with all of our ISAF partners, make an announcement when we are in a position to do so.
But this is important news in relation to our mission to Afghanistan today.
And then on the question of school funding and the question of making sure that every Australian child gets a great education, I've just had the opportunity to talk through how we are getting our nation ready for the future era of opportunity that we have in this region of the world.
Asia is the fastest growing set of economies in the world. It will be home to the biggest middle class in the world. It will be home to the most consumers in the world. This can be an era of prosperity for Australia if we make the right decisions now.
That era of prosperity is not an assured future for us. We've got to prepare for it and we've got to take the right decisions today.
Amongst the right decisions today is making sure that every child gets a great education. That means that we have got to bring to every school in the country  -  all 9,500 of them  -  the right combination of resources, and a focus on school improvement so every child gets a great education.
We have been working now for some time on our National Plan for School Improvement and we have been working on new funding arrangements for Australian schools.
We have been in discussions with state and territory colleagues and with the Catholic education sector and with independent schools.
During all of those discussions it's become increasingly clear that in too many states around the nation we have seen cutbacks to funding going into schools. Those cutbacks not only hurt directly, but they actually affect the indexation formula for the future; the amount of increase in funding that schools around the country see in the future.
So I've got a clear message for state governments around the nation and that is to stop the cut backs, and it is also to properly index their funding for the future.
They should be offering an indexation arrangement of at least three per cent for the future.
I too today want to say that our drive for school improvement is one that recognises differences in different parts of the country and in school systems.
The differences in the Catholic system from state school systems, the differences between states in the way that they offer education.
And so our drive here is not for a national uniform model, but a nationally consistent model recognising the flexibility that jurisdictions need to get on and manage their schools.
Here in WA I know that people have been told this is a takeover of Western Australian schools and that we're going to try and run these schools from Canberra. All of that is of course nonsense.
States would continue to be the drivers of education in state schools. The Catholic school system would continue to drive education in its schools. Independent schools would continue to manage themselves.
But our aim is wherever a child is educated, that they are getting a truly great education. That as a community we can transparently check they are getting a truly great education through My School and making information available.
That the powerful combination of great teaching with a continued plan for school improvement is brought together with new resources so that we can attain the goal I've set for the nation, which is being in the top five schooling systems in the world by 2025.
I'm very glad to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Premier  -  Prime Minister sorry-
PM: You'd better not tell Colin that!
JOURNALIST: An absolutely shocking Newspoll today. It would see you lose two of your last three seats here in WA. How much do you put that down to the last week?
PM: As you know, I don't comment on opinion polls but I don't think anybody in the country needed an opinion poll to tell them that last week Labor, the Federal Labor Party, had a truly appalling week.
I described it as appalling and self-indulgent yesterday. That's how I felt about it.
And I'm unsurprised that's how Australians felt about it around the nation.
For us, that week is over. The Government has always had a sense of purpose. Now it has a sense of unity. And we've got to make sure we are getting better every day, working harder and getting better every day.
Certainly, my mission to get up every morning and do this job better than I did it the day before  -  that needs to be the mission of the Government as a whole.
JOURNALIST: It's such a wipeout that you will have no members left in Western Australia including Mr Gray standing over your shoulder. And there will be Government members sitting on the Opposition benches.
PM: The election will be held on September 14. I announced that earlier this year. And Australians will make a choice on 14 September.
The only real political contest in Australia is the one between me and the Leader of the Opposition. And people will make a decision on 14 September whether they want me to lead a majority Labor Government with our clear plan for the future and the help and assistance we are providing families with all of the modern pressures they face.
Or whether people want to endorse Mr Abbott's plans to take money away from families, to cut jobs and to cut the services they rely on.
People will make their choice on election day.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that the WA Labor Leader Mark McGowan felt that you were so unpopular here that he didn't want you standing next to him during the state election campaign? And what does that fact say about your chances for turning around your popularity in this state?
PM: During the days of the state election we dealt with this matter. I obviously travel very regularly to Perth and I'm here today and I've not only been here for visits as Prime Minister I, working with my federal team in Western Australia, have ensured that we have hosted some very big international events out of Western Australia including most recently the strategic dialogue we have with the United States of America here in Australia once every two years.
The state election has come and gone. Overwhelmingly, state elections deal with state issues. For us it's about now working productively with Premier Barnett and we will continue to do that.
JOURNALIST: Do you think you owe Mark McGowan any apology, any responsibility? It was your own Defence Minister who conceded Federal Labor had been a drag on Mark McGowan's campaign.
PM: Mr McGowan, as Leader of the Opposition, ran a very good campaign indeed. And I understand he always intended to take a bit of leave with his family after the election campaign and he's doing that now and I hope he's enjoying a few days break, it's well deserved.
Mr McGowan ran a good campaign. He took responsibility for the election result. Clearly overwhelmingly, state elections are resolved on state issues.
For Labor here as we go to the federal election, we have obviously got a lot of hard work to do and I've indicated to you that each and every day I think we have always got to strive to do better and better and better, and we will.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the budget that you'll hand down in several weeks' time, how pivotal do you think that is in turning Labor's fortunes around?
PM: Budgets are pivotal for the Australian economy. What they are pivotal for is jobs and growth. Whether or not people can look forward to jobs and employment, whether our economy grows  -  that's what budgets are about.
As a Labor Party, we deliver budgets that are focused on jobs and growth and even in the last parliamentary fortnight when eyes were understandably on other things, we delivered the strongest monthly job figures in 13 years.
So jobs and growth, that's what our budgets have been about in the past. Jobs and growth, that's what this budget will be about.
JOURNALIST: Why don't you think the Australian people appear to be giving you credit for those achievements than if Newspolls are to be believed and all the other polls in the past? You say you have got a good economic story to tell but it appears that the electorate doesn't agree with you.
PM: Well I don't comment on opinion polls but as I said yesterday, I believe as Prime Minister it's vital for me and for the team I lead each and every day to be pursuing with a clear sense of purpose the shaping of Australia's future and the support for modern families. I believe we have been doing that; that we have been of have been driven by that sense of purpose.
But unity, a sense of unity, has eluded us. That was very spectacularly on display in the last week. We now have that sense of unity, so driven both by a sense of purpose and sense of unity we need to focus on all of the things that matter to Australians.
A budget that's about jobs and growth, schools which are about opportunity for every child and the future of the Australian economy. Hospitals and a healthcare system that meets peoples' need and is added to with Disability Care Australia; a new way of supporting people with disabilities.
The best of infrastructure for the future and of course the best supports we can provide to people as they go about their daily lives looking for that job, looking for a better job, starting a small business, raising their kids, looking after their older relatives.
JOURNALIST: Gary Gray has previously said that mining companies are paying more state royalties than ever and he believes that's a good thing. You said that you want an end to royalty hikes. Is he not contradicting you on that?
PM: We have got the same view about how the royalty system works and its interrelationship with the Minerals Resource Rent Tax. We brought the Minerals Resource Rent Tax into being because it is appropriate for there to be a profits-based tax for minerals in the same way that there is a profits-based tax for petroleum  -  the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax.
There is an ongoing issue about how that tax intersects with state royalties and that's the subject of continuing review and discussions between us and the State Government.
JOURNALIST: Do you believe that you can win this election?
PM: Absolutely, because the choice on election day will be the choice I've outlined.
It will come down to just the most simple of choices; whether on 15 September, I'm Prime Minister leading a majority Labor Government with a clear plan for the nation's future and supports for families today, or whether people have made Mr Abbott Prime Minister with all of his negativity, with his plans for jobs and services cuts and with his plans to take away from an average family $2,300 a year in government benefits.
JOURNALIST: Protestors are expected at tomorrow night's Cabinet angry, they say, that the Federal Government has ruined live exports.
What do you have to say to them and will you be beefing up security?
PM: I don't personally deal with security matters. They are obviously dealt with by police and the like so I don't have anything to do with that.
On live animal exports, let me be very clear. If this Government had not acted to deal with animal welfare conditions in the live cattle industry, we would not see that industry exist for the long-term.
One of the major reasons we acted was to give this industry long-term security and stability. No-one wants to see the animals mistreated, and I've met with lots of people who make their living from the live cattle industry and they were more distressed than most by the footage of animal cruelty. They raised these animals; they know these animals and don't want to see them treated like that.
So of course a concern about animal cruelty motivated us, but we were also motivated to act because this industry operates in Australia with the consent of the Australian community.
And if the Australian community withdraws that consent because they see animals mistreated time after time after time, then this industry would pass into history. No-one would be making their living from the live animal export industry.
By addressing animal welfare standards we have made sure there is a strong and secure future for this industry. It was a difficult decision and it was a difficult time for people in the industry but it was the right thing to do for the long-term future of the industry.
JOURNALIST: Two asylum seekers have died near Christmas Island. Boats continue to come. Surely the Government needs to change their policy?
PM: We have been guided in our policies by the most eminent and expert Australians you could find. I ask you just to contemplate whether there is anybody you would have asked in the country apart from Angus Houston, the former Chief of the Defence Force, Michael L'Estrange, a foreign policy expert, and Paris Aristotle, a refugee expert. They, these very eminent Australians with their expertise in these different areas, came together and chartered a course for the future.
I have wholly endorsed that course for the future and the thing that is stopping me bringing it into operation is that unfortunately the Leader of the Opposition and his team has decided it is in their political interest to see more boats.
I would in a heartbeat enact every recommendation of the Angus Houston review. We have been stopped from doing that by the negativity of the Opposition because they think more boats on the horizon is good for their politics.
JOURNALIST: You were asked by one of the young women over here what you liked most about being Prime Minister. Can I ask what you like least?
PM: One is tempted to say journalists but that would be unfair wouldn't it? And possibly not popular in this group!
No, it's a life of some stresses and strains but more than anything else, it's a life of incredible opportunity in that all of the things across my life I've seen in our nation that I've wished could be better, closest to my heart whether or not every child gets a fair go in education or whether some get left behind.
In this job, in this role, you get the opportunity to fix it and one of the things we have done and we will continue to do is make a difference for kids in schools.
I can go to schools now that not only boast buildings and more computers, but I can go to schools now where I can show you that those schools were overwhelmingly churning out kids who couldn't read and write and today they are churning out kids who can read and write.
That's because of what we've done as a Government working with those great teachers to make a difference for those kids, and now we are getting on with the very big job of making sure that that happens every time for every child in every school.
When you get to do things like that, who would describe this life as anything other than a delight?
Thank you very much.


6PR
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard is visiting Perth for the first time in about four months, I think.
She was absent during the state election campaign, we don't know quite why.
We were told that the Labor Party here said don't come; Tony Abbott came and the Liberals did pretty well with him in support so I wonder why she didn't come.
We'll find out in just a moment, she joins me, hello Prime Minister.
PM: Hi Howard.
HOST: Were you told by the Labor Party don't come during the election campaign?
PM: Howard, I visit here very regularly.
I was last here for our strategic dialogue with the United States which we have once every two years in Australia.
Obviously the state campaign has come and gone, overwhelmingly decided on state issues, and I'm here now doing a set of things including a Community Cabinet meeting.
HOST: But given what happened in the state campaign, given how badly Labor went, perhaps you could have helped them a bit.
PM: I think people know when they're voting in a state election and they're making a decision on who they want to be Premier and who they want to be the government of the State of Western Australia.
HOST: Okay, I want to start off with an issue that's not integral, not a core issue, but it needs to be addressed I think.
You spend a lot of your waking professional life attacking Opposition Leader Tony Abbott for being a misogynist, right, you would agree with that?
PM: I've certainly held Mr Abbott to account for his statements in public life.
I mean, he is contending to be Prime Minister of the country, and so I think that deserves scrutiny.
HOST: How do you explain then having Australia's most notorious misogynist, Kyle Sandilands, as your guest of honour at Kirribilli House on the weekend?
PM: What I did on the weekend was have children around for an Easter egg hunt.
These are children who use the services of a place called Bear Cottage.
Bear Cottage is a support facility for very unwell children, indeed children who are in their last stages of life.
And so I had the opportunity to put a few smiles on people's faces, to see some kids who are doing it pretty rough go on an Easter egg hunt and end up with their mouths smeared with chocolate and laughing for a while, and I took the opportunity.
HOST: No problem about that, but I'm talking about Kyle Sandilands, a bloke who called a female journalist a ‘fat slag,' he threatened to hunt her down.
The same bloke quizzed a 14 year old girl about her experiences of being raped.
You're apparently happy to have him squire around the grounds, is that right?
PM: This Easter egg hunt for these very unwell children was organised through the radio station that Kyle appears on with Jackie O-
HOST: That you appeared on with him too.
PM: Yes, I speak to a lot of people around the country Howard.
I don't necessarily agree with their views but I do go on their shows so that I get the opportunity to communicate with the Australian people.
Doing that meant that I then had the opportunity to welcome some very, very crook kids round to Kirribilli for something that they very much enjoyed and I'm glad I did it.
HOST: Prime Minister, you just don't get it about Kyle Sandilands, do you?
He is a misogynist of the first order. Wouldn't you agree with that?
PM: What I'm saying to you Howard is I made a choice about entertaining some kids who really enjoyed the afternoon. I think-
HOST: Yeah but that's not the point, you're missing the point, you're avoiding the point-
PM: Well I've said, Howard, what I think about it.
You may or may not think I'm missing the point but that's what I'm saying about it.
I had an offer made to me to participate in this event with Bear Cottage and I did it.
HOST: Okay, but feminists in The Australian today, if you read The Australian newspaper, they had a go at you too. You saw that didn't you?
PM: No I didn't. I didn't see that.
HOST: Ask Eva Cox what she thinks. You know Eva Cox don't you?
PM: Well, Howard, whatever. I made a decision about Bear Cottage and some crook children.
HOST: Okay. I reckon you should stay away from him anyway.
Now let's talk about the boat people. I want to play you a very short excerpt from a lady I just spoke to on Christmas Island.
Another boat's turned up, 188 people on board. Listen to what she has to say.
SATTLER GRAB: Let's not forget too Christmas Island is a tourist destination. You encourage tourists to go there. Is there any room for them?
CALLER: No. Very few, and that's the sad thing.
And who would want to holiday on an island that  -  what we used to have was crabs, it's now boat disasters and refugees and riots and asylum seekers.
So it doesn't paint a glossy picture for what is such a beautiful and unique place to be. It is just spectacular.
But unfortunately that's been pushed to the background as we call it the visa factory out there now.
HOST: Is it fair, Prime Minister, what your Government's policies are doing to the people on Christmas Island?
PM: What we're endeavouring to do is get the message out loud and clear that people should not get on boats.
Tragically people lose their lives as we've seen in the last few days. And people get no advantage having got on a boat.
There's the no advantage principle which means you don't get a visa more quickly than you would have, or entry to Australia.
You don't get anything that you wouldn't have got if you'd stayed put and had your immigration, refugee, asylum seeker claim processed where you were in Indonesia or Malaysia.
HOST: Clearly they're not getting that message because they're still coming.
PM: Well we haven't been able to enact our full suite of policies because we've run into a political deadlock in the parliament.
HOST: You're going to blame Tony Abbott for this one too are you?
PM: Well Howard, there are these things called facts and I think people are entitled to know them and to weigh them.
What I did in this very difficult area of policy was I asked three experts, led by the former Chief of the Defence Force Angus Houston, to provide us with a report and recommendations.
When I got them I said I'll do every one of them.
To do them all I do need legislation to pass the parliament and it is clear the Opposition will not support such legislation. That's the facts.
HOST: Can I recommend a book to you?
PM: Certainly.
HOST: It's called The People Smuggler.
You should read it, it's all about a people smuggler who started out trying to get his own family from the Middle East and he realised that the only way was to become a people smuggler.
So what he identifies in that book is the problem is at the local level in Indonesia.
People on beaches, local customs people, police, port authority people all taking backhanders. That's why the boats are leaving.
If the Indonesian Government doesn't do something about it at a local level it'll keep happening, so why don't you get the Indonesians to address that problem? That's the key.
PM: Howard, we do work with the Government of Indonesia on people smuggling.
We work with them hard on it, and we have successfully, working with the Government of Indonesia, detected and disrupted a number of ventures.
Indonesia has now criminalised people smuggling and prosecuted a number of people smugglers, and of course we pushed hard for that to happen.
If I can recommend a book back to you, can I recommend the Houston report about refugee and asylum seeker issues.
And when you've read it you might want to ask yourself the question why those very sensible recommendations can't get the support of the Federal Parliament because of the attitude being taken by the Opposition.
HOST: The People Smuggler is all about what's happening at the coalface, and I'll get to the coalface now.
A bloke called Sayed Abbas is a people smuggler; I think he's waiting to be deported to Australia.
He's told AAP up there today if the boats are turned around that will be enough to be a deterrent to asylum seeker arrivals.
Now he is a people smuggler, or an alleged people smuggler. Wouldn't you take notice of someone like him?
PM: I deal in the real world and things that can happen-
HOST: This is the real world.
PM: Howard, let me finish my sentence and I'll describe this to you.
Number one, we have the clearest advice from our navy personnel that a so-called tow-backs policy puts navy personnel at risk. That's Australian lives.
Number two, Indonesia has made it abundantly clear it would not take the return of boats towed back.
Indeed, Mr Abbott when he met with President Yudhoyono of Indonesia, despite thumping his chest about this policy in Australia, didn't raise it with President Yudhoyono because he knew that he would be repudiated on it.
HOST: You're the Prime Minister. Why don't you raise it with him?
PM: Because I know, and everybody knows from President Yudhoyono's statement, what the attitude of Indonesia is.
Indonesia, its own country, its own government, makes its own decisions and the decision it has taken on this matter is clear and well-known and no amount of running around Australia trying to claim something different can happen makes that a reality.
Tony Abbott obviously knew this because he-
HOST: So Indonesia's calling the shots are they?
PM: Indonesia is entitled to call the shots in its own nation. Of course it is.
We cannot sit here in Australia and force a sovereign nation like Indonesia to do a particular thing.
What you are talking about is taking a boat into their waters and putting it on their shores.
Of course we cannot do that; in just the same way Indonesian navy can't steam to Australia with a boat and dump it on our shores.
HOST: How come Sri Lanka can do this, how come Sri Lanka can stop the boats leaving their shores?
PM: Can I actually tell you what's happening with Sri Lanka.
We have returned to Sri Lanka around 1000 people who have travelled here by boat.
We've done it in very quick time, returned more people, more quickly, than happened under the Howard Government.
HOST: But we can't do it with Indonesia?
PM: You're talking about two entirely different things.
What has been happening with Sri Lanka is people have arrived, they haven't had a credible claim for asylum seeker status and they have been returned.
What you put to me about Indonesia was turning boats round at sea and towing them back to Indonesia.
Problem number one, fact number one, it puts Australian lives at risk. We've got Defence Force statements about that.
HOST: What happened yesterday? A Customs vessel had two of its crew finish up in the water.
PM: Fact number two Howard, and that interjection doesn't change the facts.
Fact number two, Indonesia won't take the return of these boats.
I know that and the Leader of the Opposition knows that as well, which is why he never raised that issue with the President of Indonesia when he met him.
HOST: They don't mind accepting our aid up there do they, the Indonesians?
PM: What's the relevance of that?
HOST: The relevance of that is they keep accepting our aid, we don't know where half of it goes-
PM: That's completely untrue Howard.
HOST: Really?
PM: Absolutely, completely untrue.
HOST: So you know where all the dollars go do you?
PM: Certainly we have accountability for our aid money. That is completely untrue.
And can I also say, please, let's broaden the view here.
We are talking about our near neighbour Indonesia.
We are talking about the country that, as we move into this century of change will be one of the most important countries to us.
It is in our national interest that Indonesia continues to be democratic, a prosperous and stable nation.
Nothing could be more in Australia's national interest.
HOST: You know in your heart of hearts too it's a country that's riddled with corruption.
That's what's helping the boat people get away with it, the people smugglers.
PM: And of course corruption has to be fought wherever it exists, but it is in our interest to see this highly populated country to our north, a nation of many religions and faiths, a diverse nation of many peoples, obviously a nation in many of its parts strongly Muslim in orientation.
It's in our interest to see Indonesia continue as a democracy, as a strong, stable country increasingly taking its place in the world.
It's already a very big force for good in our region, that's in our interest, that's why we engage at a political level, at an economic level, and yes in the provision of aid because it's in Australia's national interest.
HOST: Okay, another big issue today, Stephen Smith announcing that troops will be withdrawn, about two thirds by Christmas and the rest by the middle of next year.
Stephen Smith by the way kept his perfect record by refusing to appear on this program.
He's never been on it and refused every time, you might speak to him about that.
I don't know why the Member for Perth wouldn't want to talk with us but anyway that's another issue.
What's going to happen after we withdraw the last of our troops? Won't the Taliban just take over again?
PM: We are on the strategy we announced here some time back.
Howard I'm very happy to talk about this major announcement today because I think it is important to the Australian people, and particularly here in Perth as home to the SAS.
There are aspects of this that will have particular resonance.
Last April I spoke to the Australian people through a major address on Afghanistan about what people should anticipate happening in Afghanistan.
I said the province that we work in, Uruzgan province, was going to go into transition.
What that meant was increasingly Afghan local forces would take security leadership.
I said that transition would take between 12 and 18 months, and at the end of it that the bulk of Australian forces would be able to come back home.
HOST: Are you confident the Afghan forces can do this?
PM: I'm just about to answer you Howard.
That strategy I outlined last April is what has been pursued and is now happening.
So working with ISAF, the international coalition there, a decision has been made that the base where we work in Uruzgan province will close at the end of this year, which means about 1000 Australian personnel will be able to come home.
In terms of security conditions in Afghanistan beyond those personnel being there and most critically beyond 2014, because then we move to a new phase in Afghanistan's mission when as Afghan forces are in security leadership right around the country-
HOST: Quickly, we're running out of time. Did you see Four Corners last night?
PM: I think this is a pretty important topic so I will take the time.
What we believe will happen then is there will continue to be difficulties, this is a very poor country, but we will have trained Afghan local forces to provide security in Afghanistan, which was our mission, and it will have been acquitted.
HOST: Thanks for your time Prime Minister. Look forward to your company in the studio next time round.
PM: Thanks Howard.
HOST: Taking talkback, what about that?
PM: I think I did that last time and I'm happy to do that, we just weren't in a position to do it today.
HOST: Okay, take care, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you, bye. 


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Defence Stephen Smith today welcomed the decision by the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to close Multi National Base  -  Tarin Kot in Uruzgan Province, Afghanistan at the end of this year.
The decision to drawdown and close Multi National Base  -  Tarin Kot was made after consultation with Australia, which leads Combined Team  -  Uruzgan, and Afghan authorities and is in line with the timetable to transition to full Afghan led security responsibility in Uruzgan Province by the end of 2013.
With the closure of Multi National Base  -  Tarin Kot, the majority of Australia's troops will come home from Afghanistan.
The 2010 Lisbon NATO/ ISAF Summit agreed to transition to full Afghan security responsibility in Afghanistan by the end of 2014.
In July 2012, transition to Afghan security lead in Uruzgan for the four Infantry Kandaks and the two combat support Kandaks of the 4th Brigade of the 205 Hero Corps of the Afghan National Army (ANA) commenced.
By November 2012 all four Infantry Kandaks of the Afghan National Army 4th Brigade were operating independently without advisers in Uruzgan Province.
With the commencement of independent operations by the four Infantry Kandaks, Australian troops no longer conduct joint patrols with these ANA units. As well, Australia handed over control of forward operating bases and patrol bases to the 4th Brigade by the end of 2012.
By the end of 2012, Australian troops had consolidated their presence at Multi National Base  -  Tarin Kot and commenced planning for the complex task of redeploying Australian personnel and equipment and remediating buildings and facilities.
Australia will remediate the areas it has used and transfer the remaining infrastructure at Multi National Base  -  Tarin Kot to Afghanistan at the end of this year as transition occurs in Uruzgan and the Australian training and advisory mission in Uruzgan is completed.
Australian forces operate from two camps within Multi National Base  -  Tarin Kot, Camp Russell and Camp Holland.
Camp Russell is where Australia's Special Operations Task Group in Uruzgan is located. Camp Holland is a much larger area where the remainder of Australia's military and civilian personnel in Uruzgan, including the Headquarters of Combined Team Uruzgan, live and work.
Planning has now commenced to transfer all of Camp Russell and a portion of Camp Holland to the Government of Afghanistan by the end of 2013.
This is in accordance with the ISAF campaign plan and is being undertaken in consultation with ISAF and Afghan authorities.
In addition, Australia has contributed substantial funds toward the construction of permanent barracks for the Afghan 4th Brigade of the 205 Hero Corps adjacent to Multi National Base  -  Tarin Kot.
The ADF role in Uruzgan will continue as at present until the end of this year:
a)    Australian troops will continue to train and advise at the Headquarters 4th Brigade level with the two Combat Support Kandaks and at the Afghan Operational Coordination Centre  -  Provincial in Uruzgan;b)    The ADF Task Group will remain combat ready to assist Afghan Forces should the need arise; andc)    The Special Operations Task Group will continue to conduct partnered combat operations to disrupt the insurgency.
In 2014, the ADF will focus on a training role at the Afghan National Army Officer Academy in Kabul with our British and New Zealand colleagues.
In Kandahar, the ADF will continue to provide training assistance to the 205 Corps of the Afghan National Army.
Post-2014, Australia is prepared to contribute to the train, advise and assist mission for the Afghan National Security Forces by continuing to provide embedded Headquarters staff, advisors at the Corps level and trainers at the ANA Officer Academy in Kabul.Under an appropriate mandate, Australia remains prepared to make a Special Forces contribution, either for training or for counter terrorism purposes. 


ABC Perth
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, welcome to the program.
PM: Thank you very much, good to be here.
HOST: Nice to have you here. Before we get started today, I wonder if you might be able to put to bed some rumours about superannuation.
A lot of talk this morning that the Government is planning to make adjustments to super in the budget to fund the promises like the NDIS and the school reforms.
PM: Our eyes on superannuation are always about the system working well, working for working people and being sustainable for the long term future.
Superannuation is only in this country because Labor brought it here, otherwise ordinary working people wouldn't have super, only some high-income earners would.
So I can assure people, superannuation is a Labor creature, we will always nurture it well, and any decisions we make will be about the long term interests of the superannuation system.
HOST: But until you provide the detail, Tony Abbott will be able to continue to do what he did today to say that you're planning to raid tax concessions for wealthy Australians.
PM: Well, first and foremost this is the same Tony Abbott who ran around the country making wild and ridiculous claims about carbon pricing, none of which came true, so there's some credibility factors here when Mr Abbott goes back to fear campaigning.
Number two, Mr Abbott actually has a policy that he has verified on more than one occasion to cut superannuation for low-income Australians  -  that is he would take away the low income superannuation contribution scheme so he would be making low-income people up to $500 worse off when it comes to their super.
So that's the superannuation package that's on the table from the Opposition; cutting to low-income super.
HOST: But you will be aware too that Simon Crean said the other day that to make any such move, to make these adjustments, would tarnish Labor's legacy.
He, like you, says Labor created superannuation. His belief is it should be off limits to revenue raising, will it be off limits to revenue raising?
PM: As I've just said to you, when we think about superannuation we think about what is in the interests of working people. What is in the interests of their decent retirement incomes, and what is in the interests of making the system sustainable; that's what we think about.
HOST: Prime Minister, you have repeatedly said this week that Australians were appalled  -  and you were appalled  -  by what went on last week. What personal responsibility do you accept for what happened?
PM: I was appalled by the events of last week, and I think I've shared that view with Australians. For myself, I'm of course responsible for my performance as Prime Minister, and for my leadership of the Labor Government and my leadership of the nation.
We've got a lot of hard work to do. I said that I've got an aim every morning of getting out of bed and doing this job better than I did it the day before. And I want that to be the aim of all of my team.
Everybody's got to, not just step up to a mark, but improve and improve and improve. We owe the Australian people that.
HOST: Okay, but it makes it sound as if you're an onlooker and not the central character, or a central character, in the events of last week.
You ask us to look ahead and not behind. Because if we do, isn't the reality that we might see a series of terrible political car crashes?
PM: Well I'm happy to go through them if you want to put any issue to me about the performance of the Government.
HOST: Perhaps you might be a bit reflective here and consider whether you have made some mistakes?
PM: No one is perfect. You're not the perfect radio host, there's never been a perfect politician in this country  -  there never will be a perfect politician in this country.
So everybody is human, everybody is capable of making an error. People are capable of improving too.
And I do get out of bed every morning with a sense of energy and always wanting to do better for the Australian nation today than I've done yesterday.
HOST: But you don't want to engage me on this at all?
PM: No, I'm happy to but let's do it around facts. Because what I find when I do interviews  -  I did one on the 7.30 Report last  -  not last night but in recent days  -  what happens is people go through the fashionable list shopped around by the Opposition of issues with the Government.
But when you actually go through it, policy by policy, step by step, then I get the opportunity to explain what we did and why we did it.
So, if there is something about the Government that you want me to talk about, I'm more than happy to, but let's get to the specifics of it.
HOST: Well I'm happy to talk about your policies in a moment. But I guess we're looking at a week where you're facing more disastrous opinion polls  -  and I do understand your views on opinion polls  -  you've lost three senior disenchanted Cabinet Ministers to the back bench.
I wonder, do you seriously believe that you can retell all this and all the distracting events of last week as some kind of story of renewal for this week?
PM: What I can say to people absolutely straight is that the events of last week are over and the leadership issues are over.
And what has been a big problem for the Government and people's perceptions of the Government, I don't think people have doubted that we've had a sense of purpose and I had a sense of purpose as Prime Minister and I've been very determined about jobs, about improving schools, about creating the National Disability Insurance Scheme, about doing all the big things we need to do to get ready for this future century of change in our region.
I think we've had a clear sense of purpose. What we haven't had on display is any sense of unity.
HOST: What does that reflect?
PM: I think it reflects  -  and there's no mystery about this  -  there's been an ongoing leadership issue within Labor between me and Mr Rudd and it is now finished.
HOST: I'd like to go to some calls. You're listening to Glenn, good morning Glenn.
CALLER: Yeah g'day. I'm just wondering if the Prime Minister has heard about the price of refrigeration gas since the carbon tax. It's gone from $100 a bottle for your average size barbie bottle, to $1,000 a bottle. We want to know why our industry is getting absolutely slammed and there's not a thing we can do about it. Thank you.
PM: Well I've dealt with this before. Refrigeration gases  -  because they are so polluting  -  have actually been the subject of special arrangements over a long period of time; special imposts.
Indeed, that dates back to the Howard Government and to some international agreements about the treatment of these gases because they are such powerful greenhouse gases.
So Glenn, any impost  -  there's been one there for a long time  -  yes, it was increased by carbon pricing, no doubt about that. And that was all factored in to the 0.7 per cent increase in the cost of living if that increase in cost was passed through to consumers.
And as we know now, we're not just guessing, as we know now, cost of living has not increased by more than we predicted and people have received tax cuts and family payment increases and pension increases which help them with that flow through of 0.7 per cent in the cost of living.
HOST: Glenn, thanks for your question. Good morning Lachie.
CALLER: Good morning Prime Minister Gillard and Geoff, how are you going?
PM: Good thank you.
CALLER: Good. I'm a 17 year old doing political science and ag science at UWA and I'd like to raise a concern with the Prime Minister that what her view is on the live export trade.
Now my father is a farmer, a livestock producer in Bruce Rock, and to be honest Prime Minister, I think it's quite appalling that your Government can put in place a ban on live exports.
Now these people, I know the Labor Party is for the working Australia, how do you feel as the Prime Minister to take away the livelihoods of so many great Australians?
PM: I'm happy to answer that. There's no ban on live exports now.
What happened with this  -  and I had to act and take a tough decision in the long term interests of the industry  -  what happened was we export live animals, we'll continue to export live animals, there was a great deal of concern raised in the Australian community about animal welfare standards and treatment of animals who were exported.
I myself met with people who work in the live animal export industry who raised these animals and they too were just upset, tearful, they don't want to see their animals treated like that, it really hurt them.
And so we faced a situation where if we did nothing and images of this kind of cruelty just came back to Australia time after time after time, then community anxiety would have got to a stage where people were saying ban this industry and ban it for all time.
What I chose to do instead was to put in place a ban so we could move to increase animal welfare standards. We've done that. And what that means is we've put the industry on a strong and stable footing for the future.
So people will still be able to be engaged in this industry rather than losing their livelihoods for all time.
HOST: Lachie, a final observation from you?
CALLER: Yeah, yeah I understand the view on that but I still don't  -  I struggle to understand that people, Joe Ludwig and his comments on that issue. Now-
PM: Well, Joe was very supportive of farmers and industry during that debate, very supportive about working through it.
CALLER: I understand that he was supportive Ms Gillard, but how can those livestock producers up north, they can't just grow a crop to compensate for the income that they lost during the ban.
PM: Lachie, you are creating the impression now that people up north somehow today are banned from exporting their animals, that's not true.
CALLER: No, I'm not.
PM: We've got a new system with tracking and tracing of animal welfare standards so people can export, and export knowing that because animal welfare standards are being dealt with they are not at risk of a sudden outpouring of community sentiment which closes their business down for all time.
HOST: Lachie, thank you for your call. This is Garry, good morning.
CALLER: Good morning, how are you?
HOST: We're well Garry, what's your question?
CALLER: Julia, I'd just like to say as far as people working in the trades, it's a good decision to see that someone at long last has had a look at the 457 situation. The business sector is the only people that are really anti about this.
But the second thing is, I was listening to a talkback program last week saying that there's something like 600,000 New Zealand people residing in Australia now. And also that people can go through New Zealand, get a passport there from other countries, and come into Australia. Will this be looked at in the future?
PM: We've got a broad set of arrangements with New Zealand which integrate our countries. Obviously the relationship between the two of us is a very special and close one; ANZAC, our history, their history intertwined.
New Zealanders are like family to us and so there are special arrangements for New Zealanders to come to Australia and work here and for Australians to go there. We're not intending to change any of that.
My focus has been on 457s because this is the area where we've seen some real concerns for good reasons that temporary overseas workers are being brought in and taking jobs where there were Australians ready, willing and able to do it.
When I talk about these things peoples' minds always go to the mining industry but actually the number of applications for mining has gone down.
The big growth has been in things like IT and retail and hospitality where there are Australians who have the skills or could get the skills in order to get a good opportunity in those industries.
HOST: Do you have the strong evidence to support that rorting?
PM: Absolutely. Look at the statistics which we've made available. Look at the individual examples that we've pointed to where people have been brought in for jobs that are described as high-skill jobs only to find they're working as security guards or only to find that their employment has been transferred to another employer and they're in a very mainstream job where there would have been Australians available to do that work.
HOST: Let's go to Greg, who wants you to impress him over the course of the next few months, hi Greg.
CALLER: Hi Geoff, hi Julia. Thanks for coming to WA.
PM: Thank you.
CALLER: My background is, my family origins are the Hill End Goldfields in New South Wales, I've lived in WA for four years, came here for work. I've been a Labor voter for 47 years.
I believe that every time you're asked a question you respond by talking about Mr Abbott. I'm quite frankly sick and tired of him driving the agenda. I want to hear from you. I don't want you hear his name out of you or team's lips. I want to hear from you, what you've done and why you've done it.
I want you to drive the agenda and you've got five months to convince me not to vote against Labor for the first time in my life.
PM: Well that's fine and I can assure you I drive the agenda and I talk constantly about the Government's policies and plans.
I think it is appropriate from time-to-time to remind people what the alternative is, and so I will do that too.
But just sitting here on this show now I've taken questions about live animal exports, I've taken questions about a range of issues where I've talked to people about what the Government is planning.
But I do think there are times where people do want to know what the other side of politics is doing so if we're talking about superannuation I think for example low income earners are entitled to know that there is a plan on the other side of politics to cut back their superannuation benefits.
That's not trying to engage in some cheap argy-bargy, it's just giving people the facts.
HOST: Let me go back to Greg. Greg, what is it that you want to hear from the Prime Minister in the next five months?
CALLER: I want to hear questions answered directly, Geoff. You asked her several times to put off the table she was going to interfere in anyway with superannuation. She refused to answer it.
I want to hear direct responses from her.
PM: Why don't you ask me a question and I'll give you a very direct response? I'm really happy to do so.
CALLER: Okay, I've got one for you. We're trying to recruit sports coaches from overseas because there is nobody available in Australia of the quality we want.
You've taken away LAFHA which has made it much more difficult for people to come here to WA because of the cost of living.
We've had four people on the books ready to come over. But when they look at the cost of living and they no longer have access to LAFHA they have rejected the position.
Now I want to know why that's happened and would there be special circumstances where you might consider that?
PM: Well I think we should just explain for people who aren't familiar with the term. LAFHA was a set of particular tax benefits and arrangements for people coming from overseas, and we did clamp down on those and straight answer  -  it was absolutely the right thing to do because Government dollars are precious, taxpayers' dollars are precious.
I've got to make choices about whether I do that  -  those kinds of tax breaks  -  or whether I put that money into schools and hospitals and I've decided schools and hospitals and all the other important things that Government does is a higher priority. So no, we won't be bringing those breaks back.
CALLER: Straight answer, thank you Prime Minister.
PM: Very straight.
HOST: Thank you very much for the question. Prime Minister, you do have a story to tell and it's a story about low unemployment and growth and education reforms and the NBN, which all require funding, so too the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
But if the story is so compelling why is there an impression that people are not listening?
PM: I think there's been a lot of white noise and a lot of distractions, but come election day I think the choice will fine down and it'll be a very specific one as I've outlined to you.
I think we've got to be fairly understanding about the age in which we live. This is an age where, with all of the changes in media technology, the drive has been for quicker, faster, more, more, less depth, more.
And then people say well it's harder to have the public policy discussions that we used to in the past. I think it is harder. I think it's harder in Australia. I think it's harder in America. I think it's harder in the UK. I think it's harder around the world because of the changing nature of media arrangements.
Now that's not a criticism of the media, it's just an observation. You as a radio person a few years back probably could spend more time thinking directly about this exchange and less worried about tweeting and doing an interview on camera and perhaps appearing on someone else's show because presenters become brands now and they need to engage in all of this.
You talk to any of the journos in the press gallery in Canberra. They'll talk to you about the tempo, about how quickly they've got to write, they get a call in the morning, get 800 words of analysis up by 8.30 in the morning.
I just think that there's a changing tempo here. In that changing tempo all of us  -  me, the nation  -  has to find the space for the deep conversations that really matter, and none of them are more important than what we're doing to get ready for this century of change in our region. And what we're doing what example in schools.
HOST: Do you believe that sections of the media, particularly the Murdoch media, is out to sabotage your re-election prospects?
PM: Look, I'm not engaging in some conspiracy theorist politics. The observations I just made were observations I could have made sitting in the United States talking about President Obama's re-election campaign.
From time-to-time I think that there have been things in newspapers which have been unfair criticism which haven't in anyway enriched the public debate, haven't got people the facts, have in fact got them false impressions. And when we see that of course we call it.
HOST: One more question from Adam. Adam, good morning.
CALLER: Good morning, how are you Geoff?
HOST: Good thanks Adam. What's your question, mate?
CALLER: Julia, I've got a two-pronged question. Initially I'll give you a little bit of my background. I'm just about to get discharged from Defence for post-traumatic stress from my last tour of duty up in Afghanistan, and being in Western Australia you could probably work out what little group I work with.
I'm aware of a large amount of people coming home as is the media  -  two are coming home in the next 12 to 18 months. My experiences with DVA, the Department of Veteran Affairs, is a very jagged field and nobody can give you direct answers of where you're going to be and where you're going to end up which adds to the stresses and the, what else to say-
HOST: That's okay, we understand Adam.
CALLER: Just the stresses of the discharge process. Now what is your plan, this is the first half of the question, for the return guys that are coming with those problems because they are going to come back and things are going to be different for them.
And the second half of that, you come into the asylum seeker process, how can we have this asylum seeker coming into an Australian port when there's a safe UN border to get here?
So an asylum seeker coming from Afghanistan, Iraq or Sri Lanka cannot come to Australia as an asylum seeker once they've passed a safe border being Indonesia. Why haven't you jumped on the Indonesian Government and stopped the boats at the Indonesian lines like the Sri Lankans are trying to do?
HOST: Adam, thank you very much. Let's focus on the first part of the question because John Cantwell was on 7.30 last night saying that there are going to be thousands and thousands of soldiers coming back to this country, a tidal wave of post-traumatic stress disorder. What help will Adam receive?
PM: Well Adam, for your individual matter I'm more than happy through the producer here to take your details and to follow that up, your individual circumstances.
More generally, we are doing a lot of working and a lot of thinking about this. I went, for example, and met with some of the people who have served as commandos in Afghanistan and have come back with physical injuries and mental injuries, trauma, post-traumatic stress disorder and the like.
And one of the reasons I did that was to hear firsthand from people how they've found the supports and services and to work out how we can best provide those supports and services as people return. So we are working on that with Defence, with the Department of Veterans Affairs.
To be frank, I get different kinds of feedback about the Department of Veterans Affairs. I've met numbers of people who have returned from Afghanistan, who have been absolutely full of praise for the work that they've done and the support that they've had.
Obviously, you've had a different experience and I want to take that on board and deal with it very seriously which is why we'll follow it up for you.
HOST: Adam, look we've passed on your details to Annie and the Prime Minister's folks will be having a yarn with you.
Prime Minister, I know you have to go. Thank you very much for coming in this morning.
PM: Thank you very much. Good to be here. 


Perth
PM: We've talked today to school kids who here are getting Certificate I qualifications  -  that is actual recognised trade qualifications in areas like bricklaying.
The first certificate that you can get that they can then show an employer to show that they've had some experience in that area of work.
We've met in here today young people who are studying for a Certificate II in the automotive area. That means that they can show that certificate to an employer to show that they've got basic skills as a motor mechanic.
More impressive than that, as they get that Certificate II they are doing work, actually with local employers, and many of the young people we've talked to today are getting a promise of an apprenticeship out of that.
So emerging from high school with a Certificate II, with a relationship with an employer, with an apprenticeship that will then flow.
We've met one young man today who said to us that if it hadn't been for this program, he would have left school. The only reason he is still here in school is because this program is available.
That's the power of having trades education embedded into our high schools. That's why we are funding trade training centres for high schools around the country.
We're making available round after round more money so that high schools can create a state-of-the-art trade training centre, or do what so many have chosen to do which is come together in partnership with other local high schools so that they can have a bigger facility.
This means that for kids who are in vocational education they aren't studying in some dusty classroom with old tools from 40 years ago, they are getting to work in an environment that mimics modern workplaces using modern equipment.
We want to make sure all of this learning is captured and credentialed, which is why we have been pursuing an idea about a national cadetship program so that around the country in every high school you would able to emerge with qualifications that you can show to employers.
In the years of high school you would be able to show that you'd gone through the basic approaches to trades education, that you had some familiarity with the concept of what it's like to work in a trade.
And then, like here, in the upper years of high school, you could emerge with a certificate in our trades system.
This national trade cadetship program will start in the early years of high school next year, and in the upper years of high school the year after.
We've been working on it for some time and it hasn't been easy. It's required agreements with state and territory governments. But we do think it's one way of making sure that our kids have all the options and choices they need for the future.
I'm here in Western Australia to attend a Community Cabinet meeting tonight, which will be at a high school; where community members will have the opportunity to raise with me the things that matter to them.
But whilst I've been here I've been visiting schools because I understand that there is nothing more important to our future as a country  -  our strength and prosperity  -  than what we are doing to improve the quality of children's education.
And I'm very pleased to see we've made a difference here.
I'll hand over now to Minister Smith for some comments.
MINISTER SMITH: Thanks very much Prime Minister. I'm very pleased to welcome the Prime Minister this morning to my electorate and to join with the school community to welcome her to Morley Senior High School.
This is a high school where you can see the benefits of Commonwealth investment in two respects. We've seen  -  didn't go on a tour of it today  -  in this school through the Building the Education Revolution we've seen the science block refurbished at an investment of $2 million.
And here you see the trades training centre which is done in collaboration with one of our other local high schools just down the road: Hampton Senior High School.
The first time I came to the school to discuss the trades training centre was in 2006 when I was Shadow Minister for Education and we had launched our trades training centre policy.
And when we came to office in 2007 it was the Prime Minister as Education Minister who implemented that policy program and we see the benefits here.
So this morning you can see how Commonwealth interests, Commonwealth investment can help transform a school's facilities.
Morley Senior High School has been a great school for over 40 years. But the investment we've seen over the last half a dozen years  -  particularly the opportunity that you see behind you  -  has transformed opportunities for young boys and girls at this school.
And when we spoke to a number of the boys who are here at the trades training centre in the automotive area, a number of them said they had already been offered and accepted apprenticeships and that's a great thing  -  improving a pathway for secure employment for young local children.
PM: And thank you very much to Gay our school principal here. She had the generosity to say that our capital investment in this school had transformed it. Thank you very much. And thank you to you for hosting this visit and all the hard work you and your team do in this school.
We're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on refugees, is it the Government's intention to put more families on bridging visas and [inaudible]?
PM: No decision has been taken on that. What we do at the moment is we do release on bridging visas some asylum seekers, particularly single asylum seekers. And I want to make clear why we've taken some fairly tough decisions about the conditions under which they're released.
They are not able to access a job. That's for a very good reason. The clearest advice to us is that if people had work rights that could act as an incentive factor to get on a boat.
Obviously many of these people are coming from countries where Australian wages and Australian conditions look like an attraction factor.
So that's why people aren't able to work, and people are given the most basic of benefits  -  absolutely the most basic of benefits  -  the lowest benefit available in our social security system. And that too is done deliberately because we don't want the degree of support to in any way be used as a people smuggler to spruik the benefits of getting on a boat.
JOURNALIST: Is that why you haven't made up your mind on families, because you don't want to condemn whole families to living in poverty?
PM: Look, simply no decision has been taken.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]?
PM: We have transferred people to Manus Island in PNG and we'll keep working with the Government of PNG to transfer others. Each transfer is the subject of a specific agreement with PNG.
But we'll continue to make use of that facility.
JOURNALIST: Paris Aristotle has warned that unless there's a comprehensive regional solution to people smuggling more people will die at sea. He says the Malaysia solution must be implemented as part of that. Do you agree?
PM: Well Paris Aristotle is absolutely right. But the problem we confront here with implementing the agreement with Malaysia is of course that the Opposition has taken the view that it would prefer to be negative, and it would prefer to see more boats.
As I said yesterday, if we could implement the Malaysia agreement we would do it very rapidly. We have been prevented from doing that by the negative approach taken by the Opposition.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] an explosion in boat numbers once the monsoonal swell season passes?
PM: We don't want to see boats on our horizon and we do everything we can to deter people from getting on boats.
We detect and disrupt people smuggling ventures working with partners around the region  -  like Indonesia. We have offshore processing now in Manus Island and Nauru.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]?
PM: Well I'll answer your question but let's get context here. We got the best possible advice from significant Australians like the former Chief of the Defence Force, Angus Houston, a refugee advocate, Paris Aristotle, and a foreign policy expert, Michael L'Estrange.
Have we implemented their recommendations as far as we can with the Opposition's negative outlook and we would implement all of them if the Opposition wasn't standing in our way.
At the same time we've engaged in very rapid returns of large numbers of people to Sri Lanka, more people returned in a shorter period than was done under the Howard Government. So every measure we can take is being taken.
Now in terms of predictions about future arrivals, I don't do that. Obviously we work as we prepare the budget papers with proper agencies to get proper predications for the future.
But what I can certainly say is this; we would be in a position to deal better with the possibility of more boats if the Opposition stopped playing its negative political game.
The Opposition has decided it would prefer to see more boats.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in respect to the previous question though, is there a problem with Manus Island at the moment?
PM: We'll continue working on Manus Island, transfer by transfer. I'd refer you to the answers that Minister O'Connor gave to these assertions in Parliament just last week.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you made some comments about 457 visas on radio this morning. Is WA [inaudible] training locals as well employing people on 457 visas?
PM: The rules have to be the same rules right around the nation and in every part of the nation Australian jobs have to come first. That's what Australians expect, that job opportunities in their nation  -  whether it's in Western Australia or anyway else  -  are first made available to Australians.
Of course there are times when there are real skill shortages, very highly specialised skills, where we do need temporary workers from overseas.
But as I've indicated very clearly, I've become very concerned that the 457 visa program has grown in a way which means we are not seeing Australians put first and we are cracking down on it to ensure that at every point Australians are first in queue for Australian jobs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, WA Premier Colin Barnett is relying on federal funding for a number of election promises. Will you be providing that funding and is it irresponsible for the Premier to make that promise?
PM: Well he can't. Premier Barnett cannot make any promise relating to federal funds. We have proper processes, proper assessment processes, including Infrastructure Australia.
We work things through well. That has meant that here in Western Australia we've delivered more infrastructure money than ever before. We have rapidly increased the amount of infrastructure money we've put in per head of population in WA.
That's a very meaningful statistic because WA's population has been growing and we've put in so much new money that the amount of infrastructure money per head continues to grow even as the population grows.
So we very much focused on the infrastructure needs of Western Australia, but we do that in a proper way through rigorous assessments for projects like the Gateway project to the airport.
Premier Barnett is not in a position to promise federal funds.
JOURNALIST: He wants $3 billion from you, if it's such a tight budget is he likely to get it?
PM: Premier Barnett would have to go through proper assessment processes. Now I can't tell you what the outcome of those proper rigorous assessment processes would be. He needs to put forward his proposals.
We, of course, have already in the budget budgeted for our Nation Building 2 program which comes on top of our Nation Building 1 program, which made available more money for infrastructure than has ever flown before in the nation.
JOURNALIST: The Premier might end up pointing the finger at the Federal Government for promises that he made based on funding from you.
PM: Well no one is silly enough to fall for that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said this morning that Tony Abbot was running a scare campaign on superannuation. Wouldn't it be the best way to rebuff that campaign to release your plans for the superannuation system?
PM: Let's have a good look at superannuation. The only proposal for cutting back people's superannuation benefits and entitlements on the table today is Mr Abbott's plan to slug low income earners and to make them worse off. That's the only proposal on the table.
What people can always be reassured of, as the political party that created superannuation, superannuation will always be best nurtured in Labor's hands.
We're on a journey from 9 per cent to 12 per cent in superannuation, increasing the superannuation benefits of working Australians because of the actions of this Labor Government.
Neglected over many long years under the former Government. A positive action taken to increase superannuation by this Government, whereas today the only proposal on the table to superannuation cutbacks comes from the Leader of the Opposition.
JOURNALIST: Will you cut tax concessions?
PM: What I said on radio today  -  and I believe I was answering these questions yesterday as well  -  we will always take the right decisions to nurture superannuation, to get working people a decent retirement, and to ensure the system is sustainable.
JOURNALIST: But is it time for you to put your plans on the table like Mr Abbott?
PM: Well I've just indicated to you very clearly the considerations that drive us  -  what's good for working people, what gives them a decent retirement, what makes the system sustainable.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]?
PM: Not on this trip. I've had the opportunity to travel there on a number of other occasions and of course I will again. I have met during the course of this trip people that have accompanied me on some of those journeys.
For example, I met with the CEO of Chevron and I've had the opportunity to go to Barrow Island twice to look at the Gorgon project so I'm not able to on this visit but I've certainly been before and of course I'll go in the future.
JOURNALIST: Not-for-profit groups are saying they're increasing providing assistance to asylum seekers [inaudible]. It is fair that they're forced to help?
PM: As I indicated before we've taken a series of tough decisions here but we don't want to see any factor about the treatment of asylum seekers in the community that could be misused, mis-spun by people smugglers encourage people to get on boats as we've seen during the course of this week people lose their lives on boats.
In terms of the treatment of the charitable not-for-profit sector under this Government, we've worked in a very good partnership with them. When we came to Government the only way a charity or a church could get federal government funds was if they signed up to a gag clause which prevented them publically ever raising their voice against the Howard Government.
We thought that was offensive and we got rid of it.
We've worked comprehensively with the not-for-profit sector. Not only through providing resources to them but treating them with a genuine sense of dignity and respect and that's how we'll continue in the future.
Thank you very much. 


Perth
PM: I'm delighted to be here with Minister Stephen Smith and with Senator Glenn Sterle for what is a very important occasion, and that is the opening of the Great Eastern Highway upgrade.
I was just talking to Glenn and local community members about this upgrade. People have been talking about it for more than 20 years, and I'm very proud to be here today to say we have got it done.
And what it means for the people who travel this road is a quicker commute and, most importantly, a safer commute.
Instead of being locked in traffic, people can drive freely on this very important stretch of highway for Perth, getting to the airport, making a difference for travel times, making a difference for commuters, and making a difference for the movement of freight.
As a Federal Government, we are investing in Western Australia's future by investing in the infrastructure Western Australia needs.
We've invested in this Great Eastern Highway upgrade, providing $220 million joined by a contribution from the State Government, but overwhelmingly delivered with Federal Government funds.
And then we are delivering too on the $1 billion Gateway project for Perth airport where we, once again, are delivering the bulk of the funding  -  $680 million.
And the infrastructure investments don't stop there; we are also working in Northbridge with us investing $230 million and the State Government investing $100 million.
All up, there has never been more Federal Government money invested in the infrastructure of Western Australia than there is today.
That's not only true just in dollar terms; it's true per head of population.
We are investing so that our share per head of population of infrastructure funds has nearly doubled  -  from $154 per head before the Government was elected, to $261 per head now.
Now at a time of rapid growth in the population of Western Australia, we haven't kept up with population growth, we've done even better than that.
We haven't kept up the per-capita share, instead we've nearly doubled it.
This is a big commitment to the people of Western Australia, to this growing economy, to make sure that there is the infrastructure this economy needs.
I'm very proud to be here today and to get the opportunity to cut the ribbon. And I'm very happy now to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Joel Fitzgibbon says that families living on $250,000 a year are on struggle street, what do you think about that?
PM: I think the point that is being made is that working people need their superannuation and, yes, they do.
Which is why as a Federal Government we're increasing superannuation contributions from 9 to 12 per cent for working people; a very important commitment from this Federal Government
And I think there is now some ambiguity about whether or not that is matched on the other side of politics.
I want working people to retire with decent incomes.
I want them to retire with more super, and I am very prepared to fight the plans on the other side of politics to cut back superannuation for more than three million Australians; low-income Australians.
JOURNALIST: At what point would you consider someone's  -  what would you put a dollar value on someone's income as being a good income?
PM: I don't think you can just nominate one figure. Families are in all different sorts of circumstances, facing different sorts of cost-of-living pressures. We understand that.
That's why we've moved to help modern families with all of the things that put stresses and strains on their shoulders as they get about daily life.
We've introduced paid parental leave  -  people didn't used to have it before  -  some Government support so mum and dad can spend time with their new baby.
We've put more money into helping with child care costs than ever before  -  meeting 50 per cent of people's out-of-pocket costs.
There is the School Kids Bonus to help people get through with the costs of getting the kids to school.
More family payments for people who are raising teenagers, and of course we've reduced tax too, because we understand people want to keep a bit more out of their pay packet and give less to the Government.
They're our contributions to helping people make ends meet.
JOURNALIST: In the Financial Review today there's a poll conducted by a company with Peter Costello as its chair. It says you'll be wiped out here in WA; you'll lose all your marginal seats. Is there a message there you take out of that?
PM: Polls come and go and in fact they come and go very quickly. Less than 48 hours ago we had another poll, so polls literally happening every second day and as you know, I don't comment on them.
JOURNALIST: What about polls conducted by a company with Peter Costello as its chair saying Labor is going to be whipped out. Does that have much credibility?
PM: Well I think that's really a question you would need to direct to Peter Costello.
JOURNALIST: What would it mean for Labor if you lost all three of the remaining sitting lower house members in WA?
PM: Well, we don't comment on opinion polls. What we get out and do is govern the country in the interests of the people of Western Australia and Australians around the nation.
Nothing more important to people in Western Australia than working to keep the economy strong, keeping jobs and prosperity in this state, and getting ready for the jobs and prosperity of the future.
Infrastructure is important to that, traditional infrastructure like the road we're here to open today, as well as the infrastructure of the future like the National Broadband Network.
And nothing more important than the skills and capacities of the people of this great state, which is why I've been so pleased to spend so much time in schools while I've been here; the next generation and our future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say there is a lot of ambiguity around Tony Abbott's plans for super, but you're yet to clarify and I guess fully explain what you plan to do. Do you think that uncertainty is damaging the super system?
PM: I can tell you with a lot of certainty what we will do. We will increase superannuation from 9 to 12 per cent for working Australians to give them a decent retirement income.
We will make sure that more than three million low-income Australians benefit from the superannuation co-contribution.
The only plan on the table at the moment to cut superannuation for Australians is the plan of the Leader of the Opposition to take away a benefit of $500 for more than three million workers. That's one in three workers facing a superannuation cut.
JOURNALIST: Around here miners are earning $150,000 to $160,000 a year. Do you consider that they are well paid?
PM: I consider they work hard for their money. It is a difficult job.
JOURNALIST: Wealthy? Do you consider them wealthy?
PM: They're had hard-working Australians doing a difficult job often in very harsh circumstances, that is in extreme heat, and away from their families.
It is a great tribute to them that they go out and get it done. They are building the wealth of the nation.
JOURNALIST: But over-paid, under-paid?
PM: Hard-working Australians doing a great job.
JOURNALIST: Joel Fitzgibbon is just one back bencher, and there are other cross benchers who have expressed concern at any move to tax superannuation. Are you're reforms dead in the water before you've even confirmed what they are?
PM: What you can always do is trust Labor with superannuation. It wouldn't be in this country if we hadn't brought it here.
Working people would be retiring on the pension at best.
Instead, we've created a scheme which gives working Australians the opportunity to look forward to a decent retirement income and that will always be safe in Labor's hands.
JOURNALIST: There are some of your own Labor MPs who aren't trusting the direction they think the Government is taking?
PM: Well, superannuation; always safe with Labor.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, last night you alleged that state governments were prepared to cut their own funding towards schools as part of the Gonski review. Was that criticism directed to WA at all?
PM: That criticism is more directed to some other states, to be frank.
That criticism particularly directed to my own state of Victoria; we've seen some dreadful cutbacks to education, including the education maintenance allowance which is money that flows to the poorest families to help them get their kids through school.
We've seen cuts to school; we've seen cuts to technical and further education. I mean, what an amazing approach we've seen from conservative states, from Liberal governments, denying kids an opportunity and a chance to get something like an apprenticeship.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's been some negative rumblings from Colin Barnett with regards to the Gonski reforms. What sort of [inaudible]?
PM: Well, it's a plan for better education for Australian kids, and I would hope that our nation can swing behind that.
We've got to be very clear about how important this is to the life of every child and to our nation's future.
As a nation we owe every child a decent education.
As a nation, we can't have a strong and prosperous future unless our kids are getting a world-leading education.
If other nations get in front of us  -  better skills, better jobs, more prosperity  -  then that will be to our cost. We will have the strongest future if we are having kids in school getting the best results possible.
That's why I've set a goal for the nation of having our schools in the top five schooling systems in the world by 2025.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect you're going to be able to persuade the Premier-
PM: Well, comes down to a judgment call; how much do you value the education of every child?
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] considering your tone last night when you were talking about the Premier do you hope to patch up your relationship [inaudible]?
PM: I've got a very good relationship with Premier Barnett.
JOURNALIST: Why have you chosen not to meet with him?
PM: I see Premier Barnett frequently. Just on this trip there wasn't the opportunity. I'll see him in a few short weeks' time at COAG.
Okay, thank you very much. 


Perth
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today joined Member for Perth Stephen Smith and WA Senator Glenn Sterle to officially open a new section of the Great Eastern Highway between Kooyong Road and the Tonkin Highway.
This $280 million project has opened to traffic nine months early, increasing the capacity of the Great Eastern Highway in the section from 50,000 to 85,000 vehicles per day.
The Gillard Labor Government contributed $224 million to the Great Eastern Highway upgrade, with the Western Australian Government putting in $56 million.
Our governments together are making it safer, quicker and easier to move in and around Perth.
In addition the landmark $1 billion Gateway WA project commenced last month and will alleviate congestion and improve access to the airport and surrounding industrial areas.
The Gillard Labor Government has invested an unprecedented $3.6 billion in Western Australia through the Nation Building Program to renew and rebuild road, rail and public transport infrastructure across the State. 


Perth
PM: I'm delighted to be here with Minister Stephen Smith and with Senator Glenn Sterle for what is a very important occasion, and that is the opening of the Great Eastern Highway upgrade.
I was just talking to Glenn and local community members about this upgrade. People have been talking about it for more than 20 years, and I'm very proud to be here today to say we have got it done.
And what it means for the people who travel this road is a quicker commute and, most importantly, a safer commute.
Instead of being locked in traffic, people can drive freely on this very important stretch of highway for Perth, getting to the airport, making a difference for travel times, making a difference for commuters, and making a difference for the movement of freight.
As a Federal Government, we are investing in Western Australia's future by investing in the infrastructure Western Australia needs.
We've invested in this Great Eastern Highway upgrade, providing $220 million joined by a contribution from the State Government, but overwhelmingly delivered with Federal Government funds.
And then we are delivering too on the $1 billion Gateway project for Perth airport where we, once again, are delivering the bulk of the funding  -  $680 million.
And the infrastructure investments don't stop there; we are also working in Northbridge with us investing $230 million and the State Government investing $100 million.
All up, there has never been more Federal Government money invested in the infrastructure of Western Australia than there is today.
That's not only true just in dollar terms; it's true per head of population.
We are investing so that our share per head of population of infrastructure funds has nearly doubled  -  from $154 per head before the Government was elected, to $261 per head now.
Now at a time of rapid growth in the population of Western Australia, we haven't kept up with population growth, we've done even better than that.
We haven't kept up the per-capita share, instead we've nearly doubled it.
This is a big commitment to the people of Western Australia, to this growing economy, to make sure that there is the infrastructure this economy needs.
I'm very proud to be here today and to get the opportunity to cut the ribbon. And I'm very happy now to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Joel Fitzgibbon says that families living on $250,000 a year are on struggle street, what do you think about that?
PM: I think the point that is being made is that working people need their superannuation and, yes, they do.
Which is why as a Federal Government we're increasing superannuation contributions from 9 to 12 per cent for working people; a very important commitment from this Federal Government
And I think there is now some ambiguity about whether or not that is matched on the other side of politics.
I want working people to retire with decent incomes.
I want them to retire with more super, and I am very prepared to fight the plans on the other side of politics to cut back superannuation for more than three million Australians; low-income Australians.
JOURNALIST: At what point would you consider someone's  -  what would you put a dollar value on someone's income as being a good income?
PM: I don't think you can just nominate one figure. Families are in all different sorts of circumstances, facing different sorts of cost-of-living pressures. We understand that.
That's why we've moved to help modern families with all of the things that put stresses and strains on their shoulders as they get about daily life.
We've introduced paid parental leave  -  people didn't used to have it before  -  some Government support so mum and dad can spend time with their new baby.
We've put more money into helping with child care costs than ever before  -  meeting 50 per cent of people's out-of-pocket costs.
There is the School Kids Bonus to help people get through with the costs of getting the kids to school.
More family payments for people who are raising teenagers, and of course we've reduced tax too, because we understand people want to keep a bit more out of their pay packet and give less to the Government.
They're our contributions to helping people make ends meet.
JOURNALIST: In the Financial Review today there's a poll conducted by a company with Peter Costello as its chair. It says you'll be wiped out here in WA; you'll lose all your marginal seats. Is there a message there you take out of that?
PM: Polls come and go and in fact they come and go very quickly. Less than 48 hours ago we had another poll, so polls literally happening every second day and as you know, I don't comment on them.
JOURNALIST: What about polls conducted by a company with Peter Costello as its chair saying Labor is going to be whipped out. Does that have much credibility?
PM: Well I think that's really a question you would need to direct to Peter Costello.
JOURNALIST: What would it mean for Labor if you lost all three of the remaining sitting lower house members in WA?
PM: Well, we don't comment on opinion polls. What we get out and do is govern the country in the interests of the people of Western Australia and Australians around the nation.
Nothing more important to people in Western Australia than working to keep the economy strong, keeping jobs and prosperity in this state, and getting ready for the jobs and prosperity of the future.
Infrastructure is important to that, traditional infrastructure like the road we're here to open today, as well as the infrastructure of the future like the National Broadband Network.
And nothing more important than the skills and capacities of the people of this great state, which is why I've been so pleased to spend so much time in schools while I've been here; the next generation and our future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say there is a lot of ambiguity around Tony Abbott's plans for super, but you're yet to clarify and I guess fully explain what you plan to do. Do you think that uncertainty is damaging the super system?
PM: I can tell you with a lot of certainty what we will do. We will increase superannuation from 9 to 12 per cent for working Australians to give them a decent retirement income.
We will make sure that more than three million low-income Australians benefit from the superannuation co-contribution.
The only plan on the table at the moment to cut superannuation for Australians is the plan of the Leader of the Opposition to take away a benefit of $500 for more than three million workers. That's one in three workers facing a superannuation cut.
JOURNALIST: Around here miners are earning $150,000 to $160,000 a year. Do you consider that they are well paid?
PM: I consider they work hard for their money. It is a difficult job.
JOURNALIST: Wealthy? Do you consider them wealthy?
PM: They're had hard-working Australians doing a difficult job often in very harsh circumstances, that is in extreme heat, and away from their families.
It is a great tribute to them that they go out and get it done. They are building the wealth of the nation.
JOURNALIST: But over-paid, under-paid?
PM: Hard-working Australians doing a great job.
JOURNALIST: Joel Fitzgibbon is just one back bencher, and there are other cross benchers who have expressed concern at any move to tax superannuation. Are you're reforms dead in the water before you've even confirmed what they are?
PM: What you can always do is trust Labor with superannuation. It wouldn't be in this country if we hadn't brought it here.
Working people would be retiring on the pension at best.
Instead, we've created a scheme which gives working Australians the opportunity to look forward to a decent retirement income and that will always be safe in Labor's hands.
JOURNALIST: There are some of your own Labor MPs who aren't trusting the direction they think the Government is taking?
PM: Well, superannuation; always safe with Labor.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, last night you alleged that state governments were prepared to cut their own funding towards schools as part of the Gonski review. Was that criticism directed to WA at all?
PM: That criticism is more directed to some other states, to be frank.
That criticism particularly directed to my own state of Victoria; we've seen some dreadful cutbacks to education, including the education maintenance allowance which is money that flows to the poorest families to help them get their kids through school.
We've seen cuts to school; we've seen cuts to technical and further education. I mean, what an amazing approach we've seen from conservative states, from Liberal governments, denying kids an opportunity and a chance to get something like an apprenticeship.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's been some negative rumblings from Colin Barnett with regards to the Gonski reforms. What sort of [inaudible]?
PM: Well, it's a plan for better education for Australian kids, and I would hope that our nation can swing behind that.
We've got to be very clear about how important this is to the life of every child and to our nation's future.
As a nation we owe every child a decent education.
As a nation, we can't have a strong and prosperous future unless our kids are getting a world-leading education.
If other nations get in front of us  -  better skills, better jobs, more prosperity  -  then that will be to our cost. We will have the strongest future if we are having kids in school getting the best results possible.
That's why I've set a goal for the nation of having our schools in the top five schooling systems in the world by 2025.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect you're going to be able to persuade the Premier-
PM: Well, comes down to a judgment call; how much do you value the education of every child?
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] considering your tone last night when you were talking about the Premier do you hope to patch up your relationship [inaudible]?
PM: I've got a very good relationship with Premier Barnett.
JOURNALIST: Why have you chosen not to meet with him?
PM: I see Premier Barnett frequently. Just on this trip there wasn't the opportunity. I'll see him in a few short weeks' time at COAG.
Okay, thank you very much.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard will lead the most senior Australian political delegation ever to visit China during a bilateral visit from 5 to 10 April 2013.
The Prime Minister will participate in the Bo'ao Forum for Asia, an important annual gathering of Asian political and business leaders, and will meet China's new President and Premier.
The visit will be Ms Gillard's second to China as Prime Minister. 
She will be accompanied by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Bob Carr, and the Minister for Trade and Competitiveness, Dr Craig Emerson, who is responsible for Asian Century Policy, Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research. 
The Prime Minister will also be joined by the Minister for Financial Services and Superannuation, Bill Shorten, who is leading a superannuation and financial services delegation to China.   
The Gillard Government is committed, as outlined in the Australia in the Asia Century White Paper, to a stronger and more comprehensive relationship with China.
During her visit, the Prime Minister will promote Australia's rapidly growing trade, investment, education, research and people-to-people links with China.
China is Australia's largest trading partner with two-way goods and services trade worth $128 billion in 2011-12.
China is also Australia's largest source of overseas students, with around 150,000 enrolments in 2012, and the second largest source of overseas visitors, with more than 626,000 arrivals in 2012. 
The Prime Minister will meet President Xi Jinping at the Bo'ao Forum and Premier Li Keqiang in Beijing to discuss how the two countries can strengthen this vital and growing relationship. 
She will also discuss a range of common interests, including cooperation in the G20, East Asia Summit, APEC and the United Nations Security Council, climate change, and Asian security issues. 
At the Bo'ao Forum for Asia, Ms Gillard will meet other international leaders, address the plenary session and discuss trade and investment issues with senior Australian and Chinese figures. 
The Prime Minister will visit Shanghai to advance Australia's interest in closer engagement with China in the banking and finance sector. 
In Shanghai, Ms Gillard will also address one of China's top leadership academies, the China Executive Leadership Academy Pudong.
In Beijing, the Prime Minister will engage with the Australia-China CEO Roundtable, the premier business forum between the two countries, and deliver a keynote address at an event hosted by the Australian Chamber of Commerce. 


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Arts Minister Tony Burke today announced The Walt Disney Studios film 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea will join a growing list of blockbuster productions filmed in Australia.
While casting decisions are still to be made and locations are yet to be finalised, the filming of 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea will give Australian talent the opportunity to work with some of the best screen professionals in the business  -  both in front of the cameras and behind the scenes.To attract the film to Australia, the Gillard Government will grant the producers a one-off payment of $21.6 million which will result in substantial new investment in Australia and could create up to 2,000 jobs.On the back of the launch of Creative Australia, the new national cultural policy, the securing of this film is a huge coup for the Australian film industry and for the near 1,000 local businesses that will be providing goods and services for the film.Through Creative Australia, the Gillard Government committed a further $20 million in new funding to attract international production to Australia and a commitment to increase the rate of the Location Offset should the Australian dollar remain high.The announcement comes just after The Wolverine, starring Hugh Jackman, recently wrapped filming in Sydney. The Wolverine, which created over 1750 jobs and contracted more than 1027 Australian companies, generated $80 million of investment and has reaffirmed Australia's status as one of the world's best filming destinations.It also demonstrates that Gillard Government investment in the arts to drive local and national economic growth works and reflects the strong and ongoing support for the local screen industry by the Gillard Government.



HOST: Can I begin with the Royal Commission into child abuse that is opening today. It has an indefinite period of sitting, what are you looking to this commission to resolve?
PM: This is an important moral moment for our nation. When I established this Royal Commission I understood that it was going to require our whole country to stare some very uncomfortable truths in the face.
What I want to achieve out of the Royal Commission is two-fold.
For the survivors of child sexual abuse I want this to be a moment of healing, for us to say to them as a nation we hear you, you're valued and you're believed. Because for too long so many of these survivors have just run in to closed doors and closed minds.
And second, I want the Royal Commission to provide for us recommendations about the future.
We've let children down in the past as a country. We need to learn what we can do as a nation to better protect our children in the future. 
HOST: There's also quite a sharp edge to the Royal Commission beyond any healing process that it can recommend prosecution. Are you looking to the commission to produce prosecutions of criminal activity? 
PM: The Royal Commission, of course, doesn't do prosecutions itself but it will have an investigations unit and it can refer people to the police for the police to make proper judgments about prosecutions.
Wrong doers in my view should be brought to justice.
I don't underestimate the difficulty of doing that. We're talking sometimes about events that are 20 and 30 years ago and so there are problems with evidence and problems with proof, indeed some people may have died in the intervening period, so it's complex.
But, wrong doers should always be punished if that can be done. 
HOST: There have been concerns raised by some organisations, including the Catholic Church, that this might become simply a witch hunt, is there that danger?
PM: I don't think that there is that danger at all. This is about a proper look at our past and what we can learn from it.
Today, we are announcing that the counsel assisting the commission will be too very well qualified female lawyers, Gail Furness and Melinda Richards.
We're announcing that there will be a free legal advisory service for child sexual abuse survivors who want to engage with the commission's processes.
I believe the commission we have put together led by many eminent Australians  -  six eminent Australians  -  will find the right way through.
So this is healing but it is also clear recommendations for the future. 
HOST: How well do you believe the Catholic Church, which is right in the eye of this storm, has handled the issue of child abuse and specifically the responses of Cardinal Pell as the most senior Catholic? 
PM: I'm not going to get involved with an exchange about any one individual or indeed any one institution.
When I announced the Royal Commission I was very clear that this was about institutional child sexual abuse.
Of course there are some matters in the Catholic Church that will therefore be the subject of inquiry, but it's not focused on the Catholic Church.
There are a number of other institutions where survivors can tell truly horrific tales, and I've heard some of those myself.
That's why we haven't said this is about one body, one church, one entity; it is about institutional child sexual abuse. 
HOST: Prime Minister, to another topic; superannuation. There's a lot of speculation around about what changes you intent to make to superannuation taxation arrangements, superannuation arrangements generally.
Are you going to let that run until the Budget next month or can you offer some clarification of your plans? 
PM: We're now in one of those pre-budget cycles where speculation feeds on rumour, feeds on speculation, feeds on rumour, and that is playing out in our newspapers and in the media day after day.
I've been very clear over the past few days when I've been asked about this matter that superannuation is a Labor invention in this country.
It is therefore, of course, safe in Labor's hands. 
What we think about when we look at superannuation is decent retirement incomes for working people, and the long-term sustainability of the system.
That's already made us make some decisions that are very important.
First and foremost, to increase superannuation for working people from nine to 12 per cent so people get decent retirement incomes. 
Two, to boost the superannuation of low income earners, that is to give them a better tax arrangement, and unfortunately that's contested. 
Mr Abbott has said that he would take that away, and therefore put more than three million low income earners in a worse position for their superannuation.
And then we always look at the long-term sustainability of the system; so that's our focus. 
HOST: But can you offer any clarification because there's a lot of scare out there, there's a lot of uncertainty out there and you know what you intend, what do you intend in terms of change to superannuation?
PM: Marius, we'll make budget decisions and make them available publicly at the proper time. 
HOST: Is that May 14 or before May 14? 
PM: I'm not going to get involved in the speculation and rumour that's there at the moment. But I can be very clear with people about the set of principles that guide us.
They are the principles about sustainability and decent retirement incomes and I can also be very clear that the only policy on the table to cut superannuation today is the plan of the Opposition to cut the superannuation of more than three million working people. 
That's one in three working people who would have a superannuation cut imposed on them. 
HOST: But can you offer some clarification because at the moment all people know is that nobody has anything to worry about except the fabulously wealthy. Can you tell us what the income of a fabulously wealthy person is? 
PM: What people know is that superannuation is a Labor creation.
It's only in this country because of the Labor Party and consequently I think what people know is that when Labor looks at superannuation we do it from a set of values and principles which are always about advantaging working people and keeping the system sustainable and secure. 
HOST: Well that confirms the view that the fabulously wealthy are in your sights, who is fabulously wealthy? For example, your income is nearly half a million dollars, are you fabulously wealthy? 
PM: Well I'm not going to get into income ranges, but I will say this. We made some superannuation changes in the last budget for people who earn more than $300,000 a year and of course those superannuation changes should flow through to people like me, precisely, absolutely. 
HOST: So $300,000 is- 
PM: I'm not nominating, I'm not playing the game.
HOST: It's a clear inference from what you've just said. 
PM: No, no. I'm referring you to-
HOST: You are playing the game but you're playing sometimes rule in, sometimes rule out. 
PM: Marius, I'm actually taking you to a measure that was in last year's Budget.  There was no speculation in that. No speculation.
It was announced last year and the income level was announced. Now I'm not asking you to draw an inference from that other than to note when Labor has dealt with superannuation in the past, we've dealt with it on the basis of sustainability. We took a decision on sustainability last year.
HOST: What about retrospectivity. Will the changes be retrospective or can you rule out that they will be retrospective? 
PM: I've said to you the principles we are always bringing to bear on superannuation. At the moment when people pick up their newspapers, what they are seeing is speculation, some of it very wild speculation indeed. 
HOST: But that's a central issue: retrospective or not retrospective? 
PM: What's a central issue here is prudent decision making and making sure people get more income when they retire.
That's what nine to 12 per cent is about; that one in three workers who are lower income earners do better.
That's why we have the low income superannuation contribution scheme, so that they do do better, and that over time the system is sustainable. 
HOST: But on that specific of retrospectivity, we've had Simon Crean, former leader, saying that it must not be retrospective. 
Can you not say one way or the other whether it will be retrospective? 
PM: Marius, I'm not playing a game about this. 
HOST: Just a question. 
PM: Other than to say when people pick up their newspapers obviously they should discount things that are just speculation and rumour. 
HOST: Rupert Murdoch says your remarks about 457 workers, your remarks were disgusting and racist, do you accept that criticism? 
PM: Certainly not. My job as Prime Minister is to make sure that Australians  -  Australian citizens  -  have their job opportunities put first. 
HOST: But does it worry you when Rupert Murdoch criticises your rhetoric, Bill Keelty criticises your rhetoric, the Greens criticise your rhetoric. It's a fairly unusual alliance against you there.
PM: My job is to put the jobs of working Australians first; that's what I will always do.
People can say whatever they like in response to that but as Prime Minister I will always make sure we are growing the economy, we are creating jobs and we are ensuring that Australians are getting those jobs first. 
HOST: The Minerals Council is launching a new ad campaign today to warn you against looking to them for extra revenue in the Budget. In 2010, the Minerals Council, the big miners' campaign was hugely damaging, it was a big contributor to the downfall of Kevin Rudd.
Are you worried about this campaign and do you have the miners in your sights for revenue? 
PM: The only thing I ever worry about is the national interest and making sure that we keep growing the economy, we keep creating jobs. We've created more than 900,000 of them during the worst of global economic times.
And that we are sharing opportunity for the future which is why I want to see every child getting a great education. And we're making sure we don't leave people behind. So things like Disability Care are to make sure that Australians with disabilities and their families get to live a decent life too. 
They're the decisions that guide me, that's what I do as Prime Minister.
Yes, of course, people will enter the public debate from their perspective. I don't see too many people running into the public domain saying I'd like to pay more tax; we don't tend to see that. 
We tend to see people running into the public domain saying they don't want to pay any more tax, or they'd like to pay less tax, or they'd like more of a benefit. Such is the nature of vibrant debate in a democracy. 
HOST: On tax, you're taking action to close loopholes for multinationals, giants like Google, you're going to require them to reveal how much tax they pay. Is Google a tax dodger? 
PM: I think tax should be transparent and people are entitled to know how much tax is paid.
You could get on the Tax Office website and work out for every income level how much a Pay As You Earn taxpayer pays in tax.
I don't see why there shouldn't be comparable transparency in relation to company tax. 
HOST: But this is a new requirement for them to reveal how much they're paying, why are you bringing in this new requirement? 
PM: I think it's important that the tax system is understood and that there are facts in the public domain that people can make judgments against the basis of solid information. 
HOST: These multinationals, is there a view that they're not paying their fair share? 
PM: I don't want to name any specific company but clearly around the world, and it's not just Australia, these things are talked about.
At the G20 table when the leaders of the 20 biggest economies in the world, including our own, meet around the G20 table we have discussed  -  and there have been discussions at finance minister level too  -  about the issues in a very mobile world where companies can move money around, what that does mean for domestic revenue bases.
So this is an ongoing discussion at an international level. I'm sure it will be an ongoing discussion in our own economy. 
HOST: And it's real money according to the reports you're talking about, maybe you're looking for an extra billion dollar a year from missed tax that's being missed at the moment? 
PM: As a matter of principle, taxpayers, whether they're companies or individuals, should pay their proper rate of tax. 
HOST: You have two ministers in Indonesia at the moment discussing asylum seekers, is any progress being made there? 
PM: Some progress has been made and I think it's very important progress.
There's been an agreement at that meeting to ensure that people smuggling is criminalised.
Now, this might seem to us an obvious step; people smuggling is a criminal activity here in Australia and we prosecute people smugglers. 
But we have had to advocate across the region for people smuggling to be a criminal offence in countries where asylum seekers flow through.
We succeeded in making sure through advocacy with Indonesia that Indonesia made people smuggling a criminal offence and now we've seen people prosecuted.
What has been achieved at this international forum where Ministers Carr and O'Connor are in attendance is an agreement across the whole group that people smuggling should be an offence. 
HOST: Real difference or just a gradual step in a continuing process? 
PM: I think there's a real difference between something being against the criminal law or not being criminal at all.
There's a real difference because then you get police engaged, you get people prosecuted, you get people going to jail, that is a real difference. 
HOST: You're going to China on Friday. Korea is the major talking point at the moment, will you be going with a specific request for specific action from China on Korea? 
PM: The issue of North Korea will come up in my discussions in China. 
We welcome the fact that China is enforcing the UN sanctions against North Korea.
But of course this threat to peace and stability in our region will be the subject of discussions that I will do personally, and I'm taking the most high-powered delegation to China that our nation has ever sent. So of course there will be broader discussions involving the Foreign Minister too. 
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks again very much for speaking with News Radio this morning. 
PM: Thanks Marius. 


Canberra
The Royal Commission of Inquiry into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse will hold its first hearing today in Melbourne's County Court.
The Royal Commission will enable thousands of Australians who suffered as children to recount their experiences and express feelings that many carry to this day as a result of the harm caused to them.
The formal acknowledgement of these wrongs is enormously important if we are to prevent them from happening again.
These hearings will mark the start of a healing process for survivors and their families.
The Gillard Government today announced counsel assisting the Royal Commission will be Gail Furness SC and Victorian barrister Melinda Richards.
The Government also announced the establishment of a free national legal advisory service for people engaging or wishing to engage with the Royal Commission.
The free legal advisory service will provide people with legal and procedural advice on important issues such as preparing submissions to the Royal Commission.
The service will be available via a free telephone service nationwide. Face-to-face services will also be offered in selected locations.
Contact details for the new service will be advertised nationally in coming weeks.
Assistance will include advice on the implications of existing confidentiality agreements.
The service will also provide:
 * 	Advice on legal options in relation to abuse, outside the Royal Commission, including alternate dispute resolution
 * 	Civil law or criminal law options
 * 	Face to face advice services at public hearings (similar to a duty lawyer)
 * 	Advice and referral for individuals who require legal representation.
The Gillard Government believes it is important to ensure that people understand their legal rights and are given every assistance to make their evidence count.
The National Association of Community Legal Centres has been selected to deliver this important service in recognition of its experience, national presence and existing relationships with community and complementary services providers.
In addition, the Australian Government will shortly announce arrangements to ensure people engaging with the Royal Commission have access to appropriate community-based support services.
The Royal Commission has been set up by the Gillard Government to inquire into how institutions with a responsibility for children have managed and responded to allegations and instances of child sexual abuse and related matters.
It will investigate where systems failed to protect children and will make recommendations on how to improve laws, policies and practices to prevent and better respond to child sexual abuse in institutions.
For more information on the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse call 1800 099 340 or www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au


Canberra
The Australian Government is pleased to announce it has appointed an additional three senior figures with extensive experience in Asia to the Strategic Advisory Board on Australia in the Asian Century.
Mr Hamish Tyrwhitt, Executive Director and Chief Executive Officer of Leighton Holdings, Professor Margaret Gardner AO, Vice-Chancellor of RMIT, and Ms Rebecca Dee-Bradbury, President, Developed Markets, Asia Pacific of Kraft Foods, will advise the Government on how to best meet the challenges of implementing its Asian Century policies.
The economic rise of Asia is the defining development of the 21st Century.
The White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century, released in October 2012, sets ambitious goals for Australia to meet by 2025 and provides policy directions to help the country make the most of the tremendous array of opportunities arising from the region's rapid growth.
Implementation of the policies flowing from the White Paper continues, with several initiatives in business, education, security and trade already announced or under way.
The Government today is publishing its Implementation Plan, which sets out White Paper measures already taken, action envisaged over the next 12 months and further policies that need development.
The appointment of the new advisory board members will help keep governments, business and the wider Australian community focused on the opportunities presented by the transformation of Asia.
Mr Tyrwhitt, who has extensive experience in Asia, will chair the board. Prior to becoming Executive Director and CEO of Leighton Holdings, he was Managing Director of Leighton Asia Limited and Leighton Contractors (Asia) Limited.  Of the myriad projects and operations of Leighton in Asia, a trades school set up in India to train local recruits to basic Australian qualifications merited special mention in the White Paper.
Professor Gardner has been Vice-Chancellor of RMIT University since 2005, having previously held senior positions at Deakin University, Griffith University and the Queensland University of Technology.  Professor Gardner also chairs RMIT Vietnam Holdings Pty Ltd, which established RMIT University Vietnam in 2000 on the invitation of the Government of Vietnam. It is that country's first international campus. 
As President, Developed Markets, Asia Pacific of Kraft Foods, Ms Dee-Bradbury leads an organisation with about 3,650 staff in Australia and New Zealand. Before joining Kraft, she held a number of senior positions, including CEO for the Asia-Pacific Region of Maxxium, a global spirits and wine distributor. In 2012, Ms Dee-Bradbury represented industry on the Prime Minister's Taskforce on Manufacturing.  She will again provide a strong industry voice, in particular on behalf of agricultural and food processing businesses.
Mr Tyrwhitt, Professor Gardner and Ms Dee-Bradbury will join those members of the board who advised the Government on the White Paper's development. They are former Treasury Secretary Dr Ken Henry AC, Emeritus Professor Peter Drysdale AM from the ANU's Crawford School of Public Policy, Partner and CEO of Corrs Chambers Westgarth Lawyers Mr John Denton and Telstra Chairman Ms Catherine Livingstone AO.
Ex-officio board members include the Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet Dr Ian Watt AO, Secretary to the Treasury Dr Martin Parkinson PSM and Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Mr Peter Varghese AO.
The Implementation Progress Report, which also addresses the governance, monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements established to implement White Paper policy, is available at www.asiancentury.dpmc.gov.au.


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
2013 is a decisive year for our nation.
So today, I want to speak about two things  -  the facts and the future.
Where we are  -  and where we need to be.
First, the facts.
We have more jobs and stronger growth than any of our peers in any of the major developed nations.
Over 900,000 jobs created since we came to office, while millions have been added to jobless queues around the world.
Unemployment at 5.4 per cent, less than half the rate in Europe at 12per cent.
We have lower interest rates than we've had since 1996.
They're much lower than when Labor came to Government, saving $100 a week for the average family.
We have the highest median wealth in the world.
That is, we're not just good at creating wealth  -  we're also good at sharing it.
We have low inflation.
Annual underlying inflation has been at or under 2.4 per cent for the whole of the last year, the first time this has happened since 1999.
We have a triple, triple-A credit rating.
By that I mean we are for the first time ever triple-A rated with a stable outlook by all three major ratings agencies.
We have joined a very exclusive club with only 7 other countries as members.
The fact the club is so exclusive proves the difficulty of being triple, triple-A rated.
We have a strong record of economic growth.
We're now the 12th biggest economy in the world, up from 15th when we came to office.
Over the same period, our economy has grown more than five times faster than Germany and the United States.
And even on productivity and industrial disputation, which has seen more barrels of ink spilled and trees felled than any other economic topic, the facts tell their own story.
Labour productivity growth for the market sector through the year to December 2012 is significantly above its 10-year average annual growth rate.
Industrial disputations are, on average, about a third of rate under the previous Government -  which included the draconian Work Choices regime.
Enterprise bargaining is doing its job and, as a result, there hasn't been even a whiff of a wages breakout from the mining sector into the wider economy  -  like there was in the last mining boom of the early 1980s.
It's hard to reconcile this Australia with either the economic cringe which discounts our national economic achievements  -  or the political negativity which denies them.
I know foreign correspondents and your home bureaus aren't strangers to this conundrum.
It seems hardly a week passes when a respected overseas journal or international organisation doesn't point out Australia's good fortune and puzzle over our fractious politics.
The UN Human Development Index puts Australia in second place; the OECD Better Life index puts us first.
The Economist recently ranked countries according to the “best place to be born”, and Australia came second after Switzerland, up from 18th place in 1988.
The UK Guardian recently noted that as “the world lurches from crisis to economic crisis, the land of Oz is powering ahead”.
And even the stern conservatives at the Heritage Foundation have praised our “impressive economic resilience.”
I don't mean that our nation should be boastful.
Things can always be improved  -  and improving them is my mission, my driving purpose.
But all Australians are entitled to be quietly proud of what we have achieved together.
In a loud and clamorous political marketplace where bad news sells and crazy fear campaigns abound, the facts don't always get to speak for themselves.
In the nature of politics, no one has entirely clean hands, and we can all do more to lift the standard of debate.
But make no mistake; ignoring the facts is not just an insult to the quality of political debate.
It is an insult to the Australian people because those facts are the result of hard work and unremitting reform by the Australian community.
So my first point today is to urge everyone involved in the political process  -  elected leaders, commentators, business and civil society  -  to argue on the facts.
Anything less is a disservice to our people and our democracy.
A consideration of the facts then takes us to the future.
The future that will, in so many ways, be decided on September 14.
One thing this will not be is a contest about some “lost golden age”.
This is not a time for cosy bed-time stories.
There should be no false nostalgia for the days that preceded the global financial crisis: the days when our household savings ratio hit zero, when easy credit and rapidly rising terms of trade created a sugar hit that could never be sustained.
Even then, with rivers of gold flowing into federal coffers, a priceless opportunity was squandered.
Taxation receipts as a share of GDP were higher in the entire period between 2002-03 to 2007-08 than in every year since and every year before bar one.
Had the Howard Government collected the same amount of revenue as a unit of GDP as we currently do, the last seven years of the Howard Government would have been in deficit.
But rather than invest it in the future, this revenue was spent on quick fixes, at the same time bequeathing a legacy of declining productivity, rising inflation and skills shortages.
Not days we want to bring back.
We can only become a stronger nation, a nation of prosperity for all, if we correctly diagnose today's challenges and enable our nation to seize tomorrow's opportunities.
This means we must document and explain our plans for the future at a level of detail and financial costing which honours the intelligence of the Australian voters.
Bluff and bravado may have served our opponents well to date, but they are no answer now.
No answer this close to an election.
No answer now the carbon pricing fear campaign has been exposed as nonsense.
No answer now my own side of politics has resolved its leadership debate.
Now, the times demand better.
The times require deeper thought about the nature of our economic growth today and our economic opportunity tomorrow.
Our economic growth today is creating jobs. 
But that growth has not been generating government revenue in the way in which it has in the past.
Most federal taxes are aligned with nominal GDP, the actual dollar price we receive for our exports and our economic production.
But, unusually, nominal GDP is growing more slowly than real GDP simply because while production volumes have continued to grow, the prices they command have moderated.
This unusual divergence between nominal and real GDP growth has happened only a handful of times in the half century since the Bureau of Statistics began producing quarterly national accounts.
It means government revenues are lower than our experts reasonably predicted them to be.
This revenue challenge puts an even greater focus on the need to ensure that future Budget expenditure is matched with responsible and targeted savings.
This is the discipline with which we all must live  -  every politician, every commentator, every advocacy group.
This discipline should not be obscured by a false debate about debt and deficit.
Our net debt is at ten per cent of GDP, the equivalent of a person earning $100,000 a year having a mortgage of $10,000. 
To keep this in perspective, our net debt as a percentage of GDP is around one tenth of the expected peak across major advanced economies.
This net debt is obviously manageable and exists, not because of ongoing expenditure decisions, but because of the huge revenue hit we've seen due to the GFC and the unusual global economic conditions we've seen since.
Anyone who pretends this debt should not exist is effectively denying the GFC happened.
Anyone who pretends the GFC didn't happen should be treated as the same kind of amusing curiosity as those who believe the earth is flat.
Certainly, it is impossible for such a person to play any role in the hard decision-making necessary in our nation's life.
Similarly, it is impossible for any person of reason to deny the revenue effects associated with today's particular economic circumstances.
As a government, we will show through our May Budget our continued focus on fiscal discipline.
As a government, we will also continue to describe and prepare for what we have called the “Asian Century”.
The economic order of the world is changing, in turn the strategic order of the world is changing, and we are on the frontline of the challenges and the opportunities that those changes bring.
By 2030 there will be more than 3 billion middle class consumers in the region to our north.
Thanks to the relationships and capabilities we've built over four decades, Australia is pushing on an open door as we enter the Asian Century.
But once we enter, everything that follows depends on our skill and ingenuity.
Nothing is guaranteed to us  -  success is not pre-ordained.
Asia has the wealth and the demand.
Whether we meet that demand is entirely up to us.
And let's not imagine we have the field to ourselves.
Europe and the Americas are eyeing the same opportunities as we are.
As are Asian countries  -  they are selling more goods and services to each other than ever before.
The Asian Century will also involve difficult adjustments, and the high dollar is a clear example of this.
It's painful to many sectors.
But like Germany under the towering deutschmark in the days before the Euro, a high currency need not be a barrier to making products and services of such quality that our partners still want to buy them.
The sustained strength of our dollar is now a feature of the economic landscape - on a trade weighted basis, it recently rose to its highest level since 1985.
And it may persist for some time given Australia's status increasingly as something of a safe haven currency  -  Australian dollar to US dollar exchanges are now estimated to be the fifth highest traded currencies in the world.
While the high dollar has put significant competitive pressure on many industries, the answer to this is not low wages; in a high-skill advanced economy, it should never be.
It takes a more sophisticated approach  -  policy-rich, detailed, comprehensive.
That's why my Government has a plan for Australian jobs which has just those features.
A plan that means we will be seizing the opportunity in our region as well as the opportunities at home.
It's a plan to make sure that we have many diverse sources of strength in our economy.
The next election must be a referendum on policy.
It must be a test of who has a blueprint for our nation's future in the Asian Century.
And it is only Labor that has that plan.
A plan for the future that rests upon five pillars which I've described many times:
Skills and education:
It's not only about uplifting the horizons of every individual.
Independent modelling in 2010 showed that our reforms could provide an overall benefit to the national economy of around $4,000 per person per year.
We cannot win prosperity or create opportunity in this Asian Century if these reforms are stopped.
High speed broadband for all Australians:
Each 10 percentage point increase in broadband penetration is estimated to add around $20 billion to Australia's GDP.
Without fibre to the premises, a vision only Labor will realise, we will be left in the horse and buggy lane while other nations zoom past us in formula one cars.
Clean energy and innovation:
In the first six months since our carbon price was implemented, electricity emissions went down by 8.6 per cent compared to the same six month period the previous year.
And the volume of energy from renewable sources increased by almost 30 per cent, creating new jobs, and helping to save the planet along the way.
Our nation can't afford the costs of trying to repeal carbon pricing.
Competition and deregulation:
A Productivity Commission analysis of 17 of our Seamless National Economy reforms estimated that business costs would be cut by $4 billion a year.
Our energy market reforms announced last December will alleviate the burden of future household electricity bills by around $250 a year.
This major reform cannot be delivered if the problem the reform is directed at is denied.
Tax reform:
We've increased by six and a half times the tax write-off that small businesses get on new asset purchases  -  an investment injection of nearly $1 billion into the job-creating sector of our economy.
We've delivered three rounds of tax cuts. And we've tripled the tax free threshold so that 1 million people no longer lodge any tax return at all.
This means that a worker on $50,000 is paying $2,000 less in tax than they did in 2007.
Small businesses and families can't afford the tax hikes being promised by the other side of politics.
These are the five pillars this Government has identified as key to increasing jobs, prosperity and productivity.
These support our plan for Australian jobs.
A plan to back Australian firms to win more work at home so that large projects will need to engage in Australian Industry Participation Plans, creating new local jobs on existing projects.
A plan to support Australian industry to increase exports and win new business abroad.
A plan to invest in up to 10 Industry Innovation Precincts which will bring together researchers, innovators, sources of new knowledge and link them with businesses.
Transforming this new knowledge into new products, new ways of doing things, seizing innovation, creating the jobs of the future.
A plan to grow small businesses, creating new mid-sized businesses and helping them to access and prosper on world markets.
This is a serious plan for our nation; a serious plan for our future.
That's what I meant when I said at the Press Club back in January that we needed to put policies and plans back at the centre of our national discourse.
That time is here.
This is how Labor always governs  -  this is the modern Labor model.
Doing the things needed for a mature, high wage economy to succeed in a dynamic, emerging region like Asia.
Competing on skills and quality.
Playing to our strengths.
Diversifying our economic base.
Building a culture of innovation.
And perhaps most importantly, leveraging our relationships with Asia as the region grows and rises.
It's no accident that tomorrow I will leave for a visit to China  -  a visit long planned and prepared for.
It's my second visit to China and follows my many visits to the key nations in our region - India, Japan, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Vietnam, Singapore.
Appropriately, 2013 is the 40th anniversary year of the first visit by an Australian Prime Minister to the People's Republic.
I'll be leading the most senior Australian political delegation ever to visit China.
I will be among the first Western leaders to meet the new leadership.
I'll be promoting our trade and economic interests and sharing perspectives on global and regional economic and security challenges.
But I'm not just going to celebrate our existing strong relationship and its underpinnings.
But to look ahead to how we can build the comprehensive relationship envisioned in our Asian Century White Paper, including how leaders can help deliver a relationship of greater depth and durability in a more complex future.
The timing of this visit so soon after the new leadership has entered into office is deliberate and reflects the importance of our rapidly evolving relationship with China and our high-level political oversight of that relationship.
And more broadly, it reflects the centrality of Asia in the story of our nation for the 21st century.
Nothing in our destiny as a nation is certain.
We saw that a decade ago when the mining boom hit and the then-Government had no plan for skills, no plan for infrastructure, and no plan for broadband.
I won't leave our nation similarly unprepared.
As a result, we will win in the Asian Century.


Sydney
HOST: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. I might kick off the Q and A session with the first question. You mentioned several of the economic indicators of the Australian economy. There is this 21 years of constant growth, relatively low unemployment rate, very low public debt level.
There are, as always, several factors that led to this success and I guess there was also some luck in it, but I would like to focus on one factor that Australia can influence and that is population growth, mainly fuelled by immigration. 
So I'm wondering what you think - how dependent the Australian economy is on future population growth and thus immigration, and I guess you also have some idea how big Australia can get? 
PM: Thank you. Thank you for that first question.
We are, of course, a nation of migrants, and we very successfully managed a very, very sizable post-war migration program.
I am one of the products of that post-war migration program and if we took a walk down any of the streets of Sydney today, we would meet so many other Australians whose family story is about migrating here, either in recent years or the earlier generation of their family migrating in the post-Second World War period.
So we will continue in the years to come, in my view, to be a nation that welcomes migrants and particularly welcomes skilled migrants, and we continue to operate quite a sizeable immigration program. 
We have put the focus on skilled migration and I think that that is appropriate. It's appropriate for our economic needs.
And our focus too is on permanent migration; on having people come to Australia and join our nation.
We have very good rates of having people come, become permanent residents and then become citizens.
I think one of the ways in which we offer citizenship, the citizenship ceremonies we have around the country, are a special way that we mark the entry of people into being full members of the Australian nation.
So, we will continue to see immigration, it will be important to our economic growth.
It won't, of course, be the dominant part of our economic growth. We will have an economy with many sources of strength, but migration will still play a role.
In terms of estimating population numbers for the future, I'm not one that says you need to set a target.
I think what you've got to do is manage your migration program in line with your nation's needs, which means that there will always be some year-by-year adjustments.
What I've always thought was important was to have a sense of settlement patterns and one of the things that I think particularly the NBN will do and the focus we've brought to regional Australia is we will see more diffuse settlement patterns than we have in the past, where overwhelmingly migrants have come to our biggest cities and indeed for some migrant groups they've overwhelmingly settled in one part of those cities. 
QUESTION: How do you view Australia's strategic position in the trying of China, US and Australia? You have allowed US marines to be stationed in Darwin. More marines are coming to Australia.
Will that be a big part of your discussion in China, and I know China looked quite critically at that situation last year.
Will that be important in the view of the North Korean tensions as well at the moment? 
PM: The stationing of the marines in Darwin is not news, certainly not news to China, and I've attended international meetings with Chinese leaders since that announcement was made. Indeed, I've attended a number of them. 
I don't view us as being in a position where the strong relationship we have with China, the strong and growing relationship we have with China, is somehow in contest or in contrast to the relationship we have with the United States of America where we have both the bonds of history and today's friendship and our outlook for the future.
I think to put Australia in that position misunderstands our position, but I think it actually misdiagnoses the nature of the relationship between the US and China.
And one would say for very different nations with very different cultural outlooks and very different political systems, that the US and China have shown the maturity to manage their relationship and manage it well.
Inevitably there is some strategic competition but overwhelmingly this relationship between the US and China has been managed well and my view is that it will continue to be managed well in the future.
In those circumstances, for us, we will continue to do what we've done for some period of time, to tend to our friendship and alliance with the United States whilst growing our relationship with China.
On the deployment of the marines in Darwin, this is a decision that I took as part of taking a new step forward in our ongoing alliance with America. 
We made sure that we briefed our regional partners about it. Overwhelmingly it was well received in our region of the world.
People do understand that having those marines there means that we can engage in joint exercising and work on things like humanitarian relief. And all too often in our region we are called to each other's aid for humanitarian relief.
So I think the perspective on those marines is not as dramatic as sometimes the media reporting would lead you to believe.
We're talking about exercising for six months of the year in what is a good environment to exercise in, that it is a very hard environment so when you're trying to breed up very tough marines, it is a good place to go exercising, and so it suits the United States and we were happy to accommodate them. 
QUESTION: You have talked about deepening the relationship with Asia and Japan has expressed to enter the TPP and going strengthen the tie with United States and Australia and other Asian countries.
How do you relate your policy towards China and TPP negotiations as Australia hasn't given consent to Japanese entry to the negotiation? And what would be the obstacle for you?
PM: Sure, we are involved in a wide range of trade discussions and we take the view that we would have liked to have seen more progress in the Doha round in the global trade discussions. 
Our Minister for Trade, in an intrepid and determined way, continues to press for that. But of course there have been some major obstacles with pressing the Doha round to conclusion. 
We therefore pursue trade talks in a variety of multilateral and bilateral settings.
We continue to have discussions with Japan about a bilateral FTA. We continue to have discussions with China about a bilateral FTA.
We have signalled that we want to be involved in the Trans-Pacific Partnership and we are involved in those discussions.
We've welcomed the expression of interest from Japan.
We think that this has to be an ambitious, high level agreement, so we want to see every nation that expresses a wish to join meeting that aspiration of an ambitious, high level agreement.
And if Japan is entering these talks with that aspiration, then we will be very welcoming of Japan's involvement.
Of course this is something that needs to get the consent of all TPP countries in the same way that the entry of Canada and Mexico required that consent. 
QUESTION: Thank you Prime Minister. Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe recently revealed his views on national security in East Asia. He said the Japanese need to be part of the democratic security dialogue which is Australia, India, Japan, United States and Hawaii in a form of diamond shape of the security cooperation that can contain China's military expansion in the region.
So what do you think of this idea and have you discussed it with Mr Abe? 
And also there is some ongoing dispute between China and Japan, such as the territorial row over a group of small islands in the East China Sea. Are you going to discuss this particular issue with President Xi Jinping while you are in Beijing? 
PM: Thank you for the question. I have had the opportunity to speak to Prime Minister Abe by telephone and to congratulate him on his election and we did briefly, as you can in a telephone call, canvass a range of matters.
The strength of our friendship with Japan is of long standing and certainly as Prime Minister I have sought to nurture that.
And I think the fact I was the first foreign leader to visit Japan after the devastating tsunami was noted in Japan.
Certainly an amazing experience for me to see the stoicism and bravery of the Japanese people in those circumstances, and I was pleased that a visit at that time was so welcomed when of course there was so much concern about the people of Japan but also the aftermath of the nuclear incident, that by being physically present, I could show that it was possible for people to visit Japan and that I was more than happy to do so.
On security perspectives, we do not believe in a containment policy in relation to China. That is not our outlook. That is not the outlook of the United States of America.
What we want to see is a prosperous China, increasingly engaged in our region and in the world. We think that that is good for China, it's good for the region, it's good for the world.
We have a dialogue with China on security questions, military-to-military dialogue, and of course we have ongoing defence dialogues with Japan as well. And so we will continue to nurture both of those very important relationships to us. 
On tensions, the tensions that there have been around the islands  -  the tensions involving Japan and China  -  our view is that peace and security in North Asia is pivotal to all of us, it's pivotal to Australia. 
Not only do we have big economic ties to China and Japan and of course to other parts of North Asia, we've literally got tens of thousands of Australians who live in that part of the world.
So peace and security in North Asia is of pivotal importance to us. 
We don't take a view on the contending territorial claims, but we do, and in all of our dialogues, we will advocate for peaceful resolution and for the work of diplomacy to ease these tensions. 
QUESTION: I would like to ask a question on a slight change of tack on Fiji.
The Australian Government seems to have been relatively quiet on the dumping of a constitution drawn up by an independent expert in favour of one written by the Prime Minister and his Attorney-General, unelected military ruler, arguably.
What is Australia's position on this new constitution under which some people say a constitutional coup has gone on and no free and fair election could ever be held?
And is Australia's sway in that part of the world waning a little as China ups its investment right across the Pacific? 
PM: On the constitution, we understand that there were some civil society concerns about the draft of the constitution; that's a dialogue for the people of Fiji to have
Though of course, the way in which the constitution was discarded was concerning to us, but we did understand that there was civil society concerns with its contents.
For us, we continue on Fiji to have the same outlook that we've had for a long period of time, which is that we must see a return to free and fair elections, and we stand ready to assist with preparations for those elections, for the conduct of those elections.
We believe that Commodore Bainimarama needs to be held to his promises and accountabilities about having those elections, and that they need to be held on time and properly done.
So we will continue to press for that and to raise our voice in forums, including the Pacific Island Forum on those matters. 
In terms of China's engagement in the Pacific, as China's role, China's weight and power continues to rise, then of course it will have stronger and more diverse relationships around the world, including in the Pacific.
We want to see countries around the world working for aid and development in the Pacific. There is a lot to be done.
We believe that that aid and development money needs to be the subject of proper accountability and transparency, so people can see the work that is being done.
So once again we think that there are ways of working together, working together in the Pacific, to see much needed economic development, and we believe our focus has to stay on seeing a return to true democracy in Fiji. 
QUESTION: Prime Minister, thank you very much for coming. We have just realised that you are the first serving Prime Minister since Bob Hawke talking to us, so this is a truly historical moment.
Prime Minister, in your past career you had a reputation as being a compassionate lawyer with a high level of empathy and humanity. These days you govern over what some describe as one of the harshest and most inhumane asylum seeker policies in the western world.
Looking at your political, current political situation, one could say that you were at best moderately successful in appealing to the racists in the suburbs of Australia, and to those people who believe what's actually written in The Daily Telegraph.
But one could argue that you certainly, that with your policy of being even tougher than John Howard, that you certainly alienated even your staunchest supporters on the more progressive side of politics. In retrospect do you think that was a smart strategy, a smart move? 
PM: The only thing that our asylum seeker and refugee policies are about is deterring people from risking their lives by getting on boats, combatting people smuggling which is a transnational crime; trying to profit on human need and human misery, in the same way in which the international drug trade seeks to profit from human misery, in the same way in which human trafficking seeks to profit from human misery. And honouring our obligations under the Refugee Convention of which we are a proud signatory.
So these are the things that drive our policy settings: the Refugee Convention, stopping people getting on boats and risking their lives, combatting a transnational crime.
This is not an easy policy area and if one looks around the world, whether you turn your eyes towards Europe or whether you turn your eyes towards Canada or other countries, you see nation states are struggling to work out the best set of policies in asylum seeker and refugee policy area.
And I think that's because there are contending considerations. People want to be compassionate. We are a very compassionate country. We settle large numbers of refugees. Per head of population we settle them in extraordinarily large numbers.
So we can very much hold our heads up high in the world as a compassionate country. 
But we don't want to see anything in our domestic policies which would facilitate bad people making money, or cause people to believe that they will get a better future if they risk their lives on a boat. 
And for all of us in Australia, including some of our nation's most progressive elements, I think that there has been a recognition about the real dangers and real tragedies that come when people do get on boats.
So in those circumstances, we turn to the best experts for advice: to a former head of our Defence Force, to a foreign policy expert, to a refugee expert. And we said as a Government we would enact their policies in full.
And when you strip their policies right down to their underlying essence, it is that you should get no advantage for having paid a people smuggler and having got on a boat, and I think that is a compassionate underpinning.
I think it's morally right. I think it's practically right to say that you should not give people an advantage because they've got on a boat.
So that is how we're operating our policy now. I think that stands very well alongside Australian values and Labor Party values.
We've been stopped from enacting some of it by the cycle of negativity in Australian politics, but I think the report we received was good advice and the right policy way forward and that's why we're determined to keep trying to implement it all.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, I will ask a follow-up on that. Australia is getting a very good international press at the moment, but this issue around boat people gets you very negative press.
Reputational damage is being done to Australia and the national debate seems to be very ugly at times.
You hear it on talkback radio; you hear it on the streets when you go out and vox-pop people.
Do you take a measure of responsibility for that, for when you said at the Lowy Institute in 2010 that political correctness should not constrain this debate? 
PM: I think if you walked out on the streets of London and asked people what they've thought about the various waves of asylum seekers coming through into the UK; you've seen numbers of Albanians and people of other ethnicities come through into the UK.
I think if you stood and vox-popped on the streets of London, if you did it in France, if you did it in much of Europe, you would get a variety of views expressed, some of them quite harsh views about the people who are seeking asylum.
I think that is the nature of the debate is democracies about refugee and asylum seeker issues so I don't think that that is an Australian phenomenon, I just don't. 
QUESTION: [Inaudible] 
PM: Well, what leaders can do and what I have always done in this area is not focus on or seek to demonise the people who are looking for asylum, but to deal with the policy principles. And the policy principles, I think, very clear.
You should not get an advantage from having engaged in forward movement and forward movement.
It is not right or defensible that someone who can pay a people smuggler gets an advantage over a person who cannot pay a people smuggler.
Now, to get those policy settings right, in our new neighbours, whether it's Indonesia or Malaysia, there are many people with legitimate refugee claims, we have made available more places because we do think people with legitimate refugee claims should find a re-settlement opportunity in the world and Australia can step forward and offer more of those re-settlement opportunities. 
But we don't want there to be any level of encouragement for people to get on boats. 
QUESTION: Prime Minister, when you took the very unusual step of announcing the elections nearly eight months before the poll date, you promised at the time not to test Australians' patience in 2013 after a bruising 2012 and you said that the elections, this cycle "would give shape and order to the year rather than devolving into constant campaigning".
Firstly, do you feel that you and your Government have lived up to those promises? And in light of what's gone on since that announcement, do you feel it was a mistake to announce the election so early? 
PM: No I don't. I think it was important that Australians knew what the shape of this year would be.
People, when they're thinking about these issues, often don't, in my view, correctly war-game what the alternative would be. 
The alternative to us having fixed the election date, in my view, would have been fevered speculation day after day about when the election was going to be with shrill calls every second day for the election to be now.
I think I would have found it quite hard to jump in a car and go to work without people chasing me down the street to see whether or not I was going to the Governor-General's.
So, we would have seen pages and pages of newspaper coverage, hours and hours and hours of TV and radio time devoted to what ultimately is a futile pursuit which is trying to predict the election date.
We've cleared that out of the way. 
What I want to fill the space is what I've talked about today, and what I've talked about in January, which is the genuine contest of policy that the election in September should be about.
Who has got the better blueprint for this nation's future; who's got the best personal capacity to deliver that blueprint for the nation's future. That should be what the contest is about.
Now, I freely admit that some of the space that was vacated because it wasn't full of election coverage has been filled with other unproductive things.
I very frankly said that my political party put in an appalling performance in the last sitting fortnight and unfortunately that took a lot of space.
But as I've said in this speech, now we are beyond that leadership debate.
Now we are beyond the crazy nonsense people have had to listen to in the anti-carbon pricing campaign.
Now we've got the time between here and the election day to have that genuine policy dialogue.
As that time works through, I will be doing what I need to do properly as Prime Minister.
I will go to China tomorrow. I will come back from China and endeavour to wrangle premiers and chief ministers into important positions about the long-term future of education in our country at the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting.
We are preparing a Budget. We are preparing a Budget in difficult circumstances in terms of the revenue challenge, but we are doing that with our eyes firmly on the capacities our nation will need to seize the best of opportunities for the future. 
So that's how I should be using the time. That's how I will use the time.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, some of the Australian media and some of your parliamentary colleagues to me seem to be extremely or incredibly hostile to you as a person when I watch the discussions.
How much do you think of this is based on misogyny? 
PM: I don't know whether, if you can deal with that in generalisation. I'm not sure that you can.
I've been very clear as Prime Minister that when I see old-fashioned attitudes, close-minded attitudes, when I see sexism, when I see misogyny I'll be very clear about calling it out and naming it for what it is.
I think what I would say about being the first woman to do this job is a broader point, which is it's not been ever the norm in our nation before for people to wake up in the morning and look at the news and see a female leader doing this job.
For all of the years before, you would see a man in a suit. I am not a man in a suit, and I think that that has taken the nation some time to get used to.
I think it's probably still taking the nation a bit of time to get used to. I think it's the same sort of journey that many other nations around the world are on, and it speaks really to the changing nature of our times, and the forward progress for women in societies like ours.
But it's got some uncomfortable moment as long the way, there is no doubt about that, and I feel one of the things that will certainly happen, having had the first female Prime Minister is it's going to be easier for the second and then it's going to be easier again for the third, and then everybody will get over it and forget about it and no-one will even bother to comment anymore whether the images of leadership in our nation that particular year are images of female leadership or male leadership.
QUESTION; Prime Minister, my question is about the energy trade between Australia and China. Australia is regarded as a stable supplier of LNG, for example, and steaming coal.
The global supply situation is evolving, for example, the United States will possibly be an LNG supplier from 2015 into the Asian market. And in Russia, for example, the first visit by President Xi overseas was to Russia where he oversaw the signing of some strategic, what they call, breakthrough energy agreements between the Russian oil and gas companies and their Chinese counterparts.
Given that context, are you concerned about the competitive threat posed to Australian LNG exports, and is greater energy cooperation on your agenda in China? 
PM: It's a competitive world and you're right, the amount of competition in the energy sector is getting stronger and stronger and more and more acute.
So what that means is that you've got to be very good at what you do.
I am very confident that we can be very good at what we do. I think we're very good now and we are always going to have to look for the innovations that make us an even better quality supplier.
One of the things that I think in images of mining, if you ask people their images of mining, I think there would be two common misunderstandings people would make about the Australian mining situation.
Number one, people would tend to think it is a far bigger share of our economy.
People would think it's sort of 30 per cent or 40 per cent of employment. Of course it's not. 
Mining is, employment-wise, a smaller share of our economy; obviously a big share of our exports.
So we are a diversified economy, but mining is going to continue to be important to us.
The other image issue I think people would get wrong is they would get an old-fashioned image about men in hard hats and blasts and dirt and all the rest of it.
Of course, some of those images hold true today, but people would underestimate the degree of technological innovation that has revolutionised mining, that you can have someone staring at a computer screen in Perth controlling a huge piece of equipment in the north-west. 
What that means is we can always get better and better and better at what you do, and that is going to be a challenge for us in being competitive in what is going to be I think an increasingly contested and crowded marketplace.
QUESTION: [Inaudible] 
PM: Certainly, whenever I go overseas, one of the topics we talk about is energy and our status, really given the size of our country as an energy superpower. 
QUESTION: Hi, Prime Minister. As you say, the Australian dollar high, becoming a problem for Australian trade into Asia or into the globe. 
Obviously, we believe The Australian published you agreeing to Shanghai in April to sign agreement between China and Australia currency agreement and we've heard that that agreement has been postponed. Would you please confirm with me? 
PM: There was story in The Australian newspaper, that's true, speculating about what I may or may not do when I am in Shanghai.
I know I'm going to give the answer that frustrates journalists more than any other and that answer is; you are going to have to wait until I am in Shanghai. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a lot of the jobs that Labor has created have been taken up by New Zealanders, yet they still complain that they are being treated like second-class citizens here because of certain rules that were changed in 2001 which I'm sure you are across.
In your eyes, what contribution do New Zealanders make to the Australian economy? And secondly, what's stopping repealing the legislation that John Howard introduced in 2001? 
PM: Our relationship with New Zealand is one of family. It's ANZAC for a reason and that does tell you something about our relationship with New Zealand.
And as a result because of the relationship between Australia and New Zealand, New Zealanders have more access, better access to the Australian labour market, and better access to Australian benefits and supports than any other nationality.
That will continue for the future, but unfortunately the answer to your question is we've got no plans to extend it for the future.
These are issues that continue to be the subject of discussion between us and New Zealand, but I'm not in a position to say we've got any immediate plans for change.
We think the benefits that are provided do support New Zealand people in Australia.
There were some issues when former Prime Minister John Howard and former Prime Minister Helen Clark entered into that agreement.
We think many of those issues would still be relevant to considerations about repealing that agreement and repealing that legislation, so I've had this conversation many times with Prime Minister Key and I will see him again, actually he will be at the Bo'ao Forum, too, so I will have the opportunity to say hello to him there.
And I'm sure he will continue the case for change, but I'm not in a position to say that we are going to move on that area. 
JOURNALIST: Would you agree that New Zealanders contribute more to the economy than what they [inaudible]?
PM: Well certainly New Zealanders, the New Zealand contribution to the Australian economy, it's individuals who come here, who work hard who build much of their lives here and many of them do go on to become Australian citizens. Not always, many of stay as permanent residents and then take the opportunity to go back and forth a fair bit.
There's a huge contribution from New Zealanders into our economy and there's a huge benefit bestowed by Australia on New Zealanders by giving them that preferential access to our labour market and to our social security system.


Hainan Island, People's Republic of China
PM: Well I am delighted to be back here in China and over the next two days I will be here attending the Bo'ao Forum with Ministers Emerson and Carr.
I will during the course of this forum have the opportunity to meet with President Xi of China.
I will also have the opportunity to address the Forum's opening session and will be able to hear first-hand from a number of leading Chinese business players as well as a number of leading Australian business people.
From here I will travel to Shanghai where I will be joined by Minister Shorten. I will be focusing on the growing financial services linkages between Australia and China and I will also have the opportunity to meet the Shanghai Party Secretary and address one of China's elite leadership academies.
Then I will go to Beijing where the centrepiece of my program will be a meeting withPremier Li.
I will also in Beijing be able to engage with members of the Australia China CEO Roundtable, focus on our education relationship and address a business lunch.
China, of course, is absolutely pivotal to Australia's political, strategic and economic interests.
Our relationship with China is a strong one and it's a diverse one.
Our trade links are of course huge with China itself taking one third of all of our exports - it's our largest trading partner in the exchange of goods and services.
China is also the largest source of overseas students coming to study in Australia, it is the second largest source of visitors to Australia, and it is growing in its investment relationship with Australia as well.
The pace of change is truly staggering, truly remarkable, the pace of change in China but also the pace of change in the relationship between our two countries.
Since I was last here in April 2011, for example, the Chinese economy has grown by 18 per cent.
More than 13 million Chinese people have graduated from higher education institutions and around 100 million more Chinese people have plugged into the internet.
So the rate of change is truly remarkable.
My visit accompanied by the most senior political delegation to ever come fromAustralia to China is therefore a timely one.
I am here at a time of important opportunity, to put a spotlight on the relationship between our two countries very early in the term of China's new leaders and to demonstrate our commitment, Australia's commitment, to strong and constructive ties with China.
With President Xi and Premier Li, I will be focusing on how we can improve this vital relationship for Australia.
I will be particularly focusing on four aspects: how we can strengthen the strategic oversight and leadership level of the relationship.
Number two, how we can continue to grow and diversify our trade and economic links.
Put simply, that means for Australia, more jobs and better jobs.
For Australia it means more prosperity, and for China it means the complementary things that Australia can do as China's economy continues to grow.
Then thirdly, how we can further other core elements of the relationship including defence ties, people to people links and of course our very important education linkages, the things that bring particularly young people together.
And fourth and finally, how we can strengthen our cooperation to combat climate change and on carbon pricing.
During this visit, I am looking forward to practical steps in these four areas and I'm also looking forward to helping build and develop the comprehensive relationship that is envisaged between Australia and China in the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper.
What that means is a relationship that extends well beyond the economic and a relationship in which Australia and China work together, not just bilaterally, but where we have common interests regionally and globally.
So I will during the course of this visit be discussing a number of questions associated with regional security and stability including, of course, the issue of North Korea.
Australia has made very clear its condemnation of the belligerent and provocative statements we have heard from North Korea.
We have welcomed the fact that China has supported strong sanctions at the UN Security Council.
I will be urging the Chinese leadership to use its influence to help with this issue with North Korea and, most particularly, to help see an end to these provocative statements, to get North Korea to engage again with the Six Party Talks, and to get North Korea to accept the offer of the President of South Korea for trust building dialogue.
Before I came away last night, I did have the opportunity to speak to the President ofSouth Korea, to President Park, and to ensure her of the solidarity of Australia with South Korea at this time.
As I pursue these discussions on regional security issues, they will not only encompass security issues but broader issues in the region -we collaborate together in APEC, we collaborate together in the East Asia Summit, we work together globally through the G20 so there is much to do and much to talk about on this visit.
I am very much looking forward to it and I am looking forward to taking a few questions
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on North Korea, there have been some concerns expressed in Seoul that there is the possibility of over reaction on the American side as well. Is that a danger that both sides could jump at shadows here. How serious is that risk?
PM: I think the United States is showing restraint and a calm approach here, a very calm and purposeful approach.
I think South Korea is showing remarkable restraint and I made that point to President Park when I spoke to her.
But of course amongst the many risks, and this shouldn't be taken in the context of your question, this is a more general remark  -  but one of the many risks here when we see this kind of provocative and belligerent set of statements from North Korea is the risk of miscalculation.
I have been to the zone between North Korea and South Korea. It is one of the most heavily militarised places in the world so there is always the risk of miscalculation when tensions are inflamed, which is why it is very important that we all do everything we can to get North Korea to step back from these provocative and belligerent statements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what further steps can China take to deal with this situation, to ease the tension there and will Australia be backing any further moves in the UN Security Council?
PM: The UN Security Council has already dealt with a sanctions package, and we very much welcome China's support for that package of sanctions.
Of course Australia will put in to affect all of those sanctions, as is China, and we have our own autonomous sanctions as well against North Korea.
The aim here I think for everyone including China with its degree of influence over North Korea, is to put pressure on North Korea to cease the conduct that we have seen in recent days.
JOURNALIST: And you will be raising that directly in your formal meetings with the President and the Premier?
PM: Yes I will.
JOURNALIST: On defence matters, what will you be bringing in the form of suggestions to the Chinese about the ways in which we can find ways to engage with them more directly?
PM: We already have an ongoing engagement on defence matters  -  it's actually one of the unremarked features of the relationship generally  -  that at a high level we have had military-to-military dialogue over 16 years, one of only two nations in the world to do so, with the PLA.
So there has been a long pattern of discussion and dialogue between senior military leaders in China and in Australia but we are always prepared to keep working with the PLA for other measures that build cooperation and confidence between the two.
We think, for example, exchanges into academies and the like, training  -  showing what our training system is like, having a look at how training happens here. Those sorts of things are good measures.
JOURNALIST: Could it go as far as joint exercises or those sorts of engagements?
PM: Potentially over time and one of the things that is much talked about in the region is our ability to work together in the context of humanitarian assistance and disaster response and relief.
In the region in which we live, all too often we are urgently making calls to each other to see who can help out following things like the tsunami in Japan, the earthquake in New Zealand, even our own seasons of fire and floods others have made offers and come to our assistance.
And so the more you can get people working together on things like disaster relief and assistance, the better.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be raising the issue of human rights, Chin's human rights record, and does the new leadership team give you an opportunity to press further than you have been able to in the past on that issue?
PM: Well I will raise human rights and I have raised human rights in the past.
We have an ongoing human rights dialogue with China.
We are very admiring of the efforts that China has made to lift literally hundreds of millions of people out of poverty and to give them better lives as a result.
But we have concerns about human rights and we are clear in saying so and in pursuing a human rights dialogue.
JOURNALIST: But the new leadership team  -  does that give you an opportunity to press that further, given they are-
PM: This, for us, is a continuing work and we will take the same approach that we have which is we raise our concerns.
We raise those concerns both at the level of meetings that I engage in, but we have a standing human rights dialogue as well.
JOURNALIST: When you say you raise your concerns, what does that specifically mean? When you raise a concern  -  give us the language you might use.
PM: Well, I have met with Chinese leaders in the past and of course we point to concerns we have about human rights, if there are contemporary issues that have come to public attention, then we raise those concerns.
I think Australia's concern about human rights is a well-known feature of our foreign policy suite, what we do internationally  -  and so there isn't a standard set of words, but there is a standard set of values that Australians bring to the table in our engagement with China and around the world.
JOURNALIST: But is there any particular issue this time though, in terms of human rights that you might specifically bring up?
PM: I think there has been some concern by us and we have raised concerns about issues in relation to Tibet and human rights matters there.
JOURNALIST: What about the five Australians who have been jailed in China over business related disputes? Is that something you would bring up?
PM: I do raise consular concerns; I have done so in the past.
Given the various spheres of responsibility, the appropriate meeting to do that in is the meeting with Premier Li.
JOURNALIST: Whilst you were in the air, Bill Shorten and the Treasurer announced some changes to superannuation.
This has been bubbling away with speculation for a number of weeks. The political pain that your Government and you have suffered personally  -  why wasn't this unveiled earlier and why didn't you wait until budget time?
PM: Well, as I've said consistently when answering questions about superannuation over a number of days now  -  I've said first and foremost that superannuation is a Labor creation.
It would not be available to working Australians if it was not for the work of earlier Labor Governments.
We are the political party of superannuation. It is safe in our hands.
When we look at superannuation, what drives us is getting a decent retirement for working people and questions of sustainability.
They are the answers I've given to the many questions I've been asked about superannuation, and what you can see from today's package is exactly as I have said over the last little period when people have been asking me about this.
Superannuation is well and truly safe in Labor's hands.
We will always put first and foremost getting working people a decent retirement, and we will work for the sustainability of the system, and that's what the package today was about.
JOURNALIST: Just back on North Korea, Prime Minister, having spoken to President Park last night, what sense do you have now of the motivation of North Korea and its leader in taking these steps at this time in this manner, why they are doing this?
PM: I am not in a position to say that I've got a new insight from my discussion with President Park.
My purpose of that discussion was to express solidarity with the people of South Korea, to indicate that Australians were thinking of them at this time, to indicate that we would continue to press and use our voice to see North Korea stop the conduct we've seen in recent days, accept her offer of trust building discussions and we have maintained a consistent call to re-enliven the Six Party Talks.
But to do that requires North Korea to take a different stance and a different outlook than it has demonstrated in recent days.
I am not going to theorise on the motivations of the leader in North Korea, but I will say this about the outcome, this is a regime that cannot feed and properly care for its people that engages in some of the worst human rights abuses that we see around the world.
It is not in the interests of North Korea's people for this kind of belligerence to be demonstrated by the leadership of North Korea.
It would be in the interest of the people of North Korea to see more stability, and certainly over time, better lives.
Thanks very much.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
I am pleased to announce that I will be recommending to the Governor-General, Her Excellency Ms Quentin Bryce AC CVO, that she appoint Mr Simon Lewis PSM as the Secretary to the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
Mr Lewis' appointment will follow the retirement in July of the present Secretary, Mr Ian Campbell PSM. 
Mr Campbell had previously advised that he would not be seeking further appointment after his current term as Secretary expired in September this year. 
Mr Campbell will now be taking a period of leave from early May 2013 for surgery and subsequent recovery and has decided to retire as Secretary from July so as to avoid any disruption in the leadership of the Department.   
Mr Lewis will act as Secretary while Mr Campbell is on leave for medical reasons. 
Mr Lewis is currently an Associate Secretary and Chief Operating Officer in the Department of Defence. Prior to joining Defence, Mr Lewis had an extensive and lengthy public service career in the Department of Finance and Deregulation where he was responsible for asset management (including Comcover), government advertising and procurement policy. 
Mr Lewis has tertiary qualifications in economics, public administration and computing studies and is a graduate of the Joint Services Staff College.   
The Governor-General will consider the recommended appointment under amendments to the Public Service Act 1999 which commence on 1 July 2013. The appointment would be for five years.
I take this opportunity to acknowledge the outstanding service provided by Mr Campbell over his career in the Australian Public Service and wish him well in his retirement. 


Hainan Island, People's Republic of China
PM: It is good to be here in the home of the Bo'ao Forum, and to have started my program today.
I am joined here by Minister Emerson, and during the course of the morning I have also been accompanied by the Foreign Minister, by Senator Carr.
We commenced the day by meeting with Secretary-General Zhou, Secretary-General of this forum.
We thanked him for the excellent arrangements and we reflected on former Prime Minster Bob Hawke's pivotal role in establishing this forum.
I then had the opportunity with Minister Emerson and with Minister Carr to meet with Christine Lagarde, the Head of the IMF.
We had a good discussion about circumstances in the global economy, particularly the continuing recession in Europe and the work that she and the IMF had to do in relation to the crisis in Cyprus.
We reflected on that work and what more needs to be done in Europe, but we also noted other signs in the global economy, particularly some signs of strengthening in the US economy, and the fact that the IMF has lifted its outlook for China, and has a very positive outlook for growth in the Asian economies.
This means of course that as we have spoken in Australia about the economic opportunities of the age in which we live, the IMF is verifying that we live in the growing region of the world with economic opportunities which mean prosperity for Australians.
Put simply, the economic opportunities of the region in which we live mean Australian jobs. 
During the course of today I will have the opportunity to meet with Mr Forrest, ‘Twiggy' Forrest, and to meet with the business leaders that he has brought together as part of his initiative to encourage high level exchanges between Australia and China. 
Mr Forrest is working to deepen understanding between the business communities of our two nations, and I, Dr Emerson and Senator Carr will have the opportunity to participate in some of those discussions.
I will during the cause of the day meet again with my counterpart Prime Minister Key of New Zealand.
We meet frequently as is appropriate in a relationship of such closeness as our relationship with New Zealand.
And I will then have the opportunity later today to meet the new President of Mexico, Peña Nieto, newly elected President of Mexico.
I have obviously in the past dealt with his predecessor former President Calderon and this will be my first opportunity to meet the new President.
Dr Emerson and I, apart from participating in this busy program, are also today announcing the opening of the guidelines for our AsiaBound program.
People may recall that when we announced the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper, we put a particular focus on ensuring that Australians got the opportunity to study with Asia.
To do an internship or a section of their course in Asia to form all of the links that come with people studying abroad, the friendships, the understanding of the other nation, to in that sense become an ongoing ambassador for Australia for the growth and change that we are living through in this Asian century.
This AsiaBound program is a $37 million new program, announced at the time of the white paper, and it is to support 3,500 extra Australian students to study in Asia.
We are today announcing that the guidelines are there for universities to start selecting the students who will participate in this special program.
Of course, as a nation we continue to support people from Asia coming to study in Australia.
It is one of the best ways of strengthening contact between nations of our region and Australia.
There is much said about the former Colombo Plan, which in its age was an important initiative to build bridges between the people of Asia and Australia.
But what we do today dwarfs in size and scale the work that was done under the Colombo Plan.
Under the Colombo Plan 20,000 people had the opportunity to study in Australia over 35 years.
Under the program we operate today 20,000 people from around the world will have the opportunity to study in Australia in five years and 12,000 of those will be from our region in the world. 
Why do we do all of this? Well there is nothing more important to the ongoing friendships between countries than the people to people links, the depth of understanding and there is no better way to do that than to see an exchange for portions of people's study.
MINISTER EMERSON: Thanks Julia. The best investment governments can make is in the talents of their young people.
That's what the Gillard government is doing, investing in the talents of our young people, as set out in the white paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
We want to ensure more Australian students study in Asia and more students from the region study in Australia, thereby creating not just two ambassadors, an ambassador of China to Australia and an ambassador of Australia to China, but literally thousands of ambassadors because almost universally the experience is a great one and these young people then go back to their home countries and become ambassadors to the other country.
We're very proud to announce that from today applications are open, the guidelines have been issued from 1 July, under this new AsiaBound program, young people will be able to travel under the program from Australia to Asia, to do short courses, to do semester courses, even two semester courses and therefore share in the cultural experience that is available here in China and other parts of the region and similarly through our Australia Awards Asian century scholarships we will have over the next five years, 12,000 people from the Asian region studying in Australia under those scholarships.
The assistance depends on the nature of the course but we will ensure that there are those financial incentives for people to study here in the region.
In addition, in addition to that through AusHelp we will be offering AusHelp assistance of 7,500 dollars for students who want to study here in China and other parts of the region.
That's not of itself part of the AsiaBound program but it is very much linked to it.
These are the sorts of initiatives that we foreshadowed in the white paper on Australia in the Asian Century that we are delivering as we said we would.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, Andrew Forrest said today that Australia needs to lift its game in terms of its relationship with China; we've taken the relationship for granted. Do you agree?
PM: We work every day to strengthen our relationship with China. That's what we've done as a Government, and that's what I'm here doing, attending not only this Forum, but taking the opportunity which we have created for me to be here so soon after the election of the new leadership of China and to be in a position to meet that new leadership.
JOURNALIST: On North Korea, some of the European countries have received direct communication saying leave Pyongyang. Has Australia received any communications from the North Korean regime and what's your latest sort of briefing on the situation?
PM: My understanding is that North Korea has conveyed to people who have embassies in North Korea that they should consider evacuation.
We do not have an embassy in North Korea so that is the subject of media reporting, that this message is being conveyed by North Korea to people who have embassies there.
I would see that as another statement, which is about trying to exacerbate tensions in the region.
JOURNALIST: Do you feel any more optimistic or less optimistic today than yesterday about the situation there?
PM: I think the situation is unchanged. What we have seen is a continuing set of provocative statements from North Korea designed to cause tension, cause concern in the region.
That is what North Korea has been about, that is what North Korea has been doing.
This conduct is unacceptable, and we condemn it and condemn it absolutely.
It has been enlivened discussions at the Security Council leading to sanctions as is appropriate and as I indicated yesterday, we support those sanctions. We have autonomous sanctions as well.
We welcome the fact that nations including China supported those sanctions and it's now for each of us to use whatever pressure we can on North Korea to cut out this conduct, to see North Korea return to the Six Party Talks in a meaningful way and also to take the opportunity that the President of South Korea has outlined for trust building dialogue.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're here at a business forum to try and promote greater links between Australia and China in the business world, but the reality on the ground here is that there's at least three Australian business people who have been jailed in China for offences that most people believe are fairly spurious.
Isn't it time that, or do you believe it's time that the issue around safety and security and also the protection of property rights for Australians doing business in China is elevated beyond a consular matter, and is that something you'll raise as more than a consular matter?
PM: Well I will say a few things and then I'll go to Dr Emerson. There are huge opportunities for Australian businesses here in China and that fact that you're seeing such high-level attendance from the Australian business community here at this forum, and I will have the opportunity when I am in Beijing to see yet again leading Australian business identities there, speaks to the nature of the opportunity.
But there are also risks. This is a complex environment for people to work in and we believe that it is very necessary for people to understand that degree of complexity.
And if I can go to Dr Emerson now he will be able to speak about that.
MINISTER EMERSON: Your question pre-empts an announcement that I was going to make a little bit later in the week and that is that the Australian Government will be releasing a program for potential investors and traders for doing business in China.
And it is designed to alert people to the processes that they need to follow in terms of doing investment in China, potential risks of doing that, of course the rewards speak for themselves, and ways of mitigating that risk.
So we are aware of the issues that you raised but importantly we're responding to those issues.
JOURNALIST: But it's more than process, it's about whether or not the Government sees it as a sufficiently important issue to elevate it beyond a consular matter.
MINISTER EMERSON: Well we are elevating it in the sense that we have developed with a lot of thought and care and experience a program that we will make available to anyone who's considering trading with and investing in China so that not only the undoubted rewards are explained to people but also the risks.
In every country there are risks in doing business and what we're doing is simply explaining to the people who are interested in investing in China ways of mitigating those risks.
JOURNALIST: Are you saying the risks in China are greater than other places in the region?
MINISTER EMERSON: No, I'm not saying that at all. I'm saying a most obvious point that in any country there are risks in doing business.
That's why people seek returns to compensate for those risks. It's just a natural matter of reality that whatever the country; there are risks of doing business.
JOURNALIST: So you're not talking about the rule of law in China? There's lots of people in China that are concerned that the progress towards the rule of law has not happened in the last few years and if anything it might be going backwards.
MINISTER EMERSON: I think the way to answer that question is to reflect on the increase in Australian presence in China.
That Australians are increasingly interested in investing in China.
If you look at the relationship going back to 1990 it was close to zero. Now we have an incredible diversity of businesses that are seeking to do business in and with China.
Back then, when that all started, it was fundamentally based on resources and energy.
That's still a very large component but through the White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century, we are promoting the diversification of that relationship all through the service industries where we do have very great strengths, in manufacturing including in food processing to produce premium agricultural products and process them in Australia and in a whole diversity of business opportunities here in China, as set out in the white paper.
As I've indicated in any environment, in any environment, there are risks of doing business but we can play a role in mitigating those risks.
JOURNALIST: On a domestic issue, Tony Abbott said that with the assorted changes to the super tax arrangements yesterday he thought of what was happening in Cyprus. Can I get your response to that?
PM: Well this just shows how Mr Abbott is unfit on economic matters.
This is a crazy statement that no person of reason could make.
Anybody who is a person of reason, anybody who understands the circumstances in the global economy, anybody who cares about Australian jobs and our economic future could not make such a ridiculous statement.
These are dangerous words to play with.
We all know from the circumstances in Cyprus, I've obviously had the opportunity to speak to Ms Lagarde about it today, but even before coming here and speaking to Ms Lagarde it was clear to anybody who could read the media either domestic or international that the circumstances in Cyprus were very dangerous ones, for the banking system and for the people of Cyprus.
I get to mix with a number of Australians who are actually of Cypriut heritage and they were very worried about the circumstances for their families and what it meant for them and their lives and their future.
A genuine moment of economic crisis, and to toy with that as if it is a political slogan is a grossly unacceptable thing to do.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a feeling from the conference today particularly from Twiggy Forrest that Australia isn't doing enough to really support its relationship with China, so in that frame, is the Asian Century White Paper, is that a catch up, or is the Asian Century White Paper putting us right where we should be?
PM: The Asian Century White Paper is setting us up for the future.
As a Government, step by step we have worked on the relationship with China, step by step every day tended to the relationship with China.
We delivered the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper because we wanted the whole region and the whole of the Australian people to understand the nature of the opportunity and some of the risks that would confront our country in this century.
Now it's only this Government that has a plan for Australia in this century of growth and change.
It's only this Government that has a plan for comprehensive engagement across the region as a result, including with China.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on foreign investment, what messages if any have you been told by Chinese business people about their views of Australia's foreign investment system. Are you open to any changes, do you think it needs any changes?
PM: Well the section of the day in which I'll get to deal most directly with business people will be later in the day.
But from time to time I have had discussions about, with the Chinese business leaders, about foreign investment in Australia and what I say to them is, over the last ten years there has not been one investment proposal that has been knocked back, not one.
We have a Foreign Investment Review Board system which is appropriate, and we will continue to operate that system.
But what is its track record? Well its track record is over ten years not one proposal for investment by China has been declined, and we've seen I think the statistic, I think 380 given the tick.
Now this is in the interest of the Australian nation to see this capital investing in things like industries for the future including food processing that the Minister for Trade has just talked about.
It's in our interests to see that kind of investment. And that's the way in which we view investment decisions.
As for the future I might actually turn here to Minister Emerson for some remarks because he is the Minister directly involved in negotiating further trade arrangements including the free trade agreement.
MINISTER EMERSON: Thank you Prime Minister. As the Prime Minister indicated, more than 380 applications have been lodged and all of them have been accepted; six with conditions, six out of 380.
By any standard that is a country that welcomes foreign investment.
Yes we do have a Foreign Investment Review Board process; that helps give assurance to the community that that foreign investment is in the national interest.
The worst thing that can possibly happen is to meddle with that Foreign Investment Review Board process by dropping the threshold, the screening threshold, from $244 million for private companies, to $15 million, as advocated by the Leader of the Opposition and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the Nationals in the Senate, Senator Barnaby Joyce.
If you want to send a signal to China that foreign investment in China is not welcome in Australia, just look to the play book of Tony Abbott and Barnaby Joyce, because Mr Abbott came to China, actually came to China, and announced in a speech, that particular types of Chinese investment in Australia would rarely be approved.
This is sending a very negative signal.
In contrast, the Labor Government welcomes foreign investment that is in the national interest.
We will keep working with the Chinese authorities, including the China Investment Corporation, the chairman of which I met recently and he indicated that they're looking at a new vista of opportunities beyond minerals and energy and he met too with the head of the Foreign Investment Review Board.
So we don't sit back on these things. We are proactive because we know that we are a savings deficit country, that we do need foreign investment; that has been our history since European settlement.
We are committing to that for the future.
The Coalition would jeopardise it.
Furthermore, the Coalition would jeopardise a free trade agreement between Australia and China for this very reason, that China wants at the very least the maintenance of those screening thresholds.
They'd like to see change in terms of those for the better from their point of view.
But what they are seeing from the Coalition is a decision that that threshold would be dropped, would be dropped.
That is the death of a free trade agreement between Australia and China.
That's Coalition policy.
JOURNALIST: But you haven't had any progress on the FTA so-
MINISTER EMERSON: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: The FTA doesn't appear to be progressing under your Government either.
PM: I think the point the Minister is making is we continue to have discussions to advance the free trade agreement.
We continue in those discussions to bring a sophisticated understanding to Australia's economy and to its future, as opposed to the sort of simple talk, the kind of economic simpleton talk that we've seen from the other side of politics, which would make a free trade agreement with China and all of the jobs that would flow from it for Australians impossible.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister about this program...
PM: AsiaBound?
JOURNALIST: No, sorry, doing business in China
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: What exactly is it? Is it pamphlet, is it a course, is it a-
MINISTER EMERSON: It is a course. It's an online service; I'll get you all of the details later so that you can fill it out.
But it basically is being made available to any business that has an interest in doing business in China to point out that there are processes that need to be followed and to give recommendations on ways of mitigating risk of doing business in China as we would in other countries.
JOURNALIST: Do you have this service for any other country?
MINISTER EMERSON: This is particularly out of the white paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
We do provide this sort of service through our embassies whether it's in other countries in the region or more broadly.
But we thought that this is an initiative that is timely in respect to China.
Why? Because we do want to promote further Australian business engagement with the region.
Why do we do that? Because we want to create a splendid diversity of career opportunities for young people, more jobs, better jobs for young people and we see China as integral to that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about the pivot? You've mentioned that [inaudible] is pivotal to Bo'ao, and China is pivotal to Australia. And there are Chinese Generals who believe that Australia is the fulcrum to the American military pivot...
PM: Okay, I want to hear two more layers on this before I answer this question! No I am teasing you.
JOURNALIST: My sense is that when you say that Australia is not part of any military containment or military pivot to China nobody believes you in the PLA. What do you say?
PM: In answer that question Australia's outlook on peace and security in our region is of long standing, it is well known to our interlocutors in China, it is well known across the region.
You have seen it canvassed by this Government, it forms a backdrop to the White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century and we will deliver a new defence white paper relatively soon as promised. 
We welcomed the rebalance of the United States of America to our region. 
The United States has been a force for peace and stability and security in our region of the world and we believe that will continue.
We believe that looking at our region of the world that we can continue to see peace and security; that we can work with China and with other countries in the region on that long term peace and security.
That's why we pursue compressive discussions about our relationship at every level including me being here in China to meet the incoming leadership of China.
As I indicated yesterday we do, amongst a wide range of ways of broadening and deepening the relationship, continue to have a defence dialogue, which is of long standing, basically been there for a decade and a half.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Peter Costello is at this forum, he's  -  it probably won't surprise you  -  had a swipe at superannuation changes saying it'll raise barely any revenues and should have been left alone. Do you welcome his comments?
PM: The Acting Prime Minister and the Minster for Superannuation have dealt with all this in Australia today so I won't add.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you have any consultations or briefings with the US since the North Korean crisis has emerged?
PM: Clearly we get the opportunity, I haven't personally spoken to anybody from the US, but in terms of forming a view about what's going on and strategic outlook on these questions the dialogue is there as a standing part of what we do and what our officials do.
JOURNALIST: What do make of reports of Fidel Castrol that has weighed in and urged everyone to show restraint?
PM: I won't be commenting on that, our attitude is as I've outlined it yesterday and today.
Thanks very much. 


Hainan Island, People's Republic of China
Australian tertiary students will get the opportunity to study in Asia as part of the new AsiaBound program, which opens today to higher education and vocational education and training (VET) institutions.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Tertiary Education Minister Craig Emerson said AsiaBound was part of the Gillard Government's implementation of initiatives flowing from the White Paper on Australian in the Asian Century, released in October last year.
This innovative program reflects the Gillard Government's commitment to deeper regional engagement, as set out in the Paper.
Tertiary education providers are invited from Monday to apply for grants under the first round of the $37 million program, to be awarded to Australian students for study in Asia as early as the second semester this year.
Grants available include $5,000 for semester study, $2,000 for short-term study and $1,000 for language training.
Approximately 3,600 students each year will be able to study in Asia as part of their academic program. This includes 600 VET students.
China, the most popular Asian destination for Australians studying abroad in 2012, is likely to account for almost 1,000 of these.
The extraordinary growth of Asian economies translates into a wealth of career opportunities for young people keen to engage with the region.Many Australian universities and training providers already have strong regional connections. AsiaBound would help take this to a new level.AsiaBound is one way students can get a head start while experiencing what life is like in an Asian country.
AsiaBound supports practicums, clinical placements, internships, research trips and volunteer projects, as well as institution-based study for up to two semesters.
From 2014 eligible students will also have access to up to $7,500 through OS-HELP to put towards the costs of their studies in Asia.
The Gillard Government also today announced the opening of the 2014 Round of the Australia Awards Endeavour Scholarships and Fellowships program, the Government's competitive, merit-based international scholarship program.
The scholarships and fellowships provide opportunities for citizens of eligible countries, including China, to undertake study, research and professional development in Australia and for Australians to do the same overseas.
Since 2007, 175 citizens of the People's Republic of China have been awarded an Endeavour Scholarship or Fellowship, and 156 Australians have pursued study, research and professional development opportunities in China under the program.
In 2014, around 50 scholars are again expected to travel to or from China under the program, another step toward the 12,000 Asian Century Australia Awards expected over the next five years
Guidelines for both programs can be found at:
www.aei.gov.au/asiabound 
www.innovation.gov.au/InternationalEducation/EndeavourAwards/Pages/defa… 



The evolution of this Bo'ao Forum for Asia is a striking symbol of the evolution of our region itself: both of the successes and challenges which have endured and of the new challenges and opportunities which have emerged.
Here two great enduring responsibilities are discussed: continuing Asia's economic growth while achieving human development  -  and maintaining Asia's peaceful regional order while growth changes the strategic balance.
Growth in the region must continue and must strengthen.
The national economies of the region vary widely today, both in their overall degrees of development and in their immediate economic circumstances and prospects for growth. 
This Forum reflects just this variety: from developed, knowledge-based economies needing to restart long-term growth  -  to emerging economies managing the challenges of urbanisation  -  and incorporating the firms and international organisations which operate across the whole of Asia.
Through all these varying national contexts, the enduring challenge of economic growth merits an enduring response.
Unlocking the power of well-designed markets to create wealth  -  while harnessing the power of investment in the skills and knowledge of people to spread the benefits to all.
Well-designed markets and well-targeted investment in human capital remain the key to Asia's economic success.We must also understand that continued and strengthened economic growth will keep changing the strategic order of our region.
Militaries are modernizing.  Economic growth will put more pressure on energy, water and food resources. 
This does not make major power conflict inevitable  -  all countries in the region share a deep interest in strategic stability  -  but the consequences of conflict are ever more severe for us all.
This is nowhere more clear than on the Korean Peninsula.
There, any aggression is a threat to the interests of every country in the region.
For this reason, I do welcome the growing co-operation of all regional Governments to prevent conflict on the Korean Peninsula and to counter North Korean aggression.
That co-operation is also a sign of what will be needed in future as we face other security challenges.
Asia must be a region of sustainable security in which habits of co-operation are the norm.Peace and prosperity are challenges which endure  -  but since this Forum's inception, new challenges have emerged.
While the climate change debate was a live one in Asia fifteen years ago, then it was a debate about the region's future. 
Today, it is a debate about the region's present.
We are living through the effects of carbon pollution and climate change now and we are moving to clean energy sources now.
Today, Australia has a comprehensive approach including record investment in renewable energy and energy efficiency, a price on carbon and emissions trading from 1 July 2015.
Australia has deliberately pursued a market-based response to this pressing environmental challenge.  Many Asian nations are doing the same.
More than one third of the world's clean energy investment in 2012 was in Asia.
Last year Japan introduced its carbon tax. 
South Korea's national emissions trading scheme begins in 2015.
Over the three years to 2015, pilot emissions trading schemes will commence in seven Chinese cities and provinces covering 255 million people.
Beijing's emissions trading scheme, which will cover a population of twenty million people, will launch shortly.
That will be a great day for Asia's clean energy future.
So will the commencement of China's national scheme following 2015.
The climate is already changing.  Asia is already acting.
All this will be important to your discussions this weekend.
This Forum reflects change in the region  -  as it reflects the enduring significance of growth and security as matters for us all.
I want to conclude by observing that for Australians, Bo'ao is also a particularly significant symbol of the role we seek to play in the region.
The statesmen of 1998 who presented the idea of this Forum to the Chinese Government were of course, President Ramos and Prime Minister Hosokawa  -  and my friend and predecessor Prime Minister Hawke.
In this, our former Prime Minister took precisely the kind of role Australia seeks to play  -  co-operative and supportive, but more  -  accepting our share in the responsibility of collective leadership which falls to all regional leaders and nations.
This was Australia's approach to our engagement in the region as long ago as 1973: when my predecessor Gough Whitlam became the first Australian Prime Minister to visit China.
This was Australia's role in the origin of this Bo'ao Forum. 
This was Australia's role in the founding of APEC and the expansion of the East Asia Summit.
This is Australia's role this week, when I lead the most senior Australian political delegation ever to visit China.
Bo'ao is a vital forum for Asian conversations  -  and we have more to talk about than ever before.
I look forward to the insights which emerge from your discussions. 


Hainan Island, People's Republic of China
PM: I'm pleased to be here with Senator Carr and with Dr Emerson. We have just concluded a meeting with China's new President, with President Xi.
It was a very positive discussion, a substantive discussion, and it has left me with a real sense of confidence, not just about the state of the relationship now, but about how optimistic we can be for the future of the relationship.
It was a discussion which underlined really the value and importance of meeting the President so early in his term and being able to talk to him about the relationship between our two countries.
I made it clear to the President that I am committed and Australia is committed to building a stronger and more comprehensive relationship with China.
He said that he did want to see our relationship taken to a new level.
Now, we want to see our relationship strengthen, to be taken to a new level, not just because of the importance of China to Australia bilaterally, but because of the role that China has to play in the stability and prosperity of our neighbourhood, and in addressing the critical global challenges we face today including climate change.
I spoke to the President about the need for stronger and more structured high level dialogue mechanisms in our relationship to provide strategic direction to our bilateral ties which are obviously growing in scale and complexity, and I will continue that discussion with Premier Li when I reach Beijing, and I look forward to that discussion.
We talked about the economic relationship of course, and I assured the President that Australia would remain a reliable partner in supplying the mineral resources and energy that China needs and which is helping its economy grow.
And I also said that Australian welcomed investment from China.
I said that a comprehensive Free Trade Agreement would support the further diversification and growth of our economic relationship.
I took the opportunity to brief the President about our White Paper on Australian in the Asian Century and its policy framework for expanding and diversifying the links between our countries and the countries of the region, of Asia, not just economic links but also education links, science, cultural and arts links.
We discussed our cooperation on the global stage, particularly in the G20, the UN Security Council where of course we work with China.
We spoke about regional security and we spoke about the current concerns arising from the conduct of North Korea.
The President indicated that he shared those concerns about current tensions on the Korean peninsula; that the priority here is to prevent further escalation, and China is urging calm and restraint.
We talked very broadly about our cooperation in the region. I did also take the opportunity to note that the President is very familiar with Australia; he has visited every Australian state, other than Tasmania. I hope we have the opportunity to rectify that in the future.
I did invite the President to come back to Australia and we would make sure if he is able to visit, that there was a very broad program.
Happy to take any questions.JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you tell us about any discussion on military or security cooperation and could you explain to us the importance of it?
PM: We didn't in this discussion talk in, what was a broad ranging discussion over around 45 minutes, but we didn't in this discussion focus on military-to-military links.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you have talked about how positive and how confident you are after this meeting. What benchmarks should we be looking for  -  specific benchmarks in the future  -  to know that the relationship is still on track and it is growing in the way you hoped?
PM: Well I think you can take it from the nature of the discussions today that there is a great deal of confidence about the state of the relationship now, and optimism for the future.
When words are being used about taking the relationship to a new level, I think that that is indicating a spirit of optimism about how we can grow this relationship.
And I'm not surprised when you think about our role in this region, China's role in this region, the complementary nature of our two economies, the ever increasing ties we've got more broadly than economic ties, I think that there is every reason to be very optimistic about the way in which we can build for the future and certainly that was the sense of the meeting.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you just explain a little bit more about the sort of standing architecture that you were talking about, that you say you were going to talk also with the Premier when you have that meeting. Is that on track? Is that likely to be something that comes from your visit now? That there will be this annual talks or annual process that formalises the relationship?
And just on North Korea quickly, was there any sense that you got at all, that China's position or relationship with North Korea is changed by the events that are occurring at the moment?
PM: To take the second part of the question first, I have had the opportunity, indeed we have all had the opportunity whilst we've been here, to talk to a number of people about North Korea.
And I'm very clear on China's position about North Korea which is that they don't want to see conflict on the Korean peninsula; that they well and truly understand and feel very deeply that that would be an outcome that assisted no one.
And in the discussion with the President today, as I indicated, he said that China is urging calm and restraint and he made reference to the Six Party Talks as a way of trying to work through issues on the Korean peninsula and that his aspiration would be to see a denuclearisation of the Korean peninsula.
On the first part of your question, we are continuing discussions about high level political oversight and management of the strategic direction of our relationship.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said that you were going to raise Tibet, did that come up?
PM: I did raise human rights, with a reference to Tibet.      
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you tell us what you said about that though, just in what context, on what he said?
PM: Well these discussions are best had in private but as I indicated we do raise human rights concerns and I did raise human rights today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you hope to conclude an agreement on the strategic dialogue during this visit, or perhaps in the days after when your ministers [inaudible]?
PM: As the Minister for Foreign Affairs indicated on television this morning, we have been working on these issues and discussing these issues for some time. It's early in the life of the new leadership of China. We are pursuing the discussions including here in China.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you discuss the progress of the Free Trade Agreement talks with China, and what if any undertakings did the President give about bringing that to some kind of conclusion after eight years?
PM: Both of us indicated that we would like to see a conclusion to the Free Trade Agreement, and we are about to see Dr Emerson working through another round of talks on the Free Trade Agreement.
We are aspiring here for a comprehensive, high quality agreement. We have complementary economies, but we both have complex economies with many industries and many interests, so it's not surprising that there are sensitivities on both sides that need to continue to be worked through.
But certainly at this level in this very comprehensive discussion we did refer to the desire by both Australia and China to conclude the free trade agreement.
JOURNALIST: Did President Xi bring anything to the table on climate change and carbon abatement schemes? Did he give any indications to you of further engagement he's got, any further policies he's got in that area?
PM: We didn't have a discussion of climate change in that level of detail, no.
As you would know from Minister Combet and from remarks that I've made publicly we obviously have been involved in not only watching what is happening here in China as they move in a number of provinces, and indeed in Beijing itself, to emissions trading schemes. But there have also been exchanges at a policy level about the way in which carbon pricing can work.
JOURNALIST: One of the problems that's been cited by the business community has been the artificially low level of the Chinese currency. Did that come up at all today and did the President give any indications about floating or freeing it up at all?
PM: No we did not talk about currency arrangements today.
JOURNALIST: Did the President bring anything to the table and ask Australia and you of anything in particular in a broader sense at all?
PM: Well we worked through the issues that I've indicated to you so we've talked about the nature of the relationship and our aspirations for the future, whereas I indicated the President used the terminology ‘taking the relationship to a new level'.
We talked about the nature of the economic links between our two countries, the complementary nature of our economies, how we can continue to grow and diversify trade and investment, and that's where the free trade agreement most certainly fits in.
We talked about the other links between our two nations and the desire to keep growing those links, the people-to-people links.
And we've talked about the work we do regionally and globally, including with a direct discussion on circumstances on the Korean peninsula.
JOURNALIST: Further to that in recent days a number of people have asserted there are either problems or issues or concerns with Australia's relationship with China.
Did the President raise any concerns about any aspect of the relationship at all?
PM: No. No, and the tenor of the meeting was one of confidence in the relationship now, references to the strength of the relationship now and references to the desire to keep building on today's relationship ever stronger for the future.
The President at one point reflected on the past 40 years and talked about developing a vision for the next 40 years.
JOURNALIST: Is there a time limit on when the free trade agreement might be finalised? Are we talking still years away?
PM: Look it doesn't work on the basis of setting artificial deadlines.
Negotiating trade agreements is complicated. It's particularly complicated when you're talking about economies with many interests.
Obviously New Zealand was in a position to conclude a free trade agreement with China. The New Zealand economy is differently structured to our own.
With the diversity of our economy, with the diversity of the Chinese economy it's not surprising that there are sensitivities that need to be worked through.
JOURNALIST: How much importance do you put in the currency deal with China for direct conversion from Aussie dollars to Renminbi?
PM: That wasn't the subject of  -  in terms of our economic trades and exchanges we certainly talked about that today.
In terms of you know mechanical arrangements, that wasn't the subject of a discussion today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister did you raise with the President the fate of Australians or situation of Australian citizens in detention or in jail here in China? If so, what did you ask of him, what did you say, and what sort of response did you get?PM: As I indicated at the commencement of the trip given different spheres of responsibility it's appropriate to raise those matters with Premier Li, so they were not raised today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister we're still getting to know President Xi, the world is; he's such a powerful figure.
Can you, beyond policy, can you give us some sense of your sense of him as a human being, his demeanor? What was your sense of the man today?
PM: I've had the opportunity to meet President Xi before in his earlier capacity. I'm not here to try and psychoanalyse someone, but in my dealings with him both in his earlier capacity and today as President he is a figure of intellectual and policy substance as you would expect.
He's a person I think with a keen eye for the future and a vision for the future. He brings to the table a deep understanding of Australia having had the opportunity to visit so broadly in Australia and that is all to the good for the future of our relationship.
JOURNALIST: What did you make of his speech to the plenary today and the way that he's positioning China in the region with regard to his comments today? 
PM: Well I think some of the themes that came into our meeting reflected and were on the same topics as he dealt with in the speech, particularly the fact that we have shared responsibilities.
That is, all of us in the region have shared responsibilities, indeed heavy responsibilities for peace and stability in the region, and that requires having the right mechanisms and the right mindset to work through difficulties when they occur from time to time. 
JOURNALIST: Did the President raise the past issue of Huawei and the Australian decision to refuse the investment in Australia on national security grounds, or in a general sense did he raise the Defence White Paper and the past on the issues Australia has had with the Chinese in terms of security?
PM: The answer is none of the above.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how long did the meeting go for and how would you describe the cordiality of it?
PM: It was almost 45 minutes in length and it was a positive exchange. We are dealing with weighty topics so you expect people to be at the table focused and serious and that's exactly what we were doing.
There was the occasional joking reference certainly a spirit of humour about how good it would be to get the President to Tasmania. And he reflected that in an earlier role there was a sister province relationship with Tasmania so he joked that that should be the state of Australia where he spends most of his time.
I'm not sure that that's necessarily going to be possible but there were some lighthearted references to that.
But you're dealing with weighty topics, they require a business-like demeanor and that's what we had.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the language you described about what he said about North Korea sounds to be almost identical to what's been said many many times before. Are you disappointed that there doesn't appear to have been any movement in China's position contrary to what some backbenchers have been saying?
PM: Well the sense I got out of the meeting and the sense we've had out of the discussions here is that China does not want to see conflict on the Korean peninsula.
China very much understands the current state of tensions. They also understand the risk of miscalculation here and that they do want to see tensions eased and calm and restraint shown, and that it is in no one's interests to see tensions escalated on the Korean peninsula.
Thank you very much. 


Shanghai, People's Republic of China
It is a pleasure to visit CELAP for the first time today  -  on my second visit to China as Prime Minister.
Since my last visit in 2011, we have celebrated the important milestone of 40 years of our diplomatic relations.
As Vice Premier Liu Yandong and I discussed in Canberra last December, in the Great Hall of Australia's Parliament House, it was an important time not only to reflect on how far we have come, but to plan for the future.
It is remarkable to think that in the past forty years, bilateral trade has grown one thousand fold.  This reflects not only China's great rise but also the greatly complementary nature of our two economies.Today, China is Australia's largest trading partner  -  and Australia is China's seventh largest trading partner.
Chinese investors prosper in Australia's open and transparent economy and Chinese exporters find open markets and willing customers.
Earlier today we took a significant new step in the relationship when I welcomed a new agreement between our financial authorities.
The Australian and Chinese currencies will be directly traded on the Chinese mainland for the first time.
The Australian dollar will be only the 3rd major currency directly traded in China's mainland foreign exchange market, after the US Dollar and the Japanese Yen.
This reflects the rapid growth of our bilateral trade and the value of two-way investment  -  and it also creates opportunities for new financial integration. 
The important Chinese Government policy objective of greater internationalisation of the Chinese currency will be significantly advanced by these decisions.
Australia's banks, superannuation funds and financial houses will be even better placed to help in the growth of China's service economy.
This is good news for the Chinese economy and good news for the Australian economy.
Our economic ties are greatly enhanced by people to people links.
Chinese nationals made more than 620 000 visits to Australia last year while 380 000 Australian tourists travelled here  -  many beyond the first-tier and coastal cities.
There are around 120 000 Chinese students in Australia's world-leading education institutions. 
The proportion of Australian undergraduates studying some part of their degree overseas has doubled in the past five years  -  one third in Asia.
Mandarin is the second most commonly spoken language in Australia, second only to English. Cantonese is fifth.
The Chinese Australian community now numbers almost 900 000 strong.
Today, the economic reality of our complementary strengths is the core of what we each gain from our broad, enduring ties.
This will remain strong in coming years  -  and will only be reinforced by these diverse human and social connections our peoples are forging today.China's rise is the remarkable global fact of the past thirty five years.
Yours is a vast and vibrant society  -  a modernising nation confident of success.
I see this confidence in the state of the art network of high speed rail interconnecting your biggest cities and pushing out into your fast growing central and western regions.
I saw it in the showcase of Chinese talent that was the 2008 Beijing Olympics and Paralympics and the 2010 Shanghai Expo.
I saw it in the Shenzhou 9  -  China's first docking with a manned spaceship in orbit  -  and the first flight of a Chinese female astronaut.
This is the China which I believe can embrace and manage future change.Today, after decades of export-led and investment-driven expansion, I know China looks ahead to secure a new era of economically balanced, socially and environmentally sustainable growth.
This presents immense challenges  -  challenges I know your leaders fully recognise.On Sunday I met President Xi Jinping in Bo'ao.
I came away in no doubt that your new leadership is determined to succeed  -  that China will remain on the reform path.
President Xi has spoken often of the Chinese dream, “the great renewal of the Chinese nation”.
He has also made clear this national dream depends on bringing benefits to the Chinese people themselves.
In his words, so that the Chinese people can “see their dreams come true and benefit together from the country's development”.
This is a substantial challenge for you.
Enabling all Chinese to realise their dreams through better education and employment, affordable housing, and stronger health care and social security.
Boosting social services and social security, in turn enabling people to be more confident about spending the money they earn and assisting theprocess of rebalancing.
Reducing disparities in wealth and income.
Meeting the expectations, shared by all people, for the rule of law and fair and honest administration  -  and, I would add, for the personal freedoms which give human dignity.In this respect, all of you as leaders in China are living through a considerable transition in the purposes and methods of your national policy.
In recent decades, your economic growth has been the key factor driving social change  -  and the key policy challenge has been to drive growth fast enough to meet existing social pressures.
In coming decades, continuing social change will be the key factor required to sustain economic growth  -  and the policy challenge will be addressing new social pressures fast enough to ensure the expansion of the economy is balanced.This transition in policy reflects a historic transition in the nation: large scale urbanisation, which has seen almost 85 million rural residents move to the cities in the past five years alone.
Your work now also reflects all the social and environmental demands this creates.
These new demands are key challenges for China's progress  -  progress which matters not just to you, but to the region and to the world.
We see that the task for China's leadership  -  to govern history's largest nation-state through one of history's greatest periods of change  -  is formidable indeed.
In the words of Premier Li Keqiang, reform demands “courage, wisdom and tenacity”.
For nations pursuing growth and change, bold and creative thinking  -  and hard choices  -  lie ahead. 
Thirty years ago, Australia's national circumstances were very different to China's, just as they are today.
There is no one model, no single recipe for reform, but some common lessons can be shared and some common principles can be understood.In the years after Deng Xiaoping launched the market-oriented reforms which have remade China, Australia was also taking difficult but necessary steps to modernise our own economy.
Those reforms  -  like floating our currency, cutting tariffs, opening our financial sector to foreign competition  -  positioned us for growth in the decades of globalisation that followed.
Australia is a stronger, fairer, smarter nation as a result today.
We are now the 12th largest economy in the world. 
We have enjoyed 21 consecutive years of economic growth. 
Few nations emerged stronger from the global financial crisis.As it has been for you in China, one key to opening up our success has been greater integration into the global economy. 
In our experience, one key to sustaining economic success has been continued domestic and social reform  -  and we know this is something you are grappling with today.
Alongside those economic changes, we have designed and implemented sophisticated social safety nets, to ensure the benefits of growth are felt by all our people. 
Above all, universal health care and universal superannuation  -  and now we are extending these to provide national disability insurance as well.
Alongside those sophisticated social safety nets, we have also worked to ensure that the opportunities created by economic reform are available to all our people. 
Especially through reform to Australia's systems of education and training and through investment in the skills and knowledge of our people.
These reform and investments play their role in strengthening our economy as a whole. 
They also create substantial economic sectors in their own right  -  and substantial export industries in time.
Education has long been a key export for Australia, as you here well know. 
Health and aged care holds great promise for Australia as our region grows wealthier and its people live longer.All this bears a connection to your work in this Academy.
The growing importance of China's domestic and social reforms  -  like strengthening health care and expanding social security  -  will denote a growing importance for local and provincial leadership.
This has long been vital to your social and human development.
In coming decades, it will be vital to balancing and sustaining national economic growth  -  vital to national success.
Australia wishes you very well in this endeavour and we are ready to play the role of a partner and friend in this great work: Australia has a keen interest in your success.
Each of our nations understands the need for long term plans for national progress.
Your own national roadmaps, like your 12th Five Year Plan, reflect this long perspective.  Our Australia in the Asian Century White Paper outlines national objectives, pathways to get there, across five key areas for action in the years to 2025.
So let me outline the key elements of our plan: these areas of work which create such opportunity for our Chinese friends. The White Paper commits Australia to build a productive and resilient economy.
Our 2025 goal is to be in the world's top 5 for ease of doing business and the world's top 10 innovation systems.
This economic strength will offer great benefits to China.
Australia will remain a reliable long-term supplier of the resources your economy needs: a complementary strength with which we are all familiar.
Our diversifying economy will also be well placed to meet the demands of your expanding consumer markets.
Financial services is just one example of the new complementary strengths of our economies.
Direct currency trading was identified as a priority in the White Paper  -  something we are now delivering.
Further liberalisation in China's financial services sector, essential for your rebalancing, will benefit from experienced, capable and credentialed firms  -  and Australian financial houses have a long track record of successful operations here.Our White Paper sets out a plan for education and skills.
We know how much emphasis Asia's growing economies place on education.
Our 2025 goal is that our school system is in the top 5 in the world and 10 of our universities are in the world's top 100.
Already, five of Australia's thirty nine universities achieve this in the Shanghai Jiaotong world university rankings.
Over time, all Australian students will have the opportunity to undertake a continuous course of study throughout their years of schooling in an Asian language, including Mandarin.
I welcome CELAP's contribution to deepening ties through your relationships with Australian universities like the Australian National University, Latrobe University and the Queensland University of Technology.
Partnerships of this kind are helping Australia build Asia-capable institutions and people, an area where we have ambitious plans and goals.
These capabilities are the fundamental skills which will make Australians effective partners with China in this century of growth and change.
Our third key action area is to expand and integrate regional markets and build the presence of Australian firms in those markets.
Our 2025 goal: for Australia's trade links with Asia to be at least one-third of GDP, up from one-quarter in 2011.
To do this, Australian businesses must become fully part of the region:  adjusting their strategies, linking with regional value chains and developing long term relations.
Above all  -  becoming more effective and efficient, more clever and quick, at meeting the needs of their partners  -  and here, the relevance for our Chinese friends will be very directly felt.The fourth area Australia identifies in our White Paper is deep and broad relationships with the region at all levels.
Our 2025 goal is to ensure that one third of the board members of Australia's top 200 companies and one third of the senior leadership of the Australian Public Service have deep experience in and knowledge of Asia.
Australia's engagement in the region is far more than a mercantile connection.
To take just one example, from the world of sport: it was only eight years ago that Australia joined the Asian Football Confederation.  In 2015 we host the AFC Asian Cup.
In coming years we will seek to deepen all the personal connections between us, born of decades of links in education, tourism and culture.
And we will broaden our engagement in China  -  with a wider diplomatic footprint across your central and western regions.The fifth and final area for action is sustaining the security of our diverse region.
Our 2025 goal is for Asia to be a region of sustainable security in which habits of cooperation are the norm.
As our region changes, some strategic competition between its major powers is inevitable.
The task for us all is to ensure that competition is minimised, co-operation is maximised and disputes are managed peacefully, without the threat or use of force or coercion.
This can't be left to chance.
It will require conscious steps towards co-operation and trust-building by the region's leaders, bilaterally and through institutions like the East Asia Summit.
We will continue to work closely together at the UN and in the region.Australia's White Paper, like China's long-term plans, is necessarily broad.
Yet we each retain a clear focus on the prosperity of our peoples  -  and this remains the core of our work together.
The economic reality of our complementary strengths is the core of our relationship now  -  and these plans to build our respective economic strengths will be the core of our relationship in future.
There is much we share  -  together there is much we can do.
This city of Shanghai itself is a mighty symbol of all that you have achieved and all that lies ahead for us both.
From the design triumphs that are the towers of your financial district  -  to the engineering marvels that are the tunnels linking Pudong and Puxi beneath the Huangpu  -  and the civic heritage miracle we see in the revitalised Bund itself.
Shanghai's renaissance is also a dramatic proof that the engagement between Australia and China is a human, cultural and social connection.The quarter of a million Australians who live in Asia today are here as neighbours and friends.
Perhaps above all, the modern success of Shanghai is a symbol of Chinese challenges met by Chinese leadership.
I know that these challenges of change and growth stretch thousands of kilometres west and north of here.
I know too that the challenges you are grappling with in governing this vast nation dwarf even those you have overcome before.
As you meet these challenges, you have a friend and partner in Australia. 
The century of growth and change that lies ahead is truly one we share. 


Beijing, People's Republic of China
I learned this evening in Beijing of the death of Baroness Thatcher.
Her service as the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom was a history making achievement.
Her strength of conviction was recognised by her closest supporters and her strongest opponents.
I extend my sincere condolences and those of my fellow Australians to her family and friends.


Shanghai, People's Republic of China
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
PM: It's a really very great pleasure to be here this morning, in Shanghai, China's financial capital and a home away from home for so many Australians and so many of our most go-ahead companies.
To those who are already here in this market, in China, let me take this opportunity to commend your vision and your commitment, and for all of you who are looking to advance Australia's important business links with China, more strength to your arm, we want to work with you.
In particular, let me acknowledge the contribution of the Australian Chamber of Commerce under the leadership of Peter Arkell here in Shanghai.
Thank you for all of that hard work.
Your support, your practical support, your day-by-day support for the initiatives set out in the Australia in the Asian Century white paper is much appreciated, and I look forward to your active participation in the Asian Century Business Engagement Program.
For all of us here, we are looking at ways of boosting our trade and exchange with China, and I trust that my visit helps play that role.
Can I say across this room that the importance of this commercial relationship, the economic and trade relationship with China, doesn't need much explanation by me in this audience.
You are living it. You understand very deeply that China is our largest trading partner, and our largest source of overseas students.
And increasingly, an important source of investment, tourism and migration.
Our challenge today, as we set out in the white paper, the national plan for our nation's future, is to maximise all of the opportunities of engagement with Asia.
This has been a journey that has taken place over time, from Gough Whitlam laying the foundations 40 years ago to the work that we are doing today.
Certainly my government takes our relationship with China very seriously, and we are committed to taking it to a new level, to engage with China in building a stronger and more comprehensive relationship and to work with China in our region and in the world.
Yesterday I had the opportunity to meet China's new president, and tomorrow in Beijing I will meet China's new premier.
As you know, working here in China, personal relationships matter and I was very keen to make this trip early in the terms of the new leadership.
I made the point to President Xi when I met him yesterday and I will make the same point to Premier Li when I meet him tomorrow, that Australia sees great potential in all areas of our relationship.
There is much more that we can do together, much more that we can achieve together, and it's about focusing together on the opportunities of the future.
But whilst I have those discussions, I am very well aware that success in this Asian century requires work by government, but it requires effort too by business and the community working with us towards a common purpose.
That's a purpose of bringing people together today to stress that sense of common purpose.
Now I can't help but be impressed by the breadth and diversity of what the Australian business community does here in Shanghai.
We've got people across the board, the resources sector, agribusiness, tourism, education services, architectural services, legal services and of course our banks, who are represented today.
Our banks are at different stages of expanding their presence in China, but all of them are working hard towards having a presence here and recognising the excellent opportunities in this market.
Australia's banking sector rightly has a good reputation here in China and globally.
That reputation is well-deserved as our banks outperformed most of the developed world's banks through the GFC and subsequently.
That's something that we should be proud of.
China now faces important challenges as it continues the process of reform in its financial sector.
We know what reforming the financial sector feels like, we went through our own reform process in the 1980s and 1990s.
And whilst of course China's economy is different in so many ways  -  scale vastly different, vastly larger than our own  -  many of the reform principles are the same and there are many lessons from our experience in Australia that can be shared here in China.
There are also many lessons that can be shared from the development of our superannuation sector, from the development of our superannuation pool of savings, and from the expertise that therefore comes in Australia in managing those funds.
As China continues to open its financial services sector to global markets, and as China's middle class continues to grow, China will hunger for a more diverse range of financial products and Australia's expertise in providing them is well-positioned to come to the fore.
So we look forward to working with China as it expands its funds management sector and seeks to expand the range of financial products available to its people.
In my meeting tomorrow with Premier Li, I will be stressing the point that Australian companies have the expertise and the desire to make a significant contribution to the further development of China's financial services sector.
So our banks are already here and so many Australian companies are poised to join them.
Today I will be making an announcement about direct trading of our currency  -  the Australian Dollar  -  into RMB here in China.
This is an important announcement for the future, an important announcement for our currency and its exchange with China.
As you know in this room at the moment, in order to exchange between the two currencies you need a two-step process, normally through American dollars.
So RMB into American dollars into Australian dollars, or back the other way.
The announcement we will make today is that we will be able to see a direct trade between Australian dollars into RMB here on China's mainland.
We have been working on this announcement for some period of time.
It actually follows on work done by the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan when he visited China in the middle of last year.
It's an important foundation stone for what we can achieve in the future, a future of huge opportunities and potential.
I'm looking out on a room of people who will make those opportunities and that potential real.
I thank you for your work, and your commitment, and it's been a very great pleasure to be able to join you here for breakfast this morning.
Thank you very much.


Shanghai, People's Republic Of China
QUESTION: [Inaudible  -  Chinese]
PM: Thank you, just finishing the translation. Thank you very much for the question. I don't have many opportunities to address three separate issues you raised.
First in terms of foreign investment into Australia including investment from China: we are a capital hungry economy. 
We need inward investment not just to develop our resources sector though investment is needed there including in very big infrastructure but in other parts of our economy where we see huge opportunities for the future.
To take an example in the food processing industry, we are a great agricultural nation and we seek to not only export our agricultural produce but to value add to it through food processing and to therefore value add to our reputation as a clean and reliable supply of food. 
So, we are hungry for inward investment. We do have a foreign investment review board that takes a national interest oversight of foreign investment. 
But to give you one statistics I think is very important. During the life of this Government, 380 investment proposals from Chinese companies have been accepted, only 6 of them had conditions put on them, and none, not one, has been rejected. 
And so, in those circumstances, you can see that Australia is open for investment and welcoming productive investment into our country which benefits the investors but of course from the perspective of Australians creating jobs for Australian people.
Second, we do have a sophisticated system of environmental management that is not directed at foreign investors.
That is true for everyone in Australia, there is one rule and it's one rule for everyone. 
So, if anybody in our companies wanted for example to create a new coal mine, there would be environmental approvals that they would have to seek. 
We are trying to streamline that process as much as possible.
There is a state level of that process and sometimes at national level too but it's a process that applies to all it's there for a very important public policy objective which is that we do want to see development but we want to be environmentally  sustainable as well.
And then, third, on the question of carbon and emissions trading, we have moved to introduce a price on carbon. 
It started last July and it will become a full emission trading scheme on the first of July 2015. 
China is of course engaged in this development too with an emission trading scheme expected to commence in Beijing soon, with the number of provinces engaged in pilot programs covering more than 200 million people and with an expectation of a whole of China system beyond 2015. 
We are finding common approaches, market-based approaches, to addressing the challenges we both share of continuing to grow our economies but making sure as we grow them that we are reducing the carbon intensity of our economies, creating less carbon pollution and consequently less of a contribution to climate change. 
This is one area where we think there are many things we can do together because we are both on this journey.
QUESTION: [Inaudible  -  Chinese]
PM: Thank you for your question and your statistics are basically right. 
China is Australia's largest trading partner and we do want to keep strengthening that relationship both in trade, goods and services, and developing our investment relationships between our two countries which is of course a two-way investment relationship with Australia investing here in China as well as Chinese businesses looking for opportunities in Australia. 
Our plans are to keep fostering the diversification of this relationship.
The announcement for tomorrow which I have foreshadowed of direct currency trading is an important aspect of that, our business communities' meeting and exploring patterns of growth as happened at the Bo'ao Forum that I've just been at, the continue negotiations of our free trade agreement. 
We both have complex, diverse economies and so there are some sensitivities on both sides but discussions on a free trade agreement are continuing between our two countries. 
And then, in terms of our own domestic policy settings, the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper is deliberately pitched at and calibrated to get asked and think about the diverse opportunities there are in our economy to engage with Asia.
So not just in resources but in food and food production, in legal services and in architectural services, in financial services and in public policy style services associated with social safety net and universal health care. 
There are so many things that we can do together and we are deliberately as a government pursuing a set of domestic policies to facilitate the diversification of our economy in a way which means we can proceed ready to seize a full range of opportunities here in China and to have a genuine exchange.
Our economy working in a complementary way with your economy to the benefit of both.
QUESTION: [Inaudible  -  Chinese]
PM: Thank you for your question. 
We are already deeply engaged with China working for peace and stability in our region and we intend to continue to do that and to keep growing those efforts.
We all have an interest in ensuring peace and stability in the region in which we live. 
As is well known, Australia is a long term ally of the United States and we believe that the engagement with the United States in this region of the world, in the region of the world that we share, is a force for stability.
We also believe that China, rising in the way that it is now, China's growth and its participation in the regional and global dialogue is a force for good and for peace and stability in our region. 
Inevitably in any set of discussions in a region, there will be times when issues have to be dealt with that cause some moments of tension and some issues to be worked through. 
We believe that everybody has an interest in developing the institutions and the habits of trust and cooperation which enable any of those issues to be addressed and addressed peacefully. 
That is why we believe things like the East Asia Summit a lead and level exchange once a year for the countries in our region where leaders can come and speak frankly about issues. 
It's so important to developing those habits of trust and cooperation. 
Right now, in terms of our region, many eyes are focusing on what's happening in the Korean Peninsula and the attitude of North Korea and the very provocative statement it has made which are raising tensions on the Korean Peninsula and across the region.
This is in no one's interest and it is clear to me from my discussions here in China that China does not want to see this kind of tension and prospect of conflict on the Korean Peninsula. 
We all have a shared objective about stability and peace in our region and addressing this issue on the Korean Peninsula which is presented to us right now.
QUESTION: Congratulations for the wonderful speech which is quite promising not only for your country but also, I think, for the Asian countries like China.
As it is widely accepted that China and Australia has clearly and jointly created the economic prosperity for our two countries, my question is how does your Government feel the other relations.
For example, the cultural links and also the people to people exchanges between our countries and also does your Government is ready to take some actions to broaden the relations between our two countries in this regard?
Thank you very much.
PM: Thank you. Thank you very much.
We are working on a series of levels to strengthen the political and cultural links between our two countries. 
One of the announcements we've made during this course of visit is we want to have an Australia Week in China. 
We want to start that in the second half of next year. 
It's something that we have done in other parts of the world, in the United States we have a program in Los Angeles and in New York which in our Australian language our own very unique version of English we refer to as G'day LA and G'day New York. 
We want to make sure that there is an Australia Week in China where we get to showcase some of the opportunities for cultural exchange and people to people links. 
I think this is so important because the more we can diversify those links the more we truly end up with a shared understanding. 
If we can have Chinese tourists standing in Australia art galleries next to Australians looking at artistic works and the same happening the other way, Australian tourists coming to the great galleries in this nation and standing next to Chinese friends talking about Chinese arts. 
Those people to people links, those cultural links then built and bonded which matter for the future. 
So, that is why we are focussed on that program which we have announced. 
In terms of other aspects of the relationship, we are working hard on the education links. 
China is our biggest source of international students but we want to make sure this is a genuine two way exchange. 
So, during the course of this visit, we've taken another step forward in a program we are calling Asia Bound which is about bringing young people from Australia to spend part of their time studying in our region of the world. 
We anticipate around a thousand of them will come to China are the sort of things that build long term friendships and long term understandings between countries.  
Then, at the political level, one of the things that I have been engaged in on this visit and in the lead up to the visit we are continuing to work on is the high level political management and strategic oversight of the relationship between our two countries. 
And we will continue to work on that for the future. 
I am travelling with the most senior delegation of Australian leaders, politicians to ever come to China. 
So, that in itself is a statement about how seriously we take continuing to build on what is a good relationship but broadening it and deepening it, and making it more comprehensive for the future. 


Shanghai, People's Republic of China
PM: I'm absolutely delighted to be here in Shanghai and as you can see I'm joined by two of our banking chiefs, by Gail Kelly from Westpac, by Mike Smith from ANZ, and I'm also joined by my ministerial colleagues Dr Emerson, the Minister for Trade, and Bill Shorten who is here in his capacity as Minister for Superannuation and Financial Services.
We've already had the opportunity this morning to speak to a number of Australians who live and work here in Shanghai in this amazing city, in this huge financial centre.
People who are doing all sorts of business in China; they're in resources, they're in agri-business, they're in legal services, in architectural services, they are in financial services too.
And what they see and what we see as a nation is huge prospects ahead for us working with China.
As China's middle class rises, as its wealth continues to grow, then it will want to have a variety of financial products for its citizens.
It will be able to want to offer them financial services in the way in which Australians are offered financial services.
We have some of the world's strongest banks and we have a great deal of expertise in managing pools of superannuation funds. These are comparative advantages that we can take into China to spell an era of opportunity for Australia here in China.
At the end of the day all of this is about growing our economic exchange between Australia and China. That's good for Australian jobs, good for Australian growth but also good for China that is seeking that expertise as it moves to a new era and a new way of offering financial products to its citizens.
So I'm absolutely delighted to be here. And I am also delighted to be able to foreshadow the next step in our economic cooperation with China, the next important step.
Tomorrow there will be a formal announcement that Australian dollars can be directly traded into renminbi, into the Chinese currency RMB, here in China; the third currency in the world to do so after the US dollar and the Japanese yen.
This is a huge advantage for Australia, not only for our big businesses but also for our small and medium enterprises that want to do business here.
What it means is we can cut out the two steps that have to happen now where Australian dollars are traded into US dollars in order to be traded into RMB, instead of doing that there can be one step: one step for the trading and one step for the trading back again.
I'm very pleased to be able to foreshadow this announcement which will be formally made tomorrow.
That's an important step forward. You need to get agreement for that to happen and we have secured the agreement which will be formally announced tomorrow.
This has been worked on over many months now, a process started when the Deputy Prime Minister visited here in the middle of last year.
It's one thing to get the authority, then you've got to get people out there making the market, making it all happen, and I'm delighted to be able to tell you that the People's Bank of China has approved licenses for two Australian banks, ANZ and Westpac, to act as market makers for direct trading on the Chinese foreign exchange system.
Step number three, having got the approval to do it, having created the market makers, is of course to see trading happen and to create a deep and liquid market.
In order to do that we've got to get the message out that this is newly available for Australian businesses, newly available for businesses here in China, and part of being here with my business community colleagues today is to send that message loud and clear.
This is a big step forward, a good step forward for Australia. It's a strategic step forward for Australia as we add to our economic engagement with China.
I'll turn now to Gail and then to Mike for some comments.
GAIL KELLY, WESTPAC: Thank you Prime Minister and good morning everyone. Let me say right up front how much we welcome, how much Westpac welcomes, this new initiative led by the Australian Government and the Chinese Government, and really to thank the two governments for the hard work that's gone into today's announcement, or the foreshadowing of tomorrow's announcement.
This is a strategic development and really does signal a deepening of relationships between China and between Australia. It signals deepening of trade connections and great opportunities for future growth.
So Westpac really welcomes the opportunity to be part of this process, this process that will be formally announced tomorrow.
And we really look forward to being in a position where we can support our customers, both large and small customers, and as you know Westpac is a very large trading bank across Australia and New Zealand and has significant strength and customer base in the corporate, institutional and business banking sectors.
And for us and for our customers this is a great opportunity. It certainly improves a convenience for our customers and takes cost out for our customers to have the direct convertibility between the Australian dollar and the Chinese renminbi.
Whereas up to now of course as you know it has been several steps to convert first into the US dollar the usual route being into the Australian dollar or the reverse. So this takes cost out and makes it a whole lot more convenient.
So we welcome this opportunity, it's a significant step forward for Westpac and our development as well. We've been proudly operating in China for a little over 40 years, opened our first operation in Beijing in 1982.
We have a full branch in Shanghai and a full branch in Beijing and with this new development continuing to step up our engagement in the region.
So thank you very much Prime Minister, it truly is a strategic development for our country.
MIKE SMITH, ANZ: Thank you Prime Minister. On behalf of ANZ I would also like to acknowledge the help of the Australian Government and indeed the assistance of the Government of China in this important development.
As the Prime Minister and Gail mentioned this really is for the benefit of our customers and particularly the small and medium customers that we have in Australia, but also here in China where again it's another step in the progress towards deeper ties between both countries in terms of the economic and business development.
So I'm delighted to be here to witness this, as Gail said, and I think we are pre-empting the official announcement tomorrow, but also on behalf of ANZ as Australia's largest bank in China we are delighted with this development and certainly will do everything we can to improve the services to our customer base.
Thank you very much.
PM: Thank you very much  -  a healthy spirit of competition on display. Can I also acknowledge the Foreign Minister Bob Carr.
What we'll do is we will take questions on this announcement and then subsequent to that we'll take questions on any other issues associated with the trip.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you give us a simple cents in the dollar indication of what this means for every exchange, what the savings are?
PM: Well look I'd be better off asking the experts who do this every day.
SMITH: It's not going to make a huge amount in terms in actual, the dollar amount per trade, depending on the amount of course. But it's going be a few basis points.
The fact is that it's the convenience of being able to do this and rather, for example in a trade document rather than going through US dollars and having the movement of the currency over time you can immediately lock in your exchange rates, so you basically are able to create your own forward contract far more easily that you would have been able to do otherwise.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister or Dr Emerson, will this deal make it any easier to formalise an FTA with China at all, is it another step towards that?
PM: It's not directly a step in the creation of a free trade agreement but the greater our economic cooperation with China, the more compelling is the logic and the need for a free trade agreement.
So every time we take a step forward we strengthen the economic cooperation and that means that the free trade agreement, the argument for it, strengthens too.
And if I could just comment on what Mike has said I think we all, from a common sense perspective, know that a few dollars difference on many dollars ends up being a lot of money.
JOURNALIST: I just wonder if Mr Smith or Ms Kelly might be able to tell us how deep this market might be and what sort of volumes are we talking about?
KELLY: Let me start, but I know Mike will like to add to it as well, look it'll start small, inevitably it'll start small, but the point of this is this is a strategic development for our country.
We'll be only the third major currency that will actually be a currency pair with the renminbi, so that's a very important strategic step and really does signal the strength and the health of the relationship between China and between Australia. And size and the opportunity of the trade flow. Those are growing at very significant levels.
So it'll start small but it will inevitably grow. Mike you may want to give some further colour.
SMITH: I think what is important is the market making opportunity in this as well so it will become a proper traded currency mix, and the volumes of that are limitless.
But even if you consider just trade volume and if would like say working capital, or those amounts that are required by businesses in Australia here or Chinese businesses into Australia, that's going to run into billions of dollars and tens of billions of dollars. And that will pick up fairly quickly.
If you look at how the internationalisation of the renminbi has moved in Hong Kong it's already into the tens of billions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Australian exporters are obviously going to be jittery about anything that's strengthens the Australian dollar. Is this sort of an announcement going to have an impact on the level of the dollar?
PM: No, no, it won't have an impact on the level of the dollar; it will have an impact on how the dollar can be traded and what it can be exchanged for.
When you look at the opportunities for our exporters here into China the huge volumes obviously being done now in resources, but the huge volumes for the future, are across so many of our industries whether its agriculture and food, whether it's the services sector, legal architectural, financial services, health services.
All of these opportunities lie in front of us and this is a foundation stone for that, for making that an efficient way of doing business and an efficient way of trading currencies.
And can I just say in terms of the broader perspective it's in everybody's interest to see the further internationalisation of the RMB, so significant from that point of view too.
JOURNALIST: What is day one for this? So when can the first $A-RMB be directly traded?
PM: Wednesday. Do you want to get some money moving in the market personally?
JOURNALIST: Yes, lots of money!
PM: Right, they're paid well at the Financial Review and there will be engagement in trade from the Financial Review journalists from Wednesday!
JOURNALIST: On the G'Day China week, and I'd like to get both of your perspectives as well Mike and Gail on that. Is that the sort of attention that Australia should have been giving to China for some time or that we need to be doing now?
PM: Well, Gail and Mike are here to deal with the financial announcement but I'm very pleased to also be in a position to announce today that we will be having an Australia Week in China.
We have had great success in taking Australia to the United States of America through our G'day program in the United States. It's made a difference for the profile of Australia, our products, our services, our arts, our culture, our personalities.
We are going to have an Australia Week in China, starting in the second half of 2014.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister perhaps a question for you or Minister Shorten, just on superannuation-
PM: Just before we move to other questions are there any directly on the trading of currency?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in your speech today you'll be talking about the [inaudible] reforms that Australia went through in the 80s and the strength and the growth that's given to the Australian economy. What message are you sending to the Chinese about what they should be doing with their currency?
PM: I think the message from today is a very simple one. Here we are working with and strongly engaged with China, ever increasing the economic cooperation between our two countries, including doing what is a truly significant and strategic thing for the future  -  enabling direct trading of our currencies here in China.
JOURNALIST: But would you like to see the Chinese currency floated or reformed?
PM: We are very satisfied to be here announcing today's step.
JOURNALIST: Can you tell us a just a bit more about the details of this ‘G'day China'? What it is? What will see from it?
PM: You will see a program that will be more modelled on the kind of things that have happened in the USA. The program obviously will be shaped between now and the first Australia Week in China.
But our aspiration is to take some of the things that we've learned from the very successful work both in LA and in New York, where we have got a white hot spotlight on Australia and the opportunities and advantages of doing business with Australia, of coming to Australia, of being a consumer of Australian cultural exports.
So just let's just be clear, does anybody else have a question on currency trading? Anybody want some market information to inform their future financial development? No?
I think we can ask Gail and Mike to stand aside on that basis, maybe someone at the back of the pack who wants to talk about their mortgage or something?
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask you one more on the tourism event? China's already I think the largest inbound market for tourists. Potentially how large do you think the tourism market can get from China for Australia?
PM: I don't see a limit. Clearly there is a limit ultimately in our capacity though we can keep expanding the capacity of our tourism industry and so many of our tourism operators would love to do so.
We are at the stage where we are seeing very large numbers of visitors from China. But we are talking about a middle class here in China that will be numbered in the tens and tens and tens of millions.
And so, those people will want to take holidays and have tourism and cultural experiences the way in which Australians want to do that.
Australians like to travel. Middle class consumers from China will want to travel and they'll want to come and see and do the things that Australia has to offer.
Any spotlight we can put on the rich diversity of tourism experiences in Australia is good for Australian tourism. I'll go to the Minister.
MINISTER EMERSON: There are industry projections of a million tourists from China by 2020. If anything that's on the conservative side.
And this program can only lift the profile of Australia here in China. So certainly aiming for a million tourists by 2020, but likely to exceed that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, much of this trip has been about building confidence between our economy and the Chinese economy. Barnaby Joyce has had some things to say again about foreign investment, talking about lowering the Foreign Investment Review Board threshold. What's your response to those comments?
PM: I spoke to the new President of China yesterday about foreign investment and I said to him that Australia welcomes foreign investment from China because it equals Australian jobs.
It means more Australians are employed in good jobs for the future. So that was the message that I gave the President. I'll turn to the Minister for Trade for some comments.
MINISTER EMERSON: Senator Joyce's comments are economically reckless. The Coalition is questioning the national interest as expressed by the Foreign Investment Review Board. The national interest should never be the political plaything of any party.
The fact that Senator Joyce, who aspires to be the alternative Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, has again spoken out against Chinese investment in Australia, is economically reckless and it is against Australia's national interest.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Xinhua has reported this morning, and it was also on the People's Daily and the China Daily, and I'll just quote you here, they said -  and they're quoting the President  -  “She said China and Australia have agreed to foster a strategic partnership built upon on mutual trust and mutual benefit”.
The article goes on to say that both countries had pledged to build an annual meeting mechanism between their prime ministers. This seems very different language from what you and the Foreign Minister told us yesterday where you sort of gave us the idea that it was too early in the term of the new leadership to agree to such things. What's going on here?
PM: Well what we said yesterday is we continue to work on the architecture of the relationship between our two countries.
On the nature of the relationship between our two countries, this is a rich, diverse, complex, big relationship of ongoing and strategic importance to Australia.
JOURNALIST: They said you've agreed to it. They've said that this is-
PM: I've understood your question and I've given my response.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's appears to just be some breaking news out of North Korea, preparing for a fourth underground nuclear weapons test. I might just get your reaction to that.
And just so I might try and get a go on superannuation. Perhaps you or Bill Shorten just explain what you hope to get out of this trip, whether China is looking at the same kind of systems that we have?
PM: Well I'll go to Minister Shorten on the second question. On the first question, I'm not going to comment on media reports I haven't had the opportunity to see. They're obviously coming through on your Blackberry as you're standing here right now.
But our outlook towards North Korea remains what I have said consistently, we absolutely condemn the provocative words from North Korea, and of course we would condemn any provocative conduct which is aimed at raising tensions on the Korean peninsula and in the region and brings an inherent risk of miscalculation.
MINISTER SHORTEN: Good morning. In terms of superannuation, the Commonwealth Government is leading the largest group of superannuation industry leaders that we've ever seen come to China.
Over the next number of days we'll be meeting with regulators, visiting the Shanghai Stock Exchange, we'll be meeting with regulators and investors in Beijing as well. The trip was oversubscribed, there's a great deal of interest in the Australian superannuation industry in China.
I think it is worth remembering when we talk about the Australian superannuation industry we have $1.5 trillion in national savings. Or put another way, that's a third of the size of the whole of the GDP of China.
So Australia punches above its weight in terms of national savings pools. That is why it's important that we have stability at home in terms of our superannuation savings.
That is why the Government's made it clear that we want to suggest an above-politics, bipartisan approach; a group of custodians to help evaluate policy of whoever is the government of the day so superannuation can be adequate for people's retirement, it can be focused on the long-term sustainability of the system and changes can be consistent and prospective.
That is why when you stand here overlooking Shanghai and the clear Chinese miracle of its economy, Australia and Australians do not have time to waste on partisanship, locally, domestically on superannuation politics.
I think it would be a fantastic opportunity if the Opposition recognise that opposing some of our changes which will allow 160,000 people over the age of 60 put aside an extra $10,000 in their savings from 1 July this year, I think it is time to put down the negativity and let's treat superannuation as above politics.
Let's remove the bipartisanship, because we want Australian fund managers to be able to use the remarkable Australian national institution of superannuation to be part of the remarkable growth of China.
JOURNALIST: You've got the delegation travelling with you. What has been the response to the Government's announcement on super? Have the industry people with you been angry, have they been happy? How have they responded to the changes?
MINISTER SHORTEN: You'll have the opportunity to talk the Australia's leaders in superannuation yourself in the next couple of days.
But the reaction uniformly of the superannuation leaders in Australia is that our changes are sensible, that our changes are for the long-term.
They're excited by the prospect of being able to move superannuation out of the debate about the annual budget cycle or the sort of bipartisan tit-for-tat politics. I also know they support the idea of lifting the concessional caps.
Why on earth would anyone in Australia, any Australian politician, want to stop people over the age of 60 from being able to put aside an extra $10,000 if they have it, into their superannuation so they can retire with more comfort and dignity than they otherwise would?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just quickly, the Opposition has put a $90 billion price tag on your National Broadband Network, are they in the ballpark there?
PM: No.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Shanghai, People's Republic of China
A new campaign to promote Australian tourism, trade and investment opportunities to the rapidly growing Chinese market will be brought to Shanghai following the success of the G'Day USA program.
Australia Week in China will be based in Shanghai  -  China's commercial and financial capital  -  in 2014 to further boost Australia's reputation as a world leading destination and a valuable tourism, trade and investment partner.
The announcement made today in Shanghai comes during a five day visit by the most senior Australian Government delegation to ever visit China.
The week will feature a range of events and activities including a campaign to attract more Chinese tourism to Australia, cultural activities showcasing contemporary performing and visual arts, a gala dinner in Shanghai and investment activities including targeted meetings with potential Chinese investors.
It will be held in the second half of 2014 to coincide with Tourism Australia's Greater China Travel Mission, which attracts more than 120 Australian tourism operators.
As with G'Day USA, the Australian Government will be seeking to partner with the private sector as well as state and territory governments.
China is now our biggest trading partner as well as our most valuable inbound tourism market.
A record 625,000 Chinese visited Australia during 2012, up 16 per cent on the previous year. 
Australia Week in China will support our already comprehensive approach to the China market.  It will support Australian exports and attract foreign investment, including in the tourism, innovation, clean energy and infrastructure sectors.
This $1.75 million initiative is part of the suite of activities the Government is undertaking to broaden and deepen our relationship with China as outlined in the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper and Tourism 2020.
The Government launched the China 2020 Strategic Plan in June 2011 to help realise the huge tourism opportunity for Australia  -  in 2011, 70 million Chinese travelled overseas, spending US$69 billion.
We are already seeing increased aviation access between China and Australia  -  half a dozen international carriers currently fly between China and Australia including Qantas, Jetstar, Air China, China Eastern, China Southern and Sichuan Airlines.
Tourism Australia, Austrade, and the Departments of Resources, Energy and Tourism and Foreign Affairs and Trade will work together with industry and governments to deliver the initiative. 


Beijing, People's Republic of China
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today concluded her second visit to China, having held substantive discussions with China's new President and Premier weeks after China's historic leadership transition.
This trip was the most senior Australian political delegation to visit China, with the Prime Minister joined by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister for Trade and Competitiveness and the Minister for Financial Services and Superannuation.
The Gillard Government set out its commitment to broadening and deepening Australia's relationship with China in the White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
During this visit, the Prime Minister and the Chinese leadership agreed to upgraded bilateral architecture based on an annual leaders meeting and ministerial-level economic and foreign and strategic dialogues.
These arrangements will provide a modern platform to give renewed strategic direction to the relationship.
This major outcome was accompanied by a range of policy announcements spanning business and finance, tourism, international cooperation, defence and climate change.
Australia and China announced the start of direct trading between the Australian dollar and the Chinese renminbi (RMB), making it easier for Australian businesses, large and small, to buy and sell into the Chinese market, encouraging greater two-way investment and ensuring Australia gets in on the ground floor as China moves towards internationalising its currency.
Australia and China agreed to establish a carbon trading experts group and to conduct joint research on carbon trading issues as China moves towards its own national emissions trading scheme after 2015, building on the large scale pilot schemes it will roll out across seven cities and provinces, covering an estimated 255 million people.
The Prime Minister announced that Australia will move towards facilitated border clearance for the growing number of Chinese tourists and business travellers through an initial pilot scheme to make “Smartgate” open to Chinese e-passport holders.
The Gillard Government announced plans for Australia Week in China to be based in Shanghai in 2014 as a showcase of the best Australia has to offer in tourism, trade and investment.
In Beijing the Prime Minister launched ‘Expanding our Horizons: Forty Years of Australia-China Collaboration and Exchange in Education, Science and Research' which for the first time captures the breadth of our education, research and science relationship with China over the past forty years.
The Prime Minister also witnessed the signing of a new development cooperation partnership bringing Australia and China together as partners to address some of the most pressing development issues facing the region, including drug resistant malaria, HIV/AIDS and water resource management in developing countries.
In the area of defence cooperation, the Prime Minister announced strengthened bilateral defence links with China through the establishment of new initiatives between the Australian Defence Forces and the People's Liberation Army.
Australia and China launched a strategic policy exchange bringing together officials of Australia's Department of Defence and China's People's Liberation Army to discuss regional security issues and an inaugural Australia-China Military Friendship and Culture Week, to be held in Canberra in September/October 2013. 


Beijing, People's Republic of China
Tonight we celebrate forty years of education and science exchanges between Australia and China.
In turn, tonight we celebrate the work of all of you.
You have given our countries a new vision of each other.
So Expanding our Horizons is a most fitting title for the commemorative volume launched this evening.
It is a fine way to document what our countries have gained from your enterprising spirit.
I've come from my first meeting with Premier Li earlier today, where I took the opportunity to congratulate him personally on his new role.
We also discussed my Government's White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
The White Paper is an ambitious document: a blueprint for a deeper, broader engagement and a declaration of intent.
Yet its core principle  -  that Australia's security and prosperity depend upon engagement with Asia  -  is not a new one.
In 1948, the fourth session of what was then the United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East was held in Australia, in the Blue Mountains of New South Wales.
In his opening address there, Australia's Governor-General William McKell declared that for Australians, the ‘Far East' should be thought of as the ‘Near North'.
He said that the post-war world needed to recognise the “economic and political importance of Asia”.
He went on to describe the global benefits that would come from cooperating in Asia's development.
McKell was a visionary Australian and a great man.
We meet 65 years later and 11 000 kilometres north.
Yet the truth of his message stands unaltered  -  and the responsibility to understand it falls more widely than ever.
Our engagement today must be much more than the words of diplomats or the actions of political leaders.
Education and science, artistic and sporting links, perhaps human friendships above all, these are ultimately as powerful as summits and statecraft. 
Through our exchanges in education and science, the people of both our nations combine the transforming human experiences of learning and travel.
These life-changing individual experiences also combine in nation-building partnerships.
Consider the China Advanced Leadership Program, exposing China's future leaders to critical strategic issues and forging links to Australia's public sectors.
This is an innovative collaboration between the Australian and New Zealand School of Government and the Organisation Department of the Chinese Communist Party.
I know ANZSOG is working closely with the Chinese Government on a reciprocal program for senior Australian and New Zealand officials.
Or consider the Australian Government's new AsiaBound program.
This will give three thousand six hundred Australian students the chance to do part of their academic program in Asia.
China  -  the most popular destination in Asia for Australians studying abroad last year  -  is likely to account for one thousand of these places.
Or consider the way our two countries are joining a number of other governments in building the Square Kilometre Array  -  the SKA.  
You can see beside me here a photo of the Murchison site in Australia: Chinese-made dishes are part of the landscape.
I welcome representatives of our Chinese partners who are here with us this evening.
Through this collaboration, scientists and researchers around the world will share access to the world's largest telescope.
They will look back to the very beginning of the universe and map the cosmic forces at work.
The Square Kilometre Array is a marvel of collaborative science  -  combining the endeavour of our best minds.
Another very powerful example of scientific collaboration is the work which the late Jian Zhou of Wenzhou Medical College and Ian Frazier from the University of Queensland did together.
Their pioneering research in the early 1990s led to the development of a vaccine  -  Gardasil  -  which targets the virus that causes cervical cancer.
Their work is now saving the lives of more than a quarter of a million women and girls every year.
It is an inspiring example of what can be achieved  by Australian and Chinese researchers together  -  one very close to my heart.
The Australia-China research relationship has now moved into a new stage of cooperation with the establishment of six joint research centres.
These six centres will tackle the big issues of our shared future: like sustainable economic growth in a low carbon future, like water management and food security.
I am very pleased to see so many of the researchers working on these new projects here this evening.
I will be proud to unveil these tonight.
In addition to these centres, I also want to acknowledge the Sino-Australian Joint Laboratory for Eco-agriculture, which has set up in partnership with the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences.
I attended the opening of the Australian home for this centre at the University of Sydney only a few weeks ago.
It's an inspiring example of the real substance of our relationship in education and science.
We are here to celebrate what forty years of hard work has won us, but even tonight, our focus is on the future.
So I am very pleased that BHP Billiton will provide $2.2 million over five years for new, reciprocal Australia-China scholarships.
The scholarships will be offered by the Foundation for Australian Studies in China established by the Australia-China Council.
They will work alongside the Government's AsiaBound and Australia Awards programs, to increase the flow of students and professionals between Australia and China.
BHP Billiton's support shows their commitment to cooperative learning in the region.
Their funding of the BHP Billiton Chair of Australian Studies at Peking University shows this too.
I acknowledge the inaugural holder of the Chair, Professor David Walker, who is here with us tonight. 
I also acknowledge the generosity of Cheung Kong Holdings and Mr HL Kam for the Cheung Kong Endeavour Awards. 
I am very pleased a number of the awardees are here this evening to celebrate.
This evening is a particularly fitting occasion to conclude my second visit to China as Prime Minister.
I am so delighted that so many people who built the Australia-China education relationship in the past forty years are here this evening to celebrate all that has been achieved.
Everyone who is here is here for a reason  -  because we know, I know, how much you have done to change our peoples' lives and to build our nations.
I hope tonight, as you swap stories and share a meal with old friends, you will find time to reflect on all you have achieved.
During these forty years our nations have gone from distant strangers to valued friends  -  and many of you have done the same.
Education and science have been at the heart of Asia's renaissance.
Your teaching and learning, innovation and research has been at the heart of our two nations' change and growth.
For your part in all of that, tonight you can raise your glasses with pride.  
Thank you  -  and enjoy.


Beijing, People's Republic of China
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Today let me pay tribute to the work of the Australian Chamber of Commerce in Beijing  -  AustCham. 
With your wide membership, AustCham plays a critical role in cultivating strong business links between Australia and China.
This is one of the world's most important markets for Australian companies.
Your steps to consolidate the chambers into AustCham Greater China  -  bringing together the Beijing, Shanghai, Southern China and the new West China chapters  -  will help you serve your members even better.
I also want to take this opportunity to highlight the work of the Australia China Business Council, established in 1973 and now celebrating your 40th anniversary.
The leadership of the ACBC and the Chinese Investment Promotion Agency, with the support of AustCham, is why this morning's 3rd Australia China Economic and Trade
Co-operation Forum achieved its goal of being one of the leading large-scale bilateral business conversations.
I'm confident this will not only be true of this year's Forum but of those beyond.
The practical, commercial reality of the complementary strengths of the Australian and Chinese economies gives a firm basis to our national ties.
However, our relationship is broader than ever  -  and we are building diverse people-to-people links.
We have a positive political and diplomatic engagement built on mutual interest and mutual respect.
I am committed to a relationship which goes well beyond the economy.
But the extraordinary growth and success of trade and investment which you have all built is the platform on which Australian leaders stand when we meet Chinese leaders today.
Thank you for all your work.
I have come here this week leading the most senior Australian political delegation ever to visit this country.
These first days of the new leadership here are defining days for the country's coming decade.
So we have come to China with a very clear goal.
To ensure a clear focus on the Australia-China relationship early in the life of China's new leadership.
On Sunday I met President Xi Jinping.
We discussed some of the key issues for the long-term.
How to strengthen the overall strategic direction of the relationship.
How to grow and diversify our trade and investment ties including through a free trade agreement.
How to develop other core elements of our relationship, like our education and people-to-people links.
How to expand co-operation in the region and the world, including in the G20 and the United Nations.
This was a moment to establish the face-to-face contact which is so important to relationships in China  -  and a moment to set the direction for the new leadership's view of Australia, now and in coming years.
On Monday, I welcomed a very important announcement for financial integration.
The Australian and Chinese currencies will now be directly traded on the Chinese mainland for the first time.
Ours will be only the third major currency directly traded in China's mainland foreign exchange market.
This will make an important contribution to the internationalisation of the Chinese currency, a key policy objective of the Chinese Government.
Australia's banks, superannuation funds and financial houses will now be even better placed to help in the growth of China's service economy.
So part of our task this week is building relationships.
Part is taking advantage of the impetus which a high-level visit creates to deliver some specific practical results.
We have also been building the relationship's long-term future.
The bold step to establish diplomatic relations between Australia and China was taken forty years ago.
Our success has surely exceeded the most ambitious imaginings of anyone present in those dramatic days.
We must actively shape the Australia-China relationship  -  we can never simply rely on old structures or past success.
Predicting the future is always a risk  -  but the greater risk is failing to plan for it.
The continuing growth and change in the Australia-China relationship demands new measures to keep it strong.
Leaders on both sides must be confident we have the right structures to guide the decisions we need to make in coming years. 
Right now, I don't believe we do.
There is a wealth of senior dialogue and discussion; last year alone, nine Australian ministers visited China.
But the modern relationship has outgrown the mechanisms we have relied on in previous years.
We should address this now in order to shape our relationship's future.
Later today, I'll conclude my visit with a meeting with Premier Li Keqiang.
The Premier and I have previously discussed the idea of a new strategic partnership between our nations  -  and a lasting new framework for engagement between our leaders.
The long-standing elements of our relationship continue to grow and new elements in our relationship continue to emerge.
Our bilateral contacts are rapidly growing, in scale and complexity.
Even while we manage change between us, our external environment evolves dramatically and this will only continue.
As the Premier has said, our relationship is already “comprehensive, constructive and co-operative”.
It is now ready to take a very “concrete” form.
Naturally, new architecture will not do the work for us or make hard problems in our relationship easy.
What it will do is elevate our existing habits of dialogue and co-operation  -  and contribute to the trust and co-operation which we need whenever we confront difficult issues together.
New architecture can also provide the forum for leadership and decision-making: giving our leaders the necessary regular opportunity to set new objectives, make new decisions and direct new work.
We should set an ambitious goal: a level and structure of dialogue which Australia shares with only a handful of countries and one which China also shares with only very few nations.
I have no doubt it is an ambition which is justified by the times  -  and I am delighted that my Chinese counterparts share this view.
I am looking forward to the formal announcement of our plans with Premier Li this afternoon.
Given all this: given the opportunity created by our strong relationship built over decades  -  and the opportunity we are seeking to create through new structures for dialogue  -  I want to cast forward now, to outline what I think we can achieve in the relationship in the coming decade.
This is what I see ahead.
First, we must have a far more broadly-based economic relationship with rich people-to-people links.
Indeed the growing breadth in the economic relationship should drive diversity in all the connections between our nations.
We know a rapidly urbanising nation like China finds a welcome friend in a nation like Australia rich in coal and iron ore. 
Yet urbanisation isn't just an economic or technological change, it's a vast social transformation: a nation building cities is also a nation living in cities.
So in the decade ahead, I want China to find in Australia a welcome friend rich in the skills and knowledge which underpin civic life: from regulatory and legal standards for urban planning and construction, to health and welfare services, to complex infrastructure like water management and sanitation.
Chinese firms are seeing huge new opportunities in Australia's own strong, growing, diverse economy. 
In the past five financial years, the Australian Government has approved $81 billion in proposed Chinese investment in Australian business and real estate.
More than 380 business proposals were approved  -  all but seven with no conditions at all  -  and in that time, no Chinese investment has been rejected.
There is clear potential for expanded Chinese investment in Australia and I am confident this will continue to grow.
The plans both nations have to diversify our economies also mean that their complementary nature will not only remain, it will extend into new industries and sectors.
Evolving patterns of consumption and production in both Australia and China show that in the decade to come each of our nations will remain a natural market for many of the things the other is best at making and selling.
Take China's growing demand for the highest food standards and reliable trading relationships.  This is one driver of the dramatic increase in Australia's beef trade here.
A similar trend is seen in the barley trade: the majority of Australia's malting barley is traded to China, to a beer market which has grown 30 per cent in volume in five years.
The diversifying relationship between our two economies and the growing connection between our two peoples go hand in hand.
When western Sydneysiders celebrated the Wanderers winning the Premier's plate in A-league football the weekend before last, they were also celebrating the club's qualification for the Asian Football Confederation's Champions League in 2014.
There is every chance the campaign will bring them to China and bring Chinese fans to Parramatta too it's distinctly possible the fans will share some of that Aussie beef and Chinese beer when they do.
This is a key point to understand.
Both nations want our trade and investment links to diversify.
Both nations want our people-to-people links to grow.
Building a more broadly based economic connection and more diverse people-to-people links are in essence one and the same task.
In many respects, the new economic connections and the new social connections are the same transactions understood in different ways.
So the economic relationship will continue to grow and change.
Second, our relationship as a whole can be far stronger and more comprehensive, delivering greater regional and global benefits, in the decade ahead.
Defence co-operation, which is already far broader and more effective than I think is generally understood, will grow.
Only one other country in the world has an annual senior level dialogue with China and ours has been in place for sixteen years.
It's almost three years ago now that our Navies joined in live fire exercises, the first such combined exercises between the PLA-Navy and a Western Navy.
We share interests in aid and development in the Pacific, growing naval co-operation and skills and experience in disaster relief and recovery. 
These will be a major asset to the region.
In the coming decade, our co-operation will continue to grow  -  over time we would like to see this extend to tri-lateral exercises, including with the United States.
Our work together in clean energy will also expand.
Our co-operation in designing emissions trading is already invaluable. 
Our trade in gas is of huge long-term significance  -  this is a clean energy trade which is literally fuelling growth.
Over the coming decade, our co-operation on carbon market design will support national emissions trading schemes in Asia  -  and progress towards regional carbon trading.
Our links in education, science and training should become a true joint venture in human capital in the coming decade.
The flourishing partnerships between our post-school educational institutions will spread to our school sectors.
All Australian students will have access to at least one priority Asian language including Mandarin.
As part of Australia's National Plan for School Improvement, all our schools will engage with at least one school in Asia, taking advantage of our National Broadband Network.
Australian and Chinese schools will be closer than ever before.
These are all big opportunities for our relationship which we can deliver through steady progress every day.
Ours will remain a relationship characterised by a firm mutual understanding of our distinctive history and traditions, culture and society, political and economic ideas.
Australia's alliance with the United States will continue to contribute to regional stability.
Australia will continue to welcome space for China's growing global role  -  just as we know China will continue to recognise Australia's enormous stake in strategic stability in Asia.
Our different national conditions will inevitably lead to differences from time to time, including over human rights.
As partners, we engage each other with deep respect.
We will acknowledge our differences and manage them constructively. 
We have done this for years.
Four decades of progress lie behind us: they have created a new opportunity for our two nations.
This is what we can achieve in the decade ahead:
Richer links in education and training.
Deeper co-operation on issues like climate change.
A broadly-based economic relationship with growing people-to-people links.
A stronger Australian diplomatic footprint in China.
Closer work together on regional and global challenges.
New structures of political dialogue delivering new levels of confidence.
That's the vision  -  and we will get it done.
With the same pragmatic outlook  -  and through the same steady progress  -  which has worked to develop our relationship since 1972.
I have no doubt that in these years we will seize this opportunity  -  and build a partnership of real benefit to our own peoples, to the region and the world.


Beijing, People's Republic of China
Together with the People's Bank of China, we announce today an agreement to launch direct trading between the Australian Dollar (AUD) and the Chinese Renminbi (CNY).
Direct trading between the two currencies will commence on the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) and the Australian foreign exchange market on 10 April 2013.
This is an important step forward in advancing the burgeoning economic relationship between our two countries.
Australia and China will make further efforts to facilitate the development of direct AUD/CNY trading.
As China continues to move its economy towards greater financial openness, Australia stands ready as a key trading partner to work with China and to bring our financial markets closer together.
The development of direct trading between the AUD/CNY will over time help lower currency conversion costs, facilitate the use of CNY and AUD in bilateral trade and investment, and promote financial cooperation between our two countries.
Australian and Chinese banks have been consulted on the proposal and have expressed a willingness to act as market makers to support the direct trading between the AUD/CNY both in Australia and China.
Developing regional markets to the benefit of Australian businesses is an aspiration of the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper.
We will continue to explore opportunities for further financial sector cooperation between China and Australia.
Australian officials will continue to work closely with the Chinese officials to this end. 


Beijing, People's Republic of China
The future of Australia and China's relationship has been strengthened with the launch today of new bilateral architecture following my meeting with the Chinese Premier Li Keqiang in Beijing.
Today's discussions with Premier Li were positive and constructive.
We discussed the full range of issues of common interest, including trade, finance and investment relations, regional and global cooperation, people-to-people links, regional security issues, human rights and consular matters.
The meeting was also attended by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister for Trade and Competitiveness and the Minister for Financial Services and Superannuation.
Today's meeting at Beijing's Great Hall of the People follows my discussions with President Xi Jinping at Bo'ao on April 7.
Today Australia and China have agreed to new bilateral architecture to guide the future of the relationship between our countries.
The Australian Prime Minister and the Premier of the People's Republic of China will meet annually to provide high-level leadership and strategic direction to the relationship.
To support the work of leaders, Premier Li and I also agreed to:
• An annual Foreign and Strategic Dialogue led by the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs and China's Minister for Foreign Affairs; and
• An annual Strategic Economic Dialogue led on the Australian side by the Treasurer with the Minister for Trade and led on the Chinese side by the Chairman of China's National Development and Reform Commission.
The relationship will be described as a Strategic Partnership to reflect the importance both countries place on the relationship, its expanding scope and depth and the shared interests of both sides in a stable and peaceful Asian region.
In the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper, the Government committed itself to extending Australia's bilateral architecture with China through regular high-level meetings between leaders and senior ministers.
Today's launch of the Strategic Partnership delivers on this commitment. 


Beijing, People's Republic of China
PM: I am joined by Ministers Carr, Emerson and Shorten.
We have just come from a very good meeting with Premier Li, where we had a broad ranging and very positive discussion about the relationship between Australian and China.
I have been delighted across my meetings this week with the President and with the Premier about their evident commitment to the Australia-China relationship and in the words of the President to taking that relationship to a new level.
I came here with the highest level political delegation ever fielded from Australia to China.
We came at the time when the new leadership in China had just emerged and was settling in, and we have had through discussions and work, a breakthrough in the relationship between our two countries.
We have had a very good week for Australia here in China.
The breakthrough in particular is the relationship between our two countries at leader-level and it's institutionalisation into annual leader level meetings.
We've agreed to an enhanced ministerial dialogue, which means each year there would be structured annual leaders meetings to give strategic direction to this incredibly important relationship for our two countries.
We've also agreed to enhance ministerial dialogue to support the work of leaders and that will include an annual foreign and strategic dialogue lead by the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs with the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs.
And there will also be an annual strategic economic dialogue lead by the Treasurer and the Minister of Trade, and on China's side by the Chair of the National Development and Reform Commission.
We have agreed to designate our relationship as a strategic partnership.
That is a recognition that this is a relationship of incredible importance to Australia, it's broad, it's deep, it's complex and it's a relationship that we intend to keep focusing on very strongly into the future, including through these new dialogue arrangements.
In terms of a strategic partnership from China's side, this is a relationship between us and China in terms of the annual dialogue.
This is a relationship that they have with very few countries around the world.
This is a significant breakthrough and I'm very pleased to be able to announce it today.
We have achieved other important outcomes this week.
We've strengthened the future of trade relationship through direct trade of our two currencies on the Chinese mainland.
We've bolstered business-to-business links and I've been pleased this week to see so many senior Australian business people here in China  -  great Australian companies pursuing work here in China  -  and I've been very pleased too to meet their Chinese counterparts who are also making a strong contribution to our economic relationship.
We focussed as well the all-important people-to-people links by launching an Australia Week in China to promote tourism and to promote the images of Australia in this country.
We've committed ourselves to work together on the shared challenge of carbon pollution and climate change through a carbon-trading experts group.
We've agreed to work together to deliver aid in the Asia Pacific, to respond to challenges to drug-resistant malaria.
And we will also strengthen defence cooperation through a strategic policy and military capability planning exchange.
These outcomes will well and truly build the truly comprehensive relationship with China we envisaged in the white paper, the Australia in the Asian century White Paper, our national plan for the future which we announced last year.
There are few countries more important to us than China. The outcomes we have achieved this week are a real investment in our future for all Australians.
I'm very glad that we've had such a successful visit.
I'm very happy to have shared this day with my ministerial colleagues, and I'm happy to take your questions now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the whole world is focussing on China and wants to strike up relationship with the new Chinese leadership.
You've beaten the rest of Asia to the punch by getting the strategic dialogue that only a couple of other countries of the world have.
How does it feel to have scored that sort of coup and put Australia right in the forefront of this relationship?
PM: Well I'm obviously pleased for our country. This is an important step for Australia, which is why I say this has been a good week for Australia.
A good week for Australia because this relationship is so important to us, and now with this agreement we know that we will command attention here in China, that we will have an annual level leaders' exchange which galvanises our system, their system, to prepare for it, to work through issues and to work together.
That's why it's good news for us and good news for our future.
JOURNALIST: Obviously, at government and diplomatic levels this sort of thing is seen as very important but all people in the street, people back in Australia looking at it, looking for a practical angle to it.
Can you give us some examples of what it might mean for Australians?
PM: I think people in Australia understand how important China is to our economic future. I think they understand that very deeply.
And I think people too have an intuitive sense that as China continues to rise that there are strategic changes in our region with implications for Australia and we need to be able to understand them and work through them.
I think people would understand too, that right around the world countries are competing for China's attention.
They want to come to China and be heard. They want their issues to be right there at the forefront of thinking in China.
That is understandable as this great power continues to rise.
What we have secured, through an annual leaders' level dialogue and the supporting ministerial dialogues, is a structure that says we'll be there at the table.
We won't have to compete every time to get to the table. We'll be there at the table working on the issues that deeply matter to both of us.
And of course that goes to peace and stability in our region, it goes to our economic relationship, it goes to the shared big-picture challenges of climate change that the world necessarily has to focus on, and that our two countries have to focus on.
JOURNALIST: These things can drive reform, because leaders can drive bureaucracies et cetera.
Do you have any priorities in terms of what you want to achieve now that you can get to the table with the Chinese Premier?
PM: Well we've of course had discussions at Premier level. I've met regularly with the Premier, with the President, so we've got a good relationship now.
But this is about getting to a new stage and that's why it's a real breakthrough.
The things that are on our agenda are the things that we've been working on this week; deepening our economic ties and broadening them.
We want to see diverse economic links, trade and investment links.
Strengthening our people-to-people links because nothing's more important to our understandings for the future.
Continuing to work on our defence links because that helps build trust and cooperation.
Working on shared challenges like climate change for the future.
Working on the shared challenges of development in our region where too many people die of preventable causes, and we've seen things like drug-resistant malaria.
But it's a relationship of course where we will work on the two issues that matter to Australia and China, our bilateral relationship.
But as we aspire to make this a more and more comprehensive relationship, it's also about what we can do together, working within our region and within the world, structures like the East Asia Summit and the G20 and APEC where we work together.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you give us some background as to how this came about. When did you first start working on it?
And given that the leadership change was so relatively recently, what does it mean and what does it say about how China values Australia, that this is effectively one of the first things that the Chinese leadership team has done?
PM: Well, I wrote last April, so in April 2012, to the then President, to President Hu.
But Senator Bob Carr, as Minister for Foreign Affairs, travelled to China in May 2012 and pursued some discussions. So I wrote the letter and Senator Carr was here pursuing discussions.
I then asked Dennis Richardson, who is of course a very senior and experienced public servant, to act as my special envoy on this question, and he travelled to China in September last year.
Then we knew that we would see the leadership change in China and that there were certain formal processes that needed to go through as the leadership changed.
And in the very short window, between the formal change of leadership and this visit, I spoke to the Premier by telephone.
JOURNALIST: Just a sense of the significance in terms of the history of the relationship, is it the most important development since Whitlam came here in the 70s?
PM: Look, I think when people write the history of this relationship they will, of course, always start it with Gough Whitlam and that tremendously courageous decision that he made to have diplomatic relations with China.
And sitting here today, I don't think we feel the weight of that decision perhaps the way we should. It was a truly courageous decision in its time.
And there have been steps forward in the relationship since. When the history of the relationship is written, this will be remembered-
[INTERRUPTION]
PM: When the history of this relationship is written, I think this will be remembered as a day that a big step forward was taken.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you think Gough would think or what you hope he thinks of your work today?
PM: I think, for those of us that care about this relationship, and work on this relationship  -  obviously Gough's role is the stuff of legend and the stuff of history, understandably  -  I'm not really reflecting on it through his eyes.
But certainly Gough has a lot to be proud of in creating modern Australia through what he did to create this relationship.JOURNALIST: A fairly important legacy of your prime ministership (inaudible)?
PM: This is an important breakthrough for us and I'm obviously very pleased, but I'm pleased for Australia, it's been a good week here.
It's a step forward for us as a nation, that's important for us.
It's important to the people of Australia, it's important to peace, stability, the ability to talk about those things, the ability to talk about our economic relationship in a structured dialogue every year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said, I believe you were quoted as saying at some stage that foreign policy and foreign affairs issues had not been the top priority for you in your political life.
Are you getting into it now?
PM: I've taken this question quite a few times, as it happens.
And I think what you will find I said I talked about how I would always feel very comfortable, indeed feel most comfortable in classrooms in Australia talking to kids about their future.
As I think you've seen from the nature of the foreign policy engagements that I have, I have now conspired to make sure that I now go to classrooms around the world.
And I very much enjoyed the exchange with the young people in the classroom today.
And those exchanges, obviously these important leader-level discussions are the stuff of foreign policy, but I'd have to say it's often the exchanges that I have with young people, like the one I had today, which gives me the most heartwarming sense about the future for our two countries.
JOURNALIST: Notwithstanding my earlier technical slip up, could you tell us about how you found Premier Li Keqiang and do you think also that perhaps he's a Premier that, given his fluency in English, his affinity with the west, that he is maybe a leader with which Australia can build, sort of a deeper and warmer relationship, that people had previously tried to build but had be less successful with the likes of say Hu Jintao?
PM: Human beings are different, and everybody‘s got a different style and different personality.
I enjoyed my engagements with President Hu and with Premier Wen. I had the opportunity to meet Premier Li before.
We in fact reflected on our earlier meetings in 2009 in Australia and then in 2011 when I travelled here as Prime Minister.
He's an outgoing person to talk to, a real sense of humour, quick to smile and to share a joke. I think in an Australian style we enjoy that.
We like a sense of friendly warmth in a conversation rather than all the formality that can go with these occasions, so I did get a sense of warmth and engagement from him.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you had quite length talks with the Premier today. What other dimensions of the relationship did you get into?
And as you foreshadowed in recent days, did you speak about the Australians detained in China? If so, what did you say, and what did the Premier say?
PM: I did raise a range of consular issues.
I'm not intending to go into them by the names of individuals. People that are the subject to consular cases are entitled to their privacy too.
But I raised a range of consular issues, because in terms of raising that kind of matter it's appropriate to do it with the Premier and so I did that today.
Our discussions on consular cases will continue.
We talked broadly about our relationship, we obviously talked intensively about the annual dialogue that we're announcing today.
We talked about our economic relationship, about the steps forward we've taken on that during this visit, about our aspirations for a free trade agreement, about our aspirations for strengthening economic ties because that's good for both our countries, it's good for Australian jobs.
We talked about regional peace and security. We referred to tensions on the Korean Peninsula, we talked about the work we do in bodies like the East Asia Summit.
We talked about the defence links between our countries, our focus on things like carbon pollution and climate change, issues of cyber security, and I did canvass human rights questions including Tibet.
JOURNALIST: In your speech yesterday, you added, that you would like to see personal freedoms as something that is also pursued as China goes along the reform road.
Is that something, and does this level of talks give you more freedom or more ability to raise those more pointed questions, like human rights and like the need for people to have a greater sense of personal freedom?
PM: We have a continuing Human Rights Dialogue with China.
When I've met leaders in the past, I've raised human rights. I did it on both occasions, the meeting with the President and the meeting with the Premier today.
That Human Rights Dialogue will continue. And I do believe that we have a relationship where issues are not off the table, they are on the table for discussions.
JOURNALIST: A lot of countries would potentially want to have this deal. Why us?
What do we bring to the table? Is it a whole lot of iron ore? Or what is it that they've said we'll do it with you, I think there are only three other countries that China has such a relationship with.
And a second question: on defence is there anything specific? Are we going to have joint exercises or anything like that?
PM: On the defence question, the step forward we've taken today in this dialogue in our defence arrangements.
So we have a standing dialogue that I've spoken to you about during the course of this trip, a military-to-military dialogue.
There will also be a policy-level dialogue which will happen between our militaries. So this is all about building trust and confidence and transparency for the future.
On “why us,” I think it says something about how China views its relationship with Australia.
Yes, we have got a strong economic relationship, but that has been continuing for some years now, so I think that the aim here is to be broadening and deepening the relationship, so it is truly a comprehensive one.
And that is why it requires annual leaders-level exchanges, and I think that is what China sees in it, a kind of deeper relationship with Australia.
JOURNALIST: How was the meeting with the chairwoman of Huawei today?
PM: I've met a number of Chinese business leaders whilst I have been here in a series of business of events.
Huawei is a major employer in Australia. It has created a number of Australian jobs. It's a substantial seller of telecommunications technology in Australia.
So, just like I have met other Chinese business leaders, I met with the chairwoman of Huawei today.
I did note that at the business leaders' dialogue I was at that she was the only woman representative from China amongst the business leaders gathered there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you discuss the NBN decision?
PM: No, we did not.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you that a boat packed with asylum seekers sailed into Geraldton harbour today, and is it proof that the Government has lost control of our borders?
PM: I'm going to leave that matter for the responsible-
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm obviously here for a different purpose here today so that will be dealt with back home.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I have a question about your remarks in your speech today about defence. You mentioned the live-fire exercises that Australia and China do together.
You also mentioned that you would like to bring the US into some sort of three-way exercise.
Have you approached the US on this? Is this something that is an ongoing project with the US, and has there been any reaction from the Americans?
PM: We've certainly discussed with the US and it has been the subject of discussion with other countries in our region.
Having exercises that bring together military forces, our own US forces, forces from other countries in the region, to do things like disaster preparedness exercises in the region in which we live, where we have seen so many horrible disasters that have taken so many lives.
Things like the Japanese tsunami come to mind very, very quickly, as well as what happened in Indonesia with the tsunami.
We've on more than one occasion exchanged military personnel for the purpose of going to do humanitarian assistance.
If you exercise jointly about those things, then it builds your capability for that kind of urgent response. It also builds some trust and confidence and that's a good thing.
JOURNALIST: China's traditionally not been that excited about third parties hosting or being involved in US-China defence drills.
Has there been a change of heart? What are they saying to your idea of bringing the US and China together?
And can I ask a second question. What are we going to do about the debacle of Asian languages education at schools and high schools in Australia?
PM: The answer to the first is our focus today was on this policy dialogue that I spoke of in answer to another question over here so we didn't talk about trilateral exercising during the course of the discussions today.
On Asian languages in schools, we've certainly set a big aspiration in the White Paper for children having access to a priority Asian language during school.
There's been a lot of endeavours to lift Asian language study, indeed languages study, in Australian schools. It's proved to be quite difficult to do.
I think there's two things we can do, which would make a difference.
One, we would want to embed this in our national plan for school improvement associated with our funding reforms.
So it's not an add-on to the whole schooling system and the whole school funding arrangements are over here and then you have a boutique program over here.
We want to embed it in the whole school funding arrangements. That's a new approach.
We've never tried that before, and so I think that that gives us a difference for the future.
And number two, one of the problems here is you get in a spiral down where not many people have been studying languages so that there's not many qualified language teachers.
So not every school can have a language teacher in any language or all languages and obviously it's not a sustainable vision to say in every primary and secondary school we'd have someone who can speak every language and teach in it.
But through the power of the National Broadband Network, we can in real time with high quality and definition, bringing language teaching to schools that don't have a language speaker available to them.
So I think they're things we've got to do. We've also got to be very clear with young people - and this is one of the things we wanted to spark out of the White Paper - very clear with our young people about why that real effort is worth it.
It's not easy to become fluent in another language; you are actually sitting next to very high level very skilled translator, he could be explained to you how it's not easy.
So it's not easy to become fluent in another language, so we have to be inspiring our young people to understand why all that effort is worthwhile.
And indeed, careers like yours, your own and Peter's, are things that we can point to that make that effort worthwhile.
JOURNALIST: One of the big gaps in the relationship is the FTA. Did you get a sense that that can be progressed in the next couple of years, and maybe Dr Emerson has a comment.
And I was wondering what the ministers feel was the biggest point of this exercise for them?
PM: Well, great minds think alike.
That was exactly the terminology I used in the meeting with the Premier, that it is a gap in our relationship, and we are going back into talks on the FTA in May and I'll get Dr Emerson to address those talks.
MINISTER EMERSON: We seek high ambition for the FTA.
An FTA is worth having, but if it is high ambition and that means that we need to deal with the sensitivities on both sides.
We could have a low ambition FTA, like a trophy to sit on the national mantelpiece to say we've got one, but we want it to do some work we want it to make a difference.
And the Premier today looked around and I said I'm the FTA guy so I guess I've got a special responsibility because he was looking for the FTA guy.
The reason he was looking for the FTA guy is because the Premier was very keen and spent some considerable time talking about the challenge that the great benefits that an FTA would bring.
MINISTER CARR: I don't want to add to what the Prime Minister said.
JOURNALIST: Would the National Broadband Network be at risk under a Tony Abbott Government?
PM: A very creative try but I'm leaving that to the folks back home too.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Beijing, People's Republic of China
PM: The world has woken to the news that Margaret Thatcher has died.
I did want to offer my condolences to Margaret Thatcher's family.
Margaret Thatcher was a woman who changed history for women.
Obviously, Margaret Thatcher and I did not share a political outlook on the world.
But as a woman, I am admiring of her achievements becoming the first woman to lead the United Kingdom, the first female Prime Minister there.
Many around the world will be reflecting upon her life and times today, as is appropriate with the loss of such a significant figure.
For women around the world, they will be reflecting on the loss of a woman who showed a new way forward for women and a way into leadership.
[ENDS] 


Beijing, People's Repblic of China
HOST: We're the MCs for today and we are very honoured to have you here with us today. Our students are very interested in Australia so they have some questions for you. Who would like to go first?
STUDENT: I'm very honoured to ask you this question. Before entering politics have you ever thought of being an actress or performer or something else? Were you determined to a Prime Minister when you were young?
PM: No I wasn't. So when I was your age in school, I went to school called Unley High School in Adelaide in South Australia.
When I was your age, I would say to people if they asked me what do you want to do you grow up I would say I want to be a teacher. 
So that was my first ambition to be a teacher maybe a school principal like your school principal.
But in my very last period in high school I was involved in the debate club, we used to have debates.
And a close friend of mine, her mum suggested to me I might be interested in law so I ultimately became a lawyer.
And whilst I was studying to become a lawyer I got involved in campus politics, student politics, particularly getting involved in making sure there was more money available for students and education.
And It was really that that led me into the political party I am a member of, the Labor Party and then into politics and ultimately all the way to being Prime Minister.
But as Prime Minister I try to spend a lot of time in schools, so I think there is still a secret teacher somewhere inside me.
STUDENT: Thank you very much
PM: Thank you
HOST: We have the next question here.
STUDENT: Hello my excellent Prime Minister, my name is Bruce and my Chinese name is Yu Pao.
I like doing sports so my questions what is the most popular sports in Australia and what is your favourite sport?
PM: Well that is a big question. We like to think we are pretty good at sport.
And we go to the Olympics and all the international sporting competitions with high hopes but we do know that China is getting stronger and stronger and stronger.
So there will be at least one field of endeavour where we will be competing furiously and that is on the sporting field.
For Australia, many Australians play football, we would say, soccer, many girls play netball. Many school students play basketball.
But we also have our own football codes, Australian Rules Football and we also have a lot of interest in rugby as well, through rugby league.
So lots of sports played and for Australians; one of their favourite pastimes would be going to watch sporting events or watching sport on TV  -  a nation very, very passionate about its sport.
HOST: And where is our third question?
STUDENT: My name is Zhao Fan and my question is, when you were a student what is your favourite subject? Thank you.
PM: I had a quiet a few favourite subjects, but I always very much enjoyed the study of English.
I loved reading, I still love reading.
I don't' get as much time as I used to read books for leisure because I do a lot of work and many hours of reading for work.
But still enjoy reading and always enjoyed the study of it and I am pleased that I will be able to present some books to your school which represent some of our great Australian authors.
The other thing I very much enjoyed the study of was economics; I liked trying to work out how markets work, how the economy works.
I enjoyed that study at school and at university and it has been a very useful course of study becoming Prime Minister because you worry a great deal about economic matters and making sure that people have got jobs.
HOST: It is nice to know that. Welcome the next question.
STUDENT: Your Excellency Prime Minister, my English name is Ellen and my Chinese name is Zhang Qing.
First please allow me express my admiration to you and I'm actually very honoured to have such an opportunity to ask you a few questions.
And first, as we all know, Australia has very reputation for its environment, and there is a steady increase in the economy so can you give us advice or any suggestions for environmental protection.
PM: We do have a very beautiful environment and we've learned some lessons along the way about how to manage economic growth and preserving our environment.
I wouldn't claim that we've got everything right, we've still got things to learn.
But amongst the big things we've done, we've created a very sizeable system of national parks of key areas in our nation where there cannot be development because the environment is so pristine.
And some of the things that you would recognise about the Australian nation like Uluru, Ayers Rock, like Kakadu in the Northern Territory are protected areas.
Second, we've got a system of environmental approvals for big new businesses, big new mining projects.
We've worked through quite carefully to make sure that there are rules and regulations so that there is a minimal impact on the environment.
We've got quite strict rules about air quality and pollution and I know this is a big issue for you, and you would be thinking about this issue as young people growing up in Beijing, and we've just moved to putting a price on carbon in order to reduce the amount of carbon generated by our economic activity, because we want to play our part in tackling climate change, and for your generation there will be no more significant issue than the changes that are being brought to our planet by climate change and what we can do together to try and mitigate it's effects and to try and slow the amount of carbon we are putting into the atmosphere and consequently the pace of climate change.
STUDENT: And also because of Australia's beautiful environment more and more Chinese travellerschoose Australia as their travel destination so I would like to ask will the Australian Government, put forward some policy for Chinese travellers, and maybe after the prorogationof the policy, do you have any expectations to your tourism?
PM: Yes, well we do see a lot of Chinese tourists, more than 600,000 each year and we want to see more, we are aiming to increase that to one million, so we would like to see more tourists,
We also see a lot of Chinese students come and study in Australia; it's the single biggest grouping of students studying in Australia from overseas, is from China and we would like to see that increase as well.
There are a few things we can do to keep strengthening that.
One is coming to China and talking about Australia and during the course of this visit I've announced that we will have an Australia in China week to bring to people's attention all of the things you can come and do if you visit Australia.
Number two, we want to keep strengthening the quality of our education.
We've got good quality universities we want to keep improving them and keep attracting students.
We also want to see young Australians come here and study, and we've announced a special programme to do that during this visit because the exchange should be two ways.
And then there are some things about travelling that were seeking to make easier, including electronic visas in passports, and something that we're trying called Smartgate so that when you arrive at an Australian airport you just need to put your passport on a document reader and that is enough for your access to Australia rather than having to do a lot of form-filling and waiting for your passport to be stamped and those kinds of things, so we want to make it a good experience when people come.
And I certainly hope that at some point during the course of the next few years, after you've left school, each one of you gets the opportunity to come and visit.
STUDENT: I know you are the first female Prime Minister in Australia and that's really a great accomplishment, so what do you think is the key to your success, and are there any people who act as your models and motivate you?
PM: That's a good question, I don't think that there's one key to success.
I think that there are a few things you need to think about.
Whatever path in life you choose, nothing happens without hard work and dedication, and I know that that's one of your mottos of your school: hard work.
And it's true that success in life, whatever field you're in, requires application and diligence and hard work.
For me, in this life, what has been very important was to be very clear about why you do it, what's the purpose of doing it, and the special pleasure in being Prime Minister is that you get to think about your country, of which I'm fiercely proud, you get to think about what would make it an even stronger country for the future and then you get to implement the policies and plans that will get you that stronger future, that's the special pleasure in it.
And once again, whatever walk of life you're in, I think it's really being clear what you want to do and what you want to achieve, being really clear about your goals.
For me as the first female Prime Minister, I'm also a very certain that men and women are equal to each other, and that it's important that in every field of human endeavour, that we see an equal number of women and an equal number of men.
Our society is not there yet, but it's changing, as is Chinese society changing for women.
As for role models, there have been some women in my own life that have been important role models for me,
Certainly my mother, probably my first and most important role model as a woman, and then in my political life some of the women who were succeeding in politics before me including a woman who became the leader of the state, the province in which I lived, Joan Kirner.
She was, and continues to be an important role model for me.
STUDENT: Nice to meet you, I am Khao Liang and my English name is Kevin, so I have a question here.
What are the advantages, do you think, that attract more and more Chinese students to study in Australia?
PM: I think the advantages, I think the things that people see studying in Australia are the quality of our universities  -  we do have very high quality universities.
I think the nature of the study environment, Australia is a beautiful place, we talked about that, it is a harmonious, multicultural society, Chinese students are made welcome.
I think that that kind of experience, living in Australia is also highly sought after, and I would hope too, that it's a reflection that young people in China see Australia and China having a strong future together, and so it's a good way of making that link early in life.
Getting Australian friends, Australians having Chinese friends, and if you have those relationships when you're young then they can make a difference throughout your life, so I hope that people would see it that way.
I most certainly see it that way, I think there's nothing more important to the long term future of the connections between our two countries than those connections that are forged person to person, student to student when people are young.
HOST: I think that's already persuading someone to go to Australia. Who has the next question?
STUDENT: Dear Prime Minister, as we know Australia has many precious nature resources such as the Great Barrier Reef.
What is the effect of global climate change on Australia's local environment and what are you going to do to deal with that?
PM: We spoke about some of the great icons that we've got on our land.
The Great Barrier Reef is such a precious place, and we are very focused on our marine environment and the future of the Great Barrier Reef.
Just like we've declared parks on the land, national parks, where we seek to keep the environment clean and pristine, we have now announced that there will be huge marine parks too.
I think it's true that we've got the biggest set of marine reserves in the word, and we are putting aside, well, making special rules, about marine environments to keep them healthy for the future, and a big focus of that is on the Great Barrier Reef because of its special significance, not only to us, but to the world, because it is truly one of the natural wonders of the world.
STUDENT: Thank you very much.
HOST: And so who is next?
STUDENT: It is my great honour to ask you a question.
My name is Zhong Su, but you can call me Joe.
The first time you have come to Beijing, of course my home town, and this is of historical and cultural significance, so I want to ask you that, which Chinese element do you like most?
PM: I've had the opportunity to be here before, on this trip I'm not really having the time to get out and about and just wander the streets and talk to people, or even do some of the delightful things like go to the Forbidden City. I've had opportunities to do that in the past.
For me, when I come to China, the thing that always most intrigues me about it is the growth and change.
Every time you come you can see spectacular differences from the last time you came so rapid is the growth and change here, and for us, from a nation of around 23 million people, to come to a nation of 1.3 billion people on such a journey and change, is exciting, intriguing and we're always mesmerised by understanding, how your nation is managing those huge changes.
And we're very admiring of the things that have been done to lift hundreds of millions of people out of poverty and the things that are being done to make sure that young Chinese students like you have the best of opportunities and possibilities for the future; so a very exciting place to be and a very intriguing place to be.
STUDENT: It's a pity that every time you come to here and are hurried and cannot see it, so maybe next time you come to China for personal, I would like to be your guide.
PM: Thank you! We'll have to make sure we can find you and we can stay in touch.
STUDENT:  Hi, my name is Cathy and my question is something about politics.
You know as the old saying goes, it's always hard to please all.
And every time you make a decision, there will be supporters and opponents. 
How do you take measures to satisfy more people as possible and can you give me some examples?
PM: Inevitably, when you take big decisions about the future there will be many perspectives and it can be controversial and lots of views and lots of debate.
That, in many ways, can be a good thing, because it means that people are looking at all sides of the argument and in government we try and work through issues and look at them from all perspectives so that we make good decisions, and having discussions and debate is part of the process within government, within the highest level of government at Cabinet and then within our Parliament which ultimately passes the laws.
To take one example of something we've had a big debate about, we had a big debate, nationally, about putting a price on carbon.
I know here in China that here in Beijing you are relatively soon are going to move to an emissions trading scheme to try and reduce the amount of carbon.
We've put a price on carbon and we'll have an emissions trading scheme staring on 1 July 2015 and I know a number of your provinces will trial such a system too, covering more than two hundred million people, so a lot of people.
In the debate like that, what I think is important is that you get people the facts and once a system has started, you let them judge for themselves about whether it's working or not.
In our own nation there was a lot of fear and concern in the lead up to that price on carbon starting.
But since, people have been able to experience it working and see that there is really nothing for them to be concerned about.
So getting the facts out there is important, putting the arguments is important, and not being, not being surprised when people have a variety of views and then trying to work them through.
STUDENT: I have one question I want to ask you, As the environment continues to grow, the parents' expectations for their children is increasing.
In China the best way to success is receiving a higher education.
Chinese students are facing increasing pressures, we have little other time. What do you think about study pressures?
PM: I think there are a lot of pressures on young people today, that's also true in Australia where there's a lot of focus on getting a great quality education, and as Prime Minister I focus on making sure that each of our children gets a great quality education.
In the final year of high school when people do their big assessments and big exams, a lot of students in Australia feel that there's a lot of pressure on them at that point.
Now, in some ways, that's got an upside because people strive hard to achieve, and that's a good thing.
But we don't want those pressures getting out of control and weighing people down too much, so the message I always try and give students is, work hard, aim high, but keep a sense of perspective about it too.
It's a long life, and sometimes if you didn't do as well the first time around as you would have liked, then you can go back, you can try again, you can find another pathway.
There are options and choices and so, whilst you should always be striving to do the best you can, if it doesn't work for you, then don't let that defeat you, try and think about what's the alternate way through to realising your dreams and goals
And you've got to make sure, particularly as young people, that you have some fun along the way, I think that's part of being young, so you've got to find some time for yourself and for your friends.


Sydney
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PRIME MINISTER: Can I thank everybody for stepping forward and accepting the invitation to be involved in the B20. I know that this is a room of very busy people with very major responsibilities, and to take on another responsibility is a big thing to ask.
But I did want to say the work will be worthwhile because of the opportunity in front of us; how big that opportunity is.
And it's a big opportunity for us as a nation and for the business community of Australia, and there's a lot we can do working together to shape this opportunity.
To just set the back-drop, of course we are a nation that can say we worked hard together to come out of the global financial crisis well and any time you travel overseas we are reminded of the strength of that achieved.
It is a good time for Australia on the world stage, we have got the endorsement of countries around the globe to be on the UN Security Council; we've got their trust and confidence to take that role.
We have worked to strengthen relationships with so many of our key partners.
If we look around our region of the world, as Prime Minister I've certainly worked to take the next step in our historically deep relationship with the United States as it rebalances towards our region of the world.
I've worked to strengthen our long standing relationship with Japan, and I think we've injected some new warmth into that relationship because I was the first foreign leader to travel there after the tsunami which was very much valued.
I've cleared out of the way some of the difficulties that we had with India and created a strategic partnership there which stands us well for the future.
We continue to strengthen and diversify a good relationship with Indonesia, and now of course, following my visit to China, we have reached a new level in our relationship with China.
Now, all of these things come about because of patient and long-term work.
What we were able to secure in China actually started more than 12 months ago and it's been a day-by-day proposition to shape it, but that work pays dividends.
What is true of those relationships is also true as we shape the G20 being hosted in Australia.
It will take a lot of work but it is a huge opportunity to see the leaders of the world's major economies gather here representing as they do 85 per cent of the global economy, 80 per cent of world trade, two-thirds of the world's population all gathered in Australia.
There's the leader-to-leader dialogue and there are many issues that we need to work through at that level.
The G20 has a strong focus on jobs and growth. It's been a great response mechanism during the depths of the global financial crisis.
It will be part of our responsibility to ensure that there is new impetus in the G20 for jobs and growth as economies around the world move into recovery, some more quickly than others.
And we will have things to do too, like considering difficult questions on protectionism and free trade because the agreed standstill on new protectionist measures comes to an end in 2014, so what agreement we can secure here in 2014 is pivotal for the future of world trade.
So there's a lot to do at the leader level, but I want this to be a genuinely inclusive process that gives the business community a real opportunity to be involved, that the opportunity is also extended to labour, to civil society, to young Australians and particularly young entrepreneurs.
I have participated in a number of multilateral engagements now and bilateral engagements where there are business forums as part of the work.
They can, if they aren't carefully structured, be discussions of platitudes. That's not what I want for the B20.
I don't want it to be a glamorous courtesy call. I want it to be something of real substance.
To achieve that we've got to do the hard thinking now; we've got to be very clear about the priorities of the B20. If we try and put a priority on everything then we may as well have prioritised nothing.
You know that in your day-to-day work where you've got to be very rigorous about the setting of priorities for your businesses  -  that is true of the engagement in the B20.
For it to make a real difference at leader level, it not only has to be sharp on the priorities but sharp on the perspectives for the future.
What is it that you are asking leaders to do and to take away with them after this engagement  -  that message needs crystal clear.
As well as thinking about how we prioritise and get the measure to the assembled leaders, there's of course all of the opportunities that come with business-to-business interface.
We will have some of the best and brightest global business leaders here. This is a good opportunity to expand our business network and our set of business opportunities, and how we best seize that of course falls to us working in partnership with this group.
So, I'm really looking forward to it. I'm very enthusiastic about the task.
I certainly come back from China with a real sense of optimism and confidence about what we can achieve as a nation and in this format.
We worked hard to secure the G20 here. We're going to get to showcase our nation. We're going to get to showcase Queensland.
And what better introduction could there be to the Deputy Prime Minister than that, so I'll hand over to him now.
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER: Thanks very much Prime Minister. It's not only an opportunity to showcase our nation and also a chance to showcase Queensland.
But it's also an opportunity, a really important opportunity for Australia to mould a global agenda through the G20.
Those of us who sat around the table almost five years ago  -  when critical decisions had to be taken, where there was a need for cooperation between the developed world and the developing world  -  knew a lot was a stake.
And what we got from that for period of a couple of years was a common purpose.
Not just a common purpose between developed and developing countries but also between communities, and most particularly I think between business communities.
So I think there's a real opportunity here for the business community in particular, but civil society more broadly, to input into a broader and better G20 agenda.
As the Prime Minister said before, sometimes if we're doing too many things at the G20, the central purpose gets lost.
We've had I think a very good speech by Christine Lagarde overnight which makes this very important point, and this is what we've been arguing right through the last five years at the G20, and it's more important than ever right now that the G20 must concentrate on an agenda which lifts growth. An agenda which creates wealth, lifts growth and therefore supports job creation.
Because if you look around the global economy at the moment we're doing pretty well here, but plenty of other countries are not.
With very high levels of unemployment around the world the G20 needs to refocus on a growth agenda to support jobs in both the developed and developing world.
And of course at the moment with global growth having a three in front of it, we're not making the progress that we need to make to not only create jobs and develop countries but to lift people out of poverty within countries.
So this is a great opportunity for us at every level  -  government-to-government, business-to-business, civil society-to-civil society  -  to try and refocus that agenda back to an agenda of growth.
Growth means jobs and very clearly stating that in a way which people in the street see the benefit of the G20; so much of the discussion gets so technical that it simply gets lost.
But really what's at stake here is jobs through growth and getting that agenda fairly focused through the G20.
So that's what we'll be trying to do and I'm really looking forward to working with each and every one of you in doing that.
There's a big debate, as Christine Lagarde said overnight, about the extent to which fiscal policy, particularly in developed nations, is too tight in the short-term and not tight enough in the long-term.
This has really got to be a debate about lifting growth so we can get jobs, and how we do it in the short-term but as well as the long-term, and all of the structural reforms that drive that, whether it is investments in infrastructure, education, regulatory reform  -  all of those things.
And given our record of reform as a country over 30 years we are ideally placed to lead that debate and to basically make a very significant contribution and I think we can do that together.


Sydney
PRIME MINISTER: Can I thank everybody for stepping forward and accepting the invitation to be involved in the B20. I know that this is a room of very busy people with very major responsibilities, and to take on another responsibility is a big thing to ask.
But I did want to say the work will be worthwhile because of the opportunity in front of us; how big that opportunity is.
And it's a big opportunity for us as a nation and for the business community of Australia, and there's a lot we can do working together to shape this opportunity.
To just set the back-drop, of course we are a nation that can say we worked hard together to come out of the global financial crisis well and any time you travel overseas we are reminded of the strength of that achieved.
It is a good time for Australia on the world stage, we have got the endorsement of countries around the globe to be on the UN Security Council; we've got their trust and confidence to take that role.
We have worked to strengthen relationships with so many of our key partners.
If we look around our region of the world, as Prime Minister I've certainly worked to take the next step in our historically deep relationship with the United States as it rebalances towards our region of the world.
I've worked to strengthen our long standing relationship with Japan, and I think we've injected some new warmth into that relationship because I was the first foreign leader to travel there after the tsunami which was very much valued.
I've cleared out of the way some of the difficulties that we had with India and created a strategic partnership there which stands us well for the future.
We continue to strengthen and diversify a good relationship with Indonesia, and now of course, following my visit to China, we have reached a new level in our relationship with China.
Now, all of these things come about because of patient and long-term work.
What we were able to secure in China actually started more than 12 months ago and it's been a day-by-day proposition to shape it, but that work pays dividends.
What is true of those relationships is also true as we shape the G20 being hosted in Australia.
It will take a lot of work but it is a huge opportunity to see the leaders of the world's major economies gather here representing as they do 85 per cent of the global economy, 80 per cent of world trade, two-thirds of the world's population all gathered in Australia.
There's the leader-to-leader dialogue and there are many issues that we need to work through at that level.
The G20 has a strong focus on jobs and growth. It's been a great response mechanism during the depths of the global financial crisis.
It will be part of our responsibility to ensure that there is new impetus in the G20 for jobs and growth as economies around the world move into recovery, some more quickly than others.
And we will have things to do too, like considering difficult questions on protectionism and free trade because the agreed standstill on new protectionist measures comes to an end in 2014, so what agreement we can secure here in 2014 is pivotal for the future of world trade.
So there's a lot to do at the leader level, but I want this to be a genuinely inclusive process that gives the business community a real opportunity to be involved, that the opportunity is also extended to labour, to civil society, to young Australians and particularly young entrepreneurs.
I have participated in a number of multilateral engagements now and bilateral engagements where there are business forums as part of the work.
They can, if they aren't carefully structured, be discussions of platitudes. That's not what I want for the B20.
I don't want it to be a glamorous courtesy call. I want it to be something of real substance.
To achieve that we've got to do the hard thinking now; we've got to be very clear about the priorities of the B20. If we try and put a priority on everything then we may as well have prioritised nothing.
You know that in your day-to-day work where you've got to be very rigorous about the setting of priorities for your businesses  -  that is true of the engagement in the B20.
For it to make a real difference at leader level, it not only has to be sharp on the priorities but sharp on the perspectives for the future.
What is it that you are asking leaders to do and to take away with them after this engagement  -  that message needs crystal clear.
As well as thinking about how we prioritise and get the measure to the assembled leaders, there's of course all of the opportunities that come with business-to-business interface.
We will have some of the best and brightest global business leaders here. This is a good opportunity to expand our business network and our set of business opportunities, and how we best seize that of course falls to us working in partnership with this group.
So, I'm really looking forward to it. I'm very enthusiastic about the task.
I certainly come back from China with a real sense of optimism and confidence about what we can achieve as a nation and in this format.
We worked hard to secure the G20 here. We're going to get to showcase our nation. We're going to get to showcase Queensland.
And what better introduction could there be to the Deputy Prime Minister than that, so I'll hand over to him now.
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER: Thanks very much Prime Minister. It's not only an opportunity to showcase our nation and also a chance to showcase Queensland.
But it's also an opportunity, a really important opportunity for Australia to mould a global agenda through the G20.
Those of us who sat around the table almost five years ago  -  when critical decisions had to be taken, where there was a need for cooperation between the developed world and the developing world  -  knew a lot was a stake.
And what we got from that for period of a couple of years was a common purpose.
Not just a common purpose between developed and developing countries but also between communities, and most particularly I think between business communities.
So I think there's a real opportunity here for the business community in particular, but civil society more broadly, to input into a broader and better G20 agenda.
As the Prime Minister said before, sometimes if we're doing too many things at the G20, the central purpose gets lost.
We've had I think a very good speech by Christine Lagarde overnight which makes this very important point, and this is what we've been arguing right through the last five years at the G20, and it's more important than ever right now that the G20 must concentrate on an agenda which lifts growth. An agenda which creates wealth, lifts growth and therefore supports job creation.
Because if you look around the global economy at the moment we're doing pretty well here, but plenty of other countries are not.
With very high levels of unemployment around the world the G20 needs to refocus on a growth agenda to support jobs in both the developed and developing world.
And of course at the moment with global growth having a three in front of it, we're not making the progress that we need to make to not only create jobs and develop countries but to lift people out of poverty within countries.
So this is a great opportunity for us at every level  -  government-to-government, business-to-business, civil society-to-civil society  -  to try and refocus that agenda back to an agenda of growth.
Growth means jobs and very clearly stating that in a way which people in the street see the benefit of the G20; so much of the discussion gets so technical that it simply gets lost.
But really what's at stake here is jobs through growth and getting that agenda fairly focused through the G20.
So that's what we'll be trying to do and I'm really looking forward to working with each and every one of you in doing that.
There's a big debate, as Christine Lagarde said overnight, about the extent to which fiscal policy, particularly in developed nations, is too tight in the short-term and not tight enough in the long-term.
This has really got to be a debate about lifting growth so we can get jobs, and how we do it in the short-term but as well as the long-term, and all of the structural reforms that drive that, whether it is investments in infrastructure, education, regulatory reform  -  all of those things.
And given our record of reform as a country over 30 years we are ideally placed to lead that debate and to basically make a very significant contribution and I think we can do that together. 


Sydney
The Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister today launched a key dialogue with 27 business leaders to ensure Australian business is in the box seat to take advantage of Australia's G20 Presidency in 2014.
The Australian Business 20 (B20) Leadership Group met for the first time today, bringing together senior businessmen and women ahead of next year's G20 summit in Australia.
Hosting the G20  -  which accounts for 85 per cent of the world economy - next year will be an unprecedented opportunity for Australia to drive an ambitious global economic agenda that is focused on growth and jobs.
The Australian economy continues to outperform our peers and the eyes of the world will be on us as we promote our country as one of the most attractive destinations to invest in the world.
We will work with leaders in business, unions, civil society, youth and public policy to add their unique experiences, ideas and knowledge into this new dialogue.
The G20 summit will be held in Brisbane in November next year bringing together the leaders of the most important economies to Australia. We want to ensure that Australians are engaged in the lead up to the summit.
Business will play a central role in addressing the global economic challenges facing the G20 over this year and next  -  finding new sources of growth, creating jobs and building confidence.
That is why the Australian B20 Leadership Group led by Wesfarmers CEO Richard Goyder was announced in February to advise the Australian Government on priorities for next year's summit.
This group brings together Chairs and CEOs from some of Australia's largest companies to share their views and to organise the B20 summit to be held next year. The B20 itself will bring to Australia, the heads of the largest and most significant companies from across the world.
At today's meeting B20 Chair, Mr Goyder, observed that the group would work with the wider international business community to bring their perspectives to the G20 agenda.
Mr Goyder also noted that given the significance of trade and investment within the Asian region to Australia the B20 group will deeply engage with Asian business and explore issues critical to strengthening and deepening economic relationships between Australia and Asia.
Australia's engagement through the B20 will allow our business relationships and people-to-people links with the growing Asian region to flourish fostering greater economic cooperation through the region.
The Government remains committed to working with all partners in our economy given the shared responsibility and common interest in achieving strong and balanced growth with more jobs.
The Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister also welcomed Mr Goyder's appointment of Robert Milliner as his B20 sherpa.
Mr Milliner brings great experience to the role including a long and distinguished career at leading law firm King &amp; Wood Mallesons and six years as a director of the Business Council of Australia. 


Sydney
The Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister today launched a key dialogue with 27 business leaders to ensure Australian business is in the box seat to take advantage of Australia's G20 Presidency in 2014.
The Australian Business 20 (B20) Leadership Group met for the first time today, bringing together senior businessmen and women ahead of next year's G20 summit in Australia.
Hosting the G20  -  which accounts for 85 per cent of the world economy - next year will be an unprecedented opportunity for Australia to drive an ambitious global economic agenda that is focused on growth and jobs.
The Australian economy continues to outperform our peers and the eyes of the world will be on us as we promote our country as one of the most attractive destinations to invest in the world.
We will work with leaders in business, unions, civil society, youth and public policy to add their unique experiences, ideas and knowledge into this new dialogue.
The G20 summit will be held in Brisbane in November next year bringing together the leaders of the most important economies to Australia. We want to ensure that Australians are engaged in the lead up to the summit.
Business will play a central role in addressing the global economic challenges facing the G20 over this year and next  -  finding new sources of growth, creating jobs and building confidence.
That is why the Australian B20 Leadership Group led by Wesfarmers CEO Richard Goyder was announced in February to advise the Australian Government on priorities for next year's summit.
This group brings together Chairs and CEOs from some of Australia's largest companies to share their views and to organise the B20 summit to be held next year. The B20 itself will bring to Australia, the heads of the largest and most significant companies from across the world.
At today's meeting B20 Chair, Mr Goyder, observed that the group would work with the wider international business community to bring their perspectives to the G20 agenda.
Mr Goyder also noted that given the significance of trade and investment within the Asian region to Australia the B20 group will deeply engage with Asian business and explore issues critical to strengthening and deepening economic relationships between Australia and Asia.
Australia's engagement through the B20 will allow our business relationships and people-to-people links with the growing Asian region to flourish fostering greater economic cooperation through the region.
The Government remains committed to working with all partners in our economy given the shared responsibility and common interest in achieving strong and balanced growth with more jobs.
The Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister also welcomed Mr Goyder's appointment of Robert Milliner as his B20 sherpa.
Mr Milliner brings great experience to the role including a long and distinguished career at leading law firm King &amp; Wood Mallesons and six years as a director of the Business Council of Australia.


Sydney
The Gillard Government will donate $350,000 to The Salvation Army's 46th Annual Red Shield Appeal.
The donation comes ahead of the start of the 2013 Red Shield Appeal, held over the weekend of 25 and 26 May, when thousands of Salvos and volunteers will be doorknocking across the nation.
The Red Shield Appeal is the Salvos' major fundraising avenue and the money collected through the appeal enables the Salvos to continue their invaluable work assisting Australians in need.
Each year more than one million Australians access the range of services provided by the Salvos, including emergency relief during disasters, aged care, children's services like Christmas gifts and camps, and housing for women and children affected by domestic violence.
The Gillard Government is working hard to alleviate homelessness, strengthen crisis services, support vulnerable people with financial and social support and improve housing affordability to prevent homelessness from occurring.
Yet, the sad fact remains that across the nation 2,250 people rely on The Salvation Army for accommodation each and every night.
The Salvos are an integral part of Australia's not-for-profit sector and a major partner in delivering the Australian Government's vision for a more socially inclusive nation.
The Salvation Army is helping us get support to the people who need it the most  -  from financial counselling for women in crisis, to delivering early intervention services for children and families in disadvantaged communities.
We encourage all Australians to give what they can to this year's Red Shield Appeal when the Salvos come knocking on your door. 


Sydney
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for Justice Jason Clare today announced a $40 million National Crime Prevention Fund to be funded from confiscated proceeds of crime.
The National Crime Prevention Fund will target crime hotspots.
It will fund:
• Infrastructure like closed-circuit television (CCTV) systems and lighting; and
• Youth mentoring and outreach programs run by organisations like Youth Off The Streets and Police Citizens Youth Clubs that target young people at risk of falling off the tracks and getting involved in crime.
The National Crime Prevention Fund will use the money seized from criminals to prevent crime.
The National Crime Prevention Fund is the third component of the Gillard Government's package of measures to target street crime and gang violence across Australia.
Last month the Prime Minister and Minister Clare announced a $64 million National Anti-Gang Taskforce. It will be made up of 70 members from the Australian Federal Police and State Police forces together with staff from the Australian Crime Commission, Australian Customs and Border Protection, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, the Australian Taxation Office and Centrelink.
The Taskforce will use a new Australian Gang Intelligence Centre to interpret criminal intelligence on gang activity across Australia and their links overseas. It will use this information to directly target, investigate and arrest gang members in Australia.
The taskforce will be begin in July this year and will be fully operational from 1 January 2014.
Next week, the Prime Minister will take a plan to introduce national anti-gang laws, national unexplained wealth laws and reforms to the illegal firearms market to the Council of Australian Governments meeting.
These new laws would give police across the country more powers to break up gangs, seize their firearms and seize their assets.
Politicians need to work together next week to give police these powers.
Police are seizing millions of dollars but criminals are making billions of dollars. We can seize a lot more if we give police these powers. That will provide more money to invest in crime prevention projects like this.
The National Crime Prevention Fund is made up of three parts.
Youth Off The Streets
$5 million from the National Crime Prevention Fund will be allocated to the expansion of Father Chris Riley's successful Youth Off The Streets Outreach Service.
Youth Off The Streets targets young people aged between 12 and 21 and operates in areas where young people normally gather. The service provides low key and positive diversionary activities that allow young people to interact and socialise as well as meet with youth workers.
Youth Off the Streets has achieved significant success engaging young people across New South Wales in communities like Kurri Kurri, East Cessnock, Griffith, Narrandera, Cranebrook, Blacktown, Bankstown and Doonside. In Macquarie Fields, Police have reported a 40 per cent reduction in local crime levels since Youth Off The Streets began providing outreach services in the area.
The funds will allow the expansion of the Outreach program to up to ten additional locations, expanding outreach services and reducing street crime.
Police Citizens Youth Clubs
$5 million from the National Crime Prevention Fund will be allocated to projects that will be delivered by Police Citizens Youth Clubs and Blue Light organisations.
Police Citizens Youth Clubs have a long and illustrious history in Australia.
Police Citizens Youth Clubs use a range of sporting, recreation and education programs to help young people to develop their skills, character and leadership. Their programs have proved effective in reducing crime amongst young people by providing positive interactions with police, targeting local needs and building a sense of citizenship within the communities that they work.
There are over 150 Police Citizens Youth Clubs across Australia. The linkages that exist between Police and young people in these communities stands Police Citizens Youth Clubs in good stead to target street and gang-related crime.
Each Police Citizen Youth Club will be able to apply for grants of up to $300,000 for projects that target socio-economic disadvantage and crime amongst young people.
Local councils and Not-for-profit organisations
The remaining funds in the National Crime Prevention Fund will be available for local councils and not-for-profit organisations to seek funding for projects that help to stop young people from getting involved in crime and to fund security-related infrastructure projects like CCTV cameras and lighting.
Well-planned crime prevention strategies can build the social and economic well-being of communities. It is clear that neighbourhoods that have strong community participation and connections are safer communities. The Gillard Government believes that communities are in the best position to recognise local problems and develop local solutions.
The Government has therefore made the majority of funds in the National Crime Prevention Fund available to local communities to access, either through their local council or through local non-for-profit organisations.
Applications for grants as part of the National Crime Prevention Fund will open in the first week of May and projects must be completed by the end of June 2015.


Sydney
DAVID KOCH: We are very excited here at Sunrise because a charity close to our heart is getting a welcome boost from the Federal Government. Prime Minister Julia Gillard will this morning pledge $5 million towards Father Chris Riley's Youth Off The Streets program.
The charity has been helping homeless and disadvantaged young people get back on their feet for more than 20 years.
MELISSA DOYLE: It is sensational. Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins us now from the Koch Centre at Macquarie Fields, along with Father Chris Riley. Good morning to you both.
Prime Minister, I'll start with you. Why did you choose this particular charity?
PM: Well good morning Mel and good morning Kochie. I am standing in the incredibly well-named Koch Centre with Father Riley, and we are going to make available $5 million to Father Riley's work.
And we're doing that because it's so successful in getting youth off the streets, back engaged with the mainstream of Australian life, and breaking the cycle of crime.
We don't want to see young people who lose their way then ending up becoming criminals.
When I was in western Sydney a few weeks ago we announced some measures to crack down on the really serious end of crime  -  the bikies, the gang.
But today is about diverting young people from a life choice that could be a very bad one, back onto a productive path. And no better man to guide this work than the man I'm standing right next to.
KOCH: Chris, what are you going to do with the money? What will it mean for the program? It's for the Outreach programs isn't it?
FATHER CHRIS RILEY: It is Kochie. This money will basically get us out into suburbs that we know are in trouble at the moment, but get there before a crisis happens.
You know that where we're standing now, we're in Macquarie Fields after the riot about seven years ago.
We're trying to get to suburbs so it'll all be new work that we will be opening up. Getting to suburbs across the country where we can actually get to young people overcome by an absolute feeling of hopelessness.
KOCH: Yeah, it is just terrific. And a great shot in the arm. Thank you both for that, and Chris, we'll talk regularly  -  keep us up to date with how it goes. Good to see you.
FATHER CHRIS RILEY: Thanks David, and thanks Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you.
[ENDS] 


Sydney
The Gillard Government will provide $5 million to Police Citizens Youth Clubs and Blue Light organisations across Australia as part of the $40 million National Crime Prevention Fund announced today.
Police Citizens Youth Clubs have a long and illustrious history in Australia.
They use a range of sporting, recreation and education programs to help young people to develop their skills, character and leadership.
The programs run by Police Citizens Youth Clubs have proven effective in reducing crime amongst young people by providing positive interactions with police, targeting local needs and building a sense of citizenship with the communities that they work.
Police Citizens Youth Clubs have been helping kids across Australia stay on the right track for three quarters of a century.
There are over 150 Police Citizens Youth Clubs and more than 250 Blue Light organisations across Australia. The linkages that exist between Police and young people in these communities stands Police Citizens Youth Clubs in good stead to target street and gang-related crime.
Police Citizens Youth Clubs have a long record in reducing and preventing crime amongst young people. These targeted funds will allow them to build on that and reach even more of Australia's youth.
Each Police Citizen Youth Club will be able to apply for grants of up to $300,000 for projects that target socio-economic disadvantage and crime amongst young people.
Police Citizens Youth Clubs will be invited to apply for these grants from the last week in April. 


Macquarie Fields
PM: I'm pleased to be here with Minister Jason Clare, with local member Laurie Ferguson, the Member for Werriwa.
I'm joined too by Father Chris Riley and also by Chris Gardiner who leads the PCYC movement, the Police Citizens and Youth Clubs that do so much good work.
When I was last here in Sydney's west I made some announcements about cracking down on the harder end of crime, making sure that federal police and state police worked together in strike teams to deal with gangs and gang violence; to deal with what we see from committed criminals including firearms offences, shootings in our streets.
I also announced that as a Government we would be pursuing national anti-gang laws and unexplained wealth laws.
This is making sure that criminals can't exploit loopholes by moving from state to state with inconsistent regimes, or moving money around to try and stop that money being detected.
We've got the Council of Australian Governments meeting on Friday and there I will be pursuing with state premiers and chief ministers the need for national laws.
Our criminals, the gangs, they work around the nation so we do need national laws.
I also want to make sure that we're engaged in a better effort to get at unexplained wealth; the proceeds of crime that should not be in the hands of criminals.
I want to assure my state and territory colleagues that nothing about having national laws is about the Federal Government looking to take money that is currently flowing to state and territory governments because they've cracked down on crime in their jurisdiction.
We'd make sure that crime money that is got through new laws is fairly shared around the nation and the more states go out and catch criminals and find this wealth, the more money they will get.
What should that money be used for? Well today is a great example because we as a Federal Government are going to take $40 million, which is the proceeds of crime, and put it into a National Crime Prevention Fund to make a difference for young people who are just kids who need some assistance, they're at risk of losing their way.
But if they get a helping hand at the right time, then they will go on to live a great and productive life.
I've met some of those kids today who are here building a great life for themselves. I've met some youth workers who actually started being kids themselves in some of these programs on the streets at risk of losing their way but someone reached out and helped them at the right time.
And of the people who do that reaching out and make such a difference, I'm standing here with Father Chris Riley who is known around the country for his Youth Off The Streets work.
It makes a difference to young people's lives. It breaks anything that could turn into a cycle of crime. It helps young people get back on the right path.
And we will be allocating from this $40 million fund $5 million so Father Chris Riley can expand what he does  -  not only here in NSW  -  but taking it around the nation.
We will also be allocating $5 million to the great work that is undertaken by Police Citizens and Youth Clubs, by PCYCs, and Chris is here leading that PCYC movement.
These clubs make a real difference to kids too. They're safe places, they're places where they can find other young people to talk to, to get a helping hand, to get some good advice about steering their lives onto the right path.
So I'm really pleased that Chris Gardiner is here as part of today's announcement, and thank you too for all of the magnificent work that happens from PCYCs and from the associated blue light organisations and the work that they do.
For the remainder of the funds, we will be targeting this money at hotspots around the nation where work with local communities, including things like the provision of CCTV and programs for youth, will make a difference.
So this is an announcement for the nation to make a difference for our young people and I'm very pleased to be able to do it here in Sydney's west.
I'll turn now to Minister Clare for some comments and then ask both of our Chris's to make some comments.
MINISTER CLARE: Thanks very much Prime Minister. It is great to be here in Macquarie Fields with Father Chris Riley, a friend of mine, and one of our greatest Australians who does greatest Australians who does great work in our local community here.
The work of Father Chris Riley's Youth Off The Streets has done amazing work here in Macquarie Fields.
After the Macquarie Fields riots, the work that's been done here with outreach and youth services has helped to reduce crime in the local community.
Father, you've got the same outreach services in Bankstown and in Blacktown and other parts of western Sydney.
This $5 million will enable Youth Off The Streets to now expand that outreach service to ten new locations in other parts of western Sydney, and to expand Youth Off The Streets to other parts of the country.
An organisation that does such amazing work and now with this new money will have the opportunity to roll it out to other parts of Australia.
This is a $40 million National Crime Prevention Fund using money seized from criminals; $5 million for Youth Off The Streets, but $5 million also, Chris for PCYC.
I'm a boy from Cabramatta; I grew up around the corner from Cabramatta PCYC. I know the great work that PCYC does and has done for 75 years from Tasmania to Queensland, from western Sydney to WA.
PCYCs help young people who are at risk of falling through the cracks of society and putting them on the right path, meeting up with police officers and building that respect between police officers and young people.
There's no better organisation that does that than PCYC and that's why I'm glad we've been able to give $5 million to PCYC to continue the work that you're already doing so well.
As the Prime Minister said, this money will also be allocated to crime hotspots for local councils to invest in CCTV and extra lighting to help target areas where crime is worst, and help other non-government organisations with youth outreach services to target young people at risk of falling into a life of crime.
A month ago we announced the National Gang Taskforce and the national anti-gang laws will go to a meeting of premiers next Friday.
This is about targeting young people at risk of falling through the cracks; the next generation of young people.
Can I just give you one story, one example: a young bloke that I know very well who got involved in drugs and alcohol ran away from home lived in an abandoned factory.
With the help of his mum and the help of this bloke here, Father Chris Riley and Youth Off The Streets, he's back at home now. He's at Chapel School studying in year 11, and he won an award from Youth Off The Streets recently for outstanding achievement.
He wants to finish school and he wants to join the Army. That's just one example of the work that Father Chris's organisation does to turn lives around.
There are thousands and thousands of examples of that that happen every day through the work of Father Chris Riley's Youth Off The Streets, and through PCYC and we want to do more of that work.
Just one last point: this is not taxpayers' money that we're investing here. This is money seized from criminals.
Criminals make a lot of money, billions of dollars.
The Crime Commission estimates that criminals take about $15 billion off the economy every year. They're making billions.
Police are already seizing millions of dollars, but we can seize a lot more. That's why next Friday we're asking premiers to help us establish national asset seizure laws, national unexplained wealth laws, so we can seize more money off criminals.
That will mean more money for state governments and more money for Youth Off The Streets, more money for PCYC, more money to help the next generation of young people. Thanks very much.
FATHER CHRIS RILEY: Thanks Prime Minister and Minister Clare for the contribution to Youth Off The Streets. We only get 35 per cent government funding.
When you go into an outreach service like this we go in very quickly. After the riots we were here within a few weeks. Bankstown we were there 18 months when there was a stabbing, within 24 hours.
And when we go into those hot spots, basically governments, particularly state governments will say we won't fund them. You went and did it yourself, so we only receive 35 per cent government funding.
And so this is an incredible boost but it will take us into ten new areas. It won't fill that black hole.
It means we reach more kids and right across south-west and western Sydney and other parts of the country, we have thousands of young people who have been overwhelmed by feelings of helplessness.
There's nothing for them to do. Blacktown is one of our strongest and we'll be certainly moving with this funding out to the Mt Druitt area as well.
With 27 per cent of the population of Blacktown under the age of 18, why is the highest crime rate nearly in every area in that suburb? Because it's got these kids with nothing to do and I guess one of the biggest things that pushes a boy particularly back onto the streets is not having a father. That's the biggest indicator of a kid getting into trouble, being fatherless.
We have right across this nation hundreds of thousands of kids who don't have fathers. So we will move quickly I can guarantee we'll be in two locations within three to four weeks. That's how quickly we will move.
We'll roll that across over the next three or four months. We'll certainly be in about six within three or four months as well. So we will move quickly. We'll use that funding and we'll engage kids.
One of our biggest successes is we actually  -  one of the youth workers here is now a senior youth worker was involved in the riots in those days  -  our biggest magic is employing young people from the area.
So when  -  and we'll negotiate with suburbs, we won't just land there, we'll negotiate with suburbs but we'll employ local young people from the area.
We don't care what their past has been, but they're the ones who have incredible influence over the rest of the young people in those suburbs that we're going to land in.
As I say, I'm really grateful because I always speak for PCYC saying they have to raise too of money themselves and spend too much time doing that.
So we're really glad that these guys with us are receiving this funding because as I said they do so much fundraising and that's how much of their time is spent.
I'd better not speak on their behalf, though!
CHRIS GARDINER: Prime Minister, Minister, and Father Chris, this is really important work Prime Minister, and we're grateful.
There's clear evidence that the community want to divert kid away from crime. They don't want them locked up if they can be given a second chance.
Most police officers don't want to lock kids up. And so getting resources available to police officers involved in this youth work, partnering with community groups, partnering with young men like the young men from Hyatt House that you met, that's really important.
The truancy programs, the breakfast programs, the outreach programs at night, these guys working until midnight to pick kids up and steer them in the right direction, it's really important work and we are very grateful that you've done this and the Minister's championing of this.
I grew up without a father. I was put into an intervention program out in Maroubra housing commission area. I know how important it is to have young men like the men from Hyatt House come alongside you and give you another chance.
Resourcing that work is what the community wants and we're very grateful Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you very much. This is an unusual step at a press conference, but I think those stories deserve a round of applause.
So, for our friends from the media, we'll take questions on this announcement and then we'll move to questions of the day. So can I take questions on this announcement first?
JOURNALIST: What are you hoping this might achieve?
PM: I think you've heard the stories from the people who are actually doing this work. I'm hoping that it will achieve more of what you've just heard.
Young people, a helping hand at the right time in their lives, making a difference for the rest of their lives.
We don't want to embarrass any one individual in the crowd but the fact that there is someone here who was throwing rocks during the days of the riots in this community, and is now here working to steer other young people on to a great path in life tells the story just absolutely.
That if you get a second chance, if you make a friend, if someone's there to help you at the right time in life, then it will be a positive difference for all of your life.
And I agree, we're talking here about a different problem than the problem Jason and I talked about when I last came to western Sydney.
We've got the really hardened criminals, people who are well into a life of crime, causing problems for our community, and we've got to police that strongly and that's what we're determined to do with the strike teams and the unexplained wealth laws and the anti-gang laws.
But we've got this other issue which is young people at risk of losing their way; we can make a difference to them. We know it works. These two men can tell us how it's worked and if we put some more resources in we'll make a difference.
And I think it's just a wonderful thing to take money from crooks, money out of the pockets of criminals, and to put it into the pockets of Father Chris Riley and our PCYCs to make a difference.
JOURNALIST: Where are else are putting that money? Obviously there's a lot more, does this open the door for these organisations to get something every year? You've broken new ground here, is there a commitment from you to keep slushing the funds?
PM: Certainly the commitment here to these two organisations that we've spoken about today and then the balance of the $40 million National Crime Prevention Fund will go to hot spots around the country.
So it will be about where is the need, where do we know that there's a problem emerging in the community that a difference can be made to, and one of the conversations that Father Chris and I had as we moved around is, the work that's happened here in Macquarie Fields since the days of the riots is amazing but wouldn't it be fantastic if someone had seen all of that building up and intervened before it got to that stage.
Through the National Crime Prevention Fund we're obviously wanting to identify the need, identify the hot spots and make a difference before you see that kind of really explosive issue.
JOURNALIST: How much of the total money will be going to western Sydney funds?
PM: We've got obviously the $5 million allocation here and Father Chris and his organisation will work out the distribution of that but it will take this Youth Off the Streets model nationally and we know that PCYCs work nationally and have done so for three quarters of a century. So that will make a difference around the country.
For the balance of the fund it will depend where the needs are. So we will look to see the areas of greatest need.
Yes, western Sydney has needs and communities around the country do as well, and so we will be working to channel the funds where they will make the most difference.
JOURNALIST: What do you say to people who suggest this is throwing money at western Sydney in the lead up to the election in September?
PM: As I just explained to you this is about money from crooks flowing nationally to make a difference for kids and to prevent crime in the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you think about Woodside's shelving its James Price Point project?
PM: Well as Woodside has made clear this is a decision for the company.
It doesn't relate to any Federal Government regulatory issues or state government regulatory issues.
It's an issue for the company so it's for them to deal with.
JOURNALIST: Is this a major loss to our economy; $45 billion?
PM: This is a decision for Woodside. More generally, when we look at our economy, what we are continuing to see is strong investment in resources.
We haven't seen the peak of the investment phase into resources yet and we are yet to see the peak of production phase.
You've got to remember there's a cycle here. People decide to investment, then there is intensive construction generating a lot of jobs, then what has been constructed moves into production and over decades and decades and decades we sell that resource and our nation makes money from it.
So we will be seeing the resources boom at work in our economy for a long time to come.
But I am determined as Prime Minister that we've got a resilient and diversified economy, that we don't have just one source of strength, we have many sources of strength.
And one of the things I've been doing whilst I've been in China is making sure that in this century of growth and change every sector of the Australian economy benefits from the growth and new demand that is now on our doorstep.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is Jac Nasser right to say that the demise of the Australian car industry is inevitable?
PM: I certainly don't believe so. As I've just said in answer to the question here, there's nothing we value more highly as a Government than creating jobs.
That is what we've been determined to do in the worst of global economic times and we are determined to do it now.
In order to do that you need to make sure we've got a diversified economy including manufacturing and car making is important to the continuation of a strong manufacturing sector in our economy.
That's why we've been prepared to work with the car industry and we continue to be prepared to work with the car industry because the skills and innovation that come from the car industry matter to the around one million Australians employed in manufacturing.
This comes down to what you value as a Government, what you believe is the appropriate vision for our nation's future.
For me, our nation's future should be a strong economy, a diverse economy, many areas in which Australians can find jobs and opportunity  -  including manufacturing.
We're so committed to that, we're working with the car industry, we're rolling out the National Broadband Network, we're making record investments in infrastructure and in skills because that's what will create that strong economy full of opportunity for the future.
Nothing about that future's assured, it doesn't happen by accident.
It means as a Government you've got to have a national plan and take the right decisions today.
We've got that plan, we outlined it last year, Australia in the Asian Century, and we're taking the right decisions today to make sure we've got those jobs and that opportunity in the future.
JOURNALIST: Despite what he said since she passed away, wouldn't Bob Carr be the obvious choice to attend Margaret Thatcher's funeral next week?
PM: I made a decision actually travelling back from China that I would extend this opportunity to former Prime Minister John Howard.
I decided to do that because out of the former Australian prime ministers I think he is the one with the deepest connection to Margaret Thatcher and so it was the appropriate thing for him to represent the nation at the funeral.
I'm very pleased that John Howard has accepted my invitation to attend the funeral and to represent the nation.
JOURNALIST: Did you offer it to Bob Carr before you offered it to John Howard?
PM: No, not at all. I got on the plane from Beijing, as I said before, it's been two days, Beijing to Macquarie Fields; here I am. But I got on the plane from Beijing and I was reading the coverage actually in the Chinese newspapers, the English language newspapers, about the arrangements for Baroness Thatcher's funeral and at that point I decided we should extend the invitation to former Prime Minister John Howard.
JOURNALIST: The Opposition says Bob Carr should apologise to Mrs Thatcher's family for raising allegations of racism, do you think he should have made those comments?
PM: I'll leave all of that to Senator Carr.
JOURNALIST: Regarding today's announcement, Tony Abbott back in March announced $50 million for a crime prevention fund as well, are you concerned about similarities there, that you may be copying?
PM: I think the Minister can give you chapter and verse on this. I can just tell!
MINISTER CLARE: Well Mr Abbott's focused on closed circuit television cameras. My view is that you can't be specific; local communities know what they need.
In some cases it's going to be more cameras or better lighting, in some cases it's going to be more money for the Police youth club or outreach services that Father Chris Riley's Youth Off the Streets program can provide.
It's local solutions for local problems; we shouldn't be prescriptive and what this fund will do is allow local communities to make an application for what they need. That includes local councils and local youth organisations.
The one guiding principle here is that they need to back an application based on crime statistics and information from police.
We need to target this money where it's needed most.
JOURNALIST: Minister, just after that, it was two months ago when we had the shock horror news conference in Canberra about sport and the Crime Commission and ASADA, do you still stand by everything that you said that day and just how bad things are?
MINISTER CLARE: Damien, I had no other choice. The Crime Commission has done a 12-month investigation that's identified links between organised crime and sport.
That's now the subject of an ongoing investigation by ASADA that will involve interviews with more than 100 people.
Now that's going to take some time but the change in behaviour has been immediate.
One of the anti-ageing clinics that the Crime Commission was concerned about has closed and not reopened.
We've got the NRL establishing an integrity unit. Injecting of players in different codes has stopped to my advice; we've got players now coming forward.
The Crime Commission made the decision to release the report and I backed them.
The idea that you could collect all this information and then not make it public is both wrong and impossible.
When you start interviewing 100 people, that information was going to get out.
No one wants drugs involved in sport, and sport will be better for the investigation that's going on.
JOURNALIST: Match fixing is heavily targeted as well but not one police force in the country is investigating match fixing.
MINISTER CLARE: I think if you go back to the report Damien, you will see that the Crime Commission identified one case there they were working with one state police on.
That's subsequently led to more work that's being done by a Senate Committee and the Crime Commission's investigation into all of these areas continues as well.
JOURNALIST: When do you expect to close the loophole regarding the migration zone that asylum seekers are taking advantage of?
MINISTER CLARE: Minister O'Connor has carriage of that legislation. His advice to me is he intends to have that legislation debated and passed through the Senate as soon as the Parliament returns.
JOURNALIST: And Minister, the Coalition announced unmanned drones as part of its asylum seeker policy, is that something that you've looked at?
MINISTER CLARE: If you look at the Defence White Paper that was released a couple of years ago you will see that UAVs are also in the Australian Government's Defence White Paper.
There's a mixture of equipment that's necessary here to patrol our borders.
Part of it is the surveillance aircraft and the patrol boats we use now.
But in the future, UAVs are the sort of unmanned aircraft that can provide this service as well.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that aircraft could have detected that boat earlier this week?
MINISTER CLARE: It all depends upon where you target surveillance.
And as I said, we target our patrol boats and our surveillance aircraft to where boats are travelling to Australia in the north-west.
The initial interviews that have been conducted with the people on this boat indicate that they were intending to travel to New Zealand rather than Australia, but those interviews need to continue and I've asked Customs and Border Protection to conduct a review based on those interviews and advise me whether there's any change needed to their positioning or posture.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
MINISTER CLARE: No, no, it's two separate things. They're already embedded in the Defence White Paper so this is separate from the issues that occurred this week.
PM: Okay, thank you very much. 


Sydney
The Gillard Government will provide $5 million to Father Chris Riley's Youth Off The Streets Outreach Programs as part of the $40 million National Crime Prevention Fund announced today.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Home Affairs Jason Clare made the announcement at the Koch Centre for Youth in Macquarie Fields.
The Koch Centre was opened by Youth Off The Streets in January 2011. It is named in recognition of Libby and David Koch who have shown enormous commitment to helping disadvantaged young people turn their life around.
Youth Off The Streets began providing outreach services in Macquarie Fields in 2005 as a way of re-engaging young people in the area with the community, education and employment. Since that time, Police have reported a 40 per cent reduction in local crime levels.
Youth Off The Streets has achieved similar success engaging young people across New South Wales in communities like Kurri Kurri, East Cessnock, Griffith, Narrandera, Cranebrook, Blacktown, Bankstown and Doonside.
Youth Off The Streets targets young people aged between 12 and 21 and operates in areas where young people normally gather such as parks or sporting facilities. The service provides low key and positive diversionary activities that allow young people to interact and socialise as well as meet with youth workers.
The National Crime Prevention Fund, including the Youth Off The Streets component, will be funded from confiscated proceeds of crime.
The use of these funds will allow the expansion of the Outreach program to up to ten additional locations, expanding outreach services and reducing street crime.
“This investment from the Federal Government will enable us to reach out to several more struggling communities with a focus on education and employment programs,” Father Riley said.
“The young people in these areas face lives of marginalization, disadvantage, abuse, neglect, homelessness and family breakdown. By focusing on these areas, we can engage these young people in need of support, in creative, flexible and diverse activities and structured outcomes based programs that provide them with opportunities for them to grow and be part of their community.”
The funds will be used to employ additional youth workers, lease shopfronts in each of the additional locations, provide vehicles so the youth workers can meet young people at locations where they normally gather and purchase food supplies for the outreach programs. 


Sydney
Baroness Thatcher, the longest serving British Prime Minister of the twentieth century, died on 8 April 2013 at the age of 87.
The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom has announced that Her Majesty The Queen has consented to award Baroness Thatcher a ceremonial funeral with military honours.  The service will be held at St Paul's Cathedral, London, on Wednesday, 17 April 2013.
I have invited the Honourable John Howard OM AC to represent the government and people of Australia at the funeral service.  Mr Howard has kindly agreed.


Canberra
Counselling and support services will be available to participants of the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse thanks to $44 million from the Gillard Government.
The Government is seeking applications from eligible organisations to apply for funding to deliver services such as counselling, support and case management to individuals and affected family members before, during and after their engagement with the Royal Commission.
The Government understands the importance of ensuring that survivors of child sexual abuse are supported to participate in the Royal Commission.
Organisations that provide specialist support services such as counselling and case management as well as those that support people from a diverse range of backgrounds, including indigenous Australians, people living with disability and people who speak English as a second language, are encouraged to apply.
The Royal Commission, led by Justice Peter McClellan AM, is inquiring into how institutions with a responsibility for children have managed and responded to allegations and instances of child sexual abuse and related matters.
The Commission is investigating where systems have failed to protect children, and will make recommendations on how to improve laws, policies and practices to prevent and better respond to child sexual abuse in institutions.
The Government is also establishing a free national legal advisory service for people engaging or wishing to engage with the Royal Commission.
The free legal advisory service will provide people with legal and procedural advice on important issues such as preparing submissions to the Royal Commission.
Specialist support services will complement the legal advisory services as well as any service provided from within the Royal Commission.
This Government believes every child has the right to grow up safe and strong, and recognises the terrible lifelong consequences of child sexual abuse.
This Government will do everything it can to make sure that what happened to children in the past is not allowed to happen again, and is committed to doing everything it can to help survivors of past abuse receive support and justice.
Further information about Royal Commission support services and how organisations can apply for funding is available at www.fahcsia.gov.au, or by emailing rcsupportservices@fahcsia.gov.au



PM: Yes it certainly is enough to do the job, and we've worked hard to get this model right.
Taking the insights from David Gonski's work and the panel that worked with him to create a new school resource standard and loadings in that standard to deal with things like disadvantaged kids and indigenous kids who need more resources in their education to get a truly great education.
And as a government, we've made some tough decisions to ensure that the money is available, which is why I can today put an offer to premiers and to chief ministers around the country that if they sign on to this new system of school funding and school reform, then we will be able to put in $2 to their $1 to get to $14.5 billion extra over the next six years, and we will index at 4.7 per cent and ask them to index at 3.
HOST: You're setting a national standard of funding per student. What will happen to schools already above that?
Will they lose their funding or receive less?
PM: For schools that are above the school resource standard, they will continue with their current funding.
Their indexation rate will be at 3 per cent.
That is they will get the same arrangements as they would have if the old funding model continued.
HOST: Why take it from the universities to give it to the schools?
Isn't the Opposition right in suggesting you're in effect robbing Peter to pay Paul?
PM: I find this quite laughable from the Opposition.
When we came to government, we found that the former Howard Government had run a steam roller over Australia's universities.
They had neglected them and we needed to work with our universities to rebuild them and their funding.
So we have increased funding for universities by 56 per cent, by more than half.
Now what we are asking universities to do is to accept an efficiency dividend, one year at 2 per cent, one year at 1.25 per cent.
Their funding will still continue to grow, not as quickly as they might have anticipated, but still continue to grow against a backdrop of a huge increase in funding.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you so much.
PM: Thank you.


Canberra
PM: I'm here with Minister Peter Garrett and with Parliamentary Secretary Jacinta Collins.
Today, I am launching the biggest changes to school education in our nation for 40 years.
Today, I am announcing a plan. Today, I am announcing a plan to properly resource teachers, classrooms and kids for generations to come.
And these new resources, this new money, comes with new ways of working to ensure that every child in every school reaches their full potential.
For me, it was education and getting every child a great education that brought me into politics as a moral cause. That drove me into politics to start with, and it's what drives me today.
But as Prime Minister too I have had many insights into how important education is to the future of our economy. I've been able to travel our region of the world; I am very familiar with how countries in our region and around the world are improving their education systems.
Put simply, we cannot have the strong economy that we want tomorrow unless we have the best of education in our schools today.
That is why the plan that I'm announcing today is a plan to ensure that our schools are in the world's top five by 2025, to make sure that our children are getting a world-leading education.
The plan means better resourcing and better schools. It means a stronger, smarter and fairer Australia for the future.
Today, I will explain what we are doing, what we are asking the states and territories to do and why it matters so much to our nation's future.
But before doing so I do want to acknowledge that we have only reached this day because of a lot of hard work done to date.
That hard work, that went into creating My School so every Australian could know what was happening in every school and the resourcing available to every school.
The work put in to create a world-leading curriculum, the new Australian National Curriculum; the way we have worked with principals and school communities in many parts of the country to prove that if you join new resources with new ways of working, then you give kids a better education.
The new buildings and new equipment we have brought to schools around Australia; the work of David Gonski and the eminent Australians who served on his panel to give us key insights about the best way forward on school funding.
And all of the work that has happened since through the work of the Minister, Parliamentary Secretary Collins, the work of public servants here in Canberra working with education stakeholders around the country. I thank people for that spirit of endeavour, and that hard work.
So what are we doing? Well first, we are creating a school resource standard. That is the amount of money we know is what is needed to ensure that kids get a great education; the amount of money necessary to ensure kids do well at school.
Over six years, we will start moving to that school resourcing standard.
We will increase school funding so that in every school in our country  -  state schools, Catholic schools and independent schools  -  we have funding around the school resource standard for the education of children.
The base amount of that funding in the school resource standard for primary school students is $9,271 per student, and for secondary students is $12,193.
But that money is also joined by loadings  -  extra resources to cater for the fact that we know some kids need more effort if they are to succeed at school.
So extra funding, new loadings, as part of the school resource standard will be made available.
For those kids that come from poorer homes, for Indigenous children, for children who are educated in small schools or remote and regional schools. For children from non-English speaking backgrounds for whom English is a challenge, and of course for students with disabilities too.
We know that this combined  -  the school resource standard and the loadings  -  are enough to enable kids to get a great education. And we also know overwhelmingly schools have less resourcing available to them today than that.
The school resource standard means that the way we are treating funding is based on children's needs. It's children that are at the heart of the system  -  their needs and what is necessary for every child to reach their full potential.
The school resource standard will be fully publicly funded in state schools.
Non-government schools will get a proportion of the amount per student which is adjusted according to the capacity of those school communities to make private contributions, as is currently the case.
All loadings will be publicly funded in every school, so every student who needs extra support can get it.
Now the extra base funding necessary to get us to this school resourcing standard over six years is $14.5 billion. It's a lot of money, but I believe it is a wise investment in our children's future and in our nation's future.
Getting there will not only require that base funding, it will also require the Australian Government to index its contributions at 4.7 per cent, which we are prepared to do.
We will be calling on states and territories to index their contributions at least at 3 per cent.
So, to get there, today I make an offer to premiers and to chief ministers around the country, which is for the extra money required to get us to the school resourcing standard for every $1 they are prepared to put in to get there, I am prepared to put in $2.
The Federal Government, prepared to put in a 65 per cent share, basically a two-for-one offer; $2 from the national government to $1 from state and territory governments in their jurisdictions to get our kids to where they need to be with the resources at their disposal to have a great education.
A two-for-one offer to ensure that around the country we are properly resourcing teachers, classrooms and children for generations to come.
In addition, I will be saying to state premiers there's the two-for-one offer, you must index at at least three per cent, and you must stop your cuts to education.
No more taking money out of schools as we have seen around the country.
I will also be saying to premiers and chief ministers when they meet here in Canberra on Friday that these new resources must be joined to our national plan for school improvement.
What should people expect to see from that national plan? Well, they should expect to see changes in their child's classroom, like children having personalised learning plans.
What does that mean? It means that the child who's at risk of falling behind gets the extra help he or she needs to catch up with the rest of the class. Things like reading recovery.
For the child who is doing so well that they're finding the work of the classroom boring, a personalised learning plan which keeps extending them and adding to their knowledge and their capacities for the future.
It means making sure we get the best into teaching and then we support them during their teaching career so that they can always be at their best as a teaching professional; supporting them so they can be truly great teachers.
It means working with their teachers to help them deal with some of the newer challenges or some old challenges that show in new ways today, including bullying in classrooms and disruptive behaviour from some students which mean the rest of the kids don't get a chance to learn.
It means schools having access to specialists, people like librarians, people like language teachers and certainly embedded in our improvement agenda for Australian schools is students having access to a priority Asian language so our kids can have to ability to speak to languages of our region.
It also means the best of equipment; the smart boards, the iPads, the learning tools of this century.
And it means that every school must have a school improvement plan and there must be complete transparency about how schools are striving to improve and how well they are doing in acquitting themselves against the school improvement plan  -  how much better they are getting.
Now, if we fail to get this done, where does it leave our nation?
Well it means our nation is left with the old Howard model for funding of schools.
It means our schools will be $5.4 billion worse off in contributions from the Federal Government and that will be joined by cutbacks from state governments around the country.
It means a future of underfunded schools.
It means a future where school systems  -  state schools, Catholic schools, independent schools  -  continue to have to fight amongst each other for the limited resources that are available on the table.
This, in my view, is a recipe for educational disadvantage, for social division and for, at the end of the day, a weaker economy than we would otherwise have as an Australian nation.
It is therefore vital that we get this right for the future; that we are increasing funding for our schools, not cutting it.
That we, as an Australian Government, seize our responsibilities to every child in every school; independent schools, Catholic schools and public schools.
It's vital that we as a nation seize this moment to make a difference for every child in every school for the long term. This is a plan not just for school year 2014, but for generations to come.
I turn now to Minister Garrett for some comments.
MINISTER GARRETT: Thanks Prime Minister, and there's no question that education is the great enabler.
And today, what we're saying is that the nation needs a plan to make sure that kids around the country get the support they need to do the best they can and of course correspondingly for both those children and their families, and the nation to benefit in the future.
A National Plan for School Improvement means that we're putting education right at the front of our vision for Australia; an Australia that is well-trained, highly skilled and where kids in schools now get high-paying jobs in the future, not only here but of course in the increasingly important Asian region.
If I look at schools, in all of the schools that I visit, I know that we can provide targeted additional resources and investment that will make a big difference to the kids in those schools.
And if we look at an average figure of $4000 per student that is the kind of money which might help that kid read or write better.
It's the kind of money that might mean that when he or she goes into the library, there's a specially trained person there to help them as they research for their assignments or for their exams.
If we apply these additional resources, we know on the back of the investment that we've made in our literacy and numeracy national partnerships, that we will see kids lifted off the low bands towards the national minimum standard and beyond.
And that's so important for them; it's important for them and their wellbeing.
It's important for us and our nation.
The National Plan for School Improvement has been the subject of considerable work with state governments, state officials and the non-government schools sector.
And I want to put on record my appreciation, as well as the Prime Minister has, for all of the long-term hard effort that has gone into bringing us to this point.
It's a very big day for school education in Australia, this announcement, and I think there are many, many mums and dads, many teachers, many principals and many people involved in schooling around Australia who will recognise that.
Importantly, given that we have provided investment over time, targeted at making sure we apply those resources to the things that make a difference  -  quality teaching, lower socio-economic communities and literacy and numeracy, we are now in a position working with the states to make that we have a national plan which applies those resources on the basis of need across school sectors and across states as well.
What else will happen with the National Plan for School Improvement? Well as the Prime Minister said, for each school to have a school improvement plan, for the principal to have additional power and autonomy to determine how their school is teaching effectively.
For teachers coming into the school to be the best and the brightest in our classrooms, teaching our kids as well as they can; providing them with that terrific teaching opportunity.
To make sure that we're targeting on literacy and numeracy in the early years  -  on literacy especially with the reading blitz  -  and of course on engagement with Asia and access to Asian languages is absolutely essential.
And as well as that, the provision of transparent information so that schools, parents and the community can understand how their schools are travelling and can interact and have good strong and positive relationships with the school as a whole.
I think we're laying the foundations for Australia's economic security today, but equally we're laying the foundation for each young Australian to be the best they can, to live the happiest and most fulfilling life they can, and that happens primarily if they get those opportunities in education and that's what a National Plan for School Improvement is all about.
PM: Jacinta Collins will say a few words about students with disabilities.
PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY COLLINS: Thank you Prime Minister and thank you Minister, I too would like to add my thanks to the many people that have been involved in bringing us to this place today.
Students with disability are an important part of the National Plan for School Improvement, an important area where we need to provide better support for these students and this plan will achieve that.
The Gonski review recommended that we needed to build a national data set so that we could better understand how to implement a loading for these students within the broader model.
And states and territories and the Commonwealth are well on the path of developing that information.
We anticipate a loading for students with disability will be in place in 2015.
But what will occur in the meantime is that states and territories will need to maintain their existing support for students with disability and the Commonwealth will extend the very popular More Support for Students with Disability program to ensure that the work that is occurring, not only in developing the data, but better supporting those students right now, continues until the loading is available. 
PM: I'm conscious there is a lot of information there and so I do want to say to teachers and parents who want more information, that it is available on our betterschools.gov.au website.
There will also be information available on the associated Facebook page and on Twitter.
People will want to know what this means for their child's education, and so there is reliable information there for people to absorb. We are talking about an increase of $14.5 billion of resources, on average $1.5 million for each school, on average $4,000 per student.
It's a big day, it's a big announcement and I know many parents will want to personally get the details of it.
We will turn to questions now. 
JOURNALIST: PM, your share of the funding over six years is $9.4 billion. Craig Emerson announced some cuts yesterday to help pay for this.
Is that all the budget cuts that you have planned to help fund Gonski or will you do other things in the May budget and are you going to discontinue things like computers for schools, for example and roll that money into this? 
PM: To be clear, just in terms of savings announced by the Government in recent times, there were savings across the forward estimates as a result of our package to make superannuation fairer and more sustainable for the future.
So those resources are available to support the work we now want to do in schools.
Minister Emerson yesterday did announce some changes for higher education, and let me make that very clear, we as a Federal Government, since being elected, have increased funding to universities by 56 per cent. Let me say it again  -  56 per cent.
We are asking universities for an efficiency dividend of two per cent in one year and 1.25 per cent in a second year.
What that means is that every university, having seen a 56 per cent increase in university funding, will continue to see university funding rise.
But yes, we do believe that those changes announced are appropriate to have the resources necessary for this new work in schools which is so pivotal to our nation.
And from the point of view of universities, we have focused a lot on equity, we will continue to see places grow, we will continue to see kids be the first in their family to ever get to university and as a result of improving schools, we will continue to see opportunities spread throughout Australian society.
Yes, we are rolling into this money, money that that is in a number of plans for national partnerships for schools, including the one you refer to. 
JOURNALIST: You paint yourself as the education Prime Minister and you stand here today. Why didn't you stand alongside Minister Emerson yesterday? 
PM: We thought it was appropriate to do it like this. 
JOURNALIST: Can you confirm you will sign up on Friday whichever states and territories you can get, in other words it's not an all-in or none-in system? And what is your read at the moment of whether you can get all those governments? 
PM: I'm not prepared to give a state of play around the states, but you are right. 
We are making offers to states. We have been in discussions with states, officials have been sitting together for quite a long period of time now and we will work to secure agreements with states.
If we can't get everybody in, then we will execute and implement agreements with individual states. 
JOURNALIST: You have just demanded the states that the states not cut their education budgets any further. You have virtually in the same breath acknowledged that you are cutting your education budget, your universities budget to fund this. How does that anything other than completely hypocritical? 
PM: I think that is a complete misunderstanding of how we fund higher education.
Every university in this country will see more money next year than they got this year. They will see more money the year after and more money the year after that and more money the year after that, provided of course, this Government is re-elected in September.
Obviously, what will happen if this Government isn't re-elected in September is it will be back to the bad old days before we increased funding by 56 per cent.
So putting the two together, the plan we are putting before the nation today sees funding in every university rise and sees funding for schools changed for all time into a system that will last for generations and genuinely meet students' needs. 
JOURNALIST: You are saving money from the education sector to fund this, are you not? 
PM: We have got university funding going up like that. If you go from the base we inherited from the previous government, up like that. We are going to moderate the rate of growth to that. Yes, that's true. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you have made other cuts, the teacher bonus, the computers in schools and some of the national partnerships have been delayed or cancelled as well? You've redirected a lot of this funding haven't you?
PM: You wouldn't want to believe everything you read in various newspapers and Liberal Party press releases.
But yes, it is true, what we have done with school funding. We came to office and we inherited a dreadful situation from the previous government. 
No one could even tell you where the most disadvantaged schools were.
The previous government had played a cunning and vicious game of putting sector against sector; independent schools, Catholic schools, public schools all fighting against each other for limited resources available.
Since then, we have basically doubled the amount of money going into school education and now, across the nation, we are seeking to move to this school resource standard and to end for all time the need for schools and school systems to come and fight their corner for a limited pool of funds.
As we work for that process, we have put in national partnerships to drive change, teacher quality, low SES schools, national partnerships on literacy and numeracy.
Yes, now we are completely changing the school funding system, that money will be part of the new funding system as you would expect it to be.
You don't build a new funding system for the future and then say that there will be miscellaneous streams of funds outside it.
Of course you bring it together in a way which makes sense for the long term and that is precisely what we have done.
JOURNALIST: Can you give funding, how each sector will end up better off out of all this? Have you got the figures? 
PM: We have made available to you some figures today about the shares out of the $14.5 billion increase we are seeing here, or we are aiming to see here.
Obviously we have got to reach agreements with states and territories around the country. 
And then on top of that, and I would specifically refer you to this, we are committing to a 4.7 per cent indexation rate for Commonwealth funds.
Now that is a very important thing because where we are at the moment is if we just sat with the old model, the Howard Government model, we would be seeing indexation reduced to a figure like three per cent.
So in order have Commonwealth funds flow to assist schools, to get to the school resource standard, we will be indexing at 4.7 per cent.
In terms of final arrangements, we need to be there at the table with states and territories striving to get agreement and then obviously figures can be made transparent for each jurisdiction. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you set a deadline for your talks with the states and when you hope to have this agreement locked in? 
PM: Obviously I am aiming for progress during the course of this week and progress at COAG. If that progress is not possible, for whatever reason, then we will continue to push states and territories to sign up.
But yes, there will be a deadline for people to sign up and that will be 30 June this year because people need to know what circumstance they are going to be in for the 2014 school year. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Gonski model called for an extra $6.5 billion a year in funding. By 2019, how much additional funding compared to what you currently put into education will you be putting into education? 
PM: We can show you those figures. There is the addition in the base we are looking at, $14.5 billion where we are paying two thirds of it on a two-for-one share.
And then the indexation rate which we are talking about, 4.7 per cent, which obviously generates an additional flow of funds too. 
What is the alternative? The alternative is to have the old Howard Government model. 
So instead of going forward by $14.5 billion and going forward by an indexation rate of 4.7, you would actually go backwards in money, backwards by $5.4 billion and have a lower indexation rate. That's the difference. 
JOURNALIST: The $14.5 billion, you've just admitted, that's not all new money? 
PM: That's not what I said. It's $14.5 billion to work to get us to the school resource standard around the country.
We can obviously give you more details of the money flows here but you would be making a grand and grave error if you suggested this was anything else than new resources for education. It is. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given you don't  yet have figures for the disability loading and still collecting the data, in the event that turns out to cost more than the $100 million you're committing now, isn't it possible the $14.5 billion will have to rise? Isn't it possible that could be a larger figure? 
PM: We will continue to work through on disability definitions. This has been tremendously complex and I will get Parliamentary Secretary Collins to say a few words too.
Tremendously complex because different jurisdictions use different descriptions; they have capped systems, so some kids get help, some kids don't and we are trying to work through for a rational system there.
But we, in the meantime, are prepared to put into new resources, as Parliamentary Secretary Collins has described. 
JOURNALIST: Before you do that, it's a yes-no thing. Do you expect it will potentially cost more than $14.5 billion given that is an unknown in the equation? 
PM: I can't give you a figure and I'm not prepared to guess that one. 
PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY COLLINS: The Prime Minister is right; we can't anticipate the outcome of that data collection work.
What we can say though, is establishing the school resourcing standard will also assist students with disabilities in schools.
The personal learning plans the Prime Minister referred to will also assist students with disability, but on top of that, the program of more support for students with disability is a down payment on that reform and is already out there.
We have shown our bona fides to the states and territories by extending that program to indicate that the Commonwealth will maintain its contribution until that data collection is finalised, and we will expect the states to at least maintain their existing expenditure in areas where we have seen some of it removed in recent times. 
JOURNALIST: How do you put the budget together if you don't know by mid-May which states will be in the scheme? 
PM: We will provision as necessary for the Commonwealth contribution. 
JOURNALIST: On the budget, the School Kids Bonus is that going to survive or is that going to be rolled into this as well? 
PM: The School Kids Bonus is a flow of money to parents and that will stay as it is now. 
JOURNALIST: Quickly, in the briefing material this morning, you said the money would be phased up over the period. So is it safe to say we are going to see the majority of the spending, Commonwealth spending on Gonski, back-ended in the budget or is it the end of the forward estimates and beyond or would it be more equitable? 
PM: Because we are engaged in a two-for-one offer with states, we need to agree profiles with states and I can't therefore, whilst we are still negotiating, give you state-by-state and financial year-by-financial year breakdowns when we are still in this negotiating period.
But what you do know is what the end point is. We are very clear about where we want to get to and we are very clear about the size, the considerable size, of the Commonwealth's contribution to get us there. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the base level of $9,271 for primary students, and $12,100 for secondary students, that will be reached in 2019 or that will be reached next year? 
PM: That is the base in the school resource standard. The school resource standard also has the loadings that I've described, the six different loadings.
That is where we want to get to in 2019. I spoke about that at the Press Club last year.
A six-year transition is nothing new here. That has already been announced publicly. 
JOURNALIST: Under this model, WA only gets an extra $300 million. What do you say to the likely criticism that it's Canberra dudding WA again?
And secondly, where exactly is the incentive for someone like Colin Barnett to sign up when it's only $300 million and the argument could be we are already funding schools properly, there is not much need for a catch up there? 
PM: I don't know when we woke up in a world that says $300 million for kids' education isn't a lot of money. 
If you went stood outside a school in Western Australia and said to the parents dropping their kids off, do you think it would be good if there was an extra $300 million flowing to schools across your state, including your child's school, I think they would say yes.
I think they would say more money for their kids' school is a good thing.
The distributions here reflect the fact that some state governments are closer to the school resource standard than others.
So some states have done better over time. There is no doubt about that, and Western Australia is one of those states.
Where I went to school in South Australia is one of those states too.
But we have got to ask ourselves a question as a nation and the question is this.
Do we want to know that every child in every school, in every sector, in every corner of the country goes to a well-resourced school that can give them a great education, or do we want to keep the disparities and inequities that are in our system now? 
It's a question the nation needs to answer.
You could put in extra money and just build on top of every disparity and inequity that's in the system now and have a better resourced, still disparate, still inequitable system. You could do that.
But if you did that, you would never be able to say to yourself that every child in every school has the resources available to them to get a great education.
Well I say every child in every school has that right.
Yes, some jurisdictions have got further to travel than others, but let's work together to get every child that right, whether they live in WA and their parents take them to the public school at the end of the street, or they live in Queensland and their parents want them to go to the local Catholic school, or they live in New South Wales and their parents want them to go to the local state school or independent school or them public school.
Wherever they choose to go, whatever the predispositions of their parents for their education, whatever part of the country they are in, we as a nation should know they have got the resources in their education, which will enable them to have a great education.
That, I think, is not only a moral question, though it's certainly a moral question, it's an economic question.
Because if we keep every disparity and every inequity for the future, that means you are saying that tomorrow's workforce will never be as highly skilled or highly attuned to the age in which they will work and live as they could have been.
You are saying you are content to have a weaker economy tomorrow than you could have had.
Well, I say let's go out on and grab that stronger economy.
I can tell you what they are doing in Korea and in China and other parts of our region to get kids a better and better education. 
We can't afford to have our kids slip behind the standards of the world. We won't have the strong economy tomorrow if we do that. 
JOURNALIST: Is that Gonski overall funding, six years (inaudible) $39 billion, less $14.5 billion going in as part of the announcement today, is that just an acknowledgement that $39 billion is too much, is unreasonable? 
PM: I think you are completely, one, underestimating what is being announced today, and we will be happy to take you through that and through the figures. 
Number two, you are completely misunderstanding the federal-state dynamic here. Two-for-one, which means the states have to step up too.
And yes, we get it that finding money in today's budgets isn't easy. We have shown we are prepared to do savings in order to find money.
We are now turning to our state colleagues to do the same. So there is the model itself and the way it works and the extra that it requires and generates and we have given you the figures for that.
There is the shares; who needs to step up and do what, we're going to step up and do more.
There is the ability of the system to make the best use of the money and I spoke about this extensively at the Press Club last year, in terms of transforming of how schools work and who is employed there and what they are doing and what the resources are available, for a kid's education, I think it's just common sense that you can't go from here to here.
You have to change over time, which is why we announced the six-year transition last year. 
JOURNALIST: Is that $14.5 billion in existing 2012-13 dollars or does it include inflation over the period? 
PM: It's in today's dollars because we are dealing with the indexation separately. That is the figure before you deal with the indexation.
JOURNALIST: The states have already made cuts to their school spending. So you are ruling off at that level the current bottom line or are you requiring them to undo the cuts. 
PM: We will be working with states for additional contributions into education. I can't stand here and say we can necessarily undo all damage that has been done by state governments.
What we can do is ensure that for the future, we don't continue to see state government cutbacks.
This is an important thing and one that needs to be understood. When state governments cut education under the current model of school funding we inherited from the Howard Government that cuts federal funding to all schools  -  to independent schools, Catholic schools, public schools, because it cuts the indexation rate.
Now that means that if people walk away and say, let's not seize this moment in our nation's life, let's not do anything, we will see school funding go backwards.
Not steady-state, backwards.
Now, for our nation, the last thing that we can afford is that plan to see school funding go backwards, rather than seize this historic opportunity.
It's been a long time, 40 years, since anything as big as this has been done in Australian education.
It's taken five years of work to get here. If we missed this opportunity, then you will see Australian schools go backwards and our economy for the future will necessarily be weaker than it otherwise could have been. 
JOURNALIST: The states known about the two-to-one offer before today? 
PM: We are making that offer public today. Yes, there has been discussions between officials where various views have been taken about what are appropriate shares in terms of an offer to all jurisdictions. I am making that offer today. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in fully funding the loadings for the SRS, are you hoping that will encourage non-government schools, Catholics and independents to enrol more disadvantaged students? 
PM: My hope out of all of this is wherever a disadvantaged child is educated, that that child gets a great education.
We do see in many parts of the country very low-fee Christian schools and Catholic schools, some who have absolutely made it their mission to enrol disadvantaged kids, to enrol indigenous kids. 
And for those schools, I want to make sure that that disadvantage is recognised and that there are the resources available to educate those kids.
But I also understand, and this is one of the things that is a complete break with how education has been viewed in the past, that in many communities around the nation, disadvantaged kids, the only real option they have is going to the local state school.
And when we go to the local state schools, we see those disadvantaged kids; we often see schools in areas that have pockets of disadvantage; so it's not just one child that is disadvantaged, it's the majority of the school cohort, or overwhelmingly the school cohort comes from disadvantaged circumstances.
We, the Federal Government, need to respond to that too.
And that's the difference between our approach in terms of state schools and the approach of the Howard Government and earlier Liberal Governments.
I genuinely believe we are a Government with a responsibility to all children in all schools; not saying we are the Government for independent and Catholic schools and someone else can worry about the vast numbers of children that go to state schools.
We worry about them too, which is why we want to make a difference for those kids, particularly the disadvantaged kids that go to those schools. 
JOURNALIST: Have you put David Gonski in a difficult position by linking his educational reforms to cuts in university funding. He is the chancellor of a major university as well as the author of this report? 
PM: David Gonski can speak for himself.
I can understand if I was a chancellor or vice-chancellor, I wouldn't like to see even a moderation of growth in the amount of money that is going into my university.
I'm not a vice-chancellor or a chancellor, I'm Prime Minister, and I've got to make the right decisions for the nation, and moderating what has been a huge rate of growth in universities to fund this for kids is the right decision.
Okay, thank you very much. 



The Gillard Government has today set out its plan for proper resourcing of all our classrooms, teachers and schools for generations to come, to take Australian schools into the top five in the world.
The National Plan for School Improvement will establish a new, fairer school funding approach, based on the needs of individual students and linked to reforms that will improve school performance.
For every extra dollar that state and territory governments invest in schools, we will effectively invest two.
The Prime Minister has set out a goal for Australian schools to be among the world's top five in reading, numeracy and science by 2025.  A world class school system is a key part of a strong economy for the future.
The Gillard Government is offering to pay 65 per cent of the additional investment needed to fund all schools properly and reach our goals.
Under this plan, schools across the country will benefit from an extra $14.5 billion in public investment over the next six years along with better indexation.
Over six years, this will involve an estimated $9.4 billion in extra Commonwealth funding, along with indexation at a higher rate than would otherwise be the case.
This new money will help schools pay for specialist teachers and modern resources. It will make sure every school is properly funded and will help give our kids the best start in life.
The extra investment brings the total public funding for schools to $49.5 billion a year on average, over the six years.
Over the next six years this additional funding will include:
 * 	$5 billion for NSW  -  bringing total public investment in NSW schools to $87 billion (or 29% of the national public investment in schools) over 2014-19
 * 	$4 billion for VIC  -  bringing total public investment in VIC schools to $68 billion (or 23%) over 2014-19
 * 	$3.8 billion for QLD  -  bringing total public investment in QLD schools to $65 billion (or 22%) over 2014-19
 * 	$300 million for WA  -  bringing total public investment in WA schools to $38 billion (or 13%) over 2014-19
 * 	$600 million for SA  -  bringing total public investment in SA schools to $21 billion (or 7%) over 2014-19
 * 	$400 million for TAS  -  bringing total public investment in TAS schools to $7 billion (or 2%) over 2014-19
 * 	$100 million for ACT  -  bringing total public investment in ACT schools to $5 billion (or 2%) over 2014-19
 * 	$300 million for NT -  bringing total public investment in NT schools to $5 billion (or 2%) over 2014-19
This is on top of the extra funding that will be secured for every state and every sector if the states and territories agree to more stable indexation of current school spending.  
The Government has also today made a commitment to state and territory governments to an annual growth in school education spending of 4.7 per cent  -  provided states commit to grow their own school budgets by 3 per cent a year.
In return for this significant extra funding, the Commonwealth is asking states and territories to:
 * 	Maintain current school spending and stop education cuts and funding freezes
 * 	Commit to a 3 per cent growth in school funding, every year
 * 	Invest the share needed in their state or territory to fairly fund every schools
 * 	Sign a new National Education Reform Agreement which sets out the new funding approach and national school improvement reforms
The Schooling Resource Standard
The new funding approach is based on the core recommendations of the independent Gonski review, including a per student amount and extra money for disadvantaged schools and students.
The per student amount for 2014 will be $9,271 for primary school students and $12,193 for secondary school students. These are based on the average costs of high performing schools.
Loadings will also be provided for students from low SES backgrounds, indigenous students, students with disability, students with limited English proficiency, small schools, and school location. All loadings will be fully publicly funded.
A loading for students with disability will be introduced when a nationally consistent definition based on accurate data is available.
While it is being developed, the Gillard Government will extend its current commitment to More Support for Students with Disabilities. 
The extra money and the new funding approach will be phased in over six years. This makes the new investment sustainable and gives schools and systems time to adjust and make long-term plans.
Without this plan, Australia faces a crisis in school funding, with state governments cutting back, school performance declining and sectors forced into devastating conflict over diminishing resources.
A national approach to school funding
The Gillard Government will use the SRS settings to calculate all Commonwealth funding provided to school education authorities, who will then distribute this money to schools.
Government and non-government education authorities will have flexibility to implement their own needs-based school funding systems, reflecting their own priorities and circumstances. 
Different approaches will be evaluated for their consistency in addressing student need and for student outcomes.
Every distribution system will be approved by the Commonwealth to make sure it is consistent with the SRS.
The distribution of public funding for every school will be published on the My School website, so that parents and the wider community can see how resourcing relates to student need.
This will give education providers flexibility to make the best decisions for their schools while ensuring the schools and students who need more help are getting it.
National Plan for School Improvement
School funding reform is a central part of the National Plan for School Improvement, based on the five core reform areas of quality teaching, quality learning, school empowerment, meeting student need, and accountability and transparency.
The plan, developed with Education Ministers, includes:
 * 	Higher entry standards for the teaching profession, annual performance assessments and ongoing training and support
 * 	More individual support for students, including through an early years reading blitz and personalised learning plans
 * 	Empowerment of school principals to lead improvement in teaching learning, supported by experts.
 * 	More information for parents and stronger partnerships with communities to support student achievement.
This plan is essential for a strong economy. 
It will help every Australian child get the best education possible and secure a high-wage, high skilled job.
It is a plan for our country's future.
The Prime Minister is now calling on Premiers and Chief Ministers to agree the National Plan, including new school funding arrangements, at the meeting of the Council of Australian Governments on 19 April 2013.
More information about our plan is available at www.betterschools.gov.au


National plan for school improvement; Gonski reforms
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the numbers you're talking about today are enormous, but the actual Gonski review actually asks for more money to be injected in schools.
Are schools being short-changed?
PM: The numbers we're talking about today are enormous, and this is an historic change for our nation.
What we are working towards is at the endpoint in 2019 that every school around the country has available to them the right resources so kids can get a great education.
So it doesn't matter whether you choose a public school, a Catholic school, an independent school for your child.
Doesn't matter where you live  -  you know that those schools have the right level of resources to give your kids a great education.
The numbers are large - $14.5 billion extra, plus indexation at 4.7 per cent from the Commonwealth Government.
Yes, this is a big amount of money. We were very clear last year that it with such a big amount of money, that we will work for a six-year transition.
That's partly about the money but also about getting the reform agenda right.
You can't just make available new resources, you've got to drive new ways of working, so kids get a better education.
JOURNALIST: You're funding education by, in part, cutting education.
Is that contradictory to say the least?
PM: What we have done is in the university sector we have increased funding over the life of the Government by 56 per cent, by more than half.
It's a huge increase and of course well-justified.
I want our universities to be strong, to be growing, and I'm very proud that as a result of our changes in universities, we are seeing people who are the first in their family to go to university.
Against that huge increase in funding, what we're asking universities to do is one year, have a 2 per cent efficiency dividend, and on the second year have a 1.25 per cent efficiency dividend.
University funding will still grow, it's just the rate of growth will be slower.
JOURNALIST: You haven't said where all the $14.5 billion is coming from.
Are there more cuts to come?
PM: We are backing in this expenditure through the change to the rate of growth for universities that I've just described, through some changes in student income support.
But this is against a backdrop where we are putting in 78 per cent more into student income support than when we came to government.
A change in tax arrangements for education expenses for people who are in the workforce and going to seminars and the like.
The savings we have made in superannuation, which have also made the system fairer and more sustainable.
And of course there's been some money for things like improving schools which is now going to be part of the school funding system.
JOURNALIST: What about further changes, are there going to have to be more announcements either in the budget or before the budget?
PM: Well those changes taken together acquit what we need to across the Government's forward estimates period, and make a very big contribution for the future.
I have said consistently I am going to ask the nation to make some difficult choices to put our priorities where the need to be.
And in my view, properly resourcing teachers, kids, classrooms, not just for tomorrow but for all of the generations to come, ending forever the fighting between state schools, Catholic schools, independent schools all hoping to get some money from the table.
Ending that forever, getting our kids the education they need for the future and ensuring our economy can service the high skill, high wage jobs of the future.
This is worth paying for, and that's why the choices are justified.
JOURNALIST: Your new formula would deliver about $5 billion of new funding to New South Wales, but around $300 million for Western Australia.
Is that fair?
PM: What we are doing here is moving every school across the country to a school resourcing standard. And yes, some schools, some states, are further away.
Now you've got to make a choice.
Do you look at that system which means that there are different resources available for our kids' education today, and say just keep that system running until the end of time, which means that some kids in some parts of the country will always miss out forever?
Or do you actually say every child, whether they live in Western Australia and go to a Catholic school, live in Queensland and go to a state school, live in Victoria and go to an independent school, every child should be walking in the gates of a school that can properly meet their needs and give them a great education?
That's my goal, and yes it does mean when you look around the country, some states, some jurisdictions have got further to travel, but that is a national goal worth having.
JOURNALIST: Premier Barnett says he'll be nuts to sign up to a deal like this.
What happens if you can't get agreement from all the premiers and leaders next Friday?
PM: To Premier Barnett I would say that Western Australia has done a good job in resourcing its schools.
But we are talking about additional public funding with $300 million, where we're prepared to back it in two-for-one and we are prepared to index our contributions by 4.7 per cent provided Premier Barnett will back in the reform agenda and index school funding by 3 per cent.
I think for the people of Western Australia, they would want to see more money in their schools and I'm sure everyone wants to see every school trying to get better every day and meet the needs of kids.
If we can't get global sign-on, every state, every territory, then we will work with those jurisdictions who do sign on.
But I am going to keep arguing for this and campaigning for it because it's the right thing for our nation's future, for our kids, and for our economy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you very much.


ABC Sydney
HOST: Well the Prime Minister joins me now on 702 ABC Sydney. Good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: So you have said that education's what drove you into politics. Are you also perhaps hoping it will be the policy that keeps you there?
PM: This is about our nation's future and about our kids and our schools. What's driving me is making sure that we are properly resourcing our kids, teachers, classrooms, our schools not only now, but for generations and generations to come.
We've got a school funding system at the moment which means there are kids in schools that do not have the resources they need to get those kids a great education. We can do better than that as a nation and we should.
So that's the passion, that's the mission, and that's what I'm on this week and for the weeks beyond.
HOST: So what's your vision under this passion and this mission? Would you see it as a predominantly public system in the future?
PM: No, parents would be able to make choices about their child's education. And I want parents to know that any choice they make means that their child will be educated in a school that's got sufficient resources to give that child a great education.
So people will pick a state school, a Catholic school, an independent school; they're family choices.
What I don't want to see is once that's happened that a child is in a school where they are left to fall behind because the school simply doesn't have the resources equal to the task of educating that child.
That's why at the essence of all of this is a school resource standard, which is the amount of money we know is necessary to get a child a good education, plus loadings that deal with the factors that mean kids need extra resources to succeed.
Loadings for kids from poorer backgrounds, Indigenous children, children with disabilities, children from non-English speaking backgrounds, as well as recognising that there are additional costs that come to play in small and regional and remote schools.
HOST: And you're looking at areas of social disadvantage to assess that, but do NAPLAN results come in to making up that formula as well?
PM: Well the NAPLAN results are the way in which we measure the outcome. Of course education is about more than we can measure in NAPLAN. But what we can measure in NAPLAN is how children are going for literacy and numeracy; reading, writing, maths.
We can measure that, we can make it transparent, and building My School has given us that ability.
That means for the future under this new system, every school would have a school improvement plan. It would articulate and tell us all what it's trying to do to get kids in that school a better education.
And then it can be held to account against that school improvement plan because we've all go the data. It's not locked up away in the inner-vaults of some bureaucracy. It's available for us all to see on My School.
HOST: Do you concede though that sometimes the problem with NAPLAN is that it's narrowing the focus of education and narrowing the curriculum, so in some ways it's not giving you a full look at the success of schools.
PM: Well certainly not narrowing the curriculum because we are rolling out a world-leading Australia-wide national curriculum.
HOST: Well a lot of teachers are teaching to test though  -  they're teaching towards the NAPLAN results, and they are reducing other subjects to do well in NAPLAN.
PM: Let's just look at it. The curriculum is being defined through the Australian National Curriculum. First time in our country's history we've had a national curriculum. Amazing when you stop and think about it, but that's a big job we're getting done.
In terms of narrowing the teaching, whether ultimately your passion is going to be science or history or acting, or creative pursuits, music, art, whatever a child's skills and aptitudes are, to fully engage with those skills and aptitudes they're going to need to be able to read and write and to do maths.
And so time spent making sure our kids are literate and numerate is time well spent.
HOST: I just want to go to New South Wales, and we're particularly a station for Sydney.
We have this thing now in Sydney because of urban consolidation  -  people moving back to the inner suburbs  -  that we've had a massive rise in enrolment in a lot of our public schools; up between 35 and 200 per cent, some of them standing room only in the playgrounds. And we've had funding cuts in New South Wales.
Will this money have to go towards building some of the new schools that Sydney needs?
PM: This money is not for school capital. This money is for the costs of making sure as a child sits in a classroom with their pens and pencils or their iPad or computer, whatever they're learning with  -  maybe a test tube and a Bunsen burner in science class  -  it is making sure that that child is getting a great education.
HOST: And are you concerned about some of the cuts the states may have to impose if they do take you up on this? If cuts come in other areas of education or in not building the schools that we need?
PM: Well budgets are about choices. I've had to make difficult decisions on the federal government budget. It's not easy days in terms of revenue.
We are getting less revenue into the federal government coffers now per unit of GDP  -  economic activity  -  than any time since the 1990s, the early 1990s.
So it's a tough old time in terms of federal government money, money being paid to us through company tax and other things.
That means you've got to be very prudent about your choices. You've got to back in new expenditure with savings.
We've turned around and done the tough things to do that.
I am asking premiers to make choices on their budget  -  obviously they'll need to justify those choices to their communities the way that I am working to justify our choices to the Australian community.
HOST: Yes Prime Minister and I suppose that this morning you are having to justify the cuts to universities. We've spoken to the University of Western Sydney this morning and the concern is that when you remove the cap to allow more students of under-privileged background in to universities, that's terrific, but now they'll be facing more over-crowded tutorials and lecture theatres and the like. So is it worth improving our school education at the cost of our university students?
PM: I want to be very clear about this decision about universities. I very much value what our universities do and I'm proud that as a Government we have worked with our universities to increase the number of places and to get them to focus on getting disadvantaged kids into university, which means we are seeing kids go to university, first in their family to do so. So that's fantastic.
We have worked with universities to increase funding; funding has increased by more than 50 per cent.
HOST: But they've got a lot more students so their spreading it more thinly.
PM: But more than 50 per cent is a big, big increase. It's an increase per student as well as a global increase.
We have increased the amount of money going to universities. They've seen a global increase, they've seen increases per student.
Against that backdrop of increases we are saying to universities we want to moderate the future rate of growth.
So it's not a cut in the sense of you've got less next year than you had this year, what it is is slowing the rate of growth by taking a 2 per cent efficiency dividend one year, and a 1.25 per cent efficiency dividend a second year.
So universities will still see more money, just the rate of growth in that money will be less.
HOST: Well they're certainly seeing it as a cut and are predicting more crowded universities, less help for those who need it. Do you risk isolating an area, a sector that's been relatively supportive?
PM: Well the maths is the maths. It is a moderation in the rate of growth, so that's the facts of it.
If I was a university vice chancellor and I was looking at my university, of course I'd want a bigger growth rather than a lesser growth rate. Of course you would.
And I understand vice chancellors saying that about their own universities  -  I would if I was them.
But I'm not a vice chancellor, I'm Prime Minister of the country. And I've got to work out how as a nation we've got a strong economy in the future, we've got the high-skilled, high-wage jobs of the future, we do that in a context where the countries of our region are pumping their education systems ahead.
And my judgment call is if we don't get school education right for the long-term, we will not only be letting our kids down and stunting their chances in life, we will be weakening our economy for the long-term.
And I don't think in that context that it's too much to ask our universities that have seen the amount of resources into them growing strongly, to moderate growth rates for a couple of years.
HOST: Of course you mentioned that you made tough budget decisions and the state governments will have to do the same thing. But this doesn't provide all the money  -  the uni cuts  -  and I suppose a lot of people would be thinking where are you going to get the rest of the money from in a time when there's big planning for the NDIS and huge costings out there. Where will the rest come from?
PM: In terms of savings that are being directed to support this, the savings from university is one source. The savings from the superannuation package which was pitched to make superannuation more sustainable and fairer will also be making money available for better school education.
Then of course there are some school programs that we do now which will become part of this new funding model because they are pitched at the same objective, that is getting kids a great education.
HOST: So they'll be absorbed into this funding?
PM: Absolutely. We are looking at $14.5 billion of new money plus money to get us to the school resource standard.
The Federal Government is going to put in $2 for every $1 that state governments do.
We on top of all that are going to index our money to schools at 4.7 per cent. So that gives more growth in the amount of money going into schools.
We've got against that backdrop on our books at the moment national partnerships valued at $2.1 billion, which are partnerships that have an end date.
Yes, we are going to roll those into this new funding arrangement, which is far bigger for every school for all time, and pitched at the same objective.
HOST: Prime Minister I just want to give you another number, and that's 29 per cent, which the Nielson poll puts the Government at this morning.
Education possibly one of your policy strong points, if this doesn't move people, will anything?
PM: This is about our nation's future and moving our kids through school and getting them a great education.
HOST: Would you like to send Simon Crean to a re-education campaign after his comments on the weekend about you?
PM: All of that I'm not commenting on. I get it that people are interested in the atmospherics of politics. And commentators write the commentary on it, and so it goes.
What matters for our kids, our future, our nation is the reform proposal that I've got before the nation now.
What matters for the next five, ten, 15, 20 years is getting this done. That's my focus, that's what I'm talking about, that's what I'm putting my efforts towards.
HOST: Well it will be interesting to see what happens with the premiers of Friday. I thank you for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you very much. 


Gold 104.3 FM Melbourne
BRIG: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Brig, good morning Lehmo, I don't feel any hands on me, so that's just as well.
LEHMO: Probably just as well. Julia, we should start by asking you how Tim is because we know he was on a bike ride yesterday for the charity Hagar and he bumped into a kerb or came undone at some point?
PM: Yes I heard the story when I got home last night, so coming round one of the Canberra roundabouts he almost ran out of road and hit the kerb, but he is fine and he was full of tales about the ride and then of course full of teasing about Tigers versus Dogs yesterday.
I just don't want to go into it!
LEHMO: Tough weekend for the Bulldogs. Have you ever jumped on the back of the bike with Tim in charge?
PM: No I haven't, and just as well really by the sound of it.
BRIG: Keep well away from that I think, Prime Minister. Now do tell, you've had a very busy couple of weeks in China doing some great stuff, no doubt about that, and now of course it's the education.
Quite a few of these state ministers  -  ours included  -  aren't so happy with the plan which you've got for state schools.
PM: We will have discussions with the states but the thing here that really matters, for everyone in Victoria and around the country is this is a plan to make sure every school has got the resources it needs to offer kids a great education and we don't have that ta the moment.
Over years and years and years what we've seen is schools and school systems having to fight for resources.
We've often seen school systems pitted against each other  -  Catholics and independents versus government schools.
I want to end all of that, I want to get this right for all time.
Any school you send your kids to will have the right resources to give them a great education and that money will be used to genuinely improve their education.
More support for kids' learning, more improvement plans in schools, more things like librarians and literacy coaches, things that really make a difference to the quality of education.
BRIG: I think everybody is behind that, getting the greatest education, but what worries me is it has to come, sadly, at the expense of universities.
PM: Our universities are very precious to us, which is why since we came to government we've increased funding to them by more than 50 per cent.
That's a lot of money, and funding for universities is going to continue to grow.
Every university will get more money next year and the year after and the year after than they have this year.
What we are asking them to do is to have a lower growth rate to help us fund these important changes for kids around the country.
So more money in universities, so each year they'll get more money, a lower rate of growth is what we're asking for.
LEHMO: And what you've promised here is $14.5 billion and you're asking the states to chuck in $1 for every $2 that the federal government is chucking in.
I know the states are all catching up this week  -  can you force their hand, or do you just need to convince them that it's a good idea?
PM: I have to convince them. I have to convince them to put the kids in their state first.
And so we'll have those discussions around the table on Friday, and I do want to walk out of that Council of Australian Governments meeting with states signing on, hopefully understanding how important this agenda is.
If I can't get everybody there on Friday, then I'm going to keep fighting for it.
I've said that the offer will remain on the table until 30 June, and the reason for saying 30 June is schools need to know what funding position they're going to be in for next school year.
This is a big change for our nation, it's about properly resourcing the things our schools do to help our children for generations and generations to come.
So let's work together and get it right.
BRIG: Now Prime Minister, another bad poll today for you and your government.
What do you think you need to do to turn these polls around, because the people don't seem to be getting behind you.
PM: We have polls at least weekly, sometimes we have them every second day.
I don't comment on opinion polls, and what I'm focussed on today are all of the important numbers that go to making up our new school funding system and our plan to improve schools.
So feel free to ask me any number about how $14.5 billion works, that's what I'm focussing on.
LEHMO: And we absolutely want our school system in the  -  well top five in the world is the aim.
PM: It is the aim and you mentioned when I first came on the line I was in China last week, I do get to travel around our region, because of the international meetings I need to go to and I do make it a habit when I'm there to go and look at their schools and I can tell you from my first-hand experience that countries in our region are working to improve their schools.
So if we do nothing, we just quietly lapse behind the standards of the world. I don't want that to happen, I want us to be in the top five.
It's important for our kids, but it's important for our economy's future.
The jobs of the future are high-skill jobs. If you didn't get a great school education then there's no way in the world you're going to have the skills to do them, and that means we will be a weaker country in the future than we can be.
LEHMO: Absolutely Prime Minister. Very quickly, election is on 14 September.
If the Bulldogs are playing in a preliminary final on that day, will you be in attendance at the football?
PM: I did some due diligence on all of this before announcing the election date, and I checked past fixtures and I noted that in the finals generally, what's been played, that stage of the finals is a Friday night match and then a Sunday match, so we're in the clear. Relax, relax.
BRIG: We have to let you go Prime Minister, we'd love to know that you'd come to visit us in the studio because we'd like to know your favourite classic hit songs.
We know you're a fan of Gold music.
PM: I am, and I would love to do that and I can then reveal my incredibly daggy music.
BRIG: We'll look forward to that, Prime Minister Gillard, thank you for joining us this morning. 


Today
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins us now. PM, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning, Karl.
HOST: You love a barney, don't you!
PM: Well, some things are worth fighting for Karl, and getting our kids a better education is certainly worth fighting for.
This is what got me into politics; this is why I'm here. This is the thing that I'm most concerned about and most worried about for our future.
I was in China last week, I get to travel around our region, I can tell you they are improving their schools and we can only be the strong nation, the winning nation in the future, if we improve ours.
It's the right thing to do by our kids.
HOST: You love going head-to-head with those fellows who run the states though, don't you? Are you going to win?
PM: Look, it's not about the fight, it about the outcome. It's about what happens in schools.
I want to make sure that whatever school a child goes to, whether they go to the local state school, a Catholic school, an independent school, it has got the resources in the school necessary to get them a great education.
And that might mean that they have got a school librarian where they didn't used to have one. That there are better teachers in the classroom, that they have got more skills to manage things like disruptive behaviour and bullying.
These are the things that are important for kids' education, and how well they do at reading and writing and maths and all those things that build a future.
HOST: I don't think there is a person going around Australia at the moment who doesn't want more funding, want to see more funding going into our schools, and I do as well as a parent of three kids that are going to school.
Last week we heard from the Australian Bureau of Statistics that the average Australian was a 37 year-old mum living in the suburbs was a mortgage and two kids at school.
This is my question: what difference do they see in these reforms? What will they see when their child goes to school, what difference in the children will they see, what difference in their teachers will they see?
PM: For that mum I bet she is incredibly concerned about the quality of her children's education. So first and foremost, any school they go to will have the resources it needs.
Every school will have a school improvement plan that that mum can track and see how the school is improving, and how well they are going at delivering those improvements.
Those improvements will include things like better support for the teachers, so we are getting the best into teaching and they're getting better at their teaching practice in the classroom every day.
Those extra supports will be enough for things like the best of new equipment; iPads and smart boards.
It will be enough to have specialists in the school, maybe a science teacher to really start that passion for science, a literacy coach to help the kids who are falling behind, a librarian who can help spark a love of reading.
All of these things will be possible with these new resources and you will be able to track the progress every step of the way.
It won't be a mystery to you what has happened once your kid has walked in the school gates, you will be able to know what is happening in your child's school.
HOST: The problem I guess is  -  and we are seeing it today with some of the premiers  -  if you are the average Australian living in WA you're hearing Premier Colin Barnett saying hang on, you have got the portion howlingly wrong for us. He's called it “a terrible day for his state”  -  an actual cut he says of 25 per cent per student.
And Queensland Premier Campbell Newman says it's just one big mirage. Why would they sign it and is the average Australian in those states going to be worse off than say for example in New South Wales?
PM: Absolutely not. No. Every state is going to see more money for schools in that state on the basis that we're putting in $2 for every $1 coming from states. So everybody gets more money.
Now, in terms of how much more money for each state, Karl, states are in different positions and the aim of this is that every school around the country has the resource it needs to get the kids a great education.
Some states have further to go than others, that's undoubtedly true.
WA is rightly proud of its education system but there is more we can do there, there is $300 million more we can do there, and I want to get it done.
For Queensland, well for Premier Newman to just dismiss this out of hand I don't think is really the right approach.
We're talking about the future of the kids in his state, the quality of the education they get and ultimately the strength of the Queensland economy because we cannot have tomorrow's jobs if we don't have people who are capable of having the skills to do them, and that all starts in grade one, grade two, grade three.
That's why I want to make sure our kids succeed.
HOST: We'll see how you go with the negotiations with Colin Barnett because he's going to be all fired up about this I'm sure come Friday.
Anyway, let's move on to the universities; they're crying foul, universities are crying foul this morning.
You would know also that the author of these changes that you have enacted, David Gonski, has said as Chancellor of a leading Australian university  -  the University of New South Wales  -  “I fervently believe in and will continue to advocate that increases be made in funding the university sector”.
You have done the opposite. Are you telling them suck it up?
PM: I can absolutely respect David Gonski's words and as Chancellor of a university of course he would be there, putting the case for universities.
I said yesterday Karl; if I was a Chancellor of a university I would be saying similar things. But my job is as Prime Minister to weigh all of the benefits here.
In universities we have increased funding by more than 50 per cent. That's a lot of money. And we will continue to increase funding.
What we are asking universities to do is to have a lower growth rate in that funding. So there will still be more money for all universities against a back drop 50 per cent increase, but we are asking them to take a slower growth rate to help us benefit 3.5 million children around the country today.
But it is not only about today's kids, it is about getting this school system right for the generations to come.
Properly resourcing our schools for all of the generations in the future, that is what I want to achieve; a lasting change for our nation.
HOST: If you were a university student  -  it was not that long ago that you were  -  you would be burning effigies of Julia Gillard today, wouldn't you? Hey?
PM: I don't think I would be Karl, because way back when, when I was in university  -  and I was reminded of this in recent days because one of the men responsible for it actually died recently  -  but when I was in university we all participated in this broad coalition called Let's Develop Education.
This is where my passion for schools and change comes from. So university students like myself standing alongside teachers, alongside university academics, alongside parents' groups under the banner that said Let's Develop Education. And it was all about kids and schools and opportunity. Understanding what a privilege it was to get to university.
I have taken that with me since those days I was out on those university hustings, and I still believe in that now. And I don't think it is unfair to ask university students to still get more student income support than has ever been in the system before.
We have increased that by more than 70 per cent just in terms of one cash grant; a start-up scholarship, changed that to a loan that they pay back when they're earning money in the future so that we can help our kids. I don't think that is an unfair ask.
HOST: One final one for you PM this morning. The polls aren't crash  -  you're flat-lining down to 29 per cent  -  what do you say about those polls and moving forward. It's tough for you to continue at 29 per cent.
PM: Karl, as you know we see a lot of opinion polls. They are at least weekly, sometimes we get a couple in a week.
So the only numbers I'm interested in today are the ones about our new plan for school funding and school improvement.
Ask me about $14.5 billion for schools, they're the numbers that are worrying me.
HOST: Alright, thanks for your time today PM, appreciate it. 



HOST: Prime Minister, you made this announcement without consulting the premiers.
If you can't get them to agree when you see them at COAG on Friday do you think this really has a chance of happening at all?
PM: Carrie, there have been months and months and months of discussions about these reforms, ever since we asked David Gonski and a panel of eminent Australians to provide us with a report about the best way forward for school funding.
What was new yesterday was that I said we as a Federal Government would step up and put in two dollars for every one dollar the state governments put in.
I understand that budgets are tight, the federal budget is tight, but ultimately you have got to make the best choices for our nation's future and there is no more important choice than making sure every child goes to a school that can help that child realise their full potential, and that we as a nation have got a school system that is world-class so we are not falling behind the standards of our region and the standards of the world.
HOST: Some of this funding is going to come from cutting funding to universities. Gonski has criticised this today, he is the one who wrote the report that led to this reform. Is it a good start if he is criticising that plan?
PM: To be clear about what we are proposing in the federal budget you do have to make decisions.
We are getting less money in than we are used to, less money per unit of GDP, economic activity in our nation. What that means is we have to make some tough choices.
As a Government, since we came to office we have increased university funding by more than 50 per cent, by more than half. University funding will continue to increase.
They have been on a rate of growth like that, we are going to moderate that growth rate and use those savings to help back in some of the costs of this plan to give our kids a better education.
And so I understand universities would like to stay on this really steep growth rate rather than have it moderated a bit, but as Prime Minister I have to make the best decisions for the nation.
And the best decision I can make is to invest in properly resourcing children's education, our classrooms, our teachers, not just now but for generations to come.
And that is why we are asking universities to forego a little bit.
HOST: These discussions of education always descent into a barney between the state; New South Wales and Queensland getting the lion's share of the money this time around.
WA have already said they object to not getting enough, they are only getting $300 million.
Do you think maybe if WA had a few more marginal seats you might have kicked a bit more money their way?
PM: Absolutely not. This is about a formula for school funding which is to get every school up to a school resourcing standard; an amount of money that we know will get kids a great education with extra money when kids are disadvantaged and you need to put more into their schooling to get them to have good results.
Now, around our country today there are some schools that have that amount of money available for educating their kids, but there are schools around our nation that do not have that amount of money.
In fact, overwhelmingly our schools do not have that amount of money. We want to make sure that every school has that right amount of money.
In some states it is a bigger gap between today's funding and the right standard. We want to close that gap.
In other states like Western Australia it is less of a gap and that is a tribute to the Western Australian state government.
But I want to live in a nation, I want all of us to live in a nation, where we can say to ourselves, wherever a child goes to school  -  whether it is a Catholic school in WA, a state school in Brisbane, an independent school in country Victoria  -  wherever a child goes to school they are in a school that has enough money to give them a decent education.
That is what is driving these reforms. It is certainly in the interests of our kids.
I mean, why would anybody want to send a kid to a school that doesn't have enough resourcing?
And it is in the interests of our nation because I can tell you from having travelled in the region in which we live, I was just in China last week, the nations in our region are investing in their schools and we can't afford to have our schools fall behind the standards of the world.
HOST: Prime Minister, another disastrous poll for Labor today that would translate to a loss of 30 seats. Is that why you don't want to talk about polls?
PM: I want to talk about the big things that matter for our country's future.
We get polls at least once a week, sometimes we get them several times a week.
What is going to matter-
HOST: But they do have an influence, don't they Prime Minister, on whether you can do anything?
PM: Well, what is going to matter for the next five, 10, 15, 20 years for the generations to come is the big picture reform, the biggest reform in 40 years that I am determined to secure for Australian schools.
That is what I have been putting my time into and they are the numbers that worry me.
Whether or not I can get $14.5 billion of extra resourcing into our schools, whether I can make sure our schools are in the top five in the world.
HOST: Good luck Prime Minister. On a happier note are you going to go to the Enmore tonight to watch your mate Peter Garrett rock out with Midnight Oil?
PM: No, I'm not, I am not able to do that!
HOST: Are you an Aussie or not?!
PM: Minister Garrett has got an important day job and the sometimes he obviously sneaks off in the evenings for a night-time job too.
He better not turn up tired at work together. He will be in a lot of trouble!
HOST: I'm sure he will. I'm sure that would be a firmly worded email. Prime Minister, thank you for your time.
PM: Thank you very much. We will take a break back in a tick.


Canberra
PM: Congratulations to Adam Scott. By any measure this is an historic day for Australian sport. All Australians will be marvelling in his achievement and thinking of him.
Adam, Australia is incredibly proud of you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just going to ask on Gonski  -  Queensland and WA are proving to be a bit of a problem. Are you determined to take these reforms through to the election?
PM: Absolutely.
JOURNALIST: How hard is it going to be to get them on board?
PM: Well, this is the right plan for our nation's future, for our kids, and to ensure our schools are properly resourced for generations and generations to come.
So I will keep fighting for it. We will be there on Friday looking for states to sign up. We will keep fighting through to 30 June to get states on board.
And I will keep campaigning on this plan because it's right for our nation, for our kids, and for our economic future because we can't let countries in the region get in front of us when it comes to the quality of education.
JOURNALIST: Are those figures locked in, or could they change slightly as a bit of a sweetener for them?
PM: The figures are the figures, and they are there for everybody to absorb.
JOURNALIST: The 30 June deadline, with Parliament rising on 27 June, is there a chance you may need to bring Parliament back to legislate before the election?
PM: We will get the legislation through  -  I'm determined to do that. But the reason for the 30 June deadline is just simply, schools need to know what funding position they're in for next calendar year, next school year.
That's why we need to see people sign on by 30 June so schools have got six months' notice and six months to plan on what resources they'll have in their school from 2014 on.
JOURNALIST: If they hold out to 30 June, will you need to bring Parliament back before the election?
PM: No, we will legislate based on the funding arrangements and plans that we are making. We can enter agreements with state governments and we will if they step up to the plate.
We are asking for $1 for every $2 we are prepared to put in. We are going to index at 4.7 per cent. We're asking them to index at at least 3 per cent and to stop the cuts.
So the menu for state governments  -  the ask is a very clear one  -  no more cuts, index at at least 3 per cent, and for every $2 we put in, be prepared to put in $1, and get school funding right for generations to come, associated with improving our schools so quality is rising.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's more important  -  the education reforms or Labor's re-election chances?
PM: This is the right plan for our nation's future, and what we are talking about today it's a huge national plan, it's a huge difference for our nation, I've be making that clear all day.
This is the biggest change in school funding in 40 years. And if you want to know what kind of nation we're going to be tomorrow, have a look in our schools.
If we want to be a stronger nation tomorrow, we've got to have better funded schools today.
Thank you very much. 


Radio National Breakfast
HOST: Prime Minister, welcome again to Breakfast.
PM: Good morning Fran.
HOST: Can we look at first, at what this money would do? An individual school may be one or two million dollars more a year under your proposed scheme. How will that change what the school can do?
PM: That's a very good question, Fran, and what the school will be able to do is the following things.
It will be able to better support its teachers. This comes with a plan to get the best into teaching and then each and every day they need to be supported  -  continuous improvement, professional development so that their classroom practice is always getting better and better.
That would include a particular focus on things like managing disruptive kids in the class because we know that they can ruin education for everyone else, and dealing with new challenges or challenges that are old but with new twists on them like bullying.
It would enable schools to be able to have a personalised learning plan for every student so for the child who is falling behind they could have the reading recovery lessons that get them up to where the class is.
For the child that's cantering in front, they could have a specialised program that keeps extending them so that they're not bored with the work the rest of the class is doing.
It would enable them to employ specialists, librarians, language teachers, science teachers to round out the learning experience and to really inspire a love of learning, a love of reading, a love of science.
And it would come too with enough resources, so students could have equipment, schools could have the equipment they need, smartboards, iPads, the things that make up 21st century learning.
Every school would have to have a detailed school improvement plan, what they are trying to do, and everybody would be able to mark progress against that plan because it would all be transparent through My School.
HOST: That's the key isn't it because all of that sounds terrific but just giving an extra million dollars to a school is no guarantee of a better learning outcome.
So how do you guard against that and ensure better standards of teaching, better student support?
PM: We've already been able to show that we can work through new transparency, new resources, new ways of teaching and learning to get better outcomes for kids.
We've done that in our national partnership schools where we've put in new resources, joined them to new practical reforms and by making it all transparent everybody is able to see that more children are learning to read and write and do maths at the levels we need them learning through NAPLAN, so getting it right.
So we will make sure that this comes with a transparency and accountability agenda.
This is not money for nothing, it's money for change and that change will be monitored and reported on and transparent; not just to me as Prime Minister or to education ministers when they sit round at ministerial council but to you and every Australian through the work that we've done on My School.
HOST: Let's talk about the money because it's not money for nothing for the states either.
Under the two-for-one offer you've got on the table, a state like Queensland would receive an extra $3.8 billion over six years, Commonwealth kicking in $2.5 billion.
The Queensland Government would have to find an extra $1.3 billion from their budget. We've already heard from the state education minister this morning suggesting they don't actually know if they can do that. They're already cutting.
States are facing their own budget difficulties by and large. Are you asking too much in return?
PM: Budgets are about choices Fran and you show what you value through the choices you make.
I am putting the highest value on the education of our children.
It is what got me involved in politics, it is the thing that passionately drove me into the position that I hold now.
It is the key, not only to those children's lives and unlocking their full potential, but it is the key to us being a strong economy in the future.
We cannot be a strong nation in the future unless we've got a world-class schooling system in the top five in the world.
I can tell you from personal experiences in countries in our region that other nations will get in front of us and have the high-skilled jobs of the future unless we get this right.
So I understand that I'm asking premiers and chief ministers to make tough choices.
I'm not asking them to do anything I haven't had to face up to myself and indeed we are doing it in bigger measure because our offer is two-for-one.
We're prepared to make two dollars available for each dollar they put in.
HOST: Some of the offers on the face of it look curious. Western Australia will be eligible for only $300 million of the Commonwealth dollars. Colin Barnett, the Premier, calls your offer a disgrace.
Where is the incentive for WA to sign up for $300 million?
PM: Well $300 million is still lot of money.
HOST: But not compared to $2.5 billion.
PM: Well I'm happy to answer your question, Fran but I did make this point yesterday. I don't know when we got to the stage that $300 million is an amount of money to be sneered at.
$300 million would make a difference for schooling in Western Australia and I would want to see that difference made.
In terms of the shares between states, what we are doing here, the essence of this model, what is going to make us get school resourcing right for generations to come is that over a six year period we drive every school in the nation up to a school resourcing standard so that we know every school  -  whether it's Catholic, independent, state school, whether it's in WA or the Northern Territory or Tasmania  -  every school has the resources available to it to get the kids in that school a great education.
That means some jurisdictions; some states have got further to go to get to that school resourcing standard than others.
WA has done a good job with its schools, big tick there, it's got a shorter journey to the school resourcing standard and that's what explains the $300 million.
But if we just said, well let's share money out, let's keep the current system and just put money on top of it, then every inequity, every disparity, everything wrong with the current system would be taken with us into the future.
And that would mean that there are kids missing out, kids going to under-resourced schools and we would be embedding that lack of achievement in our schooling system for all time.
I am not prepared to do that.
HOST: Is it going to make it harder for you though to get agreement from WA? Under this model, WA gets less than Tasmania. It's been penalised for doing a good job in your words.
It's a bigger state, it has more people, more remote schools, more indigenous students
Some are suggesting that the money is going to the states where Labor has the most seats at risk.
PM: That's completely ridiculous, Fran. Have a look at the model.
The model is a mathematical model, no one, no person of reason could put the proposition you've just put.
The model has a figure for base funding for primary schools students  -  just over $9,000; a base figure for secondary school students  -  just over $12,000.
And then it has loadings that are worked through to address the kind of disadvantages that we know kids can bring to school and which means more resources have to go into their education.
That means that there's extra money and extra loading for poorer children, for indigenous children, for small schools, for remote schools, for students with disabilities and students with non-English speaking backgrounds.
The only thing driving this is the mathematics of the model.
And let me reverse engineer your question. Fran, is it acceptable to you that you live in a country where some kids go to schools that are less resourced than other children, that you live in a country where inherent in our school funding system we are saying some kids should get a second-class go and a worse education?
Now I'm sure you would answer, no that's not acceptable to you; every child should be able to get a good education.
Well Fran, if you've ticked that proposition then you must tick the next logical proposition which is that every school in every part of the country should have available to it the amount of resources necessary to get the kids in that school with all their advantages and all of their disadvantages a great education.
I'm asking Premier Barnett to agree with those propositions for our nation's future.
They're reasonable, they're right and they should be agreed to come COAG on Friday.
HOST: Prime Minister, I'm sure everyone listening would have ticked yes to the question you just asked then, which then leads to this next question. Why wait so long, why bring this in so close to the election?
Will you legislate this or try and legislate this, bring it into the federal parliament before parliament rises for the September election?
PM: Yes, we will and let me explain the timing. Fran, this has been a five year journey. For me it's been a lifetime journey.
For me it started in the days that I was at Adelaide University worrying about education and opportunity and getting involved in the student movement because I passionately believed that every child should get a great education.
For this Government it's been a five year journey.
We're only here now because when I was Education Minister I set about building My School.
We're only here now because when I was Education Minister we had our national partnership monies flow and we showed in individual schools that if you twin up new resources with new reforms you get a better education for our kids.
We're only here now because we asked David Gonski and a panel of eminent Australians to provide us with advice.
And we're only here now because we've patiently taken the time to work with education stakeholders to get this right.
And Fran, you've been observing Australian politics for a long period of time.
You know that whenever anybody in the past has tried to reform school funding in a systemic way that that has quickly degenerated into contests between school sectors.
We aren't seeing those contests now because we have been so careful and patient about this work and because this model has rigour and integrity and is right for the future and is joined with a plan for school improvement which means that our kids would get a better education.
That's why we've announced it now and it needs to be responded to on its merits.
HOST: So the contests we're seeing now are between the Federal Government and the states and in a sense that's nothing new too but also between education sectors themselves.
You've said on more than one occasion that education's your great moral cause. How does that fit with cutting university funding at a time when this country is ranked 25 out of 29 advanced economies for investment in our universities?
PM: Well Fran, let's get the facts on the table.
HOST: That's a fact.
PM: Yes, that's a fact but let's get the facts on the table about university funding.
What we are asking universities to do, is against a backdrop where there has been growth in university funding under this Government of more than 50 per cent, more than half; we are asking universities to accept a lower growth rate.
Every university still gets more money, everyone.
What we are asking them to do is to see less growth in that amount of new money.
Now, we are asking them to do that for two years; a 2 per cent efficiency dividend one year and a 1.25 per cent efficiency dividend the next year.
Funding gone up by more than 50 per cent, still more money flowing to each university, a moderation of the growth rate.
What matters to university, of course money matters; tell you what else matters, students.
The quality of people coming out of our schools, how prepared they are for university.
Our universities have an interest too in seeing kids get a great education.
That's why we are asking universities to contribute in the way that we announced on the weekend.
Now, I understand why if you're a university chancellor or a vice-chancellor you would be puzzling your way through all of these figures and thinking about what it means for your university, of course.
But if you broaden the landscape and say, what is right for our nation, moderating growth rates universities to get not only today's 3.5 million kids a better education but to get the school system, funding system and improvement system right for decades and decades and generations and generations to come then I think it is fair to ask unis for this contribution.
HOST: Back to the chance of success here or not the Queensland Premier has described the funding model that you've put forward a mirage. He also wants this offer put on hold until after the September election.
States like WA don't think you'll be the Prime Minister after September and see no reason why they should sign on.
It makes it harder to seal any deal here, the proximity to the election and the polls.
PM: Surely it's not too much to ask people to put kids first.
It's not too much to ask people to put our nation first  -  our nation's future and the strength of its economy.
Wherever we are in the political cycle, whatever political party ticket people have got in their wallet or purse, surely it's not too much to say to them the most important thing for our nation's future is the quality of education in our classrooms today.
So instead of looking at political atmospherics look at the reality.
Do we want kids to have a better education? Do we know what resourcing that takes? Do we know that there are schools that don't have that resourcing now and should we fix it?
They're the key questions and they should all be answered yes.
HOST: The point is, you may have a plan but today's Nielsen Poll shows a primary vote for the Government of 29 per cent for Labor.
With polls like this you won't be able to deliver your education funding plan.
PM: Well I certainly have a plan and I'm very focused on delivering it.
We have polls, one a week, sometimes a couple a week.
HOST: None of them are good lately for you for a long time.
PM: My focus isn't on the numbers in that poll, my focus is on the numbers which add up to a school funding system and a set of improvements in schools which means I'll be able to look at NAPLAN results, at national testing results and see numbers going up for achievement in reading and writing and maths.
And know, as Prime Minister of this country that we're not only treating every child fairly and giving them the education that helps them realise their full potential, that we are going to be the economy of tomorrow that has the high-skill, high-wage jobs because we've got the people with the capacities to fill them.
HOST: Looking at the polls, not just today but over the last weeks, months, over the last year or more, you can't have much hope of winning the next election.
Will you be broken-hearted if the election comes, you lose and this education plan goes to dust?
PM: Fran, the election will be on 14 September, there will be a very clear choice at that election between me-
HOST: But not a close choice by the looks of it.
PM: Fran, let's leave until election day the choice for the Australian people and pay them the respect of saying in their millions they'll make their decision as they go into polling places on election day.
There will be a clear choice then for people on election day between me, seeking a mandate to lead a majority Labor Government with a clear plan for the future, or the negativity we see on the other side of politics.
That will be the choice on election day.
But there are choices before that and there is one coming up on Friday and that is how much we value our children and how much we are prepared to invest to be a strong economy tomorrow or whether the future of our country will be slowly languishing with lower and lower growth rates and less and less skilled jobs and lower paid jobs as we watch the countries of our region zoom past us because they have been prepared to invest in their schools, they have been prepared to get their kids a great education.
HOST: Prime Minister, you've received a free character assessment from your former cabinet minister Simon Crean. He says you have tin ear when it comes to sound policy advice. What's your response?
PM: I'm not going to add to any of that debate and it's not what my focus is on today.
HOST: Is Simon Crean now doing what he accused Kevin Rudd of doing, destabilising?
PM: Fran, my focus isn't there, my focus is on the things that will matter, not only next year but 10 years from now, 20 years from now, 30 years from now.
That's this change to school funding.
HOST: Prime Minister, finally on Friday this program spoke with one of the hunger strikers inside the Melbourne detention centre. Now, for one week, 27 mainly Sri Lankan men have been refusing any food. Most of these people have been locked up for three years or more.
Is it beyond us as a nation to find a better way to manage this other than locking refugees up indefinitely without a chance to defend themselves?
PM: First and foremost Fran, what we do is we have proper assessments to see who has a genuine refugee claim and who does not.
HOST: And these people are being assessment as genuine refugees.
PM: And we have proper assessments on security grounds too. Both of them need to be done, both of them need to be abided by and you do not change your circumstance as an asylum seeker or a refugee with an adverse security assessment through hunger striking-
HOST: They've said they've been locked up for three years.
PM: And Fran, we've got duties and obligations to the nation here in terms of properly assessing who's a refugee and making appropriate security assessments.
HOST: Will we find a way to manage this and allow these people outside eventually of the detention centre?
PM: Well Fran, I've said to you how we've got to balance these things and weigh them for the nation and of course making sure that people are genuinely refugees and that we've got a proper security assessment process is right for the nation.
That's what we do and it is not changed, no one changes it through the personal conduct like going on a hunger strike.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us on Breakfast.
PM: Thank you. 


Canberra
Adam Scott's triumph at Augusta immediately joins the ranks of the truly great Australian sporting moments.
Since its inception in 1934, no Australian has had the honour of putting on the Green Jacket  -  that changes today.
Adam Scott held his nerve and prevailed in the most intense pressure imaginable on any sporting field.
With this outstanding achievement, Adam Scott has done his country proud.


Canberra
I am pleased to announce that the late Raoul Wallenberg will be recognised as an honorary Australian citizen.
This is the first time that Australia has bestowed such an honour.
Raoul Wallenberg was a Swedish diplomat who led an extraordinary rescue operation in Hungary during World War II.
He saved tens of thousands of Jews from the Holocaust by issuing protective passports and providing shelter in diplomatic buildings. 
Tragically, Raoul Wallenberg did not return to Sweden.  He was arrested by Soviet troops in January 1945 and his fate remains a mystery.
Mr Wallenberg has been recognised as an honorary citizen of the United States of America, Canada, Hungary and Israel.
Many monuments, buildings, streets, schools and other institutions around the world bear his name. 
He was awarded the honour of ‘Righteous among the Nations' by Yad Vashem, the Jewish people's living memorial to the Holocaust.
The lives of those he rescued are Mr Wallenberg's greatest memorial and Australia is honoured to have survivors he rescued living in Australia today.
The Governor-General, Her Excellency Ms Quentin Bryce AC CVO, will host the presentation of a certificate of honorary Australian citizenship at Government House, Canberra, on Monday, 6 May 2013.
The award is made in the year of the centenary of Mr Wallenberg's birth.
The award of honorary Australian citizenship is symbolic recognition of Mr Wallenberg's tireless devotion to human life during the Holocaust.
The award is not conferred under the Citizenship Act 2007. 


ABC Brisbane
HOST: Keeping the Prime Minister of Australia on hold for the golf, Prime Minister Gillard good morning to you. Sorry about keeping you waiting.
PM: That's fine, I well and truly understand and big news, and lots of nail-biting around.
HOST: Correct. Now Queensland would receive an extra $3.8 billion for education over six years in the Gonski funding that you've offered the state.
$2.5 billion of that would be from the Commonwealth; it's a two-for-one offer, so that basically means the state of Queensland would have to raise $1.3 billion is they accept your deal.
Where do they find the money Prime Minister?
PM: That's a question for the Queensland Government and the budget choices it's prepared to make.
I understand that it's hard to make budget choices.
I understand what it's like to live in an environment where revenue is constrained.
That's what's happening to us federally.
We're getting less money per unit of GDP into federal government coffers than at any time since the early 1990s.
So what does that mean? It means you live in a world of tough choices; we've made some to put our kids first, I'm obviously asking Premier Newman to do the same.
And when I say put our kids first, that's to make sure that every child goes to a school that is properly resourced and that we get the school funding system right for generations to come.
And we tie that new funding to a school improvement agenda.
Because I've just been to the region, I've been to China, I can tell you our competitors are improving their schools and if we just sit and let them get in front, then that only ends one way.
It ends up with us having a weaker economy and less ability to have the high-skilled, high-paid jobs of the future.
HOST: As I understand the calculation, Prime Minister, this means that schools will get roughly 1 or 2 million dollars per year.
How will that change in the classroom what a school principal can do with his or her school?
PM: Sure, I think that's a really important question, what does it mean for the kids?
What it means for the kids is whatever choice mum or dad has made about which school to go to  -  Catholic, independent, state school  -  they know that there are the resources in that school to give their child a great education.
For the children, what it means is that the teachers in their classroom would be from the best and brightest.
We're moving the teacher education model, and would be continually supported to get better at what they do.
And in particular, teachers would be supported so they can manage disruption in the classroom and the scourge of bullying, including cyber-bullying which is stopping so many kids from learning.
HOST: These issues that you've just pointed out, they're not really funding issues, they're more home discipline and teacher quality issues aren't they?
They're not about shovelling money at the problem.
PM: Well teacher quality is pivotal, but in terms of buttressing the quality of our teachers, improving the quality, it does take resources.
We know how to get it done, we've already piloted these things through a national partnership on teacher quality, but I want every teacher in every classroom to be a great teacher.
I also want to make sure through these new resources that schools can employ specialists  -  librarians, science teachers, language teachers.
That every student has a personalised learning plan, so that means that if one child's falling behind they get the reading recovery work that they need to get them up to where the rest of the class is-
HOST: So this is remedial money almost?
PM: No, no. It's personalised learning plans.
So if one child's behind, they get the work to get them up to where the class is.
But if one child is cantering in front, instead of sitting there being bored to snores by the work the class is doing, they get a personalised learning plan that extends them beyond the work the class is doing so that they're not there bored and disrupting which can happen for our bright kids if the work doesn't keep up with them.
It would mean too that schools have got enough resources to have equipment like the smartboards and iPads, the kind of equipment schools need today.
Every school would have a school improvement plan, and you, me, everyone would be able to benchmark how schools are going-
HOST: Sorry, who drives that school improvement plan? Does the Queensland education department do that, the federal education department, or the school principal?
PM: The schools themselves work out their school improvement plan.
HOST: So that's a tied requirement of the funding if they take it?
PM: That's right, and they're held to account against it.
If you say you are going to do these things to improve your school, and that they will make a difference to the kids' learning outcomes in the following ways, then you're accountable.
It's transparent, it's not just transparent to Premier Newman or to me as Prime Minister or to education ministers sitting around at a ministerial council, it's transparent to everyone because you'll be able to get onto My School and have a good old look.
HOST: So it's accountable to the federal education department?
PM: No, accountable to the Australian community. You will be able to get on My School and have a look-
HOST: Who will they send the plan to, I mean, if the plan is a federal requirement-
PM: The plan goes on My School, you can see the plan, and you can see how schools are achieving against their plans.
HOST: Which is your website, which is the federal government's website.
PM: Yes, well of course, it's a website I determined the nation should have.
But we needed to work with state education departments and state ministers to get it done otherwise we wouldn't have the data for it.
HOST: Now we know that you've come up with this funding model by cutting funds from universities.
I'm going to speak with the vice chancellor of the University of Queensland in just a moment, but Adam Bandt from the Greens said on the weekend that the Federal Government saved more money from pushing single mothers onto Newstart than from the mining tax.
If you hadn't bungled, or if Wayne Swan your Treasurer, hadn't bungled the mining tax, wouldn't you have not needed to cut federal funding to universities to do this?
PM: No, completely untrue. We would always have had to have made savings for these important reforms for schools.
We always said, and I said this last year at the Press Club when I spoke about this big picture reform for the future, really properly resourcing our classrooms for generations, I said then I was going to ask the nation to make some tough choices and that's exactly what I'm asking the nation to do.
But looking at university funding, we have increased funding to universities by more than 50 per cent since we came to government. That's a lot, by more than half.
Universities will continue to get more money next year and the year after than this year.
What we are looking to do is to moderate the rate of growth so that we can make a difference to school funding now for 3.5 million kids and of course get school funding and school reform and improvement right for all of the children to follow.
HOST: So you're doing to universities around Australia what you did to state health departments late last year?
PM: That's completely untrue as well.
There is more money going into Queensland Health from this Government than has ever flown in the history of our federation.
I have ensured that we have stepped up so that when costs are there in Queensland hospitals  -  costs grow, new money is required to fund that growth  -  that we are an equal partner in that growth.
That is against former governments like the Howard Government where that percentage was going down and down and down, and was in the 30 per cents.
I've brought it up to 50 per cent.
HOST: Now the total HECS debt in Australia is $26.3 billion.
That's people who have received a free education but have not bothered or for some reason can't bother to pay it back.
Why don't you try and recoup some of that $26.3 billion which is owed to the Commonwealth by Australians?
PM: Well we do make strong efforts to recoup HECS debts, so I can assure you we do do that.
HOST: $26.3 billion is an awful lot of money that's owed to the Commonwealth.
PM: And of course for the vast majority of people it's repaid over time when they hit the income thresholds for repayment.
HECS is a great system, it's enabled us to expand our universities and to make university education affordable for people who never would have got an opportunity to go if there were upfront fees.
People pay the money back when they're earning over an income which shows that they've got some benefit from their degree and that's a good system and of course we do pursue the debts and the debts routinely get repaid.
HOST: Now you just mentioned you've just come back from your successful trip in China, you'd seen what they were doing with education there.
A listener has just sent me a note pointing out that Asian schools have much larger class sizes, more hours in school and much fewer computers than we do already in Australia, and they do much better.
Doesn't that undermine your argument to me this morning?
PM: No it doesn't, because if you look around at the countries in our region  -  I'm actually staring at a map of the world in my office right now-
HOST: Are you, I'm watching the golf!
PM: Are you? Right, well if you look at Korea, if you look at Singapore, if you look what they're doing in China they are putting in more resources because they understand that the strength of your economy in the future depends on how good education is in classrooms.
Now the point I think behind your caller's intervention, and it's a good one, is it can't just be about money, it has to be about the best ways of working in classrooms to get the maximum results.
I agree with that, this is not just about putting money in.
It's money to drive change, money to drive improvement.
I want every child to get a great education.
We shouldn't rest as a nation until every child gets a great education, but we didn't just work this out in the federal bureaucracy.
What we did is we created My School, so we knew exactly what was going on in schools.
We created national partnership schools where we demonstrated that if you brought some more money to bear combined with new ways of working, kids got a better education.
Now I want to make sure that that happens in every school, not just today but for all the decades to come.
HOST: I'll speak to you again Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thanks Steve. 


Melbourne
PM: I'd like to thank everybody for making us welcome in this great school. I'm joined today by Rob Mitchell, the Member for McEwen and it's great to be with him in his electorate. And you're right, your school does rock, so thank you very much.
Unfortunately whilst I've had a great time here in this school, we are gathered together on what is a very sad day as people are seeing shocking images come out of Boston and the Boston Marathon.
As I said earlier today, the Boston Marathon is something that Australians look to, they are familiar with, many Australians across their lives would aspire to go and run in the Boston Marathon.
And to see those images of people so dreadfully hurt and to know that there has been loss of life has made it a truly saddening day.
I have on behalf of the nation written a letter of condolence to President Obama. And our thoughts continue to be with the people of Boston and particularly those who have lost loved ones, and those who are trying to now deal with injuries that they got so unexpectedly and during such scenes of terror.
On my present advice we are not aware of any Australians who have been hurt in this incident. But we know family members and friends would continue to worry.
Our advice is please try and contact your family member or friend if you think that they may have been at the Boston Marathon.
If you are unable to contact them then you should ring our consular emergency centre, and that number is 1 300 555 135.
We're asking people to make their own endeavours first to contact their family member or friend and then use the hotline if they are unable to get on to their family member or friend.
But we are not aware of any Australian who has been hurt in this incident in Boston, which is generating truly shocking images and is such a senseless and such a brutal act.
Onto happier things, and happier things include the discussions we have had today with the kids here and also with Bill the principal, and thank you very much to the teachers for making us so welcome.
I'm here today talking about our plan to properly resource schools for generations to come.
When you come to schools, when you see individual school children it reminds you that as a nation we want to make sure that every child gets the kind of education which enables them to realise their full potential.
That every child is precious and we want them to get a great education. That every child matters to our nation's future and we want to make sure that that future is one of economic strength and high skill, high wage jobs, and that all starts in classrooms like the classrooms I've been in today.
I am very committed that as a nation we adopt this school resourcing plan, and with it the school improvement agenda.
That we make sure that we can truly say to ourselves every school has got the resources it needs to give children a great education.
And every school too is working to continuously improve so kids get a better and better education.
That's why I will continue to press premiers and chief ministers to work with us and to see our nation drive towards this school resourcing standard.
I want to make sure over a transition period of six years that we drive our nation towards this school resource standard, and that we get the system right for all of the generations to come.
Here in Victoria we've spoken about a $14.5 billion new investment nationally on a two-for-one basis coming from the Federal Government, plus indexation rates from the Federal Government at 4.7 per cent.
Here in Victoria that would mean an extra amount of $4 billion  -  that's a lot of money.
It means on average an extra $1.5 million for schools. On average an extra $4,000 for every school student. It is considerable new resources.
And that is the future we could have; if we don't seize that future then unfortunately the current system of school funding, the one which we inherited from the former government, will see school funding go backwards by $5.4 billion  -  by around half a million dollars on average for every school.
I believe as a nation we can work together around the table at the Council of the Australian Governments meeting on Friday, and we can as we work around that table put the interests of Australia's children  -  and Australia's future  -  first.
And that's what I will be striving to do on Friday.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the funding plan's already received opposition in the form of Colin Barnett. Is there anything the Federal Government can do to get Western Australia across the line?
PM: Well I'd like to just make clear the figures about Western Australia because I'm not sure that they have been clear.
Already the Federal Government contributes $1.2 billion to school education in Western Australia. That's around 27 per cent of what is spent in Western Australia.
So Premier Barnett has used words like “butt out”  -  the Federal Government should “butt out”. But I doubt he wants us to butt out and take $1.2 billion  -  more than a quarter of the expenditure on schools in his state  -  with us.
I'm sure really what the people of Western Australia want to see is me and the Premier working to better resource and improve schools for the future, which is why we do want to see an extra investment of $300 million in the schools in Western Australia.
Now Premier Barnett is right to be proud of what's been achieved in WA schools. They are closer to the school resource standard than many schools around the nation.
Now the figures he's using to suggest that our school resource standard is less than what is being spent in WA schools now fails to take into account all of the loadings for disadvantage and non-English speaking kids, and small schools, remote schools, indigenous children, children with disabilities, and the whole set of loadings we've built into the system.
Properly construed, what we have on offer for Western Australian schools is more money, and as Premier, why wouldn't he want to see more resources going into WA schools?
JOURNALIST: What would this school get under Gonski?
PM: Well, what we can talk about is average figures. Obviously the model is highly correlated to levels of disadvantage.
So the way in which it works is there is a figure for the school resource standard of just over $9,000 for primary schools per child, just over $12,000 for secondary schools per child, but then you add loadings.
Loadings for disadvantage, loadings for indigenous kids, loadings for non-English speaking kids, more money for children with disabilities, and more money for small and remote schools.
So every school is going to have a different set of factors, but we have worked through very carefully so that the school resource standard  -  the money I've referred to  -  and all of those loadings gives every school the resources it needs to get the children in that school a great education.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you think of Chris Bowen's decision to write a book outlining his vision for modern Labor?
PM: Look, it's all fine. Obviously Chris Bowen will be working hard in his electorate and people can always put ideas about the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Department of Immigration yesterday said that Manus Island is cramped, lacks proper facilities, and is in urgent need of an upgrade. Will we be seeing an upgrade any time soon?
PM: What we would most want to see is that the Opposition would join with us in enabling us to put into full operation all of the recommendations that Angus Houston, the former Chief of our Defence Force and his very expert panel, recommended to the nation.
That's really the key thing we need to do.
Instead of that, unfortunately I think from Australia's point of view, we've seen political game playing around this.
I would much prefer that instead of the negativity we've seen, the Opposition would endorse such an expert plan.
JOURNALIST: The Chancellor of Swinburne University today made comments in the Financial Review; instead of stripping money from universities to fund Gonski, perhaps we should be looking at taking it from car industry subsidies. What do you make of his suggestion?
PM: Well I've dealt with this issue about university funding and made the simple mathematical point; we have increased university funding by more than 50 per cent since we came to office as a Government, more than 50 per cent.
And I understand that universities want to see more resources going to universities  -  that's fair enough.
But on behalf of the nation when we've got more than 50 per cent increase, when we've got university funding increasing like that, I think it is the right thing to do to ask them to moderate that rate of growth so that those savings can be used to improve school education.
So money to universities will still grow, it just won't grow as steeply as it otherwise would have. And the difference is 2 per cent dividend in one year, and a 1.25 per cent dividend the second year.
Universities need dollars to run, absolutely, but they also need students and the better prepared those students come from a great school education, the better for our universities.
And that's what we're trying to get our kids  -  a great school education.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask also in relation to COAG, the business community's saying that reform hasn't been quick enough through COAG. They're asking what the point of it is if it's not cutting red tape.
PM: Look I couldn't agree more. And we are always there at the COAG table with our seamless national economy agenda to try and reduce red tape for business.
We've worked long and hard on it, and unfortunately when we get to the COAG table we don't get agreement from states and territories on things that would cut red tape for business.
So I would like to see more agreement from states and territories to cutting red tape. I think it's important for business, and it's something that we've continued to work on through what we call our seamless national economy agenda, which is perhaps a complicated way of saying we want the rules in the Australian economy to work seamlessly.
So it doesn't matter if you're doing business in Victoria or Queensland or Tasmania, the rules applying to your business are the same.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr Abbott has promised to release his workplace relations policy sometime in the next couple of weeks. What are you expecting to see there?
PM: I've got a copy of the old one, Work Choices, I don't need a new one. It will be the same.
Okay, thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
Australians have awoken this morning to shocking and tragic scenes at the Boston Marathon.
Our condolences go to the families of those killed and our thoughts are with those who have been injured.
It will be some time before we know the full extent of what has occurred but these explosions have cast a long shadow over one of the world's great sporting events.
The Australian Consulate-General in New York is making urgent enquiries to determine whether any Australian citizens may have been involved in this attack.
At this time they are unaware of any Australian casualties.
Australian runners were scheduled to compete. DFAT is currently contacting these athletes to confirm their safety.
Anyone who has concerns for the welfare of family and friends in the region and has been unable to contact them should call the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade's 24-hour Consular Emergency Centre of 1 300 555 135
For their own safety, Australians in Boston need to follow instructions of civil authorities as events unfold. 


Canberra
PM: Australians have woken this morning to shocking and tragic scenes from the Boston Marathon.
The Boston Marathon is known around the world, indeed many Australians aspire during the course of their life to go and run the Boston Marathon.
Australia unreservedly condemns this brutal and senseless attack on what is a great event known around the world and one people participate in to have fun as their families and friends watch on.
The images we've seen have been truly shocking ones and our thoughts today are with those who have lost loved ones.
Our condolences go to those who have lost family and friends in this tragic event.
And our thoughts are also with the many injured.
We are also thinking too of all of those who are responding to this emergency  -  all of the emergency personnel who are being deployed to provide comfort to the bereaved and to tend to the injured.
There is much work for them to do and our thoughts are with them as they do that work.
As President Obama said this morning, we do not know who did this or why.
And it's likely to be a little while before the facts become clearer.
Obviously there are Australians who go to Boston to run the race, and Australians who go and watch, and Australians who live and work in Boston in any event and are there.
We have been addressing their safety as our paramount concern at this time.
At this stage we are not aware of any Australian victims, so we do not have any evidence before us at the moment that any Australians have been hurt in this incident.
Our Consulate-General in New York is continuing its inquiries, and the Department of Foreign Affairs will be providing updates as it can.
I've been briefed this morning by senior officials on circumstances generally in Boston and also the circumstances of Australians.
My message to Australians at this time is if they've got any concerns about the welfare of family or friends who are in Boston, to endeavour to contact them personally first.
If they are unable to do so, then they should call the 24 hour Consular Emergency Centre on 1300 555 135.
At this stage the Government has no information warranting any change in the terrorism alert level in our country, in Australia.
The terrorism alert level remains at medium, where it has been since 2001.
What that means is that a terrorist attack could occur, but I want to stress we have not upgraded warnings and warnings have been at medium since 2001.
Our travel advice for the United States has been reissued to reflect today's events, that is to reflect the fact that these senseless attacks have occurred in Boston and to advise people to listen to local authorities.
But overall our level of advice for travel to the United States has not changed.
It remains where it was previously, which is exercise normal safety precautions.
Can I stress that Australians in Boston should follow the instructions of local authorities.
This is obviously a very difficult time with those local authorities, they're very stretched with this emergency so please listen to local authorities.
This has been a shocking morning for many Australians who would be watching the images on their TV screens with a sense of horror.
Our thoughts, our condolences are with those in Boston and we will continue to provide advice as we can about who is responsible for this senseless and very, very cruel attack.
Thank you.
[ENDS] 


3AW
HOST: We're now joined as I promised before the news by the Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard. Ms Gillard, good afternoon.
PM: Good afternoon.HOST: A very sad day for Boston, which is of course the sister city to Melbourne.PM: It is a very sad day for Boston, and I agree with you about some of the shocking images we're seeing.
Just the distress on people's faces, the physically injury, you can really imagine being there in that moment and kind of, everything's fine and it's the Boston Marathon, and the next moment it's all turned to hell. It's just awful.HOST: Ms Gillard, have you actually spoke to anybody in the US administration yet about the bombing?PM: I haven't personally. Our officials have been in contact with their US counterparts and I received a briefing from them in Canberra, from our National Security Advisor and head of ASIO.HOST: Does the attack there have any ramifications for our security status here in Australia?PM: I've taken advice on that and we are keeping our terrorist alert level at the same level; that is there is no reason for us to upgrade it.HOST: As far as we know yet, were any Australians hurt in the bombing?PM: To the best of our knowledge, we are not aware of any Australian being hurt. So we don't know of anybody at this stage.We do know though that there would still be people who are anxious, they know that they've got family or friends in Boston, who either were going in the marathon or going to watch the marathon, so we're saying please firstly try and contact your loved one and if you're not able to do that, then we do have a consular support line and we've got people working to ascertain everybody's safety.But we do not have any information before us at the moment which would lead us to believe that an Australian has been hurt.HOST: That's good news and the advice about travelling to the United States, that hasn't changed for Australians planning on making a trip there?PM: No it hasn't. The travel advisory is at the same level that it is normally at.Obviously, it has been updated to specifically refer to these events in Boston so people, obviously people would know from other sources but just as an absolute failsafe if the only source of information people were getting was the travel advisory, it would tell them what's happened in Boston and say obviously in Boston that people need to pay due regard, absolute regard, to the instructions of local authorities about what to do next.HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for that. If I could just ask you to cast your mind into a different subject matter, that of education, there's all sorts of things happening at the moment, particularly from some of the proposals that you and Dr Craig Emerson have announced.Firstly, all the state premiers have been offered what you've termed as a two-for-one deal. Dennis Napthine here in Victoria says he's considering it. Why should he accept it?PM: He should accept it because it will put schools in Victoria on a proper resource standard, not only for current students in schools but for generations and generations to come.What we've had in Australian education up until this time has been a situation where schools have not had in them the resources they need to get their kids a great education.Where we've had pushing and pulling between the school sectors  -  Catholic schools, independent schools, state schools  -  we want to end all of that, we want to end it for all time.So every school in Victoria, no matter what suburb or country centre you lived in, whatever school you chose, state school, Catholic school, independent school, you would know your child was in a school that has the resources necessary to give your child a great education.And all of that new resourcing would come with an improvement approach, so we're not only getting in more money, but we're getting better and better outcomes for the money we spend because I don't want our kids falling behind the standards of the world.HOST: That's a very noble sentiment, but there must be some sort of a catch. I mean are the state governments worried about ceding too much control over education, which used to be primarily a state matter, to the federal government?PM: I think for state premiers it's obviously a decision about what you put priority on, about what you put value on.Budgets are tight, our budget's tight, and so we've needed to make savings decisions to make this two-for-one offer possible for us, and we're asking premiers with constrained state budgets to make important priority decisions too and to put kids first.HOST: And speaking of priority decisions, I mentioned Dr Emerson before, I spoke with him yesterday.Many university chancellors have come out and criticised your government's decision to reduce university funding by $2.3 billion approximately to help fund primary and secondary schools.What would you say to those chancellors?PM: What I would say to those chancellors is we as a government have increased funding to universities by more than 50 per cent.We've not only increased funding globally by more than 50 per cent, we've also been increasing funding per student place, so the number of places has grown, but funding has also gone up per student place.Money to universities is still going to grow. We've got universities on a growth path.What we are asking them to do is for one year to accept a two per cent efficiency dividend, and in the second year a 1.25 per cent efficiency dividend.That means their money would still grow, it just wouldn't grow as fast as they'd obviously wanted and seen in the figures.We think that's not too much to ask to get our kids a great education, and I've made the point whilst I've been talking to people and let me make the point again, universities certainly need money, but they also need great quality students and they have a strong interest in making sure that schools are offering the best quality education.HOST: And finally Prime Minister, an academic at the University of Melbourne, one Sally Young, she's the associate professor of political science there, has written in The Age today that the Australian media is guilty of sexism in reporting on the career of you and other female leaders. Do you think that's true?PM: I must admit I didn't see that piece, I'm a busy woman every day and I've particularly had things to attend to today.I didn't see the piece and I don't think you can make sweeping generalisations. I think people will judge media pieces as they read them.HOST: Indeed. We'll leave it there Julia Gillard, Prime Minister, thank you so much for joining us.PM: Thank you.[ENDS] 



HOST: We're now joined as I promised before the news by the Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard. Ms Gillard, good afternoon.
PM: Good afternoon.
HOST: A very sad day for Boston, which is of course the sister city to Melbourne.
PM: It is a very sad day for Boston, and I agree with you about some of the shocking images we're seeing.
Just the distress on people's faces, the physically injury, you can really imagine being there in that moment and kind of, everything's fine and it's the Boston Marathon, and the next moment it's all turned to hell. It's just awful.
HOST: Ms Gillard, have you actually spoke to anybody in the US administration yet about the bombing?
PM: I haven't personally. Our officials have been in contact with their US counterparts and I received a briefing from them in Canberra, from our National Security Advisor and head of ASIO.
HOST: Does the attack there have any ramifications for our security status here in Australia?
PM: I've taken advice on that and we are keeping our terrorist alert level at the same level; that is there is no reason for us to upgrade it.
HOST: As far as we know yet, were any Australians hurt in the bombing?
PM: To the best of our knowledge, we are not aware of any Australian being hurt. So we don't know of anybody at this stage.
We do know though that there would still be people who are anxious, they know that they've got family or friends in Boston, who either were going in the marathon or going to watch the marathon, so we're saying please firstly try and contact your loved one and if you're not able to do that, then we do have a consular support line and we've got people working to ascertain everybody's safety.
But we do not have any information before us at the moment which would lead us to believe that an Australian has been hurt.
HOST: That's good news and the advice about travelling to the United States, that hasn't changed for Australians planning on making a trip there?
PM: No it hasn't. The travel advisory is at the same level that it is normally at.
Obviously, it has been updated to specifically refer to these events in Boston so people, obviously people would know from other sources but just as an absolute failsafe if the only source of information people were getting was the travel advisory, it would tell them what's happened in Boston and say obviously in Boston that people need to pay due regard, absolute regard, to the instructions of local authorities about what to do next.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for that. If I could just ask you to cast your mind into a different subject matter, that of education, there's all sorts of things happening at the moment, particularly from some of the proposals that you and Dr Craig Emerson have announced.
Firstly, all the state premiers have been offered what you've termed as a two-for-one deal. Dennis Napthine here in Victoria says he's considering it. Why should he accept it?
PM: He should accept it because it will put schools in Victoria on a proper resource standard, not only for current students in schools but for generations and generations to come.
What we've had in Australian education up until this time has been a situation where schools have not had in them the resources they need to get their kids a great education.
Where we've had pushing and pulling between the school sectors  -  Catholic schools, independent schools, state schools  -  we want to end all of that, we want to end it for all time.
So every school in Victoria, no matter what suburb or country centre you lived in, whatever school you chose, state school, Catholic school, independent school, you would know your child was in a school that has the resources necessary to give your child a great education.
And all of that new resourcing would come with an improvement approach, so we're not only getting in more money, but we're getting better and better outcomes for the money we spend because I don't want our kids falling behind the standards of the world.
HOST: That's a very noble sentiment, but there must be some sort of a catch. I mean are the state governments worried about ceding too much control over education, which used to be primarily a state matter, to the federal government?
PM: I think for state premiers it's obviously a decision about what you put priority on, about what you put value on.
Budgets are tight, our budget's tight, and so we've needed to make savings decisions to make this two-for-one offer possible for us, and we're asking premiers with constrained state budgets to make important priority decisions too and to put kids first.
HOST: And speaking of priority decisions, I mentioned Dr Emerson before, I spoke with him yesterday.
Many university chancellors have come out and criticised your government's decision to reduce university funding by $2.3 billion approximately to help fund primary and secondary schools.
What would you say to those chancellors?
PM: What I would say to those chancellors is we as a government have increased funding to universities by more than 50 per cent.
We've not only increased funding globally by more than 50 per cent, we've also been increasing funding per student place, so the number of places has grown, but funding has also gone up per student place.
Money to universities is still going to grow. We've got universities on a growth path.
What we are asking them to do is for one year to accept a two per cent efficiency dividend, and in the second year a 1.25 per cent efficiency dividend.
That means their money would still grow, it just wouldn't grow as fast as they'd obviously wanted and seen in the figures.
We think that's not too much to ask to get our kids a great education, and I've made the point whilst I've been talking to people and let me make the point again, universities certainly need money, but they also need great quality students and they have a strong interest in making sure that schools are offering the best quality education.
HOST: And finally Prime Minister, an academic at the University of Melbourne, one Sally Young, she's the associate professor of political science there, has written in The Age today that the Australian media is guilty of sexism in reporting on the career of you and other female leaders. Do you think that's true?
PM: I must admit I didn't see that piece, I'm a busy woman every day and I've particularly had things to attend to today.
I didn't see the piece and I don't think you can make sweeping generalisations. I think people will judge media pieces as they read them.
HOST: Indeed. We'll leave it there Julia Gillard, Prime Minister, thank you so much for joining us.
PM: Thank you.


ABC Melbourne
HOST: Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Jon.
HOST: The Opposition are of course making much of what they say are the failings of the Government, but sadly you also have some of your own colleagues saying that there are failings of this Government.
In particular Simon Crean's most recent outburst cuts to the very core of the way you deal with a number of issues, which I'll come to in a moment. Let's just remind ourselves, Simon Crean accusing you of class warfare.
CREAN GRAB: I think the way in which the Labor Party has always operated most effectively is when it has been inclusive, when it has sought consensus, not when it has sought division. Not when it has gone after class warfare. That's what the Labor Party has to get back to. That's the Labor Party I want us to return to. And that's the Labor Party that I want everyone to cohese behind.
HOST: Class warfare, but not calling it class warfare, is that the agenda Prime Minister?
PM: The Labor Party I joined, Jon, was one that was focused on spreading opportunity for all.
I joined it because I became very passionate about extending opportunities through education. I thought education changed lives. It changed mine.
And here I am, all those years later from first joining the Labor Party, and being a university student involved in student politics, to being Prime Minister and still pursing the same agenda about making sure everyone gets an opportunity through a great education, and everybody gets that transforming lifetime power that comes with a great education.
So that's what I've been very much focused on. It has been a patient process, but step by step over five years that's my agenda.
So if someone wants to understand what modern Labor is about, it's about opportunity for all and making sure that no one  -  particularly no child  -  gets left behind.
HOST: But it would be politically toxic to say that it offends you that the rich are getting richer and the poor are being left behind, so you don't say it, but that's effectively what you are doing, isn't it?
PM: Well what offends me is when someone misses out on an opportunity when our society could have extended an opportunity to them.
It does offend me that there are kids in Australian classrooms today and we know that their schools do not have the right level of resourcing in them to give them a great education.
And without the right level of resources, without the right way of working in schools, we know those kids will come out of school under-prepared for life and that will mark them for a lifetime of disadvantage.
I think we should all be concerned about that. I certainly am.
HOST: If it's about redistributing why not do it properly? Private schools are doing phenomenally well and have boomed in recent years under the Howard Government, the Rudd Government and the Gillard Government.
PM: Well Jon, I think you are missing two points. Number one, I'm about ensuring we've got a strong economy and strong economic growth.
So we get into, in my view, some false discussions about who believes in growing the pie and who believes in redistributing the pie. I think that's too simple.
I believe in doing both. And I'm very proud that during the most difficult of global economic circumstances, we've grown our economy since we came to government by 13 per cent.
Now when you look at many of the economies of Europe, they've gone backwards. Their economies are smaller today than they were five years ago.
HOST: And the distribution within that growth has been unequal. Yesterday we heard from the private schools crying poor saying that fees will eventually go up in private schools because they are not going to get the growth money that they need from you. Are you sympathetic to that plea?
PM: That claim is wrong. There is nothing about our changes which will cause fees to rise. And our changes are right for all schools because what they do for all schools, Jon, is end for all time the inter-sector divisions that you are pointing to.
I want to end the politics that says let's have independent schools play off against Catholic schools, play off against state schools, by saying that for every school there is the right level of resourcing, the proper level of resourcing.
We know what that is, it's a school resource standard with a base in it and then loadings for things that mean you've got to put extra resources in to get a great outcome for kids like more money to teach disadvantaged kids and indigenous kids.
And we know every school has that level of resourcing in it.
HOST: The prospect of a deal seems to be slipping away, particularly Western Australia. Are you going to tell the Western Australian Premier that after 100 years of the rich states subsidising Western Australia it's about time that a little bit of give came the other way?
PM: Well once again you are confusing two things Jon. There's the debate about the GST and how WA relates to the GST.
We don't set  -  the Government doesn't set  -  the GST distribution formula. That's set independently of government. And indeed Colin Barnett signed on to the current formula.
What the current formula means is that WA is distributing some money to other states, but overwhelmingly across the last 50 years it has been a net taker. Now it's a net giver.
I certainly as Prime Minister want to make sure wherever you are in this country, whether you are in Tassie or the Northern Territory or WA, that you can go to schools in your suburb that are good quality schools.
You can have hospitals and healthcare at the right standard.
Then separately to that there's what does our school resourcing agenda mean for Western Australia.
Premier Barnett has made some claims in this area which simply aren't right.
Our school resourcing agenda for WA means more money for Western Australian schools because they do need more money to come up to the standard that we want to see in all schools.
HOST: Why has your Government banned Senator Sarah Hanson-Young from visiting refugees in our detention centres?
PM: Well I don't think we have banned anybody. There are always proper processes to go through.
HOST: She's been told she will not be given access to this group on a hunger strike in Melbourne.
PM: Well that would be an assessment made about security and people being worked up and all of that sort of stuff Jon.
I'm sure it would have been an assessment made with the welfare of those asylum seekers first and foremost in people's minds.
HOST: Are you comfortable indefinitely detaining people in our immigration detention centres, even after it's been accepted that they are genuine refugees?
PM: The issue here for these people is security assessment questions. And as Prime Minister whilst it's never an easy set of decisions, you would expect us to run a system where people are properly assessed to see if they are refugees.
And people are properly assessed to see whether or not they pose any security issues.
HOST: If you rely on, for instance, the government that was pursing these people for the intelligence that classifies them as alleged terrorists, a government that fought a vicious and bloody war against the Tamils, you wouldn't rely on them for a security assessment would you?
PM: Security assessments are done by Australian agencies-
HOST: Relying on intel from-
PM: Jon, seriously. Our agencies-
HOST: We've just had Four Corners playing a BBC Panorama show telling us that a war was started in Iraq ten years ago in which our government then participated, based on absolute rubbish security assessments.
PM: Well, Jon, once again we're stirring everything together as if it's all related. Let's unpack it.
Australian agencies make decisions about security questions in Australia.
They are not naïve people. They know about things like the conflict in Sri Lanka.
They're not naïve, they're analysts, they use the best intelligence they can to give us the best advice they can.
So any suggestion that these people are just naïvely ringing up governments around the world and saying ‘what do you reckon?' is not fair to those intelligence analysts and you should not create that perception in people's mind.
PM: On the Iraq war ten years ago, I didn't get to see the Four Corners, I understand that it was very hard-hitting. I just didn't have an opportunity to watch it on Monday night.
I'm a woman with many commitments and I had one on Monday night which meant I couldn't be in front of the TV.
HOST: I recommend iView, the ABC's catch-up television software.
PM: I'm a big user of iView, I love iView, but I haven't had time to sit down and have a look at it on iView either.
I understand it was very hard-hitting, but what was my perspective on the Iraq war, well my perspective, the Labor Party perspective, was we should not have gone to war in the circumstances that we did.
I am sure from what was exposed on Four Corners on Monday night and of course from other inquiries and reports that there have been since, there are many lessons to be learned by intelligence agencies and by governments.
And we should all learn those lessons.
HOST: Thank you for the promo for iView, we'll send that off to Mark Scott. He'll be delighted.
The Premier, Denis Napthine, spoke to us on this program on Monday, Prime Minister, have a listen to what the Premier said about the amount of money Victoria isn't getting from your Government.
NAPTHINE GRAB: Well we just want a fair go for Victoria, and just recently in the recent round of GST revenue distribution, we got hit again. We got further reductions in GST share for Victoria. We believe that's unfair.
HOST: And the Premier says, and the Treasurer agrees, that we're about 1.2 to 1.5 billion dollars down on our share of GST revenue.
PM: I don't decide the GST shares, I don't. They get decided independently by the Commonwealth Grants Commission.
Periodically there are discussions, between treasurers in particular, about what guidelines will be given to the Commonwealth Grants Commission. And way back when Victoria advocated some changes to Commonwealth Grants Commission guidelines.
But I don't set GST distributions. What I do do is I make decisions about monies that flow in health and education where Victoria, and indeed everyone around the nation, is better off in terms of money in health and education under this Government than they were under the Howard Government.
And when I sit round tables with premiers  -  the Council of Australian Governments table  -  and we talk about money, sometimes perhaps a little bit whimsically, I say to the premiers around the table ‘okay, anybody want to go back to the old Howard healthcare deal, just let me know. Anybody want to go back?' And everybody goes ‘no, no, don't even think about it.'
Because they are billions and billions and billions of dollars better off under this Government in healthcare and they know it. And what we are trying to do is make sure that there is an extra $4 billion available to schools in Victoria.
And I'm prepared to go two-for-one to every dollar that the Premier puts in because it's so important to me to make sure for our kids, for our future, we get this done and we get it right.
HOST: Alright, and finally I know you won't comment on the polls, I won't waste time asking you to, but Tony Abbott's Pollie Pedal shows that the Liberal Party are now ambitious towards not just Corangamite, McEwen, the seats that are regularly thought to be vulnerable in Victoria, but now Chisholm, Aston, Deakin, Bendigo  -  they reckon they could pick up half a dozen in Victoria alone, Julia Gillard?
PM: I don't know what you want me to say in response to that.
The people of Australia get to decide these questions and they'll get to decide on 14 September, and it will be the clearest of all possible choices between me leading a majority Labor Government with a clear plan for the future, versus Mr Abbott and the team he leads with their clear plans for cutbacks.
And I do hope as Tony Abbott is cycling away  -  and raising money for charity, and that's a good thing, that's a great thing  -  but I'm sure he's cycling past a lot of schools. I hope that he looks at those schools and he asks himself the question why are they committed to cutting school funding for those schools, to cutting them to the bone?
HOST: You're accused of having a tin ear by Simon Crean and other critics within the party and about exactly that issue, about vulnerable seats and policies that might save some of your colleagues and even save the furniture, for the federal parliamentary Labor Party.
PM: My prism Jon is what's right for the nation's future.
I've outlined the plan for the future in the age in which we live, the white paper we delivered on Australia in the Asian Century.
I get to travel in the region, going to meetings and meeting with the leaders in other nations. I was just in China, and I can tell you from the evidence of my own eyes that we live in an incredible era of opportunity. The growth in our region is truly staggering.
We can get wealth and prosperity from that growth, but our future in seizing that wealth and prosperity is not assured. We've got to make the right decisions now to do it.
And amongst the things we've got to get right is our education system and looking after our kids because around the region they are focussed on improving their schools, and that means that if we don't keep up, indeed get in front, that they will have the high-skill, high-wage jobs of tomorrow and we won't.
HOST: Well, it's going to be a fascinating couple of months still to come. I look forward to you coming into the studio to take some talkback next time we get to speak, thank you for your time today.
PM: Thanks Jon.
[ENDS] 


Melbourne
PM: We've never seen the likes of Black Caviar before and I don't think we ever will again.
It's perfectly fitting that the perfect horse retires with the perfect record.
Black Caviar has been cheered on by millions of adoring fans. They will be thinking today about what a career, what a horse.


Melbourne
PM: I'm joined by Peter Garrett, the Minister for School Education and by Mike Symon the local member here, the Member for Deakin.
And a little bit later today we will have the 40th Community Cabinet that we've held as a Government, here in Mike's electorate. And that will be the sixth that we've had in Victoria.
So an opportunity for local community members to raise issues at the top of their mind with us, so I will look forward to that later today.
We've had a great discussion here with the kids about the future of their school, and the future of Australian schools.
We are moving towards the Council of Australian Governments meeting on Friday.
And there I will be urging premiers and chief ministers around the country to do the right thing by the children in their states and territories, and to work with me to ensure that every Australian school is properly resourced  -  not just now but for the decades and decades to come.
Making sure that every Australian school, all 9,500 of them, have available to them the resources they need to get the kids in their class a great education.
And making sure that we can continue to work with school principals and teachers and parents and school communities on improving Australian education.
I don't want any of our children to be left behind. I want every child to get a great education. I want every school to have the resources to offer a great education.
And I want to make sure our nation gets stronger and smarter and fairer in the future and that all starts in Australian schools.
I thank everybody very much for the discussion we've had. It's been a wide-ranging one.
And I am looking forward to seeing premiers and chief ministers on Friday and saying to them let's get this done for Australia's kids and Australia's future.
I'm very happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: But are you worried by pushing the states into making decisions by Friday, Paul McClintock has said this might put the whole plan at risk if you can't get them on board.
PM: Well let's be very clear about how long we've been working on this agenda, and I'll go to Minister Garrett as well.
But this for us has been a five year journey.
It started when the Government was elected and we started getting together information on Australian schools no one had ever had before.
What we inherited from the last Government was a situation where no one had bothered to ask which were the schools in our country that were doing the best, and more importantly, which were the schools which were most disadvantaged.
No one had that information.
They didn't know how schools were going, they didn't know the amount of money in schools.
So we've put that information together.
And then, with that information, we've gone out through our National Partnerships program and worked with schools and proved that if you bring the right combination of resources together with the right teaching and practices in schools, you will lift children's results.
Then we said we'd have a major review of school funding to make the biggest change in 40 years. And we asked eminent Australians, led by David Gonski, to produce that review.
And then we worked intensively following that review. Last September we shared a modelling tool with states and territories.
We gave them more information last year, updated information in February, we have worked on this.
What we announced on the weekend that is absolutely new but shows the commitment of the Federal Government to getting change for Australian schools, is that we would put in $2 for every $1 that state and territories put in to achieve proper resourcing for Australian schools.
Now there's no time like the present for premiers and chief ministers to say ‘Yes, I will do the right thing by the children in the schools in my state or territory.'
We've said we'd keep working until 30 June if that is necessary, but premiers and chief ministers can come along and sign on on Friday, if they don't we will keep working beyond Friday.
We are willing to sign with any state or territory that is willing to start this change with us.
By 30 June, I certainly want to see right around the nation that premiers and chief ministers have said that they will improve Australia's schools.
And Peter, did you want to say something about the process of preparation.
MINISTER GARRETT: Yes, thank you PM.
When the Prime Minister meets with premiers and chief ministers on Friday, they will have in front of them a national plan for school improvement that we have been working on for months, which is noted and will be for consideration by the Prime Minister and the premiers when they meet in Canberra.
That national plan for school improvement has been the product of many hours of effort and work by officials, education officials and others, to make sure that with a new education funding model in place, we've got a plan to make every school in the country a better school.
The major obstacle to Australian schools receiving additional investment through a National Plan for School Improvement is clearly Tony Abbott and Christopher Pyne.
Christopher Pyne has said that the Coalition won't support any states who are willing to join with the Commonwealth in providing additional investment into our schools.
And this morning the Opposition Leader returned to his wrecking role by misleading the Australian public and suggesting that in fact the states would be paying the lion's share of the funding offer that is on the table.
Now Mr Abbott has either not been paying any attention at all to the school funding debate, or alternatively he's just landed a classic Abbott fib out into the 24 hour news cycle to confuse people about what's actually on the table.
The additional thing that Mr Abbott said which suggests to me that he hasn't been paying attention is that he doesn't believe that there's any detail in the National Plan for School Improvement.
Whilst at the same time, Coalition education ministers in the states have sighted this plan, which includes things like more principal autonomy, lifting teaching standards and the like; the very things that the Opposition Leader this morning identified.
So Tony Abbott can't be the wrecker on seeing schools around Australia get more support and more investment from this proposition.
What he needs to do is recognise that what we have proposed, what the Prime Minister has brought forward, is a funding offer which would see us effectively pay $2 for every $1 invested to make sure that every school in the country gets the support it needs, and every student the support they need to be the best they can.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on another matter. Why did your cabinet reject recommendations to take a tougher approach against Telstra over the NBN?
PM: We don't talk about cabinet deliberations, but whether it's the NBN or whether it's other issues that we deal with round the cabinet table, a whole lot of options are put and canvassed and then we make the best decisions.
JOURNALIST: And on industrial relations reforms that Bill Shorten is working on, will you listen to businesses and dump these reforms? I mean, they seem quite against them.
PM: We will do the right thing by the Australian people, that's what we need to do as a Government.
In workplace relations, inevitably there are different views between business and between employees. I think from a common sense perspective people understand that.
What we've always done in workplace relations, and what we will continue to do, is make sure that the pendulum in industrial relations is right in the middle. We are balancing the interests of business and of employees.
One of the reasons we swept away the very hated Work Choices is that it had taken that pendulum and put it right on the employer side, so employees had no rights and no choice. We thought that was wrong, we put it in the centre and we'll keep it in the centre.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how much will the plunge in the European carbon price cost the federal budget?
PM: We'll update budget figures and parameters at the appropriate time, which is budget night.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, should Tony Abbott stand down whilst he's subject to litigation?
PM: As I understand it there's a legal matter here and I'm not intending to comment on the legal matter.
But there's no system in our politics for people standing down when there's a civil matter in progress.
JOURNALIST: Is Australia's emissions trading scheme under threat after, overnight, with the EU's collapse of their carbon market?
PM: We are doing what we said we would when we legislated for carbon pricing. We are in the fixed price phase of the scheme and we will move to emissions trading on 1 July 2015.
JOURNALIST: Well what can Australia do about the fact that our carbon price is about six times higher than the European price?
PM: We've got the design of the scheme, it's legislated, it's there, fixed price for the first three years followed by an emissions trading scheme.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Pauline Hanson might be running against Joel Fitzgibbon. Do you (inaudible)?
PM: I'm not going to be an electoral commentator, but obviously I don't agree with Ms Hanson on any of her policies of plans for the nation's future.
And if she chooses to run anywhere in the country, then we will oppose her as we have opposed her in the past.
JOURNALIST: And Tony Abbott is riding his bike around the country. What do you think he has to gain out of (inaudible)?
PM: Mr Abbott, as I understand it, is on a bike ride for charity, so raising money for charity is a good thing.
What I would also say is I'm sure that Mr Abbott's route will take him past a large number of schools, and when he cycles past those schools I hope he looks across at those schools and think to himself why would he want to cut funding to those schools to the bone?
JOURNALIST: Would the Government ever consider dropping the price of carbon?
PM: We've legislated the scheme and the scheme is there.
JOURNALIST: There's a suggestion this morning in a report that a part of people's superannuation will be quarantined to pay for healthcare costs in the future. Is that something your government would look at?
PM: No.
JOURNALIST: FOI figures, just quickly, show the mining tax is possibly a shambles. Do you agree with that?
PM: Certainly not. The mining tax is a profits-based tax. That's how it was designed, and so it is inevitable and part of the design of the mining tax that it goes up and down as things like commodity prices go up and down.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
The Gillard Government and South Australian Government have reached a significant agreement today that will allow for the full roll out of DisabilityCare Australia, the National Disability Insurance Scheme, in South Australia by July 2018.
The agreement will provide around 33,000 South Australian residents with significant or profound disability choice and control over the care and support they receive.
DisabilityCare Australia will also give all South Australians the peace of mind that if they have or acquire a disability or have a child with disability that leaves them needing daily care and support, that they will get the support they need when they need it.
Under the agreement reached today:
 * 	By 2018-19, the South Australian Government will provide $723 million to cover all people in South Australia. This contribution was determined using the benchmark set by New South Wales in the agreement reached with the Commonwealth in December 2012.  This will contribute to the cost of care and support for people with disability.
 * 	By 2018-19, the Commonwealth Government will contribute around $760 million to the scheme for South Australians. This will be around 51 per cent of scheme costs. In addition, the Commonwealth will cover the full cost of people who turn 65 and choose to remain in the scheme.
Today's agreement builds on the agreement to launch in South Australia from July 2013 focusing on children aged birth to 5 years with significant and permanent disability.
By 2014 the age limit will be extended to 13 years and in the third year of launch all children up to 14 years.
We will progressively roll out DisabilityCare Australia in South Australia so that by July 2018, all eligible residents will be covered.
DisabilityCare Australia in South Australia will offer people with disability the care and support they need over their lifetimes.
DisabilityCare Australia will also end the cruel lottery that currently exists where the care and support they receive depends on where they live or how they acquired their disability.
The Gillard Government will continue to work closely with remaining state and territory governments to reach agreement on the national roll out of DisabilityCare Australia, so that all Australians can rest assured that if they have or acquire a disability they will have their needs met in a way that supports them to live with choice and dignity.



HOST: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard joined me from the Lodge a short time ago. Prime Minister, thank you for your time tonight.
PM: Thank you very much, Leigh.
HOST: None of the state premiers have said they'll sign up to your education reforms. We've also seen a new gap in the budget revenue forecasts emerge this week.
Does that mean that your education spending plans are already dead in the water?
PM: On the budget, on the spending, we have already announced savings to back in the spending for Australian schools. They haven't been popular but in my view they've been the right thing to do.
And I will sit at the Council of Australian Governments meeting tomorrow and make it very clear to premiers and chief ministers that this is a critical moment to make a difference for Australian education; for children today, and for the generations of children to come.
To make sure that every Australian child gets the opportunity to reach their full potential in a properly resourced school.
So I am determined, Leigh, that we get this done. I will make that clear to premiers and chief ministers tomorrow.
And then if we leave the COAG meeting with any premiers or chief ministers having not agreed, then in the ten weeks to come I will be out there, not only talking to premiers and chief ministers about the importance of our children and properly funding their education, but talking to parents, schools, communities about it too.
HOST: You say that you've already announced savings. Let's unpack that a little bit.
The Commonwealth share of funding for education plan is $9.4 billion. So far to pay for it you have nearly $3 billion in university cuts plus almost $1 billion in superannuation savings.
So that leaves a gap of about $5 billion. Where will that $5 billion come from?
PM: Leigh, you're dealing with two time scales. The figure that you're referring to of just over $9 billion, which is a lot of money, is a figure over six years.
The savings on the forward estimates are obviously the savings over a four-year period.
The kind of savings that we have selected, for example in superannuation, have helped to make the superannuation system fairer and more sustainable, and those savings continue to grow over time.
HOST: But when you're looking at four years or six years, your Government has made some serious miscalculations in what you're going to earn over the next period.
The mining tax is delivering billions less than forecast. We know that the carbon emissions revenue is likely to be substantially less than budgeted.
Aren't your spending promises fanciful given that you're not going to be making as much money as you hoped?
PM: Let's do appropriate comparisons. When we work out what we are prepared to spend of course we go through a process of properly assessing that, and we've made proper savings to back in the spending on Australian schools over our forward estimates.
And as I've just indicated, beyond the budget period some of these savings continue to grow.
On the revenue side, the amount of tax money that the government gets, the Minerals Resource Rent Tax is deliberately designed as a profits-based tax.
So when commodity prices come off, and they came off more sharply than expected, then that does affect the amount of revenue collected.
On carbon pricing, we said that we wanted a full emissions trading scheme from 1 July 2015. That's what we have legislated for.
We've said we wanted that to be internationally linked so that we got the benefits of the international price.
That's the least cost way for business to cut the amount of carbon pollution that they're generating.
Now there has been some volatility in Europe, just like there's been volatility in all markets in Europe in the wake of global financial crisis.
HOST: But you have a whole lot of policies that are going to hit a funding crunch around 2015.
You've got a dental scheme, you've got your education plan, you've got the disability insurance scheme, the cost of detaining and housing asylum seekers, a fleet of new submarines.
Isn't there a serious credibility problem here in that you're making the spending promises but the revenue forecasts you've made have been overinflated?
PM: Leigh, we make revenue projections working with the professionals in Treasury.
We are in an unusual circumstance in our economy at the moment: post the global financial crisis, the amount of tax money per unit of GDP coming to the government at its lowest rate since the recovery from the recession of the early 1990s. Certainly much lower than the professionals at Treasury who work with government predicted.
We've also got commodity prices coming off and some changes in the terms of trade.
So let's be real about the things that make budget forecasting the thing that you work with professionals to do.
And yes, there are factors that change forecasts. Of course there are. There always have been under previous governments and there always will be in the future.
HOST: But Prime Minister I am-
PM: What we've said Leigh, is that we will back in new structural saves with new structural spends. That is what we should be held to account for.
We are going to make sure that as we put on the budget new obligations to do the right thing by our kids and with people with disabilities, that we are backing that in with new savings as well.
There will be some hard choices there and I've said to the nation we'll have to make them. But that is the right thing to do to put those high priority areas; our kids, our future, people with disabilities first.
HOST: But structural changes and cutting spending can only go so far. You do rely on revenue and I'm just making a simple point you've said we're going to spend and we're going to have all these new initiatives based on forecasts that you're going to earn a certain amount of revenue and it's proven that you're not going to make that much money.
PM: Leigh, I'm working with the most up-to-date forecasts that the professionals at Treasury can give me.
Then in the budget we will update those forecasts again. That's what governments do.
But we know that if you are going to introduce a new spend, you've got to back it in with a new save. We have already accepted that discipline and we are working to it.
HOST: In terms of wanting to rely on up-to-date forecasts, we've seen what's happened with the carbon price in Europe in recent times.
Just a simple question, in this coming budget will there be a revised price for carbon in 2015- 16 and a revised revenue forecast as a result?
PM: As the Treasurer and I made clear yesterday, the budget forecasts in carbon and in all other areas will be updated in the usual way: at budget time.
HOST: Australia's relying on modeling that the European price for carbon will be $29 a tonne in 2015. It is currently around $3 a tonne.
Do we seriously think that in two years that carbon price could have recovered to ten times what it is today?
PM: Leigh, as I just said, we will be updating budget predictions and forecasts at budget in the usual way assisted by our professionals in Treasury and Finance.
So you will see those numbers on budget night.
HOST: Would you consider tweaking the current carbon price legislation?
PM: The legislation is there. The system has been outlined for all to see. We worked in a very consultative way with business to get this done.
We've got the legislation in place Leigh, and of course the system is rolling out against that legislation.
HOST: But the legislation does lock in a price that's actually a lot higher than what our competitors in Europe are paying. Would you consider tweaking that to bring in closer to what European companies are paying for their carbon emissions?
PM: Leigh, the legislation is done and you know how hard that was to get through the Australian Parliament.
You know that this has been bipartisan politics since  -  it was in 2007, let's put a price on carbon, have an emissions trading scheme.
You know Prime Minister Howard supported that and yet, because of the entrenched negativity of the Opposition, getting legislation through the Parliament was incredibly difficult.
We succeeded. We are cutting carbon pollution.
None of the silly claims about carbon pricing destroying the economy, wiping Whyalla off the map, $100 roasts, any of the foolish things said by the Opposition have proved to come true.
The legislation is there and we are working against that legislation, a fixed price now going to an emissions trading scheme on 1 July 2015.
HOST: Prime Minister Gillard, thank you for joining us tonight.
PM: Thank you.


Canberra
The Australian Government has announced $777 million to fund its share of a renewed National Partnership Agreement on Closing the Gap in Indigenous Health Outcomes for a further three years to 30 June 2016.
This funding will ensure indigenous Australians continue to benefit from improved health services and support our commitment to close the gap on indigenous disadvantage.
In particular, our health funding will help us achieve our commitment to close the gap in life expectancy between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians within a generation, and to halve the gap in mortality rates for indigenous children under five within a decade.
The Australian Government will ask the States and Territories to also continue their investment to renew the National Partnership Agreement.
Under the current National Partnership Agreement, due to expire on 30 June 2013, governments provided $1.58 billion over four years to improve access to health services for indigenous families and communities.
The Australian Government provided $805.5 million over four years for this initial agreement.
Our renewed funding of $777 million over three years is an increase over previous per annum expenditure.
The Australian Government will continue to work with indigenous people and health services as we implement the renewed agreement.
As a result of our investments in indigenous health, we are seeing improvements.
This year's Closing the Gap report showed that local health services were helping to lead a comprehensive approach to chronic disease management, encouraging people to undergo health checks and follow ups.
In 2011-12, 65,501 health assessments were provided to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people aged 15 and over, a 34 per cent increase from 2010-11.
There are also more primary care workers in indigenous and mainstream health services to help meet the increase the uptake of health services by indigenous people.
While this work is encouraging we know there is more to be done.
We need sustained investment and effort to continue the momentum and ensure continued progress.
The renewed NPA will complement the proposed National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Plan which has been the subject of extensive stakeholder consultations over the last several months. 


Canberra
PM: What you can see behind is Federal Parliament House, and it's tomorrow that here in Federal Parliament House premiers and chief ministers will come from all around the country to talk about a range of important issues.
But one is the most vital for our country's future, for the future of our kids, for the future of our economy, is making sure that we are properly resourcing every school and that we are improving every school  -  a better resourced and a better quality education for all of our children.
I am very determined to get this done and I will make that determination very clear in the room when premiers and chief ministers meet tomorrow.
And one thing that premiers and chief ministers need to understand is right across the community, people do value our kids and their future.
They do want to see every child reach his or her potential, they do understand that for the long term our country can only be a strong and fair and smart country if we've got world-class schools.
And if premiers and chief ministers don't sign up for a new school funding plan tomorrow, and the plan for school improvement, then they should expect to see back in their home states and territories community members, just like the community members standing behind me, who care passionately about children and their future and the future of our nation, and who will be making it very clear that they expect the nation's leaders to work together to give our kids and our nation a better future. So that'll be happening in Parliament House tomorrow.
Also on the agenda tomorrow is DisabilityCare, our new plan to make sure that our nation is genuinely extending to people with disabilities and their families the supports that they need.
Labor built Medicare, now we want to build DisabilityCare because for any of us, for all of us, we don't know if sometime in our life story or the story of our families that we will need to confront having a family member or personally having to deal with a disability.
Which is why it's in the interests of every Australian to ensure that we are caring properly for people with disabilities  -  not only today  -  but into the future for tomorrow.
I'm very pleased that South Australia, Premier Jay Weatherill, has today indicated South Australia will sign on for the full new DisabilityCare scheme so that it can be rolled out in South Australia for every South Australian with a disability.
I thank him for being the second premier to indicate his support for DisabilityCare in his state. 
The first premier was Premier Barry O'Farrell; the second premier, Premier Jay Weatherill.
My sincere thanks go to him for what he has been prepared to do for the people of South Australia, and I look forward during the course of today signing the formal agreement to roll out DisabilityCare in South Australia.
In addition, on tomorrow's agenda we will be discussing what more we can do to work together to combat serious and organised crime. 
This is the gang crime, the organised crime, the people who have got money to move, who end up with unexplained wealth, and often seek to evade capture or detection by moving themselves, weapons and money between state borders.
As a nation we've got to make sure there are no gaps, there are no loopholes, there is nowhere to hide, that people who commit serious crimes in our country face the full penalty and the full price, including what can be done through national anti-gang laws and national unexplained wealth laws.
So it is a big agenda; more on it than that, but they are some of the highlights as to what will happen at the Council of Australian Governments meeting tomorrow. And for me it will be a day of arguing very passionately for the future of Australia's kids and Australian education.
I'm happy to take a few quick questions. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've extended the deadline for Gonski to 30 June, but does it concern you that not one state has indicated it's prepared to sign on the line tomorrow, just 24 hours out? 
PM: We are going to keep pressing this and the right day to press it, face-to-face, person-to-person, is tomorrow when premiers and chief ministers gather here in Canberra, and that's exactly what I will be doing. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you prepared to move at all on the figures or the funding arrangements with any of the states? 
PM: The figures are there, the figure is clear, and the figure that matters the most is that we as a Federal Government are prepared to put in $2 for every $1 that state and territory governments put in to get our schools up to a school resourcing standard that means we could be assured that every school in our country has the resources it is needs to get the children in that school a great education.
So there will always be technical work to do and work for officials to do and patiently going through figures; of course we're prepared to do that.
But what we are seeking to achieve is clear, not only in funding, but through school improvement with those new funds. And what we're prepared to step up to do is clear; $2 to every $1, an indexation rate of 4.7 per cent.
And for that we're saying to states and territories, no more cuts, an indexation rate from you of at least three per cent, and then putting in $1 for every $2 from us to get there, to get our schools properly resourced.
And then of course we want to transparently know what's going on in the system so that every parent, every teacher, every community member who cares about the future of education and the future of our country can know what's going on.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you saying that you're prepared to then negotiate the timing and the overall dollars? 
PM: No, we've made a very clear offer. There is always detail and sub-detail to work through. That is the nature of Commonwealth-state agreements, but what we very clearly put on the table: six-year transition, a two-for-one funding offer from the states, the architecture of the system, a school resource standard where we could be assured every child in every school has the resources for his or her education that will get them a great education.
These things are the architecture of the system, the big things that we have announced, the things that we want for our schools because we know they are right.
This is the end point of five years of very patient, very careful work. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think you can get anyone to sign up tomorrow and if you can't, will there be another meeting before 30 June to try and drive this deal home? 
PM: Well, as I've made very clear, we are prepared to sign up and work with any state or territory that will put the kids in that state or territory first.
So we'll work tomorrow, and then work in the days beyond tomorrow if that's necessary. But my message is clear to premiers and chief ministers, there is no time like the present to do the right thing by our kids. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Greens are putting forward a bill to recognise same-sex marriages in Australia that happen overseas. Will you be supporting that bill? 
PM: What I've done, just like Prime Minister John Key in New Zealand, and obviously they have had the vote there, what I've done just like the Prime Minister of New Zealand, is make sure that for my political party there is a conscience vote on this question.
We had a conscience vote when it came to Parliament on the first occasion. We will have a conscience vote for any future votes.
For those that advocate change in our marriage laws, what we need to see is a conscience vote by everyone in Parliament. I think that's the right thing to do, to give people that conscience vote.
And I also think in terms of a Parliament, thinking about change, dealing with change, it is absolutely impossible to see change ever succeeding unless every Parliamentarian gets a conscience vote.
So that is something for the Leader of the Opposition to think about and to deal with.
I do note, of course, that Prime Minister Key is from the conservative side of politics, as is the Leader of the Opposition. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you make of the contradictions coming from the Coalition on the funding of Mr Abbott's paid parental leave scheme? 
PM: It's clear that the Opposition is in a very big budget mess and where that will end, as it always does with the Liberal Party, is in deep cuts to health and to education.
That's what Liberals do, that's what we've seen them do in states around the nation, and one of the reasons I am so determined to get this school funding agreement is to stop Liberal Government cutbacks hurting our kids.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you just explain how you are going to legislate these education reforms before 30 June if the states haven't signed up to them? 
PM: We've got a bill before the Parliament and we will keep pursuing that bill and making clear in that bill all the foundation stones and the way in which the system works.
We can of course sign bilateral agreements between the Federal Government and state governments and that's what we're prepared to do as early as tomorrow. 
JOURNALIST: Some of the states are saying they don't have enough money to pay for this. Do you have any suggestions as to where they should find cuts in their budgets to allocate the money? 
PM: I manage my budget, and in managing my budget we took some really tough decisions, and they haven't been without public controversy and there are some people upset by them. But if you are going to step up to the plate and show leadership then you need to step up and make those tough decisions.
I've done that for the Government, for the nation, in the federal budget. It's not too much to ask premiers and chief ministers to show the same kind of leadership as they manage their own budgets. 
JOURNALIST: Carmen Lawrence has suggested that one way of maybe overcoming Colin Barnett's objections to WA getting a proportionally lower share than the other states would be to maybe the Commonwealth help fund construction of schools in WA. Is that something that's under consideration?
PM: Look, we've got a national aspiration here and you and I had a bit of a conversation about this on Sunday when we announced this plan.
I think everyone, wherever you live in our nation, has got an interest in being able to say about our nation that every child in every school is getting a good education and that schools around the country have the resources to do so. 
Yes, WA is closer to the standard than a number of other jurisdictions. That's a good thing, that's a great thing.
But that doesn't mean that the people of Western Australia have got no interest in getting their schools up to the standard and more work needs to be done to achieve that, and that they've got no interest in the quality of schooling around the rest of the nation.
People of WA have got a keen interest in what kind of society we're going to be.
Are we going to be a fair society? Are we going to condemn some kids because we weren't prepared to educate them properly to a life of welfare and despondency?
Are we prepared to see a weaker national economy for the long term because we didn't properly educate our children?
These are the big questions that require people to answer with really true to the heart answers, and I think for the people of Western Australia, these questions are as important as they are in other parts of the nation.
And the only real answer, the only decent answer to those questions can be, yes, we do want our kids to get a great education.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Dennis Jensen said on Twitter that ABSTUDY, because it can't be accessed by non-Indigenous Australians that it's racist and discriminatory?
Is that the case and if not, what does that mean for the Coalition and should Tony Abbott come out and, if he hasn't done so already, come out and smack him on the wrist? 
PM: Well, of course not. I don't agree with those views which are very offensive. 
It is a question for the Leader of the Opposition about whether or not he endorses these offensive views, so that's a question you will have to put to him.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on Indigenous health, are you confident the states and territories will support the extension of the Closing the Gap funding? 
PM: Well, Minister Macklin has worked long and hard on this and in consultation with states and territories. 
This is unambiguously in our nation's interests and in the interests of Indigenous Australians, so I'd certainly hope that that agreement gets endorsed all around the country.
Alright, thank you very much.


Canberra
The Australian and Northern Territory Governments have reached an historic in-principle agreement today to launch the National Disability Insurance Scheme, DisabilityCare Australia, in the Barkly region of the Northern Territory from July 2014.
The launch of DisabilityCare Australia in the Barkly region of the Northern Territory will offer people with disability the care and support they need over their lifetimes.
The NT launch will also provide valuable experience in delivering DisabilityCare Australia in remote areas, and inform our future roll out across the country.
One of the core aims of DisabilityCare Australia is to ensure that all Australians have access to the care and support they need if they or a loved one have a significant and permanent disability  -  regardless of where they live.
Over the course of the three year launch in the Northern Territory people with significant and profound disabilities will have their needs assessed and will start to receive individual care and support packages under the DisabilityCare Australia model. 
Around 6,500 Territorians in the Barkly region will benefit from the new way of working, through the launch of DisabilityCare Australia in the Northern Territory from July next year.
This will include people with severe and profound disability as well as others who will be able to access information and referral to mainstream services.
Today's agreement builds on the agreements to launch DisabilityCare Australia in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania from July 2013 and the Australian Capital Territory from July 2014.
Under the agreement reached today, the Northern Territory and Australian Governments will share the cost of the launch on the same basis as the agreements reached with other jurisdictions.
The Australian Government will continue to work closely with remaining state and territory governments to reach agreement to roll out DisabilityCare Australia, so that all Australians can have peace of mind that if they have, or acquire, a disability they will have their needs met in a way that supports them to live with choice and dignity.


Canberra
The Gillard Government and the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) Government have reached a significant agreement today for the full roll out of DisabilityCare Australia, the National Disability Insurance Scheme, in the ACT.
The agreement will provide more than 5000 people in the ACT with significant or profound disability the guarantee they will have choice and control over the care and support they receive over their lifetimes.
The roll out of DisabilityCare Australia across the ACT and confirmed in future funding arrangements means all ACT residents can have peace of mind that if they have or acquire a disability or have a child with disability that leaves them needing daily care and support, they will get the support they need, when they need it.
Under the agreement reached today:
 * 	By 2019-20, the ACT Government will provide about $167 million to the cost of care and support for people with disability in the ACT through DisabilityCare Australia. This is consistent with the benchmark set by the full scheme agreement reached between the Commonwealth and New South Wales in December 2012.
 * 	By 2019-20, the Commonwealth Government will contribute around $175 million to the scheme for ACT residents. This will be around 51 per cent of scheme costs.  In addition, the Commonwealth will cover the full cost of people who turn 65 and choose to remain in the scheme.
Today's agreement builds on the agreement to launch from July 2014.
We will progressively roll out DisabilityCare Australia for all eligible ACT residents by July 2016. 
The ACT Government will contribute to the scheme on the same basis as set out in the Intergovernmental Agreement on the National Disability Insurance Scheme Launch until 2019-20.
DisabilityCare Australia in the ACT will offer people with disability the care and support they need over their lifetimes.
DisabilityCare Australia will also end the lottery that currently exists where the care and support they receive depends on where they live or how they acquired their disability.
The Gillard Government will continue to work closely with remaining state and territory governments to reach agreement on the national roll out of DisabilityCare Australia, so that all Australians can rest assured that if they have, or acquire, a disability they will have their needs met in a way that supports them to live with choice and dignity.


Canberra
PM: We did welcome two new colleagues, the new Premier of Victoria and the new Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, to COAG. COAG today has worked through a number of important items. If I can start first with progress in relation to DisabilityCare, the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
This is of course the major change that we will want to see for our nation so that we are better supporting people with disability. COAG today engaged in some progress on disability care, and in the margins of COAG we also made progress on jurisdictions signing up for agreements to the core costs of the scheme.
I thank South Australia for entering into such an agreement yesterday, which will make a difference to the people in South Australia. It will provide care and support to around 33,000 South Australians with significant or profound disability.
Today an agreement was also reached with the ACT, and I thank the Chief Minister for that agreement. This is significant too for all of the people of the ACT, but particularly for 5,500 people with disabilities in the ACT.
Today too, we entered agreement with the new Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, Adam Giles, to create a launch site for DisabilityCare in the Barkly area covering Tennant Creek. This will provide some important learnings for all of us because it will enable us to work through how DisabilityCare can best work in a remote part of the country, so I thank Adam for that agreement.
COAG as a whole also agreed to the principles that will guide the way that DisabilityCare works with a number of other services that make a difference to the lives of people with disability  -  health services, mental health services, early childhood development, child protection and family support, school education, employment, housing and community infrastructure, transport, justice, higher education and vocational education and training, and aged care. So those principles are agreed.
We also noted at COAG today that the Commonwealth is working bilaterally with jurisdictions on the National Injury Insurance Scheme. This is a companion in many ways to DisabilityCare. It's so that nationally consistent no-fault lifetime care and support can be given to people who are newly affected by catastrophic injury from an accident.
So in particular this goes to the circumstances and supports of people who have, say, had a motor vehicle accident, and making sure that those circumstances and supports are consistent around the country. So good work on further progress towards DisabilityCare around the nation.
COAG also discussed the Commonwealth's offer on school funding reform and school improvement. This has been the subject of much discussion in recent days publically, and the Commonwealth's offer is outlined in the section of the communique that is headed ‘National Schools Reform'.
There was an affirmation across COAG that we do want to see Australian students and their families with an education system that would place Australia in the top five countries in the world by 2025.
A high-quality education system matters to all of us. The Commonwealth, the Australian Government will continue to pursue discussions with every jurisdiction on making sure we are properly resourcing schools and improving each and every school.
No jurisdiction was in a position to sign on today. Every jurisdiction will be involved in further discussions, and I look forward to having those further discussions with my colleagues.
As I have indicated publically, it is my determination and intention to get this done, and to make sure that in the ten weeks between now and 30 June I am not only speaking about the importance of properly resourcing our schools to my colleagues  -  premiers and chief ministers  -  but also to the Australian community.
The meeting also worked through the directions set by the Asian Century white paper. Making sure that our nation can make its way in this time of change in our region was the subject of the Federal Government's white paper on Australia in the Asian Century. We have determined as a Council of Australian Governments to focus on three directions out of that white paper.
One is boosting the studies of Asia and Asian languages, one is building in-country partnerships to develop complementary skills and qualification assessment and recognition, and one very importantly is Australia's participation in Asian markets to assist food and agricultural exporters.
As I have said previously, one of the huge opportunities before us as a country as our region of the world becomes home to more middle class consumers than anywhere else on the planet, is the opportunity in front of agriculture and food and food processing.
The meeting also considered the early childhood education national partnership between the Federal Government and state and territory governments. A national partnership has been in operation to give universal access to early childhood education. That national partnership will be replaced, succeeded by a new national partnership for 2013 and 2014. An agreement has been struck with all jurisdictions on that.
The Council of Australian Governments also discussed the response of our nation to gang violence, organised crime and illegal firearms.
Clearly as organised crimes and gangs become more and more sophisticated, it is necessary to make sure that across the country there is no place to hide and no loopholes which criminals can use.
It was agreed that there would be further examination of ways of working together to strengthen our approaches here through the Standing Council on Law and Justice which brings attorneys-general together, aided and abetted by the ministers who go to the Police and Emergency Management Standing Council; this obviously affects both a legal dimension but also the policing dimension.
Senior officials will work on improving intelligence and data sharing and information, and also work on a number of proposals about firearms measures. And that work will happen with the endeavour to see if agreement can be reached out of session.
There was discussion too of public safety mobile broadband. This has been an ongoing issue. Clearly everybody wants to make sure that our public safety agencies have adequate capabilities to respond effectively and efficiently when disasters occur.
We have worked together to step up things like telecommunications alert on mobile phones during times of disaster. There is more work to do on this issue and we are awaiting the report of the Australian Communications and Media Authority.
This issue of Royal succession was discussed. This is Australia's part in ensuring that for the future girls could succeed to become the monarch in the same way that boys can, that there's not discrimination, and that there is no discrimination against the monarch marrying a Catholic.
All jurisdictions have endorsed the hybrid model which means that all jurisdictions will request the Commonwealth to enact legislation under Section 51 (38) of our Constitution. Individual states can elect if they so choose to also enact their own legislation.
We received a presentation from the Honourable John Brumby, Chairman of the COAG Reform Council, on progress on a set of COAG reform issues.
We also dealt with the question of the car industry and Australian Government fleet vehicle procurement policy, by that I mean the policies of all Australian governments. That item was led by South Australia and with Victoria in strong support.
We noted the need to ensure that there is mobile phone coverage in emergency situations, and we agreed to work collaboratively with the telecommunications industry to reduce mobile phone and internet black spots. That matter was brought to COAG by Victoria, and we noted further work on competition and regulatory reform, both as a result of the work we are doing with the Business Advisory Forum and through our agenda for a seamless national economy.
Finally and with a great deal of enthusiasm, COAG acknowledged the significant contribution of Ms Helen Silver, the Secretary of the Victorian Department of Premier and Cabinet, who is moving on from that position after an extensive career in the public service both in Victoria and in the Commonwealth. I think the number we've settled for public distribution is a 30-year career, so congratulations to Helen on all of that work, and she certainly goes with everybody's good wishes.
I'll turn now to Denis.
PREMIER NAPTHINE: Thank you very much Prime Minister, speaking as chair of CAF could I just run through a number of the issues and then obviously there'll be questions to a number of the premiers and chief ministers and the Prime Minister herself.
With respect to NDIS, the states and territories that are hosting NDIS launches reflected on the work that's being done to date, and the good work that is underway to ensure the launches in Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia proceed as planned, and that work is very, very good and has been done well.
We also welcomed the news that the Northern Territory will now be engaged in a launch in the Northern Territory in the particular area of concern up there.
On the full scheme, we noted South Australia's announcement of a commitment to the full scheme, and that a number of other jurisdictions will continue ongoing bilateral discussions towards the full scheme.
With respect to schools funding, the states and territories reiterated their commitment to improving outcomes for children at our schools across the nation. There was considerable discussion about the importance of getting this school reform proposal correct, and in the interests of all children and all jurisdictions.
Ultimately there's more work to be done with jurisdictions to examine the financial implications for each of their jurisdictions, and there will be ongoing bilateral discussions between jurisdictions and the Commonwealth on those matters and also some unresolved policy issues.
With regard to criminal organisations and gangs, all First Ministers expressed a very strong commitment to strengthen the current approach to tackling gang violence and organised crime, and COAG committed to further work by police ministers and attorneys-general to further develop agreed cooperative approaches to deal with criminal organisations and unexplained wealth.
There's also agreement with respect to examining issues associated with illegal firearms, and to strengthen existing firearms laws in regard to tracking of firearms and ballistics identification.
Jurisdictions also committed to law enforcement agencies working in a more cooperative way on investigations and improved information sharing.
With regard to the Asian white paper, there was strong support from all jurisdictions to the work being done under that Asian white paper. There was additional proposals with regard to work on improved access for visas and also for further work on free trade agreements.
With regard to early childhood education, the jurisdictions were pleased the Commonwealth has committed new money to an 18-month national partnership early childhood education agreement to ensure that service levels can be maintained for universal access for 15 hours of quality education in the year before children start school. 
It is critical, as far as jurisdictions are concerned, that this commitment is funded on an adequate and sustainable basis well beyond the current deadline of December 2014. And this will remain an ongoing concern for First Ministers of all jurisdictions. 
We welcome the agreed position with regard to Royal succession. I think this provides a sensible way forward for all jurisdictions to operate under the umbrella of the Commonwealth constitutional changes. 
With respect to the automotive industry, Premier Weatherill and myself raised the issue of the importance of buying Australian vehicles and indeed there will be further information provided to all jurisdictions to encourage those jurisdictions to look at a more proactive purchasing policy for Australian vehicles in a cost effective manner. This is a way that many jurisdictions can support our important manufacturing industry. 
The Prime Minister has outlined a number of other areas where there was good discussion and general agreement, and I think at this stage Prime Minister I will leave it there and hand back to you. 
PM: Okay, so we're happy to take some questions. We will do them one at a time. We will start with Michelle Grattan. 
JOURNALIST: You said that there's going to be further talks with all jurisdictions on the education matter, but as Western Australia has said that it won't sign up, what is the use of talking there or has there been some change of line from the West? 
PM: Well, Premier Barnett can make some comments, but I think there's always benefits in talking. 
I know Premier Barnett has got some views about this he's expressed publicly, but I want to see Western Australian schools benefitting from extra resources that we are prepared to provide. And I want to continue collaborating with Western Australia on improving school education.
We have done some work together in the past and we actually reflected on some of that today. But I will hand over to Premier Barnett. 
PREMIER BARNETT: Thank you, Prime Minister. 
Obviously Western Australia will always be part of the discussion, if you like. 
I would have preferred us to have had a good discussion about educational objectives before we started talking about how you allocate funds.
From a Western Australian point of view, obviously the share of the extra Commonwealth money in our case is very small. It works out at $33 million a year for the next six years, compared to a State Government budget which is already over $4 billion. So the money doesn't draw us in. 
Western Australia's expenditure on schools is already at least 25 per cent above the 2019 target. So there is, again, little attraction. 
But I think the main thing that concerns me and I am willing to talk about this I guess with the Prime Minister and others, is that I have a fundamental view that the prime responsibility of a state government is state government schools. 
And most children go to a state government school; in Western Australia's case those schools are funded about 90 per cent by the State Government. 
This proposal would see state government spending on education progressively shift from state government to Catholic and independent schools. That is a pretty significant policy decision to me. That hasn't been discussed and maybe there is room there.
Maybe it's acceptable that there be state drops its share from 90 to 80, I don't know. But that discussion hasn't been held. 
Indeed today, and this is not a criticism it's just an observation, today was the first time that COAG has actually discussed the Gonski proposals. 
We will stay in the debate but at the moment there is little financially to attract us to sign at the moment. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you accept from the WA Premier that you would see a progressive shift from states to Catholic and independent schools under your model? 
PM: The model here, let's be very clear about what the model here is, the model here is that every school is funded at a school resource standard which has been calibrated to meet the needs of the kids in that school. That is why there are loadings for things like disadvantage.
I certainly do believe that as Australian Prime Minister I've got a responsibility to every child in every school. I believe every premier and every chief minister has got a responsibility to every child in every school in their jurisdiction. And that's why you already see state governments making some funding available to independent and Catholic schools.
Now what it means is not a shift in the sense of there is less for state schools and more for independent and Catholic school, it most certainly doesn't mean that, and there is no way of looking at our school funding proposal to say this is about movement between sectors. We're taking a fundamentally different approach.
This is about looking at the needs of schools and every school being at a school resource standard. Around the country in every sector of education, including in state schools, there are schools that are below that standard and we want to make sure that they come up to that standard. 
But philosophically, I certainly believe all of us have got a responsibility to every child in every school.
On the school resource standard, to get the apples-to-apples comparison, it is the base figures we have outlined for primary and secondary education, plus the loadings, comparing that with what is being spent now on education. That's the actual comparison.
You can't compare the base figure to what is being spent now. That isn't an appropriate comparison. 
JOURNALIST: Can we have a show of hands from the leaders as to see who thinks we can get agreement by 30 June on the education- 
PM: We don't do shows of hands. We will go to Phil Coorey. 
JOURNALIST: Maybe Phil wants to ask the same question, I don't know. 
PM: We will go to Phil first and then come back. 
JOURNALIST: Mine is on the different topic, on the Royal succession. Is that a compromise that has been reached today? Premier Newman, have you changed your position or have you all agreed you can do it each way you like and that's going to work? 
PREMIER NEWMAN: The position when we last met was that we were being asked to refer our powers to the Commonwealth, as I recall.
Sadly on that day I think many people seemed to misunderstand where I was coming from. My Government moved this year, some weeks ago, in fact a couple of months ago, to introduce legislation to ensure what was agreed at CHOGM could be implemented in Queensland.
So in other words, some people last time reported somehow that we didn't support the female succession occurring. Absolute nonsense. 
What we have always been on about is about the sovereignty of Queensland and the way that our Constitution works.
Today I've been happy to agree that we will amend the legislation that is currently in the Queensland House. I stress that, it has already been introduced some time ago. I'm happy to amend that and to, in the amendment, have a request to the Commonwealth to similarly pass legislation under 51 (38).
That's the way we're going to go, I'm happy with that, and I think it deals with the concerns that my Cabinet and I have had. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you disappointed you didn't get agreement today on the school funding reform? Is this the final offer from the Commonwealth, and I would be interested, if not a show of hands, maybe an answer from the state and territory leaders if there is no change to the current offer, will they sign up in the next ten weeks? 
PM: I'm happy to refer that to my colleagues. We don't do shows of hands on some of the biggest questions facing our nation for obvious reasons. It's more complicated than that.
We are talking about our nation's future. We're talking about every child reaching their full potential. We're talking about whether or not we will be a strong economy in the future, or we will lag behind the standards of our region and the high skill, high wage jobs of the future will be done by someone else.
This is a profound agenda for our nation's future. That's why it's not the subject of shows of hands. It's the subject of intense discussion by people who care about our nation's future.
It's taken us five years to get to this point. Five long years of careful and patient work. Five years where we remedied some of the big holes in the past, like no one could tell you what schools were achieving in this country before we created My School. No one could tell you what resources were in schools in this country before we put that information on My School.
Whilst jurisdictions were involved in a lot of worthwhile activities, we have been able to accelerate that through the work we have done with our national partnerships and show very clearly now reform directions that make a difference.
We have had an extensive process involving very eminent Australians from around the country, including jurisdictions you are looking at here, two Western Australians to take just one example.
And guided by that we now have the biggest opportunity in 40 years to make a difference to our children's future. So I will be pursuing this every day, working through it, to make sure that our nation seizes this opportunity.
The model we have put out there we profoundly believe in. We have put out the figures associated with the model.
As I said yesterday, and this is no change in position from yesterday, of course there are always details to be worked through.
We are talking about 9,500 schools. We are talking about the population characteristics of the kids in those schools. We are talking about complicated fiscal questions for jurisdictions. We are talking about an agenda to improve every child's education in every school.
So yes, that  will be the subject of discussion as it should be, but we are very clear on this model and the aspiration to make sure that every school in this country has available to it the proper resourcing to teach the kids in that school and that we fix this for all time so that our schools are properly resourced for generations to come.
It's a big agenda we've outlined. The offer that's out there, the $14.5 billion, the 4.7 per cent indexation rate, that is against the alternate proposition which is continuing the Howard Government model, which because of lowering indexation rates because of withdrawal of effort in some jurisdictions, will mean that schools are $5.4 billion worse off.
So, it's a clear choice about the future and I intend in a very determined fashion to make sure that our nation makes the right choice.
I'm happy to go to my colleagues on this; we can start at the end. Obviously, it doesn't involve local government, but we start with Katy. 
JOURNALIST: In terms of funding from the Commonwealth is it a yes or a no?
CHIEF MINISTER GALLAGHER: In terms of the original question, which is if from the ACT's point of view we think we can reach agreement by 30 June, yes I do.
In terms of support for a national system of resourcing children, despite the fact that that is not financially advantageous to the ACT, yes I do because I actually think we need to put children in other jurisdictions  -  if they are not getting as much as the ACT  -  in the national interests ahead.
I remain committed to it. 
PREMIER WEATHERILL: I want to reach agreement by 30 June. I don't know whether we can, but I want to. And the principle reason is that I believe in a strong public education sector.
We have one of the world's great education systems but if you look at the international data, it's not a particularly equal system and we need to lift the quality of our public education system.
The way we are going to do that is for the level of government that's got the greatest fiscal strength to be involved in funding public education.
At the moment they fund private education, we fund public education, and that's not a good thing in the long-term for state and territory governments.
It's in our long-term strategic interest to have a relationship with the Commonwealth to fund public education.
It's in our interests of our budgets because it's the long-term growth is going to be in large measure picked up by the Commonwealth, so it's in our long-term interest to be part of that equation.
It's in the interests obviously of the general level of prosperity of our citizens to have a higher quality education system.
And at the level of the school what this means is that individual teachers, if they need an extra school services officer in their classrooms, they will be able to get it.
If they decide they want a language program, they will be able to put that in. If they decide they want to run an additional phys-ed program or bring in an expert, if they want an extra teacher or they want to give individual attention for kids with disabilities, they will be able to do it. 
That's what I think these reforms are all about. That's why we are striving to reach an agreement and we will see whether we get there.
PREMIER NEWMAN: Well in the case of Queensland I start by saying that I'm absolutely passionate about our schools and our kids. I'm here today though for Queensland's kids, Queensland parents, teachers and principals. And that is my first responsibility and duty.
I need to just let people know that we have made sure that we have actually increased the frontline school funding in Queensland under my government. 
In fact over the next five years we will spend $835 million fixing a very large school maintenance backlog to make our schools safe and secure, to provide decent work environments for our teachers, and learning environments for our kids.
We have also got, as part of that package, the great teachers great results program, which has very specific things that we are going to implement in Queensland because they are our state schools.
It's about teacher quality, it's about the performance of teachers, it's about scholarships so teachers can improve their skills and principals can improve their skills, it's also about rolling out the program of independent public schools. Now, we are going to do that.
Now one thing that has happened today, is that the Prime Minister has confirmed that the ask of Queensland is $1.3 billion over the next six years.
So I've got $835 million that I've put on the table over five years; $1.3 billion being asked over six. So you can see there is a gap. Well, I've got to go and work on that.
So I guess I need to stress today that if it's $1.3 billion the Commonwealth are saying, then my issue then becomes this issue about who runs the schools.
What I've stressed today is that they are state schools, it is our constitutional responsibility, and we are concerned by a number of things that we believe are centralist in approach, prescriptive and overly bureaucratic. That needs to be dealt with.
We are also concerned  -  notwithstanding what you've heard  -  about the national partnership agreement for early childhood education, that's only going for 18 months. What happens then?
And so there is still looming a very significant cut to kindergarten funding in Queensland post the end of next year and that needs to be dealt with.
I could go on and one final point, I've spoken to most of the Vice Chancellors of the universities in Queensland.
They are deeply concerned about the cuts to their budgets and the impact to their students, particularly disadvantaged and indigenous students. And they have urged me to fight for them as well that is what I'm here to do today. And so there are a number of concerns we have to sort out. 
But in summary, we are going to do our best to come up with an agreement because we want the Commonwealth money to come to our schools, but there are certain things that frankly have to be dealt with. 
PREMIER NAPTHINE: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. We are very proud in Victoria of having a very good education system but we are going to do our level best to make it even better and that's a commitment we have because we are similarly passionate about education, we are passionate about providing every child and every school with every opportunity to produce the very best educational outcomes. And we are very focused on educational outcomes that.
That is what we are doing in Victoria and that's why we have also increased funding each and every year that we have been in office for education.
That's why we have done a new enterprise bargain agreement with our teachers, principals and school support staff that deliver win-win outcomes for the staff and for our education system.
So we are very keen to continue bilateral negotiations, to get the very best deal possible for Victorian schools and Victorian education.
But we will not sign up to a deal that disadvantages any child, any school or any family in Victoria. 
PREMIER O'FARRELL: David, as I've been saying all week, we will continue to talk with the Federal Government. At a first cut at looking at how we could afford the $1.7 billion last Monday, we didn't get there.
We are determined to deliver this package, if indeed it's in the best interests of New South Wales.
We'll continue to have those discussions and we have them I suppose against the offer of an additional $3.3 billion to New South Wales schools over six years, versus not necessarily a return to the status quo, but a return to the status quo minus the national partnership funding of $300 million a year, which would be a significant cost to New South Wales schools in any case. 
PREMIER BARNETT: I will just add one point. I've already had a go. One of the other considerations for Western Australia is that we have a program of self-managing government schools.
And at the moment one-third, about 230 schools are self-managing; the right to hire and fire, single line budgets and so on.
So one of my concerns would be under this system, there would be a move away to that because you have a new set of regulation and reporting to Canberra.
And that's what a state's rights are given it just philosophically goes against the direction that Western Australian education is taking. So that's another consideration. 
PREMIER GIDDINGS: I certainly on behalf Tasmania commend the Prime Minister for driving two very important reforms here with NDIS and the Gonski education reforms.
And Tasmania stands ready to want to see both of those reforms implemented in our state.
We haven't signed up on either of those yet because there are still some final details that we are working through before we can actually put ink to paper. But we understand the importance of both of those reforms and particularly in education, in ensuring we can lift the educational outcomes for our students.
That's so critical for them as individuals, it's critical for our state, it's critical for our nation. And we believe these reforms are really, really important for all the reasons that have been said by my colleagues. 
CHIEF MINISTER GILES: Look, we all want the best for our kids, for our schools, for our teachers. The door will remain open until 30 June but the model that has been put up to us is unsatisfactory.
It is almost a case of death or Siberia. Now we have a stay of execution until 30 June. We will see what we can do between now and then with the Commonwealth Government to try and get the best outcomes for the Northern Territory.
But the model that has been put on the table, the funding commitments that are required by the Northern Territory Government are unsustainable.
So we will not close the door, but we will be happy to continue to negotiate.
JOURNALIST: The car industry is facing a difficult time at the moment and you have told us there was discussion from South Australia and Victoria about trying to convince, I presume it's mostly Queensland, New South Wales and WA, to buy and lease more Australian-made cars.
Could I ask the leaders of those other states, are you at all persuaded that you should increase the number of Australian cars that you buy or lease, and if not why not? 
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well I'm happy to kick off, Prime Minister. The fact is the number of cars that New South Wales has been buying or leasing has halved in the past six years. That, combined with the high Australian dollar, clearly has had an impact.
We have been big purchasers of one of the local Holden models that is affected by the latest cut backs.
But we will continue to look at the figures if Victoria and South Australia are going to provide in terms of value for money because ultimately for New South Wales taxpayers, it will come down to value for money.
And as others argued today, there are industries in every state where you could argue that if other states were to offer preference to those industries, we would all do well. 
PREMIER NEWMAN: I'm happy to have a go. Just a few thoughts. Firstly, it's been reported in the Courier Mail today that we have got a projected $8 billion fiscal deficit next financial year.
Now these are very serious numbers for Queensland and we have been talking about finding money for things like NDIS and education.
This is a situation my government inherited and we are doing our best to actually overcome a very serious financial situation.
We actually haven't bought any cars I'm advised since I became Premier. So for 12 months our fleet buy has dried up.
We will buy the best value on the day and we make no apologies for saving money for Queensland taxpayers. We would like to buy Australian, we prefer to buy Australian but we have got to get a good deal. 
I'm also advised that the previous government actually at one stage lost a couple of hundred million dollars on Australian-made vehicles they couldn't move.
And the final thing I add, a bit of a message to the car companies, I won't mention names but I did reveal today to the COAG meeting that one of the major car manufacturers had only recently, in recent days, agreed to the procurement policies if you like and requirements of the Queensland Government to buy from them. So, look, best endeavours, I'm not going to agree to a quota or a target. 
PREMIER BARNETT: We continue to buy cars and probably use them up pretty quickly. Western Australia buys 43 per cent of its cars at the moment are Australian and like Campbell, we will work hard to get that up over at least 50 per cent. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the nitty-gritty of the schools funding deal, one of the issues seems to be about the loadings and whether there is enough data to support some of the various loadings, particularly I think you have conceded there is nothing really on disabilities yet, but also not a lot of national data on the non-English speaking background loading.
Were you able to tell chief ministers and premiers today whether that data will be available by 30 June because it's pretty unclear how you're going to have a loading if you don't know what data you are going to be basing it on? 
PM: On students with disability, that is a work in progress between us and states and territories.
It is very, very complicated and what we have said we would do is continue the investment that we are making now.
It's a national partnership style investment into assistance for students with disabilities.
We would continue that whilst further work goes on, on this loading, and that's because it's just an absolute best endeavours, but very, very complicated.
We don't even start now with common definitions of disability for example, so this is having to be built from the ground up.
It's been done in a co-operative way but always been understood it was going to take more time than this, which is why we are continuing the disability investment that we announced, actually I believe I announced it in New South Wales with Premier O'Farrell some time back.
On students from non-English speaking backgrounds, yes of course we will keep working with states and territories on this data, on all data.
We have worked collaboratively on information since I first took over as Education Minister.
We could only put up the figures that are on the My School website because we have worked long and hard to share information and to make it public; information that was never shared before and was certainly never made public before.
It's not the Federal Government coming up with the information and then taking it out to the states. 
All of this information has had to be worked up in a collaborative way because state governments are the custodian of that information for state schools and that's the approach we will continue to take.
JOURNALIST: Thank you Prime Minister, just on the principle of the maintenance of funding, you've made it clear that under this deal no schools will lose money until all the others reach the level.
This means that some money will continue to be sent to quite wealthy schools and more so than some smaller schools, government schools.
To what extent is this an issue and to what extent would you be prepared to consider changing that principle? 
PM: Well, let's be clear about what the principle is because I think it answers your question.
Of course we've got to keep working with jurisdictions on information and assessments of the positions of individual schools and we'll continue to do that.
But the principle here is for schools that currently have available to them more resources than the school resource standard inclusive of all loadings, for those schools they will get the same funding arrangement that they would have got.
So they are in the same position they would have been if these reforms were not enacted.
For schools that are below the school resource standard there will be more money for them in their base and from us there will be an indexation rate of 4.7 per cent which is an indexation rate which combined with the new base money grows them too towards the school resource standard. That's the system we want to see.
It is not appropriate at this point for people to be pulling out individual examples of schools and comparing them and some of those figures obviously aren't reliable  -  it's not appropriate for people to be doing that. 
What we're doing at every level is data checking and work, but that principle is clear.
So to use the example you use, very underfunded state school, if one imagines one, would be getting more money in its base plus from us this indexation rate.
A school that is above the school resource standard would get the same funding deal that it would have in any event. But that is a lesser indexation rate. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, as your meeting concluded this afternoon the Opposition Leader announced that he had demoted his Director of Policy, Dr Mark Roberts, for his behaviour at a corporate function last night in which he approached the head of the National Indigenous Education Foundation apparently after having had too much to drink, allegedly, and made threats to that organisation's funding if and when the Coalition took government.
Can you tell us, what is your view, firstly of that incident, and secondly of Mr Abbott's response? 
PM: I've been here with my colleagues doing important things for the nation. Any of that is a matter for Mr Abbott. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister and any of the premiers who want to comment, was there any resolution to the concerns raised about unexplained wealth provisions in the criminal gang laws and is it still a concern held by states about how assets would be shared between the state and the Federal Government? 
PM: I think the short answer is yes, there is concern and there are a variety of views between jurisdictions on unexplained wealth laws and so further work will be done by the attorney-generals working with the police ministers as we've outlined. 
JOURNALIST: Who shares those concerns? 
PM: I mean we can go though, we'll be here all night. I'm happy to take premiers but we were talking about proposals, laws on gangs and organised crime, laws on unexplained wealth, further work on firearms and people. 
In different iterations, people had different views on different things. So that's why we need more work done. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, my question is related to the Royal succession. The world is watching and I think Premier Newman mentioned the word sovereignty. Aboriginal sovereignty movements here, there's a few tribal groups looking to have their right to self-determination and decolonisation under the United Nations.
If you support Queensland's right to become a sovereign state under these new changes, do you support Aboriginal people  -  tribes  -  who are looking to become independent in the future? 
PM: Well, I don't think my position about Queensland is any different today than it was yesterday, which is Queensland's a great state and I love visiting there.
On our engagement with indigenous Australians, you know our approach. Our approach has been about working to close the gap, it's an approach about recognising land rights and that's the approach we will continue to take in the future. 
JOURNALIST: If you recognise an Israeli state or the Palestinians' right to statehood, why not recognise these Aboriginal tribes who want to become their own states? 
PM: Well there's no discussion of that today at COAG and no change in the Government's position from what you know it to be.
JOURNALIST: You've said that the Federal Government's contribution will be indexed by 4.7 per cent, can you clarify whether that applies to the new funding you're providing, will that also be indexed by 4.7 per cent or is it solely the existing funding that you provide? 
PM: As the model gets up and running, so indexation for schools, it's paid during the school year  -  it looks a bit backwards, it's paid in October  -  so as the model runs the indexation rate will be 4.7 per cent on all Commonwealth funding that is provided to schools below the SRS. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, under current funding arrangements, it's not in your agreement, and they stand to lose targeted funding national partnership money. Will the Commonwealth deny those schools the extra funds or will you look at ways to provide the extra funding to the schools in those states?
PM: The essence here is that the Commonwealth wants to provide more money and that's what we are looking for agreement towards.
But we made clear with our colleagues there is a deadline here of 30 June, schools need to know what position they are going to be in.
We are working so that we are providing new resources to schools and we hope that states and territories can join us in that endeavour.
What will apply after 30 June in jurisdictions that don't sign on to the new reforms is the continuation of the old Howard Government funding model. 
JOURNALIST: Is there any prospect of another COAG before 30 June to try and clinch this deal and also was there any discussion of the national partnership on Closing the Gap today? 
PM: We'll be working bilaterally to close this deal so no, I don't see us having a further COAG meeting.
On Closing the Gap there was questions and commentary about the national partnership. I made it clear that I along with the Minister for Indigenous Affairs and Minister Warren Snowdon had issued a press release about the renewal of that national partnership and the funding envelope which means we are increasing funding per year. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Australia has sent 38 Sri Lankan people back to Sri Lanka without asking them if they want a lawyer. As a lawyer in your previous life do you agree with that and do you believe that Australia could be in breach of its international obligations as the Human Rights Commission has suggested?
PM: The answer to the second is no and we conduct all of these matters appropriately. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Barnett, after the state election you signalled that you would be working to provide some sort of support to the wheat farmers in WA that were struggling.
Quite a significant meeting on Monday in Meridian where 1,000 people turned out; did you get the opportunity today to talk about any of the requests that they've come forward with from that meeting because some were state requests and some were federal requests and it's also something that's being shared or some of the crisis they're dealing with there with the high Australian dollar is being shared by other sectors of the agricultural industry in other states? 
PREMIER BARNETT: An important issue but I guess a more local one for Western Australia.
I've toured through that area, I had meetings with the banks during the week about some sort of emergency financial assistance and I guess the focus will be on caring for people under stress and supporting those families, but in reality it's limited as to what can be done. 
I know there is all sorts of great claims for assistance but we'll identify what is probably a smaller number of farmers that perhaps are viable but are struggling to get their finance for this year and we'll try and see what we can do with the banks to assist them. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in light of Mr O'Farrell's comments this morning in support of same-sex marriage I wonder if it was an issue that was raised by any of the premiers today and if the state and territory leaders could comment on whether they want this issue examined again in light of New Zealand's actions? 
PM: Well we didn't have any formal discussions on this. 
Obviously in and around COAG people have been talking to Barry about the announcement that he made.
For us the important thing is for there to be a conscience vote on all sides of politics on this issue. There is a conscience vote in my political party.
I don't make any endeavours in my political party for people to have to agree with my position.
They act in accordance with their own consciences and I think that that should be what is done across Australian politics.
Barry might want to say something. 
PREMIER O'FARRELL: I said it all on the way in. 
PM: Right, said it on the way in. 
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Can I just say something because in Tasmania we would certainly hope that Will Hodgman, the Liberal leader in Tasmania does provide a conscience vote to his members, that this is an issue that we're hopeful will be raised again post our May elections for the Upper House and it can be debated.
So there is one at the moment, one Liberal Party member in the Upper House, who if she is returned, I would hope would have a conscience vote on this issue. 
Because we do think it's an important one and we congratulate New Zealand for what they have achieved and in Tasmania we will continue to pursue this issue. 
JOURNALIST: PM, just the early childhood education in the communiqué, $655 million over the next 18 months, was that inserted to assuage the concerns I think of Premier Newman and Napthine over kindergarten or is that something different altogether? 
PM: No, that's the same national partnership and it has been renewed for that period of time in the way described in the communiqué so that it is sufficient to make sure that there is no interruption of services. 
PREMIER NAPTHINE: We welcome the 18-month extension and we welcome the additional money from the Commonwealth.
What I think, without speaking for Premier Newman but for myself, what we'd like to do is have a more longer term secure funding arrangement beyond December 2014. 
PREMIER NEWMAN: I'd just add that's vitally necessary. 
JOURNALIST: Did COAG have any discussion on constitutional recognition for local government, whether that's something that the people at the table are in favour of, against, and what's going to happen with that? 
PM: Once again it was not a formal matter on the agenda for COAG.
Obviously when we get together we take the opportunity for canvassing issues and this is an important issue for local government and local governments represented at the table.
So for the Commonwealth, as you know, we are continuing to work through the prospects of a referendum to recognise local government. 
JOURNALIST: But is the referendum going to happen because the election's only five months away and there's a whole process that has to go through. Are we going to have a referendum? 
PM: That, at the end of the day, is a decision for the Federal Government and we'll announce our decision on that when we're in a position to do so.


Melbourne
It's great to be home in Melbourne, to be back at this Conference, where my political values have always been tested and shaped.
Here I see so many party and Parliamentary colleagues and friends, people who have served so long in the Labor cause.
Ours is a strong State branch with a lot of work ahead and I know how much you are already doing to prepare for the campaigns to come.
So I want to thank the State Secretary Noah Carroll, our Party officials and staff and just as important, every branch member and union member, every supporter and volunteer  -  all of you.
I want to thank our Party President, a woman of such strength and conviction, who's given her life to the Labor movement, who I know is going to bring Melbourne home for Labor, I'm so grateful for her words this morning, Cath Bowtell.
I want to thank our State Leader too, a man who has revived the Victorian Party, who's seen off one Liberal Premier, and he's certainly got another one in his sights, he gave a great speech today, Daniel Andrews.
Delegates, yesterday was the most important COAG meeting in our five and a half years in Government.
Our Party shares an abiding vision  -  opportunity for all who seek it, care for all who need it  -  yesterday your Labor Government  put that vision before the nation in the most ambitious and practical form.
Opportunity for all  -  through a plan which will properly resource all our classrooms, teachers and kids for generations to come, the biggest changes to school funding in forty years.
Care for all  -  through DisabilityCare, the biggest extension to the social safety net since Medicare, our national disability insurance scheme.
DisabilityCare is vital to so many Australians  -  to hundreds of thousands of people with disability, to their carers, family and friends.
So many of our fellow citizens have worked so hard for so long to make this happen  -  the countless advocates in the community, countless Australians who have all lent their voice  -  I thank you.
People who know that disability can strike any one of us at any time that accident or injury can change a life and remake a family's future in a single moment.
People who already knew in their own lives what the Productivity Commission has now told us all: that care for people with disabilities in our country is underfunded, unfair, fragmented, inefficient, that people with disability have little choice and no certainty of access to care.
It took their campaign to seize the attention of the nation  -  and it took a Federal Labor Government to turn that community campaign into public policy.
First, our Government, your Labor Government, committed to build a national disability insurance scheme  -  and then we got the agreement of every State and Territory to the need for change. 
That was back in 2011.
In 2012, we brought the ACT, Tasmania, South Australia and New South Wales on board for launch sites and a launch date of 1 July this year.
It took some doing, but we even got the Victorian Government to agree to launch  -  and yesterday the Northern Territory signed up to launch from 1 July 2014.
Your Labor Government has kept building.
Hard work led by a very fine Minister known so well to all of us here, Jenny Macklin, our Minister for Disability Reform.
21 March 2013 was a red letter day: the day we put DisabilityCare into law.
Because of all that, in ten weeks' time Australia will launch DisabilityCare Australia  -  on 1 July this year the NDIS begins.
Only a Federal Labor Government could deliver this result but no Federal Government could do this alone.
That was true in 2012 for agreement to launch.
That was still true this week when we signed with South Australia. 
On Thursday, Premier Weatherill and I put pen to paper, signing South Australia up to the full rollout of DisabilityCare by 1 July 2018.
Yesterday, the Australian Capital Territory signed up too.
The support of State and Territory Governments  -  Labor and Liberal is crucial  -  and I know that not every Liberal leader has to be a wrecker.
We saw that back in December last year, when Premier O'Farrell signed up New South Wales  -  committing Australia's biggest State to the full rollout of DisabilityCare over the next five years.
The story in this State is different: the sad reality here is that Victoria has had a change of Liberal leader  -  but not a change of conservative heart.
Yesterday the Government of Victoria missed another chance to put the people of our state first.
My message to Premier Napthine is clear.
This State has already been drifting and directionless for too long.
Make a decision, Denis.  Sign up to DisabilityCare today.
Delegates, the story of DisabilityCare is the story of school improvement.
A long community campaign for change  -  Labor in Government building the policies to get it done  -  an ambitious and practical reform plan on the table now  -  and a chance for every level of government and section of the community to act in the national interest.
So my message to the Premiers and the Chief Ministers is just as clear.
Do the right thing by Australia. Sign up for better schools.
Today, one in 12 Australian kids aren't meeting minimum standards in reading, writing and maths.
Kids from less well-off backgrounds can be up to three years behind their classmates. 
Lifting school standards means opportunity for all of Australia's children.
Our plan will make sure no Australian child is left behind.
Today, four of the top five schooling systems in the world are in our region and we aren't one of them. 
The average 15 year old maths student in Australia is two years behind a 15 year old in Shanghai. 
Improving school results means strength for Australia's economy.
Our plan will make sure the Australian economy isn't left behind either.
Delegates, spreading opportunity through education is the heart of the modern Labor way. You know that as well as anyone.
That is how Labor has governed in Victoria.
John Cain's Government introduced the VCE and reformed TAFE, boosting funding for schools after decades of conservative neglect.
Joan Kirner boosted the most disadvantaged schools and promoted access and equality for all students.
Steve Bracks committed to modernise every school in Victoria  -  planting the seed of Building the Education Revolution.
The Blueprint for School Reform gave us inspiring curriculum, better school management and local flexibility.
The Education Act was rewritten for the first time in a century  -  and the school leaving age raised.
John Brumby pushed through early childhood reforms, strengthened the apprenticeship system, boosted science and maths and built international education into a major growth industry for Victoria.
So much of our agenda in education began here  -  so many ideas I was proud to extend nation-wide as Education Minister and now as Prime Minister.
Fittingly embodied in the goals of the Melbourne Declaration  -  signed back in December of 2008 by every Australian Education Minister  -  a pledge to every parent that your child will have a great education, no matter who you are, what system you attend or where you live.
Goals which can only be delivered with the National Plan for School Improvement.
Delegates, because of the work of this Labor Government, we now know something we have never known in half a century of federal school funding.
We can say what resources are required for a school to get excellent results  -  we can say which schools don't get those resources today.
We can say who needs extra funding and which children need extra help.
We can also show what a fair share is between the Commonwealth and the States  -  and I've offered to put an extra two dollars in for every one extra dollar I ask of them.
The policy work has been done, the discussions have been held, the experts have reported, the advice is in.
This is the big one for Australia's future. 
We will fight to get it done.
Delegates, when you campaign in the Federal election later this year  -  this is the plan for the nation you will carry to the people.
And with it you will carry a very clear choice.
This Labor plan: to save wisely and invest in the nation's future.
The risk of our opponents: who always cut the wrong things and always cut too much.
You've seen it here in Victoria. 
You know you'll see it in Canberra if Government changes this year.
I'll give the Opposition Leader this much credit: when he came to Geelong this week, he finally spat out the truth.
He didn't hide his plan to cut $2bn in co-investment with the auto industry and put a quarter of a million manufacturing jobs on the chopping block.
He didn't pretend to have a plan for jobs or a plan for the future.
This is all Tony Abbott told Victorians on Thursday: We will do some things that will hurt.
You bet they would. 
Threatening to wield the axe on Indigenous affairs is just the latest Liberal plan for a cut which will hurt our people.
They want to cut our tripling of the tax free threshold and hurt 3.6 million working women.
They want to hurt every one of 3.5 million pensioners by cutting pensions.
They want to hurt every one of 1.2 million families by cutting the School Kids Bonus.
They want to hurt every one of 3.6 million low-income Australians saving for retirement by cutting the superannuation co-contribution.
Every one of these cuts is a plan they've boldly announced themselves.
They would take away high speed broadband.
They've said it's a white elephant.
They would take away funding for schools.
They've said they'll rip it up.
They even said DisabilityCare is a cruel hoax.
The Liberals will cut to the bone.
That's what the Liberals do: they are only the latest of the anti-Labor parties in Australia's history, they are just another in the line of succession, the blockers and stoppers of Australian public life.
That is the only reason they exist at all, to try to stop Labor acting and to try to reverse the things we've done.
These Liberal cuts will be bad for services, bad for families  -  and bad for jobs as well.
Liberal cuts will slam the brakes on for the economy at the exact time we need to be picking up speed.
They will throw away wise investments for the nation's future  -  they will throw Australians out of work at the same time.
All our plans and all our achievements, everything we have done for Australia's future, all this is what is at risk, all this is what our opponents want to take away.
We will walk a hard path together in the months ahead but I know you are ready for the campaign to come.
In 2010 and 2007 you fought for a Labor Government  -  and our Labor achievements since then should make you proud.
Our plan for school improvement  -  our plan for DisabilityCare.
Building a clean energy future when so many stood against us for so long.
Beating the global financial crisis and growing jobs when the rest of the world could not.
Tearing up Work Choices and protecting your rights at work.
Apologising to the Stolen Generation who had waited so long for that one precious word.
I so vividly remember this State conference in May 2008.
Our first since taking office in October the previous year.
We all met in hope and expectation for the achievements which still lay ahead.
Today those achievements and these plans are the substance of our governing record.
I know we meet today in a different mood.
Ours is the determination of seasoned soldiers, not the enthusiasm of raw recruits.
The knowledge of our achievements and plans will give us strength as we fight for Government again.
Helping families meet the pressures of modern family life  -  higher living standards for all our people who work so hard.
Creating and supporting jobs  -  for good wages and high skills  -  and giving you new rights at work.
Building the national broadband network  -  the real thing, for everyone.
Properly resourcing all our teachers and kids  -  improving Australia's schools  -  for generations to come.
The new safety net that was a dream before Labor governed  -  DisabilityCare, a national disability insurance scheme.
That is the choice before our nation this year.
The things Labor will do  -  the things the Liberals will take away.
Our Labor plans  -  their Liberal cuts.
Our Party, the great “Party of initiative” in Australian life  -  always the nation-builder  -  always the reforming force.
Our opponents  -  always fighting to wreck, to stop, to cut.
That is why this is the fight of our lives  -  that is why we must get out there and win.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the Centenary of Anzac Warren Snowdon today announced an interactive large-scale travelling exhibition will visit towns and cities across the country as part of the Government's Centenary of Anzac commemorative programme.
The travelling museums will provide an opportunity for communities to share the Anzac spirit and leave their own personal Anzac story through the interactive state-of-the-art wall that will be trucked around the country.
Using the latest technology to share our Anzac story will mean young people can learn first-hand about the contributions of so many brave men and women who proudly service our country.
The travelling museums form part of the recommendations to Government contained in the Anzac Centenary Advisory Board's Report to Government on the Anzac Centenary program released today.
The Prime Minister thanked the Board, led by Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston AC, AFC (Ret'd), for presenting the Government with an excellent blueprint for what will be the most significant commemoration to take place in our lifetimes.
This will be a time when all Australians can reflect upon the service and sacrifice of those who have served our country past and present.  I congratulate Angus Houston and the Board on their considerable efforts over the past year in the development of this Report.  The Board will continue to provide advice to Government leading up to and throughout the Centenary period.
The Board has put forward 25 recommendations, all of which the Government is pleased to accept.  To support the implementation of the Board's recommendations, the Government will provide an additional $25 million for the Anzac Centenary on top of the $83.5 million committed in last year's Federal Budget.
Mr Snowdon commended the Board for designing a program around the central themes of Education and Research, Commemoration, and Arts and Culture.  
The involvement of local communities in the Centenary will be critical.  The participation of individuals, towns and communities will ensure that at the end of the Centenary period we have left a legacy for the generations to come.  With this is mind, the Government announced in February that it was doubling the amount available under the Anzac Centenary Local Grants Program to $100,000 per electorate.
The $25 million we are committing today, recognises that there is a number of initiatives within the Board's Report that require an early injection of funds to ensure we are well placed for the beginning of the Centenary.
A significant recommendation by the Board is the national Anzac Centenary Travelling Exhibition for which $10 million has been provided.
The Travelling Exhibition will bring the Anzac Centenary to many people in rural and regional Australia who otherwise would have limited ability to be involved and actively engaged.
Other proposals relate to the Albany convoy commemorative event, assisting in the preservation of the HMAS AE2, digitisation of a sample of First World War repatriation records, a series of documentaries and other programming and a wide-ranging education and research program which includes scholarships and history grants.
Mr Lindsay Fox is working with the corporate sector to source donations to supplement the Government's financial commitment.
The first call on these funds will be for the Travelling Exhibition and a contribution towards significant projects identified by the States and Territories as part of their Centenary activities.
The Board's recommended approach to the Centenary Program recognises that it will run from 2014 to 2018 and includes programs and initiatives that can be designed and scaled to fit the level funding available from other sources over the period. 
The Board will have a continuing role with Members acting as ambassadors, informing the community about the program of Anzac Centenary events and assisting in the successful delivery of the program by providing strategic advice to Government.
A list of all initiatives included in today's funding announcement is attached.
A copy of the Board's Report and the Government response can be accessed at http://www.anzaccentenary.gov.au/anzac_centenary/publications.htm


Canberra
On behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people, I would like to extend our sincere condolences to those affected by the earthquake in Sichuan province, China on Saturday.
Our thoughts go out to the victims and their families in Ya'an city and surrounding areas.As demonstrated during Sichuan's tragic earthquake in 2008, the Australian Government stands ready to assist in the recovery effort, should this be requested. 


Melbourne
E &amp; OE  -  PROOF ONLY
David Speers: Hello and welcome to everyone here at the Burvale Hotel and those watching elsewhere. Welcome to the Sky News Herald Sun People's Forum and please make welcome Prime Minister Julia Gillard. 
Last week Opposition Leader Tony Abbott attended one of these People's Forums with us in Geelong in the most marginal electorate in the country, Corangamite. We are here in the second most marginal electorate in the country, Deakin. It's held by Labor on a margin of just under 1%, one of those very important seats for Labor to try and hold in this upcoming election. Now, the Prime Minister has agreed to take questions on all sorts of issues, whatever you've got in mind this evening. So we can't tell, the Prime Minister doesn't know what those questions will be. We'll find out right now because we're going to get into them very shortly. First I'll just invite the Prime Minister to make a few opening remarks.
PM: Thank you very much David and thank you to everybody for coming along tonight. I was actually here in Deakin with our Labor member here, Mike Simon, who's just over at the side here last Wednesday for a community cabinet which was an opportunity for community members to come along and to ask any question that they wanted to, and we're doing the same tonight. This is your opportunity to ask questions and I'll do my best to answer them for you. What I found at that community cabinet and what I went away thinking is that there were lots of issues on people's minds but there was a really strong sense of community and pride in community here, and I'm sure a lot of that's going to show tonight. I don't know what you're going to ask. I suspect some people are going to ask about jobs, some are going to ask about health, some are going to ask about education. I just briefly wanted to explain what we've been working on as a Government and then it's over to you.
First and foremost, we've been working to keep our economy strong during what has been a very difficult period for the world economy, the global financial crisis, and that's required all of us to work together and I think we should be pretty proud that as a country we've managed to keep growing jobs, almost a million of them, while 28 million jobs have been lost around the world. It hasn't been easy but that's been an achievement. What that means is we can now look out and build for the future, and I think this is a really interesting and, indeed, full of opportunity time in our history. We live in the region of the world that's going to see the most economic growth and I want to make sure that we get that strength and we bring it home here in Australia to this electorate, to every part of the country.
To do that the future doesn't just shape itself, it's never assured, you've got to build it. We've been working on building that future of strength and prosperity, making sure we're ready for it by investing in infrastructure, the traditional kind as well as the new infrastructure like the NBN, working on it by building a clean energy future, working on it by developing our nation's skills, including having more apprenticeships out there than ever before. Working on it too by now focussing on the quality of our schools, something I am very determined to make a difference to because I want every child to get a great education to reach their potential to be able to get one of those high-skilled high-paid jobs in the future. And if we can keep our economy strong it means that there are opportunities to share and we can also finance the things that are important to all of us, a good health care system, and then for the future too, the National Disability Insurance Scheme, disability care, so we can do better for people with disabilities in our community and we all know that if something happened to us or to a family member in the future that they would get the care and support they need.
So that's been our agenda but this isn't about our agenda. It's about anything that's on your mind. So I'm very happy to take questions and do everything I can to answer them. Thanks David.
David Speers: All right, thank you Prime Minister. Let's get straight into the questions. I'll invite our first question at the microphone, and if you wouldn't mind just telling us your first name and, if you're comfortable, what you do to give us some context behind the question you're asking. Sir? 
Bernard: Yes, my name's Bernard, I'm retired now. Prime Minister, now that the United Kingdom and New Zealand have joined the many enlightened countries of the world to legislate for all their adult citizens to have equal right of marriage, can you explain what prevents your Government now from following their lead and grasping the mettle, reinforcing Australia's image as a country of a fair go for all?
PM: Thanks for your question. And this is a debate that I think the nation's been very focussed on for the last few years but it has got a new impetus because, you know, we hate it when New Zealand does something in front of us, let's be frank. So that's brought it back onto the national agenda in a big way, not that it ever really left. What we're doing is - you know, I've got a view about this and my view is pretty well-known. But I'm not seeking to impose my view on anybody else. We have a conscience vote on the Labor site of politics. What the New Zealanders managed to do was have a conscience vote across their parliament. So Prime Minister Key, John Key, he's a conservative but his political party had a conscience vote. We need to see that across all of the political parties in the Australian Parliament because it's only that, I think, that is ever going to be able to assure people that the Australian Parliament is dealing with this with people voting in accordance with their beliefs. So we've got there for the Labor side of politics, I hope the other side of politics gets there too. And then whatever the outcome at least you know, whoever you sent to Parliament they're voting in accordance with their conscience and that can obviously be informed talking to their local community.
David Speers: PM, can I just ask: why do you personally oppose same sex marriage? 
PM: I do know when people look at me they think maybe that's a pretty eccentric view for someone like me to have, because as people know I'm not a religious person so it's not a religious reason. For me, I've always thought that our nation and its traditions, we inherit and keep some that have been forged over time and then we add to them new ones that we develop and purpose-create and they guide us for the future. And I have thought in this area that we should develop and purpose-create something new that guides us for the future so that there would be marriage in its very traditional form and then there would be other ways of recognising relationships which are full of love and full of significance. But I know a lot of people don't agree with that view.
David Speers: All right. Bernard, I think you might be one of them. But thank you for that question. Let's get to our next question.
Kevin:  My name's Kevin and I'm a university student. Firstly, I just want to say thank you for coming out tonight and providing us the opportunity to ask the questions that matter to us. My question is: the Government has recently announced $2.3 billion funding cuts to universities to help fund the Gonski reforms. If indeed the Gonski reforms does help provide a better primary and secondary education, will these same students not go on to receive an inferior university education? And secondly, Dr Emerson has recently stated that we have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to - sorry, getting a bit nervous - once-in-a-generation opportunity to make sure that every young child in Australia receives a higher quality education. So does this liberty not extend to university students also? It appears from my perspective that you're robbing Peter to pay Paul.
PM: Thank you for your question, Kevin, and I can understand, you know, there's obviously a sense of passion as you ask it and I can understand that passion. I mean, I first got involved in raising my voice publicly about anything, protesting about university cutbacks way back when under Malcolm Fraser's Government, so I do know that people get passionate about this question.  Probably some young people in the audience now all looking at each other trying to remember how long ago that was.
What we've done here is we've needed to work through in an environment where we've got a lot less tax money coming into the Federal Government than used to come in, and that's an overhang of the global financial crisis and that conditions have been a bit tough for business because of that and the high Australian dollar, there's less tax money coming in than there used to be. So, every time you take a decision to spend some money no matter how wise the spend you've also got to look for savings elsewhere in the budget, responsible savings. We need to look for those savings to put some more money into our schools for our kids because so many schools at the moment are below the resources necessary to get kids a great education.
When we looked around what we saw was that in universities we've increased funding by more than 50% since we came to Government. It is 190,000 more people who will go to university because of our reforms. Even with all of that growth in numbers money is still going up per student place. And so what we're asking universities to do is to not take a cut in the sense that they'll get less dollars next year than they've had this year. What we're saying is your funding's been growing like that, what we want to do is moderate that growth rate so one year there will be a 2% efficiency dividend, the next year a 1.25% efficiency dividend. Funding will still go up, it just won't go up as sharply. And we think that that's a fair contribution to making a real difference to what's happening in schools for the future. I want more kids to go to uni, I want more kids to have apprenticeships. We'll still be growing university places, universities will still be quality places to go. We'll keep investing to see more apprenticeships. But we are asking universities to make this contribution now.
Now, I understand it's a tough decision. If I was a vice-chancellor I'd be complaining about it but I've got to make the decisions looking at everything that's going on as to what's the highest priority and the best thing to do and that's the answer we've come up with.
David Speers: Kevin, thank you very much. Let's get to our next question.
Michael:  Good evening Prime Minister, my name is Michael, I'm an in-house counsel. My question, Prime Minister, relates to the recent announcement that Government won't be able to meet its budget surplus. My question is thus, when does the Government expect to obtain a budget surplus and how it will go about obtaining that?
PM: We've got the budget coming up in May so it's being worked on now and worked on hard by Wayne Swan and Penny Wong, the team that does our economic work for us. So I'm not in a position to unveil the May budget tonight. What I can say to you is we are working so that when we do say that there are new areas of spending, that we find savings on the budget to match that spending. So, you know, on the spending side of the budget there's been a lot of restraint and there will be a lot of restraint for the future. And it is pretty tough when, you know, you've got a big new proposal like funding schools, you know, better and we've got to look to other areas of the budget to take savings to make that happen. But that's what we're doing.
So if we're doing all of that you might be asking yourself the question: well, how come the budget isn't just coming back to surplus. The problem with that isn't on the spending side because we're taking a very tough approach to spending, it's on the money into Government side. Government doesn't have its own money, we get it either because you pay tax going to work in your pay packet or because businesses pay tax or because we get money through things like capital gains tax. And at the moment we are getting less tax money per unit of economic activity in our economy, less tax money for each unit of GDP than any time since the early 1990s. So that's the result of the global financial crisis impact on business, high Aussie dollar impact on business, they're less profitable, they're paying less tax. Things have been increasing in value less, less capital gains tax. That's what's hitting our budget side of the money coming in. So when you hear Wayne Swan talking about, you know, a sledgehammer hitting the revenue that's what he's referring to.
When you've got that kind of problem with the amount of money coming in you can do one of two things. You can say well, we'll keep cutting and cutting and cutting and cutting on the expenditure side, which would really hurt people, or you can take the approach that we're taking and say well, you know, the revenue coming in will recover over time. The important thing now is to match any new spending with savings. We've got to keep our economy strong. Cutting and cutting and cutting wouldn't help our economy stay strong. It would hurt people. So we're going to work so the budget recovers, keep the restraint on the spending side and you'll see all of the outcomes of that on budget night when all of the figures are produced.
Michael:  Thank you.
David Speers: Can I just follow up on that Prime Minister. Isn't spending also an issue here because the mining tax hasn't raised the money it was expected to and yet you're still spending that money. The carbon tax in a couple of years might drop off as well and you're still guaranteeing all the compensation for that.
PM: I'm going to have a little smile at the question in this sense that, you know, I've had to for years and years and years - well, it feels like years and years, but a few years - go to forums where people have said to me "Oh, the mining tax is so big it's going to kill mining" and now everybody goes "Oh, it's too small" and, you know, "the carbon tax is so big it's going to kill the economy", and now everybody says "Oh, it's too small". Well, it just goes to show a lot of the fear campaign about mining and about carbon wasn't right. What we've done with the revenue side and the expenditure side, they're factored into the budget bottom lines. We're factoring in the reductions in what we're getting from mining and you know we'll have to update forecasts at budget time about what we're going to get in through carbon pricing. We do that and we also look at the spending side responsibly. We knew when we created the mining tax that it would go up or down depending with the profitability of mining. That's what it's designed to do.
David Speers: So you will look at the spending associated with the carbon tax responsibly?
PM: Well, you'll see all of the household assistance that's being delivered now staying, absolutely.
David Speers: Why?
PM: We said to people they'd get that assistance. The carbon price that's in place now means people should get that assistance and they'll continue to get it.
David Speers: Even if it's a much lower tax? 
PM: We said they'd have it and they'll certainly get it.
David Speers: Okay. Let's get our next question.
Troy:  Hello, Prime Minister, my name's Troy, I work in IT so my question is about the NBN. There's rumours about costs blowout and delay in deployment of the network. How are you going to reassure people the fertility of such a large investment into public infrastructure? And also a lot of people don't understand the benefits of a high speed broadband. How are you going to encourage them to adopt and understand the new network?
PM: Thanks Troy. Well, hopefully on the benefits if you work in IT you might be able to do some of that explanation for us. With the National Broadband Network it's a big investment, you know, there's no doubt about it, it's a big investment. But it's the kind of big investment that only Government can do and do properly. Because what you are building, just like years and years ago we built the copper telephone wire network, you're building something that people will then use, will have competition on it. So you'll be able to get your broadband from many retail companies but they'll all be using the same network, the same backbone, just the same way that you can get your telephone services from various telephone companies but for the landline services they're all using the same copper wire.
In terms of the costs for the NBN, they are, you know, what we predicted they would be. With the rollout there's been some delays getting the contracting done for the people who are actually dragging the cable down streets and wiring it up. But that is being worked on and NBN Co. make sure that that's happening and you've probably heard some of that publicly.
Where does it take us to? Well, it takes us to where there will be fibre to your home, to your business around the country, more than 90% of premises getting the benefits of the fibre. That is the quickest broadband you can get. 
There are alternatives. The Opposition's put one forward where you only take the fibre so far, you put it in an ugly cupboard that would be on the street and then it connects into the copper network. That's the same as a huge highway then suddenly stopping and a tiny suburban street is supposed to take all of the traffic. It would just choke things up. It's only the fibre into the home that will give people the speeds they want and need in this modern age.
What can you do with it? Well you can create the jobs of the future, the jobs other countries with broadband are creating. You can better provide health and education services, and I've seen with my own eyes things like a dermatologist who is in one part of the country diagnosing a rash on a woman's leg when she is thousands of kilometres away because he can see it well enough through the camera to know what it is. I mean, that kind of revolution in health care for a country of our geography is a tremendous advantage and that's where the NBN will take us.
David Speers: Troy, are you satisfied with that answer? Is this the sort of thing that you want to see?
Troy:  Yes, I am, thank you very much.
David Speers: Good on you Troy, thank you. Let's get to our next question.
Ron:  Thank you Prime Minister for the opportunity. My name is Ron, I'm a retired engineer and a Bulldog tragic. My query regards lack of publicity of achievement. In June 2010 following a change of leadership of the Labor Party, which I'm sure you'd remember, Kevin Rudd addressed the media and spoke of the achievements of the Government since taking over from the Howard Government. I'm sure that many people like me were greatly impressed with this substantial list and I wondered why I had not heard of this list before. I believe that your Government has fallen into the same pattern. You've achieved a lot but failed to effectively gain publicity for those achievements. Prime Minister, what will you do in the coming months to sell your accomplishments to the electorate?
PM: Thanks Ron. Well, you're right, our footy team got smashed on the weekend so that's a problem to recover from.
On taking the message out, I mean, you can always learn things and do better and I'm certainly prepared to. And then there's I think some things about the way we get information today and the speed of the information and, you know, what's new. We're in a time of real change in the media. It's not just us, it's happening all over the developed world, and I'm not sure that any of us has quite worked out the way of having some really complicated public policy debates during this time. So I often feel like there's a sea of information out there today but it's so much that it's hard for people to pick up what bits really matter to them. And then from the point of view of, you know, the people who do our media, they've got a move, you know, really quickly because to sustain attention in a world where things move quickly they've got to move quickly. So David can't be on at 9 o'clock in the morning talking about the same thing that he's talking about at 9 o'clock that night - and he does work those kind of hours - because, you know, people would say "Oh, we're not going to watch that again". But, you know, some of our really complicated public policy debates, what is the best way of making sure children get a great education? Well, I think I've got a really good idea. But could we do that over 12 hours of TV? I'd love to. But I suspect all of the people in the media would say "No, that wouldn't work".
So there's some things about the cycle of the media now that makes it harder to communicate and get the feedback that we need, ironically even though we live in an age of more information than ever before. And I think we're all still in some ways finding what's the new rhythm for democracies in this age of really intense information. So maybe there's some things that we could do better. Maybe there's some big questions there to think about, about democratic practice and dialogue during the age we live in now where things happen so fast.
David Speers: Hopefully forums like this are a bit of the answer as well in getting some of that policy debate going. Thanks so much for that Ron. Now let's get to our next question.
Greg:  Hello, Prime Minister. My name is Greg, I'm a parking officer. Given there's a large number of people who own multiple homes and a large number of Australians who own no home, would you work towards abolishing negative gearing on non-owner-occupied properties and giving tax breaks for owner-occupied mortgages?
PM: Thanks for your question, Greg. We're not intending to change anything about negative gearing because it is an - it is a policy. I mean, people will have their views about the fairness of it and, you know, sort of there's a public policy debate itself, the fairness of it. But certainly if you made any big changes to negative gearing you'd really change the way the property market works, and in particular you'd change the way the rental market works and people's preparedness to invest in the creation of second properties that other people rent and live in. So it's not our intention to do that.
In our system there are a number of tax breaks for the family mortgage, and that's appropriate because we do want to see people owning their own homes and I'm glad that, you know, with interest rates where they are now, I mean over the life of our Government, you know, your average mortgage is costing people $5,000 less a year than it used to. And that's good, that's a good measure for housing affordability, lower interest rates and consequently lower mortgage repayments. And we've also invested too on the side of creating more affordable rental properties because there's lots of people who would like to own, can't own and do need access to quality, low-rent properties. So that's the approach we've taken. We're not intending to change anything about negative gearing.
David Speers: Is there anything though, PM, that you'll offer before the election to try and tackle this issue of home ownership and affordability?
PM: I mean, our main setting has been if we can keep the, you know, strong economy, tight on the Government budget, you know, the budget AAA rated, all the ratings agencies tight on the Government budget, you give the Reserve Bank space to move on interest rates.
David Speers: So leave it in the Reserve Bank's hands?
PM: Well, on mortgage affordability and then there are things we can do for social housing, low-income housing and we've got a number of those policies. You know, they take a while to set up and to take effect. So it's not a question of short-term changes, it's a question of then being part of the backdrop as investors makes decisions.
David Speers: Can I just test who would like to see both sides of politics doing something a bit more on home affordability? Few hands there. All right. Yes, if you can deal with the banks is the challenge there. Okay, let's get our next question.
Neil:  Good evening Prime Minister, thanks very much for this opportunity.  My name is Neil, I work as a freelance consultant on technical side. What policies are being prepared to ensure food security for Australia? My concerns are that the Australian population already exceeds the limit proposed by Tim Flannery in his book 'The Future Eaters'. Other nations are buying Australian land for food production for their people. Foreigners cannot buy land in other countries such as Thailand and Japan and, frankly, I think the Foreign Investment Review Board should try a lot harder.
PM: Thank you for your question. I read that book a few years back too, 'The Future Eaters' and I remember all of the - it was the first time I'd really read anything about megafauna and what happened to megafauna in our country, so it was a good book. We're doing a commercial for Tim Flannery's books now, we should stop that but it was a good book.
On food security, look, I think I can be very reassuring about this because I actually think the facts are very reassuring. I mean, we are a nation that makes far more food than we need. We are a huge net exporter of food so we've got farmers who are incredibly productive, have found the way of being productive, even in what can be a, you know, harsh unpredictable land. We make a lot of food, we export a lot of food. We live in a region of the world that's got growing numbers of middle class consumers, you know, more than 3 billion people are going to be middle class and they'll want quality food like the food you and I eat and we get the opportunity to eat here in Australia. So a big export industry for us now and it will be bigger in the future.
In terms of foreign investment in land, yes, it is possible for people to invest in land. You know, they don't get to take the land away so we'll always be, you know, in control and in command of what happens on Australian soil. So I don't think we've got anything to fear there and when you actually look at the statistics as to how much foreign investment there's been in land, it is proportionately very small compared with Australian ownership which is overwhelming. So I don't think we have to worry there either. We do always check, you know, we have rules for foreign investment coming in. We have a national interest test for major foreign investments. It's applied rigorously. But our nation tends to be one that looks for investment, we want to grow. So investment's a good thing. Got to meet national interests tests, we make sure that it does, and I think the settings are right for the way in which we look at foreign investment. I think, you know, the other side of the coin here is if we tightened up, less foreign investment, it would actually mean less jobs, less growth in our economy and we don't want to end up there.
David Speers: Thanks Neil. Let's get to our next question if we can. 
George:  Thank you Prime Minister. George, I'm a retired teacher. I want to raise the superannuation debate. And as the senior Australian and I have a reasonable income from my superannuation but it's probably not enough to attract the new tax, but my question is I think it is unfair that I do not pay any tax on my 80,000 a year I draw which I would pay if I was still working.
PM: Right. 
David Speers: Someone wants to pay tax. 
George:  I'm a socialist at heart.
PM: Well, that's a very unusual question. I've done a lot of these forums and I'm not sure I've ever had anybody come to the microphone and volunteer to pay more tax. So I'll be able to remember this forum very clearly.
We - we're trying to get all these settings right for long-term sustainability because that's what superannuation was about. I mean, if you think way back when, before the Hawke and Keating Governments gave us universal superannuation, superannuation was something that, you know, white collar people got, public servants got, no-one else did and everybody else just retired on the age pension and that was the best people were going to look forward to for the rest of their lives, the age pension and anything they'd managed to put into the bank. We've changed all of that. You know, a Labor scheme, wouldn't be here if it wasn't for past Labor Governments, compulsory superannuation, people looking and the young people around this audience can look forward to retiring with a decent retirement income, and from the point of view of the nation it means that over time, whilst there will always be some Australians who need the age pension there will be less and less of a call from the public purse for the age pension, more people living on their super.
So, how do you get all of that right so that you're balancing the incentives to put money into super? We've worked hard to do that. It is very concessionally taxed when you're in the drawdown phase, when you're retired. I think, you know, we looked at this long and hard. We think we've got the cut-off points right and you are below those cut-off points. So we didn't want to dissuade people from putting money away because they thought they were going to hit a big tax bill in retirement, so we haven't done that.
One thing I'm particularly passionate about is we are boosting up the super of people who have got low incomes because they'll retire on less. They're often women who have taken some time off to have kids and have go back into the workforce part-time. This is contested politics. We want to make sure that there is a continuation of that low income superannuation contribution so that's something that people can think about, but I do want to bolster at the lower end and we've only put taxes on at what is the upper end and you're obviously below that.
David Speers: PM, one of the big complaints is often to both sides of politics, stop tinkering with super. Are you able to give any sort of assurance guarantee that you'll leave these changes now and the super system untouched?
PM: Well we did at the same time that we announced these changes, said we want stability in the system, and we've all - you know, putting in a set of advisors who would, you know, publicly advise on any future changes. I agree this is an area that needs longer-term policy settings because, you know, there are people in this audience who won't retire for 35, you know, maybe 40 years, so with the maximum stability we've got to let them know what the system's going to offer them right at that time in life.
David Speers: Even if George wants to pay more tax. Thanks for that question. Let's get our next one.
Jarrad:  Hello Prime Minister, my name's Jarrad, I'm a landscape architect. My question is in relation to same sex partnerships. I think that the parliament has failed in its duties to provide order to the GBLTI community because it's once again not passed any kinds of civil relationship recognition. And I think that having a conscience vote, if Tony Abbott isn't going to allow it, is just a political connivance. I was wondering, could the Labor Party possibly go ahead to the next election with not only a vote on civil unions but also civil marriages? In that way, same sex relationships will at least have something at the end of next political term.
PM: Okay, well, what we have done and then what else you're asking us to do, what we have done, and I'm glad we've done it, is we've across, you know, dozens and dozens and dozens of federal laws, we've equalised treatment for same sex couples. So, you know, there was equal treatment between married couples and de facto, heterosexual couples, we've extended that so there's equal treatment for same sex couples. So that's things likes social security, superannuation, immigration rules, all the rest of it, we've equalised treatment. So that has been a big thing to do. My recollection is it was more than 90 laws that's needed changing so that's been achieved.
We've had the vote on changing the Marriage Act to enable same sex marriage. We had a conscience vote. The other side of politics didn't and there wasn't the majority to change the laws.
In terms of what should happen next, I mean, I think this is something that, you know, as a community people might want to put different views but my understanding is that overwhelmingly people are now not asking for a civil union structure, they are asking for a change to the marriage laws and I don't think that people would be satisfied on that side of the debate with anything less than a change to the marriage laws. At the same time, a number of states have got civil union laws so that same sex couples can have recognition under those state laws. So I think we're in a world now, frankly, where the change federally that people will want contemplated, and contemplated again given it failed in this Parliament, is a change to the Marriage Act. 
Jarrad:  Yes. 
David Speers: I think that's what Jarrad wants. Thank you very much for that question. Let's get our next question. 
Donna:  Hi, Prime Minister Gillard. My name's Donna and I'm a film maker. I've always voted for the Labor Party as it has best represented my ideals. However, the current position on live exports of animals has me deeply concerned. As our awareness of cruel practises within this and related industries become increasingly highlighted, the pragmatic motive of job preservation becomes severely challenged. Are you and your Government putting pragmatism above important human values?
PM: Thank you for your question and I'm very much exposed to this perspective on the debate. You'd find some friends in my family who put this perspective. What we've tried to do is get a balance right and sometimes when you look to get a balance right in a difficult area there are lots of people on both sides of the debate who aren't happy with you but that's what we've sought to do.
Where this sort of started we had the - got the live animal export trade, cattle and sheep. I think the explosion into public consciousness was around that 'Four Corners' report which showed dreadful acts of animal cruelty. I was actually in and around the Northern Territory not long after that report and spoke to some of the people who raise animals for live animal export and they had tears in their eyes. I mean, they had watched this footage and they're in the trade and they don't want to see animals treated like that. So, you know, I just think we be get a bit black and white on the stereotypes and who thinks what about animal welfare and animal cruelty, but I did see, your know, tough looking men with tears in their eyes because of that footage.
What we then sought to do, we put the ban in place and that was very controversial - very controversial. We put it in place to say we'll have this trade but we'll have it when we can monitor animal welfare conditions once animals are exported and so that's what we're doing now. Now, there are some people who say well, you shouldn't have stopped the trade at all and it all could have fixed itself and you cost people money. There are other people who say it hasn't gone far enough and you should stop the trade. I think where we've got the balance the balance is right, there will be the trade, there will be the jobs that come from the trade, there will be the exports, but there will also be the tracking and tracing so we know how animals are being treated and we can monitor the standards that are being applied.
David Speers: Thanks Donna. Let's get our next question.
Jodie:  Good evening Prime Minister, it's an honour to spend this evening with you, despite the fact you go for the Western Bulldogs, sorry. I have two questions that hopefully are closely linked and around tax...
David Speers: Just get your name, sorry? 
Jodie:  I beg your pardon, I'm Jodie and I'm a primary teacher by qualification but currently a full-time foster carer. I'm aware that faith-based organisations provide numerous services around the areas of emergency relief and welfare. These organisations rely on the current tax structure to - in order to remain financially viable. Have you any plans to change the current taxation arrangements within the next 12 months?
PM: There's been a - there are changes but they're changes we've worked with charities and churches on, and I'd have to say Jodie if you want to follow this in real, real detail I'm going to have to get your address and get some more detail.
Jodie:  Sure.
PM: What we've tried to do is - there's this part of the Tax Act that's called the deductible gift register. So when churches and charities say "If you give us some money you'll get a tax deduction" they are the ones who are under that register.
Jodie: Yes.
PM: There's been some questions about how it works and how fair it is and how we can deal with it in a more rational way because there's some organisations I think we'd all say gee, they should be tax deductible and they're not. So there's been a long process to lead to some new rules. David Bradbury, our Assistant Treasurer has worked on this. I know at one point, to be frank, there were some concerns from some churches and charities about where it was going but I'm pretty confident in saying we've worked to address those concerns and we can get you full details of that.
Jodie:  Fantastic...
David Speers: Actually Jodie, would you mind giving us a bit of detail on the concern that you have. Is there a practical charity you're talking about, some... 
Jodie:  Well, I do a lot of work - I'm involved obviously as a foster carer but also attending a local church and we do a lot of welfare work. And our concern as a - as the welfare arm of that church is our ability to serve really needy members of the community.
David Speers: And you're not getting the tax deductible status? 
Jodie:  We've currently got tax deductible status, but there's been some discussion around ministers of religion and that tax exemption no longer applying to them. So the concern is around in terms of how smaller churches would be able to continue providing welfare to their local area if that tax exemption is removed from recognised ministers of religion. 
David Speers: Okay, that's been looked at by the sounds of...
Jodie:  And so the other really boring tax question is - this is more a personal one. As a foster carer I've been caring for eight years and I've in that time missed out on superannuation and all the perks that go with being lucky enough to live and work in Australia. My question is at a federal level. Is there any discussion about the possibility of foster caring being, I guess, viewed as a profession with formal qualifications which would not only potentially attract more carers but also quality carers that have been appropriately skilled and resourced, so that we could actually receive all of the perks that go with being an employee, per se, in Australia? Because right now I get - I'm on a pension and I don't receive anything other than reimbursements.
PM: So you've been a foster carer for eight years? 
Jodie:  That's correct, yeah.
PM: And how many kids would you have looked after in that time? 
Jodie:  Prime Minister, of the top of my - I think I'm at 45. But they are beautiful, beautiful kids.
PM: Well done to you.
David Speers: Good on you Jodie.
Jodie:  Thank you so much. 
PM: Well, that's - well, I think the spontaneous applause says it all. That's an amazing contribution to our nation, so thank you for doing it. The truth is that's a new one on me. So that's two things that this forum, someone wanting to pay more tax and... 
Jodie:  And I want superannuation.
PM: Yeah, that's right Jodie. We're going to have to take your idea away and have a look at it. So I don't know the answer. 
Jodie:  Okay.
PM: And I'm not aware that there's any sort of plans in progress but you make a really legitimate point. So let's follow up with some details because that's - it is - I mean, I obviously know about foster care and I know how much people do, but in terms of us extending superannuation or anything like that, that's a new take on it...
Jodie: Sure.
PM: ...and I'm happy to take it away and think about it, and respond to you.
Jodie:  I really appreciate that because they have done that over in Britain, they actually made it a profession so carers must attend university and cover trauma training and things like that that would appropriately skill them to work with these kids that are so vulnerable and so needy and they do require very complex levels of care. But I'd love some super. 
PM: Fair enough too.
Jodie:  Thank you so much for your time.
PM: Thank you.
David Speers: Well done Jodie, thanks so much for that. Let's see if you can top that.
Michael:  Good evening Prime Minister, my name's Michael, I'm a student and thank you for this opportunity. So Prime Minister, as the leader of a political party that purportedly stands for a stronger, smarter and fairer Australia could you explain to me why your Government is seeking to fund its education reforms by cutting university funding rather than putting an end to mandatory detention of asylum seekers, a regime that is expected to cost taxpayers $2 billion over the next four years? Specifically, how does cutting education to fund education promote a smarter Australia? And how does locking up desperate people who have committed no crime for an indeterminate amount of time promote a fairer Australia?
PM: Okay, thank you. I can see you've been out there on the web site reading some of the stuff so that's good, that's a credit to you.
The issue about university and university funding we talked a bit about before. And so I can assure you, you know, every university in the country is going to get more money next year than it's getting this university year, more money the year after than it's getting in 2014. What's going to happen is the rate of growth is going to be slightly slower against a 50% increase. So you might think we still made the wrong decision but that's the decision we've made and I'm comfortable with it.
Michael:  So with respect, Prime Minister, the vice-chancellor at Monash University has suggested that this is the biggest cut to university funding since 1996.
PM: Well, I know that there have been emails sent out and where - and look, I know that was reported in the paper and I think maybe you've also got one from Minister Emerson explaining all of this. So look, it - we've made a change to university funding and if the vice-chancellor was going "I was going to get more money next year and now I'm not going to get all of the money I was expecting". If I was the vice-chancellor there, I would be complaining about it too. But if you put yourself in, you know, my shoes, got to make decisions for the nation, universities need money, I want them to have more money, they will have more money, we've given them a lot more money. They need students too and for the future we've got to make sure that, you know, students in the poorest homes, poorest schools are actually getting a great chance to go to university and, you know, that I think is just a foundation stone of us being a fairer country and that's what I'm very focussed on. So we may have to degree to differ on that.
On mandatory detention, asylum seeker, refugee policy, it's in - it's hugely complicated. Reasonable people will take different perspectives on it. My perspective is that we as a nation, number one, have to do everything we can to deter people from getting on boats. People lose their lives that way. People lose their lives in the hundreds that way. We've seen it happen. And people have given money to, you know, transnational criminals to people smugglers and I don't want people who are trying to profit out of other people's misery getting money.
So, how do we get there? Well we got guided by the best of opinion, former Chief of the Defence Force Angus Houston, a wonderful man, a foreign policy expert Michael L'Estrange, a refugee expert from here, from Melbourne, Paris Aristotle, and they came up with a program of action that said what we've got to do is make sure there aren't incentives to get on that boat. So, you know, if you stay where you are and get processed where you are you've got to the same chance of getting to Australia as if you got on the boat, and mandatory detention offshore processing is part of achieving that. I know a lot of people look at it and go, you know, "It makes me feel uncomfortable" but I think it is appropriate for us to do everything we can to stop people, you know, risking their lives getting on those boats and that's what we're endeavouring to do guided by this report.
David Speers: Prime Minister, let me ask you this: eight months since that report and as well intentioned it may have been, do you think offshore processing is working?
PM: I think we need to do everything that was recommended in that report and we haven't been able to because of the parliamentary gridlock. That's the unfortunate position that we find ourselves in. So, you know, I would hope in the lead-up to the next election, we don't have a simple, you know, sort of three-word slogan driven debate about this, it's a complex area. And like all transnational crimes it changes and it mutates. You know, way back when drug smugglers used to put drugs in, you know, briefcases or suitcases. Then they worked out they were going to get caught that way. So then they started getting drug mules to swallow the drugs because they thought that would be evading detection. In the same way a transnational crime like drug smuggling mutates, a transnational crime like people smuggling mutates, and we've all have got to be up to the minute with how to fight it. But I'm confident that the Houston report has given us the up-to-the-minute advice. We've got to get on and implement all of it.
David Speers: But the policy at the moment isn't working, is it? 
PM:
Well, but we haven't had the ability to put the full policy in place.
David Speers: Do you really think Malaysia would fix everything?
PM: I think Malaysia would make a big difference because it would then - you know, people would want to come here and end up somewhere else very quickly.
David Speers: Okay.
PM: And we are returning people, that's the other thing that does make a difference. So we've returned over a thousand to Sri Lanka. That's an important message too. 
David Speers: Michael, thanks for the question.
Michael:  Thank you Prime Minister.
PM: Chatting amongst ourselves.
David Speers: Let's get the next question.
Sharon:  Good evening Prime Minister, my name's Sharon, I'm currently a stay-at-home mum and I have two young girls in the public school system. I was wondering if you would be able to share with us a few improvements that Labor may be looking at improving to the public school system as it is today. 
PM: Thanks Sharon, and what ages are your girls?
Sharon:  Seven and five.
PM: Seven and five, so they've got a way to go in their schooling.
Well, to give you the story sort of quickly, what we did when we first came to office, I was Education Minister, is we made transparent what was happening in schools. That's what My School is about. First time ever that you can know, even a Federal Minister for Education could know what standards are being achieved in schools and what resources are going into that school. For all schools, public, Catholic, independent, we've never had that information before. Now you can of it the same way I can have it on My School.
Then we used that information to target a number of schools for national partnerships and in those schools we've proved that if you bring some more resources and you tie it to some new ways of working you'll lift the standards for those kids, and those new ways of working include empowering principals so that they get more of a say over what's happening in their school, boosting teacher quality so the teachers aren't just, you know, there's your class, do your best. They're supported every day in what is a really tough job.  Introducing into those schools the abilities to have specialists, maybe a literacy coach who can sit and watch the teacher's classroom practice and then give them real feedback: what you're doing well, what you need to work on. Maybe a librarian, maybe a language specialist or an extra maths teacher or someone who can really inspire in science, more resources to do those sorts of things. Then engaging parents in school because all of the evidence shows great schools have great school communities in there working with them alongside them. So they're kinds of the big reform directions: empowered principles, better teaching, access to specialists, community engaged, all of it transparent that we want to achieve through our new school funding reforms. So schools that have more resources and they'd have to have an improvement plan that brought these elements together and then everybody, not just me, but everybody here through My School would be able to hold the school to account for getting it done.
For the kids, what does it mean? Well hopefully where we get to is every child gets their own learning plan, and that sounds like jargon but what it basically means is that the child who's falling behind does get the reading recovery support they need and the child that's streaks ahead and bored gets the extra hard work that's going to keep them engaged. So it's not one size fits all. You sit at the back of the class not understanding what's going on and no-one comes and helps you. You sit at the front of the class bored because you've already done the assignment in 10 minutes when everybody else in the class is still struggling with it. That every child gets something that engages them and pushes them towards their full potential.
Sharon:  Thank you.
David Speers: Sharon, thank you. Let's get another question.
Graham:  Good evening Prime Minister. I'm a retired professional engineer and my name's Graham and I hope you don't think this is a set-up from the last question. I have five grandchildren and they attend a Catholic school, and I'd like to vote Labor if you can tell me why they'd be better off under Labor.
PM: Well, I happily can tell you that, so there we have it. What we're doing with these school funding reforms that we've just talked about with Sharon and that agenda for improvement, we're focussing on every school, public schools, Catholic schools, independent schools. We're creating a new school resource standard. So how much money, how many resources do you need in a school to get every child a great education in the school? To do that we know that there's an amount per student you need because we've worked this all through national partnerships schools, reference schools, which is what I talked to Sharon about as well. But we've also worked out it's not one size fits all. You need more money, a loading if kids are disadvantaged. You need more money, a loading if kids come from non-English speaking backgrounds. You need extra support if kids have got disabilities. You need extra support because it costs more to have schools in regional Australia. You need extra support if you're going to have a small school because there are fixed costs and there are less kids to absorb those fixed costs. So we want every school to have this school resource standard inclusive of the loadings that have been worked out for the kids in that school.
For Catholic education over the next six years, what that means is an extra $1.4 billion above what they get now in base funding, and it means around an extra billion dollars more in indexation. So a big increase in funding. Why is that fair? Because many Catholic schools have made it their mission to teach some very poor communities, or ordinary communities - I mean that in the nicest way - communities that don't have a lot of money. And so they should get federal support, they should get money to make sure their schools are coming up to the school resource standards, and under us they will.
Graham:  So you're basically saying that you're going to treat everyone the same. But except you're going to give the good ones more help and the bad ones more help as well.
PM: What I'm saying is every school would have - it's a six-year transition. Every school would end up with the amount of money in that school to get those kids a great education. For public schools that would be a mix of federal and state government money. For Catholic and independent schools that would be a mix of federal money, some state money and the money that you pay in fees. How would we work out the money you pay in fees, or your...
Graham:  Yeah.
PM: ...the parents of your children, so your son or daughter whoever it is.
Graham:  Trickle down.
PM: Yeah, that's right. How would we work out how much is fair? Well, the same way we do now. There would be a, you know, capacity to pay socio-economic loading the way there is now, socio-economic status. But, you know, because there are many schools I can tell you many schools in the Catholic system who are below the school resource standard they would look forward to more money. There are some schools that are above the school resource standard, not many but there are some. Those schools would get the same funding deal they would have had if we hadn't changed the system.
David Speers: Does that convince you Graham? You said you would be happy to vote Labor if you could be convinced on this?
Graham:  I'm sorry, I'm - I'll think about it.
David Speers: You'll digest that. Okay, fair enough Graham. Thanks so much. I think we've got time for one or two more questions. Let's try and squeeze them in. Thank you.
Kitty:  Good evening, Prime Minister. My name is Kitty. As most of us here are immigrants somehow to this nation, I'm glad to know that there are assistance to help those to enter the workforce. As you talk about tonight, about building skills, developing the future, there are significant number of Australians relying on associate benefits, for instance unemployment benefits and have been facing difficulties in getting the experience required to get jobs. So how are you going to provide opportunities to those that are unemployed and living on the benefits to breach the skill gap to gain employment?
PM: Okay, thanks Kitty, that's a really good question. I mean to - we do have people who are unemployed. By the standards of the world given all the economic turmoil there's been after the global financial crisis we've got a low unemployment rate compared to the US or countries in Europe. But there are still people who are unemployed, they want work, they don't have work and so we've got to be thinking how can we help them. The work we do is directed at trying to help people get job opportunities. So got to keep the economy growing, creating new jobs and then we've got to focus on people's skills and we've got a range of programs through our employment services to help support people to get the skills they need to get into work. Now, for some people that's a shorter journey. For some people it's a much longer journey. I mean, there are some people obviously who need assistance with English language or they went to school in Australia, they're English language speakers but their school failed them, they failed at school, they never learned to read or write or do maths. So you know, most of the jobs today people have to be literate and numerate. For some it's about getting them an apprenticeship opportunity. For some it's about supporting them with a university place. There are a range of programs to try and help people get the skills they need to get work-ready, good qualifications that can get them a job. So there's no just one quick answer that I can give you that, you know, it's tick this box. It's customised for the individual through employment services.
David Speers: Is the level of Newstart Allowance fair?
PM: I think it's incredibly tough for people on Newstart. I'm not going to try and pretend anything else, yes, it's really tough. But, you know, Newstart is there. It's not a - not a lifetime payment. It's there to tide people through until they get back to work and so, you know, there's a choice to be made about how much you invest in the payment, how much you invest in creating the work opportunities. They're never easy decisions.
David Speers: Kitty, thanks so much. I think we've got one more question, our last question. Thank you madam.
Valentina:  Good evening, Prime Minister. Thank you for the opportunity. My name is Valentina and I'm a disability pensioner. My primary issue and concern is in the public health department in which I find there is a great shortfall. The primary care is relatively good around the nation. You can go to a doctor, bulk billing clinic and the services are readily accessed. But when it comes to continuing treatment you then are on a waiting list, sometimes months, sometimes even years, and going from personal experience I know how painful certain conditions can be, and it's very, very hard waiting for someone to offer you a bed or procedures to alleviate your condition. Now, as I said before, the primary area is very accessible and a lot of people that can well afford to pay do abuse it. I know from personal experience that they do abuse it, and perhaps if a fairer system was put in where everybody across the board paid a certain amount, like a levy or contribution, whatever you might choose to call it, whether then that better health care would be available to all Australians, hospitals would then be better staffed and you wouldn't have to wait so long on the public waiting list. Would Labor considering implementing such a procedure?
PM: Well, thanks for that question. When we look at our health care system, I mean, people do pay a levy. You pay your Medicare levy and then the, you know, the rest of health, because the Medicare levy doesn't pay for all of health, the rest of health is funded out of our taxation system. So company tax, capital gains tax but also our progressive personal income tax system with higher income earners paying more tax than lower income earners. And we've actually reduced the number of people paying tax, a million less pay tax now because we've made a system where you don't pay tax at all now unless you earn more than $18,200. So that's, you know, where the money comes from.
In terms of how it should go into the system, this is - this is a big values call and the way Labor has made it, and we made it when we created Medicare and we made it when we created the free public hospital system, is that the best thing is to have a universal system that everyone's in. Yes, some people go to private hospitals, have private health insurance, but a universal system that everyone's in, because that's the best way of making sure it's a high-quality system. I would fear that if we created a dual-track system, so they're the hospitals that the lower income people go to and over here are the hospitals that the middle and upper income people go to, that over time the hospitals the poorer people go to would end up being very, very second-class places. And if you look at some American TV, I think there's a reason for thinking you could end up there, I think that's in part where America's ended up with many of its health care debates. So Medicare's a universal system, anyone can get bulk billed if they go to a bulk billing professional. Anyone here could go to the hospital emergency department and get treated if there was something wrong with us.
What can we do to then increase the quality of the system and the number of beds and places? Well, it's about some more money and it's also about reform. We're putting in a lot more money, 900 million here in Victoria over the next four years extra money, so on top of the billions that already go in. And we're trying to use that money to leverage change through the state governments that manage the hospitals to reduce waiting lists and to reduce emergency waiting times. We've got more to do there because you haven't seen waiting lists go down in this state despite there being more money. So we're going to keep the pressure on so that people do see the benefits of those waiting lists reductions.
David Speers: Valentina, thank you very much for that.
Look, we are out of time for questions. The great thing about these forums is their unpredictability and we've certainly covered a wide range of topics tonight, from school funding to the NBN, food security and foster care as well. So well done to all of you and thank you so much for coming along and taking part in this.
Before you leave, don't forget your wristbands and your opportunity to vote on whether the Prime Minister has won you over. If you support PM yes, no, or still undecided, there are three boxes there, so don't forget to do that.
But before you leave, please would you thank Prime Minister Julia Gillard.


Melbourne
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's hard to think of a more timely or fitting conversation for the Australian Davos Connection than a conversation about China, so I'm glad of the opportunity tonight presents.
You're all familiar with the expression “punching above our weight”  -  that word-picture for Australia's ability to make the most of our relationships on the world stage.
It's an expression which nicely captures an important aspect of Australia's diplomatic history and strategic culture.
In this sense it's not surprising we persist with it and it's an expression I use myself from time to time.
At best it's an image of a feisty, activist polity, boxing smart, overachieving in global affairs; but we should never be misled into thinking of ourselves as outclassed in the world or hanging on for the final bell.
Because yes, in a sense we punch above our weight  -  but we must also recognise ours is a nation of genuine strategic and economic weight in our own right.
The facts speak for themselves.
We are a world leader and a success story in economic reform, sustained through rising living standards for all.
We've created almost nine hundred thousand jobs during the worst of global economic times.
We have the twelfth largest economy in the world today.
When we understand these facts of our strength, we can appreciate the opportunities of the coming years.
We can be a leading nation in the world  -  as you saw in our decisive election to the United Nations Security Council  -  as you will see again when we host the G20 in 2014.
We can successfully maintain an alliance with the United States and a partnership with China  -  as you saw in our recent diplomatic successes in Beijing.
This is the approach of my Government: to understand our national strengths and employ them in our national interests.
As you know, I've recently returned from my second visit to China as Prime Minister, where I led the most senior Australian political delegation ever to visit there.
We achieved significant results for Australia during this visit: for trade links and financial integration, for bilateral relations and regional security.
Most significant of all, the commitment to an annual leaders' dialogue between the Australian Prime Minister and the Chinese Premier, accompanied by an annual economic dialogue and an annual foreign and strategic dialogue, each at ministerial-level.
This is a landmark in Australia-China relations: a major foreign-policy achievement for our country with enormously significant results for our relationship with China and for our foreign policy overall.
The idea of a strategic partnership with China has long been discussed.
My own view was that this had to be connected to a new “architecture” for the relationship, in other words a formal program of regular bilateral meetings, if the true benefits were to be felt by both China and Australia.
The transition in Chinese leadership provided the key opportunity to get this done.
Our discussions with China began in earnest in April last year when I wrote to President Hu outlining a new proposal.
Foreign Minister Senator Carr took direct discussions to a new level during his first visit to China, in May.
Our conclusion when he returned was that the opening was clearly going to be there to get this done.
Two key decisions followed.
I asked the then-Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, now Defence Secretary Denis Richardson, to travel to Beijing as a special envoy to follow up the opening we saw at the leadership level with his official counterparts.
We also decided that I would travel to China this year, as soon as possible following the National People's Congress, to create the opportunity for a discussion with the incoming leadership.
The phone conversation I was able to have with new Premier Li following his assumption of office in March secured in-principle agreement that there be a program of bilateral meetings  -  and that we seek to make this an outcome of our meetings in April.
So the things we achieved in China weren't products of good timing or good chance: these were neither strokes of luck nor strokes of the pen.
Our patient pursuit of a key national objective over the past year meant that by the time we departed for the Bo'ao Forum, we knew it was likely we would have good news for Australia on our return.
Australia has fully earned the diplomatic successes of the past fortnight.
We should celebrate this  -  but we shouldn't be surprised by it.
In truth our success is the logical consequence of our position in the world and the work we have done to make the most of it.
This serves as a valuable example of the strengths of Australia's standing in the world  -  and perhaps it also offers a “counsel of moderation” to some currents of thinking and debate at home.
Just after the announcement of the leaders' dialogue, I was asked by one Australian what we brought to the table with China, aside from a “whole lot of iron ore”  -  a telling question and one representative of a strand of opinion at large.
Now, of course a rapidly urbanising nation like China finds mutual interests with a resource-rich country like Australia, so our mineral resources are important to China, that's self-evident.
Many countries have coal and iron ore though; we have more.
We have a rule of law and a growing economy and a track record for economic reform.
We are stable and reliable, we're a safe place to live and work.
We have systems in place to support a corruption-resistant business culture.
Our knowledge-based industries and skilled workforce add value like few in the world.
That is all important to China too.
What's more, the urbanisation being experienced by China isn't just an economic trend.
It's a vast, social transformation.
A nation building cities is also a nation living in cities.
This is another reason Australia is important to China.
China's big challenge in the years ahead will be to rebalance economic growth, to diversify its economy and deliver benefits to a burgeoning middle-class  -  so our skilled people and their expertise are important to China.
Australians bring advice and experience in urban planning and construction.
We are ready to meet the massive demand for skills in areas like water management and sanitation.
And we have public policy expertise in carbon market design, retirement income systems and the provision of health and welfare services.
We're unusually good at these things.
Our world-leading service industries are important to China.
If we just had iron ore and coal, China wouldn't be inviting our banks to trade on the mainland.
If it was all about minerals and gas, China wouldn't be pursuing the trading of our currency.
On April 10  -  the first day of direct currency trading  -  $250 million worth of trade was conducted.
Ten times the value of the indirect trade the day before.
Australia is a leading world economy  -  and we are a leading country in our region.
If it was all about raw materials, our Navy wouldn't be the first Western partner for live firing exercises with the PLA-Navy.
We wouldn't now be preparing for annual ministerial meetings on foreign and strategic issues  -  or for strategic policy exchanges.
Just as Australia has a diverse and resilient economy with a strong future beyond the peak of the mining investment boom  -  so our relationship with China is broader than our resource trade and our importance to China is not simply that of an energy supplier.
Knowing that China is Australia's largest trading partner is an important part of understanding Australia's future  -  that's true.
Knowing that Australia is China's seventh-largest trading partner is also a very important part of understanding Australia's place in the world.
So we are not, indeed we have never been, simply a quarry or a beach; ours is a diverse and sophisticated economy and a valued trading partner with the biggest global economies.
Talking ourselves down doesn't help us achieve our goals and it isn't well grounded in the facts either.
Neither is our nation presented by insoluble strategic challenges or problems we don't understand and can't confront.
Quite the contrary.
We have a strong alliance with the United States and we advocate clearly and in measured terms for the contribution our alliance makes to strategic stability and growing prosperity for every country in Asia.
We have just agreed to a level of dialogue with China enjoyed by a handful of nations: China has just four other such annual bilateral dialogues and we have only a few relationships involving this degree of engagement and commitment.
We actively shape our destiny  -  we do not allow circumstances to dictate our national course.
False modesty at this moment would be just as great a risk as complacency.
Our children would thank us for neither.
What they will thank us for is the self-confidence that allows us to be understand and act on our strengths.
Along with the enlightened knowledge that our present strength does not guarantee us strength in future: all it does is create an opportunity to make the most of this historic moment of change.
The Asian Century has begun.
The return of Asia to economic leadership in the world is the return of an enduring reality in global affairs.
For most of human history, a nation's economic strength essentially reflected its population size.
The nations with the largest populations were the nations with the biggest economies.
The Industrial Revolution changed all that.
For the past two centuries, a few European nations with relatively small populations could boast some of the world's largest economies.
Now, the balance is shifting back: a great renaissance is underway.
The centre of world economic power is shifting to Asia, to nations with immense and growing populations, like China and India.
Population size and economic strength are converging once again.
Measured by purchasing power parity, China is set to become the world's largest economy before 2020  -  perhaps as early as 2017.
India's economy is now larger than those of Japan, Germany, Russia.
Six of the nations in the top 10 for economy size are already in the top 10 for population size: China, India, the United States, Brazil, Russia and Japan.
Projections to 2050 show that more than half of the Top 20 economies by mid-century will also be in the Top 20 for population.
This fundamental realignment is inexorable  -  and it is a challenge to Australia.
Australia has been one of the great beneficiaries of the era that is ending, with our absolute economic size far outranking our relative population.
Yet it's equally obvious the change is a huge opportunity.
The rise of China and India is not only restoring the convergence of population size and economic strength  -  it is bringing the world's economic centre to our own region, our own time zone, or own doorstep.
The centre of gravity of the global economy is shifting in our direction for the first time in our economic history.
We can maintain our strength in this new era if we understand that advantage and if we seize it with wisdom and determination.
Predicting the future is always fraught with risk  -  but the greater risk is in failing to shape it.
This is why we must use the strength we have created to shape our future now, at home and abroad.
At home, above all, by properly resourcing all our teachers, classrooms and kids for generations to come.
We know that we cannot win the economic race if we are losing the education race.
So we must deliver a plan to lift standards, improve funding and engage the world.
Abroad, in all we do to make our nation one of the winners in the Asian Century.
Whether it's getting our banks on the ground in China.
Or opening the uranium trade with India.
Whether it's negotiating a comprehensive economic partnership with Indonesia.
Developing our agriculture and food manufacturing to meet the doubling of Asian demand by mid-century.
Or supporting the contribution the United States makes to the peace and stability of our region.
The specific achievements of our diplomacy in China are the working model for how we can deliver.
They also reflect the mood and temper with which we should approach the times.
The self-confidence to recognise our national strength today.
The wisdom to know this is not guaranteed in future.
The vision of what our nation can gain if we make the most of this moment.
The far-sighted plans and the detailed implementation to get it done.
Shaping our national future, not letting events shape us  -  strong in the world, strong for tomorrow  -  that's what my visit to China was all about.
That's what the Asian Century White Paper is all about.
All our efforts of the future should be devoted to seizing the opportunity while it lasts.
Thank you. 


Melbourne
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's hard to think of a more timely or fitting conversation for the Australian Davos Connection than a conversation about China, so I'm glad of the opportunity tonight presents.
You're all familiar with the expression “punching above our weight” – that word-picture for Australia's ability to make the most of our relationships on the world stage.
It's an expression which nicely captures an important aspect of Australia's diplomatic history and strategic culture.
In this sense it's not surprising we persist with it and it's an expression I use myself from time to time.
At best it's an image of a feisty, activist polity, boxing smart, overachieving in global affairs; but we should never be misled into thinking of ourselves as outclassed in the world or hanging on for the final bell.
Because yes, in a sense we punch above our weight – but we must also recognise ours is a nation of genuine strategic and economic weight in our own right.
The facts speak for themselves.
We are a world leader and a success story in economic reform, sustained through rising living standards for all.
We've created almost nine hundred thousand jobs during the worst of global economic times.
We have the twelfth largest economy in the world today.
When we understand these facts of our strength, we can appreciate the opportunities of the coming years.
We can be a leading nation in the world – as you saw in our decisive election to the United Nations Security Council – as you will see again when we host the G20 in 2014.
We can successfully maintain an alliance with the United States and a partnership with China – as you saw in our recent diplomatic successes in Beijing.
This is the approach of my Government: to understand our national strengths and employ them in our national interests.
As you know, I've recently returned from my second visit to China as Prime Minister, where I led the most senior Australian political delegation ever to visit there.
We achieved significant results for Australia during this visit: for trade links and financial integration, for bilateral relations and regional security.
Most significant of all, the commitment to an annual leaders' dialogue between the Australian Prime Minister and the Chinese Premier, accompanied by an annual economic dialogue and an annual foreign and strategic dialogue, each at ministerial-level.
This is a landmark in Australia-China relations: a major foreign-policy achievement for our country with enormously significant results for our relationship with China and for our foreign policy overall.
The idea of a strategic partnership with China has long been discussed.
My own view was that this had to be connected to a new “architecture” for the relationship, in other words a formal program of regular bilateral meetings, if the true benefits were to be felt by both China and Australia.
The transition in Chinese leadership provided the key opportunity to get this done.
Our discussions with China began in earnest in April last year when I wrote to President Hu outlining a new proposal.
Foreign Minister Senator Carr took direct discussions to a new level during his first visit to China, in May.
Our conclusion when he returned was that the opening was clearly going to be there to get this done.
Two key decisions followed.
I asked the then-Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, now Defence Secretary Denis Richardson, to travel to Beijing as a special envoy to follow up the opening we saw at the leadership level with his official counterparts.
We also decided that I would travel to China this year, as soon as possible following the National People's Congress, to create the opportunity for a discussion with the incoming leadership.
The phone conversation I was able to have with new Premier Li following his assumption of office in March secured in-principle agreement that there be a program of bilateral meetings – and that we seek to make this an outcome of our meetings in April.
So the things we achieved in China weren't products of good timing or good chance: these were neither strokes of luck nor strokes of the pen.
Our patient pursuit of a key national objective over the past year meant that by the time we departed for the Bo'ao Forum, we knew it was likely we would have good news for Australia on our return.
Australia has fully earned the diplomatic successes of the past fortnight.
We should celebrate this – but we shouldn't be surprised by it.
In truth our success is the logical consequence of our position in the world and the work we have done to make the most of it.
This serves as a valuable example of the strengths of Australia's standing in the world – and perhaps it also offers a “counsel of moderation” to some currents of thinking and debate at home.
Just after the announcement of the leaders' dialogue, I was asked by one Australian what we brought to the table with China, aside from a “whole lot of iron ore” – a telling question and one representative of a strand of opinion at large.
Now, of course a rapidly urbanising nation like China finds mutual interests with a resource-rich country like Australia, so our mineral resources are important to China, that's self-evident.
Many countries have coal and iron ore though; we have more.
We have a rule of law and a growing economy and a track record for economic reform.
We are stable and reliable, we're a safe place to live and work.
We have systems in place to support a corruption-resistant business culture.
Our knowledge-based industries and skilled workforce add value like few in the world.
That is all important to China too.
What's more, the urbanisation being experienced by China isn't just an economic trend. 
It's a vast, social transformation.
A nation building cities is also a nation living in cities.
This is another reason Australia is important to China.
China's big challenge in the years ahead will be to rebalance economic growth, to diversify its economy and deliver benefits to a burgeoning middle-class – so our skilled people and their expertise are important to China.
Australians bring advice and experience in urban planning and construction.
We are ready to meet the massive demand for skills in areas like water management and sanitation.
And we have public policy expertise in carbon market design, retirement income systems and the provision of health and welfare services.
We're unusually good at these things.
Our world-leading service industries are important to China.
If we just had iron ore and coal, China wouldn't be inviting our banks to trade on the mainland.
If it was all about minerals and gas, China wouldn't be pursuing the trading of our currency.
On April 10 – the first day of direct currency trading – $250 million worth of trade was conducted.
Ten times the value of the indirect trade the day before.
Australia is a leading world economy – and we are a leading country in our region.
If it was all about raw materials, our Navy wouldn't be the first Western partner for live firing exercises with the PLA-Navy.
We wouldn't now be preparing for annual ministerial meetings on foreign and strategic issues – or for strategic policy exchanges.
Just as Australia has a diverse and resilient economy with a strong future beyond the peak of the mining investment boom – so our relationship with China is broader than our resource trade and our importance to China is not simply that of an energy supplier.
Knowing that China is Australia's largest trading partner is an important part of understanding Australia's future – that's true.
Knowing that Australia is China's seventh-largest trading partner is also a very important part of understanding Australia's place in the world.
So we are not, indeed we have never been, simply a quarry or a beach; ours is a diverse and sophisticated economy and a valued trading partner with the biggest global economies.
Talking ourselves down doesn't help us achieve our goals and it isn't well grounded in the facts either.
Neither is our nation presented by insoluble strategic challenges or problems we don't understand and can't confront.
Quite the contrary.
We have a strong alliance with the United States and we advocate clearly and in measured terms for the contribution our alliance makes to strategic stability and growing prosperity for every country in Asia.
We have just agreed to a level of dialogue with China enjoyed by a handful of nations: China has just four other such annual bilateral dialogues and we have only a few relationships involving this degree of engagement and commitment.
We actively shape our destiny – we do not allow circumstances to dictate our national course.
False modesty at this moment would be just as great a risk as complacency.
Our children would thank us for neither.
What they will thank us for is the self-confidence that allows us to be understand and act on our strengths.
Along with the enlightened knowledge that our present strength does not guarantee us strength in future: all it does is create an opportunity to make the most of this historic moment of change.
The Asian Century has begun.
The return of Asia to economic leadership in the world is the return of an enduring reality in global affairs.
For most of human history, a nation's economic strength essentially reflected its population size.
The nations with the largest populations were the nations with the biggest economies.
The Industrial Revolution changed all that.
For the past two centuries, a few European nations with relatively small populations could boast some of the world's largest economies.
Now, the balance is shifting back: a great renaissance is underway.
The centre of world economic power is shifting to Asia, to nations with immense and growing populations, like China and India.
Population size and economic strength are converging once again.
Measured by purchasing power parity, China is set to become the world's largest economy before 2020 – perhaps as early as 2017.
India's economy is now larger than those of Japan, Germany, Russia.
Six of the nations in the top 10 for economy size are already in the top 10 for population size: China, India, the United States, Brazil, Russia and Japan.
Projections to 2050 show that more than half of the Top 20 economies by mid-century will also be in the Top 20 for population.
This fundamental realignment is inexorable – and it is a challenge to Australia.
Australia has been one of the great beneficiaries of the era that is ending, with our absolute economic size far outranking our relative population.
Yet it's equally obvious the change is a huge opportunity.
The rise of China and India is not only restoring the convergence of population size and economic strength – it is bringing the world's economic centre to our own region, our own time zone, or own doorstep.
The centre of gravity of the global economy is shifting in our direction for the first time in our economic history.
We can maintain our strength in this new era if we understand that advantage and if we seize it with wisdom and determination.
Predicting the future is always fraught with risk – but the greater risk is in failing to shape it.
This is why we must use the strength we have created to shape our future now, at home and abroad.
At home, above all, by properly resourcing all our teachers, classrooms and kids for generations to come.
We know that we cannot win the economic race if we are losing the education race.
So we must deliver a plan to lift standards, improve funding and engage the world.
Abroad, in all we do to make our nation one of the winners in the Asian Century.
Whether it's getting our banks on the ground in China.
Or opening the uranium trade with India.
Whether it's negotiating a comprehensive economic partnership with Indonesia.
Developing our agriculture and food manufacturing to meet the doubling of Asian demand by mid-century.
Or supporting the contribution the United States makes to the peace and stability of our region.
The specific achievements of our diplomacy in China are the working model for how we can deliver.
They also reflect the mood and temper with which we should approach the times.
The self-confidence to recognise our national strength today.
The wisdom to know this is not guaranteed in future.
The vision of what our nation can gain if we make the most of this moment.
The far-sighted plans and the detailed implementation to get it done.
Shaping our national future, not letting events shape us – strong in the world, strong for tomorrow – that's what my visit to China was all about.
That's what the Asian Century White Paper is all about.
All our efforts of the future should be devoted to seizing the opportunity while it lasts.
Thank you.


Sydney
The Australian and New South Wales Governments have today reached an historic agreement which will benefit over 1.1 million students across the state.
The Prime Minister and Premier of NSW today signed the National Education Reform Agreement, kicking off the biggest change to school education in Australia for 40 years.
It's an agreement that will drive long term improvements in NSW schools and a fairer approach to funding based on the needs of every student. 
Building on recent Federal and NSW reform directions, the agreement incorporates the National Plan for School Improvement. This will see the two governments work together to achieve:
·         Stronger requirements for entry to teaching courses and better induction and support for new teachers;
·         Higher teaching standards and annual teacher performance appraisals;
·         The Australian Curriculum from Foundation to Year 12 in full;
·         Publicly available school improvement plans and reports;
·         Empowered school leadership through greater local authority in staff selection and roles; 
·         School readiness assessments for students on entry to school;
·         A priority focus on reading instruction for students in kindergarten to Year 2; and
·         Greater provision of Asian languages across all year levels.
Both Governments will adopt consistent needs-based funding arrangements, with the Federal Government moving to legislate its funding commitments over coming weeks.
This will provide NSW schools with additional investment totalling around $5 billion over six years. Of this, the Federal Government will contribute 65 per cent ($3,270 billion) and the NSW Government 35 per cent ($1,761 billion).
On top of this, the Federal Government has committed to grow its school education spending by 4.7 per cent per year from 2014 into 2015 and throughout the agreement. In return, NSW has agreed to grow its own school budget by 3 per cent per year from 2016 onwards.
Both Governments have agreed a year-by-year transition that will see funding for NSW schools reach at least 95 per cent of the new Schooling Resource Standard in 2019 in a fair and consistent way.
The NSW Government runs the largest school system in the country. Today's announcement confirms that the National Plan for School Improvement, including new funding arrangements, can and should apply to all Australian students.
This agreement between the Federal and NSW Governments sets the benchmark for other states and will drive the reforms we need to see if Australia is to be in the top five in the world in reading, maths and science by 2025.
The Australian Government is determined to keep working closely with all remaining state and territories -  and with schools, parents and communities right across the nation  -  to see these reforms agreed by 30 June 2013.
This will give schools the certainty they need to plan for next year.
These reforms are in the interests of all Australian children, and they are in our national interest so we can take economic advantage of the opportunities of the Asian century.


Sydney
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
I am here to sign the London Declaration on Combating Anti- Semitism.  And this is why:
A synagogue vandalised in Brussels.
An explosive device detonated at a Jewish community building in Sweden.
A rabbi attacked in Berlin.
Jewish graves desecrated in Prague.
Four Jews shot and killed at a Jewish school in France.
And even in my home city of Melbourne, graffiti was sprayed painted in a shopping centre saying: “The best Jew is a dead Jew”.
All these events  -  and hundreds more like them  -  occurred in just one year: 2012.
Friends, anti-Semitism did not end with the conclusion of the Second World War and the fall of Nazism.
It did not end with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
It did not end with the foundation of the State of Israel.
It pollutes our world right now.
In the face of Anti-Semitism, there can be no bystanders.
As citizens, as leaders and as nations, we must act.
History and justice demand it.
Do not ask who else should act.
It is us.
Do not ask when we should act.
It is now.
That is why since 2009, leading parliamentarians from around the world have signed the London Declaration on Combating Anti-Semitism. 
I am honoured today to be the first Australian parliamentarian to sign this historic document.
I am pleased to sign it in the presence of so many leaders of our Jewish community.
So many of whose families came to this land seeking shelter after the event that cries out to us decades after its horror.
The Holocaust did not begin during the dark days of war.
It began decades and centuries earlier  -  with the hatred, the blood libels, the pogroms and expulsions and, perhaps most significantly, the casual insults and violence that became part of everyday life and society.
The Holocaust began with words.
It culminated in the gas chambers.
It ended with the defeat of Nazi Germany and the liberation of the camps.
That is why through the London Declaration, we say with clear and loud voices.
Never again.
But friends, seven decades on from the war, combatting anti-Semitism is not just a matter of ensuring that we do not forget.
It is about comprehending its full and insidious horrors in the first instance.
And then keeping that knowledge alive.
That's why education is so crucial.
The content of the history we teach in our schools.
The tenor of our public discourse.
The laws by which we regulate our civil interactions.
The tenacity with which, as nations, we stand for what is right.
Friends, I am proud to lead a nation which has done so much to fight discrimination in its laws and in its practices.
Our Parliament debated and passed motions condemning anti-Semitism almost a decade ago.
Our anti-discrimination laws are robust.
Our courts have found that Holocaust denial and vilification of the Jewish people are illegal.
We co-sponsored the UN General Assembly Resolution 60/7, and the creation of the International Day of Commemoration in Memory of Victims of the Holocaust.
And we sponsor regular interfaith dialogue within our own region.
So our record is a good one.
But this Declaration reminds us that combatting anti-Semitism is an active process, not a passive one.
It demands vigilance.
It means remaining alert to new vehicles by which hatred and social poison can be spread, especially through the use of emerging media platforms.
It means exerting ourselves so that future generations understand the importance of civic values like respect and tolerance.
The London Declaration is, above all, a warning and a witness to those who hold offices of public trust.
In the 1930s, another generation of leaders failed the test.
We face the same test  -  and we must not fail it.
Every generation is tested  -  and they must not fail either.
So this statement is a solemn reminder of our responsibilities, and the role Parliaments can play.
A means of reminding ourselves that we too are writing history  -  in our own hands.
I am therefore very proud to be the first Member of the Parliament of Australia to sign the London Declaration.
I do so with great deliberation and profound personal commitment. 
And I trust that before long, the names of every Australian parliamentarian will appear alongside my own.


Sydney
PM: I'm very pleased to be here with Premier O'Farrell for an historic announcement. An historic announcement for the 1.1 million school children in New South Wales and all of the school children for generations and generations to come.
This is an historic announcement, not only for New South Wales education, but for Australian education.
I believe this will be remembered as the day our nation reached out to seize the opportunity of the biggest improvement agenda for our schools in 40 years.
This is an historic day for our nation because I believe, following in the footsteps of New South Wales, we will see more states and territories seriously consider standing for improved schools and improved school funding.
For me, this is the culmination of five years of work in government and a lifetime of passion for change in education beyond that.
What we've done over five years is we've made clear what's happening in Australian schools. We've made clear what we need to do to improve Australian schools.
We've worked out what it is we need to do to make sure that in our schools today people are getting ready for the high-skill, high-wage jobs of tomorrow.
And we topped all of that off by making a funding offer tied to a school improvement agenda.
It is the offer I outlined in recent weeks to provide $2 for every $1 that states and territories put in to improving education, so we can work towards a school resource standard for every school, knowing that every school is properly resourced, the teachers, the classrooms for kids not only today but for generations to come.
It was that offer that was discussed at the Council of Australian Governments meeting last Friday.
I will turn now to Premier O'Farrell to describe New South Wales' response to that offer.
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well, thank you, Prime Minister. We are delighted today to sign up to this agreement because it provides additional resources, fairer distribution, to deliver higher standards and better outcomes in schools across New South Wales.
The New South Wales Government has said since the Gonski Report was released that we supported the thrust of its recommendations.
That's why last May we changed our own resource allocation scheme to reflect the Gonski principles.
What we've done now though, is to prioritise education by ensuring that the $1.7 billion required of us under this deal can and will be found.
We know that the reforms the New South Wales Government has been pursuing; reforms around local schools and local decisions by school principals and school communities, our reforms around higher teacher standards, our reforms around improvements to literacy and numeracy result across New South Wales are in line with the Gonski Report.
This agreement, with the Federal Government, means additional resource will be able to assist to further those reforms and deliver the better education that every student in New South Wales deserves.
I'm pleased that New South Wales is the first state to sign up to this agreement.
This is the state where education started in Australia.
Importantly, this is the state in which public education was pioneered by a New South Wales premier.
This reform today has the potential to ensure that some of the debates of the past, debates about funding mixes, debates about system versus system are consigned to history and we continue to focus on what's most important in education, which is giving our young people the best possible start and opportunities in life.
PM: Thank you very much and can I thank the Premier for reaching this agreement.
What this agreement represents is a practical approach being taken by the Federal Government to work with the New South Wales Government.
What this agreement sees is 3 per cent indexation from the New South Wales Government from 2016. And what this agreement would achieve is us reaching a 95 per cent of the school resource standard by the end of the transition period in 2019; so within striking distance of the full school resource standard.
What this agreement means is that $5 billion of extra money will flow to New South Wales schools, and on top of that there will be better indexation arrangements than there would have been if this agreement had not been struck.
I am particularly excited about the really defined improvement measures that this agreement will bring in New South Wales.
I've consistently said that what we've learned over five years is that if you tie new resources to better ways of working, then you lift the outcomes for every Australian child.
The agreement that we've reached today will see some very clear things change in New South Wales schools, and they will be things that people will be able to see in operation.
To take just some examples, under this agreement you will see the best teachers rewarded for staying in classrooms, not going off into management or administration to get a pay increase, but being able to be paid more than $100,000 a year to stay in the classroom where they are doing the most important work that our country needs done.
What you will see under this agreement is meaningful annual performance appraisals of teachers, not tick-a-box, not tick-and-flick, but actual work observing classroom practice and working out year after year after year how teachers can improve.
What you will see under this agreement is if a school is falling behind and other schools teaching similar kids are doing better, then instead of that school being left to languish it will be lifted up to the same levels of improvement as other schools, so no child will be left behind and no school will be left behind.
What you will see under this agreement is the spread of Asian language teaching, so important to make sure we seize the opportunities of this age of the Asian Century of growth and change that we live in.
And what you will see under this agreement too, will be more empowered principals and parents getting more of a say in the running of their local school, including parents being able to participate in selection committees for key positions in schools including the position of principal.
A real agenda for change and improvement for every child in New South Wales.
This has always been about making sure every child can reach their full potential and no child gets left behind, and that we get school resourcing right in our classrooms with teachers, with kids, for years and years to come.
That we end the kind of inter-sector dialogue that we've seen where Catholic schools and independent schools and state schools have been there trying to have to contest with each other over limited school resources.
Now, can I conclude by saying the New South Wales Government runs the biggest school system in the country. Premier O'Farrell has just described how historic a school system it is.
And what Premier O'Farrell's agreement today demonstrates is that this deal is in the best interests of New South Wales and it's also setting a benchmark for other states to meet.
I'm determined that we see this kind of agreement right around the country.
So I will keep working with First Ministers and with schools and parents and communities right around the country to secure more of these arrangements for change and improvement over the weeks to 30 June.
All of this means Australians have got a clear choice; a choice between ensuring that we properly fund and work for improvement in our schools, or a choice to see schools go backwards with cuts to funding.
Our nation's future will be strengthened if we make sure every school is strengthened for the future.
And I'm certainly very pleased that this agreement in New South Wales today will strengthen education in this great state.
JOURNALIST: Premier, how do you think Tony Abbott will take your decision?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well, I watched interviews with the Opposition Leader on Sunday.
He made clear whether in relation to GST distributions or other issues that a state premier's principal responsibility is to their citizens.
I'm the Premier of New South Wales. I've said throughout this debate that if the proposal was in the best interests of New South Wales, if we could find the funding, that we would sign up to a report that for more than a year the Education Minister and I have said is broadly in line with the directions of the reforms we've been introducing in education in New South Wales.
JOURNALIST: It is a matter of locking it in before perhaps there is an Abbott Government?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well, certainly part of the deal which the Prime Minister offered Sunday week ago talks about legislating for the funding package, also that the funding will appear in the next Commonwealth budget.
But can I answer your real question, Andrew, and that is that we in Cabinet yesterday decided that we would fund our $1.7 billion by the deferral of the intergovernmental agreement business taxes. By the introduction in 2015/2016 of a new efficiency dividend, and by further budget savings across the whole of government but also including a continuation of our reforms to vocational education and training, including the levels of fees and subsidies that are paid which of course is at the present time subject to an IPART report.
That's the way that we've been able to prioritise education, by delivering our $1.7 billion, and getting a return as the Prime Minister said of $2 for every $1.
I don't believe that additional dollars alone delivers a better education system.
What I do believe is the resources to cement the sorts of reforms that we've been pursuing in New South Wales  -  reforms that are reflected in the Gonski Report  -  will help to empower local schools, will lift the standards of teachers across the state and will ultimately deliver better outcomes and better results for our students.
JOURNALIST: Premier, do you believe that this will put pressure on your Liberal counterparts to reach a similar agreement?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: At COAG on Friday, only two jurisdictions, the Northern Territory and Western Australia, were positively opposed to the proposal.
Every other jurisdiction that I saw and heard on that day said they would do what New South Wales had been doing.
So last Monday, Monday week ago, Cabinet had a first look at what the cost to the state would be, had a first discussion around whether the entirety of Cabinet was happy to share the load, to prioritise the delivery of this agreement for New South Wales.
Over the week between last Monday and yesterday, led by the Treasurer and the Minister for Education, further work was done which was presented to me when I came back from the COAG meeting on Friday which led to Cabinet's decision yesterday to enter the agreement, but to do so by making the responsible but tough decisions to rein in expenditure in other areas.
JOURNALIST: Can you explain again just how you are planning to do that, it sounds like TAFE fees might go up?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well vocational education reforms are being pursued by the government and yes, IPART already is looking at issues around fees and subsidies and that will be part of the package.
But equally, there are a number of business taxes that under if intergovernmental were due to be abolished that will continue temporarily to assist us to fund this, in addition to the introduction of an efficiency dividend in the 2015-16 financial year and thereafter.
I'm happy to get you those figures, Andrew.
JOURNALIST: This would survive a change of government if it's embedded in legislation before 14 September?
PM: Well legislation can always be changed and there is a clear choice here.
I'm passionate about these reforms. It's taken us five years to get here, five years of hard work driven every day by a passion for making sure that every Australian child gets a great education.
It's a question now for Mr Abbott and the other side of politics to make their position clear.
But let's note that to date their position has been to say that the current system is not broken and it should continue.
What that means is a recipe for cutbacks in our schools. What this agreement means on average is an additional $4,300 per child, an additional $1.5 million per school.
What the approach of the current system would lead you to on average is a cutback of half a million per school, so the choice is pretty clear.
JOURNALIST: When will that money begin to flow?
PM: This is money that will flow for the school year next year; 2014.
PREMIER O'FARRELL:  And I have to say, to be perfectly frank and blunt that it wasn't an easy decision because a decision not to sign up to the agreement comes with a pretty big sting in the tail.
Not just termination of national partnership funds but also a reduction in the rate of increase in base funding for schools across New South Wales. So devil and a hard place.
Ultimately what Cabinet decided was to back in education, to take the tough but responsible decision to find the savings, to deliver those additional resources to deliver them more fairly, to raise standards and to aim to deliver better outcomes for students across the state.
JOURNALIST: You're characterising this as a carrot and stick approach by the Prime Minister.
PREMIER O'FARRELL: There's no secret in that. I don't think I'm making news here but it wasn't as if, Quentin, if we said we weren't going to sign we could simply sail along unaffected.
The national partnerships finishes and there would have been a penalty in relation to the rate of increase to funding to schools across the state.
JOURNALIST: Is this a special deal for New South Wales? [Inaudible]
PM: No, this is the same deal that is on the table for every other state and territory.
It's two for one; $2 from the Commonwealth, $1 from the state of territory.
It's the six year transition period, it's the commitment that there should be no more cuts to education, it's a commitment that jurisdictions should step up to a 3 per cent indexation rate; NSW will do that in 2016.
And it's a drive towards the school resource standard, and that school resource standard is about making sure that in every school there is the right level of resourcing to get the children in that school a great education, knowing as we do that it takes more resources to teach a disadvantaged child, an Indigenous child, a non-English speaking child, a child with a disability and it just costs more money to run schools that are small or in remote locations, so that's all factored into the standard and the model.
JOURNALIST: Now that you've got New South Wales signed up have you had any approaches from the other states in the meantime and are you expecting other states to fall in line?
PM: I'd have to go check my mobile phone to answer that question.
JOURNALIST: Premier, what do you say to businesses who for the sake of Gonski may not be getting the tax reform they wanted at the moment to pay for students who may be paying higher fees for the sake of Gonski?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Ultimately we had to make some tough decisions. So those tough decisions mean that we're prioritising school education, which ultimately is the way most of us end up in business, in other professions, or in training.
We need to ensure that our students get the best possible start to education, we need to end some of the conflicts that have affected government and non-government education in the past, and we need to deliver reforms that put principals and communities in greater control of our schools, that seek to raise teacher standards and that start to address some of those literacy and numeracy issues that have plagued this country for too long.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you, just on a different topic, the population is moving to 23 million estimated tonight. Is this time for more discussion about population, a target?
PM: As I understand it, we will see the 23rd million Australian sometime tonight, presumably a new baby born, number 23 million.
I think what this reinforces for all of us is by the standards of the world we are a relatively low population country. But we've got to 12th strongest economy in the world  -  now that's an achievement.
But it's an achievement that isn't guaranteed in the future, we've got to work for it. And a key way we've got to work for it is making sure that our children are getting the best education.
As part of this arrangement today, we have both endorsed the goal that I set for the nation's future that our schooling systems be in the top five in the world by 2025, which is a recognition you can't have a strong economy in the future with high-skill high-wage jobs unless you've got great schools.
And so that's a shared ambition from the agreement we're signing today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can we just ask you about some comments that you made last night.  [Inaudible] revenue coming in to the Federal Government will recover over I was just wondering if you had a time frame on when you think that's likely to happen, how it's going to happen and by how much?
PM: You'll see the budget updates when the budget is delivered.
JOURNALIST: Back on to Gonski, you said that New South Wales indexation doesn't start until 2016 and that by the end of the transition period they'll only by 95 per cent of the commitment. Can you please explain that a little bit further, and does this mean that New South Wales students won't get the full amount?
PM: No, New South Wales students will get the $5 billion amount. There's no doubt about that.
We were in discussions with New South Wales, we've been in discussions for some time so as we were generating the offers we were putting out we recognise that there's a real tightness on government budgets, it's true for us, it's true for New South Wales.
That means that everybody who is stepping up to wise investments like money into schools has to look at the rest of the budget and make savings.
So we knew that that was going to be a tough thing to do, we knew it was going to be a tough thing to do for New South Wales.
So what we wanted to see was at the end of the transition process schools were in striking distance of the school resource standard, that there wasn't much of a gap remaining and that's what we've achieved through this agreement.
JOURNALIST: Why haven't you gone to 100 per cent?
PM: It's a question of the money constraints, particularly money constraints in New South Wales and the sorts of choices that need to be made so that you can free up this amount of extra money for schools.
JOURNALIST: Will other states go to 100 per cent?
PM: It is possible that we can see some other jurisdictions get above the 95 per cent
but I want to assure you we've got the same deal out on the table for other states and for other territories, the architecture of the deal, the details of it are the same.
The two for one, it's the same school resource standard, it's the same drive to the school resource standard or within striking distance, it's the same ask in relation to indexation and no further cuts.
And importantly, it's the same drive for school improvement because that's what this is all about; the money working in our schools so every child reaches their full potential.
We've shown in some remarkable national partnership schools what you can achieve for kids if you get that precious combination of more money and better ways of working together and it's happening in the classroom.
The aim of this is to make sure that's happening in every classroom every day.
JOURNALIST: Premier, how would you describe the deal today to the 48,000 Koori students in New South Wales?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: In addition to the connected community schools that we're delivering, this for Indigenous students, this for students with special needs, is a boon because it means that the resources will be there across both sectors to ensure that those students get the same opportunities, the same choices in education that have been available to the rest of the community.
JOURNALIST: Perhaps a question for you and the Prime Minister: should Indigenous Australian history be the same importance as the ANZAC history and if so, why so?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: I think we can do both. No-one denies the fact that Anzac Day is the nation's most sacred day.
No-one denies the fact that Aboriginal Australians, Indigenous Australians have fought and died for this country.
But we can't ignore the fact either that 225 years ago before Europeans arrived here, this was a nation inhabited by our first citizens for tens of thousands of years.
We should be proud of both.
PM: And if I can make a comment about that, the new Australian history, the Australian curriculum appropriately deals with all of these issues. This debate has been started in recent days as a deliberate distraction from the agenda that we are talking about here.
And so I'd suggest that those who have raised this debate be asked, what is their response in detail to the historic agreement that we have announced today?
JOURNALIST: Premier, given you just outlaid $1.7 billion what do you think of the idea of giving up some of the grants commission funding to help out Western Australia?
PREMIER O'FARRELL: Well, that is an internal debate as I said, Mark, before you signed up and fronted up, Western Australia did vote no to their first Federation referendum and you do get the impression, particularly after COAG meetings that they regret that they ever voted yes.


Rockhampton
PM: I'm delighted to be here with my colleagues; Minister Albanese standing right here, CT  -  Chris Trevor, our candidate for Flynn, Peter Freeleagus who is our candidate for Capricornia, and Kirsten Livermore who is our Member for Capricornia, and we are here to make an important announcement about the Bruce Highway.
And that announcement is that we will be investing more than $4 billion in upgrading the Bruce Highway.
This comes on top of the $1.7 billion of investment we've already committed to this important road in Queensland.
Now local communities know the importance of this highway. They're the ones that are driving on it every day, with concerns about safety, concerns about travel time.
We understand those concerns and today we are responding.
We are standing here at the Yeppen crossing, just outside Rockhampton. And you can see around me the signs of work that are already in progress here.That's as a result of earlier commitments.
And I'm pleased to be able to announce for the people of Rockhampton and more broadly that today we will be adding to the work that is happening here with an up to $300 million commitment to raise the north bound lanes to create a 1.6 kilometre bridge.
That is going to mean that in times of heavy rain, when we've seen flooding in this region  -  and unfortunately it happens all too often  -  that with the extra height this will be more resilient in times of flood.
This makes a difference for the people of Rockhampton, but it makes a difference for people far further afield.
It makes a difference in Gracemere, it makes a difference for the people of Mount Morgan, for the people of Emerald, and the list goes on.
I'm very pleased to be able to point to this specific example of what will flow from the extra more than $4 billion that we are investing in the Bruce Highway.
But of course with an amount of money like that, there's more work happening than the work we're able to point to here, and I'll ask Minister Albanese to outline what will be happening up and down the highway as a result of this new investment.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Thanks Prime Minister. It is indeed a very proud day to be here for this very significant investment  -  the largest ever announcement regarding the Bruce Highway which is so important for regional Queensland.
As a result of this investment we will see further work up and down the highway.
We already today have more than 1,000 people on sites such as this one doing overtaking lanes, doing heavy vehicle rest stops, doing black spots programs, assisting with construction right up and down the highway.
As a result of this commitment there will be thousands of people gain employment fixing this highway, making it more productive and more safe, and that will be right up and down the coast.
Firstly in terms of Cairns we'll be able to upgrade the southern approach to Cairns  -  that's already begun.
But as a result of this, we'll have additional work on the southern access corridor, widening from four lanes to six, making a big difference in terms of Cairns.
In terms of further south, we have of course the work raising the southern approach to the Mulgrave River Bridge.
The Cardwell Range realignment is underway. As a result of this commitment we'll have Frances Creek and Cattle Creek will be able to have a higher level bridge with raised approaches.
Both north and south of Townsville the big issue has been access through bridges. And we will be able to fix not just there, but a range of other bridges including the Haughton River Bridge as well.
In addition to that, south of Home Hill, north of Ingham, we'll be able to have targeted works there in order to fix what has been a real black spot in terms of road safety.
Further south, work at Yellow Gin Creek, Sandy Gully and approaches, pavement widening from St Lawrence to Bowen.
Mackay importantly, we've funded the Mackay Ring Road study, as a result of this the planning work can occur and construction can commence on the Mackay Ring Road.
As a result of this, we also will be able to have a continuation of the upgrade of the southern approach to Mackay; that is occurring.
In addition to that, further south, we have work continuing including the Cooroy to Curra Section C and D. This follows the opening to Cooroy to Curra Section B last year.
As a result of that, that's a great example of the investment of this Government.
Promised, funded, built and opened during the period of the Federal Labor Government with Federal Government funding.
It's an example of what we've done in practice, the sort of work that you see around you here means we haven't just talked, we haven't just listened, we have acted.
And it has taken a Federal Labor Government to put in more than four times the funding in approximately the same period of time we're talking about that the Howard Government held office; 12 years, $1.3 billion.
As a result of our commitments today we're now up to $5.7 billion  -  including this $4.1 billion over a ten year period.
In addition to that on the Sunshine Coast, the Caloundra Road to Sunshine Motorway project will be able to be completed, and as a result of further  -  closer to Brisbane as well we have a range of works using smart infrastructure to make sure we get better use out of the existing infrastructure which is there.
We'll be sitting down; I'll be meeting with Minister Emerson this afternoon to discuss the precise timeframes for rolling out this package.
But what we will see as a result of this package is construction in the areas that have been identified as the most urgent and the biggest priority.
And here of course the bringing forward of $50 million into Nation Building 1 means that construction can commence on the Yeppen section for 2013, later this year.
There will also of course be works to the north of Rockhampton in terms of access as well.
But a comprehensive plan for the Bruce Highway that enables, because it's a ten year plan, it enables savings to occur because you can roll out the infrastructure in a targeted and orderly way.
And I certainly think this a great day for productivity up and down the Queensland coast, but most importantly this is a great day for road safety here in Queensland.
PM: Thank you very much to Minister Albanese for that description and I think you can see from that what a comprehensive plan this is.
A widening of the highway for the people of Cairns, better bridges for people in Townsville, a start on the Ring Road for the people of Mackay, the works here that we've described for Rockhampton, and then improvements too for the people of the Sunshine Coast.
This is an important announcement  -  a huge investment  -  for regional Queensland.
I'll turn now to Kirsten Livermore, the Member for Capricornia has been a long-time advocate for the work that we're not only seeing here today, but for the work that will follow.
KIRSTEN LIVERMORE: Thanks Prime Minister. It's great to be here today for this very important announcement with the Prime Minister Julia Gillard, and my colleague the Minister for Infrastructure Anthony Albanese.
And of course the two men who will be taking forward the fight for infrastructure in central Queensland; the candidate for Capricornia Peter Freeleagus and the candidate for Flynn, Chris Trevor.
We're here today because the Prime Minister and Anthony Albanese share my determination and have long shared my determination that we had to have a solution for this southern entrance to Rockhampton.
The Prime Minister was here during those floods of 2011 and she saw the scale of flooding that this community suffers in times of heavy rainfall when the Fitzroy breaks its banks.
And she saw what that means, the disruption that it can cause, to the entire central Queensland region, and indeed the entire coast of Queensland all the way north of Rockhampton.
So since then I've been working very hard and had fantastic support from both the Prime Minister and particularly from the Minister for Infrastructure Anthony Albanese to work towards a solution for this problem area in Rockhampton and this link to the rest of central Queensland.
So I'm thrilled to know that we can now take the next step forward.
People can already see the work that's happening here as a result of our 2010 election commitment when the money was brought forward to make the improvements for the link from Gracemere, but very importantly to lift this Yeppen Bridge.
People are now going to see this work continued right up until we have the full bridge out to the Mount Morgan crossing, and that raised Bruce Highway coming from the south.
So this is a huge improvement. It means such a lot for the businesses of this region and the people, because during the 2011 flood event we saw businesses really going to the wall because they were cut off from their customer and supplier links.
We saw people who were unable to get into their workplaces, they were cut off for many weeks by flood waters from their workplaces in Rockhampton and it caused great hardship to this community and was a great economic disruption.
So I'm really pleased that Minister Albanese and the Prime Minister have listened to all of those problems, have worked with me every step of the way together with Terry Hill who is our local manager of main roads here in central Queensland to come up with this solution today.
And I know that Peter Freeleagus and Chris Trevor will continue on as these works progress to make sure that they're meeting their targets and really delivering this solution to the people of central Queensland. Thank you.
PM: Thanks Kirsten and thank you for all your advocacy on behalf of the people here.
I'll turn now to our Labor candidate for Capricornia, Peter Freeleagus.
PETER FREELEAGUS: Thank you Julia, and Minister Albanese. What a great day for Capricornia.
Jobs  -  that's what Labor is all about  -  it's about jobs.
It is not Tony Abbott that's come here today to deliver one cent to Capricornia and to Flynn, and not to Queensland.
Queensland is on the cusp of what we know is great. It is always great. It is sunny one day, sunny the next in Queensland.
And especially it will be sunny in a couple of weeks' time when we win State of Origin.
But what a great day for jobs. Jobs, jobs, jobs, infrastructure, and that's what Labor does, and Labor does very well.
Tony Abbott will never come close enough to what Labor does; creates jobs. And I'm sure when the news gets out there to our communities in Flynn and Capricornia and for every other Labor electorate in this state, they'll be having a toast at the table tonight because they know that their jobs will be secure and infrastructure going well ahead for Labor and for the great state of Queensland. Thank you very much.
PM: And I'll invite now Chris Trevor, CT, our candidate for Flynn to make some comments.
CHRIS TREVOR: Thank you Prime Minister, and thank you Anthony for coming back to central Queensland.
My dad was a train driver all his life and I was just about to talk about him. Maybe that was a sign. Who knows?
Firstly what a fantastic announcement we have here today for the communities of both Flynn and Capricornia.
And could I also thank Kirsten for her hard work and effort in attaining not only this project, but 15 years of hard slog for the people of Capricornia.
I'm sure Peter will serve the electorate of Capricornia equally as well.
This is a great announcement for Flynn because it will serve the communities of Mount Morgan, Gracemere, Blackwater, Emerald, and the other agricultural and mining industries throughout the community of Flynn.
It is such a critical piece of infrastructure that has been waiting for many, many years for successive governments to deliver. And finally Federal Labor has delivered it.
And I am very proud to be part of Federal Labor and part of a team that is delivering this critical piece of infrastructure to the communities of both Flynn and Capricornia.
Now I want to tell you a little story about how important this announcement today is to me personally.
Nearly 38 years ago to this day, my father the late Foo Trevor, and myself, pushed a Datsun 1000 from the start of where this new project is going to begin to the end of where this project is going to end through floodwaters, knee-deep, to get me to grade eight at Rockhampton Grammar School.
So this is personally a great triumph in the sense that no longer will parents and children have to push their cars  -  more modern than our family car these days  -  through flood waters on the Yeppen flood plain.
So dad, it took us a little while, but we got there, and I'm sure he'll be very proud to see Federal Labor  -  a staunch Labor supporter  -  I'm sure he'll be very proud to see Federal Labor delivering this project to the communities of Flynn and Capricornia.
Thank you again Prime Minister, I know it's very hot today so I won't keep talking. But thank you so much for coming back to central Queensland. Thank you Anthony  -  you're almost a brother to me.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Almost a local!
CHRIS TREVOR: Almost a local. And we see each other very, very regularly. I know you nickname me the serial pest in Canberra because I was constantly at your doorstep, never giving up in my fight for delivery of projects for Flynn.
But I wear that badge with some honour, Anthony, and I'm glad that you had the goodwill to nickname me the serial pest of Canberra.
PM: We're happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: How much of the money will be allocated in the May budget?
PM: For all of this money, for the more than $4 billion, this is ten years of works. It is a lot of work.
What you'll see allocated in the May budget is we've had our Nation Building 1 plan. You will see the money allocated for our Nation Building 2 plan, and that money in the budget period which is four years will be drawn down from to fund the works that we're talking about.
I'll get Minister Albanese to say something about his vision for Nation Building 2.
MINISTER ALBANESE: The Nation Building 2 program will follow what has been the largest ever investment in road and rail projects under Nation Building 1 in Australia's history.
And what we'll be outlining in the budget with funding allocated against including against the Bruce Highway, will be the Nation Building 2 framework across the forward estimates
Some of that we'll be bringing forward like $50 million from Nation Building 2 will be brought forward into Nation Building 1 to make sure that this project can start construction this year.
What we've done is had an orderly way, I particularly pay tribute to Kirsten and before her CT for the work that they did.
Kirsten argued strongly, she is serial pest mark two, argued for the study to happen. We did the study, we've done the work, we've done the planning, so that's why construction can be brought forward.
So we'll be bringing forward into Nation Building 1, that will be there in the budget and Nation Building 2 will be there as well in terms of all of the out years.
You'll see the increased funding that is there in this program. The third tranche of it will of course be Nation Building 3 because this is a ten year program.
But you'll see the sort of work including in the budget the $395 million, for example, that I announced last December for Cooroy to Curra next section; 395 from us, 395 from the State Government; that will also be there in the budget.
So this is fully funded. This has been worked through. This is proper planning, the way that infrastructure should be delivered. And that's why we're in a position today to make such a far reaching practical plan that can run and can deliver in terms of better infrastructure and these upgrades on the Bruce right up and down the highway.
JOURNALIST: Will any other cuts be needed to pay for this?
MINISTER ALBANESE: This is a part of Nation Building 2 that we have made provision for in terms of the budget.
So you'll see on budget night this is proper infrastructure spending. It has been budgeted for. We've made provision for it in past budgets as well.
We have had a very orderly and structured approach towards infrastructure policy development, taking on board Infrastructure Australia, looking at cost benefit analysis, looking at what the national priorities are.
And there's no doubt that for Queensland  -  this Bruce Highway represents 7 per cent of the national road network but 17 per cent of the fatalities on the national network occur on the Bruce Highway.
That is a priority. That's something that this Government takes seriously in terms of road safety.
But on top of that, of course feeding into this community from the areas that were outlined by Peter, Blackall, the mining communities, agricultural communities, this is also a productivity highway, driving the national economy.
So it is very important for both the economy, nationally, but also for road safety.
JOURNALIST: How much money is being allocated to the Sunshine Coast, Sunshine highway in this package?
MINISTER ALBANESE: The Sunshine Coast you will see as a result of this above $1 billion of expenditure in terms of the Sunshine Coast sections, both in terms of the area around Caloundra and Caboolture but also in terms of the Cooroy to Curra sections that remain.
Well over $1 billion of investment stands in stark contrast to  -  $1.3 billion from the former government over 12 years in spite of the fact that they had a bloke as the Transport Minister who is the current leader of the National Party who said the section of highway in his own electorate was the worst section of highway in Australia.
Well he was the local member, he was the Transport Minister and not one cent was spent on that section of the highway.
It's taken a Federal Labor Government to deliver.
JOURNALIST: The Caboolture-Caloundra highway is two lanes either way, it's riddled with pot holes, it's deteriorating. Are there any plans to upgrade it to six lanes?
MINISTER ALBANESE: That is in terms of the process; we're going to be sitting down and going through all of the detail.
We've outlined a substantial program; $4.1 billion. I might also say that the State Government have got to stump up as well. They can't just talk. They've got to actually act and allocate funding.
They asked for from 2012-13 they asked for a ten year program. They ran on that. We're actually delivering it, not just driving up and down the highway having a look.
I've done that as well I might say without cameras. I've actually done that in terms of sections of the highway; gone and had a look myself.
And I know that this highway needs substantial upgrades, but we're actually delivering real money for real projects that will create real jobs and will make a real difference here in Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you think of France's decision to pass the gay marriage bill?
PM: Obviously, the people of France and its Parliament have made a decision. That's a matter for the people of France and that Parliament.
JOURNALIST: What do you think of Kirsten standing down, or standing aside?
PM: I've known for some period of time that Kirsten was going to move to the next stage of her life.
I had a delightful opportunity last night to attend a farewell with some of our party members where we got to reminisce on Kirsten's personal and political career.
We're good friends; I'm going to miss her. I think this community is going to miss her because she has been such a great advocate for this community.
But I know for Kirsten and her much-loved family, it is going to bring the next stage of their life for them and I know too, that Labor will be well represented here by Peter Freeleagus.
Can I just make some comments before we go about school funding and school improvement.
Yesterday I stood in New South Wales with the Premier of New South Wales, Premier O'Farrell, and announced an historic arrangement for the 1.1 million school children in New South Wales and the generations of school kids to come.
The New South Wales Government has agreed with me that we will work together to invest $5 billion more in New South Wales schools, and we will work to improve those schools.
More empowered principals, better paid high-performing teachers, parents with more say in their local school, the spread of Asian languages, and interventions if a school is falling behind because I don't want to see any child falling behind.
I don't want to see any child left behind. I want every child to reach his or her full potential.
And I don't want to see our nation left behind because we aren't ready to seize the jobs of the future, the high skill, high paid jobs, because our schooling system has fallen behind the standards of our region and the standards of the world.
Today I'm standing here in Queensland and my message to Premier Newman is a very clear one: don't leave Queensland kids behind.
Don't let Queensland kids fall behind what's happening in New South Wales.
Every child in Queensland should get the benefit of the new funds and new ways of working that we are promising.
Now Premier Newman has raised some objections to what I'm trying to achieve for Australian schools.
I understand the budget decisions are tough. We've needed to take budget decisions.
He has also raised some concerns about our National Plan for School Improvement.
But I would say with some passion to Premier Newman, Premier O'Farrell, a Liberal, has been able to sign on to this plan. I don't see why there's any impediment to Premier Newman doing the same.
And I would say too, across the country to other premiers and chief ministers, look to what has happened in New South Wales and please, do not put the children in your state in a position where they will be falling behind.
I would say too to the Federal Opposition that their plan for cuts of $5.4 billion to Australian schools on average - half a million dollars for every school  -  that their plans to cut half a million dollars out of every school is not the right thing for our children or our nation.
I would say to the Federal Opposition that its endorsement of plans that would leave kids languishing in underperforming schools is not good enough for those children and it's not good enough for our nation.
It means that we wouldn't be in the top performing systems in the world, and we wouldn't have the ability to strengthen our economy for the future and to get the high skill, high wage jobs of the future.
So I've got a lot of work to do persuading premiers and chief ministers to come on board and do the right thing for children.
The community has got a lot of work to do too persuading their premiers and chief ministers to follow the lead here that has been established in New South Wales.
I look forward to the weeks between now and 30 June where I'll not only be talking to premiers and chief ministers, but I'll be talking too to parents and communities around the nation about getting their children the best education.
Thanks very much. Thank you. 


Mackay
Landholders and farmers will be given assistance to reduce the run-off of damaging chemicals into the Great Barrier Reef, under a $200 million extension to the Reef Rescue program.
Starting in 2008, Reef Rescue has already stopped over 92,000 tonnes of nitrogen, phosphorus, and sediment and around 1,300 kilograms of pesticide from leaching into the Great Barrier Reef. That is the equivalent of around 1 million wheelbarrows.
Due to the program's success to-date, the Gillard Government today announced an additional $200 million in funding to ensure the extension of the Reef Rescue program until 2018.
Reef Rescue helps farmer's lift on-farm productivity. It also plays a crucial role protecting the Great Barrier Reef, with run-off from farms causing coral bleaching and algae growth and smothering seagrass and coral reefs.
The Great Barrier Reef is one of the world's greatest treasures and the Gillard Government is committed to its protection.
Reef Rescue is also a highly successful partnership between Government, farmers, indigenous owners and other land managers along the Queensland coast. Reducing their chemical and fertilizer use is good for farmers as well as being good for the reef.
Since 2008 more than 3,200 land managers from Cape York to Bundaberg have benefited from Reef Rescue and its associated grants and management tools.
Reef Rescue has been expanded to include improved management of wetland and riparian areas, as well as improving urban water runoff.
The program includes support for Research and Development and partnership funding for on-farm investments. Water Quality Grants are provided to farmers to improve the quality of the water running off their land and improve their land management practices.
Reef Rescue is driven by farmers. For every dollar the Government has invested in Reef Rescue farmers have contributed around $1.80. This demonstrates their commitment to Reef Rescue and protecting the Reef.
Reef Rescue's second phase will continue to support the development of new cutting-edge water quality technologies and fund the control of crown of thorns starfish.
Reef Rescue is being funded as part of the Gillard Government's $2 billion Caring for our Country natural resource management initiative, which supports volunteers, farmers and community groups to make a real difference to their local environment.
For more information on the Reef Rescue program or the Caring for our Country initiative, visit www.nrm.gov.au. 


Rockhampton
The Gillard Labor Government has reaffirmed its commitment to the Bruce Highway, today releasing a ten-year, $4.1 billion capital works program which will further improve safety, cut travel times, ease congestion and improve the road's flood immunity.
The package of works will also lower transport costs and boost national productivity.
We are determined to continue the work we began five years ago on building a Bruce Highway which supports Queensland's growth and development, with this latest announcement taking our total commitment to this vital economic lifeline to $5.7 billion.
Compared to the former Howard Government's record of $1.3 billion, we have committed more than four times as much over a similar period of time, and right now hundreds of workers are onsite upgrading 90 kilometres of the Highway.
Attached is a list of some of the major projects which will proceed as a result of our funding boost.
We have always said it would take time to put right more than a decade of neglect.
Accordingly, we have moved today to provide long term funding certainty for the Bruce Highway, including details of the next round of targeted improvements to be delivered in partnership with the Queensland Government on a timetable that will now be negotiated with them.
Federal Labor understands that infrastructure matters and when it comes to Queensland there is no more important piece of road infrastructure than the Bruce Highway. That's why we will continue our unprecedented investment in it.
A full list of what we have previously committed to is attached.
The Bruce Highway is Queensland's main north-south transport link extending a distance of 1,700 kilometres and connecting Brisbane to the state's major regional and coastal communities. Each day, this road is used by more than 500,000 motorists and truck drivers.


Mackay
PM: It's great to be here, thank you very much to Tony for having us on his property. I'm joined by Kirsten Livermore, the Member for Capricornia, Bronwyn Taha the Labor candidate for Dawson, and of course by Senator Joe Ludwig one of our Queensland Senators who is also the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
And we're standing here to make an important announcement about the future of Reef Rescue.
Since 2008, there has been a program called Reef Rescue which has been about protecting our Great Barrier Reef and increasing agricultural productivity. We've just been having a conversation about the difference that it has made.
I'm here today to announce that we will be investing $200 million into continuing Reef Rescue.
What that means is over the next five years we will be investing $200 million to protect the Great Barrier Reef and to increase agricultural productivity.
For those who care about our marine environment and the reef, this is great news. For our farmers who want to increase their productivity, this is great news too.
Already, what we've been able to achieve under this program is the equivalent of a million wheel barrows of stuff, of pollutants, not ending up in the Great Barrier Reef.
That's a great result all around. Great for the reef, great for agricultural productivity because it means that farmers are seeing less erosion, less movement of top soil, they are finding new ways of working so that they use less insecticide; new ways of working so that we increase agricultural productivity, and we've just been discussing that over here with the replanting of the cane that you see behind us.
So I'm very pleased to be here announcing this today. I want to pay tribute to the stakeholders who are gathered here.
They are the ones that locally work through on behalf of industry and with those groups who care so passionately about the future of the Barrier Reef to get us to this result.
Congratulations to you, thank you for all of your hard work.
If I could thank Kirsten Livermore too, who has been very directly involved in this process and if I can hand over now to the Minister who's worked long and hard to lead to today's announcement.
MINISTER LUDWIG: Thank you Prime Minister and thank you for being here in the sugar capital of Queensland, and in fact Australia.
It is good news for farmers, landholders, Indigenous owners of the land, the representative groups across the sugar industry and many other representative groups  -  AgForce  -  all of them find the good news announcement of the $200 million continuation of Reef Rescue.
Everywhere I go around Queensland they mention Reef Rescue, the need for Reef Rescue and the great thing it does.
It does two basic things. It allows farmers to lift productivity, and also ensure that our reef continues to be the Great Barrier Reef for Australia.
When I talk to farmers the Reef Rescue program, the phase one, 3,200 farmers have benefited from this program.
An enormous number of farmers out there are working for Australia, working to export into Asia  -  all of them doing their job but they also know they want to continue to have a great reef.
They also know that they are responsible landholders, they want to continue to be good environmentalists and this program allows them to do that work well.
And if you look at the catchment across Queensland, 25 per cent of the catchment across Queensland from Cape York all the way down to the Mary River flows out into the Barrier Reef lagoon.
So it's important that we do have the extension of this program. The $200 million from not only  -  I think the Prime Minister's mentioned my hard work, but truly Prime Minister tip my hat off to you though I'm not wearing one at the moment.
But it's been a great program and to see it continue, we've worked with environmental groups, Kirsten Livermore from Capricornia has worked with the WWF, the industry sugar bodies and of course all of those people have said we want to continue Reef Rescue for all of the good reasons that it's provided.
And we are here on Tony's property. Tony is a good example of just one of those 3,200 farmers who have contributed to having great environmental outcomes.
Those environmental outcomes mean that we have less sediment, we have less pesticides, we have less chemicals run-off into the reef.
All of that, if you look at the number of wheel barrows the Prime Minister has mentioned, to put it in context we're talking about around 92,000 tonne of material that would have otherwise flowed into the Barrier Reef lagoon.
So with those short words, I can't speak enough for the industry assistance, they have made representations about how good Reef Rescue is. But they have also, which is one of the real good facts in this story is, for every $1 of government funding the industry has put in on average $1.80.
So they recognise the benefits of being both good environmentalists and good landholders, good agriculturalists and supporting our country's export industries.
JOURNALIST: When will the money be available for farmers?
MINISTER LUDWIG: From 1 July it'll be available so the current program will expire on 1 July and we'll then run out for five years thereafter with the Reef Rescue program.
It will have a range of programs, it will look at water quality. It will look at how we can support the industry in looking at technology, looking at how we can improve less applications of pesticides, less applications of nitrogen or phosphorous fertilisers into the soil.
All of those then benefit the landowners as well by cutting their costs. That's why they've been so supportive of it.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any actual scientific evidence that the reef itself is benefitting from this program?
MINISTER LUDWIG: The Queensland Government through water quality program have been also contributing $35 million to, and working with, the Department of Sustainability to ensure that we do have the science to underpin this work.
That's part of the reason why Reef Rescue is so successful.
If you look at the UNESCO's report they mentioned two things. They mentioned firstly that we should continue to have Reef Rescue. Why? Because they see the benefit of it.
The second thing they mentioned which was they said we should continue to share our expertise around the world about how well we manage the Great Barrier Reef.
PM: And I think, just from a common sense perspective that if there's a million wheel barrows of things like soil and pesticides and chemicals that would have gone into the water, that didn't go into the water, that's got to be better.
JOURNALIST: How much of this money is new money?
PM: Right, well I'll turn to the Minister here.
MINISTER LUDWIG: It is all new money. And it is one where we  -  as responsible managers of the economy  -  we've made the saves and we've found the new money and put it there.
So from 1 July onwards for the five years going out we'll be able to continue to support this fantastic program.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can we just ask about the Ring Road announcement today. It's a very much long-awaited project for the city here and people are looking forward to that progressing. How is that progressing with your announcement today?
PM: Today we've announced an investment of over $4 billion in the Bruce Highway. That's a ten year program of works.
But included is finalising the all-important planning for the Ring Road, and starting the work that's needed for construction, starting the construction work.
So I know from the representations that Bronwyn our candidate has made that this is a huge issue here in Mackay.
It's something that Kirsten Livermore has raised with me frequently as well.
So I'm glad that we've been able to be here today and make this announcement  -  make it with Minister Albanese a little bit earlier this morning. And we're able to provide you with the details from there.
JOURNALIST: Because it has been three years since the Treasurer was in town to announce funding for a study but we haven't really seen much come of it since then. So what guarantee are you giving today that the people of Mackay will actually start seeing work and start seeing plans?
PM: I point to our track record. The people of Mackay have seen work as we've worked on the southern approach.
So people have seen us come and announce that work is to be done, and then they've seen the work start, and then they've seen the work move towards completion. That's what happens with big road projects.
So just like we've done in the past, promised change, delivered change, people can see the change, that is what will happen in the future.
JOURNALIST: Because it's $4 billion over ten year plan, with the election coming up how do you guarantee that work will all be carried out?
PM: Well I can only guarantee it under the Government I lead.
JOURNALIST: And with the acquisition of the land, do you anticipate that could raise some challenges for you? Because we're standing in a sugar cane farm, it's likely to eat into sugar cane land.
PM: Well this is why very detailed planning work has to be done, and that's why we are expediting the money for the planning.
Big road projects are necessarily complex things. I think people would understand that, that you need to plan properly, and we will be getting on with that planning work. So that will be the way in which those kinds of questions are answered.
JOURNALIST: As it is a ten year plan, can we expect to see funding allocated to projects in this region in the budget next month?
PM: Well we've just made this announcement, and made the announcement about expediting the planning work, and then moving through to commence construction.
JOURNALIST: A question back on the funding, this might be for you Minister Ludwig, it has been reported that some NRM groups have had to create commercial arms when they're struggling with money in between funding rounds. What's being done to address this?
MINISTER LUDWIG: Good news. Yesterday I announced a continuation of funding for NRM groups. They've been wanting to continue that funding, so yesterday I announced the continuation of the Natural Resource Management funding.
So it's well over $600 million for the next five years to give them that business certainty that they really asked for.
And so we've delivered on that. We delivered on that yesterday. Why? Because the NRMs play a valuable role in our community about ensuring that they protect our pristine environment, and they work  -  much of it volunteer work  -  they continue to do that in the field.
So the Gillard Government is supporting them in that work.
The other thing I just wanted to mention, there was an earlier report I noticed from the Leader of the Opposition Tony Abbott who indicated that it was really about the extension for staff that the Attorney-General has made recently.
I, as a previous Special Minister of State, should for the record really say that the previous time post the 2010 election, Mr Abbott as the Opposition Leader wrote to me and asked for an extension for a number of weeks to deal with this.
So I was quite surprised to see Mr Abbott really be a bit two-faced about this and complain about Mr Dreyfus doing the same to give staff certainty.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it has been a little while since we've seen you in Mackay, can we expect to see you a bit more with the coming election?
PM: Really it's just about managing time, and I think you would understand that as Prime Minister I've got weighty responsibilities and it takes a lot of time, it's a big country.
I do the best to get around to every corner of the country.
Physically you can't be everywhere every day and I do have deep responsibilities that mean I've got to be in Canberra, I've got to be in Parliament, I've got to be managing the nation's business, occasionally I've got to be overseas.
But managing all of that time load, then I do try and travel as much as possible.
So it's good to be here today, I'll look forward to coming again in the future. I've been here in the past.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


ABC AM
HOST: Prime Minister, good morning and welcome to AM.
PM: Thank you very much Sabra.
HOST: With New South Wales now signed up for Gonski, how realistic is it that all other state and territories will agree by the 30 June deadline?
PM: Well Sabra, in part you are going to have to put that question to other premiers and chief ministers.
But I certainly think that as a result of the announcement I made with Premier O'Farrell today people around the country will be looking to their premiers and chief ministers to also do the right thing by the children in their schools.
Premier O'Farrell has shown that it can be done. And I want to make sure that these benefits flow right around the country, that we're not leaving any child behind, and that every school is getting the resources it needs and improvement so that we get better outcomes for our kids.
HOST: To be realistic though, Western Australia and the Northern Territory have said that they cannot agree, and Barry O'Farrell says they're pretty vehement.
PM: Well Premier Barnett has said that he's still in the conversation, so that's good.
The Northern Territory  -  I'm certainly prepared to keep working with the new chief minister there.
HOST: Did you give New South Wales a concession here? That the state's contribution to indexation of 3 per cent will apply from 2016 and not 2014 as originally planned?
PM: This is the deal that was on the table on Friday. We understood that there were fiscal constraints, money constraints, that it's not easy in tight state government budgets to find more funding for schools.
It's not easy for us either in the federal budget because we take a very prudent approach to spending, and when we spend more we look for savings to match that spending.
And some of the savings to match this new spending on schools in the federal budget have been controversial, and we've been prepared to wear all of that to get more money into our kids' schools.
So we knew that there were some spending constraints around, and we said we wanted to see 3 per cent indexation. We were prepared to agree that that start in two years' time; two school years' time.
HOST: Queensland Premier Campbell Newman said to be riding you in weeks with conditions that will be “reasonable and sensible”. Will you do a deal  -  a conditional deal  -  for Queensland?
PM: Well I'll wait to see what Premier Newman writes. But let's be very frank here Sabra, a conservative premier has found what is on the table acceptable for the children in his schools.
Not only on the side of the money  -  the additional investment  -  but also on the new ways of working to improve our children's education.
So Premier O'Farrell has been able to endorse better empowering school principals, making sure that the best teachers are paid for staying in the classroom, endorsed the spread of Asian languages, endorsed parents having more of a role in the running of their schools.
Endorsed a plan which means that if schools are falling behind, and we know that they can do better because comparable schools are, then action is taken.
All of these reform initiatives were endorsed yesterday explicitly by Premier O'Farrell under the National Plan for School Improvement we put on the table.
So much of the collateral chat that there's been around that this is somehow a Federal Government takeover of schools  -  all that has fallen away now  -  clearly that cannot be the case; that collateral chat is all wrong otherwise Premier O'Farrell wouldn't have signed.
HOST: But the Gonski reforms do involve a big cost to other education sectors in the community. You're reducing university funding, and New South Wales is jacking up TAFE and vocational education fees. That's a very confusing message about education, isn't it?
PM: Well the budget decisions that Premier O'Farrell has made are matters for him, and you should direct questions on that to him.
For the federal budget where it's my responsibility  -  and I'm happy to be held to account for it  -  I have made the decision that in circumstances where we've increased university funding by more than 50 per cent, where we are not talking about a real cut in terms of less dollars flowing, but a moderation of the growth rate of funds into universities.
That it's an appropriate decision to moderate that growth rate, slow that growth rate and use the savings to give our children better schools.
HOST: On the substance of the question though, that is a very confusing message to send about education.
PM: Well I think it's a very straightforward message. We've got to be a Government that budgets responsibly.
That means in the times in which we live, new spending has to be matched by savings. I was very clear about that when I spoke at the Press Club last year about school reform.
I talked about new structural spending being matched by new structural savings. And what we've done is taken the hard decisions to free up money to improve our education for kids in school.
HOST: Well the National Disability Insurance Scheme is something else that you're trying to figure out how to pay for. Some figures, senior figures within the Government, believe an increase in the Medicare levy is the only way to pay for it. Is that under consideration?
PM: Look Sabra, we're in budget speculation season, and I know what happens in budget speculation season  -  you start taking the first few questions on budget speculation, and then it just goes on and on and on. So I'm not engaging in any speculation about anything-
HOST: Guaranteeing that it won't go on and on. Is that under consideration?
PM: I'm simply not playing the game.
HOST: You're in Rockhampton today to announce a billion dollar or multi-billion dollar plan to fix the Bruce Highway in the future. How can Australians believe a campaign built on promises for the future when past promises on the surplus, border protection and the mining tax have fallen well short?
PM: Well Sabra, let's go through it. We've made promises on road funding in the future and delivered them.
I'll go out today in Rockhampton and inspect some works that are being funded here which we promised and which we delivered.
We are promising today to invest a further $4 billion in the Bruce Highway. We've invested here before.
People have seen the benefits of those works and they will see the benefits of this new $4 billion investment which makes such a difference to a range of Queensland communities that rely on the Bruce Highway.
On things like the MRRT, yes, profits-based tax, absolutely, and so it was always going to move up and down depending on the profitability of the resources sector.
On border protection we accepted expert advice. We can't implement all of it because Mr Abbott, with his usual negativity, is standing in the way.
On the budget surplus, well, revenue has been less than was forecast and predicted. That is the circumstance we're in.
We've got the overhang of the global financial crisis. We've got a strong Australian dollar bearing down on some sections of business.
That means that there's less tax money coming in to the Federal Government than was expected. We've got to deal with the facts. We live in the real world.
HOST: France overnight has agreed to legalise gay marriage. It comes a week after New Zealanders agreed to do this too. Is there any chance that you will change your own position on this before September?
PM: I've made my position clear to the Australian community. But the important thing is I've said that I'm not seeking to impose my views on anybody; anybody in the Australian community or anybody in the Australian Parliament or anybody in my political party  -  that people should come to the Parliament free to exercise their own conscience and their own views.
What we need to see is that everyone who comes to the Australian Parliament is in that same position, and unfortunately members of the Liberal and National Party are not.
They have not been extended a conscience vote. They have not been able to vote how they would choose on this matter.
I think the next step here that needs to be taken is that everyone is able to come to the Parliament and vote in accordance with their beliefs.
HOST: Prime Minister, with respect, I'm asking you about your own personal view. Is there any chance you will change your personal view?
PM: Look Sabra, my personal view is well known and that's my view.
HOST: We're three weeks from the budget. Business fears that you're going to hit them to pay for your promises. A survey out this morning shows that only 8 per cent of company directors think your Government actually understands business. That's less than one in ten. Are their fears founded?
PM: Well my reading of today's newspapers Sabra is that the fear that business is very focused on today is the fear of Mr Abbott's plan to finance his paid parental leave scheme by putting up company tax.
And the fear of the disruption that would come to the Australian economy should Mr Abbott be in a position to implement his so-called direct action plan, which of course anybody with expertise in the area of carbon pollution and security in markets is scoffing at.
So I understand there are big concerns for businesses on those sorts of moves by Mr Abbott, and they're questions for him.
This is a transcript of the interview that went to air on the ABC's AM program.


ABC Capricornia
HOST: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: You've announced $4 billion in funding for the Bruce Highway over the next 10 years this morning. How will this money be spent?
PM: Well some of it will be spent right here. I know from being in Rockhampton during times of flood and from receiving representations from Kirsten Livermore, your local member, how focused people have been the Bruce Highway and particularly on the Yeppen Crossing.
You know that there's work there underway already, I'm sure people sometimes talk to you about delays as they negotiate their way past that work.
We are announcing that out of this $4 billion new commitment to the Bruce Highway up to $300 million will be made available for the second stage of work there.
That's about raising the north bound lanes and it's also about a bridge  -  1.6 km bridge.
The first $50 million will be made available so it can be spent this year which means you can move from the works that are happening there now to this next stage of works.
And so that's about making that area more resistant to flood than it has been because obviously the level of it, the physical level of it is going to be raised.
HOST: That $50 million be in the May budget?
PM: Yes, it will.
HOST: Is there any more of that $4 billion anticipated to be in this year's budget?
PM: The whole commitment to our Nation Building 2 program from which these funds are being drawn will be in the May budget.
So to explain that, what we do is we budget money for infrastructure, we called our first plan Nation Building 1. It is coming to an end, it will be replaced by Nation Building 2 and from that broader allocation for infrastructure, money is allocated for specific projects and $4 billion will be allocated for the Bruce Highway.
HOST: So there won't be any cuts needed to fund this package?
PM: We've already made room in the budget for a continued investment in infrastructure.
We knew that we'd have to keep investing; there are many infrastructure projects around the nation that are important.
Of course, the $4 billion is being allocated across a 10-year program of works but you will see the allocations in the budget for our Nation Build 2 program which is the source of funds to keep drawing down on for these works on the Bruce Highway.
HOST: The state government has said it would spend $1 billion on the road if the Commonwealth put in $4 billion over 10 years. Have you got a commitment from the state government that they will do that?
PM: Well it's over to Premier Newman. They have said that they would enter an arrangement with the Commonwealth where we are overwhelmingly picking up the cost of these upgrades, an 80-20 share  -  so there's $4 billion on the table.
HOST: When will these communities start to see the benefits of this funding?
PM: Work will be in progress this year, so this calendar year.
HOST: This week we've future heard talk about the potential future deficits as revenues fall, there's also been a slowdown in the mining sector. Do you think that here in Central Queensland we've lost the opportunity to really capitalise on the mining boom?
PM: No, I don't. We are in the mining industry moving past the peak of capital investment. That peak is yet to come but it is looming, so will reach the peak of the capital investment.
What does that mean? It means the new money going into build big new projects, the absolute peak of that will move through.
But then we will be in production so you construct the huge new mining ventures and then people work in them for years and years and years to come.
The peak of that capital investment will pass and then people will be working in mining for years and years to come.
And during that phase, the production phase, when we're actually getting ore or gas or it is and exporting it, we want to make sure that the profits that are made, the very high profits that are made, are appropriately shared and that's what the minerals resource rent taxes is about.
HOST: Speaking of taxes, the Opposition appears to be stepping back from their company tax cut commitment. You've promised a one per cent cut, have you abandoned that plan now or will you take if to the election?
PM: No, we some time ago accepted the reality that the Opposition was voting against that, determined to block it in the Parliament, had the ability to block it in the Parliament and that we wouldn't get it through.
So some time ago we announced that we couldn't further proceed with that plan because of the negativity that we see on the other side of politics.
HOST: We've had a number of visits from high-ranking government members in the last 12 months here in Rockhampton. Is this an indication that you see Capricornia as a key battle ground for this election?
PM: It's an indication that we're very regular visitors to Rockhampton. I've been a regular visit here as Prime Minister and before that as Deputy Prime Minister.
It's about coming and being here, being here to talk to people, being here to physically see things because as good as Kirsten's descriptions are, you need to come and see things for yourself and being here to make important announcements for this community.
HOST: Kirsten Livermore, what do you think needs to be done for the next five months for the seat of Capricornia to be retained by Labor?
KIRSTEN LIVERMORE: I think you're seeing an example of it today. It's really drawing people's attention to the investments that we've already made.
Things like the investments in our schools, things like the MRI machine up at the Rockhampton Base Hospital, things like the training centre, the training college for medical students, also on the grounds of the Base Hospital there in Canning Street, things like the cancer centre at the Base Hospital.
The list goes on and on; the investments we've made in Central Queensland University.
So by having these opportunities with ministers and the Prime Minister coming to town we can talk about the things that we've already done here in Capricornia over the last five years of our government and to use that to draw people's attention to what we are committing to in the future.
Things like the Gonski reforms which will put much greater funding into each and every school here in Central Queensland. Things like these improvements to the Bruce Highway.
So I guess when I talk about these things I explain them by saying to people you can trust our commitments on these things because you can look at our track record.
When we say we will put up to $300 million into improving the Bruce Highway, the southern access into Rockhampton and improving its flood immunity, I can point to people that there's already $85 million of work that's happening there as a result of a commitment by this government.
When I'm saying to people, we will put these improvements in place in our primary and secondary schools I can point to the major investments that we've already made into school infrastructure, into numeracy and literacy, into teacher quality so there's a whole lot that we can do in the next four to five months talking about the future but using our very obvious track record to convince people that we are serious about these priorities and we've got the capacity to deliver on them.
HOST: Prime Minister, we've seen Chris Trevor announced as the Labor candidate for Flynn. He was very strong Kevin Rudd supporter and he was quite vocal when you took over the Prime Ministership, are you satisfied that he will be good candidate for Flynn?
PM: Absolutely. CT, Chris Trevor, is a fantastic human being and someone very dedicated to his local community, a very proud advocate for his local community.
And I'm sure that people in that community will be very pleased to see that CT's put himself forward again for their consideration and their vote and I will look forward to seeing him and spending time with him.
And I think I'll get the opportunity to see him today in fact.
HOST: Excellent. Do you think you've done enough to convince the electorates of Capricornia and Flynn that the Labor Government is the best option for this country?
PM: Well here we are today: $4 billion announcement for the Bruce Highway, a proud track record of investing in the Bruce Highway.
Our investment since we've come to office including this new investment is $5.7 billion. That compares with the Howard Government investment, of $1.3 billion over 12 years.
So do those figures: $5.7 billion committed by us since we've been in Government in 2007; $1.3 billion over 12 years. I think people would look at that and they would read our commitment to this community and to the communities that share the Bruce Highway.
HOST: There have been reports in News Limited papers this morning that Labor staffers are being offered an extra two weeks' pay in the event they no longer have a job after the election. Is that because you're worried people are going to jump ship before the election because they're afraid they're about to lose their jobs?
PM: This report has not given you the right information and so your question is wrong. That's not your fault. You've read it on the front page of the newspaper.
This is a determination for all staff that work for politicians and it's a determination about the amount of time that people have to make an election about whether they'll stay or whether they will go.
So that's it. It's a simple normal procedure that's happened in the past, it's happening again and the spin put on it in the papers is just that.
HOST: Thank you very much for your time this morning. We do know you're a very busy woman so I do appreciate it.
Kirsten Livermore and Julia Gillard, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thank you. 



I am pleased to announce that the Administrator of the Government of the Commonwealth Professor Marie Bashir AC CVO has today appointed Mr Richard Maude to the position of Director-General, Office of National Assessments, for a period of 5 years from 13 May 2013.
Mr Maude will replace Mr Allan Gyngell AO, the current Director-General, who is retiring after a distinguished career in the Australian Public Service and as the founding Executive Director of the Lowy Institute for International Policy.
Mr Maude is currently the Senior Advisor, International in the Office of the Prime Minister.
He is a senior executive of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade with an extensive background in national security and foreign policy. Mr Maude has served overseas in Malaysia, Singapore and the United States, where he was ONA's Liaison Officer in Washington.
The position of Director-General was publicly advertised in January 2013.  The appointment of Mr Maude follows an open, merit-based selection process. 
I take this opportunity to acknowledge Mr Gyngell's distinguished public service career and his significant contribution as Director-General, and to wish him well in his retirement. 


ABC Townsville
HOST: I'm joined by the Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Thank you so much for your time this morning.
PM: You're very welcome.
HOST: No politics today because it's a very special day. It's Anzac Day. So why is it important for you to be in Townsville today?
PM: It's important to be here because this is such a famous garrison city. Because we've got so many of our Australian Defence Force personnel here that I wanted to be here today, not only for the Dawn Service, but for the parade that is taking shape behind us.
I've had the opportunity as Prime Minister to commemorate Anzac Day in a variety of settings.
I was in Korea for the anniversary of the Battle of Kapyong. I was at Gallipoli last year.
It's fantastic to be in such a wonderful Australian city for Anzac Day today.
HOST: As we approach the Centenary of Anzac Day, are you encouraged by the ever growing crowds that are attending Dawn Services around the country and overseas?
PM: I certainly am. And the thing that I always look for is the number of children and there are just more and more and more, and sometimes when you get into conversations, why did you come, parents very freely admit “I got dragged here by my young son or daughter”.
So it's actually the children who are driving the next level of engagement and I think that that means that for all of time, we will commemorate Anzac Day and think about who we are as Australians on that day.
HOST: Today is the final Anzac Day service in Tarin Kowt in Afghanistan. How significant is that?
PM: It's incredibly significant. We have been engaged in Afghanistan for such a long time.
We have seen so many losses, including the losses here in Townsville; that for us to be moving to the end of the mission is a very significant thing.
So I'm sure the feelings there are mixed emotions. I mean great pride in service and what has been achieved but also a sense of moving to the next stage.
HOST: Picking up on that, as was noted in the service this morning, there have been seven deaths since last Anzac Day; thirty-nine in total in Afghanistan. This has been a difficult period for the military. What's your message to our armed forces and their families?
PM: My message is we're always thinking of you. The losses have been severe and the grief doesn't go away.
And because we've seen so many losses, and we've seen multiple losses from one regiment or one area of our ADF, there are people who really feel that weight of that burden, of those multiple burdens.
So we never forget and that's what Anzac Day is all about. We never forget.
We'll always be there to extend support to people.
But we do want to honour their sacrifice by talking too about what they've achieved.
We went to Afghanistan to deny al-Qaeda a safe haven for terrorism.
That's the work that we're doing. And that's the mission we are accomplishing.
HOST: Eight per cent of serving personnel have post-traumatic stress disorder. Is there enough psychological support for our armed forces when they're away and when they return home?
PM: We do focus on mental health services and psychological support and we're going to have to keep focusing on it.
We will have large numbers of people return, many of them from multiple tours of duty in Afghanistan.
Some will take physical injuries with them. We have seen many wounded. Many will also take psychological wounds with them.
And we'll have to just keep working to extend care and support.
HOST: I ask that because the VC recipient Ben Roberts-Smith, he said in the last couple of days that returned service people are being supported now, but he wants that momentum maintained once the war in Afghanistan ends.
PM: Well, I certainly agree with that and I think it's an important observation.
As we go through the next few years, I think we'll get a sense of the full dimensions of support that are needed.
I mean we haven't quite been here in a long time; having people return, seven tours of duty, six tours of duty, five tours of duty  -  young men, still with all of their lives in front of them.
So we're going to have to make sure that we're getting it right and that's going to mean extending the services that are there now, but also continually keeping the level and the way the services are provided under review.
I mean, generations change, the way people interact change. This will be a generation that perhaps wants those services provided differently.
And that's why we'll have to keep really engaged with it and focusing on it.
HOST: What will a post-Afghanistan Australian military look like?
PM: A post-Afghanistan Australian military? Well the force posture will not be substantially changed because of the end of the mission in Afghanistan.
We've had a force posture review and we're in the process of responding to all of that.
So we posture our forces for our ongoing needs, including, of course, defence of our own country as our prime objective.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thank you. 


Morning Service, Townsville
"Australians said goodbye ... and promised never to forget."
ANZAC DAY ADDRESS
MORNING SERVICE, TOWNSVILLE
25 APRIL 2013
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
So often, war means saying goodbye.
This city of Townsville understands that truth so well.
No one better exemplifies the ANZAC story of duty and sacrifice than the uniformed men and women of this garrison city who leave here so often to serve Australia overseas.
We honour you today.
No one better exemplifies the respect, the admiration, the affection, the love, we feel for our people in uniform than the families and citizens of this great Australian community.
Today, we honour your sacrifice too.
Saying goodbye in the hope your loved one will come back.
That is the story of this community today  -  it has been the story of so many Australian communities throughout our history  -  just as it was the story of the families and communities who farewelled the ANZACs in 1914 and 1915.
On docks and at railway stations around our land, mothers, wives, little brothers and sisters bravely suppressed tears.
Fathers extended grim handshakes.
Australians said good bye and promised never to forget.
Those who have been to war  -  you who have been to war  -  never forget its horror.
So many spend a lifetime comprehending the strange miracle of their own survival.The families of 102 000 Australians who died for us never forget war's horror too.
The dreadful sight of a clergyman or telegram boy coming up the driveway.
Or the phone ringing unexpectedly in the cool of night.
The wounded never forget the horror of war, imprinted as it is on their bodies and their minds.
They returned to lives that could never be what they once were.
Their loved ones often facing a different and longer battle behind the walls of the family home.
This is war as our country has known it  -  war as we remember it on this day.
War as the worst of human experience, war with its full dreadful price.
But with its pride and victories as well.
We remember that today, we remember our whole experience.
So if you want to know about Townsville, come here on ANZAC Day.
If you want to understand Australians, watch us on ANZAC Day.
You will see ceremonies as grave and solemn as any in Europe.
A nation which expresses its most eloquent patriotic spirit in the silences we share on this day.
Moments later, joyful laughter, rum and milk, two-up and the telling of stories that get taller by the hour  -  softening perhaps, but never denying, the truths of this day.
So much has been given to our nation by all who served.
And so little is asked in return.
That for a few hours each year, we hush the busy course of our lives and dedicate this day, to remember.
Lest we forget.


Darwin
A new IT-enabled centre in Darwin will help to transform Indigenous teaching, learning and research across northern Australia.
The Prime Minister today officially opened the Australian Centre for Indigenous Knowledges and Education (ACIKE) in Darwin.
The Centre will use technology to overcome the barrier of distance.
It will include new research and teaching facilities and a literacy laboratory which is connected online to 16 sites throughout the Northern Territory. It will be a major boost for interactive distance learning.
The Centre is located at the Casuarina campus of the Charles Darwin University and is a joint venture between the University and Batchelor Institute for Indigenous Education.
The Gillard Government is committed to improving the participation of Indigenous Australians in higher education and this Centre will help to achieve that.
The Gillard Government contributed $24.8 million to the $27.5 million centre with the University providing the remainder.
The centre is part of a broader $39 million project that focuses on delivering better facilities for Indigenous teaching, learning and research.
The other elements of the project include new student accommodation and a mobile learning unit to reach out to Indigenous students in remote or regional areas. These are now completed and in use.
Federal funding for the project comes from the Education Investment Fund which is providing more than $4.5 billion to support infrastructure projects in the higher education, VET and research sectors. 


Darwin
Prime Minister Julia Gillard will co-chair the newly formed Asia-Pacific Leaders Malaria Alliance (APLMA), which will bring together leaders from the region to fight malaria.
The announcement follows World Malaria Day on 25 April.
Malaria is a wholly preventable and treatable disease which causes more than 650,000 deaths worldwide every year and which killed more than 42,000 people in the Asia-Pacific in 2010.
Since 2007, World Malaria Day has focussed global attention on the need for sustained political commitment for malaria prevention and control.
Last year Australia sponsored a declaration about malaria at the East Asia Summit and leaders committed to a strengthened regional response to the urgent challenge of drug-resistant malaria. 
The decision to take a leadership role in the Alliance helps deliver on the declaration and the commitments made at Australia's Malaria 2012 conference.
The Gillard Government acknowledges the commitment of countries of the region and development partners to address malaria and, as co-chair of the Alliance, the Prime Minister will join with leaders to mobilise urgent country and regional action and review progress towards agreed malaria targets.
The APLMA will convene two taskforces to improve access to life-saving medicines and to ensure adequate financing of the malaria response.
With the UN Special Envoy on Malaria the APLMA will form a Champions Group of eminent advocates from the region to assist them in the fight against malaria.  
As a member state of the Asia-Pacific region Australia looks forward to joining with a partner country in this leadership role.  While it is the poorest and most vulnerable in our region that are most at risk from malaria, we all share the broader economic, social and development impact of this disease. 
APLMA's first meeting will be in the region later this year, bringing together regional leaders to save lives, and prevent the suffering and economic toll that malaria exacts.
The Gillard Government has committed $1 million to establish this Alliance, and made a pledge last year to advocate for accelerated progress towards the Millennium Development Goals and malaria is one of our regional priorities.


ABC Darwin
HOST: Julia Gillard, good morning.
PM: Good morning Julia, and I'm afraid this could get a bit confusing, couldn't it? Two Julias talking to each other!
HOST: It often does. I had a question from a listener on the text earlier asking about the Greens and who is running your show about I thought they were talking about me but they weren't.
But interesting news this morning that Clive Palmer is setting up his own political party. He's interesting for the Territory because he says neither big party cares Indigenous infant mortality rates. Should that be a more prominent issue on the political radar?
PM: Well that claim is complete rubbish from Mr Palmer. We've been very focused on Indigenous mortality rates, child mortality.
It's one of our key Closing the Gap targets and it's where we are seeing real improvement and real progress.
So the facts are always good to acquaint yourself with, and I suggest Mr Palmer acquaint himself with those facts.
HOST: Do you welcome the party though, it could perhaps split the Coalition vote and make your job ease easier of getting back into Government?
PM: It's all a question for Mr Palmer and the appropriate party registration processes.
HOST: One of the issues that's really hurting in the Territory at the moment I'm sure you're aware is the cost of living. We pay 20-30 cents more than the national average for fuel.
We've got the highest rents in the nation and this week the ABS figures showed an inflation rate four times the national average.
Will you consider increasing the zone rebates for Territorians to ease the cost of living and promoting economic growth? I know that's something former Chief Minister Paul Henderson said he'd raise with you.
PM: Darwin is a place of great economic growth and that has its upsides and sometimes its downsides and one of the downsides is cost of living pressures. For example, you see all of the price pressures in housing.
So I do understand that it can be very tough for people here to make ends meet.
We've worked with those cost of living pressures to try and help families out, doing things like increasing the tax-free threshold so you can earn $18,200 before you pay a cent of tax. That's in contest in the next election.
We support that change, people paying less tax; more than 40,000 of them here around Darwin.
And of course the Opposition wants people to pay more tax and get rid of that measure.
HOST: What about increasing that zone rebate though?
PM: Well, it's fundamental in our Constitution that tax arrangements are effectively the same around the country.
There is the zone tax rebate. We will support the zone tax rebate for the future.
HOST: Would you be happy to increase it?
PM: We haven't got any plans to change the zone tax rebate. The approach we've taken instead is to do things like cut tax, provide the School Kids Bonus to help with the costs of getting the kids to school; benefitting more than 10,000 children here.
And of course we did provide an historic increase in the pension too; benefitting more than 8,000 pensioners here.
All of that's in contest at the election because the Opposition is opposed to each of those measures.
HOST: But you've got people like Andrew ‘Twiggy' Forrest and Gina Rinehart calling on separate tax zones or removing capital gains for building a second home in the north. Are you totally opposed to that?
PM: Well number one, we do have the constitutional requirement that we don't discriminate between parts of the country on taxation arrangements.
Number two, I think a number of those measures are not fully thought through. I don't think people in Darwin would say that it was of great benefit to them if people could own a holiday house and they live in Melbourne or Sydney and that holiday house is capital gains tax free for them. That wouldn't do anything to alleviate property prices in the Darwin property market.
HOST: Prime Minister, Territorians are still pretty unhappy with your captain's pick, parachuting Nova Peris into the Territory Senate ticket ousting 15-year sitting Labor member Trish Crossin.
You declined the interview to explain that to us here in the Territory. Was that choice an example of poor political judgment not predicting that reaction?
PM: Absolutely the right choice and I will be seeing Nova today and be very pleased to see her. I wanted to put my political party, the Labor Party, in a position where we were supporting a female Indigenous candidate  -  Nova Peris, a great person  -  also on the votes of Territorians, and of course this is a choice for Territorians come election day.
But should she be supported by people in the Northern Territory she will be the first woman Indigenous Australian to ever serve in our nation's Parliament and for me, I say it's about time.
HOST: You farewelled a Labor politician in Townsville while you were there, an outgoing politician, will you be doing the same with Trish Crossin, will you be meeting her today?
PM: I'm not what you mean by the farewelling a Labor politician in Townsville?
HOST: I thought you had an engagement in Townsville or somewhere in North Queensland? I must have misread that report-
PM: I see, sorry, I know what you're talking about. Kirsten Livermore who is a very great friend of mine and the Member for Capricornia, she has chosen to not stand again at the next election.
She's been in Parliament since 1998 and wants to make a different choice for her and her quite young family, her young children. So we did have a farewell function for her.
Trish Crossin will be with me when we're at Charles Darwin University today opening a new centre there and I will be very pleased and proud to be there and I know Trish will be very much looking forward to that opening too. She has been a great supporter of the university here.
HOST: Has she been badly done by though?
PM: Trish has made a fantastic contribution in Federal Parliament. She served in the Federal Parliament for quite some time and I've obviously taken a decision that I believe is best for the future.
HOST: Prime Minister, on grog in the Territory, alcohol-related admissions to emergency have doubled at the Alice Springs Hospital since the banned drinkers register was scrapped. Your government wants it back. The Northern Territory Government doesn't. What are you going to do about it?
PM: Well I am absolutely dismayed by this and made that very clear when I gave the Closing the Gap report to Federal Parliament, which is our once a year stock-take about how we are going against our aspirational targets to change circumstances for Indigenous Australians in education, employment, health, life expectancy.
This is a huge retrograde step in the Territory. It means that there's more alcohol abuse, more rivers of grog and with all of the devastating consequences that has for individuals and local communities.
So I'm dismayed and very concerned about it.
We will keep pressure up on the Northern Territory Government to change its mind and to step away from this incredibly destructive change.
HOST: How will you do that?
PM: Well, we engage with the Northern Territory Government in a series of ways including all of the ways in which we support the work of the Northern Territory Government for Indigenous Australians. So we will be making very clear our expectations.
I don't want to be in a position where we are continuing to invest at record rates only to see that good work undermined by the tap being turned back on for the alcohol.
HOST: But the CLP has no measures to control the supply of grog. Can you actually intervene other than urge them to do something?
PM: The CLP Government was elected by the people of the Territory, so the CLP Government does get to make decisions here.
But we get to have our voice heard and we get to have a very, very strong say about the use of federal funds and the circumstances in which those funds should be used and should be made available.
Once again, there's no point putting lots of money in to try and build communities up and change lives if at the same time the CLP here is turning the tap on for the grog.
HOST: So you're talking about possibly withholding funds if they don't agree?
PM: Well I'll stick with my last statement but I'm very determined on this matter. I am dismayed and disgusted by what has happened here.
HOST: The Federal Government funded a medi-hotel at the Royal Darwin Hospital. The CLP wants to use it for the rehabilitation of problem drunks. Will you approve that?
PM: I understand that there are discussions in progress about this, so I'll leave those discussions to Minister Macklin and of course our Minister for Health Tanya Plibersek.
HOST: Are you happy in principle though for it to be used for rehabilitation?
PM: I'll let those discussions on all of the details go through. But philosophically it comes back to the point you and I just discussed.
It's the old saying about whether you build the fence at the top of the cliff or you put the ambulance down at the bottom of it.
It's always better to prevent harm. And having appropriate alcohol management strategies is about preventing harm, and that's why I very much support and believe that the Banned Drinkers Register should be brought back.
HOST: Julia Gillard, you're heading out to the CDU as you mentioned there. The Vice-Chancellor has sent an email to students warning them that they will lose $14 million over the next five years.
Meanwhile you're hoping to negotiate with Chief Minister Adam Giles to try to get him to sign up to the Gonski school funding deal. Why would he if that's the result?
PM: Well on the university funding arrangements I think it's important that people have got a sense of size and scale here.
We have increased funding to the Charles Darwin University since we came to Government by more than 90 per cent. More than 90 per cent; that's a lot of money.
And each year we provide around $120 million to CDU and I'm glad we provide it. And we will provide more next year than we provide this year, and more the year after.
What is being asked of CDU and universities around the country is that there is a moderation in the rate of growth of funds after a more than 90 per cent increase  -  a moderation in the rate of growth of funds to enable us to invest more in schools around the country, including here in the Northern Territory.
And I want every child in the Northern Territory, every child, to get a great education and I want every school to have the resources it needs to provide the kids in that school a great education.
The model of school funding we're putting before the people of the Northern Territory is certainly right for the Northern Territory because it recognises factors like the additional resources you need to educate Indigenous kids, to work small schools, to work schools in remote locations.
So it's a big step forward for education here and that's why the Chief Minister and the CLP Government should embrace it, just the way Premier O'Farrell embraced it for his state of New South Wales.
HOST: Our Chief Minister Adam Giles doesn't sound too keen though, this is what he's had to say so far.
CHIEF MINISTER GILES GRAB: Look if the Prime Minister wants to change her offer we'll be more than happy to have a chat. But what's currently on the offer is a deadly deal in the dying days of a bad Labor Government at the federal level.
HOST: A deadly deal and unacceptable says Adam Giles. Do you think you can change his mind?
PM: He might want to hop on the phone to Premier O'Farrell who runs the biggest schooling system in our country and ask Premier O'Farrell why he thought it was a good deal for New South Wales schools, for the education of the 1.1 million students in New South Wales schools, and for the future of the New South Wales economy.
HOST: How confident are you though that he will sign up?
PM: Well you'd have to put that question to Chief Minister Giles. But it comes down to a very simple proposition  -  do you put the children of the Northern Territory first? Yes or no?
HOST: A lot of our listeners want to ask you about gay marriage. New Zealand's done it, France has done it, even New South Wales is talking about it. Why are we as a nation being left behind on legalising gay marriage?
PM: Well I've got my own views on this but the appropriate thing is that every Member of Parliament can come to the Parliament and exercise their conscience and make a choice when propositions for change of the Marriage Act are put before the Parliament to create same-sex marriage.
For my political party, the Labor Party, I ensured that that was the case. I didn't want anybody to think that they needed to follow what I was going to do, they should all think as individuals.
We need to see that spread to every side of politics, and in particular the Liberal and National parties.
HOST: But isn't this is sort of thing that does need some leadership?
PM: It's the sort of thing where people should get a conscience vote. You've just pointed to the change in New Zealand.
In New Zealand the parliamentarians there had a conscience vote.
HOST: Julia Gillard, you're in town for a little while longer, what are you up to today?
PM: Well I'll get opportunity to see some schoolchildren so I'll much enjoy that.
I'll get the opportunity to go to the university and to open a new centre there.
I'll get the opportunity to be out and about talking to people so I'm very much looking forward to it.
HOST: And will one of those people be the Chief Minister?
PM: It's likely that I'll be able to catch up with him later today.
HOST: Thanks for catching up with us this morning.
PM: You're very welcome. 


Darwin
PM: It's fantastic to be here in Darwin and I'm joined by Nova Peris, our candidate for the Senate, and by Luke Gosling our candidate for Solomon.
We've just had the opportunity to talk to some wonderful kids here at this fantastic school, and thank you very much to David, the principal, for making our visit possible.
I'm here in the Northern Territory today and I want to make one point very clearly, which is I want to see every child in every school in the Northern Territory get a great education.
I want every child in every school in the Northern Territory to reach their full potential.
I want every school to have available to it the resources it needs to get the children in that school a really great education, a world-class education.
And I want to make the point too that here in Darwin, which is growing so much, and which understands the opportunities that flow from the growth in Asia, people here are already living that.
They know what that means for our economy; that we can only be the strong economy we want to be for the future if we've got great schools.
Four of the top five schooling systems in the world are in our region and ours is not amongst them, which is why I've set a goal for our nation that we be in the top five in the world by 2025.
To do that we've got to properly fund our schools and we've got to improve the ways we're working in schools; a reform agenda that makes a difference.
I want to see the Northern Territory, the Chief Minister here, the CLP Government, sign up to ensuring that the kids of the Northern Territory don't get left behind.
If Premier O'Farrell in New South Wales, running the biggest schooling system in the country can embrace the changes that I'm advocating, then it can be done here in the Northern Territory.
And I'd ask the people of the Northern Territory do you really want to see the children in your schools fall behind the standards in New South Wales?
The school improvement plan that I've put before the nation means an extra $300 million for schools here in the Northern Territory.
What happens if that doesn't go ahead? Well you will see schools here go backwards by $200 million; that's a half a billion dollar difference.
It's very important for every child in every school that we get this right for the Northern Territory.
I'm happy to have been here today at this school to be able to talk about the differences that school funding and school improvement can make, and I'm very happy to hand over to you now for some questions.
JOURNALIST: Adam Giles says the deal that's on the table at the present time are unacceptable, what are you prepared to do to change his mind?
PM: If Premier O'Farrell, running the biggest schooling system in the country, could embrace this arrangement as good for his state, good for the children in New South Wales, good for his schools, then I don't see any reason why Chief Minister Adam Giles can't do the same here in the Northern Territory.
After all, this is a model that not only provides base funding for every child in primary school and secondary school, but adds loadings on to that for the factors that make a difference about educating children, including loadings for Indigenous children, children from non-English speaking backgrounds, extra money for children with disabilities and extra money to support small and remote schools.
If you were designing an arrangement for the Northern Territory how could you do any better than that?
We were just talking about it before, when you take all of that into account, given who gets educated in the schools in the Northern Territory, this actually in many ways is a better deal for the Northern Territory because of the way these loadings work.
JOURNALIST: If you're not prepared to change what you're offering, are you prepared to put more pressure on Mr Giles to sign up?
PM: I certainly want to see Chief Minister Giles sign up.
JOURNALIST: The Federal Government has very broad powers over the Northern Territory. If it's such an important deal and so vital for the children why don't you just force him to take it?
PM: We are working with premiers and chief ministers around the country to get agreement here.
It is up to the Chief Minister to embrace his responsibilities for every child in the Northern Territory.
JOURNALIST: At COAG the Chief Minister described this deal as ‘death or Siberia', what do you make of that sort of commentary on your education reforms?
PM: I think since COAG we've seen Premier O'Farrell sign up and I don't think really that anybody who is thinking about this deeply can come to the conclusion that this is somehow a bad arrangement if it's been embraced by Premier O'Farrell.
Premier O'Farrell is in the Liberal Party, in the CLP equivalent in New South Wales, and he said it's the right thing for the children in his state.
I think, therefore, a lot of the kind of white noise around this falls away and it becomes just a very simple proposition: do you want to put kids first or not?
JOURNALIST: Are you prepared to withhold funding from the Territory to get the Territory to reinstate the BDR?
PM: We are very concerned about what has happened here with the Banned Drinkers Register and we're very concerned about the way in which alcohol hits communities, it devastates lives and more than an individual's life, wrecks families and hurts communities.
So we will be continuing to pressure the CLP Government to go back to the Banned Drinkers Register.
This is very important for the people of the Northern Territory; for those whose lives are blighted by alcohol and for the community generally.
We already know that there looks like there are increased admissions into the Alice Springs Hospital because the Banned Drinkers Register has been taken away.
JOURNALIST: What do you think of the proposed Northern Territory alcohol reforms?
PM: Well, we want to see a comprehensive approach here and so a comprehensive approach isn't about being there once the crisis is well in train, it's about stopping it get to that crisis point which is why the Banned Drinkers Register makes a real difference.
JOURNALIST: Would you put in place a federal scheme?
PM: We as the Federal Government have got our responsibilities; the CLP here has its responsibilities.
It has been entrusted by the people of the Northern Territory to make decisions for this place and it needs to step up to making the right decisions.
JOURNALIST: Will you impose an Alice Springs-wide alcohol management plan?
PM: The Alice Springs alcohol management plan is the subject of discussions that we want to see between the Federal Government and the Northern Territory Government.
Minister Macklin has put a proposition and we want to see some sensible responses from the CLP.
JOURNALIST: Nigel Scullion said that he doesn't believe the National Congress of Australia's First People should be federally funded because it makes it dependent on the Government. Do you feel that maybe it should be an independent body?
PM: We believe the arrangement that is in place now is the right arrangement and so we are opposed to this cutback just like we are opposed to the deep cutbacks that the Opposition has planned for Indigenous programs.
In the last week what we have seen is an Opposition staff member be very, very rude towards someone who is leading an effort to improve Indigenous education.
In the course of that it has become clear and has not been denied by the Opposition that they are planning deep cuts to programs that support Indigenous Australians.
Now, I'm not surprised by that because clearly the Opposition has a plan for deep cuts right across the board  -  health, education, programs that support Indigenous Australians, as well as a plan for tax increases.
JOURNALIST: You've got the power to impose mandatory supply restrictions on alcohol, why don't you just do that?
PM: We're at a stage before that where we've put a proposition and we're waiting for a sensible response.
JOURNALIST: Will you impose it if the Territory Government doesn't [inaudible]?
PM: We're at a stage before that as I've just said.
JOURANLIST: In the last Territory election there was a large swing away from Labor in the bush, are you concerned that could happen at the federal election, you might lose Lingiari?
PM: I'm concerned about kids getting a great education. I'm concerned about people who face tax increases if the Opposition becomes the Government.
I'm concerned about pensioners who would lose pension money.
I'm concerned about families that would lose their School Kids Bonus.
And I'm concerned about the deep cuts that are planned for Indigenous Australians and the programs that support them.
Instead, on 14 September I'll be asking Australians to endorse the election of a majority Labor Government with a very clear plan for the future to make sure that our nation is stronger and smarter and fairer, and that starts in Australia's schools.
JOURNALIST: Have you heard about Clive Palmer setting up a party in Queensland, what do you think of that? Does it split the Coalition's vote and help Labor?
PM: That's a matter for Mr Palmer.
JOURNALIST: On education, how close do you think you are to reaching an agreement with the Northern Territory Government?
PM: I've made clear my determination here, so I'll take that determination with me to the next event that we've got to attend.
Thank you very much. 


Charles Darwin University, Darwin
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's a great pleasure to be here today for the opening of this magnificent new centre.  
Today we celebrate the hard work that has transformed a bold idea into reality. 
And we mark another important moment in Australia's evolving appreciation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander culture.
A significant new chapter in a story we can trace back to the man whose name graces this university.
It is 177 years since Charles Darwin visited Australia.
We were just one stop on his five year voyage on the Beagle.
A journey that inspired and informed his theory which changed the way we look at the world forever.
The Origin of Species proved that Darwin saw further and thought deeper than this peers.
But Darwin's description of Australia, published in The Voyage of the Beagle, reveals that he was also a creature of his time. 
So the view of Australia which we see in Darwin's writing  -  and in particular of the First Australians  -  is a narrow one.  
When he encountered the world's oldest living culture, Darwin could not rise above a benign Victorian curiosity  -  or express himself in other than faint praise:
‘In their own arts', he wrote, ‘they are admirable'.
For Darwin, and for so many of his peers, their assessments were limited by the common prejudices of their time.
For too long, the outsiders who documented Indigenous Australia did so with closed minds.
Where they should have listened, they judged.
Where they could have learned, they sought to instruct. 
When they should have shown interest, they were apathetic.
This ignorance  -  what Stanner so aptly termed this ‘Great Australian Silence'  -  long diminished us all. 
Today is one of those days on which we are reminded of that sad past  -  and reminded of how far we have come.
Australians everywhere now understand the central place that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander culture occupies in our national story.
We are embracing it with pride.
Just as importantly, we are beginning to realise how much there is to learn from the ways of Indigenous Australia.
New perspectives on the management of our natural resources, new understandings in language, art and music. 
This is the real significance of places like the Centre for Australian Indigenous Knowledges and Education.
This is why today is so exciting.
Such places help us to see Indigenous society as a living guide to the continent and community we all share.
Alongside its cultural function, this Centre will be a home to the next generation of Indigenous leaders.
The specially designed Bachelor's Degrees will give students the opportunity to develop their abilities in governance, advocacy, community leadership and teaching.
The Preparation for Tertiary Success course will give those returning to the education system the skills and confidence to achieve the best possible results at university.
Every course works in partnership with the Learnline program so students in remote communities have access to class materials and discussions.
This Centre is a place filled with natural light and designed for group-learning and discussion, open-air conversations and classes. An ideal demonstration of the idea that the best design is a meeting of function and form.
This is a moment worth celebrating  -  you have created something which is an example for universities across Australia and around the world
I congratulate you all for your vision and courage in realising it.
This Centre is a symbol of all that Indigenous leadership can offer.
It is proof of how far Australia has come, and a marker for the road ahead.
With great pride  -  and in a spirit of Reconciliation and friendship  -  I declare the Australian Centre for Indigenous Knowledges and Education officially open and wish it every success.


Canberra
JOSH FUNDER, EVENT HOST: We now have the opportunity for questions and answers from the floor. So put your hand up and we will come to you in turn. Are there questions?
I will start with one while we are waiting and it is on the automatic stabilisers that you highlighted at the start of the speech.
How will they function given the revised estimates for revenue in the economy and on the way down and on the way up?
PM: We expect the automatic stabilisers to perform their traditional function but we're in a different context.
So what we had reasonably expected in revenue won't be there and so the journey from where we are now to a surplus budget is obviously a different one than one that was predicted at the time of the last budget or at the time of MYEFO.
It does put on us a real discipline about ensuring new spends are matched with saves.
That is a very tough discipline, let me assure you, as we work our way through the budget and we have ministers who have good ideas and good plans and have to actually jettison some of the things that they currently do in their portfolio area or that are done across government in order to back in those new spending plans.
But that is the discipline that we intend to accept for this budget. What of course we won't do is we won't artificially chase these revenue downgrades in a way that jeopardises jobs and growth.
QUESTION: I just have a question about productivity. It was a big word in the 2007 election. How are you trying to boost productivity in the coming budget, balancing that with the cuts that you are planning to make?
PM: That is a very good question and there have been some emerging good signs on productivity growth.
Now necessarily, this is a statistic you want to see for the long term so you don't want to make too much of some of the most recent evidence, you want to see the trend continuing, but there has been recently some good news on productivity growth.
And the elements that go into productivity growth are ones we are very committed to and we will continue to be committed to.
It includes our agenda for human capital, what we are doing in schools particularly, what we are doing in early childhood education, more apprenticeships than ever before and our continued historically high investments in universities.
It includes what we're doing with traditional infrastructure, the investments we have made in roads and rail and ports and for the first time ever, into public transport infrastructure.
It includes the investment we are making in the National Broadband Network and that is continuing to roll out around the country.
It also includes the focus on innovation and jobs that you saw in our Australian plan for jobs that Minister Combet and I announced a few short months ago.
And it includes our seamless national economy work. We are still an economy that is too fettered by differences between regulation in different parts of the country and we have tried to make a difference to that.
It is work for the patient, let me assure you, but we have through COAG managed to make differences on that seamless national economy agenda.
So the underlying drivers of productivity are ones that we will continue to support and nourish because we understand their long term importance for their long term importance for the economy.
So a bit like the decision that I have outlined today on improving school education, we wouldn't jeopardise a decision like that because it will make us stronger and wealthier in the future.
So that is why it is so important to us and even with what you have seen in terms of the tax money reduction coming to the Government, the revenue downgrades that I have talked about today, we will continue to fund those important priorities, particularly the work in schools.
QUESTION: Thank you Prime Minister, for your really clear discussion. I was concerned about your comment that these savings or contributions will be shared right across the community.
Will you clarify whether that applies to people who are already financially disadvantaged?
PM: I can't announce all of the budget here today. Wayne wouldn't forgive me so we need to do that on budget night and there is still some work to do.
What I can assure you is that we will take a Labor approach to the burden-sharing that I have described in the speech today.
A Labor approach which understands that people come with different capacities to the task, but also a Labor approach that understands that if we look right across our society and ask everyone to make some contribution then it lightens the load for everyone.
QUESTION: I just wanted to ask you how we could address the difference between facts and perception. I know you're focused on the facts.
There seems to be so much misperception and I just hope that Australians realise that there is so much misperception from so many factors in our society and I wondered how we might deal with that given the great work that you've done.
PM: I think it is important, even though it is complex, to try and get out the details of what I have described here today for you.
If you step back from the hurly-burly of day-to-day reporting, I actually think Australians do recognise that we came out of the global financial crisis differently to the rest of the world.
I think they see enough reporting from Europe, indeed from the US, to know that we came out differently. We need to get that fact across.
Sometimes people will say ‘Well we came out differently because we're an economy with resources,' but even in this speech I have explained to you the differential position of Canada.
Our economy's grown by 13 per cent since 2007, an economy like Canada's which is also resource-rich has grown by 5 per cent.
So you can't just say "Well, it is a world where resource-rich economies necessarily did well." We did so much better than a comparable economy like Canada's.
I think it needs to be very clearly understood that in framing this budget, we are talking about a problem posed because the amount of tax money that government was reasonably predicted to get is less.
That is why the analogy with John and his income - because I think it is easier for people to get hold of - if you reasonably planned for an income increase of 5 per cent each year and then were told very late it wouldn't happen, what would you do?
How would you deal with that as an individual?
I do think whilst there is a limit to analogies, it does help people understand the nature of the problem.
Spending is controlled, and for those who say this is all about spending, and I do note for example, the Shadow Treasurer has been out today saying this is all about spending.
Well, one, he would need to explain how he dismisses the big revenue downgrades chart that you saw, they are facts.
Two, if it is so easy to resolve this through spending, then presumably he and the Leader of the Opposition will have no difficulty on Thursday night of budget week identifying every spending program that they would stop to resolve all of this through spending reductions.
If that is truly what they believe it is about, then it is quite a simple matter for them to nominate how much is coming out of health, how much is coming out of education, how much is coming out of defence, how much is coming out of the pension, and the list goes on and publish it either before the budget or on budget reply night.
I think if they do not do that, people will be entitled to conclude that it is a little bit more complicated than the simple sloganeering has led people to believe.
QUESTION: Thank you Prime Minister, Steve Bloom from the Australian Solar Energy Council.
More of a comment, I am glad it is you not me making the decisions over the budget. They are very tough decisions.
One thing that is more of a statement than a comment that could be taken on by Government.
Solar energy internationally has grown 14 per cent over the last few years since 2008.
In the US it has more employees than the coal industry in total, and the same in Australia, so I suggest we could keep on exporting energy and not just coal energy but renewable energy.
PM: I certainly accept that comment and with the work that we are doing transforming our economy through carbon pricing and the renewable energy target, we are seeing a big growth in the use of renewable energy and we are seeing a reduction as we wanted to see of the carbon pollution in our atmosphere.
QUESTION: Given the challenges you have outlined in our speech today, can the Government still forecast a surplus even though a small one in the years 2015-16. And just a second part to my question, you said today in your speech that there might be other measures on the table when you look at budget savings that previously weren't. Does this mean that you are looking at possible changes to GST or perhaps even changes surrounding the level of the baby bonus?
PM: This is, for those in the audience who aren't as familiar with it as I am, this is the budget guessing game we play with the media. We are all very experienced participants in it. For the details of the budget, you will obviously have to see those on budget night.
Specifically on the GST, let's be clear about that, no change in the GST is being contemplated. We will not change the GST. The GST is a revenue flow which goes to state governments.
What I have outlined here today for you is changes in the amount of tax money that was expected to go to the Federal Government and the Federal Government budget problem that that therefore poses.
GST, absolutely no change and that is about money going into state government budgets, not in our budget.
On other measures, any measure, I know how this guessing game works and if I start with one, then you'll have tomorrow's list of 10 and tomorrow's list of 10 and tomorrow's list of 10 and I have joked in earlier budget seasons that by Sunday before budget, you will be asking me to rule out the sale of the Sydney Harbour Bridge and on and on it will go.
I think the best thing is if we don't play the game and we do deal with the facts and the facts are the ones I have outlined for you today.
QUESTION: My question is the bad news that we're potentially going to be experiencing with the upcoming budget. Is that also a situation that we can anticipate will be shared more broadly across Australia given the two-speed economy, the patch work economy? So is this something we need to brace ourselves for as a community, more broadly than just one tier of government?
PM: I think for people in their day-to-day experience, how do they experience the economy, how do they experience the government's budget? Well, the most important thing is that people have got jobs and got the opportunity to work.
That is the most important for every family, for every individual that they can get that all important work opportunity and that they can look over time to getting a better work opportunity to creating their own business if that is what they want to do.
The way in which they are experiencing the real economy matters to them and when we look there, we have got, by the standards of the world, low unemployment rates, we have got economic growth, we have got this conundrum that matters for the Federal Government's budget between real GDP and nominal GDP but we have got economic growth and so much of the rest of the world is not seeing economic growth.
This is an economy still with plenty of opportunities for people to share. It is an economy that is feeling differential pressures. It is much harder if you're in a trade exposed sector and the strong dollar is costing you a lot than in some other parts of the economy.
We have lived with those pressures for a while and our responses ever included the plan for Australian jobs that we put out which is a direct response to these patch work pressures arising from the high Australian dollar.
People then look to government to make the right decisions so that they can continue to see jobs and growth and as we put this budget together, that will be upper most in our minds, jobs and economic growth.
People look to government to make sure that the things they want for their families will be there for the long term, no important desire for parents than making sure their children get to go to a great school and consequently have the foundation stone of a life full of opportunity and for so many nothing more important than making sure that a family member with a disability is cared for properly or if the next family member, the next child born into your family, is born with a profound disability that they will get the supports for a decent life.
We will deliberately make the space for those things in this budget because of how highly prized they are by the community and rightly so.
In terms of education, that is not just about making sure that children can reach their full potential and the sense of emotional connection we feel with that. It is beyond that sense of emotional connection.
It is also a sense of economic connection because if we aren't educating our children well today then we cannot be that strong economy tomorrow which is why that is so precious to us as well.
My sense would be people should absorb the news about where the forecasts for tax money coming into the government take us.
They should absorb that news, but they should also absorb the full suite of economic data available to people: jobs continuing to be created, economic growth continuing to be there, us making the wise investments to set us up for a stronger and a smarter and a fairer future, us making responsible savings and asking people to share in the task of putting those savings together.


Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's a great sign of the growing recognition of Per Capita's work that your Executive Director David has been in such good company at the international Policy Network's Progressive Governance and Global Progress conference in Denmark.
Congratulations to you on the fine contribution Per Capita is making in the world of ideas.
With the Federal Budget just fifteen days away, I thank you for this opportunity to share with you the clearest possible picture of the purpose and context of our Budget deliberations.
This year's Budget will be about a national challenge  -  and a national plan.
A challenge for Australia: to respond to the huge reductions in revenue growth over the next four years.
A plan for Australia: to make necessary investments in the nation's future, to ensure that none of our people is left behind.
Tuesday 14 May will be no old-fashioned pre-election Budget night.
What the Treasurer will deliver will not be a political pamphlet  -  he will outline an economic program.
The Budget will outline the fiscal path for the coming four years, one designed both to take account of the nation's current circumstances and to shape the nation's future.
Our key long term objective, the progressive purpose of this Government's fiscal policy is enduring. 
It is:
 * 	to maximise jobs and economic growth;
 * 	to ensure sustainable funding over the long-term for the investments that strengthen our economy and the services our whole community relies on; and
 * 	to keep inflation in check and give the Reserve Bank maximum opportunity to keep interest rates low.
The Government's medium-term fiscal strategy  -  to deliver fiscal surpluses on average over the economic cycle  -  is designed to give effect to this purpose in practice.
It commits us to support jobs and economic growth when private sector demand is weak.
This is what we did so successfully during the Global Financial Crisis and, as a result, we kept around 200 000 more Australians in work.
It commits us to making Budget decisions so that in the good times and the hard times, through the inevitable variations in economic activity and Government revenue from year to year, we can afford the investments and services that make our nation stronger, smarter and fairer.
It also ensures that we don't simply “chase revenue down”  -  we don't cut to the bone and spurn wise investments, damaging jobs and growth now and in the future.
Instead our fiscal strategy responds to the economic cycle. 
In the language of economists, we allow the Budget's automatic stabilisers to do their work as well as actively controlling spending to reach surplus at the right part of the economic cycle.
That means for the coming Budget, we must fund new initiatives by making savings.
This is a necessary discipline.
This need for balance over the cycle has been summed up nicely by the Treasurer many times: if we are Keynesians on the way down, we have to be Keynesians on the way up  -  Keynesians right through the economic cycle.
The need to understand how the cycle is changing is summed up best in the remark so famously attributed to Keynes himself:
“When the facts change, I change my mind  -  what do you do, sir?”
In the face of the challenges we now face as a nation, this is what any smart leader, any forward-looking government, must be prepared to do.
So today I want to set out the facts that underpin the decisions our nation faces as we approach this year's Budget.
First, the good news, the shared achievement that we should never take for granted.
Unlike so many nations, Australia's economy is stable and resilient.
Our economic fundamentals are sound.
We have contained inflation, low interest rates, low public debt. 
We are one of only eight nations in the world to have a triple-A rating with a stable outlook from all three major ratings agencies  -  something Australia has never previously achieved.
Our economy is now more than thirteen per cent larger than it was in December 2007.
We have bounced back from the Global Financial Crisis better than any major advanced economy.
If we had made the wrong decisions during the Global Financial Crisis our nation could easily be struggling with recession today.
Instead, Australia is now the twelfth-largest economy in the world  -  when Labor came to Government we were fifteenth.
Unlike the rest of the world, we have very modest debt  -  because we have borrowed in the right way and at the right time, to support growth during the global financial crisis.
Our level of debt is the same as a person earning $100,000 a year with a $10,000 mortgage. 
Millions of Australians with mortgages and personal loans would love to be in a position where their only debt was equal to ten per cent of their income.
Similarly, countries around the world would love to be in Australia's debt position and have an unemployment rate as low as ours.
Indeed, the fundamental proof of our resilience is our ability to create and support jobs. 
Since 2007, we have created almost 900 000 jobs in this country, in a period when twenty eight million new people joined the jobless queues world-wide. 
Our national prospects in the Asian Century are bright.
As the centre of global economic gravity shifts east, it shifts towards Australia. 
Our diplomatic and trade successes in China last month, our improved relationship with India, our strengthening economic ties with Indonesia and our flourishing alliance with the United States  -  these are all proof that our plan to be one of the winners in the Asian Century is bearing fruit.
However  -  and this is key  -  while Australia is stable, resilient and close to centres of growth, the wider world economy is quite a different story.  
There is serious, persistent weakness in global growth  -  and continued volatility in the global economy.
To take one example, a resource-rich nation like Canada has only grown by five per cent in total over the last five years.
The advanced economies grew at only 1.2 per cent last year and global growth reached only around 3 per cent.
This global weakness creates important economic pressures in Australia. 
The contrast between our stability and resilience and the volatility and fragility of so much of the rest of the world is a reason for the continuing strength of the Australian dollar  - consider this. 
Today over 30 central banks around the world hold Australian currency in their reserves.
The increasing importance of our currency for central bank reserves worldwide is recognised by the International Monetary Fund.
Later this year, the IMF will begin quarterly reporting on central bank holdings of seven currencies and the Australian dollar will be one of them.
This shows we are a great investment, but that comes at a price.
The dollar's strength puts pressures on our economy, particularly our trade-exposed industries.
It would be irresponsible simply to wait in hope for these pressures to ease.
So the Government has a plan to create and support jobs, based on our five pillars of productivity, designed to seize the opportunities that proximity to Asia creates.
This back drop to our Budget decision making  -  Australia's resilience, global weakness, a persistently high dollar  -  have been known for some time.
What is new is how strong the revenue pressures on the nation's Budget are. 
We must plan for these strengthening pressures  -  and that is a key part of preparing our Budget for this year.
The persistent high dollar, as well as squeezing exporting jobs, also squeezes the profits of exporting firms: with lower profits for these companies comes lower company tax going to Government. 
We can't assume this will change soon.
The high dollar is also placing competitive pressures on firms here, who face new pressures from cheaper imports  -  holding down prices across the board, with the high dollar making it hard for these firms to pass on price increases, holding down profits  -  and in turn holding down company tax.
Consumers do benefit, but many businesses are doing it tough.
All this means the data on our economy now reveals a significant new fact.
This is the striking and continuing divergence between what economists refer to as real GDP growth and nominal GDP growth.
My best shorthand description of those terms is this.
Real GDP growth is growth in the volume of the economy.
The actual activity in the economy, how many jobs there are, the quantity of infrastructure we build, the amount of goods and services we export  -  how many tonnes of coal, how many international students pay for a course here, how many houses are built.
Nominal GDP growth counts this growth in volume and it also counts growth of the prices of all these things.
Today, real GDP is growing solidly  -  we're creating more jobs, exporting more goods and services and buying and selling more from each other, just as we planned.
However prices are growing at a slower rate than is usual for this stage of the economic cycle, a slower rate than was forecast  -  and so nominal GDP growth for this current year is significantly slower than was forecast and we expect nominal GDP growth for future years to be revised down.
The current data shows nominal GDP growth after the first half of the 2012-13 year was an annual rate of two per cent.
At Budget last year, we had forecast nominal GDP to grow at five per cent.
What's changed? 
While the prices of our exports continue to be lower than their recent peaks because of weak global demand and increasing global supply, the prices of imports are now lower than forecast because of the strength of our dollar.
The prices of goods produced at home are also lower than forecast because competition from imports is so fierce.
This is now putting so much downward pressure on prices that growth in nominal GDP is actually lower than growth in real GDP.
What's more, this has now been true for nearly an entire financial year  -  since the beginning of the June quarter last year.
This has never happened for such a long period in the whole half a century and more of the National Accounts. 
Not during the global financial crisis, not during the 1991 or 1982 recessions.
Not even during the Menzies “credit squeeze” of 1961, which was effectively a deliberate policy attempt to slow price growth, do we find a similar effect.
Now, that's a long explanation of a pretty technical fact.  
But for the Budget bottom line, it's a very meaningful fact  -  because, naturally enough, companies don't pay tax on volume, they pay tax on value, which is driven by price.  
The Pharaoh might have kept one fifth part of the grain from the field but the Tax Commissioner collects in dollars and cents. 
So even if the economy is growing as much as expected, when prices are growing much less than expected, tax grows much less too.
The “bottom line for the Budget bottom line” is this: the amount of tax revenue the Government has collected so far this financial year is already $7.5 billion less than was forecast last October.
Treasury now estimates that this reduction will increase to around $12 billion by the end of the financial year.
This unusually low revenue, which wasn't forecast even a few months ago, creates a significant fiscal gap over the Budget period. 
Put simply, spending is controlled but the amount of tax money coming to the government is growing much slower than expected.
Inevitably, confronted with the facts, the economic simpletons and sloganeers will squirm and throw in arguments to distract.
First, you will be told that revenue for the next financial year is still expected to be more than this financial year.  That's true  -  at the same time our population will be larger, more people will be on the age pension, health costs will continue to rise.
Indeed the growth in health and in the age pension will be far higher than the growth in tax money.
So revenue growth will be less than natural growth in key areas of expenditure and is spectacularly lower than reasonably predicted.
It is the failure of growth in tax money to match reasonable predictions that creates the Budget challenge.
Second, you will be told it isn't about less tax money in but about spending.
However, as informed commentators like Tim Colebatch pointed out last week, excluding east Asia, total government spending in Australia is already the second lowest in the developed world.
Of the advanced Western economies, only Switzerland spends a smaller share of its economy on government than does Australia.
The total size of government here is less than the US, less than the UK.
Not as measured in revenue either, measured in spending.
And let me reiterate, for the future we will continue to match new spending in the Budget with savings.
Given all this, tax money down, spending controlled, the question for Budget planners is difficult to answer, but simple to state: how, and how fast, to fill that significant fiscal gap?
Some of the above factors will return to trend  -  overall, revenue is being revised downward over the coming four years, not permanently.
However in part, this is a return to normality  -  returning to long-term averages.
Australia will not go back to the extraordinary revenue peaks of “mining boom mark I” from 2002-03 to 2007-08.
While we should expect revenue to improve as we move to the production and export phase of the current mining boom, it's clear that the extraordinary revenue peaks of the mid-2000s won't be repeated.
The overall story: by 2005-06 the share of the economy taken in tax reached a peak of 24.2 per cent  -  compared to 22.4 in 1996 and 22.2 as we reported in our last update in October.
The huge profits of that time meant that company tax revenue reached an astonishing 5.3 per cent of GDP in 2006-07 compared to a share of 4.5 per cent of GDP last financial year  -  a fall of around $10 billion in company tax a year.
Capital gains tax was 1.5 per cent of GDP in 2006-07  -  last financial year it was 0.4 per cent. 
We collect less than one-third of the amount compared to seven years ago and in dollar terms the drop in tax collection is around $15 billion a year.
Quite apart from any other factor, remaining competitive in the contemporary global economy doesn't allow us simply to turn back time on tax collection by dialling up tax revenue to these levels.
If I can summarise a complex picture in a few brush strokes, it's these:
The prices for what Australian companies sell overseas are lower, imports are cheaper, local competition is fierce.
Those things add up to business making less profit than planned. 
That puts pressures on our stable and resilient economy and it is one reason businesses and workers still need to work so hard to get ahead.
When businesses make less profit than planned, it also means Government gets less money in tax than expected.
That's the big challenge for the nation in this Budget  -  and it defines the decisions the Government's confronting as we put the Budget together.
Once again, to break this complex picture down in to a personal story. 
Imagine a wage earner, John, employed in the same job throughout the last 20 years.
For a period in 2003 to 2007 every year his employer gave him a sizeable bonus. 
He was grateful but in his bones knew it wouldn't last.
The bonuses did stop and John was told that his income would rise by around five per cent each year over the years to come.
That's the basis for his financial plans.
Now, very late, John has been told he won't get those promised increases for the next few years  -  but his income will get back up after that to where he was promised it would be.
What is John's rational reaction? 
To respond to this temporary loss of income by selling his home and car, dropping his private health insurance, replacing every second evening meal with two-minute noodles.
Of course not.
A rational response would be to make some responsible savings, to engage in some moderate borrowing, to get through to the time of higher income with his family and lifestyle intact and then to use the higher income to pay off the extra borrowing undertaken in the lean years.
Running a nation is always more complex than running a family budget and analogies only work so far.
But I trust the nature of the challenge we confront is now clearer, understood within the framework of the purpose of our fiscal policy and the detail of our medium-term fiscal strategy  -  and I trust that all would acknowledge the Government has some serious decisions to make and announce in the coming two weeks.
As we make those decisions let me be crystal clear about what we will and won't do.
We won't, during this time of reduced revenue, fail the future by not making the wise investments that will make us a stronger and smarter nation.
Better school funding and school improvement will not be jeopardised. 
Our nation cannot afford to leave children behind or to leave our nation's future economy limping behind the pack, unable to attract the high wage, high skill jobs of the future.
To return to John, you would not expect him to stop funding his son's top quality schooling or his daughter's university studies.
He would know that to do so would be to condemn his family to a poorer future.
And we won't fail to make the wise investments that make us a fairer nation.
DisabilityCare must not be jeopardised.
A fragmented, unfair, inefficient system hurting 400 000 Australians with disability and their families and carers  -  and putting at risk anyone who could acquire a disability  -  cannot be left in place.
Once again, we wouldn't expect John to deal with his temporary loss of income by failing to properly support the care of his wife, who has a profound disability.
What is more, these necessary investments are affordable if we make smart decisions.
So the way we proceed with these investments is to fund new structural spending with new structural savings.
But, because we now are confronted with new facts and far more significant reductions in tax money than was expected, we are going  through the process now of making decisions to spend less in some areas than we had hoped, to raise more in revenue in some areas than we had planned.
Guiding us as we make these decisions is the key principle of burden-sharing.
Because I lead a Labor Government, I lead a Government which understands that the whole of society benefits from the services Government provides.
In turn we believe that the whole of society should carry a fair share of the burden of funding Government, that the whole of society shares the burden of these saving decisions.
The more who share the work, the lighter the load for all.
Business, families, institutions. 
Everyone benefits  -  so everyone contributes. 
In the national interest, for the common good.
Now, there are no easy choices.
Of course as a Labor Prime Minister, I find these decisions both urgent and grave. 
This revenue discussion is not historical, it's very contemporary. 
There is new news here compared to six months ago  -  and new news here compared even to three months ago. 
Therefore, I have expressly determined we need to have every reasonable option on the table to meet the needs of the times, even options previously taken off the table.
The nation and the Government must have maximum flexibility to deal with these complex  -  and rapidly changing  -  events.
That is my approach.
In the Budget, the Government will do the right thing by the nation, the right thing for the long-term.
We will save responsibly, even when that means spending less on things which are important and valuable.
We will invest wisely for the future.
No one will be singled out, the burden of our decisions will be shared across the whole Australian community.
We will not cut to the bone.
That is the Government's approach  -  and it is a bright dividing line in Australian politics today.
I began by saying that this Budget will be about a challenge and about a plan.
It will also be about a choice.
Our opponents and their friends crudely flaunt the bitter language of the cut throat and the brandished axe.
We govern for all Australians, we govern to strengthen the economy and to spread the benefits to all.
Those values illuminate modern Labor every day we govern. 
I thank you for the opportunity to discuss them with you today.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced that His Majesty Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah, Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan of Brunei Darussalam, will visit Australia as a Guest of Government from 1 to 3 May at the invitation of the Governor-General, Ms Quentin Bryce AC CVO.
Australia was one of the first countries to establish diplomatic relations with Brunei and we enjoy a warm and constructive relationship based on strong education, trade, security, and people-to-people links.
This year, Brunei is the Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the East Asia Summit. 
His Majesty's visit provides an important opportunity to enhance our bilateral relationship and to deepen our regional engagement.
His Majesty will meet the Prime Minister in Canberra, and will call on the Governor-General and attend a State Lunch held in his honour at Government House.


The Project
HOST: The Prime Minister joins us now to talk more about this.
Prime Minister congratulations, this is a very important reform, but it‘s not going to happen unless you win the election.
Tony Abbott has come out and said why don't you do it now?
Why don't you do it now, why don't you just push it through?
PM: Well, I'm very happy to bring the legislation to increase the Medicare levy to the parliament.
If the Opposition is going to vote for it, then we know it will go through.
If the Opposition is going to say no, they don't want to vote for it, then the Australian people get to decide this issue in September.
Unfortunately, across the day, even though the Leader of the Opposition Mr Abbott has spoken on more than one occasion, he has not said whether or not he supports this move to increase the Medicare levy by 0.5 per cent.
This is important funding, because what we want to do is make sure that every Australian with a disability knows that DisabilityCare is there and that for all of us, for any of us, we never know when in our lives we might confront a disability or a family member might, we have got the peace of mind which knows with coming, just like Medicare, DisabilityCare is there to support people with disabilities.
HOST: You have no argument from us on how important this is for all Australians, not just Australians with a disability. But why does it need to have a levy on it?
There's been more controversial pieces of legislation that just get passed with no questions asked about the money spent on them. Is there a levy just because it's such a worthy cause, you think it's popular enough to stick a levy on it?
PM: Let me assure you there is nothing that passes the Parliament, nothing we do, which has money associated, that doesn't get the utmost scrutiny.
And the way in which we manage the budget now, is if we're going to spend more money, then we do have to make savings on the federal budget.
So that's the approach. For something as big as this, we want to have secure long-term financing. And that's why I've announced today this would be funded in part by an increase in the Medicare levy.
Yes, more money would need to be found as well and we'll do the savings for that. But this would be a long-term funding source.
HOST: The Coalition has labelled this as just another broken promise. Do you think people will feel down that you have changed your mind?
PM: I've changed my mind for good reason.
And I think people expect everyone to deal with the facts and everyone to grapple with the facts and to make the best decisions that you can when you're dealing with the facts.
And since I made those statements about Medicare levies, since the middle of last year, the following things that have happened have made a difference to me.
Firstly, we know that the amount of tax money coming to the Government is less than was expected.
Second, we've had lots of conversations with the states and territories, we need them to step up to the plate, but we understand when the scheme is in full operation, it is a big amount of money to ask them for.
And so we're going to share some of this levy money with them as well.
And then third, I've listened to for the calls for the disability sector, and they're saying please identify long-term funding.
HOST: Now, it's a great scheme. Well done for that. But the levy is only going to pay for a little bit less than half of it, Prime Minister, where will the rest of the money come from?
PM: We've identified some big savings in the Government's budget.
Things that haven't necessarily been popular like for example the changes we've made to the private health insurance rebate, which saves money now and that saving grows over the longer term.
That's the kind of saving that can then be used to fund disability care.
At the end of the day, all of this comes down to choices and values.
What do you value most? What are you prepared to put the nation's resources behind?
For me, my values say we shouldn't as Australians let another Australian get left behind.
If we see somebody who is not getting the care they need, because they have got a disability, we have got to fix that.
And the best way of doing that, is DisabilityCare for the long-term.
Funding that, let's all share the burden through an increase in the Medicare levy and let's make smart savings and decisions to pay for the rest.
HOST: Prime Minister, you've said that you had to change the funding model for this because the budget changed.
Why does it keep feeling like the Government is surprised by changes to the budget constantly?
PM: We take the best of advice and the best of forecasting, but we are in an unusual period with our economy.
There's an overhang from the global financial crisis on company profitability, even though our economy is growing.
Then we've seen this huge lift in the value of the dollar.
That can be a good thing, if you're travelling overseas, but if you are a manufacturer or business that exports, it's putting a lot of pressure on your company profitability.
And for those that compete with imports, a high dollar means imports are cheaper and there's pressure on them too.
I think intuitively a lot of Australians know that it's been pretty tough for business.
That means less company profitability, less tax coming into the Government.
We've got to face up to that and deal with it. And it's less than was forecast, even as recently as three or six months ago.
HOST: Well, we look forward to the scheme finally being in place. Hopefully, we do get it funded. Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: I'm going to keep working on it. Thank you.
[ENDS] 


Melbourne
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM:  I'm delighted to be here with the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan and the Minister for Disability Reform, Jenny Macklin.
And we are here today to make an important announcement, an announcement that is important for all Australians.
Every Australian lives with the prospect that at some time in their lives they, or one of their family members could be confronted with a profound disability.
A child born into your family with cerebral palsy, an older relative who gets one of the debilitating diseases that can come with older age.
Someone who has an accident and acquires a brain injury as a result.
At the moment, in our nation if this happened to you or one of your family members, whether or not you would get the care you needed would depend.
It would depend on the circumstances in which you acquired your disability, it would depend on where you lived in Australia. It would depend on your family's income and the ability of your family to provide support for you.
It would depend on whether the patchwork of services out there managed to meet your needs, whether you got in before they reached their cut-off and could assist no-one else.
Whether what you wanted fitted with what they were able to provide.
We are determined to change all of that, to create a new body, DisabilityCare, which would ensure that the current underfunded fragmented system of services is replaced and replaced for the long term.
That Australians with profound and significant disabilities would get the support that they needed and that that would give their families and carers the peace of mind they need to know that their loved one is getting appropriate support.
This is a big agenda for change and we have been working on it step by step.
On 1 July this year DisabilityCare will launch in a number of locations around Australia and then we want to move from those launch arrangements to a full national scheme.
We've also been frank that that will take some years and that we need to work with our State and Territory counterparts to get it done. But we are very determined that it should be done.
Not only as a matter of fairness for the 410,000 Australians who currently have a disability, but as a support for every Australian because we never know what life's chances and life's risks might bring for us or our families.
Many Australians, of course, would say yes we should have DisabilityCare, we should build on Labor's great Medicare model to create a new system of supporting people with disabilities.
That's when the choices come in about how you fund DisabilityCare for the long term.
So I'm here today to announce that the choice that I and my colleagues have made is that DisabilityCare should be supported by a 0.5 per cent increase in the Medicare levy. That's an increase of half a per cent.
What that means is for an Australian who is on an average income of say $70,000 a year, that they would be asked to contribute around $1 a day in extra Medicare levy to create DisabilityCare, to get the peace of mind that will come with knowing that there are support services for them or their families if they ever confront a disability during their lifetimes.
What this will enable us to do is to raise money through this increase to the Medicare levy.
All of the money raised will be put in a special fund for DisabilityCare. It will be put in a special fund and only spent on DisabilityCare and its creation and the rollout of services.
The first day on which this increase in the Medicare levy would come into effect would be 1 July 2014. Every cent raised would be spent on DisabilityCare.
As I said earlier, we do need to work with the States and Territories to get DisabilityCare rolled out across Australia.
We've been seeking to enter agreements with States and Territories for them to step up their efforts, to reach appropriate benchmarks, to roll out this new system of care for Australians with disabilities in their jurisdictions.
Some States have already said that they will step up, others are considering it. But we understand that this too is putting pressure on State budgets.
So we are intending to make grants from this new fund to States and Territories equivalent to a quarter of the amount raised. So a quarter of the amount raised would be used for grants to States and Territories.
Those grants would be used to assist States and Territories with the costs that come with building up to the full scheme in States and Territories.
The arrangements that I'm announcing today for the support of States and Territories are ten-year arrangements; at the end of ten years when the system is well and truly in full operation then there would be an appropriate review of the shares between the Federal Government and the State Government in supporting DisabilityCare.
To announce what we have today, we have needed to make a choice, and I will be asking the nation in September to make a choice too.
To endorse this plan, to make sure that we support DisabilityCare around Australia.
Now it is true that last year I had hoped that we could fund what we needed to do for DisabilityCare out of the money that was already available to government, that we could do it through savings.
And of course, we have been working long and hard on responsible savings, things like the changes we've made to the private health insurance rebate to free up money for priorities like DisabilityCare.
But I do today say that I have thought about this deeply and I have changed my mind. I've changed my mind for three reasons.
First, it is clear from what I said to the nation on Monday that the amount of tax money coming to the Government is not what we expected.
Second, through my dialogue with the States and Territories it has become clearer to me the dimensions of the fiscal ask we are putting on States and Territories and that we will be able to see the national rollout of DisabilityCare occur more easily if there is some more support for States and Territories to get it done.
And third, I have heard loud and clear the calls from disability advocates, from the disability sector, from people with disabilities themselves, from their family members, their friends and carers, to make sure that there is peace of mind and security around funding arrangements for DisabilityCare.
Now I do want to be clear, the amount raised from the additional Medicare levy will not fund the full cost of DisabilityCare when it's in full operation.
The Government will need to make savings for that full cost and there will be no free ride for States and Territories. They will need to step up too.
But the announcement we are making today does enable us to get this done for the nation and I will be asking the Australian people to endorse this choice in September.
I'll turn now to the Treasurer and Deputy Prime Minister for some further details.
DPM: Thanks very much, Prime Minister.
The Prime Minister has gone through a fair bit of the detail so I just want to make a couple of pretty important points but also to make the remark that I'm really proud to be here with the Prime Minister and our Families and Disabilities Minister because this is an historic day.
It's a historic day for the 410,000 Australians who have got a permanent or severe disability, but it's much larger than that. It's for their families and their friends as well.
Because in this area there has been such a tremendous amount of unmet need, which has caused enormous angst for so many families over a long period of time, and this goes to the core point that the Prime Minister made about why there needs to be a stable, secure funding stream.
That's why this announcement today is so important.
A stable, secure, funding stream that gives the capacity not just to Commonwealth but also to the States to ramp up their additional expenditure which is required over the next few years.
The advantage of this fund is that all of the money raised from the levy goes straight to the fund and cannot be used for any other purpose.
What that means in the early years is that the funds accumulate, then as the scheme comes on, as the States get more deeply involved, as the Commonwealth spends more money and more resources, there is a fund to kick-start those activities so that when it comes to 18/19, which is the first full year of the scheme right around the country, we've got the critical mass to support this vital reform.
And I guess that's the importance of the decision that we're taking today: that every dollar in this fund goes to DisabilityCare.
And as the Prime Minister said, we are also putting in place arrangements where the States will receive a share of the fund.
That is important to assist them to get up and to get running. I don't think there's going to be too many premiers with any excuses left after this announcement today when it comes to signing up for DisabilityCare.
What the Commonwealth is clearly saying is ‘you can have a share of this fund once your expenditure moves over the critical benchmarks that have been established for this scheme.'
So in that sense this is a recognition that we're all in this together and we want the States to join us, those that haven't yet signed up to join us, to make this truly national.
And I think as the Prime Minister indicated, this is a logical extension of the arrangements that are in place with Medicare because this is, if you like, one of the last big social reforms that needs to be put in place in our country.
Because everybody here is absolutely aware that there are more and more people living in our community with severe and permanent disabilities.
This is an issue of participation, not just in society but also in the workforce. A lot of discussion around at the moment about productivity.
This is a big productivity enhancing reform making sure that tens of thousands of Australians that have been excluded from participation in our work force as well as our society have a better opportunity to do just that.
And of course, we are asking people to pay a little more. To pay a little more to do a lot more for a group of Australians who have been left behind.
I would just like to make the point that in terms of the tax cuts that this Government has put in place and tax reforms, they are substantial and they have delivered substantial amounts of money, particularly to those on lower middle incomes and yes, this will cost some of those people a little bit more but for that a very important reform which brings peace of mind to so many Australians.
So today I think with this decision we are recognising the hard work and the contribution of literally tens of thousands of Australians who have laboured long to make sure that this sort of reform became a reality for people who have been excluded from our community for far too long.
And that's why I'm proud to be here today with the Prime Minister and Minister Macklin, who in particular has made such a significant contribution.
Because it's not just what's been done today, it's what's been done in recent years as well.
The billion dollars, for example, in last year's budget to get this scheme cracking. With those few words I'll throw to Jenny.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much, and thank you, Prime Minister and Treasurer.
I just want to take a moment to explain why it is so important that we have this decision today.
There's a family that lives around the corner from me here in Melbourne. Mum and dad, Rod and Janette, and they have an adult son Thomas.
Thomas has been severely disabled since birth. He is looked after by his mum and dad, they have to get up three or four times a night to turn Thomas so that he doesn't get bed sores.
They have to wash and toilet him, they have to feed him through a tube because he can't swallow anymore.
Rod and Janette have explained to me how hard it is for them to get respite, how hard it is for them to get even a couple of days off.
They've also explained to me that they've had to fund raise to get a new wheelchair for Thomas as he's grown into a young man.
His old wheelchair was causing him terrible pain and because they were having to wait so long for a wheelchair they decided to raise the money themselves for a new wheelchair.
This is the reality for families and carers, for people with disability in Australia at the moment.
This is why we need DisabilityCare Australia, the national disability insurance scheme.
DisabilityCare is being built in the Labor tradition, as we built Medicare and as we built our social security safety net.
It's there because we know disability can strike any one of us at any time.
A child can be born with a severe disability, a person can have a terrible accident or get an illness that leaves them with a profound disability.
That's why this decision today is so important. It means that each and every one of us is contributing to the security and peace of mind that will say to every Australian if disability should strike you or your family you will get the care and support that you need.
So today's decision will deliver what so many people have been waiting for.
I do also just want to briefly deal with some of the media speculation that's been around today about further possible changes to the disability support pension.
I know that this is of serious concern to people with disability and carers and their families in this country, so I want to deal with it here.
I want to say to those families that there will not be any further changes to the disability support pension in the upcoming budget.
This Government has already delivered significant reforms to the disability support pension.
We introduced major changes to the impairment tables which had not been done for 20 years, we also took the cap off the disability employment service.
These major reforms that this Government has delivered in previous budgets has meant a significant change in the grant rate for people coming on to the disability support pension.
In fact, we've seen a 20 percentage point drop in the number of people coming on to the disability support pension.
So major changes have been delivered but I do want to reassure those people who need the disability support pension and their families and carers that this very important part of the social security safety net will remain.
PM: We're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Do you regard this in any way as a broken promise? Why are you so quick to rule out a levy earlier?
PM: Well I did have a discussion with state premiers in what is normally a confidential format which is the dinner at the Council of Australian Governments meeting.
At the time I thought there was potentially some politics being played and some distractions from the efforts that States would have to go to, to lift the services in their States.
It's no mystery that we as a Federal Government have been very concerned about low levels of services around the country but particularly in places like Queensland where there's been a long-term pattern of under-investment in disability services.
I've worked through with my colleagues to make sure that we make the right decisions about long-term funding here and the right decision is the one that we've announced today.
So I've made it for three reasons. There's less tax money available to government than we were expecting.
All of the work we've done with States and Territories, and that's been very in-detailed work now on their expenditure and their budgets has made clearer and clearer to me the dimensions of the ask for States and Territories to not only get up to the benchmark, which everybody has to do, but then to fund the growth as we roll this out for everyone around Australia.
So the dimensions of the challenge there.
And third, and I think this is absolutely legitimate, obviously people with disabilities and their families worry that something is good as this starts and then it gets whittled away, taken away over time so there's a few years when things get better and then they go back to being as they were before.
I do want to give some security to those families around how this will be funded.
Now, this is the choice I've made and it's not an easy choice. I know I'm asking Australians in their millions to step up to paying an increase in the Medicare levy.
Australians will be able to ask of themselves that question when they vote in September whether or not they think it's worthwhile, just like Medicare is, where we all contribute and we all benefit to have DisabilityCare, where we all contribute and we all benefit.
JOURNALIST: On that point Prime Minister, do you think there are votes in what you're announcing today?
PM: This is the right thing for the nation.
I want to just be clear with people about the nature of the choice and then they will make it.
JOURNALIST: Can you clarify whether this will cover people with mental illnesses as well as intellectual disabilities and physical disabilities, and is it your plan to legislate this before the election?
PM: We'll go to Jenny on eligibility for the scheme.
MINISTER MACKLIN: The legislation for the national disability insurance scheme passed the parliament at the end of March.
JOURNALIST: I'm talking about the levy.
MINISTER MACKLIN: I know that, but the eligibility for the scheme was the first part of your question and it does cover people with permanent disabilities including those with permanent mental illnesses, intellectual disability, physical disabilities, yes, it covers those people.
The Prime Minister will go to the issue of the levy.
DPM: I just wanted to make the point that there is a greater public good here.
Yes, it's not been an easy decision to take but it's the right decision.
And when you take decisions like this, which sometimes are controversial, you lose some political paint.
The fact is this is in the interests of the country and most particularly in the interests of all of those people and their families with a severe or permanent disability.
Just going back to Mark's question, the real importance of the national disability insurance scheme is that it has a thorough assessment process. That's where the insurance part of the scheme comes from.
The way in which we assess the degree of impairment, if you like, the degree of severe disability, is critical to how funds are spent.
And I'd certainly like to reassure all Australians that the utmost rigour will be applied in this process.
That is terribly important, always to see that there is value for money and that the money goes absolutely where it needs to go.
That was at the core of the recommendations of the Productivity Commission, a process started by Bill Shorten who put a lot of work into this as well.
And I would urge people who are now looking again at what's been going on here to go back and see the very early work that was put in, which is the foundation of the scheme.
I guess the thing that really changed for me and the Prime Minister was as we worked our way through this issue was to think about how do we set this down for the future? How do we make sure that there is a degree of certainty that people have craved in this area?
Anyone who knows an elderly couple such as Jenny was talking about before who live around the corner knows that the thing that worries them if they have got a family member. What happens when they're not here?
And what the national disability insurance scheme is all about is answering that question.
But it takes a substantial amount of time to get it up and running and as you do that you've got to have the policy rigour at the core of it.
PM: Just on the legislation, this is to start on 1 July 2014, so the legislation can be dealt with in the next Parliament. Australians will have an opportunity to make a choice in September this year.
JOURNALIST: How much is actually being raised with the levy and how much will you need to raise in savings to meet the shortfall?
DPM: I can give you all the detail later, so we'll get a little scrum up the back and go through it.
In terms of amount raised, $20 billion between 2014-15 and 2018-19.
Now of course the money will come in early when expenditure is low but it remains in the fund so that when the fund gets to, if you like, critical mass, when the scheme gets to critical mass in 18/19 we will then start drawing down those funds to support the very extensive activities which are ramping up.
You may not be aware, and Jenny Macklin can talk about this, but the trials are starting now. They're informing how we go about constructing the scheme but the aim is to have the scheme fully operational in 18/19.
So monies will build up in the fund then they will be drawn down as it becomes fully operational. In terms of the Commonwealth, yes it's $3 billion in the first year, but in terms of the Commonwealth this will fund as you go out past the full operation of the stage about 60 per cent of our additional expenditure.
In terms of the States, I can tell you over a ten-year period what they would get out of the fund.
New South Wales $3.2 billion, Victoria $2.3 billion, Queensland $1.9 billion, Western Australia $976 million, South Australia $727 million, Tasmania $216 million, ACT $192 million, Northern Territory $92 million.
All of this detail will be available later but it is really important that you understand that the fund builds up, the scheme is in its early stages and then the monies are there as the scheme becomes more mature and fully operational.JOURNALIST: You just said that you are not intending to bring legislation before the parliament before this coming election?
PM: This can be dealt with in the next parliament, there is time.
Obviously we will see what the responses are in the parliament as to what people's dispositions are on the legislation but I anticipate that this legislation will need to be dealt with in the next parliament.
JOURNALIST: Is that because of a lack of certainty that the crossbenchers would support a levy?
PM: It's a commitment we are making to the Australian people and the Australian people get an opportunity to have a say on it.
JOURNALIST: Is there a danger that you're raising expectations from a very vulnerable group in the community that the levy starts next year, you're still in the phase of having pilot programs and the full scheme doesn't roll out for a long time, you will have a very tight conditions about who is allowed in and who is allowed out.
Is there a danger that a lot of families are going to think they're going to get a lot of help quickly from this scheme, they might have to wait a long time?
PM: I will turn to Jenny but let me make some comments too.
We have been crystal clear with people all along, that this was going to take some time to build.
We've worked hard to accelerate the period that the Productivity Commission identified, but the Productivity Commission itself said this is a huge thing to do.
Just the same way Medicare was a huge Labor initiative, this is a huge change for our nation and it will take some time to build.
We decided to get started a year earlier than the Productivity Commission recommended because we were so keen to get a start.
And then we have been very clear with people that there will be launch sites and we will learn things from those launch sites.
The one here in Victoria which will show us how it works in a regional area, the one in New South Wales which will also show us how it works in a regional area.
The one in South Australia that shows us how it works for children.
The one in Tasmania that shows us how it works for young people, adolescents becoming adults in that time in their lives where like children generally they want to start making some more of their own decisions and have their parents make less for them and they want to exercise more independence, how does this scheme work then?
Obviously the ACT is a discrete jurisdiction we can learn things from too.
And now we've entered an arrangement with the Northern Territory to learn some things about remote service delivery.
So we've always said we would do the launch sites, we would learn from the launch sites, and then we would move into the ramp-up of the scheme.
So there is nothing the Government's ever done other than be very clear with people about the timeframes here.
As Jenny says, the legislation's gone through the Parliament, which defines some of the eligibility questions that you go to, so there's words of law for people to look at about how the scheme is going to work.
So there are good sources of information around, and I would urge people and I am very conscious that there are 410,000 people around the country who hang off every word when we talk about DisabilityCare.
I would urge people and their families and carers to get the benefits of all that information. We will just go to Jenny briefly.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Did you want to ask some other detail before I answer any more?
JOURNALIST: No.
MINISTER MACKLIN: You're dead right to concentrate on the issue of security because for people with disability they do want to know that this is coming.
And, as the Prime Minister has just outlined, for 26,000 people around Australia it's about to start being a reality on 1 July.
So here in Victoria, down in Geelong, around 5,000 people will start to become eligible for DisabilityCare from that date, from 1 July.
We are launching the national disability insurance scheme, DisabilityCare Australia.
For 10,000 people in the Hunter, 5,000 children in SA, and so the list goes on.
I think very importantly the other big security that people with disability have as a result of the agreements with the New South Wales Government, with the South Australian Government and with the government in the ACT, we now have agreements for the introduction of the full rollout of DisabilityCare across all of those jurisdictions.
That means by 2018/19, we will have delivered to all of the people with disability and their families in those States all of the things that DisabilityCare will deliver for them.
We hope that we will get agreements with other jurisdictions shortly.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're not going to legislate this before the election. It's a pretty gutsy decision going into the election on what is effectively a policy to increase taxes.
PM: It's the right decision for our nation's future and that's why we are standing announcing it today so people can judge it and weigh it.
It's the same proposition that Labor fought for election after election because we were so bitterly opposed by the Liberals.
It's the same proposition we fought for on Medicare, which is that we all contribute and we all share.
That is what Medicare is about. That's what the Medicare levy is about.
In the modern age of course the Medicare levy does not pay for all our Medicare or health care expenditure but the fundamental principle of the Medicare levy is we all put in and we all take out because we all need services in the community like GPs, we've all got an interest in how our hospitals are going.
In accordance with that Labor principle that we fought for with Medicare, we are prepared to fight for this, for the principle that we all put in and we all share a risk that every Australian faces.
And lots of people, particularly younger people, like to think that they're bulletproof and that nothing bad is ever going to happen to them but I think all of us at the age in life many of us in this room are, all of us would know someone who had a child born into their family with a profound disability.
We have seen many friends have healthy babies and then there's the one friend you know who has a child with a disability and it completely changes their life and their family's life and their expectations about the future.
I think we all know someone in our family or in our circle of friends who has got that dreadful diagnosis, whether it's Parkinson's or MS or one of the really debilitating diseases that can forever change someone's expectations about what it is to age and what the rest of their life is going to bring them.
The kid that did something they thought was fun and amusing at the time  -  diving off a pier into shallow water and ends up with an acquired brain injury that actually changes the rest of their lives and the rest of their families' lives.
When any of us could face up to that, it is the right thing for all of us to share some of the costs and that is what we're asking the Australian people to do.
JOURNALIST: The 2012 budget included a billion dollars for the trial, over four years, can you explain how this funding works? Does that pay for the rollout now? At what stage can you start spending from the fund, talking about critical mass (inaudible). At what stage do you spend from it?
DPM: The profile of all of that is being settled but we've effectively already spent a billion dollars and we're not seeking to recoup that either from the fund.
But what we will do is we will draw down from the fund for the additional expenditure we are putting in both State and Federal. The States are entitled to around 25 per cent of the fund over time.
The great bulk of that money will come to the States after they've met the basic standard. So it will come in a couple of years' time.
But it is there when they have to put in there when they have to put in the big additional dollars to make the next leap. So it will draw down over time.
I am happy to give you the profiles and we will spend every dollar on these endeavours and nothing will be spent on anything else out of the fund.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your opponent Mr Abbott says that you've had to impose this levy because you've mishandled the economy and that it should be paid for, the NDIS should be paid for, through consolidated revenue and that's how he would do it.
I wanted to get your response to that and also if I could the Treasurer's response to the BCA's comments in similar vein today?
PM: Mark, thank you for your question.
On Mr Abbott's views, we are talking about 410,000 Australians now, their families and their carers, and every Australian for the future.
So if Mr Abbott says that there is another way to do this, then he owes those people not platitudes, he owes those people precise facts.
So he can only stand by that claim if he publishes where he would cut to make available the amount of money necessary for DisabilityCare, not only now but into the long term when the scheme is up in full operation.
Where the money would come out of; would it come out of pensions?
Would it come out of other sections of health care?
Would it come out of education?
Would it come out of defence?
Would he put company taxes up?
What would he do to do the funding?
Now, this is really serious. It's not for political platitudes and a slogan, it is not for the talking of nonsense.
I said before there are probably 410,000 people and their families and their carers who are concentrating on every word of this press conference because it means so much for their lives.
I feel that burden really acutely. Mr Abbott needs to shoulder that burden too and if he's got a different way of doing this, spell out every dollar and every cent, otherwise he's letting those Australians down and every Australian who wants to see this rolled out for the long term in our country, letting them down too.
DPM: Mr Hockey thinks it's fair enough for there to be a levy to pay for a parental leave scheme for people on very high incomes but it's not fair enough to have a modest levy to support the most disadvantaged Australians.
I think that says a lot about Mr Hockey and the Liberal Party and I'd also say I am profoundly disappointed with the reaction of the Business Council this morning, because they've got very little to say about Mr Hockey's levy, and they can't support a modest levy to right this wrong and to make sure we don't leave people with profound disabilities behind.
I am deeply puzzled by the approach of the Business Council on this question.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott suggested yesterday that you may have left the door open to increasing in death taxes or capital gains taxes on the family home. Any plans to do that?
PM: This is silly political games and we don't have time for that this.
We've got to run the twelfth biggest economy in the world, we have got to create jobs and opportunities for Australians every day, we have to build for the future which is not assured and we have to treat our fellow Australians more fairly through things like DisabilityCare.
Politics at the end of the day is not about the quick grabs at press conferences in the hope of getting something negative on the nightly news. Politics at the end of the day is about values and it's about facts.
We are putting our values on the table here today, we don't think any Australian should be left behind and we're prepared to make a big decision so that Australians with disabilities don't get left behind and politics is about the facts.
We're laying the facts out on the table today  -  how much it costs and how we are going to fund it by asking Australians to pay an increase in the Medicare levy.
Mr Abbott owes Australians the same courtesy. They are not children, they're adults, they're smart, they want the facts, he should give them the facts of his alternate approach.
JOURNALIST: The program may be the right thing to do, but is it the right time to do it considering there is so much debt at the moment?
PM: I will go to the Treasurer on the economics of it, but first and foremost if you were the family that Jenny spoke about that lives around the corner from her, what would you be saying about the timing for this?
If you walked out of this press conference and got some hideous news today about a family member or a friend, what would you be saying about the timing of this?
I am prepared to be judged by these choices.
Then on the question of the Government's budget, and deficit and where the budget is, facts.
Did the global financial crisis happen?
If you say yes to that, did it have an implication for government revenues?
If you say yes to that, did we need to stimulate the economy to keep people working?
If you say yes to that then you have got the explanation about what's going on with the Government's budget and why we have had deficits in our budget and obviously we'll deal with all of the figures on budget night this year.
So any person of reason seeking to explain where deficits came from needs to go through that.
Is anybody seriously denying the global financial crisis happened? Maybe Mr Abbott is. He can answer.
But everybody knows it happened. Is anybody seriously denying it had implications for government revenue or maybe Mr Abbott and Mr Hockey are they can answer that themselves.
Is anybody seriously denying we should have supported jobs? Clearly the Liberals do deny that because they voted against it.
We're happy to be judged by that choice. We supported 200,000 jobs. That is the explanation about where we are along with the high Aussie dollar and some pressures on the economy.
Against that background, how do you make choices? You make choices that are important for people for the long term and you properly fund them and that's what we're doing today.
DPM: Just a couple of things on that because our debt is a fraction of the debt of major advanced economies.
When I sit around the table at the G20, they all look at us and see a government with a strong public balance sheet, they see a government with a triple-A credit rating from the three major agencies in the world.
Our country is rated as highly as any other advanced economy in the world when it comes to the strength of our public finances.
And Mr Abbott is not entitled to go round with his fiscal fear mongering about debt and reflect on the strength of our economy the way he does.
The truth is we have low unemployment, we have solid growth, we have a high investment pipeline, we have strong public finances and we have lower interest rates.
But yes, at the moment, revenues are down. The responsible thing to do is to keep our economy strong and to keep people in jobs.
So as a matter of choice because we have modest debt we support jobs and growth and in this budget we will put in place again a pathway back to surplus, consistent with our strong support for employment.
900,000 jobs created in Australia since the end of 2007. That demonstrates our priority.
Conditions change in the global economy from time to time and governments must change too if they wish to protect the security of their citizens.
So we've got a bright future. We've got some challenges with revenue in the short term but also we know if we make the smart investments for the future we can strengthen our economy for the long term and the thing to do in the circumstances we are in at the moment is don't starve the future.
Make the investments and education which will drive the prosperity of the future and while you're doing it, also do the right thing about people with disabilities.
JOURNALIST: On the question of stability and security because that is what you're setting up here, the whole purpose is to give certainty to people with disabilities or who may develop disabilities over time.
Why don't you then legislate when you have time in the parliament before the election which would dare any future Government to dismantle something which is then already in place, so really taking a promise to the next election.
PM: Hugh, with respect, I think you misunderstand the nature of our democracy.
Governments get elected and governments change legislation. That is what happens.
So if you make a choice, it's a big choice, and it's got consequences.
When people make their choice in September, they will be making a choice between me and a majority Labor Government with a clear plan for the nation's future, including this plan for DisabilityCare, and the alternative.
JOURNALIST: Are you not bringing it to the parliament because it wasn't a promise at the last election?
PM: I'm just being clear with you Hugh, you're talking about the mechanics of legislation and I'm talking about the real world.
In the real world, governments govern and they make choices.
And if you change the Government, you change the choices that are made.
We're standing for this choice: DisabilityCare and an increase of half a per cent in the Medicare levy.
If others want to stand for other choices, then they've got an obligation to be as clear and as detailed as we have been and then Australians will choose.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Labor once described government advertising as a cancer on democracy. You said you would end this practice. Now we're heading into an election you're talking about a range of government taxpayer funded advertising campaigns.
Why are you doing that and what protection is there that this is not just asking taxpayers to pick up a shortfall in Labor's fundraising?
PM: Number one, I've seen some reports today bandying around figures which aren't right. So fact number one.
Number two, we have put in place guidelines here about government advertising which never existed in the past, so the need for information can be worked through.
Number three, we will never engage in a propaganda campaign of the style and dimensions of Work Choices under the former government.
Thanks very much.  


Wynyard, Tasmania
Dairy company Fonterra Australia Pty Ltd will improve its business competitiveness and boost export opportunity with a $659,100 grant provided through the Australian Government's Clean Technology Food and Foundries Investment Program.
The grant is part of a $6 million investment and will assist the company to modernise its operations at Wynyard in Tasmania by installing eight new cheese vats. The new vats use excess heat from elsewhere in the plant that makes them more efficient, saving up to $141,100 in energy costs per year and cutting the carbon emissions intensity of this key step of its cheese making process by 90 per cent.
Dairy production is a key growth sector for North Western Tasmania and an important export opportunity in our region, as demand for high quality dairy products grows. The Gillard Government is supporting jobs and investment in the dairy sector's capacity to benefit from these opportunities.
The project will boost production capacity at the Wynyard facility and provides the potential for the company to increase output in the future. Fonterra Australia will invest $6 million in the project as part of the company's strategy to develop and grow its Tasmanian operations.
The $1 billion Clean Technology Investment Programs assist manufacturers reduce energy costs, cut emissions and improve their competitiveness.
Energy efficiency is a vital means of improving economic productivity. Manufacturers across Australia are working with the Government to improve their operations and prepare for a low carbon economy. 
To date the Clean Technology Investment Programs have provided 221 grants totalling $120.4 million to projects across Australia and leveraging private sector investment for total investments of $331.2 million.
Fonterra Australia is also using carbon price revenue from the Carbon Farming Futures program to help dairy farmers reduce greenhouse gas emissions and participate in the Carbon Farming Initiative  -  a potential source of additional revenue for farmers and land holders who reduce emissions on the land.
The recently-announced $434,000 grant will be used to boost whole farm productivity by providing information on how farmers can reduce nitrous oxide emissions, one of the major greenhouse gases that contributes to climate change.  
The dairy sector in the north and north-west Tasmanian has already benefited from Australian Government investment including:
·         $4.5million to Circular head Agricultural Trade College to support training and a growth dairy industry, and
·         $1.5million to expand electricity infrastructure along the Harcus River Road at circular head to support the dairy industry.


Wynyard, TAS
Job seekers from northern Tasmania will once again have the opportunity to explore a marketplace of opportunities and vacancies when the Australian Government's Jobs and Skills Expo is held at the East Devonport Recreation Centre on Friday 21 June.
The Gillard Government's Jobs and Skills Expos have provided local job seekers with a great chance to connect with jobs and training opportunities in the region.
Job seekers will connect with employers, private recruitment agencies, Jobs Services Australia providers and registered training organisations.
They can expect to find opportunities from a great range of sectors and job types from retail and hospitality to resources and health care; from administration to tradespeople.
Hundreds of jobs seekers were connected with jobs and training opportunities at the previous Expo hold in Devonport in July 2010. This year in Tasmania we have already hosted a Jobs Expo in Hobart in March and there is one next week in Launceston. Now the Government is bringing back an Expo to Devonport to build on that success.
The Expos bring together employers, employment services providers and training organisations with job seekers on one day  -  creating a one-stop-shop for jobs and training.
The Gillard Government has a growth and jobs plan for Tasmania. The Government is fighting for jobs and opportunities for all Tasmanians.
The Gillard Government has delivered 76 Jobs and Skills Expos. We know that they work because we've now seen more than 26,400 Australians find employment by attending the Expos and many thousands more sign up for training opportunities.While Australia has one of the lowest unemployment rates in the developed world, finding a job can be daunting for some.
The event is a major chance for job seekers to talk to employers and sign up for jobs or training.
The Expo will be held at the East Devonport Recreation Centre, Carolyne Street, East Devonport from 10am to 3pm.
Those interested in exhibiting or registering a job vacancy at the Australian Government Jobs and Skills Expo in Devonport should visit the website at www.humanservices.gov.au/expos.
Employers can also contact their Local Employment Coordinator for North West / Northern Tasmania Priority Employment Area, James McCormack on 0428 299 262 any time or email james.mccormack@deewr.gov.au, should they wish to follow up on available assistance. 


Wynyard, Tasmania
PM: We're here together in Wynyard and we are specifically at Fonterra and I thank the Managing Director for joining us for what is an important announcement for the people who work here and for the people in this community.
Thank you very much to everyone at Fonterra for making us so welcome today.
I'm here to announce that we will make a grant of $659,100 here to Fonterra to partner with a $6 million investment they are making in ensuring that the production processes here are cleaner and greener.
What that means is that they will reduce their electricity use, particularly the way in which the cheese vats work and how they're heated.
That is of ongoing benefit to this business because it reduces their power costs.
It's also of ongoing benefit to our environment because it means that less energy is used, less carbon pollution is generated in making all of the products that come out of Fonterra, particularly all of the cheeses that people know so well from this business.
So this is great news for the people who work here; around 70 people work directly in this business, around 30 are engaged as truck drivers working with the business.
We're very pleased to be able to make this grant and we know that it will help create cleaner and greener production processes.
This is part of what we're able to do around the country through our clean technology fund, one of the things that we ensured from putting a price on carbon went to,
As we moved towards an era of less carbon pollution, our contribution to tackling climate change, we want to ensure that businesses are able to adapt and this clean technology grant assists with that.
Carbon pricing does the heavy lifting, it sends the right signals to businesses to cuts their carbon pollution and we work with them too through programs like this one. So thank you very much.
I'm also here with Sid Sidebottom to announce that we'll be bringing a jobs expo back to his electorate.
We have had job expos here before in the federal electorate of Braddon and we will be having another one shortly in Devonport and it's actually not the first time we've had a jobs expo there.
This is part of what we do around the country; we've had more than 70 jobs expos around the country.
They are a fantastic occasion where employers, with jobs that they want workers for come together with working people who need jobs all in the one place at the one time putting people together into that all important job opportunity.
And across Tasmania, having run these jobs expos we've seen 1,000 people get successfully into work, job opportunities picked up at a jobs expo.
So that next jobs expo will be on 21 June, conducted at the East Devonport Recreation Centre; can I say to everyone get ready, I know that they've been well supported by the community in the past.
And I know that Sid and his team will be working with employers, training organisations and the local community to make that a great success.
Putting together these two announcements, what is it all about for Tasmania, it's all about jobs and growth.
It's about making sure we've got the best of employment opportunities here in Tasmania.
I travel here very frequently and every time I come, people talk with a real sense of pride about where they live, they love living here, they love showing it off to visitors from the mainland and from right around the world.
But they're also conscious that their economy, the economy of Tasmania has been under pressure as a result of the high Australian dollar and other changes in the Tasmanian economy, which is why it's the right time to keep focussing here on creating new jobs.
I'm glad we were able to support this business today and I look forward to the jobs expo to put more people into work. I'll turn now to Sid for some comments.
SID SIDEBOTTOM: Thank you very much Prime Minister and thank you very much to Fonterra for hosting us.
The dairy industry, as part of my portfolio has well, has a fantastic opportunity in Tasmania and it's wonderful that companies like Fonterra and others are consolidating their works and processing here in Tasmania and most especially on the north-west coast.
We've got opportunities, we've also got challenges, Prime Minister, and I do thank you for your support through a number of our programs.
We've also got a program filling the factories and we're very keen to be able to support that and work with the state government and Dairy Tasmania in particular.
To Fonterra, thank you for what you're doing here; your consolidation here and at Spreyton who are also very successful in getting multi-thousands of dollars in terms of running out further extension programs and a very important employer to Tasmania as well and to the north-west coast.
Prime Minister, you know that we've got challenges, we've also got wonderful opportunities, and decisions have been made most recently in the Tasmanian parliament in relation to forestry and we are looking forward to working with the state government and all those stakeholders to make our industry grow again as it can.
And we ask people on the fringes of that debate to give this a chance.
Prime Minister, I know you support that and those funds that will flow into Tasmania and industries that will employ people particularly those that have been affected by the downturn in the forestry industry.
So thank you very much for coming. There's more to see and more people to meet on your travels here, we do thank you for coming and you're always very, very welcome on the north-west of Tassie.
And thank you to Fonterra.
PM: Thank you. We're happy to take any questions.JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
SID SIDEBOTTOM: We will look to and are looking to helping to fill the factories and there's more than one way to milk a cow as we've said before and we're working very closely and I'm also talking with the Prime Minister and others to make sure we get that funding  -  I dropped that in Prime Minister  -  but we're well aware of that and we're working very much to fulfil that.
That's a great opportunity for Tassie and filling the factories can get underway right now anyway, so that's terrific.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]SID SIDEBOTTOM: They're asking for $400,000 as they have from others as well, both in kind and in cash and we're working with them, we have through former ministers and the current minister now, so we're looking forward to it.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]PM: I have caught up with those comments even as I've travelled here in Tasmania and in relation to those comments, let me just say this.
When I announced this morning with my colleagues the Deputy Prime Minister and Jenny Macklin, the Minister for Disability Reform that we would choose to put a 0.5 per cent Medicare levy increase on to fund DisabilityCare, I assumed from what was in today's newspapers and the comments of the Shadow Treasurer on radio this morning that the Opposition was very likely to oppose this Medicare levy increase.
From what has happened during the hours since, the Leader of the Opposition has called on me to bring the legislation forward but has been unable or unwilling to say whether or not he would support a half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy to fund DisabilityCare.
So let me say this very clearly to the Leader of the Opposition and to the people of Australia.
If the Leader of the Opposition is prepared to support this half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy to fund DisabilityCare, then I will bring the legislation into the Parliament immediately.
If the Leader of the Opposition is unable to answer the question, what he believes in about this matter, or wants to oppose this increase to the Medicare levy, then I will take it to the Australian people in September.JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: We have to get the support in Parliament to get legislation through. That's why it matters.
And it also matters, I think, to the people of Australia to know what it is that the Leader of the Opposition stands for on this matter.
The Leader of the Opposition has said consistently that he supports the national disability insurance scheme, DisabilityCare.
Well you can't support something and then not fund it.
If the Leader of the Opposition is saying it's not the right way forward to increase the Medicare levy by half a per cent, then the obligation is on him to show every dollar and every cent of how he would fund it.
I said this morning when I announced this Medicare levy that I am incredibly conscious on this matter that 410,000 Australians with disabilities and their carers and their families hang off every word because they've waited so long for change.
You owe it to them and you owe it to the people of Australia to be clear about your intentions.
This is not an area for platitudes, it's not an area for fudge; it's an area for facts and precision.
I and my colleagues this morning have clearly outlined how we will proceed with DisabilityCare, how we are determined to increase the Medicare levy by half a per cent to assist with the funding of DisabilityCare.
I'd ask the other side of the politics to be equally as clear. They owe Australians with disabilities that much.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Well that was a different set of circumstances, very different from the circumstances that confront us now.
I'm dealing with the circumstances that confront us now and dealing with those circumstances, as I said this morning, I have changed my mind and there have been three factors that have caused me to rethink on this matter.
First, the Government is getting less tax money than it had expected and I made clear on Monday just how severe that reduction in tax money received by the Government is.
Number two, I've had plenty of discussions now with states and territories working with their actual figures, their real budgets, and I understand how big a commitment it is for states and territories to not only get up to the benchmark, which we are requiring them to do, but to keep funding growth in the system.
And number three, I've heard really clearly too from those who have advocated for change for so long that they want the peace of mind that comes with knowing there is an ongoing source of revenue to support DisabilityCare, so I'm responding to that.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: I think on this that it's just like Medicare and we've got a fairly young audience here and that's good, but I'm old enough to remember the struggles around [inaudible] successive Labor Governments, for and opposed, abolished and then brought back.
This was the story of Medicare, Labor fighting for it every step of the way.
And Labor said to the Australian community then, if you want Medicare then there will have to be a levy to pay for it.
Now all these years later, of course actual expenditure on hospitals and Medicare is more than the Medicare levy raises but all these years later I've never met an Australian who would say that they would prefer to be without Medicare.
I've never met one; not in all my years going through communities has anyone ever said to me let's get rid of Medicare.
And overwhelmingly Australians say they accept that they've got to pay a levy to have a system as good as Medicare.
We're asking Australians to show exactly that same spirit to create the next big institution of fairness in our society, DisabilityCare.
We all put in, we all get the benefit of knowing if we ever ended up with a disability, or someone in our family did or one of our friends did, that there would be appropriate care for them.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Well the rest of the money to fund the scheme will come from responsible savings that the Government makes.
We've already shown a preparedness to do that, to do things like make changes to the private health insurance rebate. That wasn't easy.
It was pretty controversial at the time, a lot of false claims made about it but we said that's a fast-growing area of expenditure and it's responsible to make a saving there.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: We initiated a review quite a while back, John Brumby and others working through matters associated with the GST, many of them are very technical matters about the way the GST works.
But beyond that review there are some very fundamental values matters for Australians when it comes to GST distribution.
And the question of values is do you believe that wherever people live in our great country that they are entitled to the same standard of health and education services as their other citizens? Do we believe that or don't we?
Well I do. And if you do believe that then that means that you don't want to see Tasmania be ripped off when it comes to GST.
Now, this is a big issue because the Leader of the Opposition has said he supports a per capita distribution of the GST. He certainly said that in Western Australia.
If you say it in Western Australia those words come back to haunt you in Tasmania because a per capita distribution would mean ripping $600 million out of the GST here in Tassie.
That's thousands of nurses gone, hundreds of doctors gone, hundreds of teachers gone, hundreds of child care protection workers gone.
Tassie couldn't afford that and that will be a big issue come voting day.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Let's remember if you look back over the last 50 years, I'm doing a bit of history for the group today, but if you go back over the last 50 years, for more than 30 of them WA was a net taker of GST revenue from other states.
We didn't always have GST across that period but a net taker of government support from other states.
And why was that? Well, huge land mass, sparsely populated; obviously people who live there couldn't afford to put in enough tax revenue to have all the services that people need.
So they relied on other states to help them step up, get the services that they needed.
They've gone on to develop the state of Western Australia into the economic powerhouse that it is today.
But there are always swings and roundabouts and whilst it is the economic powerhouse that it is today, then there are obligations towards states like Tasmania to assist with GST.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Well, this has been a long time in the making and a lot of work done here in Tasmania by people like Sid and by a range of our local members.
What I believe is this gives us a new start here in Tasmania and that the obligation is now on everyone to seize the prospect that this peace gives us, to get on with creating jobs in Tasmania as well as securing the conservation outcomes that come out of this agreement.
This all started, not because we took a view, it all started because formerly warring parties; conservationists and foresters had decided it was time to sit around a table and see if they could chart a better way forward.
It's a tribute to them that they found that better way forward.
Now the fringes of this debate need to fall away and together those concerned and about conservation and those focused on jobs and forestry need to work to realise all of this agreement.
We will play our part with almost $300 million of investments into jobs and growth in Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Certainly I want to see that.
I think that there are always some irresponsible fringe elements that want to disturb what the vast majority of people have agreed and my message to them would be the same as Sid's message to them.
It is time for those fringe elements to fall away and to let the mainstream that has come together get on with the job for Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: I can't give you what the Opposition's plans or cutbacks for Tasmania would be.
What I know on the public record already is there's $600 million of GST at risk.
The NBN, which is coming to Tasmania first, would be replaced by something that cost households $5000 to get connected and even then it wouldn't work right; that people who rely on the School Kids Bonus wouldn't get that anymore, that people who have got a tax cut through the changes in the tax-free threshold would pay more tax, and that the increases we've put through to the pension would also be taken away.
That is all crystal clear. What else would be ripped out of Tasmania, you'd need to direct to the Leader of the Opposition
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Well, I think the obligation here is on the signatories who first came together, the parties who started this process, to do everything they can to use their abilities to silence those who haven't gone with the mainstream consensus.
I do think this is a new day, it's a new opportunity and it should be seized. We certainly indeed to play our part creating jobs and improving economic growth here in Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: We're now beyond that. What we said was that the agreement would need to be the subject of legislation.
The legislation has been done so we will play our part as we've always promised to do.
Thank you very much.


Wynyard, TAS
Dairy company Fonterra Australia Pty Ltd will improve its business competitiveness and boost export opportunity with a $659,100 grant provided through the Australian Government's Clean Technology Food and Foundries Investment Program.
The grant is part of a $6 million investment and will assist the company to modernise its operations at Wynyard in Tasmania by installing eight new cheese vats. The new vats use excess heat from elsewhere in the plant that makes them more efficient, saving up to $141,100 in energy costs per year and cutting the carbon emissions intensity of this key step of its cheese making process by 90 per cent.
Dairy production is a key growth sector for North Western Tasmania and an important export opportunity in our region, as demand for high quality dairy products grows. The Gillard Government is supporting jobs and investment in the dairy sector's capacity to benefit from these opportunities.
The project will boost production capacity at the Wynyard facility and provides the potential for the company to increase output in the future. Fonterra Australia will invest $6 million in the project as part of the company's strategy to develop and grow its Tasmanian operations.
The $1 billion Clean Technology Investment Programs assist manufacturers reduce energy costs, cut emissions and improve their competitiveness.
Energy efficiency is a vital means of improving economic productivity. Manufacturers across Australia are working with the Government to improve their operations and prepare for a low carbon economy.
To date the Clean Technology Investment Programs have provided 221 grants totalling $120.4 million to projects across Australia and leveraging private sector investment for total investments of $331.2 million.
Fonterra Australia is also using carbon price revenue from the Carbon Farming Futures program to help dairy farmers reduce greenhouse gas emissions and participate in the Carbon Farming Initiative  -  a potential source of additional revenue for farmers and land holders who reduce emissions on the land.
The recently-announced $434,000 grant will be used to boost whole farm productivity by providing information on how farmers can reduce nitrous oxide emissions, one of the major greenhouse gases that contributes to climate change.
The dairy sector in the north and north-west Tasmanian has already benefited from Australian Government investment including:
• $4.5 million to Circular head Agricultural Trade College to support training and a growth dairy industry, and• $1.5 million to expand electricity infrastructure along the Harcus River Road at circular head to support the dairy industry. 


Wynyard, Tasmania
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: We're here together in Wynyard and we are specifically at Fonterra and I thank the Managing Director for joining us for what is an important announcement for the people who work here and for the people in this community.
Thank you very much to everyone at Fonterra for making us so welcome today.
I'm here to announce that we will make a grant of $659,100 here to Fonterra to partner with a $6 million investment they are making in ensuring that the production processes here are cleaner and greener.
What that means is that they will reduce their electricity use, particularly the way in which the cheese vats work and how they're heated.
That is of ongoing benefit to this business because it reduces their power costs.
It's also of ongoing benefit to our environment because it means that less energy is used, less carbon pollution is generated in making all of the products that come out of Fonterra, particularly all of the cheeses that people know so well from this business.
So this is great news for the people who work here; around 70 people work directly in this business, around 30 are engaged as truck drivers working with the business.
We're very pleased to be able to make this grant and we know that it will help create cleaner and greener production processes.
This is part of what we're able to do around the country through our clean technology fund, one of the things that we ensured from putting a price on carbon went to,
As we moved towards an era of less carbon pollution, our contribution to tackling climate change, we want to ensure that businesses are able to adapt and this clean technology grant assists with that.
Carbon pricing does the heavy lifting, it sends the right signals to businesses to cuts their carbon pollution and we work with them too through programs like this one. So thank you very much.
I'm also here with Sid Sidebottom to announce that we'll be bringing a jobs expo back to his electorate.
We have had job expos here before in the federal electorate of Braddon and we will be having another one shortly in Devonport and it's actually not the first time we've had a jobs expo there.
This is part of what we do around the country; we've had more than 70 jobs expos around the country.
They are a fantastic occasion where employers, with jobs that they want workers for come together with working people who need jobs all in the one place at the one time putting people together into that all important job opportunity.
And across Tasmania, having run these jobs expos we've seen 1,000 people get successfully into work, job opportunities picked up at a jobs expo.
So that next jobs expo will be on 21 June, conducted at the East Devonport Recreation Centre; can I say to everyone get ready, I know that they've been well supported by the community in the past.
And I know that Sid and his team will be working with employers, training organisations and the local community to make that a great success.
Putting together these two announcements, what is it all about for Tasmania, it's all about jobs and growth.
It's about making sure we've got the best of employment opportunities here in Tasmania.
I travel here very frequently and every time I come, people talk with a real sense of pride about where they live, they love living here, they love showing it off to visitors from the mainland and from right around the world.
But they're also conscious that their economy, the economy of Tasmania has been under pressure as a result of the high Australian dollar and other changes in the Tasmanian economy, which is why it's the right time to keep focussing here on creating new jobs.
I'm glad we were able to support this business today and I look forward to the jobs expo to put more people into work. I'll turn now to Sid for some comments.
SID SIDEBOTTOM: Thank you very much Prime Minister and thank you very much to Fonterra for hosting us.
The dairy industry, as part of my portfolio has well, has a fantastic opportunity in Tasmania and it's wonderful that companies like Fonterra and others are consolidating their works and processing here in Tasmania and most especially on the north-west coast.
We've got opportunities, we've also got challenges, Prime Minister, and I do thank you for your support through a number of our programs.
We've also got a program filling the factories and we're very keen to be able to support that and work with the state government and Dairy Tasmania in particular.
To Fonterra, thank you for what you're doing here; your consolidation here and at Spreyton who are also very successful in getting multi-thousands of dollars in terms of running out further extension programs and a very important employer to Tasmania as well and to the north-west coast.
Prime Minister, you know that we've got challenges, we've also got wonderful opportunities, and decisions have been made most recently in the Tasmanian parliament in relation to forestry and we are looking forward to working with the state government and all those stakeholders to make our industry grow again as it can.
And we ask people on the fringes of that debate to give this a chance.
Prime Minister, I know you support that and those funds that will flow into Tasmania and industries that will employ people particularly those that have been affected by the downturn in the forestry industry.
So thank you very much for coming. There's more to see and more people to meet on your travels here, we do thank you for coming and you're always very, very welcome on the north-west of Tassie.
And thank you to Fonterra.
PM: Thank you. We're happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
SID SIDEBOTTOM: We will look to and are looking to helping to fill the factories and there's more than one way to milk a cow as we've said before and we're working very closely and I'm also talking with the Prime Minister and others to make sure we get that funding  -  I dropped that in Prime Minister  -  but we're well aware of that and we're working very much to fulfil that.
That's a great opportunity for Tassie and filling the factories can get underway right now anyway, so that's terrific.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
SID SIDEBOTTOM: They're asking for $400,000 as they have from others as well, both in kind and in cash and we're working with them, we have through former ministers and the current minister now, so we're looking forward to it.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: I have caught up with those comments even as I've travelled here in Tasmania and in relation to those comments, let me just say this.
When I announced this morning with my colleagues the Deputy Prime Minister and Jenny Macklin, the Minister for Disability Reform that we would choose to put a 0.5 per cent Medicare levy increase on to fund DisabilityCare, I assumed from what was in today's newspapers and the comments of the Shadow Treasurer on radio this morning that the Opposition was very likely to oppose this Medicare levy increase.
From what has happened during the hours since, the Leader of the Opposition has called on me to bring the legislation forward but has been unable or unwilling to say whether or not he would support a half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy to fund DisabilityCare.
So let me say this very clearly to the Leader of the Opposition and to the people of Australia.
If the Leader of the Opposition is prepared to support this half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy to fund DisabilityCare, then I will bring the legislation into the Parliament immediately.
If the Leader of the Opposition is unable to answer the question, what he believes in about this matter, or wants to oppose this increase to the Medicare levy, then I will take it to the Australian people in September.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: We have to get the support in Parliament to get legislation through. That's why it matters.
And it also matters, I think, to the people of Australia to know what it is that the Leader of the Opposition stands for on this matter.
The Leader of the Opposition has said consistently that he supports the national disability insurance scheme, DisabilityCare.
Well you can't support something and then not fund it.
If the Leader of the Opposition is saying it's not the right way forward to increase the Medicare levy by half a per cent, then the obligation is on him to show every dollar and every cent of how he would fund it.
I said this morning when I announced this Medicare levy that I am incredibly conscious on this matter that 410,000 Australians with disabilities and their carers and their families hang off every word because they've waited so long for change.
You owe it to them and you owe it to the people of Australia to be clear about your intentions.
This is not an area for platitudes, it's not an area for fudge; it's an area for facts and precision.
I and my colleagues this morning have clearly outlined how we will proceed with DisabilityCare, how we are determined to increase the Medicare levy by half a per cent to assist with the funding of DisabilityCare.
I'd ask the other side of the politics to be equally as clear. They owe Australians with disabilities that much.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Well that was a different set of circumstances, very different from the circumstances that confront us now.
I'm dealing with the circumstances that confront us now and dealing with those circumstances, as I said this morning, I have changed my mind and there have been three factors that have caused me to rethink on this matter.
First, the Government is getting less tax money than it had expected and I made clear on Monday just how severe that reduction in tax money received by the Government is.
Number two, I've had plenty of discussions now with states and territories working with their actual figures, their real budgets, and I understand how big a commitment it is for states and territories to not only get up to the benchmark, which we are requiring them to do, but to keep funding growth in the system.
And number three, I've heard really clearly too from those who have advocated for change for so long that they want the peace of mind that comes with knowing there is an ongoing source of revenue to support DisabilityCare, so I'm responding to that.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: I think on this that it's just like Medicare and we've got a fairly young audience here and that's good, but I'm old enough to remember the struggles around [inaudible] successive Labor Governments, for and opposed, abolished and then brought back.
This was the story of Medicare, Labor fighting for it every step of the way.
And Labor said to the Australian community then, if you want Medicare then there will have to be a levy to pay for it.
Now all these years later, of course actual expenditure on hospitals and Medicare is more than the Medicare levy raises but all these years later I've never met an Australian who would say that they would prefer to be without Medicare.
I've never met one; not in all my years going through communities has anyone ever said to me let's get rid of Medicare.
And overwhelmingly Australians say they accept that they've got to pay a levy to have a system as good as Medicare.
We're asking Australians to show exactly that same spirit to create the next big institution of fairness in our society, DisabilityCare.
We all put in, we all get the benefit of knowing if we ever ended up with a disability, or someone in our family did or one of our friends did, that there would be appropriate care for them.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Well the rest of the money to fund the scheme will come from responsible savings that the Government makes.
We've already shown a preparedness to do that, to do things like make changes to the private health insurance rebate. That wasn't easy.
It was pretty controversial at the time, a lot of false claims made about it but we said that's a fast-growing area of expenditure and it's responsible to make a saving there.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: We initiated a review quite a while back, John Brumby and others working through matters associated with the GST, many of them are very technical matters about the way the GST works.
But beyond that review there are some very fundamental values matters for Australians when it comes to GST distribution.
And the question of values is do you believe that wherever people live in our great country that they are entitled to the same standard of health and education services as their other citizens? Do we believe that or don't we?
Well I do. And if you do believe that then that means that you don't want to see Tasmania be ripped off when it comes to GST.
Now, this is a big issue because the Leader of the Opposition has said he supports a per capita distribution of the GST. He certainly said that in Western Australia.
If you say it in Western Australia those words come back to haunt you in Tasmania because a per capita distribution would mean ripping $600 million out of the GST here in Tassie.
That's thousands of nurses gone, hundreds of doctors gone, hundreds of teachers gone, hundreds of child care protection workers gone.
Tassie couldn't afford that and that will be a big issue come voting day.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Let's remember if you look back over the last 50 years, I'm doing a bit of history for the group today, but if you go back over the last 50 years, for more than 30 of them WA was a net taker of GST revenue from other states.
We didn't always have GST across that period but a net taker of government support from other states.
And why was that? Well, huge land mass, sparsely populated; obviously people who live there couldn't afford to put in enough tax revenue to have all the services that people need.
So they relied on other states to help them step up, get the services that they needed.
They've gone on to develop the state of Western Australia into the economic powerhouse that it is today.
But there are always swings and roundabouts and whilst it is the economic powerhouse that it is today, then there are obligations towards states like Tasmania to assist with GST.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Well, this has been a long time in the making and a lot of work done here in Tasmania by people like Sid and by a range of our local members.
What I believe is this gives us a new start here in Tasmania and that the obligation is now on everyone to seize the prospect that this peace gives us, to get on with creating jobs in Tasmania as well as securing the conservation outcomes that come out of this agreement.
This all started, not because we took a view, it all started because formerly warring parties; conservationists and foresters had decided it was time to sit around a table and see if they could chart a better way forward.
It's a tribute to them that they found that better way forward.
Now the fringes of this debate need to fall away and together those concerned and about conservation and those focused on jobs and forestry need to work to realise all of this agreement.
We will play our part with almost $300 million of investments into jobs and growth in Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Certainly I want to see that.
I think that there are always some irresponsible fringe elements that want to disturb what the vast majority of people have agreed and my message to them would be the same as Sid's message to them.
It is time for those fringe elements to fall away and to let the mainstream that has come together get on with the job for Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: I can't give you what the Opposition's plans or cutbacks for Tasmania would be.
What I know on the public record already is there's $600 million of GST at risk.
The NBN, which is coming to Tasmania first, would be replaced by something that cost households $5000 to get connected and even then it wouldn't work right; that people who rely on the School Kids Bonus wouldn't get that anymore, that people who have got a tax cut through the changes in the tax-free threshold would pay more tax, and that the increases we've put through to the pension would also be taken away.
That is all crystal clear. What else would be ripped out of Tasmania, you'd need to direct to the Leader of the Opposition
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Well, I think the obligation here is on the signatories who first came together, the parties who started this process, to do everything they can to use their abilities to silence those who haven't gone with the mainstream consensus.
I do think this is a new day, it's a new opportunity and it should be seized. We certainly indeed to play our part creating jobs and improving economic growth here in Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: We're now beyond that. What we said was that the agreement would need to be the subject of legislation.
The legislation has been done so we will play our part as we've always promised to do.
Thank you very much.


Melbourne
The Gillard Government today announces changes to the Medicare levy to build a better life for Australians with significant and permanent disability.
Labor is transforming disability services by creating and locking in funding for DisabilityCare Australia, the national disability insurance scheme.
This reform will provide peace of mind to all Australians that if they or a loved one acquire a disability, they will be supported.
It is the most fundamental social policy reform since the introduction of Medicare.
To be implemented, DisabilityCare requires a strong and stable funding stream to provide certainty and security to the 410,000 Australians with disability, their families and carers.
For this reason, the Government will increase the Medicare levy by half a percentage point from 1 July 2014. This will take the Medicare levy from 1.5 per cent of taxable income to 2 per cent.
For someone earning around average wages of $70,000 a year, this will be a modest contribution of around 96 cents a day.
That's about a dollar a day from the average Australian towards a better life for hundreds of thousands of Australians with a significant and permanent disability, their families and carers.
Low income earners will continue to receive relief from the Medicare levy through the low income thresholds for singles, families, seniors and pensioners. The current exemptions from the Medicare levy will also remain in place, including for blind pensioners and sickness allowance recipients.
Even after this change, Australians will still benefit from the Government's three rounds of tax cuts and the tripling of the tax free threshold. For example:
• Someone earning $30,000 a year will pay an extra 41 cents a day in Medicare levy, but still be paying $903 less income tax per year than they were in 2007;• Someone earning $70,000 a year will pay an extra 96 cents a day in Medicare levy, but still be paying $953 less income tax per year than they were in 2007;• Someone earning $110,000 a year will pay an extra $1.51 a day in Medicare levy, but still be paying $1903 less income tax per year than they were in 2007.
The change to the Medicare levy will raise approximately $3.3 billion in the first year, and $20.4 billion between 2014-15 and 2018-19, when the full scheme comes into place.
DisabilityCare Australia Fund
Every dollar raised by the levy will go directly to fund DisabilityCare Australia.
To ensure this, the Government will create in legislation a special DisabilityCare Australia Fund, through a dedicated special account. Revenue from the additional levy will be paid into the fund, which will only be drawn down to meet expenditure directly related to DisabilityCare.
DisabilityCare is a national reform that requires the commitment and support of State and Territory governments.
This announcement ensures that the Commonwealth, along with every State and Territory, is in a position to deliver this reform.
Agreement has already been reached with New South Wales, South Australia and the Australian Capital Territory to deliver DisabilityCare in full, and to launch in Victoria, Tasmania and the Northern Territory. Discussions are continuing with other states and territories.
To assist with establishing DisabilityCare, the Government will make a share of the DisabilityCare Fund available to states and territories. This will be equivalent to 25 per cent of the revenue collected in 2014-15.
This will ensure an entitlement of $9.7 billion is available to states and territories in the delivery of DisabilityCare over the next decade.
Funds will be distributed to states from the DisabilityCare Fund for spending on this scheme once key conditions are met, including that a state has reached agreement to deliver the full scheme.
Payments from the fund will help states meet the growth costs, especially as a majority of their eligible population begins using DisabilityCare, and their expenditure grows.
The Commonwealth will only draw down on the fund for net additional expenditure as it launches and transitions to the full running of Disability Care.
The Commonwealth's share of revenue ($15.9 billion until 2018-19) will help to fund our additional contribution to DisabilityCare Australia until 2018-19, which is estimated to be $14.3 billion.
States who have not yet agreed to participate in the full scheme will have their share of the fund quarantined until they reach agreement to participate. These states will still be required to match, from their own revenue, the funding terms of the Commonwealth's agreements with NSW, SA and ACT.
The Commonwealth will consult with the States and Territories about the operation of the fund.
Implementing the changes
DisabilityCare, and how to fund it, are choices for Australia's future.
The Productivity Commission's inquiry into disability care and support found that our current system is fragmented and underfunded.
A modest increase in the Medicare levy  -  a dollar a day for the average earner  -  will ensure we can deliver and sustainably fund DisabilityCare Australia.
Without a stable funding stream, we put at risk DisabilityCare and put at risk the care and support needed by Australians with disability and their families.
The Gillard Government will offer this choice to the Australian people, by asking them to endorse this decision at the next election.
If re-elected, the Government will bring legislation for this increased Medicare levy to the 44th Parliament.  


Sky News
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Prime Minister thank you for your time.
Can I start with the decision to introduce a levy to pay for this disability scheme, what do you say to families who believed you when you said this money would come from within the budget, they wouldn't have to pay an extra levy or higher taxes to fund something they support that but now will see them facing a higher tax?
PM: What I would say to those families, David, is that I have changed my mind and I've done that for three good reasons.
Number one, the amount of tax money coming into the Government is not what we anticipated and I spoke about that on Monday. The set of economic circumstances that mean, even though our economy is strong we are getting less tax money than we expected.
Number two, now we've done the really detailed discussions with the states, had a good look at their figures, their budgets, not only over the next four-year budget period but over the long term.
And I do realise what a big ask it is to get states, not only up to the benchmark, but funding all the growth as more of their state comes under DisabilityCare.
Remembering we're starting with launch sites and then spreading the scheme out.
And number three, I have heard very clearly the calls from the disability sector, from people with disabilities themselves, their families, their carers, their loved ones, their friends who have said that it would give them real peace of mind to know that there was a long term source of funding available here.
So now I'm asking the Australian community to do the same thing that Labor prime ministers have asked in the past.
You've been asked by Labor before to pay a levy in order to have Medicare and Australians embraced that proposition, though of course it was viciously opposed by the Liberals at the time.
I'm now asking Australians to do the same thing with DisabilityCare  -  for us to all contribute so we can all benefit because you never now, David, what is going to happen in the future; to you as an individual, to your family, to your loved ones.
And so it helps all of us to have a scheme that looks after each of us if we end up with a disability sometime during our lives.
HOST: Okay, but just to pick up on the reasons you've given there for your change of heart on this levy.
Two of those reasons seem to suggest that you underestimated how much revenue would be in your budget and underestimated what this would cost the states. Is that fair?
PM: No I wouldn't put it like that.
Number one, on our budget, David, I said this very clearly to the nation on Monday.
We have now been advised that we are looking at a write-down in the amount of tax money that the government receives of $12 billion in just one year.
So yes, there have been increases to the amount of tax money that we're being told we won't get or perhaps to put it more clearly, we've got updated estimates about how much tax money will actually come in.
And for a whole set of very complicated reasons to do with our high Australian dollar and its impact on our economy, that tax money is less than it's been.
I think that people intuitively understand that conditions have been very tough for some businesses.
So it makes intuitive sense to people that companies aren't paying company tax at the rate that they used to. So there's that.
Then in terms of states governments, of course we are not the custodian of what state governments believe their financial position to be.
Not only over the next four years where they publish budgets but over the next six, ten years and in the period beyond and we're talking about long term financing of this scheme.
So we've learned some things in the discussions with states and territories, absolutely.
HOST: Can I ask you about the timing of legislating this levy.
This morning you said it would be after the election. Now you're saying you may do it before the election if Tony Abbott says he'll support it.
Isn't this up to you as Prime Minister to decide whether you'll introduce the legislation or not?
PM: I'm not seeing this legislation become a plaything, it's too serious for that and I'm not prepared to see that.
When I announced this morning that I would be asking the nation to support a half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy it looked to me from what was reported in today's newspapers about the Leader of the Opposition's position and what the Shadow Treasurer said on radio this morning that they were quite likely to oppose that increase in the Medicare levy.
During the course of the day it's become clear that the Leader of the Opposition is asking for the legislation to be brought to the parliament.
Let me say this very clearly to Tony Abbott and to the Australian people.
If Mr Abbott says that he will support this half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy in order to fund DisabilityCare then I will bring the legislation to the parliament immediately.
If Mr Abbott can't answer that question, what he supports, what he believes in, what he proposes, or he says no to this legislation then I'll ask the Australian people to decide the question in September.
HOST: But isn't it reasonable for an opposition leader to see the legislation, see a bit more detail before making that commitment. Why not just put the legislation in?
PM: David, what's hard to understand here? A half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy.
We've published today the figures about what that means to people at various income ranges. What's hard to understand here?
This isn't a complex piece of legislation; this isn't hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of pages of detailed clauses.
It's the sort of leadership decision that as Prime Minister you've got to front up to very frequently.
We've got to make decisions in this job. It's a responsible job.
You can't just go ‘um, ah.' You've actually got to make a judgement call.
I've made one and I am asking the Leader of the Opposition to make one too.
HOST: But you could quite possibly get this through parliament without the Coalition. The Greens and the crossbenchers have already indicated support for a levy.
If there's time before the election, why not do it?
PM: Look, I'm not going to take this to the Parliament and see it become a political plaything.
Let's go to basic principles here, David, and this isn't about the mechanics of legislation. It's about values and what you believe in.
I believe that no Australian should get left behind; that we're a big enough country and a generous enough country to say to each other that we will look after each other during difficult times, including when people are confronted with a disability or have a child born into their family with a disability.
I don't believe in leaving people behind.
I live in the real world and that means things have to be paid for so you have to make some decisions, not all of them easy decisions or pleasant decisions.
I've made one, David, that I stand for putting a half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy to give us a constant stream of revenue to support DisabilityCare.
Now, we'll need more money than that but that will be a constant stream of revenue going into DisabilityCare.
It seems to me that it is reasonable for me to ask others who say they support the National Disability Insurance Scheme, well are you with me on this?
And if you're not with me on this, what's your way of funding it?
This isn't an area for ambiguity or fudge or platitudes; this is an area for clarity because it matters to so many people.
So if the Leader of the Opposition says yes to the Medicare levy increase, let's get on with it.
If he says no, he should publish every figure that shows how he can fund DisabilityCare without a Medicare levy increase.
He owes that to 410,000 Australians with disabilities, to their families, to their carers; indeed, he owes that to the whole Australian nation.
And if that's the path he goes down people can then look at the two propositions and make their choice in September.
HOST: And do you owe it to those families as well to detail how you will fund this because the levy will only pay for half of the estimated cost. So will you now detail where the rest of the money will come from too?
PM: We are continuing, David, to do what we do which is to make responsible savings to fund the things that we really believe in.
You've seen us do things like make very controversial changes to the private health insurance rebate, a structural save which generates more money in the longer term that can be used to support important priorities like DisabilityCare.
But I've nailed my colours to the mast around this half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy, now I think those who aspire to leadership in this country have to make a decision, make a call and state it very clearly.
HOST: Just finally, will there be any more tax increases in the budget?
PM: I'm not playing the budget speculation games, David. Sorry about that, you'll wait for budget night.
HOST: Alright, two weeks to go then. Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you so much for joining us from Tasmania this afternoon.
PM: Thank you.



HOST: Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard good morning.
PM: Good morning and you look lovely. And I'm sure you look lovely even before the make-up suggestions.
HOST: Thank you very, very much. Welcome to the north of the state. You had a busy day yesterday?
PM: I did have a busy day yesterday, and I've got another great day in front of me.
Today, I will be signing the agreement for DisabilityCare in Tasmania with the Premier, Lara Giddings.
So I'm really proud about that right here today so that we know the full scheme will roll out in Tasmania, making a difference for people with disabilities now but really a difference for everybody who lives here because you never know whether it's going to be you or a family member who will confront a disability some time during your life.
And then I'm out to the maritime college too and we have got some special announcements about more investments in workforce for shipping and also in Bell Bay because we do want to see Tassie exporting into Asia and getting all of the benefits of that growth in the Asian middle class who want the things that Tassie makes so well, including all of your wonderful food and agricultural produce.
HOST: If you've got five minutes today we could send you out to Agfest and you could sample some of it?
PM: I would love to and we've just been chatting about that outside; 60,000 people at Agfest, it would be a great day, but unfortunately the program doesn't let me go and do that but I will be well represented by Sid Sidebottom our Parliamentary Secretary.
HOST: Let's talk about the NDIS, the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The rollout that is going to start happening in Tasmania is going to deal with a specific demographic. It's a specific trial looking at the, I believe, 15 to 24 year olds. Why that age group in Tasmania?
PM: That's the launch age group, so the scheme will launch on 1 July. It's launching in various parts of the country and we wanted to learn from those launch sites the lessons for the full rollout of the scheme.
So we deliberately wanted to select different population cohorts and different kinds of areas so we could learn comprehensive lessons.
So for example, South Australia is launching with children. We'll learn something about how to best care for kids.
You're launching with adolescents moving into adulthood, and so we'll learn here about what it's like to change modes of care as a young person is gaining increasing independence, just the way all teenagers want to have more of a say and there is the time that they get more decision-making and parents start to take a step back; what that means in terms of DisabilityCare.
In other parts of the country, we're doing geographic sites to work out how the full model will work.
The agreement I will strike today, we've already agreed with Tasmania, the launch arrangements, so, tick, that's happening.
The agreement I will strike today with Tasmania will move from launch to everyone who is confronting a disability in Tasmania.
HOST: With this trial that is actually going to start for this age group, what sort of numbers do you understand will be included in that trial?
PM: There will be around a thousand young people included in that trial.
HOST: That would have to go close to covering everyone perhaps in the state in that age bracket, I would have thought?
PM: I suspect it does, but we needed to work out with the Tasmanian Government all of the arrangements so there is the focus on a thousand, but we will move now from launch, 2016 it will start rolling out more broadly, beyond young people.
And then by 1 July 2019 it will cover everybody in Tasmania with a serious disability.
HOST: I had a question on my Facebook page last night to pose to you from Chris. Who exactly is covered under the National Disability Insurance Scheme, what sort of issues are covered and does it extend to mental health?
PM: Yes it does. This is for people with serious disabilities and the legislation to set it up has already passed the Parliament, so there is plenty of information available from government websites.
But serious disabilities, physical obviously, so people who are in wheelchairs, don't have the physical attributes to be able to move themselves, may not be able to shower themselves, toilet themselves, feed themselves, people who need extra assistance.
But it also covers people who are profoundly mentally ill, and that is putting a very big burden on their lives.
It can cover as well children with profound developmental delays, with serious autism which is preventing them from engaging fully in life.
HOST: Tasmania is the fourth state, I believe, to sign on. What role does the State Government have in this and how do you see the Tasmanian health system fitting in with this process?
PM: The Tasmanian Government is right there with us on DisabilityCare. We can only do this together.
So for the long-term funding arrangements, we are providing around half the money and the Tasmanian Government is providing around half the money.
Now as a result of the announcements that I've made yesterday, we will be striking a Medicare levy, 0.5 per cent.
That will help us with all of the costs of running DisabilityCare from the Federal Government, but there will also be a share of that money that comes to the Tasmanian State Government to assist them with their costs.
HOST: You've got bipartisan support for the NDIS. You've touched on the levy. Why not introduce the levy now?
PM: We've got bipartisan support, or we had it, for the passage of the legislation that created DisabilityCare.
Right now I've got no idea what the Opposition thinks about the Medicare levy.
They haven't made any announcements about that yet.
I believe the Leader of the Opposition has said he would do that today.
So what I'm saying is we want to secure this funding source for the long term to make a difference for people with disabilities.
There are two ways of doing that: we can have bipartisan support or if the Opposition is not prepared to support it the Australian people can speak loudly on this issue in September and endorse it.
HOST: If the Opposition Leader does come out and support it today, will you take this back to the next sitting of Parliament?
PM: Yes we will, but if the Opposition says they won't support it then I'm not going to play some political game that has the legislation perhaps getting through on the votes of others only to be repealed if the Opposition becomes the Government in September.
What secures this for the long term isn't that kind of political manoeuvring.
What would secure it for the long term is bipartisan support or for the Australian people to specifically endorse it via their votes in September.
HOST: Let's talk about the NDIS in practical terms. What is it going to buy? What is this levy actually going to buy for the young people who are part of this trial rollout, and eventually for everyone as they are brought into the scheme?
PM: Well, the way it works, what happens at the moment if you've got a disability, what's available to you for your care depends how you got your disability, are you under a transport accident or a workers compensation scheme, where you live in the country because some states have better systems than others, what service providers are prepared to offer you and whether you sneak in under the caps because these things are capped or whether you're the person who knocks on the door and they say, sorry, we've used all of our services for this year, we can't help you. That's not good enough.
What DisabilityCare would do would put you, if you were a person with a disability in the driver's seat.
You would be able to define what care you needed and then source it from service providers.
So you would be the decision-maker, rather than the person with the begging bowl out looking to service providers saying, can I please have this, oh sorry, you only offer that, I will take that then.
What's it mean in a practical sense, for many people now with disabilities, they only get the care to have a shower maybe once a week. That's not good enough for a nation like ours.
People get a wheelchair, but then their needs change  -  or the wheelchair, these motorised wheelchairs, they don't last forever, they need a new one  -  they go on a queue and they wait and they wait and they wait for a new wheelchair.
Well that's not good enough for a nation like ours either.
So those really practical things, if you put yourself in that position you would have had a shower this morning, I had a shower this morning. We just think that's part of life.
If someone said to us, you're going to have your next shower in a week's time, how would we feel about that?
If you really put yourself in that position, I think you can feel the power of it.
HOST: So the people that are inside the scheme will be able to say, this is what I want, I know it's going to cost this, and the scheme will fund it.
PM: The scheme will fund all reasonable supports for people.
HOST: What's the overall price tag?
PM: It's a lot of money. It is a lot of money. It builds up to being billions and billions of dollars, that's the truth of it, it's not cheap.
Not cheap here in Tasmania. The figures from Tasmania that will flow from the agreement that we sign today are large figures.
Both governments putting in a lot more than $200 million each, so it's big money.
How do you fund it, that's the question that I've been grappling with and I've asked the nation to grapple with in recent days.
I think part of the costs of this should be funded by all of us through an increase in the Medicare levy.
HOST: Assuming the levy goes through and we have a pool of money starting to accumulate to fund the NDIS or DisabilityCare, how will you protect that pool of money from some future government saying, we need that, there's another global financial crisis on the way? How will you protect that from anyone dipping their fingers into the honey pot?
PM: We are going to the money in a special account so it is clear that the money raised from the Medicare levy is there and every cent of it will be spent on DisabilityCare.
So we've been very clear about that commitment. I can only give commitments for my political party, for our side of politics so you will also need to put that question to others.
But in order to fund this, the cost of it from the Federal Government's point of view is going to be more than is raised by this increase in the Medicare levy, but I am asking Australians to chip in through this increase in the Medicare levy and we'll make big savings decisions to do the rest.
Already we've done things like tough decisions like the changing the private health insurance rebate, a lot of people didn't like it, but we took a big decision like that so that we would have savings that grew over time, that could be used for DisabilityCare.
HOST: Prime Minister, we've got a number of questions that have come in from listeners. Can we throw a few of these at you?
PM: Yes, no problems at all.
HOST: Jason says, why have you decided to have such a long lead-up to the election, why not the normal timeframe?
PM: I knew that what would happen this year, after a pretty fevered period in politics ever since the 2010 election, people have had to live with the Opposition playing a very negative political game and basically calling for an election every fifteen minutes.
I knew that if we went into this year with the election date not defined that hours and hours and hours and hours of time would be spent in election speculation.
People would be chasing me round Canberra just to see if I was going to the Governor-General's.
The Opposition would be out every day saying election now, election now.
I decided to cut all of that, to define the election date, to give people certainty and to try to get a spotlight on the issues that matter for our nation's future.
And I'm glad that we've spent so much of this interview today talking about an issue that profoundly matters like DisabilityCare.
HOST: We've got a question for Bob from Andover, Good morning to you Bob. What will you do about food security so that we don't have to rely on imports?
PM: You don't need to worry about that. I can give Bob a very clear assurance. We are a great food producing nation.
We are a great food exporting nation and we produce more food than we would ever need or ever use.
We are able not only to provide food to Australians but to make a lot of money by exporting it overseas. This is a huge opportunity for Tasmania.
We live in the region of the world that is fast becoming the biggest consumer market the planet has ever known  -  the biggest middle class the planet has ever had.
They will want the things Tassie makes, the great wine, all of the things that we love about Tasmania, the great food, and that's a huge export opportunity.
HOST: This one has come in from Judy and I think Judy's probably reacting to the chillier start this morning. She's asking, will the Prime Minister reinstate the insulation subsidy for Tasmania?
PM: Well, it is a chilly start today. I felt that as I wandered out to get in the car to come here. We, of course, did for a period of time subsidise insulation.
We haven't got any plans to do that again so I'm going to disappoint her. But insulation does make a difference to your energy costs.
HOST: Now, Tony has called through a question; a number of questions here, really. Why do working parents have to pay more for child care, shouldn't the unemployed pay more, working families seem to be struggling more than those who can but choose not to work?
PM: When it comes to the cost of child care, it can be really tough for people to make it all add up and particularly for women returning from work. Does it add up to go back to work, I'm really conscious of that.
So we've done two big things as a government. We've changed the child care system so there's more money going to support families with the costs of child care than ever before.
And we've changed the tax system so if you are a woman returning to work for example, you won't pay a cent of tax until you earn more than $18,200 a year.
That means for a lot of casual or part time working people, they now pay no tax, indeed a million people are coming out of the tax system.
So we've tried to help with those pressures.
For people who are unemployed, the approach we take is to try and create jobs and get people into work and here in Tasmania we've got a very clear focus on creating jobs and harnessing economic growth because we know there have been some difficult days in the Tassie economy.
HOST: Prime Minister, we've got a message through on the SMS and it is perhaps more just a little bit of a statement and it says, ‘Hi Julia, I remember you just as a member sitting on the plane next to me.'
PM: Oh, there you go, that's nice!
HOST: Thank you very much to Bruce. Actually we both hail from South Australia, very similar stomping ground. You're Unley High, I was Blackwood High. What do you miss most about your life over there?
PM: Look the main thing I miss is obviously day-to-day is my family. All of my family is there.
So to spend any family time, whether it's with my mum or my sister or my niece or my nephew and we've got a new baby on the way  -  my niece is having a baby due in July so I'm looking forward to the title of great aunt.
I think it has got merits in all sorts of directions doesn't it  -  the meaning of the word great in all sorts of ways! Great aunt  -  I'm looking forward to that, so it's time with family.
HOST: Is that better title than Prime Minister?
PM: I think it's a different kind of title. It'll have more meaning in my family for a longer period of time.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you for joining us this morning.
PM: Thank you.


Launceston, TAS
The Gillard Government and Tasmanian Government have reached a significant agreement today that will allow for the full roll out of DisabilityCare Australia, the National Disability Insurance Scheme, in Tasmania by July 2019.
The agreement will provide around 11,000 Tasmanian residents with significant or profound disability choice and control over the care and support they receive.DisabilityCare Australia will also give all Tasmanians the peace of mind that if they have or acquire a disability or have a child with disability that leaves them needing daily care and support, that they will get the support they need when they need it.Under the agreement reached today:• By 2019-20, the Tasmanian Government will provide an estimated $232 million to cover all people in Tasmania. This contribution was determined using the benchmark set by New South Wales in the agreement reached with the Commonwealth in December 2012. This will contribute to the cost of care and support for people with disability.• By 2019-20, the Commonwealth Government will contribute around $245 million to the scheme for Tasmanians. This will be around 51 per cent of scheme costs. In addition, the Commonwealth will cover the full cost of people who turn 65 and choose to remain in the scheme.Today's agreement builds on the agreement to launch in Tasmania from July 2013 for all young people aged 15-24 years. Other eligible Tasmanian residents will start entering the scheme in July 2016.We will progressively roll out DisabilityCare Australia in Tasmania so that by July 2019, all eligible residents will be covered.DisabilityCare Australia in Tasmania will offer people with disability the care and support they need over their lifetimes. DisabilityCare Australia will also end the cruel lottery that currently exists where the care and support they receive depends on where they live or how they acquired their disability.The Gillard Government will continue to work closely with remaining state and territory governments to reach agreement on the national roll out of DisabilityCare Australia, so that all Australians can rest assured that if they have, or acquire, a disability they will have their needs met in a way that supports them to live with choice and dignity.


ABC Melbourne
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: The Prime Minister of Australia, she joins us from Tasmania where she's just signed the historic forestry agreement down there, but all eyes on DisabilityCare. Prime Minister good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Jon.
HOST: Are you politicising the introduction of what you describe as nation-building? Why pose a challenge to Tony Abbott, why not just get on with it?
PM: We have been getting on with it, Jon. We've been getting on with it now for years. Let's be very clear about what's happened so far. We asked the Productivity Commission for advice.
We announced that we would respond and accept many of the recommendations of the Productivity Commission report, but we actually wanted to get on with building DisabilityCare a year earlier than they recommended-
HOST: But why turn it into a challenge to Tony Abbott?
PM: Jon, you've asked me a question, let me answer it. We have been getting on with this work. Productivity Commission report; decided to start a year earlier than they recommended; made a billion dollars' worth of space in our budget to fund launch sites around the country including in Victoria and in Tasmania where I am now; brought the legislation to the Parliament to create DisabilityCare.
It's gone through the Parliament, now we're working to secure agreements with states and territories for the full rollout of the scheme. I've just signed one with Tasmania and I am asking people too to put this as a priority for the nation by agreeing to put the Medicare levy up by half a per cent.
That's the work, long-term, methodical and patient, that I've done. The only question before the nation now is do they want to see the Medicare levy go up to fund DisabilityCare?
There's two ways of answering that question securely for the long term. Either we can have bipartisan support for the proposal, or in the absence of bipartisan support the Australian people can settle the question at the next election.
HOST: Why look for bipartisan support, is my question. You've got a majority on the floor of the Parliament. Tony Windsor says this will romp it in, and he'd know, so why not just do it even if they don't wholeheartedly support it?
PM: Well Jon, let's be practical about the nature of our democracy.
Are you seriously suggesting to me that if the Opposition comes out today and opposes the levy, that it would be a secure thing to do for the future to try and get it through the Parliament on the votes of others and then if government changes at the next election, then of course an Opposition opposed to it would take it away. That would be a crazy process to go through.
HOST: Yes, I am seriously suggesting that you are the Prime Minister, you have a majority on the floor of the Parliament, you pass laws for now and then wait and see what the future holds.
PM: Jon, we are talking about a Medicare levy that starts on 1 July 2014. This is too important to be hostage to political games going one way or another.
The thing that secures this for the long term is not the playing of tactical political games. It is people of good heart and good spirit saying this is important and giving it long term bipartisan support or the Australian people clearly indicating their view as they vote in the next election.
That's the way that secures it for the long term rather than it becoming something that gets tossed into the Parliament one day and tossed out of the Parliament the next.
I'm not going to put an issue I feel so passionately about, because it's about the lives of 410,000 people with profound disabilities and all of the Australians to come with profound disabilities, I'm not going to put it in that kind of political game.
It's exactly the sort of thing that should attract bipartisanship. If it doesn't then I'll campaign to get it done.
HOST: I fully expect the Liberal Party will say, and they're holding a phone hook-up pretty much as you and I are speaking now, I fully expect them to say ‘look, we don't trust this government's figures, they keep announcing a bigger and bigger deficit as we get closer to the budget day of reckoning, they're not being upfront with us and we can't rely on anything they're saying so we're going to hold back our support for anything until we see the budget'.
PM: Well that would be a nonsense position for them to take.
HOST: Why?
PM: Because the costs for the launch sites are already factored into the Government's budget. That's not what they're being asked about.
What they're being asked about is the long-term costs as we move to the scheme being in full operation around the country in financial year 2018/19.
So the question you've got to ask yourself is how do we fund this scheme for the long term? That is not a question of ‘can I have the figure today?', it is a question of your values and whether or not you're prepared to make the choices necessary to get funds available for that long term.
Now, the Opposition has at its disposal what DisabilityCare is going to cost as it moves towards full operation. It's had figures since the Productivity Commission first worked on this and of course figures have been made available by government.
It has at its disposal what the Medicare levy increase would raise  -  we made that transparent yesterday when we announced the Medicare levy increase and so it becomes a question of what do you value and what are you prepared to do. Nothing more and nothing less.
If the Opposition can't answer that question, then frankly Jon, they say they're up to leading the nation and they can't answer that question, really?
HOST: Alright, it's universally being described in the Murdoch tabloids as a tax, not a levy. The front page of the Herald Sun headline ‘Vote for my tax', the Advertiser ‘Care tax cost fight' and so on. Is it a tax or a levy?
PM: The Medicare levy has been referred to through the ages as a levy so I'm just using the title everybody knows and everybody understands. You wouldn't expect me to rename it, since it was first put in place by Labor in order to create Medicare.
It's been known as the Medicare levy and I want the Medicare levy to increase by half a per cent.
HOST: But it's effectively an increase in most people's payments of tax, because the Medicare levy comes through your tax return, through your tax system.
PM: Absolutely Jon, let's not mince any words here. I'm asking people for money that would have been in their pocket to put into DisabilityCare. So they would have had it to spend, I'm asking them to not have it to spend and to see it go to DisabilityCare. Absolutely right.
HOST: Well let's move on and in an hour we'll find out from Tony Abbott what his position on this particular strategy will be, but to other things-
PM: Jon, I am going to pull you up there. It's not a position on a strategy, it's a position on better care for Australians with disabilities and how you fund it. And I think everyone has got the obligation to say how they want to see something as big as this funded.
Now I'm saying that in part, it should be funded by all of us sharing the burden-
HOST: Got that, we've only got three minutes until the news interrupts us, so while I can, will you be, in the budget, doing anything to rein in the cost to revenue to negative gearing?
PM: Look I'm not playing the rule-in rule-out game, but you would be aware this has not been on our agenda. We have not been in a discussion about it.
HOST: No, but you've said all things are on the table now.
PM: Look Jon, I'm not going to start some silly scare campaign about negative gearing. You're smarter than that. I'm smarter than that. Let's not play a stupid game about the budget.
HOST: But if you want to reform the tax system, there was the Henry review blueprint-
PM: And Jon you know that we have not been in the business of working on those kinds of questions, so let's not play the silly game, not interested.
HOST: But why not? Because it's middle-class welfare of the most profound kind and it's bleeding the country dry.
PM: Well I don't agree with any of that and I'm not playing the game.
HOST: Is there class warfare? The conservative side of politics is saying that what you're doing is pursuing a class warfare agenda of one kind or another.
PM: And what do you mean by that Jon? Point me to a specific measure that I've announced that you think properly bears those words. Let's not sloganise, let's deal with facts.
HOST: Well they're not my words, I'm-
PM: And yes, the Opposition runs round with all sorts of slogans. You tell me one government policy which would properly be described in those words. Just one.
HOST: Well, describing the superannuation changes and saying that people who are well-off and who are the rich being asked to give something up and a lot of people who don't regard themselves as rich say, ‘hang on, that's going to potentially catch me and I don't regard myself as being one of the top one per cent in the community. I'm not wealthy'.
PM: So you're saying any time a government says that there should be a progressive system, for example our progressive tax system, that it's properly described in those terms, are you?
HOST: I'm not saying it, I'm trying to find out whether you concede-
PM: I'm just putting to you the absurdity of this kind of stuff. We get lots of silly slogans thrown around in the public debate and then there are the facts. And the facts are these.
Yes, in superannuation we've disproportionately got tax concessions going to the upper end. For the sustainability and fairness of the system we've announced some changes. They're the right thing to do.
So they can describe them how they like, but they are progressive changes that recognise that people who have superannuation nest eggs measured in the millions are in a different position from other Australians and that if you are looking for the sustainability of the system, then it makes sense to make a change at that upper end.
HOST: As so often happens, the time disappears and vanishes in front of us. We need the chance to have you in the studio for a longer chat one day soon. Thank you for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks Jon.


Launceston, TAS
PM: We're here today for three important reasons.
First, the Premier and I have signed the inter-governmental agreement on forestry. This has been a long process for the people of Tasmania but now, with the forestry issue settled, we can get on with investing in Tasmania and we are jointly committed to jobs and growth in Tasmania.
So I thank the Premier for the agreement we've signed today.
I am l also here to announce today a $22 million investment to help with the movement of freight here in the north of Tasmania. That too is about jobs and growth.
It's about an investment of $12 million into the maritime college, an investment of $5 million into industry training of workers in the maritime industry and a capital investment into Bell Bay, so freight can be moved more efficiently.
But third, and standing here with the people who live and work here with the people with disabilities that we have met today, most importantly the Premier and I have signed today an agreement to roll out DisabilityCare throughout Tasmania.
We had already agreed that Tasmania would have a launch site and we would learn from that launch about the provision of services to young people, to adolescents moving into young adulthood.
Today we have reached the agreement to do more to ensure that DisabilityCare is rolled out right throughout Tasmania.
It's going to take some time to do. We have always been clear about that.
But what this means is that by 1 July 2019, DisabilityCare will be here and operational for people in Tasmania with significant disabilities and Tasmanians will have the reassurance and peace of mind which comes with knowing that if they or a family member in the future ever confront a disability they will get the support that they need.
So it's a truly significant day. I will hand over to the Premier and let her take questions. I'll say a few more words after that about disability, and hand over to Jenny Macklin and then we'll take your questions. Unusual ordering, there we go.
PREMIER GIDDIINGS: Thank you, Prime Minister, and thank you also for allowing me to speak at this point before I have to go because today is indeed a really important day for Tasmania on so many fronts.
As the Prime Minister has spoken about, she and I did sign the inter-governmental agreement this morning on the forestry issue so we can see the funds that have been promised to Tasmania and to those sawmillers who have their log quotas bought back, the communities that will have us work with them around economic development initiatives and of course the management of the reserves that have now been created or are in the process of being formalised actually funded.
We couldn't have done it without the Australian Government and I sincerely do thank Julia Gillard and her Government for what they have done in being patient and working with us over the three-year period to see an outcome for forestry in this State.
So thank you very much for your personal commitment.
The Prime Minister also mentioned the help that the Australian Government is providing us with freight.
I also noticed an announcement yesterday with the University of Tasmania which we believe is quite significant and will help us to leverage NBN in this State, and most importantly, the announcement today of the two governments once against working together around the needs of people living with a disability in Tasmania.
This isn't just about Tasmania. This is a reform that is about all Australians living with a disability, and I hope that it will not be long now before we see all of the other States also sign up to this critical reform.
Here in Tasmania this reform will assist almost 11,000 Tasmanians when it comes into its full being in the financial year 2019/20. I do want to actually also spend a moment to thank Cassie O'Connor, the Minister for Disabilities, for her role in helping to negotiate this agreement with the sector.
This has taken a huge effort by many, many people over many years as well to achieve what has been reached today.
These things don't happen overnight. None of the issues that we're covering here today have happened overnight, whether it be forestry, disabilities, freight or indeed further investment in our university here in Tasmania too.
It's been a massive effort, it's a day we can all be very proud of. And I know particularly with NDIS just how important this has been.
Important to mums and dads who are raising their children with a disability, worried about the future of their children. Important for those carers and providers of services who needed certainty that they would get the funding they need to look after people with a disability in our community.
And most critically important for those who are living with a disability in our community to know that they will get the help they need when they need it.
So this is a historic day, this reform is as big as Medicare in its day, and it's absolutely fundamental and the commitment that's been shown by Jenny Macklin for all these years by Cassie O'Connor, by Julia Gillard and by the other premiers who have already signed up does, I believe, need that recognition and most importantly the campaigners who have not given up.
They have been tenacious and their hard work has paid off here today.
So we thank you, everybody, who has had a role to play in delivering this much-needed reform and we look forward to delivering it here in Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: Premier, was yesterday's announcement a game changer?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: We were determined to make NDIS work in this state regardless.
What the announcement of the DisabilityCare levy through Medicare has enabled us to do is to get some financial relief from the burden that we were willing to carry because we understood how important this was to people living with a disability.
But the result of this means that the growth funding, the additional funding that we will put in to this disability sector, half of that, around half of that, will now be covered by the contribution we will receive through the Australian Government, through that Medicare levy increase to cover DisabilityCare.
So it certainly does help alleviate some of the pressure we had on our budget in those out years.
JOURNALIST: What are the funding figures?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Effectively over a six-year period we're putting in an additional $134 million and generally speaking, when we start to get into the settled system that is around about an additional $37 million per year beyond that, there are some additional costs in the very first year that lifts that figure up, but on an ongoing basis it's around that vicinity.
So we expect through the levy we will get roughly $22 million back so it's around about half of that additional cost in those ongoing out years.
JOURNALIST: Where will the rest of Tasmania's share come from
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Well obviously there are issues that will be dealt with through budget processes. As the full NDIS does not begin until the financial year 2019/20, at this point in time, it will not show up in our budget because it is beyond the out years of our budget.
But it will be an issue that future governments will need to fund but this is manageable.
If you are talking about an extra $20 million-odd, that can be done and any government, whatever political persuasion, who uses it as an excuse not to deliver for disability, I believe should hang their head in shame.
JOURNALIST: Does this mean there won't be an impact on the aim to return to surplus by 2014/15?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: The issue around returning to surplus in the state budget is not associated with this issue because of the fact that this is beyond the out years of our budget. But what I would say is, while you will have to wait for budget day to see what the impact is, Tasmania is facing challenges.
It is becoming harder in that respect and we are doing our best to work towards our fiscal strategy.
JOURNALIST: Have you received any assurance that Tasmania's take from the GST won't be reduced as a result of this?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: We have signed up to NDIS under the same conditions as South Australia has signed up which did have a clause within it to ensure our state was not put at a disadvantage around the GST component of disability services and the Australian-funded aspect of that and the Australian Government are working with us over that transition period to ensure we're not put at a disadvantage.
JOURNALIST: Why are you aiming for 2019 instead of earlier?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Essentially it's about how and when we can be ready to really go into the full scheme. And we are very pleased that on 1 July of this year we will begin the first cohort of those who will be on the full NDIS scheme.
They will be people from the age of 15 to 24 years of age and we're very pleased that they will get the immediate benefits of a full-blown NDIS and they will have the comfort of knowing that that will not change in their lifetime, that they will go on to receive the benefits that they start receiving on 1 July.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PREMIER GIDDINGS: There's around 1,000 of those people who fit within that age category and they are spread across the state, as you would expect similarly to our demographics as they are.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PREMIER GIDDINGS: This morning was an important step, but the significant step, the historic step that has been taken on this issue of forestry indeed was taken on Tuesday night.
That was the time when the Tasmanian parliament put its efforts, its confidence, its belief in our future and our forest industries and our reserves agenda together.
That was so significant, in fact I personally felt the weight of this issue lift off my shoulders with that successful vote. So today has just been another day, an important day to put signatures on pieces of paper, but really the historic moment happened two nights ago.
JOURNALIST: When do you expect federal money from the forestry peace deal to start flowing?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Immediately. So for those in the sawmilling industry who need to have their quota bought back we will now have those funds flowing immediate.
There are other aspects to the agreement which mean that we have to wait, so for instance the reserves must go through the Tasmanian parliament, there is still a period of disallowance for that to occur, that disallowance period will not finish until around September, October of this year.
Therefore, there will be no funds flowing for economic development initiatives before that time.
However, that doesn't mean that we can't start talking to those communities involved who have suffered from the downturn in forestry to talk to them about what ideas they have and how we might be able to assist them to diversify their local communities.
But it is absolutely critical that none of those funds actually flow before the reserves get finally through the Tasmanian parliamentary processes.
JOURNALIST: How will the peace deal work without the support of the Australian Greens leader?
PREMIER GIDDINGS: The Australian Greens leader is only one voice, and it's a voice that now finds itself on the fringe of this issue.
In fact, yesterday I spoke very much around the analogy that we're all on a train here, heading forwards. And there are three people who have stepped off the train and are left on the platform and they're Christine Milne, Will Hodgman and Jenny Webber.
I don't know if they like that company but I can tell you what, I am very comfortable with the company that I am with on the train moving forward.
And they include key stakeholders in the industry, they include key stakeholders in the environmental movement, they include the combination of the political representation of Tasmania in the state parliament, the Labor Party, and the Greens, with the exception of one member who chose to vote an alternate way.
But I can assure you the vast majority here are on the train, moving forward. And there are very, very few left on the platform. Thank you very much.
PM: I know this is an unusual format for a press conference with people coming and going but I might just say a few things and then I am very happy to take your questions.
When yesterday I announced with Wayne Swan and Jenny Macklin that we would be asking the Australian people to endorse a half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy to help fund DisabilityCare, I said then that I really understand that when we speak about these issues there are more than 400,000 Australians hanging off every word.
They are the Australians who have disabilities and then of course there are the millions of other Australians - family members, friends or carers who care passionately about this issue.
So I want to be clear with people today, 24 hours later, about where we are and about what will happen next. Because this is an issue where I don't want people unnecessarily worried. I always want to be clear about where we are.
To just briefly go through the history. Of course this started with advocacy from the disability sector asking for a long-term solution, a national disability insurance scheme with security for the future, and all credit to their campaign and there are some great campaigners here today.
We responded to that by asking the Productivity Commission to provide us with advice about how to get something as big as this done, something as big as Medicare done and we got a great Productivity Commission report.
We accepted many of the recommendations but we actually decided to start launching the scheme a year earlier than the Productivity Commission had recommended because we were so keen to start making a difference in the lives of people with disabilities.
We found a billion dollars in the federal budget, not easy to do in these economic times, but to fund those launch sites. And those launch sites start on 1 July, including one here in Tasmania.
At the same time, we put to the parliament the legislation that sets up DisabilityCare, that deals with issues like eligibility, the way the scheme will work, and I am very pleased that that legislation went through the parliament with bipartisan support, that was good to see, so that legislation is done.
We have continued to negotiate with states and territories and to reach agreements to roll the full scheme out, and I am pleased to be here in Tasmania announcing the latest of those agreements.
What happened yesterday was we announced that in order to finance some of the cost of DisabilityCare, that we would want to see an increase of half a per cent in the Medicare levy, Australians making a contribution to this cost.
Now that half a per cent in the Medicare levy starts on 1 July 2014. So it needs to be legislated by then to become the law of this country by then.
I would want to see that legislation dealt with and dealt with in a way that is not political. If it was possible to get bipartisan support for that legislation then of course that would be very welcome, and I would very much welcome the Leader of the Opposition today stating that the Opposition was prepared to support that legislation in a bipartisan way.
If that was possible, then we would bring the legislation to the Parliament and bring it very soon in the forthcoming parliamentary session.
If the Leader of the Opposition is not prepared to support that legislation, then it will become a question for the Australian people at the election and I will be asking them in that election to endorse a half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy.
I know for many who are so passionate about this issue they say if you can get it through any which way in coming weeks why not do that? The issue here actually, fundamentally, is about security of the funding for DisabilityCare.
And you don't get that security if legislation can be supported at one moment but it is possible beyond an election that it will be taken away or fail to have support, particularly when the legislation wouldn't even come into effect at that point.
So I don't want this to become the province of political tactics and political games, legislation coming into the Parliament one day, knocked over in the Parliament potentially a few months later.
When we do this I want to be able to say to the Australian nation, 'It's done and it will be there for the long term.'
There are two ways of doing that - ensuring that the legislation once passed is there and there with security for the long term.
The first is for the passage of the legislation to have bipartisan support which I would welcome.
The second is for the Australian people to endorse it and make it very clear that this is what they want for the future.
So we await today the decision of the Opposition. Let me say again it would be terrific to see the half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy pass with bipartisan support.
That would give security for the future around the half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy. If that is not possible because of the view taken by the Opposition, then security for the future around a half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy can come in September when people make their views on this important matter heard.
I will turn now to the Minister for Disability Reform.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much, Prime Minister.
Just to add some remarks to the Prime Minister's outline of how we've got to this historic day.
but just before I do that I do want to say a very big thank you to St Michael's for having us here today and for bringing all of these people into your very, very special place and I especially want to congratulate you for the outstanding independent living units which are providing such security and happy places for people to live, so thank you very much for having us.
I do want to add some detail to the remarks that the Prime Minister's just made. The Prime Minister has outlined how important today's announcement is here in Tasmania.
But of course this is the product of an enormous amount of work and is being replicated around the country. We have an agreement to launch DisabilityCare here in Tasmania on 1 July.
So of course that means that the Commonwealth has had to get an agreement with the Tasmanian Government, allocate funding from the Federal Government and from the Tasmanian Government.
We have staff employed, some of whom are here today, who are getting ready to make sure that this is real on 1 July here in Tasmania.
Exactly the same activity is taking place right now in the Hunter in New South Wales. This is a very big launch site in New South Wales; around 10,000 people will come into DisabilityCare from 1 July.
We've got a major agreement with the NSW Government that extends beyond the launch site, agreed between the Prime Minister and Premier O'Farrell last December.
This is a big agreement for the biggest state in the country and demonstrates all of our commitment to delivering DisabilityCare Australia in that state for 140,000 people with a disability in New South Wales.
As with Tasmania, we have staff on the ground in Newcastle getting ready for the launch on 1 July.
Moving to South Australia, we also have an agreement for the launch of DisabilityCare in South Australia. That was agreed last July but, between the Prime Minister and the Premier of South Australia.
The way we're starting in South Australia is for little children, so starting with the nought-to-fives and gradually increasing the age over the next couple of years.
The Prime Minister and the Premier of South Australia have also agreed to the full rollout of DisabilityCare across South Australia, requiring South Australia to put additional funding in just as New South Wales and Tasmania have and of course the Commonwealth is committing funding to those states as well.
We have staff ready to go on 1 July in South Australia to make sure that little children come in to DisabilityCare Australia.
And then to Victoria, we have a very large launch site in Victoria. In the city of Geelong and the surrounding areas, around 5,000 people with disability will come into DisabilityCare Australia from 1 July.
We have an agreement with the Victorian Government signed between the Prime Minister and the then Premier of Victoria, and of course we hope to get an agreement to full rollout in Victoria as soon as possible.
Once again, in Geelong, staff on the ground ready to go, and I've personally seen the office down in Geelong, it's all right in the centre of the city and of course a very important place for people with disability. A one-stop shop, a place for people to go and get advice and get their plans agreed.
The reason I want to outline this is that today's announcement is really the culmination of an enormous amount of work by people with disability and their advocates, by the Productivity Commission, by the Commonwealth and the states getting us to today.
What the Prime Minister announced yesterday of course was the next step, the important step to add some funding security to the development of DisabilityCare Australia.
But of course the funding goes to make sure that we not only give the funding security, we also have the legislation to establish DisabilityCare Australia already through the parliament.
I think this is very important for everyone to remember. It went through the Federal Parliament after much discussion and negotiation with disability and carer advocates, with the states and territories, with providers over a long period of time.
That legislation went through with unanimous support of the parliament at the end of March. I emphasise this because today we've seen from the Leader of the Opposition questions around eligibility for the scheme.
The Leader of the Opposition should read the legislation that he voted for at the end of March. The eligibility criteria for people to come into the National Disability Insurance Scheme is very clear in the legislation.
It is not responsible to now raise these issues when you have voted for this legislation just over a month ago. Read the legislation, get on board, support the increase to the Medicare levy to give security to people with disability that there will be this funding source right out into the future.
Thank you.
PM: Happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in terms of the non-levy component of the funding for the NDIS, have you identified the source of that funding and will any of us be in the federal budget?
PM: We've been making long-term structural saves, the kind of saves that make a difference to the budget and grow over time.
For example, we did that with the private health insurance rebate. So we are able to associate a number of these long-term structural saves with the other costs of DisabilityCare and we are happy to answer questions on that.
What is the issue now, though, is whether or not there will be bipartisan agreement to the half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy.
As I said in my earlier remarks, I would genuinely hope that there would be bipartisan agreement around something that is so important for our country and so important to people with disabilities now and in the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you lined up yet to sign up the other states to a full rollout of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, that would be Western Australia, the ACT and the Northern Territory?
PM: Just in terms of who's signed up for the full rollout, New South Wales has signed up for the full rollout, here in Tasmania, signed up for the full rollout, South Australia has signed up for the full rollout, the ACT has signed up for the full rollout.
That means that we are still negotiating with Queensland, with the Northern Territory, with Western Australia and with Victoria.
JOURNALIST: So have you set a time when you are hoping to sign up with those other states?
PM: We haven't set a deadline. We are keeping working in the negotiations. A number of those states are participating in launch arrangements, so they have said we are happy to work with you to get this scheme launched, everybody is still in the discussion about full rollout.
Obviously many of the premiers and the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory would be digesting the news from yesterday and what it means for their budgets.
Given we have said a section of the Medicare levy money would come through the fund to them so they would get a grant equal to a quarter of what is raised.
JOURNALIST: You 're not heading off to Western Australia or the Northern Territory tomorrow?
PM: I speak to premiers in a variety of ways. Sometimes face to face in their state, sometimes by phone.
We negotiate between officials so it is not a question of that. Everything we've done including the agreement here has been the subject of patient methodical work, month by month, word by word. That's how it happened.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why make this an election issue when fundamentally the Coalition are supporting the NDIS if you could it get it through wouldn't it be highly unlikely they would be able to repeal it?
PM: You can't ask me that question, it is not a question for me. I would very much welcome it if, just like we had bipartisan support to set up DisabilityCare, there was bipartisan support for the increase in the Medicare levy. I would genuinely welcome that.
I can't say those words of welcome now because we don't know that the Opposition's position is.
Now to get security, we're talking about something that starts on 1 July next year, and then would be there for the long term. All of us here would be paying this extra Medicare levy for years to come.
To get that kind of security for the long term, you need bipartisan support or you need it to have been very clearly articulated that that is what the Australian community wants.
What I don't want to see is the uncertainty that would come, including for the people we've met today, the certainty that would come if this went through the parliament, the Opposition didn't support it, there's an election coming, if the government changes will it be taken away?
All of that uncertainty, all of that political tactics, that's not what this is about.
This is about getting things right for the long term and that is why I'd absolutely welcome bipartisan support if it's forthcoming.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you suggested a moment ago the Coalition might support the legislation for the levy.
PM: We don't know.
JOURNALIST: But then-
PM: Specifically I did not suggest that. I did not suggest that. I am putting two scenarios to you and you've confused between them. Let's clarify that because I don't want that standing as an interpretation of my remarks. That is not what I said.
What I said is there's two ways of getting long-term security here  -  bipartisan support, which I would very much welcome. If there is not bipartisan support then the Australian people get to have their say in September.
I am not suggesting that the Opposition would provide bipartisan support and then revoke that support. I am not suggesting that.
JOURNALIST: The crossbenchers seem very supportive of this legislation. So do you need the Coalition's support? Are you playing games?
PM: Listen to my words and just think about it in terms of security. We have a federal election coming up, if the Opposition chooses to go to that federal election saying they don't support an increase in the Medicare levy, even if it went through parliament now, then clearly depending on the outcome of that election it can be taken away.
Well, it would be a lot of politics to put the legislation in only then to have it in contest and potentially taken away.
Let's do this once, do it right, do it for the long term. How do you get there? You get there with bipartisan support or it being very clearly said by the Australian people that they want it.
Let's not put the people we've met today through the prospect that it's in and they think it's going to start and then it's taken away. Let's not do that to people.
JOURNALIST: When the Premier referred to Tasmania not being ready for a 2018 rollout, is that purely a funding issue?
PM: The building of this takes funding, absolutely. But it also takes the development of workforce and services, so we are talking about a huge change.
And just in the mechanics, the logistics, the common sense preparations for that, it's a huge change and we want to get this right.
We have always side that it would take a number of years to build. We have had our eyes on that 2018/19 financial year and here in Tasmania it will be in full start from 1 July 2019 at the end of that financial year.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Launceston
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Tasmanian Premier Lara Giddings have marked Tasmania's historic vote to end its decades-long forestry dispute by signing an agreement in support of the Tasmanian Forests Agreement Legislation 2013.
Tuesday's vote turned the page on the conflicts of the past, giving Tasmanians the certainty they need to get on with business in the knowledge that their rich natural heritage will be preserved.Today's agreement details what the Australian and Tasmanian Government will do to help implement the landmark reform.It honours the outcomes of the community-led forest peace deal, including the guarantees of a minimum annual wood supply and of an unprecedented expansion of Tasmania's native forest reserves.Industry will be assured of at least 137,000 cubic metres per year of high quality sawlogs, as it moves towards Forest Stewardship Council certification to reopen global markets to Tasmanian timber.More than half a million hectares of native forests  -  including forests in the Styx, Weld, Upper Florentine, Great Western Tiers and the Tarkine -- will be safeguarded for posterity.This new Intergovernmental Agreement builds on our 2011 Agreement that helped industry, unions and conservationists move beyond an initial Statement of Principles to achieve the historic peace deal.It honours all outstanding funding commitments made under the 2011 Agreement as well as those subsequently made by the Australian and Tasmanian Governments in support of the Tasmanian Forest Agreement process.It unlocks $209.4 million in joint Australian and Tasmanian Government funding for the state. Some $178 million was previously provided under the 2011 Intergovernmental Agreement.In total, the two governments have committed a combined $387.4 million to the Tasmanian forests peace process.Today's signing means affected workers and contractors in the native forest industry will get the extra support they deserve and that sawmillers will continue to have access to exit grants if they choose to leave the industry. More than $200 million will flow to projects to diversify regional economies, encourage the innovative use of plantation timber, and support the Forest Stewardship Council certification process and the management of additional reserve areas.The Australian and Tasmanian Governments will continue to consult closely with the Tasmanian Forest Agreement signatories on transitional measures to support industry and protect the environmental values of all future reserves.They will push ahead in support of this rare consensus on the future of Tasmania's forests  -  the first time such an agreement has been enshrined in law with the support of industry, conservationists and unions.


Launceston
The Gillard Labor Government will invest more than $22 million to boost the future freight capacity of northern Tasmania and improve the skills base of the state's maritime workforce.
Tasmania has great opportunities to export its high quality produce and products to growing markets across our region.
Demand for premium Tasmanian products in key sectors like cheese, wine, cherries and minerals is growing as Asian markets are transformed by the growth of the world's largest middle class.
As an island state, Tasmania relies on sea trade. The state's exporters face complex commercial realities and Tasmania's shipping needs a secure, industry led future. 
The Government will invest in:
• $5.2 million towards a new $8 million intermodal freight terminal at Bell Bay, to facilitate the movement of Tasmania's logging and other bulk freight, with the Tasmanian Government contributing $2.7 million• Almost $12 million over four years in additional funding for the Australian Maritime College (AMC) which will allow the College to deliver specialised training to over 500 maritime students • $5 million to assist the Australian shipping industry meet its future workforce training needs as part of the government's shipping reforms. 
Tasmanian traders move about 450,000 freight containers into and out of the state, each year.
Bell Bay is home to the largest heavy industrial precinct in Tasmania and with direct monthly exports to Asia reopening earlier this year, the funding to facilitate this growth is timely.
The new intermodal freight terminal will make freight movements in and out of Bell Bay more efficient and generate broader economic benefits.
Design plans will be finalised later this year with physical works to start in the first half of next year.
The Government recognises that we need to invest equally in boosting skills and creating jobs.
Funding for the AMC  -  the nation's most pre-eminent maritime training institution - will help rebuild the Australian shipping fleet and the skills base needed to keep the industry growing and prospering into the future.
Together, with our shipping reforms, funding for the AMC will see the college train more seafarers than ever before, with more jobs available on Australian flagged ships.
The Federal Labor Government is not only committed to maintaining funding for the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme, which has increased from $101.2 million in 2007 to $110.2 million this year, but since coming to power we have provided over $600 million to support the movement of people and the State's products across Bass Strait.
On top of that, $20 million has been provided for direct and immediate assistance for exporters, infrastructure improvements at the Port of Burnie to increase container handling capacity and the establishment of a freight logistics coordination team.
The Freight Logistics Coordination Team will deliver its first report in June this year which will guide a comprehensive industry-led solution to address the state's freight challenges. 
The Federal Labor Government is committed to growing jobs and opportunities for all Australians. The measures announced today will provide a better environment for Tasmanian exporters to compete internationally and help secure jobs and growth future for Tasmania's future.


Launceston
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
As Prime Minister, I have been working with the Government, with the disability sector leading our nation towards the creation of DisabilityCare  -  a new and better way to make sure that we support people with disabilities who today bear burdens of an underfunded and fragmented system.
I want to make sure that for every Australian, they've got the peace of mind that comes with knowing if you ever became in a circumstance yourself where you acquired a disability or someone in your family did, that you would get the support you need.
I've been very determined to create DisabilityCare because I don't want to see any Australian left behind.
We've done a lot of work to create DisabilityCare and to roll it out around the nation, including reaching a new funding agreement with Tasmania today.
Yesterday, I outlined to the nation a plan for funding for DisabilityCare; a plan for long-term funding by increasing the Medicare levy by half a per cent; a plan to ask every Australian to contribute to a scheme from which every Australian benefits because they get peace of mind.
I am very pleased that today the Leader of the Opposition has said that he is prepared to support this plan; that the Leader of the Opposition today has said he is prepared to support an increase in the Medicare levy.
The Leader of the Opposition has changed his mind on this matter and I welcome that change of mind.
And on the basis of that change of mind by the Leader of the Opposition, I will bring to the Parliament the legislation to increase the Medicare levy by half a per cent.
I am pleased that the Leader of the Opposition has made his statement today.
We will continue to get on with building DisabilityCare and I look forward to the launch sites for DisabilityCare coming into operation on 1 July, including the launch site here in Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: Will you agree to all of Tony Abbott's conditions for his support?
PM: I understand that the Leader of the Opposition has raised some matters of detail.
In those areas the Government was already working prior to my announcement about the Medicare levy yesterday.
On the question of savings to support DisabilityCare, we have been outlining long-term savings.
What I've announced with the increase in the Medicare levy would fully fund what we need to do in DisabilityCare over the next five years.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: As I've remarked on more than one occasion, we dealt with these questions in the Parliament when we passed the legislation to start up DisabilityCare; so that legislation has been to the Parliament.
Mr Abbott had an opportunity to read it then. It was supported by everybody in the Parliament.
There are obviously some matters of detail that Mr Abbott raises, but they are the kinds of things on which we've been working for some time now and were working well prior to yesterday's announcement.
JOURNALIST: Will you agree to all elements of the NDIS needed for the launch being legislated in the current Parliament?
PM: We've legislated for DisabilityCare. It passed the Parliament unanimously, so that's done. It's already done.
What we need to do now on the basis that the Leader of the Opposition has changed his mind and indicated that he is prepared to support an increase in the Medicare levy is bring to the Parliament the legislation for the Medicare levy.
There are regulations and things to be made under the legislation we've already passed.
Of course the Government has been working on those and has been for some time and was prior to yesterday's announcement.
JOURNALIST: When would the increase in the levy coming in?
PM: As I announced when I first spoke about this matter, on 1 July 2014.
JOURNALIST: Do you hope this is the tipping point for the remaining states to come on board?
PM: That's a question for state governments but I do think when we look at what's happened over the last few days, I did announce a plan for funding for DisabilityCare, a half a per cent increase in the Medicare levy and it received widespread community support.
It received support from quarters that people might not have expected like Premier Newman in Queensland.
It received support, I think, because Australians do understand that it is a fair thing for all of us to share in the costs of creating DisabilityCare.
I am pleased that the Leader of the Opposition has formed the view that he is prepared to support an increase in the Medicare levy, too.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about Mr Abbott referring to the levy as being temporary?
PM: That's a matter for the Leader of the Opposition. I believe that the DisabilityCare system should be here to stay.
It should be here for the long term. That needs to needs to be funded for the long term.
We will have people in our community with disabilities for all time.
I've met some young people today who will live the rest of their lives with disabilities. They will need care and support in 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 years.
That's why DisabilityCare has to be there for the long term and the way of funding it has to also be there for the long term.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Defence Stephen Smith today confirmed Australia's continuing commitment to Afghanistan.
The 2010 Lisbon NATO/ISAF Summit agreed to transition to full Afghan security responsibility in Afghanistan by the end of 2014.
In July 2012, transition to Afghan security lead in Uruzgan for the four Infantry Kandaks and the two combat support Kandaks of the 4th Brigade of the 205 Hero Corps of the Afghan National Army (ANA) commenced. 
By November 2012 all four Infantry Kandaks of the Afghan National Army 4th Brigade were operating independently without advisers in Uruzgan Province.
With the commencement of independent operations by the four Infantry Kandaks, Australian troops no longer conduct joint patrols with these ANA units. As well, Australia handed over control of forward operating bases and patrol bases to the 4th Brigade by the end of 2012.
By the end of 2012, Australian troops had consolidated their presence at Multi National Base  -  Tarin Kot and commenced planning for the complex task of redeploying Australian personnel and equipment and remediating buildings and facilities.
In March 2013 the Government welcomed the decision by the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to close Multi National Base  -  Tarin Kot in Uruzgan Province, Afghanistan at the end of this year.
The decision to drawdown and close Multi National Base  -  Tarin Kot was made after consultation with Australia, which leads Combined Team  -  Uruzgan, and Afghan authorities and is in line with the timetable to transition to full Afghan led security responsibility in Uruzgan Province by the end of 2013.
With the closure of Multi National Base  -  Tarin Kot at the end of 2013 at least 1000 ADF personnel will return home. Our civilian Agencies in Uruzgan will also draw down towards the end of 2013, moving to a nationally-focused effort.
The ADF role in Uruzgan will continue as at present until the end of this year:
a)    Australian troops will continue to train and advise at the Headquarters 4th Brigade level with the two Combat Support Kandaks and at the Afghan Operational Coordination Centre  -  Provincial in Uruzgan;
b)    The ADF Task Group will remain combat ready to assist Afghan Forces should the need arise; and
c)    The Special Operations Task Group will continue to conduct partnered combat operations to disrupt the insurgency.
In 2014, the ADF will focus on a training role at the Afghan National Army Officer Academy in Kabul with our British and New Zealand colleagues.
In Kandahar, the ADF will continue to provide training assistance to the 205 Corps of the Afghan National Army. 
Post-2014, Australia is prepared to contribute to the train, advise and assist mission for the Afghan National Security Forces by continuing to provide embedded Headquarters staff, advisors at the Corps level and trainers at the ANA Officer Academy in Kabul.                                                 
Under an appropriate mandate, Australia remains prepared to make a Special Forces contribution, either for training or for counter terrorism purposes.
Reflecting our long-term interests in a stable Afghanistan that can be responsible for its own security, Australia signed a Long-term Comprehensive Partnership with Afghanistan in May 2012.
As part of this responsibility, Australia has committed US$100 million annually for three years from 2015 to support the continued development and sustainment of the Afghan National Security Forces.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Defence Stephen Smith today announced the steps the Government has taken to strengthen Australia's air combat capability.
The 2013 Defence White Paper highlights the strategic importance of a potent and flexible air combat capability to control Australia's air approaches and support operations in the land, sea and air environments.
Emerging advanced air combat and air defence capabilities within the region, together with the proliferation of modern electronic warfare systems, will make the air combat tasks of controlling the air, conducting strike and supporting land and naval forces increasingly challenging.
Australia's air combat capability is a vital part of our national security framework and the Government will not allow a gap in our air combat capability to occur.
As a prudent measure to assure Australia's air combat capability through the transition period to the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF), the Government has decided to retain the current 24 F/A-18F Super Hornets (one operational squadron) in their current air combat and strike capability configuration.
The Government has also decided to acquire 12 new-build EA-18G Growler electronic attack aircraft instead of converting 12 of Australia's existing F/A-18F Super Hornet aircraft into the Growler configuration. 12 Growler aircraft will enhance significantly the ADF's electronic warfare capability and, together with the JSF and the Super Hornet, will form a formidable air combat force capable of controlling both the air and electronic environments.
A decision on replacing the Super Hornets with additional JSF aircraft will be made closer to the withdrawal of the Super Hornets, which is not expected until around 2030.
The 2009 Defence White Paper outlined the Government's commitment to acquire JSF and announced approval for the purchase of the first 14 JSF aircraft at a cost of around $3.2 billion.  Of these, Australia is contractually committed to two, which will be delivered in the course of 2014 to 2015 in the United States for testing and training purposes.
Due to challenges and delays within the JSF Program, the United States restructured the JSF Program last year, deferring the acquisition of 179 aircraft and providing US$15 billion less in funding over the next five years.  Australia aligned itself to this schedule in the 2012-13 Budget.  While the US remains committed to the JSF, procurement has been slowed to complete more testing and make developmental changes before the purchase of aircraft in significant quantities.
The Government remains committed to acquiring the fifth-generation JSF aircraft, with three operational squadrons planned to enter service beginning around 2020 to replace the F/A-18A/B Hornet aircraft.
Australia's Super Hornet aircraft, the delivery of the Growler electronic attack aircraft and the supporting KC-30A air-to-air refuelling aircraft will ensure the continued potency of Australia's air combat system in projecting decisive air power in the defence of Australia and its interests.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Defence Stephen Smith and Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister for Defence Science and Personnel Warren Snowdon today outlined how the 2013 Defence White Paper continues the Government's commitment to ensuring that ADF personnel and their families receive the highest quality health care and support.
Supporting Veterans
The care of wounded, injured and ill veterans is a high priority for the Government and the Australian community.
One lesson our nation learnt from Vietnam is the need for care and respect for our veterans.  In the months and years ahead, veterans' care will come to be an increasingly important focus of our time in Afghanistan and the next decade will see more young Australian veterans live in our community than since the 1970s.
Since it was elected in 2007, the Government has prioritised the mental wellbeing of our military personnel. Following the 2009 independent Dunt Reviews intomental health issues in the ADF and ex-service community,the Government invested $93 million in the Departments of Defence and Veterans' Affairs. 
In 2011, the Government and Defence released the 2010 ADF Mental Health Prevalence and Wellbeing Study and the ADF Mental Health and Wellbeing Strategy.  This was the first comprehensive assessment of the overall mental health of serving personnel, and was a world first for this type of study in a defence population.
In February 2013, the Departments of Defence and Veterans' Affairs introduced measures to better coordinate the delivery of care and support services between Defence and Veterans' Affairs.  Put simply, we need to stop our wounded, injured and ill veterans from falling between the cracks in the system and the Departments will work together to integrate the provision of health services for current and former serving personnel.
In April last year, the Government announced it would provide $14 million to the newly-formed Australian Defence Force Assistance Trust, to assist the families, in particular the widows and the children of Australian Defence Force personnel, killed, incapacitated or adversely affected as a result of their service to our country.
The establishment of the Australian Defence Force Assistance Trust means that enhanced support will now be available for the families of all ADF members who are killed or incapacitated as a result of their service. 
The Trust in the first instance has a particular focus on the families of soldiers killed or incapacitated in action in Afghanistan and was established to provide assistance to Australian Defence Force personnel not covered by the terms of existing arrangements such as the Special Air Services (SAS) Resources Trust and the Commando Welfare Trust to which Government also made a capital contribution.
Mental Health and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
As the ADF transitions from a decade of continuous high intensity operations, the Government will ensure our returning service men and women have the physical and mental health care and support they need, including through continued enhancements to Defence's screening, assessment and treatment of mental health conditions such as Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), depression and anxiety. 
The Government is committed to ensuring that comprehensive education and support is offered across all levels of the Australian Defence Force and at all stages of an Australian Defence Force career  -  from pre-recruitment and recruitment to completion of service.  This will help ensure all members of the Australian Defence Force are aware of the risks associated with mental health issues including PTSD and know how to address this risk.
The Government has also decided to provide an additional $25.3 million for enhanced mental health programs, involving:
 * 	Extending the Veterans and Veterans Families Counselling Servicecoverage to a number of current and former personnel not currently eligible ie: border protection personnel, disaster zone personnel, personnel involved in training accidents, ADF members medically discharged and submariners; partners and dependent children up to the age of 26 of these high risk peacetime groups; and families of veterans killed in operational service.
 * 	Extending mental health non-liability health cover to include access for former ADF members with three years continuous peacetime service after 1994 and expansion of current conditions of PTSD, depression and other anxiety disorders to also include alcohol and substance misuse disorders for veterans.
 * 	Implementing a post discharge GP health assessment, using a specially developed a screening tool, for former ADF members, including regular and reserve forces.
 * 	Additional funding for the Defence resilience platform, LifeSMART (Stress Management and Resilience Training) for veterans and families.  Additional modules may include anger management, substance misuse, depression, anxiety, grief and loss.
 * 	Developing and maintaining a Peer-to-Peer Support program to support recovery of veterans with a mental health condition by providing a non-clinical support network.
 * 	Additional funding for improving processing time for compensation claims by veterans and current serving personnel.
 * 	Additional assistance for veterans and current serving personnel making claims for injury.
Defence Families
The White Paper confirms the Government's intention to make available to all dependants of permanent ADF members and dependants of Reserve members on Continuous Full-Time Service health care arrangements for the provision of basic medical and dental care from 1 January 2014.
The current trial of these arrangements for Defence families living in remote and regional locations will continue until 31 December 2013 until the full program commences.
The Defence White Paper reflects the Government's appreciation of the considerable, longstanding contributions of ex-service organisations and newer non-government organisations that together provide an important additional layer of effective and reliable support and care to our ADF members and their families.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Defence Stephen Smith today outlined the Government's strategy for Australia's enhanced regional defence engagement, which will be geared towards maximising the opportunities of the emerging Indo-Pacific region.
The 2013 White Paper addresses the range of significant international and domestic developments since 2009, which influence Australia's national security and defence settings, including their impact on force posture, future force structure and the Defence budget.  
These include the ongoing economic strategic and military shift to the emerging Indo-Pacific region. 
The 2009 Defence White Paper made clear Australia's enduring interest in the stability of the wider Asia-Pacific region. The Indo-Pacific adjusts Australia's priority strategic focus to the arc extending from India though Southeast Asia to Northeast Asia, including the sea lines of communication on which the region depends.
This region is the location of unprecedented growth that has seen some countries, including China, India, Indonesia, and the Republic of Korea transformed within a generation.
Australia's international defence engagement is a critical component of the Government's approach to managing this transformation.  The 2013 Defence White Paper highlights the Government's strategy to take advantage of the opportunities and manage the challenges of this transformation.
Southeast Asia and North Asia 
Southeast Asia and North Asia are home to a number of significant regional powers, including China, Indonesia, Japan and the Republic of Korea.
Both in and beyond Southeast Asia, Australia supports a rules-based regional security order that fosters cooperation, eases tensions between states and provides incentives to major powers like China and India to rise peacefully.
The Government's policy is to strengthen the regional security architecture so that it embraces the United States, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, the Republic of Korea and other regional states within a community that is able to discuss political, economic and security issues and act cooperatively to address them.
The Government will also actively support institutions such as the East Asia Summit, the ASEAN Regional Forum and the ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting Plus, which have significant potential to help achieve this objective.
Australia's longstanding partnership with Indonesia remains our most important defence relationship in the region. The Government will develop options to expand our existing program of maritime, counter-terrorism, peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance and disaster relief cooperation with Indonesia, including through expanding our bilateral exercise program and increasing the frequency and scope of personnel and unit exchanges.
New Zealand
Australia and New Zealand have agreed to implement measures to deepen practical cooperation under the 2011 Review of the Australia New Zealand Defence Relationship  -  including at the Australia-New Zealand Defence Ministers meeting in November 2012. Australia and New Zealand will be pursuing a mutual sealift cooperation program, a 1.5 track dialogue, and eventual New Zealand participation in the Australia-US exercise Talisman Sabre. 
South Pacific
Australia has a fundamental interest in the security and stability of the Pacific Island states. The inaugural Annual South Pacific Defence Ministers meeting was held on 1-2 May 2013.
The Government has decided to implement a Pacific Maritime Security Program to assist Pacific Island states manage their Exclusive Economic Zones. The Pacific Maritime Security Program will broaden and strengthen the region's capability to respond to maritime security, fisheries protection and transnational criminal threats.
The centrepiece of the Program will be the gifting of a fleet of vessels to replace the existing Pacific Patrol Boats.  The Program will also propose to enhance practical cooperation across the South Pacific and include exploring ways to strengthen the capacity of countries to develop a regional response capability.
The Government is committed to deepening Australia's longstanding defence relationships with Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands.
Australia's shared maritime security interests with Timor-Leste, and the importance of deepening bilateral cooperation in this field, will be recognised by an invitation to extend the Pacific Maritime Security Program to Timor-Leste's defence force. In response to improvements in the security situation, the focus of Australia's defence presence has recently transitioned from the provision of a stabilisation force to a capacity-building role through a Defence Cooperation Program.
The Indian Ocean  -  South Asia, the Middle East, and Africa
The Government will engage closely with other countries with interests in the region to ensure that Indian Ocean dynamics are supported by a regional security architecture that provides mechanisms for the exchange of perspectives and management of the region's security challenges.
Australia and India are taking further steps to develop and expand upon the Strategic Partnership, under the framework of the 2009 Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation. 
Australia will continue to provide training to develop counter-insurgency related skills in the Pakistan military, and to help it to build professionalism and management capacity.
The Middle East also remains an area of significant strategic priority for the Government, not only for Australia and our national interests in the global energy trade, counter-proliferation and counter-terrorism, but also for the impact unrest there can have on global security.
International Defence Engagement Capability
Defence's overseas workforce is central to achieving its international engagement goals. Defence staff attached to Australian diplomatic missions manage cooperative activities, assist in acquiring new defence capabilities, and help the Government understand Australia's strategic environment through effective diplomatic reporting.
In 2010, the Government commissioned a review of Defence's non-operational overseas workforce. The Review considered whether Defence's non-operational overseas footprint appropriately reflected Australia's current and future strategic focus.
As recommended by the Review, the Government has directed Defence to rebalance its non-operational overseas workforce footprint towards the Indo-Pacific region, to be offset by reductions in positions in the United Kingdom and Europe.  Defence has already placed additional positions in Tokyo and New Delhi.
The Government will also invest in the development of skills and establish additional defence representation positions overseas to support Australia's increased international defence engagement. This will include the development of a skills-based cadre of ADF and Australian Public Service officers focused on supporting international engagement. Priority will be given to developing engagement capacity with our regional neighbours.


Canberra
The 2013 White Paper outlines the capabilities that the Australian Defence Force will need in the coming years to address strategic challenges.
Maintaining a capable ADF, including through appropriate force posture and preparedness settings, is central to Australia's continued effectiveness in contributing to sustainable security in our region.
The Government is committed to ensuring that the Australian Defence Force has the capability and culture it needs to effectively serve Australia's national security interests. 
It will ensure that we have one of the most capable military forces in the region to protect Australia's strategic interests and support regional security and toundertake the four priority tasks required of it by Government:
 * 	Principal Task One: deter and defeat armed attacks on Australia;
 * 	Principal Task Two: contribute to stability and security in the South Pacific and Timor-Leste;
 * 	Principal Task Three: contribute to military contingencies in the Indo-Pacific region, with priority given to Southeast Asia; and
 * 	Principal Task Four: contribute to military contingencies in support of global security.
To provide the future force to meet these tasks, the Government remains committed to delivering the core capabilities identified in the 2009 Defence White Paper.
Since 2009, the Government has approved more than 125 proposals for new or enhanced defence capabilities with a total value of over $17.3 billion. Over this period, Defence has taken delivery of a number of major systems, including C-17 heavy lift aircraft, F/A-18F Super Hornet combat aircraft, Bushmaster protected mobility vehicles and two large amphibious/sea lift vessels. By the end of this decade, the ADF will also take delivery of three Air Warfare Destroyers, two Landing Helicopter Dock amphibious ships and the initial two F-35A Joint Strike Fighter aircraft.
Since 2009, the Government has also taken decisions to acquire or progress priority acquisitions including ten C-27J Battlefield Airlift aircraft, the EA-18G Growler electronic attack capability, Australia's new air combat capability, the replacement land vehicle fleet and future submarine capability.
Building on these acquisitions, the 2012 Force Structure Review assessed capability priorities against the backdrop of Australia's contemporary strategic environment.
The Review confirmed the need to deliver priority ADF capabilities for Navy, Army and Air Force within available resources in the near term, while continuing to progress enabling capabilities essential to the ADF being a capable, integrated joint force.
In addition, significant new capability commitments outlined in the 2013 Defence White Paper will assure Australia's air combat capability as we transition to the Joint Strike Fighter, and enhance our maritime security capabilities while contributing to the long-term sustainment of Australia's critical naval shipbuilding industry. 
Examples of major planned acquisitions are outlined below.
Navy Capabilities
The Government remains committed to replacing the existing Collins Class fleet with an expanded fleet of 12 conventional submarines that will meet Australia's future strategic requirements. The future submarines will be assembled in South Australia.
The Government has taken the important decision to suspend further investigation of Future Submarine options based on military-off-the-shelf designs in favour of focusing resources on progressing an ‘evolved Collins' and new design options that are likely to best meet Australia's future strategic and capability requirements.
The Government intends to replace the capability currently provided by the supply ships HMAS Success and HMAS Sirius at the first possible opportunity. This will include examination of options for local, hybrid and overseas build or the leasing of an existing vessel. The Spanish Navy vessel Cantabria is assisting Australia's afloat support requirements while HMAS Success is in refit. This operational experience, along with other information and activity, will contribute to Defence's understanding of relevant capabilities as options are developed.
The Government will also bring forward the replacement of Australia's Armidale Class Patrol Boats, with both Australia's patrol boats and the Pacific Patrol Boats being replaced preferably by proven designs.  A multirole vessel remains a possible longer-term project, subject to technological maturity and an ability to provide operational flexibility with lower costs of ownership.
Army Capabilities
The Government is committed to a range of capability improvements to ensure that land forces remain both highly credible and sustainable for their roles in support of the Principal Tasks.
In response to the increasing complexity and lethality of land operations, the Government is committed to acquiring deployable protected and armoured vehicles offering improved firepower, protection and mobility compared to existing systems. This will include new medium and heavy trucks to replace Army's existing ageing fleet.
Air Force Capabilities
In 2012, the Government announced its commitment to acquiring the EA-18G Growler electronic attack aircraft capability based on converting 12 of Australia's current F/A-18F Super Hornet aircraft to Growlers.
The 2013 White Paper outlines the Government's decision to acquire 12 new-build EA-18G Growler aircraft.  This decision will retain all 24 Super Hornets in their current air combat and strike capability configuration.  This decision will assure Australia's air combat capability through the transition period to the Joint Strike Fighter.
The Government remains committed to acquiring the fifth-generation F-35A Joint Strike Fighter aircraft for Australia.  Australia's existing Super Hornet aircraft, together with the future Growler and Joint Strike Fighter capabilities will provide a world class air combat force capable of controlling the air and electronic environments and conducting effective land and maritime strike. 
Joint Capabilities
The White Paper also outlines key areas for investment in capabilities which support the whole ADF and Defence more generally. These include an enhanced amphibious capability based on the introduction of Australia's two new Canberra Class Landing Helicopter Dock ships in the middle of this decade, and cyber,intelligence, communications, Space Situational Awareness, Command and Control and simulation capabilities.
Defence will also analyse the value of further investment in unmanned aircraft for focused area, overland intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, including for use in border security operations. This will include the potential expansion of the role of these assets in the ADF to include interdiction and close air support, subject to policy development and Government consideration.  Domestic and international policy and legal considerations will be important elements of any Australian consideration of armed unmanned aircraft in the future. 
The Government's planned capability enhancements are costed and affordable, while building a solid foundation for future enhancements, if needed, as strategic and fiscal circumstances evolve. 
Additional details on the Government's plans for developing the future ADF will be provided in an updated four year Defence Capability Plan and six year Defence Capability Guide which will be released in coming months.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Defence Stephen Smith today announced the Government's response to the Australian Defence Force Posture Review.
The force posture of the Australian Defence Force (ADF) is an essential element of strategic Defence planning.
In 2011, the Government commissioned the first major review of the ADF's posture in over 25 years, to assess whether the ADF is correctly geographically positioned to meet Australia's current and future strategic and security challenges.
The review was undertaken by Defence and overseen by an expert panel comprising Dr Allan Hawke and Mr Ric Smith, both former Defence Secretaries.
The Government released the final report of the Australian Defence Force Posture Review (ADF Posture Review) on 3 May 2012.  The Review concluded that the Australian Defence Force needs a force posture that can support operations in Australia's Northern and Western approaches, as well as operations with our partners in the wider Asia Pacific region and the Indian Ocean Rim.  
The report found that our changing strategic environment does not require widespread changes in the location of our Defence Force bases, but that some adjustments should be made to meet future needs. 
The 2013 Defence White Paper outlines the principles underpinning Defence's force posture and the work directed by Government to implement the recommendations from the Review and the associated Defence Estate Consolidation Project.
It reflects the Government's broader theme of the White Paper of responding actively to the strategic transformation in our region and making choices about our posture and capabilities over time within our fiscal constraints.
As the 2013 Defence White Paper highlights, the Australian Defence Force's (ADF) ability to deliver against its principal tasks and respond to contingencies as directed by Government depends as much on appropriate force posture and preparedness settings as it does on the structure and particular capabilities of the force.
Implementation Strategy
The Government's implementation strategy for the Review, as set out in the White Paper, will be achieved from within Defence's allocated resources as determined through the 2013-14 Budget process.  As the White Paper notes, substantial progress has already been made in implementing many of the Review's recommendations, including:
 * 	ensuring greater visibility of the high levels of ADF activity in Australia's north-west;
 * 	enhancing the ADF's presence in northern Australia;
 * 	updating operational plans for defending the north;
 * 	developing a better understanding of the ability of civil infrastructure and logistics capacity available to support ADF operations in the north-west;
 * 	supporting border protection operations; and
 * 	enhancing defence engagement with State and Territory governments and industry. 
Many other Review recommendations will be progressed and funded through the Defence Capability Plan and Defence Major Capital Facilities Program.  The 2013 White Paper outlines that the Government will proceed with plans to:
 * 	develop Fleet Base East as the home port for the Landing Helicopter Dock ships and Air Warfare Destroyers;
 * 	enhance Fleet Base West to support submarine and major surface combatant capability and operations;
 * 	implement infrastructure requirements (as they are refined) to support major future naval capabilities including the Future Submarine, Future Frigate, Offshore Patrol Vessel and the earlier replacement of the Armidale Class Patrol Boat;
 * 	upgrade Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) bases Tindal and Learmonth to enhance KC-30 air-to-air refuelling tanker operations and Cocos (Keeling) Islands airfield facilities to support P-8A maritime surveillance aircraft operations;
 * 	enhance RAAF bases Darwin, Edinburgh, Pearce and Townsville to support future P-8A operations (enhancements which will also support KC-30 aircraft operations); and
 * 	upgrade airfields to support Joint Strike Fighter operations at RAAF bases Darwin, Tindal, Williamtown, Amberley, Edinburgh, Townsville, Learmonth, Curtin and Scherger.
The Government will also implement plans for enhancing amphibious mounting base capacity in Darwin and Townsville and if required in future, will exercise commercial arrangements using existing infrastructure to allow large amphibious ships to embark ADF personnel based in Brisbane and Adelaide.
The Review's recommendations to retain the disposition of the Australian Army's 1 Brigade centred in Darwin and 7 Brigade in Brisbane will also be implemented, and 6 Brigade will be consolidated in south-east Queensland as opportunities arise and funding permits.
However, the Government has decided not to proceed at this time with the Review's recommendation to build a second major fleet base on the east coast, and nor will we acquire a new major coastal ADF training area in the near term.  Defence's more detailed analysis of these options has revealed implementation challenges and high costs.  Together, implementation of these two recommendations would cost in the order of $6-9 billion.
Defence has assessed that the existing fleet bases in Sydney and Perth will meet the Royal Australian Navy's needs for the foreseeable future.  The ADF's training needs will continue to be met for the foreseeable future through programmed upgrades to existing training areas, with the priority being the primary joint ADF training facility at Shoalwater Bay in Queensland.
The Review noted limitations in Defence's logistics supply chain to meet strategic fuel and explosive ordnance requirements in northern Australia.  Detailed studies and ADF exercises over the next 12 months will further define required remediation measures. 
Defence will also consider opportunities to work with the United States in identifying mutually beneficial options for improving ADF base capacity and facilities at Darwin and Tindal.  This would enhance relevant training areas and supporting logistic infrastructure as part of the enhanced practical cooperation measures between Australia and the United States announced by Prime Minister Gillard and US President Obama in November 2011.
Implementation of the Review's findings as outlined in the 2013 Defence White Paper will result in a more active and visible defence posture and presence in the resource-rich north and west of Australia.  It will also ensure that our facilities, ports and training areas are appropriately developed to support the operation of major new ADF capabilities.
A full list of the implementation arrangements for Force Posture Review recommendations is attached.
Defence Estate
The Review included a recommendation that Defence finalise a plan to rationalise the defence estate for Government consideration.
While this was concluded through the White Paper process in broad terms, no decisions have been made in relation to the future of individual bases or facilities.  The Government will consider proposals for the consolidation of the defence estate over time to match contemporary defence needs and achieve long term efficiencies.
Attachment
Australian Defence Force Posture Review Implementation
Defence has begun implementing 13 recommendations  -  mostly relating to enhancing the ADF's presence in the North-West of Australia  -  from within existing Defence resources (see Table 1), with the remaining recommendations referred for consideration as part of the 2013 Defence White Paper process (see Table 2).
The Defence White Paper 2013 outlines the Government's implementation strategy for the Review.  Defence will absorb the cost of implementation, including by incorporating relevant infrastructure requirements within the scope of Defence Capability Plan (DCP) and Major Capital Facilities Program (MCFP) projects.
Table 1: Recommendations considered outside the 2013 Defence White Paper process (implementation underway and in some cases completed)
										#
											Recommendation
				1.
				Defence continue to develop a joint operating concept for how the current joint force-in-being would deter and defeat attacks against Australia across a range of threat levels.
				2.
				Defence develop a campaign plan for deterring and defeating attacks against Australia across a range of threat levels.  Such a plan should:
							 * 					integrate current arrangements for domestic security and border protection;
				 * 					have a strong focus on shaping and deterrence activities;
				 * 					support a whole-of-government approach to security; and
				 * 					be validated through joint exercises and other activities.
				3.
				Defence's annual consultative forums with State and Territory Governments be the peak forums for functional engagement on estate planning and encroachment issues.  Subordinate engagement forums and Defence-industry forums should report key issues to the state and territory consultative forums to ensure awareness and coordinated action on estate planning and encroachment.  Defence, and state and territory governments, should take a proactive approach to identify major private sector infrastructure developments with implications and/or opportunities for Defence.
				4.
				Defence continue to consult closely with the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service to determine how its Future Operating Concept and new capabilities may affect the level of access sought to Defence bases and facilities out to 2030 and beyond. 
				7.
				Defence maintain a continually updated assessment of civil infrastructure and the available logistics capacity to support operations in the North-West in a range of contingencies.
				8.
				Defence enhance its familiarity and preparedness for operations in the North-West through:
				joint exercises, including land forces such as Regional Force Surveillance units (RFSUs), and other relevant Government agencies, with a focus on contingencies involving maritime security and vital asset protection;
				more simulated exercises and ‘wargames' to minimise the costs and practical difficulties involved with exercising in the North-West;
				increased aircraft and ship visits to airfields and ports; and
				a program of senior officer and staff study visits (including Defence civilian leaders and officials from other Government agencies) to improve awareness and familiarity with the North-West.
				9.
				Defence develop an action plan to improve the sustainability of the Pilbara Regiment and other RFSUs. Possible measures could include:
							 * 					more flexible recruitment and personnel practices such as the Perth-based squadron of the Pilbara Regiment (for example, additional squadrons or troops recruited from metropolitan areas, including those in South-East Australia; ‘industry-sponsored reserves' recruiting from the fly-in, fly-out workforce; and the opening of more roles in the RFSUs to women);
				 * 					improving conditions of service for posted personnel and their families, especially in the Pilbara Regiment;
				 * 					improving training through more frequent and systematic involvement with the Army's force generation cycle; and
				 * 					using Reserve brigade units to supplement or ‘round out' regional surveillance activities.
				11.
				Defence develop a plan to communicate better the level of ADF activities and presence in North-West Australia, for both deterrence and reassurance purposes.  Activities under this plan should be coordinated with the consultative forums and other forums with industry participation such as the Australian Maritime Defence Council and the Offshore Oil and Gas Security Forum.
				18.
				Defence retain 1 Brigade's current disposition centred in Darwin.
				19.
				Defence retain 7 Brigade in Enoggera, given its advantageous strategic location in Brisbane with the Deployable Joint Force Headquarters (DJFHQ), near 6 Brigade elements, the Amberley ‘super base' and the Port of Brisbane, and the significant expense required in developing a new base closer to Shoalwater Bay.
				27.
				Plans for developing an amphibious mounting base capacity at Townsville are appropriate and on track, noting the reliance on loading explosive ordnance by watercraft at Ross Island Barracks.
				33.
				Defence review its requirements for providing best practice surgical and aero-medical evacuation support for exercises in remote training areas, to guide employment of adequate capability enablers and appropriate risk mitigation measures.
				38.
				Defence continue to use activities in the Defence International Engagement Plan and international exercises planned in the Program of Major Service Activities to enable and facilitate ADF access to overseas bases, facilities and training areas.
Table 2: Implementation strategy for recommendations considered within the 2013 Defence White Paper process
										Implementation Category
											Recommendation
				Implement with either existing DCP and MCFP funding already programmed for this purpose, or within existing Service/Group resources
				Defence create a new one star Navy appointment in Western Australia (WA) to act as a senior representational officer for broader civil and interagency coordination and international engagement, in view of the prominence of the ADF and Navy presence in WA and the increasing importance of the Indian Ocean.
				Responsibility for senior representation in the North-West regions of WA could be assigned to either this position or Commander of the ADF's Northern Command (NORCOM), noting that the Gascoyne, Pilbara and Kimberley regions lie within NORCOM's current area of responsibility. (Recommendation 10).
				Defence assess the capacity of the logistics supply chain to meet strategic fuel and explosive ordnance requirements in Northern Australia in a range of contingencies.  These assessments would complement work on options for missile loading and maintenance at Fleet Base West as per Recommendation 16 and logistics risk mitigation for air bases as per Recommendation 23. (Recommendation 34).
				Examine, in consultation with the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service, options for enhancing facilities at Broome as a forward operating base. (Recommendation 6) (Navy funding)
				Develop a more comprehensive long term master plan for meeting Navy's Force 2030 basing requirements. (Recommendation 13)  (Navy funding)
				Proceed with plans to homeport Air Warfare Destroyers and large amphibious ships at Fleet Base East. (Recommendation 15)  (DCP funding)
				Expand wharf capacity and support facilities at Fleet Base West to support forward deployment of at least one Air Warfare Destroyer. (Recommendation 16)  (MCFP funding)
				Develop options to allow large amphibious ships to embark Army units based in Brisbane and (as a lesser priority) Adelaide. (Recommendation 29)  (VCDF Group to fund commercial wharf access arrangements as required)
				Upgrade RAAF Edinburgh, Pearce, and Townsville to enable unrestricted operations by P-8 aircraft. (Recommendation 21)  (DCP funding)
				Upgrade RAAF Curtin, Learmonth, Tindal, Townsville and Scherger to support future combat aircraft operations. (Recommendation 22) (DCP funding)
				Mitigate training area deficiencies and risks through simulated training. (recommendation 30)  (DCP funding)
				Proceed with plans to remediate Point Wilson for the importation of bulk explosive ordnance. (Recommendation 36)  (MCFP funding)
				Resume development of a detailed estate consolidation plan for Government consideration, including options for rationalisation, guided by Government decisions flowing from the Review. (Recommendation 39)  (Defence Support and Reform Group funding  -  action completed)
				Include within scope of DCP projects within funding already programmed.
				Expand wharf capacity and support facilities at Fleet Base West to homeport the Future Frigate and the Future Submarine. (Recommendation 16)
				Upgrade or expand bases to accommodate the offshore patrol vessel (OPV) and replacement Landing Craft, Heavy (LCH) and the earlier replacement of the Armidale Class Patrol Boats. (Recommendation 17)
				Include in MCFP funding within the decade, but outside the Budget's forward estimates (Reprioritisation of the program required to start implementation).
				Upgrade the Cocos (Keeling) Islands airfield facilities to support maritime surveillance aircraft operations. (Recommendation 12)
				Upgrade RAAF Learmonth and Tindal to enable operations by KC-30 aircraft.  (Recommendation 5/21)
				Implement on an opportunity basis as MCFP funding permits.
				Consider support of US Navy surface ships and submarines in Fleet Base West Upgrades. (Recommendation 16)
				Consolidate 6 Brigade in South East Queensland, without compromising the retention of 7 Brigade in Brisbane. (Recommendation 20)
				Significantly enhance at least one existing training area (Shoalwater Bay, Bradshaw, Cultana and/or Yampi Sound) to alleviate the pressure on Shoalwater Bay Training Area.  (Recommendation 31)
				Ensure that Williamtown is protected from encroachment, in view of its strategic importance in generating air combat capability. (Recommendation 25)
				Further study required.
				Assess fuel and explosive ordnance (EO requirements for forward air bases during high tempo air operations. (Recommendation 23) 
				Consider options for hardening and resilience improvements at forward main bases and bare bases. (Recommendation 24) 
				Develop options for reducing Air Force's footprint at RAAF Base Richmond after the retirement of the C-130J fleet by 2026. (Recommendation 26) 
				Examine both the requirement and options for acquiring or leasing a smaller tract of land, over the next decade or so, able to support modest amphibious and other training activities.  (Recommendation 30)
				Determine training area investment priorities and appropriate levels of investment over the next decade. (Recommendation 31)
				Conduct further study to identify explosive ordnance logistics risks for Navy and the joint amphibious capability. (Recommendation 35) 
				Defence develop options for establishing a backup location (to Point Wilson) for the bulk importation of explosive ordnance. (Recommendation 36) 
				Develop options for a Strategic Fusion Integration Facility at Edinburgh, if further consideration determines that a dedicated facility is required. (Recommendation 37) 
				Consider as part of enhanced practical cooperations measures between Australian and the United States announced by the Prime Minister and President Obama in November 2011.
				Defence work with the US to identify opportunities for jointly funded improvements to base capacity and facilities at Darwin and Tindal. 
				Defence explore options for US co-investment in enhancing the Bradshaw and (as a lower priority) Yampi Sound training areas, as part of arrangements for increased US training in Australia. (Recommendation 32) 
				Not consider further until:
				 * 					Defence's budget circumstances allow consideration;
				 * 					strategic developments or operational requirements dictate action; and/or
				 * 					The matter falls for consideration in the context of the approval process for the relevant or related project.
				Commence planning now on long term options for establishing a supplementary east coast fleet base at Brisbane for the Future Submarine and large amphibious ships. (Recommendation 14)
				Upgrade RAAF Learmonth and Curtin to enable protracted, unrestricted operations by P-8 aircraft. (Recommendations 5 &amp; 21) 
				Upgrade the Cocos (Keeling) Islands airfield facilities to support KC-30 operations with some restrictions. (Recommendation 12)
				Upgrade RAAF Edinburgh, Pearce, Townsville and Curtin to enable unrestricted operations by KC-30 aircraft. (Recommendation 21)
				Develop an alternative amphibious mounting option for Darwin that includes the development ofa roll-on, roll-off loading facility at East Arm wharf. (Recommendation 28)
				Seek at least one additional training area capable of supporting full-spectrum integrated joint/amphibious and combined exercises, in all seasons, to address identified deficiencies and risks. (Recommendation 30)


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Defence Stephen Smith and Minister for Defence Materiel Mike Kelly today announced further steps the Government has taken to progress the Future Submarine Program.
The 2013 Defence White Paper highlights the strategic value and importance of Australia's submarine capability and confirms the Government's commitment to replacing the existing Collins Class fleet with an expanded fleet of 12 conventional submarines to be assembled in South Australia.
The Future Submarine project will be the largest and most complex Defence project ever undertaken by Australia.  It is a capability design, construction and sustainment challenge of unprecedented scale and complexity, and will span decades.
The 2009 Defence White Paper outlined the Government's commitment to acquire 12 new Future Submarines to be assembled in South Australia. 
In May 2012, the Prime Minister and Minister for Defence announced the Government would provide $214 million for the next stage of the Future Submarine Program for detailed studies and analysis to inform the Government's decision on the design of Australia's next submarine.  This funds design, modelling, analysis and technology studies to examine in detail options for the future submarine capability.
At the same time, the Government announced it was considering four broad options for the Future Submarines:
 * 	an existing submarine design available off-the-shelf, modified only to meet Australia's regulatory requirements;
 * 	an existing off-the-shelf design modified to incorporate Australia's specific requirements, including in relation to combat systems and weapons;
 * 	an evolved design that enhances the capabilities of existing off-the-shelf designs, including the Collins Class; and
 * 	an entirely new developmental submarine.
The Government has now taken the important decision to suspend further investigation of the two Future Submarine options based on military-off-the-shelf designs in favour of focusing resources on progressing an ‘evolved Collins' and new design options that are likely to best meet Australia's future strategic and capability requirements.
The Government has also taken the important decision to use the United States AN/BYG-1 combat system as the reference system for future design work.  The early definition of a combat system is a feature of a successful submarine program.  It allows the submarine design to proceed utilising more accurate projections of space, weight and power requirements.
The Government has also directed further work on a new Submarine Propulsion Energy Support and Integration Facility in Adelaide. This land-based facility will substantially reduce risk in the Future Submarine Program by providing the capability to research, integrate, assemble and test the propulsion and energy systems of the Future Submarine.  Elements of the facility will also be located in Western Australia (where Navy will have easy access for training purposes) and Victoria (where DSTO maritime specialists are based).
The implementation of the project will require a sustained and coordinated national effort harnessing the knowledge, skills, expertise and lessons-learned over the last 50 years of Australian submarine ownership. The success of the project will depend critically on close collaboration with Commonwealth and State Agencies and strategic partners, along with Australian industrial capacity. In particular, the Government will continue close cooperation with the United States on developing undersea warfare capabilities.
The sustainment of the Collins Class submarine fleet is an essential part of Australia's submarine capability. It is a complex task that has proven very challenging since the first Collins Class submarine, HMAS Collins, was commissioned in July 1996.  The sixth and last of the Collins Class, HMAS Rankin, was commissioned in March 2003.  The Collins Class was designed with a theoretical platform life of 28 years, which provides for an on paper indicative service life for the fleet of 2024 to 2031. 
A Service Life Evaluation Program was undertaken by Defence in 2012 to identify any issues that would prevent the Collins Class from achieving their indicative service life.  The study also considered the possibility of a service life extension for the Collins fleet.  
The study found there is no single technical issue that would fundamentally prevent the Collins Class submarines from achieving their indicative service life or a service life extension of one operating cycle for the fleet, which is currently around seven years, excluding docking periods. 
Guided by outcomes of the Study into the Business of Sustaining Australia's Strategic Collins Class Submarine Capability, led by Mr John Coles, an extensive transformation program is being implemented. 
Availability improvements are being achieved through a variety of mechanisms including the delivery of more efficient logistic support arrangements, implementation of performance based maintenance contracts with defence industry, and development of a revised approach to the programming of planned maintenance and usage.
This will increase the availability and reliability of the Collins Class and ensure that the Collins fleet will remain a viable submarine capability until replaced by the Future Submarine.


Canberra
PM: I'm very pleased to be joined here by the Minister for Defence Stephen Smith, by the Chief of the Defence Force, David Hurley, by our Secretary for Defence, Dennis Richardson, and by our ministerial team, including Warren Snowdon and Mike Kelly.
We have just launched the Defence White Paper 2013.
You've heard the remarks we've made on the launch and we're very happy to take your questions at this point.
There will have to be a limit to the questions because I am due to see the Sultan of Brunei and cannot run late for that engagement. So over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does this white paper presume that Australia will not face any credible military threat for the next 20 to 30 years?
PM: What this Defence White Paper does is it reviews the strategic order of our region, which is of course changing as China rises.
And it recognises that pivotal to the strategic order of our region is the US-China relationship.
Now, we seek to work in our region to bolster habits of cooperation, to have strategic architecture, regional architecture, where nations come together and build the bonds of trust and cooperation that matter for the longer term.
But we're also very focused on the risks in that changing strategic order and that is canvassed in the white paper too.
For us that means that we have to be prepared and the Defence White Paper outlines how we are prepared for the changing strategic order in our region.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how much is the change of focus is about [inaudible] China?
PM: Well in this Defence White Paper what you will see is that our outlook on China is a continuing one.
There is continuity in our perceptions about China. We welcome China's rise. We seek to have a comprehensive and constructive engagement with China.
We work on that relationship, and of course I was in China very recently working on that relationship.
We also recognise that China's rise and its subsequent military modernisation is changing the strategic order of our region, and that the US-China relationship is pivotal to our region of the world.
And that's why, as I indicated in answer to the earlier question, we work on regional engagement and regional architecture.
We also do want to see as China modernises its military, transparency about that military modernisation.
We are here today being very transparent about Australia's defence posture and outlook, and we press for that kind of transparency.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] on China is different than it was in 2009. Is that a recognition that we don't see China as a threat that the Government did back then?
PM: Well, our posture here has been one of continuity. We seek to have a constructive engagement with China, and we do.
We also recognise the changing nature of our regional landscape as China moves as a stronger economy than it was in the past, to invest in military modernisation.
And for us, how do you respond to that? Well, you respond by engaging in the region, shaping the work between nations that brings them together and builds habits of trust and cooperation.
We also in this very much recognise how pivotal the US-China relationship is to the future of our region.
JOURNALIST: I do recognise too, Prime Minister, the language has changed substantially from this document to what was produced in 2009 in relation to China?
PM: Well, we've updated. This is an evolutionary document from the last white paper. There has been a fundamental continuity in our policy towards China.
JOURNALIST: What has China specifically done to allay concerns about transparency and so forth regarding its military expansion?
PM: Well we continue to call for transparency on that military modernisation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in these times of fiscal restraint, is it appropriate to have all these expensive props around us here flown in for what is a party political announcement?
PM: This is a Government announcement about a very important area. Indeed, there is no more important area of government's work than our Defence and our ability to defend our nation in the world, so this is an important announcement today.
The arrangements that have been made for the launch are comparable to arrangements that have been made for past launches of white papers.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you just explain, on the options for future submarines, perhaps you or the Minister, are we looking at the possibility of an evolved Collins, or some other modern advanced submarine. Would that be a submarine we would design, or a foreign design that might be suitable?
PM: Well, I will get Minister Smith to make some comments but if I could just answer your question first up by saying in this white paper there is some good news for South Australia.
South Australia is where our submarine work is focused.
What we are saying in this white paper is that we are now focused on either an evolved Collins Class submarine or a wholly new design. That would bring work to South Australia.
In this white paper too, we are very focused on the skills and capabilities that we would need for that submarine work. I will turn to Minister Smith for some comments on the design question specifically.
MINISTER SMITH: Well thanks very much Prime Minister. You might recall that some time ago I announced that we were looking at four options in terms of progress in the future submarine program: an off the shelf solution, a modified off the shelf solution, an evolved Collins design, or a wholly new design.
We've come to the conclusion, as reflected by the white paper, that an off the shelf submarine does not give us the strategic or the operational reach that we need for Australia's interests as a maritime country and continent.
So we have determined to focus now on either an evolved Collins design  -  we have recently entered into agreements with Sweden to enable us to together with Sweden have the intellectual property access to the Collins design, so we will progress that.So far as Brendan's question, which was what does a wholly new design mean? It means precisely that.
We were also looking not just at an evolution or an evolvement from the Collins, but a brand - or wholly new design.
This is deeply significant because this design work, whether it's on an evolved Collins or a brand new design, necessarily needs to be done in Adelaide.
It narrows the focus and as I made in my remarks at the launch, the decision to utilise a United States combat weapons and communications system, also is a fundamentally important decision so far as the design is concerned. That very much sets the framework for the submarine itself.
Brendan, we will now engage in those aspects in assiduous detail. We have before us the largest single capital works program or project that the Commonwealth has seen.
We have been methodical, assiduous, careful in the preparation that we do. We have learned some painful lessons from the maintenance and sustainment of the Collins.
It's the history of such projects that if you make mistakes early in the piece, they are magnified later in the piece, and so we are doing this in an assiduous and methodical way.
That work continues, but there are some fundamentally significant decisions that we've announced and are reflected in the white paper.
JOURNALIST: The Super Hornets, the Growlers - what's the actual total cost of the additional 12, and what's the timeframe for their delivery?
MINISTER SMITH: Sure, well you might recall that in the context of the 2009 white paper, the Government announced that it would open the possibility or the prospect of the Growler electronic warfare capability by wiring up 12 of the 24 Super Hornets for the Growler capability.
Last year I made an announcement which indicated we were purchasing some long lead items to keep that option open.
And I announced in August of last year that we would purchase the electronic warfare capability Growler, effectively converting 12 of our Super Hornets.
As we've looked very carefully at our air combat capability transition, we've come to the conclusion that rather than wiring up 12 of our Supers, to leave 24 Super Hornets available for our air combat capability, we're best off buying 12 Growlers essentially of the production line and that's what we'll do.
In terms of the cost - the rule of thumb cost, and this is catered for, the purchase of the Growler is catered for in the forward estimates and you'll see that in the Budget down the track. Rule of thumb it's $1.5-$1.6 billion, but that is catered for in the Government's Budget decisions.
JOURNALIST: That's all up is it?
MINISTER SMITH: For the 12 Growlers, yes. And capital cost.
And in terms of any previous costs, it costs us, on paper we've said we'd allocated $50 million originally to wire up the 12 Growlers, in the event that's about $30 million.
The purchase of the long lead items will be taken in account by the United States and essentially rolled into as part of the new Growlers.
JOURNALIST: There was a perception that the Defence budget would again be cut. You're saying there'll be a small increase in real terms?
MINISTER SMITH: Yes, what the Prime Minister and I have both said in the course of our remarks is that when you go to the budget papers in a week or so's time, that the forward estimates for this year's Budget will not just match the forward estimates for last year's Budget, it will be a modest increase.
So those people who are out there predicting further deep cuts in Defence are wrong.
And I just also say this in passing, as I did in the last couple of days, people should always be wary of trying to discern the tea leaves, or make suggestions about the purchase of this or the purchase of that.
I saw people out there saying we were going to purchase a fourth AWD. There's never been a recommendation to me by the Chief of the Defence Force or the Chief of Navy to do such a thing.
So in the end, people should just read the white paper and read the announcements, but no further cuts in the Defence budget in the forthcoming Budget, indeed a modest increase.
And even though, Ian, I think that the secretary and the chief might bridle somewhat at the suggestion that this is a party political broadcast, I'll make a party political point.
What we now have so far as Defence funding and budget is concerned is an outbreak of bipartisanship.
The Opposition Leader has said that his position is no further cuts to Defence spending, and he has an aspiration for two per cent.
When you open the forward estimates you will see no further cuts to Defence spending, and an aspiration for two per cent  -  it's called an outbreak of bipartisanship on Defence spending.
JOURNALIST: Why is there no reference anymore to a real growth of three per cent, and do you still hold that commitment?
MINISTER SMITH: No, we have made it clear that in the 2009 white paper we set out some Defence budget rules.
What we discovered over the time since then is that it's very difficult, if not impossible, to map out precise funding for Defence, or any other area of government when you are facing changing economic and fiscal circumstances. In this case it's called the global financial crisis.
So we've put our Defence budget onto a four year forward estimates model with a six year guide after that.
And those people who pretend to you that in the aftermath of the global financial crisis  -  the adverse consequences of which remain ongoing  -  you can commit to three per cent growth, haven't seen the historic structural changes that have occurred in Australian fiscal circumstance.
JOURNALIST: May I ask of General Hurley, given the issues we have had with the Collins Class submarines, do you have any concerns that it's entirely within Australia's hands to both have this transition of the existing Collins Class and also build this entire new fleet? There's not going to be any sort of capability gap?
GENERAL HURLEY: Thank you, Prime Minister. I think once you see the plans as are laid out in the Defence capability plan, our future development path for the new submarine, and the skills program that has been put out today, and most importantly the skills program is about keeping that white-collar concept, design element into the future for our development programs.
So we'll be putting emphasis on maintaining those skill sets. We've already got skill sets in Adelaide in existence now that have allowed us to do that.
We understand the Collins, there's been enormous work done into the Collins over the last couple of years.
Availability has improved enormously and I think we're on a good platform to take the project forward.
JOURNALIST: How relieved are you that you've not had to take a haircut in the Budget?
GENERAL HURLEY: If you look at my haircut, I'm always taking haircuts.JOURNALIST: But on a serious note?
PM: He actually was serious about that.
GENERAL HURLEY: The Prime Minister should talk about Budget issues but I think this has been a good process where we've looked at the reality of the Government's fiscal position, what we need to do to preserve Defence capability into the future, and I think this has been a good outcome for all.
JOURNALIST: Will the ship building initiatives announced in this document prevent the job losses that the ship building industry has been predicting lately?
PM: I will just say a couple of words and hand over to Minister Smith.
A decision has been taken to move some of the blocks of the air warfare destroyer to Williamstown.
That means that some of the predictions about there being insufficient work available during the middle of this year won't be realised, there will be work ongoing there.
Then, embedded in the white paper and in the associated material you now have is a set of considerations and timing of considerations for things like future supply ships and patrol boats, because we do recognise that we need to hold skills and capabilities in our maritime industry.
And so we've, in this set of documentation, talked about time-frames for consideration, so we can deal with this problem of the profile of work into the future.
So I will go to Minister Smith for some in-detailed comments on that.
MINISTER SMITH: The Prime Minister's dealt with the substance of it.
So far as Williamstown and the BAE workshop there is concerned, the Air Warfare Destroyer Alliance has made a commercial decision that four blocks for the third air warfare destroyer, which were destined for the Forgacs shipyard in Newcastle will be allocated to BAE shipyard in Williamstown.
That will see, both in Forgacs in Newcastle and BAE in Williamstown, work on the third AWD proceeding until at least the middle of 2015.
What that does, and work on the AWD in the ASC shipyard in Adelaide will extend beyond that because the integration work is done in Adelaide.
So that work will continue until the middle of 2015. In the meantime, that gives us the opportunity, as we've indicated, to bring forward consideration and build or purchase or acquisition of both patrol boats and our, very importantly, our replacement to our supply or replenishment ships, HMAS Success and Sirius.
So, given that we've got work in those two shipyards until the middle of 2015, we've got, we believe, time to make judgements about patrol boats and the supply ships.
In the meantime, a very important complementary document released with the white paper is the submarine skills study.
That shows that we need to smooth out the workflow, but we also need to, as the Chief of the Defence Force said, to retain, not just for submarines but generally, the skills and the capacity, whether it's designed, whether it's white collar, back of house and the like.
What we're endeavouring to do is, after a peak of ship building activity, three air warfare destroyers and two landing helicopter docks, which has created a spike of work, to smooth out the workflow so that either for submarine future program or for surface vessels like patrol boats, like supply or replenishment ships and, further down the track, future frigates, we retain the skills and the expertise and the workforce to be able to do those jobs.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any idea when we might actually see an operational squadron of JSFs?
MINISTER SMITH: Well, we are proceeding on the basis, if there are no further delays to the JSF and by the way, any delays to date or any future delays in the Joint Strike Fighter project are not something, in real terms, that the Australian Government or Australia itself or the ADF can influence.
We are in the hands of others, and that's why we've made decisions to protect our own air combat capability with the previous acquisition of Super Hornets and now additional Growlers.But on the current timetable which we have not disturbed we expect to see two Joint Strike Fighters delivered to us in the United Sates in 2014-15, and the first of our three squadrons arriving from 2020.
You'll see in the paperwork that we envisage that our ageing classics will be good for 2020 to 2022.
It is quite clearly the case on our own analysis, but also on US analysis, that the Joint Strike Fighter project under Admiral Venlet and now General Bogdan has improved, but there are still risks associated with that and we're not prepared to take the risk of a gap in our air combat capability or superiority.
But, on the basis of current arrangements, the first of our three squadrons of Joint Strike Fighters would arrive in 2020, and progressively over the years when you got to the 2030s you'd be in a position to make a judgement as to whether the squadron of 24 Supers would be replaced by a further squadron of Joint Strike Fighters.
But a mixed fleet of Joint Strike Fighters, Growler and Super Hornets is precisely what we'll see in the US Navy, at least until 2030-2035.
I think the Prime Minister has to go. Thank you.
PM: Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
The 2013 Defence White Paper outlines the Government's commitment to acquiring deployable protected and armoured vehicles for Army offering improved firepower, protection and mobility compared to existing systems.
This includes the acquisition of new medium and heavy trucks, trailers and associated modules to replace Army's existing ageing field vehicle and trailer fleet under project LAND 121.
Field vehicles and trailers are the backbone of the Australian Defence Force's ability to provide support and sustainment to personnel deployed on operations.
The vehicles will fill roles as diverse as transporting personnel and supplies, providing a platform for carrying and using weapon systems, delivering humanitarian assistance and aid, and where necessary evacuating casualties.
The Defence White Paper outlines the requirement to provide around 2,700 protected and unprotected Medium and Heavy Vehicles under Project LAND 121 Phase 3B.
The new vehicles will have enhanced performance and protection, as well as providing commonality across the fleet, ensuring improved efficiency in operator training and simplifying logistic support to land forces.
These new trucks will have advanced safety characteristics, improved force protection, greater payload and will be networked to enable them to be more responsive on the modern battlefield.
New capabilities for Defence will include self-loading trucks that will greatly improve the distribution of materiel.
Defence is close to finalising LAND 121 Phase 3B contract negotiations for the provision of these vehicles, modules and trailers. 
Subject to satisfactory completion of all final issues and formal Government approval processes, Defence will acquire up to 2,700 protected and unprotected trucks from Rheinmetall MAN Military Vehicles Australia and trailers from Haulmark Trailers Australia.
The Government is scheduled to formally consider in the middle of this year Defence's proposal for the acquisition of the vehicles and trailers.
It is expected that the work to be undertaken in Australia by the successful vehicle and trailer contractors and their network of Australian sub-contractors will include manufacture of the trailers, installation of locally-supplied modules and parts, vehicle integration and testing.
The maintenance and through-life support for the vehicles is also expected to be undertaken in Australia.
This acquisition is in addition to the previously approved LAND 121 Phase 3A which is replacing the current fleet of ADF light unprotected field vehicles and trailers. This includes the acquisition of around 2150 unprotected Mercedes Benz G-Wagon 4x4 and 6x6 vehicles and trailers to enable tactical training.
To date around 600 vehicles and 350 trailers have been delivered to Army and Air Force with the final vehicles to be delivered by 2016.
Approximately 1,000 additional vehicles will eventually be acquired to complete the medium and heavy fleet under LAND 121 Phase 5B.


Canberra
The 2013 Defence White Paper emphasises the strategic importance of Plan BEERSHEBA as a major restructure of the Australian Army.
Plan BEERSHEBA will restructure the Army into three ‘like' multi-role combat brigades to provide the widest range of sustained and effective land forces possible to meet future circumstances. 
These brigades will be based in Townsville, Brisbane and Darwin. Each Multi-role Combat Brigade will include armour, artillery, communication, engineer, infantry and logistic elements. These Brigades will enable more effective training in Australia and rapid operational deployment for sustained periods.
The multi-role combat brigades will be supported by three enabling brigades providing specialist capabilities based on 6th Brigade (Combat support, Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance), 16th Brigade (Aviation) and 17th Brigade (Combat Service Support).
This restructure will strengthen the Army's capacity to conduct a range of tasks concurrently and to a consistently high standard for prolonged operations by applying lessons from the past decade of sustained Australian Defence Force (ADF) operational commitments.
The introduction of the ADF's new amphibious capabilities represents a significant focus for Plan BEERSHEBA. The new Landing Helicopter Dock (LHD) ships represent a fundamental shift in how Army will deploy land forces and conduct operations in response to the full spectrum of scenarios in the future.  2nd Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment (2RAR) based in Townsville will form the core of Army's contribution to a future amphibious force capable of conducting humanitarian and disaster relief and other operations, particularly in our immediate region.
Army's existing armoured units will undergo significant changes and be designated as Armoured Cavalry Regiments. An Armoured Cavalry Regiment will be established in each of Army's combat Brigades to ensure that they can operate as combined arms teams against the threats anticipated in the future.
This will see, over time, the balanced re-distribution of Army's armoured vehicle fleets to the multi-role combat brigades.  Light Armoured Reconnaissance vehicles (ASLAV) and Armoured Personnel Carriers (M113AS4) will be integral to the three brigades.  Trials are currently being conducted to examine the efficiency and suitability of placing Abrams tank in each Armoured Cavalry Regiment.  While this will not increase the number of armoured vehicles in Army, the Light Armoured Vehicles and Armoured Personnel Carriers will be replaced over time as part of the Government's commitment to project Land 400, Army's future combat vehicle project.
Plan BEERSHEBA recognises the operational capability of the Army Reserve.  The restructure will closely integrate full and part time personnel in order to generate a total force capable of meeting a range of contingencies.  The 2nd Division will assume an even greater focus on operations. Each Multi-role Manoeuvre Brigade will be supported by two Reserve Brigades from 2nd Division.
When fully implemented towards the end of the decade, Plan BEERSHEBA will have delivered a modern, adaptable and modular land combat force. The Australian soldiers that make up this force along with their various platforms will be networked by modern digital communications and battle management systems and be among the best equipped in the world.
The Australian Army is moving into the future with a new perspective and a smarter way of doing business and delivering capability within assigned resources.  Plan BEERSHEBA will ensure that Army can continue to contribute forces to operations as well as successfully transition to a force that maintains high levels of readiness to respond to the range of Australia's Defence needs in the future.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Defence Stephen Smith today announced that the Government has decided to rename the Defence Signals Directorate and the Defence Imagery and Geospatial Organisation to reflect their critical roles in support of Australia's national security.
An effective national security strategy requires effective partnerships across the National Security Community. 
Cooperation between Commonwealth Departments and Agencies will intensify over the next five years, as whole-of-government arrangements are put into place in areas such as cyber security, responses to national disasters and responses to national security events, including the G20 Summit and the Commonwealth Games.
The 2013 Defence White Paper recognises that Defence makes a significant contribution to Australia's broader national security arrangements. In particular, it recognises the Defence Signals Directorate (DSD) and the Defence Imagery and Geospatial Organisation (DIGO) play critically important roles in the support of Australia's national security.
As outlined in the 2013 Defence White Paper, the Government has decided to rename these agencies the Australian Signals Directorate (ASD) and the Australian Geospatial-Intelligence Organisation (AGO), to more accurately reflect their national roles.
The renaming of the agencies will see no change to the current functions, powers or accountability responsibilities of the agencies under the Intelligence Services Act 2001.  Both agencies remain in the Department of Defence.
Externally, the compliance of ASD and AGO with legislation and ministerial directions will, as is the case now, be monitored by the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security.
The Government will bring forward legislation to amend the Intelligence Services Act 2001 to reflect the renaming of the agencies.  The change will take effect on the enactment of the enabling legislation renaming the agencies.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Defence Stephen Smith, Minister for Climate Change, Industry and Innovation Greg Combet and Minister for Defence Materiel Mike Kelly today released the Future Submarine Industry Skills Plan (‘the plan').
The Government is committed to acquiring twelve Future Submarines to be assembled in Adelaide.  The Future Submarine project will be the biggest and most complex Defence project Australia has ever embarked upon. It will involve hundreds of companies and thousands of workers. It will involve Federal and State Governments, Defence, Industry and Universities working together for generations to come.
The Government's response to the plan also addresses key issues in the long term management of the Australian naval shipbuilding industry.
The Government will assure Australia's maritime security capability while providing more certainty to Australian industry through consideration of a smoother, coordinated shipbuilding program that will provide a more stable pattern of work for the industry and retain critical skills for the future through a range of specific measures: 
 * 	In September 2012, Ministers announced a re-baselining of the AWD construction schedule following extensive consultation with Australia's shipbuilding industry and Navy, involving extending the keel to keel interval to 18 months between each ship.
 * 	The Air Warfare Destroyer Alliance will reallocate construction of four AWD steel hull blocks from the Forgacs shipyard in Newcastle to the BAE Systems shipyard in Melbourne.  This recognises that BAE Systems has the capacity and skill to successfully take on an increased share of the workload.  Additional work on existing hull blocks is being provided to Forgacs to ensure there is no reduction of work in Newcastle.
 * 	The Government will at the earliest opportunity replace Australia's supply ships HMAS Success and HMAS Sirius.  This will include examination of options for local, hybrid and overseas build or the leasing of an existing vessel.
 * 	The Government has brought forward the replacement of Australia's Armidale Class Patrol Boats, to be assembled in Australia.
 * 	The Government will also give consideration to bringing forward the replacement of the current Anzac Class frigates with a new Future Frigate to be assembled in Australia.This will include further investment in the Australian-developed phased array radar technology already in service in the ANZAC Class frigates.
 * 	The Government has also made key decisions on the Future Submarine program, including narrowing the options to be considered and has directed further work on a new Submarine Propulsion Energy Support and Integration Facility to be based in Adelaide.
 * 	The Government will also implement the Future Submarine Industry Skills Plan.
In May 2012, the Government released the terms of reference for a plan to identify what is required to build and sustain the skills required to successfully deliver Australia's Future Submarine capability. 
The plan was developed by the Chief Executive Officer of the Defence Materiel Organisation and supported by an Expert Industry Panel, headed by Mr David Mortimer AO, that included the CEOs of the major ship construction companies and systems houses, unions, industry bodies and other government organisations.
The development of the plan was informed by research and benchmarking undertaken by the DMO team and expert industry advisers. It was the subject of broad consultation with State Governments, Australian industry, unions, industry associations and Universities.
In December 2012, the Government announced it had received the plan and would release it this year.
The Government has today released the plan which reaffirms its commitment to enhancing and maintaining the necessary skills, expertise and capacity in Australia's naval shipbuilding industry to ensure successful delivery and sustainment of Australia's future naval capabilities, particularly the Future Submarine. 
The Future Submarine Industry Skills Planpresents a practical long-term approach to the management of naval shipbuilding in Australia and sets out a new way for Defence to do business.  It uses future naval shipbuilding projects as a way to improve skills and productivity in the shipbuilding industry, through practice and innovation.
The skills needed will include systems design, naval architecture, propulsion and combat system engineering, production engineering, project planning and control, production scheduling, material procurement, risk management, budget control, financial accounting, contract management, systems integration, and trade skills such as welder, boilermaker, and electrician.
The Plan makes eleven recommendations to develop and retain the skills needed to build the future submarines and other warships for the future fleet.
The Government supports the recommendations and is confident that the Australian naval shipbuilding industry will be truly world-class. The Government will implement the Future Submarine Industry Skills Plan as it takes decisions on future naval platforms. In doing so, it will balance carefully the capability, resource, workforce and industry factors, as well as implications for competing funding priorities.
These recommendations include:
 * 	Naval shipbuilding projects should be planned with the aim of retaining wherever practical current workforce skills to place Defence and industry in the best position possible at the start of the next generation of projects;
 * 	Defence should structure the Future Submarine Program as a rolling build program, including establishing structured, funded and ongoing engineering and science and technology programs to deal progressively with equipment obsolescence and capability upgrades; and
 * 	The Defence Materiel Organisation should engage in detailed discussion on a frequent and ongoing basis with companies, unions and industry groups involved in naval shipbuilding. No plan should be approved that is not broadly practical in terms of industry capability and capacity, schedule and budget.
The Government is committed to working with industry so that Australia will have a highly capable and productive naval shipbuilding industry capable of delivering the future warships the Australian Defence Force requires to fulfill the tasks requires of it by Government.
The Plan is available at:
http://www.defence.gov.au/dmo/publications/fsisp.cfm.
Background
Currently, naval shipbuilding in Australia is based in four key areas:
 * 	ASC in Adelaide, where work on the current Air Warfare Destroyer construction program is expected to complete around mid 2019;
 * 	BAE Systems in Melbourne, where work on Air Warfare Destroyer and Landing Helicopter Dock construction programs is expected to complete around mid 2015;
 * 	Forgacs in Newcastle, where work on the Air Warfare Destroyer program is expected to complete in 2015; and
 * 	Austal in Perth, where construction of Customs Cape Class patrol boats is expected to complete around mid 2015.


Canberra
An effectively functioning Australian Defence Organisation is a critical part of protecting and defending Australia's national security interests. 
The 2013 White Paper outlines an integrated and comprehensive reform program which will embed in Defence the significant and wide ranging reforms the Government has introduced.
The reform program builds on the Strategic Reform Program (SRP), which was announced in the 2009 Defence White Paper to underpin the modernisation of the Australian Defence Organisation.
This reform program has now been expanded to include the areas of individual personal and institutional accountability, budget processes, procurement and capability and Defence conduct and culture.
The SRP was introduced to comprehensively and fundamentally improve the management of Defence by making the organisation more efficient and effective, whilst delivering savings of around $20 billion over the decade to reinvest in Defence capability.
The SRP has delivered significant improvements in the efficiency and effectiveness of Defence's core activities, including ICT delivery, sustainment, procurement, workforce management and logistics.  This has resulted in savings of $3.3 billion to the end of 2012-13. Important work to further improve the delivery of Defence's logistics, ICT services and sustainment will continue, with further savings to be made.
The savings delivered so far by the SRP have been achieved under very challenging fiscal circumstances.  This includes a contribution of $5.4 billion across the Forward Estimates from Defence in the 2012-13 Budget to support the Government's broader fiscal strategy.
That contribution had no adverse impact on operations in Afghanistan, East Timor or the Solomon Islands.  The provision of equipment to Defence personnel on operations was not adversely affected and there was no adverse impact on the number of military personnel in the Australian Defence Force. 
This contribution did increase the level of Defence's savings in travel, consultancies and the employment of Australian Public Servants, over and above that planned in the SRP. 
Since 2009, the Government has also embarked on a substantially expanded reform program, as outlined in the White Paper.  These reforms build on and enhance the SRP agenda.  They include:
 * 	reforms to strengthen personal and institutional accountability;
 * 	reforms to improve Defence's budget processes, estimation methods and underlying assumptions;
 * 	personnel reforms, including removal of gender restrictions from combat roles;
 * 	cultural reforms through the Pathway to Change, to ensure the ADF and broader Defence organisation reflects contemporary community standard and attitudes; and
 * 	further procurement and capability reforms to improve the delivery of Defence capability projects.
These significant developments since 2009 mean that Defence's reform program needs to be refreshed and refocused.
The 2013 Defence White Paper outlines how these new initiatives will be combined with the SRP to create a single reform agenda, so that reform activities are embedded into Defence's day-to-day business. 
The Government remains committed to ensuring that Defence is an effective and efficient organisation, and that every Defence dollar is spent both wisely and on the Government's highest defence priorities. 
The reform objectives of the Strategic Reform Program announced in the 2009 Defence White Paper remain current.  This includes the cost reduction measures which have been incorporated into the Defence Budget.
Reform of Defence to support the protection and defence of Australia's national security interests is a high Government priority. The Government and Defence will continue to work together to deliver the Defence reform program. 


Canberra
The 2013 Defence White Paper highlights that Australia's Alliance with the United States continues to be the bedrock of Australia's defence, security, and strategic arrangements.
Australia works in close partnership with the United States to advance shared security interests in our region and globally.  Both countries are committed to working closely in the Indo-Pacific region to promote peace and security, investment and prosperity.
In its 62nd year, the Australia-United States Alliance is the indispensable, enduring feature of Australia's strategic and security arrangements.  With the Indo-Pacific region going through a period of significant geopolitical change, it is important to ensure that our Alliance continues to grow and develop to meet the strategic and security challenges we face.
Australia welcomes the shift in US strategic focus towards the region, and the US commitment to maintain its strong diplomatic, economic and security presence.  The US rebalance provides Australia with new opportunities for cooperation with the United States and regional countries to build regional cooperation and capacity.
Substantially enhanced practical cooperation between Australia and the US is an essential part of Australia's contribution to regional peace and stability.
In November 2011, the Prime Minister and President Obama announced during the President's visit to Australia new force posture initiatives that significantly enhance practical defence cooperation between Australia and the US.
The first involves the rotation of United States Marine Corps personnel through Northern Australia to undertake bilateral training in Australia with the ADF and conduct unilateral training in Australia.  The second rotation of around 200 United States Marine Corps personnel arrived in Darwin for a six month deployment.  This rotation will be similar in nature to the initial rotation in 2012.  At the Australia-US Ministerial Meeting (AUSMIN) in Perth on 14 November 2012, Australia and the United States welcomed the success of the first rotation of US Marine Corps personnel and agreed to continue to progress the initiatives in an incremental and considered manner.  The intent in the coming years is to establish a rotational presence of up to a 2,500 personnel Marine Air Ground Task Force, rotating into Northern Australia in the northern dry season.
The second force posture initiative involves enhanced aircraft cooperation, which is expected to result in increased rotations of US Air Force aircraft through northern Australia. This will enhance bilateral collaboration and offer greater opportunities for combined and multilateral training and exercises. The details of such enhanced aerial access is yet to be the subject of detailed discussion between the Australian Government and the US Administration.
In recognition of the importance of the Indian Ocean and our combined focus on the global strategic significance of the region, Australia and the United States will also continue to explore cooperation on Indian Ocean matters, reflecting our combined focus on the global strategic significance of the region. This will include potential opportunities for additional naval cooperation at a range of locations, including HMASStirling, Australia's Indian Ocean naval base.
At the AUSMIN Meeting in November last year, Australia and the US decided to intensify cooperation to meet emerging security challenges in space and cyberspace.  AUSMIN reflected on the importance of space-enabled systems and cyberspace to our economies, societies and national security, and affirmed our common interest in ensuring the safety, stability, sustainability and security of space and cyberspace. Cooperation in areas such as space and cyber demonstrate the Alliance's adaptability to contemporary challenges.
Similarly, cooperation on defence technology between our defence organisations and our defence industries is adapting to new demands, and being enhanced by mechanisms like the Australia-US Defense Trade Cooperation Treaty.
Through the Alliance, Australia obtains access to capabilities, intelligence and capacity that we could not generate on our own. Our traditional activities  -  warfighting, training and exercising, intelligence cooperation and capability development  -  are enduring and underpin the Alliance.


Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Defence planning by its very nature is a complex business.
The judgements of governments about Australia's defence needs to be tested regularly.
In 2009, the Government committed to delivering new White Papers at intervals of no greater than five years.
Last year in May, the Minister and I agreed that we would bring forward the next Defence White Paper by a year.
We did this because of the very significant developments internationally and domestically since the 2009 White Paper.
These developments include the accelerated shift of economic and strategic weight to our region of the world; the US re-balance, the ADF drawdowns in Afghanistan, East Timor and the Solomon Islands, and the global financial crisis, the full effects of which were not clear in 2009.
The 2013 White Paper considers these important developments and their implications for our defence policy and defence force.
I want to touch briefly on the main points in the White Paper and then I will invite Minister Smith to make some comments.
First, the White Paper underlines the enormous stake Australia has in managing strategic change in the Indo-Pacific region and managing it peacefully.
In particular, in a US-China relationship in which competition is minimised and cooperation maximised.
And in a region in which flashpoints such as North Korea and territorial disputes are managed peacefully and in a way that avoids the risk of dangerous miscalculations.
Defence policy is one of the key planks of Australia's whole of government strategy for managing these challenges and securing Australia's future in Asia, which is set out in the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper and in our National Security Strategy.
The White Paper reaffirms the central and enduring importance of our alliance relationship with the United States and the contribution this makes to regional stability and to Australia's security.
And it commits the Government to deeper defence partnerships in our region including with China, our longstanding partner New Zealand, and with countries such as Indonesia, India, Singapore, Japan, the Republic of Korea and Malaysia.
Second, the White Paper finds that the key capabilities envisaged in 2009 including a more robust maritime force along with a continuing commitment to fifth generation fighter aircraft and a strategic strike capability remain appropriate for Australia.
The Government therefore reaffirms its commitment to the core capability elements of 2009 White Paper including Joint Strike Fighters, new amphibious ships, twelve new future submarines and our Air Warfare Destroyers.
Third, while the Joint Strike Fighter project has suffered cost overruns and delays, the Government remains committed to the JSF as our principal ADF strike capability and confident of its delivery.
We envisage three operational squadrons of the JSF entering service beginning around 2020.
However, to ensure air combat capability through the transition to the Joint Strike Fighter, the Government is announcing today that it will purchase twelve new-build Growler aircraft.
The Growler is the electronic warfare variant of the Super Hornet.
This capability purchase will allow Australia to retain its existing 24 Super Hornets in their current air combat configuration whilst also maintaining 12 Growler aircraft.
The cost of this purchase is estimated at around $1.5 billion over the next four years and will be contained in the forthcoming budget and included in Defence's four year forward estimates.
Fourth, Government remains committed to the assembly of twelve future submarines in South Australia.
The Government is announcing today that as a result of the detailed design analysis, it is suspending further work on military off-the-shelf or modified military off-the-self options.
Our assessment is that these options are unlikely to meet the operating requirements for the future submarine.
The Government will therefore focus its further consideration on two options: an evolved Collins Class or an entirely new design.
Minister Smith will also make some remarks about the combat system for future submarines and the land-based test platform we are developing.
We are also releasing today the future submarine industry skills plan to ensure we have the skills and expertise in the maritime sector for this major national project.
Fifth, Government makes clear in the White Paper the decisions about Defence funding cannot be made in isolation of the nation's broader fiscal position and priorities.
Into the foreseeable future, Australian governments will have to make choices about priorities and the allocation of resources across portfolios.
The White Paper commits the Government to a funding model for Defence based on the four year forward estimates budget cycle with an additional six years of funding guidance.
Over time, the Government will endeavour to increase Defence spending to about two per cent of GDP.
But I want to be clear that we see this as a longer-term objective as and when fiscal circumstances allow.
There has been considerable commentary about current levels of Defence spending since the last budget.
Notwithstanding current fiscal restraints, under this Government Defence spending over the four year forward estimates cycles topped $100 billion for the first time.
In this year's budget we will once again allocate more than $100 billion to Defence over the forward estimates.
And over that period Defence spending will rise in absolute terms and in a modest way, relative to last year's budget estimates.
The Government believes this level of funding is both appropriate in current circumstances and sustainable.
Into the future, the Government will fund capability acquisitions as and when they come on-stream.
Beyond capability and funding, the White Paper addresses a range of other issues of fundamental importance to our defence organisation.
Among these are:
 * 	How the Government will manage the transition of our Defence Force from its current very high level of operational tempo;
 * 	The vital importance of defence reform to find savings for defence investment and to drive cultural change and improve accountability;
 * 	The Government's commitment to maintaining an Australian defence industry capable of supporting our defence requirements;
 * 	Ensuring the ADF is well positioned geographically to meet Australia's security challenges through implementation of the Australian Defence Force posture review; and
 * 	The critical importance of looking after the health and wellbeing of our serving and ex-service men and women including in relation to mental health disorders
And in that context I am delighted today that we are also announcing a $25.5 million package for enhanced mental health programs for serving and ex-service personnel and their families.
I commend this White Paper to you and I invite the Minister for Defence, Minister Smith to make some comments.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Defence Minister Stephen Smith today released the 2013 Defence White Paper.
The 2013 Defence White Paper complements the National Security Strategy released on 23 January 2013, and the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper released on 28 October 2012.
These three documents are a statement of the priority the Government places on Australia's security and prosperity, and on maintaining a strong Australian Defence Force to meet Australia's national security challenges.
The White Paper addresses the range of significant international and domestic developments since 2009, which influence Australia's national security and defence settings, including their impact on force posture, future force structure and the Defence budget.  
These developments include:
 * 	the ongoing economic strategic and military shift to the Indo-Pacific;
 * 	the Australian Defence Force's (ADF) operational drawdown from Afghanistan, Timor-Leste and Solomon Islands;
 * 	the United States' re-balance to the Asia-Pacific;
 * 	Australia's substantially enhanced practical cooperation with the United States pursuant to our Alliance relationship; and
 * 	the ongoing adverse effects of the Global Financial Crisis, which have continued to have a significant deleterious impact on the global economy, domestic fiscal circumstances and Defence funding.  
The White Paper outlines the Government's judgement that the strategic shift to the Indo-Pacific means growing prosperity, but also brings some uncertainty and risk.
Regional military modernisation is increasing the ability of nations to exert military power.
The security architecture in our region that will help manage security risks is still evolving, but is being enhanced through the East Asia Summit, the ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting Plus, the ASEAN Regional Forum and other valuable regional forums.
As countries in our region modernise their defence forces, there is scope to implement deeper strategic and security partnerships, building on our longstanding cooperation.
The White Paper details how we plan to strengthen these partnerships and develop deeper defence bilateral and multi-lateral relationships through strategic dialogue, exercises, personnel exchanges and training opportunities. 
The White Paper reaffirms the importance of our longstanding Alliance with the United States as our most important relationship and a cornerstone of our defence policy. The United States' rebalance to our region presents further opportunities for cooperation with Australia through a range of enhanced practical cooperation measures.  
The White Paper also outlines how the Government will implement the Australian Defence Force Posture Review, which reinforced the need for a contemporary force posture in Australia that can support high tempo operations in our northern and western approaches, strengthened cooperation with the United States and regional partners, and the ADF's ability to support humanitarian assistance and disaster relief operations in our neighbourhood. 
A strong, capable, and credible ADF underpins our own national security, and is a core element of ourbroader influence and engagement in our region.
To that end, the 2013 Defence White Paper reflects the Government's strong commitment to maintaining a highly skilled, capable and adaptable ADF as we transition from over a decade of demanding and intensive operations.
The White Paper reaffirms the core capability commitments the Government made in the 2009 Defence White Paper and since 2009.  These commitments will ensure that we maintain world class defence capabilities that are integrated to support effective, joint ADF operations.
The White Paper also includes major new capability commitments that are critical to Australia's long-term defence and security. 
The Government will acquire 12 new build EA-18G Growler aircraft instead of converting 12 of Australia's F/A-18F Super Hornets to Growlers, thereby retaining all 24 Super Hornets in their current configuration.
This important decision will assure a first-class air combat capability for Australia through the transition period to the Joint Strike Fighter, which will proceed on its current schedule.
The White Paper also outlines the Government's decision that the Future Submarine Program will focus on two options: an ‘evolved Collins Class' design; and new design options that are likely to best meet Australia's strategic requirements.  The Government has also directed further detailed work on establishing a land-based test facility in Adelaide  -  the Submarine Propulsion Energy Support and Integration Facility  -  which will substantially assist submarine capability design, delivery and sustainment and reduce risk in all stages of the Future Submarine Program.
The Future Submarine Industry Skills Plan, which is also being released today, provides a plan to ensure that Australia maintains skills and expertise in the maritime sector to successfully deliver and sustain Australia's naval capabilities into the future.
This White Paper also reinforces the critical role of Australian industry in the development, employment, and sustainment of defence capability, in partnership with government. 
An effectively functioning Australian Defence Organisation is a critical part of protecting and defending Australia's national security interests. 
The 2013 White Paper outlines an integrated reform agenda to embed in Defence at all levels the significant and wide ranging reform program which this Government has commenced in the areas of individual personal and institutional accountability, budget processes, procurement and capability and Defence conduct and culture.
The Government will ensure that Defence has the resources and guidance it needs to deliver Government's priorities in this White Paper.
The Government has decided to bring forward Defence funding to fund the acquisition of the 12 new build EA-18G Growler aircraft and for a range of internal Defence priorities.  The Government will provide an additional small real increase in Defence funding over the Forward Estimates period.
The Government has also committed to increase Defence funding towards a long-term target of 2 per cent of GDP in an economically responsible manner, as and when fiscal circumstances allow.
The White Paper highlights a funding model for Defence based on the Federal Budget four-year forward estimates cycle, with subsequent six-year general guidance to assist Defence capability planning. The upcoming 2013-14 Budget will provide details on Defence funding. 
The Global Financial Crisis showed that strategic circumstances can change with little warning and can have significant implications for the Australian Defence Force. It also showed that it is not sensible planning to assume financial or economic circumstances will remain constant over time.
The initiatives and projects outlined in the White Paper will remain subject to change as strategic circumstances evolve, new challenges and opportunities emerge and priorities are updated to reflect the changing requirements of Government and the Australian community, and their implications for Defence and the ADF. 


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Defence Stephen Smith, Minister for Climate Change, Industry and Innovation Greg Combet and Minister for Defence Materiel Mike Kelly today outlined the Government's plan for Australia's defence industry.
The 2013 Defence White Paper highlights the critical role that Australia's defence industry plays in supporting the Australian Defence Force (ADF).
The Defence White Paper further strengthens the Government's commitment to our defence industry  -  with a focus on closer connections between strategic policy directions and defence policy for industry, and enhancing innovation, building competitiveness, and developing skills.
The Government considers Defence industry cooperation and partnerships to be important elements in Australia's deepening defence partnerships in the Indo-Pacific.
The White Paper emphasises the importance of the Government's Priority Industry Capabilities to ensure industry can continue to meet Defence's critical capability delivery and sustainment needs.
The Government has a track record of supporting the Australian defence industry, a commitment that was highlighted by the recent announcement of the establishment of a Defence Manufacturing Precinct to be based in Adelaide.
The Defense Trade Cooperation Treaty between Australia and the United States that commences in May 2013 will be an important mechanism that will have substantial benefits for Australian industry. 
The Government has also established a Priority Industry Capability Development Fund, with funding of $10 million per year from the Defence Capability Plan (DCP).
The Government will provide further assistance to Australia's defence industry through:
 * 	the establishment of the Defence Innovation Realisation Fund within the DCP funded at $10 million per year, to help mature innovative defence technologies;
 * 	a strengthened Australian Industry Capability Program, to maximise opportunities for Australian industry to participate in domestic and international supply chains;
 * 	continuation of industry assistance and support programs managed by Defence which provide grants and funding to companies to develop new equipment solutions and pursue export opportunities; and
 * 	industry support programs which focus on helping industry to develop skills in critical and new fields, including the Skilling Australia's Defence Industry Program.
The Government is committed to providing clear guidance to industry on capability intentions and opportunities for local industry to compete for work.
We will release an updated public Defence Capability Plan (DCP) and Defence Capability Guide in the coming months. 
The Government will also release an updated Defence Industry Policy Statement in the coming months. It will set out the Government's vision for how Defence and industry will work together to achieve the priorities of this White Paper. 
Science and technology innovation also underpins this important White Paper and contributes to a strong ADF and an effective defence industry.  The White Paper highlights our pursuit of new international partnerships and continuing investment in our highly skilled and respected Defence Science and Technology Organisation. 
We will continue to enhance the partnership between Defence, industry, and the science and innovation community to deliver results for Australia's defence capability.
The White Paper reinforces the Government's $1 billionPlan for Australian Jobs.  Innovation remains critically important in delivering leading edge capabilities for the ADF and also in applying existing knowledge and technology in new ways to create value in the delivery of new capabilities and reduce both acquisition and sustainment costs.


Melbourne
PM: I'm delighted to be here in Victoria.
I'm joined by the Minister for Disability Reform, Jenny Macklin, by the Premier of Victoria, and by his Minister for Disability Services Mary Wooldridge, and we're here today together to make a very important announcement.
An announcement that matters to the people of Victoria and matters right around Australia.
So I am delighted to announce that the Premier and I have agreed that DisabilityCare will be rolled out throughout Victoria, that Victoria and the Federal Government will work together on the rollout of the full scheme.
What that means is we will move from the launch site in the Barwon region, which is for 5000 people through to full rollout for more than 100,000 Victorians. DisabilityCare will be in full operation in Victoria from the middle of 2019, from mid-2019.
We've worked together on the finances for this and the Commonwealth Government in a full year of operation will make available $2.6 billion and the Victorian Government will make available $2.5 billion.
It is a substantial effort, but it is there to ensure that the people we have met today and Victorians with disabilities get the care and support they need.
More than that, it is to ensure that everyone in Victoria who faces life's chances, all of the chances of very good things that could happens, but all of the risks of living a life, including the risk of at some time in your life having a major disability, that every Victorian can feel the peace of mind of knowing that DisabilityCare would be there to support them.
Before handing over to the Premier on this important day, I do want to say a few words of thanks to the people who are gathered with us today.
I want to say thank you to all of those who have argued for DisabilityCare for decades now.
To everyone in the disability advocacy sector, to everyone with a disability and their family and friends who have raised their voices to say, as a nation, we need to do better.
Their voices have been raised for a long period of time. DisabilityCare isn't actually a new idea.
It's not a new idea to have a National Disability Insurance Scheme, it's been the subject of advocacy, literally for decades.
But we needed to listen to those voices and we have listened.
And I'm very pleased and proud that we have.
And having listened to you, we've now worked together to make sure we can see full rollout in Victoria.
This is the end of a pretty amazing week for DisabilityCare in Australia, and that's one of the reasons that I'm seeing some people for a second time this week.
We leave this week knowing that DisabilityCare has been legislated, it is the law of Australia. Knowing that there is an ongoing funding source, the Medicare levy to support DisabilityCare.
And knowing after today that DisabilityCare has been secured for almost 70 per cent of the Australian population and I and Jenny Macklin will keep working with the remaining states and territory to get this done around the nation.
It's with a great sense of pleasure that I hand over to the Premier for his words.
PREMIER NAPTHINE: Thank you.
Thank you very much Prime Minister, and can I acknowledge Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Jenny Macklin as Minister for Disability Reform in the Federal Government, Mary Wooldridge, Minister for Disability Reform and Services in the Coalition Government here in Victoria, and Andrea Coote as Parliamentary Secretary.
This is a great day for Victoria, and a particularly proud day for all of those people who fought long and hard for proper disability services in this state.
We in Victoria are very proud that we have been leaders in disability services in this state for many, many years. We have been one of the first states to fund individual people with disabilities, and giving them the power to make their own decisions about the services they purchase.
We are a state who have been very much on the front foot of fighting for a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We certainly are very proud of the fact that the launch site in Barwon will start on 1 July this year, and we have been very much to the forefront of promoting that launch site which will benefit 5000 people in the Barwon region.
We have been working hard with the groups across Victoria to make sure that we could deliver to Victoria a disability service system that takes care of the needs of all those with significant and profound disabilities.
And I'm very, very proud today, as Premier of Victoria, with Mary Wooldridge as Minister, to sign up with the Federal Government for a full rollout of DisabilityCare in this state from July 2019.
What will happen is the launch site will start in Barwon on 1 July this year. From 1 July 2016, the transition will be over three years for the full scheme rollout in 2019.
And in 2019 as the Prime Minister said, there will be $2.5 billion from the Victorian Government together with $2.6 billion from the Federal Government making sure that the over 100,000 Victorians who have a disability, be it a significant or profound disability, will have the care that they need, the support that they need, the programs they need to live as full and independent and as quality-of-life as they can, and that's what we're working towards and that's what we're achieving.
Can I say on a personal note, that aside from my role as a politician, I spent two years as house parents for a the intellectually disabled, in Hamilton.
I met a young boy there. He was six at the time, severely autistic. He's proudly part of my family today.
And so, as a person, as a family member, as a carer, as somebody who's worked in the disability area, and as a politician, I'm very, very proud to be here today, as a Victorian, with Victoria signing up to the full DisabilityCare system from 2019 and the leadup to it.
This is a really great day for Victoria. It's a great day for people with disabilities, their carers and their families. It is a day we can all be proud of.
I'd like to join with the Prime Minister to thank Jenny Macklin, Mary Wooldridge and Andrea Coote for their leadership and their work in this area over a considerable time.
I'd like to thank all the advocates, all the people who've worked for so long in the area of disabilities.
I know the people who have worked as carers, the people who have worked in CRUs and houses, people who've worked in day program areas.
They are absolutely compassionate, loving people.
And to all the people with disabilities in this state, can I say this is a great day.
You can be very proud of what both your federal and state governments have done today because this will make a difference and we can be very proud that we've been part of making a difference to people who need it most.
Thank you.
PM: We're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how far away are you from doing a deal with the remaining states and territories?
PM: We'll be getting on with that work. I mean we're now in a situation where we're almost 70 per cent of the Australian population.
We've got more work to do with Queensland, with the Northern Territory and with Western Australia, and Jenny Macklin and I will be getting on with that work during the course of the weeks to come.
JOURNALIST: Will they be the hardest deals to do?
PM: Well all of the arrangements are the same for jurisdictions to come on. This is a national scheme, so by definition what people get out of it, the support that they get out of it has to be the same.
One of the things we want to make sure is that people with disabilities and their families can choose to move interstate the way other families do, and one of the things that we've had very clearly as feedback is that people manage to put bits of care together and then think if I went to another state, if a family member of mine went to get a job opportunity in another state, how would I put my package of care together if I moved?
And so that's a big restriction on people and so we want services around the country to give people the same entitlements so that if your family did decide to move from Victoria to Western Australia or the other way around, that you would know that you were going to get the same care and support.
So the arrangements are the same, obviously different states have got different populations and so the amount of funding is different, but the arrangements are the same and we'll be taking those same arrangements to the remaining jurisdictions.
JOURNALIST: Are you surprised at how quickly this has progressed in the last seven days?
PM: Well, for us it comes on top of years and years of work, and that's for us, and I know that I'm looking out on a crowd of people for whom this has been the labour, literally, of a lifetime, so when you use the word ‘quick' it's got to be understood in a proper context.
I think for us we've worked on it now over a number of years, asked the Productivity Commission for guidance, then got the Productivity Commission report, then responded to it, then made available a billion dollars to get the launch sites done, negotiated with states and territories for that, and then we've kept doing the work and that has brought us to this week where we've seen considerable movement over seven days.
But you only get to that big movement over seven days if the years and years of work in the leadup has been done.
And it's a tribute to so many advocates around the country that it's been done, and I am very proud that as a Government, as a Federal Government, we genuinely listened and responded as worked with them and now colleagues around the states who have been running disability services and doing many good things have seen their way to taking the steps necessary to join together to get this done for everyone here in Victoria.
And we're obviously very hopeful, everyone around the country.
JOURNALIST: Can you explain in terms of the eligibility criteria specifically who will benefit and who won't?
PM: Well the eligibility criteria is dealt with in the legislation, so that's already gone through the parliament and become the law of Australia.
Yes of course there are regulations and rules to make under that legislation, and we're getting on with doing that work.
I'll turn to Jenny Macklin to take you through what's in the legislation which is available now.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister.
The legislation sets out the eligibility criteria, so people need to have a permanent disability and then within the different types of disability  -  intellectual disability, physical, cognitive, sensory, psychiatric disabilities  -  then of course we'll look at the reasonable and necessary support that people need to be able to participate in society.
So those eligibility criteria as clearly set out in the now Act of Parliament that went through the parliament at the end of March.
JOURNALIST: Premier, can I ask you, given that you often say that Victoria is a leader when it comes to disability services, why did it take a while to get to this point? What were some of the sticking points?
PREMIER NAPTHINE: We had to work through a number of issues with our people with disabilities, first and foremost, our service providers and of course there were financial arrangements that had to be agreed so that we could be assured that we would have the best outcome possible for people with disabilities, their families and carers.
That was our prime responsibility.
And certainly we have to do it within a sustainable funding model.
We're very proud that we, as a Liberal-National Government, have economic management as the core of what we do and we need to manage our budget in tight and challenging times that we can provide the services needed and we can fund things like DisabilityCare, but we can do it in a responsible way that's sustainable.
JOURNALIST: Premier, will you need to raise a new levy or taxes like Canberra did to come up with the $2.5 billion to fund the scheme?
PREMIER NAPTHINE: We expect that our current financial situation, with the assistance through the payments to Victoria through the new Medicare levy, that we believe we can find the funding concerned.
But this will require challenges for our budget, and the Victorian budget is a tight budget in challenging economic times.
But we have as our core good sound economic management and we believe that with the existing funding we provide in disability services  -  about $1.5, $1.6 billion  -  ramping that up to $2.5 billion by 2019 will be achievable with the assistance through the Medicare levy rebates to Victoria.
JOURNALIST: Now that you've signed up to one major piece of national reform, where do you stand on the other major piece of national reform?
PREMIER NAPTHINE: Well again, we stand in broad principle, we support improved educational outcomes.
We support a better educational system, and we're happy to continue bilateral negotiations and discussions with the Federal Government to try and achieve a better funding model and a better outcome for education.
But we will ensure that in Victoria that there is no school disadvantaged, no child disadvantaged and no family disadvantaged in those negotiations.
JOURNALIST: So you haven't made up your mind yet on Gonski?
PREMIER NAPTHINE: Well, we have the same objectives and what we ought to do is work bilaterally in a cooperative way to try and get the best outcome.
But I do emphasise as I've said a couple of times, these are challenging economic times for the state of Victoria, we don't have the growth taxes that our federal counterparts have, and so therefore it is more difficult for us to maintain our triple-A credit rating, to maintain the strength of our economy, and fund key infrastructure like East-West Tunnel, East-West Link, Metro Tunnel and Port of Hastings as well as fund these important services.
So it's a balancing act that we believe we're up to, but it certainly takes a lot of work.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can we ask you about the claims of animal cruelty in Egypt?
PM: The Minister for Agriculture will address this matter in more detail later today, but can I just say obviously any animal cruelty is repulsive to all of use.
It's also repulsive to this industry. I know from my own discussions with industry that people who raise these animals don't want to see them treated in a cruel way, and so I very much welcome the voluntary suspension that industry has put in place for exports to Egypt.
JOURNALIST: This is not the first time we've seen vision like this. Do you think it's time for a review of Australia's livestock industry?
PM: No, we put the right policies in place arising out of some examples of animal cruelty that shocked the nation and shocked people within the industry itself. We are now able to do tracking and tracing of animals as they move overseas.
We have received this footage and the Minister for Agriculture will be in a position to deal with it in detail, but I am pleased to see that there's been a voluntary suspension from industry.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why do you think there's been a surge in asylum seeker boats this week?
PM: This is a complex issue. People smuggling is a transnational crime. Like all other transnational crimes it changes its way of working over time, so yesterday's solutions don't work again.
You've always got to be taking the best of advice and acting on it. We did take the best of advice from Angus Houston's team.
I think it's to be deeply regretted that we haven't been able to put all of that in place, because of the negativity we've seen on the other side of parliament.
I do note that the Leader of the Opposition has now significantly stepped away from his commitment to stop the boats. I think that's a recognition of just how complex an area this is.
JOURNALIST: Will you be changing your strategy though?
PM: We are always guided by the Houston report.
There are elements of that report that we haven't been able to enact yet. We would enact them if we could get them through the federal parliament and I think that shows unfortunately that negativity costs and negativity does make a difference in the real world.
So we would enact them and we'll always be guided by the best of advice for the future.
JOURNALIST: Do you think they may be trying to get in before the election when the policies may be a bit tougher?
PM: There's absolutely no evidence of that, no, and I do note the Leader of the Opposition has stepped significantly away from his stated commitment to stop the boats.
JOURNALIST: What are your thoughts on Angry Anderson running for a safe Labor seat?
PM: That's a matter for the preselection processes of the relevant political party.
JOURNALIST: UNESCO has again expressed disappointment in Australia's lack of commitment for greater protection for the reef, particularly of developments outside of existing port areas. Is it time for Australia to step up its reef commitment?
PM: We are very committed to keeping the Great Barrier Reef as the wonderful heritage area for the world that it is and for our nation.
Very recently, indeed in the last couple of weeks, I announced a $200 million Reef Rescue commitment.
That's building on a past commitment, renewing it for the future. It's about working with farmers in a way that increases their productivity but also decreases the amount of run-off that then goes into the waters of the Great Barrier Reef.
So we are very committed and we'll keep pursuing those kind of commitments for the future.
JOURNALIST: The New South Wales Premier says he's going to legislate to ensure the continued use of CCTV cameras in the state after a council banned their use there yesterday. Are you a supporter of CCTV?
PM: We were actually having a conversation about this just before, yes, I am a supporter of CCTV and the Federal Government has got a community safety program where one of the things that communities can put in applications for is the further rollout of CCTV.
Now no one thing fixes every issue but I do believe CCTV has a role to play in community safety and that's why we support it through Federal Government money and will continue to do so.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask the Premier a question. Premier, what do you think about the protests yesterday? Do you expect some resolution on the taxi issue?
PREMIER NAPTHINE: This is an issue for the Melbourne Airport Corporation and I would urge them to sit down and resolve this issue with the taxi drivers and taxi operators.
What we don't want is taxi drivers protesting, interrupting people going about getting on and off aeroplanes and meeting friends and relatives so I would ask the taxi drivers to show some common sense and I would ask them to sit down with the airport operators and get a speedy resolution to what is a dispute that should be resolved very quickly.
JOURNALIST: On the security issue, would you ever legislate to install protective barriers or cages for taxi drivers?
PREMIER NAPTHINE: Well, we believe that the Taxi Directorate is the best one to give us the advice on that.
They talk regularly with taxi operators and taxi drivers. We are very much in favour of actions that can make it safer for taxi drivers and if taxi drivers want more protection then there's the opportunities for them to introduce that.
PM: Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Melbourne
The Gillard Government and Victorian Coalition Government have reached a historic agreement today that will allow for the full roll out of DisabilityCare Australia, the National Disability Insurance Scheme, in Victoria by July 2019.
The agreement will provide more than 100,000 Victorian residents with significant or profound disability choice and control over the care and support they receive. This will provide coverage in the event of disability to around one quarter of the Australian population.
DisabilityCare Australia will also give all Victorians the peace of mind that if they have or acquire a disability or have a child with disability that leaves them needing daily care and support, that they will get the support they need when they need it.
Under the agreement reached today:
·By 2019-20, the Victorian Government will provide an estimated $2.5 billion to cover all people in Victoria. This contribution was determined using the benchmark set by New South Wales in the agreement reached with the Commonwealth in December 2012.  This will contribute to the cost of care and support for people with disability.
·By 2019-20, the Commonwealth Government will contribute around $2.6 billion to the scheme for Victorians. This will be around 51 per cent of scheme costs. In addition, having reached agreement to broader changes in the roles and responsibilities of both governments for people aged 65 and over, the Commonwealth will cover the full cost of people who turn 65 and choose to remain in the scheme.
·The full scheme costs will be reviewed by the Productivity Commission in 2018-19 to inform COAG agreement on final scheme funding arrangements.
Following the announcement this week by the Prime Minister, the Commonwealth Government has confirmed that, from 2019-20, an amount of $244 million will be allocated to Victoria from the increase in the Medicare Levy, to assist with the cost of the scheme in Victoria.
Today's agreement builds on the agreement to launch in Barwon region of Victoria from 1 July 2013. Other eligible Victorian residents will start entering the scheme in July 2016.
We will progressively roll out DisabilityCare Australia in Victoria so that by July 2019, all eligible residents will be covered.
The NDIS is the reform of a generation and has the potential to transform the lives of some of the most vulnerable Victorians  -  people with a disability, their families and carers. It will build on Victoria's reform journey in individualising support for people with disability.
The Gillard Government will continue to work closely with remaining state and territory governments to reach agreement on the national roll out of DisabilityCare Australia, so that all Australians can rest assured that if they have, or acquire, a disability they will have their needs met in a way that supports them to live with choice and dignity.


ABC Insiders
HOST: Prime Minister good morning, welcome.
PM: Good morning, Barrie.
HOST: We'll start with the NDIS and yesterday Victoria signed up. What are the prospects now of WA and Queensland signing up as well?
PM: We'll keep working hard on this, Barrie. I do want to see the National Disability Insurance Scheme be a truly national scheme.
I think the momentum is with us now to get this as the national scheme and I'll keep talking to the premiers of Queensland and Western Australia and of course the Chief Minister in the Northern Territory and a lot of discussions are happening between officials as well to try and get agreement around the nation.
HOST: And when you say it is a national scheme, is there any scope then for the decentralisation concerns that Western Australia expresses?
PM: I want to be clear, the model of this scheme is not centralised services, far from it.
People with disabilities would be put in the driver's seat, they would be able to get their package of care and make choices.
Local service providers would have to be responsive to their needs because they would be the ones able to make decisions.
What is centralised is that everywhere around the country people should have the same entitlement.
I don't want to end up in a situation where if you grow up in Victoria and for whatever reason your family decides to move to Western Australia, that you then get a different package of care, a different model of care.
You should be able to move around the country, like everybody else is entitled to do, and experience the same level of services. So there can be no compromise on that.
HOST: Now, is it self-evident that if revenue had not dried up to the extent that it did that it wouldn't have been necessary to have a levy?
PM: I changed my mind on the levy for three reasons, Barrie. You've just pointed to one.
Yes, we're getting less tax money than was anticipated, but there were two other things that were on my mind.
We've been in really in-detail discussions with states and territories now, not only over DisabilityCare but also our school funding and school improvement plans.
That's required more transparency about state budgets than we've had in the past and I became more and more aware the kind of burden we were asking states to shoulder for nation changing reforms, reforms we need but in their fiscal positions and tight budgets it was going to be an extra weight on their shoulders.
So I decided in introducing the levy, that a quarter of what is raised would flow through in grants to states.
And then thirdly, I've spent a lot of time with advocates from disability sectors, people with disabilities, their families, their carers, people who have been calling for a National Disability Insurance Scheme, for DisabilityCare, for decades now. For many of them it's been the work of their entire lifetime.
And they very much urged a secure funding source and that's what the levy is.
HOST: Alright, but running out of money was important as well. Does it then follow that if and when the budget returns to a healthy surplus that the levy can go?
PM: I think this needs to be there as a funding source for all of time, Barrie. That's my perspective.
I think it is fair to say to Australians that you will be asked for a little bit more in order to fund something that we all benefit from.
Of course it's people with disabilities that benefit now, but Barrie, you don't know, I don't know, none of us know what the future's going to bring.
Either of us could end up with a disability over the course of our lifetime. Either of us could end up with a family member with a profound disability and we would benefit from DisabilityCare.
HOST: So it's permanent, because Tony Abbott said it could go once the budget returns to a healthy surplus?
PM: Well there we go again, Mr Abbott making commentary about budget matters but unfortunately we see no details and no facts.
Barrie, this morning in today's newspapers I saw that the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Abbott, said he wanted to reduce the tax to GDP ratio which is currently at 22.2 per cent.
Well, if he wants to reduce that by a percentage point, that's a $15 billion reduction in revenue in a year.
What would he have to cut to reduce it by a percentage point?
Well, everything we spend on schools, almost everything we spend in family tax benefits. He'd have to take an axe to payments on childcare, to carers, to students.
Now if that's what the Leader of the Opposition wants to do he needs to detail how much it would cost every family in Australia through the loss of those services.
HOST: He would have to do those things if he did it overnight but he said it's an aspiration?
PM: Barrie, the obligation is on the Leader of the Opposition to not only explain this new commitment but to explain where the cuts are going-
HOST: But it's not a commitment, it's an aspiration, and what's wrong with that as an aspiration?
PM: Well Barrie, let's be very clear. The Leader of the Opposition already, through his Shadow Treasurer, has acknowledged on television that they've got $70 billion worth of cutbacks to do.
Now, that's already cuts to the bone in areas like Medicare and the pension, health and education.
Now, if he's going to do those cuts to the bone and then aspire to do more, he's got an obligation to detail what that would do to Australian families.
HOST: Just on back to the NDIS and on funding, you start collecting from July next year and you won't spend that money for some years after that, so what happens to the money in the meantime and how secure will it be?
PM: We've said it would go into a special account and it would be held there and every cent raised would be spent on DisabilityCare.
HOST: Okay, now I wanted to also ask you about the way that the issue was handled this week and even though you secured the funding the process, do you accept, was sullied by politics?
PM: All this has ever been about from my point of view is changing something in our nation that is currently wrong and I want to see it put right.
I've been very moved personally by meeting people with disabilities, meeting their family members, seeing the struggle that they go through in their lives.
It's just incredible the courage you see on display.
I don't know if in those circumstances I could show the amount of courage that some of the people I've met have shown in trying to overcome their disabilities.
Now, what they want is a nation that's good enough to partner with them and provide the supports that they need.
There's nothing new in this. This was a call when the Howard Government was in office, it's been a continuing call over decades.
I listened to that call and I've worked to get this done, Barrie.
I was surprised when the Opposition indicated they were prepared to move on the Medicare levy and given that they changed their mind and changed their position over the course of a week, then of course, I'm prepared to step up and take that commitment from the Opposition and use it to secure the funding source.
HOST: And you said you were surprised and you built your tactics around them saying no.
PM: Barrie, I actually listen to what the Opposition says, and maybe I'm the only person in Australia who does it, but when they make statements I take them seriously.
And so the Leader of the Opposition was out there campaigning  -  already complaining  -  about the possibility of a new tax.
The Shadow Treasurer was on radio saying it would hurt the economy.
Now I took them at their word. I thought those words were meaningful. I thought those words indicated a predisposition to oppose the levy. Indeed I don't understand how any person of reason could read those words any other way.
The Leader of the Opposition changed his mind, that's a good thing, and as a result of it we'll get it done.
HOST: I think most of those words you referred to were said after you'd agreed on your tactics. You insisted if the Coalition did not support the Bill you would not introduce it, even though you almost certainly had the numbers without them. Now why would you do that?
Why would you leave a funding issue to an election you could easily lose when you have the numbers now?
PM: My view was it would have been the cruellest of things to go to the parliament in circumstances where this was opposed by the Opposition and say to the Australian people, and particularly the 410,000 people with disabilities, this is here today and possibly gone tomorrow depending on the outcome of the election.
I wanted, once we did this, to be able to say to people with disabilities and the whole Australian nation, it is done and it is done for all time.
Now, I could only be in that position if there was genuine bipartisanship, this side of the election, or if the Australian people spoke very loudly on it at the election.
I am pleased to see that that genuine bipartisanship has been reached, following the Opposition changing its mind during the week.
HOST: Sure, but you're the Prime Minister, you're running the country, why would you take so seriously the real prospect, I suppose, there is a prospect of losing at the next election. You're already building in contingency arrangements for when you lose at the next election?
PM: Barrie, that's not true and I am going to that election to win and that election will be a very clear choice for the Australian people between me and a majority Labor Government with a very clear plan for jobs and opportunity in our nation's future and a clear plan for the services that families rely on compared with the plans of the Leader of the Opposition we've canvassed during this interview to cut to the bone.
That will be the choice.
On DisabilityCare, people have campaigned for a long, long time, decades, many have devoted their lives to this campaign.
This campaign has fallen on stony ground until this Government and I wasn't going to see those people put in a position where I squeaked a bit of legislation through the parliament and then they worried whether or not it would be taken away. It's good to see that there's bipartisanship around it.
Now, I note, as that bipartisanship has broken out around the Medicare levy, that the Leader of the Opposition has basically said well, it's my job as Prime Minister to keep building this scheme and damn right, I'll keep doing that, Barrie, that is my job as Prime Minister. I take it very seriously.
We're the ones that have already got the Productivity Commission report, responded to it, budgeted to get a billion dollars when it wasn't easy for launch sites, negotiated the launch sites arrangements around the country, so people will start benefitting from 1 July.
And now state after state, jurisdiction after jurisdiction, I'm the one going out and getting the agreements that means this can roll out around the country now to almost 70 per cent of the population.
So yes, I'm building the National Disability Insurance Scheme, DisabilityCare, and I'm very proud to do it.
HOST: When is changing your mind not a broken promise?
PM: Well, Barrie, you and the commentators will no doubt canvass around that endlessly and the way that our political dialogue does chew over these questions and more power to your arm, good luck to you.
In my view what I need to do as prime minister is deal with these things called facts.
Now I know that isn't accepted by all sides of politics.
We're there dealing with the facts, the other side of politics fluffing around with the nonsense, but the facts do matter to me and as the facts emerge and the facts get crystallised and the facts change then I am prepared to change my mind in the interests of the Australian nation.
HOST: Alright, in the same spirit, the facts, the facts on gay marriage, about 60 per cent of Australians want it changed to that law, would you change your mind on that?
PM: What I can do here, and I've already done it, is ensured that there will be a conscience vote in the Labor Party. There was a conscience vote when it came to the parliament.
I don't seek to impose my view on anyone. I've never asked a member of my political party to vote with me on this. I never will.
I go to the other extreme of saying it's all up to you, you make up your minds.
But when we look around the world here, and yes, I think world attitudes are changing, Barrie.
But when we look around the world and those countries that have moved towards same-sex marriage, the key factor is that politicians have had conscience votes including on the conservative side of politics.
Look at New Zealand, Prime Minister Key, I know him well, a conservative sister political party of the Liberal Party here.
He gave his people a conscience vote and that's what we need to see done in Australia and there have been incredibly mixed messages about that.
A little flirtation with a conscience vote and now the Leader of the Opposition appearing to pull back from that and saying no, there won't even be a vote at all in the next Parliament.
Well this does matter to many Australians. I think you have an obligation to be clear with them. I'm clear about my position and about how my members are allowed to vote. I think the Leader of the Opposition owes people the same courtesy.
HOST: You talked about mixed messages on that issue but what about on the economy and with a budget coming up. You insist the economy is sound on the one hand but in your speech you said decisions you have to take in the budget are urgent and grave. Why grave if the economy is sound?
PM: The economy has growth rates in it. We've got an economy that's now 13 per cent bigger than when we came to office and given we've lived through the global financial crisis that's a statistic we should all be proud of.
And I know that many people say that's just because the minerals have been doing well, look at a resource-rich economy like Canada's, very comparable to Australia's.
Over the same time period they've seen 5 per cent growth, we've seen 13 per cent growth and we are continuing to grow at around 3 per cent.
HOST: So I go back to the point, why grave then? Why use the word grave?
PM: Because Barrie, even in that growing economy there are plenty of pressures on, because our currency has appreciated, grown in value by around 50 per cent.
So if you're in the manufacturing business, if you're trying to export then your customers are basically paying 50 per cent more for your products or services just because of a movement in our currency, not because you are charging more in your costs.
That is a really tough pressure. It is meaning for businesses they are less profitable, that is meaning there is less tax money coming into the Government than was expected. That means you do face grave decisions as you address budget questions.
We're up to doing that because we are dealing with the facts. We've done it before, garnering savings of more than $150 billion over the budgets we've done. We've done that in a way that preserves the services that families really rely on.
That's a Labor approach and we will take it to this budget. Jobs at the forefront, looking after Australians always guiding us.
HOST: And yet you do say you won't be cutting to the bone. That doesn't sound all that grave?
PM: That's because we get the decisions right, Barrie.
The contrast here, I think, is between a government that makes responsible savings and wise investments like what I want to do for Australia's school children, improving the quality of school education versus the slash and burn that we see on the other side of politics.
I will go to Queensland today. If you want to see slash and burn under a Liberal Government go and ask the people of Queensland and that's just a starter for the kind of things that people would have to live through if government did change later this year.
HOST: Now just finally, there was more speculation over the weekend that we're headed for, well, at least the Government is headed for a big loss in September, some 40 to 45 seats is one estimation, and we do read that many in your own party expect as much.
Do you detect that sense of foreboding among some of your colleagues?
PM: It's been politically tough for us, Barrie, and it will continue to be politically tough. I think that's obvious.
We've faced a relentlessly negative Opposition, we face the unusual circumstances of a minority parliament and we've done some big things, not necessarily popular things, to get the nation in the right position to seize all of the opportunities that will come in this time of change in our region.
We're going to see spectacular growth in demand in Asia. I want us to be the winners out of that and I've done some tough things, some unpopular things to get us in that position.
But when people vote in September, a lot of the white noise that is in politics and has been in politics over the last few years will fall away, people will be there in a polling place with the ballot paper in front of them and it will be a very clear choice.
Do I want  -  me  -  as Prime Minister  -  Julia Gillard  -  a majority Labor Government, a focus on jobs and growth and on the services my family needs, a clear plan for the future, or do I want the Leader of the Opposition  -  Mr Abbott  -  with his very clear plan for cutbacks?
People will make their choice then and I am approaching this election with a spirit to win, I believe we can win because at the end of the day Australians are a smart people, the facts matter, the policies matter and there we are with the right answers.
HOST: But are you struggling to inject that same sort of spirit into the minds of some of your colleagues?
PM: My job's to lead by example, Barrie, and I will be doing that. I'm doing it here and I'll do it every day.
We've got to get out and win this and yes, we are not in a period where it's any time for the faint hearted, but just as I've done some things that people haven't expected, I listen to this negative commentary all the time.
I got told for 12 months our relationship with China was in ruins, it was in tatters. I go to China and pull off things that people weren't expecting and everybody goes ‘well, that's a bit interesting.'
I get told Gonski's dead in the water. I go to New South Wales and get an agreement with Premier O'Farrell.
I get told we won't get DisabilityCare done, that we can't actually get agreement for the levy, and there we are, we've done it during the course of this week.
So I'm pretty used to the negative chit chat, Barrie, and I'm pretty used to prevailing against that negative chit chat and I'll do that again in September.
HOST: Thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks, Barrie.
[ENDS] 


Brisbane
E &amp; OE  -  PROOF ONLY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I've come here today to say one thing to you, and that is that I stand for Queensland.
I stand with you for Queensland.
And standing for Queensland, standing for the working people of Queensland means you stand against Campbell Newman's cutbacks to the services if this great state.
You've seen 14,000 public servants lose their jobs and you know how hurtful that has been.
Nurses, midwives, thrown out of hospitals onto the streets.
You've seen firefighters sent in to fight fires without foam.
You've seen Breast Screen Queensland smashed up by the Campbell Newman Government.
Working people in Queensland should not have to put up with these cutbacks.
We are going to oppose them, we are going to fight them, and that is why we're here today.
And friends, you were told, you were told that all of these cutbacks were about starting private sector growth, but here in Queensland we haven't seen any employment growth, no new employment growth over the last 12 months.
Queenslanders who want jobs not able to get jobs despite the false promises of Campbell Newman.
Well friends, you know that there is a better way to govern Queensland, a better way to create a future for the working people in this state and their families.
That's the Labor way; it's what we demonstrate at the federal government level every day.
I'm proud that we're the government that got rid of the hated Work Choices.
We campaigned together then and we won.
I'm proud we're the government that is building the big things that matter for the nation's future, doing it in a Labor way.
Just like governments in the past have built Medicare, we're building the National Disability Insurance Scheme, DisabilityCare.
Just like Labor governments in the past have ensured that children can get a great education and access to a great life, we are improving school funding and life's chances all around the nation.
Just like Labor governments in the past we are building for the future.
Clean energy, the National Broadband Network, the infrastructure we need for the future; because it is only Labor governments that get the big things done that matter for the nation and matter for working families.
And we have kept at the forefront jobs.
During the worst of economic times since the Great Depression, we've grown almost 900,000 jobs in this country whilst around the world millions of people have joined the unemployment queue.
We know jobs matter.
They matter to you, they matter to working people and we will always, as a Labor government, focus on jobs and growth because working people need that opportunity.
And having a job is so important but fairness and decency at work matters too.
Which is why I am offended by what you're having to put up with in this state.
By redefining who a worker is for workers' compensation.
By the lazy threats we're seeing from the Coalition, from Tony Abbott, to strip away your penalty rates, a precursor to bringing Work Choices back.
Fairness and decency at work is the Labor way, and we are prepared to fight for it.
Our nation has got a big decision coming in September.
It's a big decision between two visions of the future.
And I tell you what, in Queensland of all places in our nation, you cannot afford Tony Abbott's plans to cut to the bone, to join with Peter Costello's privatisation plans, to join with Campbell Newman's cutbacks and no growth in jobs.
You can't afford that combination here in Queensland.
Abbott and Costello, back to doing what they do best, hurting working people.
That's not a future for Queensland, that's not a future for our nation.
The Leader of the Opposition has already said through his shadow treasurer they stand for cutbacks of $70 billion, and then this very weekend he said he wants to reduce tax, the tax to GDP ratio.
If he did that by 1 per cent that's a plan for another $15 billion of cutbacks.
Now this is of the scale of getting rid of Medicare, of ending payments to old-age pensioners, of taking an axe to childcare, to carers, to students, to the payments that people rely on, to the health and education services that our nation most values.
We cannot allow Tony Abbott's vision of the future to come true.
Instead friends, I'm asking you to get out and fight.
To fight for a better vision of the future, a vision of jobs and opportunity shared by all.
A vision of great services relied upon by all; a vision of world class schools so that we build our future; a vision of a National Disability Insurance Scheme that makes a difference right around the nation.
This is our Labor vision, this is our Labor way.
I'm asking you to get out and fight for it and I'll be proud to be with you leading that fight every day between now and September.
Friends, thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard will visit Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, from 9 to 11 May 2013.
Papua New Guinea is Australia's nearest neighbour and one of our most important bilateral partners.
Our unique relationship is based on shared history, extensive business links, the deep friendship between our two peoples and close government ties.
In Port Moresby, the Prime Minister will meet Prime Minister Peter O'Neill and his Cabinet to discuss priority bilateral interests and cooperation on shared regional challenges.
Ms Gillard will also call on Papua New Guinea's Governor-General, Sir Michael Ogio GCMG CBE, and meet the Leader of the Opposition, the Honourable Belden Namah MP.
Ms Gillard will address the Papua New Guinea Chamber of Commerce and Industry, visit the $19 billion PNG LNG project and see first-hand how Australia's development assistance is delivering real benefits for Papua New Guineans.
This will be Ms Gillard's first visit to Papua New Guinea as Prime Minister. 


Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OMITTED]
In the depths of the northern winter of 1945, Raoul Wallenberg disappeared.
We do not know his fate but it is thought he died later that year.
By this time, the war was over and the Jewish people saved by Wallenberg were counting the miracle of their survival and beginning to contemplate new lives in places of safety like Israel and Australia.
Wallenberg never saw our lovely land in his 34 years on earth.
And yet today we join his name with that of our nation as its first honorary citizen.
I believe this is entirely fitting: as a tribute to this man of “moral courage and heroic example”.
As a statement of the values Australians hold close to our hearts.
As an expression of our deep gratitude for all that our nation gained when so many saved by Wallenberg came to these shores.
Raoul Wallenberg would have been brilliant in any era.
He was physically brave.
He possessed strategic brilliance and peerless, nerveless negotiating skills.
But what makes his name live on is the way he employed these skills in the service of humanity.
He acted as though there were no strangers.
He lived as though every day might be his last.
That's how Frank Vajda comes to be here with us in Canberra today.
As a nine-year-old in Budapest, Frank and his family had been reported to the authorities for not wearing the yellow Star of David.
A band of armed men came and seized them, and dragged them to a military barracks where they were lined up in front of a machine gun.
The soldiers were debating whether to shoot them on the spot or throw them into the Danube when some men in civilian clothing suddenly appeared  -  Raoul Wallenberg and his escort  -  who negotiated their safe release.
The escort was a man named John Farkas  -  a resistance fighter who was Wallenberg's companion during those desperate days in Budapest.
Mr Farkas came to Australia in 1949, and lived an unassuming life until his heroism was uncovered by the ABC Four Corners program in the early 1980s.
In almost four decades, he had never spoken of his deeds until a journalist came to ask.
Mr Farkas passed away in 1987 but his son George is here among us, proudly bearing witness.
Frank Vajda and George Farkas have known of each other for years but they have not met until today: this story of courage reaching across decades, generations and continents.
So friends, we are here today to celebrate something exceptional in the human spirit.
Something that will keep teaching us lessons for as long as humans record their history.
Something for which we have profound gratitude because the deeds of one man secured, for tens of thousands, the most precious gift of all: the gift of human life.
As the last witnesses to the horrors of World War II leave us, it is vital, it is imperative, to keep alive the memory and example of individuals like Raoul Wallenberg.
That is why there are memorials to Wallenberg all over the world  -  in Budapest, Tel Aviv, London, Argentina, the United States and here in Australia.
But perhaps the most poignant monument is the one outside his birthplace in Sweden.
It is a bronze cast of his briefcase, standing on the cobblestones as though he had just put it down momentarily, its precious cargo of live-giving passports still inside, testament to the example of what one individual can do, even in the face of catastrophic evil.
An embodiment of the Jewish proverb reminding us that even when we are without choice, we can mobilize the spirit of courage.
Raoul Wallenberg's fate may never be known for sure.
He has no grave.
But his legacy endures.
It is measured in the example he sets for our own and future generations.
But it is also measured in the tens of thousands of deaths he prevented through his actions.
Some of the individuals whose lives he redeemed became part of our first, great transforming wave of post-war immigration; among the first to pledge themselves to their new home after Australian nationality was formalised in 1949.
Now, seven decades later, Raoul Wallenberg will join them as an honorary Australian citizen.
This will be the first time this honour has been bestowed by our country.
And I cannot imagine a more fitting individual upon whom to bestow it.
I conclude by expressing my gratitude to the Governor-General for this magnificent act of state to enshrine this most righteous of human beings in our national family forever.
[ENDS] 


Brisbane
The Gillard Government and Queensland Government have reached an historic agreement today that will see DisabilityCare Australia, the national disability insurance scheme, rolled out across Queensland by July 2019.
The agreement will provide around 97,000 Queenslanders with significant or profound disability choice and control over the care and support they receive.
DisabilityCare Australia will also give all Queenslanders peace of mind that if they have or acquire a disability, or have a child with disability, that leaves them needing daily care and support, they will get the support they need when they need it.
The agreements reached to date mean almost 90 per cent of Australians will be covered by DisabilityCare Australia in the event they are born with or acquire a disability.
Over the next couple of years, the Queensland Government will lay the groundwork for the introduction of DisabilityCare in Queensland, implementing reforms to disability services consistent with NDIS design principles including introducing greater consumer choice and control.
Eligible people with disability in Queensland will start entering DisabilityCare in July 2016. We will progressively roll out DisabilityCare Australia in Queensland so that by July 2019, all eligible Queensland residents will be covered.
Under the agreement reached today:• By 2019-20, the Queensland Government will provide an estimated $2.03 billion to cover all Queenslanders. This contribution was determined using the benchmark set by New South Wales in the agreement reached with the Commonwealth in December 2012. The Queensland Government's contribution will go to the cost of care and support for people with disability.• By 2019-20, the Australian Government will contribute around $2.14 billion to the scheme for Queensland residents. This will be around 51 per cent of scheme costs. In addition, the Commonwealth will cover the full cost of people who turn 65 and choose to remain in the scheme.• The full scheme costs will be reviewed by the Productivity Commission before to the commencement of full scheme to inform COAG agreement on final scheme funding arrangements.
Following the announcement last week by the Prime Minister, the Gillard Government has confirmed that, in 2019-20, an amount of $197 million will be allocated to Queensland from the increase in the Medicare Levy, to assist with the cost of the scheme in Queensland.
Today's agreement builds on those with the governments of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory and the agreement to launch the scheme in the Barkly region of the Northern Territory.
The NDIS is the reform of a generation and has the potential to transform the lives of Queenslanders with a disability, their families and carers.
The Gillard Government will continue to work towards the national roll out of DisabilityCare Australia, so that all Australians can know that if they have, or acquire, a disability they will have their needs met in a way that enables them to live with choice and dignity. 


Brisbane
Australians diagnosed with cancer will benefit from better collection and reporting of national cancer data under a new funding initiative announced today.
The clinical management and outcomes of many cancers depends on the stage of disease at diagnosis.
However, there is currently no national cancer data in this area, leaving gaps in our knowledge.
We must fill this gap if we are to continue to lead the world in cancer care.
The Gillard Government will provide Cancer Australia with $2.4 million over the next four years to collect, collate and report national data on:• The stage of the disease when cancer is diagnosed;• The treatments applied at each stage; and• How frequently cancer recurs after treatment.
An estimated 125,000 people will be diagnosed with cancer this year, with this figure expected to rise to 150,000 in 2020.
Improved cancer data will help to improve cancer care.
National collection and reporting of this data will fill a significant gap in our knowledge by identifying areas that may benefit from new approaches to the delivery of best practice cancer care.
It will also provide important insight into variations in survival outcomes by cancer type and of the cancer pathway after diagnosis.
Through this funding, Cancer Australia will also develop a framework to monitor and report on a set of indicators that will benchmark cancer control efforts in Australia, nationally and internationally.
Cancer Council Australia chief executive Professor Ian Olver AM said evidence was the key to effective cancer care.
"Cancer survival statistics help provide the big picture. But we need data sets on stage at diagnosis, recurrence and responsiveness to treatment to guide best practice," he said.
Cancer Australia is the Australian Government's national agency providing leadership in cancer control to improve outcomes for those affected by cancer, their families and carers.
This initiative will start on 1 July 2013. 


Logan City
E &amp; OE - PROOF ONLY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
PM: We're here today to have a cup of tea, and that's a pretty humble thing to do but people are going to be doing it right around the country in support of the World's Biggest Morning Tea to raise funds and to raise awareness about cancer.
And I'd like to thank Dr Helen Zorbas from Cancer Australia for being here and gracing this morning tea with her presence.
As we come together over a cup of tea we will no doubt be sharing stories about people we know who have faced a battle with cancer, are facing a battle with cancer, perhaps even loved ones we have lost to cancer.
It's something that touches every Australian family. There wouldn't be a person in our country who in their family, in their friendship group, in their workplace isn't aware of someone who has battled cancer during the course of their lives.
And around 125,000 Australians will be diagnosed with cancer this year; that's a large number joining the ranks of those who are already locked in a battle with cancer.
It's important that as a nation we make appropriate provision to support people with cancer and to support the healthcare services they need.
I am proud as a Government that we are investing record amounts in supporting world-class cancer care; $2.5 billion has been invested.
And when you do invest you see returns. Australia leads the world in cancer care. In the last two decades alone the survival rate for many cancers has increased by up to 30 per cent.
But we've got to keep going, we've got to keep fighting cancer during prevention, early detection, and new treatments and models of care, and that's a very key priority for us as a nation, and as a result a key priority for me and the Government I'm proud to lead.
Just last week our Minister for Health, Tanya Plibersek, announced an additional $18.3 million over four years for the wonderful work CanTeen does to support young people living with cancer.
And when we look at the young people in this audience or the many that I've walked past and had the opportunity to say a quick hello to  -  I don't think you can think of anything worse than a child having cancer and therefore we do, as a country, want to come together and support our kids in that battle.
Australians are innovative people; we are good at coming up with new ideas.
And we have been responsible for many of the great medical breakthroughs of modern times: trials of chemotherapy for children with leukaemia; the Gardasil vaccine now protecting a generation of Australian boys and girls and preventing them from getting a particular type of cancer.
I'm proud that we continue to support our researchers who are busy working on what will be the next breakthrough in prevention or detection or cancer treatment.
We all want to see those breakthroughs made in our nation; we want to see a difference for people with cancer.
Today we'll come together and put our gold coin in. That makes a difference. As a Government too, here today at a morning tea, part of the World's Biggest Morning Tea, I want us to make a further contribution.
I'm proud to announce today that the Government will invest $2.4 million over the next four years to improve cancer data in order to improve cancer care.
That will enable Cancer Australia to build on the work they are currently doing so that Australians diagnosed with cancer benefit from better collection and reporting of national cancer data.
Now I know talking about data can sound a little bit boring, a bit too much like a maths class; I understand that.
But it is important that around the nation we end up with a national set of data so we know how different treatments are working, we know how often cancers are returning, and if we have all of that information it helps feed into our efforts to make a change for people with cancer.
So I'm very pleased and proud to be able to announce that new investment today.
Here in school we know never to underestimate the power of good information; putting together My School and having national testing data is revolutionising the way we think about schools, so information is important.
Thank you to everyone for coming together today. It matters as a demonstration to others around the nation and I'd urge others around the nation to do exactly what you are doing here today.
Come together, have a cup of tea, have a chat and put in a gold coin. Do your bit, help out, it's important to all of us.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Brisbane
PM: I am absolutely delighted to be here. I'm obviously here with Premier Newman and members of his team I'm sure he will introduce.
And from my team I've got Jenny Macklin, our Minister for Disability Reform and Graham Perrett who is the local member and it's great to be in your patch of the world at this very impressive facility.
Thank you very much for hosting us here today and thank you for gathering in such large numbers too.
The Premier and I have joined together today to make an important announcement for the people of Queensland, indeed an important announcement for our whole nation.
And I know I'm looking out on a crowd of people who could tell me, could tell all of us, the whole nation, about the problems that there currently are with care for people with disabilities.
For so long in Australia people with disabilities have had to put up with an underfunded and fragmented system.
That's meant things like people not being able to get the personal support they need to have a shower more than once a week.
People having to have fundraisers to get a new wheelchair because the system wasn't going to deliver them a new wheelchair.
These are the practical real world problems that families have had to live with, and it's not good enough for Australians to have to live with those pressures and strains. And here, particularly in Queensland, people have felt those stresses and strains.
People with disabilities, their families, their carers, their friends, their loved ones have for a long period of time now asked us as a nation to do better.
For too long their voices went unheard.
I'm very pleased that as a Government, the Federal Labor Government, we listened to those voices and embarked on a journey to create a national disability insurance scheme.
Whilst that journey has taken some time, the last few weeks have seen amazing steps forward in realising that national scheme of care, DisabilityCare, right around Australia.
Over the last few weeks we've seen a funding source secured for DisabilityCare in the form of a Medicare levy with bipartisan support.
I've been able to enter into an agreement with Victoria and with Tasmania, and I'm proud today that I'm here able to enter such an agreement with the great state of Queensland too and I thank Premier Newman for that.
The agreement that we are announcing today means that DisabilityCare will be rolled out in Queensland.
The rollout will start in mid-2016 after Queensland has worked hard to come up to benchmarks that other states are also being asked to achieve.
And then it will ramp up to mid-2019 when it will be in full operation.
That will make a difference to almost 100,000 people in Queensland with severe disabilities; people who need care and support and need that care and support from us.
This is a big thing to do. It's also a costly thing to do, and so as two governments we've had to work together to put the money together to make this happen.
To take one year of operation, a full year of operation in 2019-20, what the agreement today means is that the Federal Government in that year would contribute $2.1 billion and the State Government would contribute $2 billion.
That's a lot of money but it will make a real difference in the lives of people with disabilities.
With today's agreement we reach the stage where almost 90 per cent of Australians are going to be covered by DisabilityCare. The agreements are done to cover almost 90 per cent of Australians.
So can I use this opportunity to say to the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory and to the Premier of Western Australia, I do want to work with you to make sure that those places and the people in them  -  the Northern Territory and Western Australia  -  get covered by this scheme too.
So with those words I'll turn to Premier Newman for his contribution.
PREMIER NEWMAN: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.
I'd like to welcome the Prime Minister here to Macgregor today and also to Minister Macklin. I acknowledge Graham Perrett whose electorate we're in and also we have Minister Tracy Davis and Mark Stewart, the State Member for Sunnybank; great to be here with all of you.
I guess, ladies and gentlemen, it's a fair comment to say that as you look across the nation I don't think you will find too many families where somebody doesn't have a close relative or a close friend that is affected by a disability.
And indeed that is the case in my own family where a close relative lived a normal life for many years in business and then ended up with an acquired brain injury which meant they had a significant disability having to then live with their elderly mother as their carer on an ongoing permanent basis.
So throughout this whole debate I've been painfully conscious from a personal perspective of the needs of people with disabilities, and particularly what it means to families to have to care for somebody, a close relative, in such circumstances.
I am absolutely thrilled and delighted to be here with the Prime Minister. This is a historic moment, and I say to the people who are here today that have disabilities and their friends and families, congratulations.
You have fought the good fight, you have convinced your fellow Australians and Queenslanders of the need to do something better than we've done before.
So it's a very, very special day and the day is yours and I am thrilled for all of you.
I want to thank the Prime Minister for making the decision on the levy. This is a new, important scheme.
It is something we haven't done before and it's important that Australians who say they want to help understand that when you say you want to help and you ask government, whether it be the State or Federal Governments, to chip in and to do something, then ultimately we're the ones as a community that have to chip in.
But I acknowledge that it was a big decision for the Prime Minister to make that call last week.
But it is the important decision that gets this whole thing across the line. So congratulations Prime Minister, it's an important initiative. And I certainly, again of course, strongly support that.
What does it mean for Queenslanders? Well, currently about 45,000 people get support under the current arrangements in Queensland and yet there are many, many more  -  tens of thousands more  -  who need support right now but sadly only those with the greatest of needs have to date been funded in Queensland.
Currently we put in around $900 million a year and that will rise, as I committed in December last year, to about $1.8 billion a year in only five years' time.
With the money coming from the levy that rises to $2 billion and essentially you're seeing approximately a 50/50 arrangement with the Commonwealth.
Well what does that mean? It means we go from just under 45,000 people a year getting support as the Prime Minister said, to around 97,000 people across Queensland getting that support. And that is right; it is just, it is appropriate.
So I want to thank again everybody involved in working so hard for this. I thank my Minister, I thank Minister Macklin, the Prime Minister for their work to make this all happen.
I am truly delighted and thrilled to be here on a very historic day for Australia and for Queensland.
Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Will there be a trial site in Gympie as has been flagged?
PREMIER NEWMAN: Well look, in terms of the implementation arrangements you heard the Prime Minister say that we really crank it up properly from mid-2016.
We will now be talking about how we go forward with trial sites and the like.
But I just make the point that there is a lot to sort out, a lot of the detail to work through, but we had already been changing our arrangements in this state so we actually go towards the features of the NDIS.
One of the great things about DisabilityCare Australia and the way this is going to work is that people, the people with disabilities themselves get the funding, get the resource, and they get to decide what sort of care they need.
So we are moving towards that right now.
As to specific trial areas or locations, we're more than happy to do that but we will work that through with the Commonwealth.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect this arrangement to be reviewed by Tony Abbott?
PREMIER NEWMAN: Well that's a matter you need to put to Tony Abbott and I'd only say that I'd be pretty confident that he sees very much what people are saying and what they want.
I look at these folk today and we know what people around the nation are saying that they are prepared to support this and I think again that there is support for people to put their hand in their pocket and pay for this as well because it's new, it's bold, it's important and it gives a level of care and support that we haven't had in this nation before.
JOURNALST: It's quite rare to see the show of unity between you.
PREMIER NEWMAN: I don't know about that. We have the most delightful dinners, don't we?
PM: We do. People will talk, Campbell.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how are you going forward to reach agreement with Western Australia and the Northern Territory?
PM: As I said at the end of last week, I think the momentum is with this now so I can't make decisions for the Chief Minister or for the Premier.
But I do think that they'd see Premier Newman today, they saw the Premier of Victoria, the Premier of Tasmania, so see work very much happening across the political divide on this, and hopefully that momentum urges them on to reach an agreement with the Federal Government.
JOURNALIST: Are you anticipating the same sort of agreement over Gonski?
PM: Well I would hope so.
PREMIER NEWMAN: I'll just go back to what the Prime Minister said.
That's an issue for another day and another time but this just demonstrates, I think, that both the Federal Government and the Queensland State Government are prepared to work together when there's an important issue at stake.
And that's what we've done today, and I'm again thrilled to be here for this important event.
JOURNALIST: Premier, you initially said that the scheme should be only funded by the Federal Government. What was the change?
PREMIER NEWMAN: Well look, today's a day for celebration, not really raking over the embers of past discussions and debates, really.
The only thing I'll say on the matter is that I was always guided by the original Productivity Commission report.
But an agreement has been reached today. We will stick to that agreement and again, I acknowledge the Prime Minister's decision to go with the levy and that is appropriate.
I can't stress that enough. If you want to do something new, something bold, something that hasn't been there before, whatever the field is, then it is then fair and reasonable to put to people that they put their hand in their pocket and pay for it.
And reaching out to people with disabilities, their families and carers is something that we haven't done in the right way before in Australia and that's why the levy is important and justified.
JOURNALIST: Is there any idea how many people in Queensland are waiting for this?
PREMIER NEWMAN: Well essentially it's roughly the difference between the 45,000 that currently are receiving assistance under current arrangements, and around I think it's the north side of about 85,000 or so.
So there's a gap of at least 40,000 people anyway.
We believe it will be 97,000 who get support in five years' time when the scheme kicks off.
One thing I haven't mentioned today by the way is that Queensland is working on the NIIS, we have to work on the implementation of that as well.
And that is something the Treasurer and I are putting our thoughts to at the moment. But there's no decision made on that yet.
JOURNALIST: As far as the level of care provided, some people who have a semblance of care at the moment say it's not enough. Will that be ramped up as well, not just the amount?
PREMIER NEWMAN: It remains to be seen exactly how this works out.
I'll just make this point that people who received a package in Queensland at the current time, it's fair to say those people usually received a level of funding that is greater than the other states currently.
But the other states actually provided care for more people.
So the per capita funding right across the population in Queensland was lower than the national average but those who received support got more money for their needs.
So what's happening with NDIS or DisabilityCare Australia is that we are moving to national benchmarks, and the Prime Minister alluded to that.
So we're increasing our funding and of course then there's the federal funding that comes in over the next few years as well.
So we're going to reach those national benchmarks first.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when do you expect to introduce the legislation?
PM: Well, we've already legislated to create DisabilityCare.
So that legislation went through the Parliament, it deals with matters like eligibility which are, of course, so important to the scheme and so important to the people here and people who have advocated for this for a long time.
On the legislation for the Medicare levy, we'll be looking to introduce that into the Parliament during budget week, so that's next week.
QUESTION: I'm a father. I've got two kids that currently go to this school. My youngest one is in normal mainstream. My oldest one is sitting there right now.
Without this school they struggle. They don't struggle in normal mainstream because there's no funding for any of these kids in the disability in special schools, mainstreams, what about them? That's where they're struggling.
PM: Actually in mainstream schools, is that what you said?
QUESTION: My son goes to Forest Lake which has the only special-care education in this whole city. There's no other one in this city. They're doing the best they can with what resources they can.
This school is the only one that actually brought my son where they have. And even then it's not the government funding the school, it's people like me that put in thousands and thousands of dollars to actually put the money into this school to get our kids help.
PM: Well, I'm happy to say something about that and then we can move to taking other questions from the media.
And I'm happy to get your name and stay in contact and give you some details.
We entered a national partnership arrangement, what we call a national partnership to bring $100 million more to bear for students with disabilities including kids who have learning issues because of conditions like autism into schools, so into mainstream schools.
Now you would have heard a lot about the work on school funding, school improvement, the work that David Gonski and his team led through a report.
That's asking us to put a loading on so that for the education costs of children with disability there is more money available to recognise that for their education they need more resources. And we're working on that with states and territories.
At the moment there aren't even national definitions or even the foundation stones, but we're working on that at the moment.
And I'd be happy to make sure that we can give you all of the details of that work and I'll get someone to come around and get your name and email or contact number and we'll take it with us. Thanks very much.
PREMIER NEWMAN: I'd like to get that too because actually we've just kicked off a program to support kids with autism, and I'd like to get you that information so you've got those details.
That's just kicking off, it's one of our things that we're just bringing in.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: When we introduced carbon pricing we introduced a package of assistance for families and households.
It included a tax cut, a change to the tax free threshold. So it took a million people out of the tax system, millions paying less tax and people now can earn $18,200 a year and not pay tax.
We also introduced increased family payments and increased pensions.
All of that will still be delivered and the benefits that have been promised will be indexed.
What we said about future tax cuts is as the carbon price moved up then there would come a time that through more tax cuts we would provide more assistance.
What the Minister has dealt with today is the fact that the carbon price, once we get beyond the period of the carbon tax into the emissions trading scheme, will be less than was originally anticipated.
Because it's less there's not the need for that new stream of assistance.
When the carbon price does get to the stage that that stream of assistance, those tax cuts are required, then they will be given.
So this is a recognition that the carbon price is going to be less.
And if I can just make a point about the mechanics of carbon pricing, people will have heard a lot about a carbon tax.
The carbon tax lasts for three years, then we get to an emissions trading scheme, the same sort of scheme that Prime Minister Howard supported when he was prime minister.
That has a price set by the market, and it is that market price that is less than was originally anticipated.
JOURNALIST: Is $11 billion an accurate deficit figure?
PM: Well, the figures that I think you might be getting confused with, what we've confirmed is that for this financial year compared with the figures in the last budget, the writedowns in revenue are $17 billion.
So that's $17 billion of less tax money coming to the Government than was anticipated.
JOURNALIST: It's also referring to the forecast from Access and Deloitte, are they accurate?
PM: We do all those numbers on budget night.
JOURNALIST: Since you've allocated funding [inaudible]
PM: It is, you've just used the word ‘billions' and you've used that deliberately because this is a huge project.
As you know, I live in Melbourne, I actually live in Melbourne's west so we like to refer to it as West-East rather than East-West, but we won't let the semantics get in the way.
This is a multi-billion dollar project and what we do with multi-billion dollar projects is we have a proper process of assessment through Infrastructure Australia.
We asked the Victorian Government to bring this project to Infrastructure Australia for assessment.
That was done, but it's only been done relatively recently and discussions are still in train to get all of the details of that project.
We don't go around making multi-billion dollar infrastructure proposals, promises about funding for big road projects without an Infrastructure Australia assessment.
JOURNALIST: Has it been a good day to be the Prime Minister in Queensland? A pretty good reaction out at Marsden, you're signing this today?
PM: I had a great reaction out at Marsden, some very excited kids, lots of hand-shaking, lots of photographs, a few high fives and some very generous statements along the way.
That was a great day to go and see Marsden and one of the reasons I love going to schools is it's always tremendously energising to see our young people in their schools.
When I speak to them I always say it's where our future's being made.
It's the most important place in Australia, a schoolroom, so I like going to schools and I had a fun time at Marsden.
This is a great day. It's a great day for Queensland. It's a great day for Australia; more than anything else it's a great day for people with disabilities and people who have campaigned for change for so long.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
MINISTER MACKLIN: This is an important matter when we're dealing with fraud, so of course the Department of Human Services and Centrelink need to be able to pursue people who do the wrong thing.
So we understand the decision that's been made.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday you dumped an increase in Family Tax Benefit A, why not scrap the Schoolkids Bonus or make further cuts to the baby bonus?
PM: To go to yesterday's decision, we're very mindful that for many Australian families it isn't easy to make ends meet.
I think people do understand that our economy has come through the global financial crisis in a different state than economies around the world.
Our economy's still growing, we've got the benefits of jobs and we avoided a recession and the loss of 200,000 jobs.
But having said that, many families haven't found it an easy period.
And so we've wanted to work with families to help them with those pressures.
Take a family earning $130,000 a year; they're $2,500 better off as a result of tax cuts that the Government has provided.
As a result of interest rate reductions which have happened whilst we've been in government, if you're paying off an average mortgage that's costing you $5,500 a year less than it used to.
We've proudly created paid parental leave to help people when they have a new baby.
We've proudly put more money into childcare than there has ever been in childcare before to help families with the cost of kids in childcare.
And we've provided the Schoolkids Bonus to help people with the cost of getting the kids to school.
And we're very committed to making sure that we work with families on those kinds of practical costs, like the costs of getting the kids to school.
There are times though when you do have to take difficult decisions.
We've seen big revenue writedowns. Put simply, what that means is there is less tax money coming into the government than was expected.
In those circumstances we have taken the decision that an increase in family tax benefits that hasn't been received yet will not be paid.
What that means is that people aren't losing money. What it means is a benefit that we had hoped to deliver now won't be delivered.
JOURNALIST: There's some claims in some media today that you had a sandwich thrown at you while at Marsden?
PM: Well far be it from me to say that the media errs on the side of the dramatic, far be it for me to say that.
But I think out of hundreds and hundreds of screaming over-excited kids, one kid thought they might just be a little bit naughty and had a little squealing sense of delight as they did it.
So there was half a sandwich which, was just really on the ground rather than anywhere else.
JOURNALIST: Did they get detention?
PM: A bit of hijinks, a bit of hijinks.
JOURNALIST: Can Australians expect any more reneging on some of these commitments before the budget?
PM: What Australians can expect to see in the budget is the Government continuing to make responsible savings.
We've made more than $150 billion of savings decisions over the budgets we've delivered.
But they should expect to see too us continuing to make wise investments, wise investments like putting money into DisabilityCare, wise investments like the money that we want to devote to Australia's schools to get the funding right for generations to come.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe that Tony Abbott's paid parental scheme will actually be implemented if the Coalition wins office or do you believe it's one of those things that may be watered down or changed?
PM: That's a question for Mr Abbott, but what I would say about Mr Abbott's paid parental leave scheme is, put simply, I believe women are equal.
I believe women are equal to men, I believe all Australians are equal and the Australian way is that we benefit equally or we actually give a helping hand to those who need a helping hand the most. That's the Australian way.
Mr Abbott's scheme is the complete reverse of that. The more you have the more you get and that isn't how we provide assistance in Australia.
Thanks very much.


Brisbane
HOST: The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, is in the Sunshine State for the announcement and says it is great news for Queenslanders. Here's what she told me a short time ago.
PM: What it means for Queenslanders is that DisabilityCare  -  the new way of providing support for people with disabilities  -  will be rolled out right throughout Queensland.
It means between now and mid-2016 that Queensland will increase investment into DisabilityCare because the sad truth is Queensland is behind other states. It's in fact the state with the worst per capita spend on people with disabilities.
Then from mid-2016 to mid-2019 the full DisabilityCare model will be rolled out. That means in the year that it's in first operation  -  2019-2020  -  the state will put in $2 billion, we'll put in $2.1 billion.
People with disabilities will be in control of their future. They will be able to work out what package of care they want, and source that package of care.
And people won't be put on the kind of merry-go-round they are on at the moment where there isn't enough care, some people miss out entirely.
Some people only get enough support for one shower a week, some people have had to fundraise privately for their wheelchairs, get their mates to put in some money; all of the things that have made it such a pressure for people with disabilities and their families.
HOST: Prime Minister, will there be a trial site in Queensland as there is in other states?
PM: Queensland hasn't negotiated a ‘launch site' as we call them, and we deliberately call them launch sites because I think people with disabilities thought if we said we were going to do a pilot or a trial, then the full scheme would never come.
Launch sites are happening in New South Wales, the ACT, in Victoria, in South Australia and in Tasmania.
But there has been no launch site agreed here in Queensland.
HOST: Is there scope for that to still happen?
PM: Well look, no proposal has been put forward to us for a launch site. I think really, given Queensland has got a lot of ground to catch up because it has lagged behind the other states, the effort needs to be put in to lifting up to the benchmarks that other states have as they've done their launch sites.
HOST: On another issue that you're still trying to convince the State Government to sign up to, that is the Gonski education reforms, are you any closer on that front do you think?
PM: Premier Newman and I haven't discussed that today. We were very pleased and delighted to be announcing that DisabilityCare is coming to Queensland.
So that's an historic day. I've got more work to do with Premier Newman. I do want to see the schools in this state benefit from $3.8 billion of new resources.
That's a lot of money, but our kids deserve it, and every child in every school should be getting the resources put into their education that they need to get a great education.
HOST: Speaking of money, and that's been a key point over the past week. Yesterday we saw the announcement that your Government will scrap the increase to Family Tax Benefit payments. Today there's news the Government will also defer carbon tax compensation.
The Opposition says both are broken promises. What other bad news is on the cards in this year's Budget? It's under a week away now.
PM: Well the Budget will be next Tuesday and so people will get all of the budget facts and figures from there, but to go through these issues with you; first on Family Tax Benefits.
We're a Government that's very much focused on creating jobs and working with families on the pressures that are on them.
We have cut tax so if your family for example earns $130,000 a year, to pick a figure, then you are $2,500 better off as a result of tax cuts.
We're providing paid parental leave, more money into child care, the Schoolkids Bonus.
Where interest rates are now, if you have got an average mortgage, that's costing you $5,500 less than it used to.
Now a lot of these things are contested in politics. Mr Abbott says he would take the Schoolkids Bonus away. Mr Abbott says that he would reduce the tax-free threshold so people would pay more tax.
So that will be the contest leading up to September.
On the Family Tax Benefit increase that we have said we would deliver next year, we're in a period in our economy that there is a lot less tax money coming into the government than was expected: over-hang from the global financial crisis and strong Aussie dollar are the factors there.
And so to make a saving, a responsible saving decision, we won't provide that benefit now.
HOST: The tax revenue to the government won't be what was forecast, down about $17 billion at this stage.
Can you explain why there is such a great difference between what was forecast and what's now becoming reality?
PM: Yes I can. Unfortunately it's going to require me to use some economic terms, but I will explain them as I go.
HOST: Let's see how we go.
PM: Okay. We are in an usual economic period. We measure what our economy does and is worth in two ways.
One's called Gross Domestic Product, which is really a measure of all of the activities in our economy  -  that's real GDP.
One is nominal GDP, which is a measure of everything we are doing in our economy times by price.
Now normally prices are going up, so nominal GDP is bigger than real GDP.
We are in this incredibly unusual period  -  an unprecedented period  -  where for a sustained period of time now nominal GDP has actually been less than real GDP.
Now what does that all mean in practical terms? By this stage you roll you're rolling your eyes going ‘heavens above'.
What it means is for businesses  -  because prices aren't rising, we've got very low inflation, people are competing against imports that are cheaper because of the high Aussie dollar, people when they're exporting overseas aren't getting the returns they are used to because of the pressures of the high Aussie dollar  -  so they are not able to put prices up much.
That has hit into company profitability, that has then hit into company tax, and the big reductions in tax money expected have been company tax write-downs.
So if you were an economist you'd be going ‘gee this is one for the history books, never seen this before'. If you are a government, what it means is that there is less tax money coming in than was very reasonably expected.
HOST: Just before I let you go Prime Minister, and I know time in tight. Yesterday we saw graziers from across Queensland meet in Richmond.
The federal agriculture minister Joe Ludwig was there to hear their concerns and to hear their plight at the moment.
The industry is in crisis  -  that's the message from graziers. What more can the Federal Government do to help them?
PM: I know Minister Ludwig attended that meeting yesterday and he will take on board what was said to him there.
In order to make proper decisions, obviously he's gone to the meeting, he's got all of the information and he will now bring that back for proper government processes.
But I do realise that it's very, very tough out there and I'll make sure that I stay in contact with Minister Ludwig who wants to hear from industry and understand the full dimensions of the problem.
HOST: Prime Minister thanks so much for your time this afternoon.
PM: Thank you.


Brisbane
The Australian Government is planning to hold a referendum on 14 September to ask Australians to financially recognise local government in our nation's Constitution.
We are asking the Australian people to support a small but important change to our Constitution so that the existing practice of Federal Government support for local communities is formally recognised in our Constitution.
This delivers on a long-standing Labor commitment.
Our Constitution, which was drafted more than 100 years ago, says nothing about the role of local government and yet most Australians have daily contact with the services provided by their local council, through childcare, sporting fields, swimming pools, libraries, local roads and more.
Many of these council services are provided in partnership with the Federal Government  -  something that has been common practice for decades.
In just the last five years, the Commonwealth has partnered with local government to deliver over 6,000 community projects such as libraries, indoor and outdoor sporting facilities, pools, walking trails, roads and bridges, in every single community.
This is in addition to the repair and upgrade work that's taken place at 16,000 road sites across the country under the Roads to Recovery program.
We are proposing a modest and common sense change to our Constitution that simply reflects the modern reality in our local communities.
This is about saying ‘yes' to retaining important community benefits. This is about saying ‘yes' to our communities.
The change will not diminish the role of the States with regard to the administration of local government. Recognition in the Constitution does not alter the fact that local governments are created by and are accountable to State Governments.
The modest change we are putting forward to the Australian people is based on advice that the Government has received from the Expert Panel led by the Hon. James Spigelman AC QC and endorsed by the Parliamentary Joint Select Committee.
This proposal to change the Constitution is one that the Government expects will receive broad and bipartisan support in the Federal Parliament and across the country.
The draft legislation and the proposed words will be released shortly.


Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It is a great honour for me to be here in this beautiful land.
Like Australia, this is a land of the Southern Cross.
No country is closer to Australia than Papua New Guinea.
Our geographic proximity mirrors the closeness of our people and our institutions.
We are neighbours and we are yet more than neighbours.
During a terrible world war, our people were bound together in mutual striving and sacrifice, and some of the places most sacred to the Australian imagination today are on your soil.
Australians fought alongside the men of the Papuan Infantry Battalion and the Pacific Islands Regiment.
All of them comrades in arms  -  too many of them, comrades in death.
Australians received aid from other Papua New Guineans all along the frontline.
Angels of kindness and courage, men and women of PNG who remain heroes to Australians today.
While I'm here I'll be announcing details of a new oral history project, to collect the remarkable stories of Papua New Guineans during the Second World War.
This forms part of our initiative to document and preserve the immense historical and cultural value of the Kokoda Track and other major Papua New Guinean theatres of the Pacific Campaign.
Australians are proud of our part in the shared endeavour of the 1940s.
Australians are also proud of our part in the shared endeavour of the 1970s  -  building the foundations for an independent, modern Papua New Guinea based on the rule of law, democratic institutions and human rights.
As my great predecessor Prime Minister Gough Whitlam rightly said: Australia was never truly free until Papua New Guinea became free.
When other emerging countries followed the false trails of dictatorship and doctrine, you took the harder and the better path.
Free elections under a democratic constitution.
An independent judiciary.
A free and active press.
Openness to investment and growth.
As you approach four decades of nationhood, we survey a remarkable journey for Papua New Guinea.
Just as we are proud of the shared endeavours of our forebears, we are determined to succeed in the shared endeavours of our own day.
So I come here  -  firstly and above all else  -  to honour this land and its people.
To pledge Australia's abiding commitment to Papua New Guinea as one of our closest friends, in every sense of the word.
Here, Australians see a nation able to resolve its political differences peacefully and in accordance with the Constitution.
A nation showing leadership in the Pacific: encouraging Fiji back onto the path of democracy, contributing to RAMSI, fighting the scourge of people smuggling.
A land rich in resources enjoying a decade of uninterrupted economic expansion.
Home to seven million people, increasingly connected to each other and to the world through technology and a wider network of international trade and investment links.
In short, a country surely and steadily finding its own place in the Asian Century.
I come here with a firm faith in Papua New Guinea and its future joined with a firm determination that Australia play our right part.
Through the entrepreneurs of both our nations, partnering in the unlocking of this land's hidden wealth.
The scholarly exchanges between our universities.
The important work of development shared by our communities.
The friendship between our two Parliaments, including  -  I'm delighted to say  -  three strong Papua New Guinean women.
As with every nation pursuing development and growth, significant challenges remain.
In governance and transparency  -  so vital to investment and growth.
In security  -  especially for women, who endure such particular horrors.
In health  -  where levels of maternal mortality remain worryingly high.
In education  -  where so much remains to be done and where so much good can be achieved.
In development  -  where progress towards the Millennium Development Goals is unacceptably slow.
I know you are committed to progress in these fields, and Australia joins you as a partner.
The PNG Government has a far-reaching agenda of reform and we will support and assist you in that vital work.
Our aid program is improving quality and access to education.
In health we are providing medicines and training nurses and supporting a growing number of supervised births.
We help maintain PNG's road network and community facilities.
Australia's development assistance is based on partnership with the PNG Government, embodied in agreed goals and shared commitments.
This is a period of unmatched opportunity for Papua New Guinea.
I know how determined this generation of leaders is to translate that opportunity into benefits for the generations to come.
We can see the signs of progress in the 40 billion kina PNG LNG project, backed by an international consortium including the Australian Government through the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation  -  where I will visit tomorrow.  
We see the same signs in the 41 billion kina in Australian investment and in your commitment to establish an effective sovereign wealth fund based on international best practice.
Australia is by far the biggest destination for Papua New Guinean exports and the biggest source of PNG's own imports of goods and services.
We see the signs of progress in the exchange of human contacts  -  no longer just northwards but southwards as well.
We have researchers and students at each other's educational institutions forging lifelong ties.
Our sportspeople play alongside each other and against each other with passion and pride.
Each year thousands of Australians make their pilgrimage to the Kokoda Track.
All these connections between our people will be made easier by the introduction in the near future of the new PNG Online Visitor Visa.
Of course, the firm basis for all this is our traditional diplomacy  -  the bonds and collaborations of governments and leaders.
Our officials work fruitfully together, our Ministers meet regularly and know each other as colleagues and friends.
I've been delighted to have had regular opportunities to meet with Prime Minister O'Neill over the past two years.
We must build relationships that stand the test of time during the pressures and changes that accompany the Asian Century.
That is why Prime Minister O'Neill and I will tomorrow sign a Joint Declaration for a new Papua New Guinea-Australia Partnership.
The Declaration builds on the 1987 Joint Declaration signed by then-Prime Ministers Paias Wingti and Bob Hawke in Canberra.
This 2013 Declaration points the way to a new level of cooperation based on mutual trust, respect and common values.
Papua New Guinea has grown richer and stronger throughout the past four decades  -  the next four decades hold the same promise.
You will be a nation with a population the size that Australia has today.
You will be a force for good in the Pacific and the world.
The potential conceived at independence will continue to unfold.
And as you grow, our fortunes and futures will be connected, as two hands are joined, in friendship and respect.
Thank you very much.



HOST: It's been hailed as an historic agreement, bipartisan support as Queensland signed up to the National Disability Insurance Scheme yesterday. Though what a pity a flying sandwich seemed to have stolen the headlines in the meantime.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning and welcome to 612 ABC Brisbane.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: You had a little laugh about the sandwich, are you still laughing about it this morning?
PM: It has all got incredibly silly I'd have to say, so you've got to be laughing about it.
HOST: Well let's just clear the air on it now. You are still laughing about it. The accused teen says he didn't do it. He has been suspended for 15 days. Is it a bit harsh? Some have even suggested a prime ministerial pardon might be needed today?
PM: I have had a prime ministerial pardon suggested to me. I think though that this is a matter for the principal. I wouldn't want to undermine the authority of Principal Alan Jones, the well-named Alan Jones.
I wouldn't want to undermine his authority in any way. He seemed like a fantastic bloke and a great leader of that school because Marsden State High is now a leader around the nation in vocational education and training.
As for the sandwich, I didn't see a sandwich in the air. I did see half a sandwich on the ground.
What I actually saw were screaming, over-excited, enthusiastic kids being very warm, very friendly and it was a great event.
HOST: Is that the sort of reception you do get at schools? Not the sandwiches, I mean that excitement, that level of almost hysteria?
PM: Look, you often do. Kids are very pleased to see you, very excited to see you.
Obviously they see you on TV and so it's a big thing when you turn up at their school.
I love going to schools because I always leave feeling energised. Young people are just full of so much enthusiasm and passion and I get to conduct a lot of school forums.
Even primary school kids, secondary school kids, doesn't matter what their ages are, they give you some good ideas.
HOST: And the occasional sandwich, anyway we are moving on now. The NDIS of course, which was the main reason you should've been in the headlines yesterday.
Did it feel good to have bipartisan support with Premier Campbell Newman to announce that change yesterday?
PM: It certainly did because this has been such a long time coming.
And I think when people focus on the dramatic events of the last fortnight and how much momentum has been generated out of those events, maybe there are some people in the community are thinking ‘gee this happened quickly' but it hasn't happened quickly.
People with disabilities and their families have campaigned for decades and decades and felt for many long years that no one was listening to them.
And I am really pleased that we as a Government listened to them, that we did all of the patient work that took us to this point.
But then we had to break through with agreements and it's great that we are breaking through with agreements, including here in Queensland.
A good bipartisan moment, but a great moment for the people of Queensland because per head, less is spent here on people with disabilities than any other state, and now that's going to be changed.
HOST: A couple of people have asked, they're concerned that the NDIS package might cut out at the age of 65. If so, why? Would it?
PM: We're working on arrangements for people over 65.
The simple answer is because the Commonwealth plays more of a role already in the support of people over 65.
For example, we fund residential aged care, so there's different ways of working for people over 65.
HOST: But will there be provision made for someone who is disabled and is over 65? They've had the NDIS support up until 65. Will there be arrangements? Will there be a safety net for them that they can get another wheelchair, that sort of thing?
PM: Absolutely. This is not about giving people lesser standards of support.
It's just a recognition that we are already, as a Federal Government, more responsible for the support of older Australians.
If we look at disabilities overall, we've increased funding a great deal. But we're about a 30 per cent funder of DisabilityCare now.
We are going to change that through Disability Care, through the National Disability Insurance Scheme, so we end up funding half/half with States.
The shares here are in full year of operation we would be putting in $2.1 billion and the State would be putting in $2 billion.
HOST: You mentioned it felt good to have bipartisan support with the Premier, Campbell Newman. Did you use yesterday as an opportunity to perhaps bring up Gonski? Do you think you have got more likelihood of coming to an agreement on that one?
PM: We didn't have any substantial discussions on school funding reform yesterday and school improvement, that's not what the day was for.
But I certainly will be pressing Premier Newman to sign up to this new funding arrangement.
Put at its most simple, it means $3.8 billion for schools here in Queensland. And all of that money comes with an improvement agenda so the money is used to improve kids' education. I've seen it done around the country. It can be done, it should be done.
HOST: Speaking of money, we're looking ahead to next week and the Budget and the state of the economy. The budget black hole is around $12 billion and climbing and we now face national deficits as long as the eye can see according to one economist this week.
Where has all the money gone from the resources boom?
PM: It's much more complicated than that. The resources sector is continuing to grow strongly and it is doing what we expected it to do, which is that there would be a peak investment phase when people are constructing these huge new resources projects, and then there is a peak production phase when the mines are in operation over a life cycle like 40 years.
There has been some variability in commodity prices. They came off more sharply than many were expecting. But overall resources are going well.
So you ask, well why then is there this issue with the budget. That is about less tax money coming in to the government than was expected.
It's not about expenditure; it's about less tax money coming in. And that is happening because we've got an overhang of the global financial crisis, weak global growth, and we've got a hugely strong Australian dollar putting a lot of pressure on parts of the economy; businesses making less profits, so paying less tax.
HOST: Shouldn't a well-functioning treasury department be able to take into that in their predictions of future forecasts?
PM: Treasury is a well-functioning department and full of professionals.
What is happening in our economy now  -  and it gets quite complicated because it's about the difference between real GDP, the work that's happening in our economy, versus nominal GDP, which is all of that work times by price.
What is happening with these economic indicators at the moment is something that has never been seen before; it's unprecedented.
So your question to me is really, should highly professional forecasters have forecast something that's never been seen before in the economy?
I think a common sense person would say ‘gee, that's a pretty rough characterisation isn't it, if they haven't seen these circumstances before'.
But what those circumstances end up meaning is the high dollar is constraining profits because it is weighing on our exporters.
It's also constraining profits because people who compete with imports are now competing with imports which are cheaper because of our high Australian dollar.
It all adds up to less company profitability, and I think people know that it's been pretty tough for business, and therefore less tax money coming into the government.
They're the circumstances we're dealing with. Any government siting in the chair now would be dealing with those circumstances.
It's not about Labor Governments, Liberal Governments, what have you. Any government would be dealing with those circumstances.
What you can control is how you respond, and we are going to respond by putting a priority on jobs and growth.
HOST: Also as part of your response to the budget has been going back on some key promises like the compensation for the carbon tax for working families and the family tax part A benefits.
Weren't there other options you could've looked at instead?
PM: Well, let me just go through that. Every dollar of assistance that we are paying to families around the country because of carbon pricing will continue to be paid.
People will get the benefit of the tax cuts, they'll get the benefit of the increased pension and family payments and they will be indexed.
The only risk to them is actually the other side of politics that wants to take them away.
HOST: But you have built up an expectation that people will have more money in their pocket down the track.
PM: What we said down the track is when the carbon price goes up then there will be the need for more assistance.
Now we know that the carbon price is not going to reach that higher level for some time to come, so the assistance for that higher carbon price will be paid at the right time when the carbon price gets there.
HOST: But between now and September, that is difficult to sell. A lot of people will just get the message about broken promises, that the Opposition will continue with, and that will be what's ringing in their ears when they go to vote.
PM: I think what will be ringing in their ears when they go to vote is we've cut tax, we've increased the tax-free threshold so you don't pay a dollar of tax until you have earned more than $18,200.
That's taken a million people out of the tax system and Mr Abbott is on the record, his Coalition is on the record, as saying they would take that away, people would pay more tax.
They're also on the record as saying that the other benefits that have flowed, increased pensions increased family payments, would also be taken away.
So the decision on 14 September is very simple; do people want to keep that money?
HOST: Jobless figures out today. What are you expecting?
PM: I don't make predictions, and I don't get the figures in advance. So we'll see the figures when they come out today.
Overwhelmingly our economy is continuing to create jobs.
There are pressures around because of the high Australian dollar, but compared with nations around the world at this time, in the global economy, we have a relatively low unemployment rate.
HOST: It's the Reserve Bank's reasoning for dropping interest rates again to take pressure off the high Australian dollar. What if that doesn't work? What if things are still flat-lining? How many more interest rates do you think could be in the future?
PM: Things aren't flat-lining. Our economy is continuing to grow.
So it's important that we understand the pressures that are here. We neither overestimate them nor underestimate them.
So we have a growing economy, we have sections of our economy under pressure from the high Australian dollar.
We have low interest rates by historic standards in this country, but compared with a number of nations around the world that effectively have interest rates at zero or a quarter of a per cent, if you've got a lot of money and you're a global investor, Australia is a good place to put it, and that is bringing money in, and that is boosting the value of the dollar up.
That is bringing pressure on, and the Reserve Bank was acutely aware of that. They said they had scope to reduce interest rates. There is further scope there should the Reserve Bank choose to use it. So that's one of the ways we can support industries like manufacturing at this time.
Another way we can do it is the plans the Government has, plans for Australian jobs working with manufacturing, working with other industries, to innovate and to make sure that we keep the jobs we've got now, and we're adding to them through innovation.
HOST: You are going to apparently make an announcement today about constitutional changes and perhaps putting a referendum to the people when they go to vote in September. What does that relate to?
PM: Yes, today I will be announcing with the Minister for Local Government Anthony Albanese that when people vote in September, they will also be asked to vote on a referendum to recognise local government in the Australian Constitution.
Local government plays an important role. Here in Queensland, right round the country, people interact with their local councils almost every day.
We work a lot with local councils. We've had more than 6,000 projects to build infrastructure that local councils need.
More than 16,000 times we've worked with local councils for Roads to Recovery, black spot funding to help with roads.
We want the role of local government recognised in the Constitution. I trust that this will also be bipartisan politics and I know it's very strongly supported by the Premier of Queensland.
HOST: What does that mean though on a practical level when local government is recognised in the Constitution? How does that play out?
PM: It's just catching up our Constitution with today's reality, which is that local government is an important area for service provision and local government is a level of government we want to have a direct relationship with as a Federal Government.
HOST: Our guest this morning is Prime Minister Julia Gillard who can't unpack her bags for very long in her role, in fact this afternoon is flying off to Papua New Guinea.
Your first visit as Prime Minister, tell us about the importance of this.
PM: PNG is an incredibly important nation to Australia. In fact PNG is the nation closest to us in geography and we are also tied by some very important history  -  including the history in World War II, which so many Australians want to feel the experience of by going to Kokoda and other locations within PNG.
I know Prime Minister O'Neill from PNG well. We've met on a number of occasions before. We strive to have annual exchanges between our two countries, so it's our turn to go there.
So I will be there talking about our economic relationship with PNG, our aid and development relationship with PNG, the people-to-people links, the education links between our two countries, and the arrangements that we make for visitors to move as unimpeded as possible between our two nations.
You've still got to have visas and the like, but the way that you can deal with those visas and how they can be given to people makes a difference to how easy travel is.
HOST: Speaking of leaders, coming the other way of course we're counting down until next year when Brisbane hosts the G20.
PM: You certainly are, very exciting.
HOST: Well, it's exciting on one level and also a little bit anxiety-causing on another for people who live in Brisbane wondering how it's going to transform our city in the short term as far as security measures. Will we be able to get to work, will life go on as usual.
How does something like this work in a city for that short amount of time? Can we have a normal life while the G20 is here?
PM: To be frank, inevitably there will be some changes to normal life. You can't have people like President Obama come to your city without appropriate security arrangements being made. I think people get that.
And so people will have some things that they'll have to work with and go with.
But I've been to an Australian city in the middle of hosting a huge event. I was in Perth for many days as we hosted the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting there.
And there was some disruption for the people of Perth, but there was actually a sense of delight and pride that they were getting to show their nation off to the world.
Many people turned out for example to see the Queen when she did an open access public event, a barbecue in a great Aussie spirit.
So I think Brisbane will bring that same spirit to the G20. There will be moments of inconvenience, but I think more than that there will be some moments of great delight as people see this beautiful city on the world stage.
HOST: Well it was on the world stage 25 years ago when we had Expo, 25 years. This was a time when as they say Brisbane really grew up. Did you actually come to Expo?
PM: No I didn't. I would have liked to have done, I'm sure it was an incredibly exciting time, but we weren't great travellers the Gillard family, so no I didn't get to Expo.
HOST: Speaking of the Gillard family, it's a big family time this weekend of course moving into Mother's Day territory. Will you be back in time to give your mum a quick phone call?
PM: I won't be able to be in Adelaide where my mother is, but I spoke to her last weekend and we had a chat about me not being able to be there for Mother's Day, so she's forgiven me in advance which is lovely, and I'll have a chat with her on Sunday.
HOST: I wonder if she has forgiven you some of the presents you've given her over the years. I was having a chat with my son last night. He's forgoing the school Mother's Day stall this year. He figures he can get better value for money and buy me a much nicer present.
And I had to pick out the other day on the internet a necklace that glows in the dark. Apparently that's what I'm getting, so that's right up there! Can you think of any gifts you've given your mum that you are sure she treasures even today?
PM: Well I don't know about treasures, but I do remember we learned pottery at primary school.
HOST: That was big in the 70s, wasn't it?
PM: I'm trying to remember whether it was the upper-end of primary school or the early years of secondary school. But I was quite young and I'd have to say despite my best efforts on the wheel, it really wasn't a circle. It wasn't symmetrical. It was a bit squished to one side.
But as mothers do, she was delighted.
HOST: She was delighted, she said it was beautiful darling, and just what I needed!
PM: She absolutely did! And it's still hanging around somewhere I'm sure.
HOST: Next time you pop in you've got to get her to bring it out.
PM: It's hopefully in the back, in the very, very dark back of the cupboard.
HOST: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, thank you for being our guest this morning here on Mornings. And good luck in PNG.
PM: Thank you.



HOST: Our Prime Minister Julia Gillard joining us on air this morning. She was in town for the National Disability Insurance Scheme. We're going to get to that is a sec, first though we need to see if she's okay after sandwich-gate yesterday at Marsden State High.
Morning Ms Gillard, how are you?
PM: Good morning and I'm very well indeed.
And I had a great visit to Marsden State High; very excited kids. One little bit of naughtiness, but really a great visit and the school did a wonderful thing in greeting me, and we had the world's biggest morning tea there.
So we were actually making a point about cancer, raising awareness, and raising some money.
HOST: Yeah absolutely, that's a good cause. But we just were concerned because we obviously saw the vegemite sandwich that was thrown.
HOST: From a grassy knoll Julia! A grassy knoll!
PM: Well I didn't see it at all except that there was half a sandwich on the ground as I walked past.
What was really in my eye-line was lots of screaming, over-excited kids wanting photos, and being absolutely lovely.
HOST: Well the kid apparently that threw the sandwich  -  Kyle Thomson  -  is 16 and he's been suspended from school for 15 days. He is actually joining us on the air this morning.
Hello Kyle?
KYLE: Hello?
HOST: You are on the air with the Prime Minister. What would you like to say to her?
KYLE: I'd like to say I'm sorry I punked her, but I'm innocent and I did not throw it.
HOST: So you think you're innocent and you didn't throw the sandwich?
KYLE: Yes.
HOST: Ms Julia Gillard, right of reply.
PM: Well I think Kyle needs to have really a chat with the school principal because it's not my job to be saying anything different to a very good school principal, named Alan Jones would you believe it.
But he has led that school so that it is now an Australia-wide leader in getting kids through into vocational education and training.
So good school, good visit.
HOST: I think this is a deeper issue and what Kyle is saying is that he is a patsy that's been set up by the Government! And there was a second gunman  -  a second sandwich guy  -  in the book depository, your comments ma'am?
PM: [Laughs] I think we might all be getting a little bit carried away.
HOST: I hear Oliver Stone's up to direct, so I'm really looking forward to it!
Can I just quickly, finally on sandwich-gate, I know with your job comes a certain amount of power. Would there be any way you could do some sort of parliamentary pardon for his suspension?
HOST: He's on 15 days suspension he's got.
PM: Well, I do sympathise because it was just a little act of hijinks by whoever it was carried out by.
But I think as Prime Minister, what I've got to say is school principals are wonderful people and it's really for the school principal at Marsden.
HOST: Kyle, we tried buddy.
KYLE: Yeah it's alright.
HOST: Kyle's like, don't get me the 15 days back! I'm happy!
Well we can put to bed sandwich-gate.
PM: We can.
HOST: I suppose more importantly, big job for you yesterday. You were here for the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
HOST: You and Newman actually shaking hands and smiling together?
PM: Absolutely right. So it was a huge day yesterday, an historic day for Queensland, indeed for all Australia because with Queensland signing on to DisabilityCare it means we've now got agreements for almost 90 per cent of the Australian population.
And no state needs DisabilityCare more than Queensland.
Actually at the moment Queensland spends less per capita on people with disabilities than anywhere else in the country, so there is a big journey of change that needs to be gone through here to make sure that we're properly supporting people with disabilities.
And this is about people who have got disabilities now, almost 100,000 of them will benefit from the scheme.
But realistically, life is full of chances and you never know when that could be you or a family member you really care about, so it's good news for everyone.
HOST: Look, in the lead up to the election I know we've pointed out before; my ultimate hero moment I've always wanted to do is be a bodyguard. If you need-
HOST: Please don't say yes.
HOST: I will take a vegemite sandwich for you. If you need me, I am here.
PM: Okay, I will keep that in mind. So those days when there is something to be anxious about, I'll know who to call.
HOST: Yeah, call Labby that would be a great name for a bodyguard.
HOST: The fact Ms Gillard is that more people want to shoot him than you!
PM: Maybe I could be his body guard!
HOST: That would be great. Thank you so much for coming on, we appreciate it.
HOST: Good on you PM, thanks for your time.
PM: Thank you.


Brisbane
PM: We have gathered today to make a very important announcement which is on 14 September, when Australians go to vote in the Federal election they will also be asked to vote local government referendum.
They will be asked to vote yes to recognise local government in the Australian Constitution.
Our Constitution is 113 years old and it doesn't recognise the level of government which people deal with every day for services that are so important to their lives.
We want to change that and we want to recognise in the Australian Constitution that local government is important, it is important to communities, it is important to the nation and I will be asking Australians on 14 September to vote yes to communities, yes to local government.
As a Federal Government we are very proud to work with local governments around the nation.
We do that in a wide variety of ways but to just take some examples, on more than 6,000 occasions we have worked with local governments to develop projects that local communities need; local infrastructure which makes such a difference to communities.
It might be a new library. It might be a refurbishment of a very grand city hall but projects around the country that change the way communities can live because they've got better facilities.
On 16,000 occasions, we have worked with local governments around the country to develop roads infrastructure, our Roads to Recovery program, making a real difference to the way people can move around their local community.
They are just a couple of the ways we work with local government but as a Federal Government, we well and truly recognise that this is an important tier of government that has the faith of local communities and that local communities turn to each and every day for services and support.
This referendum will be presented in a bipartisan spirit.
The Leader of the Opposition has indicated he is prepared to support such a referendum.
We took this as a promise to the 2010 election and now, here in 2013, I will be asking the nation to vote yes and to get this done.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Thank you Prime Minister.
Look, it is very good to be here, particularly to be here in the here in Brisbane City Council, the Hall we just went to was in part refurbished with a modest contribution by the Federal Government to Brisbane City Council.
Brisbane City is of course also the place that sees the largest ever partnership between a national government and local government with the Legacy Way project.
I was here with the Lord Mayor two weeks ago for the breakthrough of that project.
There is a natural fit indeed great partnership between infrastructure and transport in my portfolio that I have had since 2007 and local government that I had during the first Labor term and that I now have again because right throughout the country, the Federal Government partners with local government on infrastructure and transport projects to make a difference to local communities.
The benefit of that is that the decisions are being made at the local level. Not by some bureaucracy in Canberra; being made by local communities through their local representatives determining what their priorities are.
That's why it is important that this referendum, which we are asking people to vote yes for on 14 September, is carried.
It recognises the reality of modern Australia  -  the reality in which local government has long ago moved beyond just being rates, roads and rubbish.
Local government that's engaged in childcare, that's involved in a range of service provisions.
We want to recognise that whilst making sure that we have got the process right.
In 2010, the Federal Government as part of this commitment provided money to the Australian Local Government Association so they could consult with their membership and their communities about a way forward.
That consultation process has led to an expert panel on Constitutional recognition, to a Parliamentary Committee that tabled its report in March and we are now in a position to move forward in a way that I think should see very broad support across the political spectrum and across the community for this change.
The change will not impact the relationship of local government to state governments.
It will recognise, of course, that local governments are creations of state governments and are still responsible to and accountable to those state governments.
But a modest change but an important one to ensure that our Constitution, our most important document, reflects the reality of modern Australia and that's why we will be campaigning for, across the spectrum a yes-vote on 14 September.
LORD MAYOR QUIRK: Thanks very much Prime Minister and Minister Albanese, to the President of the Australian Local Government Association and Queensland President as well.
Ladies and gentlemen, local government has long sought Constitutional recognition.
Today, we thank the Prime Minister and the Government for bringing this referendum on.
It is a pleasing outcome where you see both Government and Opposition prepared to support a referendum put forward to the Australian people.
As Minister Albanese just said, it is recognition of the reality of Australia today.
We are a three-tiered system of government and local government, closest to the people, provides a very, very important part of the functioning of our orderly life within Australia.
So we welcome the announcement today and we obviously offer our full support to this referendum and the Constitutional recognition of local government.
I do want to reiterate the point that Minister Albanese made, is that we do not see, out of this change to Section 96 of the Constitution, any alteration to the powers of the state governments.
The state governments will remain responsible in terms of the performance of local government and indeed, local government will remain responsible to the states and accountable to the states for our performances.
That will not change.
But it is recognition that the nature of government in Australia today is that of a three-tiered system and we welcome the announcement today.
AUSTRALIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION PRESIDENT, FELICITY-ANN LEWIS: Thanks very much Prime Minister and Minister Albanese and to my local government colleagues.
It is fantastic to be here today, as the Minister has already said, we have had a long process of engagement with our local councils across Australia for a long period of time talking about what we need to do to ensure that we can have the surety and the assurance of funding payments coming from the Federal Government into local communities.
As others have said, there are a vast range of programs which regularly and have done for many years receive payments to provide vital infrastructure and programs and services within our community.
That's what this referendum is all about.
It is about securing funding, ensuring that the relationship between the Federal Government and local government can be maintained this way.
I look forward to a bipartisan referendum campaign, ensuring that other Greens and independents who have supported this to this point get behind it.
I'm urging everyone in our local communities to engage with their councils to find out what this is about so that people are very clear and understand fully the need for this to go ahead so we can get this finally resolved and we can move forward with an assurance we can continue to operate as three functional levels of government.
I am not going to recap on the issues others have mentioned, they have been captured thoroughly.
Just to get across the message, we are wanting to ensure our local communities can continue to receive the funding they need for the vital programs and infrastructure which they provide to each and every one of you in your communities in Australia today.
Thank Australia Prime Minister for this announcement.
PM: Thank you to everyone. Can I say thank you very much to everyone for coming along and lending their support for what is the start of a campaign to vote yes.
And I'd particularly like to thank Minister Albanese and his predecessor Minister Crean for their work in bringing us to this point.
JOURNALIST: Councils will obviously want to run a vote yes campaign for this proposal; will there be any federal funding a campaign such as this?
PM: Questions of funding the yes case and indeed the alternative will be worked through.
But we are here today to advocate a vote yes to communities, yes to local government.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: That's correct. The referendum, the proposal for change, would not change the ability of state governments to legislate for local government, including legislating amalgamations.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: No we didn't. This is a proposal that has been very much advocated by local government but understanding the continuing role of state governments.
JOURNALIST: Why has it taken so long?
PM: As Minister Albanese has announced, we have had a very meticulous process here including an expert panel, including work by a Parliamentary Committee that involved all sides of politics.
We believe that meticulous process was necessary because this is a big thing to do, to change a Constitution, so you want to do all of the work and do it very carefully.
JOURNALIST: Barnaby Joyce says it is too little, too late and you're setting it up for failure.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Look, Barnaby Joyce has said that he supports this referendum.
What he has to do, therefore, is to change a habit of a lifetime and go out and actually be positive and say what he says he supports.
Say yes to this referendum.
You can't actually say that you support something and then nitpick at the sides.
What we have done is consult properly with local government.
We have had proper processes including through the Parliament of which the Coalition have certainly been engaged in and indeed the National Party members such as Michael McCormack was one of the strongest advocates on that committee to ensure we went forward at this election campaign.
I was the Minister in 2010 at the ALGA Conference that went along.
I spoke also at the ALGA Constitutional Recognition Conference in Melbourne that was held at the end of 2009.
This has been a meticulous process gone through.
It's also the case that, of the 550 or thereabouts local government and shires throughout Australia, over the next four months, they have an opportunity and certainly talking to them they are very keen, to go out there and campaign in their local communities to ensure that there is a positive result.
Tony Abbott, I've had personal conversations with about this, I have spoken to state premiers and territory leaders, there is a positive recognition that this change is important, that the time to do it is now and that is why an appropriate time in terms of minimising costs, is to do it in conjunction with the federal election on 14 September.
Because we know the certainty of the date as well, there is another added advantage in terms of the campaign that local government will play.
It is simply about saying yes to local communities.
I urge Barnaby Joyce and everyone else to get on board, go out there and campaign in a positive way.
JOURNALIST: If the yes vote is successful, how long will it actually take to change the Constitution?
MINISTER ALBANESE: It's changed. The people control the Constitution. The people vote and if the people vote for it on 14 September.
We know that Constitutional change in Australia historically has been very difficult.
This has been put before the Australian people twice before and it has not been successful.
But on those occasions, it did not have bipartisan support.
This proposal does have bipartisan support.
It has been worked through in a very constructive way to ensure that the concerns of state and territory leaders have been addressed in terms of the relationship between local government and state government.
So I see no reason why every Australian political leader across the spectrum shouldn't be out there advocating a yes vote on 14 September and that local government certainly right across the nation will be advocating a yes vote on 14 September.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think this is the most pressing Constitutional issue for consideration?
PM: I think this is an important Constitutional issue or I wouldn't have given the commitment in 2010 for change and we wouldn't be here today announcing it.
I think it is important to local communities that they have local government there recognised by the Australian Constitution, that our Australian Constitution catches up with the reality of how people engage and intersect with government today.
That reality is that people look to their local councils for a wide variety of services. It is the most immediate form of government for people.
It is the one where they feel the really direct nature of the relationship and given that I think it is important that the Australian Constitution reflects it.
JOURNALIST: Why is it more important in terms of timing than putting the question, say, of Aboriginal recognition?
PM: On the recognition of our Indigenous peoples, we are also working on that and working on it very carefully and working on it with Indigenous leaders.
We want that proposal to go to the Australian people at the time that Indigenous Australians believe is right after there has been a comprehensive community education campaign.
We took counsel from Indigenous leaders about whether or not it was appropriate to move at this stage to the referendum.
The advice we received from many of our most senior Indigenous leaders was they didn't think the time was right, that they wanted further time to do work in the community, to get a real ground swell of change here like there was for the 1967 referendum.
We are working with them, including resourcing their efforts.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: This is about recognising local governments role. Decisions are made by federal governments and by state governments and by local government themselves which goes to their available resources.
As Prime Minister, I'm very proud that we have I'm worked strongly with local government and will continue to do so in the future, including making available resources that have made a real difference for community lives.
JOURNALIST: Labor is fighting for its political future. How do you expect politicians to devote time to this or is it just a fait accompli?
PM: Each and every day Members of Parliament are out in their communities talking to them about the issues that matter and talking to them about individual constituent matters.
If you look at a Parliamentarian's time, and you might want to talk to a few about what their day consists of, it consists of working with individuals who might have issues that they need their local member's help on.
It consists of working with the local government; Members of Parliament inevitably spend a lot of time working with their local councils. 
It consists of being out there with local community groups, going to local schools, and to local health care services and out there doing the kinds of things people more directly recognise as political campaigning particularly as we move to election day.
Across the broad sweep of what local Members of Parliament do, I think that they will have the opportunity working with their local councils to support the yes case.
JOURNALIST: F3 to M2, the front page reports that there is going to be some money in the budget for it, is that right?
MINISTER ALBANESE: I can certainly confirm that we've been in discussions for some time with Transurban and with the New South Wales Government about progressing the F3 to M2 issue.
We've had $150 million in our budget since 2008 to progress that issue.
Certainly the discussions have not concluded.
There are ongoing discussions about this important road.
But we also established two years ago the Infrastructure Finance Working Group that is looking at ways in which we can facilitate private sector input into infrastructure given the constraints that are there on government finances.
It looked at a number of models. Obviously one of those models could apply for the F3 to M2.
It is a case that in last year's budget, we announced money to progress the F3 to M2 but also to progress other Sydney motorways particularly those that would have a benefit in terms of productivity and freight.
The F3 to M2 is a missing link Sydney's road network.
The F3 to M2 is particularly important for freight down the whole corridor between Brisbane and Melbourne, but it's also particularly important for those commuters who live on the Central Coast or the Lower Hunter as well as dealing with the difficulties that are created at Pennant Hills Road and in other areas where the F3 ends fairly abruptly when it comes to traffic congestion.
We are working with the state government, working through these issues. They are not finalised yet.
We are working also with Transurban where we have had constructive discussions.
I met with the Transurban board as early as a couple of years ago about progressing these issues.
Further announcements will be made when they're finalised but there is no doubt that this is an important road for Sydney and it is important that infrastructure development be progressed in terms of dealing with traffic congestion in Sydney.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect a toll to be introduced to fund the road?
MINISTER ALBANESE: Those details would be up to the state government.
The Federal Government doesn't impose tolls on roads. Those are a matter for state governments.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you speak to the sandwich thrower today?
PM: Well I think, to be frank, the reporting of it has all got a little bit silly.
I went to Marsden State High School yesterday; I got a fantastic reception, lovely kids, very excited that I was there, lots of wonderful shouts of support and kids just very, very full of energy and very excited to see me.
My recollections of being there are always going to be of a wonderful event with a lot of excited kids.
JOURNALIST: Did you speak to him on radio this morning?
PM: Well I didn't have a chat to him. I was on a radio station that also spoke to him.
I met yesterday the principal of Marsden; Alan Jones is his name, the principal of Marsden.
Obviously there is more than one Alan Jones in Australia; this one is the principal of Marsden.
He is a great leader of that school. He has actually introduced at that school ways of getting kids engaged in vocational education and training so they end up with a trade qualification.
That is an Australian leading model.
As for matters of management of the school, I will leave it to the school principal.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] will that be your last trip overseas before the election?
PM: I am going to PNG later today and I will be there for what is a fairly short visit but an important visit.
Papua New Guinea is the nation closest to Australia. We have got great historic ties and also the outlook for the future that we share.
We want to see Papua New Guinea grow and develop. I am looking forward to that trip.
As for any other future travels, details will be confirmed closer to the time as usual.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: I expect the Opposition to be negative so, you know, business as usual from their point of view.
JOURNALIST: Will you be talking to Prime Minister O'Neill about the death penalty in Papua New Guinea?
PM: I'll be speaking to Prime Minister O'Neill about a wide range of matters. I have met Prime Minister O'Neill on many occasions.
I know him well. He has obviously had an election during this period.
I have met with him before the election and spoken to him since the election.
We will canvas a broad range of issues. Australia's opposition to the death penalty is well known.
JOURNALIST: There is an article by Rick Morton in the Australian today about the no-advantage claims and what they may do to asylum seekers. What do you have to say on that?
PM: We are pursuing recommendations and advice that we received from Australian experts; former Chief of the Defence Force, expert on refugee matters, a foreign policy expert.
I think it is to be regretted that the negativity of the Opposition has stopped us fully implementing that report.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Eric Roozendaal has resigned from the NSW Parliament today, are you pleased to see the back of him?
PM: That's a matter for New South Wales.
PM: Can we go back to Marsden State School [Inaudible]?
PM: I had a great day at Marsden yesterday. I got to meet some wonderful kids very excited to see me and full of very supportive words.
I really enjoyed the visit and anything to do with school management is a matter for the principal Alan Jones who is a wonderful bloke, leading a good school and making sure that that school offers vocational education and training to those kids in an Australian leading model.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned to see people in Australia left without any financial support because of the no-advantage change?
PM: No, I think you are confusing a few things there, to be frank.
The no-advantage principle that arises from the Houston Review is about saying that people shouldn't get an advantage because they travelled to Australia by boat that the waiting time that they get for a resettlement opportunity is the same amount of waiting time they would have had if they had not got on that boat.
The no-advantage principle is about sending a clear message that if you get on a boat, all you do is risk your life and pay a people smuggler; you don't get an advantage from doing it.
The matter you raise is a separate matter and that separate matter is, if people have made an application to be considered as a refugee and that application has been properly rejected, and we do have thorough processes here, if people's claims have been rejected, then they should return to their homeland and obviously that's what we want people to do.
In those circumstances, for Australia, it is not a question of support for these people; it is a question of them going back home.
Thanks very much.


Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea
PM: I am delighted to be here in Papua New Guinea. I've arrived this afternoon and I will be here today until the day after. I am very pleased to be here.
Papua New Guinea is Australia's closest neighbour and of course we are long term friends.
The bond between our two countries was forged during the dark days of World War II and over the 70 years since, our friendship has grown to today's comprehensive relationship between our two countries. 
I'm here on this visit as Prime Minister to discuss the next chapter in our relationship with PNG. 
Papua New Guinea is modernising, it's changing, you can see it all around you. 
And that means it is a good time for me to be here talking about the future of this relationship.
When we look at the modern relationship between our two countries it spans across an economic relationship which is growing in strength. There are now more than $16 billion of Australian investment right here in PNG.
Our relationship spreads to our Defence cooperation. And one of the things that I will be doing on this visit is working through and signing a Defence cooperation arrangement between our two countries.
Our relationship spans people to people links. 
The education links that we have and of course the partnership we have here for development in PNG.
The centrepiece of the visit that I will have here will be my meetings tomorrow with Prime Minister O'Neill and senior members of his Cabinet. 
I have met Prime Minister O'Neill on a number of occasions and I look forward to seeing him again to talk about the relationship between our two countries.
Tomorrow I will too have the opportunity to visit the LNG project; a symbol of the growing economic strength of PNG and collaboration with Australia. This is Australian investment at work.
It is work through our export finance corporation and of course we are also working with PNG on designing a Sovereign Wealth Fund for the proceeds from this major resources investment and this very important time of economic development here in PNG.
I will have the opportunity to see too some of the work that our development monies are doing. I will be able to visit a school and we are big contributors to school education here in PNG. I will have the opportunity to go to a market where through our work for women and their empowerment we want to see more women being able to bring their produce to the market.
I am looking forward too, to speaking to the Chamber of Commerce.
On the final day that I am here, on Saturday, I will pay my respects and the respects of the Australian nation at the war cemetery, thinking about the history that binds us together. But here on this visit I will be very much focused on a new chapter in our relationship and the future of the relationship between our two countries. 
That future also means that we work together on regional issues. This is a bilateral relationship but one where we take our partnership out into the region.
I will be discussing with the Prime Minister issues such as people smuggling, where we are cooperating to combat people smuggling, and work in our region including Fiji returning to democracy.
So it is a broad agenda. I am very much looking forward to it. And I am happy to take your questions now.
JOURNALIST:  Peter O'Neill has asked that the construction of the permanent centre on Manus Island be speeded up. And be completed earlier. Can you offer him anything in this regard?
PM: Well we are moving to construction of the permanent centre. So construction will be starting later this year. Starting in July. We do want to see a permanent facility on Manus Island too. So we are on the same page.
JOURNALIST:  Ms Gillard, any chance of the ECP being renewed?
PM: Well one of the things that I will be talking to Prime Minister O'Neill about is Police Cooperation. We have had that Police Cooperation in the past under the enhanced program that you refer to and we will be talking about police cooperation for the future.
So I am not in a position to detail all of what will happen in those discussions today.
But it is certainly an item on our agenda and we know that it is very valued here in PNG to see a strengthening of police capacity.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, what about the conditions on Manus Island?  Some doctors have said that it's no place for women and children to stay.
PM: Well my perspective is that in line with the things that have been recommended to us by the review undertaken by Angus Houston and other experts, are that we do need to have offshore processing.
We do need to make sure the conditions are appropriate. The Minister for Immigration has visited Manus Island. Our High Commissioner has visited Manus Island. We do invest in the circumstances there in making services available for people and we will continue to do so.
JOURNALIST:  Excuse me PM, do you have any plans to visit Manus Island yourself?
PM:  No I do not.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister would it be appropriate for you to visit Manus Island seeing as some Immigration Officials, people within that department, have raised some serious concerns (unclear unclear) to look at new information as it comes, is that something that would be useful to look at and see at with you own eyes?
PM: I of course can get information about what is happening on Manus Island and I do reiterate our Minister for Immigration was there in February and our High Commissioner has visited more recently than that.
The purpose of my visit here is a broader one. It is about the full breadth of the bilateral relationship between us and Papua New Guinea.
JOURNALIST:  Do you see Manus Island playing a role in regional approaches to people smuggling that you mentioned and when it is made permanent should it be expanded?
PM: The role we see for it at the moment is the one that is happening now and a permanent facility will be built which is dealing with flows that come to Australia. That is its purpose.
JOURNALIST:  Regarding the Defence Cooperation agreement that was signed. What practical difference will that make and are there any other declarations to be signed?
PM:  We will be in a position to detail all of that for you. I will be signing a declaration about the relationship between Australia and PNG. A relationship about a new chapter, a new phase.
A declaration that really recognises that PNG is modernising, it's changing, and that we want to work together as partners.
JOURNALIST:  Could you tell us any more about the defence agreement with PNG?
PM: We will be dealing with it tomorrow and so will be happy to talk to you about that tomorrow.
JOURNALIST:  Do you want to make it easier for PNG nationals to travel to Australia and commute? Could you explain how that will work?
PM: Well yes we do or course want to see people able to travel and not hit unnecessary obstacles.
So we do have an online visa arrangement for PNG and we are moving to arrangements that are less burdensome in terms of the paper work for people who engage in multiple entries into Australia.
We do not have a visa on arrival system for anyone, even New Zealand, despite the long term bonds between our two countries, the Anzac tradition. We do not operate visa on arrival systems.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister have you had a chance to cast your eye over Tony Abbott's Industrial Relations Policy?
PM:  The Minister for Workplace Relations has been dealing with that back in Australia so I will leave it predominantly to him. 
I spent more than a year of my life working to get rid of the hated WorkChoices and to replace it with the FairWork System and so it stands to reason I will do everything in my power to make sure that we never see WorkChoices come back.
JOURNALIST:  Are you hopeful that your visit here will provide something of an inspiration for the women of this country?
PM: You would need to be out and about talking to women in PNG about that. What I think, and I think this from my own experience in Australia as well as some of the things I have got to do as I have travelled representing Australia around the world, that it is important for women to see women's faces in leadership.
It is important for women to believe that it is possible for them, or a women in their country, to become a leader. That really is one way of reinforcing a sense of equal opportunity in society.
One of the things about me being the first women Prime Minister of Australia is I do think that there are women and girls who have looked and thought, well maybe that is something that I could do and the very image of a women doing a job has reinforced that in them.
So if that has any broader effect then I am delighted about it.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, you have spoken about the modernisation here. Do you think that could eventually take us to the level where Australian aid to this Nation is reduced?
PM: Well this is our second biggest aid program; our biggest aid program is to Indonesia.
So it is a substantial investment from Australia doing a lot of good work in areas like health and education and in infrastructure. And there is a lot to do when we look at modern PNG.
Even though it is growing and changing there is still work to do to realise the Millennium Development Goals and to give the people of PNG appropriate health care and access to opportunity through education.
But as PNG modernises and grows, well our aid component, is 7 per cent of the budget available to PNG, so overwhelmingly the budget available to PNG does not come from Australian aid it comes from their own sources, and of course there are some other countries that are aid donors but not at the level that we are.
JOURNALIST: So you don't see aid reduced, then?
PM: Well I think as PNG becomes stronger and more prosperous that it will have more of its own resources to devote to the task of lifting people up.
That is of course appropriate. That is the journey of development. That is what we want to see happen. Countries develop and strengthen and use that new prosperity to ensure that all of their people are lifted up and get an opportunity in life.
I think Australian aid will be required here for quite some time to come. When we look at the indicators against the Millennium Development Goals there is much work to do. But PNG is growing in its own capacity to do that work.
JOURNALIST:  What about this upcoming Budget? Will you be assuring the Prime Minister tomorrow that the aid to PNG won't be affected by budget savings?
PM: Well look we will do our budget matters when we are in Australia not in PNG.
JOURNALIST:  How close is an announcement to being made about a permanent facility for the Manus Island site?
PM: We will move to building a permanent facility. There is no doubt about that.
JOURNALIST:  Has the site been (inaudible)?
PM: We will be moving to building a permanent facility on Manus Island; we indicated that at the time we constructed the temporary facility so that will be happening. We will be looking to moving to the construction phase from July this year.
JOURNALIST:  Has the PNG Government signed off on that?
PM: Well, I do want to thank Prime Minister O'Neill for his leadership and support on this centre on Manus Island. 
He has been a strong supporter and we will work alongside him to get this done. But because he has been a strong supporter and it has always been part of our plan to have a permanent facility.
Apart from the usual pressures that come with doing construction work I do not see any problems with getting it done.
JOURNALIST:  The Coalition's industrial relations policy, do think it is a considerable easing from Work Choices? And are you interested in the timing of the announcement today given the time you flew out?
PM: I have nothing to say on timing of questions. You will have to ask the Opposition about that. On the Opposition‘s outlook here.
It is not that long ago that the leader of the Opposition was out telling Australians that Work Choices was good for wages, good for the economy, good for everyone and that that needed to be remembered.
Well presumably when he spoke those words he was saying what he felt in his heart and his mind. That Work Choices was wholly good.
Well if he believes that, if he believed it then, I think he believes it now and whatever is said by the Opposition, that their drive, if they are ever the government will be to reintroduce a policy they passionately believe in, and that is Work Choices.
Thank you very much.


Port Moresby
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today announced Australia would work with the PNG business community to enhance the status of women in workplaces in Papua New Guinea.
Australia will work with the private sector to increase the number of women leaders in business and to develop better policies and practices to enable women to succeed at work. 
Surveys on formal employment in PNG show that men are almost twice as likely as women to work for wages - 40 per cent of men compared to 24 per cent of women nationally.  Women in formal sector jobs in PNG report average wages which are less than half that of men.
The focus is on supporting female employees with high potential into positions of leadership through mentoring, networking and training.
The initiative will also support businesses to implement workplace policies which address the very important issue of violence against women.
Employers in PNG understand that tapping into the full potential of women isn't just the right thing to do, it's the smart thing to do. 
Nations and companies alike thrive when women can participate in politics, business and society as equals. 
The business community is at the forefront of this initiative  -  led by two of Papua New Guinea's peak business bodies, the Papua New Guinea Business Council and the Port Moresby Chamber of Commerce.
Lady Winifred Kamit, a highly respected member of the business community and advocate for women, is the patron of the initiative, which will be managed by the private sector arm of the World Bank, the International Finance Corporation.
Australia will contribute $1 million over five years to the initiative through the aid program.  This is part of the Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development initiative, announced by the Prime Minister at the 2012 Pacific Islands Forum.


Port Moresby
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today launched a rugby league program in Papua New Guinean schools that will encourage healthy lifestyles for 50,000 children, while boosting their physical, social, reading and maths skills.
The PNG Rugby League in Schools Pilot Program will support 50,000 Papua New Guinean boys and girls to participate in rugby league in 80 primary schools across three provinces. 
The Australian Sports Commission and the National Rugby League will deliver the program in partnership with the PNG National Department of Education and PNG Rugby Football League.  The program will be funded by AusAID through Australia's aid program in PNG.
The three-year program commencing in 2013 will deliver up to 100 resource kits and train up to 500 teachers.
It will include clinics to develop physical skills and teamwork as well as books and other learning materials to help with maths and reading.
The program will go well beyond sport, promoting team building, fair play and healthy lifestyles.
In PNG, 30 per cent of children do not finish primary school. Through programs such as this, Australia is helping PNG to support its children stay in school longer and improve learning outcomes.
The $4 million program is part of the $15 million Pacific Sports Partnership, which is working to strengthen grassroots sports activities in Pacific communities and build the skills of administrators, coaches and officials to take up the cause of achieving development outcomes through sport.


Port Moresby
Prime Minister Gillard announced today the commencement of the third phase of the PNG-Australia Policing Partnership, which will see enhanced Australian support for the modernisation and reform of the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary.
Australia's support for the Constabulary will include Australian Federal Police assistance for the recruitment and funding of Australians or international police to occupy four key in-line positions, including the Assistant Commissioner (Reform) and Commandant of the Bomana Police Training College.  It will also include additional AFP advisory support to the RPNGC.
The AFP will also offer Constabulary personnel attachments to the AFP, Northern Territory Police and Queensland Police, as well as additional training and mentoring opportunities.
This builds on the success of previous phases of the program, which since 2008 has supported capacity development, training and infrastructure upgrades for RPNGC facilities.
The overall package of new and existing programs will comprise 19 AFP personnel and four externally recruited in-line officers at a total cost of $56.6 million over four years.


Port Moresby
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and PNG Prime Minister Peter O'Neill have today signed the Joint Declaration for a new Papua New Guinea-Australia Partnership, providing a framework for the contemporary bilateral relationship.
While our friendship and shared values remain constant, the relationship between Australia and Papua New Guinea has evolved significantly since prime ministers Bob Hawke and Paias Wingti signed the first Joint Declaration of Principles in 1987.
This Joint Partnership Declaration reflects the shift to a modern and dynamic partnership in which trade and economic links play an integral role, and our increasing cooperation in the region to promote stability and prosperity.


Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea
[Acknowledgments omitted]
It's a great pleasure to be able to join you here this morning.
Let me thank the Port Moresby Chamber of Commerce and Industry for your invitation today.
The Chamber is one of this city's most respected institutions.
Programs like the Business Against Corruption Alliance, Business Against HIV and AIDS and the Ginigoada Business Development Foundation are fine proof of that.
Let me also acknowledge the Australia-Papua New Guinea Business Council and the Business Council of PNG who join us this morning and who make a major contribution to the ongoing successful expansion of our bilateral business relations.
Above all, I'm in PNG today to express my confidence in this nation and its future.
That's the message I want to share loudly and clearly: this is a period of unmatched opportunity for this nation.
That's the message I'll be sharing later this morning when I meet with your leaders of today  -  Prime Minister Peter O'Neill and his Cabinet.
That's also the message I'll be sharing when I meet with your leaders of tomorrow  -  young Papua New Guineans at Marianville Secondary School and at the University of PNG  -  young people who treasure the most precious commodity in an emerging nation; hope.
They are the grandchildren of Independence.
In an increasingly inter-connected world, they're looking for opportunity, for better lives  -  and in many ways that means they are looking to all of you.
So much of the substance of the things these young people hope for will come from what the PNG business community does every day.
From the jobs you create and the wealth you unlock  -  the virtuous cycle you begin.
Trade and investment, leading to employment which gives dignity and hope  -  delivering the public revenues which are essential to better education, infrastructure and human services  -  in turn promoting future growth and opportunities for investment and trade.
You all know that this country is not only bursting with potential, this is a country already making so much of it.
A rich natural endowment, location in the Asia-Pacific region, the vast potential of your human capital  -  your people.
Eleven straight years of growth, the third fastest growing economy in the Asia-Pacific in 2011, the fifth fastest in 2012.
This is a formidable record and perhaps one not widely enough appreciated in the wider world.
The links between our business communities are so important to this success and where the work you all do matters so much.
As the PNG economy has grown, the economic relationship between Australia and PNG has grown.
Over the past five years, two-way trade has increased rapidly to more than 16 billion kina.
The balance of trade stands  -  by more than one billion dollars  -  in Papua New Guinea's favour.
Australian investment, which has grown fivefold over five years to more than 41 billion kina shows the confidence Australian business has in this country.
Of course, Papua New Guinea is not only Australia's closest neighbour, but one of our warmest friends: from war-time sacrifice and deep historic ties, to the broad and growing friendship between our peoples today.
I want that friendship to be expressed in jobs  -  in growth  -  in the bottom line.
Perhaps no single project better symbolises the promise of economic development than the PNG LNG project, which I will visit later today.
It is a 40 billion kina statement that our economic futures are tied each to the other, a project which will create jobs and growth for our peoples for decades to come.
For PNG, the project holds the promise of up to US$150 billion in returns over its estimated thirty-year life.
For Australian business, the project has already meant US$3 billion in new contracts.
This is why both the Australian and PNG Governments continue to work to get the greatest possible benefit for our peoples from our growing economic ties.
In 2011, we agreed to negotiate an Economic Cooperation Treaty with Papua New Guinea.
The Treaty  -  to be signed later this year  -  will place our economic relationship on a new footing as full and active partners.
Our Ministers also maintain a strong dialogue with our business communities through the Papua New Guinea-Australia Business Forum.
Since 2012, officials and business representatives have met regularly to further strengthen business links.
Of special importance was our agreement at the 2012 meeting to simplify the visa application process for PNG citizens.
The number of visitor visas granted has now increased by 25 per cent in the past year alone, we regularly exceed our ten-day clearing time, and we remain on track to deliver online visa lodgement for PNG tourism and business visitors to Australia by mid-year.
This is a very important development for PNG and Australian business: the PNG Online Visitor Visa will finally be introduced in a number of weeks.
So we are making progress together.
I come here with great confidence in this nation  -  I also come with great realism about the challenges you face.
The United Nations Millennium Development Goals remain elusive. Social indicators such as literacy levels and maternal and child mortality are disappointing to us all.
We know that your Government is determined to harness economic growth to meet this country's development challenges, and you should know that Australia is committed to helping Papua New Guinea's Government and its people do just that.
Our shared aspirations are embodied in the Partnership for Development  -  a partnership based on mutual accountability and with clear priorities in health; education; law and justice; transport and infrastructure.
I particularly note Prime Minister O'Neill's focus on infrastructure, a commitment Australia shares.
This financial year Australia will spend 37 per cent of our development assistance on infrastructure  -  an investment of around 396 million kina.
We're also working closely with the PNG Government to help design a Sovereign Wealth Fund. A best-practice Fund delivering stable returns will support long-term planning and help you to manage future economic uncertainties.
There's another development priority that's dear to my own heart  -  the empowerment of women in our region.
The ten-year A$320 million initiative Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development which I launched at the 2012 Pacific Islands Forum is designed to help.
Prime Minister O'Neill was at the launch in Rarotonga and strongly supports the initiative.
I want to thank the many businesses here who are working hard to extend opportunity to the women of PNG.
The Westpac ‘Women in Business Awards' have helped lift the profile of women in business.
Companies like SP Breweries have been actively recruiting women into their graduate programs.
National Catering Services has implemented policies to ensure equal treatment of women in the workplace.
To encourage more businesses to follow this lead, I'm pleased to announce a new initiative in partnership with the International Finance Corporation to help PNG companies promote women's participation.
I am delighted that Lady Winifred Kamit, one of this nation's most respected leaders, has agreed to be patron.
Lady Winifred, I'm so glad you're here today along with a number of other women who I am looking forward to meeting this morning, and I want you to know how much I admire your achievements and appreciate your support.
Our initiative will focus on two areas.
First, women's welfare and safety, in particular preventing violence against women in the workplace.
Secondly, mentorship, networking and training to bring high-potential female employees into positions of leadership.
No nation can truly succeed without embracing the development of all its citizens and unlocking the talents of all its people.
Papua New Guinea has travelled far over the past 40 years.
So many early challenges have been surmounted. The institutions of a free nation have been entrenched. Economic development has brought new opportunities.
And the prospect of a better future has never seemed more real for all the people of Papua New Guinea.
Australia wants to work with Papua New Guinea as economic partners, as development partners, and as partners in the region, to help you seize that future.
Everyone here is so important to that work.
Doing business together  -  united in friendship and respect. Proud of what we've achieved together  -  and certain that even better days lie ahead.


Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea
PRIME MINISTER O'NEILL: Prime Minister Julia Gillard, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Firstly thank you very much for you joining us today on this occasion of the signing of the new partnership between the Papua New Guinea and Australian governments.
We today discussed a wide range of issues covering many aspects of our bilateral relationship.
It has shown a new level of maturity, and a goodwill on both sides in those discussions.
As we all know Australia is our closest neighbour and our best friend. And today's signing signifies that even more.
The Joint Declaration lays out the basic principles which will underpin the growth and diversity of our mutual beneficial relationship.
This document represents a significant advance in the Papua New Guinea  -  Australia relationship. And our Government will work closely with the Australian Government to ensure that the principles contained in the Joint Declaration can be translated into a substantial outcome of mutual benefits to both countries.
Australia continues to be the largest development assistance donor to Papua New Guinea. It remains the largest investor in our nation's private sector.
That is a fact that we are greatly appreciate by our Government and the people of Papua New Guinea for the support and the confidence that both Australian Government and the private sector in Australia display to us.
Our exchanges today were frank but very constructive and very positive. And I especially welcome the initiative by the Prime Minister to make her time available in joining us here and again agreeing to some of the issues that we have raised with her.
We have talked about many issues including the entry issues for visa into Australia by many of our citizens. We have made some important steps towards addressing those concerns so that we can make it easier for our citizens to visit the country of Australia.
We also made very constructive arrangements to work together in developing many of our infrastructure issues in the country, which includes rehabilitation of some of our key infrastructures that we have suggested to the Australian Government through their aid program.
That includes some of the issues that we have put forward in various sectors like the health sector for Enga Hospital, the road infrastructure for Madang - Ramu Road and of course the law and order sector of trying to establish a ministerial [inaudible] here in Port Moresby.
I am also pleased that we have also made very positives commitments to constructing a permanent regional detention centre in Manus.
And I am pleased that the Prime Minister is working for us to commence that construction this year, later part of this year. And we warmly welcome that, and especially welcome by the people of Manus Province.
Again as I said it earlier the development assistance program discussions have been very constructive.
Our objective in Papua New Guinea is to see that the taxpayers' money of Australia brings out the best outcome that we both want. And again we appreciate the frank discussions that we have had together with the Australian Prime Minister.
We continue to also today sign the Defence Cooperation Agreement which will announce our defence cooperation between the two countries and at the same time build capacities within our own defence force in Papua New Guinea.
On policing, the Australian Government's assistance, continued assistance, in that program is very much appreciated.
We welcome further assistance through line positions within our police structure, including building capacities around training, prosecution and investigations so that our police men and women can do their job.
So again I thank the Australian Prime Minister for these discussions and thank you again for visiting our country at this moment. Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER GILLARD: Thank you very much and can I think Prime Minister O'Neill for the discussions I have been able to have today with him and with senior members of his Government.
I thank him for the warmth of the welcome that we have enjoyed here and the warmth of the welcome we have also received from the wider community.
I think the very warmth of that welcome highlights the very deep ties that exist between our two countries. And those ties are the foundation of our unique bilateral relationship.
We also share important economic, development and security interests. And we have talked about those interests today as partners who understand each other and want to offer each other assistance.
The way we do business with each other is modernising and changing.
The discussions I have had with Prime Minister O'Neill and his Cabinet have focused on the future and on the new chapter in our relations.
Our signing a short time ago at this table of the Joint Declaration between our two countries reflects this evolution and highlights both the maturity of our relationship and our commitment to supporting each other.
I was also very pleased to sign here today a Defence Cooperation Arrangement.
Building on what is our biggest defence cooperation program, that Arrangement will guide our important and expanding defence ties, including through annual talks between our defence ministers.
In our meetings earlier today we spoke about Papua New Guinea's impressive economic growth over the past decade, and the long term benefits offered by the historic PNG LNG project which I will have the opportunity to see later today.
We agreed to work towards signing an economic cooperation treaty. The text of which was initialled by our Foreign Ministers late last year.
The treaty will reinforce the commitments made in the Joint Declaration for a long term equal partnership across the full range of our relationship.
And Australia remains committed to helping PNG manage the gains from the LNG Project and from other minerals windfalls through assisting the development of an international best practice Sovereign Wealth Fund.
Australian companies are participating in the LNG project and working with PNG partners in other areas. Indeed Australian investment in PNG today is approaching our investment in China.
I have also discussed with Prime Minister O'Neill, and with members of his Government, the development challenges that face Papua New Guinea. I confirmed Australia's commitment to assisting and welcomed his Government's focus on national infrastructure.
Australia has committed $180 million a year  -  that is 37 precent of all aid  -  to infrastructure development here in PNG.
And I am delighted that today we were able to agree that we would assist with the development of an infrastructure body that would be able to look at projects and do cost-benefit analysis and project scoping, and that we have agreed today that in addition to assisting with the establishment of an Infrastructure Development Authority here by 2015 we would also work on scoping the three development projects, infrastructure projects, that Prime Minister O'Neill has spoken of.
In working on the scoping of those projects they can then be got ready for looking for possible sources of funds for those projects.
We also agreed to delegate health procurement to AusAID as a precursor to establishing an Independent Health Procurement Authority. And I thank the Prime Minister for that.
We discussed law and order and assistance to police in PNG. This is a very important issue.
We will provide assistance which will include support for the recruitment of high calibre retired senior police officers into inline positions, including an Assistant Commissioner for Reform and a Head of the Training College.
We want to make sure we are capacity building in the PNG Police. We will be doing that through advisors, senior level mentoring and training.
I want at this press conference to say that I very much welcome Prime Minister O'Neill's leadership on improving the situation of women here in his own nation and the leadership he has also provided in discussions we have had at forums like the Pacific Islands Forum when we have talked about women's empowerment.
I am very pleased to see the election of three impressive women to PNG's ninth Parliament and the subsequent appointment of one as Minister for Community Development and another as Vice Minister for Treasury.
I look forward to the day when there are many more women in the Parliament here.
Prime Minister O' Neill and I also talked about the support he has provided, and his nation has provided, to the regional approach to the challenge of people smuggling, and I thanked him personally for his efforts in working with the Australian Government to establish a regional processing centre on Manus Island.
We are both pleased that work is proceeding towards the establishment of a permanent facility.
Our partnership goes beyond what we do bilaterally and extends to our cooperation in the region. The Prime Minister and I had an opportunity to talk about regional issues including our joint desire that we do see Fiji return to democracy.
Prime Minister, it is a great pleasure to be here, it is a privilege to be here in Papua New Guinea among friends, families and wantoks. Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: Prime Ministers, has there been any progress on selecting a permanent site for Manus Island Regional Processing Centre? And Prime Minister Gillard do you think that the permanent site should also process asylum seekers who are from places other than from Australia, across the region?
GILLARD: I might say something first and then hand over to Prime Minister O'Neill.
A permanent site has been selected. We will move to construction later this year. We need to go through a tender process and then construction can start.
On the approach about other countries using the facility, in the short to medium term obviously we see this as a facility that Australia will be using and that is how it has been constructed.
Over the longer term we want to keep working with PNG on regional approaches to combatting people smuggling.
One of the reasons we have been able to reach agreement on the processing centre is I think we understand that this is a regional challenge. Not a challenge for just one nation.
O'NEILL: As the Prime Minister has alluded to we have found a site where the construction will take place.
On the regional issue, I think we will be using the forums like the Pacific Island Forum to discuss that approach and try to process other illegal immigrants within the region in this facility.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard and Mr O'Neill, how will the police program be structured and when will it start. And will it be similar to the ECP?
GILLARD: The Police Program we are announcing today is more than $50 million of investment. We will certainly want to get that work started as soon as possible.
It is a model where police would be made available to participate in advisory roles and capacity building roles. To give examples of those kind of roles: the Assistant Commissioner in charge of reform, and the Head of your police training facility, these would be the sorts of roles that police and people with skills from Australia could fill.
We will also look broader than that to recruit former police to work and assist in PNG. And we are certainly prepared to work closely with PNG on the international recruitment of the next Police Commissioner.
When that person is selected we will then be working with PNG and with the newly selected Police Commissioner on what else can be done to assist.
O'NEILL: The agreements do not reflect the ECP style of policing agreement to take place in the country because we have got some legislative issues and constitutional issues that we in Papua New Guinea need to sort out.
But the immediate engagement, as the Prime Minister has stated, will basically be in-line positions within our existing police structure and the capacity to improve training so that we can build up our numbers.
As many of you know we have not trained any single policeman over the last ten years. So the process of rebuilding the training facility has begun.
We have trained and released our first 200 last year and furthermore this year. So with the help of the assistance of the AusAID program, that is now starting.
We are hoping to build that capacity up to a 1,000 policemen within our own police force and I believe that the assistance that the Australian Government is providing will further enhance that.
We are also asking the Australian Government and agreeing to expand on prosecution training because of our shortfall in that area and investigating the policing within our police structure.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I know you have already spoken about Australia's efforts to streamline the visa process for Papua New Guinea.
Can I ask you specifically about how you felt about the way Prime Minister O'Neill approached the subject last night, your first night in here PNG, you were the guest of honour.
Were you a little bit taken aback or even embarrassed and do you think this could or may have had the potential to set the trip off perhaps on the wrong foot?
GILLARD: No, certainly not. I know that issues about visa processing have been the subject of much discussion here, and I know that as a result Prime Minister O'Neill has been reflecting concerns that he hears as he moves around the community.
We want to make sure, one, that there is accurate information available about what is happening now. So at the moment we are seeing more than 20 per cent increases each year in the number of visas issued, so people are having visas issued and that is on its way up.
Notwithstanding that, there continues to be concerns and as a result I am very pleased to say that I have agreed with Prime Minister O'Neill that there will be the ability to apply online for visas.
And, that for people who have multiple entry needs into Australia, for example the business people who travel quickly and frequently back and forth between our two countries to facilitate trade and investment, that it would be less paperwork burdensome for them to get a multi-year, multi-access visa.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, what is the Australian Government doing to help Papua New Guinea authorities to bring back business man, Erimas Wartoto, to face criminal charges in PNG?
GILLARD: Thank you for your question. Unfortunately, I am not in a position to discuss specifics about an individual case that are the subject of legal proceedings. I am not in a position to do that.
I can certainly say more broadly from any individual case, that we do work strongly with Papua New Guinea, and we will continue to do so, on addressing any matters about criminal conduct associated with the movement of money or any such matters.
[ENDS] 


Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea
PM: It is a great delight to be here at Marianville, this school that you can see around me where AusAID is doing so much good work.
When I travel internationally I always love coming to schools. You can feel the future of a country; you can see it being made in classrooms.
I always feel that when I travel to schools in Australia, and I have certainly felt it here at Marianville today, here in Port Moresby.
The girls here are going to be a big part of the future of this country and I want that to be a future where women have fully equal roles with men.
It is my aspiration for our nation, for this nation, indeed for the whole world.
I would like to take this opportunity to say a big thank you to AusAID for the work that they do.
Can I also say thank you to Sister Angela, the principal of this school, she has been here for more than 20 years. She is originally a woman from Mackay doing incredible work here.
So this is part of what has been a great trip to PNG, where I am getting to see the various dimensions of our relationship.
Nothing more important to us than the fostering of people to people links, and being here today with these girls is part of that building the links between our two countries.
I am very happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when you first came here you said you were hoping to write a new chapter in the Australia-PNG relationship.
Do you think you've done that?
PM: I think we are moving to a new chapter.
It will not be the work of one day. It will be the work of a longer period.
But it will be a chapter of partnership, recognising the changes that have happened here. The changes of modernising and growth.
There are still some familiar challenges here, particularly meeting the Millennium Development Goals and continuing to lift people out of impoverished circumstances and getting to them the health and education services that they need.
But I think that Papua New Guinea today is moving into a new era, one of greater economic prosperity and one that will give it the opportunity to extend more possibilities in life to its people including its women.
JOURNALIST: Just on Manus Island do you see any obstacles in actually having a structure on Manus Island under construction in July?
No obstacles other than the usual stresses and strains that come with construction project. We will be moving to construct a permanent facility.
There is land available to do that. We will be engaging a construction through a tender process.
Obviously construction anywhere in the world brings its own stresses and strains.
Doing it on Manus Island here in PNG has a few extra stresses and strains than construction say in urban Australia, but we will work our way through those.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is July optimistic?
PM: I think the process we are in now is we will be going out for tender, getting tenders, we will see construction starting in the second half of this year.
We obviously want to do that as soon as possible, but we do need to engage a construction company and get the materials in to Manus Island to get it done.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr O'Neill has said today, yet again, that he was keen to see this facility be available for asylum seekers for other Pacific Island countries, he talked about taking this as an idea to the Pacific Islands Forum.
I wonder what your response is. Is this something Australia could conceive of in the longer term?
PM: There are no current plans to do anything other than the processing of people who have sought to come to Australia by boat at Manus Island.
But we are engaged in discussions in our region about regional collaboration to combat people struggling.
There is a regional recognition that this is not the problem of a nation it is a problem for all nations in the region. The principal process there is the Bali Process in which we engage.
But of course it is possible in other forums such as the Pacific Islands Forum to also pursue this discussion.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, next week at Parliament will start debating the death penalty. Are your comfortable with PNG executing criminals?
PM: We will make clear as I have today in my discussions today that we Prime Minister O'Neill that we are opposed to the death penalty.
Australia is universally opposed to the death penalty.
That is not a question about the death penalty here in PNG. It is about the death penalty anywhere. And we do express that view all around the world.
We would of course continue our aid relationship here in PNG.
What does our aid do? It educates children, it educates girls. It provides vitally needed medicines to people who are unwell.
It assists with lifting the rates of infants who live through birth and then thrive, and lifting the rates of mothers who survive birth.
This vitally needed assistance would continue.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: There are always going to be fluctuations up and fluctuations down. Yes the high dollar is putting a lot of pressure on Australian businesses.
Rather than comment on a short term currency movement, what we look for is the underlying trends.
And even with the currency movement we have seen in the last few days obviously the underlying trend is for our dollar to be far more highly valued than it has been in the past and it is that, the underlying trend, that is putting pressure on manufacturing and other trade-exposed industries.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott said under his IR policy individual flexibility arrangements would be no different from the current legislation.
Why do you say that it's a move towards Work Choices?
PM: Well number one as a point of logic if there's no difference why would you change anything, if you're changing something then, guess what, there's a difference.
So I don't know who Mr Abbott thinks he may be fooling with a statement like that, but it's obviously absurd.
Number two, Mr Abbott's just playing word games here, what he's talking about is individual agreements and individual agreements equal rip-offs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your reaction to the ANZ dropping its interest rates below what the RBA specified?
PM: Any interest rate relief is good for families, so I welcome that.
Under our Government, since we were elected in 2007, we've seen payments on the average mortgage go down by $5,500 a year, that's good for families and I always welcome interest rate relief for families.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Tuesday's budget will continue what we've done in the past, which is make responsible savings.
We're a government that's made more than $150 billion worth of savings. We make responsible savings and we fund wise investments.
I'm here today looking at a wise investment, that's an investment into education; and an investment into the future.
And back home in Australia what we are fighting for is wise investments including better investments into Australian schools and of course the full rollout of DisabilityCare.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister if I could ask you about the case of Mr Wartoto, a PNG national who has been in Australia on a 457 visa.
Could you tell us whether you're aware of any representations the PNG Foreign Minister may have made to the Australian High Commission on behalf of Mr Wartoto?
PM: Look I am not in a position to deal with an individual case and don't intend to do so, and this individual case is also subject to legal proceedings.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a clear disagreement between yourself and the Prime Minister here about visa arrangements.
Is that going to be an impediment to increasing economic ties between the two countries?
PM: Prime Minister O'Neill has welcomed the step forward that we've taken today on visas.
Visas between PNG, Papua New Guineans and Australia have gone up by in the order of more than 20 percent over recent years, so visas are being obtained, they're obviously being obtained in greater and greater numbers.
But there is still concern about the arrangements for visas and we are responding to that by making available an online visa process and by alleviating some of the burden of paperwork that comes with multiple entry visas for people who are pursuing business in Australia.
Now for us there's always a question of getting a balance right here.
We've got to make sure, for example, that when we're extending visas, PNG is a nation, to take one example, with greater rates with TB than us, so it's appropriate to do health checking before visas are extended.
JOURNALIST: Were you surprised that he raised it in such a public forum last night? Were you embarrassed or taken aback a bit?
PM: I happily attended last night's dinner and thought it was a good occasion.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister given that this matter is subject to legal proceedings will Australia now consider revoking Mr Wartoto's visa on character principles?
PM: I'm not going to deal with an individual matter, but from media reports, if I can do it that way, from media reports as I understand it the man in question is now in PNG.
JOURNALIST: You're signing a defence cooperation agreement. Why wasn't the economic treaty signed today?
PM: Well there's more work to do.
There was the initialling of a document between foreign ministers and there's some more work to do to finalise that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We are clearly seeing greater trade and investment between our two countries, and so what we want to do is address any barriers to trade and investment, make sure that we're working together.
In many ways we've got complementary angles in our economy, we are a great resources nation; PNG is expanding its resources extraction.
That means that there are all sorts of services and capabilities that Australia can make available to PNG.
So, we'll continue working on that agreement and when it's finalised we will be able to announce it at the appropriate time.
But I was very pleased to sign the Joint Declaration today and the Defence Cooperation Arrangement.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned the threat of migrants bringing TB into Australia.
That's already happened, and some doctors in Australia criticised your Government for cutting funding to clinics that treat Papua New Guinean nationals.
Was that raised at all today?
PM: No it wasn't, it wasn't raised at all today and I think there have been some issues in Queensland, including about Queensland State Government funding.
As you would be aware, there has never been more health funding available from the Federal Government than there is today.
Thank you.
[ENDS] 


Port Moresby
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today concluded her visit to Papua New Guinea, having held discussions with PNG's Prime Minister Peter O'Neill and his senior ministers.
The Prime Ministers signed a Joint Partnership Declaration, building on the Declaration of Principles signed by former Prime Ministers Bob Hawke and Paias Wingti in 1987.
The Partnership Declaration reflects the evolution of the bilateral relationship, to a new level of cooperation based on mutual trust, respect and common values.
The Declaration affirms both countries' commitment to deepening ties and to working together in the region to benefit from the opportunities presented by the Asian Century.
The bilateral trade and investment relationship is vibrant and growing. Two-way trade today stands at more than $7 billion, growing by 5 per cent in 2011-12.
Australian investment in PNG, including through participation in the landmark PNG LNG project, has grown five-fold in five years and today stands at more than $19 billion.
The Prime Minister launched the Pacific Women in Business initiative to establish a mentoring program to assist women to access management positions and tackle violence against women.
The Prime Minister announced the commencement of Phase III of the PNG-Australia Policing Partnership, which will see enhanced Australian support for the modernisation and reform of the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary (RPNGC).
This includes assistance for the recruitment and funding of Australians or international police to occupy key in-line positions, additional AFP advisory support to the RPNGC and a program of secondments and mentoring.
Bilateral defence links will also be enhanced, with Australia set to increase engagement through a new Defence Cooperation Arrangement (DCA) which was signed by both Prime Ministers.
This reflects Australia and Papua New Guinea's mutual security interests and provides a practical set of principles to guide our future cooperation under the Defence Cooperation Program, our largest with any country.Before departing Port Moresby, the Prime Minister laid a wreath at the Bomana War Cemetery to honour the Australians and others who died during the Pacific Campaign of World War II.
Bomana holds over 3,300 Australian burials, the largest number of Australian war graves anywhere in the world.
In the spirit of Kokoda, and the other battlefields of the Pacific Campaign, the Prime Minister announced a research project which will commence in 2013 to document an oral history of Papua New Guineans' experiences during World War II.
The results of the project will be presented to a major symposium in 2017, to mark the 75th anniversary of the Pacific Campaign.
The Prime Minister also acknowledged the important Pacific leadership role already played by PNG through its contribution to RAMSI and the Pacific Islands Forum. The two Prime Ministers also discussed the importance of Fiji's return to democracy and support to ensure free and fair elections. 


Darwin
The Gillard Government and the Northern Territory Government have reached an historic agreement today that will see DisabilityCare Australia, the national disability insurance scheme, rolled out across the Northern Territory by July 2019.
The agreement will provide around 7,000 Northern Territory residents with significant or profound disability choice and control over the care and support they receive.
DisabilityCare Australia will also give all Northern Territory residents peace of mind that if they have or acquire a disability, or have a child with disability, that leaves them needing daily care and support, that they will get the support they need when they need it.
The agreements reached with states and territories to date mean around 90 per cent of Australians will be covered by DisabilityCare Australia in the event they are born with or acquire a disability.
This builds on the agreement to launch in the Barkly region of the Northern Territory from 1 July 2014 which will provide valuable lessons on how DisabilityCare will operate in remote areas of Australia. Other eligible people with disability in the Northern Territory will start entering the scheme from July 2016 and we will progressively roll out DisabilityCare Australia across the Northern Territory so that by July 2019, all eligible Northern Territory residents are covered.
Under the agreement reached today:
• By 2019-20, the Northern Territory Government will provide around $99 million to cover all people in the Northern Territory. This contribution was determined using the benchmark set by New South Wales in the agreement reached with the Commonwealth in December 2012. The Northern Territory Government's contribution will go to the cost of care and support for people with disability.
• By 2019-20, the Australian Government will contribute around $105 million to the scheme for Northern Territory residents. This will be around 51 per cent of scheme costs. In addition, the Commonwealth will cover the full cost of people who turn 65 and choose to remain in the scheme.
• The full scheme costs will be reviewed by the Productivity Commission before the commencement of full scheme to inform COAG agreement on final scheme funding arrangements.
Following the announcement last week by the Prime Minister, the Gillard Government has confirmed that, in 2019-20, an amount of $10 million will be allocated to the Northern Territory from the increase in the Medicare Levy, to assist with the cost of the scheme in the Northern Territory.
The Gillard Government has also reached agreement for the full scheme roll out of DisabilityCare Australia with the governments of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory.
The NDIS is the reform of a generation and has the potential to transform the lives of people in the Northern Territory with disability, their families and carers.
The Gillard Government will continue to work towards the national roll out of DisabilityCare Australia, so that all Australians can know that if they have, or acquire, a disability they will have their needs met in a way that enables them to live with choice and dignity. 


Bomana War Cemetery, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea
PM: It's a very moving experience to be here and to see the rows of Australian war dead.
I've come here to PNG to commemorate our past and to build for our future.
I'm very pleased I had the opportunity today to come and pay my respects and the respects of the Australian nation to those who sacrificed so much for the freedom that we enjoy today.
QUESTION: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, as we move through the war graves, we talked about the history, and it pays to remind about the history and the heroism of Australians and PNG troops who held back the Japanese here in PNG.
If they'd failed to do so, and if the Japanese had taken Port Moresby, then the history would have been a very different one.
So we are really commemorating sacrifice that made our nation the safe place that it is today, otherwise the history of the last century would have been very different.
QUESTION: Do you have any relatives here?
PM: No, I do not.
My family is from the United Kingdom, so my grandfather fought with the British forces in World War II.
QUESTION: So you've been to many war graves. Can you explain how this one is different to any of the others?
PM: This is different.
I think the setting here in PNG, the tropical setting, the lush setting, is such a stark contrast to the headstones that we see behind us.
So the brutal simplicity of it really brings the message home for everybody.
[ENDS] 


Darwin
JOURNALIST: So are you aware of the latest breakout of 18 Vietnamese asylum seekers from the Northam Immigration Detention Centre?
PM: Yes I am, I've been briefed by the Minister for Immigration and the Department is making inquiries of Serco, the company that runs the detention centre, about this incident.
JOURNALIST: Does it concern you to hear?
PM: There have been, in the past, I have seen bigger instances than this.
You'd recall under the Howard Government that were considerably bigger in numbers than this incident.
But any incident needs to be investigated and that's what's happening.
JOURNALIST: Obviously we've had an increasing number of boats, we have had four escape earlier this week, I'm not sure they're been picked up. Should security be beefed up in some of the immigration detention centres we have in Darwin or across Australia?
PM: Well the Minister's already dealing with the matter, the Department's already making inquiries, so we'll get to the bottom of what's happened here.
But I would remind we've seen issues like this in the past under the Howard Government in far greater numbers.
We'll certainly get to the bottom of this and if anything needs to be changed then it will be changed.
JOURNALIST: It stoked claims that the Darwin immigration detention support groups around here have said it's further proof of inhumane conditions that people are forced to live in. What's your response to that?
PM: Well I don't accept that analysis.
We treat people in detention centres well.
We properly detain people, there's no excuse for poor conduct, never any excuse for poor conduct.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the border protection needs to be beefed up in the Territory given we are getting more boats?
PM: We deal with all of this; as you know I answer these questions a lot, and as you would be aware we received a very expert report and we've been stopped from implementing all of its recommendations because of the negativity of the Opposition.


Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea
PM: It's a very moving experience to be here and to see the rows of Australian war dead.
I've come here to PNG to commemorate our past and to build for our future.
I'm very pleased I had the opportunity today to come and pay my respects and the respects of the Australian nation to those who sacrificed so much for the freedom that we enjoy today.
QUESTION: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, as we move through the war graves, we talked about the history, and it pays to remind about the history and the heroism of Australians and PNG troops who held back the Japanese here in PNG.
If they'd failed to do so, and if the Japanese had taken Port Moresby, then the history would have been a very different one.
So we are really commemorating sacrifice that made our nation the safe place that it is today, otherwise the history of the last century would have been very different.
QUESTION: Do you have any relatives here?
PM: No, I do not.
My family is from the United Kingdom, so my grandfather fought with the British forces in World War II.
QUESTION: So you've been to many war graves. Can you explain how this one is different to any of the others?
PM: This is different.
I think the setting here in PNG, the tropical setting, the lush setting, is such a stark contrast to the headstones that we see behind us.
So the brutal simplicity of it really brings the message home for everybody.


Darwin
PM: Thank you very much to everyone for gathering here today and thank you most significantly to you for making us so welcome and for your long career here, working with people with disabilities.
And I know I'm looking out on a crowd of people, many of whom have devoted their lives and their advocacy to see a better deal for people with disabilities across our nation.
And so I'm very pleased, delighted, to be here today with the Chief Minister Adam Giles to say we're taking another big step to making sure that DisabilityCare comes right around Australia.
We've just signed the agreement which means we will roll out DisabilityCare here in the Northern Territory to make a difference to the 7000 people with disabilities in the Northern Territory, but also to give all Territorians the peace of mind that can only come with knowing that if disability struck you or a member of your family, you would be supported and get the help that you needed.
We've worked on this agreement and I very much thank Adam and his team and the Northern Territory Government for entering the agreement today. what it means is we'll not only have the launch site in the Barkly region  -  Tennant Creek and that region  -  it means we will build into full DisabilityCare across the Northern Territory by mid-2019.
In a year of operation, it means that the Northern Territory will contribute $99 million and the Federal Government will contribute $105 million. Because we have struck agreement around the Medicare levy too, a proportion of that money will come to the Northern Territory and that will be $10 million a year.
So this is a big step forward but I'm really conscious that it's the people in this room and rooms like it around the country who have been the ones that have really made this happen.
I've met people on this journey who have been arguing for a National Disability Insurance Scheme for five, ten, fifteen, twenty years. We've listened to you and today in the Northern Territory you can congratulate each other because it's been the power of your advocacy that has got this done for the Northern Territory.
As Prime Minister, can I take the opportunity to say I've got one more thing I need to do on DisabilityCare, which is reach agreement with Western Australia, but I certainly believe the momentum is there now to get DisabilityCare right around the nation, and then we will keep doing all of the patient work we've been doing to build it right around the nation based on these agreements and based on this agreement with the Northern Territory.
So Chief Minister, thanks, it's great to join you here today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does this deal with the Territory differ in any way from the other states?
PM: The foundations of this arrangement are the same as what New South Wales has signed up and the other jurisdictions. It needs to be like that because we want people around the country to have the same rights and entitlements.
People come and go, I've met a few people who've lived in the Territory here today who've been here more than 25 years  -  apparently that's the point where you get considered a Territorian the Chief Minister says  -  but as you well know people might come to the Territory to live a few years of their life and then go to Sydney, then they might go to South Australia.
We want to make sure that they can get a package of care everywhere.
JOURNALIST: Do you think (inaudible) that Colin Barnett will sign before the election?
PM: Well, I think the momentum is with us and I know that Premier Barnett has said he's got concerns about centralisation  -  he doesn't need to have those concerns. The essence of DisabilityCare is that the person with disability is in the driver's seat; they get to make the decisions.
So you couldn't have a more decentralised model than this. Premier Barnett has also said he's got concerns about the money, particularly he's concerned (inaudible) will go down, but of course this is about more resources in DisabilityCare.
JOURNALIST: The ABC's heard that the Government is planning on cutting the foreign aid budget this year.
PM: I'm not doing budget speculation today, we'll do the budget next Tuesday. 
[ENDS]


Canberra
The Gillard Government has made a $9.8 billion commitment to increase school funding over six years, along with better indexation and reforms to lift student achievement, under the National Plan for School Improvement. 
This commitment, first announced in April ahead of the Prime Minister meeting with Premiers and Chief Ministers, is provided for in the Budget, which delivers long term investment in schools.  Negotiations with states and territories continue and the Prime Minister's offer remains open until 30 June.
This historic reform to school funding will create better Australian schools for generations to come; ensuring our classrooms, teachers and kids are properly resourced and we can reach our goal of being in the top 5 education systems in the world by 2025.
Investment will increase year by year throughout the six year period of the agreement. The Gillard Government is delivering historic education reform because too many schools and students are being left behind, and our school results have not been improving as much as they could.
This is the most comprehensive reform of school funding in 40 years. The Gonski Review called for a fundamental overhaul of a school funding system that is leaving too many students behind. 
That's why we need the National Plan for School Improvement. To ensure every Australian student gets the great education they deserve, no matter where they go to school. The National Plan for School Improvement will focus reforms on quality teaching, quality learning, meeting student need, empowered school leadership, and accountability and transparency.
The plan will establish a national Schooling Resource Standard which includes a benchmark per student amount and extra money through loadings for students we know need it most.
Loadings will be available for students from low socioeconomic backgrounds, Indigenous students, students with limited English and students with disability, and reflect school location and size.
The Plan includes:
 * 	professional standards, annual performance assessments and ongoing training and support for teachers;
 * 	more individual support for students, including through intensive early years intervention in reading;
 * 	more local decision making for school principals, supported by experts; and
 * 	more information than ever before for parents, and stronger partnerships with communities to support higher student achievement.
By making every school a better school, we will help every young Australian get the best possible education and secure a high-wage, high-skilled job of the future.
The Gillard Government is offering to pay around 65 per cent of the additional investment needed to fund all schools properly and reach our goals  -  essentially a 2 for 1 offer for all states and territories.
The Gillard Government has also committed to annual growth in school education spending of 4.7 per cent indexation  -  provided states commit to grow their own school budgets by 3 per cent.
The Government is negotiating with state and territory governments on the Plan, to ensure all schools around Australia can look forward to funding security and increased investment.
We know Australia needs these school reforms and, principals, teachers, students and the community support this extra funding to get the best possible education outcomes.
New South Wales has already committed to these historic reforms and is working to implement the Plan from next year. 
Other Premiers and Chief Ministers must follow the lead of Prime Minister Gillard and Premier Barry O'Farrell.
This year, there is a choice  -  between the Gillard Government investing in education, or Tony Abbott's strategy of cutting to the bone.
We are investing for the future, putting jobs and economic growth first and protecting the important services that Australians rely on.
We're doing this to keep our economy one of the most resilient in the world  -  we have low unemployment, solid growth, contained inflation and low interest rates.


Canberra
The Gillard Government will invest $14.3 billion over seven years to roll out DisabilityCare Australia, the national disability insurance scheme, across the country.
This Budget makes the responsible decisions to fully fund DisabilityCare Australia for the long term. This unprecedented long term funding security will provide people with significant and permanent disability, their families and carers the certainty they deserve.
DisabilityCare Australia will give people with disability, their families and carers the care and support they need over their lifetimes, and choice and control over the services they receive. DisabilityCare will end the cruel lottery that currently exists, where the care and support a person receives depends on where they live and how they acquired their disability.
The Gillard Government has secured agreements for a full scheme roll out by July 2018 with the New South Wales, South Australian and ACT Governments. Agreements have also been reached with the Victorian, Queensland, Tasmanian, and Northern Territory Governments for a full scheme roll out by July 2019. These agreements are based on agreed funding and governance arrangements, with the Commonwealth contributing over half of the costs of the scheme once it is fully rolled out.
These agreements mean around 90 per cent of Australians will be covered by DisabilityCare Australia in the event they are born with or acquire a disability.
Under the terms of the agreements, the Commonwealth will pay for the full cost of participants who turn 65 (50 for Indigenous Australians) and choose to remain in the scheme. The Commonwealth will also contribute:
 * 	Around $3.3 billion in 2018-19 to support around 150,000 people with disability in NSW;
 * 	Around $2.6 billion in 2019-20 to support more than 100,000 people with disability in Victoria;
 * 	Around $2.1 billion in 2019-20 to support around 97,000 people with disability in Queensland;
 * 	Around $760 million in 2018-19 to support around 33,000 people with disability in South Australia;
 * 	Around $245 million in 2019-20 to support around 11,000 people with disability in Tasmania;
 * 	Around $175 million in 2019-20 to support more than 5,000 people with disability in the ACT; and
 * 	Around $105 million in 2019-20 to support around 7,000 people with disability in the NT.
The Government will continue to seek the agreement of the Western Australian Government for a full national roll out of DisabilityCare so that all Australians with a permanent and significant disability, no matter where they live, can receive the care and support they deserve.
If all states and territories agree to the roll out of a national scheme, the Commonwealth will contribute $14.3 billion over the seven years to 1 July 2019 to DisabilityCare Australia. This includes a contribution to the cost of individual care and support packages, administration of the national scheme and other supports for people with disability, their carers and families. The Commonwealth will also cover the full cost of care for people who turn 65 (and Indigenous Australians over 50) and who choose to remain in the scheme.
This historic funding commitment to deliver a national scheme builds on the Government's $1 billion investment in the 2012-13 Budget for the launch of DisabilityCare Australia, which will now be in six locations across the country. DisabilityCare will become a reality for thousands of people with disability, their families and carers from the middle of this year.


Canberra
The Gillard Government is providing $434.1 million over four years from 2012-13 to support the work of the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse.
This funding will provide the Royal Commission with the necessary resources to fully investigate where institutions have gone wrong and to ensure survivors of child sexual abuse have the support they need to tell their story. 
This funding recognises the importance the Government places on addressing injustices that have occurred in institutions against the most vulnerable in our society.
It is a key component in the Government's plans to ensure a stronger, smarter and fairer Australia.
The Royal Commission will make recommendations on ways to improve laws, practices and policies which will be fundamental to protecting all children in institutions in the future.
Its recommendations will also help ensure the failings of those institutions in the past are never allowed to happen again, and that survivors receive the support and justice they deserve.
Importantly, the Royal Commission will assist with the healing process for those affected by traumatic experiences.
This is perhaps the most significant and far-reaching Royal Commission in Australia's history.
As part of this investment, the Gillard Government is providing $45.0 million over four years from 2012-13 years to support survivors of child sexual abuse and affected family members who are participating in the Royal Commission.
We understand the importance of ensuring that survivors of child sexual abuse are supported to participate in the Royal Commission.
For many people, talking about their experiences will be very traumatic, and they will require support to participate in the Commission and to help with their healing.
Organisations will receive funding to deliver services such as counselling, support and case management to individuals and affected family members before, during as well as after their engagement with the Royal Commission.
This includes funding for organisations that provide specialist services to people from a diverse range of backgrounds, including Indigenous Australians, people with disability and people who speak English as a second language.
These specialist support services will complement existing legal support mechanisms for people participating in the Commission process, as well as any support services provided within the Royal Commission.
The Government is also providing a suite of legal support mechanisms to meet the needs of those engaging with the Royal Commission. These include:
 * 	payment of the expenses of witnesses appearing before the Royal Commission, such as travel;
 * 	a legal financial assistance scheme for those requiring lawyers when appearing in front of the Royal Commission;  and
 * 	the establishment of a national legal advisory service to provide independent and confidential advice via face-to-face and telephone services for persons engaging, or considering engaging, with the Royal Commission.
The Government is also investigating ways to support pro bono services for small, not-for-profit organisations appearing before the Royal Commission.
This will ensure those engaging with the Royal Commission have access to appropriate legal advice and representation.
Information on how individuals can share their story with the Royal Commission is available by calling 1800 099 340 or visiting the Royal Commission's website at www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au.


Canberra
HOST: In her only interview tonight, Prime Minister Julia Gillard joins us now from outside her office. A big day for you Prime Minister, were you surprised at your emotions in today's speech?
PM: I was a bit. I got to a section of the speech where I was telling some stories about young people with disabilities that I have met around the country.
Just thinking about them and thinking about so many Australians I've met with disability and their parents and the things that they have said to me.
I did get very emotional about it. I did not expect to at the start of the speech.
HOST: My sister works in disability and I can tell from her reaction to the NDIS, it is a massive moment for Australia and well done there.
There is a $17 billion shortfall in revenue. Is the Treasury to blame for that?
PM: None of this is about blame or any of that kind of stuff. I mean it is what it is, there is less tax money coming into the Government than was expected.
HOST: Surely someone is to blame? Somebody has to have responsibility for the economic direction of this country.
We were promised a surplus. We have a fairly significant deficit.
Who is responsible for that if there is no one to blame?
PM: Well I just do not think you can say it is about a particular individual. It is about a set of economic circumstances  -  really high dollar, us getting less for the things we sell than we used to, the terms of trade.
Really the important thing about the budget is what do you then choose to do and yes, we have made choices to have responsible savings to do really big things that will matter for our nation.
DisabilityCare is certainly one of them.
Of course we financed the work in schools too, very close to my heart.
I want every kid to get a great education. So that is really what the budget is about.
HOST: From a strategy point of view, many thought that you would promise the world to get a lot of votes but you actually chose to do the opposition. Why is that?
PM: Because it is about doing the right thing for the nation. Look I get it that most pre-election budgets are give-away time  -  here have this, have a cash bonus.
We deliberately decided to do the things that are right for the long term and the things that really accord with our Labor values and our Labor values are about caring for people.
It is about being fairer.
HOST: Let's talk the Baby Bonus. So it is going to come to an end March 1, next year.
We kind of worked it out. It gives it about two weeks for couples to get busy and pump one out in time.
Are you advising them to head into the bedroom tonight?
Can I just say Julia, she was talking about a baby then alright?
PM: I got that Dave, I am not that old. I got what she was talking about. I can assure you that as Prime Minister I do not dispense advice on such topics.
HOST: But there is risk return there. Any financial adviser in the country would be selling a return on this.
If you make it happen, there is a positive for everyone.
It makes financial sense.
PM: Well as someone who has just laboured over a budget, let me just give this bit of financial advice.
Having a child is going to cost you a lot more than the Baby Bonus. I can assure you of that.
HOST: Alright Prime Minister, we will let you get back to it but thank you so much for making time for us tonight.
PM: Thanks a lot. 


ABC AM
HOST: Prime Minister good morning and welcome to the ABC.
PM: Thank you Sabra.HOST: Some newspaper headlines say this morning that this budget is Labor's last stand and it's the Prime Minister's swansong. They're not glowing reviews.PM: Well I don't worry about the newspaper headlines.
What I worry about is making a budget, the budget choices that are right for the nation, and what we've done in this budget is we have charted a path to surplus.
We have focused on jobs and growth - that's what we do as a Labor Government - and we are also making room for the wise investments our country needs for the future: making sure every child goes to a great school and making sure we better support people with disabilities because our nation has let them down for far too long.HOST: Even without the revenue writedown, you'd still be recording a deficit this year, not a surplus as promised.PM: The difference there is the movement of some spectrum sale, so it's not an increase in expenditure, it's the movement of some spectrum.
But Sabra, let's be clear, the big difference here has been the less tax money coming into the Government than what was expected.Over five years that is more than $60 billion less. In the past we've seen $170 billion of tax money come out of the Government's budget.
That's about the global financial crisis and its overhang. It's about the strong Australian dollar - indeed it's about a set of events that haven't happened before in our economy.HOST: But still it was something that you said: failure was not an option on the surplus question.PM: And we relied on the best possible advice - the same people who advised prime minister Howard and governments before that.
But Sabra, if you're going to chide us and chide the forecasters for not getting it right, then let's be clear, you're chiding us for not foreseeing something that's never happened before in Australia's economic history.HOST: Okay but you've just pointed all of that out then, so how can you be so confident then in your forward forecasts of a surplus in 2016-17?PM: Well understanding what has happened in this period, where growth in nominal GDP has been less than growth in real GDP - that's the technical explanation but it's really about the terms of trade coming off - but the dollar staying so strong, hitting into company profits, and therefore hitting into government revenues.We now understand that, we also can understand when those pressure are going to change and we're going to return to a more normal revenue environment. So Treasury, as it has guided governments in the past, is guiding us.HOST: And it's still guiding you in those papers. It says that commodity prices are still going to be a bit fickle. It even says that the path ahead is not going to be seamless.PM: Well absolutely, and the forecasts all deal with those questions, so that's not something that's going to change the forecasts. The forecasts have been based understanding those factors.And what does that mean? Not seamless? Well it means we're moving from the peak of the investment phase in the mining boom, which employs more people, going to the production phase, which employs less people.We therefore need other sections of the economy to step up and employ people and push growth, and that movement won't be seamless, which is why the budget, for example, has a slight drift up in the unemployment rate.HOST: But you're still relying on that forecast for commodity prices, so it's completely fickle.PM: Well those forecasts have been made understanding that transition in the economy.
Sabra, you seem to be creating an impression that we've got economic commentary here and forecasts over here. The forecasts have been done based on that economic commentary.We understand that transition isn't going to be seamless. We're also relying on the best possible forecasts of the terms of trade. Anyone sitting in this chair - Prime Minister Howard sitting in this chair - would be getting the same advice.The important thing is what do you do having received that information? Well in this budget we've made a set of important choices, wise spending for the future.
We are prepared to be judged by that. I want our nation to have better schools and every child to have a better education. I want us to support people with disabilities. We've made the choices to do that and people can judge that.HOST: All the major business groups have given this the thumbs down. They say that the document's confusing, it does nothing for confidence.PM: Well I don't accept that analysis. The budget documents are the budget documents, they're formatted as the budget has been in the past. What people have seen in these budget documents is $43 billion of savings.What that means is that we've had a very careful, very methodical, very thorough process.
And why have we done that? Because we are a Labor government, and even in these unusual economic times, we are always going to put jobs and growth first, and we are always going to make room for the wise investments of the future.HOST: But business helps you make that growth, they make this nation prosperous. They're saying that this budget does absolutely nothing for them.PM: Well do they want to see better schools, yes or no? I've met a lot of leading business identities who have said to me, please, please, please do the reforms that David Gonski outlined for the nation.
Well this budget delivers it, not only for the next four years, but shows how we are going to fund it for the next decade.I've met lots of business people who have said to me, we do need to price carbon, we want an internationally linked system. I don't want to pay more in Australia than a counterpart overseas. I want the international price.Well this budget shows that they will get the international price. I've met lots of business people who say I will be at a competitive disadvantage if my business doesn't have the NBN.
Well this budget continues the roll-out of the NBN. And I've met lots of business people who say a big cost in my budget is the way in which people get held up coming to work. It's lost productivity, it's lost time.Well the historic investments in rail, in public transport in this budget, are right in there about how people move around our big cities.HOST: But infrastructure spending, that's $24 million over six years. Most of it is outside the forward estimates. That's being tricky.PM: No, of course not Sabra.
That is because we are moving from the Nation Building One program, which is already in the budget, roads under construction now, to heralding the Nation Building Two program, which will be the new projects that we're giving a tick to.HOST: The Newstart allowance for the unemployed, you've done nothing there to boost the Newstart allowance despite the fact that non-government agencies, business groups, have all been calling for it.If you can't deliver that in times where we've got a minerals resource boom, are you ever going to be able to deliver it?PM: Well Sabra, we've just been talking about where we are in the minerals boom, moving into the production phase.
But directly on the Newstart question, I value work. I think it is important that kids grow up in a household where someone works.Now I understand that it's incredibly difficult for someone who's raising a child by themselves, and when a child is young you want to be there and be available; it'd be very hard for people to work.
When a child is school age though, I am absolutely persuaded by the research that says it is better for a child to grow up in a household where someone works.And so what we have done in this budget is said, if you work, then you will be better rewarded for that work. I think that's the right change.HOST: The baby bonus. Why get rid of it now? If it was bad policy, why didn't you get rid of it when you introduced the paid parental leave scheme?PM: Well we have introduced paid parental leave-HOST: But why didn't you do this-PM: Well we've made the decision now because we want that money to go into our school funding reform.
We've made a values judgement and I'm happy to be judged by it myself.
I've made a values judgement that that money would be better spent making sure that that child, that new baby - indeed every Australian child - gets a world class education.
That's not just about every child reaching their full potential, it's about the future of our economy.We cannot have a strong economy in the future if we fall behind the standards of the world in school education.HOST: The cost of processing asylum seekers has now blown out by $3.2 billion. You've now signalled a comprehensive review of the refugee determination process. What does that all mean?PM: Well that means we do want to see our refugee status determination process work in line with international norms for acceptance rates of refugees. This was one of the recommendations of the expert panel guiding government.We've said we'd implement every recommendation. We of course have been stopped by the negativity of the Opposition from implementing some. They wanted to vote for more boats, but-HOST: You want to reject more would-be refugees?PM: Well there's a question here, which is: if acceptance rates around the world are different to Australian acceptance rates, why is that so? We want the refugee status determination review to address that question.HOST: When you became Prime Minister, you promised to fix three things. The mining tax, carbon pricing and asylum seekers.
The mining tax will only collect $200 million this year, despite original forecasts of $3 billion, the carbon price now has been revised down to $12.10 from 2015, half what companies are paying now, and the asylum seekers, well we've just touched on that.None of those things seem to be fixed, Prime Minister.PM: Well I'm happy to go through those, but when I became Prime Minister I spoke about my values.
I spoke about valuing hard work, I spoke about the transformation that education brings to lives, including my own, I talked about the way in which government needs to provide services and supports to people that only government can provide.
And here we are in this budget guided by those values, putting jobs first, putting schoolchildren first, and making sure that we support Australians with disability.On those three things, there is a Minerals Resource Rent Tax, it's a profit based tax, it goes up and down depending on profits, that's what it's designed to do.
On carbon pricing, again, it's the most vicious and hysterical campaign in Australia's history - we got this done.
And on asylum seekers, yes it's hard. We are guided by the best of expert advice and we run into the negativity of the Opposition that wants to see more boats.HOST: Prime Minister, you're in the polls, you're at the election in four months. If this doesn't turn voters around, what will?PM: This is about the nation's future. Voters will judge the Government and they'll choose the future on 14 September.When people walk into polling places on 14 September, I think what will be on their minds is, what next for my family?
They'll have a choice between two futures when they ask what next for their family: the clear plan I've laid out for the nation, a responsible path to surplus, a focus on jobs and growth, better education for children, a fairer nation; or the cutting to the bone that the Opposition is advocating, taking services away, cuts to education, cuts to health, cuts to jobs and people paying more tax.They'll make their choice on 14 September.HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.PM: Thanks Sabra.



HOST: Prime Minister, welcome. Now even without this $17 billion revenue writedown you talk about, this year's Budget would still be in deficit, wouldn't it?
PM: The big hit has been from the revenue writedown. What we're talking about is $17 billion this year, and then more than $60 billion over five years, so that's the substantial factor.
And any government, any prime minister sitting in this chair would have to deal with that.
The choice is, how do you deal with it.
HOST: Even without that you'd still have a deficit, wouldn't you? Of about $2.5 billion this year.
PM: David, that's mathematically true but let's gets serious here.
Where's the big issue? The big issue is in the reduction in tax money coming into the Government compared with what was expected and that issue has happened because our economy hasn't performed like this before.
So I know there's a lot of chiding of forecasters going on from the Liberal Party-
HOST: What I'm trying to get to here is that you made such a big deal about this emphatic promise of a surplus this financial year and yet even without that revenue writedown it still would have been a deficit.
PM: Well David, if the only factors we were dealing with, if revenue was still coming in at the same levels, then obviously we could focus on that slight difference between deficit figure this year and a surplus figure this year.
What is of course the unbridgeable amount is the revenue writedown.
Now, faced with those revenue writedowns, and anybody sitting in this chair would be faced with those revenue writedowns, what you've got to do is make some choices.
We've made some choices about charting a pathway to surplus, but doing it in a responsible way and making room for the big investments, the wise investments that our nation needs, including improving school education for every child and of course better supporting people with disabilities.
On the expenditure side I know the Liberal Party is running around talking about expenditure. The growth in expenditure over this Budget is over the forward estimates, the years of the Budget, is 1.3 per cent.
That's the lowest average growth of expenditure in 25 years.
HOST: Let's look at your new spending plans, and the big signature items of DisabilityCare and school funding. Now the bulk of this new spending won't come until not only after this election but after the four year forward estimate period of this Budget.
So too with the cuts you're making to pay for it. Now, are you essentially trying to lock in a future government to these reforms leaving them very little room to do anything else?
PM: David, I'm doing exactly what I said I would do. I said to the nation that I wanted to make new big spends  -  structural spends  -  things that will be in the Budget every year.
More money going into schools, more money going into supporting people with disabilities.
And I said to the nation very clearly in order to make those new big spends, I'd be asking the nation to make some big structural saves. That's exactly what we've done in accordance with our values.
So I do believe, for example, that it's appropriate to have the Medicare levy to support DisabilityCare, but also appropriate that things like superannuation changes go to support DisabilityCare, private health insurance changes go to support DisabilityCare.
I am prepared to stand and argue that getting rid of the Baby Bonus, making changes in family benefits, making changes in business tax is the right way of supporting children's education at the highest possible standard.
HOST: Let me ask you about some of the forecasts now in this Budget.
The mining tax this year is only going to raise $200 million, down from $2 billion originally forecast, but then you're saying it will grow to $2.2 billion in four years even though the peak in the mining boom is coming down.
How is that going to happen?
PM: I think you are getting confused between two phases of the mining boom.
What we're approaching is the end of the peak investment phase  -  that's where people are out constructing these mining ventures, thousands of workers doing the construction.
Then the construction workers leave and you go into production and the team is there dragging the ore out of the ground or getting the gas and selling it.
The tax is actually paid in that phase when you're getting the minerals, getting the gas and shipping it off overseas and making money for it.
HOST: And you're also in this Budget though hitting some of the smaller miners by ending the immediate deductibility for exploration. How's that going to impact on these smaller miners as we go through this change in the mining boom?
PM: What we're getting rid of there is a rort that has been exploited. So there will still be-
HOST: Not all rorting it though?
PM: No, no, no they're not.
There will still be proper deductions for exploration but what we've seen happen is people artificially inflating exploration.
So they explore, then they sell for a huge amount to another company that does hardly anything but then claims this enormous deduction and gets it very quickly  -  that's a rort and we're getting rid of it.
HOST: But there will be some smaller miners who suffer here, won't there?
PM: Well we've worked hard to make sure that these changes don't hit legitimate business practices and things like  -  they're called farm-in farm-out arrangements, historic arrangements  -  between smaller miners and bigger miners are still possible.
And there is a consultation period here where people will be able to put forward their views.
HOST: On the carbon tax, you're now saying in 2015 the price will come down to $12 a tonne when it links in with the European price. The European price overnight was trading at $4.60 Australian a tonne. Is this another optimistic forecast?
PM: The is a Treasury forecast and you can't take one day's spot price and then say how will the market be trading in a few years' time.
You've got to look at the trends over time and the way in which-
HOST: This has been the trend for a while now.
PM: And the way in which decision makers will respond to those trends. That's what Treasury has done.
So the same professionals who advised Prime Minister Howard are advising me; advised Treasurer Costello, now advising Treasurer Swan and that's their best forecast.
HOST: Do you have confidence in that Treasury advice and indeed your Treasurer after the forecasts of last year?
PM: I most certainly do. And David, let's just be very clear: yes, the Liberal Party is out there trying to criticise both Treasurer Swan and Treasury.
That criticism is that they didn't foresee an event that has never happened in our economy before.
HOST: They did forecast the iron ore price and the dollar fairly accurately.
PM: But what wasn't correctly forecast is the flow through to nominal GDP and how nominal GDP growth would compare with real GDP growth.
Now I know that that's incredibly technical, but what it ends up meaning is people are criticising  -  particularly the Liberal Party  -  the Treasurer and the Treasury for not foreseeing an event that had never happened in our economic history before over such a period of time.
We've had three quarters where nominal GDP growth has been less than real GDP growth.
Now I think it's a bit rough, just common sense to say ‘gee, bad forecasting for not foreseeing something that's never happened before.'
And when you then move away from this debate about the forecasts; the revenue is the revenue, you've got to make choices against that revenue.
This Budget lays out this Government's choices, it lays out a future of wise investments, better schools, better funding for disability.
Now the Opposition is free to make other choices and it seems from the statements of Mr Robb last night they are very focused on cutting to the bone  -  well that's a matter for them, lay those choices out, people will make their judgement on 14 September.
HOST: One further area that we have seen a budget blow out in is of course asylum seeker costs. They've gone up I think some $4 billion since last year's Budget.
But you are now forecasting there will be a slowdown in boat arrivals next financial year. How do you see that happening?
PM: We are putting in place the recommendations of the expert panel that's guiding government policy.
We've been stopped from putting in place some of those recommendations by the continued negativity of the Opposition  -  they wanted to see more boats, that was their political tactic.
One of the things we are certainly following up from the expert panel, and the Opposition can't really stop us doing this, is reviewing the refugee status determination mechanisms.
HOST: So that will slow down boat arrivals?
PM: Well I think the whole package guided by the expert panel will make a difference.
It is to be regretted that our hands are tied from putting the whole lot in place because of the negativity of the Opposition.
HOST: But this review that you talk about on determining refugee status, this is going to see more people turned away and then more people stopped trying to come?
PM: Well, it will send a message of course about how many people's claims are accepted.
We want to look at the way in which claims assessment is done, not by the public servants who do it, but at the higher levels like the refugee review tribunal.
HOST: But your intention here is to deny more people refugee status.
PM: Our intention is to see Australian acceptance rates converge to the international norms.
HOST: Finally Prime Minister, what happens if voters don't reward you for this Budget? Is there anything left in the bottom drawer that could turn Labor's fortunes around in the four months left before the election?
PM: Voters will make their decision on 14 September. This Budget is what's right for the nation in my view, guided by my values.
I've been around this nation, I've met with people with disabilities, I've met with them when they've had tears in their eyes about the level of service that they get now.
I've met elderly parents who have struggled to support their child with a disability for 20, 30, 40 years and the biggest thing they worry about is not what will happen to me when I go to residential age care.
The biggest thing they worry about is what will happen to my son or daughter when I'm physically not able to care for them anymore.
I've gone to schools where there have been teachers there who have said the new resources you've given me have meant that that boy now reads, that girl can now count. I want that for every child in every school.
I've made some tough decisions to make that possible. People can judge them. But that's me, that's this Labor Government, that's who we are.
HOST: Prime Minister thank you.
PM: Thank you.


Canberra
CAustralia's strong economy and Australia's social safety nets are the envy of the world.
In this Bill, we see Australia at its very best.
In this Bill, we see that we still can bethe strong, smart, fair Australia that created the Age Pension and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, Medibank, Medicareanduniversal superannuation.
In this Bill, we see that there is still a place for collective action to solve those great pressures of life that are too big and complex for individuals and families to solve alone.
In this Bill, we see a nation united in a spirit of concern to strengthen and extend the fair go, to ensure no one is left behind; we also see a Parliament ready to put the national interest ahead of ideology.
To those who say Australian politics no longer works, I say simply: read the Medicare Levy Amendment (DisabilityCare Australia) Bill.
This is a united embrace of national responsibility and a great act of mutual care and solidarity.
Every week or fortnight, a sliver of the pay packet will go to DisabilityCare Australia: around a dollar a day for the average earner.
But all that money added together from every corner of the nation will be a mighty force for good.
Today we give an assurance to all Australians who live with disability and to those who care for them: DisabilityCare Australia will be here when you need it ... election after election, decade after decade, generation after generation.
A new assurance for 410 000 Australians living with significant, permanent disability now and for their families and carers.
Today we also give a new assurance to all those Australians who do not have a disability today but who, through the vagaries of fortune, will come to have a significant, permanent disability in times to come.
For everyone who thinks, “it couldn't happen to me  -  could it?” this Bill brings peace of mind, it brings the knowledge that a scheme as well-designed and stably-funded as Medicare will be here when you need it.
Let me turn to the detail of the Bill. 
The Bill will increase the Medicare levy by half a percentage point, from 1.5 per cent to 2 per cent, from 1 July 2014.
The Bill also makes consequential changes to the upper phase-in amount for low-income taxpayers with income between certain thresholds  -  as well as to the formula for calculating the amount of a person's Medicare levy liability where a person has a spouse or dependants.
These changes reflect the increase in the Medicare levy.
Low-income earners will continue to receive relief from the Medicare levy through the low-income thresholds for singles, families, seniors and pensioners. 
The current exemptions from the Medicare levy will also remain in place, including for blind pensioners and sickness allowance recipients.
A number of other tax rates that include a component for the Medicare levy will also increase in line with this change  -  these include increases in the rate of fringe benefits tax and excess contributions tax.
These bills will be introduced by my Ministers today and further details of these consequential increases are set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.
Every cent raised by the increase in the Medicare levy will be allocated to a special fund over the next decade  -  the DisabilityCare Australia Fund.
By law, the fund will only be spent on supporting people with disability through DisabilityCare Australia.
The DisabilityCare Australia Fund will be established by the DisabilityCare Australia Fund Bill 2013, which will be put before the House as part of this package. 
Full details of this fund will be outlined in the explanatory memorandum to that Bill which is to be tabled by the Deputy Prime Minister shortly.
Increasing the Medicare levy will raise approximately $20.4 billion between 2014-15 and 2018-19  -  amounting to approximately 55 per cent of the total cost of funding DisabilityCare Australia over that period. 
The Commonwealth's share of the fund will go toward our additional contribution to DisabilityCare Australia.
This will cover around 60 per cent of the Australian Government's net new spending on the scheme over the ten years from 2014-15.
In last night's Budget, the Deputy Prime Minister outlined that through this increased Levy and other wise savings, DisabilityCare Australia is fully funded.
DisabilityCare Australia is designed to ensure every Australian with significant and permanent disability, regardless of where he or she lives, gets the care and support they need.
DisabilityCare Australia will end the notorious “postcode lottery” for people with disabilities in this country.
I want no more of the unfairness and irrationality by which a person gets vastly different support merely because of where he or she lives or how a disability was acquired.
This requires the commitment and support of State and Territory governments.
The Government will assist the States and Territories with funding their share of DisabilityCare Australia, by setting aside some of the money going into the DisabilityCare Australia Fund.
Over the life of the fund, the States and Territories will be allocated a total of $9.7 billion.
The States and Territories will be able to draw down from the Fund when they meet key conditions for implementation.
DisabilityCare Australia will have full coverage across the Australian Capital Territory by July 2016, in New South Wales and South Australia by July 2018, and Tasmania, Victoria, Queensland and the Northern Territory by July 2019.
These agreements will see the scheme cover around
90 per cent of the total Australian population.
The Western Australian allocation from the Fund will be quarantined until we reach agreement with the State.
We encourage the Western Australian Government to join the cause.
All our people deserve the best.
To ensure that DisabilityCare Australia is fully funded, the Government has implemented a number of other savings measures.
Part of the savings from reforms to the Government's assistance for private health insurance announced in the 2012-13 MYEFO which have not been allocated to the Government's dental package will support DisabilityCare.
Funding will also come from reforms to retirement incomes policy, the phase out of the net medical expenses tax offset and other long-term savings decisions now announced as part of the 2013-14 Budget.
Making a new call upon the finances of Australians is not something that is done without care in this country  -  the fact is when a levy does happen, there is rightly a very good reason.
Bob Hawke with the Medicare levy.
John Howard with the levy for gun buy-backs.
This Government's flood levy which rebuilt Queensland.
Now, this increase in the Medicare levy to support DisabilityCare.
Ours has been a fiscally-responsible government.
Offsetting all new spending since 2009, holding expenditure at a level lower than the average seen over the past 25 years.
A levy was not ourfirst choice of funding vehicle for DisabilityCare.
But with the high dollar and the historic anomaly of nominal GDP growth falling below real GDPgrowth for a sustained period, the revenue write-downs have been unprecedented... $17 billion for this financial year since the last budget update alone.
In short, the facts have changed.
I am also deeply conscious that the States and Territories face their own fiscal pressures arising from these same complex economic circumstances.
So we want to be able to offer them more support to pay for the scheme  -  which is why a substantial share of funds raised by this levy will go to the States and Territories.
Most importantly, we've listened to the sound case made by disability support groups for secure, ongoing funding for the national disability insurance scheme.
In a time of burden sharing and wise savings, they are right to want to ensure that DisabilityCare has a sustainable and stable funding stream ...  in order to guarantee the security DisabilityCare is designed to bring.
The President of People with Disability Australia, Craig Wallace, has summarised the argument well  -  the levy will be “An insurance premium for good times and bad ... people's disabilities will not go away the next time we have a surplus.”
That's the backdrop against which I introduce this Bill.
That's why the Government not only hasbipartisan support for this Bill, we have near-nationwide agreement on this scheme.
Following the ground breaking agreement withNew South Wales last December, the other jurisdictions have joined the cause,one by one: South Australia, the ACT, Tasmania, Victoria, Queensland and most recently the Northern Territory.
That means 90 per cent of Australians are now part of the plan  ... leaving onlythe people of Western Australia still waiting for a decision by their Premier.
People with disabilities and their families have campaigned so long to design and fund a national disability insurance scheme.
Many of those advocates are here with us today  -  I want to take the time to welcome and acknowledge you all now  -  and to acknowledge the passion and dedication of so many people with disability, so many families and carers, who have brought the campaign to this point.
In recent weeks, as the momentum you have built has broken through, as we have struck agreements with States and Territories and announced details of the funding, I have seen the hope and anticipation which Australians with disability, particularly young Australians, now share.
The Saturday before last, I travelled to Melbourne to meet Premier Napthine and sign up Victoria to DisabilityCare.
In Melbourne, I saw Sophie, a twelve-year-old girl who lives with Down Syndrome.
As her parents describe her, Sophie “reads and writes, mucks around on the monkey bars, can be well behaved and badly behaved, runs like a billy goat, and is a budding photographer”.
She took my photo while we were there.
Last week I travelled to Brisbane to meet Premier Newman and sign up Queensland to DisabilityCare.
While I was there, I met Sandy, who is 17 and lives with a physical disability similar to cerebral palsy.
Sandy has big dreams for his future, like any teenager, but his future also has some big needs: mobility aids that cost tens of thousands of dollars, personal care to maintain his hygiene, physical therapy to maintain his muscles and his health.
When I met this young man he handed me a card signed by him and his mates to say thanks for what we are doing for people with disability  -  a card illustrated by the photo Sophie had taken a week before.
In years to come, DisabilityCare Australia will ensure Sophie and Sandy and so many other young people with disability will have the security and dignity every Australian deserves.
This, above all, is why Australians so overwhelmingly support DisabilityCare.
Over the past six years, the idea of a national disability insurance scheme has found a place in our nation's heart.
In March, we gave it a place in our nation's laws.
Today we inscribe it in our nation's finances.
The people who've gathered here today from around the country to witness this debate, know what this means.
There'll be no more “in principle” and no more “when circumstances permit”.
There'll be launches, not trials; permanent care, not temporary help.
DisabilityCare Australia starts in seven weeks  -  and there will be no turning back. 
I commend this Bill to the House. 


Sunrise
HOST: The Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, joins me now. Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Kochie.
HOST: This time last year we were sitting here talking about a $1.5 billion surplus; $19 billion deficit it's turned into. Massive turnaround.
Are you a bit embarrassed about that?
PM: No I'm not, because I understand what's driven it.
What's driven it is a huge hit of the amount of tax money coming into the Government.
And that's because of where our economy is now. We've had the terms of trade coming off; what the world gives us for what we sell.
At the same time our dollar remained extraordinarily high.
Now those factors have flowed through into company profitability, less money coming into to the Government.
It is an unusual economic time, indeed things are happening now that have never happened before in our economy, it does make it difficult to predict.
HOST: Mining tax and carbon tax receipts way down as well, they were big contributors. Are they policy failures?
PM: No, the biggest contributor is the knock around in company tax, in normal company tax.
The MRRT, the mineral resources rent tax, is down. This is a profits-based tax so if profitability is down it goes down.
Carbon pricing, we always said, internationally linked. We don't want our businesses paying any more costs than businesses elsewhere in the world.
HOST: But when you look at the Budget papers, yes, tax receipts, expectations are down.
But revenue is actually up as a line figure, so you can't help but think if we just kept spending where it is, we would be okay.
But you have got these big schemes and these big spending programs that you want to bring in. Is it bad timing? Can we afford it now?
PM: Sure, let me just give you one statistic on spending. Average growth over five years covered by this Budget is 1.3 per cent.
That's the lowest average growth in 25 years. So the explanation here is not big spending, the explanation is the hit to the tax money coming into the government.
HOST: But revenue is up, revenue as a bottom line revenue is up though, only a tiny amount.
PM: Yes that's right, the average increase in spending is 1.3 per cent.
Some things automatically increase Kochie, we index pensions and things like that for example.
But 1.3 per cent on average, that's the lowest in 25 years. Yes, we have got some big investments for the future. I say they are wise investments.
Investing in every child and school and making a real difference for people with disabilities.
HOST: But can we afford it now?
PM: Yes, because we've made some big responsible savings decisions to back in the spending, not just for the Government's four year budget period but for 10 years.
Yes, I am asking people to make choices: baby bonus, better school education? I say better school education.
HOST: Okay, the Opposition says the budget is in chaos, that you've mismanaged the economy. Tell the Australian public why that's not the case.
When you look at surpluses turning into deficits and having to cut back on baby bonuses, why are you managing so well, in your eyes?
PM: We are managing well because we've got the nation through the biggest economic shock the world has seen since the Great Depression, focusing on jobs, not having a recession.
Anyone sitting in this chair as prime minister would be confronted with the same set of figures I'm confronted with.
What matters is what choices you then make. I am unashamedly focusing on jobs and growth, and big investments, wise investments for the future.
There is a pathway back to surplus there too.
Now there is another way. You could say let's cut to the bone. If revenue is town $17 billion, let's cut $17 billion.
If you did that, you would have to do something like stop all Medicare payments to everyone for the whole year.
Mr Abbott's strategy appears to be those kind of cuts. That's what Andrew Robb, his finance spokesperson was saying last night.
And he said to you this morning Kochie he would rip up the NSW schools agreement; he'd cost schools in NSW on average $1.5 million each.
Well I don't believe in that cutting to the bone.
That's why I believe we are the Government that has made the right decisions for not only now, these economic times, but our nation's long term future.
HOST: Was it stupid to promise a surplus in the first place, given these economic times? Blind Freddy knew the world was in disarray.
PM: The world has been through some tough times. What we have done working with Treasury is the best of forecasts available at the time.
Yes, we have lived in difficult economic times. We have kept people working, I am very proud of that.
Now I want to give our kids a better education.
And gee Kochie, I have met people with disabilities around the country, just heroic people leading incredible lives given the disabilities they have.
We can do a bit better for them, can't we?
And to say let's leave that for five, ten, fifteen years in the future, that's not good enough for me.
Those people need care and support. We've got to start building DisabilityCare now.
HOST: Asylum seekers budget blown out as well; the forecast $4 billion. Any answer to that at all?
PM: We asked the experts for the best possible answer and we are methodically putting in place everything that they've said, including now looking at the way how we work out who is a refugee.
We have been stopped from putting some of it in place because of the negativity in this joint you see behind us.
Parliament and the Opposition hasn't been prepared to go with all of those measures.
HOST: Okay, Julia Gillard, thanks very much for joining us.
PM: Thank you Kochie.


Today
HOST: PM, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Karl.
HOST: [inaudible]
PM: Lovely to see you. I just wish we were in a warmer environment. You need that nice studio in Sydney.
HOST: I know it's freezing out here. I know, or that nice studio back there.
Chilly morning, it has been in many sectors this morning a chilly response to the budget as you would know. Your response to that?
PM: Well this is a budget that is right for these economic times.
We have focussed on jobs and growth. We focus too on making the big investments we need for the nation's future.
The one closest to my heart of course, get a great education for every Australian child but also making a profound difference for people with disabilities.
HOST: I guess though that the criticism is why make those big investments now when we can least afford them?
PM: I have never had a parent of a child with a disability come up to me and say can you leave this for a few years.
They tell me about how they've struggled for decades and decades.
For many of them the single biggest thing in their life is what will happen with my child when I'm too old to care for them or when I'm gone.
Now for those people it can't happen quickly enough.
In this time, yes to make those wise investments we've got to make responsible savings.
But I am not going to let those people down and for our kids we've got to make sure that every child is reaching their full potential and our economy can't afford to have our schooling system fall behind the standards of the world.
HOST: The economy itself though and let's talk about that in terms of those Treasury estimates.
I mean you are predicting now a surplus for 2016/17.
How does that prediction have any credibility?
PM: Well we get it by the same people who advised governments in the past, the experts in Treasury.
Yes there has been a big change in the forecast of the amount of tax money coming into government.
That's because in our economy at the moment the terms of trade have come off what the world gives us for what we sell, but the dollar has stayed so high.
That has meant that companies are making less profit, that is less tax money.
HOST: Treasury predicted that though.
PM: They predicted those two factors. What they did not predict was the impact that that would have on what is called nominal GDP.
HOST: How could they not see that?
PM: Well it has never happened before.
We are actually going through a set of circumstances that have never happened before in our economic history.
So people can chide about the forecasts but getting told off for failing to predict something that has never ever happened before, I think from a common sense perspective people would say ‘gee, we understand it is hard to foresee something that you have had no past experience of.'
HOST: If they were in the private sector there would be heads rolling at Treasury though wouldn't there?
PM: Let us look at the private sector. How many of them actually forecast everything to do with the Global Financial Crisis?
We have lived through an extraordinary economic period.
HOST: In those situations those heads did roll.
PM: I think people might debate some of that about how many did roll.
Look we have lived through the biggest economic event since the Great Depression.
You and I will probably not live through another economic event of this magnitude.
I think that means people understand it is not easy to foresee everything that is going to happen.
HOST: A Labor Treasurer has not delivered a surplus since  -  and you can correct me if I am wrong  -  but 89/90 and it was Paul Keating.
That is a long time between drinks, a long time.
PM: I am not going to go back into history.
I am going to talk about the government in lead.
We have in the Global Financial Crisis unashamedly focussed on jobs and growth.
I need people who are still in work today because of what we did to stimulate the economy and I am happy that they are still in jobs and that they are still bringing a pay packet home for their families and that we didn't have a recession and we've come out stronger than the rest of the world.
HOST: The issue is again, coming back to credibility, how do you convince Australians that you are the right people for the job when we've been told certain things in the last couple of years and it has not happened, and you have gone well hang on, that cannot happen because of global circumstances.
How can you then look ahead to 2016/17 and say this will happen and convince people that is going to happen?
PM: Looking backwards, Global Financial Crisis, who stepped up to the plate and saved jobs in this country and kept us out of recession? The Labor Government did.
Going forward, what's our focus? Jobs and growth.
What do Labor Government's do? We build the big things we need for the future.
We built Medicare, now we're going to build DisabilityCare.
We care about every child's education and I am going to get them a better one.
I am content to be judged by that.
HOST: We are also not sure how those revenues will be affected in the future.
We do not know how significant the hits on the mining sector are going to be, the finance sector, those company revenues may stay down, may get worse.
PM: Well I do not think there is any reason to assume that.
We have just seen the dollar come off a little bit.
But we have made some very prudent projections working with Treasury about the estimates for the future.
HOST: Do you trust the Treasury?
PM: They give the best possible advice [inaudible]
HOST: Do you trust them?
PM: I am very trusting of them and very happy to work with them.
The reality is any Prime Minister sitting in this chair, if his name was Tom, if his name was Fred, if his name was Karl, if her name was Susie.
Any Prime Minister sitting in this chair would be confronted with the same information.
The real thing is what do we choose to do with it. Well what I choose to do is chart a pathway back to surplus, focus on jobs and growth, make the big investments for the future.
If Mr Abbott was sitting here, he would say cut to the bone. Well, we will be judged by that.
HOST: Your last budget?
PM: People will decide that on September 14.
HOST: Just before we go, we know that there is something entirely different, Angelina Jolie has gone through a double mastectomy, just a message to the women of Australia and what she has done and the message there?
PM: I was pretty shocked to hear that yesterday.
I mean such a huge decision and obviously she is in the world's eye, she is so famous.
But lots of women make that decision in Australia too. I cannot imagine being confronted with that decision.
But I guess it reminds us all that we have got to get all of the checking and health stuff done.
If one woman is out there today reading about Angeline Jolie and then saying it has been awhile since I've gone to get a breast screen, I hope she goes.
HOST: Alright, good advice, PM thanks for your time today.
PM: Thank you. 


Canberra
The Gillard Government will set a new target aimed at increasing access to services for Indigenous people with disability.
This will strengthen efforts to close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage by ensuring that the benefits of DisabilityCare Australia are realised for Indigenous people.
Minister for Families, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs and Minister Disability Reform Jenny Macklin today announced the proposed new target at the launch of the First Peoples Disability Network Australia's 10 point plan for the implementation of DisabilityCare Australia.
The Government also announced $900,000 over three years for the First People's Disability Network Australia to provide services to assist Indigenous Australians to understand and access support from DisabilityCare Australia.
The Gillard Government is committed to closing the gap for Indigenous Australians with disability. 
We must ensure that DisabilityCare Australia increases support and services for Indigenous people with disability and a target will drive these efforts.
We know the prevalence of severe or profound disability among Indigenous people is around twice the rate for non-Indigenous Australians.
Unfortunately many Indigenous people are reluctant to identify themselves as a person with disability and often do not seek help with disability services.
A new target will concentrate efforts on closing the gap for Indigenous Australians with disability and ensure they are not left behind in the implementation of DisabilityCare Australia. 
The targetwill be developed through a working group of key Indigenous and disability stakeholders, chaired by Damian Griffis, Executive Officer of First Peoples Disability Network, in parallel with discussions with state and territory governments.
The working group will be asked to report to Government on options for a possible target that could be agreed by the Council of Australian Governments. An interim report is to be provided by mid July 2013.
We want to build on the ambitious targets we have already set to close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage in the areas of health, education and employment.
With the launch of DisabilityCare Australia only six weeks away the Government is working hard to ensure that Indigenous people with disability are prepared for the launch.
DisabilityCare Australia is seeking to employ Indigenous planners and local area coordinators where ever possible, and is also engaging at a local level with Indigenous organisations. In addition, DisabilityCare Australia is developing cultural training packages for its staff as well as developing information about the scheme for Indigenous Australians using culturally appropriate methods, including outreach and interpreters.
This information will assist Indigenous people with disability, their families and carers to understand personal planning and person-centred support delivery.In consultation with the Co-Chairs of the National Disability Strategy Implementation Reference Group and the First Peoples Disability Network, the new Indigenous Working Group will be comprised of members representing the following organisations:
 * 	National Disability Strategy Implementation Reference Group
 * 	First Peoples Disability Network
 * 	National Congress of Australia's First Peoples
 * 	National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations
 * 	Secretariat of National Aboriginal and Islander Child Care
 * 	NPY Women's Council
 * 	MJD Foundation (Machado-Joseph Disease)
 * 	University of Sydney


Canberra
Children will be encouraged to participate in sport from a young age, through $39.4 million in funding to continue the popular Active After-school Communities program.
While Australians love their sport, we know that some young Australians are missing out on opportunities to get involved.
The Active After-school Communities program assists by providing access to free, inclusive and positive sporting experiences to children after school.
The Gillard Government invested $115 million in community sports participation programs in the 2013-14 Budget, including the Active After-school Communities program. This will ensure the Active After-school Communities program is funded until 31 December 2014.
The Active After-school Communities program is currently delivered at more than 3200 sites across Australia to about 190,000 children.
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Sport today visited Red Hill Primary School in Canberra to see first-hand how children are getting active through the program.
Research shows that after participating in the program, two thirds of kids show an interest in participating in sport. Over 70 different sports are on offer through the program.
One of the enduring legacies of the program is the 53,000 community coaches that have been trained through the program from when it commenced in 2005. These coaches are helping children across the country fall in love with sport and ultimately encouraging kids to join their local sporting club.
The program is particularly paying dividends in regional and remote Australia by helping to build strong local networks of sport providers.
The Active After-school Communities program is managed by the Australian Sports Commission through a network of locally-based regional coordinators who assist schools and after-school care centres to deliver the program.
Visit ausport.gov.au/participating/aasc/  for more information on the AASC program.


Canberra
PM: I'm absolutely delighted to be here at Red Hill Primary School and thank you very much to all of the kids for showing us what they're learning and all of the sports that they're playing, thank you kids.
And can I thank David, the acting principal, for having us at his school and can I thank Simon from the Australian Sports Commission for joining us today too. I'm joined by Minister Lundy, the Minister for Sport.
In the Budget, we funded for 2014 the Active After-School Communities Program.
What that means is right around the country we are funding up to 190,000 children to participate in over 70 different sports doing the kinds of things we've seen the kids doing today, building fitness, building skills, and hopefully then going on to select a sport that they really like and really want to participate in.
The Budget is investing in our kids and in our future. At the centre of the Budget is a plan for jobs and growth, but the Budget also makes the wise investments we need for our nation's future.
There's nothing more important for the kind of country we are going to be in the future than what happens for the education of our children.
The Budget, as one of its centrepieces, is funding school improvement and school funding changes.
We need to make sure that every Australian school has the right resources available to it so that it can teach every child, every child can reach their full potential and so we can be a strong economy with high wage and high skilled jobs for the future.
We were very determined in this Budget to make the responsible savings that not only enabled us to fund DisabilityCare, but also enabled us to better fund our schools and all of that funding is clearly shown for the next ten years.
On top of that, we're funding these programs for after-school, to help our kids make sure they're physically fit and they're engaged in sport.
I'll hand over to the Minister for Sport for some comments.
MINISTER LUNDY: The Active After-School Community Program has been going since 2005.
As you've heard, 190,000 Australian schoolchildren get to participate each year and this is over 5200 sites around the country.
In this way we're able to invest, through the Australian Sports Commission, in this particular program, in boosting participation in sport and we're very pleased and proud as a Government to continue this investment for the 2014 calendar year.
Just a few comments about the value of sport and physical activity in children's lives.
There is growing research every year which shows that the benefits of sport extend way beyond the obvious physical benefits.
There is social inclusion; sport is a platform for social inclusion, is incredibly strong, as are the mental health and wellbeing outcomes for keeping physically active.
So through this program we're able to provide opportunities for kids who perhaps otherwise wouldn't be able to play sport or have that opportunity and inspire them to take up playing sport as part of their life not just when they're children but hopefully into adulthood as well.
PM: Thanks, Kate. Thank you very much. We're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it sounds like Tony Abbott is going to say, "me too," tonight on a lot of these Budget measures, the cuts and the increase to the Medicare levy. What do you expect from him?
PM: I've seen the morning newspapers and it seems that the Leader of the Opposition will endorse the responsible savings that the Government's put forward in this Budget.
But the test for the Leader of the Opposition tonight is to outline what cutbacks he's going to deliver, if he is Prime Minister, to fill in their $70 billion black hole.
The Shadow Treasurer admitted on morning television that they are $70 billion behind.
Mr Abbott tonight needs to outline where that $70 billion is going to be cut from.
Schools, hospitals, where in the Budget is going to be cut?
The Australian people are entitled to those details and that's what the Leader of the Opposition should do tonight in his Budget Reply speech.
JOURNALIST: Prime Ministers of course always demand that and Opposition Leaders never deliver it. Sometimes the Shadow Treasurer does a week later so is that a realistic expectation?
PM: I think that's a very realistic expectation.
This is the last Budget reply the Leader of the Opposition will give before the forthcoming election.
At the forthcoming election, the Leader of the Opposition will ask the Australian people to endorse his plans. Well, the Australian people are entitled to know what those plans are.
Those plans, I believe, are to cut to the bone. He needs to do that to make up a $70 billion shortfall but Australians are entitled to know is it my child's school, is it my local hospital, is it my mum's aged care pension?
What is in Mr Abbott's sights for cutbacks? He should detail that tonight.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what did you think of the Coalition refusing to give Michelle Rowland a pairing?
PM: Of course I've heard all of this and can I say very clearly what has happened with this matter makes an absolute mockery of everything the Leader of the Opposition has ever said about working women.
It just shows so clearly that he doesn't get it.
JOURNALIST: On the subject of stay-at-home mums, there are complaints around that both sides of parliament are punishing stay-at-home mums compared to those who are in the workforce. What's your comment on that?
PM: We made a decision about the baby bonus and replacing it with some family payments.
I stand by that decision. Why did we do it? To make money available for schools.
I'm standing in a school now. This is where our future is being made. This is where we are decide whether or not for the long-term we want to be a country with a strong economy, with high-skill, high-wage jobs.
This is where we're deciding whether every child gets to reach their full potential. I believe that is a higher priority and so I stand by that responsible saving to make sure we can put more money into schools.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed Craig Thomson is quitting the Labor Party and running as an Independent?
PM: Mr Thomson was suspended from the Labor Party quite some time back.
JOURNALIST: Will it make it harder to win the seat?
PM: Mr Thomson was suspended quite some time back.
JOURNALIST: But you're standing a candidate presumably?
PM: Certainly, of course. We will field a Labor candidate in Dobell and it will be someone who can advocate for our plan for the nation's future which is all about jobs and growth, all about making sure we're a fairer society through DisabilityCare and all about building the future by investments like the ones we want to make in Australian schools.
JOURNALIST: But having a former Labor member standing in that seat against whoever Labor puts out, does that make it harder to win the seat?
PM: The people of Dobell will express their views on 14 September. Mr Thomson was suspended from the Labor Party quite some time back.
JOURNALIST: I know you will say it's a matter for the party organisation but will there be a preference deal with Mr Thomson?
PM: All these matters are for the party itself.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about reports NSW Labor offered Craig Thomson money not to run for that seat?
PM: I have seen a media report and I believe the Secretary of the NSW branch has dealt with that matter.
JOURNALIST: Peter Reith said, I think, that the Opposition's paid parental leave scheme is unaffordable and wrong in principle, I doubt that you'd agree with that.
Taking it back to the stay-at-home mums issue, do you see in the Opposition's plan a disconnect between money that might be made available to working parents compared with decisions that might be made about mums who might stay at home?
PM: I've seen Mr Reith's comments.
Can I say this, and it comes back to the question I was asked earlier and why it is so important that tonight Mr Abbott is very clear with the Australian people about his plans.
Today we see in newspapers leading Liberals advocating big industrial relations changes, back to WorkChoices, Mr Reith is doing that.
Mr Howard advocating a GST on food; extending the good and services tax onto food.
These are leading Liberals with sway over the Liberal Party room. Mr Abbott has to be clear with the Australian people about his plans because leading Liberals are saying, "Let's go back to WorkChoices. Let's put a GST on food."
Mr Abbott has to answer whether or not he agrees with all of that. What are the plans for a GST on food? What all the plans for a return to WorkChoices?
On Mr Abbott's paid parental leave scheme, clearly this is a scheme that would cost every Australian.
They are the ones who would be paying the bill because the companies subject to Mr Abbott's tax would flow that through to the things that people buy, the things they buy in the shops.
This is a scheme that is skewed towards higher income Australians.
I think when we look at the Australian way, it's either that we all have the same entitlement or we give a helping hand to those who need it the most.
The scheme Mr Abbott is advocating does not stand in accord with Australian values.
JOURNALIST: Given how far some of the estimates have been in terms of the surplus and revenue, how far out they've been so far, is it not fair enough for the Opposition to say let's wait until the pre-election fiscal update?
PM: That's a game the Opposition is playing to try and alleviate its obligation to be clear with the Australian people about its plans.
JOURNALIST: But in terms of what's happened, aren't they right in saying that the estimates so far have been a long way out, they're not reliable?
PM: If Mr Abbott was sitting in my chair today he would have for the same set of figures in front of him. So given they are the figures, Mr Abbott has an obligation to outline his plans to the Australian people.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Hobart
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Heritage Minister Tony Burke today announced funding for the conservation of the birthplace of Australia's modern Antarctic program, Mawson's Huts at Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, Antarctica.
The Gillard Government is providing $472,725 for conservation work to ensure this remarkable part of Australia's history is preserved for future generations and continues to serve as a reminder of the leadership, bravery and determination of the Mawson expedition more than 100 years ago.
Funding is being provided for the project under the Government's Your Community Heritage grants program, through the Protection National Heritage Sites sub-program.
Mawson's expedition was the first large-scale Australian-led scientific expedition to the frozen continent.
Mawson's Huts are Australia's first base in Antarctica and the foundation for Australia's sovereign claim of 42 per cent of Antarctica.
Located 3,000 kilometres south of Tasmania, Mawson's Huts are on the National Heritage List and the Antarctic Treaty list of historic monuments.
Because of the site's extreme remoteness and the limited window of time for operating in Antarctica the conservation work will take place on a year by year basis.
Mawson's Huts are located in the windiest place on earth at sea level and this is compounded by the other extreme weather conditions at Commonwealth Bay.
The main priorities for the conservation work are the stabilisation of the main hut and associated structures, removal of interior ice and the prevention of snow getting inside the structures.
Mawson's Huts are a critical part of Australia's enduring connection with the continent to our south.
The Mawson expedition left Hobart in December 1911 and reached Commonwealth Bay in January 1912.
The ongoing preservation of Mawson's Huts will mean the story and inspiration of Mawson's epic adventure, the tragedy of the expedition and his survival under extraordinary circumstances will continue to amaze Australians for generations to come.
In addition to the conservation work the Australian Government is providing $350,000 for stage one of the Mawson's Hut Replica venture between the Mawson's Huts Foundation and the Australian Geographic Society.
Assistance for this project will result in a full scale replica of Mawson's Hut being built in Hobart, just 200 metres from the site that Mawson and his men departed.
Stage one of the project involves the construction of the Mawson's Hut replica.
Construction of the hut will be as close as possible to the original.
This proposal has been developed by the Mawson's Huts Foundation, who also worked to save the original huts.
It will be built using the same materials, in Launceston, and be located on the Hobart waterfront where it will be a major tourist attraction.
The Gillard Government is providing support for Antarctic research and exploration activities, including through $25 million for the Antarctic Cooperative Research Centre announced in the Budget.
It is also investing in the remediation of the Hobart rail yards, helping the long term redevelopment of the Hobart waterfront.
For information on the project go to http://www.mawsons-huts.org.au/replica/ and for information on the Your Community Heritage grants program go to http://www.environment.gov.au/heritage/programs/ych/index.html 


Hobart
OfficeMax Australia will create up to 70 new jobs in a high tech new call centre in Derwent Park Tasmania, thanks to a $600,000 investment by the Gillard Government.
Backed by the Gillard Government and the Tasmanian Government, OfficeMax will create the jobs in a new call centre at their Derwent Park facility, north of Hobart.
The additional jobs have been made possible through $600,000 in funding from the Federal Government and $200,000 in funding from the State Government.
The State Government will also waive payroll tax for the new employees.
The Gillard Government's contribution will also go towards upgrading facilities, including improved access for people with disability and high tech equipment to make use of the National Broadband Network.
Staff at the new call centre will utilise the NBN.
Recruitment for the call centre is expected to start next year.
If the business model is successful, OfficeMax has indicated it may expand further and build new facilities in the area.
Today's announcement is good news for the Tasmanian economy, and it shows the Gillard Government's ongoing commitment to policies which support and create jobs in Australia. 


Hobart
PM: Thank you very much to Leanne for that introduction. Can I start by acknowledging my ministerial colleague Julie Collins, who is also the Member for Franklin.
So it is good to be with you and it is also good to be with my old friend Michelle O'Byrne. Not so old, long-time friend I should have said in her capacity as Minister for Health.
In many ways I do not think I could tell the story of what we are trying to achieve here better than the video presentation you have just seen.
It is telling us the story of how we are working to put people in regional and remote locations together with the medical help that they need because we do not want any Australian, no matter where they live in this great country of ours to miss out on the best of medical care.
What we want to do to achieve that is to combine a number of government policies.
None of them more important than the National Broadband Network, I've been assured by Julie that the NBN is just down the end of the street coming here very soon.
Already around 200,000 homes, small businesses, hospitals and schools have construction of the fibre network, commenced or complete in their areas.
We are already seeing the fruits of this; schools linked up to the rest of the world, small businesses in Tasmania linked up to international markets and now we are seeing the power of this technology as it links people up for healthcare.
So I'm very pleased to be here to announce a further step with Medibank Private launching their Anywhere HealthCare virtual clinic right here in Tasmania.
No better place to do that launch than here at Clarence GP Super Clinic  -  a $5.5 million investment from our government and in very good use.
We've met some of the patients today who are here for all sorts of things including good things like getting ready to go on holidays, those vitally needed jabs before you go.
Providing Medicare funded GP services, practice nurses, psychological and counselling services, all of that is done from this Super Clinic and so I am very pleased to be here and I know it is making a very real difference to people's lives.
So what is the next step? Well the next step you have just seen exhibited in this video is Medibank Private's Anywhere HealthCare virtual clinic.
So you can get in contact with the specialist you need with no out of pocket expenses and with reduced referral times.
It means that around the country for people who cannot in their local community see an expert in paediatric care, in psychiatry, in dermatology, many of the specialties that people do need during the course of their lives.
Those people will be able to make a link with those specialists.
That will be removing barriers to care because it is not just about alleviating the journey for people saying ‘well you can get healthcare where you are and you don't have to make a journey to another location.'
We unfortunately know that if a journey is required many people will go without.
They will go without the healthcare services that they need, with all of the costs that that then has for their own personal health.
But it is just too difficult for them to make the journey, take the time away from family, time away from their local community.
We as a government want to play our part in this and what we can do is make sure that Medicare is there.
Our great Medicare system providing the rebates that people need and the rebates across the new technology, so the rebates for telehealth services.
We have made that available and the growth is there to see.
This is going to be such an important way of delivering healthcare in the future.
We have seen over 77,000 telehealth services provided through Medicare by more than 7,700 practitioners to over 33,000 patients.
So already solid footing but much more to do.
Thank you to Medibank for enabling this great new stage and it is a great pleasure for me to be here and have the honour of officially launching it today.
Thank you very much.


Hobart
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
My Government's priority for Tasmania is jobs and growth.
Our plan is for Australia to be a stronger, smarter, fairer nation.
This week, we have delivered more important steps towards those goals for Tasmania.
Stronger: through new investment in infrastructure, including the $500m upgrade of the Midland Highway.
Smarter: through long term plans to improve our schools and new investment in research and skills.
Fairer: by delivering DisabilityCare.
Working together with the state government and the Tasmanian community, we are delivering real steps towards new growth and opportunities.
Our plan for Tasmania means investing in the future. Global economic change is putting real pressure on Tasmanian jobs.
It builds on strategic partnerships and focuses on the things that Tasmania and Tasmanian's do best.
We will build on Tasmania's unique strengths:• its natural resources;• its landscape;• its people;• its creativity and• its reputation for clean, high quality products.
To create growth in sectors that can flourish, create jobs and help young people build their lives in the state through better education and new opportunities.
We are already doing so much.
We are investing in Tasmania's economic backbone.
As the NBN is rolled out across Tasmania the rollout is creating as many as 800 jobs directly, and helping to create many more through businesses and services.
Today I have announced that together with OfficeMax and the Tasmanian Government we are partnering to provide a further 70 skilled jobs to the state.
This is on top of the 700 new jobs I announced with Vodafone last time I was here.
The NBN is providing the backbone for skills based employment for Tasmanians.
These jobs can continue to move here for decades to come.
Tasmania is in the box seat to exploit its early connection to the NBN with roll out due to be completed by 2015.
Only Labor will deliver a genuine NBN for Tasmanian's with the entire community able to benefit from a high speed, high quality network right into their homes and businesses.
This is happening today in communities all around Tasmania.
Hard infrastructure in Tasmania - Road, Rail and Port - has been a significant beneficiary of our doubling of the Commonwealth spend on infrastructure.
I was very pleased that we were able to announce as part of the National building 2 package in the budget a new round of investment and revitalisation for Tasmania's transport arteries, including:
A Midland Highway Package: that will improve safety and reduce travel times.
Freight Rail Revitalisation: To continue the improvements to the major lines on the freight rail network, including replacing approximately 290 track kilometres of old rail track.
We are delivering a smarter future for Tasmania.
Funding for the University of Tasmania has grown by 29 per cent since Labor came to government and will continue to grow over the next three years.
Under the Gillard Government's reforms, the number of Commonwealth Supported Students at the University of Tasmania has increased from 12,540 in 2007 to 18,713 in 2011.
Schools in Tasmania will benefit from around an additional $400 million through the National Plan for School Improvement.
To achieve this, I have committed that for every dollar that the Tasmanian Government is prepared to invest, the Federal Government will pay two.
A new school funding system is crucial to ensure all students and all schools get the money they need to do a great job.
We will match our investment in the foundations of the Tasmanian economy with an approach that supports success.
The natural environment has delivered Tasmania an abundance of gifts. Clean air and land, plentiful rain and sunshine.
These gifts can be transformed into jobs and economic opportunities for Tasmanians.
This is reflected in primary industries like aquaculture, dairy and wine but also in service industries like tourism and hospitality.
Our approach will be to continue to support these successes.
The growth of the dairy and food manufacturing industries has been supported by strategic investments by the Commonwealth and is an example of what is possible.
What is needed now is to develop further scale advantages and build on the innovations that farmers and processors will need to deliver sustainable long term growth and the jobs that come with it.
Our Plan has already made important progress across these areas and we are set to build on those success.
I have taken the decision that the time for this investment is now.
With the passage of legislation to support an historic accord in the forestry industry we need to move forward rapidly with our plan for jobs and growth.
To do this, as part of the Federal budget I have brought forward the investments this government will make in economic diversification.
Rather than spreading out our investment over 15 years we will focus our efforts and deliver a more focused injection to drive job creation and seize new opportunities for the Tasmanian economy.
To do this we will deliver our investment in just 4 years.
We have also decided on a modest increase of this fund, so that there is $100 million available over the next four years, to be invested in smart ways to drive the growth of sectors that can prosper, in Tasmania, in this Asian century.
The challenge now to operationalize our plan and deliver on all the potential there is here: through smart, targeted investments.
I have asked Minister Albanese to lead this work.
In doing that, I want to draw on the best advice from Tasmanians  -  experts and entrepreneurs, as we continue to deliver.
Tasmanian ALP caucus members have been out in the community, working with them and advocating for them in Canberra.
The delivery of our plan will still be linked to the successful implementation of the forestry agreement and ongoing market stability.
That stability is what the Tasmanian economy needs, and what the Tasmanian community expects.
The opponents of that stability are those who continue to attack the forestry agreement and attack the other long term investments we are making in the future of our economy because it does not serve their own narrow interests.
The Australian Government will continue making investments in Tasmania, building on the investments we have already made.
The key to growth and jobs now is how we work together to seize those opportunities.
I and my senior Ministers will be working in the weeks and months ahead to make sure that we do take those opportunities, and that Tasmanians benefit from the right investments for the future.  


Hobart
PM: I am absolutely delighted to be in Tasmania with my ministerial colleague Julie Collins and we are here in her electorate of Franklin.
We have had the opportunity today to meet some of the staff and some of the patients at this GP Super Clinic which we delivered here with a $5.5 million Labor Government investment.
It has been the perfect place for us to launch with Medibank anytime Anywhere HealthCare.
What this is about is using out Medicare system to provide rebates so that people can get the health services they need, using new technology, including right across Tasmania, people being able to access specialists whose care they may not be able to get locally.
Access them using the power of new technology and building on the National Broadband Network.
Tasmania is in the absolute forefront of the development of the National Broadband Network.
I'm very pleased to be here at the end of Budget week because in the Government's Budget we have made provision for an $800 million package for Tasmania.
We want to focus on jobs and growth in Tasmania.
Our $800 million package includes $680 million for infrastructure, including half a billion on the Midland Highway and that includes the planning and start of construction to replace the bridge at Bridgewater.
So I'm very pleased to be able to say we are investing again in infrastructure in Tasmania, bringing our total investment since 2008 to $1.9 billion.
As part of this $800 machine Tasmania package, we will be making available $100 million over the next four years for direct investment in jobs.
Now people would have heard me speak before about making provision following the forestry agreement to invest in jobs in Tasmania.
That was to be a $93 million investment over 15 years.
I've decided that Tasmania needs support and it needs it now and I've certainly listened to the representations from my Labor colleagues here in Tasmania, including Julie, about what needs to be done.
So we will bring that money forward and we will add to it. Instead of $93 million over 15 years, $100 million will be invested over four years to bring jobs and growth to Tasmania.
These decisions won't be made remote from Tasmania.
We want to make them in consultation with the local community and we will be asking Jonathan West working with our local members local community members to define priorities for Tasmania.
This builds on top of the new jobs coming because of the NBN.
The new jobs that we have invested in, more than 700 jobs through Vodafone.
We are directly adding to those jobs today, with 70 new jobs through the Officemax call centre in Derwent.
So jobs coming to Tasmania and $100 million package to get more jobs and growth into the Tasmanian economy.
The balance economy of the $800 million package is our investment into the co-operative research centre for work on the Antarctic.
Tasmania is where all of this happens.
It is our gateway to the Antarctic. It is a specialty in Tasmania.
It has brought skills here, it has brought jobs here and we want to keep investing in those skills and those jobs for the future.
So I am very pleased to be here today to outline an $800 million package of support for Tasmanian jobs and growth.
Budgets are about choices and on Tuesday night, as the Government, we outlined our choices for the nation's future.
We put a priority on jobs, on DisabilityCare and investing in our nation's schools.
That's our values, our priorities, making sure that there are jobs today and jobs tomorrow, that we put our children first and that we better support people with disabilities.
Last night the Leader of the Opposition outlined his choices and what he has chosen to do is to take an axe to working people's superannuation and to reduce school funding by more than $16 billion.
These are just the start of the cuts to the bone that the Leader of the Opposition has planned and it is clear that his targets are working people and their families.
The Leader of the Opposition has made those choices clear.
But, of course, there is so much more to come because the Leader of the Opposition is committed to further cuts.
Here in Tasmania, I think people will be very disturbed to hear that the Leader of the Opposition is leaving on the table consideration of increasing the rate of the GST.
Tasmanians already know that the Leader of the Opposition has a plan to rip $600 million of GST out of Tasmania and now he is leaving on the table consideration of increasing the rate of the GST with all of the cost of living problems that that would give Australian families, including here in Tasmania.
I am very happy to take people's questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on Gonski, Tasmania is yet to sign up, along with other States. To what extent are you willing to compromise and change the principles under which Gonski is allocated in terms of the loadings and so on and to what extent are you not?
PM: We already have the nation's biggest schooling system signed up to our school improvement reforms and that is the State of New South Wales.
Mr Abbott's plan to rip that money away from schools and children would cost New South Wales $5 billion.
We are having good and constructive discussions with the Tasmanian Government on making sure that every school in Tasmania has the resources it needs to get children a great education and we will keep working through those discussions.
But the model is clear and the model is there for all to see.
It is about a school resource standard and loadings so that when children come to school from poorer homes, indigenous children, children with disabilities, children from non-English speaking backgrounds, more is made available to support their education because we know it costs more to get those children a great education.
JOURNALIST: Are you prepared it change that model?
PM: The deal that is on the table is the same deal that was taken by the biggest schooling system in the nation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on immigration changes, why shouldn't the Australian Human Rights Commissioner be able to visit detention centres in Nauru and Manus Island? What is there that the government has to hide?
PM: We do make it possible for people to go to detention facilities from time to time. That access is arranged through the Minister for Immigration.
JOURNALIST: So the Human Rights Commissioner can go?
PM: We do make access available. It is one of the changes that we have made from the Howard Government. It is a matter of approaching the Minister for Immigration and making appropriate arrangements.
JOURNALIST: That decision to excise Australia from the migration [inaudible] from the migration zone, that is a contravention of the refugee convention, is it not?
PM: No, absolutely not and I would refer you to the Expert Panel report where this was recommended.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott says Australians will be $600 better off a week under him. How do those figures stack up for you?
PM: Let us do the adding up for Mr Abbott because clearly he is not doing that adding up right.
Mr Abbott has played clear his choices and what his choices mean is for a 30-year-old male worker who is on the average wage, when they retire, when that person retires they will get $127,000 less to retire on.
What Mr Abbott's figure work means is that schools around the country would be more than $16 billion worse off.
What Mr Abbott's figure work to date means is that people with kids would have the Schoolkids Bonus ripped away from them.
That he would be trying to move money from supporting families with childcare costs into paying for nannies, for families with more money.
Mr Abbott's plans also mean that he has got a very big black hole and would have to put a big burden on the shoulders of working families to pay for his parental paid scheme which is rejected by so many members of his own political party.
Remember, that is just the start.
Mr Abbott from last night's announcements, he is $26 billion down on the bottom line.
He is going to do a lot more cutting and we know from just being at the start of Mr Abbott's cuts to the bone, that the people he has got in his sights are working Australians and their families.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, isn't it a bit much to say that Mr Abbott has left the GST when he said that he has ruled that out in his first term if he gets into government?
PM: I would refer you to Mr Abbott's words and that is not what he has done today.
He has said last night in his speech he would have a comprehensive review of tax reform and during media interviews today he has not ruled out the rate of the GST rising and of course here in Tasmania you know that he has plans to rip $600 million out of your GST.
Every time he goes to Western Australia, he says so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how is your budget going to help vulnerable Tasmanian MPs like Sid Sidebottom and Geoff Lyons hang on to their seats?
PM: Our Budget is about helping the people of Tasmania by investing in jobs and growth here in Tasmania, making sure that people have got opportunities for work in Tasmania.
It is about investing in Tasmania's schools, making sure every child gets a great education.
It is about rolling out DisabilityCare here so we do better for people with disabilities and it builds on all of the other work we have done in Tasmania.
It brings our infrastructure investment to $1.9 billion, continues the rollout of the NBN, continues the rollout of our clean energy future which is great for this State of Tasmania.
This clean, green place and of course we are making record provisions for the healthcare services in Tasmania, including standing here in a Super Clinic constructed with Labor Government resources.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, to what extent is the decision to bring forward that $100 million in regional development funds cynical pork barrelling in the lead up to the election?
PM: It is a recognition of economic circumstances here in Tasmania.
As you are aware, there has been a lot of work done on the future of the forestry industry here in Tasmania by the stakeholders who have, many of them been at war, in the forests over a long period of time.
Stakeholders came together and we said that if an agreement could be reached and legislated, then we would support jobs following that agreement.
We said initially we would roll that out over 15 years.
My view of the Tasmanian economy is that investment should be made sooner and so we have made provision to do that and we have increased the investment to $100 million.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, back on immigration, is it still Labor's policy that no children should be held behind wire and if so, what about the children in Manus and in Pontville?
PM: We have made our policies clear following the receipt of the Expert Panel from Angus Houston and Paris Aristotle and Michael L'Estrange.
We said we would accept all of their recommendations, more than 20 of them.
We are implementing those recommendations, other than the ones we have been stopped from implementing by the negativity of the opposition.
JOURNALIST: So that keeps the children behind the wire [inaudible]?
PM: We are making appropriate provision for children and that is dealt with not only by our policies but I would refer you to the Expert Panel report.
JOURNALIST: You say that, Prime Minister, but there are children at Pontville who can't attend schools?
PM: We do seek to make arrangement for children to attend schools around the country.
JOURNALIST: But why are we still make waiting for those children [inaudible]?
PM: We do make arrangements for children to attend school around the country.
Our approach here for first instance detention is that we work through health and security and identity issues and then people are moved into community arrangements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Abbott has labelled the Budget a budget emergency. What is your response to that?
PM: Mr Abbott is bringing a very big insight through all of these words to the Australian people about his plans to cut to the bone.
Of course, the Budget that we laid out on Tuesday night is a Budget that has been received by global ratings agencies with AAA ticks.
We are AAA-rated by all three major ratings agencies for the first time in this nation's history under this Government.
So the judgment of the experts is in and its AAA rated.
Mr Abbott is wandering around talking about a Budget emergency.
Well if he says Budget emergency, what that is about is softening you and the community up for more and deeper cuts.
What those words should ring in the ears of Australians when they hear those words Budget emergency from Mr Abbott, they should be asking themselves how much does that mean he is going to cut from my local hospital?
How much does that mean he is going to cut from investment in my roads?
How much does that mean that he is going to cut from the work that Government does to support jobs?
How many people are getting the sack?
That is what those words "Budget emergency" mean from Mr Abbott  -  cuts to the bone.
JOURNALIST: Didn't he contradict that when he said that some of Labor's savings measures could actually be included if he was in Government?
PM: You will have to ask Mr Abbott about his own contradictions.
We have made responsible savings in order to fund great Labor priorities.
Making sure every child reaches their full potential and that for generations and generations to come our schools are properly funded.
We have made responsible savings so our nation can better look after people with disabilities.
Mr Abbott is not only saying he will take those responsible savings but he will go so much further.
First in his sights, smash people's superannuation.
Second in his sight, rip money out of schools.
People should be asking themselves what is next as he goes about cutting to the bone.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you explain the jobs at the call centre and address... Tasmania's unemployment is 7.4 and it is going up, how grim is that?
PM: We are concerned about making sure that Tasmanians have got the benefit of work.
That is why, working with my Tasmanian colleagues, we announced the arrangement we came to with Vodafone to create more than 700 jobs.
We are here today with the arrangement with Officemax to create 70 jobs and we are here creating the jobs that will flow from $680 million of investment in infrastructure, $100 million directly at jobs and diversifying this economy and the jobs that will be secured through the work of the co-operative research centre.
That is what we are doing, investing in jobs and growth in Tasmania.
JOURNALIST: Gina Rinehart has said that, warned that Australia could be heading for the kind of economic collapse of some of the European nations. What is your response to that?
PM: That is absolute nonsense, absolute nonsense and not backed in by responsible economists and not backed in by the ratings agencies with their AAA rating of the Australian economy.
What that is about, of course, is helping with the softening up campaign for more of Mr Abbott's cuts.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] with her view who say Governments are using the mining industry as an ATM?
PM: What we are doing is taxing super profits in the mining industry because at the end of the day it is Australians that own the mineral wealth in our grounds, no-one individual.
OK, thank you very much.


Canberra
New data released today reveals the benefit to schools across the country  -  by sector and state  -  under the Gillard Government's National Plan for School Improvement.
Under the current broken school funding model introduced by the Howard Government, federal school funding will go backwards by a staggering $16.2 billion over the next six years. This is because of falling indexation and the Opposition's refusal to guarantee the extra investment provided for schools in this year's Budget will be delivered.
If the National Plan for School Improvement does not proceed, every school, in every state and territory and in every sector, will be worse off.
If the plan is not implemented, over the next six years:
 * 	In NSW, government schools would lose a total of around $3.6 billion ($1.7 million on average per school) and non-government schools would lose a total of around $765 million ($800,000 on average per school);
 * 	In Victoria, government schools would lose a total of around $3 billion ($1.9 million on average per school) and non-government schools would lose a total of around $1.2 billion ($1.7 million on average per school);
 * 	In Queensland, government schools would lose a total of around $3 billion ($2.4 million on average per school), and non-government schools would lose a total of around $1.2 billion ($2.5 million on average per school).
 * 	In WA, government schools would lose a total of around $450 million ($600,000 on average per school) and non-Government schools would lose a total of around $680 million ($2.3 million on average per school)
 * 	In SA, government schools would lose a total of around $750 million ($1.4 million on average per school) and non-Government schools would lose a total of around $190 million ($1 million on average per school)
 * 	In Tasmania, government schools would lose a total of around $500 million ($2.6 million on average per school) and non-Government schools would lose a total of around $160 million ($2.4 million on average per school)
 * 	In the ACT, government schools would lose a total of around $40 million ($500,000 on average per school) and non-Government schools would lose a total of around $60 million ($1.4 million on average per school)
 * 	In the NT, government schools would lose a total of around $640 million ($4.2 million on average per schools) and non-Government schools would lose a total of around $90 million ($2.3 million on average per school)
If the National Plan for School Improvement is implemented, Australian schools will benefit from an extra $14.5 billion in funding over the next six years, as well as higher teaching standards, a stronger focus on early years literacy, and more information for parents and the community.
If states and territories sign up to our plan and this extra investment is delivered, it would mean, on average:
 * 	Around $2.2 million extra for every school in QLD;
 * 	Around $1.8 million extra for every school in Victoria;
 * 	Around $1.6 million extra for every school in NSW, Tasmania, and the NT;
 * 	Around $800,000 extra for every school in SA and the ACT;
 * 	Around $300,000 extra for every school in WA.
This extra funding on offer under our plan will help pay for literacy and numeracy coaches, ICT equipment, staff training, homework clubs and intensive support for students who need it. It will help make sure that every student, in every school, is getting a great education.
When it comes to the future of the nation's schools, the choice is clear.
Under the National Plan for school Improvement, Australian schools will be properly funded under a new and fairer funding system, based on the needs of every student in every classroom. There will be higher standards and better results.
Under Tony Abbott, every single Australian school will be on a funding hit list.


Canberra
PM: I'm delighted to be here with Minister Garrett, the Minister for School Education.
In the lead up to the Budget I announced that the Government would support an increase to the Medicare levy in order to pay for DisabilityCare, the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
And I was very pleased following that announcement to be able to strike a series of agreements around the country to deliver DisabilityCare.
We're now in a position where DisabilityCare will be rolled out for 90 per cent of the Australian population and of course work continues to try and persuade the Premier of Western Australia to also join DisabilityCare.
Having delivered the Budget last week, my focus will now be on Australian schools and working around the country to get agreement to improve Australian schools. We must do this as a nation.
The current funding system is broken.
It's unfair because schools that are teaching similar children get different levels of resourcing.
It's confusing, with some schools' funding maintained and some schools' funding guaranteed, schools in comparable positions being treated very differently under the funding arrangements.
It is also worrying schools because state government cutbacks feed into indexation. What that means is schools cannot plan for the future knowing what indexation rates are going to be for their school.
It is not properly resourcing the education of every child, so too many schools in our country do not have the resources that we know they need in order to give the children in that school a great education.
And the current funding system is not tied to a plan for school improvement. So, the funding system is not serving our needs, it's broken, it's unfair, it will not secure what we need in school improvement for our nation's future.
Now that is of concern to Australian parents, but it is of concern too to the whole Australian nation. Because we cannot be the strong economy we want to be for the future if our schooling system falls behind the standards of the world.
Having delivered the Budget, we can now say with certainty what the difference is between staying with this broken system as opposed to embracing our agenda to better fund every school.
And the difference for the whole of the nation is $16.2 billion over the next six years.
That's a staggering difference in funding for Australian schools. I want the nation to understand that's what's at risk for Australian education - $16.2 billion.
Parents and communities will want to understand that far more detailed for their own community  -  what does this mean for my community, what does it mean for my school?
So today, for the first time, we are releasing figures which show what our plan for better funding means on average for schools around the country, by sector and by state.
So if your child goes to a government school in an Australian state, you will be able to look up the figure for your state with the government schools.
If your child goes to a non-government school, you will be able to look up the figure for a non-government school in your state.
These are average figures, but they will serve to give parents and local communities a greater understanding of what is at risk for their school if the nation does not embrace our plan for school improvement.
To give you some quick figures there, in New South Wales the difference for a government school is $1.7 million.
In New South Wales the difference for a non-government school is $800,000.
In the Northern Territory, the difference for a government school is $4.2 million.
In the Northern Territory, the difference for a non-government school is $2.3 million.
They are resources that could be used in schools for literacy coaches, for extra teachers' aides, for work that would improve the education of those school students.
So in the week to come and in the weeks that follow, I will be making it very clear to the Australian community what is at risk for Australian schools if our plan for better funding for school improvement is not endorsed.
I'll hand over now to the Minister for School Education for some comments.
MINISTER GARRETT: Thanks Prime Minister. Today we see the real cost of Tony Abbott's cuts to education right across schools, right across the nation.
And by identifying the $16.2 billion of additional investment that would go to schools that Mr Abbott will not support, and that again this morning the Coalition would not support, we can now see very clearly what the impact on schools around the nation would be.
Because Mr Abbott is putting the interests of Australian schools and students last.
Just look briefly, following on from the Prime Minister's figures, in Victoria we'd see an average $1.9 million per school lost under Mr Abbott.
An average of $1.7 million per school in the non-government sector.
Under our plan, we'd see schools receive an average of $1.8 million in money over the next six years extra.
And the point about this is where would these extra funds go to  -  things like literacy and numeracy coaches across six years, something that is important, something that makes a difference in schools and something that Mr Abbott now is not supporting.
In Queensland, and average of $2.4 million per school in the government sector, $2.5 million per school in the non-government sector.
Again, an opportunity for the employment, additional resources, literacy coaches, people in the classroom to make a difference to the education that kids are getting.
And finally quickly, South Australia. Here about an average of $1.4 million per school in the government sector that schools would lose over the next six years because Mr Abbott won't support the National Plan for School Improvement.
And finally just to make this point, we know that if we invest in our schools in a targeted way, we can lift the education in schools right around the nation. We're prepared to make that investment.
Mr Abbott clearly signals that he's not prepared to make that investment. He's putting education last, while we put the students and the needs of schools in Australia first.
Thanks Prime Minister.
PM: Thank you, we're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: No mention of WA there. What are the figures showing there?
PM: We can give you the WA figures, and we would expect you to ask, so thank you for the question. The WA figures for a government school, an average of $600,000, for a non-government school, the average is more than that, actually more than that.
We can get you the precise figure but there are losses in WA schools too.
JOURNALIST: Does this show therefore that Colin Barnett's got a point that this system, like a lot of complaints he's had regarding programs, is geared towards the underperforming eastern states?
PM: No, it doesn't show that.
What it shows is what is happening for Western Australian schools is money that we want to invest in them, new money for Western Australian schools, we want every school to come up to a school resource standard in Western Australia closer to that school resource standard than schools in other states.
But they are not, all schools in WA, at that school resource standard. So it is still more money available for Western Australian schools with two dollars out of three flowing from the Federal Government. So of course there is an advantage for Western Australian education.
What we are being very clear about here by giving average figures for government and non-government schools around the country, is that there are two choices for the future of Australian schools.
We can have the current broken system limp on year after year with our children not getting the high quality education they deserve, or we can endorse the Government's new plan for school improvement and new funding, improving funding into schools by $16.2 billion.
Now this is a very different future for our country  -  better schools, school improvement, $16.2 billion extra invested as opposed to the current system just limping along and schools actually over time having less resources available to them for the education of our children.
JOURNALIST: Can you give us that whole table today?
PM: Yes, you will have that whole table.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we're less than four months from an election with an opposition which is casting doubt on its commitment to Gonski, it's prepared to say it's going to delay superannuation, it's even not running away from flagging an increase to the GST in two elections' time.
Does that worry you that the Opposition is now so confident it can start making those sorts things and seemingly not be worried about any consequences?
PM: The only thing that worries me is our nation's future and whether it's going to be a strong and prosperous one, and whether every child's going to reach their full potential. That's what worries me.
I've been able to work with Liberal leaders; I've been able to work for example with Premier O'Farrell to seize a better vision for our kids' future.
Premier O'Farrell on TV today said the current funding system in broken and unfair. He acknowledged that the Leader of the Opposition went to see him to try and dissuade him from getting kids in New South Wales a better future.
Well there are two choices for this nation's future when it comes to our children.
Better funded schools with school improvement, or Mr Abbott's plan to reduce $16.2 billion of resources from our schools. So two futures; ours, $16.2 billion of more resources; Mr Abbott's, the current system limping along ultimately meaning cutbacks for schools.
JOURNALIST: How are these negotiations going? Do you think you're going to get enough of these states across the line by June 30?
PM: Well, the question for premiers and chief ministers is whether or not they're prepared to put the children in their jurisdiction first in the way that Premier O'Farrell has.
Discussions are continuing around the nation and we will keep working on it. But I am passionate about making sure we realise a good education for every Australian child.
I don't want to fix this now for one budget year or even the four years of the budget; I want to fix it for generations and generations to come. That we can say every child in every school has the resources necessary to get them a great education.
So there's a clear choice here. The plan that we're putting forward, or the current funding system broken, unfair, supported by Mr Abbott and the other side of politics.
But I do believe Australians have a right to understand the clear difference here including getting a sense about what it means for their child's school and that's why we're releasing these new figures today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, New South Wales Legal Aid says it doesn't have enough funding to sufficiently represent victims at the Royal Commission into Child Abuse. What is the Federal Government doing to assist New South Wales Legal Aid?
PM: We made some resources available, as we did the Royal Commission, for support services and assistance for people. We'll be happy to get you the details.
JOURNALIST: Is there more available though? They're saying at this stage they don't have enough?
PM: We can give you the figures, not only what is in the Royal Commission's budget which as you would know is a quarter of a million dollars to assist people as well as the details of what we've done for Legal Aid.
JOURNALIST: But that's the final on that, there's not potentially more assistance?
PM: No, what you've seen in the Budget is what there is.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition keeps saying that nobody knows what is in these Gonski bills, that it's a deal that's cobbled together in back rooms. Do you feel like you've done enough to explain how it actually works?
PM: Has Mr Abbott ever met Premier O'Farrell? The answer to that is yes. Why is it that Premier O'Farrell can put his hand up and say this is a good deal for the children in my state, and Mr Abbott wanders round pretending that it's beyond his comprehension?
Well in truth it's not beyond his comprehension, Mr Abbott just hasn't wanted to be upfront. Mr Abbott really needs to say “I stand for $16.2 billion less in Australian schools.” It's not confusing.
Mr Abbott needs to pick up these budget papers, and let me be very clear about these budget papers, this is budget paper number two.
Mr Abbott can pick that up and he can find the chart, and he can say to himself well, looking at this budget table, what Mr Abbott stands for is $16.2 billion less for Australian schools.
If you stand for that, then you stand for a worse education for Australians.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, another area where there seems to be a clear choice emerging is on the issue of tax reform. The Coalition seems to be promising a white paper looking at tax reform, and are even prepared to go as far as GST.
Does the Government have a tax reform agenda that it would be taking to this year's election?
PM: We do not support and will never support a broadening of the base of the GST or an increase in its rate.
Mr Abbott has put broadening the base and increasing the rate of the GST squarely in front of everyone, that's what he and his Treasury spokesperson have done over the last week and his Treasury spokesperson today.
So it's definitely there on their agenda for consideration. It is not on ours.
JOURNALIST: In terms of broader tax reform, does the Government have any kind of tax reform plan that it would be taking to the election?
PM: We have delivered tax reform which makes a real difference.
We've delivered tax reform by tripling the tax-free threshold for working Australians.
We've delivered tax reform for small businesses with the instant asset write-off.
We've delivered tax reform through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
We've delivered tax reform including the addressing of rorts and inconsistencies in taxation - that was dealt with in the Budget on budget night.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you support New South Wales Labor's call to segregate vaccinated kids from non-vaccinated kids in childcare centres, and should that be rolled out nationally?
PM: Look I am concerned about vaccination rates. I'm a big supporter of vaccination. We make sure through the payments that we make available to families that you put those payments at risk if you don't get your child vaccinated.
That is one of the things we do as a federal government to send a very strong message to people that it's in their child's interest to be properly vaccinated.
JOURNALIST: Should the schools actually be segregated, I mean that's the question, should you separate the kids?
PM: For us, the approach we've taken is the payments we make to families which are payments that we directly control, we've decided to use those payments to send a clear signal about vaccinating children.
I can understand in communities, why people are worried about this, and I want to see vaccination rates moving up.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why was Steve Bracks chosen to be the next consul-general in New York, and what do you think of the Opposition's threat, or reserving their right, to remove him from the position if they win the election?
PM: Mr Bracks has the capacities to perform that role and to perform it well. He's obviously a very experienced person, not only through being Premier of Victoria but in his engagements with corporate Australia since.
So we thought he had the right background to serve the nation in New York.
When you look at the appointments that the Government has made, we've looked across the political spectrum to get the best of skills.
I personally was very enthusiastic to see Brendan Nelson take over the War Memorial position, at this time when we are moving to the Centenary of Anzac.
I thought he was exactly the right person to do it, and of course prior to that, we had asked him to represent the nation at NATO and to the European Union.
So we look broadly across the political spectrum and across Australian life to get the right people with the right skills to do jobs.
JOURNALIST: And the threat to remove him?
PM: Well you'd have to ask the Opposition about that, but I do note that when we came to government there were a number of former Liberal MPs serving in various diplomatic posts around the world.
I personally for example did some things in New York with Robert Hill when he was serving there at the UN.
Of course Senator Vanstone had been appointed to Italy, and there's quite an extensive list and we did not engage in instability and churning of appointments based on who had a political party ticket.
We took the view that what was in the best interests of the nation was stability and having people continue to do their jobs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, back on the budget, I know you don't like to comment on polls but are you expecting in the near future a lift out of the events of last week, not just your Budget but Tony Abbott's reply  -  do you see hope there for Labor?
PM: You've answered the question for me in the form of the question, so it doesn't need any other comment.
The focus here is on things that matter to the Australian people. I mean I have been working hard with the team, particularly  -  we were always working hard, but particularly in recent weeks  -  we have been so focussed on the things that matter for our nation's long term future.
Securing DisabilityCare, now seeking to secure school funding improvement, and better ways of working with Australian schools, ways that we know work, through our National Partnership money.
We have both been to schools  -  some of them together and some of them separately  -  we have both been to schools where we have shown that those children are getting a better education because of new resources and improvements that are being delivered in those school.
Well I want to see that right around the nation. That's our focus, and it's the nation's choice.
Better schools outing our kids first, or school cutbacks and a lesser standard of education.
That's the choice, and I'll be making that choice very, very clear in the weeks to come.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why haven't the Labor states signed up to the Gonski reforms?
PM: We're still working hard  -  we're working hard with all states, including with the Labor states.
As Premier O'Farrell showed in New South Wales, this does, because it's significant new resources for schools, mean that state governments have to look very long and hard and forensically at their budgets.
Premier O'Farrell had to do that in order to put forward the extra resources for schools. We had to do that too, and so are states around the country including Labor states.
What's different between Labor states and conservative states is Labor states don't have Mr Abbott on the phone or at their door urging them not to sign up and not to put children first.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you toured the country signing up states onto the NDIS. Were you discussing Gonski with them at the same time?
PM: We focussed on securing the National Disability Insurance Scheme immediately after the announcement of the Medicare levy.
But even as we were doing that our officials were continuing to discuss school reform and school improvement with premiers and chief ministers.
So this process has never stopped. Inevitably, how public the process is-
MINISTER GARRETT: (Inaudible)
PM: You can vouch for that. Inevitably how public the process is, whether or not you're there with TV camera rolling, depends a bit on what else is happening in the nation's life that day and I'm not surprised that the focus of reporting has been on the successful securing of DisabilityCare agreements.
Indeed I would have been astonished if it was anything else.
But even during those days while we were securing agreements for DisabilityCare, we've been working on a plan for improving schools.
JOURNALIST: PM, are the dollars you're talking about today just Commonwealth dollars or do they include state funding?
PM: It's the total dollars so from both sources.
And you would know that we've talked about $14.5 billion that is on a two-for-one federal government and state.
If you just keep the current broken system, then that inevitably means indexation rates will go down, because they trigger off state government cutbacks, and that means less for schools, which is why you get to a difference of $16.2 billion for the current system, just chugging along ultimately delivering cuts as opposed to our plan for new resources and new ways of working with schools.
It's a very clear choice and I would urge Australian parents and communities to make sure they are familiar with these figures broken down by state and school system so they can get a real sense of what it means for them, their child and their community.
JOURNALIST: PM, Joe Hockey today said that in the years in the short term, education funding actually decreases because of some of the fiscal fiddles and shifting money into Gonski.
Can you confirm that and explain why this is the case?
PM: Mr Hockey is 100 per cent wrong. He's obviously picked up his lines form Mr Pyne, who is 100 per cent wrong.
You would have been there in the Budget lockup when these budget papers were released, and I'm sure you've studied every page.
Mr Hockey certainly should have done so given he says he wants to be Treasurer in a forthcoming government.
This is Budget Paper number one, all you need to do is open it up, take yourself to page 6-20, Table 7, Summary Expenses  -  Education, and there you see funding going up year after year for schools.
Funding goes up each year for schools as you would expect with our school improvement agenda.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mr O'Farrell broke ranks with some people on his side of politics and he's upset quite a few of the, were you surprised that he did that, and what do you think about his actions?
PM: I think Premier O'Farrell proved that you can be a Liberal leader and not be a wrecker. I think that's what he proved.
I think it was very hard for Premier O'Farrell, absolutely, because he was under extraordinary pressure from the Leader of the Opposition to not sign up.
So the Leader of the Opposition was not prepared to put the schoolchildren of New South Wales first. I'm delighted that Premier O'Farrell resisted the pressure and he put kids in his state first.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in the announcement of the New South Wales funding deal, Premier Barry O'Farrell said basically that there was a potential sting in the tail if they didn't sign up.
Is the Federal Government similarly offering that sting in the tail of funding cuts to other states and territories?
PM: Let's be very clear here. The way in which school funding works is that the indexation rate gets triggered off state government cutbacks.
So if you have states cutting back education, then it feeds into indexation to the federal government funds and it drags it down.
If the nation doesn't endorse our plans for school improvement, what you will continue to see is state governments withdrawing effort and reducing indexation rates.
If that happens then the indexation gets pulled down.
At the same time, a number of time-limited national partnerships are coming to an end.
So, what's the future for schools if you do nothing?
State government cutbacks feeding into less money coming from the Federal Government and time-limited national partnerships coming to an end, versus what we have promised, which is new money building on top of everything that's in the national partnerships, new money, higher indexation, stability over time, this issue fixed for generations to come.
And every (inaudible) with a plan for school improvement so people know that there's not only more funds going into education but those more funds are being used to get better results for kids.
More kids reading, more kids writing, more kids doing maths, more kids attaining the high levels of education we are absolutely passionate about making sure that they get.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
PM: I'm delighted to be here at Forrest Primary School.
Thank you to Chris and the team here who have shown us around today. I'm delighted to be here with Senator Kate Lundy.
We've had the opportunity to chat about the school as we've moved around. We've had the opportunity to meet with a lot of kids and to do that in their Building the Education Revolution facility.
There was $3.1 million allocated to this school for a new multi-purpose school hall, so I'm glad to see it's being put to very good use and we've got to see some kids in there today.
Yesterday I released new information about the difference that our plan for school improvement will make for Australian schools.
It is an additional investment of $16.2 billion over six years.
And yesterday we released new figures so around the country, by state and by school system, you can see on average what is planned for your school.
I want to make sure every school is a great school. I want to make sure that every child gets to reach their full potential.
That means for the children who are at the front of the class and can learn more, that they've got a learning plan that's really extending them.
It means for the kids that are at risk of falling behind, that they get the support that they need so they don't just go from grade to grade falling further and further behind, but they too get a great education, learn to read and write and do maths to get the skills they need for their future.
This is important for every child, so it is important for every family and every parent.
But it is also important for all of our nation because we cannot be the strong economy we want to be in the future if our kids miss out during their school years.
When I come to schools I often say that this is where our future is being made, and that is absolutely true.
Our future can only be as good as our school education is for our children.
That's why I am determined that we improve school education right around the country and we invest new resources to do so.
Standing here in this school gives you a flavour of what's at risk if the nation doesn't endorse this plan for better school funding and school improvement.
On average a government school like this in the ACT will get an additional investment of $800,000 compared with a future of going backwards by $500,000.
It is a stark choice, to take a school like this, $800,000 more of investment, or to make $500,000 of cutbacks to this school.
The choice is for the nation to make. It is certainly something that I will continue to be campaigning for; change in our schools.
So today I will write to the premiers and chief ministers who have yet to sign on to our new school funding plan or our plan for school improvement and put to them again the case for change, including the figures that we released yesterday.
As we move towards the federal election, it is becoming clearer and clearer that Australian schools face two futures.
A future of improvement and new resources outlined by the Government, or a future of cutbacks outlined by the Opposition.
I was very disturbed today to see that Mr Pyne, the shadow spokesperson on education, has become so arrogant that he is now criticising Premier O'Farrell for signing up to do the best for his schools.
The words of Christopher Pyne today, that Premier O'Farrell has been conned, are arrogant words.
Premier O'Farrell has studied what is in the interests of his schools. He has been prepared to make tough choices to make new investment possible.
He has been prepared to work across the political divide in the interests of his schools. That should be respected, not criticised by Mr Pyne in what has been an incredibly arrogant display.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Is there any way you can lock in any part of the Gonski reforms?
For instance, with New South Wales, could you legislate that in any way so a future government might need senate approval to dismantle agreements state by state?
PM: If you change the government, you change the nation.
There is only one way of making sure that schools continue to improve with new resources and that's to back in our plans.
If you endorse Mr Abbott's plan, you are endorsing a loss of $16.2 billion for Australia's schools.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if you are providing figures to the premiers today, didn't they already have those figures?
Certainly the premiers have had a lot of data, including all of the work we have done with them to show differences for different schools and different school types.
There was a new take on the data yesterday including both government and non-government schools, and so I will send that to them.
Of course they have had a wealth of information in the in-detail discussions and it was that wealth of information that informed Premier O'Farrell's decision to sign up.
JOURNALIST: Victoria says 50:50 chance of them signing up. Northern Territory still has some pretty significant concerns.
What chance do you give of this getting all the states on board?
PM: It depends on whether or not people are prepared to put our children first.
JOURNALIST: Do you think there is a good chance?
PM: That's a question you're going to have to put to them. It is a question as to whether or not premiers and chief ministers are prepared to put Australia's children first.
JOURNALIST: What happens if they don't sign up? Is there a plan B? Will you reinstitute the National Partnerships funding?
PM: There are two plans on the table here. $16.2 billion of new investment flowing from us; a $16.2 billion plan incorporating the work we have done through National Partnerships and then building on it.
That's the future that we want for Australian schools as compared to schools being cut back. They're the two choices, the two options, that people need to decide between.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's another major choice to be made and that's on carbon pricing at this next election.
The Opposition Leader has mapped out in some detail how he would - the timing of how he would make any changes if he gets into government, how do you think the carbon pricing system stacks up against his?
PM: Let's be very clear about it.
Our carbon pricing system is working to cut carbon pollution.
It is working without any of the ridiculous fear campaign claims made by Mr Abbott coming true.
You would recall Mr Abbott being out there making nonsense claims about a wrecking ball through the economy, astronomical increases in the cost of living. None of that has come true.
And let's remember, the carbon tax is the fixed price for the first three years, then we move to an emissions trading scheme.
That is, by the time of the election, we will be less than two years away from the scheme that Mr Abbott backed when he was a government minister, and was backed by Prime Minister Howard.
So, stability and certainty dictates that we stay with the current system and keep tackling climate change by reducing carbon pollution.
JOURNALIST: What do you make of Direct Action as a plan?
PM: Well it's just a slogan, isn't it?
Have you seen in-detail costings for Direct Action?
Have you seen firm by firm what it would mean for money in, money out for firms?
Have you seen modelling of the impact that it would have on jobs?
Have you seen modelling of the impact it would have on cost of living if penalties are levied against firms as specified by the policy document?
Direct Action is just a slogan. It's not a policy. And it's just a fig leaf to cover up for the fact that Mr Abbott and all of his team are on record as supporting an emissions trading scheme  -  carbon pricing.
That's what they did when they were in government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, as more details emerge about Tony Abbott's planned budget savings, do you still think the Coalition has a $70 billion crater?
PM: I believe that the Coalition has plans for cuts to the bone and we are only just starting to see the first cuts confirmed, and there is so much more to come.
There is nothing that isn't on the table when it comes to the Coalition's cuts.
The Leader of the Opposition said superannuation was safe in their hands, now of course they are cutting superannuation. He has broken his word.
The Leader of the Opposition said that they would defend the Baby Bonus. Now it appears they are not only cutting the Baby Bonus, but they want to cut more deeply into family payments. The Leader of the Opposition has broken his word.
If the Leader of the Opposition has broken his word on those two cutbacks, then how much more is to come?
Well, everything is on the table for deep cuts to the bone, and Mr Abbott can't keep walking away from legitimate questioning about where those cuts will fall.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your personal opinion poll ratings are up this morning but the party vote still seems to be stubbornly low.
Given that you have announced such big measures like disability insurance and education reforms, why isn't it you can't shift that party poll?
PM: Look, I don't comment on opinion polls.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in terms of that Family Tax Benefit payment for new parents, that's actually going to help you get the budget back into surplus if the Coalition does actually oppose that new measure?
PM: Well we've, as you have seen from what we put out on Budget night, we have indicated savings to support our big plans for improvement in schools and our plans for DisabilityCare.
So what we have done with the Baby Bonus, which we think is responsible, replacing it with a benefit in the family payment system, the saving from that will go to improving schools around the country.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tim Mathieson is in the US at the moment. Can you categorically rule out there is no public funding being spent there? And what is he there for?
PM: There is no public funding being spent there and he is on a private trip.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have any comment on Peta Credlin being picked up for drink driving?
PM: No, I don't.
JOURNALIST: Just on Gonski, what happens on 1 July if all the states haven't signed up?
PM: We will be working between now and 30 June to get states and territories signing up.
Now I do understand that the Leader of the Opposition is going in hard with his Liberal Party colleagues to prevent them signing on.
And here we have got Mr Pyne today criticising Barry O'Farrell for having done so, suggesting he was conned; such an arrogant thing to say and do.
So I do understand that in trying to get Liberal states signing on, we are pushing against the directions of the Opposition.
They don't want to see more money in schools; in fact, they have endorsed a plan for cutbacks in schools.
But despite that negativity from the Opposition, I will keep working to realise this vision of better schools for the Australian people and for Australian children.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there is a report today in one of the papers that some of your members in western Sydney are already lining up for jobs in New South Wales or trying to get elected in New South Wales, any comment on that?
PM: I think you will find the members in that report have already issued denials of that report today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on school funding, does your school funding plan deliver a real increase over four years?
PM: I referred you yesterday to the Budget table.
Do not fall for this nonsense being spun by the Opposition.
It is in the Budget. Get the Budget table out and what you see is year by year increases in school funding.
The reason that the Opposition is seeking to confuse about this is they think that if they can confuse people, they will be alleviated of the responsibility of saying very clearly that they stand for cutting schools.
No one should be confused. The Budget figures are there for all to see.
The Opposition stands for cutting schools and that's just a taste of the cuts to the bone that they are planning for the Australian people, and they need to  -  for the Australian people  -  outline everywhere those cuts would fall.
JOURNALIST: If as you say the Liberal states, it is going to be hard to get them to sign up, what guarantee can you give parents come 1 July about the future of school funding for your period of office?
PM: What I can always say to the parents of Australia is every day I will be working to improve funding in Australian schools.
And I can say to the parents of Australia in contrast; every day, the Leader of the Opposition is working to cut funding to Australian schools.
It is on the public record from Premier O'Farrell yesterday that the Leader of the Opposition worked to cut funding to New South Wales schools by seeking to dissuade Premier O'Farrell from signing on to our school funding reforms.
JOURNALIST: But PM, one of the arguments about school funding is that over the last decade or so, we have seen a big increase in school funding but not a related increase in academic achievement.
So what's your position on whether the funding actually lifts school standards, school academic standards?
PM: It lifts school standards, and I can say that to you with absolute confidence.
JOURNALIST: Based on?
PM: Well, based on the work we have done in schools.
The approach we have taken, and we have worked on these reforms all of the time we have been in office.
Transparency, so you knew what was going on; National Partnership Schools, where we combined new resources with new ways of working; and we can show you in those schools that kids are getting a better education.
I can take you to schools around the country where the teachers can give you the before case and the after case, all of the data, the lift in outcomes that has happened because of that money and that new way of working.
We now want to take that out to 9,500 schools around the country.
So, all of this has been carefully done and I would suggest, ask yourself the question.
Would Premier O'Farrell, the man responsible for the biggest schooling system in the country, have thought deeply about this before he signed on given the inevitable political criticism that was going to come from his own side of politics?
He has done that because he understands that those resources and those changed ways of working make a real difference for the kids in his schools.
So this is just the nonsense distraction debate.
The rubbish being spoken about in terms of the Budget figures, the ‘look over here' distraction about the standards debate; let's just put that to one side for the white noise and distraction that it is.
We have shown over five years of working through patience and method that if you are transparent, if you bring new resources, if you measure outcomes, you will get kids a better education.
That's what we want to do in every Australian school.
What Mr Abbott and his team wants to do is cut funding to schooling. That will get kids worse outcomes.
JOURNALIST: We are hearing there are some teachers who aren't so crash hot at understanding the NAPLAN data when they get it back. One of my colleagues wrote about that today.
Do you have any concerns about whether teachers understand or can process enough of that NAPLAN data correctly?
PM: Well I think it is always important to be working to support teachers with professional development and new ways of working.
When I go to schools  -  and I do it very frequently  -  teachers are very focused on the data, not just on NAPLAN data, but their own diagnostic tests about what needs to be done to support a child's education.
Now, there are thousands and thousands and thousands of people out there teaching. Do some of them need support? Inevitably, yes.
Just the same way do some journalists occasionally need their grammar corrected? Inevitably, yes.
So in any human occupation, are there people who need some support and assistance? Absolutely.
The question then becomes, do you have a systematic way of providing it so you are building those teachers' skills, or do you just ignore it and cut some funds out of their school?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do we need tax reform in the next term do you think?
PM: We have undertaken tax reform and we will never support an increase to the rate of the GST or broadening its base.
That's the plan of the other side of politics front and centre now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how are you going to win this election? How?
PM: Look, people will make their choice on 14 September.
My job is to keep building the things that make a real difference for our nation's future. That's what I'm doing here today.
And to make clear to Australians the choice and what's at risk on 14 September, and I'm doing that today too.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the polling would be a factor when premiers consider whether to sign up to Gonski, that they might be looking and thinking, well the polling indicates a Labor loss and so therefore why negotiate?
Do you think it would be a factor?
PM: For any responsible decision-maker, the only factor that should ever drive them is what is in the best interests of the children whose education is ultimately their responsibility.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Melbourne
PM: Well I'm delighted to be here with Nicola Roxon and with our Labor candidate for Gellibrand Tim Watts and I'd like to thank this wonderful, wonderful school.
I am not sure if our principal is in the back there but thank you to her and thank you to all the students for the very warm welcome we have received here.
Of course we are only two or three minutes' walk from where my home is in Altona, so it is great to be here in a local school.
I have been here today teaching a class about economics and the Government's Budget.
At the same time the Minister for School Education, Minister Garrett has been teaching a music class in a school.
We are trying to show our teaching skills and no doubt teachers around the country will have a view about how well or how badly we have gone.
But we are trying to make a point about the importance of teaching, good quality teaching, to the future of Australian education and to our children reaching their full potential.
Making sure that teachers are high quality and we are supporting teachers to be their best is a big part of our National Plan for School Improvement; tied to new funding for Australia's schools.
Here in Victoria I want these children, the children I have met today and the children in Victorian schools to benefit from our new plans for education funding reform.
There is a difference of $4 billion for Victoria.
On average that means an extra $1.8 million per school.
I have reached agreement with Premier O'Farrell in New South Wales, and I don't want there to be a situation where if you drive across the border, on one side of the border there are children in schools that are better resourced, getting a better education, and on the Victorian side of the border, there are schools with less resources and less ability to give those kids a great education.
I don't want Victorian students to be left behind.
That is why I am very determined to work with the Premier here and premiers and chief ministers around the country to roll out our new funding plans for Australian schools.
Compared with just having the old system roll on, our new system will make a difference of $16.2 billion. That is a lot of money but it will come tied with new ways of working.
It will mean really practical things; more literacy and numeracy coaches, more ability to have specialist teachers, more ability to support teachers to be honing their skills and their craft so that we have got better and better teachers in front of classrooms, more ability to afford the equipment that schools want.
These are really important changes for Australian education. They matter for every child in every school.
They matter for children here in Victoria, in Victorian schools, and today I want to say very clearly to the Premier of Victoria and to the Government of Victoria, I want to work with you to put more resources into Victorian schools.
I am happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: On the question of resources, the Opposition and quite a few state ministers are suggesting that those figures are changing or might not be correct. What do you say to that?
PM: The figures are correct. The figures are in the Budget papers.
The Shadow Minister for Education, Mr Pyne has been on a deliberate campaign of distraction here because he doesn't want to say clearly to the Australian people that he and the Leader of the Opposition stand for schools being $16.2 billion worse off.
So he will say anything to try and distract from that.
But Premier O'Farrell today has confirmed yet again that he signed up to this arrangement with the Federal Government because it meant better resources for the children in his schools and better outcomes for the children in his schools.
So, people can look at that; a Liberal leader, Premier O'Farrell saying better resources, better outcomes for kids as opposed to Mr Pyne's silly distractions.
Obviously those silly distractions should fall away.
This is about a better deal for Australian education.
The difference between my plan and Mr Abbott's plan is more than $16 billion.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned, Prime Minister, with the deadline of 30 June and you have just got one state signed up so far?
I understand you have sent a letter to the Victorian Government basically giving them an ultimatum. Would you like things to be moving perhaps a little quicker than they are on the issue?
PM: We are working hard on it but we need to have the deadline. We need to have the deadline so schools know what funding position they are going to be in for calendar year 2014.
Schools make plans just like everybody else makes plans and they need to know what money is going to flow.
That is why the deadline is 30 June and it is up to premiers and chief ministers to make sure that they work with us to meet that deadline.
JOURNALIST: Are you closer to a deal with any of the states or territories?
PM: Well the Victorian Minister for Education has said that he thinks it's 50/50 here in Victoria.
I would hope that the Premier focuses on it and that it is a lot better than that.
I really do not see why the Premier here in Victoria would want to have his schools less resourced than the schools Premier O'Farrell runs just across the border.
Just think about it, you would be driving through Albury-Wodonga and one side of the border would be better funded schools and the other side of the border worse funded schools.
That is not a vision for the future of Victoria.
JOURNALIST: How likely is that to happen though? Is that a reality?
PM: Well Premier O'Farrell's been able to do it and if Premier O'Farrell's been able to do it, running the biggest school system in the country, then I believe other premiers and chief ministers can do it too.
JOURNALIST: Kevin Rudd says in a blog post he has changed his mind on same sex marriage. Are you reconsidering your position?
PM: What I have done as Prime Minister is make sure that for the Labor Party that there is a conscience vote.
That means every member is free to come to the parliament and vote in accordance with their conscience.
That is what happened when this was voted upon in the Australian Parliament.
Obviously individual Labor members, including Kevin Rudd, will use that freedom to reflect deeply and to form their own views about same sex marriage.
Kevin has done that, every Labor member is free to do that.
The problem that we have in the Australian Parliament is on the other side of politics, conservative members are not free to follow their conscience.
They have to follow Mr Abbott's party dictates.
When you look around the world and at those nations that have changed their laws and embraced same sex marriage, a hallmark of those nations has been that conservative leaders have given their members a conscience vote.
So the step forward that we need to see here is that Mr Abbott does what I have already done for the Labor Party, and that Mr Abbott gives his members a conscience vote.
JOURNALIST: Is there any chance that you will change your position on it?
PM: Look, I have made my position clear. But I have also made it clear that I don't ask any Labor member to vote with me.
What I ask them to do is to think deeply and to vote in accordance with their conscience.
JOURNALIST: Today the top Victorian road cop said that people who, P platers should stay on their P plates until they are 25. What do you think about that?
PM: That is a matter for the Victorian State Government.
JOURNALIST: Back on Kevin, are you disappointed with the timing of it, taking away attention from the education reforms?
PM: That is a matter for Kevin. Every Labor member has the ability to vote in any debate on same sex marriage in accordance with their conscience.
JOURNALIST: South Australia's taken some moves to ban betting ads during televised sportscasts. Would you like to see something happen, or a quicker process, federally?
PM: We are already making change happen.
I have been very clear about this. It just drives me crazy when I am sitting in front of sporting coverage and what you are getting is discussion of live betting odds instead of getting to watch your favourite sport.
So I can understand how frustrating this is for people, for sports lovers.
Because we understand how frustrating it is for sports lovers, we are already working on a code of conduct.
That work is proceeding and proceeding quickly so that we can make a difference to this coverage of odds for sporting events.
JOURNALIST: Andrew Wilkie said this morning that Tom Waterhouse was showing contempt to parliament by not appearing in the parliamentary inquiry into gambling. What do you think about that?
PM: I will leave that as a matter for Mr Wilkie if he wants to comment on it.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that Tom Waterhouse-
PM: I won't be commenting on the work of parliamentary committees. The people on those committees can comment on it.
JOURNALIST: On the Australians sentenced in Dubai. Is Australia making any further representations on behalf of Matthew Joyce?
PM: Can I just say I can understand how incredibly a distressing time this is for Mr Joyce and for his family.
They have lived with pressure and uncertainty for four years and now have got the worst possible news.
We have made representations in the past on behalf of Mr Joyce and Mr Lee, particularly about the amount of time they were forced to wait.
We will continue to make representations and we will continue to provide consular support.
We will be there continuing to provide assistance for Mr Joyce and his family as they deal with such devastating news.
JOURNALIST: Has Australia received an extradition order for Angus Reed who was found guilty in absentia in Australia?
PM: We don't comment on individual cases.
JOURNALIST: One more question about gay marriage. Do you think the tide is swinging the other way, and do you think Labor MPs will change their mind over time towards gay marriage?
PM: Have a look at how people voted when this was the subject of a vote in the parliament relatively recently.
I think inevitably over time some people will look and think again. Mr Rudd's obviously chosen to do that.
But you will see the way in which Labor members voted during that debate. They are on the record as to what they believe about same sex marriage.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that you will ever change your stance on it?
PM: I have made my stance clear. But the important thing for me is that members of my political party can exercise their conscience when it comes to voting.
And the next big change that needs to happen is that Mr Abbott needs to follow in the footsteps of conservative leader John Key in New Zealand, conservative Prime Minister David Cameron in the United Kingdom and do what those conservative leaders have done and allow their members a conscience vote.
JOURNALIST: When you see the other countries passing legislation on marriage equality, what do you make of that?
PM: What I make of it is what I have just said, that it is obviously an issue of public debate.
Members of Parliament reflect public debates in their own way in accordance with their own conscience, and a hallmark of those debates in other countries has been that everybody has been able to come to the parliament and vote in accordance with what they believe.
JOURNALIST: How do you think that Australia gains from its young people travelling overseas to study? Are you planning more links with overseas schools particularly in Asia?
PM: We certainly are big supporters of young people travelling overseas to study and schools having links.
This has been part of our vision from our Asian Century white paper.
You would see in that what we call the Bridge Program that brings schools in Australia into partnership with schools in our region, and of course all of that will be turbo-charged by the NBN because people will be able to interact as if they were in the same room.
And we are big supporters of Australians studying overseas too.
When I was relatively recently in China, I announced another step forward in us supporting young Australians studying in our region, and of course we have got the biggest scholarship program that there has ever been to bring people from our region to study in Australia.
From time to time you would hear people talk about the ‘Colombo plan' and we need a ‘Colombo plan'. What we do now dwarfs the Colombo plan. We do so much more.
Thank you very much.


Sydney
PM: Can I say it is a very great pleasure to be here. I am joined by John Murphy, the Member for Reid.
We are in a wonderful school, Auburn West School. Thank you very much to John, the principal, for having us here. The kids here have been absolutely fantastic. So a big, big thank you to all of the staff and students here.
What I've got to do today is read a story to these kids and that is part of story time right around the country; an initiative today to get kids around the country all reading the same story at the same time.
It has been a great pleasure to participate in it.
I came today to read a story to these children first, because it is such good fun to do, but second because we want to put a spotlight on the kind of improvements that our National Plan for School Improvement will bring.
It will bring what we refer to as the reading blitz, a very strong focus from kindy to year three on literacy.
We want to make sure all of our children can read and write; that they are literate.
If our kids don't get those foundation stones in the early years at school, then it can be so hard to make that up later.
If our kids don't get basic skills  -  reading, writing, doing maths  -  then the world of higher learning is locked away from them.
So our new plan for schools is about improving outcomes for kids; more kids reading and writing the way we want them to.
That is, more kids reading and writing at the standards that we know they need to read and write at in order to succeed.
In schools around the country through our National Partnership programs, we have shown that if you combine new resources with new ways of working, you make a difference. You make a difference for the children.
Put simply, they get a better education, they achieve at a higher level.
Now we want to roll that out right around the country to all 9,500 schools.
I'm standing here in New South Wales and the Premier of New South Wales has signed on to our new funding plan and our plan for school improvement.
That means $5 billion extra for New South Wales. And I am calling on other states and territories to do what the Premier of New South Wales has done and to put the kids in their state and their territory first and to sign on with us to make sure that those children, their teachers, their classrooms, have the resources that they need for generations and generations to come.
This is important for every child because it is about every child reaching their full potential.
But it is also important for our whole nation's future because we cannot be the strong economy and strong nation we want to be in the future if our kids aren't getting a great education.
I am very concerned that Mr Abbott's plan is a very stark contrast to all of this.
We want to make sure that our schools are better resourced and our kids are achieving at a higher level.
Unfortunately, Mr Abbott has said that he wants to see schools go backwards.
The difference between his plan for the future and our plan for the future is $16.2 billion tied to our plan for school improvement to drive better outcomes for kids.
Australia's children are worth it. They're worth our investment. And I will keep working to get premiers and chief ministers around the country signing on to our plan for school improvement.
I'm happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: You're talking about Barry O'Farrell signing on to your Gonski reforms. Why do you think you are finding it difficult to get the other states and territories to also sign on? Especially South Australia, Tasmania, and even the ACT, they're Labor states and territories?
PM: Premier O'Farrell here had to work closely with us through officials and he had to make some difficult decisions on his own budget. This is $14.5 billion of extra resources for schools.
Overwhelmingly, two for one, coming from the Federal Government, but states do have to step forward and put in some extra money too and that does require them to make budget decisions. And so, some time needs to be taken to do that.
As states and territories work through that, I'm obviously concerned that the Leader of the Opposition is out there lobbying to stop this happening in schools.
He did do that in New South Wales.
Journalist: But would you have expected the Labor states to have signed on by now, especially South Australia and Tasmania?
PM: I've set a deadline for 30 June and my expectation for the country is that states and territories sign on and meet that deadline whatever pressures are put on them from the Liberal side of politics, that they sign on and meet that deadline because that is what puts our kids first and improves their education.
JOURNALIST: What will you do if they do not meet that deadline?
PM: We have been very clear that this plan for school improvement and new school resources needs to be signed on to by 30 June.
Schools are entitled to know what funding position they are going to be in for school year 2014.
That is why we have set the deadline for 30 June.
My focus is on the days before that deadline and getting people to sign up.
JOURNALIST: Do you agree with Penny Wong's criticism of the Australian Christian Lobby regarding their comments [inaudible]?
PM: I endorse Penny Wong's comments from yesterday. I've seen what Penny had to say and I absolutely endorse her comments from yesterday.
There is no place for any form of bigotry in our public discussion.
JOURNALIST: The Salvation Army has recorded a 12 per cent jump in the number of people seeking their assistance and they say it is because of the Government's policy forcing single parents on to Newstart Allowance. How concerned are you about that?
PM: Let us firstly be very clear about the change that we have made.
What we have done is that there was a group of single parents who were on different rules to single parents generally.
So a change had been made some years ago by the Howard Government.
There had been a group that was grandfathered, and so we had single parents in exactly the same positions on two different schemes of assistance, and we moved to equalise that.
People with children are not simply in receipt of Newstart benefit.
People with children are also in receipt of family payments and benefits like our Schoolkids Bonus.
Of course, I want to make sure that we are working with single parents around the country. They do an incredible job.
It is not easy to be a single person caring for a child, I absolutely respect and admire what single parents do.
But I also want to work with them so they get the benefits of work opportunities because it is unambiguously true that it is better for children if they grow up in a home where someone works.
That is what we are aiming for.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one of the major concerns for young people today is the proliferation of gambling. It appears the Government's tough talk in public is quite different behind the scenes with the television industry?
PM: You are probably referring to a story on the front of the Sydney Morning Herald and already today the lobby group involved has said that the story is incorrect.
JOURNALIST: What sort of reception are you expecting at the Community Cabinet tonight?
PM: Well they are always interesting, Community Cabinet. What I tend to find is people are less focused on the issues that are in the newspapers or on the TV and very focused on them, their families and their local community.
I'm sure we will get a wide range of issues and some of them will be very, very local ones.
JOURNALIST: Back to Gonski, Christopher Pyne has sent a letter to all the state premiers and territory leaders in the last couple of days. He is suggesting that if the coalition were to win the election, that he would fund a deal that is better than Gonski. What do you make of him sending these letters out?
PM: Let us just get a few facts on the table.
Christopher Pyne has sent a letter to the media. It hasn't got to premiers or chief ministers yet.
So you are one of the happy recipients of the letter.
It is just a pity that none of the premiers and chief ministers are happy recipients of the letter.
And I think that is telling you this is a media stunt to get journalists asking questions like you have just asked.
This is an absurd proposition from Christopher Pyne, an absolutely absurd proposition.
Let's just cut to the chase here. It's got embarrassing.
Christopher Pyne is thrashing around with every distraction he can think of because he doesn't want to stand in front of a television camera and say and that he and Mr Abbott stand for schools missing out on $16.2 billion.
That is the truth and I understand that Mr Abbott and Mr Pyne will say ‘look over here, look over here', distract, distract, fudge, fudge, because they don't want to admit they stand for schools being $16.2 billion worse off.
At some point the thrashing around has got to stop and Mr Abbott and Mr Pyne have to say they stand for schools being $16.2 billion dollars worse off and then we'll have the community debate about whether or not our nation values our children more than that, and our nation values our future more than that.
Because you cannot make schools $16.2 billion worse off without hurting the quality of education kids are getting and hurting the economic prospects of our country for the long term.
So let's just have the rubbish go to one side and let's focus on what is true in this debate, and that $16.2 billion figure is absolutely true.
JOURNALIST: An additional 19 charges have been laid against Craig Thomson today, fraud charges. You must be pleased that he is no longer linked with the Labor Party?
PM: I am not going to comment on a legal matter.JOURNALIST: Just back on the Salvo's report, can we expect to see more initiatives to help single parents find work?
PM: What we have rolled out, and we have rolled out supports for people, rolled out supports to assist people to find employment, rolled out supports with childcare.
They have already been announced and budgeted for.
JOURNALIST: But obviously those parents say that the supports that have been rolled out so far [inaudible]?
PM: Well the approach we have taken is the one you have heard today.JOURNALIST: How worried are you about these seats in Sydney's west in the election on 14 September?
PM: We are here doing what I do regularly which is get out to communities.
I go to a lot of schools, I like coming to schools, I very much enjoyed being at this school.
Thank you very much to John and the team for having us here and we are on another Community Cabinet and as you know we do those very, very regularly and we have done them right around the country.
It is always good to have them and I am looking forward to tonight.
JOURNALIST: How worried are you about this area?
PM: We are here doing what we do and we will listen to community members tonight.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it is acceptable that the TV industry still wants to put live odds [inaudible]?
PM: I have made my attitude very clear to this. I have been asked on a number of occasions.
It annoys me, as someone who watches sporting events, that you get discussion about the odds and it worries me too, that kids when they are watching TV and watching sport are not talking about the things we would like them to be talking about which is the game itself and the team and how the team is working together and how good the individual performances are, but talking about the live odds.
So it does concern me.
We have just finished a public consultation period for the form of the code to deal with all of this.
Minister Conroy is obviously overseeing that and the report today in the Sydney Morning Herald, already the lobby group involved has been very clear that that report is wrong.
JOURNALIST: What about banning live odds during children's television hours?
PM: I am not going to prejudge what will come out of the methodical process that Senator Conroy has been going through.
JOURNALIST: But is there a backbench revolt being led by Stephen Jones against the Minister?
PM: Stephen Jones put a motion on notice for consideration in the last Caucus meeting. That is a very regular part of our procedures.
Thank you very much. 


Sydney
KYLE: Good morning Prime Minister.
JACKIE O: Morning.
PM: Good morning, it's great to be here in the studio.
JACKIE O: You look lovely.
KYLE: I love when you visit.
PM: The guys were telling me that they cleaned their desk down. There's a bottle of Ajax spray there. I am very impressed.
JACKIE O: We don't often do things like that for guests.
KYLE: I thought he said there was, it looked like there was Ajax on the table and I thought you know what the entertainment industry is like. They got to clean their desks up because you know they're all wild this crew.
JACKIE O: What's on the agenda today, Prime Minister?
PM: On the agenda today, I'm visiting a school, talking about better school funding, a better deal for our kids and then tonight we've got a Community Cabinet which is when members of the local community get to come and ask questions and have a discussion with us about what they think needs to be there.
JACKIE O: Do you like that?
PM: Yeah I do like it. I like getting out and about and it's just a genuine talk with people.
They can be unpredictable and the hardest, hardest questions always come from children in the audience.
So you know if there's a ten year old or a 12 year old with their hand up that it's going to be an absolute zinger of a question, we've sort of got to take it if a child wants to ask a question.
JACKIE O: What do you do?
KYLE: Given by their parent or is it really their question do you think?
PM: I think there's a mix, sometimes they're there, little shaking hands, reading a question and you think mum and dad's had a bit of a hand in this. But sometimes they're obviously just questions the kids have come up with and they're really hard ones.
KYLE: So you just IQ The Voice when you're out doing these things at night so you've got some TV when you get home or what?
PM: When I get home, well it depends how late it is, sometimes I've still got work to do.
The paperwork chases you around so you've got to get it done sometime.
Sometimes I'll flick on the TV, do a little bit of knitting, wind down a bit.
JACKIE O: You knitted the little booties for Fifi's baby.
PM: I did knit the little booties for Fifi's baby.
KYLE: That's nice.
JACKIE O: I was very impressed that you did that.
PM: Thank you.
JACKIE O: That was nice of you to take the time out to do that.
KYLE: Did she really do it or did someone else knit and you just did the photo?
PM: I absolutely knitted the booties.
KYLE: Because you are a knitter!
PM: Yes, I am a knitter. I'm just doing a cardigan at the moment.
My niece Jenna is having a baby in July so I've just finished the body of it, actually did the casting off last night.
KYLE: So when do you rest?
JACKIE O: So is that like your meditation, your zoning out, the knitting?
PM: Absolutely, because you come back from a long day and your still, you know, thoughts racing at a million miles an hour.
Often I've come in quite late, I've got to get up early and if you just chucked yourself into bed like that you'd just be lying there.
Whereas the knitting, it takes enough of your attention that you can't really be thinking about things at a million miles an hour, but not so much of it that it's winding you up rather than winding you down.
JACKIE O: What about the day's press that's been said about you, do you watch that on TV? Do you take those things, read those things at the end of the day and have a look at what they've been saying? No?
PM: Not particularly, I mean I look at the newspapers in the morning of course because I come and do interviews and you might ask me about something that's in the newspapers.
KYLE: You just look for yourself like I do? Because I flick through that in a heartbeat. I'm like ‘I'm not in it, I'm not watching it'.
PM: I look for you first and then I kind of track the political stories and at the end of the day I'm not normally anywhere where I could watch the news but we do get media summaries so I get a taste of what's been on the news.
KYLE: You don't have a TV in the car?
PM: No we don't. There's a video thing that would work if the car was stationary rather than moving.
KYLE: I know a bloke down in Leichhardt, he can fix that.
PM: Right.
JACKIE O: He can do a dodgy deal can he?
KYLE: A couple of bucks, yeah.
PM: I've never used it.
JACKIE O: We had Tony Abbott on the show, was it yesterday he was on?
KYLE: I don't know, can't remember.
JACKIE O: Might have been yesterday and we asked him a couple of yes/no questions and played a little yes/no game with him and, have a listen to how he responded to a couple of our questions.
PM: Okay.
KYLE: Here's Mr Abbott.
JACKIE O: Have you ever had a dream about being the Prime Minister? Yes or no?
ABBOTT: Not while I'm asleep. 
JACKIE O: Right, fair enough. Have you thought about your victory speech if you were to win?
ABBOTT: The truth is yes. 
JACKIE O: I will just take that, thank you Mr Abbott 
KYLE: That's when we should play ‘I'm a dreamer, I wouldn't...' What do you think?
PM: You're getting all the hard hitting news scoops, that's fantastic.
KYLE: Yeah we are.
PM: Call me old fashioned but I just think you probably should let people go and vote and then worry about what sort of speech you're going to give.
KYLE: Right.
PM: I think the Australia people voting, that's important.
JACKIE O: That's the important part.
KYLE: When is this thing happening? The election?
PM: It's happening on 14 September.
KYLE: It's that close?
PM: It's that close.
JACKIE O: It's very close.
KYLE: I saw a poll the other day that said you were even.
JACKIE O: Neck and neck.
PM: Look, there was a poll earlier this week, in fact there were two polls earlier this week. They come, they go, you can't get too distracted by it.
KYLE: Who does those polls? Are they real do you think or are they fudge?
PM: They're polling companies that are telephoning to real people, yes.
KYLE: Right. But I've realised over the years because we do these internal polls as well where they ring you up and go do you like this song? Or do you like Kyle and Jackie? Or do you like Dicko over at 2UE? And I've realised if you're answering a survey on the phone, you're a loser. You've got better things, normal people we all go no or we make up some lie.
JACKIE O: But Kyle, they are still the people that are voting. So those people will be voting regardless.
KYLE: So losers voting as well.
JACKIE O: Well they will, yeah.
KYLE: All sorts of people.
JACKIE O: The Prime Minister's not going to agree with you on that.
PM: I want to specifically say I am not endorsing that comment.
JACKIE O: Now Prime Minister, it's very rare we get you in the studio so we have some options for you to play a game this morning.
KYLE: Don't look at me; I've got no clue what's happening.
JACKIE O: Yes you do, don't play dumb.
KYLE: Oh this is what we normally play with movie stars or if Beyoncé was in we'd play a game or something like that.
JACKIE O: And usually we don't give them a choice but because you're the Prime Minister, you get the choice this morning.
KYLE: Run through some of the game options for the Prime Minister.
JACKIE O: Okay. One is spin the bottle.
PM: Spin the bottle, right.
KYLE: How long since you've done that one?
PM: So long ago I've forgotten.
KYLE: Last time that ended up with you kissing the Premier Barry O'Farrell.
PM: I remember that, I actually did something with Barry that day.
KYLE: Oh he came over with the bottle and was like ‘right let's get this game on.'
JACKIE O: The next one is crack it, which involves cracking eggs on your forehead. Some are raw, some are cooked. Don't give us your answer yet. Hear me out, hear me out.
PM: Okay. This is like, do you want to be hung, drawn and quartered, boiled in oil, that's the options.
JACKIE O: Or you can do sing the next line, which is we play you a song and you have to sing the next line. It's a game. See if you can sing the lyrics.
PM: Yes.
KYLE: Now that's a good game. It's easy.
JACKIE O: I really don't have any more. The only other one I had was rolls of cash but your definitely, you're not going to want to do that one.
KYLE: Do you want me to explain rolls of cash?
PM: Rolls of cash.
KYLE: We've played it before. We get a big inflatable pool, we fill it up with honey and money, people strip down to their undies and roll around and whatever money sticks to them they get to keep.
PM: Okay.
KYLE: There's a lot of money in there.
PM: Right, I could consult Wayne Swan or I could just say no at this point.
KYLE: Any of those games tickle your fancy?
PM: They all sound very hard.
JACKIE O: Sing the next line will be fun.
PM: Sing the next line, you think?
JACKIE O: Yeah I reckon you'll be good at it.
PM: I don't really do much singing, but we'll do our best.
JACKIE O: Okay, good on you Prime Minister.
KYLE: Now I've thought you might choose sing the next line so I've made the songs 80s songs.
PM: Okay, there's some possibility I might know.
JACKIE O: I reckon you will.
KYLE: Imagine when you had the curly hair, you had the tube top on, you were out at the clubs.
PM: The poodle perm, okay.
JACKIE O: Alright, let's hear the first song.
KYLE: Hang on, we've got to start the game properly with the introduction and everything. Here we go. Playing this morning is the Prime Minister Julia Gillard. 80s songs are ready to go.
JACKIE O: The song will play, as soon as it stops you have to continue singing the next line, Ms Gillard here we go.
KYLE: If you don't know, doesn't matter, you've got plenty of chances.
PM: Okay.
KYLE: Up to 400 chances.
PM: I'm going to be here for a long time.
JACKIE O: You've got to try and get as many as you can.
KYLE: Here's the first song.
[Clip of Freedom, George Michael]
PM: Doesn't it just repeat, all we have to see?
KYLE: No.
PM: No? Okay!
JACKIE O: It's the chorus! Freedom-
KYLE: Don't give away the clue!
PM: Freedom? Yes.
JACKIE O: Okay go on next song.
KYLE: Let's go for one that everyone knows.
PM: Just to take the pressure off.
KYLE: You want some of the Feds to come in and back you up?
PM: I wish I had one of those things in my ear now; I could get some answers through.
KYLE: Everyone knows this song.
JACKIE O: You will know it, I promise you.
KYLE: Chuck the actions in if need be.
[Clip of YMCA, Village People]
PM: It's fun to stay at the YMCA.
KYLE: Sing it.
JACKIE O: Sing it Julia.
PM: That was as close to singing as I get!
KYLE: That was very good.
PM: I could do the hand actions, but no.
JACKIE O: Okay, next one Kyle. Julia, I want to really hear your singing voice.
KYLE: She's shy. What if we all sung?
JACKIE O: What if we sung with you?
PM: Alright.
JACKIE O: Okay, let's go, next one then.
[Clip of Like a Virgin, Madonna]
JACKIE O: What are you playing this for?
KYLE: Ready, ready.
PM: Like Madonna singing a really old song.
JACKIE O: You're not going to say it!
KYLE: She's too good!
JACKIE O: Making sure you're being clever.
KYLE: Okay hang on, one more.
[Clip of Bad, Michael Jackson] 
PM: Oh, that was it?
KYLE: Remember, cause I'm bad.
PM: Yeah, I'm bad, et cetera.
JACKIE O: Are you worried they're going to get a grab of you saying ‘because I'm bad, I'm bad'. Is that what she's worried about?
KYLE: No and I agree, that would be bad. Okay, one more song.
Yeah, you know that channel Nine News is going to put that sort of song montage together and then they come back and go ‘mmm'.
We'll do one more song. I can't think of anything they can do to make this look dodgy.
JACKIE O: Okay.
PM: Okay.
[Clip of Livin' On A Prayer, Bon Jovi]
PM: I'm halfway there.
KYLE: Do not come to Australia's Got Talent, all I'm saying.
PM: No I won't!
KYLE: You can come and sit in the audience but if you walk on stage I'm going to go errr.
PM: This is a deep seated Gillard family fear, singing in public.
JACKIE O: Is it really?
PM: Yes it is, like this is very dangerous terrain for me. We're Welsh originally, we migrated from Wales, the Welsh are supposed to be fantastic singers, and the only Welsh people on the planet who can't sing are me and my family.
JACKIE O: No!
PM: One of my earliest memories is of being in church with my mother elbowing my father going ‘quieter John, quieter' because he's singing a hymn out of tune with the rest of the congregation. So this is actually psychologically very difficult for me.
KYLE: I love that.
JACKIE O: Oh god, it's bringing back terrible memories.
KYLE: Where's Timmy?
PM: Timmy's not here today.
KYLE: Where is he?
PM: Well he's been away in the States; he's on his way back today so he'll be in Canberra.
KYLE: Boys trip, lucky thing.
JACKIE O: While you're here are you going to stay in Kirribilli House tonight?
PM: I will be.
JACKIE O: I love that place.
PM: You love that place?
JACKIE O: I love it!
KYLE: Don't tell the people where the Prime Minister is!
JACKIE O: I'm assuming because she's in Sydney she would be staying there.
PM: I am staying there, but there's no racing down the hill, eggs rolling, no games on the grass.
KYLE: It's all quiet on the home front tonight.
PM: It's all quiet, I'll get back there quite late, there's a Community Cabinet.
KYLE: One last thing I wanted to offer you because I saw that clunker you're in. That old car, that old commodore thing.
PM: Are you insulting C1?
KYLE: How old is it? It's got some age on it Prime Minister.
PM: Yeah, I saw a news report. I never know anything about cars but I saw a news report saying something like it was 14 years old or 16 years old or something like that.
KYLE: How do the rest of us go out and buy a new car when you've got the clunker there. But I suppose it's quite expensive because it's bullet proof and all that stuff.
PM: Well it does have some special powers.
JACKIE O: So what are you offering?
KYLE: I've got a surprise for you down in the car park.
PM: A surprise in the car park?
KYLE: I'm going to play the ad, I'm going to walk you downstairs to your fleet, the clunker fleet, and I've got something there that's going to blow your socks off.
JACKIE O: I don't even know about this.
KYLE: No you don't. I've just decided on the spare of the moment.
JACKIE O: Okay.
PM: Okay.
JACKIE O: So when we cross to you when you're downstairs?
KYLE: I'll be on the phone. But today, you are really going to be like Queen Elizabeth.
JACKIE O: Are you offering your car?
KYLE: You ruin everything!
JACKIE O: I think we all connected the dots on that one.
KYLE: No, no, we'll go downstairs, just see what you think.
PM: Okay.
KYLE: Got the flags on it ready to go.
PM: I was actually talking to someone this morning who saw you putting petrol in your car yesterday.
KYLE: Nothing escapes you!
PM: I have people everywhere.
KYLE: How did they see that?
PM: Nothing escapes me.
KYLE: The Prime Minister and I will be from the garage  -  oh the police don't want me to say exactly where we are! We'll be back straight after this. Thank you for coming in.
PM: Thank you.


Sydney
I was so sad to learn this evening that Hazel Hawke has died.
Ordinary Australians saw the best of themselves in Hazel  -  many women of her generation will feel they have lost a friend.
Hazel was one of those rare people who are liked and respected in equal measure.  Her warmth and generosity of spirit in success were only matched by her courage and dignity in adversity.
Bob Hawke's public achievements in the union movement and in Government are unthinkable without Hazel's steadfast support.    
After her diagnosis with Alzheimer's disease, Hazel's life of service to Australia continued in ever more trying circumstances.
We have lost a wonderful Australian.
In coming days the Government will discuss with her family an appropriate way to recognise Hazel's contribution to public life. 


Sydney
PM: Today is a very sad day for the workers at Ford who have heard the news today that their jobs will come to an end in October 2016.
This is a very sad day for those workers and for their families. Our thoughts are with them on what is an incredibly difficult day for them.
This is also a day of anxiety and sadness for the communities of Geelong and Broadmeadows, and also for those who work in the supply chain supplying automotive parts to Ford.
I want to take this opportunity to explain what will happen from here and what government is determined to do in these circumstances.
First, to the workers at Ford; these workers are proud working people who do a great job making Ford cars.
This is very hard news for them today given how proud they are of what they do and the significance of Ford and their work at Ford in their lives and the lives of their families.
For those working people as they absorb this news, I want to say to them we will make sure that you are not left behind.
The Government will be providing the most intensive form of employment assistance that we can provide to help people as they source opportunities for the days beyond October 2016 when Ford ceases to manufacture in Australia and those jobs come to an end.
We will be working with you to help you get a new opportunity beyond Ford.
For those in the supply chain; we understand that this is a day of anxiety for you.
We are already working with automotive suppliers to help them diversify their markets.
Today I announce that we are adding to that assistance.
As a Federal Government, we will put an additional $10 million into that work and the Victorian Government has committed an additional $2 million creating a fund of $12 million to assist those who work in the supply chain.
And to the communities of Geelong and Broadmeadows who also would be very distressed today absorbing this news.
We want to work with you and support you as your communities look for the new sources of strength and opportunity in your area; the new places where people will get work and make a living.
Today I announce that we will be creating a fund to work in support of those communities.
The Federal Government will allocate $30 million to this fund, the Victorian Government will allocate $9 million to this fund, and today I call on Ford to make a substantial contribution to this fund as well.
The fund will work with local communities so that we can source new opportunities for those communities, new work for people to have in the place where they are proud to work and so happy to live.
For Australians generally, I understand many people will hear today's news and it will worry them. I understand that and I want to say to Australians that here in our nation we show time after time how good we are when we work together.
We worked together through the global financial crisis to create the strong economy that we have today: an economy that is growing, an economy with low unemployment, with low debt, with low interest rates and with job opportunities for people.
The economy that we have today has many sources of strength but the high Australian dollar is putting a lot of pressure on some industries, particularly manufacturing.
We have been working to respond with our billion-dollar plan for Australian jobs so that we can continue to be a country that manufactures goods that we want locally and that the world wants to buy from us.
We will continue with all of that work, including in automotive because Australians are very good at manufacturing goods, and we will continue to be a nation that manufactures goods for the future.
I will turn now to Dr Emerson for some comments and then we will take questions.
MINISTER EMERSON: Thanks PM. One of the considerations that affected Ford's viability is the fact that it operated on a relatively small scale by international standards, and even by national standards.
Ford is producing less than 40,000 vehicles per annum. That's headed towards around 30,000, whereas Toyota and Holden are producing more than 90,000 vehicles a year each.
Ford has established a factory in China that is producing 250,000 vehicles per annum so the economies of scale were not there for Ford's operations in Australia and that has been a major consideration.
I have had the opportunity to speak briefly to Mike Devereux, the CEO of Holden and also to Max Yasuda, the CEO of Toyota.
Mr Devereux has already put out a release about its commitment to continue to working with the Australian Government.
They have identified opportunities through to the year 2022 and that's good news for Australian manufacturing, and auto manufacturing in particular.
And Max Yasuda, in a brief conversation, indicated that Toyota would continue to invest in and operate here in Australia.
As the Prime Minister said, this is a very sad day for the workers.
This is an incredibly loyal workforce at Ford and they would be understandably distressed, as would their families and the broader communities of Geelong and Broadmeadows and those suppliers as well.
We will continue to work with them to develop alternative jobs, alternative industries for these areas that actually do have a very positive future. But there is no doubt that today is a sad day for those workers and their families.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you promised Ford last year $34 million of assistance. Ford says it still expects to receive that money, does the Government intend to still give it to them?
PM: Yes we do because that $34 million package was about the models that are going to be produced and to be produced until October 2016.
So that money was pledged for a purpose and it will still be used for that same purpose. That is, enabling jobs to continue to October 2016.
What we know now is that the manufacturing jobs won't continue beyond that.
Ford will continue to employ people in Australia; 1,500 people  -  1,100 of them in design and engineering  -  but around 1,200 workers today have been given the very hard news that their jobs won't be there after October 2016.
So our thoughts are definitely with them and obviously we have made preparations for the announcements that we have given you today as to how we will support those working people and also the regions that are affected by today's announcement.
I don't want anybody to be left behind as a result of this. I don't want people to feel that there isn't assistance available. It will be available. It will be there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Ford has been granted around $1.1 billion by both conservative and also Labor governments over the past 12 years or so. Was there a time earlier that maybe governments should have bitten the bullet and realised it was just simply not a viable industry for Australia?
PM: Well I don't agree with your characterisation that making cars isn't a viable industry for Australia.
You have just heard the words of Dr Emerson there, where he has spoken today to Toyota and to Holden and Dr Emerson has pointed out they are manufacturing at a larger scale than Ford.
It is not easy days in manufacturing. The strength of the Australian dollar obviously bears down on Australian manufacturing and it does make it a difficult environment for manufacturing to prosper.
We wanted to make sure  -  there are around a million Australians employed in manufacturing  -  that we are still a nation that makes things, that manufactures goods. That's why we have worked with the car industry and will continue to work with the car industry.
MINISTER EMERSON: If I can add there, both Toyota and Holden are plugged into regional and global value chains or supply chains and that is something that Ford had not been able to do through its manufacturing operations.
Through the R&amp;D facility, yes, it will be doing research and development for the global business of Ford.
But these other two manufacturers have seen the opportunity, indeed the necessity, of tapping into those global supply chains and that has helped keep them in a position and at a scale that Ford was not able to achieve.
JOURNALIST: Some would argue that continuing with the $34 million subsidy is throwing good money after bad. We should cut our losses now and pull out. What do you say to that?
PM: I think you have got to be very clear what the $34 million is for, and the $34 million is supporting the cars that will be rolling off the production line, employing people in Geelong and Broadmeadows until October 2016.
That's the purpose of the $34 million.
JOURNALIST: Do you feel that all the Federal Government money that has gone into Ford that this is a bit of an act of betrayal by Ford in terms of not continuing on with production?
PM: What I feel today is I feel an incredible sense of disappointment for the working people who have had this news today.
I've been to Ford in Geelong, I have been to Ford in Broadmeadows, my home in Melbourne is in Altona so it's not that far away.
I'm actually around the corner from where Toyota manufacturers, so I've had the opportunity as Prime Minister and as a local member to meet a lot of people who work in the car industry.
They are really proud of what they do. They're really at a very high skill level, always striving to improve.
For many of them it has been the job they've had for decades and decades.
So today what I feel is a real sense of disappointment for the almost 1,200 people who have got this news.
JOURNALIST: But you must be disappointed with Ford as well Prime Minister. Did they give you any indication at all when you committed that last amount of funding, that this was anywhere on the short-term horizon?
PM: Well the last round of funding was for the purpose that I have described so it was about the manufacturing that will happen up until October 2016.
In terms of discussions with Ford, I should just explain, Minister Combet is unwell today and that's why Dr Emerson is here as acting Minister for Innovation and Industry.
Minister Combet was briefed by Ford on Sunday about this pending announcement and we have been able to make preparations since for what we have announced today.
I was in a position to speak to the Premier of Victoria yesterday and I'm pleased that we are working together at what is a difficult time in Victoria for both Ford in Geelong and Ford in Broadmeadows, a difficult time for those working people and for those communities.
I am pleased that I am able to work with the Premier of Victoria to make the announcements about assistance and support today.
JOURNALIST: A month ago you'd indicated to the Geelong Advertiser that you believed the car industry in Geelong would not survive a Coalition Government under its car plan. Does the announcement today mean that simply Ford was not going to survive either party's plan for the car industry?
That ultimately the car industry at Ford was not going to survive at Geelong no matter which party was in power?
PM: Well I am not going to make any political comments today. The purpose of the assistance that we have provided to the car industry is because we do want to be a nation that has car manufacturing happening.
That's important to us because it is jobs, but it is also important to us because it is skills and innovation.
When you go to many places in Australia where people are manufacturing things  -  making a part of a plane, I have gone and visited that and seen what they are doing with the Dreamliner  -  when you talk to people doing that manufacturing and say where did you come from, how did you end up here, what's your background, very, very often they will say to you I got my start in car making, I got my skills in car making.
And now here I am manufacturing a part for a plane or manufacturing other sorts of goods.
That's why car making is important to us. It is an important component to a broader manufacturing sector so you get the innovation and skills that you need.
That's the purpose of the car investment that we have engaged in as a government, and earlier governments have obviously engaged in investment too.
JOURNALIST: Dr Emerson, it may not as yet be a wipe-out in Whyalla, but we have today seen wipe-outs of jobs in Victoria.
Now the Opposition is no doubt saying this is a vote of no confidence in the economic policies of the Government; the carbon tax, the increases in superannuation et cetera. What would you say to that?
MINISTER EMERSON: I'd say that the weight of the Australian dollar has been borne very heavily by Ford.
The Australian dollar ordinarily as commodity prices come off would have come off with it.
That had not happened, although in the last little while the Australian dollar has fallen below parity.
That offers encouragement for manufacturers in this country and businesses that are exporting as well.
So there was no reference to the carbon price in this decision.
I think it is a combination of a high dollar and the fact that Ford has been operating at a very low scale, not only by national but certainly by international standards, so it has not been able to reap the economies of scale that are being reaped by factories such as the Ford plant that has been built in China to produce 250,000 vehicles per annum compared with what will be around 30,000 vehicles per annum up to this period of October 2016.
PM: Can I just say before your next question, this is too serious and hard a day, too serious and hard a day for too many people for people to play silly games about it.
I think that will just turn people's stomachs.
That's not what we are here to do. We are here to explain very carefully the assistance that will be available for people because people will be hurting today, and so we want to explain to them what is going to happen next and the way in which they are going to be supported.
JOURNALIST: Can I just go to Geelong for a moment, because Geelong clearly has had the announcement of closure of the Shell refinery. There is a question mark over the Alcoa refinery in Geelong. And now the Ford plant which Geelong has basically been built on. I mean it really is for even regional Australia a very important manufacturing sector of Australia.
These are three significant body blows potentially to the town.
PM: I have spoken today to our local members in Geelong and to our local member in Broadmeadows, so to Maria Vamvakinou, to Richard Marles, to Darren Cheeseman.
And in one of those conversations, one of them did remark to me that Geelong has had to absorb difficult news in the past and it's the kind of place where people pull together and they think very deeply about their future and they create strategies for the future.
There is a strong civic leadership there, strong representation, and Geelong will be working through this news today, and we will be working through with them in the same way that we will be working through with Broadmeadows, and I was able to have that conversation with Ms Vamvakinou about Broadmeadows.
JOURNALIST: You've played a significant contribution to the supply chain issue involved in all of this, $30 million. But some experts say that without Ford, one of the three key makers going, that the supply chain won't have the critical mass to be able to exist in this country and it will threaten the very existence of the other two.
And some of those commentators include Jack Nasser. What do you say to that? Are you worried about the survivability of the other two makers?
PM: You are right, we already have a $30 million program working with the supply chain and what I have announced today is, between us and the Victorian Government, we will be adding an extra $12 million; $10 million from the Federal Government, $2 million from the Victorian Government.
There are issues that we will need to work through on the supply chain but we need to do that carefully and methodically. I am not a believer in snapshots.
I remember when Mitsubishi in South Australia announced that it was going to close. People on that day said, well, if we move from four to three, the supply chain won't be viable, only to see that supply chain move and adapt to manufacturing then.
We want to see the supply chain move and adapt for what is the manufacturing landscape now.
MINISTER EMERSON: And through organisations such as Austrade, just as we were talking about ensuring that our auto manufacturers are locked into regional and global supply chains, that applies too to the component manufacturers.
An opportunity, if we get this right, to produce components on a world scale for a much larger number of vehicles, and Austrade will continue to facilitate that sort of work identifying customers in our region which, as you know, is rapidly expanding.
So I think we should think beyond just producing for the domestic market and look for opportunities to produce for the global market and particularly the rapidly expanding market of the Asian region.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you explain the mechanism by which the high dollar is hitting Ford so much? As I understand it, it is really domestic manufacturing that we are talking about. If anything, any overseas inputs would actually be cheaper. So why is the high Australian dollar affecting the domestic export industry?
PM: You have answered your own question, it is because the dollar is high, imports are cheaper.
So when you take yourself out to buy a car and you look at all of the models that are available and I think in explaining this today, the CEO of Ford said that there were around 360 different kinds of cars available in Australia.
When you take yourself out to buy a new car, the high Australian dollar means that imported cars are comparatively cheaper than they used to be.
Now, many people, they want a Ford. They want a Ford Territory and they are going to go down to the dealership and they are going to buy a Ford Territory or they are going to buy a Ford ute.
But for a lot of people they will look and see comparisons and so it has made it tougher for our car manufacturers that imports are comparatively cheaper than they used to be.
MINISTER EMERSON: Similarly on the export side, the Australian dollar returns from any exports are reduced by the very high value of the currency.
So Ford is squeezed, both in terms of competition from imports and its capacity to export and it has not had that capacity to export whereas the other manufacturers have had their exports curtailed somewhat by the high Australian dollar but their strategies have been based on producing at least a proportion of their total runs for exports.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you have spoken about how the dollar makes industry uncompetitive or makes it more difficult to compete, what about wage claims? Because there is no doubt that there have been significant wage claims in the car industry which has seen in the past obviously jobs lost. Are wage claims a part of the reasons why the car industry in Australia is uncompetitive?
PM: I don't accept the premise of your question.
Yes, there has been wage bargaining at our car manufacturers and it was ever thus, they have always had bargaining rounds and bargaining agreements and worked through and worked through in a very sophisticated way.
One thing I can tell you about car workers and the unions that represent them, is they know everything that there is to know about the car industry.
They take a very sophisticated perspective to it.
So they understand the economics of the industry as they bargain and as they work with their employer for wages, yes, but also for productivity gains. We have very productive car industry workers, very highly skilled car industry workers.
We are not going to compete with the countries of our region on wages. 
That is not the future for Australia to say what is the lowest wage in China or in Vietnam or in Indonesia and let's pay an Aussie worker less than that.
That is not a vision of the future for Australia that I would ever give a tick to.
What that means is, because we are a country that proudly has got a track record of treating people decently and fairly and that is one of our proudest achievements.
Given that, what that means is you have to be innovative, you have got to be productive, you have got to be very smart about how you do things.
That is why we are continuing to work with manufacturing to be unique at what we do or the best at what we do and to compete on that basis, not on ever undercutting wages.
JOURNALIST: Minister, on undercutting wages, do you think when Ford refers to its costs being four times that they are in Asia, would that be mainly wages, or something else?
MINISTER EMERSON: I think it would be very much related to scale.
If you are producing 30,000 vehicles in a state-of-the-art car manufacturing and China is producing 250,000, you just need to do the arithmetic and realise there are enormous economies of scale from producing 250,000 vehicles.
Economies of scale that have not been available to Ford and that, for better or worse, it has not integrated itself into global markets to the extent that Toyota and Holden have sought to do.
PM: Can I thank everybody very much. 


Sydney
Ford Australia's announcement that it will cease manufacturing in Australia from 2016 makes this a distressing day for the company's workforce, suppliers and the broader communities affected.
The Australian and Victorian Governments are working together to do everything we can to look after the interests of the Ford workforce, the automotive supply chain and the communities of Geelong and Broadmeadows in Melbourne.Ford Australia has not announced any immediate job losses, giving workers time to plan their future and seek assistance in gaining new employment.We will be contributing almost $40 million to structural adjustment programs to support the economic development and diversification of the Geelong and northern Melbourne regions.  The Australian Government will contribute $30 million and the Victorian Government $9 million.We will be seeking a significant contribution to this effort from Ford Australia. We will work with all of the important stakeholders, including unions, local communities and business organisations to design programs that will generate new and exciting opportunities for jobs and investment.
We are confident in the strength and resilience of the people in this industry and workforce. The Australian Government will also support businesses and workers in the automotive supply chain by providing an additional $10 million for the Automotive New Markets Program. The Victorian Government will make a $2 million contribution to support Victorian component suppliers. This Program has been successfully helping auto component makers to diversify and win business opportunities in new markets. This will build on existing Australian Government assistance for individual employees. It will help the Victorian local economies and the automotive component manufacturers who will be affected by Ford's decision.The existing Automotive Industry Structural Adjustment package will provide automatic access to Ford workers made redundant as a result of this announcement to the highest level of job services support.The company remains committed to its Research and Development work in Australia. The engineers and designers at Ford Australia's Melbourne Design and Engineering Centre are global leaders in their skills and innovation, as evidenced by the design of models that have proved successful all around the world. This world-class capability is recognised by Ford globally. Ford Australia will continue to produce the Falcon and Territory to October 2016 and will continue to support these vehicles well into the future.
No one buying these vehicles should be concerned that this decision will affect future vehicle servicing or availability of spare parts. 
Ford Australia did not approach the Australian or Victorian Governments for any additional support to keep its Australian manufacturing operations going.As a company that has been operating since 1925 and has made such a significant contribution to Australia over many decades, both governments anticipate Ford Australia will make a significant contribution to the structural adjustment programs.The Australian and Victorian Governments believe Ford Australia understands and will fulfil its obligations to employees and the communities around Geelong and Broadmeadows.The Australian and Victorian Governments will continue to support Australian manufacturing, and the local car industry, as an important source of jobs, innovation and growth. 


Sydney
Prime Minister Julia Gillard today joined Federal Infrastructure and Transport Minister Anthony Albanese and Robertson MP Deb O'Neill on the Central Coast to reaffirm Federal Labor's $600 million plan to ease congestion and cut travel times along the F3, which connects Sydney to the Central Coast and Newcastle.
That's real money for real projects that will make a real difference.
Funded in last week's Federal Budget, the new package of works can't come soon enough. Already, this corridor is used by some 75,000 cars and 7,000 trucks a day, with freight volumes alone predicted to nearly double within just the next two decades.
The centrepiece of Federal Labor's plan is $405 million to bring forward the construction of the much needed, long talked about “missing link” between the F3 and M2.
As well as delivering smoother, quicker driving conditions, this new 7.7 kilometre dual two lane road tunnel beneath Pennant Hills Road will also greatly reduce traffic congestion through Sydney's northern suburbs.
The project will be delivered in partnership with the NSW Government, which will provide the same amount of upfront funding.  The balance of the required funding will come from the private sector, with the project expected to go to market within months.
In addition to making the F3 to M2 Link a reality, Federal Labor's plan also funds targeted improvements to tackle congestion and improve safety along the existing F3, including:
 * 	widening the section between Tuggerah and Doyalson;
 * 	widening the section between Kariong and Somersby;
 * 	upgrading the Kariong Interchange; and
 * 	upgrading the Weakleys Drive intersection.
The staged delivery of these projects could begin as soon as next year and will be jointly funded by the Federal and NSW governments, with each contributing $195.8 million.
The extensive upgrade of the road corridor between Sydney and Central Coast is part of the much larger Federally-funded capital works program currently being rolled out across the State.
In fact since coming to office in late 2007, this Labor Government has more than doubled Federal spending from $132 to $269 per person. Our total investment in the State's road, rail and public transport infrastructure now stands at an unprecedented$23.4 billion.
While there's always more to be done, this Labor Government has reversed the neglect inherited and is building the modern, well-planned transport infrastructure that makes working people's lives easier, our businesses more competitive and the national economy stronger.
Federal Labor, after all, is the party of nation building infrastructure.



HOST: A short while ago I spoke to the Prime Minister of Australia, Julia Gillard. I began by asking her whether she was surprised by Ford's decision to pull out yesterday. Here's what she had to say.
PM: We had been briefed about Ford's decision; the Minister for Innovation and Industry, Greg Combet, was briefed on Sunday.
So obviously we did have some time to prepare and to work with the Victorian Government in order to announce the streams of support and assistance that I announced yesterday.
HOST: Ford has been paid over $1 billion in subsidies throughout the past decade. Will you try and get some of that money back for the Australian taxpayer?
PM: No we won't be. That money's been paid over time under the Government I lead, under the Government Kevin Rudd led and then under John Howard's Government as well.
What we've particularly authorised in relatively recent times is $34 million worth of support, and that is support for the models that are in production now and will continue in production until October 2016.
HOST: Will you reconsider the money that's continuing to be paid to both Holden and Toyota to keep producing cars here?
PM: I think supporting the car industry is important for our nation's future. It's important to the future of manufacturing.
You would have seen that Holden and Toyota have both verified as the news about Ford has broken, that they do intend to continue to make cars in Australia. So the Government assistance that's been pledged to them will continue to flow.
HOST: Prime Minister, I mean, Holden's commitment is just to 2022, granted that's six years more than what Ford has committed to, 2016. But isn't it just delaying the inevitable?
PM: I don't think so. I think we can be a country that continues to manufacture cars. And I think manufacturing cars is so important as a skill and innovation driver across manufacturing.
Around a million Australians work in manufacturing and when you go to manufacturing establishments inevitably you meet people who got their start in the car industry.
And we do need to remember even with this bad news from Ford, that Ford will continue to employ people in Australia including more than 1,000 people in design and engineering work.
So I think overall we want to see the car industry continue. We want the Australian economy to have many sources of strength. And that's why we have taken this co-investment approach.
I do have a real sense that Ford owes the communities of Geelong and Broadmeadows, and I am calling on Ford to make a very generous contribution to the funds that we are establishing with the Victorian Government to support economic diversification and new jobs in Geelong and Broadmeadows.
HOST: Let's be honest, Ford is run out of America. They're not going to pump one single dollar more into Geelong or Broadmeadows than what they have to, will they?
PM: I think that's remains to be seen. I am certainly calling on them to do so.
HOST: Okay, do you think you will have any success though?
PM: Well I believe that they do owe that to the local communities and we will certainly keep pressing the case.
HOST: Graham Richardson, your former colleague in the Labor Party, says that car making in Australia must now go the way of the dodo. Do you agree?
PM: Well obviously I don't.
HOST: It occurs to me that we don't have a plan B. Like if the resources industry slows down seriously, if all the growth projections don't pan out as expected, then the Australian economy would be stuffed, wouldn't it?
PM: Absolutely not, no Tom. And that is not true of our economic indicators now.
That is underestimating the strength in other parts of the economy where we are seeing export growth, and it's misunderstanding the transition we are in.
We as a Government have known for a long time that the resources boom was going to move from the big investment phase when you are constructing huge new projects and there are thousands of workers on site doing the construction. To the production phase where there are less workers, you're getting the ore or the gas out of the ground, and you're still making very good money. In fact that is the time you make the money, you're making money selling it around the world.
So we've always known this transition was going to happen and we've planned for it. That's why last year we put out the Asian Century white paper to guide the next period of economic growth for our country.
And why we've been putting in place the things we will need to fuel that economic growth; infrastructure investments, the National Broadband Network, a clean energy future, and the very important investments we've been making into the skills and capacities of the Australian people.
More uni places than ever before, more apprenticeships than ever before, now of course a new investment and improvement agenda for schools.
HOST: Prime Minister, yesterday I spoke to Bob Katter, just coming back to the demand for Australian cars, and he was surprised as I was that it was not compulsory for all federal government departments and agencies to buy solely Australian made vehicles.
He wants to introduce a private members bill into the Parliament to change this. Would you support it?
PM: Well for us he doesn't need to. We have, as a Federal Government, very clear purchasing guidelines.
People have to get Australian made vehicles unless there is not an Australian made vehicle that is fit for the purpose. Obviously there are some specialist vehicles that governments have.
And we have been urging the same approach on our state government colleagues  -  the Victorian State Government does have a comparable approach to the Federal Government. But some other states around the country don't.
So we've been saying to them please, get on board and have the same Australian made policy that we do.
HOST: If I could just also turn your attention to another issue. Sadly Hazel Hawke died in the last 24 hours. Would you describe her, as we have here, as the quintessential Australian woman?
PM: I certainly would describe her as a wonderful Australian woman. And I think the courage she has shown with such a cruel, such a horrible illness, the courage she has shown in the face of that I think has really inspired people.
HOST: Is there any chance you will offer her a state funeral?
PM: The family specifically said that they want a private family funeral.
HOST: Okay, obviously we have to honour those wishes.
HOST: Finally Ms Gillard, the workers who will lose their jobs within three years at Geelong and Broadmeadows. Is it going to be  -  I can't see how it's going to be easy to retrain them. We're talking about people that might have spent their entire adult working lives at the Ford motor company.
What would you say to those men and women?
PM: What I'd say to those men and women is yesterday would have been one of the toughest days of their lives. And they would be spending a lot of time today and over the weekend with family and friends thinking it through.
We will be there to support them and what I can say is, when you look back on things like the closure of Mitsubishi in South Australia, government worked with the employees there to find new opportunities and the results were very good in terms of getting people the next opportunity in their lives.
So we will be there supporting the individual workers. But we will also be there supporting the communities of Geelong and Broadmeadows.
I don't want people to feel like they're going to just be left on the wayside, left behind. They won't be.
We will be there to help and support.
HOST: I guess that's good to hear. We'll leave it there Prime Minister, thank you so much for your time.
PM: Thank you.


Sydney
The National Panel for Economic Reform (the Panel) held its second meeting today in Sydney.  The Panel brings together leaders from the Government, business community, union movement and community sector to develop, agree and champion reforms which will drive long-term productivity growth, while also improving equity, participation and reducing disadvantage.
The Prime Minister and representatives from the Business Council of Australia, the Australian Council of Trade Unions, the Australian Industry Group, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Council of Small Business of Australia and the Australian Council of Social Service participated in the meeting.  Given his role as the Government's primary economic minister, the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, as a permanent invitee, also participated in the meeting. As the skills and education system and innovative and productive workplaces were a focus of the meeting, the Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research and the Minister for Higher Education and Skills also joined the meeting.  The Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations was ill and sent his apologies. 
Ford Australia's Announcement of 23 May 2013
The Prime Minister noted Ford Australia's announcement that it will cease manufacturing in Australia from 2016. The Panel discussed the economic conditions that are making manufacturing challenging in Australia including the high Australian Dollar and intense international competition.
The Panel agreed that it is important that Australia has a strong manufacturing base, including providing opportunities for smaller manufacturers to be part of larger supply chains.  The Panel also agreed that it is important that policies which encourage Australian business, including manufacturers, to be more internationally competitive continue to be pursued.   
The Prime Minister also informed the meeting that she supported ACTU's request for a strategic discussion on the future of Australia's automotive industry, and will therefore convene a meeting built around the Prime Minister's Taskforce on Manufacturing. Minister Emerson, as acting Industry Minister will speak with key stakeholders shortly to formalise an agenda for the meeting and commission the necessary work from officials.
Australia's Current Economic Conditions and Fiscal Outlook
The Treasurer briefed the Panel on the economic and fiscal outlook, consistent with the 2013-14 Budget.
The Panel noted that Australia's economic outlook remains favourable, with the Australian economy expected to outperform most of the developed world over the next two years.  The Panel also noted the transition underway in the economy towards non-resource drivers of growth.  Conditions are expected to remain uneven across the economy, with the transition underway occurring alongside ongoing pressure from the sustained high Australian dollarand continued household caution around debt accumulation.
While the fundamentals of the Australian economy remain strong, the sustained high dollar and weaker corporate profitability have contributed to significant revenue write downs across the forward estimates.  The Panel noted the implications of revenue write downs for fiscal settings, and the need to support jobs and growth while making room for critical investments and maintaining strong public finances over the medium term.
Skills measures in the 2013-14 Budget
The Panel welcomed the 2013-14 Budget announcements ‘Alternative Pathways to the Trades' program and the ‘Skills Connect Fund'. These initiatives aligned well with proposals developed by the Panel's Working Group for consideration at the meeting.
Through the Alternative Pathways to the Trades measure the Australian Government will provide funding of $68.8 million over 4 years to pilot alternative pathways to trade training. The pilot will test approaches to training which are competency-based and will combine flexible approaches to on and off the job training. 
The Australian Government recognises that the model needs to be developed with industry, unions and training providers and the Panel has agreed to work together on the implementation details of the proposal.  The Panel will consider the detailed implementation plan at its next meeting.
While the Panel noted that flexible arrangements could play an important role in meeting Australia's skills needs, the existing Australian apprenticeship system is, and will remain, the key path to trade qualifications.  Importantly, these employment arrangements combine work integrated learning with off the job training.
The Government has also announced that it will invest $45 million in a new Skills Connect Fund as a single entry point for enterprises seeking to access Government funding for training their workforces.  It was agreed that the Panel through its Working Group would work with officials in refining the priority, scope and operation of the fund.
Human capital 
Following on from its first meeting, the Panel continued its discussions about potential improvements to Australia's education and training systems and the way skills are used in the workplace.  These discussions focused on four areas: foundation skills, the vocational training and education (VET) sector, skills for disadvantaged Australians, and innovative and productive workplaces.  The Panel considered the policy context and trends, current initiatives and possible policy options for each area. 
From these deliberations, in addition to the further work on the 2013-14 Budget measures, the Panel agreed to further develop proposals in the following key areas, with a view to continuing its deliberations on this topic at future meetings.
 * 	Foundation skills: proposals will focus on improving the foundation skills of Australians - identifying those who need help, removing the stigma associated with seeking help, and supporting workers (and their employers) to improve their skills.
 * 	Future VET reform: the Panel will further consider how, in the future, vocational skills are developed across the education and training system, including making the most of the considerable investment in VET in Schools, facilitating better pathways for entry into vocational training, as well as increasing interconnection between the current VET system and higher education.
 * 	Skills for disadvantaged Australians: proposals will focus on expanding targeted support for early childhood learning and development, supporting young people to make successful transitions from school to further education and training, and work.  The Panel will also consider specific proposals for collaboration between business, the community sector and government to help the long term unemployed, Indigenous Australian and other disadvantaged groups into real jobs, appropriately supported by services and training.  These will build on the idea outlined in Opportunity for All (a joint publication by the BCA, ACOSS and ACTU) which sought to a new approach to employment services, including by having job seekers connect early with employers who can offer a pathway towards secure employment, as well as through more tailored support services to give individual Australians the best chance of making a successful transition to work.
 * 	Productive and innovative workplaces: the Panel will explore specific proposals for governments, industry bodies and unions to provide information, leadership and support to organisations by raising the awareness and promoting changing culture in workplaces and providing support to implement High Performing Workplace best practice.
Next Topic 
Reflecting that the Panel's role is to consider reforms which will drive long-term productivity growth and that infrastructure is a cornerstone of our competitive and productive economy, the Panel agreed that its next topic would be infrastructure.  The Panel agreed that it could consider ways to: improve the productivity of existing infrastructure; improve planning and governance processes; reduce project costs; encourage more innovative means of funding and financing infrastructure projects; and improve transport around cities.
State and Territory Engagement
State and Territory governments have important responsibilities and expertise in areas the Panel will continue to explore. The Panel agreed it was timely for the Prime Minister to invite representatives from the States to join relevant Panel discussions.  Initially, this will focus on the ‘Alternative Pathways to the Trades' and the ‘Skills Connect Fund' Budget measures. The States' input on infrastructure  -  the Panel's next topic  -  will also be sought given their knowledge and expertise in this area.    
Next Meeting
The Panel will hold its next meeting on 1 July 2013.


Sydney
PM: I'm delighted to be here with Senator Conroy in New South Wales.
Today I announce something that will be good news for Australian families, and that is that there will be no live odds during sporting events.
From the moment that the players step onto the field to the moment that they leave the field, there will be no live odds.
This is good news for families because families I think have become increasingly frustrated about the penetration of live odds into sporting coverage, and worried that their young son or daughter is now talking about the game not through the prism of what's happening on the field, but through the prism of the associated betting.
So no live odds.
In addition there will be no crosses to gambling representatives at the ground or near the ground. And gambling advertising will be limited to scheduled breaks in play. What that means is that it can happen at half time or quarter time.
So for someone who wants to sit with their young son or daughter and watch the match, they'll be able to settle down as play is starting, watch all of the play without seeing any live odds or any gambling advertisements.
This, I think, is very good news for Australian families.
The way in which this will be achieved is we are saying to Australian broadcasters that they need to bring forward a code to us that complies with these requirements and then it will get the assessment and approval of the Australian Communications and Media Authority.
Should they fail to do so, then we will legislate to ensure that this happens.
I'll turn now to Senator Conroy for some comments. He's been working long and hard on this policy move.
MINISTER CONROY: Thanks very much Prime Minister.
Yes, we've been in discussions with the television industry, the sports bets industry, for quite a considerable period of time and I think what today's announcement reflects is that Australians are sick of having gambling and live odds in particular rammed down their throat.
It is not a satisfactory circumstance where kids are looking at newspapers, watching matches and they're talking about what's the odds on the match rather than what a brilliant game Adam Goodes played on Friday night and what a miserable game Collingwood played on Friday night.
That should be the focus of a discussion that is taking place around the television, around a breakfast table, and where we've got to now is that the industry and the TV stations are on notice that they have to make these changes.
So we expect this code to be supplied in the next few weeks, matching our announcement, agreeing with our announcements today, to the ACMA.
And the ACMA will then be charged with regulating this code and overseeing this code as it does with all of the other broadcasting codes.
But I did want to make one point that I hope you've all had a chance to see this morning.
Tony Abbott is claiming that we've adopted his policy.
Well, let me read to you a very simple quote that Tony Abbott gave just a few Sundays ago on 5 May, and he said very specifically, ‘if the industry is to act on these proposals, the Coalition will be satisfied.'
So Tony Abbott a few weeks ago signed up to the code that is out there on the table.
We're being very clear; we do not think that goes far enough.
We want to see the changes the Prime Minister's just announced.
But Tony Abbott on the record in a press conference said they would be satisfied with the code as it was.
We reject this and we believe that Australian families will support a tougher code.
PM: Thank you, we're happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I just wanted to clarify, there will be no gambling advertisements during the broadcasts. Does that mean commentary dressed up as advertisements or does that mean cutting to actual commercial breaks there will be no advertising, any gambling advertising?
PM: Whilst the players are out on the field, so AFL, NRL, the players run onto the field, they play the game, there's normally some carry-on at the end of the game, one team elated, another team not so happy, and then the players exit the field.
For the entire time that they are out on the field there will be no reference to live odds by anyone in any circumstance.
There can be advertisements for gaming, that is a reference to a gaming organisation, but only during scheduled breaks in play in advertisement time.
So that would be half-time, quarter time, three-quarter time. That's the way in which it would work.
You would not be able to have someone who is a gaming representative integrated into the commentary team.
JOURNALIST: As a technicality, could you not have a betting agency, and only because he's been the poster-boy for it, Tom Waterhouse, coming in in an advertisement during the broadcast and say right now you can bet live on this game, go to our website?
PM: You would be able to have a gaming advertisement, but no reference to live odds.
It would only be during quarter time, half time, three-quarter time, and so for football lovers who don't want to watch those advertisements, well as they do now, half time's a good time to get up and go and get a drink and then come and settle yourself down for the rest of the match.
You would be able to do that, watch every minute of play, without seeing a gaming advertisement and certainly you would not be able to hear any reference to live odds.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if you want to get rid of the influence of gambling in sport, why don't you go as far as to ban any gambling related advertisements even through half time onward?
PM: Well we considered that but the proposal that we're announcing today, we believe, gets the balance right between protecting the community from gaming and the influence of gaming and making sure that there is an appropriate revenue stream for broadcast rights for our sporting codes.
People want to watch great sporting matches on TV. Obviously that's got to stack up as an economic model for broadcasters, so we believe that what we've announced today gets that balance right.
JOURNALIST: What's the timeframe in terms of media authorities  -  ACMA  -  making its assessment and will legislation be required?
MINISTER CONROY: We are calling on Free TV to adopt what we've announced today.
We've been through the consultation period and we expect to see Free TV adopt the policies we've put forward today and submit it in the next few weeks to the ACMA, and once it's submitted we then expect it to be adhered to.
And the ACMA's job is to ensure that the TV stations adhere to that code.
So we don't believe if it's adopted by Free TV that legislation is needed, but as the Prime Minister has said, if the TV stations don't adopt that then we're prepared to take it to the floor of parliament.
JOURNALIST: Some critics would suggest that there should be a ban on gambling ads altogether, that the evil is just as bad as cigarettes, in which we do see that. What's your response to that?
PM: It's the same response as I gave over here.
The thing that's really been frustrating me as someone who watches sport, and I think worrying families, has been the constant references to live odds.
It's been the integration of gambling representatives into what appears to be the broadcast, the commentary, the round-the-ground, the round-the-play.
I think that has really frustrated families too.
And so, through what we've announced today, all of that would be cut out whilst you're watching a sporting match that you love, whether it's NRL or AFL or any of the other codes.
We've needed to get the balance right between making sure families can enjoy a great match without being exposed to lots of advertisements and live odds.
We've needed to get the balance right between that and the economic proposition that brings those great matches to our screens.
And what that means is it's got to stack up for the broadcasters to pay the money to the codes to have access to the game, to put it on TV, so you and I can sit there and watch it.
We think we've got the balance right because people know when half time is, they know when, if they're watching AFL, quarter time and three-quarter time are.
That means if you're sitting there and you don't want to watch any gambling advertisements, then have a chat amongst yourselves, go and get a drink, have a little wander around, settle back in for the next section of play.
You can watch every moment of the match and not see a gambling ad and not hear any reference to live odds.
JOURNALIST: Do you suspect this will be the most politically popular thing you've ever done?
PM: I think it has just got over the top, and so I think people will be relieved to hear this today. Just the penetration, particularly of the live odds into matches, has got over the top.
So what's motivating us is it's the right thing to do.
I want kids to know their maths, but I don't want them to learn their maths by watching live odds on sporting events. I want them to learn their maths in classrooms and in other ways.
When they watch a great sporting match, what I want them to be doing is enjoying the contest, the physical prowess, the display of teamwork, all of those things that we think is very inspiring about sport for our young people.
JOURNALIST: Won't kids still be watching during half time?
PM: That's a question for parents, but I know when I watch an AFL match at home, what you do, for me, is check the phone, check the emails, those sorts of things at quarter time, half time, three-quarter time.
In days gone by when I had a little bit more spare time, you'd have a potter round the house and go and grab a drink and something to nibble on for the second half of the football.
People can do all of that. If they do all of that, then they will not be exposed to any gaming advertisements.
MINISTER CONROY: Let me just reiterate a point the Prime Minister has made, that if TV stations try and abuse that period by putting wall-to-wall gambling ads on in the half time breaks or quarter time break, then we will act further.
It's not going to be an acceptable process, they are on notice, that if they abuse that period we will take further action.
And if you're like me on Friday night, you're probably turning off the footy to go and do something else, but we're being very clear about this.
If they start increasing the intensity as a response to this in those now allowed periods, we will take further action.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
MINISTER CONROY: We will go an consider and put in place legislation so that they can't abuse the process.
So we're saying let's be reasonable, let's have a conversation about this, but if they choose to abuse and increase the intensity at half times and the other periods they're allowed to then we will take further action.
JOURNALIST: Given the response of gambling (inaudible) thus far, why not legislate now?
PM: If a code is brought forward in accordance with what we've announced today, then there is no need to legislate because the whole industry will be regulated as we've announced today.
So the code will come into the relevant government authority, and that government authority will regulate it.
If the broadcasters don't step up and bring forward a code that complies with what we've announced today, then we will legislate.
As Minister Conroy says, we believe we've got the balance right by enabling there to still be gambling advertisements at half time, quarter time.
But if the intensity of those advertisements gets over-the-top then we reserve the right to come back in and make further changes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about Gonski. Are you still confident that you can reach an agreement with the states by 30 June?
PM: Well on our school funding reform, can I start by making an apology. Yesterday I referred to the Minister for Education in New South Wales as a Liberal minister.
Of course Mr Piccoli is a member of the National Party and I want to apologise for any offence or umbrage that was taken by Mr Piccoli because I referred to him as a Liberal.
So if we could get the record straight on that.
Second, on our school funding, school improvement agenda, we're continuing to work hard with other states and territories and I'm continuing to call on premiers and chief ministers around the country to do what Barry O'Farrell has done here and to put the kids in their jurisdiction first.
We'll keep working on this, I've got some confidence that we will make further progress because I do believe the case for change is overwhelming.
And if I can point to the National Party Minister Mr Piccoli, he over the course of this weekend has destroyed every argument put forward by Tony Abbott and his team against school funding reform.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on another issue, overnight David Cameron has said that he would consider banning clerics from inciting hate speech following the death of the soldier in the UK. Are you going to consider something similar here?
PM: Hate speech is already unlawful in Australia under our Racial Discrimination Act.
There is a proposal for change and that is that the Leader of the Opposition has announced if he were prime minister he would abolish that provision.
I believe in the hate speech provision, I think it should be unlawful for people to use speech to incite acts of violence and to incite discrimination and hatred, so we will be fighting to preserve the provision that makes it unlawful.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've backed calls from the union movement for a summit on the car industry. Have you had any further discussions about when that will be held and what will be up for discussion?
PM: I, as Prime Minister, created the Prime Minister's manufacturing taskforce.
We knew that in this time of transition in our economy, it would be difficult days for manufacturing.
Our economy is a resilient one, we've come out of the global financial crisis strong; a by-product of that is a very strong Australian dollar and that's been bringing a lot of pressure to bear on manufacturing.
We knew that that would be occurring, that's why I created the manufacturing taskforce and why we announced our billion dollar plan for Australian jobs.
In the wake of Ford's announcement, what I've determined to do is to bring taskforce members back together for some further discussion.
So we will be building out of the Prime Minister's manufacturing taskforce structure.
We haven't set a date for that yet, but we were able to have a preliminary conversation on Friday because I have a regular meeting with the business community and with trade unions, and that meeting was Friday.
We've already announced substantial assistance to make sure that we can diversify the economies of Geelong and Broadmeadows, and get those working people who are obviously feeling the brunt of Ford's announcement a new opportunity.
MINISTER CONROY: Could I just emphasise the point the Prime Minister's making.
On Friday, in unfortunate timing, I was at the opening of the new part of a Corning's factory that is building the cables that are being used for the National Broadband Network. They're moving from about a 180 workforce to nearly 400.
In the afternoon I was visiting a company called Warren and Brown in Maidstone in Melbourne, who increased their workforce because they're supplying manufactured parts to the National Broadband Network.
And while I was at Corning's they announced that they had just let a contract to a Mordialloc based company in Melbourne that is building the housing for all of the parts that are used in the Corning's fibre cabling.
So there is a lot of work coming in the manufacturing area around the National Broadband Network, and that was demonstrated to me very ably on Friday.
So there is a future for manufacturing in this country and those who want to argue that we should just give it up are just ideological zealots.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the NRMA is suggesting that perhaps you could provide a hundred million dollars to improve (inaudible) for various streets. Is that the sort of money you'd be able to find anywhere?
PM: We've been very big investors into infrastructure in Sydney.
We've invested $5.5 billion, that's 15 times more than the Howard Government did during all of its years in office, and much of that money is directed to fixing the spots where the gridlock gets the worst.
Just in recent days I've been to the Central Coast to look at the site where our money will be making a difference for people who travel from the Central Coast to Sydney.
That is the work that we're doing to improve the F3 and to build the missing link to the M2  -  a $600 million package.
So we're continuing to work hard to improve Sydney's infrastructure.
Yes there was a lot of neglect under the Howard Government and we've been working hard to make that neglect up.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: You can say yes to our continuing investments at record levels trying to overcome the backlog from the Howard Government; investment 15 times more.
JOURNALIST: But no an additional $100 million?
PM: We announced just in Budget Week $24 billion of extra investment into infrastructure, that's our next Nation Building package, and you can see in there the investments that we're making in New South Wales.
So we'll continue investing at record levels.
JOURNALIST: Just quickly, have you ever had a cheeky fiver on the Dogs?
PM: No, I've never bet on football.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I do my football tips, so I tip the Dogs every week.
That does mean that some weeks it's pretty hard to get a clean sweep on your footy tips. I've never had a bet on a football match.
I put the occasional ten bucks on the Melbourne Cup and that's the limit of betting for me.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Sydney
All promotions of odds by gambling companies and commentators will be banned during the broadcast of live sports matches, under new rules.
The Gillard Government has demanded that Australia's broadcasters amend their broadcasting codes in the following ways to ensure a reduction in the promotion and advertising of gambling during sport:
 * 	All promotion of betting odds on broadcast media will be prohibited during live sports matches. This includes by gambling companies and commentators.
 * 	All generic gambling broadcast advertisements will be banned during play. Advertisements of this sort would only be allowed before or after a game; or during a scheduled break in play, such as quarter-time and half-time.
 * 	Banner adverts, sponsorship logos, and other broadcast promotions must not appear during play.
 * 	When crossed to, representatives of gambling companies must not be at or around the venue. They also must not appear with the commentary team at any time and must be clearly identified as a gambling representative.
 * 	The Government will monitor the intensity of generic gambling advertisements within the allowed periods. If it is found to go beyond reasonable levels, the Government will impose a total advertising ban.
The public have had enough of odds and betting promotions being shoved down their throats while listening to and watching sport.
Younger Australians, in particular, should continue to talk about which is the best football team, best netball team, or best rugby team, not which team is at the shortest odds to win a game.
These measures ensure that the watching of sport and the promotion of gambling is kept separate.
The Government expects that the broadcasting industry will submit a revised code to the Australian Communications and Media Authority that reflects this position as soon as possible.
The Government expects the ACMA to consider these revised codes promptly.
Should the industry elect not to do this, the Government will fast-track legislation to enshrine these standards in this term of Parliament.


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Foreign Minister Bob Carr today announced further funding to help eradicate polio  -  a debilitating disease that continues to strike the world's most vulnerable people, especially children.
Australia will provide $80 million over four years from 2015 to 2018 to help finish the job and achieve worldwide polio eradication.
This contribution follows a $50 million commitment to the Global Polio Eradication Initiative from 2011 to 2014 announced by the Prime Minister at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Perth in October 2011. 
The Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister applauded the leadership shown by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the World Health Organization, UNICEF and Rotary International on polio.  The Gates Foundation is contributing US$1.8 billion for the Polio Endgame Strategic Plan  2013 - 2018, which is one-third of the total budget.
Australia has a proud history of support for polio eradication.  From 1912 to 1972, more than 30,000 cases of paralytic poliomyelitis were reported in Australia, and a number of polio survivors in Australia today still live with the pain and debilitation of post-polio syndrome. 
It was Australia's Sir Clem Renouf who, as President of Rotary International in 1978 and 1979, led the international campaign to vaccinate every child against polio. As a result of these early efforts by Rotary, the global community came together in 1988 to launch the Global Polio Eradication Initiative.
Since 1988, there has been a reduction in the number of polio cases by 99.9 per cent.  Following the certification of India as polio-free in 2012, polio remains endemic in only Afghanistan, Pakistan and Nigeria.  The world now has polio eradication within its reach.  This would be the second disease to be eradicated globally after small pox and a major victory for international aid and public health. 
The new contribution brings Australia's total commitment to polio eradication to over $130 million.  Our aim is to help eradicate polio and strengthen routine immunisation.


Canberra
PM: I am delighted to be here with the Chief Minister of the ACT and the Education Minister, and thank you very much to Colleen and her team for having us in this wonderful school that's got an all-star cast when it comes to former pupils.
We've had a great exchange today, talking to the students here so it's been a very special delight to have the opportunity to come out of parliament, see some school kids and answer some questions.
But we are here for a very important occasion and that is today I am announcing with the Chief Minister that the ACT and the Federal Government have reached agreement on our reform agenda and school funding plans. 
People around the nation would have heard the word Gonski used.
David Gonski and his team of experts led our nation to a new way of approaching school funding so that we could be assured that in every school around the country that they had the right resources for generations to come so that children could get an excellent education.
The ACT has become the second jurisdiction today to sign on to this new funding arrangement, but also to all of the new ways of working in school which we know will make a difference for our children and the standard of their education.
What we're trying to achieve through these agreements right around the country is that our kids have got a better resourced classroom.
But what that means for those children is that they'll have more access to one on one support as they learn. 
There will be specialist teachers there to support kids. There will be literacy and numeracy coaches there to support kids.
Kids will be able to have access to the equipment they need. Teachers will be supported to teach at their very best and new teachers will be particularly supported so that they can be high achieving teachers across their career. 
Principals will be more empowered to work with their local community and to focus on school improvement.
These are practical changes in our classrooms.
I want to see them in every classroom around the country in all 9,500 schools. 
I'm delighted we've been able to reach agreement with the ACT and here that will mean an investment of an extra $190 million between the two jurisdictions to make a difference to the learning of our children.
In addition, here in the ACT, because it is home to so many high achieving schools, today we are announcing that we will work with the ACT and provide $26 million of funding over six years to establish a centre for quality teaching and learning at the University of Canberra. 
We believe the ACT is the right place for such a centre because of the high achievement of its schools.
I'll hand over now to the Chief Minister to make some comments. 
CHIEF MINISTER: Thank you, Prime Minister, it's great to be here.
The ACT has long been an advocate of national funding reform and the National Plan for School Improvement so we're really pleased that we've been able to reach agreement with the Commonwealth today.
What this means is that there will be no school worse off in the ACT, indeed all schools will receive extra support over the next six years.
What it also means is for every student in the ACT, regardless of where you go to school, whether you're in a Catholic system primary school or a small primary school on the outer of Canberra or in a busy large school in the middle of Canberra, you will get the same access to resources and support as every other student in the Territory.
I think one of the issues I'm really pleased about is this national funding reform puts to bed the government and non-government school divide once and for all.
It says regardless of where you go to school, this is the money that we need to provide you with an excellent education and that's a really important part of the reform.
We've also been very supportive of this nationally. 
The ACT's in a unique position where we're already a very high performing and well-resourced education system.
So in many ways we have a system that many of the other jurisdictions are wanting to reach over the transition period and this puts us in a great position but it also means for us as a country that we are very supportive of students in less resourced systems outside of the ACT getting adequate resourcing through this agreement as well. 
We've been supportive of that from the beginning and we continue to be.
I don't think this should be a who gets what from whom debate. It should be that all kids in Australia get access to a high-quality education.
We're very pleased with the announcement of the support for the University of Canberra for a national quality teaching institute.
Again, this is important for our system because we already perform very highly.
This will give an opportunity to take our teachers to the next level as well. So we're pleased, we think it's a great national reform.
The ACT's wanted to reach agreement and we've done that today. 
PM: Thank you. We're happy to take questions. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the ACT has had, out of its universities, ripped out almost $30 million a year for the Gonski cuts. You're putting in a little over $30 million a year in this Gonski reform. There's hardly any net gain for the ACT. That doesn't sound like education reform does it? 
PM: It most certainly is. First in terms of universities here in the ACT and right around the country, as a result of this Government, funding to universities has increased by more than 50 per cent and funding in universities will continue to increase next year and the year after and the year after that and so on.
That's because I want us to be a nation with high quality universities.
But when we've increased funding so rapidly, what we are asking universities to do is still get more funding but moderate the rate of growth and for that funding to be made available to support a higher quality education for our kids, for all of the changes in schools that I spoke about before which will enable our children to reach their full potential.
So that's the reform we're seeking to achieve here in the ACT and right around the nation.
As the Chief Minister has just said to you, this is a reform that ends for all time the warring and intersect of politics between Catholic, independent and public schools.
It means that we can all be assured that for generations to come there will be the right resources available for the education of our nation's children. 
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that on another school visit you've had another sandwich thrown at you? 
PM: I think they must have thought I was hungry. 
JOURNALIST: The ACT is quite a small jurisdiction. Do you think that this will have any impact on other jurisdictions signing up to Gonski? 
PM: I think every agreement gives momentum to these reforms.
Premier O'Farrell signed the first agreement, now your Chief Minister has signed the second agreement.
I think every signature gives momentum to the reforms because it becomes clearer and clearer that this is a good way of making sure our children get a great education.
And so if your Chief Minister here is prepared to say that, if the Premier of New South Wales is prepared to say that, then I do think that that has a force and effect for other premiers and leaders around the country. 
JOURNALIST: The Treasurer said yesterday that the electoral reforms were about integrity in the system. Given that, will you be proceeding with the changes and putting that Bill to parliament? 
PM: This will be the subject of consideration and I think Minister Albanese's already said that to you.
JOURNALIST: What do you think about Tony Abbott reneging on his commitment? 
PM: Mr Abbott has said to the nation that you can trust him if he signs on the dotted line.
He said to the nation that you can trust what's in writing.
What we know today is even if Mr Abbott signs on a dotted line you can't trust it.
There's a huge gulf between what Mr Abbott says and what Mr Abbott does.
That means for the Australian people if Mr Abbott says to them that he won't cut schools, you can't believe him. 
If he says he won't cut health care, you can't believe him.
If Mr Abbott says he won't cut to the bone, you can't believe him. 
JOURNALIST: A question for Ms Gallagher. In terms of rates of indexation under this, will any non-government schools be worse off? 
CHIEF MINISTER: No, all schools will increase funding in real terms. 
The arrangement overall is for indexation as a system at 4.7 per cent. 
Most of the schools who are at or above the school resourcing standard will be indexed at 3 per cent, so no school will be worse off. 
In terms of additionality of the funding that's over and above indexation, what schools need to get to the school resourcing standard over six years, the majority of that extra funding with go to the Catholic system primary schools and that's because they've been recognised under the school resourcing standard as operating below that now.
In the government system for example, I think there's four schools that operate below the school resourcing standard so most of our schools are at or above it at this point in time. 
JOURNALIST: Is there any indication of what the funding will be over the forward estimates for ACT?
CHIEF MINISTER: What element of the funding? There's indexation and there's additional funding. The additional funding over six years is $190 million and that's over the six school years. 
That's over and above what we would have expected to get under the current arrangements or if we hadn't signed up. 
JOURNALIST: Comcare has issued stop work notices at at least two Telstra NBN sites. What plans did you account for in terms of health risks and roll-out delays when you and Cabinet signed off on the NBN deal? 
PM: This is a matter for Telstra, and the Minister for Communications, Stephen Conroy, has spoken to the chief executive officer of Telstra, to Mr Thodey, and made it very clear that Telstra does need to act here and Telstra is acting. 
This is about Telstra's ducts and the condition that they are in.
So really on specifics you need to direct questions to Telstra, but because the Minister has spoken to Telstra I am in a position to be assured that Telstra is acting. 
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about the fact that there has been asbestos exposure around Telstra pits and some of the work that's been done ahead of the NBN roll-out? 
PM: Of course I am concerned about asbestos, whether it's the asbestos exposure you are talking about now or asbestos in workplaces or homes anywhere.
The Government's taking some steps forward on asbestos eradication because we do know how dangerous asbestos can be.
So I am concerned about asbestos generally, I'm concerned about this. The Minister for Communications has expressed his concerns directly to Telstra and Telstra is acting. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, has the Labor Party misjudged somewhat how strongly the community felt about the electoral funding reforms?
PM: I think what's at the forefront of community attitudes and views is what is Government doing to build the future for me and my family, and that's exactly what we're here today talking about.
No better way of building our nation's future than making sure our children get a world-class education.
I do think the reforms have merits. I don't think people want to see private money undisclosed or having a disproportionate effect in politics.
I do think that worries people so I think the reforms have merit.
Mr Abbott gave a very big tick to these reforms but of course he's walked away from his own promises and pledges today. 
JOURNALIST: He says he's listened to the people on this. Won't you as well? Do you still support the legislation? 
PM: I'd refer you to Mr Abbott's letter and ask you to identify the words where he says that. He didn't. He signed onto these reforms and gave them a very big tick unconditionally. 
JOURNALIST: You've spoken about the merits of the reforms otherwise, other than just the extra money. So will you push ahead with them seeing as the main reason it appears to have stalled is because of the extra money, the extra funding? Will you be pushing ahead with the other things? 
PM: In terms of school education? 
JOURNALIST: No, in terms of the funding this morning, in terms of more scrutiny on political donations. 
PM: In terms of the future of any of those proposals, we'll work that through. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, should David Feeney be preselected in the seat of Bradman [sic]? 
PM: It's actually Batman. The former minister Ferguson announced to the parliament yesterday that he won't be contesting the next election.
The preselection process isn't even underway yet so I haven't got any comments. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are states and territories like the ACT and Western Australia being punished under Gonski, not getting very much money because they have very, very good education systems, they're not getting as much money, are they? 
PM: Certainly not. The architecture of this reform, and this is the fundamental principle which is about fairness to our children and building our nation's future; we want every child to reach their full potential but we can only be a strong, prosperous country in the future if our kids get a world-class education.
So whether or not you're a parent, it matters to all of us what the quality of what's happening in Australian classrooms is.
The way in which this reform works is that we would be able to be assured that for every school around the country they have available to them the right amount of resources to teach the kids in that school.
The school resource standard with loadings for disadvantages that kids can bring to school, so children with the most need have more money directed towards the schools that they're taught in. 
So this is a great reform right around the nation.
Yes, it's true that some jurisdictions are closer to the school resource standard than others, that's absolutely right, but I want to live in a nation where we can say every school in every state, in every territory, for every child, has the resources available to it to get the children in that school a great education. 
JOURNALIST: What did you make of the speech by Tony Abbott yesterday about Martin Ferguson in parliament?
PM: I made my remarks in parliament on Mr Ferguson. 
JOURNALIST: What did you make of Tony Abbott's speech? 
PM: I made my own remarks yesterday. 
JOURNALIST: You speak of Mr Abbott reneging on his agreement? Isn't it just part of the political process where you listen to what your electorate says and what your backbenchers say? Isn't it a sign of his leadership, one might say, that he actually decided to listen to those concerns? 
PM: I think what actually happened here is Mr Abbott's leadership team rolled Mr Abbott.
I think what's happened here is Mr Abbott's leadership team have said that Mr Abbott is not up to the job, and if his closest colleagues don't think he's up to the job then why should anybody else? 
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that today's good announcement, this victory you've had with Gonski sign-up, that it could get overshadowed by something like a sandwich being thrown at you? 
PM: That's a question for you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you have on various occasions changed your mind on issues and you've defended your right to do so. Is this not what Tony Abbott is doing, and should he not have the same right to change his mind? 
PM: I direct you to the words of the letter. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you have been strong on getting more women into parliament. Do you think there's room perhaps for you to exert some of your influence when it comes to the seat of Batman? Do you think maybe a woman should be in that seat?
PM: The preselection process hasn't started yet and I'm not making any comments on it.
Okay, thank you very much.


Canberra
The Australian and Australian Capital Territory Governments have today reached an historic agreement which will benefit around 62,000 students across the territory.
The Prime Minister and the ACT Chief Minister today signed the National Education Reform Agreement, which will drive long term improvements in ACT schools and a fairer approach to funding based on the needs of every student.The agreement incorporates the National Plan for School Improvement, which will see the two Governments work together to achieve:• Continued improvement in teacher quality, through ensuring all ACT teachers are registered using the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers;• Full delivery of the world class Australian Curriculum in all ACT schools;• More power for local school leaders through supporting principals to better monitor achievement and track progress to inform publicly available plans for school improvement;• Flexible learning options that recognise the different learning styles and needs of students, particularly those students at risk of being or already disengaged from school;• Implementation of the Disability Standards for Education to provide reasonable adjustments for students with a disability to access the curriculum;• Greater access to quality language programs, including priority Asian languages.As part of the National Plan, both Governments will also adopt consistent needs-based funding arrangements, with the Gillard Government moving to legislate its funding commitments over coming weeks.
Building on the already strong public investment in the ACT, this will bring the total public investment in ACT schools to around $5 billion over the six years from 2014  -  with around $190 million extra for ACT schools over this period.
This extra resourcing will mean that all ACT schools are funded to at least the level of the new Schooling Resource Standard (SRS) by 2019, as well as ensuring that schools across all sectors benefit from new more stable indexation arrangements over this period.
In simple terms, these indexation arrangements mean all schools in the ACT  -  Government, Independent and Catholic  -  will see fair funding growth each year.
Schools already funded at, or above, the new SRS will see their funding grow in real terms.
In addition, the Gillard Government has committed to grow its school education spending by 4.7 per cent per year from 2014 into 2015 and throughout the agreement.
In return, ACT has agreed to grow its own school budget by 3 per cent per year from 2015 onwards.
The results of ACT students are among the best in the country  -  and that's why the Gillard Government is also announcing today that we will provide $26 million over six years to establish a Centre for Quality Teaching and Learning at the University of Canberra.
This will help all education authorities in the ACT to continue to be at the forefront of school reform in this country.
It will also help to achieve our goal for all schools in Australia to be in the top five in the world in reading, maths and science by 2025.
The Gillard Government is determined to keep working closely with all remaining states and territories  -  and with schools, parents and communities right across the nation  -  to see these reforms agreed by 30 June 2013.This will give schools the certainty they need to plan for next year.These reforms are in the interests of all Australian children, and they are in our national interest so we can take economic advantage of the opportunities of the Asian century. 


Melbourne
The Australian Football Community today joined together in celebration with the announcement from Mauritius that Moya Dodd will be co-opted as the first ever Australian to the FIFA executive committee.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Minister for Sport Kate Lundy today congratulated Ms Dodd on her amazing achievement. 
A former Matilda's vice captain, Ms Dodd has been on the Football Federation of Australia board since 2007 and was elected Vice-President of the Asian Football Confederation in 2009, proudly representing Australian football across Asia. 
Australian Football is expanding at a rapid rate and it is fantastic that Australia will have a voice in one of the world's most powerful sporting bodies. 
In addition to being the first Australian on the executive committee, Ms Dodd also becomes one of the first women, joining a representative from Burundi and the Turks and Caicos Islands. 
It is positive to see barriers for women on sporting governing bodies being broken down not only in Australia but also internationally. So many women are passionate about sport and this is great news for those that dream of a career in sporting administration.


Geelong
The Gillard Labor Government will invest an additional $15.1 million to assist Ford employees in their transition to new employment following the company's recent announcement to close its Geelong and Broadmeadows plants by October 2016.
This support is in addition to the Commonwealth's commitment of $30 million for economic development and diversification in the local Geelong and North West Melbourne communities and $10 million for the Automotive New Markets Program.The $15.1 million is also in addition to the existing $51.9 million Automotive Industry Structural Adjustment Program (AISAP) which provides automatic access to Ford employees to Stream 3 job services support.
$5 million will be immediately set aside from the National Workforce Development Fund for Auto Skills Australia, an Industry Skills Council, to coordinate labour adjustment activities, and to provide career advice services and training to supplement employment support services. The fund will also support communities to identify how they will respond to this significant adjustment in the local economy.
A further $5 million from future years' NWDF allocations will be set aside for the future skills needs of the automotive sector should further assistance be required.
For the first time, the Gillard Government has established Geelong as a Priority Employment Area. This will bring the total number of Priority Employment Areas across the Nation to 21.As a result, a Local Employment Coordinator will be appointed to the Geelong region Priority Employment Area, providing access to $200,000 in a Flexible Funding Pool to help workers transition into new work prior to or following the plant's closure.Broadmeadows is already covered by the North Western Melbourne Priority Employment Area.An Australian Jobs and Skills Expo will be held prior to 30 June 2014 in the new Priority Employment Area of Geelong at a cost of just over $200,000.Four smaller, targeted Jobs Marts will be held where and when they are needed at a cost of up to $100,000 each.These are practical steps that will help workers and their families.
The Gillard Government will also provide $470,000 in assistance to the Federation of Automotive Parts Manufacturers (FAPM) to support downstream businesses affected by Ford's decision.Labor's $51.9 million Automotive Industry Structural Adjustment Program (AISAP) not only provides workers with immediate access to intensive Stream 3 employment support but tailored, one-on-one intensive support and additional funding of $2,880 per person in an Employment Pathway Fund.This Fund can be used to obtain work-related items such as clothing, safety equipment and licences or help with short-term travel and relocation costs when starting new jobs.
The Government is working closely with Ford to fast track this support, which is normally only provided once a redundancy letter has been received by the employee.Labour Adjustment Officers funded under the AISAP will continue their hands on work in affected communities with an extension up to 30 June 2017.
Information sessions have been organised for workers in Geelong and Broadmeadows to ensure Ford workers know about the range of support available to them.Any workers affected by Ford's decision who would like to know more about any of these services can call the dedicated Ford workers' hotline: 1800 269 564.The $5.1 million Ford package announced today is supported by the AMWU and the company.


Geelong
Tens of thousands of AFL fans will pack Simonds Stadium tonight to watch the Geelong Football Club's first ever night game at its home ground, made possible through a Federal Government grant to install match-quality lighting at the venue.
The Prime Minister will join Minister for Regional Services and Local Communities, Catherine King, Member for Corio, Richard Marles, and Member for Corangamite, Darren Cheeseman, at the historic match to see first-hand the benefits that Regional Development Australia Funding grants are delivering to regional communities.
The Federal Government's $10 million contribution was used to install four broadcast-quality lighting fixtures, and forms part of a $35 million redevelopment of the southern stand to increase the capacity of the stadium to at least 33,500 and provide much-needed amenity upgrades.
The redevelopment brings opportunities for the Geelong Football Club and its league of loyal supporters.
However, the benefits of the stadium upgrade will extend far beyond the AFL and will be warmly welcomed by the region's cricketers, soccer players, rugby union and league teams alike.
They will be able to enjoy longer, more flexible access to the ground and will benefit from the improved, purpose-built facilities.
The project will also deliver benefits to tourists, locals and businesses.
This is another example of the real benefits of targeted, long-term investment in regional communities.
Overall, the redevelopment has supported 100 jobs throughout the project construction, with additional economic benefits to flow to area's hotels, restaurants and attractions as a direct result of increased stadium capacity and operation times.
The Federal Government's RDAF program is building on our record investments in health and hospitals, skills, higher education and infrastructure, including the rollout of the NBN, totalling around $14 billion for regional Australia.
Information on the Regional Development Australia Fund can be found at www.regional.gov.au


Canberra
We have today lost a great Australian voice in the efforts towards reconciliation.
We have lost a uniquely talented musician, a passionate advocate for Aboriginal people and a truly great friend.A former Australian of the Year, his music set out challenges for us all in the road to reconciliation.He will be remembered for his tremendous musical achievements, including being added to the ARIA Hall of Fame last year as the lead singer of Yothu Yindi.He will also be remembered as a great educational leader and a champion for the Yolngu people in East Arnhem Land, in the Northern Territory.He leaves a great body of work to inspire us and we will need all of that inspiration, for so much work remains undone.


Geelong
$76 million will be available to help more than 350 government and non-government special schools across the country over the next six years as part of the National Plan for School Improvement.
This funding will be over and above the additional resourcing that many special schools will already be eligible to receive as part of the new needs-based school funding arrangements being progressed by the Gillard Government.
The Review of Funding for Schooling recognised the high resourcing demands in all special schools and this extra investment will assist the more than 25,000 children with multiple and complex disability in the special school environment.
This extra help will ensure that students with disability attending special schools, their teachers and parents will receive the support they need to address these complex needs.
Boosting in funding for students in special schools will also give certainty around the resourcing required for these schools, while work continues on the Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School Students with Disability.
The data collection will, for the first time, provide detailed information about the levels of adjustment provided to students with disability to ensure they can access education on the same basis as students without disability.
As recommended by the Review of Funding for Schooling, this data collection will be used to implement a permanent disability loading in 2015.
This Government believes in the transformative effect of students with disability accessing education opportunities just like any other student.
That is why the National Plan for School Improvement provides:
·         $100 million extension of the More Support for Students with Disabilities initiative;
·         A safety net for special schools to ensure schools maintain current levels of funding; and
·         Full public funding of the SRS for students in special schools.
Currently mainstream and special schools each serve an important role within the educational landscape and it is recognised that special schools play an integral role in the education of some students with disability with complex needs.
This extra support, announced today, could provide:
More specialist teachers and extra training in the use of assistive technology;
Assistance to support special schools to serve as centres of expertise for other schools;
Design and delivery of school-based professional development for teachers;
Closer links with allied health professionals to strengthen schools' and teachers' capacity to support students with disability;
School-based fixed equipment; and
Education based therapy.
The Commonwealth Government will also collaborate with state and territory education ministers through the Standing Council on School Education and Early Childhood (SCSEEC) to commission technical work on the resourcing of special schools and special assistance schools.
Special assistance schools provide vital support to students who may have social, emotional or behavioural challenges.


Geelong
The Gillard and Victorian Governments announced today that the head office of DisabilityCare Australia will be located in Geelong.
This will create around 300 new jobs once DisabilityCare is fully rolled out from 2019-20.
This is in addition to the 120 jobs already announced for the Agency's Geelong regional office, which will open in time for the launch of DisabilityCare Australia in the Barwon region next month.
The DisabilityCare head office will include staff responsible for managing the scheme's operation, such as national operations management, the CEO and executive support and corporate services.
The Gillard Government has made this decision on the location of the head office on the basis of the Victorian Government's offer of $25 million toward the costs of relocation and establishment for the head office.
The Victorian Government has also agreed to fund works to significantly improve the accessibility of the Geelong train station.
As part of the agreements reached with the states and territories, the Commonwealth is meeting costs of the administration of DisabilityCare Australia, including establishing a network of regional DisabilityCare offices around Australia.
Basing DisabilityCare Australia's head office in Geelong will help attract investment, create jobs and meet community needs in and around Geelong.
Geelong is ideally suited to support the head office functions of such an important agency. The city has a history of driving innovation in disability, health and community services through the collaboration of its local council, local health services and locally-based disability service agencies.
DisabilityCare Australia will also benefit from being located in the same city as the Victorian Transport Accident Commission, which delivers Victoria's no fault transport accident lifetime care and support scheme.
DisabilityCare Australia will immediately start investigating location options, with a view to placing some staff in Geelong from January 2014.
DisabilityCare is also establishing regional offices in locations around Australia, starting with launch locations. This will enable people with disability, their families and carers can access local support from local staff.
This year, DisabilityCare Australia, the national disability insurance scheme, will become a reality for thousands of Australians with disability, their families and carers.
Once the scheme is fully rolled out, DisabilityCare Australia will provide support for around 460,000 people who have a significant and permanent disability that affects their communication, mobility, self-care or self-management.


Geelong
PM: Thank you very much to Jenny Macklin for that introduction. 
And it is with a great sense of delight that I join her here today, the Premier, Jenny's counterpart Mary Wooldridge and of course our local members who are very great lobbyists, indeed so persistent they will chase you down a corridor, into an office, up-hill and down-dale to make sure they are putting the case for Geelong and the greater region. 
So it is great to join Darren Cheeseman and Richard Marles as well.
We are here for an exciting announcement.
I feel like it has been a weekend of excitement for me and Geelong. 
I had the great delight to coming down here Saturday night with the Premier to turn on the lights at Kardinia Park and then watch Geelong go on to a great victory, even though I'd have to say, Richard, Darren, even the Mayor I think, they were pacing around in the lead up to three-quarter time and in the minutes afterwards, and I was there saying "it'll be fine, Geelong is a strong team, they will kick away in the fourth quarter". 
Notwithstanding that, at the end, Richard Marles says to me "never in doubt", having exhibited all that nervousness in the match. But it was a great evening of excitement.
As exciting as that, I really feel a bigger sense of excitement today because today we are taking the next big step forward in rolling out DisabilityCare around the nation.
And for everyone who is there wearing a t-shirt, Every Australian Counts, or holding up a sign, yes, every Australian does count and DisabilityCare is about making sure we are not leaving anyone behind and we are particularly not leaving behind Australians with disabilities.
Our nation for too long has not embraced into our national life people with disabilities.
We have allowed people to struggle with underfunded and fragmented services.
We as a nation have determined we are going to change that.
I want to thank the Premier for the partnership that he entered into with me to make sure that we are rolling out DisabilityCare in Victoria and we can count down now the days to the launch right here in this region on 1 July.
You have got the launch office here, 120 people working away to make sure that we launch on 1 July and DisabilityCare goes live.
We have had to make the decision, too, about where the headquarters of DisabilityCare should go, DisabilityCare's headquarters for the rollout all around the nation.
There have been a couple of contenders to be the headquarters of DisabilityCare but it is with a great sense of delight that I announce today that the national headquarters of DisabilityCare will be right here in Geelong.
This is great news for Geelong.
Why did it happen? Not because Minister Macklin is a Geelong supporter, we need to make sure that no one thinks that's the reason, though she is a very passionate Geelong supporter.
Why here in Geelong? First and foremost I'd like to thank the Premier because our partnership around DisabilityCare has extended to Victoria saying it would invest $25 million to see the headquarters come here to Geelong.
Secondly, because Geelong is undergoing some tough times. The Ford decision has not been an easy decision for anyone and I met with some of the directly affected workers on Saturday and saw the hurt in their eyes and listened to them talk about what it means for them and their families.
It is exactly the right time to be bringing another source of jobs to Geelong so I am very pleased that we are able to put the DisabilityCare headquarters here.
It is also a tribute to the representation strongly from Richard Marles and Darren Cheeseman who have said to me consistently and very persuasively that given Geelong is the home of the Transport Accident Commission, this is a community that already has expertise in running something that is there to support people with disabilities and given that expertise, it was a natural fit for the headquarters of DisabilityCare to come here. 
So the DisabilityCare headquarters will mean up to 300 jobs. The jobs will start rolling out from next year in 2014.
It will be in full operation when DisabilityCare is in full operation and it means right around the country people will always look to your part of the nation, to Geelong, to this region for leadership in DisabilityCare, leadership in rolling out this incredibly important scheme for the nation.
Darren said in his introduction that this is an important piece of social policy.
It is the biggest reform agenda since our nation decided to create Medicare and its head office is going to be right here and I know you are going to do that wonderfully, very proudly and hold that banner of DisabilityCare high and make sure that as a whole community you are saying to each other and to the whole nation that every Australian counts.
I want to thank the Premier too for the fact that our partnership on this is extending, to the State Government making modifications at the railway station so it is easier for people with disabilities to travel here.
I thank him for that. That's another sign of further commitment. 
So thank you, everyone, you deserve it and I am going to enjoy in the years to come coming down here to visit DisabilityCare and to see all of the hard work that's happening from head office, but that's only possible because of all of the hard work of so many Australians here and around the nation who lobbied for, pressed for, raised their voice for DisabilityCare.
It's starting. It's real. Roll on 1 July. 
Thank you. 


Canberra
The Gillard Government will build on its work to close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage with a new closing the gap target to ensure Indigenous children are attending preschool or kindergarten. 
The new target will drive efforts to ensure 90 per cent of enrolled Indigenous children across Australia attend a quality early childhood education program in the year before they start full-time school. 
As a result of the Government's unprecedented investments, our first Closing the Gap target  -  giving all Indigenous four-year-old children in remote communities access to early childhood education  -  will be met this year.
Achieving this target is an important step in closing the gap in educational outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
However, we know more needs to be done. Improving access to quality early childhood education must be followed with Indigenous children regularly attending preschool or kindergarten so they can get the best possible start in life.
Progress towards the new Closing the Gap target will be supported by the new National Partnership Agreement on Universal Access to Early Childhood Education. The Australian Government will contribute $655.6 million over the next 18 months to fund its share of this National Partnership Agreement.
Setting this participation target will help focus governments' efforts in early childhood education and drive sustained improvements in school readiness for Indigenous children across Australia.
The Prime Minister has written to all states and territories asking them to join the Australian Government in working towards this new target so all Indigenous children can benefit from the great start in life that a preschool or kindergarten program provides.
The Australian Government will also work with state and territory governments to ensure the new target becomes part of the overall COAG Closing the Gap framework, reported on annually in Parliament.
We are committed to the Closing the Gap targets because we know that previous haphazard approaches to ending Indigenous disadvantage have not been good enough.
The Closing the Gap targets commit all governments to an overarching framework and hold them accountable to specific targets. This, together with our unprecedented investment, is beginning to make a difference, but the Government recognises that this work will take time and continued effort.


Canberra
The Gillard Government will build on its work to close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage with a new closing the gap target to ensure Indigenous children are attending preschool or kindergarten.
The new target will drive efforts to ensure 90 per cent of enrolled Indigenous children across Australia attend a quality early childhood education program in the year before they start full time school.
As a result of the Government's unprecedented investments, our first Closing the Gap target  -  giving all Indigenous four-year-old children in remote communities access to early childhood education  -  will be met this year.
Achieving this target is an important step in closing the gap in educational outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
However, we know more needs to be done. Improving access to quality early childhood education must be followed with Indigenous children regularly attending preschool or kindergarten so they can get the best possible start in life.Progress towards the new Closing the Gap target will be supported by the new National Partnership Agreement on Universal Access to Early Childhood Education. The Australian Government will contribute $655.6 million over the next 18 months to fund its share of this National Partnership Agreement.
Setting this participation target will help focus governments' efforts in early childhood education and drive sustained improvements in school readiness for Indigenous children across Australia.
The Prime Minister has written to all states and territories asking them to join the Australian Government in working towards this new target so all Indigenous children can benefit from the great start in life that a preschool or kindergarten program provides.
The Australian Government will also work with state and territory governments to ensure the new target becomes part of the overall COAG Closing the Gap framework, reported on annually in Parliament.
We are committed to the Closing the Gap targets because we know that previous haphazard approaches to ending Indigenous disadvantage have not been good enough.
The Closing the Gap targets commit all governments to an overarching framework and hold them accountable to specific targets. This, together with our unprecedented investment, is beginning to make a difference, but the Government recognises that this work will take time and continued effort. 


Canberra
Amendments to the Australian Education Bill 2012 introduced in Parliament today will enshrine a new, fairer school funding system that will see every school funded on the basis of need, for the first time.
The amendments set out in detail the Gillard Government's National Plan for School Improvement reforms, including a Schooling Resource Standard (SRS) funding model based on the recommendations of the independent Gonski review.
The Bill brings Commonwealth funding for government and non-government schools together in the one piece of federal legislation, and it provides for extra public funding for students who need it, no matter where they live or the school they attend.
Moreover, it removes the current unfair broken funding system that is leaving disadvantaged schools and students behind.
Together with the extra $14.5 billion we want to see invested in schools over the next six years, the legislation will lock in fairness, school improvement reforms, and yearly increases in funding for the long term.
The amendments:
 * 	Detail the Commonwealth's new funding model for all Australian schools, including the per student amount, loading amounts for disadvantaged schools and students, and capacity to contribute settings for non-government schools.
 * 	Lock in Commonwealth schools funding growth of 4.7 per cent
 * 	Detail the transition arrangements for schools currently above, at, and below their SRS funding amount
 * 	Set out the requirements for participating schools to implement the reforms within National Plan for School Improvement, for example the development of annual school improvement plans.
 * 	Enshrine the commitment to greater transparency and accountability as part of the national plan, including the publication of more information about school funding and results.
Under the legislation school sectors participating in the National Plan for School Improvement will be required to introduce their own needs-based funding approach, using the same loading categories as the Commonwealth's model. They must also commit to our school improvement goals, and develop detailed implementation plans setting out how the reforms will be introduced.
The Australian Education Bill also makes clear that non-participating school sectors will be putting at risk the extra resources on offer for their schools. They will receive funding on the same basis they did in 2013 and existing National Partnerships for schools will not be renewed once they expire.
This is a once in a generation chance to improve our schools, lock in fairer funding and give every Australian student access to a great education. It will enshrine higher standards and give parents and the community more information about school performance, and help achieve our goal of being a top five schooling nation by 2025.
The choice could not be clearer for our schools. Our plan will ensure our schools and classrooms are properly resourced for generations  -  meaning more individual support, specialist teachers where they are needed most and higher standards and more support for teachers to improve results.
Tony Abbott's Coalition would stick to a broken funding system that would see school funding go backwards by $16.2 billion, and leave too many schools and students behind.
More information about the Australian Education Bill is available at www.betterschools.gov.au


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED
It's a great pleasure to join you this evening and a privilege to introduce this evening's distinguished speaker.
First, however, a few words about the Association.
There's a certain pragmatic genius in organisation in which the order of the words “Australian” and “American” seems interchangeable, depending upon whose signature block is on the correspondence.
Fortunately, the acronym  -  AAA  -  covers either contingency.
Perhaps that is how it ought to be between friends, equals and allies  -  and it reflects the seamless way our people share lives in our countries.
Both nations have diasporas who not only enrich the world through their values and commitments but now serve the nations of their birth in the wider world.
No matter how far away, they share their world knowledge with us at home.
They never really leave us: they are our representatives, wherever they live and work. Our reputation rides with them.
It's just that kind of global public good with great national benefits that drives this Association.
Who else would provide the online listings of which Australian pubs broadcast American football and baseball and ice hockey or the emergency register of American-style ‘diners' in Australia.
Who else would advise unsuspecting Americans to ‘try before they buy' when it comes to Vegemite.
Or warn them that when an Australian business contact ends a sentence on an upward inflection it doesn't necessarily mean he or she is asking you a question.
The support the Association offers is also a serious contribution to the affairs of our two nations, including through your partnership with the Australian Government to found the United States Studies Centre at the University of Sydney.
One of the important pieces of work coming from that centre is the three-year $2 million “Alliance 21” project.
Enlisting 50 of the best strategic thinkers to identify challenges and opportunities for the US-Australia alliance.
Another important mechanism for knitting new bonds between our nations is the Association's postgraduate fellowship program.
Tonight, by your presence here, you are supporting young professionals with everything to offer and everything to achieve.
Young men and women with the same character and attributes as the young Andrew Liveris.
In 1976 Andrew was a newly-minted Bachelor of Science in Chemical Engineering from the University of Queensland.
First-class Honours, university medal, a bright love of chemistry instilled by his school science teachers  -  obvious potential for a fine academic career.
Instead, Andrew went for a job interview with Dow.
In the course of that interview Dow offered to “show him the world” - an offer he could not resist and one they have more than delivered on in the 37 years since.
Hong Kong. Thailand. Saudi Arabia. Of course, the US  -  and so many places between.
Andrew has transformed one of the world's great companies.
Recasting a 20th-century industrial icon as a modern, 21st-century presence in 160 countries and a global workforce of more than 50,000.
Turning Dow into a company dedicated to innovation, research and development  -  a firm that teams up with strong local companies to pursue global opportunities  -  a business producing high-tech manufacturing for new and profitable markets.
As Andrew set about transforming the company, he set about transforming the culture of the company too.
Taking to heart the words of Dow founder, Herbert H. Dow: “If you can't do it better, why do it?”
For Andrew, better also means better for the planet and its people.
He knows that social responsibility isn't an impediment to corporate success  -  indeed done right it's a selling point.
Now, 37 years after Dow promised to show him the world, Andrew Liveris, the boy born in the Northern Territory, is President, Chair and Executive Director of Dow worldwide.
There's a touch of derring-do to his work, no-one can deny.
A few years ago he played a co-starring role in former President Clinton's dramatic mission to repatriate two jailed American journalists from North Korea.
The plane used in the rescue was one of Andrew's.
When he's not on missions of mercy, he finds time to co-chair President Barack Obama's committee on manufacturing and to chair the US Business Council.
He's written editorials for the Wall Street Journal and given testimony before US Senate Committees.
His views are sought and valued everywhere he is known.
He has been named a Legend in Leadership by the Yale Chief Executive Leadership Institute and was hailed as a True Leader by the Australian Financial Review's “BOSS” magazine in 2012.
He is one of the most respected CEOs in the United States.
I certainly appreciated his participation in my 2011 Future Jobs Summit.
We agree on much  -  and sometimes agree to disagree.
From his base in Michigan Andrew is a frequent visitor to our shores and a keen observer of the Australian scene.
And still, after all these years, his robust commentary is delivered with a definite trace of an Australian accent.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to introduce to youa great friend of two great nations, Mr Andrew Liveris. 


Melbourne
Australian Conservation Foundation chief executive Don Henry has tonight been named the Prime Minister's Environmentalist of the Year.
Mr Henry was awarded the title this evening for his outstanding commitment to environmental advocacy over many years.
The Parliamentary Secretary for Sustainability and Urban Water presented the award on the Prime Minister's behalf at the United Nations Association of Australia's World Environment Day awards ceremony in Melbourne.
The Prime Minister's Young Environmentalist of the Year award was jointly presented to Ms Kirsty Albion and Ms Lucy Manne for their powerful vision and leadership of the Australian Youth Climate Coalition.
The Prime Minister congratulated the award winners and paid tribute to Mr Henry for dedicating his working life to protecting and advocating on behalf of the environment.
The Prime Minister also paid tribute to all of the award nominees and finalists for their ongoing efforts to protect the environment.
The Parliamentary Secretary for Sustainability and Urban Water said the winners represented a commitment and passion for protecting our environment which should inspire many Australians.
Winner and finalists for Prime Minister's Environmentalist of the Year 2013
·         Mr Don Henry, Australian Conservation Foundation (winner)
·         Dr Peter Dann, Phillip Island Nature Parks
·         Dr David Lindenmayer, Australian National University
·         Ms Lee Scott-Virtue, Sustainability of the Kimberley
·         Mr John Weigel, Devil Ark
Winners and finalists for Prime Minister's Young Environmentalist of the Year 2013
·         Ms Kirsty Albion and Ms Lucy Manne, Australian Youth Climate Coalition (winners)
·         Ms Gemma Borgo-Caratti, Australian Youth Climate Coalition
·         Ms Emma Hamilton-Foster, UTS
·         Ms Amelia Telford, Australian Youth Climate Coalition
Details about the award winners and finalists can be found at: www.unaavictoria.org.au/awards-programs/world-environment-day-awards.


Melbourne
Representatives from the Australian, Victorian and South Australian Governments met with automotive industry leaders, including representatives from Holden, Toyota and Ford, component manufactures, industry associations and union leaders to discuss the future of Australia's automotive industry.
All parties acknowledged the shared responsibility in ensuring a viable, innovative and efficient automotive industry. The meeting expressed a shared commitment and optimism about the future of automotive manufacturing in Australia.Today's meeting agreed on the importance of cooperation and community involvement in implementing the $76 million package of measures announced in response to Ford's recent decision to cease manufacturing operations in Australia in October 2016, noting that Ford will remain in local production until then and will continue as a significant employer in design, engineering and sales.
The meeting of key industry, union and government representatives welcomed the measures and agreed to work closely on implementation of the package.
All participants emphasised that displaced workers, affected regions and automotive supply chain firms are the highest priority and will be supported.
The meeting acknowledged Ford's contribution of $10 million to the Industry and Innovation Funds. Further details of the package are attached, including activity by all governments.
Workforce, community and industry consultation and engagement will be vital in shaping and implementing these support measures on the ground, ensuring they meet local needs and are community based.
All parties urged state and local governments to use the opportunity to buy Australian made motor vehicles as part of their fleet purchasing arrangements, consistent with the practice of the Commonwealth, Victorian and South Australian governments.
Workers
Participants acknowledged the support needed for workers affected by Ford's recent decision, both directly in the company and indirectly through the supply chain.
The Australian Government's $10 million support for training through the National Workforce Development Fund will assist this process, with Auto Skills Australia coordinating labour adjustment activities including career advice services and training to supplement employment support services.
Employment assistance is also being provided for affected workers from Ford and downstream automotive suppliers. A key element of the package will be to establish the Geelong region as a Priority Employment Area from 1 July 2013. This area will be supported by access to a Flexible Funding Pool and a Local Employment Coordinator who will work with Ford and other local stakeholders to ensure affected workers in the Geelong region get the help they need as they start planning for new employment. There is already a Local Employment Coordinator in the North Western Melbourne Priority Employment Area who is working to help support employees from the Ford plant located in Broadmeadows.
Additional funding is also being provided for Regional Industry Employment Coordinator to help affected employees from automotive industry suppliers maximise opportunities available through the Government's economic development and diversification programs and funding for the Federation of Automotive Products Manufacturers. This is in addition to the assistance being provided by the Australian Manufacturing Workers' Union through the Government's $51.9 million Automotive Industry Structural Adjustment Program, to support affected workers including those from downstream suppliers as the industry adjusts.
Regions
The meeting discussed how the two Innovation and Investment Funds will be used to diversify the employment and economic base of the regions by stimulating investment which generates sustainable job opportunities.
The Australian and Victorian Governments will appoint independent local representatives to the advisory committees for the funds.
The guidelines for the competitive grants programs will be finalised through stakeholder consultation over the coming month and there will be a call for applications for each of the funds by July 2013.
Automotive Industry
The meeting acknowledged that a successful automotive industry, which creates skilled jobs, drives high-level research and supports other technologically sophisticated industries, is a marker for an advanced economy and its manufacturing capability.
The automotive leaders noted the impact Ford's decision will have on the industry. They also emphasised other positive developments including recent investment decisions by Holden and Toyota.
Representatives from the automotive supply chain pointed to the importance of the assistance to automotive supply chain companies to diversify their customer base and product range.
Minister Combet indicated that following the meeting, he will be discussing prospective policy arrangements, including supply chain arrangements, with motor vehicle producers, component manufacturers, unions and other industry stakeholders.
The meeting noted that the Manufacturing Leaders Group will continue a tripartite discussion on these matters.
All parties will be consulted in this policy work over coming months, addressing issues facing motor vehicle producers, and associated companies engaged in the supply chain through component manufacturing.  


Brisbane
New figures released by the Gillard Government today have confirmed that every single government school in Queensland will receive extra funding over the next six years, under our new and fairer funding model.
The figures, based on the needs-based funding model the Gillard Government wants to introduce for every school, reveal that schools with the highest needs will benefit the most from the National Plan for School Improvement.
The Government has released these figures today in response to the misleading and highly alarmist claims by the Newman Government that up to 300 schools in QLD will be worse off under the new national model.
These figures show that every single state school in Queensland will see more money flow over the next six years under our plan.
They will reassure parents, principals and the community that no school will be worse off under the new model.
This extra money will help Queensland schools give every student the best education possible, no matter where they live or their family background.
It will help deliver:
 * 	More one on one attention and support in the classroom for every child;
 * 	Specialist literacy and numeracy programs for those children in danger of being left behind;
 * 	Greater assistance for those students with disability or special need; and
 * 	Improvements in building the skills and knowledge of teachers and providing mentoring support for those who are new to the profession.
This is a once in a lifetime opportunity to deliver the biggest investment in education in generations.
It's time for Premier Newman to get serious, stop his misleading scare campaign, and to sign up to the Gillard Government's plan for better schools.
The Newman Government needs to commit to paying their fair share of the $3.8 billion on offer over the next six years, as that is the only way to guarantee that Queensland schools will have the resources they need to give their students a world-class education.
The figures released today have been calculated using the Schooling Resource Standard model, which includes a base amount per student and extra money through loadings for indigenous and low SES students, students with disability, and students with limited English skills. Small schools and schools in regional and remote locations also receive extra funding.
Under the National Plan, the Commonwealth will allocate federal funding for all schools in states that sign up using the SRS. State Governments must agree to also distribute funding using a needs-based model, and to increase school funding by at least 3 per cent every year. The final details of any Queensland needs-based funding model will need to be confirmed with the State Government, however this data demonstrates the substantial increase in funding available for all schools under the new needs based system.
Based on the SRS model the Gillard Government is implementing, a similar result would be produced for all school sectors, in every state and territory  -  funding increases for every school, with the biggest increases going to schools with the highest needs.
More information on the National Plan for School Improvement is available at www.betterschools.gov.au


Brisbane
PM: It's great here to be here at St Joseph's. I'm joined by the Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan and by Yvette D'Ath, we are in her federal electorate of Petrie and it is great to join her here today.
I want to say a very big thank you to our school principal Gary for making us so welcome today.
We have seen a lot of parents, a lot of teachers and a lot of kids; very much enjoyed our visit to this great school.
And we have come to this school today because Queensland's future is being made in this school and the 1,700 schools across the state.
Our nation's future is being made in the 9,500 schools across the country.
We can only be a strong, prosperous nation in the future if we get our schooling right for our children.
If we invest in them and make sure that they get a world-class education.
I want to make sure that every child reaches his or her full potential and that means I want to make sure every child goes to a great school.
We have been working over the five years of government to improve the standards of Australian education.
I am really conscious that we are slipping behind the standards of the world. I don't want our nation to be left behind. I do not want our kids to be left behind.
That is why we have had a major school improvement agenda.
It has included My School, to make sure everybody's got more information about our schools than we ever had before.
National curriculum that is world class. Better school buildings and more school equipment. And then we've worked in National Partnership schools to absolutely prove that if you bring some new money into the school and combine it with some new ways of working that you lift the results of the students.
Now what that can mean is that that new money is used to employ an extra teacher who focuses on literacy and numeracy, making sure the kids who are at the back of the class who might get left behind actually come up to standard.
It can mean employing specialist teachers, a school librarian, a language teacher, so that our kids can get a world-class education.
It can mean buying more books and equipment, the learning tools that can help our children stay in front; really practical things that make a difference to the quality of education in every school.
Now we have proved in these National Partnership schools that we can lift standards and now this is the critical window for taking that learning from those schools and spreading it right round the nation.
This is the time to make sure that for generations to come we get school funding and school improvement right for all of our students, for all of our schools.
Here in Queensland Premier Newman has been playing politics rather than putting the kids of Queensland first.
I'm here today with Wayne and with Yvette to say to Premier Newman that the time for playing politics is gone; it's time to put the kids of Queensland first.
We want to invest in total $3.8 billion more in the schools in Queensland.
In today's Courier Mail you can see the kind of difference that that can make to each government school.
The figures in the Courier Mail are figures that we have supplied. They are the best figures that we can generate when the Queensland Government isn't cooperating with us at all.
What I'd want to see is Premier Newman stop playing Tony Abbott's politics and put the kids of Queensland first, and that means signing up for $3.8 billion of extra resources and our plan for school improvement so we can lift standards in Queensland schools.
It would be a tragedy for Queensland if Queenslanders could look across the border and see schools in New South Wales that were better resourced and getting better results because Premier Newman had put the politics first.
This week I and the Labor team will be out in schools making the case.
We need to get states and territories around the country to sign on to our plan for school improvement by 30 June this year.
There aren't many days left but this is the work that our nation needs done for its future.
So to premiers around the nation, Premier O'Farrell has signed on, the Chief Minister in the ACT has signed on, but to other premiers and to the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory: don't let these days go by without signing on to improve your schools and to better fund them.
Now, as we go about talking about improving Australian education I'm well aware that there's plenty of rumour-mongering and plenty of speculation.
A breath spent on that speculation or rumour-mongering is a breath that isn't spent on putting the case for improving our schools for our kids.
So this week will be about putting the case for improving our schools for our kids.
I'll turn now to Wayne Swan for some comments.
DPM: Thanks very much, Prime Minister.
I think as we have moved around this school this morning, looked into the eyes of the children, spoken to the parents, you can see that they all understand the most fundamental difference that we can make to the life of a family, or indeed to the life of a nation, is to invest in the quality of our education.
I think the Australian people understand that and they understand why investing in education is the most fundamental thing we can do to ensure prosperity for the future.
That's why it's so puzzling to me that the Premier, Mr Newman, and Mr Abbott want to see 1,700 schools in Queensland worse off than schools in New South Wales.
Why should a family with a child in Bracken Ridge receive less resources for their education than a family with a child in Blacktown in New South Wales.
Mr O'Farrell understands the importance of education in the life of a nation, in the life of a state, and in the life of a family.
But this is not understood by Mr Abbott and Mr Newman.
Today Mr Abbott has spoken about painful decisions.
Well of course one of those painful decisions is his decision to cut to the bone resources going to education.
Mr Hockey this morning has said that the Coalition is not going to be upfront about the rest of their agenda and of course this is where Mr Abbott and Mr Newman have so much in common.
Mr Newman went to the last election refusing to say what he would be doing across a range of areas, and then after the election he had a commission of audit which cut to the bone right across the state of Queensland.
That is what Mr Abbott's commission of cuts would be about if he were elected.
So there is a fundamental difference here between Labor on the one hand and the Liberal and National parties on the other.
We understand the importance of investing in schools, in education, in the quality of teaching, in providing additional resources for schools.
That challenge and that importance is not understood by Mr Abbott or Mr Newman and that's why we do look forward to having this discussion with the Australian people in the months ahead.
YVETTE D'ATH: I'd just like to welcome the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister to the electorate of Petrie.
We talk about 1,700 schools across the state who are potentially missing out on a stronger future and better education because of the decisions that Campbell Newman's making.
Here in the electorate of Petrie we're talking about 37 schools. Right here at St Joseph's at Bracken Ridge they're one of those 37 who will miss out.
So I welcome the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister being here fighting with me to get the best education, the best funding for our kids' future, and I call on Campbell Newman to step up and to invest in our kids' future and stop putting politics ahead of our kids.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, that 30 June deadline is not in the legislation, why are you so insistent about it?
PM: Let me be very clear about this.
We have always said 30 June because I want schools to be able to properly plan for the next school year and in order to properly plan for school year 2014 they need to know by 30 June what resources they will have available for them in 2014.
Now I've seen these calls, ‘why 30 June'  -  the Premier of Victoria has just engaged in this call.
At the same time they say ‘oh, there's no certainty' and then they complain about the 30 June. Well you can't do both.
I want to make sure that schools know exactly what is happening for them in 2014 and then the years that follow.
I want to get that done by 30 June.
Here in Queensland there have been more than 50 times where federal officials have worked with state officials in order to explain our reform agenda and new funding plan; more than 50 times.
The modelling tool that we have used to generate the figures that you can see today through the Courier Mail is a modelling tool that the Queensland Government has.
So there is no excuse except the playing of politics for not getting this done.
JOURNALIST: If they indicated that they would sign up in a show of good faith, would you extend the deadline?
PM: If they indicate they will sign up then we will sign on the dotted line and then we will work together on implementation.
That is what we are doing in New South Wales.
You sign the agreement and then you keep working together to implement the new funding and implement the new plan and of course if Queensland signed on we would be doing that work in partnership with Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the longer it goes the less likely it is they will sign?
PM: I think actually the pressure is building on premiers like Premier Newman to sign up.
I think initially immediately post COAG, perhaps even immediately post Barry O'Farrell signing up, Premier Newman and others could say I still need some time to look at it.
But weeks have past now and the information that was good enough for Premier O'Farrell to sign up to is the information we're asking Premier Newman to sign up to.
So if a Liberal premier in New South Wales said, ‘I've got enough detail, I know it's better for my schools, where's the dotted line, let me sign it,' why can't Premier Newman say that?
Well the explanation I think is a pretty clear one.
We know that the Leader of the Opposition and his team have been going in very hard to put the politics first rather than kids in Queensland or around the country and the Treasurer has just explained to you why they want to put the politics first.
Their view is schools should be $16.2 billion worse off in terms of federal funding than our plan.
So it is a pretty stark choice for the future.
Their plan, our plan, in federal funding it is a $16.2 billion gap. For Queensland schools it's a $4.2 billion gap.
They are the painful decisions that Mr Abbott is talking about.
He just needs to be really clear that he means that school by school, including schools in Queensland, not having the resources for the person who teaches literacy, who helps the kids who are struggling.
Not having the resources for the extension work for the really gifted kids.
Not having the resources for the new equipment which we want to teach kids with today.
Not having the resources for the extra investment in school libraries.
These are the real differences between our plan for the future and the plan on the other side of politics.
JOURNALIST: How confident are you that you will lead the Labor Party to the next election?
PM: Completely.
JOURNALIST: Are there no circumstances under which that will not occur, none whatsoever?
PM: I am the best person to lead the Labor Party. Government is about getting things done. It's about getting done the big things you need to achieve for your nation's future.
None bigger than making sure our children get a world quality education. That's what's driving me; getting those big things done.
Now I understand that these are difficult times but people elect governments to do the big things our nation needs for the future and they re-elect governments if they are achieving and getting those big things done, and that's what my focus is on.
JOURNALIST: Paul Howes has now said that there's whispers going on, how will you get things done with this background chatter?
PM: Well I did indicate that there's been plenty of speculation and rumour-mongering, and if people are wasting their time on that, that time that would be better used out there in the community putting the case for Australia's kids and Australia's schools.
JOURNALIST: Have you spoken to Bill Shorten about your leadership?
PM: No I have not. Mr Shorten has indicated publicly that he is supporting me as I get about this important work for the nation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are there any circumstances under which you will not lead Labor to the next election? Any at all?
PM: No there are not. So to make sure we haven't confused anybody with too many double negatives there, I will certainly be leading Labor at the next election and I will be taking to that election the clearest possible choice between a government that is investing in our nation's future.
That has seen this nation through tough economic times and continued to invest for the future, versus the Leader of the Opposition's plan for painful decisions and big cuts.
JOURNALIST: How big do you think the battle is in Queensland?
PM: That is a question you really need to talk to Premier Newman about. But I would say to the parents who are listening today and to the teachers who are listening today: have a look at the information school by school on the Courier Mail website.
Now that is giving you a flavour of whatis at risk for every school in terms of new funding, what their school would be missing out on if Mr Newman doesn't sign up to our agreement and our plan for improvement.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how would you feel if the only voice in the House of Reps you had in Queensland was Kevin Rudd?
PM: The election will be held on 14 September. And maybe it's a bit old school  -  as we're standing in a school  -  maybe it's a bit old school and it's certainly not subscribed to by the Opposition, but I actually think Australians get to decide elections.
I think they get to decide that in their millions when they go and vote.
And I know the Leader of the Opposition is sitting there with his pre-packaged victory speech and is now of the view that Australians don't matter and they don't count, and their votes are irrelevant and he'll just be giving that victory speech. I've got a different view.
I think Australians do matter. I think their votes do count and I think they will decide who represents them on the 14 September.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: There's speculation, some of it is media speculating about media and journalists reporting the words of journalists.
Yes, there is rumour-mongering and speculation; it's wasted breath.
JOURNALIST: Are you 100 per cent confident that Mr Rudd has no remaining aspirations to take on the leadership before September?
PM: Well I would refer you to Mr Rudd's words.
JOURNALIST: The northern command not retrieving the bodies of the asylum seekers  -  why aren't they doing that?
PM: That is a very tough decision but it is an operational decision.
As border command has made clear, they always put the highest priority on saving lives and I think we would all understand why that's got to come first in any tasking or any work that border command does.
We have seen yet another dreadful tragedy, considerable loss of life. I think it breaks everybody's heart to see that loss of life, which is why we send the message very clearly; do not risk your life, do not risk your children's lives, do not get on a boat.
JOURNALIST: What about the comments today where the Tamil community said if they were Australians we would be out there retrieving the bodies.
PM: We would always put the highest priority on saving lives.
JOURNALSIT: Does David Feeney have your support in his preselection for the seat of Batman?
PM: Yes, he does. David Feeney has my support. He is a very talented man. He will be a continuing good contributor to Federal Labor.
He is Martin Ferguson's preferred successor in the seat of Batman and on that basis he has my support.
JOURNALIST: The AMA has backed calls for an investigation into the military's use of special bomb-jamming devices over cancer concerns. Do you support that as well?
PM: I would have to refer that to the Minister for Defence.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, the polls have been quite dire particularly in Queensland. How confident are you to holding on to Lilley at the next election with Ms Gillard as leader?
DPM: There are opinion polls every day and they don't matter a bit. What we do is we do the right thing by Australia by putting in place the very big policy reforms for the future.
We're here talking about one of those this morning, in education.
As I move around my electorate, and I was out and about the electorate on the weekend talking to parents; I went to a school fete down in Virginia.
They're not raising opinion polls with me. What I'll do is what I have always done, which is work locally. I have never taken the outcome in Lilley for granted since the whole time I have represented the seat.
It's in fact been a marginal seat, and in every election I have had to earn the support of the people of Lilley and I'll go out and do that again.
When it comes to all of this fevered speculation about opinion polls, it doesn't matter a row of beans.
The way in which these matters are treated in the media is cavalier, it's generally inaccurate and it should be discounted for what it is.
And when I walk around talking to parents like the ones here today, they're not raising opinion polling with me, they're much more focussed on the future education of their kids, getting up every day, going to work, getting the kids off to school, coming home, cooking tea and getting up the next day and doing it again.
And I think it's disrespectful of all of those people to be constantly analysing the outcome of an election result before it has actually happened.
We all have an obligation to be out there talking to the Australian people about the things that matter to them.
And they actually don't want us talking about opinion polls all the time. They'd rather see us talking about the things that really matter to them in their daily lives.
So between now and September there will be opinion poll after opinion poll after opinion poll after opinion poll. And I think most people are completely and utterly disinterested in those polls.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] they're the ones spending a lot of time and money on it, are you worried that major political parties spend all this time and money on polling?
DPM: I've been in politics a little while and it seems to me that anything that is being done by political parties in this area is now dwarfed by an avalanche of polls.
You get up every day and there's a new poll conducted by someone somewhere with some dubious methodology interpreted by someone who has never seen the sample or understands even the questions that were asked. And they are reported as if they're accurate.
What I am saying to you is there will be a lot more of those between now and September, the approach I take is a respectful one to the Australian people and particularly to my electors in my electorate.
And they want us to go out and have a fair dinkum discussion with them about what their needs and wants are for the future, and that's the way I treat them.
JOURNALIST: What do you say to your party colleagues who may be engaging in leadership speculation?
DPM: The one thing I don't do is speculate on the speculation. So I am not going to do that because I've just outlined to you all the reasons we shouldn't do that.
I think it's disrespectful to the people that will vote in September, I believe it's not what the Australian people want us to be doing.
I think the Australian people want us to concentrate on the things that matter to them.
Now, in this fevered media environment I understand why we see a lot of the coverage and the commentary, and it will go on. What I'm saying to you is that from my perspective, and particularly from the Government's perspective, we will stay absolutely focussed on the things that matter to the Australian people and there is nothing that matters more to a family than the education of their child, what sort of resources they will get at school.
They go to work, earn an income to bring up their kids to make sure their kids get a better life than them.
And what they're really focussed on is how they achieve that on a day-to-day basis.
And in the middle of all of that, opinion polls for those people don't loom large. I do understand why they loom large for the political class, for the commentariat, for the media and everybody else.
But for our part, what we will stay focussed on is the things that actually matter to the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] think your own side of politics to stop talking about the speculation?
PM: As the Treasurer has just said, the focus here and what we will be doing this week, what I will will be doing this week, what the team is doing this week, is doing exactly what we have done today. Come to a school, talk about education, talk about the future, talk about these children and how they can achieve their full potential.
There is nothing more important for the long-term future of our country than what's happening in Australian schools; it's one of the reasons I love coming to them.
You always see fantastic kids, it's an energising experience, they're full of bean, full of energy and you can feel the future being made. You can actually feel it being made in Australia's classrooms and we, the adults of this country, get to decide how good a future that is for our kids.
Well I am for making it the best possible future. That is what this week is about. That's what being here today is about.
Thank you very much.


Sydney
PM: Thank you very much, can I start by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and pay my respects to their elders past and present.
Apart from acknowledging Clementine for that world-class introduction, I'd like to acknowledge all of the members and board and friends and supporters of Women for Gillard, and especially your national director Clarabella, thank you very much for all your hard work.
And I want to acknowledge too someone who is not in the room with us today but I very much in our hearts, and that is Anna Bligh. Anna showed the greatest courage for the people of Queensland during the greatest tests of her public life.
Now she's showing incredible courage for herself and her family during the greatest test if her private life. And I know that we are all wishing her well. There's a room full of love and support for her here today.
And I also want to acknowledge all of you, the women who have taken time out of all of your busy lives, some of them incredibly busy lives, to be here today.
I am humbled by your support, I thrive on your optimism; your faith in the future nourishes mine. And that faith rests on what Anne Summers so eloquently calls the Three Pillars: inclusion, equality, respect.
All of us in our own way have fought to make these things real in the life of our nation. As politicians, as leaders in our communities, as young activists setting out on our life working for change.
All of us, women who care enough to stand up and to be counted.
But we're not here today to congratulate ourselves. We're here today because Australian women need a voice, an authentic voice, a voice that can be trusted, and friends, that voice is Labor.
Friends, we didn't discover ‘women's issues' in a focus group. We didn't do that. We aren't engaged in that type of pretence; we're driven by purpose.
Our party  -  the Labor Party  -  is the party of the many, not the few. That means we're the party of women. Labor is the party of equal opportunity.
That means we are the party of women. Labor is the party that leaves no one behind. That means we are the party of women.
You know that and I know that, and we want to make sure that that is heard loud and clear. Look at our history. It was Labor that introduced maternity allowances, the first great wave of social reform after federation.
It was Labor that gave women the chance to serve and shine in the farms and factories of wartime in the 1940s.
It was Gough Whitlam's Labor that delivered the first pay equality case and started federal funding for childcare.
And it was only ever Labor that was going to give this nation its first female prime minister.
It was only ever Labor that was going to put paid parental leave on the agenda and get it done.
Only Labor that understood that childcare was about affordability, but it was about quality too, and it's about supporting the women who work in childcare.
That's why we've increased childcare rebates, focussed on higher quality standards, and we're supporting the women  -  predominantly women  -  who work in childcare centres as well.
It was only ever Labor that was going to increase the tax-free threshold to more than $18,000, benefiting low-income workers, predominantly working women.
And it was only ever Labor that was going to deliver a historic increase in the pension, particularly of benefit to single pensioners, disproportionately women, and it was only ever Labor that was going to reduce tax on superannuation for part-time working mums.
It's only Labor that ever would have put in an equal pay principle that actually worked; that worked to make a difference so women in social and community services can get the pay and recognition that they deserve.
It was only ever Labor that was going to make sure that we had fairness and decency at work.
It was only ever Labor that was going to out a National Disability Insurance Scheme on the agenda, so women with disability and women who bear the burden of caring can get the supports that they need.
It was only ever Labor that was going to invest in the future by rolling out the National Broadband Network, and it's only Labor that is going to invest in the education of every child in every school.
That's Labor's agenda, and it's only Labor that would deliver an agenda like that for Australia's women.
Ben Chifley famously spoke of the things worth fighting for. I'm here today to tell you about the women worth fighting for.
Australian women, who benefit from Labor's purpose, from Labor's passion; I'm here to tell you today, to urge you, to get out and fight. We've got a hard fight ahead but it's a hard fight to wage and we must win on 14 September.
On that day, 14 September, we are going to make a big decision as a nation. It's a decision about whether, once again, we will banish women's voices from our political life.
I invite you to imagine it. A prime minister  -  a man in a blue tie  -  who goes on holidays to be replaced by a man in a blue tie.
A treasurer, who delivers a budget wearing a blue tie, to be supported by a finance minister  -  another man in a blue tie. Women once again banished from the centre of Australia's political life.
We don't want to see an Australia where a paid parental leave scheme divides women, that divides upper-income women from lower-income women; that divides upper-income women from their sisters who earn less but pay through potentially loss of jobs and certainly increased prices for a paid parental leave scheme that gives those that earn the most the most benefits.
We don't want to see childcare slashed; we don't want to see healthcare slashed; look at what has happened in Queensland: cuts to healthcare, cuts to Breast Screen. We don't want that to be our future in Australia.
We don't want to see superannuation slashed, particularly for working women. We don't to see women lose rights at work, because when fairness and dignity at work goes it's women who bear the brunt. We know that, we've seen it before.
We don't want to see the National Disability Insurance Scheme put in the custody of a political party that didn't create it, didn't believe in it with the power that we did and simply said ‘me too'.
We don't want to stand in front of school gates knowing that the children in that school, including the girls in that school, are getting less of an education than they should because our nation hasn't seen fit to invest in their future.
Finally but very importantly, we don't want to live in an Australia where abortion again becomes the political plaything of men who think they know better.
That's not the future we should choose for our nation, it's not the future that I want to see for Australian women, it's not the future I want to see for Australia's girls.
Now there is always a commentator, and there is always a pollster who tells you that we can't win and that this is the Australia we are linked in to on 14 September.
Well, to the commentators and the pollsters I say this: there's always a moment in every fight where you're got to choose whether you are daunted by it or energised by it. I can tell in this room we are energised for this fight.
And we know nothing worth fighting for ever came easy. Look at the suffragettes and what they faced. Look at the garment workers who went on strike, the feminists of the 1970s.
Women's equality has always been hard-fought for, and we're entering a hard fight again.
But I know I've got so many women to share it with in this room and beyond. I'm energised for the fight, thank you for coming along.


Perth
The Australian Government is very pleased to announce that the Reverend Tim Costello AO will chair the Australian Civil Society 20 (C20) Steering Group.
The Australian Government is strongly committed to ensuring that G20 deliberations in Australia next year are fully informed by the expertise and knowledge of civil society.
The benefits of economic growth must reach everyone, especially the most disadvantaged in our community. We must build a strong global economy that leaves nobody behind, and places jobs and growth at its core. 
The Australian C20 will help the G20 to do this by gathering the views of civil society from across the globe and convening a C20 summit to develop recommendations for G20 leaders' consideration.
The Group will also include 13 Australians who are leaders in their field:
·         Mr Joseph Assaf AM  -  Ethnic Business Awards
·         Ms Jody Broun  -  National Congress of Australia's First Peoples
·         Reverend Tara Curlewis  -  National Council of Churches in Australia
·         Dr Cassandra Goldie  -  Australian Council of Social Service
·         Ms Julie McKay  -  UN Women Australia
·         Professor Rob Moodie  -  Melbourne School of Population and Global Health
·         Mr Dermot O'Gorman  -  World Wide Fund for Nature Australia
·         Mr Marc Purcell  -  Australian Council for International Development
·         Mr Bill Scales AO  -  Swinburne University of Technology
·         Ms Sally Sinclair  -  National Employment Services Association
·         Judge Rauf Soulio  -  Australian Multicultural Council
·         Dr Helen Szoke  -  Oxfam Australia
·         Mr Greg Thompson  -  Transparency International Australia
This year, Rev Costello and the C20 Steering Group will be engaging with Australian civil society, working closely with their counterparts in the C20 during Russia's presidency, and developing a process that will facilitate effective and productive engagement between civil society and G20 leaders in 2014. 
The C20 must be civil society-owned and civil society-led.  While the Government will work closely with the C20 Steering Group on matters of process, the C20's input to G20 deliberations will be independent.
The C20 is one of a number of groups that will ensure that business, labour, civil society, youth and think tanks can contribute effectively to Australia's G20 presidency.


Perth
PM: I am delighted to be here in Western Australia.
I have just met with Premier Barnett and I have taken the opportunity to make a new offer about school funding for Western Australia to Premier Barnett.
I am working around the country to make sure that every school, all 9500 schools, have available to them the resources they need to teach the children in that school.
I am working to ensure that we fix the current broken school funding system and we get school resourcing right for generations and generations to come and of course this new money comes tied to new ways of working.
I want to make sure that these resources are available so that kids that need extra help to learn to read and write and do maths get that extra help.
That the kids who are racing away, who have done all of the school work and are at risk of getting bored get a personalised program that keeps extending them.
That schools have got the specialist teachers they need: the librarians, the music teachers, the language teachers.
That schools have got the equipment that they need in the twenty first century.
When we first announced our funding offer for Western Australia we said that to move schools in Western Australia up towards the school resource standard would mean in injection of $300 million into base funding in Western Australia plus Commonwealth indexation at 4.7 per cent and we said we would require state indexation of least 3 per cent.
That $300 million would be divided on a two for one basis between federal funds and state funds.
When we first put out that offer we had taken into account that costs are greater in Western Australia.
Because of the nature of the state, its vast size, but also the nature of its economy, schools cost more to run here.
Put simply of course, teachers can go and get other job opportunities that could potentially pay them more, so Western Australian teachers are paid better than teachers around the rest of the nation.
We had already taken that into account in the first offer and said that the cost base here was 8 per cent higher than other parts of the country.
We have done some more work, some more figure work, some more research and actually the cost differential is more like 11 per cent.
On the basis that we now better understand the increased costs of providing education in Western Australia I have today told Premier Barnett that we are prepared to increase the offer that we have put for Western Australia to sign onto these school reforms.
Our new offer would mean that the increase in base funding would be around $920 million and then of course with indexation that means that schools in Western Australia over 6 years would get an additional $2.8 billion of resources.
Divided, $2 for every $1 coming from the commonwealth to the state; so us paying 65%, the state paying 35%.
We have just put that offer to Premier Barnett, I have put it to him personally.
We will now have officials follow up with those discussions.
But I do want to see Western Australian schools benefiting from better funding arrangements and from our national plan for school improvement.
I do want to see every child in Western Australia going to a school that has the resources in it that are needed to get them a great education.
I do understand that Western Australia wants to be fairly treated in this reform agenda.
I want WA kids to get fair treatment too and the new funding offer that I have put on the table today, I believe, is a very persuasive one.
An extra $2.8 billion for kids' education here in Western Australia.
I am happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: So is the stand-off over Gonski [inaudible]
PM: We have reworked the figures; this is not changing the model in any way.
The model is the same for all 9,500 schools around the country.
A school resource standard which is factored on how much it takes to teach a primary school kid, how much it takes to teach a high school kid, how much it takes to get them a great education.
Then with loadings that recognise that if kids come to school from poor homes, Indigenous children, children with disabilities, children from non-English speaking backgrounds  -  it takes more to teach them so there are loadings.
Then for small schools, and for remote and regional schools, there are additional costs.
So the model is the same but we always factored into the model the difference in the cost base here in WA.
We have done some work and as a result of that work I am in a position to announce the offer today.
JOURNALIST: Barry O'Farrell [inaudible]
PM: These factors about the cost base would have never applied to New South Wales.
They apply here in Western Australia because of the nature of the economy here and the fact that teachers are paid more here and as a result of course the costs of schooling are more here, because teacher salaries, the costs of staff are such a big proportion of whole school costs.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: The cost base change is from 108 per cent to 111 per cent,
That does change the base funding from $300 million extra to $920 million extra.
Then there was always going to be the indexation, when you add in the indexation, that brings you up to the figure of $2.8 billion over six years.
JOURNALIST: Where has it come from?
PM: Well the maths is the same as it always has been.
We've always said that for the increase in the base funding we would put in $2 for every $1 that a state put in; when it came to indexation we would index our share at 4.7 per cent and we would ask states to at least have a 3 per cent indexation rate.
Where does it come from in terms of the Federal Budget? We made some savings and many of them were controversial.
But we made some savings to free up money to invest in schools not only now but in the long term and those ten year funding figures are available in the Budget.
JOURNALIST: Premier Barnett [inaudible].
PM: Well I spoke to Premier Barnett today and I think it's respectful for me to suggest that you should get his response directly from him.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Well when I saw Premier Barnett today I said I would provide full details of this offer.
I would certainly ask him to consider full details of this offer.
I do not understand why anyone would stand in the way of children in Western Australia getting a better education and children benefiting from $2.8 billion in new resources.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: The characterisation in your question isn't right.
We had always factored in Western Australia that there was a difference in the cost base here.
So we had analysed the difference in the cost base and that gave us the 108 per cent figure, we've done some more work and determined that the difference in the cost base is 111 per cent.
Inevitably as you work through a big and complex reform like this you've got information to consider, facts to consider and when facts come to hand of course we take them into account.
You wouldn't want people doing anything else would you? Ignoring the facts? Surely not.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: The figures that I have put forward today are a reflection that on having done more work we thought the cost base differential more accurately reflected higher costs in Western Australia at a 111 per cent.
That is what has driven the change today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on another issue, you would have been briefed on a so-called Liberal Party function venue...
PM: Yes I have been.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] about your body shape, what is your take on that? What is your response?
PM: Well I mean this is Tony Abbott's Liberals, this is what they're like and I think that the real risk for Australia is if Mr Abbott was ever Prime Minister it wouldn't be a question of what‘s on fundraising menus, we would see this lack of respect for women littered throughout all of his government policies and documents.
JOURNALIST: But they're not all like that, surely? Mr Abbott himself didn't [inaudible]
PM: Let's go through the pattern of behaviour here, Mr Abbott personally has gone and stood next to signs that describe me in a sexist way.
We've had the Young Liberals hosting a function where jokes were cracked about the death of my father and now we have Mr Brough and Mr Hockey at a function with this grossly sexist and offensive menu on display. Join the dots.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that - because Joe Hockey says he didn't see it - do you believe that he did not see it?
PM: Well, you know, you can talk to Mr Hockey about that...
JOURNALIST: He says, he tweeted, that he hadn't seen it, are you [inaudible] you don't believe that?
PM: I think that there is a great deal of convenience in that answer from Mr Hockey.
JOURNALIST: And the same for Mr Brough, it was his function no less...
PM: I think there is a great deal of convenience in that answer from Mr Brough.
JOURNALIST: Is there a pattern here? You say there is a pattern from the Liberal Party, can I ask was that, has that, has the Labor Party been sitting on that menu, that story about that menu?
PM: Absolutely not, no, and the first that...I'm aware that this is now circulating and isn't that interesting in and of itself that a grossly sexist and offensive Liberal party menu card comes out publicly and somehow the spin is immediately that this is all Labor's fault.
Well excuse me, the first I ever knew about this was when it started coming into public light though Twitter and I was briefed on it by my media staff because I knew you would ask, and the first my office knew about it was when it went out on Twitter and became a subject of public conversation.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Mr Brough should be dis-endorsed. That's what should happen here.
Question: [inaudible]
PM: Well I've certainly been very clear on my view about Mr Abbott and his conduct and the conduct of his colleagues. Here we are yet again, Mr Abbot saying that he condemns behaviour, but we see a pattern of behaviour, it doesn't go away.
Standing next to signs that describe me offensively, Liberal Party functions that you know mock the death of my father and then we the see this, a pattern of behaviour just time after time after time.
Mr Abbott's solution to this pattern of behaviour is not to show any leadership, I mean he's effectively stood by Mr Brough.
I mean Mr Brough is retaining his endorsement.
Presumably if Mr Abbott becomes Prime Minister Mr Brough will be a senior minister in the Abbott government, I mean is Mr Abbott ruling out giving him the portfolio of the Status of Women?
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: I was in Parliament, I was aware that Mr Jones and Mr Husic have had something to say about this.
There's a difference here I think.
Neither Mr Jones nor Mr Husic were in Parliament when Liberal Party women rebelled when Tony Abbott was Health Minister, so concerned were they about the attitude that he was taking to RU486.
Well I was in Parliament, I was Shadow Health Minister, I saw those Liberal women rebel against Tony Abbott as Health Minister, and consequently I think Mr Abbott's conduct at that time and the fact that women in his own political party felt the need to rebel tells you something about Mr Abbott's attitudes.
Now Mr Jones and Mr Husic weren't there at the time, I was.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: I like it when I come to Perth, you'll see more of me in Perth and we've got some things to do in Perth today.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] decision to deny the party to school base [inaudible]
PM: Premier Barnett says this is a long standing policy in Western Australia so you really need to have that discussion with Premier Barnett.
I'd have to say what I'm more concerned about is Premier Newman excluding the Federal Minister for Education Mr Garrett from visiting schools in Queensland.
That's a naked political act and it just seems to me if you can't win the argument about school improvement and school funding somehow you lock people out of schools and prevent them putting the argument.
Well as a nation I think we're a lot, lot better than that and that conduct is truly objectionable by Premier Newman.
Thank you very much.


Perth
Western Australian schools now stand to gain $2.8 billion over six years under the Australian Government's National Plan for School Improvement.
The Prime Minister has made a revised offer to the Western Australian Government, including around $920 million extra over six years to bring all schools up to the new Schooling Resource Standard on top of better indexation. This is up from the $300 million previously on offer.
The Australian Government is willing to invest $2 for every $1 from the Western Australian Government to bring schools up to the new funding standard.  This means the Australian Government would invest an extra $590 million and the Western Australian Government would invest about $330 million into improving local schools.
With improved indexation, this revised offer will deliver about an extra $1.9 billion for government schools, about $360 million extra for Catholic schools and about $480 million extra for independent schools across Western Australia over six years.
This reflects the benefits of locking in better and more stable rates of indexation, as well as the funding increase required to bring schools up to the new standard.
The new offer is based on more up to date information about the relative costs of schooling across the country.
Under the original offer, the cost of delivering school education in Western Australia was calculated to be 8 per cent, higher because of the size of Western Australia, the remote locations of many schools, and higher teacher wages.
Further work by Commonwealth officials has since confirmed the extra cost of education in Western Australia is 11 per cent, so we have revised our offer to take this into account.
There is now $2.8 billion over six years on the table to help make every school in Western Australia better, so that local students get the best possible start in life.
The National Plan for School Improvement will deliver:
 * 	More one on one attention and support in the classroom for every child.
 * 	Specialist literacy and numeracy programs for those children in danger of being left behind.
 * 	Greater assistance for those students with disability or special need.
 * 	Building the skills and knowledge of teachers and providing mentoring support for those who are new to the profession.
This is a fair and generous offer which will deliver benefits to Western Australia for generations to come.
Premier Barnett has until 30 June 2013 to sign up to the National Plan for School Improvement, contribute WA's share and secure a better deal for every school in his state.


Perth
Work on the Perth City Link project is progressing ahead of schedule, with trains expected to start using the new rail tunnel by early August. 
The Prime Minister and the Member for Perth today visited the worksite for the project to inspect the progress first hand.
This project is reshaping the heart of Perth and putting hundreds of people to work. It forms part of the Gillard Government's unprecedented $6.9 billion investment in WA's road, rail and public transport infrastructure.
The City Link project also shows what is possible when all three levels of government are prepared to work together and pool resources, with this $360 million project backed by the Federal and State governments as well as the City of Perth.
Since 2007, we have increased annual infrastructure spending from $154 to $261 per Western Australian, to help support the State's growing population and future economic prosperity.
This investment needs to be maintained which is why the 2013 Budget sets out funding for new projects identified as priorities by the State Government, including:
 * Perth Public Transport Package: Assist deliver the light rail project and/or build a new rail link to the Airport, with the priority and construction timetables to be determined in consultation with the State Government. 
and subject to an assessment by Infrastructure Australia.
 -  Federal contribution: $500 million.
 * Swan Valley Bypass: Build a new road between the Reid Highway/Tonkin Highway intersection and Muchea to replace the Great Northern Highway as the main freight route into and out the City from the north.
 -  Federal contribution: $418.3 million.
 * Great Northern Highway: Package of works to improve the section between Muchea and Wubin, including straightening and widening dangerous sections, upgrading existing intersections and constructing additional overtaking lanes.
 -  Federal contribution: $307.8 million.
 * North West Coastal Highway: Package of works along the 136 kilometre section between Minilya and Barradale, including strengthening and widening various sections as well as erecting two new bridges.
 -  Federal contribution: $174 million.
 * Tonkin Highway: Build three new interchanges at the intersections 
with Benara Road, Morley Drive and Collier Road to ease congestion and improve freight movements.
 -  Federal contribution: $140.6 million.
 * Leach Highway: Upgrade Fremantle's High Street between Carrington Street and Stirling Highway to a four lane divided road along a new alignment.
 -  Federal contribution: $59 million.
From the outset Federal Labor's mission has been to reverse the neglect we inherited and build the modern, well-planned transport infrastructure which makes working people's lives easier, our businesses more competitive and the national economy stronger.
The LNP have made it very clear that the Federal Government should not be in the business of funding urban public transport projects, dismissing traffic congestion as someone else's problem to fix.
Labor has always been the party of nation building, and Labor is the only party that will continue to invest in both road and rail projects.


Perth
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Prime Minister, welcome to the program.
PM: Good morning Geoff.
HOST: I understand that you have just met with Arnold Schwarzenegger, what did you discuss this morning?
Was it climate change policy or how to destroy one's enemies against seemingly insurmountable odds?
PM: It was climate change policy let me assure you.
Though of course I am a devotee of Arnie Schwarzenegger movies so I quite cheerfully could have talked about the movies, but we didn't do that today.
What we talked about was climate change.
Governor Schwarzenegger is here, he of course led California to put in a price on carbon to reduce carbon pollution.
He is from the conservative side of politics, a Republican.
If he was here in Australia he would be on the Liberal National party side of politics.
But he saw his way to putting a price on carbon as the best way of tackling climate change.
So we talked about his experiences in California and how we have put a price on carbon here.
HOST: Prime Minister, internal polling suggests Labor could lose its three remaining seats in WA, a result that would be without precedence.
If you were told that those seats could only be saved if you stepped down, would you consider it?
PM: I've seen that story today on the front of the newspaper and as I said earlier this week there will be plenty of rumour and plenty of speculation, plenty of speculative stories in the newspapers.
Everybody engaging in all of that rumour and speculation is just wasting their breath and I'm not going to waste mine on it.
HOST: It was reported today that Bill Shorten has been doing a ring around to canvass what support there is for Kevin Rudd.
Are you aware of that or might you have asked him to do that on your behalf?
PM: Geoff I'm aware of the media reports or speculation
HOST: But you can tell us what is true and what is just media speculation?
PM: I can tell you what is true, absolutely.
Nothing has changed since I dealt with this at my press conference at the start of the week.
The important thing, the reason I am here in Western Australia amongst other commitments is to put a spotlight on Western Australian schools and their future.
So Geoff there is nothing new to learn from my press conference early this week and I am not going to waste my time on all of this sort of rumour churning.
HOST: I assure you we will be talking about education matters in just a moment.
But Prime Minister regarding the menu at the Mal Brough function fundraiser, the owner of the restaurant has said he produced it with his son, it never appeared on tables and that Mal Brough and Joe Hockey would have been unaware of it.
Do you accept that?
PM: Well that's not what Mr Brough said yesterday, Mr Brough yesterday said he was aware of it.
So I don't understand how those two stories add up.
I believe Mr Brough will be making a statement to the media during the course of this morning, if he does that then of course he should take every question on this matter.
Because I think the media will have a lot of questions given the version seems to have changed between yesterday and today.
HOST: On the basis of what you know, do you still say that this is representative of a pattern of behaviour in the Coalition?
PM: Mr Brough yesterday did say that he was aware of this menu and yes I stand by everything I said yesterday.
We have seen a pattern of behaviour here, the Leader of the Opposition standing next to sexist signs, now we see this sexist menu.
Mr Brough has got a lot of explaining to do and I hope he does take and answer all questions today.
HOST: Prime Minister, to education matters  -  the Premier Colin Barnett was on this program yesterday and this is what he had to say when I asked him if he would sign up to your Gonski reforms:
PREMIER BARNETT: No.
HOST: Not at all?
PREMIER BARNETT: Not to Gonski, no. The real issue about Gonski is that it's an attempt at a federal level to take control of everything in education, which constitutionally is the responsibility of the state.
The degree of administration, red tape reporting is ludicrous.
Absolutely ludicrous and you have only had one state in New South Wales sign up and they will probably regret it now
HOST: Barry O'Farrell hasn't said that.
PREMIER BARNETT: No I'm saying that they are probably regretting it, that's my observation.
No other state has signed, including some Labor states because this has not been properly thought through. That is the reality.
HOST: Prime Minister, you then upped the offer, what was the response by Mr Barnett?
PM: Mr Barnett, yesterday I did have a good meeting with the Premier.
He is obviously considering his position and we will make sure that through his officials he gets full details of the new offer.
But let me be very clear here, this is not about a federal takeover of schools.
That is nonsense.
The state government would continue to run and manage state schools, Catholic schools will continue to be managed by Catholic education, independent schools will be left the way they are now by school principals and school communities.
What this is about is making sure that every school in the nation has the right resources in it so that can properly teach the kids within that school.
This is the end product of five years of work, it is the end product of knowing and proving through national partnership schools that if you bring the right level of resources and new ways of working then the kids do better in their education.
This is the product of a panel of eminent Australians who have said every school should have school resource standard which means that the right resources to teach the kids in that school, with all of the advantages and disadvantages that kids can bring to school.
It comes with a school improvement plan and people would have to be accountable for school improvement.
But shouldn't schools be accountable to the community for what is happening with the education of our children? How can anybody object to that?
HOST: So Prime Minister when Colin Barnett seeks to reduce what is complex and expensive, when he seeks to reduce it to an issue of this being a federal takeover  -  what prospect is there that your reforms will get the approval of the Western Australian Government?
It doesn't sound promising.
PM: Well there is only one question here for Premier Barnett that is will he put the children of Western Australia first?
Premier O'Farrell has been able to do that, so this isn't a party political question in the sense that somehow conservative leaders can't sign on.
Premier O'Farrell has already shown that you can be constructive on education as a Liberal Premier.
I am asking Premier Barnett to do no more or no less than his colleague in New South Wales, who is running the biggest school system in the country, has been prepared to do.
I do want to see $2.8 billion dollars of additional resources in Western Australian schools in the next six years.
I don't want to see the kids of Western Australia left behind as other states move to improve their schools with the benefit of these new resources.
HOST: Prime Minister you are casting the Leader of the Opposition and his party as being determined to, and I use your words from the other day, banishing women's' voices from our political life.
Why do you think voters will care about your focussing on the politics of gender?
PM: I suggest you have a look at the full speech.
In the full speech I was outlining what this Government has achieved for women and what is at risk on the 14th of September.
This is a Government that is very much focussed on bringing issues like paid parental leave on to the national agenda and then getting it done.
Increasing support for childcare, making sure that part-time working women pay less tax.
The tripling of the tax-free threshold meaning that you don't pay tax now until you have earnt $18,200 dollars has been a benefit to many low incomes earners.
But particularly women who tend to work part-time when they are doubling up family life and work.
The work that we have done with women on equal pay to make sure that the workers in the social and community services sector get paid properly.
What we have done in workplace relations, because it was women who bore the brunt of WorkChoices; to name just a few of the things that we have done as a Labor government because we have wanted women to be treated fairly, decently, with respect, to have the support they need to get about their life.
I am of course going to talk about what the Government has achieved here and what we want to continue to do.
HOST: But the implication is that you do not believe under a Tony Abbott government women would be treated fairly and decently and with respect.
How can you say that? What is the evidence to support that?
PM: Well I've been very clear about the Leader of the Opposition's past statements.
Politicians get judged on what they say, I do and I accept that.
The Leader of the Opposition should get judged on his past statements too about women's roles and women's lives.
Then when you turn to their very practical policy suite, take something like childcare  -  what they've said is that they would be funding nannies but that would come out of the current bucket of money that funds childcare.
So that must mean that if you are relying on childcare payments now from the federal government, they will be less under a government led by Tony Abbott.
The Leader of the Opposition has been very clear, he is going to cut the superannuation bonus that we have for low-income Australians, they are predominantly women.
They are women who are there, probably working part-time or in low-income jobs, we are giving them a superannuation benefit because I want to boost their retirement income.
Mr Abbott wants to take that away.
Indeed, he would prejudice every Australian on superannuation because he would prevent our planned increase from 9 to 12 per cent.
On industrial relations, you have to say that the intentions of Tony Abbott as Prime Minister, were he Prime Minister are very, very murky indeed.
But if we judge from the past, WorkChoices hit working women hard. 
So the list goes on and I will keep making clear our policies versus the Leader of the Opposition's policies.
I think people are entitled to that information when they go and vote.
HOST: Prime Minister, Arnold Schwarzenegger's catchphrase is ‘I'll be back', what prospect is there that you will be after September 14th?
PM: I'm very confident that when people vote on the 14th of September and they are facing such a clear choice between a government led by me with our very, very clear plan for the future.
The investments that we want to make for the nation's future including particularly this week the investments that we want to make for our children and their future and consequently the future of our economy.
I'm sure when people make a choice between those plans to invest in the future and the plans for cutbacks on the other side of politics that they will choose Labor.



E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
HOST: Always a special time when we have the Prime Minister of our country in Perth and an even more special time when the Prime Minister is good enough to join us on our radio program.
So Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning and welcome to Lisa, Paul and Baz.
PM: Good morning, good to be with you.
HOST: Good morning Julia, thank you so much for your time. 
Julia, you've done a lot of stuff with our station so I will just disclose that I'm a big fan and I vote Labor. I've got no problems saying that. 
Julia, can I just start by just talking about the menu at the Liberal's dinner which you called grossly sexist and offensive. 
This has just been playing on my mind since yesterday. 
As a woman, does that hurt your feelings? 
Because I know once a paper took a picture of me and put under it that I had a fat ass and I went home and I cried for about 2 days and I'm tough as nails. 
Did it hurt your feelings?
PM: No Lisa, it doesn't. It doesn't hurt my feelings. I mean I suppose I'm pretty resilient. 
I've needed to be and you know I've had all of this happen before from the Liberal Party and you know, offensive things happening at Liberal Party fundraisers and the Leader of the Opposition standing next to grossly sexist signs and all of that. 
So because I've had all of that experience, no it doesn't personally hurt me.
HOST: Do you fear for women should Tony Abbott become Prime Minister?
PM: Well I dealt with that earlier this week and yes I'm very concerned about what's at risk and what women will lose if Mr Abbott becomes Prime Minister on 14 September. 
I gave a speech, some parts of which have been reported and some parts haven't been reported. 
But to just go through some really practical things, let me just go to two  -  we make a special contribution for low income earners to put into their superannuation. 
They're predominantly women and Mr Abbott has said that he would take that away. Very practical. 
Mr Abbott has said that he wants to fund nannies but do it out of the current pot of money that goes into childcare.
So that means if you're using childcare now and getting some childcare money, that money must be being cut back. 
I mean they're just 2 things that we know but the plan for cut backs is far broader than what's been publicly exposed at the moment and that is all bad news for women. 
I think as I said earlier this week, women look at our nation's life now; they look at me, women like our Finance Minister Penny Wong, they're used to seeing women's voices right there at the core, you know me as Prime Minister. 
When it's budget time you get Wayne Swan to delivering the budget and then there's Penny Wong as Finance Minister. 
You wouldn't have those women's voices.
HOST: Prime Minister, political satire has been a mainstay of Australian comedy for a long time now? 
Where do you reckon we draw the line?
PM: I think we've got to be just a little bit clear about comedy and what is political life. 
I mean, professional comedians, people who go on TV and make their living cracking jokes, are they going to have a red hot go at politicians, at celebrities, at sporting identities?
Yes they are, that's how they make their living, and I think we can all tell when we're sitting in an audience and a professional comedian is cracking jokes whether it's the right side of the good taste line or not. 
I think we've all got a sense of that. 
But then there's things that politicians do and should be held accountable for. 
I mean we're in the business of leading the nation, not in the business of professional comedy. 
So I think that there is, when politicians engage in things and Mr Brough has still got a lot of explaining to do about this menu. 
When those sorts of things happen people bring a different standard to bear because you're talking about the people who are going to sit in the nation's parliament and make very important national decisions.
HOST: Prime Minister, I just want to say that whoever's responsible for those comments on the menu, I mean they should feel ashamed of themselves because clearly it's just inappropriate, it's tasteless and it demeans women, but of course it demeans the Office of Prime Minister. 
I've also got a confession to make, you talked about people going on TV. 
I'm just going to tell you what I did last night, I want you to tell me what you think of me.
I went on TV last night because I also do the sport here for Channel 7 and I wore a blue tie, now am I in your bad books automatically?
PM: Absolutely not, no! 
I was actually in a conversation with Ben Elton last night where he asked me whether he needed to go and chuck all his blue ties out. 
I made it very clear that when I made a speech earlier this week I did talk about men in blue ties, but I was clearly referring to the fact, and it's been the subject of much public discussion that the Leader of the Opposition now only appears in a white shirt and blue tie.
So some advice from the focus groups I think.
HOST: He must have a hundred of them-
PM: Well he must have many of them absolutely but he was the man in the white shirt and the blue tie that led me to talking about men in white shirts and blue ties.
Referring really to the absence of women's voices from the core of our national debate. 
I used the example of, you know, Prime Minister or the personal who acts as Prime Minister when the Prime Minister's away, Treasurer, Finance Minister and talked about the blue tie in that context. 
So your blue tie is fine.
HOST: Prime Minister we've noticed on Twitter that you are a massive fan of Game of Thrones and I'm wondering has Canberra turned into a bit of a King's Landing?
I mean we've had an old King in Mark Latham, he was waffling on last week. 
You've got Prince Joffrey, I guess that'd be Tony Abbott, he wants a seat on the throne. 
Do you feel like it is a Game of Thrones sometimes Prime Minister Gillard?
PM: Let me assure you in Canberra we don't have that brilliant sunshine, vivid colours and women wandering around in you know, flowy, off the shoulder numbers. 
We don't have that happening in Canberra, that is only happening at King's Landing.
HOST: Julia Gillard, you are the strongest woman I have ever known and I speak for a lot of women when I say we absolutely respect you, we respect the job that you're doing. 
I don't know any other woman in the world that could be putting up with what you're putting up with in this political environment and I absolutely take my hat off to you. 
I adore you and I wish you all the best in the upcoming election. You're tremendous. 
I fear if Tony Abbott gets into the Prime Ministership, that's all I can say. 
So thank you for coming on our show.
PM: Thank you very much, thanks Lisa, Paul, Baz, thank you.


Perth
A new regional sports and community centre - including an aquatic centre and permanent training facilities - will be built for the Fremantle Football Club.
The $114 million complex will become a hub of sporting and community life in the area with both indoor and outdoor swimming pools for swimming competitions, water polo, hydrotherapy and children's activities. It will also include an indoor stadium with seven highball courts and a gymnasium.
The Gillard Government is contributing $10 million to the project through the Regional Development Australia Fund.
Once completed, the centre will also include community facilities such as walking and running tracks, playgrounds, picnic areas, a multi-purpose oval, cafe and spaces for meetings and functions.
Educational facilities will also be integrated into the project's design with a lecture theatre, health and wellness laboratories, sports medicine facilities and multi-media rooms to be constructed.
This project brings environmental as well as social and economic benefits to the residents of Cockburn and surrounding areas.
Importantly, the new centre will generate 400 jobs during construction and create 796 ongoing jobs in the area, providing the economic vitality that regional areas need for a prosperous future.
The initial investment will increase the area's economic output by $339 million.
Tourism will also increase, with the centre expected to receive 690,000 visits a year from spectators attending sports and recreational events that have previously not been possible, due to capacity constraints.
To be completed in February 2016, the new centre will replace aging infrastructure and integrate closely with Perth's public transport system.
Its central location will encourage visitors to arrive using public transport rather than private vehicle, setting the centre apart as a model of eco-efficiency.
The City of Cockburn Council is to be congratulated on its successful proposal under round four of the Federal Government's Regional Development Australia Fund.
The application process for this round of funding proved very competitive, with all proposals scrutinised against eligibility, risk, viability and value-for-money criteria.
The Federal Government places tremendous importance on strong, sustainable regional towns and communities.
Further information on the Regional Development Australia Fund can be found at www.regional.gov.au


Perth
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: I am delighted to be here today with the member for Perth, Stephen Smith, and also with Senator Louise Pratt and of course Stephen Smith is also the Minister for Defence.
I would like to say a very big thank you to everybody who has made us so welcome here today and shown us around this amazing project and you can hear the sounds of public transport, people moving around.
But this City Link project is going to change the face of Perth. 
It is going to change the face of this city connecting up the CBD and Northbridge.
It is an incredible change for this city opening up new spaces for use, changing the way that people can flow through the city and into Northbridge and back again. 
I am very pleased that what is happening here is part of our $6.9 billion worth of investment into transport infrastructure in Western Australia. 
In the recent Budget we outlined our plans for transport here in Western Australia, including putting on the table half a billion dollars for public transport. 
As a Federal Government, we believe you have to invest in the future and you have to invest in public transport as well as roads and so half a billion on the table to improve public transport in Perth. 
We have also put money on the table for the Swan Valley Bypass, for the Tonkin Highway, for the Great Northern Highway, we want to see these investments for the people of Western Australia. 
This is just one way we are investing in the future of this great state.
Today the monthly unemployment numbers came out and showed once again the resilience of the Australian economy, the unemployment rate staying steady and here in Western Australia actually falling to 4.9 per cent. 
As a Government, we have always put jobs first. 
We did that during the global financial crisis. 
We are continuing to do that now by investing in the future including investing in much needed public transport and transport infrastructure. 
Jobs are valuable for families. You can't make a life for yourself and your family without access to a good job opportunity.
So I am particularly concerned today, on the day that we got our new unemployment numbers and showed yet again that compared to nations around the world we've come through the global financial crisis strong and resilient. 
I am concerned today to see threats from the Liberal Party to 2000 car making jobs in South Australia. 
Our nation can't afford to be throwing those kinds of jobs away and for the Leader of the Opposition to be contemplating throwing those jobs away just isn't smart. 
It isn't a smart way for our nation to approach the future. 
I have just been advised that here in Western Australia, Premier Barnett has announced 1200 jobs will be lost here in WA from the public sector. 
Once again, I am very concerned about what that means for those working people and their families. 
It follows a pattern right around the country where State Liberal Governments have cut jobs. 
We take a different approach. We want to see jobs around our nation, we will continue to focus on economic growth and jobs and we will focus too on the wise investments for the future. 
I have been here in Western Australia focussing on the future of this great state. 
That future is being made today in the classrooms in Western Australia. 
The future of this state can't be better than the quality of the education that children are getting in those classrooms. 
I want to see them get a great education and that's why I want to see an additional $2.8 billion invested in Western Australian schools over the next six years. 
That is a smart investment in the future and I'm calling on Premier Barnett to work with me to deliver that for the children of Western Australia.
I will turn now to Stephen Smith, the Member for Perth, for some comments. 
SMITH: Thanks, Prime Minister. 
I am pleased to welcome the Prime Minister to Perth and particularly to welcome her to my electorate and to one of the very important infrastructure projects in the electorate and the city of Perth. 
This project strongly supported by the Commonwealth, over $230 million. 
Without the contribution from the Commonwealth this project would not have gone ahead. 
This project will transform Perth transport and will also join Northbridge to the city for the first time.
So this is a terrific project and I am very pleased that the Prime Minister has inspected it today and we're seeing very good progress. 
This is just one of a number of important infrastructure projects, important to my electorate but also to the city of Perth and Perth generally. 
This comes in addition to of course the Gateway project where we're seeing a billion dollar project to transform the road network around the airport and to make transport from the airport to the city much better. 
It follows upon the transformation of Great Eastern Highway as a gateway to the city itself and with important direct benefits for my electorate  -  the transformation of Tonkin Highway with the great separation in Tonkin Highway and also down the track the Swan Valley bypass. 
All of these strongly supported by the Commonwealth, strongly supported by the Prime Minister and Transport and Infrastructure Minister Anthony Albanese. 
When you look at the sweep of contributions that this Government has made, we have made about double the contribution to infrastructure investment in Western Australia that the Howard Government did over half the period. 
So Tony Abbott was a Minister for 11 years in the Howard Government and in 6 years, less than 6 years, we have seen double the investment in Western Australian infrastructure over half the time. 
We have also put on the table in the recent Budget a half a billion dollars for public transport, whether that's light rail or other forms of public transport. 
Despite all of the promises from the Barnett Government in the course of the recent state election campaign, not one cent on the table for that from the State Government. 
So when you look at the contrast, substantial investment by the Commonwealth Government into infrastructure in Perth, whether it is transforming the railway system and Northbridge or Tonkin Highway or the gateway to the airport; substantial investments just about double the per capita contribution to Western Australia.
Of course infrastructure investment brings with it opportunities and jobs and I join with the Prime Minister in expressing great concern over the announcement today by Colin Barnett, the Premier, that some 1200 jobs will potentially go from Western Australian public servants. 
We heard nothing of this in the election. 
Plenty of promises about public transport which haven't been met but nothing about cuts, nothing about job losses. 
This is precisely what you can expect from Tony Abbott if he is elected as Prime Minister. 
You'll hear nothing from Tony Abbott in the run-up to the middle of September about cuts to jobs, cuts to employment, cuts to services, cuts to health and education, no investment in infrastructure. 
He will be silent on that but we have seen from Colin Barnett, we've seen in Queensland from the Queensland Liberal National government.
We've seen elsewhere that when they are elected the promises go out the door and the cuts to services and the cuts to jobs come in in full bore. 
I join the Prime Minister in expressing great concern about that announcement today, none of which we heard in the run-up to recent the state election. 
PM: Thank you. We'll take some questions. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Well you are referring to a story on the front of the newspaper today. 
A little bit earlier this week I talked about the rumour and speculation that shouldn't people - people shouldn't waste their breath on. 
I won't be wasting my breath on any of that rumour and speculation. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: The remuneration for members of Parliament is set entirely independently of government and of members of Parliament and I think that is appropriate that we don't have a political process, we have a non-political process. 
But if I could pick you up on the wording of your question, I think you've got me confused with the Leader of the Opposition. 
It is him that is preaching austerity. 
We are the government that wants to keep supporting families by supporting jobs and supporting families costs of living.
For example, through the schoolkids bonus, the money that helps you get the kids to school and pay for all the things they need, cutting that out in the name of austerity is the Leader of the Opposition's plan. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: It is set independently for good reason. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Well, I stand by absolutely everything I said yesterday and it seems to me that there are dozens and dozens and dozens of questions for Mal Brough to still answer. 
Yesterday Mal Brough said he had seen this menu, he acknowledged that he had seen it. 
Today we're hearing quite a different version. Well it's for Mal Brough to answer every question about that. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Mal Brough yesterday said he'd seen the menu and he offered an apology. Today we get a completely different version. It's for Mr Brough to explain that. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: It was deeply offensive, deeply offensive. No other description should be used. 
It was a tawdry document and it was a document that Mal Brough yesterday said that he saw. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: It hasn't distracted me from doing anything I normally do as Prime Minister. 
I mean I've been through this cycle before; seeing for example the Leader of the Opposition standing next to sexist and offensive signs. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Let's be very clear, we're getting a different version today than the version we got yesterday. It is for Mal Brough to explain how that possibly adds up. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Once again rumour and speculation, I'm not dealing with it. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Rumour and speculation you have got out of the newspapers and as I said earlier this week, don't waste your breath, I'm not wasting mine. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: No, he did not. Did not raise the matter. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Well, I think this is a very difficult day for the people of Western Australia and certainly a very difficult day for people who are now worrying about their jobs. 
What has happened here is if you vote Liberal then you get job cutbacks. 
If you vote Liberal you get job cutbacks that you weren't told about. 
We have seen it around the country. We have seen it in other Liberal States. 
Now we are seeing it here in Western Australia. 
The last thing the people of Australia can afford is to add Mr Abbott's plans for cuts to the bone on top of these job cutbacks. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Look, I stand by everything that I've said about that this week and I refer you to the entirety of my speech. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Yes, I do. I had a conversation with Ben Elton about that yesterday and I'd actually refer you to that conversation. 
I was obviously making a reference to the fact that the Leader of the Opposition as a result of focus groups or the political handlers that he has, as a result of that now only appears in a white shirt and a blue tie. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: That was a reference to what life would look like if Mr Abbott was elected Prime Minister. 
You would see Mr Abbott as Prime Minister. 
If he went on leave you would see Warren Truss acting as Prime Minister. 
What I went through in my speech and let me go through it, you'd see Tony Abbott as Prime Minister, if he went on leave or went overseas, you'd see Warren Truss as Prime Minister. 
On budget night you'd see Joe Hockey deliver the budget. 
On budget night and the days following you'd see Andrew Robb as Finance Minister helping explain the budget. 
Our team is different. 
You see me as Prime Minister. You see Wayne Swan if I'm away overseas. 
You see Wayne Swan deliver the budget and you see Penny Wong who's working as Finance Minister there with Wayne Swan at the core of budget preparations. 
That's the point I was making. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: I was pleased to meet Governor Schwarzenegger this morning because what we talked about was tackling climate change and pricing carbon. 
Governor Schwarzenegger of course has been the Governor of California. 
He's from the other side of politics. He's a republican. 
If he was an Australian, then he would be a member of the Liberal Party. 
But Governor Schwarzenegger, despite being a conservative politician, has reached out to seize the future by putting a price on carbon, and when a policy was under threat in California he defended it and California is still seizing a clean energy future as a result. 
I am pleased that the people of California are tackling climate change in the way in which Australia is tackling climate change, putting a price on carbon. 
What this is telling you is if people from both sides of politics, from the progressive side and the conservative side can come together and say let's tackle climate change the best way we know how and that's putting a price on carbon. 
Why is Mr Abbott holding himself out to the extremes when that's the mainstream consensus from politicians, including conservatives like Arnold Schwarzenegger. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: You will have to see us down there. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Oh of course, issues about women are there right throughout our world. 
Of course that's true, I mean its obvious common sense, isn't it? You never thought any different to that. 
But the reason for my meeting with Arnold Schwarzenegger today was to talk about climate change and putting a price on carbon. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: You will have to speak a little bit louder. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: No, absolutely not. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
SMITH: I'm proposing to make some announcements about Defence tomorrow and my advice to you is turn up. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
SMITH: And you should let the Chief of Army make his announcement. 
I will be out tomorrow at HMAS Stirling welcoming one of our ships back. 
I will be making a range of announcements and I will very happily speak about the Chief of Armies announcements tomorrow. 
You should let the Chief of Army make his announcement. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
SMITH: Well I'm in a 6 per cent seat. When I first became the member for Perth it was a 5 per cent seat. 
This election is going to be a tough election. 
I have seen references to opinion polling. I'm not sure that is right. I'm not sure that is right. 
What you do know though is this is going to be a tough election. 
It will be a tough election for me in my seat of Perth. It will be a tough election for Gary Gray in his seat of Brand and it will be a tough election for Melissa Parke in her seat of Fremantle. 
But I have been of the view all along that Labor will hang onto those three seats, will hold those three seats. 
If you transpose the state election results, which is an imperfect science, Labor holds all of those seats and will hold those seats because by the time we get to September, when the community in Western Australia see the whites of Tony Abbott's eyes.
When they start to focus on choice and contrast.
When they start to focus on the investment that we've made in Western Australia in terms of infrastructure.
When they focus on the strength of the economy as a result of the work we did to avoid the recession in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.
When they focus on what Liberals do, Colin Barnett slashing jobs without telling people in the run-up to an election. 
Tony Abbott cutting services to their core, slashing jobs without telling people, when they make that choice, when they see that contrast, I have always been confident that we will hang onto the seats that we've got here. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
Smith: As I said, the Chief of Army is making an announcement later today. 
He is obviously briefed me on those matters. 
You should let the Chief of Army make his announcement and after he's made his announcement, I am very happy to make public comment. 
PM: Thank you very much and with the sounds of building and construction behind us, thank you. 
Thanks very much. 


Kwinana
Gas manufacturer and supplier BOC Limited will use almost $10 million in carbon price revenue to upgrade its Kwinana site in Western Australia with a modern air gas liquefaction plant.
The upgrade will cut the carbon emissions intensity of BOC Limited's production process by up to 54 per cent and help reduce energy costs by up to $3.5 million per year.
The upgrade is also a significant project for the Kwinana region and will support the local economy and local jobs.
The $9.9 million funding grant will be delivered under the Gillard Labor Government's Clean Technology Investment Program.
The Gillard Government has been working with manufacturers across Australia to reduce energy costs and improve competitiveness.
BOC is an example of this partnership. The company is investing in its future and showing how manufacturers can cut energy costs, reduce emissions and improve productivity.
In addition to the Gillard Labor Government's contribution, BOC will invest almost $25 million in the air gas liquefaction plant.
This grant will replace BOC's existing air separation unit and nitrogen liquefier unit with a state-of-the-art gas liquefaction plant.
The $800 million Clean Technology Investment Program and the $200 million Clean Technology Food and Foundries Investment Program are providing grants to assist manufacturers to invest in energy efficient capital equipment and low emissions technologies, processes and products.
The $200 million Clean Technology Innovation Program is providing grants to businesses to develop new clean technologies. All three programs are funded by carbon price revenue and are open for applications.
For more information, companies should contact AusIndustry on 13 28 46 or visit the website www.ausindustry.gov.au.


Adelaide
PM: Well I'm absolutely delighted to be here at Mitcham Primary School  -  my old school.
I've come with a variety of friends. Of course I am here with the Premier of South Australia, Senator Don Farrell, our candidate in this federal electorate of Boothby, where I grew up, where my family still lives, the federal electorate of Boothby Annabel Digance and we are joined too by Jennifer Rankin, the State Minister for Education.
The reason we're here in such force and such numbers is we are absolutely delighted to be together to announce that today the Premier and I have signed the National Education reform agreement for South Australia.
What that means is new resources for South Australian  schools and an agreed agenda of improvement for South Australian schools.
I want to see South Australian school kids succeeding.
I want to see South Australian schools in the top five schooling systems in the world.
I want the kids who come to this school today, who go to all South Australian schools, to have their potential fully realised and for the economy of this State in the future it can only be as good and as strong as the quality of what's happening in the classrooms today.
Put simply, if South Australian kids fall behind the standards of the world, then South Australia can't have a strong economy in the future.
We have worked together and I would very much like to thank the Premier and his Government for the cooperation they have shown on school funding.
We have agreed an agenda for school improvement.
It is an agenda about better quality teaching, focusing on teacher quality because it is the single biggest thing that makes a difference to the quality of the education in a classroom.
Focusing on empowering school principals, on involving local school communities in decisions at school, continuing the roll out of the national curriculum; we know all of these things combined can work to make a difference.
I have seen it in schools where we have national partnership arrangements now; new ways of working, making a difference.
But in order to finance that you need new resources.
You need schools to be in a position where they have got the resources available to their school to teach the kids that go there.
To make sure that if they need that extra teaching because some of the kids are falling behind in reading, that it is there.
To make sure for the kids that are really at the top of the class and are absolutely champing to do more that those kids get personalised learning plans that extend them.
To make sure schools can employ the specialist teachers, the language teachers, school librarians, resources that make a real practical difference to whether kids learn to read and write and do maths at the standards we want them to.
So there will be new money for South Australian schools. Over the next 6 years the amount of new money is $656 million into base funding.
By the time you add indexation to that and we are guaranteeing our indexation rate of 4.7 per cent it becomes a total injection of $1.1 billion dollars more for South Australian schools.
It will be funded with the Federal Government picking up 65 per cent, the South Australian government picking up 35 per cent.
This mirrors the arrangement we've struck in other parts of the country like NSW and like the ACT.
I genuinely want to thank the Premier for putting the kids of South Australia first and today I do take the opportunity to call on premiers and the Chief Minister in the Northern Territory who haven't yet signed on to do the same thing and to put their kids first.
I turn now to the Premier for some comments.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Well, thank you Prime Minister and congratulations on finally achieving this agreement here in South Australia and also congratulations on the leadership role that you have taken in this nation on this question of school funding.
This will, in the long term, make an extraordinary difference to the future prosperity of South Australia and the wellbeing of its citizens.
There can't be anything more important than investing in the people and that is what we are doing here with these school reforms.
For any parent out there that is thinking about their children, anybody that has children understands that there, within a family, there might be a couple of kids but they can be so different.
They all have extraordinary, unique needs and talents but unlocking the secret to meeting those needs and unlocking those talents requires excellent teaching and that individual attention that is needed for each of those children can only come if the teacher actually has the time and the space to meet those needs.
To be able to work with your child to actually understand your child and what it is that allows them to progress.
It will be different things for every child.
Sometimes it will require a bit of extra help, it might be some speech pathology.
It may be that one child is just racing ahead of the other children in the class and needs some special attention to make sure they continue to be challenged.
Or there might be a child that has some particular behavioural issues that need to be addressed.
All of those things, all the complexities, the rich complexities and differences that exist across our whole classroom is something that these school reforms are directed to.
It requires first-class teachers that understand how to actually meet those needs and it requires the resources that allow them to put into the classroom the things that are going to make a difference.
That's what this is all about.
We know what quality teaching looks like, we know what quality leadership looks like.
We also know what great schools look like and there are many in our system.
We want all of the schools and all of the teachers to be lifted to that standard and that is what these resources give us the opportunity to do everywhere in the nation.
That is why this is such an important reform.
That is why I am so proud to be standing here with the Prime Minister pledging South Australia's agreement..
PM: Thank you very much. Just briefly before we go to questions, I am aware that a number of you want to ask questions relating to the interview I did yesterday with Mr Howard Sattler.
Can I just say to you I'm not intending to make any comments on that interview, except to say this.
I've seen the remarks of the Sex Discrimination Commissioner Elizabeth Broderick, where she has spoken about her concerns that things like this send a message to women and to girls not to be involved in public life.
I am concerned about that too and having seen so many young girls today, I don't want to see a message like that sent to those young girls.
I want young girls and women to be able to feel like they can be included in public life and not have to face questioning like the questioning I faced yesterday.
I will take questions now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you explain the difference in the funding that was previously offered and the new funding?
Also the per capita amount of additional funding under this scheme for South Australia is less than some other states.
Is South Australia being punished for committing more money to education in the past?
PM: Sure, they are both good questions and I am happy to answer both of them.
When we first announced our offers to states, we announced base funding and we pledged indexation.
The base funding then for South Australia was $566 million.
We have worked in the meantime with the South Australia Government to study and refine the figures.
Particularly to get a more accurate view of the starting point in 2014 and having done that, the way the model works is that the figures do increase to the figure that we announced today - $1.1 billion in total, $656 million in new base funding.
So there is always work to do and we knew we would have to do that work with jurisdictions around the country.
In terms of the comparison between South Australia and other states, South Australia has been a long term strong funder of school education, and that is a great tribute to the Government.
It does mean that South Australia is therefore closer to the school resource standard.
The aim of these reforms is that for all of the schools around the country 9500 of them, they have got available to them the school resource standard, including loadings, so they have got the right amount of money to teach the kids in that school.
So it recognises that kids from poor homes come to school and they need extra effort and extra resources in their education, so do kids from non-English speaking backgrounds.
So the model works to make sure around the country we can all say to each other that our schools have got the right resources to teach our children not just now but for generations to come.
So South Australia was closer to the school resourcing standard and that explains the difference.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister does that difference then mean that we have more disadvantaged students than we previously thought?
PM: No, it's a difference with the starting point and the figures in 2014.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does that mean that you'll be considering increasing the funding offers to Victoria and Queensland and you've already increased it to Western Australia but to the other states that haven't signed?
PM: Well we've been joking with the kids today about doing maths.
There is a lot of maths in all of these school funding offers.
What we have done is we have continued to refine the understanding of things like the cost base in South Australia, the understanding of the starting point here.
That is what is changing the figures.
The model is the same as the model I agreed with New South Wales and the model is the model that is on the table with other jurisdictions.
Now when it comes to Queensland and Victoria, if they start fully cooperating and giving us their real figures, yes, it is possible.
The maths might change.
What we have done is the best we can do when states aren't cooperating with us.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on that resourcing standard, you say South Australia is closer, but South Australia's NAPLAN results are consistently lower than some of the other states.
Doesn't that demonstrate that money isn't necessarily going to be the solution?
PM: I want to be very clear, the agreement we have signed today is about money for schools, but it's also about new ways of working.
It is called the National Plan for School Improvement for a reason, and that is that is all about lifting standards in schools.
Kids who couldn't read and write, learning to read and write.
Kids that couldn't do maths, getting to do maths at the right standard, kids that weren't going to come out of primary school prepared for high school, coming out of primary school ready to go.
These things are the improvements we want to see and we know we can do it because we have worked over five years on these reforms.
Transparency, so we knew what was happening in schools.
National curriculum, to lift the quality of the curriculum.
New school buildings and new school equipment and national partnerships, schools including disadvantaged schools where we have gone and worked with new resources and we can demonstrate having done that, the kids get a better result.
What these resources enable is that, that approach, that improvement, to be done right around South Australia and I am obviously hoping right around the nation because I don't want to see any kids left behind.
Which is why I do want to see the other Premiers do what the South Australian Premier, Premier Weatherill, has been prepared to do today.
I should have said in answer to your question, the working of the model means that if numbers of children from say poorer backgrounds increase for whatever reason then the model works so that that flows new resources.
This is about the needs for kids in schools.
So there is the base amount of funding and then the loadings, including the loadings for children including from disadvantaged backgrounds.
So if you saw more children from disadvantaged backgrounds more loading funding would flow.
JOURNALIST: How much is, where is that extra funding coming from, the funding for South Australia, from the State Government and the Federal Government, where exactly? PM: Well, for us, we made provision at Budget time in our contingency reserve so that we would have a pool of money available to us as we work through with states and territories and refined the calculations based on the model.
JOURNALIST: Premier, can we ask you - you made the point when you were going through the River Murray debate that you weren't going to sign up to a deal that didn't recognise the contributions that South Australia had made in the past.
Why are you now signing up to a deal which gives you less money than other states because you have already spent money?
WEATHERILL: Because we are trying to get to a standard.
The standard is the amount of resource that's necessary to ensure that children have an excellent education.
So that is the standard we are not prepared to compromise, just as we weren't prepared to compromise on the river, what the river needed to be healthy.
So the objectives have never been compromised.
The fact that we have a shorter distance to travel is to the credit of the South Australia Government in all of its forms over previous decades.
We have invested in education in this state.
So we continue to provide the support and resources that are necessary for people in South Australia and that's what when agreement is about.
JOURNALIST: But given your budget position aren't now at a relative disadvantage to your competitors interstate where those states may be spending less per capita on education now as a result of getting a bigger slice from the Federal Government?
WEATHERILL: I don't want to get into a long complicated argument about horizontal fiscal equalisation, but South Australia can't be disadvantaged in terms of commonwealth/state financial relations because the way in which those commonwealth/state financial relations work. JOURNALIST: Did you negotiate as hard as you could?
Obviously South Australia is the second state to sign up and there's some time to the deadline.
Could you have gone harder and secured more money for South Australia?
WEATHERILL: I think this is a very beneficial arrangement for South Australia and I'm very pleased to have reached agreement.
JOURNALIST: When will the South Australian funding kick in?
When will you put South Australian funding in, in 2014?
WEATHERILL: Yes, straight away. We put money in straight away and obviously we reach the standard in 2018/19.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
WEATHERILL: Yes, at the time when I was asked questions about funding for education, I said that there were sufficient reserves that were available to meet the commitment that we would need to make to reach agreement and we have now reached agreement and we will draw on those reserves.
JOURNALIST: Some of that is the $70 million from DisabilityCare?
WEATHERILL: Well in the long term, the truth is being able to consume both the DisabilityCare and the education funding reforms would have placed very significant burden on South Australia.
So there is no doubt that the additional funding that comes to us through the striking of the additional Medicare levy, a quarter of which comes to South Australia, has made this affordable for South Australia.
But in the short term in terms of the forward estimates, the four years that we publish, that's well within the reserves that we have set for ourselves.
JOURNALIST: How much in the first year from the South Australia government?
WEATHERILL: I will provide you with the details.
JOURNALIST: In terms of nuts and bolts, will we see improved ratios of teacher to student...
WEATHERILL: What parents will see is the individual needs of their children met.
If that means more individual attention with more teachers, that's what will happen.
If it's more school service officer support, that's what will happen.
If specialist support needs to be brought into their schools, occupational therapy, the speech therapy, that will be brought into schools.
If it is about a specialist teacher, a language teacher, a physical education teacher, if it's about resources, particular resources, or a guest educator that might come in on a specific topic.
All of those things become possible and that's what this funding arrangement allows schools to do.
Excellent leaders working with first-class teachers, focusing on what will unlock the talents of every individual child within a classroom, and you need resources to do that.
This is a very resource intensive business.
If you want the time to be able to spend with each individual child, that requires additional resources in the classroom.
That's what this funding formula gives us.
JOURNALIST: The bulk of the Medicare levy, the extra funding comes from 2018/19, but you're proposing to spend that money straightaway is that...
WEATHERILL: No, no, obviously the national plan for school improvement and the funding ramps up the very substantial commitments occur at about the same time as the funding comes to South Australia
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
WEATHERILL: I will provide you with a breakdown of all of that, but essentially it ramps up to the point where it's very substantial in the years when the National Disability Insurance Scheme also kicks in.
So we have two very substantial commitments which have been
JOURNALIST: But it's more than another election cycle away...
WEATHERILL: But they are locked in.
In terms of Disability Care, that's an agreed lock-in matter and hopefully these reforms will be agreed locked-in matters between the Commonwealth and State Government.
JOURNALIST: The June 30 deadline was about giving schools certainty but do they have certainty?
The Coalition says that they'll repeal the Gonski reforms so they're still in a sense without certainty? Is that?
PM: Well, they will have it from us.
It's all at risk on September 14. What they know from me and this government is that we've worked hard to improve schools and if re-elected, we will continue to do that by honouring the agreement that I have entered into with the Premier today.
I do note that the Shadow Minister for Education Christopher Pyne has now made it crystal-clear that if the Opposition is elected as the government they will repeal all of this before the start of next school year.
So from us, certain. We will now work with the South Australian government on what the school-by-school figures are, so people can see that.
From us, certain.
From Mr Abbott, all at risk.
JOURNALIST: Does that include even if the other states don't sign up?
PM: As I understand the words of the Shadow Minister for Education now he has committed the Opposition to repealing all of this if they are elected before the start of the next school year.
JOURNALIST: Premier, how would that affect us?
WEATHERILL: Well it would be a disaster for the children of South Australia.
That's why people should think very carefully about how they vote at the next federal election and not just on this.
There is a whole tranche of things.
Any self-respecting South Australian citizen, if they look at the threat under GST, $980m ripped out of South Australia.
The threat to Holden, the closure of Holden - that's what we know is going to happen.
Holden aren't bluffing, they've closed German plants.
They won't re-invest without the commitment that the current Federal Government has made.
Should the Coalition form a government, Holden would close.
We know they would love to find a way of backing out of the River Murray agreement.
These are all critical issues for South Australia. South Australia's interests are served by the policies of Federal Labor and this has to be front and centre in people's considerations.
Of course these reforms are massively in South Australia's interests and every state and territory if they thought about it for a moment and didn't play politics would realise that having the commonwealth government funding the private school system and the state governments funding the public school system is not in the long-term interest of public education.
Because the fiscally stronger level of government is funding one sector and the less strong fiscal level of government is funding the public education system.
It's just not where you would want to be if you actually want public education to prosper.
That's why we have now - we get to abolish the distinction between commonwealth and state government funding with this agreement.
You don't have to talk about in the future the notion of commonwealth and state governments funding education.
There is just one funding system for wherever your student goes, wherever your child goes to school, whether its private education or public education, they will be guaranteed a certain standard of funding.
This will be an extraordinary achievement if we can make this happen and it is up for grabs.
JOURNALIST: Premier, I can't help but notice you are wearing a blue tie today, is that a coincidence?
WEATHERILL: I prefer to think of it as purple.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on that topic, do you feel the events of this week justify your speech about sexism in Sydney earlier this week?
PM: I'm not going to answer that question on the basis I suspect it would draw me into commenting on Mr Sattler and I'm not intending to.
JOURNALIST: Given your concerns that women would be put off going into public life, do you think suspension of Howard Sattler is appropriate?
PM: I'm not answering any question on that.
JOURNALIST: What about Bill Shorten. Are you concerned about Bill Shorten challenging your leadership?
PM: I've seen some nonsense in today's newspapers and I'm not concerned about that at all.
That's a report about a book that's obviously wrong.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about Syria and the US Government's statement that it now has proved that Syria has used chemical weapons, what do you make of that?
PM: We will make this the last question.
This is a very serious matter.
We would all condemn the use of chemical weapons and as the White House has said today there is evidence that chemical weapons have been used in Syria, and that is the view of our own security personnel as well.
So we would all condemn the use of chemical weapons, and we would all be calling for the regime in Syria to let the UN inspection team in.
Thank you very much.


Adelaide
New figures released by the Gillard Government today have confirmed that every single school in Western Australia will receive extra funding over the next six years, under our new and fairer funding model.
The figures, based on the needs-based funding model the Gillard Government wants to introduce for every school, set out how much additional money will flow to Western Australian schools under the National Plan for School Improvement by 2019.
Under our offer to the Western Australian Government, schools across the state will benefit by around $2.8 billion, as a result of extra investment and securing better indexation for schools.
This means that over six years, government schools would receive around an extra $1.9 billion, Catholic schools around an extra $360 million and independent schools would benefit by around $480 million.
Schools with the highest needs will benefit the most from the extra money we are offering.
This extra money will help bring every Western Australian school up to its Schooling Resource Standard, ensuring around 760 schools have the money they need to support every student and deliver the best education possible.
These new figures will reassure parents, principals and the community that no school will be worse off under the new model.
Under the fairer funding model, every school will be funded based on the needs of individual students.
This includes a base amount per student, plus extra money for schools and students that need more support  -  including Indigenous students, low SES students, students with disability, students with limited English proficiency, small schools, and regional and remote schools.
The National Plan for School Improvement will also deliver:
 * 	More one on one attention and support in the classroom for every child.
 * 	Specialist literacy and numeracy programs for those children in danger of being left behind.
 * 	Greater assistance for those students with disability or special need.
 * 	Building the skills and knowledge of teachers and providing mentoring support for those who are new to the profession.
This is a fair and generous offer which will deliver benefits to Western Australia for generations to come.
Premier Barnett has until 30 June 2013 to sign up to the National Plan for School Improvement, contribute Western Australia's share and secure a better deal for every school in his state.


Adelaide
The Australian and South Australian Governments have today reached an historic agreement which will benefit around 250,000 students across South Australia by delivering long term improvements in every school across every schooling sector.
South Australia has now joined New South Wales and the ACT in signing the National Education Reform Agreement which will drive the reforms we need for Australia to be in the top five countries for reading, maths and science by 2025.
The agreement will ensure that funding arrangements will now be based on the needs of individual students and individual schools and it will also incorporate the National Plan for School Improvement which will drive continued reform and improvement in the areas we know drive better student outcomes.
This agreement will increase public funding to South Australian schools by around $1.1 billion between 2013 and 2019.
Total new funding to public schools will be $717 million, total new funding to the Catholic schools sector will be $197 million and total new funding for the Independent schools sector will be $186 million.
This $1.1 billion in extra funding comprises around $656 million in State and Federal Government investments to bring per-student funding up to the new Schooling Resource Standard, as well as better rates of indexation. 
To achieve this, the Gillard Government has committed to grow its school education spending by 4.7 per cent per year from 2014 into 2015 and throughout the agreement.
In return, South Australia has committed to reach an indexation rate of 3 per cent over the new funding period.
For the first time, all funding will be linked to education reforms.  This means that all South Australian students, no matter where they go to school, will receive a world-class education and the required level of support to fulfil their educational potential and prepare them for the high-skill, high-wage jobs of tomorrow.
The agreements signed today will benefit principals and teachers, who will see more training and support, greater rewards for staying in classrooms and more autonomy in decision making in schools.
Parents and community organisations will see more transparency around school performance and funding so they can be more informed and involved in the education of their students.
The Australian Government is determined to keep working closely with all remaining states and territories and the non-government sector– and with schools, parents and communities right across the nation – to see these reforms agreed by 30 June 2013.


Adelaide 
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Minister for Defence Stephen Smith and Minister for Defence Science and Personnel Warren Snowdon today announced that Australia and the United States have agreed to progress to a larger six month rotation of around 1,150 US Marines to northern Australia from 2014.The majority of the Marines will be accommodated at Robertson Barracks, with a smaller aviation support contingent of around 130 personnel at RAAF Darwin, along with four heavy lift helicopters.Six month rotations of US Marines to northern Australia were announced by Prime Minister Julia Gillard and United States President Barack Obama on 16 November 2011.Progressing to this larger six month rotation will provide the Australian Defence Force (ADF) with increased opportunities for combined training and deepening interoperability.These six month rotations will better position both nations to join with other regional partners to respond in a timely and effective manner to a range of contingencies in the Indo-Pacific, including humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.These rotations assist Australia's long-held strategic interests by supporting United States engagement in our region in a manner that promotes peace, stability and prosperity.The intent over coming years is to establish a six month rotational presence (not before 2016) of an up to 2,500 person Marine Air Ground Task Force, rotating into northern Australia in the six month northern dry season.The initial rotation of around 200 Marines occurred between April and September 2012. A second six month rotation of around 200 Marines arrived in Darwin on 21 April 2013.On 30 May, the Minister for Defence and Minister for Defence Science and Personnel released the outcomes of the Social and Economic Assessments of the impacts associated with the six month rotations of 1,100 United States Marines in northern Australia proposed to start in 2014.The assessments found that most impacts resulting from a rotation of 1,100 Marines were expected to be positive or neutral, and that the economic impact would be modest and positive.The Social and Economic Assessments informed Government consideration about the size, nature and timing of the next increment in possible future rotations.The Economic Assessment suggests that a rotation of 1,100 Marines is expected to contribute an additional $5.6 million to the Northern Territory Gross State Product in 2011-12 dollars, or $5,090 per Marine.The Economic Assessment found that the impact on Northern Territory industry would benefit the retail trade, transport, recreational and other business service sectors.The Economic Assessment noted that assumptions underlying the economic modelling were conservative, and it is likely that there will be additional expenditure into the Australian economy over and above these conservative estimates.The Economic Assessment is consistent with the Assessment released by Defence in October 2012 on the outcomes of Social and Economic Assessments of the impacts associated with the initial company-sized rotational deployments of 200 to 250 United States Marines to Darwin in 2012 and 2013.Bradshaw Field Training Exercise August 2013The Prime Minister, Minister for Defence and Minister for Defence Science and Personnel today also announced that around 1000 Marines would undertake a training exercise for 13 days beginning on 15 August this year at the Bradshaw Field Training Area as a follow on to this year's Exercise Talisman Saber.The 1000 Marines would be drawn from the 200 Marines currently on six month rotation in Darwin and the Marine contingent at Exercise Talisman Saber.Exercise Talisman Saber is a combined Australian and US training activity designed to train Australian and US forces in planning and conducting Combined Task Force operations.Exercise Talisman Saber this year will occur at the Shoal Water Bay Training Area and the adjacent maritime areas in the Coral Sea. It will also include activities within the Townsville Field Training Area, RAAF Amberley and Gallipoli Barracks, Enoggera, during the period 15 July to 5 August. Approximately 20,000 US personnel will attend this years' Exercise Talisman Saber, either ashore within defined Defence training areas (5000), or at Sea (15,000).Exercise Talisman Saber is a biennial exercise which has occurred every two years since 2005.The 2011 Exercise Talisman Saber took place at Shoal Water Bay between 11 and 29 July 2011 and involved approximately 20,000 US personnel.Bradshaw training area is one of the exercise areas that the rotational Marine presence will utilise. This year's exercise is aimed at developing their knowledge of the facility for future use by the 1150 strong rotation.


Adelaide
South Australia's health and biomedical precinct has today received a $100 million boost for two key projects.The Prime Minister today announced in Adelaide that the Government would provide funding for two world class education and health science and research facilities:
 * 	$40 million in funding for a new University of South Australia Centre for Cancer Biology. This Centre will house 250 researchers investigating blood cancers such as leukaemia and lymphoma.
 * 	$60 million in funding for the University of Adelaide's Integrated Clinical School to deliver teaching, learning and research facilities for medical and nursing students.
By supporting the establishment of these two new facilities in the city's north-west corner, the Gillard Government is supporting biomedical research and innovation and helping to create SA jobs.The $100m Centre for Cancer Biology will have a specific focus on the research of blood-related cancers such as leukaemia and lymphoma which account for nearly 20 per cent of cancer mortalities in Australia and over one third of cancers in childrenThe new $120 million Integrated Clinical School will support more than 1550 students, in addition to 1000 clinicians and researchers tackling cancer, heart disease, and obesity.This building will represent a new era in Australian medical education modelled on leading international university hospital precincts. The two new facilities will be part of the South Australian Health and Biomedical Precinct, which includes the Commonwealth-funded South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute and the State Government's new $2.1 billion Royal Adelaide Hospital.Bringing together the University of Adelaide's clinical schools and the Royal Adelaide Hospital ensures graduates are prepared for the clinical environment.\These projects are part of the Gillard Government's support for world class science and research, and complement other infrastructure such as the SA nodes of the Australian Phenomics Network and the European Molecular Biology Laboratory Australia.Together they will form part of a world-leading precinct delivering health and medical research, education and clinical practice close to Adelaide's centre.The Australian Government has invested more than $2 billion in research infrastructure since 2005 to support innovation and so create high-quality jobs.The recent 2013-14 Budget included a further $321.2 million in continuing support for Australian researchers and research. Costs for these projects will also be met from funding provided in the 2013-14 budget.


Adelaide
PM: Thank you very much. It's a great pleasure to be here today.
Of course I'm joined by the Premier of South Australia, I'm joined by a number of my senate colleagues, Senator Anne McEwen, Senator Penny Wong and Senator Don Farrell.And I'm joined very significantly by the vice-chancellors that you see standing here, South Australia University and the University of Adelaide.
We have all come together for a very important announcement and I'm very pleased to be here today to make it.
South Australia prides itself on being a well-planned place, Adelaide is a beautifully planned city, I know that from growing up here and I do want to commend the Premier and the State Labor Government for their new vision for the city of Adelaide and the way in which the city moves, people move through it and the work that is done here.
I particularly want to commend the vision for having a health and medical research precinct, a place where you can see the hospital working  -  so people getting treatment, you can see the medical staff of tomorrow being trained and you can see the researchers who are providing cures for the future working alongside them.
So people can seamlessly move from treatment to training, to research and each can enrich the other.
It is a fantastic vision creating the biggest precinct of its type in the Southern Hemisphere, a great tribute to the Government of South Australia.
I am here today to say that the Federal Government is going to join in the realisation of this vision with an allocation of $100 million to make sure that as this vision takes shape we are playing our part.
Firstly, we will be contributing $60 million to the integrated clinical school being established by the University of Adelaide.
We are very pleased to provide this support.
The integrated clinical school will support teaching and research for 1550 students and support 230 staff across the medical and nursing faculties.
The fact that it is co-located will be of particular benefit and today I have had the opportunity to meet some students who are talking about how they are in training for so long because of the need to do many years of training that they will actually graduate from this new facility and they're speaking about that with a real sense of delight.
So I am very pleased that we could provide that benefit for the University of Adelaide.
Then secondly, we will provide $40 million for the University of South Australia's Centre for Cancer Biology.
We all know that cancer is the second leading cause of death in Australia.
It certainly accounts for a lot of expenditure as well as widespread heart ache and loss of life.
Nine billion dollars per annum of life of our country's direct health costs is spent in fighting cancer.
So anything we can do to provide the cures for tomorrow will make a huge difference not only in the lives of individuals but in the life of our nation.
Australians pride themselves on being world-class at medical research and we are.
We have been responsible for so many breakthroughs and I believe that this centre will be a home for many of the breakthroughs of the future.
It is going to be a world-class facility and space to house up to 250 of Australia's top researchers and what they are going to be doing is working towards a deeper understanding of blood cancers like leukaemia.
Such an important field for the future and I think if we went around the room everybody would be able to name someone they know who has had to battle that kind of cancer.
I know that being co-located too will be a great benefit for that facility.
So it is with a great sense of delight that I join with my colleagues in making the announcement today.
I do want to thank the Premier very much for his vision and leadership on this.
I want to thank one other person too who couldn't be here today, that is the local Member for Adelaide Kate Ellis, my federal parliamentary colleague.
She has been a strong, and let me assure you, very vocal advocate of Federal Government support.
She was very disappointed she couldn't be here today but I do want to pay a tribute to Kate Ellis's work in making possible the announcements.
I'll hand over to the Premier.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Thank you Prime Minister and you are so welcome here, your senators, other representatives of your Government in making this wonderful announcement today.
I want to begin where you left off and that is to thank a number of people who have brought us to this day.
The vice-chancellors, of course, the vision of their particular institutions, to partner with the Commonwealth Government in this precinct and all of those people that have actually made the case.
There are competing demands on Federal Government resources and so putting together a cogent case is an incredibly important part of the process.
So people have actually explained how this fits in to the Commonwealth Government's vision for the health and wellbeing of the citizens of this country but also were able to persuade to the Commonwealth of the particular benefits for South Australia in this region.
It speaks very powerfully to a number of our ambitions in South Australia.
It speaks to our ambition to revitalise our city.
This whole river bank precinct is just an exciting part of South Australia now.
It is a vision that extends all the way from Bowden to Gilberton and this is just one precinct within this incredibly interesting and exciting part of South Australia.
It will have an identity, the riverbank park will have an identity and this discreet element of it, the bioscience precinct, will be an essential part of it.
You can't throw five or six thousand people into a part of the city without fundamentally changing its culture.
So this will spread its tentacles into the other parts of the city, the west end, extending further back down into the entertainment precinct in a way which will be incredibly exciting for our state.
The other thing that, of course, this particular investment does is build on extraordinary excellence that exists in our health and medical research capabilities here in South Australia.
We are already seeing the exciting SAHMRI building and researchers there are lining up to be part of this.
This is part of attracting the best and brightest to be part of the South Australian story and also retaining those young people that see an exciting job for themselves in the future and it is not unrelated to the quality of the medical services that we provide.
Many of our best clinicians will actually choose to work in the particular facility not just because of the salary they get or the work that they're able to do in the clinical setting but also the research opportunities that sit alongside it.
So that is something we can offer that no other place can offer now with this extraordinary bioscience precinct.
The other benefit of this particular area is that this is an industry in its own right.
For too long people have seen health as just a service that's provided to the community.
Of course it's that but it is also a thriving source of employment and also economic opportunities; we commercialise the opportunities that flow from this particular sector.
Then further it is an example of what happens with high quality public investments.
The South Australian government has invested $2.1 billion in the new Royal Adelaide Hospital.
It has also invested further funds to ensure that this precinct is been reorganised so that there's space for these buildings.
We'll be providing the land essentially to no cost to these institutions to allow them to build, to permit these investments to happen.
So public investments leverage other investments, the Commonwealth, these tertiary institutions, their investment and that's fantastic for South Australia at this point in its history.
Because as our public investments begin to taper off we want to encourage further investments by other sectors and we are beginning to see that now in this precinct.
This is leveraging extraordinary additional investments and I think this is just a wonderful example of the way in which public investment can then cause further investments in our economy.
So all in all it ticks so many boxes, we're just so thrilled the Commonwealth has made this investment.
It is just a wonderful thing for South Australia and of course these two wonderful institutions and it is my great pleasure now to invite the Vice-Chancellor of the University of South Australia to say a few words, Mr David Lloyd. Thank you.
VICE-CHANCELLOR LLOYD: Prime Minister, Premier, Senators, Ministers, Vice-Chancellor.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am David Lloyd, I am the Vice-Chancellor and President of the University of South Australia.
It is my great pleasure to welcome you all here today to the Hawke Building.
You will probably note from my accent that I am not from around these parts.
I moved to South Australia and to Adelaide with my family just after Christmas and I have only been here since the turn of the year.
Now in Ireland, Senator Farrell will probably know this one, we have a saying, there's a folk ballad which talks about The West's Awake. The West's Awake today in Adelaide, the city end, the west end is certainly awake.
In 1996 the University of South Australia was pretty much the only tenant of this part of the city.
We took an undeveloped part of Adelaide and we invested in an opportunity when we opened this campus.
It is home to more than 10,000 students and staff today.
The centre of gravity of the city is shifting westwards.
It is kind of fitting that the investment today has shifted the new Adelaide which is being laid down around us just yards from the first acre plots which were laid out in Colonel Light's survey of Adelaide when he arrived to settle the state.
So the new settlement of the state has been built on new industries.
It has been built on innovation and the connection of public health services with high technology, with professional training and with knowledge creation.
Today we are reminded of the economic power that can arise when governments, when education and when enterprise come together.
Today's announcement equips the University of South Australia and the state for the future.
It equips us for the education of modern professionals, for the conduct of leading edge biomedical research and it is coupled directly to patient benefit.
The creation of the University of South Australia's Centre for Cancer Biology in partnership with SA pathology and the CCB underpins the delivery of a major component of the university's footprint in the new South Australian health precinct.
The CCB is one of the top three cancer research facilities in the world.
It is here in Adelaide and we're very proud to be forging a new partnership in collaboration with them.
The Prime Minister touched on the economic cost and the human cost of cancer.
One in two Australian men and one in three Australian women will be diagnosed with cancer by the age of 85.
30 per cent of all deaths in Australia are due to cancer.
So research in this area and patient-focused research in this area is of critical need.
Our centre will spearhead the creation of innovative new therapies through patient-focussed, cancer research and it will have global visibility as a centre of excellence which actually has true relevance to everybody in this room.
The creation of SAHMRI which is due to be completed just across the road heralded a new beginning in cooperation between universities.
The University of South Australia, the University of Adelaide and the University of Flinders came together to deliver a world class clinical research facility linked directly to the new Royal Adelaide Hospital.
The addition of our development and the University of Adelaide's medical and nursing education development will further this enhance the scale and scope of this precinct.
The Federal Government's investment coupled with the State Government's ongoing support will actually help us to realise our own ambition for the delivery of a $280 million facility across road on North Terrace by 2017.
Our commitment today is that we will leverage the Federal Government's funding to deliver not only a world class facility for cancer research but we are going to build on our position as the largest educator of modern professionals in the health space to deliver new infrastructure for allied health.
We're going to advance specialised clinics, a centre for healthcare innovation and a major science and technology outreach initiative to underpin the state's competitiveness across the [inaudible] horizon.
So on behalf of the University of South Australia I extend my sincere thanks to the Federal and to the State Government for this.
Their clear vote of confidence in us and their investments to secure the future prosperity of the state.
VICE-CHANCELLOR BEBBINGTON: Well now, unlike David, I've been here for 11 months.
So I'm a positive veteran, relatively.
The University of Adelaide's medical school and the Royal Adelaide Hospital have been together on Frome Road for over 130 years.
It has to be like that because any medical school and its teaching hospital move together in a partnership like a single organism.
There's 1500 clinicians working in that hospital who also have teaching appointments with the University.
What this announcement does today is it means that that partnership, that organism goes on and grows flourishes in the future.
The University of Adelaide will match with $60 million of its own funds the grant that's been made to us today.
That means construction will start early next year on our medical school.
It means that the medical school will open when the new Royal Adelaide Hospital opens in 2016 and so the partnership we've had, this historic and very necessary partnership will continue seamlessly and without interruption.
It also means that all those health students who started their courses with us this year will now finish with their clinical practice on this new precinct at the new Royal Adelaide in the new medical school.
The building next to SAHMRI is also important. I would guess that probably half of all the researchers who will be working in SAHMRI will be University of Adelaide staff.
That means that we can bring onto a single site not only our medical researchers but our medical teachers, our students and our patients.
It greatly magnifies our capacity to address the most urgent issues that face health in Australia  -  heart disease, diabetes, obesity, young babies, cancer, the problems of human nutrition and metabolism.
Our vision for this building also includes moving our dental school into it, a school which not only produces dentists for South Australia but also in the process provides more than two thirds of the all the free dental care into this state.
But adding our dental school into this blows the envelope out quite a bit possibly to $200 million and we will be working very hard in the coming weeks to see if we can fund the gap and include the dental school in this project making this a truly comprehensive health precinct.
Every South Australian has been cared for by a University of Adelaide doctor, dentist or nurse at some point in their life.
We are currently training as you have heard over 1500 these young people to join those professions and the great thing about this announcement is that in the future, these professionals will all be able train together in a new first integrated curriculum model.
A first for Australia and one which will produce a newly adaptable class of health care workers, a quality health care work force of the kind Australia needs.
It remains just for me, Prime Minister, on behalf of the University of Adelaide, to thank you profoundly for this magnificent gift of $60 million.
I can only imagine the financial pressures that you deal with every day, the challenges of the Federal Budget and in the midst of all that to somehow have found the capacity to make this grant to the University of Adelaide, which is the largest in our history, was a step of boldness, a step of great vision.
With the state's help in facilitating this site we will respond and you can rest assured that what you have done today will have a profound effect on the health, the healthcare and the healthcare workforce of South Australia. Thank you.
PM: Well we joked on the way in, I asked what the collective noun for vice-chancellors was and was told an argument, but we haven't had any arguments today.
We are happy to take questions if we could take questions first on today's announcement and when we have exhausted those questions then we'll move to other questions of the day.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you have expected that South Australian taxpayers or the government to chip in for this project as well?
PM: The Premier's outlined the vision here. What I am very pleased we were able to do is make a contribution.
I do thank you for the acknowledgment that it is not easy at the moment.
Of course, we are making sure that we are working so that the Budget comes back to surplus.
We have had a very big focus on jobs and growth, been very prudent about the Government's resources but these two projects are so compelling I am glad we were able to make a contribution.
JOURNALIST: So when would you like to start these projects and complete them by?
PM: I think the completion dates were given in the discussion.
So your project you are hoping 2016 and your project 2017 but with work starting next year.
JOURNALIST: How has the Federal Government found the money for the projects?
PM: Through the Budget process, this is provisioned in the Budget.
So through the process where we had to weigh responsible savings for important investments and as we did that what we prioritised at every point, and I'm very conscious that the Minister for Finance is here and she certainly knows how hard we worked on this.
But the approach of the Government has been to put a priority on the investments that we need for the future.
We have consciously put at the front of the queue things that will make us stronger and smarter and fairer for the future.
The school funding reforms are a big part of that.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme, DisabilityCare, is a big part of that.
But so are investments like these which will strengthen the capacities of South Australia in every way for the future.
Not just treating South Australians and getting them the benefit of up to the minute research, but as the Premier wisely observed this is an industry and so it does mean jobs and growth in South Australia.
JOURNALIST: So Prime Minister, was the pressure on you and Senator Wong because of the building project at the new Royal Adelaide Hospital, something had to be done to the medical school that is at the other end of town and there has been controversy surrounding that? It really was a no brainer, it had to be done anyway.
PM: Look, the only thing that we weighed in all of this was the merit of the projects and the contribution that that they would make to the city of Adelaide and to the state of South Australia.
JOURNALIST: In terms of this project how will they all integrate, the SAHMRI, the Royal Adelaide and these two facilities. How do they integrate and work together?
PM: I think I should hand over to the experts for that.
VICE-CHANCELLOR BEBBINGTON: Well, I think I touched on this in my answer.
I mean in terms of clinical schools it's absolutely essential that the hospital and the clinical school be close together.
Physically we're going to be right next door so this means clinicians can move back and forth as they do at present at the other end of town.
JOURNALIST: Professor, would you see this as an added bonus that in trying to attract international students, which Adelaide actively is doing, that this is a much greater incentive than it would have been otherwise?
VICE-CHANCELLOR BEBBINGTON: Well this precinct is going to be considerably ahead of the Parkville precinct in Melbourne when it's finished.
So yes, it will be a significant attractor to international students, that's true.
JOURNALIST: So would you see that as the big growth area for the student population of Adelaide?
VICE-CHANCELLOR BEBBINGTON: Not necessarily. Just bear in mind that in the health area international students are restricted.
Numbers for international students are monitored unlike in other areas.
JOURNALIST: Even if they've got the money and they want to come?
VICE-CHANCELLOR BEBBINGTON: There's a control on health, on medical places. So it's not going to change the current relativities but we have a very strong international student presence and that will go on.
JOURNALIST: Can I just clarify, you've got $60 million through the Federal Government and you will match it with $60 million but your project is more like $200 million.
VICE-CHANCELLOR BEBBINGTON: If it's medicine and nursing it's $120 million. We would very much like to include the dental school in it which will take it closer to $200 million and we need now to work out how to close the gap.
JOURNALIST: Any thoughts on where that cash might come from?
VICE-CHANCELLOR BEBBINGTON: Not at this stage.
JOURNALIST: Premier, do you see that you've got out of this quite lightly?
PM: He's definitely on a theme. You've got to give a tick for the theme in the questions.
JOURNALIST: The Feds have done the hard work and the universities are doing the hard work and you get all the kudos.
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Some might describe $2.1 billion investment in the new hospital as a substantial investment and also the actual clearing of the rest of the site.
So there's been a range of works to ensure that there's no land use conflict between the operations of the railway system and the land.
So there's been quite a lot of work and investment that's been done.
We are not seeking to recover that.
We will be providing this land free of charge and there's the master planning process as well.
We have put over this precinct a sophisticated master planning process.
So all of these buildings work together and the public spaces between them work very effectively.
So of course we welcome this investment.
It is a tremendous benefit for South Australia but we think we've done our bit as well.
JOURNALIST: Is there an estimate of how many construction jobs in the two projects?
PREMIER WEATHERILL: I don't have that but I am happy to supply it to you.
JOURNALIST: It is perhaps a relatively minor point but what happens to the skate park?
PREMIER WEATHERILL: We've thought about that. It's not a minor point, it's a very important point and we've done a lot of thinking about that. There's lots of options we've given thought to.
We've been communicating with the council. There will be a replicated skate park because a lot of people rely upon it. It needs to be relatively close to public transport so that the young people that use it still have a place to go.
JOURNALIST: Still looking for a location?
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Absolutely.
JOURNALIST: How long have you been working on this, Premier, given the fact that we have this deadline looming, we had to have a new facility to train in?
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Well for as long as I can remember. We've had numerous conversations, the universities have been collaborating with us, our public servants have been meeting with federal public servants.
I think I have spoken to every federal minister, including the Prime Minister on numerous occasions and we are very pleased that we have come to a landing today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does it come as some concern that it would appear the AWU now is urging its supporters in caucus perhaps not to support you?
PM: Well I'd refer you to the words of the actual story. Lots of this is, headlines-wise, it is much more rumour on speculation.
JOURNALIST: Do you have the support of Paul Howes?
PM: You might want to pick up the newspaper and have a look.
JOURNALIST: John Murphy has spoken out though, what does that say about your leadership?
PM: All this week I have taken questions like this and all this week I have focussed on what I do which is making sure we're investing for the future and building a stronger future for our country.
That is what I am intending to do. All of this across the week we have got lots of rumour, lots of speculation.
We have got Mr Murphy who has had a continuing view for some time now. So I don't worry about any of that, I just get on with it.
JOURNALIST: How much faith do you have in Kevin Rudd's sincerity when he's out in western Sydney and in the spotlight saying one thing but the visual images tend to suggest something else? Do you trust Kevin Rudd?
PM: I am expecting all of the team to be out there campaigning and campaigning hard.
Yesterday whilst I was here with the Premier in South Australia announcing that South Australia had signed on to our new school reforms, around the country Labor MPs were out talking about school funding, particularly pressing those jurisdictions who haven't signed yet to get on board and to invest in their children's future.
So I expected Labor MPs to be out at schools yesterday and they were including Mr Rudd.
JOURNALIST: Would you prefer Mr Rudd kept a slightly lower profile?
PM: I expect everybody to be out there campaigning including campaigning on school funding reform.
If I can say something very specific about school funding reform, I came here to South Australia yesterday to make a major announcement for the children of this state and for the future of this state.
This is Labor work driven by Labor values. I was delighted to be able to deliver it here with a Labor Premier.
But it's also the kind of priority that a Liberal who is determined not to be a wrecker can put at the front of the queue. Premier O'Farrell's done that.
I notice today that the Premier of Victoria is suggesting that he's considering Victoria signing on and putting the children of Victoria first.
I would urge him to do that, to put the children first and the politics second.
JOURNALIST: He does want a really good deal though, are you able to give him what he wants?
PM: All of this is a very good deal for Australia's children.
What we are taking to every state and every territory is the same model for school funding.
It works the same way for every school, a school resource standard inclusive of extra resources for the kids we know bring some disadvantages to school.
It is all about not just kids who are in school today, this is a reform for quality education for generations and generations to come.
What we are trying to achieve around the country would be making a difference for the quality of our children's education in 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 years; it is a reform of that magnitude.
It is why I'm so passionate about delivering it.
JOURNALIST: With all the concessions being made and presumably more with Victoria and other yet-to-sign-on states, where is the extra money coming from?
PM: We did provision at Budget time for some extra resources for schools.
But if I can chip you a little bit on the word of your question, it is the same model.
What we always said when we put the figures out one Sunday, we said this is what we've got on the table, these are the figures for individual states, all of it is plus indexation.
We then said we would go into an intensive process with states.
That intensive process with South Australia yielded the figures that we announced yesterday so that is the model at work.
Greater collaboration, getting a better understanding of the figures and we announced the agreement yesterday.
In Western Australia we have made one change because we have got a better understanding of their cost base which is different to the rest of the country's as a result of the WA economy where people can go teaching but they can also go and earn six figure sums working in the resources sector.
So the cost base for WA schools reflects that.
Any impression that anybody is trying to create that this is something outside the working of the model we first announced, that is absolutely wrong.
It is the model at work with the benefit of further information.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just very quickly again on leadership, can you honestly say you are not feeling any outside pressure that seems to be growing by the day? Can you honestly say that?
PM: I can honestly say that I am here and delighted to be getting on with the job and the things that I focussed on this week, what's taken most of the time, has been the focus on the work on schools.
So I mean all the rumour and speculation I just let that wash its way around.
JOURNALIST: Are you getting fed up it though?
PM: Look, yes, you must be fed up with writing it, don't worry about it.
JOURNALIST: You say rumour and speculation but here's a Labor MP willing to speak out and call for Kevin Rudd to be installed-
PREMIER WEATHERILL: Are you interested in another Labor MP's perspective?
My support for the Prime Minister is absolute and I am very pleased that she has come here today to make this magnificent announcement for South Australia and was here yesterday making another magnificent announcement for South Australia.
That is the real work that the people, the citizens of this country are interested in, not this nonsense, thank you.
PM: But my answer to your question is the Member of Parliament you refer to has had a long-standing view.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just asking about Syria. America's now looking at supporting a no-fly zone, what's your position?
PM: That is not my understanding, I would have to say.
My understanding is that the United States is contemplating providing some assistance to the opposition forces in Syria.
I understand why the United States has come to that conclusion.
The United States, President Obama, some time back indicated that a red line for him was the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
He asked his intelligence agencies to provide careful and the best possible reporting on the use of chemical weapons.
Those intelligence agencies have reported that chemical weapons have been used.
That too is the view of the Australian National Security Committee on the best evidence available to us, the national security community in Australia.
President Obama as a result of that advice has indicated that the US is prepared to provide some resources to opposition forces.
I can understand that decision.
For Australia, we are obviously a long way away.
No approaches have been made to us by the United States in relation to the matter and I don't anticipate any will be.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your reaction to Howard Sattler being sacked?
PM: Anything I wanted to say about that matter I said yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's been some reports that some fishermen were told by authorities not to help an asylum seeker boat in trouble, does this not contravene our obligations at sea?
PM: Look, I have seen those reports, the Minister for Immigration is actually speaking publicly today and can deal with any of this kind of reporting.
Thank you very much.


Adelaide 
The Gillard Government is providing further support to social and community services (SACS) workers in Western Australia.
The Government believes SACS workers in WA should be recognised for the important work they do, just like other workers in the sector around Australia.
That is why the Government has committed to fund its share of any wage increases resulting from pay equity proceedings currently before the Western Australian Industrial Relations Commission (WAIRC).
This commitment is in addition to around $3 billion the Government has already committed to fund its share of the wage increases of 23 to 45 per cent to 150,000 SACS workers awarded by the Fair Work Commission as part of the historic equal remuneration case.  The Commission's decision did not apply to SACS workers in WA outside the national workplace relations system, due to the fact the WA Government had not referred its industrial relations powers to the Commonwealth.
The Government recognises the critical role of SACS workers in our community - most are women who provide vital services to some of our nation's most vulnerable citizens.  SACS workers deserve to have their work properly valued and to receive decent wages.
This funding to WA SACS workers will ensure jobs and vital services in WA are secure now and into the future.
We are proud of the Government's commitment to equal remuneration, and this additional support is further evidence of this commitment for SACS workers across Australia.
Today's announcement is good for employers and workers in the SACS sector in WA, good for caring workers, good for women, good for families and good for the economy.
The Government will provide further details regarding the funding amount once the  WAIRC announces its decision.


Canberra
The Prime Minister tonight announced the winners of the prestigious National Awards for Local Government.
The awards were presented at the 4th Australian Council of Local Government in Canberra -  the nation's largest annual gathering of mayors and shire presidents.
The two award winners for 2013 are:
• Dungog Shire, Maitland City Council and Port Stephens Council from New South Wales for their Safer Motorcycle Routes project. Together, the three Councils developed a ‘safe system' approach that would make motorcyclists' recreational rides through the Hunter Region safer. This included working with motorcyclists and road organisations on an audit of the most problematic routes, the installation of more effective signage and the provision of enforcement bays for police to target speed. The community benefited with safer roads and better protected pedestrians.
• Northern Grampians Shire Council in Victoria for its Monash Steps/Stawell Steps project. This project incorporates two engineer-designed spillways aimed at diverting flood water away from nearby properties. In addition to providing protection against floods, the architecturally designed Stawell Steps has now become a community meeting space with wheelchair accessibility.
In addition, 17 councils and shires received awards across 10 categories today.
These awards show what can be achieved when a community works together and is thinking innovatively.
All four councils have done a tremendous job identifying local challenges and coming up with innovative solutions that are appropriate for their communities.
With 192 entries coming from all over Australia, it was a big task for the chair of the National Awards Judging Panel Cr Paul Bell AM, Central Highlands Regional Council and the panel in determining the winners.
The Gillard Government congratulates every council nominated for an award and the category winners.
As the tier of government closest to the people, local government delivers important services and infrastructure for their communities.
The Gillard Government is proud to work with the 565 elected councils across the nation that bring about positive and lasting change at the local level every day to make their communities, stronger communities.
More information about the National Awards for Local Government can be found at www.regional.gov.au


Canberra
E &amp; OE
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
We're here tonight for the nation's largest gathering of mayors and shire presidents, and I've come to say welcome, welcome to Canberra on this cold June night.
I hope you'll be warmed by the conversation and the company.
As well as welcome, I have come tonight to say a big thank you to you for all the work you do.
When we look at local government today, we look at so many aspects that touch the lives of Australians.
Whether it's enabling people to swim some laps in the council pool to wind down at the end of the day; whether it's people hearing the sound of a garbage truck at dawn, or borrowing the latest Miles Franklin winner from the local library and then reading it on a bench in the city park, or taking the kids to the local sports ground, or relying on the local community services, or partying at a local festival  -  the lives of Australians are improved every day by the work of modern local government.
Delivered in local government areas ranging in size from a few densely packed square kilometres in our capital cities up to the great tracts of land larger than many European nations.
In Gippsland and Carpentaria, on the Shoalhaven and in the Clarence Valley; in the outer suburbs and the inner cities, serving people, creating communities, building our nation; that is local government today.
And it deserves to be recognised in our Constitution.
While you're here in Canberra, I know your conversations will range widely, but at the heart of the matter this week is the campaign for the constitutional recognition of local government.
This campaign won't be won by federal politicians nodding sagely amongst ourselves and agreeing that the time is right.
It will be won where you live, in your towns and cities.
Where the reality of the financial relationships between the Government I lead and the Governments you lead is experienced.
Where you know, from your daily work, that conversations on a street corner can turn into conversations that engage and enthuse a whole community.
We won't succeed without millions of Australians whose lives are touched daily by local government, in ways large and small, voting Yes.
That means we won't succeed without the efforts of all of you.
I have got no doubt at all that this referendum, the third time this issue will have been voted on in forty years; this is the last chance for recognition of local government.
With a Government prepared to propose change, with serious and effective bipartisan support, and with a successful grassroots campaign, then this referendum can succeed.
If any of those things aren't in place then this referendum will fail.
I can guarantee every effort from the Government; only the Opposition can deliver bipartisanship; and only you can deliver the community campaign.
I know you are putting together money to fight for a Yes vote.
Tonight, I pledge that the Government will also assist with additional resources for your campaign.
Apart from coming here tonight to personally convey my admiration for what you do, I've come with a request for your help, above and beyond your help in campaigning Yes for the referendum.
It's a simple request but an important one.
With so many Australian jobs relying on manufacturing and with car making at manufacturing's heart, I've come tonight to ask you to support your fellow Australians by buying local when you renew your vehicle fleets.
Help a mate with a job; that's all I ask and I'm sure it's something you can do.
Tonight is a very special occasion.
It's part of what you've been doing for a few days and I know many of you will be here for a few days to come.
We'll see you walking the corridors, we'll see you knocking on Members of Parliament's doors; we'll see you in ministerial offices, no doubt I'll see some of you too.
This is a fantastic way to directly engage.
I know Members of Parliament are looking forward to it; the Government is looking forward to it.
But before all of that hard work continues, please enjoy the night, and we'll enjoy your presence in Canberra over the next few days.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Arts Minister Tony Burke today announced the 2013 Prime Minister's Literary Awards shortlists.
Now in their sixth year, the 2013 shortlists recognise the best in Australian fiction, poetry, non-fiction, history, young adult and children's fiction published in 2012.From children's books that excel in the art of storytelling, through to revealing works of non-fiction and history, the 2013 shortlists represent the breadth and depth of the Australian story, and imagination.The Prime Minister and Minister commended the quality and diversity of entries, noting the evolving richness of Australia's literary sector.2013 also saw the poetry, the newest Award category firmly established, receiving 65 entries, a significant increase on 2012 entries.A total of $595,000 will be awarded in six Award categories, making the Prime Minister's Literary Awards the richest literary awards in Australia.
A tax free prize of $80,000 will be awarded to the winner of each of the award categories. Shortlisted entries receive $5,000 tax free.The 2013 Prime Minister's Literary Awards shortlists are:
Fiction shortlistFloundering by Romy AshThe Chemistry of Tears by Peter CareyQuestions of Travel by Michelle de KretserLost Voices by Christopher Koch Mateship with Birds by Carrie TiffanyPoetry shortlistBurning Rice by Eileen ChongThe Sunlit Zone by Lisa Jacobson 
Jam Tree Gully: Poems by John KinsellaLiquid NitrogenbyJennifer MaidenCrimson Crop by Peter Rose Non-fiction shortlist Bradman's Warby Malcolm KnoxUncommon Soldier by Chris Masters Plein Airs and Graces by Adrian MitchellThe Australian Moment by George MegalogenisBold Palates by Barbara Santich
Prize for Australian History shortlistThe Sex Lives of Australians: A History by Frank Bongiorno Sandakan byPaul Ham Gough Whitlam by Jenny HockingFarewell, dear people by Ross McMullinThe Censor's Library by Nicole Moore
Young adult fiction shortlistEverything Left Unsaidby Jessica DavidsonThe Children of the King by Sonya HartnettGrace Beside Me by Sue McPhersonFog a Dox by Bruce PascoeFriday Brown by Vikki Wakefield
Children's fiction shortlistRedbyLibby GleesonToday We Have No Plans by Jane Godwin and illustrated by Anna WalkerWhat's the Matter, Aunty May? by Peter Friend and illustrated by Andrew JoynerThe Beginner's Guide to Revenge by Marianne Musgrove
More information on the Prime Minister's Literary Awards can be found at www.arts.gov.au/pmla


Canberra
New figures released by the Gillard Government today have confirmed that every single government school in Victoria will receive extra funding over the next six years, under our new and fairer funding model.
The figures, based on the needs-based funding model the Gillard Government wants to introduce for every school, reveal that schools with the highest needs will benefit the most from the National Plan for School Improvement.They show the increase in funding for every government school in Victoria by 2019.The Gillard Government has released these figures today in response to the misleading and highly alarmist claims by the Napthine Government that 249 government schools in Victoria will be worse off under the new national model.These claims are wrong. They are based on the assumption that Commonwealth indexation under the current system will be 4.7 per cent. In fact the current indexation rate is 3.9 per cent and is forecast to fall to 3 per cent over the coming years.Premier Napthine and his Education Minister have used incorrect forecasts to make a political point. They should apologise to the schools they have named for causing unnecessary alarm.Our figures clearly show that every single government school in Victoria will see more money flow over the next six years under our plan.They will reassure parents, principals and the community that no school will be worse off under the new model.This extra money will help Victorian schools give every student the best education possible, no matter where they live or their family background.It will help deliver:• More one on one attention and support in the classroom for every child;• Specialist literacy and numeracy programs for those children in danger of being left behind;• Greater assistance for those students with disability or special need; and• Improvements in building the skills and knowledge of teachers and providing mentoring support for those who are new to the profession.This is a once in a lifetime opportunity to deliver the biggest investment in education in generations.It's time for Premier Napthine to get serious, stop his misleading scare campaign, and to sign up to the Gillard Government's plan for better schools.The Victorian Liberal Government needs to commit to paying their fair share of the $4 billion on offer over the next six years, as that is the only way to guarantee that schools in their state will have the resources they need to give their students a world-class education.The figures released today have been calculated using the Schooling Resource Standard model, which includes a base amount per student and extra money through loadings for indigenous and low SES students, students with disability, and students with limited English skills. Small schools and schools in regional and remote locations also receive extra funding.Under the National Plan, the Commonwealth will allocate federal funding for all schools in states that sign up using the SRS. State Governments must agree to also distribute funding using a needs-based model, and to increase school funding by at least 3 per cent every year.The final details of any Victorian needs-based funding model will need to be confirmed with the State Government, however this data demonstrates the substantial increase in funding available for all schools under the new needs-based system.Based on the SRS model the Gillard Government is implementing, a similar result would be produced for all school sectors, in every state and territory  -  funding increases for every school, with the biggest increases going to schools with the highest needs.


Canberra
New data released today confirms overall funding for every school sector in the Northern Territory will increase every year under the Gillard Government's National Plan for School Improvement.
Government schools in the Territory will receive a boost of around $205 million, while non-government schools will benefit from around an extra $95 million in funding over the next six years.
The data is based on the $300 million of extra funding on offer to Northern Territory schools under Labor's plan, provided the Giles Government signs up to the National Plan for better schools.
If Adam Giles signs up to the offer, schools in the Territory will benefit from around an additional $200 million in Commonwealth funding over the next six years.
Under the plan every school will see its funding rise year-on-year, with the biggest increases going to the schools that need it most.
Labor's National Plan for School Improvement will deliver:
 * 	More one on one attention and support in the classroom for every child.
 * 	Specialist literacy and numeracy programs for those children in danger of being left behind.
 * 	Greater assistance for those students with disability or special need.
 * 	Building the skills and knowledge of teachers and providing mentoring support for those who are new to the profession.
The National Plan will particularly help Indigenous students in the Territory, through specific funding ‘loadings'for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students and small, remote schools.
From the total public funding provided to Territory schools over the next six years:
 * 	The location loading will provide about $921 million for NT students  -  benefiting 41,000 students in every schools (190 schools in total)
 * 	The size loading will provide about $160 million for NT students -  benefiting 25,000 students in 162 schools (85 per cent of all schools).
 * 	The Indigenous loadingwill provide about $1 billion for Indigenous students in the NT  -  benefiting about 16,800 students in 187 schools (98 per cent of all schools)
Results from the 2012 NAPLAN assessments show that across all year levels, on average, Indigenous students are behind other students. In the Northern Territory, the gap is equivalent to around four years.
It's time for Chief Minister Adam Giles and Education Minister Peter Chandler to put the students of the Territory first and signed up to the National Plan for School Improvement.
This is a once in a lifetime opportunity to deliver the biggest investment in schools in generations.
With 11 days to go the choice is clear. They can walk away from the offer and short-change students, or they can sign up to the new fairer funding system which will benefit every sector and every school in the Northern Territory.
The table below shows extra funding, per sector, under the Prime Minister's offer to the Northern Territory:
Additional funding for Northern Territory schools under the National Plan for School Improvement
       $ millions
      2014
      2015
      2016
      2017
      2018
      2019
      TOTAL
      Government Schools
       8
       17
       27
       38
       51
       65
       205 
      Catholic Schools
       2
       5
       7
       10
       13
       16
       53 
      Independent Schools
       2
       4
       6
       8
       10
       12
       41 
      TOTAL
       12
       26
       40
       56
       73
       92
       300 


Canberra
Every school sector in Western Australia will see their funding increase every year under the Gillard Government's National Plan for School Improvement, as shown by new data released today.
Government schools in Western Australia will receive a boost of around $670 million, while non-government schools will benefit from around an extra $250 million in funding over the next six years.
This extra investment, plus securing a better indexation rate, comes on top of existing funding for schools and will see a total public investment of about $2.8 billion in the six years from 2014.
The new data is based on around $920 million of extra funding on offer under Labor's plan, provided the Barnett Government signs up to the National Plan for School Improvement.
From the total public funding provided to WA schools over the next six years if the National Plan is adopted:
 * 	The location loading will provide about $1.9 billion  - benefitting 83,000 students in 378 schools (35 per cent of all schools.)
 * 	The size loading will provide about $770 million  -  benefitting 126,800 students in 648 schools (61 per cent of all schools).
 * 	The Indigenous loading will provide about $1.1 billion for Indigenous students  -  benefitting around 27,000 students in 917 schools (86 per cent of all schools).
If Colin Barnett accepts the offer that will see better schools across WA, schools will benefit from around an additional $600 million in Commonwealth funding over the next six years.
Under the plan every school will see its funding rise year-on-year, with the biggest increases going to the schools that need it most.
Labor's National Plan for School Improvement will deliver:
 * 	More one on one attention and support in the classroom for every child.
 * 	Specialist literacy and numeracy programs for those children in danger of being left behind.
 * 	Greater assistance for those students with disability or special need.
 * 	Building the skills and knowledge of teachers and providing mentoring support for those who are new to the profession.
It is time for Premier Barnett and Education Minister Peter Collier to put the students of Western Australia first and sign up to the National Plan for School Improvement.
With 10 days to go the choice is clear. They can walk away from the offer and short-change students, or they can sign up to the new fairer funding system which will benefit every sector and every school in Western Australia.
This is a once in a lifetime opportunity to deliver the biggest investment in schools in generations.
The table below shows extra funding, per sector, under the Prime Minister's offer to Western Australia:
	Additional funding for Western Australian schools under the National Plan for School Improvement						$ millions					2014					2015					2016					2017					2018					2019					TOTAL							Government Schools					20					48					82					123					171					227					671							Catholic Schools					5					11					16					21					25					30					107							Independent Schools					6					13					20					27					35					43					143							TOTAL					31					71					118					171					231					300					921	


Sydney
The Gillard Government today released its 15 priorities for strategic research to drive investment in those areas which can help address Australia's most important economic, environmental and social challenges.
The Prime Minister joined Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research Dr Craig Emerson, the Minister for Science and Research Senator Don Farrell, and Australia's Chief Scientist Professor Ian Chubb to unveil the Strategic Research Priorities.
The Priorities are a result of extensive consultation across the Australian research spectrum, from academia to industry.
They represent a new way to focus Australia's research effort, while recognising the need for flexibility in our approach to using research to answer important policy questions.
Under the Government's National Research Investment Plan, the 15 Priorities will be updated every three years to mobilise Australia's scientists and researchers and direct our research investment to meet the challenges of national importance.
The challenges addressed by the Strategic Research Priorities are:• Living in a changing environment• Promoting population health and wellbeing• Managing food and water assets• Securing Australia's place in a changing world• Lifting productivity and economic growth
The Priorities are designed to help Australia to make the most of the opportunities on offer in the Asian Century.
Better targeted research is crucial to maintaining our competitive advantage and will help Australia meet our objectives under the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper.
The Labor Government has increased investment in R&amp;D through science, research and innovation programs by 30 per cent since coming into office.
These Priorities are part of the Government's continuing commitment to quality research to respond to challenges and harness opportunities.
The May Budget included an additional $321.2 million to support Australian researchers and research facilities to drive innovation and support high-quality jobs growth.
The Strategic Research Priorities replace the 10-year old National Research Priorities.
Details of the priorities can be found at www.innovation.gov.au/StrategicResearchPriorities


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
We're here in the name of a truly great Australian, Margaret Whitlam.
We honour her memory and celebrate her life.
For over sixty years, Margaret was part of our Labor family, and in the end she stood at its very core.
Now with Margaret's absence, there is a gap we can never fill.
So tonight our first thoughts must be with Gough, who is making the lonely journey without his lifelong partner and equal.
Gough  -  you are in our hearts and our affection, tonight and always.
I want to acknowledge another woman of courage and class, Tanya Plibersek.Tanya's the daughter of “modest, hardworking, generous people” as she put it herself; people who came from Eastern Europe in search of a better future.
Tanya seized every opportunity available to her and now stands at the forefront of our nation's public life.
I've been privileged to share my entire federal political journey with Tanya since we entered the Parliament together in 1998.
I'm proud to call her both a colleague and a friend.
Tanya is just the sort of smart, feisty woman that Margaret Whitlam loved  -  and indeed, Tanya I know Margaret did love and admire you very much.
No-one could better represent this area, its people, its history and its values.
The electorate of Sydney covers a wonderful part of this metropolis where our great party kicked into life.
Yes it's a very different place to the run-down terrace houses of yesteryear with one cold water tap and kids running around without shoes.
Today, we're likely to see solar panels on rooftops and broadband being connected.
I'm not here to give a lecture on Margaret Whitlam  -  but there are some features of her life that can guide and instruct us.
On one occasion Margaret was reflecting on a photo of herself as a baby  -  the picture is reproduced in Susan Mitchell's biography and it shows a plump, healthy, happy infant.
Margaret observed that she was “Well cared for. Loved and wanted”, as she wished every Australian child could be.
Margaret grew up in the 1920s and 30s, the daughter of a barrister who later became an eminent judge.
It was a life of relative privilege in the Eastern Suburbs of Sydney, and she could just as easily have become a society matron like many of her classmates.
But she didn't.
Even from a childhood of privilege, Margaret had a profound belief in fairness.
Long before it found expression in the Labor Party and her partnership with Gough, Margaret held that value of fairness closer than anything.
It was her touchstone.
To live a good life, she felt she had to spread fairness and opportunity to others.
So marriage to Gough became not just a union of hearts and intellects, but also a meeting of moral and social values.
Because of Gough's ambition to serve, together they spent 25 years sharing the life of the suburbs; understanding the dignity of that life but also the limitations.
Lack of transport. No sewerage. Poor schools. Inadequate hospitals.
As Susan Mitchell records:
“it was Margaret who had organised the building of two houses [in the outer suburbs], raised four children there and arranged for them to travel twenty miles to a high school and twelve miles to a swimming pool (before she helped build one in Cabramatta).
Margaret, who had always loved reading, had lived where there were few municipal libraries, no paved roads within a mile of their houses and no paved footpaths”. [Margaret Whitlam by Susan Mitchell, p177]
The famous Whitlam ‘Program' was born out of that lived experience, out of deep respect for Australian suburban life.
And at the heart of that program was the rights and empowerment of women including his decision to fling open the doors of higher education for all Australians.
Even now, women still write letters of thanks to Gough for this nation-changing policy.
As a result, Australian women live lives of opportunity unimaginable to our grandmothers.
In our own time, a woman of Margaret Whitlam's intellect, warmth and courage could surely have become a senior federal Minister or even Prime Minister.
Born 40 years later, it could easily have been Margaret instead of me or Tanya.
But why didn't Margaret Whitlam become an elected representative in her own right or even Prime Minister?
The answer is because Gough Whitlam hadn't yet become Prime Minister.
It just wasn't possible for a woman brought up in the 1920s and 30s, even one with a university education, a comfortable upbringing and strong social connections as Margaret enjoyed.
Yet the daughter of a psych nurse and an aged care cook from the suburbs of Adelaide could get there.
The difference, of course, was Gough Whitlam.
The difference was the things that happen when Labor governs.
Through his transformative work on women's rights and access to education, it was Gough who created the Australia in which the Julia Gillards, the Tanya Pliberseks, the Jenny Macklins, the Ged Kearneys could thrive.
That's the great Labor story we share and celebrate tonight.
That's the great Labor story that keeps us renewing our membership, year after year, in good times and in bad.
Because the work of nation-building is never complete.
The only way to truly honour Gough and Margaret's legacy is by extending it.
Throwing forth new bridges to the future.
And protecting the things we've already achieved; the things worth fighting for.
In 2013, that means keeping the Liberals off the Treasury benches and keeping Tony Abbott out of The Lodge.
Think about it this way:
At the 1969 poll  -  the Don's Party election  -  Gough and Margaret were hosting their traditional election night party at their home in Cabramatta.
Margaret put on a brave face all evening but when the guests had gone home, young Stephen Whitlam saw his mum crying in the backyard all alone, and he quickly perceived the reason for her tears.
In his words: “After all we'd done, after all we'd tried to do, the bastards won”.
In another decisive election year, I want every progressive Australian to know and understand the moral of the story is exactly the same:
Don't let that be us.
Don't let the wrong side win.
Don't be one of those people driving around with a bumper sticker saying: Don't blame me, I didn't vote for Tony Abbott.
Don't let them get away with it.
They aren't ready and they don't deserve it.
Tony Abbott is all platitudes and no policy.
Empty of ambition for the country, but full of ambition for himself.
He's never had a new idea about disability care.
Never had a new idea about broadband or clean energy.
Never had an idea about better funding for our schools.
All we get is talk of cuts and sackings and abolishing good and decent policies like the carbon price, the NBN and our plan to fund schools fairly.
We know what an Abbott government would look like because we saw it in the Menzies era, the Fraser era, the Howard era.
The erosion of common values; the neglect of public institutions.
Public education, public broadcasting, public health,public transport.
The Liberals inherit, but they do not create.
They destroy but they never build.
That's why Paul Keating posed this question about the prospect of an Abbott-led Australia: “Is that all there is?”
Our answer to that question must be no.
A resounding, defiant no.
There is more.
More Australia can do.
More Australia can be.
Give me a majority and we can do it all.
Especially given our extraordinary track record amid the constraints of minority government:
Keeping our economy strong with almost a million jobs created.
Clean energy up, carbon pollution down.
A fair go for all Australian schools, public and private alike.
Early childhood education; more apprenticeships; and more university places, especially for poorer students.
DisabilityCare  -  the greatest social reform in 30 years.
Bringing high-speed broadband to every Australian and breaking Telstra's monopoly grip forever.
Delivering tax cuts to our lowest paid and making sure superannuation benefits increase, especially for those who need them most.
Higher pay for our community sector workers.
Financial help for pensioners and for families.
Health reform, and aged care reform.
The biggest Commonwealth investment in public transport since Federation.
A Royal Commission to bring healing and justice to victims of horrendous betrayal.
Plain packaging to help protect our kids from the dangers of smoking.
We won't let go of these achievements so easily.
Could we have done some things better?
Of course.
But in the end, on the big things that count, we have proven to be a good government.
A government worth fighting for.
A government affirmed and emboldened in our sense of Labor purpose.
Unlike our opponents, we don't measure political success by how well you've been able to denigrate and disrupt.
We measure ourselves by a very different metric: by what we achieve for Australia.
So to all those who want things to be better, I say things can be better.
With a majority Labor government, things can be better.
With a more constructive Opposition led by someone other than Tony Abbott, things can be better.
After three extraordinary years, we've been toughened and tempered through experience.
We've got the big calls right.
And while the Opposition have a flimsy pamphlet, we've got a plan.
A plan for Australia's future.
A detailed, credible plan to make us winners in the Asian Century and seize the opportunities of tomorrow.
As members and supporters of our great Party, you know better than everyone that politics is about ideas and it's about achievements.
Leadership is about getting the big things done that really matter for our nation's future.
So an election is a contest of values and contest of ideas.
Some people like to set-up an idealised version of a perfect Labor Government and then pick apart all our faults. Any armchair critic can do that.
I know there's a lot of talk and chatter out there.
All sorts of scenarios and alternatives are imagined every day.
But forget all the noise and nonsense.
The choice today is the choice that will be available on September 14: Tony Abbott or me; a majority Labor government or a majority Coalition government.
So I'd say to anyone questioning what's on offer, reduce this election to its most fundamental proposition:
If you want fairer funding for our schools and a life of opportunity for our kids;
If you want a clean energy revolution;
If you want true high-speed broadband;
If you want DisabilityCare;
If you want to protect jobs and working conditions;
If you want those new rail lines rolled-out in our big cities;
If you want to continue our great work on the arts and the environment, then vote for me.
And on the other side of the coin: if you want cuts in health and education, cuts that hurt families and cost jobs, then vote for Tony Abbott.
Simple as that.
We know that true and profound differences are at stake in this election.
Nothing's inevitable.
Everything's possible.
There is a choice.
So share our great story with your friends and neighbours, your work-mates and loved ones.
Hold firm to our Labor faith.
Take pride in our achievements.
And don't let the wrong side win. 


Sydney
Prime Minister Julia Gillard will host the Government's 42nd Community Cabinet meeting in Rockhampton on Tuesday 16 July.
This meeting will be the ninth Community Cabinet to be held in Queensland, and will provide a unique opportunity for members of the community to meet federal government ministers face-to-face.
The Prime Minister and Member for Capricornia Kirsten Livermore today encouraged local residents to register to attend the meeting, which will be held at the North Rockhampton State High School.
“Everyone is welcome to attend the Rockhampton Community Cabinet, and if you are interested in coming along make sure you register as early as possible. There are opportunities to meet ministers face-to-face or ask a question at the forum,” said Ms Livermore.
A number of ministers will attend the meeting to answer questions on topics such as the Government's plan to create and support Australian jobs, the National Plan for School Improvement, and the rollout of the National Broadband Network.
So far, more than 15,500 people have attended Community Cabinet meetings across Australia. There have been over 2,000 face-to-face meetings with ministers.
Registrations open from Monday 1 July to Friday 5 July, but may close earlier if capacity is reached. 
If people want to attend the public forum only, they must register online at http://www.pm.gov.auor by calling 1800 088 323. To request a face-to-face meeting with a minister please call 1800 088 323.
Further information can be found at: http://www.pm.gov.au


Canberra
 Today the Gillard Government released new figures that confirm increases in the overall funding allocations for every school, in every schooling sector, in Queensland over the next six years.
  The figures show that, under the Gillard Government's National Plan for School Improvement, Queensland Government schools will receive a boost of around $3.3 billion, while non-government schools will benefit from more than $500 million over the next six years.
  The data is based on the $3.8 billion of extra funding on offer to all Queensland schools provided the Newman Government signs up by the June 30 deadline  -  just nine days from now.
  Labor's National Plan for School Improvement will deliver:
   *  More one on one attention and support in the classroom for every child;
   *  Specialist literacy and numeracy programs for children in danger of being left behind;
   *  Greater assistance for those students with disability or special need; and
   *  Building the skills of teachers and providing mentoring support for new teachers.     
 Premier Campbell Newman and Education Minister John-Paul Langbroek must put the students of Queensland first and sign up to the National Plan for School Improvement.
  This is a once in a lifetime opportunity to deliver the biggest investment in schools in generations. 
  There is a very clear choice now before the LNP Government.
  Signing up to the new, fairer funding system, will benefit every sector and every Queensland school. Continuing to play politics and refusing to sign will result in students being left behind.
  In a state the size of Queensland, there are many schools in remote and regional areas that require extra support and extra resources. That is precisely what our plan delivers.
  Every single one of Queensland's 1700 schools will benefit from increased funding under the funding offer we put to the Queensland LNP Government on 14 April, some 89 days ago. 
  Today is the last day of the school term before students break for winter holidays.
  With just over a week remaining until the deadline, time is rapidly running out for Mr Newman to sign on to this funding offer.
  The table below shows extra funding, per sector, under the Prime Minister's offer to Queensland:
  Additional funding for Queensland schools under the National Plan for School Improvement
       $ millions
       2014
       2015
       2016
       2017
       2018
       2019
       Total   
       Government Schools
       119
       265
       425
       608
       822
       1,074
       3,314
       Catholic Schools
       14
       26
       38
       50
       59
       67
       254
       Independent Schools
       11
       25
       37
       49
       61
       73
       258
       TOTAL
       114
       316
       500
       707
       943
       1,214
       3,825


Yungaburra
Today we meet to open a remarkable national memorial.
To honour the memory of 39 young Australians who died for us in a dangerous place far from home  -  in the deserts, green valleys and mountains of Afghanistan.
They are not the first Australians to die for us in uniform overseas.
Gallipoli's rocks and Fromelles' mud  -  Tobruk's sands, the beach of Bangka Island  -  Kapyong's hills and the rubber of Long Tan  -  and so many places near and far all witnessed the last moments of brave young people who we still treasure and who we will always call our own.
Just as the brave soldiers we honour today rightly called the Anzac tradition and legacy their own  -  a legacy of service they took to heart and a tradition of sacrifice they followed in Afghanistan.
This beautiful new memorial captures the spirit of the Avenues of Honour that enrich the history and beauty of more than 500 Australian towns.
Each one a striking reminder of Australia's promise never to forget.
We all know country towns where the trees and white statues that mark the fallen outnumber the buildings that house those who remain.
Communities which said goodbye to too many citizen-soldiers a century ago and welcomed home too few.
The husbands, the fathers, the sons, the friends, the Australians whose sacrifice we honour today  -  they were professional soldiers.
They knew the life of arms and they knew their craft and above all they knew what they put at risk when they went away for us.
And yet knowing all that, they did go away.
I know you all marvel at their courage.
I want you all to know I am amazed by your courage  -  those who saw them not come back and those of you who go away again.
By the strength and grace of the families and friends who continue through life so bravely, carrying so much sorrow as well as their brothers and sisters in arms who carry mental and physical scars from service in our name
You amaze me.
Susan, Gordon, the fruit of your grief could so easily have been bitterness in your lives.
Instead you have created this national memorial to all the sons lost in Afghanistan.
From their courage, and from yours, Australia draws inspiration. 
We will see our mission in Afghanistan through. That is for tomorrow.
For today, we dedicate this place to the memory of those we have lost.
This is a special place that belongs to you, the people these young Australians loved, the people who loved them in return.
This is a special place for the nation to honour all the men and women who have served in Afghanistan.
I want you to know it is also a place which is very special to me.
I attended the funerals of 24 of the Australians whose names will be read today. 
I met many of you on those dreadful days.
I will never forget this memorial here, I will never forget you here today and and most importantly we will remember them.
Lest we forget. 


Sydney
Today the Gillard Government released new figures that confirm increases in the overall funding allocations for every school, in every schooling sector, in Tasmania over the next six years.
The figures show that, under the Gillard Government's National Plan for School Improvement, Tasmanian schools will receive about an extra $400 million over six years to bring their schools up to the new resourcing standard.
Of this, government schools will get a boost of about $230 million, Catholic schools will receive about $110 million and Independent schools will be boosted by about $60 million.
The Gillard Government today also released new figures that confirm that every single government school in Tasmania will receive extra funding over the next six years, under our new and fairer funding model.
The figures - based on the needs-based funding model the Gillard Government wants to introduce for every school - reveal that schools with the highest needs will benefit the most from the National Plan for School Improvement.
They show the increase in funding for every government school in Tasmania by 2019.
This extra money will help Tasmanian schools give every student the best education possible, no matter where they live or their family background.
It will help deliver:• More one on one attention and support in the classroom for every child;• Specialist literacy and numeracy programs for those children in danger of being left behind;• Greater assistance for those students with disability or special need; and• Improvements in building the skills and knowledge of teachers and providing mentoring support for those who are new to the profession.
This is a once in a lifetime opportunity to deliver the biggest investment in education in generations.
It's time for Premier Lara Giddings to get serious and to sign up to the Gillard Government's plan for better schools.
The Tasmanian Government needs to commit to paying their fair share of the $400 million on offer over the next six years, as that is the only way to guarantee that schools in their state will have the resources they need to give their students a world-class education.
The figures released today have been calculated using the Schooling Resource Standard (SRS) model, which includes a base amount per student and extra money through loadings for indigenous and low SES students, students with disability, and students with limited English skills. Small schools and schools in regional and remote locations also receive extra funding.
Under the National Plan, the Australian Government will allocate federal funding for all schools in states that sign up using the SRS. State Governments must agree to also distribute funding using a needs-based model, and to increase school funding by at least 3 per cent every year.
The final details of any Tasmanian needs-based funding model will need to be confirmed with the State Government, however this data demonstrates the substantial increase in funding available for all schools under the new needs-based system.
Based on the SRS model the Gillard Government is implementing, a similar result would be produced for all school sectors, in every state and territory  -  funding increases for every school, with the biggest increases going to schools with the highest needs. 


Holbrook
It's wonderful to be here in Holbrook  -  and what a fantastic achievement we celebrate today.
An exercise in nation-building that spans  -  and joins  -  decades, governments and communities.
The entire exercise has employed about 130,000 people over the decades.
If the entire Hume duplication is valued in today's dollars it is an investment of perhaps as much as $20 billion.
No single government, no single generation, can claim the credit for this grand undertaking.
Still, as Prime Minister I am proud to be in the line of descent from Gough Whitlam, whose National Roads Act of 1974 set these works in motion.
The Hume duplication is part of my Government's enormous efforts to invest in building our nation's future  -  part of our $60 billion investment in transport infrastructure through our Nation Building Program.
Building or upgrading 7500km of roadway across the country  -  a doubling of Commonwealth investment since we came to government.
Building or upgrading 4000km of rail  -  a ten-fold Commonwealth investment in rail over the same period.
A hundred and sixty projects completed.
Ninety more under way.
And for the future, urban projects like Perth Light Rail and the F3-M2 Missing Link.
Australia is still a young country and nation-building is still happening here.
The Hume has been defining ‘where we go' ever since Governor Lachlan Macquarie gave the order in 1819 for the construction of a Great South Road.
A century later, the motley collection of roads connecting Melbourne and Sydney was elevated to the grand status of ‘highway'.
It would be another decade until the final section of the Hume was even sealed.
But its importance had already been decided.
The towns and cities along the Hume's 800 kilometres of tarmac are rich with history.
Hume's own family home, at Yass.
Snake Gully, with its much-loved Dog on the Tuckerbox.
At Gundagai, one of the longest bridges in NSW  -  a full one metre longer than the Sydney Harbour Bridge.
Glenrowan, where Ned Kelly made his last stand.
Benalla and Euroa  -  towns with their own links to the Kelly Gang.
Or one of the small treasures: Tarcutta, half-way between Melbourne and Sydney, where truck drivers once changed shifts and where there's now a memorial wall to truckies who have lost their lives along the Hume and other highways.
Rows upon rows of names  -  and nicknames:  Lenny. Stumpy. Daylight. Blue - because roads can tear families apart, as well as bring them closer.
Reducing the dreadful toll on our roads has always been one aim of the duplication of the Hume.
In 1976 there were almost two and a half thousand crashes and 71 deaths along the NSW sections of the Hume alone.
With dual carriageway the length of the highway, crashes are now in the low hundreds.
Fatalities this year are in the single digits.
I'm determined we keep saving lives and we haven't just upgraded roads to make them safer we've updated laws to make driving safer, especially through the Safe Rates legislation which passed the Parliament last year.
In a big dry country like ours, roads are like rivers. They take us places and define our geography.
Look at any map. It's the roads and the rivers that define where we go.
It's why we put them in our songs and in our stories.
In 1985 Paul Kelly released a single called From St Kilda to King's Cross.
He sang of thirteen hours on a bus, on the Hume, his face pressed against the glass, watching “the white lines rushing past.”
The time it takes to drive from Melbourne to Sydney has now been cut by three hours  -  Paul Kelly may need to change his lyrics.
Even a grand project like the Hume duplication always prompts mixed feelings and some homesickness for the past.
This is a project that has transformed our landscape.
Forty-nine bypasses, taking thousands of trucks off the streets of our loveliest country towns.
That has turned what was once a capital J “Journey” into a cruise-controlled, air-conditioned glide.
We all have our memories of the Hume.
The shimmer of hot road ahead that signals a summer holiday has begun.
The first sight of the city, suburb or town that lets us know we are almost home.
That won't change.
We'll just need to remember to get off the highway once in a while  -  taking a break here at Holbrook, or at Goulburn, or Wangaratta.
To remind ourselves that even with such a great road beneath our wheels, the journey isn't just about the destination.
Put today, we are celebrating the arrival at a long planned, long anticipated destination  -  the full duplication of the Hume. 
Congratulations Australia! 


Canberra
PM: Yesterday I had the very great honour of attending the opening of the memorial for those lost in Afghanistan.
A memorial put together by families, particularly under the leadership of Gordon Chuck and Susan Chuck who lost their son Ben in Afghanistan.
The opening of that memorial was attended by a number of the families who have lost loved ones in Afghanistan.
You could see on their faces that the sorrow is still there, but so is the pride in service.
It seems particularly cruel that as that service was coming to an end, that we were starting to receive the first news of more death and more wounding in Afghanistan.
Every death, every loss in Afghanistan hits the nation hard.
I think not only will the nation be hit hard today, but for many, this will be a very painful reminder that the risk is not over, the danger isn't gone.
Our last loss was in October last year and I think many have probably lulled themselves into a false sense of security that we would see no more losses in Afghanistan.
This news reminds us that our mission is ongoing, that the danger is ongoing.
We have got work to do and our ADF personnel are over there doing important work for the nation, but work that has real risks.
On behalf of the nation, I offer our condolences to the family and friends of the commando who has been lost.
He was an elite soldier and a very brave man.
We are thinking of his family and friends today and we respect their wishes for privacy at this time.
The nation's thoughts are also with the family of the soldier who has been seriously wounded.
We wish for him a speedy recovery. Our thoughts are with him as he recovers.
And our thoughts too are with the airman who has sustained more minor wounds.
I will take questions but solely on this matter.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the death of an Australian soldier generally sparks some calls to reconsider the mission in Afghanistan. What would you say to those who might question what we are doing here?
PM: I would say what I've always said, and as a Government we have shown a constant sea of purpose about this. As a nation I believe we've shown a constant sea of purpose.
We went to Afghanistan for the right reasons. We went there because Afghanistan had provided a safe haven for the training of terrorists. And that terrorist training was implicated in the loss of Australian lives, including in Bali.
So we are very clear about our mission. We are clear about its end point.
The bulk of our forces will come home at the end of this year.
But we have got more work to do in Afghanistan, and so we will see that mission through.
JOURNALIST: As that drawdown date approaches, do you expect the risk for Australian troops to be heightened?
PM: The risk is always there.
The process of extraction will be a very carefully managed one.
The lessons from other theatres of combat have been learnt about the risks of extraction, and so our defence personnel are working hard on managing those risks.
What has happened here of course is the risk that comes by taking the fight to the insurgents, and we have seen that risk take a toll before and it's taken a toll again.
JOURNALIST: How ready are the Afghanistan security services to take over control when we leave?
PM: All of the advice to me and the view of our Defence personnel who work in Afghanistan is that our mission of training and mentoring has made a real difference and increasingly Afghan local forces are able to step up to security leadership.
And that is the process that we are in now so the Afghan people can provide security for the Afghan nation.
That doesn't mean, though, that our mission will come to a complete end.
We have said that the bulk of our forces will come home at the end of this year when the base in Tarin Kowt is closed.
But we will have a continuing role providing assistance and advice to Afghan local forces, and training.
And as I've consistently said we have also left open the possibility of a continuing role for Special Forces beyond the end of the current mission, the current ISAF mission at the end of 2014.
JOURNALIST: Has the likelihood of a continued operation of the Special Forces personnel increased after this sort of incident?
PM: That decision is not related to events in the field.
It's related to strategic discussions between us and ISAF partners and the nation of Afghanistan.
Thank you. 


Holbrook
After half a century of continuous construction and the investment of billions of dollars, a modern fully duplicated Hume Highway is at last a reality  -  a significant nation building achievement.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Federal Infrastructure and Transport Minister Anthony Albanese and NSW Roads Minister Duncan Gay today joined with local community at Holbrook in southern NSW to celebrate this historic event and inspect the town's newly built bypass, the final stage in the upgrade of this iconic road.
The Bypass will open to traffic next month.
Rebuilding the 808 kilometre Hume Highway has been a massive engineering endeavour, one made more challenging by the vast and varied landscape through which it travels.
As well as duplicating the entire road, the project also involved removing some 90 million cubic metres of earth, erecting 205 new bridges, building 68 new interchanges and planting millions of trees.  And along with Holbrook, the Highway has beenre-routed around 49 towns.
Even more remarkably, it is estimated that as many as 130,000 Australians at some point worked onsite transforming the Highway.  For some this project has been a life's work.  In fact, one of the workers now putting the finishing touches on the Holbrook Bypass first started working on the Hume back in 1972.
The end product of all that labour is a modern 21st century highway.
In practical terms, the upgrade has reduced travel times between Sydney and Melbourne by around three hours and made those journeys far safer.  Indeed, along just the NSW section of the Highway fatalities have declined dramatically from 71in 1976 to 4 so far this year.
What's more, the Highway is now fit for purpose as one of Australia's busiesttransport routes.  It is now able to carry more goods with fewer delays, speeding up the movement of freight along the eastern seaboard and boosting national productivity.
In addition to today's Community Day, a new interactive website has been created to mark the completion of the upgrade: www.rms.nsw.gov.au/humecelebration.
As well as providing a unique insight into the history of this vital road, the ‘Celebrating a Momentous Journey' website also gives everyone the opportunity to record their memories about this iconic road.
Such personal reflections and anecdotes, together with videos and photos dating back to as early as 1876, will help make this website a valuable resource for anyone interested in tracking the history of the Hume Highway from dirt track to what it is today.
Without a doubt, it has been a momentous journey.
The Highway closely follows the path first taken by European explorers Hamilton Hume and William Hovell during their successful 1824 expedition to find an alternate inland route from Sydney to Port Phillip, the site of modern day Melbourne.  Work on its northern section between Picton and the Goulburn Plains begun in 1819 on the orders of Australia's original nation builder, Governor Lachlan Macquarie.


Canberra
Welcome to Parliament House.
Thank you for coming here to build on CEDA's stewardship of detailed and serious discussion about the state of the Australian economy and its future.
Your presence here this week is not only very important, it is very timely, so I'm particularly pleased to join you first up today.
Three weeks ago the National Accounts for the March quarter of this year were released.
They were solid  -  they showed our economy is growing and stable and strong  -  they were good news.
The National Accounts reflected the economy's underlying stability and strength and our status as a leading nation  -  yes, in a mixed world environment and yes, with some complex transitions underway.
Solid growth at 2.5 per cent for the year.
Household savings at over 10 per cent.
New business investment still around fifty-year highs as a share of GDP, at 17.5 per cent.
Productivity growth now above trend at 2 per cent.
Net exports making their strongest contribution to growth in four years.
If I can speak candidly, the subsequent discussion has been marked by some strikingly misguided commentary.I'm not talking here about criticism of the Government's economic policies  -  not at all  -  I'm referring to glaring misstatements about the economy itself.
If “irrational exuberance” has an opposite it's probably “unreasonable pessimism” and we've witnessed that in some quarters these past three weeks.
I want to address that in some detail this morning but first I want to be clear on why I think it's worth doing.
Simply put, your presence here in Parliament House this week presents you with a special opportunity to bring to the national economic debate the “correction we have to have”.
You can bring to the national public discussion an understanding of the facts, an interrogation of the policy demands that the facts impose on us, an understanding that the benefits of long-term reform are felt precisely over that long-term, and crucially you can present a well-founded confidence in the Australian economy.
I know you will have rigorous and vigorous policy debate and I absolutely welcome critical discussion of the Government's policy approach. 
But I know you want to hear opinion based on facts.
So that's what I'm asking you to do while you are here  -  get all the facts on the table, discuss the real policy challenges, and then challenge the negative economic sentiment that is around in some quarters.
Where have the pessimists gone wrong?
First, some reporting has neglected important specific facts about the quarterly figures.
Two particular features would have given Australians some interesting insights on where the economy is headed.
New dwelling investment over the year rose by 10.2 per cent  -  the strongest annual growth in ten years, further evidence that the non-resource sectors of the economy picking up.
Non-rural commodity export volumes were up 13.2 per cent over the year.
This ramp up largely drove the rise in export volumes  -  and it is a sign that the production phase of the mining boom we have spoken about for some time is now starting to come through.
These are important signs that the transitions we planned for in the Budget are now underway  -  yet they went barely remarked.
Second, the most irresponsible pessimists have tossed around the “r” word.
Something not so much sinister as silly, a claim I'm frankly somewhat reluctant to repeat, even in order to contradict it, lest I give it weight.
But consider this.
For the third time in just five years, one leading firm of economists predicted a 20 per cent chance that the Australian economy will actually shrink for two quarters in a row.
Another then quoted a 25 per cent chance that growth would halt completely.
Now as Jessica Irvine has pointed out in a column for News Ltd publications, even these sensationally pessimistic statements were still forecasting the most likely outcome is growth.
Or to put it another way, even these outlying forecasts are themselves statements that the glass is actually three quarters or four fifths full.
Yet the effect on confidence can only be negative and on all the facts, is clearly not justified.
One national daily reported on its front page that our economy had shrunk if you excluded net exports.
You might as well say Shakespeare hardly earned a penny in his life, except from the theatre.
And the assault on confidence in Western Australia was particularly sharp.
This arose from the national accounts reporting that final state demand their fell by 3.9 per cent in the March quarter.
Bear in mind, state demand excludes not only net exports but interstate trade.
You might as well say the economy is shrinking in your house when you exclude the money you earn at your office.
The Secretary of Treasury, Dr Parkinson, and his deputy Dr Gruen responded to this unambiguously in Senate hearings ten days ago. As Dr Gruen put it:
The idea that in the face of the largest investment boom we have ever seen, you ignore exports and focus on the piece of the economy that is demand by Western Australia ... belongs in the comic books.
As Prime Minister, I am concerned that left unchecked, this kind of distorted coverage could continue to spread.
Australians woke last Wednesday morning to widespread news reports that markets expected the labour force figures for that day to show 10,000 jobs lost in May.
By lunchtime the ABS figures showed a small increase in jobs.
I don't know if the Australian Communications and Media Authority would welcome a request for 11,100 corrections to be put to air but if anyone here wants to make that submission feel free to cite me in support.
We all acknowledge that forecasting is difficult  -  at any time.
But the continued pessimism is not being matched by the continued performance of our key economic indicators and low expectations can themselves become an economic problem.
Now, as I have said, many serious commentators have taken issue with the unreasonable pessimists.
Many of you here share their frustration.
Michael Pascoe in his Fairfax column was the most scathing but also I thought the most amusing, reporting on what he called “squawking”. This led, in his words, to squawk like:
“The national accounts suggest the economy would have contracted without a 1 percentage point boost from falling imports and rising exports...”
Michael went on to say:
It would have contracted if a meteor took out Melbourne and would have expanded if kangaroos started defecating gold.
Yes he is pretty good, isn't he!
Now you came this morning for a discussion about the economic development of Australia, not an episode of Media Watch. 
So it's important that we be very clear about why it matters to get the public discussion right.
Dr Parkinson's summary overall, in that same Senate hearing?
Trashing confidence for whatever reason is not in the national interest.
This is the first fundamental point. Confidence matters. 
Not hope or optimism, but a well-founded positive sentiment based on the facts, recognising that our economy is growing and stable and strong.
In November 2008, in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, Reserve Bank Governor Glenn Stevens, warned about the need to go about business with a “quiet confidence” in our prospects. 
His words:
Given the underlying strengths of the economy, about the biggest mistake we could make would be to talk ourselves into unnecessary economic weakness.
Still true.
Any irrational threat to economic confidence is a threat to jobs and growth.
The second reason to get the discussion right is that as economic decision-makers, we must be able to separate the signal from the noise.
We need to pick the real transitions as they are coming.
Growth in Asia, enduring for decades to come.
The peak of the mining investment boom.
The digital disruption and the clean energy future.
The pick-up in broader sources of growth beyond resources.
Critical for the economy right now  -  new sources of growth, sustaining economic diversity with a strong dollar.
Perhaps there's no better example of the failure to separate signal from noise than the pessimists who say that the dollar rising is bad news and then say the dollar falling is bad news.
Last week a retail industry leader who's spent years advocating for direct relief from the strong dollar and low-price imports did widespread media complaining that the falling dollar was bad for consumer confidence. 
This actually happened.
I am sure the recent movements in the dollar will not go unremarked here, so I will say just a few things on that front.
The Australian dollar has been at historically high level for some time now and as you all know this has moderated in recent weeks.
Our high dollar reflects our strong fundamentals  -  solid growth, low unemployment, low debt, AAA credit ratings  -  but also the challenges that many other developed economies have faced in the aftermath of the GFC, the worst economic conditions in over 80 years.
More simply, the high value of the Australian dollar has been a combination of our strength and global weakness.
Our strength remains, and the good news is that the signs from America are becoming more positive for their growth.
Improvements in the US economy should be welcome  -  these support the global recovery and growth in the world's largest economy provides significant opportunities for Australian exporters.
While the high dollar has provided benefits for consumers, it has meant significant challenges for some of our exporters.
As the Treasurer has said, a sustained depreciation of the Australian dollar in those circumstances would be a very good thing, to stimulate further growth in the non-mining sector  -  while the firms that have adjusted to the historically high dollar stand to benefit from its fall.
As a Government we recognise we need to be ready to seize the opportunities that the future will bring.
We need to make the right investments and deliver the right reforms.
Your theme this week, of “Australia adjusting”, neatly captures the elements of agency and change that are in play.
Your agenda demonstrates that CEDA, at least, is able to identify the real economic signals and to work up the agenda points for a serious discussion about what is to be done.
Productivity and structural reform: where Labor's “five pillars” of skills and education, infrastructure, innovation, tax and regulatory reform are so vital  -  and form a discussion which connects to so many other key areas.
Education: as you put it, ensuring Australia's future prosperity  -  nothing matters more and this week is vital for this reform.
Energy policy: a historic challenge to decouple economic growth from emissions growth.
International competitiveness: where the dollar's recent easing hasn't eased the demand that we plan for jobs and growth and do so through sustained economic diversity.
Innovation: where the jobs of the future depend so heavily on the ideas and the infrastructure of the future.
Health reform and funding models: the structural reforms already made to Commonwealth-State relations and the structural savings we've delivered in Commonwealth spending have begun a process which must continue to sustain public finances.
The big one, the Asian Century, a century of growth and change, of Asian middle-class demand for high value Australian services and goods.
Education and tourism, agriculture and advanced manufacturing, financial services, health services, digital media.
These are the real issues, the big picture, the things that matter. You are absolutely right to be discussing them here this week.
2013 is a big year for Australia.
Economic choices and political choices are before us all.
Choices with consequences, choices with purpose, choices which should be informed, informed by the facts.
The facts are these.
Labor  -  returning the Budget to balance faster than most of the developed world.Our net debt  -  one-third Canada's, one-fifth Germany's and one-eighth the size of the United States.
Equivalent to a person with a $100 000 income each year having a $12 000 mortgage.
Our nation's best ever credit rating.  Interest rates are low.  Inflation is contained.The average tax to GDP ratio under Labor, well below the previous Coalition Government.
Since Labor came to power, the Australian economy has grown by 14 per cent.
And the bottom line of all bottom lines: under Labor, our nation has created more than 950,000 jobs.
You have a big program before you and I'm looking forward to our conversation because there is so much to discuss. 


Canberra
This is my 15th year in Parliament, but I am always learning new things about this place.
For example, I was recently told that it would take one painter 16 and a half years to paint the entire building.
Which, if nothing else, gives us a new perspective on Michelangelo's achievement in the Sistine Chapel. 
Perhaps just as remarkably, more than 20 million visitors have passed through the House's doors in 25 years.
Australian political giants and foreign dignitaries.
The leader of the world's largest nation  -  Hu Jintao.
The leader of the world's largest Islamic society  -  Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.
The Queen of Australia and the Prime Minister of this parliament's distinguished ancestor in Westminster  -  Tony Blair.
The Prime Ministers of two of our closest Commonwealth friends  -  Canada's Stephen Harper and New Zealand's John Key.
And all four Presidents of the United States elected since the opening of this place.
Legends of radio, television and the Parliamentary press gallery have walked these corridors. 
Spiritual leaders and business tycoons.
Community groups and protest movements whose causes span the ideological spectrum. 
Millions of excited schoolchildren and their patient teachers.
Australian tourists and international visitors.
People drawn by the striking lines of this building and itslight-filled design.
The warmth of its Australian timbers. The beauty of its magnificent art collection. 
People who have come to see our democracy in action.
Both the cut and thrust of Question Time and the unifying spirit of great bipartisan moments.  
People who come to have their voices heard, see their argument made.
To receive a nation's thanks. Or its apology.  
And I think it is not too much to hope that these visitors leave inspired.
Not just by the place Australians have built.
But the country, the civic pride and the democratic system that this building represents. 
Today though, we are here to honour those who made this place possible:
Its visionary architect Romaldo Giurgola, who unfortunately can't be with us today.
And the men and women who brought that vision to fruition; taking an empty hilltop and turning into our nation's foremost public building.
We also celebrate the thousands of people who come to this house every working day.
There is a group that is not employed by the Parliament but which makes this place both their home and their subject-matter (for good or ill): the press gallery, who have the opportunity to render such a vital service to our democracy.
There are the cleaners who maintain the 9.6km of corridors and the guides who make visitors feel so welcome within these halls.
The electricians who make sure the 40,000 lights go on.
The gardeners who care for the 13 hectares of grounds and mow the sloping lawns that children just love to roll down.
The editors who produce the 19,600 pages of Hansard each year.
The tabling office and chamber staff who have overseen the passage of more than 4,200 bills.
The parliamentary librarians who have fielded more than 680,000 enquiries.
The chefs, waiters and baristas who have prepared and served hundreds of thousands of meals and millions of cups of coffee.
The security guards, plumbers, printers, switchboard operators, fitness trainers, nurses and IT staff.
All of you who do your jobs so well and with such quiet efficiency that you sometimes miss out on the recognition you deserve.
In a place often associated with prima donnas and limelight, you are backstage making sure that the show goes on.
More than 70 of you have been here from day one, a distinction you share with just four of my Parliamentary colleagues.
There is no better illustration of the apolitical dedication that so many of you bring to your daily work.
And no better reminder that the smooth running of this building is something we should never take for granted. 
So on behalf of all Australians I pay tribute to Aldo and to all who created this building, and I thank all those who through their hard work, patience and good-humour give it life every day.
Through their love of freedom, generations of Australians have built a great democracy.
You have given that democracy a fine and worthy home.
On behalf of the nation, I simply say: “thank you”. 


Canberra
QUESTION: Prime Minister, Everald Compton. I'm delighted with the initiative that you and Wayne Swan took in identifying the ageing of the population and how that should be turned into an asset and not being a liability.
And I see based on your remarks about the Asian Century a great opportunity for aged care services in Australia to be exported to China where the demand will be enormous, and I think it could even get to the point of becoming a major export for the country and I wondered what you thought about that?
PM: Thank you very much Everald, and thank you for the contributions you've made to our policies too.
Everald's been working with us on a set of participation policies to make it easier for older Australians to continue to work.
So many of our public policy settings have made assumptions about when full retirement is, and in modern Australia where we need to lift participation and where so many older Australians want to continue in work, Everald's played a very leading role making sure we get those things right.
I also agree with your analysis about our potential to export aged care and health care and education services, financial services to Asia.
This is going to be such a big part of our future, including the export of public policy services. We are good at public policy.
Things like compulsory superannuation, Medicare, carbon pricing; these things are rightly studied in our region as models for advanced economies as to how you manage ageing populations, how you manage social welfare, how you manage to reduce carbon pollution.
So I think all of that Australian expertise and those leading-edge services can be a source of income and prosperity for us in this Asian Century.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, Baden Firth from the Mitsubishi Corporation. If you could give us your comments on the achievements that you feel you've delivered through the Fair Work Act to date, and then what sort of agenda platform you'll be taking to the next election around industrial relations, I'd be very grateful. Thank you.
PM: Sure. Certainly we're very proud of the Fair Work Act and whilst it's going to I'm sure be the continued topic of lively conversation with the business community, here again I think it's important that people get the facts on the table.
We are seeing rising productivity. We are seeing wages contained. In terms of levels of industrial disputation we are below the average of the Howard years.
And indeed much of the industrial disputation in recent statistics has arisen from state government bargaining disputes with state government employees like teachers and nurses.
So this is the set of achievements of the Fair Work Act.
We've recently passed some changes to Fair Work which have been about better balancing work and family life and addressing modern problems like bullying.
We believe we've basically got the settings right. We will not go to the election with a big program of change.
We will go to the election saying this is a system that is working for Australia.
And we will certainly go to the election resisting the alternative  -  whether it is frankly put or only quietly spoken  -  an alternative that takes us to the very divisive conflict of the Work Choices years.
QUESTION: Good morning Prime Minister, Ken King, CEO of the Pilbara Development Commission.
I'd just like to ask you for your comments about northern Australia. Particularly northern Western Australia, the Northern Territory and the north of Queensland as regions that provide great opportunities to drive the economy from the resources sector in particular.
And I think more importantly, not just about extractive efforts, extractive industries, but more importantly, your policies around encouraging people to live as well as work in northern Australia.
PM: Thank you very much for that question. I'm in the business of saying we should get things done. I do note that that's not necessarily embraced by all.
We've seen a bit of a flim-flam pamphlet come out on the future of northern Australia which promises rounds of endless reviews and meetings but not much content.
We've taken a different view; we've just got up there and got things done.
So whether it's been our record investments in the Kimberley to open up that region, whether it's been the huge investments we've made in the Northern Territory and in the north of Queensland, the investments we're making in infrastructure, the investments we're making in education to encourage people to aspire to the highest levels of education.
These are practical changes for northern Australia.
We've been working well with local government representatives in northern Australia. We actually work well with the Barnett Government on the strategy for the Kimberley.
We worked well with the Northern Territory Government to do things like secure the INPEX investment and to build the associated training facilities, which means that people will get jobs.
We've had our moments with the Queensland Government, but our big investments in the north of Queensland continue. And they will make a long term difference.
Northern Australia has the opportunity to benefit from many of our policy settings, including our settings for a clean energy future  -  we're talking about parts of the country where clean energy development is going to be a big part of their future and their future prosperity.
So we're out there on the ground doing practical work every day, and that's the approach that we'll continue to take.
QUESTION: Good morning Prime Minister, Gloria Jacob from Regional Development Australia in the Pilbara. Following on from Dr King's question  -  I was wondering what your position would be on encouraging more people to live there, certainly in northern Australia, but especially with regards to the special economic zone?
PM: Look I think you've got to be very careful about some of these economic suggestions.
We do have a zonal tax rebate for people who live in remote regions. I don't want to get into the work of constitutional lawyers  -  that's not my bag  -  we've got constitutional lawyers who do that for the nation.
But there is of course a lively discussion about whether or not such a proposal  -  the one we have in operation now and any proposal to build on it  -  would survive constitutional challenge. So that's on the income tax side.
On the business side  -  what I believe is if you get the underlying conditions right, then you will attract private sector investment.
And the underlying conditions are about traditional infrastructure, where we are a Government that is investing more in roads and rail and ports than any government in the nation's history.
We've radically upped investment since the days of the Howard Government.
If you can build new communications technologies  -  part of what has kept people from living in northern Australia or in more regional or remote Australia is the sense of isolation  -  the NBN and all of the technologies associated with the NBN can end that for all time.
Part of what has dissuaded people from living in those areas is the sense that they wouldn't be able to get quality services for their family. There wouldn't be quality in the local schools.
There wouldn't be quality in the local health care facilities. There wouldn't be the opportunity to go on to higher education.
We have worked to transform that. What I want to achieve in this parliament this week with the new school funding and new school improvement plan would radically lift the quality and resources of schools in regional and remote Australia.
The investments that we've put into universities that work in regional and remote Australia are working at transformation too.
So if you can get all of that right; the infrastructure, the human capital, the access to information, the sense for people that they could live lives supported by appropriate services in those parts of the country, then I believe individuals will respond and the private sector will respond as well. 


Canberra
I want to offer a special acknowledgment to the Founder and Chairman of these Awards, Mr Joseph Assaf
Joseph has made a towering contribution to multiculturalism and to the business community.
His deep commitment to the values of innovation, tolerance and social equity has become legendary.
That's why I've appointed Joseph to the Civil Society 20 group  -  the C20  -  as part of our wider engagement process for the G20 meeting in Australia next year.
A big part of our effort will be showcasing Australia's multicultural success-story and how it helps us reach out to the world.
Multiculturalism is a success story.
Perhaps our greatest success as a modern nation.
And 25 years of the Ethnic Business Awards show just what that achievement means.
For a quarter of a century, we've been celebrating men and women who have come to this country with their worldly goods in a suitcase, with hands ready for hard work and heads busy with ambitious dreams.
Migrants who have founded the businesses that have shaped this nation.
The tradesmen and labourers who delivered nation-building infrastructure like the Snowy Hydro scheme.
The family construction companies that built our city suburbs, street by street, in the post-war boom years.
The mum-and-dad entrepreneurs who gave us great and enduring family-owned businesses, from the corner shop to our iconic department stores and shopping malls.
The men and women who have become property moguls and giants of manufacturing.
And the ones who have created the local jobs that have kept our towns and our regional economies humming.
And now, new generations of arrivals who are engaging the world, at the outer frontiers of new technologies.
Ethnic businesses have much to do with the prosperity, stability and strength of our economy.
While there are some who leave the land of their birth in desperation, fleeing war or persecution, escaping a nightmare, many others  -  including my family  -  make the life-changing decision as a clear choice.
As the fulfilment of a dream.
Through human history, migration has, to some extent, selected the risk-takers.
The men and women who see opportunity and seize it.
Those who see a glass half full and have a plan for the other half.
The very qualities so essential to business and entrepreneurialism.
Thirty per cent of small business owners operating in Australia today were born overseas.
Six of the top 10 Australian billionaires listed in BRW's Richest 200 list had a first- or second-generation migrant or refugee background.
The spirit, energy and ingenuity of our ethnic businessmen and women are things that cannot be taught, or bought.
They come from within.
But there are things governments can do to make the first steps of a new migrant steadier.
Things we can do as a generous and welcoming community, and which we have been doing for decades through programs like the successful Adult Migrant English Program.
But it is important that we also hold out a hand not just of welcome, but of help, to the children of those who have newly arrived.
The boys and girls who will design the cities of our tomorrow, manufacture the products of our future, dream up the innovations of the next century.
But before they embark on those lives, they need a good education.
And that means proficiency in English.
Our schools already offer effective and intensive English-language tuition.
But I believe we can do more.
That's why, as part of the Government's National Plan for School Improvement I'm determined to see greater resources go to students who speak languages other than English at home.
About 100,000 girls and boys stand to benefit from this additional funding.
It's an important investment.
An investment in the lives and prospects of individual boys and girls, at a time of profound transition in their lives.
I want to make sure that the new life we hold out to migrant children and their families is a life of genuine opportunity from the very start.
Of course, if proficiency in English is crucial for those making new homes here, proficiency in languages other than English  -  particularly the languages of Asia  -  is becoming essential to our national economic interest.
The Asian Century has dawned.
The centre of world economic activity is moving closer.
The share of world output generated within 10,000km of Australia's borders has doubled over the past half century.
It now accounts for more than a third of all global output.
This will rise to around half of all global output by 2030 - the year a child born today will finish high school.
I want that child  -  and every child of that generation  -  to have the chance to continuously study a priority Asian language throughout their years of schooling:
Mandarin, Hindi, Indonesian or Japanese.
Of course, the reality is that the example of multilingualism is already being set for us, daily by members of the ethnic business community.
Men and women fluent in the languages of our current and future trading partners, and fluent too in the cultural nuances so crucial in a global marketplace.
Our ethnic businessmen and women carried these skills with them when they came to Australia.
Now they pass them to their children and grandchildren.
It's an inheritance from which we all gain.
We've come a long way from the days when we tended to think of ourselves as a melting pot headed towards the goal of assimilation.
We no longer use that language.
And we no longer seek the uniformity that it dictated.
Migrants aren't forced to anglicise their names and disguise their backgrounds.
We can be proudly Lebanese-Australian.
Staunchly Greek-Australian.
We can observe Ramadan, or Hanukkah, or Vesak.
We can trace our family trees, preserve our faiths  -  or profess no faith at all  -  and feel safe in doing so.
We can carry forward our ancestors' names, pass on our mother tongues.
We can gather to mark Glendi or Diwali.
As the founder of these awards, Joseph Assaf, has pointed out, we need look no further than the Chinese and Indian diasporas to know that a growing number of individuals see themselves  -  and behave  -  as transnationals.
Proud Australians, but fully engaged in a wider world of commerce, culture and intellectual inquiry.
Australians, but with a special, and precious, entrée to the world economy.
With the cultural insights, the language skills and the contacts.
Joseph gave a speech some years ago in which he remarked that on Christmas Day, seven million phone calls were made from Australia.
Seven million living connections to the world beyond our shores.
That speech was delivered almost a decade ago.
These days, I imagine, the ‘living connection' is increasingly made through Skype.
The Christmas card has become a text message.
Indeed, the very first text message ever sent, back in 1992, contained just two words:  “Merry Christmas”.
And if our social connections across the world are now maintained via swipe-screens and Facebook, business is increasingly conducted the same way: instantly; urgently, immediately.
The tyranny of distance has become the tyranny of 24/7.
It's a tyranny I suspect Joseph Assaf meets head-on, with gusto.
Most of you know his story  -  the archetypal migrant story.
The 22-year-old Lebanese migrant working in a factory and teaching himself English.
In time, founder of the communications agency Etcom.
Founder of these awards, 25 years ago.
A mover and shaker in ethnic radio, on countless boards and committees.
A sought-after conference speaker.
A passionate advocate for education.
But passionate, above all, about the precious gift of multiculturalism that defines us as a people.
Congratulations Joseph on 25 years of the Ethnic Business Awards.
And congratulations to all those ethnic businessmen and women whose stories and successes are so central to Australia's national story.
Our story.
Our unique contribution to the shape of the world.
Written  -  in pride and unity  -  together.


Canberra
A fair funding system, school improvement reforms and extra funding for Australian schools are now enshrined in law following the passage of the Australian Education Bill through the Senate today.
This is a great day for Australian schools, students and families. For the first time, we have a needs-based funding model for schools across all sectors, one that will ensure our classrooms are properly resourced for generations to come.
The new National Plan for School Improvement applies to all government schools in participating states, and non-government schools in all states. It delivers:
 * 	A school funding model based on individual student need, with a per student amount and extra money for schools and students that need more support;
 * 	Extra resources over the next six years to bring schools up to their Schooling Resource Standard, plus better rates of indexation; and
 * 	School improvement reforms that will help every Australian student get a great education, and help take Australian schools to the top five in the world by 2025.
For states and territories that have signed up to the National Plan for School Improvement, today's Senate vote guarantees extra funding and higher indexation from the Commonwealth over the next six years.
New South Wales, South Australia and the ACT have already signed up to our plan. Every school and every sector in these jurisdictions will benefit from extra funding, delivered under a needs-based system, as well as higher rates of indexation.
Nationally, all non-government schools will be funded under the new, fairer funding system outlined in the Bill.
As a result over 60% of students in almost 60% schools across the country will now benefit from their share of the $15 billion on offer to all states and territories if they sign up to a fairer school funding model and school improvement reforms.
National Plan for School Improvement
All participating schools will benefit from school reforms aimed at lifting student results and providing a high-quality, high-equity education for all Australians.
School sectors taking part in the National Plan have committed to implementing these reforms in five key areas: quality teaching, quality learning, greater autonomy, more transparency, and meeting student need.
For schools and students, this means:
 * 	Higher entry standards for the teaching profession
 * 	More training and support for teachers
 * 	More individual support for students
 * 	School improvement plans for every school
 * 	More information for parents and the community about school funding and performance
Non-participating states
All states and territories will be asked to sign up to implementing education reforms in the five main areas, and to commit to our goal of being in the top five schooling countries by 2025.
The Australian Education Bill also sets out Commonwealth funding arrangements for non-participating states and territories. The Commonwealth will provide current levels of school funding to state and territory governments, indexed to meet rising costs.
We have been clear, however, there will be no windfall gain for non-participating states and territories.
Government school sectors in non-participating states will also miss out on the extra funding we have put on the table. Non-government schools in these states will receive their share of extra Commonwealth funding, but will miss out on guaranteed extra funding from their state or territory government.
This makes it even more urgent that all jurisdictions sign up to our plan by June 30.
We don't want to see schools and students in these states missing out because of a decision by their state or territory government not to commit to extra funding.
Next steps
We will continue to negotiate with remaining states and territories ahead of the June 30 deadline, because we want to secure the best deal possible for every Australian school and student.
Detailed implementation plans are being developed with participating sectors which set out how the new funding model will work, how the extra funding will be phased in, and how school improvement reforms will be implemented on the ground.
These will be released when finalised and will provide further details of funding available to schools from next year.
The National Plan for School Improvement, including the new, fairer funding approach, will be in place in our classrooms from January 1, 2014.
From next year, there will be more money, higher standards, and better results for Australian students.


Canberra
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for your time. Will you call a leadership ballot? 
PM: Thank you David for this opportunity. 
As you've been reporting, and others are reporting, there is apparently a petition circulating within the Labor Party to call for a leadership ballot.
I haven't seen this petition. 
Call me old fashioned, but the way in which these things are normally done is a challenger approaches the leader of the Labor Party and asks them to call a ballot for the leadership, you shake hands and then a ballot is held. 
That hasn't happened. But in these circumstances I do think it's in the best interests of the nation  -  and in the best interests of the Labor Party  -  for this matter to be resolved. 
So, whilst I haven't been approached by anyone saying that they wish to be Prime Minister, or Labor leader, it is my intention to call a ballot for the Labor leadership at 7PM tonight. 
HOST: And you will stand? 
PM: Yes I most certainly will stand. I actually believe that politics, government, is about purpose. 
It's not about personalities. It's about values and getting the big things done that the nation needs. 
And even today in the midst of what has been a fair bit of hurly burly I've been very focused on our education reforms and improving schools for every child. That's my focus. 
HOST: Will you win this ballot? 
PM: Well David, I do want to say to you because I believe politics is about purpose  -  not about personality  -  that going into this ballot tonight I think that everyone involved should accept a few conditions on the ballot, should come to understand the true significance of the ballot.
First and foremost, anybody who believes that they should be Labor leader should put themselves forward for this ballot. 
This is it. 
There are no more opportunities. 
Tonight is the night and this is it. 
Number two, because politics is not about personality, all of these issues need to be resolved tonight. 
We cannot have the Government or the Labor Party go to the next election with a person leading the Labor Party and a person floating around as the potential alternate leader.
In those circumstances I believe anybody who enters the ballot tonight should do it on the following conditions: that if you win, you're Labor leader; that if you lose, you retire from politics. 
HOST: You are agreeing to do that? 
PM: Absolutely. 
HOST: If you lose tonight you will leave Parliament at the election? 
PM: Correct. 
And I think that that is the right thing to do for the nation and for the political party I lead, and I hope to lead following the ballot. 
We cannot be in a circumstance where the nightly news has been as the nightly news has been for much of my prime ministership if the truth be told, where I have been in a political contest with the Leader of the Opposition, but I've also been in a political contest with people from my own political party. 
No leader should be in that position; certainly no leader should be in that position in the run up to an election. 
And so tonight, this is it, finished. I am asking my political party to endorse me as a leader and Prime Minister of purpose. 
People will make their decision but having made their decision it's over and the best way of it being over is for the person not successful to retire from politics. 
HOST: As you indicate, this issue has not left you throughout this parliamentary term. 
This is the third time it's coming to a head. 
Who do you blame for that? Has Kevin Rudd really been an honest broker when he says he's not interested in challenging? 
PM: Well I'll let my caucus colleagues decide all of that and judge the history. 
What I would say for myself, and I know that these things are contested and spoken about in politics, what has always driven me in politics and will continue to drive me if I receive the trust of my colleagues tonight is getting things done in accordance with Labor values for a Labor purpose. 
HOST: But Prime Minister, you said this earlier on in the year. Why does it keep coming back to this? 
Do you accept any responsibility for the fact that so many of your colleagues want to bring this on again? 
PM: I accept responsibility for my own conduct. People need to accept responsibility for their conduct. 
And so I think your questions are perhaps best put to others. 
What I can certainly tell you as Prime Minister and as Labor leader is I have never been diverted from that task and achieving the big things the country needs by all of this nonsense. 
But I am, as a rational politician, aware how debilitating this nonsense is for my political party, for my parliamentary colleagues, which is why I am making it a contest where I think the only decent thing for anybody to do is to say that is it, tonight is the moment for caucus to decide. 
I accept that outcome so fundamentally that if I am not successful I will not run at the next election. 
I ask others to accept the outcome on the same basis. 
And whether it's me or whether it's someone else who emerges from tonight's contest, they can go to the next election leading a united team because there is no one seeking to divert attention from Labor's re-election campaign.
HOST: You said you have not seen this petition. Has anybody approached you to call on you to bring about a spill? 
PM: No they have not and I have been wryly joking with some of my colleagues that this petition is the political equivalent of the Loch Ness monster. Everybody says that it exists but nobody has actually got the photograph of the Loch Ness monster. 
HOST: And you haven't spoken to anyone who has seen it? 
PM: No I haven't spoken to anyone who has seen it. 
HOST: Do you doubt its existence?
PM: Look, David, I don't know. 
What I do know, and I don't want to be critical of your honourable profession during the course of this interview. 
What I do know is that when things get like this there are all sorts of claims and counter claims but I've got an obligation to the nation. 
We are talking about who leads the nation. 
I'm not going to let that speculation run endlessly. 
I'm not going to have this Parliament, when we've still got business to do and big things to get done, end up being subject to media crews cannoning up and down parliamentary corridors in the hope of catching someone that they can then get half a sentence from. 
That's not the way I want to do things so let's get it done. 
HOST: Just getting back to the earlier question, how confident are you that you will still be Prime Minister this evening? 
PM: Well I wouldn't be putting myself forward unless I had a degree of confidence about the support of my parliamentary colleagues. 
I certainly have very much received good support from my closest cabinet colleagues, people who are doing very good and important work for the country. 
This is a pressurised time. People will make a decision. The important thing is that people keep in their mind as they walk into that room what is in the best interests of the nation, what is in the best interests of the Labor Party. 
I answer those questions by saying what's in the best interests of the nation and the Labor Party is to have a sense of  values and purpose and discipline and that is why I am shaping up tonight's ballot like that. 
HOST: In a nutshell then, if this is your final pitch publicly before that caucus ballot tonight, why are you a better Prime Minister than Kevin Rudd? 
PM: I will speak to caucus colleagues about the way in which caucus colleagues vote but I am happy to answer your question generally about why I have done this job and why I seek to continue to do this job. 
I came into politics to make a difference. 
I came into politics believing government could be about providing opportunity and it wouldn't matter whether you came from a rich background or a poor background, you're a migrant, you're an indigenous Australian, you were entitled to lead a life of opportunity partnered with your own endeavour and hard work. 
That's how I've lived my life and that's how I've brought the reforms that we've focussed on as a government, nothing more important than the school funding reform. 
These are Labor values, Labor purpose. That's what drives me. 
I'm not interested in public accolades, I'm not interested in applause. I'm not interested in any of that personality politics. I'm interested in getting things done. 
HOST: But do you think Kevin Rudd does not share those Labor values that you just articulated? 
PM: Mr Rudd can speak for himself and I would not be presumptuous enough to speak for him. 
HOST: But if he ends up leading Labor again tonight, do you fear for the future of the Government and the party? 
PM: I'm not being drawn about hypotheticals beyond tonight's ballot. 
HOST: Well Prime Minister, we know you do have a busy few hours ahead, I appreciate your time. Thank you. 
PM: Thanks David.


As you would probably be aware by now, Kevin Rudd has been elected as leader of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party. I congratulate Mr Rudd on his election. 
In view of his election I have written to the Governor-General asking her to commission Rudd as Prime Minister of Australia. 
I will shortly leave from this Parliament to see the Governor-General on this matter. 
In accordance with the pledge I gave earlier today, I announce that I will not recontest the federal electorate of Lalor at the forthcoming Federal Election.
I will have time in the coming weeks to be back home in my electorate and to say hello and goodbye to the community that I've had the absolute privilege of representing in this parliament since 1998.
So I will keep comments about my electorate until that time.
Three years ago I had the very great honour of being elected as Labor leader. It followed having the honour of being elected as Deputy Leader and Deputy Prime Minister following the 2007 election. 
This privilege was truly humbling, I thank the Australian Labor Party ofr that privilege and I thank the Australian people for their support.
When I first put myself forward for consideration as Labor leader in 2010, I had the overwhelming support of my colleagues to do so. I thank them for that.
And I thank them for giving the opportunity to me not only to serve the nation, but to serve as the first female Prime Minister of this country. 
In the years in which I have served as Prime Minister, predominantly I have faced a minority Parliament and I have also faced internal division within my political party. It has not been an easy environment to work in. 
But I am pleased that in this environment, which wasn't easy, I have prevailed to ensure that this country is made stronger and smarter and fairer for the future. 
I am very proud of what this Government has achieved, which will endure for the long term. 
Very proud of the way in which we achieved health reform against the odds with newly elected conservative leaders. 
Very pleased that we pushed through and put a price on carbon, an historic reform that will serve this nation well and which required us to have the guts and tenacity to stare down one of the most reckless fear campaigns in this nation's history. 
What we have achieved through DisabilityCare, to launch on 1 July this year, apparently an obvious reform to everyone now, but something that it took this Labor Government to get done and I am very proud of it. 
I am very proud too of the work that we have done in Australian schools. Today we passed the legislation which means 60 per cent of school children are covered by our new reforms. 
But this great Labor mission must be concluded not only in the days that remain to 30 June, but in the days beyond by Labor winning the Federal Election. 
It has been the defining passion of my life that every Australian child gets a great opportunity at a life of work and the dignity that comes with work, gets a great opportunity for the education that they should have and that reform is almost completed and it needs to be part of the continuing Labor project to get it done. 
I'm also very proud of having commenced the Royal Commission Into Child Sexual Abuse in Institutional Settings. 
This Royal Commission is now working its way around the country. I believe it will have many years of work in front of it, but it will change the nation. 
It will change individual lives, as people get to come forward and tell their story. It will change the nation because we will learn how to better protect our children for the future. 
I'm also very proud of the foreign policy achievements of this Government. Things people said couldn't be done, we have done; particularly we have strengthened both alliance with the United States while taking a major stride forward in our relationship with China. 
I'm very pleased, too, that we have taken big strides forward in other relationships, including our relationship with India. 
I am confident that I leave the prime ministership having strengthened the relationship with our major partners, every one of them. 
I also believe that the work we have done in Afghanistan is something to be proud of as an Australian nation. 
One of the things that has most delighted me as Prime Minister and before that as Deputy Prime Minister has been getting to know our Defence Force personnel. 
I can't claim that I came out of opposition with any great experience in Defence, or any great exposure to Australian Defence Force personnel. 
Now I have had both experience in Defence and that exposure, and whilst there are issues to address in our Defence Force about the treatment of women, overwhelmingly the men and women of our ADF are great Australians and getting to know them has been a real privilege. 
I have, either as Prime Minister or as Acting Prime Minister, attended 24 funerals for soldiers lost in Afghanistan. 
I am very aware of the courage and the sacrifice and part of being Prime Minister has been being there for those families in their darkest moments. 
My colleagues through all of this journey have provided me with great support, and I want to thank them for that great support. 
They defied political gravity time after time to provide me with more support as leader of the Labor Party. 
When the going got incredibly tough, when all of those that read polls and do the commentary on them were saying that there was only one logical conclusion, and that was to change the leader, my colleagues showed courage, they showed determination, they showed spine in the face of that kind of pressure. 
They showed conviction in our Labor project and in our Labor cause. 
They showed belief in the agenda of this Labor Government. I understand that at the caucus meeting today the pressure finally got too great for many of my colleagues. I respect that and I respect the decision that they have made. 
But I do say to my caucus colleagues, don't lack the guts, don't lack the fortitude, don't lack the resilience to go out there with our Labor agenda and to win this election. 
I know that it can be done. And I also say to my caucus colleagues that that will best be done by us putting the divisions of the past behind us and uniting as a political party, making sure we put our best face forward at the forthcoming election campaign and in the years beyond. 
I want to say a few remarks about being the first woman to serve in this position. 
There has been a lot of analysis about the so-called gender wars, me playing the so-called gender card because heavens knows no one noticed I was a woman until I raised it. 
But against that background, I do want to say about all of these issues, the reaction to being the first female Prime Minister does not explain everything about my prime ministership, nor does it explain nothing about my prime ministership. 
I have been a little bit bemused by those colleagues in the newspapers who have admitted that I have suffered more pressure as a result of my gender than other prime ministers in the past, but then concluded that it had zero effect on my political position or the political position of the Labor Party. 
It doesn't explain everything, it doesn't explain nothing, it explains some things. 
And it is for the nation to think in a sophisticated way about those shades of grey. 
What I am absolutely confident of is it will be easier for the next woman and the woman after that and the woman after that, and I'm proud of that. 
Can I say now a few thank-yous, particularly to my colleague Wayne Swan, who I think will address you shortly. 
He has been fantastic. I have had loyal and capable colleagues. I want to thank them for their dedication and determination. 
Politicians aren't fashionable in the Australian community, but take it from me, even as I go out the door, politicians work incredibly hard and overwhelmingly people come into this Parliament with a sense of service and that certainly defines my colleagues; their sense of service to the nation. 
I want to thank the people who have worked with me. I want to thank the staff at The Lodge and Kirribilli House. I want to thank the AFP - what's a few sandwiches between friends - don't worry about it. I want to thank my personal staff led ably by Ben Hubbard. 
Unfortunately it is becoming part of our political debate to draw staff members into the contest. I think that is wrong, I have always believed it wrong and I hope it desists now. 
I would like to thank my electorate office staff, particularly Michelle Fitzgerald and Carlos, who have been with me since I was elected in 1998. 
I would like to thank Tim and my family and I would like to say, as I have already said by way of text to my niece, who is due to have a baby in July, look forward to the most meddlesome great aunt in Australia's history. 
Thank you very much.


Canberra
Tony Windsor long ago earned the respect and affection of his community in New England. In the past three years he has earned the respect and affection of many Australians from all political persuasions. Millions will be sorry to see him depart the Parliament at the coming election and I will be one of them.
Tony served ten years in the New South Wales Parliament, including a period of minority Government, and thirteen years in the Parliament of Australia, including three years of minority Government. He is one of Australia's great parliamentarians.
Tony Windsor's legacy can be seen all around the community where he lives and which he loves so much. I have seenfor myself the benefits high speed broadband already promises for the people of Armidale.
Many will think of the Environment Protection Bio-diversity Act Amendment (Water Trigger) as his signature achievement in this final term of public office and one characteristic of Tony himself: legislating a responsible and mature policy approach to an issue of great community concern among the people he represents.
I have enjoyed working with Tony Windsor and I wish him and Lyn many happy years together in retirement.


Canberra
Rob Oakeshott is a man of energy and ideas whose fundamental optimism for Australia endears him to almost everyone who knows him. 
Rob served ten years in the New South Wales Parliament and five years in the Parliament of Australia. He is still a young man with a young family and I know how much he is looking forward to being at home.
Rob Oakeshott has been widely recognised for the passion of his advocacy for improvement in education. He has worked tirelessly to spread the benefits of our strong economy through investment in regional Australia.
The national debate on climate change was enriched by the perspective Rob brought to carbon, soil and water issues. He can point to a number of specific achievements reflected in the Clean Energy Future legislation which passed the Parliament during this term.
Rob smiles easily and wears his heart on his sleeve and politics could do with more of that, not less. I know he and Sarah-Jane are looking forward to the next phase of life together.


